01篇名：從產權分離探討都市更新之激勵機制並列篇名：An Analysis on the Incentive Mechanism of Urban Renewal from the Separation of Property Rights Viewpoint作者：楊松齡(Song-Ling Yang);卓輝華(Hui-Hua Cho)關鍵字：都市更新;權利變換;控制權;剩餘索取權;激勵;Urban Renewal;Rights Transformation;Control Right;Residual Claim;and Incentive期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文將都市更新事業過程的控制權，區分為提議、同意、執行、監督等四步驟，當土地權利人與實施者，共同於一都市更新單元，組成共同開發體時，土地權利人初期擁有較強的提議與同意之控制權，隨著實施者握有超過都市更新法定之同意書門檻後，實施者掌握較強的執行控制權，土地權利人擁有較弱的監督控制權。又現行都市更新權利變換的價值分配，是實施者投入共同負擔費用，並以更新完成後之土地與建築物部分折價抵付，其餘土地及建築物則分配與原土地所有權人，因此土地權利人得到大部分的剩餘索取權。這樣的控制權與剩餘索取權分離狀態下，其權利變換價值分配模式，是否為適當的產權安排？對於都市更新參與人能否有所激勵？能否促進都市更新之推動效率？是本文主要的探討分析重點。英文摘要：This paper divides the residual right of control for urban renewal business into four steps: proposing, agreement, implementation and monitoring. When the land owners and the implementers organize as a common development entity on a very urban renewal unit, the land owners initially hold stronger control rights on both proposing step and agreement step; along the implementers hold agreement letters exceeding the official threshold of urban renewal regulations, they will control better execution rights, and the landowners hold weaker surveillance control rights. The current value allocation of rights transformation for urban renewal employs common sharing of expenses with the implementers. After deducting the common sharing of the discounted price substitute payment of the land and buildings after the rights transformation, the remaining lands and buildings shall be allocated to the original landowners according to the rights value proportion before each piece of land rights was transformed. In so doing, the land owners obtain most of the residual claim. Under such separation of the control rights and the residual claim, whether the value allocation of the rights transformation is as suitable arrangement for property rights? Will it be the incentives to the urban renewal participants? Whether it will facilitate the efficiency of urban renewal promotion? These are the main points of the analysis of this paper.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201105_14(1).00012篇名：台灣農地功能之研究：一般民眾與農民態度及空間差異的比較並列篇名：Attitude towards Agricultural Land Functions in Taiwan: A Comparative Study of the General Public and Farmers and of Spatial Difference作者：李承嘉(Chen-Jai Lee);方怡茹(Yi-Ru Fang);廖本全(Ben-Chuan Liao);王玉真(Yu-Jen Wang);藍逸之(Yi-Chi Lan)關鍵字：農地功能;後生產論;多功能性;一般民眾;農民;agricultural land functions;post-productivism;multifunctionality;the general public;farmers期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：傳統的農業功能被界定在糧食生產，但在1980年代中期，西方先進國家提出了新的農業體制－後生產論與多功能農業（或多功能性）。新農業體制強調，除了生產糧食的功能之外，農業活動也可以形塑景觀、提供環境利益（例如土地保存、可更新資源的永續經營及生物多樣性的為維護）、以及有利於農村地區的發展等。由於土地為農業經營的基本因素，因此農地具有什麼功能遂成為實踐新農業體制的重要議題。本文採用李克特態度量表，進行一般民眾及農民的問卷調查，以了解受訪者對台灣農地功能的態度。在農民問卷的部分則針對二個台灣農村類型的代表地區進行調查，其中之一為宜蘭縣三星鄉大洲村，代表的是已經邁向新農業體制的調適型農村；另一為台南縣後壁鄉菁寮社區，其代表的是農地仍然用以生產為主的傳統型農村。不同的問卷調查使本文可以對一般民眾的態度與農民的態度進行比較，同時也可以對不同農村的農民態度進行比較。本文調查發現主要有三項：1.不論是一般民眾或是農民都具有新農業體制的認知，亦即他們認同農地具有多重功能－生產、生態及生活的功能。2.一般民眾較農民更具浪漫的鄉村情懷；在農地利用上，農民則相對務實與保守。3.不同農村型的農民具有不同的農地功能傾向，調適型農村的農民有比較高的比例同意，農地除了糧食生產的功能之外，還有其他的功能，例如環境保護、休閒等。英文摘要：The traditional function of agriculture is for food production. Two new agricultural regimes-post-productivism and multifunctional agriculture (or multifuctionality)-are initiated in western advanced countries in the mid 1980s. The new agricultural regime state that ”beyond its primary function of producing food and fibre, agricultural activity can also shape the landscape, provide environmental benefits such as land conservation, the sustainable management of renewable resources and preservation of biodiversity and contribute to the socio-economic viability of rural areas.” The land is the main factor for agricultural management, so that what function should agricultural land have is a critical issue for implementation of new agricultural regime.This paper conducts Likert's scale questionnaires of general public and farmers in order to understand there attitude toward agricultural land functions Taiwan's. The questionnaires of farmers are conducted in two ideal types of rural. One of them is Dachou village in I-Lan county which represents an adjusting rural space type toward new agricultural regime and other is Ginliou community in Tainan county which presents a traditional rural space type remain producing food and fibre as primary function of agricultural land use. The different questionnaire enables us to compare the attitude between general public and farmers, and also between farmers in different rural types.The findings show that:1. Both of the general public and farmers have an attitude toward the new agricultural regime. This means that they agree that agricultural land has multiple functions-producing, ecological and living functions.2. The general public is more romantic to rural idyll than farmers, and in agricultural land use farmers are more practical and conservative than the general public.3. The farmers in different rural space have different attitudes toward agricultural land functions. The farmers in adjusted rural have a higher percentage of agree that beyond its primary function of producing food and fibre, agricultural land can also shape alternative functions-for environment protection, leisure and so on.起始頁-結束頁：29-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201105_14(1).00023篇名：桃園海岸林分發展與地形變遷之關聯性研究(1978~2004)並列篇名：A Study of the Relationship between Stand Development and Coastal Morphology Change in Tao-Yuan Coast (1978~2004)作者：莊永忠;林雪美;沈淑敏;廖學誠關鍵字：地形變遷;沙丘;保安林;桃園海岸;Morphology Change;Protection Forest;Sand Dune;Tao-Yuan Coast期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：海岸林分發展與環境變遷息息相關，地形即為重要影響因子之一。本研究透過地理資訊圖層套疊呈現1978~2004年間桃園海岸林分空間分布變化，探討其與地形變遷之關聯性，並對照林務局歷年保安林總成圖層分析造林地規劃之適宜性。結果顯示桃園海岸之林分在二十六年間因濱線內移致使林分前緣持續後退，其中又以草漯海濱、觀音工業區外濱海位置（富林溪口至大堀溪口，海湖底與樹林子）、以及觀音溪口至小飯瀝溪口段最為嚴重。而沙丘後退內移，以及沙丘位置之林木生長條件不佳亦造成林分受害，致使林帶寬度大為縮減，因而大幅降低林分阻隔飛沙與固定沙丘之能力。而對照林務局歷年保安林造林台帳圖後，亦發現許多保安林邊界已不符合近年海岸變遷與林分發展趨勢，應視目前情況進行擴編或解除，以利當地長期之林分發展。英文摘要：Forest stand development in coastal region is highly related to environmental change. Morphology is one of the most important factors. This research analyzed the spatial distribution change of coastal stand in Tao-Yuan coastal from 1978 to 2004, and tried to find the relationship between morphology changing and stand development by using map overlay on GIS platform. Cadastral map of coastal protection forests was also used to examine the suitability of location planning. The results showed the forest stand of Tao-Yuan Coast have been withdrawing in 26 years due to the shoreline retreat, especially in the seacoast of Tsao-Ta and Guan-Ying Industrial Park, and the estuary of Guan-Ying River and Sao-Fan-Li River. The retreating sand dune and the bad conditions of habitats were also found as a reason to cause the vanishing forests with lower ability for dust prevention and sand dune fixation. Besides, as the boundaries of protection forest were not with the trend of stand development and coastal morphology change, it is necessary to take the proper act for boundaries modification of protection forests.起始頁-結束頁：69-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201105_14(1).00034篇名：環境風險評估通過比率的比較研究－以環境影響說明書及評估報告書為例並列篇名：Comparisons of Environmental Risk Assessments-A Study of Environmental Assessments and Environmental Impact Statements作者：廖麗敏(Li-Min Liao);陳銘薰(Ming-Shiun Chen);徐世榮(Shih-Jung Hsu)關鍵字：環保抗爭;環境風險評估;環境影響說明書;環境影響評估報告書;Environmental Assessment;Environmental Impact Statement;Environmental Protection;Environmental Risk Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：為了解決經濟成長與環境保護相互衝突的問題，西方國家所使用的環境影響評估制度於1970年代逐漸的被引進臺灣，由於它是建構於科學及專業的評估，因此，被視之為是解決經濟成長與環保抗爭二者衝突的最佳利器。可是，雖然「環境影響評估法」已經通過並實施多年，許多重要的開發案件皆必須經過環境影響評估的審查，然而，許多已經通過環境影響評估的開發案仍然引起了環保抗爭運動，激烈衝突的景象仍然不斷的上演。本文探討的問題為：我國環境影響評估的通過比率是否過高？環境風險評估在我國是否出現了低估的現象？本文乃是透過環境影響說明書及環境影響評估報告書的製作成果，並與歐美國家類似資料來比較，嘗試回答上述課題。本文以環保署網站為基礎建立了計13年之資料庫，並深入分析「預防及減輕開發行為對環境不良影響對策摘要表」發現在實施解決對策之前，被評定為有負面影響程度者為61%；但是，在實施解決對策之後，有負面影響程度者降低為33%，而且最為嚴重之程度皆僅是「輕微負面影響」環境風險恐有低估之虞，而這可能也就是絕大多數的說明書(85.9%)及評估書(94.2%)都是以「有條件通過審查」通過的主要原因，這個比率是比歐美還來得高。英文摘要：In order to resolve conflicts between economic growth and environmental protection, the mechanism of environmental impact statement (EIS), originally from the US, has been established in Taiwan from 1970s. The government hopes the controversy can be solved by science and technology, which are backbone of the Taiwan EIS. Unfortunately, many serious environmental protests still emerge against those development projects, whose EISs have been approved by the government. The paper tries to find out the approval rates of the Taiwan environmental assessment (EA) & (EIS) and make comparison with their rates of the US and European countries. The major question of the paper is whether Taiwan underestimates its environmental risk? The reports of EA and EIS in Taiwan invariably show that there will be no major harm to the environment or local people. It is because 85.9% of EA and 94.2% of EIS are accepted by ”conditional approval” from 1996 to 2008. In the US, the approval rate is between 72.5% and 74.9%. Therefore, environmental risks in Taiwan are seemingly underestimated.起始頁-結束頁：91-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201105_14(1).000401篇名：陳映真的第三世界－50年代左翼分子的昨日今生（以本文紀念溝口雄三教授）並列篇名：Chen Yingzhen's Third World-On the Life and after Life of the Leftists of the 1950s作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)關鍵字：陳映真;第三世界;左翼分子;精神狀況;50年代;Chen Yingzhen;Third World;leftist;mental conditions;1950s期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文透過細讀陳映真自1960年起至1994年，有關50年代左翼分子的五個重要文學文本，試圖追溯地下黨人及其家屬在當時投身社會主義運動與失敗後的精神風貌，並初步的勾勒那一代左翼分子的心靈史的結構。主要的發現是：陳映真在書寫中承繼了50年代左翼的思想情感，其重要性不僅僅在台灣內部搭起了與過去銜接的橋樑，同時連接回中國大陸、聯繫到第三世界，持續了社會主義世界革命的精神。要如何持續挖掘、搶救、研究、書寫台灣戰後左翼歷史，是學術思想界當前所面臨的挑戰。英文摘要：This essay is an attempt to trace the historical trajectories of the life and/or afterlife of the leftists in the 1950s Taiwan, through close readings of five key texts of Chen Yingzhen's five novels, written from 1960 to 1994. The result is a preliminary picture of the structural configuration of the spiritual history of the leftists from that era. The major discovery is that through writing practices, Chen Yingzhen inherits the thought and sentiment of the 1950s generation. Its contribution goes far beyond bridging the crucial link between the past and present in Taiwan into establishing critical connections with mainland China and the Third Word, especially in the upholding the socialist spirit of the world revolution. How to continue to recover, rescue, research and writing the postwar leftist history in Taiwan is a real challenge to the critical intellectual circle of thought.起始頁-結束頁：137-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00042篇名：民主化與經濟發展－台灣發展型國家的不成功轉型並列篇名：Democratization and Economic Development-The Unsuccessful Transformation of Taiwan's Developmental State作者：瞿宛文(Wan-Wen Chu)關鍵字：民主化;發展型國家之轉型;產業政策;民族主義;經濟發展;democratization;transformation of developmental state;Industrial policy;nationalism;economic development期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011中文摘要：在戰後，台灣及其他東亞國家依靠發展型國家模式而成功地發展了經濟。近年來東亞民主化帶來的變化，是否導致發展型國家模式的解體，是一眾所矚目的議題，而本文主題即是探討民主轉型對台灣發展型國家模式的影響。為了理解政治與經濟轉型的產生背景，本文先對台灣戰後發展型國家的形成與動力作一敘述，指陳國民政府在台灣推動經濟發展的政治意志，源自中國百多年來面對西方與日本挑戰，為了救亡圖存而形構成的現代中華民族主義。發展型國家的政策模式主要包括執政者對經濟發展的堅定支持，經濟官僚體系有能力且具鑲嵌自主性，以整體發展為目標，發展的優先性得在政策協調上顯現。而這些部分在近年則都受到民主化過程的影響。從1980年代開始，台灣政治與經濟方面的轉型幾乎同時進行。本文將民主轉型對於經濟政策轉型的影響分幾方面討論：一是就政策目標之擴大以包容經濟發展以外之考量因素而言，發現民主轉型中社會議題之爭議趨向黨派化，使得社會對如何修正發展優先政策不易形成共識；二是就政策目標是否能持續以整體經濟發展為考量而言，發現民主競爭模式造成之分化及黨派化考量，對此帶來挑戰；三是討論主導性經濟理念的變化，發現民主運動對以往之全盤否定，也導致從以往之發展為先的理念轉變為以新自由主義為主導，無助於對全球化影響的因應；四則論及民主轉型中形成的主流論述，因強調台灣新國族的打造，未能處理台灣經濟重新定位的問題，也使得台灣經濟願景難以形成。雖說過去發展型國家模式確實應該且必須轉型，但至今轉型並非完全成功。英文摘要：The East Asian tigers relied upon their developmental states (DSs) to achieve extraordinary economic development in the postwar era. Whether these DSs would remain effective after democratization occurred has been a subject of great interest. This paper addresses this question relating to the case of Taiwan. The formation and make-up of Taiwan's DS is discussed first from a historical perspective. It is argued here that the DS's will to develop came from modern Chinese nationalism, which had been formed during China's lengthy process of facing up to the challenge from the West since the Opium War. Taiwan's DS consists of the following features: the ruling elite's will to develop, a capable economic bureaucracy with embedded autonomy, an industrial policy framework with an aim of further overall growth, and an arrangement to coordinate policies to give development top priority. All these facets have been affected by the process of democratization in the last two decades. By the 1980s, the success of Taiwan's development has brought great pressure for it to transform the original economic model and the political institutions at the same time. This paper discuss the impact of democratization on Taiwan's DS in four aspects: in terms of broadening policy objectives to include social concerns besides that of economic development, it is found that the fight over social issues have become too partisan for the society to form a policy consensus; as to whether the policy objective is furthering of overall interests, the new mode of political competition has sometimes led to pursuit of divisive and partisan ways of distributing resources; regarding the guiding principle of economic policy, neo-liberalism has replaced developmentalism as the guide because the democratic movement had adopted neo-liberalism in its fight against authoritarian rule; and finally, because the newly formed democracy discourse is mainly for forging an independent nation and against integration with Mainland China, it hence fails to provide a vision and a feasible future development plan for the Taiwan economy. In sum, the transformation of Taiwan's DS has been less than successful.起始頁-結束頁：243-288資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00053篇名：1960年代的陳映真－訪談淺井基文教授並列篇名：Chen Yingzhen and the 1960s-An Interview with Prof. Asai Motofumi作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：289-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00064篇名：三鶯大橋的兩端並列篇名：Two Ends of the Sanying Bridge-Wu Yaozhong and Chen Yingzhen作者：林麗雲(Li-Yun Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：309-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00075篇名：大國與小國的相互演進並列篇名：Mutual Involution between the Big State and Small State作者：崔元植(Won-Shik Choi)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：319-333資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00086篇名：最後一堂課－2011上海陳映真文學研讀班總結心得並列篇名：The Last Session-The Chen Yingzhen Study Group's Final Roundtable, Shanghai, 2011期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：335-382資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00097篇名：跟上陳映真的回家路並列篇名：Pursuing the Misplaced Work of Chen Yingzhen作者：張立本(Li-Pen Chang)關鍵字：陳映真;家;民眾;知識份子;社會實踐;Chen Yingzhen;home;the people;intellectuals;social practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011中文摘要：藉由陳映真迂迴地補課時，作者得以嘗試重新進入與理解台灣的歷史與社會，並釐清自我。以自我經驗重新閱讀陳映真，作者不僅感受到了全面清理身份、情緒、知識，與社會性格之身世的可能性，換言之，重新面對自我、社會之自我的可能性，更因為逐漸把握到陳映真對人、人性的深刻關懷，從而領略藉由陳映真小說作品，歷史地展開「亞洲」、「亞洲民眾」之意義的新可能。作者認為，面對陳映真這跨40年寫作的台灣思想家、實踐者，我們有必要像當初跟著康雄離家那樣，為著探索今日的知識困頓的源由，和尋求未來的動力、持續逼問民眾為何？如何實踐？隨楊斌回家、追上陳映真。英文摘要：By reading 'Chen Yingzhen', the author founds a way re-entering, re-comprehending the history and society of Taiwan. This also helped the author ready to re-examine his 'self'. Reading through self-experiences, the author felt that there is a possibility fully rearranging thoughts of self of the society, including origins and present conditions of the society, knowledge and thoughts of and for the society, the condition and position of people of the local, etc. Especially while recognizing Chen's ocean deep concern on human and humanity, it is a possibility to re-examine criterions like 'the people', Asia, in relation to colonialism, post-colonialism, imperialism, neo-imperialism capitalism historically. The author thinks that facing an intellectual like Chen, we should try to pursue Chen's work that was usually misplaced. And this is for the aim asking is the dynamic for future and for future of the people, knowledge, thoughts, practice, possible?起始頁-結束頁：383-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00108篇名：「土地正義的堅持與實踐：大埔事件一年過後」專題引言並列篇名：The Persistence and Practice of Land Justice-One Year after Dapu Event作者：蔡培慧(Pei-Hui Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：397-401資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.00119篇名：建構民主人權的土地政策並列篇名：Constructing the Democratic and Humanitarian Land Use Policy作者：徐世榮(Shih-Jung Hsu);廖麗敏(Li-Min Liao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：403-429資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.001210篇名：公民農業與社會重建並列篇名：Civic Agriculture and Social Reconstruction作者：李丁讚(Ding-Tzann Lii)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：431-464資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.001311篇名：重識、介入與結伴前行的反圈地路途並列篇名：The Recognization, Intervention and Union of Anti-enclosure Movement作者：蔡培慧(Pei-Hui Tsai);許博任(Po-Jen Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：465-479資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.001412篇名：編輯室報告並列篇名：From The Editor作者：臺灣社會研究季刊期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000113篇名：為什麼馬殺雞？視障按摩歷史的行動網絡分析並列篇名：Why Massage? An Actor-Network Analysis of the History of Massage by the Visually-Impaired in Taiwan作者：邱大昕(Ta-Sing Chiu)關鍵字：身心障礙;視覺障礙;按摩;行動者網絡理論;disability;visual impairment;massage;ANT期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣的盲人在日治時期，除了按摩之外，還從事針灸與電療等工作。但是到了國民政府時期，台灣的視障者的工作卻逐轉變成現在的按摩工作。為什麼盲人會從事「非醫療」的按摩工作呢？本研究採用行動者網絡理論（Actor Network Theory），來分析這個「身體」與「工作」間複雜動態的關係。在本研究中我們可以看到，過去百年間法規、政府、警察、教科書、針灸電療器具、中西醫專業團體，以及視障者如何在這轉變過程中，共同形塑出現在所看到的視障按摩樣貌與內容。2008年10月31日司法院釋字第六四九號解釋，宣告視障按摩保障違憲後，許多視障按摩團體希望能改變視障者就業訓練過程，重新進入醫療體系從事理療工作。然而從本研究的角度與立場來看，這雖然不是不可能的目標，但卻是個百廢待舉重新建構網絡的龐大工程。英文摘要：The blind in Taiwan used to perform acupuncture, moxibustion, massage, and electrotherapy under the Japanese regime. Why did these blind physical therapists become ”non-medical” massagers after the Chinese Nationalist's takeover of Taiwan? This is the main topic to be explored in the current study. Since the current disability models are incapable of explaining these complicated relations between body and work, this study adopts Actor Network Theory as a tool to analyze and answer these questions. We will examine how government law and policy, medical professionals, blind workers and medical devices coproduce the form and content of today's blind massage. On October 31, 2008, the Taiwan Justices of the Constitutional Court issued Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 649, which proclaimed that it is unconstitutional to restrict massage work to vision-impaired individuals. Many of the blind-massage groups now intend to retrain the blind back into medical professions. However, though not impossible, there will be a lot of work to do to rebuild the network required.起始頁-結束頁：5-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000214篇名：視障按摩多元執業類型演變與按摩師弱勢型態分析並列篇名：The Evolving Working Styles of Visually Impaired Massage Workers and the Types of Their Disadvantaged Positions作者：王育瑜(Yu-Yu Wang)關鍵字：視障按摩師;執業類型;弱勢型態;visually impaired massage workers;working styles;the types of disadvantaged positions期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：司法院大法官會議六四九號釋憲案主張按摩職業保留政策違憲，須修法取消該規定。法界人士批判釋憲文未能說明視障按摩師之弱勢處境，據以作為結論基礎。另方面，按摩師則表達面臨經濟困頓，因而結群靜坐，訴求現金補助。發補助金是否真能解決按摩師的弱勢處境？或者，有其他需要被解決的問題？是本文所關心的問題。本研究以質性探究取向，研究參與者包括不同執業類型的視障按摩師共30名，以及視障服務提供者共7名。資料蒐集以深度訪談為主，輔以焦點團體。本文試圖釐清按摩師的弱勢型態，期望做為未來推展貼近需求的政策與服務之參考。按摩業多年的演變，顯示按摩師為了求生存而發展出多元執業類型，其弱勢型態也呈現差異，需給予針對其所面臨問題的「對症下藥」協助。而集體層次而言，按摩師共同面臨視障按摩專業不被認可，所衍生之專業培訓、考試、職業生涯發展等等方面的限制。因此未來對視障按摩師的輔導，宜著眼於認可並提升視障按摩專業，制度上建立完整之專業培育、考核與發展機制。本研究主張，政策與服務同時處理個別與制度層面，始能協助視障按摩師脫離弱勢處境。英文摘要：Following the No. 649 Interpretation of the Constitutional Court, the policy of massage as reserved occupation for visually impaired people, will be abolished in 2011. The Interpretation has been criticized, by some law scholars, as not being able to base its conclusion on clear analyses of the disadvantages of visually impaired massage workers [VIMWs]. On the other hand, VIMWs went on a strike to ask for cash subsidies. Is giving money the only and the best solution? Or, are there other problems to be solved? This question has to be addressed, in order to liberate VIMWs from their disadvantaged positions. This study adopts qualitative approach. Participants include 30 VIMWs and 7 service providers. In-depth interviews and a focus group interview were utilized as data collection methods. This study found that the diversified working styles of VIMWs reveal the different survival strategies as well as varieties of their disadvantaged positions. Whereas, at the collective level, not being recognized as a profession, leads to inadequate professional education, examination, and career development. Therefore, to liberate VIMWs from their disadvantaged positions, assisting individual VIMWs, and developing adequate policies and services at the system level, should both be considered.起始頁-結束頁：37-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000315篇名：保障還是限制？定額進用政策與視障者的就業困境並列篇名：Protection or Restriction? Employment Quota Policy and Life Experiences of Persons with Visual Impairment in Labor Market作者：郭峰誠(Feng-Cheng Kuo);張恆豪(Heng-Hao Chang)關鍵字：定額進用政策;視障者;工作權;歧視;社會模式;健常能力偏見;Employment Quota policy;visually impaired persons;the right to work;discrimination;social model of disability;ableism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：資本主義市場經濟體系當中，規格化的勞動條件往往排除身心障礙者於就業市場之外。台灣仿效德、日等國的「配額模式」，以身心障礙者定額進用的政策增進身心障礙者的勞動參與率。然而，定額進用政策的實質效果卻沒有經過實證研究的檢驗。本研究訪談33位視障者的就業經驗，探討台灣的定額進用政策對視障者進入職場的實質影響。研究發現：在求職過程中，受健常能力偏見的影響，「視障」被認為是沒有工作能力的個體，雇主寧願聘僱障礙等級輕微，或不受「視覺」影響的身心障礙者擔任工作職務。定額進用政策固然增加了視障者的工作機會，然而，相關配套措施的成效不彰，無法改變社會環境與工作環境的障礙。即便視障者因為定額進用的政策進入職場，也不容易融入職場，不容易被長期雇用。有時候雇主乾脆讓視障者在一般工作場所從事按摩工作。而定額進用重視雇用比例，沒有考慮障礙者的差異，也導致面試與職場上不同障礙類別的排擠效應。在工作場所的互動關係上，視障者常面對兩極化的對待，不是上司、同儕過度保護，就是忽略視障者進入勞動市場所需的支持。本研究建議，定額進用政策不該只求讓視障者進入職場，而忽略「障礙」的異質性。定額進用政策的施行，應該從社會模式的觀點出發，一方面針對視障者在職場勞動參與的不同需求作適切的安排、改善職場環境的限制、增進人際溝通的管道、提供無障礙的職場配套措施，並促進視障者同等享有一般民眾的工作待遇。另一方面解決就業的障礙，應該消除社會的健常能力的偏見、消弭對視障者工作能力不足的迷思。英文摘要：The Taiwan government has adopted an employment quota policy which has established a fixed quota for employees in both the public and private sectors to hire people with disabilities in order to improve the participation of disabled people in the labor market. This study interviewed thirty-three persons with visual impairments and discussed the impacts of the employment quota system on them. As a result, this study demonstrates that employers usually prefer people with minor impairments and exclude persons with visual impairment. An employment quota policy increases the job opportunities for persons with disabilities; however, without proper support in the work environment, it is still very difficult for people with visual impairment to get into the labor market. When people with visual impairment enter this market, it is not easy to fit in or to keep the job, and in some cases, they are hired to work as a massager for other co-workers.This research suggests that the disability employment policy should not ignore the diversity of disabled persons. From the perspective of a social model of disability, the policy should address the disabling environment in the workplace rather than fixed quotas.起始頁-結束頁：95-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000416篇名：去祖國：二次戰後國民黨僑務政策中的地緣政治並列篇名：Decentering Homeland: The Geopolitics of Taiwan's Post-War Homeland Policy作者：范雅梅(Ya-Moi Pham)關鍵字：華僑;僑務政策;國民黨在台政權;祖國政治;冷戰;Overseas Chinese;Overseas Chinese policy;Qiaowu;Kuomintang regime in Taiwan;homeland politics;Cold War期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文嘗試提出一種「去祖國」的研究視角，以挑戰長期以來以祖國為中心的論述。過去對於國民黨僑務政策在台灣戰後發展的研究，論者都以祖國為論述中心，將僑務政策視為國民黨與海外華人延續過去革命情誼的工具，或將之看作國民黨為了保衛政權的手段；而在國外的海外華人研究領域中，學者們只偏重研究中國共產黨的僑務政策，對於國民黨僑務政策往往只視之為表演性的政治修辭，未能作更深入的分析。本文發軔於一個簡單的提問：為何僑務政策得以在二次戰後，在民族國家制度作為圭臬的時代氣氛中能推行成功？拒絕以祖國（即國民黨）為中心的角度來解釋僑務政策如何可能，本文憑藉Roger Brubaker所框構的概念架構，將僑務政策放在去殖民的政治脈絡中，了解海外僑社的多元種族政治如何銜接了祖國的政治招喚，以及在冷戰時期的地緣政治下，祖國性又如何在世界霸權的政治操弄下在台灣被重新建制。英文摘要：This paper challenges the narrative of homeland as a central historical actor. In the existing literature, the post-war Overseas Chinese policy is either regarded as a historical legacy of the revolutionary partnership between the Kuomintang and the Overseas Chinese, or treated as an essential source of legitimacy for the exiled regime before 1979. Many scholars of East Asia prefer to focus only on the parallel policy in mainland China, dismissing Taiwan's policy as mere political rhetoric. However, this paper starts from a simple question: how did this transnational practice fit within its larger historical context of decolonization and national formation? By extending the framework developed by Roger Brubaker, this paper illustrates how the homeland-ness of China was imposed on Taiwan through the interaction of ethnic politics in postcolonial Southeast Asia with the wider geopolitics of the Cold War.起始頁-結束頁：137-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000517篇名：男性不在場：台灣女性參政的性別階序格局並列篇名：The Absence of Men: Matrices of Gender Hierarchy behind Taiwanese Women's Political Participation作者：姜貞吟(Chen-Yin Chiang)關鍵字：政治參與;女性;性別;立委選舉;性別階序格局;political participation;women;gender;legislative election;matrices of gender hierarchy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：女性在政治場域的參與，一直是婦女運動與性別研究者高度關注的議題，並且將參政數量的增加視為政治參與性質轉變的重要關鍵，因此，關心政治與性別的學者，經常對兩性在政治參與的差異、不平等的現象提出解釋。過往研究經常以教育資源、專業技能、現代獨立來解釋現在女性參政提高的因素，但這個現代化的發展進程，卻無法完全解釋為什麼台灣女性參政比例還是無法快速增加的結構因素。本研究係以第二屆到第七屆女性立法委員為分析對象，目的在找出台灣女性參政的社會條件為何。研究發現如下：（1）台灣女性參政持續受到政治家庭與地方勢力的結構因素影響，形成「參選人才庫」的內在封閉網絡，排擠其他女性參政的可能。（2）台灣女性雖具有高教育程度與專業經歷等現代化人力資本的條件，但她們的出場仍然深受在地男性無法在場、男性不願在場、男性不准在場等性別框架所影響。（3）這三種男性不在場背後隱含了參選人才庫中的四個位階的「性別階序格局」，是一種以地方勢力與政治家庭為基礎單位，血緣、地緣跟性別為主要篩選機制所組成的階序格局模式。英文摘要：Political participation of women is a starting point in the study of social structure of gender for many researchers. They think that increasing rate of political participation of women signifies the improvement of women's political status. Therefore, they often explain the phenomenon of gender differences and inequalities in political participation. Previous studies often interprets the factors influencing the increase of women's participation nowadays in politics with educational resources, professional skills, modern independence, however, this modernization process can't thoroughly explain why the participation rate of Taiwanese women still has yet to increase significantly. This study is based on the analysis of women legislators ranking from the second to seventh terms with the aim to identify the social conditions of Taiwanese women's participation in politics.The research findings are: (1) Taiwanese women's participation in politics has continually influenced by political families and the factional structures. This has resulted in ”pool of candidates” inner closed network and also led to the exclusion of other women in politics. (2) Although Taiwanese women have a high level of education and professional experience and other modern conditions of human capital, but their political participations are still profoundly limited by the gender frames like men's failure, reluctance, and forbidden to show up. (3) Behind the previous three situations in which men are absent implies the ranking gap of ”matrices of gender hierarchy” existing in the ”candidates pool”. This structure is primarily a screening mechanism based on the political families and local factional power structures, which is made up of kinship, geographical factors and gender politics.起始頁-結束頁：179-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000618篇名：解讀《巴西，如斯壯麗》：回應台灣學界對於卡多索自傳的評論與簡介並列篇名：A Critique of Some Responses from the Taiwanese Academic Community to "The Accidental President of Brazil: A Memoir"作者：蔡侑霖(You-Lin Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：巴西前總統卡多索的自傳近來被譯成中文出版後，引起一些台灣學者針對該書提出評論與簡介。當許多出身於或研究拉丁美洲的學者對卡多索的新自由主義轉型提出批判時，台灣學界的迴響顯得相當正面，不但讚揚卡多索在從政時仍持續身為學者時的關懷，也肯定他在社會正義、經濟繁榮，以及將巴西整合進全球經濟的貢獻。透過重讀卡多索的早期著作，以及回顧他的政策與政績，本文指出這些對卡多索治下的「巴西奇蹟」之正面評價，乃源自對近年巴西發展經驗的片面理解。此外，本文也認為，當討論卡多索時，其早年的立場與轉變也較少獲得關注。最後，本文試圖指出，當全球面對新自由主義全球化之際，台灣學界對卡多索的解讀與「奇蹟」經濟的理解經常忽略了由拉丁美洲衍生而出的反思與辯論。因此，藉由本文的討論，期待著能拋磚引玉，觸動更多對新自由主義全球化的在地批判性探討。英文摘要：By reviewing Fernando H. Cardoso's memoir, ”Dependency and Development in Latin America”, and the relevant discussion on his policies, this paper offers a critique to the general interpretation and understanding of his early scholarship and his neoliberal reform at Brazil within the academic sphere in Taiwan. In contrast with the critical attitude from Latin American scholars, Taiwanese intellectuals in general have responded quite positively to Cardoso's work, emphasizing his contribution to social justice, economic prosperity, and the integration of Brazil into the global economy. This paper argues that the recognition given to Cardoso in Taiwan is built on the lack of a strong, reflexive critique toward neoliberal globalization and limited understanding of the critiques from Latin America. Moreover, although Taiwan, like Brazil, is also facing neoliberal globalization, very few Taiwanese scholars examine Latin American perspectives on neoliberal reforms and recontextualize these neoliberal critiques to shed light on the processes of neoliberalization in Taiwan. In sum, in response to Taiwanese researchers' extant interpretation of Cardoso's early scholarship and political actions, this paper aims to posit an alternative understanding of his neoliberal reform, hoping to generate a dynamic discussion on neoliberalism in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：241-269資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000719篇名：法律如何生產性／別不平等？並列篇名：How can Gender/Sexual Inequality Be Produced by Law?作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：271-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000820篇名：極端保護觀：透過兒少保護的新管制國家與階級治理並列篇名：The Extreme Protectionist Prejudice: Technocratic Government through Child Welfare in the New Regulatory State of Taiwan作者：甯應斌(Yin-Bin Ning)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：277-291資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.000901篇名：魯曼的溝通運作：一個去人文主義化的轉向並列篇名：The Operation of Communication in Luhmann's Theory: A De-humanistic Shift作者：阮曉眉(Hsiao-Mei Juan)關鍵字：去主體;去人文主義;雙重偶連性;魯曼;de-Subjectivation;de-Humanism;double contingency;Niklas Luhmann期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：36期出版年：2011中文摘要：社會學的形成就某種程度而言，是基於對康德超驗主體(das transzendentale Subjekt)的反省，這促成了社會學對主體的第一波解構運動。然而，在社會學的持續發展中，逐漸形成第二波的激進解構主體的運動，亦即一種去人文主義化(Dehumanisierung)的取徑。兩者雖然都修正或否認了康德超驗主體的有效性，然而，前者還是接受一種主要由人來引導的實踐概念，而後者則認為實踐不必然與個人心理動機或意圖相符應，而是具有自成一格的運作邏輯。這第二波運動的要旨是：實際發生在具體情境裡的運作或行動，並無法簡單的歸因於意志、心理動機或者自由等等的人類內在性。換言之，主體及其相關同等項無法再作為實踐的推動基礎；相應於此，個體也無法作為社會的基本元素。本文主要以魯曼(Niklas Luhmann)作為討論對象，嘗試從其理論中所揭露的兩個論點來闡述其去人文主義化的觀點，亦即：(1)「雙重偶連性情境不是行動的阻礙，而是行動的前提假設」，以及(2)與之相關的「溝通過程的非對稱性關係」。接著將論述去人文主義化的取徑對實在的看法，這個取徑將關注焦點從本質的存有轉向經驗的實在，亦即不是直接追問「什麼」，而是採取從「如何」著手以獲得「什麼」的取徑，並且強調社會現實在被選擇實踐出來之前的不確定性及不可規定性－即使實踐最後通常都符合社會的期待框架。最後，我將討論在去人文主義化觀點下，具暫時性質的實踐與相對穩定的結構間的關係。英文摘要：The emergence and development of sociology is a response to and critique of Kant's idea of the transcendental subject. This leads to the first wave of de-subjectivation. The second wave of de-subjectivation, a de-humanistic approach, has gradually been established with the continuous development of sociology. Both approaches reject the validity of Kant’s idea of the transcendental subject. The difference is that while the first wave still promotes a human-oriented practice, the second one argues that the practice has its own logic and can work without a subject's intention and motive. In this article, I discuss Luhmann's theory in respect of the de-humanistic approach from two perspectives: First, that the context of double contingency is not seen as an obstacle of an action but as a requirement; secondly, that interaction or communication is an asymmetric, dynamic process. Following this, the idea of reality from the de-humanistic perspective will be the focus of discussion. The substantial being elucidated in this approach will be transformed into an empirical and temporal practice. Finally, I explore the relationship between temporal practice and relative stable structure.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110300360012篇名：突現作為弔詭：從整體／部分到形式／媒介之區別的社會系統理論觀察並列篇名：Emergence as Paradox: From Whole/Part to Form/Media through Social Systems Theory作者：劉育成(Yu-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：突現;社會系統理論;媒介／形式;區別;弔詭;emergence;social systems theory;media/form distinction;Niklas Luhmann;paradox期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：36期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文企圖探究的是「突現」概念與Luhmann的社會系統理論之間的關係。一般而言，「突現」概念與複雜系統的自組織(self-organization)過程有關，在此過程中所出現的嶄新且具連貫性的結構、類型與性質等，乃被視之為突現概念的主要內涵。有研究者認為Luhmann在其社會系統理論中並未處理此概念。這樣的看法或許有失公允。本文所主張的是，在系統形成之運作中，「突現」就是弔詭。透過對系統／環境的這組差異以及系統在自身之中再引入這組差異之運作的討論，或許對突現概念提供了不同的理解。「系統即差異」的觀點以及媒介／形式之區別則提供了理解突現的較好途徑。英文摘要：The aim of this article is to elucidate the idea of ”emergence” and its relation to Niklas Luhmann's social systems theory. Some critics claim that Luhmann overlooks the idea of emergence which can be defined as ”the arising of novel and coherent structures, patterns, and properties during the process of self-organization in complex systems”. By contrast, I contend that in fact the idea of emergence exhibits the paradox in the operations of systems formation and can be solved. The emergent property can be explicated through system/environment difference with which system unfolds the paradox within itself. The concept of ”System is difference” and its extensive media/form distinction can contribute to a better understanding of the idea of emergence.起始頁-結束頁：39-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110300360023篇名：魯曼社會系統理論中的自我指涉與異己指涉並列篇名：Self-Reference and Hetero-Reference in Niklas Luhmann's Theory of Social Systems作者：胡育祥(Yui-Shiang Hu)關鍵字：社會系統;自我指涉;異己指涉;告知;訊息;自我觀察;偶然;social systems;self-reference;hetero-reference;utterance;information;self-observation;contingency期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：36期出版年：2011中文摘要：自1980年代以來，魯曼就將自我指涉／異己指涉當成社會系統的必要成分。本文首先從魯曼的理論發展來追蹤自我指涉／異己指涉這組區別的出現和變化，並從其中推導出一個隱含的弔詭：與訊息區別開來的告知是系統自我觀察的成果，但自我觀察卻是系統取得關於自身的訊息，由此訊息既和告知區別開來，也不和告知區別開來。直到後期，魯曼才試圖解決這個弔詭，但他的解決方法引發了更多問題：首先，他沒有解釋異己概念為何需要擴充；其次，過程性自我指涉和反省現在既被他視為自我指涉，也被他視為異己指涉；最後，他也沒有解釋自我觀察為何有些涉及訊息的製造，有些則否。有鑑於此，本文建議將這組差異視為偶然的成分，它在歷史中既非必然出現，也非不可能出現。如此一來，研究者便能追問它的可能性條件。英文摘要：Since 1980s Niklas Luhmann has treated the distinction between self-reference and hetero-reference as the necessary component of social systems. This article examines how this distinction emerges and changes throughout the development of Luhmann's system theory, and a paradox hidden behind the distinction. The utterance, which differs from information, is the result of self-observation of the system. But the self-observation refers to the information about the system itself. That is, an utterance is an information and not an information at the same time. Luhmann had not tried to solve this paradox until the end of 1990s. His solution, however, leads to more problems. First, he cannot explain why the concept of ”hetero-” must be extended. Secondly, procedural self-reference and reflection are also treated as hetero-reference; Lastly, he cannot explain why some of the self-observations are involved in information and some not. In order to overcome these dilemmas, this article suggests that the distinction between self-reference and hetero-reference is a contingent component of social systems; it is neither necessary nor impossible. As a result, researchers should investigate its conditions of possibility.起始頁-結束頁：87-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110300360034篇名：重建普遍性的嘗試：Jacques Ranciere論「平等」、「民主」與「警察」並列篇名：Reconstructing the Universality: Jacques Ranciere on "Equality", "Democracy" and "Police"作者：李建漳(Chien-Chang Lee)關鍵字：洪席耶;平等;警察;民主;政治哲學;Jacques Ranciere;equality;police;democracy;political Philosophy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：36期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文試圖詮釋當代法國最重要的政治思想家之一，Jacques Ranciere。洪席耶的理論有三大概念：「平等」、「警察」及「政治」。平等原則不是傳統理論中所追求的倫理學目標，而是政治世界中最根本的實有，它被設想成一種真實存在的預設，是使不平等及所有社會現象成為可能的條件。「警察」是一種獨殊的感性世界觀的分享，它宣稱自己是一個完滿的整體，否認他者性，否定「不是部分之部分」的存在。而我們最好將洪席耶所定義的「政治」－他有時稱之為「民主」或「主體化」－視為是一種平等原則與警察世界之間的「差異」：民主不但立基於平等與警察的「非同一性」，它的功能就是不斷「差異化」平等原則與警察世界之間永存的差異。洪席耶試圖重建現代性，將平等視為唯一的普遍性，而這個思路最大的特點在於，他「負面式」地、以「弱勢異者」為出發點來建構平等原則的普遍性。英文摘要：This paper discusses the political view of the French philosopher, Jacques Ranciere. There were three fundamental elements in Ranciere's political theory: ”Equality”, ”Police” and ”Politics”. Ranciere considers the equality a real presupposition, rather than an objective to achieve. By Police, Ranciere takes it to be a special version of world where there was no ”the part that has no part”, i.e., the synonym of the otherness. As Ranciere deploys the word of ”Politics” (or sometimes ”Democracy” instead) in a peculiar way, this paper suggests that it should be interpreted as a ”difference” between Equality and Police, which constitutes a power of differentiation. The main tenet of Ranciere's theory is the criterion of equality: the validity of a theory should be tested by those who are the most disadvantaged. Ranciere further argues that the universal principle should be appreciated by a ”negative” way; that is, the universal principle was nothing but the effect of its own power and there was no possibility of a full realization of the ”community of equals” here and now. His political views therefore, became an open and non-dominant system.起始頁-結束頁：123-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201103003600401篇名：公害、職災與科學－RCA專輯導言作者：陳信行期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：11-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.00112篇名：司法正義與科學事實如何交會？從Daubert爭議看法律、科學與社會並列篇名：How Does Legal Justice Meet Scientific Fact? A View on Law, Science and Society through the 〞Daubert〞 Controversy作者：陳信行(Hsin-Hsing Chen)關鍵字：毒物侵權訴訟;科學因果關係;證據標準;專家證人;toxic tort;scientific causality;rules of evidence;expert testimony期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：包括公害、職業病與產品責任等課題的「毒物侵權訴訟」（toxic tort litigation），從工業革命以來，就時常成為關於工業製程與產品對不同人群的危害問題的科學與社會爭論場域。美國從1993年開始的一系列關於法庭應當如何處理這種訴訟中的科學證據和專家證人與證詞的爭論，通過三個最高法院判例，產生了所謂「Daubert標準」；該標準的實施大量減少了美國毒物侵權訴訟的數量。十餘年來的爭議中，工業界與司法界多持肯定態度，但科學及其他領域專業者對於Daubert標準幾乎都強烈反對。本文檢視Daubert標準形成的背景、過程、及其立即影響，討論其中「科學事實」的邊界如何在爭議中被不同行動者打造、推移，並介紹美國STS學界對此的分析。同時，本文討論了Daubert標準所代表的制式科學因果觀之外的兩個重要的另類觀點：日本的「疫學原則」與歐盟的化學品登記法規所根據的「預防原則」。最後，本文嘗試討論類似RCA職業病案等台灣的司法訴訟事件對於STS學術所提出的重要知識課題。英文摘要：Toxic tort litigation, including pollution, occupational hazard, and product liability disputes, has long been one of the norm-setting mechanisms regulating technology in society since the Industrial Revolution. Often through litigation and litigation-generated scientific and social debates, issues of potential hazards of industrial procedures and products become known and addressed. In Taiwan, the ongoing RCA cancer litigation is one of the very rare science-intensive toxic tort cases to date. The Taiwanese court has few precedences to follow regarding handling of scientific expert testimonies. In the U.S. courts, however, a series of heated debates on such issues have been ongoing since the 1993 Supreme Court ruling of 〞Daubert〞 v. Merrell Dow. The so-called 〞Daubert Standard〞 produced through three consecutive rulings have since been a focus of a multifaceted debate involving actors in a myriad of fields and positions. The 〞Daubert〞 Standard stipulates that the trial judge should act as 〞gatekeeper〞 to ensure only relevant and reliable expert witness and testimonies reach the court, so that the jury who represents the general public will not be misled by 〞junk science.〞 Application of the 〞Daubert〞 Standard has resulted in drastic reduction of toxic tort cases. It is acclaimed by the industry and some lawyers, but widely and fiercely criticized by many scientists, philosophers, and other professionals. This article examines the background, context, and preliminary implications of the rise of 〞Daubert〞 Standard as a case of 〞boundary work,〞 and introduces critiques from English-language STS and philosophical scholarship. Alternative causality standards are discussed in comparison to 〞Daubert〞, such as the 〞epidemiological principles〞 used in Japanese pollution trials and the 〞precautionary principles〞 used in recent EU industrial chemical regulations. Finally, this article argues that science-intensive litigations in Taiwan such as the RCA hold strategic importance both for STS research and for wider understanding of science and society.起始頁-結束頁：17-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.00173篇名：死了幾位電子廠女工之後：有機溶劑的健康風險爭議並列篇名：After the Death of Some Electronic Workers: The Health Risk Controversies of Organic Solvents作者：林宜平(Yi-Ping Din)關鍵字：電子業;女工;有機溶劑;健康風險;該做而未做的科學研究;Electronic Industry;Female Workers;Organic!Solvent;Health Risks;Wndone Science期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究回顧及討論有機溶劑的健康風險爭議，重建RCA〈Radio Company of America〉電子廠1992年關廠之前的有機溶劑使用狀況及作業環境，並且從新政治科學社會學〈New Political Sociology of Science〉的觀點，討論有機溶劑環境與職業健康風險爭議中「該做而未做的科學研究」〈undone science〉。本研究發現，在多名年輕女工猝死的「飛歌事件」後，政府部門於1974年開始管制有機溶劑，不過RCA在飛歌事件後，持續宣導三氯乙烯的安全性，直至1988年，工廠的作業環境仍因排氣通風不良，佈滿有機溶劑。RCA不但惡意傾倒有機溶劑，汙染地下水，並且有八次違反有機溶劑管理規則的記錄。臺灣的RCA流行病學研究，由於次級資料庫殘缺不齊，低估早期進場勞工的健康危害。作者並以國際學術社群的三氯乙烯健康效應研究為例，討論科學證據生產過程中的性別、階級與種族不平等。本研究指出，科學研究是複雜的政治、經濟、法律與社會產物，無論臺灣的RCA研究，或是國際科學社群的有機溶劑健康效應研究，都有許多該做而未做的科學研究，而政府和被視為模範工廠的RCA，對勞工健康的保護，也有許多該盡而未盡的責任。英文摘要：In this study, I review and discuss the health risk controversies of organic solvents. I reconstruct the solvent's usage and working environment in RCA's factory before its closure in 1992. I also examine the ”undone science” of the health risks of organic solvents from the perspective of the ”New Political Sociology of Science”.I find that after the Philco case in the 1970s, RCA continued using and promoting the safety of trichloroethylene. Due to its poor ventilation systems, RCA's factory was filled with solvents until 1988. Not only did the RCA factory pollute the ground water with organic solvents, they had eight occupational solvent regulation violations. Taiwanese RCA epidemiological studies suffered from incomplete and crippled databases, and underestimated the health hazards to the workers. I further examined the toxicological and occupational studies of trichloroethylene. These revealed that there were gender, class and racial inequalities in the production of scientific evidence. I conclude that scientific research has complicated political, economic, legal and social contexts. There was undone science in both the RCA health research in Taiwan and in the international scientific research on the health risks of organic solvents. Finally, the government and RCA ignored their duties in protecting the health of workers.起始頁-結束頁：61-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.00614篇名：流行病學的政治：RCA流行病學研究的後設分析並列篇名：The Politics of Epidemiology:A 'Meta-Analysis' on RCA's Epidemiological Research作者：陳政亮(Cheng-Liang Chen)關鍵字：流行病學;RCA;科學民主化;Epidemiology;RCA;democratization of science期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：在公害與工安訴訟中，流行病學往往扮演著關鍵的角色，其研究結果也決定了不同團體的利益，因此也是激烈對抗的場域，本文便企圖分析此場域的政治性與其超越的可能。從RCA訴訟的例子出發，本文首先討論流行病學在司法中的角色、其知識上的潛力與限制、與其所處的社會位置。並進一步後設的分析與RCA相關的本地學術論文，以討論流行病學超越其限制的可能。本文認為，在當前資本主義社會下，流行病學被夾在企業與受害者之間，極容易透過方法設計而成為生產「科學不確定性」的學科，它經常失卻了其學科宣稱的「保衛公眾健康」目標，甚至走向企業那一邊去。而透過分析RCA案中的流行病學論文，本文討論了台灣流行病學例行化的風格，以及相對保守的推論；一般而言，它較缺乏受害者的身體感受與歷史經驗，對於社會變遷缺乏敏感度。另外，也指出了納入受害者的身體經驗的研究較能夠接近真實。最後，本文提出一個公民／科學聯盟的策略，此聯盟有助於流行病學對抗企業與捍衛受害者，並形成新的政治／知識形式。英文摘要：In toxic tort litigation, epidemiology often plays a crucial role. Since its research conclusion influences interests of two parties, it becomes an area with fierce conflict. Focusing on the RCA (Radio Corporation of America) lawsuit in Taiwan, this article sees the nature of the conflict as a form of politics of knowledge, and intends to explore, blur and go beyond its boundary. It is found that epidemiology is put in an untoward position between corporations and victims in capitalist societies, and is easily manipulated to produce 'uncertainty'; as a result, it retreats from victims or leans to corporations for the worse. By 'meta-analyzing' four epidemiological articles on RCA Taiwan, in which the causation between diseases found on workers and organic solvents used on the shop floor is studied, this article indicates a kind of routinized and conservative style in these studies, and suggests that bringing workers' bodily experiences into research is beneficial in pursuit of both social and biological facts. It also suggests that a 'citizen-scientist alliance' can help epidemiology challenging the power of corporations. In relation to knowledge, in such alliance epidemiology can be democratized along with the participation of lay people, based on which it will have the possibility to go beyond its social and intellectual limits.起始頁-結束頁：113-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.01135篇名：白老鼠上法院：從兩例工業污染訴訟案談起並列篇名：Guinea Pigs Go to Court: Two Cases of Industrial Hazards in Taiwan作者：彭保羅(Paul Jobin);曾育慧(Yu-Hwei Tseng)關鍵字：公害職業病;RCA;有機溶劑;台鹼安順廠;戴奧辛汙染;Industrial hazards;RCA;organic solvents;Taiwan Alkali Industry;dioxin期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：在RCA案中，上千名以女性為主、罹患各種癌症的前RCA員工，委託法律扶助基金會〈法扶〉提告。被告以流行病學研究未發現顯著因果關係拒絕賠償。目前公衛專家僅能證明暴露提高罹患乳癌的機率。在台南，遭受中石化安順廠戴奧辛汙染的居民亦由法扶協助展開訴訟。與RCA稍有不同，中石化和公部門在初期否認後，承認舊場址為汙染來源。台南市政府的調查僅發現較高的糖尿病盛行，其他如癌症與生殖系統等疾病則可能因多重暴露被低估。兩岸均突顯流行病學在保障公眾健康與汙染監測雙重任務中的侷限。原告表達自己淪為「白老鼠」，以其為主體的研究並未回饋給居民，任憑其健康持續惡化卻得不到補償與照護，他們擔心等到流行病學證明出汙染與疾病有顯著相關之前，將眼睜睜地看著更多人發病、甚至死亡。法扶因而必須跟時間賽跑，試圖突破動物實驗與流行病學的障礙，將未定論的研究結果轉換成司法判決，除了對污染損害做事後承認與賠償外，亦催化具預警精神的工業危害預防政策。英文摘要：In Northern Taiwan, the former electronics plants of ACA have brought serious occupational and environmental damage. Over one thousand workers suffer from a variety of cancers. As they believe that these cancers were provoked by on-the-job exposure to organic solvents and polluted tap water, a group of 450 of them have sued the company with the support of the Legal Aid Foundation. In Southern Taiwan, the same foundation supports a group of residents of the Anshun area, where extremely high concentrations of dioxin have been found around a former chemical plant. Neighbors of the plant have experienced particularly high levels of diabetes. Dissatisfied with the relief payments and concerned about future health problems, notably a rise in cancer incidence, two hundred residents have launched a lawsuit against the company, the city and the state. In both cases, the numerous studies conducted have left the plaintiffs feeling like guinea pigs used for the purpose of science, while they receive little or no return in terms of medical care or other compensation. They fear that, given the delays caused by wait-and-see politics, lengthy procedural battles, and the never-ending medical controversies at court, they will have to witness more deaths within their group before any resolution may be found. Their lawyers are thus racing against the clock in an effort to turn insufficient data and inconclusive results into positive judicial decisions.起始頁-結束頁：159-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.01596篇名：法律系統對因果關係之建構作者：何建志期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：205-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.02057篇名：流行病學與社會分析的因果關係作者：陳政亮期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：233-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.02338篇名：因果關係的推論需要多少證據的支持？作者：王榮麟期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：243-249資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.02439篇名：健康照護與政策之性別主流化：從國際經驗學起作者：Ellen Kuhlmann;成令方;蔡昌成期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：251-271資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201104.025101篇名：英國社區新政對台灣社區工作的啟示與借鏡：社區治理觀點的分析並列篇名：Implications and Lessons of the New Deal for Communities in England for Taiwan's Community Work-Perspective of Community Governance作者：黃源協(Yuan-Shie Hwang);劉素珍(Su-Jen Liu);蕭文高(Wen-Kao Hsiao)關鍵字：社區新政;社區治理;社區發展;社區營造;The New Deal for Communities;community governance;community development;community building期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：23期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在由社區治理的觀點，探究英國「社區新政」的內涵、實施策略及運作模式，並依據相關的評估報告檢視其實施成效及遭遇的困境。在分析台灣社區政策的內涵與實施經驗後，本文從英國社區新政的實施經驗，歸納出可供台灣社區工作的啟示與借鏡，啟示方面包括：(1)社區定義與範圍的再思考；(2)政府角色與功能的再調整；(3)社區居民之公民角色的發揮；(4)貧困社區之機會公平的保障；(5)以「實證」為基礎的社區方案；(6)建構政策實踐的統合機制；(7)檢視社區發展與社區營造的績效。借鏡方面包括：(1)伙伴關係經營不善難以成就社區的發展；(2)社區發展工作不宜過度倚重重要「個人」；(3)社區所遭遇的問題並非樣樣皆適合由社區層次做介入；(4)難解的社區衝突將不利於社區的發展；(5)穩定且長期的財政支出不必然能讓社區邁向永續。英文摘要：In England, when the New Labour came into the power in 1997, communities and neighbourhoods were full of problems of unemployment, education failure and crime. To cope with these problems, the Labour Government proposed the new community programme, New Deal for Communities (NDC). The NDC intended to solve the difficulties faced the deprived areas and to alleviate the phenomenon of social exclusion. For the past decade, the reports of the NDC evaluation have been published in succession. This paper aims to discover the contents, strategies and operational model of the NDC from the perspective of community governance. After analyzing the contents and reflecting the experiences of community work in Taiwan, this paper concluded some implications and lessons of the NDC experiences for future Taiwan’s community work. The implications include: (1) Rethinking the community definition and range; (2) Readjusting the government's role and function; (3) Elaborating the role of citizen of community residents; (4) Protecting equal opportunity for deprived communities; (5) Promoting the evidence-based community projects (6) Constructing an integrated mechanism for policy implementation; and (7) Reviewing the performance of community development and community building. The lessons include: (1) Poor management for partnership cannot achieve better community development; (2) Community development work is unsuitable to overly rely on significant individual; (3) Community problems cannot be solved entirely only by intervention through community level; (4) Community conflict which is hard to solve will be harmful to community development; and (5) Stable and long-term financial expenditure is not guaranteed to sustainable community development.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.23.012篇名：政治民主化與社會政策：探索政治制度對台灣年金制度建構的影響並列篇名：Political Democratization and Social Policy: Exploring the Impact of Political Institutions on the Pension Scheme-Building in Taiwan作者：施世駿(Shih-Jiunn Shi);葉羽曼(Yu-Man Yeh)關鍵字：社會政策;國民年金;政治制度論;否決點;台灣;social policy;national pension insurance;political institutionalism;veto point;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：23期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣自1990年代初開始國民年金的規劃與研議，期間歷經行政、立法部門、專家學者與社會團體的參與討論，最後在2007年通過法案。本文試圖從政治制度論的觀點，透視台灣民主化過程中年金政策決議過程的制度「否決點」形態，並且佐以文獻研究、次級資料分析、專家訪談等方式做為經驗資料的基礎，分析國民年金保險制度建立過程中，政治制度形態以及制度否決點的變化，如何影響國民年金政策的理念、利益與制度樣貌。我們發現在民主深化後的少數政府制度制約與朝野緊張的政治競爭下，國民年金的政策研擬深受多元化的政治與社會力量影響，導致政策不連續，甚至形成政治空轉的民主困境。從民主突破到民主深化的過程中，國民年金體現台灣政治制度的權力責任分散化，以及社會團體參與多元化的特性，雖然有助於不同理念的彼此爭辯，藉此凝聚較強的政策共識，但是卻也較易造成政策決議過程的擺盪。從民主轉型的政治制度與否決點面向分析出發，本文企圖提供日後研究台灣社會政策過程中的不同思考取徑，以及相關制度理論觀點對未來分析台灣社會福利政策的意涵。英文摘要：Since 1990s, Taiwan has put National Pension Insurance scheme on the political agenda, and finalized the version in 2008 after decade-long discussions by various government mechanisms and many interest groups in Taiwan's civil society. This article seeks to employ the perspective of political institutionalism in order to identify the form of 'veto points' in the pension policymaking against the background of democratization. Based on the literature review, secondary data analysis, and expert interviews, we explore the impact of changing political institutions and institutional veto points on policy ideas, interests and institutional frameworks of the National Pension Insurance. The main finding is that, under the constraints of the minority government and political tensions between ruling and opposition parties during the democratic deepening phase (i.e. after year 2000), the policymaking process of the National Pension Insurance scheme has been bogged down by the interplay of pluralized, if not contradictory, political and social interests, leading to political impasse and policy fluctuations. In National Pension policy domain, we have witnessed fragmentary power relations in political institutions as well as pluralization of social interest intermediation. Although these changing contexts have indeed facilitated the contestation of different ideas conducive to the convergence of policy consensus, the result is that these contexts inevitably tended to precipitate inconsistent policy developments. The present study should demonstrate the explanatory power of political institutionalism and veto points in accounting for pension policy evolution within the context of democratic transformation, and offer rationales for the application of these theoretical viewpoints in the future research of social policy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：47-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.23.023篇名：「我很辛苦，可是我不可憐！」東南亞新移民女性在台生活的優勢觀點分析並列篇名："My Marital Life is Hard, but I am not Pitiful!" Analyzing Southeast Asian Immigrant Wives' Lives in Taiwan through Strengths Perspective作者：王翊涵(Yi-Han Wang)關鍵字：新移民女性;優勢觀點;跨國婚姻;東南亞國家;immigrant wives;Southeast Asia;strengths perspective;transnational marriage期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：23期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討台灣社會重視的跨國婚姻議題，從優勢觀點來對當前將東南亞新移民女性在台生活等同於適應困難的論述提出質疑。收集18位受訪者的經驗後，可以發現新移民女性的婚後生活確實受到箝制，然而爬梳於她們對於自己在台生活經驗的理解，本文提出這群女性並非如既有主流論述所言是可憐的受迫害者，她們是有能力展現優勢的主體，可以在異地文化差異的適應過程、家務勞動以及母職實踐中創造多重意義與增權賦能，並能因應協商接待社會所加諸其身上的污名歧視。這樣的研究結果呈現不僅提供社會工作者對東南亞新移民女性婚後生活裡優勢經驗的理解，亦期待在當前優勢觀點社會工作模式尚未應用於女性移民的服務處遇時，本文可以為日後相關領域的發展有拋磚引玉的貢獻。最後，本文提醒台灣社會需要落實對於多元文化的尊重，需擴大社區裡有利於這群女性展現優勢的資源與機會。英文摘要：Based on the theory of strengths perspective, this article explores immigrant wives' life experiences in Taiwan. Interview data were collected from 18 women who married into Taiwanese society from Vietnam, Indonesia and Cambodia. The data have spoken for themselves and two main findings can be revealed. First, immigrant wives certainly suffer inferiority in Taiwan. Their lives are overshadowed by racialization, the negative media images of foreign brides, and the operation of profit-pursuing marriage agents. Second, immigrant wives are active agents drawing on strengths rather than passive victims. They have capacities, talents, competencies, and possibilities to cope with structural coercion and resist discriminatory gaze, i.e. transforming problems of language barrier into linguistic capital, pursuing economic empowerment, and reviving energies by negotiating with gender culture. These findings not only challenge the existing research results but also remind social work practitioners of widening understandings of these women. Finally, this article suggests that the respect for diverse cultures should be put into effect so that the communities can be the ”enabling niches” of immigrant wives.起始頁-結束頁：93-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.23.034篇名：社會功能與社區慢性精神病人復元之相關性研究－以社區復健中心與康復之家為例並列篇名：A Correlation Study of Social Functioning and Recovery on Community Mental Health Patients: Examples of Community Mental Health Centers and Halfway Houses作者：劉素芬(Su-Fen Liu)關鍵字：社會功能;精神復健;復元;social functioning;mental health rehabilitation;recovery期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：23期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以使用社區精神復健服務的個案為對象，探討社會功能與其精神復元的相關性。資料蒐集方式為量化問卷調查，樣本來源來自台灣各地共13家社區復健中心與13家康復之家，共訪問310位的社區慢性精神病患。社會功能量表使用宋麗玉(2001)發展的社區精神病患社會功能量表。精神復元指標包括精神病人主觀的精神復元評估，以及工作人員的客觀評估；前者採用Corrigan, Giffort, Rashid, Leary 與Okeke(1999)發展的精神復元自評表，後者使用簡明精神病評定量表(Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, BPRS)。本研究亦納入病人的基本資料及疾病史等變項。在資料分析方面以多元階層迴歸分析為主。資料分析結果顯示精神病人的社會功能表現愈好，其主觀精神復元程度愈佳，其精神症狀穩度較高。社會功能與五個主觀精神復元次向度－目標與成功取向、信心與希望、求助意願、自助以及不受症狀影響皆達顯著相關。機構類型（社區復健中心或康復之家）與病人之精神復元程度並未發現顯著差異。本文亦討論其它相關影響精神復元因素。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the relationship between social functioning and recovery from mental illness, using persons with mental illness as target. This study employed a cross-sectional survey design using a convenience sample of 310 mental health consumers who were members in community mental health agencies (the rehabilitation centers or the half-way houses) in Taiwan and 26 practitioners who were familiar with these participated consumers. Social functioning was measured using an adapted Chinese version of the Social Functioning Scale (SFS), which is developed by Song (2001). Subjective recovery from mental illness was assessed through the adapted Chinese version of the Recovery Assessment Scale (RAS), which was developed by Corrigan et al. in 1999. Objective recovery from mental illness was assessed through the adapted Chinese version of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. A series of hierarchical multiple-regression models were used.There were the significant association between social functioning and subjective recovery from mental illness. Persons with mental illness having higher level of social functioning were more likely to have better level of subjective recovery from mental illness. In addition, there were significant association between social functioning and five sub-dimensions of subjective recovery: goal and success orientation, personal confidence and hope, willingness to ask for help, self-help, and not dominated by symptoms. The correlation between the agency type (community mental health centers and half-way houses) and the level of recovery from mental illness was not found in this study. Factors related to the level of recovery from mental illness are also discussed in the study.起始頁-結束頁：137-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.23.0401篇名：盈餘管理動機與資產減損會計：中國證據並列篇名：The Motive for Earnings Management and Accounting for Asset Impairment: Evidence from China作者：曾小青(Xiao-Qing Zeng);李貴富(Kuei-Fu Li);王全三(Chuan-San Wang);黃秋冬(Qiu-Dong Huang)關鍵字：資產減損;盈餘管理;國際會計準則;asset impairment;earnings management;IFRS期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：2003至2005年間，中國資產減損會計與國際會計準則相近，允許經理人提列資產減損損失及迴轉利益；同期間，證券管理當局以淨利或股東權益報酬率為指標，決定是否終止上市或得否發行新股，此特殊環境形成盈餘管理的動機。研究結果顯示中國上市公司於可能取得配股或增發資格時，會減少資產減損和增加迴轉利益；中國經理人於連續虧損年度，為增加未來轉虧為盈之機率，亦有提列較高資產減損和較低迴轉利益的現象。由於本研究區分正常及異常資產減損（迴轉），並先估算盈餘管理動機的機率，再用以解釋異常資產減損（迴轉），且研究之資產減損項目包括壞帳準備等八項，因而能以創新的方法，完整呈現中國資產減損會計的全貌，作為已採用或將採用國際會計準則國家的參考。英文摘要：Accounting practice for asset impairment in China was similar with International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) over the 2003-2005 period. Managers of listed firms in China were allowed to write off and reverse asset impairment loss. In this same period, Chinese authorities used net income or return on equity as a standard to decide whether a firm was to be de-listed or allowed to make seasoned-equity offerings (SEOs). This special setting created an incentive to manage accounting earnings. Our empirical results show that Chinese firms will decrease the write-offs or increase the reversals of asset impairment losses to qualify for issuing new shares. They will also increase the write-offs or decrease the reversals of asset impairment losses to increase the probability of not reporting a loss in consecutive years with net losses. Our research design separates abnormal from normal write-offs and reversals. Moreover, we estimate the likelihood of earnings management before explaining its impact on the abnormal write-offs and reversals. We use write-offs and reversals of eight asset accounts and are able to show a complete picture of the impairment accounting in China. The results also provide a reference for countries that have applied for or will apply for the IFRS.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.12篇名：申購熱潮是長期績效的反指標嗎？並列篇名：Subscription Fads: Is It an Inverse Indicator for Security's Longterm Performance?作者：王朝仕(Chao-Shi Wang)關鍵字：申購熱潮;資訊不對稱;過度反應;subscription fads;information asymmetry;overreaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究驗證投資人申購熱潮與績效表現的關係，探討對象嘗試整合新上市公司股票（IPOs）與現金增資股票（SEOs）申購市場；此二者的比較基礎在於同屬公司權益政策，且其間市場具有資訊不對稱程度的理論差異。實證顯示有諸多證據指向熱申購將導致長期績效傾向不佳，而此效應不單發生於IPOs，在SEOs亦被偵測出相同的現象；上述關係即使在考量風險因素後仍獲支持。但是，SEOs熱申購對於績效的解釋能力較IPOs低，表示投資人對於SEOs的過度反應較不嚴重。此外，本研究尚發現IPOs市場經驗為公司擬定SEOs申購計畫與投資人決策的重要依據。英文摘要：This study provides an integrative analysis on the performance of IPOs and SEOs to investigate the influence of subscription fads. Grounded on the degree differentiation of information asymmetry in IPOs and SEOs markets, the empirical results suggest that the long-term performance of securities with subscription fads tend to underperform in both IPOs and SEOs markets whereas the fads in SEOs have less explanation power. The statistical result, in the meanwhile, remains significant as risk factor is introduced in the model. The lower explanation power of subscription fads in SEOs market indicates investors' overreaction to SEOs is less severe. Finally, this study also demonstrates that the marketing experience in IPOs provides informative reference for companies and investors when making subscription plan in SEOs and investment decision, respectively.起始頁-結束頁：31-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.313篇名：超法律制度影響本期股票報酬率：對未來公司盈餘資訊效果之跨國實證研究並列篇名：The Informativeness of Current Return about Future Earnings and Extra-Legal Institutions: International Evidence作者：朱立倫(Eric Li-Luan Chu);吳毓武(Woody Wu)關鍵字：公司治理;超法律制度;盈餘資訊效果;corporate governance;extra-legal institution;earnings informativeness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文研究超法律制度如何影響當期股價報酬率所蘊含之關於未來盈餘的資訊結果。本文樣本係由1989－1999期間8個東亞及11個西歐國家之上市公司所組成，這些國家具有不同的超法律制度。我們發現當期報酬率對未來盈餘的資訊效果如下 : （1）對於有好消息的企業，此資訊效果隨產品市場的競爭程度增加而減弱；（2）對於有壞消息的企業，此資訊效果隨著產品市場競爭程度增加而增加；（3）上述效果在監督越強的國家則越為顯著。我們的多元回歸結果進一步顯示，一個國家層面的超法律和法律制度彼此相輔相成。本研究對於超法律制度在公司治理中的作用提供了實證支持。我們認為，由於政治或歷史原因，要改變一個國家的法律制度，例如法律傳統、司法制度或相關法令等等，成本往往非常高昂，而改進超法律制度則可能讓改革控制在一定可行的範圍之內，其相對效果亦呈顯著 。英文摘要：This study examines the impact of extra-legal institutional factors on the informativeness of current return about future earnings. Using a sample of firm-level observations during the period from 1989 to 1999 in eight East Asian and eleven Western European countries that exhibit different levels of extra-legal institutions, we find evidence that the informativeness of current return about future earnings: (1) decreases with stronger product market competition for good news firms, (2) increases with stronger product market competition for bad news firms; and (3) is more pronounced in countries where there is strong pressure from public opinion. Furthermore, multiple regression results show that country-specific extralegal and legal institutional features add the incremental contribution above and beyond the others. This study provides empirical support for the role of extra-legal institutions in corporate governance. While changing legal institutions, such as the legal tradition, the judicial system, or the rule of law, may be costly for historical or political reasons, or both, improving the extra-legal institutions is likely to be well within the range of feasible reforms.起始頁-結束頁：67-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.674篇名：非營利組織之組織認定歸類模式：利益關係者理論觀點並列篇名：The Organizational Identity Categorization Model of Non-profit Organizations: Stakeholder Theory Perspective作者：林家五(Chia-Wu Lin);胡宛仙(Wan-Hsien Hu)關鍵字：組織認定;利益關係人理論;非營利組織;organizational identity;stakeholder theory;nonprofit organization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以利益關係人理論為基礎，組織認定為核心概念，探討非營利組織中各類利益關係人所知覺之組織認定內涵。共針對七家社會救助類別的非營利組織，進行了15場半結構的深度訪談，受訪者類別共包含高階主管（執行長、副執行長）、中階主管（部門主任、資深員工等）及志工。在以紮根理論建議的技巧分析後，發現非營利組織的認定內涵，可以用「內部—外部」及「動態—靜態」兩大取向來描述，亦可用更細緻的5種向度、10種類別來分類。英文摘要：Using stakeholder theory as the basis and organizational identity as the core concept, this research probed into the content dimensions of the stakeholders' organizational identity connotation in the nonprofit organization. 15 semi-structural interviews of 7 NPOs were collected. The respondents ranged from top management (CEO, vice-CEO), middle managers (ex. directors of social workers), administrative staff, to volunteers. After grounded theory analysis, two main approaches (inside vs. outside; static vs. dynamic) and five dimensions, ten categories were inducted from qualitative data.起始頁-結束頁：97-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.975篇名：主管管理職能提升：自我導向學習與知覺組織支持的交互效果並列篇名：The Enhancement of Manager's Managerial Competency: The Interactive Effects of Self-Directed Learning and Perceived Organizational Support作者：施智婷(Chih-Ting Shih);陳旭耀(Hsu-Yao Chen);黃良志(Liang-Chih Huang)關鍵字：自我導向學習;知覺組織支持;管理職能;self-directed learning readiness;perceived organizational support;managerial competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：過去學者與業界對於發展主管管理職能往往強調由組織主導一套完善的管理發展活動，達到提升管理職能與工作績效之目的，而忽略個體自發性學習活動的價值。本研究主要探討主管自我導向學習對管理職能與工作績效的影響，同時以組織支持的角度探討組織在此過程中扮演的角色。本研究以來自不同產業之200位中階主管為研究對象，經干擾結構方程式模式檢驗後發現，自我導向學習、知覺組織支持以及兩者之交互效果能夠顯著提升主管之管理職能，進而增進工作績效。本研究結果顯示雖然管理職能的發展與工作績效能由主管自我導向學習達成，並與組織正式訓練達到相同的效果，組織對主管管理職能發展之支持亦是不可或缺的推手。英文摘要：Prior literature on human resource development have put more emphasis on the dominant role that organization plays in need-identifying and planning a set of training and development projects to enhance managers' managerial competency, while ignoring the effect of self-directed learning in the workplace. The study analyzed 200 middle-managers with moderated structural equation modeling (MSE). Results showed that self-directed learning readiness of managers have significant interactive effect with perceived organizational support on managerial competency, and in turn have positive effect of managers' performance. Theoretical and practical implications are further discussed.起始頁-結束頁：135-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.1356篇名：股權結構與多角化並列篇名：Ownership Structure and Firm Diversification作者：曹壽民(Shou-Min Tsao);金成隆(Chen-Lung Chin);呂學典(Hsueh-Tien Lu)關鍵字：股權結構;多角化;公司績效;ownership structure;diversification;firm performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討股權結構是否會影響多角化的程度，以及多角化的績效。實證結果發現，當控制股東擁有較大的現金流量權，較低的控制權與現金流量權偏離時，公司較會進行國際多角化；當控制股東擁有較低的現金流量權，較高的控制權與現金流量權偏離時，公司較會進行產品多角化。此一結果顯示，控制股東可能基於公司價值極大化動機進行國際多角化，基於剝削小股東的動機進行產品多角化。同時，我們也發現公司進行多角化的績效與股權結構有關，當控制股東擁有較高的現金流量權，較低的股權偏離時，產品多角化與國際多角化的績效較好。本文的實證結果顯示，台灣上市櫃公司對於國際多角化與產品多角化的動機不同，股權結構為多角化績效的重要決定因素。英文摘要：This study investigates the impact of firm's ownership structure on the extent of firm diversification and the performance attributable to diversification. We document that firm's degree of international diversification (product diversification) is positively (negatively) related to the controlling shareholders' cash flow rights, and negatively (positively) related to the divergence between cash flow rights and control rights of the controlling shareholders. Our empirical findings are consistent with the conjecture that the controlling shareholders of Taiwan's listed firms use product diversification to extract private benefits at the expense of minority shareholders, while international diversification is driven by the controlling shareholders' desire to enhance shareholder value. Furthermore, we find that the controlling shareholders' cash flow rights (the cash-vote divergence of the controlling shareholders) positively (negatively) moderate the impact of both product diversification and international diversification on firm performance. Our findings highlight the importance of distinguishing the motivation of different diversification strategies, and support firm's ownership structure as an explanation for the performance of diversified firms.起始頁-結束頁：165-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.1657篇名：外部創新多元性、吸收能力，與創新產出：以台灣2000年到2004年上市公司為例並列篇名：Diversity of External Innovation, Absorptive Capacity, and Innovation Output: An Example for Companies Listed on Taiwan Stock Exchange Markets During the Period From 2000 To 2004作者：陳玉麟(Yu-Lin Chen)關鍵字：開放性創新模式;外部創新多元性;吸收能力;open innovation model;diversity of external innovation;absorptive capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：鮮少研究探討新興工業國的企業如何運用開放性創新模式來促進企業創新績效。本研究檢視購併、研發合作、技術授權與移轉等外部創新多元性是否有益於台灣企業的創新產出，以及吸收能力如何調節外部創新多元性與企業創新績效間的關係。2000-2002年的混合資料顯示：外部創新多元性可增加企業專利權數量的累積。購併與技術移轉佔外部創新比重對於企業未來專利權數量有正向助益。此外，研發能力、網路的深度與廣度，以及外部創新經驗均正向調節外部創新多元性與未來創新產出間的關係。同時，前二者的調節效果較後者為強。最後，關係企業長期供應鏈的正向調節效果，大於非關係企業長期、短期供應鏈的影響。英文摘要：Few studies have investigated how an enterprise applies the open innovation model to facilitate its innovation performance in a newly industrialized country. This paper focuses on examining whether the diversity of external innovation, consisting of mergers and acquisitions, R&D cooperation, technology transfer, and technology licensing contracts, promotes firm innovation performance. Another focus is to determine how absorptive capacity moderates the relationship between the diversity of external innovation and innovation outputs in Taiwan. Evidence from pooling data gathered during the period from 2000 to 2002 demonstrates that the diversity of external innovation enables an enterprise to support superior outcomes. Both ratios of mergers and acquisitions to external innovation and ratios of technology transfer to external innovation positively influence patent counts. Moreover, the results show that R&D capability, depth and scope of networks, as well as external innovation experience, positively affect the relationship between diversity of external innovation and future patent accumulation. Meanwhile, the moderating effects of R&D capability and depth and scope of networks are stronger than those of external innovation experience. Finally, the moderating effects of the long-term relationships with supplier-and customer-affiliates are stronger than those of relationships with non-affiliates.起始頁-結束頁：199-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.1998篇名：工作壓力及其後果的組群差異：以OSI模式為理論基礎之大樣本分析並列篇名：Group Differences in Work Stress and Strains: A Large Sample Analysis Based on the Theoretical Model of OSI作者：高旭繁(Shu-Fang Kao);陸洛(Luo Lu)關鍵字：工作壓力;組群差異;統合性的工作壓力模式（OSI）;work stress;group differences;a comprehensive theoretical framework of work stress (OSI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：陸洛於1997年提出統合性的工作壓力模式並發展了職業壓力指標（簡稱OSI-2）量表，此OSI-2量表廣為眾多研究者使用，施測對象相當多元。本研究以使用OSI-2量表的9754筆資料進行大樣本分析，主要研究結果為：其一，以大樣本檢定統合性工作壓力模式中，工作壓力對其後果（工作滿意度、身心健康、離職意願）的影響，以及因應策略與掌控感受的調節效果，結果相當符合理論假設，顯見此工作壓力模式有其穩定性。其二，在組群差異方面，綜攬各種不同來源的樣本，發現高工作壓力及壓力後果的危險組群為女性、未婚、年輕、資淺、大專學歷、非管理職的員工，不同職業別之工作壓力與壓力後果亦有差異。本文進一步提出組群間可能的交互作用影響，並提供對實務界工作的建議。英文摘要：Lu (1997) proposed a ”Comprehensive Theoretical Framework of Work Stress” and developed a measurement tool named ”Occupational Stress Indicator” (OSI-2). Subsequent research using the OSI has accumulated more than 9000 individual data across a wide range of occupations. The present analysis included 9754 individual data and found two major results: (1) work stress had negative impact on strains (job satisfaction, mental health, physical health, turnover intention), whereas work control and coping efforts moderated the relationships between stress and strains, as predicted by the ”Comprehensive Theoretical Framework of Work Stress”. (2) female, single, non-managerial, young, junior, and collegeeducated employees were high risk groups for work stress and strains. Employees of different occupations had different experiences of work stress and strains. We further pointed out possible interactions between various demographic/background variables, to better inform organizational stress intervention practices.起始頁-結束頁：239-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.2399篇名：期望績效回饋效果對企業投資活動的影響：台灣電子製造業之實證研究並列篇名：The Impact of Aspiration-Performance Feedback Effect on Investment Activity of Firms: The Empirical of Taiwan's Electronics Manufacturing Firms作者：曾真真(Jen-Jen Tseng);賴勇成(Yung-Cheng Lai)關鍵字：績效回饋;社會期望績效;歷史期望績效;performance feedback;social aspiration performance;historical aspiration performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以期望績效回饋模型探討正績效回饋與負績效回饋效果對企業投資決策的影響。實證時採1998、2002及2006年1601個上市（櫃）之電子資訊企業作為樣本，以檢驗社會比較績效與歷史比較績效對增量資產成長率的影響，研究結果發現當實際績效大於期望目標時，管理人對投資活動轉趨保守，因而與增量資產成長率呈負向關係；相對的，實際績效低於期望目標則與增量資產成長率呈正向關係。另外，本研究亦發現組織之剩餘資源可以在績效低於期望目標時，支持管理人從事投資活動。英文摘要：Based on the model of performance-aspiration, this study examines the effect of positive and negative performance feedback on the investment decision. Using 1601 public offering firms as data set from Taiwanese electronics manufacturing industry in 1998, 2002 and 2006, we test the impact of both performances relative to social-aspiration and historicalaspiration level on increasing growth rates of assets. Empirical analysis results show manager taking less risk on investment decision when performance exceeds their goals, which indicating the negative relationship between the performance above the aspiration level and increasing growth rates of assets. In contrast, there is a positive relationship between the performance below the aspiration level and increasing growth rates of assets. Furthermore, it also shows there is probability that manager can take advantage of slack resource to investment activities when the performance below the aspiration level.起始頁-結束頁：273-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.27310篇名：重大資本支出後的經營績效：成長機會與公司治理的角色並列篇名：Corporate Performance after Substantial Capital Expenditure: The Role of Growth Opportunity and Corporate Governance作者：黃旭輝(Hsu-Huei Huang);黃一祥(I-Hsiang Huang);張志向(Chih-Hsiang Chang)關鍵字：資本支出;公司治理;成長機會;capital expenditure;corporate governance;growth opportunity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要想回答二個問題，首先，公司在重大資本支出後的經營績效是否會優於其產業的水準？其次，什麼樣的公司在資本支出後會有較佳的績效表現？我們以1999至2003年固定資產淨值增加20％以上的267個台灣上市公司作為研究樣本。實證結果顯示，就整體樣本而言公司在歷經重大資本支出後的經營績效並未一致性的優於或低於產業的水準。其次，我們也發現成長機會、內部人持股、獨立董事和家族企業對於資本支出後的經營績效具有顯著正向的影響，若公司的董事會規模較小以及薪酬制度的激勵效果較大，其資本支出後的績效表現也較佳。最後，我們發現治理機制較佳的公司對低成長公司在資本支出後的績效提升更為顯著。英文摘要：This paper seeks to answer the following questions. Does corporate performance outperform the market after substantial capital expenditure? Which firms perform better after substantial capital expenditure? Our sample includes 267 companies listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange whose net fixed assets have increased by more than 20% during 1999-2003. Our evidence shows that companies do not consistently outperform the market after substantial capital expenditure. Furthermore, we find that companies with higher growth opportunities, higher insider shareholdings, independent directors, a smaller board of directors, a more incentive-based compensation structure or that are family-controlled perform better after incurring capital expenditure. We also find that the performance of firms with independent directors, higher managerial shareholdings or that are family-controlled is enhanced more significantly in the case of low-growth companies.起始頁-結束頁：297-325資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.29711篇名：會計師意見在財務危機預測之應用與分析並列篇名：The Analysis of Auditors' Opinions in Financial Distress Prediction作者：蔡璧徽(Bi-Huei Tsai);李正福(Cheng-Few Lee)關鍵字：會計師意見;繼續經營;ROC曲線;auditors' opinion;going concern;ROC curve期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究針對會計師「對繼續經營假設有疑慮」、「違反一致性」以及「投資損益依未查核財報認列」意見，以單期logit 模型與離散時間涉險模型，測試會計師意見是否有助於預測企業財務危機。增額測試中，若公司在該年度四月三十日以前就發生財務危機，則改採用該公司前二年度的會計師意見作預測，並比較四大會計事務所的預測是否較其他會計事務所更準確。研究結果發現離散時間涉險模型的預測績效優於單期logit模型，也發現會計師意見具增額解釋能力。增額測試進而顯示會計師並未及時簽發「對繼續經營假設有疑慮」的意見，大會計師事務所預測能力僅些微優於小會計師事務所，實證結果並未強力支持會計師具備財務危機預測或出具修正式意見的道德勇氣。英文摘要：This study utilizes ”doubts of going-concern”, ”lack of consistency” and ”realized investment income based on non-audited financial statements” opinions provided by auditors to construct sixteen predictive models of financial distress. Two different approaches: single-period logit model and discrete-time hazard model are developed to forecast financial distress and the results obtained are compared among the various models. Furthermore, additional tests revise to adopt the auditors' opinions from the most recent auditors' reports in the predictive models. If a firm suffers financial distress prior to April 30, additional tests choose the auditors' opinions in the year before the last. The results show that the accuracy of discrete-time hazard model is superior to that of single-period logit model. In addition, the coefficients of auditors' opinions are statistically significant, which implies that the auditors' opinion provides incremental information content in explaining financial distress. Finally, the results of additional tests show that the auditors do not timely issue ”going-concern” opinion before financial distress. Even the Big-4 CPA firms only perform slightly better than the other CPA firms in predicting financial distress. The findings do not strongly support the views that auditors meet the ethics requirements in financial distress prediction and the issuance of modified opinions.起始頁-結束頁：327-356資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.32712篇名：台灣股市券商分析師盈餘預測之利益衝突並列篇名：The Conflicts of Interest on Security Analysts' Earnings Forecasts in Taiwan作者：賴紀誠(Chi-Cheng Lai);林問一(Wen-Yi Lin);劉亞秋(Angela Y. Liu)關鍵字：盈餘預測;自營部門;利益衝突;earnings forecasts;proprietary dealing department;conflicts of interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討券商分析師對台灣上市櫃公司發佈的盈餘預測是否會與投資人產生利益衝突。實證結果發現，券商分析師的盈餘預測和自營部門的股票操作有顯著關聯，且無論是樂觀抑或悲觀盈餘預測的股票，所屬券商自營部門均有明顯反向操作的情形，而且有反向操作的股票報酬率是優於沒有反向操作的股票。因此本研究推測券商分析師盈餘預測的利益衝突問題存在。此外，在分析師樂觀盈餘預測下，不論是電子工業類股還是傳統產業類股，均可發現利益衝突，但在分析師悲觀預測下，卻只有電子工業類股才有出現，因而本研究推論利益衝突的產業效應僅發生於分析師的悲觀盈餘預測。英文摘要：This study investigates the possible conflicts of interest of security analysts with market investors when making earnings forecasts. Using a sample of listed companies in Taiwan, we show evidence of close connections between analysts' earnings forecasts and their firm's proprietary dealing department's trading patterns, specifically, our findings indicate that the analyst firm's proprietary trading actions tend to be in the opposite direction as suggested by the earnings forecasts, whether they are optimistic or pessimistic. Additionally, the returns on proprietary dealing department's opposite-direction trading stocks are better than no opposite-direction trading ones. Hence we presume the conflicts of interest exist in analysts' earnings forecasts. Furthermore, we find that the conflicts of interest are presented in stocks of both electronic and traditional companies under the optimistic earnings forecasts, but exist only in electronic companies given pessimistic forecasts, suggesting a possible industry effect of conflicts of interest when earning forecasts' biases are positive.起始頁-結束頁：357-389資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.22.1.35713篇名：The Development of a Computer Auditing System Sufficient for Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404: A Study on the Sales and Revenue Cycle of the ERP System並列篇名：符合沙氏法案404節連續性電腦稽核系統之建構與實證：以銷售及收款循環為例作者：張碩毅(She-I Chang);張益誠(I-Cheng Chang);王尹廷(Ying-Ting Wang)關鍵字：沙氏法案;電腦稽核;銷售及收款循環;Sarbanes-Oxley Act;computer auditing;sales and revenue cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：美國國會於2002年提出沙氏法案(Sarbanes-Oxley Act, SOX)來規範公開發行公司必須建置與維持和財務報導有關之內部控制，藉以加強公司在內部控制及編製可靠財務報表之能力。本研究之主要研究目的為：(1)探討符合SOX404之銷售及收款循環在電腦稽核系統上的重要查核項目；(2)建構符合SOX404規範，並以企業資源規劃系統為基礎之銷售及收款循環重要查核項目之電腦稽核系統；(3)以ISO/IEC9126模型為基礎，進行此稽核系統對於內部控制制度實施的有效性及稽查結果正確性之實證研究以確定符合SOX404。本研究藉由紮根理論與專家問卷形成銷售及收款循環之查核項目，並使用這些查核項目進行系統實作與實驗設計研究。本研究成果可協助管理當局或稽核人員提升電腦稽核之成效。英文摘要：After the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act 404 enacted in 2002, public companies were required to comply and maintain internal control of financial reporting in order to strengthen the abilities of internal control and to ensure reliable financial reporting. The objectives of this research are: (1) Explore the important audit items in the sales and revenue cycle to match the principles of SOX404 on the computer audit system. (2) Construct the computer audit system based on the ERP system in the sales and revenue cycle to match the principles of SOX404. (3) Based on the ISO/IEC9126 model, this research verifies the quality of this computer audit system and the accuracy of the audit results. This research explores the control items of the sales and revenue cycle by Grounded Theory and expert questionnaire, as well as develops a computer auditing system using the results of the conceptual aspect followed by laboratory study experimentation to ensure the quality of the computer audit system and the accuracy of the audit results. The outcome of this study assists management and auditors to perform computer auditing.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.114篇名：Connections between Corporate Social Responsibility and Corporation Image: Risk Society as the Moderator並列篇名：社會責任與公司形象之關聯：風險社會之調節效果作者：許建隆(Chien-Lung Hsu);邱光輝(Kuang-Hui Chiu);林靖(Arthur J. Lin)關鍵字：企業社會責任;企業形象;風險社會;corporate social responsibility CSR;corporate image;risk society期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討工業進步所引發的負面效應，以電信業的電磁波為研究對象。在民眾享受行動通訊便利的同時，也需分擔其可能造成的風險。若是企業無法發揮其社會責任的功能，風險的延伸可能觸發無法彌補的後果。除了對使用者造成健康的威脅，對於企業形象也是個不定時炸彈。這亦是Beck(1992)所提及的迴力棒效應。企業未能以行動善盡自身的責任，當風險演變成危機時，就必須付出龐大的社會成本及資本，以彌補長期以來的責任缺口及負面形象。本研究以上述論點為研究目的，並針對企業社會責任與企業形象兩者關係之中，將風險社會加入以作為調節因子，探討該因子對於兩者交互關係之影響成因與結果。英文摘要：The focus of this research is on the negative effects brought about by the industrial progress, especially the electromagnetic field that comes along with the telecommunication industry. While modern people are blessed by the conveniences of the telecommunication, they also have to take the risks of exposing to electromagnetic field. If the corporations do not perform their social responsibility, the risks may trigger irreparable consequences. In addition to the threats to the mobile phone users, the side effects of electromagnetic field can undermine the corporate image. This is what Ulrich Beck (1992) calls ”the boomerang effect”. If the corporations do not take actions to uphold their responsibility and image, large quantity of social costs and capitals will be lavished when risks have evolved to crises. This paper takes this argument as the research subject, and probes into the interconnections between corporate social responsibility and corporate image. Risk society here, is taken as the moderator and to further examine the correlations between corporate social responsibility and corporate image.起始頁-結束頁：33-54資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.3315篇名：Effects of Advertising, Customer Satisfaction, and Research and Development on a Firm's Systematic and Unsystematic Risks並列篇名：廣告、顧客滿意度與研究發展對企業系統與非系統風險之效果作者：陳妙玲(Miao-Ling Chen);林楚彬(Chu-Bin Lin);戴良安(Liang-Ann Tai)關鍵字：廣告;系統風險;非系統風險;advertising;systematic risk;unsystematic risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討廣告、顧客滿意度與研究發展如何影響企業財務主管與高階經理人所關心之焦點－企業系統風險與非系統風險。本研究除延續過去文獻所關注之行銷對於企業系統風險之影響，更進一步將非系統風險納入探討。我們使用混合最小平方法與固定時間效果二種迴歸分析方法估計實證模型，實證結果支持本研究之假說：廣告和顧客滿意度可顯著降低企業之總風險、系統風險與非系統風險，研究發展則顯著提高企業之系統風險、非系統風險與總風險。此外，本研究也分別採用CAPM與Fama-French三因子資產定價模型衡量系統風險與非系統風險，使用不同估計風險方法檢定假說，顯示本研究之實證結果具有穩健性。英文摘要：In this study, we examine how advertising, customer satisfaction, and research and development (R&D) affect a firm's systematic risk and unsystematic risk; these risks being metrics of interest to both finance executives and senior management. Our studies' findings extend prior studies that primarily considered the effects of marketing initiatives on performance metrics, focusing only on systematic risk. We estimate empirical models by the pooled ordinary least squares and the time-series fixed-effects regression analysis. The results significantly support our hypotheses that higher advertising and higher customer satisfaction lower a firm's total risk, systematic risk and unsystematic risk. R&D is significantly associated with higher levels for a firm's total risk, systematic risk, and unsystematic risk. In addition, these effects are robust to alternative estimates of risks, estimating systematic risk and unsystematic risk using both CAPM and the Fama-French three-factor asset pricing model.起始頁-結束頁：55-79資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.5516篇名：Product Liability Insurance and Enterprise Risk Management並列篇名：產品責任保險與企業風險管理作者：陳彩稚(Tsai-Jyh Chen);黃慧琳(Hui-Lin Huang)關鍵字：企業風險管理;產品責任風險;保險需求;enterprise risk management;product liability risk;insurance demand期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文目的在於探討產品責任保險與企業風險管理之關係，並經由下列四個構面進行分析：(1)可行之風險管理工具；(2)公司理財；(3)公司本身特質；(4)企業經營效率。本文之實證研究結果除支持Ehrilich與Becker (1972)之傳統理論－認為保險可與其他風險管理工具互為補充品；並且亦支持近日Culp (2001)之主張－認為風險管理工具不僅具有傳統上控制風險之功能，同時亦可促進企業提高經營效率。此外，本文研究發現企業對於產品責任之風險管理可以穩定其股票報酬率之波動，但是並未能提高其公司價值。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to study the relationship between product liability insurance and enterprise risk management. The analyses include four constructs: (1) alternative risk management tools, (2) corporate finance, (3) firm features, and (4) business operation efficiency. The empirical results support Ehrilich and Becker (1972) that insurance and other risk control programs can be complements and support Culp (2001) that risk management can play the role of efficiency enhancer in addition to the role of classical risk controller. Additionally, this study finds that risk management for product liability may stabilize the volatility of stock returns but does not increase the firm value.起始頁-結束頁：81-110資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.8117篇名：Developing Key Risk Indicators for B2B International Internet Banking: A RM-BSC Approach並列篇名：以RM-BSC方法發展B2B網路銀行之關鍵風險指標作者：曾淑峰(Shu-Feng Tseng);余千智(Chien-Chih Yu);江俊豪(Chun-Hao Chiang)關鍵字：階層分析程序法;風險管理;平衡計分卡;analytic hierarchy process;risk management;balanced scorecard期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：企業網路銀行已經成為銀行維持競爭優勢的利器，跨組織網路交易的各種風險也成為銀行風險管理之重要議題。本論文提出一個RM-BSC整合架構與作法，調查參與C計畫之銀行放款專業人員或高階主管的認知，以初步AHP先找出關鍵風險因子，再依風險管理策略規劃步驟，延展成為重點風險指標，再以進一步AHP評估這些關鍵風險因子構面與因子本身之相對重要順位。建議在組織環境中採用PDCA作法，週期性的重新認定關鍵風險因子及其相對重要順位。最後採用SEM方法進行模型統計顯著性檢定，結果顯示問卷問項具良好的收斂確實性、內部一致性、各構面具有足夠的分辨力，進一步作路徑分析也辨識出若干串連4構面關鍵風險因子之顯著路徑。英文摘要：Business-to-business international internet banking (B2B IIB) has emerged as one of the key drivers in sustaining a bank's competitive advantage and the related risk management issues are getting important. This paper proposes an integrated RM-BSC framework and approach to incorporate key risk factors and then elaborate these risk factors along with the risk management (RM) strategy to establish key risk indicators. The risk factors and their rankings are identified through the two-step Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) conducted by surveying the bank representatives who joined the government-sponsored C-plan (TMEA, 2004) to develop B2B IIB. A suggested PDCA approach for periodical assessment and elaboration of key risk factors and its implication for risk management in the dynamic B2B IIB environment are also discussed. The validation of the risk factor associations in the RM-BSC framework were conducted based on the SEM testing with statistical significance. The results exhibit a good convergent validity, an adequate internal consistency, a good discriminating validity, and a proper structural model. The further path analysis identifying the important paths from Learning and Growth perspective to financial perspective might imply the causal-effect relationships along with the Strategy map consisted of the risk factors.起始頁-結束頁：111-156資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.11118篇名：台灣海外可轉債發行後轉換價格重設對股東價值之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Conversion Price Downward Resetting on the Value of Convertible Bond Issuing Companies in Taiwan作者：李存修(Tsun-Siou Lee);胡星陽(Shing-Yang Hu);王瑪如(Ma-Ju Wang)關鍵字：可轉換公司債;轉換價格;重設條款;convertible bond;conversion price;reset clause期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：可轉換公司債的轉換價格向下重設使轉換比率提高，預期每股盈餘會被稀釋，但轉換價格的調降也使轉換的可能性升高，減緩償債壓力。我們發現公司宣告重設轉換價格時，市場反應並不顯著，但重設生效日的事件效果則顯著為負，此時盈餘稀釋效果大於債務緩和效果。比較發行日與重設轉換價格日兩個期間的營運績效顯示，重設期間之績效相對於發行時都是衰退的。一般而言，重設轉換價格下降之幅度愈大，對股東愈不利，但是對於營運現金流量衰退幅度較大之公司，包括向下重設幅度接近法定兩成上限之公司，可能面臨較嚴重的償債壓力，當重設的幅度愈大，轉換可能性愈高，償還本息的壓力愈小，重設日之股票異常報酬卻是正的，顯示此時股東重視債務緩和更勝於盈餘被稀釋。英文摘要：It is not uncommon for convertible bonds to have a conversion-price reset option built in, especially in Taiwan. Downward resetting of conversion price raises the conversion ratio and hence induces heavier potential dilution on EPS upon conversion. On the other hand, downward resetting of CP also enhances the likelihood of conversion and therefore ease the cash flow burden of principal repayment. While the former, called dilution effect, is predicted to be negative, the latter, called debt alleviation effect, is predicted to be positive-on the underlying share price.It is found in this paper, using Taiwanese data, that share prices do not react in any significant way around the announcement date of CP downward resetting. Share prices however do react negatively around the effective date of the resetting event, making dilution effect dominant over debt alleviation effect. After reviewing the operating performance between the CB issuing period and the CP resetting period, we find that sales growth, return on assets and operating cash flow have all been worsening off, which may explain the motivation behind the decision of CP downward resetting.Intuitively, the higher the magnitude of CP downward resetting, the more the dilution effect will be. But for companies suffering from severe cash flow shortage, the opposite effect may prevail. In other words, when CP reset by close to 20% downward (the legal limit), share prices react positively to the event, i.e., debt alleviation effect becomes dominant.起始頁-結束頁：157-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.15719篇名：財務危機公司內部治理對會計師簽發繼續經營疑慮意見的影響：台灣上市公司之實證研究並列篇名：The Influence of Corporate Governance on a CPA's Going-concern Opinion for Financially Distressed Firms: An Empirical Study for Firms Listed in the Taiwan Stock Exchange作者：吳清在(Tsing-Zai C. Wu);邱正仁(Jeng-Ren Chiou);鄭莉(Li Cheng)關鍵字：繼續經營疑慮意見;審計品質;公司治理;going-concern opinion;audit quality;corporate governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：會計師簽發繼續經營疑慮意見必須權衡「經濟依賴」與「聲譽維持」兩個因素的影響，本文以存在危機警訊的樣本探討公司內部治理機制對會計師表示繼續經營疑慮意見的影響。對公司來說更換會計師的成本不高，而會計師卻有避免被更換的動機，致使會計師本質上會為了滿足客戶需求而使獨立性受損；此外台灣企業失敗引起的審計訴訟風險不高，降低「聲譽維持」誘因對會計師簽發查核意見的影響。實證結果發現會計師對於存有財務危機警訊的公司簽發查核意見時，客戶董監事持股比率與未擔任董監事的大股東持股比率越高，會計師會降低簽發繼續經營疑慮意見；客戶董監事股權質押比率提高或董事長有兼任總經理的情況下，會計師會提高簽發繼續經營疑慮意見的機率。英文摘要：For a financially distressed firm, the decision of a CPA to issue a going-concern opinion must consider the trade-off between ”economic dependence” and ”reputation protection”. In this paper, we investigate the influence of corporate governance on a CPA's going-concern opinion for financially distressed firms. As the cost to switch its CPA is inexpensive for a firm, the CPA has motive of not being dismissed. Such ”economic dependence” consequently leads to a compromise of CPA's independence. Moreover, since the probability of auditor litigation caused by business failure is low in Taiwan, the motive of ”reputation protection” for a CPA reduces. Our empirical results indicate that the larger shares directors and supervisors hold, the less likelihood a CPA issuing a going-concern opinion. Similar results are found for the outside blockholdings. Where the shares of directors and supervisors are used as collateral and the chairman of the board also serves as the CEO, the likelihood of a CPA to issue a going-concern opinion increases.起始頁-結束頁：187-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.18720篇名：金融資產重分類之股價影響及財報編製遵循狀況之研究並列篇名：Market Pricing and the Disclosure Compliance of the Reclassification Rules for Financial Instruments作者：李淑華(Shu-Hua Lee);陳菀姍(Wan-Shan Chen)關鍵字：金融資產重分類;公平價值會計;金融工具之會計處理;reclassification of financial assets;fair value accounting;accounting for financial instruments期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：採用財務會計準則公報第34號第二次修訂金融資產重分類規定之公司，主要是將交易目的金融資產重分類至備供出售類，且有採用重分類公司之整體揭露狀況良好，但至少有15家公司違反該公報揭露規定。其它實證結果包含：(1)金融資產重分類後之會計資訊對公司股價的解釋能力優於倘若未進行金融資產重分類之會計資訊。(2)全樣本與以異常盈餘（或稅後淨利）由負轉負組之實證結果一致。投資人對金融資產重分類損益影響數之評價不同於其他盈餘要素資訊；而金融資產重分類損益影響數資訊具價值攸關性；且投資人對於金融資產重分類損益影響數（損失）為正向評價。該結果似乎顯示投資人存在注意力有限或功能固著現象，固著於現行財務報表（重分類後）之較高盈餘的「損益表」資訊。英文摘要：Most of the firms adopting the second amendment of TFAS 34 reclassify financial assets held for trading to available for sale. There are 15 firms violate the disclosure requirements regarding the reclassification of financial assets, while the rest of the sample firms are fully compliant with the requirements. In addition, our empirical results show: (1) the explanatory power of the models using accounting information as reported is greater than that of the models using accounting information assuming no-reclassification and the difference is statistically significant, and (2) the empirical results for the total sample and the negative-to-negative sub-sample, which consist of firms with negative abnormal earnings (or negative earnings after tax, or negative earnings before tax) both before as well as after the reclassification, are the same. Investors' valuation of the income effects from reclassification is significantly different from other earnings components. Though the income effects from reclassification is value relevant, the investors' valuation of the disclosed reclassification effects (losses) is significantly positively. Overall, the empirical results are consistent with the ”limited attention” and the ”functional fixation” hypotheses. Investors seem to fixate on the earnings as reported.起始頁-結束頁：219-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.21901篇名：台灣上市櫃建設公司股票報酬率影響因素之研究並列篇名：The Determinants on Stock Returns for Listed Real Estate Development Companies in Taiwan作者：游舜德(Tony Shun-Te Yuo);林詩榕(Shih-Rong Lin)關鍵字：土地交易訊息;不動產投資;托賓q;財務比率;Financial ratios;Information of land transactions;Property investment;Tobin's q期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：建設公司在不動產空間市場中，扮演著實際供給者與創造者的角色，透過不動產開發活動，提供新的樓地板供給，以滿足各種不動產市場中的使用者與投資者的需求。然而，不動產開發活動的特色之一，在於其投資金額的龐大，因此，一般的小額投資大眾，並無法直接參與建設開發活動。此時，透過於股票市場公開發行的上市櫃建設公司，便成為小額投資人參與不動產開發相當重要的途徑。本研究探討的重點，在於一般投資人面對複雜的市場訊息來源，如何取得投資決策的依據。透過二階段的分析方法，以因素分析、追蹤資料分析法（Panel data）、以及其他適當的檢定工具，探討財務指標、市場價值指標（Tobin's q）與土地異動訊息等三個面向，與投資人關心的股票報酬率之間的關係。本研究發現，對財務指標的因素分析中，獲利能力、融資與負債能力、資本結構與固定資本週轉能力、以及資產存貨周轉能力四個面向最具解釋變異能力，然在追蹤資料迴歸分析中，僅獲利能力因素與股票報酬率具有顯著的關係，而L－R Tobin's q亦未能找到與股票報酬率之間的顯著關係，但經流動資產修正市場價值後的C－P Tobin's q則具有相當強的係數值與顯著關係，經研判與建設公司流動資產之高存貨比率有關，影響市場價值指標甚鉅；另外，土地訊息效果中的交易次數，對上市櫃建設公司之股票報酬率，亦有相當顯著的影響。英文摘要：In real estate space market, development companies are the suppliers and creators of new floorspaces that fulfilling the demand of various users and investors. However, property development requires large capital inputs, thus small investors can hardly involve development projects directly. Under this circumstance, indirect channels such as the listed real estate development companies in pubic market became a convenient and reachable place. Nevertheless, investors face complex characteristics and performance information of these companies. Thus, how to validating these information became crucial for investment decision making. There are three major concerns in this research: the effective financial ratios, the market value index that measures the expectation and intellectual capital from the market (Tobin's q), and the information effects of land transactions. Using factor analysis, panel data regression and other statistical tests, this paper examines the effects of these variables with stock returns for the listed real estate development companies in Taiwan. The results show that for financial ratios, only the profitability factor is significant with seasonal stock return. And the L-R Tobin's q is not relevant, but the short-term capital adjusted C-P Tobin's q is highly positive significant to stock returns. This may suggests that the stock amount will affect the value of development companies significantly. And the announcement of land transactions for listed real estate companies is also with positive significant effect to stock returns.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201111_14(2).00012篇名：都市化與氣候暖化關係之研究─以台北都會區為例並列篇名：The Study of Relationship between Urbanization and Climate Warming-An Example of Taipei Metropolitan Area作者：劉小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Liu);賴玫錡(Mei-Chi Lai)關鍵字：地理資訊系統;氣候暖化;都市蔓延;追蹤資料模型;urban sprawl;climate warming;GIS;panel data model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討台北都會區都市化與氣候暖化之關係，實證分析是否都市化會造成氣溫的上升。本研究實證分析部分使用地理資訊系統（GIS）之內差法（interpolation）和空間分析方法，以及迴歸分析使用panel data之固定效果模型等工具；內插法之結果得到台北都會區年平均氣溫自1996年至2006年約上升1℃，有些地區甚至上升約2℃，且上升之溫度範圍有擴大的趨勢，呈現放射狀的溫度分布，此與都市蔓延之放射狀發展形態類似。使用空間分析方法則證實了一地人口數的增加會造成該地氣溫上升，並且也發現近來人口數多增加在都市外圍地區，這與上述氣溫分布和都市蔓延之放射狀發展形態也相符合。迴歸分析結果顯示人口數對於氣溫有相當大之正相關，耕地面積、工廠面積對氣溫則呈現負相關，可見得擁有廣大綠地以及較低密度發展之工業使用可以降低區域之氣溫，減緩氣候暖化。另外在各鄉鎮市區固定效果估計量方面，可以歸納出若一地區有廣大的公園、綠地、或是有河川流域的經過，對於降低當地氣溫有明顯的幫助。因此必須重視都市化對氣候暖化的影響，以及如何防止氣候暖化的發生。英文摘要：In this study, we research the relationship between urban sprawl and climate warming in Taipei metropolitan area. We analyze empirically whether the developed shape of urban sprawl causes rising temperatures.The empirical analysis in this study is based on the Interpolation Method and Spatial Analysis of GIS, and the regression analysis is based on the Fixed Effect Model of Panel Data. The yearly average temperature increased about 1℃ to 2℃ in the Taipei metropolitan area from 1996 to 2006. Furthermore, the range of the increasing temperature has been trending upward and it reveals a radial distribution; it is similar to the radial developed shape of urban sprawl. By using Spatial Analysis, we prove that the temperature of an area increases when the population rises and we find that the population rises in most of the peri-urban areas. It also answers to the radial developed shape of urban sprawl and the distribution of the temperature as above.The result of using the regression analysis shows that there is a positive correlation between population and temperature, and a negative correlation between the farmland areas and the temperature so that if there is a big green space, it can decrease the temperature in an area, and reduce climate warming. From the fixed effect estimation, we conclude that it helps decrease the temperature in an area where there is a big park, big green space or where a river passes through. The time trend of the fixed effect estimation indicates that the climate in the Taipei metropolitan area will be getting warm as time goes by. Therefore, we must take into account the influence of urban sprawl to climate warming, and how to prevent climate warming.起始頁-結束頁：39-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201111_14(2).00023篇名：原住民社區永續農業發展之實踐─以新竹縣尖石鄉石磊部落自然農法為例並列篇名：The Practice of Sustainable Agricultural Development in Indigenous Community-A Case Study in Shi-Lei Indigenous Community, Jienshih Township, Hsinchu County, Taiwan作者：顏愛靜(Ai-Ching Yen);傅小芝(Xiao-Zhi Fu);何欣芳(Xin-Fang He)關鍵字：原住民社區;土地倫理;石磊部落;有機農業;自然農法;Indigenous People Community;Land Ethics;Qalang Quri Tribal Community;Organic Farming;Natural Farming期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：振興產業是促進社區永續發展的重要因素，然而當經濟利益的獲取，是以侵蝕資源基底（resources-base）為代價時，資源本體的衰退亦將象徵著社區不再永續發展。Walck and Strong（2001）以Aldo Leopold（1970）所提土地倫理概念為基礎，建構土地倫理及權力關係對土地健康的影響模式，闡述前兩者將影響土地利用的行動，漸次導致土地是否健康，而土地的健康與否亦將反饋至土地利用，兩者互為因果，成為社區產業能否永續發展的關鍵所在。本文擬藉由深度訪談、參與觀察及文獻蒐集之研究方式，探悉台灣原住民社區農業經營方式的轉變，並檢視該理論基礎的適用性。本文以新竹縣尖石鄉玉峰村的石磊部落（Qalang Quri）為研究對象，其為泰雅族原住民社區，因交通不便利，觀光產業發展不易，仍以農業經營為主，生產有機高冷蔬菜、水蜜桃等農作。又因該部落位處石門水庫集水區之山坡地，其農業活動除受限於土地使用管制規範外，更被指責是導致近年來山崩、土石流而造成水庫淤積日深的禍源。該部落居民有感於過去採取噴灑化學肥料與施用農藥等不循土地倫理的農業經營方式，不僅造成生態環境的污染，亦將有礙土地健康，乃在土地倫理的省思下，嘗試以融合傳統生態知識（traditional ecological knowledge，簡稱TEK）的無毒自然農法為其農業生產的技術。雖然，相較於慣行農法，自然農法的生產技術可使產期縮短，產品質佳量豐，有利於土地健康，然而如何藉由社區自主的力量以推廣這項技術，並開拓良好的市場產銷通路，是為當務之急；而政府或其他非營利組織的資源，適時給予支援，且社區建立自主分配機制，或將是促使部落經營得以獲致穩定收益的重要助力。英文摘要：To foster agricultural development is of great significance to tribal community. However, if the capture of economic interest is at the price of eroding the resources basis (resources-base), the degradation of resources will lead the community to be unsustainable. Based on Aldo Leopold's concept of the land ethics, Walck and Strong (2001) constructed a model concerning land ethics, power structure, land use and land health. The main idea of the model is land ethics and the power structure will influence pattern of land use, and land use activities will affect land health in turn. This is the key factor to foster sustainable agricultural development for the community. To investigate the relevance of the model regarding agricultural development in indigenous communities, we take Qalang Quri community as a case, and employ methods of literature review, depth interview and participatory observation.Qalang Quri community is a typical Tayal indigenous community where is remote and with inconvenient traffic that results in difficulties in tourism development. The main industry in this community is agriculture, which crops organic high-and-cold (high altitude and low temperature) vegetables, peach and so on. Also, this community is located on a mountainside of Shimen Watershed catchment. Besides agricultural activities have been limited under the standard of land use restraint, people who live in this place have been criticized as trouble makers of landslides and mudslides whose activities silted up the reservoir. Communal residents sense that the way of spraying chemical fertilizers and pesticides and the way of agricultural operation which is not following land ethics, not only cause pollution on ecological environment but also obstruct the health of land. Therefore, residents reflect land ethics, attempting to combine nonpoisonous natural farming of their traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) for the technique of agricultural production.Although, to compare with the conventional farming, the production technique of natural farming may reduce growth period, make good quality and abundant quantity, and is beneficial for land health. However, how to promote this technique via communal self-governing strength, and develop good production and marketing channel is of great significance. The government or other Non-profit organization's resources timely support and communities construct self-distributed mechanism, probably will urge communities to obtain stable income in the future.起始頁-結束頁：67-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201111_14(2).00034篇名：不同都市階層之地方公共財組合對地價的影響並列篇名：Land Prices and the Basket of Local Public Goods作者：鄭明書(Ming-Shu Cheng);林享博(Hsiang-Po Lin)關鍵字：地方公共財組合;偏好集群;地價;the Basket of Local Public Goods;Preference Groups;Land Prices期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：14卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：地方公共財組合不僅可反映當地的生活與居住環境，在這方面的經費支出與投入也會反映到當地的地價。為驗證此等組合對地價的影響，本文以民國93至95年國內全部358個行政區為研究對象，選取教育、交通、環保等三項經費，及公園綠地面積做為衡量地方公共財組合的四項指標，經由集群分析，將全部的行政區歸為5個偏好集群。同一偏好集群內的行政區具有相近的地方公共財組合。其次，以所得、人口密度及偏好集群為解釋變數，各行政區的地價為應變數，進行迴歸分析，模型結果顯示，各偏好集群的公共財組合對地價有顯著影響。同時，各行政區的所得與人口密度變數，對地價亦存在正向影響。英文摘要：The baskets of local public goods represent the quality of local living and residential environment. The expenditure and physical inputs of the baskets will be capitalized in local land prices. To find out the effect of the baskets on land prices, we choose all 358 jurisdictions in Taiwan as the study subject. The three expenditures on education, transportation, and environmental protection and the land area of parks and greenery consist of the basket and are used to do a clustered analysis on the jurisdictions which are classified into 5 preference groups by that analysis. Jurisdictions in the same preference groups have very similar baskets of local public goods. Then we use income, population density, and preference groups as explanatory variables, and land prices as independent variables, to build a regression model for the jurisdictions. The model shows that the baskets of each preference group contribute significant positive effects on land prices. The influence of the income level, and population density of jurisdictions are positive too.起始頁-結束頁：99-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201111_14(2).000401篇名：刑法第二三五條的法律效力：從晶晶書庫案談起並列篇名：Experiencing the "Force of Law": Definitions of Obscene Publications in Taiwan作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：293-312資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.00102篇名：被合法的慾望、被消失的同志：晶晶書庫案（釋字第六一七號）及相關司法實務的再思考並列篇名：Constitutionalizing Desire, Liquidizing Homosexuality: Revisiting Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 617 and No. 623作者：黃丞儀(Cheng-Yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：313-328資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.00113篇名：「是她／他也是妳和我」：由W訴婚姻登記處一案看香港跨性別法律機器並列篇名："It Is both Her/Him and You/Me" From W v. Registrar of Marriages to Hong Kong Transsexual Law Machine作者：趙文宗(Man-Chung Chiu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：83期出版年：2011中文摘要：2010年，香港高等法院於W訴Registrar of Marriages（即婚姻登記處）一案中否決易性人士以新性別與異性結婚的權利。本文以該案作介入，討論易性學術研究跨性別身體研究；結合中華漢族傳統，企圖生產一套適合香港身體平等的改革法律策略。起始頁-結束頁：329-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201108.00124篇名：「近似家人，實非親故」：移工情感勞動與影像親密性的文化政治並列篇名：Like a Family but Not Quite: Emotional Labor and Cinematic Politics of Intimacy作者：黃宗儀(Michelle Tsung-Yi Huang);李紀舍(Chi-She Li)關鍵字：生命政治;視覺再現;台灣外籍家務勞工／看護工;情感勞動;biopolitics;visual representations;foreign domestic workers/health care workers in Taiwan;emotional labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文藉由分析《八東病房》、《娘惹滋味》與《我倆沒有明天》三部關注在台外籍移工處境的紀錄與劇情片來探討邊界繁生的複雜意涵。幾部影片的拍攝皆出於對在台外籍移工的深刻關懷與認同，這些作品也在為家務勞工／看護工發聲上扮演日益重要的角色。《八東病房》（2006）為台灣國際勞工組織製作出品的紀錄片；劇情片《娘惹滋味》（2007）由公共電視出品播放，旨在推動多元文化視野，促進外籍配偶融入台灣社會；《我倆沒有明天》（2003）也曾在公共電視播放。這三部影片都將觀眾與外籍移工角色的親密性根植於家庭喻象（family trope），導演善意地將移工比喻為家庭成員，以塑造其溫和可親的形象。透過移工在工作場域裡與台灣人近身接觸的經驗來肯定他們，視覺親密性因此轉化為強化認同移工的重要來源。然而，家庭喻象的複雜性需要經過嚴格的批判性檢視，看似親密的家人影像再現也必須被置入家務勞動／看護工作的內在邏輯，也就是「近似家人，實非親故」（like a family，but not quite）的弔詭情境中來深入探討。本文將說明即便這些影像工作者試圖將移工納為「家庭的一份子」，這些善意的嘗試同時可能捲入由政府的勞工引進機制所操控的複雜邊界管理而與之難分難解。藉由審視這三部影片，我們企圖深究僱用移工與善待移工之間難以消解的緊張關係，釐清對外籍移工日常表現的肯定與國家管制他們所採取的限制性治理兩者間的錯結糾葛。英文摘要：In this paper we analyze closely three works representative of recent filmic representations about how female foreign laborers are treated in Taiwan: Hospital 8 East Wing (2006), by the Taiwan International Workers Association (TIWA) labor organization, Nyonya's Taste of Life (2007), aired on the Public Television Service (PTS) Channel to promote a multicultural approach to integrating foreign spouses into Taiwanese society, and We Don't Have a Future Together, also aired on PTS (2003). All of the three films are well-meaning endeavors that cast migrants into affable cinematic images by likening them to family members. Meanwhile, the audience is encouraged to identify with the protagonist workers and develop cinematic intimacy with the characters. Our assessment of cinematic representation takes place within a critical analysis of the constitutive logic of domestic/healthcare work, namely the paradox of being ”like a family, but not quite”. In spite of the fact that these film makers attempt to include the migrant laborers as ”one of the family,” such benign efforts are entangled with complex border management. As a result, in examining these three films we inquire into the unsettled tensions between congenial affirmation of migrant workers and the constrictive governance of migrant labor for the state's regulatory purposes.起始頁-結束頁：5-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.00015篇名：我們有多元文化城市嗎？台北都會區東南亞族裔領域化的機制、類型與作用並列篇名：Do we Have a Multi-Cultural City? The Southeast Asian Ethnic Territorialization in Taipei Metropolitan Area作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：族裔化地方;領域化;公民資格;都市治理;跨國網絡;ethnic place;territorialization;citizenship;urban governance;transnational network期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以台北都會區東南亞消費空間為例，探討「族裔領域化」的機制和作用。族裔領域化即「族裔性」在領域上的構成，常呈現為「族裔化地方」的形成，但不局限於地理聚集，還牽涉多重跨界和劃界動態。台灣的東南亞族裔領域化往往呈現為不同於「族裔聚居區」或「飛地」的節奏化消費地景，以東南亞華人和婚姻移民為中介角色，隨著交通、地租和文化供需而位於特定區位。這些特性須安置於跨國流移、公民資格差別化賦予、都市治理策略，以及階級劃界等，不同尺度的領域化機制中來理解，展現為幾種相互重疊的消費地景類型：文化經濟邏輯下的異國象徵地景、族裔經濟邏輯下的維生地景、公民資格和地產權保障下的族裔飛地，以及階級劃界與都市更新下竄流的縫隙地景。本文亦展望這些族裔化地方的可能正向作用：就東南亞族裔而言，族裔化地方成為族裔經濟網絡和族裔公共空間的跨國節點，可能發揮從縫隙到槓桿的功效。就台灣社會而言，族裔領域化呈現了由劃界到中介混雜的動態，可能開展異類共存、反思我群的倫理效果；亦即族裔化地方的存在和運作，有構成多元族裔城市之交流邊境和「反身鏡域」的潛能。英文摘要：This paper discusses the structural mechanisms and functions of ”ethnic territorialization” through the case of Southeast Asian consumptive space in Taipei metropolitan area. Ethnic territorialization means the territorially construction of ethnicity which often leads to the forming of ethnic places or clusters, but it also involves multiple boundary-crossing and boundary-making. Firstly, the author argues that the mechanisms of Taipei's Southeast Asian ethnic territorialization include transnational diaspora, difference in citizenship, urban governance strategies, and class boundary-making which act on different geographical scales. And the combination of different mechanisms brings about four overlapping types of consumptive landscapes: exotic landscape under cultural economy, survival landscape under ethnic economy, ethnic enclave under citizenship and house ownership, and the flowing interstitial landscape under class exclusion and urban renewal. Finally, in prospecting for the positive functions of these ethnic places, there are two dimensions: (1) for the Southeast Asian migrants, they act as transnational nodes of ethnic economic network and ethnic public space which may change from marginal ”interstice” to social ”levers”; and (2) for Taiwanese society, these ethnic places arouse dynamics of border-crossing and hybridity, and may foster a spatial ethics of coexistence for acting as ”reflexive heterotopia” in a multi-ethnic city.起始頁-結束頁：31-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.00026篇名：從屬的「越南新娘」與台越仲介婚姻並列篇名：Subordination of "Vietnamese Brides" and the Matchmaking Marriages between Taiwan and Vietnam作者：龔宜君(I-Chun Kung)關鍵字：跨國仲介婚姻;從屬化;性契約;越南新娘;台灣;international matchmaking marriage;subordination;sexual contract;Vietnamese-brides;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011中文摘要：在本篇文章中，作者以有別於「理性選擇」與「利潤」的觀點來討論台越跨國仲介婚姻；而以仲介過程所造成的性別政治效果，來說明台越仲介婚姻是一種形塑兩性關係的重要機制。在具體的研究內容上，本文試圖藉由仲介婚姻的過程（「養新娘」、「相親」、「新娘學校」）等帶有儀式性的運作方式，來討論仲介婚姻如何為既定的社會性別秩序提供了實踐證明，並確認了越南女性和從屬性之社會角色之間的公開關係。本研究發現，「越南新娘」在台灣出現的原因，一方面是在於作為仲裁機制的台灣社會成員所秉持的性契約倫理觀；另一方面，則是人們對仲介婚姻儀式過程主觀感知的客觀化結果。性契約的倫理觀讓仲介婚姻得以存在，而通過仲介婚姻過程中的運作方式，「越南新娘」作為從屬者的社會形象成為客觀存在的認識對象。英文摘要：This paper examines the subordination of women in Taiwanese-Vietnamese international matchmaking marriage. Author casts doubt on the 'rational choice' argument which downplay the subordination side of international matchmaking marriage. The central thesis is that subordination caused by commoditized international matchmaking marriage not only come form money exchange women in openly market but also realized by matchmaking operations which embedded patriarchal ideology. In this paper author will identifies three mechanisms- recruiting of the brides (collecting the brides), blind date (brides shopping), bride's school (making Taiwanese wife), through these matchmaking mechanisms Vietnamese girls will be transformed become Taiwanese subordinated wives in private and public sphere.起始頁-結束頁：85-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.00037篇名：結構限制下的能動性施展：台越跨國婚姻受暴婦女的動態父權協商並列篇名：Dynamic Structurally Constrained Agency: Negotiating Patriarchy in Taiwan-Vietnam Cross-Border Marriages by Abused Female Migrants作者：唐文慧(Anna Wen-Hui Tang);王宏仁(Hong-Zen Wang)關鍵字：越南女性移民;工作;父權;跨國婚姻;能動性;Vietnamese migrant women;work;patriarchy;cross-border marriages;agency期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討面對跨國婚姻衝突的新移民女性在台灣的社會結構下，如何在不同的婚姻階段與父權家庭結構討價還價，在有限的選擇中，找到自己生命的出路。透過訪談16位越南籍女性配偶與3位台灣丈夫，我們發現，台越兩國性別文化的差異，表現在跨國婚姻夫妻對彼此性別角色期待的落差，導致家庭內部與夫妻的衝突。受暴的新移民越南女性積極爭取外出工作，結果雖然讓新移民女性漸獲充權，卻可能導致夫妻雙方的衝突更為升高、暴力加劇，甚至婚姻的破裂。我們發現，對於這群女性來說，外出工作並不只是經濟理由，她們透過就業的機會，逐步地增進個人資源，並改變與夫家互動方式與權力關係。研究同時發現，兩個台灣特殊的社會結構因素：家庭暴力防治法與中小企業為主的市場結構，有利於這群女性外出工作，最後成為能走出婚姻暴力的主要力量。英文摘要：This paper explores how Vietnamese migrant women in Taiwan find a way out of Taiwanese patriarchal family structures in different marital stages with their own limited resources. We argue that getting a job outside family is a reason causing domestic violence, and also the catalyst to initiate a dynamic process of negotiating the patriarchy family system, and probably result in leaving unhappy marriage and pursuing an independent life of their own.With in-depth interview of sixteen Vietnamese migrant women and three of their husbands, it shows that getting a job is not only motivated by economic reason, but also an important factor to gain resources to negotiate patriarchy family in this dynamic process. The gender roles expectation gap between Taiwanese husband and Vietnamese wife often results in conflict view of getting a job, and division of labor in domestic affairs. In Taiwan, two structural factors, i.e., the Domestic Violence Prevention Law and small- and medium-sized enterprises structures, facilitate these migrant women to escape the constraints set by their patriarchy families.起始頁-結束頁：123-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.00048篇名：治理「文化治理」：傅柯、班奈特與王志弘並列篇名：Governing the "Cultural Governance" Foucault, Bennett, and Chih-Hung Wang作者：吳彥明(Yen-Ming Wu)關鍵字：治理性;文化治理;文化政治;傅柯;Governmentality;cultural governance;cultural politics;Foucault期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011中文摘要：就理論或是實踐的層面上，傅柯本人並沒有正面發想「文化治理」這個概念，主要是涉及政治上的自由主義以及新自由主義，而這也是現有文獻著力甚深的面向。當然，傅柯或多或少也指涉了宗教、家庭、性別以及主體建構的治理，但「文化」這個字彙始終不在他或是目前主流治理性文獻的理論議程之中。歐美學術圈之所以會有「文化治理」的概念，當然是受到Tony Bennett的影響甚鉅，而在台灣的人文社會學科之中，論及「文化治理」的討論，王志弘一系列的作品也必然是對話的對象。因此本文的書寫策略就是從傅柯、Bennett與王志弘三位學者的著作來依序進行討論。總的來說，本文試圖想做的，並非是對傅柯式的「治理性」或是Bennett的「文化治理」這兩個概念進行系譜學的分析，畢竟前者已有學者多有著墨了，後者目前也有一些退燒了；而是，在他們的基礎上，試圖對「文化治理」在台灣這個既是研究領域也是研究方法的概念進行反思與檢討。本文發現，傅柯本身有三種版本的治理性解讀。而Bennett與王志弘兩位學者，基於不同的學術生產脈絡，對於文化治理的理論化工程則是大相逕庭，前者主動與傅柯進行對話，對於文化治理的理論化比較偏向傅柯第二版本的治理性，並將文化治理與文化政治切割開來；而後者基於與都市治理研究的對話成果，則是認為文化治理與文化政治兩者是相互指涉的。鑑於以上這點，本文作者進一步指出，文化治理在台灣的理論化工程是發散而不明確的，無法突顯出文化與治理之間的歷史性與理論關係性。英文摘要：Theoretically or practically, Foucault himself didn't elaborate the ”cultural governance”. Rather, both his main focus and the current literature are linked to the liberalism and neo-liberalism. Without any question, Foucault more or less referred to the government of religion, family, gender and subject, but the ”culture” is eventually excluded from his or mainstream theoretical agenda. Tony Bennett enacted the ”cultural governance” as a research agenda. And in Taiwan, the pilot scholar was Chih-hung Wang. Therefore, logically, the author tries to elaborate the ”cultural governance” based on these three scholars' writings sequentially. In doing so, this article's main problematic is to introspect and criticize the ”cultural governance” as a rising sub-field of cultural studies or sociology in Taiwan.This article concludes that Foucault himself had three distinct but intrinsically related versions of governmentality. Bennett and Chih-hung Wang, based on different intellectual context, theorized two contrasted versions of cultural governance. Bennett actively involved and dialogued with Foucault, his interpretation contrasted the cultural governance with cultural politics and was much more linked to the second version of Foucault. Conversely, Chih-hung Wang, who was trained in urban governance and political economy school, argued that cultural governance and cultural politics is mutual-reference. Accordingly, the author argues that the theorization of cultural governance in Taiwan is blurring and defocusing, unable to the highlight the historical-ness and theoretical connection between culture and governmentality.起始頁-結束頁：171-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.00059篇名：文化治理是不是關鍵詞？並列篇名：Is Cultural Governance a Keyword?作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：205-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.000610篇名：橫向思考的東亞圖景：評白樂晴與白永瑞近作並列篇名：Horizontal Thought of the East Asian Scene: On the Recent Works of Paik Nak-Chung and Baik Youngseo作者：孫歌(Ge Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：213-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.000711篇名：閱讀「架構」與「創新」之過去、現在與未來：評介"Internet Architecture and Innovation"並列篇名：Reading Architecture and Innovations: A Review on "Internet Architecture and Innovation"作者：劉靜怡(Ching-Yi Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：245-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.000812篇名：「高教發展與評鑑制度」專題引言並列篇名：The Critical Review of Academic Assessment in Taiwan's Higher Education作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：261-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.000913篇名：台灣社會科學學術評鑑制度的理想與現實：以社會學為例並列篇名：The Ideal and Reality of the Academic Evaluation System in Taiwan: Taking Sociology as an Example作者：黃厚銘(Hou-Ming Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：267-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.001014篇名：建構教授們的自律主體：台灣的大學學術評鑑治理術並列篇名：Constructing the Self-Disciplined Subject of University Professors: The Governmentality of Academic Assessment in Taiwan's Higher Education作者：徐進鈺(Jinn-Yuh Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：281-288資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.001115篇名：有錢趕快撈的彈性薪資制度並列篇名：The Crazy Chase for Adjustable Salaries in Higher Education Institutions of Taiwan作者：李威儀(Wei-I Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：289-294資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.001216篇名：從「樹人」到「術人」：反思台灣的大學教育主體性並列篇名：From "Public Educator" to "Academic Craftsman": Reflections on the Subjectivity of University Education in Taiwan作者：劉雅芳(Ya-Fang Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：82期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：295-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201106.001317篇名：台灣公共衛生體系市場化與醫療化的歷史發展分析並列篇名：The Analysis of the Historical Development of Marketization and Medicalization of the National Public Health System in Taiwan作者：陳美霞(Meei-Shia Chen)關鍵字：醫療化;市場化;共生關係;公共衛生體系;台灣;醫療體系;medicalization;marketization;symbiotic relationships;national public health system;Taiwan;medical care system期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011中文摘要：2003年SARS流行對台灣經濟及社會的沈重打擊，暴露公衛體系的種種問題，本文分析其中市場化及醫療化這兩類問題。目前台灣公共衛生或醫療相關學術研究文獻，尚未對此兩大問題做過系統分析；此外，這兩類問題，幾乎都是分開被不同的人，不同的文章提出的，亦即，一般認為這是兩個互不相關的問題。以歷史的考察為主要研究取徑，本文作者指出，台灣公共衛生體系的醫療部門從光復後至今—尤其在1980年代之後，是不斷商品化、市場化的過程；而公衛體系則是不斷醫療化的過程，這個過程也是在1980年代後加速進行。作者進一步提出，公衛體系的這兩大問題不但相關，甚至有共生的關係︰即，要是公衛體系的醫療部門不過度市場化，它過度醫療化的問題不會存在；反之，要是公衛體系不將健康問題醫療化，醫療部門過度市場化的問題不易產生。兩者共生互促共息，缺一無以為繼。英文摘要：The outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in 2003 had an enormous economic and social impact on Taiwan. It revealed that Taiwan's public health system had many problems. Of these problems, this paper analyzes two major ones: its marketization and medicalization, for which the health and medical literature in Taiwan lacks a systematic analysis. Moreover, these two issues were mostly raised separately by different researchers or commentators, and treated as un-related problems. Using a historical inquiry approach, the author argues that the medical sector of Taiwan's public health system has been continuously commodified and marketized since Taiwan was returned to China from the colonial Japanese government. The pace of this marketization process has been particularly fast starting from the 1980s. In the same period, Taiwan's public health system has also been continuously medicalized and this process has also been much faster. The author further argues that the marketization and medicalization processes are not only related but also have symbiotic relationships. On the one hand, the over-medicalization of the public health system would not have occurred if the medical sector was not over-marketized; on the other, the over-marketization of the medical sector would not have occurred if Taiwanese people's health problems were not medicalized. These two problems have a mutually beneficial relationship; without one, the other would not have continued.起始頁-結束頁：3-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.000118篇名：是減害還是加害？愛滋新聞論述中的毒癮者框架並列篇名：Reducing or Inducing Harm?Framing Injecting Drug Users in the HIV/AIDS News Discourse作者：徐美苓(Mei-Ling Hsu);熊培伶(Pei-Ling Hsiung);賴若函(Jo-Han Lai);吳姿(Tzu-Hsien Wu);施馨堯(Sin-Yao Shih)關鍵字：毒癮;框架分析;減害計畫;愛滋病;新聞論述;framing analysis;harm reduction;HIV/AIDS;injecting drug use;news discourse期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣過去多年的愛滋病絕大部份是經由性行為傳染，但自2004年起，毒品病患感染人數激增，實施以提供清潔針具以及以口服方式（例如美沙冬或丁基原啡因）取代注射（海洛因）方式的替代療法，也成了衛生當局極力推動的愛滋防治政策。本研究從社會建構論的角度切入，以框架（framing）分析的取徑，探討媒體論述中有關「愛滋」與「毒品」交集的的毒癮者框架。我們以2004-2007年四年間的新聞文本作為觀察對象，以愛滋、毒癮、吸毒、減害療法、美沙冬、針具交換等重要關鍵詞，至《中國時報》、《聯合報》、《蘋果日報》新聞資料庫進行相關文本搜尋。根據針對742則文本的觀察，新聞所出現的毒癮者描述大致可分為「可被醫治的病人」、「受害者」、「無藥可救的失敗者」、「加害者／失序者」等四個類別，以及以上任一類別的混合。雖然減害計畫的實施，使得毒癮者被新聞框架為可被醫治病人的數量躍升，成為所有類別的第二高，但整體而言，毒癮者仍舊是以負面框架再現為大宗，其中又以加害者／失序者的框架類別為最多。本研究希冀從具在地性的思維與關懷的角度，藉此新聞論述框架剖析進一步帶入健康議題相關者權利面向的省思。英文摘要：The increasing number of HIV patients due to injecting drug use (IDU) enabled the Taiwanese government to implement harm reduction program, including distribution of clean needles and drug substitution treatment, in 2004. By taking a social constructionist perspective and using van Gorp's framing package approach, this study analyzed how frames of injecting drug users are represented in the news discourse when addressing the reconstructed social problem of IDU and HIV/AIDS in Taiwan. Seven hundred and forty two relevant news stories from China Times, United Daily News, and Apple Daily, dated from January 2004 to December 2007, were collected via the newspaper web databases. The results showed that injecting drug users were framed as one of the following: curable patients, victims, incurable losers, victimizers/deviants, and the mixed type of any of the four frames. Although increased number of news stories while injecting drug users were framed as curable patients was found, frames with negative nature were still the majority in the news discourse, whereas injecting drug users as victimizers/deviants were the predominant. Based on the findings, the study went further to discuss issues related to health and rights from indigenous and humanitarian perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：79-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.000219篇名：台灣透析醫療社會力的轉變並列篇名：The Transformation of Societal Agency of Dialysis Patients in Taiwan作者：林文源(Wen-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：社會力;病患團體;意向性佈署;社會運動;透析;societal agency;patients' organization;deployment of intentionality;social movement;dialysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以透析病患團體介入醫療場域的行動，分析近三十年來台灣透析醫療社會力的轉變。本文借助Michel Foucault與行動者網絡理論，發展「意向性佈署」概念，指出在不同歷史時空的政策、與腎臟醫療專業關係、社會處境等條件下，病患團體的佈署介入使透析醫療場域呈現「集體性浮現：整體動員與社會賦體」、「場域雙元化：去正當性的權利與矛盾的集體性」、「垂直整合：新／去集體性與例行化」等三種透析醫療體制，構成透析病患團體的集體意向性。在這些模式下，不但浮現不同面貌的醫療品質議題，病患族群的集體性與社會、自我認同樣貌也不斷變形。其中各階段的透析醫療社會力也有不同可能性與限制。最後，除了在理論上試圖發展「實作體制」、「意向性佈署」分析社會力構成與轉變的概念工具外，這個個案分析也顯示，儘管當前透析病患團體數量增多，透析醫療社會力並未累積，反而以依附垂直整合體制為主，這是當前透析醫療社會力發展的隱憂與限制。英文摘要：This study explores the transformation of societal agency in the field of dialysis medicine by examining the case of patients' organizations actions in Taiwan in the last three decades. A new concept of 'deployment of intentionality' is devised from Michel Foucault and Actor-Network theory's insights to portray the changing regimen of dialysis practice and social intentionality toward patients. The analysis examines the changing dialysis regimen and patients' agency deployed by patients' organizations and other policy, professional, and social actors in different eras: 'emergence of collectivity: mobilization of the collective identity, and societal embodiment,' 'dualization of the field: de-legitimatization of rights and the contradictive collectivity,' and 'vertical integration: emergence and erosion of collective identity and routinitization.' Theoretically, this study elaborates the conceptual frameworks of regime of practice and deployment of intentionality to trace the transformation of societal agency. Empirically, the analysis shows a worrying future. The increasing amount of patients' organizations does not increase the possibility of changing the regime of vertical integration and the dialysis patients' agency is diminished.起始頁-結束頁：129-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.000320篇名：對蚊子宣戰：二次戰後台灣根除瘧疾的科技與社會研究並列篇名：War against Mosquitoes-Science, Technology and Society Study of Post-War Malaria Eradication in Taiwan作者：林宜平(Yi-Ping Lin)關鍵字：瘧疾;戰後;DDT;根除計畫;科技與社會;Malaria;post-war;DDT;Eradication Program;Science;Technology and Society期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011中文摘要：二次戰後WHO以噴灑DDT消滅瘧蚊，在世界各國展開根除瘧疾計畫，台灣是戰後全球除瘧行動中，極少數完全根絕瘧疾，並且長期維持無本土病例的國家。本研究從科技與社會的觀點，回顧從日治到美援台灣瘧疾防制「對人法」與「對蚊法」的爭議；戰後以DDT家戶噴射對瘧蚊宣戰的準備、攻擊、肅清與保全；批判檢視台灣戰前／戰後瘧疾死因與盛行率的變化；最後從社會世界的理論觀點，討論台灣成功除瘧的歷史與社會脈絡。本研究發現，台灣戰後的除瘧行動，有延續自日治時期的瘧蚊研究，瘧原蟲檢驗技術，藥物治療，以及防瘧體系的支持。戰後世界衛生組織、美國與國民黨政府耗費眾多人力與物力，全力支持DDT家戶噴射，有冷戰與戒嚴的特殊歷史脈絡。台灣根除瘧疾得以長期維持，除了對人法舊技術與對蚊法新技術同時並行，以及戒嚴時期限制人民海外旅行之外，矮小瘧蚊也不敵台灣生態環境的變遷，節節敗退。此外，台灣在1952年代全面噴射DDT之前，瘧疾盛行率已經大幅下降。DDT是戰後全球瘧疾根除計畫的邊界物，標準化的家戶噴射作業流程雖然無法在全球各地同步執行，但是和台灣的人與非人行動者，組成穩固的防瘧技術網絡，成為非常少數的成功案例。本研究具體回應「超越國家單位的國際書寫架構」，從社會世界的理論觀點，討論DDT在台灣除瘧所扮演的角色，不但可以協助理解技術物的多重社會性格，對當前全球公共衛生政策，也有重要貢獻。英文摘要：After World War II, the World Health Organization promoted the use of residual DDT spraying to eradicate malaria. Taiwan was one of the very few countries to successfully eradicate malaria and to stay malaria-free for many years. In this study, I took the Science, Technology and Society (STS) perspective to review the Taiwanese history of malaria eradication, starting from the Japanese colonial period up to the USAID after WWII, as well as the scientific controversies surrounding malaria control. I explored the ”war against mosquitoes” from the phases of preparation, attack, consolidation, and maintenance, and re-analyzed the malaria mortality and morbidity data to elucidate the social and historical context of malaria eradication in Taiwan. I suggest that the malaria eradication efforts in Taiwan had indeed continued from the Japanese Colonial period. There were entomological studies, parasite-examining techniques, medication, and anti-malaria public health systems. During the post-war period, the WHO, US and Taiwanese governments spent a lot of money and manpower to support DDT residual spraying. Other than treating the patients and the mosquitos, Taiwanese people were not allowed to travel under marshal law, and An. Minimus retreated because of the ecological changes in Taiwan. Furthermore, the prevalence of malaria in Taiwan had dramatically dropped before DDT spraying began in 1952. DDT was a boundary object in the post-war global malaria eradication program. While the standardized house-spraying methods could not apply to many countries during this time, there were human and non-human actors forming to consolidate malaria eradication networks in Taiwan. This study aims to retell the Taiwan story on the international level. Social world theory helps clarify the multiple social characters of objects, and may contribute to global public health policies.起始頁-結束頁：187-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.000401篇名：論韋伯的「價值中立」概念並列篇名：On Max Weber's Concept of "Value-freedom"作者：張旺山(Wahng-Shan Chang)關鍵字：韋伯;價值中立;方法論;價值多神論;人格;Max Weber;value-freedom;methodology;axiological polytheism;personality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：37期出版年：2011中文摘要：韋伯一生堅持科學探究必須「價值中立」(wertfrei)。但他的「價值中立<U+FF63>(Wertfreiheit)概念應該如何理解，卻始終是學界爭論的一個焦點。一般而言，韋伯學界大多將「價值中立」理解為韋伯的一個「方法論的或邏輯的原則」。但在我看來，這樣的一種理解顯然太過「稀薄」；而如果將韋伯的「價值中立」理解為只是一個「邏輯的原則」或「方法論原則」，則是對韋伯「價值中立」思想的一種嚴重的誤解：對韋伯而言，「價值中立」固然是一個「方法論原則」，但絕不僅僅只是、或主要是一個「方法論原則」。這篇文章的主要目的，是想要透過某種詮釋韋伯的觀點（主要是由韋伯的「人圖像」、「價值多神論」與「人格」概念等方面著手），去提供一種較為完整的理解韋伯的「價值中立」概念的方式，藉以消除這種「方法論的誤解」。韋伯的「價值中立」概念，絕不只是一個單純的「方法論原則」，而是一個相當複雜的概念，對這概念的正確理解，將是理解韋伯的「人」和他的著作的一個重要關鍵。英文摘要：Max Weber famously proposes that scientific investigations must be ”value-free”. But how should his conception of value-freedom be understood is still disputed by Weber scholars nowadays. Most of them understand it as a ”methodological principle.” Such an understanding seems too ”thin” and leads to serious misunderstanding. I contend that, although value-freedom is a methodological principle, it is not limited in this regard, not even primarily a methodological principle. The purpose of this article is to provide a comprehensive understanding of Weber's conception of value-freedom through an interpretation of his thoughts concerning humanity, personality and axiological polytheism. In this way, I attempt to relate Weber’s complicated concept of value-freedom to his personality as well as his theoretical world-view.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110600370012篇名：政治統一體與代表－沃格林對施米特政治代表理論的批判並列篇名：Political Entity and Representation-Voegelin's Critique of Schmitt's Theory of Political Representation作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：施米特;沃格林;代表;政治統一體;人民;政治宗教;Schmitt;Voegelin;Representation;political entity;people;political Religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：37期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文試圖以施米特的「代表」概念為起點，來分析卡爾•施米特如何想像政治代表與民主之問的衝突。此外，並欲釐清艾瑞克•沃格林如何對於施米特的代表圖像做出回應，以重新思考現代國家中政治代表的正當性問題。施米特以「代表」和「同一性」兩原則的對立來批判議會制，並從其對政治統一體的想像，建構出一套統治者直接訴諸政治集體而取得正當性的代表模式。對此，沃格林批評施米特的民主進路，並未徹底去除「代表」原則的要素，而只是以民主的術語來重構君主作為「政治代表」的理論。本文將進一步分析沃格林的「政治宗教」這個概念，以說明沃格林如何試圖挑戰施米特將政治代表建構在集體性「人民」概念之上的政治一神學類比。本文試圖以施米特的「代表」概念為起點，來分析卡爾•施米特如何想像政治代表與民主之間的衝突。此外，並欲釐清艾瑞克．沃格林如何對於施米特的代表圖像做出回應，以重新思考現代國家中政治代表的正當性問題。施米特以「代表」和「同一性」兩原則的對立來批判議會制，並從其對政治統一體的想像，建構出一套統治者直接訴諸政治集體而取得正當性的代表模式。對此，沃格林批評施米特的民主進路，並未徹底去除「代表」原則的要素，而只是以民主的術語來重構君主作為「政治代表」的理論。本文將進一步分析沃格林的「政治宗教」這個概念，以說明沃格林如何試圖挑戰施米特將政治代表建構在集體性「人民」概念之上的政治－神學類比。英文摘要：This article analyzes Carl Schmitt's concepts of representation and democracy and Eric Voegelin's critiques. The aim is to rethink the legitimacy of political representation in the modern state. Schmitt criticizes parliamentarism from two contrary principles: representation and identity. And he erects his representative mode which authorities acquiring their legitimacy through directly resort to the political collective. In contrast, Voegelin disagrees with Schmitt's idea and demonstrates that the latter did not entirely remove the element of representation. Moreover, Voegelin argues against Schmitt who rebuilds the principle of monarchy with the democratic terminology as the theory of political representation. This essay, furthermore, analyzes Voegelin's concept of ”political religion,” demonstrating how Voegelin challenged Schmitt's politicaltheological analogy that political representation is established on the collective concept of ”people” bases.起始頁-結束頁：39-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110600370023篇名：抗拒直接民主的公民投票法？從憲法及法學方法論觀點檢視公民投票審議委員會對台聯ECFA公投提安之認定並列篇名：The Anti-Democratic Referendum Law? A Critical Analysis of the ECFA Referendum Case from Constitutional and Methodological Perspective作者：黃舒芃(Shu-Perng Hwang)關鍵字：直接民主;公民投票;公審會;公投法;漏洞;類推適用;direct democracy;referendum;Referendum Commission;Referendum Law;gap;analogical reasoning期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：37期出版年：2011中文摘要：2010年6月3日，行政院公民投票審議委員會駁回台灣團結聯盟的ECFA公投提案。由於公審會的駁回理由，攸關公投法如何解釋的問題，因此筆者認為，欲釐清這次事件的爭議關鍵，勢必得先回溯探討公投制度在我國憲法架構之下的定位，才能進一步瞭解公投法相關規定的意義何在。有鑑於此，本文旨從憲法的角度出發，透過觀察我國憲法所建構的民主實踐模式，分析我國憲法如何鋪陳直接民主與間接民主的關係。本文將指出，由於我國憲法預設了一套支持直接民主與間接民主並存，並且讓直接民主得以有效制衡間接民主的架構，因此公投法的規範目的，恰恰在於協助實現直接民主對間接民主的制衡。根據此等對公投法規範目的的認知，本文將主張，面對這次公投法解釋的爭議，解決之道並非如公審會所主張的「反面推論」，而應該在認定法律規範漏洞存在的前提之下，運用「類推適用」的方式，安置「不同意者佔多數」之公投結果的法律效果。起始頁-結束頁：75-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110600370034篇名：左派政治發展的邏輯－理查•羅蒂論20世紀美國左派並列篇名：The Logic of Leftism in American: Richard Rorty on American Leftism in 20 Century作者：鄭維偉(Wei-Wei Zheng)關鍵字：改良左派;新左派;馬克思主義;福柯;全球化;Reformist Leftism;New Left;Marxism;Foucault;Globalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：37期出版年：2011中文摘要：羅蒂是二戰後美國最有影響力的哲學家之一。他對美國左派歷史的描述，展現了左派政治光譜的複雜性。改良左派希望通過啟動美國憲政結構來化解社會衝突，改善底層的經濟狀況。知識份子的獨特優勢在於擔當上層與底層之問溝通的管道。不過，新左派破壞了這一傳統。他們向美國制度本身開火，把美國描述為道德侏儒，希望通過顛覆人與人之問普遍存在的施虐心理來讓下層民眾獲得尊嚴。他們斷絕了與工會的聯繫，崇尚書齋裹的文化革命。在全球化背景下，羅蒂期望新左派能拋棄將社會問題理論化的趨勢，重新建立與工會的聯繫，共同致力於民眾生活的改善。英文摘要：Richard Rorty is one of the most influential American philosophers after World War Ⅱ. In order to demonstrate the complexity of political genealogy of the left, he re-narrates the history of American leftism. The Reformist leftist wishes to revive social conflict and improve economical situation of the working class by making the constitution function properly. The contribution of the intellectuals is acting as the medium between the top and the bottom classes. Rorty highlights that the New Left destroys this tradition. They attack American institution fiercely and portray it as morally defective. They believe that the working class can acquire dignity by eliminating the psychology of maltreat. They also break the relationship with labor union and worship a sort of cultural revolution. Rorty believes that the New Left must abandon the indulgence in theorizing social problems, and work with labor unions to improve the well-being of the disadvantaged.起始頁-結束頁：127-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201106003700401篇名：大海嘯、福島核災、與東亞的科技與社會作者：傅大為期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：9-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.00092篇名：心理的「下層工作」：《西風》與1930－1940年代大眾心理衛生論述並列篇名："West Wind Monthly" and the Popular Mental Hygiene Discourse in Republican China作者：王文基(Wen-Ji Wang)關鍵字：《西風》月刊;心理衛生;自我;醫療史;精神醫學史;"West Wind Monthly";Mental Hygiene;Republican China;History of Medicine;History of Psychiatry期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011中文摘要：民國成立後，中國由制度變革走向思想啟蒙，新文化運動到五四運動的成果即為著例。但欲探究思想改造深入廣大社會的過程，必須實際考察知識分子如何投身於社會活動，及大眾之回應。本文藉由1930至1940年代主要於上海發行並擁有廣大讀者群的《西風》月刊及副刊，探究科學心理學在中國發揮影響的管道。《西風》藉由開闢讀者信箱、徵文、論壇及各種介紹西方心理學知識的單元，在與讀者雙向交流的場域中，試圖將舊社會的傳統論述從讀者心中剔除，建立以西方科學為基礎的為人處世之道。《西風》欲使讀者共同習得一套新的認識及管理自我的技術，而這套新心理學論述，經由反覆練習與複製，也漸次滲透若干中國青年的心理結構中。然而在諸多限制下，此項心理改造事業的實際成效，恐怕尚需斟酌。在清末以降各種國民改造運動的推廣下，新青年以頗為多元的方式面對這源自西方的自我改造工程。例如，大部分讀者最關切者，除接受科學新知外，乃是透過《西風》抒發對傳統家庭不滿，對社會進行批判，或從編輯處獲得立即且務實之建言，而非在心理衛生的知識基礎上發展出一套自我技術。本文就《西風》月刊所欲從事之心理層次的改造工作，其心理衛生論述所預設之社會觀，乃至於讀者閱讀經驗的多樣性等相關議題，進行分析。英文摘要：There has been little historical research into the history of mental hygiene in Republican China. Using popular magazines West Wind Monthly and West Wind Supplement, this article sets out to rectify this omission. With articles and columns especially designed to further the cause of mental hygiene movement in China, West Wind introduced a 'modern' and 'scientific' body of knowledge and technologies of self-cultivation. Their messages did reach some Chinese youths and altered their ways of understanding and managing themselves. Nevertheless, as resources were scarce in terms of personnel and social support, and as the Chinese society was constantly in turmoil, the real impact of this popular mental hygiene discourse remains to be determined. In many cases, the niceties of the characteristically psychological technologies of the self the two magazines worked hard to convey very often did not pass through, as their young readers were more interested in using West Wind as a platform for voicing collective distress and social critique, and for finding practical help in solving personal and interpersonal problems. It is concluded that the present study not only demonstrates the diversity of nation formation movements, of which the mental hygiene movement was a part, during the Republican era, but helps learn more about the transit of knowledge in a different cultural context.起始頁-結束頁：15-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.00153篇名：消失的歇斯底里烙印並列篇名：The Disappearance of Hysterical Stigmata作者：陳嘉新(Jia-Shin Chen)關鍵字：歇斯底里;烙印;Jean-Martin Charcot;Hippolyte Bernheim;Sigmund Freud;Hysteria;Stigmata;Jean-Martin Charcot;Hippolyte Bernheim;Sigmund Freud期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011中文摘要：「烙印」（Stigmata）曾經在十九世紀的歇斯底里研究佔有重要的地位，當時著名的神經醫學家如Jean-Martin Charcot，認為烙印是歇斯底里症的重要身體症狀，跟歇斯底里痙攣的分期一樣，是讓這個多變的疾病得以被辨識的基礎且固定的特徵。然而此症狀卻隨著疾病分類、醫療技法、機構體制與治療關係的變遷，而逐漸在臨床表現中消失。追尋歇斯底里烙印消失的歷史，一方面有助於理解知識與身體的相互關係，另外一方面也點出這個關係的社會意義。英文摘要：Stigmata were considered pivotal to studies on hysteria in nineteenth-century French neurology. Jean-Martin Charcot, a distinguished neurologist then, defined stigmata as major physical symptoms of hysteria. Just as the staging of hysterical fits, the presence of stigmata constituted a significant foundation upon which an elusive illness such as hysteria could be identified. However, the symptom disappeared clinically as medical taxonomy, clinical intervention, institutional condition, and therapeutic relationship changed over time. This history of hysterical stigmata aims to clarify the co-constructiveness of knowledge and body on the one hand, and to highlight social meanings of this relationship on the other.起始頁-結束頁：89-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.00894篇名：山不轉路轉：公民社會與台灣步道工程技術的轉型並列篇名：Changing the Path: Civil Society and Technological Change of Taiwan's Tourist Trail作者：徐銘謙(Ming-Chien Hsu);林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin)關鍵字：公民社會;STS;登山步道;社會運動;工作假期;civil society;STS;mountain trail;social movement;working holiday期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011中文摘要：受科學、技術與社會研究（Science，Technology and Society，簡稱STS）的啟發，本文以台灣的登山步道為例，研究國家與公民社會關係，以及專業技術社群與使用社群之間的關係，如何影響步道技術模式變遷的過程。與台灣其他的公共投資類似，1990年代以前觀光或登山步道工程通常是由國家官僚體制發包給營造商的標案，其技術準則是被景觀規劃或園林設計專業者所決定。然而，自2002年起，台灣登山社團與環保團體反對登山步道工程的抗議此起彼落，挑戰政府由上而下制訂步道施工標準與決定工程發包的舊有步道技術模式，並提出公民參與步道規劃的訴求。在社會運動的壓力下，國家步道工程主管單位林務局及各國家公園管理處，逐漸將登山社團的抗爭者、古道研究者以及步道志工模式的推動者納入步道規劃決策與維護體系中，嘗試學習「生態工法」減少步道土木工程，並引進民間社團參與、用人力進行步道日常維護的新技術模式。結果，這個公民社會改變登山步道施工技術的故事，對台灣其他希望參與公共工程規劃與技術轉型的社會運動提供了寶貴的經驗。英文摘要：Inspired by the Science, Technology and Society (STS) studies, this article examines how the state-society relationship and relationship among engineering-hiking communities shaped the transformation of technological paradigm of mountain trails in Taiwan. Before 2002, the authority of design and construction of mountain trails is controlled by the state technocrats and landscape architecture professionals. Under the ”national landscape model”, the trail is taken as the infrastructure of tourist industry and its design is regarded as the symbol of nationalist identity. Until 2002, the protests of hiking associations changed the state-society relationship and forced the engineering communities to develop a more sustainable alternative of trail construction and conservation. The alternative model, we called it ”civil participation model,” introduced the ideas from Ecological Engineering and the volunteers from hiking clubs and trail researchers for design and conservation of mountain trails. The case studies of civil participation on the changes of trails' building illustrated the impact of social movement on the shift of technological paradigm in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：119-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.01195篇名：對技術的社會建構論之挑戰：建構東亞技術研究主體性的一個契機並列篇名：Challenges to Social Construction of Technology (SCOT) Theory: Considering a Methodological Subjectivity for East Asian Technology Studies作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：技術的社會建構論（SCOT）;科技與社會;技術研究;技術社會學;東亞;social construction of technology (SCOT);science and technology studies (STS);technology studies;sociology of technology;East Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文評述技術的社會建構論（social construction of technology; SCOT）自1980年代中期發表之後，歷年來STS（science and technology studies）學界對其所做的重要檢討。這些檢討主要是質疑許多應用SCOT所做的技術研究成果，不但欠缺社會結構面的考量，還忽略對技術價值與性質的省思，而這主要是因為SCOT過於關注到技術創新的微觀要素及過程。本文也藉對SCOT的檢討，來對東亞及台灣技術研究能走多遠這樣的問題，提供一個方法上的看法。除對技術價值及性質的哲學性探究之外，本文建議在中觀、甚至是巨觀的結構設定及微觀的議題選擇等面向上，基於東亞社會的特殊結構所發展出來的論點及理論應具有主體性，而有機會足以與西方相提並論。當國家（state）作為一種相關社會團體時，探索其與其他國家對某個技術的共識及衝突，還有理解其本身內在的社會結構性特色，或許是一種適合東亞的SCOT取徑，特別是在指涉國際技術移轉的系絡時，這樣的SCOT亞型應更有助於研究非歐美先進國家的技術史及技術社會學。本文也建議SCOT並不是被西方學者所認為是西方的，卻更是一種理解技術的科學或是技術的技術，而在提問東亞技術研究能走多遠時，也必須審視它與西方STS分享了多少的路。英文摘要：This article reviews some critical challenges to the social construction of technology (SCOT) theory, which has been an effective and useful theoretical approach to study technology innovation since the middle 1980s. These challenges question whether the theory of SCOT might be limited in its analysis of some deeper and broader relations between technology and society due to SCOT's lack of some considerations in terms of social structure. They also indicate that the theory confines itself to exploring some philosophical relations between modernity and technology. By reviewing SCOT's theoretical development, this article offers a methodological response to Daiwie Fu's question of how far East Asian technology studies (EATS) can go. It suggests that EATS might be able to develop its academic and methodological subjectivity by integrating its specific social structures, such as colonial and historical backgrounds, into the theory of SCOT. Therefore, the theory of SCOT should not be exclusively categorized as a research model for the West only. As long as SCOT incorporates the considerations of social structure, it helps explore the technology stories in East Asia. The question of how far EATS can go, thus, points out another important question of how much it shares with the scholarship in western technology studies.起始頁-結束頁：171-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.01716篇名：別把STS做小了：麥肯其訪談錄並列篇名：Broadening the Horizons of STS: An Interview with Donald MacKenzie作者：朱容萱(Rong-Xuan Chu);黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011中文摘要：麥肯其教授（Professor Donald MacKenzie）是愛丁堡學派第二代中最富盛名的學者之一，也是前代元老退休後，還繼續鎮守在強綱領發源地的台柱。這篇訪談是從「一加一怎麼可能不等於二」這個簡單的問題開始的。麥教授告訴我們，把視野放寬，一加一就有無限的可能；它可能是10，也可能引來一場大爆炸。緊接著，他告訴我們「數學」是他多年研究的主軸。換言之，不管是導彈議題、碳權交易、還是金融市場，這些看似繁雜的研究背後，都有條「數學」的主線。其次，麥教授也為我們說明了他所理解的有限論（finitism）與操演性（performativity），並替我們解釋了他如何在研究議題上具體運用這些概念。此外，在談到「布洛爾－拉圖爾」論爭的問題時，他也從愛丁堡學派人的角度，來闡析一連串的誤解。最後，麥肯其教授也為東亞的科技與社會研究提出了建言。「不要把這個領域想得太窄！」是他的肺腑之言。英文摘要：With a background in applied mathematics, Professor Donald MacKenzie has recently been named among the top 25 brains of the financial crisis. He is also a pioneer in developing the discipline of science studies of finance. For decades, he has explored new fields in the sociology of science and technology, especially those that deeply affect people's lives such as the eugenics movement, the accuracy of nuclear weapons, emissions markets, and his recent work on current credit crunch. This interview started with a simple, but baffling question of how it could be possible that one plus one does not always equal two. We then attempted to find a thread from a diversity of his research topics. He responded that most of his studies have revolved around the application of mathematics and its impacts on our daily lives. We also asked for his comments on the Bloor-Latour debate. To this request, he replied what he described as a ”very biased Edinburgh School answer”. That is, he sees the attacks on the Edinburgh School as being attacks on a sociologically reductionist misunderstanding of its position. At the end of this interview, he encouraged East Asian scholars to move away from the traditional topics and to be prepared to search for novel ones.起始頁-結束頁：223-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.02237篇名：《科技、醫療與社會》十年路－創刊十週年紀念座談會記要作者：陳瑞麟期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：13期出版年：2011中文摘要：本刊於2001年3月發行創刊號，至今年4月第12期為止，剛好屆滿十年。在這不算短的歲月中，STM期刊從新生到茁壯，是作者、投稿人、讀者訂閱者、科工館、群學出版社、歷屆編委助理們共同努力的結果。十年是值得一書的時期，編委會因此策劃一個創刊十週年紀念座談會，邀請一些作者、歷屆編委與讀者一起來回顧STM十年路與前瞻她的未來。為了推擴STM期刊、STS研究與活動到潛力十足的中部地區，編委會透過本刊優秀作者、目前於中興大學歷史系任教的許宏彬教授居中連繫，承蒙該系主任羅麗雲教授慨然支持，還有台灣科技與社會研究學會、中正大學哲學系、成功大學STM（社會、科技與醫療）研究中心主任楊倍昌教授共同贊助，「STM創刊十週年紀念座談會」正式於6月30日在中興大學歷史系登場。本次座談會共有三場，第一場由現任編委黃俊夫主持，副主編林文源、編委王秀雲與我報告STM期刊近況。第二場則邀請前副主編王文基主持兼引言人，歷屆編委傅大為、祝平一、林宜平、雷祥麟擔任引言人，第三場邀請楊倍昌主持，並邀請曾在STM發表過兩篇論文的作者林崇熙、許宏彬、楊弘任、陳政亮擔任引言人，一起回首來時路，並討論對STM的期許與遠景。起始頁-結束頁：251-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201110.025101篇名：菁英與民眾對於政策意見之一致性研究：健保政策評估指標之案例分析並列篇名：Evaluation Indicators of National Health Insurance Policy: Comparisons of Opinions of the Elites and the General Public作者：劉宜君(I-Chun Liu)關鍵字：全民健保;政策評估;評估指標;菁英;national health insurance;policy evaluation;evaluation indicators;elite期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：24期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究有別於過去以專家或民眾為單一研究對象的健保政策評估研究，結合「由上而下」與「由下而上」方式蒐集實證資料。先利用政策德菲法蒐集專家對於健保政策評估指標的意見，並以專家共識高的指標作為民意調查問卷的基礎，再利用電話調查法蒐集民眾對於健保政策評估指標的意見。研究發現，健保開辦已十餘年，菁英與民眾具有高度共識的評估指標著重在醫療資源配置、制度課責與資源使用效率等面向，計有七項，包括：「民眾需要的醫療服務項目，健保保障的程度」（完整性指標）、「健保照顧到偏遠地區民眾的醫療服務」（適足性指標）、「民眾到醫院看病時，醫院、醫師數量充足的程度」（適足性指標）、「民眾對於健保的滿意度」（課責性指標）、「以最少的錢來照顧民眾健康的程度」（效率性指標）、「提升民眾健康的程度」（效能性指標）、「政府討論健保公開讓民眾瞭解的程度」（課責性指標）。研究建議，除了財務平衡指標外，菁英與民眾具有共識的指標作為健保政策成效評量指標，以符合專業與民主參與的原則。英文摘要：The present study discusses evaluation indicators of the National Health Insurance policy, incorporating opinions from the elites and the general public. The empirical study implemented the policy Delphi method to obtain the elite opinion on evaluation indicators of the National Health Insurance policy, while a telephone opinion survey collected the general public opinion. Results indicated that the elites and the general public reach a consensus on several evaluation indicators. These indicators include, ”All people can obtain basic medical services which the national health insurance policy can afford” (comprehensiveness indicator), ”People can obtain basic medical care services despite living in rural or remote areas.” (adequacy indicator), ”People can obtain sufficient medical care services according to their demands” (adequacy indicator), ”General public satisfaction with the national health insurance policy” (accountability indicator),” When the government decides on health insurance issues, its decision-making processes are open for public understanding” (accountability indicator), ”The national health insurance can provide necessary services in the most efficient way” (efficiency indicator), and, ”To enhance the effectiveness of the health care of the public in general” (effectiveness indicator). The higher satisfaction indicators of the national health insurance policy were, ”To enhance the effectiveness of the health care of the public in general” (effectiveness indicator) and, ”The national health insurance can provide necessary services in the least costly way” (efficiency indicator). These findings indicate that performance assessment indicators should integrate the opinions of different representative sections of the population, professional and democratic principles of decision-making.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.24.012篇名：探討不同障礙者的情慾問題：一個質性研究成果的分析並列篇名：Exploring the Sexuality of People with Varied Disabilities: Results from a Qualitative Study作者：邱連枝(Lien-Chih Chiou)關鍵字：身心障礙;情慾;人權;性公民權利;disability;sexuality;human rights;sexual citizenship期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：24期出版年：2011中文摘要：身心障礙者情慾或性慾的話題向來是社會的禁忌，然而，近年來無論國、內外相關身心障礙法案的變革，皆強調身心障礙者同等擁有人權的權利訴求，身心障礙者的情慾表達議題也已到了需要被重視的時刻。此外，國內相關團體推動公娼合法化，對外諸求此舉可作為解決底層及身心障礙者性慾需求的選項之一，反對者提出罰嫖措施以杜絕對女性的性剝削。本研究重點不在於探討性工作者是否該合法化，然而，在倡議過程中台灣社會卻遺漏了身心障礙者的聲音，無論是罰娼或罰嫖的爭論，明顯忽略身心障礙者情慾表達的權利與障礙處境。本文從情慾表達是人權的基點出發，同時透過「障礙」觀點的詮釋，探討身心障礙者情慾表達的困境，以彰顯情慾表達人權應被正視的正當性。本文透過非營利組織人員的訪談，嘗試呈現台灣不同障礙者的情慾圖像，提供政府未來相關處遇措施的參考；同時在性產業是否合法化的推動過程，提供另一種立基於身心障礙者性權利的政策思維。英文摘要：Issues of sexuality and disability have been a taboo topic in the society. However, recent disability legislation, in both international and regional forms, has aimed to ensure basic human rights are also available to the disabled. The human right issue of sexual expression for the disabled has come to point that it cannot be neglected any more.At the same time, feminist groups are advocating the legalization of the sex industry and asserting it may become one of the options for the disabled and underprivileged to exercise their sexual rights. However, those who are against it want to punish sexual consumers to prevent gender oppression of female sex workers. The author believes arguments concerning ”sex worker” penalties or ”consumer” penalties neglect the disadvantaged situation disabled men face in sexual expression. The voices of the disabled are ignored in today's society.From that viewpoint, this paper takes a sexual rights perspective to conduct a bio-social interactive research approach and discuss barriers disabled people face in sexual expression. Through interviewing key people in several non-profit organizations, this paper attempts to portray the sexuality of people with varied disabilities in Taiwan. It is hoped the results of the research will provide the government with recommendations in policymaking, and become an important aspect of the debate on the legalization of the sex industry.起始頁-結束頁：39-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.24.023篇名：身心障礙者服務的正常化與個別化原則之迷思與再省思：以「身心障礙兒童與少年安置寄養家庭委託服務方案」為例並列篇名：The Myth and Introspection of the Normalization Principle and Individualization Principles for Disability Welfare Service: A Case Study of "The Foster Family Care Program for Children with Disabilities"作者：周怡君(Yi-Chun Chou)關鍵字：正常化原則;身心障礙兒少;個別化原則;家庭寄養;normalization;individualization;children and early youths with disabilities;family foster期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：24期出版年：2011中文摘要：身心障礙者的福利服務強調障礙者需回歸主流社會生活模式的「正常化原則」與重視特殊需求的「個別化」原則。本文以文獻分析與質性訪談的研究方法，分析全國唯一針對身心障礙兒少所開辦之北部某都市的「身心障礙兒少家庭寄養安置方案」，探討一般社會服務方案在正常化原則與個別化原則的應用狀況。該方案有別於一般兒少家庭寄養服務，置於身心障礙福利科下辦理，目前已實施有5年。本文研究結果發現，該方案開辦動機雖符合要讓身心障礙兒少能接受家庭寄養服務、減少機構寄養的正常化原則，但卻有寄養時間普遍較長、原生家庭重建效果低落的情況，其原因乃在對正常化原則與個別化原則的無法適切應用。英文摘要：The disability welfare service puts emphasis on the ”the normalization principle” and ”the individualization principle.” The former argues that the service for the disables should promote mainstreaming so that they can return to the society to have a normal live; the latter attaches importance to the disables' special needs. By exploring a unique program for foster family care for the children and early youth with disabilities in northern Taiwan, this article discusses the practical application of the two principles. This foster family care program, which has been implemented for 5 years, is quite distinctive because it is one of the scopes of business of the Disabled Welfare Section in the local government. After analyzing relative documents and conducting in-depth interviews, this article found that although this program tries to conform to ”the normalization principle” by promoting the disabled children and early youth to live in the foster family rather than in the placement agency, the negative results are produced due to the too long foster period and the limited effectiveness of reconstruction of these disabled children's and early youth's native families. Thus this article argues that how ”the normalization principle” and ”the individualization principle” can be effectively applied to the disability welfare service should be further explored.起始頁-結束頁：87-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.24.034篇名：這是「房子」，不是「家屋」：從解釋性互動論探討莫拉克風災後原住民的遷徙與衝擊並列篇名：This Is Just a House, Not Our Home: The Immigration and Life-Shock's Experience of Taiwanese Indigene after Typhoon Morakot Through an Interpretive Interactionism Perspective作者：謝文中(Wen-Chung Hsieh);鄭夙芬(Su-Fen Cheng);鄭期緯(Chi-Wei Cheng)關鍵字：莫拉克風災;原住民;解釋性互動論;遷徙;interpretive interactionism;typhoon morakot;indigene;immigration期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：24期出版年：2011中文摘要：研究目的：本文以解釋性互動論探討受災原民面對災後永久遷徙造成的苦痛與衝擊，並以此為根據對政府永久安置計畫加以批判。研究方法：採解釋性互動論，立意取樣5位莫拉克風災重災區之那瑪夏鄉原民，並以深度訪談與參與觀察蒐集資料。研究結果與討論：描繪5位研究對象個人生命故事，再切入面對災後永久遷徙造成的苦痛與衝擊之主顯節經驗，並呈現研究者生命時刻和研究立場，形成三個結果：「在一個『變』、『慌』和『亂』中決定『永久』」、「又見災難：搬到杉林≠回到山林」及「遷移之名，創造切割的事實」，並據此提出：「決定永久前，請多給一點溫柔」及「如果我們再搬一次家，政府請別太意外」等結語。英文摘要：(1) Purpose: To explore Taiwanese indigene's experience of immigration and life-shock after typhoon Morakot and examining the Implementation of Reconstruction Programs by a critical point. (2) Method: This was a qualitative research which based on an Interpretive Interactionism approach and used deep-interview and observation to collect data. There were five participants who were recruited by availability sampling. (3) Result and Conclusions: There were three major results in this research. a. Making an important decision of immigration under a flustered and changeable situation. b. The new living place is never like our traditional habitat in the mountains. c. Far away from our native environment and culture is the really story which is covered by the name of immigration. This research had three suggestions according to the results. a. Using more gentle and soft-way to help indigene to determine the decision of immigration. b. Authorities do not be surprised to our another decision, if we choose to move again in the future.起始頁-結束頁：135-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2011.24.0401篇名：轉換型領導與組織認同：領導者組織典範性知覺的調節效果並列篇名：The Relationship between Transformational Leadership and Organizational Identification: Moderating Effect of Perception of Leader Organizational Prototypicality作者：溫金豐(Jin-Feng Uen);林裘緒(Chiou-Shiu Lin);錢書華(Michael S. Chien)關鍵字：轉換型領導;組織認同;領導者組織典範性;transformational leadership;organizational identification;leader organizational prototypicality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要討論部屬對領導者行為動機的評估是否將調節轉換型領導行為與部屬組織認同的關係。由於部屬對領導者組織典範性知覺代表他們相信領導者利組織動機的程度，因此我們將其視為部屬對領導者行為動機評估的指標來進行後續討論。本研究總共收集318份有效部屬問卷分別隸屬57名領導者。在控制了正向情感與社會期許等方法變項後，研究結果顯示在領導者組織典範性知覺較高的情況下，將強化轉換型領導行為對於部屬組織認同的影響；反之，則會限制轉換型領導行為對組織認同的影響力。最後，我們根據研究結果分別提出學術與管理上的貢獻與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the research is to discuss the moderating effect of the perception of leader's motivation on the relationship between transformational leadership behavior and subordinate's organizational identification. Since the perception of leader organizational prototypicality represents that subordinates trust leaders will behalf based on organization-oriented interest, we regard prototypicality as the indicator of subordinates' perception of the motivation of leader's behavior for further discussion. We collected 318 questionnaires from subordinates with 57 leaders, respectively. After controlling the effect of positive affectivity and social desirable response, the results indicate when the perception of leader organizational prototypicality is high, it will enhance the relationship between transformational leadership behavior and subordinate's organizational identification; otherwise, it will constrain the effect of transformational leadership behavior to organizational identification. We accordingly raise some suggestions for further research and practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：265-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.2652篇名：管理控制制度之跨國比較個案分析：以台灣資訊業為例並列篇名：A Cross-border, Comparative Case Study of Management Control Systems: An Analysis of Taiwan's IT作者：黃振豊(Cheng-Li Huang);洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung)關鍵字：管理控制制度;多國籍企業;比較個案;management control system MCS;multinational corporation;comparative case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究引用權變及文化理論，探索企業總部管理型態與海外作業單位當地文化，對跨國企業海外作業單位管理控制制度之影響。我們採用比較個案研究方法，分析四家同時在台灣及歐洲地區都有作業單位且規模相當之資訊科技企業。我們的研究顯示，企業總部之管理型態深入地影響其歐洲作業單位組織程序及評估程序之管理控制制度，而獎酬程序深受歐洲當地文化之影響，至於計畫程序同時則受企業總部管理型態及當地國家文化之影響。本研究並發現重視財務控制導向之個案，其台、歐作業單位管理控制制度之一致性，明顯較重視策略導向之個案為高。而長期派駐海外作業單位經理，對該作業單位之計畫、組織及評估程序之管理控制制度之影響則甚大。英文摘要：Based on contingency and cultural theories, this study attempts to explore how organizational management style channeled through Taiwan's headquarter and host culture affect the management control systems (MCSs) of foreign operations. Empirically, it draws on comparative case study approach to examine four Taiwanese IT firms. Our research findings show that, management style from headquarter had a significant effect on the organizational and evaluation processes of MCSs of European operation; reward process was deeply influenced by host culture; and planning process was interactively influenced by both. We also find that those case firms focusing on financial control had more uniform MCSs between Taiwanese and European operations than those focusing on strategic management. The results also show expatriate managers-especially with long-term assignment-had significant impact on planning, organization and evaluation processes of MCSs involving European operations.起始頁-結束頁：287-314資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.2873篇名：不同類型公司（專業經營vs.多角化）舉債的財富效果並列篇名：Organizational Forms and Wealth Effects of Public Debt Offerings作者：陳一如(I-Ju Chen)關鍵字：投資機會假說;自由現金流量假說;舉債;investment opportunities hypothesis;free cash flow hypothesis;debt offering期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究提出投資機會假說與自由現金流量假說，利用事件研究法檢視1999年到2005年間台灣上市上櫃公司中不同經營型態（專業經營vs.多角化）的公司，宣告發行普通公司債後的股東財富效果。實證結果發現台灣上市上櫃公司宣告發行普通公司債後，專業經營公司有正的標準化累積超額報酬，但多角化公司宣告期間的累積超額報酬表現並不明顯，此實證結果支持投資機會假說。另外，本研究也進一步發現，當一成長機會低且自由現金流量高的多角化公司宣告發行公司債時，市場負面評價較不明顯，此結果顯示對代理問題較嚴重（成長機會低且自由現金流量高）的多角化公司而言，舉債可有效控制代理成本，並可有效提升公司會計績效。英文摘要：Literature indicates that the multiple-segment firms have higher free cash flows and lower growth opportunities compared to the single-segment firms. It also has been long recognized that leverage helps control the agency costs problem associated with potential corporate over-investment. Based on these findings, two hypotheses, including free cash flow and investment opportunities hypotheses, are proposed in this study to examine the effects of the different organization forms (single-segment vs. multiple-segment firms) on the announcement of public debt offering by Taiwan public traded firms between 1999 and 2005. Free cash flow hypothesis expects that announcement effect of debt offering is more positive for multiple-segment firms than for single-segment firms because the potential for debt offering to reduce over-investment problem should be higher for multiple-segment firms than for single-segment firms. However, single-segment firms on the other hand are predicted to have higher announcement return of debt offerings under the investment opportunities hypothesis. We find that consistent with the investment opportunities hypothesis, the stock market's responses to the announcement of public debt offering are more favorable for single-segment firms than for multiple-segment firms. The overall findings after several robust checks suggest that leverage works to lessen the overinvestment problem for multiple-segment firms.起始頁-結束頁：315-347資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.3154篇名：商標與創新權變契合及其績效結果：台灣紡織、食品與化學產業證據並列篇名：Contingency Fit and Performance Consequences of Trademark and Innovation: Evidence from Taiwan's Textile, Food, and Chemicals Industries作者：陳玉麟(Yu-Lin Chen)關鍵字：內外部技術並進的創新策略;商標品牌;產業生命週期;make-and-buy innovation strategy;trademark;industrial life cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：文獻較少著墨於成熟期產業，本研究旨在針對國內紡織、食品與化學產業，探討創新與商標品牌的企業經濟績效關係及其影響因素。本研究的主要結果為：商標品牌對於廣告密度較高、研發密度較高、營運槓桿度較低的企業來說，較具策略重要性。當企業相對缺乏重要的專利保護、可支援員工創新的資源較多、研發密度較高、規模較大，較可能採取內外部並進的創新策略。經濟績效意涵方面，大體而言支持權變理論觀點：商標品牌的策略性契合與企業的每股盈餘、銷售成長率、營業利潤率、會計績效指標之間存在正向關聯性。企業的創新策略性契合有助於促進營業利潤率與會計績效之增加。商標品牌的策略性契合只能促進新產品數量的擴增，創新策略與創新策略性契合才能提昇新產品的獲利率。最後，本研究發現商標品牌策略性契合相對於創新策略性契合對於企業績效更具關聯性。英文摘要：Given the lack of empirical study targeting mature industry, using data from Taiwan's textile, food, and chemicals industries, this study examines the performance consequences of trademark and innovation and their determinants. The main results of this study show that firms are more likely to rely on the strategic importance of trademark if they have greater levels of advertisement intensity and R&D intensity, and lower ratios of operating leverage. Innovating firms are more likely to adopt the make-and-buy innovation strategy if they own less ”important” patents and have more resources to support their employees' innovation efforts, higher R&D intensity, and larger size. This study provides evidence in support of the contingency viewpoint. The findings suggest that the strategic fit of a trademark delivers better performance in terms of such measures as EPS, sales growth rate, operating profit ratio, and accounting broad-index. Superior accounting performance also results from the strategic fit of innovation. The strategic fit of the trademark can only facilitate increases in new product quantity, whereas both the make-and-buy strategy and strategic fit of innovation can drive new product profitability. Finally, the results demonstrate that the strategic fit of the trademark is more closely associated with the firm's performance than is the strategic fit of innovation.起始頁-結束頁：349-390資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.3495篇名：組織創新活力及其效果：時間壓力干擾之探討並列篇名：Organizational Innovation Vitality and Its Outcomes: Exploring the Moderating Effect of Time Pressure作者：徐聯恩(Michael L.A. Hsu);樊學良(Hsueh-Liang Fan)關鍵字：組織創新活力;時間壓力;創造力;organizational innovation vitality;time pressure;creativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：21卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：當代探討組織成員創造力的主要研究取向之一，是透過成員對組織創新氛圍的主觀知覺，推論其創新動機與行為。本研究以我國研發機構的工程師為對象，探討時間壓力是否干擾組織創新活力與其效果間之關係。分析結果顯示：(1)組織創新活力是影響成員創造力及其工作滿足感的重要變數；(2)時間壓力與成員創造力無關，但干擾組織創新活力與其效果間之關係。在高組織創新活力與低時間壓力下，成員創造力與工作滿足感最高，此時增加時間壓力，對成員創造力產生抑制作用；反之，在低組織創新活力情境下，高時間壓力有助於促進成員創造力。本研究解釋了過去研究者主張與管理者實務經驗的差異，並發展出組織創新活力／時間壓力矩陣，提供具體的管理建議。英文摘要：The effect of time pressure on employee creativity is controversial, and studies in examining the relationship between time pressure and employee creativity obtained conflicting results. This study updated the concept of organizational innovation climate into organizational innovation vitality, then examined the relationship of organizational innovation vitality and its outcomes (employees creativity and their job satisfaction), and explored the moderating effect of time pressure on the relationship between organizational innovation vitality and its outcomes. Data were collected from 470 R&D employees at four national research institutions in Taiwan in which employee creativity and creative outcomes are eagerly desired.The structural equations modeling analysis indicated that organizational innovation vitality positively related to employee creativity and their job satisfaction, time pressure negatively related to employee job satisfaction, and time pressure moderated the relationship between organizational innovation vitality and its outcomes. Though time pressure constrains employee creativity in strong organizational innovation climates, it enhances employee creativity in weak organizational innovation climates. This finding explains why theorists argue that time pressure hinders organizational innovation, while practitioners always feel that exerting time pressure on employees can get a move on their innovation performance. Further implications are discussed with the time pressure/organizational innovation vitality matrix.起始頁-結束頁：391-421資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2011.21.2.39101篇名：保守與激進之上：中國政治自由主義的希望與困境並列篇名：Beyond Conservatism and Radicalism-On the Hopes and Predicaments of Chinese Political Liberalism作者：陳宜中(I-Chung Chen)關鍵字：保守主義;激進主義;中國;自由民主;市場列寧主義;conservatism;radicalism;China;liberal democracy;market Leninism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從「漸進實現（中國）自由民主」的視野申論指出：正因為自由民主並非一蹴可幾，而有其重要的實現條件；我們既不該無條件支持拒絕和平漸進的威權或後極權體制，也不該輕易接受那種以為「只要推翻一黨專政，自由民主便將水到渠成」的迷思。我們應有必要對政治保守主義（主張維持、保留政治現狀）與政治激進主義（主張以劇烈手段推翻政治現狀）進行雙重反思，以避免採取僵固的保守或激進立場。本文並分析指出：從漸進實現自由民主的角度，民主過渡的動力或主體並非最主要的問題。更關鍵的問題在於：自由民主的實現與穩定條件，如何能在漸進的發展過程中漸漸形成、茁壯、邁向成熟？這在實踐面上意味著：要逼著威權政府逐漸落實基本人權、社會公正與憲政法治，展開漸進的政治改革，逐步釋放有限度但不斷擴大的民主權力以及言論、出版、集會、結社自由；以使多元的、良性的社會整合機制得以漸漸形成，以為自由民主的漸進實現提供更多、更有利的社會及政治條件。英文摘要：This paper argues, from the perspective of 'gradual realization of Chinese liberal democracy', that political liberals should not fix upon either political conservatism or political radicalism. Rather, a 'double reflection' on both is called for. Since the current authoritarian or post-totalitarian regime has not adopted a path of development that is favorable to peaceful political transformation, any uncritical or unconditional support of the political status quo would have few affinities with political liberalism. However, to the very extent that conditions for realizing and stabilizing a successful liberal democracy remain deficient, full-blooded democratic transition or revolution is not sensible either. In the last analysis the most pertinent 'practical question' today is: how could gradual, progressive reforms-with respect to basic civil rights, rule of law, constitutionalism, social justice, and democratic control from below-come about through the public bringing unceasing pressure to bear on the present regime, so as to effect increasingly better conditions for a potentially well-ordered liberal democracy? Thus conceived, the problematic of 'gradual realization of Chinese liberal democracy' suggests that we move beyond the reified stance on either political conservatism or political radicalism.起始頁-結束頁：237-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00052篇名：邏輯實證論在台灣：透過殷海光對思想與文化產生的影響並列篇名：Logical Positivism in Taiwan-Its Influence on the Intellectual and Cultural History Mediated by Yin Hai-Kuang作者：陳瑞麟(Ruey-Lin Chen)關鍵字：邏輯實證論;殷海光;台灣思想史;中國文化;logical positivism;Yin Hai-Kuang;intellectual history;Taiwan;Chinese culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文討論邏輯實證論如何透過殷海光而對台灣的思想和文化產生深遠的影響。這樣的影響如何發生呢？思想史其實是一部思想影響史。本文將提出一個「結構－動態分析」方法，即分別分析影響源和被影響者的思想結構，以看出其中的動態演變。所謂思想結構由一組論旨（即傳統上的思想內容）、論域（思想所涉及的主題和範圍）和方法論三者構成的。被影響者在這三個項目上對影響源的不同程度之吸收，導致不同程度的回應型態：完全接受、局部接受、轉化、背離。本文將應用上述模式來探討邏輯實證論對台灣的影響。首先，我們要討論邏輯實證論對殷海光的影響廣度與深度，根據「結構－動態分析」，我們將分析邏輯實證論的思想結構與殷海光的實證論版本；接著，我們討論殷海光如何把他的版本應用到文化的領域上—《中國文化的展望》其實是殷海光建構「文化科學」的一個嘗試。再來，我們將探討殷海光的思想在「中西文化論戰」中的角色。最後討論「歷史學」和「哲學」這兩個學科中受到殷海光影響的成分，雖然它們繼承了殷版實證論的方法論精神，但內容已有所轉變。英文摘要：Logical positivism had ever left a distinguished mark on the intellectual history in Taiwan, since Yin Hai-Kuang introduced Taiwanese scholars to logical positivism in the 1950s. What was this history? The intellectual history amounts to a history of ideas through the influences of a thinker or a school of thought on another one. To analyze such a history, I propose a structural-dynamic approach, which considers a thinker's or a school's system of thought as a unit. The approach requires that one should compare the system of thought of the thinker who has influences over the others with that of the affected scholars. By such a comparison, one can find a series of micro-dynamic changes from the sources to the affected. According to the structural-dynamic approach, I first compare Yin's thought with logical positivism, showing the slight change from the latter to the former. Next I point out that Yin attempted to construct a cultural science by using the scientific method presented by logical positivists in his great work Prospects of Chinese Culture, in which Yin enlarged the range of logical positivism. Yin also played an important role in the great debate on Chinese versus Western culture, which burst out in 1962. All of these events show that the influence of logical positivism on the intellectuals in Taiwan through Yin Hai-Kuang's works.起始頁-結束頁：281-319資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00063篇名：記2010年東亞批判刊物金門會議：編按並列篇名：Editorial Introduction-2010 East Asian Critical Journals Conference in Kinmen作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：321-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00074篇名：沖繩在東亞中的角色並列篇名：The Role of Okinawa in East Asia作者：新崎盛暉(Arasaki Moriteru) 著;<U+51A8>永悠介(Tominaga Yusuke);阮欣婷(Hsin-Ting Juan) 譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：329-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00085篇名：金門冷戰的歷史與其影響並列篇名：Cold War History and Its Influence in Kinmen作者：李福井(Fu-Chin Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：341-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00096篇名：戰後日本左派中的亞洲聯合並列篇名：How did the Japanese Left Imagine Asia in the Postwar Era?作者：池上善彥(Ikegami Yoshihiko) 著;顏麗蕊(Li-Rui Yan) 譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：353-363資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00107篇名：從暗處看到了希望並列篇名：The Bright Light Seen from a Dark Place作者：白永瑞(Youngseo Baik)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：381-384資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00118篇名：東亞共同體構想與韓半島分斷體制並列篇名：The Idea of East Asian Community and Korea's Division System作者：白樂晴(Nak-Chung Paik) 著;黃文俊(Mon Wong) 譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：385-389資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.00129篇名：大陸批判知識份子的困惑：在金門東亞批判刊物會議上的發言並列篇名：The Quandary of Critical Intellectuals in Mainland China-A Speech at "Historical Culture of the Cold War-East Asian Critical Journals Conference"作者：錢理群(Li-Qun Qian)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：391-394資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001310篇名：民眾視角與民眾的連帶並列篇名：People's Perspective and People's Solidarity作者：孫歌(Ge Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：395-410資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001411篇名：做為「方法」的溝口雄三教授並列篇名：Professor Yuzo Mizoguchi as Method作者：張永堂(Yung-Tang Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：411-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001512篇名：回想戰爭苦痛，再思生命的價值：評Japan's Contested War Memories: The 'Memory Rift' in Historical Consciousness of World War II並列篇名：When We Recall the Misery of War, We Know again the Value of Life作者：呂詠彥(Yung-Yen Lu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：435-442資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001613篇名：怎樣「反叛」，如何「抗議」？試論「搖滾樂改變世界」的政治想像並列篇名：The Political Imagination of "Can Rock & Roll Change the World?"作者：張世倫(Shih-Lun Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：443-461資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001714篇名：「社會住宅」導言並列篇名：Introduction to the "Social Housing Forum"作者：徐進鈺(Jinn-Yuh Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：463-467資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001815篇名：市民城市權論述的建構：找回城市的使用價值並列篇名：The Construction of Right to the City-Bringing Use Value back in作者：徐進鈺(Jinn-Yuh Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：469-476資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.001916篇名：社會權論述的路障並列篇名：Roadblocks to the Social Right Discourse作者：趙剛(Kang Chao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：477-489資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.002017篇名：以住宅「社會化」對抗貧窮「污名化」並列篇名：Socializing the Stigmatized Social Housing for the Poor作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：81期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：491-499資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201103.002101篇名：從同情共感到效益：論《人性論》與《道德原理探索》的異與同並列篇名：Sympathy and Utility: A Comparison between A Treatise of Human Nature and An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals作者：陳建綱(Brian Chien-Kang Chen)關鍵字：休謨;描述性;同情共感;效益;David Hume;Descriptive;Sympathy;Utility期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：《人性論》與《道德原理探索》之間存在微妙的轉變，認真看待這些轉變有助於我們理解休謨的道德哲學。本文以同情共感與效益為線索，仔細比較了休謨於前述兩書中對於德行的觀察與闡釋，進以指出兩書之間的差異並非來自於休謨在輿論的壓力下被迫修改其理論，而是由於其立論觀點發生了變化，即從著重於探索德行的根源過渡為彰顯德行的效用。然而，在差異之外，休謨的基本立場在兩部著作之間並無實質的改變，他始終以人性的解剖學家自居而致力於建立一個描述性的理論。英文摘要：While there are some delicate differences between Hume's Treatise of Human Nature and his Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, to take these differences seriously is essential to an adequate understanding of Hume's moral thought. This essay examines Hume's ideas of justice and benevolence elaborated in those works. My main contention is that the differences between the two works are caused not by Hume's revision of his theory under the pressure of public opinion, but by the change of the perspective from which he observes virtues, namely his focus has been transferred from the different origins of virtues to the utility they bring about. In spite of the differences, however, the nature of Hume's theory remains the same. Hume is faithful to his position as an anatomist of human nature, and his aim is to provide a descriptive rather than prescriptive theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110900380012篇名：黑格爾的權利概念與民主政治並列篇名：Hegel's Concept of Right and Democracy作者：魏楚陽(Chu-Yang Wei)關鍵字：黑格爾;民主政治;Ernst-Wolfgang Bockenforde;現代國家;權利;倫理國家;G.W.F. Hegel;democracy;Ernst-Wolfgang Bockenforde;state;right期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：「自由、世俗化的國家所賴以生存的前提，並無法由其自身加以保證」。此一由德國當代法學家Ernst-Wolfgang Bockenforde透過對黑格爾法哲學理論的詮釋所提出關於現代國家的命題，指出現代國家雖以自由與權利的保障為目的，但是此一目的的實現，卻不是建立在現代性原則，而是弔詭地建立在政治共同體此一概念的基礎之上。本文透過對黑格爾權利概念以及Bockenford相關論述的分析，指出Bockenforde命題不僅對當代民主政治的基礎提出了批判，更具有對當代民主政治的積極性意義，即指出了公民政治文化的建立與現代民主國家之間的內在關聯性。為論證上述主張，本文第二部分處理Bockenforde所述現代國家興起時的歷史現實情境，第三部分與第四部分處理黑格爾如何論證權利概念與現實之間的內在關聯性，第五部分探討黑格爾如何將倫理共同體與現代性自由加以連結，第六部分論述黑格爾的倫理共同體概念與現代民主政治之間的相互關係，結論部分則指出Bockenforde命題對當代民主政治所帶來的啟發與意義。英文摘要：”The liberal and secularized state depends on the precondition, which can not be guaranteed by the modern state self”. This proposition from the interpretation of Hegel's Philosophy of Right by German legal philosopher Ernst-Wolfgang Bockenforde indicates that, although the aim of modern state is to secure freedom and right, the realization of this aim could not depend solely on the principle of the modern ideas of freedom and right. On the contrary, sovereignty and ethical political community are required. In this article I analyze Hegel's concept of right in modern state from Bockenforde's interpretative perspective, that modern democracy ought to be grounded on the sphere of democratic culture in an ethical political community. Moreover, the internal crises and threats to modern democracy can be regarded as means to the securing freedom and right, if sovereignty and ethical political community become constitutive of the modern state.起始頁-結束頁：57-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110900380023篇名：算數正義與幾何正義的辯證：馬克思正義觀的一個詮釋並列篇名：Dialectics of Arithmetical and Geometrical Justice: An Interpretation of Marx's Conception of Justice作者：孫善豪(Shan-Hao Sun)關鍵字：幾何的／算數的正義;社會的／個人的正義;盧卡斯;金里卡;卡斯托里亞第斯;馬克思;Justice;Marxism;Lukes;Kymlicka;Castoriadis期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：從「富士康跳樓事件」可以引發一個問題：工人爭取提高工資的鬥爭，需要或不需要道德訴求？馬克思在這個問題上的立場，又可以引發出各種不同的解釋。在各種不同的解釋中，「何謂剝削」的根本問題卻是始終沒有被觸及的。本文藉由對盧卡斯、金里卡與卡斯托里亞第斯的討論，指出過去馬克思主義者在討論此問題上的限制，並區分出算數、幾何、社會、個人四個生產與分配的面向，以期藉由此區分、以及其間之辯證關係，闡明馬克思對於正義之想法。英文摘要：The facts of the Foxconn-events have revealed a vital problem: Is it necessary to appeal morality when there are struggles for raising salary? Marx's position on this question is so ambiguous that it could encompass entirely different interpretations. I contend that in all these interpretations there is a persistent lack of an adequate conception of ”exploitation.” Thus, this article attempts to solve this problem by examining the theories of Lukes, Kymlicka and Castoriadis in order to indicate the inadequacies of contemporary Marxist discourses. This article distinguishes the geometrical justice from arithmetical justice, and social justice from individual justice, so as to illustrate the dialectics of these elements. I contend that Marx's conception of justice would be clarified in this way.起始頁-結束頁：95-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110900380034篇名：人權於公平與公正待遇中的規範向度與效度：全球行政法方法論的建構並列篇名：The Normative Dimension and Efficacy of Human Rights in the Fair and Equitable Treatment: The Construction of a Methodology of Global Administrative Law作者：王自雄(Tzu-Hsiung Wang)關鍵字：人權;國際投資;公平與公正待遇;全球行政法;全球治理;財產權保障;規範向度;動態分析;方法論;human rights;international investment;fair and equitable treatment FET;global administrative law GAL;global governance;property protection;normative dimension;dynamic process analysis;methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：國際投資法的核心，是保障外國人在地主國的投資財產，這曾經是一條挹注國際人權運動的泉源。之後，國際人權運動將人權實證法化，並課予國家保障人權的義務。因此，地主國對外國投資人所實施的管制措施背後，不但能夠，而且也應該是以人權保障為政策目的。古典國際法對於外人投資下的人權保障議題，多以「國際人權法」與「國際投資法」這樣的二元論來觀察與詮釋。對此，本文嘗試提出一種不同的觀點。透過觀察公平與公正待遇的國際實踐，本文發現，起源於地主國管制措施的人權保障議題，其核心是公平與公正待遇與地主國行政法間的互動，而人權的意涵則貫穿其間。這個經由觀察所得到的假設，需要透過方法論的建構與應用來證明其為真。首先，因為人權保障的議題是發生在國際投資的背景下，所以必須從公平與公正待遇的實踐中檢證是否存在人權的規範向度。人權在當中必須具備系統性與可預測性，才能進一步利用動態的分析方法，探究規範效度在具體個案中的強弱大小。公平與公正待遇與地主國行政法間的持續互動與反饋，即有可能形成一個以人權為基礎的全球行政法，並在全球治理的理念下，照亮憲政暗區並填補規範真空。如此一來，對於所有那些非一國法體系所能規範的法律關係－如同前國際法院法官傑賽普所提出的跨國界法（或稱超國界法），本文希望能提供一個理論架構，並期待形成一個能夠因應新時代挑戰的國際法。英文摘要：The protection of foreign investment has been a vital resource of international human rights movement, which led to positivized the human rights obligations of states. Therefore, human rights have been established as the policy purpose behind the regulatory measures undertaken by host states. Under classical international law, this issue was interpreted as a conflict between two lex specialis-”international human rights law” and ”international investment law”. This article attempts to establish a different perspective. After discussing some arbitration practices of the fair and equitable treatment, the article contends that the focus is rather the interaction between the treatment of the administrative law of host states, as both share human rights obligations. This perspective is validated by means of methodological construction. Although the human rights issues occur in the context of international investment, there is a need to verify the existence of normative dimension of human rights in the fair and equitable treatment. The discourse on human rights can be systematized by the verification of existence of its normative dimension. Through the static verification of normative dimension and dynamic analysis of efficacy, the global administrative law (the GAL) based on human rights is a likely outcome derived from the continuous interaction and feedback between the treatment and the administrative law of host states. In the area of global governance, the GAL could function to lighten up the ”constitutional penumbra” and fill up the normative vacuum. Thus, with regards to all relationships which do not belong to domestic legal system, this article contributes to the enterprise of theorizing international law in a new era.起始頁-結束頁：141-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110900380045篇名：評《自由人的平等政治》－從穩定性－觀念考察並列篇名：A Review of Politics of Liberal Equality: From the Perspective of Moral Stability作者：曾瑞明(Sui-Ming Tsang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：201-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110900380056篇名：論道德人觀的基礎－評周保松《自由人的平等政治》作者：王邦華期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：211-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320110900380067篇名：如何為《自由人的平等政治》辯護並列篇名：How to Defend Politics of Liberal Equality作者：周保松(Po-Chung Chow)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：38期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：225-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201109003800701篇名：政治領導與民主：一種政治觀念史的闡釋並列篇名：Political Leadership and Democracy: An Interpretation in the History of Western Political Ideas作者：蔡英文(Ying-Wen Tsai)關鍵字：政治領導;共和民主;君主制;制度性的主權;人民主權;中立性的權力;political leadership;republican democracy;monarchy;sovereignty of institution;popular sovereignty;the power of neutrality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：民主就其古典的意義來說乃意指人民（demo）以自由與平等的身分共同參與政治事務，是一個不分統治者與被治者的平等體制。但是人民作為一個集體如何可能不由政治領導者的統治，而得以自我形成一個治理的政治體制？如果民主需要一個政府，那麼就有了治人與治於人的關係在；在民主制中、政治領導者的地位與角色跟在君主制的中有何不同？對於這些問題，本文嘗試以觀念史的進路，探討西方自1世紀塞尼嘉（Seneca, 4B.C-65 A.D）為古羅馬帝制所立的君主統御的觀念以降，政治領導與治理的觀念如何跟民主自治（所謂人民主權）的理想互動交錯，對立緊張，而有所演變。依此，本文論證下列兩個主題：（1）在君主制中，君主實質性的政治領導統御在霍布斯（Thomas Hobbes, 1588-1679）的「制度性主權」的理論中，轉向體制性的治理權威，職司政治的判斷與仲裁。這種轉向到19世紀初葉在龔斯當（Benjamin Constant, 1767-1830）的政治思想中，發展出鑲嵌於自由憲政中的中立性權力的理論：（2）在君主制論述的政治觀念史脈絡中，反君主專制的共和主義式民主的理想不斷地與之相抗衡，本文所論的16世紀法國思想家La Boetie（1530-1596）與18世紀的盧梭（Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1712 -1778）所揭示的共和民主的人民自治理念代表這種抗衡的思想趨向。英文摘要：The term ”democracy” in its original sense does mean the demos is endowed with free and equal status to participate in political affairs and thus can shape an autonomous collective power. How is it possible for the demos considered as ”multitude of men” to from such a collective power without a leader who can coordinate them together? Supposed the demostries to build up a government, how is it possible for democratic apparatus of power to exercise without a distinction between the ruler and ruled? What is the status and quality of political leader (or ruler) in democratic government which is different from other regimes, especially from the monarchical government? With these questions, this article tries to examine the relationship between political leadership (and rulership) and democracy from an interpretation in the history of western political idea. It starts with Seneca's justification of Roman Empire's ”principate”, and then explains two status of Medieval princes, that is the rulership and lordship, and ends by an illustration of Constant's ideal of the ”neutrality of power”. In order to interpret the turning point of the conception of political leadership and its tension with the idea of democracy, this article also deals with Machiavelli's idea of political leadership and La Boetie's principle of ”anti-monarchy”, as well as Hobbes' and Rousseau's theory of sovereignty. There are two argumentative theses as follows: one is to interpret the transformation of the status and quality of political leadership (and rulership) from substantive domination to a seat of umpirage elaborated in Hobbes' idea of ”the sovereignty of institution” and further in Constant's the ideal of the ”neutrality of power”. The second is to illustrate the opposition of democratic ideal of people's self-governing to the idea of political leadership that is represented by La Boetie and Rousseau.起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320111200390012篇名：價值多元論與自由主義─兼論伯林的政治理論方法論並列篇名：Taking Berlin's Methodology Seriously: An Interpretation of Value Pluralism and Liberalism作者：葉浩(Hao Yeh)關鍵字：價值多元論;自由主義;消極自由;積極自由;一元論;同情理解;value pluralism;liberalism;negative liberty;positive liberty;monism;empathy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：伯林提倡價值多元論，同時宣稱支持自由主義。諸多批評者主張，價值多元論本身無法賦予特定價值優先性，所以邏輯上無法支持自由主義，抑或該主義的核心價值。另一方面，也有學者認為，伯林的價值多元論在邏輯上與主流自由主義理論相斥，甚至可以作為一種有別傳統的自由主義之理論基礎。然而，雙方皆無視於伯林的強調，價值多元論與自由主義之間並無邏輯的必然關連性。本文主張，伯林的政治思想必須依循他所倡議的方法論來理解，一方面將多元論與一元論理解為不可共量的思維模式，不僅對於何謂「價值」與「理性」的理解不同，對於人類作為道德行為者的根本看法也南轅北轍，一方面將〈兩種自由概念〉一文理解成於思想的最抽象層次上對於人類自由的捍衛，進而指出價值多元論必然否定教條式的自由主義，但卻蘊含一種「嚴以律己、寬以待人」的態度，也就是古典自由主義精神的展現。據此詮釋，伯林從事政治思想史的真正意圖，乃在於引導「刺蝟」看見多元價值之存在─他一生所呼籲的「同情理解」，也就是「狐狸」的邀請。英文摘要：Isaiah Berlin is well known to have advocated value pluralism and supported liberalism. Many critics have argued that value pluralism by logic cannot prioritize any particular value, and therefore cannot give support to liberalism. By contrast, followers of Berlin have pointed out that value pluralism logically runs against todays mainstream liberalism, but it can serve as the foundation for a new form of liberalism. Yet neither of them have taken seriously Berlins statement that the relations between value pluralism and liberalism are not logical connections.Contending that Berlins political thought can only be fully understood in light of the methodology proposed by him, this article is meant to read his writings strictly in his own terms. The result of this reading is that Berlins value pluralism and what he termed as monism are two irreconcilable visions of the world-their differences run as deep as how value and rationality may be understood, and ultimately what counts as a free moral agent. And understanding as such paves the way for us to interpret Berlins distinction between positive and negative liberty as a defence for human freedom at the most abstract level of thought, as well as a to appreciate value pluralism as a powerful argument against any form of ideology, including doctrinaire liberalism. In the end, it will be clear that value pluralism is an extrapolation of his vision of the world, which in itself is an expression of tolerant and self-critical spirit- that is, undeniably a liberal mentality. Only then could we truly understand Berlins call for empathy and his life-long engagement with writing history of ideas as a foxs strategy- to convert hedgehogs into value pluralists.起始頁-結束頁：59-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320111200390023篇名：超越化的內在或內在化的超越？論新法蘭克福批判法學派對於法與正義關係的分析並列篇名：Transcendentisation of Immanence or Immanencisation of Transcendence? On New Frankfurt School's Analysis of Relation between Law and Justice作者：鍾芳樺(Fang-Hua Chung)關鍵字：正義;民族社群;社會片斷化;社會立憲主義;系統論;法的政治理論;Justice;National Community;Fragmentation of Society;Societal Constitutionalism;System theory;Political Theory of Law期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文將討論新法蘭克福學派對法與正義的分析。新法蘭克福學派所指的正義，既不是傳統舊歐洲的實質正義觀，也不是（哈伯馬斯或羅爾斯的）程序正義；新法蘭克福學派重構了正義的論述，認為正義的論述是為了解決在功能分化（社會片斷化）的背景下，個別功能系統過度擴張所帶來的問題。新法蘭克福學派認為，系統溝通的過程必須要考慮到環境。環境在系統再引入「環境與系統」區分時，被系統的運作所考慮，一方面成為去弔詭的依據，另一方面也防止系統過度擴張，破壞了其他系統的自律，或者侵害到個人。依這個觀點，新法蘭克福學派指出正義在社會批判理論中的意義。最後，延伸新法蘭克福學派的觀點，外於社會溝通之個人身心痛苦，以跨國人權的論述，引入社會的溝通之中，可以成為普遍的正義理念，用來擾動世界社會的法系統溝通，並促成法的演化。英文摘要：This article tries to analyze the New Frankfurt school's theory of justice and its relation to the law, in order to clarify, how the discourse of justice contributes to the evolution of the legal system. The New Frankfurt school receives Luhmann's system theory and develops a new concept of justice: Justice is not the absolute transcendent canon of law, but the irritation of operations in the legal system. Justice forces the operation in social legal subsystem to take its environment into account. The integrity of mind and pains of body, which is the environment of social communicative system, can reenter the communicative legal and political system by the discourse of ”human rights” and ”justice”. This process of ”re-entry” gives the reason to reform the given conditions of the law, and in this way prompts its evolution.起始頁-結束頁：115-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320111200390034篇名：從反普遍主義到反自由民主？幾點商榷與反思並列篇名：From Anti-Universalism to Anti-Liberal-Democracy? Some Interrogations and Reflections作者：陳宜中(I-Chung Chen)關鍵字：普遍主義;自由民主;西方;中國;本質主義;國族主義;universalism;liberal democracy;the West;China;essentialism;nationalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文藉助當代反普遍主義邏輯之基本精神，分析、質疑時下以反西化之名反自由民主的中國國族主義言說。後者把自由民主相對化、本質化為根深蒂固的西方產物，彷彿自由民主與中國性不能兩立；至於主張中國走自由民主道路的中國人，則儼然成了受到西方污染、中國性不足的次中國人。本文把此類言說界定為一種政治化的族群／文化本質主義，並對其（內在）普適性宣稱、真理宣稱進行商榷。本文分析指出：其關於西方與中國的本質性、同質性、（內在）普適性宣稱，如「自由民主是根深蒂固的西方產物」、「自由民主與中國性不能兩立」、「威權主義體現中國文化」等，實難以成立。而建立於此的國族浪漫主義、歷史主義言說，及其「存在即合理」、「當下即我們」、「當下即公意」等維護、鞏固現存黨國體制的真理宣稱，自然也稱不上真理。當其把現代威權主義看作「中體」屹立不搖的明證，並把中國體內的自由民主元素打成西方污染時，其（內在）普適性宣稱實已不攻自破，而其排他性、獨斷性、宰制性則昭然若揭。英文摘要：This paper critically examines the thesis that liberal democracy is essentially Western and utterly incompatible with Chineseness. In recent years there has emerged in China a popular nationalist discourse which rejects liberal democracy as Western and therefore alien to Chineseness. Correspondingly, Chineseness has come to be defined as essentially anti-liberal-democratic. This also involves the suggestion that the presently existing authoritarian ”Chinese model” or ”Chinese road” be intrinsic to Chinese culture. Liberal democracy as a political choice is, thus, being excluded a priori in the name of anti-Westernization and anti-universalism. This paper argues that at the heart of this particular anti-liberal-democratic discourse is a species of what might be called ”politicized ethnic/cultural essentialism.” The trouble with it, however, is that its claims to (internal) universality could hardly be sustained. Drawing on the spirit of the poststructuralist logic of anti-universalism, the paper aims to deconstruct this ethnic/cultural essentialism and its truth claims about China and the West. As a form of power/knowledge, this overtly politicized ethnic/cultural essentialism is revealed to be exclusive, dogmatic, and repressive.起始頁-結束頁：171-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320111200390045篇名：由成本效益分析邁向科際整合的公共政策─評喬納森•沃夫（Jonathan Wolff）的《倫理學與公共政策》（Ethics and Public Policy）並列篇名：Public Policy: From Benefit Analysis to an Interdisciplinary Approach作者：張裕斌(Yu-Bin Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：39期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：227-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201112003900501篇名：物質基礎、理念慣性：中國「王道」戰略文化的實證檢驗1838∼1842並列篇名：Material Basis, Ideational Inertia: An Empirical Assessment of Chinese "Benevolent" Strategic Culture 1838~1842作者：楊仕樂(Shih-Yueh Yang)關鍵字：現實主義;建構主義;戰略文化;物質;理念;武力使用;Realism;constructivism;strategic culture;material;ideation;use of force期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：中國戰略文化（Strategic Culture）的研究，是當今現實主義（Realism）與建構主義（Constructivism）間理論爭議，與如何面對崛起中國政策辯論的交會點。依循現實主義的傳統，崛起後的中國將走向侵略擴張、破壞體系穩定；但從建構主義的觀點出發，現實主義純物質的見解則被認為是忽略了文化對行為的作用，是只基於西方經驗的片面斷言。中國與西方有若不同的戰略文化，是中國「王道」與西方「霸道」的差別，如果不考慮中國此一戰略文化的獨特性，將不能瞭解中國的戰略行為。只不過，這種「王道」與「霸道」之別的見解，往往缺乏嚴謹的實證檢驗。目前雖有研究嘗試以有系統的方式呈現宋、明兩代的歷史紀錄，視這兩個朝代為中國戰略文化解釋最可能成立的案例，來駁斥這「王道」不同於「霸道」的論點，但這樣的實證研究仍然只佔相對的少數，且亦存有概念與方法上的缺陷。「王道」戰略文化對中國的戰略行為究竟有沒有影響？本文將採取物質基礎、理念慣性的觀點，針對「王道」戰略文化解釋真正最可能成立的晚清時代，以鴉片戰爭為案例，嘗試對這有關中國戰略文化的焦點問題提供解答。英文摘要：The Chinese strategic culture is the convergence of theoretical debates between realist and constructivist, which drives the policy debates on the means to deal with the rising China. Following the tradition of realism, a rising China will favor aggression and expansion, undermining international stability. In contrast, according to the constructivist perspective, the realist materialist perspective ignores the role of culture on state’s behaviors thus an incomplete assertion based on the Western experience only. In fact, China and the West have different strategic culture. Chinese ”benevolence” is different from Western ”hegemony”. Only when this unique Chinese strategic culture is considered can one understand China’s strategic behavior. Nonetheless, this ”benevolent/hegemony” argument often lacks rigorous empirical testing. Some attempts were made by presenting historical records of China’s Song and Ming Dynasties, the two most likely resemblences for strategic culture explanation. However, such empirical researches are relatively rare and contain conceptual and methodological flaws. Did Chinese ”benevolent” strategic culture ever make an impact on China’s strategic behavior? This article introduces a material basis/ideational inertia perspective on the strategic culture and takes the Opium War in the late Qing Dynasty as the true resemblance to test the validity of cultural explanation.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201112_54(4).00012篇名：「階級差異」或「認同制約」？大陸臺灣人當地融入的分析並列篇名：Class or Identity Matters?: The Social Assimilation of Taiwanese Sojoumers in China作者：林瑞華(Emmy Rui-Hua Lin);胡偉星(Richard Wei-Xing Hu);耿曙(Shu Keng)關鍵字：社會融入;社會階級;身分認同;臺灣人／臺商;兩岸關條;social assimilation;class;identity;Taiwanese/Taiwanese businessmen;cross-Strait relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：涉及兩岸未來走向的問題，學界多從結構層面探討，甚少觸及個人的態度立場。有鑑於此，本文乃以長居大陸的全灣人士為研究對象，觀察他們在歷經長期的社會接觸後，能否逐步融入當地社會？過程中又是何種因素導致融入上的差異？本研究的經驗資料，來自作者2009年在大上海與東莞周邊地區，藉訪談與問卷調查所得，訪談對象共214人，為歷來調查規模最大且最具系統者。研究發現，「社會階級」與「身分認同」對臺人的當地融入影響顯著，其中，前者主要影響臺人生活層面的融入，而後者則對深層的社會交往和心理層面具有顯著影響。英文摘要：Most scholarly works on the effects of growing cross-Strait economic relations stay at the macro-level, and few have touched upon interpersonal contacts and attitude changes at the micro-level. Yet it would be difficult to predict or make sense of incremental changes at the macro-level without referring to developments at the micro-level. The aim of this paper is to examine whether the Taiwanese living in the mainland have been assimilated into the local society after years of interactions with local people. If so, what factors have caused these changes, and what implications do they have for future cross-Strait relations? This article reports and discusses the results of a survey project about the social and political attitude of Taiwanese living in the mainland. In this survey project, we interviewed more than 200 Taiwanese living in the Greater Shanghai region and Dongguan region in the summer of 2009. In this most extensive survey so far in the mainland, we find that ”class” and ”identity” are the two most important factors affecting the Taiwanese's assimilation into the local society, with the former explaining how they mingle with the local people and the latter shaping the degree of their relationships and psychological acceptance of the local society.起始頁-結束頁：29-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201112_54(4).00023篇名：中共對臺政策之理性與組織過程分析：以2002－2010年的政策變化為例並列篇名：Analysis of Rational Actors and the Organizational Process of PRC's Taiwan Policy between 2002 and 2010作者：游智偉(Chih-Wei Yu);陳政一(Cheng-I Chen)關鍵字：國家利益;有限理性;中共對臺政策;兩岸關係;national interests;bounded rationality;PRC's Taiwan policy;cross-Strait relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年中共對臺政策不再以文攻武嚇為主，反以軟性交流或讓步為政策主軸，其於2009年不阻擋臺灣以「中華臺北」名義參與世界衛生大會更被視為兩岸關係的里程碑，然問題在於中共為何讓步？為何放寬其對「一個中國」原則的解釋？本文認為上述變化可歸結於中共在有限理性下重新考量國家統一和經濟發展的重要性所致，藉和平發展的提出重構國家發展路徑，將發展經濟視為國家最高利益，而和平發展則為國家統一的先期工作，並藉反分裂國家法將對臺政策重心從促統轉向反獨，目標從改變現狀轉為維持現狀，但這些變化卻影響中共各部門執行層級原奉行的標準作業程序，使其臺辦系統承受其他系統的壓力，而在2008年下半年後不斷拋出政治議題，但這樣的情景在2010年底後消失，在領導人有限理性的意志下，「穩中求進」成為當前大陸對臺政策主要的綱領依據。英文摘要：Recently, it seemed that PRC's Taiwan policy had been changed, characterized by Taiwan's successful participation in the World Health Assembly (WHA) in 2009. The changes can be described by ”bounded rationality”, as PRC reconsidered the priority of national interests amongst state unification and economic development through peaceful means. With the formulation of the ”Anti-Secession Law (ASL),” the focus and purpose of PRC's Taiwan Policy had been transformed from ”promoting unification” and ”changing Status Quo” to ”opposing independence” and “maintaining Status Quo.” Therefore, the most significant meaning in the ASL was that the ”One China Principle” had been loosened. The standard operation process held by each governmental branch had also been influenced by these changes, causing the Taiwan Affairs Office System (TAOS) to experience added pressure, especially in foreign affairs and commerce in the WHA and ECFA cases. TAOS, as a result of such, had proposed and pressed Taiwan to engage in political issues in the second half of 2008. However, the circumstance disappeared at the end of 2010 when China's leaders had re-confirmed the ”proactive” principle (wen-jung-chiou-jin) as the basic outline of PCR's Taiwan policy.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201112_54(4).00034篇名：中國菸草專賣制度下菸葉收購發展與變遷探討並列篇名：Analysis of the Tobacco Leaf Procurement under the State Monopoly System in China作者：鄭怡雯(Yi-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：菸草專賣;烤菸收購;計畫經濟;中國菸草公司;垂直管理;tobacco monopoly;tobacco leaf procurement;planned economy;China National Tobacco Corporation;vertical management期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文把焦點放在中國菸草行業中菸葉收購的發展歷程，來探討1982年採計畫經濟模式建立的菸草專賣體系，如何鑲嵌在一個向市場經濟轉軌的體制下運作，以及該專賣體系建立至今，近三十年來的發展和變遷。在菸草專責制度規範下，中國菸草公司是烤菸唯一合法的買家，每年菸草公司依據中央擬訂的指令計畫與菸農簽訂合同來收購菸葉。然而菸葉依合同收購的計畫生產模式，直至1997年爆發嚴重的於菸葉大超產後，才得以真正落實。因此本文有兩個主軸，一是透過大超產前後的變化來討論市場經濟改革和計畫經濟模式之間的互動關條，從而論證菸業生產和收購的計畫性正是在市場經濟、改革日益深化的過程中弔詭地得到強化。二是分析1998年後落實烤菸全面計畫生產和收購的制度安排，即菸草公司利用農村財政日趨衰微的結構來驅動地方政府完成烤菸收購工作。透由探討上述問題，本文期以從不同面向來捕捉中國經濟改革的圖像。英文摘要：By focusing on the tobacco leaf procurement, this article aims to explore the operation and development of the Chinese tobacco state monopoly system, based on the planned economy mode, in the transition economy since establishment circa 1982. In terms of the monopoly institutional regulations, only the China National Tobacco Corporation (CNTC) can legitimately buy tobacco leaves from peasant households by signing the procurement contracts according to the mandatory plan. However, the real practices of tobacco cultivation and procurement did not comply with the mandatory plan until the serious overproduction of tobacco leaves exploded in 1997. Therefore, there are two main research threads presented here: the first is to discuss the interaction between market reform and planned economy throughout the changes before and after the overproduction in 1997, which paradoxically demonstrates that the tobacco planned economy has strengthened with deepening reform of market economy. The second is to analyze the institutional arrangements of fulfilling the planned production and procurement on flue-cured tobacco since 1998; that is, the tobacco corporation has been driving the local governments to implement the tobacco work by taking advantage of the weakening financial capacity in the rural areas. By probing the aforementioned arguments, this article aims to present another prospective to China's economic reform.起始頁-結束頁：89-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201112_54(4).00045篇名：氣候論述權－中國應對氣候變化公約的立場與論辯並列篇名：The Climate Discourse-China's Position and Debates on Climate Change作者：宋國誠(Kuo-Chen Sung)關鍵字：氣候變化;氣候論述;國際氣候公約;climate change;climate discourse;international climate convention期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在2009年的「哥本哈根氣候變化會議」(Copenhagen Conference on Climate Chang, COP15)上，中國成為英美國家指責的對象，國際間紛紛要求中國承擔溫室氣體減排的責任。因為截至2007年，中國碳排放量總量已超過美國，成為世界最大碳排放國家，並成為影響全球氣溫上升最主要的國家，未來中國面對國際氣候組織的壓力將越來越沉重。本文通過「中國氣候論述權」vs「氣候公約壓力」的分析路徑，探討中國應對氣候變化的立場與態度。本文指明，中國在應對氣候變化經歷兩個階段，一是「公約－京都」時期「局部抵制－有條件合作」階段，二是「京都後－哥本哈根」時期「高度配合－協商式合作」階段。本文通過此一演進階段的細部闡釋和解析，說明中國對全球氣候變化的政治立場與理論論述。本文試圖回答，中國是否積極遵守國際氣候公約，期待成為國際氣候社群的合作夥伴？中國是否採取積極作為，在全球環境和氣候變化上扮演「負責任的大國」？本文論證，中國對於遵守國際氣候公約的真實態度是「意願有餘，能力不足」，因此所有的氣候論述皆以「非不遵守，但有區別」或「高度配合，但有條件」為立足點，其目標則是運用論述批判、謹慎論證、有限承諾等等論述策略，藉以爭取轉變國內發展模式從「能耗型」到「節約型」的時間與空間，但最終仍期望實現並符合國際氣候公約的標準與要求。英文摘要：At the 2009 Copenhagen Conference on Climate Change, China became the target of public discussion when each and every country successively approached China's leaders asking them to take up responsibility for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. In 2007, China's discharge of carbon dioxide had already surpassed emissions caused by the United States, turning China into the world's number one polluter and a major contributor to climate change. In the years to come, the pressure China has to face from international climate organizations is going to increase notably.This paper investigates the relationship between China's leverage in the discourse on climate change on the one hand and the pressure originating from climate conventions on the other. It provides an in-depth analysis of the country's position and conduct in the climate change debate.This paper shows that China has been going through two different phases for addressing climate change. During the first phase, corresponding with the period of the Kyoto Protocol, the country passed through a stage of ”partial boycott” and ”cooperation with strings attached”. During the second phase which parallels the post-Kyoto era and the time around the Copenhagen summit, China's behavior has involved a high degree of coordination, agreement and cooperation.The article thoroughly traces the progression of these different phases, as China's evolving political position and its theoretical discourse regarding global climate change. It also attempts to answer the questions as to whether China is actively going to abide by international climate change conventions and whether it is becoming a cooperative partner in the international climate arena. Finally, the paper tries to answer the question-Will China adopt an active approach and play the role of a ”responsible power” in the field of global environmental and climate change.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201109_54(3).00016篇名：中國燃料電池研發及其環境溝通並列篇名：China's Fuel Cell R&D and Its Environmental Communication作者：陳世榮(Shih-Jung Chen);李河清(Ho-Ching Lee)關鍵字：中國;燃料電池;環境溝通;語意網絡;三螺旋指標;China;fuel cell;environmental communication;semantic network;Triple Helix Index期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在國內外壓力下，近年來中國對氣候變遷之回應轉趨積極，並以新能源技術開發為解決經濟與環境衝突的主要策略，尤其對於燃料電池研發特別加以標榜，以<U+648E>高其綠色形象。然而技術研發是否就能彰顯環境意義？本文利用新華網的相關報導，進行語意網絡與三螺旋指標分析，藉以釐清中國燃料電池開發所反映的議題框架與環境溝通。研究發現，伴隨技術進展固然引發環境議題的討論，但聚集層次的分析顯示市場與經濟才是核心主題，燃料電池的環境意義隨著技術開發受到稀釋，轉趨模糊，其中產官部門間的環境共識更曾發生逸散現象，可見長期而言，技術投入本身並不能確保環境意義的伸張，中國的氣候回應必須回歸決策承諾。英文摘要：In recent years, China has become active in addressing and responding to climate change. In particular, green energy technology is regarded as a crucial strategy to ease the tension between economic development and environmental protection. Among others, fuel cell research and development have been overly highlighted in order to construct China's green image. Does technological initiative foster environmental meaning in public sphere? This paper aims to clarify the issue as well as environmental communication surrounding China's fuel cell research and development by way of semantic network analysis and quantitative text analysis on Xinhuanet news documents. Results of this study find that the environmental implication of fuel cell is diluted along with the process of the technological development. At the aggregate level, it is the market and economic issues that construct the core frames of the media communication. Furthermore, the environmental consensus between the industrial and governmental sectors had confronted dissipation and disruption. In the long term, the technological initiative is incapable of maintaining its environment al meaning. China ought to restore its focuses on policy commitment rather than technological hype in responding to climate change.起始頁-結束頁：33-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201109_54(3).00027篇名：東亞地緣政治結構對中國歷代大戰略的影響並列篇名：East Asian Geopolitical Structure and Its' Impact on the Variation of Ancient China's Grand Strategies作者：王俊評(Chun-Ping Wang)關鍵字：東亞地緣政治結構;中國;大戰略;East Asian geopolitical structure;China;grand strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：地緣政治結構是從地理的角度研究政治、資源、國際權力重心的相對位置分布，並以國家是否控制結構中戰略交通線來決定結構形式，並對結構中各層級單元－地緣政治領域、地緣政治區域與民族國家的地緣政治模式與特徵進行政治地理分析的結構模型，以此研究國家在此種地理關係下的大戰略行為。國家在特定時代的大戰略受到該國的地理環境以及該時代地緣政治結構的影響。東亞在歷史上是一相當封閉的區域地緣政治結構，但做為東亞主體國家的中國在歷史上甚少居於完全的霸權地位，大多數時候東亞地緣政治結構長期在無極、單極、兩極與三極中變化，中國因而經常必須與其他強大力量中心競爭結構中過於中原農耕文明發展與重要國防與經濟利益的地區，使得中國大戰略從西周起就經常帶有明顯的攻勢／擴張傾向，但同時以安撫型戰略手段減少在兩個以上戰線作戰的戰略困境。兩宋與明朝由於地緣政治結構的改變而使防禦型大戰略逐漸取代攻勢／擴張大戰略；而只有在東漢與清朝時期，結構形式為中國完全沒有競爭對手的霸權結構，安撫型大戰略才成為主要的大戰略類型。英文摘要：Geopolitical structure analyzes the distributions of political and international power gravity and resources. It differentiates shapes of structure by considering whether state can control the strategic line of communication of structure, and focuses on the strategic behavior between structure and the geopolitical features of every unit at each level, including geostrategic realms, regions, and states. State's strategic behavior in a certain era is influenced by its own geopolitical settings and the structure. Historically, East Asia is a closed regional geopolitical structure, but the dominating state of East Asia, China, is rarely a hegemony. The shapes of structure change between non-polarity, unipolarity, bipolarity, multipolarity, and tripolarity. China therefore usually competes with other power centers in controlling areas suitable for the development of Han agricultural civilization and with other important defense or economic interests. The grand strategies of ancient China from Western Zhou were usually offensive/expansionist oriented consequently, but also with accommodationist character to avoid fighting simultaneously During the Song and the Ming dynasties, offensive/expansionist is replaced by defensive strategy due to significant structural changes. Only in the mid-Eastern Han and Qing, there were no real challengers in the hegemonic structure, accommodateonist thus predominates the preferences of grand strategy.起始頁-結束頁：71-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201109_54(3).00038篇名：中國大陸主權財富基金發展與影響的政治經濟分析並列篇名：Political and Economic Analysis on the Development and Influences of China's Sovereign Wealth Funds作者：范世平(Shih-Ping Fan)關鍵字：主權財富基金;相互依存理論;中國投資有限責任公司;國際政治經濟學;sovereign wealth funds;interdependence theory;China Investment Corporation;international political economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：中國大陸在坐擁世界第一的外匯存底情況下，於2007年成立了第一個主權財富基金，隨即受到國際間的高度矚目，一方面是因其規模高達2,000億美元，在全球排名第六；另一方面是從2008年開始的全球金融風暴下，中國的主權財富基金成為各國資金短缺下的活水源頭。本文從相互依存理論的角度出發，探討中國成立主權財富基金迄今，在政治與經濟層面所獲得的正面效益，以及所遭遇的諸多問題，並提出其未來應該發展方向之建議。英文摘要：As the largest holder of foreign exchange reserves in the world, China established its first Sovereign Wealth Fund in 2007, which attracted considerable international attention immediately. On one hand, the scale of sovereign wealth funds had reached 200 million USD, the sixth highest in the world; on the other hand, China's sovereign wealth funds became active funds for investment under the global financial crisis that occurred in 2008 when many countries were facing fund shortages. From the viewpoint of the interdependence theory, this study investigated the positive political and economic benefits of China's sovereign wealth funds, as well as its problems, and proposed suggestions to its future development.起始頁-結束頁：107-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201109_54(3).00049篇名：1987年以後解放軍領導人的政治流動：專業化與制度化的影響並列篇名：The Political Mobility of PLA Leaders after 1987: The Impact of Professionalism and Institutionalization作者：寇健文(Chien-wen Kou)關鍵字：菁英流動;解放軍;專業化;制度化;中央軍事委員會（軍委會）;elite mobility;PLA;professionalization;institutionalization;Central Military Commission(CMC)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：自1980年代開始，中共軍文關係逐漸從「雙重角色菁英」轉變為「中共領導下的專業化軍人」，專業化和制度化對將領晉升的影響也日益升高。這個發展使得高級將領的晉升流動較過去更為穩定，更具有可預測性。非正式關係依然重要，但需要在合乎制度規範與專業素質的框架下發揮影響。本文歸納1987年以後25位軍職軍委副主席和軍委員的軍旅歷程後，指出已經出現的甄補特徵包括中委會資歷、年齡限制、職務歷練與專業分工、軍銜資歷等。本文同時將這些特徵分類為基本條件和加分條件，進而篩選出23位可能在2012年十八大連任或新任軍委成員的將領。英文摘要：Since the 1980s, civil-military relations in China have transitioned from ”dual role elites” to ”professional soldiers under the leadership of the communist party.” During this process, institutionalization and professionalism have thereby become increasingly important in determining the upward-mobility of military officers. Informal politics remains important but must conform to institutional procedures and professionalism. This development makes the recruitment pattern of senior officers more stable and more predictable. After analyzing the career development of 25 former and incumbent vice-chairmen and members of the China's Central Military Commission (CMC) after 1987, this paper indicates several attributes in their upward-mobility including the CCP Central Committee membership, age limits, working experiences and specialties, and military ranks. After classifying these recruitment attributes into necessary requirements and competitive advantages, this paper further filters out 23 officers who are likely to be elected as the CMC vice-chairmen or members in the coming 18th Party Congress in 2012.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201106_54(2).000110篇名：中國特區經濟發展誘因機制轉變的政經意涵：天津濱海新區的個案分析並列篇名：The Political and Economic Implications of the Changing Incentive Mechanisms in the Chinese Special Economic Zones: A Case Study of the Tianjin Binhai New Area作者：張弘遠(Hong-yuan Zhang);林雅鈴(Ya-ling Lin)關鍵字：天津濱海新區;特區經濟;特許政策;投資誘因;Tianjin Binhai New Area;special economic zones;policy privilege;investment incentive期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要探索中國大陸採用特區形式發展經濟誘因機制的轉變。採用特區形式發展經濟，是中國大陸自改革初期以來所使用的一種發展模式。1994年，胡鞍鋼提出「特區不特」的觀點後，「特區特不特？」即成為各界辯論的焦點，中國加入WTO後，特區發展形式更引發公平爭議。本文以中共中央批准天津濱海新區的設立與發展進行分析，認為一方面是因為中央政府對於推動經濟成長的能力有所進步；另一方面是因為內需市場的快速發展吸引外資，使得中國經濟發展模式從「特區經濟」發展模式，轉換到現在這種「特許政策」的經濟發展模式。過去「特區經濟」發展模式主要是政治部門放鬆對於經濟事務的管制，藉此反差而給予特定地區經濟發展的契機。現在各種新區的「特許政策」發展模式，則是透過非經濟政策的特許來給予特定地區經濟發展的機會。從原先的特區經濟形態，轉換到現在以主導產業帶領的形態，政府政策的重要性以及政策執行的能力也就隨之凸顯。只是，從經濟優惠到政策特許，主控大陸經濟發展基調的仍是政府政策的作為。英文摘要：This article explores the changing incentive mechanisms in the Chinese special economic zones. The special economic zones established in China since reform and opening-up play an important role in the economic development. After Hu An-Gang pointed out that the special economic zone was not ”special” anymore in 1994, his perspective became the focus of attention. With China's accession to the WTO, the special economic zone model caused more disputes about fairness. In the face of criticism, however, the Chinese government still brought up the Tianjin Binhai New Area, a new special economic zone, to stimulate the development of the regional economy. This article argues that (1) the ability of the central government to promote economic growth is increasing; (2) the pattern of the economic development is changing from the special economic zones to the model of leading industrial policies. In the past, the government gave special economic zones special economic policies and allowed special economic zones to loosen regulation of economic affairs that is especially conducive to doing business that does not exist in the rest of China. Nowadays, the government permits policy privilege instead of special economic policies to the Tianjin Binhai New Area to promote economic growth. However, it is still within the limit of governmental controls of the economic development policy.起始頁-結束頁：35-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201106_54(2).000211篇名：非洲兄弟？檢視1962年非洲學生北京絕食抗議事件並列篇名：A Brotherhood with the Blacks? Reviewing the Beijing African Students' Hunger Strike of 1962作者：劉曉鵬(Philip Hsiaopong Liu)關鍵字：非洲;種族歧視;黑人;援助;Africa;racism;black people;assistance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：一般驗證中國對非洲友誼，都是以中國人在非洲大陸的援助行為當範例，但是當場景轉為非洲人到中國大陸接受援助，可能會得出完全不同的答案。本文將以1962年非洲學生集體絕食抗議的事件為核心，回顧歷史上非洲人在中國人心中的地位，探討1949年後對非洲人的態度如何受政策與資本主義影響，並藉此檢驗中國官學界常稱道的非洲兄弟情。英文摘要：Scholars rely on Chinese aid projects to Africa to demonstrate the former's kindness towards the latter, but the picture changes when we investigate the assistance to Africans living on the Chinese mainland. By focusing on the African students' hunger strike in Beijing in 1962, this paper revisits images of Africa in Chinese history, studies how Chinese attitudes toward Africa have evolved with policies and capitalism since 1949, and reanalyzes the Sino-African brotherhood that Chinese officials and scholars highly praise.起始頁-結束頁：63-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201106_54(2).000312篇名：由「識正書簡」到兩岸漢字整合問題並列篇名：Chinese Characters Integration between the Traditional Form and the Simplified Form作者：劉勝驥(Sun-chi Liu)關鍵字：漢字;簡化字;正體字;繁簡之爭;漢字整合;Chinese character;simplified character;traditional character;display traditional and simplified dispute;Chinese character integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：兩岸漢字的分化肇因「五四新文化運動」批判漢字落後，「漢字存廢論」所衍生的拼音拉丁化運動失敗了，大陸只好改行簡化字；但是臺灣堅持繁體字，造成簡化字和繁體字分割了中文世界。馬總統接見海外華人，提出「識正書簡」議題，作為整合兩岸繁、簡漢字的第一步可行的公約數；本研究提出七標準，認為「統一漢字」才是漢字整合的終極目標。本研究的創見是建立七標準（1）造字原理（2）文字定義（3）運用便利（4）資訊密度（5）藝術美感（6）研習文化（7）政治統合等，將之評價繁、簡漢字，可以做出兩岸漢字統合的建議書。英文摘要：The Chinese characters experienced a divergence after the May Fourth Movement when the scholars at the time criticized the Chinese characters as outdated and trite, and although the Romanization of the Chinese character failed in the aftermath, the Simplified character form took the foothold in mainland China while the Traditional form continued in Taiwan. President Ma, during his reception of the oversea Chinese, puts forward the project of ”reading the Traditional form while writing the Simplification form” as a compromise and an overture for the Chinese character integration. This research proposed seven standards to evaluate the two forms of Chinese characters, (1) Principle of etymology (2) definition of words (3) accessibility and convenience (4) structure and information density (5) aesthetics (6) connection to the Chinese culture (7) implication of political integration. These standards will serve as guides to the Chinese character integration.起始頁-結束頁：83-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201106_54(2).000413篇名：在治理改革中走向民主：浙江溫嶺鄉鎮人大參與式預算之個案研究並列篇名：From Governance Reform to Democratic Reform?-A Case Study of the Participatory Budget Reform at the People's Congress of Wenling Township of Zhejiang Province in China作者：徐斯儉(Szu-Chien Hsu);吳建忠(Chien-Chung Wu)關鍵字：制度論;公共治理;參與式預算;政治企業家;institutionalism;public governance;participatory budget reform;political entrepreneur期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：中國近年來有許多新興的公共治理徑驗，其中最有民主意涵且受到最多國內外關注的，厥為浙江省台州市溫嶺的「參與式預算」改革。本文擬籍對此案例的研究，來回答一個更大的問題，即在中國目前的環境下，具民主意涵的治理改革是否及如何可能？什麼是其出現的條件，其維持的動力又可能來自何方？本文引用了三種制度論（歷史制度論、社會學制度論、及理性選擇制度論）來觀察X鎮的案例。本文發現，三種制度論都可以被用來解釋制度創發後的現象。譬如，參與式預算的制度創發後產生了利益的博弈，博弈後又產生了參與者對此制度的路徑依賴，也產生新的社會網絡，並回頭形成了當地的政治文化，形成某種社會符號的意義，這些都會對往後的制度變遷產生影響。但三種制度論對於制度一開始如何產生卻都顯得有其不足之處。本文研究發現，X鎮之所以出現這樣一個案例具有相當的偶然性，在一開始既非由政治菁英自上而下推動，亦非社會力量自下而上街撞，而是由某些被本文稱為「政治企業家」(political entrepreneur)的人物在地方奔走串連推動而成。然而，一旦此一制度出現後，便成為一個可進行利益博弈的「局」，各方力量便進入此局進行博弈，並且形成了一個多次博弈的局面，因而各方力量在此達致某種利益交換的均衡。一旦如此，這個「參與式預算」的制度便具有其自身內在的可持續生命力，因而不再是一個短暫的現象。英文摘要：There are many new models of public governance emerged in recent years in China. One of the cases with democratic implications that have received most attention is the ”participatory budget reform” in Wenling, Zhejiang. This paper intends to respond to a larger theoretical question by examining this case. The larger question is: How is any reform with democratic implications possible under current circumstances in China? What are the conditions that contribute to such reform, and where do the dynamisms that create such reform come from?This paper applies three schools of institutionalism to examine the case (historical, sociological, and rational institutionalism). This paper finds that all three institutionalisms are applicable in explaining how the institution of ”participatory budget reform” evolves once it was established. However, they all appear to be insufficient in explaining how the institution emerged from the very beginning. The paper finds that a group of ”political entrepreneurs” played important roles in making possible the emergence of this institution. They mobilize political resources and explore possibility under the constraints of existing political institutions.However, once the institution has taken place, the institution allows various social groups and villages to form a ”game” so that they can bargain among themselves to seek a balance of their multiple interests. Once the equilibrium is reached within such a game, the institution can obtain an internal balance, and the institution becomes no longer a temporary reform.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201103_54(1).000114篇名：中國大陸新型農村合作醫療制度發展與國家角色之研究並列篇名：State and the New Cooperative Medical Schemes in Rural China作者：黃德北(Te-Pei Huang)關鍵字：新型農村合作醫療制度;中央國家;地方國家;農村治理;new cooperative medical scheme;central state;local state;rural governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要是依據研究者2007年以來在中國大陸農村所作的田野經驗調查為基礎，並參考國內外農村合作醫療制度的相關研究文獻，探討中國大陸新型農村合作醫療制度的特質與發展，以及國家在農村合作醫療制度建立與發展過程中的角色，進而說明國家與農村發展的關係。由於中國大陸幅員廣大，長期以來又給予地方某種形式的分權，以致分析中國大陸國家角色要區分中央國家與地方國家的差異，兩者的國家性質與角色會有很大的不同，甚至兩者之間會因利益與行為的差異而出現相當的緊張關係，以致影響國家對農村發展的影響。本文希望能從這兩個層次分析中國大陸國家在農村合作醫療制度發展的角色。我們的研究發現：黔東南的地方國家具有高度的制度創新，使當地的新型農村合作醫療制度能順利運作，農民的衛生醫療得到大幅改善；晉西的地方國家嚴格遵守中央國家的規定，以致新農合實施後，村衛生員反而處境更為困難；冀北農村因為醫療高度市場化，以致地方國家很難採取有效措施使新型農村合作醫療制度順利發展。英文摘要：By comparing the results of a field investigation on the impact of the New Cooperative Medical Schemes (NCMS) in the rural areas of China, this article aims to examine the status of medical services in rural areas, the characteristics of the NCMS, the problems that exist within the system and potential reforms. In addition, as social policy establishment and administration in China has become decentralized, there is considerable variance in the execution of the NCMS in different places, which is also discussed in this study.The geographic area of China is large and therefore decentralization has been adopted. Decentralization leads to a division of the role of the nation: central state and local state. The nature and role of these two states are quite different and could even cause tension if any conflicts in interests and behaviors occur, which further affects the development in rural areas. Hence, the purpose of this study is to analyze the role of the nation on the implementation of the NCMS from the perspective of the two governing levels.The results of our study show that the operation of the local state in southeast Guizhou was qualified in creating systems, and thus the NCMS ran smoothly there. The local state in west Shanxi followed the regulations of the central state strictly, and because of this, the NCMS presented several problems for local physicians. 1n the rural areas of north Hebei, the healthcare system was highly market-oriented, and therefore, the local state could not enact effective measures to maintain the development of the NCMS.起始頁-結束頁：29-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201103_54(1).000215篇名：中國大陸新興私營企業主政治地位的初探：政治組織席次角度的分析並列篇名：An Initial Analysis of the Political Position of Newly-emerging Private Enterprise Owners in the PRC作者：楊穎超(Ying-Chao Yang)關鍵字：私營企業主;政商關係;經濟改革;新興資產階級;中華全國工商業聯合會;private enterprise owners;modernization;democratization;All-China Federation of Industry & Commerce期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從政治組織席次佔有率切入，評估1979年後，私營企業主在中共政治中的地位。過去論者認為經改後中國大陸的私營企業主政治地位大幅提升。本文質疑其因果推論，並以「中華全國工商業聯合會」第一至第十屆共204人次之高層人事變化進行跨時比較。發現不論1979年前後，該組織皆無真正的私營企業主擔任領導職務，在副職比例上私營企業主所佔也不高。而在該組織的政治行情中，從歷屆領導前及兼職看來，其地位也未見提升。可見當前私營企業主的政治地位相較過去並無太大的變化。英文摘要：This article assesses the political position of private enterprise owners in the PRC. In the past, scholars argued that the political position of private enterprise owners in the PRC improved rapidly after the 1979 economic reforms. This article refutes this conclusion. First, although this conclusion appears reasonable, supporting research does not delve deeply enough into what has actually caused this phenomenon to occur. For example, it is possible that, in some cases, CPC members have become private businessmen which would make it seem that the political position of private enterprise owners has improved, when actually it has not. Furthermore, although other scholars have already concluded that the political position of private businesspersons has not improved because the PRC still maintains control over them, previous research and research designs evince serious flaws in both logic and reasoning, which have effected the outcomes of this research. In an attempt to confront these issues, this article examines the development of the ACFIC to explore changes in the relationship between private enterprise owners and PRC political elites. From this examination, it is discovered that there has been no significant improvement in the political position of private enterprise owners in the PRC since 1979.起始頁-結束頁：53-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201103_54(1).000316篇名：中國經濟研究的網路資源索引並列篇名：Index of Internet Resources on China Economic Studies作者：童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung);王國臣(Guo-Chen Wang)關鍵字：中國經濟研究;線上搜尋;網絡資源;電子資料庫;主成分分析;China economic studies;online search;internet resources;electronic databases;principal component analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文建立、評鑑並排序中國經濟研究網絡資源清單，包括研究專書、學術論文、新聞與分析報告、統計數據。首先，本文根據學術文獻、網絡指南與31所重點研究機構收錄的電子資料庫建立中國經濟研究網絡資源清單。其次，本文根據三項原則評鑑中國經濟研究網路資源；被引用次數、內容覆蓋率與被使用頻率。第三、本文利用主成分分析進行中國經濟研究網絡資源排序，並且徵詢中國經濟專家建議以補強本文內容。英文摘要：This paper establishes, evaluates and ranks the list of internet resources on China economic studies, including books, academic papers, news and statistical data. First, this paper establishes the list of internet resources on China economic studies based on academic literature, guides to internet resources and library e-databases of 31 worldwide key research institutions Secondly, the internet resources are evaluated based on three principles: quotation frequency, frequency of use and content coverage rate. Thirdly, principal component analysis is employed to rank the internet resources. Finally, feedback from China economic experts is incorporated into the study to reinforce the finding of this paper.起始頁-結束頁：79-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201103_54(1).000401篇名：師資職前教育的生涯課程發展暨輔導效果研究並列篇名：The Study of Career Course Development and Effect on the Pre-Service Teacher Education作者：吳淑禎(Shu-Chen Wu)關鍵字：生涯課程;生涯輔導;師資生;career course;career guidance;pre-service teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：31期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在發展師資生的生涯課程並評估課程對師資生的輔導效果。研究採用前後測實驗設計，研究對象為北部某大學選修生涯輔導課程之師資生，共計79名，其中A組有39名，B組有40名，皆為實驗組。本研究的自變項為生涯課程，依變項以楊淑珍（1999）所編製之生涯因素量表的得分為依據。以相依樣本t考驗進行重複測量，研究所發展的課程計有18個結構式單元，每週一個單元，每單元2小時，內容包括自我探索與評估、自傳履歷生涯檔案製作與回饋、職場資訊、目標設定與抉擇、面試模擬等單元。重複測量結果顯示，師資生在「定向」、「安適」、以及原因量表中的「環境資訊」、「雙趨衝突」、「焦慮猶豫」、「科系因素」、「外在阻力」、「科系因素」及「自我認識」皆達顯著差異，惟「抉擇時機」則未獲顯著。歸納主要研究結果，顯示生涯課程有助師資生增進其生涯定向程度以及目前職業目標選擇的安適程度，同時改善生涯未定向原因之影響。其次，師資生對課程單元的自陳回饋皆持肯定的態度。因此，本研究結果明顯支持生涯課程對師資生生涯發展的正向影響。綜合各項研究結果與發現，本研究提出進一步建議，作為師資培育的生涯教育與輔導參考。英文摘要：The study attempted to develop career course and investigated its counseling effect on the pre-service teacher education. Research method adopted repeated-measure experimental design. The sample consisted of 79 participants who took career course at the National Taiwan Normal University in spring 2009. The subjects were divided into two experimental groups for ethical concerns. Group A had 39 subjects, and Group B had 40 subjects. The independent variable in this study was career course training, and the dependent variable was Career Factors Inventory, which is comprised of Decidedness scale, Comfort scale and 7 Reasons scale. The career course was consisted of 18 structural units. Each unit lasted 2 hours per week, which included self exploration and assessment, autobiography/resume writing and feedbacks, information about job markets, goal-setting and decision-making, and mock interviews. The results from the repeated-measure analysis of the Decidedness scale, Comfort scale, and six of the Reasons scale showed significant changes in environmental information, dual conflicts, anxiety and hesitation, major, external obstruction, and self-understanding, but not in timing of decision-making. The results received positive support and proved that career course can help pre-service teachers to promote their career decision, decision comfort, and to improve their indecisiveness. The pre-service teachers' course feedback also supported the current findings. Future research and practical implications with the goal of diversifying career guidance were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201112.00022篇名：雙向度完美主義與正負向情感、學習困擾關係之研究：以反芻及因應策略為中介並列篇名：The Effect of Bi-Dimensional Perfectionism on Positive Emotion, Negative Emotion and Learning Difficulties: Examination of Rumination and Coping Strategies as Mediators作者：方紫薇(Tzu-Wei Fang)關鍵字：完美主義;反芻思考;正負向情感;因應;學習困擾;coping;learning problem;perfectionism;positive and negative affect;rumination期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：31期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視正負向完美主義對學習困擾及正負向情感之預測，並檢證反芻思考和因應在完美主義與正負向情感間、或完美主義與學習困擾間之中介效果。本研究針對大學生進行調查研究，共施測941位大學生（426男，515女）。經統計分析後，研究結果顯示（1）正向完美主義對正向情感有顯著預測效果，負向完美主義對負向情感及學習困擾有顯著預測效果；（2）憂思、反思在負向完美主義與負向情感間有部份中介效果；憂思、反思在負向完美主義與學習困擾間有部份中介效果；以及（3）積極因應在正向完美主義與正向情感間有部份中介效果；逃避因應在負向完美主義與負向情感間有部份中介效果、逃避因應在負向完美主義與學習困擾間有部份中介效果。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate whether bi-dimensional perfectionism effectively predicts learning difficulties and positive/negative emotions. This study further examined whether rumination and coping mediate the relationship between perfectionism and learning difficulties, or between perfectionism and positive/negative emotions. A sample 941 undergraduate students (426 males and 515 females) were recruited to participate in this study. The statistical methods used to analyze the data were t-test, Pearson product-moment correlation, and hierarchical multiple regression. The results of this study were shown as follows. First, positive perfectionism significantly predicted positive emotion; negative perfectionism significantly predicted learning difficulties and negative emotion. Second, brooding rumination and reflective rumination partially mediated the relationship between negative perfectionism and negative emotion and/or learning difficulties. Lastly, active coping partially mediated the relationship between positive perfectionism and positive emotion; avoidance coping partially mediated the relationship between negative perfectionism and negative emotion; finally, avoidance coping partially mediated the relationship between negative perfectionism and learning difficulties. Implications for further research and practice were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201112.00343篇名：碩士層級實習學校諮商員督導團體之關切議題、學習因素與參與經驗分析並列篇名：Practicum School Counselors' Concerns, Learning, and Experiences in Group Supervision作者：許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)關鍵字：諮商實習;諮商員教育;專業發展;學校諮商員;學校輔導;學習因素;團體督導;counselor education;counseling practicum;group supervision;learning factors;professional development;school counselor;school guidance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：31期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在探討碩士層級實習學校諮商員參與督導團體時，所關注之議題、學習相關因素，以及相關參與經驗反思。研究邀請26位在職諮商碩士班研究生於進行學校諮商實習時同步參與四個各進行五次、每次90分鐘之團體督導，每次於開始前填寫「督導需求問卷」，結束後填寫「團體督導經驗問卷」，並於實習結束後分析其週誌和整體心得與督導團體相關之經驗。研究結果發現學校實習諮商輔導人員之關注議題、學習因素和參與經驗反思，可分為實務介入學習、團體整體經驗、人際互動學習、自我專業發展四個層面進行探討。關注議題包含關切對象、介入內容、工作模式與衝突議題面對等；學習因素上最重要的為「諮商實務策略學習」，其次為「團體氣氛感受與助益」、「人際互動與回饋學習」，以及「專業能力發展與學習」等；參與經驗方面包括：團體層次之支持氣氛、視野擴展、需求無法滿足等；實務層次的介入策略學習、具體技術學習、個案概念化學習等；人際層次之成員回饋，以及與督導者互動之隱含學習；自我專業發展層次之取向探索、自我覺察、專業瓶頸省思、以及角色重新定位等。研究針對學校諮商督導、團體督導實務、培育理念、和後續研究等進行討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore practicum school counselors' concerns, learning, and experiences in group supervision. Twenty-six master-level counseling students were invited to join four supervision groups. Each supervision group consisted of five 90-minute sessions. The participants also conducted seventy-two contact hours of individual and group counseling, psychological assessment, lectures, and consultations for parents and teachers. The participants filled out the Needs for Supervision Questionnaire before each session to explore their concerns. They then filled out the Experience of Group Supervision Questionnaire after each session to assess their learning experiences. Segments of their weekly journals and term reflection papers were selected and analyzed to explore their learning experience. The results revealed four dimensions as important learning focus for practicum school counselors in group supervision, including practical learning, group experience, interpersonal learning, and professional development. The results showed highest five concerns: the targets, contents, intervention models, and conflicting topics. In terms of learning experience, the learning of counseling practice and strategies was most important, followed by group climate and associated benefits, interpersonal interaction and feedback, and professional development and learning. The learning of practical strategies, concrete techniques, and case conceptualizations were in the practical learning dimension. The group support, generation of the new views, and needs not being met were reported in the group experience dimension. The participants' interactions and feedback, and indirect learning from the supervisors were in the interpersonal learning dimension. The career self-exploration, self-awareness, career difficulties, and role redefinition were in the professional development dimension. Recommendations for school counseling and supervision, group supervision, and future research were discussed and proposed.起始頁-結束頁：61-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201112.00624篇名：工作目的價值觀的變與不變：十年之後並列篇名：The Stability and Change of Taiwanese Work Values: Ten Years Later作者：王叢桂(Chung-Kwei Wang);羅國英(Kuo-Ying Lo)關鍵字：工作目的價值;父母職責信念;價值變遷;parenthood beliefs;value change;work end-values期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：31期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究追蹤調查182位1970左右出生的大學畢業工作者，比較他們十年前與現在的工作目的價值觀念的異同，以及他們十年前的父母職責信念是否會影響現在的工作價值？結果顯示受訪者的價值在個人與關係取向內在酬賞以及關係取向外在酬賞的工作價值方面有相當程度的穩定性；但是個人取向外在酬賞的自主彈性與均衡生活兩項價值與關係取向外在酬賞的安定保障價值的變化較大。十年後的工作者更重視工作的穩定與內在挑戰成長性，以及更不重視權勢地位。兩性在工作價值上的差異也與十年前類似，仍符合傳統性別角色的期望，男性依舊比較重視外在成就，女性則比較重視內在成長。工作者十年前的父母職責信念與十年後的工作目的價值之間有關連；女性親職信念與工作內外在酬賞價值相衝突；男性要實踐親職者則須同時重視工作成就。英文摘要：The present research conducted a follow-up survey to investigate the work values of college graduates who were born during 1970s and had been surveyed in 1999. One hundred and eighty two workers' work values measured from an indigenous work value scale were compared with their responses ten years ago. Results revealed that both individual- and relationship-oriented intrinsic and extrinsic work values are relative stable. The following work values were relatively unstable stable: security and safety, autonomy and flexibility, balance between work and life. In comparison with the responses ten years ago, workers now valued more on intrinsic challenge and growth, extrinsic reward, stability and security of work and less concerned about power, status and leadership, which might reflect the influences of economic recession and societal change. The relationship between beliefs in parenthood and work values measured ten years later suggests that female workers' beliefs in parenthood are still in conflict with their individual-oriented intrinsic and extrinsic work values. Male workers' beliefs in parenthood may strengthen their work values. The stability of work values suggested that value analysis is useful for college students' career counseling.起始頁-結束頁：101-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201112.01025篇名：心理諮商中上帝意象的使用並列篇名：The Use of Image of God in Counseling作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);蔡秀玲(Shiou-Ling Tsai);鄭玉英(Yu-Ying Cheng)關鍵字：上帝意象;心理諮商;心像法;靈性;counseling;image of God;imagery;spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：31期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討將上帝意象的心像法運用於心理諮商工作中，具體的研究問題是：探討在心理諮商的工作中，基督徒案主透過心像法所產生的上帝意象特徵、諮商者如何應用上帝意象心像法於心理諮商、以及這樣的工作對案主心理與靈性的改變。本研究透過招募的方式，獲得三位有人際或心理困擾，有基督信仰的成年個案。一位有相同基督宗教信仰的諮商員，對他們分別提供運用上帝意象的心像法於三至六次的短期個別心理諮商。研究資料的收集包括：諮商員與每個個案的每一次諮商錄音逐字謄稿，以及每次諮商結束後諮商員與每位個案的事後訪談錄音及逐字謄稿。資料分析的方法是截取出每位個案於事後訪談所指認在諮商中出現上帝意象的段落，並配合諮商會談中的相關段落逐字稿進行分析。研究發現包括：上帝意象圖像的特徵與類型、諮商中使用上帝意象對案主的幫助，以及諮商員使用上帝意象於心理諮商的工作理念與技術等部分，文末並依據研究結果進行討論。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to explore the clients' change process when the counselor integrated the imagery technique with the image of God and spirituality in counseling. Three interpersonally disturbed adult Christian clients were recruited to the study. A female experienced Christian counselor applied the imagery technique with the image of God in her counseling work. Each client received 3-6 brief counseling sessions. Each session was taped and transcribed. Upon completion of each counseling session, both counselor and client were interviewed to debrief about their counseling session. The qualitative analysis method was used to analyze the types and characteristics of the image of God emerged from the clients, the helpfulness received from the client's imagery, and the counselor's imagery techniques employed. The results found five different types and characteristics of the image of God, five positive impacts received from the clients, and the counselor's rationales, procedures, attitudes, and specific techniques adopted in integrating the imagery work in counseling. The discussions and implications of the study were further illustrated.起始頁-結束頁：127-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201112.01286篇名：年輕女同志的親密關係、情慾探索與性實踐並列篇名：A Study on Young Lesbians' Intimate Relationships, Sexual Explorations and Sexual Practices作者：蔣琬斯(Wan-Ssu Chiang);游美惠(Mei-Hui You)關鍵字：T／婆;女同志;不分;親密關係;bufen;intimate relationships;lesbian;T/Pao期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：31期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從性別觀點分析女同志的親密關係，探究女同志如何定位自己的T／婆角色，而這定位又如何影響著女同志伴侶間的互動模式；相較於過往的T／婆分明角色關係，現今T／婆角色樣貌已更多元，並且跳脫T為陽剛、婆則陰柔的必然連結。本研究發現，由於身處於異性戀霸權下，女同志在剛開始建立親密關係時，常陷入「只能做不能說」的尷尬處境，不僅與傳統浪漫愛的腳本順序不盡相同，探索情慾的資源也更顯貧乏；在性實踐上則有著兩個困境，一是婆常被嫌棄床上技巧不佳，另一則是T「想要」但羞於表達。研究者希望透過本研究之探討能彰顯出多元的親密關係內涵，進而引發更性別友善的輔導論述蓬勃發展。英文摘要：This study explored lesbians' intimate relationships. The researchers interviewed six lesbians (aged 20-25) and explored their experiences of love, sexualities and interactions in intimate relationships. They also explored how the participants' gender roles as T (Tomboy or masculine role), Pao (feminine role), and/or Bufen (neutral role) have affected their sexual practices. According to the present findings, the changes in the relationships and gender roles among lesbians reveal that sexualities are gendered, and the lesbians’ gender roles are not static but socially constructed. Their experiences reflect the problems faced by many lesbian youths who live in a heterosexual society.起始頁-結束頁：159-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201112.01607篇名：當事人的諮商期望、對諮商初期諮商師可信度與工作同盟之關係研究並列篇名：Relationship among Clients' Counseling Expectations, Perceptions of the Counselor Credibility and the Initial Working Alliance作者：袁聖琇(Sheng-Shiou Yuan);陳慶福(Ching-Fu Chen)關鍵字：工作同盟;諮商初期;諮商師可信度;諮商期望;clients' counseling expectations;counselor credibility;initial counseling session;working alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：30期出版年：2011中文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship among clients' counseling expectations, their perception of counselor credibility, and the initial working alliance. One hundred and twenty-one clients seeking personal counseling at 18 university counseling centers in Taiwan completed the revised Expectation about Counseling-Brief Form (Tinsley, 1982) prior to their first counseling session, the Social Influence Inventory (clients' perception of counselor credibility) and the Working Alliance Inventory (WAI) after second counseling session. Results indicated that clients' expectations for personal commitment and perception of counselors' credibility of expertness and attractiveness predicted the task and goal dimensions of the working alliance. Clients' expectations for personal commitment and facilitative conditions and perception of counselors' credibility of expertness, attractiveness and trustworthiness predicted the bond dimension of the working alliance. Also, clients' expectations of counseling predicted working alliance indirectly through perceived counselor credibility, the effect size is .42 (p＜.05), and clients' expectations of counseling directly predicted working alliance, the effect size is .23 (p＜.05). The findings of current study suggested that counselor credibility might mediate the relationship between counseling expectation and initial working alliance. Clinical implications are discussed.英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship among clients' counseling expectations, their perception of counselor credibility, and the initial working alliance. One hundred and twenty-one clients seeking personal counseling at 18 university counseling centers in Taiwan completed the revised Expectation about Counseling-Brief Form (Tinsley, 1982) prior to their first counseling session, the Social Influence Inventory (clients' perception of counselor credibility) and the Working Alliance Inventory (WAI) after second counseling session. Results indicated that clients' expectations for personal commitment and perception of counselors' credibility of expertness and attractiveness predicted the task and goal dimensions of the working alliance. Clients' expectations for personal commitment and facilitative conditions and perception of counselors' credibility of expertness, attractiveness and trustworthiness predicted the bond dimension of the working alliance. Also, clients' expectations of counseling predicted working alliance indirectly through perceived counselor credibility, the effect size is .42 (p＜.05), and clients' expectations of counseling directly predicted working alliance, the effect size is .23 (p＜.05). The findings of current study suggested that counselor credibility might mediate the relationship between counseling expectation and initial working alliance. Clinical implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201108.00018篇名：諮商心理與社會工作在「家庭暴力暨性侵害防治中心」的跨專業合作經驗－從社工觀點反思諮商心理專業並列篇名：The Experience of Interdisciplinary Cooperation in the "Taiwanese Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse Prevention Center" between the Professions of Counseling and Social Work-Reflection on the Counseling Profession from the Perspectives of Social Workers作者：游淑華(Shu-Hua Yu);姜兆眉(Chao-Mei Chiang)關鍵字：社工專業;諮商心理專業;跨專業合作;台灣;social work;counseling psychology;interdisciplinary cooperation;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：30期出版年：2011中文摘要：諮商心理專業面臨跨專業合作，是開展專業服務的趨勢所在。本文從兩位研究者申請「家庭暴力暨性侵害防治中心」（以下簡稱家暴中心）作為碩、博士諮商實習機構的申請經驗出發，思考在諮商心理教育過程與實習場域忽略公部門系統的相關議題；其次，在研究者與家暴中心的合作經驗中，亦發現「諮商心理」與「社會工作」在專業合作中仍有待磨合，且專業資源仍未充分使用。本研究以四位服務於家暴與性侵害受害族群之社工師為研究參與者，就其與諮商心理專業合作的經驗，進行訪談，擬藉此了解專業合作現況，並深入理解社工對與諮商心理專業合作的期待。本研究結果如下：（一）從社工的觀點，探究諮商心理專業在家暴中心與社工專業合作的經驗，包含：(1)專業合作的緣起與發展脈絡；(2)社工轉介個案諮商過程；以及(3)社工對與諮商心理專業合作的觀察與反思。（二）從社工的觀點，探究其對諮商心理專業在家暴中心專業合作的期待，發現有以下二點：(1)建立機制讓諮商心理師（以下簡稱諮商師）討論諮商進程；以及(2)期待諮商心理師能夠建立互信與監督的機制。（三）從社工的觀點，對諮商心理專業發展的建議為融入社工文化脈絡。最後，研究者針對研究結果，反思諮商心理專業於社區諮商中之實踐，進一步提出未來研究與諮商實務之建議。英文摘要：Interdisciplinary cooperation is the future trend of professional counseling service. This study began at researchers' experiences with their internship application to the Taiwanese Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse Prevention Center (DVSAPC); furthermore, the Taiwanese government and public sectors were often ignored in counseling psychology training. Secondly, previous studies indicated that counselors' experiences of working with the DVSAPC, the negotiation existed between the counseling psychology and social work and the social resource were not fully utilized. This study was designed to understand interdisciplinary cooperation and the expectation of social workers. Data from four social workers who work with the population of domestic violence and sexual abuse were collected through semi-structured interviews. They shared their experience of cooperation with counselors. The result of this study demonstrated that: First, from social workers' perspectives, the cooperation between counseling and social work profession includes (a) the beginning stage and how interdisciplinary cooperation developed, (b) current referral system of counseling service and (c) the observation and reflection of the interdisciplinary cooperation. Second, from social workers' perspectives, the expectation of interdisciplinary cooperation includes (a) developing the cooperation procedure to discuss the counseling progress, (b) expecting counselors to develop mutual trust with social workers and supervision structure. And third, from social workers' perspectives of development of the counseling profession, they expect counselors to join in the social work culture. Finally, researchers will discuss the results and reflected on the practice of community counseling. The implications of future research in interdisciplinary cooperation and counseling practice will also be presented.起始頁-結束頁：24-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201108.00249篇名：完形治療團體對未成年時期經歷父母離異事件之大學生的效果研究並列篇名：The Effect of Gestalt Group Therapy on College Students Who Experienced Parental Divorce in Childhood作者：卓紋君(Wen-Chun Cho);陳宗興(Chung-Shing Chen)關鍵字：大學生;父母離異;失落悲傷;未竟事務;完形團體治療;college students;Gestalt group therapy;loss and grief;parental divorce;unfinished business期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：30期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討完形治療團體對未成年時期經歷父母離異事件大學生之諮商效果。研究對象為南部某大專院校三十名未成年時期經歷父母離異之學生，分成實驗組及控制組各十五名。實驗組成員接受三日，共計十八小時的完形團體。研究者以「失落量表」與「貝克憂鬱量表第二版中文版」為研究工具，對實驗組與控制組進行前、後及追蹤測。從詹森－內曼統計考驗發現：對多數的大學生成員（即失落量表得分約17分以上，憂鬱量表得分約10分以上者），完形治療團體能立即與持續降低其未成年時期經歷父母離異的悲傷反應。此外，研究者分別在團體結束第四至第六週，訪談成員所指定之親近友人、與成員同住之父或母，以及成員自身，分析發現：成員在團體之後，其情緒、想法、身體知覺、行為表現以及人際互動等五大向度上有正向的改變。研究者根據研究結果進行討論，並參酌在研究過程中的經驗，提出具體建議，以供實務工作者及未來相關研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effect of Gestalt group therapy on the college students who experienced parental divorce in childhood. Thirty participants from a college located in southern Taiwan were recruited, with fifteen of them assigned to the experimental group and the other fifiteeen to the control group. The experimental group received 18 hours of Gestalt group therapy within three days. The Loss Inventory and BDI-II (Chinese version) were administered at the pre-test, post-test and follow-up test to all participants. The results based on Johnson-Neyman Method showed that for the majority of the participants in the experimental group, Gestalt group therapy was able to alleviate the participants' grief at post-test and follow-up test. From the interviews of participants' intimate friends, the parents living with the participants, and participants themselves, it was found that the participants changed positively after receiving Gestalt group therapy in terms of emotions, behaviors, thoughts, physiological conditions and interpersonal relationships. Further discussion and suggestions were addressed for the practitioners and future researchers.起始頁-結束頁：54-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201108.005410篇名：督導雙方對諮商督導關係知覺之配對研究並列篇名：A Dyad Study of the Supervisee's and Supervisor's Perceptions of Counseling Supervisory Relationship作者：張淑芬(Shu-Fen Chang);廖鳳池(Fen-Tsu Laio)關鍵字：諮商督導關係;歷程研究;配對研究;重要事件;counseling supervisory relationship;process research;significant events;dyad research期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：30期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究針對一個督導配對一學期之完整督導歷程進行研究，採歷程研究及配對研究設計，藉由分析受督導者與督導者對督導關係重要事件的觀點，以了解雙方知覺督導關係的內涵與異同。研究發現：(1)受督導者知覺的督導關係為：督導關係重要事件包括人際互動溝通、情感連結狀態，及專業介入衝擊三類。督導者知覺的督導關係為：督導關係重要事件包括人際影響狀態、情感密切和諧，及專業權力展現三類；以及(2)比較雙方對督導關係的觀點後發現，雙方知覺的一致性有不同程度的組合，形成知覺相似型、知覺相錯型、知覺相歧型，以及知覺獨立型等四種關係知覺類型，且各階段皆以知覺獨立型所佔比例最高。英文摘要：The purposes of this study are to compare the perceptions of the supervisee and the supervisor on the counseling supervisory relationship by analyzing their viewpoints towards significant events in the supervision process. The researchers adopted process research paradigm and dyad research to collect data from one dyad for one semester. The major findings were: (1) The supervisee's perception: significant events were categorized into three categories, including interpersonal interaction, the state of emotional bond, and the impact of professional intervention. The supervisor's perception: significant events were categorized into three categories, including interpersonal influence state, harmonic bonds, and showing profession power. (2) Four patterns of relationship perceptions emerged from data analyses, including similar perceptions, respective perceptions, divergent perceptions, and independent perceptions, with independent perceptions prevailing at all phases.起始頁-結束頁：79-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201108.007901篇名：公共管理者對於公私合夥風險的認知：調查與反思並列篇名：Exploring the Public Manager's Perceptions of Risks in Public-Private Partnerships作者：曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng);黃偉誠(Wei-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：公私合夥;風險評價;風險配置偏好;風險分擔;促參;public-private partnerships;risk ratings;risk allocation preference;risk sharing;promotion of private participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：41期出版年：2011中文摘要：公共管理者如何看待公私合夥專案的風險？對於合夥過程中風險移轉與風險分擔有何偏好？「風險移轉」是公私合夥專案運作最重要的原則，但唯有透過良好的「風險配置」機制，方能成功地結合公、私部門雙方特質，否則將導致合夥專案成本的上升、延展工期，甚至失靈等後果。理論上，風險應該由最有能力管理一造承擔，但最適化的風險配置原則並不容易落實。除了客觀條件的權變與方法論上困難性外，政府當局本身尚須透過特定政策工具的支持，以落實「風險分擔」之責任。不過，此舉可能違反了公部門管理者的工作動機，也隱含從事這類循證分析的必要。根據上述文獻背景，由於公私合夥專案往往是由公部門加以發動，站在私部門角度，倘若未能洞悉公部門管理者風險配置的偏好，影響所及的是後續契約協商的成本，也會阻礙專案績效的達成。遺憾的是，過往台灣鮮少產出相關調查研究——風險移轉與風險分擔多停留在一些原則性討論。是以，方法論上，本研究主要藉由行政院公共工程委員會網站所公布的資料，進行公私合夥專案的公部門電話調查，初步呈現公共管理者對於這類專案風險的評價和風險分擔的認知，再針對此一調查發現，本研究也結合文獻分析與深度訪談資料，進行相關討論與反思，最後則對於未來研究方向提出一些建議。英文摘要：How do public managers perceive the risks in public-private partnership (PPP) projects? What are their attitudes toward risk shifting and risk sharing during the collaboration? ”Risk shifting” is one of the key principals in operating PPP projects, only through a well-designed ”risk allocation” mechanism can we combine the distinct characteristics of the public and private sector. Otherwise, the PPP projects will inevitably face increased costs, postpone, and even failure. Theoretically, risks should be allocated to the party who can manage them well, however, it is uneasy to actualize the principal of optimal risk allocation. In addition to the environmental contingencies and methodological difficulties, government authorities, in order to take the responsibility of ”risk sharing”, have an obligation to support the private sector via utilizing certain policy tools. However, this may contradict the public managers’ work motivation, and which reveals that it is worth to conduct the evidence-based analysis. Against this research background, since PPP projects are often initiated by the public sector actor, the private sector actor has to grasp the public managers’ risk allocation preferences, and thus the transaction costs can be minimized and project performance can be enhanced as well. Unfortunately, to the author’s knowledge, the investigations regarding the topic of risk shifting and risk sharing in PPP projects in Taiwan are scarce. This research, methodologically, intends to focus on the public managers’ attitudes toward risks in PPP projects via phone investigation, and the related data was collected from the website of Public Construction Commission Exceutive Yuan. Our findings demonstrate the results of risk ratings and risk allocation preference in PPP projects especially from the angle of public sector. The implications are discussed in accordance to the literature and in-depth interviews, and the recommendations for future research are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201112_(41).00012篇名：地方政府跨域合作模式與案例分析—台灣與德國之比較並列篇名：Analysis on the model and case of cross-boundary cooperation among local governments between Taiwan and Germany作者：劉明德(Ming-Te Liu);徐玉珍(Yu-Chen Hsu)關鍵字：府際關係;跨域合作;地方自治;區域治理;負責伙伴關係;intergovernmental relationship;cross-boundary cooperation;local self-government;regional governance;responsible partnership期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：41期出版年：2011中文摘要：目前台灣地方政府間的合作非常有限，多停留在共同宣言和研討會的層次，並侷限於交通、垃圾處理等議題。相反的，德國具有地方合作的傳統以及各類型的合作模式，因此，德國經驗對於一直缺少合作經驗的台灣而言，當具有高度的參考價值。經過對台灣和德國跨域合作做比較分析之後，本研究認為，台灣的跨域合作應有根本性的改變，也就是不只要有非正式組織，更要從非正式組織進入正式合作的階段，具體的建議包括：以積極取代消極合作、立法地方合作法和修訂財劃法、成立直轄市論壇、都會區公司、縣市聯合協會、建立網絡式上下整合的合作平台、建立災害防救的負責伙伴關係等。英文摘要：Currently there is yet little cooperation between local governments in Taiwan. Among the few cooperative efforts, most stay in the level of common manifest or symposiums with agendas limited to such as traffic and garbage disposal. In contrast, Germany is noted for its tradition in the cooperation among local governments in various ways. In this regard, Taiwan may learn and benefit a great deal from Germany. The current study conducted comparative analysis between Taiwan and Germany and proposed that a fundamental change is needed in terms of collaboration among local governments, which suggests escalating the current informal mode of cooperation to a formal level. The study also offered concrete recommendations which include: (1) encourage proactive cooperation, (2) draw up the collaboration of local governments Act and revise the allocation of fiscal revenue and expenditure Act, and (3) found Direct-controlled municipality forums, Limited liability companies from public and private sectors, national associations of cities and municipalities, and platforms to facilitate both vertical and horizontal cooperation among governments.起始頁-結束頁：37-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201112_(41).00023篇名：重塑黨國體系？中國大陸地方「大部制」改革的探討並列篇名：Remaking Party-State System? The Discussion of "Super-Ministry System" in China's Local Level作者：蔡文軒(Wen-Hsuan Tsai)關鍵字：大部制;府際管理;扁平化組織;順德;新集權主義;flat organization;intergovernmental management;new centralism;Shunde;super-ministry system期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：41期出版年：2011中文摘要：中共在近年所推動的行政改革中，「大部制」是甚具代表性的制度。在諸多試點方案中，以廣東省順德區最為先進，本文以此做為主要的分析個案。在該區的改革過程中，出現兩個有趣的現象。其一，是黨政合一的「新集權主義」；其二，是由於地方和省級的改革進程不一，而迫使改革者必須創新「府際管理」的機制。最後，我們將討論中共在順德推動「大部制」的意涵與侷限。英文摘要：In recent years, all the administrative reforms pushed in China by Chinese Communist Party (CCP), ”Super-Ministry System” is the typical one. In this process of reform, the advanced program was performed in Shunde where is our object to analyze. We focus on two interesting phenomenons in this division. Firstly, Shunde integrated the party and governmental bureaus and led it to a consequence－“new centralism”. Secondly, due to the diverse progress between local and provincial levels, it forced the reformer to create the new mechanism of the ”intergovernmental management” to solve the dilemma. Finally, focus on the ”Super-Ministry System” implemented in Shunde, we will discuss the implications and limitations.起始頁-結束頁：73-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201112_(41).00034篇名：英國基因改造作物與食品公共辯論：公民參與科技政策模式之評估並列篇名：The UK's Public Debate on GM Crops and Foods: Evaluation of the Model of Public Participation in Science and Technology Decision-Making作者：范玫芳(Mei-Fang Fan);邱智民(Chih-Ming Chiu)關鍵字：公民參與;審議民主;科技決策;風險溝通;基因改造作物與食品;public participation;deliberative democracy;technology decisionmaking;risk communication;GM crops and foods期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：41期出版年：2011中文摘要：晚近公民參與受到歐洲、美國與新興民主國家的高度關注，學界嘗試建立各種評估參與模式的標準，以檢視其品質與成效。英國在2002-2003年間舉行「基因改造國家？公共辯論」（The GM Nation? Debate），採行多元的公民參與形式，包括：基礎討論工作坊、公開討論會、互動網站與深度焦點團體，針對基因改造科技爭議進行全國性討論，以作為政府在基改科技可能的應用與管制之參考。本文旨在針對公共辯論的參與過程與結果面進行評估，檢視公民參與過程、公共辯論對參與者與政策影響以及不同公民參與模式的成效，呈現此公共辯論的特殊性與侷限性，以作為台灣未來推動公民參與和審議民主的參考。本研究採取文件分析法並輔以深度訪談資料。研究發現基礎討論工作坊、深度焦點團體在過程評估上具較高成效；公開討論會、互動網站在過程評估之成效不理想；公共辯論對參與者具有提升其知識與能力的功效；政治菁英對於公民參與科技決策議題的論述轉變；對實際政策影響有限，卻開啟政府在後續科技決策上，更重視公共審議和參與管道。本文最後主張推動多元公民參與形式、建立「回溯上游參與」（upstream engagement）及強化行政課責機制以促進公共審議之推動。英文摘要：As public participation has received considerable attention in Europe, North America and newly democratic countries, various criteria for evaluating participatory methods have been developed to examine the quality and efficiency of participatory mechanisms. To guide the government’s consideration for potentially adopting the applications of GM technology and regulations, the UK Government initiated a nationwide public debate - the ”GM Nation? Debate” - on the controversies of GM technology during 2002-2003. The UK government adopted various participatory mechanisms, which included public meetings, narrow-but-deep groups, interactive website and workshops. This paper aims to examine the UK public debate on GM issues and to evaluate the process and outcome of the debate. It explores the particularities and limitations of the GM public debate in the UK, and provides suggestions for future public deliberations on science and technology in Taiwan. The research methods adopted are archival analysis and interviews. It shows that the foundation discussion workshop and narrow-but-deep groups achieve more efficiency in process evaluation, while the public meeting and interactive website generate less result. Public discussions raise the specific knowledge and capacity of the participants. They have a limited direct effect on policy decision-making, but have led to the government’s greater emphasis on public consultation and participation. Finally, this paper argues for the need to facilitate various forms of public participation, establish upstream engagement and create an accountability mechanism to promote public deliberation.起始頁-結束頁：103-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201112_(41).00045篇名：中國大陸公眾參與政府績效管理的現狀與思考—以「民主評議政風行風」工作為例並列篇名：Current Situation and Reflection of Public Participation in Government Performance Management in Mainland China: A Case Study of "Democratic Review of Administrative and Business Style"作者：徐雙敏(Shuang-Min Hsu)關鍵字：政府績效管理;績效評估;公眾參與;第三方評議;行風評議;government performance management;performance evaluation;public participation;the third party assessment;democratic review of administrative and business style期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：41期出版年：2011中文摘要：當前中國大陸公眾參與政府績效管理的有效形式之一，就是「民主評議政風行風」。本文旨在通過對「民主評議政風行風」活動現狀的研究，提出完善行風評議中公眾參與的建議。從西方新公共管理運動的成功經驗看，政府績效管理必須以「顧客」為導向，以公眾滿意為標準，請公眾充分參與政府工作績效的評估。在中國大陸持續開展的「民主評議政風行風」活動中，主持活動的政府主管部門聘請「行評代表」，同時向「第三方」發放調查問卷，是這個活動中的兩種「公眾參與」形式。通過分別研究「民主評議政風行風」活動，及這個活動中的兩種公眾參與形式，可以看到，現在公眾參與的主體構成趨於多元化、科學化；評議對象和內容更加廣泛；評議形式更為多樣。現在行風評議工作，已經極大地促進了政府部門政風行風的轉變，但也在一定程度上存在一些問題。例如評議主體與被評對象資訊不夠對稱；「第三方」一定程度地被動參與、形式參與；「問卷調查表」設計不夠科學；「第三方」的構成職業比例不夠科學等問題。針對這些問題，建議進一步實施政務公開，加大政府工作的透明度；分類管理，增強「問卷調查表」的科學性和專業性；科學組織，提高「第三方」參與評議的能力；以「第三方」評議形式，促進政府專項工作的開展。英文摘要：”Democratic Review of Administrative and Business Style” (DRABS) is one of methods of public participative government performance management in Mainland China. This paper is aimed to propose how to improve the practice of the DRABS by reviewing its implementation. From the perspective of new public management, government performance management must be ”customeroriented” and assessed based on the public satisfaction, so it needs to absorb adequate public participation. In the exercise of the DRABS, the office-incharge would employ ”assessment representatives” and conduct questionnaire surveys among the public, or so-called ”the third party.” These are two kinds of public participation. Through the analysis of the DRABS and the two kinds of public participation, it can be found that the sources of public participation become increasingly diverse and the assessment also becomes more scientific; the targets and contents of assessment become broader; methods of assessment become more diverse. Under the DRABS, the service of government agencies has been greatly improved but some problems can be found in the process of the DRABS. There is information asymmetry between the assessment targets and assessors; the participation of the ”third party” is too passive and too superficial; the design of the questionnaire is not scientific enough; the sources of the ”third party” assessors do not match the assessment targets. For these problems, the author suggests that the openness and transparency of the government works should be strengthened; different assessment methods should be applied to different kinds of agencies; the questionnaire survey should be more scientific and professional; the capacity of the ”third party” participation should be enhanced; government affairs should be improved by the ”third party” assessment.起始頁-結束頁：135-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201112_(41).00056篇名：地方文化創意產業政策的公眾參與認知研究並列篇名：A Study on the Cognition of Public Participation in Local Cultural Creative Industry Policy作者：馬群傑(Chun-Chieh Ma)關鍵字：文化創意產業;公眾參與;理性;直覺;認知續線理論;public participation;cultural creative industry;rational;intuitive;Cognitive Continuum Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：40期出版年：2011中文摘要：決策制定是公共政策研究中的重要課題之一。然而，決策制定者究竟採行何種認知決策途徑，才能切合政策利害關係人的認知需求，國內公共政策研究中卻較少探討。因此，本研究即聚焦於公共政策中的理性與直覺（超理性）決策制定途徑，探討多元決策者在進行決策制定時，所執持認知分析型態與其分歧程度。臺南市擁有國內傳統特有的古蹟文化資產，然而，地區公私群體對於地方文化產業發展意見卻莫衷一是。為求瞭解公私群體的認知型式與認知差異，期以釐清地方公私群體間的決策制定認知途徑，本研究即以臺南市為研究範圍，採取理性與直覺決策制定途徑分析。研究先針對國內地區文化產業發展現況進行分析比較，再透過認知續線理論（Cognitive Continuum Theory，CCT）的社會準實驗，深入了解多元群體對臺南市地方文化產業發展政策的認知取向。研究發現，首先，國內文創產業的資源分布具有相當程度的地域落差。其次，以CCT進行本土性文創產業政策的探究乃具備研究方法上的可行性、嚴謹性與適當性。再者，透過準實驗的量化衡量方法檢測，研究者乃足以將地方發展群體之認知模式與政策偏好歧異進行具體釐清與完整展現。由此，本研究方法與成果應可提供予未來地方文創產業政策決策者，裨益其進行公眾參與認知差異的有效解構，並達成由根本上化解因決策變數修改而引致公共決策衝突之最終目的。英文摘要：Since decision making is one of the most important topics on the research of public policy, there has been relatively little effort devoted in exploring the cognition of policy stakeholders in Taiwan. Under such circumstances, this study focuses on modes and degrees of diversity of cognition with the rational and intuitive approach while making decisions. Tainan is transforming into a livable place with traditional cultural uniqueness. However, demands of citizens in Tainan are not fully corresponded to public policies made by public sectors. In order to recognize the modes and degrees of diversity of cognition of public and private stakeholders in Tainan, the study proceeds through exploring the rational and intuitive decision-making approach. To sum up, the study describes situations of the cultural creative industry development policies in Tainan and illustrate the competitive strengths. Then we introduce and testify the Cognitive Continuum Theory (CCT) in the quasi-experiment of cultural creative industry development of Tainan. Results of this study are as followed. First, there exist gaps of resources of cultural industry between cities in Taiwan. Second, studies on domestic policies of cultural creative industry with the application of CCT would be of much feasibility, conscientiousness and suitability. Third, we can figure out the models of cognitions and differences of preferences on local development policy by adopting quasi-experiment research designs. The method and results should be of benefit to decision-makers engaging in local cultural creative industry policy, so as to de-structuring the differences of cognition of public participation effectively and condensing conflicts between multiple decision-makers and achieving the goal of predicting conflicts caused by variables.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201109_(40).00017篇名：跨部門治理的理論與實踐：以蓮潭國際文教會館的委外經驗為例並列篇名：Theory and Practice of Cross-sector Governance: A Case Study of Garden Villa作者：李柏諭(Po-Yu Lee)關鍵字：跨部門治理;公私協力;委外;動態協力治理;生命週期論;cross-sector governance;public-private partnership;contract out;dynamic collaborative governance;life cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：40期出版年：2011中文摘要：在近代，隨著公共事務或公共議題賦予跨領域性質，從而導致更多元跨域治理的研究受到政治學界的重視。跨部門治理的概念同時也隨著時代的變遷與公共事務跨域性質之轉變，持續不斷被賦予新的意涵，強調互為協力關係的跨部門間，必須建立在一個相對自主、公平參與、明確課責、透明程序與相互信諾的新互動模式上。本研究主要探討跨部門治理的協力概念對於政府委外經營將帶來如何的關聯與效應，具體分析對象為「蓮潭國際文教會館」（Garden Villa）。蓮潭國際文教會館是一個以跨部門協力為主要概念的ROT（Rehabilitate-Operate-Transfer）委外實例，由「高雄市政府公務人力發展中心」（Civil Service Development Institute, Kaohsiung City）透過場域委外合作單位，以夥伴關係及跨部門協力的理念，與「台灣首府大學」（Taiwan Shoufu University）共同建立具現代化、國際化與知識化的新型態跨領域合作模式，至今仍穩定運作，被外界視為是成功的個案。本研究將以動態協力治理的生命週期論，探討蓮潭國際文教會館從創設迄今的運作過程，並據此充分說明公私部門在協力的不同政策階段因目標與手段的異同而所衍生的跨部門互動情況。最後，本研究希冀透過本案的委外經驗，可以發揮正外部效果，逐漸向外擴散到國內許多已從事或即將從事的委外案，最終達成促進民間正面積極參與公共事務活化公共資源的理念。英文摘要：The theory of cross-sector governance in public administration emphasizes the interaction relationship of public sector, private sector, and civil society. Furthermore, government is obliged to integrate those three sectors to form a niche effectively, and its managerial competency must be expanded to the convergence and interaction of government and society. This paper based on cross-sector governance emphasizes on the partnership between governments and society organizations that co-produce public services. Garden Villa is the first case of Rehabilitate-Operate-Transfer (ROT) in Kaohsiung city. Its success is from that Civil Service Development Institute of Kaohsiung government and Taiwan Shoufu University have formed a partnership which has successfully achieving public service delivery, providing professional civil service training and hospitality management. This paper will construct the life cycle of dynamic collaborative governance to analysis the beginning and operation processes in Garden Villa, further explaining this case's successful experiences.起始頁-結束頁：41-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201109_(40).00028篇名：為什麼創新先驅成為後進者？臺北市政府的行車倒數計時顯示器政策學習過程並列篇名：Why did the Pioneer Turn into a Follower? The Policy Learning Process of Taipei City's Adoption of Traffic Signal Countdown Displays作者：陳序廷(Hsu-Ting Chen);黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang)關鍵字：政策學習;政策移植;移植網絡;政治可欲性;行車倒數計時顯示器;policy learning;policy transfer;transfer network;political desirability;traffic signal countdown displays期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：40期出版年：2011中文摘要：在全球化與資訊通訊科技的脈絡下，各級政府間為解決政策問題或改善政策績效而相互進行政策學習已成為趨勢，可以說是一種運用標竿學習來提升治理能力的思維模式。本文以臺北市政府的行車倒數計時顯示器政策為個案，透過檔案研究法和深度訪談相關決策與執行人員，探討過去一向是「創新先驅」的臺北市在此政策中成為「後進者」的原因，及其學習過程和影響因素，希冀這個特殊個案能為相關領域累積本土個案的探索性研究。研究發現，在不具備技術可行性和政治可欲性的「雙重否決」情形下，致使臺北市在行車倒數計時顯示器的設置上成為後進者。隨著時勢推移，本個案的主要學習驅力則是政治可欲性推動技術可行性再次評估，而學習對象之選擇受到其顯示型式是否為紅燈倒數以及地理區位因素影響，直接學習管道主要由非正式的菁英網絡建立，從中流通資訊促進政策學習，且政策學習主要發生在政策評估與政策規劃兩個階段。臺北市也因較晚推動而獲得較其他縣市更為充分的資訊，形成「後進者的創新」，甚至直接影響中央法規的修訂。根據以上初步發現，本文建議未來除在學術上應豐富有關學習動機之研究外，並將政策學習理論結合實務的管理面，建置政策知識庫以及制度化的政策學習網絡，讓地方政府的施政經驗得以保存、累積與流通應用，以作為政策知識管理和學習的有效後盾，提昇政策績效。英文摘要：Under the influence of globalization and Information and Communication Technologies, governments at all levels get more chances to cross boundaries in order to run policy learning as a way to solve policy problem or to promote policy performance. By means of benchmarking, policy learning has formed gradually a new trend to improve governance.This study takes ”Taipei City's Adoption of Traffic Signal Countdown Displays” as a case. The authors intend to look over the process and contributing factors of policy learning, and to realize why a pioneer-like capital shows its retardation in this case. By literature review and in-depth interviews with officers of Taipei Traffic Engineering Office, this study digs out that lack of technical practicality and political desirability, (named ”Doubly reject”) had Taipei City's policymakers set up the traffic signal countdown displays later than other cities for a couple of years. By re-assessing the policy from political desirability to technical practicality, policy learning happened eventually in the phases of policy evaluation and policymaking, and built on a non-elite network as a learning channel. Taipei City's experience turned out to be an ”innovation of follower” due to more sufficient information, and had an impact on revising the legislation.The author integrate different policy learning theories and apply it in an abnormal case as main contribution in academic way; by way of gathering relevant information and extracting the research results, this study looks forward to offering practical suggestions as a reference of a policy learning mechanism.起始頁-結束頁：77-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201109_(40).00039篇名：政府契約委外的再檢視：目標、理論應用、績效衡量、與知識論基礎並列篇名：Revisiting Contracting-Out: Goals, Theoretical Grounding, Performance Measurement, and Epistemology作者：陳重安(Chung-An Chen)關鍵字：契約委外;私有化;經濟途徑;社會─政治途徑;比較分析;contracting-out;privatization;economic approach;socio-political approach;comparative analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：40期出版年：2011中文摘要：在八○年代新政府運動的帶頭下，私有化長久以來被認為是一個經濟典範下的產物，也是幫助政府節省成本、追求效率的一種最佳方法之一，而契約委外可謂是這個私有化潮流下最有代表性的工具。筆者檢視國際上契約委外的諸多個案分析，發現到無效率、浪費、失敗的例子多得不勝枚舉，但是各國政府仍不斷的將其政府服務發包給私人企業或民間社團。筆者不禁懷疑：難到「追求效率」這個假定有問題嗎？在回顧文獻之後，筆者認為契約委外的研究長期以來受到經濟典範的影響，導致出現了一些偏差的假定，這些偏差假定進而影響契約管理研究不當的理論應用、績效衡量、以及知識論基礎。若從社會─政治途徑的角度來觀察，我們會發現契約委外本身的目標不一定是為了效率，很多時候可能是政治上合理性與正當性的考量。在此情形下，我們將經濟途徑的理論，例如代理人理論與交易成本理論，應用在契約管理的研究上，便成了「牛頭不對馬嘴」的謬誤。在績效衡量上，學者們也忽略了許多社會與政治面向上的指標，好比說廉潔程度、課責性、與勞動市場的問題。爰此，本文藉由文獻回顧，分析研究契約委外的兩種途徑：經濟途徑與社會─政治途徑，並用平行陳列的方式比較兩種途徑的目標、契約管理的理論應用、績效衡量、與知識論基礎。筆者並期待學者們在未來的研究中能就社會─政治面做更多的探索。英文摘要：Although contracting-out has long been considered as one of the best ways to help government enhance the overall level of efficiency, empirical evidence suggests that inefficient contracting is prevalent in public organizations. Ironically, inefficiency does not impede the use of contracting in governments. The fact that legitimacy instead of efficiency is the paramount concern for government contracting is probably the origin of this paradox. In this, the author reexamines theories, performance measurement, and epistemology of public sector contracting. The author argues that applying principal-agent theory, transaction costs theory, and market theorem to government contracting may be misleading. Theories in sociology and political science can more appropriately depict the dynamics of government contracting. Socio-political indicators such as probity, accountability, and problems in a labor market are more adequate performance measures. In sum, public administration scholars are encouraged to employ the socio-political approach to conduct contracting research in the future.起始頁-結束頁：111-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201109_(40).000410篇名：因應電子化政府發展資訊人員員額配置之原則初探並列篇名：The Study of the Deployment of IT Manpower Applied in E-Government作者：蔣麗君(Li-Chun Chiang);顏上晴(Shang-Ching Yeh)關鍵字：資訊科技;資訊人力員額配置;電子化政府;政府改造;新公共管理;information technology;deployment of IT manpower;e-government;reengineering government;new public management期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：40期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要研究目的在於瞭解我國政府機關資訊單位人力員額配置現況，尋求在政府組織再造原則下，政府機關資訊單位合理人力配置的原則或參考指標。本研究「政府資訊人力」係指地方政府「資訊單位人力」與「負責資訊業務的人力」，並非一般公務人員的資訊能力，亦非中央政府資訊人力，故研究對象未包含行政院主計處或行政院主計處之電子資料處理中心。本研究採「深度訪談法」，經研考會資管處協助聯絡，受訪對象以中央政府與地方政府資訊單位為主。同時為更瞭解人員配置之合理員額，在2009年9月底赴韓國，進行資料蒐集與訪談，以利提供我國合理員額配置之可能諮詢與考量變項。最後，本研究旨在尋求政府組織再造原則下，我國政府機關資訊單位合理人力員額配置的原則或參考指標，並蒐集與我國國情相近之韓國，其電子化政府發展亦屬領先之國家資訊人力相關資料，作為比較或參考。依研究結果發現，資訊人力員額配置增額指標建議依人口、資訊業務量與預算為基準。再則，與韓國比較發現，（1）高雄市不論資訊人力與資訊經費皆大幅少於首爾市；（2）首爾市建制執行機關首爾資料中心，高雄市則無。因此，建議我國日後可以考慮建置統一資料中心以利提升資料整合與公共服務提升。英文摘要：The research aims to explore the status quo of IT manpower deployment and to study the principles of appropriate manpower applied in IT agencies in Taiwan e-government. IT manpower in e-government means manpower in IT agencies and manpower charged of digitalized administrative works, but not including the Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics in the Executive Yuan and relative agency are not included as the research samples. In-depth interview method is applied as the research method. With the help of the Research, Development and Evaluation Commission in the Executive Yuan, the authors interviewed IT agencies in the central government and the local government as the research samples. In order to understand the principal of appropriate IT manpower, the authors went to Korea in September 2009 to interview and collect the data related to IT manpower deployment. Through the results of interviews in both countries, the authors provided possible research variables and principles of IT manpower deployment. According to the research results shown, the main principals of IT manpower deployment are population, IT administrative work and budget. After studying the interviewing results of Taiwan and Korea, (1) IT manpower and IT budget in the Kaoshiung city is less than that in the Seoul city; (2) the Seoul city has established a database center, but the Kaoshiung city does not have had it.起始頁-結束頁：145-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201109_(40).000501篇名：地方首長領導風格對府會互動的影響─前新竹市長林政則的個案觀察為例並列篇名：A Study of the Influence between Local Government Official's Leadership Style and Its Executive-Legislative Relations: The Case of Former Hsinchu City Mayor Lin Junq-Tzer's作者：柯志昌(Chih-Chang Ko);何佳蓉(Chia-Jung Ho)關鍵字：領導風格;善治;府會互動;leadership style;good governance;executive-Iegislative relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：在這二十一世紀全球化的浪潮下，各個國家間的競爭，帶動了城市間的激烈競賽，全球地方政府大刀闊斧地改革，以期能與全球接軌。在這樣的趨勢與衝擊下，縣市首長的領導風格與府會互動關係更是影響地方治理績效的關鍵因素。本文以《遠見雜誌》在2009年針對25縣市長施政滿意度調查結果中，連續三年拿下五顆星最高榮譽的前新竹市長林政則進行個案研究。從「領導風格」與「府會互動」的分析觀點切入探討，藉由文獻檢閱、彙整、與分析的過程，歸納出和林政則市長的領導風格與府會互動相關的議題，結合問卷調查， 並與官方資料比對來剖析林政則市長領導風格與府會互動之關聯性。英文摘要：Under 21(superscript st) century, the wave of globalization has tremendously effected the high competition among different cities. In order to follow the tendency of globalization, the personal leadership o f local magistatrates and interaction between local government and city council have played pivotal roles on the local governance. This paper employs the former Hsinchu Mayor Lin Junq-Tzer as a case study, who has won the five star ranking by the survey of 25 countries and cities' policy and satisfaction in the 2009 magazine of ”Global View”. The authors try to generalize the characteristics and relationship of Mayor Lins' the ”personal leadership” and ”interaction between executive-legislative relations” by the way of literature review, survey, and questionnaire survey, and analysis.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201112.00072篇名：原住民族財產權之發展─以美洲人權法院Awas Tingni案為初始的思考並列篇名：Reconceptualizing Indigenous Property Rights作者：蔡志偉Awi Mona(Chih-Wei Tsai)關鍵字：Awas Tingni案;原住民族財產權;美洲人權公約;國際人權法;特殊權利;Awas Tingni;indigenous property right;American Convention on Human Rights;international human rights law;sui generis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：國際原住民族權利發展上的一項顯著匯流，在於原住民族對其土地與自然資源權利之守護者角色，獲得國際法上的承認與支持。本文以美洲人權法院審理Awas Tingni v. Nicaragua乙案為例出發，從國際司法實務上探究原住民族藉由參與國際人權規範監測組織，具體陳述並論證殖民主義擴張的原住民族史觀，試圖在國際法制的架構內重行闡釋原住民族生存與發展的基本人權內涵，結合美洲人權系統與其他國際人權系統對於財產權論證的闡釋，探究國際法上論證原住民族財產權的發展，希冀啟發對於國內現行法制下的原住民族土地及自然資源之財產權內容的發想。英文摘要：Indigenous human rights as a fast-growing right thesis and principal subject within the modern international legal framework, surely offers a unique opportunity for the world indigenous peoples to participate at international institutionalized and substantialized the development of human rights regime. This paper studies the OAS's human rights protection system and focuses on the Inter-American Court of Human Right's case on the Awas Tingni Community v. Nicaragua. By exploring international judicial practice and its relationship with indigenous peoples rights articulation on indigenous historiography of colonial expansion, this paper attempts to re-expound and re-conceptualize the theory of indigenous fundamental rights of survival and development within the international legal framework. Through incorporating OAS human rights system and other international human rights schemes on the demonstration of property rights, this paper argues the idea of indigenous properly is originated from traditional laws and cultural norms and their sacred connection to the land worldview. From the standpoint of comparative laws, it would offer a new property paradigm for the Taiwanese administration, legislation and justice departments to envisage the further examination on indigenous properly issues within the existing framework.起始頁-結束頁：45-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201112.00513篇名：為什麼淪為不情願夥伴?─公私夥伴關係失靈個案的制度解釋並列篇名：Becoming Reluctant Partners? An Institutionalist Explanation on a Futile Case of Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs)作者：曾冠球(Kuan- Chiu Tseng)關鍵字：公私夥伴關係;衝突性制度邏輯;制度壓力;不情願夥伴;public-private partnerships;competing inslitutional logic;institutional pressures;the reluctant partners期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：「公私夥伴關係」泛指政府與廠商之間具有共同願景與目標，並分享權威、財務與技術資源，以及風險之一種制度安排。近年來，BOT這類長期公私夥伴關係實務日漸盛行。由於公私夥伴關係這樣的組織形式正巧位居公、私領域的「模糊地帶」（the twilight zone），協力行為深受所謂的「衝突性制度邏輯」（competing in　stitutional logic）影響。基此，有關公私夥伴關係治理成效之研究，若僅單純著眼於「功能主義」觀點，卻忽略來自「社會學新制度論」觀點的洞見，似乎並不適當。本文主要推論在於：有關公私夥伴關係之成功運作，促參機關與『協力廠商』之間關係固然重要，但促參機關與『外部組織』（制度支持者）之間互動也不容等閒視之」特別是從民主國家分權與制衡的角度觀之。本文試圖藉由「臺北市民生活網公私合營專案」的個案研究，闡述原先合作夥伴何以最終淪為「不情願夥伴」。個案研究結果顯示主要因素有三，分別是：兩造（1）從「權威分享」的政策宣稱，逐漸回復到公部門「權力支配」之慣性；（2）從秉持「彈性協商與相互調適」的信念，逐漸步向「裁量限縮與契約僵化」的回頭路；（3）從原先「風險移轉與風險分擔」的契約設計理念，逐漸掉入公部門只圖「風險移轉」卻「規避風險」的死胡同。這意味著支持公私夥伴關係有效運作的「聯盟－關係正當性」與公部門長期追求的「行政－法律正當性」和「社會－政治正當性」之間可能潛存衝突。因此，學界或實務界鼓吹跨部門治理之餘，不應對公、私部門之間本質衝突問題置若罔聞；更重要的是，單憑促參政策未必能夠對公共治理成效產生多大改變，「制度壓力」影響夥伴關係治理的問題，必須獲得正視。英文摘要：”Public-private partnerships (PPPs)” refer to an institutional arrangement of having common vision and goal, and sharing of authority, financial and technical resources, and even risks between the government and the firm. Long-term PPPs practices such as BOT has been prevailing in recent years. Actually since the form of an organization such as PPPs locales on ”the twilight zone” between the public and private sphere, collaborative behaviors would be affected by the so-called ”competing institutional logic”. It seems, therefore inadequately to do this kind of study solely from the viewpoint of ”functionalism while neglecting the insights provided by the viewpoint of ”the new institutionalism in sociology”. The author would like to argue that ”the relationship between the public sector and the private sector is crucial, but the relationship between the public sector and the other institutional constituents also should not be disregarded”, especially from the perspective of separation of powers and checks and balances issues in democracy. Through the case study of ”My Taipei Website PPPs Project”, the author intends to explore the reason why partners working together eventually became ”the reluctant partners”. The findings designated that the operation of PPPs was (a) from the original policy claims of ”authority sharing” return to the bureaucratic inertia of ”power dominance”, (b) from the belief of flexible negotiation and mutual adjustment” return to the bureaucratic habits of ”discretion self-shrinking and contract rigidity”; (c) from the ideas of ”risk-shifting and risk-sharing” return to the bureaucratic tradition of enjoying the ”risk-shirting” while disregarding ”risk- sharing”. Accordingly, it is recommended that the ”alliance-relational legitimacy” supporting the operation of successful PPPs seems to potentially conflict with the ”administrative-legal legitimacy” and ”social-political legitimacy” pursued, for a long time, by the public sector. Thus, the topic of the cross-sector governance advocated by scholars and practitioners, interest conflicts between the Public and private sector should be considered. Plus, it would be naively to expect that the Promotion Participation Policy would have significant effects on the outcome of public governance, unless the fact that ”institutional pressures” might influence the governance in PPPs is also seriously concerned.起始頁-結束頁：83-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201112.00894篇名：台灣政黨體系的制度化─大眾政治態度面向的探討並列篇名：Institutionalization of Party System in Taiwan: An Analysis on the Mass Political Attitudes作者：林聰吉(Tsong-Jyi Lin)關鍵字：政黨體系;制度化;政黨認同;政黨正當性;民主化;party system;institutionalization;party identification;party legitimacy;democratization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：參酌政黨理論的研究傳統，本文以政黨的選舉實力、政黨在民主政治的正當性兩項指標，觀察我國自民主化以來政黨體系制度化的程度，結果顯示，在選舉實力方面，無論是由民眾政黨認同或者政黨得票率來看，我國可被歸類為長期穩定的兩黨體系。至於政黨正當性方面，儘管未能像第一項指標有近20年的實證資料，但現有2008－2011年的調查顯示，肯定政黨在民主政治重要地位的民意，穩定地介於七成三到八成之間的高百分比。統計模型也發現，愈肯定政黨競選動員、政府治理功能者，愈認同政黨的正當性；顯示政黨的表現與其制度化的程度息息相關。另外，愈支持民主的民眾，也傾向愈肯定政黨在民主政治的重要地位。過去許多文獻均已指出，政黨體系的制度化有助於一國的民主鞏固。如果將此一論點對照我國的發展經驗與本文的研究發現可知，對於政黨、選舉、民主政治三者在我國政治的互動結果，吾人應能給予審慎而樂觀的評價。從大眾政治態度的面向來看，我國政黨體系已邁向制度化；此外，儘管選舉糾紛屢見不鮮，但無論是精英或大眾多己能接受政黨選舉競爭為共同認可的遊戲規則。從我國現有政治的運作經驗觀之，上述結果也有利於民主公民文化的逐漸成形。然而，我們也不能過份樂觀，畢竟政黨體系的制度化只是民主邁向鞏固的條件之一，台灣的民主政治是否得以深化，無疑地將有待更多條件的配合。英文摘要：The study examines institutionalization of party system by two criteria: electoral strength and party legitimacy. With regard to electoral strengths, Taiwan's case apparently is a stable two-party system according to the trend of party identification and votes since 1986. In addition, nearly 73-80% Taiwanese support party legitimacy in Taiwan's democracy. The statistic model finds that party performance and support for democracy are the major reasons for explaining Taiwanese support for party legitimacy. Old generation and party identifiers are also inclined to prove party legitimacy. In conclusion, the author argues that increasing institutionalization of party system has exerted positive effects on Taiwanese democracy. Most people has accepted party-based election as the only game in town. However, party institutionalization is merely one of the element for deepening democracy, more works are needed for democratic consolidation.起始頁-結束頁：135-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201112.01415篇名：書評：The Expropriation of Environmental Governance: Protecting Foreign Investors at the Expense of Public Policy〔環境治理權的徵收─犧牲公共政策換取外資保護的代價〕by Kyla Tienhaara〔凱拉•滕哈拉〕並列篇名：A Review of "The Expropriation of Environmental Governance: Protecting Foreign Investors at the Expense of Public Policy" by Kyla Tienhaara作者：朱柔若(Jou-Juo Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：161-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201112.01676篇名：書評：Environmental Politics and Deliberative Democracy: Examining the Promis of New Modes of Governance 〔環境政治與審議式民主─檢視新治理模式的允諾〕by Karin Backstrand, Jamil Khan, Annica Kronsell, Eva Lovbrand 〔卡琳•巴斯特蘭、賈米爾•卡漢、安妮卡•柯蘭索、伊娃•賴布蘭登〕並列篇名：A Review of "Environmental Politics and Deliberative Democracy: Examining the Promis of New Modes of Governance" by Karin Backstrand, Jamil Khan, Annica Kronsell, Eva Lovbrand作者：王鼎傑(Ting-Jieh Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：169-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201112.01757篇名：宗教、社會運動與民主化－左翼社會主義、自由派還是伊斯蘭主義？並列篇名：Religion, Social Movement, and Democratization: The Leftist Socialism, Liberal Thoughts, or Islamism?作者：劉育成(Yu-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：伊斯蘭主義;左翼社會主義;茉莉花革命;民主化運動;社會運動;Islamism;leftist socialism;Jasmine Revolution;democratization;social movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：2010年底，突尼西亞一名受過大學教育的青年在街頭自焚的事件，就像野火燎原般地席捲了數個北非與中東國家。這些抗議行動的主要目的都是要嘗試擺脫原本的威權統治，要求更充分與更自由的民主政治體制。埃及人民受到突尼西亞革命勝利的鼓舞，同樣選擇走上街頭以表達對既存政權的不滿。透過社群網站與其他電子通訊設備的串聯，埃及人民用更短的時間便迫使政權垮台。這兩場運動的結果象徵的不僅是人民不再願意忍受威權統治下的不自由與不平等，同時也彰顯了人民在面對國家機器時所具有的主體性與能動性。這兩場運動的特殊性表現在，第一，這兩個國家都是穆斯林占多數的國家；第二，被推翻的兩個政權都是親西方、世俗化的政權；第三，在這兩個社會中主要的反對力量都是與宗教有關密切相關，在這裡指的是伊斯蘭主義團體；第四，在運動過程中，宗教因素均極力地被淡化。由於這些社會與文化脈絡上的特殊性，當反政府的示威與抗議運動爆發之際，以及後續的發展上，宗教團體在其中扮演的角色與功能便格外引人注意。本文將從上述特殊性出發，進一步探究宗教（團體）在其中的角色。運動本身是否如媒體報導的如此單純與世俗化，或許是值得深思。從突尼西亞與埃及的例子中，本研究發現，宗教（團體）在社會運動，尤其是在所謂的「民主化運動」上可能具有重要位置。然而，在策略上，宗教（主要是指伊斯蘭主義團體）則需要巧妙地迴避成<U+7232>親西方、世俗化政權矛頭所指的對象。本研究將探究伊斯蘭主義、左派社會主義與自由派思想三者在突尼西亞與埃及社會中的複雜關係。其彼此間偶然的結盟與對立<U+7232>這兩場運動的成功帶來貢獻。本研究並嘗試指出在社會運動／民主化過程中，宗教團體是如何不會也不應該缺席的。英文摘要：In the late 2010, a young man's self-immolation in the suburbs of Tunis, the capital of Tunisia, ignited a series of anti-government revolts from Tunisia to Egypt, and then to other countries in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA). People's desire to live more liberal and with more justice pours them into the streets, and expresses their voices to the governments disappointed them. It was called ”Jasmine Revolution”. Following and encouraged by the achievements Tunisians have made within a month, Egyptians also organized their own revolts in Cairo and other cities all over the country. They overthrew the regime of Mubarak within less than three weeks, and established the interim government in order to prepare for the general election after six months. Considering these two people's movements, they have something in common. First of all, the two countries are muslim-majorities. Second, the two regimes overthrown are pro-Western and pro-secular. Third, the biggest and most powerful oppositions are Islamist groups, Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and Ennahdha in Tunisia, although they were oppressed by the authorities for a long time. Forth and the last, the role of religion, Islam and Islamism, has been minimalized during the revolts. Due to these common features, most of the mass media reported and emphasized that these movements must to be secular and Islamist-free. Even the Islamist groups announced this to the public since they joined. Despite Islam and Islamism, like the media most reported, may not play important role in these revolts, they still contribute a lot to them. Strategically, these Islamist groups have to avoid from being the target of those authoritarian regimes lest they could be brutally suppressed under the name of anti-terrorism. The success of these revolts involves several forces, including mainly three kinds: Islamism, leftist socialism, and liberal thoughts. This essay will examine the relationship among these three forces, and how they contribute to the revolts, historically, theoretically, and practically. We argue that religion and religious groups always play a certain role on the way to democratization, they will not and should not be absent from social movements toward democracies.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201109.00018篇名：網際網路如何影響社會運動中的動員結構與組織型態？－以台北野草莓學運<U+7232>個案研究並列篇名：How the Internet Impacts Social Movements: A Case Study of the Taiwan Wild Strawberry Movement作者：蕭遠(Yuan Hsiao)關鍵字：網際網路;社會運動;動員結構;組織型態;虛擬生態圈;the internet;social movements;mobilization;organizational structure;virtual ecology mobilization process期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：網路媒介如何影響社會運動的動員結構及組織型態？本研究以野草莓學運<U+7232>例，試圖探討網路媒介興起對社會運動動員結構所造成的影響，以及此影響又如何改變了社會運動組織型態。本研究延伸趙鼎新所創的生態圈概念，主張野草莓學運中網路媒介所動員的是種超越實體空間的「虛擬生態圈」(virtual ecology)。而這種動員方式，使野草莓學運跳脫傳統網絡，在短時間內爆發動員強度，但同時產生人際網絡枝節斷裂(segmented)的參與者，進而造成「無領導的民主行動群」的扁平式組織。本研究呈現了科技媒介、動員結構與組織型態三者如何相互影響的過程。英文摘要：This article discusses the relationship between the internet and social movements, focusing on how the internet affects the mobilization process and organizational structure of social movements. An investigation of the Taiwan Wild Strawberry Student Movement indicates that the internet facilitates a new mobilization process called the ”virtual ecology mobilization process”. Mobilization through the internet makes social networks in a movement segmented and difficult to create leadership. Thus, the organizational structure becomes ”flat” and lacks co-ordination. Mobilization through the internet and its consequential impact on organizational structures differs significantly from student movements in the past in Taiwan, which emphasize the importance of pre-existing organizations. We can conclude that technologies available in a society affect the media means social movement groups can choose to spread information, which influences its mobilization process and consequentially impacts its organizational structure. Technologies, mobilization processes and organizational structures are three factors deeply related to one another.起始頁-結束頁：45-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201109.00459篇名：實證主義與政治理解的貧困－政治學方法論的反思並列篇名：Positivism and the Poverty of Political Understanding: Reflections on the Methodology of Political Science作者：曾國祥(Roy Kuo-Hsiang Tseng)關鍵字：現代性;全球化;政治理解;實證主義;科學主義;技術主義;modernity;globalization;political understanding;positivism;scientism;technocracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：藉著引述現代性與全球化的相關議題，本文旨在對科學主義支配下「政治理解」的貧困窘境，進行方法論的反思。依照紀登斯(Giddens Anthony)的講法，全球化緊密聯繫著現代性，而構成現代性的三個顯著面向則是時空分離、抽離化與反思性。雖然全球化具有普遍化的趨向，但如一般所知，全球化亦激發在地化，因此，反思性同時意指：面對技術統治之高度理性化所造成的去人性化危機，行<U+7232>者對於地方價值與社群實踐的反思重構。順此，作者將試著揭露根植於科學主義的此一道德悖論：技術統治是構成現代性危機的重要部分，然而，在一個受到技術統治所主宰的社會中，「政治理解」卻僅只關注科學方法的普遍性，而甚少論及我們從事「在地反思」所不可或缺的知識型態，包括哲學、歷史、美學、道德與政治思想等。由於這種渴望科學確定性之思維的方法論基礎，主要來自實證主義或邏輯實證論，作者在重申道德與政治哲學之研究價值的過程中，將著手批判其核心假設：客觀效用、價值中立、進步史觀。最後，作者將指出，因受制於實證主義的科學觀，「實證政治科學」無法有效處理以下三項重要的民主課題：公民德行的價值、民主的審議轉向以及跨文化對話的意義。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine the poverty of political understanding within the reach of scientism by bringing into focus the issues of modernity and globalization. Following Anthony Gidden,s words, globalization is closely bound up with modernity, which embraces three significant aspects, namely, time-space separation, disembedding, and reflexivity. Despite the universalizing tendencies, however, globalization simultaneously implies localization; and thus, the idea of reflexivity also denotes a reconstruction of local values and collective practices in the face of the dehumanizing implications of highly ”rationalizing”. As for political understanding, it follows that there is a moral paradox embedded in scientism: While technocracy is part of the crisis of modernity, in a technocratic society political understanding is often restricted to scientific methods alone and has little to do with the non-scientific forms of knowledge which are indispensible to ”local reflexivity”; the forms of knowledge at stake consist of philosophy, history, aesthetics, moral and political thought, etc. Since the methodological foundation which justifies the thirst for scientific certainty, as a matter of fact, comes from positivism or logical positivism, in the course of reviving moral and political philosophy, I will try to criticize its key assumptions: scientism, value-neutrality, and scientific progressivism. Finally, I will conclude this essay by arguing that the positivist conception of political science actually falls short of dealing with three crucial issues of democracy: the importance of civic virtues, the deliberative turn of democracy and the significance of cross-cultural dialogue.起始頁-結束頁：87-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201109.008710篇名：選舉結果機率之分析－以2006年與2008年台灣選舉<U+7232>例並列篇名：Analysis on Probability of Election Results: Case Studies of 2006 and 2008 Elections in Taiwan作者：童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung);周子全(Tzu-Chuan Chou);林繼文(Jih-Wen Lin);林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin)關鍵字：預測市場;民意調查;機率;北高市長選舉;立委選舉;總統大選;prediction markets;opinion polls;probability;Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral elections;legislator election;presidential election期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文利用「未來事件交易所」的交易資料，分析預測市場「是否預測型」合約能否準確預測選舉結果，合約包括2006年的北高市長選舉、2008年的立委選舉及總統大選。本文分成四個部份分析「是否預測型」合約的準確度：加權平均價格與事件發生機率；加權平均價格與該合約結果的迴歸分析；五項比率（正確率、精準率、命中率、假警報率與貴氏比率差）分析；三項穩健性測試。本文發現：1、選舉當選預測合約的加權平均價格能充分反映候選人當選機率；2、加權平均價格是影響當選與否的主要因素；3、預測市場的預測準確度高於民調機構；4、預測市場的準確度隨時間接近選舉而逐步提升。英文摘要：Using trading data of the Exchange of Future Events, this paper analyzes whether yes-or-no contracts of prediction markets can accurately predict the election results, including Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral election in 2006, legislator election and presidential election in 2008. This paper analyzes the accuracy of the yes-or-no contracts in four parts: volume-weighted average price and the probability of event occurrence, logit model analysis on the volume-weighted average prices and the results of these contracts, analysis of five rates (correctness rate, precision rate, hit rate, false alarm rate, Kuipers score), and three robustness tests. This paper finds that: 1. volume-weighted average price can reflect the probability of candidates winning elections; 2. volume-weighted average price is the main factor to predict the events; 3. the prediction accuracy of prediction markets is higher that of polling institutions; 4. the accuracy of prediction markets increases as the election day approaches.起始頁-結束頁：135-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201109.013501篇名：國家野生動物保育體制、社經變遷與原住民狩獵：制度互動之太魯閣族實證分析並列篇名：Governmental Conservation Institutions, Socioeconomic Change and Indigenous Hunting: An Empirical Analysis of Institutional Interplay in a Truku Case作者：戴興盛(Hsing-Sheng Tai);莊武龍(Wu-Long Jhuang);林祥偉(Shyang-Woei Lin)關鍵字：制度;原住民;狩獵;共有資源;保育;太魯閣族;institution;indigenous people;hunting;common-pool resources;conservation;Truku Tribe期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：狩獵為我國原住民族與野生動物保育政策中一個非常重要且極具爭議性的議題。本文的主要目的為，研究國家野生動物保育體制與原住民族內部傳統狩獵規範之互動。本文針對某太魯閣族原住民之區域進行實證研究，研究結果顯示，綜合而言，從1970年代至今的長期間，社會經濟變遷因素扮演著主要角色，對原住民族傳統狩獵規範持續施加著相對緩慢、但影響深遠的變遷壓力，而國家野生動物保育體制則在2000年代中期前，僅扮演次要的角色，在此外部制度環境下，原住民獵區制度仍能維持其韌性。然而，在2000年代中期後，因國家保育體制嚴格執法而驅動了原住民獵區制度的加速喪失影響力。長期的整體結果是，野生動物族群量的確已經明顯增加，而原住民的狩獵活動大為降低，原住民內部狩獵規範則逐漸降低其影響力。本文最後討論以上實證結果的規範性意涵，並建議，由於太魯閣族獵區制度在友善的外部制度環境中實具有相當程度之韌性，未來若能結合太魯閣族自治架構，由國家保育體制與太魯閣族內部規範共同治理野生動物，此方案應具備一定程度的現實可行性。英文摘要：Indigenous hunting and its impact on wildlife represents one of the most critical and controversial issues in Taiwan. This study aims to investigate the interplay between governmental conservation institutions and indigenous hunting norms in an anonymous Truku area. The empirical results show that, over the long term between the 1970s and mid-2000s, socioeconomic change has played a pivotal role, and has exerted a relatively slow but significant influence on indigenous hunting norms, while governmental conservation institutions have played a minor role. In such external institutional settings, Truku hunting territory norms remain robust. However, since the mid-2000s, strict legal enforcement by governmental institutions has resulted in a more rapid decline in indigenous hunting territories. In the long run, wildlife populations have significantly recovered. At the same time, indigenous hunting activities have dramatically declined, and nowadays indigenous hunting norms are increasingly losing their influence. Finally, we discuss the normative implications of the empirical findings. We suggest that, in friendly external institutional settings, Truku hunting territory norms are quite robust. Accordingly, in cooperating with the future framework of Truku self governance, a wildlife co-management proposal governed by both the governmental conservation institutions and Truku hunting norms may become feasible.起始頁-結束頁：3-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201112.15(2).3-662篇名：來臺陸生的政治態度與臺灣主權接受程度並列篇名：The Impacts of Political Attitudes on the Acceptance of Taiwanese Sovereignty by Mainland Chinese Students Studying in Taiwan作者：王嘉州(Chia-Chou Wang)關鍵字：民主價值;兩岸關係;政府認同;政治效能感;政治信任感;democratic value;cross-Strait relationship;government identification;political efficacy consciousness;political trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：因兩岸關係核心問題在主權爭議，故本文以在臺短期研修的大陸學生為對象，以問卷調查法分析政治態度對臺灣主權接受程度之影響。本研究發現：來臺陸生對臺灣主權之接受程度整體偏低，平均值僅1.63。影響陸生臺灣主權接受程度的因素中，以對臺灣政府喜愛程度、外在政治效能感與政治信任感最為重要。根據本文研究發現，為維護臺灣主權，就不該拒絕陸生來臺就學，反而應該招收更多陸生。不過，應有相關配套措施，以提升其對臺灣政府的喜好程度、降低其外在政治效能感及對中國大陸政府的政治信任感。英文摘要：The core issue of cross-Strait relations lies in the debate over sovereignty. This study targets Mainland Chinese students studying in Taiwan for a short period of time as research subjects. Through questionnaires, the impact of political attitudes on the acceptance of Taiwanese sovereignty is investigated. This study's research findings show that the acceptance of Taiwanese sovereignty by Mainland Chinese students studying in Taiwan is generally low with a mean of 1.63. Among the factors influencing the acceptance of Taiwanese sovereignty by Mainland Chinese students, favorable attitudes towards the Taiwan government, external political efficacy, and political trust are deemed to be the most important. According to this study, to protect Taiwanese sovereignty, the government should encourage more Mainland Chinese students to come to Taiwan rather than refusing them admittance. However, complementary measures should be developed to increase favorable attitudes towards the Taiwan government and to decrease external political efficacy and political trust in Mainland China's government by Mainland Chinese students.起始頁-結束頁：67-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201112.15(2).67-1133篇名：中國社會組織的治理結構與場域分析：環保與愛滋NGO的比較並列篇名：The Governance Structure and Field Analysis of Social Organizations in China: A Comparison of Environmental and AIDS NGOs作者：王占璽(Chan-Hsi Wang);王信賢(Hsin-Hsien Wang)關鍵字：治理結構;組織場域;「國家─社會」關係;環保組織;愛滋病組織;governance structure;organizational field;state-society relationship;Environmental NGOs;AIDS NGOs期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著中國政經轉型與社會變遷，各式社會組織的出現引發人們的關注。而就「國家—社會」關係的研究角度看來，目前仍由「國家中心論」所主導，國家的意志與能力被視為關鍵的解釋變項，因而忽略了對社會力量如何組織以及如何動員的關注，也無法針對不同議題性質與社會部門行動者屬性異同的比較。針對此，本文在理論上以組織「治理結構」研究中「組織場域」為基礎，提出一個關於中國NGO的場域分析框架，將社會組織在模式、動力與機制上的變化與影響，視為重要的研究對象。另一方面，在實證研究上，本文選擇當前中國最為活躍的兩個草根組織─環保與愛滋病組織為研究對象，在這兩個領域中，雖出現部分類似特徵，但其在行動策略、動員模式，以及與國家互動的關係上，卻呈現出截然不同的圖像，本文基於廣泛的經驗調查，將具體描述這些面向的差異。最後，本文將透過上述的理論與實證對話，呈現當前中國社會組織的治理結構與組織場域圖像，以期對相關研究有所貢獻。英文摘要：China's drive toward reform and modernization over the past 30 years has not only led to rapid economic growth, but has also created new opportunities for social change. The dramatic changes and significant consequences stirred by the development of social organizations have drawn much attention to the subject. Existing studies on the state-society relationship remain largely dominated by the ”State-centered approach”, in which the state will and capacity are considered to be the key interpretation variables. By contrast, the attention given to the ”organizing of social forces” and ”mobilization of social resources” remains limited, and inadequate attention has been directed to the influence arising from the differences between the nature of different agendas and the characteristics of social-sector actors. With the tendency to focus on state apparatuses, research on the relationship between the state and social organizations in China today has been going nowhere, and more in-depth comparative analysis is unlikely.Theoretically, this article first of all argues that the ”governance structure” and ”organizational field” of social forces should be reestablished as the focus of research in contemporary China. Such research must focus on the changes in and effects of the various models, driving forces, and structures of social organizations. Secondly, it presents an empirical study of the two most active grassroots organizations in China-environmental NGOs and AIDS NGOs. Both organizations exhibit similar characteristics in certain areas, but they differ vastly in terms of action strategy, methods of mobilization, and interaction with the state. Backed up by extensive empirical investigations, this article will demonstrate such differences. Based on these, this article provides a dialogue with the foregoing empirical research to identify the potential blind spots of existing theoretical viewpoints in their analyses.起始頁-結束頁：115-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201112.15(2).115-1754篇名：中國大陸基層民主與農村社會保障制度的發展並列篇名：Grassroots Democracy in China and the Development of Rural Welfare Provision作者：張佑宗(Yu-Tzung Chang);吳振嘉(Chen-Chia Wu)關鍵字：基層選舉;功能論;社會權利理論;非正式制度;中國農村;village election;functionalism;social rights theory;informal institution;rural China期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：社會保障是一種公共財（public goods）的提供，本文分析中國大陸農村提供這項公共財背後的政治邏輯。當人民公社在八○年代初期解體後，鄉鎮單位就不再擔任積極的角色，村幹部必須各顯神通解決各自的難題，其中就包括提供社會保障的制度。本文主要的研究假設源自社會權利理論（citizenship and social right theory）中民主促進論（democracy promotion）的看法。隨著中國大陸基層選舉的落實，有效提升人民基本的公民權利意識，引發村民開始追求社會保障制度的落實。因此，基層選舉持續的推動，將成為落實社會保障制度主要的機制之一。透過2007至2008年「亞洲民主動態調查」（Asian Barometer Surveys）計畫，在中國大陸356個農村所蒐集的總體資料，統計結果完全符合上述的假設，亦即基層選舉實施比較成功的農村，在農村社會保障供給的完整性也比較好。即使控制其他重要因素，例如現代化程度的指標，以及與非正式制度有關的指標，基層選舉的解釋力仍是最顯著的因素。英文摘要：Social welfare is concerned with the provision of a public good. This paper is concerned with the political logic behind the provision of this public good. It uses empirical data to evaluate the functionalist view in modernization theory, the democracy promotion view in citizenship and social rights theory, and finally the more recent non-institutionalist social capital view. Each of these three theories is concerned with revealing the motivation behind the provision of social welfare. This paper uses data gathered by the 2007-2008 Asian Barometer Survey in 356 villages across China, and attempts to show that there is a positive relationship between grassroots democracy and the provision of social welfare. The exercise of rural democracy helps raise awareness of the rights of individuals, and therefore helps draw greater attention to redistribution through the mechanism of social welfare provision. The statistical results show that in villages that have had a more successful experience of grassroots democracy, the provision of social welfare has been more comprehensive. Adding the social capital variable increases the explanatory power of the whole model, but the influence of local elections remains strong, and continues to have more explanatory power than the social capital variable. Even when we control for the level of economic development, regional differences, and level of education, the influence of local democracy on rural welfare provision remains powerful.起始頁-結束頁：177-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201112.15(2).177-2325篇名：Environmental "Dam-age" and Social Vulnerability in Southwest China: A Case of Adaptive Authoritarianism?並列篇名：中國西南地區的環境破壞與社會脆弱性：調適型威權主義的案例？作者：李泳雯(Sabrina Habich)關鍵字：中國西南地區;水電開發;調適型威權主義;Southwest China;hydropower development;adaptive authoritarianism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：中國快速的經濟成長導致電力需求大增，也使得水力發電在中國能源部門的策略中占有一席之地。雲南省因其龐大的水力發電量而成為中國東南沿岸的重要電力供應者。然而，雲南不只擁有重要的礦產與水資源，許多貧窮的少數民族更以此為家。儘管水力發電的開發可能會改善雲南居民的社會經濟地位與生活條件，但所造成的環境破壞與大規模搬遷仍然嚴重影響了當地社區的生活。為了呈現雲南水電開發的動態過程，本文透過James Scott的架構檢視中國西南地區水電開發的演變。儘管中國水力發電的政治變化反映出威權體制的調適能力，但造成嚴重社會與環境影響的大型水壩建造計畫仍持續進行。過去，中央政治領導人主導這些發展計畫，現在則由地方政府與電力公司掌握決策權，顯示中國政府的決策過程為一種割裂的狀態。英文摘要：China's rapid economic growth has led to a dramatic increase in electricity demand. This is one of the reasons why hydropower is now playing a major role in China's energy sector strategy, turning Yunnan Province with its huge hydropower reserves into a crucial power supplier for the country's booming eastern and southern coastal regions. However, Yunnan does not only have important mineral and water resources. The province is also home to a high number of ethnic minorities mainly living in poverty. While hydropower development has the potential to improve Yunnan's low social-economic status and ameliorate the living conditions of the local population, the environmental damage and the large scale resettling processes that are caused by hydropower development projects severely impact the lives of local communities. In order to show how these dynamics play out in the process of hydropower development in Yunnan, this article examines the evolution of hydropower development in Southwest China through the lens of James Scott's framework for explaining tragic consequences of large-scale development schemes. While the changes that have been taking place in China's hydropower politics are evidence of the adaptive capacity of China's authoritarian regime, large dams with severe social and environmental implications are still being planned and constructed in China today. These development projects used to be driven by China's central political leaders, but nowadays, much of the decision-making power rests with local governments and hydropower companies, highlighting the fragmented state of China's policy-making.起始頁-結束頁：233-282資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201112.15(2).233-2826篇名：政黨競爭與台灣族群認同與國家認同間的聯結並列篇名：Party Competition and the Connection between the Taiwanese Ethnic Identity and National Identity作者：張傳賢(Alex C. H. Chang);黃紀(Chi Huang)關鍵字：族群認同;政黨認同;統獨議題;政治競爭;負面競選;ethnic identity;party identity;unification/independence alternatives;political competition;negative campaigning期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文重新探索族群認同、國家認同與政黨認同，並思考兩個主要的問題：一、何以自李登輝主政時期族群認同與國家認同開始有劇烈變化？二、何以多數民眾在族群上認同台灣人並於統獨上傾向維持現狀的情形下，政黨間在選舉競爭時卻產生激烈的衝突？<U+7232>回答上述問題，筆者同時從政治社會學理論與歷史的角度出發，認<U+7232>在政治人物以極大化個人政治利益<U+7232>目標的操作下，國家認同問題與族群問題並非如以往學者所假設的呈現高度相關，而是在政黨競爭下藉由政黨認同而形成的間接聯結。筆者進一步從政治競爭的角度出發，認<U+7232>由於政黨以勝選<U+7232>前提而調整意識型態並運用負面競選策略，使得社會上的族群與國家認同雖然一片和諧，但是在政治競爭層面上卻造成衝突。我們利用結構方程式模型結合調查研究資料驗證上述假設。分析結果發現在控制政黨認同下，國家認同與族群認同間因果關係並不顯著。進一步將三項認同的延續性納入考量後，我們發現選民統獨立場僅與其認同泛綠與否間具有因果關係，而族群立場僅與其認同泛藍與否間具有因果關係。英文摘要：In the process of Taiwan's democratization, scholars assert that ethnic identity, national identity, and party identity are closely linked with each other. In this paper, in addition to carefully examining the relationships among the three identities from the historical, political and sociological perspectives, we provide our hypotheses after investigating the political competition among political parties. We assert that to maximize their political benefit, political actors manipulate the definition and the content of the ethnic identity. Therefore, the ethnic identity has different meanings in different eras. Based on this assertion, we hypothesize that the relationship between the national identity and the ethnic identity is not primordially bound together, but is linked via the political competitions among parties and their engaging in negative campaigning. In order to provide empirical support for out theoretical hypotheses, we incorporate structural equation modeling with survey data. The analytical result shows that controlling for the influence of party identity, there is no significant causality between national identity and ethnic identity. In addition, after controlling for the continuity of the three identities, the pan-blue identity only causally connects with ethnic identity and the pan-green identity only connects with national identity.起始頁-結束頁：3-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201106.15(1).3-717篇名：地方政府如何回應民意？以2006-2007年<U+7232>例並列篇名：Evaluating the Responsiveness of Local Governments in Taiwan: A Case Study of Policies and Public Opinion between 2006 and 2007作者：蔡佳泓(Chia-Hung Tsai);俞振華(Eric Chen-Hua Yu)關鍵字：回應;民意;政策;預算;responsiveness;public opinion;policy;budget期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：民主的理念之一是政府應該不斷回應公民的偏好。過去台灣學界重視民主化、統獨、國家認同等議題，以及衍生的兩岸關係等議題，僅有少數研究注意到政府與民意之間的互動。本文分析台灣23個縣市政府的三個政策制定與民眾偏好之間的關係，以2006及2007年的預算資料以及民意調查資料<U+7232>例進行分析，探索地方政府回應民眾偏好的方式與程度。另外，本研究以兩個縣市政府官員的訪問來佐證量化資料分析。這個初探性研究顯示，民意對於地方環境保護政策具有影響，而總統選舉結果則對地方交通建設支出具有影響。除了透視地方政府回應民意的模式，本文的分析途徑提供一個混合質化與量化研究方法的例子。英文摘要：Responsiveness is one of the ideal propositions of democracy. Regarding Taiwan's political studies, scholars have long concentrated on democratization, the unification-independence issue, national identity, and cross-Strait relations. Only a few have paid attention to the relationship between public opinion and policy output. This article evaluates the responsiveness of Taiwan's local governments by examining the relationship between public opinion and policy output across three policy domains between 2006 and 2007. In addition, to analyze opinion survey data and local governments' expense records, this research interviews officials of two local governments and councilors to support the empirical findings drawn from the quantitative analysis. Indeed, public opinion has a great impact on determining a local government's expenditure on environmental policy, and the presidential election result has an effect on the expenditure on transportation policy. This research not only provides empirical evidence of responsiveness, but it also provides an example of a mixed research method.起始頁-結束頁：73-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201106.15(1).73-1368篇名：社區培力與資源保育：我國社區林業政策評析並列篇名：Community Empowerment and Resource Conservation: Reviewing the Community Forestry Policy in Taiwan作者：盧道杰(Dau-Jye Lu);闕河嘉(Ho-Chia Chueh);黃書娟(Su-Jenung Huang);林鴻忠(Hong-Chung Lin);汪中仁(Chung-Ren Wang)關鍵字：社區培力;社區參與;去集中化;典範轉移;體制排置;community empowerment;community participation;decentralization;paradigm shift;institutional arrangements期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究透過文獻回顧、內容分析、參與觀察與質性訪談，分析台灣社區林業的運作機制與初步的結果，探究其計畫本質，並討論其挑戰與機會。台灣自2002年開始執行社區林業計畫，一方面追隨國際趨勢，同時因應1990年代以來國內民主深根的現實，一方面則<U+7232>改善與在地社區，特別是原住民族部落的關係。台灣的社區林業計畫採三階段設計的計畫發展，以逐步與在地社區建立資源協同管理的夥伴關係。截至2008年底，林務局補助了超過千件的第一階段社區林業計畫與九件第二階段計畫。結果顯示，自2005年下半年即由各林管處負責的第一階段計畫推行順利，林務局自己掌控的第二階段計畫卻有一半以上停滯或中斷。整體而言，台灣林務單位透過社區林業，主動走入社區，提供經費與技術跟社區互動，提升了林務單位在社區基層的形象，但對森林經營管理與保育的實質貢獻卻十分有限。分析其推行機制與計畫內容，社區林業可說是企圖以在地生態旅遊發展來促進與在地社區連結的政府計畫。以國際社區林業及參與式發展的經驗<U+7232>本，本研究發現台灣現行社區林業的幾個問題：缺乏清楚的政策與合適的體制安排，以及在地培力和參與不足。林務單位仍奉<U+7232>圭臬的中央集權的森林科學管理典範，可能是社區林業計畫的關鍵挑戰之一。本研究建議台灣的社區林業計畫應釐清在地社區參與的空間，進一步簡化與去中心相關的行政過程，多元化體制排置，並與日常業務做更多的連結。英文摘要：This study explores the nature of community forestry and provides a discussion of its development in Taiwan that was initiated in 2002 with a view to including a cooperative approach to forest resources management with local communities. By the end of 2008, the Forestry Bureau had sponsored more than 1,000 community forestry projects, which promoted the public image of the Bureau. However, it is argued that their contributions to forest management and conservation works are rather limited, due to the lack of clear policies, proper institutional arrangements, local empowerment and participation. It is also argued that the rigidly centralized forest management approach is the constraint of the program. This study suggests that to effect better cooperative forest resources management, the program has to consider more local community participation, to deregulate and simplify bureaucratic processes, to diversify institutional arrangements, and to be embedded in the Bureau's routine business.起始頁-結束頁：137-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201106.15(1).137-2049篇名：《尹文子》中的政治思想淺析－從「名定分明」談起並列篇名：Analysis of the Political Thought of Yin Wen Zi作者：林俊宏(Chun-Hung Lin)關鍵字：尹文;名實;名形;名定分明;黃老;思想匯集;Yin-Wen;name and reality;name and figure;concretization of boundaries;Huang-Lao;convergence of thoughts期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：今本《尹文子》的內容涉及了名、法、道、儒各個學術集團的思想，歷來已有不少討論，包括對於版本、年代、學術思想歸屬等等。本文主要從「名定分明」一詞入手，討論《尹文子》如何發展其「名形－名實－名分－名定分明」的思考。同時，本文以「思想匯集」作<U+7232>面對這個文本的基本思考，由此簡單地討論《尹文子》關於政治角色的分界職能與政治統治的基本思想。《尹文子》在名學的出發點上展開了知識與治理的對話，同時，也適度地反映了戰國時代思想與思想之間的融合。英文摘要：This article deals with the political thought of Yin Wen Zi. We leave open the question of the academic school to which this text belongs as well as the question of when this text had been written down.We find the core thesis of Yin Wen Zi is to make clear boundaries in all dimensions of public affairs. We also realize that the understanding above dwells on the epistemological concern of Yin Wen Zi. Taoism, accompanied by Confucianism and Legalism, has been taken as the basic foundation of this text. Yin Wen Zi argued that adequate dialogue and correct interaction between the name (Ming 名) and reality (Shi 實) formed good governance. By emphasizing the fusion of Taoist philosophy with legal philosophy, Yin Wen Zi constructed a natural political ruling system within the ruling system of the monarchy for emperors that were searching for a good (or even ideal) political order.起始頁-結束頁：205-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201106.15(1).205-24510篇名：Canadian Oil Policy and Strategic Petroleum Reserves: A Hawk and Dove Approach並列篇名：加拿大的石油政策與戰略石油儲備：一個鷹鴿賽局的途徑作者：韓德夫(David G. R. Hann)關鍵字：加拿大;戰略石油儲備;油砂;鷹鴿賽局;Canada;strategic petroleum reserves;oil sands;hawk-dove games期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討有關戰略石油儲備(SPR)的議題，並就加拿大決定放棄戰略石油儲備的案件做具體深入的討論，加拿大此一決定不僅違背了國際能源機構(IEA)成員國的規範，對於其他淨出口國際能源署成員國的選擇更是造成嚴重衝擊。本文第一部分將概述，<U+7232>什麼加拿大就戰略石油儲備一事作反其道的選擇。然後在第二部分，將從一個理性的選擇／博弈論的理論觀點，作精闢的分析探討。本節也將近一步討論理論框架和證據之間的相互作用。本文的證據，主要是由進行的各種訪談整理的結果。最後一節將總結，包括限制和建議，供進一步的研究實際影響和政策建議作參考。英文摘要：The following paper examines the case of strategic petroleum reserves (SPR) and, more specifically, the case of Canada's decision to forego an SPR, which goes against the norm of International Energy Agency (IEA) members, but more specifically goes against the choices of the other net-export IEA countries. The first section of this paper will outline the puzzle as to why Canada is going against the grain in regards to an SPR, and then the second section will take a look at this puzzle from a rational choice/game theory theoretical perspective. This section will also discuss the findings and interaction between the theoretical framework and the evidence. The evidence for this paper was mainly conducted through various interviews. The final section will summarize the results, including limits and suggestions for further research along with practical implications and policy recommendations.起始頁-結束頁：247-271資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201106.15(1).247-27101篇名：民主生活與公共利益：一個預備性的考察並列篇名：Democratic Life and Public Interest: A Preliminary Inquiry作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：公共利益;個人利益;民主;public interest;individual interest; democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：53期出版年：2011中文摘要：即使個人利益是不容否認的社會動力，但一個健全的社會能否僅僅只仰賴個人利益的驅動，仍不無疑問。事實上，在群體生活中，是否有未必能全然等同於每一個人的個人利益的公共利益存在，乃是當代政治理論所面臨的基本問題之一。此一基本問題的釐清也涉及了當代民主社會究竟是要繼續停留在熊彼得式的民主圖像，還是要進一步開展其內在的可能性。現今的世界無疑已是一個經濟理性和私利不斷施展更強大的形塑作用的時代，但此一形塑作用亦不無令人憂心之處。因此，對於公共利益的理論考察，可謂是針對此種形塑作用的負面後果的一種積極式應對。本文將針對何謂公共利益、公共利益與個人利益的可能關係、公共利益之彰顯、公共利益對於現代民主體制的重要性等主題進行嘗試性的探究。本文試圖指出，公共利益是檢視一個民主社會的集體性格和團體面貌的重要判準，缺乏對於公共利益的關注的社會，往往會是個人利益交相征伐的社會，在最終亦會是弱勢者的個人利益經常被漠視的社會。英文摘要：Whether there exists public interest that is not wholly reducible to private or individual interests is one of the pivotal problems that modern political theory has to face. Though the modern scenario structured by private interests and economic reason has greatly marginalized discourses of public interest, the appeal of public interest still has undeniable importance both in theory and in practice. This essay tackles the relations between public and individual interests and argues that a democratic society without certain consideration of public interest is doomed to disappointment. Furthermore, the public interest a society embraces signifies its very collective character and testifies its peculiar way of life.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201112.00012篇名：為什麼初任公務人員職位配置採用「分發」制度？一個歷史回顧分析並列篇名：Why is the Job Position of the Newly Appointed Civil Servant Centrally Assigned? A Historical Perspective Analysis作者：蘇偉業(Bennis Wai-Yip So);黎世輝(Shi-Hui Li)關鍵字：分發;遴用;考銓二分;政治途徑;管理途徑;job placement by central assignment;selection by public manager;examination-appointment dichotomy;political approach;managerial approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：53期出版年：2011中文摘要：在我國百年歷史中，對初任公務人員大多採用「分發」方式進行實際工作職位配置（placement），世界其他國家政府的人事進用罕有如我國般採用如此大規模的「分發制度」，其亦成為我國初任公務人員進用管理其中一個重要環節。「分發」是相對於「遴用」制度，代表用人機關並沒有參與人才進用之過程，特別是最後之進用人選決定。這是有違一般人力資源管理之做法，也否定了用人機關管理者的人事權。但為何我國對此制度如此堅持？本文嘗試以歷史角度出發，從中國古代科舉考銓二分制度解釋自古以來官員配置制度之承襲根源。而民國初建時必要之「國家滲透」（state penetration）工程及現實所面對之龐大阻力，則強化人事管理上透過分發達至政治控制。國民政府遷台後，大陸時期的相關論述，特別對用人機關的不信任，一直延續。雖然政府逐漸注意到用人機關的需求立場，但人民投考及任公職之權益保障及公平分配要求更受到重視。在權衡各種利益矛盾及在多次「試錯」（trial-and-error）學習後，「分發」制度成為多種因素制約下的剩餘選擇。本文利用經修飾過的 David H. Rosenbloom 提出的政治途徑（political approach）及管理途徑（managerial approach）來分析以上的人事政策取向，並指出政治途徑（political approach）思維一直佔據著支配性的地位，掩蓋管理途徑（managerial approach）。本文利用文獻分析作為研究方法，當中蒐集了大量民國建立以來的各類原始文獻，調理出本議題的歷史脈絡，並就官方及民間輿論進行論述分析（discourse analysis），以詮釋制度背後及時人之價值取向及認知。英文摘要：During the 100-year history of the Republic of China (ROC), the job position for the newly-appointed civil servants has been mostly centrally assigned by the Examination Yuan. The government personnel systems around the world are seldom engaged in such a large scale of centralized job placement, but that is one of the most significant staffing procedures in Taiwan. This practice excludes those government agencies that appoint the new staff from the selection of freshmen, and works against the common practice of human resource management. It also deprives of a significant personnel authority of public managers. Why has the government in Taiwan been insisting on this practice? This paper tries to trace the historical root of the current job placement system back to the civil service examination in ancient China. In the early years of the ROC, the need for state penetration justified the central assignment in order to realize the political control. Those policy discourses against the personnel authority of public managers continued, which developed in the Mainland China, continued during the era of the ROC on Taiwan. Even though the government has gradually recognized legitimacy of the authority but it is overruled by the constitutional rights for citizens to take a civil service examination and public office in a fair manner. Under the trade-offs among different interests and trials-and-errors, the placement by central assignment seems to become a sole alternative.This paper adopts the political and the managerial approaches, modified from the theme of David H. Rosenbloom, to examine the personnel policies concerned in Taiwan. The author argues that the political approach has been taking a prevailing status, overruling the managerial approach. The research mainly relies on documentary analysis, in which huge primary sources of documents since the founding of the ROC have been utilized for building the historical path of the issue. An analysis for official and private discourses is taken to interpret the value judgment behind the institution and the then people.起始頁-結束頁：25-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201112.00023篇名：社會網絡影響公私協力運作成效之研究：以台灣中醫與牙醫健康保險總額支付委員會為例並列篇名：A Study on the Impact of SocialNetworks on Operational Performance of Public- Private Partnership: Evidence from the Chinese Medical and Dental Global Budget PaymentCommittees in Taiwan作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang)關鍵字：公私協力;社會網絡;健保總額支付委員會;社會鑲嵌性;集體決策;public private partnership (PPP); social network;Global Budget Payment Committee;social embeddedness;collective decision-making期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：53期出版年：2011中文摘要：公私協力的運作機制反映了集體行動的特質，然對於運作良窳的評估，行動者間關係所造成的影響往往在分析中被忽視。健保總額支付委員會是站在執行總額預算制度第一線的公私協力單位，也是執行總額政策環節中，健保局、醫事團體與其他相關代表最重要的溝通平台，對於其運作效能的評估，自然有其管理上的重要意涵。本文利用陳敦源（2008）健保局委託研究案的資料，對於牙醫與中醫總額支付委員會協力機制運作良窳觀感的影響因素進行分析。在該報告中，陳敦源（2008）已經透過四個總額支委會的資料，驗證了制度環境的條件如果愈完善，對於支付委員會此一協力機制運作績效的觀感也會愈正面。作者依據本文研究目的，先透過因素分析進行變數上合理的調整，繼之控制上述制度變項，並加入社會網絡變項及決策行為、決策影響力等變項進行分析，再一次檢視是否會改變原有的預測，並進一步檢視社會網絡的變項，是否會影響委員對於支付委員會運作良窳的觀感。分析結果顯示，社會網絡的變項對公私協力機制的成效均產生顯著的影響，其反映透過對委員彼此間關係的管理，會有助於改善中醫與牙醫總額支付委員會的運作成效。英文摘要：Public private partnership (PPP) is a collective action rather than an individual option. In literature, PPP can be symbolised as a collaborative network which is formed between the public bodies and private sectors, based on a shared commitment to achieve a desired public policy outcome. For understanding the operational performance of PPP it is important to understand as to how people work together and the factors to influence the collective action. Studies demonstrate that decisions are not made in isolation but they are the products of influence and confluence of social correlates. Social network studies of decision making focus the research analysis on the dynamic social interactions between actors embedded in collective action scenarios. This study attempts to apply social network analysis to study the impact factors associated with the operation performance of the Chinese Medicine and Dental Global Budget Payment Committees. In regard to research methods, social network questionnaire survey has been used to collect data. In conclusion, despite the factors of institutional environment, the analysis shows that social networks of these committee members are matter for the operational performance of the committees.起始頁-結束頁：65-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201112.00034篇名：臺北市房屋稅公平性之研究─兼論豪宅稅之合理性並列篇名：Examine House Tax Equity andExplore the Rationale for Mansion Tax in Taipei City作者：陳德翰(Te-Han Chen);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：財產稅;房屋稅;水平公平;垂直公平;累退性;累進性;豪宅稅;property tax;house tax;horizontal equity;vertical equity;regressivity; progress-sivity;mansion tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：53期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究實證分析臺北市 2007至2009年不動產交易資料，結果顯示臺北市房屋稅之估價比率大多集中在10％至16％之間，估價比率之中位數為14.79％，從市郊往開發越早的市中心，水平不公平就越嚴重；垂直不公平部分，低價位房屋具有累退性的問題，中高價位房屋則呈現累進性的現象，此外，低價位房屋的估價比率差異程度較大。故房屋稅在進行房屋現值評定時，對於低價位房屋應調降其評估價值，並設法減輕低價位房屋的估價比率差異程度；中高價位房屋現值的評定雖皆具累進性，但許多高價位房屋的估價比率是低於中低價位房屋之估價比率，豪宅稅的課徵似能提高高價位房屋之估價比率，並使房屋稅更加公平，但其效果仍有待觀察。英文摘要：This study investigates home tax equity in the Taipei City. By analyzing the real estate transaction data from 2007 to 2009, the results show that the median assessment ratio is 14.79% and most of the assessment ratios are between 10% and 16%. The horizontal equity does not hold in Taipei and it gets worse in the downtown. The results also show that the house tax for low-cost houses is regressive. In addition, the variation in the assessment ratios of low-cost houses is the largest. Therefore, the local government should reduce the assessment value and its variation for low-cost houses. Because there are many high-cost houses with lower assessment ratios, the mansion tax may make the house tax more equity by increasing the assessment ratios of high-cost houses. But its effect needs more studies.起始頁-結束頁：115-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201112.00045篇名：我國政府捐助財團法人績效考核制度之建構：層級分析法應用並列篇名：Building the System of Performance Assessment for Government Funded Nonprofit Organizations in Taiwan: The Application of Analytic Hierarchy Process作者：鄭惠文(Huey-Wen Cheng);張四明(Su-Ming Chang);陳于淇(Yu-Chi Chen)關鍵字：政府捐助財團法人;績效考核;層級分析法;法人治理;平衡計分卡;Government Funded Nonprofit Organizations GFNPOs;performance assessment;Analytic Hierarchy Process AHP;corporate governance;Balanced Scorecard BSC期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：政府捐助財團法人係政府<U+7232>達成特定政策或行政目的，透過組織設置條例或行政命令等方式而捐助成立。然而，近年來我國政府捐助財團法人卻發生諸多問題，例如董事席次的爭議、酬庸退休官員擔任董事，以及財產不當處理或運用等現象，仍無法有效處理與防制等，引起各界的關注。政府捐助財團法人<U+7232>民法規範之私法人，惟本身兼具「公」與「私」的雙重性格，難免顯現與民主責任政治的衝突本質，實有賴績效考核制度之設置，強化與多元利益關係人的層級課責，以滿足民眾與國會期望。據此，<U+7232>兼顧政府捐助財團法人短期和長期發展，以及財務與非財務之平衡關係，本文試從平衡計分卡與法人治理相關文獻，建構政府捐助財團法人績效構面與考核項目，藉由層級分析法之實證調查來解析其權重的先後順序，提出政府捐助財團法人績效考核制度設計之建議，俾利監督機關未來建立監督管理的課責機制。研究發現，在N1或N2樣本中，依績效構面權重值的排序結果，法人治理的重要性最高，依序<U+7232>業務活動、財務管理和內部管理。然而，若將N1樣本區分成學術界與實務界兩類，學術界認<U+7232>法人治理構面居首，接著<U+7232>業務活動、財務管理和內部管理；另外，實務界則呈現不同偏好，順次<U+7232>業務活動、內部管理、財務管理及法人治理。英文摘要：Government Funded Nonprofit Organizations (GFNPOs) are typically established by some government agencies to serve the citizenry as a whole through targeting the needs of particular public policies or fulfilling specific administrative functions. GFNPOs represent one type of hybrid organizations with both public and private sector characteristics. However, these organizations, mostly governed by the private law, have been criticized for the lack of accountability to their constituencies in recent years due to the disputes over those issues of board seats, personnel patronage, property disposition, and so forth.To strengthen public accountability for GFNPOs, this study first reviews the literatures of corporate governance as well as balanced scorecard, and then seeks to build the system of performance assessment by applying the approach of Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) for resolving multi-criteria decisions such as developing performance metrics and assigning weights to the most important factors used in the evaluation process.After the investigation, the research result reveals that in accordance with the weights of four perspectives, the priority order is Corporate Governance first, Service Delivery second, Financial Management third, and Internal Administration last no matter what the samples are in N1 or N2^10. However, if dividing N1 samples into two categories of Academic Scholars and Practical Experts, the priority order of Academic Scholars is Corporate Governance first, Service Delivery second, Financial Management third, and Internal Administration last; on the other side, the priority order of Practical Experts is Service Delivery first, Internal Administration second, Financial Management third, and Corporate Governance last.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201106.00016篇名：從形式參與邁向實質參與的公共治理：哲學與理論的分析並列篇名：From Ostensible Citizen Participation Toward Authentic Participatory Public Governance: Philosophy and Theory作者：許立一(Li-Yi Hsu)關鍵字：公民意識;社群;實質參與;公共對話;公共治理;citizenship;community;authentic participation;public dialogue;public governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：20世紀初迄今，自由社會中政治運作模式大致<U+7232>多元論和公共選擇論所描述的型態，它們所標榜的價值之一就是「參與」。但就本文的分析，多元論和公共選擇論的民主政治建築在自利取向的利益共謀基礎上，它們並不能夠促成實質參與，也因而難以實現社會公正。此種自利取向的民主政治，幾與傳統西方政治思想所嚮往的「求善的治理（善治）」背道而馳，也經常導致壟斷性的政治操作，不僅分配的權力往往掌握在少數政治精英之手，更重要的是分配的結果可能嚴重違背人民的期望。因此在20世紀末葉，主張直接民主或實質參與的呼聲日隆，自利取向的民主政治正朝以實質參與<U+7232>基礎的公民治理轉型。本文將以公民意識與社群觀念<U+7232>哲學基礎，並以真誠對話<U+7232>理論基礎，提出所謂實質參與的公共治理。本文的鋪陳架構如後：第一、從哲學以及理論與實踐層面分析自利取向的民主政治；第二、再從哲學以及理論與實踐層面省思自利取向的民主政治之限制；第三、闡述實質參與的公共治理之哲學基礎；第四、提出實質參與的公共治理之理論基礎與實踐原則；第五、評價實質參與的公共治理之可行性及其對民主政治的貢獻。最後，綜合以上分析提出總結。英文摘要：Since the early 20th century, the dominant theories and practices in western politics tend to be about pluralism and public choice; among them the idea of ”participation” is most important value. However, pluralism and public choice are based on self-interested individualism which may not really accelerate the authentic participation and achieve social equity. This self-interested democracy on the contrary goes against ”good governance”, an idea embedded in western democracy and always leads to monolithic politics of manipulation-a monopolized distribution by political elites and the result of distribution contravenes the public expectations. As a result the advocacy of direct democracy which focuses on authentic participation in governing process has grabbed people's attentions, and citizens' direct participation in policy making and even in implementation has became a trend in which every citizen's authentic participation in policy process was not mere ”a story” or ”an idea”. The subject matter of this article, therefore, aims to argue that citizens' direct participation in governing process must to be built on discourses that take cautious approaches to self-interested individualism and theories of community, discourses that have derived from the orthodoxy of western political thought from ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle's politics to the rise of modern political science.起始頁-結束頁：39-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201106.00027篇名：社區社會資本的促成、阻礙因素及其發展策略：社區領導者觀點之分析並列篇名：Developmental Strategies for Community Social Capital-Community Leaders' Perspectives作者：黃源協(Yuan-Shie Hwang);莊俐昕(Li-Hsin Chuang);劉素珍(Su-Jen Liu)關鍵字：社區社會資本;橋接型社會資本;連結型社會資本;社區能力;community social capital;bridging social capital;linking social capital community capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討社區社會資本的促成、阻礙因素及其發展策略，研究者以全國社區在社會資本與社區發展的表現<U+7232>考量，隨機抽取34個社區發展協會<U+7232>研究對象，針對該社區的領袖（理事長、理監事或總幹事）進行個別深度訪談。研究結果顯示，社區中存在著許多促成或阻礙社會資本的因素，社區中也有各種促進其社會資本的策略。依據研究發現，本研究提出八項促進社區社會資本之相關的討論與建議，包括：(1)規劃重建社區社會資本的策略與議程；(2)發掘與培育有開展社區社會資本之能力的領導者；(3)投資與經營有利於橋接型社會資本的「審議式民主」；(4)營造有助於橋接型社會資本的社區參與和行動的機會；(5)發展有助於橋接型社會資本的個人和社區的互惠行動；(6)學習和認識多元文化以降低橋接型社會資本的發展障礙；(7)創造與經營社區的品牌／特色以開拓連結型社會資本；(8)建立公私部門與社區之間的伙伴關係以強化連結型社會資本。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the promoting and impeding factors and developmental strategies for community social capital. Considering the performance of community social capital and community development, 34 Registered Community Development Associations (RCDAs) were sampled, and their leaders (chairmen, board members or general mangers) were interviewed in depth. The research shows that there are many factors promoting and impeding community social capital in the communities, and various strategies for developing community social capital as well. According to the findings, this research raises 8 issues related to promoting community social capital for discussions, and suggestions are proposed including: (1) planning strategies and agendas of rebuilding community social capital; (2) discovering and cultivating leaders with the ability to develop community social capital; (3) investing and managing 'deliberative democracy' beneficial to bridging social capital; (4) creating the opportunities of community participation and action beneficial to bridging social capital; (5) developing reciprocal action of individual and community beneficial to bridging social capital; (6) learning and recognizing multi-culture in order to decreasing the obstacle of developing bridging social capital; (7) creating and managing brands/specialties of communities in order to progressing linking social capital, and (8) forming partnership among public-private sector and community in order to strengthening linking social capital.起始頁-結束頁：87-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201106.00038篇名：我國郵政事業績效評量之探討並列篇名：Performance Measurement of Postal Services in Taiwan作者：林玉惠(Yu-Hui Lin);徐世勳(Shih-Shun Hsu);張靜貞(Ching-Cheng Chang);賴朝煌(Chao-Huang Lai);黃敏玲(Min-Lin Huang)關鍵字：郵政;績效;多部門資料包絡分析;共用投入;共同產出;準固定投入;post office;efficiency;multi-activity DEA;shared inputs;shared outputs;quasi-fixed inputs期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：郵政總局改制成國營公司後，經營環境日趨嚴峻，本研究欲藉由實證分析來探討郵局的運作效率及環境因素對郵局營運績效的影響，同時參酌其他國家郵政事業的績效和生產力設算方式及投入工時管理模式，期能對我國郵政事業績效評量的管理改革方向，提供有用參考。有鑑於郵局的郵務和儲匯部門各有特定投入和特定產出，但又存在共用投入和共同產出，因此，本文選用Tsai and Mar Molinero(2002)的多部門DEA作<U+7232>基本模型，並結合Banker and Morey(1986a)準固定投入和Fare et al.(1994)graph導向的概念，建構一個適合評量郵局績效的完整多部門績效評估模型。研究顯示：儲匯和郵務部門的效率沒有明顯相關；儲匯效率佳的郵局，郵務效率可能仍有進步空間；反之亦然。週六營業、超商密度高、或面積廣大而平均服務人口少的經營環境，對於郵務績效有負面影響；此外，週六營業、郵局局等高而業務繁雜、郵局設立密度過高、或位於超商密度和金融同業密度高的地區，對於儲匯部門的績效則顯著不利。因此，對於不同經營環境的郵局，績效評量公式若能有所區隔調整、或以其他指標來輔助衡量，將更能提升績效評量的適切性。彙整國外郵政績效評量的經驗後可知，包括評量項目和權重設定、年度營收目標的設定、勞動生產力改善度的考評標準、城鄉之間投入工時的設算採計等方面，皆可予以差異化；而工作量的設算過程也可加入地理環境和里程的考量。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to explores the influences of environmental factors on the performance of postal services in Taiwan. This paper modifies the multi-activity DEA proposed by Tsai and Mar Molinero (2002) to evaluate the efficiency of post offices when allocation of shared inputs and shared outputs between the mail and banking counters is unclear. In particular, the shared quasi-fixed input is also employed in our study to provide a complete performance measure. The overall efficiency of post offices can then be decomposed into efficiency of mail department and banking department. It is found that there are no close ties between the efficiencies of the two departments. In addition, this study also employs Tobit regression to analyze the impacts of organizational size, organizational location, and organizational characteristics on postal productivity and revenues. The analysis results reveal that postal revenues and performance have been under certain impacts due to the differences of organizational size, organizational location, and other environmental factors. Large-scale post offices perform worse at produce efficiency; moreover, manpower management for postal offices operating on Saturday is necessary for enhancing working efficiency. Besides, since remote postal offices confront a more violent and competitive environment, performance indicators and weight should vary considerably to reflect the different operating environments of postal offices.起始頁-結束頁：131-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201106.000401篇名：哪一種半總統制？－概念界定爭議的釐清並列篇名：Which Kind of Semi-Presidentialism Is It?-The Clarification of the Concept ofSemi-Presidentialism作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su)關鍵字：憲政體制;半總統制;雙首長制;混合制;constitutional system;semi-presidentialism;dual-executivesystem;mixed system期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文試圖釐清學術界對於「半總統制」此一概念在理解和認知上的分歧與爭議。本文探討的議題看似政治學中最基本的概念界定問題，但此問題卻是探討半總統制相關議題之前必須先釐清的前提。本文釐清了「半總統制」與其他類似概念—「混合制」、「雙首長制」、「行政權雙軌制」的差異，討論了「半總統制」此一概念的缺失，提出了「半總統制」的具體判斷標準，並檢視了目前學界對「半總統制」次類型的劃分方式。本文認為，在對「半總統制」進行次類型劃分時，應該以「半總統制」的基本運作原則作為劃分次類型的標準，且憲政規範與憲政實踐是兩個不應混淆的層面，而「半總統制」既然是一種制度，也是一種規範，因此有必要從憲政規範而非憲政實踐的角度來思考「半總統制」的次類型劃分問題。在此基礎上，本文將「半總統制」區分為「一元型半總統制」與「二元型半總統制」。本文認為此種界定方式，既能清楚掌握「半總統制」的基本原則，也能以最簡單扼要的劃分標準來探討最多的個案。總之，本文對於「半總統制」概念的探討，希望可以為學界各種更為深入細緻的半總統制研究提供一個最起始的基礎。英文摘要：This paper tries to elaborate the concept of semi-presidentialism, which is the most essential issue in the study of semi-presidentialism. It clarifies the differences between the concept of semi-presidentialism and other similar ones, looks into the flaws of semi-presidentialism, proposes the judging criterion of semi-presidentialism, and reviews the subtyping method for semi-presidentialism currently applied by scholars. It is of the opinion that the basic principles of semi-presidentialism should be applied as the criterion for subtyping semi-presidentialism, and that constitutional norm and constitutional practice are two different domains which should be discriminated. Since semi-presidentialism is not only a constitutional system but also a political institution and norm, it is necessary to subtype semi-presidentialism from the perspective of constitutional norm rather than that of constitutional practice. On this basis, semi-presidentialism is subtyped into ”semi-presidentialism with single accountability” and ”semi-presidentialism with dual accountability”. This subtyping method grasps the basic principles of semi-presidentialism, and also can be applied to most empirical cases for its most concise subtyping criterion. In sum, only when the concept of semi-presidentialism is clarified can we further determine whether a country is adopting semi-presidentialism and which kind of semi-presidentialism it is. By elaborating the concept of semi-presidentialism, this paper hopes to provide a primary basis for further and detailed researches on semi-presidentialism.起始頁-結束頁：1-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201112.00022篇名：左右共治的類型研究並列篇名：A Study on the Subtypes of Cohabitation in Semi-presidential System作者：張峻豪(Chun-Hao Chang)關鍵字：半總統制;左右共治;總統;總理;行政權;semi-presidentialism;cohabitation;president;primeminister;executive power期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文透過總統與總理在憲法上的權力，以及行政權內部互動關係，析論左右共治不同內涵。經由新興民主國家的案例檢視，本文企圖論證，論者所主張在府會不一致下「應」出現的「左右共治」運作類型，除了不是半總統制的「宿命」，亦因總統或總理「讓出」及「爭奪」行政權所存在的種種變數，使得這一類型的運作內涵變得更複雜難測。因此，在應然面與實然面之間，左右共治各種類型將有被指陳之必要，而透過不同的左右共治類型，半總統制研究將能經由行政權內部互動，更有效地解釋行政與立法關係穩定與否。英文摘要：This paper will discuss various forms of ”cohabitation” through the constitutional stipulations and intra-executive relationships between the president and the prime minister inherent in semi-presidentialism system. By examining the cases of newly democratic countries with semi-presidential systems, this paper seeks to demonstrate that many authors supposed ”cohabitation” that should exist is not guaranteed in this system, and the operational types are highly complex and unpredictable, due to the many variables inherent in the ”yielding” or ”competing for” executive power between the president and the prime minister. Thus, between the ”normative” and ”positive” aspects, it is necessary to point out various forms of ”cohabitation” in semi-presidential system and outline the details of the internal workings of the executive power based on the variables of goals and means of the president and the prime minister to explain executive-legislative relationship more effectively.起始頁-結束頁：73-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201112.00743篇名：俄羅斯的民主抉擇與統治菁英權力結構變化並列篇名：Russia's Democratic Choice and the Structural Changes of Power Elites作者：許菁芸(Jing-Yun Hsu);宋鎮照(Jenn-Jaw Soong)關鍵字：俄羅斯;民主;半總統制;菁英;中央再集權;Russia;democracy;semi-presidentialism;elite;recentralization期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：「梅普共治」中普金的強勢總理角色，無論在形象上或權力上似乎都超越了總統梅德維傑夫。要如何去解釋俄羅斯半總統制高度人治的現象，是個極為有趣的議題。憲政法規與政黨政治之制度性因素對於解釋俄羅斯高度人治現象是否具有一定的分析張力？抑或是非制度性因素，也就是普金所領導之統治菁英派系與權力傾軋更能對俄羅斯該特有現象提供不同層次的思考？因此，本文焦點是放在統治菁英權力層級的結構與缺陷，並探討其權力消長與變化，進而影響俄羅斯民主制度和政治體制的改變，分析普金政權之權力層級與權力層級的推手－俄羅斯資源型經濟，並由此導出為何普金會在2008年將總統職位交與梅德維傑夫，自己退居總理職位，卻能在未修憲的情況下，讓總理之權高於總統。最後，並試圖建構俄羅斯人民的民主抉擇模型來導出普金架構的統治菁英是否成功地以中央集權政策將權力集中於莫斯科中央，而俄羅斯民主抉擇的變項會對俄羅斯的半總統制與民主的未來會產成何種影響，皆是本文想探討的問題。英文摘要：In 2008, Russian President Vladimir Putin left the presidency in accordance with the constitution, which forbids more than two consecutive periods in office. He has now become prime minister, but neither the power nor the image he had seems to have gone beyond the President. While the nature of his relationship with the new president, Dmitry Medvedev, remains a question mark to Russians, the power elites and groups surrounding Putin play an important role in the process of power consolidation, since they try to ensure that their patron demonstrate a greater political profile. Therefore, this paper focuses on the ruling-elite power structure and its defects, fluctuation and changes of the elite structure, which thereby affects Russia's democratic development and the political system, trying to analyze the power hierarchy and its boost, resource-based economy. Finally, the authors try to construct a model of Russia's democratic choice to explain the policy of recentralization, which is conducted by the ruling elites of the Putin Regime, and to analyze the variables of the model which will affect semi-presidentialism and the future development of democracy in Russia.起始頁-結束頁：116-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201112.01174篇名：Lee Teng-hui's "Two-State" Theory: Perceptions and Policy Changee並列篇名：李登輝的兩國論：認知與政策轉變作者：林能山(Neng-Shan Ling)關鍵字：兩國論;認知研究;中程協議;政治心理學;"two-state" theory;perception approach;interim agreements期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主張前總統李登輝於1998年中，決定強化台灣主權論述的動機是解釋1999年兩國論此一政策改變的主要因素。將兩國論決策過程的分析分成兩部分︰（1）為什麼1998年李總統決定強化台灣主權論述？（2）為什麼兩國論最後選擇在1999年發動？此舉將提供較完整的解釋—為什麼台北政府放棄 “一中政策” 轉而主張兩岸是特殊的國與國關係？將李前總統的兩國論開始於1998年中的發現納入兩國論的分析，產生兩個不同於現有文獻的研究結果—（1）國內因素的排除以及（2）外部因素的確認。英文摘要：This paper argues that President Lee Teng-Hui's intention to enhance the legal status of Taiwan in mid-1998 is the major reason behind his launching of the ”two-state” theory in July 1999. By dividing the policymaking process of the ”two-state” theory into two parts - (a) the reasons for Lee's preparation of the policy change in 1998 and (b) his announcement of the policy change in 1999 - this article provides an insight into why the Lee administration moved away from its original China policy and instead promoted the ”two-state” theory. The application of Lee's motives for the policy change in mid-1998 to the research into the ”two-state” theory leads to the introduction of two new contributing factors to the literature dealing with this policy shift; first, the influence of domestic politics needs be downplayed, if not excluded, and, secondly, external factors, hitherto under-acknowledged or ignored, are identified.起始頁-結束頁：175-247資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201112.01765篇名：美國對台灣民主發展之影響：一個「霸權穩定論」演化的分析觀點並列篇名：U.S. Influence on Taiwan's Democratic Development: The Analytical Perspective of an Evolutionary Approach of Hegemonic Stability Theory作者：宋學文(Hseik-Wen Soong);陳亮智(Liang-Chih Evans Chen)關鍵字：台灣民主;台灣安全;霸權穩定論;霸權穩定論之演化;美國自由霸權;干預;Taiwan's democracy;Taiwan's security;hegemonic stability theory;evolution of hegemonic stability theory;American liberal hegemony;intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：攸關台灣政治發展的外部力量－美國，其對台灣民主轉型之影響為何？美國對台灣的民主發展是無條件支持？或視情況而定？由於二次大戰結束以來美國在國際事務之領導方式已由強調政治、軍事與經濟逐漸轉為除了政治、軍事與經濟外，亦著重民主、自由、平等之非物質因素以及多邊主義之精神，因此本文從「霸權穩定論」之演化的角度出發，強調「美國自由霸權」與傳統霸權穩定論之差異，並就美國在海外的人道與民主干預行為，提出一個可以解釋並分析美國對台灣民主發展之角色分析的研究途徑。我們認為美國對台灣民主發展的態度基本上是同情並且支持的。但在後冷戰時期，一方面由於中國國力的上升，另一方面台海穩定與亞太安全逐漸成為美國對台政策之最核心考量，而這種考量則同時包含了政治、軍事、經濟與民主、自由之精神。這正是學界近年來之所以強調「美國自由霸權」，而非僅從傳統的「霸權穩定論」去解釋美國對外干預的原因，而這也呼應本文所持霸權穩定論之演化的觀點。英文摘要：As we know, the United States is the most important outside factor in Taiwan's political development. What is the U.S. influence on the island's democratic transition? Does it promote democracy in Taiwan conditionally or unconditionally?Since the end of World War Ⅱ, Washington's leadership in international affairs has changed its focus from political, military, and economic matters to an emphasis on both material and nonmaterial factors, such as democracy, freedom, equity, and multilateral cooperation. Considering this transformation, this research paper examines the U.S. role in Taiwan's democratic development from the evolutionary perspective of hegemonic stability theory, followed by addressing traditional hegemonic stability theory, features of American liberal hegemony, and its humanitarian and democratic intervention abroad. Basically, we argue that the U.S. is sympathetic and supportive of Taiwan's democracy. During the post-Cold War period, however, because of China's rise, stability in the Taiwan Strait and security in the Asia-Pacific area has become the core consideration of America's Taiwan policy. The concern is based on both U.S. political, economic, and military interests and its support for liberal democracy. This development demonstrates why recently the scholarly study of international relations appears to probe U.S. foreign intervention from the perspective of ”American liberal hegemony” instead of the viewpoint of traditional hegemonic stability theory only, and it also echoes our evolutionary approach of hegemonic stability theory in this study.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201109.00016篇名：市場主導式vs.銀行主導式金融體制：其相對競爭優勢、不同資本主義與國家角色並列篇名：Market-based vs. Bank-based Financial Institutions: Their Competitive Advantages, Varieties of Capitalism, and the Role of the State作者：王輝煌(Hui-Huang Wang)關鍵字：市場主導式;銀行主導式;金融體制;風險;資訊經濟學;財務槓桿;不同資本主義;國家角色;競爭優勢;market-based financial institutions;bank-based financial institutions;risks;information economics;financial leverage;varieties of capitalism;the role of the state;competitive advantages期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：金融體制乃資本主義國家的重要基礎之一。不同資本主義國家往往會採行不同的金融體制，並搭配各種其他相關政策體制。本文的主要目的乃由微觀的政治經濟原理來探討金融體制的兩種基本型態（市場主導式vs.銀行主導式金融體制）到底有何基本差異，再進而檢視在這種差異之下，國家總體的政經結構如何安排、管理這種差異所導致的問題。本文認為不同金融體制背後意味著不同現代工業國家所各自採行不同的經濟冒險與風險管理方式，而市場主導式與銀行主導式金融體制各有其相對優點與缺點。然而，要回答不同金融體制如何形成、其行為、表現特質如何，則必須深入查考國家的角色、發展策略與整體的發展政策－亦即不同資本主義的角度－方能得出充分而完整的理解。同樣的，政府在考慮金融政策應如何制訂時，也應該建立在這樣整體理解的基礎上。英文摘要：Financial institutions are one of the most important bases of capitalist economies. Different capitalist countries tend to adopt different financial institutions, supported by a spectrum of other related policies. This paper aims at, first of all, exploring the micro-based rationale of the political economy of the two types of financial institutions, i.e. market-based and bank-based financial institutions. Then, the political and economic arrangements at the state level will also be examined. This paper proposes that underlying the varieties of financial institutions are different approaches to venture and how the tremendous number of risks involved in the development process of modern industrial economies are managed. This paper argues further that market-based financial institutions and bank-based financial institutions have their relative advantages respectively. However, to answer the question of how different financial institutions in different countries develop their structural, behavioral, and performance features, it is unavoidable that the roles of the state, their development strategies, and the overall development policies, i.e. basic features of the 'varieties of capitalism,' will have to be thoroughly investigated. Likewise, when formulating policies related to financial institutions, governments should also base their considerations on foundations with such an integral view.起始頁-結束頁：53-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201109.00537篇名：政治代表、治理效率與城市穩定：論中國大陸城市基層治理策略中的國家與社會關係並列篇名：Representative, Governance Efficiency, and Urban Stability: Local Governance Strategies in Urban China作者：陳奕伶(Yi-Ling Chen)關鍵字：中國大陸;居民委員會;居委會屬地化;社區自治;基層選舉;China;Residential Committee;cadre localization;community governance;direct election期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究從「委託－代理人理論」(principal-agent theory)分析中國大陸城市基層社區「國家與社會」互動。以此理論作為構築社區中各行為者行動取向的分析框架，並透過社區權力的互動，解釋影響治理制度轉變的微觀動力。綜觀當前中國大陸城市基層研究，對於探討直接選舉後社區治理影響的相關文獻仍有空缺，本文從選後的社區治理入手，以居民委員會為論述核心，探討直選的「屬地化」政策對選後社區治理的影響。由於屬地化強調社區的「在地經營」，有助於打破過去社區幹部由上級指派、偏向政府利益的行動策略。因此，社區選舉制度改革引發的政治效果，以及影響治理政策的社會力量，將對中國大陸的治理改革具有重要意義。英文摘要：This paper focuses on local governance's institutional effects in urban China and takes the principal-agent theory as the analysis framework for illustrating the interaction between state and society. Most research on this issue mainly stresses on the political reform of Residential Committees' [RC] direct elections and how to rationalize the state-society relationship in local governance in modern China, but do not study what local governance is like after the direct elections. Before promoting the policies of direct elections and cadre localization, RC cadres were assigned to manage local communities by the Street Office, that means RC cadres were the agents of the state and act according to orders of superiors. After the implementation of reform policies, citizens have rights to affect RC cadres. In theory, both state and citizens are the principals of RC cadres. The cadre localization policy narrows the gap between RC cadres and citizens, and not only changes the cadres' attitude toward citizens but also reduces the patron-client relationship with the Street Office. Otherwise, the institutional mechanism causes two unintended consequences between state and society which are ”interest divergent” and ”oversight gap.” This study shows that citizens in China yearn for more political rights, and the more politically representative the RCs are, the better governance efficiency will be.起始頁-結束頁：121-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201109.01218篇名：預防原則歐盟化之研究並列篇名：Europeanization of the Precautionary Principle作者：洪德欽(Der-Chin Horng)關鍵字：歐盟;歐盟化;預防原則;科學不確定性;歐盟運作條約TFEU;WTO;EU;Europeanization;the precautionary principle;scientific uncertainty;TFEU;WTO期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本篇論文乃預防原則歐盟化的研究，主要議題包括預防原則的概念、發展背景，在歐盟的相關規定、實務操作與適用；以及預防原則為何歐盟化、如何歐盟化、歐盟化又有那些意涵與影響？本文研究方法採取法律文義解釋法、歐盟法院與WTO案例分析法(case law study)、比較方法等方式，以了解預防原則在歐盟法律體系的發展路徑、法律意義以及政策影響；預防原則的性質以及為何具有強制力；預防原則如何從內國法、環境法原則發展為一項歐盟法律一般原則；適用範圍如何從環境擴大至健康、食品安全及消費者保障等領域；如何從原則規定發展為具體實務操作以及在會員國適用，歐盟執委會及歐盟法院在實踐方面又扮演那些角色；歐盟又如何在WTO及國際論壇積極主張預防原則，其間又涉及那些不同利益的競合關係。這些議題又如何影響到預防原則將來的發展，凡此種種皆值得重視，而有研究之必要。英文摘要：The theme of this paper is to review the Europeanization of the precautionary principle in the European Union (EU). Based on a method of legal interpretation, the following core issues are explored: the concept, background, formation and practice of the precautionary principle; the processes of Europeanization of the principle; the role of EU institutions in the Europeanization of this principle; and the significance and impact of the Europeanization of this principle.Developed and applied originally in the field of environmental regulation, the precautionary principle has been subsequently extended to other policy areas such as human health, food security, and consumer protection. The precaution has been featured as a general principle of EU law through the process of Europeanization. The precautionary principle has had a substantial impact on both EU policies and international laws.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201106.00019篇名：環境風險與科技決策：檢視中科四期環評爭議並列篇名：Environmental Risks and Policy Making: Examining the EIA Controversies of CTSP-IV作者：杜文苓(Wen-Ling Tu)關鍵字：環境爭議;公共決策;中科四期;風險評估;科技政治;環境影響評估;environmental controversy;public decision making;CTSP-IV;environmental impact assessment EIA;risk assessment;technological politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：伴隨科技發展的環境風險日趨複雜，使攸關風險課題的公共決策面臨極大挑戰。由於高科技產業製程日新月異且排放物質難以全盤掌握，使科學園區的設置和相關的環境影響評估，逐年遭受日漸強大的質疑聲浪與細緻的反對論述。高科技所引發的環境爭議，也揭示了風險評估與決策不僅是科學問題，更涉及環境治理的政治過程。本文以中科四期環評爭議為例，探討技術官僚在面臨社會大眾的疑慮時，如何進行相關風險溝通、科學資料詮釋與政策辯護？其回應背後透露了什麼科技政治的意涵？而此風險決策模式，又透露了什麼樣的環境治理特性？從檢視風險決策中的科技政治論述出發，透過新聞報導和檔案資料的分析、田野參與觀察，對照中科四期環評爭議過程中的輿論質疑和官方的回應舉措，檢視高科技光電產業污染爭議中，官方所呈現的風險管理態度以及隱藏的科技政治意涵，以進一步解析高科技產業環境爭議未能得解的原因與挑戰。英文摘要：As the environmental risks accompanying technological advancement become more complicated, the relevant public risk policies encounter enormous challenges. This paper focuses upon the subject of environmental impact assessment of High-Tech Park development. The EIA processes on Central Taiwan Science Park (CTSP) face increasing counter discourses and questions because of its unknown risks. Such environmental controversies disclose a proposition that the process of risk assessment and decision making is not only scientific but also a political process involving environmental governance.As a case study on the controversies of CTSP-IV, this paper discusses how the technocrats communicate, interpret, and defend their policy under public scrutiny. In addition, it probes the technology politics and the features of environmental governance within the process above. By analyzing news, archives, and notes from participant observations, we contrast public opinions with official reactions during the EIA process of CTSP-IV. Through this case, we investigate the official attitude towards risk management, the technological politics behind the scene, and the reason why environmental controversies of high-tech development have never been resolved.起始頁-結束頁：57-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201106.005710篇名：地方毒品危害防制中心的實際運作－政策網絡觀點的分析並列篇名：The Policy Implementation of Local Drug Abuse Control Center-A Policy Network Perspective作者：顏良恭(Liang-Kung Yen);林俊宏(Jung-Hong Lin)關鍵字：毒品政策;地方毒品危害防制中心;政策網絡;drug policy;the local Drug Abuse Control Center;policy network期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：毒品的存在由來已久，近年在生活壓力漸增下，毒品濫用的問題愈演愈烈，此可見諸於我國吸毒入監人數以及毒品吸食的再犯率屢創新高。政府為了抑制社會毒品濫用的問題，減少犯罪與社會危害，遂推動地方毒品危害防制中心的政策措施，希望能結合政府與民間的資源與力量，共同進行反毒作戰。為了對此政策的形成與運作有更深入的了解，本研究以現有反毒文獻較缺乏的政策執行過程面向切入，運用政策網絡縱貫面的觀察架構，輔以橫切面的要素分析，並透過深度訪談與次級資料分析，企圖了解地方毒品危害防制中心的互動結構與關係發展的過程。本研究發現該政策主要是植基於應急式的反毒政策推動，為了因應漸趨嚴重的毒品問題，政府採取運用現有的組織資源方式來做政策推動，在此資源侷限下，主責的中央政府官員採取建立網絡、遊說指導策略，主責的地方政府官員則採取尋找資源的策略，在其策略運用的過程之中，中央與地方的毒品防制網絡漸趨形成。雖然該網絡的形成是地方毒品危害防制中心政策的最主要貢獻，但是系絡的資源困境仍阻礙反毒網絡的發展與持續深化。從任務編組的人員配置到反毒業務的金額補助有限，不只使主責的單位面臨難以負荷的問題，也使網絡中的其他行動者傾向被動配合，沿襲舊有的反毒政策推動內涵，實際產生的政策變革有限，組織間的連結也呈現弱連結型態。除此之外，在地方反毒網絡的擴展與反毒醫療、輔導信念的執行過程中，主責的中心人員也面臨吸毒犯心理依賴強烈與病識感不足的困境，前者所導致的高再犯率使得民間資源普遍投入的意願不高，後者則為吸毒者配合意願不高讓政府的輔導措施面臨難以推動的困境。上述的困境使得地方毒品危害防制中心的現行運作面臨發展的侷限，本研究基於此運作的實際情況與問題的了解，嘗試提出改善的短、中、長期政策建議。英文摘要：Drug abuse have existed for a long time. Recently, due to the escalating stress of life, drug abuse problems have become a much more serious social problem. Both the growing number of people being sent to jail for drug abuse and the high percentage of people retaking drugs are evidence in this trend. In order to tackle this problem, our government has set up the locally government controlled Drug Abuse Control Center.Through this organization, it is hoped that government and non-governmental organizations can work together to prevent drug abuse and crime. By using policy network analysis and in-depth interviews, this research tries to understand the interaction between structure and policy implementation of the local Drug Abuse Control Center. This study found that the policy is mainly an emergency-type of anti-drug policy. The central and local government officials are taking action to cope with serious drug problem respectively. On the part of the central government, the Ministry of Justice has carried out strategies of lobbing, guidance and constructing a network under the constraints of limited resources. On the part of local governments, the local Drug Abuse Control Center's strategy is to find outside resources and cooperate with other parts of the local governments and civil society. Accordingly, both a central and local drug abuse control network has gradually formed. The most important contribution under the local Drug Abuse Control Center's policy implementation is the formation of a central and local drug abuse control network. We conclude that resource dilemma in the context, staffing in the task force, limited assistance from anti-drug operation, and weak ties between organizations have hindered the local Drug Abuse Control Center's network development and persistent unfolding. In addition, the drug user groups' lack of awareness of their disease and their strong psychological dependence have made policy implementation even more difficult. Finally, we propose several short-term, mid-term and long-term policy recommendations to improve implementation.起始頁-結束頁：111-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201106.011101篇名：從自民黨總裁選舉制度分析自民黨派閥勢力的形成與消長並列篇名：An Analysis of the Formation, Growth and Decline of Factions within the LDP: A Perspective on the Electoral System for the LDP President作者：吳明上(Ming-Shan Wu)關鍵字：自民黨總裁;派閥政治;政治改革;政治決定過程;保守政治體制;LDP President;Factional Politics;Political Reform;Policy-Making Process期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：48期出版年：2011中文摘要：自民黨成立到二度下台<U+7232>止的約五十四年期間，除了短暫的二年三個月外，不論是自民黨單獨執政，或是組成聯合政權，自民黨的總裁同時擔任總理大臣，不僅是日本政治的最高領導者，而且掌握政黨與政府的龐大資源。自民黨政治家<U+7232>了爭奪總裁職位，集結成派閥，展開激烈的競合關係。因此，派閥勢力也成<U+7232>觀察戰後自民黨政治與日本政治的重要關鍵詞。既往的研究將「總裁選舉」視<U+7232>被解釋項，用派閥的競合關係解釋總裁選舉中由誰勝出。然而，本文研究發現，派閥是總裁職位爭奪的產物，而其勢力亦將隨著總裁選舉的變化而出現消長的現象。本文嘗試著從總裁選舉的實施過程中，對派閥勢力消長的影響，具有代表性的三個階段，亦即首屆總裁選舉、總裁初選制度的採用、第八十七屆的總裁選舉等時間點，論述自民黨派閥的成立，以及其勢力的消長，提供另一個觀察自民黨政治運作的切入點。英文摘要：In the fifty-four years before it lost power for a second time in 2009, the LDP president normally also served as prime minister and dominated Japanese politics, regardless of whether the LDP was in power alone or as part of a coalition government. The only exceptions were the cabinets of Morihiro, Tsutomu and Tomiichi (a total period of two years and three months). Since the LDP dominated the machinery of government, the president had control over both government resources as well as the party. LDP factions were formed with the purpose of winning the position of president. LDP politics was defined by conflict and cooperation between different factions as each group sought to maximize its own advantages.In previous research, the LDP presidential election, as a dependent variable, is highly connected with conflict and cooperation between factions. However, this article argues that factional politics is not a variable which explains the LDP presidential election, but rather is a product of the current electoral system. It also argues that the rise and fall of factions has a strong relationship with the outcome of presidential elections.From observation of three important phrases of the LDP presidential election-the first presidential election, the adoption of presidential primary election and the presidential elections after the 87th session-this article analyzes the formation, growth and decline of factions within the LDP, and tries to provide anew perspective on factional politics within the party.起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.48(33-61)2篇名：新加坡全球城市國家建構及其國家控制的政治官僚模式並列篇名：Singapore as a Developmental Global City-State and Its State-Controlled Political-Bureaucratic Model作者：施奕任(Yi-Jen Shih)關鍵字：新加坡;全球城市;政聯企業;發展型國家;國家控制模式;Singapore;Global City Theory;Developmental State;Government-linked Companies期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：48期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討新加坡全球城市國家治理模式而與全球城市理論進行對話，並分別檢視地理脈絡以及政治脈絡。在地理脈絡上，本文認<U+7232>領土狹小迫使新加坡認知到全球佈局的必要性，因此積極建構全球城市策略將自身嵌入全球經濟，諸如主導龐大跨國資金的流動、推動跨界特殊的全球城市區域以及吸引大量國際移民等。另一方面，本文反駁既有文獻將新加坡推動全球佈局的國家自主性與能力歸因於特殊的都市國家尺度，認<U+7232>其難以解釋香港與新加坡同處於都市國家尺度卻呈現極端迥異的發展路徑。在政治脈絡上，本文認<U+7232>新加坡屬於國家控制的政治官僚模式，人民行動黨政府壟斷了政治權力，並建立規模龐大的金融控股公司以及政府關聯企業，使得國家跨過私人資本佔據市場治理網絡的核心位置，直接引導新加坡的全球控制能力。新加坡全球城市國家的發展路徑，說明全球城市形塑並非僅是反應跨國資本流動的結果，城市所處的政治脈絡以及國家角色，同樣影響其推動其全球控制的能力。英文摘要：This paper analyzes how Singapore, as a global city-state, can formulate its global control capability through the city governance process. Since Singapore has a spatially constrained territory, its government recognized early the importance of global control capability and aimed to become a key regional and global location for financial services and advanced producer services, similar to leading global cities in the West. This paper finds that Singapore's global city formation relies on a state-controlled model. The People's Action Party (PAP) government dominates politics in the city-state, allowing party elites to implement national economic and industrial policy with little opposition. On the basis of an illiberal democracy and the developmental state, the PAP government has established Temasek Holdings and many large government-linked companies (GLCs). PAP elites and bureaucratic systems occupy the core of market governance network, excluding the private sector. The Singapore government uses Temasek and other GLCs to implement its economic policies and strengthen its global control capability. In short, this paper argues that formation of global cities such as Singapore is not simply the result of global economic flows; the geographical and political context also can influence the characteristics and capabilities of global cities.起始頁-結束頁：63-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.48(63-108)3篇名：在中國的滿洲看見西田幾多郎的場所：兼與泰戈爾文明觀的比較並列篇名：Bridging Civilizations through Nothingness: Manchurian China as Nishida Kitaro's "Place"作者：石之瑜(Chih-Yu Shih);黃威霖(Wei-Lin Huang);張芝瑾(Chih-Chin Chang);黃鈺淳(Yu-Chun Huang);陳鼎尹(Ting-Yin Chen);黃欣婷(Hsin-Ting Huang)關鍵字：滿洲;西田幾多郎;泰戈爾;文明橋樑;Manchuria;Nishida Kitaro;Rabindranath Tagore;Civilizational Bridge期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：48期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文介紹西田幾多郎的文明橋樑模式，以泰戈爾的文明橋樑模式作<U+7232>對照，並透過推論將西田模式具體聯繫到滿洲國的建立。文明橋樑的自喻是弱者提升自尊的一種方法，藉由個人化的修養來匯合東西文明，是泰戈爾超越西方展現自信的途徑。與泰戈爾的模式相比，西田幾多郎的模式替日本整體找到一個無的場所，也是無所不包的場所。這樣的場所沒有尚未完成的追求者，因此不存在任何行動的指導，反而欣賞沉默的靜態，既然沒有<U+7232>個體能動性提供思想準備，則個體行動者由不動到動的過程只能是動員的，因而是依附的。這樣由見者回到動者，從無的場所進入有的場所，似乎是一種退出，可是中國的滿洲提供了一次進取的機會。中國的滿蒙是白鳥理論中的東、西洋的共同源起之地，與西田哲學的無的場所若合符節，當無的場所做<U+7232>八紘一宇的神道境界以後，中國的滿洲成就了文明橋樑的自況。英文摘要：Bridging is a metaphor used by colonized people torn between traditional indigenous culture and the intruding Western civilization to transcend material weakness and provide spiritual remedy to the materialist West. This paper introduces Nishda Kitaro's model of bridging, with a note on Rabinfranath Tagore's model as a reference. The Nishida model, embedded in the philosophy of nothingness, takes away individual agency for transcendence. The paper engages Shiratori Kurakichi and his notion of Manchuria as the origin of world civilizations, which later reifies the place of nothingness. The resultant enthusiasm toward the establishment of Manchukuo was both a form of bridging and a twist toward imperialism. Overall, our paper reinterprets the meaning of bridging in the context of modern Japanese political thought.起始頁-結束頁：109-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.48(109-137)4篇名：半總統制：全球發展與研究議程並列篇名：Semi-Presidentialism: Global Developments and Research Agenda作者：吳玉山(Yu-Shan Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：47期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.47(1-32)5篇名：半總統制下行政體系二元化之內涵並列篇名：The Content of Dual-Executive Systems under Semi-Presidentialism作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen)關鍵字：半總統制;二元體系;分權式二元;分時式二元;Semi-Presidentialism;Dual-Executive;Horizontal Dualistic;Vertical Dualistic期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：47期出版年：2011中文摘要：行政體系二元化是半總統制重要的特色之一。這個二元化的設計，將總統與總理視<U+7232>二元架構中的兩個領導者，然而，當代對半總統制的研究中，對於所謂的二元體系大多定義<U+7232>二元行政分權治理的情況。之所以有這樣的前提，主要原因一方面是受到法國模式的影響，另一方面是大多的半總統制國家，其現實的政治運作也凸顯了二元架構的分權治理。然而，也有一部份的半總統制國家，其二元行政的設計並非來自於權力的分配，而是基於一種將總統視<U+7232>備而不用的、治理能力填補式角色的考量。這類國家，在制度設計上吻合對半總統制的定義，但具體的運作卻引起是否適合歸類於半總統制的質疑，例如奧地利、冰島、2000年之後的芬蘭、新興民主的斯洛維尼亞、甚至如歷史上的威瑪共和等。基於此，本文擬就行政體系二元化<U+7232>比較的焦點，探究不同設計理念下的二元行政。本文認<U+7232>，在制度上分權治理二元行政是一種分權式的二元分權結構；而具有相互補充的二元行政則是一種分時式權力置換的二元結構。這兩種類型都符合對半總統制的定義，但卻會對憲政運作造成截然不同的影響。英文摘要：A dual-executive is the central characteristic of semi-presidential systems. Both the president and the prime minister are political leaders of the government. The current literature defines the relationship between the president and the prime minister as either cooperative or competitive. There are also many semi-presidential regimes such as the Fifth French Republic, in which the prime minister is regarded as the president's challenger. However, there are also some semi-presidential regimes in which the president is regarded only as a political leader ”in reserve”. In normal times, the government is led by the prime minister. The constitutional operation of these countries, such as Austria, Iceland, Finland after 2000, Slovenia, and Weimar Germany is similar to parliamentary systems, but with a semi-presidential constitution. Therefore, dual-executive systems should be differentiated between horizontal and and vertical dual systems. Under a horizontal dual-executive system, the president and the prime minister are both political leaders at the same time. They might either share or fight for power at the head of government. However, under a vertical dual-executive system, the president is regarded as a leader only under exceptional circumstances. These two different dual-executive systems both conform to standard definitions of semi-presidentialism, but their constitutional operations are entirely different.起始頁-結束頁：33-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.47(33-64)6篇名：總理總統制與政治穩定：以烏克蘭、羅馬尼亞<U+7232>例並列篇名：Premier-Presidentialism and Political Stability: Comparing Romania with Ukraine作者：蔡榮祥(Jung-Hsiang Tsai);石鵬翔(Peng-Hsiang Shih)關鍵字：總理總統制;政治穩定;執政聯盟;烏克蘭;羅馬尼亞;Premier-Presidentialism;Political Stability;Ruling Coalition;Romania;Ukraine期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：47期出版年：2011中文摘要：比較憲政工程的傳統智慧認<U+7232>半總統制的次類型總理總統制比另一次類型總統國會制運作更<U+7232>穩定，並且援引法國或葡萄牙等總理總統制國家運作成功的個案作<U+7232>相關的佐證。然而，一些總理總統制的新興民主國家，其運作上卻出現政治不穩定的現象。本文的目的在於探究<U+7232>何這些總理總統制國家會出現不穩定的原因和模式以及透過這些反面個案(negative cases)來搜尋總理總統制成功運作的關鍵因素。  過去的研究認<U+7232>在總理總統制的運作當中，國會的政黨組成情況對於政治穩定有關鍵性的影響，同時也論證如果總統黨能夠進入國會的多數執政聯盟，對於政治穩定會有正面的幫助。本文針對東歐的總理總統制國家烏克蘭、羅馬尼亞之憲政運作進行分析，探討國會的政黨組成情況對於政治穩定的影響。本文觀察兩個案例後發現，即使總統黨進入多數的執政聯盟後，還必須觀察總統黨在多數聯盟內部是否具有主導地位才能進一步判斷國會的政黨組成情況對於政治穩定的影響。如果總統黨無法在執政聯盟內部取得領導的地位，而是由總理黨取得主導地位，則總統權力可能會受到較大的制約，容易引發總統和總理之間的衝突，政治運作較<U+7232>不穩定。反之，當總統黨能主導執政聯盟，則總統權力受到制約的情況較小，總統與總理較不易發生衝突，政治運作較<U+7232>穩定。英文摘要：The conventional wisdom on comparative constitutional engineering argues, on the basis of the successful experiences of France and Portugal, that the operation of premier-presidentialism (one subtype of semi-presidentialism) has been more stable than the operation of president-parliamentarism (the other subtype of semipresidentialism). However, some newly democratized countries which have chosen premier-presidentialism have witnessed political instability. This paper aims to explore why these countries have suffered from political instability and to identify the crucial factors which facilitate the democratic workability of premierpresidentialism, by way of analyzing these negative cases.Past research claims that the constellation of political parties in the parliament is the key factor affecting political stability and also suggests that if the president's party is included in the ruling coalition, then it can substantially contribute to the political stability of premier-presidentialism. After delving into the cases of Romania and Ukraine, this paper further argues that not only do we need to observe whether the president's party is in the coalition, but we also need to examine whether the president's party has a dominant position in the coalition. If the prime minister's party, rather than the president's party, takes the helm in the coalition, presidential power and authority may be constrained, thereby leading to the clashes between the president and prime minister and sometimes to serious political instability. In contrast, when the president's party leads the coalition, conflicts between the president and prime minister are less likely, leading to greater political stability.起始頁-結束頁：65-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.47(65-106)7篇名：一致政府下的內閣穩定：比較二○○八年總統大選之後的俄羅斯與台灣並列篇名：Cabinet Stability under Unified Government: The Cases of Russia and Taiwan after the 2008 Presidential Elections作者：李鳳玉(Feng-Yu Lee);藍夢荷(Meng-Ho Lan)關鍵字：半總統制;內閣穩定;一致政府;台灣;俄羅斯;Semi-presidentialism;Cabinet Stability;Unified Government;Taiwan;Russia期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：47期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣與俄羅斯在二○○八年總統選舉之後的政治制度有著許多相似的特性，例如兩國的總統都擁有單獨任免總理的權力；兩國的國會都存在擁有三分之二以上席次的政黨，而且府會關係是一致的。由於這些相似性，所以兩國應該擁有相似的內閣穩定度。然而，實際的政治運作卻非如此，究竟是什麼原因造成這樣的差異，這是本文分析的重點。本文認<U+7232>，台灣與俄羅斯的權力中心並不相同，所以造成兩國的內閣穩定度相當不同。三個因素決定權力中心的歸屬，分別是：總統權力的來源與存續條件以及總統對國會的掌控能力。經由對於兩國的深入分析，本文的假設獲得實證資料的支持。英文摘要：Taiwan and Russia have shared some important similarities in terms of institutional configurations since the presidential elections of 2008. Taiwan and Russia are led by presidents with strong constitutional powers, and face little legislative opposition from friendly parliaments. In both cases, the president belongs to a party than controls around two-thirds of parliamentary seats. However, contrary to the claims of much of the existing literature, these similarities do not make the cabinets of the two countries equally stable. This paper argues that, because of important differences in who wields actual political power, cabinet stability varies across the two cases. Three factors decides where the apex of political power is located: how the president is elected, how easily he or she can be removed from the presidency, and whether a president serves as a de facto leader of the biggest party of a parliament. This paper undertakes an in-depth comparison between Russia and Taiwan, providing supporting evidence for a link between the location of the apex of political power and cabinet stability under unified government.起始頁-結束頁：107-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.47(107-142)8篇名：二○○八年後梅－普架構下俄羅斯半總統制的檢視並列篇名：A Study of Russian Semi-Presidentialism after 2008 Based on the Medvedev-Putin Framework作者：趙竹成(Zhu-Cheng Zhao)關鍵字：俄羅斯聯邦;普京;統一俄羅斯黨;蘇聯;聯邦主體;Russian Federation;Putin;United Russia;Soviet Union;federal subject期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：47期出版年：2011中文摘要：一九九○年後，前蘇聯各加盟共和國在政治轉型過程中無論是聯邦或共和國，在其政體的選擇模式，除了波羅的海三國中的拉脫維亞與愛沙尼亞是選擇內閣制，土庫曼<U+7232>總統制外，其餘各國主要是選擇半總統制。就制度形式部分來看，在深化其運作效果後，大部分的例子是向三種不同的道路發展：一種走向總統的實質獨裁，第二種是不斷的出現總統－總理／國會表面化的政治爭議，第三種是總統與總理協力而實權在總理。俄羅斯則是走過這三種道路，形成一個有趣的案例。本文試圖探討有那種角度可以重新評價俄羅斯的半總統制運作。英文摘要：After 1990, the states that formed out of the former Soviet Union, with the exception of the Baltic states of Latvia and Estonia which opted for parliamentary systems and Turkmenistan which opted for a presidential system, adopted semi-presidential regimes. In terms of the formation and operation of political systems, we can identify three distinct paths. The first is a gradual move towards presidential dictatorship. The second is the emergence of superficial disputes between the president on the one hand, and premier and parliament on the other. The third is the emergence of cooperative arrangements between president and premier, but with actual power held by the premier. Russia has evolved in the third direction, providing an interesting case study. This paper examines Russian semipresidentialism after 2008 from the perspective of this third path.起始頁-結束頁：143-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.47(143-174)01篇名：當前歐盟氣候治理策略的發展與挑戰－從氣候難民問題分析並列篇名：Development and Challenge of Contemporary EU Climate Governance Strategy: Viewpoint of Climate Refugee Problem作者：李玫憲(Mei-Hsien Lee);洪銘德(Ming-Te Hung)關鍵字：柔性強權;氣候治理;氣候難民;氣候變遷;歐洲聯盟;civilian power;climate change;climate governance;climate refugee;European Union期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文為歐盟氣候變遷政策之研究，這在透過氣候難民問題的討論，檢視當前歐盟氣候治理策略的發展與挑戰。文章圍繞歐盟「柔性強權」的規範性角色而發，探討歐盟如何在多邊主義與人類安全等核心價值下，賡續推動全球氣候治理策略，以應對極端氣候事件所造成的難民問題。首先，本文將闡述國際上關於氣候變遷的作法；其次，說明氣候難民問題的形成背景，及其所衍生出之安全意涵；再次，文章嘗試彙整學術研究與相關政策實踐，系統地呈現歐盟氣候治理策略的發展脈絡，及其因應氣候難民問題之立場與對策；最後，本文擬以氣候難民問題檢視歐盟氣候治理策略之成效，進一步分析政策取捨可能衍生之利弊得失，以及對其「柔性強權」角色之潛在影響。英文摘要：This article is a study on the European Union's policy on climate change, which aims at examining the development and challenge for EU strategy through a discussion of the issue of climate refugee. Based on the EU's normative role as ”civilian power,” the authors look into how the EU continues to push forward global climate change governance strategy in response to the climate refugee problem, based on the values of multilateralism and human security. First, this article discusses the international community's general response towards climate change and the background of the climate refugee issue and its security implications. Then this article seeks to combine theory and policy by systematically showing the development history of the EU's governance strategy and its policy stance and response towards the climate refugee problem. This article seeks to evaluate the result of the EU's governance strategy and analyze the benefits and losses of various policies and the underlying influences on the EU's role as civilian power.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.52.012篇名：中國大陸參與國際核裁軍建制態度的變化－國際社會化或調適學習？並列篇名：The Change of China's Policy towards International Nuclear Disarmament Regime: International Socialization or Adaptation Learning作者：游智偉(Chih-Wei Yu)關鍵字：中國大陸核裁軍政策;國際防擴散建制;國際社會化;調適學習;adaptation learning;China's nuclear disarmament policy;international socialization;non-proliferation regimes期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文試圖透過以調過適中心的學習與國際社會化概念解釋為何中國大陸對類似建制的參與態度變化並不是源於國際社會化，而是源於因勢制宜的學習概念，本文的研究成果有三：其一，在參與全面禁止核試爆條約談判的同時，中國大陸核武試爆的頻率也增加，而即使在制定出口管制規定後，中國大陸部分國營企業也持續出口管制品，故中國大陸並未接受國際核裁軍或防擴散建制蘊含的價值觀；其二，在北京其備一定嚇阻能力後，核武擴散不利維持其嚇阻能力，故對北京來說，參與建制帶來的利益大於不參與的利益，此為促使中國大陸參與的動力；其三，從中國大陸對國際防擴散建制與伊朗的態度來說，北京參與政策的變化更可能起源於其對不同時期的世界局勢與安全威脅的認知，故其在全球層次遵守建制，但卻在區域層次繼續違規出口管制品。英文摘要：In this essay, based on the differences between international socialization and adaptation learning, I try to explain why China's participating policy towards international nuclear disarmament regimes is not stemmed from international socialization, but learning process. The achievements of this essay are as below: firstly, when China negotiated on CTBT, China has also increased its nuclear tests, and even after the regulation of exports and imports has been set up, partial state owned enterprises have still continued to export the restricted goods; according to those two evidences, China does not accept the value behind international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regimes. Secondly, since the proliferation of nuclear weapon is harmful to the capability of deterrence, for China, after obtaining certain capability, the interests caused by participating in those regimes are better than non-participation so that is China's motive to participate in. Finally, according to China's policy towards international non-proliferation and Iran, the reason why China's policy has been changed may be their different perception of world circumstances and threats in different periods and levels; therefore, China has obey the regime in global level but continue to disobey the regulations in regional level.起始頁-結束頁：29-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.52.023篇名：新加坡選舉制度與政治效應－1988∼2011年國會選舉分析並列篇名：The Electoral System in Singapore and its Political Effects (1988-2011)作者：施奕任(Yi-Jen Shih)關鍵字：政黨體系;單一選區;集選區;選舉制度;選舉政治;electoral politics;electoral systems;group representation constituencies;party systems;single member district期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文透過新加坡選舉局選舉結果資料庫的實證資料，分析1988∼2011年新加坡國會選制設計及其政治效應，特別是比例性偏差的問題。從選票結構層面來看，新加坡還制呈現三種特徵。一、單選區相對多數決具有贏者全拿的特性，造成行動黨1980年代以來平均獲得六成得票率，卻壟斷國會多數席次；二、單選區相對多數決在選舉過程中造成多數選區形成兩黨競爭的局面，除了行動黨同額自動當選選區，1988年以來僅有14個三黨以上競爭選區，不僅比重偏低且參選的第三黨或候選人多產生被邊緣化的結果；三、多數兩黨競爭選區反對黨策略性彼此錯開，各自選擇不同選區與行動黨對峙，避免同選區過多反對黨參選稀釋票源，鷸蚌相爭反而增加行動黨當選機會。從選區規模層面來看，新加坡在1988年以後採行單選區與集選區混合選制，並產生三項效應。一、集選區制度擴大贏者全拿的政治效應，更加容易造成政黨國會席次差距；二、反對黨受限於政黨實力，還區規模擴大而難以提出足額候選人參選；三、反對黨在部分選區缺席，除了使得行動黨自動當選，該選區選民形同被剝奪選舉權，被剝奪選舉權的選民數不斷成長，直到2011年因為選區規模縮小及反對黨改變選戰策略才有明顯降低。英文摘要：This paper analyzes Singapore Elections Department's parliamentary elections results to discuss Singapore electoral system and its political effects from 1988 to 2011. The political system of Singapore under the People's Action Party (PAP) has been one-party-domination after independence. Although some opposition politicians won seats in general elections since 1984, the PAP has maintained an absolute majority in the Parliament until now. Previous studies suggest that PAP's overwhelming victories in general elections are resulted from their campaign strategies, including the enactments of Internal Security Act, filings of defamation lawsuits, designing of serial number on ballot paper and the control of the mass media. However, from the perspective of campaign strategy, the disproportionality of turnout rate in general elections and parliament seats can not be explained effectively.Therefore, this paper emphasizes on electoral system instead of campaign strategies to explain the seats distribution in Singapore Parliament. On the aspect of the ballot structure, Singapore's electoral system causes three important effects. First, The single member plurality system, given its winner-take-all characteristic, allows PAP to dominate Singapore Parliament. Second, except some uncontested divisions, two parties campaign in most electoral divisions. Furthermore, different opposition parties would choice their electoral divisions respectively to challenge PAP's candidates.On the aspect of the electoral district size, the mixed electoral system of SMDs and group representation constituencies (GRC) cause three political effects. First, GRC system expands the influence of winner-take-all and aggravates the disproportionality in Parliament. Second, most of opposition parties were lack of qualified candidates to compete with PAP in GRCs. Third, because of the absence of opposition parties, the increasing number uncontested divisions reflects that voters in these divisions are deprived of their fundamental right to vote.起始頁-結束頁：65-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.52.034篇名：跨域投資與治理－台、韓、日商中國大陸投資跨國比較並列篇名：Cross-Border Investment and Governance: A Comparison of Taiwanese, Korean and Japanese Business Investment in China作者：陳德昇(Te-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：台;韓;日商;全球生產網絡;制度創新;發展型國家;跨域治理;cross-border governance;developmental state;global production network;institution innovation;Taiwan;Korean and Japanese businessmen期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：52期出版年：2011中文摘要：在經濟全球化背景下，外商投資的群眾成因及其所衍生之投資環境治理、體制創新、國際接軌，皆與地方政府跨域治理之運作相關。在投資行為運作過程中，除需考量區位選擇、經貿環境與規範、全球生產網絡連結與產業競爭力維持外，且涉及與地方政府互動、對話及折衝，期能提升生產績效，進而實現獲利之目標。本文主要研究焦點議題包括：（一）中國大陸外資吸引之不同階段，台、韓、日商在中國大陸的投資區位選擇，以及參與跨域治理過程的影響與回應；（二）不同區位發展與外商跨域治理，對體制創新與國際接軌之影響；（三）台、韓、日商「協會」之平台角色與中介組織之互動治理關係；（四）跨域治理與社會資本有關信任建構運作與效應；（五）跨域治理結構穩定性與否，與資本及產業流動之關聯性。基本上，在中共威權政治體制下，外資吸引績效彰顯，但蘇州昆山、青島城陽與大連金州跨域治理之運作，與西方民主社會下多元參與及互動仍有本質性之差異。中國大陸地方政府的運作，更多體現在經濟現實需要與外資運作的功能性考量。在現階段中共政權體制下，跨域治理既有特殊性、功能性與階段性之特質，並有廣度與深度的差異性與限制性。英文摘要：This article is a comparative study of Taiwanese, Japanese and Korean business investments in China within the conceptual framework of cross-border investment and governance. In the era of globalization, Taiwanese, Japanese and Korean business investments in Kunshan, Dalian and Chengyang in China aim to link up with global production networks. The driving forces of investment include lowering costs, creating a better investment environment, building up mutual trust and institutionalizing the process of exporting from these areas through negotiations with local governments. In general, if local governments are capable of cross-border governance with foreign investors, this will improve performance and help stabilize business ventures during periods of international economic challenges.This study attempts to answer the following two questions: 1)What are the types, interactions and contents of cross-border governance and participation during different periods of FDI influx in Kunshan, Chengyang and Jinzhou? 2)In different regions of economic development in China, what are the interaction of and impact on institutional innovation and international synchronization in operations involving cross-border governance? This article finds that the experiences of Kunshan, Chenyung and Jinzhou and their interaction with the local governments do not align with the concept of cross-border governance in Western democratic society. Evidence in this article also indicates that China's local governments remain authoritarian and short-sightedly utilitarian. Likewise, the adaptation in governance is only limited to the economy, market, and compliance with international rules.起始頁-結束頁：101-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.52.045篇名：中國大陸的村莊治理與公共財供給－一個政治經濟分析並列篇名：Village Governance and Public Goods Provision in Rural China: An Analysis of Political Economy作者：曹海濤(Hai-Tao Tsao);柯朝斌(Chao-Pin Ko);楊宜勳(I-Hsun Yang)關鍵字：地方公共財;村民委員會選舉;鄉村治理;鄉鎮財政;local public goods;township public finance;village governance;villages' committee election期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：51期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以談判理論為基礎，探討「後農業稅時代」中國大陸農村基層治理問題。在農村推行基層選舉的背景下，村民委員會選舉強化了村莊的自治能力；另一方面，取消農業稅雖然在某種程度上減輕了農民的負擔，但卻惡化了鄉鎮財政能力。兩種作用相互影響，使得村莊公共財的總供給未必增加，村莊治理也未必更加完善。因此，於相同議題的文獻中，便可能出現不同的實證結果。透過本文的模型分析發現，基層選舉與取消農業稅對於村莊公共財總供給的影響，取決於村莊的所得規模。經濟較富裕、鄉村工商業較發達的社區，即使稅費改革後來自鄉鎮政府的公共財投資下降，村莊公共財總供給也未必會減少；相反地，經濟貧困的社區，其公共財總供給則會因來自鄉鎮政府的公共財投資下降而陷入停滯。英文摘要：The main purpose of this paper is to delve into the issue of village governance in the era of agriculture reform in rural China. We view village governance as a bargaining between villagers' committee and township government by virtue of Nash bargaining theory. The abrogation agriculture tax mitigates the burden upon Chinese farmers, but it exacerbates township government's public finance. Therefore, grass-roots democracy intensifies and enlarges villages' self-governance but it is not a necessary result to improve village governance due to the insufficient supply of local public goods. We indicate that the level of the supply of local public goods depends on the income of villages in the terms of our model. The rich village will attain much public investment than the poor counterpart even if they all confront the financial predicament descended from township government after the reform of agriculture tax.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2011.51.016篇名：亞太主義與東亞主義對峙下的東協加八並列篇名：Confrontation between Asia-Pacificism and East-Asianism: ASEAN+8作者：廖舜右(Shun-Yo Liao)關鍵字：亞太主義;亞太經合會;東亞主義;東亞高峰會;東協加八;Asia-Pacificism;Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation;ASEAN plus Eight;East-Asianism;East Asia Summit期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：51期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文係以區域主義角度來探討「東協加八」，並分析其與亞太經合會的競合關係。B. Obama總統宣示美國為太平洋國家後，積極推動重返東亞政策，最顯著的事件即為美國於2011年成為東亞高峰會成員，「東協加八」正式成型。美國主導的亞太主義進入原本僅存在東亞主義架構下的東亞高峰會後，東亞高峰會將成為亞太主義與東亞主義直接對峙的場域；另一方面，亞太經合會向為美國推動亞太主義的重要平台，未來發展可能受「東協加八」的影響而回歸於經貿議題的方向。英文摘要：The purpose of this article is to examine the formation of ASEAN+8 and its interaction with APEC from the perspectives of regionalisms. The United States began to restore its preponderance status in East Asia since President Obama declared himself the President of the Pacific Ocean. The most significant development in this regard includes the accession of the United States to East Asia Summit in 2011. Asia-Pacificism, led by the United States, will confront directly with East-Asianism in ASEAN. Due to the impacts of ASEAN+8, APEC would return its agenda setting back to economic concerns excluding security issues.起始頁-結束頁：29-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2011.51.027篇名：水權費開徵之可行性評估並列篇名：The Feasibility Analysis of the Water Rights Fee作者：張筵儀(Yan-Yi Chang);陳金哲(Chin-Cher Chen);羅光達(kuang-Ta Lo)關鍵字：水資源管理;水權費開徵;可行性評估;共享性資源;混合方法;common-pool resource;feasibility analysis;mixed methods;water resource management;water rights fee期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：51期出版年：2011中文摘要：水資源不穩定的台灣，應如何進行水資源的合理分配與管理，長期以來未受到應有的重視，尤其農業、工業與民生用水等，在經濟發展、生態保育及政治影響等複雜因素的糾葛下，擁有合法水權狀者，對於水資源的應用考量，各有其立場。有鑑於此，如何依據《水利法》的規定，從課徵水權使用費的角度，評估開徵水權費的可行性，建立公平合理的水資源使用機制，提供政策說服的可行策略為本研究目標。本研究採取混合方法論的途徑，資料蒐集過程分為兩階段，在第一階段的質性研究面向上，研究團隊與開徵水權費時受到影響之所有利害關係人進行焦點訪談，並就訪談資料加以分析；第二階段則以量化研究方法，就前階段之資料分析結果，設定調查議題並進行問卷調查，以瞭解開徵水權費所將面臨的影響及挑戰，對於水資源主管機關而言，如何綜合這些影響因素並慎選政策時機，將是其推動政策順利與否的關鍵。綜合前述分析，以水利署水權費開徵之SWOT分析得出部分開徵水權費可行性，藉由個案的分析結果，就台灣水資源、管理改革所需面對的政策時機拿捏及更重要的可行性考慮。同時，本文研究成果還提出水權交易的可行性分析，以及農田水利會對水權費開徵的重要影響，本文結論認為，政治上的效應才是水權管理機關能否建構有效推動政策的第一考量。英文摘要：In recent years, the issue of water resources has seen the increased attention being given by the public and the private sector. Also, it has been highly concerned by the International Commission on Climate Change (International Panel on Climate Change, IPCC) because of the deterioration of water resources scarce. Moreover, water resources were viewed as the limited natural resources, which every country intends to actively develop and possess. It is very similar to the typical Common-Pool Resource with necessity and rival but not excludability. In Taiwan, water resources are unstable, and the rational allocation of water resources management appears to have been neglected for a long time. Therefore, the aim of this article attempts to evaluate the political possibility of levying water rights fee based on the Water Law. It is also expected to establish the mechanism for using water resources and offer the possible strategies for persuading policy. This research involved the mixed methodology, comprised of the quantitative of and qualitative approaches. The first stage is to conduct focus group interviews to investigate the policy stakeholders. The second stage is to use the questionnaire to survey the related policy stakeholders. According to the above results, we use SWOT to analyze the political possibility of levying water rights fee of Water Resource Agency. Overall, results of this study provide the reflections and challenges on the levying water rights fee. In conclusion, whether the policies could be effectively built and promoted by water rights management organization, it depends on the political effect.起始頁-結束頁：53-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2011.51.038篇名：演化賽局在生態保育運動之應用－以湖山水庫興建為例並列篇名：A Game Theoretic Approach to the Resistance Movement of Ecological Reservation in Taiwan: A Case Study on the Construction of the Hushan Dam作者：李建正(Chien-Cheng Lee);邱明斌(Ming-Ping Chiu)關鍵字：生態保育抗爭運動;仲裁;最適反應策略;演化賽局理論;arbitration;best response strategies;evolutionary game theory;resistance movement of ecological reservation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：51期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要透過演化賽局理論，分析湖山水庫生態保育抗爭運動中，公部門、保育團體與地方居民三者之行為互動模式，並探究不同的情境下，各參賽者的「最適反應策略」。本研究主要發現為：演化賽局理論就參賽者之間的關係，其解釋力是理性賽局理論所不及的。本研究進一步提出未來生態保育抗爭運動發展的可行途徑，例如，「聽證」、「公民訴訟」等管道，並建議以仲裁取代行政訴訟之可行性。英文摘要：This research applies ”Evolutionary Game Theory” to analyze the interactions among the public sectors, the environmental protection organizations, and local residents in movement of ecological reservation (RMER). Furthermore, this study also investigates what types of the strategies that the participants should adopt in order to achieve the ”Best Response Strategies” under various decision-making circumstances. The major finding of this research is that Evolution Game Theory can provide better explanations on both the interrelationships between resisters, and between resisters and public sectors than the Rational Game Theory. This study also suggests several alternatives such as ”Hearing” and ”Civic Lawsuit” for RMER's future development, and perhaps, the possibility of replacing administrative procedures with arbitration.起始頁-結束頁：105-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2011.51.0401篇名：科技大學工程學生導數概念理解之研究並列篇名：An Investigation of Engineering Students' Conceptual Understanding of Derivative作者：黃志賢(Chih-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：工程學生;行動─過程─物件─基模（APOS）;表徵;導數;Engineering Students;Action-Process-Object-Schema (APOS); Representation;Derivative期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以APOS （Action-Process-Object-Schema）理論與表徵理論為理論架構，目的在於探討科技大學大一工程學生的導數概念基模，以做為導數概念教學設計之參考。研究對象為21位接受傳統微積分教學的科技大學大一工程學生，研究方法包括問卷調查及半結構式一對一訪談，以Piaget與Garcia的三合一機制（triad mechanism）做為描述導數基模的模型。從理論的觀點，APOS理論與表徵理論的理論架構是有用的且是互補的，讓研究者可以從兩個不同但互補的觀點檢視同一現象。一方面，APOS理論可以用來確定學生能夠在表徵系統內和表徵系統間進行表徵轉換所必要的構思；另一方面，藉由學生在表徵系統的轉換方式的分析，提供學生已經建立的導數基模的成分間的關係。研究結果顯示，學生學習導數概念及其導數基模發展所遭遇的困難分別是數量導數的過程概念及圖形導數的過程概念，這兩個過程概念居導數基模的樞紐位置。起始頁-結束頁：483-506資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1906.012篇名：國小五年級學生數學自我效能感之調查研究並列篇名：A Survey Study of Fifth Graders' Mathematics Self-Efficacy作者：張宇樑(Yu-Liang Chang)關鍵字：性別;家長教育風格;家庭社經地位;數學學業成就;學生數學自我效能感;Gender;Parenting Style;Family Socio-economic Status; Mathematical Academic Achievement;Student's Mathematics Self-Efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解中部某縣國小五年級學生數學自我效能感之現況，並分析擁有不同性別、家庭社經地位、和家長教育風格之學生數學自我效能感的差異情形。此外，進一步分析擁有不同程度數學自我效能感之學生其數學學業成就的差異，及檢驗學生數學自我效能感對數學學業成就之預測力。本研究採調查研究法，以中部某縣國小五年級學生為母群體進行調查研究，以分層隨機抽樣選取760位學生填答基本資料表與學生數學自我效能感量表，同時蒐集其背景資料及在校數學學業成績。經統計分析後發現：（1）所有參與之學生其數學自我效能感平均值為71.00，即他們對自己是否相信和預期自己之數學學習能力之平均值為71.0%的信心等級；且有25.9%之學生擁有低於60.0%之信心。（2）不同性別和家庭社經地位之學生其數學自我效能感間皆無顯著差異。而在不同家長教育風格的管教下，學生數學自我效能感則有顯著差異存在。（3）擁有不同程度數學自我效能感之學生其數學學業成就（T分數）皆有顯著差異存在。（4）五年級學生之數學自我效能感能夠有效預測其數學學業成就；且學生之數學學習自我效能感分面向亦能夠有效預測其數學學業成就。最後，根據研究結果與討論，提出對提升國小五年級學生數學自我效能感的具體建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study include: (1) Investigating the current status of fifth graders’ Mathematics Self-Efficacy (MSE) in elementary schools in the central part of Taiwan. (2) Examining the difference of these students’ MSE by factors of gender, family Socio-Economic Status (SES), and parenting style. (3) Examining the difference in academic mathematical achievement among these students who had different levels (i.e., high, middle, and low) of MSE. (4) Analyzing if a student’s MSE could effectively predict his/ her mathematical achievement. Accordingly, a survey method was employed. The research samples (769 students) were selected by a stratified random sampling method from all fifth graders in targeted elementary schools. A student background questionnaire and a mathematics self-efficacy instrument were used for gathering the data, as well as collecting their school mathematical achievement scores. Corresponding statistical analyses were then applied. Findings were generalized as followings: (1) Considering the mean scores of MSE, participants had approximately 71.0% degree of confidence in their own mathematical learning abilities, while 25.9% of them had less than 60.0% confidence. (2) For factors of gender and SES, no significant difference on their MSE was found. For parenting style, fifth-graders under an authoritativereciprocal discipline pattern had significantly superior ratings on MSE than those who with either an indulgent-permissive pattern or an indifferent-uninvolved pattern. (3) For mathematical achievement T score, fifth-graders with high MSE scored significantly better than those who with middle and low MSE. (4) Fifth-graders’ MSE ratings (whole scale) could predict their mathematical achievement scores in the school. Further, their ”Self-Efficacy for Mathematical Learning” (SEML) ratings (sub-scale) could also predict their mathematical academic achievement: the better their SEML ratings the better their mathematical achievement. Based on these findings and discussion, concrete recommendations are proposed for efficacious improvements of fifth-graders’ mathematics self-efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：507-530資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1906.023篇名：由認識觀發展的角度探討國小學童對科學探究過程之看法並列篇名：Exploring Elementary Students' Views Regarding Scientific Inquiry from the Perspective of Epistemological Development作者：林美馨(Mei-Hsin Lin);楊芳瑩(Fang-Ying Yang)關鍵字：科學探究;認識觀;Science Inquiry;Epistemology期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的目的旨在以個人認識觀發展的角度探討國小學童對科學探究看法之現況。研究工具為「科學探究看法問卷」，採開放性的問答方式，針對120位三、六年級與男、女各半的學童做施測，此科學探究問卷包含：科學活動、科學方法與科學證據等三個面向。施測完畢後，根據過去研究發展出的認識觀架構，進行內容解碼分析，並進行評分者一致性的百分比考驗。主要研究發現如下：（1）在科學活動方面，三年級學童大部分持前實證觀觀點，六年級才有較多的實證觀點；（2）三、六年級學童在科學方法上，大都持有前實證觀點；（3）三、六年級學童針對科學證據的本質所提出的看法則大都屬實證認識觀點，並有朝向多元觀發展之趨勢；（4）男、女生在科學探究過程的三個面向，即科學活動、科學方法與科學證據的看法上沒顯著差異；（5）三、六年級學童在科學活動、科學證據的看法上有顯著不同，但在科學方法方面則沒有顯著差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore epistemological perspectives regarding scientific inquiry among elementary school students. The research tool was the ”Views Of Science Inquiry” (VOSI) questionnaire. The participants were 120 third and sixth grade students, half of which are male and half are female. A coding scheme developed by Yang et al. (2008) was modified and applied to content analysis, and a chisquare test was conducted for evaluator consistency. The results showed that epistemological perspectives regarding scientific inquiry among third grade students can be classified into at least four categories, namely, pre-positivist, positivist, multiplist, and constructivist positions. Most third grade participants held a prepositivist position, while many sixth graders showed a positivist viewpoint toward scientific activities. Regarding epistemological perspectives concerning scientific methods, both third and sixth graders occupied a pre-positivist position. In regard to scientific evidence, the majority of third and sixth grade students displayed a positivist position, while some began to express a multiplist view. There was no significant gender difference in epistemological perspectives regarding scientific activities, methodology, and evidence. However, the third and sixth grade participants showed significant differences in their views regarding scientific activities and evidence, but not scientific methods. The research findings support the premise that epistemological perspectives regarding scientific inquiry are undergoing development during these years.起始頁-結束頁：531-548資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1906.034篇名：高職學生電工機械混成式數位學習效果並列篇名：The Effects of Blended Electrical-Machinery e-Learning onVocational High School Students作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);徐郁昇(Yu-Sheng Hsu)關鍵字：自我覺知效果;混成式數位學習;電工機械;學習成效;Self-perceived Effect;Blended E-learning;Electrical-machinery; Learning Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討混成式數位學習對電工機械的學習成效（包括成就測驗與自我覺知效果）之影響。實驗對象為高職電機科二年級修習「電工機械」課程的兩班學生，實驗組學生33名與控制組32名。實驗組為混成式數位學習，控制組為傳統式教室學習，實施時間為期五週。結果顯示：（1）混成式數位學習與傳統式教室學習在學生的成就測驗上無顯著差異。（2）混成式數位學習的自我覺知效果顯著優於傳統式教室學習，其中認知效果最高，技能次之。（3）接受混成式數位學習之後的「自我覺知效果（認知、技能、情意）」顯著優於之前的。本研究結論為混成式數位學習對於學生的成就測驗無顯著影響，但對於自我覺知效果有顯著正面影響。英文摘要：This study examined the impact of blended e-learning on electrical machinery learning, as measured by both an achievement test and self-perceived effects. The subjects were two classes of second-year vocational high school students who took an electrical-machinery course in the department of Electrical Technology. There were 33 students in an experimental group and 32 students in a control group. The experimental group used blended e-learning and the control group used traditional c-learning. The experiment lasted for 5 weeks. The results were as follows: (1) There was no significant difference in achievement test scores between blended e-learning and traditional c-learning. (2) The self-perceived effects of blended e-learning were significantly higher than those of traditional c-learning. These effects were greater for cognition, compared to skills. (3) The self-perceived effects after the blended e-learning were significantly higher than that before it. The conclusion is drawn, that blended e-learning had no impact on achievement test scores, but compared with traditional c-learning, it had a significant impact on self-perceived effects.起始頁-結束頁：549-579資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1906.045篇名：融入式診斷教學法對國小五年級學生分數學習成效之探究並列篇名：A Study of Integrated Diagnostic Teaching on Fractions forElementary Fifth-Grade Students作者：溫世展(Shih-Chan Wen)關鍵字：迷思概念;單位量;等值分數;診斷教學;認知衝突;Misconception;Unit Amount; Equivalent Fraction;Integrated Diagnostic Teaching;CognitiveConflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討「融入式診斷教學法」對於分數學習的成效。本研究採準實驗設計，對國小五年級學童進行分數概念融入式診斷教學，研究工具包括融入式診斷教學活動及評量試題，實驗組（33人）採用融入式診斷教學，控制組（34人）採用小組討論式教學。實驗組與控制組學生在五年級上學期的數學期中考試、數學期末考試、前測的結果顯示二組學生的數學及分數概念在教學實驗前的表現是相當的。本研究透過二組學童的後測、延後測，以及實驗組課堂學習的情況來檢驗融入式診斷教學的成效。研究發現，融入式診斷教學法除仍能製造學童的認知衝突，進而達到概念澄清與糾正的效果，有效改善學童的分數迷思概念之外，並能節省教師設計教學活動所需花費的時間。主要研究結果如下：（1）接受融入式診斷教學的實驗組學童，在後測、延後測的表現都顯著優於控制組學生。（2）教學觀察分析顯示實驗組學生在教學活動中的學習表現有顯著提升，且學生的思考、反省與發表能力更加精進。根據研究結果，本研究對融入式診斷教學課程設計、教學、師資培育提出一些建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to examine the effectiveness of integrated diagnostic teaching on the learning of fractions. A Quasi-experimental approach is adopted in this research and the lessons on fractions were taught to fifth grade students in elementary school. The research tools included integrated diagnostic teaching activities and assessments. The experimental group was instructed using the method of integrated diagnostic teaching and the control group was taught using the method of small discussion groups. The two groups had similar math ability and fractions concepts before the experimental teaching. They were chosen based on two exams (midterm and final) during their first semester of 5th grade and a pretest on fractions. The results of the integrated diagnostic teaching were analyzed through comparisons and contrasts between these two groups from three sources: (1) results of a fractions test after instruction (a post-test); (2) a retention test; and (3) scores on the school’s midterm test in the second semester. In addition, judgments of experimental group students’ performance based on classroom observation is also included. The results of this research reveals that the integrated diagnostic teaching can create cognitive conflicts for students and their misconceptions on fractions can be dispelled, clarified and corrected effectively. In addition, it can save teachers’ lesson preparation time. The main research results are reported as follows: (1) The post-test, retention test and the school’s midterm results revealed that the experimental group achieved higher math scores than the control group. (2) The analysis on classroom observation revealed that integrated diagnostic teaching is beneficial for learning of fractions. It improves students’ thinking, reflection and oral expression skills. Further, based on the research results, this study proposes some suggestions for designing integrated diagnostic teaching activities, design of textbooks, instructions, teacher development, and future　research directions.起始頁-結束頁：383-408資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1905.016篇名：國中自然與生活科技教師課程領導、組織承諾和教學效能關係之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Relationships Between Curriculum Leadership,Organizational Commitment and Teaching Effectiveness of Junior-High-School Science and Technology Teachers作者：陳玫良(Mei-Liang Cheng);李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee)關鍵字：自然與生活科技領域;教學效能;組織承諾;課程領導;Science and Technology (S&T) Learning Area;Teaching Effectiveness;OrganizationalCommitment;Curriculum Leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：教師課程領導、組織承諾以及教學效能之間的關係在某些學科或學習領域曾被探究，但在國中自然與生活科技學習領域則仍待了解。本研究旨在分析國中自然與生活科技學習領域教師課程領導、組織承諾以及教學效能之間的關係。透過問卷調查289名國中自然與生活科技教師，結果如下：（1）教師在課程領導、組織承諾、教學效能整體表現良好，以專業自信及尊重、義務內化、學科教學能力三構面為最佳；（2）男性教師在課程領導、組織承諾及教學效能顯著高於女性教師；在組織承諾方面，大型學校教師顯著高於中型學校、職務專任教師顯著高於兼導師教師；（3）教師課程領導、組織承諾及教學效能三者呈現正相關；（4）義務內化、專業成長、和專業自信及尊重三構面，可有效預測教學效能；（5）教師組織承諾對課程領導及教學效能有顯著之中介效果，課程領導可透過組織承諾影響教學效能。起始頁-結束頁：409-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1905.027篇名：結合實物與虛擬實驗促進八年級學生「溫度與熱」知識整合、實驗能力與學習策略之研究並列篇名：Combining Hands-on and Virtual Experiments to Promote Eighth-Grade Students' Knowledge Integration, Experimental Ability and Learning Strategies作者：蔡錕承(Kun-Chen Tsai);張欣怡(Hsin-Yi Chang)關鍵字：知識整合;虛擬實驗;溫度與熱;實物實驗;Knowledge Integration;Virtual Experiment;Heat and Temperature;Hands-on Experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討八年級學生接受網路科學探究課程─「溫度與熱」單元教學後，課程中所包含的兩種實驗，實物實驗(hands-on experiment)與虛擬實驗(virtual experiment)，於促進學生溫度與熱概念之知識整合成效，並討論學生進行實物與虛擬實驗所展現的學習策略與實驗能力，以瞭解本研究虛擬與實物實驗於學生學習所扮演的角色，以及學生實驗能力由實物實驗過渡至虛擬實驗的情形。本研究採混合研究法，以32位高雄市八年級學生為研究對象，資料收集包含進行課程之前、後測驗、課程中之嵌入式評量、以及學生電腦操作與討論影音檔。研究結果顯示實物與虛擬實驗活動均可促進學生知識整合。多數學生並可將於實物實驗所展現之實驗能力過渡至虛擬實驗。而兩種實驗活動均可促進學生高層次學習策略的使用。然而，有較多學生於理解本研究虛擬實驗的研究情境與問題產生困難，另一方面，則有較多的學生於解釋實物實驗的結果並連結至科學原則產生困難，但本研究亦提出證據，說明這些困難應為課程中意欲的困難。英文摘要：In this study we investigated how hands-on and virtual experiments of heat and temperature could support 8th-grade students’ knowledge integration of heat and temperature, development of experimental ability, and employment of learning strategies. The study employed mixed methods. Thirty-two eighthgrade students in Kaohsiung participated in this study. Data collected included pre-post tests, embedded assessments, and process videos during the hands-on and virtual experiments. The results indicate that both types of experiments effectively facilitated students’ knowledge integration of the heat and temperature concepts. The majority of students were able to translate their experimental abilities from hands-on to virtual experiments. Moreover, students employed high-level learning strategies during both the hands-on and virtual experiments. Finally, we identified difficult areas in both types of experiments that require further curriculum support, including how to guide students to make sense of the experiment context and develop questions in the virtual experiment environment, and guide students to explain the experimental results and connect to science principles in the hands-on experiment environment.起始頁-結束頁：435-459資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1905.038篇名：邁向科學之路？臺灣中學生性別對科學生涯選擇意向之影響並列篇名：Investigating the Impact of Secondary School Students' Gender on Science-Related Career Choice Intentions in Taiwan-The Case in PISA 2006作者：簡晉龍(Chin-Lung Chien);任宗浩(Tsung-Hau Jen)關鍵字：生涯選擇;次級資料分析;自我效能;社會構成論;結構方程式模型;Career Choice;Secondary Data Analysis;Self-efficacy;Social Constructionism;Structural Equation Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在瞭解不同性別學生在「科學生涯選擇意向」（science-related career choice intentions）上的差異，並探究造成此差異的相關中介因素。從社會認知生涯理論（social cognitive career theory）及社會構成論（social constructionism）的觀點，性別（gender）背後隱含的社會文化因素，會造成性別在科學生涯選擇上的差異；這些社會文化因素很可能透過科學自我效能、科學結果期待及科學興趣等中介因素，影響不同性別學生的科學生涯選擇意向，也可能有直接的影響。本研究為次級資料分析，資料取自PISA 2006資料庫，樣本為臺灣的15歲在學學生，扣除遺漏值後，共8,812人。潛在平均數比較的結果顯示：男學生在「科學生涯意向」、「科學自我效能」、「科學結果期待」、及「科學興趣」，均顯著高於女學生。路徑模式檢驗的結果顯示：性別對科學生涯意向的影響，大部分是先透過科學自我效能，再經由科學結果期待及科學興趣共同作用，而性別對科學生涯意向也有直接效果。最後，討論本研究之意涵及未來研究方向。英文摘要：The study aimed to investigate gender difference on “Science-related Career Choice　Intentions” (SCCI) and the potential variables mediating the effect of gender on SCCI. According to social cognitive career theory and social constructionism, the socio-cultural factors implicated behind the social construct of “gender” may cause gender difference on SCCI, and the gender effect on SCCI may be mediated by science self-efficacy, outcome expectation (external motivation), and science interest (internal motivation). The study used a secondary analysis approach and the data from 8,812 Taiwanese students responses in the PISA 2006 instrument were analyzed. The latent mean analyses showed that boys’ SCCI, science self-efficacy, outcome expectation, and science interest were significantly higher than girls’. Most importantly, path analysis with latent variables showed that the gender variable exerts a direct effect on SCCI and indirect effects mediated through science self-efficacy, outcome expectation and science interest. Finally, the implications and directions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：461-481資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1905.049篇名：緣「案例研討」之路徑學習教數學－以職前教師為例並列篇名：Learning to Teach Mathematics through Case-Based Observation and Discussion作者：姚如芬(Ru-Fen Yao)關鍵字：案例研討;教師專業發展;數學教學;職前教師;Case-Based Observation and Discussion;Professional Development;Mathematics Instruction;Pre-Service Teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探究小學職前教師數學教學專業發展。研究者以「案例觀察與紀錄」以及「案例分享與討論」作為案例研討路徑，帶領六位職前教師至小學數學課輔現場，以學童的數學學習情況做為「案例」，進行二十二次的案例研討，為期六個月。經由觀察、問卷、與相關文件分析，研究發現：職前教師在案例研討路徑上的數學教學專業發展依序可歸納為焦點模糊、聚焦提問、與嘗試求解三個階段；且其在「關於數學教學的想法與做法」以及「對學習者的理解」兩方面有較為明顯的轉變，至於「數學知識」與「數學課程知識」的進展則較為有限；而此案例研討路徑對職前教師專業成長的牽引主要來自教學現場觀摩、與學童面對面接觸、成員的問題交流、研究團隊的支援與在職教師的經驗分享等面向。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to investigate pre-service teachers' professional development on mathematics instruction. Through a workshop on mathematical teaching, six pre-service teachers participated in observing the mathematical learning of students in an elementary school for six months. ”Case-observe-record” and ”case-share-discuss” were used as an approach to enhance and investigate the professional development of participants. Through observation, and analysis of questionnaires and related documents, the results revealed that there were three stages of participants' professional development during the period of observation in schools: ”without sense,” ”focus and question,” ”try to find solutions.” Participants' thinking and actions toward mathematical teaching were improved, as well as their understanding of students' mathematical learning. In the context of case-based observation and discussion, the main influential factors in participants' changes were observation in the teaching field, face-to-face contact with students, problem sharing among participants, and support from the researcher and in-service teachers. However, for enhancing the mathematical knowledge and curriculum knowledge of participants, the effect of this teacher preparation approach was limited.起始頁-結束頁：283-308資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1904.0110篇名：建模教學對國小學童的模型認知及地質概念理解之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Modeling Instruction on Understanding of Models and Geologic Conceptions of Primary School Students作者：洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung);莊敏雄(Min-Shiung Chuang);宋國城(Quo-Chen Sung)關鍵字：地質概念理解;建模教學;模型認知;Geologic Conceptions;Modeling Instruction;Understanding of Models期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the effect of modeling instructions on understanding of models and geologic conceptions of primary school students using a quasi-experimental design. A six-week geologic conception teaching sequence was conducted in three classes of sixth grade students. The classes were subjected to different modeling instructional approaches and were entitled: Modeling Sequences (Guiding students to construct models through teacher-student discussion), Model Making (Guiding students to construct models using teacher demonstration of model making) and Graphical Models (Guiding students to draw models through teacher illustration of graphic models). Pre-and post-teaching assessment was implemented using the SUMS (with a Cronbach's α value of .85) and a Geologic Conception Test (with a Cronbach's α value of .83, an average item difficulty of .45, and a discriminant validity of each question higher than .25). The pre-test data were used as the covariate for ANCOVA. The pre- and post-teaching ground plane structure models drawn by the students were used to analyze their model-using ability. The findings revealed that for understanding of models and for geologic conceptions, Modeling Sequence had the highest score, followed by Model Making and then Graphical Models (p＜.050), and that Modeling Sequence had the best score for model-using ability.英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the effect of modeling instructions on understanding of models and geologic conceptions of primary school students using a quasi-experimental design. A six-week geologic conception teaching sequence was conducted in three classes of sixth grade students. The classes were subjected to different modeling instructional approaches and were entitled: Modeling Sequences (Guiding students to construct models through teacher-student discussion), Model Making (Guiding students to construct models using teacher demonstration of model making) and Graphical Models (Guiding students to draw models through teacher illustration of graphic models). Pre-and post-teaching assessment was implemented using the SUMS (with a Cronbach's α value of .85) and a Geologic Conception Test (with a Cronbach's α value of .83, an average item difficulty of .45, and a discriminant validity of each question higher than .25). The pre-test data were used as the covariate for ANCOVA. The pre- and post-teaching ground plane structure models drawn by the students were used to analyze their model-using ability. The findings revealed that for understanding of models and for geologic conceptions, Modeling Sequence had the highest score, followed by Model Making and then Graphical Models (p＜.050), and that Modeling Sequence had the best score for model-using ability.起始頁-結束頁：309-333資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1904.0411篇名：國民中小學教師資訊融入教學素養評量表之建構與調查並列篇名：The Construction and Evaluation of ICT Integration Scale for Elementary and Junior High School Teachers作者：徐式寬(Shih-Kuan Hsu);關秉寅(Ping-Yin Kuan)關鍵字：全國調查;教學素養;評量表;量化分析;資訊融入教學;National Survey;Instructional Proficiency;Evaluation Instrument;Quantitative Study;ICT Integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：資訊科技的設備在學校中逐漸普及，如何評量教師使用資訊科技以融入教學是個重要的課題。為了瞭解教師資訊融入教學的素養，本研究以美國國際教育科技學會所擬定的教師運用資訊科技的能力指標為架構，以國內的教師經驗為基礎，建構出適合本土教師資訊融入教學素養之評量表。本研究並以此評量表進行了全國抽樣調查，一共抽樣334所學校，共4,911位國中小教師，最後獲得有效問卷3,729份。研究資料以探索性因素分析來瞭解教師資訊融入教學構念之內部結構，並透過信度分析瞭解其向度之間的內部一致性。研究結果發現教師資訊融入教學素養可分為六個向度，包括(1)教學準備及資料蒐集、(2)教材製作及硬體問題解決、(3)管理、溝通與分享、(4)規劃、教學與評量、(5)專業成長與自我學習、及(6)資訊倫理、安全與健康。調查結果發現國中小教師在教材準備及蒐集資訊的向度得分最高，但規劃、教學與評量的素養則偏低。分析不同背景教師，發現男性、碩博士、研習時數高者其資訊融入教學素養較高。國中教師以及教授中學主科的教師的資訊融入教學較低，但城鄉差距的影響並不明顯。本評量表可提供教師、學校、以及縣市政府進行檢視，作為提升教師資訊融入教學素養之參考。英文摘要：Recent investment in information and communication technology in Taiwan has provided much equipment in classrooms. How to measure teachers' level of technology integration, however, remains a question. This study used teacher technology integration performance standards developed by International Society of Technology in Education (ISTE) as a framework, combined with teachers' experiences, to develop an instrument to evaluate teachers' technology integration proficiency. A total of 334 schools and 4,911 elementary and secondary teachers was sampled nation-wide, and 3,729 valid questionnaires were collected. Exploratory factor analysis was used to explore the underlying structure of the scale, and internal consistency was calculated. The results revealed six scales for teachers' technology integration, including (1) teaching preparation and information gathering, (2) instructional material and hardware problem-solving, (3) management, communication, and sharing, (4) planning, instruction, and evaluation, and (5) professional development and self-study. Using several background factors to compare teachers' ICT integration level, it was found that male teachers, teachers with masters' degrees, and teachers with more professional development scored higher. Junior high school teachers and those who teach secondary school major subjects scored lower on ICT integration. The influence of economic development of the area was not significant. This instrument can be used to help teachers, schools, and counties to evaluate teachers' ICT integration proficiency.起始頁-結束頁：335-357資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1904.0212篇名：設計體驗式探究鷹架教學應用於非制式科學教育－不同探究能力學童的學習比較並列篇名：Practical Experiential Inquiry-Based Scaffold Teaching Method Used in Non-Standard Science Education-A Comparative Study of Children with Different Science Inquiry Learning Ability作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu);洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);陳月雲(Yueh-Yun Chen)關鍵字：社區資源;科學探究能力;體驗式探究鷹架教學;Community Resource;Science Inquiry Learning Ability;Practical Experiential Inquiry-Based Scaffold Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：In this research, we used practical experiential inquiry-based scaffold teaching in informal science education teaching about the soap industry, which was a community resource we wished to use in school lessons. Unlike basic hand-wash activities, we designed a ”Soap” teaching lesson. The designed lesson comprised four activities and an extended exercise. We used 105 fifth grade students as our research subjects, and used the Science Inquiry Learning Ability assessment (SILA) and the Achievement Testing of Soap Course (ATSC) to measure their learning over the teaching lessons and to compare the difference in learning between students with different learning inquiry ability. According to our study, ATSC F-test results show SILA high scoring students’ learning achievement is higher than that of SILA middle scoring students, and higher again than SILA low scoring students (p＜.01). Second, we find that most students from SILA high scoring group are capable of experiencing and reflecting. Not only could they generate their own conceptions or principles, but also apply the cardinal principle of soap preservation and solve problems which they encountered in the soap pilling exercise. Third, the SILA middle scoring student group had less sensitivity to the problems. They directly believed the data they had, but didn't think more about why this might happen. It appeared that they could provide various strategies, but not necessarily able to solve the problem. It was necessary for teachers to use scaffolding strategy to lead the students. Fourth, the SILA low scoring student group was in a passive position most of the time. They think conservatively and don't get on well with others. They recognized the natural phenomenon, but had no other ideas, and needed the teacher to give examples and guide them to finish the project.英文摘要：In this research, we used practical experiential inquiry-based scaffold teaching in informal science education teaching about the soap industry, which was a community resource we wished to use in school lessons. Unlike basic hand-wash activities, we designed a ”Soap” teaching lesson. The designed lesson comprised four activities and an extended exercise. We used 105 fifth grade students as our research subjects, and used the Science Inquiry Learning Ability assessment (SILA) and the Achievement Testing of Soap Course (ATSC) to measure their learning over the teaching lessons and to compare the difference in learning between students with different learning inquiry ability. According to our study, ATSC F-test results show SILA high scoring students’ learning achievement is higher than that of SILA middle scoring students, and higher again than SILA low scoring students (p＜.01). Second, we find that most students from SILA high scoring group are capable of experiencing and reflecting. Not only could they generate their own conceptions or principles, but also apply the cardinal principle of soap preservation and solve problems which they encountered in the soap pilling exercise. Third, the SILA middle scoring student group had less sensitivity to the problems. They directly believed the data they had, but didn't think more about why this might happen. It appeared that they could provide various strategies, but not necessarily able to solve the problem. It was necessary for teachers to use scaffolding strategy to lead the students. Fourth, the SILA low scoring student group was in a passive position most of the time. They think conservatively and don't get on well with others. They recognized the natural phenomenon, but had no other ideas, and needed the teacher to give examples and guide them to finish the project.起始頁-結束頁：359-381資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1904.0313篇名：問題本位學習對四年級學童的問題解決與批判思考之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Problem-Based Learning on the Problem Solving and Critical Thinking of Fourth Graders作者：楊坤原(Kun-Yuan Yang);陳建樺(Jian-Hua Chen);張賴妙理(Miao-Li Changlai)關鍵字：批判思考;問題本位學習;問題解決;Critical Thinking;Problem-Based Learning;Problem Solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate problem solving and critical thinking of fourth-grade students who were given Problem-Based Learning (PBL) instruction compared to students who were given a more traditional non-PBL instruction. Four classes of students were selected from a public elementary school in Tau-Yuan county and classes were randomly divided into two experimental groups (n=65) and two control groups (n=65) to implement PBL and lecture-based teaching respectively. The groups of students were tested by the Test of Problem-Solving, Cornell Critical Thinking Test (Level X) and the results from paired t-tests showed that the means of posttests in these two tests for experimental group students were significantly better than those of pretests (p＜.010). One-way analysis of covariance found significant differences between the means of posttests in these two tests for experimental group students and control groups (p＜.050). These findings suggested that PBL promoted the problem solving and critical thinking abilities of fourth graders. Evidence derived from the qualitative data analysis found that the experimental groups brainstormed the various causes of problems and exercisable problem-solving methods according to the problem scenarios. They reflected how to improve and resolve the difficulties they suffered when designing experiments and determining learning issues. They also actively confirm the reliability of the data collected from different sources and made deductive reasoning based upon the data. These findings suggested PBL was beneficial for fourth graders to develop their competency of problem solving and critical thinking.英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate problem solving and critical thinking of fourth-grade students who were given Problem-Based Learning (PBL) instruction compared to students who were given a more traditional non-PBL instruction. Four classes of students were selected from a public elementary school in Tau-Yuan county and classes were randomly divided into two experimental groups (n=65) and two control groups (n=65) to implement PBL and lecture-based teaching respectively. The groups of students were tested by the Test of Problem-Solving, Cornell Critical Thinking Test (Level X) and the results from paired t-tests showed that the means of posttests in these two tests for experimental group students were significantly better than those of pretests (p＜.010). One-way analysis of covariance found significant differences between the means of posttests in these two tests for experimental group students and control groups (p＜.050). These findings suggested that PBL promoted the problem solving and critical thinking abilities of fourth graders. Evidence derived from the qualitative data analysis found that the experimental groups brainstormed the various causes of problems and exercisable problem-solving methods according to the problem scenarios. They reflected how to improve and resolve the difficulties they suffered when designing experiments and determining learning issues. They also actively confirm the reliability of the data collected from different sources and made deductive reasoning based upon the data. These findings suggested PBL was beneficial for fourth graders to develop their competency of problem solving and critical thinking.起始頁-結束頁：185-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1903.0114篇名：低年級學童對於「加法交換律」與「等號」的認識並列篇名：Children's Understanding of the Additive Commutative Law and the Equal Sign作者：姚如芬(Ru-Fen Yao)關鍵字：加法交換律;低年級學童;個案研究;等號;Additive Commutative Law;Children;Case Study;Equal Sign期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本個案研究主要目的在探討17位國小低年級學童對「加法交換律」的認識、並討論這群個案學童對於「等號」的相關想法。經由補救教學期間的觀察、晤談與相關文件的綜合分析，研究發現：多數學童在補救教學前知道「50+25」與「25+50」結果相同，但係透過計算而非「加法交換律」的應用；經由補救教學引導，學童關於「加法交換律」的認識可以逐步進階，依序為計算階段、認知階段、等式表徵前階段、等式表徵階段，而這些不同的認識階段與這群學童對「等號」的認識息息相關；研究者綜合此些發現，於文中提出了關於學童「加法交換律」的發展階層及其與「等號」認識之關聯圖；同時針對「加法交換律」相關的教學與探究，提出若干省思與建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this case study was to investigate 17 children's understanding of the commutative law of addition and the equal sign. Various data was obtained through observation, interview and the collection of relevant documents. From analyses of the data it was noticed that prior to any instruction most students could recognize 50+25=25+50 through counting but not through the application of the additive commutative law. After instruction, students' understanding of the additive commutative law improved, and this understanding was related to their understanding about the equal sign in equation. According to these findings, the researcher developed a model to show the progress of students' understanding of the additive commutative law in addition to their understanding of equal sign. Reflections and suggestions are also presented in this article.起始頁-結束頁：211-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1903.0215篇名：虛擬實境結合問題導向學習應用於行動化醫學教育之研究並列篇名：A Study of Virtual Reality and Problem-Based Learning Applied in Mobile Medical Education作者：廖述盛(Shu-Sheng Liaw);黃秀美(Hsiu-Mei Huang);賴崇閔(Chung-Min Lai)關鍵字：行動學習;問題導向學習;虛擬實境;Mobile Learning;Problem-Based Learning;Virtual Reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要在建立一個「行動虛擬人體結構學習系統」用於輔助學生在人體結構學上的學習。本系統利用虛擬實境(Virtual Reality, VR)技術建置3D立體化人體器官，學習者可透過此系統觀察3D虛擬人體器官，使其瞭解人體器官的功能、運作方式及人體結構間的空間位置。本系統以網頁的方式呈現一個互動式的學習環境，運作於行動載具（如：PDA），學習者可利用行動載具及無線網路進行行動學習，如此可在不受時間及空間的限制下進行學習，增加學習上的便利性和即時性。有鑑於問題導向學習(Problem-Based Learning, PBL)逐漸受到教育界的重視。因此，本系統結合問題導向學習，讓學生在學習情境中獲取問題解決的能力，如此可提供學生判斷思考的機會，並進而培養學生臨床上問題解決能力。本研究旨在探討3D虛擬實境結合問題導向學習及行動學習應用於醫學教育之研究，並依據問題導向學習、虛擬實境等文獻建立研究架構，其研究變數包括：虛擬實境三特性（互動性、融入性及想像力）、行動化虛擬實境教材的喜好及問題導向學習的態度。評估的方法是以採用問卷調查的方式瞭解學生對行動化醫學教育之態度，研究結果顯示虛擬實境的互動性、融入性及想像力皆可預測行動化虛擬實境教材的喜好、行動化虛擬實境教材的喜好可預測問題導向學習的態度。英文摘要：In this study the authors built a Mobile Virtual Body Structures Learning System to support learners in studying human structure. This system used Virtual Reality (VR) to create three-dimensional models of the human organs that help learners to memorize the human structure, organ functions and knowledge of 3D spatial relationship between organ structures. This system is a Web-based interactive learning environment executed by a mobile device (such as PDA). Therefore, learners can use this 3D VR learning system at any place when they need. Specially, this system adopted Problem-Based Learning (PBL) approach as the learning and teaching strategy in order to enhance learner's problem solving ability. The purpose of this study attempted to evaluate learners' perceptions of virtual reality and problem-based learning applied in mobile medical education. There search variables: virtual reality features (immersion, interaction, imagination), learners' preferences of mobile virtual reality learning and learning attitude of problem-based learning were investigated in this study. Finally, a questionnaire was developed for evaluating learners' attitude toward the mobile medical education. Results indicated that immersion, interaction and imagination can predict learner preferences of mobile virtual reality as well as learner of mobile virtual reality material and learning attitude of problem-based learning.起始頁-結束頁：237-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1903.0316篇名：從學生的表現與觀點探討引導發現式教學作為發展探究教學之折衷方案角色的成效－以密度概念為例並列篇名：Exploring the Effect of Guided Discovery Teaching as a Mediated Way to Put Inquiry into Classroom Practice-From Students' Perspectives作者：顧炳宏(Bing-Hong Ku);陳瓊森(Chyong-Sun Chen);溫媺純(Mei-Chun Lydia Wen)關鍵字：引導發現式教學;物理教學;密度概念;探究教學;Guided Discovery Teaching;Physics Teaching;Density Concept;Inquiry Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在發展一介於探究教學和食譜式實驗之間，可作為折衷方案的教學方式－引導發現式教學。研究採準實驗研究設計，針對四個班、總人數135位的八年級學生，以質性、量化資料收集與分析方法並行的方式，探討前述三種不同教學方式對學生的學習成效影響有何差異，並從學生的觀點了解其對於不同教學方式的知覺為何。本研究藉由「密度概念診斷測驗」及「理化教室氣氛問卷」為工具，以前、後測方式收集量的資料並採ANCOVA統計分析，以探討不同開放程度的探究教學策略對學生不同面向上之學習成效與差異；接之以問卷統計結果為基礎，挑選學生與之晤談以收集質性資料，以瞭解學生對於不同教學方式的感受和看法；綜合質與量的資料檢視不同開放程度探究教學之效益和效率。研究結果發現，在概念學習成效上，引導發現式的教學在密度概念學習成效上優於探究教學以及食譜式實驗教學。其次，在學生探究能力培養上，相較於探究教學，引導發現式教學能提供同等的機會和成效且較具引導性。最後，引導發現式教學較可符合教師在現實課室環境中的需求，並作為協助教師改變教學之有效適應性方案。英文摘要：This article intends to explore whether guided discovery teaching can serve as a mediated teaching approach to progress the instruction from traditional recipe style experiment to inquiry teaching. The development of guided discovery teaching for the density concept was described. A quasi-experimental method was employed in this study to explore the influences of three different teaching styles-inquiry teaching, guided discovery teaching, and the recipe style experiment-on learning from the students' perspectives. Through both quantitative and qualitative data analyses it was firstly founded that guided discovery teaching provided significantly better effects than inquiry teaching did on facilitating students' learning of the density concept. Secondly, it was founded that compared with inquiry teaching, guided discovery teaching produced equivalent result on developing students' inquiry skills. Finally, it was founded that guided discovery teaching could better meet the demands in practical classroom environment. Hence, we concluded that the guided discovery teaching might successfully perform the role as a mediated teaching approach which is feasible and effective to fill the gap between inquiry teaching and the traditional recipe style experiment.起始頁-結束頁：257-282資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1903.0417篇名：數學課程實施－一位國小資深教師的個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study-How Did an Experienced Teacher Implement Mathematics Curriculum in Her Classroom?作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu)關鍵字：國小教師;數學課程;課程實施;Elementary School Teacher;Mathematics Curriculum;Curriculum Implementation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的目的在瞭解教室內數學課程實施的情形，並探討影響教師數學課程實施的因素。以一位任教超過十年的國小資深教師為對象，採用個案研究法，透過教學觀察和訪談來蒐集資料。結果發現，在課程實施方面，雖然大部分源自教科書，但是個案教師會調整問題的情境和表徵方式；在數學任務的類型上，個案教師大部分採用高認知需求的數學任務，並以解題、發表、討論的方式來實施，過程中強調不同表徵間的連結。在影響課程實施的因素上，本研究發現個人的教學知識、信念和角色定位，對個案教師數學課程實施的影響較大，相較之下教科書的特色、學生的表現和脈絡等因素影響較小，但還是會影響個案教師數學任務的使用與實施。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore how an experienced elementary school teacher implemented mathematics curriculum in her classroom, and to identify factors that were considered during the implementation process. Case study methodology was used to study a sixth-grade teacher with more than 10 years teaching experience. The primary data sources were classroom observations and teacher interviews collected during the 2006-07 school year. Findings of this study indicated that the teacher actively chose and then frequently adjusted mathematics tasks from the textbook. Most of the tasks she used during her teaching were classified as high cognitive demand mathematical tasks. She regularly implemented these tasks in an interactive way and provided many opportunities for students to discuss and explain their thinking as they worked on and completed the tasks. The teacher usually actively interpreted the students' reactions and took account of textbook features in deciding how to implement mathematics tasks. This study also found teacher identity, which included her teaching knowledge, beliefs about students and teaching, and professional role identity, had significant impact on her curriculum implementation. The limitations of the teaching context that the teacher faced did not seem to be considered during her curriculum implementation.起始頁-結束頁：101-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1902.0118篇名：知覺父母回饋與國小高年級學童數學科考試失敗歸因之研究並列篇名：The Effect of Perceptions of Parents' Feedback and Attribution Style on Fifth and Sixth Grade Children's Math Achievement Motivation作者：李宜玫(Yi-Mei Lee);蔡育(Yu-Shien Tsai)關鍵字：人際間歸因理論;情緒反應;數學科;歸因類型;Interpersonal Attribution Theory;Emotion Response;Mathematics;Attribution Styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在探討學童數學考試失敗歸因在父母親口語與情緒回饋下人際間歸因的互動影響。以臺灣190名國小5、6年級學生（男101人，女89人），採隨機分派成5組，分別進行情境劇影片的實驗處理（能力、努力、策略3種口語回饋，以及生氣、同情2種情緒反應），最後再進行學童個人與人際知覺的歸因型態個別訪談，並將資料進行編碼與卡方考驗分析。結果顯示：五種實驗處理後學童的社會知覺普遍產生傾向努力與生氣的偏誤，後續學童自我歸因主要受到自己所知覺父母的歸因型態所影響，而且多數傾向努力歸因，並對未來設定較高目標。結論有三：(1)強調努力的文化價值深植臺灣學童的信念中，而人際間歸因互動受到學童主觀的知覺影響；(2)人際間歸因理論僅努力與生氣獲驗證，能力歸因與同情反應正確知覺低；(3)不同自我歸因類型均展現未來高目標設定。起始頁-結束頁：123-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1902.0219篇名：探究教學的專業成長歷程－以十位國中科學教師的觀點為例並列篇名：The Process of Teachers' Inquiry Teaching Professional Development-The Perceptions of 10 Experienced Junior-High Science Teachers作者：曾崇賢(Chung-Hsien Tseng);段曉林(Hsiao-Lin Tuan);靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin)關鍵字：探究;探究教學;教師專業成長;紮根理論;Inquiry;Inquiry Teaching;Teacher Professional Development;Grounded Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在建構實施探究教學的國中科學教師其探究教學的專業成長歷程。研究對象為10位具有兩年以上成功探究教學經驗的國中科學教師，資料蒐集包含科學探究教學效能問卷(ITEQ)及二次半結構式晤談，透過紮根理論研究法建構科學教師從傳統教學轉化為探究教學的專業成長歷程。研究發現，教師經歷的專業成長歷程有知識論轉變及學科教學轉變等二個面向，教學反思及支持系統為影響教師專業成長的關鍵因子，而信念的強化是專業成長的重要階段，它影響了教師的轉變且支持教師願意繼續進行探究教學。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the perceptions of 10 experienced junior-high science teachers concerning their learning experiences with inquiry teaching, and the perceptions of their own professional development. An ITEQ questionnaire and semi-structured interview were used for data collection and a grounded theory method used for analysis. The findings indicate that there are two dimensions of the process of inquiry teaching professional development, including epistemology and teaching practice transformation. These case teachers changed their epistemology from positivism to constructivism based on their previous learning experience and their experience of the course. After the case teachers changed their epistemology, they increased their flexibility in designing inquiry lesson plans and in their inquiry teaching repertoire. While implementing inquiry lessons, these teachers still faced a dilemma concerning student learning outcomes vs. pressures from school, but their teaching beliefs, reflections and support systems were critical factors reinforcing their persistence in implementing inquiry teaching.起始頁-結束頁：143-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1902.0420篇名：網路化學習歷程檔案學習者自評之信效度並列篇名：Reliability and Validity of Learner Web-Based Portfolio Self-Assessment作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);吳炳宏(Bing-Hong Wu)關鍵字：自評;學習歷程檔案;網路化學習歷程檔案;網路化檔案評量;Self-Assessment;Portfolio;Web-Based Portfolio;Web-Based Portfolio Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討網路化檔案學習者自評的信、效度。研究樣本為某高職修習「計算機概論」課程的72位學生。學生藉由網路化檔案評量系統進行個人檔案的製作、觀摩與自評。結果顯示：(1)學習者兩次檔案自評結果具有高度的一致性；(2)學習者自評與教學者評量結果具高度一致性且無顯著差異；(3)學習者檔案自評分數與測驗成績結果具高度一致性，顯示網路化檔案自評可以反應學習成就。簡言之，網路化檔案自評兼具信、效度。英文摘要：This study examines the reliability and validity of Web-based portfolio self-assessment. The research sample consisted of seventy-two students taking an ”Introduction to Computers” course in the second grade of a vocational high school. The students used a Web-based portfolio assessment system to create their portfolio, emulate peers' portfolios, and perform self-assessment. The results demonstrate that there exists a high consistency between the two self-assessments. There exists a high consistency and no significant difference between student self-assessment and teacher assessment. The consistency between peer-assessment and test score was high, implying that the Web-based portfolio self-assessment may reflect learning achievement. In short, Web-based portfolio self-assessment has adequate reliable and validity.起始頁-結束頁：169-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1902.0301篇名：生涯概念在特殊教育場域之論述∼以臺灣特殊教育導論教科書為例並列篇名：Career Discourse in Special Education in Taiwan: IntroductorySpecial Education Textbooks Published from 1966 to 2003作者：黃文慧(Wen-Hui Huang);林幸台(Hsin-Tai Lin)關鍵字：特殊教育導論;教科書;論述分析;discourse analysis;introductory special education;textbook期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以論述分析檢視民國55年至92年臺灣特殊教育導論教科書對障礙者生涯之建構，探討特殊教育入門知識選取、認可的論述型態與視框。結果發現，隨著戒嚴解除，社會團體進入特殊教育論述場域、生涯議題納入官方政策，以及教科書出版的間隔時間，生涯論述可以民國80年為界，分為二類：一、民國55年至80年醫學與經濟論述搭架的生涯，其主要特色包括：就業導向的生涯論述、分／合的經濟生產位置、個體特質支配生涯決定、升學論述沉默與障別、性別、職種缺席的策略。二、民國80年至92年醫學、經濟與社會契約論述搭架的生涯，其主要特色包括：職業／升學選擇並置的生涯、分／合之外的生產位置、生涯決定取決於個體生涯技能與能力的準備、點綴式與篇幅增加的策略。文末則從檢視教科書發話位置、障礙者主體位置、提供多元生涯發展例證與生涯論述觀點等提出建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Under the policy of equity and adapted education, increasingly more students with disabilities graduating from high school are facing career decision-making. This study did not only identify the career discourse development of individuals with disabilities, but also enquires how to construct career discourse in introductory special education textbooks in Taiwan to challenge our thinking about realistic aspects of careers in the field of special education. Methods: This study adopted a qualitative approach and employed Foucauldian Discourse Analysis. Two sets of data were used in the study. Primary data were the 16 introductory special education textbooks published in Taiwan from 1966 to 2003. Other documents compared or supplied textbook arguments as follows: (1) policy documents, official publications, and academic papers related to careers for individuals with disabilities; (2) documents and publications from special interest groups related to people with disabilities. After collecting data, the researcher undertook data analysis by a constant comparison method, and connected themes to derived results. Findings: During the 1990’s when martial law ended in Taiwan, career discourse shifted because of more interest groups participating in the discursive special education field, and career issues became an agenda in special education policy. Two categories of career discourse emerged for discursive shift. The first career discourse from 1966 to 1990 was based on medical and economic discursive construction: (1) employment-based discourse lacked post-secondary education discourse, (2) either separate or competitive placement of economic production, (3) career decision was made by object’s trait-factors, and (4) discur sive strategies were used in the absence of disabilities, gender, and occupation classifications. The second career discourse from 1991 to 2003 was based on medical, economic, and social contracts: (1) career discourse-blended employment and post-secondary education discourse, (2) continuous placement of economic production, (3) career decision was made regarding the participant’s career skills and competence, and (4) discursive strategies: intersperse and increase literature on post-secondary education discourse. Conclusions/ Implications: The results demonstrated that introductory special education textbooks construct career discourse on people with disabilities within the medical and economical framework. The study suggested the following: (1) examine the spoken position of introductory special education textbooks, (2) identify subject positions of people with disabilities in introductory special education textbooks, and (3) supplement examples on alternative career development for people with disabilities in introductory special education textbooks.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201111.36030012篇名：特殊教育實習輔導教師與實習教師教學後的互動與反思並列篇名：Interaction and Reflective Thinking of Special Education Student Teachers and Their Expert Mentors作者：胡心慈(Shin-Tzu Hu);林淑莉(Shu-Li Lin)關鍵字：專家教師;實習教師;實習輔導教師;教學反思;student teachers;mentors;expert teachers;reflective thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討「專家教師」身分的特教實習輔導教師和實習教師在教育實習上的互動及教學反思過程。以觀察及參與討論的方式，蒐集數次實習輔導教師與其實習教師的教學或觀摩教學，及其後的互動與討論內容。研究發現：一、三對輔導教師與實習教師互動的關係分別呈現「同儕式」、「師徒式」及「家人式」。「同儕式」的對等關係讓輔導教師與實習教師能進行較多與理論整合的討論。二、在「同儕式」的對等討論中，較能顯出教學反思循環的歷程。三、三名輔導（專家）教師均注重目標、學生行為的意義、滿足個別化需求並多利用教學知識；一名與輔導教師呈現「同儕式」互動關係的實習教師也注重目標並多利用教學知識，另兩名實習教師則較關心學生秩序及參與度而較少運用知識。研究者鼓勵輔導教師和實習教師能對等會談，將理論和實務整合成專家知識，促進教師專業發展。英文摘要：Purpose: Reflective thinking is considered an important factor in the professional development of teachers; therefore, peer interaction and professional dialogue are effective approaches to promote reflective thinking. This study explores the interaction and reflective thinking of special education student teachers and their expert mentors on practicum. Methods: Three special education student teachers and 3 expert mentors participated in this study. The expert mentors were selected according to certain criteria including graduating from teacher colleges or normal universities, more than 7 years teaching experience, obtaining recognition from the staff of their school, and obtaining a government award. Data were collected through field observations, interviews, and some documents on practicum from participants in three schools. Participants of the same school were observed when they taught a minimum of 4 times, after which the dialogue after teaching was recorded and translated into a manuscript. Findings: The interacting model of special education student teachers and their expert mentors included 3 models: the peer model, the mentor-apprenticeship model, and the family model. Teachers of the peer model possessed mutual respect and discussed equally. Teachers of the mentor apprenticeship model did not discuss equally and the mentor rendered direct instruction to the student teacher. The mentor of the family model did not discuss equally with the student teacher, nor rendered direct instruction to the student teacher, but interacted similar to a mother-daughter relationship. Both teachers in the peer model obtained enhanced professional development, and exhibited progress in reflective thinking. The reflective thinking process includes planning, teaching action, self-criticism, and constructing in structional knowledge. Teachers in the mentor apprenticeship model and the family model achieved less development than teachers in the peer model. The 3 expert mentors esteemed educational goals, understanding student behaviors, students’ special needs, and used more instructional knowledge; the student teacher in the peer model esteemed educational goals and used more instructional knowledge. The other 2 student teachers esteemed student routines and participation. Conclusions/Implications: Based on the findings, the authors encourage student teachers and their expert mentors to provide equal emphasis to professional dialogue to promote professional development. Expert mentors can encourage young student teachers to talk more and inspire them to think more. Student teachers should respectfully consult their senior mentors, but still express their reflective thinking. The authors encourage expert mentors and young student teachers to continue to integrate theory and practice.起始頁-結束頁：27-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201111.36030023篇名：一般兒童與自閉症兒童在不同溝通中斷類型之修補能力研究並列篇名：Conversation Repairs in Different Communication Breakdown Contexts: Typically Developing Children and Autistic Children作者：朱芳誼(Fang-Yi Chu);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：自閉症;語言修補能力;溝通中斷;Autism;communication breakdown;repair strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解一般兒童與自閉症兒童，在不同溝通中斷情境下的修補能力與策略類型表現。研究對象依年齡可分為學前和國小兩組，同年齡組以托尼非語文智力再版、修訂畢保德圖畫詞彙測驗甲式、兒童口語表達能力測驗得分進行能力配對。學前與國小組普通及自閉兒童各11名，合計44名。研究者以遊戲形式與受試者進行互動，並依半結構方式依序出現：「要求澄清」、「忽視」、「轉移」話題三種溝通中斷類型。每名受試者都需完成15道題項，計分方式為適當的修補策略得1分、不當反應則為0分。研究者並將兒童的反應進行編碼，類別包含「重複」、「添加訊息」、「提供修正」、「詞彙定義」、「主動延續話題」、「話題轉移」、「引起注意」、「展示」、「眼神注視」、「不當反應－自言自語」、「不當反應－未給予任何回應」和「不當反應－未轉移話題」12類。研究發現：一、所有兒童在「要求澄清」類型下的得分最高、「轉移話題」次之、「忽視」類型的得分最低，在特定情境中會使用優先策略進行修補。二、國小組一般兒童和自閉症兒童，在三項中斷類型的修補得分皆未顯著高於學前組。三、在「要求澄清」類型中，國小組一般兒童使用的修補策略類型數顯著高於學前組；自閉症兒童則無顯著差異。四、學前組與國小組自閉症兒童的三類中斷修補得分，都顯著低於學前組一般兒童。五、一般兒童及自閉症兒童皆有不適當的回應，但除了「未給予任何回應」和「未轉移話題」外，自閉症兒童還比一般組兒童多出了「自言自語」的不當回應現象。研究結果顯示，不論學前或國小自閉症兒童仍具有修補動機與意圖，只是品質較一般兒童不佳。研究者針對可能原因做一探討，並提出建議供教學實務與未來研究參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study compares how Mandarin-speaking children with autism and normally developing children repair communication breakdowns in various contexts. Method: Two groups of children participated in this study: autistic children (N=22) and typically developing children (N=22). Each group consisted of preschoolers (N=11) and first and second graders (N=11). All the children were asked to complete three standardized tests, including PPVT-R (verbal comprehension), the Children Verbal Expression Test (verbal expression), and the TONI3 (nonverbal IQ) to understand their verbal skill and IQ. The children were also asked to interact with the experimenter in a play, a semistructured context where three communication breakdowns, request for clarification, non-acknowledgment, and topic shift, occurred. Children’s strategy to repair communication breakdowns was scored with either one point for an appropriate response or zero point for an inappropriate response. Their response was also coded into twelve categories, including repair, addition, recast, definition, spontaneous topic continuation, topic shift, attention, showing, eye contact, inappropriate strategy-monologue, inappropriate strategy- no response, and inappropriate strategy-no topic shift. Fifteen communication breakdown items were assessed in total. Findings: All children received higher mean scores in the request for clarification context than they did in the topic shift (second highest) and non-acknowledgement contexts (lowest). No significant difference was found in communication breakdown scores between the preschoolers and the first and second graders for both the group of autistic children and the group of typically developing chilren. In the context of request for clarification, the typically developing first and second graders used significantly more repair strategies than the preschoolers did. No significant difference, however, was observed between the preschoolers and the first and second graders with autism. All of the preschoolers, first graders, and second graders with autism received significantly lower scores in the three communication breakdown contexts than the typically developing preschoolers. Both the group of autistic children and the group of typically developing children used inappropriate strategies to repair communication breakdown. Other than the no response and no topic shift, the children with autism also used monologue to repair communication breakdown, which was not observed in normally developing children. Conclusion: Results of this study show that the preschoolers, first graders, and second graders with autism all have the intention and ability to repair communication breakdowns to some extent, but their repair strategies are more limited compared to typically developing children. Educational implications for improving the conversation repair ability in children with autism and suggestions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：57-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201111.36030034篇名：「不想成為班上的小白兔！」：以符號詮釋自閉症學童在融合教育中友誼建立之挑戰並列篇名："Don't Want to be a Pet Rabbit in Class!": Using Symbolic Interpretation to Explore theChallenges of Friendship Building on Students with Autism in Inclusive Education作者：姜義村(I-Tsun Chiang)關鍵字：符號學;泛自閉症障礙;質性研究;semiotics;autism spectrum disorder;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：近幾年國內外研究開始對融合教育進行反省，嘗試轉換過去以社會、行政或教育系統之「人權」、「正常化」、「主流」、「教育均等」……等的「巨觀」觀點進行，開始傾聽與反思融合教育中參與實務工作之教師和實際受教之特殊學生與其家長的「微觀」經驗與回饋。本研究以質性研究法之多元研究取向，蒐集國內外各層面有關融合教育與自閉症學童之相關文獻，以兼顧巨觀與微觀之多元層級方式檢視過去在國內外的適應體育實務教學經驗、分析比對過去二個國內外自閉症學童相關研究計畫資料，並透過符號學角度詮釋自閉症學童在融合教育過程中友誼建立的挑戰與未來因應方向。研究結果以Peirce符號系統詮釋自閉症學童在融合教育之河暗藏友誼建立之「失友漩渦」，其漩渦以瞭解社會訊息的缺陷為中心，經由低社會讚許、低同儕聲望、低社會期待、被容忍與忽視形成惡性循環力量讓自閉症學童難以在同儕之間建立友誼，而教師也經常感受到無力感、無助感與愧疚心態面對此一漩渦。此符號現象探究融合教育實務中自閉症學童在友誼建立過程所遭遇的挑戰以及所蘊含的衝突意涵，究竟是高舉人權教育的火炬賦予自閉症學童回歸主流教育的權力，抑或是在實質上成為協助教育體系執行正常化觀念並壓抑自閉症學童自我倡導的刑具。本研究根據結果建議學校教育當局應正視上述教學場域中的現況，能積極傾聽融合教育實施過程中教師、家長與學生的感受與經驗，並期待學校能有健全的配套措施與制度面的支援體系，營造自閉症學童更「友」善的教育環境。英文摘要：Purpose: Recent research in inclusive education began using the micro-viewpoint instead of the macro-viewpoint, such as human rights, normalization, mainstreaming, and educational equity, to explore the learning process of students with special needs, teaching experiences of special education teachers, and parent feedback. This study aims to explore the challenges of facilitating ideal inclusive learning environment and to discover possible solutions of friendship building on students with autism in inclusive education through the theoretical framework of semiotics. Methods: Integrating macro- and micro- viewpoints within multi-level perspectives, a multi-method qualitative research approach was used to collect and compare the findings of 1 U.S. autism research grant, 1 Taiwan autism research grant, personal teaching/training experiences in adapted physical education, and special education on students with autism. To obtain qualitative information and deepen the findings, recent autism-related theses and dissertations on inclusive education from 2002 to 2010 were also reviewed and analyzed. Constant comparison was used to analyze the qualitative information with QSR Nvivo7. Findings: Using semiotics in the Peirce system, the findings showed that a symbol, whirlpool of losing friends, can be found in a mainstreaming river, defined as an argument, to explain the dilemma of friendship building on students with autism. Beginning from the icon, deficits in understanding social cues, the whirlpool was formed and reinforced by 4 indices, low levels of social desirability, poor social reputation, low social expectation, and being tolerated and ignored. Finally, identified as another icon, special education teachers also expressed their feelings of guilt, helplessness, and hopelessness when they found they could not help, improve, or change the current situation in this inclusive education system. Conclusions/Implications: The results identified that students with autism have challenges in friendship building in inclusive education. Current practices of inclusive education may create challenges that actually conflict with the ideal situation of inclusive education. The findings remind educators to think critically whether inclusive education provides students with autism the right to have a normalized educational environment or if it is actually an instrument of torture that suppresses self-advocacy of students with autism to execute political mainstreaming in ideal educational situations. This study suggests that school authorities and superintendents focus on the individual feelings and personal experiences of students with autism, elicit feedback from parents and special education teachers to provide sound resources, support their needs, and create a friendly inclusive education environment.起始頁-結束頁：87-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201111.36030045篇名：特殊幼兒轉銜服務的協同行動研究並列篇名：Collaborative Action Research on Transition Services for Young Children with Special Needs and Their Family作者：林秀錦(Hsiu-Chin Lin);王天苗(Tien-Miau Wang)關鍵字：幼小銜接;協同行動研究;特殊幼兒;轉銜;Transition;Kindergarten;Young children with special needs;Collaborative action research期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：這個協同行動研究的目的在探究特殊幼兒及家庭轉銜服務的歷程，並檢視服務的成果。研究者和城城幼稚園十三名老師合作，為園內六位特殊幼兒及其家長提供個別化轉銜服務方案，歷時一年餘。轉銜服務方案內容包括：提供家長支持、與小學聯繫以及為幼兒做入學準備。行動過程中，以訪談和觀察進行資料蒐集，並輔以相關文件進行相互檢證。本研究發現，家長在孩子轉銜之際，有許多擔心和不了解，而且幼小之間的聯繫並不容易。研究結果顯示，提供轉銜服務，可以減輕家庭的焦慮和壓力，擴權家長以對等的角色主動參與；促進家長與國小老師的正向互動；讓國小為特殊幼兒做好準備，來幫助孩子適應新環境；讓孩子也能適應普通班環境；此外，這個過程讓幼稚園和國小建立友善的關係，也提升幼稚園老師對轉銜的理解。整體來說，這個研究呼應了Bronfenbrenner 的生態－發展觀點，特殊幼兒的幼小銜接是生態系統間搭橋的大工程，需要各個系統的連結和整合。在轉銜歷程中浮現出的重要議題包括家長在轉銜過程中的參與和權益、孩子入學之準備度和緩讀問題。從我們的行動，對於轉銜政策、轉銜服務人員的研習以及未來轉銜服務的做法，提出一些具體的想法。英文摘要：Purpose: In Taiwan, the Special Education Act of 1997 regulated transition services for children with special needs and their family. However, other than referring children and transferring case records, individual child transition needs are not well understood by kindergarten teachers. The purpose of this study was to explore the process of transition services for young children with special needs and their family and to examine the outcomes of the services. Method: During this yearlong collaborative action research, thirteen teachers in the Cheng-Cheng Kindergarten worked together with the researchers to plan and implement individualized transition programs for six young children with special needs and their family. Data were collected through group discussions, interviews, observations, and related documents. Qualitative research methods were employed to conduct data analysis. Procedure of the collaborative action: The needs for transition services were first identified based upon the insufficient information reported by parents of children with special needs and the difficult tasks for kindergarten teachers to make connections with elementary schools. Individualized transition services were then delivered to support these parents throughout the process, to enhance children's readiness, and to promote collaboration between teachers at the kindergarten and elementary schools. There were three dimensions of the individual transition service: parenting support, collaborations between kindergarten and elementary school teachers, and preparation for children's readiness skills. The parents were provided with information related to the procedures of identifying children with special needs, special education services and inclusion education in elementary schools, the rights of parents, and the issue of delayed entry to elementary schools. The parents were encouraged to participate in the identification procedure and to assert their own rights throughout the whole process. Some parents did not actively participate in the transition service, and economic pressure may have been a concern for those parents. However, the special needs for those parents were constantly monitored throughout the research. Kindergarten teachers invited elementary teachers to visit their classrooms and discussed the special needs of the young children before graduation. During the school year in the elementary school, the kindergarten teachers kept track of the young children's learning in the elementary school. In addition, the readiness skills needed for each child were integrated with the learning activities in the kindergarten. Children with special needs also visited the elementary schools and interacted with their new teachers before being placed in the elementary school. Results/Findings: As a result of these actions, parents of children with special needs were empowered to actively participate as equal partners in the transition process and to interact positively with elementary school teachers. Teachers became more considerate and knowledgeable of the needs of children and parents. Most importantly, they put more efforts into preparing these young children with special needs to adjust to new learning environments. In addition, teachers at the kindergarten and elementary schools had established close partnerships through the process of the action. Conclusions/Implications: Echoing with Bronfenbrenner's ecological-development perspectives, the evidence showed the needs to cross boundaries among the ecological systems of families, kindergartens, and elementary schools on transition services for young children with special needs and their family. The study also identified issues related to parent involvement, readiness and delayed entry to elementary schools. Finally, some thoughts regarding policy, personnel preparation, and strategies to improve transition services in the future were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201107.36020016篇名：學習障礙兒童對華語捲舌音特徵的聽知覺辨識並列篇名：The Auditory Identification of Mandarin Retroflex Features for Children with Learning Disabilities作者：鄭靜宜(Jing-Yi Jeng)關鍵字：捲舌音;學習障礙;聽覺辨識;頻譜;動差分析;Retroflex;Learning disability;Auditory identification;Spectral;Moment analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：華語中有三對捲舌音對比。在聲學方面，捲舌音對比的不同主要在於噪音頻譜型態的差異，學習障礙兒童對於捲舌音對比聽覺區辨是否異於一般兒童？本研究目的在比較學習障礙兒童和一般學童對於華語捲舌音特徵的聽知覺辨識，並探討和捲舌音判斷有關的聲學頻譜參數。共計有六十位兒童參與聽覺實驗，兒童的年齡範圍分佈由九歲到十二歲，其中三十位兒童具有學習障礙，三十位無學習障礙兒童為控制組。在第一項作業中兒童需判斷所聽到的華語單音節是否為捲舌音，在第二項作業中判斷雙音節詞中的第一音節是否為捲舌音。結果顯示無論是對單音節詞或是雙音節詞語音刺激，學習障礙兒童的捲舌判斷正確率皆顯著低於一般兒童，尤其對不捲舌語音刺激的誤判率較高。根據兒童捲舌判斷的反應分析刺激項噪音之聲學頻譜動差參數，發現學障組在四個動差參數上皆有對比性減弱的趨勢，顯示學障兒童對於語音噪音段能量的頻譜型態辨識能力較弱。多元迴歸分析的結果顯示控制組的反應在頻譜重心頻率(M1)變項上具有最大的解釋量，而在學障組也是以M1有最大的解釋量，但解釋量的大小卻遠不及控制組。由於捲舌音對比在聲學上主要的差異是噪音位在頻譜頻帶的分布型態，推論學障兒童在聽知覺上較無法掌握語音中噪音頻譜的頻率重心特徵。英文摘要：In Mandarin Chinese, there are three retroflex contrasts of fricatives and affricates. The major acoustical difference between these retroflex contrasts is the spectral pattern of frication noise, but the perceptual distinction between these contrasts is subtle in nature. It is of interest to discover if children with learning disabilities (LD) have difficulty differentiating the retroflex contrasts perceptually, as well as whether children with LD have different response patterns for the task of retroflex detection. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to compare differences in the auditory identification of retroflexes between children with LD and children without LD, and to investigate the acoustical spectral parameters related to the retroflex perceptual judgment of the two groups of children. Methods: There were a total of 60 children participating in the experiment, 30 of which had LD and 30 that did not. The children that did not have LD served as the control group. The ages of the subjects ranged from 9 to 12 years old. The perceptual task was to listen to monosyllabic words one by one and judge if the stimuli were retro-flexes or not as quickly as possible. In the second task, the stimuli were bisyllabic words, and the retroflex judgment was constrained to the first syllable of each word. Results: The results showed that the percentage of correct retroflex identifications of monosyllabic words for children with LD was 52%, which was significantly lower than that for the control group, at 66%. For the bisyllabic word stimuli, the trend of the response patterns was similar to that for the monosyllabic words. The percentage of correct retroflex identifications for children with LD was 51%, which was significantly lower than that for the control group, at 66%. For nonretroflexed stimuli, the LD group had more 'false alarm' responses. Moreover, the LD group had more errors for words with nonretroflexed aspirated consonants. This suggested that for listeners with LD, the detection of retroflex features might interfere with the aspirated features. Using the retroflexion response of the two groups, the spectral moments of the frication noise in the words were acoustically analyzed. The results showed that the level of contrast between two categories (retroflexed vs. nonretroflexed) on the four moment values for the LD group was greatly reduced, especially in the first moment, M1, which implied the spectral frequency gravity of frication noise. In fact, M1 for retroflexed consonants should be lower than for their nonretroflexed counterparts; however, the responses of children with LD showed no such trends. Stepwise multi-regression also showed M1 to be the only robust variable entering the model. This held true for both groups, but the multi-regression correlation coefficient for the control group (R=0.66) was much higher than that for the LD group (R=0.23). Conclusions/Implications: The conclusions and implications of this study were as follows. The children with LD had difficulties differentiating the retroflex contrasts perceptually. The results of the spectral moment analysis suggested that the children with LD did not differentiate retroflexion according to M1, which is an important cue for normal listeners. The perceptual processing of the frequency gravity for the frication noise in speech may be defective for children with LD. This suggested that they may have auditory frequency resolution deficits during speech noise processing.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201107.36020027篇名：輕症ASD兒童會話理解能力之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Comprehension of Conversation in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders作者：林迺超(Nai-Chou Lin);張正芬(Cheng-Fen Chang)關鍵字：輕症ASD兒童;會話理解能力;非字面意義語言;Children with ASD;Conversation comprehension;Non-literal language期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討輕症ASD兒童與一般兒童在會話理解過程中，對於字面意義及非字面意義理解的差異情形，為進行此研究故先編製一套會話理解測驗。「會話理解測驗」編製過程中，首先抽取台北市、新北市667位二至四年級一般兒童，經由預試、專家修訂、信效度建立等程序，完成題數三十五題，答題方式為選擇題形式的測驗內容。其次，分別控制語言理解能力及生理年齡，立意取樣各47名二至四年級的輕症ASD與一般兒童，共計94名受試者以個別施測方式實施會話理解測驗。研究結果：1.「會話理解測驗」信效度考驗結果良好，符合語言學及認知發展的構念；2.輕症ASD兒童字面意義或非字面意義的會話理解能力均較一般兒童低落，兩者誤解非字面意義會話時，均偏向字面意義解讀；3.明喻、言外之意及反諷等不同類型的非字面意義會話對輕症ASD兒童並無難度上的差異；4.就字面意義會話理解表現而言，輕症ASD兒童和一般兒童的表現均與生理年齡無關，但輕症ASD兒童則和語言理解能力有關；5.非字面意義會話理解方面，一般兒童的表現和生理年齡有關，但和語文理解能力無關；相反地，輕症ASD兒童則是和語文理解能力有關，但和生理年齡無關。由研究結果可歸納以下結論：1.「會話理解測驗」可有效應用於評估輕症ASD兒童的會話理解能力；2.輕症ASD兒童較容易誤解非字面意義會話，且誤解時的錯誤類型比例和一般兒童不同；3.一般兒童字面意義和非字面意義兩種會話理解之間的差距會隨著年齡的增加而減少。相較之下，輕症ASD兒童卻有隨之擴大的情形。英文摘要：Purpose: The main purpose of this study was to explore the differences of literal and non-literal comprehension between normal children and children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Methods: A test was designed to meet this purpose, which was, entitled ”The Test of Conversation Comprehension”. In the first stage, a total of 667 second to fourth grade normal children from Taipei City and New Taipei City were invited to participate. After conducting pretesting, expert correction, and proof of reliability and validity, the final version of the test included 35 multiple-choice items. The second stage of the study proceeded after matching language comprehension and chronological age. A total of 94 children (47 with ASD, and 47 with normal children) were invited to individually take the ”Test of Conversation Comprehension”, in order to assess their conversation comprehension. Findings: This study made a number of findings. First, the ”Test of Conversation Comprehension” consisted of four subtests, which were: statements, similes, implicature, and irony. The reliability and validity were good and all four sub-tests corresponded well with the theory of linguistic and cognitive development. Second, the children with ASD were found to be apparently weaker in their comprehension of conversation than the normal children, and the weakness appeared in both literal and non-literal understanding. For both the children with ASD and the normal children, misunderstandings in non-literal conversations were caused by interpreting the conversations with literal meanings. Third, no significant differences in difficulties were found during the three sub-tests of similes, implicature, and irony, respectively, of the non-literal conversations for the ASD children. Fourth, the comprehension of literal meaning in both the normal children and those with ASD was not related to chorological age; however, in the children with ASD it was related to their comprehension of language itself. Lastly, the comprehension of non-literal meaning in the normal children was related to their chorological age, while that in the children with ASD was related to their comprehension of language itself. Conclusion/Implications: Based on the above findings, three conclusions were made, which are listed as follows: (1) the ”Test of Conversation Comprehension” could be used to effectively evaluate the comprehension of conversation abilities of children with ASD; (2) non-literal conversation is more frequently misunderstood by children with ASD than normal children, and the proportion of error types differs between the children with ASD and normal children; and (3) for normal children, the difference between the comprehension of literal and non-literal conversation decreases along with their age, while the opposite was found in the ASD group. Based on the research findings, this study made a number of suggestions about the comprehension of conversation for children with ASD, which can be used for further research and teaching purposes.起始頁-結束頁：51-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201107.36020038篇名：不同性別與發展階段資優生故事寫作的內容分析並列篇名：Developmental and Gender Differences on the Story Writings of Gifted Students作者：陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen);林宜駿(Yi-Chun Lin);林一真(Yeh-Jen Lin)關鍵字：性別差異;發展差異;資優生;寫作;Gender difference;Developmental differences;Gifted students;Writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：寫作是複雜的認知活動，一方面反映作者對外界人事物的觀察和認識，另一方面也反映其內在情感與思維；有學者建議寫作是實施資優生情意教育可善用的工具。本研究分析不同性別與發展階段資優生書寫的故事內容，並探究資優生情意教育值得注意的議題。參與本研究之資優生來自台北市國小、國中和高中，共計167位，他們在50分鐘內書寫一篇以「他／她今天沒有出門」為首句之文章，學生自選以「他」或「她」起始。本研究由故事中的角色、主題、情緒和結局分析學生作品。研究結果顯示，故事中的角色最能展現性別差異，無論男生或女生都有較高比例創造與自己相同性別的角色；此現象在男生群體更明顯，男生創造的男女角色比例更懸殊；不同發展階段學生創造的故事角色未出現系統化的差異。寫作主題分析顯示，不同階段資優生最常出現的主題都是「情感／關係」；「生命意義」主題出現的百分比隨發展階段遞升，「奇幻」及「懲罰及厄運」隨發展階段降低。在故事展現的情緒方面，最常出現的情緒是「快樂」，正面情緒在中學階段微升；小學生「悲傷」、「恐懼」及「憤怒」三負向情緒的比例接近，中學以後「悲傷」的比例增加，其他負向情緒減少。不同性別學生在故事主題或情緒方面並未出現系統化差異。在故事結局方面，女生故事以正向結局的百分比稍高於男生；男生負向結局的百分比高於女生；男女生中性結局的百分比接近；故事結局未發現系統化的發展階段差異。本研究並討論資優生情意教育與後續研究宜關切的議題。英文摘要：Purpose: Writing is one of the ways that individuals learn and construct meaning for their life, identity and culture. A number of scholars have suggested that writings are powerful media to understand the inner world of gifted students. This study explored the developmental and gender differences of gifted students through story writings, and investigated social and emotional issures in gifted education based on an analysis of the stories. Methods: The participants were 167 gifted students in grades four, eight and twelve. They were invited to write a story, starting with the phrase, ”He/She did not go out today”, within 50 minutes. The participants were asked to choose either ”he” or ”she” as initial word. A number of story elements were analyzed, including the characters created in the stories, the story themes, the emotions appearing within the stories, and the endings of the stories. Findings: The results showed that gender differences lay within the characters that the authors created. Both male and female students tended to create characters of the same gender as themselves. This situation was more obvious in the male group, where 95.51% of the writers created male characters but only 55.06% created female characters. In addition, none of the writers in the male group created stories that only contained female characters. In the female group, 78.57% of the writers created female characters, 67.14% created male characters, and 20.00% created stories that only contained male characters. Developmental differences were not found in the gender of the characters. Developmental similarities and differences were both noticed in the story themes and emotions. The most frequently occurring theme, across grade and develop-mental levels, was 'Affection/Relationships', with a total percentage of 63.52%. The percentage for 'Meaning of Life' was 15.22% for the grade four students. This increased to 38.89% for the grade eight students, and further increased to 47.76% for the grade 12 students. The percentage for 'Punishment and misfortune' was the highest for the grade four students (32.61%), and it was much lower for the grade eight students (5.56%) and the grade 12 students (1.69%). The most frequently appearing emotion was 'Happiness', with a total percentage of 75.47%. The percentage of positive emotions (happiness and love) was lowest for the grade four students, increased for the grade eight students, and was the highest for the grade 12 students. The percentages of different negative emotions (sadness, fear and anger) were closer, and were between 30-50% for the grade four students. However, the percentage for 'Sadness' increased from 36.96 for the grade four students to 70.37% for the grade eight students and 69.49% for the grade 12 students. The percentage for 'Anger' was highest for the grade four students (45.65%), and lowest for the grade eight students (14.81%), with the grade twelve students getting a percentage somewhere in the middle (23.73%). Systematic gender differences were not found in the story themes or the emotions appearing in the stories. As to the endings of the stories, 64.29% of the female students and 53.93% of the male students created positive endings, and 33.71% of the male students and 18.57% of the female students created negative endings. Implications: This study found that both male and female students tended to create characters of the same gender as themselves, but that male students were more rigid in choosing or creating their characters. It could be an important issue for both male and female gifted students to learn the unique meaning and effect of gender in their pursuit of self-identity and career development. Developmental differences showed in the story themes and emotions used in the stories. It was delightful to find that the percentage of positive emotions increased in gifted students' writings, from elementary to high school. However, the increasing percentage of 'Sadness' and the decreasing percentage of 'Anger' might imply that the negative emotions of gifted adolescent are hidden. Parents and teachers need to be more sensitive to the signals of student maladjustment.起始頁-結束頁：77-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201107.36020049篇名：以家庭優勢為焦點的個別化家庭服務計畫－任務性團體過程與成果並列篇名：Individualized Family Service Plan Based on Family Strengths: The Process and Outcome of a Task Group作者：張秀玉(Hsiu-Yu Chang)關鍵字：個別化家庭服務計畫;家庭優勢;早期療育;社會工作者;以家庭為中心的處遇;Individualized Family Service Plan IFSP;Family Strengths;Early Intervention;Social Workers;Family-Centered Intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：研究者帶領某社會福利機構十位社會工作者進行為期之一年之任務性團體，此團體之目的為協助參與者學習以優勢觀點為基礎之家庭評量與擬定個別化家庭服務計畫的技術。資料來源包括團體逐字稿記錄、團體成員心得，資料分析則是依循質性研究的方法。研究者分就過程與成果的角度，呈現研究結果，並於文中以實例呈現研究參與者以家庭優勢為焦點所擬訂之個別化家庭服務計畫。在過程部分，研究參與者學習到家庭優勢評量以及依此擬定與執行IFSP之專業知識、對於自己工作的方法有了重新的檢視與反省；在成果部分，此任務團體不僅滿足研究參與者個人的需求、並將機構內之IFSP表格增列家庭優勢之相關欄位，使得機構之早期療育服務流程以及服務內容獲得改善，達到了滿足機構需求的團體目的。最後，研究者依據研究結果，提出下列幾項研究建議：一、IFSP應以家庭優勢為焦點，才能實踐早期療育服務中以家庭為中心的信念；二、釐清IFSP與家庭處遇之間的關係，整合服務單位中所有之紀錄表單；三、協助實務工作者獲得持續且定期的專業訓練、督導或互動討論；四、提供早期療育社會工作、醫療復健與特殊教育工作者家庭優勢之相關訓練；五、進行後續研究，以釐清家庭優勢為焦點之IFSP和家庭充權之關係。英文摘要：Purpose: The researcher led a task group of 10 social workers from a social welfare agency for one year to learn Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) skills based on family strengths. Participants were trained to assess family strengths, and to design and implement IFSP based on family strengths in order to practice family-centered early intervention services through social welfare agencies. Methods: Data include the transcripts of the groups and feedback from the participants. Qualitative research methods were employed to conduct data analysis. Findings: The researcher presented the research findings from the perspectives of process and outcome. Examples were presented in this paper to show the IFSP designed by the participants. From the view of the process, the finding showed that the purposes of this study were achieved: 1. Participants had a clearer understanding of the theoretical basis of family strengths and IFSP; 2. Through simulation and actual cases, the participants learned how to assess the strengths of the family as well as how to design and implement an IFSP; 3. Participants learned new ways of reviewing and reflecting their work methods. From the view of the outcomes, the finding also showed that the purposes of this study were achieved: 1. Participants had the ability to assess the strengths of the family and learned skills for designing and implementing an IFSP based on family strengths to meet the individual needs of study participants; 2. Having acquired and enhanced their ability, participants not only practiced family-centered early intervention services, they also assisted their social welfare agencies to modify the forms of the IFSP by adding a column for assessing family strengths. Thus, the early intervention services were improved, which met the needs of the organization. Conclusions/Implications: Based on the findings, the following research implications were suggested: 1. An IFSP should focus on family strengths to practice early intervention services; 2. The relationship between IFSP and family intervention and integrated service units should be clarified; 3. Regular continuous supervision is an important strategy for social workers to design and implement IFSP based on family strengths; 4. Follow-up study is needed to clarify the relationship of IFSP based on family strengths and family empowerment.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201103.360100110篇名：一位發展遲緩幼兒母親參與家庭中心取向教育方案之行動研究並列篇名：Parent Participation in Developing Education Programs for Child with Developmental Delays作者：陳采緹(Tsai-Ti Chen)關鍵字：家庭中心取向;家長參與;發展遲緩兒童;family-centered approach;parent participation;children with developmental delays期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究採行動研究，透過非干擾性測量、觀察、訪談等方式蒐集資料，探討一位發展遲緩幼兒森斌母親琳媽參與家庭中心取向教育方案的歷程和成效。琳媽參與研究者帶領的學前特殊需求兒童家長團體，團體結束後，仍未解決在家教育森斌的困難，希望以個案方式繼續學習教養技能。行動建構在平等合作的夥伴關係之上，包括兩階段發展和執行家庭中心取向教育方案。首先，應用現有的兒童發展評量工具及自編的家庭評量工具蒐集資料，經由討論評量摘要協助琳媽覺知森斌發展現況及家庭優勢和需求；其次，引導琳媽統整評量結果、決定目標順序，透過在家試作及活動差異分析發展與家庭適配的教育方案；第三，因應家庭突發事件調整教育方案；第四，依據觀察和教學記錄，協助琳媽精熟和應用特定教學策略、將目標類化至家庭其他情境。行動後，琳媽能在協助下參與發展與執行教育方案、應用家庭教育資源、覺知教育森斌的能力及森斌的學習特質；森斌達到預定目標，且類化至家庭其他情境。綜合研究結果，行動方案為發展遲緩兒童家長參與家庭中心取向教育方案的可行方式之一。英文摘要：Purose: In this study, the researcher supported the mother (Lin) of a child (Sanben) with developmental delays to develop and implement family-centered education programs at home, and then investigated the process and effects. Methods: This study adopted an action research design. The data collection techniques included unobtrusive measures, observations, interviews, and others (e.g., checklists and scales). After collecting data, the researcher undertook data analysis by a constant comparison method, and then connected themes to derive results. Findings: This study included a two-step spiral process of developing and implementing programs in collaborative partnerships between the researcher, Lin and her family. The researcher used existing tools for child development and developed family assessment scales to continually and reciprocally collect information about family parenting abilities, values, strengths and needs. In the process of developing the educational programs, the researcher assisted Lin to observe and evaluate Sanben's development and her family's parenting strengths and needs by discussing the assessments summaries. The researcher also guided Lin to integrate the data from family assessments, prioritize educational goals, establish teaching goals at home, and draft educational programs. Lin was responsible for implementing the educational programs. In the process of implementing these programs, the researcher assisted Lin to master and modify specific instructional strategies in terms of teaching records, observation and discussion. Lin was encouraged to generalize the goals into natural home routines and daily activities, and the researcher supported her to routinely implement her plan, mobilize informal family resources, and encourage family members to help teach Sanben. The effects on this study revealed Lin could participate in developing and implementing educational programs with little assistance, mobilize her family's parenting resources, become aware of her own teaching style and Sanben's learning characteristics, and be satisfied with progress in her parenting abilities. Sanben attained the educational goals, eating and toileting with minimal assistance, and worked these skills into family natural routines with other family members. Conclusions/Implications: The results demonstrated this plan was a feasible method for family-centered parent participation in educational programs for children with developmental delays. While providing family-centered services, this study suggested the need for the following: (a) structuring a family-centered approach for developing and implementing educational programs; (b) implementing action based on collaborative partnerships; (c) continual review of knowledge and skills in a family-centered approach; (d) providing parent education consistent with family-centered educational programs; (e) keeping educational programs flexible for coping with unexpected family events; and (f) adapting custom service time and accountability for different stages of family-centered educational programs.起始頁-結束頁：27-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201103.360100211篇名：自閉症類障礙兒童的私語表現初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Study on Private Speech in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders作者：張琇雁(Shiu-Yein Chang);林慧麗(Hui-Li Lin);楊宗仁(Tsung-Ren Yang);張顯達(Hintat Cheung)關鍵字：自閉症類障礙兒童;私語;Autism Spectrum Disorders;Private Speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究觀察以中文為母語之自閉症類障礙(Autism Spectrum Disorders)兒童私語的表現。Vygotsky將兒童自言自語的現象稱之為「私語」(private speech)，並認為私語源於社會互動中的對話，協助個體在問題解決過程中，透過私語進行自我對話，引導行為與注意力。自閉症類障礙兒童特殊的社會化模式，獨特的語言發展過程，以及認知發展與語言發展之間的不同步等現象，使其私語表現成為理論上與實質上都需要被釐清的議題。本研究以自閉症類障礙兒童為對象，觀察在面對認知作業的問題解決過程中其私語表現，並測量其語言能力及與其認知能力相關的作業解題表現，以試圖釐清私語表現型態，私語表現與語言之間的關連性，及私語表現與認知能力之間的關連性。本研究共分析29位參與者的私語資料（男：女＝26:3，7歲3月－13歲4月，平均9.34歲（SD=1.65歲））。結果顯示，自閉症類障礙兒童未分類的整體私語發展無明顯趨勢，然而隨著語言能力的精進，與作業相關私語以及與作業不相關私語之單位時間的平均語句數有增大的趨勢。此外，自閉症類障礙兒童私語發展呈現明顯的個別變異，語言能力越好的自閉症類障礙兒童，其間個體差異就越大，此差異可能反映自閉症類障礙兒童的語言與認知能力非平行發展的現象。英文摘要：Purpose: According to Vygotsky, private speech plays an essential role in forming thoughts and concepts as it guides and regulates problem-solving processes. It has been used successfully to teach both typically developing children and children with special needs how to self-regulate behavior, including emotion, social skills and cognitive function. Not many studies have examined the development of private speech in children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). This study is the first to examine private speech in Mandarin-speaking children with ASD in Taiwan. Methods: Thirty research participants with ASD were recruited, and their private speech was recorded and analyzed. The private speech data were collected from two problem-solving situations, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task and Tower of London. Their language abilities were assessed with WISC-Ⅲ. These data were collected in order to clarify relations between private speech and each of the abilities (language abilities and problem solving performance). Findings: Only 29 participants completed the tasks (26 male, 3 female; chronological age ranged from 7 years 3 months to 13 years 4 months (M=9.34 years, S.D.=1.65 years)). All but one participant were observed to use private speech during the problem-solving processes. The transcribed private speech utterances were then further classified into three categories, task-relevant, task-irrelevant and partially audible, according to Berk's coding system (Berk, 1986). The result indicates that no clearly increasing developmental trend of global uncategorized private speech is evident. Nevertheless, relations between language abilities and the further categorized private speech data have shown that mean utterances per minute of both task-relevant and task-irrelevant private speech increased as a function of language abilities. However, the differences were not statistically significant. Unlike typically developing children, the children with ASD have shown more variation among individuals in private speech as their language abilities increased; the better their language abilities, the greater the private speech variation among them. The statistically insignificant finding might be partially due to the non-parallel developmental trajectories of ASD children's language and cognitive abilities, which in turn could cause problems in controlling task difficulty for each single individual. The other main finding was that, compared to their problem-solving counterparts, those who performed at a medium level were observed to express the greatest number of task-relevant private speech utterances per minute. And those with the worst task performance expressed the greatest number of task-irrelevant private speech utterances per minute. Conclusions/Implications: As it has been shown that task difficulty affects private speech behavior, one might need to control for both language abilities and individually tailored task difficulty in order to obtain a clear-cut picture of private speech development trends in ASD children. Our findings also imply that a well-designed private speech intervention program promoting the use of task-relevant private speech might be useful in improving ASD children's performance on tasks involving executive function.起始頁-結束頁：57-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201103.360100312篇名：探訪傑出作曲家的樂曲創作歷程並列篇名：So Many Cliches and So Much Repetition! Also this is Far Too Long an Exploration of the Creative Process of Eminent Composers作者：黃揚婷(Yang-Ting Huang);蔡典謨(Den-Mo Tsai)關鍵字：創作歷程;傑出作曲家;Creative progress;composers期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：為探究傑出作曲家在作曲領域的創作歷程，本研究乃邀請十位曾因作曲榮獲世界性或全國性獎項、創造具時代性與歷史地位的音樂風潮，或因音樂作品迅速傳播成名，獲得社會大眾高度肯定與讚賞之華人傑出作曲家為研究參與者，經由深度訪談傑出作曲家本人及二十三位重要他人，再輔以訪談日誌與非干擾性測量資料等方式進行多重個案研究，探索當代傑出作曲家之真實生活脈絡，旨在瞭解傑出作曲家於作曲領域的創作歷程。研究發現傑出作曲家的樂曲創作歷程是具循環性的，依序為“經驗∼醞釀音源、原創性強”、“靈感∼感性得來、理性整理”、“創作∼組合素材、逐步構築”、“完成∼自我突破、再創高峰”與“驗證∼呈現樂曲、持續創作”等五個過程。每首新樂曲的誕生都是依恃傑出作曲家的創作意識與自我決定，於該些過程中完成，並具有以下幾項特點：1.有次序性的；2.有循環性的；3.沒有時間限制；4.沒有起點限制；5.沒有終點限制。英文摘要：Purpose: Musical composition is the presentation of a composer's inner creative conceptualizing. While abstract ideas regarding music are organized and concretized through rational, logical thinking, the personal sensibilities and inner thoughts of the composer are also embodied and conveyed; a composer's unique and original musical language is thereby created. This study explored the underlying context of the life of ten contemporary eminent composers, the aim being to understand the creative progress of musical composition. The discussion also covers how the composers continually make creative breakthroughs by challenging themselves, as well as the performers and listeners involved, through musical composition, while creating new musical trends. Methods: repetition The research participants of this study are ten eminent Chinese composers; they have either been honored with international or national awards, created musical trends of great historical significance, or become renowned overnight for their compositions. In addition to in-depth interviews with these eminent composers and 23 other significant people in the field, the study was conducted through multiple case studies, and employed interview notes and data elicited from unobtrusive measures. More than 400 pieces of data, all using unobtrusive measures, were collected from biographies, documentaries, personal works, studies, dissertations and theses, and media reports related to the participants, and were coded, input, categorized, and analyzed to attempt to explicate the creative progress of musical composition. Results: The composers studied here defy regulation; for them, everything can become a source for the creation of new sound. Through diverse creative methods and composition techniques, they combine varied musical elements in creating a unique style. Such a hybridized synthesis is the very essence of musical composition. The research result shows that music composition is a continuous process and a series of breakthroughs. The creative progress of musical composition of eminent composers is cyclical, comprising five main stages: ”experience-cultivation of sounds and strong originality”; ”inspiration-stemming from sensibility and organized by the senses”; ”creation-organizing materials and constructing them step by step”; ”accomplishment-personal breakthroughs and reaching new peaks”; and ”test and verify-presenting the musical piece.” The creation of every new musical composition relies on the composer's free creative consciousness and is completed within stages which feature sequential; cyclical progression; timelessness; no fixed starting point; and no fixed terminal point. Conclusions/Implications: For the ten composers participating in this study, each piece of music can be regarded as the basis for the next work, whatever the motivation, material or inspirational source of the sounds. Creative progress is based on continuous breakthroughs from previous works. Again and again, a new piece transcends the previous one and suggests the advent of a new creative peak. To bring the works to perfection, ”test and verify” is an indispensable step in the cyclical process of musical composition as it constitutes a step that merges with another cycle. Eminent composers believe that the next work will be better; with countless cycles of musical creative processes, they lay the foundation for future achievements.起始頁-結束頁：85-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201103.360100413篇名：Effects of "Noncontingent Reinforcement Plus Differential Reinforcement of Alternative Behavior" and "Response Interruption and Redirection" on a Child's Vocal Stereotypy Maintained by Automatic Reinforcement並列篇名：探討「非立即性增強」以及「打斷行為反應和重新引導」兩種策略對自閉症幼童的語言固著行為之成效作者：朱思穎(Szu-Yin Chu);Sonia Baker關鍵字：自閉症;固著語言行為;自動增強;打斷反應並重導方向;非立即性增強;autism spectrum disorder;vocal stereotypy;automatic reinforcement;response intervention and interruption;noncontingent reinforcement期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：36卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：自閉症是終身殘疾，其特徵包含在社會互動、溝通及行為方面的缺陷，自閉症兒童並時常展現重複和非功能性的固著行為(stereotypic behaviors)。固著行為可能藉由本身感官所產生的反應，而導致自動增強(automatic reinforcement)。同時，固著行為會干擾聽覺處理、無法區別學習，以及有困難展現適切的社會行為。因為固著行為會影響孩童發展，目前針對自閉症幼童此行為有其相關研究策略。然而，目前相對少的研究文獻針對自閉症兒童的語言固著行為(vocal stereotypy)進行探討。先前研究提出「打斷行為並重新引導」(response interruption and redirection)策略可以降低語言固著行為。另一策略是藉由非立即性增強(noncontingent reinforcement)，孩子將其注意力放在可替代的刺激上而異常反應（例如：語言固著行為），這樣替代性刺激可以有效的取代異常反應。然而這兩種策略都有其限制。本研究的目的在探討行為策略的介入，是否可以有效改善一位五歲自閉症幼童的語言固著行為。採用功能分析檢視幼童的語言固著行為的由來。結果顯示「自動增強」為語言固著行為產生的原因。除了非立即性增強外，應用區別性增強替代行為(differential reinforcement of alternative behavior)策略去提升適切語言溝通的機會。根據行為功能分析的結果，實驗設計為ABCACBA，使用兩種行為策略（打斷行為並重新引導以及非立即性增強以及替代行為增強）並分成階段進行介入，以比較兩種策略的成效。研究結果顯示，使用「非立即性增強以及替代行為增強」策略不僅顯著降低不適切的語言固著行為，並顯著提高適切語言行為的使用。英文摘要：Purpose: In this study, the authors investigated the effective treatment of repetitive and noncontextual vocal behaviors of a 5-year-old child (John) with an autism spectrum disorder. Background: Autism is a life-long disability characterized by deficits in social interactions, communication, and behavior. Children with autism often display stereotypic movements that are characterized by their repetitive and nonfunctional nature. Although it is believed that stereotypic behaviors might be automatically reinforced by the sensory consequences produced by engaging in the response, some evidence also shows that stereotypy can be related to social or demand consequences. Meanwhile, stereotypic behaviors can interfere with auditory processing, discrimination learning, and appropriate social behaviors. The focus of a treatment for frequent engagement in stereotypic movements by children with autism has been examined because this type of behavior may hamper children's development. Non-contextual vocalization is one stereotypic behavior that children with autism often display. However, there has been relatively limited research focused on the treatment of vocal stereotypy for children with autism. Specifically, it is difficult to treat if vocal stereotypy is self-reinforcing (i.e., automatic reinforcement). An approach to treating vocal stereotypy maintained by automatic reinforcement is response interruption and redirection (RIRD). To block vocal stereotype, RIRD treatment may involve teachers initiating vocal demands with whichthe child readily complies Previous research revealed the positive effects of RIRD on reducing the level of vocal stereotype. Another approach to developing treatment for automatic reinforcement has focused on noncontingent access to preferred items (NCR). According to operational definition of NCR, it is hypothesized that if the child chooses to spend more time with the alterative stimuli, rather than engage in the aberrant response (e.g., vocal stereotype), these stimuli can effectively compete with the aberrant response. But, both approaches (RIRD and NCR) have their own limitations. The treatment of RIRD is labor-intensive while NCR alone was not effective as a treatment. Method: Functional analyses (FA) were implemented to identify the function of John's stereotypical behavior. Using the methods described by Iwata and his colleagues (1982/1994), vocal stereotype was assessed in four specific conditions (i.e., attention, demand, alone, control/play) to determine which specific consequences (e.g., attention, escape, or sensory) were maintaining the behaviors. According to previous preference assessment, a cookie served as strong reinforcement for John, and could be used to promote the use of appropriate language. In addition, differential reinforcement of alternative behavior (DRA) was included to eliminate the limitation of NCR as well as strengthen appropriate communication (e.g., request). Following FA, two treatment packages, ”RIRD” and ”NCR plus DRA,” were implemented in an ABCACBC design to determine whether either RIRD or NCR plus DRA could reduce John's vocal stereotypy. Findings: The results of FA suggested that vocal stereotypy was maintained by automatic reinforcement. The findings suggested that NCR plus DRA can significantly reduce the behavior of noncommunicative vocalization maintained by automatic reinforcement. The findings also revealed that NCR plus DRA produced levels of appropriate vocal behaviors more thanthose observed in both baseline and RIRD phases. Conclusions/Implications: This study suggests that highly preferred stimuli may compete with engagement in automatically reinforced challenging behaviors. Implications of this study are also discussed in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：109-127資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201103.360100501篇名：國民中小學情緒行為障礙學生多元介入調查研究並列篇名：A Survey for Multiple Interventions of Elementary and Secondary School Students with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders作者：陳志平(Chih-Ping Chen);周台傑(Tair-Jye Chou);孟瑛如(Ying-Ru Meng)關鍵字：情緒行為障礙;多元介入;鑑定安置;多重模式治療;Emotional and behavioral disorders;Multiple interventions;Identification and placement;Multimodal therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：34期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在調查國民中小學情緒行為障礙學生多元介入的情形，自492份回收的398份問卷以及從中抽取的153份參照樣本，得知以下結論。第一、師生背景變項：（一）女性普通班、特殊教育教教師為主要輔導人力；（二）輔導教師普遍缺乏，但國民中學的介入者較多；（三）年輕稍具經驗的教師為輔導主力；（四）教師的特教專業多於輔導專業；（五）學生安置的學校規模較大；（六）注意力缺陷過動症的男生發現較早，但介入較晚；（七）學生的行為與學業危險因子多；（八）學校運用多元介入的程度偏低。第二、多元介入現況：（一）鑑定安置輔導措施、多重模式治療達良好程度，但輔導成效中等；（二）負向外在行為與學業問題出現率較高者改善情況較差；（三）輔導教師的比例與學生部分行為的改變有關。第三、多元介入的差異：（一）大部分的教師背景變項影響鑑定安置輔導措施；（二）教師的性別、學歷、職務、輔導背景、學校規模影響多重模式治療；（三）教師的年資、任教地區影響輔導成效；（四）大部分的學生背景變項影響鑑定安置輔導措施；（五）學生的主要問題與輔導資源影響多重模式治療；（六）持有鑑輔會證明、學生的主要問題與輔導資源影響輔導成效。第四、人際關係最能預測輔導成效。其次是輔導教師的比例較低時，認知與安置輔導是重要預測因子；若輔導教師的比例較高時，則是形象／想像為重要預測因子。最後提出若干建議作為未來教育輔導及相關研究參考之用。英文摘要：This study explored the multiple interventions for elementary and secondary students with emotional and behavioral disorders (EBD). A quantitative questionnaire was adopted and 398 out of 492 efficient questionnaires were received, from which 153 teachers were withdrawn as reference group. The results were as follows: First, the demographic information about teachers and students with EBD: (1) most teachers were female, general, and special education teachers; (2) there was a shortage of guidance teachers, but it was better in secondary schools; (3) most teachers were younger and had fewer years of teaching experience; (4) teachers' professional trainings in special education was more than guidance competence; (5) more students with EBD were placed in large schools; (6) male attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) students were identified early, but intervened late; (7) the risk factors for students with EBD were academic and behavioral problems; (8) The use of multiple interventions in schools were insufficient. Second, the multiple interventions of teaching elementary and secondary students with EBD: (1) identification and placement (IDP) and multimodal therapy (MMT) were better, but educational outcomes (EOs) were intermediate; (2) It was hard to improve high levels of behavior and study problems; (3) there were relationships between high ratio of guidance teachers and the improvement of the behavior problems of students with EBD. Third, the differences of multiple interventions: (1) IDP varied based on most of teacher variables; (2) teachers' gender, education, categories, guidance background, and school size affected MMT significantly; (3) teachers' seniority and school areas affected EOs significantly; (4) IDP varied based on most of student variables; (5) main problems of student and guidance resources affected MMT significantly; (6) students with EBD proofs, main problems of students, and guidance resources affected EOs significantly. Forth, interpersonal relationships can most efficiently predict EOs, cognition and imagery can also predict according to different ratio of guidance teachers. Finally, some educational applications, guidance, and the directions for further research are referred based on the findings and the limitations of this study.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201112.00032篇名：國中學習障礙學生與普通學生之觀念產出及寫作表現之差異比較研究並列篇名：The Comparisons of Idea Generation and Writing Performance among Junior High School Students with and without Learning Disabilities作者：陳瑋婷(Wei-Ting Chen);吳訓生(Shiunn-Sheng Wu)關鍵字：學習障礙學生;觀念產出;寫作表現;工作記憶;聽寫能力;文章知識;Learning disabilities;Idea generation;Writing performance;Writing memory;Dictation abilities;Discourse knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：34期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在比較國中學習障礙學生與普通學生在觀念產出、寫作表現及相關影響因素之差異情形。研究對象為就讀於彰化縣國民中學的八位學習障礙學生及八位普通學生，所運用的方法包含觀察、訪談、觀念產出內容分析及寫作成品分析等，而資料分析的方法包含平均數、標準差、Mann-Whitney U考驗與效應量等。本研究結果發現學習障礙學生與普通學生在觀念產出前所需時間、觀念產出命題數、觀念產出所需時間及觀念產出之產出速率等觀念產出並未有明顯差異。在寫作表現的比較上，儘管兩組學生的寫作所需時間沒有差別，學習障礙學生的寫作成品命題數、寫作成品之產出速率及各層面寫作成品分析得分均不及普通學生。相較於普通學生，學習障礙學生的工作記憶、聽寫能力與文章知識等寫作歷程相關影響因素也較弱。英文摘要：The Purpose of this study was to figure out the differences in idea generation, writing performances, and other factors influencing writing of junior high school students with and without learning disabilities. Idea generation content, written products, observation records and interview results collected from participants were analyzed by methods of means, standard deviations, Mann-Whitney U tests, and effects sizes. The primary results showed that there were no significant differences in idea generation including time before idea generation, propositions of idea generation, time during idea generation, and rate of idea generation among students with and without learning disabilities. Though there were no differences in time during writing, the other writing performances including propositions of written products, rate of writing, and scores of written products of students with learning disabilities were worse than the outcomes of students without learning disabilities. At last, factors correlated with writing including working memory, dictation abilities, and discourse knowledge of students with learning disabilities were worse than those of students without learning disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：33-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201112.00353篇名：家長對高中職階段智能障礙子女未來婚育狀況之態度研究並列篇名：A Study of Parents' Marital Attitude for Their Children with Intellectual Disabilities in the High Schools作者：陳瑩真(Ying-Chen Chen);張美華(Mei-Hua Chang)關鍵字：家長婚姻態度;智能障礙子女;未來婚育狀況;高級中學;Parents' marital attitude;Children with intellectual disabilities;Future marriage condition;High school期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：34期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討家長對高中職階段智能障礙子女未來婚育狀況之態度，以及不同子女變項與家庭變項對家長態度的影響。本研究之研究對象為雲嘉南地區高中職智障學生之家長，共272位。以研究者自編之「家長對智能障礙子女未來婚育狀況之態度調查表」為研究工具進行問卷調查；所獲得的資料則以描述統計、單因子變異數分析、獨立樣本t考驗與卡方考驗等方式予以統計與分析。依據資料分析結果，本研究歸納出以下幾點主要結論：第一，家長普遍同意其智障子女在成年後結婚，但不同意其婚後生育孩子。第二，家長為子女安排婚配之動機主要是基於「讓智障子女未來有人照顧」及「為子女找個生活上的寄託」等考量。第三，家長將來為子女擇偶時將首重對方的能力條件。第四，半數以上的家長並不侷限於任一種為子女擇偶婚配之方式，但也有高達四成左右的家長僅能接受親友介紹的方式。第五，若以將來會讓子女生育為前提時，則家長贊成之動機多數是基於智障子女「可以和孩子建立親密情感」，並且絕大多數家長期盼將來智障子女能「在親屬從旁協助下養育孩子」。第六，家長對子女未來婚育狀況之態度受子女就讀學校類型、子女性別、子女障礙程度、子女有無伴隨其他障礙、家庭居住地、家庭月總收入、家庭有無正常手足等變項影響而有差異。很據上述研究結果，本研究從教育與輔導、政策與福利、以及未來研究等面向提出相關之具體建議。英文摘要：This study was aimed to explore the parents' marital attitude for their children with intellectual disabilities, and to compare the influence between different background variables toward parents' attitude. A total of 272 participants were parents of students with intellectual disabilities in the high schools in Yunlin, Chiayi, and Tainan Region. The ”Questionnaire on the Parents' Marital Attitude for Their Children with Intellectual Disabilities” was developed by the researchers as research instrument. The data collected from questionnaire were analyzed by descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, independent-samples t test and Chi-square test. The major findings were as follows: First, the parents generally agreed their children with intellectual disabilities to merry in adult, but didn't agree them to give birth. Second, the motivation of parents arranging marriages for their children was ”let their children be taken care” and ”finding the sustenance for children's future life”. Third, parents of students with intellectual disabilities would take priority of capacity of their children's spouse. Forth, more than 50% of the parents didn't limit of any approach of choosing the spouse for their children. However, around 40% of parents accepted only match-making from their relatives and friends. Fifth, the motivation of parents agreeing their children to give birth was ”the children with intellectual disabilities can build intimacy with their own children”. Besides, most of parents expected that their children with intellectual disabilities can rear children by relatives' assistance. Sixth, the parents' attitude were significant different that affected by their children's school types, gender, degrees of intellectual disabilities, whether with other associate disabilities or not, family residence, monthly income, and whether having other normal siblings or not. According to the results of this study, there were some suggestions offered on the educations, policies, and other researches in the future.起始頁-結束頁：57-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201112.00594篇名：學齡階段身心障礙學生自我決策量表之編製並列篇名：The Development of a Self-Determination Scale for School-Age Students with Disabilities作者：趙本強(Pen-Chiang Chao)關鍵字：身心障礙學生;自我決策;標準化量表;Students with disabilities;Self-determination;Standardized scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：34期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的主要目的係針對學齡階段身心障礙學生編製一份標準化自我決策量表並評估其信、效度，另亦建立不同性別、年級與障礙類別之常模。本研究自編之「學齡階段身心障擬學生自我決策量表」係參酌相關理論、同質量表及與教師的訪談結果等編製而成。量表包括自我瞭解、心理賦權、自我調整及獨立自主四個分量表。量表共合37道題目，總分介於37－148分，分數愈高代表自我決策程度愈高。本研究採分層隨機抽樣並輔以立意取樣方式，從全國募集國小五年級至高中職三年級的身心障礙學生參與研究。研究對象分為預試樣本（N = 403）及常模樣本（N = 2,215）。前者的資料用於編修量表，使用的資料分析方法包括描述統計、項目總分相關、內部一致性效標及探索性因素分析;後者的資料則用於評估量表信、效度並建立常摸，評估信、效度的方法包括內部一致性、相關及驗證性因素分析，常模分析則係呈現不同群組之原始分數及標準分數的分佈型態，並以變異數分析比較彼此間之差異。研究結果顯示，本研究自編之量表有不錯的內部一致性、折半及再測信度，且亦有理想的效標關聯及構念效度。就常模而言，男、女生之間的差異不大，然身障生的自我決策程度隨其年齡增長而有逐漸升高的傾向，另不同障別間的常模差異頗大。研究最後提出相關研究建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to develop a standardized self-determination scale for school-age students with disabilities, evaluate the psychometric properties of the scale, and establish the norms of gender, age, and type of disability. ”SAS Self-Determination Scale” (SAS-SDS) developed in this study consists of four subscales, including self-realization, psychological empowerment, self-regulation, and autonomy. The ”SAS-SDS” contains 37 items, with full scale scores ranging from 37 to148. The higher scores indicate the higher level of self-determination. Subjects were 2,618 school-age students with disabilities, selected from each county in Taiwan by using both probability and non-probability sampling methods. Among the subjects, 403 involved in the item-analysis process, whereas 2,215 participated in the process of assessing scale validity and reliability as well as the examination of the norms. Methods used in this study included descriptive statistics, correlation analyses, analyses of variance, item analyses, and factor analyses, all of which were used to assess the scale's internal consistency reliability, test-retest reliability, criterion-related validity, and construct validity. Results showed that the ”SAS-SDS” is a scale with appropriate psychometric properties. With regard to the norms of gender, age, and type of disability, findings indicated that there were no differences between males and females. Nonetheless, the level of self-determination of students with disabilities increases as they became older. Additionally, level of self-determination among students with different disabilities varied apparently. Suggestions were provided for future research.起始頁-結束頁：101-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201112.01035篇名：學前兒童華語聲母之音韻歷程分析並列篇名：The Phonological Processes of Syllable-Initial Consonants Spoken by the Preschool Children of Mandarin Chinese作者：鄭靜宜(Jing-Yi Jeng)關鍵字：音韻歷程;語音異常;音韻異常;構音異常;語音發展遲緩;Phonological process;Speech sound disorders;Phonological disorders;Articulatory disorders;Speech developmental delay期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：34期出版年：2011中文摘要：學前兒童產生的語音錯誤中有常有一些共有的型態或特徵性，音韻歷程的分析即是分析歸納個體產生的語音錯誤中語音改變的型態或規則。本研究的目的在調查學前說華語兒童和音韻異常兒童常見的語音錯誤之音韻歷程。本研究包含兩個研究，研究一分析326位二歲半歲至六歲學前兒童的詞語；念名音誤之音韻歷程，比較六個年齡組（二歲半歲、三歲、三歲半、四歲、五歲、六歲）音誤中各音韻歷程的出現率和次數。結果發現學前兒童出現最多的音韻歷程依次為不捲舌化、後置化、塞音化、塞擦音化和不送氣化。各音韻歷程出現率在整體上呈現隨著年齡組的年齡增加有逐漸下降的趨勢，其中以後置化、塞音化、塞擦音化和不送氣化，這四種音韻歷程的出現率降低的幅度最大。研究二分析55位語音異常兒童的語音樣本，歸納其音誤中音韻歷程的種類和次數。和研究一的結果相較，語音異常兒童的語音中有顯著較多的音韻歷程次數和種類。然而語音異常兒童的音韻歷程種類和出現率排行型態和研究一同年齡的普通兒童樣本則頗為相近，顯示兩群體的差異主要是在音韻歷程數量方面，語音異常兒童尚未完成音韻歷程的抑制，具有語音發展遲緩的徵兆。使用各歷程出現個數和歷程種類數做為預測變項，進行語音異常和發展正常兒童的區別分析，結果顯示這些預測變項可將這些兒童做正確地區分，區分正確率達83.4%。英文摘要：A lot of research works about phonological processes have been done for English speaking children, but none for Mandarin speaking children. The aim of this research was to investigate the phonological processes in the speech of Mandarin speaking children and children with speech disorders. It was comprised of two studies. The Study 1 was to analyze the phonological processes in the speech errors of 326 children with age ranging from 2.5 to 6 years old. There were six age groups for children with2.5-, 3-, 3.5-, 4-, 5-, and 6-year-old. The incidence and frequency of phonological processes for the six age groups were compared. The results showed that for these preschool children, the most frequent phonological processes were deretroflexion, backing, stopping, affricating, and deaspiration, with descending order respectively. As the age of groups increased, the incidence and frequency of phonological processes were significantly decreased. There were four phonological processes showed apparently suppressed: backing, stopping, affricating, and deaspiration in the groups of older ages (4-, 5- and 6-year-old). In the Study 2, the speech errors of 55 children with speech sound disorders were analyzed, and their frequency and types of phonological processes were compared with those of the normal children with the same age (5- and 6-year-old) in the Study 1. There were significantly differences between speech disorder group and the normal group in the frequency and the number of types in phonological processes; however, the types and the patterns of the incidence of the phonological processes were pretty similar. It suggests that the differences between the two groups were mostly in the quantitative aspect. Most children in the speech disorder group showed signs of speech developmental delay in the pattern of phonological process. With the frequency and the type numbers of phonological process as the predictive variables, the discriminant analysis showed that 83.4% of the original grouped cases were correctly classified. These results can provide information as developmental norm of phonological processes for preschool children as well as the children with speech sound disorders.起始頁-結束頁：135-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201112.01376篇名：盲生化學實驗課合作教學行動研究並列篇名：Cooperative Instruction in Teaching Blind Students during Their Chemistry Experiment Course: An Action Research作者：曾怡惇(Yi-Tun Tseng);廖焜熙(Kun-Hsi Liao)關鍵字：盲生;化學實驗;合作教學;行動研究;blind students;chemistry experiment;cooperative teaching;action research期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：33期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以質性研究方法，探索盲生於普通班實驗課，如何與明眼學生合作學習化學實驗課；以及理化教師與視障教育教師合作教學，協助盲生與普通生進行化學實驗操作的情形。資料蒐集以攝影機拍攝師生上課情形，以錄音機蒐集理化教師、視障教育教師、盲生、明眼學生合作教學、合作學習方式之感受及其所面臨的問題。研究參與者包括國中盲生兩位及理化教師兩位，分別<U+7232>兩位盲生的理化教師、視障教育教師<U+7232>研究者及明眼同儕一位（<U+7232>盲生同班同組同學）。實驗教材<U+7232>教育部審定國民中學二年級上學期適用的「自然與生活科技」第三冊的化學實驗單元。研究結果發現：(1)盲生渴望學習化學，但教科書中的圖形與表格無法令盲生上課同步學習；(2)盲生化學課亟需專人從旁協助抄筆記、口述教師黑板的講解內容，以及協助實驗操作；(3)普通班盲生實驗課之理化教師與視障教育教師合作教學模式，需重新調整。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to explore during experiment course, how blind students learned cooperatively with normal students, and how chemistry teachers cooperated with the teacher of blind students to teach both blind and normal students in chemistry courses. Participants included two blind students (both were 8(superscript th) grade junior high students), one blind-education teacher, two teachers who teach these students chemistry, and one normal student who was the students' peer in the same learning group. Blind-education teacher also was the researcher. The researcher used a video recorder to videotape classroom instruction sessions, and used a tape recorder for recording interview data for chemistry teachers, blind-education teacher, visual impaired students, and normal student on their perceptions of cooperative teaching, cooperative learning, and problems they faced. The teaching materials for the experiment were from chemistry experiment units of Nature Science and Life Technology (3(superscript rd) volume) which used for the first semester of the 8th grade junior high school students. Research findings of this study include: (1)Blind students desired to learn chemistry, but they could not see the diagram and tables in the textbook; (2)they desperately needed experts to assist them to take note, orally repeat the instructor's teaching content, and help with students' chemistry experimental operation task; and (3)the co-teaching model consisted of chemistry teacher from the regular classroom and the special education teacher specialized in blind education should be re-modified.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201106.00017篇名：普通班腦性麻痺兒童之重要成人對圖形溝通符號明識度覺知之研究並列篇名：Exploring the Translucency of Picture Communication Symbols for Important Adults of Children with Cerebral Palsy in Regular Classes作者：黃志雄(Chih-Hsiung Huang);陳明聰(Ming-Chung Chen)關鍵字：符號明識度;輔助溝通;圖形溝通符號;腦性麻痺學生;重要成人;translucency;augmentative and alternative communication AAC;picture communication symbols;student with cerebral palsy;important adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：33期出版年：2011中文摘要：在融合教育思潮的影響下，我國已有越來越多的腦性麻痺兒童在普通班就讀，但是受到動作和語言能力的限制，往往需要透過以圖形符號<U+7232>主之輔助溝通和科技輔具，來協助他們順利地適應普通班級的生活學習和溝通互動。然而，如果腦性麻痺兒童所使用的圖形符號，無法透明且清晰地傳遞訊息，他們將無法有效地與人溝通互動和融入普通班的學習環境中。近年來，雖然有許多應用輔助溝通和圖形符號方面的研究，但在國內仍缺乏探討有關圖形符號明識度之研究。因此，本研究以自編之「圖形溝通符號明識度調查表」<U+7232>工具，以同時呈現符號和文字之七點量表方式，調查80位普通班腦性麻痺兒童之重要成人，對國內常用彩色圖形溝通符號明識度的覺知，並探討影響符號辨識之可能因素。研究結果發現國內常用之彩色圖形溝通符號具有高明識度，而高明識度的符號以名詞居多，低明識度的符號則是以形容詞居多。同時，研究結果亦顯示身份與詞性兩變項與明識度得分並無交互作用，但在身份變項上，教師評定的結果高於家長；而名詞、動詞和形容詞三種詞性符號之明識度得分，彼此有顯著差異，其中名詞顯著優於動詞和形容詞，動詞也顯著優於形容詞。英文摘要：Under the influence of the ideological trend in inclusive education, more and more children with cerebral palsy receive mandatory education in general education classrooms. However, their limited motor and language abilities affect their learning outcomes and social interaction, and they often need to use graphic symbols and augmentative and alternative communication system to overcome the challenges. The graphic symbols are the major lexicon for children with cerebral palsy in communication and learning process. If the graphic symbols can't transmit transparent messages, they won't be able to communicate with others and learn effectively. Although a variety of studies explored the applications of graphic symbols and AAC, they still lack the issues related the translucency and iconicity of graphic symbols in Taiwan. Therefore, this study adopted a self-developed 7-point Likert questionnaire on ”The Translucency of Picture Communication Symbols” as a tool, which presented both symbols and characters (meanings) simultaneously. Eighty importnat adults of children with cerebral palsy in regular classes rated the translucency of ninety colored picture communication symbols. In addition to exploring the degree of translucency, this study also tried to find out the symbols with high translucency and the ones with low translucency. The result of the survey indicates that the domestic common picture communication symbols are with high translucency on average. Most of the symbols with high translucency are nouns; in contrast, most of the symbols rated as low translucency are adjectives. Meanwhile, the result also shows that there were no interaction effects between the groups (teachers and parents) and lexical categories (nouns, verbs, and adjectives). However, the teachers rated higher translucency than the parents did. There were also significant translucency differences among the nouns, verbs and adjectives. The nouns were notably rated as the highest translucency, then the verbs, and the adjectives were the lowest.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201106.00298篇名：身心障礙資優生優弱勢分析結果之探究並列篇名：A Research through Strengths and Weaknesses Analysis Results of Gifted Students with Disabilities作者：鄒小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Tsou);盧台華(Tai-Hwa Lu)關鍵字：身心障礙資優生;優弱勢分析;gifted students with disabilities;strengths and weaknesses analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：33期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究對象<U+7232>國小一至六年級亞斯伯格症資優生、高功能自閉症資優生、注意力缺陷過動症資優生與學習障礙資優生，共計九名。採多元評量與多資料來源進行優弱勢分析，包括標準化測驗量表檢核、半結構式訪談和文件分析等策略，藉以了解身心障礙資優生優勢潛能與弱勢困難，做<U+7232>未來介入服務之依據。綜合本研究主要發現如下：一、本研究個案在魏氏兒童智力量表（第四版）之全量表或組合量表智商至少<U+7232>120。全量表智商以亞斯伯格症資優生最高，學障資優生最低；處理速度共同偏低。二、本研究個案在陶倫斯創造思考測驗全量表得分皆偏低，分測驗以精密力表現較佳。三、本研究個案在學生自評之多元智能量表表現歧異，有高估或低估現象。四、本研究個案在家長評定之行<U+7232>與情緒量表顯見人際關係分量表<U+7232>共同弱勢。五、本研究個案在校多數科目表現優等；家長對個案的弱勢覺知較優勢明確。六、本研究從語文理解、知覺推理、創造思考、多元智能、情緒管理、人際互動與學習動機七個向度綜合評析個案優弱勢。本研究個案共同優勢<U+7232>詞彙與常識豐富、喜好閱讀、記憶力佳、圖形設計與推理良好；共同弱勢<U+7232>處理速度慢、書寫不佳、創意技巧不足、遇困難易放棄、不善人際互動與情緒管理待加強。英文摘要：This research was to investigate and analyze the strengths and weaknesses of gifted students with disabilities. There were nine subjects from 1st to 6th grade elementary school students, including gifted students with AS, HFA, ADHD, and LD. Data collected through standardized tests, questionnaire, check with non-standardized interview, and document analysis of multiple strategies in order to understand the strengths of gifted students with disabilities and disadvantaged potential difficulties. The main findings were outlined below:1. This research applied the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (4th ed.) to all subjects, and all students scored low on Processing Speed Index as a result.2. All students' Torrance Creativity Test full scores were low.3. There were over or underestimate the abilities according to the self-assessment of multiple intelligence scale performance differences.4. The results of all students’ Behavior and Emotional Assessment by parents, were different, but the interpersonal subscales were common weak.5. Parents were more aware of the weakness than the strength of all students' academic subjects in school performance superior.6. This research consolidated material of seven aspects from various sources and multiple scale assessments covering. By using this information, the researcher were able to effectively analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the subjects. The different types of gifted students with disabilities advantage of strengths and weaknesses have similarities and differences. The strengths were rich of vocabulary and common sense, love to read, good memory, graphic design, and reasoning. The weaknesses were processing speed, poor writing, lacking of creative skills, easy to give up, and poor social interaction and emotional management.起始頁-結束頁：57-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201106.00579篇名：提升高職特教班學生自我決策能力成效之研究－從做中學之教學模式並列篇名：A Study of Promoting Self-Determination Skills of Vocational High School Students with Disabilities-A Learning by Doing Teaching Model作者：趙本強(Pen-Chiang Chao)關鍵字：自我決策;身心障礙;高職特教班;從做中學;課程教學;high school students;disabilities;self-determination;special education class;learning by doing;curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：33期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的主要目的是發展一份強調行<U+7232>實踐訓練之自我決策課程，並評估其用於提升高職身心障礙學生自我決策能力之成效。本研究以立意取樣方式從北部兩所高職綜合職能科選取80名高一至高三智能障礙及自閉症學生參與研究。學生按其就讀學校分別組成實驗組(n=41)與控制組(n=39)。實驗組共接受16週的教學。本研究自編之「從做中學自我決策課程」係奠基於從做中學、發現學習及鷹架作用等學習理論，教師藉由解釋、示範及獨立練習等策略教導學生如何從做選擇與決定、解決問題及自主行動等行<U+7232>過程中習得相關自我決策知能。課程成效主要以變異數分析及盒形圖之視覺分析評估兩組學生在兩份自我決策量表組內之前、後測差異及以共變數分析評估組間之差異，質性訪談資料則用於輔助說明課程成效。研究結果顯示，實驗組在兩份量表的後測分數皆顯著高於其前測分數，控制組則無此差異情形。另共變數分析的結果顯示，以前測<U+7232>共變數，實驗組在兩份量表的後測分數均顯著高於控制組的後測分數。訪談結果顯示，受訪的學生、教師及家長皆對課程內容及其教學成效抱持正向態度。本研究的結果證實，高職智能障礙及自閉症學生的確能從行<U+7232>實踐中習得自我決策技能。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a self-determination curriculum emphasizing behavioral practices and examine its effects on promoting self-determination skills of students with disabilities. Participants were 80 students with intellectual disabilities and autism, recruited from two vocational high schools and assigned to an experimental group (n=41) and a control group (n=39) based on the school they attend. Students in the experimental group received a total of 16 sessions of instruction. ”Learning by Doing Self-Determination Curriculum” based on the conceptualizations of learning by doing, discovery learning, and scaffolding was developed to help students acquire self-determination skills through the process of exercising decision-making, problem-solving, and autonomy behaviors. Strategies teachers used to facilitate learning included explicit explanations, modeling, feedbacks, and independent practices. Effects of the curriculum were assessed by using analyses of variance and covariance to analyze students' scores on the Arc's Self-Determination Scale and the Self-Determination Scale for High School Students. Interviews with students and teachers were also employed to evaluate effects of the curriculum. Results showed that the experimental group's posttest scores were significantly higher than its pretest scores on both scales. This situation, however, was not observed in the control group. Results also showed that using the pretest as the covariate, students in the experimental group significantly outperformed their counterparts in the control group on both scales. Participants interviewed all showed positive attitudes toward the curriculum and its effects on promoting students' skills. Findings of the study suggest that high school students with intellectual disabilities and autism can improve their self-determination skills through the learning by doing teaching model.起始頁-結束頁：93-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201106.009310篇名：特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫失敗樣本分析研究－以96學年度調查資料<U+7232>例並列篇名：Analysis of Nonresponse Bias with the 2007 Survey Data in Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study (SNELS)作者：鄭淑芬(Shu-Fen Cheng);王天苗(Tien-Miau Wang);洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hung);蔡欣玶(Shin-Ping Tsai)關鍵字：失敗樣本;無反應偏誤;邏輯斯迴歸分析;unit-nonresponse;nonresponse bias;logistic regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：33期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在檢視「特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫」失敗樣本對推論可能造成偏頗的影響因素。以該資料庫民國96學年度學前及國小三歲、五歲、小一和小三等四組4,873名有效樣本資料<U+7232>對照，追蹤調查隨機抽取之527名失敗樣本在性別、居住地區、父親教育程度、母親教育程度、障礙類別、安置型態、障礙影響程度、家長參與程度及學習進步程度等九個變項上的情形，以卡方考驗和多變量邏輯斯迴歸分析進行失敗樣本和有效樣本在這些標竿指標上的差異考驗。分析結果發現，四組失敗樣本與有效樣本之間的差異主要在家長參與程度、障礙影響程度和學習進步程度三項，其中，尤其以家長參與程度<U+7232>最大關鍵因素。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine nonresponse bias in a large-scale survey, the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study, which interviewed special needs children's parents, teachers and school administrators. Data analyses included a comparison between the originally selected sample and the follow-up survey for unit-nonresponses on the demographic characteristics and variables related to learning outcomes. The results revealed that except for the 5-year-old sample, there was no significant difference between these two groups on demographic variables for the 3-year-old, the first-grade, and the third-grade samples; on the contrary, the variables related to learning outcomes were the main causes accounting for the nonresponses. Multivariate logistic regression models were applied to estimate the odds of correlates of nonresponse, including demographic characteristics and variables related to learning outcomes. Again, the results demonstrated that parental involvement, a variable related to learning outcomes, was a significant predictor of nonresponse bias across 3-year-olds to 3rd graders. None of the demographic characteristics was statistically significant. For the pre-school stage, except for parental involvement, influence of disabilities was another index to predict nonresponse. For the elementary stage, learning progress was an additional key variable to portend nonresponse. The findings suggest that the variables related to learning outcomes, rather than demographic characteristics, may be the important sources of nonresponse bias in the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study.起始頁-結束頁：125-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201106.012511篇名：學生創造力影響因素之研究：三層次分析架構並列篇名：A Study on Influential Factors of Students' Creativity: The Three-Level Analysis as Analytic Framework作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsia)關鍵字：創造力;創造力教學;學校創新氣氛;動機;creativity;creativity teaching;school innovation climate;motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：33期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究採取匯合取向，藉由階層線性模式以三層次角度來探討學校層次（學校創新氣氛）、教師層次（教師創造力教學）以及學生層次（動機）對創造力表現的影響。本研究採用自編量表與創造力測驗，經43所學校、333位教師、3,330位學生的問卷資料分析後發現以下四點結論：第一，學生的內在動機、教師的創造力技能及校長鼓勵對學生的創造力表現具有直接影響效果。第二，創造力技能在內、外在動機與創造力表現間扮演不同的調節效果。第三，學校鼓勵對於教師創造力教學行<U+7232>具有直接影響效果。第四，校長鼓勵、資源充分、以及學習成長扮演重要的調節效果。英文摘要：With confluence approaches, this study, from the aspect of three levels, discussed the effects of school (school innovation climate), teachers (creativity teaching), and students (motivation) on the performance of creativity through hierarchical linear model. This study used the self-developed scale and creativity test, and haved questionnaire analyses on 43 schools with 333 teachers and 3,330 students. Four conclusions were drawn: First, the internal motivation of students, the creative skills of teachers, and the encouragement from the principal to the creativity of students presented direct effects on student creativity; second, creative skills played various moderation effects on internal and external motivation and the performance of creativity, third, the encouragement from the school to teachers' creative instructions appeared direct influence, and fourth, the encouragement from the principal, sufficient resources, and learning to grow played important roles in moderation effects.起始頁-結束頁：151-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201106.015101篇名：指讀及文字討論之共讀方式對幼兒認字的影響並列篇名：Effects of Print Referencing in Joint Storybook Reading on Preschoolers' Word Recognition作者：陳惠茹(Hui-Ju Chen);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：文字覺識;共讀方式;指讀;認字;joint storybook reading;print awareness;word recognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在探討成人以指讀及文字討論的共讀方式帶領幼兒閱讀童書對其辨認書中字彙能力的影響。四十八位平均年齡四歲三個月的幼兒，分成三組，在不同的成人閱讀指引方式下，共讀「三隻小兔」童書五次，並測試其辨認書中六個字彙的能力。研究結果顯示（1）在「指讀及文字討論」的共讀方式帶領下，幼兒辨認書中字彙的能力與參與「指讀及命名」、「純粹唸讀」共讀活動的幼兒有顯著差異。（2）在「指讀及文字討論」的共讀方式帶領下，幼兒出現較多自發性對印刷文字的討論，且自發的文字討論次數與其認字能力呈現正相關。文中並對未來相關研究及閱讀教學策略提出討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of adult using print referencing (i. e., pointing while discussing print materials) during joint storybook reading on preschoolers' word recognition ability. Forty-eight preschool-aged children with an average age of four years and three months were assigned to three guided storybook reading conditions: (a) verbatim reading, (b) pointing and labeling the print, and (c) pointing and discussing about the print. After five joint readings of the ”Three Rabbits” storybook, children's ability to recognize six target words were examined. Results showed: (1) Children in the pointing-and-discussing-about-print condition scored significantly higher than children in the verbatim-reading and pointing-and-labeling-print conditions. (2) Children in the pointing-and-discussing- about-print condition initiated more discussions about the printed materials, and there is a positive relationship between the frequency of self initiation and word recognition ability. Implications for pedagogy are discussed and future research directions are suggested.起始頁-結束頁：377-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201006112篇名：四分法成就需求架構之驗證及其對成就目標導向模式的調節效果並列篇名：Testing a Quadripolar Framework of Achievement Need and its Moderating Effect on a Model of Achievement Goal Orientation作者：江民瑜(Min-Yu Chiang);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：不適應性學習組型;四分法成就需求;個人目標導向;適應性學習組型;課室目標結構;adaptive and maladaptive patterns of learning;classroom goal structure;individual goal orientation;quadripolar framework of need for achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的有（1）檢驗四分法成就需求在適應性與不適應性學習組型的差異情形：（2）分析四分法成就需求對成就目標導向模式的調節作用。樣本選取共抽取高雄市16所國中63個班級1780名學生，蒐集的資料以多變量變異數分析、結構方程模式多樣本分析進行統計考驗。研究結果顯示（1）求成需求與避敗需求呈低度負相關，支持四分法成就需求的觀點：（2）在適應性學習組型的興趣與自我效能，成功導向組顯著高於過分努力組；早在成功期望，失敗逃避組顯著高於失敗接受阻；在不適應性學習組型的自我設限與逃避生疏。過分努力組顯著高於成功導向組；在逃避生疏，失敗逃避組顯著高於失敗接受組；（3）多樣本分析結果顯示，四組在精熟課室目標結構影響個人精熟目標導向有顯著差異。最後，根據研究結果提出相關課室實務與未來研究建議。英文摘要：This study aims at testing: (a) the application of a quadripolar framework of need for achievement to differentiate students with adaptive and maladaptive patterns of learning; (b) the moderating effect of the achievement need model on achievement goal orientation. The sample consisted of 1780 seventh-to-ninth graders representing 63 classrooms from 16 schools in Kaohsiung City. Multivariate analyses and structural equation modeling using multi samples were conducted. Results indicated: (a) a low and negative correlation between success achievement need and failure avoidance need, which confirms the hypothesis of the quadripolar model; (b) In the adaptive patterns of learning group, success-oriented individuals were significantly higher than overstrivers on academic interest and self-efficacy, and failure-avoiders were significantly higher than failure-acceptant s on the expectance of success; (c) In the maladaptive patterns of learning group, overstrivers were significantly higher than success-oriented individuals on self-handicapping and novelty avoidance, and failure-avoiders were significantly higher than failure-acceptants on novelty avoidance; (d) results of multi-sample analysis indicated that the structural parameters on the model of achievement goal orientation were significantly different among the four groups. The results and implications for intervention and future research were addressed.起始頁-結束頁：397-418資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201006153篇名：國小實習教師的角色知覺、工作投入與專業成長之因果關係研究並列篇名：The Causality among Role Perception, Job Involvement and Professional Growth作者：吳和堂(Ho-Tang Wu);鍾明翰(Ming-Han Chung)關鍵字：工作投入;角色知覺;專業成長;國小實習教師;intern teacher;job involvement;professional growth;role perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小實習教師的角色知覺、工作投入與專業成長三者的現況、相關與因果關係。經用自編的國小實習教師角色知覺、工作投入與專業成長問卷， 共施測256位國小實習教師，經描述性統計，積差相關與結構方程模式等統計，分析後發現：國小實習教師在整體角色知覺、工作投入、專業成長上都達中等以上程度，三者彼此之間也都有顯著的正相關。在因果關係方面，本研究發現角色知覺是透過工作投入，來影響專業成長。依據發現，首先，建議國小實習教師要更積極與正向地深入認識教師角色，其次，建議實習教師工作投入應更積極。最後，建議在未來研究上增加角色知覺、工作投入的層面，以找出更多影響國小實習教師專業成長的因素。英文摘要：This study aims at examining the statuses and relationships among role perception, vocational commitment, and professional growth of grade school intern teachers. A survey designed by the authors were administered to 256 interns. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and structural equation modeling (SEM). Results indicated that (a) interns scored in the middle range on their levels of role perception, vocational commitment, and professional growth, and there is a significant positive correlation among the three variables. Meanwhile, the effect of role oerceotion on professional growth is mediated by vocational commitment. Several suggestions are offered based on the results. First, intern teachers in grade school need to develop more positive appraisal of professional role. Second, intern teachers need to develop stronger commitment to the vocation. Future research should focus more on the contributions of role perception and vocational commitment to teachers' professional development.起始頁-結束頁：419-438資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20100618.14篇名：教師工作壓力及因應策略相關性之後設分析並列篇名：A Meta Aalysis of The Relationship between Job Stress and Coping Strategies of Teachers作者：陳瑋婷(Wei-Ting Chen)關鍵字：工作壓力;因應策略;後設分析;教師;coping strategies;educators;job stress;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：為了解國內學前至高中職階段教師工作壓力與因應策略之相關性，本研究針對79篇研究報告及31, 565位研究對象進行後設分析。結果發現教師工作壓力與因應策略之加權平均效應量為.04，具有正相關及低效應量。經同質性考驗後發現，效應量間的變異係受到研究年代變項，任教階段變項及擔任職務變項等變項的調節作用，除此之外，本研究尚無法確認效應量選取類型變項是否具調節作用。英文摘要：To understand the relationship between job stress and coping strategies of kindergarten to high school teachers, a meta analysis of 79 research studies with a combined sample of 31,565 participants was conducted. Results indicated a small but positive correlation between teachers' job s tress and coping strategies, with a weighted effect size of 0.04. Test of homogeneity was rejected, indicating significant variation among effect size and the moderating effects of the year of the study's publication, stage of teacher's career, and the type of teacher's position. However, the selective influence of moderating effects cannot be confirmed.起始頁-結束頁：439-455資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20100618.25篇名：國小高年級學童情緒安全類型與父母婚姻衝突因應、抵制教養聯盟關係之探討並列篇名：Examining the Relationships among Chidlren's Emotional Security, Parent Marital Conflict Coping, and Undermining of Parenting Alliance of Elementary School Students作者：林惠雅(Huey-Ya Lin)關鍵字：父母關係;婚姻衝突因應;情緒安全類型;教養聯盟;coping strategies for marital conflict;emotional security pattern;parental relationship; parenting alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的是探究國小高年級學童情緒安全類型與其父母婚姻衝突因應、抵制教養聯盟的關聯。研究對象為居住於大台北地區國小高年級學童及其父母，共計398個家庭。本研究工具包括「兒童情緒安全量表」、「婚姻衝突因應量表」、「抵制教養聯盟量表」。本研究結果顯示，兒童情緒安全有「安全型」、「焦慮型」、和「疏離型」三種類型。至於三種兒童情緒安全類型孩子的父母的婚姻衝突因應抵制教養聯盟的差異，在父親方面，「安全型」兒童的父親有較高程度的「正向回應」；「焦慮型」兒童的父親有最高程度的「爭執」和「抵制教養聯盟」，而「安全型」兒童的父親則最低；「焦慮型」和「疏離型」兒童的父親則有較高的「自我責備」、「逃避」、「自我興趣」，且「焦慮型」和「疏離型」兒童的父親並無顯著差異。在母親方面，「安全型」兒童的母親有最高程度的「正向回應」、「焦慮型」兒童的母親的程度最低；而「爭執」、「自我責備」和「抵制教養聯盟」，則是「焦慮型」兒童的母親的程度最高，「安全型」兒童的母親的程度最低；「焦慮型」兒童的母親有較高的「逃避」、「安全型」兒童的母親有較低的「自我興趣」。英文摘要：The aims of the present study were to identify children's emotional security patterns and to examine its relationships with parents' marital conflict coping strategies, and undermining of parenting alliance. Participants were 398 families, including 5(superscript th) and 6(superscript th) graders and their parents. Results indicated that children's emotional security patterns could be identified as ”security pattern,” ”preoccupied pattern,” and ”dismissing pattern.” Fathers with children in ”security pattern” reported higher level of ”positive reaction” strategy when coping with marital conflict. Fathers with children in ”preoccupied pattern” reported higher level of ”argument” strategy and highest level of undermining of parenting alliance whereas fathers with children in ”security pattern” reported lowest levels of these two aspects. Fathers with children in ”preoccupied pattern” and in ”dismissing pattern” reported high levels of ”self-blamed,” ”escaping from conflict,” and ”self-interested” strategies, however, there was no significant differences between fathers with children in these two patterns. Mothers with children in ”security pattern” reported higher level of ”positive reaction”, strategy whereas mothers with children in ”preoccupied pattern” reported lowest level of this strategy. Mothers with children in ”preoccupied pattern” reported highest levels of ”argument” and ”self-blamed” strategies and undermining of parenting alliance, and mothers with children in ”security pattern” reported lowest levels of these two strategies. Moreover, mothers with children in ”preoccupied pattern” reported highest level of ”escaping from conflict,” and mothers with children in ”security pattern” reported lowest level of ”self-blamed” strategies.起始頁-結束頁：457-476資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201007126篇名：道德認同對軍事社會化與道德疏離間的調節作用並列篇名：Moderating Effects of Moral Identity on Relationship between Military Socialization and Moral Disengagement作者：余一鳴(Yi-Ming Yu);顏志龍(Chin-Long Yen)關鍵字：軍事社會化;道德疏離;道德認同;military socialization;moral disengagement;moral identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以Bandura（1986）道德疏離的研究典範，探討軍事社會化對道德疏離之影響，以及道德認同對此關係之調節效果。以問卷調查198位軍校學生（男性占91. 8%）。使用的工具包含「軍事社會化」、「道德疏離」及「道德認同」等量表。 以階層迴歸分析道德認同對軍事社會化與道德疏離的調節效果，結果顯示軍事社會化程度對於道德疏離有顯著正向影響；但影響程度受原生社會的道德認同調節。對道德認同低的軍校生，軍事社會化會影響道德疏離；對道德認同高者，軍事社會化並不會造成道德疏離。根據本研究成果，道德疏離並不完全是一種不道德的認知或反社會道德的錯誤認同，它也受到特殊的職業規能要求所形塑。未來可再進行不同情境或道德判斷之研究，持續深化本議題。英文摘要：The relationship among military socialization, moral disengagement, and moral identity was explored. One hundred and ninety-eight military cadets responded to scales of military socialization, moral disengagement, and moral identity. As predicted, a positive effect of the military socialization on moral disengagement was found, and subjects' moral identity moderated this effect. Relationship between military socialization and moral disengagement was stronger among subjects with low moral identity than those with high identity. The study's implications for theory and research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：477-497資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201008027篇名：調整焦點動機、成功預期對創造力與批判性思考的影響並列篇名：The Effects of Regulatory Focus and Expectancy to Success on Creativity and Critical Thinking作者：張旭中(Hsu-Chung Chang);邱發忠(Fa-Chung Chiu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);徐芝君(Chih-Chun Hsu)關鍵字：目標成功預期;促進焦點;批判性思考;預防焦點;創造力;creativity;critical thinking;expectancy to success;prevention focus;promotion focus期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在探究調整焦點動機對創造性、批判性思考表現的影響，及成功預期調節調整焦點動機與創造力、批判性思考間的關係。在實驗一，58位參與者分別被誘發促進焦點、預防焦點及中性狀況。之後，進行創造性和批判性思考作業。結果發現經促進焦點誘發後會提升創造表現，而預防焦點則提升批判思考表現。在實驗二A中，72位參與者被分別操弄促進／高預期、促進／低預期、預防／高預期、預防／低預期及中性狀況。結果在促進焦點狀況下，高預期組在創造力上的表現高於低預期狀況。在實驗二B中，70位參與者被隨機分派至如同實驗二A的五個狀況，然而，調整焦點動機的操弄方式同實驗一。結果發現在預防焦點狀況下，低成功預期狀況在批判性思考表現上高於高成功預期狀況；在低預期狀況下，預防焦點在批判性思考表現大於促進焦點狀況。綜合上述可知，促進焦點會提升創造表現，而預防焦點會提升批判性思考表現，此外，調整焦點動機會調節調整焦點動機與創造力與批判性思考表現間的關係。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to explore the effect of regulatory focus on creativity and critical thinking, and whether the expectancy to success moderates the relationship between the regulatory focus and creativity and critical thinking. In experiment 1, participants (N = 58) were randomly assigned to one of three conditions. To manipulate the promotion, prevention, and neutral conditions, participants in the promotion focus condition were asked to complete imaginative aggressive task, and participants in the prevention focus condition were asked to complete imaginative defensive task, and participants in the neutral condition were asked to read psychological article and then writing it out. After completing the respective task, participants in all conditions filled out the Remote Association Test and Critical Thinking Test. Results indicated that promotion focus motivation priming can promote creative thinking, while prevention focus motivation can promote critical thinking. In experiment 2A, participants (N = 72) were randomly assigned to ”promotion and high expectancy,” ”promotion and low expectancy,” ”prevention and high expectancy,””prevention and low expectancy,” and control conditions. Under the promotion focus condition, high expectancy group scored higher on creativity than low expectancy group. In experiment 2B, participants (N = 72) were randomly assigned to the same 5 conditions as in 2A; however, the method of inducing regulatory focus was the same as that in Experiment 1. Results show that under the prevention focus condition, the critical thinking performance of the low expectancy is higher than the high expectancy, and under the low expectancy, the prevention focus is higher than promotion focus. In sum, promotion focus motivation priming can promote creative thinking, whereas the prevention focus motivation can promote critical thinking. In addition, the expectancy to success moderates the relationship between the regulatory focus and creativity and critical thinking.起始頁-結束頁：499-520資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201009088篇名：國中生動機涉入之分類結構及其相關因素探討並列篇名：The Classification and Related Factors of Motivational Engagement for Junior High School Students作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：成就動機;求成需求;動機涉入;學業成就;避敗需求;academic achievement;achievement motivation;motivational engagement;need for achievement;need for avoiding failure期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：當代教育心理學對學習動機的研究可區分動機信念、動機涉入、動機策略三大領域，但是針對動機涉入的研究較少，且國內外的研究也尚無動機涉入之分類架構。因此，本研究試圖建構動機涉入的分類架構，考驗其與觀察資料的適配度，並進一步建構「動機涉入模式」探討成就動機、動機涉入與學業成就之關係。受試者取自台灣地區1224名國二學生，所蒐集的資料以結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果顯示：一、本研究所建構「動機涉入二階驗證性因素分析模式」獲得觀察資料支持。二、本研究所建構的「動機涉入模式」獲得觀察資料支持，且變項間關係的假定亦獲得支持；求成需求能正向預測適應性動機涉入，負向預測不適應性動機涉入；避敗需求能正向預測不適應性動機涉入；適應性動機涉入能正向預由學業成就，不適應性動機涉入則負向預測學業成就。本研究根據研究結果在理論及實務上的涵義進行討論，並提出未來的建議。英文摘要：Contemporary esearch in learning motivation can be divided into three domains: motivational belief, motivational engagement, and motivational strategy. However, research on motivational engagement is few and lacks a structural model. This study addresses several purposes: First, we seek to verify the goodness of fit between empirically observed data and the second order confirmatory factory analysis model of motivational engagement proposed by the authors. Second, we analyze the relationships among achievement motivation, motivational engagement and academic achievement. Participants were 1224 junior high school students. Data were analyzed using structural equation modeling with the LISREL computer program. The following results were obtained: (a) the second order confirmatory factor analysis model of motivational engagement fit the observed data well. (b) Need for achievement positively predicted adaptive motivational engagement and negatively predicted maladaptive motivational engagement. Need to avoid failure positively predicted maladaptive motivational engagement. Adaptive motivational engagement positively predicted academic achievement, and maladaptive motivational engagement negatively predicted academic achievement. Implications for theory, practice and further research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：521-546資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201010189篇名：花東地區學生識字量的特性：偏遠小校—弱勢中的弱勢並列篇名：The Number of Characters of Students in Remote Villages of the Most Disadvantageous Area of Eastern Taiwan作者：陳淑麗(Shu-Li Chen);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung)關鍵字：小型學校;馬太效應;偏遠地區;識字能力;識字量發展;development of vocabulary Matthew effect;remote area;small school;word recognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：花東是國內典型的弱勢縣市，本研究旨在瞭解花東地區學生的識字能力特徵。研究主要以花東小一∼國三2,144位學生的識字量評估測驗資料進行分析，但由於該測驗建立常模時所用的取樣方式易忽略小型學校，本研究特別再對台東縣4所偏遠小型國小實施識字量評估測驗，小一至小五共523人。研究結果發現，花東地區學生的識字量隨著年級漸增，但低識字組學生的識字問題相當嚴重，小五至國一低識字組學生，僅有一般學生小二的程度；國三低識字組學生，平均未達一般學生小三的程度。另外，花東學生的識字能力從小一開始就落後全國兒童，在小四後差距有擴大的趨勢，且識字能力越弱的學生，落後的情況越嚴重。進一步的分析指出，偏遠小型學校的識字問題更為嚴重，有29.5％的學生落入低分組，比花東常模16.2％多了近一倍。本研究最重要的發現是，花東兩弱勢縣市兒童的識字量低於全國常模，而且，偏遠小型學校學生尤為弱勢中的弱勢。英文摘要：Hualien and Taitung counties are the most disadvantageous area in Taiwan. Using the standardized test of Chinese characters Estimation, the researchers investigated the character size of 2144 students in grade 1 to 9. To further investigate character size of students in remote elementary schools who tend to be undersampled when the national norm is established, the research assessed character size of a total of 523 first- to fifth-grade students from four low-enrollment elementary schools remotely located in the counties It was found that character size of student in the two counties was lower than the national norm at each of the grade level. More disturbingly, the discrepancy in character size between the students in the two counties and the national norm increased with grade level. The disadvantage in vocabulary is even more profound in the low-enrollment remote schools where 29.5% of students were identified as having ”limited character size,” which is twice as much as the national norm of 16.2%.起始頁-結束頁：205-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011012510篇名：以眼動追蹤技術探討先備知識對科學圖形理解的影響並列篇名：Explore the Influence of Prior Knowledge on Understanding in Scientific Diagrams through Eye Tracking作者：劉嘉茹(Chia-Ju Liu);侯依伶(I-Lin Hou)關鍵字：先備知識;眼動追蹤技術;圖形理解;diagrams understanding;eye tracking;prior knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以板塊構造運動概念為例探討不同先備知識的個體在理解科學圖形過程中眼球運動的差異情形。本研究使用繪圖測驗及回溯性放聲思考法來了解受試者的先備知識，及閱讀科學圖形後板塊運動概念的進步情形，並以眼動追蹤儀器來收集受試者在閱讀科學圖形時眼球運動的型態。研究對象為36位自願參加的國立大學理學院學生。研究結果顯示不同先備知識程度的受試者在觀看科學圖形時，對不同關鍵區的注意力分布、認知處理時間以及個體的觀看策略都不相同。其中高先備知識的受試者比低先備知識的受試者使用在文字區的認知處理時間更多，也更傾向從文字區獲取圖形的訊息，而高先備知識的受試者也比低先備知識的受試者更企圖從文字與文字的對應以及文字和板塊圖形的連結中獲得對圖形的理解。研究結果也顯示受試者是否從教學圖片中獲得充分的資訊來調整自身的板塊構造運動概念，與其在閱讀教學圖片過程中眼球運動的凝視位置分布有關。英文摘要：According to Eye-Mind theory, eye movement has been considered an indicator of attention and thinking. The objective of this research is to explore the difference of prior knowledge on eye moment while participant understanding in scientific diagrams by Plate tectonics for example. Thirty-six participants were voluntary university students who majored in science. A drawing test was conducted to the participants as well as an eye tracking test was conducted while participant understanding scientific diagrams, At last, Retrospective Think Aloud was used to realize prior knowledge of participants and the progress after understanding scientific diagrams. The data showed that (a) Higher prior knowledge group paid more attention on textual representation rather than Lower prior knowledge group, and more tended to get information of diagrams through textual representation. (b) Higher prior knowledge group had an attempt on understanding scientific diagrams through mapping textual representation and textual representation, textual representation and Plate tectonics diagrams. (c) The participant obtained sufficient information to adjust Plate tectonics concepts by himself or not was related to fixation position.起始頁-結束頁：227-249資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011030711篇名：口語和閱讀關連性研究之文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：A Literature Review: Research on the Relationship between Oral Language and Reading of Taiwanese Children作者：劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：口語能力;文獻回顧;閱讀能力;language skill;literature review;reading ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：兒童學習閱讀的過程中，口語能力在此過程中扮演哪一種角色？本文以文獻回顧的方式探討國內自1990年到2008年間關於口語和閱讀能力關連性的研究結果，文獻來源為發表在具審查制度的期刊論文，共有12篇。分析結果顯示國內對此議題的探討大都以組間比較的研究設計說明閱讀困難或低閱讀能力學童的口語能力也同時較一般發展學童明顯低落，且各項口語能力和閱讀能力在國小階段大致呈現中低度左右的相關，但究竟是哪些特定面向的口語能力和哪些特定的閱讀能力成份的關連性最強，又或者這些關連性在不同年齡發展階段的本質為何，則仍無法形成定論。本文並針對口語與閱讀關係之研究提出未來研究的展望與建議。英文摘要：The literature review summaries research findings on the role oral language plays in children's reading development reported by Taiwanese researchers from 1990 to 2008, including 12 articles published in peer-refereed journals. Mostly based on sectional-comparison research, researchers concluded that, compared with normally developed children, children with limited reading ability or reading difficulties tend to have lower oral language proficiency. Low or medium levels of correlation between oral language and reading can be observed at different grade levels of elementary schools. However, research findings are inconclusive on the aspects of the relationship where the strongest correlation exits and the mechanism under the relationship between the two language abilities at various developmental stages. Suggestions for future research on the relationship between oral language and reading were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：251-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011033012篇名：中文部件組字與形構資料庫之建立及其在識字教學的應用並列篇名：Chinese Orthography Database and Its Application in Teaching Chinese Characters作者：陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);張瓅勻(Li-Yun Chang);邱郁秀(Yu-Shiou Chiou);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);張國恩(Kuo-En Chang)關鍵字：中文組字規則;形構規則性;部件;部件位置規則性;Chinese orthography;configuration regularity;radical;radical position-based regularity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：近幾年來，字部件在中文字教學中的作用日益受到重視，因而提升字部件的應用和研究價值。中文部件（radical）是構成中文字的基本單位，每個中文字（character）由單一或多個部件在二維方形空間中，依照組字規則排列組合而成。從當代心理學研究成果來看，部件數、筆畫數越多，其字形組成越趨於複雜，學習者處理時所需的心理歷程也越繁複；然而，過去少有以正體中文所建立的完整部件組字與形構資料庫，或對部件之頻次位置、結構等進行竭盡式地分析，因此，教學者或學習者無法對正體中文的部件屬性有通盤的了解。基於此，本研究拆分6097個常用中文字，建立439個基礎中文部件，並歸納11種空間結構關係，以此建構中文部件組字與形構資料庫。本研究以此資料庫為基礎，分析出以下指標：1. 部件出現頻次、2. 常用字之結構關係出現頻次、3. 部件與結構關係之組合關係頻次、4. 中文部件之衍生字族集合（即具有某部件的所有中文字，如「麻」的衍生字，包括「嘛麼（嬤）摩麾磨（蘑）糜靡魔」）。期透過中文字各項指標與知識之建立，提供字詞研究與教學實務之教材編製作參考。英文摘要：Radicals, as components of Chinese characters, and configurations are integral parts of Chinese orthography. Current studies have proven the psychological entity as well as the pedagogical meaning of radicals; however, little research has been done on the properties of radicals. The present study aims to develop a data-driven and exhaustive searching knowledge base - Chinese Orthography Database-which consists of a radical set and a traditional Chinese character set. Four hundred and thirty-nine radicals are used, with 11 symbols of configurations, to take apart 6097 frequent characters, which is the union of two sets of frequent characters defined by the Big-5 encoding method and the Chinese Knowledge and Information Processing group. These freguent characters are computed by the parameters of Chinese character constituent and exhaustively analyzed, while several orthographic indices are created: (a) radical frequency by type/token, (b) configuration frequency, (c) position-based radical frequency and, (d) neighborhood sizes of radicals. To assist researchers in constructing experimental materials and educators in teaching Chinese, several the applications of the Chinese Orthography Database are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：269-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011041213篇名：以分段方式降低任務複雜度對專家與生手閱讀幾何證明的影響並列篇名：Impact of Reducing Task Complexity by Segmentation on Experts' and Comprehension of Novices' Reading Geometric Proof Problems作者：左台益(Tai-Yih Tso);呂鳳琳(Feng-Lin Lu);曾世綺(Shyh-Chii Tzeng);吳慧敏(Huei-MinWu);陳明璋(Ming-Jang Chen);譚寧君(Ning-Chun Tan)關鍵字：認知負荷;閱讀理解;幾何證明;cognitive load;geometric proof;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討將一個複雜的幾何證明用分段方式呈現，以降低任務的複雜度對專家與生手在認知負荷感受與閱讀理解之影響。依據數學結構及Duval（1998）的推理資訊組織層次將幾何證明分成分段與未分段兩種文本方式呈現，並將專家（亦即，28位準中學數學教師和21位中學數學教師）與生手（66位八年級學生）隨機分派於不同呈現方式的組別中，以瞭解其認知負荷感受與閱讀理解的情形。研究結果顯示：（1）不論是對專家或對生手而言，證明文本以分段方式呈現，有助於提高其閱讀意願以及降低其閱讀證明時的困難度和所花費的心力，但對他們在閱讀理解的表現上，則未造成顯著差異。（2）不論證明文本以分段或未分段呈現，專家的閱讀意願與信心指數皆顯著高於生手，而其閱讀證明時的困難度和所花費的心力則顯著低於生手；且專家的閱讀理解表現也顯著優於生手。本研究依據研究結果，對幾何證明的後續研究與教學提出可能的教學策略與建議，以做為學術研究與教學實務工作者參考之用。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate whether reducing task difficulty by segmenting a complex geometric proof would have a differential influence on experts' and novices' cognitive load and reading comprehension. Based on mathematical structures and the theory of reasoning with organization (Duval, 1998), two versions (i.e., segmented and nonsegmented) of a print-based geometric proof were created. Forty-nine experts (i.e., 28 pre-service and 21 in-service math teachers) and sixty-six novices in their eighth-grade year were randomly assigned to either a segmented or non-segmented group. Results showed that for both experts and novices, segmentation helped increase their reading willingness and to lower their perceived task difficulty and cognitive demandingness of task. Segmenting or not, however, would not make a statistical difference with respect to participants' reading comprehension. Additionally, irrespective of versions of text read, experts' reading willingness and confidence level were significantly higher than those of the novices. Experts' perceived task difficulty and cognitive demandingness of task were significantly lower than those of the novices. Also, experts were found to comprehend the geometric proof significantly better than novices. Based on results of the study, future research and instructional strategies for teaching geometric proofs were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：291-314資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011051714篇名：親子共讀研究文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：Literature Review of Research on Parent-Child Joint Book Reading in Taiwan作者：張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：文獻回顧;閱讀;親子共讀;literature review;parent child book reading;reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：親子共讀被視為可促進兒童語文能力發展的一項重要家庭活動，是國內外學者關注的研究議題。本文採文獻回顧方式，以整理國外親子共讀研究文獻為基礎，再回顧國內相關期刊論文共十八篇，並提出未來研究之展望與建議。國內所回顧之論文發表時間為2000年至2011年，主要結果顯示（1）兒童閱讀態度與家長閱讀習慣、教育程度和職業等因素有關（2）親子共讀互動方式多以家長為主導，但有個別差異且因幼兒年齡而不同（3）適切的親子共讀活動可增進兒童語言能力、專注力、情緒理解等能力。未來研究建議增加實驗介入和縱貫期設計之研究，並（1）深入探討不同年齡和背景家庭家長親子共讀信念和方式（2）釐清親子共讀經驗對幼兒語言和閱讀相關能力之影響（3）檢驗國內親子共讀介入方案之成效。英文摘要：Joint book reading has been regarded as an important family activity that facilitates language and literacy development in children. This paper reviews previous research on joint book reading in foreign countries and Taiwan and provides suggestions for future research. Eighteen journal articles published from 2000 to 2011 were included for the review. Three main findings of these studies were obtained (a) a child's reading attitude was related to the reading habits, educational levels and occupations of his/her parents, (b) individual differences in parent-child interaction patterns during joint book reading were evident and these patterns varied across the age of the children, and (c) joint book reading practices at home facilitated children's language ability. Studies with experimental and longitudinal design were recommended for future research. Issues such as effects of joint book reading experiences and intervention programs on children's language and reading development, parental beliefs in shared book reading and joint book reading practices across families with different socio-cultural backgrounds were also suggested to be examined in the future.起始頁-結束頁：315-336資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201111_43(S).000615篇名：推論性問題引導課程對國小四年級學童推論理解與閱讀理解能力之影響並列篇名：The Effects "InferentialQuestion Discussion Program" on InferentialComprehension and Reading Comprehension of FourthGrade Students作者：沈欣怡(Hsin-Yi Shen);蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su)關鍵字：推論理解;推論性問題引導課程;國小學童;閱讀理解;elementary school students;inferential comprehension;inferential question discussion program;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討「推論性問題引導課程」對國小四年級學童在推論理解能力與閱讀理解能力上的影響。研究方法採準實驗設計中的不等組前後測設計，以國小四年級學童為對象，實驗組接受「推論性問題引導課程方案」，控制組則未接受實驗課程。研究結果顯示：（一）推論性問題引導課程對學童在推論理解測驗上的「指稱」、「精緻化」和「類比」推論有提升效果；至於自發性產出的推論量與質上，在「指稱」和「摘取大意」部分也有增進效果。（二）推論性問題引導課程也有助於提升學童的閱讀理解能力。研究者也根據研究結果對國小教學提出應用上的建議。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the effects of an inferential question discussion program on inferential comprehension and reading comprehension of fourth grade students. A quasi-experimental design was adopted. The participants were 71 fourth graders selected from two classes of an elementary school in Keelung County. There were 36 students in the experimental group and 35 students in the control group. The experimental group was treated with the inferential question discussion program, while the control group did not receive any experimental treatment. The results showed that the inferential question discussion program significantly improved students' inferential comprehension performance on takes of referential, elaborative, and analogical inference in the Inferential Comprehension Test. Regarding the spontaneous inferences, the training program significantly increased the quantity and quality of students' spontaneous inferences on the aspects of referential inference and summarization. The training program also effectively improved students' reading comprehension performance. Instructional application and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：337-356資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011080116篇名：The Influence of Parental Education Level, ParentalReadingAttitude, and Current Home ReadingActivities on Students'ReadingAttainment: Findings fromthe PIRLS 2006並列篇名：家長教育程度、閱讀態度和家庭閱讀活動對於學生閱讀成就的影響：PIRLS 2006作者：陳素燕(Su-Yen Chen);張毓仁(Yu-Jen Chang);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko)關鍵字：多群組分析;促進國際閱讀素養研究;家長教育程度;閱讀成就;閱讀態度;multiple-group analysis;parental education level;PIRLS;reading attitude;reading attainment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷S期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探索家長教育程度、閱讀態度和家庭閱讀活動對學生閱讀成就的影響，及此影響是否具有跨性別群體的恆等性。研究資料為臺灣地區「促進國際閱讀素養研究」（PIRLS 2006）資料庫，研究者以結構方程模式的多群組分析（multiple-group analysis）方法進行探究。結果顯示，家長教育程度、閱讀態度和家庭閱讀活動對於不同性別學生的閱讀成就之結構模型均具有良好適配。其次，測量恆等性分析支持模型有跨性別群體的效度。家長教育程度對學生閱讀成就影響的直接效果十分顯著，而間接效果則僅透過閱讀態度產生影響，且效果微弱。最後，本文提出對於台灣閱讀影響因素研究的建議。英文摘要：By using Taiwanese 4,589 fourth-graders data from the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) 2006, this study probed the influence of parental educational level, parental reading attitude, and current home reading activities on students' reading attainment. With the multiple-group analyses of structural equation modeling (MGSEM), we also examined the equivalence of these influential relations across gender. The results indicated that the hypothesized model was fitted data separately in male and female groups, and the strengths of relationships among the variables were similar. Parental education level substantially and directly linked to students' reading attainment. Its indirect effect only mediated by parental reading attitude and it was weak. Based on the research findings, the researchers address suggestions pertaining to reading research in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：357-376資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011060717篇名：鷹架式概念構圖教學策略對學童生物文章的閱讀表徵與情意之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Scaffolding Concept Mapping Instructional Strategies on Children's Biological Science Text Representation and Affection作者：吳裕聖(Yu-Sheng Wu);曾玉村(Yuh-Tsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：情意;教學策略;概念構圖;閱讀表徵;鷹架作用;affection;concept mapping;instructional strategy;reading representation;scaffolding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：先前研究發現概念構圖策略有助於學生的學習，但學習如何繪製概念構圖並不容易，如何減低學習繪製概念構圖的難度乃成<U+7232>概念構圖策略教學的關鍵議題。因此，本研究導入鷹架理論，藉由適時的提供與拆除對學生的協助，有助於解決學童學習概念構圖策略的瓶頸。本研究設計<U+7232>4（繪製概念構圖組、閱讀概念構圖組、鷹架漸拆概念構圖組、控制組）×2（高、低先備知識）二因子不等組前後測設計。受試者<U+7232>國小五年級四個班級共138名學生，四組先施以生物文章的先備知識測驗及閱讀理解的前測，接著進行十二週的教學實驗，之後均實施後測及情意評定。結果發現：1.文本表徵問題的得分上，各實驗組皆高於控制組而實驗組間無差異，關連強度中等。2.情境模式問題的得分上，鷹架漸拆概念構圖組高於各組，繪製概念構圖組高於控制組，但閱讀概念構圖組與控制組無差異，關連強度中等。3.高先備知識的學生，不論在文本表徵或情境模式問題的得分上均高於低先備知識的學生，但關連強度分屬於微弱與中等。4.教學策略與先備知識間無交互作用。5.在情意的反應上：實驗組中以鷹架漸拆概念構圖更受學生喜歡和樂意日後繼續使用之傾向，其與各組之主要差異是「聯結語」的使用能力較無困難，顯示鷹架歷程發揮了關鍵性的功能。英文摘要：Proven to be a useful leaning strategy, concept mapping remains as a challenging skill for students to learn. A key instructional issue is to reduce the difficulty of learning of the strategy. In this study, we incorporated principles of the scaffolding theory in the process of teaching concept mapping strategy with manipulated support of learning the strategy of concept mapping to seek evidence for effectiveness of the manipulation. A 4×2 quasi-experimental design of the study with the independent variables of manipulation of the scaffolding support (concept-map drawing, concept-map reading, scaffold-fading, and control groups) and prior knowledge (high versus low background knowledge) was adopted. Participants were 138 5(superscript th) grade students recruited from 4 different classes. A pre-test on biological science knowledge was administered followed by a 12-week instruction. A post-test and a questionnaire were given to assess the effectiveness of the scaffolding on student learning and their attitude toward the instruction. The results indicated that (a) all experimental groups score higher than control group on text-based representation of knowledge (?) and no differences among experimental groups; (b)For situation model representation, scaffold-fading group score the highest, followed by the concept-map drawing and the concept-map reading and the control groups, with no significant difference between the last two groups; (c) Students with high prior knowledge scored more highly than those with low prior knowledge on both text-based and situation model representation; (d) There was no interaction between teaching strategy and background knowledge; and (e) Scaffold-fading group enjoyed more learning concept mapping and indicated they were more likely to use this strategy in the future. Analysis of their drawing protocol revealed that providing proper scaffolding did make it easy for students to learn relationships between conceptual nodes. The study showed scaffolding as a critical component for successful concept mapping instruction.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009051218篇名：運用「範例(worked-out example)」在國小數學問題解決的教學實驗研究並列篇名：An Instructional Experiment: Using Worked-out Examples in Mathematics Problem-Solving of Elementary School Students作者：<U+51C3>金堂(Chin-Tang Tu)關鍵字：問題解決;認知負荷;範例;cognitive load;problem solving;worked-out example期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，國外許多學者以認知負荷理論(cognitive load theory)<U+7232>依據，採用數學範例教學實驗，大多顯示實驗組的數學成績顯著高於控制組。本研究以66位國小五年級學生<U+7232>研究對象，進行兩次數學科範例教學實驗。實驗一，實驗組接受範例教學法，控制組接受傳統教學法，實驗結果顯示實驗組與控制組的教學實驗，產生性向處理交互作用(aptitude-treatment interaction)：採用範例教學較適合數學成就測驗前測分數較低的學生，採用傳統教學較適合數學成就前測分數較高的學生。實驗二與實驗一是相同的班級，實驗組分兩組，分別接受powerpoint電子檔的範例，以及接受紙本的範例，控制組接受傳統教學法，實驗結果顯示接受powerpoint電子檔範例教學的學生，其數學成就測驗後測成績，顯著高於接受傳統教學的學生。英文摘要：With the framework of the cognitive load theory, researchers have shown students in an experimental condition learned mathematics with worked-out examples significantly outperformed those learning mathematics in the control condition. The current consists of two experimental studies with 66 fifth grade students as participants. In Study 1, participants were divided into an experimental and a control condition, learning mathematics with the worked-out example instruction and traditional instruction, respectively. The result shows an aptitude-treatment interaction, that is, the worked-out example method was more beneficial for students for students with lower prior achievement, while the traditional method was more beneficial for students with higher prior achievement in mathematics. In Study 2, students were assigned to three conditions to learn mathematics, a condition with worked-out examples presented with PowerPoint, a condition with worked-out examples presented with hard copies, and a condition with traditional instruction. The results indicated that the students who received instruction with the worked-out example presented via PowerPoint gained significantly higher grades in a posttest of the mathematical achievement test than those who received the traditional instruction.起始頁-結束頁：25-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010041419篇名：大專校院輔導教師工作現況與專業知能需求之研究並列篇名：A Study on College Counselors' Work Status and Needs for Professional Competences作者：許雅惠(Ya-Hui Hsu)關鍵字：大專校院輔導教師;工作現況;專業知能需求;college counselors;current work status;the need for professional competence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大專校院輔導教師之工作現況與專業知能需求。採深度訪談與問卷調查法，共計10位大專校院輔導教師參與深度訪談，77位大專校院輔導教師參與問卷調查。研究結果如下：（一）受訪者認<U+7232>大專校院輔導教師須具備心理師、教師、諮詢者、溝通協調者、倡導者，以及學校心理學家等角色；（二）訪談與問卷調查結果共同呈現之大專校院輔導教師知覺之主要工作困境<U+7232>：缺乏制度化督導、工作知能不足，與工作角色定位不清；（三）受訪之大專校院輔導教師認<U+7232>工作中所須具備之核心專業知能包含：諮商專業知能、學校輔導行政、自我成長知能，以及危機處理能力等面向。問卷調查結果發現「危機處理能力」、「自我覺察能力」、「進行生涯諮商能力」、「溝通協調能力」，以及「促進案主表達、探索與改變之技能」<U+7232>大專校院輔導教師主要須具備之核心專業能力。依研究結果，對諮商實務工作提出建議。英文摘要：Using in-depth interview and a survey study, the current study was attempted to explore college counselors' current work status and professional competences needed to be a college counselor. Ten college counselors participated in the in-depth interview, and 77 college counselors participated in the survey research. The findings of the study are as follows: (a) College counselors are expected to play multiple roles, including being counselors, teachers, consultants, coordinators, initiators, and school psychologists; (b) Challenges that most college counselors are facing include lack of supervision, lack professional competence needed to college students, and the ambiguity of the role they have to carry; (c) The core professional competencies an effective college counselor needs include: counseling competence, school administration competence, competence for self growth and competence for crisis management. Data collected with the survey questionnaire show competences in crisis management, self awareness, career counseling, communicating and coordinating competence, and skills to promote clients' expression, exploration, and change are the most fundamental competences needed for effective counseling. Implications and application of the research finding in counseling are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：51-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010041920篇名：幼稚園大班兒童空間表徵之探究並列篇名：A Study of Kindergarten Children's Spatial Representations作者：陳淑敏(Shu-Min Chen)關鍵字：比例尺;地圖;空間表徵;模型;觀點;map;model;perspective;scale;spatial representation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究從幼稚園大班兒童對熟悉的大比例尺空間，及表徵該空間的小比例尺空間訊息之處理，探究幼兒的空間表徵。研究對象選自一所公立幼稚園大班共59 名幼兒，使用幼稚園遊戲場模型和地圖進行個別晤談。研究顯示：(1)幼兒主要使用拓樸空間線索，然間或使用投影空間和幾何空間線索處理大比例尺空間訊息；(2)幼兒較能記憶遊具的空間配置型態，較難記憶遊具之間的距離或作比例轉；(3)幼兒主要使用拓樸空間線索處理小比例尺空間訊息，但也使用投影和幾何空間線索；(4)幼兒能瞭解模型與地圖表徵空間之意義；(5)觀點改變影響幼兒的空間訊息處理，在對應位置尋找，模型與地圖方向一致優於不一致；(6)男童對大比例尺空間配置的記憶較女童<U+7232>佳，而小比例尺空間訊息的處理則無性別差異。英文摘要：The study was designed to investigate kindergarten children's spatial representation through their reduced spatial representation of a large-scale space that they were familiar with, the playground. Fifty nine children were recruited from a public kindergarten to participate in the study. Each child was interviewed individually twice, using scaled models of equipments and a map of their kindergarten playground to demonstrate their spatial representation of the playground. Results indicated: (a) that kindergarten children displayed more topological relational knowledge than projective and Euclidean relational knowledge when constructing the model of their kindergarten playground; (b) that kindergarten children remembered spatial layout of the playground better than distance between each piece of equipment; (c) that kindergarten children used more typological relational cues than projective and Euclidean relational cues while searching for target locations on small-scale map; (d) that kindergarten children performed significantly better when the map and the model were aligned than unaligned; (e) that boys' memory about the layout of their kindergarten playground was significantly better than that of girls on large-scale representations; but (f) there was no gender differences on small-scale spatial tasks.起始頁-結束頁：77-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010042101篇名：中等學校師資培育課程的發展特色與教育專業課程的能力指標分析並列篇名：The Curriculum Development Characteristics and Competence Indicator Analysis of the Secondary School Teacher Education Programs作者：吳淑禎(Shu-Chen Wu)關鍵字：師資培育課程;發展特色;能力指標;competence indicators;development characteristics;teacher education programs期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討中等學校師資培育課程的發展特色，以及教育專業課程所能達成的能力指標分析。本研究探文件分析法、調查法以及訪談法，探討41所師資培育學校的課程發展特色、290位師資生，以及1,538位大一學生對課程特色的知覺與期待。其次，了解課程實施概況並分析10個教育專業科目所能達成的能力指標。本研究顯示，各校對中等學校師資培育課程的發展特色，包括教育專業、教學態度、實務與實習等19項特色，其中，實務與實習是師資生知覺與期待的特色。其次，訪談發現：一、現行教育專業課程從科目出發，未能要求具體能力指標，難與實務接軌；二、考試領導教學，影響實質教學；三、遴選與教師檢定方式，無法有效評量教師能力。研究也顯示，教育基礎與教育方法等10個課程科目，可達成規劃、教學、管理、評鑑，以及專業發展等五個層面、12個向度、35項能力指標。英文摘要：This study was aimed to explore the development characteristics of the secondary school teacher education programs and to analyze the professional competence indicators that these programs achieved. The data were collected through documents, surveys, and interviews. The sample consisted of program curriculums from 41 colleges as well as the perception and expectation of 290 pre-service teachers, 1,538 freshmen, and 22 experts. The results showed that the development of these teacher education programs was characterized by educational specialty, teaching attitude, practice and intern ship, etc. Especially, practice and internship were not only the pre-service teachers' real perception but also their expectation. The research also found that: (1) the subject-based curriculum lacked competence indicators to meet the requirements of current practice; (2) the exam-driven teaching influenced the quality of learning; (3) the methods of certificating and selecting failed to measure new teachers' abilities. In addition, the research also indicated that 10 courses in educational foundations and teaching methods could achieve 35 competence indicators in 12 dimensions, including planning, teaching, management, evaluation ,and professional development.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820111257040012篇名：女性學士、碩士教育與工作不對稱及其對薪資影響之比較並列篇名：Mismatch between Education and Job and Its Influence on Earnings: A Comparison between Female Bachelors and Female Masters作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);簡維萱(Wei-Hsuan Chien)關鍵字：高教低就;學非所用;碩士;學士;overeducation;skill mismatch;masters;bachelors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:4期出版年：2011中文摘要：資料顯示，大約一半的臺灣大學畢業生有「高教低就」與「學非所用」的感受。本文探究提高學歷可否降低「高教低就」與「學非所用」的感受，利用「臺灣高等教育整合資料庫」94學年度畢業當年與畢業後一年資料，分析碩士相較於學士的工作與教育不對稱現象，卻發現碩士有更嚴重的「高教低就」感受，但較可能「學以致用」。整體來看，碩士較學士有更嚴重的教育與工作不對稱感受。在學士方面，「過度教育」與「學非所用」都有顯著的薪資損失；在碩士方面則只有「學非所用」有顯著的薪資損失。公立大學在「高教低就」與「學非所用」都有最低的發生機率，但私立大學與公立技職在這兩者上則有相反的表現。英文摘要：Statistics indicates that roughly 50% of college graduates in Taiwan feel that they are overeducated, or that their jobs do not match their majors. This study investigated whether the feelings of overeducation and mismatch could be mitigated through more education. Using the data of college graduates in 2005 and one year follow-up survey from Taiwan Integrated Postsecondary Database, this study analyzed skill/educational mismatch in terms of the graduates with bachelor's and master's degrees. The result showed that, as compared with those with bachelor's degrees, graduates with master's degrees have stronger feelings of being overeducated. However, they performed better in finding jobs that suited their majors. Overall, graduates with master's degrees tended to have stronger feelings of educational mismatch than those with bachelor's degrees. College graduates who were overeducated or suffered from skill mismatch tended to have significantly lower earnings. By contrast, for graduates with master's degrees, only those with skill mismatch suffered from significantly lower earnings. The probability of overeducation and skill mismatch in public colleges were the lowest, while the opposite was the case in both private colleges and public technology colleges.起始頁-結束頁：43-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820111257040023篇名：校長專業發展之研究－指標建構並列篇名：Professional Development of Principals: Constructing of Indicators作者：林煥民(Huan-Min Lin);鄭彩鳳(Tsai-Feng Cheng)關鍵字：園中小校長;專業發展;專業發展指標;principals of elementary and junior high schools;professional development;professional development indicators of principals期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在建構國中小校長專業發展指標，並將建構的指標轉化為問卷進行抽樣調查，以驗證分析指標具有良好之信、效度。本研究共分三階段進行：首先，整理校長專業發展理論及國內外10個模式文獻等，以形成指標初稿；其次，邀請8位專家進行焦點座談以修正指標，以及編製指標問卷草案並邀請9位專家建構內容效度;再進行預試與正式問卷施測，以分析考驗本指標。研究結果顯示，本研究之「國中小校長專業發展指標調查問卷」具有良好的信度與效度。最後，根據研究結果對教育單位與國中小校長提出具體建議。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to construct professional development indicators for the principals of elementary and junior high schools and then test in the validity and reliability through a questionnaire. The process consisted of three stages. At first, the researcher reviewed a wide range of literature related to professional development to compile a list of ten patterns associated with the professional development of principals. Second, eight experts were assembled for a focus group to examine the indicators. Nine other experts evaluated the questionnaire for content validity before drafting a preliminary version of the questionnaire. Finally, the revised version was trial-tested and revised as the final version to test the indicators. The proposed questionnaire was found to have acceptable reliability and validity. A number of practical recommendations were made for administrators and principals of elementary and junior high schools.起始頁-結束頁：81-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820111257040034篇名：幼稚園品牌行銷、品牌權益與家長行為意向之研究並列篇名：Brand Marketing, Brand Equity, and Parents' Behavior Intention at Kindergartens作者：黃義良(Yi-Lian Huang)關鍵字：幼稚園;品牌行銷;品牌權益;家長行為意向;kindergartens;brand marketing;brand equity;parents' behavior intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討幼稚園品牌行銷、品牌權益與家長行為意向的現況，並探討各變項間之關聯。為達研究目的，研究透過自編問卷進行調查並分析資料。採分層隨機方式抽取臺灣地區100所私立幼稚園的園長、保育員與家長共1,200位進行調查，得有效樣本735人。研究發現，受試者知覺幼稚園品牌行銷、品牌權益和家長行為意向的情形，整體而言尚屬良好，但各構面間有落差；在徑路關係方面，品牌行銷影響品牌權益、品牌權益影響家長行為意向，亦即，品牌行銷對家長行為意向具有直接和間接效果；整體而言，本研究的結構模式可適用於不同群組，但在部分因素的負荷量上稍有差異；而在背景變項上，以「家長身分、較大規模、具有直營機構」的受試者知覺各變項的運作情形較為理想。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the current status of brand marketing, brand equity, and parents' behavior intention at kindergartens, as well as to assess the correlation between these variables. A survey was conducted using self-edited questionnaires, and then data were analyzed. 1200 directors, child-care workers, and parent s from 100 private kindergartens in Taiwan were selected through stratified random sampling, and 735 questionaires were returned with valid responses. It was found that brand marketing, brand equity, and parents' behavior intention were well perceived as a whole. However, there was a significant difference between these dimensions. In pass relations, it was found that brand marketing would affect bran d equity, brand equity had an impact on parents' behavior intention, and brand marketing had direct and indirect effects on parents' behavior intention. In general, the structural model of the study could apply to different groups. However, there was a slight difference in partial factor loading. As to background variables, subjects who were ”parents at large-scale units with direct managing organization” had better perception of each variable.起始頁-結束頁：121-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820111257040045篇名：教育哲學研究歷史發展之國際比較並列篇名：An International Comparison of the Historical Development of Educational Philosophy作者：楊深坑(Seng-Keng Yang)關鍵字：教育哲學史;比較;分析哲學;觀念論;理性主義;history of educational philosophy;comparison;analytical philosophy;idealism;rationalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在運用N. Luhmann社會系統理論為方法論的概念工具，以比較分析英、美、德、法和澳洲五個國家教育哲學研究制度化的歷史過程，藉以彰顯教育哲學研究的共同特色及各國教育哲學發展之個殊文化特質。英國教育哲學的起源可追溯到1651年Wotton的《教育哲學探究》，其奠定了英國教育分析哲學之基礎，後經十九、二十世紀之交的觀念論籠罩，及至1970∼1980年代則由分析哲學主導教育哲學發展。美國二十世紀初，觀念論的教育哲學和本土的Dewey實用主義互相激盪，到1970年代的分析哲學鼎盛。法國思想傳統素具人文主義與普遍主義特色，衍而為理性主義哲學傳統。德國虔敬派神學及神祕主義孕育了以「陶冶」為核心概念的教育哲學，後經Kant與Hegel及其學派樹立了具世界性影響力的觀念論哲學傳統。澳洲教育哲學由對英、美之依賴，走向試圖建立本土特色之教育哲學。1990年代以降，各國教育哲學大多呈現了現象學、詮釋學、批判理論、後現代主義、後結構主義等各種哲學思想互相爭衡、百花齊放的景象。英文摘要：Adopting N. Luhmann's system theory as methodological tool, this paper attempts to compare the historical development of the studies in educational philosophy in the U.K., the U.S.A., Germany, France, and Australia. This aim is to explicate the universal nature of educational philosophy and the characteristic features of its study in each country. The origin of philosophy of education can be traced to Sir Henry Wotton's A Philosophical Survey of Educationpublished in 1651 which laid foundations of British analytical philosophy. German idealism founded mainly by Kant, Hegel, and their followers had exerted a world-wide influence on the development of educational philosophy during the turn of 19th to 20th century. In the U.S.A., the competitions between the imported idealism and native pragmatism in the early 20th century was followed by the domination of analytical philosophy from 1970s to 1980s. In Australia, many philosophers attempted to free themselves from the dependence on American and British philosophy and to establish their native philosophy of education. Since late 1990s, the world-wide philosophy of education has been characterized by a kaleidoscopic scene of competitions among phenomenology, hermeneutics, critical theory, and various ”postisms.”起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820110957030016篇名：不同等號概念之基模導向解題教學實驗研究並列篇名：A Schema-based Problem-solving Instruction Experiment of Different Concepts of the Equal Sign on First Graders作者：陳嘉皇(Chia-Huang Chen)關鍵字：等號;分解;合成;基模;equal sign;decompose;regroup;schema期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在針對不同等號概念之教材，進行基模導向解題教學實驗，以探索學生等號概念的表現，並歸納合宜之學習路徑，以做為日後改善代數推理教學與課程設計的依據。研究樣本為公立小學12名一年級學生，2人一組，參與研究者設計之不同順序等號概念的教學實驗與測驗，資料分析與說明則採取質、量併陳方式來呈現。綜合研究發現，獲得以下結果：經不同等號概念之教學情境實驗後，學生能獲得等號反身性、單邊運算與雙邊運算相等關係的觀念；學生等號概念的學習以路徑「單邊運算→反身性→雙邊運算」之教學效果最佳，其次為「反身性→單（雙）邊運算→雙（單）邊運算」之教學順序；等號概念之間的轉化與連結，依學生認知能力不同而有不同表現。研究者根據發現結果提出建議，提供未來等號概念之教學與研究參考。英文摘要：The goal of this study was to reevaluate the concept of the equal sign and implement schema-based problem-solving instruction experiment to understand the process of solving equation problems and the means of learing it. When taking a test, twelve first graders completed three sequential tasks specifying a concept related to the equal sign. The collected data were analyzed according to descriptive statistics with a qualitative approach. The results showed that most of the students were capable of acquiring the three concepts represented by the equal sign after such an experiment,. The best method of learning the concepts of the equal sign involved the following sequences: 1) one-side operation → reflection → two-side operation; 2) reflection → one-side operation → reflection → two-side operation; or 3) reflection → two-side operation → one-side operation. Students of different cognitive abilities showed different degrees of performance in the transformation and connection of their concepts of the equal sign. These findings could support teachers engaging students in opportunities to learn the concepts of the equal sign, by demonstrating how instruction can be used to improve and guide the design of curricula.起始頁-結束頁：37-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820110957030027篇名：女性的教育成就與大學畢業後初期位置之關係並列篇名：Female College Students' Preference for Fields of Study and Their First-year Jobs作者：陳建州(Jian-Jhou Chen)關鍵字：學類;女性就業;勞動市場部門;fields of study;women's employment;labor market sectors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:3期出版年：2011中文摘要：女性偏好的教育種類（學類）雖未能帶給她們與男性相當的職業地位，但是長期以來，女性投入某些學類的傾向卻維持著穩定性。本研究認為，如果這些學類能連結女性偏好的職業，便可補充說明女性教育選擇傾向穩定的現象。在考量女性就業需求之後，本研究依據滿足女性就業需求的程度差異，將勞動市場劃分成數組區隔的部門，其中，屬於女性的「好工作」是公部門與非營利機構。本研究採用2006年「臺灣高等教育資料庫」中大學畢業後一年之女性為樣本，以多元邏輯迴歸分析估計家庭背景、學校類型、學類、證照等變項，針對大學畢業後一年的狀態，描繪女性的教育成就與勞動市場的連結情形。研究發現：（一）升研究所階段的教育轉換具有社經階層差異。（二）公立大學畢業者取得公部門與非營利機構工作的勝算最高，私立技職院校畢業者的勝算最低。（三）女性偏好的學類連結至公部門與非營利機構的機率，高於男性投入較高的學類，此種連結關係可能穩定了女性的教育選擇傾向。（四）除了通過公職考試或國家專業技術考試較有利於取得好工作，其他專業證照或認證並無助益。英文摘要：This research explores the characteristics of women's employment and their desire for rewards in different labor market sectors, analyzes the effects of the types of university, fields of study, and professional certifications on higher educated women's early jobs, and explains the stable distribution of female college students in defferent fields of study. Using data retrieved from the ”Taiwan Higher Education Data System,” the entire analysis includes 7,547 higher educated women who had graduated from universities one year ago. The results of the multinomial logit regression suggest 1) women from upper socio-economic status were more likely to enter graduate schools; 2) the female graduates of public universities were disproportionately employed in public and nonprofit organizations, but the ones graduating from private vocational universities were more likely to obtain jobs in small firms; 3) women who studied in a field with higher concentration of female students were more likely to be employed in public and nonprofit organizations, which might explain the stability of women's choice in the fields of higher education; 4) except for the professional certifications from the government, most certifications were not helpful in obtaining better jobs.起始頁-結束頁：75-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820110957030038篇名：抗拒乎？拒絕乎？偏差乎？學生文化研究中抗拒概念之誤用與澄清並列篇名：Is Resistance Different From Rejection or Deviance? Clarifying the Meaning of Resistance in Student Culture Research作者：黃鴻文(Horng-Wen Huang)關鍵字：學生抗拒;理論效度;抗拒研究;student resistance;theoretical validity;resistance research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:3期出版年：2011中文摘要：許多學生文化的研究中，誤將「拒絕」或「偏差」當成「抗拒」，疏於描述支配群體的壓迫，或只聚焦於特定層面的抗拒，使文化的描述不夠厚實，徒具抗拒理論的浪漫色彩，降低其理論效度與分析的效力，殊為可惜。本研究之主要目的即在澄清抗拒概念的意義，並提出研究抗拒時宜蒐集哪些資料、考量哪些議題、避免哪些問題。本研究並延伸討論過去在質性研究經常被忽略的理論效度，期盼後續的質性研究能對教育理論與實務，有更多的貢獻。英文摘要：This article clarifies the meaning of resistance and other related concepts employed in qualitative research of student cultures. In addition, it discusses the theoretical validity of resistance. Based on literature review and the author's ethnographic research, this article points out several mistakes in the research on student resistance culture such as 1) interpreting rejection or deviance as resistance; 2) focusing only on a particular life aspect of student resisters; 3) omitting to recount the concrete targets of student resistance. These mistakes make the description of student culture too ”thin” to grasp the holistic picture of student life and produce some problems of theoretical validity. Critical issues of performing resistance research are also suggested.起始頁-結束頁：123-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820110957030049篇名：G. Harman與J. Doris社會心理學情境論與德行倫理學的品格辯論及其對品格教育的啟示並列篇名：Social Psychological Situationism vs. Virtue Ethics: A Debate about Character and Its Implications for Character Education作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：品格教育;情境論;德行倫理學;character education;situationism;virtue ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:2期出版年：2011中文摘要：近來備受討論的品格辯論與品格教育密切相關，因為受到社會心理學情境論的實驗結果所散發的一派哲學家試圖挑戰Aristotle的品格觀，而後者正是當代品格教育主要的哲學基礎。面對情境論的挑戰，致力維護Aristotle品格觀的德行倫理學家表示，情境論所操弄的行為主義式的品格觀是有問題的，在完全以外顯行為與跨情境的行為一致性做為觀察重點，卻忽視行動者內在道德心理的情況下，它非但無法適當反映，遑論測試Aristotle整體論式的品格觀，甚至有誤將品格特質化約成行為的氣質性傾向之虞，因而扭曲品格的本質。(盡管情境論的挑戰並未成功，但它對品格教育至少有如下五點啟示，包括：一、品格教育需關照(道德)品格的完整內涵外顯行為與內在道德心理；二、基本歸因偏誤彰顯品格特質歸因與評量的難度與複雜性；三、完整的品格特質的罕見性促使我們反省品格特質歸因與評量的適當用詞；四、情境因素微妙的行為影響力有助於解釋道德現象及改善道德行動；五、情境管理與品格建構應被視為促成道德行為的夥伴。英文摘要：The currently heated debate about character is highly relevant to character education, since a camp of philosophers inspired by the empirical findings of situationism in social psychology purport to question an Aristotelian conception of character which fuels contemporary character education. This challenge is countered by some virtue ethicists who respond that this behaviourist conception of character is problematic .Overwhelmingly focusing on one's overt behaviour at the cost of his moral psychology, it risk reducing character traits to mere behavioural dispositions. In addition to, distorting the nature of character, it does not have sufficient resources to represent and even test a more appropriate holistic Aristotelian conception of character. Despite its failure, situationism does indeed have some practical implications for character education. Firstly, character education must consider the concept of (moral) character to the full -that is, both its behavioural dimension and the subject's moral psychology and functioning. Secondly, the fundamental attribution error highlights the difficulty and complexity of making character trait attributions and evaluations. Thirdly, the empirical rarity of global character traits compels one to reflect on what the appropriate language is in which character trait attributions and evaluations can be made. Fourthly, the subtle influence of some situational fact ors on behavior help s explain some moral phenomena and improve moral action. Finally, situation management and character construction are collaborative in promoting moral behaviour.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201106_(57-2).000110篇名：探析專業學習社群的展化學習經驗與課程創新行動－－活動理論取徑並列篇名：Exploring the Expansive Learning and Curriculum Innovation of a Professional Learning Community: An Approach of Activity Theory作者：陳佩英(Pei- Ying Chen);曾正宜(Jeng- Yi Tzeng)關鍵字：活動理論;展化學習;專業學習社群;探究教學;activity theory;expansive learning;professional learning community;inquiry-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:2期出版年：2011中文摘要：政策目標導入可衍生新的需求，促進教師成長和課程革新。本文應用活動理論和展化學習，揭示高瞻目標引發教師社群之專業成長、社群和課程與教學創新行動之間的辯證關係。本文採個案研究法，主要透過訪談、焦點團體討論、文件分析等方式蒐集資料。研究發現，計畫活動系統因高瞻目標而形成，主體為學校研究團隊，工具則為集體活動之重要中介。工具包括會議、教案與關鍵性問題等，為團隊建立共識和完成任務的重要憑藉。工具的發展涉及活動系統中的衝突與矛盾，矛盾成為集體目標發展的動力，透過社群專業增能、研討、教案設計與修正和反思等，團隊的展化學習歷程得以開展。此外，由大學支援提供的鄰近發展區，搭起教師專業知能發展的鷹架，將挑戰、衝突等不一致的矛盾狀態，轉為社群學習的驅力機制。社群行動的協商與跨科合作，深化團隊展化學習的場域，使個體的專業成長和社群的任務達成相輔相成。英文摘要：Policy-based initiatives can encourage professional development and curriculum innovation. By means of in-depth interviews, focus group interviews, and document analyses, this case study investigated the interplay among professional growth, construction of professional learning community, and innovative teaching in a high school team for ”the high scope program.” On the basis of the activity theory and the expansive learning model, the findings showed that to accomplish the policy objectives of the program, a program activity system emerged, which precipitated the formation of the aforementioned interplay. The artifacts generated in this system included meetings, lesson plans, and critical questions. They helped solve contradictions among the entities of program activities. The team also built a platform for collegial discussion, question analyses, lesson plan design and revision, and reflection. The process demonstrated the expansive learning cycle of the team that integrated individual actions into collective activities. The outcomes of such a cycle included mastery of inquiry-based teaching methods and creation of curriculum modules for innovative teaching. The university scholar s provided scaffolds of challenges and conflicts to facilitate the professional development of the team. Through negotiations and constructive actions in the professional learning community, the team engaged in boundary-crossing collaboration which constantly pushed the team's epistemic horizon, and thus fostered individual as well as collective professional growth.起始頁-結束頁：39-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201106_(57-2).000201篇名：潛在調節徑路模型的模型設定並列篇名：Model Specification of Latent Moderated Path Model作者：陳淑萍(Shu-Ping Chen);鄭中平(Chung-Ping Cheng)關鍵字：潛在交互作用;調節徑路分析;LISREL;調節中介;中介調節;latent interaction;moderated path analysis;LISREL;mediated moderation;moderated mediation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：中介與調節效果是社會與行為科學中，用以設想現象的分析架構，Edwards與 Lambert（2007）提出了調節路徑分析的一般性架構，同時考量中介與調節效果，而提出八種可能的模型。由於該架構基於迴歸分析，在測量誤差較大時可能影響係數估計，本研究建議將此架構推展至潛在變項的版本，而能利用結構方程模型處理測量誤差。八種模型中，基礎中介模型設定相當簡易，本研究則推導其中五種模型之模型設定與所需限制式，並提供包括基礎中介模型之六種模型之LISREL程式供使用，LISREL程式正確性則以模擬資料加以確認。英文摘要：Mediation and moderation are two popular analytic frameworks for social and behavioral sciences. Edwards and Lambert (2007) proposed the moderated path analysis framework, which involves eight models, to incorporate mediation and moderation into a comprehensive framework. However, when there are considerable measurement errors, the above approach may lead to biased estimates since it is based on regression analysis. This study aims to extend the moderated path analysis framework into its latent variable version which is reformulated with structural equation models. By doing so, measurement errors can be taken into account. Besides the basic mediated model, model specification and associated constraints of five models are derived from the study. LISREL codes for the six models are also provided and their accuracy is demonstrated by simulated datasets.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00012篇名：階層線性模式路徑圖與策略化模型建構機制並列篇名：A Six-Step Standardized Model Development Strategy for Hierarchical Linear Model作者：王郁琮(Yu-Chung L.Wang)關鍵字：階層線性模式;多階層路徑圖;策略化模型建構機制;hierarchical linear model;model development strategy;multi-level path diagram期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：多階層統計分析概念較之於傳統單一階層研究錯綜複雜，對習於單層次研究設計者而言頗難理解其中道理，又多層次分析模型建構一直缺乏策略化機制，造成無所適從的窘態。本研究提出一原發性之多階層路徑概念圖像以及六步驟策略化模型建構機制，提供初學者從事多階層資料分析之指南。文中並以美國大型國家研究計畫High School and Beyond之實徵資料，隨機抽取得160所公私立高中7,185高三學生作為分析樣本，逐步示範六步驟模式發展機制應用。研究結果顯示本研究概念圖與模型建構機制兼具探索與驗證模型策略，可有效簡化模式發展並幫助研究者建立出兼顧理論與實徵的最佳適配模式，而複核效化結果進一步顯示，二折半樣本分別驗證六步驟模式發展機制所獲得完整模式，顯示本模型建構機制所推導之完整模式具穩定性，故為一有效模型建構策略。本文最後針對可能之限制及未來發展方向提出若干具體建議。英文摘要：For researchers familiar with conventional single level analysis, multilevel modeling often appears intimidating, not only due to the novel nested structure implied by the different ”levels”, but also due the lack of conceptually oriented path diagrams and model development strategies. The purpose of this paper is to remedy this situation by providing a multilevel diagramming system and developing a strategic six-step HLM model development strategy to give researchers guidance in developing the best-fitting models. A random sample of data from the national study of High School and Beyond from the 80s in the US consisting of 7,185 high school seniors from 160 schools, public and Catholic, are used to illustrate the step-by-step model building strategy. Results show that a well-fitting model can be effectively and successfully obtained by using the proposed multilevel diagrams and the model development strategy. Results from a cross-validation study, using two split-half data sets, confirm the stability of the final model. Future directions and issues related to multilevel analysis are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：25-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00023篇名：Motivation, Germane Cognitive Load, and Task Performance in Foreign Language Learning並列篇名：學習動機和有效認知負荷對外語學習表現之影響作者：陳怡容(I-Jung Chen);謝佩蓉(Pei-Jung Hsieh)關鍵字：Cognitive load theory;Germane cognitive load;motivation;Bootstrapping;認知負荷理論;有效認知負荷;學習動機;拔靴法期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：Germane cognitive load (GCL) is the load incurred when working memory resources are devoted to cognitive activities. GCL posits that GCL needs to be maximized for the best learning results. This study investigated the relationship among motivation, germane cognitive load, and task performance. The participants were 109 students majoring in English. Correlational analysis indicated a positive relationship between motivation and GCL as well as between GCL and task performance. However, motivation was not correlated with task performance. Path analysis confirmed the overall relationship of the variables under discussion. Bootstrapping was used to test the indirect effect of GCL. Results suggest that affective factors, such as learning motivation, are important in CLT.英文摘要：認知負荷理論指出，一旦我們的工作記憶開始從事與認知相關的活動，有效認知負荷就啟動了，並且對於學習表現有正向的影響。本研究旨在於探討學習動機、有效認知負荷、以及學習表現之間的關係。研究對象為某科技大學應用外語系109位四技學生，透過學習動機量表、認知負荷量表、以及英語聽力測驗收集資料，結果發現：學習動機和有效認知負荷間、有效認知負荷與學習表現間均為正相關，學習動機和學習表現間的相關則未達統計上顯著水準。進一步以徑路分析和拔靴法進行資料分析，發現有效認知負荷確實為學習動機和學習表現之中介變項，亦即本研究所提出之學習表現徑路模式可獲得資料之支持。最後根據研究結果，提出數項建議以供參考。起始頁-結束頁：57-73資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00034篇名：「高職學生學業動機調節量表」構念效度驗證之研究並列篇名：Confirmatory Factor Analysis and Construct Validity of the Academic Motivational Regulation Scale for Taiwan Vocational High School Students作者：林啟超(Chi-Chau Lin)關鍵字：學業動機調節;驗證性因素分析;測量恆等性;academic motivational regulation;confirmatory factor analysis;measurement invariance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：研究旨在發展一份適合國內高職學生學業動機調節量表，以驗證性因素分析及測量恆等性來檢驗。研究對象為中部地區高職二年級學生共1273人。首先，以男生樣本606位評鑑測量模式是否與實徵資料相互適配，並且找出最佳的適配與簡效模式。結果顯示二階因素模式為最佳簡效模式且適配良好，進而檢定此一最佳簡效模式之信效度，包括個別項目信度、組成信度、收斂效度以及區別效度。最後，再以女生樣本667位進行測量恆等性檢驗，結果顯示對不同性別的高職學生而言，該量表通過恆等性之檢驗，顯示該量表具有跨樣本的有效性及穩定性。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the construct validity of Academic Motivational Regulation Scale by confirmatory factor analysis and to test the factor invariance of this scale. The subjects were 1,273 students, drawn from vocational high schools in central Taiwan, divided into two groups. The first group of 606 male students was used for the development of Academic Motivational Regulation Scale and to conduct confirmatory factor analysis. This study adopted the way of comparing the model fitness of the competitive models to choose the best model. Furthermore, this study tested the reliability and validity of the best model, including item reliability, composite reliability, convergent validity and discriminant validity. At last, the other group (667 female students) was used to measure invariance of the best model to assure the stability of the factorial structure construct validity. The factor structure was a good fit for the empirical data and invariant across gender levels.起始頁-結束頁：75-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00045篇名：Contradictions Derived from Collaboration: Transformations and Regenerations through University-School Partnership in Remote Schools並列篇名：協同改進而生的矛盾：中學－大學夥伴關係的轉化與再生作者：林彥宏(Yen-Hung Lin);陳佩英(Pei-Ying Chen)關鍵字：university-school partnership;Activity Theory;school improvement;EFSSD;學校－大學夥伴關係;活動理論;學校改進;學校全面發展計畫期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：Since the 1980, university-school partnership has become a synonym of combining theory and practice, one that is regarded as a panaceum for school improvement. Hence, the Center for Educational Research and Evaluation (CERE) of National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU) in 2008 set up a project called ”Evaluation for Systemic School Development (EFSSD)”. The EFSSD project was expected to help schools by raising their capacity of identifying and defining school problems and then developing action plans for improvement. A model of cyclic actions of evaluating-diagnosing-planning-improving (EDPI) was adopted for facilitating sustainable improvement. In order to investigate transformation and regeneration in this partnership, this paper drew on the Activity Theory proposed by Engestrom as the theoretical framework to examine collaborations and interactions taking place in the joint enterprise of school improvement. According to the the findings, the inner contradictions in the university were the fragementation of two research teams and the incoordination within division; the inner contradictions in schools were different external expectations and the inutility of action plans. In addition, the divergent perception and interpretation of the object in this project also had limited effects on school self-improvement. The purpose of this study was to provide a basis for further research and university-school partnership in Taiwan through two-year project.英文摘要：自1980年代以來，學校－大學夥伴關係已成為實務與理論彼此互惠的代名詞，此合作形式也常被視為學校改進的萬靈丹。也因此自2008年開始，國立臺灣師範大學教育評鑑與發展研究中心便發起「學校全面發展計畫」，期透過相關工具進行評鑑、診斷、計畫、改進四者循環之模式，以協助中學進行自我評鑑並不斷地成長發展。為探究兩端合作關係的轉化與再生，本文擬運用Engestrom的活動理論來分析在同一個目標下，中學與大學兩個活動系統產生了何種互動形式與相互矛盾。研究發現在此夥伴關係中，大學端存在著研究團隊與分工形式相互協調的本質矛盾；中學端則存在著外在規範與發展工具的本質矛盾。此外，也因此兩活動系統對於該計畫的詮釋與認知差異，導致此夥伴關係對於啟動學校自我改善動能的效益實屬有限。本文目的乃是希冀藉由兩年的經驗，能為未來研究與國內各種形式的學校－大學夥伴關係提供參考。起始頁-結束頁：103-130資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00056篇名：指導教授與研究生間關係結合的型態及其效果並列篇名：The Types and Effects of Relational Bonds between Advisor and Graduate Student作者：丁學勤(Shueh-Chin Ting);楊忠傑(Chung-Chieh Yang)關鍵字：指導教授;關係結合;功利價值;享樂價值;忠誠度;advisor;relational bond;utilitarian value;hedonic value;loyalty期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究欲了解指導教授與研究生之間有哪些型態的關係結合，同時這些不同型態的關係結合對研究生會產生什麼影響。研究目的是幫助指導教授運用不同型態的關係結合，讓研究生的論文寫作更加順利，提昇研究生對指導教授的信心，建立忠誠的行為。本研究以404份研究生填答的有效問卷為基礎，以結構方程模式進行模式驗證。本研究的發現如下：指導教授與研究生之間有三種型態的關係結合—財務性結合、社交性結合與結構性結合，財務性結合會正向影響功利價值，社交性結合會正向影響享樂價值，結構性結合對功利與享樂價值都會正向影響，據此指導教授可善用與研究生之間的三種型態的關係結合來提升功利與享樂價值，本研究又發現功利與享樂價值可以改善研究生對指導教授的滿意度，而增進信任感，最後產生對指導教授的忠誠度。英文摘要：This study aims to understand types of relational bonds between advisor and graduate student and what impacts these relational bonds have on graduate students. The purpose of this study is to help the advisor make good use of relational bonds of different types to facilitate paper writing of graduate student, promote graduate student's confidence in the advisor, and establish loyal behavior. Based on 404 valid questionnaires from respondents (graduate students), model test was conducted by structural equation modeling. The findings of this study indicate that there are three types of relational bonds between the advisor and graduate students: financial bond, social bond and structural bond; financial bond positively influences utilitarian value, social bond positively influences hedonic value, and structural bond positively influences both utilitarian and hedonic value. Accordingly, the advisor can effectively use these three types of relational bonds to enhance utilitarian and hedonic value. This study also finds that utilitarian and hedonic value can improve graduate student's satisfaction with the advisor, then enhance trust, and finally strengthen loyalty to the advisor.起始頁-結束頁：131-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00067篇名：臺灣的大學類科之教育收益研究：擴充會減少收益嗎？並列篇名：Analysis of the Returns to Higher Education in Taiwan: Does the Expansion lower the Return?作者：張芳全(Fang-Chung Chang)關鍵字：教育收益;大學類科;人力資本理論;returns to education;higher education faculty;human capital theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，臺灣的高等教育擴充相當快，因而高等教育畢業生的教育收益情形是值得分析的議題。本研究以Mincer（1974）提出的薪資所得模型，來分析臺灣的大學程度以上畢業生之教育收益，研究中以最小平方法（Ordinary Least Squares）進行實證分析。本研究使用行政院主計處（1990，2008）的人力資源調查資料，對臺灣的大學程度以上之類科教育收益情形發現：證實臺灣的大學生之人力資本存量估算結果與Mincer提出的模式一樣；同時臺灣的高等教育學生之教育收益率，並沒有因為高等教育擴充而下降，反而增加了畢業生的教育收益，尤其在文科、商管與教育類科的教育收益有增加，而理、農及醫學類科則下降。此外，男性及已婚的勞動者有較高的薪資所得，居住在都會區者沒有明顯較高；而女性大學程度以上畢業生的教育收益比男性高；男性在各類科的教育收益率最高為醫學，最低為教育類科；女生則以法學類科最高，醫學類科最低。英文摘要：In recent years, the higher education has expanded fast in Taiwan. However, the returns to higher education are worth analysis. In order to investigate returns to education of different courses of studies in higher education in Taiwan, Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) were used to examine the returns to education. Data were adopted from the Manpower Utilization Survey issued by the Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics (1990, 2008). The results were as following: Using the Mincer's wage equation to estimate the different department of higher education was confirmed in Taiwan data. Besides, the returns to higher education did not decrease for the higher education expansion, and it increased instead, especially for the faculties of law, management and education. However, the returns to higher education for engineering, agriculture and biomedical subjects decreased. Male wages were higher than that of female as well as the wages of married were higher than of unmarried. Finally, the returns to education for female were higher than that for male. The highest returns to education for male were in biomedical subjects and education had the lowest. In turn, the highest returns to education for female offered law and the lowest were in biomedical subjects.起始頁-結束頁：165-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).00078篇名：A Case Study on Interdisciplinary Teachers Developing an Integrated Curriculum並列篇名：跨學科教師發展統整課程之個案研究作者：曾月紅(Yueh-Hung Tseng)關鍵字：integrated curriculum;inter-language curriculum;interdisciplinary curriculum;professional learning community of teachers;統整課程;跨語言課程;跨科際課程;教師專業學習社群期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：7卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the processes of how elementary school teachers from different disciplines (language arts, social studies, art) and from different languages (English or Chinese) co-created an integrated curriculum, and to provide the suggestions for teacher professional development. The research question concerns how in-service teachers developed an integrated curriculum. This study's data are of three main types: (1) audio tapes of teacher study-group conversations (in transcript form), (2) teachers' portfolio (which collected teachers' curriculum and artifacts generated from the research), and (3) reflection entries from my reflection journal. Findings suggest that the processes of teachers integrating curriculum were ”searching the focus,” ”intertextualizing,” and projecting. In addation, teachers were successful in creating an integrated curriculum when they were able to use their own interpretation, connections, and vision. Findings also suggest that the teachers' construction of an integrated curriculum is different from that of academics. Academics and other experts should allow teachers to use their own interpretation, connection and vision, and respect their autonomy. With that foundation, academics and teachers can collaborate with fruitful results.英文摘要：這個研究的目的是要藉由檢視不同領域和語言的小學教師共同創造統整課程的過程來對教師專業發展做建議。研究的問題是在職教師如何發展統整課程。研究資料包括教師的團體討論的錄音帶（以逐字稿呈現）、教師的檔案夾（收集了教師所有課程設計和研究中所產生文件等資料）、研究者的省思札記。研究發現教師發展課程統整的過程包括教師尋找焦點，做連結和預設課程。研究發現從教師的角度來建構課程統整是與課程統整的學者定義的課程統整內容和過程是不同，課程學者和專家能夠了解並尊重教師在課程統整的能夠使用自己的詮釋、連結和願景，並尊重教師能夠發展屬於自己統整課程自主權。在這基礎上，專家學者和教師可有更好的合作和結果。起始頁-結束頁：201-236資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201112_7(4).000801篇名：臺灣中小學奈米科技實驗教材之內容分析並列篇名：Content Analysis of Nanotechnology Experimental Teaching Materials in Primary and Secondary Schools in Taiwan作者：趙毓圻(Yu-Chi Chao);熊召弟(Chao-Ti Hsiung);于曉平(Hsiao-Ping Yu)關鍵字：內容分析;奈米尺度科學與工程重要概念;奈米科技教育;content analysis;"big ideas" of nanoscale science and engineering;nanotechnology education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探究奈米國家型第一期人才培育計畫（2003至2008年）中小學種子教師自主發展的實驗教材所含有的奈米科技重要概念的出現頻率和關聯性。樣本包含209份教材，以Stevens、Sutherland與Krajcik（2009）提出的九項奈米尺度科學與工程重要概念：尺寸與尺度、物質構造、尺寸效應、力與交互作用、量子效應、自組裝、工具與儀器、模型與模擬、科學、科技與社會等為分析類目，首先依照各重要概念的定義，編製「奈米科技關鍵詞彙表」，並使用Excel計數功能，分析國小、國中和高中各學習年段教材中的重要概念出現頻率和關聯性。研究結果發現：各年段中，高中實驗教材含有的奈米科技關鍵詞彙數量最多，且各重要概念間呈現高關聯性；整體中小學實驗教材的各重要概念出現頻率和相互關聯性的結構裡，以「尺寸與尺度」、「物質構造」和「尺寸效應」呈高出現頻率及高關聯性。本研究結果可作為未來建構臺灣中小學奈米科技課程指標，以及發展奈米科技教材之參考。英文摘要：This study investigates the occurrence and relationships among significant nanotechnology concepts employed in the experimental teaching materials developed by primary and secondary seed teachers during Phase I of the National Science and Technology Program in Nanotechnology (2003 to 2008). This study adopts the core principles or ”big ideas” of nanoscale science and engineering education, namely size and scale, structure of matter, forces and interactions, quantum effects, size-dependent properties, self-assembly, tools and instruments, models and simulations, and science, technology, and society (Stevens, Sutherland, & Krajcik, 2009), to compile a checklist of scientific terms in nine dimensions, and uses Microsoft Excel to analyze 209 teaching materials from each educational level. The investigation results revealed that 10 to 12 teaching materials from each level used more scientific keywords and had stronger relationships; the highest occurrence frequency and strongest relationships were between size and scale, structure of matter, and size effects. The results of this study can provide a reference for establishing nanotechnology curriculum indicators of primary and secondary education and developing nanotechnology teaching materials.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學2篇名：正向情緒及幽默有助於國中生之科學問題解決嗎？並列篇名：Whether Positive Emotions and Humor Can Improve the Science Problem-Solving Performance of Adolescents作者：方紫薇(Tzu-Wei Fang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);佘曉清(Hsiao-Ching She);蘇嘉鈴(Chia-Ling Su)關鍵字：正負向情緒;幽默;科學問題解決;認知評估;positive and negative emotion;humor;science problem solving;cognitive appraisal期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討正向情緒及幽默對學生在科學問題解決時的成績表現、認知評估與事後情緒之影響。本研究針對國中生進行調查研究，共施測318位八年級學生，男生166位、女生152位。經進行t檢定及多變量變異數之統計分析後，研究結果顯示，在油醋分離之問題解決題目上，高正向情緒者在科學問題解決之成績表現、有趣程度之認知評估及事後之正向情緒，皆顯著高於低正向情緒者；在事後負向情緒上則顯著低於低正向情緒者。在鐵棒戳紙題目方面，高正向情緒者認知評估之挑戰、有趣、容易之分數，以及事後正向情緒皆顯著高於低正向情緒者。幽默版本激起之正向情緒是有比原始版本高。但幽默版本與原始版本在科學問題解決上之成績表現、認知評估與事後情緒上皆未達顯著差異。本研究可提供教師教學之參考，即如何營造正向情緒的學習氛圍及環境，來促進科學問題解決能力之學習。英文摘要：This study investigates whether emotions and humor can influence science problem-solving performance, cognitive appraisal, and emotion after the event. This study conducts a survey of 318 junior high school students (166 Male and 152 Female). The statistical methods used to analyze the data are t test and multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA). The results of this study are as follows: (1) When solving the scientific problem of Oil and Vinegar Separation, students with high positive emotions had superior science problem-solving performance, interest appraisal, and positive emotions after the event compared to students with low positive emotions; however, they experienced lower negative emotion after the event than low positive emotion students did; and (2) when solving the scientific problem of Can the Iron Bar Pierce the Paper, students with high positive emotions reported higher scores of cognitive appraisal (interest and difficulty) and positive emotion after the event, compared to students with low positive emotions. Additionally, humorous items produced more positive emotions compared to non-humorous items. However, no differences existed between the influence of humorous items and non-humorous items on science problem-solving performance, cognitive appraisal, and emotion after the event.起始頁-結束頁：43-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學3篇名：揭開日本學生傑出表現背後的秘密：教學研究並列篇名：The Most Significant Factor Underlying Japanese Students' Academic Success: Lesson Study作者：黃源河(Robin Yuan-Her Hwang);符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu)關鍵字：社會建構主義;專業發展;教學研究;第三次國際數理競賽;學生學習;social constructivism;professional development;lesson study;TIMSS;student learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：1995年日本中小學生在國際數理競賽（Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, TIMSS）傲人的表現，引發國際學者的好奇，紛紛探究其背後的原因。結果發現，日本教師專業發展模式－「教學研究」居功厥偉。雖然最近兩次國際數理競賽，日本學生的表現略微下滑，但其實施近百年，頗具特色的「教學研究」仍值得各國關注。本研究旨在探討日本的教學研究如何聚焦於學生學習，以增進教師專業成長。全文先介紹日本的課堂教學，其次說明其幕後推手「教學研究」，並舉出運作實例，接著進行學理分析，最後討論對我國師資培育與中小學教育的啟示。英文摘要：The outstanding performance of Japanese students in the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) in 1995 attracted significant international attention. Numerous education researchers have attempted to determine what factors or practices underlie Japanese students' success. They found that lesson study, a specialized model of teacher professional development used in Japan for over 100 years, can be credited with significant contributions to the improvement of instructional practices, resulting in excellent student performance and academic achievement. This study investigates how lesson study furthers teacher professional development and improves student learning, and examines and analyzes the underlying rationale. Finally, we present the practical implications of this investigation and analysis to inform current discussions on education and teacher professional development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：69-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學4篇名：網路學生出題策略應用於國小古典詩課程其成效之研究並列篇名：Effects of Online Student Question-Generation on Primary School Classic Chinese Poetry Instruction作者：邱廷榮(Ting-Jung Chiu);于富雲(Fu-Yun Yu)關鍵字：上課情意;古典詩教學;網路學生出題策略;學習成就;學習動機;attitudes toward class;classic Chinese poetry;online student question-generation strategy;academic performance;motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探究網路學生出題策略應用於國小古典詩課程對學習成就、學習動機與上課情意之影響。本研究採準實驗研究設計法，受試者為屏東縣某一國小六年級共三班學生（共100人），分為網路學生出題實驗組（68人）與傳統學習單習寫對照組（32人）。實驗教學前進行前測，5週實驗課程後再進行後測。資料以單因子共變數分析以及成對樣本t檢定進行分析。主要研究發現：一、實驗組在學習成就、學習動機與上課情意上顯著優於對照組；二、實驗組能有效提升受試者的學習動機與上課情意。文末，根據研究發現提出教學與未來研究之建議。英文摘要：This study investigates the comparative effects of an online student question-generation strategy against the use of traditional worksheets on student academic performance, learning motivation and attitudes toward classic Chinese poetry using a quasi-experimental research design. Three 6th-grade classes (N=100) participated in the study and were randomly assigned to the experimental group (2 classes, N=68) and the control group (N=32). Several findings were obtained. First, analysis of covariance indicated that students in the online student question-generation group scored significantly higher than those in the traditional worksheet group in academic performance, learning motivation and attitudes toward class, compared to those in the contrast group. Second, a paired sample t test revealed that the learning motivation and attitudes toward class for the online student question-generation group significantly improved after the question-generation experience. Finally, the learning motivation for the worksheet group significantly lowered after the treatment. Suggestions for instructional practices and future studies are provided.起始頁-結束頁：99-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學5篇名：中學生歷史思維能力之探究：歷史觀點取替模式的應用並列篇名：Historical Thinking Development of Students: Applying the Historical Perspective-Taking Model作者：楊淑晴(Shu-Ching Yang);黃麗蓉(Li-Jung Huang)關鍵字：歷史思維能力;歷史神入;歷史教育;歷史觀點取替模式;historical thinking abilities;historical empathy;history education;historical perspective taking期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：近來歷史教育的目標，已逐漸從傳統史實傳遞中鬆綁，走向強化學生歷史思維能力之趨勢。其中，「歷史神入」（historical empathy）與「歷史觀點取替」（historical perspective taking, HPT）乃為一適合應用於中學生歷史思維教學的切入點。本研究參照Hartmann與Hasselhorn（2008）提出的歷史觀點取替模式為架構，編擬一份適用於國、高中生之歷史觀點取替測驗工具，以高雄市某八年級、九年級學生，以及某高中二年級學生為施測對象，得有效問卷1,017份。研究結果顯示，因素分析抽取出含括「以現代觀點取替」（present-oriented perspective taking, POP）和「歷史人物的角色」（the role of the historical agent, ROA）的「現代觀點」與「歷史脈絡的理解能力」（students' ability for historical contextualization, CONT）兩個因素。年級、性別之差異結果發現：男、女生在整體歷史思維能力上並無顯著差異存在；但在「歷史人物的角色」層面中，女學生的分數比男學生高；在「歷史脈絡的理解能力」因子中，九年級學生的得分顯著高於八年級學生，而高二學生的得分亦顯著高於八年級學生。相關分析研究結果則顯示中學生閱讀歷史小說或故事的頻率愈高，愈會將歷史相關事件放在合適的脈絡中去理解、思考。本研究並進一步針對研究結果提出具體建議，供教師、後續研究者作為參考與修訂之方向。英文摘要：History education should emphasize student competencies of historical thinking instead of learning historical facts. Of all the competencies, historical empathy and historical perspective-taking are well adopted points for teaching historical thinking to high school students. This study uses the historical perspective-taking (HPT) model (Hartmann & Hasselhorn, 2008) to develop an HPT measure, to investigate the historical perspective-taking of high school students. In total, 1,017 participants were recruited from the 8th, 9th and 11th grade students within the Kaohsiung County. The factor analysis results show that the two factors of present perspective and student ability for historical contextualization (CONT) with good reliability. The factor of the present perspective includes present-oriented perspective taking (POP) and the role of the historical agent (ROA). The findings revealed no gender differences on the entire HPT measure, but girls scored higher on ROA than boys. For CONT, second-grade senior high school students outperformed the second-grade junior high school students, and the third-grade junior high school outperformed the second grade. Based on the findings, this study proposes suggestions for history teachers and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：129-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學6篇名：跨越科系的藩籬：我國研究型大學實施前段不分系模式分析與個案大學實施策略之探討並列篇名：Crossing the Border of Disciplinary Knowledge: An Analysis of the Choice of Major at the Upper Level of College in Research-Oriented Comprehensive Universities, with the Use of One Case Study Based on Student Needs in Taiwan作者：王秀槐(Hsiou-Huai Wang);丁艾竹(Ai-Chu Ding);蘇愛嵐(Ai-Lan Su)關鍵字：大學前段不分系;大學部課程;跨領域學習;適性選擇;choice of major at the upper level of college;undergraduate curriculum;cross-disciplinary learning;career exploration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：國際高等教育趨勢顯示全球化、知識經濟與大眾化的議題持續受到廣泛的關注。在此一趨勢發展下，大學科系間的界限愈來愈模糊，高等教育日益重視知識的統整融合，多元適性選擇的呼聲也水漲船高。我國教育當局為因應此一趨勢，逐步展開「大學前段不分系」的試辦與推廣，近年來亦有部分校系開始實施大學前段不分系措施。針對此一高等教育領域方興未艾的重大改革，國內相關實徵研究卻仍鳳毛麟角。本研究為彌補此一不足，首先提出大學前段不分系的目的為協助學生「適性選擇」與「跨領域學習」；再針對國內15所研究型綜合大學實施前段不分系的院系單位，分析其辦理模式與規劃的課程如何滿足學生適性選擇與跨領域學習需求，歸納出三種分流模式與四類課程規劃；最後針對1所研究型綜合大學，蒐集學生需求資料與相關修課規定，發現該校學生較傾向於追求跨領域學習；研究者參考前述辦理模式，提出未來規劃前段不分系措施的建議，期使大學前段不分系改革更能貼近學生需求。英文摘要：The recent trend of globalization, knowledge economy, and massive expansion have increasingly collapsed the boundaries between academic disciplines, and promoted cross-disciplinary learning and individualized choices in higher education. To meet such challenges, a number of institutions in Taiwan have recently implemented the policy of ”choice of major at the upper level of college” or ”declaration of major at sophomore or junior year.” However, analyzing student needs and the curriculum structure of a university before launching an appropriate model is necessary. Therefore, this study analyzes various models currently implemented by 15 research-oriented comprehensive universities before exploring the student needs and the curriculum structure of a research-oriented institution (University T), and advising how this comprehensive university should implement this policy. Four models were found, as follows: choice of department within a college; choice of majors within a college; choice of majors across different colleges; and entry into an integrated program. Based on our analysis of student needs and curriculum barriers, we suggest that University T adopt the model of ”choice of major across different colleges.” Such findings contribute to the future implementation of the rising trend of ”choice of major at the upper level of college” in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學7篇名：學生評鑑教師教學量表跨層級構念的分析並列篇名：The Inter-Construct of Student Ratings of Instruction: An Analysis of Multilevel Cross-Validation作者：曾明基(Ming-Chi Tseng);羅寶鳳(Pao-Feng Lo);張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);邱于真(Yu-Zhen Qiu)關鍵字：多層次效標關聯效度;多層次模式競爭;多層次複核效度;學生評鑑教師教學;multilevel criterion related validity;multilevel model competition;multilevel cross-validation;student ratings of instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：研究主要探討學生評鑑教師教學因素構念在跨層級架構下的合理性，以作為學生評鑑教師教學多層次議題發展的立論依據。研究對象為東部某大學大學部180班學生，班級人數介於13和78人之間，總樣本數為6,568人。經多層次模式競爭及多層次複核效度檢定發現，學生評鑑教師教學量表的因素構念在學生層次分為教學準備、教材內容、教學方法、教學評量、教學態度等五個次向度，但在班級層次卻僅以單一因素構念「學生評鑑教師教學」反映不同班級間的差異。因此，本研究建議在進行跨層級的量表建構及議題探討時，應先檢視跨層級的構念是否產生改變，透過跨層級的模式競爭及效度複核，忠實呈現因素構念在多層次下的樣貌，而非僅將組間層次及組內層次的因素結構假定為相等，以避免後續跨層級推論的謬誤。英文摘要：This study examined the rationality of multilevel constructs of student ratings of instruction. The sample consisted of 180 undergraduate classes from a university on the east coast of Taiwan, with a class size ranging between 13 and 78, for a total sample of 6,568 students. The results indicate five sub-dimensions of student ratings of instruction, including Teaching Preparation, Teaching Materials, Teaching Methods, Learning Evaluation, and Teaching Attitudes. The same instrument within class level, however, indicates only one single dimension. This study suggests examining the changes in cross-level constructs through multilevel model competition and multilevel cross-validation approaches. Examining the validity and rationality of the cross-level model presents the effect of each dimension under multilevel constructs to avoid the fallacy of cross-level inference.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學8篇名：國民小學教師海洋教育能力指標及權重體系建構之研究並列篇名：Construction of Competence Indicators and Weight System of Marine Education for Elementary School Teachers作者：許籐繼(Terng-Ji Sheu)關鍵字：能力指標;海洋教育;權重體系;competence indicator;marine education;weight system期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在建構國民小學教師海洋教育能力指標及權重體系，為達成前述之目的，採用專家座談（panel discussion）、德懷術（Delphi technique）、層級分析（analytic hierarchy process, AHP）等方法。專家座談邀請11位專家，討論與修正指標初稿。其次，邀請18位德懷術專家成員，進行多回合的問卷調查，直到達成共識為止。第三，根據所形成的能力指標設計相對權重調查問卷，針對18位專家進行指標相對權重的調查。主要研究發現有二：一、完成國民小學教師海洋教育能力指標之建構，共計四層面十二向度與四十一細項指標；二、建立四層面十二向度與四十一細項指標之相對權重體系。最後，據以提出研究結論和建議，供實施海洋教育相關機構、人員和未來進一步研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to construct the competence indicators and a weight system for teachers implementing marine education into elementary schools. To achieve this, the methods adopted were panel discussion, the Delphi technique, and analytic hierarchy process (AHP). The results were as follows: 1. Complete constructing the competence indicators of the teachers' implementing marine education in elementary schools, including 4 dimensions, 12 items, and 41 indicators; and 2. create the relative weight system of 4 dimensions, 12 items, and 41 indicators. Lastly, the suggestions and conclusions from the results were provided for the relative staff and institution implementing marine education, and for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：61-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學9篇名：摘要策略教學對提升國小五年級學童摘要能力與閱讀理解的成效並列篇名：Examining the Effects of Summarization Strategy Instruction on Summary Skills and Reading Comprehension of Fifth Graders作者：陸怡琮(I-Chung Lu)關鍵字：國小學童;摘要能力;摘要策略教學;閱讀理解;elementary school children;summary skills;summarization strategy instruction;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在設計適用於國小高年級國語科的摘要策略教學模式，並檢視此模式對提升學生摘要能力和閱讀理解之效果。研究設計採控制組前後測的準實驗設計，以屏東縣2所國小各兩班五年級學生為對象，隨機分配每校中的一班為實驗組，接受融入國語科的摘要策略教學，另一班為控制組，進行國語評量卷的習寫與回饋。教學前、後及教學結束後1個月，進行摘要能力和閱讀理解的測量，實驗組學生在教學結束後填答回饋問卷。結果顯示，摘要策略教學對提升摘要能力有立即與維持的效果，且在追蹤後測階段對低能力學生摘要表現的促進效果大於對高能力學生，但對促進閱讀理解則無顯著效果，學生對摘要策略與教學都有非常正向的態度。英文摘要：This study designed a summarization strategy instruction for elementary students and examined its effects on the summary skills and reading comprehension of fifth graders. Four fifth-grade classes from two elementary schools in Pingtung County participated in the study. Using a quasi-experimental pretest-posttest control group design, one class in each school was assigned to the experimental group, which received the summarization strategy instruction, while the other class in each school served as the control group, which took practice tests on language arts and received feedback from the teacher. Before, immediately after, and four weeks following the experiment, both groups were tested on summary skills and reading comprehension. The experimental group also filled out a questionnaire after the experiment on their perceptions of the instruction. The results indicated that the experimental group scored significantly higher than the control group did in summary skills in both the posttest and delayed posttest and interaction effect was found between instruction and reading ability in the delayed posttest. The two instruction groups did not differ in reading comprehension after the experiment. Students in the experimental group were positive toward the strategy and the instruction.起始頁-結束頁：91-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學10篇名：性別、自我效能、工作價值、科學素養及學校層次因素對臺灣青少年學習情緒之影響：個人與情境交互作用之多層次分析並列篇名：The Impact of Gender, Self-Efficacy, Task Value, Scientific Literacy, and School-Level Factors on Taiwanese Teenagers' Academic Emotions: A Multilevel Analysis of Person-Context Interactions作者：巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu);賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai)關鍵字：PISA國際評量計畫;多層次模型;跨層次交互作用效果;聚合脈絡變數;學習情緒;PISA;multilevel models;cross-level interaction effect;aggregate context variables;achievement/academic emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以學習情緒的控制價值理論為基礎，探討個人與學校層次變項對學習情緒之影響。研究資料係取自PISA 2006所釋出之階層巢套資料，有效樣本為8,678名（女生4,134名、男生4,544名）來自236個不同學校的臺灣15歲青少年。本研究採多層次模型進行分析，結果顯示個人層次變項（性別、自我效能、工作價值及科學素養）與學校層次變項（學校平均科學素養、學校平均工作價值、團體效能）能正向且顯著地解釋學生的正向學習情緒，且自我效能對學習情緒的影響會受到學校平均科學素養與團體效能等脈絡變項所調節。針對上述研究發現，本研究提出未來研究與學習輔導之相關建議。英文摘要：Based on control-value theory of achievement emotions, this study investigates the effects of individual- and school-level factors on academic emotions. Hierarchically nested data were obtained from 8,678 15-year-old students (4,134 girls and 4,544 boys) of 236 schools in Taiwan, who participated in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). The results obtained from a multilevel model reveal that individual-level factors (gender, self-efficacy, task value, and scientific literacy) and school-level factors (school mean of scientific literacy, school mean of task value, and collective efficacy) are positively and significantly related to the positive academic emotions of students. Additionally, the school mean of scientific literacy and collective efficacy moderate the effects of self-efficacy on academic emotions. This study presents a discussion on the implications and educational practices, and provides suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：119-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：社區大學新移民議題融入媒體技巧課程經驗之個案研究並列篇名：On the Experiences of Infusing Issues of New Immigrants into a Community College Curriculum: A Case Study of a Civic Journalists Workshop作者：徐敏雄(Min-Hsiung Hsu)關鍵字：社區大學;跨文化理解;媒體技巧;融入式課程;community college;intercultural understanding;media skills;infusion curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究採取個案研究方法，運用非結構式訪談及作品檢核等資料蒐集與分析策略，探究社區大學師生參與新移民議題融入媒體技巧課程的經驗，以瞭解融入式課程的參與經驗對於提升師生融入式課程設計、媒體操作技巧和跨文化理解等知識技能的關連性。基本上，台灣社區大學的辦學目標均設定在「知識解放、邁向公民社會」，亦即要讓教科書中的套裝知識能與生活經驗相互對話，重拾生活經驗的重要性與價值性，並培養學員具備參與公共事務的公民素養。但鑑於本課程授課講師過去的教學經驗甚少深入在地生活經驗，所以本次課程特地將在地新移民的生活議題融入既有網路媒體技巧之中，並採取融入議題與主軸課程彼此對話、相互修正的融入原則進行課程設計與教學，讓師生們有更多機會將課堂所學運用在現實生活之中，進而關心在地多元文化議題。整套課程執行下來共延續三個月，平均每兩周上課3小時；學員人數共有12位，其中11位是女性，學歷涵蓋小學至大學畢業。根據本研究結果顯示，融入式課程的操作模式不僅能提升社大師生們的媒體技巧和跨文化理解能力，亦可強化講師融入式課程設計相關知能，可作為未來其他社大推動融入式課程之參考依據。英文摘要：This research adopted a case study approach, where data was collected through unstructured interviews and checklists, to investigate the implementation process of infusing issues of new immigrants into a civic journalists workshop and to explore its impacts on participants' media skills and intercultural understanding abilities in a community college. Basically, the educational goals of community college were ”knowledge liberation and civil society development”. By using instructional strategies based on three kinds of infusion principles, this three-month curriculum was designed to provide training in media skills and cultivate in-depth understanding about the living conditions of new immigrants. Twelve participants (11 of whom were women) attended the class where they meet 3 hours every two weeks. The educational backgrounds of these participants range from having a college degree to ones who are elementary school graduates. The results of this study shows that infusion curriculum indeed helped the learners raise intercultural understanding and media skills, and the instructor was allowed to improve her professional knowledge and competence about infusion curriculum design. Based on these findings, some suggestions were proposed for further infusion curriculum implementation and research.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201112.00042篇名：國小高年級媒體素養課程規劃與教學實施之行動研究並列篇名：An Action Research of Curriculum Planning and Implementation of Media Literacy Education for the 6th Grade Students作者：簡梅瑩(Mei-Ying Chien)關鍵字：媒體素養教育;主題教學;批判思考;行動研究;media literacy education;topic teaching;critical thinking;action research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：學校實施媒體素養教育之重要性，在能提供學生發展對不同媒體的認識，及參與反思媒體內容及影響力的學習機會。研究者以協同合作之教學行動研究形式，徵詢一位國小六年級教師參與合作，並以其授課班級為研究場域，共同規劃及評估媒體素養教育實施過程對教師教學專業知能及學生媒體素養能力發展之影響。資料收集方法包括：研究者省思日誌、教室觀察記錄與教師省思、與教師之半結構式錄音訪談、與學生小組之錄影訪談、課程實施前後之結構式問卷調查，及相關文件之收集與分析。根據資料分析結果，此文以納入協同合作形式於此課程實施之影響，提出結論。一、知識經驗互惠與課程規劃發展：研究者與教師藉由彼此間相互回饋方式，持續課程規劃發展與教學反思，此歷程不僅幫助教師能整合媒體於教學主題的擬定實施，並能反思媒體教材的適當與應用性；而藉由實施之教學主題與方法，學生則受益於能知覺思考媒體內容，及認識不同媒體特性與近用方式。二、權力對等關係與教學實施限制：研究者對權力對等關係的關注及避免教師教學壓力的考量，卻也相對限制教學過程中的反省修正，致使此課程在促進師生間充分對話及發展學生問題思考能力部份，均有待再修正改進。英文摘要：The implementation of media literacy education in schools should be directed towards developing students' understanding of the different types of media while providing them with opportunities for personal reflection on the content and effects of media. An action research was carried out with a group of grade-6 students and their teacher at one elementary school to evaluate the teacher's teaching and students' learning about media. Multiple methods of data collection were used for the purpose of triangulation, including research diary, classroom observations and field-notes taking, teacher's reflective feedback, semi-structured tape-recorded interviews with the teacher, group video-recorded interviews with the students, questionnaires, and documents. Based on the research findings, conclusions in two respects were given on evaluating the impact of adopting a mutual collaborative mode in the conduction of this action research. 1. Mutual feedback and curriculum planning: the on-going mutual feedback between the teacher and the researcher had helped the teacher develop specific skills of integrating media into topic teaching and reflection on media use. The students had also benefited from learning the media including the development of a better understanding of media and their use. 2. Equal status and teaching limitations: the researcher's concerns over sustaining equal status to lessen the teacher's tension had, to some extent, limited our mutual feedback on the teaching process. Therefore, there should have been more substantive dialogues between the teacher and the students, and the critical thinking skills of students should also have been elicited and developed.起始頁-結束頁：33-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201112.00363篇名：中學生的歷史概念、歷史學習態度與歷史批判思考傾向並列篇名：High School Students' Historical Concepts, Attitudes toward History Learning, and Historical Critical Thinking Disposition作者：黃麗蓉(Li-Jung Huang);賴思儀(Si-Yi Lai);楊淑晴(Shu-Ching Yang)關鍵字：歷史批判思考傾向;歷史思考能力;歷史教育;historical critical thinking abilities;historical critical thinking disposition;history education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，學生歷史思考能力的培養，已是歐美國家教育改革的主要方向；於此風潮之下，臺灣中學的歷史教育也出現了新變革。但是，針對中學生如何理解與認知「史料」、「證據」、「解釋」等重要歷史核心概念，至今則未見植基於「學習者中心」之觀點來進行探索。再者，國內學界對於學生如何看待歷史，以及歷史批判思維能力的相關測驗工具並不多見，故本研究參酌國內、外相關研究量表，據以為基礎進行改編，使其符合歷史科目之特性，最後乃編製成「歷史科批判思考傾向量表」，藉此探究目前中學生之歷史概念、歷史學習態度與歷史批判思考傾向。本研究對象為高雄市國中二、三年級學生以及高中二年級學生，有效問卷計1,017份。研究結果顯示，學生在歷史課堂的學習，以歷史知識為主，對於歷史概念內涵的認知相當有限。此外，對歷史老師評價愈高的學生、愈常閱讀歷史小說或故事者、以及愈喜好歷史科的中學生，其歷史批判思考傾向則愈高。最後，本研究亦針對研究結果，提出具體建議以供教師、後續研究者作為適用與修訂之方向。英文摘要：Exploring ways to cultivate learners' historical critical thinking has been one of the main themes in recent US and European educational reform. However, the processes by which learners' understand the concepts in history (i.e. historical documents, evidence, empathy, interpretation and accounts) have not been investigated from a learner-centered perspective. Furthermore, how learners view history and their disposition to historical critical thinking have not been fully explored. The purpose of the study is to design instruments that measure students' history learning and to explore learners' development of history concepts, attitude toward history learning, and their historical critical thinking disposition. The participants were 1017 8th, 9th and 11th grade students within the Kaohsiung County. Results showed that learners in history courses, in general, tend to focus on memorizing historical facts and display only limited understanding toward the concepts of history. In addition, analysis showed that learners with more positive evaluation toward teachers, read a greater number of historical novels and stories, as well as reported more liking of history. These learners also display much better performance on historical critical thinking disposition. Based on the findings, some suggestions were proposed for history teachers and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：65-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201112.00684篇名：國小輔導教師之實務培訓與督導需求初探並列篇名：Preliminary Investigation of Practice Training and Supervision Needs of Elementary School Counselors作者：許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)關鍵字：諮商督導;國小輔導教師;學校諮商;學校諮商師;團體督導;Counseling supervision;elementary school counselors;group supervision;school counseling;school counselors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小輔導教師之實務培訓與督導需求，研究招募共30位當前擔任國小教師且兼任輔導教師、並實際從事接案之成員，進行兩個各四次、每次160分鐘之督導團體，且於每次督導團體前邀請成員提出其督導需求。研究針對所得之督導需求描述，採內容分析與類別歸類方式進行資料分析，並以現象摘要方式呈現各概念範疇之描述文本。發現輔導教師期望獲得督導研討的焦點包括：學生特定議題的處理、諮商輔導歷程實務、家長與教師諮詢工作、體系建構與團隊資源議題，以及個人專業發展狀態。研究統整上述實務困境與督導需求，朝國小輔導教師之專業服務介入、體制運作與角色職責，和個人專業發展促進等三個面向進行探討，並針對督導實務和未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：Aimed to explore practice training and supervision needs of school counselors in elementary schools, thirty teachers who adjunct as school counselors were invited to join two supervision groups, each consists of four 160-minute sessions. The practice difficulties and their supervision needs were proposed before each session. The transcripts were analyzed and divided into several categories which related to the phenomenon of their concerned issues. Five types of supervision needs were found, they were: treating the specific issues of students, conducting practice of counseling and guidance, parents and teachers consulting, administration system building and resource supporting, and the professional development issues of school counselors. Three dimensions including direct services and interventions, system cooperating, and professional development of the elementary school counselors were discussed and integrated from above results. Applications and suggestions of practice training, supervision needs, and further research were discussed and proposed.起始頁-結束頁：99-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201112.01025篇名：Kano二維品質模式應用於個案科技大學教學品質之改善並列篇名：Applying Kano Model to a Case University for Teaching Quality Improvement作者：張媛甯(Yuan-Ning Chang)關鍵字：Kano二維品質模式;教學品質;科技大學;Kano's two-dimensional quality model;teaching quality;University of Technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：在高等教育評鑑實務逐漸轉變為重視學生學習成效的今日，卓越的學校教學品質已成為高等教育機構的關鍵策略及各國高等教育改革的訴求重點，以提供學生所需之必要與創新的教與學活動。本研究首先透過文獻探討來瞭解教學品質的意義及Kano二維品質模式；其次，運用Kano二維品質模式來探討S科技大學教學品質，分析個案學校教學品質要素所具有的品質屬性而進行歸類，並瞭解不同背景變項之學生對品質屬性歸類的差異性；再次，藉由結合Kano二維品質改良模式與重要性─滿意度模式，探討學校教學品質的改善策略；最後，依據研究結果提出具體的建議，提供學校實務及後續研究評估教學品質之參考依據。英文摘要：While evaluation practice of higher education gradually emphasizes students' learning outcomes, universities must focus on excellent teaching quality to provide students the necessary and innovative teaching and learning activities, since teaching quality is the key strategy in higher education institutions and the emphasis of educational reform in the world. This study first explored teaching quality and Kano's two-dimensional quality model by documentary analysis. Second, the study applied the Kano model to classify teaching quality elements into five quality attributes, and analyzed students' different classifications for teaching quality elements in S University of Technology. Third, combining a refined Kano model and IS model, the study investigated strategies of teaching quality improvement. Last, according to research conclusions, the study provided suggestions for management practices in S University of Technology and future researches for assessing teaching quality.起始頁-結束頁：129-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201112.01326篇名：從學生人權觀點論「表意管教措施」之妥適性並列篇名：Disciplinary Measures of Compulsory Expression in Schools: Perspectives of Student Human Rights作者：曾大千(Dah-Chian Tseng)關鍵字：表意自由;校園人權;學生懲戒;freedom of expression;human rights in school;student discipline期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：學生之身體自主權及人格發展權，均為《教育基本法》所明文保障；事實上，除體罰對學生身心發展存在不良影響外，要求學生道歉或寫悔過書等強制表意管教措施，亦對學生表現自由與人格發展權有所侵害。惟相對於「體罰」向為教育主管機關所嚴禁，「強制表意」非但未被禁止，歷來更屬有關法令明文例示教師所得採取之措施；然而，此等措施除可能抵觸憲法所保障的言論自由與人性尊嚴外，與國際人權發展趨勢亦顯有出入。就此，本文乃試圖在法令相關規範、司法實務見解、基本人權理論與國際人權文件等基礎上，綜合觀察表意管教措施所可能存在的問題點並提出見解，以提供實務運作之參考。本文認為，表意管教措施除在法制層面上難以具備法律依據，有關學生個人的內心真意亦本即無從強制；因此，學校若有運用表意管教措施之必要，則除須恪遵不強制表意的基本原則外，更應著重此等措施所具有之實質輔導意涵，並依學生最佳利益法則，進一步在程序上導入鼓勵合作而不強制的正向管教理念與作法。英文摘要：Students' rights to body autonomy and personality development are protected in the Educational Fundamental Act in Taiwan. In contrast to corporal punishment which is prohibited by law, disciplinary measures of compulsory expression such as asking students to apologize or confess in writing are commonly practiced in elementary and middle schools. Although such disciplinary measures are likely to negatively impact one's personality development, they have been widely accepted in most education related laws. However, these particular disciplinary measures might not only conflict with freedom of speech and human dignity protected by the Constitution but also differ from the trend of international human rights development. As a result, this paper attempts to analyze the problems that disciplinary measures of compulsory expression may have caused based on regulations in law, views in judicial practice, basic human rights theories and international human rights documents. This study finds that it is practically difficult for disciplinary measures of compulsory expression to have a legal basis as students' inner thoughts cannot be manipulated. Therefore, when schools need to carry out disciplinary measures of compulsory expression, it is essential to do it in a noncompulsory way and focus more on the intention of such measures in counseling. To act in students' best interests, school counselors may incorporate some positive values and encourage cooperation-in a noncompulsory manner.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201106.00017篇名：反省取向的「二階段集中實習課程」對國小師資生實務知識發展的影響並列篇名：Exploring the Influence of a Two Stage Reflective Teaching Practicum on the Development of Student Teachers' Practical Knowledge作者：陳國泰(Kuo-Tai Chen)關鍵字：二階段集中實習課程;反省取向的師資培育;師資生;教學意象;實務知識;image of teaching;practical knowledge;reflective teacher education;student teacher;two-stage teaching practicum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在設計一個反省取向的二階段集中實習課程，以探討其對國小師資生實務知識發展的影響。為此，本研究以南部某學院師資培育中心國小教育學程修習「國民小學教學實習」課程的21位師資生為研究對象，並將集中實習課程分成二階段，每階段皆駐校及在固定班級實習二週／10天，且在第一階段實習前、後與第二階段實習後，分別安排7週、5週與2週之反省取向課程活動（在第一階段實習後之5週反省取向課程，本研究稱為增能課程），至於蒐集資料的方法則包括教室觀察、訪談及文件分析。經由一學期（約18週）的探究，本研究有三點發現：(1)反省取向的二階段集中實習課程雖未改變個案師資生實務知識的上層結構（教學意象）之性質，但卻影響實務知識相關內涵的發展，而使教學意象更趨細緻化，亦使實務知識更具可行性。(2)反省取向的二階段集中實習課程促使個案師資生歷經「觀察與覺知、質疑與批判、探查與深究、頓悟與認同」等反省與澄清歷程，使師資生在教學目標知識、學習者知識及一般教學法知識等三項實務知識內涵上，產生較明顯的發展。(3)國小個案師資生在第一階段集中實習及增能課程期間反省所得之實務知識，由於相當清晰且具有明確方向，因而在第二階段集中實習返回相同班級、重新面對類似教學問題時，即能針對反省所得之實務知識予以驗證，而在收到良好教學成效後，乃進一步強化所獲得之實務知識。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to design a reflective teaching practicum with two stages in which an enhanced curriculum was arranged between the first and second stage, and then the study explored its influence on the development of student teachers' practical knowledge. Twenty-one student teachers taking the course of ”teaching practicum” at center of teacher education in south Taiwan were invited to participate in this study, and data was collected by classroom observation, interviews and document analysis. The results were as follows: (1) Although student teachers' super structure of practical knowledge (i.e. image of teaching) was not influenced by the two stages of reflective student teaching course, their concepts of relevant practical knowledge was. Thus, their images of teaching were getting more exquisite enabling their practical knowledge to be more applicable. (2) Students teachers significantly developed their knowledge of teaching objectives, knowledge of learners, and knowledge of instruction through the reflective and clarifying process of observation and awareness, suspicion and criticize, investigation and exploration, and insight and identification. (3) The practical knowledge student teachers attained during the enhanced curriculum and the first stage of the student teaching course was very clear and in a definite direction; therefore, when they went back to the same classroom setting and were faced with similar teaching problems in the second stage, they would verify the practical knowledge developed through reflection, and their enhanced teaching effectiveness would reinforce their practical knowledge again.起始頁-結束頁：25-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201106.00258篇名：網路與課室學習環境促進學童論證能力之效益並列篇名：The Effect of Argumentation-Based Learning Environment on Promoting 6(superscript th) Grade Students' Argumentation Abilities作者：洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung);林志能(Chih-Neng Lin)關鍵字：網路學習環境;論證能力;論證學習環境;argumentation abilities;argumentation-based learning environment;networked learning environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在設計論證素材，規劃論證活動，並將之轉化為可在網路學習環境與課室學習環境中具體操作的論證課程，藉以提升學童論證能力。研究方法採用準實驗研究的不等組前後測設計，以葉玉珠(2003)的「批判思考測驗－第一級」為前測，以研究者自編的「論證能力測驗」為後測進行共變數分析。研究對象為國小六年級學生共103人，進行連續八週的實驗教學活動後，比較網路論證學習環境組、課室論證學習環境組和對照組三組學生論證能力的表現。資料分析顯示課室論證學習環境組學童的論證能力表現比網路論證學習環境組好，課室論證學習環境的設計對六年級學童整體的論證能力提升有幫助，且具有中度以上的實驗效果量，因此在教學實務上具有推廣的價值。另外，研究也發現學生使用論證語言來進行解釋時主要是進行現象的描述，使用論證語言來進行辯護時主要是為自己的宣稱進行防禦，使用論證語言來進行反駁時主要以思考對方弱點的方式來進行。英文摘要：This study aimed to design an argumentation-based learning environment to promote the argumentation abilities of 6(superscript th) grade students. Three intact classes with a total of 103 students participated in the study. The treatments lasted for eight weeks to compare the argumentation performance in three different groups: the online argumentative-based learning group (OG), the in-class argumentative-based learning group (IG), and the control group (CG). This study, which adopted a quasi-experimental design, used the Critical Thinking Test I (Yeh, 2003) for pre-test and an Argumentation Ability Test for post-test. The results showed that: a) The argumentation abilities of the students in the IG group were superior to those in the OG group and the effect size was medium. The implication revealed that the design of IG could be applied to teaching practice. b) Students' argumentation focused mainly on describing a phenomenon instead of explaining it, c) Students defended their own claims while they were in the debate, and d) Students rebut by identifying their opponents' weaknesses in arguments.起始頁-結束頁：67-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201106.00679篇名：國內身心障礙教育概況之指標項目分析並列篇名：Indicator-Based Evaluation of Special Education Practices for Students with Disabilities in Taiwan作者：王天苗(Tien-Miau Wang);黃俊榮(Chun-Jung Huang)關鍵字：身心障礙學生;特殊教育;教育指標;educational indicators;special education;students with disabilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在以國際組織及先進國家重視的重要指標性項目，探究身心障礙教育服務對象、身心障礙學生接受特教服務及身心障礙教育資源之情形，以掌握國內身心障礙教育實施的現況，有助於檢討或規劃政策方向。以自編問卷於96學年度調查25縣市特教承辦人，並分析特教通報網次級資料，主要發現包括：(1)服務對象：學前至高中職階段89,900名身心障礙學生中，男女出現比率約65%和35%；國教階段身心障礙學生占學生總數約2.3%；學前身心障礙幼兒以發展遲緩和智能障礙所占比率最高，國中小和高中職最多為智能障礙和學習障礙；身心障礙學生人數在二、八、九年級有增加情形。(2)接受特教服務情形：身心障礙學生就讀公立園所或學校的比率為學前33.6%、國中小98.8%、高中職62.2%；各教育階段大多數身心障礙學生就讀普通班，學前幼兒得較多巡迴輔導服務，國中小學生得較多資源班服務，高中職學生約44%就讀特殊班或特殊學校；95學年度國中應屆畢業身心障礙學生升學率約91.3%。(3)教育資源情形：各教育階段一般公立學校或幼稚園設有身心障礙類特教班級的普及率分別為公幼9.6%、國小46.5%、國中76.5%、高中23.5%、高職66.3%；學前至高中職身障類專任特教教師專業合格率平均約91.2%；法定無障礙設施設置合格率國小約48.5％、國中約42.5％；縣市編列之特教經費占主管教育總預算比率有四縣市未達法定標準，縣市差異大。最後，依研究結果提出有關保障教育權益及推動特教政策方向等建議。英文摘要：Based on some indicators on educational provision for students with disabilities, this study intends to investigate what resources and services are provided for students with disabilities across different levels of education in Taiwan and who receives such services. A questionnaire was designed to collect data from city/county educational authorities in the school year of 2007 and selected data in Special Education Transmit Net were analyzed. It was found that approximately 2.3% of students recieving compulsory education have disabilities, and were mostly identified as having developmental delays, intellectual disabilities, or learning disabilities. The male-female ratio was reported to be 65:35. The percentages of students with disabilities receiving special education in public schools were about 33.6% at preschool, 98.8% at elementary and junior high, and 62.2% at senior high levels. Most of the students with disabilities were placed in regular classes at all levels; however, there were more itinerant specialist assistance in preschools, more resource room programs provided in elementary and junior high schools, but 44% of students with disabilities at senior high level were educated in special classes or special schools. Approximately 91% of junior high school graduates with disabilities attended advanced study in senior high schools. In terms of service accessibility in public schools, 9.6% of preschools, 46.5% of elementary, 76.5% of junior high, and 23.5% of senior high schools provided special education for students with disabilities. Variation of resources among counties or cities has great impacts on what and how special education and related services are delivered to children with disabilities. Some recommendations are offered to protect rights to education for students with disabilities and to promote special education policy.起始頁-結束頁：107-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201106.010710篇名：與他同行－在關係的涉入中撫慰生命的刻痕並列篇名：Walk with Him/Her: Alleviate the Scars through Involvement Relationship作者：張慈宜(Tsz-Yi Chang);游賀凱(Ho-Kai Yu)關鍵字：助人工作;青少年;敘說團體;精神障礙者子女;adolescent;child of depressive patient;helping behavior;narrative group期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：2009年夏天，新竹新埔山上舉行了一個特別的敘說團體。成員年紀從13歲到19歲不等，出自三個家庭，包括：住在一起，但常不知道彼此狀態的三兄弟；時而吵嘴，但感情親密的一對兄妹，以及外型與內心高度反差，19歲的團體大姊。成員皆來自於父親或母親被診斷為精神疾患的家庭，此外，沒有太多的共通點。加上，兄弟姊妹參加同一個團體，那些不便讓家人知道的經歷、內心感受遂難以在團體中有出口。以傳統的治療觀點來看，這應該是一個足以引發很多疑慮的團體組成。不過，「我們」本來就不是要「治療」「他們」，他們同意接受願意傾聽、理解他們的人陪伴、協助，但不需要被治療。「撫慰」或「抒解」或許更接近我們這兩位青少年教育工作者一路走來信仰，並且堅持在做的事。對許多我們所認識的處於台灣底邊社會，或被判定缺陷家庭中的孩子來說，我們相信那些因階級、經濟結構、道德偏見的磨難而在生命中所留下深淺不一的刻痕，唯有對於孩子的真正信任與關愛可以抒解，這就是我們所謂的「撫慰」。信任他們的對抗，他們的反叛，或甚至出走，都是奮力在被圍困的生命中突破往前的步伐。兩位作者藉由重新書寫2009年夏天的這個團體，反映回觀我們的青少年教育工作，並對我們未來的工作路線提出進一步的思辨。英文摘要：In the summer of 2009, we shared a marvelous journey in a narrative group in Hsinchu mountain with young friends whose parents had been diagnosed with mental illness. The composition of this group was unusual. Members' age ranged from 13 to 19 years old, and they were from three different families: three brothers who lived together but were rarely aware of each other; a cynical adolescent and his younger sister with whom he fought a lot, but were close as well; a manly yet delicate and considerate 19-year-old young girl who was always the big sister in the group. Except for the parent’s mental condition, there was little similarity within the groups. In addition, with siblings in the group, various unspoken feelings were even harder to be shared. From a traditional treatment point of view, the composition of this group was controversial and doubtful. However, ”we” never meant to ”cure” ”them”. They agreed to accept help and companionship from those who listened to them with sincerity and empathy, but not treatment. Instead of ”treatment” or ”therapy,” providing ”relief” is more like what we have been doing in our educational practices for young people. For these youngsters who are living in what is considered to be the bottom of society, who come from what are so-called ”defective” families,, tribulations due to class, economic structure, and moral prejudice may somewhat scar them in the course of life, but we truly believe these scars can be relieved by trust and love. This is what we mean by ”relief.” Through re-writing the stories of the group in the summer 2009, the authors reflect and invite readers to new prospects for adolescent educational practices.起始頁-結束頁：135-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201106.013501篇名：香港特區國民教育的議論批判並列篇名：Critique of National Education Discourse in the HKSAR作者：曾榮光(Wing-Kwong TSANG)關鍵字：國民教育;民族國家;國民身分認同;national education;nation-state;national identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：2011年5月，課程發展議會公布了《德育及國民教育科課程指引（小一至中六）：諮詢稿》，進行三個月公眾諮詢。本文是筆者對有關諮詢稿的回應，包括：（1）環繞諮詢稿的眾多言論，筆者發現當中有不少謬論以至歪理，身為負責任的教育工作者，實須加以批判，以正視聽，使香港特區的國民教育政策議論，不致被政客的媚詞及黨派的腔調所騎<U+523C>，並回到教育與教學的實質探討上。（2）諮詢稿所建議的課程內容，犯了一個嚴重錯誤，就是把香港特區國民所身處的幾個重要制度脈絡－國家、民族與「民族國家」－胡亂配置與混淆，致使所建議的國民教育課程內容完全不符合中國歷史現實、當今國情及香港本土文化社會實況。（3）諮詢稿所建議課程內容的另一錯誤，就是把香港特區國民歸屬於錯誤的身分認同概念視域之下，致使香港學童所認同的一種國民身分，不單與中華民族的「多元一體格局」無從整合，更可能對香港國際都會的「多元文化格局」造成矛盾與衝突。（4）除了課程內容上的錯誤，建議的國民教育教學取向亦犯上嚴重錯誤。首先，諮詢稿所強調的國民教育教學取向是一種停留在Lawrence Kohlberg所謂的「成規」（conventional）層次，即只<U+7740>重合模於「正面的價值觀」、「優秀的國民素質」樣版，而未能提升至「後成規」（post-conventional）層次。其次，諮詢稿更把國民教育教學取向界定為一種「激情為本」的模式，即<U+7740>重引發學生的激情及情緒。試想，若香港特區未來的公民是本<U+7740>由「激情」引發並墨守「成規」的態度，來處理在全球一體化下種種日形複雜的族裔、民族及國際政治問題，則香港這個國際大都會的政治生態將會出現怎樣的變化？（5）最後，本文據此提出一系列改進上述錯誤的建議。英文摘要：The Curriculum Development Council issued the Chinese version of Moral and National Education Curriculum Guide (Primary 1 to Secondary 6): Consultation Draft in May 2011. This article records the formal submission of the author to the consultation. It consists of five sections: (a) Numbers of fallacies and misunderstandings about the conceptions of national education have emerged from the discourse initiated by the Consultation Draft. As a serving educator of the HKSAR, I feel obliged to put forth my criticism to these educationally harmful conceptions. It attempts to rescue the policy discourse on national education in the HKSAR from the siege by politicians and partisans' rhetorics and to recourse the discourse back to the purview of educational enquiry. (b) One of the serious faults found in the curriculum content stipulated in the Consultation Draft is the conflation of institutional contexts essential to the national identity of Hong Kong citizens, namely the state, nation and nation-state. As a result, the curriculum content proposed by the Consultation Draft is in total discordance with the historical, national and socio-cultural contexts of the HKSAR. (c) Another fault found in the proposed curriculum content is the misplacement of the national identity of Hong Kong citizens in empirically inappropriate conceptual perspectives. As a result, the national identity to be nurtured through the proposed curriculum may not only be incongruent with the Chinese nationality, which has been characterized by Professor Fei Xiaotong as ”pattern of diversity and unity,” but may also elicit contradictions or even conflicts in the multicultural context of Hong Kong as an international metropolitan. (d) Apart from the faults found in curriculum content, serious faults can also be found in the pedagogical approach proposed by the Consultation Draft. First, the teaching objective of the pedagogical approach has been identified as to inculcate ”positive values” and ”desirable national qualities” among Hong Kong school children. Such objective however could only prepare students up to the ”conventional level” of moral development in Lawrence Kohlberg's conception. It has fallen short of elevating them to the ”post-conventional level” of moral development. Second, the proposed pedagogical approach has been defined in the Consultation Draft as the ”passion-based” model. Accordingly, the major effort of the model is to ”trigger” students' ”passion” and ”emotion.” Imagine if future citizens of the HKSAR are all passion-prone and/or emotion-prone in handling ethnic, national and international-political issues in the ever-growing globalizing context, what would happen to the political ecology of Hong Kong as an international metropolitan? (e) Accordingly, the article will conclude with a series of suggestions in rectifying the aforementioned faults found in the Consultation Draft.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：辨國族身分並列篇名：On National Identity作者：謝均才(Kwan-Choi TSE)關鍵字：身分／認同;國家;民族;愛國心;國民教育;identity;state;nation;patriotism;national education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨<U+7740>1997年香港主權回歸中國，「香港人」政治成員身分的變化這議題便變得重要而迫切；年前「愛國論」、新近「德育及國民教育課程」的出台和公民教育的重新定向亦帶來連番爭議。本文討論和初步疏理有關國族身分或認同在概念上和倫理證成上的一些問題。綜合而言，就「認同國族身分乃道德原則」的證成，迄今支持個人要優先效忠國族的論據還是比較薄弱。雖然國族仍有一定的內在價值和工具價值（特別是在其對個人的精神寄託和對整個社群的福祉上），但這些價值卻從屬於如公正等其他價值。況且，亦沒有證據證明要滿足某些需要便非國族不可。再者，在某些處境下，認同國族身分反過來可能害及個人、國族自身或其他社群。簡言之，僅有愛國心並不足夠，還須明智，才能愛得其值、愛得合宜。英文摘要：Against the background of the controversies over patriotism and national education in Hong Kong during a period of political transition, this article examines some major arguments concerning the pros and cons of national identity (with patriotism also included). The debates at stake are discussed in light of conceptual clarification, empirical analysis, and normative justifications. Conceptual clarification is conducted on two groups of key concepts: nation and identity in the usage of Chinese and English. And the five major arguments in favor of the extrinsic and intrinsic values of national identity are discussed one by one. This article concludes that some arguments for national identity are supported, albeit with certain modifications.起始頁-結束頁：25-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：「優質學校改進計劃」在香港教育改革下的作用：學校領導的視角並列篇名：The Influences of Quality School Improvement Project in Hong Kong Education Reform: School Leaders' Perspectives作者：趙志成(Chi-Shing CHIU);麥君榮(Kwan-Wing MAK)關鍵字：學校改進;夥伴協作;教育改革;school improvement;partnership;education reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：「優質學校改進計劃」是個大學與學校夥伴協作計劃，自1998年起一直給予中、小學全面專業支援，目的是整體學校改進。2000年，教育統籌委員會發表了《香港教育制度改革建議》，在充滿理想的改革原則策動下，中、小學教育及課程有明顯改變，但在推行及實踐各樣改革時，教與學的實際困境亦一一浮現。本文以香港「優質學校改進計劃」下的學校個案，探討學校領導為何在由上而下的改革浪潮下，引進大學專業人員的知識及實踐經驗，並從學校領導的視角，探索「計劃」在學校教育的不同層面所起的作用。英文摘要：Quality School Improvement Project (QSIP) is a university-school partnership program for comprehensive school improvement. Since 1998, QSIP has provided holistic professional support to primary and secondary schools in Hong Kong. In 2000, Education Commission published the Reform Proposals for the Education System in Hong Kong to outline some desirable education reform principles and proposals for schools. Following the reform principles, school education system and curriculum have some remarkable changes. When implementing the various education reforms, challenges and difficulties have also surfaced in the teaching and learning environment in schools. This article reviews why school leaders introduce QSIP into their school reform environment and how the professional supports from QSIP have influenced school education in different levels from school leaders' perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：39-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：學習差異的理解及處理：教師的視角並列篇名：The Understanding of and Catering for Learning Difference and Diversity: Teachers' Perspectives作者：韓孝述(Hau-Sut HON);李文浩(Man-Ho LI);黃顯華(Hin-Wah WONG)關鍵字：學習差異;教師視角;教師專業發展;learning difference and diversity;teachers' perspectives;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：自20世紀70年代末起，香港逐步實施義務普及學校教育。隨<U+7740>學位大量增加，學校教育無可避免要處理愈趨複雜的學習差異問題。香港教育界在學校、學科課程、課堂教學等不同層面，針對學習差異先後作出連串嘗試。教師是日常教學及各項處理策略的設計者和執行者，他們理解不同學習者的表現時採取哪種視角，將直接影響策略的實施及成效。本文是針對上述教師視角所作初步研究的報告，以10位來自5所香港中、小學的教師為訪談對象，嘗試從教師的表述中探取其對學習差異及學校相關處理策略的詮釋。研究結果肯定了「斷症者」及「協助者」兩種教師視角，並以教師效能感為有效預測教師視角的因素。這發現對於針對學習差異進行的教師專業發展有重要啟示。英文摘要：Since compulsory education was introduced in the late 1970s, the increasing number of eligible students has made learning difference and diversity an inevitable issue in Hong Kong's schooling agenda. An abundance of effort has therefore been drawn to attempts of catering for learning difference and diversity on different levels (e.g., levels of school, curriculum, and classroom teaching). As teachers are both ”writers” and ”actors” of everyday teaching and catering strategies, their perspectives of understanding the issue shall affect the implementation and effectiveness of strategy. This article reports on a preliminary investigation into the abovementioned teachers' perspectives by interviewing 10 teachers from 5 local primary and secondary schools. Findings confirmed and further substantiated the ”pathognomonic” and ”interventionist” perspectives of teachers in face of learning difference and diversity, with teacher's efficacy as a reliable predictor. Implications on teacher professional development were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：67-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：香港新高中數學科校本評核：英國GCSE學科作業及澳洲昆士蘭州校本評核的啟示並列篇名：Hong Kong New Senior Secondary Mathematics School-based Assessment: Inspirations from GCSE Coursework of England and School-based Assessment of Queensland作者：張家麟(Ka-Luen CHEUNG);林智中(Chi-Chung LAM);黃毅英(Ngai-Ying WONG);何上沛(Polly Sheung-Pui HO)關鍵字：數學評核;數學教育;新高中;校本評核;香港教育改革;mathematics assessment;mathematics education;new senior secondary;school-based assessment;Hong Kong education reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：實行校本評核是香港新高中學制改革的重要一環。雖然數學科校本評核的時間表至今還未落實，但已有不少本地研究結果顯示，數學科教師對校本評核的擬題及建議評核模式甚感徬徨和憂慮，亦懷疑其成效及公平性。在推行數學校本評核方面，英國和澳洲均有豐富經驗。香港建議的評估模式與英國曾使用的方式相近，而澳洲昆士蘭州的校本評核則建基於校本課程的推行，甚具特色。本文將透過分析英國GCSE數學科的學科作業和澳洲昆士蘭州校本評核的經驗得失，探討香港數學科校本評核未來的發展方向，以期為有關當局構想的校本評核模式提供改進建議。英文摘要：The implementation of school-based assessment (SBA) is an important component of the new senior secondary (NSS) education reform. Although there is yet to be a timeframe for the implementation of Mathematics SBA, a number of studies have revealed that Mathematics teachers are anxious about the setting and the suggested assessment of SBA questions. Some of them even challenge its effectiveness and fairness. England and Australia are experienced in implementing Mathematics SBA. The assessment model proposed in Hong Kong is similar to the one implemented in England, and the feature of SBA in Queensland is unique as it is based on its school-based curriculum in implementation. With reference to the experience of GCSE coursework in England and SBA in Queensland, this article attempts to provide insights and recommendations on how the Mathematics SBA of Hong Kong might be implemented in the near future.起始頁-結束頁：95-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：論PMI課堂的學生語言適應並列篇名：On Students' Language Adaptation in PMI Classroom作者：郭思豪(See-Ho KWOK)關鍵字：普通話教中文(PMI);課堂語言;語言適應;teaching Chinese in Putonghua (PMI);classroom language;language adaptation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：過往有關「用普通話教中文」（下稱PMI）的研究，多集中探討教學、課程及學校行政支援等方面，鮮有細緻地從學習者的角度思考問題。事實上，PMI本質上屬於教學語言的變革，因此審視PMI課堂師生之間的語言互動，以之為理解問題的切入點，顯然更靠近問題核心。本文將根據一系列小學一年級的PMI課堂錄像，集中觀察學生的語言表現（如詞匯、句式選擇），分析他們在適應過程中所面對的傳意障礙（如因學習的規避心理所引致的沉默、省略及換碼等現象），並為調整教學策略提出建議。英文摘要：Previous studies on PMI seldom investigate PMI issue from the perspective of student learning as their main concerns are other aspects like teaching, curriculum, and school administrative support. Essentially, PMI is a reform in classroom teaching language. Only when teacher-student verbal interaction in PMI classes is included in the investigation can the issue and its core problems be scrutinized and better understood. This article uses a series of video recording of primary one PMI classes to probe into students' language performance, like word selection and sentence structure selection. An analysis is also carried out to understand the communicative barriers (including silence, omission, transcoding, all arising from avoidance) faced by P1 students at their adaptation stage. Suggestions for adjusting teaching strategies are made.起始頁-結束頁：117-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：香港早期聾人教育與香港手語源流的關係並列篇名：Early Deaf Education in Hong Kong and Its Relation With the Origin of Hong Kong Sign Language作者：施婉萍(Felix SZE);路駿怡(Connie LO);盧瑞華(Lisa LO);朱君毅(Kenny CHU)關鍵字：香港聾童教育;香港手語;教學語言;手語源流;education of deaf children in Hong Kong;Hong Kong Sign Language;medium of instruction;origin of sign language期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究透過搜集資料和採訪人物，追溯香港早期聾人教育發展情況，探討當時聾校語言政策與香港手語源流的關係，以及聾人對不同教學語言的看法。根據採集所得資料，香港的聾童教育最早可追溯至1935年成立的一所聾校。雖然該校禁止師生使用手語，但基於溝通需要及本能，聾童之間自自然然發展出一套以手部動作表達意思的溝通方法，形成手語的雛形。戰後聾校數目逐步增加，當中部分聾校引入了相信是源自南京或上海的手語為教學語言，因此香港手語其後的發展深受南京或上海手語影響。我們在採訪中亦發現，無論是從口語學校或手語學校畢業的聾生，絕大部分都認為手語教學對他們的學習有幫助。如歷史能夠重演，他們都渴望健聽老師能用手語授課。英文摘要：Through reviewing existing documentation and conducting interviews, this article reconstructs the history of deaf education in Hong Kong in the early days, investigates how the development of Hong Kong Sign Language was related to the language policies of different deaf schools, and finds out deaf people's view on the issue of medium of instruction. According to the information collected, formal deaf education in Hong Kong began in 1935 with the establishment of the first deaf school. Although that school prohibited the use of signs, deaf children spontaneously developed a gestural system of communication among themselves due to the pressing needs for communication. This gestural communication system can be viewed as an early form of sign language. In the postwar period, the number of deaf schools gradually increased. Some of them introduced the Nanjing/Shanghai variety of Chinese Sign Language, which influenced the subsequent development of Hong Kong Sign Language. Through our interviews, we found that the majority of the deaf interviewees, whether they graduated from oral or signing schools, felt that the use of sign language could enhance their learning and that if they could turn back time, they wished their hearing teachers could use sign language as the medium of instruction.起始頁-結束頁：139-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：教師情緒政治之探究：台灣一所國民中學之個案研究並列篇名：An Inquiry of Teachers' Emotional Politics: A Case Study of a Junior High School in Taiwan作者：陳幸仁(Hsin-Jen CHEN);許惠茹(Hui-Ju HSU)關鍵字：情緒政治;情緒勞務;組織文化;組織情緒規則;emotional politics;emotional labor;organizational culture;emotional rules in organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：39卷1-2期出版年：2011中文摘要：教師是學校組織成員，不論在處理工作任務或與人互動時，都會產生各種情緒經驗，情緒於是成為教師學校組織生活的一部分。過往，在有關教育組織的研究中，甚少探討學校組織情緒這面向，但它卻值得關注。本文以台灣一所國民中學為個案，探討學校組織情緒，以及教師面對組織情緒會呈現甚麼情緒政治。為了深入了解教師在學校組織內的情緒，本研究採用深度訪談及觀察等質性研究方法蒐集資料。研究結果顯示，學校組織文化與學校組織情緒規則，往往規範學校成員的情緒，形成教師情緒勞務與情緒疏離；再者，教師反思其情緒能使他們覺醒其意識，並能把意識轉化為行動而替情緒發聲；最後，學校教師會為追求教師專業自主，能推翻舊有學校情緒政體，建構同僚專業互享機制，並累積正面的情緒知識。領導者若能適當重視教師組織情緒，可增強教師對組織的歸屬感。英文摘要：Teachers are members of the school organization. No matter facing the challenge from task demands or interacting with people, they would have various emotional experiences. Emotions, therefore, become part of teachers' school life. In spite of a great deal of studies focusing on teachers' lives, few have paid attention to teacher emotions. This study aims to explore organizational emotions and teachers' emotional politics in a junior high school in Taiwan, and adopts qualitative research methods (i.e., in-depth interviews and observation) to collect data for gaining deeper understanding of teacher emotions in the case school. Research findings include: (a) emotional rules embedded in both organizational culture and organization's emotional regime regulate teacher emotions, bringing about emotional labor and emotional alienation of teachers; (b) teachers' emotional reflection has a positive function of provoking teachers' agency and voices; (c) for the pursuit of professional autonomy, the teacher association in the case school overturns organization's emotional regime, constructs collegiality, and accumulates positive emotional knowledge. Finally, if school leaders value teacher emotions, teachers may in turn enhance their sense of belonging.起始頁-結束頁：157-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：垂直等化連結特性之研究：六種連結方法的比較並列篇名：A Comparison of the Differences in Linked Score Properties for Vertical Scaling Obtained Using Six Linking Methods作者：陳煥文(Huan-Wen Chen)關鍵字：垂直等化;相同分數分配特性;連結方法;連結關係;等值特性;equity properties;linking methods;linking relationships;same distribution property;vertical scaling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：Six linking methods were used to link the grade 4 math test to grade 6 math test using common-item design. The six linking methods included in this study were four observed score methods (frequency estimation, Tucker observed linear, Levine observed linear, and IRT observed) and two true score methods (IRT true and Levine true linear). The criteria used for comparisons included similarities of the linking relationships, the equal distribution property, first order equity, and second order equity. The two tests for grade 4 and grade 6 are computerized math tests consisting of twenty-five and twenty-seven items, respectively. Among the items in the two tests, five of them are common items. The results indicated the existence of curvilinear linking relationship between the two tests. In general, first order equity tended to be more closely achieved by the true score methods than by the observed score methods. By contrast, the same distribution property and second order equity property were more closely achieved by the observed score methods than by the true score methods.英文摘要：Six linking methods were used to link the grade 4 math test to grade 6 math test using common-item design. The six linking methods included in this study were four observed score methods (frequency estimation, Tucker observed linear, Levine observed linear, and IRT observed) and two true score methods (IRT true and Levine true linear). The criteria used for comparisons included similarities of the linking relationships, the equal distribution property, first order equity, and second order equity. The two tests for grade 4 and grade 6 are computerized math tests consisting of twenty-five and twenty-seven items, respectively. Among the items in the two tests, five of them are common items. The results indicated the existence of curvilinear linking relationship between the two tests. In general, first order equity tended to be more closely achieved by the true score methods than by the observed score methods. By contrast, the same distribution property and second order equity property were more closely achieved by the observed score methods than by the true score methods.起始頁-結束頁：559-583資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201112.00022篇名：以「魏氏兒童智力量表」（第四版）的四因素為基礎之簡式版本分析：臨床應用指引並列篇名：Development of Factor-Based WISC-IV Tetrads: A Guild to Clinical Practice作者：陳心怡(Hsin-Yi Chen);花茂棽(Man-Sun Hua);張本聖(Ben-Shang Chang);陳榮華(Yung-Hua Chen)關鍵字：「魏氏兒童智力量表」（第四版）;簡式版本;臺灣常模;short form;Taiwan norm;WISC-IV期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究根據臺灣「魏氏兒童智力量表」（第四版）之標準化樣本，共968位6至16歲兒童，檢視以四因素為基礎的簡式版本。文中考量心理計量特性、施測省時便易性，以及臨床意義性等多項因素，並以線性轉換法分析36組估計智商之適用性。結果顯示，「類同─矩陣推理─數字序列─符號尋找」與「類同─矩陣推理─記憶廣度─符號尋找」二組合是相對較佳選擇，施測時間約在21至23分鐘間。此外，「詞彙─矩陣推理─記憶廣度─符號尋找」、「詞彙─圖形設計─數字序列─符號尋找」，以及「類同─圖形設計─記憶廣度─符號尋找」亦是可選用的組合。此五組合與實際智商的整組平均差異在0.01分內，相關在.92至.93間，適用於團體平均智商研究。唯結果亦發現，僅約68∼69%兒童估計智商位於真實智商的95%信賴區間內，對智商120分以上兒童更普遍有低估傾向。此外，根據實際智商或估計智商進行的排名亦有顯著差異，排名差異絕對值之中位數約在60至70名間，即使是相對較佳的簡式組合仍存有相當之估計誤差。臨床工作者務必注意簡式版本應僅作為篩選或團體研究用途。如何在省時與效度間達到平衡，及如何正確使用和解釋簡式版本估計智商，將持續是使用者的中心考量。英文摘要：Factor-based WISC-IV tetrads were investigated with the Taiwan WISC-IV standardization sample of 968 children, ages 6 to 16 years old. Various psychometric characteristics, clinical utilities, as well as time constraints were compared among 36 tetrads. By linear equating procedure, current results identified five tetrads with relatively better overall quality. Both the ”Similarities-Matrix Reasoning-Letter Number Sequencing-Symbol Search” and ”Similarities-Matrix Reasoning-Digit Span-Symbol Search” forms exceeded others with respect to validity, content representation, and time saving. The testing time estimates were between 21 to 23 minutes. Three other forms, ”Vocabulary-Matrix Reasoning-Digit Span-Symbol Search”; ”Vocabulary-Block Design-Letter Number Sequencing-Symbol Search”, and ”Similarities-Block Design-Digit Span - Symbol Search” were also considered as optimal options. For all the above five selected tetrads, the mean differences between estimated and actual FSIQ were within 0.01 IQ points, and the correlation were between .92 to .93. They were appropriate for group study. Nonetheless, results also revealed that merely 68-69% of the sample getting their estimated FSIQ within the 95% confidence interval of the true FSIQ. Besides, rankings based on estimated FSIQ were found differ significantly from empirical rankings. The median for ranking difference was around 60 to 70. These factor-based tetrads tend to show under-estimation for children with FSIQ higher than 120. Users are cautioned to use these short forms for screening, and group research purposes only.起始頁-結束頁：585-611資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201112.00283篇名：招生選才過程中不同甄審項目的實質影響力並列篇名：Real vs. Claimed Weights of Different Assessment Procedures in the College Admission or Personnel Selection Process作者：詹志禹(Jason C. Chan);許嘉家(Jia-Jia Syu)關鍵字：分散趨勢;加權;招生;高等教育;評分者間共識;電腦模擬;甄選;Admission;computer simulation;distributional dispersion;higher education;inter-rater reliability;screening;weighting期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：招生選才的甄審項目經常包含客觀筆試及主觀評審，但招生簡章中公布的占分比例其實往往只是假象。本研究以電腦模擬方式實驗前述現象，並透過一些實際案例的招生資料作為佐證。實驗操弄的自變數包括：（1）主觀評審項目的不同評分範圍；（2）評審間的共識度；（3）評審項目占最後總分的比例，共形成3×4×3＝36種實驗情境。模擬的客觀筆試成績範圍為0∼100的常態分配隨機變數，主觀評審成績則再依上述操弄情境加以轉換。實驗結果發現：主觀評審項目對總成績的實質影響力，大部分低於預設的占分比例，並隨著評審評分範圍的縮小及評審共識程度的降低而更趨嚴重。此外，本研究針對2009年台灣北區一所大學十五個學系的大學甄選分數及十五個碩士班的招生入學分數，進行兩個實際案例分析，結果發現「主觀或客觀」不是關鍵，甄審項目的分數範圍才是；成績分散範圍較廣／區辨力較強的甄審項目之實際影響力較大，且可能導致招生或選才簡章中公布的占分比例成為假象。本研究的結果可提供招生選才機構思考評分機制、計分程序及選才效果等問題，並提供應試者參考。英文摘要：College Admission or Personnel Selection Process usually adopts both subjective and objective assessment procedures. The weight of each procedure might be claimed publicly, but it often did not reflect its real influence on the final grade. The current study simulated this phenomenon in the computer and employed data of real cases to investigate some factors behind the phenomenon. In the Monte Carlo study, the following variables were manipulated: 1. ranges of subjective rating scores; 2. levels of inter-rater consensus; 3. weights of different assessment procedures. A total of 36 experimental conditions were formed, and 20 replicated samples were generated in each condition. Normally distributed random numbers between 0-100 were generated as the scores of the objective assessment procedure, and they were transformed according to the experimental conditions to form the scores of subjective assessment procedures. Results showed that real weights of subjective procedures were lower than claimed weights of them in most conditions. The phenomenon became acute when narrowing the rating range and reducing the degree of inter-rater consensus. Some analyses were also performed on admission scores of year 2009 from real cases, including 15 departments and 15 graduate schools from one university at north Taiwan. Results indicated that the property of objectivity or subjectivity of assessment did not play an important role. The key factor was the discrimination power of assessment procedures. Those results have some implications for school admission or personnel screening process as well as for applicants in the process.起始頁-結束頁：613-638資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201112.00564篇名：「研究生希望信念量表」之發展並列篇名：The Development of the "Hope Inventory for Graduate Students"作者：彭月茵(Yueh-Yin Peng);葉玉珠(Yu-Chu Yeh)關鍵字：希望;動力思考;探索性因素分析;路徑思考;驗證性因素分析;agency thinking;confirmatory factor analysis;exploratory factor analysis;hope belief;pathways thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在發展「研究生希望信念量表」（Hope Inventory for Graduate Students, HIGS）。本研究提出，HIGS發展有三階段：第一階段是以希望理論為架構，編製開放性問卷，再蒐集國內研究生進行論文撰寫時，其希望信念的相關感受與經驗，並做為編製預試問卷之依據；第二階段採立意取樣，抽取222位研究生為預試樣本，進行探索性因素分析與信度分析，結果共抽取兩個因素：動力思考與路徑思考；總量表之Cronbach's為.88（共16題）；第三階段以立意取樣抽取1,028位研究生為正式樣本，進行驗證性因素分析與效標關聯效度分析，結果發現HIGS具有合理之適配與良好之效標關聯效度，且HIGS兩個因素與全量表具有良好的組合信度與平均變異數解釋量。因此，HIGS具有良好之信度與效度。此外，本研究亦探討研究生希望信念的發展與差異現況，研究結果發現，男、女研究生之希望信念並無差異；博士生之希望信念則顯著高於碩士生；而教育學院之研究生的希望信念則顯著高於工學院之研究生。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to develop the ”Hope Inventory for Graduate Students” (HIGS). The development of the HIGS included three stages. First, an open questionnaire based on the hope theory was employed to collect graduate students' hope belief of writing a thesis or a dissertation. Second, 222 participants were included in the pretest to perform exploratory factor analysis and reliability analysis. Two factors, pathways thinking and agency thinking, were extracted. The Cronbach's of the HIGS was .88 (16 items). Third, 1,028 participants were used to perform confirmatory factor analysis and criterion-related validity. The analyses revealed that the HIGS had good goodness-of-fit and criterion-related validity; moreover, the two factors in the HIGS had good composite reliability and satisfactory average variance. The HIGS therefore has good reliability and validity. The other findings of this study were as follow: (a) there were no significant differences on hope belief between the male and female graduates; (b) students in doctor programs had stronger hope belief than those in master's programs; (c) graduate students in college of education had stronger hope belief than those in college of engineering.起始頁-結束頁：639-664資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201112.00825篇名：羅氏「工作成癮測驗」中文版心理計量特質之檢驗並列篇名：Psychometric Properties of the Chinese Version of Robinson's Work Addition Risk Test作者：黃瑞傑(Jui-Chieh Huang);王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang);胡昌亞(Chang-Ya Hu)關鍵字：工作成癮測驗;工作狂;工作時數;情緒耗竭;emotional exhaustion;Work Addition Risk Test;workaholism;working hours期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：工時過長是台灣普遍的現象，其與工作狂行為有顯著相關，但目前並未有良好的工具能協助國內研究的進行。本研究欲檢驗Robinson（1989）「工作成癮測驗」（Work Addiction Risk Test, WART）中文版之心理計量特質與結構。本研究依Brislin（1980）的回覆翻譯策略將WART中文化，並以1,235位全職員工作為樣本；由於初步的驗證性因素分析結果未符合過往研究的因素結構，本研究進一步將整體樣本隨機分成兩組，先對一組樣本（N = 618）進行探索性因素分析，結果顯示共可萃取五個因子；而另一組樣本（N = 617）的驗證性因素分析結果顯示，五因子模式配適度良好。同時WART各項因素與工作投入皆呈現顯著關聯性，且除了工作滿意以外，五因子也與情緒耗竭、工作對家庭衝突、家庭對工作衝突，以及工作時數等效標變項，皆呈現顯著關聯性，此顯示效標關聯效度獲得支持。最後則討論研究結果對未來工作狂研究以及企業員工協助方案的助益。英文摘要：It is common that the employees work quite long in Taiwan. Based on previous studies, this phenomenon has positive correlation with workaholic behavior. To develop a well Chinese measurement to understand workaholism in Taiwan, the current study aimed to investigate the psychometric properties of the Chinese version of the Work Addition Risk Test (Robinson, 1989). Participants were a random sample of 1,235 fulltime workers. As the result of primary confirmatory factor analysis failed to fit the factor models of previous studies, the original sample was divided randomly into two groups. Using one group (N = 618) to explore the factor structure, the result of exploratory factor analysis showed five factors model in this study. To test the factor model, the fit index of another group (N = 617) suggested that the five factors model fit the data. The significantly positive relationship between these five factors and job involvement provided strong evidence for convergent validity. Furthermore, the significant correlations between the five factors and criterion variables (emotional exhaustion, job satisfaction and working hours per week) also provided proof of criterion-related validity. In addition, implications and limitations of these findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：665-690資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201112.01086篇名：以Rasch分析檢驗「多向度幽默感量表」之信效度並列篇名：Validation of the Multidimensional Sense of Humor Scale Using Rasch Analyses作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng);劉昆夏(Kun-Shia Liu);何曉琪(Hsiao-Chi Ho)關鍵字：Rasch分析;多向度幽默感量表;幽默感;Multidimensional Sense of Humor Scale;Rasch analysis;sense of humor期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在以Rasch分析重新檢驗Thorson與Powell（1993）「多向度幽默感量表」（TheMultidimensional Sense of Humor Scale,MSHS）的信、效度。研究對象包含預試樣本634位大學生，正式樣本587位大學生。經以Rasch分析結果，修訂後之量表具有良好的模式資料適配度，分為「幽默產生」、「幽默態度」以及「幽默因應」三個向度，共計18題。所有的題目在男、女生以及施測方式（網路和紙本）上，並無明顯的差異試題功能（differential item functioning）。幽默產生、幽默態度及幽默因應的信度分別是.95、.74 與.84。本研究亦提供「多向度幽默感量表」的各種效度證據。最後，針對幽默感評量工具的發展與應用，提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：The study aims to validate the Multidimensional Sense of Humor Scale (MSHS) (Thorson & Powell, 1993). Participants were 634 and 587 undergraduate students respectively for item revision and validation. Rasch techniques were applied to assess model-data fit and to provide the validity evidence of the MSHS. The results indicated that three dimensions of the revised MSHS, humor production, attitudes toward humor, and coping with humor, exhibited good model-data fit. All items had no significantly differential item functioning between genders and between ways of testing (paper-andpencil and online). The person separation reliabilities of the measures from humor production, attitudes towards humor, and coping with humor subscales were .95, .74, and .84, respectively. The study also provided multiple sources of validity evidence for the revised MSHS. Suggestions for further development and application of the revised MSHS were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：691-713資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201112.01347篇名：以視覺監控<U+7232>基礎之感覺統合姿勢動作評量研究並列篇名：Visual Surveillance Based Posture Movements Assessment for Sensory Integration作者：吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);林巾凱(Chin-Kai Lin);郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：姿勢動作;視覺監控;感覺統合功能障礙;實作評量;樣式辨識;pattern recognition;performance assessments;sensory integration posture movements;sensory integration dysfunction;visual surveillance期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究從實作評量之觀點，探討使用視覺監控分析人物目標之姿勢動作並結合樣式辨識，應用於診斷受試者感覺統合障礙之有效性。本研究之研究對象是239位4至6歲幼稚園兒童，主要是從不同角度蒐集受試者感覺統合臨床觀察之姿勢動作，搭配不同的分類器，診斷受試者感覺統合臨床觀察之姿勢動作是否有障礙。研究結論彙整如下：1.以視覺監控為基礎之感覺統合實作評量，搭配支撐向量機和貝氏網路能得到較好的診斷效果。2.以視覺監控為基礎之感覺統合實作評量，Cronbach's係數是.80，顯示本研究發展的評量工具具有良好之信度。3.以視覺監控為基礎之感覺統合實作評量，在診斷「趴姿伸直」姿勢動作之診斷正確率達86.2%，診斷「臥姿彎曲」姿勢動作之診斷正確率達85.0%，顯示具有良好之效度。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop a visual surveillance based posture movements assessment for sensory integration clinical observation. Based on the view of performance assessments, the pattern recognition is combined with the visual surveillance procedures to analyze the posture movements (prone extension and supine flexion) and to diagnose the sensory integration dysfunction of subjects in this study.A total of 239 participants with age from four to six years old were selected from kindergartens. The major findings of this study are summarized as follow: (1) for employing the support vector machine classifier and Baysian network classifier are best in diagnosing disorder of sensory integration functions in terms of important features and overall performance of prone extension and supine flexion, respectively. (2) With good prediction rates, prone extension: 86.2% and supine flexion: 85%, the visual surveillance based performance assessment for sensory integration has good validity. (3) With good internal index, Cronbach's α: .80, the visual surveillance based posture movements assessment for sensory integration has good reliability.起始頁-結束頁：423-451資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201109.04238篇名：大學男女新生在健康促進生活型態測量恆等性之研究並列篇名：A Study of Measurement Invariance on HPLP: An Example of the Freshmen in One University作者：邱思慈(Stu-Tzu Chiu);張家銘(Chia-Ming Chang);連婉如(Wen-Ru Lian);黃芳銘(Fang-Ming Huang)關鍵字：大學新生;健康促進生活型態;測量恆等性;Health-Promoting Life Profile;measurement invariance;university's freshmen期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討大學男女新生在「健康促進生活型態量表」的測量恆等性檢定，了解健康促進生活型態是否具有跨群體的信、效度，檢定健康促進生活型態的六個構面是否具備因素以及結構的恆等(factorial and structural invariance)，如果因素具備測量恆等性，則進行男女新生在此六個構面的因素平均數差異性比較。以國內某一大學的新生（包括大學部、研究所）為研究對象，男女樣本各為384人。研究結果顯示，模式良好適配更增強「健康促進生活型態中文簡式量表」的效度，因此「健康促進生活型態中文簡式量表」是一份可實行的(viable)以及可推廣的測量工具。在恆等性上，男女生模式具備形貌恆等，尺度、因素變異以及共變數恆等，但在營養及人際支持兩個因素，只具有部分截距恆等及兩道題信度不恆等。此外，平均數的檢定結果亦顯示，男生的運動生活型態優於女生,而女生的人際支持生活型態則優於男生。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the measurement invariance on Health-Promoting Life Profile (HPLP), to confirm the existence of cross-group reliability and validity, furthermore to examine if there were any factorial and structural invariance among 6 dimensions of HPLP. If the factors revealed measurement invariance, then compared the mean difference between males and females. The research subjects were students of one university's freshmen (including under and graduate students) in Taiwan, 384 samples for each of two genders. The results showed that high goodness of fit would promote the validity of Health Promotion Lifestyle Profile: Short Form (HPLP-S), therefore HPLP-S seemed to be a viable instrument of measurement in this study or future studies. Regarding the invariance, both genders presented configural invariance, metric invariance, factorial variance, and covariance invariance. The factors of nutrition and interpersonal support are only partial intercept invariance. Besides, there were two items showed reliability non-invariance. The factorial mean test displayed that the exercise life style was better in males than in females when females performed better in interpersonal support life style than males.起始頁-結束頁：453-478資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201109.04539篇名：「台灣憂鬱症量表」心理計量特質分析報告並列篇名：The Development and Psychometric Study of Taiwan Depression Scale作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);黃馨瑩(Hsin-Ying Huang);劉育如(Yu-Ju Liu)關鍵字：ROC曲線;台灣憂鬱症量表;結構方程式模型;憂鬱症;Depression;Receiver Operating Characteristic curve;structural equation modeling;Taiwan Depression Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在根據全人醫治取向，以及精神科醫生的臨床經驗，編製一份適合國人使用的自陳式憂鬱症量表－「台灣憂鬱症量表」。其包含認知、情緒、身體與人際等四個向度共22題，採用李克特氏四點量表計分方式。樣本來自大台北地區的憂鬱症患者213人，以及200名大學生，並以「CES-D憂鬱量表」作為效標，使用結構方程式模型進行量表信效度分析。研究結果顯示，本自編量表具良好的信效度，與「CES-D 憂鬱量表」之效標關聯效度達.92；以四個向度分數作為預測因子進行區別分析，得到93.46%的正確分類率，ROC曲線下的面積也高達.99，表示本量表具有相當良好的區別力。此外，本研究參考ROC分析結果，設定決斷分數為27分，以提供社會大眾憂鬱症初步篩檢之用。英文摘要：A Taiwanese Depression Scale (TDS) with four factors is newly developed based on the holistic approach to healing theory and empirical psychiatrists' diagnosis. These factors indicate cognitive, emotional, physical, and interpersonal. And 22 items in 4-point Likert-type format are included in this scale. The sample comprised 213 depression patients and 200 normal undergraduates. The results show that TDS is a reliable test with valid factor structures. Correlation between the TDS and CSE-D was .92. Besides, 93.46% of original grouped cases are correctly classified by discriminant analysis where the four subscale factors are used as predictors and the area under the ROC curve was .99. The ROC curves indicate a best effectiveness cut-off score of 27. TDS could be a useful instrument for evaluating depressive symptoms.起始頁-結束頁：479-500資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201109.047910篇名：「資優生休閒動機量表」之編製研究並列篇名：The Development of Leisure Motivation Scale for Gifted Students作者：李偉清(Wei-Ching Lee)關鍵字：休閒動機;資優生;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;gifted students;leisure motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在針對資優生編製一份具信效度之休閒動機量表，並比較不同背景資優生在此工具上是否具有組間不變性。研究者乃根據理論以自編之量表對國中小資優生進行調查，採分層隨機與叢集取樣合併之抽樣方式，共獲得有效樣本1,059份，再依分析的需要將此樣本隨機分為三等分。先以第一組樣本作探索性因素分析和項目分析，再以第二組樣本進行結構方程模式之驗證性因素分析，然後使用第三組樣本做此一測量模式之複核效化，最後則採多群組分析進行逐漸嚴苛之多層次檢驗。結果顯示：本量表因素結構良好、具有建構效度，信度考驗也達到令人滿意的標準，且蒐集的資料適配提出的理論模式，而模式的穩定性也通過了最寬鬆至最嚴苛之統計考驗，另本研究也證實了測量工具對不同背景之資優生均具有測量的恆等性。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to construct a reliable and valid Leisure Motivation Scale for Gifted Students and to compare whether there were groups invariance for the different background gifted students in this scale.Based on theories, a self-designed scale for gifted students was used to survey gifted students of the junior high and elementary schools. 1,059 valid samples were collected by the stratified random sampling and cluster sampling. The samples were divided into three sets by a random procedure. First, the first sample set was analyzed by item analysis and exploratory factor analysis. Moreover, the second sample set was analyzed by confirmatory factor analysis of structure equation modeling and the cross-validation was tested by the third sample set. Finally, the different levels of strictness multi-groups analysis were proceeded.The results showed that the factors had great structures and there were construction validities in this scale. The reliabilities of the data were satisfactory, too. The collected data fitted to the theoretical model and this stability of model passed the statistical tests from loose to tight replication strategies. In this study, measurement invariance was confirmed for gifted students with different background, too.起始頁-結束頁：501-530資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201109.050101篇名：法國教育研究的評析並列篇名：A Critical Analysis of Education Research in France作者：王秋絨(Chiou-Rong Wang)關鍵字：法國;教育研究;教育科學;教學論;France;education research;education science;pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在分析並批判自1833年至今的法國教育研究現況。為達此目的，本文運用歷史研究法、書目計量法加以研究，共獲得以下幾項結論：一、教育研究的「理論」與「實務」研究分立於大學教育科學系與師資培育學院（IUFM），為研究雙軌制。二、教育科學研究的發展具有多元的辯證制度化情形：教育科學發軔於1883年為配合教育政策的大學單一學科講座，直到教育歐洲、全球化證據為本的衝擊後，教育研究進入多元發展的跨學門（transdisplines）的研究時期，其研究方法論、認識論大多朝向單元與多元之間相互辯證的發展。三、教育科學及教學論的研究議題側重在「課程與教學、學生研究、教育學理論研究」，較少「教育改革、教育政策與行政」之研究。四、受到歐盟教育領導權力以及全球化知識經濟公民培育的競爭，法國教育科學及教學論之研究品質受到重視，因此，更為系統化與多元化，同時，後設分析等之教育科學研究的精緻化亦逐漸受到重視。此外，為因應歐盟國際化的影響，比較教育之文獻日益增加。英文摘要：Employing a historical approach and a bibliometric method, this paper offers a critical analysis of education research in France since 1833. The study yielded the following results: 1. A dual system of education characterizes the education research scenario in France, i.e. research in departments of education in the tertiary sector is more theory-oriented, while in College of Teacher Education Training (Institut Universitaire de Formation des Maitres, IUFM) it is more practice-oriented. 2. A multiple dialectical process concerning the development of education research has manifested itself in the institutionalization history of education science at universities. Since the establishment of the first university chair of education in 1883, a monolithic methodology has been the foundation of education. Due to the impact of global trends in evidence-based research and policy-making, transdisciplinary research has emerged in education studies adopting pluralistic methodologies. 3. From the perspective of the most commonly researched topics, more studies have been conducted on the topics of ”curriculum & instruction,” ”students” and ”educational theory,” while studies on the themes of ”education reform” and ”educational policy and administration” are fewer. 4. After the Bologna Process, high-quality of education science and pedagogy have received much greater emphasis, leading to an increase in studies on systematic and meta-analytic studies on related education research, especially comparative education research.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1904.012篇名：論行動研究論文審查上的一些問題並列篇名：Issues Concerning the Review of Action Research Papers作者：潘世尊(Thie-Tzuen Pan)關鍵字：行動研究;行動研究品質;行動研究價值;action research;quality in action research;value of action research期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：近十幾年來，行動研究在國內教育領域之發展，甚為迅速，然而，學術期刊論文的審查者，可能以其他研究取向之規準來評估行動研究，長此以往，將不利於行動研究、教育實務及教育學之發展。因此，筆者試著針對行動研究論文審查上的一些問題，加以探究。首先，簡要說明行動研究之內涵，以做為分析與討論之基礎；其次，分從「品質」與「價值」這兩個向度，闡明若干有關行動研究論文審查之參考項目與應注意事項。在品質部分，筆者探究的焦點與結果攸關行動研究之「研究活動的內容」與「研究報告的形式」之評估；在價值部分，則涉及「學術」與「應用」價值之檢視。最後，筆者建議學者們在審查行動研究論文時，需對其精神與特質有所瞭解，且不宜堅持運用植基於其他研究取向之評估標準，方能儘量避免偏誤的產生。英文摘要：Over the past ten years, action research has rapidly developed within the field of education in Taiwan. However, when researchers who employed an action research approach submit a manuscript for review, they sometimes discover that reviewers of academic journals employ criteria based on other research approaches to assess the action research manuscript. If this continues, the development of action research, educational practice, and pedagogy will be negatively affected. This study examined the issues involved in the review of action research papers. First, the action research approach is explained, and will be used as the basis of further analysis and discussion. Secondly, some referable and noteworthy aspects regarding the review of action research papers are put forward in terms of ”quality” and ''value''. The focus of the study was on the research topics often examined in action research studies, and the style adopted in manuscripts about action research. The academic and practical value of action research papers was also discussed. Finally, it is suggested that reviewers of action research papers need to understand the goals and characteristics of action research, and should not persist ill employing assessment criteria based on other academic paradigms. Ultimately it is hoped that the utilization of inappropriate criteria to review action research papers will be reduced.起始頁-結束頁：41-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1904.023篇名：學校創新氣氛、教師內在動機與教師創意教學表現關聯之研究：多層次調節式中介效果之探討並列篇名：The Relationship between Schools' Climate of Creativity, Teachers' Intrinsic Motivation, and Teachers' Creative Teaching Performance: A Discussion of Multilevel Moderated Mediation作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：多層次調節中介效果;師內在動機;創意教學表現;學校創新氣氛;multilevel moderated mediation;teachers' intrinsic motivation;teachers' creative teaching performance;schools' climate of creativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究是在多層次中介效果模式的設定下，延伸到跨層次交互作用，檢驗多層次調節中介效果模式。實證資料以個體層次之內在動機與總體層次之學校創新氣氛為自變數，探討兩者對教師創意教學表現的影響，其中，教師內在動機包含專業自主、接受挑戰、福樂經驗等三大構面。透過對35所國小、216位教師的調查，使用HLM分析變數之間的關係。研究結果發現如下：一、專業自主、接受挑戰、福樂經驗及學校創新氣氛均對創意教學表現有顯著的直接正向影響效果；二、學校創新氣氛在接受挑戰與創意教學表現之間扮演負向調節效果；但在褔樂經驗與創意教學表現之間扮演正向調節效果；三、學校創新氣氛也可透過專業自主、接受挑戰、福樂經驗的中介作用而對創意教學表現產生影響，也就是說，專業自主是中介變項，而接受挑戰與福樂經驗除了是中介變項之外，也是被調節的變項。針對上述結果，本研究提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：The proposed model was conceptualized by integrating the ideas of multilevel mediation together with an analysis of cross-level interaction. This study focused on the influences of intrinsic motivation and schools' climate of creativity on the creative teaching performance of teachers. The participants consisted of 216 teachers from 35 elementary schools in Taiwan. Findings include: (1) professional self-actualization, challenge tendency, flow experience, and schools' climate of creativity positively affected creative teaching performance. (2) schools' climate of creativity played a role of negative moderating effects in the explanation for the relationships among challenge tendency and creative teaching performance of teachers, but schools' climate of creativity also played a role of positive moderating effects in the explanation for the relationships among flow experience and creative teaching performance of teachers. (3) professional self-actualization, challenge tendency, and flow experience have a significant mediation effect on the prediction relationship of schools' climate of creativity on the creative teaching performance of teachers. In other words, autonomy, challenge tendency and flow experience played a role of mediation, and challenge tendency, flow experience played a role of moderation. Based on the results, the study also provided some discussions and suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：85-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1904.034篇名：學生教育抱負與學習成就關係之研究：長期追蹤資料之分析並列篇名：The Relationship between the Educational Aspirations of Students and Their Learning Achievements: An Analysis of Panel Data作者：陳俊瑋(Chun-Wei Chen)關鍵字：長期追蹤交叉延宕模式;潛在成長曲線模式;學生教育抱負;學習成就;cross-lagged panel modeling;latent growth curve modeling;educational aspirations of students;learning achievements期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討學生教育抱負與學習成就之相互影響效果、學生教育抱負與學習成就個別潛在成長變化，以及學生教育抱負與學習成就之潛在成長變化的關係。本研究利用結構方程模式的長期追蹤交叉延宕模式與潛在成長曲線模式，分析「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」2001年、2003年、2005年及2007年追蹤樣本學生（n = 1,651）的資料。研究結果發現，學生教育抱負與學習成就存在相互影響效果。其次，學生教育抱負初始狀態與學生教育抱負成長速率呈顯著正相關；學習成就初始狀態與學習成就成長速率也呈顯著正相關。再者，學生教育抱負初始狀態對學習成就成長速率有顯著正向的影響效果；學習成就初始狀態對學生教育抱負成長速率也有顯著正向的影響效果。英文摘要：The objective of this study was to explore the relationship between the educational aspirations of students and their learning achievements. Structural equation modeling with cross-lagged panel modeling and latent growth curve modeling were used to analyze the core panel sample (n = 1,651) data of the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS) in 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2007. Results of this study show that the cross-lagged effect of the educational aspirations of students predicting their subsequent learning achievements was statistically significant, and the cross-lagged effect of learning achievements predicting their subsequent educational aspirations was also statistically significant. Moreover, the correlation between the initial status and the growth rate of the educational aspirations of students was positive; the correlation between the initial status and the growth rate of learning achievements was also positive. Additionally, the initial status of the educational aspirations of students positively predicted the growth rate of learning achievements, and the initial status of learning achievements positively predicted the growth rate of the educational aspirations of students.起始頁-結束頁：127-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1904.045篇名：豐子愷童心觀的概念分析及其於教育上之應用並列篇名：A Concept Analysis of Zi-Kai Feng's Theory of the Naive Mind and Its Applications for Education作者：李崗(Kang Lee)關鍵字：童心;豐子愷;同情;率真;概念分析;the Naive Mind;Zi-Kai Feng;sympathy;authenticity;concept analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在透過概念分析的方法，釐清豐子愷先生的童心觀究竟所指為何，同時也從當代教育的角度，詮釋其思想之理論涵義與應用之道。主要的論證過程如下：首先，考察海峽兩岸的相關文獻，指出目前研究成果之間的論爭與矛盾。第一，童心有時被視為一種童年經驗，有時又被視為一種人生理想。第二，有人將童心解釋為順應自然，有人卻將童心解釋為抗拒社會。第三，有人認為好奇心就是童心，有人認為創造力才是童心。第四，有人主張童心是個性的展現，有人主張童心是佛心的狀態。其次，回歸豐氏著作原典的引述與分析，本文企圖證成豐子愷歌頌的童心，其實是人人皆可擁有的一種生命情調。兒童常常不待教化已渾然天成，成人則需放下偏見以反璞歸真。不過，問題的關鍵並不在於年齡，造成差異的主要原因是眼光與心態。總括來說，其童心觀蘊含四項規準：一是「率真」，指人願意公開顯露自然的本性；二是「同情」，指人願意對世間一切現象都感同身受；三是「健全」，指人願意一視同仁地觀看世間事物的真相；四是「大人」，指人願意不為物誘且通達萬變地待人處事。進而，說明豐氏思想與西方當代教育思潮的關係，一方面指出其童心觀並非受到Rousseau或Dewey的影響，另一方面發現Nietzsche與Montessori的主張與豐氏之童心觀有其相似之處。最後，針對豐氏童心觀於教育上之應用，提出若干具體建議：就師資培育而言，應教導實習教師正視童心的教育涵義，並且藉由童話閱讀、絕緣、涵養趣味、全新的心等方式來培養自己的童心；就家庭教育而言，父母應避免兒童的成人化，包括態度、服裝、玩具、家庭生活等四大面向，才能妥善保留孩子的童心，以免在成長過程中消磨殆盡。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to analyze Zi-Kai Feng's philosophy of the Naive Mind, and to illuminate the application of his writings in education. First, the author distinguishes the Naive Mind from the Sophisticated Mind by four questions: (a) Would the person like to reveal his or her attitude publicly? (b) Is the person sympathetic to everything in the world? (c) Can the person perceive the holistic reality without prejudice? and (d) Is the person virtuous or not. Second, Zi-Kai Feng presents his views on cultivation of personality in many different places within his writings about stories, but he does not develop a single, coherent treatment of the topic. Therefore, the present author attempts to construct a systematic framework for understanding and interpreting Zi-Kai Feng's philosophy, literary works, and educational methods. Finally, some suggestions on teacher education and family education in Taiwan are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1903.016篇名：學業層面之參與、抱負、自我效能及緊張因素對初次偏差行為影響之縱貫性研究並列篇名：A Longitudinal Research on the Effects of Involvement, Commitment, Self-efficacy, and Strain from Academic Aspect on Onset of Delinquency作者：張楓明(Feng-Ming Chang)關鍵字：初次偏差行為;學業參與;學業抱負;學業自我效能;學業緊張;onset of delinquency;academic involvement;academic commitment;academic self-efficacy;academic strain期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：國內將研究焦點聚集於初次偏差行為的實證研究較少，且鑑於先前實證研究仍未有採用較完整而具系統性的動態分析觀點及技術，對學業層面之參與、抱負、自我效能及緊張因素對國中生初次偏差行為之影響力進行深入探討者。因此，本研究嘗試運用動態分析觀點及技術，而以一個較完整之學業多元層面取向架構，探討參與、抱負、自我效能及緊張因素與國中生初次偏差行為發生之因果關聯性。本研究採取縱貫研究策略，利用自陳問卷調查法，選取嘉義市八所國民中學學生為研究對象，共計完成縱貫調查之樣本數為415人。統計分析方法採用事件史分析法，而時間效應之變異性為重要之自變項，本研究將時間轉換為時間1（2009年9月迄12月）、時間2（2010年1月迄3月）及時間3（2010年4月迄6月）等三個虛擬變項。研究結果發現，就整個國中一年級而言，學業參與、學業抱負及學業緊張與初次偏差行為存在著關聯性。其中，學業參與及學業抱負對其初次偏差行為的發生具有抑制性影響力，而學業緊張則與初次偏差行為間存在著正向關聯性。此外，學業緊張對初次偏差行為發生之效應在時間1比時間2及時間3具較高的影響力。英文摘要：Few empirical studies in Taiwan have focused on the factors involved in the onset of delinquency in junior high school students. Moreover, previous empirical studies have rarely used complete, systematic, and dynamic analytical techniques to test the effects of academic involvement, academic commitment, academic selfefficacy, and academic strain on delinquency in junior high schools students. Therefore, this study endeavored to apply a more complete academic framework and used dynamic techniques to determine how involvement, commitment, self-efficacy, and strain affected the onset of delinquency in students at the junior high school level. Using a longitudinal approach, this study used self-report questionnaires to collect data from 415 students in eight junior high schools in Chiayi City. Event history analysis was used to analyze the collected data. The impact of various times was a meaningful independent variable, and it was dummy coded into three variables: Time 1 (September-December 2009), Time 2 (January-March 2010), and Time 3 (April- June 2010). Findings indicated that academic involvement, academic commitment, and academic strain were related to the onset of delinquency during the entire first year in junior high school. Moreover, academic involvement and academic commitment was able to limit the onset of delinquency, and there was a positive relationship between academic strain and the onset of delinquency. Additionally, academic strain had a differential impact on the onset of delinquency in the three different time periods. The effect of academic strain on the onset of delinquency in Time 1 was greater than that in Time 2 and Time 3.起始頁-結束頁：39-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1903.027篇名：敘事課程之文本選擇與組織原則探究並列篇名：The Principles of Selecting Narrative Texts and Content Organization for a Narrative Curriculum作者：簡良平(Liang-Ping Jian)關鍵字：識能;敘事文本;敘事課程;Literacy;narrative text;narrative curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文目的在論述敘事課程內容的文本選擇原則與課程組織原則，主要以敘事文本為範疇，藉以引導學童進入敘事理解與敘事活動，達成提升其語文識能的目標。敘事文本選擇區分為內容選擇及形式選擇，前者包含符合教育目的之道德與智識內涵、學童社會認同與文化理解需求、心理發展與情意滿足等原則的判斷；後者，係指敘事文本形式選擇，乃評選其是否具備敘事要素、敘事結構、敘事言說特質表達完整的意義，適合學童演練敘事理解策略及參與敘事活動者。課程組織以順序性及統整性考量，前者參照學童概念認知與心理發展階段、敘事文本知識內涵與言說形態，連續組織敘事文本順序；後者統整性組織指主題閱讀規劃，由文本含括議題連結學童生活經驗及其他領域的知識學習，或篩選敘事文本脈絡的社會問題作為探索標的，發展應用知識於讀、寫敘事活動，提升解決問題的行動力，敘事成為課程實施架構。本文討論課程慎思原則，希冀教師課程決定之際多與參照，考量融入學校課程系統，提升敘事課程實踐性。英文摘要：The purposes of this paper are to connect the concepts of literacy, text and curriculum, and to focus on exploring the principles of choosing narrative texts and organizing them into a narrative curriculum. Text content is evaluated to examine if the meanings of the narrative text content meet educational goals, to examine how the narrators form social context and guide the audit to confirm self-identity and social identity, and to examine how text content affects student thinking in developing optimistic emotions through reading activities. When choosing narrative text forms, one must evaluate the narrative elements, narrative structure, and narrative styles all in the text context, and determine if the narrator connected every part to the entire meaning of the story.The principle of organizing narrative curriculum content requires an exploration of the relationships between the structure of narrative texts and the stages of children’s literacy development. Teachers can develop a thematic curriculum in order to encourage reading narrative texts in sequence, and design an integrated curriculum through asking questions from the context of stories, choosing one of the questions to form the exploring activities across other disciplines, and finding the resolution with their students so as to react with reading and writing in real situations. Finally, we can elevate students’ literacy through narrative curriculum implementation in the school system.起始頁-結束頁：83-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1903.038篇名：教育行政「潛規則」之理論探討與概念模式建構並列篇名：A Theoretical Investigation and Construction of the Conceptual Model of "Hidden Rules" in Educational Administration作者：陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen)關鍵字：潛規則;正式規則;教育行政;educational administration;hidden rules;formal rules期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：組織的實際運作除了依靠正式規則加以規範以外，事實上，還另外盛行著一套「潛規則」。潛規則即是為人們所默認、遵從、只做不說、隱匿在正式規則下的一套行為規範。在教育行政的組織脈絡中，如果非正式組織與正式組織得以分庭抗禮，同為領導者關注的兩大場域，那麼衍生而出的潛規則當亦與正式規則勢均力敵，一起影響組織發展興衰和效能良窳。針對潛規則此一新名詞所代表的舊現象，雖然百家爭鳴，各路觀點薈萃，但因為其尚未成熟發展出一套完整的獨立論述，本研究即從初步整理潛規則的對應理論入手，繼而據以建構一組教育行政潛規則的概念模式。本研究歸納出複雜理論、交易成本理論、派系理論與社會交換理論為潛規則的代表性立論基礎。與之同時，本研究所建構之潛規則概念模式涵蓋潛規則的起因、類別、與正式規則的關係、操作形態和影響等主要面向。本研究以提出潛規則在教育行政所具有的啟示作結。英文摘要：In addition to formal rules that publicly maintain organizational operations on a daily basis, in fact, there exist other kinds of ”hidden rules” in organizations that privately dominate members’ interactions. The so-called ”hidden rules” are the behaviors and regulations that are obeyed, tacitly recognized, done without saying by members, and concealed under formal rules. Within the organizational context of educational administration, if the informal organization is considered as critical as the formal organization, and both equivalently draw leaders’ major attention, then the hidden rules, to a great degree, are tantamount to the formal rules, and both have a major impact on organizational development and effectiveness. Given that the current theoretical discourse for ”hidden rules” is not yet fully developed, this paper therefore begins with discussing the corresponding theories of hidden rules, and then constructs a comprehensive conceptual model of hidden rules accordingly. As a result, the four theories of complexity, transaction cost, faction, and social exchange are incorporated into the theoretical foundation of hidden rules. Meanwhile, the five dimensions of cause, type, relationships with formal rules, operational patterns, and influences are included to build the conceptual model of hidden rules. This paper concludes by proposing theories related to hidden rules, as well as practical implications of hidden rules on educational administration.起始頁-結束頁：121-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1903.049篇名：書評－《校長教學領導：理論與實踐》並列篇名：A Book Review on Militello, M., Rallis, S. F., & Goldring, E. B., Leading with Inquiry & Action: How Principals Improve Teaching and Learning作者：李安明(An-Min Li);謝傳崇(Chuan-Chung Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：161-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心10篇名：德國大學理念與教學範式之轉變並列篇名：The Transformation of Ideas and Teaching Paradigms in German Universities作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：德國高等教育;洪堡理念;波隆納進程;系統理論;German higher education;Humboldt;Bologna Process;systems theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文透過文件與相關文獻之分析，探討德國大學理念與教學範式之轉變，尤其是Humboldt與波隆納進程之大學理念與教學範式之差異。本文首先探討二者之大學理念及其教學範式，其次析論學者從洪堡觀點對前者之批判，最後再探究二者差異的實質意義，並提出一種辯證性綜合。在洪堡的大學理念中，大學為完全從事學術研究的機構，其教學範式屬於「研究依附型」，在波隆納進程中，其教學範式標舉職業能力與模組化課程，大學理念由Humboldt觀點轉向Hayek之自由市場與競爭範式。相應地，高等學校的組織型態也由「學者共和國」邁向學術性「給付企業體」。最後，本文經由盧曼系統理論之觀點，探討Humboldt與波隆納陣營間之爭辯，是中上階層的「教養市民層」與中下階層的「力爭上游層」之爭，亦為「教育是一項公民權利」與「教養市民層的權利」間之對抗；二者之差異應朝向一種辯證性的綜合發展，亦即，「通過學術進行教育」（洪堡觀點）+「為職業而受教育」（波隆納進程）=「以學術研究促進職業培訓」。英文摘要：Through an examination of documents and the relevant literature, this study investigates the different ideas and teaching paradigms of the traditional Humboldt educational system in Germany, and changes that have been experienced as a result of the Bologna Process. Firstly, the ideas and teaching paradigms associated with Humboldt and the Bologna Process are discussed. Secondly, criticism of the Bologna Process by scholars who support the approach of Humboldt is presented. Finally, the differences between the two approaches are addressed, which leads to a discussion of a dialectical synthetic. In the ideas of Humboldt, university is absolutely engaged in academic research and the teaching paradigm is associated with the academic development of students. However, as a result of the Bologna Process, the teaching paradigm has shifted to an emphasis on professional abilities and modularization. Thus the focus of university has moved from the views of Humboldt to the approach of Hayek, where the free market and competition are emphasized. As a result, the organization of a university has shifted from promoting a scholarly republic to an academic service enterprise. Drawing on the perspective of Niklas Luhmann's Systems Theory, the final part of the paper explores the idea that the debate between Humboldt and the Bologna Process is the debate between educated citizens of the upper class and those of lower social classes who are upwardly mobile. This can also be viewed as a conflict between those who believe that education is a right of citizenship and the rights of educated citizens. The difference between them should evolve toward a kind of dialectical synthetic-''using academics for education” + ”receiving education for professional purposes” = ”using academic research to promote professional training.”起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1902.0101篇名：互動式電子白板教室環境感受量表之發展並列篇名：Development of the ”Learning Environment Scale for Interactive Whiteboard Classroom (LES-IWBC)”作者：楊凱悌(Kai-Ti Yang);王子華(Tzu-Hua Wang);邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu)關鍵字：互動式電子白板;互動式電子白板教室環境感受量表;學習環境;interactive whiteboard;learning environment scale for interactive whiteboard classroom (LES-IWBC);learning environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著資訊與通訊技術（Information and Communication Technology, ICT）的快速發展，將互動式電子白板（Interactive Whiteboard, IWB）導入課室教學環境已成為未來趨勢。本研究旨在發展「互動式電子白板教室環境感受量表」，以量測學生對此一新興教育科技營造之學習環境的感受。本研究以Maor與Fraser之「建構式多媒體學習環境量表」（Constructivist Multimedia Learning Environment Survey, CMLES）為基礎來發展「互動式電子白板教室環境感受量表」。量表初稿共30題，經專家審查並針對222位國中一、二年級學生實施預試後，採用因素分析法考驗構念效度，正式量表共23題，包含「學習溝通」（5題）、「學習探究」（3題）、「學習思考」（5題）、「關聯性」（4題）、「易用性」（3題）和「挑戰性」（3題）六個分量表。量表累積總變異量為70.7%，Cronbach α為.923。英文摘要：With the rapid development of Information and Communication Technology (ICT), integrating the Interactive Whiteboard (IWB) into traditional classroom teaching has been a trend. The purpose of this study is to develop the ”Learning Environment Scale for Interactive Whiteboard Classroom (LES-IWBC)” for assessing students' perceptions about the learning environment equipped with IWB. This study refers to the ”Constructivist Multimedia Learning Environment Survey (CMLES)” to develop the LES-IWBC. The original version of LES-IWBC is composed of 30 items. It is reviewed by experts and tested by 222 junior high school students. We adopt factor analysis to do data analysis and delete unsuitable items. The final version of LES-IWBC contains 23 items including six sub-scales, ”Learning to Communicate” (5 items), ”Learning to Investigate” (3 items), ”Learning to Think” (5 items), ”Relevance” (4 items), ”Ease to Use” (3 items) and ”Challenge” (3 items). The cumulative percentage of variance of LES-IWBC is 70.7 %. The Cronbach α of LES-IWBC is .923.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會2篇名：於微型部落格運用問題導向學習模式之探討並列篇名：The Investigations of Adopting Problem-Based Learning Model in Micro-Blog作者：陳鴻仁(Hong-Ren Chen);黃淑賢(Shu-Hsien Huang);張世明(Shih-Ming Chang);吳婷婷(Ting-Ting Wu);黃悅民(Yueh-Min Huang)關鍵字：問題導向學習;部落格;微型部落格;Problem-Based Learning;Blog;Micro-Blog期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：現今高科技網路普及化的時代，網路互動平臺已具有即時性及高互動性的服務，其系統的再利用性及共享性功能，不僅受到一般大眾的喜愛，線上開放原始碼（open source），更能依照個別需求修改程式，亦是目前教學中運用最廣的教學輔助工具。目前許多研究均顯示，以部落格為教學輔助學習系統其學習成效多為正向，且在微型部落格（Micro-Blog, Microlog）中運用問題導向學習之教學策略皆有良好的成效，但大部分之研究多探討運用部落格為教學平臺並分析其學習成效，鮮少以微型部落格進行探討。因此，本研究以微型部落格為學習平臺，並以問題導向學習模式為教學活動，主要探討以問題導向學習與微型部落格的應用結果，分析內容包含：一、探討學生接受不同教學方式，在學習成效上之顯著差異；二、探討不同學習成就之學生融入微型部落格問題導向式學習之顯著差異；三、探討學習者對於使用微型部落格以問題導向學習模式在學習上的成效分析。其實驗結果顯示，使用微型部落格之學習小組皆優於部落格學習小組，以不同學習成就之中、高成就之學生而言，使用微型部落格或部落格平臺學習沒有顯著差異，表示兩種平臺不影響中、高成就學生的學習，但低成就之學生使用微型部落格則優於部落格學習。因此，未來在課堂中可使用微型部落格平臺進行問題導向學習之教學，以利發揮平臺的功效並提升學習之成效。英文摘要：In high-tech information era, online interactive platform provides immediate and highly interactive services. Reuse and share of the system are popular; moreover, it offers open source and modifies the program according to individual needs. It is currently the most commonly used teaching tool. At present, many studies demonstrate that learning effectiveness of Blog as instruction-supported learning system tends to be positive. Moreover, learning strategies of Problem-Based Learning (PBL) in Micro-Blog (Microlog) are usually good. However, most of researches probe into elementary school students' use of Blog as instructional platform, and analyze the learning effectiveness and few of them study junior high school students' use of Micro-Blog. Therefore, this study treats Micro- Blog as the learning platform and PBL as the instructional activity to explore junior high school students' learning effectiveness in information ethics course and analyze their satisfaction. Include: 1. Students accepted different teaching methods in information ethics courses in junior high school have significant differences. 2. Different students accepted different teaching methods in information ethics courses in junior high school have significant differences. 3. The Investigate effectiveness of using Micro-Blog for the PBL. The overall experimental result suggested that according to posttest score of achievement test of information ethics course, performance of PBL by Micro-Blog is superior to Blog. Regarding students with different learning achievements, for medium and high-achievement students, PBL by Micro-Blog or Blog does not influence their learning effect. However, for low-achievement students, learning effectiveness of PBL by Micro- Blog is more significant than Blog. The result demonstrates that these two platforms are different for low-achievement students. Thus, future classrooms can use Micro-Blog for the PBL, and they will certainly obtain better learning effectiveness and fulfill the effect of Micro-Blog.起始頁-結束頁：19-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會3篇名：觸控顯示手寫板應用於國中生物教學之成效－以細胞單元為例並列篇名：The Learning Effectiveness of ”Alternatively Interactive Whiteboard” Integrate into Junior High School Biology Teaching: An Example of the Cell Unit作者：鄭富中(Fu-Chung Cheng);楊景盛(Ching-Sheng Yang);林素華(Shu-Hua Lin)關鍵字：互動性媒體;互動式電子白板;學習動機;學習成就;interactive media;Interactive Whiteboard;motivation;achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，具有互動功能的互動性媒體日益發展，其中強調互動的互動式電子白板（Interactive Whiteboard, IWB）逐漸的成為資訊融入教育的媒體新寵，但受限於數量以及價格之因素，在臺灣仍無法普及；而本研究擬以價格較IWB便宜之互動性媒體－「觸控顯示手寫板」，針對國中學生學習有困難之「細胞」單元設計教材並進行教學，採準實驗研究設計，評估此種替代IWB之互動性媒體於教學上之效益。樣本選取中部地區國中學生共197人為受試對象，分為「觸控顯示手寫板教學實驗組」、「PPT教學對照組」、「傳統教學對照組」，先進行國中生物細胞單元學習成就測驗以及學習動機量表的前測，3週的細胞單元教學後進行國中生物細胞單元學習成就測驗以及學習動機量表的後測，並進行實驗組學生的學習感受問卷調查。研究結果發現，雖然學習動機方面，男學生顯著高於女學生，但實驗組與對照組進行教學後，學習成就皆有顯著提升，而男學生在觸控顯示手寫板實驗組中有較好的學習成就。在感受方面，學生表現了正向的感受，因此在科技發展、設備擴充前，觸控顯示手寫板不失為一互動性媒體的選擇。英文摘要：Recently, the interaction mediums are well developed. Interactive Whiteboard (IWB) is one of interaction medium and it emphasize in the interaction between students and teachers. As the result, IWB becomes a new technique using in education; however, it can not available to all because of its price and quantity in Taiwan. Alternatively Interaction Whiteboard is one kind of interaction media and it is cheaper the most IWB; hence, to evaluate the benefit of Alternatively Interaction Whiteboard using in education, a quasi-experiment is designed with ”cell” unit and Alternatively Interactive Whiteboard is used in class. 197 students from midland of Taiwan are choose as samples. They are classifying into three groups as follow: Alternatively Interactive Whiteboard teaching group, PPT teaching group and traditional teaching group, whereas PPT teaching and traditional teaching are controls. In the beginning, students have already completed the pre-test of learning achievement and motivation questionnaire. After three weeks for teaching students, they have taken the post test of achievement and motivation questionnaire. In addition, the perception questionnaire had collected from experiment group. To understand their learning perception, interviews are also taken with students The results indicate that both experimental group and control group significantly improve learning achievement after teaching, but male students had better achievement in experiment group. In motivation, male students had statistical difference to female students, and in perception, students had positive perception in class. Hence, Alternatively Interaction Whiteboard might be a choice when the schools need to purchase some interaction mediums products.起始頁-結束頁：43-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會4篇名：A Study of an Inquiry-Based Learning Approach on College Students' Online Problem-Solving Abilities並列篇名：探究式學習法對大學生線上問題解決能力之研究作者：李建億(Chien-I Lee);謝曜謙(Yao-Chien Hsieh);黃國禎(Gwo-Jen Hwang)關鍵字：cognitive styles;inquiry-based learning;problem-solving ability;web-based learning;認知風格;探究式學習;問題解決能力;線上學習期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：Improving students' web-based problem-solving ability has been recognized as an important and challenging issue before they enter job market. This study aims to explore the problem-solving effectiveness and learning attitude of college students toward applying a web-based learning system (Meta-Analyzer) within an inquiry learning activity. Fifty three first-year college students of Business Administration Department participated in the study to experience the intervention of the system. However, it is unsure whether such a learning mechanism is suitable to every learner. Thus, this study examines the effects of human factors on problem-solving effectiveness within the web-based inquiry learning context. Among various human factors, this study focuses on cognitive styles, especially Witken's Field Dependence. The results indicate that Field Independent learners can get great benefits from the learning mechanism. Discussions on how to accommodate the needs of different cognitive styles groups are provided based on the results.英文摘要：強化學生線上問題解決能力一直被視為是進入職場前重要的問題。本研究主要目的在探討，應用網路搜尋行為輔助測驗與分析系統的探究式學習活動，對大學生的線上問題解決能力與態度的影響。共計60位大學一年級學生參與此研究。然而，這樣的學習機制並不能確定適合每位學生，因此本研究將針對不同認知風格的學生進行學習成效分析。研究結果顯示，場地獨立學習者在這樣的學習機制下獲得學習成效顯著優於場地依賴的學生。最後，基於研究發現針對不同學習風格群體提出處方性建議。起始頁-結束頁：65-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會5篇名：免費部落格平臺應用於建立高等教育電子學習歷程檔案之研究並列篇名：Exploring Uses of Free Blogs for E-Portfolio Setup in Higher Education作者：洪暉鈞(Hui-Chun Hung);吳佳珊(Chia-Shan Wu);楊叔卿(Shelley Shwu-Ching Young)關鍵字：計畫行為理論;高等教育;部落格;電子學習歷程檔案;theory of planned behavior;higher education;Blog;E-Portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來部落格（Blog）的風行與技術的進步，除可作為個人記錄工具，更結合多媒體影音及社交功能。本研究分析臺灣各大免費部落格平臺的功能，從文獻歸納E-Portfolio所需之系統功能。並以「計畫行為理論」為基礎，透過問卷蒐集與焦點訪談等方式，了解臺灣高等教育學生對於使用E-Portfolio系統的需求與動機。研究結果顯示部落格所提供的功能，幾乎支持電子歷程檔案的「蒐集」、「互動」、「應用」建置三階段，證實兩者在系統功能的相關性。此外，可從「行為信念」、「成效評估」、「外部誘因」、「群體影響」等變因來滿足學生在E-Portfolio系統的使用需求。本研究最後提供教師與學生在使用上的相關建議，期待師生能善用部落格著重於互動及分享的特點，並加入第三方網路服務的應用，建置自己的E-portfolio。英文摘要：Based on the popularization of Blog and the advancement of internet technologies, Blog is not only for posting photos and articles but also support music, video and even social interaction service. The functions Blog supported may be potential to meet what E-Portfolio needs. In this paper, to recognize if we could build E-Portfolio using Blog platform or not, we review the related reference, analyze the main functions of the E-Portfolio system. Moreover, to analyze the needs and motivations of using E-Portfolio, college students participated in this study by the questionnaire and the small group interview based on the theory of planned behavior. The results show the free Blog has the potential to be a platform of E-Portfolio supported by the function of collection, interaction, and application. We could meet students’ demands, according to the inner and outer factors from their behavioral beliefs, outcome evaluations and normative beliefs, if we using Blog to build E-Portfolio. This paper also describes a guideline and makes recommendation of how to use Blog for E-Portfolio.起始頁-結束頁：1-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會6篇名：從家長的數位應用表現探討偏遠學校設置數位機會中心之效益並列篇名：The Study of the Influences of DOC in Remote Schools on Students Parents' Digital Applications作者：林燕珍(Yen-Chen Lin);林怡均(Yi-Chun Lin);趙涵捷(Han-Chieh Chao)關鍵字：資訊近用;數位落差;數位機會;數位機會中心;digital divide;information access;digital opportunity;digital opportunity center期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：為改善臺灣數位落差的問題，教育部自2007年起擴大結合偏遠學校資源，設置「數位機會中心」（簡稱DOC），擬提供家長與民眾資訊近用機會、並增進其資訊素養與應用。本文描述學校設置DOC的目的和功能，調查偏遠國中、小學校學生家長個人的資訊近用、資訊素養和資訊應用情況，以及探究學校設置DOC對於家長的資訊應用程度有無顯著的差異。本研究問卷調查943所偏遠學校的學生家長，計回收23,467份，以描述性統計與t 檢定分析問卷資料。結果顯示，偏遠學校家長曾使用電腦且有上網經驗的比率僅有54.3%，應用電腦發電子郵件、電腦簡易故障的排除、進行文書處理等的使用比例皆不高。而有設置DOC的鄰近學生家長，家戶有電腦、連網比率都較無設置DOC為低。但在學校設置DOC對家長使用電子郵件、上網找資料和網路設定使用上，確實頗有助益，有設置DOC學校的家長也較常使用線上傳呼軟體、經常上網瀏覽部落格、經營個人部落格、自行設計網頁等的應用，且亦經常上網提供知識或經驗給他人參考。最後，建議DOC仍可結合學校適度開放服務家長，但政府有關單位應規劃指導DOC營運，以有效提升偏遠學校設置DOC的效益，達成資源共享的目標。英文摘要：In order to improve Taiwan's digital divide issue, the Ministry of Education set the ”Digital Opportunity Centers” (DOCs). Since 2007. the plan of DOC has combined with expanded resources in remote schools, provided opportunities for parents and citizens in information access, and promoted information literacy and application. The main purpose of this article is to indicate the mission and function of the DOCs. Additionally, the survey in remote country schools regarding parents' personal usage of computer, information literacy and information applications. This investigation also explored whether there are significant differences existing between those parents' information application in the schools having DOC and those in the schools having no DOC. The target of the questionnaire was those parents in 943 remote schools, and 23,467 questionnaires in total were collected. The study adopted t test statistical analysis to examine the data. The results showed that the computer usage rate of those parents in remote schools was 54.3%. In addition, the amount of computers with internet in the schools set DOC is less than the amount in the schools set no DOC. Households without a computer networking parents, but there are many items of the questionnaire, such as using email, internet, and blog, showed that those parents' information literacy and application in the DOCs are higher than other parents. Finally, combining the school resources to set DOC is recommended to be conducted. However, in order to enhance the effects of DOC and to achieve the aim of resource sharing, it is important for the government to direct the operation of DOC.起始頁-結束頁：17-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會7篇名：從知覺玩興探討擴充實境導入國小藝術與人文學習領域之成效並列篇名：Effectiveness Analysis of Integrating Augmented Reality into Learning Domain of Arts and Humanities: A Perspective of User Playfulness作者：林信志(Hsin-Chih Lin);湯凱雯(Kai-Wen Tang);彭郁雅(Yu-Ya Peng)關鍵字：知覺玩興;科技接受模式;資訊融入教學;擴充實境;perceived playfulness;technology acceptance model;IT-integrated instruction;augmented reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以擴充實境（Augmented Reality, AR）建置一套國小藝術與人文學習領域中，關於聖誕節的數位教材，並利用虛擬物件呈現、高度互動性、簡易重製、可攜帶性、低成本等優勢，提供該領域教師新的教學模式，也提升學生學習興趣與吸收程度；此外，本研究以科技接受模式（technology acceptance model）探討AR導入藝術與人文學習領域之成效。研究結果顯示：「知覺玩興」是影響使用者行為相當重要的因素；使用者對於學習操作AR教具是感到輕鬆容易的，且對AR教具也保持著一定的專注度與好奇感，但須改善模型流暢呈現之問題，才能降低使用者的挫折感；對於初次接觸AR教具的使用者必須提供協助，使其了解AR技術對自我學習的影響及本身對AR技術的需求。英文摘要：In this study, we adopt augmented reality (AR) to perform a teaching experiment for the learning domain of arts and humanities. Our AR material deals with the Christmas holiday and the participants are fourth-grade students in an elementary school. Afterward Technology Acceptance Model is applied to analyze the effectiveness of integrating AR into the experiment. Especially we emphasize the analysis from the perspective of user playfulness. The result of this study is as follows: Most students agree that AR is attractive and easy to use. The playfulness is a dominant for students to accept AR-integrated learning. The adaptation of AR has significantly improved the learning performance of students. To avoid being frustrated in using AR, the students should realize pros and cons of AR-integrated learning and their cognitive needs in advance. Also, the problem of superimposing 3D models smoothly on the video should be tackled.起始頁-結束頁：39-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會8篇名：基於學習歷程分析之個人化英語閱讀引導策略與應用並列篇名：Personalized English Reading Strategy and Application based on Learning Portfolio Analysis作者：吳婷婷(Ting-Ting Wu);黃悅民(Yueh-Min Huang)關鍵字：英語閱讀;情境學習;無所不在學習;學習引導;學習歷程;English reading;situated learning;ubiquitous learning;reading guidance;learning portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：情境式的學習方式，使學習者與真實環境產生互動關聯並促進學習印象與學習經驗之建立，而適當地結合科技環境與閱讀策略，除可強化學生理解能力，進而還能提高學習之效益。藉此，本研究以情境式語言教學法為基礎，建置一個結合位置感知技術與文章閱讀引導之英語閱讀學習系統。於閱讀引導機制部分，則依據學習歷程之分析，經統計計算後作為決策參數，再藉由基因演算法考量文章閱讀關聯性與文章困難度，透過疊代的演化排序，提供適切、漸進且個人化的文章閱讀順序進行學習。而於實驗分析部分，評估結果均顯示，此學習系統確實有效提升學習者學習意願與學習成效。英文摘要：The theory of situational language teaching which promotes students to transform abstract perceptions into tangible thoughts is the key to stimulate the learners' internal and external learning motives. Moreover, the combination of technological environments and good guidance and reading instructions enhance the linguistic capabilities and enhance reading comprehension of students. Therefore, this paper constructs a ubiquitous English-reading learning system that combines RFID location-aware technologies and a guidance mechanism. The guidance mechanism utilizes the data of a learning portfolio to evaluate guidance parameters, and simultaneously considers information regarding the degree of relational reading and reading difficulty, which can be entered into a genetic algorithm to construct a near optimal reading sequence during learning activities. Based on the experimental results, this reading learning system results in an efficient and effective learning performance to promote learning motivation through appropriate learning paths.起始頁-結束頁：57-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會9篇名：情境式WebQuest應用於國小環境教育之研究並列篇名：WebQuest: M-Learning for Environmental Education作者：張承憲(Cheng-Sian Chang);許為翔(Wei-Hsiang Hsu);陳宗禧(Tzung-Shi Chen)關鍵字：情境學習;資源回收及分類;環境教育;WebQuest;environmental education;resource recycling and classification;situation learning;WebQuest期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究讓學習者利用PDA及無線網路搭配WebQuest教學網站，在資源回收場進行垃圾分類及資源回收的學習，目的在探討接受不同的教學策略對環境教育學習成效及學習歷程之影響。研究對象為臺南縣某國小六年級103位學童，分為對照組1（傳統教學）、對照組2（WebQuest主題探索教學）及實驗組（WebQuest融入情境學習教學）。研究結果顯示，實驗組在垃圾分類及資源回收的學習成效優於兩對照組；而在WebQuest任務活動之學習歷程的影響上，實驗組與對照組2則無明顯差異。英文摘要：In this study, students learned about resource recycling and classification through an instructional website based on the teaching tool WebQuest. The purpose of this study was to demonstrate the impact of different teaching strategies on the learning performance of environmental education using quantitative methods. There were 103 sixth grade students participating in this study and broken down into three groups: traditional instruction, traditional instruction with WebQuest and WebQuest instruction with outdoors. The results show that using WebQuest instruction with outdoors influences the learning performance of students positively.起始頁-結束頁：77-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會10篇名：兼顧認知成分分析與難度參數變異的圖形推理試題模型發展策略並列篇名：An Iterative Revising Approach for Developing the Item Models of Figural Matrix Test作者：蘇義翔(I-Hsiang Su);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung)關鍵字：參數不確定性;期望反應函數;試題模型;圖形推理測驗;難度參數;parameter uncertainty;expected response function;item model;figure matrix test;difficulty parameter期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：當代電腦化適性測驗的發展往往因為試題編製成本居高不下而受到限制，晚近電腦科技與認知科學的進展，讓更富經濟效能的試題複製理論和技術漸臻成熟。然而，試題複製所產生的參數不確定性，自然會造成能力估計的誤差。因此，控制試題參數的不確定性成為自動化命題技術探討的重要課題。本研究以認知成分分析為基礎，針對國小學童圖形推理作業，建立試題構成原則。文中提出19個試題模型，複製產生103個試題，並針對616名國小四、五、六年級學生施測後，以題目反應理論單參數模式估計試題難度參數。整體而言，試題模型內難度變異的平均極小（σ^2=.053），顯示研究中所採用難度參數變異與試題認知成分交互檢核的模型微調策略，可以依據構念內含的認知成分，有效將試題模型內的難度參數變異降低到合理的水準。英文摘要：Implementation of computerized adaptive testing is limited due to costly expense and time-consuming item production. Taking advantage of the advanced computer technology and cognitive science, more economical and efficient item cloning theories and technologies are evolved into feasibility. However, item parameter uncertainty induced by item cloning causes ability estimate error inevitably. How to control item parameter uncertainty becomes a critical issue on the automated item generation. Based on cognitive component analysis literatures, the present study attempts to establish item generation principles for figural matrix tasks. Nineteen item models are developed to generate 103 isomorphic item variants. The response data of 616 4th to 6th grade students is used for Item Response Theory (IRT) one-parameter model item parameter calibration. Whenever the variance of difficulty parameters within an item model is relatively large, a related component will be identified to establish a new item model. Overall, the average variance of item difficulty parameter within item models is very small (σ^2=.053). The results suggest that the item modeling mechanism accomplish a reliable control for item parameter.起始頁-結束頁：95-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會01篇名：特定政黨不認同：台灣地區民意調查中關於政黨認同的新測量工具並列篇名：A Study of Negative Identification against a Specific Party in Taiwan作者：莊淑媚(Shu-Mei Chuang);洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hung)關鍵字：政黨認同;特定政黨不認同;新的政黨認同指標;party identification;negative party identification against a specific party;new party identification variable期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：從《美國選民》一書出版以來，政黨認同一詞即被各界廣泛引用，是解釋選民長期投票行為的最主要因素之一。然而將這個概念運用於台灣時，人們會發現仍有些不足之處。本研究認為台灣選民的整體投票行為，除了受到政黨認同的影響之外，還有對特定政黨不認同的因素。特定政黨不認同是選民對於某一特定政黨長時間、持續、且不輕易改變的厭惡情感，無論如何絕對不會支持這個政黨。文獻和質化研究都顯示，台灣選民特定政黨不認同態度的形成因素主要是國家認同、族群意識以及政黨形象。根據這些結果，本研究設計題組量表測量選民對特定政黨不認同的態度，並將選民投票行為與「絕不投票支持某政黨」的行為相對照，實證結果顯示此一測量有很好的效度與信度。其次，本研究結合傳統的選民政黨認同與特定政黨不認同兩項觀察變數成為一個新的政黨認同變數，進一步觀察與解釋台灣選民對政黨的態度及其投票行為。電話調查結果顯示46.3%的台灣選民有絕對不會投票支持某一個政黨的行為，而新的政黨認同指標與選民的投票行為相當一致，在解釋台灣選民投票行為的分類與判斷方面不但有效，而且是一個相當具有說服力的指標。英文摘要：According to The American Voter, party identification affects voters' attitudes, feelings, even the voting behavior towards political parties. In Taiwan, party identification indeed has fundamental effects on voters' voting behavior. But there is still something that can't be explained. This study found that negative identification against a specific party is also a crucial factor that affects voters' voting behavior. The negative attitude towards a specific party is a long-term, consistent attitude. And it is very hard to change.The study employed methods including in-depth interviews, focus groups and telephone survey to investigate the issue. First, results from qualitative research indicated that three factors, namely, national identity, ethnic identity and party image are the roots of the voters' negative attitude toward a specific party. The study also developed a questionnaire to measure the negative attitudes toward a specific party of the voters in Taiwan; 46.3% of the survey respondents expressed that there is one or more than one parties they would have never voted for. We then combined the traditional party identification variable and the newly-developed ”which party that you will never vote for” variable into a new party identification indicator. Empirical studies using survey data showed that the new variable were good in both validity and reliability tests and was doing very well in explaining voters' voting behavior in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.02.01-292篇名：票房良藥或毒藥？探討馬政府施政滿意度對立委補選之影響並列篇名：Is the Central Government Performance a Candy or a Poison? Empirical Evidence of Taiwan's Legislative Yuan By-Election作者：林啟耀(Kah-Yew Lim)關鍵字：公民複決理論;立委補選;施政滿意度;投票行為;referendum theory;by-election;assessment of government performance;voting behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：馬英九一直都是選戰常勝軍，更是藍營的票房良藥，但是在他執政後的國民黨卻在多次立委補選敗選，是否明星光環不在？社會輿論中，更是把國民黨在近幾次立委補選的失利歸咎在中央政府的施政不佳。本研究在回溯性理論與公民複決理論的支持下，透過觀察2009年的三場立委補選，嘗試驗證這些選民的投票行為是否會受到他們對中央政府的執政滿意度所影響。研究結果顯示，在苗栗縣第一選區的選舉中，中央施政滿意度沒有對選民的投票行為產生顯著影響。但是，在台北市第六選區與雲林縣第二選區的選舉中，選民對中央施政的滿意度對他們的投票行為產生不同的影響。之所以會出現各縣市分析結果的差異，作者相信與選舉情境差異有關。由於台北市第六選區與雲林縣第二選區的補選都涉及藍綠對決，因此泛綠在競選過程不斷以中央施政無力來攻擊泛藍候選人，讓選民會將中央施政結果列入他們的考慮中。在苗栗縣第一選區的補選中，由於是藍軍自家分裂的對決，因此這種氛圍就不再存在。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the extent to which performances of the central governments could shape Legislative Yuan by-election outcomes. Based on the retrospective voting theory and referendum voting theory, this research used the survey data of Taiwan's Elections and Democratization Studies (TEDS) to explore whether one's assessments of the central government's performances affect his/her choice in by-elections. There are some findings from this research: first, the result showed Miaoli's first district voters have differing voting behavior compared to voters in Taipei City's sixth district and Yunlin's second district. The assessment on central government performance has no significant influence on Miaoli's voters voting behavior; second, for the voters in Taipei City sixth district and Yunlin second district, the assessment of the central government performance have mixed effects due to the election context. As a result, we may conclude that the by-elections in Taipei City sixth district and Yunlin second district can be regarded as referenda on the central government, but the by-election in Miaoli's first district was different from the others.起始頁-結束頁：31-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.02.31-573篇名：施政表現在不同層級地方選舉中的影響：2009年雲林縣縣長及鄉鎮市長選舉之分析並列篇名：Government Performance and Voter Choice in Local Elections: The Case of 2009 Yunlin County and Township Magistrates Elections作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao);黃紀(Chi Huang)關鍵字：施政表現;投票抉擇;地方選舉;government performance;vote choice;local elections期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：自由公平的選舉是民主政治的核心價值。透過定期改選，民眾依據執政者的施政表現決定投票意向，即是責任政治的展現。而依據學理探討，政府的施政表現在不同層級的地方選舉中，對選民的投票抉擇應有不同的影響。在層級較高的選舉，中央政府施政表現的影響較大；而在地方基層選舉，地方政府施政表現的影響力則應相對較高。本文以2009年雲林縣縣長及鄉鎮市長選舉為例，利用「台灣選舉與民主化調查」於選後所進行的面訪調查資料進行檢證。結果發現，選民在縣長選舉的投票抉擇上，不論是對中央政府或縣政府的施政表現評價，皆具有顯著的影響效果。但在鄉鎮市長選舉方面，中央政府或縣政府的施政表現評價，則皆不具顯著影響力，甚至政黨認同的解釋力亦大幅下降。作者認為這主要是因為地方選舉型態的特性，以及此次選舉雙方實力差距懸殊的結果導致。此外，本研究也突顯出地方派系在地方基層選舉運作上的影響力不容忽視。英文摘要：Free and fair election is the core of democracy. Regular election in turn is the most important vehicle for the electorate to hold the ruling party and government accountable. This paper, based on theoretical arguments, elaborates the effects of government performance at different levels of elections. We argue that the higher the level of elections, the higher the level of government is held accountable by the electorate, while at the bottom local level elections, only the local government performance matters. In the county magistrate's election, the central government's performance should play a more important role on voter choice. By contrast, in the township magistrate's election, the local government's performance should have greater effects on voter choice. We test this proposition with the case of Yunlin in the 2009 county and township magistrates' elections with the survey data collected by the Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS) project. We find that indeed voter choice in county magistrate's election is significantly affected by both central and county government's performance. However, neither central nor local government performance has significant effect on voter choice in township magistrates' election. This finding may reflect the fact that bottom-level local elections relies more on social networks and local factions than on government policy evaluation.起始頁-結束頁：59-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.02.59-864篇名：原住民政治版圖的持續與變遷：1992－2008立委選舉的總體資料分析並列篇名：The Change and Continuity of Aboriginal Electoral Politics: An Analysis of the Aggregate Data of Indigenous Legislative Elections Results (1992-2008)作者：包正豪(Cheng-Hao Pao)關鍵字：原住民;個人選票;立委選舉;跨層次推論;indigenous people;personal vote;legislative elections;cross-level inference期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以1992到2008年間6屆立委選舉的得票資料來探究國內主要政黨的原住民選票分布情形，並同時以區位推論方法來估計得票穩定程度與其流向，以嘗試釐清影響國內主要政黨於原住民立委選舉當中的得票差異與穩定情形的原因，同時將更進一步闡述原住民政治版圖的持續與變遷對國內政黨體系發展的影響為何？研究結果顯示，國民黨在原住民選民內所獲得的選舉支持並未若想像中穩固。國民黨相當一部分的選舉支持植基於地方型政治人物的地盤選票，當此類政治人物與國民黨的結盟關係破裂，即導致國民黨社會支持的衰退，與政黨體系的重組。換言之，原住民選舉研究若以政黨為分析對象，而忽略地方型政治人物的組織力量的話，或將導致對原住民政治的認知偏誤。英文摘要：This research analyzes the aggregate data of indigenous legislative election results (1992-2008) to figure out the indigenous vote distribution and to discuss the reasons to cause the electoral stability and change by using the cross-level inference method. The research findings show that the KMT does not enjoy a stable support from Taiwan's indigenous electorate. A certain part of the KMTs electoral support is based on local politicians' personal votes. Once the alliance between the KMT and local politicians is broken, the KMT's electoral support will be immediately shrunk. In other words, political students who study Taiwan's aboriginal electoral politics should regard not only political parties but also local politicians as research units. In fact, in order to have profound understandings about aboriginal electoral politics, this research suggests a new perspective, by using local politician's personal votes as a breakthrough point, to do the researches.起始頁-結束頁：87-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.02.87-1205篇名：婚姻對身分認同之影響的初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Analysis on the Impact of Marriage on Self-Identity作者：陳光輝(Kuang-Hui Chen)關鍵字：政治社會化;身分認同;婚姻;配偶;political socialization;self-identity;marriage;spouse期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：由於身分認同與省籍背景為台灣政治之主要分歧，本文探討人們是否因配偶省籍背景的異同而對其身分認同造成影響？哪些人的身分認同較容易受到其配偶省籍背景的影響？回答這些問題得以對成人期之社會化經驗與影響做一初步的評估。本文合併TEDS歷年全國性調查資料來評估婚姻與配偶省籍對於受訪者身分認同的可能影響，主要研究發現有：（一）受訪者之原生家庭的省籍背景影響其身分認同與其配偶省籍背景；（二）受訪者較可能與同樣省籍背景者結婚；（三）受訪者的身分認同受到其配偶省籍的影響；（四）女性的身分認同較可能受到配偶省籍背景的影響，但是高學歷女性有其獨立性，較不受到配偶省籍的影響；（五）較高教育程度的男性之身分認同較有可能受到配偶省籍背景的影響。英文摘要：Given that ethnicity and identity are the principal factors of political cleavage in Taiwan, this article explores the following questions: Whether individuals Taiwanese/Chinese identities are influenced by their spouses' ethnic background? If so, whose identities are more likely to be shaped by the intensive interactions between husbands and wives in a marriage? Answers to these questions are helpful to researchers who are interested in assessing the effect of political socialization experiences during adulthood. This article analyzes pooled survey data from Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study and the main findings are: (1) Ethnic background affects the respondents' self-identities. (2) Respondents tend to marry within their ethnic group. (3) Respondents' self-identities are influenced by their spouses' ethnic background. (4) Although females' self-identities are generally affected by their spouses' ethnicity, the best-educated females' self-identities are less likely to be changed after getting married. (5) The best-educated males' self-identities are more likely to be shifted after getting married than their female counterparts.起始頁-結束頁：121-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.02.121-1566篇名：民主態度的類型：台灣民眾二次政黨輪替後的分析並列篇名：Constructing a Typology of Popular Attitudes to Democracy: An Analysis after the Second Party Alternation in Taiwan作者：黃信豪(Hsin-Hao Huang)關鍵字：民主支持;民主滿意度;政黨輪替;選舉輸家;政治文化;support for democracy;satisfaction with democracy;party alternation in power;election loser;political culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：從政治文化的角度來看，民眾的民主態度是一國民主政治體制得以維繫的重要條件。本研究嘗試結合過去廣受討論的「民主支持」與「民主滿意度」概念，建構一個民主態度的初探性類型，藉此探討台灣民眾經歷二次政黨輪替後對民主體制的態度與看法；同時，作者也從民主的內在傾向與工具傾向出發，以檢驗此類型的理論區辨度。研究結果顯示，台灣民眾在二次政黨輪替過後對民主體制表達絕對支持的比例僅約為半數，而滿意目前民主運作的比例也僅約略超過一半，屬「民主滿意者」的比例則約為三成左右，這表示仍有相當比例民眾對台灣民主體制情感或實踐上的支持仍存有疑慮。其次，我們也發現內在傾向與工具傾向能分別解釋民眾對民主的絕對支持與體制運作的評價，這表示本研究所建構的民主態度類型能彰顯背後的理論意義。值得注意的是，經由投票對象與統獨立場的檢視，本文發現2008年總統選舉後台灣選民並沒有出現選舉輸家對民主態度衰退的現象。如何增強民眾對民主體制的支持與信心，不但在民主鞏固的過程相當重要，也是台灣民主未來走向深化的路途中應受到學界注意的關鍵議題。英文摘要：A democracy cannot be considered as consolidated without its institutions being supported by a majority of populace. Based upon the suggested concepts of ”support for democracy” and ”satisfaction with democracy”, this paper proposes an exploratory topology to probe the popular attitudes toward democracy in Taiwan, with the special focus on the time point after the second party alternation in 2008. Furthermore, the author checks the validity of this democratic topology via the intrinsic and instrumental dispositions, which are the two main origins of people's democratic attitudes. The findings show that, firstly, slightly fewer less than half of Taiwanese approved of the democratic regime with the absolute manner, and also about half of them were satisfied with the current practice and performance of democracy after the second party alternation. The fact that only about 30 percent of citizens are categorized as ”democratic satisfaction” means that a proportion of Taiwanese still have doubts about democracy on either the emotional or practical dimensions. Secondly, the intrinsic and instrumental dispositions can separately increase the desirability and satisfaction of democracy, thereby explain different types of democratic attitudes in Taiwan. Moreover, with other variables remaining constant, the election result of 2008 did not lead to the systematic effect of ”election loser”; voters whose preferable candidate lost in the election did not become more likely to suspect the responsibility of the democratic system. Totally speaking, how to increase the popular support and confidence for democracy not only remains crucial to the process of democratic consolidation, but also should be regarded as a key issue for the future of democratic deepening in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.01.01-347篇名：選民政黨傾向與候選人危機反應策略之關係並列篇名：A Study on the Relationship of Voters' Party Inclinations and Candidates' Crisis Response Strategies作者：姚惠忠(Hui-Chung Yao);汪睿祥(Rui-Xiang Wang);高浩緯(Hao-Wei Kao)關鍵字：危機傳播;危機反應策略;形象修護效果;政黨傾向;crisis communication;crisis response strategy;image repairing effect;party inclinations期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：迄今，研究者多以「整體選民」的認知與評價，來評估候選人危機反應策略的形象修護效果。本研究進一步分析不同政黨傾向選民對候選人反應策略的評價，探討選民政黨傾向對候選人反應策略效果的影響。本研究以2006年北高市長選舉為材料，以內容分析法分析候選人的危機反應策略，以調查法分析候選人反應策略的形象修護效果。本研究發現：選舉危機反應策略自成一格，以「否認」與「反擊對手」兩項策略為主。候選人任何策略都得不到政黨傾向相反之選民的支持，獨立選民的態度在選戰中具關鍵角色。「反擊對手」策略多能獲得自家支持選民的認同，但不易被對方陣營選民所接受。對獨立選民，只有在厭惡程度低時，「反擊對手」、「提高層次」策略才能獲得認同；只有在證據真實度低時，「否認」、「尋求支撐」、「無力控制」策略才有效。整體而言，危機事件的厭惡程度與證據真實度，是影響候選人對獨立選民形象修護效果的重要變項。英文摘要：Most crisis communication literature did not distinguish the communicaion effect between different publics. This article explored the effects of response strategies of voters with different party identifications, using content analysis and survey. Cases were selected from the mayoral elections of Taipei and Kaohsiung, 2006. We found (1)the crisis communication strategies of political campaigns are different from strategies of business corporates, (2)no strategies can earn the agreements of adversary's supporter, (3)the candidates' communication effects on independent voters determines the margin of the campaigns, (4)independent voters' perceived evidences and disgust to crisis incidents affect the success of candidates' image repair.起始頁-結束頁：35-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.01.35-618篇名：2009年台灣縣市長選舉預測分析並列篇名：Analysis on the Prediction Results of the 2009 Magistrate and Mayoral Election in Taiwan作者：童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung);周子全(Tzu-Chuan Chou);林繼文(Jih-Wen Lin);林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin)關鍵字：預測市場;民意調查;準確度;縣市長選舉;prediction markets;opinion polls;accuracy;magistrate and mayoral election期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：民意調查是預測選舉結果最常見的方法之一。但近年來預測市場逐漸成為另一種常見的預測機制，並有許多文獻比較預測市場與民意調查的準確度。本論文根據未來事件交易所的交易資料和本研究彙整的民調資料，分析預測市場對台灣2009年縣市長選舉預測結果，並對比預測市場和民調機構對於此次選舉的預測。本研究發現：對當選人預測合約，預測市場的加權平均價格對當選比率在統計上有顯著正向影響，並且在統計上相當程度可表示為候選人當選之機率。再者，根據正確率、精準率、命中率、假警報率與貴氏比率差等五項指標，預測市場對當選人預測的能力均高於民調機構。對得票率的預測，預測市場的預測能力在選前20天以後便高過民調機構，而且預測市場的預測準確度會隨著合約到期日的接近而逐漸增加。不過，本研究也認為民意調查的優點在於可以協助研究者進行變項的相關分析，所以可和預測市場同時運用，相互增強。英文摘要：Opinion poll has been the most widely used way to conduct election prediction. However, recently prediction market has become another widely applied prediction mechanism, attracting the literature to compare the accuracy of the two prediction methods. According to trading data of the Exchange of Future Events and opinion polls collected by this study, this paper analyzes the prediction results of the 2009 magistrate and mayoral election in Taiwan, and compares the prediction accuracies on this election between prediction markets and poll institutions. What this paper finds are: for prediction contracts on election winners, the weighted average prices of prediction markets are positive and statistically significant on the ratio of winning elections and can be regarded as the candidates' probability of winning elections. In addition, based upon five indicators of correctness rate, precision rate, hit rate, false alarm rate and Kuipers score, predictive power of prediction markets on election winners is obviously higher than that of poll institutions. For prediction on vote shares, predictive power of prediction markets is higher than that of poll institutions within 20 days before the election, and prediction accuracy of prediction markets is getting higher along with approaching the expiration of the contracts. Nevertheless, we also agree that opinion survey can help researchers conduct covariance analysis, which can be used together with prediction market to reinforce the findings of each other.起始頁-結束頁：63-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.01.63-949篇名：一個屋簷下的性別權力關係對國家認同的影響（1996－2008）並列篇名：Exploring the Influence of Gender Power on National Identity under the Same Roof (1996-2008)作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-Ying Yang);李冠成(Kuan-Chen Lee)關鍵字：國族認同;族群認同;國家選擇;婚姻關係;性別權力;national identity;ethnic identity;national choice;marriage;gender power期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要討論婚姻中的權力關係對於個人國族認同的影響。相較於既有研究著重於認同的集體變遷，本研究將分析的視角置於個別家戶之中，探討婚姻對個人認同的影響，以及不同的夫妻權力關係在形塑個人政治認同上可能產生的影響。家庭權力關係理論指出，夫與妻相對的社經資源多寡及性別角色差異，會影響夫妻間權力分配的多寡，本文藉由1996年至2008年的橫斷面調查訪問資料，觀察婚姻中的權力關係是否會影響男女的國族認同。研究結果發現，個人的國族認同容易受到配偶省籍的影響，而且女性的認同受到配偶影響的程度大於男性。多項勝算對數模型也顯示，影響男性台灣人／中國人認同與統獨立場的主要因素，是「自己的省籍」、「自己的政黨認同」和「訪問年度」，這些因素也同樣影響女性。不同於男性的是，在女性的部分，在台灣人／中國人族群認同與統獨國家選擇上，「配偶的省籍」有其直接或間接的作用。其中，女性的台灣人／中國人族群認同，受到丈夫省籍的直接影響，而與夫妻之間的社經背景及政治涉入感差異無關。相對地，女性的統獨國家選擇則是受到配偶省籍的間接影響，此種間接影響指的是，當妻子的教育程度越低時，其統獨立場越容易受到丈夫省籍的影響。簡言之，妻向夫的認同傾斜並非普遍或固定的現象，在不同認同層面上，發展出不同的夫妻認同影響模式，且受到不同家戶中夫妻相對權力關係的影響。英文摘要：This study examines how the power relationship within households affects individuals' national identity. Comparing with the past studies which address the collective changes of national identity, this study instead focuses on individual households to explore the malleability of individual national identity changed by marriages. Family power studies have shown that the socioeconomic-resource and gender role differences have great impact upon the power distribution among husbands and wives, this study applies the 1996-2008 cross-sectional data to explore the effect of the gender power within households on individuals' national identity. The results of this investigation show that, individuals' national identity is affected by their spouses' ethnic groupings, and women are more likely than men to be affected by their spouses'. The models show that, on the male part, their identity on Taiwanese/Chinese and pro-independence/unification are significantly affected by their own ethnic backgrounds, party identification, and the year of investigation, these factors also affect women's national identities. However, in contrast to men, women's identity on Taiwanese/ Chinese and pro-independence/unification are greatly affected by their spouses' ethnicities. In terms of the Taiwanese/Chinese identity, women are directly affected by their husbands' ethnicities, regardless of their differences in socio-economic status or political engagements. Relatively, in terms of the pro-independence/unification identity, women are indirectly affected by their husbands' ethnic backgrounds caused by the educational gap. As the wives' education level gets lower, their pro-independence/unification stance is more likely to be affected by their husbands' ethnicities. In short, the gender asymmetries of which wives' identity affected by their husbands' ethnicities are not fixed, rather they are distributed differently across households and varied by identity dimensions.起始頁-結束頁：95-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.01.95-13710篇名：董事政治關聯及政治獻金影響企業價值嗎？並列篇名：Do Directorate Political Connections and/or Political Donations Affect Firm Value?作者：張琬喻(Woan-Yuh Jang);張凱雯(Kai-Wen Chang)關鍵字：總統選舉;政商關係;董事政治關聯;政治獻金;事件研究法;president election;political relationships;directorate political connections;political donations;event study methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：18卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以台灣上市公司為研究樣本，依公司董事個人政治色彩將所有公司歸類為泛藍派、泛綠派或其他類，分別以「2008總統大選」與「公司聘任具政治背景董事之宣告」為研究事件，探討不同政治色彩之政商網絡關係對企業價值的影響，並同時考慮政治獻金的因素。實證結果發現，當藍營贏得總統大選時，泛藍派公司具有勝選行情，在股票市場上產生顯著正向累積異常報酬；而敗選的綠營，則使得泛綠派公司呈現落選行情，對公司之股價異常報酬率產生負向影響。在政治獻金方面，藍營與綠營皆有捐贈之公司累積異常報酬顯著大於僅捐給藍營之公司。在具政治背景董事進入董事會之宣告效果部分，結果顯示當公司宣布聘任泛藍派董事消息時，公司股價出現顯著正向累積異常報酬；而公司聘任泛綠派董事之宣告，在股價反映上則沒有顯著的異常報酬發生，但兩者之差異並不顯著。英文摘要：The research uses the hand-gathered data that details the political background of all directors on the boards of companies listed in the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TSE). The companies are divided into three groups: companies connected to the Pan-Blue Coalition, companies connected to the Pan-Green Coalition, and the others. This article looks at two different events. The first is the 2008 president election on March 22 incorporating the factor of political donations, and the second is the announcement of politically connected director appointment. The study examines the effects of political network linkages on firm value. The analysis shows that companies connected to the Pan-Blue Coalition exhibit a positive and significant cumulative abnormal return when the Pan-Blue Coalition wins the 2008 president election. Conversely, companies connected to the Pan- Green Coalition suffer a negative cumulative abnormal return. In addition, the companies which donate to both Pan-Blue and Pan-Green Coalitions experience a cumulative abnormal return significantly greater than those only to the Pan-Blue Coalition. This article also demonstrates that the stock market displays a positive response following the announcement of the appointment of directors connected to the Pan-Blue Coalition. However, there is no significant abnormal return on the stock market when news of directors connected to the Pan-Green Coalition entering the boards is announced. Furthermore, the difference between the two groups fails to be significant.起始頁-結束頁：139-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2011.18.01.139-17401篇名：難以跨越的鴻溝？－諮商老手的意圖與行動之落差並列篇名：Is It an Unrecoverable Error?-The Discrepancy between Intention and Action in Experienced Counselors作者：彭秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Peng);黃<U+56C7>莉(Li-Li Huang);陳金燕(Chin-Yen Chen)關鍵字：諮商老手;意圖;行動;落差經驗;discrepancy;the discrepancy between intention and action;experienced counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：30期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探索諮商老手在諮商過程中意圖與行動的落差經驗。以深度訪談與人際回憶訪談分別蒐集諮商老手過去曾經歷過與目前正經歷的落差經驗之敘說資料。藉由5位諮商老手，共蒐集到24個落差經驗。資料分析結果顯示，在內涵上，諮商老手的落差經驗是一種卡住的感覺，也是期待自己越做越好的理想追求，且落差經驗只是一種破綻或裂痕，而不是難以跨越的鴻溝。產生落差的原因是諮商師的用語習慣、缺乏自信、個性太急、錯誤的諮商理念、疏忽當事人的狀態或當事人動機不足。諮商師要覺察到落差，則可透過自我覺察、他人告知以及行為觀察與評估等管道。諮商師一旦發現落差，就會啟動因應的歷程，透過反省、評估與重新建立假設，將落差經驗正向化，以及不斷追求卓越的歷程，成為技巧熟練與理念成熟的諮商老手，另外，還經常在諮商中形成改變的契機。因意圖與行動是描述諮商師行為與預測諮商成效的重要向度，一旦發現落差即啟動修正歷程，可謂極富行動力。在諮商實務的應用上，本研究的結果除了可讓諮商老手、諮商新手在實務工作與專業發展中善加利用，也可以提供諮商督導和諮商教育工作者進行督導或教學時的參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore seasoned counselors' experiences of discrepancy between intention and action in the counseling process. Data were collected from five experienced counselors via in-depth interview and interpersonal process recall (IPR) interview; that is, the experiences include memory of the past and current counseling experiences.The results are as follows. In contents, the seasoned counselors' experiences of discrepancy between their intentions and actions were ”feelings of getting stuck” and ”hoping to be better”. In properties, the experiences of discrepancy were cracks rather than unrecoverable errors. The contributing factors of discrepancy were the counselors' idiographic verbal expressions, the lack of confidence, quick temper, inappropriate rationale, negligence of counseling situations, and the lack of motivation of client. The three channels in which counselors discovered the experiences of discrepancy were: self awareness, others' comments, as well as behavior observation and evaluation. As soon as counselors became aware of the discrepancy, they started the process of coping. The strategies of coping were ”introspection, assessment, and hypothesis testing”, ”positive regard for discrepancy”, and ”in pursuit of excellence”. When coped successfully, they became skilled and matured experts. And, the discrepancy always became the impetus to change in counseling process.Both intention and action were important predictors of counseling outcomes. The experiences of discrepancy were filled with powerful action because corrective process started immediately as soon as counselors acknowledged the discrepancy. In the development of professionalism, the phenomenon of discrepancy can be useful for the experts and novices. Findings of the study are also relevant to supervision and counselor education.起始頁-結束頁：103-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201108.01032篇名：家族治療的文化脈絡與靈性議題：家暴的困境、轉變與反思並列篇名：Cultural Contexts and Spiritual Issues in Family Therapy: Predicaments, Change and Reflections from a Domestic Violence Family作者：賈紅鶯(Hong-Ying Chia)關鍵字：文化脈絡;家族治療;家暴;靈性;cultural contexts;family therapy;domestic violence;spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：30期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究經由一家暴家庭十三次家族治療，探討其中的文化脈絡與靈性議題。研究者經由錄影、謄錄逐字稿後進行對話分析。家暴困境包括被暴力控制的婚姻與手足關係、受暴婦女走不出的害怕與無助因應、受暴的繼親孩子等；反映父權文化對家暴的合理化、社會對單親母親的歧見、宗教信仰對婚姻的規範、單親的經濟壓力及家暴與貧窮、犯罪的關聯等社會脈絡。家暴家庭的轉變包括，婚暴關係的轉變、親子關係的轉變、手足關係的改變等家庭系統與關係的改變。家暴家庭反映出「父權」、「為母則強」以及「以和為貴」文化的交織、家暴改變緣於治療師對受暴婦女不離開暴力丈夫的文化理解、對自身與受暴婦女文化差異的反思、體認受暴婦女對暴力的恐懼、協助受暴婦女「解構」被暴力控制的無助，探討如何在不離家情況下，但離開暴力。治療師同時與受暴婦女基督信仰的靈性資源對話，發現教會帶給受暴婦女在人際壓力、與不能離婚的靈性掙扎。治療者面對靈性議題的處遇為信仰態度的適切開放、靈性知識的對話，與教會資源的合作，個案最終能超越「教會」而回到「神」的眼光對其處境的接納。研究者據此指出文化脈絡與靈性議題在家族治療實務與訓練的重要性。英文摘要：This paper explores the cultural contexts and spiritual issues in family therapy, with a special focus on a case of domestic violence. The process of family therapy was videotaped and analyzed through discourse analysis. Results revealed the family's predicaments, such as the battered woman's fear and helplessness in the face of violence, the abused child, spousal abuse and sibling relationships controlled by the father's violence. These conditions indicate that domestic violence has become normalized by patriarchal culture, social prejudice towards single mothers, religious norms on marital separation, economic pressure on single mothers, poverty and crime-related violence. After family therapy, the family has been transformed such as the relationship between the woman and her husband, among the mother, children and the siblings, although the woman still stayed in her marriage, but she knew how to free the violence from her husband. There were different culture values including 'as a mother as a strong woman', 'harmony is very precious' and male chauvinism interweaved in this violent family. This therapeutic change was related to the therapist's deeply understand why the woman didn't want to leave her husband from the cultural contexts, the reflection on cultural differences between the therapist and the battered woman, the fear of the woman to her violent husband, helped the woman de-construct the helpless to her violent husband, and to explore how to protect herself and children without leaving her husband. Church and religion provided important social and spiritual resources to the family; however, these also exerted social pressure on marital obedience through fellowship and spiritual struggles, as dictated by Christian dogma. Using her own Christian identity, the therapist openly discussed biblical teachings about divorce, which reduced the client's anxiety. This resulted in a transformation from a personal religious problem to a form of spiritual healing. The author highlighted the importance of cultural context and spirituality in future family therapy training and applications.起始頁-結束頁：124-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201108.01243篇名：雙生涯女性優勢中心生涯適應諮商模式之建構研究並列篇名：The Construction of a Strength-centered Career Adjustment Model for Counseling Dual-career Women作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Tien);吳麗琴(Li-Chin Wu)關鍵字：生涯適應;生涯諮商;任務分析;雙生涯女性;優勢中心取向;career adjustment;career counseling;dual-career women;strength-centered counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在建構雙生涯女性優勢中心生涯適應諮商模式。研究對象為10名雙生涯女性，年齡介於28至47歲（平均年齡為38.8歲）。由第一位研究者擔任心理師角色，對參與者進行6到8次諮商，期間進行1-2次的人際歷程訪談瞭解諮商經驗。本研究係以任務分析方法建構諮商模式，資料蒐集方法是個別諮商與人際歷程訪談，所得逐字稿資料以發現取向質性方法進行分析。結果歸納出正向情感、適應力、夢想目標等13項優勢力量，並建構出包含四大巨集、十大段落及二十九個細項的諮商模式。四大巨集為探索評估、深化覺察、改變以及行動等巨集。十大段落分別為：(1)諮商的開始；(2)陳述困擾問題；(3)探索、評估、認識成長經驗與現在生活角色的內涵與影響；(4)洞察自我內在價值與需求，統整正負向經驗；(5)覺察型塑社會文化與性別經驗的內涵；(6)覺察角色間衝突與既有因應方式；(7)優勢的萃取和應用；(8)重新架構；(9)創意與創造；以及(10)行動等段落。根據結果提出組型結構與諮商流程圖。最後依據結果進行討論，並提出建議以供未來研究與實務工作者參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to construct a strength-centered career adjustment model for counseling dual-career women. The study adopted the task analysis approach in which participants received six to eight counseling sessions. Participants of this study included ten dual-career women, aged between 28 to 47 years old (M=38.8). The interview transcripts were analyzed qualitatively using discovery-oriented psychotherapy. Based on the analyses, a model containing four theme categories and ten themes were constructed. The strength-centered counseling protocol for dual-career women was then proposed. The four theme categories include Exploration/Assessment, Insight, Change, and Action. The model consists of ten stages: (1)defining the problem; (2)stating the problem, including causes and contexts; (3)exploring, assessing and understanding the content and influences of an individual's life experiences and current roles in life; (4)bringing insights into her intrinsic values and needs, and integrating both positive and negative experiences; (5)perceiving the content of social, culture, and gender experiences; (6)being aware of the conflicts between different roles and coping strategies; (7)knowing, creating and expanding one's own strengths; (8)reframing; (9)creativeness and creating, specifically making plans, practicing exercises, connecting diverse strengths and creating an integrated and balanced prospect; and (10)taking actions. The results demonstrate thirteen strengths, such as positive emotion, good adjustment, dream/goal, etc. The findings in this research are discussed, and the implications and recommendations for practice and future study are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201104.00014篇名：影響未婚受暴女性關係抉擇之因素並列篇名：Factors Influencing Unmarried Battered Women's Decision-Making of Intimate Relationship Development作者：楊嘉玲(Chia-Ling Yang);趙淑珠(Shu-Chu Chao)關鍵字：未婚受暴女性;伴侶暴力;抉擇因素;關係慣性;intimate partner violence;the influencing factor of decision-making;relationship inertia;unmarried battered females期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：有鑑於國內對於未婚受暴女性主題上的缺乏，研究者希望藉此研究瞭解影響未婚受暴女性關係抉擇的因素與內涵。研究者以半結構深度訪談方法，訪談四位曾經驗或正處於暴力關係的未婚女性，並採用質性研究方法進行資料的分析與探究。研究發現影響受訪者抉擇的因素相當多，但其中以「關係慣性」與「性關係」兩者，佔有相當大的比重。值得一提的是，研究發現透過時間的催化與因素間的交互作用，受訪者與施暴男友會共構出許多不對等的互動規則，並逐漸累積成一種「關係慣性」，是奠基於兩人的互動序列與反應模式所形成的動力，使關係對彼此產生影響，進而促發受訪者對關係的依賴感和需求性；且具有動態性，會隨著交往時間增加，使受訪者對改變產生強烈的不適應感或恐懼，以致於受訪者難以離開暴力關係。英文摘要：For approximately two decades, clinicians and researchers have recognized the presence of intimate partner violence (IPV) in the lives of women in Taiwan. These studies, however, focused primarily on the experience of married women in abusive relationships. On the other hand, the lack of consideration of and attention to unmarried women involved in intimate violent relationships has been noted. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to fill in the gap that explores unmarried women involved in intimate violent relationships. What factors have affected unmarried battered women in their decision-making?Semi-constructive and in-depth interviews were conducted with four unmarried women. A qualitative research approach was adopted to analyze the data. A variety of factors on the decision to terminate an abusive relationship were identified. Among these factors, relationship inertia and sexual relationship were the most prominent. One worthy note to mention is that unmarried battered women and their partners together constructed many unequal interactive rules, which gradually accumulated into a kind of ”relationship inertia.” This ”relationship inertia” would result in unmarried battered women's lack of courage to change an intimate relationship or to terminate a violent relationship.起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201104.00375篇名：女同志向家人現身歷程之敘說研究並列篇名：The Narrative Research on Coming out Process of the Lesbians to Their Family作者：莊瑞君(Ruei-Jyun Jhuang);陳慶福(Ching-Fu Chen);劉安真(An-Chen Liu)關鍵字：女同志;女同性戀;出櫃;家人;現身歷程;coming out process;disclosure;family;lesbian期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解女同志向家人現身的歷程，包括女同志現身的考量因素與現身過程的因應方式。本研究採質性研究之敘說研究取向，及採滾雪球抽樣方式進行取樣，共訪談了九位已在社會工作、至少向家庭中一名以上的成員現身，且自我認同為女同志者。研究者選取及呈現當中三位女同志的生命故事，其脈絡如下：(1)小光的現身故事：傳統價值觀的包袱讓現身失去對話的空間；(2)小龜的現身故事：心照不宣的默契，等待現身的時機；(3)小寧的現身故事：追尋母親認同的現身路。透過三個故事的討論，研究者進一步以不同的家庭角色作為區分來呈現現身歷程的內涵：(1)女同志向手足現身的歷程：輕鬆、負擔少的現身過程；(2)女同志向母親現身的歷程：掙扎與沈重的現身過程；(3)女同志不向父親現身的考量因素：互動疏離與承擔風險，降低現身的可能性。最後，本研究針對研究發現作進一步的討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the coming out process of lesbians to their family, including lesbians' concerns about coming out and ways to cope with the process. The study adopted narrative qualitative methodology and snow ball sampling. The participants were three self-identified lesbians (ages 26 to 30) who have worked and come out to at least one family member. The authors selected and presented the three participants' life narratives. The findings suggest that the factors that affect lesbians' coming out process include the motivation, the subject, and the timing of the coming out. The coming out process included three types in accordance with family roles: sibling, mother and father. Lesbians felt at ease and more unburdened when coming out to their sibling. They felt more of a struggle and encumbrance for coming out to their mothers. They are less likely to come out to their fathers because the relationship is more distant and it is more risky to come out to fathers.起始頁-結束頁：71-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201104.00716篇名：諮商滿意量表發展之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Development of the Counseling Satisfaction Inventory作者：陳慶福(Ching-Fu Chen);姜淑卿(Shu-Qing Jian)關鍵字：平行分析;探索性因素分析;幅合效度;諮商滿意;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;convergent validity;counseling satisfaction;exploratory factor analysis;parallel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop the Counseling Satisfaction Inventory (CSI), a new assessment on clients' satisfaction for clients who are counseled by college counseling centers or community counseling centers. The CSI was analyzed in terms of (a) its factor structure and (b) the reliability of the subscales. Parallel analysis (N=542) revealed two factors: Facilitating & Positive Relationship and Change & Effectiveness, which accounted for 54.25% of the total variance. Internal consistency of the scales was determined by Cronbach's alpha coefficient, which was .95 for the total 23-item inventory. Reliability estimate of the two subscales were .92 and .91. The test-retest coefficient of CSI over a 3-week period was .81 (N=54). The obtained data were also analyzed by structural equation modeling. The 10-item short form of CSI had better fit indices than that of the 23-item full inventory. The findings also suggested that clients who were counseled by college counseling centers were much more satisfied than the clients who received counseling from community counseling centers. Implications for using the CSI and recommendations for further development were discussed.英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop the Counseling Satisfaction Inventory (CSI), a new assessment on clients' satisfaction for clients who are counseled by college counseling centers or community counseling centers. The CSI was analyzed in terms of (a) its factor structure and (b) the reliability of the subscales. Parallel analysis (N=542) revealed two factors: Facilitating & Positive Relationship and Change & Effectiveness, which accounted for 54.25% of the total variance. Internal consistency of the scales was determined by Cronbach's alpha coefficient, which was .95 for the total 23-item inventory. Reliability estimate of the two subscales were .92 and .91. The test-retest coefficient of CSI over a 3-week period was .81 (N=54). The obtained data were also analyzed by structural equation modeling. The 10-item short form of CSI had better fit indices than that of the 23-item full inventory. The findings also suggested that clients who were counseled by college counseling centers were much more satisfied than the clients who received counseling from community counseling centers. Implications for using the CSI and recommendations for further development were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：105-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201104.01057篇名：後心理師法時代社區專線機構之運作困境與因應作為：以「885專線」為例並列篇名：The Practical Barriers and Responses of Community Hotline Service Organization in Post Psychologist Act Era: Study of "885-Hotline"作者：沈慶鴻(Ching-Hung Shen)關鍵字：心理師法;專線服務;運作困境;Psychologist Act;hotline service;practical barrier期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：為瞭解心理師法對社區專線機構運作的影響，研究者以「885專線」為例，分別進行三場焦點團體訪談、收集18位來自各縣市家庭教育中心專線服務之業務承辦人的想法，並以個別訪談法收集4位熟悉「885專線」運作之專家學者的觀點，企圖整合內部人和外部人對「885專線」運作困境之觀察和因應策略之建議。研究結果顯示，受訪者認為「885專線」除了原即存在的運作問題外，心理師法通過後，更新增了六項新困境，包括不瞭解專線運作的新定位、面臨服務過程中進退失據的兩難處境、志工的抱怨和流失、訓練課程減少，定位、宣導、訓練的相互抑制，並挑戰專線存在的價值等。而在因應困境的策略建議上，受訪者除期待主管機關能針對專線存廢做出明確決定外，繼續服務、委託經營和結束服務的想法都有受訪者支持，意見十分紛歧。最後，研究者還針對相關的研究結果進行討論和建議。英文摘要：To understand the impact of Psychologist Act on the community hotline service organizations, the author chose the ”885 hotline” service and formed three focus groups from 18 family educator center hotline services employees. The author also adopted single case study to interview four experts who were familiar with the operation of the 855 hotlines. The author attempted to integrate the insiders' and outsiders' views on the barriers of implementation on the 855 hotlines and their recommendations on coping strategies. The findings showed that in addition to the existing problems on implementation, the interviewees discussed six new barriers after the issue of Psychologist Act: unaware of the new mission of the hotline services; facing dilemmas in services; volunteers' complaints and losses; reduced training programs; conflicts between mission, propaganda and training; and challenging the worth of the hotline. In coping with the new barriers, the interviewees expected that the higher administrators can make a clear decision on whether to abolish or retain the 885-hotline. However, their opinions are quite diverse on the continuation of the service, service assigned to others, or discontinuation of the service. Lastly, the author discussed about the relevant results and recommendations.起始頁-結束頁：137-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201104.01378篇名：個人、家庭與學校脈絡中的影響變因與青少年身心健康發展軌跡之討論並列篇名：The Impact of Self-Esteem, Factors in Family and School Contexts on Trajectories of Adolescent Depressive Symptom作者：黃鈺婷(Yu-Ting Huang)關鍵字：青少年;憂鬱症狀;影響變因;潛在成長曲線模型;adolescent;depressive symptom;dynamic factor;latent growth curve model期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究使用一筆青少年貫時性追蹤資料，嘗試突破橫斷式資料的囿限，應用潛在成長曲線模型的研究方法，試圖捕捉青少年憂鬱症狀的起始狀態、與個別的成長軌跡發展，並納入動態影響變因，分析這些變項對於青少年身心健康發展的影響。本研究以924個國中生重覆填答之測量資料，分析個人自尊、家庭脈絡下的因子（親子關係滿意度）、學校脈絡下的因子（學校依附、師生關係、好朋友關係）等五個動態變因對青少年憂鬱症狀軌跡發展跨時間的影響。研究結果發現：(1)青少年的自尊是影響青少年憂鬱症狀發展軌跡的最關鍵因子；(2)親子關係滿意度，對於青少年憂鬱症狀的影響僅及於起始狀態；以及(3)師生和好朋友關係影響青少年長期憂鬱症狀的發展。研究結論顯示：家庭與學校脈絡中的動態變因，對青少年身心健康發展軌跡的影響，具不同時序的影響效果。英文摘要：Derived from a panel study on Taiwanese adolescents, this study intended to break through the limitations of cross-sectional studies and attempted to model the adolescents' initial status and the developments of their depressive symptoms with the latent growth curve model. The adolescents' self-esteem and several family and school contextual latent constructs (e.g., satisfaction with the parent-child relationship, school attachment, and relationships with teachers and friends) are factors affecting the developments of adolescents' well-beings.The participants consisted of 924 junior high school students who had completed repeated measurements over time. The results showed that self-esteem was the most crucial factor on the developments of adolescents' depressive symptoms. While an adolescent's satisfaction with parent-child relationship had little impact on an adolescent's initial status of depressive symptoms, the relationships with teachers and friends significantly influenced the changing path of an adolescent's depressive symptoms. The findings suggest that the impact of family and school contextual factors on the development of an adolescent's depressive symptoms varies over time.起始頁-結束頁：161-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201104.016101篇名：民間參與公共建設的迷思與現實：日本公立醫院PFI之<U+5553>示並列篇名：Myths and Reality of Funding Public Infrastructure Projects with Private Capital-Reflection from PFI-funded Public Hospitals in Japan作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：民營化;民間參與;公共建設;公私協力;民間財務啟動;privatization;private capital;public infrastructure;public-private partnership;private finance initiative期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：民間參與公共建設被視為是民營化政策的一環，是我國政府實現國際化、自由化的重要經濟發展策略。其政策目標在減輕政府財政負擔、精簡政府組織人才，以及提升公共建設的效率與服務品質，以達成促進國家社會經濟發展為最終目標，其中又以減輕政府財政負擔最為迫切。然而，該項政策推動的結果卻未如預期，部分公共建設的經營也產生嚴重虧損，使人不得不對民營化或公私協力的理論預期效益產生質疑。因此，本文以日本公立醫院為例來分析民間參與公共建設所可能產生的迷思與限制，並提出可供我國參考與借鏡之處。研究結果發現，民間參與公共建設可能會在五個面向上產生限制，分別是：(1)組織文化衝突、(2)提升公共設施經營管理效率、(3)減輕政府財政負擔、(4)長期契約風險、(5)事業特質等。作者認為若要減少民間參與公共建設所產生的限制，首要之務應先釐清公共建設本身的屬性與特質，以避免後續可能引發的相關問題。英文摘要：As one part of the privatization policy, funding public infrastructure projects with private capital is an important strategy of economic development of Taiwan's government to achieve internationalization and liberalization. The goal of the strategy aims to reduce government's financial burden, downsize talents in governmental organizations and enhance the efficiency and service quality of public infrastructure to achieve the ultimate goal of enhancing national economic and social development, especially reduce government's financial burden. However, results for the promotion of the policy have fall short of expectations, as the operations for part of the public infrastructure is in great deficit that results in doubts over the expected effects of privatization or public-private partnerships theory. Therefore, this paper conducts a case study on PFI (private finance initiative) hospitals in Japan to analyze the myths and restrictions of funding public infrastructure projects with private capital, further offering Taiwan for further reference.Research findings indicate that funding public infrastructure projects with private capital may give rise to restrictions on five dimensions (1) The conflicts in organizational culture; (2) Enhance operations management efficiency of public infrastructure; (3) Reduce government's financial burden; (4) Risks of long-term contracts, and (5) Business characteristics. This research suggests that clarifying the attributes and distinguishing characteristics of public infrastructure projects first will be the priority to reduce restrictions on funding public infrastructure projects with private capital, avoiding the condition that related problems may occur subsequently.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201106_(39).00012篇名：我國地方財政赤字之理論與實證分析並列篇名：The Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Local Fiscal Deficits in Taiwan作者：姚名鴻(Ming-Hung Yao)關鍵字：地方財政赤字;府際財政關係;官僚決策模型;追蹤資料迴歸模型;政治經濟;local fiscal deficit;intergovernmental fiscal relation;bureaucratic decision model;panel data regression model;political economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究首先利用Bird與Tarasov (2004)的定義，將補助款收入及補助款支出分別從歲入總額及歲出總額中扣除，以自主性收入及自主性支出計算我國直轄市及縣（市）政府從一九九八年至二<U+3007><U+3007>九年度的修正財政統計量。其次，本研究修正Martinez-Vazquez與Yao(2009)的賽局模型，藉由中央與地方政府首長追求預期得票率極大的決策行為，探討地方財政赤字的起因。以「五都」行政區改制前我國原有的2個直轄市及台灣省轄下21個縣（市）政府自一九九八至二<U+3007><U+3007>九年度資料為實證分析對象，依據固定效果模型的估計結果，本研究發現若地方首長與中央執政黨屬於同一政黨，則該地方政府的財政赤字問題愈嚴重，但效果並不顯著。其次，歲入的中央集權比例愈高，地方財政赤字問題愈惡化。第三，一地方政府轄區居民可支配所得水準愈高，該地方政府的財政狀況愈良好。第四，一地方政府轄區居民低收入戶人口比例愈高，則該地方政府的財政狀況愈窘困。第五，地方財政赤字的政治景氣循環現象並不顯著。第六，實質景氣循環顯著地影響一地方政府財政狀況，失業率愈高的地方政府，財政赤字問題愈嚴重。第七，現行的「財政收支劃分法」無法有效解決地方財政困境。最後，在控制了可能影響地方財政赤字的政治面、經濟面及制度面因素後，本文的實證研究發現我國直轄市的財政狀況較為舒緩，其次為省轄市政府，原台灣省轄下的縣政府財政缺口問題較嚴峻。英文摘要：Based on Bird and Tarasov (2004), this study calculated the fiscal statistics of the 2 municipality and 21 county (city) governments in Taiwan from 1998 to 2009. Then we revised the model of a two-player-two-stage game by Martinez-Vazquez and Yao (2009) to investigate the determinants of local government deficits. We further conducted a panel data analysis to verify the hypotheses derived from the theoretical model. Our empirical results show that the fiscal deficit of a local government is severe when the party affiliation between central and local governors is similar. The residents' income level is positively correlated with the adjusted fiscal statistics; on the other hand, the revenue centralization ratio, the ratio of poverty population, and the unemployment rate are negatively correlated with the adjusted fiscal statistics. We fail to find the evidence supporting the political business cycle in local deficit. The empirical results also show that the revision of the Law Governing Allocation of Government Revenues and Expenditures in 1999 did not significantly improve to the local government deficit problem in Taiwan. Finally, controlling for the political, economic and institutional factors, the fiscal condition of the municipality government is better than other local governments in Taiwan; meanwhile, the fiscal deficit problems of the county governments are much more severe.起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201106_(39).00023篇名：本土語言政策發展與復振的網絡分析並列篇名：Network Analysis on Development and Revitalization of Native Language Policy作者：黃建銘(Jian-Ming Huang)關鍵字：母語;語言政策;語言活力;語言復振;RLS;語言人權;政策網絡;mother tongue;language policy;language vitality;language revitalization;RLS;language right;policy network期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：語言是人類重要的資產，多語的社會反映多元文化的特質，故語言有其保存的價值，惟臺灣諸多本土語言歷經過去推行「國語」政策的影響，已逐漸瀕臨滅絕的危機，雖然民主化後，政府著手本土語言的推行，但本土語言的負面意象仍難破除，故如何減緩母語消逝的危機，乃是本文探討的主要問題。本文認為過去推行「國語」政策所導致語言雅俗化、語言世代化、語言階層化、語言地域化以及語言場所化等現象，嚴重限制母語的發展。而現階段本土語言政策似乎未能真正體認危機的存在，故政府應重新確認此一問題的本質，從政策網絡的觀點加以思考，將家庭、學校以及社區融入政策網絡，建構具體可行的本土語言政策。英文摘要：Languages are an essential asset of human being. A multi-languages society reflects features of multiple cultures, therefore, it is valuable to preserve languages. Nevertheless, in Taiwan, a lot of native languages suppressed by the Speaking-Mandarin policy have facing a crisis of language vanishing. Notwithstanding the government has pushing native language policy after democratization, it is still difficult to remove negative images of native languages. Consequently, this article aims to alleviate the crises of native languages.The article claims that there are some existing phenomena caused by pushing the Speaking-Mandarin policy, including language difference between elegance and vulgarity, language difference among generations, language class differentiation, language regionalization, language difference among places. That has restricting seriously the development of mother tongues. However, it seems that the native language policy so far has failed to address the crisis, so the government should review the nature of problems and consider that families, schools and communities are put in policy networks in order to construct concrete and feasible policies of native languages.起始頁-結束頁：71-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201106_(39).00034篇名：「信任」在電子治理中所扮演的角色：以文獻檢閱<U+7232>基礎的初探性分析並列篇名：Positioning "Trust" in E-Governance: An Exploratory Literature Review作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：電子治理;電子化政府;信任;科技接受模式;文獻分析法;e-governance;e-government;trust;technology acceptance model;literature review期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：39期出版年：2011中文摘要：在社會學、經濟學或公共行政與政治學界中，對於「信任」相關議題已經有相當多的討論，研究焦點大多集中在信任如何在社會系統或政治系統運作過程中產生影響（例如，人際信任或社會資本能否影響經濟及政治成效）？「信任」如何分類？不同層次信任之間的關係等。然而，當資訊及通訊科技(Information and Communication Technologies, ICTs)在1990年代大量進入政府運作過程，電子治理(e-governance)成為政府的新治理模式，或甚至被認為是一種公共行政的制度變遷時，卻很少有文獻談論傳統上相當受到重視的「民眾信任」，如何在ICTs應用所帶來的新治理方式中產生影響？如何建立民眾對於電子治理的信任？本文定位在文獻檢閱與整理工作。主要目的為透過文獻分析方法，一方面從概念上的討論開始，連結傳統公共行政與政治學領域，以及電子商務領域所討論的信任，找出信任在電子治理研究當中所扮演的角色；另一方面，則是在進入實證資料蒐集之前，從方法上尋找建構與測量電子治理民眾信任指標的方法。本文發現，目前相關文獻集中在「電子治理的支持或採用」此共有核心週邊。以此核心為中心點，目前電子治理文獻中對於「信任」議題的討論，大致上將信任設定在扮演「作為電子治理採用之自變數」（第一類文獻：角色Ⅰ），以及「作為電子治理採用與成效之依變數」（第二類文獻：角色Ⅱ）的雙元角色。在這雙元角色中，信任又可以區分出許多不同的概念化定義。英文摘要：The importance of trust has been recognized in public administration, political science, sociology, and economics. In the field of public administration, most studies argue it is not only the crucial link between citizen and government, but also the base of social capital.Since Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) became essential instruments in governments in 1980s, e-governance grew into a new model of public administration, and now is seen as an emerging paradigm. Even with its new popularity, however, only a small portion of literature has paid attention to the role of ”trust” in the digital world. Does trust have a new conceptual definition in e-governance? What role does it play in e-governance? The main purposes of this paper are to answer the questions above; to position the ”trust” in the (e) governing process; and to explore the operationalization of its new role in this digital era. This study hopes to supplement insufficient academic attention on citizen trust in e-governance, and find ways to increase the adoption of e-governance by the citizens through enhancing trust.起始頁-結束頁：105-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201106_(39).00045篇名：政策合法化過程行政官員與立法委員論述的內容分析－審議民主的觀點並列篇名：Content Analysis of Administrators' and Legislators' Discourse in Policy Legitimation-Deliberative Democracy Perspective作者：劉姵吟(Pei-Yin Liu);黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang)關鍵字：審議民主;政策合法化;內容分析;立法院;政策論述;deliberative democracy;policy legitimation;content analysis;the Legislative Yuan;policy discourse期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：政策合法化階段為政策執行的基礎前提，在代議民主的制度設計下，政策合法化係行政官員與立法委員相互對話之結果，且兩者應透過具備審議民主精神的論述內容，強化決策的正當性與品質，然而此主題過去卻為學界所忽略。本文從多元性、互惠性、尊重性、與合理性等面向探究政策合法化論述之審議民主精神，透過個案比較研究法，選取大學法與私立學校法的修法過程進行內容分析。研究結果顯示，立法委員論述的互惠性、多元性、尊重性、與合理性皆有待加強；行政官員的論述則過於保守與消極，缺乏合理性精神。審議民主精神的不足應與兩者的制度性角色要求相關。基於研究發現，本文建議應於現制中增加立法委員彼此間互動與對話的誘因，以更接近審議民主之理想；並鼓勵行政官員發表積極論述，強化其合理性進而發揮更多影響力。本文為一初探性嘗試，未來學界可根據實務觀察，建構更完善的評估指標，甚至輔以制度論角度，裨益於對政策合法化論述的審議精神有更全面性地解釋。英文摘要：Policy legitimation is the prerequisite of policy implementation. Under the representative democracy, policy legitimation results from the interaction between administrators and legislators. And they should strengthen the legitimacy and quality of decision-making by deliberative discourse. However, this process is ignored by the academia in the past. This study investigates the policy legitimation discourse from the perspective of deliberative democracy, specifically from the aspects of diversity, reciprocity, respect, and reasonableness. The author selected the processes of amending the University Act and the Private School Law by comparative study of cases, and used the content analysis as the research method. The results show the attributes such as reciprocity, diversity, respect, and reasonableness in the legislators' policy legitimation discourse have a great room for improvement. Administrators are always conservative and passive, and there is a lack of the reasonableness in the discourse. The difference between legislators and administrators' discourses may relate to respective institutional roles. Accordingly, this study suggests current system should give legislators more incentives to interact with each other, and to promote the deliberative spirit of the discourse. The institution should encourage administrators to be more active in making arguments, to enhance reasonableness and exert more influence. This study also gives suggestions to further studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201103_(38).00016篇名：地方建設BOT治理模式之績效研究：治理結構之觀點並列篇名：Performance Studies on Governance of Local Infrastructure by BOT Modes: Viewpoints of Governance Structure作者：汪明生(Ming-Sheng Wang);曾玉祥(Yu-Siang Zeng)關鍵字：BOT模式治理;交易成本;治理結構;績效;資產專用性;BOT modes governance;transaction cost;governance structure;performance;asset specificity期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以治理結構之概念，應用於地方建設BOT模式之治理，將BOT模式之治理分為準市場、準廠商之混合模型，然後以交易成本及資產專用性強度為基礎，研究其治理績效，據以瞭解BOT方案的達成度，驗證推動BOT方案適合以何種模式經營。  本文之研究設計，以18種地方建設方案為標的，假設可行性、需要性、融資易、低風險、報酬、廠商意願六項準則為績效指標，其中融資易（不確定性低）、低風險（資產專用性低）二項準則為低交易成本指標。研究方法以德菲法徵詢學者專家意見，尋求一致性後，以集群分析及階層迴歸驗證結果。  結果顯示推動BOT之地方建設方案，醫院、停車場、靈骨塔、渡假旅館、遊樂區、勞工住宅、焚化爐等有較高績效，U檢定顯示其相對效率有顯著差異，階層迴歸顯示交易成本有高解釋力，上開方案傾向準市場模型特性，資產專用性低導致交易成本較低。  由區組集群分析驗證，交易成本低之區組與績效高之區組，二者觀察體的集群分類相同，並有高解釋力，顯示交易成本低為方案取得高績效之原因。  由驗證之結論，BOT模式治理之經營，資產專用性低的方案適合準市場模式經營，資產專用性高的方案適合準廠商模式經營，支持治理結構之理論假說。英文摘要：This article takes the viewpoints of governance structure to apply to governance of local infrastructure by BOT modes which is divided into the mixed models of quasi-market or quasi-firms. Next, transaction cost and the strength of asset specificity are the bases to study the governance performance to understand the achievements of BOT program and prove which model is adequate to operate and promote BOT projects.This study design focuses on 18 local infrastructure projects to assume 6 criteria of practicability, desirability, easily financing, low risk, remuneration, and manufactures' intentions as the performance index, two criteria of easily financing (low uncertainty) and low risks (low asset specificity) as the low transaction costs index. The research method is to ask experts and scholars for opinions by Delphi method and look for consistency, cluster analysis and hierarchical regression are used to verify the results.The findings show that the local infrastructure promoted by BOT such as hospitals, parking lots, Columbarium Pagodas, Resort hotels, Amusement parks, labor housing and Incinerators, etc. have higher performances. U test shows that it has significant differences in relative efficiency. The hierarchical regression shows that transaction cost has high explanatory power. The abovementioned projects are inclined to the property of quasi-market model, and manifest lower asset specificity causes lower transaction cost.The sections of low transaction cost and high performance are verified by cluster analysis. The cluster classification of two observing objects is the same and has high explanatory power which shows low transaction is the reason for the program to achieve high performances.The conclusion of the operation governed by BOT modes is that the projects of low asset specificity is suitable for quasi-market model and the projects of high asset specificity is suitable for the mixed model of quasi-firms which stands for the theoretical proposition of governance structure.起始頁-結束頁：49-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201103_(38).00027篇名：國賠案件中基層官僚機關的行<U+7232>動機與行<U+7232>類型並列篇名：Behavioral Motives and Styles of Street-level Bureaucracy in State Compensation Cases作者：陳智昆(Jhi-Kuen Chen)關鍵字：基層官僚機關;國家賠償;服務;私利;專業主義;street-level bureaucracy;State Compensation;service;self-interest;professionalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：基層官僚機關在公共政策過程上扮演關鍵性的角色，除了聽命執行以外亦創制決策。政府實務與學術研究皆追尋優良的公共服務品質，如何驅使基層官僚機關致力於良好的服務是大哉問，對其服務動機與行為的探討更是一項重要的研究課題。本研究利用司法判決做為評斷標準，以二手分析法取材於法院的裁判書與報紙的新聞報導，藉以探究基層官僚機關在國家賠償案件中的反應，以此釐清其行為類型、辨明其動機所在。結果顯示，基層官僚機關在49.48%的案件中以私利為考量，消極地面對民眾的國賠訴求。英文摘要：Street-level bureaucracy casts the important role in the process of public policy. It does implementation and makes decisions. Both government and scholar circle devoted to develop excellent quality of public services. How to drive street-level bureaucracy to provide good services would be a big question. To detect and explore street-level bureaucracy's behaviors and motives is rather a significant research question. This research takes court judgment as analytic standard, uses secondary analysis by collecting results of judgments and rulings and newspaper data, and then studies street-level bureaucracy's behavioral motives and styles by exploring their response in State Compensation cases. The results show that street-level bureaucracy responses with self-interest and passively in 49.48% cases.起始頁-結束頁：75-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201103_(38).00038篇名：推動性別主流化之過程評估：架構建立與先導研究並列篇名：Evaluating the Implementation Process of Gender Mainstreaming in Taiwan: Framework Building and a Pilot Study作者：彭渰雯(Yen-Wen Peng);李秉叡(Ping-Jui Li)關鍵字：性別主流化;過程評估;執行評估;評估架構;先導研究;gender mainstreaming;process evaluation;implementation evaluation;evaluation framework;pilot study期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：38期出版年：2011中文摘要：行政院各部會自2005年10月起，展開為期4年的第一階段「性別主流化實施計畫」，已在2009年底告一段落，也產生了對執行過程之評估的需求，以回饋第二階段計畫之進行。基此，本研究參考歐盟研究各國性別主流化執行經驗的評估架構，以及國際間性別主流化相關文獻的討論，針對第一階段各部會執行性別主流化實施計畫的情形，設計一套包含目標、行動者與工具等3個構面、6個子題的評估架構與問卷題項。接著，作者將問卷發送給各部會性別業務承辦人，進行了一次先導研究，以瞭解第一階段性別主流化推動概況，以及本套評估架構的適用度。本文除了逐一說明6個子題的評估結果之外，也在最後的討論中，從題項設計及資料蒐集策略等方面，檢討本次前導研究的經驗，並提出對於未來正式的過程評估之建議。英文摘要：Starting since October 2005 and lasted for 4 years, the first phase of Gender Mainstreaming Program in the central government in Taiwan has come to its end. This research draws on the insight of EQUAPOL research study that assessed the progress and impact of gender-sensitive policies in the European Union, and develops its own framework to evaluate the implementation process of the Gender Mainstreaming Program in Taiwan. The authors designed a structured questionnaire that embodied six sub-dimensions for evaluation, and conducted a pilot study on the frontline bureaucrats who were in charge of gender mainstreaming affairs. This paper explores the results of the pilot study, reflecting on the strength and weakness of the evaluation framework and research design, and then concludes with some suggestions for further process evaluation research.起始頁-結束頁：115-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201103_(38).000401篇名：資訊提供與立法院政治信任－使用IVOD的探索性研究並列篇名：Providing Information for Citizen's Political Trust to Congress: An Exploratory Study through IVOD作者：王宏恩(Austin Horng-En Wang)關鍵字：立法委員;立法院;政治信任;IVOD;準實驗設計;外在事實與腦中圖像理論;Legislative Yuan;Political Trust;IVOD;The World Outside and The Pictures In Our Heads期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：我國民眾對立法院政治信任逐年下降，過往文獻大多認<U+7232>此現象與立法委員們及立法院表現不佳有關，但此說法可能隱含『人民清楚了解立法院運作實況並進以評斷』之假設。傳播理論中『外在事實與腦中圖像』理論，暗示民眾對立法院評價的依據，並非親身接觸的事實，而是媒體再過濾後的資訊，民眾依此片段形成腦中對立法院的想像進以評價其信任。當民眾獲得更多立法院運作實況，是否會因而改變腦中圖像，更<U+7232>信任立法院？藉社團法人公民監督國會聯盟募集的170位參與立法院網際網路多媒體隨選視訊系統(IVOD)立委評鑑的民眾，本文以準實驗設計衡量這些主動參與的民眾看完4小時IVOD後對於立法院政治信任的改變。實證結果顯示，大部份的受試者觀看完某一委員會完整會議影片後，對立法院政治信任顯著提高。也對媒體的公正性產生懷疑，認<U+7232>媒體過往提供的資訊相較於影片內容並不完整。迴歸模型顯示，民眾對立法院政治信任的提升量與影片中立委平均表現有顯著的正相關。本文的研究結果，暗示了現階段調查民眾對於立法院的政治信任，可能只是『民眾是否信任媒體上的立法院形象』，而非『民眾是否信任立法院實際運作狀況』。本文的結果也加強了追求國會透明的正當性。英文摘要：Taiwan citizen's political trust toward Legislative Yuan has been decreasing since 1987. Previous researches attribute the decrease to bad behaviors and inefficiency in Legislative Yuan, but the explanation depends on an assumption that citizens indeed realize and then evaluate what happened in Congress. ”The World Outside and The Pictures in Our Heads” Theory indicates that people evaluate the Congress basing not on what they'd experienced by themselves, but on partial and biased information provided by mass media. Will people increase their trust to Legislative Yuan when they receive information about it? Thanks to the data from Citizen Congress Watch, this article finds out that Parliament Broadcast Internet Multimedia Video On Demand System (IVOD), which provides intact congressional video records to viewers, significantly in average enhances 170 viewers' trust toward Legislative Yuan, after they randomly watched 4 hours of committee meeting video. Regression analysis shows high correlation exists between Citizen's change of political trust and the average quality of legislators the citizen saw on IVOD. Therefore, this article infers that the decrease of political trust to Legislative Yuan in Taiwan might be because people do not receive what Legislative Yuan actually did. Besides, this article also ensures the importance and necessity of Congress Transparency.起始頁-結束頁：161-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201109.01612篇名：阿拉伯之春的<U+5553>示與反思並列篇名：Some Reflections on the Arab Spring作者：蔡秀勤(Lydia Hsiu-Chin Tsai);張佑宗(Yu-Tzung Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：199-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201109.01993篇名：資訊公開法的實踐－台灣地方政府財務資訊揭露並列篇名：The Practice of "The Freedom of Government Information Law" on Taiwan's Local Government Financial Information Disclosure on the Internet作者：何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho);郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo);吳佳穎(Chia-Ying Wu)關鍵字：資訊公開;網路財務揭露;地方政府網站;information disclosure;internet financial disclosure index;local government website期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：地方政府利用網路進行財務訊息的揭露，傳遞最新資訊給人民，以使民眾瞭解政府部門的施政績效。本文建立衡量我國地方政府在網路揭露財務資訊的衡量指標，並探討對其造成影響之決定因素，藉此來瞭解我國地方政府在資訊公開法的要求之下使用網路公開其財務資訊的情況以及動機。採用真有相似格式的各縣市預、決算財務報告。以我國25縣市政府在2009年2月於各縣市政府網站揭露之財務資訊進行財務訊息提供的類型、訊息品質特性及網站設計可親近性加以記點。並探討造成揭露財務訊息程度不同的影響因素。實證結果顯示25個縣市資訊公開程度以中位數區分<U+7232>高、低公開組。發現各縣市政府在網路上公開其財務資訊較多的縣市，通常是府會較和諧、人口數較多、教育水準較高的縣市。而討論各縣市存在財務資訊公開差異因素的實證結果發現，「現任首長是否<U+7232>連任」以及「政黨一致性」並不是重要影響公開程度的因素。但是當人口數增加的|侍候，對資訊公開程度有負面影響。負債越多，會越願意公開其財務資訊。縣市政府被媒體報導的次數越多，網站設計也更加可親。英文摘要：This paper investigates the internet financial disclosure index in Taiwan's local government. We use governmental financial disclosure on the Web as an index to analyze public financial accountability. The index is built from data obtained from the web-sites of 25 Taiwan's local governments. The index includes 3 parts of information, the categories of disclosure financial statement, the qualities of disclosure financial information and the convenience of internet searching. The result shows that ”high disclosure” local governments are those with less political competition, less population and higher education governments. The determinants for Taiwan's local government web-financial disclosure are population, public debt balance and press visibility.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.00014篇名：環境資訊公開的民主實踐課題－以霄裡溪光電廢水汙染爭議<U+7232>例並列篇名：Democratic Practice of Environmental Information Disclosure-A Lesson from Siaoli River Pollution Disputes作者：杜文苓(Wen-Ling Tu);李翰林(Han-Lin Li)關鍵字：資訊公開;環境資訊;光電廢水;高科技污染;奧爾胡斯公約;霄裡溪;information disclosure;environmental information;optoelectronic wastewater;high-tech pollution;Aarhus Convention;Siaoli River期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：政府資訊公開與公共決策透明，是落實環境民主決策的基礎要件。尤其面對複雜的科技發展，伴隨而至的環境風險充滿不確定性，使當令環境治理充滿挑戰。而政府資訊公開與決策資訊透明，已成<U+7232>解決當前環境治理困境行政程序中不可或缺的一環。我國2005年公佈施行《政府資訊公開法》，希望便利人民共享與公平使用政府資訊，保障人民的知情權，並促進民主參與。政府資訊公開雖完成法制化的基礎工作，但環境資訊的公開實踐課題卻少有討論，尤其環境風險之相關資訊，更有生產與運用之權力關係問題。本文以霄裡溪光電廢水汙染爭議<U+7232>例，探討政府、民間團體、與企業在爭議過程中的資訊生產與資訊解讀，並從公民主動要求、申請資訊的動態過程，勾勒環境資訊民主實踐的樣貌，提出進一步值得省思的課題。我們也嘗試追間，在現行法制化的基礎上，落實環境資訊透明，還需要哪些制度性的支持與資源的配合？透過相關檔案資料、會議紀錄的分析，輔以深度訪談，本文探究霄裡溪汙染爭議中一般公民所面臨的資訊取得障礙，了解台灣環境爭議中不利於資訊公開之制度性因素。英文摘要：Government information disclosure and transparency are essential elements in an environmental decision making process. But its actual implementation poses a tremendous challenge to today's environmental governance, particularly in light of the uncertain environmental risks associated with complex technological developments. Government information disclosure and decision-making transparency have become an integral part of the current administrative procedure in resolving environmental management dilemmas. Taiwan has promulgated ”Government Information Transparency Law” in 2005 with the desire to promote democratic participation and to safeguard the people's right to information disclosure by facilitating the distribution and fair use of government information to the public. Although the disclosure of government information may have achieved its basic goal in the legal sense, in reality it has garnered little discussion in actual implementation; especially in the problematic area of the right to production and consumption of environmental risk related information. This article takes the Siaoli River optoelectronic wastewater pollution dispute as an example; examines information production and interpretation between the government, the public, and the manufacturers during the course: and outlines the dynamic process of Taiwan's environmental information disclosure as a topic worthy of further reflection. We also strive to inquire what further institutional support and resources could strengthen the implementation of environmental information disclosure under Taiwan's political climate. Through the analysis of the relevant documents, meeting minutes, and in depth interviews; this paper explores information barriers facing the ordinary citizens in the Siaoli River pollution dispute and pinpoints what institutionalized factors are obstructive to Taiwan's information disclosure system in such environmental disputes.起始頁-結束頁：59-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.00595篇名：選舉結果、政治學習與民主支持－兩次政黨輪替後台灣公民在民主態度與價值的變遷並列篇名：Electoral Outcomes, Political Learning, and Support for Democracy: Changes in Citizens' Attitudes towards Democracy in Taiwan after the Year 2000作者：張佑宗(Yu-Tzung Chang)關鍵字：選舉結果;政治學習;政治社會化;民主支持;民主鞏固;electoral outcomes;political learning;political socialization;support for democracy;democratic consolidation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：對一個新興民主國家而言，政黨輪替是過去從未發生過的脈絡變遷，公民被迫要適應學習這種新的政治環境，而且會因其選舉結果而出現不同的學習路徑，這些脈絡因素都對公民的民主態度變遷造成影響。2008年台灣發生第二次政黨輪替，如果與2000年第一次政黨輪替相比，公民對民主的態度是否有所轉變？透過統計模型的分析，台灣的民主經驗顯示，隨著台灣民主的持續，直接的民主支持很快獲得社會的認同，間接民主支持的增長則較緩慢。世代差異主要呈現在間接的民主支持度上，而不是在直接的民主支持度。泛綠支持者不論經歷贏家或輸家，在直接民主支持度上，都遠高於泛藍支持者與政黨中立者。另一方面，不論泛藍或泛綠支持者，如果在某次選舉是贏家的話，民主價值的發展有倒退或停滯狀態的現象；另一方面，選舉輸家在民主價值上，則有大幅度的成長。年齡與直接的民主支持，呈現一種「U型」的因果關係。但是年齡與間接的民主支持，卻呈現一種「倒U型」的因果關係。因此，制度因素可以解釋直接民主支持度的變遷，世代差異與生命週期可以解釋間接民主支持度的變遷，而選舉結果則同時影響這兩種民主支持度的變遷。英文摘要：For new democracies, rotation of power between parties is an experience without precedent. Citizens are forced to learn to adapt to this new type of political environment, and furthermore, will adopt different paths of learning depending on the political environment. These different contextual factors also impact changes in citizens' attitudes towards democracy. We are interested in the question of how changes in citizens' political attitudes after Taiwan's first rotation of power compare with changes after the second rotation, in particular given the reversal of the ”winner” and ”loser” roles. Taiwan's experience reveals that when a democratic system remains in place over time, direct support for democracy quickly achieves high levels, but indirect support for democracy grows at a slower pace. Differences over time are much more pronounced when we measure indirect support for democracy. Direct support for democracy is consistently significantly higher among pan-green supporters than both their pan-blue rivals and unaligned voters, regardless of the success or otherwise of pan-green politicians at the polls. In addition, both pan-blue and pan-green supporters express almost universal satisfaction at the election result when their side wins, and dissatisfaction with opposition checks on the activities of the government. Measuring age against direct support for democracy produces a U-shaped correlation, but against indirect support for democracy we find instead a reverse U-shaped correlation. Therefore, institutional factors can explain changes in direct support for democracy: and generational differences with life cycle can explain changes in indirect support for democracy, while election results affect both direct and indirect support for democracy.起始頁-結束頁：99-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.00996篇名：探索政治議題感知的世代差異－一個媒介效果的觀點並列篇名：Exploring the Generation Differences on Perception of Political Issues: A Media Effects Perspective作者：陳憶寧(Yi-Ning Katherine Chen)關鍵字：世代;台灣社會變遷調查;政治議題;媒介;新聞;generations;media;news;political issues;Taiwan Social Change Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的主要目的在探討不同世代的媒介使用與政治議題感知的關係。本研究發現，市民、嬰兒潮以及年輕世代的重要議題感知沒有顯著差異，然而，媒介使用的確不同，而不同的媒介使用、媒介依賴程度和可信度與民眾的政治議題感知之間的確有所關聯，且網路新聞的影響力不可忽視。本文以2008年中研院社會變遷調查<U+7232>資料來源，分析結果顯示年輕世代使用網路新聞的時間在政治議題感知的影響力凌駕於電視與報紙，但是其他世代的分析當中，並未見網路使用時間、網路新聞依賴程度以及網路新聞可信度對於政治議題感的影響，但是對報紙新聞的依賴以及電視新聞的可信度可以預測部分的政治議題感知。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine whether generation differences exist in media effects on acquiring important political issues. The results showed that there were no significant differences in important issues among the youngest, baby boomers, and the civic generations. However, there were differences in effects of media use, media reliance, and media credibility on political issues recognition. Internet obviously plays an important role in the youngest generation. Using data from Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS) based in Academia Sinica, our analyses showed that time spent on Internet news in the youngest generation served as a better predictor than time spent on TV news and newspaper news. Although time spent on Internet news, reliance on Internet news, and Internet news credibility did not predict any political issues cognition in the other two generations, the extent of reliance on newspaper news and TV news credibility predicted political issues recognition to certain degree.起始頁-結束頁：139-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.01397篇名：透明治理工具的虛幻與現實並列篇名：The Illusion and Reality of Transparency Inspired Governing Tools作者：陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：183-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.01838篇名：行政改革路徑中之政府透明化工程並列篇名：Governmental Transparency in the Path of Administrative Reform作者：胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu);蘇珊妮•皮歐裘斯基(Suzanne J. Piotrowski)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：197-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.01979篇名：世界民主大事紀　2011年1-3月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: January-March 2011期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：203-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201106.020310篇名：我們培育孩子成<U+7232>全球公民嗎？－從全球教育觀對國小社會教科書的論述分析並列篇名：Will Our Children Become Global Citizens? Discourse Analysis on Social Studies Textbooks in Taiwan's Elementary Schools from the Perspective of Global Education作者：周珮儀(Pei-I Chou);鄭明長(Ming-Chang Cheng)關鍵字：全球教育;教科書;社會科;global education;textbook;social studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究針對國小社會教科書的全球化論述進行論述分析並提出改進建議，研究結果如下：一、雖然主流論述在字面上強調在地與全球連結，但是並未從學生的生活世界理解全球化的基本概念和發展歷程。二、雖然主流論述注意到「時空壓縮」轉變空間概念，但是其全球空間往往指涉國外而排除台灣，並缺乏全球地理的基本概念和生態相互依存的系統觀點。三、主流論述敘說台灣如何受到外來殖民的壓迫，呈現台灣歷史事件時並未提供相對參照的全球歷史發展，傾向單面向的台灣歷史意識，缺乏過去、現在、未來互動的全球史觀。四、主流論述關注文化議題而忽視經濟議題。英文摘要：This study applies Foucault's discourse analysis to illuminate what is said and is not said, and what the superficial and deeper meanings is of each social studies textbook currently used in elementary schools in Taiwan. The findings are as follows:1. The discourses in these textbooks superficially touch on the linkage between globalization and localization, but do not explain clear enough how the process has been developing.2. The discourses state that the networks of globalization have changed the meaning of space. However, they also strangely imply that Taiwan is passively shaped by the process of globalization while not actively contributing anythi1lg significant to it. Besides, they lack necessary geographical knowledge for students to cultivate basic global consciousness.3. The discourses concerns history events only related to Taiwan, without explaining what those events meant in context to the development of global history. In addition, the they also fall short in terms of offering a comprehensive part of global history.4. The discourses emphasize the importance of multiculturalism, but economic issues have been largely ignored.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201103.000101篇名：台北雙城記？一個選舉地理的考察並列篇名：A Tale of Two Taipei Cities? Electoral Geography and Aggregate Votes作者：徐永明(Yung-Ming Hsu)關鍵字：選舉地理;空間分析;社經發展;總統選舉;縣市長選舉;民進黨;electoral geography;spatial analysis;socioeconomic development;presidential election;municipal elections;DPP期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以台北縣市過去各層次的選舉結果（總統／縣市長）為例，探討兩縣市除了相鄰與同一縣市內的鄉鎮市區民進黨選票互動關係外，是否存在其他決定鄉鎮市區選票互動影響的因素。藉由空間分析方法的運用，顯示除了代表地理位置的「鄰近空間關係」與「行政區域劃分」會影響鄉鎮市區之間選票相互關係之外，各鄉鎮市區之間的社經發展程度，反而更顯著影響鄉鎮市區選票之間的互動效果。換句話說，除了鄰近或是同一縣市鄉鎮市區的選票增加，會促使該鄉鎮市區的選票提升之外，相同社經發展程度鄉鎮市區選票的增加，同樣會使得該鄉鎮市區選票提升，且其選票提升的程度比受到鄰近或是相同縣市等地理性質影響的程度更大。因此，本文強調選舉地理研究的區域性不只空間距離與行政區域劃分，亦因著重在整體地區社經發展的關係，以不同網絡背景來探討選票之間互動影響關係的方式。亦即台北縣市的雙城代表性，不只是受到鄰近性質的地理因素影響，且選票的互動關係，跨越了行政區域的劃分，而是受到社經發展程度的影響。我們依據選舉地理空間分析所提供的架構，提出一項更為廣泛探討鄰近(neighborhood)與環境背景(context)對於選票互動關係影響的分析方式。針對未來的選舉地理研究，發展出一項更為完善的分析模式與研究架構。英文摘要：This paper aims to investigate the electoral interaction between the two Taipei cities. We argue that there is another social network factor that can be used to explain the connections between the two Taipei cities beyond the electoral geography. We re-examine the spatial effect using three definitions: (1) the neighborhood interaction of the region, (2) the administrative divisions of the region, (3) the socioeconomic development degree of the region. The empirical result using a spatial autoregressive model shows that the interaction of the region in a social network (socioeconomic development) is more important than the neighborhood interaction of the region and the administrative divisions. The conclusion shows that the social network interaction of the region must be considered in election analysis.起始頁-結束頁：181-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201106.01812篇名：混和研究與質量爭議x並列篇名：Mixed Research and the Qualitative-Quantitative Debate作者：郭秋永(Chiu-Yeoung Kuo)關鍵字：典範;典範戰爭;質量爭議;質方法;量方法;混和方法;paradigm;paradigm wars;qualitative-quantitative debate;quantitative method;qualitative method;mixed methods期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：在社會科學方法論的研究領域中，一些著名學者曾將近三十年來的發展大勢，分成「質典範」、「量典範」、以及「混和典範」等三個時期。根據這些學者的見解，所謂第三個發展時期的「混和典範」，乃是整合「質典範」與「量典範」而成的一個新典範，從而意指它已經終結了「質量爭議」或「典範戰爭」。誠然，近幾年來，奠基在「混和典範」之上所進行的「混和研究」，確實所在多有，也出版了許多期刊論文與專門書籍，但是「混和典範」是否能夠或已經終結了「典範戰爭」，卻惹起廣泛而又深入的一連串質疑。這一連串質疑所涉及的棘手課題，大體上仍是「質量爭議」中長期以來尚未解決的根本課題。面對這些糾纏不清的棘手課題，本文試圖透過一個簡單區分與一個研究實例，去澄清其中幾個課題的關鍵所在，進而提出一些暫時性的解答。英文摘要：Some famous scholars have divided the general developmental trend of social science methodology over the past 30 years into the following three periods: the period of ”quantitative paradigm”, the period of ”qualitative paradigm”, and the period of ”mixed paradigm”. According to the opinion of these scholars, ”mixed paradigm”, the so-called paradigm of the third period, has integrated the ”quantitative paradigm” and the ”qualitative paradigm” into a new paradigm, and thus terminates the ”qualitative-quantitative debate” or ”paradigm wars”.Indeed, the number of articles and books of the ”mixed methods research”, which is based on a ”mixed paradigm”, have rapidly increased in recent years, but whether the ”mixed paradigm” can or has already ended the ”paradigm war” has created a series of contestable problems. On the whole, complicated and thorny problems are still basic unresolved subjects in the ”qualitative-quantitative debate” and have been for a long time. In the face of these persistent thorny problems, this article, by using a simple classification and a example of research practice, attempts to clarify several key points and puts forward some temporary answers.起始頁-結束頁：1-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201103.00013篇名：人間與《政府論兩篇》並列篇名：The Mortal World (Ren-Jian) and Two Treatises of Government作者：陳瑞崇(Jui-Chung Chen)關鍵字：洛克;政府論兩篇;財產;勞動;政治社會;John Locke;Two Treatises of Government;property;labor;political society期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：財產權之倡議與私產制之確立是為反映、擴大或是用來引導和限制人的貪婪天性？如果設立政治社會與政府的目的是用來保障財產及財產權，是不是同時保障或限制人之貪婪天性，包括無窮之欲望與滿足欲望之行動？人為何天性貪婪？本文擬證成以下見解：《政府論兩篇》乃作者體察神不在人間之真實，期以聖經詮釋與「論政府」供世人自救於生活困局的論辯。神之創世與造人雖是計畫，亞當與夏娃之被逐卻屬意外。先祖違背上帝意旨，子孫萬難期望神再臨塵世。世人唯有設法，就在此世以財產權之聲稱及巨大強制力安置此生為安身立命所不可或缺，卻又容易引人無限貪欲的財產，由此推演出成立國家與政府的必要性與合理性，也展現洛克對政治與人生之關聯的見解。那就是人獨在人間，若欲挽救墮落之格局，唯有人以不違逆上帝之賜福及對人類自愛愛人之期許，接受獨在人間的事實，以同意與授權為手段，以有限立法為體制之樞紐，以保衛社會作為無可退讓的立足點，造起純粹出於人之理性與力量且無待神意或神力以行永固人間之效的政治秩序。英文摘要：Whether the purpose of advocacy and the establishment of the institution of private property are to reflect, expand or guide and restrict human greed? If the ultimate purpose of political society and government are going to preserve private property and property right, are political society and government also going to protect or limit human greed, including endless human desires and their implementation? Why the human is greed innately?This article intends to justify the following arguments: John Locke's ”Two Treatises of Government” is a debate concerning how a legitmate government evolved from the human effort to deliver from human predicament which arose from the genuine truth-God created human and left them to conduct a mortal and laborous life alone without enlightening any ready-made ways to live peacefully together in the chaos of meaning, value, and authorty. The proper and easy way to acquire sufficient property in the new world became the first urgent issue for human to execute the God’s blessing, 'Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it.' Both of a critical bibical interpreation for refuting Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha and a Lockean theory of limited governmental power that generated from the consent of the majority provided two influential solutons for the human conditions in the state of nature. Locke's arguments in this materpiece embodied an impressive but uneasy situation for everyone in this mortal world that God created the world and all things, and the human was blessed to become the master to govern the earth for God, however, without appreciating the suitable approach to implement this donation. Therefore, political power and its necessary discourse concerning ”what is the political” were the entirely secular relucant human inventions to shelter ourselves from the destined saling in ”a boundless and bottomless sea.”起始頁-結束頁：65-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201103.00654篇名：北冰洋安全問題與區域安全治理之挑戰並列篇名：Security Issues and Regional Security Governance in the Arctic Ocean作者：蔡明彥(Ming-Yen Tsai);李玫憲(Mei-Hsien Lee)關鍵字：北冰洋;北極融冰;北極航線;安全治理;聯合國海洋法公約;Arctic Ocean;Arctic melting;Arctic routes;security governance;United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在探討北極融冰所衍生之安全問題及區域安全治理面臨之挑戰。有鑑於「治理」這個概念在國際安全研究中的應用尚屬發展階段，本文將先綜整研究文獻，釐清「安全治理」的確切意涵，做為本文的分析立論。其次，本文將分別從地緣戰略競逐、資源開發爭端、大陸礁層爭奪、西北航道爭議以及生態環境安全等面向，逐一說明北冰洋安全問題的發展脈絡。另外，本文分析牽涉北冰洋安全事務主要行為者，包括俄羅斯、美國、加拿大、丹麥和挪威等國的政策立場，以瞭解各國立場的異同。最後則是檢視近年來北冰洋地區安全治理之實踐，以及其所面臨的主要挑戰。英文摘要：This study aims to explore security issues and regional security governance in the Arctic Ocean. Given that the study of ”governance” is still in a preliminary phase, this paper starts with examining the existing literature to offer a definite concept of ”security governance” for the analysis of the Arctic case. Second, it explains the context of security issues, through the examination of geopolitical values, energy economic interests, continental shelf disputes, the Northwest Passage's position, and environmental security. Third, it analyzes the stances of main actors involved in the arctic security affairs, including Russia, U.S., Canada, Demark, and Norway. Finally, it discusses the practices and challenges of developing regional security governance in the Arctic Ocean.起始頁-結束頁：113-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201103.01135篇名：國立故宮博物院院長之角色扮演及行銷策略個案分析並列篇名：A Case Study of National Palace Museum's Directors, Their Roles, and Their Marketing Strategy作者：魯炳炎(Wilbur Bing-Tan Lu);林佩宜(Pei-Yi Li)關鍵字：協力領導;非營利組織;故宮;使命;博物館行銷;collaborative leadership;nonprofit organization;National Palace Museum;mission;museum marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：進入廿一世紀以來，屬於文化與遊憩類非營利組織的國立故宮博物院營運方向深深受到院長角色扮演的影響，本文基於深度訪談的內容，探討第二次政黨輪替前後故宮院長的領導統御或經營管理風格如何影響行銷策略的運用。研究結果發現，有沒有必要採用行銷策略進行博物館行銷取決於院長的博物館治理思維和未來願景規劃以及外在政策環境的演變，由於故宮院長對於歷史文物的認定詮釋在不同政黨執政期間並不相同，從而影響到使命任務的自詡與行銷策略的運用。此外，使命感的召喚使得政治立場並不相同的故宮院長更迭其實沒有真正影響到博物館的專業治理，基於故宮設立宗旨所賦予使命的凝聚與引導也形成不同院長進行博物館行銷時的共識基礎，而具有中國特色的館藏文物以及長期以來深植人心之服務與專業的故宮品牌也成為博物館行銷最大的資產。對於公共部門的啟發意義則在於，當面對變動不居的政策環境時，政策企業家或公共管理者的領導統御與創新理念必須基於公共利益，以協力領導的作為促成政策目標的達成。英文摘要：Since the 21st century, as a not-for-profit museum, the director's role of the National Palace Museum has been subjected to accelerated change, due to the change in party after the election and a refocusing of government policy. Based on in-depth interviewing, this paper explores the leadership and management styles of the former and present director of National Palace Museum that influence museum marketing strategies. The research results indicate that the necessity of adopting museum marketing strategy is up to the strategic thinking and vision planning of the museum directors and external policy environment. Because of different recognition and interpretation of the Chinese historical collections for different changing roles of directors, the former and present directors exercise upon mission statement formulation of the museum management and diverse marketing strategies. Moreover, mission statements can be seen as the consensus base for different directors, whereas the brand of the National Palace Museum is the powerful assest in a changing policy context. When branding brings together tools of the museum directors to communicate a clear message to consumers in an increasingly complex marketplace, marketing is no longer a dirty word. To the public sector, when policy entrepreneurs and public managers face the challenging policy environment, based on public interest, their collaborative leadership may facilitate the achievement of policy goals.起始頁-結束頁：179-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201103.017901篇名：獨裁或專政？由漢譯名探討施米特的Diktatur概念並列篇名：Ducai or "Zhuanzheng"? An Analysis of Schmitt's Concept of "Diktatur" through Its Chinese Translation作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：施米特;委任獨裁;主權獨裁;專政;馬克思主義;Schmitt;Commissarial Dictatorship;Sovereign Dictatorship;Zhuanzheng;Marxism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：施米特（Carl Schmitt）曾對於Diktatur這個概念進行深入而獨特的討論，並且由法學的角度來重構這個充滿政治意涵的概念。現今中國大陸對於施米特Diktatur概念的翻譯，多半皆以「專政」一詞來翻譯之。這種翻譯用詞若是從思想脈絡上來看，乃是來自於馬克思主義所提出之「無產階級專政」這個概念。但如果深究施米特對於此概念的討論，則似乎帶有濃厚馬克思主義傾向的「專政」譯名，並無法清楚地表達施米特意義下Diktatur概念的完整意義以及政治取向。在施米特的理論中，Diktatur被分成兩種類型，其一是在合憲架構下的，目的在於維持憲法整體秩序之存在的「委任獨裁」；另一則是在憲法架構之外的「主權獨裁」，目的是在革命時期由制憲的團體掌握國家權力，制訂出憲法並使之生效。從思想史的沿革來看，施米特以為，前一種類型是源自於羅馬共和時期的獨裁官建制；另一種則是在法國大革命之後出現的現代形態，並且在馬克思主義理論脈絡中被發展成為重要的核心概念。本文將指出，如果就施米特在威瑪時期的思想整體來看，他對於兩種獨裁概念的區分，試圖有意識地和主權獨裁以及馬克思主義的獨裁理解保持距離。藉此，他一方面試圖從法學上解釋總統在緊急狀態出現時，所具有的超越法律常態的權限之必要性；另一方面，則是針對當時共黨的革命性政治立場提出警告，並說明基於此革命立場所產生出來的議會提案，不應在威瑪憲法還具有效力的情況下付諸實施，否則便等同於再次回到革命狀態。據此，施米特才將獨裁概念上溯到羅馬的古典傳統。英文摘要：Carl Schmitt provides us with a profound and distinct exposition of the concept of the diktatur (dictator), reconstructing this political controversial concept from a jurisprudential perspective. However, in Chinese academic circles, diktatur has been generally translated as zhuanzheng. This translation derives from the Marxist concept of wuchan jieji zhuanzheng (or ”dictatorship of the proletariat”). However, a close examination of Schmitt's work reveals that the Chinese translation zhuanzheng does not accurately capture his use of the concept or its political orientation. In Schmitt's theory, the concept of dictatorship is differentiated into two types. One is the ”commissioners' dictatorship,” which is an institution within the constitutional framework and functions to maintain the entire constitutional order; the other is ”sovereign dictatorship,” which is, on the contrary, apart from the constitution, and refers to the state powers that groups involved in the designing of a new constitution or revolutionary parties hold during the revolutionary period before a new constitution is established. Looking at the history of political thought, Schmitt argues that the former emerged from the institution of the dictator in ancient Rome, while the later emerged from the French Revolution and subsequently became an important concept in Marxist theory. This article highlights Schmitt's distinction between the two concepts of dictatorship and his analytical separation of sovereign dictatorship and the concept of dictatorship under Marxism. Although Schmitt affirms the necessity of extraordinary presidential powers to be exercised in an emergency, he also warns of the danger of the communist revolutionary political standing and argued that the revolutionary proposals of the Weimar communists in parliament should be rejected as long as the Weimar Constitution remained in effect, since to allow them would negate any difference with the revolutionary period. On this basis, Schmitt refers the concept of dictatorship back to the classic Roman tradition.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.54(1-36)2篇名：不情願的專業主義：從普天間基地問題探討日本民主黨政權決策過程並列篇名：Reluctant Professionalism: The Decision Making Process of the DPJ Government on the MCAS Futenma Issue作者：李世暉(Shih-Hui Li)關鍵字：日本民主黨;決策過程;專業主義;多元主義;普天間基地;Democratic Party of Japan;Decision-making Process;Professionalism;Pluralism;Marine Corps Air Station MCAS Futenma期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：2009年9月16日成立的日本民主黨政權，以落實其「政權公約」為政府主要的施政方針。觀察民主黨歷年的政權公約發現，日本行政體制的改革一直是該黨政權公約的主要內容，而其核心主張即是建立一「擺脫官僚依賴」的決策機制，並讓國民的多元意見能夠在此一機制內獲得反映。民主黨首任首相鳩山由紀夫，即以「脫官僚」（擺脫依賴官僚）與「市民主體」（國民意見優先）的理念思維，思考「普天間基地遷移」的議題。此一影響重大的議題有兩大重要特徵：第一，排除專業官僚的決策參與；第二，首相官邸主導決策。在9個月的決策過程中，民主黨政權內部的多元主義決策思維扮演關鍵角色，與擁有專業知識、熟習決策流程的官僚之間，呈現對抗的態勢。鳩山由紀夫排除專業官僚的結果，導致決策的挫敗，也使得繼任的菅直人與野田佳彥首相不得不重新借重官僚的專業。此一轉變，與過去民主黨政權公約的內容相左，但卻是民主黨不得不與政治現實進行的妥協方案，可稱之為「不情願的專業主義」。英文摘要：After coming to power on September 16, 2009, the key priority for the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) government was to enforce its manifesto, which aimed to weaken bureaucrats and produce a more pluralistic decision making mechanism. Based on these principles, Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama reviewed the issue of the relocation of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma (MCAS Futenma). Two key factors were at work: first, wresting control of the decision making process from professional bureaucrats, and, second, giving the Cabinet Office predominance in the policy domain. During the nine-month period of the Hatoyama Cabinet, pluralist decision-making dominated, resulting in conflict with the professionalized bureaucracy. However, exclusion of bureaucrats from decision-making led to policy failure. As a result, the subsequent Kan and Noda premierships were forced to return to the bureaucratic policy-making system. This change contradicted DPJ manifesto principles, and was regarded as a compromise in the face of political reality. This compromise might be labeled as ”reluctant professionalism.”起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.54(37-70)3篇名：手機政治簡訊的廣告效果之探索性研究：臺灣北部五所大學生的試驗並列篇名：The Advertising Effectiveness of Political Text Messages: An Exploratory Study on Undergraduates from Five Universities in North Taiwan作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou);周繼祥(Jih-Shine Chou)關鍵字：政治傳播;簡訊廣告;廣告效果;大學生選民;Political Communication;Mobile SMS Ddvertising;Advertising Effectiveness;Undergraduate Voters期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：邇來的選舉，候選人大都透過手機發送大量簡訊廣告，將自己的訴求用快速、精準的方式傳遞予目標選民，以達政治傳播之目的。本研究旨在探討年輕的大學生選民對於政治簡訊廣告之反應，作者從政治簡訊的內容、發送來源、接收者個人因素三個面向切入，擬釐清廣告主題、訴求類型、內容資訊性、娛樂性、社交性、互動性、廣告發送來源、接收者個人政黨傾向、簡訊廣告一般性態度和持續性政治涉入等前置因素所造成的廣告效果。實驗結果發現：（1）以簡訊提醒選民投票及傳播正面主題，相較於負面主題，可產生較佳的廣告效果；（2）廣告訴求越理性、內容的資訊性、娛樂性、社交性越強，則會引發選民較佳的反應；（3）政治簡訊廣告發起方的政黨若與收訊選民的政黨傾向一致時，相較於不一致者，會使該則政治簡訊產生較佳的廣告效果；（4）選民對簡訊廣告的一般性態度越佳，則可連帶提升政治簡訊的廣告效果。英文摘要：In recent elections in Taiwan, candidates have sent a large number of political advertisements using text messages (SMS). SMS is a quick and precise means of communicating messages to the electorate. However, few scholars of political communications have empirically explored the effects of political advertisements sent by SMS, and many unanswered questions remain, such as how to design the contents of political SMS messages and how to target messages to certain receivers to achieve better results. This study examines the responses of undergraduate voters to political SMS messages, focusing on three aspects of political advertising by SMS message - message contents, message source, and message receiver. The study examines the effects of this advertising according to subject, appeal type, content informativeness, entertainment, sociality, interactivity, sources of the advertisement, party orientation of the receiver, and general attitudes toward mobile advertising, applying relevant theory from existing research on political advertising and mobile advertising. The experimental results reveal the following: (1) SMS advertisements that remind people to vote and disseminate positive information generate better effects when compared to those that disseminate negative information; (2) SMS advertisements with higher rationality, informativeness, entertainment, and sociality value achieved more positive responses; (3) Advertising effectiveness is higher when the receiver favors the party sending the SMS advertisement than when the sponsor is a competing party or when the receiver is an independent voter; and (4) Voters' general attitudes toward mobile advertising impact their receptiveness to SMS political advertisements.起始頁-結束頁：71-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.54(71-120)4篇名：總統大選對股票市場之動態衝擊分析：美國與台灣之比較並列篇名：The Dynamic Impact of Presidential Elections on the Stock Market: A Comparison between the United States and Taiwan作者：汪志忠(Chi-Chung Wang);鄭雅云(Ya-Yun Cheng)關鍵字：總統大選;民主;股票市場;干預模式;Presidential Election;Stock Market;Intervention Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：在民主國家，總統大選對於經濟的影響關係是普受重視的政治經濟問題。本研究主要目的是分析在不同民主程度與資本市場成熟度的國家，總統大選對於股票市場的動態衝擊為何，分析的對象為2000年與2004年台美兩國的總統大選，應用時間數列分析之干預模式，使用股票市場之發行量加權股價指數每日收盤價資料進行模式建立與比較分析。實證結果發現，2000年與2004年的台灣總統大選對股票市場有不同型態的衝擊，2000年的台灣第一次政黨輪替，選舉結果對股票市場造成結構性的改變與強大的衝擊，而2004年雖因319槍擊案使得大選結果對股票市場造成重大的負向衝擊，但後續的衝擊呈現逐漸遞減，並回歸基本面；就美國而言，2000年選舉結果受選票爭議事件影響，故對股票市場造成負向的結構性影響，但影響效果緩慢趨於平穩，而2004年選舉結果對股票市場則是造成正向的結構性衝擊。英文摘要：In democratic societies, presidential elections have an impact on the economy. This study examines the dynamic impact of presidential elections on the stock market in two countries with different levels of democratic development and market maturity. The empirical results show that Taiwan's 2000 presidential elections had a temporary impact on the stock market, which gradually developed into a structural shift. However, the stock market experienced a major shock after the 319 shooting incident during the 2004 presidential campaign. Nevertheless, the impact tailed off and the market eventually returned to normal. In contrast, in the United States, presidential elections have caused permanent structural shifts in stock market due to fundamental differences in economic policies offered by the candidates.起始頁-結束頁：121-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.54(121-151)5篇名：治理理論與國家職能的辯證：英國觀點並列篇名：The Dialectics of Governance Theory and State Capacity: A British Perspective作者：陳嫈郁(Rene Ying-Yu Chen)關鍵字：方法論;國家理論;治理理論;治理網絡;後設治理;國家職能;Methodology;State Theory;Governance Theory;Governance Network;Meta-governance;State Capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，台灣對於治理相關理論的議題在學術界與實務界幾乎是全盤性的接受。亦即是在政策初始點即把治理視為一種民主政體既定的發展路徑與模式，鮮少回溯到治理理論在規範性國家理論、政治理論與方法論的爭辯上來討論。然而，西方國家尤其是英國與歐盟地區卻已悄悄的興起另一股對於「治理」概念的反思與批判浪潮。因此，本文試圖從解構規範性國家理論的方式，以回歸到理論根源、權力機制與方法論的層次討論「治理」典範，並論證全球化與民主化中的治理模式與國家職能並不需要建立在國家是否已被其他權力結構與行動者侵蝕而「空洞化」的兩難辯證上。本文首先以分析治理理論根源為起點，論述新多元與自由貨幣主義、傅科主義與「可治理性」、季登斯的「內省現代性」與哈伯瑪斯的參與及審議式民主等四大理論對整個治理理論典範發展與變遷的影響。其次，剖析三波治理理論建構的假設與權力機制，驗證治理理論本質上即是一種具有時空獨特性的工具性國家理論。第三、進而針對治理理論的假設與機制提出批判，指出其實踐範圍的限制與可能缺失。最後，本文主張政策規劃與實踐在引用「治理」典範時，需要先釐清該政策層次與屬性以及執行政策所需的國家職能差異，始能有效達到政策目標。英文摘要：In recent years, studies on governance in Taiwan have universally accepted the network-based model of governance and its predetermined development path following globalization and democratization. At both academic and practical levels, little of the existing empirical literature calls into question the theoretical propositions that set out from the normative state theory, political theory, power theory (institutions and mechanisms) and methodological arguments. As such, there are two purposes of this article. First, the article will anatomize ”governance” according to its theoretical origins, mechanisms, and methodological inferences. By doing so, it will help to clarify the concept of governance and verify the state hollowing-out dilemmas in globalization and democracy. Second, at an empirical level, drawing on the insights from ”state-centric meta-governance,” this article suggests that the employment of governance-related theories in any particular spatio-temporal fix should take the character and level of policy seriously. The article also attempts to clarify the differentiated state capacities needed for warfare, workfare and welfare policies. Concerns with contingency between the global environment, form of capitalism, and civil society are emphasized.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.53(1-52)6篇名：義戰道德與利比亞戰爭：規範性理論分析並列篇名：The Morality of Just War and the Libyan War: A Normative-Theoretical Analysis作者：陳宜中(I-Chung Chen)關鍵字：義戰;道德;利比亞;人道干預;政體改造;Just War;Morality;Libya;Humanitarian Intervention;Regime Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文從分析性的義戰理論視野，論證利比亞戰爭在「正義的戰爭目的」這一層面上的道德短缺。美英法領袖以保護平民、制止人道災難作為發動戰爭的主要理由；他們也明白表示軍事行動是為了推翻格達費政權，促進利比亞的民主化。因此，利比亞戰爭同時涉及「人道干預」和「政體改造」這兩項課題。本文分析指出：第一，利比亞戰爭稱不上是人道干預，因其未能滿足人道干預原則的基本規定。按人道干預原則，唯有當極嚴重的人道災難發生時，人道干預才得成為正義的戰爭目的－但這並不適用於戰爭前夕的利比亞。第二，在某些極特殊的情況下，政體改造也許是道德上可允許的戰爭目的－但這同樣不適用於利比亞。從義戰道德視野，吾人有理由對政體改造戰爭持審慎保留的態度，反對其動輒上綱。英文摘要：In March 2011, NATO launched the Libyan war in the name of protecting civilians and preventing an impending humanitarian disaster, while at the same time pointing to the necessity of ”regime change.” Did, then, there exist a just cause for war in the case of Libya in March 2011? This paper advances two lines of argument against the Libyan war, especially in relation to the ”just cause” requirement of the morality of just war. The first, through a critical exposition of the ”principle of humanitarian intervention,” argues that the Libya war should not be regarded as a humanitarian intervention in any real sense. Nor, therefore, could this war be justified in such terms. The second, dealing with normative issues concerning regime change and drawing on Michael Walzer and John Rawls, contends that regime change might be a morally permissible cause for war only in extreme cases. On this view, the Libyan war as a regime change operation is not morally acceptable. Regime change did not constitute a just cause for the Libyan war, even if the latter did indeed aim for regime change. The presence of a just cause does not in itself determine whether or not a war is fully just. But a war without a just cause must necessarily be morally deficient. To put it rather more strongly, such a war is morally unjustifiable insofar as just war theory, or a defensible account of it, is concerned.起始頁-結束頁：53-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.53(53-93)7篇名：以靜則聖，以動則王：宋徽宗《御解道德真經》中的政治思想並列篇名：The Political Thought of Emperor Song Huizong's "Imperial Commentary on Dao De Zhen Jing"作者：袁翊軒(Yi-Hsuan Yuan)關鍵字：宋代老子學;宋徽宗;新學;心性;御解道德經;Dao;Studies of Laozi's Philosophy in Song Dynasty;Song Emperor Huizong;Laozi期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：傳統思想史研究往往將宋代思想史和理學發展史劃上等號，這是站在儒學本位的立場回頭觀看宋代的結果。事實上，要研究唐宋兩代的思想變化，必須同時考量儒釋道三教的角色。宋代則應當斷代為二，理學興盛而定於一尊乃是南宋時期的發展。北宋之季是唐代和南宋的中介階段，思想世界再度爭鳴的時期。若仔細觀察北宋士人的論述內容，可發現經歷三教互相激盪之後，雖然仍有判教的先後順序，大致都試圖將三者融而為一，建立一個從內在到外在、從個人性到公共性的體系。只是其方法和觀點不同，故有新學、朔學、蜀學和洛學之別。但是時代氛圍使得各學派同時校注三教經典，《道德經》當然也不例外。北宋的注老風潮至宋徽宗《御解道德真經》一出，大致上可謂定調。一方面宋徽宗崇尚道教，提升《道德經》的定位，不再是人人皆可任意批評的經典；另一方面透過官方力量，掌握了對《道德經》的詮釋可能性。宋徽宗注解的過程中，除了針對《道德經》的義理分析外，還可反映出其所處時代的學術旨趣和氛圍，如心性問題、統治者面對異論相攪的思考等。在其中徽宗描繪出盡性復命而體道的聖人，足以因性而修身、治國、平天下。然而，近人研究往往因為宋徽宗縱情於文藝、宗教，而淪為亡國之君的窘境，認定《御解道德真經》透顯出消極無為的意義，似乎是值得再次反思的。英文摘要：The history of thought in the Song Dynasty is strongly associated with the development of neo-Confucianism. However, when we examine the development of thought between the Song and Tang dynasties, we also need to consider the roles of Daoism, and Buddhism. At the same time, the Song Dynasty is divided into two periods, with Song Confucianism especially developed during the Southern Song Dynasty while the Northern Song period acted as a mediator between the Song and Tang dynasties, with a period of contention between different schools of thought. When we examine discourses from the Song Dynasty in detail, when find that following struggles between the three schools, although doctrinal judgment still existed, there was an effort to create dialogue and produce a system that integrated the three schools in the private and public realm. However, differences in methods and perspectives lead to distinctions between the New School, Su School, Shu School, and Luo School. In this atmosphere, the different schools applied their own interpretations to the classics, including the ”Dao De Jing”. Emperor Huizong's ”Imperial Commentary on the Dao De Jing” set the tone for the renewed focus on Laozi in the Northern Song. On the one hand, Emperor Huizong raised the status of the ”Dao De Jing” to a classic above criticism. On the other hand, Emperor Huizong used his official authority to determine how the ”Dao De Jing” was interpreted. Emperor Huizong's commentary, aside from its analysis of the moral principles of the ”Dao De Jing”, also reflects the intellectual interests and atmosphere of its time, including spiritual problems and how rulers met the challenges of contending thoughts. In this, Emperor Huizong describes the ”figure of the saint” under heaven who cultivates his own moral character and rules the country. However, due to Emperor Huizong's indulgences in arts and religion and the eventual end of the Song Dynasty shortly after his death, recent research have seen the Imperial Commentary on the ”Dao De Jing” as a symbol of imperial inaction. This view is now worth reassessing.起始頁-結束頁：95-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.53(95-120)8篇名：契約委外與都市政治：台南市立醫院第三期委外經營為例並列篇名：Contracting-out and Urban Politics: A Case Study on Tainan Municipal Hospital作者：陳金哲(Chin-Cher Chen)關鍵字：契約委外;個案研究;都市政治;領導人因素;公司協力;Contracting-out;Case Study;Urban politics;Leadership;Public-private Collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討地方公立醫院委外過程中，都市政治對公私協力個案所造成的影響為何。在個案選擇上，以台南市立醫院第3期委外經營案為分析單位，透過深度訪談、地方議會議事錄、媒體新聞報導等資料收集方式，將研究聚焦於台南市立醫院第3期委外經營過程之分析，探討政治因素對醫院以契約委外決策的影響，並兼及都市治理的探討。本研究發現契約委外策略屬於政治過程的一環；其決策過程深受領導人因素所影響；地方公立醫院委外經營，除有利於經營績效的提升外，對於建構完整的都市醫療網絡也扮演重要的角色；另公私協力關係從原來的關係伙伴轉為績效評量的契約委外模式。英文摘要：This paper aims to analyze the influence of urban politics on public-private collaboration in local public hospital contracting-out carried out by the Tainan Municipal Hospital. The case study is adopted as the method to collect empirical data for this study. Based on the in-depth interviews, interpellation documents from the Tainan Municipal Council and related news reports, this study provides the opportunity to look at the characteristics of local public hospital contracting-out to consider a solution to the problems urban governance. The findings of this study are as follows: contracting-out is part of a wider political process; hospital leadership exerts an important influence in this case of local public hospital contracting-out; hospital contracting-out supports the urban health network and helps supply better and accessible medical services for the community; and public-private collaboration has transformed from its original partnership relationship to a model based on performance measurement and contracting-out.起始頁-結束頁：121-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.53(121-161)9篇名：孫中山思想、民國百年與兩岸發展模式－一個總體的分析架構並列篇名：Sun Yat-sen Thoughts, the Centennial of the Republic of China, and Development Models in Taiwan and Mainland China: A Macro Analytical Framework作者：吳玉山(Yu-Shan Wu)關鍵字：中華民國;孫中山思想;兩岸關係;制度匯合;Republic of China;Sun Yat-sen Thoughts;Cross-Strait Relations;Institutional Convergence期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：52期出版年：2012中文摘要：對於民國百年的回顧，如果只是看在大陸的前四十年、或在台灣的威權時期，或是最後二十年的民主化與民主鞏固，都不能窺見這百年的全貌。本文試圖以中華民國百年發展的眼光，統觀民國第一個世紀的三個時期，並提供一個理論的系絡，點出發展與轉型的機制，以宏觀地掌握歷史的脈動。觀察的對象有三個：孫中山的主張、中華民國的實踐，與中國大陸在1949年以後的發展。這三個對象，在不同的時期當中，一共產生了七個不同的觀察點，座落在由國家的政治支配力和國家的經濟支配力為兩軸所構成的平面圖上。不同的國家政治支配力產生了自由民主、現代化威權，和極權主義等三種體制；而不同的國家經濟支配力則產生了市場資本主義、國家資本主義，與國家社會主義等三種產權結構和經濟體制。政治和經濟體制的搭配產生了九種政經制度組合，提供了現代中國發展七個觀察點的定位指標。國家政經支配力相稱的體制較為穩定，其次是政高經低的體制，而最難以出現與維持的是政低經高的體制。孫中山的思想是由民主國家資本主義轉移到威權國家資本主義（但最終理想點未變）；中華民國是由有限的威權國家資本主義（大陸時期）轉化到完全的威權國家資本主義（民主化前的台灣），再轉型到民主市場資本主義（民主化後的台灣）；而中國大陸在1949年之後則是由極權國家社會主義（毛澤東時期）逐漸轉型到後極權的國家資本主義（後毛、後天安門時期）。由於政高經低，當今中國大陸的後極權國家資本主義有相當的制度韌性，已經成功地度過了多次政經危機。在孫中山的後期思想、中華民國的第二階段（威權台灣），和大陸的後天安門時期之間出現了制度趨同的現象，也就是中國大陸已經走入了台灣的過去。至於未來兩岸之間是否會出現進一步的制度趨同，則繫於中國大陸國力發展和制度變遷之間的相對速度。英文摘要：It would do no justice to a review of the Republic of China's (ROC) centennial development if a focus were cast exclusively on the ROC's early period on the Chinese mainland, the authoritarian era in Taiwan, or the two decades after democratization. This article attempts to provide a broad overview of the century of the Republic by putting the ROC's three developmental stages in a theoretical framework, pointing out the mechanisms of transitions, and capturing the grand trends in historical development. We observe three subjects: Sun Yat-sen's thoughts, the practice of the ROC, and the post-1949 development on mainland China. These three produce seven observation points on a two-dimensional map laid out by the axes of state political control and state economic control. Three political systems are identified on the political axis: liberal democracy, modernizing authoritarianism, and totalitarianism, as well as three property rights structures/economic systems on the economic axis: market capitalism, state capitalism, and state socialism, based on different levels of political and economic control by the state. This gives rise to nine institutional combinations against which the seven observation points can be located. When state political control matches economic control, the institutional combination is most stable. This is followed by high political control cum low economic control. The least sustainable combination is when low political control is paired with high economic control. On the institutional map, Sun Yet-sen's thoughts migrated from democratic state capitalism to authoritarian state capitalism, with the ultimate ideal point remaining unchanged. The ROC shifted from a limited form of authoritarian state capitalism (while on the mainland) to full authoritarian state capitalism (prior to democratization in Taiwan), and finally to democratic market capitalism (after democratization in Taiwan). The PRC transitioned from totalitarian state socialism under Mao Zedong to post-totalitarian state capitalism during the post-Mao, and particularly the post-Tiananmen period. Because high political control is paired with low economic control, this system demonstrated considerable institutional resilience, capable of overcoming the challenge posed by a series of politico-economic crises. Institutional isomorphism is found in Sun Yat-sen's later thoughts, the ROC's authoritarian stage, and contemporary China. The mainland has moved into Taiwan's institutional past. The prospects for further institutional convergence between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait will be determined by the relative rate of the rise of national capability compared with institutional change on the mainland.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.52(1-42)10篇名：改寫男人的憲法：從平等條款、婦女憲章到釋憲運動的婦運憲法動員並列篇名：Rewriting a Male Constitution: Constitutional Mobilization by the Women's Movement from the Gender Equality Clause and Women's Charter to the Constitutional Litigation Movement作者：陳昭如(Chao-Ju Chen)關鍵字：憲法動員;性別平等;婦運;法律機會結構;女性主義憲法議程;Constitutional Mobilization;Gender Equality;Women's Movement;Legal Opportunity Structure;Feminist Constitutional Agenda期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：52期出版年：2012中文摘要：許多國家的歷史經驗顯示，憲法之所以保障性別平等，不是以男性為主的制憲者所自動給予的恩賜，而是婦運的集體抗爭所促成的結果。中華民國憲法也不例外。本文考察我國憲法中性別平等條款的歷史，以「法律機會結構」來解釋婦運如何在制憲的過程中納入男女平等條款來改寫男人的憲法、在修憲的過程中倡議婦女憲章、接著又發動釋憲運動來實踐憲法，並以女性主義憲法動員論來探討婦運在不同階段中提出憲法平等想像的意義與限制。從改造男人所寫的憲法到書寫女人的憲法，乃至於讓憲法為女人所用，這一系列的婦運憲法動員雖然有其侷限性，但已經在憲法共識中儲存了性別平等的價值，並且改變許多性別歧視的法律。本文主張，婦運應該繼續不斷地對憲法文本加以爭辯並且賦予其意義，如此，憲法才會是屬於人民的憲法，女人才能成為民主國家中憲法社群的一份子。英文摘要：The Republic of China constitution has two gender equality clauses, whose existence is well-known but whose history remains largely unstudied. This paper is an investigation into the feminist legal history of the constitution, focusing on the making and of the two gender equality clauses so as to explore the relationship between the women's movement and the constitution as well as the contested meanings of gender equality. I consider the text of the constitution as a site of contestation and examine how feminists have made interpretive and amendatory claims on the constitution's text, especially through constitutional litigation and advocacy for a constitutional amendment. Employing the concepts of the legal opportunity structure and the feminist constitutional agenda, my study reveals how the women's movement in China in the early twentieth century advocated the inclusion of gender equality clause in the new constitution, how feminists in Taiwan had mobilized for constitutional change in the early 1990s, advocating a constitutional amendment for substantive equality, and how these feminists went on to mobilize for constitutional litigation as part of the feminist legal reform movement that targeted laws that impose different treatment on women. Their campaign to change and interpret the text of the constitution is both an attempt to declare women's membership to the constitutional community and an effort to reshape the meaning of equality in the constitution. I argue that the feminist constitutional mobilization has produced significant change, and suggest that feminists continue to raise claims about the constitution so as to transform the constitution into a living document in people's lives and to make women participatory members of the constitutional community.起始頁-結束頁：43-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.52(43-88)01篇名：高中探究本位課程之設計與實施的個案研究－以新興科技議題為例並列篇名：The Design and Enactment of an Emerging Technology Inquiry-Based Curriculum in Senior High School: A Case Study作者：洪振方(Jeng-Fung Huang);陳毓凱(Yu-Kai Chen)關鍵字：中等教育;探究本位課程;新興科技;Secondary Education;Inquiry-Based Curriculum;Emerging Technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在於提供一個高中其設計與實施新興科技探究本位課程(Emerging Technology Inquiry-based Curriculum, ETIC)之成功範例。資料來源包括課室觀察記錄；教材、會議記錄等文本資料；教師與學生的半結構式晤談；以及學生的問卷資料。本研究採個案研究法，參與者為六位高中科學教師以及一個學生小組。研究主要發現如下：(1)ETIC之教學目標在培養學生對環境議題的關懷、發展替代能源的知識以及運用探究來進行學習；(2)ETIC之課程設計由教學目標轉化而成，主要包含「專家講座」、「補充教學」、「校外經驗」以及「科學探究」等成分；(3)ETIC在實施上採取「刺激誘發」、「教學介入」與「引導探究」等機制；(4)ETIC課程提供學生經驗科學探究的歷程，培養學生高層次思考的能力。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to provide a successful case for designing and implementing an Emerging Technology Inquiry-based Curriculum (ETIC) in a senior high school. The data sources included fieldnotes, a collection of artefacts (such as teaching materials, meeting records), interviews (both for instructors and students), and open-ended questionnaires from all students. The interview participants for this case study included six secondary science teachers and a purposively selected student group, with four students. The results revealed that (1) the objectives of ETIC included a concern for environmental issues, developing knowledge of renewable energy, and involvement in scientific inquiry; (2) the foundation for ETIC curriculum design was built around the objectives above, with the approach including ”professional lectures,” ”supplementary instruction,” ”out-of-school experience,” and ”scientific inquiry;” (3) the ETIC implementing mechanisms included ”exciting stimulation,” ”teaching intervention,” and ”guided inquiry;” and (4) the students’ experiences closely reflected the objectives of ETIC. Furthermore, the students recognized important features of scientific research.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1901.012篇名：理性、批判思考和教育－論Harvey Siegel的批判思考理論並列篇名：Rationality, Critical Thinking, and Education-The Critical Thinking Theory of Harvey Siegel作者：蘇鈺楠(Yu-Nan Su)關鍵字：批判思考;科學哲學;理性教育;Critical Thinking;Philosophy of Science;Rational Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：在英美分析哲學的傳統之下，批判思考能力的培育一直是重要的教育目的。然而在眾多研究批判思考的學者當中，以批判思考做<U+7232>教育目的，並在批判思考中將理性和教育之連結，做出最詳盡的論述與證成者，無疑<U+7232>英國科學哲學家Harvey Siegel。本文企圖以其對理性思考之角度切入，瞭解其知識論的觀點，並逐步擴及其對批判思考能力內涵和教育之結合，揭露以批判思考做<U+7232>教育目的之四大理由─把學生當成個體來尊重、自足並<U+7232>成年作準備、引領入理性傳統、批判思考和民主生活，和批判思考與教育間之關係，最後並以此產生出在教育上的啟示。英文摘要：Developing critical thinking ability is a crucial purpose of education. Among critical scholars, British scientific philosopher, Harvey Siegel's work impressively demonstrates the relationship between rationality and education, and considers critical thinking ability as an end of education. This research, based on his perspective on epistemology, traces Siegel's theory concerning the connection between rationality and critical thinking, to reveal four reasons to take critical thinking as an educational purpose-respect for students as persons, self-sufficiency and preparation for adulthood, initiation into rational traditions, critical thinking and democratic living. The paper then applies the connection to a consideration of critical thinking and education.起始頁-結束頁：25-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1901.023篇名：臺灣、美國和新加坡三個七年級代數教科書發展學生數學能力方式之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Methods for Developing 7th-Graders' Mathematical Ability in Selected Algebra Textbooks from Taiwan, U.S.A. and Singapore作者：楊德清(Der-Ching Yang);陳仁輝(Ren-Huei Chen)關鍵字：代數;情境數學;教科書;部編數學;新課程數學;Alegebra;Developing Mathematical Ability;Mathematics Textbooks;Cross Cultural Comparison of Mathematics Textbooks期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討美國「情境數學」(Mathematics in Context)、新加坡「新課程數學」(New Syllabus Mathematics)與臺灣九年一貫「部編版」(Mathematics Official Textbook)等三個數學教材中七年級代數課程發展數學能力方式之差異性比較。本研究選取上述三套教科書，並以質性之內容分析法進行分析。研究結果顯示，「部編版數學」的知識內容最廣，偏重程序性知識的精熟，循Polya的解題方式，發展數學能力；「情境數學」則藉由情境學習促進學生建構概念性的理解，以科技輔助運算，發展多元策略以提升數學能力；「新課程數學」主張代數的工具性角色，強調精熟學習。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to compare the methods by which textbooks on algebra develop 7thgraders' mathematical ability between the Mathematics Official Textbook (MOT) in Taiwan, Mathematics in Context (MiC) in the U.S.A., and New Syllabus Mathematics (NSM) in Singapore. The above three different textbooks were selected for this study, which involved a qualitative method of content analysis. The results of the study show that the mathematical content knowledge of MOT is the deepest among the three different textbooks, through highlighting procedural knowledge via practice and following the model of Polya to develop students’ mathematics ability. The MiC focuses strongly on conceptual understanding using multiple strategies, technologies and contexts. The NSM puts more emphasis on learning procedures through practice.起始頁-結束頁：39-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1901.034篇名：概念卡通論證教學促進學童論證能力之研究並列篇名：The Application of a Concept Cartoon Argumentation Strategy to Enhance Children's Argumentation Ability作者：陳文正(Wen-Cheng Chen);古智雄(Chih-Hsiung Ku);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu);楊文金(Wen-Gin Yang)關鍵字：概念卡通;對科學的態度;論證;論證教學;Concept Cartoon;Attitudes toward Science;Argumentation;Argumentation Instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討概念卡通論證教學如何促進學童之論證能力，並分析教學前後，個案學童「論證能力」及「對科學的態度」之變化情形。本研究採單組前後測設計，以東臺灣某國小高年級21位學童為研究對象，施以概念卡通策略之論證教學共六週六個單元。主要研究工具有自編的「論證能力測驗卷」及龍麟如(1997)的「國小高年級學童對科學的態度量表」。研究發現：經過概念卡通論證教學後，研究對象的論證能力表現得到提升。進一步以自然學業成就表現分析學童學習論證的成效，其中，低分組、中分組及高分組學童學習論證的表現有所不同。在「對科學的態度」方面，學童只在「對參與科學探討活動的態度」的提升達顯著性差異，其餘三個分項則無。最後，依據研究結果，提出三項研究建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of concept cartoon argumentation instruction on students' argumentation ability. The difference between students' ”argumentation ability” and ”attitudes toward science” after implementing this argument instruction was analyzed. A one-group pretest-posttest design was adopted in this research. The subjects were 21 upper graders in a remote elementary school. Based on the concept cartoon strategy, experimental argumentation instruction was provided during six consecutive weeks. The self-designed ”paper-and-pencil test on argumentation ability” and ”Attitudes Toward Science Scale (ATSS)” designed by Lung (1997) were used in the study. The results indicated that using the concept cartoon strategy in argumentation instruction could enhance the students' argumentation ability. However, there was difference in argumentation performance between high-, mid- and low-score groups. With respect to pre- and post-test analyzing of ATSS, the sub-scale of the attitudes toward participating in science activities and inquiry showed significant difference after implementing the argumentation instruction, but none of the other three sub-scales did. Based on the research results, three research implications are suggested.起始頁-結束頁：69-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2011.1901.0401篇名：重度與極重度肢體障礙者輔助科技長期介入成果研究並列篇名：Effects of Long-term Interventions with Assistive Technology on Life and Development of Individuals with Severe and Profound Physical Disabilities作者：林淑玟(Shu-Wen Lin);羅錦興(Ching-Hsing Luo)關鍵字：長期介入成果;肢體障礙者;跨專業團隊;輔助科技延伸服務;輔助科技設備與服務;Assistive Technology Devices and Services ATDS;Assistive Technology Extended Services ATES;long-term interventions and outcomes;persons with physical disabilities;transdisciplinary team期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究透過跨專業輔助科技團隊，<U+7232>四位重度與極重度肢體障礙者（頸椎損傷、腦性麻痺各兩位），提供長達七年個別化電腦科技輔具研製、輔助科技設備與服務(ATDS)及輔助科技延伸服務（ATES，含生涯發展／轉銜服務、職業重建、心理復健等）。本文採多重個案研究法(multiple-case study)，探討前述AT介入之短期成果與長期影響。經提供一至三年ATDS 後，四位個案皆出現良好短期成果，包括：輔助科技設備(ATD)符合需求、訓練目標完全達成、持續且高頻率使用ATD。再經提供數年ATES後，出現之長期正面影響包括：ATD應用範圍擴增、活動能力增強、參與表現提高、正向心理感受與滿意度提昇。同時，四位個案生活品質皆大幅改善。此外，也發現若干心理社會因素（如家人態度與支持、人格特質、動機、致殘時期、接納傷殘、自我防衛機制等），會影響AT 介入成果。英文摘要：The study examined the effects of a seven-year project, in which assistive technology (AT) developed by an interdisciplinary assistive technology team was used to assist individuals with severe and profound physical disabilities, on the life and development of the individuals. Four cases, including two persons with cervical spinal injuries and two persons with cerebral palsy were participants of the study. Customized high-tech devices, AT devices and services (ATDS), and AT extended services (ATES) designed for career development/transition services, vocational rehabilitation, or psychological rehabilitation were used as AT intervention to improve the individuals' abilities to actively participate in life events and their quality of life. The results indicated that positive shorter-term outcomes resulted from the AT interventions for the four cases, including ATD possessing features to meet users' needs, the completion of training goals ATD was designed to provide, and the persistence and frequency of usage of ATD by participants.. The study also showed positive long-term outcomes of the AT intervention, including extension of using ATD improved mobility and activity, increased participation performance, enhanced self-perception and satisfaction experienced by participants, and improved quality of life. Some psychosocial and social factors, such as family’s attitude and support, personal characteristics, motivation, time of onset, acceptance of impairment, and mechanisms of self-protection, could confound with the influence the AT intervention.起始頁-結束頁：97-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201005032篇名：歷程導向設計及學習策略中介教導對個體不同層次數學解題學習潛能開展效益影響之動態評量研究並列篇名：The Differentiated Effects of Process-Oriented Design and Learning Strategy Instruction in Dynamic Assessment for First Graders' Learning on Word Problem Solving作者：許家驊(Chia-Hua Hsu)關鍵字：可能發展區間;解題自我調節;解題歷程動態評量;學習策略;學習潛能;dynamic assessment DA of mathematical problem solving MPS;learning potential;learning strategy;self-regulation in MPS;zone of proximal development ZPD期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同歷程導向設計（歷程導向及非歷程導向）及學習策略中介教導（認知整合後設認知及歸因、認知整合歸因、認知）動態評量設計對不同層次（認知及高層心智）個體解題潛能開展效益之影響，採二因子2×3變異數實驗設計外加參照組進行，實驗細格施予不同處理組合，參照組給予自我練習。結果發現在不同層次表現，兩因子間雖無整體交互作用，然各具主要效果，歷程導向顯著優於非歷程導向且有助於解題及遷移，認知整合後設認知及歸因顯著優於餘二者，且有助於解題及自我調節表現，但後二者間無顯著差異，各組均顯著優於參照組並具大幅效果值及關聯強度。故採歷程導向、認知整合後設認知及歸因中介設計，其不同層次促進效益優於其他中介形式。英文摘要：ANOVA with a 2×3 factorial experimental design was used to examine effects of the independent variables of xxx and xxx on the dependent variables of xxx and xxx. A contingent control group was added to clarify the effects of treatment vs. no-treatment. No interaction effect was reported. However, the main effects of the variables of xxx and xxx were found on xxx as well as the simple gain scores, deferred gain scores and transfer performances except for the scores of self-regulated learning (SRL) in process-oriented design (POD). The effects of POD are better than counterpart both on solving and transfer scores, the effects of cognitive integrated metacognitive with attribution strategy instruction are better than others both on solving and SRL scores, but there are no differences on the scores of cognitive integrated attribution and cognitive strategy instruction. Finally, the effects of all treatment groups are better than control group.起始頁-結束頁：127-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201005123篇名：成人依附、社交自我效能、困擾的自我揭露、寂寞與憂鬱之關係：以有戀愛經驗的大學生為例並列篇名：The Relationships among Adult Attachment, Social Self-efficacy, Distress Self-disclosure, Loneliness and Depression of College Students with Romance作者：李靜如(Ching-Ju Li);林邦傑(Pang-Chieh Lin);修慧蘭(Hui-Lan Hsiu)關鍵字：成人依附;困擾的自我揭露;社交自我效能;寂寞;憂鬱;adult attachment;depression;distress self-disclosure;loneliness;social self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在以結構方程式模型探討成人依附、社交自我效能、困擾的自我揭露、寂寞與憂鬱之間的關係。以國內805位有戀愛經驗大學生<U+7232>對象，分<U+7232>兩組，一組用來刪題與發展模式；另一組用來驗證模式。在模式適配良好且穩定情況下，得到如下結論：1.逃避依附與焦慮依附會透過社交自我效能而間接影響寂寞，再間接影響憂鬱；2.逃避依附會透過困擾的自我揭露，間接影響社交自我效能，再透過社交自我效能間接影響寂寞，再間接影響憂鬱；3.焦慮依附會直接影響憂鬱；4.焦慮依附會透過寂寞間接影響憂鬱；5.焦慮依附對憂鬱的影響效果會大過逃避依附對憂鬱的影響效果；6.困擾的自我揭露對寂寞不具直接影響力，困擾的自我揭露會透過社交自我效能間接影響寂寞。英文摘要：The main purpose of this research was to use SEM model to study the relationships among adult attachment, social self-efficacy, distress self-disclosure, loneliness and depression of the college students who had romantic experience. The participants of the study were 805 Taiwan college students who had romance, and were divided into two groups. Data from the participants in group one were used for instrument and model development, and data from the participants in group two were used for model validation. The researcher found the model was well supported by observed data and the stability of the model was confirmed. The main results were as follows: (a) Attachment avoidance and attachment anxiety affect social self-efficacy, which in turn affects loneliness and further indirectly affect depression through loneliness; (b) Attachment avoidance affects distress self-disclosure, which in turn affects social self-efficacy and sequentially affects loneliness sand depression; (c) Attachment anxiety directly affects depression; (d) Attachment anxiety indirectly affects depression through loneliness; (e) Attachment anxiety is a stronger predictor for depression thanattachment avoidance; and (f) Distress self-disclosure indirectly affects loneliness through social self-efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：155-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201006014篇名：A Case Study on Parental Discourse Strategies and a Bilingual Child's Code-Mixing並列篇名：父母言談策略與一個中、英雙語幼童語言轉換行<U+7232>之個案研究作者：閔慧慈(Hui-Tzu Min)關鍵字：父母言談策略;台灣;同時習得雙語之幼童;個案研究;語言轉換;case study;code-mixing;parental discourse strategies;simultaneous bilingual children;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：此個案研究旨在檢視一雙語家庭中，非以英語<U+7232>母語之雙親遵循【一人一語言】(one-person-one-language)之言談策略與其兩歲女童使用中、英語言轉換之關係。經<U+7232>期一年之每月觀察親子互動記錄顯示：女童父親使用中文與其互動時，較容許女童雙使用中、英夾雜，且不堅持女童需使用中文與其互動；但女童母親則要求女童以英語與其互動。因此，女童使用中文或中、英夾雜方式與父親互動，與母親互動時，則多使用英文，較少中、英夾雜。一系列相關統計分析顯示：女童雙親因應女童中、英夾雜使用不同言談策略，而雙親不同之言談策略，與女童後續使用中、英夾雜之頻率，多呈正向顯著相關。證據亦顯示：女童在與雙親互動時，似習得不同語用知識，在觀察後期中，女童能明確說出家中【一人一語言】之模式，並糾正母親應使用英文與其互動。本研究之貢獻在於使用【質量混合】之研究方法，<U+7232>【雙親言談策略假設】提供部份佐證。英文摘要：The case study was conducted to examine the relationship between parental discourse strategies and the mixed-coding of language behavior of a 2-year-old Mandarin-English bilingual girl in interactions between the parents and the child. The parents were non-English native speakers and adopted the ”one-person one-language” practice in the family, where the father spoke Chinese to the daughter and allowed the daughter to respond in either Chinese or English, while the mother used only English in the interaction with the daughter. Monthly recordings of the child's naturalistic interactions with both parents over one year revealed that the father was more tolerant of the child's mixed coding, and the mother was intolerant. The child used mixed Mandarin and English in interactions with her father frequently, but less frequently used the mixed coding with her mother. A series of correlation analyses shows that parents' discourse strategies in response to the child's mixed coding of language are positively and significantly correlated with the child's overall rates of using mixed-coding and the likelihood that the mixed-coding was used in the next round of conversation. It seems the child differentiated pragmatic strategies in her interactions with respective parents. She recognized the one-person-one-language rule in her interactions with her mother and eventually appliedit in her interactions with her father. The significance of findings of the study is to contribute partial empirical support for Parental Discourse Hypothesis through a mixed methodology.起始頁-結束頁：175-202資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201005175篇名：學校社會工作實務中的倫理兩難並列篇名：Ethical Dilemmas in School Social Work Practice作者：胡中宜(Chung-Yi Hu)關鍵字：倫理兩難;倫理判斷;學校社會工作;ethical dilemmas;ethical judgment;school social work期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討學校社會工作員從事校園輔導工作時所遭遇的倫理兩難，以及他們進行倫理判斷的考量層面。本研究訪問14位巡迴與駐校的學校社工員，以訪談方式收集資料，採用紮根理論之概念藉由WinMAX軟體進行資料分析。研究結果發現實務中的倫理兩難包括價值兩難、義務兩難與結構兩難，學校社工員的倫理判斷包括法律、倫理、效果與價值等層面。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine ethical dilemmas school social workers in secondary schools encountered and the bases they used to resolve the dilemmas. Interview methods were conducted to collect data from fourteen school social workers who were on site and circuital. Grounded Theory was used to guide the analysis using the WinMAX software. Three types of ethical dilemmas were found: Value dilemmas, obligation dilemmas and structural dilemmas. Four bases were used in the deliberation process: Legal, ethical, effectiveness, and value.起始頁-結束頁：543-566資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.200911246篇名：家庭調適的質量對話並列篇名：The Dialogue between Quantitative and Qualitative Research on Family Adjustment作者：劉惠琴(Whei-Ching Liu)關鍵字：家庭系統;家庭調適;family adjustment;family system期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以量性設計及質性設計二種研究程序共同探討本地的青少年與其家人如何在日常生活中面對大環境的挑戰而調適的現象。研究對象主要以晚期青少年家庭為主。本研究樣本分<U+7232>三階段蒐集，第一階段<U+7232>大樣本的大學生班級團體。第二階段的研究樣本則是以研究者過去在親子個體化研究的樣本群中，徵求青少年家庭參與焦點團體的研究。第三階段則徵求有意願的焦點團體成員及其家人進行家庭訪問資料的蒐集。研究結果則分別(1)以簡單相關分析方法探討家人間對家庭系統知覺的差異與共識。(2)以簡單相關及t檢定法探討大學生受試者對其家庭系統知覺的連續性與變化性。(3)以Q因素分析描繪家庭動力之變化。及(4)以質性敘說分析方法探討相關家人對家庭調適行動的詮釋、理解，與行動意向。從量性研究結果來看，同一家庭內的不同家人間對其家庭系統的知覺是有差異的。研究樣本中的大學生們對家庭系統的知覺與母親及與手足的知覺有較高的關聯，與父親的知覺則無關聯。整體而言，家庭共識與青少年的家庭知覺呈現中度的正關聯，而家庭差異則呈現中度的負相關，研究樣本中的大學生們只有1/3自覺到其家庭系統會因時間而有所變化。從質性研究的結果來看，本文以分別面對不同環境變化的三個家庭<U+7232>例，說明家庭如何面對環境變化的調適與轉化過程。最後，作者則提出對於家庭調適之不同探究方式的討論。英文摘要：This study used qualitative and quantitative methods to examine adjustment of youths and the families as they confront challenges from societal change. Research sample focused on late-adolescent families. Data were collected in three phases: College students completed surveys in the first phase; data from past focus group interviews were used in the second phase; and data from volunteers recruited for family interview in focus groups were used in the third phase. The following results were reported: 1. Consensus and discrepancies of family system perceptions among family members. 2. Continuity and changes of family system perceptions. 3. Changes of family dynamics using Q-factor analysis. 4. Qualitative descriptions of the content, understanding, and intent of the behavioral adjustment among family members. Results indicated that college students' perceptions of their family systems were highly correlated with mothers' and siblings' perceptions but not corelated with fathers' perceptions. Qualitative data from three families were used to illustrate how the family system adjusted and adapted to societal changes. Finally, different approaches to investigate the multi-systems and dynamic family processes were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：567-589資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201001207篇名：「修訂Enright寬恕治療歷程模式」團體介入方案對國小兒童寬恕態度、情緒智力與幸福感之研究並列篇名：The Effects of Revised Enright Process Model of Forgiveness Educational Intervention on Forgiveness, Emotional Intelligence, and Well-being among Elementary Students作者：林維芬(Wei-Fen Lin)關鍵字：介入方案;幸福感;情緒智力;寬恕;emotional intelligence;forgiveness;intervention;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討「修訂Enright寬恕治療歷程模式」團體介入方案對國小兒童在寬恕態度、情緒智力與幸福感之輔導效果。研究方法<U+7232>準實驗研究法，研究對象<U+7232>國小六年級學童，實驗組與對照組各<U+7232>22人。實驗組接受<U+7232>期24次，每週兩次「修訂Enright寬恕治療歷程模式」團體介入方案，對照組接受一般團體課程處理。受試者分別在實驗前、後及八週後分別接受前測、後測與追蹤測；研究工具<U+7232>「Enright寬恕量表」、「兒童情緒智力量表」與「國小兒童幸福感量表」。所得資料以獨立樣本單因子共變數分析之；同時以團體成員回饋問卷，作<U+7232>實驗方案介入的回饋與省思。研究結果顯示實驗組受試在寬恕態度、情緒智力與幸福感之立即與延續性效果顯著優於對照組，在成員回饋表中也顯示在實驗方案也對孩子的人際關係有正向提升效果。英文摘要：This study examined the effectiveness of the ”Revised Enright process model of forgiveness” group intervention on forgiveness attitude, emotional intelligence, and well-being among 6th graders in elementary school. Quasi-experimental design was used. Forty-four children from two classes were randomly selected from one elementary school. Twenty-two students were assigned to the experimental group and the alternative treatment group, respectively. The experimental group participated in 24 sessions (twice a week) of group intervention using the ”Revised Enright process model of forgiveness” while the alternative treatment group received general intervention. All participants were administrated the Enright forgiveness inventory, a children emotional intelligence scale, and a children well-being inventory at pretest, posttest and follow-up. One-way ANCOVA was conducted using pretest scores as covariates. Feedback returned from group members was also analyzed. Results showed that compared to the alternative treatment group, the experimental group scored significantly higher in forgiveness, emotional intelligence, and well-being at pretest, posttest and follow-up. Participant feedback also indicated that the group intervention had significant positive impact on the interpersonal relationships among children in the experimental group.起始頁-結束頁：591-611資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201002098篇名：模式錯誤假設對電腦化測驗的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Model Misspecification on Computerized Testing作者：盧宏益(Hung-Yi Lu);徐永豐(Yung-Feng Hsu);薛國松(Kuo-Sung Hsueh)關鍵字：試題反應理論;電腦化適性測驗;模式錯誤假設;computerized adaptive testing;item response theory;model misspecification期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：試題反應理論被廣泛地使用在電腦化適性測驗上，其以機率的觀點，透過試題反應模式，解釋考生能力與試題間的關係。藉由所選擇的試題反應模式，施測者可以根據不同的測驗目的編製適合的測驗。然而在實際的測驗情境中，試題反應模式通常是未知且須事先認定的。本研究旨在探討試題反應模式錯誤假設對測驗結果造成之影響，研究結果顯示，在常模參照測驗中，試題反應模式錯誤假設對考生能力估計所產生的偏誤比在真實模式下來的大，並造成測驗成本的增加，尤以真實測驗模式<U+7232>3PLM時最<U+7232>嚴重。在效標參照測驗中，試題反應模式錯誤假設對分類結果影響不大，但會造成測驗題數的增加，浪費施測成本。英文摘要：Item response theory (IRT) has been widely applied in computerized adaptive testing (CAT) with the logistic type models most often used. IRT prescribes an item characteristic curve that provides the probability of an examinee correctly answering an item with a parameter of a given ability level. Examiners can develop various tests for different purposes based on a chosen item response model. However, in actual testing practice, the priori item response model is often unknown. The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of model misspecification on computerized testing. Using norm-referenced testing, results indicated that model misspecification has an effect on the estimate of examinees' abilities. Both the RMSE and test length significantly increased when the wrong item response models were used, especially when item bank belongs to three-parameter logistic model. In criterion-referenced testing, model misspecification has no effect on the accuracy of classification. However, it will increase test length and cost of testing.起始頁-結束頁：613-630資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201003029篇名：優勢中心取向生涯諮商之諮商歷程與療效內涵探究並列篇名：The Process of Strength-Based Career Counseling and the Content of Its Therapeutic Efficacy for Dual-Career Women作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Shelley Tien);朱惠瓊(Hui-Chuang Chu);葉寶玲(Pao-Ling Yeh)關鍵字：生涯諮商;諮商歷程;諮商療效;優勢中心取向;雙生涯女性;career counseling;counseling process;dual career women;strength-based method;therapeutic efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：研究目的<U+7232>探究優勢中心取向生涯諮商之諮商歷程與療效內涵。參與者<U+7232>14名已婚的職業婦女，年齡介於28到47歲之間（平均年齡<U+7232>36.64歲，標準差<U+7232>5.40）。參與者均接受6到8次短期優勢中心生涯諮商，並於諮商結束後一週進行訪談。研究工具<U+7232>研究者所擬定之訪談大綱，以半結構式訪談進行資料蒐集，所得資料以質性研究中的紮根方法進行分析，並以參與者諮商過程中所填寫之晤談感受作<U+7232>輔助分析的資料。研究結果歸納出影響諮商歷程的因素<U+7232>個人的內在準備、諮商介入、外在事件影響以及療效內涵等四部份。其中療效內涵又可歸納<U+7232>自我內在系統的認知、情感與行動層面、外在脈絡系統的人我關係與工作層面以及統轄系統的因應策略與自我效能等層面，據此結果提出一諮商歷程與療效內涵的改變機制模式。本研究根據上述研究結果進行討論，最後針對未來研究以及實務工作等提出相關具體建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the counselling process and therapeutic efficacy of a strength-based career counseling model for dual-career women in Taiwan. Participants were 14 married dual-career women between 28 to 47 years of age (M=36.64, SD=5.40). Pariticipants were interviewed one week after termination of counseling, which ranged from 6 to 8 sessions. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews and analysed using grounded theory approach. Results indicated four counseling process themes: Personal readiness for counseling, counseling intervention, impact of external circumstances, and content of therapeutic efficacy. Moreover, the content of therapeutic efficacy could be inducted into three systems-internal system, including cognitive, emotional and behavioral dimensions; external and contextual system, including self/other relation and career dimensions, and a coordination system, including coping strategies and self-efficacy dimensions. According to the result, a model of change mechanism for the counseling process and the therapeutic efficacy content was proposed. Discussion and implications of results were provided and recommended.起始頁-結束頁：631-653資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010031010篇名：諮商團體成員自我揭露因素之歷程變化分析並列篇名：Investigation for the Factors Changes of Members' Self Disclosure in the Process of Counseling Groups作者：許育光(Kevin Hsu)關鍵字：自我揭露;自我揭露因素;團體諮商;團體歷程;factors of self disclosure;group counseling;group process;self disclosure期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討諮商團體的歷程中，影響成員在團體中選擇作自我表達的原因之歷程變化。採問卷調查方法進行，以九個非結構式、各進行十次的諮商團體之58個成員作<U+7232>研究對象，分析其第二次至第十次團體聚會單元後，所填寫之「自我揭露量表」。研究結果發現：（一）在團體前段（二至四次）成員自我陳述願意揭露自己的因素較重要的<U+7232>「正向關係」；而未能自我揭露的原因則以「自我不確定性」和「自我貶抑」因素<U+7232>主。（二）在團體中段（五至七次）成員願意自我揭露之因素大致與前段相同，惟「正向關係」因素與「打破沉默」因素均略微下降；未能揭露之「自我不確定性」和「自我貶抑」因素較<U+7232>降低，但「個人步調」和「無法自在」卻略微上升。（三）在團體後段（八至十次）成員願意自我揭露的因素次序約與前、中段相同；未能揭露因素中「自我不確定性」和「自我貶抑」因素，較中段更<U+7232>下降，「自我貶抑」、「信賴不足」、「個人步調」和「無法自在」等因素均趨近於零。研究根據結果進行相關實務討論與建議。英文摘要：This study explored factors affecting self-disclosure and their changes among members in group counseling. Questionnaires were used to collect data from 58 clients in nine counseling groups each lasted for 10 sessions. Data from the second to the eighth sessions were gathered at the conclusion of each counseling session using the ”Self-Disclosure Questionnaire (SDQ)”. Results indicated that: (1) at the initial phase (sessions 2 to 4),willingness to self-disclose is due to ”Positive Relation” factor, and unwillingness to self-disclose is due to ”uncertainty about self” and ”self-deprecation” factors. (2) at the middle phase (sessions 5 to 7), willingness to self-disclose is related to similar factors as those in the initial phase, although the weights of ”Positive Relationship” and ”Break the Silence” factors slightly decreased; for unwillingness to self-disclose, the weights of the ”Self Uncertainty” and ”Self-Deprecation” factors slightly decreased, but the weights of ”Personal Pace” and ”Feeling Uncomfortable” slightly increased. (3) At the latter phase (sessions 8 to 10), willingness to self-disclose factors and their relative weights were about the same as that in the initial and middle phases; for unwillingness to self disclose, the factors of ”Uncertainty” and ”Self-Deprecation” factors were lower than that in the middle phase, and the factors of ”Self-Deprecation,” ”Lack of Trust,” ”Personal Pace,” and ”Feeling Uncomfortable” approached zero. Results were discussed and practical implications were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：655-676資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010031911篇名：以結構方程模式探討台灣大學生自尊、生活目標、希望感及校園人際關係對憂鬱情緒之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Self-esteem, Life goals, Hope, and Campus Interpersonal Relationships on The Depressive Mood of College Students in Taiwan作者：賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai);陸偉明(Wei-Ming Luh);董旭英(Yuk-Ying Tung)關鍵字：正向心理學;次級資料;希望感;高等教育資料庫;憂鬱情緒;positive psychology;secondary data;Structural Equation Modeling;Taiwan Higher Educational Database期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討台灣大三學生的正向特質與正向情緒對憂鬱情緒之效應，其中分析自尊、生活目標、希望感及校園人際關係等變項對憂鬱情緒之影響徑路，並針對所建構之模式進行適配度考驗。研究樣本乃取自臺灣高等教育資料庫之94學年度大三學生問卷，共計24,999人。結果發現：(1)自尊除了對生活目標、希望感、校園人際關係及憂鬱情緒具有直接影響外，亦能透過上述變項對憂鬱情緒產生間接影響；(2)生活目標對希望感具有直接影響，亦會透過希望感對校園人際關係與憂鬱情緒產生間接影響；(3)希望感對校園人際關係與憂鬱情緒具有直接影響外，亦會透過校園人際關係對憂鬱情緒產生間接影響；(4)校園人際關係對憂鬱情<U+7DD6>具有直接影響。最後，本研究依據研究發現進行討論，並提出相關建議以供參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to explore the effects of Taiwanese junior college students' positive trait and positive emotion on depressive mood. The structural paths of self-esteem, life goals, hope, and campus interpersonal relationships to depressive mood were examined, and the goodness-of-fit of the hypothesized strucutral model was tested. Participants were 24,999 junior college students from 2005-2006 the Taiwan Higher Education Database. Results indicated goodness-of-fit of the data and the hypothesized model: (1) Self-esteem has direct effects on life goals, hope, campus interpersonal relationships, and depressive mood, and indirect effect on depressive mood through these three variables. (2) Life goals directly influenced hope and indirectly influenced interpersonal relationships and depressive mood through hope. (3) Hope has direct effects on campus interpersonal relationships and depressive mood, and indirectly influences depressive mood through campus interpersonal relationships. (4) Campus interpersonal relationships have a direct effect on depressive mood. Implications for educational practices and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：677-699資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010032412篇名：利他意願在調節負向情緒上的效果並列篇名：Effect of Altruism on the Regulation of Negative Emotion作者：楊牧貞(Mu-Jang Yang);陳沐新(Mu-Hsin Chen)關鍵字：正向心理學;利他意願;情緒;閱讀;altruism;emotion;positive psychology;reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討利他意願對情緒的影響。實驗一呈現兩篇不同內容的文章以探討閱讀對情緒的影響。研究結果顯示溫馨內容之文章可使閱讀者產生正向的情緒，災難內容之文章則使閱讀者產生負向的情緒。實驗二採用實驗一中所使用之災難內容的文章以使閱讀者產生負向情緒，然後請其表達是否願意以捐款或擔任志工的方式幫助災民。結果發現幾乎所有的參與者均願意伸出援手，而和未被詢及助人意願之控制組相較之下，實驗組的負向情緒很明顯的比控制組的負向情緒低，此結果顯示利他意願可以降低負向情緒。本研究在教育上之應用於文中亦有所討論。英文摘要：The effect of altruism on affect was examined in this study. In Experiment 1, two articles with different content were presented to participants. Results indicated that the article with kind and pleasant content produced positive affect while the one describing an earthquake disaster produced negative affect for the participants. In Experiment 2, the participants were first asked to read the same article about earthquake disaster in Experiment 1. Then they were asked if they would like to donate some money or to work as a volunteer to help the earthquake survivors. Participants who wished to help the survivors in Experiment 2 reported less negative affect than participants in Experiment 1 who read the same article. The hypothesis that willingness to help others produced a decrease in negative affect is confirmed. Implications for education are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：701-718資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010033113篇名：學齡前幼兒的故事結構發展：故事文法之分析x並列篇名：Developing Narrative Structure in Preschoolers' Retellings of a Story Book: Episodic Analysis作者：陳欣希(Hsin-Hsi Chen);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang);陳秀芬(Hsiu-Fen Chen)關鍵字：中文;故事文法;敘事結構;情節分析;學齡前幼兒;Chinese;episodic analysis;narrative structure;preschoolers;story grammar期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文依據Stein和Glenn (1979)的故事文法架構，分析三、四、五歲共208名幼兒重述圖畫書時之故事結構元素及類型，並檢視其與年齡的關係。研究者採用CHILDES系統進行語料轉譯、編碼和計分，並作單因子變異數分析。研究發現除了「背景」元素未顯現年齡差異外，「內在計畫」、「結果」和「回應」的使用於五歲組和三歲組之間有顯著差異，而「引發事件」、「內在反應」和「嘗試」元素的表現均<U+7232>五歲組優於四歲組和三歲組。故事結構類型則隨年齡成長而趨向有目標的情節式故事結構，且包含比較多的因果關係。然而異於過去之研究，國內幼兒之「縮簡式情節」的比例未隨著年齡增長而減少。本研究結果將可瞭解幼兒故事結構的發展，並提出建議以作<U+7232>幼兒教育及未來研究的參考。英文摘要：Based on the story grammar framework proposed by Stein and Glenn (1979), this study aimed to analyze story elements and macrostructure in preschoolers' retellings of a story book, and explore the effect of age differences on such narrative structure. Two hundred and eight narratives produced by children of three age groups, age 3 (N=59), age 4 (N=75), and age 5 (N=74), were transcribed, coded and scored using the CHILDES system. One-way ANOVA was adopted to analyze the effect of age on narrative performance. The study findings show that, except for story background information, there are significant differences in internal plans, consequences, and reactions between five-years-olds and three-year-olds. It was also found that, the performance scores in frequencies of initiating events, internal responses, and attempts of five-year-olds are significantly higher than those of the four-year-olds as well as the three-year-olds. In terms of macrostructure, older age groups tend to present stories in purposive and pisodic structure and include more causal relationships in their stories. However, the percentages of abbreviated episodes does not decrease with the increase of age in this study, which is inconsistent with the prior research findings. The result may shed light on the development of preschoolers' narrative structure and provide suggestions for preschool education, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：359-378資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009072314篇名：發展二階段診斷工具探討學生之統計迷思概念：以「相關」為例並列篇名：Developing Two-Tier Diagnostic Instrument for Exploring Students' Statistical Misconceptions: Take "Correlation" as the Example作者：劉子鍵(Tzu-Chien Liu);林怡均(Yi-Chun Lin)關鍵字：二階段診斷工具;迷思概念;相關;統計教育;correlation;misconception;statistics education;two-tier diagnostic instrument期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：統計素養是當代公民的必備能力，然而學生在學習統計時，常會產生迷思概念。相較於其他科學領域已經發展二階段診斷工具來探究學生的迷思概念，在統計教育領域中罕有類似的工具。據此，本研究針對基礎統計學中重要的概念，「相關」，編製二階段診斷工具，Two-tier Diagnostic Instrument about Correlation Misconceptions (TDICM)，並利用該工具對982名已修畢「相關」課程的高三學生之作答反應進行分析，以探討其「相關」理解情形，「相關」迷思概念的類型、普遍性與可能成因。研究結果顯示：(1)TDICM的試題難度分配平均，內部一致性信度與鑑別度均佳；(2)受測學生的相關概念理解情形不佳，部分受測學生雖然能答對TDICM的第一階段試題，卻因<U+7232>缺乏對相關概念的完全理解，而無法答對TDICM的第二階段試題；(3)根據受測學生的兩階段答案組型，顯示TDICM所診斷的14個相關迷思概念皆被學生所普遍擁有；(4)上述14個相關迷思概念中有7個是過去研究曾探討過，有7個是本研究於診斷工具發展過程中發現學生常具備的迷思概念。此外，本研究亦在研究結果與討論中探討這14個迷思概念的可能成因與教育意涵。最後，本研究針對「二階段診斷工具」與「相關」迷思概念在統計教育研究之應用提出建議。英文摘要：Statistical literacy is essential to people of modern era. However, research has shown that students often hold misconceptions when they study statistics. Although two-tier diagnostic instruments have been developed for diagnosing and exploring students' misconceptions in other fields of science, few are availble in statistics education. Therefore, the main purpose of the current study was to develop a two tier diagnostic instrument: Two-tier Diagnostic Instrument about Correlation Misconceptions (TDICM). This instrument was adopted to analyze the responses of 982 12th-graders who had taken statistics courses to ”correlation”, and to explore the types, universality, and possible causes of such misconceptions in correlation. The research results showed that: (a) TDICM has satisfactory levels of difficulty, internal consistency reliability, and discrimination; (b) most participants do not have good comprehension of ”correlation” concepts. Although some were able to answer the questions correctly in the first tier of TDICM, they failed to do so in the second tier due to lack of comprehensive understanding of correlation; (c) students' responses in the two-tier model indicated that there are 14 correlation misconceptions universally held by the participants; (d) seven of the 14 misconceptions has been discussed in the literature, and others were identified in this study. Furthermore, the possible causes of these misconceptions and the implications in education were discussed. Finally, this study provided some suggestions to the application of two-tier diagnostic instrument and the correlation misconceptions in statistics education.起始頁-結束頁：379-399資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009080515篇名：屏東縣中低收入戶幼兒就讀之幼托園所其結構品質與過程品質關係之探討並列篇名：Study of the Relationship between Structural Quality and Process Quality in Child Cares for Low-Income Children in Pingtung County作者：陳雅鈴(Ya-Ling Chen);高武銓(Wu-Chyuan Gau)關鍵字：中低收入戶;幼兒教育;幼托品質;幼稚園;托兒所;child care quality;early childhood education;kindergarten;low-income children;preschool期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要的目的除了探討屏東縣收托中低收入戶幼托園所之結構品質與過程品質表現外，主要重點在探討不同結構品質變項下，其過程品質平均數是否有顯著差異；以及哪些結構品質變項與過程品質有顯著相關。結構品質變項主要包含師生比、團體人數、教師的教育程度、教師的專業訓練、及教師薪資福利。過程品質主要包括：由ECERS-R/FDCRS評量的幼托園所照顧學習過程品質（包括：個人生活照顧、語言品質、學習活動品質、社會互動品質、成人需求品質）；以及由Arnett Scale評估的師生互動過程品質（包括互動過程中的正向性、懲罰性、容忍度、以及放任度）。樣本主要是從屏東縣33個鄉中有收托中低收入戶幼兒的幼稚園及托兒所分層隨機抽樣取得，總計抽取115所做<U+7232>本研究樣本。研究以ECERS-R/FDCRS以及Arnett Scale做<U+7232>評量園所過程品質的主要工具；結構品質則以結構訪談問卷獲得。資料主要採用變異數分析方式進行。研究結果顯示：（一）教師薪資福利與過程品質相關性最強，教師薪資福利層次較高，過程品質表現亦較佳；（二）教師薪資福利及教育程度的交互作用，對過程品質有較顯著的影響。文末針對研究結果做一討論，並提出相關建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to investigate structural quality and process quality in child cares for low-income children in Pingtung County. In addition, research focus was to explore whether significant difference existed among different structural quality variables, and which structural quality variables were significantly related to the process quality. Structural quality included student/teacher ratio, group size, teachers' education level, teachers' professional training, and teachers' salary and fringe benefits. Process quality included two main parts: (1) caring and learning process quality of child cares' facilities evaluated by’-ECERS-R/FDCRS scale, including basic personal care, language quality, learning activity quality, social interaction quality, and characters needed for adulthood; (2) quality of teacher-children interaction evaluated by Arnett Scale, including positive interaction, punitiveness, tolerance, and permissiveness. Researchers used stratified random sampling technique to choose child care facilitiess in which low-income children enrolled from 33 towns in Pingtung County. A total of 115 child cares facilitiess participated in this study. Researchers used ECERS-R/FDCRS and Arnett Scale to measure child cares' process quality, and structural questionnaire to gather structural quality data. ANOVA was conducted to analyze data. The results show: (a) teachers' salary and benefits haves the strongest relationship with the process quality. The higher the teachers' level of salary and benefits, the better the process quality is; (b) teachers' welfare and educational level have an interactive effect, which has significant influences on the process quality. Discussions and suggestions related to above findings in childcare were included as well.起始頁-結束頁：401-421資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009082716篇名：不同年齡男女專業工作者之玩興與工作創新並列篇名：Age and Gender Differences in Playfulness and Innovation Behavior among Professional Workers作者：余嬪(Yu Ping);吳靜吉(Jing-Jyi Wu);陳以亨(I-Heng Chen);區衿綾(Jing-Ling Ou)關鍵字：工作創新;年齡;性別;玩興;創造力;age;creativity;gender;playfulness;work innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來成人玩興與創新受到研究與實務界的關注。有研究發現專業工作者玩興與工作創新有中高度的正相關，而在職場中對年齡與性別的差異與可能的交互作用則甚少探討。本研究以問卷調查法探討專業工作者性別與年齡在玩興與工作創新之關係。受試者包括教育界、藝術傳播界、高科技產業界、以及傳統產業界四類專業員工男668人、女809人，共1477人。研究工具<U+7232>成人玩興量表短題本與創新行<U+7232>量表。研究發現：(1)性別與年齡在玩興上有交互作用。不同年齡男性彼此之間與女性彼此之間玩興沒有差異，但在40歲以前較年輕的組別裡，男性的玩興顯著高於女性，而40歲以上男女的玩興差異則不顯著。(2)性別與年齡在工作創新上有交互作用。不同年齡組間男性的工作創新行<U+7232>沒有顯著差異，而50-59歲女性的創新行<U+7232>顯著高於20-29歲的女性。同時50歲以前各年齡組男性工作創新行<U+7232>均高於女性；50-59歲男女工作創新差異不顯著。(3)職場中高齡男性與女性專業工作者創新行<U+7232>並不因年齡大而減低，女性在中年過後玩興與創新更增高。建議職場應避免對中高齡者之刻板印象，並重視不同年齡男女之玩興與創新行<U+7232>之差異而給予不同支持激勵與工作管理設計。英文摘要：In recent years, there has been increasing interest in adult playfulness and innovation behavior in research and profession. Research has found significantly positive relationships between playfulness and innovation behaviors in professional workers. However, little attention has been paid to age difference, gender differences, and the interactive effect of these twos. The purpose of this study was to investigate the interactive effects of age and gender on playfulness and innovation behavior in professional workers. A total of 1477 participants (672 males and 810 females) from education, arts and communication, high-tech industry, and traditional industry were involved the survey. Adult Playfulness Inventory (API) and Innovation Behavior Questionnaire (IBQ) were used to collect data. The major findings are as follows: 1) There is an interactive effect between gender and age on playfulness. No significant differences was found in API among different age age groups of males or females Males in younger age groups (age＜40) show significantly higher playfulness than females in equivalent age groups However, no significant difference was found between males and females in older age groups (age＞40). 2) There is an interactive effect between gender and age on work innovation behavior. No significant differences was found in IBQ among different male age groups. Interestingly, females of age 50-59 show significantly higher innovation behavior than females of age 20-29. In addition, males under age 50 show significantly higher innovation behavior than females in equivalent age groups, but no gender difference was found in age group 50-59. 3) In general, innovation behaviors do not decrease in professionals with the increase of age. Female professionals even show higher playfulness spirits and innovation behavior after age 40 or 50. It is suggested that stereotypes of senior professionals be avoided and that supportive environment and management be provided to reinforce employee's playfulness and innovation behavior according to their gender and age differences.起始頁-結束頁：423-444資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009091717篇名：生涯未確定當事人對敘事取向生涯諮商之經驗內涵分析並列篇名：The Content Analysis on the Experiences of Career Counseling in a Narrative Approach with Career Indecision Clients作者：蕭景容(Ching-Jung Hsiao);徐巧玲(Chiao-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：生涯諮商;生涯未確定;敘事取向;career counseling;career indecision;narrative therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在了解生涯未確定者在敘事取向生涯諮商中的經驗內涵。研究參與者<U+7232>八位經立意取樣所邀請之生涯未確定者，他們接受四到九次的敘事取向生涯諮商，結束後並進行一次追蹤訪談，以回溯其接受諮商過程中的經驗內涵。資料分析方式採敘事分析中的類別－內容分析方法。研究結果發現接受敘事取向生涯諮商之經驗內涵，包括「與己關係」、「與助人者的諮商關係」、以及「與重要他人關係」等三個層面。第一，在與己關係層面，包括了：影響生涯因素的覺察、重拾生命的主導權、自我價值感的轉變、新的覺察與洞察、談不愉快往事的抗拒到豁然開朗、方向與目標的釐清帶來積極與正向的行動力。第二，關於諮商關係的部分，包括：當事人感受到的諮商心理師與諮商關係、當事人認<U+7232>諮商心理師有效的諮商技巧。第三，在與重要他人關係層面，包括：當事人對於重要關係對生涯決定、其他關係互動模式影響的覺察，以及覺察自己與對方，理解帶來的接納與關係轉變。本研究最後根據研究結果加以討論，並針對實務工作及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to understand the experience of career indecision clients who received career counseling in a narrative approach. Recruited through purposive sampling, the participants were eight career indecision individuals, who had received four to nine sessions of career counseling in a narrative approach. A follow-up interview was conducted to explore the experience the of the participant's in these counseling sessions. The data were analyzed with ”categorical-content” method in narrative analysis. The results indicated that the experience contents in receiving career counseling in a narrative approach consist of three aspects: ”relationship with”, ”counseling relationships with the counselor”, and ”relationship with significant others”. First, in relationship with self, the important experiences included awareness of factors influencing caree; over one's life, transformation of self-esteem; new pereptions and insights; going through resistance to openness with unhappy experiences; positiveness and motivations from clarification of goals. Second, relationships with the counselor included the counselor and counseling relationships perceived by the clients and counselor's techniques perceived as effective by the clients. Third, relationships with significant others included clients' awareness of the influence of their significant relationships on their career decisions and on their interactions with others; awareness of the acceptance and transformation of relationships brought about by understanding of the relationship between self and significant others. Finally, the research results were discussed and suggestions were provided for practices and further studies.起始頁-結束頁：445-465資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009100118篇名：科學教育有助於消除迷信嗎？－從思考統整層面所做的觀察並列篇名：The Effect of Science Education on Scientific Thinking and Superstitious Thinking in Terms of Local Coherence and Global Coherence作者：王震武(Jenn-Wu Wang);林文瑛(Wen-Ying Lin);張郁雯(Yu-Wen Chang)關鍵字：局部統整;科學式思考;科學教育;迷信式思考;整體統整;global coherence;local coherence;science education;scientific thinking;superstitious thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的目的在釐清科學教育與思考統整性的發展之關係。假如科學教育使人趨於理性，則隨著科學教育年限的增長，迷信式思考便會逐步削弱，而思考的統整性則會越來越強，這也是科學教育有助於破除迷信的真正意涵。本研究針對小、中、大學生，以三個實驗分別去釐清他們對命相、風水、鬼神三類議題的思考之統整程度。每個實驗呈現兩個故事，每個故事均包含一個關於命相／風水／鬼神的說法，但兩故事的說法是彼此矛盾的。參與者須以五點量表表示他對每個說法的接受度。三個實驗結果非常類似，不論是關於命相、風水或鬼神議題的思考，隨著受教育年限的增長，參與者對這些說法的接受度趨於下降。然而，參與者對兩個矛盾說法的反應相關係數卻顯示，參與者的思考是局部統整的，而且此局部統整現象遍通於命相、風水與鬼神類議題的思考，並隨教育年限的增長而趨於明顯。換句話說，偏重科學知識的科學教育，除了明顯增進受教育者懷疑精神外，在思考上，並未能成功的教導最重要的科學理性－思考統整。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to understand the relationship between science education and development of global coherence in thinking. To devise successful science education, it is necessary to consider both scientific knowledge and scientific thinking. The crucial point of scientific thinking is to achieve global coherence in thinking instead of local coherence which involves conflicts in thinking. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of science education on diluting superstitious thinking in terms of local coherence in thinking. Three experiments were designed to investigate the coherence in thinking of elementary school, middle/high school, and college students in the fields of physiognomy, supernaturalism, and geomancy, respectively. In each experiment, two stories depicting the same unusual events with conflicting paranormal explanations were presented. The participants were asked to rate their acceptance of each explanation in a five point scale. Similar results were found in the three experiments: (1) Participants' acceptance of paranormal explanations decreases with age; (2) However, the correlation between participants' two responses to the two conflicting explanations suggests local coherence in participants' thinking. And such local coherence in thinking increases with age. In other words, science education with focus on science knowledge has not successfully taught student global coherence in thinking, which is the most important part of science reasoning.起始頁-結束頁：467-490資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2009111219篇名：論點立場與品質對高中生論點贊否反應影響的意識處理機制並列篇名：The Conscious Mechanisms of the Influences of Argument Position and Argument Quality on Senior High school Students' Argument Agreement/Disagreement Responses作者：劉政宏(Cheng-Hong Liu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);張文哲(Wen-Jer Chang);張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang)關鍵字：立場對立情境之論點贊否模式CSAAM;自動化處理;意識處理;論點立場;論點品質;argument position;argument quality;arguments agreement/disagreement model of a counterpositional situation CSAAM;automatic processing;conscious processing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在日常生活或教育情境中，人們常常會對接觸到的論點進行贊成或反對的判斷，以往有許多研究在針對與此議題相關的溝通現象進行探討。先前的研究顯示，論點立場與品質是影響個體對論點做出贊成或反對判斷的主要因素（若論點與個體自身立場一致或有道理，會引發贊成傾向），然而卻甚少有研究針對「論點立場與品質對論點贊否判斷的影響屬於意識或自動化處理？」的問題進行深入探討。因此，本研究試圖由「能否覺察？」、「能否控制？」及「所需認知資源多寡？」等三種區分意識與自動化處理的指標，針對論點立場與品質兩種論點性質影響路徑的意識或自動化處理本質進行檢驗。實驗一以64名高中生<U+7232>對象，發現參與者可以覺察到自己對論點的贊否判斷會受到論點立場的影響，而且在實驗者對其進行監控提醒後（提醒其要公正客觀地進行判斷），也能夠修正依據論點立場進行判斷的傾向；然而，參與者雖然可以覺察到自己的判斷會受到論點品質的影響，但在經過監控提醒後，並未能提升其依據論點品質進行判斷的傾向。實驗二在調整實驗一的方法後，在73名高中生的研究結果中發現論點立場與品質的影響分別會被監控提醒所修正或促進。實驗三以96名高中生<U+7232>對象，顯示參與者可覺察論點立場與品質的影響，且此影響也會被分心作業所干擾。整體而言，多數結果支持論點立場與品質的影響屬於意識處理，本研究據此進行討論，並提出結果應用及未來研究建議。英文摘要：People often make ”agree or disagree” judgments on arguments in daily life and education settings. Researches have been exploring the communication phenomena relating to this topic and several studies indicated that the position and quality of an argument would influence whether people agree with it (when an argument is compatible with prior beliefs or strong in quality, tendency to agree it is elicited), but very few has examined the conscious/automatic essences of the processing routes this study aimed to examine. Sixty-four high school students were involved in Experiment 1 and it was founded that the influence of argument position on judgments was conscious processing as the participants were aware of such influence, and it could also be corrected by instructions which reminded the participants to monitor the judgments objectively (monitor reminding). However, although the participants were also aware of the influence of argument quality on their judgments, the results did not show facilitating effect of monitor reminding. After revising the procedures of Experiment 1, the Experiment 2 with 73 high school students found that the influences of argument quality and position could be respectively corrected or facilitated by monitor reminding. The results of Experiment 3 with 96 high school participants indicate that both influences of argument position and argument quality were conscious processing inasmuch as the influences were interfered by distraction task and the participants were aware of the influences. Based on the research findings, possible implications for educators and suggestions for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：491-515資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010081820篇名：以認知神經科學取向探討兒童注意力的發展和學習之關聯並列篇名：The Relationship between Development of Attention and Learning in Children a Cognitive Neuroscience Approach作者：林宜親(Yi-Chin Lin);李冠慧(Kuan-Hui Li);宋玟欣(Wen-Shin Sung);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko);曾志朗(Ovid JL Tzeng);洪蘭(Daisy L Hung);阮啟弘(Chi-Hung Juan)關鍵字：注意力發展;認知神經科學;學習;attentional development;cognitive neuroscience;learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：42卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：過去十年以來，在發展心理學與認知神經科學的領域，兒童的注意力及執行功能發展的研究已成<U+7232>重要議題，從許多腦造影及認知神經科學之研究，提供了此領域新的發現及觀點，這些新的發現也促進了教育心理學與認知神經科學之整合。因此教師、教育心理學家、以及認知神經科學家之間的互動及溝通，對於推動此整合性的新興領域之發展及其可能之應用是絕對必要的。台灣在這一方面的研究尚未完備，在本回顧性的論文當中，將介紹現今對於兒童注意力研究之進展，以及未來之發展趨勢。期望有助於增進台灣不同領域研究者之間的交流並激發出新的研究想法。英文摘要：The development of attention and executive function in children has been an important research topic in developmental psychology and cognitive neuroscience in the last decade. Many studies have provided new findings and insights on this topic by using neuroimaging and other cognitive neuroscientific techniques. These new developments have also facilitated integrated research between educational psychology and cognitive neuroscience. As such, the interaction and communication among teachers, educational psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists are crucial to promoting future research and possible applications in this emerging multidisciplinary field. In this article, we reviewed recent progresses and future trends in attention research in children. Finally, we hope to facilitate cross-disciplinary discussion and inspire new research ideas that connect attention and learning.起始頁-結束頁：517-541資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010090201篇名：三位六年級教師數學課程實施之比較並列篇名：The Implementation of Mathematics Curriculum: A Case Study of Three Sixth-grade Teachers作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu)關鍵字：課程實施;國小教師;數學課程;curriculum implementation;elementary school teacher;mathematics curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以三位不同背景的國小六年級教師為對象，探討個案教師於教室內實施數學課程的情形。本研究採用個案研究法，透過教學觀察、訪談和文件來蒐集資料，從教師使用數學任務的來源、類型和實施方式等三個面向來了解教師實施數學課程的情形。結果發現，三位教師使用的數學任務，雖然大多來自於教科書，但一位偏向調整內容以符合學生的生活經驗，另外兩位偏向忠實使用教科書的內容;三位教師使用的數學任務類型，雖然都以「有意義連結」的任務居多，但一位以小組開放討論的方式來實施，使學生大多以高認知的方式來學習數學任務， 另外兩位採封閉式對話的方式來實施，使學生大多以低認知的方式來進行學習。三位教師在數學課程實施時，主要考量的因素分別是個人數學教學的信念、學校評量的政策和教學進度，以及學生的學習特性，因而呈現出不同數學課程實施的樣貌。英文摘要：This study was aimed to understand how elementary school teachers implemented mathematics curriculum in their classroom, and to explore factors which influenced such processes. A case study methodology was used to compare three sixth-grade teachers with different teaching experiences and backgrounds. The primary data sources were classroom observations, teacher interviews, and documents recorded all collected during the 2009-10 school year. Data analyses indicated that most mathematics tasks which the three teachers used were from textbooks. One of the teachers usually adjusted tasks to match students ' life experience, and the other teachers usually followed textbooks. Although most tasks they used were classified as 'procedure with connection,' one teacher let her students learn mathematics tasks in a high cognitive way, because she often used teamwork and open-ended questions. The other teachers had their students learn mathematics in a low cognitive way, because they used close-ended questions. When the three teachers implemented mathematics curriculum, they had different considerations, including personal mathematics teaching beliefs, school policy related to achievement tests and scheduled progress, and students' learning habits, respectively. Thus, they presented different pictures of implementing mathematics curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：85-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201106_(57-2).00032篇名：愛的教育，鐵的紀律？父母教養方式與青少年心理健康之相關並列篇名：Warm Support vs. Iron Discipline? The Relation between Parenting and Adolescent Mental Health作者：陳婉琪(Wan-Chi Chen);徐崇倫(Chung-Lun Hsu)關鍵字：心理健康;青少年;父母教養;監督管教;嚴厲教養;mental health;adolescent;parenting;parental monitoring;harsh parenting期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:2期出版年：2011中文摘要：父母親教養如何影響子女的心理健康？以「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」之國中生樣本進行分析，本文再次印證既有之結論──父母關愛支持對子女心理健康帶來正面影響，而嚴厲教養帶來負面影響，並且進一步回答了幾個問題。首先，只要不採用嚴厲的教養，並提供子女適度監督，便可以輕微減少焦慮、憂鬱等負面心理症狀。其次，高度的關愛支持能夠稍微緩衝嚴厲教養所帶來的不良影響。接著，針對家長性別發現，父親具有獨立於母親的影響力，其影響強度與母親不相上下。最後，區分子女性別後，原先的監督管教正效應僅出現在「父子」及「母女」的親子配對上。此結果指出，同性別家長對子女可能具有某種程度的重要性。最後，值得注意的是，儘管父母監督管教有助於子女心理健康，但影響幅度仍遠小於父母提供的關愛與支持。英文摘要：Based on the data analysis from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS), this study examines how adolescents' mental health is correlated with parenting behavior among 12,753 ninth-grader students in Taiwan. In addition to reconfirming the positive influence of parental support and the negative effect of harsh parenting on adolescents' mental health, this study also contributes to the literature as follows. First, as long as harsh parenting does not prevail, proper discipline and monitoring are positively correlated with adolescents' mental health. Second, high parental support could mitigate the negative impact of harsh parenting. Third, fathers' parenting effect differs from mothers', and both are equally important. Lastly, the positive influence of parental monitoring on child's mental health mentioned above only occurs in fatherson and mother-daughter pairs. The results suggest that the same-sex parent may play a more crucial role in adolescents' mental health development. Moreover, although parental monitoring has a positive effect on adolescents' mental health, parental care and support remain the most crucial factors.起始頁-結束頁：121-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201106_(57-2).00043篇名：C, Macaulay的「兩性平等」人性觀與教育學說並列篇名：C. Macaulay's Human Nature Views of Gender Equality and Her Thoughts on Education作者：方永泉(Yung-Chuan Fang)關鍵字：女子教育;兩性平等;人文主義教育;C. Macaulay;female education;gender equality;humanistic education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:1期出版年：2011中文摘要：為探索C. Macaulay（1731 - 1791）這位在歷史上被忽略的女性教育學者，本文首先探討了她的生平背景，發現她在當時以男性為主的社會中，並末自我囿限於傳統所賦予之女性定位，而係以豐富的學識與堅定的決心，將政治改革者與女性知識份子的角色融於一身。筆者認為，Macaulay 的人性觀與其教育思想間有密切關係，故先探討其人性觀。Macaulay主張，理性與情感均衡及兩性平等的人性觀，認為所謂的「性別互補」觀念應是在個人之內，而非社會之中。而在教育思想方面，Macaulay 則有下列的主張：一、教育的改進是社會及政治改革的起點；二、人的知識與品格可以透過教育來培育；三、重視道德教育的作用；四、主張男女皆可適用的文學教育；五、重視教師的品格及素質等。總言之，Macaulay 的教育論述並末論及窮人與僕人的階級該如何習得其所倡導的教育，可說是其理論缺陷。惟其透過對於兩性平等人性觀的倡導，具體地將一套完整的人文主義教育主張貫注在她的教育計畫中，正體現了Macaulay心中的美德價值及人性尊嚴。英文摘要：After investigating related studies on the contexts and backgrounds of C. Macaulay (”the forgotten educational theorist”), the author finds that Macaulay strived to break through the limits imposed on women's living and working space with her perseverance and self-cultivation as well as scholarships obtained. Macaulay successfully integrated the roles of a political reformer and a woman into a female intellectual. Macaulay believed that all human beings, including women, are gifted with reason and intellect. The author therefore argues that her human nature views of gender equality are closely related to her thoughts on education. The author analyzes her human nature views, and elaborates her educational thoughts as follows: 1) The political and social reform must begin with educational reform; 2) the cultivation of knowledge and personality formation should be achieved through nurture and education; 3) the functions of moral education should be highlighted; 4) the same literary education should be advocated for both boys and girls; and 5) the character and quality of teachers should be stressed. In conclusion, the educational thoughts of Macaulay are not without deficiencies in terms of today's society. However, the author thinks that Macaulay showed her firm beliefs in human dignity and virtue as well as gender equality through her writings and educational thoughts. These might be the most important values that we can learn from Macaulay's writings today.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201103_(57-1).00014篇名：德國中小學學生法律地位之萌芽期並列篇名：The Initial Period of German Students' Legal Status in Middle and Elementary Schools作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：德國教育;公共教育;特別權力關係;German education;public education;the special power relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:1期出版年：2011中文摘要：歷史上，臺灣的教育法體系主要繼受於德國法，為釐清其歷史根源，本文探討德國中小學學生法律地位之萌芽期，先由歷史發展的角度，闡釋德國公共教育之濫觴；而後再進一步說明公共教育興起後，學生法律地位之相關理論，此包含國家概念與法律保留原則等；最後探討學生法律地位之內涵。德國教育體制的建立，源自教會之學習機構;至十八世紀末，普魯士在啟蒙運動與開明專制的背景下，建立了義務教育制度，以此促使學者展開對於學生法律地位之研究。傳統的德國在學關係是一種「營造物關係」；營造物被視為國家的一部分，其使用與管理均屬於國家內部事宜，無須受到法律規範；行政機關有權制定特殊的內部規則，亦無須符合法律保留原則。學生處於營造物關係之特別權力關係中，必須受到校規的特別管束，從而喪失其獨立的公民主體身分。英文摘要：Taiwan inherited a system of educational law from Germany long ago. This study was aimed to discuss the initial period of German students' legal status of in middle and elementary schools. Firstly, this study analyzed the sources of German public education from a historic viewpoint. Then, it explained related theories of students' legal status, including the concept of state and the principle of legal retention. Finally, this study explored the contents of students' legal status. The establishment of German educational system derived from churches. Due to the background of Enlightenment and enlightened absolutism, Prussia established the system of mandatory education in late 18 century and stimulated researches on students' legal status. The tradition relationship in German schools was a kind of institute-relationship. Institutes were regarded as a part of the country. Their usage and management belonged to internal affairs of the country without restriction of the law. Administrative organizations had power to set up particular internal regulations, unrestricted by the principle of legal retention. In such a special power relationship, Students had to be restrained by school regulations; moreover, they lost their independent status as citizens.起始頁-結束頁：35-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201103_(57-1).00025篇名：共學社群中女性社區工作者的經驗與實踐並列篇名：Female Community Workers' Experiences and Praxis in Co-learning Community作者：方雅慧(Ya-Hui Fang);何青蓉(Ching-Jung Ho)關鍵字：社群意識;反省性實踐;網絡連結與協作;實踐社群;sense of community;reflexive practice;networking and collaboration;community of practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:1期出版年：2011中文摘要：農村的社區營造工作，長期被政策期待能夠扮演促進活化偏鄉的積極角色。面臨社區工作議題的多元複雜和方案資源的有限性，為了平衡資源與服務之間的落差，農村社區營造工作的社區組織乃發展跨組織間工作者的網絡連結與協作，做為永續推動社區營造的行動議程。本研究以長期從事民間推動社區營造的屏東縣為背景，探討女性社區工作者形成協作網絡之發展歷程，以及影響她們對於社群認同的因素。研究中討論女性社區工作者從個人超越朝向共同願景的軌跡。研究發現，個案藉由發展「實踐社群」的群體關係，組成了一個有社群意識的共學社群。研究結果也提出了女性社區工作者的個人動能、她們所構築的社群意識與特性，以及在社區學習網絡協作與共學歷程可能面對的挑戰。英文摘要：Community work has been long expected by policy makers to be an activator in improving rural areas. Despite complex community work and limited resources in community projects, community organizations try to develop cross-organization networking and collaboration to support the agendas of community work and to bridge the gap between resources and services. The background of the research is Ping Tung County, which has been promoting community empowerment for a long time. This research aims to explore the developing process of the learning network in the community, how the female community practitioners engage in social practices and what makes them identify themselves with the co-learning community. This research discusses how female community practitioners practiced networking and collaboration, as well as what they experienced during the co-learning process from personal mastery toward a shared vision of the community. The conclusion has proved that the key factor of promoting a sense of co-learning community can be realized through the relationship in ”community of practices”. Such result also brings forward the potential of the female practitioners, their establishment of sense of community, and features and possible challenges in future development from the concrete collaboration and co-learning experiences in this community learning network.起始頁-結束頁：63-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201103_(57-1).00036篇名：重探學科補習的階層化與效益：Wisconsin模型的延伸並列篇名：A Re-exploration of Stratification and Efficacy in Cram Schooling: An Extension of the Wisconsin Model作者：陳俊瑋(Chun-Wei Chen);黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：學科補習;教育期望;威斯康辛模型;cram schooling;educational expectations;the Wisconsin model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：57:1期出版年：2011中文摘要：過去探討學科補習的研究，其關注焦點主要著重在學科補習階層化與其效益這兩方面。但這些研究在探討階層化與效益時，存在著兩大缺口，一是探討學科補習階層化的研究並沒有考量家庭社經地位對學科補習參與影響中可能存在的中介變項，二是探討學科補習效益的研究存在著高估學科補習效益的可能性。本文在檢討過去探討學科補習階層化與效益的研究後，參考Wisconsin模型，運用「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」資料，以更適當的研究架構，對上述問題重新探討。研究結果顯示：一、家庭社經地位愈高，父母教育期望與子女自我教育期望愈高，進而提高學科補習參與；二、控制父母教育期望與子女自我教育期望後，學科補習參與對於學業成績先升後降的非直線影響下降許多。由於過去探討學科補習效益的研究很可能高估學科補習的效益，本研究的發現有助於打破學科補習高效益的迷思。英文摘要：Chun- Wei Chen Previous studies of cram schooling have focused primarily on stratification and efficacy. However, they have fallen short of the depth of their discussions. Concerning stratification, previous studies have not considered possible intervening variables caused by socioeconomic status of family that might influence children's attendance at cram schools. Moreover, these studies have perhaps overestimated the efficacy of cram schools. This research focused on two unresolved issues regarding the stratification and efficacy of cram schools, taking the Wisconsin model into account and using data collected from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey, to develop a well-defined research framework to reinvestigate the research questions above. It was found that higher socioeconomic status of a family led to higher educational expectations of parents and children. This in turn led to an increase in children's attendance at cram schools. The non-linear influence, first ascending and then descending, of student attendance at cram schools on academic achievement, decreased greatly after the variables of educational expectations of parents and children were held constant. Because previous studies probably overestimated the efficacy of cram schooling, this study may help dispel the myths surrounding the efficacy of cram schools.起始頁-結束頁：101-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.6910/BER.201103_(57-1).000401篇名：探討臺灣學生的自律學習：TEPS資料的縱貫性分析並列篇名：Self-Regulation Learning among Taiwanese Students: A Longitudinal Analysis of the TEPS Database作者：趙珮晴(Pei-Ching Chao);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);張芳全(Fang-Chung Chang)關鍵字：分析能力;台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;自律學習;潛在成長曲線模型;analytical ability;Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS);self-regulation learning;latent growth curve model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：課後學生自主的時間能否自己自律繼續學習，是值得關注的議題。本研究欲瞭解學生從國中到高中自律學習發展情況，以台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫的2,939個追蹤樣本，進行潛在成長曲線模型分析。在本研究的假設模型中發現：兩性學生在自律學習的假設模型無顯著差異，而且國中高自律學習的學生到高中的自律學習成長有限；國中低自律學習的學生到高中自律學習成長幅度較大。至於學生家庭社經地位愈高、父母學校參與和接納的程度愈高，學生國中時期的自律學習情況會愈好；但是學生家庭社經地位愈高、父母學校參與程度愈高，對於學生國中到高中自律學習成長有限，至於父母接納則無顯著影響關係。另外，國中自律學習良好的學生，有較良好的分析能力；但是自律學習無法有效預測分析能力的成長情況。本研究將依據上述研究結果提出相關結論與建議以供參考。英文摘要：Students self-regulating their learning after school is an important topic. This study examines the development of self-regulation learning (SRL) and analytical abilities using 2,939 samples from junior high schools and senior high schools. Data were collected from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS). A latent growth curve model was employed to analyze the data. The analysis results are as follows: No gender differences exist regarding the development of SRL and analytical ability in both junior and senior high school students in Taiwan. Junior high school students with higher levels of SRL tend to make less SRL progress during senior high school, whereas students with lower SRL levels tend to make greater progress. Junior high school students with higher family socioeconomic status, greater parental involvement and acceptance, and superior SRL levels demonstrated less SRL progress in senior high school. Additionally, junior high school students with higher SRL levels tend to have greater analytical abilities. However, the SRL level of senior high school students could not accurately predict their analytical abilities. Based on these results, this study provides a number of conclusions and suggestions for practical applications and future research.起始頁-結束頁：151-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學2篇名：臺灣高等教育院校之學校品質、經營效率與最適規模分析並列篇名：School Quality, Operational Efficiency, and Optimal Size: An Analysis of Higher Education Institutions in Taiwan作者：傅祖壇(Tsu-Tan Fu)關鍵字：成本效率;高等教育;規模經濟;學校品質;cost efficiency;higher education;economy of size;school quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來由於少子化及高等教育之過度擴充，臺灣有許多家高等教育院校正面臨嚴重的招生不足及財務困難之問題。教育主管當局亦針對這些學校要求採取減招或系所關閉，或與他校合併之鼓勵措施。為提供較客觀數據作為調整時之參考，高等教育院校之經營效率及最適規模探討已為當前高等教育必要且重要之研究課題。本研究利用平均成本邊界函數法衡量高等教育院校之成本效率，並探究在考慮學校品質差異性下之最適經營規模。研究結果顯示，最適規模會與學校品質成正比。而就目前之平均學校品質水準而言，約有60%之大學及技職院校之規模未達或超過最適規模水準，應設法擴大或降低這些學校之經營規模，而本文之實證結果當可作為這些學校規模調整之參考。此外，研究亦發現：經營效率改善所獲致之成本節省，將超過調整規模所能產生之成本效益。是故，學校在調整規模之同時，更應重視成本效率之提升。英文摘要：As a result of low birth rates and over-expansion during past decades, a number of higher education institutions in Taiwan are currently confronted by problems of low enrollment rates and financial distress. The educational authority in Taiwan has also requested that these schools reduce their study body, shut down problematic departments, or consolidate with other institutions. An investigation of the efficiency and optimal size of schools is a vital research issue in contemporary higher education of Taiwan to provide objective information for resource reallocation to schools. This study employs the stochastic unit cost frontier to measure the cost efficiency of higher education institutions, and to investigate their optimal size by considering the heterogeneous school quality. The empirical results reveal a positive correlation between the optimal size of a school and school quality. We found that approximately 60% of schools are identified as either over-or under-sized, and therefore, must adjust the number of students. The results also indicate that the cost reduction resulting from efficiency improvement will be higher than that from size adjustment. Therefore, managers of schools should focus specifically on efficiency improvement while considering the size adjustment.起始頁-結束頁：181-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學3篇名：美國八年研究經驗對我國大學入學制度革新之啟示並列篇名：Perspectives on Innovating the College Entrance System in Taiwan作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)關鍵字：八年研究;大學入學制度;高中課程;高等教育;教育機會均等;eight-year study;college entrance system;senior high school curriculum;higher education;equality of educational opportunity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在瞭解臺灣地區大學制度發展理念與議題，分析美國八年研究可茲啟發之經驗，以作為臺灣地區大學入學制度的參考。為建立比較點，本文運用King比較分析產生跨時空的經驗參照，分析臺灣地區大學入學制度的發展以及八年研究經驗，產生社會公平與適性發展的問題概念。其次，根據架構探究如以適性發展之公平概念檢視八年研究經驗，當高中不限於為大學入學條件而預備時，高中教育的課程、教學與評量則可以學生學習主體做出發，符合學生的需要與興趣，且不影響學生的入學準備程度，是為一種適性發展的公平概念。最後，在高中教育的目的、教師與學生共同參與的經驗、評估學生表現證據、採納高中表現的後設驗證，進行跨時空與跨脈絡的對話與討論後，本文提供臺灣地區大學入學制度革新的八項啟示，包括大學入學制度可吸納潛能取向適性發展的公平觀、大學入學制度宜併同高中教育進行革新考量、大學入學制度可以評估納入高中學校本位表現評量、重視學校本位表現評量有降低升學壓力之空間、採納學校本位評量可減緩考試的絕對價值、大學入學制度可兼重多元表現的證據、大學入學制度可促進大學和高中合作的可能，以及大學入學制度革新可強化高中教師專業能力的重要性等，期能供臺灣地區大學入學制度革新之參考。英文摘要：This study analyzed the idea and issue for developing a college entrance system in Taiwan that understands the experience using an eight-year study from the United States to provide the framework for innovating college entrance systems in Taiwan. This study used King's method to establish comparative points. First, the trend of college entrance systems included de-politicization, deregulation, independent institutes, exam professionalization, and multiple entrance paths into colleges. However, previous studies indicated the affects from college entrance systems showed that student learning was ignored. Further, these previous studies also indicated that it was hard to reduce the pressure from exams and student enrollment will be influenced by socioeconomic status. Second, the capabilities approach was designed to compare scores with the experience of the eight-year study to Taiwan. By loosening restrictions for entering college, the experiences of the eight-year study recorded students' performance with multiple data. This study also designed an adaptive curriculum based on student interest and need. Enrolled college students had better learning outcomes that can be seen from the fairness used to develop student potential. Finally, four discourses, which included goals statement of high school, teacher and student participation curriculum and pedagogical considerations, evidence of past student performance, and meta-verification of student performance in college were discussed for college entrance systems in Taiwan. The results of this study provided eight suggestions for innovating the college entrance system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學4篇名：以網路為研究媒介之研究倫理問題新挑戰：85－97學年度教育類論文之分析研究並列篇名：The Exploration of Research Ethics Regarding Online Research Methods Using Academic Years 1996-2008 Session Educational Theses as an Example作者：陳碧祥(Bei-Shian Chen)關鍵字：研究倫理;網際網路;線上研究;research ethics;Internet;online research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：網際網路為當前世界帶來溝通對話新途徑，也為學術研究帶來新工具。本文藉理論與實徵性資料85－97學年度教育類碩、博士論文進行論述與分析，發現研究倫理問題有資料來源可靠性、研究參與者同意、訊息告知、當事者權利、保密和隱私、著作權。較為特殊違反研究倫理問題有回收率及回應率過低、重複填答問卷、自願性樣本等。是故，宜提供網路技術及軟體專區或透過相關教育提升研究者網路技術，解決前述影響資料可靠性問題。其次，應重視網路為研究媒介之研究方法及方法論之探究，建立線上研究之倫理規範。再者，希冀透過倫理學、網路倫理學、方法論及研究方法，以建構研究倫理素養及培養研究倫理意識，並降低違反研究倫理之可能。英文摘要：The Internet has emerged as a major data resource for social science research, and researchers should bear an ethical responsibility. The aim of this article is to explore the research ethics regarding online methods for educational theses from 1996 to 2008 sessions using literacy analysis and content analysis to facilitate understanding of research ethics. Problems of online research methods regarding research ethics include: source information, agreement, notification, rights of participants, secrecy, and privacy. For example, issues regarding source information include response rate, repeating scale, and sampling selection bias, which requires particular attention. Based on the aforementioned concerns, solutions can be sought to establish ethical research environments, such as education pertaining to Internet techniques, the exploration of research method and methodology, and familiarization of the norms for ethical Internet research. Therefore, ethics regarding literacy, the Internet, and research methods and methodology have become increasingly vital for researchers.起始頁-結束頁：27-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學5篇名：教師閱讀教學行為與學生閱讀態度和閱讀能力自我評價對於閱讀成就之跨層次影響：以PIRLS 2006為例並列篇名：The Cross-Level Effects of Teachers' Reading Instruction, Students' Reading Attitude, and Self-Assessment in Reading Proficiency on Students' Reading Achievement: A Multilevel Study of PIRLS 2006作者：張毓仁(Yu-Jen Chang);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko);邱皓政(Haw-Jeng Chiou);歐宗霖(Tsung-Lin Ou);溫福星(Fur-Hsing Wen)關鍵字：促進國際閱讀素養研究;階層線性模式;資料庫;跨層次交互作用;閱讀成就;PIRLS;hierarchical linear modeling;database;cross-level interaction;reading achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探究教師閱讀教學行為（閱讀教學活動和閱讀策略教學頻率）與學生閱讀態度、閱讀能力自我評價對於學生閱讀成就的影響。研究資料為臺灣地區「促進國際閱讀素養研究」（PIRLS 2006），研究者挑選128名教師和相配對的3,472位學生，以多層次線性模式進行分析。結果顯示，個體層次的學童家庭教育資源、閱讀態度、閱讀能力自我評價對於閱讀成就皆具有顯著的正向影響。其次，總體層次的教師閱讀教學活動頻率和閱讀策略教學頻率對於學童閱讀成就則沒有顯著的脈絡效果。第三，跨層次交互作用可能具有特定性，教師閱讀活動教學頻率可能對於學生閱讀態度產生強化作用。最後，本文提出對於閱讀教育的省思和資料庫分析研究的建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study is to probe the impacts of the frequencies of Reading Instruction Activities (RIA) and Reading Strategies Teaching (RST) implemented by teachers, as well as students' Home Education Resources (HER), Reading Attitude (RA), and Self-Assessment (SA) regarding their reading proficiency to students' reading achievement. A two-level database of 128 teachers (macro-level) and matched 3,472 fourth-graders (micro-level) was selected from the Taiwan PIRLS 2006 Database. Multilevel linear modeling (MLM) was then applied to analyze the data. The results indicated that in micro-level, HER, RA, and SA can significantly explain students' reading achievement in a positive way. In the macro-level, neither RIA nor RST showed a significant contextual effect on students' reading achievement. Additionally, the specific interaction among the cross-level analysis was likely to involve the frequencies of RIA, enhancing the relationship between students' RA and their reading achievement. Based on the research findings, the researcher also addresses issues pertaining to the limitations of the study and suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：69-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學6篇名：綜合高中分流政策對學生學習成就的影響：以TEPS資料分析為例並列篇名：Effects of Comprehensive High School Policy on Students' Achievement: Evidence from Taiwan Education Panel Survey作者：李敦義(Duen-Yi Lee)關鍵字：傾向分數配對法;綜合高中;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;課程分化;propensity score matching; comprehensive high school;Taiwan Education Panel Survey;curriculum tracking期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：我國自1996年開始試辦綜合高中，該政策的目的在於促使我國後期中等教育能在高中、高職之外，提供另一條不同的選擇進路，俾使學生得以適性發展，學得多方面知識，達到適性教育的目標。綜合高中分流政策立意甚佳，然而就歷年來綜合高中學生數變化來看，顯然綜合高中在我國後期中等教育仍不是主流，何以綜合高中沒有成為我國後期中等教育的主流？是否與國內相關研究發現綜合高中分流政策在執行上遭遇瓶頸有關，且進一步影響到國中畢業生在選擇就讀綜合高中的考量？此外，過去國內關於綜合高中分流政策的研究，大都集中在探討綜合高中的辦學績效和實施困難，而非該政策對學生學習成就的影響之探討。有鑑於此，本研究進一步探討綜合高中分流政策對綜合高中學生學習成就的影響？原始資料取自臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（Taiwan Education Panel Survey）公共使用版中的第一波到第四波國中追蹤樣本資料，並使用傾向分數配對法（propensity score matching）進行資料分析。研究結果發現：在學生學習成就表現上，就整體平均效果來看，就讀綜合高中的學生並不比就讀普通高中或高職的學生來得好。最後，說明本研究結果對綜合高中分流政策的意涵，及提出研究建議供相關人員與後續研究之用。英文摘要：Since 1996, the Taiwanese government has launched the policy of comprehensive high school (CHS) to relax the traditional system of curriculum tracking at the level of senior secondary education. The aim of CHS is to offer junior high graduates delaying their choice between senior high and vocational curricula, an opportunity to increase their common knowledge and achieve a goal of personally tailored development. However, in contrast with students in both senior high and vocational schools, the percentage of those in the comprehensive high schools has been rather small since the 1998 school year. Furthermore, a number of studies and on-site evaluation reports on CHS have been conducted. Thus far, these studies and reports have focused on exploring the performance of comprehensive high schools and difficulties in implementing the policy. No evaluation of the impacts of the CHS policy on student achievement has yet been performed. Hence, the main purpose of this study is to investigate the causal effects of CHS policy on students' achievement in comprehensive high schools in Taiwan.Using the data from the public released core panel data of the Taiwan Education Panel Survey in 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2007, this study employs the method of propensity score matching to estimate the average treatment effect of CHS policy on students' achievement in comprehensive high schools. The results show virtually no gain in students’ achievement from the CHS policy for those enrolled in comprehensive high schools in Taiwan. Finally, the present study discusses the implications of the CHS policy and suggests directions for stakeholders and future research.起始頁-結束頁：107-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學7篇名：Blog網路學習社群對大學生藝術通識課程知識建構影響之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Influence of Blog Learning Communities on Undergraduates' Knowledge Constructions in Arts General Curriculum作者：盧姵綺(Pei-Chi Lu)關鍵字：blog;Web 2.0知識共構;大學藝術通識課程;混成式課程;網路學習社群;blog;Web 2.0 knowledge co-construction;general arts curriculum in universities;blended curriculum;web-based learning community期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討blog網路學習社群在大學藝術通識課程之應用及對學生知識建構之影響，研究對象為86位「藝術鑑賞」通識課程選修學生。本研究blog網路社群為以建構主義教學相關理論為核心概念，結合Web 2.0知識分享與共構，以及應用blog平臺之課程網路社群，目的在輔助學生進行藝術通識課程學習。本研究依據不同的blog網路社群互動型態，將學生分為教學助理參與組及對照組，以進行教學實驗，在「教學助理參與」實驗組中，本研究參考Salmon（2003）提出之五階段線上教學模式，由教學助理進行線上教學並參與blog社群之互動討論，並應用Gunawardena、Lowe和Anderson（1997）的Interaction Analysis Model知識建構編碼表作為資料分析研究工具，以進行教學助理與學生blog互動內容之編碼分析，探討blog網路學習社群融入教學對大學生知識建構之影響。研究結果blog網路學習社群與教學助理線上教學對學生知識建構程度有正向影響，且教學助理提問技巧與適時運用教學策略為學生產出高階層知識建構之主要影響因素。惟學生主動參與線上社群活動、發表回饋意見之積極度與反思深度仍待加強。最後提出未來Web 2.0與網路社群教學建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate how blog learning communities have been applied in an arts general education for undergraduates, as well as their impact on students' ”knowledge construction.” The research subjects included 86 students participating in a university general curriculum of art appreciation. The blog learning community herein, a web-based learning community that applies constructionist-based theories as its core concept, integrates a model of Web 2.0 knowledge-sharing and co-construction, in addition to applying a blog platform with the aim of assisting students with their learning in the arts general curriculum. This study categorized the students into the ”TA participating” experimental group and the control group, based on different models of interaction in blog learning communities. In the ”TA participating” experimental group, the TAs implement online teaching based on the five-stage e-moderating model advocated by Salmon (2003), and join in the interactive discussions in the blog learning community. The Interaction Analysis Model (Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson, 1997) was used as the coding tool for analyzing the contents of the TAs' and students' interactions on the blogs, to explore how teaching that incorporates blog learning communities affects undergraduates' knowledge construction. The results indicate that the blog learning communities and TAs' online teaching present positive influences on the knowledge construction developed by students. Furthermore, TAs' inquiry skills and teaching strategies are the main factors that enable students to produce high-level knowledge construction. However, students' motivation for participating in an on-line group, advancing feedback opinions, and employing critical thinking must be strengthened. Finally, the study proposes suggestions for the future development of Web 2.0 and web-based learning community education.起始頁-結束頁：137-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學8篇名：兩篇七年級「能量塔」文本之比較分析並列篇名：Evaluating Two 7th Grade Texts of "Pyramid of Energy Flow"作者：葉佳承(Chia-Cheng Yeh);楊文金(Wen-Gin Yang);廖斌吟(Pin-Yin Liao);黃柏森(Bo-Sen Huang)關鍵字：技術建構;科學文本;科學語言;銜接關係;漢語特性;technicality construction;science text;language of science; cohesion;features of Mandarin期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在分析比較2篇能量塔文本的語言特性及其差異。選取七年級X、Y版生態系單元與能量塔概念有關的內容為標的文本，以逐步文本分析系統分析比較2篇文本的基本語言、漢語及科學語言等特性之差異。研究發現，2篇文本的詞彙密度及科學詞彙密度未達顯著差異，而科學詞彙內容則有不同。從漢語特性來看，X版出現無訊息零代詞及不具分類意涵之含「的」的名詞組較Y版多，可能會對閱讀X版之讀者有較多閱讀理解之挑戰。從科學語言特性來看，Y版以具體事件逐漸抽象化的歷程來構作科學概念，符合技術建構歷程，並使用較多元的銜接關係，相較之下，X版則無技術建構的歷程，使用的銜接關係也較少。本文建議科學教科書的編寫應考量漢語特性及科學語言特性。英文摘要：This study investigates the differences between two texts (X-version and Y-version) regarding pyramid of energy flow in 7th grade science textbooks, conducting a stepwise regression analysis of language base on systemic functional linguistics. The analysis required studying the number of events, lexical density, zero anaphora, nominal groups, technical construction, and cohesion, to clarify the differences between the two texts. The results of this study showed no differences between these two texts regarding the number of events and lexical density. The Y-version provided more cues for readers to retrace the zero anaphora and understand the taxonomy of nominal groups. For providing interpretations of scientific concepts, the Y-version was more cohesive compared to the X-version by using more language resources, such as conjunctions and adverbs. Therefore, evaluations of the texts should consider the features of Mandarin and the language of science.起始頁-結束頁：175-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學9篇名：跨年級中學生認知地圖之分析研究：以粒子行為試題為例並列篇名：A Secondary Analysis Study of Student Conceptions on the Behavior of Gas Particles by Utilizing the Cognitive Map Approach作者：邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu);鐘建坪(Jing-Ping Jong);張志康(Chih-Kang Chang);白勝安(Sheng-An Bai)關鍵字：次級資料分析;概念調查;認知地圖;雙層診斷測驗;secondary analysis;concept survey;cognitive maps;two-tier diagnostic instrument期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究針對全國概念調查的結果進行次級資料分析（secondary data analysis），目的在探索中學生的認知地圖及其形成的相關限制因素。研究的分析架構是以Hempel（1958）描述現象觀察的理論解釋與Wellman（1994）和其他學者（Chaib-draa & Desharnais, 1998; Pena, Sossa, & Gutierrez, 2008）詮釋因果推論的認知地圖為基礎。首先，研究者依據全國概念調查雙層診斷測驗試題內容（Chiu, 2007），找出特定概念間的相互關係；其次，透過雙層試題的語意連結，形成不同試題選項之認知地圖的質性描述；最後，分析跨年級中學生認知地圖的分布情形，藉以瞭解學生在概念發展上的差異。本研究結果指出：一、跨年級中學生正確連結理論系統與經驗觀察的人數比例，雖然隨年級增加而提高，但是比例仍然偏低。二、在相似情境試題中，跨年級中學生受到壓力、重量以及隨機性等不同限制因素的影響，會形成不同類型的認知地圖。本研究所確認的概念限制因素可解釋認知地圖在概念圖像化的因果推論關係，而以認知地圖作為次級資料分析的研究方法所產生的限制與對研究的意涵將在文末一併討論。英文摘要：The purpose of this secondary data analysis study is to explore the cognitive maps (CMs) held by the students and their constraints of conceptions while forming their qualitative inferences regarding the behaviors of gas particles. The data used in this study was derived from the National Science Concept Learning Study via the use of two-tier diagnostic instruments proposed by Treagust (1988, 1995). Unlike other studies only comparing student performance, the analytical method of this study adapted a model of scientific explanations proposed by Hempel (1958), and cognitive maps by Wellman (1994) and others (Chaib-draa & Desharnais, 1998; Pena, Sossa, & Gutierrez, 2008). The results are as follows: (1) although the performances of 11th graders were superior to those of 8th and 9th graders, the percentages of correct answers were still relatively low; (2) in similar contexts, due to the constraints (gravity, pressure, and randomness of motions) of factors, the students held various CMs of gas particles and causal inferences. The identified CMs of gas particles provide information regarding the constraints that students held in their mental representations. This study presents a discussion of the educational implications for designing two-tier diagnostic instruments, and the limitations of CMs.起始頁-結束頁：207-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學10篇名：大型資料庫國小四年級自然科學習成就評量標準設定結果之效度評估並列篇名：Validation of the Standard Setting Procedure for a Large Scale 4th Grade Science Assessment作者：謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh);謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh);林世華(Sieh-Hwa Lin);林陳涌(Chen-Yung Lin);陳清溪(Chin-Hsi Chen);謝佩蓉(Pei-Jung Hsieh)關鍵字：效度評估;書籤標定法;標準設定;validation;Bookmark method;standard setting期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：學習成就評量資料庫建置目的之一，在於描述學生於各學科的學習成就表現概況；而學習成就表現的描述，即牽涉到標準設定議題。隨著臺灣學生學習成就評量資料庫對於國小四年級自然科之評量架構調整，致使沿用的表現標準已多不符合實務運用，而興起重新修訂之舉。本研究主要目的在於評估2009年自然科學習成就評量國小四年級標準設定結果之效度，以Kane（1994, 2001）的效度評估證據為依據，藉由效度的過程證據、內部證據以及外部證據，作為標準設定結果之效度證據來源。結果發現，從各項效度證據來看，國小四年級自然科標準設定可由標準設定成員的組成及其回應、設定結果的一致性，以及外推論於數學成就的效度外部證據得到支持。本研究最後提出數項建議，供未來標準設定研究者參考。英文摘要：One of the main purposes for constructing an academic achievement database is to understand the students’ academic performance for each content area. Standard setting is the main issue in the academic achievement. Due to the adjustment of the test blueprint for Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement 4th grade science, the previous performance level description is outmoded for practice. Therefore, modifying the standards is necessary. The purpose of this study is to validate a science standard setting procedure designed for 2009 4th grade science students. Based on Kane’s (1994, 2001) framework for validation, this study collected procedural evidence, internal evidence, as well as external evidence using mathematics academic performance. Several suggestions are provided in the conclusion for further studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：大學生基本能力指標之建構並列篇名：Constructing the Indicators of Undergraduate Students' Key Competences作者：鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng);葉麗貞(Li-Jen Yeh);劉昆夏(Kun-Shia Liu);莫慕貞(Magdalena Mo Ching Mok)關鍵字：Rasch模式;大學生;指標建構;基本能力;indicator construction;key competences;Rasch model;undergraduate students期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以系統化的方式，從國內外相關文獻的分析彙整，到大學生基本能力指標問卷之發展和施測，最後以Rasch測量模式分析指標的相對重要性和擁有度，完整呈現大學生基本能力指標之建構歷程。大學生基本能力指標問卷經25位通識教育各領域的學者專家之共識後，歸納出『專業及基礎能力』、『創意與問題解決』、『人際溝通』、『品格與公民素養』、『國際視野』和『自主學習』等六個面向40項指標。問卷施測對象包括116位大學教師、113位產業主管和413位大學生。結果發現，產業主管、大學教師和大學生認為較重要的指標面向為「人際溝通」，當前大學生擁有度較高的指標面向為「品格與公民素養」，而「外語的能力」則是大學生最應具備卻未具備的能力。此外，大學教師和產業主管，以及不同學院的學生對於某些基本能力指標的重要性和擁有度之認知有所不同。未來各大學可參考此模式，發展具學校特色的學生能力指標，以培育社會所需之多元人才。英文摘要：The study systematically developed the Indicators of Undergraduate Students' Key Competences (IUSKC) as an instrument to investigate the key competences for Taiwanese university students. With a consensus of 25 scholars and experts representing several general education fields, the IUSKC consisted of 40 indices in six dimensions including ”professional and fundamental abilities,” ”creativity and problem solving,” ”interpersonal communication,” ”character and citizenship,” ”global view,” and ”autonomous learning.” The IUSKC questionnaire was administered to 116 professors, 113 business executives and 413 undergraduate students and asked them to evaluate the importance of the key competencies and the extent of these competencies acquired by Taiwan undergraduate students. The Rasch analyses of the data showed that the subjects regarded ”interpersonal communication” as the most important dimension of the index, ”character and citizenship” as a competence possessed by most of Taiwanese undergraduate students,” and ”foreign language” as the most required but wanted competence among Taiwan undergraduates. The business executives, university professors, students from different faculties also demonstrated varied perceptions towards the significance and extent of possession of some indices. The results provided a useful framework for universities/colleges to develop school-specific competence indicators aimed at fostering students' multiple talents demanded by the society.起始頁-結束頁：531-558資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201109.05312篇名：量尺穩定性評估標準之探究並列篇名：Investigation of the Criteria for Assessing Equating Consistency作者：曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：同一等化;直接等化;連鎖等百分比等化;連鎖線性等化;循環等化;量尺穩定性;間接等化;chained equipercentile equating;chained linear equating;circular equating;direct equating;identity equating;indirect equating;scale stability期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：The two commonly used criteria in assessing equating consistency for a potential scale drift-direct equating (versus indirect equating) and equating in a circle (versus identity equating) were studied through simulation. The chained equipercentile and linear methods were used for equating when population difference in ability in terms of the standardized mean difference (SMD) in anchor scores were observed with a wide range of values in the anchor test equating design. For the equipercentile method, when the obtained SMD values were less than 1, the differences between the direct and indirect equatings, or between the circular and identity equatings were small and trivial. When the obtained SMD values were greater than 1, the differences of the conversions between the indirect and direct equatings, or between the circular and identity equatings appeared to be substantially large. For the linear method, the differences between the two conversions appeared to be substantially large when the SMD values were very small.英文摘要：The two commonly used criteria in assessing equating consistency for a potential scale drift-direct equating (versus indirect equating) and equating in a circle (versus identity equating) were studied through simulation. The chained equipercentile and linear methods were used for equating when population difference in ability in terms of the standardized mean difference (SMD) in anchor scores were observed with a wide range of values in the anchor test equating design. For the equipercentile method, when the obtained SMD values were less than 1, the differences between the direct and indirect equatings, or between the circular and identity equatings were small and trivial. When the obtained SMD values were greater than 1, the differences of the conversions between the indirect and direct equatings, or between the circular and identity equatings appeared to be substantially large. For the linear method, the differences between the two conversions appeared to be substantially large when the SMD values were very small.起始頁-結束頁：291-316資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201106.02913篇名：「教師工作偏好量表」修訂之研究並列篇名：The Revision of Work Preference Inventory作者：郭奕龍(Yi-Lung Kuo);曾敬梅(Ching-Mei Tseng);吳武典(Wu-Tien Wu)關鍵字：工作偏好;內在動機;外在動機;教師教學動機;extrinsic motivation;intrinsic motivation;teaching motivation;work preference期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在修訂T. M. Amabile等人所發展之「工作偏好量表」(Work Preference Inventory, WPI)，以作為中小學教師了解自身教學動機之工具。原量表之工作動機可分為內在動機與外在動機：內在動機含括「享受挑戰」與「樂在其中」，而外在動機則含括「期待外在酬賞」與「尋求認可與指示」。本量表之修訂以364位臺北縣市中小學教師為研究對象，經檢視資料結構、透過探索性與驗證性因素分析進行複合效度研究，以及信效度分析後，全量表共計20題。此外，以「教師教學創新行為量表」為校標進行校標關聯效度之考驗後發現，教師教學創意行為與內在動機及其次級因素相關較高(r=.40~.60)，而與外在動機及其次級因素相關較低(r=.08~.29)。文末亦就臺灣教師與美國成人在「工作偏好量表」之差異進行探討。英文摘要：The Work Preference Inventory (WPI), based on Amabile's social contextual motivation theory, was designed to assess stable individual differences in intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations. The instrument was scored on two primary scales (intrinsic and extrinsic); each further subdivided respectively into two secondary scales (enjoyment and challenge, as well as outward and compensation). The purpose of this investigation was to tailor the WPI for first through twelfth grade teachers as a simple and quick tool to understand their teaching motivation, and for instructors in in-service teacher programs to develop professional and effective curricula for creative teaching. In this study, 364 teachers in 29 public elementary and secondary schools in Taipei, Taiwan, were sampled (this homogeneously represents the population) via a convenience sampling method, which increased the scale validity, the teacher representatives, and rate of return. The WPI was translated by the authors and two distinguished professors who earned their doctoral degrees in the US and possess expertise in adapting scales in the English language. Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analyses were used to examine the scale constructs and conduct cross-validation, whereas Cronbach's was employed to test the internal reliability. The WPI-teacher version, including 20 items, was developed after crossing out 10 items from the original version based on the review of instrument adaptation and cultural consideration. Convergent/discriminant validity and criterion-related validity using an Innovative Teaching Behavior Scale were examined. The findings also showed that teachers' creative teaching behaviors highly correlated with intrinsic motivation and its secondary scales (r=.40-.60) and less correlated with extrinsic motivation and its secondary scales (r=.08-.29). Several limitations in terms of sample sizes, research models, and indigenous cultural differences were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：317-341資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201106.03174篇名：「中文色塊測驗」之Rasch模式分析並列篇名：Rasch Modeling of Mandarin Token Test Performance作者：林月仙(Yueh-Hsien Lin);曾進興(Chin-Hsing Tseng);吳裕益(Yuh-Yih Wu)關鍵字：Rasch模式;中文色塊測驗;同時估計;垂直量尺化;concurrent estimation;Mandarin Token Test;Rasch model;vertical scaling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在應用Rasch模式來分析與探討「中文色塊測驗」之效度。研究樣本為2,000名3至6歲兒童。主要研究結果有四項：首先，Rasch模式適合度分析結果顯示絕大部分試題的適合度良好。其次，本研究以同時估計法進行垂直量尺化，並分別將各年齡組受試者設為參照組來校準試題難度，雖然施測題目不同，但所得到的能力估計值是可以相互比較的。最後，本研究發現試題難度隨著口語指令長度與複雜度而遞增，共同試題難度則隨受試者所屬年齡層增加而遞減。英文摘要：The purpose of this research was to examine the validity of the Mandarin Token Test within the framework of Rasch analysis. Two thousand children aged 3 to 6 were employed as the subjects of the research. The major findings can be summarized as follows. First, most of our test items demonstrated good model fit. Second, we used concurrent estimation to achieve vertical scaling and rescaled the performance of each age group with one other age group as reference alternately. As such, despite the different choice of test items across age groups, it is possible to compare the estimates of their abilities with vertical scaling. Finally, the results showed that item difficulty increased as complexity and length of commands increased and the difficulty of common items decreased with age.起始頁-結束頁：343-365資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201106.03435篇名：題目順序對學生評鑑教師教學與學生自評影響之探索性研究並列篇名：The Exploratory Study on the Effects of Question Order on Student Ratings of Instruction and Student Self-Evaluation作者：張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);邱于真(Yu-Chen Chiu);羅寶鳳(Pao-Feng Lo)關鍵字：學生自評;學生評鑑教師教學;題目順序;Question Order;Student Ratings of Instruction;Student Self-Evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討題目順序對學生評鑑教師教學與學生自評的影響。研究對象為東部某大學大學部160班學生，班級人數介於30至92人之間。每班學生隨機平均分為A組和B組：A組學生填寫學生評鑑教師教學題目在前，且學生自評題目在後的量表，簡稱A版；B組則剛好相反，簡稱B版。A版的第1至15題是學生評鑑教師教學題目，第16至19題則是學生自評題目；而B版則是將學生自評的4個題目改為第1~4題，第5~19題則為學生評鑑教師教學題目。研究結果發現，教師在A版所得的評鑑分數和在B版沒有差異，但學生在A版所得的自評分數顯著低於在B版所得的分數，本研究依照研究發現，對學生評鑑教師教學以及學生自評實施程序提出相關建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of question order on the results of student ratings of instruction and student self-evaluation. The sample consisted of 160 undergraduate courses with 65 (40.6%) freshman courses, 52 (32.5%) sophomore courses, 34 (21.3%) junior courses, and 9 (5.6%) senior courses from a university in the east coast of Taiwan in the fall semester 2008. There were two forms (Form A and Form B) of the Student Ratings of Instruction (SRI) Instrument developed in 2008 at the institute. The SRI form was composed of 15 student ratings of instruction items and 4 student self-evaluation items. On Form A, the student ratings of instruction items were placed before the student self-evaluation items. On Form B, the question order was opposite to the order of Form A. Half of students in each class filled out Form A and the other filled Form B at the end of the semester. The student ratings of instruction scores from Form A were not significantly different from those from Form B on each items and the total. The student self-evaluation scores from Form B were significantly higher than those from Form A. The implications of these findings for student ratings instruments and policies are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：367-389資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201106.03676篇名：國內教育、心理後設分析研究出版偏誤檢定之實徵分析並列篇名：Empirical Assessment of Effect of Publication Bias on Meta-Analysis in Domestic Education and Psychology作者：謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh);陳敏瑜(Min-Yu Chen)關鍵字：出版偏誤;成敗估計值;後設分析;Fail-safe N;meta-analysis;publication bias期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：後設分析技術自1976年起就逐漸成為社會科學重要的研究方法之一，但國內多數研究均是以應用導向為首要，其中，對於可能導致錯誤結論之出版偏誤議題，則較少以系統性的方式進行探討。據此，本研究經調查國內103篇教育、心理後設分析研究之出版偏誤檢定現況後，發現其檢定比率確實不高，只有近四成研究曾利用出版偏誤方法進行檢定，其中，幾乎有39篇研究都是以傳統Fail-safe N指標為考量，但此方法存在的實務與假設限制，是值得研究者重視。接續，本研究經引用30篇後設分析研究之實徵數據，採用等級相關與線型迴歸分析檢定funnel plot之不對稱性，並搭配trim and fill方法後，發現各方法檢定結果雖不一致，但卻顯示出版偏誤是可能存在於國內後設分析研究，並影響著分析結果。最後，經檢視各方法特色及實徵分析數據後，建議未來研究者在傳統Fail-safe N指標外，可考量同時運用線型迴歸分析、trim and fill方法產生的訊息，以較保守的態度來看待與呈現出版偏誤可能對其研究結果產生的影響。英文摘要：Since 1976, meta-analysis has become an important method in social science. It has been observed that many meta-analysis have been used for application, but only few evaluated publication biases systematically. After surveying, a total of 103 educational and psychological meta-analysis were assessed, but only 39 (37.86%) evaluated publication bias. Also almost every meta-analysis only reported Fail-safe N, which should be treated with considerable caution due to some practical limitations. Therefore, researchers adopted rank correlation test and linear regression approach to measure funnel plot asymmetry, and assessed 30 published meta-analysis by trim and fill method. Although results are of discordance, researcher observed publication biases were common within meta-analysis and affected the results. Finally, some suggestions were proposed for future usage.起始頁-結束頁：391-422資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201106.03917篇名：「大學生感恩量表」之發展並列篇名：The Development of the "Inventory ofUndergraduates' Gratitude"作者：林志哲(Chih-Che Lin);葉玉珠(Yu-Chu Yeh)關鍵字：大學生;年級;宗教信仰;性別;感恩;gender;grade;gratitude;religious belief;undergraduate student期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷S出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的主要目的在發展「大學生感恩量表」（Inventory of Undergraduates' Gratitude, IUG）。本研究分兩階段各抽取大學一至四年級學生。首先以立意抽樣選取214人為預試參與者，進行項目分析、探索性因素分析及信度分析，結果共抽取出五個因素：感謝他人、感念恩典、知足惜福、感謝逆境、珍視當下；總量表的Cronbach's α係數為.930（共26題）。接著，以非隨機分層抽樣選取另750人為正式施測參與者，進行驗證性因素分析及效標關聯效度分析，結果發現「大學生的感恩量表」（IUG）模式有合理的適配及良好的效標關聯效度，而且「大學生的感恩量表」（IUG）五個一階因素具有合理的組合信度與變異數平均解釋量。因此，「大學生的感恩量表」（IUG）具有良好的信度與效度。此外，本研究發現女大學生在感恩的整體表現及五個分量表（感謝他人、感念恩典、知足惜福、感謝逆境、珍視當下）的表現均優於男大學生；有宗教信仰（信仰道、基督／天主教）大學生在「感念恩典」、「感謝逆境」分量表的表現優於無宗教信仰大學生，而信仰佛教大學生在感恩的整體表現及「感念恩典」的表現上也優於無宗教信仰大學生；但不同年級的參與者在感恩的表現上則無差異。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to develop the Inventory of Undergraduates' Gratitude (IUG). This study included 964 freshmen to senior students in universities as participants through two stages. The researchers first used 214 participants by using purposive sampling in the pretest to conduct item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and reliability analysis. Five factors-thanks others, thanks God, cherish what you have, appreciate the hardship, and appreciate the moment-were extracted. The Cronbach's coefficient of the IUG was .930 (26 items). The researchers then used another 750 participants by using non-random stratified sampling to conduct confirmatory factor analysis and criterion-related validity. The results suggest that the IUG has good goodnessof-fit and criterion-related validity; moreover, the five factors have good composite reliability and average variance extracted. The IUG therefore has good reliability and validity. This study also found that the girls outperformed the boys on the overall gratitude, ”thanks others”, ”thanks God”, ”cherish what you have”, ”appreciate the hardship”, and ”appreciate the moment”; moreover, the students who believe in Chinese traditional belief, Christianity, and Catholicism outperformed the ones who have no religious belief on the ”thanks God” and ”appreciate the hardship”, the students who believe in Buddhism outperformed the ones who have no religious belief on the overall gratitude and ”thanks God”, but no significant differences were found among the four grade levels.起始頁-結束頁：147-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201104.00028篇名：「台灣青少年幽默測量工具」之發展與編製並列篇名：Development and Compilation of Taiwan Adolescent Humor Instruments (TAHI)作者：江宜珍(Yi-Chen Chiang);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen);吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);邱玉蟬(Yu-Chan Chiu);鄭其嘉(Chi-Chia Cheng);盛慧珊(Hui-Shan Sheng)關鍵字：青少年;幽默;測量工具;信度;效度;adolescent;humor;measurement instrument;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷S出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在發展一套適用於台灣青少年的幽默測量工具，並檢驗其信度及效度。利用「台灣地區國中生有關幽默之概念及型態：幽默對個人健康的影響研究」，於2007年蒐集之全國性資料進行分析。研究樣本係選自台灣的北、中、南、東四個地區；各地區隨機抽取5所國民中學；被抽中之國中的一至三年級各隨機抽出一個班級；被抽中之班級的全體學生均接受問卷調查。以團體施測及學生自填問卷的方式蒐集資料，共有1,639人完成調查。針對量表的信度，採用內部一致性係數評估；針對量表的效度，則以專家效度、探索性因素分析、驗證性因素分析，以及區辨效度等四種方法評估。結果發現，各個向度之量表的內部一致性係數介於.75∼.93，顯示信度良好。探索性因素分析結果顯示，各個向度之量表的因素結構與初擬時所預設之因素結構類似。進一步綜合信度、專家效度及探索性因素分析的結果，經驗證性因素分析發現，所有量表均通過適合度檢定，尤其是GFI與AGFI值均達.94以上，並具區辨效度，顯示效度良好。本研究發展之幽默測量工具，以全國樣本進行分析證實具有良好的信度與效度，可作為評估台灣青少年之幽默感、幽默表現和接收經驗的測量工具。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop humor instruments for use in Taiwan adolescents. We analyzed nationally representative data from the Humor project (The concept and style of humor among junior high school students in Taiwan: A study on the effect of humor on personal health) in 2007. The study sample was selected from northern, central, southern and eastern Taiwan. Five public schools were randomly selected from each of the four regions and one class was randomly selected from each of the three grades in each school. All students in the selected classes were given the questionnaire and filled them out as a class group. A total of 1,639 students completed the questionnaire. The reliability of the scale was assessed by the internal consistency coefficient. The validity of the scale was assessed by the experts, exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and discriminant validity. The internal consistency coefficients for each dimension of the scale ranged from .75 to .93 which indicates good reliability. Exploratory factor analysis showed that the factor structure of each dimension of the scale was similar to the factor structure developed in our preliminary draft. Results of confirmatory factor analysis showed that all dimensions of the scale fitted the data well. Particularly, the value of GFI and AGFI were greater than .94 indicated good validity. We developed a multidimensional humor scales and confirmed that they had good reliability and validity in a nationally representative sample. These scales can be used to measure the sense of humor, the experience of humor expression, and the experience of receiving humor messages in Taiwanese adolescents.起始頁-結束頁：179-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201104.00349篇名：區分良善與有害的幽默─正體中文版「幽默風格量表」的發展並列篇名：Distinguishing between Kindhearted and Malicious Humor: Development of a Traditional Chinese Version of the Humor Styles Questionnaire作者：詹雨臻(Yu-Chen Chan);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);卓淑玲(Shu-Ling Cho);Rod A. Martin關鍵字：幽默;幽默風格量表;量表發展;信度;效度;humor;Chinese-lanuage Humor Styles Questionnaire;questionnaire development;reliability and validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷S出版年：2011中文摘要：過去幽默測量的研究大多視幽默為正向的特質，而無法區分出良善或是有害的幽默。因此，本研究旨在發展一份正體中文版「幽默風格量表」（HSQ-TC），包含親和型幽默、自我提升型幽默、攻擊型幽默和自我貶抑型幽默四個分量表，前兩者為正向幽默風格，後兩者為負向幽默風格。本量表翻譯自Martin、Puhlik-Doris、Larsen、Gray 和Weir（2003）的「幽默風格量表」。以非隨機分層立意抽樣，先以預試樣本382位大學生進行項目分析，接著再另以935位參與者為正式樣本進行信度和效度分析。結果發現，四個分量表的Cronbach's係數為.77∼.88、再測信度為.83∼.86、四個一階因素皆具有良好的組合信度與變異數平均解釋量，顯示HSQ-TC具有良好的信度。本研究模式具有合理適配的建構效度，再以嘲笑風格、人格特質、攻擊行為和自尊再度考驗其建構效度，發現這些變項都具有良好的區辨效度，故HSQ-TC具有良好的信度和效度。此外，本量表採直譯及回譯比對的嚴謹程序，具有其價值性和應用性。因此，HSQ-TC的發展不僅可提供跨文化的比較，亦可助於探索善意和惡意幽默的使用，以及應用於教育、諮商、職場、廣告、創造力、心理健康等層面之研究。英文摘要：In the past, most research viewed humor as a positive trait, failing to distinguish naive humor from deteriorating humor. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to develop a traditional Chinese version of the Humor Styles Questionnaire (HSQ-TC) for the assessment of affiliative, self-enhancing, aggressive and self-defeating humor styles in Taiwan. The first two could be used to measure positive styles while the later two could measure negative styles. The HSQ-TC was translated from the English version of the HSQ. Item analysis of results from a pilot study with a non-random stratified sample of 382 Taiwanese undergraduate students suggested that the items were satisfactory. The questionnaire was then administered to a larger sample (N = 935) and the results were used to assess reliability and construct validity. Reliability results for the HSQ-TC subscales were impressive, with the Cronbach's coefficients ranging from .73 to .88, and the test-retest reliabilities from .83 to .86. The four factors showed good composite reliability and average variance extracted. Goodness-of-fit indices and confirmatory factor analysis provided evidence for the construct validity of the scale. A comparison of HSQ-TC results with measures of PhoPhiKat-TC, personality traits, aggressive behavior and self-esteem found further evidence for the discriminant validity of the instrument. These findings suggest that the HSQ-TC is likely to generate valid and reliable scores. The authors feel that the HSQ-TC is an innovative tool with valuable potential applications, including enabling further cross-cultural comparisons. Finally, the index of the HSQ-TC can be used to further explore the distinction between potentially beneficial and detrimental uses of humor in education, psychotherapy, the workplace, commercial advertisement, creativity research, and psychological health.起始頁-結束頁：207-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201104.006210篇名：中文版「止觀覺察注意量表」之信效度分析並列篇名：Psychometric Properties of the Chinese Translation of Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (CMAAS)作者：張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin);黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang)關鍵字：中文版止觀覺察注意量表;止觀;止觀覺察注意量表;Chinese version Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (CMAAS);Mindful Awareness Attention Scale (MAAS);Mindfulness期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷S出版年：2011中文摘要：「止觀」源於佛禪靜坐之概念，為一種專注於此時此刻，但又不評價之心理歷程。近年來此概念已廣泛被應用至醫學、教育、輔導、心理治療等等領域，並已發展出相關測量工具。其中，最被廣泛使用的「止觀覺察注意量表」（Mindful attention awareness scale），目前已被翻譯成多種語言版本，但卻仍無中文版本。本研究目的即為建立中文版「止觀覺察注意量表」。研究一以157名受試者進行探索性因素分析，得到單一因素結構，且該量表能有效預測心理適應指標。研究二以204名受試者進行驗證性因素分析，單一因素結構符合模型適配指標，亦重複驗證與心理適應指標據以顯著之關連。研究三以116名受試者間隔兩個月施測，得到良好的再測信度。三個研究顯示中文版「止觀覺察注意量表」具有良好的信效度。本文亦針對止觀研究與應用進行延伸討論。英文摘要：Mindfulness originally refers to a Buddhist meditation practice that cultivates present moment awareness with a nonjudgmental manner. Recently, the concept of mindfulness has been transformed into psychological treatments and widely adapted to medical, educational, counseling, and psychotherapy domains. Beyond clinical treatments, researchers also developed several scales to measure individual differences. Among these scales, the Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (MAAS) (Brown & Ryan, 2003) is the most widely used measurement and has been translated into different languages. However, there is no Chinese version of the MAAS yet. The main purpose of this research was to establish the Chinese version of the MAAS. Exploratory (study 1, n = 157) and confirmatory (study 2, n = 204) factor analyses confirmed the one factor solution. Good internal consistency and test-retest reliability (study 3, n = 116) were supported. Furthermore, the relationships between MAAS and other psychological adjustment indices were significant as expected (Study 1 and 2). Potential theoretical and practical applications of the measure were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：235-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201104.009001篇名：從分散認知觀點分析國小校長教學領導的認知歷程並列篇名：Analysis of the Cognitive Process of a Principal's Instructional Leadership from a Distributed Cognition Perspective作者：梁金都(Chin-Tu Liang);洪志成(Chih-Cheng Hung)關鍵字：人造物;分散認知;國小校長;教學領導;artifacts;distributed cognition;instructional leadership;elementary school principals期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要是從分散認知理論的觀點，透過實地的參與觀察和訪談等方式，蒐集國小校長進行教學領導過程中行動者與人造物等的互動資料，以分析校長與教師等的認知歷程，並獲致了以下重要結論：一、皮（化名）校長在達成其教學領導目的的歷程中，呈現了四種行動者與人造物的互動形式；二、針對特定的人造物，校長與教師的認知系統不一致外，教師之間的認知系統也有分歧；三、校長會利用或調整人造物，以促進成員之間認知分享的機會；四、在教學領導歷程中，包含多次的討論與分享、辦理相關的活動、建立良好人際關係、關注學生需求、尊重教師專業自主等，這些是有助於成員認知趨於一致的因素。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate how artifacts, if any, functioned in the process of a principal's instructional leadership based on the theory of distributed cognition. In order to explore why instructional leadership did not always function well, a qualitative approach was adopted in this study. Through participatory observations and interviews, the researchers collected data regarding the interaction between artifacts and actors, and thus were able to clarify the cognitive process of Principal P and the teachers in the school. The four major findings included: Firstly, in the process of Principal P's instructional leadership, at least four artifacts were identified, and four types of interactions between the artifacts and actors (the teachers and Principal P) were identified as well. Secondly, inconsistencies appeared not only in the cognition system between Principal P and the teachers, but also among the teachers. Thirdly, the principal recognized some of the inconsistencies and took steps to re-shape the original artifacts to achieve the goals of sharing thoughts among the actors. Lastly, discussion, sharing, conducting relevant activities, establishing good interpersonal relationships, concern for students' needs, and respecting teachers' professional autonomy were the factors instrumental to furthering the consistency of members' cognition.起始頁-結束頁：41-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1902.022篇名：法國教育優先區的實施及其借鑑並列篇名：The Vicissitudes of French Priority Education Zone Programs: Lessons and Implications for Educational Policies Related to Taiwan's Disadvantaged Students作者：葉珍玲(Chen-Lin Yeh);許添明(Tian-Ming Sheu)關鍵字：補償教育;教育優先區;弱勢者教育;compensatory education;priority education zones;education for disadvantaged students期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：我國自1996年實施教育優先區政策，期能落實積極性差別待遇之理念，改善教育資源貧乏地區之教育環境，提升學生受教品質，然研究指出，在計畫目標、對象選取、政策推動與運作及政策效果評鑑等面向仍有改善空間。而分享共同名稱與內涵的法國教育優先區政策，自1981年起推動迄今已實施近30年，歷經四波的政策轉變，或有借鏡之處。本文透過文獻，分析法國教育優先區政策，檢視優先區概念、實施策略及評鑑內容的演變。從法國經驗中，作者歸納出四點可供我國弱勢者教育政策規劃借鏡之處：一、法國政府認知到學校無法獨力提升學生學習成效，職是之故，法國教育優先區政策以「區」為概念，整合區內中小學、政府部門、社區及家庭，透過政策橫向連結，擴充教育系統的廣度，共同解決弱勢學生學習失敗問題；二、法國政府認同教師在優先區工作所面臨的困境，除戮力建置跨層級的支持性優先區行政運作系統，強化政策推行的深度外，自1990年代末期亦開始積極提供教師亟需的專業伴隨與增能，以協助教師在教室產生改變；三、為強化教育優先區政策的效率及影響力，集中教育資源給予最不利的弱勢地區學生，政策目標亦以學生學習為重；四、官方的定期報告與實徵研究結果是歷次教育優先區政策修正的重要參考依據。英文摘要：In 1996, the Education Priority Area Project (EPAP) was launched with the goal to improve the academic performance of students in disadvantaged areas in Taiwan. However, it is believed that EPAP can make additional improvements in several key areas: prioritizing objectives, determining the policy coverage rate, administrative coordination, and evaluation. Beginning in 1981, France established the Priority Education Zones program (Zones d 'Education Prioritaires, ZEP), an initiative with objectives similar to Taiwan's EPAP program. Since its implementation the ZEP program has undergone four major waves of development. The purpose of this study was to analyze the policies of the ZEP program, and examine the changes in concept, strategy, and evaluation of the ZEP program over time. Four principles of the French program may shed light on the implementation of programs for children in disadvantaged areas in Taiwan. Firstly, acknowledging that schools cannot compensate for society, the ZEP program employed a global approach to get schools, public services, communities, and families involved in efforts to improve student achievement. In other words, the policy framework was system-wide in its construction. Secondly, the struggles faced by teaching professionals in ZEP programs were recognized. In an effort to help teachers meet these challenges, the French government established a system across all levels of government to promote broad administrative supportive of the ZEP policy initiatives. Since the late 1990s, the French Ministry of Education has also fostered teacher empowerment and encouraged participation in professional development programs. Thirdly, educational resources were concentrated on the most needed areas and student learning was highlighted as a priority objective to enhance policy impact and efficiency. Lastly, official periodical reports and empirical research evidence served as evaluation tools and provided suggestions for ways to improve ZEP programs.起始頁-結束頁：81-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1902.033篇名：大學自治下大學評鑑制度的檢討：以系所評鑑為例並列篇名：A Critical Analysis of University Accreditation under the Principle of University Autonomy: From the Perspective of Departmental Accreditation作者：許育典(Yue-Dian Hsu);陳碧玉(Be-Yu Chen)關鍵字：大學自治;大學評鑑;學術自治;制度性保障;系所評鑑;academic autonomy;departmental accreditation;systematical protection;university accreditation;university autonomy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：為了使學術不受到國家的任意干擾，大學享有自治的權限。但是，自治不代表不受任何拘束。因此，《憲法》第162條授權國家得以法律監督大學自治，《大學法》第5條第2項的規定讓教育部得以對大學進行評鑑。雖然大學評鑑的實施，能夠讓大學明白其問題所在，並因而達到評鑑乃是為了追求學術的目的。然而，不可否認地，大學評鑑與大學自治之間有一緊張關係。因此，本文透過大學自治與大學評鑑關係的釐清、大學評鑑制度的檢討，以檢討我國的大學評鑑法制。簡單來說，本文的主要目的即在於調和大學自治與大學評鑑之間的衝突關係，並為我國的大學評鑑法制，提供改善的建議。英文摘要：In order to promote academic freedom and academic development, it is a generally accepted principle that universities should be autonomous and free from arbitrary governmental interference. However, to say universities enjoy the right of autonomy does not necessarily imply that universities are free from restrictions. Article 162 of the Constitution empowers the state to prescribe laws to supervise university autonomy. Of all the relevant laws, Article 5, Paragraph 2, of the University Act authorizes the Ministry of Education to accredit universities. Although the intended purpose of university accreditation is to enable individual universities to discover their deficiencies and make improvements, there is a tension between university accreditation and university autonomy. This paper will describe a critical analysis of the university accreditation process in Taiwan via the clarification of the relationship between university autonomy and university accreditation, and via a review of the current university accreditation system. Some suggestions will be made concerning how to bridge the gap between the university accreditation process and university autonomy, and to offer some suggestions for improving the regulations concerning university accreditation.起始頁-結束頁：119-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1902.044篇名：書評－SAGE《教育哲學手冊》並列篇名：A Book Review on Bailey, R., Barrow, R., Carr, D., & McCarthy, C. (Eds.)., the SAGE Handbook of Philosophy of Education作者：蘇永明(Yung-Ming Shu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：159-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心5篇名：當小孩的滋味：金門縣幼兒的生活敘說並列篇名：On Being a Child: Personal Narratives of Young Children in Kinmen作者：蔡敏玲(Min-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：幼兒敘說;經驗再現;敘說結構;children's narratives;the representation of experiences;narrative styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文描述金門縣幼兒的生活敘說特色，並試論此種敘說特色形塑的脈絡因素。作者在金門縣棒棒糖班蒐集18位幼兒中班到大班的生活敘說，並訪談幼兒、教師與幼兒家長。以詩節分段方式，整理兩年共257則敘說文本之結構，並剖析敘說文本之場景、內容及角色刻劃。結果顯示，形式特色有二：半數幼兒以「多層次」敘說結構細說生活，三分之二的敘說文本包含觀感／評論。內容特色包括：吃與玩是主要關注，敘說飽含感官知覺的細節，手足角色之建構展露高度的自覺與主張。作者推測，金門和緩的生活步調讓幼兒細緻體驗生活；自在的分享空間與教師的提問是幼兒敘說特色充分展現的脈絡；父母順其自然的教養態度是幼兒刻劃手足角色呈現自覺與主張的重要背景。為理解幼兒與幼兒眼中的生活，傾聽幼兒敘說、覺察幼兒敘說特色是必要而有意義的教育作為。英文摘要：This paper describes the characteristics of personal narratives of young children from Kinmen, texture of childhood represented in these narratives, and the possible influence of context. Over a two-year period, the author collected the personal narratives of eighteen children in a kindergarten classroom in Kinmen. Stanza analysis was adopted to analyze the narrative structure. As to the contents, the author attended to how settings and characters were depicted in these texts. In regards to the form, a ”multi-layered” narrative structure was typical for half of the children and two-thirds of the narrative texts contained evaluative elements. In terms of content, vivid sensory details were used to describe eating and playing. It can be inferred that a slow pace of life allowed the children to have an enhanced perception of their daily lives. The atmosphere surrounding the sharing time, the attitude of the teacher during the listening, and the nature of the probing questions might all have contributed to the full unfolding of these children's narrative competence. A hands-off parenting style was an important context where the children depicted their siblings with multiple viewpoints. It is therefore proposed that children's narratives can serve as an important avenue in which researchers and teachers can better understand children and how they perceive their daily lives.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1901.016篇名：重建大學課程的意義與策略初探：來自建構大學系所學生專業能力的經驗反思並列篇名：Reconstructing a College Curriculum: Reflections from an Experience Constructing College Students' Professional Competencies作者：宋明娟(Min-Chuan Sung);甄曉蘭(Sharon Hsiao-Lan Chen)關鍵字：大學課程;課程發展;專業能力;高等教育;college curriculum;curriculum development;professional competencies;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，高等教育議題紛擾不斷，但有關「學生應有怎樣的學習經驗」、「系所應如何規劃課程」、「應培養學生具備怎樣的能力」等，卻是嚴重被忽略的議題。基於課程承載教育的目的、意義、功能及價值，面對當前強調發展學生專業能力的高等教育品質提升訴求，實有必要認真檢視、重建高等教育的系所課程結構。基於此，本文根據某大學教育研究單位協助校內共22個系所建構學生專業能力的經驗，探討重建大學課程的意義與策略。首先，論及大學系所學生專業能力的建構與課程發展之關係，指出大學課程發展的動態歷程、系所課程發展的決策模式，以及大學系所學生專業能力與課程發展的定位。其次，討論建構大學系所學生專業能力的思考向度，包括專業能力的面向、專業能力的情境評估以及權重考量等，進而根據以專業能力為取向的課程發展衡量因素，提出八項應用原則與實例。最後，則就參與系所在建構學生專業能力的過程中所提出的爭議問題，反思重建大學課程所面對的挑戰。希冀透過本文所呈現的經驗反思，對國內高等教育課程重建的策略思維能有所助益。英文摘要：Although there is heated debate in higher education concerning what students should experience in university, how the curriculum should be organized, and the competencies students should be equipped with upon graduation, there is little serious effort toward answering these questions. Since a curriculum reflects the mission, meaning, function, and value of a university, quality assurance in higher education requires that colleges and universities periodically review the curriculum and make changes if necessary. The purpose of this paper was to explore the principles and strategies used in reconstructing a college curriculum. Twenty-two departments and graduate institutes voluntarily participated in a university-wide identification of the professional competencies students should be equipped with upon graduation. The authors first explored the relationship between constructing students' professional competencies and the dynamic process of curriculum development. Then, the authors discussed the imperative considerations in the construction of students' professional competencies. In the discussion, guiding principles and illustrative examples are provided for the constructive thinking of a ”professional competency-oriented” college curriculum design. Finally, based on the issues raised in the process of constructing students' professional competencies, the authors reflect critically on the challenges confronted in the reconstruction of a college curriculum. It is hoped that through engaging in critical reflection, this paper can provide useful recommendations for curriculum deliberation in higher education.起始頁-結束頁：55-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1901.027篇名：影響大學生畢業流向因素之研究並列篇名：A Study of Impact Factors on Graduate Destination作者：劉若蘭(Ruo-Lan Liu);林大森(Da-Sen Lin)關鍵字：大學生;校園經驗;學習成果;畢業流向;college students;campus experience;learning outcome;graduate destination期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同學校類型大學生個人因素、學習成果與畢業流向的關係。研究對象為填答高等教育資料庫94學年度大三、畢業前、畢業後一年等三份問卷者。在本研究中，學校類型包括公私立大學與技職校院，個人因素包括家庭背景、自我概念、教育抱負與校園經驗等，學習成果包括畢業成績與具備職場能力。研究結果發現，畢業後全職就業與就學組在自我概念、社團參與、師生互動、同儕關係與課業投入等因素高於未就業組；父親職業聲望較低、家庭收入較高、不打算進修、有工作經驗、同儕關係較滿意且畢業成績、職涯規劃能力愈佳的學生，有全職工作的比例較高；父親教育程度、家庭收入較高、自我概念與課業學習較正向、職涯規劃能力與畢業成績較高、大三即打算進修的學生，全職就學的比例亦比未就業者為高。此外，公私立大學與公立技職學生全職工作與就學的比例，均比私立技職學生高，而私立技職學生參與社團對於畢業後找到全職工作有利。本研究之分析成果，能為大學規劃有效措施，促進學生學習品質與就業提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the relationships between college students' individual factors, their learning outcomes and their graduate destination. The author used the 2005 junior student cohort data of ”Taiwan Integrated Postsecondary Education Database.” Variables of types of higher education institutions consist of public and private universities as well as colleges of technology. The individual variables include family background, self-concept, educational aspiration, and campus experience. Learning outcome variables are graduation grade point and competencies of employability. Results of the study show that comparing to their unemployed peers after graduation, those who continued to study in graduate schools or found a full-time job are more likely to have higher self-evaluation, frequent club participation, better faculty-student interactions, closer peer relation and deeper academic involvement. Variables related to the full-time employment status of college graduates include lower paternal occupation status, higher family income, no plan for gradate study, with working experience, good peer relation, good graduation grade point and career planning ability. But higher paternal education, better family income, positive self-concept and academic involvement, better graduation grade point and career planning ability, and early planning for further study are related to the full-time graduate study status. In addition, those who graduated from public or private universities and public colleges of technology are more likely to go to graduate schools or find a permanent job than those ones graduated from private colleges of technology. However graduates form private college of technology benefit from club participation for finding full-time jobs. Based on the research results, recommendations for planning effective programs to enhance students' learning and employability are provided.起始頁-結束頁：101-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1901.038篇名：日治後期杜威教育思想在臺灣之引進與實踐並列篇名：The Introduction and Implementation of Dewey's Educational Philosophy in Taiwan in Late Japanese Colonial Period作者：祝若穎(Jo-Ying Chu)關鍵字：臺灣教育史;杜威教育學說;林茂生;日治時期;history of Taiwan education;John Dewey's educational philosophy;Lin Mosei;Japanese colonial period期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以杜威的教育思想為論述軸心，整理與分析自1919至1930年初期的教育雜誌與時人論著，探究杜威學說在臺灣之引進與實踐。在引進的理論上，歸納出五項要點，包括教育即生長、教育應貼近生活之必需、重視兒童的生活經驗、學校教育與社會之結合，以及學校的道德教育。在教學法的實踐面上，該時期重視兒童個別差異、強調兒童實際生活，以及「做中學」與「自學主義」，並考察其教學活動的成效與檢討。再者，探究林茂生對杜威進步主義與民主主義觀之運用。最後，從杜威思想傳入臺灣之轉化內涵來看，發現該學說在臺灣強調進步主義的教育，卻忽視民主本質。研究也發現，有些臺籍教師己能以具深度與廣度的方式闡述杜威理論，並將其落實於教育現場中。英文摘要：This paper aims to investigate how Dewey's thoughts in education was introduced to and implemented in Taiwan through analyzing educational journals, and related articles and books from 1919 to early 1930. Based on the author's analysis, five key concepts of Dewey's educational thoughts were introduced to Taiwan, including education as growth, the relatedness between education and the needs in life, the importance of children's experience, the interplay of school and society, and moral education in school. Concerning the pedagogical practice during late Japanese colonial period, the author found that individual differences, children's living experiences, ”learning by doing” and ”self-study”, as well as the evaluation of effects of pedagogical activities were emphasized. In addition, Dr. Lin Mosei's application of Dewey's progressivism and the concept of democracy were also explored in this study. Lastly, this study found that the introduction of Dewey's philosophy tended to promote the progressive education rather than the essence of democracy. Nevertheless, some Taiwanese teachers were able not only to develop in depth discourse on Dewey's theory but also to implement it in school settings.起始頁-結束頁：145-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2011.1901.049篇名：書評－《理解貧困的一種框架》並列篇名：A Book Review on Payne, R. K., a framework for Understanding Poverty作者：唐淑華(Shu-Hua Tang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：195-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心01篇名：數位說故事在成語教學的創新應用並列篇名：An Investigation on Learning Chinese Idioms with Digital Storytelling作者：黃意雯(Iwen Huang);劉姍姍(Shan-Shan Liu)關鍵字：成語數位學習;科技融入教學;數位說故事;Chinese idioms e-learning;integrated technology into teaching;digital story telling期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究將數位說故事融入成語的創新教學上，國小五年級學生了解成語的意義後，依據此成語典故來創作數位成語故事。從數位成語故事的實作中學習如何正確應用成語，幫助學生建構學習，啟發其學習興趣與動機，加深對成語的記憶。再透過數位說故事評量表，對認知、情意、技能中的八個向度進行學習成效調查，結果發現，數位成語故事的教學活動對學生的學習具有正面的成效。其中，以認知面的表現最優秀，學習者除了可以正確了解成語典故和涵義，還能清楚利用自己的想法和創意表達出來。在情意面上，藉由數位說故事的新方式，提升其學習動機，並且透過分享的活動來欣賞他人的創作。但從觀察與訪談中發現，由於製作數位成語過程中遇到種種的困難與干擾，此活動對學習動機雖有提升作用，但以此種方式進行學習亦會減弱部分學生的學習意願。技能面的整體表現良好，但在聲音、語言及步調的標準差稍微偏高，顯示學生其語言表達流暢度與運用合適的音量和速度來呈現故事這兩部分是有所差異的。並從觀察與訪談中發現可進一步探討製作成語故事的過程，關於科技、互動、動機、環境等面向對學習的影響，並提出相關建議。英文摘要：Taiwan has started the trend of teaching by digital storytelling in recent years. Researches showed digital storytelling enabled students learn with enjoyment. This study integrated digital storytelling as the innovative teaching of Chinese idioms by using MS Photo Story. The purpose of the study was to explore a way that can increase students’ learning interests and motivation, thus enhance their memory to Chinese idioms by the practice of telling their own stories. There were 5 fifth grade students from Cha-Yi County participated in this activity to make animated Chinese idiom stories with computer. This research used a digital storytelling evaluation rubric to assess eight aspects of learning effectiveness including cognitive, affective, and psychomotor skill performances. The results found that digital storytelling has positive learning effects to students. From observations and interviews with students, the research concluded the influences and suggestions to concern about technology, interaction, motivation, and environment in the future study.起始頁-結束頁：1-19資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會2篇名：結合行動、感應及語音科技之圖書館導引系統及其成效分析並列篇名：A Library Guide System Combining Mobile, Sensing, and Voice Technologies and Its Effect Analysis作者：黃國豪(Gwo-Haur Hwang);陳碧茵(Beyin Chen);葉志鴻(Jr-Hung Ye);林冠妤(Kuan-Yu Lin)關鍵字：情境感知;無線射頻辨識系統;無所不在;圖書館應用;語音導引;context-awareness;RFID;ubiquitous;library application;voice user-guide期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：由於科技的進步，藉由無線網路及無線射頻辨識技術，建立不同於傳統圖書館的使用環境，成為提升圖書館形象的服務之一。本研究針對國小學童較無地理位置概念的特性，藉由行動及感應技術，製作了能夠幫助學童在圖書館內快速尋書的系統環境。並針對低年級更需要聲音的協助，提供了不必依賴螢幕的語音導引功能。本研究參考過去學者之研究架構，設計出針對某國小圖書館滿意度架構的4項指標，並指出指標中以「引導設備因素」影響整體滿意度最高。為了解系統語音對學童使用滿意度的影響，我們亦進行了相關因素的研究分析，結果顯示，每一項語音因素，均對系統的使用滿意度產生正相關的影響。另外，找到書的人次比例亦因本系統的協助有提高的現象。英文摘要：Due to the progress of the science and technologies, using wireless networks and the technology important for promoting library image. Therefore, based on mobile and sensing technologies, this research presented a library guide system to help elementary schoolchildren to seek books fast in libraries. Aimed at the demand of sound for lower grade schoolchildren, the system also provided the function of voice guide by which the system can be used easily with less screen-needed. Based on the past research architecture, we presented four merit points to measure satisfactory degree for the schoolchildren. The experimental result showed that among the four points, the guide equipment is the most effective reason. In order to understand the influence factors of the system voice satisfaction, the relative research and analysis were done. The result showed that each voice function positively influence the usage satisfaction of the guide system. Additionally, by the assistance of the system, the rate of elementary schoolchildren to find books had been increased.起始頁-結束頁：21-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會3篇名：導入數位遊戲於學童創造力之培育並列篇名：Apply Digital Games in Creativity Enhancement作者：莊宗嚴(Tsung-Yen Chuang);林勝介(Sheng-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：創造力;創造力培育;數位遊戲;creativity;creativity enhancement;digital game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來的研究成果證實悅趣式數位學習有增進學習成效的可能，而本研究基於之前的研究成果進一步探討以數位遊戲應用於當前學者最為關心與待解的難題：如何有效地提升創造力？為探究此議題，本研究篩選出「Sheep’s Quest」與「Arctic Quest 2」兩款數位遊戲為研究工具進行實驗。56名學童經過8次，每次50分鐘的「數位遊戲」活動後，其研究結果顯示實驗組參與者在「威廉斯創造力測驗」中的各向度，包括流暢力、開放性、變通力、獨創力、精密力、標題、想像及挑戰皆達顯著差異水準。由分析實驗結果證實了數位遊戲確實能刺激國小高年級學童創造力的提升。因此，適當地運用數位遊戲結合課程教學，應能有效輔助教師提升學生之創造力。英文摘要：This study was investigated the possibility of apply digital game on creativity enhancement for elementary students. For this purpose, this study chose two digital games: ”Sheep’s Quest” and ”Arctic Quest 2” as research tools. The results indicated that these digital games have significantly effects in the creativity enhancement of experimental group. Especially in ”Fluency”, ”Unrestricted”, ”Flexibility”, ”Originality”, ”Elaboration”, ”Denominate”, ”Imagination”, and ”Challenge” of ”Creativity Assessment Packet”. The findings of this study showed that digital games could be a valuable teaching material to improve student's creativity in the future.起始頁-結束頁：45-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會4篇名：情境學習理論應用於音樂演奏與學習之研究並列篇名：The Applications of Situated E-learning on Music Performance and Practice作者：曾善美(Shan-Mei Tseng)關鍵字：音樂演奏;情境學習理論;數位學習;music performance;situated learning;e-learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探索情境學習理論在音樂演奏與學習上的應用。本文以10位音樂系大學生與研究生為對象，以為期15週之參與觀察與3次深度訪談之質性研究方式，探討使用「虛擬練習情境」數位系統學習之歷程對其音樂演奏與學習在認知與行為方面所造成的影響。透過10位個案之交叉分析結果發現，學生若能在模擬真實情境之多功能音樂數位環境中練習，並擁有人性化數位伴奏，在認知方面，對其音樂演奏詮釋、音準與節奏的敏銳度與增強背譜能力、提升學習興趣應有正面助益。此外，藉由虛擬舞臺情境能降低演奏焦慮，因此在行為方面，達到加速演出預備、有效率地練習及更穩定演出的效益。本文並根據資料分析結果，對情境學習理論應用於音樂演奏與學習之影響做出結論並對未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the applications of situated e-learning on music performance and practice. This research seeks to understand the impact of a virtual practice system on collegiate music students' practice in terms of cognition and behavior. Data was collected after participant observation for fifteen-weeks and three semi-structured interviews and analyzed with coding techniques proposed by grounded theorists. The findings of this study suggested that practice within a situated e-learning environment can enhance students' skills on music interpretation, reduce their stage fright, and expedite their performance preparation. Other benefits included better intonation, abilities to perform from memory, motivation for practice and finally, steadier performance.起始頁-結束頁：61-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會5篇名：素養取向科技使用量表之發展並列篇名：The Development of a Literacy-based Technology Application Scale作者：曾建勳(Chien-Hsun Tseng);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung);林宜樺(I-Hua Lin)關鍵字：性別差異;科技支持學習;科技接受模式;計畫行為理論;素養;gender difference;learning with technology;technology acceptance model;planned behavior;literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：素養是國小學生適應未來生活的關鍵，科技支持學習則是數位紀元中創新而重要的學習取向。素養取向科技使用量表著重科技在真實情境運用功能的覺察與認同，本研究透過量表發展，評估國小學生以科技支持學習的態度與意向，作為教師發展科技支持學習方案的具體參考。研究中以計畫行為理論與科技接受模式為基礎，發展網路化國小學生科技使用量表，包含科技使用態度、科技控制知覺、科技主觀規範與科技使用意向等四個層面，共26題。在610位國小高年級學生的有效樣本中，全量表α係數為0.94，分層面α係數分別為0.83、0.85、0.79及0.84。各層面之間的相關介於0.68至0.76。量表得分與學生在校電腦成績的相關略高於與自然或數學成績的相關，男生平均得分也比女生略高。整體而言，量表呈現合理的內部一致性和構念效度。英文摘要：Development of student’s learning literacy is a very crucial goal for elementary education. Learning with technology is an innovative and important learning approach for students to develop their competences in a digital era. Student’s technology application attitude and intention may affect their technology literacy development. The curriculum design for learning with technology should also take the related factors into considerations. This study developed a technology application scale (TAS) for elementary students based on the theory of planned behavior and technology acceptance model. There were 610 fifth and sixth-graders sampled from twenty-six schools included as the norm. In this study we explore the differences between grades and gender of TAS. There is no significant difference between the 5th and 6th graders on TAS. The male students perform a little bit better than the female students. The correlation pattern reasonably supports the theory of planned behavior. The results suggest TAS is a reliable and valid instrument to provide basic information about students’ affective aspect of technology application.起始頁-結束頁：81-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會6篇名：Design of an Online Diagnostic Test Tool for Personalized Learning Based on Componential IRT Approach並列篇名：植基於組成式試題反應理論模式的個人化學習線上診斷測驗工具之設計作者：王豐緒(Feng-Hsu Wang)關鍵字：diagnostic test;e-learning standards;item response theory;online assessment;personalized learning;診斷測驗;數位學習標準;試題反應理論;線上評量;個人化學習期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：Diagnostic test plays an important role in personalized eLearning due to its capability to provide information about students’ cognitive states. This paper proposes a novel design of an online diagnostic test tool based on a Componential IRT (CIRT) model that is able to handle multiple concepts/skills involved in an item. Features of the CIRT model are investigated, and an online test component based on the CIRT approach was implemented in a standard-conformant web-based learning system. Applications of the test tool in two practical online courses have been conducted and analyzed through the Chi-Square fitness test with the cross-validation technique. The cross-validation results show that empirically the approach can find a suitable CIRT model for an item, and most items in the test cases can find good-fitting CIRT models. Therefore, the proposed approach is highly potentially effective in providing useful diagnostic information that can be used for personalized learning on the Web.英文摘要：診斷測驗（diagnostic test）可提供學生認知狀態的相關訊息，因此在個人化學習的領域中扮演著重要的角色。本文基於組成式試題反應理論（componential IRT）的模式，設計一套個人化學習線上診斷測驗工具，以應付多重概念試題的施測需求。本文探討組成式試題反應理論的特色，並據以在現有的學習網站中實做出符合IMS標準的線上測驗工具。我們將本工具應用在兩門實際的線上課程中，並透過卡方適模檢測（Chi-Square fitness test）分析其應用成效。檢測結果顯示本工具可以找到多重概念試題合宜的試題反應模式，因此，本研究所提及的工具可望對於網路個人化學習中提供有用的學習診斷訊息。起始頁-結束頁：99-122資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會7篇名：科學文章摘要自動化概念比對計分方式的發展與應用並列篇名：Comparative Study on Automatic Scoring Methods for Summarization of Science Articles作者：黃彥博(Yen-Bo Huang);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung);蘇義翔(I-Hsiang Su)關鍵字：摘要能力;科學文章;自動化計分;概念比對;潛在性語意分析;science reading;summarization;automated scoring;concept similarity;LSA期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在發展國小六年級學生適用的科學文章摘要自動化概念比對評分系統，文中以科學文章摘要人工評分為效標，同時以科學閱讀理解和在校學科成績為相關變項，比較概念比對（CS）、潛在性語意分析（LSA）和關鍵詞比對（KWC）三種自動化計分方法與關聯變項的關連組型，作為科學文章摘要自動化概念比對評分機制的效度討論依據。研究結果顯示以人工評定為效標，CS法表現較佳。如果看摘要能力與科學閱讀理解表現的相關，LSA 評分結果與理解相關略高於CS。以在校成績為關聯變項，其相關組型顯示CS 與LSA 與在校國語與自然相關較高，呈現合理的幅合和區別效度。整體而言，CS 法呈現經濟的優勢和文章特定的限制，相反地，LSA 需要龐大的資料庫但應用的類推潛力可能較佳。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to compare the performances of three automated scoring methods on science reading summarization. Human rating is used as the criterion. The automatic scoring methods included are concept similarity (CS), latent semantic analysis (LSA) and key-word comparison (KWC). Four expository passages on science were used in this study. Science reading comprehension and school grades on Mandarin, science and mathematics were also collected for convergent and discriminant validity discussions. Two facets of summary are rated by human raters: key concept and the structure of reading passage. On the facet of key concept, the correlation coefficients between automated scoring and human rating are around .88 for CS, .72 for LSA, and .63 for KWC. On the facet of structure, the correlation coefficients are .84 for CS, .69 for LSA and .52 for KWC. The correlation coefficients of automated scoring with science reading comprehension are .38 for CS, .45 for LSA and .21 for KWC. Generally speaking, CS and LSA demonstrate promising potential for further technical and application researches.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會8篇名：行動式影音教學系統在混合教學上之實作研究並列篇名：An Action-type Digital Broadcasting System for Supporting Learning Activities作者：賴膺守(Yen-Shou Lai);蔡鴻旭(Yen-Shou Lai);游寶達(Pao-Ta Yu)關鍵字：多媒體學習;視訊錄影;遠距教學;數位廣播;multimedia learning;internet protocol television;distance learning;digital broadcasting期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究發展與應用行動式影音廣播教學系統支援班級教學活動。行動式影音廣播教學系統能方便教師提供遠端學生具有高品質的多媒體教學檔案，遠端學生可以聽到課堂上教師的講解過程，清楚地看到教室裡的教學情境與教材內容，使學生能即時參與班級教學活動，學生也可以在下課後隨時隨地下載教師所提供的多媒體錄影檔案。研究結果顯示，利用此多媒體教學檔案，可以幫助學生清晰地回憶當時課堂上的教學情境，方便學生憶起或重新思考教師的解題技巧，能有效提升學生的學習感知成效。英文摘要：This study develops an action-type audio and video learning system to support classroom teaching and learning activities. With the increase in network bandwidth, live broadcast and video-on-demand are becoming increasingly popular services. The system can immediately broadcast the facial expression of participants and the content of script for distance learning. It integrates various video and audio devices and make output screen simultaneously present more than two video frames and mixed audio. The live broadcast and the video-on-demand are both provided within this system and let viewers watch high-quality films for student’s self-learning at any time and anywhere. Therefore, the discussions and illustrations of teacher and students can be perfectly displayed to the viewers who are not able to participate in this class. In conclusion, the applications in learning with the system achieve excellent outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：29-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會9篇名：目標設定與回饋對網路使用者任務執行成效之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Goal Setting and Feedback on Internet Task Performance for High/Low Efficiency Internet Users作者：張陳明(Chen-Ming Chang);陳明溥(Ming-Puu Chen);林哲宇(Che-Yu Lin)關鍵字：目標設定;回饋;網路焦慮;goal setting;feedback;Internet anxiety期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同的目標設定與目標導向回饋對高/低網路任務執行效率的使用者網路任務執行之影響。研究對象為國小教職員。研究變項包含目標設定(整體性目標vs. 階段性目標)、目標導向回饋(表現目標回饋vs.精熟目標回饋)與網路任務執行效率(高vs. 低)。研究結果發現：(1)無論給予使用者何種目標設定和目標導向回饋均會增加使用者的網路焦慮；(2)使用者對目標設定與目標導向回饋皆持正面的看法；(3)整體性目標有助於高網路任務執行效率之使用者者獲得較佳的態度；(4)目標導向回饋則對使用者態度無顯著影響。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of goal setting and feedback on Internet task performance for high/low efficiency Internet users. The participants of this study were randomly selected from 2,675 elementary school teachers who had to participate in a compulsory Internet task of filling a questionnaire. The effects of goal setting (long-term goal vs. sub-goal), feedback (performance feedback vs. mastery feedback) and personal Internet task execution efficiency (high vs. low) on Internet task execution and attitude were examined. The results showed that (a) regardless of the type of goal setting or type of feedback, all participants' Internet anxiety was increased; (b) the participants showed positive attitudes toward both the employed types of goal setting and both the received types of feedback; (c) the high-efficient participants demonstrated the most positive attitude when long-term goal setting was applied on them; and finally, (d) the type of feedback did not reveal any significant effect on participants' attitude.起始頁-結束頁：42-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會10篇名：河川輸砂模式數位學習網站建置之研究並列篇名：A study on the e-Learning Website Construction of River Sediment Transport Model作者：謝慧民(Hui-Ming Hsieh);李鴻源(Hong-Yuan Lee);李逢春(Fung-Chun Li)關鍵字：NETSTARS 模式;視窗介面;數位學習;網站營運;NETSTARS Model;Windows Interface;E-Learning;Website operation期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：數值模式的學習除了透過使用者手冊摸索外，大都需要嘗試錯誤來累積經驗，往往花費了許多時間與精力仍然不得要領，本文嘗試在國產的水利模式NETSTARS 視窗化後的使用上提供一個學習網站，讓學習更有效率。NETSTARS 模式是一個可以計算複雜河系河床沖淤的工具，經視窗化後版本為V2.0，本文規劃建立的數位學習網站內容包括：(1).使用XOOPS架站機建置風格網站：http://www.hmhsieh.idv.tw/xoops2/index.php。(2).製作NETSTARS 模式之理論簡介Powerpoint 投影片、視窗化程式操作及Arcview 外掛模組操作等Flash 格式之網頁動態影音，搭配網頁製作表單介紹學習單元的內容、時間及超連結位置。(3).使用Flash 設計Menu 可選取播放超過100 個影音投影片。(4).透過功能模組的安裝及網頁崁入區塊功能，設計許多網站有用的功能選項，包括行事曆、討論區、最新消息、檔案下載、天氣預報、投票、線上學習單元與測驗及一些統計功能等。(5).使用Anark Studio 製作淡水河系河床變動的3D 互動式示範網頁。希望藉由影音數位教材的重複聽看及討論可以提高使用者的學習效率。由網站營運分析了解使用者大都使用e-mail 發問以獲得答案，由五分制問卷調查成果，平均得分為3.255，藉以了解有待加強的部分包括定期更新、留言版設置、Q&A 功能、增加網站地圖的網頁、首頁的設計、文字的編排及設計風格等。英文摘要：Numerical model's study, besides using the user handbook, mostly needs trial and error to accumulate the experience of operation. The learner must spend long time to understand the software performance, but can still not perfectly find out all the skills. Even thought the windows interface of the model was finished, the user still feels learning the model was very hard. The NETSTARS model, developed with FORTRAN language, was selected to make the windows system and to build the e-Learning website by authors. The NETSTARS model is able to simulate the channel bed evolutions of a channel network. In order to popularize the application of the software using windows interface for this model, the website for learning must be built at this time. The e-Learning website of NETSTARS model version 2.0 includes the following parts: (1). the structure of website was finished by XOOPS technology. The website address is http://www.hmhsieh.idv.tw/xoops2/index.php. (2). the e-Learning contents of Adobe Flash format were made by some tools including the slide introduction of NETSTARS theorem , the operation of windows interface ,and the operation of ArcView 3.2 extension modules. There are some e-Learning units as content statement, time duration, and hyperlink in the integrated tables in some web pages. (3). PowerPoint slides were recorded in excess of 100 video files, and Adobe Flash was used to make menus that those e-learning courses can be selected and broadcasted. (4).the website has some functions as calendar, discussion area, news, downloads, prediction for weather, voting, e-Learning course and examination, stats for some information. (5). the software of Anark Studio 2.0 was used to make 3D variation of bed topology for Tanhsui River using browser view. The learning of the model will be better effective. The users mostly used e-mail to ask some questions and obtain the answers from website operation analysis. The averaged score 3.255 was obtained by the results of the five-grade marking system of questionnaire survey. This website still needs to be progressed including the continuous revision in fixed period, the message board establishment, the Q&A function, the website map, the home page design, the writing arrangement and the design style and so on.起始頁-結束頁：62-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會01篇名：公民行動取向全球議題課程設計模式與實踐案例並列篇名：A Civic Action Model for Global-issues Curriculum Design and Some Exemplary Cases作者：陳麗華(Li-Hua Chen)關鍵字：公民行動取向課程設計;全球議題;全球議題課程;全球教育;civic action model for curriculum design;global issues;global-issues curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：在全球化的社會裡，培養學生具備世界公民資質，有能力參與全球議題的解決，是學校教育嶄新且重要的課題。本文整理研究者過去三年的國科會計畫研究成果，提出公民行動取向全球議題課程的設計模式與實踐案例，供學校規畫與實施之參考，期以<U+7232>培養學生具備世界公民素養盡一分心力。全文首先闡述全球議題課程的重要性，其次，探討全球議題的內涵與課程目標，包括全球議題的意義與性質、議題種類、選擇規準、課程目標等；復次，探討公民行動取向課程設計，包括公民教育取向分析，以及公民養成方案與公民行動取向課程等兩個設計模式；最後，介紹公民行動取向全球議題課程的實踐案例，並從研究經驗中歸結出若干實施困境與因應的變通作法。英文摘要：It is paramount to prepare students' global citizenship for learning and helping to solve the global issues in global society. This paper proposed a civic action model for global-issues curriculum design, and introduced some exemplary practice cases.Firstly, the definition, category, and selection criteria of global issues for curriculum design were depicted. Secondly, the curriculum models were explored, including the comparison of four civic education approaches, the model of ”we the people, project citizen” and ”civic action model for curriculum design”. Finally, the implementation of some practice cases which adopted civic action model for global-issues curriculum design were introduced, and some predicaments and solutions raised during the curriculum implementation were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：47-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201103.00472篇名：選區溝通的新管道－選民與立委的電子郵件接觸並列篇名：Emailing as a New Medium of Communication between Parliament Members and Their Constituents in Taiwan作者：陳蓉怡(Rung-Yi Chen);蔡韻竹(Yun-Chu Tsai)關鍵字：電子郵件;選區服務;立法機構與選區溝通;立委個人態度;代議民主;e-mail;constituency service;legislative-constituent communications;legislator's attitudes;representative democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：選區服務對立委建立個人選票影響甚鉅，然而，當電子化政府、電子化民主與網路選戰逐漸成<U+7232>政治學界關懷重視的焦點，我們認<U+7232>網際網路在代議政治領域所發揮的重要性仍待進一步解釋釐清。本文以電子郵件作<U+7232>研究對象，藉此瞭解立法委員如何利用新的溝通媒介執行其代議士的選區服務職責。透過對第六屆立法委員與選區溝通媒介使用進行分析，我們認<U+7232>在現階段電子郵件作<U+7232>一種立委與選區溝通的新媒介，對於傳統媒介在選區服務上的應用是扮演一種補充而非取代的角色。更進一步而言，多數立委辦公室已開始使用電子郵件與選區接觸，但使用情況則受到立委個人及選區因素影響而迥然有別。英文摘要：This article aims to investigate the significance of internet to political campaign. Comparing with the traditional in-person constituency service, how the use of 'e-tools' affect representative politics in Taiwan remains under-explored. In order to further our understanding about how the elected officials utilize e-tools to enhance their constituency service, we focus on analyzing the emailing behavior of the legislators during the Sixth Legislature. We argue that emailing, as a new medium of communication between the legislators and their constituencies, plays merely a supplementany role in constituency service at the current stage. Our research also suggests that personal attitudes towards e-tools of the legislators and the social-economic differences among constituencies are the two important determinants of legislators' individual emailing behavior.起始頁-結束頁：83-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201103.00833篇名：美國工會承認之法律政策－陷入制度性困境？並列篇名：Legal Policies for Union Recognition in the United States: Enter into an Institutional Difficulty作者：吳育仁(Yu-Jen Wu)關鍵字：工會承認;集體協商;不當勞動行<U+7232>;勞動關係;union recognition;collective bargaining;unfair labor practice;labor relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文的主要目的有二：一是發掘美國制定法上工會承認的程序和架構，二是檢視美國工會承認程序及其實際經驗，對集體協商關係建立的實益。<U+7232>達成上述目的，本文檢視美國工會承認法律政策是否有利於集體協商關係之建立和進行？是否實質上阻礙了集體協商，抑或促進了集體協商呢？本文的主要論點：當肯定集體協商制度的必要性、且支持工會在職場上代表勞工，就應該設計出有利工會承認的制度性機制。本文發現，美國勞資雙方過度依賴國家勞工關係局之法定確認程序，將可能使工會承認陷入制度性困境。英文摘要：The aim of this article has two aspects: to explore the procedure and structure of union recognition in the statutes of the United States on the one hand, and to examine its actual advantages of helping to develop the collective bargaining relations on the other. To achieve such the aim, the article discovers whether or not the legal policies of union recognition are beneficial to the development of collective bargaining and to what extent these legal policies discourage or promote collective bargaining. The main argument is that if American labor laws recognize both the necessity of collective bargaining and the representative role of trade unions at work, legal arrangements for union recognition need to be established institutionally. The article concludes that legal recognition procedures on which management and unions greatly rely are most likely to bring union recognition into an institutional difficulty.起始頁-結束頁：133-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201103.01334篇名：不<U+7232>利潤－<U+7232>什麼民主需要人文學科？並列篇名：Not for Profit: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities作者：蔡英文期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：177-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201103.01775篇名：公共哲學新調－卷一：民主與公民自由；卷二：帝國主義與公民自由並列篇名：Public Philosophy in a New Key, Volume 1: Democracy and Civic Freedom; Volume 2: Imperialism and Civic Freedom作者：陳嘉銘期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：185-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201103.018501篇名：二階段分層叢集抽樣的設計效應估計：以TIMSS 2007調查研究為例並列篇名：An Estimation of the Design Effect for the Two-Stage Stratified Cluster Sampling Design作者：任宗浩(Tsung-Hau Jen);譚克平(Hak-Ping Tam);張立民(Margaret Wu)關鍵字：大型評量;抽樣架構計畫;降低抽樣誤差;複雜抽樣設計;變異量估計;large-scale assessment;planning sampling framework;sampling error reduction;complex survey design;variance estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：大型調查研究常採用多階段分層叢集抽樣，檢視臺灣學生歷年來參與TIMSS研究的結果顯示，其平均表現之標準誤常較他國稍大。應TIMSS專責抽樣之單位要求，本研究旨在推導設計二階段分層叢集抽樣時即可預估標準誤的公式，以利選擇較佳分層架構，達減少標準誤的目標，並進行三個分析檢查其有效性。分析一將30個參與TIMSS 2007的國家資料，用該公式與《TIMSS技術手冊》建議之刀切重複取樣法，分別估算各國學生平均科學成績之標準誤，發現兩者之線性相關達.98。分析二以29個連續參加TIMSS 2003和2007的國家資料，論述利用該公式與現有輔助變項預估將要進行調查的誤差之實用性。分析三探討當叢集的分層輔助變項為連續量時，不同分層數與二階段分層叢集抽樣誤差間的關係，以預估臺灣學生在TIMSS 2011平均科學成績之標準誤。文後尚提出四階段的評估流程，供相關研究預估主要依變項平均值之標準誤時做參考。英文摘要：Most large-scale educational surveys utilize a multi-stage stratified cluster sampling design. Past findings revealed that the standard errors of Taiwan students’ mean performances were slightly larger than other countries'. In response to the request by the institute in charge of TIMSS sampling, this study was launched to derive a formula that could estimate the standard error of population mean prior to conducting a two-stage stratified cluster sampling design. This formula could then be used to select an optimal stratification framework that could reduce the size of standard error to an acceptable level. Its validity was investigated in three subsequent studies. In the first study, standard errors for 30 TIMSS 2007 participating countries were estimated according to the newly derived formula as well as by the jackknife replication. The correlation between the two sets of standard errors amounted to 0.98. The second study investigated the practicality of using the new formula in addition to auxiliary variables for predicting standard errors on the data of 29 countries that participated in both TIMSS 2003 and 2007. The third study explored the relationship between the number of stratum and the standard errors under a two-stage stratified cluster sampling design when the auxiliary variables for stratification were continuous. This paper closed by suggesting a four-step procedure to facilitate researchers in estimating standard errors of means during the planning stage of sampling design.起始頁-結束頁：33-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學2篇名：Using PISA and TIMSS Mathematics Assessments to Identify the Relative Strengths of Students in Western and Asian Countries並列篇名：透過PISA與TIMSS評比研究檢視西方與亞洲學生數學的相對強項作者：張立民(Margaret Wu)關鍵字：國際研究;數學;國際學生能力評量計畫;國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查;international study;Mathematics;PISA;TIMSS期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：Wu（2009）的研究曾將2003年「國際學生能力評量計畫」（Programme for International Student Assessment, PISA）的數學表現，與「國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查」（Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, TIMSS）八年級學生的數學表現做一比較，結果發現，西方國家在PISA的表現大致上比在TIMSS的表現為佳。本研究則將TIMSS公開的題目分為兩組，一組與PISA的架構相符，另一組則不相符。其中，TIMSS評比有很多幾何與代數的題目是屬於「純粹的數學」題（即未以真實生活情境作為背景的數學題），而這些題目並未出現在PISA評比之中。本研究檢視六個國家在這兩組題目表現上的差異，藉此反映出西方與亞洲國家的相對強項與弱點，接著再將這些強項與弱點連結到PISA與TIMSS評比的內容上。有證據顯示，西方與亞洲國家在PISA與TIMSS的差異表現可歸因於兩評比題目種類的不同。英文摘要：A study was carried out that compared Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2003 Mathematics results with Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 2003 Grade 8 Mathematics results (Wu, 2009). It was found that Western countries generally performed better in PISA than in TIMSS, and Eastern European and Asian countries generally performed better in TIMSS than in PISA. In this paper, TIMSS released items are divided into two sets: one that fits the PISA framework and one that does not. In particular, many geometry and algebra items in TIMSS are ”inner mathematics” (mathematics without a real-life context), and such items do not appear in the PISA test. Differential performances of six countries on each set of items are examined. In this way, the relative strengths and weaknesses of Western and Asian countries are identified. These strengths and weaknesses are then linked back to the contents of the PISA and TIMSS tests. There is strong evidence that differential performance between Western and Asian countries in PISA and TIMSS can be directly attributed to the types of items in the respective tests.起始頁-結束頁：67-89資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學3篇名：Differential Item Functioning Analyses in Large-Scale Educational Surveys: Key Concepts and Modeling Approaches for Secondary Analysts並列篇名：大型教育調查研究中的差別試題功能：次級分析中的核心概念及建模方法作者：朱小姝(Xiao-Shu Zhu);安德魯˙儒普(Andre A. Rupp);高靜(Jing Gao)關鍵字：複雜題本設計;差別試題功能;多階層廣義線性模式;多階段抽樣設計通;complex booklet design;DIF;HGLMs;multi-stage sampling design期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：型教育評量研究常採用多階段抽樣的設計（multi-stage sampling design），透過對母群體之抽樣單位進行分層以抽取受測者。此外，還會採用複雜題本設計（complex booklet design）的方式將題目組成多份測驗題本。在此情況下，欲確保公正測量出不同受測群體的能力，關鍵在於能夠有效偵測所採用的題目是否具差別試題功能（differential item functioning, DIF）。本文旨在介紹探討在大型教育評量複雜設計之下能用以偵測差別試題功能的建模方法，並應用六種可用於偵測DIF的多階層廣義線性模式（hierarchical generalized linear models, HGLMs），再透過電腦模擬比較它們偵測DIF的效力。接著又將這些模式應用到國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查研究（TIMSS）的實證數據上，藉以探測是否存在一致性的性別DIF（uniform gender DIF）。英文摘要：Many educational surveys employ a multi-stage sampling design for students, which makes use of stratification and/or clustering of population units, as well as a complex booklet design for items from an item pool. In these surveys, the reliable detection of item bias or differential item functioning (DIF) across student groups is a key component for ensuring fair representations of different student groups. In this paper, we describe several modeling approaches that can be useful for detecting DIF in educational surveys. We illustrate the key ideas by investigating the performance of six hierarchical generalized linear models (HGLMs) using a small simulation study and by applying them to real data from the Trends in Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) study where we use them to investigate potential uniform gender DIF.起始頁-結束頁：91-127資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學4篇名：內容探勘技術在教育評鑑研究發展趨勢分析之應用並列篇名：The Application of Content Mining Techniques to the Analysis of Educational Evaluation Research Trends作者：曾元顯(Yuen-Hsien Tseng);林瑜一(Yu-I Lin)關鍵字：主題偵測;科學計量學;核心期刊;評鑑理論樹;趨勢分析;topic detection;scientometrics;core journals;evaluation theory tree;trend analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：由於大型資料庫時代的來臨，各種教育評鑑研究的數位文件，累積的速度相當快，相關的統計、探勘分析方法，需求漸為殷切。本研究以專家問卷、資料庫搜尋等方式，來界定教育評鑑研究領域的核心期刊。另外，透過引文分析、文字探勘技術等方法，自動從核心期刊中偵測出校長領導、班級大小、評鑑、改革、教師認證、學習機會、留級、教育券等概念，為顯著的研究議題。從評鑑方法的主題中，本研究探勘出Chen、Weiss與Rossi等學者討論的方法，比Cook、Compbell等人的還新，此點從領域學者Alkin（2004）在主題樹中對上述專家的擺設位置，也觀察到相同的現象。最後，本研究透過主題趨勢的分析，發現教育評鑑裡的主要議題，其論文數量有愈來愈少的趨勢。然而，這些結果的意義，仍有待領域專家的深入解讀。本研究所提方法可應用在不同學科領域，不僅能增進內容分析的效率，還可定期追蹤主題的演變，甚至標示出重要學者的位置，提供後續相關研究的線索與素材。英文摘要：Due to the mass accumulation of digital documents in nowadays research environment, related statistical or content mining methods for analyzing, organizing, and accessing information from the document collections are in great need. This research aimed to: (1) identify the core journals in the field of educational evaluation research through cross-verification of questionnaire survey and database searching; (2) find out major research topics and their evolutions by analyzing the publications in the core journals based on scientometrics methods such as citation analysis and text mining techniques. Based on the findings, the major salient research topics include principal’s leadership, class size, evaluation, reform, teacher certification, opportunity to learn, retention, and voucher. And as to the issue of the evaluation methods, the studies conducted by Chen, Weiss, and Rossi are identified as newer ones than those by Cook and Compbell, which coincides with the fact shown in the evaluation theory tree (a sort of topical tree) organized by Marvin Alkin, an experienced expert in the field. Besides, with this topic trend analysis, it is also found that the number of papers dealing with the major research topics seems to be decreasing. However, all these results need to be interpreted by domain experts to reveal their true meanings. The methodology presented in this research may be applied not only to improve the efficiency of content analysis, but also to facilitate regular tracing of topic evolution, to spot the positions of important researchers in the field, and therefore to provide relevant clues or materials for further studies.起始頁-結束頁：129-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學5篇名：臺灣兒童於1997至2007年智能進步狀況分析：弗林效應之探討並列篇名：Increased IQ for Taiwanese Children from 1997 to 2007: Flynn Effect Investigated作者：陳心怡(Hsin-Yi Chen);廖永<U+5803>(Yung-Kun Liao);陳榮華(Yung-Hua Chen);朱建軍(Jian-Jun Zhu)關鍵字：弗林效應;智力變化;魏氏兒童智力量表第三版;魏氏兒童智力量表第四版;Flynn effect;IQ change;WISC-III;WISC-IV期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在探討臺灣兒童於近10年間智能進步狀況。根據121位6至16歲兒童在魏氏兒童智力量表第三與第四版本的表現，經對抗平衡法研究設計後發現，全量表智商之組平均相差1.23分。然而，由於此二版本在全量表智商之組成上只有五個共同分測驗，故研究者進一步分析此組兒童在組成魏氏兒童智力量表第三版全量表智商十個分測驗於1997至2007年之可能進步情況。結果發現，當將測驗內容控制為一致之情況下，臺灣兒童全量表智商間隔10.5年共進步2.50分，平均1年進步0.24智商分數。此結果比弗林效應假設每年進步0.3分略低，但與近年北歐已開發國家智力進步有減緩趨勢之發現相符合。此外，臺灣兒童近10年來在視覺符號快速比對搜尋以及非語文流體推理能力進步相對最多，但10-16歲青少年對社會知識規範之理解幾乎無進步，且6-12歲兒童在一般常識廣度的表現更是不進反退，此一現象值得重視與討論。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the increase in IQ for Taiwanese children over the past 10 years. WISC-III and WISC-IV scores were collected following a counter-balanced design, based on a sample of 121 children aged 6 to 16 years old. The comparison between the WISC-IV and the WISC-III showed a mean difference of 1.23 FSIQ points. However, only five subtests were shared between WISC-III and WISC-IV full IQs. To partial out possible variations due to content differences, we estimated the increase in IQ based on the 10 core subtests of the WISC-III. Increased IQs over the intervening 10.5 years were 2.5 points, yielding an estimated growth of 0.24 IQ points per year. While America and other developing countries were still reporting an increased rate of 0.30 IQ points per year, increased IQ for Taiwanese children seemed slower than what the Flynn effect would have indicated. Current findings have matched recent reports from Scandinavian nations that the increase in IQ is slowing. Finally, Taiwanese children showed, comparatively, the largest gain on visual symbol search and nonverbal fluid reasoning abilities. However, Taiwanese children aged 10 to 16 showed no improvement in social and ethical reasoning, and those aged 6-12 showed a salient decline in the breadth of basic information. Possible hypotheses were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：167-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學6篇名：原漢族群、家庭背景與高中職入學考試基測成績、教育分流：以臺東縣為例並列篇名：Aboriginals and Hans, Family Background and Their Relationship with the Basic Competence Test, and Educational Tracking: A Study in Taitung作者：李佩嬛(Pei-Huan Lee);黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：家庭背景;原漢族群;教育分流;基測成績;family background;Aboriginals and Hans;educational tracking;Basic Competence Test score期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：臺灣地區原住民比率最高、社經背景最低落，且基測成績最差的臺東縣，原漢族群與家庭背景對高中職入學考試基測成績，以及是否升學與所升上的教育分流有何影響？非常值得探討，然而，研究者未見國內有關這方面的研究。本研究根據「臺東縣教育長期資料庫」所蒐集的2006年高中職入學考試基測成績與升學結果資料做分析。研究結果顯示：雖然整體升學率已接近100%，不同出身背景者幾乎都能升學而<U+6CA1>多大不同，可是漢人升上出路最佳的公立高中比率仍比原住民高出許多，原住民學生升上出路最差的私立高職比率仍較漢人高出許多。原住民在入學考試雖享有加分三分之一的優待，不過由於原始成績低於漢人許多，加分後的成績與所升上教育分流的出路仍比漢人差了不少；而原住民成績比漢人低許多，重要原因是家庭背景較差。英文摘要：Taitung, a county known for having the highest percentage of Aboriginal population and lowest SES (Socioeconomic status) of residents in Taiwan, is ranked the lowest in the Basic Competence Test. What effects do Aboriginal and Han ethnic groups and their respective family backgrounds have on their Basic Competence Test scores, their enrollment to upper secondary education, and educational tracking? According to our literature review, no study has yet addressed this question. The data of this study were obtained from the ”Taitung Educational Panel Survey.” By compiling the Basic Competence Test scores and enrollment information collected in 2006, the above question was examined. The main findings are as follows. Although the overall student enrollment of upper secondary education was approximately 100 percent regardless of student background, the enrollment rate of Han students in public senior high schools (which has been deemed the optimal educational tracking measure for future socioeconomic status attainment) was far higher than that of Aboriginal students. The enrollment rate of Aboriginal students in private vocational schools (deemed the least optimal educational tracking measure for future status attainment) was far higher than that of Han students. Despite the fact that Aboriginal students were granted an additional one-third on their original scores on the Basic Competence Test, Aboriginal student scores were still much lower than Han students; and so was the future status attainment following their educational tracking. It was found that their disadvantageous family background is the main factor explaining their lower academic performance.起始頁-結束頁：193-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：「國民小學教師學術樂觀量表」之發展與衡量並列篇名：Development of the Teacher Academic Optimism Inventory and Validation Study in Elementary Schools作者：張奕華(I-Hua Chang);許正妹(Cheng-Mei Hsu);顏弘欽(Hung-Chin Yen)關鍵字：國民小學;教師學術樂觀;elementary school;teacher academic optimism期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷S出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在發展適合用以衡量國民小學教師學術樂觀之測量工具。首先，經文獻探討後確立學術強調、效能感與信任關係為本研究之概念架構，據以發展測量題項，並透過探索性因素分析確立教師學術樂觀之因素結構。其次，以873位台灣地區公立國民小學教師為研究樣本，進行資料蒐集與分析。為進一步確認測量模式之適切性，本研究透過模型競爭之策略，比較多因素直交模型、多因素斜交模型與二階因素模型後，選定多因素斜交模型做為國民小學教師學術樂觀之驗證模型；並透過個別項目信度、組成信度、平均變異數抽取量、幅合效度、區別效度與複核效化等方法，檢證模型之信效度。最後，根據所發展之量表，針對教師之學術樂觀知覺程度進行衡量。本研究結果顯示，「國民小學教師學術樂觀量表」包含學術強調、信任學生與家長、信任同儕教師、信任領導者與效能感等五個潛在因素，共計18題，且具良好之信效度。此外，國民小學教師在學術樂觀各層面的現況良好，而不同性別、年齡及職務別之教師，在知覺程度上有所差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to develop an inventory for measuring the academic optimism of the teachers in elementary schools. Firstly, the establishment of academic emphasis, perceived efficacy and mutual trust after the literature review is the conceptual framework for this research, which can be the basic for developing the measurement items, and through the exploratory factor analysis, the factor structure of teacher academic optimism can be decided. And secondly, 873 teachers from public elementary schools in Taiwan are sampled for data collection and analysis. For the further validation of the appropriateness on measurement model, through comparing the strategy of competing models, after comparing the uncorrelated factors model, correlated factors model and hierarchical model, correlated factors model has been chosen as the measurement model for academic optimism in elementary schools. Then through the verifying methods of the individual item reliability, composite reliability, average variance extracted, convergent validity, discriminant validity and cross-validation, the reliability and validity of the model can be measured. Furthermore, according to the inventory that has been developed, teachers' perceptions on academic optimism can be measured. This result shows that the inventory of teacher academic optimism contains 5 latent factors (academic emphasis, trust on students and parents, trust on the peer teachers, trust on the leader, and teacher efficacy), and the 18 measurement items all together, which has the excellent reliability and validity. In addition, all dimensions of academic optimism had the highly score, and the characteristics of teachers was perceived significantly different from gender, age and position.起始頁-結束頁：261-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201104.01162篇名：內外注意係數異常作答診斷空間的建立與探證並列篇名：Establishing and Examining the Diagnostic Space of Two New Developed Person-Fit Indices: The W(superscript *) and the B(superscript *) Indices作者：黃財尉(Tsai-Wei Huang)關鍵字：內注意係數;外注意係數;異常作答組型;診斷空間;Aberrant Response Patterns;Beyond-Ability-Surprise Index B(superscript *);Diagnostic Space;Within-Ability-Concern Index W(superscript *)期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討內外注意係數的診斷空間關係，利用群集分析技術，以內注意係數(W(上標 *))與外注意係數(B(上標 *))的指標值作為區別受試群診斷空間的空間軸向，並以指標各自均差比(M/SD)作為異常作答歸群的依據，分為內顯、內偏、均等、外偏，與外顯等異常作答類型，最後則配合W(上標 *)與B(上標 *)第90、95與99的百分位數平均決斷值，作為國小數常識測驗實徵資料在指標診斷空間的參照依據。研究結論如下：(1)高能力群偏向於能力內該對卻錯的異常作答，易產生較多內偏型與內顯型的異常作答分配；而低能力群偏向該錯卻對的異常作答，易產生外偏型與外顯型的異常作答分配；至於中能力群則分布在內偏型、均等型與外偏型之間；(2)在與真實資料（高難度試題集）比對的結果顯示，高能力群資料組比較適合二個與四個群集數，低能力群的資料組適合三個群集數的分類，而中能力群資料組則皆適合這三種群集數；(3)結合指標決斷值互相配合解釋，可以進一步有效檢視不同分群類型的異常作答情形的嚴重程度。文末並提供異常作答類型的歸類與使用內外注意係數時的實務應用建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to establish and examine the diagnostic-space relationships of two new developed indices, the within-ability-concern index (W(superscript *)) and the beyond-ability-surprise index (B(superscript *)). The diagnostic space expanded by the W(superscript *) and B(superscript *) coordinate axes were established after two runs of cluster analyses. Also after the proportions of mean to standard deviation of W(superscript *) and B(superscript *) indices were calculated, respectively, a ratio of the B(superscript *) proportion to the W(superscript *) proportion were calculated again for setting the five aberrant response patterns (manifest W(superscript *), slight W(superscript *), equal-aberrance, slight B(superscript *), manifest B(superscript *)) on the ratio line from left to right. Finally, combining the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles of W(superscript *) and B(superscript *) cutoff scores as the referred points of aberrant response patterns were set for interpreting an empirical data set from the number sense test for elementary school students. Findings showed that (1) high ability students leaned to be classified as the aberrant response clusters of ”slight W(superscript *)” and ”manifest W(superscript *)”; low ability students tended to be clustered as the patterns of ”slight B(superscript *)” and ”manifest B(superscript *)”; as the medium ability students, a distribution of the aberrant response patterns of ”slight W(superscript *)”, ”equal-strength”, and ”slight B(superscript *)” were found; (2) in the empirical comparisons, high-ability-high-difficulty (Hh) students were suited for being clustered into 2 or 4 groups, 3 groups were adequate low-ability-high-difficulty students (Lh), but middle-ability-high-difficulty students (Mh) were suited for all these three groups; (3) it is effective to examine individuals' aberrant response clusters by interpreting the percentiles of W(superscript *) and B(superscript *) cutoff scores. Finally, many suggestions about the classification of aberrant response patterns and the use of the two indices were also provided in text.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201103.00013篇名：正交化無限制潛在交互效果模式之修正策略的評估並列篇名：The Evaluation of the Modified Strategies for Orthogonalizing Approach for Unconstrained Structural Equation Models作者：林冠群(Guan-Chyun Lin);溫忠麟(Zhong-Lin Wen);Herbert W. Marsh;林惠賢(Huey-Shyan Lin)關鍵字：正交化;無限制方式;潛在交互效果;雙重均心化;double mean centering;latent interaction;orthogonalizing;unconstrained approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：Little、Bovaird 和Widaman(2006)提出的處理潛在交互效果模式的乘積指標正交化策略(orthogonalizing strategy)，在三階動差(third-order moments)不為零時，會有結構不一致性問題，因此對常態假設不具穩健性(robustness)（林冠群、溫忠麟、Marsh、林惠賢，2008；Lin, Wen, Marsh, & Lin, 2010）。本文介紹了三種修正此問題的策略，並將它們與Lin等人(2010)的雙重均心化策略(double-mean-centering strategy)一同進行比較。結果顯示先針對潛在交互項進行正交化，然後再尋找適合潛在交互項的指標的修正方式（修正策略1），在四種分布條件下其偏差大都在5%左右或是更小，為三種修正策略中表現最佳的估計方式。然而，不論哪一種修正策略的表現，皆不如指標建立過程較為容易的雙重均心化策略。本文建議如果要估計潛在交互效果，最好不要採用正交化策略及其修正策略，而應採用雙重均心化策略。英文摘要：As the third-order moments is not equal to 0, the orthogonalizing strategy for unconstrained latent interaction models proposed by Little, Bovaird, & Widaman (2006) will produce the inconsistency problem of structure, leading to substantial bias of estimated interaction effect (Lin, Wen, Marsh, & Lin, 2010). This paper introduced three modified strategies to solve the problem, and compared them with the double-mean-centering strategy (Lin et al., 2010). The results showed that the best one of the three modified strategies is to orthogonalize the latent interaction term and then create proper indicators for it (modified strategy 1). This strategy is approximately 5% or even smaller bias under four different kinds of distribution conditions. However, this strategy is not as good as the double-mean-centering strategy in terms of less bias of estimated interaction effect. More importantly, the double-mean-centering strategy is much easier to be applied. As the result, the double-mean-centering strategy w as recommended.起始頁-結束頁：29-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201103.00294篇名：教師主觀幸福感模式建構與驗證之研究並列篇名：Confirmatory Study of Model of Teachers' Subjective Well Being作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh);林士郁(Shih-Yu Lin);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);曾筱婕(Hsiao-Chieh Tseng)關鍵字：主觀幸福感;教師;臺灣憂鬱症量表;subjective well being;Taiwan Depression Scale;teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在針對國內國小、國中，以及高中職教師進行二階主觀幸福感三因素模式之驗證。研究中依據全國各縣市學校數比率進行抽樣後，共得有效分析樣本數為984人，經採用兩階段流程進行模式驗證後，發現在測量部分，僅有在「生活目標」之Item7、Item9受年齡因素影響與「社會一致性」之Item33題意較模糊，而表現出較差的解釋力外，其餘測量指標皆具備不錯的構念解釋權重；接續，在執行完整的二階主觀幸福感驗證性因素分析時，整體模式具備相當不錯的適配度。本研究復以「臺灣憂鬱症量表」作為外在效標，進行效標關聯效度分析，發現心理、社會、情緒幸福感與憂鬱之潛在相關係數值，均呈現負向且達顯著水準，顯示本研究教師主觀幸福感模式是具備不錯的外在效標關聯效度。最後，綜合整理各項結論並提出建議，供未來實務工作者之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to confirm second-order three factor model of teacher's subjective well being and then evaluate their state of mental health based on model confirmation result. After sampling according to the ratio of the number of schools in each city around Taiwan, we obtained an efficient sample size 984. Through two-stage process of model confirmation, we found that except the factor loadings of item 7 and item 9 in ”purpose of life” and, of item 33 in ”social coherence” performed poorly due to the age factor and unclear content, the others approximately had appropriate factor loadings. Afterwards, the full second-order factor model also performed adequate goodness of fit. Besides, the study adopted the Taiwan Depression Scale as an external criterion for validity confirmation. The result showed the psychological, social, and emotional well beings all had significant negative relationship with depression. This indicated that there existed a good criterion-related validity in teachers' subjective well being model. Finally, some suggestions are proposed for future usage.起始頁-結束頁：55-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201103.00555篇名：陰柔特質男性態度量表之發展並列篇名：The Development of Attitude Scale toward the Feminine Male作者：黃珮茹(Pei-Ju Huang);林烘煜(Hung-Yu Lin)關鍵字：偏見;陰柔特質男性;態度;attitude;feminine male;prejudice期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究的目的在編製一份適合國中學生之對陰柔特質男性的態度量表，以提供未來教學與研究之應用。量表編製過程包括焦點訪談資料蒐集、量表題目編製、專家效度之評估、預試與信、效度之建立與探討。經過兩個以中學生為樣本（分別284與251人）之測試，本研究之因素分析及信、效度考驗結果顯示：(1)因素分析結果顯示本量表在所欲測量的建構上具有相當的穩定性與一致性；(2)量表具有良好的內部一致性信度；(3)區辨效度之結果大致符合預期，量表與性別角色態度量表、同性戀態度量表、「娘娘腔」語意差異量表及無意義感量表之相關均為顯著正相關，與個人效能量表及自尊量表之相關則無關。論文最後討論有關陰柔特質男性態度量表如何使用及應該注意事項。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to construct an attitude scale toward the feminine male for junior high school students. The development of the scale included a focus group interview study, the assessment of content validity from 4 experts of gender education, a pilot study with 284 junior high school students to develop the formal items, and finally, establishment of reliability and validity of the scale with another 251 junior high school students. The main results of the studies were: (1) Factor analysis showed that the scale had satisfactory construct validity and internal consistency; (2) The scale showed pretty good reliability; and (3) The results of validity were generally in line with expectations: the scale had significant positive correlation with ”Gender Role Attitude Scale”, ”Homosexuality Attitude Scale”, ””sissy” semantic differential scale”, and ”Meaningless Scale”, and the scale also had no significant correlation with ”The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale” and ”The Spheres of Control Scale”. When and how to use the attitude scale toward the feminine male were discussed and suggested.起始頁-結束頁：87-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201103.00876篇名：被笑恐懼相關特質的測量與信度及效度之評估並列篇名：Evaluating the Reliability and Validity of a Traditional Chinese Version of the PhoPhiKat-45作者：陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);詹雨臻(Yu-Chen Chan);Willibald Ruch;Rene Proyer關鍵字：怕被笑;喜笑人;喜被笑;無幽默感;嘲笑風格量表;gelotophobia;gelotophilia;katagelasticism;humorlessness;PhoPhiKat-TC Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在發展一份正體中文版「嘲笑風格量表」(PhoPhiKat-TC Scale)，包含怕被笑、喜被笑和喜笑人三個分量表。本量表採回譯(back-translation)方式發展，程序嚴謹。以非隨機分層立意抽樣，先以預試樣本253位大學生進行項目分析，接著另再以1,369位為正式樣本進行信度和效度分析。結果發現，三個分量表的Cronbach's α係數皆為.85、再測信度為.87~.92、三個一階因素具有良好的組合信度與變異數平均解釋量，顯示PhoPhiKat-TC具有良好的信度。本研究亦發現模式有合理適配的建構效度，再以幽默風格、攻擊行為、人格特質、依附風格和自尊再度考驗其建構效度，發現這些變項具有良好的區辨效度。總而言之，PhoPhiKat-TC具有良好的信度和效度，在台灣未曾有人編製過，有其獨創性、創新性、價值性和應用性。本量表不僅可提供跨文化的比較，亦可有助進一步暸解幽默感、無幽默感和嘲笑風格之間的關係，並可作為諮商或治療上的指標。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a traditional Chinese version (PhoPhiKat-TC Scale) of Ruch and Proyer's PhoPhiKat-45 scale for the assessment of gelotophobia, gelotophilia, and katagelasticism in Taiwan. The original English version of the PhoPhiKat-45 was first translated into Chinese, and this Chinese translation was then back-translated into English. Using non-random stratified sampling, the instrument was administered to first to fourth year Taiwanese undergraduate students. Results of an item analysis of a pilot study with 253 participants suggested that the items were satisfactory. The scale was then administered to a larger sample (N=1,369) and the results were used to assess reliability and construct validity. The reliability tests for the PhoPhiKat-TC subscales yielded impressive values. The Cronbach's coefficients were .85, .85 and .85, and the test-retest reliabilities were .92, .94, .87 respectively. The three factors showed good composite reliability and average variance extracted. Goodness-of-fit indices and confirmatory factor analysis provided evidence for the construct validity of the scale. A comparison of PhoPhiKat-TC results with measures of humor styles, aggressive behavior, personality, attachment styles, and self-esteem found further evidence for the discriminant validity of the instrument. The authors conclude that the Pho-PhiKat-TC is a valid and reliable instrument, which is original, innovative and has valuable potential applications. Its development could enable further cross-cultural comparisons between individualistic and collectivistic cultures. It has made possible a fruitful research exchange which is currently underway and which promises to contribute to a greater understanding of the role of humor, humorlessness, and laughter. Finally, the index of the PhoPhiKat-TC can be used to aid interpretation of results for counseling or therapy.起始頁-結束頁：119-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201103.011901篇名：電腦化課文摘要動態評量系統應用效益之探討並列篇名：The Effects of a Computerized-text Summarization Dynamic Assessment System作者：李淑華(Shu-Hau Lee);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung)關鍵字：課文摘要;電腦化動態評量;閱讀理解;介入反應性;階層線性模式;summarization;dynamic assessment;reading comprehension;Response to Intervention;hierarchical linear modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究發展國小國語文教學適用的電腦化課文摘要動態評量系統，以學生的進展斜率作為學習潛力指標，探討動態評量的應用效益。研究中依據國小國語文教學適用的中文摘要學習系統(Chinese Abstracting Learning System, CALS)進行微幅調整，以電腦化國語課文摘要的評定回饋作為實驗介入。採用線性階層模式(hierarchical linear model, HLM )之組別模式，檢驗動態評量實驗處理效益，與不同類別學生的閱讀理解與摘要成長斜率之差異。研究結果顯示電腦化課文摘要動態評量系統對一般學生呈現明顯的協助效益，學生學習進展斜率也可做為閱讀障礙學生篩選的參考指標。英文摘要：To provide effective text-summarization instruction, school teachers need clear scoring rubric to monitor students' performance. The main purpose of this study is to explore the effects of a computerized-text summarization dynamic assessment system (CSDAS). The scoring feedbacks of online text-summarizations are functioning as the instructional intervention. The slope of CSDAS obtained by hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) analysis is used as the indicator of Response to Intervention (RTI). The preliminary results suggest that CSDAS is helpful for most students. The slope of CSDAS is also a promising indicator for screening reading disability students.起始頁-結束頁：86-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會2篇名：鷹架類型與先備知識對高職電腦軟體應用課程之成效探討並列篇名：The Effect of Scaffolding and Prior Knowledge on Vocational High School Students' Performance in Technician Certificate Curriculum of Computer Software Application作者：陳袕(Shiou-Ling Chen);陳明溥(Ming-Puu Chen);韓宜娣(Yi-Ti Han)關鍵字：程序鷹架;後設認知鷹架;先備知識;乙級電腦軟體應用檢定;procedural scaffolding;metacognitive scaffolding;prior knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：3卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討鷹架類型與電腦先備知識對學習者在「乙級電腦軟體應用」檢定課程之學習成效與學習態度的影響。研究樣本為北縣某私立高職資料處理科的學生。研究變項包含鷹架類型、電腦先備知識，鷹架類型分為「程序鷹架」與「後設認知鷹架」，電腦先備知識分為「高電腦先備知識」與「低電腦先備知識」。研究結果發現：(1)後設認知鷹架組的學習成效較程序鷹架組佳；(2)高電腦先備知識學習者的學習成效優於低電腦先備知識學習組。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of type of scaffolding and computer prior knowledge on vocational high school students' performance in Technician Certificate Curriculum of Class B Skill Category of computer software application. Participants were 98 voluntary vocational high school students. Research variables included the type of scaffolding (procedural scaffolding vs. meta-cognitive scaffolding) and computer prior knowledge (high vs. low). The results showed that a) the metacognitive scaffolding facilitated learners' project performance, including the applications of Access, Excel and Word software; and b) high computer prior knowledge learners achieved better learning performance.起始頁-結束頁：101-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會01篇名：大學行政服務品質初探：領導行為、服務氣候及組織公民行為的效果並列篇名：Leading Behavior, Service Climate, and Organizational Citizenship Behavior as Quality Determinants of University Administrative Services作者：孫思源(Szu-Yuan Sun);潘豐泉(Feng-Chuan Pan);林重均(Chung-Chun Lin)關鍵字：服務品質;服務氣候;組織公民行為;領導行為;service quality; service climate; organizational citizenship behavior; leadership behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：過去研究顯示，服務氣候及組織公民行為是影響服務品質的重要因素。鑑於員工在服務品質塑造與維持之不可替代性，本研究以兩構面領導理論為基礎，探討領導行為對員工服務氣候、組織公民行為及學生所覺知之服務品質之間的關係。研究樣本以115 位員工及333 位學生為對偶研究樣本，研究結果顯示：(1) 較突出的體恤型領導與結構型領導對於服務氣候均具有顯著正向影響，但對組織公民行為的影響效果則不顯著；(2) 服務氣候對於組織公民行為有顯著正向影響效果；(3) 服務氣候及組織公民行為對於服務品質都有顯著正向影響效果；(4) 組織公民行為對服務氣候與服務品質的關係有中介影響。本研究亦討論本研究之研究限制，並建議未來研究之方向以及在管理實務上之意涵。英文摘要：The literature suggests that service climate and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) have substantial effects on quality of service. This study adopts conventional two-dimension leadership theory of the Ohio State University to examine the effect of varied leading behavior on the service climate, organizational citizenship behavior, and service quality. Data gathered for analyses are 115 administrative matching students who received administrative services in the beginning of a new semester. Major research findings include first, both consideration and initiation of structure of leading behavior positively influence the service climate, yet not on OCB. Second, the service climate significantly influences OCB. Third, the service climate and OCB positively influence service quality respectively. Fourth, OCB partially mediates the relationship between the service climate and the service quality. This report ends with suggestions for future research direction and managerial implication.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1104.012篇名：訓練與會計師事務所財務績效：考慮策略與市場區隔之影響並列篇名：Training and Audit Firms Financial Performance: Consideration of Strategy and Market Segment作者：陳燕錫(Yahn-Shir Chen);管國珍(Kuo-Tson Goan);陳筱平(Shaw-Ping Chen)關鍵字：專業訓練;組織策略;市場區隔;會計師事務所;professional training; organization strategy; market segmentation; audit firms期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討在組織策略與市場區隔下，會計師事務所專業訓練與組織層級財務績效之關聯性。資料來源為行政院金融監督管理委員會之《會計師事務所服務業調查報告》資料庫，期間自1992 年至2006 年。本文首先將會計師事務所依不同的組織策略分成穩定及擴張二種策略，其次依不同市場區隔，將事務所區分成全國型、區域型及地方型三種類型。實證結果顯示，在全體樣本下，專業訓練與財務績效間呈顯著正相關；若考慮組織策略及市場區隔的交互影響，大部分的結果亦呈顯著正相關，符合預期。英文摘要：This research explores the relationships between professional training and organizational financial performance under taking account of strategies taken by audit firms and market segments in the market. Empirical data are from “Survey Report of Audit Firms in Taiwan,” published by the Financial Supervisory Commission, Executive Yuan, ranging from year 1992 to 2006. Audit firms are classified into stability and expansion firms based on strategy type. According to the market segmentation, audit firms are also divided into national, regional, and local firms. The result shows that professional training is significantly positively associated with financial performance. Further details also indicate that most of the interacting relationships between organization strategies and market segments are significantly positively associated as expected.起始頁-結束頁：23-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1104.023篇名：生涯成熟度與訓練遷移動機之關係：目標導向之調節效果並列篇名：The Relationship between Career Maturity and Training Transfer Motive: The Moderating Effect of Goal Orientation作者：李怡禛(I-Chen Lee);陳雅柔(Ya-Jou Chen);湯淑貞(Shu-Chen Tang);廖茂宏(Mao-Hung Liao)關鍵字：生涯成熟度;目標導向;訓練遷移動機;career maturity; goal orientation; training transfer motive期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討生涯成熟度、目標導向與訓練遷移動機間之關係，問卷調查314 位參與企業訓練課程之在職員工。實證結果顯示「生涯認知」與「工作認識」均對訓練遷移動機有正向影響；學習導向與訓練遷移動機之關聯強度大於績效導向；學習導向調節工作認識與訓練遷移動機之關係，但績效導向則否。建議企業辦理教育訓練時，可考量與評估受訓員工之生涯成熟度與學習導向，有助於提升員工應用習得的知識和技能於工作任務中之意願。英文摘要：The present study investigates the main and joint influences of career maturity and goal orientation on the motivation of training transfer among employees in various industries. Questionnaire data was collected from 314 employees who have participate in the training program within the past three months. Results show that both career cognition and job recognition are positively associated with training transfer motive. In addition, the influence of learning goal orientation on the outcome is greater than that of performance goal orientation. Rather than performance goal orientation, we discover that learning goal orientation positively moderates the relationship between career cognition and training transfer motive. We suggest that enterprises should improve employees’ training transfer motive by evaluating the individual’s career maturity and learning goal orientation during the initial stages of the training program.起始頁-結束頁：49-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1104.034篇名：加盟者人格特質、加盟動機與加盟績效關係之研究：以台灣餐飲連鎖加盟業為例並列篇名：The Study on the Relationship of Franchisee's Personality, Motivation and Operational Performance for Franchising: In the Case on Franchise System for F&B Industry作者：岑淑筱(Shu-Hsiao Tsen);吳京叡(Ching-Jui Wu)關鍵字：加盟者人格特質;加盟動機;加盟績效;franchisee's personality; motivation; operational performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討餐飲連鎖加盟者人格特質、加盟動機與加盟績效之關係，並針對加盟店數占總店數半數以上之七類餐飲業者，取各類別加盟數最多之前三者為研究範圍，其中選取加盟時間達一年以上之加盟者進行問卷調查，回收375 份有效問卷。以SPSS12.0 進行集群分析後，將加盟者人格特質分為：目標導向型（目標導向／重實質報酬）、適應調整型（適應力強／彈性調整）、問題解決型（問題解決／堅持不懈）以及專業循規型（重視專業／循規蹈矩）；此外，透過單因子變異數分析與階層迴歸分析後發現，加盟者人格特質、加盟動機皆會影響加盟者的加盟績效表現，並且證實加盟動機對加盟者人格特質與經濟績效之關係具有干擾效果，亦即，不同人格特質加盟者也會因為決定加盟之動機而有不同的經濟績效。英文摘要：The main purpose of this research was to explore and discuss the relationships between personality of franchisees, motivation and their performance in the franchise system of Food and Beverage (F&B) Industry. The subjects of the research was targeted at the franchisees, and totally 375 valid questionnaires was collected, and for the purpose of the hypotheses, the statistic methods on cluster analysis and hierarchical- multiple regression were adopted and processed these data by SPSS12.0. The result of this study pointed that, there are four types of the franchisee’s personalities. First type is “target/rewarding focus,” who paid more attention on the profit curve for the business. Second one is “adaption/flexibility focus,” who owned fast response to the business difficulties; the third one is “total solution focus,” who kept consistent in their goals for their start-ups; and the final one is “professionalism oriented,” who focused on professional supports from headquarter. In addition, there are two major inding on the study: first, personality of franchisee, motivation will affect the operational performance. Second, it also improves that motivation is a mediator variable to the relationship between personality and economic of franchisee.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1104.045篇名：管理才能發展訓練方案成效評估：以公部門教育訓練機構為例並列篇名：Training Evaluation of Management Development Training Program: A Case Study of Public Sector Training Institution作者：黃佳純(Jie-Tsuen Huang);謝慧賢(Hui-Hsien Hsieh)關鍵字：訓練評估;Kirkpatrick四階層評估模式;效用分析;公部門教育訓練;管理發展;training evaluation;Kirkpatrick's four-level evaluation model;utility analysis;public sector training;management development期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著強調實際貢獻的課責要求及結果導向績效管理制度之興起，人力資源發展乃由過去的活動導向轉為成果導向，而訓練評估的焦點也應延伸至更高層次的評估，如訓練效用與投資報酬率。因此，本研究乃以一結合Kirkpatrick四階層評估模式與效用分析的訓練評估架構，透過個案研究方式針對公部門訓練專責機構所舉辦之管理才能發展訓練方案進行系統化的訓練成效衡量與評估。結果顯示，受訓者在反應、學習、行為、成果等四個評估層級中皆有良好的訓練成效，且經由效用分析得知此管理才能發展訓練方案能夠產生3,233,385（元）的淨經濟效益，整體訓練方案的投資報酬率為718%。最後，結論乃針對人力資源發展人員、組織管理者、公部門訓練機構等三方面與未來研究方向提出相關建議。英文摘要：Accompanying the rise of accountability demands and outcome-based performance management, Human Resource Development will move from activity-based in the past toward more results-based. In addition, the focus of training evaluation should extend to higher levels such as the utility and return on investment of training program. Therefore, for building a both activity-based and result-based model, this study proposes a training evaluation framework combining Kirkpatrick's four-level evaluation model and utility analysis and conducts a case study on a management development training program implemented by a public sector training institution. The results indicate that the trainees have satisfactory outcomes in the four evaluation levels of reaction, learning, behavior, and results. Meanwhile, through utility analysis, the net benefits of the management development training program is NT$ 3,233,385, and the program's return on investment is 718%. In conclusion, suggestions towards human resource development professionals, organization managers, public sector training institutions, and future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1103.016篇名：台灣中部地區勞資爭議事件研究：以組織衝突管理論論之並列篇名：A Study of Labor Disputes in Central Taiwan: A Perspective of Conflict Management Theory in Organization作者：廖述嘉(Shu-Chia Liao);謝曉琪(Hsiao-Chi Hsieh)關鍵字：勞資爭議;衝突管理;內容分析;labor disputes;conflict management;content analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在勞工意識抬頭以及資訊科技的發展之下，資方與勞工之間如何建立和諧的勞資關係已成為企業、政府及社會所關注的課題，本研究主要為探討勞資爭議申請者之背景特性，以及組織內部衝突管理機制向外進行勞資爭議協調的動機及過程、結果處理之因果關係。因此本研究採用事後回溯研究方法，以100件台中市勞資爭議案件的勞資爭議協調申請書及協調記錄兩項資料進行量化及質性的內容分析，進一步探究至組織衝突管理對於勞資爭議影響之根本原因。研究結果如下：(1)勞資爭議協調申訴者較容易發生在服務業或是公司服務年資未滿一年的員工族群。(2)當勞資雙方為目標衝突時，較易達成協調成立；情感及認知衝突使協調結果較不易達成。(3)經由勞資爭議協調的成立案件數比例雖高，但成立金額比例低。英文摘要：With growing awareness of labor rights in Taiwan and the rapid development of information technology in recent years, how to establish harmonious labor relations has become a matter of concern for business, government and society. This study primarily attempts to investigate the background of the applicants in labor-management disputes, the motives and procedures for applying internal conflict management in an organization to the coordination of labor disputes as well as the cause and effect relationship between the approach used and the results obtained. Thus, a retrospective research method was adopted for this study to conduct quantitative and qualitative content analysis of 100 labor-management dispute cases in Taichung City based on two kinds of data-application forms for coordination of labor disputes and transcripts of coordination proceedings-and identify from an organizational conflict management perspective the basic factors causing labor disputes. The study findings include: (1) Employees working less than a year in a service industry or corporation were more likely to generate labor-management disputes; (2) labor conflicts over objectives were most readily settled, while conflicts involving emotions or perceptions were relatively intractable; and (3) although the percentage of settled cases was comparatively high, the settlement sums were proportionally small.起始頁-結束頁：27-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1103.027篇名：「還有明天？」工作不安全感對員工的差異性影響並列篇名：Will You Still Have the Job Tomorrow? The Differential Effects of Job Insecurity on Employees作者：陳佳雯(Jia-Wun Chen);陸洛(Luo Lu)關鍵字：工作不安全感;組織承諾;工作滿意;個人特性;家庭特性;job insecurity;organizational commitment;job satisfaction;individual characteristics;family characteristics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討工作不安全感對員工的差異性影響，企圖了解工作不安全感與其結果反應（工作滿意與組織承諾），是否因為個人（性別及年齡）及家庭（養育子女及配偶全職工作）特性的不同而存在著差異。即個人與家庭特性對於工作不安全感與個人工作態度之關聯的調節作用。我們利用「台灣社會變遷基本調查」計畫所得之資料，選取1,122位全職工作者作為分析對象。主要研究結果為：1.個人特性：性別與年齡皆會調節工作不安全感與工作滿意的關係。即男性的工作不安全感與工作滿意的負向關係會較女性來得強；年長者的工作不安全感與工作滿意的負向關係會較年輕者來得強。2.家庭特性：配偶工作狀態會調節工作不安全感與工作滿意關係。即工作不安全感對於配偶無全職工作者之工作滿意的負向影響會大於配偶有全職工作者。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to examine the differential effects of job insecurity on employees, namely the moderating effects of individual characteristics (gender and age) and family characteristics (family dependents and working spouse) on relationships between job insecurity and work attitudes (job satisfaction and organizational commitment).Our analyses were based on data from 2005 Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS). We used a nationwide representative sample of 1,122 individuals with full-time jobs. Main findings are as below:1. Individual characteristics: Gender and age moderated the relationship between job insecurity and job satisfaction. The negative relationship between job insecurity and job satisfaction was stronger among older workers than younger workers, and among men than women.2. Family characteristics: Working spouses moderated the relationship between job insecurity and job satisfaction. Job insecurity negatively impacted more on job satisfaction of those with nonworking spouses.起始頁-結束頁：49-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1103.038篇名：The Effects of Work-Life Bundles on Organizational Turnover and Productivity並列篇名：工作與生活平衡實務對組織離職率與生產力之影響作者：劉念琪(Nien-Chi Liu);王志袁(Chih-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：工作與生活平衡實務;員工離職率;企業生產力;work-life practices;employee turnover;organizational productivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：當工作與生活平衡成為一個職場上的新興議題時，本研究深入探討其內涵以及對於企業離職率與生產力之影響。結合問卷調查法及次級資料庫，我們一共蒐集120家台灣企業樣本，並結合集群分析與階層迴歸分析後發現，企業有完整而廣泛的工作與生活平衡群組，會為企業帶來更高的生產力與較低的離職率。本研究提供了實質證據支持工作與生活平衡實務不僅能協助員工有效管理工作與非工作間的角色需求，也能帶給對企業成長正向的影響。英文摘要：This study aimed to integrate the emerging concept of ”work-life” practices and examine the effects of work-life bundles on organizational turnover and productivity. Using survey and secondary data sources, this study analyzed 120 Taiwanese firms using cluster and regression analysis to test hypotheses. Our findings indicate that firms with a comprehensive work-life bundle have better organizational productivity and lower employee turnover compared to other firms. This study provides empirical evidences that work-life practices are beneficial to multiple organizational performance indicators. In addition, we provide valuable insights by demonstrating that a comprehensive set of work-life bundle is more effective in helping employees face multiple and complex work and non-work demands.起始頁-結束頁：75-95資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1103.049篇名：本卷期中文目次期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：0-0資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1102.0110篇名：主管心情感染與員工創新行?的關係：敬業貢獻與工作倦怠的中介角色並列篇名：The Relationships between Supervisor's Mood Contagion and Employee's Innovative Behavior: The Mediating Roles of Work Engagement and Burnout作者：張火燦(Huo-Tsan Chang);劉嘉雯(Jia-Wen Liou);許宏明(Hung-Ming Hsu);繆敏志(Min-Chih Miao);童志隆(Chih-Lung Tung)關鍵字：心情感染;敬業貢獻;工作倦怠;創新行為;mood contagion;work engagement;burnout;innovative behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要是在探討廣告公司創意部門的主管其正向及負向心情感染對廣告設計人員之創新行<U+7232>的影響路徑，並探討敬業貢獻與工作倦怠在上述路徑所扮演的中介角色。本研究採用配對樣本的方式進行問卷調查，以結構方程模式進行路徑分析。本研究結果顯示：(1)主管正向心情表現會經由員工正向心情感受正向影響員工敬業貢獻；(2)員工正向心情感受會經由敬業貢獻正向影響創新行<U+7232>；(3)主管負向心情表現會經由員工負向心情感受正向影響工作倦怠，但不會對創新行<U+7232>產生顯著之影響。本研究提出研究結論與管理意涵之討論。英文摘要：This study explored the relationships between supervisors' positive and negative mood contagion and employees' innovative behavior. We focused on the mediating effect of work engagement and burnout. Subjects in this study were 123 dyads of supervisors and employees from the creative department of advertising companies. Structural Equation Modeling was employed to test the hypotheses. Findings showed that: (1) employees' positive mood experience mediated the positive relationship between supervisors' positive mood expression and employees' work engagement. (2) Work engagement mediated the positive relationship between employee's positive mood experience and innovative behavior. (3) Employees' negative mood experience mediated the positive relationship between supervisors' negative mood expression and employees' burnout, but this influence subsequently did not affect employees' innovative behavior. The theoretical and practical implications are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1102.0211篇名：團隊回復力形成機制分析：團隊正面情感的中介角色並列篇名：Exploring the Formation of Team Resilience: The Mediation Role of Positive Team Affectivity作者：林家五(Chia-Wu Lin);張秀如(Hsiu-Ju Chang);張書豪(Shu-Hao Chang);施建彬(Jian-Bin Shih);胡宛仙(Wan-Hsien Hu)關鍵字：領導者回復力;正面團隊情感;團隊回復力;情緒渲染;leader resilience;positive team affectivity;team resilience;emotion contagion期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：如何有效地管理團隊是現今管理者關切的焦點之一。本研究由領導者回復力的觀點出發，調查了32個團隊，158位團隊成員，以驗證領導者回復力對團隊回復力的影響，以及在情緒渲染機制下，團隊正面情感的中介角色。研究結果發現，領導者回復力會顯著正向影響團隊正面情感，而正向團隊情感確實在領導者回復力與團隊回復力之間，扮演中介的角色。研究的實務意涵，則建議回復力應該做<U+7232>篩選團隊領導者的重要標準，且在領導力的訓練課程中，亦應該將回復力的提升納入。英文摘要：How to manage team effectively becomes the main concern for most of managers. This research investigates 158 team members of 32 teams to verify the influence of leader resilience on team resilience, and the mediation role of positive team affectivity under the emotion contagion mechanism. The results show that leader resilience significantly impacted the positive team affectivity, and it plays the mediation role in the relation between leader resilience and team resilience. The implication of our results suggests that resilience is the important selection criterion for team leaders, as to the leadership training program, resilience enhancing should also be included.起始頁-結束頁：25-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1102.0312篇名：組織公平、工作安全感與職場友誼關係之研究－正職勞工與派遣勞工之探討並列篇名：A Study of Regular Employees and Dispatch Workers among Organizational Justice, Job Security and Workplace Friendship作者：顏昌華(Chang-Hua Yen);林英顏(Yin-Yen Lin);黃文平(Wen-Ping Huang);鄧秀玉(Hsiu-Yu Teng)關鍵字：派遣勞工;組織公平;工作安全感;職場友誼;dispatch worker;organizational justice;job security;workplace friendship期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著經濟快速發展，派遣勞動之勞務提供型態雖已成<U+7232>時勢所趨，但兩種不同身分勞工並存於要派企業，不僅衝擊企業的管理思維，也牽動勞工對職場氛圍的感受。本研究目的在瞭解正職勞工與派遣勞工對組織公平與工作安全感之認知，及其與職場友誼之關係。本研究採郵寄問卷法，選定20家要派企業之勞工<U+7232>研究對象，透過人力資源部門主管的協助，獲得有效問卷310份，其中正職勞工151份，派遣勞工159份。本研究結果顯示，正職勞工的工作安全感高於派遣勞工，而組織公平三個構面中僅正職勞工之互動公平與職場友誼呈顯著正相關，且正職勞工之關係強度大於派遣勞工；在工作安全感方面，不論正職勞工或派遣勞工，工作安全感與職場友誼皆呈顯著正相關，且派遣勞工之關係強度大於正職勞工。根據本研究結果，對要派企業及相關主管機關提出管理實務建議，並提供後續研究之參考。英文摘要：Along with economic development, dispatch worker has become a contemporary trend. However, the existence of both regular and dispatch workers in the enterprise not only affects the enterprise's management philosophy, but also workers' perception of the workplace atmosphere. The purpose of this study is to understand relationship among regular employees and dispatch workers' perception of organizational justice, job security and workplace friendship. Questionnaires were mailed out to regular and dispatch workers of the 20 enterprises. Through the assistance of the human resource manager at the enterprise, 310 valid surveys were returned, including 151 regular employees and 159 dispatch workers. Results of this study indicate that regular employees are rated significantly higher than dispatch workers in job security. In the three dimensions of organizational justice, only regular employees' interactional justice and workplace friendship demonstrated a significant and positive relationship. In addition, regular employees are higher than dispatch workers in the relationship. In job security, regardless of regular employees or dispatch workers, their job security was significantly positive related to workplace friendship. Besides, dispatch workers are higher than regular employees in the relationship. According to the results of this study, managerial implications are proposed and references for future studies are provided.起始頁-結束頁：47-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1102.0413篇名：師徒功能對工作倦怠的影響－組織社會化程度的中介作用並列篇名：The Mediating Influence of Organizational Socialization in the Relationship between Mentoring Functions and Burnout作者：張瑞元(Ruei-Yuan Chang);陳心懿(Angela Shin-Yih Chen);林金賢(Chin-Shien Lin);施佩玲(Pei-Ling Shih)關鍵字：師徒功能;組織社會化程度;工作倦怠;mentoring functions;organizational socialization;burnout期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：士大夫觀念造就了台灣補教業的蓬勃發展，而在競爭日益激烈的補教產業中，對於強調教學經驗與專業累積的產業特性來說，教師成<U+7232>補習班賴以生存及維持競爭優勢的關鍵因子。本文透過實務現象的觀察與訪談過程中得知，目前補習班普遍利用師徒功能制度來減緩新進教師工作倦怠的產生，<U+7232>瞭解答補習班業者對師徒功能有效性的疑惑，本文希望藉由相關理論探討提出一個解釋模型，透過實際資料的驗證，進而對實務界提供解答。本研究認<U+7232>，組織社會化的程度越高將會減緩工作倦怠感，由於師徒功能制對於教師的組織社會化將有正向的影響，因此師徒功能可以透過組織社會化來減緩工作倦怠。換句話說，本研究主要在探討師徒功能與工作倦怠的關連性，並以組織社會化程度<U+7232>中介變數，探討組織社會化程度在師徒功能與工作倦怠之間的中介效果。本研究以問卷方式蒐集資料，藉由219位補教業教師<U+7232>樣本，採用迴歸方程式進行分析。研究結果發現組織社會化程度<U+7232>師徒功能對工作倦怠的完全中介變數，亦即師徒功能並不能直接減緩工作倦怠，但卻可以透過組織社會化來減緩工作倦怠。最後，本研究依據實證結果提出實務與未來深入研究之建議。英文摘要：The over-emphasis of academic achievement in education has causing the flourish development of the cram school industry in Taiwan. The quality of teachers has been recognized as one of the crucial factors to be competitive in this industry. That is to say, it is an important issue for the cram school industry to maintain a low turnover rate of their teachers. Human resources literatures have suggested that turnover is associated with burnout and mentoring system can increase one’s perception of organizational socialization, indicating mentoring can be a useful tool to retain new teachers. Hence, the main objective of this study is to investigate whether the mentoring mechanism can reduce burnout, and consequently prevent the turnover. This study investigated the mediating effect of organizational socialization on the relationship between mentoring functions and burnout. Data were obtained from 219 cram school teachers and hierarchical regression was applied to data analysis. The results showed that organizational socialization fully mediated the relationship between mentoring functions and burnout. Implications for future research and practices were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：71-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1102.0514篇名：國際觀光旅館客房部門員工壓力源、組織認同與績效表現之相關研究：以調適行為為干擾變項並列篇名：Study of Stressors, Organizational Identification and Job Performance of Room Division Department Employees in the International Tourist Hotels: Coping Behavior as a Moderator作者：許順旺(Shun-Wang Hsu);林顯邦(Hsien-Pang Lin);張姮燕(Heidi-H. Chang)關鍵字：客房部門;壓力源;組織認同;績效表現;調適行為;room division department;stressor;organizational identification;job performance;coping behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以台灣地區國際觀光旅館客房部門（即客務部與房務部）員工<U+7232>研究對象，探討客房部門員工壓力源、組織認同與績效表現之關係，並探討調適行<U+7232>是否會對壓力源與組織認同的關係產生干擾作用。研究採便利抽樣方式進行問卷調查，受測對象<U+7232>客務部門及房務部門之正式員工，問卷共計發放700份，回收有效問卷593份。研究結果顯示，壓力源（人際關係壓力、角色壓力與工作壓力）與組織認同、績效表現均存在顯著負相關；組織認同與績效表現存在顯著正相關；組織認同對壓力源（人際關係壓力、角色壓力與工作壓力）與績效表現的關係皆會產生中介的效果；調適行<U+7232>對人際關係壓力與組織認同的關係具有干擾的效果；調適行<U+7232>對工作壓力與組織認同的關係具有反向干擾的效果。英文摘要：This research targets at employees in the Room Division Department (guest service division and housekeeping division) of International Toursit Hotels in Taiwan, and aims to explore the relationship among Room Department employees' stressors, organizational identification and job performance. It also examines the moderator effect of coping behavior on the relationship between stressors and organizational identification. Data was collected through the administration of a survey questionnaire to a convenience sample of full time employees in guest service division and housekeeping deivion. Seven hundred questionnaires were sent while 593 valid data was received. The results indicated (1) a negative correlation between stressors (interpersonal stress, role stress, and job stress) and organizational identification and job performance; (2) a positive correlation between organizational identification and job performance; (3) a mediator effect of organizational identification on the relationship between stressor (interpersonal stress, role stress, and job stress) and performance; (4) a moderation effect of coping behavior on the relationship between interpersonal stress and organizational identification; (5) a negative moderation effect of coping behavior on the relationship between job stress and organizational identification.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1101.0115篇名：大專畢業生至企業職場實習方案對正職員工工作不安全感與工作反應關係之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Relationship among Graduates' Practical Training Program, Permanent Employee Job Insecurity and Work Reaction作者：李怡禛(I-Chen Lee);簡秀良(Siou-Liang Jian)關鍵字：大專畢業生至企業職場實習方案;工作不安全感;組織承諾;工作壓力;graduates' practical training program;job insecurity;organizational commitment;job stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討企業正職員工對政府推出之「大專畢業生至企業職場實習方案」之方案認同程度，是否造成員工對工作產生預期不安全感、甚至對員工組織承諾與工作壓力造成預期影響。研究對象以國內11家民營銀行之正職員工<U+7232>樣本進行問卷調查，總計回收有效問卷315份。結果發現正職員工對「大專畢業生至企業職場實習方案」認同程度與組織承諾有正向關係，但與工作不安全感及工作壓力有負向關係；工作不安全感則與組織承諾有負向關係、但與工作壓力呈正向關係。本研究建議經營者應謹慎思考此方案對企業正職員工心理層面之影響，避免因追求短期降低勞務成本，導致正職員工對未來工作產生不安，進而減少對組織付出努力，對企業競爭力的長期累積造成負面效應。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the relationship among atypical employment alternatives, job insecurity, organizational commitment and job stress. A total of 315 valid questionnaires from 11 private banks were received. The results show that atypical employment alternatives has positive relationship with organizational commitment but negative with job insecurity and job stress; whereas the job insecurity has negative relationship with organizational commitment but positive with job stress. We suggest that supervisors should pay much attention to the permanent employees' psychological impact from atypical employment alternatives, avoid negative effects to the long term accumulation of the corporate competitiveness.起始頁-結束頁：27-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1101.0216篇名：壽險業人員之社會資本與人力資本關聯性研究：以虛擬社群知識分享為中介變項並列篇名：A Study of Insurance Industry Employees' Relationships between Social Capital and Human Capital: Knowledge Sharing of Virtual Community as a Mediator作者：溫玲玉(Ling-Yu Melody Wen);莊仁鋒(Ren-Feng Zhuang)關鍵字：社會資本;人力資本;虛擬社群;知識分享;虛擬社群知識分享;social capital;human capital;virtual community;knowledge sharing;knowledge sharing of virtual community期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討社會資本、人力資本與虛擬社群知識分享之關聯性。本研究針對壽險業人員，共發放300份問卷，有效樣本共198份，有效回收率66%。以描述性統計、Pearson積差相關、強迫進入變數法多元迴歸與階層多元迴歸等方法進行資料分析與假設考驗，本研究結論如下：(1)業務專員、基層主管的壽險業人員，對「網絡關係」的發展較重視；(2)基層主管對於「工作經驗」的重視程度，比中高階主管以上的壽險業人員要來得重視；(3)小型資本額、完全台資的壽險公司，在「網絡結構」的發展上較活躍；(4)愈重視社會資本之運用，對人力資本的影響愈有幫助；(5)虛擬社群知識分享之「正式化」與「信任」經由社會資本對人力資本所產生的影響性程度不高。最後，本研究對壽險產業與後續研究者提出具體建議，以供之參考依據。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the employees' relationships among social capital, human capital, and knowledge sharing of virtual community mediating effect. The research subjects were the employees of insurance industry, and research method was survey questionnaire. There were 300 administered questionnaires, 273 returns, 198 valid returns, with a 66% valid return rate. The data were collected and analyzed using descriptive statistics analysis, Pearson correlation, multiple stepwise regressions and hierarchical moderator regression.According to the findings, the conclusions were summarized as follows: (1) Salespeople, entry level managers of insurance industry perceived the network relationship's development more important than the others did; (2) Entry level managers perceived ”work experience” more important than middle/high level managers did; (3) Small size capital, Taiwanese of insurance companies, were more active in the development of ”network structure;” (4) The more increased the applications of ”social capital,” the more influenced ”human capital;” (5) The ”formal” and ”trust” of knowledge sharing of virtual community” through ”social capital” on the extent of the impact of ”human capital” was not high. Finally, the recommendations based on the findings and conclusions of the study were made for insurance industry and the further study.起始頁-結束頁：49-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1101.0317篇名：組織承諾、知識分享與組織公民行為關聯性之研究：台灣半導體產業為例並列篇名：The Relationships among Organizational Commitment, Knowledge Sharing, and Organizational Citizenship Behavior: A Case of Taiwan Semiconductor Industry作者：吳啟絹(Chi-Chuan Wu);廖述賢(Shu-Hsien Liao);胡大謙(Da-Chian Hu);羅文彬(Wen-Pin Lo)關鍵字：組織承諾;知識分享;組織公民行為;結構化方程式模型;半導體產業;organizational commitment;knowledge sharing;organizational citizenship behavior;structural equation modeling;semiconductor industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：11卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以半導體相關產業員工的角度探討組織承諾（價值承諾、努力承諾、留職承諾）、知識分享（分享個人內在知識、分享學習機會、鼓勵他人學習）與組織公民行<U+7232>（認同組織、利他行<U+7232>、盡職行<U+7232>、人際和諧、保護組織資源）的關係。經由研究假設的推論，建立研究架構，透過實際調查國內半導體上游、中游與下游樣本，共取得428份有效問卷。經過結構化方程式模型驗證後結果顯示，組織承諾透過知識分享之中介對組織公民行<U+7232>產生影響。本研究並發現半導體產業上游、中游及下游對知識分享的態度也有顯著差異。英文摘要：This study tries to explore organizational commitment, knowledge sharing, and organizational citizenship behavior among employees in the Taiwan semiconductor industry. By literature review, this study proposes the research framework and some hypothesis. Empirically we collect the 428 effective subjects from upper, middle, lower teirs in Taiwan semiconductor industry. By structural equation modeling (SEM), this study finds that the knowledge sharing has a full mediation effect on relationship of employee's trust and organizational citizenship behavior. However, knowledge sharing is notable difference on Taiwan semiconductor industry.起始頁-結束頁：77-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1101.0401篇名：主編的話作者：姜蘭虹期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：人口老化與全民健保支出：死亡距離取向的分析作者：李大正(Tai-Cheng Lee);楊靜利(Ching-Li Yang);王德睦(Te-Mu Wang)關鍵字：人口老化;死亡距離;醫療費用;population aging;time to death;health care expenditures期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011中文摘要：一般認為醫療費用隨著年齡增加而增加，因此人口老化將加重醫療費用上漲壓力。然而，部分研究指出老年人的平均醫療費用比年輕人高的關鍵不只是年齡較大，還有老年人較年輕人更接近死亡，因此主張討論人口老化與醫療費用的關聯時，必須納入「死亡距離」的考量。本文從死亡距離角度分析臺灣不同年齡人口之死亡距離別醫療費用的分佈，以檢視年齡、死亡距離與醫療費用三者的關聯。最後結合人口推計結果，比較年齡與死亡距離兩種取向下未來全民健保整體支出的趨勢。研究結果顯示，個人醫療費用的高峰集中於死亡前一段時間，而死亡年齡越高，死亡距離別平均醫療費用越低，隱含壽命延長一方面因增加高齡人數而對整體醫療費用帶來壓力，另一方面也對整體費用的上漲有遞延作用。此外，從歷年資料來看，平均每人醫療支出開始快速增加的時間與死亡時間的距離逐漸擴大，顯示罹患疾病的時間拉長，又加大醫療支出。綜合而言，總體醫療費用將隨著人口老化而逐漸成長，但是費用推計的結果顯示年齡模型的估計值明顯較死亡距離模型估計值來得高，顯然單從年齡取向探討人口老化與醫療費用的關聯，容易高估人口老化對醫療費用的影響。英文摘要：The effects of ageing on health care spending are uncertain. Some argue that health care expenditures increase substantially with age primarily because mortality rates increase with age, and expenditures increase with closeness to death. The main reason why healthcare costs increase with age is that older people are closer to death than younger people. The pattern of health expenditure by age is considerably influenced by the concentration of expenditure in the final years of life. The greater expenditure on the elderly is a consequence of the heavy weight of so-called death costs. In addition, increases in longevity may be expected to lead to postponement of these costs of the final years of life, and declines in age-specific mortality may be expected to lead to declines in age-specific costs because declining mortality reduces the proportion of those near death. If we overlook this aspect, we envisage a misleading scenario of health expenditure increase.Incorporating the concept of time to death, this paper reexamines the relationship of population aging and healthcare expenditure in Taiwan. Results indicate that different death age groups have similar average expenditures patterns against time to death, but expenditures are higher for younger people than for older people. These imply that increases in longevity delay the high costs associated with the final stage of life. Projections failing to take time to death into account might result in upward biased simulations, while total expenditures will still be raised by the absolute number of elderly people.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.53篇名：規律折扣數列與高齡死亡率並列篇名：Using Regular Discount Sequence to Model Elderly Mortality作者：王信忠(Hsin-Chung Wang);余清祥(Jack C. Yue)關鍵字：吃角子老虎問題;布朗運動;長壽風險;蒙地卡羅模擬;區塊拔靴法;Bandit Problem;Brownian Motion;Longevity Risk;Monte Carlo Simulation;Block Bootstrap期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011中文摘要：自二十世紀中葉以來，人類平均壽命屢創歷史紀錄，高齡（65歲以上）人口在許多國家已經或即將超過全國人口的五分之一，老年族群成為二十一世紀的熱門研究議題。然而，由於高齡人口資料在1990年代以後才有較完整紀錄，對於何種高齡死亡率模型為較佳，至今仍無定論。本文引入吃角子老虎問題（Bandit Problem）的規律折扣數列（Regular Discount Sequence），用來描述老年人的平均餘命變化，以及預測未來的高齡死亡率。許多常用的死亡率模型，例如：Gompertz法則、均勻死亡假設（Uniform Distribution of Death）、定死力假設（Constant Force）、以及雙曲線假設（Hyperbolic）等，都滿足規律折扣數列的條件。除了理論推導之外，我們採用美國加州大學柏克萊分校（University of California, Berkeley）的Human Mortality Database（HMD）資料庫，包括臺灣、日本及美國的死亡率資料，驗證規律折扣數列，三個國家的生存數與平均餘命均大致符合折扣數列的假設。另外，我們也使用布朗運動（Brownian Motion）隨機微分方程式，建立折扣數列模型，用來預測未來的高齡人口死亡率，電腦模擬顯示無論是數列比值或是死亡率預測，折扣數列模型都有不錯的結果，亦即本文提出的模型可用於預測高齡死亡率。英文摘要：Life expectancies of the human male and female have been increasing significantly since the turn of the 20th century, and the trend is expected to continue. The study of elderly mortality has thus become a favorite research topic. However, because there were not enough elderly data before 1990, there is still no conclusion about which mortality model is appropriate for describing elderly mortality. In this study, we modify the regular discount sequence in the Bandit Problem and use it to describe elderly mortality. We found that many frequently used mortality models, such as the Gompertz Law, and famous mortality assumptions (Uniform Distribution of Death, Constant Force, and Hyperbolic assumption) all satisfy the requirement of a regular discount sequence.We also use empirical data from the HMD (Human Mortality Database from University of California, Berkeley), including data from Japan, the US, and Taiwan, to evaluate the proposed approach. The discount sequences of life expectancy and surviving number ratio do satisfy the regularity condition. In addition, we use the Brownian Motion Stochastic Differential Equation to model the discount sequence. Using this model, we predict the future mortality rates and life expectancy. The simulation study shows some promising results.起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.64篇名：Sex-Differentials in Childhood Mortality in Punjab and Haryana-Are They Reality?並列篇名：印度旁遮普省與哈里亞納省孩童死亡率之性別差距作者：薩布拉塔•拉依禮(Subrata Lahiri);艾密夏•凱薩(Avishek Hazra);艾比須•辛特(Abhishek Singh)關鍵字：性別差距;孩童死亡率;存活曲線;卜瓦松迴歸;sex differential;child mortality;survival curve;Poisson regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011中文摘要：在印度，過盛的女性孩童死亡率一直是個無法紓解的特有現象，尤其是在北印度的旁遮普省與哈里亞納省。本文欲運用三份1992－2006期間之印度國家家庭衛生調查（National Family Health Survey, NFHS）統計資料，全面性的探討孩童死亡率性別差距之基本真相。更詳細的說，本文欲探討以下三個問題：（一）旁遮普省與哈里亞納省的孩童死亡率之性別差距在過去二十年間是否有減少？（二）糧食、預防與治療照護之分配不均，是否能解釋既有的孩童死亡率之性別差距？（三）有哪些因素能夠解釋孩童死亡率之性別差距？本文使用卜瓦松迴歸（Poisson Regression）研究孩童死亡率性別差距之決定因素。考克斯迴歸（Cox Regression）研究結果所呈現的存活曲線，顯示兩個重要的發現：初生女嬰的存活率較男嬰高；而在嬰兒後期與孩童時期則有相反現象。英文摘要：Excess female mortality during childhood is a distinct and unrelieved phenomenon in India, particularly in the two northern Indian states- Punjab and Haryana. This paper investigates the basic facts of sex differentials in child mortality in a very comprehensive manner using the three rounds of NFHS data sets from 1992 to 2006. More specifically, this paper examines the following three basic questions: (1) Have the sex differentials in child mortality in Punjab and Haryana narrowed down during the past two decades? (2) Does discrimination in food as well as preventive and curative care explain the existing sex differentials in child mortality? And (3) What are factors that explain the sex differentials in child mortality? The determinants of childhood mortality have been studied through Poisson regression. The survival curves resulted from Cox regression reveal two important findings: survival chances for females during neonatal period is higher, while an opposite phenomenon appears in the post-neonatal and childhood ages.起始頁-結束頁：71-98資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.75篇名：失蹤女性的成因與後果作者：林明仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：99-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.86篇名：逾百年臺灣縣市人口興衰之轉折：1897－2010並列篇名：An Observation of Taiwan's Population Distribution at the County Level from 1897-2010作者：徐茂炫(Mau-Shan Shi);陳建亨(Chien-Heng Chen);黃彥豪(Yen-Hao Huang)關鍵字：人口史;人口分布;population density;population distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文擬利用百年臺灣廿三縣市人口統計資料，嘗試對臺灣地區的人口變遷之長期趨勢進行研究，以期有助於當前人口相關研究之開展。經本研究處理之人口資料橫跨日治時期與國府時期，呈現了臺灣縣市人口興衰之轉折，也可為相關的研究議題提供基礎資訊。本文以縣、市層級之人口數排名資料指出，歷來擁有人口數最多之縣市逐年由南而中、由中而北的漸進過程。藉由此等臺灣各地長期人口之數據，文中發現：日治迄今，全臺人口重心的位置，就戰前而言，日治前期先呈北移、日治後期則現南降，至於戰後迄今則一路呈現持續北移之勢。此外，總計全臺人口數排名首位亦有三次轉折，第一次為彰化縣取代臺南縣，第二次為臺北市取代彰化縣，第三次為臺北縣取代臺北市，然其背後所對應之各時期全臺人口分布型態有所不同。英文摘要：This paper seeks to examine Taiwan's long-term trend in population distribution using the twenty-three-county (hsien) population statistical database from 1897 to 2010, in the hope of aiding any current studies regarding population. The information presented in this paper covers the time span from the Japanese Colonial Period to Early Nationalist Rule in China, providing the rise and fall of county population in Taiwan. That said, this paper can also be of reference for related studies. From records of city and county population ranking, this paper finds the trend in city with largest population developing from south-to-mid and mid-to-north of Taiwan. And from long-term population statistics, this paper finds that from the Japanese Colonial Period to this day, before WWII, the majority of the Taiwanese population changed from migrating northward during Early Japanese Rule, to migrating south during Late Japanese Rule. Then, settling at a steady trend of migrating northward occurred after WWII. In addition, the city with largest population has changed three times in history: first, Changhua County surpassed Tainan County; second, Taipei City outgrew Changhua County; and lastly, Taipei County replaced Taipei City as the largest. Yet, keep in mind that each transition matches a different national population distribution.起始頁-結束頁：109-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.97篇名：1971年以來大臺南製造業發展與人口變遷並列篇名：The Development and Changes of Manufacturing in Tainan City作者：陳鈺昇(Yu-Sheng Chen);吳連賞(Lien-Shang Wu);鄭春發(Chun-Fa Cheng)關鍵字：產業發展;製造業;成長指數;區位商數;趨勢分析;industry development;manufacturing;growth index;location quotient (L.Q.);trend analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文欲釐清戰後至今（1966－2011年）近四十五年間，大臺南市製造業的發展脈絡與其空間變遷關係。研究首先透過大臺南市歷年（1971－2006年）製造業工廠數、員工數及生產總值，計算都市各分帶之成長指數變化，同時藉「工業強度」、「區位商數」及「過剩員工數」等三大工業指數，以製圖方法釐清市內各區產業發展及郊區化概況，呈現製造業「入」字型聚集現象。其次利用都市計畫圖、編定工業區位圖、土地利用圖及交通路網圖，闡明該產業空間佈局與都市土地發展存在「住宅與工商混合使用」及具有強化「地方化經濟」成長的機能。最後研究分析「工業區—村里居住人口—製造業及業人口」三因子之集中分布趨勢，結果顯示受高科技工業區外部效益擴散的影響，該類園區周圍各里之製造業就業與及業人口大為增加。未來，唯有持續調適並克服產業結構再組織的挑戰，方能邁向創新轉型並強化其產業競爭力。英文摘要：Although political and economic circumstances deteriorated in Tainan, its industrial base has since improved with the issuing of industrial law in 1960. The district has since been revived in 2010 with the merger of Tainan City and Tainan County. This paper aims to explore Tainan's historical and special manufacturing changes between 1966 to 2011. We offer to holistically explore Tainan's manufacturing development through four aspects: the growth index, the aggregation trend of symbol ”入”, the interdependency of location-urban development, and Tainan's other potentials.The growth index is computed from the number of factory, labor, and total output value from every district. The aggregation trend of symbol ”入” is obtained by analyzing industrial indexes such as industrial strength, location quotient (L.Q.), and surplus labor-space analysis. The interdependency of location-urban development can be examined from city planning blueprints, distribution of industry maps, land use maps, traffic network maps, etc.Finally, the paper provides suggestions on ”industrial zone-population center village” and ”industrial zone-labor center of manufacturing village” in regards to future development trends in manufacturing in Tainan.起始頁-結束頁：137-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.108篇名：2011臺灣人口學會年會暨學術研討會國際學者來訪紀實作者：林季平;蔡青龍;劉千嘉期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：43期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：175-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.119篇名：臺灣失業勞工的遷徙及再就業：初級、回流、及連續遷徙分析並列篇名：Migrations of the Unemployed and Reemployment: Evidence of Primary, Return, and Onward Migrations from Taiwan作者：林季平(Ji-Ping Lin);廖高禮(Kao-Lee Liaw)關鍵字：失業;再就業;初級遷徙;回流遷徙;連續遷徙;unemployment;reemployment;primary migration;return migration;onward migration期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：42期出版年：2011中文摘要：鑑於勞工遷徙是幫助失業勞工再就業之有效機制，而且針對失業勞工之遷徙研究很少見，本研究旨在區分失業勞工的三種遷徙，包括初級、回流和連續遷徙，並分析這三種遷徙與失業勞工再就業之關係。本研究問題意識是：傳統認為失業勞工遷徙係由失業者為了再就業所驅動，且既有理論和實證研究皆發現失業者較其他勞動人口有較高遷徙率，這表示失業勞工遷徙應具促進再就業之效果，但面對總體失業率難以下降的事實，這卻又表示失業勞工遷徙不必然是因失業者為了再就業所驅動。本研究以1991-2006年「人力運用擬追蹤調查資料」為基礎，目的在(1)檢驗失望假說、慣性假說、及反應假說在驅動失業勞工遷徙的理論效果；(2)探討失業勞工遷徙和再就業的關係；及(3)比較三大類遷徙對失業勞工再就業過程的相對重要性。研究主要發現：(1)三大理論皆獲得部分支持，但沒有任何一個單一理論能完全解釋失業勞工再遷徙決策；(2)失業勞工遷徙受個人過去遷徙經驗、自身因素（如性別、年齡和教育）、景氣循環、勞動市場資訊及條件、及親友網絡等要素所影響；(3)勞動狀態變化是驅動勞工遷徙要素，且相較就業者，失業勞工較易選擇回流而非連續遷徙；回流遷徙失業勞工以持續失業者為主，但連續遷徙失業勞工以再就業成功者為主；(4)雖然景氣循環對失業勞工的回流遷徙有負向效果，但失業勞工遷徙和景氣循環存在強烈正向關係，該正向關係主要是由初級遷徙及連續遷徙的失業勞工遷徙所形塑出來的；(5)有關教育和職業選擇性，失業者初級遷徙及連續遷徙以高教育及職業階層較高者為主，而失業者回流遷徙選擇性則和初級遷徙及連續遷徙相反。英文摘要：Considering the contribution of labor migration to the reemployment of the unemployed and the fact that there is a paucity of studies on this in existing literature, this research studies the connections between the primary, return, and onward migrations and the reemployment of unemployed labor in Taiwan. The distinction among these three types of migration is essential for avoiding ambiguous and misleading empirical findings. A motivation for this research is the desire to obtain insights into the apparent contradiction between the relatively high geographical mobility of the unemployed and the persistence of a high unemployment rate in Taiwan since the mid-1990s. Based on the 1991-2006 ”Quasi-Longitudinal Manpower Utilization Survey”, the research goals are threefold: (1) to assess the effectiveness of the ”disappointment hypothesis”, ”chronicity hypothesis”, and ”responsiveness hypothesis” in explaining repeat (i.e. onward and return) migration behaviors of the unemployed; (2) to ascertain the relationship between migration of the unemployed and reemployment; (3) to distinguish the relative effectiveness of primary, onward, and return migrations in promoting reemployment of the unemployed. Major research findings are as follows: (1) the three hypotheses all gain partial support, and none could exclusively explain the repeat migration behaviors of the unemployed; (2) past migration experiences, individual characteristics (gender, age, education, etc.), business cycle, availability of labor market information, and ties to and strength of kinship-friendship networks are crucial in explaining the migration behaviors of the unemployed; (3) a change in labor force status tends to trigger labor migration, and relative to the employed workforce, the unemployed are more prone to choose return migration than onward migration; (4) once the decision of repeat migration has been made, the unemployed who eventually get reemployed are more likely to engage in onward migration than the unemployed who do not successfully acquire a new job; (5) although the business cycle exhibits the expected negative effect on return migration for the unemployed, the positive association between the business cycle and migration of the unemployed is mainly shaped by its effect on primary and onward migrations amongst the unemployed; (6) in contrast to its primary and onward counterparts, return migration of the unemployed is selective of those with less human capital and lower in the occupational hierarchy.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.110篇名：臺灣的死亡率步調效果：步調調整後的平均餘命並列篇名：The Tempo Effect of Mortality in Taiwan: Tempo-Adjusted Life Expectancy作者：董宜禎(Yi-Jhen Dong);王德睦(Te-Mu Wang)關鍵字：步調效果;平均餘命;時期率;邏輯斯模型;Gompertz死亡率改變模型;tempo effect;life expectancy;period rate;logistic model;Gompertz mortality change model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：42期出版年：2011中文摘要：「步調效果」(tempo effect)的研究首度出現在生育率上，之後逐漸擴展至其他時期率的討論，尤其是初婚率與死亡率。所謂的「步調效果」是指慣用的「時期」測量，其多種率與平均餘命會受到「步調」影響，產生偏誤的情形(Bongaarts and Feeney 2006)。有鑑於此，去除年齡改變所造成的扭曲，估計「實際」的趨勢變化已成為長久以來學界努力的目標。一般均接受生育步調改變會對時期別生育率產生影響，但對於死亡率的步調效果則有較大爭議。另一方面，臺灣目前僅有生育率與初婚率步調效果的研究，對於死亡率步調的討論與經驗研究尚付之闕如。因此本研究乃針對死亡率步調作系統性的討論，進一步探究臺灣死亡率的步調效果，瞭解死亡率下降的過程中，平均餘命受步調效果的影響與實際變化趨勢。研究結果發現，臺灣成人死亡率的變化同於其他高平均餘命國家，更接近邏輯斯模型(logistic model)而非Gompertz模型。此外，在當時條件(current conditions)的觀點下，調整過後的平均餘命與生育率一樣，為去除步調效果後的時期測量。當去除死亡的步調效果後，慣用的平均餘命有高估的現象，且女性大於男性，平均的步調效果各為2.3與2.1，女性的步調效果高於瑞典、美國、德國、丹麥、英格蘭與威爾斯，原因可能是臺灣死亡率下降的速度較快，造成步調效果偏高的情形。再者，兩性在調整過後平均餘命之差異上，一路呈現平滑的上升趨勢，但在時期別指標之差異上卻受到步調效果影響，分成兩階段的變化，期間上下波動，這也顯示使用調整過後的平均餘命比未調整的平均餘命可能更可以反映當時的死亡率條件。英文摘要：The tempo effect was first discussed and applied to fertility studies, before being extended to other fields such as marriage and mortality. The tempo effect means that the period quantum and tempo of conventional life tables are impacted by tempo, which results in bias (Bongaarts and Feeney 2006). Therefore, the goal of recent studies has been to adjust this tempo distortion, which results from a rise or fall in the mean age at which an event occurs, and to estimate the actual period measure of longevity. In general, the fertility tempo effect is widely accepted, but the mortality tempo effect remains controversial. Studies of the tempo effect on fertility and first marriage have been examined thoroughly in Taiwan. For this reason, our research focuses on the mortality tempo effect, and explores unadjusted and adjusted life expectancies in Taiwan. Our results show first, that the observed adult mortality rate fits the logistic model better than the Gompertz model, as in other countries with high life expectancy. On the other hand, tempo adjusted life expectancy measures current conditions, as does fertility. Second, when the tempo effect on mortality is excluded (thus the value of average life span is increased), the conventional life expectancy has a positive bias, with women having a higher life expectancy than men, and the average tempo effect is 2.3 and 2.1 years respectively. Finally, the tempo effect on women in Taiwan is higher than that in Sweden, the U.S., Germany, Denmark, England and Wales. The reason might be that mortality in Taiwan has decreased more sharply than other countries, causing the tempo effect to be higher. We conclude that the adjusted life expectancy is more accurate than the unadjusted one.起始頁-結束頁：43-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.211篇名：女性就業與離婚風險並列篇名：Women's Employment and Marital Dissolution作者：陳婉琪(Wan-Chi Chen);吳慧靖(Hui-Jing Wu)關鍵字：女性就業;離婚;經濟獨立;female labor force participation;divorce;economic independence期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：42期出版年：2011中文摘要：離婚的「經濟獨立假說」在國外文獻中仍處於爭論的狀態，實證上並無明確結論，相關婚姻理論也遭到挑戰；不過，臺灣的相關研究卻相當支持「女性就業及其經濟獨立會提高離婚風險」這個論點。本文利用華人家庭動態資料庫及事件史分析法來重探這個問題，所得到的結果並未完全符合此假說：處於就業狀態的女性，離婚事件發生的機會較高，看似符合經濟獨立假說的預測，然而，若進一步將女性婚後至今參與勞動市場的時間比例納入考慮時，雖證實了婚後至今經常處於就業狀態的女性（相較於就業量居間的女性）離婚風險偏高，但同時卻也發現，女性於婚後若長期處於未就業狀態，也同樣有顯著較高的離婚機會。換言之，就業量與離婚機會，兩者之間呈現了U型的關係。此分析結果與相關討論對經濟獨立論提出兩項質疑：一、就業量較高的「就業型已婚女性」離婚風險雖偏高，但除了所得（經濟獨立）效應之外，工時（蠟燭兩頭燒）效應也是可能的影響機制。二、就業量偏低的「家庭型已婚女性」，離婚風險亦偏高，顯然完全不符合「經濟獨立假說」的預測，女性若是缺乏經濟能力，未能提供家庭貢獻，可能也會減少婚姻中的協商能力。英文摘要：The well-known economic independence hypothesis accounting for marital dissolution has been challenged in Western countries for the past two decades. However, existing studies in Taiwan claim that women's labor force participation destabilizes marriage. This study re-examines the question by taking advantage of marriage and work history information from Taiwan's Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD) and event history analysis. While taking into consideration the amount of women's labor force participation, we found that the results do not fully support the economic independence hypothesis. Not only do wives who work most of the time during marriage have a higher divorce risk (compared with those who work one to three fourths of the length of marriage), but stay-home wives are significantly more likely to divorce, too. It is possible that women's lack of bargaining power due to a low level of labor market involvement has a negative impact on marriage stability.起始頁-結束頁：81-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.312篇名：臺灣都市原住民的族群通婚：社會界線的世代差異並列篇名：Intermarriage among Taiwan's Urban Indigenous: The Social Boundary of Different Generations作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu)關鍵字：都市原住民;第二代都市原住民;社會界線;社會距離;族群通婚;urban indigenous;second migrant generation;social boundary;social distance;ethnic intermarriage期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：42期出版年：2011中文摘要：遷徙係許多臺灣原住民共同的生命歷程，都市原住民與原鄉原住民所面臨的社會處境截然不同，本文擺脫以往對都市原住民問題化的關切，關注這群移徙族群所經歷的族群社會界線的改變。本研究運用「臺灣原住民社會變遷與政策評估」調查資料，自空間與婚姻上的同化行為，檢視原住民在經歷四十餘年的移徙後，自世代的觀點比較原漢族群距離與社會界線的改變。研究發現如下：(1)二代都原較年輕、人力品質結構較佳、職業發展較佳、通婚比例亦較高；(2)社會接觸有助於縮減族群社會距離，社會接觸的效應對一代都原較二代都原更重要；(3)二代都原較一代都原更易跨越族群社會界線；(4)社會接觸越頻繁、社會距離越小，通婚機率越高。英文摘要：Migration is the common trajectory for most of the indigenous in Taiwan, but the social situations they encounter are totally different between the urban indigenous and those who stay in traditional areas. Instead of concentrating on the social problems urban indigenous might encounter, this paper focuses on the effect of social distance that migrants might experience and whether they can overcome the so-called ethnic boundaries. The research uses the data of the Taiwan Indigenous People Survey (TIPS) both to reveal those aspects of space distribution, employment status and social distance among urban indigenous and to elaborate the difference between the first and second migrant generations. The main findings are as follows: (1) the second migrant generation are much younger, better educated and have a higher probability of ethnic intermarriage and better job opportunities than the first generation; (2) the social contact with other ethnic groups has a positive effect on decreasing social distance between the indigenous and Han people; moreover the effect is more significant among the first generation than the second one; (3) the second generation is more likely to cross the social boundary than the first one; (4) for both generations, the effects of social contact and social distance on predicting the probability of ethnic intermarriage are both significant.起始頁-結束頁：115-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2011.401篇名：北歐普及照顧與充分就業政策及其決策機制的台灣轉化並列篇名：Taiwan's Transformation of Scandinavian Universal Care and Full Employment Policies and Decision-Making Mechanism作者：劉毓秀(Yu-Hsiu Liu)關鍵字：北歐普及照顧政策;充分就業政策;性別平等;托育政策;民主組合主義;制度性民主審議;低生育率;民間組織;Scandinavian universal care services;childcare services;full employment policy;democratic corporatism;institutionalized deliberation;gender equality;low birth rate;NGO期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣婦女運動陣營於十五年前開始著書立說，聯結民間與政府力量，致力於轉化北歐國家融合「（性別）平等」與「普及公共照顧」的政策路線，及其民主組合決策機制。晚近，國際比較研究指出，這套北歐政策，尤其是普及公共托育政策，能夠有效促進性別平等，並因應人口危機與全球化時代的社會困境。本論文嘗試聚焦於托育政策，探析北歐制度的台灣轉化工程之理念、過程、成果與困境，並探討其政治動能，冀望藉此為深陷人口、家庭、性別角色等棘手問題的我國社會提供解決難題的一線曙光。英文摘要：Approximately 1 years ago, women's organizations in Taiwan began promoting Scandinavian-style policies of gender equality and universal care services, as well as the Scandinavian decision-making process called ”democratic corporatism.” Recently, these Scandinavian policies have been recognized as having the potential to effectively implement gender equality and resolve demographic and social problems, such as low birth rates, rapidly aging populations, and social polarization, faced by developed countries in this age of globalization. This study investigates the process, result, and obstacles encountered when transforming the Scandinavian policies into Taiwanese policies, as well as the political dynamics behind this movement.起始頁-結束頁：1-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.29.12篇名：照顧公共化的改革與挑戰－以保母托育體系的改革為例並列篇名：Reform and Challenge of Care System in Taiwan: A Case of the Community Childminder Service作者：傅立葉(Li-Yeh Fu);王兆慶(Chao-Ching Wang)關鍵字：照顧;公共化;保母;托育;社區保母系統;婦女運動;女性主義;childcare;public governance;childminder service;community service;state feminism;women's movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：「照顧公共化」是讓現代公民（特別是女性）兼顧工作與家庭照顧，促進性別平等的策略，也是改變老人、兒童照顧商品化問題的藥方。但在實踐上，如何於長期維持家庭照顧傳統、家庭範疇以外照顧高度市場化的台灣，創造社會變遷，進而形成國家承擔照顧責任的體系？台灣近九成0∼3歲的幼兒由母親和家庭親屬照顧，僅約1成由保母照顧；保母長期處於非正式經濟地位，習於與家長私下協商托育關係，國家過去也未曾積極介入。直至2008年內政部兒童局通過的「保母托育管理與托育費用補助實施計畫」，始明確揭示積極性福利原則，建構普及的嬰幼兒保母托育服務，以分擔家庭或女性自行育兒的責任，做為試圖將幼兒照顧公共化的改革政策。本文的主要目的在探討此一改革政策的基本理念、政策制訂的過程、政策執行的狀況，以及此一保母托育制度公共化行動未來可能面對的挑戰。本文的分析顯示，上述計畫的誕生代表國家女性主義運動的成果，亦即在缺乏社會民主共識的條件下，公共化的保母托育理念，透過行政部門體制內的民間婦運代表的倡議與協力規劃，落實成為國家的政策。此一政策的真正意涵，不應被簡化為津貼補助，或是片面的保母輔導制度，而是打造保母托育制度公共治理的基礎建設，以為未來進一步推動照顧公共化的進程鋪路。然而，本研究也發現，該計畫發展過程中引發的種種爭議，以及執行上遭遇來自市場的反挫，反映了保母托育公共化的路途並不平順，未來的挑戰仍然艱鉅。英文摘要：Developing a public care system is crucial in helping citizens balance their family care and job responsibilities, as well as to avoid commodification of care for children and the elderly. However, in Taiwan approximately 0% of children aged 0–3 were cared for by their mothers and other family members. Only 10% of these children received childminder services, which were provided mainly in the informal market based on private negotiations between parents and childminders without any intervention by the state. In 2008 the Ministry of Interior implemented the Program of Management and Subsidy for Childminder Services, and the state began placing childminder services under public governance to pursue an active social welfare policy based on the idea of universal social services. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to analyze the development and implementation of this innovative policy, as well as the challenges for reform. This study determined that, without a social basis of social democracy, the reform policy was a result of the efforts made by state feminists, who not only advocated for the notion of a public childcare system, but also cooperated with state bureaucrats to design and plan the entire program. This program should not be considered merely as a cash subsidy or a management measure for childminder services; it is a vital infrastructure with the ideal of developing a public childcare system in Taiwan. Nevertheless, this study also revealed that this reform did not proceed smoothly. The controversy that arose during the planning process and the backlash after the implementation of the program showed that this reform had faced severe challenges.起始頁-結束頁：79-109+112-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.29.793篇名：當「男女有別」變成「男女不平等」－性別角色認知與政治效能感並列篇名：When Gender Differences Become Gender Inequalities: The Political Effects of Gender-role Perceptions作者：楊婉瑩(Wang-Ying Yang);林珮婷(Pei-Ting Lin)關鍵字：職業區隔;公私分工;性別刻板印象;政治效能感;gender segregation in work;gender division of the public-private domain;gender stereotype;political efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：性別差異與平等是女性主義持續關懷的理論課題。本研究試圖檢視看似平等的差異化性別角色認知，如何可能產生不平等的政治結果。透過實證資料分析，本研究主要提出兩個發現：一方面，隨著社會現代化發展，傳統性別分工的社會安排或許在逐漸減弱，然而兩性差異的看法仍轉化為各種不同形式，存在於多數人心中。民眾對性別角色分化的認知可區分為職業區隔、公私分工、性別刻板印象等三個構面。雖然這三構面彼此相關，民眾的接受程度卻不相同─職業區隔由於帶有歧視意味較不為社會所接受，但多數人仍普遍接受傳統性別刻板印象，認為男女與生俱來的能力和個性有所不同。另一方面，本研究認為此種「男女有別」的認知並非中立的，並非單純對於既有性別秩序的反應，而具有支配的效果─對於女性產生政治上的剝奪效果，對於男性則有政治上的增能效果。就政治心理層面的內在政治效能感來觀察，越接受兩性有別的女性，其內在政治效能感越低；反之，兩性有別的認知，有助於增加男性的政治效能感，合理化並強化男性在政治領域的地位。英文摘要：Gender difference and gender equality are the constantly debated issues in feminist studies. This study attempts to disentangle the varied dimensions of gender-role divisions, and to examine the political consequences caused by that division. Through empirical data analyses, we show two main findings. Firstly, while the process of social modernization weakens the traditional social arrangements based on gender-role division, the public still accepts the gender-role differentiation in varied formats. The gender differentiations perceived by the public could be classified into three types: gender segregation in work, gender division of the publicprivate domain, and gender stereotype. Of the three highly related gender perceptions, gender segregation in work is the least accepted by the public, for it connotes gender discrimination; and gender stereotype on the differences of the characters and abilities of both sexes is still widely accepted. Secondly, we also shows that these gender-role perceptions are not neutral or simply reflections of the reality, and that it does reinforce the male-dominated structure by exploiting women's political efficacy and strengthening men's political efficacy. In terms of internal political efficacy, the political psychological effect, women who are more likely to accept the traditional gender-role divisions feel politically less competent. On the contrary, men who are more likely to accept the traditional genderrole feel politically more competent.起始頁-結束頁：121-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.29.1214篇名：運動與學術雙向結合－台灣性別研究發展之跨學門比較並列篇名：Mutual Engagement of Social Activism and Academic Research: A Comparative Analysis of Gender Studies in Three Disciplines作者：黃淑玲(Shu-Ling Hwang);謝小芩(Hsiao-Chin Hsieh)關鍵字：婦女研究;性別研究;女性主義;婦女運動;women's studies;gender studies;feminist scholarship;women's movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究檢視1990年至2007年間，台灣的西方文學／文化研究、社會學及教育學等三學門主流學術期刊的性別研究論文，考察其出版數量、理論觀點、研究方法與研究主題，藉以評估性別研究在這三種學門中的主流化程度。本文提出一個包括兩組因素─學科特質與研究社群的女性主義認同─的分析架構，來解釋性別研究在三種學門不同的主流化程度與女性主義理論的影響力。本研究有兩項主要發現：第一，在此三學門中，性別研究都被視為「女性的」學術領域，處於被邊緣化、區隔化的位置；由此可見，女性主義並未成為此三學門的主流理論典範。第二，三種學門性別研究的發展步伐不一：西方文學／文化研究勇於接受新興思潮，性別研究發展最早，但2000年後卻急速萎縮；我們認為主因之一是該學門的研究社群對女性主義的認同及婦運實踐都偏低。在教育學門，雖然婦運學者推動性別平等教育的立法，但主流教育學者吸收女性主義思想的速度相對較慢，且性別研究學者亦較少在主流期刊發表研究成果，致使性別研究主流化程度顯得最低。社會學門部分，作者群的婦運實踐力最強，女性主義理論亦已成為社會學性別研究的主流範式。本文的結論是，雖然婦運與學術雙向結合是啟動與持續台灣性別研究發展之動力引擎，但這項獨特的學科特質只有在社會學門表現最亮眼。英文摘要：This study examines the incorporation of gender and feminist scholarship into Taiwan's mainstream scholarship, with a focus on three fields: Western literature and culture studies, sociology, and education. The current work proposes an analytical framework consisting of two sets of factors to explain the level of integration of feminist scholarship into the mainstream. These factors include the distinctive features of each discipline and the researcher's identification with feminism.To assess how well feminist scholarship has been accepted and how well the field of gender studies has made its way into the academic mainstream, this study investigates the number of women's and gender studies articles published in core journals of these three fields from 1990 to 2007 and explores the theoretical perspectives, research themes, and methods of these articles. The findings indicate that gender studies is identified as a ”women's field” and has been marginalized and segregated in the mainstream academics. The number and percentage of feminist articles in core journals of the three disciplines also vary. In the field of western literature and culture studies, the number of articles peaked in the 1990s, but rapidly decreased in the new millennium. In education, both figures are the lowest, compared to the other two disciplines. Only in the sociology core journals have feminist articles taken a relatively significant position. These findings are discussed with our analytical framework. In conclusion, we suggest that the mutual engagement of social activism and academic research have been the engine driving the expansion of gender studies across all three disciplines. However, only feminist scholars in sociology have embodied a commitment to this unique facet of gender studies.起始頁-結束頁：173-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.29.1735篇名：從婦女人身安全保障到經濟自主－解析彭婉如基金會模式並列篇名：From Women's Personal Safety to Economic Autonomy: Analysis of the PWR Foundation Model作者：鄭勝分(Jason Sheng-Fen Cheng)關鍵字：彭婉如基金會;社會創新;社會企業;the PWR Foundation;social innovation;social enterprise期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：29期出版年：2011中文摘要：彭婉如基金會採取經濟自主導向之運作模式，於台灣實踐北歐民主參與，創造出新型態的婦女運動模式，彭婉如基金會稱之為婉如模式。然而，對於婉如模式的內涵，目前雖有部分研究，但似乎未能窺其全貌，基此，本文之目的在於檢視婉如模式的發展歷程及其與台灣婦女權益發展的關係。本文首先探索彭婉如基金會發展歷程，分析人身安全保障、經濟自主與推展照顧公共化等三階段的方案內容；其次，從社會創新的角度，自內容、過程及授能三個面向分析婉如模式的運作策略；第三，從社會企業的角度進行對話；最後，從實務、政策與理論三層面提出建議，以資非營利組織、政府及學術界參考。英文摘要：The Peng Wan-Ru (PWR) Foundation's model is based on economic autonomy, implementing the Scandinavian form of democratic participation in Taiwan, and creating new models and styles for women's movements. Although various studies have investigated the PWR Foundation model, we remain unable to understand the phenomenon thoroughly. This study uses the organization's timeline, within context, to develop a complete strategy. Using the organizational timeline, we analyze the reason women's participation in politics evolved into concerns for women's safety and employment opportunities through a detailed exploration of work safety practices and caregiving policy. From the perspective of social innovation, the organization itself and its history and empowerment reveal the true nature of the PWR model and its developmental strategy. Additionally, using ”social enterprise” as a theoretical base for comparison, the PWR foundation model can be distinguished clearly from that of the Scandinavian development. Finally, regarding affairs, policy and theory provide effective suggestions to government, the non-profit sector, and academia.起始頁-結束頁：233-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.29.2336篇名：<U+7232>何從母姓？　夫妻約定子女姓氏的影響因素調查並列篇名：Why Taking Mother's Surname? Investigating the Factors That Influence Taiwanese Married Couples' Decision on Their Children's Surnames作者：彭渰雯(Yen-Wen Peng);洪綾君(Ling-Chun Hung)關鍵字：從母姓;子女姓氏;父系主義;性別平等;性別與家庭;inherit the mother's surname;children's surname;patrilinealism;gender equality;gender and family期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：28期出版年：2011中文摘要：2007年5月23日，我國民法親屬編1059條有關子女姓氏之規定，有了劃時代的修正。從原本「子女從父姓」的父權優先條款，修改為父母得以書面約定方式，自主決定子女從父姓或母姓。不過根據內政部戶政司(2011)的統計，自新法實施後4年間，父母雙方約定新生兒從母姓者，僅有1.54%。那麼，這1.54%的新生兒父母，為了什麼理由讓子女從母姓？他們與讓子女從父姓者，是否有些不同的特徵？由於過去國內對於這些在婚姻內約定子女從母姓的「極少數族群」，僅有少數質化訪談研究，因此本研究透過較大規模的問卷調查，對這個族群進行基本屬性的瞭解，並與從父姓者交互對照。本研究問卷係於2010年8至11月間，經由內政部戶政司的協助，從全台369個戶政事務所直接發給約定子女「從母姓」及「從父姓」的民眾。共計回收779份問卷，其中從母姓者257份，從父姓者522份。整體而言，目前婚姻內約定從母姓者，是以人口變項的影響為主（父親為外國人、母親為原住民、母無兄弟等），「性別平等」、「姓氏自主」等態度變項為輔。性別意識較高的父母，不必然在行動上會約定子女從母姓。相對的，擁有易從母姓的人口變項者（如母親為原住民、母無兄弟），則會以「性別平等」、「公平」等理由，來強化從母姓選擇的正當性。英文摘要：In May 2007, a revision of Article 1059 of the Civil Code was passed in Taiwan. The amendment stipulates that, before filing a child's birth registration, parents should agree in writing whose surname the child would inherit. This was viewed as an important milestone in the history of gender equality in Taiwan, as men and women are granted the same privilege to pass on their surnames to their children henceforth. Nevertheless, statistics shows that, excluding those born out of wedlock, only 1.54% of the newborn children of the past years have inherited their mothers' surnames.It is predictable that such a low percentage of Taiwanese children inherit their mothers' surnames, as culture and tradition are often more difficult to change than formal institution. This research interests itself in the reasons behind the decisions of the 1.54% of newborns' parents who have their children inherit the mothers' surnames under the new law. A survey was conducted, through which researchers collected 257 questionnaires from parents whose children inherited the mothers' surnames, and 522 from parents whose children inherited the fathers' surnames. The demographic and attitude characteristics that significantly distinguish the two groups are summarized and discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.28.17篇名：誰在擲石頭？2009年台灣商業性交易論述之運動語藝分析並列篇名：Stoned by Whom? A Rhetorical Analysis of Taiwan's Commercial Sex Trade Discourse in 2009作者：葉德蘭(Theresa Der-Lan Yeh)關鍵字：娼妓;除罪／罰化;公共論述;社會運動語藝分析;prostitution;decriminalization;rhetorical analysis of social movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：28期出版年：2011中文摘要：在2009年的台灣公共論述中，娼妓除罪化除罰化議題再度引發社會各界關注，特別是在公部門6月決定商業性交易將朝除罪化方向研議，並於半年內擬定性工作管理辦法，及討論是否設置專區之決議形成前後，台灣諸多公民團體(NGO)相互集結發聲，再現討論熱潮。本研究以2009年間公民團體聲明、報紙投書、新聞訪談報導、委託研究報告及口語（演講、會議）資料等各方公共言論為文本，佐以2004年迄今具指標意義之重要公共論述，分析台灣主要論述陣營在探討商業性交易議題時，所使用之社會運動語藝策略及其有效性。英文摘要：This article analyses public discourse debating the legalization of commercial sex trade in Taiwan after the government announced the decision to deliberate towards the decriminalization of prostitutes in 2009. A multi-layered rhetorical model of function, strategy and form is applied to investigate the rhetorical structures of social campaign discourse from both pro-and anti-sides of the controversy. The public discourse examined includes NGO announcements, news releases, press coverage, letters to the editors, and town meeting reports, corroborated with other significant public discourse texts since 2004. The study concludes with an evaluation of how effective the rhetorical campaigns are in accordance with their respective goals and suggestions for those developing or revising advocacy plans for social changes.起始頁-結束頁：55-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.28.558篇名：依違於中心與邊陲之間　論邱妙津作品中的女同志文化菁英氣質與性別邊緣位置並列篇名：Nestled Between the Center and the Edge: Discussion about the Temperament of Lesbian Cultural Elites and the Marginal Position of Gender in Qiu Miaojin's Works作者：林佩苓(Pei-Ling Lin)關鍵字：女同志;性別;鱷魚手記;蒙馬特遺書;飄浪;階級;lesbian;gender;The Crocodile's Journal;The Last Book of Montmartre;diaspora;class期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：28期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討台灣當代女同志因性別認同與文化階層的差異，所形成的菁英／邊緣位置游移現象。文中以台灣女同志文學代表作家邱妙津的小說《鬼的狂歡》、《鱷魚手記》、《蒙馬特遺書》為觀察核心，探討邱妙津如何透過小說書寫菁英女同志的心靈，並思索同志身分在人群中寂寞且游移的性別氣質。菁英女同志雖處於文化階層的中心位置，但其於社會體制中性別認同的邊緣位置，卻使她們與社會大眾更形區隔。本文將探討菁英女同志所處之性別認同與社會角色的矛盾，並透過小說文本的閱讀與分析，進一步理解台灣女同志文學與文化中，菁英女同志依違於中心與邊陲之間的特殊位置。英文摘要：This paper discusses contemporary Taiwanese lesbians' drifting between elite and marginal positions due to differences regarding gender identity and cultural class. The paper is based on Ghost's Carnival, The Crocodile's Journal, and The Last Book of Montmartre, which are novels written by Qiu Miao-jin, an author representative of Taiwanese lesbian literature. The paper explores how Qiu Miao-jin describes the minds of lesbian elites and ponders on homosexuals' loneliness and drifting identity in the society through her novels. Although lesbian elites are in the central position of cultural class, their marginal position in the social system in regards to gender identity separate them from the society. The paper examines the contradiction between gender identity and social role for lesbian elites, and also the special position of lesbian elites caught between centrality and marginality, through reading and analyzing Qui's novels.起始頁-結束頁：107-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.28.1079篇名：教師性別意識與教學困境　反思中小學教師的性別教育課程設計與教學實踐並列篇名：Teachers' Gender Consciousness and Difficulties in Teaching: Reflection on Gender Curriculum Design and Teaching Practice of Elementary and Secondary School Teachers作者：李雪菱(Shiue-Ling Lee)關鍵字：性別課程設計與教學;性別意識;curriculum design and teaching;gender consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：28期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文針對中小學教師性別課程設計與教學實踐的成果進行反思，研究發現，教師性別意識會影響性別課程，且與教學資源關係密切。具性別意識的教師是有效教導性別課程的關鍵，相對地，以套入而非融入方式橫向移植課程或進行政策宣導，則是缺乏性別意識的教師最簡易而安全的作法，而且，類似課程易窄化性別教育，或造成師生對性別教育的刻板印象。具性別意識的教師可以主動創造並連結教學資源；缺乏性別意識的教師恐因無法掌握性別教育的目標，而導致依賴外部資源，且無法敏覺其教學過程與結果對性別教育造成的反挫。此外，即使是具性別意識的教師，也難以對抗既存體制的資源偏見，比如求療癒心態和升學主義。英文摘要：In this paper, we study elementary and secondary school teachers' gender curriculum design and teaching practice. It was found that teachers' gender consciousness not only affects gender curricula, but is also closely related to teaching resources. Teachers with gender consciousness play a key role in effectively carrying out a gender curriculum. On the other hand, teachers without gender consciousness find it easy and safe to conduct a gender curriculum by simply copying a similar curriculum or promoting gender policies in disregard of specific conditions in their own classrooms. These half-baked gender curricula may narrow down gender education and/or generate stereotypes. Teachers with gender consciousness can take the initiative to create a gender curriculum from nothing, and make good use of the teaching resources to fulfill their curriculum. Teachers lacking gender consciousness may lose sight of the true purpose of gender equality education. They rely too much on external resources, unaware of the negative effect of their teaching process on gender education. Even teachers with gender consciousness find it hard to combat bias within resources under the existing system, such as the healing-seeking mindset, and the pressure resulting from exam-oriented educational agenda.起始頁-結束頁：133-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2011.28.13301篇名：編輯室報告期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00012篇名：哀悼無色青春：反娼女性主義之濫情政治與哀傷現代「性」並列篇名：Mourning the Monogamous Ideal: Anti-Prostitution Feminism, Conjugal Sentimentality and the Formation of Melancholic Sexual Modernity in Taiwan作者：黃道明(Hans Tao-Ming Huang)關鍵字：反娼女性主義;性自主;親密關係;情感政治;單一伴侶制;傷感;哀傷;現代性;anti-prostitution feminism;sexual autonomy;intimacy;politics of affect;monogamy;sentimentality;melancholia;sexual modernity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：本論文主要處理自90年代中期以來造就台灣反娼女性主義霸權興起的一種主流女性濫情傷感，企圖顯示，這種依戀婚姻單一伴侶關係的情感模式，如何驅動著一種對當下非婚親密關係嚴厲管控的自由主義治理。藉由對反娼女性主義代表人物黃淑玲的論述分析，本論文將顯示黃淑玲社會學想像所構出的交易女人場景，是如何發自於丁乃非所歷史／理論化的「現代妻」主體以及強迫單一伴侶制的優勢情感位置。我特別將分析聚焦於婦女救援基金會所編著的《染色的青春：十個色情工作少女的故事》。我將這本根據黃淑玲田野研究改寫成的教育性書籍視為生命權力運作下的規訓產物，並揭示這個將「不幸少女」境遇大幅濫情化的救贖性計畫，如何在性別主流化過程中建制化的「性自主」場域裡，建構了一種女人潔淨無瑕的性。我將論證，寓於這個「性自主」的政治潛意識裡的，是無色青春作為文化理想失落的女性主義哀傷，而這樣一種情感狀態所滋養高度的保守性道德，正是台灣性的憂鬱現代性的體現。藉由對「性」福倫理的探討，我挑戰了這個親密公共領域所孕育的哀傷現代「性」，並提出一個跨越女性主義至善的邊地倫理位置，來持續攪擾那個應允我們婚後終將幸福美滿的主流敘事。英文摘要：This paper concerns itself with the analysis of a dominant form of female sentimentality that animates the hegemonic rise of anti-prostitution feminist public sphere since the mid 1990s, showing how this affective mode, attached as it is to conjugal intimacy, propels a liberal form of state governance that intensifies the regulation of sexualities in present-day Taiwan. Through examining the praxes of the sociologist Hwang Shu-ling, a prominent figure in anti-prostitution feminism, I show how her articulation of the traffic in women is structured through the positionality of what Ding Naifei has termed as 'wife-in-monogamy'. Further, through examining ”The Youthhood Tainted By Sex: Stories of Ten Teenage Girls Doing Sex Work(2003)”, a pedagogical book compiled by the Women Rescue Foundation under Hwang's supervision, I demonstrate how this redemptive project of sex, which massively sentimentalises those 'hapless' girls fallen into the sex market, constructs a pristine feminine sexuality within the institutionalised field of 'sexual autonomy'. What inheres in the political unconsciousness of 'sexual autonomy' is, I argue, a profound sense of melancholia that mourns the loss of sexual innocence qua feminist ideal. Finally, through exploring the ethics of sexual happiness, I contest this melancholic state and the heightened moralism it gives rise to, calling for a queer politics to sabotage the happily ever-after.起始頁-結束頁：5-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00023篇名：近現代東亞思想史與「武士道」：傳統的發明與越境並列篇名：Modern East Asian Intellectual History and 'Bushid<U+014D>': The Invention of Tradition in Japan, Transgression into China and Taiwan作者：藍弘岳(Hung-Yueh Lan)關鍵字：武士道;東亞;發明;越境;梁啟超;李登輝;bushid<U+014D>;East Asia;invention;transgression;Liang Qi-chao;Lee Teng-hui期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：說到日本，相信許多人都會想到「武士道」。然而，何謂「武士道」？這是個看似簡單卻難以回答的問題。不管如何，不可否認地，「武士道」可謂是一種被創造的傳統。而且，「武士道」會越境到日本的鄰國與其殖民地，與該地的政治思想論述發生關係，促使中國與台灣、韓國等地知識人去發現屬於他們的傳統的「武士道」。故本文之主要目的如下：（1）說明「近代以前的武士道」與「近代武士道」的差異性與連續性。（2）整理近代日本武士道被發明的思想史過程，以及各種武士道論與近代日本政治思想的關連。（3）探討近代日本發明的「武士道」如何越境到近代中國引發梁啟超等人對「武士道」的關注與其如何打造中國的「武士道」等問題。（4）研討現代台灣的前總統李登輝如何透過對新渡戶稻造的武士道論的解釋，建構屬於台灣人的武士道論、民族精神論等問題。最後，本文將在東亞的視野中，經由對以上的武士道論的討論去思考被發明且越境成功的「武士道」論述與日本、中國、台灣間之國族建構的相關性、衝突性、複雜性，並企圖批判性地理解「武士道」等近代日本的歷史敘事對近現代東亞的影響。英文摘要：What is 'bushid<U+014D>'? This is a hard question to answer. We could say it is an ”invented tradition” of modern Japanese history, which crossed the border to China and Taiwan etc, inspiring intellectuals to forge their own 'bushid<U+014D>' traditions. In this paper, I discussed three following questions. First, I tried to clarify the events and conditions that led to the creation of ”bushid<U+014D>” in modern Japan and examine some major works of bushid<U+014D> in the context of modern Japanese political thought. Second, I analyzed how Liang Qi-chao related ”bushid<U+014D>” to Chinese history to invent a Chinese version of 'bushid<U+014D>'. Third, I discussed how the former Taiwan president Lee Teng-hui reconstructed the 'bushid<U+014D>' of Taiwan by reinterpreting Bushid<U+014D>: The Soul of Japan, An Exposition of Japan Thought by Nitobe Inaz<U+014D>. In doing so, this paper explained the complexities and contradictions in the creation of 'bushid<U+014D>' in Japan and its border transgressions into China and Taiwan in order to shed a new light on the complexity of East Asian history.起始頁-結束頁：51-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00034篇名：管理或剝削？家庭外籍看護工雇主的生存之道並列篇名：Management or Exploitation? The Survival Strategy of Employer of Family Foreign Care Workers作者：陳正芬(Chen-Fen Chen)關鍵字：家庭外籍看護工;長期照顧;無被害人犯罪;foreign care workers;long-term care;crimes without victims期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文檢視「家庭外籍看護工」聘僱政策與相關規範，並探討雇主在此政策下聘僱與管理外籍看護工的犯罪行為，並分析為何被視為邊陲與補充勞動力的外籍看護工為何會逐步成為民眾選擇長期照顧服務的唯一選項。本研究發現，家庭外籍看護工的聘僱與管理在台灣社會已建構為一無被害人的犯罪型態，被害人並非不存在，而是雇主透過合理化的方式策略否認被害人的存在，被害人也被政策法規、雇主及仲介公司制約下被迫放棄對外求援或申訴的機會。而原本被賦予「外人照顧」污名的外籍看護工，則在擔任照顧者的成年子女，以及被照顧的失能老人強烈排除需遠離家庭場域與親人的機構式服務的情感驅使，以及受限於居家服務的時段與被排除於服務對象之外的困境之下，致使外籍看護工成為照顧者與被照顧者雙方在照顧責任與需求滿足之間取得平衡的唯一選項，脫胎換骨成為符合我國孝道傳統的在地老化服務模式。若欲修正政策規劃與執行的高度落差，唯有透過本國籍照顧服務員與外籍看護工的銜接與配合，以及需求評估與照顧計畫的連結，建構民眾認識各項長期服務的社會學習管道；也唯有當外籍看護工違法聘僱與違法運用的事實被社會大眾皆確認是壓迫行為，且將外籍看護工的聘僱與管理確實整併進入長期照顧體系，讓外籍看護工的勞動條件在長期照顧服務監督機制的制衡下獲得保障，才有可能讓雇主與外籍看護工之間的關係，不再是支配與剝削的衝突對象，而可能透過其他服務模式的引進，有機會發展為互賴與互信的結盟關係，亦讓被照顧者得以透過制度獲致照顧品質的保障。英文摘要：This paper examines the policies and regulations for employing and managing foreign domestic care workers, the illegal means for hiring and abuse of foreign care workers, and the belief that hiring foreigners for long-term domestic care is the only option. This purpose of this study is to demonstrate how the victimless crime concept applies to this sector of long-term care in Taiwan. Society generally disregards the policies set for this industry and views the employment of foreign care workers as a victimless crime, when in actuality both the employers themselves and the foreign employees are harmed in the process. Another problem stemming from this false view is the lack of enforcement of the laws that regulate the hiring, management and treatment of foreign care workers. Important to understanding the situation involves looking at how the employment of foreign domestic care workers increased. In the past, the general attitude of Taiwanese families was in favor of family members being responsible for long-term care. In addition, the idea of hiring a foreigner for providing domestic care was unacceptable to most. However, due to the unavailability and inaccessibility of home care services, the fear of using institutional care services, and the effect that social learning has had on making known the benefits of hiring foreign care workers, what was the stigma of ”stranger care” has now become a privilege. Addressing this problem involves shortening the gap between policy design and implementation. This includes removing the ”boundary” that exists between Taiwanese- and foreigner-provided domestic long-term care by incorporating the supervision of foreign care workers into the quality control mechanism present in the long-term care system, which currently oversees only Taiwanese care workers. Other components include increasing awareness and promoting recognition of what constitutes abuse and illegal treatment of domestic care workers, as well as making better known publicly the variety of home care services available. Employing this framework benefits the care recipient by providing higher-quality care, while guaranteeing better working conditions for and humane treatment of foreign domestic care workers.起始頁-結束頁：89-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00045篇名：追尋主體性的工程設計：威權政治轉型下的台灣高鐵土木設計並列篇名：Pursuing Independent Engineering Design: State Transformation and Inclusive Civil Design in the Early Taiwan High Speed Rail Project作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：工程研究;主體性;科技研究;高鐵;國家轉型;engineering studies;subjectivity;science and technology studies;high speed rail;state transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：1990年代初期，台灣政府的政治人物及工程師們在面對大型工程計畫的同時，分別都有政治性的期待。本文以高鐵工程設計為例，除說明政治人物企圖以大型工程計畫來回應國內人民及走向國際社會之外，更論證台灣官方工程師們如何在受先進國家技術支配的傳統下，使他們能實現在大型工程計畫當中獲得主導權的政治性期待。不只是台灣的政府及公民在國家轉型的過程中重新進行政治定位，工程師們對其本身的專業領域也加速進行主體性的轉變，而在「忠誠」、「安全」、「簡便」及「技術至上」等的幾個工程價值當中，選擇把「開放性」排在較優先的位置。因此當政府工程師在進行高鐵工程設計時，企圖透過優先進行土木結構的設計，藉此讓日本、法國及德國的核心機電系統都能有相同機會前來競逐，更期望藉此來轉型台灣與國外工程師之間的支配關係。英文摘要：While most of the Taiwanese people and their government confronted a serious social and political transformation from authoritative to democratic politics in the early 1990s, some of their official engineers were also thinking of how to respond to and participate in it in terms of their professional identity. This essay investigates the different engineering policies and knowledge the Taiwanese official engineers practiced before and after the state transformation. By taking the Taiwan High Speed Rail (THSR) project as an example, this essay argues why the official engineers changed their ethical priorities among several different engineering values and explores what strategies they adopted during the transformation. Among loyalty, safety, simplicity and technical perfection etc., the Taiwanese official engineers chose to place inclusiveness as their highest priority value in order to earn themselves equal and independent control from the engineers of advanced countries while conducting technology transfers. They devoted most of their efforts on the THSR's civil engineering design, by which all potential high speed rail technology exporters could be included in the THSR project with an equal opportunity. The Taiwanese official engineers thus could prevent the project from technological domination by countries such as Japan, France and Germany.起始頁-結束頁：157-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00056篇名：為何職業婦女決定離職？結構限制下的母職認同與實踐並列篇名：Why Working Women Quit? The Mothering Identity and Practices under Structural Constrains作者：唐文慧(Anna Wen-Hui Tang)關鍵字：工作與照顧衝突;建制民族誌;選擇差距;照顧者認同;母職實踐;work-care conflict;institutional ethnography;choice gap;carers;identities;mothering practices期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：許多研究者認為，台灣的兒童照顧制度公共化程度低，勞動市場對母親不友善，而導致許多婦女因親自育兒的壓力，而決定離開職場。然而，過去研究多從結構面，較少從母親個人的角度出發，探討她們面對衝突時，為何決定離職，以及離職後的生活與照顧安排。本研究透過訪談十五位中產階級母親，採建制民族誌視角，檢視這群母親面臨衝突時，在結構限制下的認同和行動的選擇。研究發現她們強調離職是「自願的選擇」，但作者分析其面臨的是結構限制下的「選擇差距」。離職後她們會展現自主性並操演認同，採「密集母職」扮演社會所期待的「好媽媽」角色。另外，她們以兼職工作或參與志工的方式，來逃避社會對「傳統家庭主婦」的負面標籤，以建立自我的正向認同。值得注意的是，從制度的層面來看，其母職認同與離職的選擇，卻間接地鞏固了台灣性別化與市場化的兒童照顧體制，加深兒童照顧是個人與家庭責任的社會氛圍。對於推動照顧與工作共容的社會運動與政策制訂者來說，這群離職母親的真實聲音，值得被慎重地考量。英文摘要：Most of the studies in the past had stressed the disadvantages of mothers in lobor market when encountering work-care conflict from a structural point of view. Yet, this research, adopting narrative method and institutional ethnography perspective, explores and analyzes the identity construction and action of middle-class mothers under the same situation from a different viewpoint. Through interviews with 15 stay-at-home mothers, it is found that they identified themselves' choice to quit is a voluntary one, while we argued that it is a choice gap under structural constrains. They would practise intensive mothering in order to preserve the social image of a good mother. Meanwhile, to avoid social stigma as a traditional housewife, they would also work part-time or as a volunteer which helps establish positive self-identification. Yet, on the other hand, it is worth noting that this action has consolidated the traditional gender roles as well as encourages low state intervention on child care. This paper emphasized the group of middle-class mothers' real voices should be taken into account seriously by the public child care policy makers and activists in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：201-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00067篇名：沈默中的表達，順服中的抗拒：女性性騷擾因應論述的自我培力並列篇名：Resistance in Oppression, Expression in Silence: The Discursive Empowerment in Taiwan Women's Coping with Sexual Harassment作者：羅燦煐(Tsun-Yin Luo)關鍵字：性騷擾因應;積極性柔弱;有見識的行動者;權力轉換策略;女性培力;sexual harassment;coping strategy;affirmative weakness;knowledgeable agent;discursive empowerment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：國內外文獻顯示，性騷擾雖是許多女性的共通經驗，但受擾女性多選擇消極逃避之因應方式。本研究綜觀國內性騷擾因應相關研究，發現多數研究倚賴量化研究法，缺乏以權力女性主義分析觀點，探討受擾女性因應策略的意向與動機。本研究訪談九位女性受訪者對性騷擾的因應意圖及意義建構，發現：1.性騷擾受害女性未採取符合陽剛界定的對抗方式，並非等同女性默許或同意這些行為；2.受擾女性作為「有見識的行動者」，能夠評估社會場域之結構限制，並做出既可保全自我又可衝撞父權壓迫之因應抉擇；3.受擾女性有意識地選擇陰柔因應策略，應被視為「積極性柔弱」；4.受擾女性在考慮是否及如何公開對抗或提出申訴時，經常採取權力轉換策略，以提升自己的行動資源；5.受擾女性透過性騷擾因應論述及意義建構，得以發展自我培力，包括：透過對性騷擾事件之因應及申訴歷程，展現出對女性所處社會政治環境的批判性認知，就近利用相關資源的知能及積極的生命態度，及開始相信自己具有掌控自己生命的知能。綜上所述，本研究認為，女性的性騷擾因應策略於沈默中具有表達，順服中隱含抗拒，因此，即使性騷擾受害女性選擇被動因應或沈默以對，仍應被視為主體性的展現。英文摘要：The literature has suggested that, women surviror of sexual harassment tend to adopt passive coping strategies, such as ignoring or avoiding the harassers, in order to survive the oppressive patriarchal system. Nevertheless, mainstream feminists maintain that women's passive copings tend to sustain and re-enforce the oppressive system from which they try to escape. Power feminists present an alternative perspective on defining resistance by and empowerment for women. Based on conceptualizing sexual harassment as discursive practice, they suggest that sexual harassment studies examine the dialectics of silence and expression, and oppression and resistance in women's discursive construction of coping strategies. The present study interviewed 9 women for their construction of their own coping strategies to sexual harassment and sexual assault. In adopting power feminist perspectives to analyze the discursive data, this study found a dialectical relationship between oppression and resistance and a possible transcendence of human agency over social structure. For example, women survivors of sexual harassment, as knowledgeable agents, were able to formulate self preservation strategies based on their social positions and personal resources in responding to sexual harassment incidents. This study considers the coping of affirmative weakness indicative of women's agency instead of total subordination to patriarchy. Furthermore, this study found that some women were able to acquire critical understanding of the patriarchal structure and to affirm their life experience through their coping discourse to sexual harassment. Thus, the study findings support power feminist perspective that women's discursive construction of their coping strategies to sexual harassment indicate possible subversion to and transcendence over the oppressive patriarchy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：267-316資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00078篇名：人禍天災的再認識與社群實力的再生成並列篇名：On Understanding Man-made Catastrophes and Re-generating Communal Capacities作者：丘延亮(Fred Y. L. Chiu)關鍵字：自然災難;人為禍患;風險社會;殖民主義;在地知識;原住民;natural disasters;man-made catastrophes;risk society;colonialism;local knowledge;Primordial Inhabitants期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011中文摘要：自古，原住民向來和大自然緊密互動，與大地相依存，而在創造性的適應過程裡維持生計、創發文化；現代觀點的「天災」對他們而言，實是自然循環的一部分，在古老文化智慧下，往往能避災減損，繼續讓部落活出來。但今日世界的「災難」頻仍，往往被說成全球環境變遷下的天災，卻忽視「天災的人禍性」之歷史事證。因此，我們有必要藉不同主體對「災難經驗」的實際感知，進行問題與討論；重新釐析天災與人禍交織的辯證課題，並把「天災的人禍性」置於災難資本主義全球化的脈絡，重讀世界性的殖民主義擴張歷史，以期更看清國家、資本、慈善機構等在「災後重建」過程可能的同謀關係，並期能回歸原住民生活主體性和袪殖民主義的角度，重新提問。英文摘要：Upon reviewing thousands of entries of reportages dispatched from affected areas of the 921 earthquake as well 88 flood on their aftermaths, this paper purport to enquire into the ”man-made catastrophic” aspects of these said ”natural disaster”. It is found that the Modernist's discourses on ”risk society” and its collateral strategies of disaster-relief do not work for the benefit of the Primordial Inhabitants in these areas at all. Suggestions were made to understand those ”man-made aspects of natural disasters” in light of the achievements of the Primordial Inhabitants' ways in re-generating their communal capacities to re-build their lives.起始頁-結束頁：317-352資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.00089篇名：「台北寄居蟹－2010居無定所攝影展」影像紀要並列篇名：Living without Place: 2010 Taiwan Homeless Photographer Exhibition作者：戴瑜慧(Yu-Hui Tai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：353-376資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.000910篇名：專題導言：長期照顧服務法面面觀並列篇名：Perspectives from the Margins on Long Term Care Act作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：377-379資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001011篇名：雙軌分立的長期照顧體系：照顧服務員國籍與品質的抉擇叉路並列篇名：Dual Long Term Care System: The Dilemma Choice between Ethnicity and Service Quality作者：陳正芬(Chen-Fen Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：381-386資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001112篇名：誰配合誰？部落生活觀點與長期照護服務法草案並列篇名：Tribal Live Perspectives and Long Term Care Act作者：Kui許俊才(Chun-Tsai Hsu);林東龍(Dong-Long Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：387-395資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001213篇名：家庭照顧者做為一種改革長期照顧的社會運動並列篇名：Reforming Long Term Care through the Movement of Family Caregivers作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：397-414資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001314篇名：網路與社運：趨勢、機會與課題專題前言並列篇名：The Internet and Social Movement: Trends, Opportunities, and Agendas作者：魏玓(Ti Wei)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：415-421資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001415篇名：學術研究與公民社會的「另類」互動：公民行動影音紀錄資料庫的實踐經驗並列篇名：The 'Alternative' Interaction between the Academic Research and the Civil Society: The Experience of Taiwan Citizen Digital Audio/Video Archives作者：管中祥(Chung-Hsiang Kuang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：423-436資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001516篇名：從網路到街頭：反國光石化的動員經驗、成效與反省並列篇名：Moving from the Internet to the Street: The Mobilization Experience, Effects, and Reflections of the Anti- Kuokuang Petrochemical Technology Co. Movement作者：陳平軒(Ping-Hsuan Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：437-450資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001617篇名：台灣社會媒體與網路動員（2009-2011）並列篇名：Social Media and Online Mobilization in Taiwan (2009-2011)作者：鄭國威(Kuo-Wei Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：85期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：451-482資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201112.001718篇名：「陳映真：思想與文學Ⅱ」專號導言並列篇名：Chen Yingzhen: Thought and Literature (Ⅱ) Editorial Introduction作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.000119篇名：陳映真的文學視野－陰柔理論的啟示並列篇名：The Literary Perspective of Chen Yingzhen-Enlightenment of Yin Rou Theory作者：戴盛柏(Chung Bor Day)關鍵字：陳映真;陰柔理論;凌駕父權;生活節奏;家;交織;包容力;Chen Yingzhen;yin rou theory;override patriarchy;the rhythm of everyday life;home;intertwine;containing force期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011中文摘要：若要探討整體社會問題，就不得不面對最根本的合理化問題，亦即人類生活世界的日常生活實踐為什麼是合理的問題。面對此問題，必須具有社會理論的要求。只是社會理論的使用，並非借用任何現有理論架構來維持既定的社會發展模式，而是一種啟示性關係的運用，以面對未來社會的塑造。研究者經由理論的啟示，進入生活世界來對行動者加以瞭解，再回過頭重新形構既有的想法與觀念，如此方能真正問及日常生活世界中那些行動者們認為重要且相關的問題，也方能展望未來。因此，社會理論的運用關鍵在於啟發。一位研究者可以從日常生活世界諸多面向中，汲取具啟發性的社會理論。不全然相同於學院領域所建立的理論，小說文本也具有建立一種理論啟示的可能。吾人針對台灣文學家陳映真的五篇小說作為探討依據，試圖從小說內容中進行初步的社會理論探索；即作為本文的核心問題－陳映真小說中基於女性、母性為出發點，在現代資本主義社會底下，是否具有建立一種陰柔理論的可能。文中首先以西方對於女性、母性為探討主軸的社會理論作為一種對比，突顯陳映真小說理論的特殊性、及其對於陰性理論發展的潛在優勢；其次針對陳映真小說進行陰柔理論探索，使得該理論的初步圖像能夠顯現。透過陳映真小說所彰顯的社會理論啟示，在於行動者以「包容力」與「生活節奏」兩個概念相互作用所形成的動能機制，而能不斷進行連結、交織、浮現、萌生的生活節奏型塑過程，並從中獲得個人生活的意義與社會集體發展的意義。英文摘要：Like political economics, sociology is used to treat society as a whole, and the most fundamental issue is about rationalization. Why the practice of human daily life is reasonable? Its' need approach of social theory to answer this question. The social theories have played an indirect role to enlighten the study of human behavior and daily life. For that reason, a researcher could build social theories from any dimensions of the world we live, even literature and fiction. This article has tried to find a potential perspective of social theories from five short fictions of Chen Yingzhen, a famous writer in Taiwan. The main concern is the perspective about women and motherhood under the capitalist society in Chen's fictions. Is it possible to establish a Yin-Rou theory which is different from academic Western Feminism? Through the revelation from the social theories revealed in Chen's fictions, an actor can make an agency from the conceptions of containing force and the rhythm of daily life, and obtain some meanings from the interaction between individual life and social collective development.起始頁-結束頁：5-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.000220篇名：從仰望聖城到復歸民眾－陳映真小說〈雲〉裡的知識分子學習之路並列篇名：Getting Back to the People from a Phantom Pilgrimage-Reading Chen Yingzhen's Fiction "The Cloud"作者：趙剛(Kang Chao)關鍵字：陳映真;知識分子;民眾;美國;第三世界;工會;現實主義;Chen Yingzhen;intellectuals;people;America;the Third World;labor union;realism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：84期出版年：2011中文摘要：〈雲〉的核心是思考如何反抗當代的資本主義現代性。陳映真相信唯一的出路是第三世界的知識分子要在思想與實踐上重回故里，回到被壓迫被歧視被損害的民眾身上，從他（她）們身上重新學習。是在這個脈絡下，陳映真開展了日常生活的、人間的實踐倫理學，而將它展現在張維傑這個人物身上。透過張維傑，陳映真想要傳達的是一個核心的道理：第三世界的左翼知識分子要重新有一個理想主義的出發，就必須先找到一種建立在歷史縱深與日常生活之上的精神的「家」、「鄉」或「故里」，你不能也無法從一個「外在於」歷史傳統、社會現實與一般民眾的基點，進行理想主義的反抗。英文摘要：Core to the novel ”The Cloud” is how to resist the sweeping capitalist modernity often under an innocent facade of ”American dream.” In an age of ”end of ideology,” Chen Yingzhen provides a third-world perspective for our rethinking of the old issue. He insists that the intellectuals of the third world have no way but to build up a new idealism which is rooted in people's cultural tradition and daily life.起始頁-結束頁：59-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201109.000301篇名：主編的話作者：張晉芬期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：22期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：2-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.22.i2篇名：在「祖國」與「外國」之間：旅中台生的認同與畫界並列篇名：Between ”Homeland” and ”Foreign Country”: Liminal Identity and Boundary Work of Taiwanese Students in China作者：藍佩嘉(Pei-Chia Lan);吳伊凡(Yi-Fan Wu)關鍵字：學生遷移;畫界工作;認同;國族認同;兩岸關係;student migration;boundary work;identification;national identity;Taiwan and China期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：22期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文針對在中國大陸就讀高等教育的台灣學生，探討遷移經驗如何影響國族認同的形構與轉變。透過61 份深入訪談資料，闡釋旅中台生如何在台灣與中國、想像的中國與現實的中國、「祖國」與「外國」之間交織而成的論述網絡裡，磋商其曖昧的主體位置，以及如何在日常互動中，指認我群與他群的差異，並透過各種生活實作，模糊或強化我群與當地人的界線。本文用畫界工作的概念來分析台生的磋商與行動策略，並提出座標圖的工具來分析台生內部的異質經驗，研究發現三種主要類型的畫界工作策略：(1)傾向畢業後不留在中國工作，強調台灣人與當地人之間的差異，常見於學位導向的台生。(2)傾向畢業後留在中國，或納入在地社會程度較高者，如部分專業移民子女與尋求本地謀職的台生。(3)多數人希望留在當地工作，但在地理空間與社會生活上，都維持與本地人明確的區隔，如聚落台商子女與尋求跨區生涯流動者。英文摘要：Based on 61 in-depth interviews with Taiwanese students who moved to China for higher education, our study examines how migratory experience impacts the configuration and transformation of national identities. In particular, we explore how migrant students negotiate their ambiguous subject positions in webs of discourses that are interwoven between Taiwan and China, between China-as-imagined and China-inreality, and between ”homeland” and ”foreign country.” We demonstrate how students re-identify ”us” and ”them” during personal encounters while living in China, and how they utilize a variety of everyday practices to highlight or downplay the boundaries between themselves and locals. We propose a map of boundary work to analyze migrants' heterogeneous positions and multifarious experiences. We identify three major types of boundary work, as follows: (1) Some students are inclined to leave China after graduation and emphasize the existence of radical differences between Chinese and Taiwanese; this strategy is most common among those who emigrated to study for degrees. (2) Some students are inclined to stay in China and become incorporated into the local society to a higher degree, such as those whose parents work in China as professionals and those who came to China for job prospects. (3) The others choose to stay in China but highlight the boundaries between themselves and locals by deploying spatial and social segregation; examples include those whose parents run businesses in China and those who seek cross-region employment and mobility.起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.22.13篇名：經濟轉型中的應對策略與制度分歧：溫州與無錫並列篇名：Coping Strategies and Institutional Divergence in the Economic Transition of Wenzhou and Wuxi作者：劉雅靈(Yia-Ling Liu)關鍵字：比較制度優勢;制度互補;制度企業家;制度變遷的手工修補與層疊交替;comparative institutional advantages;institutional complementary;institutional entrepreneur;institutional change of bricolage and layering期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：22期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從制度論出發，強調在地方比較制度優勢與制度互補的影響下，溫州與無錫如何回應日漸激烈的中國市場競爭與國際金融危機？本文強調溫州與無錫的地方行動者，如政府經濟治理能力的強弱、行業商會的外向連結或自我封閉、企業獨立或依賴的經營精神，均影響地方採行不同的應對策略做經濟轉型，以回應市場競爭的挑戰。溫州已從過去割喉式準自由市場競爭走向以商會協調為主的市場經濟，而無錫從過去地方政府產權所有的公司法人走向以地方政府協調為主的混合市場經濟。本文認為在應對策略選擇中，溫州開放包容與外向連結的行業商會，扮演制度企業家角色，以豐富的資訊、理念與資源做制度創新，防止市場失靈。相較之下，無錫地方政府雖以強勢姿態干預經濟，如積極引進外資、推動高科技產業升級與密集式成長、產權私有化改革、組織企業集團上市、營造城鎮總體規劃、普及社會福利等，但無錫始終追隨中央政策之後，並造成許多資源浪費與效益低落，故無錫地方政府僅呈現弱勢制度企業家角色。溫州與無錫在制度變遷過程中，不僅出現舊制度元素重新組合的手工修補，而且出現新、舊制度元素相互混合的層疊交替，並在各自原有不同的比較制度優勢與制度互補約制下，走向分歧的經濟轉型路徑。英文摘要：This article explores the ways in which Wenzhou and Wuxi, under the constraints of the local comparative institutional advantages and institutional complementarity, develop different coping strategies in response to intensified domestic market competition and international financial crisis in their respective paths toward market transition when China is embracing global capitalism. From an institutional perspective, this paper argues that it is the outward bridging character of business associations in Wenzhou that assume the role of a strong institutional entrepreneur to initiate institutional innovation, contributing to the local transition from the semi-laissez faire market economy to a market economy coordinated by business associations in order to prevent market failure. In contrast, it is the domination of the local state in Wuxi that ended local state corporatism over the past two decades and took the local-state-coordinated mixed-market economy at the turn of the century. The local state in Wuxi played only a weak institutional entrepreneurial role, always followed in the steps of the central state, and lacked initiative to shape its own path of transition. As a result, this article demonstrates the characteristics of bricolage and layering in the institutional change of Wenzhou and Wuxi's economic transition.起始頁-結束頁：59-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.22.594篇名：編排風險：多胚胎孕育的多重社會科技網絡並列篇名：Choreographing Risk: Multiple Sociotechnical Networks of Multiple Pregnancy作者：吳嘉苓(Chia-Ling Wu)關鍵字：風險;性別;人工協助生殖科技;多胚胎植入;減胎;risk;gender;assisted reproductive technology;multiple embryo transfer;fetal reduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：22期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文提出「編排風險」概念，探討人工協助生殖科技所引發的多胚胎孕育網絡，並著重分析該網絡的變動性，以及婦女的行動與經驗。主要資料來自婦女訪談、相關醫事人員訪談與檔案資料。本文發現，在多胚胎助孕、受孕與懷孕的歷程，其組成元素與組合模式，往往圍繞著風險來運作，有異質的網絡特性，同時又彼此環環相扣。在助孕的網絡中，醫用雙方都以懷孕失敗作為主要風險，醫界並以多胚胎植入與排卵藥物作為風險處理策略，卻進一步增加了多胚胎孕育的健康風險。醫界提出以減胎當作備用的風險處理措施，然而一些產婦整合出一個混雜了價值、經濟、宗教、身體、情緒、技術等等風險評估綜合體，抗拒進入減胎網絡；另一些產婦雖有意採用減胎措施，卻因為醫師不推薦、不施行，使得減胎網絡經常瓦解。而台灣高比例的多胞胎懷孕，主要由多胞胎孕婦透過身體工作，以及協調生產與再生產勞動，努力支撐起安胎網絡，並承擔其風險後果。透過這三個異質網絡的比較，本文彰顯出婦女在多胚胎孕育歷程中，越來越擔起編排風險的要角，也承擔更多的成敗與後果。在政策意涵上，本文提出醫界在各關卡編排風險的方式，應考量婦女的異質風險觀與利益，並減少多胚胎受孕的發生，降低婦女編排風險的勞心勞力。英文摘要：This paper creates the concept of ”choreographing risk” to explore the sociotechnical networks of multiple pregnancy, mostly caused by assisted reproductive technology. I argue that during the processes of assisted conception and multiple pregnancy, heterogeneous elements of technology, legality, financial issues, emotions, politics and gender are coordinated around risk. Data include in-depth interviews of women and medical professionals, as well as archival data. I find that at the stage of getting pregnant with assisted reproductive technology, doctors tend to usemultiple embryo transfer and ovarian stimulation medication to increase the pregnancy rate. Both doctors and women perceive failure of conception as the major risk and tend to disregard the risk of multiple pregnancy. In the case of multifetal conception, fetal reduction becomes a technical model to reduce the risk of multiple pregnancy. Some women and doctors refuse this technique for reasons other than health risk, however; the network of fetal reduction often collapses. High prevalence of multiple pregnancy in Taiwan exists. Pregnant women of twins and triples take embodied responsibility to avoid the risk of premature birth, including diverse bodily work and negotiation between productive and reproductive labor. This paper shows that women vis-a-vis medical professionals are becoming the central choreographers in the multiple networks of multiple pregnancy. For a policy implication, I suggest adjusting assisted conception methods, such as reducing the number of multiple embryo transfers during in-vitro fertilization, to relieve women from the hard labor of multiple risk choreography.起始頁-結束頁：111-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.22.1115篇名：彈性專業化作為產業轉型途徑：以台灣遊艇製造業為例並列篇名：Flexible Specialization as a Strategy of Industrial Upgrading: The Case of the Yacht-Making Industry in Taiwan作者：鄭力軒(Li-Hsuan Cheng)關鍵字：遊艇製造;產業升級;彈性專業化;客製化;工匠;Yacht Manufacturing;Industrial Upgrading;Flexible Specialization;Customized Production;Craftsmanship期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：22期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣遊艇業在過去二十年間成功地從廉價小型遊艇生產者，轉型成為中大型、中高單價遊艇生產者，以客製化模式在國際遊艇市場中生存。本文主張這個案例呈現出彈性專業化可以作為產業升級在技術追趕外的另一種模式，彈性專業化指的是利用高技術勞動力與不斷創新，以因應市場的快速變化的生產模式。透過蒐集文獻資料，以及深度訪談木工師傅、工程師、負責人、經理人及協力廠商，並實地觀察施作過程，本文發現台灣遊艇業在面臨成本升高的衝擊下，必須轉往中大型、中高單價遊艇市場發展，但受制於市場地位而必須仰賴客製化模式和歐美廠商做區隔。另一方面，既有的木工在工匠生產模式中所孕育的技能支撐了客製化的發展，木工所培養的現場應變能力比合乎管理理論的組合式工法更能快速應對客戶的特殊需求，同時在生產現場孕育了不斷自我提升的能力，促成品質得以不斷提升，支撐了遊艇業的升級。英文摘要：Over the last two decades, yacht makers in Taiwan successfully shifted their products from small, lower-value-added yachts to mega-yachts with higher values. I argue that this case demonstrates flexible specialization, which refers to a production model that relies on high-skilled workers who can instantly respond to rapid market change. I obtained the data by collecting relevant documents and interviewing owners, managers, engineers, carpenters, and other relevant actors, which yielded the following findings. In the late 1980s when yacht makers lost the competitiveness in the market of small yachts, many chose to upgrade to the market of mega yachts. Because of the lack of market status, however, Taiwanese yacht makers must rely on customized orders for upgrading. The craftsmanship embedded in the traditional model of production buttressed the development of customized production and facilitated the long-term improvement of quality, but it also prevented yacht makers from adopting the module production system.起始頁-結束頁：157-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.22.1576篇名：探尋前沿的視角可能性：代替評論的回響作者：湯志傑期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：22期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：197-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.22.1977篇名：主編的話作者：張晉芬期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：2-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.i8篇名：消失的農漁民：重探台灣早期環境抗爭並列篇名：Vanishing Farmers: Taiwan's Early Environmental Protests Revisited作者：劉華真(Hwa-Jen Liu)關鍵字：環境行動;資源競爭;經濟生存;小農階級;environmental activism;resources competition;economic survival;smallholding farmers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011中文摘要：現代意義下的環境運動在各國的發跡各有不同。西歐與北美的環境運動除了是1960 年代學運和反戰浪潮下的一支，也是對諸多環境安全事件（例如殺蟲劑使用與食品安全）的爭辯與反省。從台灣1970年代的環境抗爭來看，戰後第一波環境衝突源於農工部門爭奪自然資源使用權與配置權，農漁民的訴求明確反映了高度商品化的農業部門利益，其行動亦代表了小農階級在工業資本擴張、不利環境之下所做的垂死掙扎。然而隨著知識分子的論述介入，1980 與1990 年代的台灣環境運動由「當地居民」取代「農民」，「普世利益」取代「經濟利益」，開始了一種「普世運動」的建造工程。這個追求「普遍利益」的運動固然建構出一個包容各方勢力的平台，然而它也擱置了弱勢階級的經濟利益，避談分配議題，放棄了結合環境與階級議題的另種運動路線。而在環境運動的歷史書寫中，農漁民以環境抗爭來保衛經濟利益並沒有獲得重視，反而強化了環境運動重「普世利益」、輕「階級利益」的傾向。英文摘要：Forms of modern, mass-based environmental activism have emerged with different sizes and shapes. On both sides of the Atlantic, environmental movements of the 1960s arose in response to environmental hazards disturbing the landscapes of affluent societies. As a late industrializer, Taiwan's first wave of environmental actions began as an inter-sectoral struggle over the access and control of natural resources in the early 1970s. Aided by the developmental state, industrial capital seized water resources and took arable land away from smallholding farmers to build industrial parks and factories. Without proper regulations in place, unregulated liquid toxins were dumped in the surrounding irrigation systems, the emission of harmful fumes resulted in crop failure, and groundwater and fishing harbors were badly contaminated. Understandably, farmers and fishers continuously protested against such industrial practices and demanded proper compensations. Yet the intervention of intellectuals and middle classes, armed with an American-styled, class-interest-free version of environmentalism, changed the landscape of the environmental struggle. The early 1980s heralded the birth of an environmental movement wary of public health and food safety, yet devoid of genuine concerns about the economic survival of the disadvantaged. Previous struggles prompted by agricultural livelihoods had been forgotten and unequal distribution of natural resources unaddressed, and in the next ten to fifteen years, this movement bulldozed the opportunity to simultaneously pursue ecological and economic justice.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.19篇名：永遠的異鄉客？公民身份差序與中國農民工階級並列篇名：Strangers Forever? Differential Citizenship and China's Rural Migrant Workers作者：吳介民(Jieh-Min Wu)關鍵字：公民身分差序;資本主義;階級;城鄉二元體制;農民工;differential citizenship;capitalism;class;rural-urban dualism;rural migrant workers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討資本主義工業化進程、國內移民、公民權不平等三者之間的關係。作者以公民身分差序(differential citizenship)的概念，解釋中國農民工所遭受的制度性歧視，尤其是在社會福利等面向。農民工在目前中國資本主義發展框架中，同時遭受著階級與身分的雙重剝削。中國市場經濟經過三十幾年的發展，民工已經成為藍領勞動階級中最重要的一個組成部分。民工階級是後毛時期開放人口流動以及世界生產分工結構重整的產物。民工的身分特徵，起源於毛時代的城鄉二元體制。「改革開放」時期，民工作為「外來人口」被排除在移居城市福利體制之外。近年來，由於社會經濟不平等的現象加劇，中國中央政府採取新的政策，要求移居地政府改善民工生活工作條件，但是新形態的城市自我保護主義卻隨之興起，城鄉二元體制發生了歷史—空間的轉型，並且構成了剝削民工機制的制度性基礎。本文解釋這種新城市保護主義形成的背景與過程，而公民身分的制度化排除機制是關照的焦點。尤其在東部沿海的發達城市，地方政府表面上將民工納入了城市公民身分體制，實則藉由諸種措施而將其擺放在次等市民的制度位置，從而造成既納入又歧視的結果。「農民工問題」是中國在後社會主義階段轉向市場經濟的一個深刻難題。本文將問題導向了資本主義與公民權發展之間的比較歷史視野，並指出公民身分差序體制對於民工階級形成的重大影響。英文摘要：The paper explores the interrelationships among capitalist industrialization, domestic migration, and the inequality of citizen rights. The concept of differential citizenship (gongmin shenfen chaxu) is defined and used to explain the discriminatory treatment of rural migrant workers, especially in the sphere of social welfare. Situated within the Chinese style of capitalist development, migrant laborers suffered a double exploitation in terms of economic class relation and citizen status. The migrant working class was created by a dual process of restructuring the division of labor in world production and massive population movement in the post-Mao epoch. The disadvantaged status of migrant workers originated in the rural-urban divide and the household registration (hukou) system during Mao's time. Rural-urban dualism, retooled during post-Mao's ”open reform,” was utilized by migrant-receiving cities to exclude the ”population from outside” from enjoying urban public goods. In recent years, as social and economic inequalities became aggravated, the central government adopted new policies and demanded that local governments improve migrants' working and living conditions, but as a consequence, a new form of urban protectionism arose in response to central reform policies, and it has further institutionalized the exploitative mechanism. This paper unravels the subtle configuration of urban protectionism by focusing on the institutionalized exclusionary devices employed on migrants. Particularly, local governments of the major East-coast cities ostensibly incorporated migrants into the urban citizenship regime, but in effect relocated them into a position of inferior citizenship; a strategy of ”incorporate-to-discriminate” thus emerged. The ”problem of migrant workers” leads us to the issue of transitioning to a market economy in a post-socialist nation. The author adopts a comparativehistorical perspective on modern citizenship development and points out that how the differential citizenship regime has helped forge the Chinese migrant working class.起始頁-結束頁：51-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.5110篇名：我可能不夠女性主義：女性主義認同與實踐的敘事建構並列篇名：”Maybe I'm Not a Qualified Feminist”: Narrative Construction of Feminism Identity and Practice作者：余貞誼(Chen-Yi Yu)關鍵字：敘事;女性主義;認同;實踐;文化框架;narrative;feminism;identity;practice;culture frameworks期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011中文摘要：在大學中受過女性主義訓練，進入媒體工作的女性主義者們，當她們在敘說自己實踐女性主義的經歷時，大多吐露一種自己不夠女性主義的焦慮，這種焦慮集合起來便形成一個公共議題：是什麼因素引起此一致的歉意？本文從敘事研究的角度，透過將道歉敘事放置在它所鑲嵌的女性主義社群，探討社群文化框架中的敘事典範和主流情節輪廓如何滲透進這些敘說者的生命經驗，使她們以框架中蘊含的價值、成就和道德義務來組織和詮釋生命中的事件，因而認知到自己行動與理想典範間的差距，並將此差距詮釋為一種反責自我的歉疚。透過這樣的討論，道歉敘事不再只是個人實踐行動後的自省，而更深化為一種文化框架的再生產過程，讓我們看到個人敘事與更大的文化結構間的交織作用，並且使此歉意超越個人煩惱的層次，成為女性主義發展的公共議題。英文摘要：Having received feminist education in university, feminists who have become media workers tend to reveal an anxiety - ”maybe I’m not a qualified feminist” - when narrating their feminist practice experience in the workplace. When these anxieties gather together, they become a public issue and attract attention to the causes of their collective apology. Using the narrative approach, the author puts these apologetic narratives into the context of the feminist community to explore how the narrative exemplars and popular plot outline of feminism culture frameworks penetrate the narrators’ life experiences, and lead them to organize and interpret life events with values, achievement, and moral responsibility embedded in the frameworks. In this case, narrators often perceive a gap between ideal models and their actions, and interpret the gap as their fault for which they should apologize. The author concludes that apologetic narratives are not only self-reflections, but also represent a deeper reproduction process of culture frameworks in which personal narratives interact with a larger cultural structure, going beyond personal troubles to public issues.起始頁-結束頁：101-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.10111篇名：從「夫枷」到「國枷」：結構交織困境下的受暴越南婚移婦女並列篇名：From Family to State Tightrope: Structural Intersectionality and Battered Vietnamese Wives in Taiwan作者：唐文慧(Anna Wen-Hui Tang);王宏仁(Hong-Zen Wang)關鍵字：結構交織觀點;家庭暴力防治法;越南婚移女性;事實運作中的法律;建制民族誌;structural intersectionality approach;Domestic Violence Prevention Law;Vietnamese immigrant women;law in action;institutional ethnography期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文採建制民族誌的研究取向，探討有哪些結構性因素，使得一群婚移台灣的越南女性，在面臨家庭暴力時難以脫離困境？台灣雖然已經有「家庭暴力防治法」，相關人員依法必須協助她們走出暴力，然而我們檢視「法律運作」的過程，訪談越南婦女和台灣丈夫，佐以相關人士的說法和文本資料，卻發現從最初不知該如何求助，到進入求助體系，最後縱使取得家暴保護令，受暴婦女在每一個階段中，都面臨了結構困境。從結構交織的觀點出發，我們認為在性別、國族與階級的交織作用下，父權國家在法律運作以及福利服務輸送的過程當中，所形成的制度性暴力，是越南婚移婦女無法順利走出家暴困境的關鍵。英文摘要：This paper explores what structural factors hinder Vietnamese immigrant wives from escaping domestic violence by applying an institutional ethnography perspective. Taiwan's Domestic Violence Prevention Law regulates the government to assign professionals to help abused victims, but the law in action shows that abused Vietnamese wives must go through multiple institutions, which put different structural constraints on them to reach the goal of escaping domestic violence. Following the structural intersectionality approach, we contend that gender, nationalism, and class structural factors intersectionally impose constraints on immigrant women in the process of seeking help from the state.起始頁-結束頁：157-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.15712篇名：台海兩地華人家庭圖像的變奏－評Understanding Chinese Family: A Comparative Study of Taiwan and Southeast China作者：賴淑娟期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：199-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.19913篇名：掌握量化社會研究之鑰：評謝宇《迴歸分析》作者：李瑞中期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：211-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.21114篇名：評Getting Saved in America: Taiwanese Immigration and Religious Experience作者：趙星光期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：21期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：217-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2011.21.21701篇名：待更新不動產之實質選擇權價值分析並列篇名：A Study on the Real Option Value of the Urban Redevelopment of Real Estate作者：彭建文(Chien-Wen Peng);馮靖博(Jing-Bo Feng);丁玟甄(Wen-Jing Deng)關鍵字：實質選擇權;都市更新;待更新不動產;門檻價值;real option;urban redevelopment;redevelopment real estate;hurdle value期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究運用實質選擇權的概念，探討市場環境與都市更新制度對於待更新不動產選擇權價值與更新時機的影響，透過模型推導與台北市待更新不動產的模擬分析發現，當建築物殘餘耐用年數為20年時，參與都市更新雖可獲得正報酬，但納入租金不確定性風險後仍未達更新門檻，所有權人將不會提前更新。其次，若一個地區的預期租金成長率與其變異數較低（例如大同區與萬華區），通常代表其市場未來發展不熱絡，此將抵銷容積獎勵誘因的效果，顯示市場發展性仍為影響更新政策能否有效推行的主因。待更新不動產實質選擇權價值與容積獎勵倍數、租金預期成長率、租金預期成長率變異數呈現正相關，與殘餘耐用年數、相關更新成本則為負相關。此外，殘餘耐用年數、租金預期成長率變異數、相關更新成本增加時會使更新門檻提高，使所有權人延後更新，但容積獎勵倍數提高則會降低更新門檻，使所有權人提前進行更新。不過，預期租金成長率過高或過低時，都將延後更新時機。英文摘要：This study applies real option theory to analyze the influences of market conditions and urban redevelopment policies on the option value and optimal timing of the redevelopment of real estate. The simulation results reveal some interesting findings. Firstly, although the redevelopment project can generate positive revenue when the remaining economic life of the structure is twenty years, since the market rent can not reach the redevelopment hurdle value when considering the risk of rent uncertainty, the owners will not execute redevelopment project immediately. Secondly, a low expected rent appreciation rate and its variance (for example in Datong District and Wanhua District) implies that the market conditions are not good in the near future, and so the effect of the bonus of the floor area ratio will be offset. Thirdly, the real option value of redevelopment real estate is positively correlated with the bonus of the floor area ratio, the expected rent appreciation rate and its variance, but is negatively correlated with the remaining economic life and redevelopment costrelated variables. Finally, an increase in the remaining economic life, the variance of the expected rent appreciation rate, and the redevelopment-cost related variables will delay the optimal timing of the redevelopment decision, but the effect of the bonus of the floor area ratio will be reversed. However, an either too high or too low expected rent appreciation rate will delay the optimal timing of redevelopment.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201112.00022篇名：固定利率與指數型不動產逆向抵押貸款之比較分析並列篇名：A Comparison between Fixed-Rate and Adjustable-Rate Reverse Mortgages作者：李秉芳(Ping-Fang Li);楊屯山(Jerry T.Yang);林哲群(Che-Chun Lin)關鍵字：不動產逆向抵押貸款;固定利率不動產逆向抵押貸款;指數型不動產逆向抵押貸款;總貸款成本率;reverse mortgage;fixed-rate reverse mortgage;adjustable-rate reverse mortgage;total annual loan costs期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：不動產逆向抵押貸款（RM）允許年長者擁有之房屋權益轉換成現金，以支付日常生活所需，為近來以房養老諸多方案之一。本文使用2008台灣生命表之國民的平均餘命數據資料，根據性別、年齡、及模擬的房價與利率，估計最大可能的貸款成數，進而推估固定利率及指數型RM的年金水準。再者，設定不同的房貸保費結構，結合其情境模擬，從借款者角度比較兩者之月收入與總貸款成本，以判斷兩種RM對於台灣不同群組的年長者的適當性。研究結果顯示，借款者年紀越長，每月可得到的付款額也越多；且年齡低於90歲的女性，得到之每月付款額較男性為少。再者，除了95歲女性借款者外，同性別年齡之借款人，其指數型RM的每月付款額及總貸款成本，均較固定利率RM為高；而兩種RM的總貸款成本，隨著貸款之經過月數增加而下降。英文摘要：We examine the fitness of fixed-or adjustable-rate reverse mortgages(RM) programs for various gender-age groups of retirees in Taiwan. RM programs allowsenioror retirees to exchange their house equity fora stream of level cash flows to cover their living expenses. We use the Taiwan 2008 Life Expectancy Database and simulate house prices and interest rates to estimate the annuitiesand the maximum loan to value for different gender-age groups if either RM program is adopted. While accounting for the mortgage insurance premium structure, we evaluate each RM program based upon the monthly payments the senior receive and the total annual loan costs (TALC) they pay. The results show that the elders receive more monthly payments, and female over 90 years old receive more monthly payment than the male counterparts while the reverse is true if the female are below 90. The TALC (or monthly payments) of the adjustable-rate RM is lower (are higher) than the fixedrate RM given the same gender-age group except for the female-95 group.起始頁-結束頁：27-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201112.00283篇名：不動產估價師理性行為之探討並列篇名：Are Appraisers Rational?作者：陳奉瑤(Fong-Yao Chen)關鍵字：部分調整;估價師行為;不動產證券化;估價平滑;partial adjustment;appraisal behavior;REITs;smoothing期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：金融海嘯席捲世界造成重大傷害，突顯出經濟景氣循環中繁榮階段的過度樂觀與泡沫化，其似乎隱現投資人具動物本性，有追高助跌的行為，也引發對估價平滑評判的再省思。過去探討估價平滑之相關文獻多以總體資料切入，並將該現象歸因於估價師不能確實掌握市場變動，而直接尋求去平滑的方法。本文有別於過去多數相關研究，改由個別估價資料進行觀察，以T-REITs重新估價案例為對象，依循Quan & Quigley(1991)部分調整模型之理念，以迴歸分析衡量估值與當期市場價格和前期估值之關係，判斷部分調整的程度；並藉由信心函數的建立，進一步觀察部分調整行為是否理性。實證結果顯示，市場噪音越大，估價師賦予市場資訊的權重越小，驗證估價師確有部分調整行為且應屬理性行為。英文摘要：Previous studies defined appraisal smoothing as reduced volatility or the lag structure of the appraisal-based index as compared to the transaction-based index. Most of these studies examined data at an aggregate level and used extensive data sets in order to de-smooth the appraisal-based index. This paper aims to observe smoothing behavior among appraisers in Taiwan. It uses the re-appraisal data of T-REITs and modifies the partial adjustment model, developed by Quan & Quigley(1991), to observe smoothing issues. The results show that partial adjustments have existed and that T-REITs appraisers attach less weights to market information because of market noise.起始頁-結束頁：47-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201112.00484篇名：迎毗設施與鄰避設施對住宅價格影響之研究並列篇名：The Impacts of Housing Price in YIMBY and NIMBY Facilities作者：楊宗憲(Chung-Hsien Yang);蘇倖慧(Shing-Huei Su)關鍵字：迎毗設施;鄰避設施;住宅價格;平均絕對百分比誤差;估價模型;YIMBY;NIMBY;housing price;MAPE;appraisal regression model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：迎毗設施與鄰避設施一直以來對住宅價格存有一定程度的影響，然過去文獻甚少同時探討某特定設施對住宅價格影響，在評估對住宅價格之影響時極易發生誤判。因此，釐清不同設施間對住宅價格的影響力差異，對在估價過程中，建立客觀的評估準則具有相當重要的意義。研究結果顯示，在迎毗設施方面，學校對房價的影響最大，其次是大型公園、百貨公司、捷運站及大型體育場館；而在鄰避設施方面，殯儀館對房價的影響較大，其次是污水處理廠、寺廟、變電塔、垃圾焚化廠。此外，加入迎毗與鄰避設施的估價模型，平均絕對百分比誤差則顯著的低了近1個百分點。英文摘要：The YIMBY and NIMBY facilities are two significant factors in the housing price. Many recent studies have discussed their importance separately. How the YIMBY and the NIMBY facilities are related in affecting the housing price is still unclear but to ignore the potentials may lead to biased decision in appraisal. Therefore it is very important to fully understand how these two factors are related in order to reduce the number of misjudged appraisal in deciding the housing price. In our study, the schools in the categories of the YIMBY facilities are weighted the most as the housing price factor and then the large-scale parks, followed by department stores, MRT stations and largescale gymnasiums. Furthermore, as for the NIMBY facilities, the funeral home is first on the first influence list, followed by sewage treatment plants, temples, power transmission stations and then the refuse incineration plant. When the YIMBY and NIMBY facilities are included, the MAPE has been reduced by 1% in the appraisal regression model.起始頁-結束頁：61-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201112.00625篇名：台灣不動產市場的下方風險－以台灣四個縣市為例並列篇名：The Downside Risk of Real Estate Markets in Taiwan-Evidence from Four Areas作者：江明珠(Ming-Chu Chiang);李政峰(Cheng-Feng Lee);欉清全(Ching-Chuan Tsong)關鍵字：涉險值;不動產市場;下方風險;極值理論;歷史模擬法;value at risk;real estate market;downside risk;extreme value theory;historical simulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從不動產抵押貸款銀行的角度，以涉險值(Value at Risk)的觀念，衡量台灣四個縣市（台北市（縣）、台中市與高雄市）不動產市場的下檔風險；並藉由比較各縣市的涉險值大小，深入了解各區域不動產市場的風險。實證結果顯示，四縣市中除台中市外，其餘縣市的房價報酬率分配則可能為常態；其次，本文使用的三種模型在不同的信賴水準下，表現有些微差異，並不存在單一模型能完全預測四縣市的房價風險；再者，各縣市的房價下跌風險高低依序為高雄市、台中市、台北市、台北縣，此一結果與一般認為台北市風險最高的認知，顯然大異其趣；最後，在最高的信賴水準下(99%)，極值理論法能正確的預測四個縣市極端的房價跌幅，因此不失為一種較能反映房價風險的預測方法。英文摘要：The current study employs Value at Risk (VaR) to evaluate the downside risk of the real estate market in four areas (Taipei City, Taipei County, Taichung City and Kaohsiung City) in Taiwan, and compares the VaR estimates among them with in-depth measurements of real estate price risk in these metropolitan areas. The main empirical results show that, first, the distributions of house price returns in the four areas fall into two categories: non-normal fat-tailed distributions for Taichung City and normal distributions for the other three cities. Second, there is no universally appropriate VaR model that captures real estate risk in the four areas. Third, the risk levels of the four areas in order of size are Kaohsiung City, Taichung City, Taipei City, and Taipei County. Finally, under the highest level of confidence (99%), the model based on extreme value theory responds quickly to the changes in house price returns and provides correct VaR forecasts in these four areas compared to the other models.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201106.00016篇名：台灣不動產投資信託基金之抗跌與風險特性並列篇名：The Defensive and Risk Characteristics of REITs in the Taiwan Stock Market作者：蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：不動產投資信託基金;防禦性股票;風險;波動性;Real Estate Investment Trusts;defensive stock;risk;volatility期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：雖然不動產投資信託基金(real estate investment trusts, REITs)常被視為是防禦性(defensive)證券，但文獻上對於此資產特性的研究尚有一些爭議。因此本文希望藉由檢視我國REITs的風險性特性來提供投資人客觀的投資依據。本研究以2006年1月至2009年5月為樣本期間，檢視目前已上市的八檔REITs，發現其低風險的特性可顯現在對特殊事件的抗跌能力上。如在台股當日或隔夜有巨幅下跌時，REITs的下跌幅度明顯的比非REITs的股票低；此外，若與一般同被視為防禦性股票的國營企業類股或同屬收益與不動產相關的飯店百貨類股相較時，REITs也顯現較高的抗跌性。而在分散風險的能力方面，REITs與大盤的相關性無論是以線性或非線性來衡量，都較其他股票為低。最後本文以GJR-GARCH(Glosten Jagannathan Runkle-generalized ARCH)模型，檢視REITs是否具有波動性的不對稱效果時，發現有五檔REITs及REITs指數都具有顯著的反向槓桿效果(anti-leverage effect)，其說明當前一期的新進衝擊是負向影響股價報酬時，本期報酬的波動反而會降低，此與一般股票的波動特性恰好相反，更說明REITs的抗跌優勢。英文摘要：Although Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) are usually viewed as assets with lower risk and higher yields, there is little agreement on the characteristics of these assets in the literature. Hence, this research seeks to examine the defensive and risk characteristics of REITs in Taiwan to provide objective advice for investors. Using daily data from January 2006 to May 2009 to observe the performance of eight listed REITs, this paper shows that the decline in REIT values is much smaller than the decline in non-REIT values on the dates when the Taiwan stock market collapsed. The decline is also more defensive than for the stocks of the utility companies, and hotel and department store industries. Furthermore, the REITs in Taiwan are found to perform well in terms of diversifying risk, since the relationships between the REITs and the stock market are very insignificant in this study. Finally, this paper uses the Glosten Jagannathan Runkle-generalized ARCH model and finds that five REITs exhibit an anti-leverage effect. That is, when the lagged innovations are negative, the volatility of current returns is found to decrease.起始頁-結束頁：25-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201106.00257篇名：資本寬容對房屋抵押貸款保險之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Capital Forbearance on Mortgage Insurance作者：楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang);張嘉倩(Chia-Chien Chang);王昭文(Chou-Wen Wang);徐守德(So-De Shyu)關鍵字：資本寬容;房屋抵押貸款保險契約;違約風險;capital forbearance;mortgage insurance contract;counterparty risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：房屋抵押貸款保險制度在國外已經行之有年，並成為房貸市場重要機制。但是，在次貸風暴期間，大型房貸保險公司無不承擔龐大損失，各國政府卻不敢貿然讓房貸保險公司倒閉，以免造成系統性的金融危機。有鑑於此，本研究除了考慮房貸保險公司違約風險，並同時考量資本寬容機制，推導出房屋抵押貸款保險契約之公平保費公式解。藉由數值分析可知，資本寬容程度越高，房貸保險契約之保費越高。此外，隨著資產負債價值比例增加，資本寬容門檻值對於房貸保險保費之影響更顯重要。最後，藉由延長房貸保險公司經營時間來解決房貸保險公司資本不足問題，亦將使得房貸保險契約之保費上升，且當資產負債價值比例增加，延長經營時間效果對保費上升之效果亦趨明顯。英文摘要：The system of mortgage insurance has developed over a long period of time and plays an important role in the housing financial market. Since many mortgage insurers suffered huge losses during the subprime mortgage crisis which resulted in capital scarcity, the government came under great pressure to bail them out in order to avoid a systemic economic crisis. Hence, this paper derives a closed-form formula for a mortgage insurance contract that takes into consideration counterparty default risk and capital forbearance. From the numerical analysis, we demonstrate that the mortgage insurance premium is an increasing function of the forbearance threshold. Furthermore, a higher asset-liability ratio leads to a more significant impact of the forbearance threshold on the fair premium for mortgage insurance. In addition, the longer the capital forbearance period and the higher the asset-liability ratio, the higher the fair premium of mortgage insurance.起始頁-結束頁：59-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201106.00598篇名：不動產指數衍生性商品發展概況與回顧：台灣房價指數衍生性商品發展與挑戰並列篇名：The Development and Literature Survey on Property Derivatives: The Growing Challenge for Taiwan Housing Index Derivatives作者：李桐豪(Tung-Hao Lee);廖志峰(Chih-Feng Liao)關鍵字：不動產指數衍生性商品;房價指數;不動產;property derivatives;housing price index;real estate期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：有鑒於我國現有不動產投資工具相對有限，無法滿足投資人對資訊揭露、交易流動性與多元資產配置之需求，本文因此進行我國發展房價指數衍生性商品機會與挑戰的研究，希望未來能增加我國房地產投資與避險管道，以健全不動產市場之發展。本文介紹英美兩國不動產指數衍生性商品發展種類與歷程，回顧不動產指數衍生性商品訂價文獻，並採用Fabozzi et al. (2009, 2010)不動產指數衍生性商品訂價模型，以我國1998年第1季至2010年第2季的國泰全國房價指數與信義房屋台灣地區房價指數進行實證分析。實證結果顯示，國泰全國房價指數較符合Fabozzi et al. (2009, 2010)不動產指數衍生性商品訂價模型假設，故可據此提出我國房價指數衍生性商品發行訂價範例。此外，本文認為我國房價指數的編製仍有改善空間，建議主管機關整合現行統計資料，編製較能反映實際房市交易情況之房價指數，並可考慮每月發佈。英文摘要：Due to the limited availability of real estate investment instruments in Taiwan, the demand for transparency, liquidity, and diversification by real estate investors has not been satisfied. This paper discusses the opportunities and challenges faced in developing Taiwan housing index derivatives, which may help to provide additional real estate investment and hedging instruments. We use the Cathay Real Estate Price Index (Cathay Index) and Sinyi Housing Price Index (Sinyi Index) to study the property derivatives pricing model developed by Fabozzi et al. (2009, 2010). The sample covers the period from the first quarter of 1998 to the second quarter of 2010. Our empirical results show that the stochastic process of the Cathay Index follows the mean reverting assumption in the logarithmic scale, and hence is more suitable than the Sinyi Index in applying the Fabozzi et al. (2009, 2010) model. We therefore use the Cathay Index as a paradigmatic example for Taiwanese property derivatives. Our study suggests that there is room for improvement in housing index construction, and that the government should take the lead in integrating the transaction data, and publishing the new Taiwan housing index on a monthly basis.起始頁-結束頁：85-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201106.00859篇名：逆向房屋抵押貸款在臺灣推行之需求分析並列篇名：The Analysis of Demand for the Reverse Mortgage Program in Taiwan作者：林左裕(Tsoyu Calvin Lin);楊博翔(Po-Hsiang Yang)關鍵字：逆反向房屋抵押貸款;羅吉斯迴歸;在宅老化;reverse mortgage;logistic regression;aging in place期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來我國人口呈少子化與高齡化之趨勢，此趨勢帶來龐大財政負擔及老年人口安養等社會福利問題，是目前備受政府與金融市場關注的議題。因此本研究旨在提供一可能解決之道－「逆（反）向房屋抵押貸款(reverse mortgage, RM)」。本研究先對30至60歲且名下擁有不動產之家戶進行問卷調查，並以以羅吉斯迴歸(logistic regression)分析影響申請意願之顯著因子，研究結果顯示，當潛在消費者教育程度越高、購有理財型保險、資產持有以股票、債券或基金為主、以及退休後不與子女同住者等，越有意願申請逆向房屋抵押貸款。另一方面，本研究利用意願程度與是否具備支付能力或資格者，推估申請逆向房屋抵押貸款之潛在需求量，研究顯示目前臺灣對逆向貸款潛在需求量約為20萬戶至35萬戶。英文摘要：With its continuously declining fertility rates and increased life expectancy, Taiwan has become one of the aging societies in the world. To alleviate the financial strain on the government, a great amount of research has suggested an alternative option-the reverse mortgage (RM)-to improve the living quality of the retiring elderly. This study identifies factors affecting the interest in applying for RM in Taiwan. A questionnaire survey was conducted among middle-aged homeowners, and analyzed through a Logistic regression model. The results indicate that homeowners who participate in whole life insurance programs, invest in financial assets, intend to live apart from their children, and have higher education levels are more likely to apply for RM. We also estimate the potential market demand for RM in Taiwan. The findings reveal that potential demand for RM in Taiwan ranges from 200,000 to 346,000 households. These results can serve as valuable reference for governments and financial institutions with a view to determining whether and how to launch reverse mortgage programs.起始頁-結束頁：109-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201106.010901篇名：移工健康服務之行動研究：iACT－楠梓移工健康協作網絡發展之經驗分析並列篇名：Health Services and Network Coordination for Migrant Workers: Action Research on the iACT Health Consultation Outreach Project in Nanzi作者：尤素芬(Su-Fen You);鄭惠珠(Huei-Chu Cheng)關鍵字：行動研究;健康協作網絡;健康服務;移工;台灣國際醫療行動協會;action research;health network coordination;health services;migrant worker;iACT期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：在台灣的移工權益遭受侵害時，很難獲得制度性的協助，而非政府組織向來扮演協助爭取權益的重要角色，但很少著力於健康議題。本文旨在籍由台灣國際醫療行動協會（簡稱iACT）發端、透過社區結盟發展出來的協作網絡服務方案，說明社區型移工健康服務的可能樣貌與工作方法。楠梓方案是一種關照全面性健康的行動研究，重視移工身體與生活經驗的表述，經由互動的過程了解移工的健康問題與需求，做為形塑議題的基礎。此方案經驗呈現了資源很少的外來團體，如何利用志願結社的特性與資源網絡的連結，一方面解決資源不足的問題，另一方面發展出在地的網絡協作策略。在過程裡，實務工作者係藉由行動研究增強自身與服務對學之權能，以達成更有效的社會實踐。英文摘要：In Taiwan, migrant workers are denied equal status concerning citizenship, even if they are curtailed of their rights. Non-governmental organization (NGOs) have therefore played an important role as a main supporter for  migrant workers' interests, but not many have paid attention to health care issues yet. Although the network coordination between NGOs has proved to be useful within the Taiwanese community work, there are very few cases dealing with health service for migrant workers. This article reviews the iACT (International Action and Cooperation Team) project concerning health consultation outreach to migrant workers at some Catholic church in Nanzi. It concentrates on the format ion of health network coordination and the development of community-based working methods, especially how organizational dynamic empowerment can be put into practice. The Nanzi project was established on the basis of positive meaning of health, and the practitioners embraced action research approach to improve their working manners. The body and life experiences of Nanzi migrant workers were collected and estimated for the understanding of their health demands and particular health issues. In order to solve the problem of insufficient resources, the practitioners drew on voluntary association properties and resource network connection, and meanwhile a strategy of health network coordination on a local basis was gradually developed. As a result, the practitioners reached better social practice through the empowerment of their own and the migrants.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201112.00032篇名：壓迫概念之認識：以服務新移民工作者為例並列篇名：Understand Oppression: Social Work Practice with New Immigrant Women作者：馬宗潔(Tsung-Chieh Ma)關鍵字：新移民;壓迫;種族;性別;階級;new immigrants;oppression;race;gender;class期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：從來南亞來的婚姻移民婦女是國內正在成長的族群，無庸置疑地，這些女性在台灣社會所面臨的問題，源自於她們在社會中所處的被壓迫（oppressed）位置，是被社會排除的一群人。壓迫（oppression），以何種形式在社會中呈現，而每一個團體於社會中的壓迫之經驗，以及其細緻的內涵，都與其特殊的歷史背景、社會脈絡、以及政治角力相關。本研究的研究目的為了解與東南籍新移民婦女的工作者，對於新移民被壓迫經驗的認識、如何解讀這些壓迫現象、以及對於工作實踐的影響。期待可以更誠實的面對社會工作與異文化相處時可能的處境，做為未來多元文化教育的基礎。質性研究之深入訪談為研究方法，共訪淡12位在相關機構的工作者，主要研究結果為：機構服務宗旨對於研究參與者的壓迫概念形成，最具關鍵影響力。英文摘要：The dramatic increase in cultural diversity and oppressed groups in Taiwan society is no longer a forecast but reality, even more dramatic change on the horizon. The fastest growing population in Taiwan is women who immigrated from the South-East Asia on the base of marriage. The new immigrant women are experienced at least three kinds of oppression based on their identities, which are gender, race, and class. However, most of the social workers in Taiwan may not have too much experience encounter people from different background, may not imbalance the knowledge of power, identity, different, oppression related to racial and gender issues. The research question is that do social workers who practice with new immigrant women understand the oppression experience This research interviewed 12 social workers from mainstream background, and examined their working experience with immigrant women from the South-East Asia, and what do they view these immigrant women. Hopefully, the result of this research can help social work educators to prepare students to be multicultural competent.起始頁-結束頁：39-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201112.00413篇名：兒童少年家庭照顧者之照顧經驗初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of the Caring Experience of Young Carers作者：吳書昀(Jessie Shu-Yun Wu)關鍵字：兒童少年家庭照顧者;照顧經驗;兒童及少年;架構分析法;young carers;caring experience;children and young people;framework analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：兒童少年做為家庭照顧者雖不是一個新的社會現象，但這些孩子的照顧經驗與不利處境卻長期被忽略，在台灣，相關的實證資料亦相當稀少。本文從初步探索的立場出發，以質化研究的方式深入了解兒童少年家庭照顧者的真實生活樣貌，期待專業服務者及政策制定者能敏察並認知到這群隱性案主，使得負擔家庭照顧責任的孩子能得到應有的支持。本研究的結果發現，當兒童少年被賦予照顧某位家人的責任時，他們需同時承擔許多角色任務，有些任務與照顧直接相關，如：提供家庭成員身心上的照料；有些任務則是因家庭中的照顧需求而衍生出來的，如：擔負家庭勞務、維持家庭的日常運作、因應家庭經濟上的困難。這些任務並非全都是兒童少年的發展階段能夠掌握或適合參與的，因此本研究的結果也顯示，在照顧過程中，孩子的課業及學校參與被犧牲，孩子的身心健康受到傷害或處於危機，核子也欠缺發展或維繫友伴關係的機會。針對兒童少年家庭照顧者所面臨的種種不利處境與限制，本研究提出相關之思索與建議，分別為「賦予兒童少年家庭照顧者特定的福利身份類別」、「發展適切的評估與處遇，讓孩子安心求助」、以及「學校應扮演積極角色」，期待給予這些孩子適時的協助。英文摘要：The undertaking of family care responsibilities by children and young people is not a recent social phenomenon. However, the roles performed by these individuals as well as the negative impacts of these roles on them have not been well recognized. The situation of young carers in Taiwan is also poorly understood. In this preliminary study, the qualitative method and in-depth interviews are adopted to examine the everyday experiences and practices of children and young people involved in family care provision in Taiwan. By providing a deeper investigation of the lives of young caring, this research enhances the understanding of the nature of young caring. The empirical findings reveal that young carers carry out a variety of tasks in and around the home, ranging from intimate and personal care responsibilities to domestic chores and financial support. Many of these tasks distinguish the young carers from other children and young people who do not take on caring roles within the family. The research particularly identifies the ways in which the caring roles affect the lives and development of the young carers. The burden of caring can severely impede the educational performance of the children and young people. It also has an adverse effect on the young carers' physical and mental wellbeing. In addition, the young carers experience difficulties in establishing friendships. To respond to the impacts of care activities on children and young people, this research concludes by proposing recommendations for further enhancing current services in order to support young carers.起始頁-結束頁：79-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201112.00814篇名：社會工作紀錄問題檢視與反思並列篇名：A Critical Look at Record-Keeping in Social Work作者：汪淑媛(Shu-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：社會工作;社工紀錄;責信;風險管理;Taiwan social work;social work record;accountability;risk management期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究蒐集121份社工員自顧填寫的匿名問卷，發現88%社工員有紀錄寫不完的壓力，61%的社工表示寫紀錄的時間多於直接服務案主的時間，每位社工平均花在紀錄書寫的時間達46%的工時。紀錄是當前實務社工的普遍性問題，其成因不僅是社工本身能力問題，也反映社會工作內在的兩難與結構性因素。雖然社會工作服務使用者與資源提供者不同，紀錄是不可避免的，然而本研究發現社工專業對紀錄所扮演的功能過度期待可能是造成耗時的關鍵因素，同時也與社工員耗竭與人力不足現象相關。作者建議精簡紀錄內容，以工作掌握、責信、與風險管理作為實務工作紀錄主要功能訴求。英文摘要：Questionnaires from 121 social workers in Taiwan revealed 88%were stressed by their job's record-keeping requirements and 61% spent more time keeping records of the services they delivered than actually delivering those services. They spent an average of 46% of total hours worked keeping records. Though social workers are not paid by those they serve and instead need to account for themselves to those who do fund their work and evaluate their performance-still, the exaggerated recordkeeping requirements most social workers are saddled with today cannot help but contribute to burn-out and the shortage of human resources in the profession. As necessary a part of their job as it is, record-keeping should not be allowed to become an obstacle to the effective performance of the social workers' main duties. The author suggests that simplifying recordkeeping requirements in the profession would equally well serve risk management and accountability needs.起始頁-結束頁：141-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201112.01435篇名：誰是身心障礙者：從身心障礙鑑定的演變看「國際健康功能與身心障礙分類系統」（ICF）的實施並列篇名：Who Are the Disabled: An Examination of the Application of ICF in Light of the History of Disability Evaluations in Taiwan作者：邱大昕(Ta-Sing Chiu)關鍵字：身心障礙;鑑定;需求評估;ICF;政策考古學;disability;evaluation;needs assessment;ICF;policy archeology期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣身心障礙鑑定與相關法規政策已有百年歷史，過去百年來發生過許多重大的轉折與變化。然而在身心障礙政策發展的背後，台灣一直缺乏一套以本土歷史經驗為基礎的統整思考架構。因此本研究由台灣歷史經驗出發，首先追溯台灣身心障礙鑑定的歷史與醫療化的過程。按著由障礙角色、管理類別、需求團體三個面向來探討幾個核心的問題：到底什麼是身心障礙？為什麼要做身心障礙鑑定？以及為什麼會以醫療檢查為主？最後本研究再根據這些歷史資料與討論，進一步來檢視台灣目前ICF新制身心障礙鑑定的實施方向與內涵。英文摘要：Policy and practices for evaluating people with disabilities in Taiwan have changed extensively over the past 100 years. This study first traces the changes in the disability evaluation system and the medicalization of disability in Taiwan. Then this study tries to answer three main questions: What is disability? Why is disability evaluation needed? Why it is mainly based on medical examination? The concepts of disabled role, administrative category, and needy group are used to explain the use and limit of the medical examination of impairment. This study concludes by discussing the implications for the new disability assessment system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：187-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201112.01896篇名：勞動過程與勞動主體性：地方記者職場勞動之政治經濟分析並列篇名：Labour Process and Labour Subjectivity: Political Economy of Local Journalists at Work作者：吳育仁(Yu-Jen Wu)關鍵字：勞動過程;勞動主體性;勞動從屬性;管理控制;labour process;labour subjectivity;labour subordination;management control期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文的主要目的是，以勞動過程理論的視角，了解勞工實際勞動過程的特徵，以及發掘勞工是否存在勞動的主體性。本研究以新聞記者<U+7232>例，將他們置於職場中勞動關係的政治經濟情境脈絡下，從時間、空間、以及生產的社會關係等三個角度，勾勒出新聞記者的勞動過程與生活經驗，辨別出勞動主體性的存在或態樣。本研究歸納出新聞記者勞動過程的三個特徵：不現則的隱形工作時間表的內化、勞動空閒的控制和監視意涵、以及結構性矛盾的生產社會關係。在勞動主體性上，則呈現多樣化的型態。英文摘要：The aim of this paper is to investigate the characteristics of the labour process of journalists and explore the existence of the labour subjectivity of the journalists in terms of labour process theory. To achieve this, journalism is examined within the context of the political economy of their labour process. In terms of time, space, and social relations, their labour process and living experiences are delineated carefully. The existence and form of their labour subjectivity are identified. Finally, the labour process of journalists is divided into three categories: the internalization of irregular and virtual schedules, the control and supervisory nature of work space, and the structured contradiction of social relations of production. The labour subjectivity is appeared in various forms.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201106.00017篇名：The Dynamics of Social Disadvantage Cumulation: A Case Study of Taiwan並列篇名：弱勢累積動態特性之分析：以台灣的個案<U+7232>例作者：李易駿(Yih-Jiunn Lee)關鍵字：社會排除;多重弱勢;累積的動態性;弱勢累積;social exclusion;multi-disadvantages;dynamics of cumulation;disadvantage cumulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究試圖分析多重弱勢的動態累積特性。研究目的<U+7232>：描繪弱勢累積的軌跡類型、探討弱勢累積導致社會排除的關鍵性弱勢項目、以及分析弱勢累積的動態特性。藉由個案研究方法，本研究對研究個案之家庭事件及弱勢情況予以重建，再進行弱勢累積的軌跡的描繪及分析。研究發現包括：1.弱勢累積具有網狀的發展特性。2.「變態滋生」是弱勢累積的重要動態特性，即弱勢會引發新的弱勢項及發生累積，而新弱勢在滋生時也發生「樣態」變化，包括受害者、弱勢項、及型態（弱勢／事件）三種樣態的變化。3.從研究個案中歸納出「債務型」、「藥酒癮」及「遺棄型」三種弱勢累積軌跡，並發現暴力、所得不足及心理疾病是導致社會排除過程中的關鍵性弱勢項。最後，作者依據研究發現進行理論及政策討論。英文摘要：This research attempts to explore the dynamic characteristics of multi-disadvantage cumulation in the social exclusion process. The author illustrated the trajectories of how disadvantages cumulated to clarify the dynamic features and to understand how the dynamic features had emerged and how they extended. The main findings are as bellow. Firstly, the cumulation characteristic could be better described as a 'web-like' pattern rather than a linear one. Secondly, the multi-disadvantage cumulation can be understood as a 'transformative breeding' process which can be observed through three attributes: the transition among characteristics, the transition among social disadvantage dimensions, and the shifting process among the sufferers. Thirdly, there are three types of multi-disadvantaged cumulative trajectories to be recognized: the 'debt-oriented', 'drug/alcohol driven' and 'abandonment-extended' trajectories. In addition to the main findings, the research found that violence, insufficient income and mental illness are the core/transitional disadvantages leading to social exclusion.起始頁-結束頁：39-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201106.00398篇名：台灣機構式長期照顧服務組織屬性與政府相關政策演變之探討並列篇名：An Empirical Study on the Organizational Attribution of the Long-Term Care Providers and the Transformation of the Government's Related Policies in Taiwan作者：陳正芬(Chen-Fen Chen);官有垣(Yu-Yuan Kuan)關鍵字：長期照顧;非營利;營利;財團法人;護理之家;long-term care;nonprofit;for-profit;endowment-based NPOs;nursing homes期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：高齡化社會中，老人對於社會照顧之需求遽增，如何滿足與日俱增的照顧服務量即成<U+7232>各國照顧政策探討的重點，各國採取的回應策略之一即是開放營利事業組織加入服務提供行列。我國在老人福利法於1997年修法後特許營利事業進入小型機構服務範疇，但行政院衛生署主管的護理之家並未被要求需辦理財團人登記；究竟長期照顧相關服務之提供上，公部門在長期照顧體系的規劃以及政策法令建構過程中到底扮演了什麼角色，而服務提供者之組織屬性是「營利」或「非營利」在服務品質、案主權益的關照、經營效率與成本等面向是否有所差別，乃是本研究關注的焦點。據此，本研究參考Antonin Wagner建構的公共服務領域之結構轉變(structural transformation of the Public sphere)理論觀點，分析台灣長期照顧服務組織屬性與政府的政策互動關係。本研究運用次級資料分析法，分析內政部社會司主管的老人福利機構屬性及家數在老人福利法第一次修法前後之變動趨勢，以及行政院衛生署主管的護理之家變動之趨勢，並輔以深度訪談法，訪談中央及地方老人福利機構及護理之家主管機關，以及老人福利機構及護理之家經營者等人，從「時間」(time)與「轉變」(transformation)兩個面向觀察台灣長期照顧服務提供的形貌、變化及其原因，進而對我國長期照護相關政策與法令規範提出政策建言。英文摘要：There is a significant increase in the demand of social care service for the aging population in modern society. As a result, it has become a major focus for the government to create or revise policies with respect to both of the quantity and quality of the institutional are. After passing the first amendment of the Senior Citizens Welfare Ac in Taiwan, it allows long-term care institutions to be operated as for-profit entities. However, the same regulation was not applied to nursing homes whose operations are in the jurisdiction of the Department of Health the Executive Yuan. This article analyzes mainly the intra-governmental and government-private (nonprofit and for-profit) relationships in the area of long-term care service providers for the elderly, which is based on the analytical framework of structural transformation of the public sp ere proposed by Antonin Wagner (2000). The focus of this paper, as a consequence, is to explain how and why the long-term care system in Taiwan has been changed since the late 1990s by examining both aspects of time and transformation. The secondary data analysis was used to investigate the profile of the senior citizens welfare institutions and nursing home in Taiwan in terms of their characteristics and the transformation in their number since 1997. The method of ”in-depth interview” was then adopted to assemble key information from managers of the institutions, as well as public officers.起始頁-結束頁：91-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201106.00919篇名：中介團體：台灣社區發展運作難題與另類選擇並列篇名：On the Intermediate Group: Difficulties of Community Development in Taiwan and Its Alternative Choice作者：林明禛(Ming-Chen Lin)關鍵字：社區中介組織;旨趣社群;社區參與;broker organization;interest community;community participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：1968年「台灣省社區發展10年計畫」開始的社區理事會以及後來的社區發展協會，經歷從官方指定組織到人民團體之性質；其中社區發展協會成<U+7232>台灣雄動社區發展工作與政府部門的重要對口單位，也成<U+7232>社區務展運作下之傳統的中介團體角色。社區發展協會在扮演社區永續發展的中介組織(broker organization)角色上，處於基層政治派系的糾葛，不斷遭致詬病，無疑是不被肯定的。1994年文建會推動社區總體營造以來，出現一批對歷史人文空閒、文化產業有著相當旨趣的草根人物且接受相當專業知識技能培訓的社群－社區營造員。社區營造員對社區人文與空間的關注，形成事緣的旨趣社群(interest community)投入地緣的空間社區(space community)營造。中介團體的變遷媒介(change medium)角色是推動社區居民參與的重要關鍵，而社區參與則是社區永續發展重要議題：社區發展協會做<U+7232>一個中介團體，卻無法恰當扮演角色，相當值得檢討與反省。本文提出不拘泥於傳統的社區發展協會運用，改以多元的兼容社區營造員社群<U+7232>中介團體的另類考量；此類社群更能符合Mancur Olson集體行動邏輯論述的最適團體型態。相較於社區發展協會內部的侍從關係與政治盤據現象，社區營造的草根社群，具備促進社區參與集體行<U+7232>的選擇性誘因(selective incentives)更高。一旦中介團體運作順遂與正常化，自然容易帶動社區參與，促進社區的永續經營。總結而言，藉由以社區營造員的草根社群<U+7232>中介團體的運作方式，可跳脫長久以來社區發展協會組織的政治侍從困境，而有另一番嶄新的作<U+7232>，成<U+7232>台灣社區發展運作難題下的另類選擇。英文摘要：From government's eye, the community council of early time or the community development association at later period was always the only suitable unit of broker organization for the community business. Because of the benefit of political faction, being difficult problem with community development, this intermediate is denounced all the way as the role by various domains. Since the 90's, there're more and more people participated the community renaissance movement, and became the ”interest community”. They may be taken as another new broker group for the community development. According to the elaboration of point by Mancur Olson (1971) at ”The Logic of Collective Action”. And then, these kinds and the scale of groups, which are tallying with selective incentives, are also the more suitable for the community development business than association. This might be the alternative option being difficult problem of community development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：137-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201106.013710篇名：鄰避與被鄰避：身心障礙機構與設施抗爭處理經驗之研究並列篇名：Avoiding and Being Avoided: The Management of Community Protests against Service Agencies for the Disabled in Taiwan作者：邱大昕(Ta-Sing Chiu);羅淑霞(Shu-Hsia Lo)關鍵字：身心障礙;鄰避現象;社區化;爭議事件;disability;NIMBY;community-based;controversy期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：鄰避情結（Not in My Backyard，縮寫NIMBY）是一個複雜，充滿矛盾的現象。依據內政部訂定之「推展社會福利補助經費申請項目及基準」，身心障礙福利機構基地三百公尺內不得有「鄰避設施」。但是，當身心障礙設施在迴避這些鄰避設施的同時，自己也經常成<U+7232>社區居民所抗拒的鄰避設施。本研究以身心障礙機構或設施抗爭過程中，第一線處理工作者<U+7232>研究對象。透過訪談瞭解他們在抗爭事件中與民眾互動的經驗，當時所採取的因應措施，以及背後的思考邏輯。透過與現有鄰避文獻的對話與討論，比較身心障礙機構與污染性鄰避設施之異同，來給目前相關研究提出新的觀點與方向。英文摘要：NIMBY (Not-in-my-back-yard) is a complicated and controversial phenomenon. According to the Ministry of the Interior, services for the disabled should not be established within 300 meters of NIMBY facilities. However, services for the disabled are themselves considered NTMBY facilities by local communities, and thus often face demonstrations. In this study, we interview first-line agency workers who have managed and handled community protests against the service agencies for the disabled in Taiwan. This study compares their experiences and strategies in handling these public protests with how, as reported in several studies, protests against pollution facilities have been handled. By doing this, this study shows new perspectives and directions for future study.起始頁-結束頁：167-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201106.016701篇名：貿易開放與所得不均：以門檻迴歸法分析並列篇名：Threshold Effects of Openness on Income Inequality作者：莊希豐(Shi-Feng Chuang);陳亞為(Yah-Wei Chen)關鍵字：貿易開放;外人直接投資;所得分配不均;門檻;HOSS定理;Trade Openness;Foreign Direct Investment;Income Inequality;Threshold;HOSS Theorem期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文引用Hansen(1999)門檻模型，針對1960年至2005年62個國家資料作橫斷面分析，客觀估計貿易自由化對高、低所得國家之所得分配影響。實證結果指出在低所得國家商品自由化大致會惡化國內所得分配，在高所得國家商品自由化大致上對國內所得分配無顯著影響；而外人直接投資對低所得國家所得分配無影響，在高所得國家外人直接投資將顯著惡化國內所得分配。此結果意味著各國可依其經濟發展程度適當地調整開放政策，以利國內長期經濟發展與所得分配。英文摘要：This paper empirically investigates the threshold effects of openness on income inequality. Specifically, we use Hansen's (1999) threshold regression model to examine whether the openness-inequality link varies with the degree of a country's income. By applying the model to 62 countries during the period 1996-2005, we find that there indeed exists an income threshold in the openness-inequality link. Moreover, the opening of goods markets increases income inequality in low-income countries. However, in high-income ones trade openness has minor effects. By contrast, foreign direct investment is found to increase income inequality in high-income countries and has an unimportant effect in low-income ones. These findings suggest that to reduce income inequality, the governments need to consider their positions in the economic development process and adopt relevant openness strategies.起始頁-結束頁：185-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201107.00012篇名：非協調合作與通貨膨脹契約並列篇名：Non-Coordination and Inflation Contract作者：江秀燕(Hsiu-Yen Chiang)關鍵字：工會;通貨膨脹;非協調合作;Union;Inflation;Non-Coordination期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文藉由財政當局與工會採行非協調合作的方式，來檢視時序不一致的議題。本文發現央行官員提高對通膨的偏好權數，會降低社會福利水準。然而，當財政當局提高對政府支出比率的偏好權數，以及工會提高對通膨的偏好權數，社會福利水準卻會提升。另外，本文發現通膨與產出波動彼此無抵換關係。再者，央行官員對通膨的趨避程度不會引起通膨與產出波動，此結果不同於Rogoff的命題。英文摘要：This paper examines the time inconsistency issues by means of non-coordinated fiscal authority and union. It is found that a rise in the weight assigned to inflation by the central banker depresses the social welfare. However, the social welfare can be enhanced if (i) the fiscal authority raises the weight assigned to the government spending ratio; or (ii) the union raises its concern about inflation. It is also found that there is no policy trade-off between the inflation and output stability. Moreover, in contrast to Rogoff's Proposition, we find that the inflation aversion of the central banker plays no role in the inflation or output fluctuations.起始頁-結束頁：225-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201107.00023篇名：災害保險需求地區性差異之實驗研究並列篇名：An Experimental Study on the Regional Differences in the Demand for Disaster Insurance作者：樊沁萍(Chinn-Ping Fan);陳碧<U+7D89>(Bih-Shiow Chen);陳竽蓁(Yu-Chen Chen)關鍵字：災害保險;風險決策;彩券實驗;Disaster Insurance;Decision Making Under Uncertainty;Lottery Experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣颱風洪水險保費依地區不同而有三級差異，高風險區保費比低風險區高出許多。本研究從需求面檢驗不同地區民眾對災害保險之願付價格是否有差異。我們於花蓮（高保費區）、埔里及新竹（低保費區）招募113位受試者參與彩券實驗及問卷調查。我們發現花蓮地區受試者對災害保險之願付價格及購買意願都不比新竹埔里地區<U+7232>高。我們也發現受試者行<U+7232>支持展望理論之「低機率高估，高機率低估」；問卷研究與彩券實驗之結論一致性甚高。英文摘要：The premium for disaster insurance in Taiwan has a three-tier structure, with it being much higher for high-risk areas. We focus on the demand side and study whether the willingness to pay are unsimilar for people in different areas. We recruit 113 subjects from Hualien (a high premium areas) and Puli and Hsinchu (low premium areas) to conduct a lottery experiment and questionnaire survey. We find that, in comparison with Puli and Hsinchu, subjects from Hualien do not want to pay a higher premium for disaster insurance and their intentions for buying disaster insurance are also not higher. In addition, we also find that the subjects' behavior supports the prospect theory, in that they tend to overestimate low probabilities and underestimate high probabilities. The results from analyzing questionnaire responses are in agreement with experiment conclusions.起始頁-結束頁：265-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201107.00034篇名：美國存託憑證與母國股票報酬間之動態關連性－極端尾部相依性以及Kendall's tau之研究並列篇名：The Dynamics Interdependence between the Stock Returns of Taiwanese High-Technology Firms and Their ADRs-Evidence from the Extreme Tail-Dependence and Kendall's tau Measures作者：張光亮(Kuang-Liang Chang);黃宗佑(Tsung-Yu Huang)關鍵字：Copula函數;尾部相依性;Kendall's tau;GARCH模型;美國存託憑證;Copula;Tail-Dependence;Kendall's tau;GARCH;American Depository Receipts期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文的主要目的是透過很多不同型式之copula設定（包含Normal、Student's t、Gumbel、Clayton、Frank以及三種混合型copula模型）來調查台灣高科技廠商（台積電、矽品、聯電、日月光、友達）股票與其美國存託憑證(American Depositary Recipts, ADRs)之動態相依性。兩市場間之關聯性是透過尾部相依以及Kendall' s tau測度來衡量。實證結果發現，對矽品以及聯電公司而言，Student's t copula函數最適合用來描述美國存託憑證與母公司股票報酬之動態關聯性。此一結果隱含同一種資產在台灣與美國上市之報酬具有對稱之動態相依性。另外一方面，由Normal、Gumbel、Gumbel-Survival copulas所構成之混合型設定適合於台積電、日月光以及友達，顯示現貨與ADRs存在非對稱相依結構。不論公司<U+7232>何，本文發現相依性結構並非固定不變而是隨著時間經過而有所不同。在2008年金融海嘯發生期間，Kendall's tau以及尾部相依性指標透露出它們之間的相依性出現下跌傾向，此一現象可能與政府對股票市場之干預與管制有關。英文摘要：This paper examines the dynamics interdependence between stock returns of Taiwanese high-technology firms and their American Depository Receipts (ADRs) using a variety of copula specifications. The empirical results find that the Kendall's tau and the tail-dependence measures vary across time, supporting that time-varying specification as being important in describing interdependence between asset returns. The Student's t copula which emphasizes the symmetric dependence is suitable for Siliconware Precision Industries Company (SPIL) and United Microelectronics Corporation (UMC). The mixture copula which emphasizes the asymmetric dependence is suitable for Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSM), Advanced Semiconductor Engineering Incorporation (ASX) and AU Optronics Corporation (AUO). Furthermore, during the 2008 financial tsunami, the decrease in interdependence can be attributed to the government intervention and control in the stock market.起始頁-結束頁：305-356資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201107.00045篇名：最適差別通路稅之分析並列篇名：Optimal Taxation on the Commodity with Various Market Channels作者：翁<U+5803>嵐(K. L. Ueng Glen);吳家恩(J. Wu Chiaen)關鍵字：通路;臨店交易;網路交易;租稅改革;租稅設計;轉換效果;Distribution Channel;In-store Transaction;Internet Commerce;Tax Reform;Tax Design;Switch Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文建構一個商品通路的模型來解釋線上通路的興起，並藉以探討課徵差別通路稅的福利效果。文中有幾個重要發現：首先，從租稅設計的觀點來看，對於某些商品而言，課徵差別通路稅具有三種福利效果：購物通路的轉換效果、傳統課徵商品稅的Ramsey效果，以及所得重分配的效果，而最適稅制即在此三種效果間取得平衡；其次，當線上通路的『平均稅率彈性』不大於傳統通路時，最適的差別通路稅應對較不費時的通路課以較重之稅負。最後，由本文所獲致的結果可延伸出，在忽略網路交易的稽徵成本下，從社會福祉的觀點來看，不僅應對網路交易課稅，而且其稅率應高於傳統臨店交易的稅率。另外，本模型亦可延伸應用於代客泊車、代客驗車及到府維修等省時勞務之消費與提供。英文摘要：The taxation on commodities has been made complicated by the Internet. The traditional literature on optimal taxation neglects the effects of tax on the distribution channel. This paper attempts to answer the following questions: Should the tax rate be the same both on line and in stores? Should the tax be lower over the Internet? What is the optimal tax structure of the commodity for the different forms of transaction? To our knowledge, taxing different forms of transaction has not yet been theoretically investigated in the literature. The paper establish differences in the purchasing behavior of customers between on-line and in-store transactions based on Becker’s concept of time allocation. With various time costs, the consumer will choose a marketing channel to maximize her utility. In the model, the consumers with the higher wages are likely to purchase the commodity on line. Therefore, the time cost serves as a screening device to reveal the information about their income and provides valuable reference for government policy on income redistribution. To maximize the level of social welfare, the tax rate on on-line purchases is inclined to be higher than that on in-store purchases.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201101.00016篇名：租稅競爭、公共財提供與廠商家數並列篇名：Tax Competition, Provision of Public Goods and the Number of Firms作者：郭虹瑩(Horn-In Kuo)關鍵字：租稅競爭;公共財;廠商家數;配置生產效率;Tax Competition;Public Goods;Number of Firms;Allocative Production Efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：Lai (2006)一文將利潤移轉效果納入傳統租稅競爭模型中發現：在三國兩廠商的架構下，當廠商進行數量競爭時，利潤移轉效果會讓租稅競爭的程度加劇，因此Oates (1972)提出的假說仍然成立。本篇短文則發現Lai (2006)所獲致的結果，廠商的家數扮演相當關鍵的角色。當本國廠商的生產成本<U+7232>同質時，只要本國廠商相對競爭國廠商的家數夠多時，利潤移轉效果會緩和租稅競爭的程度而非加劇，且Oates (1972)假說不一定會成立；當本國廠商的生產成本<U+7232>異質時，配置生產效率效果會強化上述結果，使得租稅競爭的程度更<U+7232>降低。英文摘要：Under the three-countries-two-firms duopolistic structure, Lai (2006) incorporates the rent-shifting effect in the typical tax competition model. He finds that when firms compete in terms of quantity, the rent-shifting effect aggravates the under-provision of public goods in a Cournot duopoly, i.e., the Oates hypothesis still holds. However, in this note we find that the number of firms plays an important role in the result which Lai (2006) has obtained. Moreover, if the number of home country manufacturers is larger than the foreign country's under the homogeneous cost structures of the home country manufacturers, the rent-shifting effect will increase (not reduce) the provision of public goods and mitigate (not aggravate) the inefficiency arising from tax competition. On the other hand, under the heterogeneous cost structures of the home country manufacturers, the effect of allocative production efficiency will enhance the above result.起始頁-結束頁：27-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201101.00027篇名：年報資訊揭露與資訊不對稱：來自私有資訊交易之證據並列篇名：The Association between the Information Disclosure Level in the Annual Report and Information Asymmetry: Evidence from Private Information-based Trading作者：廖益興(Yi-Hsing Liao);陳彥綺(Yan-Chi Chen);王貞靜(Chen-Chin Wang)關鍵字：資訊揭露;資訊不對稱;Information Disclosure;Information Asymmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：提升企業資訊揭露的透明度，降低投資人資訊接觸的障礙，<U+7232>政府推動公司治理改革的重要方針。證<U+52B5>暨期貨發展基金會所推動的「資訊揭露評鑑系統」，正是希望以外部監督機制來促使受評公司之揭露政策能同時兼顧法規要求與資訊自願需求，俾能降低企業資訊不對稱的環境。緣此，本研究旨在探討年報中資訊揭露水準對資訊不對稱程度之影響。實證結果顯示，年報中所呈現的整體資訊揭露水準愈高，愈能有助於緩和企業資訊不對稱的程度。若進一步考量資訊揭露的性質，更可清楚發現自願性資訊揭露水準愈高，企業反應出的資訊不對稱程度愈輕，但此結論並不適用於家族控制企業及股份盈餘偏離程度高的企業，至於強制性資訊揭露降低資訊不對稱的效果則不明顯。本研究之政策意涵<U+7232>：就降低資訊不對稱程度的立場而言，鼓勵督促企業提昇自願性資訊揭露的效果明顯優於以法令強制企業從事資訊之揭露。英文摘要：To narrow the information gap between managers and investors, the Taiwan authorities have called for greater corporate transparency and treated it as an important policy in the reform of corporate governance. In addition, the Taiwan Securities and Futures Institute has also launched the ”Information Disclosure and Evaluation System” with the expectation that the outside monitoring mechanism can urge companies to strengthen their voluntary disclosure besides mandatory disclosure, and thereby reduce corporate information asymmetry. For the reasons given above, this study aims to examine the impact that the disclosure level of the annual report has on the degree of information asymmetry. The empirical results show that the disclosure level of the annual report is negatively associated with the degree of information asymmetry. If we further consider the nature of the disclosure, the evidence shows that the degree of information asymmetry will become lower as the level of voluntary disclosure becomes higher. However, this finding is not applicable to firms under family control or firms with a larger wedge between voting and cash flow rights. As for mandatory disclosure, its effect is not significant in reducing information asymmetry. The implication for policy is that the benefits from promoting voluntary disclosure are better than those from complying with mandatory disclosure regulations in terms of mitigating the degree of information asymmetry.起始頁-結束頁：45-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201101.00038篇名：Development Zones in China: Are STIPs a Substitute for or a Complement to ETDZs?並列篇名：中國開發區：高新技術產業園區對經濟技術開發區具互補性或是替代性之研究作者：劉碧珍(Bih-Jane Liu);吳玉瑩(Yu-Yin Wu)關鍵字：外人直接投資;開發區;區域發展;中國;FDI;Economic Zones;Regional Development;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文利用2001年至2005年中國國家級高新技術產業園區對於經濟技術開發區吸引外人直接投資(foreign direct investment, FDI)的影響。迴歸結果顯示，在控制區域特性後，中國國家級高新技術產業園區對於同城市內的經濟技術開發區外資流入具有正向影響，顯示高新區對於同城市內的經濟技術開發區具互補性。其互補性亦表現於高新區的出口額、銷售額以及就業情況，亦即，當高新技術產業園區的出口、銷售或者就業增加時，同城市的經濟技術開發區外資流入亦會增加。然而，高新區對於經濟技術開發區的互補效果在東部地區顯著大於西部效果，此種發展型態恐將對區域發展已不均的中國產生不利的影響。英文摘要：This paper examines the relationships between two types of development zones in China, namely, the Economic Technological Development Zones (ETDZs) and Science and Technology Industrial Parks (STIPs), during the period 2001 to 2005. After controlling for regional characteristics, the results show that an ETDZ with a STIP located in the same region (city) attracts significantly more foreign direct investment (FDI), an indication of a complementary relationship between ETDZs and STIPs. This complementary relationship is reinforced by the fact that more exports, sales, or employment on the part of STIPs induces greater FDI to the ETDZs within the same region. However, the spillovers fall unevenly across regions. The ETDZs in the coastal regions benefit more from the presence of STIPs than those in the inland regions, which may lead to greater regional development disparities in China.起始頁-結束頁：97-145資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201101.00049篇名：本國銀行業成本效率之研究－共同邊界函數應用並列篇名：Measuring Cost Efficiencies in Domestic Banks: Application of the Metafrontier Approach作者：顏晃平(Huang-Ping Yen);張靜文(Jing-Wen Chang)關鍵字：金融控股公司;共同邊界;技術缺口比率;Financial Holding Company;Metafrontier;Technology Gap Ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：傳統進行跨群組比較時，只能觀察樣本所屬群組內成本效率的相對情況，並無法得出潛在效率改善的參考指標。有鑑於此，<U+7232>了比較不同類型銀行經營績效差異，本文將採用共同邊界評量概念，計算技術缺口比率(technology gap ratio, TGR)指標，以避免傳統效率評量只能考慮相同技術水準情況之缺失，並藉此指標做<U+7232>銀行群組間技術水準與成本節省幅度比較標準。此外，亦同時探討本國銀行生產之規模與範疇經濟現象。實證部份將以本國銀行做<U+7232>研究標的，研究觀察期間區分<U+7232>1991年至2000年及2001年至2008年兩段期間，共計4類群組（以是否加入金融控股公司做<U+7232>區分標準），以及710筆非平衡縱橫資料。實證結果顯示：金控制度成立之前，於2001年後加入金融控股公司之銀行組別內，多數樣本較靠近共同邊界成本（成本最小）；而於2001年至2008年期間，則以非屬金融控股公司之銀行較接近共同邊界成本。此外，在1991年至2000年間，兩類型銀行群組皆呈現近似些微規模不經濟；而於2001年至2008年期間，不同群組則皆具顯著規模經濟。整體而言，兩段期間內，各群組銀行皆存在顯著範疇經濟，並以加入金融控股公司之銀行，在2001年至2008年間，所計算範疇經濟值明顯小於非屬金融控股公司之銀行水準。此結果隱含金融控股公司之銀行應更重視金融商品組合多樣性，以充份發揮成本節省優勢。英文摘要：The cost efficiencies of domestic banks operating under a given technology, assumed to be defined by a stochastic frontier model, are not comparable efficiencies for banks operating under different technologies. Therefore, this study uses the concept of a metafrontier to compare the efficiencies of banks that may be classified into different groups. Panel data for 4 groups covering the 1991-2008 period are employed to illustrate this model. The empirical results show that the banks joining the financial holding companies in the later years are more efficient and enjoy greater cost savings than any other group of domestic banks during the period 1991-2000. By contrast, the banks not joining the financial holding companies are better than all the others during the period 2001-2008. Moreover, all of the domestic banks exhibit economies of scale and scope over the period, implying that the banks joining the financial holding companies should focus on product diversification so as to take advantage of cost savings.起始頁-結束頁：147-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201101.000501篇名：Taiwanese Fathers' Experiences of Having Their Child Diagnosed With a Developmental Disability並列篇名：台灣父親得知孩子被診斷發展障礙的經驗作者：黃玉苹(Yu-Ping Huang);　Winsome St John;蔡森蔚(Sen-Wei Tsai);陳秀蓉(Hsiu-Jung Chen)關鍵字：發展障礙;孩童;診斷;父親;護理;現象學;developmental disability;child;diagnosis;fathers;nursing;phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在探討在中國文化情境下，父親得知孩子被診斷為發展障礙時的生活經驗。英文摘要：The goal of this study was to explore fathers' experiences of having a child diagnosed with a developmental disability in a Chinese cultural context.起始頁-結束頁：239-249資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182389e342篇名：Exploration of Clinical Nurses' Perceptions of Spirituality and Spiritual Care並列篇名：臨床護理人員對靈性與靈性照護的感知探討作者：吳麗芬(Li-Fen Wu);林麗英(Lih-Ying Lin)關鍵字：臨床護理人員;感知;靈性;靈性照護;台灣;clinical　nurse;perception;spirituality;spiritual care;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討台灣臨床護理人員對靈性與靈性照護的感知，及人口特徵造成的差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of specific nurse demographic characteristics in predicting perception differences with regard to spirituality and spiritual care.起始頁-結束頁：250-256資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318236cf783篇名：Effectiveness of a Self-Care Program in Improving Symptom Distress and Quality of Life in Congestive Heart Failure Patients: A Preliminary Study並列篇名：自我照顧方案改善心衰竭患者生活品質與症狀困擾成效之初步研究作者：王筱珮(Shiao-Pei Wang);林麗嬋(Li-Chan Lin);李啟明(Chii-Ming Lee);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：自我照顧;心臟衰竭;生活品質;症狀困擾;self-care;congestive heart failure;quality of life;symptomdistress;nursing;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：探討心衰竭自我照顧方案的執行，是否能顯著降低心衰竭病患的症狀困擾，提昇功能狀態，改善生活品質，減少再入院及急診的機會。英文摘要：This study was undertaken to determine if participants with heart failure who were managed under the HFSC program had fewer distressing symptoms, better functional status, improved quality of life, and reduced hospital and emergency readmission rates compared with control group participants.起始頁-結束頁：257-266資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318237f08d4篇名：The Effects of Low-Impact Dance on Knee Torque and Lower Extremity Mobility in Middle-Aged and Older Women並列篇名：低衝擊舞蹈對中老年女性從事者的膝關節力矩與下肢活動度的影響作者：吳惠瑩(Hui-Ying Wu);曹德弘(Te-Hung Tsao);徐錦興(Chin-Hsing Hsu);涂瑞洪(Jui-Hung Tu);楊昌斌(Chang-Bing Yang)關鍵字：低衝擊舞蹈;關節活動度;膝關節力矩;knee joint torque;low-impact dance;range of motion of joint期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：比較中老年婦女其長期從事低衝擊舞蹈者與無規律身體活動者的下肢關節活動度與膝關節力矩的差異。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to examine the effects of low-impact dance on knee torque and lower extremity joint ROM in older women.起始頁-結束頁：267-274資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318236cfb25篇名：A Systematic Review of Sleep Patterns and Factors That Disturb Sleep After Heart Surgery並列篇名：開心手術後病人睡眠型態與睡眠干擾因素之系統性文獻回顧作者：廖玟君(Wen-Chun Liao);黃正宜(Cheng-Yi Huang);黃翠媛(Tsuey-Yuan Huang);黃秀梨(Shiow-Li Hwang)關鍵字：心臟手術;睡眠型態;睡眠紊亂因素;系統性文獻回顧;heart surgery;sleep pattern; disturbed factors;systematic期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：為了瞭解心臟手術病人睡眠型態的恢復狀況並尋找可行的處置，透過本系統性文獻回顧，分析探討心臟手術病患術後睡眠型態與其相關因素。英文摘要：This study describes sleep patterns in adults over the recovery course after heart surgery and works to identify potential interventions. Researchers analyzed and synthesized studies of sleep patterns and sleep-related factors in heart surgery patients.起始頁-結束頁：275-288資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318236cf686篇名：Brushing Teeth With Purified Water to Reduce Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia並列篇名：利用純水刷牙減少呼吸器相關肺炎之研究作者：姚俐音(Li-Yin Yao);張承圭(Cheng-Kuei Chang);馬素華(Suh-Hwa Maa);王彥雯(Charlotte Wang);陳佳慧(Cheryl Chia-Hui Chen)關鍵字：呼吸器相關肺炎;口腔護理;刷牙;口腔健康;口腔衛生;ventilator-associated pneumonia;oral care;toothbrushing;oral health;oral hygiene期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：研究目的在於探討每日兩次純水刷牙，是否可以降低神經外科加護病房病患呼吸器相關肺炎的發生率，並改善口腔健康及衛生。英文摘要：This study evaluated the effects in postneurosurgical, intensive care unit patients of brushing teeth twice daily with purified water on VAP rates and oral health or hygiene.起始頁-結束頁：289-297資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318236d05f7篇名：Relationship Between Elderly Depression and Health Status in Male Veterans並列篇名：老年男性榮民之憂鬱與健康狀況作者：張彩雲(Tsai-Yun Chang);闕可欣(Ke-Hsin Chueh)關鍵字：老人;老年憂鬱;榮民;健康狀況;白內障;older people;elderly depression;male veterans;health status;cataracts期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主探討男性老年榮民住民之憂鬱、健康狀況及人口特性之間的關係。英文摘要：This study explored the relationship between depression and health status in institutionalizedmale veterans in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：298-304資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318236cf898篇名：A Computer Literacy Scale for Newly Enrolled Nursing College Students: Development and Validation並列篇名：護理學院新生電腦素養量表之發展與驗證作者：林東正(Tung-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：電腦素養;資訊素養;護理電腦技能;護理學生;computer literacy;information literacy; computer competence in nursing;nursing student期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：發展具備良好信、效度的電腦素養量表，並瞭解受測者電腦素養現況，用以作為規劃適宜的電腦課程，以符合護理相關學門學生的需求。英文摘要：This study developed a computer literacy scale with good reliability and validity and investigated the current computer literacy of newly enrolled students to develop computer courses appropriate to students' skill levels and needs.起始頁-結束頁：305-317資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318236d03f9篇名：Socially Supportive Activity Inventory: Reliability and Validity of a Social Activity Instrument for Long-Term Care Institutions並列篇名：長期照護機構之社會支持型活動量表信度與效度之建構作者：許雅娟(Ya-Chuan Hsu)關鍵字：老人;社會活動;長期照護;信效度;elders;social activity;long-term care;reliability and validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　在長期照護機構中，為使住民在機構化的生活中增添生活樂趣，進而提升住民身心健康，安排豐富又多元的活動是常見的方式；但活動情形之評估，尚缺乏具信效度之本土性量表。目的　為建構一份具文化敏感度之「社會支持型活動量表」及其信效度，以期日後能對長期照護機構評量住民參與社會活動的量與質有所助益。方法　此量表奠基於社會支持理論，在整合社會活動相關文獻與結合台灣文化背景下所發展。量表以專家效度與再測信度來檢驗，經由方便取樣方式，以台灣南部一所提供常規、多樣化活動之長期照護機構之10位非失智老年住民為對象進行前驅研究。結果　研究結果顯示，專家內容效度指標(content validity index, CVI)達.96。信度方面，本量表間隔兩週再測信度(test-retest reliability)係數分別為：整體量表.76-1.00；活動之頻率1.00；活動之意義性.76-1.00；活動之享樂性.78-1.00，顯示所有題目皆達顯著穩定性。結論　結果顯示，「社會支持型活動量表」無論是效度或信度上，可為長期照護機構在評估其住民參與社會活動之質與量的可靠及可信工具。由於此為前驅性研究，建議未來能夠增加長期照護機構研究地點、樣本數，以及利用不同方法比較、測量社會活動，以建立更完善、嚴謹之心理計量特質。英文摘要：Background: Diverse social and recreational activities in elder care institutions have been provided to enrich a person's mental well-being amidst what is a relatively monotonous life. However, few instruments that measure the social activities of long-term care residents are available.Purpose: This study was designed to develop a culturally sensitive instrument (Socially Supportive Activity Inventory, SSAI) to assess quantity and quality of social activities for long-term care institutions and validate the instrument's psychometric properties.Methods: The SSAI was developed on the basis of the social support theory, a synthesis of literature, and Taiwanese cultural mores. The instrument was rigorously subjected to a two-stage process to evaluate its reliability and validity. In Stage 1, six experts from diverse backgrounds were recruited to evaluate instrument items and estimate the content validity of the instrument using a content validity questionnaire. Items were modified and refined on the basis of the responses of the expert panel and a set of criteria. After obtaining approval from a university institutional review board, in the second stage of evaluating test-retest reliability, a convenience sample of 10 Taiwanese institutionalized elders in a pilot study, recruited from a nursing home, completed the revised instrument at two separate times over 2 weeks.Results: Results showed a content validity of .96. Test-retest reliability from a sample of 10 participants yielded stability coefficients of .76-1.00. The stability coefficient was 1.00 for the component of frequency, .76-1.00 for the component of meaningfulness, and .78-1.00 for the component of enjoyment.Conclusion: The SSAI is a highly relevant and reliable culturally based instrument that can measure social activity in long-term care facilities. Because of the pilot nature of this study, future directions include further exploration of the SSAI instrument's psychometric properties. This should be done by enlarging the sample size to include more long-term care facilities and individual participants. Future studies can utilize diverse measures of social activity for comparison and validation of the SSAI.起始頁-結束頁：161-172資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318229c47910篇名：The Sleep Log and Actigraphy: Congruency of Measurement Results for Heart Failure Patients並列篇名：腕動計與睡眠日誌於心衰竭病患睡眠測量之一致性評估作者：王美業(Mei-Yeh Wang);洪香蓮(Hsiang-Lien Hung);蔡佩珊(Pei-Shan Tsai)關鍵字：睡眠;心臟衰竭;腕動計;睡眠日誌;sleep;heart failure;actigraphy;sleep log期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：Background: Quality of life in patients with heart failure (HF) can be significantly impacted by poor sleep and its daytime consequences. As more attention is being paid to the sleep problems of HF patients, it is important to evaluate the degree of congruence between subjective and objective sleep measurements in this patient group.Purpose: This study was developed to evaluate the congruence between sleep parameters as measured using a wrist-worn ActiGraph and a daily sleep log in patients with stable HF.Methods: Forty-three HF patients aged 40-92 years served as subjects. Sleep parameters were derived from actigraphy and a daily sleep log by averaging scores for 7 nights.Results: There were significant differences in wake time after sleep onset (WASO) and total sleep time between the sleep log and the ActiGraph (both ps＜.001). Neither WASO nor sleep onset latency, both derived from the sleep log, correlated significantly with actigraphy variables. The mean bias for WASO and total sleep time between methods was 54.1 min (SD=47.5 min) and 109.3 min (SD=91.68 min) as assessed using a Bland-Altman analysis. A majority (83.7%) of participants experienced sleep disturbances as assessed by actigraphy. However, fewer (53.5%) had sleep disturbances as assessed using the sleep log.Conclusion: A considerable degree of incongruence between actigraphy- and sleep log-derived measures of sleep exists in patients with stable HF.英文摘要：Background: Quality of life in patients with heart failure (HF) can be significantly impacted by poor sleep and its daytime consequences. As more attention is being paid to the sleep problems of HF patients, it is important to evaluate the degree of congruence between subjective and objective sleep measurements in this patient group.Purpose: This study was developed to evaluate the congruence between sleep parameters as measured using a wrist-worn ActiGraph and a daily sleep log in patients with stable HF.Methods: Forty-three HF patients aged 40-92 years served as subjects. Sleep parameters were derived from actigraphy and a daily sleep log by averaging scores for 7 nights.Results: There were significant differences in wake time after sleep onset (WASO) and total sleep time between the sleep log and the ActiGraph (both ps＜.001). Neither WASO nor sleep onset latency, both derived from the sleep log, correlated significantly with actigraphy variables. The mean bias for WASO and total sleep time between methods was 54.1 min (SD=47.5 min) and 109.3 min (SD=91.68 min) as assessed using a Bland-Altman analysis. A majority (83.7%) of participants experienced sleep disturbances as assessed by actigraphy. However, fewer (53.5%) had sleep disturbances as assessed using the sleep log.Conclusion: A considerable degree of incongruence between actigraphy- and sleep log-derived measures of sleep exists in patients with stable HF.起始頁-結束頁：173-180資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318229c42f11篇名：Continuous Quality Improvement of Nursing Care: Case Study of a Clinical Pathway Revision for Cardiac Catheterization並列篇名：護理照護之持續性醫療品質改善－以Tw-DRGs125之臨床路徑為例作者：嚴玉華(Yu-Hua Yan);陳怡(Yi Chen);龔志銘(Chih-Ming Kung);彭麗蓉(Li-Jung Peng)關鍵字：臨床路徑修正;診斷關聯群;持續性醫療品質改善;clinical pathway revision;Taiwan diagnosis related groups Tw-DRGs;continuous quality improvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：Background: Taiwan's Bureau of National Health Insurance (BNHI) has been gradually introducing Taiwan diagnosis related groups (Tw-DRGs) for inpatient cases since 2010. Challenged to adapt to payment system changes, hospitals must implement necessary management control systems or measures to maintain both fiscal soundness and medical care quality.Purpose: This study investigated the outcome of management participation in work to revise cardiac catheterization clinical pathway operating procedures.Methods: BNHI-qualified cases for Tw-DRGs 125 payment principles were recruited as study subjects to revise the cardiac catheterization clinical pathway. Researchers compared pre-and postrevision values in terms of mean medical care fees, patient volumes, healthcare quality, and length of hospital stay, as well as financial risk.Results: Significant differences were observed in precardiac catheterization nursing care completion rates, mean lengths of hospital stay, diagnosis numbers, surgical treatment numbers, and numbers of complications or comorbidities. Medical utilization was also significantly lower (p＜.05) after revision implementation.Conclusions: Clinical pathway revision involves organization, procedural flows, and performance management. The revision successfully improved hospital finances and promoted medical care quality.英文摘要：Background: Taiwan's Bureau of National Health Insurance (BNHI) has been gradually introducing Taiwan diagnosis related groups (Tw-DRGs) for inpatient cases since 2010. Challenged to adapt to payment system changes, hospitals must implement necessary management control systems or measures to maintain both fiscal soundness and medical care quality.Purpose: This study investigated the outcome of management participation in work to revise cardiac catheterization clinical pathway operating procedures.Methods: BNHI-qualified cases for Tw-DRGs 125 payment principles were recruited as study subjects to revise the cardiac catheterization clinical pathway. Researchers compared pre-and postrevision values in terms of mean medical care fees, patient volumes, healthcare quality, and length of hospital stay, as well as financial risk.Results: Significant differences were observed in precardiac catheterization nursing care completion rates, mean lengths of hospital stay, diagnosis numbers, surgical treatment numbers, and numbers of complications or comorbidities. Medical utilization was also significantly lower (p＜.05) after revision implementation.Conclusions: Clinical pathway revision involves organization, procedural flows, and performance management. The revision successfully improved hospital finances and promoted medical care quality.起始頁-結束頁：181-189資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318228cf4612篇名：Translating and Adapting Mental Health Service Outcome Measurements for Use in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣精神醫療服務測量量表之翻譯與文化適應模式作者：靖永潔(Yung-Chieh Ching)關鍵字：精神醫療服務;結果測量;病患滿意度;文化適應;psychiatric services;outcome measurement;patient satisfaction;cultural adaptation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　完善的健康照護須仰賴醫護人員提供有效率又符合成本效益，且須不斷以「使用者為導向」方式進行評估及持續改進為目標。在許多評估模式中，病患滿意度普查是評價醫療服務最重要指標之一，且滿意度指標能確實反應出醫護人員提供給病患照護之成效性。目的　台灣目前缺乏具國際標準的精神醫療服務病患滿意度量表可供人員進行正確有效的評估，因此本研究目的在發展合適的滿意度測量工具，於台灣特有的社會文化模式下使用。方法　Verona Service Satisfaction Scale為使用多年、適用於各種精神醫療服務環境下的病患滿意度量表，沿用EPSILON (European Psychiatric Services: Input Linked to Outcome Domains and Needs)研究團隊所使用的文化適應模式，進行完整而嚴謹的翻譯程序。結果　問卷通過效度測定，同時於前測後進行信度檢定，結果顯示此問卷與英文版問卷有相似檢定結果，因此可證明此中文版之精神醫療服務滿意度問卷為有效、且適用於台灣的中文版測量問卷。實務應用　醫護人員及精神醫療政策決策者，開始重視病患對醫療服務滿意度、以及未來改革發展方向的重要性，故本研究所完成的精神醫療服務病患滿意度問卷，可對未來服務人員在評估醫療服務及對未來台灣精神醫療改革方向有所助益。英文摘要：Background: Healthcare providers must deliver efficient and cost-effective care while continuously assessing user-focused outcomes to make appropriate improvements. Patient satisfaction is an important variable in the evaluation of psychiatric services, which complements the measurement of other outcome variables. Previous research suggests a strong link between satisfaction and the effectiveness of patient care.Purpose: Few international standard outcome measurements have been used in Taiwan to measure patient satisfaction with mental health services. In this study, a satisfaction survey instrument suited to Taiwan's cultural mores was developed.Methods: The researcher selected the Verona Service Satisfaction Scale (VSSS) as an optimal measurement instrument. The approach of the European Psychiatric Services Input Linked to Outcome Domains and Needs Study Group was adopted to translate and adapt an English version of a psychiatric-setting-specific, validated, and multidimensional satisfaction scale into a culturally appropriate traditional Chinese version scale.Results: This study used particular translation protocols to confirm the validity of the Chinese version of the VSSS questionnaire. Pilot study results demonstrate the adequate reliability of the Chinese version of the VSSS, which achieved results similar to those of the original-language European Psychiatric Services Input Linked to Outcome Domains and Needs Study.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In Taiwan, patient satisfaction with received care has risen concurrently with rising concerns regarding the future development of healthcare services. The intention of this project was to develop and use such outcome measurement in future research to gain insights into how to better value the expressed opinions and input of service users and develop services better tailored to Taiwan's cultural mores and in line with national mental health system requirements.起始頁-結束頁：190-198資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318228cf9f13篇名：Impact of the Life Review Program on Elders with Dementia: A Preliminary Study at a Day Care Center in Southern Taiwan並列篇名：生命回顧課程對失智症患者之影響：南台灣老人日間照護中心個案型先驅研究作者：林儷蓉(Li-Jung Lin);李冠逸(Kuan-Yi Li);Carla E. S. Tabourne關鍵字：生命回顧;失智症;日間照護;生活品質;休閒治療;life review;dementia;day care;quality of life;recreation therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　生命回顧課程屬於懷舊療法的一種，旨為協助參與者得以在進行團體生命回顧的過程中找尋自我的價值，並強化其在社會中的自我存在感以及生活滿意度。目的　本先驅研究的目的在於檢視一個以台灣老人為對象之生命回顧課程，對於患有輕中度失智症的參與者，其在課程參與前後的生活品質自覺是否有所改變。其次則是探討參與者失智程度的輕重是否會影響課程的成效。方法　採單組前後測之前實驗設計，以立意取樣方式，篩選出七位符合資格之課程參與者，徵得其同意後，在每位受試者參加以休閒治療為手法的生命回顧課程之前後，接受生活品質問卷調查(SF-36)之個人訪談。結果　結果顯示，參與者的生活品質在身體健康及心理健康覺知上，於課程後有略為提升的趨勢，惟未達統計上的顯著水準。再以認知程度為區分，中度失智的參與者其在身體的自覺改善上略優於輕度失智的參與者，但亦未達顯著意義。實務應用　未來相關的研究應增加樣本數及延長介入方案的期間，並且採取多面向之生活品質調查方法，以加深研究之嚴謹程度。本研究也對生命回顧課程的前置準備及執行過程提出改善建議。英文摘要：Background: Life review, a type of reminiscence therapy, assists participants to seek personal value in order to enhance social status and maintain a high quality of life (QOL).Purpose: This study aimed to examine the impact of an adaptive life review program (LRP) on perceived QOL in elders with mild to moderate dementia at a day care center and assess the effect, if any, of different cognitive impairment levels on intervention outcome.Methods: This pre-experimental design used a single group of seven subjects for pretest and posttest and purposive sampling at a 2-week interval. Researchers administered to each subject a 10-day therapeutic recreation program modified from Tabourne's (1991) LRP.Results: Posttest results found no statistically significant improvements. However, subjects reported higher mean scores of perceived QOL as measured by the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey. This finding indicated a trend of improving physical and mental health after the intervention. In addition, subjects with moderate cognitive impairment reported a higher improvement in physical health perception than did subjects with mild cognitive impairment.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Future research should include a larger sample size and a longer period of intervention and adopt multiple dimensions of QOL measurements to increase research rigor. Suggestions from this study can be used to improve the LRP.起始頁-結束頁：199-209資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318228ced314篇名：The Lived Experiences of Fathers in Cross-National Marriages並列篇名：跨國婚姻家庭之父親經驗作者：于素珍(Su-Chen Yu);王迺輝(Mattew N. H. Wang);陳玉枝(Yu-Chih Chen);穆佩芬(Pei-Fan Mu)關鍵字：跨國婚姻;父親;生活經驗;現象學;護理;cross-national marriage;father;lived experience;phenomenology;nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　近年移民婦女之婚姻議題多著眼於「發展遲緩」及「調適困難」。隨著國際村概念的提升，台灣移民及多元文化議題更受重視。由夫妻初始的邂逅到孕育孩子，跨國婚姻家庭功能之發展的過程受到重視。於此脈絡，父親於家中的角色及其照顧家庭之經驗尚待探討。目的　本研究目的為瞭解跨國婚姻家庭育兒時期之父親生活經驗的本質結構。方法　本研究應用Colaizzi的現象學研究法調查父親之生活經驗。參與研究者乃以立意選樣，樣本來自台灣一所綜合醫院。選樣條件為跨國婚姻之父親、育有幼兒之家庭，且兒童出生時無健康問題，共11位父親參與研究。樣本數取決於現象學之資料飽和原則，另以深入訪談方式進行資料之收集。文本以Colaizzi之現象學分析方式進行，嚴謹度則由Lincoln及Guba之原則來控制。結果　研究結果展現父親之經驗包含四個主題：（一）人生任務的達成、（二）婚姻生活的困頓、（三）家庭生活的紛擾及（四）為人父的尊嚴與責任。結論／臨床應用　本研究結果說明於跨國婚姻之育兒期家庭的父親，經歷了婚姻的準備，建構婚姻生活中與其他家庭成員的關係，及婚姻生活中為人父的尊嚴與責任。本研究結果，可提供護理人員在面對跨國婚姻家庭時，如何協助其父親角色的增進，以發展及促進此次群體之家庭健康。英文摘要：Background: Research on cross-national marriages in Taiwan has concentrated on development and adaptation issues related to the children of such relationships. Taiwan has seen a dramatic increase in immigration and cultural diversity over the past 2 decades. Understanding the dynamics of cross-national families from initial courtship through marriage and having and raising children is, thus, important. Little research has been done on the role or caring experiences of the father in cross-national families.Purpose: This study used the lived experiences of fathers in cross-national marriages with children to explore the essence of their role.Methods: Colaizzi's phenomenological approach was used to investigate subject experiences. Subjects were purposively chosen from a general hospital in Taiwan. Subject selection criteria included being a father in a cross-national marriage, having a child born in that marriage and the child was free of major health problems. Eleven fathers participated in the study. Sample size was determined by the saturation principle of phenomenology. Data collected included family demographic characteristics and open interview information. Narrative data were analyzed using Colaizzi's phenomenological approach. Trustworthiness was examined using principles from Lincoln and Guba.Results: Subject experiences concentrated on four themes: (a) achievement of a life mission, (b) marital difficulties, (c) activities external to the framework of family life, and (d) majesty and responsibility.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Fathers in the childbearing stage of cross-national marriages have experienced preparation for marriage, constructed a marital life together including relationships with other family members, and experienced the majesty and responsibility associated with their marriage. These findings provide knowledge for nurses that will help further enhance the role of fathers while developing and promoting family health within this subpopulation in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：210-219資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318229c3ee15篇名：The Skill Mix Model: A Preliminary Study of Changing Nurse Role Functions in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣護理人員在技術混合照護模式中角色功能改變之先驅性研究作者：黃立琪(Li-Chi Huang);李卓倫(Jwo-Leun Lee);梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);徐明儀(Ming-Yi Hsu);鄭睿芬(Jui-Fen Cheng);梅婷婷(Ting-Ting Mei)關鍵字：護理角色功能;技術混合照護模式;照顧服務員;nurses' role function;skill mix model;nurse aide期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　護理人員短缺是目前全世界所面臨的嚴重問題，因此運用照顧服務員於護理人力中之技術混合照護模式，已被應用在健康照護體系中。目的　研究目的在調查台灣於技術混合照護模式實施後，護理人員自覺其角色功能之改變情形。方法　研究採橫斷式研究設計，以結構式問卷進行調查。研究對象共38位，為試辦計劃的三間醫院，於實施技術混合照護模式六個月後之內科病房護理師。結構式問卷內容包括：人口學基本資料、護理人員自覺其角色功能、角色與工作滿意度、病人照護品質。護理人員角色功能包含獨立性、依賴性及相互依賴性等角色功能。結果　研究結果顯示，護理人員自覺其獨立性與相互依賴性角色功能，於技術混合照護模式實施後有所改變。角色功能明顯改變的有：擔任照顧服務員教育者、病人照護督導者、及護理照護結果之評值者等獨立性角色功能，及護理工作和健康照護團隊之整合者等相互依賴性角色功能。此外護理人員自覺病人被重覆確認及病人照護品質是增加的。結論　研究顯示，護理人員在技術混合照護模式中，需要更多關於分派、教育照顧服務員，及擔任督導和護理照護整合者之角色功能。此研究結果將可作為台灣醫院之護理照護模式的參考。英文摘要：Background: Nursing shortage is a critical problem worldwide. Using nurse aides (NAs) within a skill mix model has been applied in the healthcare delivery system as a strategy to improve nursing workforce shortages.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate changes in nurse perceptions of their role functions under the skill mix model in Taiwan.Methods: This was a cross-sectional designed study that employed a structured questionnaire. Participants included 38 registered nurses from three medical wards in three hospitals that had implemented the skill mix model for 6 months. The questionnaire gathered data on participant demographics, perceptions on the role functions, role and job satisfaction of nurses, and patient care quality. Nurses' role functions were grouped into independent, dependent, and interdependent categories.Results: Results demonstrate that nurses' perceptions of independent and interdependent role function have changed since the implementation of the skill mix model. The most significant role changes in the independent function category included the nurse as educator of NAs, supervisor for patient care, and evaluator for nursing care outcomes. The most significant role changes in the interdependent function category included the nurse as integrator of nursing work and coordinator of the healthcare team. Nurses' perceived changes increase in repetitive confirmation of patient conditions and patient care quality.Conclusions: This study revealed that nurses working in skill mix model environments need more authority to delegate and educate NAs and to supervise and integrate nursing care. Study results may serve as a reference for hospital nursing practice in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：220-229資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318228cd5d16篇名：A School-Based Health Promotion Program for Stressed Nursing Students in Taiwan並列篇名：探討以學校為基礎的健康促進計畫成效－針對台灣承受壓力的護理學生作者：謝佩玲(Pei-Lin Hsieh)關鍵字：同儕支持;運動;壓力;護理學生;peer support;physical activity;stress;nursing student期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　護理學生面臨臨床及大學課業壓力，許多的理論及研究文獻建議，同儕的支持及規律運動是非常重要的，且可以有效的管理護理學生的壓力。目的　本研究旨在探討以學校為基礎的健康促進計畫，針對台灣護理學生，以團體運動方式介入及同儕的支持來管理壓力。方法　採類實驗研究設計，資料收集工具包括壓力問卷、半結構式問卷及團體討論，參與者為來自北部某技術學院的護理學生共77位，採隨機分配到實驗組(n=37)及對照組(n=40)，計畫為期16週。參與者是中度及重度壓力的學生，實驗組分成小組參與團體運動，每週三次，每次30分鐘。在第八週後，研究者邀請實驗組各小組分享他們的感受及管理壓力的策略，實驗組及對照組皆需完成壓力問卷的前後測試。量性資料以SPSS 14版套裝軟體進行分析；團體討論的質性資料以內容分析法分析。結果　研究結果發現，實驗組護生的壓力顯著下降，且實驗組及對照組的下降程度有顯著不同。參與介入的護生比未參與者的壓力較低，並且對於同儕的支持及運動持正向看法。結論／實務應用　結果證實，以學校為基礎的健康促進計畫，對於減輕台灣護理學生的壓力是有效的，此研究可提供教師於發展協助護生管理壓力健康促進計畫的參考，更可協助學生藉由運動及同儕支持進而發展抒解壓力策略。英文摘要：Background: Nursing students face both clinical and academic stress. Extensive theoretical and research literature suggests that peer support and regular exercise are critically important and can efficiently manage stress for nursing students.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of a school-based health promotion program in a group physical activity intervention and peer support program for stressed nursing students.Methods: This study used a quasi-experimental design to collect information and collected data from a stress questionnaire, semistructured questionnaire, and group discussion. Participants included 77 nursing students at an institute of technology in northern Taiwan. Participants were randomly assigned into experimental (n=37) and control (n=40) groups. Program duration was 16 weeks. Participants were selected based on their assessment results as having moderate or severe levels of stress. All participants in the experimental group took part in a group physical activity for 30 minutes three times a week. Eight weeks later, the researcher invited each group to discuss their feelings and stress coping strategies. Both groups completed pretest and posttest stress questionnaires. Quantitative data were analyzed using SPSS 14.0 Statistical Package for Windows, and qualitative data from each group discussion were analyzed using content analysis.Results: Results revealed that level of stress was statistically decreased in the experimental group. Posttest stress levels were significantly different in experimental and control groups. The results suggested that students who participated in the intervention had less stress than did those in the control group after the intervention. Those in the experimental group held positive views of peer support and physical activity.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study confirmed the efficacy of school-based health promotion programs in reducing stress in nursing students. Findings may provide educators with information to assist their developing effective health promotion programs to manage stress for their students. This study can also help students develop personal coping strategies through physical activity and peer support.起始頁-結束頁：230-237資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318228d01017篇名：Drinking Behaviors: The Life Narratives of Indigenous Bunun Women in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣布農族婦女對飲酒的生命敘說作者：張麗蓉(Li-Jung Chang);羅淑芬(Shu-Fen Lo);Mark Hayter關鍵字：民族誌;飲酒行為;文化意義;布農族婦女;台灣;ethnography;drinking behavior;cultural meaning;Bunun women;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　從醫療的觀點，原住民的飲酒文化已成為嚴重的健康議題。布農族婦女對飲酒的感受及行為議題文獻付之闕如。目的　本研究的目的是探討布農族婦女知覺到飲酒的感受及飲酒的行為問題。方法　本研究以民族誌方法於台灣東部地區進行資料收集分析。資料收集以半結構深度訪談收集10位布農族婦女其飲酒的戚受與行為。結果　本研究從資料中萃取出六個主要的文化主題，分別是：(1)以酒會友、(2)借酒澆愁、(3)詮釋酒的文化意義、(4)酒會傷身、(5)飲酒的傳統束縛降低、及(6)過度飲酒的調控機制。結論／實務應用　本研究的結果可以幫助：(1)了解原住民女性並尊重他們對酒的飲用；(2)對於跨文化護理未來的臨床應用。期待本研究能提昇原住民的護理品質。英文摘要：Background: Alcohol intoxication is a serious health issue among Taiwan's indigenous Malayo-Polynesian groups. No published studies address the drinking perceptions and behaviors of Bunun women.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to describe the drinking perceptions and behaviors of Bunun women in Taiwan.Methods: This study used an ethnographic approach to study the residents of one township located in eastern Taiwan. Researchers used semistructured, in-depth interviews to collect data from 10 Bunun women in 2006.Results: Researchers identified six key culture themes from the data. These were (a) drinking to help make friends, (b) drinking to help solve emotional problems, (c) interpreting the meaning of drinking, (d) hurting the body due to alcohol abuse, (e) decreasing the bond of convention for drinking, and (f) establishing mechanisms to control drinking.Conclusions/Implication for Practice: The results of this study may help one to understand the alcohol use behavior and attitudes of indigenous women in Taiwan and contribute to better cross-cultural nursing clinical practice. This study is expected to enhance the quality of nursing care provided to Taiwan's indigenous people.起始頁-結束頁：83-93資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821cbbd018篇名：Factors Related to Milk Supply Perception in Women Who Underwent Cesarean Section並列篇名：計畫性剖腹產婦女乳汁分泌感知之相關因素作者：林素瑛(Su-Ying Lin);李絳桃(Jian-Tao Lee);楊誠嘉(Cherng-Chia Yang);高美玲(Meei-Ling Gau)關鍵字：母乳哺餵;計畫剖腹生產;乳汁分泌感知;breastfeeding;planned cesarean section;perceived milk supply期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　主觀性乳汁分泌不足常見於產後婦女，也是造成早期斷奶的主要原因。研究指出，剖腹產婦女感受到乳汁分泌不足的發生率高於陰道產之婦女。目的　探討計畫剖腹生產產婦乳汁分泌感知之相關因素。方法　採描述相關研究，以方便取樣方式於台灣北部某區域教學醫院，於產後第三天，針對141名計畫剖腹生產產婦進行收案。研究工具包括人口學屬性、生產措施調查表、視覺疼痛評估量表以及H&H乳汁分泌量表，以檢測影響計畫剖腹產產婦乳汁分泌感知的相關因素。結果　以複迴歸分析發現，胎次、麻醉方式、首次哺乳的時間、配方奶的使用是計畫剖腹產婦女乳汁分泌感知的重要預測因子，共可解釋23.1%的變異量。採用硬膜外止痛、第一次哺乳時間延遲、哺乳頻率較少、添加配方奶之剖腹產婦女有較低的乳汁分泌感知分數。結論／實務應用　醫護人員應該鼓勵剖腹產產婦儘早依嬰兒需求開始哺乳，減少配方奶的使用，及增加嬰兒吸吮乳房的次數；縮短手術後硬膜外止痛使用日數，改以非麻醉性口服止痛藥以促進產婦成功哺乳。英文摘要：Background: Perceived insufficient milk supply is common among postpartum women and is a major reason for early weaning. Studies indicate a significantly higher incidence of insufficient milk supply in women who undergo cesarean section as compared with women who undergo vaginal delivery.Purpose: This study was designed to determine perceived milk supply in postpartum women who underwent a planned cesarean section, as well as related factors.Methods: Authors employed a descriptive correlational study design. Factors associated with milk supply perception in postpartum women (at 3 days postpartum) were collected from 141 postpartum women who planned to undergo cesarean section at a regional teaching hospital in northern Taiwan. A demographic data sheet, the Birth Practice Inventory, a visual pain analog scale, and the Hill and Humenick Lactation Scale were used to identify factors affecting the perceived milk supply of participants.Results: The study used multiple linear regression to identify significant predictors of milk supply perception. Four factors, including parity, type of anesthesia, time to initial breastfeeding, and use of formula, explained 23.1% of total variance among participants. Women who experienced epidural patient-controlled analgesia, those with delayed initial breastfeeding or lower breastfeeding frequency, and those who used formula supplementation earned relatively lower perceived milk supply scores.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Study results indicate that medical staff should encourage postpartum women to commence breastfeeding, based on infant need, as early as possible and reduce formula use to increase breastfeeding frequency. Shifting to nonnarcotic analgesic medications from epidural patient-controlled analgesia as early as possible is also recommended to increase breastfeeding success.起始頁-結束頁：94-101資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821988e919篇名：Effectiveness of Interactive Multimedia CD on Self-Care and Powerlessness in Hemodialysis Patients並列篇名：運用多媒體互動式光碟改善血液透析患者自我照顧及無力感之成效作者：王魯梅(Lu-Mei Wang);丘周萍(Chou-Ping Chiou)關鍵字：多媒體互動式光碟;血液透析;自我照顧;無力感;interactive multimedia CD;hemodialysis;self-care;powerlessness期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：Background: Hemodialysis (HD) patients have low self-care knowledge, poor self-care behavior, and powerlessness.Purpose: The authors designed this study to, first, understand the current state of first-year HD patients' self-care knowledge, self-care behavior, and powerlessness and, second, assess the effectiveness of an interactive multimedia CD educational intervention.Method: A quasi-experimental, repeated measures design, with intervention and comparison groups, was used. All subjects for this study were recruited from six dialysis centers in southern Taiwan. The three points for outcome testing included baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks. Research tools included an HD self-care knowledge questionnaire, an HD self-care behavioral questionnaire, a powerlessness questionnaire, and an interactive multimedia CD.Results: Results found that participants possessed insufficient knowledge, were incapable of completely achieving or comprehending routine self-care, and were affected by powerlessness. The interactive multimedia CD intervention effectively enhanced self-care knowledge (p＜.000) and self-care behavior (p＜.000) and improved powerlessness (p＜.000). Positive results persisted well after the conclusion of the intervention.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Participants in the intervention group had better self-care knowledge and behaviors and feeling of control over their lives than those in the control group. This illustrates the positive effects of the interactive multimedia CD. Results demonstrate the potential benefits of using the interactive multimedia CD with elderly patients in HD and nursing practice education.英文摘要：Background: Hemodialysis (HD) patients have low self-care knowledge, poor self-care behavior, and powerlessness.Purpose: The authors designed this study to, first, understand the current state of first-year HD patients' self-care knowledge, self-care behavior, and powerlessness and, second, assess the effectiveness of an interactive multimedia CD educational intervention.Method: A quasi-experimental, repeated measures design, with intervention and comparison groups, was used. All subjects for this study were recruited from six dialysis centers in southern Taiwan. The three points for outcome testing included baseline, 4 weeks, and 8 weeks. Research tools included an HD self-care knowledge questionnaire, an HD self-care behavioral questionnaire, a powerlessness questionnaire, and an interactive multimedia CD.Results: Results found that participants possessed insufficient knowledge, were incapable of completely achieving or comprehending routine self-care, and were affected by powerlessness. The interactive multimedia CD intervention effectively enhanced self-care knowledge (p＜.000) and self-care behavior (p＜.000) and improved powerlessness (p＜.000). Positive results persisted well after the conclusion of the intervention.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Participants in the intervention group had better self-care knowledge and behaviors and feeling of control over their lives than those in the control group. This illustrates the positive effects of the interactive multimedia CD. Results demonstrate the potential benefits of using the interactive multimedia CD with elderly patients in HD and nursing practice education.起始頁-結束頁：102-111資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821b0eff20篇名：Developing Practical Knowledge Content of Emergency Nursing Professionals並列篇名：急診護理人員實務知識內涵作者：朱雯(Wen Chu);許麗齡(Li-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：實務知識;現象學;急診護理;急診護理人員;practical knowledge;phenomenology;emergency room nursing;emergency room nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　有關臨床／實務知識內涵的研究相當缺乏，然而，急診護理人員如何習得、發展以及維持急診照護品質以達實務知識水準的需求，亦值得探究。目的　本研究目的乃經由檢視發生於臨床情境的學習歷程，以探討急診室護理人員的實務知識內涵。方法　本研究採用現象學研究法與深度訪談法，訪談10位具急診3年以上年資的護理人員。以Moustakas之分析步驟進行文本資料分析。藉由可信度、遷移性、可靠性與驗證性檢驗本研究之嚴謹度。結果　內容分析顯示，急診護理人員發展實務知識可歸納出4個主題，包括：(1)急診基本處置流程、常規及症狀處理；(2)疾病及藥物機轉、藥效學及治療反應；(3)最新急診處置與技能、藥物治療的討論及最近辨識的疾病；及(a)護理價值的認同，包括護理態度與持續護理。所有的參與者皆可從第一階段至第三階段中發展出實務知識，並結合和應用這些不同型式的知識於護理實務上。但只有少數參與者經驗過第四階段。結論／實務應用　急診護理人員的臨床／實務知識學習歷程如下：(1)描述性知識：如急診基本處置常規實務應用與操作程序（知道什麼）；(2)程序性知識：包含由管理者、實務練習與訓練人員的教授；(3)情境性知識：在與病人互動的過程中，涉及觀察與處置的知識（知道何時與知道為何）。為了實施綜合評估、確認病人狀況與發展可促進照護品質的有效方法，對護理人員而言，於護理實務中聯結與應用多種型態的知識顯得相當重要。英文摘要：Background: There is a paucity of published research on clinical or practical nursing knowledge. The ways that nurses acquire, develop, and maintain emergency room (ER) nursing care skills is a research area, in particular, that deserves further investigation.Purpose: This study examined clinical setting learning processes to better understand the practical knowledge content of ER nurses.Methods: This study used a phenomenological approach and in-depth interviews of 10 nurses. Each participant had at least 3 years of ER experience. Researchers used Moustakas' method to analyze interview data. Findings were checked for credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability.Results: The authors identified four major practical knowledge themes for ER professionals. These were (a) basic emergency treatment procedure routines and symptom management; (b) disease mechanisms, pharmacodynamics, and treatment responses; (c) newly identified diseases, updated emergency treatments and techniques, and medical treatment discussions; and (d) identifying nursing values including nursing attitudes and continuing patient care. Participants in this study had experience with the first three themes and successfully combined various types of nursing knowledge in their nursing care duties. Only few participants indicated experience with the fourth theme.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings clarify that clinical or practical knowledge in ER nurses evolves first from declarative knowledge (e.g., basic emergency treatment routines and operating procedures) to procedural knowledge (e.g., instructions from supervisors, actual practice, and drills) to conditional knowledge (e.g., observation and treatment involving direct interactions with patients). Nurses should combine and apply the various knowledge types in their nursing practice to assess comprehensively each patient’s condition and administer effective treatment and service.起始頁-結束頁：112-118資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821aa0eb01篇名：The Effectiveness of Exercise on Improving Cognitive Function in Older People: A Systematic Review並列篇名：運動對改善老人認知功能之成效－系統性文獻回顧作者：曾建寧(Chien-Ning Tseng);高碧霞(Bih-Shya Gau);羅美芳(Meei-Fang Lou)關鍵字：運動;認知功能;老人;exercise;cognitive function;older people期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　運動對身體的好處已廣為證實，且運動在改善心智健康上也越顯其重要性。然而，運動對老人認知功能的成效為何，研究結果仍然不一致。目的　本研究旨在了解運動在改善老人認知功能的成效。方法　本文獻回顧採用敘事合成法，搜尋2006年到2009 MEDLINE、CINAHL、Cochrane Library、Airiti Library（中文期刊論文）等電腦資料庫，使用的關鍵詞包括運動、身體活動、認知功能，研究對象為老人的研究，並運用CONSOR標準作為研究品質的評估。結果　共有12篇中至高品質的研究納入此次文獻回顧。本研究結果發現：每次60分鐘，每週3次，持續24週的運動計畫廣為多數研究採用；而12篇研究中有8篇顯示運動可以改善認知功能，其中研究對象有5篇是健康老人，3篇是認知受損老人；此外，單一項目運動對改善認知功能受損老人的成效較健康老人佳，而對健康老人而言，多面向運動則更具正向的效果。結論／實務應用　每次60分鐘、每週3次，持續6週的運動對老人認知功能即具有正向效益。而關於多面向運動對健康老人認知功能改善的成效，則需要採更嚴謹的研究方法及足夠樣本數來進一步證實。英文摘要：Background: The well-documented physical benefits of exercise and the value of exercise for improving mental health have raised the profile and role of exercise in healthcare. However, studies evaluating the effects of exercise on neurocognitive function have produced equivocal results.Purpose: This study was designed to examine the effectiveness of exercise on improving cognitive function in older people.Methods: Researchers used a narrative synthesis approach in this review and conducted a computer-based search in MEDLINE, CINAHL, Cochrane Library, and Airiti Library (Chinese) from 2006 to 2009 using the search terms exercise, physical activity, and cognition. Research quality appraisal was rated using Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials criteria.Result: This review included 12 medium-to high-quality randomized controlled trials. Most studies examined used a 60-minute exercise regimen scheduled three times per week that was continued for 24 weeks. Of the 12 studies, 8 revealed that exercise can improve cognitive function. Five studies focused on healthy older people and three studied older people who had impaired cognition at baseline. Analysis of the studies showed simple, one-component exercise as better for older people with cognitive impairment and multicomponent exercise as better for those without such impairment.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This systematic review demonstrated that an exercise regimen of 6 weeks and at least 3 times per week for 60 minutes had a positive effect on cognition. Whether multicomponent exercise is significantly more effective in improving cognitive function, particularly in healthy older people, should be tested using larger trials with more rigorous methodology.起始頁-結束頁：119-131資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821988372篇名：Preceptors' Experiences Training New Graduate Nurses: A Hermeneutic Phenomenological Approach並列篇名：以詮釋現象學探討護理臨床教師訓練新畢業護理人員之經驗作者：陳雅惠(Ya-Huei Chen);杜異珍(Yih-Jen Duh);馮延芬(Yen-Fen Feng);黃玉苹(Yu-Ping Huang)關鍵字：臨床指導教師;新進護理人員;經驗;詮釋現象學;preceptor;new nurses;experience;hermeneutic phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　護理臨床教師對於新進護理人員的長期留任及工作滿意度有其關鍵性，因此對於探討護理臨床教師的經驗相當重要，然而，目前台灣卻缺乏探討護理臨床教師的研究。目的　本研究目的在於探討護理臨床教師在醫院訓練新進畢業護理人員的經驗。方法　本研究採詮釋現象學並以立意性取樣自台灣一所中部醫學中心募集15位臨床指導師，資料以半結構式的深度訪談作為資料收集，所有訪談皆錄音並轉寫成逐字稿，以詮釋循環為資料分析的方法。結果　結果呈現三個主題：一、運用多元化的教學策略；二、感受身為臨床指導教師的負擔；及三、發展成就感。結論／臨床應用　同時擔任護理臨床教師及護士的角色常會引起角色衝突感，也同時產生工作上的負荷及害怕無法勝任護理臨床教師的角色，因此當護理臨床教師訓練新進護理人員時，應降低其照護病人的人數。培養正向的工作氛圍可支持護理臨床教師及新進護理人員，因而護理臨床教師不會再覺得孤單及壓力。為減輕對文書工作的不熟悉感及額外過多文書工作的壓力，建議在正式訓練前，護理臨床教師及新進人員都應參與研討會，以便對其介紹整個訓練過程及文書作業的相關細節，進而對教與學產生整體的概念。英文摘要：Background: Preceptors are a key to retaining new graduate nurses in a hospital setting. Thus, it is important to understand new staff teaching experiences from their own perspectives. Preceptor experience is an inadequately explored topic in Taiwan.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore preceptor experiences related to their training of new graduate nurses in a hospital setting in Taiwan.Methods: For this interpretive phenomenological study, researchers purposively recruited 15 nurse preceptors from a medical center in central Taiwan. Study data were collected by means of semistructured, in-depth interviews. Tape recordings were transcribed verbatim, and transcripts were analyzed using a hermeneutic circle approach.Results: Three general themes captured the new nurse training experiences of the preceptors: (a) applying a variety of teaching strategies, (b) feeling the burden of being a preceptor, and (c) developing a sense of achievement.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Being in the role of both a preceptor and nurse was perceived as a challenge by participants because of heavy workloads and fears of failure. Thus, reducing the preceptor's patient care responsibilities while educating new nurses should be a priority. This study also found cultivating a positive work climate as crucial to support preceptors and new nurses so that preceptors do not feel alienated or overly stressed. A workshop is a useful strategy to introduce preceptors and new nurses to standardized training procedures and documents; this, in turn, can provide a more holistic approach to teaching and learning and reduce pressures on preceptors caused by additional, unfamiliar paperwork.起始頁-結束頁：132-140資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821aa1553篇名：Using Clinical Caring Journaling: Nursing Student and Instructor Experiences並列篇名：護生與臨床教師運用臨床關懷日誌的經驗作者：郭倩琳(Chien-Lin Kuo);麥哲恩(Michael Turton);鄭夙芬(Su-Fen Cheng);李皎正(Jane Lee-Hsieh)關鍵字：關懷;臨床關懷日誌;護理學生;護理教師;caring;clinical caring journaling;nursing students;nursing instructors期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　許多護理課程將日誌書寫作為主動反思的教學策略，以促進學生的學習過程、個人成長及專業發展。然而，護理研究卻鮮少探討日誌書寫之教學策略於護生學習關懷的適當性。目的　探討護生和臨床教師運用「臨床關懷日誌」的經驗及感受。方法　採描述性質性研究設計，針對某校880位五專實習護生及90位臨床教師於實施「臨床關懷日誌」一學年後，進行焦點團體訪談，其中16位護生及7位教師自願參與本研究，訪談資料以內容分析法進行分析。結果　師生的經驗與感受包含六個主題：引導護生關懷病人、增強護生反思關懷能力、建立護生自信、促進師生互動、促進護生自我成長、及克服書寫困難等。結論／實務應用　本研究結果可提供護理教育者運用臨床關懷日誌教學策略於護生臨床實習之參考。英文摘要：Background: Journaling has been incorporated into many nursing courses as an active reflective teaching strategy that can facilitate the learning process, personal growth, and professional development of students. There is limited research support of journaling as an appropriate tool to promote reflection for the purpose of learning caring in nursing education.Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the experiences and perceptions of student nurses and instructors who use clinical caring journaling (CCJ) in their clinical practicum.Methods: Researchers used a descriptive qualitative research design. The study population was 880 senior student nurses and 90 clinical instructors from a nursing program at a university in Taiwan who used CCJ. After completion of 1 year of clinical practicum, 16 students and 7 instructors participated voluntarily in focus group interviews. Researchers used content analysis to sort interview data into themes.Results: Six themes were categorized that encapsulated student and instructor experiences and perceptions regarding using CCJ in their clinical practicum. These themes were guiding caring behavior toward patients, enabling students' reflective caring abilities, building up students' self-confidence, increasing interaction between students and instructors, enhancing students' self-development, and overcoming writing difficulty.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Research findings may serve as a reference for nursing educators to use CCJ strategy in student nurses' clinical practicum.起始頁-結束頁：141-149資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821aa1a74篇名：A Study of Factors Affecting Acceptance of Hospital Information Systems: A Nursing Perspective並列篇名：探討影響護理人員使用醫院資訊系統接受度之關鍵因素作者：蕭如玲(Ju-Ling Hsiao);張惠娟(Hui-Chuan Chang);陳瑞甫(Rai-Fu Chen)關鍵字：護理人員;醫院資訊系統;科技接受模式;nurses;hospital information system HIS;technology acceptance model TAM期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　隨著醫院資訊系統廣泛的被使用，醫院資訊系統績效必須被審慎的評估。護理人員是醫院內最大的專業族群，同時也是給予病患合適照護的主要提供者，因此護理人員對於醫院資訊系統的導入與評估扮演一個關鍵角色。目的　本研究主要目的為探討影響護理人員接受醫院資訊系統使用之關鍵因素。並以科技接受模式為理論基礎，加入系統品質與資訊品質、高階主管支持與專案小組技能、使用者之自我效能與相容性等六個外生變項，以建立研究架構，並依此架構進行研究工具發展。方法　採用問卷調查法，以某區域醫院護理人員為對象，共發放545份問卷，回收有效問卷501份，有效回收率91.9%。所蒐集資料再以複迴歸進行資料分析。結果　本研究發現，護理人員對於醫院資訊系統的認知有用主要受到高階主管支持、相容性與資訊品質的影響；而認知易用的影響因素為個人電腦自我效能、高階主管支持、相容性與資訊品質。影響護理人員使用醫院資訊系統使用接受度之關鍵因素為其對醫院資訊系統認知有用與認知易用，整體解釋變異能力達45.1%。結論／實務應用　此結果可提供醫院管理者了解護理人員對醫院資訊系統使用之重要考量，並可作為醫院系統發展之參考。英文摘要：Background: Hospital information systems (HISs) are widely used in Taiwan, and HIS performance must be carefully evaluated. Nursing personnel are the largest group of staff in a hospital and are the center of care delivery; thus, they play an important role in the adoption and evaluation of HISs.Purpose: The primary objective of this study was to explore the critical factors affecting the acceptance of HISs in Taiwan from a nursing perspective. On the basis of the technology acceptance model, we used six exogenous variables (system quality, information quality, user self-efficacy, compatibility, top management support, and project team competency) as investigation factors.Methods: Survey research targeted nursing personnel in the selected case hospital as participants. A total of 545 questionnaires were sent out, and 501 were returned, indicating a valid response rate of 91.9%. Collected data were analyzed using multiple regression analysis.Results: Results indicate that user self-efficacy, top management support, compatibility, and information quality have significant impacts on perceived ease of use. In addition, top management support, compatibility, and information quality were identified as having significant impacts on perceived usefulness. Furthermore, nurses' perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness on HISs was found to impact significantly on system acceptance, with 45.1% of the total explained variance.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Results can help managers understand key considerations affecting HIS development and use and may be applied as a reference for system development and improvement.起始頁-結束頁：150-160資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31821cbb255篇名：Spiritual Well-Being in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis並列篇名：類風濕性關節炎病患之靈性安適作者：林文絹(Wen-Chuan Lin);高美玲(Meei-Ling Gau);林慧珍(Hui-Chen Lin);林惠如(Hung-Ru Lin)關鍵字：資料統合分析;靈性;靈性安適狀態;類風濕性關節炎;meta-synthesis;spirituality;spiritual well-being;rheumatoid arthritis RA期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　類風濕性關節炎是一慢性長期性的疾病，此疾病雖不會造成立即的生命威脅，但罹病過程卻須面對生活上的種種壓力與挑戰，影響不僅在生理上，同時也帶來心理社會層面的影響，如無助感、依賴他人、自尊受威脅、社交活動受干擾、影響與家人的關係、有困難繼續工作等。病患的靈性安適狀態能反應在生活品質上，可做為病患適應之重要指標。目的　本研究之目的為描繪類風濕性關節病患之靈性安適狀態。方法　依Sandelowski與Barroso之建議進行質性資料統合分析。藉完整之系統性資料庫搜尋，尋找探討類風濕性關節病患靈性安適之研究原著。每一篇被搜尋到的文章都經過系統性的評價，如符合下列條件則納入選擇：必須是質性研究，並有清楚之研究目的、收案標準與程序、樣本數與特性、資料分析方式及結果之呈現。結果　經檢視675篇發表於1995至2009年間之研究文章，十篇符合收案條件。經分析類風濕性關節炎病患之靈性安適可以四個主題呈現，包括與疾病共存、重掌控制、重新架構情況及增長勇氣。結論／實務應用　在協助病患適應疾病上，投注給予病患靈性力量的支持應考量多層面的來源，除認知為主的教育課程外，應借助病友團體的力量，並規劃家屬教育課程。本研究所呈現之靈性適應面向之內涵，可成為發展評價類風濕性關節炎病患生活品質之重要素材。英文摘要：Background: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, long-term, and non-life-threatening disease. Individuals with RA face various daily pressures that include physical symptoms as well as feelings of helplessness, dependency, threats to self-respect, interference with social activities, disruptions of family ties, and difficulties in continuing to work. Quality of life reflects a patient's spiritual well-being and can be used as an important indicator of adaptation to RA.Purpose: The aim of this study was to describe the status of spiritual well-being in RA patients.Methods: This study used meta-synthesis with Sandelowski and Barroso's qualitative meta-summary technique. A comprehensive search of Academic Search Complete, CINAHL, MEDLINE, PsycARTICA LES, and SocINDEX using relevant keywords identified primary research studies that have previously explored spiritual well-being in patients with RA. Each study was systematically evaluated on the basis of the following inclusion criteria: (a) clear descriptions of research purposes and qualitative research, sampling strategies and techniques used; (b) statement of sample size and sample variables; (c) description of data analysis methods used; and (d) quality of research finding presentation.Results: A total of 675 articles, published between 1995 and 2009, were found. Ten met the inclusion criteria. The results revealed four consistent themes related to RA patients' spiritual well-being, namely, living with the disease, reclaiming control, reframing the situation, and bolstering courage.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Multifaceted resources should be used to give patients spiritual support. These resources should include establishing cognition-based education programs that provide information about the disease and programs that offer strong support for patient groups. Curricula should address how to plan family education courses. Spiritual well-being as presented in this study should be integrated into quality-of-life evaluations of RA patients and provide an evaluation tool able to assess the effectiveness of various interventions.起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820b0f8c6篇名：Relationships among Supervisor Feedback Environment, Work-Related Stressors, and Employee Deviance並列篇名：主管回饋環境、工作壓力源與員工偏差行為相關性之研究作者：彭瑞振(Jei-Chen Peng);曾美屘(Mei-Man Tseng);李吟玲(Yin-Ling Lee)關鍵字：主管回饋環境;工作相關的壓力源;員工偏差行為;supervisor feedback environment;work-related stressors;employee deviance期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　先前的研究已證實，員工偏差行為會造成組織績效與生產力的大幅降低。再者，先前研究亦已證實，主管提供一個適宜的回饋環境，會增進員工的工作績效。因此，探討主管回饋環境與員工偏差行為的關係，對組織（醫院）而言是一個重要的主題。目的　本研究的目的為探討主管回饋環境對員工偏差行為的影響，及導入工作相關的壓力源為中介變項，以檢視其中介機制。方法　本研究以個案醫院之員工（護士）與其直屬主管（護理長）所配對的276份橫斷面資料為樣本，採用結構方程式模型來驗證假設模型。結果　研究結果顯示：主管回饋環境與員工的偏差行為有負向關係；工作相關的壓力源為此負向關係中的部分中介因子。結論／實務應用　本研究結果指出，當員工（護士）知覺主管提供適宜的回饋環境，會降低其工作相關的壓力，進而抑制偏差行為的產生。因此，為降低員工從事偏差行為，組織可培養主管下列的整合性回饋知識<U+2474>如何增進員工的正確績效、<U+2475>如何精確的釐清員工對績效資訊的冀求、及<U+2476>如何提供更多持續性績效回饋給予員工。主管如擁有這些整合性的回饋知識，則可在與部屬的日常互動中，降低員工工作壓力與減少偏差行為。英文摘要：Background: Previous research has demonstrated that the employee deviance imposes enormous costs on organizational performance and productivity. Similar research supports the positive effect of favorable supervisor feedback on employee job performance. In light of such, it is important to understand the interaction between supervisor feedback environment and employee deviant behavior to streamline organization operations.Purpose: The purposes of this study were to explore how the supervisor feedback environment influences employee deviance and to examine the mediating role played by work-related stressors.Methods: Data were collected from 276 subordinate-supervisor dyads at a regional hospital in Yilan. Structural equation modeling analyses were conducted to test hypotheses.Results: Structural equation modeling analysis results show that supervisor feedback environment negatively related to interpersonal and organizational deviance. Moreover, work-related stressors were found to partially mediate the relationship between supervisor feedback environment and employee deviance.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Study findings suggest that when employees (nurses in this case) perceive an appropriate supervisor-provided feedback environment, their deviance is suppressed because of the related reduction in work-related stressors. Thus, to decrease deviant behavior, organizations may foster supervisor integration of disseminated knowledge such as (a) how to improve employees' actual performance, (b) how to effectively clarify expected performance, and (c) how to improve continuous performance feedback. If supervisors absorb this integrated feedback knowledge, they should be in a better position to enhance their own daily interactions with nurses and reduce nurses' work-related stress and, consequently, decrease deviant behavior.起始頁-結束頁：13-24資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820b0fe57篇名：Differences in Filial Behavior in Multigeneration Families That Live Together並列篇名：三代同堂間孝道行為之差異作者：劉碧素(Bi-Su Liu);李中一(Chung-Yi Li);葉光輝(Kuang-Hui Yeh);黃惠璣(Hui-Chi Huang)關鍵字：孝道;認知孝道自我效能;孝道行為;三代;filial piety;perceived filial self-efficacy;filial piety behavior;three generations期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　台灣近年受到西方文化的影響，孝道觀念逐漸減弱。文獻指出孝道影響日後父母生病時子女照護的意願。老年父母生病因其不同程度失能，需要生理、心理、社會及靈性照護。若子女無負擔照護父母的意願，則可能衝擊失能老人的護理照護計畫，例如社會資源及經濟支持等。目的　探討影響居住在同一屋簷下的三代間孝道行為之差異因素。了解子女的孝道行為，使護理人員了解子女擔負照護責任的意願，以協助安排適合老人的居家或機構照護。方法　本研究使用橫斷式設計及滾雪球取樣法。於中台灣某鄉鎮選取49戶共128位樣本，為期三週。研究工具含人口學特性、孝道感情、認知孝道自我效能與孝道行為量表。結果　可預測三代孝道行為差異之因素有：較年長者、已婚者、正向孝道感情及認知孝道自我效能得分較高者。研究發現，若第三代成人在0-6歲時，接受祖父母照顧頻率一周大於三次者（G3-2次群體）較少於兩次者（G3-1次群體）對其父母的孝道行為得分較高；同時，這群父母對祖父母的正向孝道感情及認知孝道自我效能得分也較高。結論／實務應用　孝道是值得保留的傳統美德，須從學校教育、父母對子女的教養、發展良好的家庭關係去維持，並須制定政策著手獎勵年輕世代的孝道行為。英文摘要：Background: Western values and culture have undermined concepts filial piety in Taiwan in recent decades. Extant literature has identified the strong influence of filial piety on the willingness of children to care for their parents when ill. Most elderly parents experience illness and suffer from various types and degrees of disabilities and thus need physical, psychological, social, and spiritual care. Less involvement by children in elderly care naturally impacts nursing care, social resource allocations, and economic support for disabled elderly.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate differences in filial piety in three-generation families who live together. Understanding children's filial piety behavior can help nurses understand their willingness to accept responsibility for parental care and can help nurses assist with arranging appropriate home or institutional care for elderly patients.Methods: The study used a cross-sectional research design and snowball sampling. The data set was collected in a township in Central Taiwan and involved 128 participants from 49 households. The questionnaires included demographics, filial piety affection, perceived filial self-efficacy, and filial behavior.Results: Predicted variables for filial behavior included the following: being a member of an older generation, marital status, having positive filial piety affection, and having positive perceived filial self-efficacy. This study found that adults in the youngest group (G3-2 subgroup) who received care and feeding three or more times a week from a grandparent when 0 to 6 years of age had higher scores for filial piety affection toward their parents than their youngest group peers (G3-1 subgroup). The G3-2 subgroup's parents also had higher positive scores for the Filial Piety Affection and Perceived Filial Self-efficacy scales relative to their own parents.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Filial piety is a basic virtue and a traditional cultural value that is worth retaining. There is a need to give positive reinforcement to filial piety values through school education, better parenting, and development of good family relationships. Furthermore, government policy should work to encourage improved filial behavior in youth.起始頁-結束頁：25-34資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820b0f3c8篇名：Health Status and Health-Related Behaviors Among Type 2 Diabetes Community Residents並列篇名：第二型糖尿病社區居民的健康狀態與健康相關行為之探討作者：陳美燕(Mei-Yen Chen);黃維超(Wei-Chao Huang);彭雲杏(Yun-Shing Peng);鍾明昌(Ming-Chung Jong);陳秋月(Chu-Yeh Chen);林惠娟(Hui-Chuan Lin)關鍵字：糖尿病;基層醫療;社會支持;diabetes mellitus;primary healthcare;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　第二型糖尿病之標準化死亡率，在台灣地區是高於其他已開發國家，同時嘉義地區因為糖尿病而死亡的比率也高於國內其他地區。目的　本研究主要目的是了解嘉義沿海地區患有第二型糖尿病之居民的健康狀態（六項生理指標之測量）、健康相關行為及其影響因素之探討。方法　針對嘉義沿海九鄉鎮之第二型糖尿病民眾，採用橫斷面及相關性之研究設計，共有387位已經被確立為糖尿病之居民，以簡單隨機方式抽樣並邀請加入本研究調查。結果　結果顯示，59%的參與者為女性，平均年齡為68.7歲，平均患糖尿病時間7.9年。多數接受基層醫療之照顧並採用口服降血糖藥物(90.7%)，超過40%民眾無規律運動以及33.9%未採飲食控制。整體參與者在身體質量指數、腰圍、糖化血色素、以及週邊神經血管功能有高比率之異常。在控制相關干擾因素後，腰圍越小、有參與社區病友會、有較佳的足部照顧能力以及經常運動者，有較好的健康狀態指標；而患病時間越長、教育程度越低，以及男性民眾則出現較不利的健康指標。結論／實務應用　本研究顯示，偏遠地區患有第二型糖尿病之社區民眾，其健康狀態及健康相關行為並不理想。建議將提升社區民眾參與糖尿病支持團體、運動頻率與足部自我照顧能力等列為護理措施，特別是教育程度偏低及男性民眾，以提升民眾達到理想的糖尿病控制指標。英文摘要：Background: The standardized mortality rate of type 2 diabetes is higher in Taiwan than that in other developed countries. In Taiwan, the diabetes mortality rate in Chiayi County is the highest nationwide.Purpose: This study was designed to explore the health status (to measure six physiological indicators), the health-related behaviors, and the associated factors among type 2 diabetes sufferers living in rural communities.Methods: Researchers used a cross-sectional, correlation design and conducted the study at nine local health districts in Chiayi County, Taiwan. A total of 387 participants previously diagnosed with type 2 diabetes were randomly selected and invited to join in the program.Results: Fifty-nine percent of participants were women; their mean age was 68.7 years, and their mean duration with diabetes was 7.9 years. Most were treated at local health centers and took oral medications (90.7%). More than 40% did not exercise regularly and 33.9% did not practice diet control. Results found a higher percentage of abnormal health indicators in terms of participant body mass index, waist circumference, HbA1C, and peripheral neurovascular function. After controlling for potential confounding factors, researchers found smaller waist circumference, participating in community support groups, better foot self-care capability, and frequent exercise to be associated with better health indicators. Diabetes duration, lower education, and being of male gender were found to be negatively associated with health status.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study found that rural residents with diabetes do not adequately control their diabetes and exhibit inadequate health-related behavior. Joining community support groups, increasing exercise frequencies, and improving foot self-care capabilities should be employed in nursing strategies and health policies for diabetes control-especially for those who have less formal education or are male.起始頁-結束頁：35-43資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820beb5b9篇名：Cross-Cultural Comparisons of Health-Related Quality of Life between Taiwanese Women and Transnational Marriage Vietnamese Women in Taiwan並列篇名：越南籍跨國婚姻婦女與台灣版生活品質婦女常模之跨文化比較作者：楊詠梅(Yung-Mei Yang);王秀紅(Hsiu-Hung Wang)關鍵字：跨國婚姻婦女;健康生活品質;移民健康;transnational marriage women;health-related quality of life HRQL;immigrant health期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　根據內政部統資料顯示，至2010年為止，東南亞外籍配偶在台人數約十三萬人，其中68%來自於越南，雖然越南籍跨國婚姻婦女為最大宗的移民族裔，但其健康狀態的研究卻很少。目的　為探討越南籍跨國婚姻婦女之健康生活品質並與台灣版SF-36常模比較。方法　以橫斷式問卷調查收集資料，收案時間是2007年6月至2008年7月，以方便及滾雪球法取樣自高雄縣市、台南縣市以及屏東縣市等地區之越南籍跨國婚姻婦女共203人。研究工具包括人口學資料表，以及編修後的越南文SF-36V2。用以跨文化比較的台灣版SF-36常模為，行政院衛生署國民健康局人口與健康調查研究中心，於2001年國民健康調查12歲（含以上）的受訪者18,142人為分析樣本，所建立的台灣版SF-36常模。結果　本研究發現，越南籍跨國婚姻婦女的健康生活品質狀況比國人婦女低，研究結果顯示，越南籍跨國婚姻婦女的健康生活品質，比國人婦女健康生活品質在七個面向分數都較低，包括身體功能、因身體問題所引起的角色限制、一般健康知覺、活力、社會功能、因情緒問題所引起的角色限制、和心理健康等。而越南籍跨國婚姻婦女在身體疼痛面向分數較高。結論　越南籍跨國婚姻婦女的身體疼痛、疲憊、身心症、社會孤立以及心理健康等問題應被關切，本研究結果可提供政府對跨國婚姻婦女健康政策制訂的依據。英文摘要：Background: According to the Ministry of the Interior, Department of Statistics, Taiwan, ROC (2010), Taiwan is home to 131,000 Southeast Asian female spouses holding valid resident permits. More than two thirds (68%) of this number is from Vietnam. An understanding of health-related quality of life (HRQL) among female Vietnamese spouses is essential to develop appropriate health policies and interventions for this population.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to compare HRQL values between the general Taiwan female spouse population and the female Vietnamese spouses living in Taiwan.Methods: This study was conducted in a community-based health center in southern Taiwan and targeted households with Vietnamese wives in the Tainan, Kaohsiung, and Pingtung areas. A total of 203 female Vietnamese spouses were included in this study, with data collected using questionnaires between June 2007 and July 2008. Research instruments included the Demographic Inventory Scale and the 36-Item Short Form Version 2. The general population norm was based on the findings of the Center for Population and Health Survey Research, Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health in Taiwan (2001) using the 36-Item Short Form Version 2, with norm scoring based on 18,142 subjects aged 12 years and older.Results: Cross-cultural comparisons indicate that Vietnamese immigrant women have a generally lower HRQL mean score than Taiwanese women in terms of seven dimensions, including physical functioning, role limitations due to physical health, general health perceptions, vitality, social functioning, role limitations due to emotional problems, and mental health. Only one domain, bodily pain, showed a slightly higher level among Vietnamese spouse respondents. This result is consistent with previous studies that indicate immigrant health status is generally lower than that of the people in the host society.Conclusions: High bodily pain, low vitality, somatization, social isolation, and mental health issues were discussed and should of concern to future policymakers. This study can inform the government regarding which references to use to make appropriate health policies for immigrant women and their families.起始頁-結束頁：44-52資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820bebcd10篇名：Hospital Nurse Job Attitudes and Performance: The Impact of Employment Status並列篇名：檢視護理人員雇用方式對其工作態度與績效之影響作者：朱正一(Cheng-I Chu);許耀峰(Yao-Feng Hsu)關鍵字：約用護士;組織承諾;工作滿意;組織公民行為;工作績效;contract nurse;organizational commitment;job satisfaction;organizational citizenship behavior;job performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　部分公立醫院的約用護理人力已高達47.6%，且約用護理人員的流動率通常為正式護理人員的五至八倍。鑒於護理人員的高流動率易負面影響護理照護的持續性，近來有關護理人員的任職形態與護理品質間的關聯，已引起高度的關注。目的　探討某公立醫院的護理人員是否會因其任職形態（約用或正式）之不同，而在組織承諾、工作滿意、組織公民行為與工作績效上出現差異。方法　本研究樣本選自一家具代表性的署立醫院。自評問項外，為避免共同方法偏誤，亦採用主管評核的結構式績效問卷。統計分析以迴歸分析探討護理人員是否會因其任職形態（約用或正式）之不同，而影響其工作滿意、組織承諾、組織公民行為與工作績效。結果　研究發現：<U+2474>組織承諾、工作滿意、組織公民行為與工作績效間呈正相關；<U+2475>約用或正式護理人員在組織承諾、工作滿意、組織公民行為與自評工作績效上無差異，但在主管評核的工作績效上，正式護理人員的工作績效顯著優於約用護理人員；<U+2476>組織公民行為在組織承諾、工作滿意與工作績效上具中介效果。結論　在主管評核的工作績效上，正式護理人員的工作績效顯著優於約用護理人員的結果，值得後續研究深入探討。英文摘要：Background: According to the 2007 Taiwan Labor Front Human Resources Report, as much as 47.6% of nurses at some public hospitals were contracted rather than full time. Furthermore, turnover rates for contract nurses were found to be as high as five to eight times of those for full-time nurses. Because high turnover rates are likely to induce negative impacts on the stability of care provided in the absence of staffing continuity, the association between nursing employment arrangement and nursing care quality is attracting greater attention.Purpose: This study was designed to investigate the work status of contract versus full-time nurses at a public hospital in Taiwan and to examine the impact of such on work-related attitudes, organizational citizenship behavior, and job performance.Methods: Samples were recruited from a public hospital in Taiwan. In addition to self-rated items, researchers used supervisor-rated structured questionnaires for job performance to attenuate the possible effect of common method bias. The study investigated the impact of hospital nurse employment status on work-related attitudes, organizational citizenship behavior, and job performance using a regression model that included the critical work-related attitudes variables of job satisfaction and organizational commitment.Results: Study findings included the following: (a) organizational commitment, job satisfaction, organizational citizenship behavior, and job performance correlate positively with one another. (b) No significant difference between contract and full-time nurses was found in terms of organizational commitment, job satisfaction, organizational citizenship behavior, and self-rated job performance. However, when rated by supervisors, reported job performance levels for full-time nurses were significantly higher than those of contract nurses. (c) Organizational citizenship behavior exhibited a mediating effect between job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and job performance.Conclusions: In this study, supervisors gave higher job performance ratings to full-time nurses than to contract nurses. This result deserves further investigation.起始頁-結束頁：53-60資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820beba911篇名：Cleaning Small-Volume Nebulizers: The Efficacy of Different Reagents and Application Methods並列篇名：不同清潔溶液與清潔方式應用在小劑量噴霧器上的清潔效果作者：戴佳惠(Chia-Hua Tai);林念璁(Nien-Tsung Lin);彭台珠(Tai-Chu Peng);李茹萍(Ru-Ping Lee)關鍵字：清洗劑;清洗方法;小劑量噴霧器;清潔效果;cleaning reagents;cleaning methods;small-volume nebulizers;cleaning efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：Background: Aerosol inhalation is an important treatment for immobilized patients living at home. Aerosol application of medicine can reduce symptoms of acute and chronic respiratory tract diseases. However, aerosol therapy performed using small-volume nebulizers (SVNs) may induce bacterial colonization and increase pneumonia risk. The proper cleaning of SVNs is important to prevent pneumonia.Purpose: This experimental study was designed to compare the cleaning efficacy of two different cleaning reagents and three different cleaning methods with regard to SVNs.Methods: Tap water and sterile distilled water were used as the two cleaning reagents. The three different cleaning methods included (a) soaking the nebulizer for 10 minutes, (b) rinsing the nebulizer for 30 seconds, and (c) soaking the nebulizer for 10 minutes, changing the water, and then rinsing reagent for 30 seconds. There were 13 groups in the study. Six groups were assigned into the noncontaminated and the remaining seven were contaminated with Escherichia coli. One contaminated group was assigned with noncleaning as a positive control group, and 12 groups were assigned into each of the unique cleaning reagent + cleaning method combinations. Evaluations of microbe presence were performed by taking samples from nebulizers after cleaning.Results: Results showed insignificant differences among cleaning reagent efficacies (p=.186) and significant differences among cleaning methods (p＜.001). The soak-then-rinse method was found to provide significantly better results in comparison with the other two methods.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: On the basis of the results, we suggest that SVN cleaning procedures should focus on the cleansing method. Findings provide evidence to support that the soak-then-rinse method may the preferred technique to use in cleaning SVNs.英文摘要：Background: Aerosol inhalation is an important treatment for immobilized patients living at home. Aerosol application of medicine can reduce symptoms of acute and chronic respiratory tract diseases. However, aerosol therapy performed using small-volume nebulizers (SVNs) may induce bacterial colonization and increase pneumonia risk. The proper cleaning of SVNs is important to prevent pneumonia.Purpose: This experimental study was designed to compare the cleaning efficacy of two different cleaning reagents and three different cleaning methods with regard to SVNs.Methods: Tap water and sterile distilled water were used as the two cleaning reagents. The three different cleaning methods included (a) soaking the nebulizer for 10 minutes, (b) rinsing the nebulizer for 30 seconds, and (c) soaking the nebulizer for 10 minutes, changing the water, and then rinsing reagent for 30 seconds. There were 13 groups in the study. Six groups were assigned into the noncontaminated and the remaining seven were contaminated with Escherichia coli. One contaminated group was assigned with noncleaning as a positive control group, and 12 groups were assigned into each of the unique cleaning reagent + cleaning method combinations. Evaluations of microbe presence were performed by taking samples from nebulizers after cleaning.Results: Results showed insignificant differences among cleaning reagent efficacies (p=.186) and significant differences among cleaning methods (p＜.001). The soak-then-rinse method was found to provide significantly better results in comparison with the other two methods.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: On the basis of the results, we suggest that SVN cleaning procedures should focus on the cleansing method. Findings provide evidence to support that the soak-then-rinse method may the preferred technique to use in cleaning SVNs.起始頁-結束頁：61-67資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820b0ff612篇名：The Effect of Shift Rotation on Employee Cortisol Profile, Sleep Quality, Fatigue, and Attention Level: A Systematic Review並列篇名：輪班工作對cortisol變化、睡眠品質、疲倦、注意力之影響：系統性文獻回顧作者：鈕淑芬(Shu-Fen Niu);鍾明惠(Min-Huey Chung);陳瓊華(Chiung-Hua Chen);Desley Hegney;Anthony O'Brien;周桂如(Kuei-Ru Chou)關鍵字：睡眠品質;疲倦;輪班工作;系統性文獻;護理;sleep quality;fatigue;rotating shift work;systematic review;nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：背景　輪班的工作人員，特別是夜間工作者，因晝夜節律受干擾及不正常的睡眠型態，會產生睡眠剝奪、疲倦並降低警覺性及負向影響工作安全。目的　回顧護理人員輪班對cortisol變化、睡眠品質、疲倦、注意力之影響。方法　此系統性文獻查詢自1996自2008年發表之文章，資料庫搜尋包括SCOPUS、OVID、Blackwell Science、EBSCO Host、PsychINFO、Cochrane Controlled Trials Register及中華民國期刊論文索引，總共有28篇文獻納入。結果　文獻中關於輪班工作對cortisol變化、睡眠品質、疲倦、注意力之影響的研究，所採用為實證等級Ⅱ至Ⅳ的證據。經由系統回顧發現，夜班工作者於睡醒週期及光暗週期發生衝突，引起的晝夜節律紊亂，影響睡眠品質產生疲倦並降低注意力，會導致工作效率降低。夜間工作者於日間體內cortisol分泌高時睡覺，會影響睡眠品質及睡眠時數，睡眠時數較白班工作者於夜間睡眠時數少1-4小時。大量的睡眠債會產生慢性疲倦。長期的疲勞和不足夠的休息，導致工作警覺性降低與意外事故增多。結論　夜間工作者，因晝夜節律受干擾，會引起包括生理及心理上各種問題，並負向影響工作安全及效率。英文摘要：Background: Disrupted circadian rhythm, especially working night duty together with irregular sleep patterns, sleep deprivation, and fatigue, creates an occupational health risk associated with diminished vigilance and work performance.Purpose: This study reviewed the effect of shift rotations on employee cortisol profile, sleep quality, fatigue, and attention level.Methods: Researchers conducted a systematic review of relevant articles published between 1996 and 2008 that were listed on the following databases: SCOPUS, OVID, Blackwell Science, EBSCO Host, PsycINFO, Cochrane Controlled Trials Register, and CEPS. A total of 28 articles were included in the review.Results: Previous research into the effects of shift work on cortisol profiles, sleep quality, fatigue, and attention used data assessed at evidence Levels Ⅱ to Ⅳ. Our systematic review confirmed a conflict between sleep-wake cycle and light-dark cycle in night work. Consequences of circadian rhythm disturbance include disruption of sleep, decreased vigilance, general feeling of malaise, and decreased mental efficiency. Shift workers who sleep during the day (day sleepers) experience cortisol secretion increases, which diminish the healing power of sleep and enjoy 1 to 4 hours less sleep on average than night sleepers. Sleep debt accumulation results in chronic fatigue. Prolonged fatigue and inadequate recovery result in decreased work performance and more incidents. Rotation from day shift to night shift and its effect on shift workers was a special focus of the articles retained for review.Conclusions: Disturbed circadian rhythm in humans has been associated with a variety of mental and physical disorders and may negatively impact on work safety, performance, and productivity.起始頁-結束頁：68-81資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31820c187901篇名：論「雙邊自由貿易協定」對「亞太經濟合作會議」的組織運作之衝擊並列篇名：The Impact of Signing Bilateral Free Trade Agreements on the Operations of the Asia PacificEconomic Cooperation作者：黃偉峰(David W. F. Huang)關鍵字：雙邊自由貿易協定;亞太經濟合作會議;世界貿易組織;內容分析法;國際建制;BFTAs;APEC;WTO;content analysis;international regime期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：一般預期，雙邊自由貿易協定（ Bilateral Free Trade Agreements, BFTAs）會危害到多邊經貿組織的貿易自由化議程及其內部的組織運作（簡稱危害說）。為此，本文運用大量原始檔案的內容分析結果，來試圖檢證亞太地區的BFTAs洽簽活動是否危害亞太經濟合作會議（Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, APEC）的組織運作。首先，從言語重視程度來看，本文發現APEC各國領袖及資深官員可能會因BFTAs洽簽活動而較不關注APEC之貿易暨投資自由化核心議程，卻反而較強調APEC經濟和技術合作及能力建構之核心議程。然而，上述兩大核心議程在APEC領袖和資深官員的言辭重視中並非互斥關係。另外，從APEC組織運作的實際行動，即APEC工作計畫的執行來看，本文發現若特定年度任兩個配對國曾向世界貿易組織（World Trade Organization，WTO）登記BFTAs，則其執行的APEC計畫數目較少，由此證賞了「危害說」。然而，當在特定年度此組配對國向WTO登記BFTAs的累計數目越多時，則其所執行APEC計畫數目反而越多。此項發現意謂著會員體之BFTAs洽簽活動對APEC組織運作並不全然是負面的影響。尤其當各會員體之BFTAs累計數量愈多時，反而更願意執行APEC計畫來強化其BFTAs之政策方向。本文之發現因而修正了過去學界對此議題的理論假設。英文摘要：It is usually assumed that the signing of bilateral free trade agreements (BFTAs) will undermine the trade liberalization agenda and internal operations of multilateral organizations (call it the ”undermining hypothesis”). Using the results of content analyses on massive volumes of archive data from the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), this paper aims to verify the above ”undermining hypothesis.” Contrary to the common expectations, I find that APEC leaders and senior officials, perhaps due to various BFTAs activities, are less likely to emphasize the core agenda of APEC on trade and investment liberalization and facilitation (TILF), but more likely to stress another core agenda on economic and technology cooperation (ECOTECH). However, there is no tradeoff effect between their emphasis on TILF and that on the ECOTECH agenda. Moreover, in the implementation record of APEC projects, I find that in any given year, if a pair of countries (APEC economies themselves, or non-members) register BFTAs in the World Trade Organization(WTO), then the number of their APEC projects implemented is reduced However, in any given year, the greater the accumulated number of BFTAs for a pair of countries, the greater the number of APEC projects they implement This latter finding is not entirely compatible with the ”undermining hypothesis,” as it seems to suggest that the greater the accumulated number of BFTAs is signed, the greater the need to implement APEC projects. indeed, many APEC projects are considered by member economies as preconditions, facilitators, or side payments for them to push forward the trade liberalization agenda Therefore, it is likely that when the accumulated number of BFTAs increases, APEC members may feel it necessary to do more APEC projects, and hence the number of APEC project implemented increases. This finding revises the conventional wisdom derived from the ”undermining hypothesis.”起始頁-結束頁：399-445資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201112.00032篇名：國光客運民營化後國道客運業之生產效率分析並列篇名：The Production Efficiency of the Highway Bus Service Industry After the Privatization of Kuo-Kuang Motor Transit Company作者：陳志成(Chih-Cheng Chen)關鍵字：國道客運;資料包絡法;Tobit追蹤資料模型;動態追蹤資料模型;highway bus service;data envelopment analysis;Tobit paneldata model;dynamic panel data model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要針對台汽民營化為國光客運之後，對於整體國道客運產業在技術效率以及各種效率變動指數上的影響。本文首先利用2001∼2007年「中華民國公共汽車客運業統計資料」所整理之縱橫資料（panel data），利用CCR與BCC之資料包絡法，估算各年度、各國道客運公司投入傾向之各種技術效率與效率變動指數；其次利用Tobit追蹤資料模型來估計整體國道客運產業技術效率之影響因素，並利用動態追蹤資料模型來討論生產力變動指數的影響因素。估計結果顯示國光客運民營化後整體國道客運產業在技術效率上並未有明顯提升，2006年後則持續惡化，不過這段期間的生產力指數平均值仍高於100，表示生產力有所提升。此外，行駛總距離與市場占有率對於技術效率的提升有正向顯著的影響，但是2007年對於規模效率卻為顯著地負向影響。而影響生產力變動的因素中，駕駛員工數的增加會顯著降低生產力的提升，行駛班次與行駛總距離的增加則可顯著提升之。英文摘要：This paper focuses on the changes of technical efficiencies and the overall efficiency changes of the highway bus service industry after the privatization of Taiwan Transport Bus Company (also called Kuo-Kuang Motor Transport Company) in 2001-2007. We calculate the technical efficiencies and efficiency changes of every bus company in every year by applying the CCR and BCC models in data envelopment analysis (DEA) method. We also apply the Tobit panel data model and the dynamic panel data model to investigate the factors influencing the level of technical efficiencies and efficiency changes respectively. We find that the technical efficiency of the highway bus service industry has not improved on average after Kuo-Kuang's privatization and has been worsening since 2006. Meanwhile, the average Malmquist Index is slightly higher than 100, which implies the productivity of the highway bus service industry has improved. In addition, the total driving distance and market share of a bus company are vital factors which could positively and significantly improve the technical efficiencies. Finally, the increases of total driving distance and total number of frequencies could significantly increase the productivities.起始頁-結束頁：447-498資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201112.00513篇名：市場開放與產品品質並列篇名：Market Openness and Product Quality作者：劉惠玲(Hui-Ling Liu)關鍵字：市場開放;產品品質;market openness;product quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以一高、低品質廠商雙占競爭的貿易模型，來探討貿易國政府片面開放市場或同時開放市場對廠商內生品質決策的影響。在Cournot 數量競爭下，高品質生產國片面開放市場會使得產品品質全面提升，此時品質差異必會降低，但平均產品品質則有可能會降低，而高品質產品生產國的福利必會因片面開放而降低。若低品質生產國片面開放市場或兩國均開放市場，則低品質廠商的品質效率越好，有可能使全球褔利反而降低。在Bertrand價格競爭下，高品質生產國片面開放市場，則低品質廠商的品質效率越差，會使高品質產品生產國的褔利越低。在Cournot數量競爭下，兩國政府市場開放政策的Nash均衡為低品質產品生產國會選擇開放市場，高品質產品生產國則會選擇不開放市場。在Bertrand價格競爭下，兩國政府市場開放政策Nash均衡則為兩國均選擇開放市場。英文摘要：This paper explores the firm's endogenous quality choice in response to unilateral (or bilateral) market openness in a high/low quality firm duopolistic competition trade model. Under Cournot quantity competition, a high quality country unilaterally opening its domestic market would (1) improve product quality generally, (2) narrow the quality differentiation between high/low quality countries, (3) probably decrease average product quality, and (4) deteriorate the welfare of the high quality country. On the other hand, a low quality country unilaterally or two countries bilaterally opening the market would raise the low quality country is quality efficiency but possibly decrease global welfare. Based on Bertrand price competition, a high quality country unilaterally opening the domestic market would worsen the quality efficiency of a low quality country and the welfare of the high quality country. For Cournot competition, the Nash equilibrium of market openness policy is that the low quality country removes trade barriers and the high quality country keeps market closure. However, the two countries would open their markets simultaneously under Bertrand competition.起始頁-結束頁：499-530資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201112.01034篇名：醫藥分業社會實踐之限制及其可能性的探討並列篇名：Limitations and Possibilities of the Praxis of Separation of Dispensing from Prescription作者：陳敏郎(Min-Lang Chen)關鍵字：醫藥分業;整體社會;生活言行理論;結構化與結構中的結構;separation of dispensing from prescription;total society;theory of practice;structured and structuring structures期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣於1997年3月1日「依法」施行「醫藥分業」。從施行現狀看來，「施藥診所」仍是基層醫藥服務體系的普遍現象。除了過去若干「權宜性分業」模式有些許改變之外，「理念性分業」的醫藥服務型態其實仍未見落實。本文的主要目的，即在於嘗試從「整體社會」以及「生活言行理論」的觀點，理解醫藥分業在議論數十年，也依法施行逾十年之後，「理念性分業」終究難行的可能原因。本文基本上認為，醫藥分業的椎動不只是做為一種政策的施行，還在於其表徵為建構一種「新社會事實」的可能性；從而，也在突顯及牽動其間諸多具有「結構性特徵」之社會行動的鞏固與轉變的過程中，彰顯其實踐意涵。從本文的觀點看來，「進步社會的象徵」、「財務目的的考量」以及「專業分工的效益」等相關理念意象的宣示與強調，仍未能達成落質「理念性分業」的結果，正說明長期醫藥不分業在經濟、政治、社會以及文化等領域所體現並互相牽動之諸多結構性力量，同時存在之「結構化結槽」／制約與「結構中結構」／再生的作用與影響。從而，除了必須面對醫樂兩界政治與社會權力的動員與對抗，及其固有經濟利益的維護與創造，以及社會大眾日積月累之就醫取藥慣習等相關結機性力量的影響之外，認真思考專業分工的社會基礎、發展公民認知及參與公共政策的機制，以及重新定位國家機器的角色與作為，或能為「理念性分業」的落實找到新的認識基礎與實踐方向。英文摘要：Following the implementation of the National Health Insurance Institution, the separation of dispensing from prescription (SDFP) became administrative policy of Taiwan in March 1997. After decades of discussions and executed according to law over ten years, there has been a practic of the ”expedient separation” rather than the ”ideal separation” model of SDFP. In terms of this article, ideal claims of SDFP do not transform into meaningful activities or acquire expected effects. In fact, the dispensing didn't separate from prescription, revealing both the practical influences and forces of ”structured structures” and ”structuring structures” that frustrated attempts to enforce SDFP. From the perspectives of ”total society” and ”theory of practice”, first of all, the ideal claims of ”progress symbol”, ”financial purpose” and ”professional consideration” could not become the crucial elements for the praxis of SDFP. Secondly, the ”structured structures” include the mobilization of social and political power, economic interests concerning both physician and pharmacist and the habitus of patients' behaviors should be confronted seriously. Finally, the implementation of SDFP requires further consideration of the social foundations and meanings of professional division of labor, developing the mechanism of citizen empowerment and the roles of the state.起始頁-結束頁：531-566資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201112.01355篇名：競爭模式、聯合廣告以及市場成長性對廣告的影響並列篇名：An Economic Analysis of Advertising-The Effects of Competitive Behavior, Cooperative Advertising and Market Maturity作者：楊維娟(Wei-Chuan Yang);周登陽(Deng-Yang Chou);黃宗煌(Chung-Huang Huang)關鍵字：說服性廣告;合作均衡;非合作均衡;價格競爭;數量競爭;persuasive advertising;cooperative equilibria;non-cooperative equilibria;Bertrand competition;Cournot competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在探討廣告的經濟效果，並分析廠商間進行聯合廣告或非合作廣告、競爭模式（數量競爭或價格競爭）及不同的市場成長性等情況下，對廣告率及社會福利的影響。文中發現：需求<U+7232>固定彈性下，若市場具高度成長性，則數量競爭下廠商間的廣告競爭形態<U+7232>策略性互補，且相較於價格競爭下有較高的廣告率。若市場接近飽和，則兩種競爭形態下，廠商間的廣告競爭均<U+7232>策略性替代，且價格競爭下有較高的廣告率。高成長性市場中，獨立廣告率低於最適廣告率，若廠商聯合廣告，則價格競爭下之廣告率將更偏離最適廣告率，而數量競爭下則可提高廣告率使其接近最適廣告率。反之，若市場已接近飽和，則非合作均衡之廣告量均過大，此時廠商聯合廣告，不論在何種競爭形態下，均可降低廣告率並接近最適水準。英文摘要：This paper investigates how competitive behavior and market maturity affect the economic effects of advertising. We also compare the effects between the firms' cooperative and independent advertising. Considering the case of constant elasticity demand function, this paper shows that if the market size can be expanded, the firms' advertising expenditures in a Cournot model are strategic complements, and the advertising rate is higher than in a Bertrand model. If the industry is mature, no matter what the competition model is, the firms' advertising expenditures are strategic substitutes and the advertising rate is higher in Bertrand than in Cournot. In an emerging industry, the independent advertising rate is lower than the optimal advertising rate. If firms cooperate in advertising, the advertising rate will deviate from the optimal level in the Bertrand model hut will be closer to optimal level in the Cournot Model. In a mature market, on the contrary, the independent advertising rate is higher than the optimal level. If firms cooperate in advertising, the equilibrium advertising rate decreases and will be closer to the optimal level in both competition models.起始頁-結束頁：285-310資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201109.02856篇名：臺灣的大學聯考和補習風氣：擴充大學招生名額與低學費政策對社會流動的影響並列篇名：Higher Education and Cramming for Examinations: The Roles of Educational Quotas and Low-tuition Policies on Social Mobility作者：張<U+701E>云(Jing-Jun Chang)關鍵字：升學補習;教育名額限制;借貸限制;社會流動;低學費政策;cramming for examination;educational quota;borrowing constraint;social mobility;low-tuition policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文嘗試於補習已成社會風氣且勞動工資<U+7232>外生固定參數的前提下，討論當社會存在父母所得有高有低、而小孩資質雖不同但分配相同的兩個所得階層家庭時，政府擴增大學名額和降低高等教育學費，對會支援補習的家長（或補習學生）總人數、補習總支出和跨代向上流動的影響。我們認<U+7232>大學名額的擴增將同時提升高所得和低所得家庭小孩受高等教育的比例，利於向上跨代流動；並因聯考最低錄取分數的降低，鼓勵原本無望錄取的考生，選擇加入補習，復以人口結構中高等教育畢業之技術勞力家庭比例增加，願意讓小孩補習的家長數目增多，而使得社會之補習總人數和補習總支出皆上升，其次，當政府對高等教育採低學費政策時，將因降低教育成本而增強受高等教育誘因，低所得和高所得家庭的補習支出均上揚；若高等教育名額不變且補習支出對聯考分數的提升具邊際報酬遞減作用時，低學費政策並將利於向上跨代流動。英文摘要：This study sets up to develop a cramming-for-examination model with an economy characterized by heterogeneous-ability individuals, an educational quota for attending universities, and capital market imperfection, in an attempt to discuss the possible impacts of educational quotas and low-tuition policies on cramming decisions and social mobility. We show that an increase in educational quotas might increase the cramming expenditures and social mobility since they raise the opportunities for median-ability individuals to pass the entrance examination by cramming for examinations. However the low-tuition policy will be good for social upward mobility only in a specific condition.起始頁-結束頁：311-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201109.03117篇名：<U+53C2>選人競選支出效果及其外部性：<U+5355>記非讓渡投票制下之黨<U+5185>競<U+4E89>性分析並列篇名：The Effect of Campaign Spending and Its Externality: An Analysis of Intraparty Competition in SNTV作者：王鼎<U+94ED>(Ding-Ming Wang)關鍵字：單記非讓渡投票制;黨內競爭;競選支出;外部性;負面競選;single nontransferable vote SNTV;intraparty competition;campaign spending;externality;negative campaigning期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：<U+53C2>選人競選開支除了會影瞥自己的得票率，同時會對對手產生負面外部效果，這在過去<U+6B27>美學界已<U+9887>具研究成果。本文擴充競選支出的相關理論到台灣單記非讓渡投票制(SNTV)的國會選舉，檢<U+89C6>學理上SNTV低當選門<U+69DB>及同黨相爭的特性下，同選區同黨對手競選支出的負面效果，是否確實比他黨競爭者的影響<U+6765>得大。2004年立法委員選舉是台灣唯一一次受「政治獻金法」<U+89C4>範下，探SNTV選制的國會選舉，本文利用從監察院及中選會蒐集的相關資料，以兩階段最小平方法(2SLS)分析參選人競選支出對得票率的影響。主要結論可歸納以下幾點：一、非現任的挑戰者競選支出會對選票增長產生正面幫助，而現任者支出對選票影響的邊際效果不僅遠低於挑戰者，反而對本身選票有負面的影響，此一發現吻合Jacobson (1978)所代表的傳統競選支出理論。二、來自黨外競爭對手支出的負面作用並不顯著，僅對現任者的選票產生一些影響，對原本票源就不充足的挑戰者而言更毫無作用。三、同黨競爭對手的支出會對同黨同志的選票產生顯著的負面影響，而且這種黨內互鬥的本質對擁有票源優勢現任者的直接影響較大，若與黨外對手支出的作用相較，更可發現跨黨之間的票源競爭性確實較黨內競爭性來得低。四、當同黨參選人數越多，同黨對手支出影響挑戰者的負面力道又會越強，顯示在這種協調機制較困難的情況下，同黨相爭對挑戰者的影響越嚴重。英文摘要：Previous studies have shown that campaign spending not only plays an important role of attracting votes for the candidates, but also imposes a negative externality to their competitors. This paper expands the traditional campaign spending theory to Taiwan Legislative elections where the Single Non-transferable Vote (SNTV) is employed. Since SNTV endorses the characteristics of low electoral threshold and intraparty competition, we distinguish two kinds of opponents' spending, spending of the same party and other parties, to capture their different influences. The data was collected from the Control Yuan for the 2004 Taiwan Legislative election, which is the only case with SNTV where the political contribution and campaign expenditures data are available. A two-stage least squares (2SLS) model is used to analyze the relationship between candidates's spending and vote ratio. The findings can be summarized as follows. First, challenger's spending has a positive effect on their electoral outcome, while the incumbents doesn't. Second, the interparty competition is not severe, due to the insignificant influence of opponent's spending from other parties. Third, the spending of same-party competitors has a significant negative externality on the electoral result, especially for the incumbent's votes. Forth, the negative externality becomes more severe in the large districts. It indicates that the intraparty competition is more brutal when the coordination mechanism fails to function corresponding to larger district magnitude.起始頁-結束頁：341-370資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201109.03418篇名：如何使用健保資料推估社經變數並列篇名：How to Construct Social-Economic Variables from National Health Insurance Data作者：連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien)關鍵字：健保資料;就業;薪資;家庭結構;Taiwan National Health Insurance data;employment;working salary;family structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來使用健保資料庫相關研究日益增加；然而，由於健保資料缺乏病患社經變數，阻礙健保資料在社會學科應用。在主管機關協助下，本文以2005年家庭收支調查家戶<U+7232>樣本，串聯健保承保資料，利用家庭收支調查所記錄豐富社經變數，驗證使用承保資料推估病患戶籍縣市、全職就業、薪資所得以及兒童家庭結構等變數準確性。比較結果發現：(1)使用投保類別<U+7232>地區人口，農民，與地方公職人員，且投保人和被保險人相同者，其投保單位縣市和戶籍所在縣市相同者達九成五；(2)使用投保人和被保險人相同樣本，在公、勞保投保人的就業準確度相當高，平均達九成以上；(3)使用就業準確樣本推估薪資所得，公保投保者其投保薪資<U+7232>實際薪資9成，勞保民營受僱者投保薪資最低1/3投保人，其投保薪資較調查薪資低估3成，最高1/3投保人投保薪資高約6%；(4)十五歲以下兒童投保人<U+7232>父或母時，與投保人同居比率高達93%；(5)使用承保資料推估十五歲以下手足數目，準確度達九成以上。最後，我們提供一個研究案例，利用承保資料來分析乳癌對就業婦女存活、就業和薪資的衝擊。英文摘要：Recently more and more researchers have conducted studies based on National Health Insurance Data (NHID). However, few studies are related to the social sciences due to the lack of social-economic variables in NHID. With the help from the Department of Health, which merged the sample of the 2005 Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES) with eligibility files of NHID, this study examines the validity of inferring four variables from eligibility files: residence county, full-time employment, working salary, and children's family structure. Our results show that: (1) The accuracy rate of inferring residence county based on one's county of enrolled units is above 95% for those obtaining coverage from a farmer's association, registration offices, or as public electorates; (2) The accuracy rate of inferring full-time employment status using self-insured status is above 90% for the sample of public employee insurance (PEI) or labor insurance (LI); (3) For PEI sample, the working salary inferred from one's insurance premium is approximately 90% of their reported working salary in FIES. For LI sample, the inferred salary is roughly 30% below the FIES working salary for low-paid workers (bottom 1/3), and 6% higher for high-paid ones (Top 1/3); (4) For children under 15 obtaining coverage through parents, more than 90% of them co-habit with at least one of their parents; (5) The accuracy rate of inferring sibling number and birth order based on eligibility files is at least 90% for children aged below 15. Finally, I use a research example to analyze how the incidence of breast cancer affects the survival, employment, and working salary of employed women.起始頁-結束頁：371-398資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201109.03719篇名：替換類型與市場競爭對總經理異動宣告股東財富之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Replacement Type and Market Competition on Investors' Reactions to CEO Turnover Announcements作者：王曉雯(Hsiao-Wen Wang);吳明政(Ming-Cheng Wu)關鍵字：總經理異動;替換類型;市場競爭;股東財富;CEO turnover;replacement type;competition;stockholder wealth期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要研究目的係探討總經理異動宣告導致的股東財富效果是否將會受到總經理異動類型與公司面臨的市場競爭程度所影響。本文發現相較於自願性總經理異動企業，投資人對於公司宣告強迫性總經理異動將會給予較大顯著負向股價反應。相較於低度市場競爭企業，投資人對高度競爭公司之總經理異動類型宣告將較<U+7232>敏感。投資人對高度市場競爭公司宣告強迫性總經理異動將會給予較自願性總經理異動<U+7232>大的顯著負向股價反應。自願性、強迫性總經理異動類型<U+7232>高度市場競爭企業帶來的股價績效差距將會大於低度競爭公司。最後，織任總經理如自由董事長自行兼任將會對總經理異動宣告股價異常報酬產生負向顯著影響效果；此發現與公司治理精神一致。英文摘要：This study investigates how replacement type and intensity of market competition affect the stockholder wealth resulting from a firm's CEO turnover announcement. How the interaction between the announcement of CEO replacement type and a firm's industry competition position influences the information content effect is another focus of the study.This study finds that compared with firms replacing CEOs voluntarily, investors will have larger negative price reactions to firms with forced CEO turnover announcements. Compared with firms in less competitive sectors, investors are more sensitive to CEO turnover announcements in firms of highly competitive nature， and tend to have larger negative reactions in terms of their share prices. Investors will have larger negative reactions to firms in more competitive sectors with forced CEO turnover announcements than those firms with voluntary CEO turnover announcements. CEO turnover type will result in higher abnormal returns in highly competitive industries than in less competitive sectors. Finally, the board chairman serving concurrently as the successor CEO (after predecessor CEO turnover) will have a significantly negative impact on abnormal returns. This finding is consistent with the spirit of corporate governance.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201106.000110篇名：團員關鍵性、忠誠行<U+7232>與團體動能的關聯並列篇名：Situational Analysis on the Association between Membership Criticality, Loyal Behaviors and Group Dynamics作者：張守中(Kirk Chang);李宜玲(I-Ling Lee);鄭國泰(Kuo-Tai Cheng)關鍵字：團體動能;忠誠;管理;成員資格;利益;group dynamics;loyalty;management;membership;interests期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以兩個子研究分析忠誠行<U+7232>與國體動能之間的關聯性。研究一以實驗室情境模擬法進行，樣本<U+7232>六十名大學生，透過一系列的投資遊戲，來分析團體對忠誠行<U+7232>與非忠誠行<U+7232>之反應。研究一發現團員展現忠誠行<U+7232>時會收到較正面的評價，展現非忠誠行<U+7232>時則收到較負面的評價；若是高關鍵性團員展現非忠誠行<U+7232>時（關鍵性是以團員對團體的重要性而定），則會收到最負面的評價，而且此非忠誠行<U+7232>會影響團體整體表現。但低關鍵性團員展現非忠誠行<U+7232>時，對團體整體表現的影響則不大。研究二以另外六十名大學生<U+7232>樣本，研究設計同於研究一，進一步分析忠誠行<U+7232>與成員感受的關聯。研究二發現，相較於低關鍵性團員，高關鍵性團員在展現非忠誠行<U+7232>峙，會激起其他團員更多的反感情緒。團體裡的其它團員，即使是犧牲自己的利益，也要懲罰那些對國體不忠誠的團員。這些發現指出，非忠誠行<U+7232>並不是解釋固體動能、關體表現變差的唯一因素，非忠誠團員本身對團體的關鍵性也必須予以考量。最後，本文討論這些新發現對國總管理政策之啟發，並對公共和私人部門之管理人員提出建言。英文摘要：This research project aimed to examine group reactions towards acts of loyalty versus disloyalty. Study One revealed that, compared to their counterparts, members with loyal behavior received more positive evaluations from the group. Critical members with disloyal behaviors received the worst evaluations and generated negative impact on group performance, in which criticality was defined as individual significance towards their own group. Yet, non-critical members with disloyal behaviors did not generate any salient impact on group performance. Study Two indicated that critical members with disloyal behavior provoked more negative emotions than non-critical members with disloyal behavior. General group members were keen to punish the disloyal members, even sacrificing their own interests. This research suggested that disloyal behavior may not be the sole factor accounting for deteriorated group dynamics and performance, because the degree criticality of disloyal members is also of importance. Implication of the findings and their contribution to the theoretical framework of group management are evaluated. Suggestions for group leaders, personnel officers, and managerial practitioners are discussed accordingly.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201106.003711篇名：<U+FF62>中韓友好條約<U+FF63>簽訂過程中的<U+FF62>韓國華僑問題<U+FF63>(1952-1964)並列篇名："The Issue of Overseas Chinese in Korea" in the Signing of the "Treaty of Amity between the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea"(1952~1964)作者：王恩美(En-Mei Wang)關鍵字：中韓友好條約;韓國華僑;中韓外交;台韓外交;反共外交;華僑經濟;韓僑;僑民;反共主義;Treaty of Amity between the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea;overseas Chinese in Korea;ROC-Korea diplomacy;Taiwan-Korea diplomacy;anti-communist diplomacy;overseas Chinese economy;overseas Korean;anti-com期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：戰後，中華民國與大韓民國以反共<U+7232>基礎，追求相互的合作與友好關係，彼此稱呼兩國關係<U+7232>「兄弟之邦」、「堅強盟友」不斷對內外宣傳兩國的反共同頭關係。然而，兩國的反共同盟關係並沒有如表面般順利進行，實際上兩國不僅沒有簽訂軍事同盟，連象徽友好關係的「中韓友好條約」也遷至1964年才簽訂。中華民國曾數次提出簽訂友好條約的要求，都遭韓國政府拒絕。韓國拒絕的最重要原因在於「韓國華僑問題」。換言之，「韓國華僑問題」是「中韓友好條約」的最大障礙因素。因此本文將探討韓國華僑問題對「中韓友好條約」簽訂過程所產生的影響，並分析韓國政府何以如此重視「韓國華僑問題」與「中韓友好條約」簽訂過程中的雙方利益衝突。透過「中韓友好條約」的簽訂過程，我們可以了解表面看來毫無衝突的兩者間，其實隱含著各自利益之衝突，可以顯現出東亞反共同盟隱藏的多元且複雜的面貌。英文摘要：After World War II, the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea sought mutual cooperation and amity on the basis of anti-communism. The two nations used terms such as ”brotherly nations” and ”strong alliance” to refer to the relation between them. Despite the continuous publicizing both within the nations and internationally, the anti-communist alliance of the ROC and ROK did not run as smoothly as it seemed. In fact, the two nations have never entered into a treaty of military alliance ”Treaty of Amity between the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea”, a treaty representing their amity, was not even signed until 1964. The ROK had rejected several times suggestions made by the ROC to sign a treaty of amity， mainly due to ”the issue of overseas Chinese in Korea”. In other words, ”the issue of overseas Chinese in Korea” was the crucial obstacle to the signing of the ”Treaty of Amity between the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea”. This article investigates the influences of the issue of overseas Chinese in Korea on the signing of the ”Treaty of Amity between the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea” and analyzes the reasons behind the focus of the Korean government on ”the issue of overseas Chinese in Korea” and the contradiction of interests during the signing process. Through the signing of ”Treaty of Amity between the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea”, conflicts of interest between the two seemingly harmonious nations are revealed, indicating the complexity and pluralism aspect of the East Asian anti-communist allegiance.起始頁-結束頁：73-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201106.007312篇名：日治時期新竹地區妾婚現象的歷史人口學分析並列篇名：A Historical and Demographical Analysis of Concubine Marriage in Hsin-Chu Area during Japanese Colonial Rule in Taiwan作者：張孟珠(Meng-Zhu Zhang);楊文山(Wen-Shan Yang);莊英章(Ying-Chang Chuang)關鍵字：納妾;妾婚;歷史人口學;日治時期台灣戶籍資料庫;concubine marriage;qui 妾;historical demography;Colonial Taiwan Household Registration Database期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文考察清末以迄日治時期，台灣社會納妾制度的相關源流與文獻紀錄，人們如何理解、看待「妾」習俗的存在與功能。在過往文獻排比分析之外，又藉助歷史人口學的研究取徑，以新竹地區<U+7232>考察重心，擷取日治時期殖民政府所留下的戶籍登錄資料，討論新竹地區竹北、北埔、峨眉等三地村落間的納妾現象，探究妾婚之成因及目的、「妾」之生育與其處境、在夫家居留久暫間的關係。英文摘要：The aim of this paper is to gain a better understanding of how the institution of concubine marriage was constructed in Taiwan by reviewing different sources of historical records dated from the late Qing dynasty to the Japanese colonial era. We probe not only the reasons why concubine marriage existed and how it functioned in Taiwan's society in specific eras of the past, but also the ways in which it was perceived as a unique form of marriage. The data employed in this study come from a register-based database compiled by the Japanese colonial government. The area of investigation is limited to Hsinchu county. This database provides an opportunity to take a closer look at the practices of concubine marriage in three local villages in the Chupei, Beipu and Emei areas. Techniques developed from historical and demographical analyses are applied to trace the causes and consequences of concubine marriage, particularly the relationship between fertility level and the duration of cohabitation, as well as the destiny of women in concubine marriages after their husbands' death.起始頁-結束頁：117-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201106.011713篇名：On Environmental Quality: "Normal" Versus "Luxury" Good並列篇名：環境品質對消費者而言是奢侈財？亦或正常財？作者：賴靜瑤(C. Y. Irene Lai);楊建成(C. C. Yang)關鍵字：環境品質;正常財;奢侈財;environmental quality;normal good;luxury good期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：Kristrom and Riera (1996)發現歐洲各國消費者對環境品質改善願付價格的所得彈性普遍地皆介於0和1之間，因而認<U+7232>環境品質<U+7232>正常財；然而根據OECD各國投入環境改善支出的所得彈性顯著地大於1的實證數據，Pearce and Palmer (2001)認<U+7232>環境品質應<U+7232>奢侈財。本文籍由建構一個直覺上易理解的靜態模型成功地調和並解釋Kristrom and Riera(1996)和Pearce and Palmer(2001)兩個看似矛盾的實證現象。英文摘要：This note considers a simple model in which we reconcile two seem ingly contradictory findings on environmental quality: Kristrom and Riera's (1996) ”normal” good versus Pearce and Palmer's (2001) ”luxury” good.起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201103.000114篇名：攘外必先安內：產業公會與台灣鞋業治理結構形成的歷史分析並列篇名："Internal Goes before International": A Historical Analysis of the Governance Structure of Taiwan Footwear Industry作者：鄭志鵬(Chih-Peng Cheng)關鍵字：鞋業;治理結構;產業公會;發展型國家;市場政治;footwear industry;governance structure;industrial associations;developmental state;markets as politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：不同於過去研究中強調成本與信任面向，本文企圖從政治的角度探討產業治理結構的形成對於1990年代之前台灣成<U+7232>世界製鞋王國所起的關鍵作用。其中，台灣製鞋工業同業公會，在1960年代的削價競爭與1970年代的國際貿易保護主義時期都扮演著穩定市場的重要角色。該會所制訂及執行的「協定價格，核章出口」及「有秩序市場行銷協定」兩項措施，不僅規範企業之間的競爭與合作關係，更進一步區隔出製鞋產業內部宰制者(incumbent)與挑戰者(challenger)的階層地位，奠定了1980年代晚期鞋業台商將事業版圖轉向中國大陸的成功基礎。本文凸顯產業公會在台灣製鞋產業的歷史地位，不僅調校了Fligstein的市場政治模型，也企圖進一步闡述並周密發展型國家的理論觀點。英文摘要：Instead of adopting approaches emphasizing cost and trust, this paper examines the hi story of Taiwan's footwear industry from a political perspective, and analyzes how the formation of the industrial governance structure helped Taiwan to become a global leader in shoe exports. Particularly, the Taiwanese Footwear Manufacture's Association (TFMA) played an important role in stabilizing the production market during both the cutthroat competition in the late 1960s and the international trade protectionism in the 1970s. The ”price approval for licensed export” and the ”orderly marketing agreement” implemented by TFMA not only regulated the interaction between enterprises, but also distinguished the incumbents from the challengers in the footwear industry. Furthermore, the emergence of the status hierarchy led to the successful relocation of Taiwan footwear industry to China. Finally, the industrial association highlighted in the paper not only supplements Fligstein's model of markets as politics, but also elaborates the perspective of the developmental state.起始頁-結束頁：15-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201103.001515篇名：紈<U+88B4>子弟與流氓教授：台灣的教育與階級流動並列篇名：Education and Social Mobility in Taiwan作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);陳晏羚(Yeng-Ling Chen)關鍵字：教育成就;社會階級;代間階級流動;相對勝算比;educational attainment;social status;social mobility;relative odds ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文採用「華人家庭動態資料庫」研究父代與子代間階級流動的情況，並探討教育成就是否<U+7232>促進代間階級流動的重要管道。實證結果發現父代<U+7232>上層階級的子代接受高等教育相對最具有優勢，相較於勞工階級與農民階級子代，中產階級的子代也有較高的機會接受高等教育。另一方面，教育成就對社會階級亦有著顯著的影響，愈高的教育成就進入上層階級的相對勝算比也愈高，尤其具大學以上教育成就更有高度的優勢。特別是相對於國小以下教育程度，受專科教育<U+7232>子代進入上層階級帶來了優勢，而這樣的優勢效果在來自非上層階級的子代又比來自上層階級的子代<U+7232>大。即先天上家庭環境的不足仍可藉由後天教育成就的提升而改善階級壟斷！而高中與專科教育程度可造就出最有機會進入中產階級的優勢，惟教育成就高低對進入上層階級的相對勝算比不會因<U+7232>不同的世代而有所不同。整體而言，教育的普及與避免教育壟斷的確有助於社會階級代間的向上流動，故教育政策的首要目標應該避免產生階級壟斷教育的現象，唯有人人教育機會均等的環境，才能真正達到階級的有效流動，讓窮人有真正翻身的機會。英文摘要：Using Taiwan's Panel Study of Family Dynamics data, this paper investigates intergenerational social mobility and analyzes whether education can be an effective means for fostering social mobility. Empirical results find that father's social status affects an individual's educational attainment. Offspring whose father is in the upper class have a better chance of receiving higher education than those whose father is not. Moreover, education has a profound influence on social status. The higher the educational attainment is, especially for university and above, the greater the chance one will be in the upper-class. The education advantage confers for entry into the upper class does not vary among different cohorts. This implies that the upper-class may dominate education to preserve their social status. However, other things being equal, those with junior college education but whose fathers are not in the upper-class tend to have a greater chance to be in the upper-class than those whose father is in the upper-class. Hence, education can still be an effective means to compensate for the disadvantage in one's father's social status. We also find that senior high school and junior college education confer the greatest chance to be in the middle class, which is conducive to social stability. Our results confirm that popularization of education is beneficial to intergenerational social mobility. Thus, equal opportunity to attain education and prevention of monopoly in education by the upper class should be the ultimate goal of a government's educational policy, as it not only enhances one's earning capability but also fosters social mobility.起始頁-結束頁：61-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201103.006116篇名：地方治理的制度選擇與轉型政治：台灣水利會制度變革的政治與經濟分析並列篇名：Institutional Choice of Local Governance and Transition Politics: An Analysis of Institutional Adaptation of Irrigation Associations in Taiwan作者：邱崇原(Chung-Yuan Chiu);湯京平(Ching-Ping Tang);黃建勳(Chien-Hsun Huang)關鍵字：合產;特別功能政府;共享性資源;制度調適;co-production;special-purpose government;common-pool resources;institutional adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：走過殖民、威權統治，到民主時代，台灣的灌溉系統的治理，展現了難得一見的制度韌性。至少從日據時代開始，這個治理體系結合了制度經濟學中「最適治理疆域」以及「公私合產增效」兩大原則，並嵌入複雜的地方政治運作之中，執行著傲人的治理功能。然而，隨著民主改革而來的政治經濟情勢變化，大幅改變了地方政治的風貌。築基於地方政治的灌溉系統治理，也必須隨之調適。雖歷經衝擊，這套治理體系卻依然維持著基本的運作，展現奇特的制度調適能力，引發學術好奇。本研究採動態的觀點，除檢視這套「特別功能政府」的制度適應基層政治制度變革的情形，展示民主化下地方治理的真實風貌，並希望能增加學界對於制度調適與變革的認識。英文摘要：The governing system of Taiwan's irrigation has survived colonial, authoritarian, and democratic eras, indicating impressive institutional robustness. A close examination indicates that the system has actually been practicing such economic principles as pursuing better economies of governing scale and of public-private synergy in public goods provision, which Elinor Ostrom and her followers have long, advocated. Nevertheless, it is interesting to ask whether the efficiency of governance can be maintained when the political system start to transform, thus affecting the operation of the functional institutions standing on it. By examining Taiwan's case, this research points out the dynamics between changes of institutions in different tiers. It indicates that a functional institution with the principle of user-participation might help it survive the dramatic changes in the course of democratic reforms.起始頁-結束頁：93-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201103.009301篇名：「情感的亞洲」專題導言並列篇名：Introduction to "Feeling Asia: Memories, Metaphors and Modernity"作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：8-12資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00012篇名：從「戰爭的記憶」到「記憶的戰爭」：宋澤萊、陳映真與目取真俊的二戰記憶書寫並列篇名：From War Memories to Memory Wars: Literary Representations of Memories of World War II in Taiwan and Okinawa作者：朱惠足(Huei-Chu Chu)關鍵字：戰爭記憶;戰爭責任;戰後責任;台灣人日本兵;沖繩戰;war memories;war responsibility;postwar responsibility;Taiwanese Japanese-soldier;Okinawa War期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以宋澤萊〈最後的一場戰爭〉（1976）、陳映真〈忠孝公園〉（2001）與目取真俊〈水滴〉（1997）三篇小說中的二戰記憶書寫為題材，討論台灣與沖繩作家各自以何種立場介入東亞地區戰爭責任與戰後責任問題的爭議。本文主要探討的問題為：三篇小說當中的戰爭記憶書寫，分別呈現台灣與沖繩在戰爭與戰後責任議題上的何種歷史困境？與兩地在戰後的國族身分議題呈現何種交錯與糾葛？藉由對這些問題的對照討論，本文試圖思考台灣與沖繩作為東亞地區的「非國家」，如何建立具體連帶關係，共同抵抗以「國族」為名的戰爭與「戰後」暴力。將三篇小說放置於台灣與沖繩各自的歷史脈絡下，本文觀察到原台灣人日本兵與沖繩居民在與日本的戰爭與戰後責任爭議中，都必須強調自己在戰爭期間如何「作為日本人而戰」，使得他們在二戰期間身體受苦的戰爭體驗與記憶，面臨被日本國族敘事收編的危機。本文最後提出，原台灣人日本兵與沖繩居民作為國族身分「矛盾」與「錯亂」之歷史主體，其存在本身其實已經擾亂了「身體」、「國族」與「戰爭」的單一對應關係與邏輯，將「作為日本人而戰」的「身體」加以問題化，多重地挑戰著東亞的國族戰爭敘事與記憶政治學。同時，這些「非國家」身體挑戰東亞國族敘事的歷史能動性，也開啟了戰前被迫「作為日本人而戰」的原台灣人日本兵、戰後成為美軍基地「惡魔之島」的沖繩居民超越國族身分界線，與其他弱勢族裔人民「共有」戰爭的歷史經驗與創傷記憶，連帶抵抗以國族為名的戰爭與「戰後」暴力之可能性。英文摘要：This paper deals with literary representations of memories of world war II in three novels, including Taiwanese writer Song Ze-Lai's ”The Last War” (1976), Chen Ying-Zhen's ”The Zhong-Xiao Park” (2001), and Okinawa writer Medoruma Shun's ”Droplet” (1997), exploring how Taiwanese and Okinawa writers intervene in the heated debates on war and postwar responsibility in East Asia. Through divergent writings of East Asian war memories and memory wars, how do these novels demonstrate the historical predicaments of Taiwan and Okinawa? How do the issues of war memories intersect and entangle with postwar national identities? Locating three literary texts in historical contexts, this paper analyzes the condition in which war memories of Taiwanese Japanese-soldiers and Okinawa inhabitants are in danger of being incorporated into Japan's national war narrative, as a consequence of emphasizing their contributions ”fighting as Japanese” in the debates of war and postwar responsibility. This paper argues that as ambivalent and confused historical subjects, the very existence of Taiwanese Japanese-soldiers and Okinawa inhabitants have disturbed the singular alignment of body, nationality, and war, and therefore problematize their bodies ”fighting as Japanese,” challenging national war narratives and politics of war memories in East Asia. Furthermore, the historical dynamics of these ”non-state” bodies also connect to the possibility for Taiwanese Japanese-soldiers and Okinawa inhabitants to cross national demarcations and share historical experiences and traumatic memories of war with other minority people, and work together to resist wartime and postwar violence in the name of nationalism.起始頁-結束頁：13-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00023篇名：「現代」主體的浮現與「現代性／亞洲」傷口的彌合：《南京！南京！》的文化症候並列篇名：The Appearance of Modern Subject and Healing the Wounds of Modernity/Asia: An Analysis of the Cultural Symptom of City of Life and Death作者：張慧瑜(Hui-Yu Zhang)關鍵字：後冷戰;抗戰影像;現代主體的內在分裂;現代性／亞洲的傷口;被砍頭者的位置;post-cold war;resistance image;internal splitting of modern subject;wounds of modernity/Asia;position of the beheaded期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：《南京！南京！》這部建國60周年的獻禮片因選擇日本士兵的視角而引起激烈的爭論，本文把這部電影放置在中國「大國崛起」和東亞「區域整合」的雙重語境中來解讀，試圖從三個角度來呈現這部影片的文化症候。一是把這部電影放置在抗戰影像的流變中，這種由80年代「落後就要挨打」的悲情敘述到把自我想像為侵華日軍的轉變是一種從「前現代」主體到「現代」主體的置換，這種轉換與中國走向「大國崛起」的主體想像有關；二是這部影片講述了日本士兵角川從侵略、屠城到走向崩潰、自殺的心理歷程，在這裡，我引入對魯迅「幻燈片事件」的討論來呈現這種現代主體的自我批判與現代性所攜帶的內在暴力之間的關係；三是中國所遭遇的現代性暴力主要來自於同樣是亞洲國家的日本，亞洲的傷口與現代性植入這個區域有著密切關係，因此，亞洲的傷口也是現代性的傷口，而這種日本士兵／他者的視角在新的東亞區域整合的背景中成為醫治近代以來中日戰爭創傷的嘗試。由此，《南京！南京！》具有雙重整合功能，對內扭轉80年代以來的悲情敘述，對外以入侵者自殺的敘述來彌合現代性／亞洲的傷口。英文摘要：This paper is designed, according to the context of ”the rise of the great nation” and ”the territorial integration of East Asia”, to present three cultural symptoms of City of Life and Death, a film controversial for its Japanese perspective. Firstly, based on a study of the evolution of resistance images, the author argues that the shift of the narrative strategy is the replacement of premodern subjects with modern subjects, which is in fact a reflection of the idea of ”the rise of the great nation”. Secondly, the author will track, with reference to Lu Xun's ”The Slide Event”, the psychological journey of a Japanese soldier named Kadokawa from invasion to massacre to breakdown to suicide, demonstrating the relationship between modern subjects' self-criticism and the inborn violence of modernity. Thirdly, considering the violence of modernity befallen to the Chinese was mainly from Japan, and the wounds of Asia also the wounds of modernity, the author claims that the Japanese or Otherness perspective is, against the background of territorial integration of East Asia, an attempt to heal the trauma resulting from the Sino-Japanese wars. As such, City of Life and Death plays a twofold function in integration, internally reversing the sad strategy adopted in the 1980s while externally healing the wounds of modernity/Asia.起始頁-結束頁：45-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00034篇名：作為隱喻的亞洲並列篇名：Asia as Metaphor作者：李明皓(Chris Lee);沈思(Szu Shen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：74-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00045篇名：「亞洲」的記憶／技藝：張承志《敬重與惜別─致日本》讀後並列篇名：The Arts and Memories of "Asia"作者：林淑芬(Shu-Fen Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：94-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00056篇名：「恐怖主義」文學的異端：張承志《敬重與惜別—致日本》讀後並列篇名：A Heresy of "Terrorist" Literature: Notes on Cheng-Zhi Zhang's "Pay Respect and Bidding Farewell to Japan"作者：彭明偉(Ming-Wei Peng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：106-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00067篇名：貼近與錯身：作為情感的亞細亞並列篇名：Getting Close and Passing by: Asia as Affect作者：王智明(Chih-Ming Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：114-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00078篇名：亞洲能否誕生團結的話語？—從張承志的亞洲觀出發並列篇名：Can Asia Emerge Discourse for Solidarity?-Departure from Cheng-Zhi Zhang's Ideas on Asia作者：宋堯璽(Yao-Xi Song)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：126-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).00089篇名：如何亞洲、什麼情感：思考的局限與知識的困境並列篇名：Which Asia and What Affect?: Limitations of Thinking and Knowledge作者：陳光興;汪宏倫;藍弘岳期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：138-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).000910篇名：「運動文化」專題導言並列篇名：Introduction to "Sports Culture"作者：蘇碩斌期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：158-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001011篇名：作為機關裝置的收音機體操與殖民地台灣並列篇名：Radio Gymnastic Exercises as a Device and the Colonial Taiwan作者：許佩賢(Pei-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：收音機體操;近代化;國民化;戰爭動員;日治時期;radio gymnastic exercises;modernization;nationalization;war mobilization;colonial Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：日治時期台灣的收音機體操，是自殖民母國日本傳過來的。日本的收音機體操（<U+30E9><U+30B8><U+30AA>体操）顧名思義，是配合收音機廣播的音樂節奏來做體操，自戰前1928年開始成為收音機廣播的固定節目。台灣則稍晚自1930年4月起固定播放，一直到日本統治結束。本文主要從近代化的裝置、國民化的裝置以及戰爭動員的裝置來考察日治時期台灣收音機體操的發展過程。收音機廣播本身是20年代最先進的媒體，收音機體操的音樂是用鋼琴演奏的西洋風樂曲，收音機體操不論是硬體（收音機）或是軟體（聲音），都充分表現其近代風格，清晨的收音機體操使身體配合近代的時間規律，符合都市生活作息。收音機體操於1930年代出現在台灣，正好就是台灣的都會文化、大眾文化發展的時期。1930年代前半，台灣也開始倣效日本內地於每年夏季舉行收音機體操大會，隨著電波的傳送，社會大眾經歷一種共時性的體驗。從日常學校中的體操課、學校或州郡運動會的集團體操，到每日的收音機體操廣播、全島性的收音機體操大會，再到帝國規模的體操祭，透過收音機體操，總督府官僚所期待的共同感，才能由學校、州郡這樣的小團體，擴大到台灣、然後到帝國，從而達到日本國民化的目標。1930年代中期以後，在國民精神總動員的旗幟下，收音機體操和各種新發明的體操在整個帝國同步總動員，收音機體操是帝國確認忠誠的試紙，因此，我們一方面可以看到帝國大大的宣揚「大東亞共榮圈」到處都在做收音機體操；另一方面，朝鮮、台灣這些帝國周邊的殖民地，甚至比本國更進一步，藉由自創的集團體操，向本國表達忠誠。英文摘要：This article mainly discusses about the development of Taiwan radio gymnastic exercises from three devices: modernity, nationality and war mobilization. The radio gymnastic exercises at morning make people work on modern time rule, which is matched with urban lifestyle. During the 1930s, radio gymnastic exercises first appeared in Taiwan, which was exactly the developing time of Taiwanese urban and popular culture. After 1930s, the general assemblies of radio gymnastic exercises had been held every summer in Taiwan, and also received the broadcast form Japan, doing radio gymnastic exercises with the whole empire. With the transmission of radio wave, the masses had had the experience of simultaneous. The radio gymnastic exercises and other new gymnastic exercises after the middle of 1930s were synchronized with the whole empire, was the examination and the expression of loyalty.起始頁-結束頁：159-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001112篇名：棒球文化：紅土上的原住民文化展演和運動儀式並列篇名：Playing Baseball, Playing Culture: The Cultural Performance and Athletic Ritual of Indigenous Peoples on the Baseball Diamond作者：林文蘭(Wen-Lan Lin)關鍵字：文化展演;運動儀式;戰歌;喊聲;禁忌;cultural performances;athletic rituals;battle songs;athletic shouts;taboos期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文勾勒棒球場上的文化展演和運動儀式，以及球場如何成為原住民的文化再現舞台。透過民族誌的研究方法，貼近原住民球員的運動世界，參與觀察其訓練流程和比賽實況，梳理出紅土上的原住民棒球文化。本研究關注有四：一、從運動儀式中的喊聲與戰歌，檢視原住民球員和親友啦啦隊如何轉借、挪用和重構原住民文化元素。二、棒球如何發揮社會凝聚的功能，運動儀式又如何化解衝突和維持整合。三、運動文化如何體現出靈力與禁忌的信仰體系。四、初探棒球文化與原住民文化的異形同構和文化創生的內涵。從兩者的社會組織運作邏輯、年長制的階序身分、權力賦予和資源分配，勾勒出文化親近是原住民打棒球的「族群特殊性」。研究發現主要有：第一、紅土上的訓練過程和競賽文化成為原住民文化的展演平台。第二、運動儀式和象徵展演扮演著消弭衝突和凝聚集體意識的角色，催化球隊的團體生產活動，再生產球隊的文化，更成為動員情緒、重構社會關係和激發運動能量的催化劑。第三、運動儀式體現出文化競逐的意義，其社會功能是形構球員據以行事的價值體系，維繫運動結構運作的穩定性。從紅土上的棒球文化，有助於見識原住民文化在當代社會中展演的多元樣貌。英文摘要：This research began with an attempt to examine how cultural performances and athletic rituals on the baseball diamond have become a stage for the presentation of indigenous culture. On the basis of the ethnography of these indigenous baseball teams, the study focused on their training processes and contests to examine the cultural characteristics of how they played the game. The following research questions are probed: (1) observing how indigenous baseball players and cheer squads made up of indigenous players and their relatives borrow, appropriate, and reconstruct elements of their culture in their athletic shouts and battle songs; (2) demonstrating how baseball promotes social solidarity, and how athletic rituals resolve conflicts and maintain social integration; and (3) analyzing how this athletic culture embodies belief systems concerning mana and taboos; and (4) illuminating the meaning of cultural production between baseball culture and indigenous culture. Findings produced three results. The study showed that the training process and athletic culture on the baseball diamond was a representative arena for the indigenous culture. In addition, athletic rituals and symbolic performances prevented conflicts and created a collective consciousness; that is, they not only stimulated the productivity of the team and reproduced a team culture but also mobilized emotions, reconstructed social relationships, and acted as a catalyst for exercise energy. The research also found that the athletic rituals reflected the meaning of the cultural contests in that their social functions are based on value systems that the players can relate to and stand on. This enables them to maintain an athletic structure that can operate stably. The recognition of this playing culture on the baseball diamond provides us with an opportunity to widen our views and realize how indigenous culture can present and add diversity to our present-day society.起始頁-結束頁：203-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001213篇名：山寨中國並列篇名：Shan-Zhai China作者：何春蕤(Josephine Chuen-Juei Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：262-266資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001314篇名：智慧財產權與創意經濟並列篇名：IPRs and Creative Economy作者：彭麗君(Lai-Kwan Pang);蕭旭智(Hsu-Chih Hsiao) 翻譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：268-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001415篇名：海賊版與文化鬥爭並列篇名：Piracy and Cultural Conflict作者：山田獎治(Yamada Shoji);陳惠敏(Hui-Min Chen) 翻譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：276-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001516篇名：創意產業中的偷偷摸摸vs.圍剿並列篇名：Stealth versus Siege in Creative Industry作者：蔡明發(Beng-Huat Chua);蕭旭智(Hsu-Chih Hsiao) 翻譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：280-283資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001617篇名：劉曉波的「民主」及其他並列篇名：Liu Xiao-bo's "Democracy" and Others作者：丸川哲史(Marukawa Tetsushi);鈴木將久(Suzuki Masahisa);馮啟斌(Ci-Bin Fong) 翻譯期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：284-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001718篇名：評介《凌駕諸民族：技術、環境與西方帝國主義，1400年至今》並列篇名：A Review of Daniel R. Headrick's "Power over Peoples: Technology, Environments and Western Imperialism,1400 to the Present"作者：李尚仁(Shang-Jen Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：300-305資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001819篇名：NSK國家在台北的「Real Wince」並列篇名：NSK in Taipei: Real Wince (R. Irwin S.)作者：黃建宏(Chien-Hung Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：306-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).001920篇名：謝春德和他的創作並列篇名：Hsieh Chun-te and His Works作者：林志明(Chi-Ming Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：12期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：320-325資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201109_(12).002001篇名：台灣社會政治環境變遷、防治策略與登革熱流行及未來展望並列篇名：The Relationships among Socio-political/Environmental Changes, Prevention and Control Strategies, and Epidemics of Dengue Fever in Taiwan-Future Prospects作者：董宗華(Tsung-Hua Tung);蔡坤憲(Kun-Hsien Tsai);金傳蓬(Chwan-Pong King);黃彥彰(Scott Yan-Jang Huang);金傳春(Chwan-Chuen King)關鍵字：登革熱;環境變遷;防治策略;傳染病偵測;全球衛生;Dengue;Environment change;Control Strategies;Infectious Diseases Surveillance;Global Health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣登革流行史，自南洋戰爭、戒嚴、環境整治至今日防疫，恰是台灣社會變遷最速期。而交通發展、都市化加速疾病傳播效率，政治民主化與媒體致防治困難，消費型態改變增病媒蚊滋生處，尤其全球氣候變遷更對病媒蚊生長與傳播影響深遠。本文以大尺度社會與政治變遷為背景溯析與登革流行相關的外在變化，進而由組織架構更替、登革偵測系統、防治作為與全球氣候變遷的面向，嘗試探索其對流行的影響。中央／地方政府、基層衛生人員與民眾合作無間為台灣登革防治成功的重要關鍵。因選舉年基層動員及空窗期而無暇防疫，致使2002、2006及2010年平均本土病例數較往年為高[平均±標準差：1526.3±928.1（在2002、2006、2010的三選舉年）] vs 156.9±181.6[在非選舉年（1999∼2001、2003∼2005、2007∼2009）, p＝0.004）]。台灣近年在偵測系統與實驗診斷有長足的進步，是目前登革防治的最大優勢，但基層公共衛生功能與防疫人才流失為兩大隱憂，尤其過去與民眾關係最密切的里長及衛生所防疫功能漸失。全球暖化後，登革防治為全球衛生的重要議題，因此系統化跨年檢討台灣登革流行，期能鑑往知來，對未來全球登革防治盡棉薄之力。（台灣衛誌2011；30（6）：517－532）英文摘要：The history of dengue epidemics in Taiwan has spanned World War II, martial law, and environmental remediation. We are currently in a period of rapid social change with an emphasis on disease prevention. Urbanization and mass-transportation systems have facilitated viral transmission, while democratization, mass media, changing patterns of consumption, and global climate change have all created more difficulties in prevention and control. The aim of this article was to retrospectively examine the relationship between epidemics of dengue/dengue hemorrhagic fever and ”external changes,” and to explore important factors (organizational structure, surveillance systems and global/regional climate change) that may have had an impact on Taiwan's dengue epidemics. Collaborations among central/local government, public health professionals, and cooperative residents have been the key to success in prevention and control of dengue. The mean number of cases in the years of city-mayor elections (2002, 2006, and 2010) was significantly higher than in those years without an election (1526.3 ± 928.1 vs 156.9 ± 181.6, p = 0.004). This was possibly due to grassroots mobilization and the lack of effective implementation during the transition period. The major strengths in the control of dengue in Taiwan are advancements in the surveillance system and in laboratory diagnosis, however, the diminishing function of local public health agencies and the loss of infectious disease experts are two important problems. The assistance provided by district leaders and officials at local health centers that are closest to residents have gradually gone. Dengue is an important issue in global health in an era of global warming. Our systematic examination of the micro- and macro- factors in the success and failure of prevention and control of dengue over three decades will hopefully be helpful in the global control of dengue. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):517-532)起始頁-結束頁：517-532資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-012篇名：台灣地區高樓可得性與跳樓自殺之相關並列篇名：The Correlation between Availability of High-rise Buildings and Suicide by Jumping in Taiwan作者：紀玉臨(Yu-Lin Chi);周孟嫻(Meng-Sian Jhou);謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：跳樓自殺;方法可得性;探索式空間資料分析;多層次分析;Suicide by Jumping;Availability of Methods;Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis;Multilevel Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to explore the spatial patterns of suicide by jumping in Taiwan and to examine the effects of the availability of high-rise buildings on suicide completers' propensity to jump from heights. Methods: Data on all completed suicides during the period 1994-2007 (n=50,705) were derived from the cause of death database provided by the Department of Health, Executive Yuan, Taiwan. The proportion of high-rise building at the township-level (n=358) came from the 2000 census of population and housing. Exploratory spatial data analysis methods were used to investigate the spatial patterns of proportions of suicide by jumping and high-rise buildings. Multilevel logistic regressions were employed to assess the association between the township-level availability of high-rise buildings and the individual's choice of suicide methods. Results: The proportion of suicide by jumping showed a significant spatial dependence (Moran's I=0.551, p＜0.001). Hot spots were detected in Keelung-Taipei-Taoyuan, Taichung, and Kaohsiung metropolitan areas. Such a spatial pattern coincided with the proportion of high-rise buildings. Results from multilevel models indicated that 10% of the variance in the choice of suicide methods was between townships. After controlling for gender, age, marital status, occupational status, season, period, social fragmentation, economic deprivation, and level of urbanization, we found that the deceased who lived in a township with a greater availability of tall buildings had a significantly higher likelihood of committing suicide by jumping. Conclusions: Since there are significant township-level differences in the proportions of suicide by jumping, community suicide intervention strategies should take these spatial variations into account. Programs to prevent suicide by jumping should be targeted to areas with more high-rise buildings. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):533-546)英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to explore the spatial patterns of suicide by jumping in Taiwan and to examine the effects of the availability of high-rise buildings on suicide completers' propensity to jump from heights. Methods: Data on all completed suicides during the period 1994-2007 (n=50,705) were derived from the cause of death database provided by the Department of Health, Executive Yuan, Taiwan. The proportion of high-rise building at the township-level (n=358) came from the 2000 census of population and housing. Exploratory spatial data analysis methods were used to investigate the spatial patterns of proportions of suicide by jumping and high-rise buildings. Multilevel logistic regressions were employed to assess the association between the township-level availability of high-rise buildings and the individual's choice of suicide methods. Results: The proportion of suicide by jumping showed a significant spatial dependence (Moran's I=0.551, p＜0.001). Hot spots were detected in Keelung-Taipei-Taoyuan, Taichung, and Kaohsiung metropolitan areas. Such a spatial pattern coincided with the proportion of high-rise buildings. Results from multilevel models indicated that 10% of the variance in the choice of suicide methods was between townships. After controlling for gender, age, marital status, occupational status, season, period, social fragmentation, economic deprivation, and level of urbanization, we found that the deceased who lived in a township with a greater availability of tall buildings had a significantly higher likelihood of committing suicide by jumping. Conclusions: Since there are significant township-level differences in the proportions of suicide by jumping, community suicide intervention strategies should take these spatial variations into account. Programs to prevent suicide by jumping should be targeted to areas with more high-rise buildings. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):533-546)起始頁-結束頁：533-546資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-023篇名：評論：台灣地區高樓可得性與跳樓自殺之相關作者：溫在弘期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：547-547資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-034篇名：作者回覆：台灣地區高樓可得性與跳樓自殺之相關作者：紀玉臨;周孟嫻;謝雨生期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：548-548資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-045篇名：服用雞尾酒療法之愛滋病毒感染者其慢性病盛行率與發生率之探討並列篇名：The Incidence and Prevalence of Chronic Diseases among HIV-Infected Patients on Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART)作者：林<U+548F>臻(Yung-Jen Lin);楊靖慧(Chin-Hui Yang);黃彥芳(Yen-Fang Huang);賴安琪(An-Chi Lai)關鍵字：人類免疫缺乏病毒;雞尾酒療法;糖尿病;高血壓;高血脂;HIV;highly active antiretroviral therapy;diabetes;hypertension;hyperlipidemia期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：Objectives: Although highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) can effectively improve immunity, reduce morbidity and mortality, and prolong the life-span of patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), it may also increase the risk of chronic diseases and subsequent medical costs. To understand the risks of HAART, the aim of this research was investigate the incidence and prevalence of chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension and hyperlipidemia, and to determine the differences between those HIV infected patients with and without HAART regimens. Methods: A prospective observational study was conducted among 1,724 patients diagnosed with HIV infections before 2000 in order to estimate the prevalence and risk of chronic diseases in 2010 for patients, and between those patients with and without HAART regimens. Furthermore, patients completed an interviewer-administered questionnaire to investigate the incidence of chronic diseases. Results: A total of 1,344 patients survived until 2010. In 2010, the prevalence rates among all patients were 7.5% for diabetes, 11.5% for hypertension, and 29.1% for hyperlipidemia. Among the 85.3% of patients who had taken HAART, there were higher prevalence rates for chronic diseases (diabetes: 7.8%＞2.2%, hypertension: 11.8% ＞4.4%, hyperlipidemia: 30.1% ＞4.4%, p＜.001) than for those patients without HAART regimens. After adjustment for age and gender, patients with HAART regimens have significantly higher ORs then did those without HAART regimens (diabetes: 17.8, hypertension: 13.6, hyperlipidemia: 44.2, p＜.001). The incidence of diabetes among HIV infected patients was 6.2 cases per 1000 person-years. It was 6.6 cases per 1000 person-years for hypertension, and 28.5 cases per 1000 person-years for hyperlipidemia. Conclusions: The prevalence rates for chronic diseases among HIV-infected patients with HAART were higher than those of patients without HAART regimens. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):549-557)英文摘要：Objectives: Although highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) can effectively improve immunity, reduce morbidity and mortality, and prolong the life-span of patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), it may also increase the risk of chronic diseases and subsequent medical costs. To understand the risks of HAART, the aim of this research was investigate the incidence and prevalence of chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension and hyperlipidemia, and to determine the differences between those HIV infected patients with and without HAART regimens. Methods: A prospective observational study was conducted among 1,724 patients diagnosed with HIV infections before 2000 in order to estimate the prevalence and risk of chronic diseases in 2010 for patients, and between those patients with and without HAART regimens. Furthermore, patients completed an interviewer-administered questionnaire to investigate the incidence of chronic diseases. Results: A total of 1,344 patients survived until 2010. In 2010, the prevalence rates among all patients were 7.5% for diabetes, 11.5% for hypertension, and 29.1% for hyperlipidemia. Among the 85.3% of patients who had taken HAART, there were higher prevalence rates for chronic diseases (diabetes: 7.8%＞2.2%, hypertension: 11.8% ＞4.4%, hyperlipidemia: 30.1% ＞4.4%, p＜.001) than for those patients without HAART regimens. After adjustment for age and gender, patients with HAART regimens have significantly higher ORs then did those without HAART regimens (diabetes: 17.8, hypertension: 13.6, hyperlipidemia: 44.2, p＜.001). The incidence of diabetes among HIV infected patients was 6.2 cases per 1000 person-years. It was 6.6 cases per 1000 person-years for hypertension, and 28.5 cases per 1000 person-years for hyperlipidemia. Conclusions: The prevalence rates for chronic diseases among HIV-infected patients with HAART were higher than those of patients without HAART regimens. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):549-557)起始頁-結束頁：549-557資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-056篇名：比較不同地理可近性分析方法於評估台灣各鄉鎮每萬人口西醫師數之差異並列篇名：Comparisons of Different Methods of Geographical Accessibility in Evaluating Township-level Physician-to-Population Ratios in Taiwan作者：章殷超(Yin-Chao Chang);溫在弘(Tzai-Hung Wen);賴美淑(Mei-Shu Lai)關鍵字：醫師人口比;地理可近性;地理修正醫師人口比;地理資訊系統;二階段浮動可近區位法;physician-to-population ratio;geographic accessibility;geographically modified physician-to-population ratio;geographic information system;Two-step floating catchment area method期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：適當的資源評估，將影響資源配置的合理性。以往以行政區域每萬人口醫療資源作為評估醫療資源配置的依據之一，由於地理資訊系統能夠掌握複雜的空間變異與差異，本研究旨在比較不同的地理概念所呈現的地理可近性對醫療資源評估的影響。方法：本研究應用「二階段浮動可近區位法」的分析方法，提出兩種具備距離特質的地理可近性評估模式，以2007年台灣本島各鄉鎮的每萬人口西醫師數為例，比較衛生署「現行評估法」與本研究的模式評估結果之差異。結果：本研究的兩種模式與衛生署「現行評估法」的比較結果，其分布差異大且相關度不高（相關係數各為0.38及0.57）。在進行西醫師資源缺乏鄉鎮的判定部分，與健保局判定的結果一致性並不理想（kappa=0.141∼0.231）。此外，「新模式」與「現行評估法」之比值在空間單元面積最大組（面積大於112平方公里）有最多的鄉鎮介於0.8－1.25之間，而同組中有最多的鄉鎮評估順位下降大於50名；以鄉鎮人口加總至較大的縣市或區域時，其差異程度降低。結論：本研究顯示具距離特質的地理可近性模式對於評估鄉鎮層次的醫師資源有重大的影響，若未詳加考量將可能導致醫療資源補助的錯置。（台灣衛誌2011；30（6）：558－572）英文摘要：Objectives: An appropriate evaluation of the supply of and demand for physician resources is important for the allocation of medical resource. The current evaluation practice, the townshiplevel physician-to-population ratio, cannot capture the characteristics of cross-district movements of the population. The purpose of this study was to use a geographic information system to capture spatial variations in order to compare different methods of spatial accessibility in the evaluation of physician resources. Methods: This study proposed a geographically modified physician-topopulation ratio by using a two-step floating catchment area method which incorporated two different distance-decay functions to evaluate physician resources in Taiwan. These methods were also compared with current evaluation practices. Results: Results from the catchment area method that incorporated two distance-decay functions were different from the current evaluation practice of township level ratios (correlation coefficients were 0.37 and 0.58). The areas of physician shortage identified by these two methods were also different from current evaluation practices (kappa = 0.141-0.231); however, the differences among these methods decreased when township-level population and physician data were aggregated at the county or regional levels. Conclusions: Our significant findings showed that township-level resource allocations could be misplaced if cross-township accessibility were not incorporated in the evaluation models. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):558-572)起始頁-結束頁：558-572資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-067篇名：探索勞工健康信念與噪音暴露防護行為之關聯並列篇名：Exploring Various Health Beliefs Concerning Hearing Loss and Noise Prevention Among Workers in Relation to their Personal protective behavior作者：黃郁凱(Yu-Kai Huang);黃俊豪(Jiun-Hau Huang)關鍵字：健康信念模式;噪音;聽力損失;勞工;Health Belief Model;noise;hearing loss;worker期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探索勞工是否會因為健康信念差異而對於噪音預防個人防護用具的使用有所不同。方法：利用問卷調查的方式，收集34位作業環境有噪音暴露且患有二級聽力損失的勞工做為研究對象，參考健康信念模式，分析勞工健康信念與噪音預防個人防護用具使用之關係。結果：勞工之健康信念中，噪音暴露預防行為的自覺障礙性較高者，其噪音預防個人防護用具的使用意願以及過往實際使用頻率顯著較低；噪音暴露預防行為之自我效能較高者，其使用意願以及過往實際使用頻率顯著較高。此外，因噪音暴露導致聽力損失的自覺嚴重性、噪音暴露預防行為的自覺利益性較高者，使用意願顯著較高。然而，接收資訊之行動線索與勞工過往實際使用頻率並無顯著相關。結論：勞工之健康信念及其對於噪音預防個人防護用具的使用意願有顯著關聯。未來若欲提升現行職業衛生安全教育效果，可參考本研究之結果，改變勞工的健康信念。（台灣衛誌2011；30（6）：573－581）英文摘要：Objectives: The objectives of this study were to explore various health beliefs concerning hearing loss and noise prevention, and to examine the relationship of those beliefs with personal protective behavior. Methods: Based on the Health Belief Model as its theoretical framework, this study gathered information with a self-administered questionnaire from a total of 34 workers who had occupational noise exposure and hearing loss. Statistical analyses, including Fisher's exact test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, and the chi-square test, were performed to examine the associations between workers' health beliefs and their personal protective behavior. Results: Perceived barriers were found to be associated with both decreased intention to adopt and decreased actual practice of personal protective behavior. By contrast, greater self-efficacy was associated with an increase in both the intention to adopt and the actual practice of personal protective behavior. Perceived benefits and perceived severity also increased the intention to adopt personal protective behavior; however, cues to action were not significantly associated with increased practice of personal protective behavior. Conclusions: Our findings indicated that workers' health beliefs regarding noise were significantly associated with their personal protective behavior. Accordingly, in order to improve the effectiveness of occupational health education, future programs about noise and hearing loss prevention should consider putting more emphasis on modifying related health beliefs among workers. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):573-581)起始頁-結束頁：573-581資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-078篇名：民眾溝通特質與策略對醫師滿意與信任的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Personal Communication Characteristics and Strategies for Dialogue on Patients' Satisfaction with and Trust in Physicians作者：洪小涵(Hsiao-Han Hung);邱玉蟬(Yu-Chan Chiu)關鍵字：網路;溝通特質;溝通策略;滿意;信任;Internet;communication characteristics;communication strategy;satisfaction;trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：網際網路逐漸成為提供病人醫療資訊的重要角色。本研究探討民眾的溝通特質、提問網路資訊策略與感知醫師回應等因素，對醫師滿意與信任的影響。方法：本研究使用網路問卷搜集資料，張貼連結於14個網站，13個個人部落格及寄送電子郵件，共回收231份有效問卷。結果：本研究發現（1）感受到醫師正向回應的人，對醫師比較滿意。（2）個人溝通特質隸屬傾向高（個人希望被所屬團體接納程度愈高者）、採取直接列出資料提問、感受到醫師正向回應的人，對醫師比較信任。結論：民眾溝通特質、提問策略與感知醫師回應，會影響民眾在與醫師討論網路資訊後，對醫師的滿意與信任。建議醫學教育訓練內容應教導醫師如何引導民眾說出資訊來源，提出問題，減少被動的民眾對醫師回應感到不滿意的可能性，促進良好的醫病關係。（台灣衛誌2011；30（6）：582－593）英文摘要：Objectives: The Internet has become a major source of health information for the public. This study examined how people's personal communication characteristics, strategies for asking questions, and perceived physician responses influenced their satisfaction with and trust in physicians. Methods: This study used an online survey (N=231). The survey link was posted on 14 cancer support group sites, 13 personal blogs, and also sent out by e-mails. Results: The results showed that (1) People who .perceived more positive feedback from a physician were more likely to have higher satisfaction with physicians. (2) Subordinate communication characteristics and printed information were also associated with greater trust. Conclusions: People's communication characteristics, strategies, and perceived physician feedback had an impact on their satisfaction with and trust in physicians. This study suggests that medical education should improve the physician's ability to provide patients with an opportunity to participate in the discussion in the clinic so as to enhance the physician-patient relationship. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):582-593)起始頁-結束頁：582-593資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-089篇名：台灣小型醫院防火安全等級評價模式並列篇名：Ranking Evaluation and Analysis of Fire Safety for Small-Scale Hospitals in Taiwan作者：曾偉文(Wei-Wen Tseng);張文成(Wen-Cheng Chang);潘國雄(Kuo-Hsiung Pan)關鍵字：小型醫院;防火安全;評價模式;small-scale hospitals;fire safety;evaluation model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：針對99床以下小型醫院防火安全進行評價模式開發與試用。方法：藉由案例分析了解小型醫院防火安全問題，初步研擬出我國小型醫院防火安全評價內容，再由模糊德爾非法專家問卷取得評價主、次指標因子，依指標因子再分別進行層級分析法（A.H.P.）專家問卷取得權重，並以25家小型醫院做實證調查分析。結果：以醫療衛生、建管及消防各角度，所研擬之小型醫院防火安全評價項目指標內容，可針對既有小型醫院防火安全之良窳，做出客觀有效的等級評價。結論：提出模式運用、限制及未來改善方向；運用防火安全評價，可將小型醫院予以初步安全分級，就安全評價較低之小型醫院火災風險現況，做為優先予以輔導改善的目標。（台灣衛誌2011；30（6）：594－603）英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to develop a fire safety evaluation model for small-scale hospitals (fewer than 99 beds) in Taiwan and to execute a trial survey. Methods: An evaluation model was developed by means of an analysis of small hospital fire safety problems through case studies. A preliminarily proposal of fire safety evaluation criteria was developed before using the fuzzy Delphi method to obtain primary/secondary index factors which were then evaluated by experts by means of questionnaires. These were then weighted separately by using the Analytical Hierarchy Process. Twenty five small-scale hospitals were the focus of this new model of empirical survey and analysis. Results: The fire safety status of small-scale hospitals can be classified clearly and fairly with an objective and effective evaluation model that meets the criteria of health authorities, building controls, and the fire service. Discussions: Model applications, limitations, and directions for improvement in the near future have been proposed. A comprehensive survey using this model is necessary in order to identify priorities in fire safety for health authorities. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):594-603)起始頁-結束頁：594-603資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-0910篇名：台灣毒品防制政策成效未能彰顯之成因探究並列篇名：The Primary Factors that Affect the Efficacy of Drug Prevention Policies in Taiwan作者：詹中原(Chung-Yuang Jan);陳泉錫(Chuan-His Chen)關鍵字：減害;美沙酮;毒癮者;毒品危害防制中心;再犯率;Harm reduction;methadone;drug offenders;drug prevention center;recidivism rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷6期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：台灣自1993年宣布向毒品宣戰以來，歷經十餘年之施行，毒品犯人數與再犯率並未減緩，反出現增加之趨勢。足見毒品防制政策有全面檢視問題癥結，重新調整執行策略之必要。方法：本文從國家治理及出監毒癮者需求兩個面向分別進行研究。經由深度訪談具實務經驗之矯正機關、毒品防制中心主管，並對7,596名即將出監之毒品犯進行社會適應需求問卷調查，分析歸納影響防制政策成效不顯的主要成因癥結。結果：影響現行毒品防制成效不彰最具關鍵的三項問題為：1.缺少常設之國家級專責機關2.中途處遇機制缺乏3.部會間防制作業程序不一，防治資訊未能整合。在出監藥癮者需求方面，本研究發現出監藥癮者社會適應最大障礙在於找不到工作及避不開毒友的勸誘。結論：毒品防制最待改善之三項關鍵問題與建議可作為政府規劃毒品防制資源投入方向之重要參考。59%出監藥癮者有工作需求，只是不易被社會接受且又躲不開毒友的勸誘終致棄守而再犯，甚值政府重視，並速採對策因應。（台灣衛誌2011；30（6）：604－616）英文摘要：Objectives: The Taiwan government has waged war on drugs since 1993; however, after more than 10 years of enforcement, the number of drug offenders continues to increase steadily and the recidivism rate remains high, thereby demonstrating a need to review current drug policies. Methods: This study adopted a multi-method research approach by interviewing the directors of correctional institutions and the managers of drug prevention centers, and conducting a questionnaire survey of 7,596 drug addicts nearing the end of their prison sentences. Results: The three most critical issues affecting the efficacy of drug abuse prevention in Taiwan are: (1) lack of a permanent responsible government department; (2) lack of midway treatment mechanisms; and (3) a lack of integration among drug prevention agencies. On the demand side, 59 % of drug users require a job but have difficulty being accepted by employers; thus results in a high rate of recidivism. This study determined that the biggest obstacles for drug addicts to surmount after leaving prison are the difficulties in securing employment and avoiding temptation from drug-using friends. Conclusions: These three critical issues and the actions suggested in response to them are worth the attention of the government. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2011;30(6):604-616)起始頁-結束頁：604-616資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-06-1011篇名：可避免住院研究回顧對台灣基層醫療照護的意涵並列篇名：A Literature Review of Preventable Hospitalizations: Implications for Primary Care in Taiwan作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);林育秀(Yu-Hsiu Lin);李卓倫(Jwo-Leun Lee);張曉鳳(Hsiao-Feng Chang)關鍵字：可避免住院;門診敏感照護狀況;基層醫療;Preventable hospitalization;ambulatory care sensitive conditions;primary care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：健保局採取多項措施減緩醫療支出增加，但成效有限。若能減少可避免住院醫療費用，將可舒緩健保財務惡化。本文回顧國內外研究對可避免住院的訂定原則、疾病與影響因子，期開啟國內對此議題的重現並提出建議。本文發現研究依疾病碼定義明確、住院率高、具文獻依據且可經由基層醫療提供照護等原則，訂定出11-24種可避免住院。國內外研究均發現，性別、年齡、社經地位、健康狀況、地理區域、照護連續性是顯著影響因子；國外研究另發現種族、婚姻狀況、有無保險、保險類別、基層醫師人力為顯著影響因子。未實施全民健保的國家，有無保險及保險類別是顯著因子，但實施全民健保的國家，個人社經狀況及醫療資源的影響可能凌駕保險。可避免住院可用以衡量基層醫療照護可近性，亦可監控門診照護結果品質，在台灣全民健康保險即將邁入以公平、品質、效率為核心精神的二代健保之際，建議將可避免住院列為例行收集之正式衛生統計指標，並發展台灣版的可避免住院表列。英文摘要：The Bureau of National Health Insurance adopted several policies to control rising healthcare expenditures; however, the results were limited. The financial burden on National Health Insurance can be reduced by avoiding expenditures for preventable hospitalizations. This article provides a brief review of criteria for preventable hospitalizations, describes diseases associated with preventable hospitalizations, and summarizes factors associated with preventable hospitalizations in a review of the national/international literature. It concludes with our recommendations for further work and a look at what the future might hold. Criteria developed for considering the appropriateness of hospitalization include clarity in the definition and coding of diagnoses, a hospitalization rate of at least 1/10,000, the existence of prior studies, and if the hospitalization could potentially have been avoided through utilization of primary health care. We selected 11-24 ICD codes as a list of ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSCs). Gender, age, socioeconomic status (SES), health status, geography, and provider continuity were found to be associated with preventable hospitalizations both internationally and in Taiwan; however, race, marital status, insurance status, insurance type, and primary care provider were also found to be significant in other countries. For countries without universal insurance, insurance status and insurance type were significant predictors; however, for countries with universal insurance, SES and medical resources were significant predictors. The measurement of preventable hospitalization can be adopted to indicate both the accessibility and effectiveness of primary care. Since Second Generation National Health Insurance that focuses on equity, quality, and efficiency is now being contemplated, this study suggests that the rate of preventable hospitalizations should be considered as one of the health indicators in conjunction with Taiwan's ACSCs list.起始頁-結束頁：409-421資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0112篇名：社區復健中心服務對精神分裂症病患後續醫療利用之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Community Rehabilitation Services for Patients with Schizophrenia on the Utilization of Health Services作者：吳希文(His-Wen Wu);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang)關鍵字：精神病患;社區復健;傾向分數;醫療利用;醫療費用;Psychiatric patient;Community rehabilitation;Propensity score;Health Services Utilization;Medical cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究探討精神分裂症病患有無接受社區復健中心服務及治療時間長短，對其結束治療後1年內／2年內醫療利用的影響。方法：以2006年自精神科住院出院後一年內，連續接受30日以上社區復健中心治療的個案203人，及僅接受精神科門診追蹤之1631人為研究對象。以描述性統計、卡方檢定、t檢定、複迴歸進行資料分析，另以傾向分數分析法校正選樣誤差。結果：接受社區復健中心治療時間為10-12個月者比僅接受1-3個月者，追蹤其結束社區復健中心治療後2年內精神科急慢性住院日數、醫療費用、精神醫療治療費皆較低。相較於僅接受精神科門診治療者，接受社區復健中心治療者，其結束治療後1年內及2年內精神科急性住院日數、醫療費用、精神醫療治療費較低；但精神科慢性住院日數、醫療費用較高，結束社區復健中心治療後2年內，精神科慢性住院精神醫療治療費亦較高。結論：本研究呈現精神分裂症病患接受社區復健中心服務後之醫療利用情形，藉此反映精神分裂症患者就醫之重要資訊，並進而推論病患社區復健之成效。英文摘要：The aim of this research was to investigate the effects on health service utilization among patients with schizophrenia after 1 or 2 years of treatment in community rehabilitation centers. Methods: We included 203 patients discharged from psychiatric hospitals within 1 year and continuously in treatment for more than 30 days in community rehabilitation centers. We also included 1631 patients readmitted to psychiatric hospitals within 1 year after receiving only psychiatric outpatient follow-up. Data were analyzed by descriptive methods, χ^2 tests, t-tests, and multiple regression analysis. In order to reduce selection bias, the researchers used the propensity score method to balance the covariates. Results: Patients with 10-12 months of treatment in community rehabilitation centers had a shorter length-of-stay and lower medical expenditures and psychiatric medical expenditures in acute and chronic psychiatric hospitals over a 2-year follow-up period than did those with 1-3 months of treatment. Compared with patients who received only psychiatric outpatient treatment, patients who received treatment from community rehabilitation centers had a shorter length-of-stay and lower medical expenditures and psychiatric medical expenditures in acute psychiatric facilities over 1 or 2-years of follow-up, but had a longer length-of-stay and higher medical expenditures in chronic psychiatric facilities over 1 and 2-years of follow-up, and higher psychiatric medical expenditures in chronic psychiatric facilities at 2-year follow-up. Conclusions: The results characterized the utilization of health services by patients with schizophrenia after treatment in community rehabilitation centers. They provide important information about medical utilization by these patients and show the effects of their community rehabilitation.起始頁-結束頁：422-435資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0213篇名：職場經期健康與生理假實施初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Study on Menstrual Health and Menstrual Leave in the Workplace in Taiwan作者：張<U+73CF>(Chuen Chang);陳芬苓(Fen-Ling Chen);張菊惠(Chu-Hui Chang);徐儆暉(Ching-Hui Hsu)關鍵字：生理假;性別工作平等法;經期健康;menstrual leave;Gender Equal Employment Act;menstrual health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：我國《性別工作平等法》於2002年通過，生理假是其中對婦女健康的一項福利措施，在實施多年後有必要瞭解國內女性勞工因工作性質及環境影響其生理假需求情形，生理假實際執行的狀況，探索生理假制度是否會因女性勞工工作而有執行上差異，以俾提出相關政策或方案。方法：本研究運用檔案研究法與日本生理假政策做比較，並以焦點團體方法訪談不同行業女性因工作而經期不適的差異經驗，以及對生理假看法與經驗。結果：目前明確實施生理假的國家有日本、印尼、韓國與台灣。在焦點團體分析上，發現被訪問大多數女性都有經歷經期不適的情況，也瞭解不同的公司及生理假的實施和使用規定。但是在使用情況，會因為「規定太過僵化」、「其他人都沒有請」、「有其他假可以休」、「沒有人代班」或「必須要有醫生證明」等因素導致生理假使用率低。女性勞動者也反映希望主管和男性員工能增加對生理假的認知，職場中友善工作環境的建立才能使生理假制度順利推行。結論：文後針對生理假的爭議，包括生理假制定的必要性、舉證及濫用問題、考績評核問題、職場經期健康促進與生理假的關係等議題進行討論，並提出政策未來建議，包括：l.鼓勵職場建立經期支持環境；2.工作場所管理模式改變；3.生理假彈性化；4.經期健康教育融入每年例行職業安全衛生講習中；5.對廠護提供經期健康訓練課程；6.加強經期與工作關聯性資料蒐集等。英文摘要：The Gender Equal Employment Act was enacted in 2002 and the right to apply for menstrual leave was one of its provisions. It is important to evaluate the need for this policy, the impact of menstrual leave and the relationship between women menstrual health and work. Methods: In order to understand the practice of menstrual leave under the Gender Equity Work Act, two research methods were adopted by this study: documentary research and 8 focus groups. Results: According to the focus group, most of our interviewees had experienced menstrual discomfort. Their reasons included congenital physical problems, pressure, nervousness, an bad life style, and drinking cold liquids. They did not understand the regulations about menstrual leave such as how to apply for it or how to use it. They seldom used menstrual leave for the following reasons: the regulation had no flexibility, no one they knew had ever applied for it, there are many other leaves that might apply, nobody could take over their jobs, and the organization needed medical receipts if the workers wanted to apply for menstrual leave. We also asked interviewees for their opinions about governmental policies regarding menstrual leave. Conclusions: Further actions should be: 1. to build a supportive environment for menstrual care in the workplace, 2. to adjust management style in the workplace, 3. to make menstrual leave flexible, 4. to provide lectures to help female workers take care of themselves during their menstrual periods and to include these lectures in routine occupational health and safety courses, 5. to train nurses in the factories to care for menstrual discomfort, 6. to collecting data related to the relationship between menstrual health and employment.起始頁-結束頁：436-450資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0314篇名：職場經期健康與生理假實施初探作者：蔡慈儀期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：451-451資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0415篇名：職場經期健康與生理假實施初探作者：張<U+73CF>;陳芬苓;張菊惠;徐儆暉期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：452-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0516篇名：社經地位與健康路徑關係之性別差異並列篇名：Gender Differences in a pathway Linking Socioeconomic Status and Health作者：李妙純(Miaw-Chwen Lee);張華庭(Hua-Ting Chang)關鍵字：性別不平等;自覺健康;健康不均;路徑分析;gender inequality;self-reported health;health inequality;path analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：為瞭解性別之健康差異，本文以路徑分析探討性別如何經由社經地位影響性別之健康差異。方法：本研究以「2005年國民健康訪問調查」12-64歲個人問春為資料，以台灣版SF-36自覺健康狀態為健康指標。結果：當調整年齡、社經地位、健康行為、環境風險因子及飲食多樣性後，男性健康皆比女性佳。性別透過社經地位或再由社經地位影響健康行為、環境風險因子及飲食多樣性等間接影響健康；若未考慮間接效果，將低估性別之健康差異。對大部分的健康指標而言，社經地位對女性健康的直接效果比男性小；社經地位透過環境風險因子對女性健康的間接效果較大，男性則為飲食多樣性；社經地位透過健康行為對女性健康的效果相當小，男性則不然。結論：性別為影響健康之重要因素，但也與社經地位相關，並透過其他因素，特別是健康行為、環境風險因子及飲食多樣性而影響兩性健康差異。在社會資源有限及性別主流化趨勢下，應該針對兩性之特異性提出有效政策，以提升整體健康並改善性別之健康差異。英文摘要：This study examined the influence of socioeconomic status on gender disparities in health by using a path analysis. Methods: Data came from the 2005 National Health Interview Survey in Taiwan, which contains data about 18099 non-institutionalized residents aged 12-64. Health was measured with the Short-form 36 health status, Taiwan version. Results: When other factors were controlled, women's health was worse than men's. The direct effect of gender on health contributed the most to the gender disparity. The indirect effect of gender on health (through its effect on socioeconomic status) was positive and significant. For men, higher socioeconomic status and more health-damaging behavior had negative effects on health. If we neglect the indirect effect, the gender disparities in health were under-estimated. For separate samples of women and men, the direct effect of socioeconomic status on health was smaller for women than for men. Most of the indirect effect of socioeconomic status on health was through environmental risk factors for women, but through food varieties for men. These indirect effects of health-related behavior were smaller for women than for men. Conclusions: Our results confirmed that gender differences in health are potentially moderated by socio-economic status through variables such as health-related behavior, environmental risks and food varieties. Understanding the gender differences in health is helpful for policy-makers in order to devise gender-equality in social policy for the improvement of health of both men and women and to address the gender disparity in health.起始頁-結束頁：453-467資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0617篇名：鄰里層次社會資本與個人層次特質對嚼檳榔行為之多層次分析並列篇名：A Multilevel Analysis of neighborhood-level Social Capital and individual-level Characteristics in Relation to Betel Quid Chewing Behavior in Taiwan作者：張芳華(Fang-Hua Jhang)關鍵字：台灣社會變遷調查;社會資本;嚼食檳榔;多層次分析;Taiwan Social Change Survey TSCS;social capital;betel quid chewing;multilevel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的在了解2000年至2005年檳榔嚼食率變化，並分析探討兩年度鄰里層次社會資本與個人層次特徵對嚼檳榔行為的影響。方法：運用「台灣社會變遷調查」20歲以上資料，有效樣本分別為1,774與1,995人，村里數分別為87與88個，以雙變項分析、比例Z檢定與多層次邏輯迴歸來分析資料。結果：檳榔嚼食率在5年間未顯著下降，整體嚼食率仍在9%上下，男性檳榔嚼食率更達15%以上。以多層次邏輯迴歸分析發現鄰里層次社會資本持續發揮影響力，在兩個年度社會互動與嚼食檳榔風險皆顯著相關(OR=1.60, 95%CI: 1.01-2.54; OR=2.50, 95%CI: 1.16-5.39)。性別、年齡、教育程度、吸菸與喝酒行為等個人層次變項對嚼檳榔行為亦為影響因素。結論：嚼食檳榔不僅與個人特質有關，也與社會資本有關。在社會互動脈絡下，檳榔成為與他人建立某種關係的媒介物，而非被視為致癌物。建議除應在鄰里間加強檳榔危害宣導外，培養國人健康社交活動的認知也是有效對策，以弱化檳榔在文化與社會互動上的角色。英文摘要：The aims of this study were to compare the rates of betel quid chewing between 2000 and 2005, and to explore the effects of neighborhood-level social capital and individual-level characteristics on betel quid chewing behavior over that time period. Methods: Nationally representative data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey were obtained from 1774 respondents in 87 neighborhoods in 2000 and 1995 respondents in 88 neighborhoods in 2005. Bivariate analysis, two-sample tests for proportions, and multilevel logistic regression were used to analyze the data. Results: The rates of betel quid chewing were not significantly reduced in 5 years. Between 2000 and 2005, the rate of overall chewing was about 9%, and, for men, it was over 15%. In multilevel logistic regression, neighborhood-level social capital's influence on the risk of betel quid chewing was durable. This study demonstrated that the risk of betel quid chewing was significantly related to social interaction in 2000 and in 2005 (OR=1.60, 95%CI: 1.01-2.54; OR=2.50, 95%CI: 1.16-5.39). Individual-level characteristics associated with betel quid chewing were gender, age, education, and smoking and drinking behavior. Conclusions: Betel quid chewing was associated not only with individual characteristics but also with social capital. In the context of social interactions, betel quid was treated as a medium for establishing relationships with others instead of as a carcinogen. The results suggest that educating the public about the dangers of betel quid in neighborhoods and developing healthy cognitions about social interactions are effective strategies to weaken the role of betel quid.起始頁-結束頁：468-480資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0718篇名：以類神經網路及分類迴歸樹輔助肝癌病患預測存活情形並列篇名：Prediction of Survival in Patients with Liver Cancer Using Artificial Neural Networks and Classification and Regression Trees作者：陳正美(Cheng-Mei Chen);徐建業(Chien-Yeh Hsu);邱泓文(Hung-Wen Chiu);白其卉(Chyi-Huey Bai);吳柏動(Po-Husn Wu)關鍵字：肝癌;類神經網路;分類迴歸樹;預測模型;Liver Cancer;Artificial Neural Networks;Classification and Regression Trees;Prediction Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：This study created a survival prediction model for liver cancer using data mining algorithms. Methods: The data were collected from the cancer registry of a medical center in Northern Taiwan between 2004 and 2008. A total of 227 patients were newly diagnosed with liver cancer during this time. Following a literature review, expert consultation, and collection of patients' data, nine variables pertaining to liver cancer survival rates were analyzed using t-tests and chi-square tests. Six variables were significant. An artificial neural network (ANN) and a classification and regression tree (CART) algorithm were adopted as prediction models. The models were tested in three conditions: one variable (clinical stage alone), six significant variables, and all nine variables (significant and non-significant). Five-year survival was the output prediction. Results: The ANN model with nine input variables was a superior predictor of survival (p＜0.001). The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) was 0.843, and 0.78, 0.76, and 0.80 for accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity respectively. Conclusions: An artificial neural network was more accurate than a CART system in predicting liver cancer survival. In the future, we suggest developing a computer system using the nine input variables in the ANN prediction model to predict liver cancer survival. The system would use an ANN algorithm to automatically calculate the prediction result and assist patients in understanding their potential treatment outcomes and survival.英文摘要：This study created a survival prediction model for liver cancer using data mining algorithms. Methods: The data were collected from the cancer registry of a medical center in Northern Taiwan between 2004 and 2008. A total of 227 patients were newly diagnosed with liver cancer during this time. Following a literature review, expert consultation, and collection of patients' data, nine variables pertaining to liver cancer survival rates were analyzed using t-tests and chi-square tests. Six variables were significant. An artificial neural network (ANN) and a classification and regression tree (CART) algorithm were adopted as prediction models. The models were tested in three conditions: one variable (clinical stage alone), six significant variables, and all nine variables (significant and non-significant). Five-year survival was the output prediction. Results: The ANN model with nine input variables was a superior predictor of survival (p＜0.001). The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) was 0.843, and 0.78, 0.76, and 0.80 for accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity respectively. Conclusions: An artificial neural network was more accurate than a CART system in predicting liver cancer survival. In the future, we suggest developing a computer system using the nine input variables in the ANN prediction model to predict liver cancer survival. The system would use an ANN algorithm to automatically calculate the prediction result and assist patients in understanding their potential treatment outcomes and survival.起始頁-結束頁：481-493資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0819篇名：Gender Differences in Occupational Stress and Health among Legal Professionals in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣司法從業人員工作壓力與健康功能之性別差異作者：蔡奉真(Feng-Jen Tsai);詹長權(Chang-Chuan Chan)關鍵字：付出回饋失衡;性別;負荷控制支持;司法從業人員;工作壓力;ERI;gender;JCQ;legal professional;occupational stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：了解工作壓力及健康功能之性別差異，及「負荷－控制－支持」與「付出－回饋失衡」兩種不同工作壓力模型，對於男性及女性司法從業人員造成之不良健康功能影響。方法：本橫斷性研究之樣本係來自6個地方法院，1個高等法院，3個地方檢察署及26個法律事務所之193位男性及170位女性司法從業人員。以中文版之「負荷控制支持量表」及「付出回饋失衡量表」測量工作壓力，以簡式「生活品質量表」測量健康功能，並以復迴歸統計方式在控制年齡、婚姻狀況、工作內容、年資、每日工作時數後，分析女性對於男性在不良健康功能之勝算比，及個別性別之工作壓力模型與不良健康功能間之關連性。結果：男性司法從業人員回報顯著較女性司法從業人員為高之工作控制(70.54 vs. 66.46)與工作滿意度(59.99 vs. 57.45)。女性回報顯著低於男性之身體功能(90.23 vs. 93.80)、身體疼動(72.73 vs. 77.68)、社會功能(66.25 vs. 72.85)及心理健康(58.02 vs. 62.41)。工作壓力與不良健康關係間之關連性有顯著之性別差異。我們發現男性的不良健康功能與工作負荷較顯著相關，而付出回饋失衡與男女性之不良健康功能影響則較為平等。結論：性別差異存在於司法從業人員之工作壓力、健康功能及不同工作壓力模型與不良健康狀態之關聯性強度上。英文摘要：This study sought to determine gender differences in occupational stress and health and to compare the strength of association between two occupational stress models, demand-control-support (DCS) and effort-reward imbalance (ERI), on poor health among male and female legal professionals. Methods: This cross-sectional study included 193 male and 170 female legal professionals from 6 district courts, 1 appeals court, 3 District Procurators Offices and 26 law firms. The Chinese versions of Karasek job content questionnaire (C-JCQ) and Siegrist effort-reward imbalance questionnaire (C-ERI) were used to evaluate occupational stress, and the International Quality of Life Assessment Short Form-36 (IQOLA SF-36) questionnaire to evaluate health. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to calculate the odds ratio of poor health among female legal professionals versus male legal professionals, and the gender-specific association between DCS and ERI models and poor health adjusted for age, marital status, job content, years of work experience, and working hours per day. Results: Male legal professionals scored significantly higher on job control (70.54 vs. 66.46) and job satisfaction (59.99 vs. 57.45) than did female legal professionals. Females scored significantly lower on physical function (90.23 vs. 93.80), bodily pain (72.73 vs. 77.68), social function (66.25 vs. 72.85) and mental health (58.02 vs. 62.41) than did males. There was a significant gender difference in the association between occupational stress and poor health. We found that men’s poor health was more significantly related to job strain while effort-reward imbalance was associated equally with poor health in both males and females. Conclusions: Gender differences exist in occupational stress, health and the strength of association between occupational stress models and poor health among legal professionals in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：494-504資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-0920篇名：非緊急急診病人特性及其相關因素探討並列篇名：Non-urgent Emergency Department Use by Patients in a Regional Hospital作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);蔡哲宏(Jeffrey Che-Hung Tsai);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen)關鍵字：急診;非緊急急診;病人特性;加拿大檢傷分類系統;emergency department;non-urgent emergency department visits;patient characteristics;Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷5期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究以加拿大檢傷分類系統(CTAS)探討非緊急急診比率並探討其影響因子。方法：本研究以中台灣某區域教學醫院急診病人為研究對象，共完成840位急診病人的訪視及病歷相關資料的檢視，最後完整收集758位急診病人資料，作為統計分析之用。本研究將CTAS第四級第五級病人定義為本研究之非緊急急診病人，再以邏輯斯複迴歸計算非緊急急診發生因子的危險對比值與95%信賴區間。結果：非緊急急診比率達51.97%，就診日、急診病人認為病情是否需要急診、檢傷人員判定病人疼痛程度及病人期望多快接受看診是非緊急急診發生的顯著因子。結論：衛生主管機關應持續加強民眾對急診的認識，積極宣導急診的正確使用時機，減少急診醫療資源的浪費；推動各項醫療服務改革政策時，必須跳脫單一醫療服務的思維，鼓勵不同層級醫療照護體系的合作，保障民眾的就醫可近性與醫療服務的適當性與品質。英文摘要：This study determined the percentage of non-urgent emergency department (ED) patients and the factors influencing their visits by using the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS). Methods: During the study period, 840 patients presenting at a central Taiwan regional hospital ED were seen by the triage nurses and classified according to the CTAS. Data from 758 patients were analyzed. Non-urgent patients were defined as those who were classified CTAS IV and V. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to identify factors associated with non-urgent ED visits. Results: Of these 758 visits, an estimated 51.97% were non-urgent. Significant factors associated with non-urgent ED patients were: visit days, patients perceptions about the emergency nature of the visit, pain level assigned by the triage nurses, and patient expected waiting time to be seen by a physician. Conclusions: Health administrators should persist in trying to educate people as to how to use ED services properly. In addition, policy makers need to understand that there is an inter-categorical relationship between ED use and other medical services; therefore, development of an integrated delivery system is encouraged along with implementation of policies to improve access to comprehensive, high quality health care services.起始頁-結束頁：505-516資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-05-1001篇名：過勞職災的認定爭議與政策因應：日本經驗對台灣的啟示並列篇名：Disputes and Policy Responses Concerning the Hazards of Overwork and Workers' Compensation: Experiences in Japan and Their Implications for Taiwan作者：鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng);吳宣蓓(Shiuan-Be Wu);翁裕峰(Yu-Feng Wong)關鍵字：工作壓力;職業傷病;職災補償制度;預防;日本;job stress;occupational injuries and diseases;worker's compensation;prevention;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣近年來疑似工作過度而猝死的事件頻傳，政府為因應此職災認定爭議，陸續參考日本規範，頒布修訂相關認定指引。本研究採文獻回顧與政府統計分析，旨在回顧日本過勞職災認定爭議的發展歷程，描述歷年職災認定狀況，最後探討日本對於過勞問題所採的預防策略。我們建議，台灣應參考日本經驗，檢討當前職災認定標準與程序；針對工時規範與工時過長工作者的健康管理，應修改相關法規，使雇主與醫師能落實預防責任；政府並應整理並公布職災認定相關統計資料，以利外部監督。我們亦應留意日本過勞政策之缺失，以期建立更好的規範。英文摘要：In Taiwan, cases of sudden death linked to overwork are a growing concern. The government has adopted several Japanese regulations and guidelines which concern the recognition of and compensation for work-related injuries and diseases that are due to overwork. Based on the literature and analyses of official statistics from the worker's compensation system in Japan, we examined the development of policies concerning the recognition and prevention of overwork hazards in Japan. Based on this review, we suggest that Taiwan should reduce the barriers for workers' compensation by revising the criteria for the recognition of work-related diseases. Regulations concerning working hours and the health management of workers with prolonged working hours should also be improved. In addition, statistics and the related content of workers' claims for compensation should be made public. Taiwan should also be aware of and avoid the limitations of the Japanese approach.起始頁-結束頁：301-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-012篇名：台灣阿茲海默症病人確診前的門診醫療利用並列篇名：The Utilization of Ambulatory Care Services before the Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease in Taiwan作者：蔡維河(Wer-Her Tsai);侯素秋(Shu-Chu Hou);黎家銘(Chia-Ming Li);楊清泉(Ching-Chyune Yang)關鍵字：阿茲海默症;門診醫療利用;病例對照研究;全民健保研究資料庫;Alzheimer's disease;ambulatory care utilization;case-control study;National health insurance reseach database期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討台灣阿茲海默症病人確診前3年內的門診醫療利用，及與非阿茲海默症病患間是否存在顯著差異。方法：採用1996至2007年國家衛生研究院2005年全民健康保險承保抽樣歸人檔資料，採用隨機對照研究，篩選用藥明細首次出現阿茲海默症用藥（乙醯膽鹼<U+9176>抑制劑與NMDA受體拮抗劑）之確診病人共845人為病例組，另經性別、年齡、查爾森共病指數等匹配隨機選取1,677人為對照組，比較確診前三年兩組個案同期門診醫療利用的差異。結果：阿茲海默症病人確診前的門診醫療利用明顯高於對照組。阿茲海默症病人確診前1年的總門診次數及神經精神科門診次數，診察費、藥費、處置費、及總費用等4項費用，均較對照組高，且均達統計顯著差異水準。其中，阿茲海默症病人確診前3年期間的藥費，均顯著較對照組為高。結論：台灣阿茲海默病人確診前門診醫療利用，高於非阿茲海默症個案。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to assess if the rate of ambulatory care utilization within three years before the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease was significantly different from that of non-Alzheimer's patients. Methods: The data were drawn from the National Health Insurance Research Database from 1996 to 2007. A case-control design was employed. A total of 845 patients treated with Alzheimer's disease medications (cholinesterase inhibitors and NMDA receptor antagonists) were the case group. Another 1,677 patients who were randomly matched by age, sex, and Charlson index served as the control group. Ambulatory care utilization by the case group within three consecutive years before diagnosis was explored and compared to that of the control group. Results: Alzheimer's disease patients used significantly more ambulatory care services (neurology and psychiatry clinics, diagnostic fees, drug fees, treatment fees) than did the control group within the first year before diagnosis. Drug fees within the three consecutive years before diagnosis were significantly higher than those of the control group. Conclusions: Patients with Alzheimer's disease patients used significantly more ambulatory care services than did non-Alzheimer's patients before that diagnosis was made.起始頁-結束頁：316-325資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-023篇名：部分負擔調整對醫療利用的衝擊：以2005年政策調整為例並列篇名：How Did the Increase in NHI Copayments in 2005 Affect the Use of Health Care?作者：許績天(Ji-Tian Sheu);韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han);連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien);羅光達(Kuang-Ta Lo)關鍵字：部分負擔;醫療利用;容量限制;payment;health care utilization;capacity constraints期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本文探討2005年健保局調高部分負擔對民眾醫療利用和就醫選擇影響。方法：本文使用2005年健保百萬歸人檔中的西醫門診資料來分析政策效果。由於2005年部分負擔調高僅侷限於醫院，政策效果理應依民眾所屬鄉鎮使用診所高低而有差別。本文因而將病患經常就醫鄉鎮按平均診所就醫比例區分三組：低於65%（分組Ⅰ），65%-75%（分組Ⅱ），高於75%（分組Ⅲ），採障礙模型(Hurdle model)估計部分負擔調高後對各組就醫機率與次數影響。結果：部分負擔調整顯著減少就醫機率及門診次數。整體而言，調漲後半年門診次數減少0.34次（或6.1%），其中醫院次數為0.07次，高層級醫院為0.01次。更重要的是，各分組間政策效果存在相當差異。處於使用醫院最高比例鄉鎮（分組Ⅰ）民眾，降低醫院（和高層級醫院）利用；相反的，處於使用醫院比例最低鄉鎮（分組Ⅲ）民眾，增加醫院（和高層級醫院）利用。這估計結果即使將樣本時間延長至政策前後一年仍相同。結論：部分負擔調高的確減少就診次數，降低民眾醫療利用。另外，政策效果會依民眾經常就醫地點而有顯著差異。一個可能解釋為醫院服務的容量限制(capacity constraint)。因醫院存在容量限制，使得鄰近醫院的分組Ⅰ民眾較易接受醫院服務，但是當部分負擔調漲使得分組Ⅰ民眾降低醫院就醫，此時就醫距離較遠鄉鎮民眾（分組Ⅲ）填補原先醫院門診空缺，使得分組Ⅲ民眾醫院利用反而在部分負擔調高後有所增加。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of the increase in NHI copayments in 2005 on the choice and use of health care. Methods: We analyzed the outpatient utilization of one million NHI enrollees between 2004 and 2006. Because the policy increased only the copayment for hospital visits, it was plausible to expect that the effect would be smaller for individuals residing or working in towns with a lower propensity for visiting hospitals. Therefore, based on the average percentage of clinical care in the town of residence, the sample was separated into three groups: less than 65% (group Ⅰ), between 65 and 75% (groupⅡ), and more than 75% (group Ⅲ). We then used the Hurdle regression model to examine the effect of the new policy on the probability of health care utilization, and the number of outpatient visits for each group. Results: Our results showed that the increase in copayment significantly reduced the probability and the number of outpatient visits. We estimated that outpatient use six months after the policy change decreased by 0.34 visits (or 6.1%), of which 0.07 were visits to hospitals, and 0.01 were visits to regional hospitals or above. More importantly, the effect differed substantially across groups. Individuals residing or working in towns with a higher propensity to visit hospitals (group Ⅰ) reduced their visits to hospitals after the policy change. On the other hand, individuals residing or working in towns with a lower chance of visiting hospitals (group 3) increased their visits. These findings were robust even after extending the sample period from six to 12 months. Conclusions: Our results confirmed that a copayment increase in 2005 reduced the use of outpatient services. Nonetheless, the effect differed substantially across groups with various propensities to make hospital visits. One explanation might be that there is a capacity constraint that limits outpatient services offered by hospitals. While individuals residing or working in towns near hospitals reduced their hospital visits due to the price hike, those residing or working in more distant towns increased their hospital visits.起始頁-結束頁：326-336資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-034篇名：財務誘因與台灣區域醫院醫師服務績效之跨層次分析並列篇名：A Multievel Analysis of Financial Incentives and Physician Performance in Taiwan's Regional Hospitals作者：汪秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Wang);羅永欽(Joon-Khim Loh);洪純隆(Shen-Long Howng)關鍵字：服務績效;成果基礎誘因;系絡效果;層級線性模式;service performance;outcome-based incentive;contexual effect;hierarchical linear modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：Objectives: Previous studies of performance have focused on either organizational or individual-level analysis. Multilevel theory has been used to explore the effect of the method of compensation on the quality and quantity of individual physician services after hospital global budgeting (HGB) was implemented in Taiwan. Methods: We used a sample of convenience of 33 regional hospitals that participated in HGB and surveyed managers and physicians with structured questionnaires in 2008. A total of 210 valid questionnaires from 24 hospitals were returned. We conducted hierarchical linear modeling analyses and demonstrated that both individual-level and organizational-level factors were associated with physician performance. Results: The effect of the variable compensation level on quality of physicians' service, productivity in the outpatient department (OPD) and in the inpatient department (IPD) was not significant (0.250, 0.171, 0.253, all p＞.05). The ratio of beds to physicians negatively affected individual quality (-0.044, p＜.01) while positively influencing productivity in and IPD (0.040, p＜.05). The OPD production of physicians in public or non-profit hospitals was higher than those in private ones (43.7%, 79.1%). Physician quality and IPD production in northern hospitals was higher than that in the southern area (18.3%, 45.1%). Tenure was positively related to physicians’ productivity (0.846, p＜.001; 0.523, p＜.05). The OPD of internists was higher than that of 27.0% of surgeons. Overall, the individual-level factors explained 19.96%, 20.74%, 18.86% of within-hospital variance on performance and hospital-level factors explained 54.13%, 56.93%, 36.26% of between-hospital variance. Conclusions: Variable compensation did not stimulate physicians to reduce quality or productivity. Hospital features and physician performance were co-determinant, thus weakening the contextual effect of financial compensation.英文摘要：Objectives: Previous studies of performance have focused on either organizational or individual-level analysis. Multilevel theory has been used to explore the effect of the method of compensation on the quality and quantity of individual physician services after hospital global budgeting (HGB) was implemented in Taiwan. Methods: We used a sample of convenience of 33 regional hospitals that participated in HGB and surveyed managers and physicians with structured questionnaires in 2008. A total of 210 valid questionnaires from 24 hospitals were returned. We conducted hierarchical linear modeling analyses and demonstrated that both individual-level and organizational-level factors were associated with physician performance. Results: The effect of the variable compensation level on quality of physicians' service, productivity in the outpatient department (OPD) and in the inpatient department (IPD) was not significant (0.250, 0.171, 0.253, all p＞.05). The ratio of beds to physicians negatively affected individual quality (-0.044, p＜.01) while positively influencing productivity in and IPD (0.040, p＜.05). The OPD production of physicians in public or non-profit hospitals was higher than those in private ones (43.7%, 79.1%). Physician quality and IPD production in northern hospitals was higher than that in the southern area (18.3%, 45.1%). Tenure was positively related to physicians’ productivity (0.846, p＜.001; 0.523, p＜.05). The OPD of internists was higher than that of 27.0% of surgeons. Overall, the individual-level factors explained 19.96%, 20.74%, 18.86% of within-hospital variance on performance and hospital-level factors explained 54.13%, 56.93%, 36.26% of between-hospital variance. Conclusions: Variable compensation did not stimulate physicians to reduce quality or productivity. Hospital features and physician performance were co-determinant, thus weakening the contextual effect of financial compensation.起始頁-結束頁：337-346資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-045篇名：利用地區差異與人口學特徵評估全民健保資料庫人口居住地變項之推估原則並列篇名：Using Regional Differences and Demographic Characteristics to Evaluate the Principles of Estimation of the Residence of the Population in National Health Insurance Research Databases (NHIRD)作者：林民浩(Min-Hau Lin);楊安琪(Ann-Chi Yang);溫在弘(Tzai-Hung Wen)關鍵字：居住地變項;全民健保資料庫;地理資訊系統;人口估計;健康服務研究;Place-of-Residence;National Health Insurance Research Databases NHIRD;Geographic Information Systems GIS;Population Distribution;Health Service Research期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：瞭解地理區位差異在公共衛生研究扮演重要的角色，但在全民健保資料庫中，並不包含居住地資訊，侷限探索地理與健康關連的可行性。本研究之目的在於提出估計居住地變項的原則及其適用性。方法：利用2005年承保抽樣歸人檔，依不同被保險人特質及就醫地，建立三種不同的居住地估計方法，並與內政部各鄉鎮市區現住人口數為基準，比較其相關係數，再以肺癌與肝癌就醫人數的鄉鎮分佈進行驗證。結果：以被保險人投保地、呼吸道感染門診就醫地、被保險人身分、投保類別與被保險人年齡相互搭配之居住地估計方法，在不同都市化程度的鄉鎮與不同年齡層都有較佳的表現。僅以投保地為居住地或僅以呼吸道感染就醫地為居住地的估計方法，則僅適用於特定鄉鎮市區與特定年齡層人口。結論：本研究比較不同都市化程度與年齡結構的分層結果，確認居住地估計方法的可行性，並瞭解不同居住地估計方法的適用性。本研究結果可提供研究者選擇適合之居住地估計原則。英文摘要：Objectives: Understanding the geographic patterns and regional differences in health status plays an important role in public health research; however, the place-of-residence (township level) of an insured is not available in National Health Insurance Research Databases (NHIRD). The objective of this study was to propose principles for estimating the place-of-residence (township level) in NHIRD. Methods: Based on demographic characteristics, insurance classification, location of hospital visit, and insurance registration of the insured, this study compared three methods of estimating the place-of-residence (township level) from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database of NHIRD in 2005. Official statistics of the usual resident population in each township from the Department of the Interior were used as reference data for comparisons among the three methods. The study further verified these methods by comparing the estimated numbers and official statistics for the medical treatment of lung and liver cancer patients in 2005. Results: This study found that the method which combined insurance classification, location of hospital visit, and insurance registration provided an optimal estimate of place-of-residence in each area by different levels of urbanization and age-group. Consideration of either location of hospital visit or insurance registration may be appropriate for specific townships and age groups. Conclusions: This study demonstrated the feasibility of estimating place-of-residence in NHIRD and the applicability of these proposed methods.起始頁-結束頁：347-361資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-056篇名：血液透析之末期腎病併多重器官衰竭之病人，退出血液透析的影響因素探討－質性比較分析法並列篇名：What Makes Doctors Suggest Withholding Hemodialysis Treatment for Patients with end-stage Renal Disease and Multiple Organ Failure? A Qualitative Comparative Analysis作者：張必正(Bih-Jeng Chang);陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);吳寬墩(Kwan-Dun Wu)關鍵字：QCA研究;質性研究;撤除透析;末期腎病;末期照護;qualitative comparative analysis;qualitative research;withhold hemodialysis;End-Stage renal disease;End-of-Life care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：2003年起，台灣末期腎病的發生率與盛行率皆為世界第一。全民健保施行後，有更多重症病人接受洗腎，即使病情不樂觀，仍不願放棄治療。本研究希望了解醫師建議病人退出透析的原因，及當醫師建議退出透析後，病人／家屬同意與否的因素。方法：8位腎臟科與急重症專科醫師提供末期腎病個案，並接受訪談。共蒐集31例。利用QCA(Qualitative Comparative Analysis)研究法進行質性資料分析。結果：『無法積極治療』是醫師建議退出透析最重要的必要條件。當『家人對治療的信念不一致』，即使醫師建議退出，家屬仍會拒絕。『年齡不大且透析時間長』是另一個意見不同的原因。結論：如果家屬間對治療的信念一致，而且醫師判定為「病患年齡大、情緒不佳、且預後不佳」時，醫師會建議退出透析，家屬多能接受。當家屬間對治療的信念不一致，醫師實需強化醫病溝通，建議退出透析，易引起爭議，不易提升末期照護品質。英文摘要：Objectives: The incidence and prevalence of End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) in Taiwan have ranked first in the world since 2003. Under National Health Insurance, more ESRD patients with severe multiple organ failure undergo hemodialysis (HD) without regard to the quality of end-of-life. The purposes of this study were: first, to examine the conditions for which doctors would suggest that their patients consider withholding HD; second, to examine the conditions for which doctors had suggested that their patients consider withholding HD but the patients' families declined. Methods: Eight nephrologists and ICU specialists were asked to provide detailed information about their ESRD patients without revealing their names or other identifying data. Thirty-one clinical cases were collected. The Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) method was employed to analyze the qualitative data. Results: The crucial factor associated with a doctor's suggestion to withhold HD was that the treatment would not be effective. When there were family disputes, the families would decline doctors' suggestions to withhold HD. Young age with a long duration of dialysis was another factor in disagreement. Conclusions: When a patient suffered from emotional problems, was in critical condition, was aged and there were no family disputes, then patients and doctors could agree on withholding HD for a better quality end-of-life. Given the same conditions, yet with family disputes, shared decision-making is recommended to reach consensus and preserve a better quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：362-371資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-067篇名：台灣地區已婚婦女非計畫懷孕情形及其相關因素分析並列篇名：Factors Associated with Unplanned Pregnancy among Married Women in Taiwan作者：張德安(Te-An Chang);林宇旋(Yu-Hsuan Lin);洪百薰(Baai-Shyun Hurng);施靜儀(Ching-Yi Shih);吳秀英(Shiow-Ing Wu);邱淑媞(Shu-Ti Chiou)關鍵字：生育力調查;非計畫懷孕;人工流產;婦女健康;reproductive survey;unplanned pregnancy;induced abortion;maternal health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本文旨在探討台灣育齡已婚人口非計畫懷孕現況、相關因素與婦女懷孕結果。方法：以2008年「第十次家庭與生育力調查」完訪之2,603名20至49歲已婚婦女為對象，比較不同社會人口學背景特徵已婚婦女之非計畫懷孕經驗，探討其與個人生育經驗、知識及對婚姻態度之相關，並分析比較以人工流產終止懷孕之百分比在計畫懷孕與非計畫懷孕婦女之差異。結果：77.2%已婚婦女曾有非計畫懷孕經驗，其中近70.0%曾重複非計畫懷孕。年紀較輕、教育程度越低、自述經濟狀況不佳、或活產數越多之已婚婦女，非計畫懷孕之風險明顯較高。非計畫懷孕婦女以人工流產終止懷孕之百分比，顯著高於計畫懷孕婦女。結論：我國育齡已婚人口非計畫懷孕百分比偏高，且因社會人口學特性不同而呈現明顯差異，為降低非計畫懷孕之不良影響，應針對高風險族群提供相關宣導及介入服務。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to examine the proportion of unplanned pregnancies among married couples in Taiwan, their association with potential risk factors, and the results of those pregnancies. Methods: Data from the 2008 Women and Fertility Survey of a national representative sample of 2,603 married women aged 20-49 were analyzed. We compared the proportion of unplanned pregnancies among subgroups characterized by socio-demographic factors, experience of child-bearing, and their knowledge about and attitude toward marriage. The difference in induced abortion rates between women with planned and unplanned pregnancies was also examined. Results: A total of 77.2% of the married women had ever had an unplanned pregnancy. Near 70% of those had repeated unplanned pregnancies. Younger age, lower educational attainment, poor self-rated economic status, and more live births were significantly associated with unplanned pregnancies. The induced abortion rates were higher among women with unplanned pregnancies than among women who planned pregnancy. Conclusions: The proportion of unplanned pregnancies among married couples in Taiwan was high. Socio-demographic factors were significant predictors of unplanned pregnancy. The provision of health education and intervention services that focus on high-risk groups is crucial in order to reduce the adverse outcomes of an unplanned pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：372-387資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-078篇名：病人安全氣候、文化研究中測量等值性問題的檢視：本質、影響、檢測程序與補救並列篇名：Measurement Equivalence/Invariance in the Climate and Culture of Patient Safety Research: Its Nature, Effects, Test Procedures, and Remedies作者：汪秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Wang);關皚麗(Aij-Lie Kwan);洪純隆(Shen-Long Howng)關鍵字：測量等值;病人安全態度;安全氣候;安全文化;measurement equivalence/invariance;patient safety attitude;safety climate;safety culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：簡述測量等值性(Measurement Equivalence/Invariance; ME/I)的本質、影響及檢測程序，檢視病安態度研究對該議題重視的程度並討論ME/I某些疑慮。方法：搜尋PubMed電子資料庫，2000年1月至2010年4月英文期刊論文，檢索條件以”Patient Safety Attitude” or ”Safety Culture” or ”Safety Climate” in Keyword，同時以”HealthCare” or ”Hospital” in Title/Abstrat，以及”Safety Instrument” in Text，針對問卷調查為主的量性研究分析工具心理計量特徵，分析層次以及如何利用測量作比較。結果：41篇文獻內容分析顯示，效度衡鑑統計技術多以信度估計、相關分析、迴歸分析、因素分析、多特質多方法，以T-test，ANOVA，MANOVA，Chi-square test比較跨群差異，少有以ME/I檢視病安氣候因素結構在跨樣本或跨情境等值程度，僅報導適配度評定假設模型與觀測資料的共變異矩陣之接近程度。本文提出ME/I實作、未能通過ME/I檢定的原因及補救方法。結論：ME/I攸關著病安氣候構念的概化以及預測氣候是否改變，其重要性不容忽視，期以本文與國內學者共同關注這些議題的後續發展。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to articulate what measurement equivalence/invariance (ME/I) is, determine its impact, describe the procedural techniques in conducting ME/I, review the health-care literature on the climate and culture of patient safety, and discuss questions about ME/I testing. Methods: We looked at English language journal articles published between Jan 2000 and April 2010 by searching PubMed (free Medline) electronic databases using the keywords ”patient safety attitude” or ”safety climate” or ”safety culture”, simultaneously with the terms ”health care” or ”hospital” in title/abstracts, and ”safety instruments” in text. Our focus was on quantitative empirical studies adopting questionnaire-survey methods. A total of 41 articles were reviewed to analyze the psychometric properties of instruments, the level of analysis and the use of this measure for comparisons. Results: We found that most studies demonstrated reliability and validity of the constructs using the statistical methods of reliability estimation, correlation, regression, exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and multitrait-multimethod matrices, and tested group differences by t-tests, ANOVA or MANOVA. Evaluations of invariant factor structure across populations or contexts by applying ME/I testing were seldom addressed. The majority of these studies did not address the ME/I issue. We suggest that some analytical forms of ME/I testing, the triggers for not supporting ME/I, and the remedies for patient safety require further research. Conclusions: There are some questions about the sensitivity of ME/I analytical procedures and the susceptibility of these procedures to contextual influences.起始頁-結束頁：388-407資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-04-089篇名：健全公衛安全網，我們需要公共衛生師∼為【公共衛生師法】催生作者：李玉春期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：201-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0110篇名：三歲幼兒居家安全與事故傷害相關性研究並列篇名：A Study of the Association between Household Safety and Injury among three-year-old Children in Taiwan作者：蔡益堅(Yih-Jian Tsai);吳秀英(Show-Ing Wu);林宇旋(Yu-Hsuan Lin);陳瑞菊(Rachel Chen);吳淑惠(Shu-Hui Wu)關鍵字：幼兒;居家安全;事故傷害;跌傷;台灣出生世代研究;children;household safety;injury;fall injury;TBCS Taiwan Birth Cohort Study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討三歲幼兒居家環境安全與事故傷害的相關性。方法：分析2008年嬰幼兒健康照護需求調查（台灣出生世代研究第三波調查）資料檔，先檢視幼兒過去一年各種事故傷害之盛行率，及事故傷害與幼兒及其照顧者特性、幼兒居家安全簡要檢核表各個項目及居家安全檢核分數（分為低、中、高風險組）的相關性。再使用多變項邏輯迴歸模式，控制幼兒及其照顧者特性，以檢視居家安全檢核分數與事故傷害之相關性。結果：在完訪的19,910位三歲幼兒家長當中，約13.08%（2,653人）自述在過去一年其幼兒曾因事故傷害而就醫；前五項事故傷害盛行率高低排序為：跌傷(8.03%)、物體或人撞擊(1.33%)、尖利物刺割傷(1.06%)、燒燙傷(1.00%)及器物夾壓(0.77%)。19,251人進入後續分析，雙變項分析發現：事故傷害盛行率男童顯著高於女童；白天為幼托園或保母且晚上為父母親照顧者，高於全天皆由父母親照顧者，以及白天為（外）祖父母，晚上為父母親照顧者。事故傷害盛行率隨居家安全檢核分數之增加而升高。以多變項邏輯迴歸控制幼兒性別及現住地；母親年齡、教育程度、過去一年工作情形及競爭照護需求；幼兒主要照顧者，發現：幼兒居家安全檢核分數高風險組之幼兒事故傷害及跌傷風險均為低風險組之1.5倍。結論：三歲幼兒過去一年事故傷害盛行率為13.08%，幼兒居家安全檢核分數與事故傷害風險均顯著相關，其因果關係值得後續研究。英文摘要：Objectives: This study examined the association between household safety and unintentional injury among three-year-old children in Taiwan. Methods: Data from the third wave TBCS (Taiwan Birth Cohort Study) were analyzed to examine the prevalence of unintentional injuries (e.g. falls, being hit by objects or persons, being stabbed or cut by sharp instruments), and the association between injury and each item on a household safety checklist and its summary household safety score (categorized as low, moderate, and high risk groups). The association was further investigated with multiple logistic regression after controlling for the characteristics of children and their caregivers. Results: Of the 19,910 three-year-old children studied, 13.08% received medical care due to an unintentional injury. The top five categories of injuries were falls (8.03%), being hit by objects or persons (1.33%), being stabbed or cut by sharp instruments (1.06%), burns (1.00%) and being clamped by an instrument (0.77%). Data about 19,251 of these children were analyzed further. On bivariate analysis, the prevalence of unintentional injury was higher for boys than for girls, and higher for those at kindergarten in the daytime and cared for by a parent at night than for those cared for by a parent for the whole day and those cared for by a grandparent in the daytime and by a parent at night. The prevalence of unintentional injury increased as the household safety score did. The high risk group had 1.5 times the risk of unintentional injury as did the low risk group in the multiple logistic regression model when controlled for children's gender, current address, mothers' age, education, and job in the previous year, competitive demand of caring, and type of principal caregiver. Conclusions: Over thirteen percent of three-year-old children received medical care due to unintentional injury in the past year. The household safety score was significantly associated with the risk of unintentional injury. A causal relationship is worth further study.起始頁-結束頁：207-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0211篇名：不安定僱用模式與受僱者健康之相關並列篇名：The Association between Precarious Employment and Health Status among Employees in Taiwan作者：王佳雯(Chia-Wen Wang);鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng);徐儆暉(Jin-Huei Hsu)關鍵字：不安定僱用;受僱者;健康狀況;precarious employment;employees;health status期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：此研究旨在檢視台灣受僱者不安定僱用的盛行狀況，並探討不安定僱用與工作者健康狀況之相關。方法：我們分析2007年全國性25~65歲受僱者問卷調查之資料，包括男性9,303人，女性7,165人。以問卷詢問受測者之僱用契約狀態，並將其分為「安定僱用」與「不安定僱用模式」兩類，後者包括約聘僱、臨時性、短期性、季節性契約、派遣或人力仲介公司等類別。此調查並詢問受測者自評健康狀況、工作滿意度、生病缺勤、身體各部位痠痛、疲勞等面向。結果：分析結果顯示，台灣受僱者中有21%屬不安定僱用模式；不論男、女性，不安定僱用盛行於較高年齡層、低教育程度、低職等、小公司、工時短之受僱者族群。相較於長期受僱者，不安定僱用模式之受僱者有較差的自評健康、較高的工作不滿意度、較高的生病缺勤及身體痠痛不適等問題，此外，亦有較高的疲勞指數。結論：研究結果顯示，屬不安定僱用模式之受僱者，不僅職場工作條件較差，健康狀況亦較差，乃是職場健康促進工作需要關注的族群。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the prevalence of precarious employment and its association with health status among employees in Taiwan. Methods: We analyzed data from a national survey of 9303 male and 7165 female employees aged 25~65 years in 2007. Information with regard to the types of employment was obtained by questionnaire and dichotomized into permanent employment vs. precarious employment; the latter included contract-based, temporary, short-term, seasonal, or outsourced employment. Health status was also assessed by the questionnaire. This included self-rated health, job dissatisfaction, days of absenteeism due to sickness, bodily pain, and burnout status. Results: The results showed that 21% of employees were on precarious employment. For both genders, precarious employment was more prevalent among employees who were older, had a lower level of education, were in lower grades of employment, were employed in smaller enterprises, and had shorter working hours. When compared to workers with permanent employment, precarious employees had poorer self-rated health, higher levels of job dissatisfaction, higher risk of absenteeism due to sickness, more bodily pain, and higher scores for burnout status. Conclusions: These results suggested that workers with precarious employment were more likely to be exposed to adverse work conditions and had poorer health. These issues should be targets for health promotion at the worksite.起始頁-結束頁：217-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0312篇名：台灣公私部門受僱者僱用方式和職場疲勞狀況的相關性並列篇名：Association of Employees' Types of Employment and Their Burnout Status in the Public and Private Sectors in Taiwan作者：湯家碩(Chia-Shuo Tang);葉婉榆(Wan-Yu Yeh);劉梅君(Mei-Chun Liu);蔡宗宏(Chung-Hung Tsai);徐儆暉(Jin-Huei Hsu)關鍵字：僱用方式;非典型僱用;工作壓力;疲勞;台灣;employment type;atypical employment non-standard employment;work stress;burnout;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：了解國內不同僱用方式（長期、非長期受僱）工作者的人口社會背景和工作特性差異，並探討在公、私部門中，受僱者僱用方式和疲勞程度的相關性。方法：運用勞委會2007年全國受僱者調查進行分析，樣本共17,016人，疲勞以「職場疲勞量表」中的「個人疲勞」與「工作疲勞」兩個分量表來測量。問卷也詢問人口學與工作背景、家庭照顧負荷等。結果：台灣受僱者有23.6%處於約聘、外包、人力派遣等的非長期僱用模式；在私部門中非長期受僱者比長期受僱者年齡較長，教育程度和職等較低，個人疲勞和工作疲勞指數均高於長期受僱者；在公部門中的長期、非長期受僱者年齡分佈和私部門不同，且兩者疲勞程度差異較不明顯；運用複迴歸模式將個人、工作變項納入控制後，結果仍然類似。結論：台灣私部門中非長期受僱者其工作條件比長期受僱者較為不利，並面臨較高心理壓力與職場疲勞的風險；然而公部門對彈性勞動的人力運用和私部門有相當不同的考量，僱用方式和疲勞狀況的相關性不若私部門明顯。英文摘要：Objectives: This study was designed to investigate differences in social distribution and job characteristics between non-permanent and permanent workers and the association of type of employment and burnout in the public and private sectors in Taiwan. Methods: A national survey of 17016 employees was conducted by the Council of Labor Affairs in 2007. The status of personal burnout and work-related burnout was measured by an occupational burnout inventory. Also assessed were demographic backgrounds, job characteristics and family care workloads. Results: In 2007 Taiwan, 23.6% of employees were in non-permanent employment such as contract-based, outsourced or agency workers. In the private sector, non-permanent employees were found to be older, less educated and in lower employment grades than permanent employees. Compared with permanent workers, higher personal and work burnout scores were also found among non-permanent employees in the private sector. In the public sector, the distributions of ages and employment grades of permanent and non-permanent workers were different, but there was no significant difference in burnout scores between them. Our results remained the same in multivariate regression models even after adjusting for demographics, family, and work-related variables. Conclusions: Our results showed that non-permanent employees in the private sector had worse work conditions and faced greater psychosocial stress and risks for burnout. The use of flexible labor resources might be different between the public and private sectors, so that the association between type of employment and burnout in the public sector was not as significant as it was in private sector enterprises.起始頁-結束頁：230-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0413篇名：從醫療職場工作特質探討醫院護理長與臨床護理人員之工作壓力源並列篇名：Exploring Job Stressors for Head Nurses and Clinical Nurses from the Perspective of Their Job Characteristics作者：林瑜雯(Yu-Wen Lin);莊子萱(Tzu-Hsuen Chuang);劉曦宸(His-Chen Liu);陳韻柔(Yun-Jou Chen);陳富莉(Fu-Li Chen)關鍵字：工作負荷;危害暴露;工作壓力源;質性研究;護理人員;Job demand;Hazard exposure;Job stressor;Qualitative research;Nurse期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究以醫療職場的工作特質，分析不同職位護理人員之工作壓力源。方法：採質性訪談方式，共訪問九位護理長及十七位臨床護理人員，訪談資料經轉譯、編碼形成類組，發展概念。結果：研究發現護理長的工作壓力源來自於處理許多單位內及醫院所交付的行政工作，但欠缺管理上自主權又難獲得同事間的社會支持；而臨床護理人員來自於短時間內劇增病人量或輪班交班延長工作時數的負荷，且缺乏病人照護的技能及決定自主權，並面對無法控制的危害暴露及病人或同事間溝通不良的問題。結論：醫院護理長及護理人員之工作壓力源雖不盡相同，但均來自於工作環境因素及個人因應能力。故建議護理長可參與醫院政策制定過程，以降低主管與基層單位的想法差異；並調整臨床護理人員排班制度及改善行政作業流程。另外，為提升護理長領導技能及新進護理人員醫療照護技能提供相關訓練。醫院亦可以提供一些健康促進活動，增進醫療人員互動，強化社會支持。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to explore the job stressors for head nurses and clinical nurses from the perspective of their job characteristics. Methods: Nine head nurses and 17 clinical nurses participated in this study. All interview contents were transcribed and coded. Matrices were constructed to identify themes and evolving concepts. Results: Execution of administrative tasks without sufficient decision-making authority and lack of colleagues' social support were the major stressors for head nurses. The clinical nurses' stress levels were raised by an overwhelming workload such as a large number of patients checking in within a short time period or work-hour extension due to task transfer between shifts, inadequate professional skills in patient care and a lack of decision-making authority. Involuntary exposure to hazardous materials and poor communication with patients or coworkers were also job stressors. Conclusions: Head nurses and clinical nurses experienced different job stressors. Most came from the work environment and poor personal coping strategies. We suggest that head nurses be involved in hospital policy making processes and that the work-shift arrangements for clinical nurses be adjusted. Optimizing administrative procedure is also recommended. Skill-based training courses that promote leadership skills for head nurses and patient care skills for newly hired nurses are needed. Hospitals might also offer health promotion activities to improve employee interaction and encourage social support.起始頁-結束頁：245-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0514篇名：台灣兒童疫苗接種的社會差異：以三合一疫苗及流感疫苗為例並列篇名：Social Disparity of Childhood Immunization in Taiwan: The Cases of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP) and Influenza Vaccines作者：黎伊帆(Yi-Fan Li);江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)關鍵字：兒童;疫苗接種;社經差異;children;vaccine immunization;socioeconomic disparity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：Objectives: This study aims to examine the social disparity of child vaccination in Taiwan using both of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP) vaccine and influenza vaccine as examples. Methods: Data for the analysis came from the Taiwan Birth Cohort Study. We included 20,099 children who completed interview surveys at both 6 months and 18 months old, with a response rate of 83.4%. The dependent variables were whether vaccinated with DTP (any DTP or DTaP) and influenza vaccine; the independent variables used were parents' educational attainment, monthly family income, and urbanization of residential areas. Results: The vaccination rate of any DTP vaccine and influenza vaccine reached 97.1% and 59.9%, respectively. The multiple logistic regression analysis showed that: after controlling children’s sex, maternal nationality and age at birth, the odds ratio of taking DTaP vaccine was two times higher for the highest socioeconomic groups than that of their lowest counterparts (p＜0.001), while the influenza vaccination rates were higher only in the groups of the highest family income group and higher urbanization. Conclusions: Our study reconfirmed that socioeconomic status affects childhood vaccination. The efficacy of vaccine and compulsory vaccination policy play an essential role in increasing coverage rate of childhood immunization, and free of charge could be an important strategy to tackle disparities of childhood immunization across different socioeconomic groups.英文摘要：Objectives: This study aims to examine the social disparity of child vaccination in Taiwan using both of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP) vaccine and influenza vaccine as examples. Methods: Data for the analysis came from the Taiwan Birth Cohort Study. We included 20,099 children who completed interview surveys at both 6 months and 18 months old, with a response rate of 83.4%. The dependent variables were whether vaccinated with DTP (any DTP or DTaP) and influenza vaccine; the independent variables used were parents' educational attainment, monthly family income, and urbanization of residential areas. Results: The vaccination rate of any DTP vaccine and influenza vaccine reached 97.1% and 59.9%, respectively. The multiple logistic regression analysis showed that: after controlling children’s sex, maternal nationality and age at birth, the odds ratio of taking DTaP vaccine was two times higher for the highest socioeconomic groups than that of their lowest counterparts (p＜0.001), while the influenza vaccination rates were higher only in the groups of the highest family income group and higher urbanization. Conclusions: Our study reconfirmed that socioeconomic status affects childhood vaccination. The efficacy of vaccine and compulsory vaccination policy play an essential role in increasing coverage rate of childhood immunization, and free of charge could be an important strategy to tackle disparities of childhood immunization across different socioeconomic groups.起始頁-結束頁：257-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0615篇名：中小學校雨水及中水貯留再利用系統水質分析之研究並列篇名：Research on the Quality of Rain Water and Grey Water Reused on Campuses作者：王仁俊(Jen-Chun Wang);張麗蓉(Li-Zone Chang);余光昌(Kuang-Chung Yu)關鍵字：永續校園;水資源再利用;雨水;中水;水質;Sustainable Campus;Harvested Water;Rain Water;Grey Water;Water Quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：回收水之水質為重要議題。本文為國內首次大規模針對中小學校雨水及中水回收水體之水質調查。方法：以教育部補助設置雨水及中水回收90校永續校園為例，遴選有效樣本34例，包含純收雨水23例、併收雨中水9例、純收中水2例，分別進行大腸桿菌群、化學項目及物理項目等水質檢測。結果：純回收雨水樣本，水質明顯優於併收雨中水的樣本，整體有65%符合飲用水水源取用標準，僅9%能符合沖廁用水基準。在化學項目及物理項目檢測上，分別有26%及12%之水質未能符合環保署訂定之標準。而大腸桿菌群和總有機碳的相關呈顯著。結論：多數學校以屋頂面且不設置任何過濾之方式收集雨水，以應噴灌或飲用水水源取用，然多數水質均未能符合沖廁用途基準。英文摘要：Objectives: The quality of harvested water is a public health concern. This study is the first large-scale investigation of the harvested rain water and grey water collected on campuses. Methods: The Ministry of Education has subsidized 90 sustainable campuses. We selected 34 eligible sites for this field investigation. Among them, 23 harvested only rainwater; 9 harvested both rainwater and grey water; and 2 harvested only grey water. Samples were collected for water quality analyses including tests for Escherichia coli, chemicals and physical characteristics. Results: The quality of rain water was obviously better than that of grey water. Approximately 65% of the samples met the standards for drinking water. Only 9% of samples were adequate for flushing a toilet. On chemical and physical analyses, 26% and 12% of the samples, respectively, did not conform to the standards of the Environmental Protection Administration. There was a significant association between the measurements of Escherichia coli and total organic carbon. Conclusions: Most of the schools collected rainwater on the roof without filtration. This was adequate for use as sprinkling water or as drinking water. Most of collected water samples did not qualify for use in flushing toilets.起始頁-結束頁：265-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0716篇名：極端氣溫對台灣都會區65歲以上族群心肺疾病死亡之風險趨勢分析並列篇名：A Chronological Study of Mortality Risks Associated with Extreme Temperature for Elderly Populations in Metropolitan Areas of Taiwan作者：林于凱(Yu-Kai Lin);吳祐誠(Yu-Chung Wu);黃鈴雅(Ling-Ya Huang);林嘉明(Chia-Ming Lin);吳聰能(Trong-Neng Wu);周昌弘(Chang-Hung Chou);宋鴻樟(Fung-Chang Sung);王玉純(Yu-Chun Wang)關鍵字：心血管;呼吸道;死亡;溫度;cardiovascular;respiratory;mortality;temperature期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：Objectives: To evaluate the mortality risks from all causes as well as cardiorespiratory diseases associated with extreme temperatures among the elderly in the Taipei, Taichung and Kaohsiung areas of Taiwan from 1994-2008. Methods: We used the distributed lag model to analyze the 7-day cumulative mortality risks associated with 1℃ daily average temperature increases above 30℃ and the 21-day cumulative mortality risks associated with 1℃ daily average temperature decreases below 18℃ in the study areas. Relative risks associated with extreme temperature (＞95% and ＜5%) for more than 3 consecutive days were also evaluated. Results: Taipei had a significant 5% excess mortality from all causes as well as cardiovascular diseases as daily average temperature above 30℃ with each 1℃ rise. Low temperature resulted in higher risks in Kaohsiung where the relative risk was 1.07 (95% CI: 1.05-1.10) for mortality from all causes and 1.09 (95% CI: 1.03-1.04) for mortality from cardiovascular diseases as the daily average temperature below 18℃ decreased by each 1℃. We observed adaption for high temperature but not cold temperature. No significant associations were observed between temperature changes of 1℃ and mortality from respiratory diseases. Conclusions: Cumulative mortality risks from all causes and cardiovascular diseases were significantly associated with high and low temperatures in metropolitan areas of Taiwan. The impact of each 1℃ temperature change appeared to be greater for people in the Taipei area than for those in other areas.英文摘要：Objectives: To evaluate the mortality risks from all causes as well as cardiorespiratory diseases associated with extreme temperatures among the elderly in the Taipei, Taichung and Kaohsiung areas of Taiwan from 1994-2008. Methods: We used the distributed lag model to analyze the 7-day cumulative mortality risks associated with 1℃ daily average temperature increases above 30℃ and the 21-day cumulative mortality risks associated with 1℃ daily average temperature decreases below 18℃ in the study areas. Relative risks associated with extreme temperature (＞95% and ＜5%) for more than 3 consecutive days were also evaluated. Results: Taipei had a significant 5% excess mortality from all causes as well as cardiovascular diseases as daily average temperature above 30℃ with each 1℃ rise. Low temperature resulted in higher risks in Kaohsiung where the relative risk was 1.07 (95% CI: 1.05-1.10) for mortality from all causes and 1.09 (95% CI: 1.03-1.04) for mortality from cardiovascular diseases as the daily average temperature below 18℃ decreased by each 1℃. We observed adaption for high temperature but not cold temperature. No significant associations were observed between temperature changes of 1℃ and mortality from respiratory diseases. Conclusions: Cumulative mortality risks from all causes and cardiovascular diseases were significantly associated with high and low temperatures in metropolitan areas of Taiwan. The impact of each 1℃ temperature change appeared to be greater for people in the Taipei area than for those in other areas.起始頁-結束頁：277-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0817篇名：提高社區面訪調查回應率之可行策略與成效分析並列篇名：Practical Strategies to Improve the Response Rate for a Household Interview Survey作者：林宇旋(Yu-Hsuan Lin);楊景閔(Chin-Min Yang);洪百薰(Baai-Shyun Hurng);劉怡妏(I-Wen Liu);吳秀英(Shiow-Ing Wu);邱淑媞(Shu-Ti Chiou)關鍵字：面訪調查;回應率;選擇性偏誤;Household interview survey;response rate;selection bias期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探討依據戶籍抽樣之社區面訪調查，若針對未居住於原抽戶籍地址樣本加以追蹤，能否提昇調查回應率及改善完訪樣本代表性，並估算所需投入行政成本。方法：資料來源為2008年「台灣第十次家庭與生育力調查」，該調查以設籍台灣20至49歲婦女為訪查對象，以內政部戶籍資料為抽樣母體清冊。運用描述性統計方法，計算不同追蹤程度回應率，再以類別變項比例檢定，比較原抽戶籍地址完訪與追蹤完訪樣本之背景特性差異。結果：若僅就居住在原抽戶籍地址樣本進行訪查，整體回應率僅4成5左右，就未居住於原抽戶籍地址樣本追蹤訪查，整體回應率可提高至7成以上，投入之行政成本只相對增加6.3%。原址完訪與追蹤完訪樣本在年齡、居住地區以及經濟狀況等，均具統計顯著差異，驗證樣本居住於原抽戶籍地址與否具選擇性。結論：針對未居住在原抽戶籍地址樣本追蹤訪查，為提高社區面訪調查回應率與改善完訪資料代表性之可行且具成效策略。英文摘要：Objectives: This study had two specific aims. The first was to determine if the tracing of household interview survey samples could improve response rates and data representativeness. The second was to estimate the proportion of increased administrative cost arising from sample tracing as compared with the proportion of increased response rate. Methods: The data used for analysis were from the ”Women's Health and Fertility Survey” conducted in 2008 by the Bureau of Health Promotion. Household registration data managed by the Ministry of the Interior were used as the sampling frame and all females aged 20 to 49 were eligible. We used a descriptive statistical method to calculate response rates by level of administrative input and used the Chi- Square test to detect significant differences in background characteristics between those who were residing at the registered address and those who were not. Results: Results showed that only a 45% response rate could be achieved without tracing those who did not reside at the registered address. By tracing those who were not residing at the registered address, the response rate increased, remarkably, to greater than 70%, whereas only a 6.3% increase in administrative cost was required. There were significant differences between those who were residing at the registered address and those who were not in terms of age distribution, urbanization of residence, and income. Conclusions: We concluded that survey results were biased if those who did not reside at the registered address were not traced. To improve the response rate and data representativeness, household interview surveys that use household registration data as their sampling frame need to trace samples of those who do not reside at the registered address.起始頁-結束頁：290-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-03-0918篇名：以系統性文獻回顧檢視賦權介入在糖尿病個案的應用及成效並列篇名：The Application and Effectiveness of an Empowerment Intervention among Diabetes Patients: A Systematic Review作者：陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen);王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang);唐善美(Shan-Mei Tang)關鍵字：系統性文獻回顧;賦權;糖尿病;systematic review;empowerment;diabetes期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：世界衛生組織指出賦權對糖尿病個案是很重要的衛教策略。本文採系統性文獻回顧法，分析賦權介入措施於糖尿病個案之應用及其結果。方法為搜尋PubMed等6個中、英文資料庫，經收案與排除條件審核後，共19篇文章符合篩選標準。結果顯示，文章研究品質佔最多為A級的設計良好，具隨機化控制之研究與B級的控制好的回溯性研究或有良好的控制組研究，各佔8篇(42.1%)。在賦權方式方面，18篇文章以團體方式進行賦權。內容無論是以個案問題或研究者自定糖尿病相關主題為主，皆強調激發個案覺醒、開放性的溝通、共同參與與提供必要的訊息。在賦權結果方面，19篇文章中，僅2篇文獻以質性分析呈現結果，其餘皆是量性結果分析。在介入成效中，以探討糖化血色素最多，共15篇，其中13篇(86.7%)對糖化血色素是有顯著改善。無論在介入策略之運用或介入後的成效，皆能呼應賦權之理論。本文可作為臨床實務與未來賦權研究方向之參考。英文摘要：The World Health Organization has postulated that education in empowerment strategies is essential for patients living with diabetes. This study reviewed the literature on empowerment interventions for these patients. The literature search included six medical databases in either Chinese or English, including PubMed. Nineteen studies that met the inclusion criteria for this study were reviewed. The authors evaluated all studies in terms of quality of the research. Of the nineteen articles rated, eight (42%) received an A rating (a well-conducted and adequately randomized and controlled study), and eight (42%) received a B rating (a well-conducted cohort study or a well-conducted case-control study). Eighteen studies delivered the empowerment programs to groups. Whether the content of the programs focused mainly on specific problems which patients had, or on pre-planned diabetes related issues, the strategies included raising awareness, open communication, mutual participation and the provision of necessary information. With regard to outcome analysis, only two studies used qualitative methods whereas the others used quantitative methods. The results of all reviewed studies were consistent with the theory regarding change in self, change in behavior and change in relationships. Of the fifteen studies indicating that the HbA1C level was an important indicator of empowerment in this patient group, thirteen reported that empowerment interventions significantly improved HbA1C levels in their participants. The content and outcome of empowerment interventions were consistent with the theory about patient empowerment. The findings of this study may provide a reference for clinical practice and empowerment research.起始頁-結束頁：93-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-0119篇名：營養訊息及價格介入對大學校園商店低熱量食品銷售之影響效果並列篇名：The Effects of Nutritional Information and Pricing on Sales of low-calorie Foods in College Campus Stores作者：魏米秀(Mi-Hsiu Wei);陳建宏(Chien-Hung Chen)關鍵字：環境介入;低熱量;價格;營養訊息;environmental intervention;low-calorie;price;nutrition information期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探討在大學校園便利商店中，進行營養訊息與價格環境介入對於低熱量食品的銷售影響。方法：以兩間大學校園的便利商店為對象，一間為實驗商店，一間為對照商店。實驗目標商品為低脂鮮乳、無糖優酪乳、低糖豆漿、無糖綠茶及無糖可樂，對照商品是與實驗商品同品牌但熱量較高的常規商品。實驗階段分為基準期、訊息介入期（提供熱量訊息）、價格介入期（價格降低約25%）、訊息價格介入期。依收銀系統記錄商品的每日銷售量。結果：整體上實驗介入對於低熱量目標商品的銷售反應有提升效果。實驗商店與對照商店於各實驗階段的目標商品銷售率反應不同，在實驗商店，目標商品於訊息價格介入期的銷售率顯著高於基準期。結論：在公共衛生實務上，未來可透過價格與購買點營養訊息的策略，促進消費者對健康目標食品的選購。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of environmental interventions designed to increase nutritional information and price incentives on the sale of low-calorie foods in convenience stores on college campuses. Methods: Two college convenience stores participated in the study: one was the experimental store, and the other served as a control. The target foods consisted of low-fat milk, no-sugar yogurt, no-sugar tea, low-sugar soybean milk, and no-sugar cola. The control foods were regular products containing more calories. The experimental periods consisted of baseline, nutritional information intervention, price decrease intervention (the price of the target foods decreased by approximately 25%), and a combination of information and price intervention. The sales of food items were monitored. Results: The percentages of low-calorie foods sold differed by store and intervention period. In the experimental store, the percentages of low-calorie foods sold during the combination information and price intervention period were significantly higher than those during baseline. Conclusions: Public health policies can influence the dietary environment through pricing and nutritional information displayed at the point-of-purchase to encourage customers to select healthier foods.起始頁-結束頁：110-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-0220篇名：台灣老人食物攝取頻率與憂鬱風險關聯性之探討並列篇名：Association between the Frequency of Food Consumption and the Risk of Depression in Elderly Taiwanese作者：游瑞鳳(Rei-Fong Yu);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：食物攝取;憂鬱風險;蔬菜;水果;茶;food consumption frequency;depression;vegetables;fruits;camellia tea期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探討台灣老年人食物攝取頻率與憂鬱之關聯。方法：本研究資料來源為「台灣中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」第一世代樣本於1999年（2074名，<U+2265>67歲）及2003年的資料庫。以邏吉斯迴歸分析各類食物攝取頻率與憂鬱傾向（1999年）的關聯性，及預測四年後(2003)憂鬱風險的能力。結果：在控制性別、年齡、教育年數、獨居與否、吸菸、飲酒、運動、慢性疾病數、自覺健康狀況、經濟、活動功能、身體質量指數、及食慾等變項下，橫斷分析顯示每週攝取蔬果<U+2265>3次者比以下者之憂鬱風險少38%(OR=0.62, 95 CI=0.44-0.87, p=0.005)；茶每週飲用<U+2265>3次比以下者少38%(0.62, 0.45-0.86, p=0.004)；縱貫分析顯示，蔬果每週攝取<U+2265>3次者比以下者，其四年後的憂鬱傾向少38%(0.62, 0.42-0.93, p=0.022)，而茶每週飲用<U+2265>3次者比以下者少44%(0.56, 0.38-0.82, p=0.003)；其他食物如肉禽、乳品、蛋、豆類、魚類、穀類及營養補充品，則不顯著。結論：蔬果及茶的攝取與老年人的憂鬱風險呈負關聯，也是憂鬱風險的預測因子。此結果顯示食物攝取可能影響憂鬱風險，也凸顯健康飲食的重要性。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the association between the frequency of intake of the major food categories and the risk of depression in older Taiwanese. Methods: The study analyzed the 1999 and 2003 data sets (2074<U+2265>67 year-old individuals) of the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to determine the significance of the association between frequency of food intake and the risk of depression (cross-sectional analysis) and the ability of frequency of intake to predict the risk for future depression (longitudinal analysis) in older Taiwanese after controlling for gender, age, education, living status, smoking, drinking, physical exercise, number of chronic diseases, self-rated health status, satisfaction with economic condition, functional status, Body Mass Index and appetite. Results: Results showed that more frequent consumption (<U+2265>3 times/wk vs. <U+2264>2 times/wk) of fruits & vegetables and more frequent consumption of tea (camellia sinensis) were significantly associated with reduced risk of depression (OR=0.62, 95% CI=0.44-0.87, p=0.005 and 0.62, 0.45-0.86, p=0.004, respectively) and more frequent fruit & vegetable consumption and tea-drinking also significantly predicted a lower risk of depression (0.62, 0.42-0.93, p=0.022 and 0.56, 0.38-0.82, p=0.003, respectively) four years later. Other food groups including meat-poultry, dairy, legumes, fish, grain and nutritional supplements were of no significant benefit. Conclusions: Results suggest that more frequent consumption of fruits and vegetables is associated with reduced current and future risk of depression in older Taiwanese. These results suggest that diet may play a role in depression, and a healthy diet is the key to a healthy life.起始頁-結束頁：123-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-0301篇名：台灣地區1991~2007年男女性之健康差距：以平均餘命、死亡率及潛在生命年數損失為指標並列篇名：Gender Differences in Health in Taiwan, 1991~2007: Life Expectancy, Mortality and Years of Potential Life Lost as Indicators作者：潘怜燕(Ling-Yen Pan);邱淑媞(Shu-Ti Chiou)關鍵字：性別差距;零歲平均餘命;死亡率;潛在生命年數損失YPLL;Gender Differences;Life Expectancy;Mortality;Years of Potential Life Lost YPLL期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：國人健康狀況逐年改善，然性別健康差距卻日漸擴大。本研究就平均餘命、死亡率及潛在生命年數損失三項指標探討性別的健康差距狀況，並討論可能的解釋原因。方法：研究資料下載自行政院內政部及衛生署所發布之官方統計數字，並以台灣地區2000年年中人口做為標準人口，計算1991~2007年間的男女性主要死因別標準化死亡率和標準化每千人口潛在生命年數損失(SYPLL)。結果：台灣地區零歲平均餘命之性別差距由5.31歲擴大為6.26歲。惡性腫瘤與自殺之標準化死亡率不論男女均逐年上升，且性別差距擴大；心臟疾病及腦血管疾病的標準化死亡率都逐年下降，但性別差距卻略增。男性事故傷害標準化死亡率之下降幅度大於女性且性別差距逐年縮小。兩性全死因之SYPLL逐年下降且性別差距由38.60年縮小為33.32年，然若將因事故傷害所造成之SYPLL扣除，則兩性之性別差距是擴大的，由19.48%增為25.79%。但惡性腫瘤之SYPLL的性別差距則上升，且佔全死因性別差距之比例也由9.82%升為19.47%。結論：台灣地區之性別健康差距逐年擴大，推論係因男性高吸菸率之故。是否會因男性吸菸率下降而縮小，尚需密切觀察。英文摘要：Objectives: The health status of the Taiwanese people has improved; however, the gender difference in life expenctancy is widening. Three indicators, life expectancy at birth, standardized mortality rate and standardized years of potential life lost, were applied to understand the potential causes of gender gap. Methods: Data were obtained from the statistics published by the Department of Interior and the Department of Health, Executive Yuan, Taiwan. The standardized mortality rate (SMR) and standardized years of potential life lost (SYPLL) between 1991 and 2007 were calculated by the applied direct standardization method and adjusted to the 2000 Taiwan mid-year population. Results: The gender difference in life expectancy at birth widened from 5.31 years to 6.26 years. The SMR for malignant neoplasms and suicide in both genders increased year by year and the gender differences widened. The gender differences in SMR for cardiovascular diseases and cerebrovascular diseases also widened slightly although the SMRs themselves decreased each year. The SMR for accidents in both males and females decreased dramatically and the gender difference also narrowed. The SYPLL from all causes decreased yearly and the gender difference narrowed from 38.60 to 33.32; however, the gender gap for SYPLL widened if the SYPLL caused by accidents were deducted from the SYPLL from all causes. The gender difference in malignant neoplasm-specific SYPLL increased and its proportion to SYPLL from all causes increased from 9.82% in 1991 to 19.47% in 2007. Conclusions: In Taiwan, the gender differences in health were widening. It was inferred that this was related to the high smoking rate among male adults. Whether the gender difference will be narrowed by lowering the male smoking rate remains to be determined.起始頁-結束頁：135-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-042篇名：基層醫師對實施基層分科總額預算之意願及影響因素並列篇名：Factors Associated with the Willingness of Primary Care Physicians to Implement the Department Global Budget作者：陳文侯(Wen-Hou Chen);龔佩珍(Pei-Tseng Kung);蔡文正(Wen-Chen Tsai);李亞欣(Ya-Hsin Li);曾盈甄(Ying-Chen Tseng)關鍵字：總額預算;基層醫師;分科總額預算;global budget;primary care physician;department global budget期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探討實施基層分科總額管理試辦計畫對醫師執業之影響及滿意度，並了解基層醫師對實施分科總額預算之意願及其影響因素。方法：針對中部四縣市所有健保特約西醫基層醫師，利用結構式問卷以郵寄方式進行普查，回收579份問卷。除描述性與雙變項統計分析外，以羅吉斯迴歸分析探討影響基層醫師是否贊成實施分科總額預算之相關因素。結果：55%的基層醫師認為分科方式不合理，54.63%認為分科管理對未來發展為負面影響，整體滿意度認為滿意者20.67%，但是有38.52%表示不滿意。在較都市化區執業競爭較激烈而整體滿意度較低。不贊成實施分科總額預算者佔57.99%。對於實施繼續分科總額之意願，泌尿科、外科、骨科、耳鼻喉科及婦產科明顯較贊成，而精神科、皮膚科及家醫科傾向不贊成。由羅吉斯迴歸分析結果發現「實施後基層醫師間之競爭度」、「實施後平均每週看診次數之變化」、「執業年資」、「分科方式合理性」、「對該科未來之影響」及「科別」會影響醫師是否贊成實施分科總額預算。結論：基層醫師對於分科管理的滿意度偏低，對於在都會區中執業之醫師較不利，多數基層醫師不贊成進一步實施分科總額預算。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the influences on implementation of the department global budget (DGB) demonstration project in primary care physicians' practices and their satisfaction with DGB. In addition, this study explored the factors associated with the willingness of primary care physicians (PCPs) to implement DGB. Methods: This study adopted the survey method with a structured questionnaire. All national health insurance-contracted PCPs practicing Western medicine s in four cities/counties in central Taiwan were surveyed, and 579 valid responses were received. In addition to descriptive statistics and bivariate analysis, this study utilized a logistic regression analysis to explore the factors associated with the PCPs' willingness to accept DGB implementation. Results: Fifty-five percent of PCPs thought that the methodology of DGB was unreasonable; 54.63% thought the DGB had a negative effect on departmental development; 20.67% were satisfied with DGB while 38.52% were dissatisfied. The level of satisfaction was lower in more urbanized areas, probably due to a higher rate of competition. A total of 57.99% of PCPs disagreed with the implementation of DGB. The PCPs in urology, surgery, orthopedics, ENT, obstetrics and gynecology agreed more with continuing the implementation of DGB, but PCPs in psychiatry, dermatology and family medicine were inclined to disagree. According to logistic regression analysis, the factors that affected agreement with DGB included the level of competition after DGB, alteration in work time after DGB, years of practice, perception of the rationality of DGB, the anticipated effect on departmental development and the field of the department. Conclusions: Satisfaction with the DGB demonstration project was relatively low. The DGB is disadvantageous to PCPs in more urbanized areas and the majority of PCPs disagreed with implementation of the DGB.起始頁-結束頁：150-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-053篇名：台灣不同族群老人長期照護需要差異之趨勢分析並列篇名：Trend Analysis of the long-term Care Needs of Elderly Different Ethnic Groups in Taiwan作者：陳正芬(Chen-Fen Chen);呂寶靜(Pau-Ching Lu);王彥雯(Charlotte Wang)關鍵字：長期照護;老人;族群;健康差距;貫時研究;Long-term care;Elderly;Ethnicity;Health Disparities;Longitudinal Study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究運用雙重困境觀點、老年均質化及持續不平等論點，檢視台灣不同省籍老人的長期照護需要之差異及省籍隨歷史時間推移之變化趨勢。方法：本研究利用「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」，歷時十四年的資料，以線性混合模式進行分析，將隨機效果納入模式之中。結果：研究發現，未控制社經變項時，本省籍老人的長期照護需要項目較多；在控制社經地位的差異後，發現省籍之間的長期照護需要差異不僅持續存在，即是將歷史時間及健保實施因素納入考量，而且隨著歷次調查時間的推移，本省籍老人的長期照護需要項目每年較外省籍老人多0.019項，表示省籍的差異出現擴大的趨勢，進入老老人階段後更加明顯，也就是長期照護需要差距在生命歷程最後階段更加擴大。結論：我國不同省籍老人的長期照護需要差距符合雙重剝奪觀點的論述，未來在規劃與執行老人健康與社會政策時，需考量族群與時間因素對老人長期照護需要造成的影響，且應特別關注本省籍老人在使用健康及長期照護資源的可能阻礙，進而排除服務使用的阻礙因素。英文摘要：Objectives: From the perspectives of double jeopardy, aging as leveler, and persistent health inequality, this study examined the trends in long-term care needs of native Taiwanese and Mainlanders in Taiwan. Methods: Data used in this study were collected by the Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health in 1989, 1993, 1996, 1999 and 2003. A linear mixed model was applied for trend analysis. Results: Without controlling for independent variables, the long-term care needs of the native Taiwanese elderly were greater than those of elderly Mainlanders. After controlling for the socioeconomic and health status of the respondents, and considering the implementation of health insurance over the period of 1984 to 2003, the disparity became greater over time. The native Taiwanese elderly seemed to be more vulnerable to disability than their counterparts, the Mainlanders. Furthermore, the disparity in long-term care needs between the elderly Taiwanese and the elderly Mainlanders will continue to grow as the lifespan of the elderly steadily increases. Conclusions: This study supports the ”double jeopardy” hypothesis. The results also suggest that public policymakers must understand that the elderly in different ethnic groups face various barriers to receiving health care and long-term care in our society.起始頁-結束頁：165-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-064篇名：慢性病老年人潛在不適當用藥影響因素之研究並列篇名：The Risk Factors of Potentially Inappropriate Prescribing for the Elderly with Chronic Diseases in Taiwan作者：黃光華(Kuang-Hua Huang);葉玲玲(Ling-Ling Yeh);洪錦墩(Chin-Tun Hung);謝儀靜(Yi-Ching Hsieh);蔡東翰(Tung-Han Tsai)關鍵字：老年人;慢性病;潛在不適當用藥;比爾斯標準;the elderly;chronic disease;potentially inappropriate prescribing in the elderly PIPE;Beers criteria期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：老年人屬多重藥物使用族群，且為藥物不良反應高危險群；雖然老年人潛在不適當用藥之問題，已受到全球醫療實務界之重視，但在台灣卻鮮少有相關研究。本研究目的為探討老年人潛在不適當用藥之影響因素，希望據此作為改善老年人處方用藥安全之參考。方法：本研究資料來源為國家衛生研究院「全民健康保險學術研究資料庫」之「承保抽樣歸人檔」(LHID2005)。並以「Beers老年人潛在不適當用藥準則－2002版」作為潛在不適當用藥之判斷標準，分析2005-2007年65歲以上老年慢性病患西醫門診處方潛在不適當用藥之影響因素，包括病患特性、醫療機構特性及醫師特性三大構面。結果：納入100,578位慢性病老人及其7,521,186張處方，其中91,772位慢性病老人(91.24%)至少接受過一次潛在不適當用藥，而其有1,839,654張處方(24.46%)為潛在不適當用藥；而病患性別、病患年齡、用藥品項數、醫療院所評鑑層級、就醫科別、權屬別、都市化程度、醫師性別、醫師年齡及醫師年資等，皆為處方潛在不適當用藥之影響因素。結論：國內老年人潛在不適當用藥之盛行率遠高於國外，衛生相關單位及醫師可參考本研究潛在不適當用藥影響因素之結果，謹慎處方以確保加強需要長期服藥的慢性病老年病患之健康及用藥安全。英文摘要：Objectives: The elderly often receive poly-pharmacy and may be at a higher risk for adverse drug reactions. Potentially inappropriate prescribing in the elderly (PIPE) is one of the major patient safety concerns worldwide; however, few studies have been conducted on PIPE in Taiwan. The aim of this research was to investigate the risk factors associated with PIPE. Methods: The data source was the 2005-2007 Longitudinal Health Insurance Database (LHID2005), a nationally representative database established by the National Health Research Institutes. We analyzed the patients, facilities and physicians as risk factors for PIPE among patients over age 65 with chronic diseases. PIPE was identified by the 2002 Beers criteria. Results: A total of 91,772 patients (91.24%) out of 100,578 had received at least one PIPE between 2005 and 2007. Among a total of 7,521,186 outpatient prescriptions, 1,839,654 (24.46%) were PIPE. Patients' gender, age, number of drug items, level of hospital, department visited, ownership, urbanization, and physician’s gender, age and seniority were the risk factors associated with PIPE. Conclusions: The prevalence of PIPE in Taiwan was higher than that in other countries. We suggest that health authorities and physicians consider the risk factors for PIPE in order to ensure drug safety for the elderly with chronic diseases.起始頁-結束頁：180-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-075篇名：出國旅客登革熱之防護知識及態度與其行為之相關因素探討並列篇名：Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices with Regard to Dengue Fever among Travelers in Taiwan作者：王穎筠(Ying-Yun Wang);蔡慈儀(Tzu-I Tsai)關鍵字：登革熱;知識態度行為;旅客;Dengue fever;Knowledge;Attitudes and Practices KAP;traveler期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：東南亞國家是登革熱疫情盛行，也是國人出國旅遊、探親商務往返最頻繁的地區，本研究調查台灣出國旅客其登革熱知識及態度與其防護行為之相關。方法：採橫斷式調查研究設計，自填式結構問卷設計以KAP(knowledge, attitudes and practices)模式為基礎，研究對象為18歲以上準備由桃園機場前往東南亞國家的出境旅客。結果：共完成有效問卷386份（回收率90.6%）。研究顯示出國旅客對登革熱的防護認知答對率為68.5%，防護態度偏積極正向（平均值為3.87分），有74.9%旅客至少攜帶一種防蚊用物。女性、教育程度愈高及出國前曾利用旅遊健康門診獲得登革熱防護訊息的旅客，與登革熱之知識及防治態度方面有正相關，且自我防護行為表現較佳。結論：對於前往東南亞國家之旅客，透過多種形式的宣導管道，包括旅遊門診、大眾傳播媒體，提供給不同出國旅客健康資訊，增強其對登革熱防護知識及態度，進而強化其自我防護行為。英文摘要：Objectives: Dengue fever is endemic in Southeast Asia-the most popular business and travel destination for people from Taiwan. The purpose of this study was to investigate the association between knowledge and attitude about Dengue fever and preventive behaviors of travelers. Method: This was a cross-sectional study. A questionnaire was developed based on the KAP (knowledge, attitudes and practices) model. Participants who were over 18 years of age and headed to a Southeast Asian country completed a self-administrated survey at the departure gates at the Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport. Results: In total, 386 travelers completed the questionnaires, for a response rate of 90.6%. The percentage of individuals with correct knowledge about the prevention of Dengue fever was 68.5%, the attitude towards Dengue fever prevention was positive (average 3.87 points), and 74.9% of the passengers had prepared at least one method to protect themselves from mosquito bites. Women, those with higher education, and those passengers who had received health information from travel clinics had better knowledge about and attitudes toward Dengue fever, and also practiced better personal preventive behaviors. Conclusions: Information about Dengue fever needs to be distributed through diverse methods, i.e. travel clinics, mass media, and print material, in order to encourage travelers heading to Southeast Asian countries to practice preventive behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：191-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-02-086篇名：全民健保向論人支付邁進作者：鄭守夏期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-017篇名：雇主對精神障礙者就業之看法與聘用意願：現況、問題與政策因應並列篇名：Attitudes of Employers toward People with Mental Illness: Conditions and Problems with the Employment Policy for the Disabled in Taiwan作者：張鳳航(Feng-Hang Chang);張<U+73CF>(Chueh Chang);鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：精神障礙者;雇主;就業政策;mental illness;employment;policy intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在了解雇主對於精神障礙者就業的看法與聘用意願，並探討相關政策和服務之現況與問題，以做為政策因應建議之參考。方法：研究以立意取樣，深度訪談13位一般性企業或機構的雇主（7位目前有僱用精障者，3位曾雇用過精障者，3位未僱用精障者）。訪談內容皆騰為逐字稿，進行登錄、分類與分析。結果：儘管13位雇主都認同精神障礙者之工作權，但多數雇主仍因對精障者的症狀和工作能力感到疑懼而缺乏聘僱意願，或因精障者的症狀和表現限制其工作類型。在就業相關政策部份，我們也發現：1)雇主普遍不清楚相關就業政策及法規；2)政府罰鍰及獎勵補助金對於提升精神障礙者之就業效果有限；3)雇主對精神疾病缺乏正確知識；及4)就業服務員的素質不一。結論：就訪談結果，我們除提出對政府建議的雛議外，也建議未來量性調查雇主意願及影響因素。雛議包括應加強就業服務人力、提升服務內涵、調整經濟誘因、相關就業政策與法令宣導，並加強去除烙印的社會教育。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to explore employers' perceptions of people with mental illness, and to understand their attitudes and concerns about the employment policy for the disabled in Taiwan. Methods: In-depth interviews with 13 employers (including 7 employers who hired people with mental illness, and 6 who did not) were conducted. Responses were audio taped, transcribed, and coded. All the data were synthesized and interpreted. Results: Despite the fact that all employers agreed that people with mental illness had the same right to work as did normal people, over half were not willing to hire them because of concerns about their symptoms and work competencies. With regard to the employment policy, we found: 1) most employers were not aware of the employment policy; 2) the economic incentives seemed weak to employers; 3) most employers had insufficient knowledge about mental illness; 4) the quality of job coaches and employment support services was low. Conclusions: In order to increase employers' willingness to hire people with mental illness, the government should strengthen the support system for both employers and employees. Efforts should also be made to improve the quality of employment support services, adjust the economic incentives, increase awareness of the employment policy, and enhance knowledge and acceptance with regard to mental illness.起始頁-結束頁：5-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-028篇名：糖尿病照護成效與影響因素之探討：以台東某區域醫院糖尿病共同照護網為例並列篇名：The Outcomes and Factors Associated with Diabetes Care: The Diabetes Shared Care Program in a Regional Hospital in Taitung, Taiwan作者：黃憶玫(Yi-Mei Huang);張慈桂(Tzu-Kuei Chang)關鍵字：台東地區;糖尿病;共同照護網;糖化血色素;Taitung area;Diabetes mellitus;diabetes shared care program;HbA1c期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to assess 3-year outcomes and factors associated with those outcomes in type 2 diabetic patients who joined the diabetes shared-care program in Taitung, Taiwan. Methods: 242 type Ⅱ diabetic patients in a Taitung regional hospital were enrolled in this study and completed 4 follow-up measures. The principal measure was the patient's mean HbA1c at baseline and at each annual follow-up. A logistic regression model was used to examine the factors associated with poor glycemic control. Results: (1) The mean HbA1c level showed the greatest reduction in the first follow-up year. The level gradually increased over time (the mean values for HbA1c at baseline, 1(superscript st), 2(superscript nd), and 3(superscript rd) years were 9.12%, 7.93%, 8.20%, and 8.27% respectively, p＜0.05); however, the 3(superscript rd) year level of HbA1c was still a significant improvement over baseline. (2) Age＜65, aborigines, a higher HbA1c level at baseline, a longer duration of illness, and higher doses of medication were significantly associated with poor glycemic control. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated the long-term efficacy of a diabetes shared- care program in HbA1c control. Age, ethnicity, initial HbA1c level, duration of illness, and medication used were significantly associated with poor diabetes control. It would be helpful in improving the quality of diabetes-care among the Taitung population if case management were combined with community resources.英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to assess 3-year outcomes and factors associated with those outcomes in type 2 diabetic patients who joined the diabetes shared-care program in Taitung, Taiwan. Methods: 242 type Ⅱ diabetic patients in a Taitung regional hospital were enrolled in this study and completed 4 follow-up measures. The principal measure was the patient's mean HbA1c at baseline and at each annual follow-up. A logistic regression model was used to examine the factors associated with poor glycemic control. Results: (1) The mean HbA1c level showed the greatest reduction in the first follow-up year. The level gradually increased over time (the mean values for HbA1c at baseline, 1(superscript st), 2(superscript nd), and 3(superscript rd) years were 9.12%, 7.93%, 8.20%, and 8.27% respectively, p＜0.05); however, the 3(superscript rd) year level of HbA1c was still a significant improvement over baseline. (2) Age＜65, aborigines, a higher HbA1c level at baseline, a longer duration of illness, and higher doses of medication were significantly associated with poor glycemic control. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated the long-term efficacy of a diabetes shared- care program in HbA1c control. Age, ethnicity, initial HbA1c level, duration of illness, and medication used were significantly associated with poor diabetes control. It would be helpful in improving the quality of diabetes-care among the Taitung population if case management were combined with community resources.起始頁-結束頁：19-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-039篇名：衛生傳播中的醫療行銷－醫師的記者會對其門診量之影響並列篇名：Medical Marketing in Health Communication: The Impact of Physicians' Press Conferences on the Number of Outpatients作者：張耀懋(Yao-Mao Chang);張秀惠(Hsiu-Hui Chang);謝敏青(Min-Ching Hsieh);許怡欣(Yi-Hsin Elsa Hsu)關鍵字：醫療行銷;新聞行銷;門診量;報紙;記者會;medical marketing;news marketing;outpatient amount;newspaper;press conference期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：現代經營醫療機構除要講究醫療專業與服務品質外，尚須結合行銷觀念以建立正面形象與知名度。本研究旨在探討記者發表會的操作對醫師門診量之影響以及其效果之持續性。方法：本研究整合2002年至2003年台灣某知名診所召開記者會與門診資料人數資料。結果：部分科別醫師召開記者會與當科別醫師的門診量呈正相關，且持續一段時間。結論：召開記者會的行銷活動有助於門診病患人數之增加。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to understand the effect of press conferences on the number of new outpatients for medical clinics or physicians and to determine what particular medical news was correlated with the number of new outpatients for specific clinic divisions and physicians. Methods: Data were collected from a clinic in Taipei during the period from 2002 to 2003. Results: The results indicated that the impact of press conferences on the number of new outpatients was positive and persistent. Conclusions: Calling press conferences as a marketing device contributed to the increase in the number of new outpatients.起始頁-結束頁：29-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-0410篇名：台灣中老年男性戒菸因素之探討並列篇名：Predictors of Smoking Cessation among Older Male Smokers in Taiwan作者：林芸安(Yun-Ann Lin);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：戒菸;中老年;行動功能;預測因子;Smoking cessation;Older adults;Functional activity;Predictor期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：吸菸是影響人類健康的最主要危險行為之一。然而至今為止，台灣中老年人之戒菸行為及其相關因素之探討不多。故本研究之目的在探討台灣中老年男性戒菸的預測因子。方法：本研究之資料來源為國民健康局的「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活健康狀況長期追蹤調查研究」。以其補充樣本（50~66歲）2,462人中，於1996年吸菸的男性673人中，2003年完成訪談，且資料完整者502人為分析對象。以邏吉斯迴歸分析其隨後7年間停止吸菸的預測因子。結果：本研究發現，日常生活活動功能(ADL)變差及首次住院，為台灣中老年男性吸菸者戒菸的主要預測因子。只罹患重大慢性疾病如糖尿病、高血壓、心臟病等，仍不足以預測戒菸。此外，較高齡及有婚姻伴侶與戒菸行為呈正關聯，而高菸齡及高吸菸量與戒菸行為呈負關聯。結論：本研究為國內首次以長期追蹤調查資料探討中老年人戒菸的預測因子。結果顯示擔心健康(health concern)為戒菸的主要動機，而行動功能惡化或重大健康事故如住院為中老年男性戒菸的主要 預測因子。本研究的結果可供有關單位研擬台灣中老年人有效戒菸介入政策之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Smoking is a major risk factor for several diseases; however, the predictors of smoking cessation in older male Taiwanese have not been studied very well. The objective of this study was to determine these predictors. Methods: The study analyzed the 1996 and 2003 databases of the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were 673 50 to 66 year-old male smokers sampled in the second cohort (2462 persons) in 1996. Logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the associations among socio-demographic, lifestyle and health-related variables and the changes in these variables which occurred between baseline and the endpoint (2003) of the study for those who stopped smoking. Results: The study found that physical functional decline was the major predictor of smoking cessation. Major medical events such as a first hospitalization were also associated with an increased likelihood of smoking cessation; however, the new diagnosis of a major chronic disease such heart disease, diabetes or hypertension was not. The study also found that older age and being married were associated with an increased likelihood of smoking cessation, whereas a longer smoking history and greater daily cigarette consumption were associated with a reduced likelihood of stopping. Conclusions: Results suggested that concerns over health particularly a major medical event such as functional impairment or a first hospitalization were the major predictors of smoking cessation in older male Taiwanese smokers. These findings may be useful for public health planners in designing more effective smoking cessation programs.起始頁-結束頁：36-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-0511篇名：提升國中生乳製品攝取營養教育課程設計及成效評估並列篇名：Design and Evaluation of a Dairy Products Nutrition Education Program for Adolescents作者：林薇(Wei Lin);杭極敏(Chi-Ming Hang);鄭惠文(Hui-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：乳製品;乳鈣攝取;國中生;飲食行為;營養教育;dairy products;dairy calcium intake;adolescent;eating behavior;nutrition education期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究主要目的是發展提升國中生乳製品攝取教育課程，並評估其成效。方法：整合健康信念模式(Health Belief Model)、計畫行為理論(Theory of planned behavior)及社會認知理論(Social cognitive theory)之重要概念，發展之乳製品教育介入課程包括五個單元（每單元45分鐘）的課堂教學，以及兩份家長簡訊，選擇台灣地區城市型、鄉村型、山地型及離島型的國民中學各二所，394位八年級學生為成效評估研究對象。研究設計分兩組，實驗組(N=189)實施每週一單元課堂教學，並發家長簡訊；控制組(N=205)則無任何相關的營養教育活動。在介入前、後一週，分別對兩組學生進行前測及後測評量。結果：研究結果顯示，實驗組學生在接受五次課程介入後，其乳製品相關營養知識、行為結果態度、主觀規範、自我效能、行為改變階段、攝取行為及乳鈣攝取量皆顯著改善，且對於城市、鄉村、山地及離島四種地區學生皆有成效，只是在某些層面對於山地地區學生之成效低於其他地區。結論：本研究課程設計除教授健康有關知識外，尚注重增加與選食乳製品行為能力有關之知識和技能；藉品嚐降低行為障礙（口味不好）；結果顯示這種設計確實達到提升乳製品攝取立即的成效。但由於對山地地區成效低於其他地區，而此地區學生鈣質攝取又低於其他地區，顯示需要針對此族群之鈣質攝取改善作深入探討與設計。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to design and evaluate a dairy calcium intake nutrition education program which was developed based on important constructs in the Health Belief Model, the Theory of Planned Behavior, and Social Cognitive Theory. Methods: A total of 394 eighth graders from four area middle schools in Taiwan participated in the study. The intervention group (N=120) received a dairy calcium intake nutrition education program which included five 45-min classroom sessions and 2 newsletters for parents. The control group (N=112) received no nutrition education program. The outcomes of intervention were measured by questionnaires administered one week before (pre-test) and after (post-test) the intervention. Results: The results indicated that the intervention group knowledge about dairy products, subjective norms, self-efficacy, behaviors, stage of change, and dairy calcium intake improved (p＜.01) on post-test in 4 areas with different degrees of urbanization. Conclusions: The dairy calcium intake nutrition education program which included not only the teaching of health-related knowledge, but also activities to increase behavioral capability and decrease behavioral barriers was found to be effective immediately after the intervention. The program was less effective for students in an aboriginal area and they also consumed less calcium when compared to students in other areas; therefore, we suggest further studies focused on aboriginal areas, as well as studies of the longer term effects of the intervention.起始頁-結束頁：45-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-0612篇名：The Effect of Educational Differentials on Mortality of the Elderly in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣地區老人教育程度差異對死亡率影響探討作者：林正祥(Cheng-Hsiang Lin);鄭維芬(Wei-Fen Cheng)關鍵字：教育;老人保健與生活問題調查;存活狀況;脆弱Cox比例風險模式;education;survey of health and living status of the elderly;survival status;Coxfrailty proportional hazard model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探討教育程度差異對台灣老人死亡率的影響。方法：採用前衛生署家庭計畫研究所起始於1989年5次「台灣地區老人保健與生活問題調查」實際訪察4,049個案為研究對象，排除與教育無關的死亡案例，蒐集其與死亡率相關之變數，並考慮可能存在模式中未能辨識的干擾因子，以脆弱Cox比例風險存活模式探討教育程度差異與死亡率間的關係。本研究以外在因子（教育及相關人口變數）等變數建構模式一，其他三個模式則分別為模式一加上一個、二個或三個中介因子（健康狀況、健康行為及社會參與），故模式四則為包含外在因子及三個中介因子，藉此探討教育對死亡率的間接影響。結果：在未考慮三個中介因子之情形下，教育程度較高者死亡風險較低，受教育每增加一年，死亡風險下降13.7%。另一方面，在模型中加入和健康因子相關的變數會使教育對死亡率的影響不顯著，惟每增加一年教育，死亡風險下降6.1%。結論：教育對死亡率之影響係其藉由健康狀況、健康行為及社會參與等相關變數，其中又以健康狀況因子之影響為最。另外，不論是否考慮健康相關因子，本研究中人口相關變數均與老人死亡率有密切關係。英文摘要：Objectives: To study the effect of educational differentials on mortality of the elderly in Taiwan. Methods: Our research uses five waves of surveys of health and living status of the elderly conducted from 1989-2003 in Taiwan to investigate the trend of effect of education on elderly mortality. Exogenous factors (education and other demographic characteristics) were included in Model 1. The other 3 models are with each adding one, two or three mediating factors (health status, health behaviors and social relationships) from Model 1. Both exogenous and mediating factors were included in Model 4. The 4 models present information of the decomposition of the effect of education on the mortality of older Taiwanese from 1989 to 2003. This study exclude those death cases due to accident which is not related to education and adopt Cox-frailty proportional hazard model which accounts for heterogeneity caused by some other unidentified factors related to the effect of social dynamic on old-age mortality. Results: Without considering the three mediate factors, there is a 13.7% reduction on mortality pre year education increased. On the other hand, it turns out the effect of education on the mortality is insignificant when the three mediate factors are included in the model. The hazard ratio reduced 6.1% on mortality with a 1-year increase in education. Conclusions: The effect of education on the mortality of the elderly is by means of the 3 mediating factors, particularly health status. Besides, no matter health related factors are in the model or not, demographics characteristics show strong relationship with the mortality of the elderly.起始頁-結束頁：58-71資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-0713篇名：第二類型糖尿病人之身體活動建議量初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of Recommendations for Physical Activity for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes作者：徐錦興(Chin-Hsing Hsu);曹德弘(Te-Hsung Tsao);張蕙雯(Hui-Wen Chang)關鍵字：身體活動;糖化血色素;走路時間;劑量反應關係;physical activity;glycated hemoglobin;walking time;dose-response relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：本研究目的在探討糖尿病人身體活動量與病情控制的關係，並運用劑量反應關係解釋研究結果，以提供糖尿病照護上對身體活動的建議量。方法：研究採橫斷性調查設計，初期招募220名糖尿病人為預備受試對象。研究工具為國際身體活動量表；以12個月為期，對所有受試對象進行身體活動量前後調查。在確認一年間維持同一生活型態的前提下，選擇210位為正式受試對象，再依糖化血色素控制情形分為控制良好與控制不良組。身體活動資料並與生理及血液生化檢測值進行羅吉斯迴歸分析。結果：不同生活型態的糖尿病人在血糖與糖化血色素控制上，其劑量反應關係圖形皆呈“反J”曲線，顯示中度與高度身體活動之糖尿病人的病情控制顯著優於低度身體活動者。糖化血色素控制良好組平均每天步行時間為37分鐘、控制不良組為28分鐘；其勝算比值為1.26。結論：建議糖尿病人可用「走路」為提高身體活動量的主要模式，頻率為每週6天、每天至少37分鐘，在病情控制上較易得到顯著成效。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to investigate the association between physical activity and the status of diabetes mellitus control and to provide recommendations for physical activity for patients with type 2 diabetes. Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 220 patients were recruited in the initial phase. The International Physical Activity Questionnaire was used to determine the level of physical activity for each subject. The study was carried out over 12 months with a pretest/posttest design to determine if patients still maintained the same lifestyle; 210 patients met this criterion. These subjects were then divided into two groups based on their glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) control: an HbA1c under-control group and an out-of-control group. Logistic regression analysis was used to estimate relationships among subjects' physical activity, physiological measures, and blood biochemical parameters on the posttest. Results: The results indicated that there was an inverse-J shape relationship between lifestyle and blood glucose/HbA1c. This demonstrated that moderate/vigorous physical activity might play an important role in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. The average duration of walking time/per day was 37 min in the HbA1c under-control group, while only 28 minutes in the HbA1c out-of-control group; the odds ratio was 1.26. Conclusions: We suggest that an appropriate physical activity for patients with type 2 diabetes is walking, 6 days/week, at least 37 min per day. This produced significant effects in HbA1c control.起始頁-結束頁：72-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-0814篇名：利用體外試驗研究探討短期臭氧暴露之揮發性有機物質變化並列篇名：An in vitro Study of short-term Ozone Exposure Induced Volatile Organic Compounds作者：胡佩儀(Pei-Yei Hu);馬一中(Yee-Chung Ma)關鍵字：臭氧暴露;人類肺部細胞;揮發性有機物;氣相層析質譜儀;Ozone exposure;MRC-5;VOCs;GC/MS期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：探討人類肺部細胞MRC-5在不同濃度、時間暴露之臭氧衝擊式系統下，藉由產生揮發性有機物質(Volatile organic compounds, VOCs)之種類及含量變化，間接從細胞脂質過氧化了解氧化壓力程度。為確認VOCs為臭氧與細胞膜上不飽和脂肪酸PUFA (Polyunsaturated fatty acids)所反應物質，再進行臭氧暴露至PUFA (Arachidonic Acid, AA; Linoleic Acid, LA)。方法：在細胞部分，暴露時間為30分鐘，臭氧濃度範圍在0.1至2ppm，暴露後觀察時間為30，60，120分鐘。10ppm PUFA暴露至1ppm臭氧30分鐘後，以採樣管進行收集，再以氣相層析質譜儀分析。結果：比較臭氧與空氣暴露之收集氣體並分析後，有18種物質在兩組間達統計上顯著差異。其中以methyl cyclopentane物質為最，不論是在高或低濃度臭氧暴露皆達顯著差異。3-methyl-butanal在暴露30分鐘於高濃度臭氧暴露下有顯著；carbon disulfide及dimethyl disulfide兩者暴露臭氧1.5ppm 30分鐘後亦有顯著。此外，暴露空氣與臭氧至PUFA （AA及LA），結果顯示暴露至AA有顯著差異為2-methyl-1-propene，而LA則為pentane。結論：利用體外試驗之臭氧暴露系統所得到有顯著差異之VOCs物質，可做為臭氧暴露後氧化壓力之生物標誌。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate the impinger in vitro exposure system used to investigate ozone exposure induced oxidative stress. Comparisons of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) levels in collected gas and MRC-5 cell membrane integrity were made after ozone exposure. In order to validate the source of the VOCs, the reactions of ozone with two polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA); Arachidonic Acid (AA) and Linoleic Acid (LA) were also determined. Methods: MRC-5 cells were treated with air and ozone concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 2 ppm for 30 min, and VOCs were collected during and after ozone exposure at 30, 60, 90, and 120 min intervals. PUFAs 10 ppm were exposed to 1 ppm ozone for 30 min. Sampling tubes were used to collect the reacting gas after ozone exposure on human lung cells or PUFAs and these were then analyzed by GC/MS. Results: When the VOCs from air and ozone exposure in MRC-5 cells were compared at different time points, 18 compounds were found to be significantly different. The methyl cyclopentane level increased acutely after oxidative stress to lung tissue. 3-methyl butanal was significantly associated with a high ozone level; carbon disulfide and dimethyl disulfide increased immediately following ozone exposure at 1.5 ppm for 30 min. 2-butanal and methyl cyclopentane were significant different after exposure to ozone 2 ppm as measured by the Tukey HSD test. 2-methyl-1-propene and pentane were also significantly different in the reactive gases of AA and LA after ozone exposure. Conclusions: VOCs may be significant markers of oxidative stress after the human lung cell is exposed to ozone in the impinger exposure system.起始頁-結束頁：82-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2011-30-01-0901篇名：何謂在地性？：從地方知識與在地範疇出發並列篇名：What is Locality? From the Perspective of Local Knowledge and Indigenous Category作者：楊弘任(Hung-Jen Yang)關鍵字：公共性;公民社會;文化轉譯;在地範疇;地方知識;邊界;boundary;civil society;cultural translation;indigenous category;local knowledge;public engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：臺灣社會九十年代社區總體營造風潮之後，關於「在地性」（locality）的課題極為要緊，「在地性」到底具有哪些特質，在不斷的現代性、都市化、全球化、符號消費化等外來力量衝擊後，「在地性」將會呈現哪些轉型的趨勢？同時，社造運動的外來行動者，也持續帶來關於長遠社會改革的知識實作與理念範疇，這些外來的知識與範疇，最終將會如何與在地既有的知識與範疇產生有意義的對話與轉型？本文由「邊界」（boundary）的概念入手，嘗試界定並探討「在地性」的性質。任何社造行動者都需在血緣、地緣、祭祀圈所造就的在地性邊界內，同時進行「邊界維繫」與「社會改革」的雙重行動。在地性邊界的歸屬感之下，也使村落社區或街道巷弄形成了代代相傳的「地方知識」與「在地範疇」。地方知識可再次分為「認知化的常識」與「身體化的技術」，後者更能以自身風格迎向外來的「專家知識」，進行有意義的相互轉譯。在社造風潮中，在地範疇最具重要性的即是「公共性」的範疇，在公共參與、公民社會與公民性的外來範疇引領下，在地性必須在實作中重啟想像力，找出以在地範疇有效轉譯外來範疇的新方向。英文摘要：In the wake of community making in Taiwan’s society in the 1990s, the issue of locality has become urgent. What characterizes ”locality”? From outside the community, those actors engaged in the movement of community making hold a set of knowledge and practice, as well as conceptual categories, about long-term social reform; how would these ideas about knowledge and categories from outside influence, or be influenced by, those rooted in the locality? This paper intervenes in the discussion of locality from the concept of ”boundary,” with a view to defining and complicating the meaning of ”locality.” The actors engaged in community making are required to commit themselves to the double actions, ”boundary maintenence” and ”social reform,” within the boundaries of the locality, established by kinship, local connections, and worships. In the movement of community making, the most significant aspect of indigenous category is ”public engagement.” Under the influence of those extrinsic categories, such as civil society and citizenship, locality has to be reconsidered in practice and a new way of translating the extrinsic categories into indigenous categories has to be discovered.起始頁-結束頁：5-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.00102篇名：地方學的發展與挑戰並列篇名：The Development and Challenges of Local Historical Studies作者：王御風(Yu-Fong Wang)關鍵字：地方學;地方政府;社區大學;社區總體營造;study of local history;local government;community college;grass-root community building期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：地方學為一九九○年代開始興起，以臺灣各地行政區域為範圍，對其進行歷史社會等相關面向之研究，為近年來臺灣地方文史研究熱潮之一。其與傳統地方研究最大之不同，在於地方學崛起時，受到臺灣史開始被重視，以及社區營造運動影響，因此有許多社造精神注入其中，也帶來臺灣地方文史研究的新面貌。本文回顧地方學發展至今的過程，發現地方學之推動，以地方政府、大學、社區大學、民間團體為主力。其中具有社造精神之社區大學與民間團體，因缺乏專職師資及學員參與，成績並不理想，反而是地方政府因其文史業務與地方學相符，與大學、社區大學、民間團體等大量合作，採用研討會及出版方式，如今已成為地方學發展之主力，更讓許多地區的地方學成為一年一度的學術研討會大拜拜，也使地方學最初之理想喪失，更與傳統地方研究不同之界線模糊。此亦成為地方學要持續發展，所面對的最大挑戰。英文摘要：The rise of local historical studies happened at around 1990s, with its research focuses on the socio-economical development of each local administrative area in Taiwan. Unlike traditional local studies, the new wave of local historical studies was very much supported by Taiwan historical academia as well as influenced by grass root movements of community building, which in turn brought new energy into historical studies in Taiwan. Looking back at the boom of local studies in recet years, this essay reveals that in almost every county and town, there are various institutions devoted to this filed, and the most important ones include local governments, universities, community colleges and civil society organizations. The later two, while closely involve in grass root movements of community building, do not yield fruitful results as compared with local governments and universities due to limitations in resources. The main player of local studies had been shifted to local governments, who very actively organize seminars on a yearly basis per the needs of its policies. This has gradually smother the zeal and enthusiasm of local historical studies and become a great challenge for its long-term development.起始頁-結束頁：31-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.00363篇名：「社區影像」作為文化政策：一個批判性的回顧並列篇名："Community Documentary" as Cultural Policy: A Critical Review作者：蔡慶同(Chin-Tong Tsai)關鍵字：紀錄片;社區總體營造;「社區影像」;documentary;community building;"community documentary"期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，由於紀錄技術的輕便，乃至紀錄權力的開放、紀錄影像的普及，臺灣紀錄片的發展由政宣與教化的功能，逐漸轉向常民與生活的紀實，尤其是在一九九○年代與社區總體營造結合之後，形塑了「社區影像」的文化政策。因此，本文透過回顧「社區影像」作為文化政策的歷史變遷，企圖從產製、文本與觀看的主要面向，分析影像用以營造社區的不同治理策略，包括了技術的移轉、地方的再現與影像的展示，藉此釐清其所引發的紀錄片導演或社造工作者、紀錄片作品或影像資料庫、觀看的實踐或實踐的觀看等等矛盾，並進一步提出未來深化「社區影像」的可能作法。英文摘要：This article discusses the nature and transformation of ”community documentary” as cultural policy in Taiwan. It is divided into three kinds of governance strategy including transferring technique, visualizing place and exhibiting image. All the discussions of different strategy are positioned in the context of community building and stressing the tendency towards documentary as record, archive and practice.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.00624篇名：「草地」的變遷：一個農村聚落地景的考察並列篇名：The Change of "Tsau-di": How the Landscape of a Rural VillageTransformed from Qing Dynasty to the 1970s作者：蔡嘉信(Jia-Shin Tsai)關鍵字：方言地名;地景變遷;土溝;草地;toponym in dialect;change of landscape;Tugou;Tsau-di期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究是一個歷史地景的考察，研究對象是嘉南平原中的一個農村聚落─土溝，行政區轄屬臺南市後壁區。它和臺灣大多數的農村一樣，被視為「草地」，被人稱為「草地所在」。「草地」是閩南方言中的詞彙，指的是較低度開發的鄉野地區，有別於開發程度較大的都市地區。作者關心的重點在於「草地」地景如何變成我們今天所看到的模樣。這個研究首先遇到的困難是土溝缺乏相關的文獻與史料，因此我從兩方面尋求替代的根據：一、進行居民的訪談及對現場環境的調查，並將所聽、所見標註在我所蒐集到的地圖上；二、參考相關歷史學與地理學方面的著作，把土溝跟臺灣歷史脈絡，以及嘉南平原的環境脈絡作連結，讓土溝不至於成為獨處於周圍環境與時代的個案。本研究拉出的歷史焦距橫跨了清代、日治至戰後一九七○年代，在土溝這個基地上，作者發現，整體而言，地景的變遷是一段由豐富到單調的過程。也就是說，土地特徵趨於均質，居民的土地經驗則趨於平淡。這其中有著自然、人為與國家三方力量在交互作用著，而土溝地景的呈現正是這些力量交互作用的結果。筆者認為，土溝作為一個具體存在的「草地」，它所呈現的地景樣貌與變遷應可作為一個認識鄉村、認識常民生活世界的參考點。英文摘要：By incorporating fieldwork interview, literature review, and visual representation, this paper examines the historical changes of Tugou village, a rural village located in the Jia-Nan Plain of Southwestern Taiwan. In local dialect Hokkien, Tugou is named as ”Tsau-di” (grass-land), which is a common name for countryside in Taiwan. But how does this rural grass-land becomes a rural village nowadays remains unseen in academic research. To understand the changing landscape in rural Taiwan, the author conducted interviews with local Tugou residents from summer 2007 to spring 2008 and collected information from fieldwork as well as from historical maps. Due to the lack of primary documents from Tugou, such as family tree records, extant land deals, or even photos, this author reconstructs the visual presentation of Tugou's historical landscape and analyzes the drawings here. The analysis shows that, on the one hand, in transition from Qing Dynasty, Colonial Period to the seventies, the landscape of Tugou has been homogenized as flat and accessible for farming. On the other hand, residents' relations with local environment have become more alienated than before. To sum up, this historical, visual analysis of Tugou's landscape and its relationship with local residents offers a crucial contribution to a better understanding of the everyday life in rural Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：89-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.00945篇名：農村再生條例關注行動中的象徵鬥爭並列篇名：The Symbolic Struggle in the Action of Concerning the Rural Regeneration Act作者：鍾怡婷(Yi-Ting Chung)關鍵字：農村再生;象徵權力;論述建構;Rural Regeneration;symbolic power;discourse construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：「農村再生條例」於二○○八年年底通過一讀後，引發臺灣社會的關注。農村是否會因這部法令而「再生」或是「再見」，成為反對者與支持者之間論辯的一條軸線。沿著此一軸線，展開了關於「什麼是農村『再生』？」以及「農村要『再生』成什麼樣子？」的意義鬥爭。在這一場關注農村再生條例的行動中，行動者各自運用不同的方式進行著意義鬥爭，意義的鬥爭透過象徵權力的操弄而施展開來，而民間社會則透過地方紮根的方式來進行對抗。「農村再生條例」的制訂與立法，全面引發了臺灣社會對「農」此一議題的重新關注。雖然已完成立法，但關注的行動並沒有結束，如同本文所試圖闡釋且吾人必須理解的是，國家與官方施展著象徵權力，而象徵權力作為建構論述的權力，會確立人們的認知與信仰，把現存的政治與經濟關係合理化，有助於不平等的社會關係間的再生產。因此，關注農村再生條例的行動不只是立法是否通過的鬥爭，實質上這是一場關於農村之意義的鬥爭，同時它也是意識型態的鬥爭，仍將繼續進行。英文摘要：Since the Rural Regeneration Act had passed the first reading, it had aroused the whole society paying attention on it. The debate between opponents and supporters is on the question if the rural in Taiwan will be revival or died. Along the axis, the struggle for the meaning of ”what is rural regeneration” and ”what will it be” has spread out. In the action of concerning the Rural Regeneration Act, agents involve in the struggle over the meaning in different ways and it was manipulate through symbolic power, while the civil society made confrontation through rooted in the local community. The Rural Regeneration Act had aroused the whole society to concern issues of agriculture again. Although it had been legislated, the action of concerning has not over. What the article explored and we should understand is that the power presented by the state and authority is symbolic power, which is the power of discourse construction, and it will establish our cognition and belief. Also, it will rationalize the existed relation of politics and economy, and then reproduce the unequal social relationship. Therefore, the concerning action is not merely the struggle for the legislation of Rural Regeneration Act. The struggle over the meaning and ideology of rural will still continue.起始頁-結束頁：139-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.01446篇名：地方志研究的新領域：評介巴兆祥著《中國地方志流播日本研究》並列篇名：New Field of Chorography Study: Critique on "Studies on Expansion of Chinese Chorography to Japan" by Zhao-Xiang Ba作者：郭佳玲(Chia-Ling Kuo)關鍵字：漢籍;地方志;方志學;Books of the Han dynasty;chorography期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：自古以來，中國和日本不論是在政治、經濟，或是文化交流上，都相互影響。其中，漢籍東傳日本，有其悠久的歷史和傳播的規模，因而構成中日民族間文化交流的重要內容。巴兆祥透過對中國地方志東傳日本的探討，系統地說明日本自十七世紀起對中國地方志的搜集方式、探討中國地方志在日本境內的傳播與變化、比較日本不同機構收藏的中國地方志書版本及其價值，以及論述中國地方志對日本地方志纂修所產生的影響；並以豐富的史料為基礎，運用多學科的研究方式，除提出具獨創性的見解外，亦深化了中國地方志流播日本的研究內容，不僅為從事中國地方志研究者，提供了許多珍貴的參考資料，也開創了地方志研究的一個新領域。英文摘要：Chinese and Japanese have been mutually influenced no matter on politics, economics, or on cultural exchange since very old age. Among those exchanges and influences from books of the Han dynasty east expanding to Japan, its expanding scale with very long-term history causes a very important content of cultural exchange between Chinese and Japanese. Zhao-Xiang Ba systematically explains that the way Japanese collected Chinese chorography, discussed Chinese chorography's expansion and changes in Japan, compared collected Chinese chorography's versions and values from different organizations in Japan, and mentioned Chinese chorography's editing influences to Japanese chorography by discussions of Chinese chorography east expanding to Japan. BA not only brings up his unique views, but also deepens research contents that Chinese chorography expanded to Japan based on abundant historic data and research modes of multiple subjects. The efforts offer precious references and create a new field of chorography studies.起始頁-結束頁：161-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.01667篇名：戰爭與和平：女性主義多元觀點評述並列篇名：Evaluating Feminist Multiple Perspectives on War and Peace作者：黃競涓(Ching-Chane Hwang)關鍵字：性別差異結構;陽性特質;軍事主義;母性和平;陰性特質;War and Peace;Maternal Peace;Masculinity;Femininity;Hypermasculinity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文首先簡介一些女性主義流派對戰爭與和平之觀點及主張，包括有條件義戰者、批判性別差異結構中陽性特質與軍國主義者、質疑和平本體論為陽性思維者、母性和平者、本質主義者以及自由主義者等，並討論女性主義與積極和平之關係。隨後逐一檢討這些女性主義流派主張之優點與缺點，說明討論戰爭起源勢必要討論和平如何可能。在探討過程中指出數個重要爭議，例如本質主義與非本質主義之爭論、平等與差異之爭執，以及絕對和平與有條件義戰之爭辯。順帶說明戰爭對女性產生的正負面影響，最後對本文的討論內容做進一步的評論。女性主義有關戰爭與和平之論述，呈現論點多元並存，且有時各自矛盾甚至自我抵銷。但所有女性主義者皆批判主流戰爭研究所自滿之「武裝和平」，也批評主流和平研究所專注之「以控制衝突為典範」的研究議程。大多數女性主義者皆批判陽性陰性特質二元對立所建構之軍事主義，及各種強者宰制弱者之結構暴力。英文摘要：This paper intends to do the following jobs: (1) introducing various kinds of feminist perspectives on war and peace; (2) evaluating each perspective's strength and weakness and making some comparison among one another; (3) suggesting further research on some important issues. These critical issues including some important debates as follows: (1) self vs other; (2) masculinity vs femininity; (3) essentialism vs non-essentialism; (4) war vs conditional just war; (5) conditional peace vs absolute peace and (6) equality vs difference. We could be self and be other's other; therefore our attitude towards other could be various depending on other's attitude towards us. How does masculinity eventually lead to militarism and war? Is femininity actually related to peace? Can non-essentialists can really avoid the trap of essentialism? Does just war have truly objective standards? Conditional just war cannot be determined objectively. Is there a so-called absolute peace? What is the balance points between equality and defference?起始頁-結束頁：181-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.01868篇名：結婚最佳時機的性別差異：一個以臺灣人口資料的模擬配對研究並列篇名：Gender Differences on the Best Marriage Timing: A Simulation Match Study of Mate Selection by Taiwan Data作者：張榮富(Jung-Fu Chang)關鍵字：擇偶;模擬配對;結婚年齡;婚姻市場;跨國婚姻;match;marriage age;marriage market;cross-national marriage期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：我該與眼前這一個結婚？還是等待下一個呢？本文運用理性選擇假設下的「擇偶模擬配對模型」來探討結婚最佳時機的男女差異。本文把「結婚最佳時機」的概念區分為「配對成功率」（代表尋找伴侶的難易）與「擇偶利得」（代表結婚意願的強弱）。個人的擇偶資源（外貌與所得）與婚姻市場（可婚異性與同性競爭者的人數與品質）將隨年齡的增加而改變，故模擬配對後，各年齡層的配對成功率與擇偶利得也將不同。以二○○○年臺灣未婚人口的資料，模擬二十至四十九歲男女的配對，結果發現：（1）女性配對成功率的高峰比男性來得早，但是下降的速度比男性快。（2）男性擇偶利得的高峰發生得比女性早，但在年長時有明顯回升的跡象，女性則在擇偶利得高峰過後一路下降。（3）二○○○年時男女最佳的結婚時機都是在三十至三十四歲，男女性在此年齡層有較高的配對成功率與擇偶利得。（4）女性一旦錯過了擇偶成功率或利得的最佳年齡，其負面後果（成功率與利得的下降）要比男性來得嚴重。（5）男女延遲婚姻的理由並不一樣。男性擇偶利得的高峰比其配對成功率的高峰來得早，想早婚的男性，可能苦於當時配對成功率較低而「不易」結婚。反之，女性擇偶利得的高峰卻比其配對成功率的高峰來得晚，有較高結婚機會的年輕女性可能因擇偶利得較低而在當時「不想」早婚。（6）本文於最後運用上述延遲婚姻的男女差異討論臺灣女性不婚與男性外婚的問題。英文摘要：This study applies the ”simulation matching model” for ”gender differences on the best marriage timing”. The best marriage timing includes two concepts: the successful mating rate (SMR) which represents the mating difficulty and the mate-selection benefit (MSB) which represents the marriage willingness. In the model, individual's mating resources (physical attractiveness and income) and marriage market (the quantity and quality of the marriageable partner and competitors) will change as individuals' age change. The study has found: (1) the peak of women's SMR comes earlier than men's, but it falls down faster than men's. (2) The peak of men's MSB comes earlier than women's. (3) The peak of men's MSB comes earlier than the peak of SMR. Therefore, those young men, who would be willing to marry earlier, may confront a lower marriage opportunities. (4) In contrast, the peak of women's MSB comes later than the peak of SMR. Therefore, some young women may miss their highest marriage chance in their earlier age and become never married because of waiting and expecting for the higher MSB later. (5) Taiwanese men and women confront a dilemma of marriage decision, in which the peak of MSB and the peak of SMR does not match together.起始頁-結束頁：215-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201112.02209篇名：「政治迷霧下的ECFA研究」專號導言作者：鄭政秉期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201109.000510篇名：ECFA的爭議脈絡與自由化進程之探索：以「兩岸經貿關係正常化」做為分析視角並列篇名：On the Causes of Disputes and Uncertainties in ECFA: From the Perspective of Normalization ofCross-strait Trade Relations作者：洪財隆(Honigmann Tsai-Lung Hong)關鍵字：兩岸經貿關係正常化;經濟整合;經濟合作架構協議（ECFA）;economic integration; normalization;ECFA期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在應用經濟整合概念，察看兩岸經貿關係的現狀、本質與特色，以及馬英九總統在二○○八年五月就任以來的相應政策與思維，並論證何以「兩岸經貿關係正常化」此一概念，不僅已逐漸成為兩岸三方（北京、臺灣的藍綠）的共同政治修辭（rhetoric），也可透過賦予適當的操作性定義，作為評判兩岸經貿關係進展的依據。中國與臺灣已先後成為WTO會員，兩岸經貿關係從此又多了國際規範面向，WTO的最惠國待遇（MFN）普遍原則，自然也成了測度兩岸經貿關係是否符合正常化的極佳標準。ECFA簽署之前，兩岸經貿關係乃處於MFN minus與MFN兩種狀態。儘管ECFA只是架構協議，但由於兩岸部分產品「互惠與優惠」率先實施（「早收清單」），ECFA之後的兩岸經貿關係變成MFN minus、MFN，以及MFN plus三種狀態。循此分析可知，純就經貿意義而言，ECFA其實是兩岸經貿關係正常化與進一步自由化同時兼具。兩岸制度性的經濟整合，除了功能性議題（如直航、觀光等）之外，對臺灣內部當構成不小壓力。ECFA的諸多爭議、後續協商，以及向WTO做正式通報（notifica-tion）何以面臨困難等前瞻問題，都可以在此脈絡下看出端倪。本文也據此推論，ECFA勢必徘徊在「WTO規範」與「兩岸特色」之間，內容與自由化進程將因而充滿不確定性。英文摘要：Because cross-straits economic issues have been highly publicized, Taiwan, which has not yet fully fulfilled its WTO commitments, is now under pressure to shorten its timetable for liberalizing its markets following the signing of the ECFA. The number of Chinese products prohibited from import into Taiwan accounts for 20% of Taiwan's total import items. This indicates that cross-straits economic and trade relations are yet to be normalized. However, the ECFA is by definition more preferential than WTO MFN treatment.Taking the trade in goods as an example of further elaboration, when a prohibited item, under ”WTO-minus” provisions, become a legal import, its tariff level is reduced from the set tariff ceiling to MFN tariff rates. If it is included in the ECFA, a “WTO-plus” pact, the tariff rate is further cut to zero. That is to say, inclusion in the ECFA of items on the list of prohibited imports to Taiwan will deal a powerful blow to the Taiwanese economy, industry, and labor marketECFA is designed as a ” Framework Agreement” setting out the objectives and principles of the prospective negotiations plus ”Early Harvest Program” with a list of limited products to apply for preferential treatment So goes the argument that Taiwan might find it difficult to comply fully with the WTO rules imposed on developed members engaging in regional trade agreements, particularly the criteria of ” substantially all the trade” (SAT) in products originating in the partner 's territory since there is no ”plan and schedule” in the legal text of ECFA. Besides, it is therefore difficult to make a reliable assessment of economic impacts from ECFA because its contents remain open.起始頁-結束頁：9-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201109.001311篇名：Advantages and Limitations of President Ma's Cross-Strait Negotiation: CECA/ECFA as an Example並列篇名：馬英九總統兩岸談判的優勢與限制：以CECA／ECFA為例作者：徐斯儉(Szu-Chien Hsu)關鍵字：ECFA;兩岸經濟合作架構協議;兩岸關係;馬英九;ECFA;Cross-Strait Relations;Ma Ying-Jeo期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在有關「衝突策略」的討論中，Thomas Schelling指出，假如正在進行國際談判的執政者，刻意地運用其在國內所受的限制，那麼在對外談判中會有較大籌碼。類似的觀點也在Robert Putnam的「雙層賽局模型」中提出。這一模型認為，當一國內部的贏方和國際上的對手打交道時，此種外交談判的情境就會出現。Putnam也指出，當一國內的贏方相對上沒那麼強勢時，在對外談判的過程中反而會有好處。這篇論文以雙層賽局模型以及Schelling的觀點作為分析架構，檢視馬英九總統就CECA或ECFA和北京的協商過程。本文發現了若干個尚未被雙層賽局模型檢驗過的潛在預設。這些發現可以幫助我們暸解，馬英九總統和北京進行CECA或ECFA協商策略的成功之處與限制所在，同時也有助於審視雙層賽局理論模型本身。英文摘要：In the ”Strategy of Conflict”, Schelling conjectured that if an executive intentionally ties hi s or her hands with domestic constraints， he or she may gain greater leverage in international bargaining. A similar point has also been raised by Robert Putnam with his ”two-level game model”. This model argues that such a diplomatic bargain can be reached when domestic win-set intersects with the international one. Putnam also argues that when a domestic win-set is small, it can be a bargaining advantage for the negotiator. This paper intends to re view President Ma Ying-Jeou's bargaining process with Beijing on the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Arrangement (CECA) or Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) with the analytic framework of two-level game and the Schelling Conjecture. This paper finds some implicit assumptions that are not well examined by the two-level game model. These findings may help us understand the success and limitations of President Ma's negotiation strategy with Beijing on CECA/ECFA, and also help us review the theoretical model of the two-level game.起始頁-結束頁：55-94資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201109.005912篇名：愛恨ECFA：兩岸貿易與臺灣的階級政治並列篇名：Cross-Strait Trade and Class Politics in Taiwan作者：林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin);胡克威(Alfred Ko-We Hu)關鍵字：社會階層化;階級政治;選舉;投票行為;臺灣;貿易;兩岸關係;social stratification;class politics;election;voting behavior;trade;Taiwan;cross-strait relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：兩岸經貿談判已經引起臺灣政壇的重大爭議與社會衝突。以兩岸經濟合作協議（Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement，簡稱ECFA）為例，本文發現臺灣各階級民眾對海峽兩岸經貿利益分配的認知大不相同。根據中央研究院二○一○年第一次社會意向調查資料庫的分析，我們發現：（1）臺灣各階級民眾之間對ECFA意見分歧，中下階級認為兩岸經貿關係擴大將使貧富差距惡化，因而反對ECFA，資方與管理階層則認為兩岸經貿關係擴大將使經濟成長，因而支持ECFA，（2）對兩岸經貿往來的認知影響了臺灣各階級選民的政治行為，認為兩岸經貿有益於臺灣經濟者－多數是資方與中產管理階級，傾向國民黨代表他們的階級利益；認為兩岸經貿將導致貧富差距惡化者－主要是工農與中下階級，傾向民進黨代表他們的階級利益；最近幾次選舉的結果，似乎可以看出臺灣選民的投票行為，已經受到民眾對兩岸貿易與階級利益分配認知的影響。英文摘要：Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA), a cross strait trade agreement has irritated political debates and social discontents in Taiwan. In this article we investigate the class politics of trade and its impact on the political behavior of Taiwanese voters. According to a national survey of 2010, which asked 1,242 Taiwanese adults about their opinions of the trade agreement, we found that social class shaped people's expectation and preference of trade, which influenced their voting behavior. The members of working class and self employed opposed the agreement because they expected that the expending cross-strait trade will deteriorate income inequality. In contrast, the capitalists and managers supported the agreement because they expected that the expending trade with China will improve economic performance of Taiwan. The different expectations of ECFA impacts connected with the voting behavior - the ECFA supporters, mostly capitalists and managers, preferred to sustain the pan-blue camp; while the ECFA opposition, mostly the working class and self-employed, preferred to support the pan-green camp. The results displayed that the c1ass voting and trade coalition matter in the recent elections in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：95-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201109.009913篇名：如何看待ECFA簽訂的戰略利益：區域經濟分工轉型下的政治經濟分析並列篇名：The Strategic Interest of the ECFA: a Politico-Economic Analysis on Regional Economic Division of Labor作者：祭宏政(Hung-Jeng Tsai)關鍵字：EFCA;全球化;東亞區域性;美元循環;ECFA, East Asian open regionalism;regional transformation;US hegemony期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：臺灣朝野對EFCA的爭論。從國際間的自由貿易、對中貿易依賴、關稅減讓項目與時程、產業轉型與相關的失業輔導救濟、乃至於GTAP等貿易模型設算問題等等，正反雙方對立，幾無共識可言。本文論證，把ECFA定義為「純經濟」議題、甚至於再縮小為自由貿易議題，會產生一種誤導性的迷思。「全球化」、「區域化」或「貿易自由化」都是在一定的國際政治與社會結構中，由一連串各國政府互動下的歷史產物，經常反映的是強權國家的利益折衝與計算。臺灣在這種國際政治經濟變動格局中，需要先確定自己的戰略性利益何在，才能有更細部的關稅減讓項目與時程、產業轉型與相關失業輔導與救濟等具體的方案設計。目前東亞區域主義是在開放式與封閉式之間的光譜上移動，牽涉到東亞強權之間的角力變化。本文建議，臺灣的基本戰略利益應該是在強權主導的局勢變化中維持戰略平衡。英文摘要：This article analyzes Taiwan's strategic position by signing ECFA in terms of international political economy. We first argue that the core of the East Asian open regionalism after WWII was the US-Japan security treaty and flying geese production networks. Both of them worked together to support the US hegemony in East Asia. However, flying geese system was transformed and ex tended to include China after the 1980s due to the US financial regulation, new division of labor due to technological innovation, and Chinese economic reform. As globalization in this region was set back by the East Asian financial crisis in 1997 and failure of Doha round of the WTO negotiation, ASEAN plus one emerged as a new model for economic regionalization, in which China 's influence was weighted and created Taiwan's ECFA issue. Nevertheless, The US hegemony, which stands for open East Asia n regionalism, still holds a firm regional leadership and therefore counter-balances a closed East Asian economic regionalization. We argue that Taiwan should keep a subtle balance in this regional transformation and measure its own strategic position by four criteria, that is, regional military change, international financial standard, global final market, and technological leadership.起始頁-結束頁：135-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201109.013914篇名：離返與性別規範：一九六○至一九七○年代沖繩諸島的臺灣女工並列篇名：Roundtrip and Gender Norms:Taiwanese Female Emigrant Workers in Okinawa Islands from 1960 to 1970作者：邱琡雯(Shwu-Wen Chiou)關鍵字：性別規範;臺灣女工;跨國勞動遷徙;家族生存策略;gender norms;Taiwanese female emigrant workers;transnational labor migration;strategies for family sustenance and improvementand improvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文站在送出國而非接受國的立場，從離返與性別主見花的關連性切入，解構一九六○至一九七○年代，沖繩諸島臺灣女工的跨國生命經驗，並以嘉義縣大林鎮八位女工的訪談內容進行描述與分析。研究發現：一、女工出國工作被當成是一種夫家的家族生存策略，從夫家外於女工出國動機的左右、夫家對於女工移動形式的干預、以及夫家在女工出國期間的支援等三點可以看出，這個策略的決定和行使，不在女工身上而是在於夫家。二、女工在這趟「苦工旅行」中，必須承擔精神上的苦痛也就是想家，女工返鄉後，確實對於改善夫家家計有所貢獻，但她們對辛苦賺來的金錢無權過問，與夫家成員的關係變化也不大，更沒有去反省身處農村性別規範下的困境與卑微，只能繼績默默地吞忍。究其原因，她們本身對於傳統性別角色的認知根深柢固，而且，農村父權制家庭內的倫常關係確實難以轉變。英文摘要：Viewing from the perspectives of ”roundtrip and gender norms”, this paper analyzes Taiwanese female emigrant workers ' transnational life experiences in Okinawa islands from 1960 to 1970 from the standpoint of sending country instead of the receiving one. The data were obtained through interviewing eight woman workers in Dalin township, Chiayi County. The main findings are: (1) For wives to work as emigrant workers was considered a strategy of sustenance and improvement for their husbands ' families. The husbands' families exert inf1uence on the wives' motive of working abroad and their migration style. (2) Not only had the female emigrant workers to endure all kinds of hardship, but also financially contribute to their husbands' families when they return. They had no power to dispose any of their income, and their situation in the husbands' families remained unchanged. Moreover, these women never reflected on their inferior positions under the village's patriarchal culture. To conclude, the ”roundtrip” experience bring no change to the status quo of these female workers because (1) they are deeply influenced by the traditional gender role; (2) the hierarchical system in the village's traditional patriarchal family is almost impossible to accept any change.起始頁-結束頁：167-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201109.017115篇名：自由的多重思索：「自由主義、儒家傳統與多元價值」專輯•小引作者：潘光哲期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.000516篇名：自由主義、新儒家與一九五○年代臺灣自由民主運動：從徐復觀的視角出發並列篇名：Liberalism, New Confucianism and the Democracy Movement of Taiwan in the 1950s: From Xu Fuguan's Perspective作者：李淑珍(Su-San Lee)關鍵字：自由主義;新儒家;自由民主運動;徐復觀;胡適;雷震;殷海光;liberalism;new Confucianism;liberal democracy movement;Xu Fuguan;Hu Shi;Lei Zhen;Yin Haiguang期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：一九五○年代的臺灣自由民主運動由外省知識份子主導，外拒大陸共產極權統治，內抗島內國民黨威權體制。這場運動固然以《自由中國》為核心，而同樣主張反共、提倡民主的《民主評論》也扮演了相當角色。它的創辦人－新儒家徐復觀，與自由主義陣營亦敵亦友，是當年民主運動重要的參與考與觀察者。本文從徐復觀的視角出發，引用文集、日記、信件、回憶錄等史料，透過思想史的脈絡化分析和敘事筆法，試圖重建白色恐怖時期的歷史現場。由徐復觀與自由派領袖的交往中可以看出：胡適在政治上瞻顧徘徊，殷海光充滿自我衝突，雷震則富有包容性與行動力；這些性格特色決定了他們在民主運動中扮演的不同角色。文中也將由徐復觀與《自由中國》作者群歷次論戰，說明新儒家與自由主義者的思想歧異。在政治經濟議題上，有「左翼自由主義」與「古典自由主義」的不同；在哲學立場上，則有「理想主義」與「經驗主義」的扞格；而雙方對「自由」的理解、對「政治與道德的關係」的看法，更是針鋒相對。放在華人思想史的脈絡來看這些討論上承五四時期論戰，下<U+5553>台灣黨外民主運動，也預示了一九九○年代大陸新左派與自由主義者的爭議。這些議題的不斷重複，代表著二十世紀華人困境的持續。英文摘要：Xu Fuguan (1904-1082) was a Confucian democrat active in the political and cultural scenes on Taiwan during the period of White Terror. His friendship and debates with liberals of Free China shed much light on the intellectual dimension of Taiwan's democracy movement in the 1950s Through the approach of contextualization and narrative history, this article tries to capture the milieu of that era, revealing the personalities of leading liberal intellectuals and their different roles in the democratization enterprise as seen from Xu's eyes. It also illustrates the economical, political, philosophical and moral polemics between new Confucians and liberals from Xu's perspective. Those debates were reminiscent of the controversies of the May Fourth Movement while anticipating the contentions between liberals and the New Left in China in the 1990s. Such repetitions suggest that the predicaments confronting Chinese societies pcrsisted throughout the 20(superscript th) century.起始頁-結束頁：9-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.001317篇名：自由與平等：《自由中國》時期殷海光、夏道平對政治與經濟關係的反思並列篇名：Liberty or Equality: Yin Hai-Guang and Xia Dao-Ping's Reflection On Relationship between Politics and Economy in "Free China"作者：何卓恩(Zhuo-En He)關鍵字：自由;平等;殷海光;夏道平;《自由中國》;freedom;equality;Taiwan;1950s;"Free China"期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：二十世紀上半期，自由主義在大陸發展的時候，受強勁的社會主義思潮的影響，存在相當顯著的社會平等、計劃經濟埋想，追求「新自由主義」和「自由的社會主義」。一九四九年部分自由主義者逃亡臺灣，為了體現思想本質上與共產主義意識型態的區隔，出現真假平等、真假社會主義的論述。朝鮮戰爭爆發後，國民黨迅速向集權方向發展，殷海光、夏道平等自由者開始重新思考自由與平等的關係問題，主張充分的自由經濟，以經濟自由促進政治和思想自由。無論他們的反思是消極面的還是積極面的，也無論這種反思是否代表了自由與平等關係思想的「終結」，「沒有經濟自由就沒有政治自由」這個意涵的揭示，從中國近代思想史的角度觀察，的確標誌著相當重要的發展。英文摘要：In the first half of 20 century, by the strong influence of socialism, there were some notable trends of social equality and planned economy ideas in Chinese liberalism. After some liberals fled to Taiwan in 1949, to show the difference from communist, they began pay attention to discriminate about ”true” equality (socialism) and ”false ”equality (socialism). And after the outbreak of the Korean War, the United States got involved in Taiwan's military security affairs, the KMT quickly developed to the direction of Centralization of State Power. Liberals like Yin Hai-Guang and Xia Dao-Ping began rethink of the relationship between liberty and equality, advocating a free economy to promote political freedom and thought freedom. This adjustment indicated the change of political background of society could affect the direction of some trend of thought just as the learning resource did. Revealing of the meaning ”there is no political freedom without economic freedom” indeed marks a very important development from the perspective of the modern Chinese intellectual history, whether they reflect on its positive side or negative side, and whether this represents the ”end” on ideas of freedom and equality.起始頁-結束頁：91-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.009518篇名：殷海光對儒家的批判與反思並列篇名：Yin Hai-Guang's Critique and Resonsideration of Confucianism作者：簡明海(Ming-Hai Jian)關鍵字：殷海光;新儒家;自由主義;五四;反傳統;Yin Hai-Guang;New-Confucianist;May Fourth;Liberalism;Anti-tradition期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：當代臺海兩岸自由主義代表人物之一的殷海光，以「五四之子」的身分聞名，自稱「五四的兒子」與「五四後期人物」的殷海光，其與新儒家的針鋒相對，更突出其反儒、反傳統的濃厚色彩。這從過去的學術研究成果中，已有充分的展現。然而相關研究或強調殷海光的自由主義與反傳統的部分，或者與新儒家論辨的面向，卻沒有對其反儒思想進一步深入探討，本文即立論於此，希望以此課題為重點，省思殷海光反省儒家的背景與特點，並介紹說明其對比的自我檢討， 並對其反儒思想提出反思，以提供此議題深化探討的可能。具體而言，主要將殷海光早期的邏輯方法分析論著《怎樣判別是非》，以及因反傳統言論被查禁且對中西文化論戰提出回應的《中國文化的展望》二書，說明殷海光反儒思想的主要論點，並區分為政治與文化兩方面來討論殷海光的反儒觀念。英文摘要：Yin Hai-Guang is a important intellect of modem history in China and Taiwan. Yin Hai-Guang is called ”son of May Fourth” or ”a post May-Fourthian”. He was an anti-traditionalist and a ruggedly individualistic man His critique of Confucianism and New-Confucianist is very strong. Yin Hai-Guang is a great liberalist of modem history in China and Taiwan. We can start from Yin Hai-Guang's anti-traditionalist Confucian modes of thinking to approach the question.起始頁-結束頁：127-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.013119篇名：儒學也能推導出現代法治原則嗎？以「道德自主性」為中心的探討並列篇名：Can We Deduce the Principle of Rule of Law from Confucianism? An Analysis Based on the Conception of Moral Autonomy作者：何信全(Hsin-Chuan Ho)關鍵字：儒學;自由主義;法治原則;道德自主性;普遍性;Confucianism;Liberalism;Principle of Rule of Law;Moral Autonomy;Universalizability期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討儒學傳統在「聖王之治」理想之下的人治格局，是否亦有可能經由新的詮釋，創造性地轉化為現代普遍規則之治的法治思維與論述。本文檢視西方自由主義的法治論證、從洛克立基於人的理性以論法治之下的自由；肇端於盧梭「普遍意志」，經康德轉化而落實為「無條件律令」之道德自主性法治論證；以迄維爾斯祈嚮由理性的自律主體所構成合乎正義原則之法治國家。透過比較分析，本文嘗試從儒家孟子以迄陸象山、王陽明此一心學脈絡，進行普遍法則之治可能資源的挖掘。本文指出，就思想內在理路而言，從孟子性善論、陸象山「心即理」到王陽明「致良知」的道德哲學，在中國歷史脈絡中固然導向德治仁政的人治格局；然而與西方近代自由主義立基於「道德自主性」的法治論證對比分析，其實可以發掘出儒家心學傳統中亦蘊含充沛的「道德自主性」觀念內涵，得以推導出現代法治原則。英文摘要：In this paper, I would like to investigate the issue whether it is possible to deduce the principle of rule of law from Confucianism. Admittedly, instead of ”rule of law”, the ideal state is ”rule of sage-king” in traditional China. Nevertheless, the point is whether it is possible to seek the resources for the justifications of rule of law in Confucianism by a new interpretation or so-called 'creative transformation'. Through the comparative analyses with the justifications of rule of law in liberalism, such as Lock's 'liberty under the rule of law' based on human reason, the transformation from Rousseau's 'general will' to Kant's 'categorical imperative', and Rawls's principles of justice which are analogous to categorical imperative, I indicate we could deduce the principle of rule of law from idealistic Confucianism which originated from Mencius, through Sung-Ming to contemporary neo-Confucianism. As the justifications of rule of universal law, Mencius's ”human nature is good”, Lu Hsiang-shan's ”mind is principles” and Wang Yang-ming's chih liang-chih are all based on the conception of moral autonomy. From this viewpoint, I conclude that it seems possible to deduce the principle of rule of law from Confucianism.起始頁-結束頁：165-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.016920篇名：平權的制度與個人並列篇名：Equal Rights in Institutions and Individuals作者：陸品妃(Pin-Fei Lu)關鍵字：能力;承認;平權;自由主義;制度;道德;個人;Capability;Recognition;Equal Right;Liberalism;Institution;Moral person期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：我們由國家社會制度以及個人生活行動的角度此二切入點，來分析公民如何得以作為真正的平權道德主體這個問題，容易推得的一項結論是，平權的主體之可能，勢必仰賴公民承認彼此自由又平等的能力。承認彼此自由又平等的能力此項初步必要的條件既然如此重要，公共政策的設計或施行者，以及公民負擔的責任，又應該怎樣劃分與界定，才能夠促成它的實現？本文首先將討論與提出一項論證說明：當代英美分配正義理論關於「甚麼的平等」（”equality of what”）問題脈絡論辯中，基於「能力」（capability）的平等衡量項之目標設定，相較於其它選項，因為直接促成個人承認能力的實行及其他理由，而為本文倡議的平權制度選項。其次，透過概念分析的方式，本文為平權公民負有的個人行動責任，亦即，如何互相承認彼此自由又平等，提供「能力」進路允許的規範性說明。英文摘要：If we search for the ways citizens can be moral agents bearing with genuine equal rights from the vantage points of the institution and the individual citizen, an immediate result is this: the very possibility of moral agents bearing with genuine equal rights must be determined by the capacity individuals recognizing each others as free and equal. Since the capacity plays such a key role in realizing genuine equal rights for all, what exactly should institutions and individuals take the capacity be, so that it also provides an account specifying reasonable and distinguished responsibilities for institutions and individuals? This article is to facilitate two aims in responding to the question. First, accepting Nancy Fraser's integrating ideal orientating for both redistribution and recognition, I argue that, comparably, due to its necessary, efficient and direct effect in promoting and substantiating the capacity recognizing each other as free and equal, 'the capability approach,' first introduced by Amartya Sen, in the debate 'Equality of What' should be the chosen theory in governing the institutional design. Second, some normative aspects for individuals realizing genuine equal rights are also made clear.起始頁-結束頁：197-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.020101篇名：多元社會下的公共治理：以《自由中國》雜誌為指引並列篇名：Public Governance in Pluralistic Society: in Light of Free China Magazine作者：吳鯤魯(Kun-Lu Wu)關鍵字：治理;多元社會;體制設計;自由中國雜誌;governance;pluralistic society;institutional design;Free China Magazine期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：「治理」的研究在臺灣的公共事務與管理學界逐漸形成為重點理論傾向，但既有的文獻較少運用於思考如何於自由化與民主化的多元社會中，推動有效的濟弱扶傾公共政策又免於過度干預自主領域，且能就整體體制設計建構更好的願景。本文試圖以《自由中國》雜誌諸前賢雷震、殷海光、戴杜衡的思考與言論為指引，探究「治理」文獻，衡諸臺灣展現多元社會的歷史與現實，由之接引出設計與建立可能的體制及相應政策的轉變方向。比較當代政治哲學家就體制設計的思考，本文的研究發現《自由中國》雜誌諸前賢，特別是戴杜衡先生要求提昇社會領域自主性及多元治理的想法，先驅性地透露當代多元社會與公共治理原則的端倪。英文摘要：The literature of governance has become a new focus of public affair theory and management research, but still delinked from the design of institution in reality and the future scenario of totality. This article is written in light of the thoughts of authors from Free China Magazine, especially that of Mr. Lei Chien, Mr. Yin Hai-kuang and Mr. Dai Du-heng, to compile the history of development of pluralistic society of Taiwan and to bridge the gap between the governance towards plurality in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：225-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201106.02292篇名：自由的歷史建構：「臺灣自由主義傳統的歷史建構」專輯．小引作者：潘光哲期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.00063篇名：《民主評論》的新儒家與《自由中國》的自由主義者關係變化初探：以徐復觀與殷海光為中心的討論並列篇名：Initial Exploration of the Relationship Change between New-Confucianism of "The Democratic Review" andLiberalists of "Free China": Taking Hsu Fu-Kuan and Yin Hai-guang as the Focuses作者：蘇瑞鏘(Jui-Chiang Su)關鍵字：民主評論;自由中國;徐復觀;殷海光;The Democratic Review;Free China;Hsu Fu-Kuan;Yin Hai-Guang期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：《民主評論》與《自由中國》創刊的背景相當類似，其民主與反共的目標也相同，早年主要成員的私交也不錯，然後來何以關係惡化？本文從雙方內在哲學與文化立場的差異、外在政治形勢的變動，乃至個人的恩怨等面向，分析彼此關係的變化。其中，外在政治形勢變動的視角，乃前人較少分析的面向。本文以為，《民主評論》與《自由中國》原本的哲學與文化立場早已隱含矛盾。但在一九四九年創刊之初，中共政權是兩個刊物共同的「主要矛盾」，哲學與文化立場的差異只是兩個刊物間的「次要矛盾」。然到了一九五○年代中期以後，臺灣來自中共政權的威脅明顯減低，原本《自由中國》與《民主評論》已存在哲學與文化立場的「次要矛盾」遂躍升為「主要矛盾」，雙方關係於是逐漸惡化。再加上兩個刊物的成員間存在一些個人恩怨等因素，到了一九五○年代後期，終因爆發激烈的民主與傳統論戰，導致雙方正式的決裂。英文摘要：”The Democratic Review” and ”Free China's” background of beginning publication was similar, their goals of democracy and anti-communism were the same, and the personal friendship among the main members in their early years was good, but why did the relation deteriorate later? The thesis analyzed the change of mutual relationship from the dimensions of internal differences of philosophic and cultural standpoints, external change of political situation, and personal conflict. Among them, the visual angle of external change of political situation was the dimension that previous researchers' did little analysis. The thesis believed that the original philosophic and cultural standpoints of ”The Democratic Review” and ”Free China” already had contradiction. However, in the beginning of 1949 when they began publication, Chinese Communist Regime was the two periodicals' common ”major contradiction, ”and the differences of philosophic and cultural standpoints were only ”minor contradiction. ” Yet after mid 1950s, in Taiwan the thread from Chinese Communist Regime obviously lessened, and the ”minor contradiction” of philosophic and cultural standpoints originally existed between ”The Demoratic Review” and ”Free China” thus leaped to be the ”major contradiction,” and therefore, both parties' relationship gradually deteriorated. Moreover, owing to personal conflict among the members of two periodicals, the intense controversy of democracy and tradition exploded finally in late 1950s, resulting in both parties’ formal breakup.起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.00124篇名：黨化教育vs公共教育：《自由中國》的教育論述並列篇名：Party Education VS Public Education: Education Discusses in the "Free China"作者：何卓恩(Zhuo-En He)關鍵字：黨化教育;《自由中國》;知識份子;公共空間;Party Education;the Free China;Liberal intellectuals;Public space期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：教育獨立於政治是近代中國社會轉型的基本方向，然而隨著革命聲浪的興起，教育卻日益政黨化。一九四八年中華民國憲法的實施，本應為教育公共化開闢道路，卻因內戰造成兩岸對峙的政治格局，反而使教育政黨化愈演愈烈。不過在臺灣地區，由於自由知識份子的存在，爭取文教公共空間的努力沒有懈怠過，政治主宰教育一直受到批評，直到臺灣政治的轉型、文教公共化的初步實現。二十世紀五十年代國民黨在臺灣重建黨化教育，自由知識份子通過《自由中國》半月刊表達極大關注，發表大量文章對黨化教育的內容和黨化教育組織展開了全面的揭露和抨擊，並推動了文教公共空間理念的建構。雖然這一過程中《自由中國》也顯示出一些認識侷限，而且結果亦沒有扭轉國民黨的教育政策，但是這種建基於人格力量的鬥爭，為幾十年後臺灣地區教育逐步邁向獨立發展播下了火種。英文摘要：Education independence from politics is the basic direction of the social transformation in modern China, but with the rise of the revolutionary wave, education is increasingly controlled by some political parties. After the implementation of the ROC Constitution in 1948, which should have paved the way for the freedom of education, the political situation appeared serious standoff between the mainland China and Taiwan as a result of the civil war, and the party- controlled education get more obvious. But in Taiwan area, liberal intellectuals had been fighting for public spaces of cultural and educational and criticizing the party-controlled education until the transformation of Taiwan's political and the initial implementation of culture and education public space. In 1950s, the Nationalist Party re-established its party-monopolized education in Taiwan. Liberal intellectuals, through their semimonthly Free China, launched an overall and illuminating attack on the content and organization of the party-monopolized education, and raised some important points about of public space in culture and education. Although there were some limitations on views of the Free China, and the semimonthly failed to avert the education policy of the Nationalist Party, the struggle that had started, which drew its strength from sheer personality, had paved the way for future development that finally led to the independence of education in Taiwan dozens of years later.起始頁-結束頁：45-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.00505篇名：一位自由主義者的戰爭並列篇名：War That Belongs to a Liberal作者：王之相(Chih-Hsiang Wang)關鍵字：戰爭;自由主義;雷震;War;Liberalism;Lei Chen期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：基於意識型態自身之理念邏輯，自由主義者以個人自由為關懷主軸，基本上對於戰爭並未予以充分之正視；此一態度包含對戰爭抱持負面評價，以及無法理解戰爭對於現代國家的深遠影響。本文假定於韓戰簽定停戰協定之前，雷震先生的戰爭思維受到自由主義影響與侷限，無法面對冷戰現實作出解釋，不但僅只在個人自由與言論自由層次掙扎，而且整個自由主義理念也同樣受制於冷戰。之後，雷震先生的戰爭思維轉而與現代國家和地緣政治結合，論述上更貼近現代國家的行動，而更有效揭穿當時國民黨政權軍事動員統治之戰爭正當性。但，這也只是戰術層次的挪用，根底上雷震先生自由主義思維模式並未改變，而此一堅持未必有助於拓寬公共空間所需之歷史縱深。英文摘要：Confined by ideological framework, liberal thinkers focus on individual liberties rather than wars. Such theoretical position induced liberal thinkers to view human war affairs as negative and thus give less attention to the deep influence of war-making upon modern states. This paper supposed that Mr. Lei Chen, a liberal fighter, had taken similar position toward war affairs before the ”peaceful” ending of Korean War. Right after this big event of Cold War, Mr. Lei Chen changes his face to be a cold-minded Militarist with international and geo-politics in mind. Such strategic transformation effectively undermined the legitimacy of authoritative government in Taiwan, but Mr. Lei Chen has been a liberal in the core. However, such theoretical insistence, regarding to the review of history, may not be so helpful to the widening of public sphere.起始頁-結束頁：81-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.00866篇名：殷海光的終極關懷、文明反思與「人」的理念並列篇名：Ultimate Concern, Reflection of Civilization and Idea of "Man" of Yin Haiguang作者：王中江(Zhong-Jiang Wang)關鍵字：終極關懷;文明反思;人;Ultimate Concern;Reflection of Civilization;Idea of "Man"期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：只要仔細研究就會發現，殷海光不是那種伴隨一個時代而出現也伴隨一個時代而逝去的人物，他一生的奮鬥具有超越具體歷史空間和時間的不朽性，其中最重要的就是他對「人」的終極關懷。在人類從事的各種事務和目標中，一種是屬於短期性的目標，一種則是屬於長期性的目標。殷海光有強烈的科學主義和實證 主義傾向，相應地他也有明顯的西化立場，但這些主要是在理性化的思維方法上被肯定的，它們都沒有把殷海光引向對「工具理性」和工業技術文明的讚頌。恰恰相反，殷海光對此保持著警惕，而且這種做法亦非只是晚年的產物，它是伴隨著殷海光一生的經歷，只不過晚年更加突出罷了。殷海光真正關心的是人類精神生活的長遠目標，他探討和追求的「人」的理念，就是這種長遠性的目標。正是在這一長遠目標追求中，他反思了現代文明對「人」的扭曲，批判了沒有自我和個性的「現代人」，昭示了人之所以為人的條件、目標和崇高價值，也正是由此他的奮鬥具有了超凡的意義。英文摘要：Yin Haiguang's investigation and pursuit of the idea of ”Man” reflects not merely a limited historical or parochial academic interest, but indeed addresses an ultimate concern of humanity which transcends any spatiotemporal limitations. In criticizing ”modern man” for its faceless and nonself-identical figure, Yin Haiguang brings the conditions, purposes and noble values of humanity to light. His work has extraordinary significance for the highest aims of humanity and civilization.起始頁-結束頁：105-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.01107篇名：柏楊的醬缸文化論述，一九六○至一九六八並列篇名：Bo Yang's Discourse of Jiang Gang Culture,1960-1968作者：陳聖屏(Sheng-Ping Chen)關鍵字：柏楊;醬缸;現代化;馬克思主義;儒家;官僚;Bo yang;jiang-gang;modernization;Marxism;Confucianism;bureaucrat期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：首先，柏楊認為在一九六○年代的臺灣，中國傳統文化的力量仍然牢不可破，它不但造成各種社會問題，也阻礙了經濟與現代化的發展。其次，柏楊將臺灣的文化菁英區分成兩個對立的團體：傳統儒家式的道德菁英（聖崽）與近代中國的西化知識菁英（西崽）。這兩種精英團體剛好對應於文化保守主義和全盤西化的兩種主張，在柏楊看來，兩者都不能適合於社會的需要：前者抗拒一切必要的改革，後者則只進行表面的西化，但並未觸及中國文化的本質。此外，對於中國共產黨在一九四九年贏得全面勝利的原因，柏楊認為是由於中國傳統文化中具有許多不良因素，使得馬克思主義得以在中國開花結果。但中國文化仍缺乏馬克思主義所具有的一些基本要素，例如唯物辯證法、「不斷鬥爭」的政治哲學等等，因此馬克思主義被柏楊稱為「硫磺缸」，並與中國傳統文化的「醬缸」有所區隔。最後，在醬缸文化的論述中，柏楊不僅重視醬缸在意識型態的成因（儒家思想），同時也重視它的社會結構成因（官僚主導的社會）。儒家思想作為主流的意識型態，就會使這種社會結構變得更加穩定；它不但為專制君主提供正當性的依據，也使人們在其思想前提中就認為，堅持正義與反抗權威在本質上就是一種錯誤。英文摘要：At first, Bo yang thinks the Chinese traditional culture rooted in Taiwan in the 1960s, which not only triggered various social problems, but hindered economic developments and modernization as well. In addition, he categorizes the Taiwanese cultural elites into two opposite groups: one, the conventional, Confucian and moralized elites; the other, the modernized, Westernized intellectuals. These two groups respectively correspond to two positions: the former one in favor of Cultural conservatism; the latter one for complete Westernization. In Bo yang's perspective, the advocates of these two claims do not meet the society's need, because the former one resist every necessary reforms, while the latter one only try to carry out the trivial Westernization without transforming the essence of the Chinese culture. Moreover, Bo yang finds that many harmful factors intrinsic in the Chinese traditions instead facilitated the prevalence of Marxism in China, which finally led to the CCP's overwhelming victory in 1949. Still, the Chinese culture lacks the fundamental factors of Marxism, for instance, the materialistic dialectics, the political philosophy of ”constant struggle,” and that is why Bo yang calls Marxism ”the vat of brimstone”, opposite to ”the vat of soy sauce” (jiang gang) which crystallizes the Chinese traditional culture. Finally, in his arguments about the cultural discourse of jiang gang, Bo yang focuses on the causes not only from the ideology (Confucianism), but also from the social structure (bureaucrat-ruling society). As a mainstream ideology, Confucianism has this social structure more stable, justifies despotism, and becomes the prerequisite that it is erroneous to adhere to justice and defy the authority.起始頁-結束頁：147-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.01528篇名：林毓生「創造性轉化」對五四自由思想的批判與繼承並列篇名：Lin Yu-Sheng's "Creative Transformation" and the Critique and Transfusion of May Fourth Liberalism作者：簡明海(Ming-Hai Jian)關鍵字：林毓生;創造性轉化;五四;殷海光;胡適;自由思想;Lin Yu-sheng;Creative Transformation;May Fourth;Yin Hai-Kuang;Hu Shih;Liberalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：「創造性轉化」一詞，在當代臺灣與中國大陸曾激起熱烈討論，其源自林毓生探討五四時期整體反傳統的「中國意識的危機」而起，並得到的進一步發展，更是因應兩岸從傳統走向現代之所需。由於林毓生與五四之父與子胡適、殷海光皆有密切關係，更以自由主義者自居，因此「創造性轉化」對於五四自由主義的深化探討有極為實質的貢獻，也充滿了知識份子的現實關懷。然而，林毓生對於五四激進的各式思想，包括自由主義有著強烈的批判，但又要從有限的歷史資源中，尋求解決歷史與現實糾結的問題。「創造性轉化」無疑是其提供的主要藥方之一，也是了解五四自由主義思潮不可或缺的一部。雖然有其運用的限制，在方法論上亦有討論餘地，但仍是數十年來對於五四相關研究，最具重要成果的理論創見。英文摘要：Lin Yu-sheng's ”creative transformation” is a very important idea for modern China and Taiwan, and was highly significant for both the development of a critique of May Fourth liberalism and its transmission. The ”creative transformation” stressed the importance of methodology and culture. We must understand the meaning of ”creative transformation”, and its impact on Hu Shih, Yin Hai-Kuang, and other May Fourth intellectuals.起始頁-結束頁：199-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201103.020401篇名：董監自利行為與核心代理問題之關聯性並列篇名：The Relationship between Director and Supervisor's Self-interest Behavior and Core Agency Problem作者：王元章(Yung-Jang Wang);陳振傑(Zhen-Jie Chen)關鍵字：董監自利行為;董事會結構;股權結構;核心代理問題;Self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors;Board structure;Ownership structure;Core agency problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究遵循台灣證券交易所的定義挑選出董監自利公司並探討其董監自利行為與核心代理問題間的關係。實證結果發現董監持股比率愈低、信用評等愈差、控制股東現金流量請求權愈低、或控制權與現金流量請求權偏離程度愈高之公司，其董監事的自利程度與自利行為發生之機率也會愈高。此外，若控制股東能完全控制公司時也會有較高的董監自利程度。外部董監席次比率愈低之公司，因為代理問題或監督機制的不完善，導致其董監自利行為之發生機率也會愈高。國內企業因具特殊的股權結構，易導致董監自利行為的發生，本研究結果將可協助釐清董監自利行為與核心代理問題之間的關係。英文摘要：This study follows the definition of Taiwan Stock Exchange Corporation to select the director and supervisor's self-interest companies and investigate the relationship between the self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors and the core agency problem. The results show that companies with higher degree and probability of self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors are usually characterized by the lower ownership of directors and supervisors, worse TCRI rankings, lower cash flow rights or greater separation between the control rights and cash flow rights of the controlling shareholders. In addition, the companies fully controlled by the controlling shareholders also have a higher degree of self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors. The companies with low outside directors and supervisors, due to core agency problem and weak corporate governance mechanism, are more likely to have self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors. On account of the unique ownership structure of Taiwanese companies, it's not hard to observe the self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors. The findings of this study may help us better understand the relationship between the self-interest behavior of directors and supervisors and core agency problem.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(4).12篇名：健康照護與風險性資產投資並列篇名：Health Care and Risky Asset Investment作者：呂進瑞(Jin-Ray Lu);陳世軒(Shih-Syuan Chen)關鍵字：醫療照護;資產配置;隨機最適控制;medical care;asset allocation;stochastic optimal control期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：健康與財富是每個人關注的兩項資本，如何促進健康及增加財富是一般人極為關心的議題。本文整合財務經濟學之資產配置決策及健康經濟學之醫療照護等相關決策，建構健康與財富之連續時間隨機性模型，分析一般個人如何同時考量休閒活動投入、醫療照護需求、股市投資與消費計劃的選擇。主要研究發現如下，在一般常用的效用函數下，風險性資產投資需求及醫療照護需求在面對財務風險及醫療價格風險下，都有自身投資之需求及規避價格波動風險之避險需求。而且個人健康情形也會影響著休閒決策、醫療照護需求、股市投資決策與投資人效用。英文摘要：Health and wealth are the two main forms of capitals which humans have concerned themselves with throughout the ages. This paper incorporates asset allocation decision-makings in financial economics and medical care decision-makings in health economics into a systematic and theoretical model, using a stochastic optimal control methodology. We construct a continuous-time stochastic model in which both health and wealth are governed by possibly correlated Wiener processes. We attempt to derive results that model how an individual determines his leisure, medical care, stock investment, and consumption plans, simultaneously, under the constraints of wealth and health dynamic processes. Under the assumption of general forms of utility functions, the investment decisions as between risky assets and medical care consist of an individual's self-investment demand and hedging demand against stock market risk and/or health care price risk. In addition, the individual's health status influences his leisure activities, health care, asset allocation, and investor utility.起始頁-結束頁：41-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(4).23篇名：CEO Overconfidence and Pecking Order Prediction- Evidence from Taiwanese Electronics Companies並列篇名：經理人過度自信對公司融資順位的影響－以台電子公司為例作者：鄧家珍(Chia-Chen Teng);劉維琪(Victor W. Liu)關鍵字：過度自信;融資順位理論;管理信念;員工認股權證;融資決策;Overconfidence;Pecking order theory;Managerial beliefs;Employee stock option;Financing decisions期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：國外研究發現，管理信念如過度自信或過度樂觀可以解釋公司融資順位行為的變化。然而，由於衡量國內過度樂觀指標有存續性的問題、過度樂觀與過度自信本質上的差異、以及跨國性過度自信程度上的不同，因此，我們認為以台灣經理人為主體的實證研究有其必要性。本篇論文以員工認股權證來衡量台灣電子公司經理人過度自信的程度，並重新測試過度自信與公司外部融資決策的關係。結果發現，在需要外部資金的情況下，過度自信經理人會比非過度自信經理人傾向於發行更多的債券，同時，也確認了管理信念在解釋公司融資順位的重要性。英文摘要：Previous studies suggest that managerial beliefs such as overconfidence and optimism help to explain variation in pecking-order behavior. Nevertheless, due to a limitation on the sustainability of the measure of optimism, the difference between optimism and overconfidence, and the cross-nation variation in overconfidence, we believe an additional test for CEO overconfidence in Taiwan is necessary. This paper uses employee stock options to measure the level of CEO overconfidence in Taiwanese electronics companies and tests the relationship between overconfidence and corporate external financing decisions. We find that, conditional on accessing external funds, overconfident CEOs issue more debt than non-overconfident ones, confirming the importance of managerial beliefs in explaining hierarchical financing.起始頁-結束頁：89-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(4).34篇名：Index Options and Informativeness of the Underlying Stocks' Prices: An Empirical Study並列篇名：指數選擇權與標的股價價格可提供的訊息作者：Shinhua Liu;Ken Hung;段昌文(Chang-Wen Duan)關鍵字：S&P 100指數選擇權;標的股票;報酬可預測性;價格可提供之資訊;S&P 100 index options;underlying stocks;return predictability;price informativeness期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：理論上預期指數衍生性商品的發行是可能會影響標的股票價格可提供的訊息，因此，我們以CBOE於1983年3月發行S&P 100選擇權後，透過觀察股票價格行為來檢測此假說。本文以兩種不同的統計方法於日資料與週資料，我們發現，在指數選擇權上市後，標的股票價格報酬率明顯變得更為隨機，也因此預測就變得較困難，導致當代整體市場淨效率的改變。換而言之，隨著指數選擇權發行後，標的股票價格有更多可提供訊息的傾向，與假說是一致的。英文摘要：Theories predict that initiation of index derivatives could affect the informativeness of the underlying stocks' prices. We test this hypothesis by exploring stock price behavior around the introduction of the S&P 100 options on the CBOE in March 1983. Applying two alternative statistical methods to both daily and weekly data, we find that, following the listing of the index options, the underlying stocks' returns become significantly more random and, thus, less predictable, net of contemporary marketwide efficiency shifts. That is, the underlying stocks' prices tend to be more informative following the commencement of the index options, consistent with the hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：119-139資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(4).45篇名：公司治理與高階主管股票選擇權對股利支付之影響並列篇名：Corporate Governance and Executive Stock Options' Influence on Dividend Payout作者：魏慧珊(Hui-Shan Wei)關鍵字：股利支付;公司治理;高階主管股票選擇權;Dividend payout;corporate governance;executive stock options期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討公司治理與高階主管股票選擇權對股利支付之影響。實證發現，股利支付與公司治理呈負相關，隱含公司治理較強之公司其潛在代理問題較小，故透過股利降低代理問題之動機較低。另一方面，股利支付與高階主管股票選擇權亦呈負相關，因在美國高階主管股票選擇權一般不受股利保護，股利支付將降低股票選擇權的價值，故股票選擇權將使高階主管有降低股利支付之動機。最後，發現公司治理的強弱會影響股利支付與高階主管股票選擇權之關係。公司治理較強與公司治理較弱之公司，股利支付與高階主管股票選擇權之關係反轉為正相關，而一般公司治理之公司，股利支付與高階主管股票選擇權乃為負相關。即，股利支付與公司治理和高階主管股票選擇權之間呈非線性關係。英文摘要：This study examines the influences of the corporate governance and executive stock options on dividend payout. The evidence shows a negative association between dividend payout and corporate governance. This implies that the firms with strong governance suffer less potential agency problems than other types of firms, so the motivation of dividend payout to mitigate the agency problem is low. The evidence also demonstrates a negative association between dividend payout and executive stock options. It is due to the fact that the executive stock options are not generally dividend-protected in the U.S. and thus the dividend payout will decrease the value of stock options to manager. As a consequence, the executive stock options provide manager an incentive to lower dividend payout. Finally, the evidence shows the quality (strength) of corporate governance will affect the relationship between dividend payout and executive stock options. The firms with strong governance and weak governance have positive association between dividend payout and executive stock options, while the firms with moderate governance have negative association between dividend payout and executive stock options. That is, our evidence reveals a non-linear association between dividend payout, corporate governance and executive stock options.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(3).16篇名：國安基金干預成效與期貨交易人過度反應並列篇名：The Intervention of NFSF and the Overreaction of Traders in the Futures Market作者：黃柏凱(Po-Kai Huang)關鍵字：國安基金;正價差;逆價差;過度反應;價格反轉;National Financial Stabilization Fund (NFSF);overpricing;underpricing;overreact;price reversal期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：民國89年10月國安基金首次干預期貨市場，其目的為拉抬期貨形成超額正價差，引導現貨價格上漲。本研究探討期貨交易人對於國安基金的過度反應，是否為此次國安基金沒有達成政策任務的原因。更明確地說，當國安基金干預產生超額正價差時，期貨交易人是否會過度反應此「人為」的訊號，而在隨後修正造成價格反轉，使得政策效果不如預期。本研究的實證結果發現，當國安基金實際干預造成超額正價差，則隨後的期貨報酬顯著為負，而且超額正價差的幅度愈大或干預的規模愈大，隨後的價格反轉幅度也愈大。本研究進一步發現，國安基金買進干預所引發期貨價格反轉的速度，比賣出干預時慢。最後，不管是買進干預或賣出干預，隔日期貨收盤價均呈現反轉，而且還低於干預時的價格，因此本研究認為交易人的過度反應使得政策效果不如預期。英文摘要：In October 2000, the National Financial Stabilization Fund (NFSF) unprecedentedly intervened to raise the TAIEX futures price in relation to the cash index. Based on the close linkage between cash and futures prices, the ultimate goal of the intervention was to induce an upsurge in the stock index through market traders' efforts. It was, however, soon proven to be a vain attempt. This paper investigates whether the overreaction of traders to the market prices caused the failure. Specifically, the primary concern is to see if futures traders overreacted to the overpriced futures price created by the NFSF intervention and then made subsequent corrections so that the futures price reverted to its fair value. We find that the overpriced futures price caused by the NFSF intervention tends to be followed by a decline in futures price, resulting in negative futures return for the rest of that day and the next day. The magnitude of the subsequent price reversal is positively related to the size of the price jump and the volume of trade induced by the NFSF intervention. Furthermore, the price reversal following the NFSF buying intervention occurs sooner than that following the NFSF selling intervention. Finally, for both buying and selling interventions, the next-day futures closing price reverts to a level even below the pre-intervention price. The findings of the study suggest that the overreaction of futures traders may have an adverse effect on the NFSF intervention.起始頁-結束頁：41-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(3).27篇名：聲譽、訊息模糊與分析師從眾、離眾行為之研究並列篇名：Reputation, Information Ambiguity and Analysts Herding and Anti-herding Behavior作者：李春安(Chun-An Li);唐明曦(Ming-Hsi Tang)關鍵字：從眾行為;離眾行為;聲譽;訊息模糊;Herding Behavior;Anti-herding Behavior;Reputation;Information Ambiguity期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以分析師為研究對象，在過去基於聲譽與薪酬考量的模型中，加入訊息模糊的理論觀點，提出詮釋分析師從眾與離眾行為的新理論。本文理論模型的推論結果發現影響分析師策略選擇最重要的因素為市場給予唯一能力強的分析師的續期薪酬高低。在分析師重視未來聲譽甚於當期成果的假設下，人力市場給予唯一能力強的分析師的續期薪酬與分析師的離眾傾向呈正向關係。在市場對分析師的行為具預期的情況下，分析師初始聲譽與分析師的離眾傾向呈反向關係；訊息模糊程度則與分析師的離眾傾向呈正向關係。本文模型推導結果為相關實證研究提供理論基礎。在模型中加入訊息模糊程度變數後，對分析師行為的詮釋更為完備，可提升對分析師行為的瞭解，並可為未來實證研究者提供研究方向。英文摘要：Herding behavior is one of the focal topics in finance and accounting in the last decades. A number of theories have been developed to explain the reasons behind herding behavior. In this paper, we introduce a new variable: information ambiguity into the reputation-oriented model to analyze the behavior tendency of financial analysts. We find that the most important factor affecting financial analysts' herding (anti-herding) behavior is the wage labor market offers to the sole winner. When the analyst values his reputation more than the outcome of his recommendation, his anti-herding propensity is positively related to the wage labor market offers to the sole winner and the level of information ambiguity, but negatively related to the initial reputation of the analyst. Adding information ambiguity into the model helps to elevate our understanding of analysts' behavior.起始頁-結束頁：81-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(3).38篇名：建構台灣投資等級信用組合與其基礎相關性之研究並列篇名：On the Construction of Taiwan Investment Grade Credit Portfolio and Its Base Correlation作者：李賢源(Shyan-Yuan Lee);鍾懿芳(Yi-Fang Chung);陶亞蘭(Ya-Lan Tao)關鍵字：擔保債權憑證;批次證券;基礎相關性;指數信用價差;違約回復率;首次支付費用;Collateralized Debt Obligation;Tranche;Base Correlation;Index Spread;Recovery Rate;Upfront Fee期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文建構類似CDX IG. NA.的信用組合代表台灣投資等級信用市場。用Merton（1974）結構式模型來模擬評價整個信用組合和各個批次證券的信用價差，再以JP Morgan模型求算各個基礎批次證券對應的基礎相關性。本文實證結果發現，指數信用價差、違約回復率、以及權益證券的首次支付費用是影響求解基礎相關性的關鍵因子。再者，發現評價模型低估了指數信用價差，連帶低估了權益證券的首次支付費用；尤有甚者，縱然拉高違約回復率，仍不足以產生足夠的違約強度來求得合理的基礎相關性，顯示指數信用價差低估嚴重。英文摘要：This paper mimics CDX IG. NA. to construct a credit portfolio representing Taiwan investment grade market. Under Merton's (1976) structured form model, we simulate credit spreads for the whole credit portfolio and each tranche. The model proposed by JP Morgan is applied to calculate base correlations for corresponding base tranches. The empirical results indicate that index spread, recovery rate and upfront fee are the key factors affecting the search of reasonable base correlations. Moreover, the evidence shows that index spread is undervalued so that the upfront fee is under estimated as well. The severely undervalued index spread leads to not enough default intensity to generate reasonable base correlations even arbitrarily raising the recovery rate.起始頁-結束頁：121-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(3).49篇名：資本支出用途現金增資公司之長期營運績效－由自由現金流量理論探討並列篇名：Long-term Operating Performance of the SEO Firms for the Capital Expenditures Purpose: Evidence from the Free Cash Flow Theory作者：林問一(Wen-Yi Lin);蔡佩珊(Pei-Shan Tsai)關鍵字：現金增資;資本支出;自由現金流量;營運績效;Seasoned equity offerings (SEOs);capital expenditures;free cash flow;operating performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要探討資本支出用途現金增資公司，在增資後的長期營運績效能否由Jensen（1986）自由現金流量理論所解釋。結果發現，以現金增資融通資本支出的公司，在增資後長期營運績效未顯著惡化，這與傳統現金增資公司的實證結果不同。然而，增資前有較高自由現金流量的公司，當其現金增資的目的為資本支出時，增資後長期營運績效會變差，這結果符合Jensen（1986）自由現金流量假說。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to examine whether the long-term operating performance of the seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) company for the capital expenditure purpose can be explained by Jensen's (1986) free cash flow theory. The empirical evidences show that the firms' operating performance does not significantly deteriorate after SEOs and contrast with the conventional SEOs firms' empirical results. However, we find when a SEO-issuing company for the purpose of capital expenditure holds excess free cash flow, its long-term operating performance would be declined. Overall, our findings support Jensen's (1986) free cash flow hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(2).110篇名：國家特定變數對財務比率與銀行信用評等關係之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Country-Specific Variables on the Relationship between Financial Ratios and Bank Credit Ratings作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：信用評等;財務比率;順序分類模型;資訊不對稱;國家特定變數;credit rating;financial ratio;ordered probit model;information asymmetry;country-specific variables期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文採用2002至2006年間全球77國的2,321家商業銀行所獲得的標準普爾信評機構之長期信用評等資料，試圖了解為何相同財務比率的銀行在不同的國家卻獲得不同的信用評等，我們提出『品質增進假說』，預期高所得、高度發展及政府治理較佳的國家，其銀行財務報表的可信度較高，財務資訊更能反映銀行的內在價值，此時信評機構與銀行間存在較少資訊不對稱的問題，使信評機構更信任財務報表的品質，因而提高財務比率對信用評等的解釋能力，實證結果與我們的假說一致。此外，本文也發現信評機構將較低度發展國家之較高的資本適足率視為有利於評等的財務比率，且給予較大的權數，表示較低度發展國家可以經由提高資本適足率以獲得較佳的信用評等。英文摘要：Why do banks with similar financial ratios have different ratings in different countries? We employ the data of S&P's long-term ratings on 2,321 commercial banks in 77 countries during the period of 2002-2006. We propose a quality-enhancing hypothesis and posit when a bank is in a high-income country, in a better region and in a country characterized with strong government governance, the financial ratios are more likely to reflect the intrinsic value of a bank. Accordingly, less asymmetric information exists between rating agencies and banks. Thus, rating agencies give higher weights to financial ratios in these countries. Results are consistent with our hypothesis. We also find higher capital adequacy ratio can enhance bank credit ratings in less-developed countries.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(2).211篇名：通貨膨脹風險、學習機制與策略性資產配置並列篇名：Inflation Risk, Learning Mechanism and Strategic Asset Allocation作者：張士傑(Chang Shih-Chieh);蔡政憲(Tsai Cheng-Hsien)黃雅文(Hwang Ya-Wen)關鍵字：投資期限;財富效用;波動度;風險趨避;改善率;Time horizon;expected utility;volatility;risk averse;improvement rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：Campbell和Viceira（2001）將通貨膨脹風險納入跨期投資，結論市場缺乏通膨連動投資標的時，投資人將減碼長債之持有。但其未考慮通膨動態過程之參數不確定性。Xia（2001）發現投資人忽視利用估計資產報酬之不確定性下，會錯失市場時機而產生機會成本，故利用學習機制更新股價估計。本文將通膨學習機制納入跨期資產配置，提出依學習機制修正之投資策略可顯著增加財富效用，並分析其影響程度，結論如下：（1）學習機制將隨通膨瞬間波動度增加而顯著正向影響財富效用，投資期間較長及風險趨避程度高之投資人，學習機制影響越顯著。（2）消費者物價指數瞬間波動度與通膨估計誤差變異數增加時，學習機制可增加投資人之期末期望財富與效用值，但效用改善率隨波動度與變異數增加而下降。英文摘要：Campbell and Viceira (2001) were the first to incorporate inflation risk into the optimal portfolio problem and found that the investor decreased the holding weights of long term bonds in the absence of inflation-linked underlying assets. Xia (2001) found that opportunity cost was significantly substantial when investors ignored the learning mechanism of uncertainty parameters and used the learning method to predict the parameter of the dynamics of stock price. In this study, we not only show that the learning process increases the utility value of terminal wealth, but also analyze the effect of learning process on the expected utility value of terminal wealth. The results are as follows. 1. Investment horizon, instantaneous volatility of inflation rate and risk attitude positively affects the learning process on the terminal wealth and its expected utility. The effects are more significant when the investment horizon, volatility and risk-averse attitude increase. 2. When volatility of the consumer price index and the estimation error increase, the learning ability enhance the expected wealth and utility. However, the improvement rate of utility decrease since investors becomes hardly learn from the inflation rate.起始頁-結束頁：73-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(2).312篇名：國企治理與利益輸送－台灣經驗並列篇名：SOE Governance and Asset Tunnelling- Experience in Taiwan作者：楊屯山(Jerry T. Yang);范建得(Chien-Te Fan)關鍵字：國有企業;公司治理;國企治理;利益輸送;台灣;State-owned Enterprise (SOE);Corporate Governance;SOE Governance;Assets Tunneling;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文藉由台灣「國營企業民營化」的經驗，來探討國有企業中，特殊的代理人問題，與如何建立有效的「國企治理」體制。自2000年以來，台灣試圖藉由國營企業民營化，減少政府財稅負擔或增加國庫收入。然而，在追求這似乎名正言順的民營化過程中，若缺乏「治理文化」的養成與健全的「國企治理」體制配套，很可能造成利益輸送、或國產掏空情事。因國有企業存在目的的特殊、與「權」「利」糾葛的複雜，其可能產生利益輸送的成因與管道與民間企業不同，以至於從一般「公司治理」的角度，無法概括「國企治理」相關問題。本文從企業金融與法律的面向，檢視目前台灣官股具有絕對或實質影響力的國有企業內的治理問題，並提出建立有效「國企治理」體制的方案，以避免將國有資產不當掏空、浪費、或輸送於財團或個人。英文摘要：We examine the asset tunneling where the authorities in Taiwan empower certain individuals or organizations to hold the reins of state-owned (or- influenced) enterprises (SOEs) without legitimate reasons. In the name of privatization, Taiwan government has been seeking to minimize its role in the economy by privatizing state enterprises since Year 2000. However, pursuing privatization without putting sound governance culture and system in place may not serve original intentions. This paper examines the governance system of several leading and influential SOEs in Taiwan from the perspective of both finance and law. We identify alleged ”tunnels” where the transfer of state assets without monitoring mechanism is possible. Tunnelling examples are provided, structural remedies are suggested, and SOE governance is called upon academic attention.起始頁-結束頁：111-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(2).413篇名：透明度、資訊內涵及下單策略之實證研究並列篇名：Transparency, Information Content and Order Placement Strategy作者：林雅玲(Ya-Ling Lin);馬黛(Tai Ma)關鍵字：事前透明度;限價簿;資訊內涵;下單策略;Pre-trade transparency;limit order book;information content;order strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣證交所自民國91年及92年起連續歷經兩次揭示制度變革，本文採用高頻率日內資料探討其在透明度增加後的兩個構面：（1）限價簿資訊內涵；（2）限價簿資訊對投資人下單策略的影響。實證顯示，法人買方揭示價量的資訊內涵高於法人賣方、揭示價的資訊內涵高於揭示量、法人的揭示價量資訊內涵高於散戶、散戶第一檔揭示價量的資訊內涵皆高於第一檔以外的平均揭示價量，反之，法人第一檔以外平均揭示價量的資訊內涵並不低於第一檔，尤以國內法人較為明顯。另亦發現，雖投資人的下單決策大多受到最佳一檔揭示資訊影響，新增的第二檔至第五檔揭示資訊仍具部分解釋力。英文摘要：This study examines the impact of increasing pre-trade transparency using intraday data from the Taiwanese stock market, which has experienced a gradual increase in transparency. Specifically, we analyze the influence of transparency on information content of the limit order book, and its effect on order placement strategies. According to limit order book information, we evidence four major results. The bid disclosures of institutional investors are more informative than the ask disclosures. The disclosed quotes are more informative than the accompanied depth, and the orders of institutional traders are more informative than those of individual traders. Interestingly, the best quotes of unexecuted orders for individual traders always contain more information than the average quotes from steps 2 to 5, whereas this does not apply for institutional investors, especially for domestic institutional traders. With regard to order strategies, though most of the explanatory power of the limit order book concentrates on the best quotes, however, the book beyond the best quotes also matters in explaining the order aggressiveness of investors.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(1).114篇名：基金經理人風險調整行為之研究－展望理論觀點並列篇名：Fund Managers' Risk Adjustment Behavior: The Viewpoint of Prospect Theory作者：李春安(Chun-An Li);陳輝格(Hui-Ko Chen);林慶章(Chin-Chang Lin)關鍵字：升遷制度;過度自信;展望理論;自利性風險調整行為;Promotion system;Overconfidence;Prospect theory;Self-interest risk adjustment behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文利用展望理論觀點，架構理論模型以探討過度自信與升遷制度對基金經理人風險調整行為的影響。研究結果顯示，當投入成本愈大，在相對利得的情境下，基金經理人會趨於保守，在相對損失的情境下，則是趨於投機。升遷制度的考量會使具相對利得的基金經理人更投機，使具相對損失的基金經理人更保守。只有在相對利得情境下，過度自信的基金經理人才會選擇比較高風險水準的投資組合，在相對損失的情境下，過度自信的基金經理人選擇比較低風險水準的投資組合。本研究的結果意味著，雖然升遷制度與過度自信心理都會影響基金經理人的投資組合風險調整行為，但真正的關鍵則是在於基金經理人為相對贏家或是相對輸家的心理情境，在成為相對贏家或相對輸家之後，基金經理人很可能就會有自利性的風險調整行為。英文摘要：This paper develops a model from the viewpoint of ”Prospect Theory” and uses it to investigate the relationship among fund managers' overconfidence, promotion system and their risk adjustment behavior. Our results describe as follows. Fund managers will be conservative while under relative gain situation, and becoming speculative while under relative loss situation. The consideration of promotion system will let fund managers more speculative while under relative gain situation, and more conservative while under relative loss situation. The demonstration shows that when considering the mind of overconfidence, fund managers may increase their portfolio risk under relative gain situation; fund managers instead decrease their portfolio risk under relative loss situation. It means that promotion system and overconfidence both can affect fund managers' portfolio risk choice, the key point is fund managers is relative winner or loser. Overall, our results suggest that only fund managers become relative winner or loser could they reveal self-interest risk adjustment behavior.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(1).215篇名：The Comparison of Option Compensation from the Viewpoints of Firms and Executives並列篇名：從公司與經理人立場比較不同股票選擇權薪酬之優劣作者：楊東曉(Tung-Hsiao Yang)關鍵字：經理人報酬;連動選擇權;誘因效果;Executive compensation;indexed option;incentive effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從公司與經理人的角度比較三種股票選擇權報酬的優劣，三種股票選擇權為：傳統股票選擇權、市場連動選擇權及資金成本連動選擇權。利用傳統及修正後的Black-Scholes公式計算公司發放不同選擇權報酬的成本，結果發現資金成本連動選擇權的發行成本最低。除此之外，經理人對於資金成本連動選擇權的評價高於市場連動選擇權；從誘因效果及選擇權報酬的效率性比較發現，資金成本連動選擇權比市場連動選擇權擁有較高的誘因效果及效率性，若經理人需負擔一部分的發行成本時，兩種連動型選擇權間誘因效果與效率性的差異都因此而加大。公司為減少傳統股票選擇權報酬所延伸出的問題，計劃以連動型選擇權取代傳統型股票選擇權時，資金成本連動選擇權為優於市場連動選擇權的報酬工具。英文摘要：We compare three types of stock options: traditional stock options, market-indexed options, and cost-of-capital indexed options from the firm's and executive's perspectives. Applying the traditional and modified Black-Scholes formulae, we find that the cost-of-capital indexed options, in general, have the lowest cost to a company relative to the traditional stock options and market-indexed options. In addition, executives place higher values on the cost-of capital indexed options than those on the market-indexed options. These options also have higher incentives and are more efficient than the market-indexed options. Especially when managers pay certain amount of money for their options, the differences of both the option values and the incentives between these two indexed options become larger.起始頁-結束頁：63-96資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(1).316篇名：台灣財金系所期刊著作表現之研究：2003-2008並列篇名：Research Performance of the Finance Departments in Taiwan: 2003-2008作者：俞明德(Min-Teh Yu);沈仰斌(Yang-Pin Shen);蔡湘萍(Hsiang-Ping Tsai)關鍵字：研究表現;期刊著作;財金;research performance;journal publication;finance期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究統計國內48個財金系所514名專任教師2003-2008年間之學術著作表現。我們依據沈仰斌、俞明德、張峰嘉（2002）與陳聖賢、盧秋玲、張士傑、林丙輝（2005）之概念進行期刊分類，並分別以教師「現職校系」與「發表校系」歸類著作所屬校系，據以報導各級著作總數與平均每人每年著作數前20名系所。與過去相較，本研究期間財金著作數量與品質都有大幅度之進展。國際期刊著作則有集中在前10名系所之現象。我們亦針對樣本教師平均每年著作數進行排序，以供各類學術獎助申請案之審查人評估申請者學術表現之參考。此外，若觀察排名5%（約為全國第25名）的學者，平均每年在國科會A（A-）級以上期刊發表篇數為0.056（0.167），可知發表在頂尖與優質國際財務期刊仍屬相當不易。英文摘要：This study examines research publications for 514 faculty members in 48 finance departments in Taiwan's universities during 2003-2008. We follow Shen, Yu, and Chang (2002) and Chen, Lu, Chang, and Lin (2005) to select and categorize finance research journals. This study then calculates and ranks department performance according to the author's current affiliations and publication's affiliation. We rank and report the top 20 departments according to the total number of articles and articles per faculty. Our results suggest that the overall finance research performance during 2003-2008 improves substantially than the periods before 2001. We also find that publications in international journals are mainly contributed by the top 10 finance departments. In addition, we report the faculty publication capacity per year at the 1^(st), 5^(th), and 10^(th) to 50^(th) percentile to provide a benchmark of research performance in Taiwan. At the 5^(th) percentile, a faculty member ranked the 25^(th) in our 514 faculty sample, can only produce 0.056 (0.167) article per year in A (A-) and above journals. This result shows the difficulty of publishing top-tier journal articles in the area of finance.起始頁-結束頁：97-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2011.19(1).401篇名：台灣經濟學會「2010年經濟學傑出貢獻獎」期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：397-399資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201112.00012篇名：固定效果動態追蹤資料模型之估計與推論－二階差分動差法並列篇名：Gaussian Inference in Dynamic Panels with Fixed Effects Based on Second Differencing作者：陳致綱(Jhih-Gang Chen);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo)關鍵字：追蹤資料單根檢定;動差條件;弱工具變數;Panel unit root test;Moment conditions;Weak instruments期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文提出一種簡單的二階差分估計式來估計具固定效果的動態追蹤資料模型 （dynamic panels with fixed effects），而此方法可避免傳統一般動差法在近單根環境下面臨的弱工具變數問題 （weak instrument problem）。特別的是，不論序列為恆定或具單根，隨著橫斷面規模或／和時間序列長度趨近於無窮大，該估計式皆可收斂至常態分配。相較於 Han and Phillips（2010）之一階差分估計式，當序列為正自我相關，且序列長度適度地長，二階差分估計式具有較小的漸近變異數；受惠於此，據以發展的單根檢定擁有較佳的檢力。當模型存在個別趨勢項時，本文提出一種雙重二階差分估計式；同樣地，其於恆定與單根的環境下皆具漸近常態分配。值得注意的是，利用該估計式所建構的單根檢定相較於Han and Phillips（2010），雖然型一誤差略高，但在檢力上卻具有顯著的優勢。英文摘要：This paper develops a new approach to estimation in dynamic panel data models with fixed effects and incidental trends, based on second differencing. The proposed estimation method is immune to the weak instrument problem that is known to arise when the conventional GMM is applied to the cases where the autoregressive coefficient (ρ) is close to unity. Similar to the first-difference estimator introduced by Han and Phillips (2010, pp. 119-151), the new estimator has standard Gaussian asymptotics for all values of ρ <U+2208> (-1, 1) in both panel and time series cases. Given its smaller asymptotic variance when the series exhibit positive or moderate positive autocorrelation, the panel unit root test built on the second-difference estimator is more powerful than that built on Han and Phillips' counterpart.起始頁-結束頁：401-438資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201112.00023篇名：世代競爭下的阻止策略並列篇名：Deterrence Strategy in Generation Competition作者：徐學忍(Hsueh-Jen Hsu)關鍵字：技術能力差距;阻止策略;世代競爭;融資限制;Technological competence difference;Deterrence strategy;Generation competition; Finance constraint期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：有些產業的新世代生產線，其主材料面積較前一世代擴大了數倍，加上材料使用效率提高，使得產能倍數成長，且單位成本顯著降低。設備使用者常須負起技術研發的責任。然而，研發與設備的投資資金受限於本身的利潤，本文要探討的問題為：低成本廠商是否可以迫使對手放棄研發新世代技術。其次，低成本廠商真的會去執行延遲策略嗎？本文發現，當新世代產能成長幅度太大或太小，採延遲策略不是沒有必要就是無效。在產能擴增效率為中等程度，延遲策略可阻止高成本廠商研發新技術，且是可信賴的威脅。廠商的技術差距越大，採延遲策略的機會越大。英文摘要：In some industries, the size of the main raw material used in each new generation of production line is much larger than that used in the previous generation. The main material also is more fully utilized. Therefore the output of each new generation increases dramatically, and its average variable cost decreases significantly. However, equipment users may have to play a main role in developing the new technology. When the expense of R&D and physical investment are financed mainly from a firm's profit, a low-cost firm can strategically raise capacity utilization rate and force its rivals to give up initiating the developing process. The first question is whether low-cost firm can successfully deter high-cost firm from advancing to the new generation? Second, is it rational for the low-cost firm to adopt such a deterrence strategy? The findings of this paper are: when the capacity enlargement efficiency is large or small, the deterrence strategy would be unnecessary and ineffective respectively. When the capacity enlargement efficiency falls at a medium level, the deterrence strategy is both credible and effective in deterring the high-cost firm from developing new technology. The larger the cost difference between firms, the more likely it is that the low-cost firm will adopt deterrence strategy.起始頁-結束頁：439-471資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201112.00034篇名：所得差距、經濟整合與 FDI並列篇名：Income Disparity, Economic Integration and FDI作者：劉亮君(Liang-Jing Liu);林燕淑(Yan-Shu Lin);黃鴻(Hong Hwang)關鍵字：所得差距;經濟整合;FDI;社會福利;Income disparity;Economic integration;FDI;Social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：許多WTO的會員國都在WTO的架構下進行經濟整合。這些國家不論是已開發或是未開發都希望透過經濟整合來降低彼此的貿易障礙，進而提高經濟資源的有效分配，以及參與國之福祉。本文分析當整合中的兩個國家存在所得差異時，經濟整合會如何影響其社會福利及外人直接投資（FDI）。本文得到以下結論：當被投資國政府不對FDI採課稅或補貼政策時：（1）高所得國會吸引較多之FDI廠商； （2）隨兩國之所得差異增加時，到高（低）所得國家之廠商數會增加（減少）； （3）貿易成本對FDI沒有影響。當被投資國政府對FDI採定額課稅或補貼政策時：（1）在貿易成本很小（大）時，政府會採課稅（補貼）政策；（2）低所得國家的均衡廠商數會大於高所得國，且隨整合程度提高，到高（低）所得國家之廠商數會減少（增加）；（3）經濟整合對兩國之福利皆為有利的。英文摘要：Many members of the WTO, including developed and non-developed countries, have engaged in economic integration under the framework of the WTO to reduce trade barriers and to improve the efficiency of resource distribution and welfare. In the present study, we utilize a generalized oligopoly model to analyze how economic integration between two countries with income disparity affects their welfare and FDI, and have reached the following conclusions. If the governments of the two countries do not impose any tax or subsidy policy on FDI, (1) the country with higher income will attract more FDI; (2) the magnitude of the FDI is positively related to the income disparity; (3) the FDIs will not be affected by the trade cost. On the other hand, if the two governments impose taxes or subsidies on FDI, (1) the governments will levy taxes (subsidies) on FDI if the trade cost is small (large); (2) FDI to the low-income country is higher than that to the high-income country, and the difference in FDIs increases with the integration; (3) both countries are better off after economic integration.起始頁-結束頁：473-497資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201112.00045篇名：錄取率與試題鑑別度對異質考生努力程度及其效用之影響並列篇名：Effects of Pass Rate and Test Discriminability upon Efforts and Welfare of Heterogeneous Exam Takers作者：鄭保志(Roger P. C. Cheng);黃若茵(Zoe Huang)關鍵字：錄取率;試題鑑別度;排序競賽;異質參賽者;Pass rate;Test discriminability;Tournament;Heterogeneous contestants期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文在假定學歷僅具傳訊功能的前提下，利用標準的排序競賽模型，從經濟數學模型來探討當考生只有能力為異質時，考試制度的相關變數（如試題鑑別度、錄取率及錄取方式等）將如何影響考生準備考試的努力程度及其效用。根據分析結果，我們發現在不同的能力分佈型態與試題鑑別度之下，各種能力考生的努力程度在錄取率提高的過程中會有不同的調整方式，也發現考生在某些狀況下會產生激烈競爭並有其外溢影響。總的來說，本文提出相關的政策思考：「增加偏遠地區教育資源以縮小城鄉差距」及「在差異式錄取率提高下增加試題鑑別度」均有減輕考生負擔及提升整體考生福利的效果。英文摘要：Under the assumption that a college degree only provides its holders with a high productivity signal for the labor market, this paper adopts a standard tournament model to explore the effects of pass rate, educational expansion arrangement, and test discriminability upon efforts and welfare of heterogeneous exam takers. Results of numerical analysis suggest that exam takers differ in their responses to an educational expansion when facing various talent distributions and degrees of test discriminability. In some cases, severe competition exists among some group of exam takers, and its effects spill over to other exam takers outside this group. In sum, we propose related policy thinking as follows: increasing either educational resources for disadvantageous students or the degree of test discriminability under a differential expansion system can decrease the effort levels in preparing for the exam and raise the total welfare of all exam takers.起始頁-結束頁：499-533資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201112.00056篇名：Welfare, Output Allocation and Price Discrimination in Input Markets並列篇名：社會福利，產出配置與要素市場差別訂價作者：陳金盛(Chin-Sheng Chen);黃鴻(Hong Hwang);彭正浩(Cheng-Hau Peng)關鍵字：要素差別訂價;社會福利;產出配置;Input price discrimination;Social welfare;Output allocation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究分析上游獨占廠商訂價決策對最終財產量分配及社會福利的影響。假設要素市場存在一獨占廠商將其生產的中間財銷售給下游的多家獨立零售商（local retailer）生產最終財。每一個最終財市場中存在一家獨立零售廠商與一家向後整合的連鎖廠商（backward-integrated chain store）進行數量競爭。不同於過去文獻的結論，本文發現上游獨占廠商在採取差別訂價時對高效率的零售廠商可能收取較低的要素價格。此外，我們也發現當配置效率的正效果高於生產效率的負效果時，即使總產量不變，要素差別訂價亦有可能提高社會福利。本文的發現與一般文獻上認為中間財差別訂價有損社會福利的看法有很大的不同。且此一結論在連鎖廠商沒有向後整合的情形之下仍然成立。英文摘要：We analyze the price decision of an upstream monopolist who produces and sells an intermediate good to downstream markets where a backward-integrated chain store competes with many local retailers. It is shown that the upstream monopolist may charge a more efficient local retailer a lower input price under price discrimination. This finding is of interest as it goes against the standard conclusion in the input price discrimination literature. Moreover, contrary to the general findings in the literature in which input price discrimination is welfare-deteriorating, we find that input price discrimination improves social welfare if the positive output allocation efficiency effect outweighs the negative production efficiency effect. These results are robust even if the chain store is not backward integrated.起始頁-結束頁：535-560資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201112.00067篇名：進口競爭、廠商搭售與研發並列篇名：Import Competition, Firm's Bundling and Innovation作者：鍾<U+66B3>陵(Hui-Ling Chung);林燕淑(Yan-Shu Lin);黃鴻(Hong Hwang)關鍵字：搭售;研發;福利分析;Bundling;Innovation;Welfare analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在網景與微軟的爭議中，網景認為微軟的搭售行為會扼殺產業之研發。此一觀點獲歐盟之採納，並對微軟做出嚴厲之處分。本文設立一個兩國兩廠商兩類型產品的理論模型，分析當廠商進行Bertrand或Cournot競爭時，外國廠商的搭售行為對產業研發、本國廠商利潤、消費者剩餘以及社會福利的影響。假定產品1僅由外國（搭售）廠商生產，產品2則同時由本國與外國廠商生產，此二產品互為獨立品且兩廠商針對產品2進行研發競爭，本文發現在Bertrand競爭下，外國廠商之搭售行為將使外國廠商的研發水準下降、本國廠商之研發水準增加；但在Cournot競爭時，兩廠商的研發水準皆下降。此外，不論廠商間競爭的方式為何，搭售會使本國廠商利潤上升以及市場總研發水準、本國消費者剩餘及社會福利皆下降。英文摘要：In the dispute between Netscape and Microsoft, Netscape argued that Microsoft's bundling practices stifle innovation in the industry. The European Commission accepted the argument and punished Microsoft. This paper sets up a duopoly model with one domestic firm and one foreign firm to analyze the effects of bundling behavior by the foreign firm on the innovation and profit of the domestic firm, consumer surplus, and social welfare under Bertrand or Cournot competition. There are two products in the model in which product 1 is produced only by the foreign firm and product 2 is produced by both firms. Assuming that the two goods are independent in demand and the two firms engage in innovation only for product 2, we find that the bundling practice decreases the foreign firm's innovation, but increases the domestic firm's innovation under Bertrand competition. However, it decreases both firms' innovation. Moreover, the bundling practice always increases the domestic firm's profits and innovation of the industry, and reduces the domestic consumer surplus and welfare.起始頁-結束頁：279-305資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201109.00018篇名：再論台灣非線性利率法則並列篇名：The Re-Examination of the Non-Liner Interest Rate Rule in Taiwan作者：吳致寧(Jyh-Lin Wu);李慶男(Ching-Nun Lee);張志揚(Chih-Yang Chang);林依伶(Yi-Ling Lin);陳佩玗(Pei-Yu Chen);林雅淇(Ya-Chi Lin)關鍵字：泰勒法則;貨幣政策;政策慣性假說;遺漏變數假說;門檻模型;Taylor rule;Monetary policy;Policy inertia hypothesis;Omitted variable hypothesis;Threshold model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以具內生解釋變數及內生門檻變數之門檻模型重新探討台灣央行自1998年後之非線性利率法則。實證結果指出，央行採取反景氣循環的貨幣政策法則，匯率穩定為央行貨幣政策的重要目標，貨幣政策對經濟變數有不對稱的反應及門檻估計值為正。匯率變動之絕對值增加在新台幣貶值期間使利率上升，然後在新台幣升值期間則使利率下跌，此反映出央行採逆風向干預之貨幣政策，前述結論據實證上之穩健性。英文摘要：This paper applies a threshold model with endogenous threshold and explanatory variables to re-examine the nonlinear interest rate rule of the central bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan) since 1998. Empirical results indicate that the central bank adopts a counter-cyclical monetary policy rule, and exchange rate stability is an important target in the conducted policy. Besides, monetary policies have asymmetric effects on macro variables and the estimated threshold value is positive. An increase in the exchange rate change, measured in its absolute value, increases the interest rate under a depreciation regime, but it decreases the interest rate under an appreciation regime. This reflects that the central bank conducted a monetary policy to lean against the wind. Furthermore, the above mentioned results are robust empirically.起始頁-結束頁：307-338資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201109.00029篇名：利用小波轉換分析美國總體指標與道瓊工業指數之關係並列篇名：The Relationship between Macroeconomic Indicators and Djia Index: A Wavelet Transform Analysis作者：周靖秦(Ching-Chin Chou);陳秀淋(Show-Lin Chen)關鍵字：道瓊股價指數;總體指標;小波轉換;多重解析度;Dow Jones Industrial Index;Macroeconomics indicators;Wavelet transform;Multi-resolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文利用小波轉換（wavelet transform）的分析方法，將股價與總體指標拆解成「趨勢走向」與「波動情形」兩項；再輔以多重解析度（multi-resolution）的概念，計算資料在各次頻帶（sub-band）的相關係數，以探討股價與各項總體指標在趨勢項與波動項的相關性。研究結果顯示，在所有觀察尺度下，股價趨勢項與六個總體指標的趨勢項有顯著且持續的相關性，即：出口年增率（EXYR）、消費者物價指數（CPI）、耐久財訂單（DUOR）、M1年增率（M1YR）、非農就業人數（NFE）和個人儲蓄率（PSR）；而股價波動項則與消費者信心指數（CCI）和個人消費支出（PCE）這兩項總體指標的波動項顯著相關。最後，根據實證結果選取相關的總體指標與股價進行驗證，藉此做為實證結果可信度的再驗證，進而提供投資者更正確的選擇。英文摘要：The goal of this paper is to investigate the relationship between the macro-economic indices and the stock index by using wavelet transform. According to wavelet analysis, the Dow Jones Industrial Index and the macroeconomics indicators are first decomposed into ”trend components” (scaling coefficients) and ”volatility components” (wavelet component). Then, with the concept of multi-resolution representation, we evaluate the correlation coefficients between each sub-band of the stock price and the macro-economic indices. Consequently, the connection between the ”trend-components/volatility-components” of stock price and macro-economic indices could be discussed and thus revealed.Based on our results, the ”trend component” of the Dow Jones Index has significant relations to those of the following six indices: EXYR (Export Annual Growth Rate), CPI (Consumer Price Index), DUOR (Durable Goods Orders), M1YR (M1 Annual Growth Rate), NFE (Non-Farm Employment) and PSR (Personal Savings Rate). Meanwhile, the ”volatility component” of the Dow Jones Index is connected to those of the CCI (Consumer Confidence Index) and PCE (Personal Consumption Expenditure). Finally, we use recent Dow Jones Industrial Index and macroeconomics indicators data to carry out the ex-ante analysis and get the same results. This confirms the efficacy of our analysis.起始頁-結束頁：339-367資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201109.000310篇名：Are FDI Firms Always More Productive? The Role of Technology Transfer Costs並列篇名：對外投資廠商是否一定是生產力較高的廠商？─當技術轉移成本存在時作者：劉碧珍(Bih-Jane Liu);羅竹平(Chu-Ping Lo);陳添枝(Tain-Jy Chen)關鍵字：對外投資;委外生產;技術轉移;多國企業;FDI;Foreign outsourcing;Technology transfer;Multinational firms期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：與跨國委外生產相比，對外投資需負擔較高的沉入成本（sunk costs），因此傳統文獻多認為生產力較高的廠商會選擇對外投資，生產力次之的廠商會選擇進行委外生產。本文發現若考慮技術移轉成本以及組織成本時，上述結論只有在產業處於發展初期時才能成立；但隨著產業越趨成熟，高生產力的廠商反而會選擇委外生產，至於低生產力的廠商則選擇對外投資。本文將此一對外投資廠商的生產力與產業發展程度呈現負相關的現象，稱作對外投資循環（FDI cycle）。英文摘要：In contrast to mainstream literature, which maintains that more productive firms in the industry prefer FDI to outsourcing, we find in this paper that the opposite may also be true. By incorporating technology transfer and organizational costs in the model, we show that the decision made by productive firms to engage in FDI depends crucially on the maturity level of the industry. An FDI cycle emerges from this model, illustrating a negative relationship between industry maturity and the productivity of investing firms. Our statistical test on Taiwan's manufacturing firms supports our argument.起始頁-結束頁：369-395資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201109.000411篇名：A Computationally Practical Simulation Estimation for Dynamic Panel Tobit Models並列篇名：以計算實用之模擬估計法所估計之動態面板數據Tobit模型作者：張勝凱(Sheng-Kai Chang)關鍵字：動態面板數據Tobit模型;GHK模擬法;Gibbs模擬法;相關隨機估計法;起始值問題;Dynamic Panel Tobit models;GHK simulator;Gibbs sampling simulator;Correlated random effects;Initial conditions problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：在考慮動態面板數據Tobit模型多種可能的相關結構下，本文提出一個容易計算並實用的模擬估計法。此模擬估計法是藉由相關隨機估計法來執行。其取對數之概似函數是經由GHK及Gibbs模擬方法加以模擬並求其極大值。動態模型中之起始值問題在本文中亦有詳細之討論。Scholz et al. (2006)曾使用本文所提出的模擬估計法去估計動態面板數據Tobit模型並應用於美國退休金問題之探討。本文所作之模擬實驗亦顯示所提出之動態面板數據Tobit模型之模擬估計法在模擬樣本數小的情況下亦非常精確。英文摘要：This paper provides a computationally practical simulation estimation for the dynamic panel Tobit model with large categories of dependence structures. The simulation estimators are conducted through correlated random effects approach. The log-likelihood function is simulated and maximized through procedures based on a recursive algorithm formulated by GHK and Gibbs sampling simulators. The initial conditions problem is discussed in details. The simulation estimators discussed in this paper have been implemented by Scholz et al. (2006) to study retirement savings. Monte Carlo experiments indicate that the simulation estimators perform strikingly well, especially in the case of the Gibbs estimator, even for a small simulation size.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201106.000112篇名：Government Relief as a Partial Insurance for the Individual's Background Risk並列篇名：政府救助為個人背景風險之保險作者：黃瑞卿(Rachel J. Huang)關鍵字：政府干預;所得背景風險;政府救助;Government intervention;Background risk;Government relief期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本篇論文討論當個人面對獨立的所得背景風險時，政府是否應提供救助。論文發現政府若提供與所得水準相關的救助系統，則此種救助不一定會具有排擠效果，使得個人減少對私人保險之購買。同時，此種系統具有保險的功能，可使個人移轉部分所得背景風險，並提高社會福利。英文摘要：This paper discusses whether governments should intervene in the private insurance market by providing income-related relief when the individual faces an insurable risk and an independent uninsurable background income risk. It is found that the government's relief may not totally crowd out the private insurance market, and that the government could improve social welfare if it provides additional coverage against the insurable risk only when the individuals are in a low income state. This income-related government relief could serve as a partial hedge for the individual's background risk.起始頁-結束頁：33-59資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201106.000213篇名：台灣房市存在價格泡沫嗎？並列篇名：On the Existence of Price Bubbles in the Taiwan Housing Market作者：王景南(Jying-Nan Wang);葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh);林宗漢(Zong-Han Lin)關鍵字：理性泡沫;房價指數;改良式單根檢定;Rational bubble;Housing price index;Unit root test期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：房價是近年來投資者與政府機關所重視的重大民生議題之一。自1993年至2009年台灣房市持續飆漲，其背後是否存在價格泡沫的現象，為本研究所欲探討之問題。我們應用Phillips et al. (2011)所提出之遞迴迴歸法，驗證房屋市場是否存在價格泡沫。此方法之優點為直接針對房價泡沫所隱含的輕微發散價格，動態驗證泡沫的存在性、發生與破滅；不需事先估計房市之基礎價值，因此得以避免一些傳統檢定所可能衍生的諸如假設、模型或代理變數誤設所致的偏誤。並且能夠立即地發現泡沫生成與破滅的時間。實證結果發現：台北市自2006年起，開始出現房屋價格泡沫的現象，但是在2008年金融海嘯後此現象隨即消失，隨後至2009年又再次有房屋價格泡沫的生成。然而，其他行政區的房市並無泡沫化之現象。本研究的結果顯示，這樣的方法有助於房價泡沫預警系統之建立，可讓政府主管機關能及早擬定因應政策，並且作為一般大眾投資房市之參考。英文摘要：This study investigates the existence of price bubbles in Taiwan's housing market during the period from 1993 to 2009. Without estimating the fair value from market fundamental proxies or pricing models, we test bubbles directly using the deduced dynamics properties from the housing prices by applying the modified recursive unit root test from Phillips et al. (2011). This approach not only identifies the origin and collapse dates of the bubble but also provides an early warning system of housing bubbles for the government in policy making and for the public in their decision making. Our empirical results indentified a bubble in the housing market in Taipei that originated in 2006 and burst in 2008. Moreover, we found a new bubble was forming again in 2009, though we find no supportive evidence of housing price bubbles in Taipei county, Taichung, Kaohsiung, and Taiwan, as a whole nation-wide housing market.起始頁-結束頁：61-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201106.000314篇名：自由匯率制度的政策效果與隔絕功能並列篇名：Macroeconomic Policies and Insulation Properties under the Free Exchange Rate System作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur)關鍵字：自由匯率制度;通貨替代;匯率動態;貨幣自主性;外國通貨膨脹;隔絕功能;Free exchange rate system;Currency substitution;Exchange rate dynamics;Monetary independence;Foreign inflation;Insulation properties期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文將Chen (1973)自由匯率制度（即允許居民持有外幣的浮動匯率制度）的兩國模型簡約為小國的分析架構，藉此研究總體政策（包括財政政策和貨幣政策）及國外干擾對小型開放經濟產出與實質匯率的影響，並據以探討自由匯率制度的貨幣自主性、隔絕功能及其與通貨替代的關係。我們的分析發現：通貨替代程度、國外通貨膨脹率的大小、以及國外通貨需求的成本彈性等模型的結構參數，是影響本國政策效果、貨幣自主性與隔絕功能的判定因素。當國外通貨膨脹率恰為某一定值（從而貿易條件的變化對經常帳沒有影響），或兩種通貨獨立無關，則無論兩種通貨的替代彈性是大或小，本國皆具有貨幣自主性；在其他情況下，自由匯率制度下貨幣政策效果的大小，要看兩種通貨究竟是毛替代或毛補充而定，並非如Miles (1978)所謂：單憑通貨替代彈性的高低即可決定貨幣自主性的強弱。英文摘要：This paper reduces Chen's (1973) two-country, two-money model to the conventional small-economy with currency substitution model to investigate the effects of macroeconomic policies and foreign inflation under the free exchange rate system (i.e., flexible exchange rates without restrictions on holding outer currencies). It has been shown that the relative magnitude among the currency substitution elasticity, the cost (interest) elasticity of holding currency, the foreign monetary growth rate, and trade elasticities determine critically the steady-state values and dynamic properties of real exchange rates. Given other relevant parameters, the relative value of the currency substitution elasticity to the currency cost (interest) elasticity rather than the absolute value of the currency substitution elasticity, in turn, is crucial in influencing the monetary independence and the insulation effect of the free exchange rate system. The results differ significantly from Miles's (1978) argument that ”the degree to which inflation will be transmitted between the countries will of course be proportional to the degree of substitution between currencies.”起始頁-結束頁：91-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201106.000415篇名：A Computationally Practical Simulation Estimation for Dynamic Panel Tobit Models並列篇名：以計算實用之模擬估計法所估計之動態面板數據Tobit模型作者：張勝凱(Sheng-Kai Chang)關鍵字：Dynamic Panel Tobit models;GHK simulator;Gibbs sampling simulator;Correlated random effects;Initial conditions problem;動態面板數據Tobit模型;GHK模擬法;Gibbs模擬法;相關隨機估計法;起始值問題期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：This paper provides a computationally practical simulation estimation for the dynamic panel Tobit model with large categories of dependence structures. The simulation estimators are conducted through correlated random effects approach. The log-likelihood function is simulated and maximized through procedures based on a recursive algorithm formulated by GHK and Gibbs sampling simulators. The initial conditions problem is discussed in details. The simulation estimators discussed in this paper have been implemented by Scholz et al. (2006) to study retirement savings. Monte Carlo experiments indicate that the simulation estimators perform strikingly well, especially in the case of the Gibbs estimator, even for a small simulation size.英文摘要：在考慮動態面板數據Tobit模型多種可能的相關結構下，本文提出一個容易計算並實用的模擬估計法。此模擬估計法是藉由相關隨機估計法來執行。其取對數之概似函數是經由GHK及Gibbs模擬方法加以模擬並求其極大值。動態模型中之起始值問題在本文中亦有詳細之討論。Scholz et al.（2006）曾使用本文所提出的模擬估計法去估計動態面板數據Tobit模型並應用於美國退休金問題之探討。本文所作之模擬實驗亦顯示所提出之動態面板數據Tobit模型之模擬估計法在模擬樣本數小的情況下亦非常精確。起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：Government Relief as a Partial Insurance for the Individual's Background Risk並列篇名：政府救助為個人背景風險之保險作者：黃瑞卿(Rachel J. Huang)關鍵字：Government intervention;Background risk;Government relief;政府干預;所得背景風險;政府救助期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：This paper discusses whether governments should intervene in the private insurance market by providing income-related relief when the individual faces an insurable risk and an independent uninsurable background income risk. It is found that the government's relief may not totally crowd out the private insurance market, and that the government could improve social welfare if it provides additional coverage against the insurable risk only when the individuals are in a low income state. This income-related government relief could serve as a partial hedge for the individual's background risk.英文摘要：本篇論文討論當個人面對獨立的所得背景風險時，政府是否應提供救助。論文發現政府若提供與所得水準相關的救助系統，則此種救助不一定會具有排擠效果，使得個人減少對私人保險之購買。同時，此種系統具有保險的功能，可使個人移轉部分所得背景風險，並提高社會福利。起始頁-結束頁：33-59資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所17篇名：台灣房市存在價格泡沫嗎？並列篇名：ON THE EXISTENCE OF PRICE BUBBLES IN THE TAIWAN HOUSING MARKET作者：王景南(Jying-Nan Wang);葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh);林宗漢(Zong-Han Lin)關鍵字：理性泡沫;房價指數;改良式單根檢定;Rational bubble;Housing price index;Unit root test期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：房價是近年來投資者與政府機關所重視的重大民生議題之一。自1993年至2009年台灣房市持續飆漲，其背後是否存在價格泡沫的現象，為本研究所欲探討之問題。我們應用Phillips et al.（2011）所提出之遞迴迴歸法，驗證房屋市場是否存在價格泡沫。此方法之優點為直接針對房價泡沫所隱含的輕微發散價格，動態驗證泡沫的存在性、發生與破滅；不需事先估計房市之基礎價值，因此得以避免一些傳統檢定所可能衍生的諸如假設、模型或代理變數誤設所致的偏誤。並且能夠立即地發現泡沫生成與破滅的時間。實證結果發現：台北市自2006年起，開始出現房屋價格泡沫的現象，但是在2008年金融海嘯後此現象隨即消失，隨後至2009年又再次有房屋價格泡沫的生成。然而，其他行政區的房市並無泡沫化之現象。本研究的結果顯示，這樣的方法有助於房價泡沫預警系統之建立，可讓政府主管機關能及早擬定因應政策，並且作為一般大眾投資房市之參考。英文摘要：This study investigates the existence of price bubbles in Taiwan's housing market during the period from 1993 to 2009. Without estimating the fair value from market fundamental proxies or pricing models, we test bubbles directly using the deduced dynamics properties from the housing prices by applying the modified recursive unit root test from Phillips et al. (2011). This approach not only identifies the origin and collapse dates of the bubble but also provides an early warning system of housing bubbles for the government in policy making and for the public in their decision making. Our empirical results indentified a bubble in the housing market in Taipei that originated in 2006 and burst in 2008. Moreover, we found a new bubble was forming again in 2009, though we find no supportive evidence of housing price bubbles in Taipei county, Taichung, Kaohsiung, and Taiwan, as a whole nation-wide housing market.起始頁-結束頁：61-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所18篇名：自由匯率制度的政策效果與隔絕功能並列篇名：MACROECONOMIC POLICIES AND INSULATION PROPERTIES UNDER THE FREE EXCHANGE RATE SYSTEM作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur)關鍵字：自由匯率制度;通貨替代;匯率動態;貨幣自主性;外國通貨膨脹;隔絕功能;Free exchange rate system;Currency substitution;Exchange rate dynamics;Monetary independence;Foreign inflation;Insulation properties期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文將Chen（1973）自由匯率制度（即允許居民持有外幣的浮動匯率制度）的兩國模型簡約為小國的分析架構，藉此研究總體政策（包括財政政策和貨幣政策）及國外干擾對小型開放經濟產出與實質匯率的影響，並據以探討自由匯率制度的貨幣自主性、隔絕功能及其與通貨替代的關係。我們的分析發現：通貨替代程度、國外通貨膨脹率的大小、以及國外通貨需求的成本彈性等模型的結構參數，是影響本國政策效果、貨幣自主性與隔絕功能的判定因素。當國外通貨膨脹率恰為某一定值（從而貿易條件的變化對經常帳沒有影響），或兩種通貨獨立無關，則無論兩種通貨的替代彈性是大或小，本國皆具有貨幣自主性；在其他情況下，自由匯率制度下貨幣政策效果的大小，要看兩種通貨究竟是毛替代或毛補充而定，並非如Miles（1978）所謂：單憑通貨替代彈性的高低即可決定貨幣自主性的強弱。英文摘要：This paper reduces Chen's (1973) two-country, two-money model to the conventional small-economy with currency substitution model to investigate the effects of macroeconomic policies and foreign inflation under the free exchange rate system (i.e., flexible exchange rates without restrictions on holding outer currencies). It has been shown that the relative magnitude among the currency substitution elasticity, the cost (interest) elasticity of holding currency, the foreign monetary growth rate, and trade elasticities determine critically the steady-state values and dynamic properties of real exchange rates. Given other relevant parameters, the relative value of the currency substitution elasticity to the currency cost (interest) elasticity rather than the absolute value of the currency substitution elasticity, in turn, is crucial in influencing the monetary independence and the insulation effect of the free exchange rate system. The results differ significantly from Miles's (1978) argument that ”the degree to which inflation will be transmitted between the countries will of course be proportional to the degree of substitution between currencies.”起始頁-結束頁：91-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：Why World Exports Are Susceptible to the Economic Crisis? -The "Export Overshooting" Phenomenon並列篇名：為何世界貿易對於經濟危機之反應如此敏感？—出口過度反應現象之探討作者：劉碧珍(Bih-Jane Liu)關鍵字：出口過度反應;經濟危機;長鞭效應;台灣;export overshooting;economic crisis;bullwhip effect;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要針對出口過度脫離長期趨勢的現象（本文稱之為出口過度反應現象，exportovershooting），提供一些例證。本文研究2000年至2009年期間11個國家（經濟體） 的出口變動，發現2001年與2008年之經濟危機，的確有促使出口過度下跌的現象，且各國在2008年經濟危機之出口過度反應的程度高於2001年經濟危機，而台灣出口過度反應的程度也高於其他國家。長鞭效果（bullwhip effect） 是造成出口過度反應現象背後的主因之一。台灣由於位處供應鏈上游，長鞭效果尤其顯著，受到經濟危機之影響程度因而高於其他國家。此外，台灣廠商進行台灣接單海外生產的運籌操作，以及出口偏集於所得彈性較高之電子科技產品，也促使台灣在面對經濟危機時，出口下跌幅度較其他國家來得快、也來得深；不過，一旦景氣回升，出口回漲速度與幅度也較其他國家來得快與大。英文摘要：This paper provides some evidence of the ”export overshooting” phenomenon, i.e., the unusually large deviation of exports from their long-run level. We examined the exports of 11 economies over the period 2000-2009 and found overshooting did occur during the 2001 and 2008 crises. The overshooting, however, was more severe in Taiwan than in other countries, and in the 2008 crisis than in the 2001 crisis. We argue that the bullwhip effect is a major driving force behind the ”export overshooting” phenomenon. Following this line of argument, Taiwan’s increasing susceptibility to economic crisis can be attributed to an increase in cross-border vertical specialization, offshore outsourcing of downstream production and the concentration of her exports in high-tech products that are sensitive to demand shocks.起始頁-結束頁：425-462資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.394.12篇名：市場狀態與投資人對盈餘訊息之反應並列篇名：The Market States and the Investors' Reaction to Earnings News作者：詹場(Chang Chan);胡星陽(Shing-Yang Hu);呂朝元(Chao-Yuan Lyu);徐崇閔(Chung-Min Hsu)關鍵字：市場狀態;牛市;熊市;盈餘訊息;心裡帳戶;market states;bear market;bull market;reaction to earning news;mental account期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討投資人在牛市與熊市期間對盈餘訊息之反應是否不同。依據GervaisandOdean（2001），PengandXiong（2006），TverskyandKahneman（1974）及Thaler（1985）之理論，我們預期：在牛市期間，市場氣氛較為樂觀，投資人信心較強，對壞盈餘訊息之關注度較低，以及牛市期間投資績效較佳，在混合利得及損失之心理帳戶中，壞盈餘訊息所致之損失相對較小，使得投資人對壞盈餘訊息之反應較慢。反之，在熊市期間，投資人對好盈餘訊息的反應較慢。我們運用1996至2009年期間台灣股市所有上市公司17，000筆盈餘資料進行實證，結果與預期一致：台灣股市在牛市期間股價對壞盈餘訊息之反應較慢，在熊市期間股價對好盈餘訊息之反應較慢。英文摘要：This research aims to explore whether investors have different responses to earnings news in a bull market and a bear market. Based on the theories of Gervais andOdean (2001), Peng and Xiong (2006), Tversky and Kahneman (1974), and Thaler (1985), we anticipate that investors do respond differently. In the bull market, investors have a slower response to bad earning news because investors, having more confidence in the prosperous market, pay less attention to the bad earnings news, and also because in the bull market where the investors have better investment performance, the loss caused by the bad earning news is comparatively small in their mental account. In the bear market, however, the investors have slower responses to good earnings news. The findings of our research confirm our expectations: investors in Taiwan’s stock market respond more slowly to bad earnings news in a bull market; they respond more slowly to good earnings news in a bear market.起始頁-結束頁：463-510資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.394.23篇名：性別失衡對婚姻前景與勞動市場的影響—以戰後初期移民人口性比例為工具變數的實證研究並列篇名：Imbalanced Sex Ratios, Marriage Opportunities and Labor Market Outcomes: A Natural Experiment Based on Chinese Migration in the Late 1940s作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(Wehn-Jyuan Tsai)關鍵字：性比例;婚姻市場;家庭分工;sex ratio;marriage market;intrahousehold bargaining期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：透過婚姻市場的運作，性比例（男性相對於女性人口之比值）將會影響相關人口的婚姻前景、勞動參與及其他社經變數。然而，實證研究普遍觀察到的性比例與社經條件之間的相關性卻可能會受到遺漏變數與同時性問題的影響而產生偏誤。本文藉由探索戰後初期外省人口大規模遷徙所形成的自然試驗，使用1946-1951年移民人口的懸殊性比例做為工具變數，研究性比例對戰後出生世代人口婚姻前景與社經結果的影響。實證結果顯示性比例的增加會提升女性結婚的比例、擴大家庭規模，並降低女性的勞動參與率與提高居住於自有住宅的比例。實證結果大致符合婚姻理論模型的預測，亦即性比例的增加會提升女性在婚姻市場中的協商能力，進而改善女性的社經條件。英文摘要：Sex ratios (i.e., the relative numbers of men and women) can affect marriage opportunities, labor force participation and other socioeconomic outcomes. A common problem with many studies, however, is omitted variable bias and reverse causality in the observed correlation between sex ratios and socioeconomic outcomes. This paper exploits the natural experiment provided by the Chinese migration during the period from 1946 through 1951 to identify the effect of sex ratios on the native-born generation. The empirical results suggest that high sex ratios had a large positive effect on the likelihood of female marriage, family size and the homeownership rate, and a large negative effect on female labor force participation. The empirical results thus provide evidence consistent with the theory of marriage in which an increase in the sex ratio increases female bargaining power in the marriage market, leading to a change in socioeconomic outcomes that is favorable for women.起始頁-結束頁：511-540資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.394.34篇名：數學能力與性別對高中學生選組之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Mathematics Background and Gender on the Choice of Major in Taiwan's Senior High School作者：郭祐誠(Yu-Chen Kuo);許聖章(Sheng-Jang Sheu)關鍵字：高中生選組;數學背景;家庭背景;性別差異;Choice of Major;Math Achievement;Socioeconomic Status;Gender Gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣地區歷經經濟發展及教育環境變遷，高中生在選組上仍明顯存在性別差異，且隨時間演進並無重大改變。本研究利用「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」（TaiwanEducationPanelSurvey）分析性別、學生數學能力及家庭背景對於選組的影響，我們的實證結果顯示高中生選組偏好存在相當大的歧異，其中數學成就差距是重要的解釋因素，但數學對男女的影響並不一致，而其它家庭背景變數則相對並不重要。此外雖然女性明顯較男性不傾向選擇自然組，但性別間稟賦差距可解釋的部分只佔16%－21%，性別間選組差異仍大部分無法由男女間稟賦不同所解釋。最後本研究結果間接反駁女生較不傾向選擇自然組，乃因其數學能力較差所致之觀點。英文摘要：Historical data indicate a significant and persistent gap between male and female choice of major in Taiwan’s high schools. This study examines the effects of parental socioeconomic status on the choice of major, with special attention to gender disparity and its interaction with other factors. Furthermore, using the newly released panel data from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS), we are able to investigate the potential influence of a student’s past math achievement on the choice of major and further analyze the difference between male and female students. While math achievement is the most important factor among all variables in determining the choice of major, the impact of math is not consistent across gender. Our results indicate that the differences in endowments account for only 16%-21% of the overall gender gap. Still a considerable portion of the gender gap cannot be explained. Thus, it is inappropriate to attribute the gender difference in choice of major solely to math ability.起始頁-結束頁：541-591資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.394.45篇名：The Effect of Information Disclosure on Product Demand: Evidence from Yahoo! Auctions Taiwan並列篇名：訊息揭露對於產品需求的影響：以台灣奇摩拍賣網站為例作者：黃景沂(Ching-I Huang);蘇民傑(Min-Jie Su)關鍵字：資訊品質;訊息不對稱;估計需求;訊息揭露;information quality;asymmetric information;demand estimation;information disclosure期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：針對網路交易平台上的反淘汰問題，本文透過對於需求函數的估計來衡量訊息揭露對於解決此一問題的效果。網路平台上的賣家，通常可以利用張貼商品照片的方式來揭露商品的特徵，藉以減少訊息不對稱所造成的問題。在我們所研究的奇摩網站T恤交易市場當中，賣家所揭露的訊息可以依據照片內容區分為高、低兩種品質。我們的實證結果發現，張貼高品質訊息的照片不但會面對較高的商品需求，而且照片的數量對於需求也有正的邊際效果。另一方面，張貼低品質訊息的照片時，照片張數對於商品的需求幾乎沒有任何影響。英文摘要：We study the effect of information disclosure in resolving adverse selection by estimating the demand for a specific type of T-shirt sold on the Yahoo! Auctions platform. To reduce information asymmetry in Internet transactions, a seller usually voluntarily discloses product information by providing photos on the website. The disclosed information in the market we studied can be naturally separated into high and low quality levels. Not only does providing high-quality information which accurately reflects product characteristics increase consumer demand, but also an increase in the quantity of high-quality information will have a positive marginal effect. On the contrary, increasing the amount of low-quality information has almost no effect on demand.起始頁-結束頁：299-324資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.393.16篇名：員工認股選擇權與公司績效—反事實分析架構之應用並列篇名：Employee Stock Options and Business Performance-Applying a Counterfactual Framework作者：張元(Yuan Chang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen);李卿企(Chin-Chi Lee)關鍵字：員工認股選擇權;傾向分數配對方法;反事實樣本;選擇偏誤;ESO;Propensity Score Matching Method;Counterfactual Sample;Selection Bias期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：公司實施誘因報酬制度，例如員工分紅入股制度或是員工認股選擇權制度，是否能提升企業經營績效，在既有理論與實證研究中一直沒有一致性的結論。本文應用傾向分數配對方法（Propensity ScoreMatching method），根據企業特性變數是否相近為依據進行樣本配對，分析實施員工認股選擇權制度的公司與其反事實樣本（CounterfactualSample；特性變數與實施員工認股選擇權公司極為近似，但未實施該制度之公司）的績效差異，趨近「其他條件不變」的要求，降低文獻中的樣本選擇偏誤。根據台灣部分上市電子公司2004年至2008年的資料我們發現，實施員工認股權制度的公司績效並未顯著相對較佳，以配對後的樣本進行分析亦未出現相反的證據，採取員工認股權制度無法改善公司績效。英文摘要：This paper fills a gap in the empirical literature which examines the impact of Employee Stock Options (ESO) on financial performance by considering and correcting for sample selection bias due to non-random sampling. Based on data from TWSE-listing hi-tech companies, we employ several propensity score matching method, developed by Rubin (1973), Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983, 1985a,b), construct samples of ESO-firms and after-matching non-ESO-firms (counterfactual samples, without adopting ESO but sharing similar characteristics with ESO-firms) and then use regression analysis to examine their performance differences during 2005-2008. Our empirical results suggest that there is little evidence that ESO-firms outperform Non- ESO-firms. On the contrary, cash bonuses exert large and significantly positive effects on most performance measures in the regression results. Thus, we conclude that adopting ESO alone cannot improve financial performance.起始頁-結束頁：325-372資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.393.27篇名：彈性生產下的產能投資與代工行為並列篇名：Capacity Investment and Subcontracting Behavior under Flexible Manufacturing作者：王光正(Andy Kuang-Cheng Wang);梁文榮(Wen-Jung Liang)關鍵字：彈性生產;代工;產能投資;flexible manufacturing;subcontracting;capacity investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文從彈性生產的角度切入，建立一理論模型探討代工發生的原因。得到的主要結果如下: 第一、由於品牌廠商不具彈性生產能力，因此一旦需求景氣的風險變大，即使具彈性生產能力的代工廠商生產成本較高，品牌廠商也會尋求代工；第二、在品牌廠商決定不代工（或沒有代工市場時）的決策下，品牌廠商的產能資本投資可能隨需求景氣的變異數擴張而增加，或隨景氣需求的預期平均值增加而增加。但一旦品牌廠商決定代工後，品牌廠商的產能資本投資必隨需求景氣的變異數擴張而減少；第三、品牌廠商產能投資邊際成本越小，代工廠彈性生產的優勢就越低，代工就越不可能發生。英文摘要：This paper constructs a theoretical model which introduces flexible manufacturing to study the causes giving rise to subcontracting. The main findings of the paper are as follows. Firstly, owing to an inability to flexibly manufacture, the consignor would choose to subcontract out its production even if the production cost of the subcontracting firm is higher than that of the consignor, when the variance, i.e., risk, of a demand shock is large. Secondly, when subcontracting does not occur, the cosigner's capacity investment increases as the variance or the mean of a demand shock rises. However, given that subcontracting occurs, the consignor's capacity investment will decrease as the variance of a demand shock rises. Thirdly, the smaller the consignor's marginal cost of capacity investment, the less the possibility of the emergence of subcontracting due to a fall in the comparative advantage of the flexible manufacturing owned by the subcontracting firm.起始頁-結束頁：373-402資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.393.38篇名：台灣行政區域人口密度：1640－2008並列篇名：A Preliminary Survey of the Population Density of Taiwan: 1640-2008作者：徐茂炫(Mau-Shan Shi);黃彥豪(Yen-Hao Huang);陳建亨(Chien-Heng Chen)關鍵字：人口密度;人口史;行政區域;population density of Taiwan;population history;administrative region期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：為研究台灣四百年的人口密度之趨勢，本文藉由歷史學者之考據以及當代官方人口統計資料的蒐集，並量化台灣各時期（荷據、明鄭、清領、日治與民國時期）行政區域的土地面積，計算長期台灣人口密度。文獻上有關台灣長期人口密度的計算，並未考慮到行政區域之變遷，僅以全台面積進行計算。然如此而得之人口密度僅包含了人口成長的資訊，難以得窺台灣長期的開發過程中，人口成長與土地空間之間的互動變化。因此，本文進行人口密度計算的同時，考慮各個時間點的人口數據下，所對應的行政區域面積，從而得到包含人口成長及土地空間變化資訊之人口密度指標，並以數字方式呈現台灣四百年來由人煙罕至走向人口稠密的過程。英文摘要：The work provides a preliminary four-century survey of the population density of Taiwan. Unlike the existing literature, which by and large, used the natural area of the whole island as the measuring reference, we take the effective political territory as the denominator. This adaption makes the presentation of the cross-century population density of Taiwan more plausible than conventional presentations in that the five successive political regimes of Taiwan each had a distinct sense of sovereignty as well as territory. Using the area of the whole island to estimate the population density of Taiwan before the 20th century would be misleading since the political territories did not dominate the whole island. Our results thus create a long-term time series for the population density of Taiwan that is advanced and consistent with reality. To our knowledge, our work is possibly the first effort of this type seen in the literature. It is not only important to demography but also to other relevant fields.起始頁-結束頁：403-423資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.393.49篇名：勞工組成特性對工廠生產力及薪資之影響：以台灣電子業工廠為例並列篇名：The Impact of Workforce Composition on Plant Productivity and Wages: Evidence from the Taiwan Electronics Industry作者：張景褔(Ching-Fu Chang);盧其宏(Chyi-Horng Lu);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu)關鍵字：勞工組成特性;合併資料;生產力;薪資;外籍勞工;workforce composition;matched data;productivity;wage;foreign labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文係以1998年至2003年台灣電子業工廠與員工的合併資料作<U+7232>實證基礎，觀察工廠與勞工特性對於工廠生產力與平均薪資之影響。本文所討論的生產力指標包括勞動生產力與總要素生產力。另外，<U+7232>考量生產要素投入與生產力兩者間關聯性所造成的估計偏誤，本文進一步利用Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)的生產力估計方法來解決生產要素投入的內生性問題。實證結果顯示，整體來說，電子業工廠規模較大、工廠營運年數較多、員工的男性比例與人力資本指標較高的工廠，其生產力越高，我們發現員工的教育程度組成<U+7232>大型工廠生產力的重要決定因素，但員工的年齡結構與性別組成對其生產力則無明顯影響。至於工廠平均薪資方面，各項特性對於薪資的影響方向大略與生產力相同，僅員工年齡組成對於生產力與薪資有相反的效果。英文摘要：This paper investigates the effect of workforce composition on plant productivity and wages using a unique employer-employee matched data set with data from Taiwan electronics plants. Specifically, we adopt the methodology proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) to address the endogeneity caused by the correlation between inputs and unobservable productivity shocks when estimating production functions. Our results suggest that plant productivity increases with plant size, plant age, and the proportion of male, younger and more-educated workers within a plant. Moreover, the impact of the education composition of the workforce on plant productivity is more significant for large-scale plants. In addition, while younger workers ate more productive than older ones, there is an age-wage premium with older workers being paid higher wages. Finally, employing foreign workers is beneficial to plant productivity, yet such benefit decreases as the ratio of foreign workers increases.起始頁-結束頁：177-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.392.110篇名：隨收隨付與完全提存的國民退休年金：不同財政政策指標之比較並列篇名：The Pay-as-you-go Pension System and the Fully-funded Pension System作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：國民退休年金;隨收隨付制;完全提存制;經濟成長;社會福利;national pension;pay-as-you-go;fully-funded;economic growth;social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文考慮政府財政政策的指標<U+7232>釘住固定的政府支出規模或釘住固定的勞動所得稅率，比較隨收隨付年金制與完全提存年金制對經濟成長以及社會福利的影響，我們發現：1.無論財政政策的指標<U+7232>釘住固定的政府支出規模或釘住固定的勞動所得稅率，隨收隨付的國民年金制皆將減低經濟成長、提升當代年長者福利、減弱未來世代的福利；2.若以固定政府支出規模<U+7232>指標，隨收隨付的國民年金制度將不利於當代年輕人的福利，而以固定勞動所得稅率<U+7232>指標之下，隨收隨付的國民年金制度則有助於當代年輕人的福利；3.若財政政策的指標<U+7232>固定政府支出規模，完全提存的國民年金將完全不會對經濟成長以及社會福利造成影響；4.若財政政策的指標<U+7232>固定勞動所得稅率，完全提存的國民年金對經濟成長、當代年輕人福利、未來世代的福利皆有正面的影響效果。英文摘要：This paper considers two fiscal policy rules including government spending scale targeting and income tax rate targeting to compare the growth and welfare effects of the pay-as-you-go pension system with those of the fully-funded pension system. Several main findings emerge from the analysis. First, regardless of the fiscal policy rule, the pay-as-you-go pension system reduces the economic growth and the welfare of the future generations, but raises the welfare of the older generation. Secondly, the pay-as-you-go pension system reduces the welfare of the younger generation under government spending scale targeting but raises it under income tax rate targeting. Thirdly, the fully-funded pension system does not affect economic growth and social welfare under government spending scale targeting. Fourthly, the fully-funded pension system raises economic growth and welfare of the young and future generations under income tax rate targeting.起始頁-結束頁：213-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.392.211篇名：所得分配不均與犯罪：台灣縣市動態追蹤資料分析並列篇名：Income Inequality and Crime: A Study Based on Regional Dynamic Panel Data from Taiwan作者：劉孟奇(Mon-Chi Lio);盧敬植(Ching-Chih Lu)關鍵字：所得分配不均;吉尼係數;犯罪率;動態追蹤資料;income inequality;gini coefficient;crime rate;dynamic panel data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文運用台灣1998-2005年的縣市別動態追蹤資料，估計所得分配不均對於各種犯罪率的影響。在研究方法方面，除了OLS與固定效果模型外，並採用系統GMM方法進行估計。研究結果顯示，如果在模型中不考慮時間虛擬變項，則OLS、固定效果模型、動態追蹤資料模型GMM估計方法都相當一致地顯示出縣市以吉尼係數代表的所得分配不均程度，對於普通竊盜、故意殺人、強制性交犯罪率有顯著正向影響。同時在動態追蹤資料模型中，所得分配不均顯現出對於刑案犯罪率與暴力犯罪率都有顯著正向影響。如果在模型中考慮時間虛擬變項，則OLS、固定效果模型、動態追蹤資料模型GMM估計方法相當一致地顯示出所得分配不均程度對於普通竊盜犯罪率與故意殺人犯罪率有顯著正向影響。我們的研究結論與1990年代以後國外文獻中普遍發現所得分配不均與謀殺犯罪率之間有顯著正向關連的結論一致。英文摘要：This paper applies the system GMM approach along with a traditional OLS and fixed-effect model to investigate the impact of income inequality on various crime rates based on Taiwan's regional data from 1998 to 2005. In the models without time dummy variables, we find that all models consistently show that the Gini coefficient, the income inequality measure we use in this paper, has significantly positive impact on common theft, murder and forcible rape. The estimation from the system GMM approach also implies that the income inequality leads to higher crime rates and especially higher violent crime rates. Once we introduce time dummy into our models, all approaches show that the common theft and murder rate are higher with greater income inequality, which is also consistent with the connection between income inequality and the murder rate found in the literature from other countries.起始頁-結束頁：243-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.392.312篇名：強制添加生質能源政策探討並列篇名：A Study of the Biofuel Blend Ratio Policy作者：洪鳴丰(Ming-Feng Hung);陳智華(Jhy-Hwa Chen);蕭代基(Daigee Shaw);林文偉(Wei-Wei Lin)關鍵字：生質能;添加比;能源政策;油價;糧食價格;bioenergy;biofuel blend ratio;energy policy;fossil fuel price;food price期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：強制添加生質能源政策是目前世界各國最廣<U+7232>採用以發展生質能源的政策之一，然而回顧其相關文獻，政策的理論基礎卻十分薄弱。本文之主要貢獻，即是建立一包含能源市場、能源作物市場以及能源外部性的理論模型，分析政府應如何制訂最適添加比，以及添加比如何影響生質能源與能源（糧食）作物價格，並探討當相關變數外生改變時，最適添加比應如何改變以維持社會福利極大。研究發現，在其他因素不變下，生質能源添加比的提高將造成均衡的生質能源與糧食價格提高，而國際化石能源價格提高則會造成均衡的生質能源與糧食價格降低。其次，當溫室氣體排放對於社會福利的損害程度很大時，若單位生質能源之溫室氣體排放量降低，政府應採取較高的添加比；但當國際化石能源價格提高時，對最適添加比的影響則是不確定。英文摘要：The biofuel blend ratio policy is one of the most widely applied measures to develop bioenergy The theoretical basis of this policy is, however, very weak. The main contribution of this paper is to specify a theoretical model that considers the energy and agricultural feedstock markets and externalities from the consumption of energy. Other things equal, we find that an increase in the biofuel blend ratio increases the equilibrium prices of biofuel and feedstock; an increase in fossil fuel price, however, decreases the equilibrium prices of biofuel and feedstock. Furthermore, if the problem of the greenhouse effect is serious, the optimal blend ratio should be raised when the greenhouse gas reduction technology of biofuel improves. However, the optimal adjustment of blend ratio to an increase in fossil fuel prices internationally is indeterminate. It depends on the relative magnitudes of several competing effects-in particular the utility impact on consumers and the externality of energy use.起始頁-結束頁：277-298資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.392.413篇名：經濟成長率預測之評估與更新並列篇名：Evaluating and Updating Economic Growth Rate Forecasts作者：陳宜廷(Yi-Ting Chen);徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu);劉瑞文(Ruey-Wan Liou);莊額嘉(O-Chia Chuang)關鍵字：經濟成長率;條件動差檢定;擴散指標;預測誤差;預測更新;economic growth rate;conditional moment test;diffusion index;forecasting error;forecast updating model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究由設定檢驗的觀點，評估行政院主計處的一季前經濟成長率預測表現，並提供可能的預測更新模型。實證顯示前述預測的誤差項具有顯著的一階自我相關結構，並與部分總體擴散指標之落後項相關。亦即，此預測誤差具有可再預測性，故主計處的預測表現末臻預測均方差極小化之最適結果。依據檢定所得出的訊息，我們設計出數個預測更新模型。其中最簡單的模型，僅需主計處上一期的預測誤差，即可對其當期預測值進行即時的更新。預測更新模型的樣本內、外表現，皆優於主計處原有的一季前預測，亦明顯優於未納入主計處預測的擴散指標模型。英文摘要：In this empirical study, we evaluate the one-quarter-ahead economic-growth- rate forecasting performance of Taiwan's Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics (DGBAS) and provide certain forecast updating models to improve the forecasting performance. Specifically, the DGBAS forecasting error sequence has significant autocorrelation of order one and is correlated with the macroeconomic diffusion indexes. This motivates us to propose a set of models for updating the DGBAS forecast. Among these models, the simplest one needs only the current DGBAS forecast and the previous DGBAS forecasting error, and the best model extends this simple model by including certain properly selected diffusion indexes as explanatory variables. The updated models considerably outperform the DGBAS forecast and the pure diffusion index models (that do not account for the DGBAS forecast) in both the in-sample and out-of-sample comparisons.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.391.114篇名：日治時期台灣的犯罪統計並列篇名：Crime Statistics in Japanese Colonial Taiwan作者：古慧雯(Hui-Wen Koo)關鍵字：犯罪統計;日治時期;crime statistics;Japanese colonial era期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文整理1897-1942期間台灣的犯罪相關資料。我們發現暴力犯罪，如殺人、強盜、縱火等之犯罪率，在日治初期即大幅減少，而賭博、竊盜之犯罪率卻不斷在增加中。另方面，各地區的犯罪情況有明顯的差異。台東花蓮廳之暴力犯罪率（如殺人、縱火）最高；台北州的賭博、竊盜之犯罪率則<U+7232>台灣之最高。英文摘要：This paper compiles Taiwanese crime statistics for the period 1897-1942. Violent crimes, such as murder, robbery and arson, are found to have decreased significantly at the beginning of Japanese rule, On the other hand, crime rates for gambling and theft increased constantly over time. The crime situation varied greatly among regions. Taitung and Hualien Districts had the highest violent crime rates (including murder and arson), while Taipei Prefecture had the highest crimes rates for gambling and theft.起始頁-結束頁：45-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.391.215篇名：不同世代下之教育報酬與能力差異並列篇名：A Cohort Analysis of Returns to Education with Heterogeneous Ability: The Case of Taiwan作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);賴偉文(Wei-Wen Lai)關鍵字：個人能力異質性;世代效果;教育報酬;強化效果;彌補效果;heterogeneous ability;cohort effect;returns to education期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文採用1978年至2004年的行政院主計處「人力運用調查」原始資料，依據不同年群資料分析不同工資條件分配下的邊際教育報酬率。估計結果支持個人能力的異質性將反應在工資分配上，因此傳統以OLS模型估計的平均教育報酬率並不適當，且個人能力的異質住在較年輕世代中最<U+7232>明顯。本文亦發現在較年長的世代，教育投資對個人能力呈現強化效果(strengthened effect)，即接受教育的結果能強化個人的能力；而較年輕的世代，教育對個人能力則呈現彌補效果(supplementary effect)，即教育可補個人能力之不足，且愈年輕的世代，其教育對個人能力的彌補性也愈強。英文摘要：Using cohort data generated from time series of cross section data from Tai-wan's Manpower Utilization Survey from the period 1978-2004, this paper adopts the Quantile Regression method to estimate heterogeneous rates of return to education conditional on different wage distributions. Estimation results support the heterogeneous-ability hypothesis for wage distribution and cast doubt on the average rate of return to education calculated by the traditional OLS estimation method. The results show that heterogeneity is strongest within the young cohorts; education and ability are complements in the older cohorts and are substitutes in the younger cohorts. This implies that the younger the cohort is and the stronger the complementary effect will be between education and ability, and thus education may reinforce individuals' heterogeneity.起始頁-結束頁：81-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.391.316篇名：銀行集中度及效率對市場競爭度的影響：台灣實證研究並列篇名：The Impact of Bank Concentration and Efficiency on Competition: Evidence from Taiwan作者：劉景中(Jin-Chung Liu)關鍵字：銀行集中度;銀行效率;市場競爭度;市場獨佔力;bank concentration;bank efficiency;competition;market power期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：台灣政府近年來推動許多金融改革政策，主要是希望藉由提高金融機構的集中度以降低它們惡性競爭，以及改善金融機構經營效率不佳的現象。本文以1996-2007年台灣銀行業<U+7232>研究對象，探討銀行集中度及銀行效率對銀行市場競爭度的影響。主要實證結果有以下兩個：第一、銀行集中度與銀行市場競爭度的關係呈非線性的關係。當銀行集中度低時，提高銀行集中度會提高銀行的市場競爭度，當銀行集中度高時，提高銀行集中度會降低銀行的市場競爭度。第二、銀行效率愈高，銀行的市場競爭度愈低。英文摘要：In recent years, the Taiwan government has implemented numerous financial reforms. The main aims of these reforms has been to lower excessive competition among financial institutions by raising their concentration and to improve the efficiency of financial institutions. This paper presents an empirical study on the impact of bank concentration and bank efficiency on bank competition in Taiwan from 1996 to 2007. This paper finds that the relation between bank concentration and bank competition is nonlinear. While bank concentration is low, increasing bank concentration results in increasing bank competition. While bank concentration is high, increasing bank concentration results in decreasing bank competition. This paper also finds that higher bank efficiency lowers bank competition.起始頁-結束頁：115-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2011.391.401篇名：網路意見領袖量表之建構並列篇名：The Development of A Multiple-Item Scale for Measuring Online Opinion Leader作者：蔡瑤昇(Yau-Sheng Tsai);呂文琴(Wen-Chin Lu);洪榮照(Jung-Chao Hung)關鍵字：網路意見領袖;量表發展;網路口碑;Online Opinion Leader;Scale Development;Online Word-of-Mouth期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：網際網路的興盛提供了新型態的資訊交流管道，使得意見領袖的影響力不再侷限於僅透過傳統環境面對面的口碑傳播，因網路環境而生的網路意見領袖，藉著網路口碑來發揮其更廣大的影響力；因此，意見領袖的「質」與「量」已儼然產生明顯的變化。然而過去文獻所發展的意見領袖量表皆建構於傳統環境，對於網路意見領袖的測量缺乏完整且具體的工具。本研究透過實體與網路發放問卷，在352份有效樣本進行探索性因素分析和驗證性因素分析之後，發展出具有良好信度與效度的網路意見領袖量表，提出包含傳統領袖特質、持久涉入、產品知識察覺、探索行為、網路創新、電腦能力及領域涉入等七大構面總計21題項，並提出建議與未來研究方向。英文摘要：The prosperity of the internet provides new type of information exchange and communications. It makes word of mouth not just only face to face communication but also changing the quality and quantity of online opinion leader. However, the construct of the present opinion leader scale was built in a traditional environment. It lacks of fitness for measuring online opinion leader in a virtual environment. The research conducted questionnaires to physical and online surveys and obtains 352 valid samples. By using exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis, an online opinion leader scale is developed with good reliability and validity. The study points out seven constructs, including traditional characteristics of opinion leader, enduring involvement, self-perceived knowledge, exploratory behaviour, innovativeness, computer skills, and field involvement. And twenty-one measuring items are identified. The study also provides suggestions for the academic and management implications. The future research suggestions are provided as well.起始頁-結束頁：759-779資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).052篇名：社會影響與社群特性對於部落客任務價值及Blog持續使用意圖之影響並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Social Influence and CommunityCharacteristics Impact Bloggers' Perceived Task Value and Blog Continuous Usage Intention in Blog Context作者：許麗玲(Li-Ling Hsu);徐村和(Tsuen-Ho Hsu);唐嘉偉(Jia-Wei Tang);陳嘉奇(Chia-Chi Chen)關鍵字：Blog;任務價值;社會影響;社群特性;持續使用;Blog;Task Value;Social Influence; Community Characteristics; Continuous Usage期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：過去以任務價值為主要理論依據的相關研究中，大部份的研究結果已指出任務價值會影響使用者的滿意度與持續使用意圖，然而卻缺乏從社會影響、生活經驗與社群等社會學的角度，更為宏觀地探討是否有相關的前置變數。此外，鑑於Blog的社群已經逐步形成一種社會結構，卻仍少有以社會影響層面來探討形成虛擬社群特性的相關研究。再者，相較於過去Blog研究是以個別Blog為社群觀點，探討部落客的社群認同對於Blog使用意圖的影響，本研究的特點是著眼於藉由部落客們在「Blog間」的往來使用與互動行為中，所產生的社群特性觀點，來探討Blog之社群特性是否能夠影響部落客的任務價值，進而驅動部落客持續使用與經營Blog的意圖。因此，本研究以Eccles et al.（1983）所提出的任務價值為核心，結合社會影響與Blog社群特性等個人社會層面的心理因素，以彌補先前研究結果的缺口，提出一套能夠在Blog情境下解釋部落客滿意度與持續使用意圖之模式。經由實證分析結果發現，本研究加入的Blog社會影響與社群特性之因素，能夠有效地解釋部落客任務價值的來源，以及部落客對於使用Blog的滿意度與持續使用意圖。英文摘要：In the past studies, most results indicated that ”Task Value” will influence users' satisfaction and continuance intention based on Expectancy-Value Theory. However, it lacks to find out other independent variables (including social influence and community characteristics) to examine the mediator (Task Value), as well as, the effects of Bloggers' satisfaction and continuance intention in Blog context. In addition, few studies discussed the effects of social influence on Blog community characteristics. Moreover, the distinguishing feature of this study focus on interaction of Blog usage for Bloggers between ”Blogs” as community rather than single Blog to investigate whether Blog community characteristics influence Bloggers' task value or not, and further to promote the intention for Blog continuous usage and Blog management for Bloggers. The purpose of this study focuses on investigating user's continue intention. The Model adopted ”Task Value” construct which from Expectancy- Value Theory (Eccle s et al., 1983) to determine crucial factors which could affect people to continue using Blog. This research tests the relationships among constructs, such as ”Perceived Task Value”, ”Bloggers' Attitude”, ”Bloggers' Satisfaction” and ”Blog Continuous Usage Intention”. And further, to review the literature, the study founded that ”Social Influence” and ”Community Characteristics” are exogenous variable of Task Value. This study proposed a theoretical framework and validated the model on Blog context. This study found that can explain the source of ”Task Value” for Bloggers efficiently by adding Blog ”Social influence” and ”Community Characteristics”, as well as can explain ”Bloggers' Satisfaction” and ”Blog Continuous Usage Intention”起始頁-結束頁：781-816資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).073篇名：以知識本體為基礎建構病毒分類知識系統並列篇名：An Ontology-based Approach toward Knowledge Systems in Classification of Virus作者：許通安(Tong-An Hsu);洪智力(Chih-Li Hung);黃盈豪(Ying-Hao Huang)關鍵字：電腦病毒分類;知識本體;自我組織映射網路;Computer Virus Classification; Ontology;Self-Organizing Map期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：在網際網路時代裡，形形色色的網路應用在無地域限制下快速的發展。同時，基於某種原因，電腦病毒開發者，也將不斷開發出新型的變種電腦病毒，藉由網際網路的便利性四處散佈。當使用者遭受電腦病毒感染與威脅時，快速識別出電腦病毒的型態，並找尋相關解決方案是非常重要的。本研究提出藉由知識本體結合機器學習的創新方式，進行電腦病毒的分類，具體而言，本研究採用自我組織映射網路（self-organizing map）結合k平均法（k-means）的自動分群技術，並導入C4.5決策樹演算法以建立電腦病毒的知識階層架構。此種方式能夠以客觀的方式迅速有效的自動化塑模電腦病毒知識本體，並能透過本體規則推論找出最適合的病毒感染解決方案。英文摘要：In the era of Internet, many varied information flows prompt a rich of usage over Internet without geographical limitation. However, for some purpose, many computer virus creators also take the benefit of Internet and make varied viruses diffuse ubiquitously on the Internet. It should be necessary to recognize the virus type and look for solutions immediately when a computer is attacked by a virus. Based on the integration of ontology learning and machine learning, this research proposes a useful solution to classify viruses to their associated categories. More specifically, we propose a novel method, which integrates self-organizing map (SOM) with K-means into C4.5 decision tree in order to objectively produce a hierarchical knowledge base for virus. Our proposed method is able to build the computer virus ontology automatically, effectively and efficiently and find the most suitable solution for an infected computer via rule inference in this computer virus ontology.起始頁-結束頁：817-840資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).084篇名：從多元觀點探討使用者對於電子書閱讀器的採用行為並列篇名：The Antecedents of E-Book Reader Adoption Intentions: AMulti-Lens Perspective作者：蔡顯童(Hsien-Tung Tsai);賴子珍(Tzyy-Jane Lay);邱雅鈴(Ya-Ling Chiu)關鍵字：科技接受理論;計畫行為理論;自我認同理論;分量迴歸;Technology Acceptance Model; Theory of Planned Behavior;Self-Identity Theory;Quantile Regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：在近期，電子書閱讀器（e-Reader）接受度是經理人所關注的焦點，然而過去研究對於消費者採用電子書閱讀器行為了解仍顯不足。本研究主要從消費者的角度出發，探討影響消費者採用電子書閱讀器的前置因素。本研究透過文獻回顧，延伸TAM與TPB學理，並且整合自我認同理論，提出多元觀點的科技採用模型。本研究針對360位潛在使用者進行問卷調查，並利用LISREL進行模型估計；實證結果發現：消費者採用電子閱讀器的行為意向，會顯著地受到「知覺有用性」、「知覺易用性」、「知覺享樂性」、「態度」、「主觀規範」、以及使用者「世界主義傾向」所影響。本研究並以分量迴歸（quantile regression）針對不同使用意願的使用者進行分析，結果顯示：「知覺有用性」的影響效果，將隨著使用者的採用意向提升而逐漸下降；「知覺易用性」對採用意向的影響，則隨著採用意向的增加而逐漸提高；而「知覺享樂性」對使用者的採用意向影響，則是呈現先增後減的「倒U」現象。本研究的發現除了深化科技接受模式的學理之外，亦提供經理人在開發新科技產品或是擬定行銷方案之具體建議。英文摘要：This study extends previous research related to the technology acceptance model by conceptualizing the determinants of e-book reader adoption intentions. The authors test their hypotheses using self-reported data obtained from 360 respondents. The results show that TAM-based factors (i.e., perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and perceived enjoyment), TPB-based factors (i.e., attitudes and subjective norms), and self-identity-based factor (cosmopolitanism) all relate significantly to users' adoption intentions. In addition, through the use of quantile regression analysis, the study provides insights into the relative importance of six antecedents of adoption intentions. The authors discuss the managerial implications of their findings, as well as avenues for future research.起始頁-結束頁：841-871資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).095篇名：RFID技術導入機台製造流程之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Application of the RFID Technology to theManufacturing Flow of Machines作者：黃敬仁(Ching-Jen Huang);廖麗滿(Li-Man Liao);廖麗芬(Li-Fen Liao);江振恭(Chen-Kung Chiang)關鍵字：RFID;IDEF0;企業流程模型化與分析;機台製造流程;RFID;IDEF0;BPMA;Manufacturing flow of machine期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：企業應用RFID技術以提升生產效率，期望能監督與掌控更精確的品質、交期與成本，為企業建立更多的競爭利基。本研究目的是藉由導入RFID技術至機台，掌控整體之製造流程，進而改善作業之效能，提升生產力。本研究運用企業流程模型化與分析（BPMA）方法，並以IDEF0為工具，分析生產作業流程，進一步予以合理化，藉由進行作業流程之工時分析，了解個案公司導入RFID系統後，對整體效能具有顯著地提升。研究結果顯示，RFID技術的導入，可縮短工作時數、提高產品品質及服務效能，增加企業的營運綜效與競爭能力。英文摘要：Enterprises apply the RFID technology to move up production efficiency and desire to monitor and control the quality, due date and cost of manufacturing process more accurately. This will make more niches for enterprises. The purpose of this research is to improve production performance and promote productivity by introducing RFID technology to the manufacturing flow of machine for the case company. In this research, BPMA methodology and IDEF0 tools are applied to analyze the production processes and the processes are further rationalized. By the working hour analysis of production process, we realized that the performance of case company is moved up significantly after the RFID technology was introduced. The results show that the working hours are reduced, the production quality and service performance are promoted, and the operating synergy and competence are increased by applying the RFID technology to the case company.起始頁-結束頁：873-894資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).016篇名：商業智慧系統導入與公司營運績效並列篇名：Implementing Business Intelligence Systems and Firm Performance作者：許恩得(Ente Hsu);吳顯忠(Shian-Chung Wu);王存國(Eric T.G. Wang)關鍵字：商業智慧;商業智慧系統;營運績效;Business intelligence;Business intelligence system;Firm performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：根據資源基礎觀點，引進新的資訊系統能協助企業產生持久性競爭優勢。然而，亦有文獻發現，企業進行資訊科技之投資，不必然產生正面效果；即所謂的「生產力矛盾」。在全球化的環境下，企業必須迅速回應變化，因此，「商業智慧系統」（BIS）日益受到重視。本研究透過實徵研究，使用較可靠的上市公司資料，分別從收益與成本面，共八個營運績效指標，測試企業導入商業智慧系統與營運績效的關聯性。本研究發現，導入商業智慧系統可以降低成本，及增加生產力，卻無顯著提升其收益面之績效指標。其原因可能是收益面績效指標受到其他外部環境因素影響，或單一資訊系統無法產生明顯的收益。因此建議，企業在評估是否導入商業智慧系統時，或應先以成本及生產力為考量重點。英文摘要：According to the resource-based view, implementing a new information system may help firms create sustained competitive advantage. However, the results of academic research have shown that IT investments do not necessarily have a positive effect for firms, a phenomenon called ”productivity paradox.” In nowadays fast-changing global environments, firms have to respond to the change rapidly, and the business intelligence system (BIS) may be the information system that can help firms most presently. In this study, we use the more credible data from listed companies in Taiwan and examine eight firm performance indicators, including profit and cost dimensions, to test our proposed research hypotheses. The result shows that implementing BIS can help firms reduce cost and improve productivity. However, we also find that its effect on profitability is insignificant. Such a result may be caused by other influential factors in the external environment, implicating that it is unlikely to significantly enhance firm profitability with one single information system. Thus, when firms evaluate a BIS, it may be more appropriate for them to emphasize the system's first order effects on cost and productivity.起始頁-結束頁：895-918資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).027篇名：部落格口碑訊息訴求對購買決策之影響並列篇名：A Study for the Influence of Consumer Purchase Decisions in Message Appeal of Blog Word-of-Mouth作者：邱于平(Yu-Ping Chiou);楊美雪(Mei-Hsueh Yang)關鍵字：部落格口碑;訊息訴求;購買決策;blog word-of-mouth;message appeals;purchase decisions期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：部落格的興起，使口碑的型態從面對面方式轉移到透過部落格文字與圖像的描述進行，其中又以文字的訊息訴求扮演著重要的角色。本研究以550則部落格口碑作為內容分析樣本，藉以瞭解部落格口碑的陳述現況。此外，也以網路問卷來了解消費者是否會受到不同訴求方式的影響。最後將內容分析與問卷結果相互比對，以探討陳述方式對消費者購買決策的影響。研究結果發現：（1）「影視音樂」與「3C數位產品」類相關訊息內容易受理性訴求的口碑內容所影響；（2）「旅遊札記」與「美食報導」類消費者在面臨購買決策時，易受感性訴求影響；「流行時尚」、「美容保健」、「寵物用品」與「圖書資訊」類的消費者則同時會受到「理性」與「感性」訴求左右其購買決策，而各類的訴求元素也有所差異。因此，若要增加對消費者的影響力，依據各產品類型的差異，來規劃整體口碑的陳述方式，將是部落格口碑傳播者的必要作法。英文摘要：With more popular of blog using, dissemination of word-of-mouth has changed from face-to-face to blogosphere. In message appeals, texts play an important role. This study not only used content analyze approach to understand blog word-of-mouth statements' appeals, but also used online questionnaire to investigate the influence of consumers' purchase decision towards message appeals in blog word-of-mouth. The results show that there has positive relationship of using rational appeal concerning movies and digital electronic products. Emotional appeal has more impacts to tourism and food consumers. Finally, both rational and emotional appeals have positive relationship to fashion, cosmetic, pet supplies, and books; thus, it is suggested that bloggers should provide different message statements according to different products.起始頁-結束頁：919-937資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).038篇名：An International Comparison of Mobile-Internet Acceptance: The Moderating Roles of Masculineand Uncertainty Avoidance並列篇名：行動網際網路的接受度研究－以跨文化之不確定性迴避與男性作風為干擾變數作者：耿慶瑞(Ching-Jui Keng);黃增隆(Tseng-Lung Huang);王嘉偉(Jia-Wei Wang)關鍵字：行動網際網路;使用者接受度;科技接受模式;創新擴散;跨文化研究;Masculine;Uncertainty avoidance; Technology-acceptance model; Mobile Internet;Innovation diffusion期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：行動科技快速卓越的發展將我們的生活型態帶入另一個新紀元，本篇研究整合科技接受模式與創新擴散理論以檢驗使用者對於行動網際網路的態度。此外本研究亦整理納入相關外部變數以及Hofstede所提出之文化價值調查模組，包括不確定性規避程度與男性作風程度用以瞭解跨文化環境下對於行動網際網路接受度的可能影響因素。本研究以相同的研究架構對中國大陸及台灣同步進行調查，抽樣對象則針對曾使用過行動網際網路或對行動網際網路有基礎瞭解的使用者。回收的資料則透過線性結構關係（LISREL）進行分析二群組分析（two-group analysis）後，發現在不確定性規避程度方面，台灣高於中國大陸，在科技接受模式方面也發現相容性對態度與可觀察性對態度的關係顯著比起中國大陸的分數高；在男性作風方面，中國大陸高於台灣，在科技接受模式方面也發現易用性對實用性與易用性對態度的關係顯著比起台灣的分數高。英文摘要：This study integrates the technology-acceptance model (TAM) and Diffusion of Innovation to estimate user attitudes towards the mobile Internet. Moreover, the study compares the results of the extended TAM in the cross-culture dimensions of masculine and uncertainty avoidance. A total of 306 self-administered questionnaires were gathered in China and 454 self-administered questionnaires were collected in Taiwan. This study identifies the differences of structural weights by referencing two-group analysis of structural invariance. Analytical results indicate that the extended TAM explains effectively the acceptance of the mobile Internet, and that masculine and uncertainty avoidance significantly moderate the extended TAM. These results can help managers and engineers allocate resources effectively, formulate marketing strategies, and design the functionality and interface properties of mobile Internet applications.起始頁-結束頁：939-967資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).049篇名：Factors Influencing Business Adoption of Online Tax Payment Services並列篇名：臺灣企業採用網路報稅系統之相關因素探討作者：陳瀅慧(Ying-Hueih Chen);簡淑華(Shu-Hua Chien);黃詩捷(Shih-Jie Huang)關鍵字：電子化政府;信任;科技接受模型;網路報稅服務;E-government;Trust;Technology acceptance model;Online tax payment service期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本量化研究旨在探討影響臺灣企業採用電子化報稅服務的相關因素。本研究以科技接受模型及信任為理論基礎，提出態度及信任為影響企業使用者採用電子化報稅服務意願的重要因素。本研究以臺灣1000大製造業之財會部門主管為對象進行問卷調查，發放問卷820份，回收206份，刪除2份填答不完整的問卷，共得有效問卷204份。分析結果顯示：認知易用性對認知有用性具正向影響，結構上的保證則影響企業使用者對系統的信任。認知易用性、認知有用性、及信任對使用者態度具正向影響，而態度及信任則影響企業使用者對電子化政府報稅系統的使用意願。研究結果顯示政府對電子化報稅服務不僅應強調網路系統功能，亦需提供有效的資訊安全機制，以提昇系統使用意願。英文摘要：Enhanced telecommunication technologies have enabled government to provide business organizations and citizens with integrated information and online services. Such technology-based services, often referred to e-government, have substantially advanced the efficiency and accessibility of public services. While the benefits of e-government are widely recognized, the use of online services remains low. The present quantitative study aims to uncover the underlying factors that influence business user adoption of e-government services. In particular, this study integrates the system acceptance model with the trust perspective to investigate the factors that influence business user intentions. Based on the results from questionnaires collected from 204 business users of an online tax payment system, the findings suggest that perceived ease of use has a positive impact on perceived usefulness, that structural assurance influences trust positively, that perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and trust have positive impact on attitude, and that trust and attitude influence behavioral intentions positively. The research findings indicate that governments not only need to increase the public awareness of the technological merits of the online tax services but also need to provide adequate security mechanisms to facilitate online transaction. The research implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：969-988資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(4).0610篇名：IT Applications that Support Market Orientation and Marketing Capabilities: Two Vital Ingredients for e-Business Success並列篇名：支援市場導向的資訊科技應用與行銷能力：兩項電子化企業成功的重要成份作者：盧盈光(Ying-Guang Lu);王存國(Eric T. G. Wang)關鍵字：資訊科技應用;市場導向;行銷能力;電子化企業績效;IT Applications;Market Orientation;Marketing Capabilities;e-Business Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：儘管2000年至20003之間網際網路公司出現大舉倒閉的風潮，但網際網路環境存在的契機，卻仍然吸引了許多公司相繼投入電子化企業的領域。企業為了能夠在網際網路的環境蓬勃發展，並避免重蹈覆轍，便必須找出電子化企業成功的重要成份。本研究採用市場導向及行銷能力兩個主要的行銷概念，來探究電子化企業成功的關鍵驅動力。本研究探究的結果建議，公司應該發展支援市場導向的資訊科技應用，同時建構企業的行銷能力。運用部份最小平方法(partial least squares)的統計方法進行檢測後，本研究發現：(1)支援市場導向的資訊科技應用及行銷能力對於電子化企業的績效具有直接的增進效果；(2)支援市場導向的資訊科技應用有助於提升於電子化企業的行銷能力；(3)支援市場導向的資訊科技應用也間接透過行銷能力提昇了電子化企業的績效。英文摘要：Despite the high rate of insolvency of Internet companies during 2000-2003, the opportunities in the Internet environment remain attractive, causing firms to plunge into the e-business domain. To prosper in the Internet world and to break with past patterns, firms must identify the vital ingredients of e-business success. This study used two principal marketing concepts-market orientation and marketing capabilities-to investigate key drivers of e-business performance. The results suggest that online businesses should develop IT (information technology) applications that support market orientation, and build marketing capabilities. With a Partial Least Square (PLS) analysis, we find that: (1) both IT applications that support market orientation and marketing capabilities have direct enhancing effects on e-business performance; (2) IT applications that support market orientation are helpful for e-business marketing capabilities; (3) IT applications that support market orientation also increase e-business performance indirectly through marketing capabilities.起始頁-結束頁：491-516資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0111篇名：網路重度使用者對網頁訊息認知與瀏覽模式之研究－以台灣購物網站商品訊息呈現為例並列篇名：Eye Tracking Study on the Internet Heavy Users' Cognitive Processing of Information and Navigational Patterns of Online Shopping Websites in Taiwan作者：黎佩芬(Pei-Fen Li);賴建都(Chien-Tu Lai)關鍵字：線上購物;網路重度使用者;眼動追蹤;瀏覽模式;Online shopping;Internet heavy users;Eye tracking;Scanpath期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：網際網路於二十世紀誕生後，蔓延至全球，也帶動了電子商務產業的崛起。隨著網路人口不斷攀升，國外網路業者陸續加入本地市場後，未來台灣的電子商務環境競爭將臻白熱化，購物網站的頁面設計與商品訊息置入的效果在競爭的環境下尤其顯得重要。本研究針對網路重度使用者，使用眼動儀(Eye tracking system)調查其對台灣主要購物網站的瀏覽模式及網頁訊息的認知情況。研究發現：Yahoo!購物網的頁面設計較單純，商品訊息呈現清晰，使用者較不易迷失；PayEasy購物網的索引頁、商品目錄頁、次目錄頁的訊息過於複雜，凝視點停留與集中稍多；PChome購物網的各網頁在凝視點與凝視時間累積上呈現不平均的現象；momo購物網的商品目錄頁與商品訊息頁呈現大量凝視點集中與凝視時間停留的情況。英文摘要：After the emergence of the Internet in the late 20th century, the electronic commerce has developed rapidly. As the Internet users have grown increasingly and foreign Internet retailers have been eager to establish their operations in Taiwan, the electronic commerce industry will be more competitive than ever. In order to survive and compete, the online retailers must organize their product categories and present product information more effectively so that consumers could make better and more accurate purchase decisions.In this research, we conducted eye tracking experiments for the Internet heavy users and tracked their fixations, gaze durations, and scan paths toward major online shopping sites in Taiwan. Results showed that information display in Yahoo! shopping site is more user-friendly. Subjects' fixation time and gaze duration were longer on PayEasy shopping site's index page, category page, and sub-category page. As for PChome shopping site, subjects' fixation time and gaze duration vary across different web pages. Subjects made more fixations and longer gaze duration on category page and detail page of momo shopping site.起始頁-結束頁：517-553資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0212篇名：整合服務品質與軟體品質的ASP服務策略：中小企業使用者觀點並列篇名：An ASP Provision Strategy Integrating Service Quality with Software Quality: The SMEs Perspective作者：洪嘉良(Chia-Liang Hung);周志隆(Jerome Chih-Lung Chou);朱慧娟(Hui-Chuan Chu)關鍵字：應用服務供應商;服務階層協定;服務品質;軟體品質;能力成熟度整合模型;Application Service Provider;Service Level Agreement;Service Quality;Software Quality;Capability Maturity Model Integrated期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：在e化的時代，企業網路化已成為必然的趨勢，因此造就ASP(Application Service Provider)供應商可觀的商機。ASP廠商如雨後春筍般地出現，競爭亦日趨激烈，因此創造差異化且迅速地滿足客戶之需求，ASP服務策略成為重要課題。雖然軟體品質(Software Quality)一向作為軟體專案的重要指標，然而服務導向的ASP，其客戶更重視服務品質(Quality of Service)的感受。因此本研究企圖找出兩者的關聯性，以協助ASP供應商以有限資源而發揮事半功倍之效果，在服務階層協定（Service Level Agreement，簡稱SLA）的不同生命週期，鎖住特定的軟體品質目標，而滿足不同階段的ASP客戶所重視的服務品質。本研究經由典型相關分析發現：當ASP廠商面對製造業時，在研發期與銷售訂約期階段，首重「信任型」的服務品質與軟體品質之組合；在安裝、設定期應重視「適應型」之組合；在使用期則致力「實用型」的組合；售後檢討期則重視「敏捷型」的組合。相對地，面對於服務業的客戶，在研發期、銷售訂約期、及使用期應強調「專業型」的組合；在安裝、設定期與售後檢討期則以「調整型」的組合為主。根據此結果，本文提出ASP服務策略，發展CMMI軟體專案管理之策略行動，以實現軟體品質之要項，再藉由典型相關分析的服務S與軟體品質之相關性，而滿足ASP客戶在SLA不同的階段所重視的服務品質，以利於ASP供應商贏得市場的競爭優勢。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to articulate efficient service approaches for enhancing the ASP user satisfaction. In this paper, the authors describe the problems confronted by the recently prosperous Internet-based ASP vendors and propose an integrated solution combined two streams of quality management. One is the software quality derived from the subject of software engineering, while the other is the widely-used SERVQUAL service quality framework. The authors study the ASP provision process along the life cycle of Service Level Agreement (SLA) from the user perspective and discover the significant correlated configurations between software quality and service quality by means of the canonical analysis. According to the correlated configurations, this research suggests that the ASP vendors have better to treat the manufacturing users and the service industry users with different service strategies. When the ASP vendors face to the manufacturing users, they have better to focus on the ”Trust” onfiguration type in the first two SLA stages, that is, R&D and contracting; the ”Adaptation” type is suited for the installation stage; the ”Pragmatic” one is for the operation stage; the ”Agile” one is for the last after-sales stage. Contrarily, when the ASP vendors face to the service industry users, they have better to emphasize on the ”Professional” configuration type in the SLA stages of R&D, contracting, and operation, while the ”Adjustment” type is suited for the installation and after-sales stages. Furthermore, the paper also deliberates the fulfilling approaches for the ASP vendors in terms of CMMI software guidelines, so as to enhance the critical software quality along the SLA stages. Thus, the corresponding service quality that is importantly concerned by the ASP users at each SLA stage will be achieved by the especially emphasized software quality.起始頁-結束頁：555-585資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0313篇名：虛擬組織績效模式的因果與干擾關係之研究並列篇名：The study of the Causal and Moderating Relationships of the Performance Model for Virtual Organization作者：陳佑全(Yu-Chuan Chen);唐順明(Shung-Ming Tang);陳美菁(Mei-Ching Chen)關鍵字：夥伴選擇;資訊科技;協調機制;成本機制;虛擬組織績效;Partner Selection;Information Technology;Coordinate Mechanisms;Cost Mechanisms;Performance of Virtual Organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究是探討台灣集團企業虛擬組織績效模式的因果與干擾關係。以台灣地區250家集團及3531家子公司為研究母群體，郵寄問卷調查，運用結構方程模式驗證實際資料與理論模式之契合度。研究發現：協調機制對成本、虛擬組織績效有正向顯著影響；成本機制對虛擬組織績效也有正向顯著影響；其次，成本機制是協調機制影響虛擬組織績效的中介變數。夥伴選擇對協調機制與成本機制有正向顯著的干擾效果；資訊科技對協調機制與成本機制、協調機制與虛擬組織績效皆有正向顯著的干擾效果。因此，虛擬組織主要透過慎選夥伴，藉由資訊科技增進溝通協調，降低營運成本，進而影響虛擬組織績效。本模式是以台灣集團企業為背景，提供企業邁向虛擬組織運作模式的參考。英文摘要：We investigated the causal and moderating relationships of the performance model for virtual organization. We used random sampling method to select the co-operation of 3531 individual suppliers for nearly 250 business groups as the research objectives. We also used the empirical research method and questionnaire mail survey in this research. Then, we verified the research model and hypotheses using SEM analysis. The results of this research show that coordinate mechanisms have significant effect on cost mechanisms and performance of virtual organizations. The cost mechanisms have significant influences on the performance of virtual organizations. Secondly, we examine the mediating effect of cost mechanisms between coordinate mechanisms and performance of virtual organizations is obtained support. Partner Selection has a moderating effect on the coordinate mechanisms and cost mechanisms. Other hypotheses include that information technology has moderating effect on the coordinate mechanisms and cost mechanisms. Information technology also has moderating effect on the coordinate mechanisms and performance of virtual organizations. Therefore, the virtual organizations will reduce the cost of operation to affect the performance by way of partner selection and information technology which promote communication and coordination. In addition, the findings of this research results can provide reference to perform the virtual organization of business groups of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：587-623資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0414篇名：行動廣告內容、廣告價值、隱私權保護對消費者採用意願之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Mobile Ads Content, Ads Values and Privacy Protection on Consumer Adopt Intention作者：施翠倚(Tsui-Yii Shih);楊力旗(Li-Chi Yang)關鍵字：許可性廣告;誘因性廣告;定位性廣告;廣告價值;隱私權保護;Permission Advertising;Incentive Advertising;Location-Based Advertising;Advertising Value;Privacy Protection期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討行動廣告的三種類型（許可性廣告、誘因性廣告和定位性廣告）下的廣告內容認知（資訊性、干擾性、娛樂性和可信度）對於廣告價值造成的影響，並探討廣告價值及隱私權保護對於消費者採用意願的影響。結果發現：(1)許可性廣告的廣告內容認知中，資訊性、娛樂性和可信度對於廣告價值有正向影響，干擾性則無影響；(2)誘因性廣告的廣告內容認知中，僅可信度對於廣告價值有正向影響；(3)定位性廣告的廣告內容認知中，僅娛樂性和可信度對於廣告價值有正向的影響；(4)三種類型的行動廣告價值對於消費者採用意願都具有正向的影響關係；(5)在隱私權部分，相較於廣告價值，僅定位性行動廣告的隱私權保護對於消費者採用意願具有正向的影響關係。本研究之研究結果可作為學術界、企業及行動廣告業者之參考。英文摘要：The study discusses the determinant effects of advertising content (informativeness/entertainment/irritation/credibility) on mobile advertising value, and consumer adoption intention regarding three Mobile Advertising type including permission advertising, incentive advertising and location-based adverting. The research results find: (1) In permission advertising, factors including informativeness, entertainment and credibility positively affect advertising value; (2) In incentive advertising content, only credibility positively affect advertising value; (3) In location-based advertising, only entertainment and credibility positively affect advertising values; (4) Mobile advertising value positively affects consumer adoption intention; and finally (5) Perceived privacy protection, in comparison to advertising value, positively affects consumer adoption intention regarding location-based mobile ads. The study results can be referenced by scholars, firms and mobile advertising firms.起始頁-結束頁：625-647資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0515篇名：五金傳統產業消費族群對線上購物系統之接受意圖的探討並列篇名：Understanding Consumer Intentions toward Online Shopping in the Metal Industry作者：柯秀佳(Hsiu-Chia Ko);王世華(Shi-Hua Wang)關鍵字：線上購物接受意圖;電腦自我效能;科技接受模式;五金產業;online shopping intention;computer self-efficacy;TAM;metal industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著電子商務環境的成熟及線上購物人口的持續上升，許多實體商店紛紛朝向虛實整合的經營模式前進。國內有部分的傳統零售業，例如五金產業，其消費族群多數擁有產品的專業知識，然而，由於年齡層較高及缺乏電腦使用經驗，因此，該群專業消費者的電腦自我效能可能較低，並影響其採用五金線上購物系統的意願。本研究以五金產業為例，並以自我效能及科技接受模式為理論基礎，探討五金產業的專業消費者與一般消費者對五金線上購物系統的接受意圖。研究結果發現過去經驗、替代經驗、口語說服、及電腦焦慮顯著影響電腦自我效能，並透過認知有用性與易用性影響消費者使用線上購物系統的意圖。而不同消費族群影響電腦自我效能的因素亦有所差異，且對線上購物系統的認知有用性與易用性的影響力也有所不同。最後，本研究發現對專業的消費族群而言，電腦自我效能是影響其使用線上購物系統的重要因素之一。研究結果可以做為五金產業及其他傳統相關產業經營電子商務的參考。英文摘要：With the maturity of the e-commerce environment and the increase in numbers of online shoppers, numerous physical stores have adopted the clicks-and-mortar business model. For many traditional industries, such as the metal industry, most of their customers are specialized in metal industry products. However, these customers are frequently older, lack computer experience, and have low computer self-efficacy, all of which factors may influence their acceptance of online shopping systems. This investigation focused on the metal industry. Based on the self-efficacy theory and Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), this study investigated how the computer self-efficacy of professional and general consumers influenced their online shopping intentions. The research results demonstrated that performance, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and computer anxiety significantly influenced consumers' computer self-efficacy, which in turn affected their online shopping intention through their perceptions of ease of use and usefulness. Moreover, the factors which influenced on computer self-efficacy were varied between two groups of consumers, as did their perceptions of ease-of-use and usefulness. Finally, this research demonstrated that computer self-efficacy was one of the main influences on the online shopping intentions of professional consumers. The research results provide a reference for the metal industry and related traditional industries in operating e-commerce systems.起始頁-結束頁：647-672資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0616篇名：結合網站設計品質、設計特性與購物價值觀點探討旅遊網站消費者之購買意願並列篇名：Effects of the Travel Website Design Quality, Design Characteristics, and Shopping Value on Online Consumer Purchase Intention作者：陳宜棻(Yi-Fen Chen);倪家雄(Chia-Hsiung Ni);蕭登泰(Teng-Tai Hasio)關鍵字：旅遊網站;網站設計品質;網站設計特性;網站購物價值;購買意願;Travel website;Website design quality;Website design characteristics;Website shopping value;Purchase intention.期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：旅遊網站提供者藉由網站提供符合消費者需求的旅遊產品或服務，提昇消費者的生活品質與便利性，以期在競爭激烈的環境中開拓更多的商機，進而強化本身的競爭優勢。本研究結合網站設計品質、設計特性與購物價值觀點，並以滿意度及信任作為串連的基礎，探討其對旅遊網站消費者購買意願之影響。本研究使用網路問卷調查，對象為曾有上網瀏覽使用旅遊網站或交易之民眾，共收集573份樣本，進行結構方程模式分析。研究結果顯示消費者所知覺的旅遊網站設計品質正向影響消費者信任，旅遊網站設計品質、旅遊網站設計特性及旅遊網站購物價值正向影響消費者滿意度，而消費者滿意度及信任亦正向影響消費者購買意願。英文摘要：Travel websites promote the quality of life and provide convenience for consumers by online travel products and services. Online purchasing advantages help cultivate more business opportunities in competitive environment. This study investigates effects of design factors regarding travel websites design quality, travel website design characteristics, and travel website shopping value on consumer trust, satisfaction, and purchase intention. An online survey was used on a sample of 573 participants who had experiences of travel website shopping or web surfing. Furthermore, structural equation models (SEM) are used to examine hypotheses within the theoretical framework. Analytical results indicate that consumer perceived quality of design substantially influence consumer trust. Website design quality, design characteristics, and shopping value positively influence consumer satisfaction. Furthermore, consumer satisfaction and trust positively influence consumer purchase intention.起始頁-結束頁：673-696資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0717篇名：以跨服務分類觀點探討行動服務使用者採用模式之研究並列篇名：A Study of Mobile Service's Adoption Model: A Prospect of Cross Services' Classification作者：朱國明(Kuo-Ming Chu);袁建中(Benjamin J. C. Yuan);詹惠君(Hui-Chun Chan)關鍵字：行動服務;跨服務分類;整合性的科技接受模式;消費者行為;Mobile Service;Cross-service Classification;UTAUT;Consumer Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：由於行動服務具有了個人化、適地化、互動性與即時性等特性，不同的服務項目其採用模式亦會有所差異。首先，本研究採用Pedersen et al.(2003)的觀點，並考量國內行動服務市場的現況，發展出四種行動服務概念性的分類。其次，並以台灣行動服務市場為對象針對不同服務種類建構適合採用模式；研究發現影響行動通話與接觸通訊服務使用者的使用態度與實際行為因素較為全面性；而對於行動付款服務的使用者除了較重視使用上所需資源的評估與是否可提升其個人形象與社會地位之外，安全性似乎是影響其採用的關鍵因素；行動育樂與遊戲的使用者除了重視所需資源的評估外，參考群體對於其是否採用的影響亦深。最後，透過本研究所建立之行動服務分類方式與跨服務觀點之採用模式實證結果，可提供給業者擬訂行銷策略之參考。英文摘要：Although an increasing number of academic studies are starting to focus on mobile services from a service management perspective, but formal classifications or categorizations of mobile services are still scarce. First, the study First, this research uses Pedersen et al. (2003) the viewpoint and considerate domestic mobile service market present situation, the study investigates the adoption of mobile services across four different services categories. Next, as mobile services of Taiwan to discover all the influence factors on text messaging and mobile contact services to end-user attitude and actual behavior factor are similarly important. But besides quite takes in the use to need the resources the appraisal with whether can promote its individual image and the social position, the security is the key factor as if which affects it to use. The users of mobile entertainment and gaming play besides to take to need the resources the appraisal; the reference community regarding it whether uses the influence is also deep. The resulting classification gives implications for further empirical research in mobile service area and helps managers to differentiate and group their mobile service offerings in a meaningful way that is especially useful for marketing purposes.起始頁-結束頁：697-725資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0818篇名：台灣線上遊戲公司價值轉移之個案研究－融合內部能力與企業網絡觀點並列篇名：A Case Study of Value Migration Processes within a Taiwan Online Game Company-Integrating Firm Capabilities and Business Network Perspectives作者：吳建明(Chien-Ming Wu);孫嘉明(Chia-Ming Sun)關鍵字：線上遊戲產業;內部資源能力;企業網絡結構;動態能力;Online Game Industry;Internal Firm Capacities;Business Network;Dynamic Capabilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究以「內部資源能力」與「企業網絡關係」等多元觀點，對「台灣線上遊戲公司」的經營歷程進行探究分析。研究透過「歷史資料收集」與「深度訪談」等方式蒐集田野資料，進而從中理解該公司創造經營優勢之寓理。研究發起動因有二：其一為「線上遊戲產業」在亞洲市場快速崛起，市場機會與威脅與日俱增，如何在逆境中掙得競爭優勢是經營的關鍵課題；而個案公司從單機遊戲跨入行銷、營運、研發乃至發展海外市場之歷程對相關企業有重要啟迪意義。其二在探討競爭優勢的形成因素。過往對此議題探討多持「內部資源能力」與「企業網絡結構」分立觀點；本研究加入融合觀點，以促進理論應用範疇與意涵。研究顯示：個案公司「線上遊戲事業經營」能持續創造與維繫企業競爭力，關鍵在於透過「內部資源能力」與「企業網絡結構」兩構面不斷交互促進的管理模式所致。其說明，線上遊戲公司可以透過內部多元核心能力團隊養成與外部同業或異業結盟等雙軌策略，提升經營績效。同時，其亦能藉助企業網路效率提升，促進組織動態能力發展，進而促進經營效能。英文摘要：In this study, we adopt multiple perspectives, including the views of both internal firm capabilities and business network structure, to explore the shifting process of value migration illustrated by an online game company in Taiwan. The research was conducted through the methods of both qualitative data collection and in-depth interviews to extract and confirm the concepts that how the online-game company sustains its continuous competitive advantages.The motivations for this research are: First, the online game industries in Asia countries are fast growing accompanied with fierce competition and increasing threats. How to create and sustain the competitive advantages is the critical issue for online-game vendors. The case company analyzed in this research inspired us how a pc game product dealer extends into different value chain areas of online game industry, which include marketing, operation and R&D activities, simultaneously expanding into oversea markets. Second, prior researches mostly take the isolated viewpoint, as either internal firm capabilities or business network perspective. In this research, we take an infusion approach to integrate the both perspectives and enrich the scope and meaning of the applied theories.The research results indicate that: the key factor for the case company to sustain competitive advantages is to adopt a specific management model, which acquires the benefits from the interaction between internal firm capabilities and business network structure. This convergence behavior expanded its capabilities through the sustained activities of restructuring, development and innovation, which are stimulated by internal and exogenous environments. The value migration progress resulted in the synergy of dynamic capabilities. In addition, the research results show that the infusion approach with multiple perspectives closers to reality and discover more management practices of the online game industry.起始頁-結束頁：727-757資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(3).0919篇名：供應鏈整合之研究：資訊通訊科技、產品複雜度、供應鏈成員參與及對供應鏈績效之影響並列篇名：A Study of Supply Chain Integration and Its Relations with ICT, Product Complexity, Involvement of SC Members, and SC Performance作者：陳至柔(Chih-Jou Chen)關鍵字：供應鏈績效;供應鏈整合;資訊通訊科技;產品複雜度;供應鏈成員參與;Supply Chain Performance;Supply Chain Integration;ICT;Product Complexity;Involvement of Supply Chain Members期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究深入探討資訊通訊科技及產品複雜度是否能有效促進供應鏈成員參與及供應鏈整合的提昇，進而增進供應鏈績效。本研究所提出之研究架構及假設利用結構方程模式進行驗證與檢定。研究結果顯示，資訊通訊科技及產品複雜度均對供應鏈成員參及供應鏈整合有顯著且正面的影響，並且進而正面的影響供應鏈績效。在變動快速且競爭激烈的全球環境中，台灣的製造業廠商若能透過資訊通訊科技與產品複雜度的有效管理來促進與重要供應鏈夥伴的參與及整合，必能增進供應鏈績效與長期的競爭優勢。英文摘要：This purpose of the paper is to examine the effects of information and communication technology (ICT) and product complexity on involvement of supply chain members and supply chain integration, and whether more leads to superior supply chain performance. Literature of involvement of supply chain members, supply chain integration and performance were fully reviewed. The ICT application and product complexity were also studied. The model and hypothesized relationship are empirically tested using the structural equation modeling (SEM) approach. The results of this study showed that ICT and product complexity all positively influence upon involvement of supply chain members and supply chain integration, and further have positive effects on supply chain performance. In today's highly dynamic and global competitive environment, manufacturers in Taiwan should accelerate ICT application and product development to enhance involvement of supply chain members and supply chain integration. Effective management of I CT and product complexity can increase involvement of supply chain members, supply chain integration, supply chain performance, and long-term competitive advantage.起始頁-結束頁：241-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).0120篇名：B2B電子交易市集報童模式通路協調之研究並列篇名：Channel Coordination for a Newsvendor Model in B2B Electronic Markets作者：陳亮都(Liang-Tu Chena);陳佳延(Jia-Yan Chena);魏俊卿(Chun-Chin Wei)關鍵字：報童模式;通路協調;電子交易市集;Newsvendor model;Channel coordination;Electronic transaction markets期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討單一製造商及單一零售商二階層傳統交易市集及電子交易市集之報童模式通路，在寄售合約與營收分享協調機制下利潤最佳化決策。本研究設定零售商扮演通路領導者，決定營收分享比例；製造商扮演追隨者，決定產品數量及零售價格，並保有產品所有權。根據本研究數值分析發現，寄售合約與營收分享協調機制在電子交易市集所得到的利潤比傳統交易市集高，並可達成柏拉圖改善。英文摘要：This study investigates two kinds of channel performances, including electronic and traditional transaction markets, under consignment with revenue-sharing contracts for newsvendor models. A retailer, acting as a leader in the channel, offers a manufacturer a revenue-sharing contract under consignment, who specifies the percentage allocation of sales revenue between her and the manufacturer. The manufacturer, acting as a follower in the channel, retains ownership of the goods and decides the goods quantity and retail price. The numerical results show that the solution generated by the electronic markets outperforms that by the traditional markets in maximizing profits of the channel, retailer and manufacturer.起始頁-結束頁：273-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).0201篇名：Risk Perception and e-Purchase Intention: Implications for Online CRM並列篇名：風險認知對網路購物意願及客戶關係管理之影響作者：王淑娟(Sophia Wang);田潔(Jenny Tian);王銘宗(Ming-Tzong Wang);黃郁文(Juh-Wen Hwang)關鍵字：網路購物;風險認知;顧客行為;電子商務;客戶關係管理;online purchase;risk perception;consumer behavior;e-commerce;customer relationship management期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文對過往網路購物行為研究作進一步延展，探討網路風險認知如何調節知識及心理因素對網路購物意願之影響。基於傳統認知－態度－意願模型，我們假設網路知識、網路資訊搜尋活動、及自我效能認知會影響個人對網路購物之態度偏好，且態度偏好進而決定購物意願。本研究同時發現，風險認知較高的消費者，其態度偏好更可能受到網路知識及資訊搜尋活動之影響。但在這一族群中，態度偏好對購物意願之正向影響，反而不如在風險認知較低族群中那樣顯著。本研究突顯風險認知對消費者行為存在多方面影響。這一發現有助於網路公司改善客戶關係管理及網站設計。英文摘要：This study examines how perceived risk of e-purchasing moderates the effects of attitudinal and cognitive factors on e-purchase intention. We found that the relationships between Web knowledge, Web-based information search, and consumer attitude were stronger among the consumers who perceived online purchasing as highly risky. On the other hand, the relationship between attitude and e-purchase intention was significantly weaker among consumers with higher risk perceptions. The implications of these results for online customer relationship management and website design are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：281-301資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).032篇名：電信解除管制後新產品服務知覺品質、服務等候、企業形象與知覺價值對消費者行為意向之影響－台灣三大電信公司服務競爭模型之比較並列篇名：The effects of the Perceived Services Quality of New Telecom Products, Waiting Experience, Corporate Image and Perceived Value on Customer's Behavioral Intentions: A Comparison of Three Telecommunications Companies Customer's Intentions Competitive Model in Post-Privatization作者：王明坤(Ming-Kuen Wang);黃國平(Kevin P. Hwang)關鍵字：知覺服務品質;服務等候;知覺價值;服務競爭行為;企業形象;結構方程模式;Perceived Quality of New Product Services;Waiting Experience;Perceived Value;Services competitive behavior;Corporate Image;SEM期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：多數經營管理者、決策制定者與經濟學者皆確信私營企業比公營企業較具有生產效率，他們咸認為新產品的多樣化，消費者能夠有更多挑選與服務的機會。本研究目的在調查台灣電信解除管制後三大電信公司的服務競爭模型，總共有1,216份問卷調查樣本來參與研究，樣本經過誇文化的信度及效度測試，使用結構方程模式(SEM)來檢驗各項假設。研究發現：台灣電信產業經過民營化過程、產業環境變遷後產生不同的消費者價值觀。整體消費者對台灣三家大電信公司推出新產品服務之知覺品質與知覺價值不顯著，知覺價值顯著影響電信公司服務競爭行為意向，知覺價值在服務競爭行為意向中具有中介效果。研究新發現：解除管制後的電信產業，傳統的「企業形象」已不再積極影響消費者之選擇，消費者重視實質電信費率「利益」、「得」的「直接效果」。AT&T子公司的遠電信的消費者重視「服務等候」，顯著影響消費者行為意向。先驅者中華電信的消費者重視新產品「Total Solution服務知覺品質」，顯著影響消費者行為意向。潛在新進入者台灣大哥大電信卻擁有比較多的校園學生族群消費者。本研究資訊可提供各電信業決策制定者推出新產品行銷策略參考及各消費者購前時點參考。英文摘要：It is believed by many managers, economists, and policy makers that service production of a private enterprise is more efficient than that of a public one. They think consumers prefer making choice among multiple commodities. This paper investigates the service competitive behaviors after the deregulation of the telecommunication industry in Taiwan. A total of 1,216 samples were collected and examined for the three prevailing telecommunication companies in Taiwan. Following cross-cultural reliability and validity tests, SEM was used to test the hypotheses. Research findings reveal that changes through deregulation have resulted in adjustments and transformations of customers' value. Overall, customers no longer have significant difference in new service perception in quality and value. Perceived value affects significantly the competitive behavior. Perceived value also has mediating effect on competitive behavior. It is also found that tradition corporate image does not affect the choice behavior of consumers. Consumers emphasize on the direct effect of gain or benefit of service or product. For the subordinate company of AT& T in Taiwan, service waiting significantly affects consumers' behavior intention. The innovative 'Total solution' service of the government own company before deregulation has significant effect on consumers' choice intention. This study contributes to the marketing strategy and time point of promotion when a new product is introduced.起始頁-結束頁：303-338資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).043篇名：ERP應用於救災資源整合－以莫拉克颱風災後救援為例並列篇名：The Application of ERP to the Rescue and Relief of Natural Disaster: The Case of Typhoon Morak作者：陳瓊瑤(Chiung-Yao Chen)關鍵字：ERP;災難救援;資源整合;災難管理;ERP;Humanitarian Logistics;Resources Integration;Disaster Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：ERP為企業資源規劃與整合之資訊系統，由於其功能強大，而廣為企業所應用。從資源整合的角度來看，天然災害之搶救與重建所牽涉的資源管理，與企業的ERP運作有很多類似之處。然而，此一企業廣泛使用的工具，卻未被運用於今日救災時的資源管理，以致於每次救災行動中，總有許多資源調度不當，或分配不均現象，而造成救援遲緩與資源的浪費。本文將ERP觀念導入天然救災之資源整合與作業管理中，並以莫拉克颱風之情境模擬，示範鼎新Workflow ERP之應用。期使社會各界重視救災ERP資訊系統之建立，進而提高救災資源整合之有效運用。英文摘要：ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) information system has been widely applied in business for its powerful features and is seen as essential in integration management. From the perspective of resource integration, the logistics operation of immediate disaster relief and reconstructions in the aftermath do have something in common to that of business operations. However, little research has been done in applying the ERP concept to the resource management of humanitarian relief of natural disasters. Streams of unsolicited and inappropriate supplies often flow into the disaster areas and clog the ports and warehouses, or even become obstacles to the aid agencies in making the supply of much-needed goods more difficult. This paper aims to introduce the ERP concept into the strategic planning and logistics operation procedure for disaster relief. The case of Typhoon Morak (2009) which caused widespread flooding in Southern Taiwan is simulated to the ERP Workflow system of Data Systems Consulting Co. This paper strives to urge the attention to build an ERP System for Disaster Relief Management so as to promote the integration of relief resources by balancing supply-demand sides and improving the efficiency of relief operations.起始頁-結束頁：339-362資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).054篇名：失效模式與效應分析及無線射頻識別技術於疫苗配送流程之應用並列篇名：The Applications of the FMEA and RFID Technologies in Vaccines Distribution作者：姚銘忠(Ming-Jong Yao);張巍翰(Wei-Han Chang)關鍵字：疫苗;配送;企業流程再造;失效模式與效應分析;無線射頻識別技術;Vaccines;Distribution;Business Process Reengineering;Failure Mode and Effects Analysis;Radio Frequency Identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：疫苗為高單價產品，對溫度敏感且具時效性，一旦發生溫度改變或是其他原因，造成疫苗變質、毀損等情況，可能造成疫苗功能失效，不僅產生龐大的金錢損失，甚至造成社會成本損失。有鑑於此，本研究針對低溫疫苗配送流程進行企業流程再造(Business Process Reengineering, BPR)，運用失效模式與效應分析手法(Failure mode and effects analysis, FMEA)及無線射頻識別(Radio Frequency Identification, RFID)技術，建立疫苗配送的標準化作業流程，並開發一套具有緊急預警功能的疫苗配送流程監控資訊系統。本研究開發之資訊系統可以即時監控疫苗在配送流程的溫濕度，且緊急預警功能之設計，如果疫苗可能進入異常狀態，可提早警告使用者，使其可以提前進行緊急處理。根據本研究之敏感度分析，本研究開發之資訊系統因為可以有效避免疫苗發生失效情況，故具有相當高的成本效益，而且因為資訊系統提供充分通透度，可顯著提昇疫苗配送流程之可靠度與保有疫苗品質的安全性。英文摘要：Vaccines are high-value products with higher sensitivity to temperature control than other products. When the temperature readings of vaccines fall in out of-control range, the batch of vaccines will be discarded due to safety consideration, and it usually incurs not only a huge financial loss, but also possible social cost. In order to solve this problem, we employ the techniques of Business Process Reengineering (BPR), Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) and the Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology to propose a Standard Operating Procedure and develop an information system for monitoring the distribution processes of vaccines in this study. The proposed RFID-based monitors the temperature readings of vaccines during the distribution process in a real-time fashion. Also, our proposed system also highlights its alerting function that is able to show warnings and to allow the users some time for taking actions in advance. Following our sensitivity analysis, we assert that our proposed sys tem is able to save considerable costs by preventing failure of vaccines. Also, since the proposed RFID-based information system can effectively facilitate the transparency so as to improve the reliability of the distribution process and to secure the quality of vaccines.起始頁-結束頁：363-388資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).065篇名：運用風險因子識別與分析在軟體發展流程選擇並列篇名：Use Risk Factors Identification and Analysis for Selecting the Software Development Processes作者：陳榮靜(Rung-Ching Chen);劉延純(Yen-Chun Liu);楊政豐(Jeng-Feng Yang)關鍵字：軟體發展流程;軟體開發模型;風險因子;風險識別分析;風險評估因應;Software Development Process;Software Development Model;Risk Factor;Risk Identification and Analysis;Risk Assessment and Response期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：產官學界等機關組織在資訊系統委外開發的過程中，常會面臨到各式不同的軟體風險，因而導致開發進度嚴重延宕甚至失敗，這些問題都是資訊管理者最迫切亟待解決的議題。因此，規範風險識別分析準則，及制定因應的軟體發展流程就顯得十分重要。但至今少有中外文獻探討軟體風險識別因子與軟體發展流程暨開發模型之間的關係，本研究將試圖探討如何運用統一化工作分解結構特徵分類法則與Boehm的風險分析架構，於專案起始階段，辯識可能存在的專案風險，評估各類風險對專案的影響，並依據各類資訊系統專案特性，進而建議可選擇之軟體發展流程與軟體開發模型，以期能減緩或避免風險的影響，增加軟體專案的成功機率。英文摘要：Organizations, government and academia in the process of information systems in the outsourcing, often face the risk of all kinds of different software. These risks will lead to serious delays in the development progress. These problems are among the most pressing issues to be solved by information management. Therefore, the specification of criteria for risk identification and development of the software development process are very important. However, many studies are rarely found in the literature on the relationships between soft-ware risk identification factors and software development process. This study attempts to explore how to use unified Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) feature classification rules and Boehm's risk analysis framework, in the initial phase of the project, to identify the possible project risks and to assess the impact of various risks on the project. We proposed and alternative software development processes and software development models for various types of information systems based on project characteristics. Expect to slow down or avoid risks, and increase the success rate of software projects.起始頁-結束頁：389-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).076篇名：虛擬社群持續參與因素之探討並列篇名：Intention to Participate Continually in Virtual Communities作者：范懿文(Yi-Wen Fan);方毓賢(Yu-Hsien Fang);吳政杰(Cheng-Chieh Wu);劉昌輝(Chang-Huei Liou)關鍵字：虛擬社群;使用與滿足;社會認定;資訊系統持續模式;Virtual Community;Uses and Gratifications;Social Identity;Information System Continuance Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：虛擬社群的潛在價值必須藉由成員持續參與才能培養與傳達，因此影響虛擬社群持續參與的原因成為網際網路研究領域重要研究的主題之一。本研究整合了三種相關理論（資訊系統持續模式、使用與滿足理論、社會認定）提出一互補性的觀點來探討：影響社群成員持續參與意圖的重要因素；因素間相互影響的潛在模式；這些因素的效果在不同類型的社群內是否會有所差異。本研究挑選兩個台灣具代表性的虛擬社群進行抽樣，共計回收443份有效樣本(PTT.cc:181; Facebook: 262)。研究採用結構方程模式分析程序進行整體模型驗證與假說檢定，亦對兩個社群樣本進行個別分析。比較兩個社群樣本的實證結果，本研究發現虛擬社群持續參與之前因有顯著差異影響。例如，群體參照價值對於社會互助型社群（如：Facebook）發展有正面影響，對資訊交換型社群（如：PTT.cc）則產生負面影響。英文摘要：Potential benefits of participating Virtual Communities (VCs) could only be realized and delivered with members' continuous participation in VCs. Therefore, it attracts quite a lot attention to study the antecedents influencing intention to participate continually in VCs. This study integrates three relevant theories (information system continuance, uses and gratifications and social identity) to explore: (1) factors influencing members' intention of continual participation in VCs; (2) the underlying relationships among these factors; (3) influence patterns in different VCs. Two representative VCs in Taiwan were selected as sampling sources and 443 respondents were collected (PTT.cc: 181, Facebook: 262). Structure Equation Modeling Analysis was used to validate the research model and hypotheses through a full sample model and two individual subsample models. Based on the research data analysis, this study finds that there are different influence patterns among different VCs. For instance, group reference value will positively influence the continual intention to participate in Social Support VCs, such as Facebook. On the other hand, group reference value will negatively influence the continual intention to participate in Information Exchange VCs, such as PTT.cc.起始頁-結束頁：413-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).087篇名：遠距健康照護評估量表之發展與驗證並列篇名：A Measure of the Effectiveness of Telehealth: Scale Development and Validation作者：蔡宗宏(Chung-Hung Tsai);謝輝龍(Hui-Lung Hsieh);莊碧焜(Bi-Kun Chuang);蘇素匹(Su-Pi Su)關鍵字：遠距健康照護;功能風險;隱私風險;體制信任;醫病信任;Telehealth;Functional Risk;Privacy Risk;Institutional Trust;Patient Trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，資訊通信科技與生物醫學技術的快速發展，使得全球各國逐漸地重視應用遠距醫療技術以增進或擴展現今病患照護與服務，稱之為遠距健康照護。然而，近年來有關遠距健康照護之學術論述，率多注重技術的發展與系統的建構，鮮少以病患或顧客的角度，針對遠距健康照護的服務過程，進行全面性與通盤性的評估與測量，以致於無法發掘高齡者的真正需求或問題所在，在臨床的應用上有其侷限，並造成知識發展上之障礙。此外，遠距健康照護的採用是一個結合技術、社會、管理的過程，目前較缺乏整合三個面向的評估量表的相關研究。另外，侷限於特定領域及樣本規模過小，也是許多研究普遍的現象。本研究透過回顧歷來重要之遠距醫療與遠距健康照護的文獻，簡述其演進過程。並針對效能評估的議題，進行深入的探討，歸納整理評估或測量的面向，界定為三大面向與十個指標，分別為技術面：包括系統品質，社會心理面：功能風險、隱私風險、體制信任與醫病信任，管理面：服務品質、成本效益、滿意程度、使用意向、健康影響等。本研究之研究對象係以台灣中部曾經使用遠距健康照護系統的某鄉村社區居民為調查樣本，以訪員面訪方式進行調查，共獲得262份有效問卷。本研究發展之本土中文化多面向評估量表，預試問卷原為35題，經過相關之心理計量考驗之後，刪除1題，最後版本共計34題項。量表經過探索性因素分析與驗證性因素分析後，確定為十個因素，符合原預期之十個指標，並可解釋82.625%的解釋量。本量表證實具有良好信度與效度，確立了量表之適切性與可行性，可做為未來進一步研究之基礎。期望藉由本文之探討，激發學術理論與臨床實務的深入之探究與洞見，共同型塑與創造在地「安全、安心、安老」的照護網絡之美好願景。英文摘要：Recently, advances in information and communication technology as well as biomedical technology have introduced numerous ways of telemedicine technology to enhance or expand the services and care provided to patients, that is, telehealth. However, most telehealth studies focused only on the development of technology rather than on comprehensive evaluation of patients' (or customers') perception about service processes. Therefore, it's very difficult to understand the elderly population's actual needs and problems, limiting the clinical implementation of the findings and presenting barriers to knowledge development. Besides, the adoption of the telehealth systems is an integrated technical-social-managing process. There is a paucity of scale research that integrates these three dimensions. In addition, most studies have been limited in special scope or small sample size.This article reviews important literatures on telemedicine and telehealth, discusses deeply the issue of evaluating the effectiveness of such technology. The three key dimensions and ten sub-indictors have been identified. That is, technical dimension, including system quality; social psychological dimension, including functional risk, privacy risk, institutional trust and patient trust; and managing dimension, including service quality, cost benefit, satisfaction, use intention, and influence on health. The 262 elderly samples of this study were collected by face to face interviewed from rural community located in central Taiwan. The preliminary Chinese version of multi-dimensional telehealth scale was validated by psychometric analyses to test the reliability and validity, and reduced the number of scale items from 35 to 34. Using exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis methods, the ten factors were extracted that was consistent with proposed ten dimensions and explained 82.625% of the variance. The final Chinese version of multi-dimensional telehealth scale demonstrated excellent reliability and validity, and it provided available and applicable measuring tool to evaluate the effectiveness of telehealth.Through this article, we hope to stimulate deeper exploration and insight of academic theory and clinical practice to help shape and create a better vision of aging in place.起始頁-結束頁：435-463資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).098篇名：The e-Commerce Model of Health Websites: An Integration of Technological and Social Psychological Perspectives並列篇名：健康資訊網站之電子商務模式－整合技術與社會心理觀點作者：蔡宗宏(Chung-Hung Tsai);吳文彬(Wen-Ping Wu);楊朝堂(Tsau-Tang Yang)關鍵字：網站品質;知覺利益;知覺互動;知覺信任;電子商務;web quality;perceived benefit;perceived interactivity;perceived trust;e-commerce期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，健康資訊網站已成為相當熱門的電子商務應用之一。然而，目前仍然僅有少數的研究，同時考量技術因素與社會心理因素對健康網站成效之影響。本研究整合技術因素（網站品質：系統品質、資訊品質、服務品質），社會心理因素（知覺利益、知覺互動與知覺信任）與網站成效（網站使用、網站滿意、網站忠誠）以探討健康資訊網站之電子商務模式。本研究共計回收1076份有效問卷，驗證所提出之模式。研究結果顯示，所有的技術因素（網站品質：系統品質、資訊品質、服務品質）均對社會心理因素（知覺利益、知覺互動與知覺信任）產生正向影響。此外，本研究也證實社會心理因素是介於技術因素與網站成效之間，為相當重要之中介因素。同時，在社會心理因素相互間的關係，知覺互動顯著地影響知覺利益與知覺信任。另外，相對於其他因素而言，網站品質對網站忠誠有最強之總影響，知覺互動次之，網站滿意再次之。再者，網站品質對網站滿意與網站使用有最強之總影響，知覺互動次之，網站利益再次之。本研究提出之管理意涵認為，醫療院所應同時強化網站之技術與社會心理面向，方能達到更佳的健康網站成效。英文摘要：Health websites have emerged as one of the most popular e-commerce applications in Taiwan recently. However, there are still limited studies simultaneously considering the influence of technological and psychological factors on health websites' outcomes. The study integrates technological factors (web quality: system quality, information quality, and service quality), social psychological factors (perceived benefit, perceived interactivity and perceived trust) and web outcomes (web usage, web satisfaction, and web loyalty) to explore the ecommerce model of health websites. A survey of 1076 users of health websites was conducted to validate the proposed model. The findings show that technological factors have all significantly positive effects on social psychological factors. This study also confirms that social psychological factors are important mediators between technological factors and web outcomes. Meanwhile, with regard to the interrelationship among the three social psychological factors, perceived interactivity influences significantly perceived benefit and perceived trust. Furthermore, web quality, followed by perceived interactivity and web satisfaction in order, has the strongest total effects on web loyalty relative to the other factors. Finally, web quality, followed by perceived interactivity and perceived benefit in order, has the strongest total effects on web satisfaction and usage. This study provides important implications that technological and social psychological aspects of health websites should be simultaneously reinforced by hospitals to achieve better health websites' outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：465-490資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(2).109篇名：Sense of Virtual Community: Antecedents and Consequences並列篇名：虛擬社群意識形成因素及影響性之研究作者：江義平(I-Ping Chiang);林佳蓁(Chia-Chen Lin);王凱生(Kai-Sheng M. Wang)關鍵字：虛擬社群;虛擬社群意識;網路行銷;virtual community;sense of virtual community;internet marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：虛擬社群意識(SOVC)是人們在虛擬社群中與他人溝通時的一種歸屬和依戀的感覺。虛擬社群意識就是這樣的一個核心概念，不僅加強化了成員間的社群歸屬感，同時也增加了成員對與社群忠誠度的影響。本研究之樣本對象鎖定為虛擬社群成員，所探討的是虛擬社群意識的組成構面，以及其形成因素與影響性。透過網路問卷的方式回收1200份有效問卷，並以線性結構方程式進行資料分析。結果顯示虛擬社群意識包含三個有效的組成構面：成員歸屬感、影響力與沉迷，並受到三種虛擬社群特性所影響：領導者熱忱、娛樂性知覺與實用性知覺，且最終影響虛擬社群的會員忠誠。英文摘要：Sense of virtual community (SOVC) is a feeling of belongingness and attachment to a certain virtual community when people communicate to each others online. SOVC is such a core concept that it not only strengthens the members' belongingness to the community, but also increases their loyalty that ultimately enhances the impact of the virtual community. Although several literatures have thoroughly discussed SOVC, however, the dimensions of SOVC and its consequences and antecedents have not yet been addressed properly. This study attempts to investigate the key dimensions of SOVC, explore the antecedents of SOVC, and then examine its consequences. Online Survey had been adopted in which 1,200 qualified sample participants of certain virtual communities were collected. The results of the empirical study point to the following findings. First, SOVC contains three key dimensions, belongingness of membership, influence, and immersion. Second, the results of structure equation model analysis show that three anteced ents-leaders' enthusiasm, perceived enjoyability, and perceived usefulness-have significant impacts on all dimensions of SOVC. Third, all the antecedents and the dimensions of SOVC lead to increasing member loyalty toward virtual community.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2010.12(4).0110篇名：基於知識本體之文獻多維度關聯視覺化導覽平台並列篇名：An Ontology-based Navigation Platform for Browsing Multi-dimensional Relationships of Academic Papers作者：楊亨利(Heng-Li Yang);趙逢毅(August F.Y. Chao)關鍵字：引文網路分析;社會網路分析;知識本體;視覺化資料挖掘;Citation Network Analysis;Social Network Analysis;Ontology;Visual Data Mining期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：學術研究必須建立於過去已完成的研究，因此文獻探討非常重要。數位時代下，改變了過去研究者必須東奔西跑的尋找文獻方式，但卻也會造成研究者被許多數位文獻淹沒。若奠基於事先定義好的領域本體論，人類的視覺化資訊處理能力應可協助瞭解文獻中多維度的複雜資料關聯。本研究提出一個文獻導覽平台系統架構，協助使用者依預訂的知識本體導覽領域文獻，並能依循「知識本體與關鍵字」、「引文網路」及「人員關係網路」三種關聯來導覽論文，並與呈現的網路圖形資料互動。最後實作視覺化導覽雛型平台，並以國家圖書館之博、碩士論文網所提供的部分論文為雛形測試資料。英文摘要：Paper survey is the most important task for conducting research. Nowadays, this work might return huge amount of information owing to digitalized-documentation and high-speed Internet. Based on predefined domain ontology, human visual data-processing capability might help understand multiple dimensions of complicated information relationships. This study proposes a framework for document exploration to assist users to browse domain literature based on predefined ontology. It also guides users to explore the literature based on three different relationships: network of knowledge ontology and keyword, citation network, and people social network. Finally, a prototype was implemented and part of data from Electronic Theses and Dissertations System of National Library were fed to test the feasibility.起始頁-結束頁：27-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(1).0311篇名：預測盜版軟體的使用：知覺風險、軟體成本、道德義務與計劃行為理論之整合模式並列篇名：Predicting the Use of Pirated Software: Integrating Perceived Risk, Software Cost, and Moral Obligation with the Theory of Planned Behavior作者：林鴻南(Hong-Nan Lin);廖則竣(Che-Chen Liao)關鍵字：軟體盜版;知覺風險;軟體成本;道德義務;計劃行為理論;Software Piracy;Perceived Risk;Software Cost;Moral Obligation;Theory of Planned Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：當軟體盜版持續對國家及全球經濟的成長造成嚴重威脅之際，瞭解人們的盜版軟體使用行為並據以擬定出有效的策略以遏阻盜版軟體的使用已成為當務之急。本研究企圖將知覺風險、軟體成本與道德義務這三項因素與計劃行為理論整合，以發展一有效之理論模式來解釋與預測盜版軟體的使用行為。本研究採用網路問卷調查方法，蒐集到314份有效問卷，並以結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果發現知覺風險、軟體成本與道德義務皆是影響盜版軟體使用決策的重要因素。本研究並指出理論面與管理面可能的意涵與未來研究方向的建議。英文摘要：While software piracy continues to be a big threat to the growth of national and global economies, understanding why people intend to use pirated software and how to deter the use of pirated software have become urgent and important issues. The proposed model integrates perceived risk, software cost, and moral obligation with the theory of planned behavior (TPB) to jointly predict individual attitude and intention toward using pirated software. Data were collected through an online survey of 314 participants. A structural equation modeling was employed to test hypotheses. The results showed that perceived risk, software cost, and moral obligation could have impacts on the decisions to use pirated software. Theoretical and managerial implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：55-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(1).0412篇名：一個互動式演化計算運行框架：以最佳化產品設計為例並列篇名：An Interactive Evolutionary Computation Framework: A Case Study of the Optimal Product Design作者：王柳鋐(Leuo-Hong Wang);廖峻德(Jun-De Liao)關鍵字：疲勞問題;互動式演化計算;演算式機率;適應值預測;human fatigue problem;interactive evolutionary computation;algorithmic probability;fitness prediction期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：疲勞問題(fatigue problem)一直是互動式演化計算(interactive evolutionary computation, IEC)領域中重要的研究問題之一。本文以解決IEC疲勞問題常見的適應值預測(fitness prediction)策略為出發點，提出一套以演算式機率(algorithmic probability, ALP)為基礎的IEC系統(ALP-IEC)。ALP-IEC以多目標遺傳演算法(multi-objective genetic algorithm, MOGA)實作ALP理論，作為系統的學習模組。當ALP-IEC與受測者(respondent)互動時，學習模組便會以受測者的評估結果做為訓練資料，並習得受測者的效用函數，以進行適應值預測。透過產品設計問題的應用研究，本文比較了ALP-IEC與傳統IEC的效率與效果；ALP-IEC與IEC常見的適應值預測方法－類神經網路(neural network, NN)學習模組的效率與效果。統計檢定顯示ALPIEC在效率與效果上，均優於傳統IEC。換句話說，ALP-IEC在不犧牲效果的情況下，可以提升IEC運行效率，降低疲勞問題發生的可能性。另外，ALP-IEC在產品組合的個案上，其預測誤差的表現，也較NN為佳。英文摘要：Human fatigue problem is one of the most important research topics in the interactive evolutionary computation (IEC) research discipline. Following the fitness prediction approach proposed in literatures, an algorithmic probability (ALP) based IEC system named as ALP-IEC has been developed in this paper. ALP-IEC has an ALP-based learning module that fulfills the ALP theory and is actually implemented by a multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA). The ALP-based learning module is trained by the evaluation results and generates respondent's utility function while the respondent interacts with the system. The fitness prediction is then accomplished by using the utility function. The optimal product design problem has been studied in this paper to compare (1) the effectiveness and efficiency of ALP-IEC with the canonical IEC; (2) the effectiveness and efficiency of ALP-IEC with an IEC system incorporated with a neural network (NN) learning module. The statistical tests indicated that ALP-IEC is statistically significant superior to the canonical IEC for both effectiveness and efficiency. ALP-IEC is capable of, in other words, improving the efficiency of IEC without degrading the effectiveness. In addition, the prediction errors caused by the ALP-based learning module are also less than the errors of NN based learning module.起始頁-結束頁：77-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(1).0513篇名：像素不擴展之漸進式視覺密碼並列篇名：Progressive Visual Cryptography with Unexpanded Shares作者：侯永昌(Young-Chang Hou);官振宇(Zen-Yu Quan)關鍵字：視覺密碼;漸進式視覺密碼;機密資訊分享;Visual Cryptography;Progressive Visual Cryptography;Secret Sharing期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：視覺密碼的(k, n)-threshold機制，是將機密影像分給n個參與者，當取得k張以上的分享影像時，透過分享影像的疊合就可以顯示出機密影像，如果小於k張分享影像，則無法獲得機密影像的資訊。在這個機制之下，就算你已經取得k-1張的分享影像，也無法得知任何機密影像的蛛絲馬跡，這樣無形中降低了資訊分享的便利性。漸進式視覺密碼則是在疊合分享影像時，隨著疊合的分享影像數目增加，可以逐步地還原機密影像。在較少張分享影像的情況下，只能疊合出機密資訊的輪廓，隨著疊合的分享影像增加，即可逐漸獲得機密資訊的細部內容。以往的漸進式視覺密碼研究都是以像素擴展為基礎，所以造成儲存空間與傳輸時間的浪費，並且針對機密影像上的黑點部分，在還原影像上並不保證是產生全黑，這將會造成機密影像的還原品質不佳。因此本研究將提出一個新的漸進式視覺密碼分享方法，我們的分享矩陣可以產生不擴展的分享影像，隨著疊合的分享影像數目增加，機密資訊的輪廓將愈來愈清晰，並且機密影像中黑點部分在疊合的還原影像上將是全黑，藉此產生良好的色差對比、提升還原影像的視覺品質。根據實驗結果可以發現，無論機密影像的像素內容是黑點或白點，分享影像上出現黑點的機率皆相同，都是1/n，因此無法從單張分享影像中獲得機密影像的資訊，可以確保視覺密碼的安全性。當疊合k張分享影像後，機密影像中的白色部分被疊合出黑點的機率仍然是1/n，而黑色部份的機率則漸增為k/n，使得色差對比加大，機密影像愈來愈清晰。當疊合所有的分享影像後，在疊合影像上的黑白色差增加為(n-1)/n，優於傳統視覺密碼中50%的色差，因此可以產生更清晰的疊合影像。英文摘要：The basic (k, n)-threshold visual cryptography scheme is to share a secret image with n participators. The secret image can be recovered while stacking k or more shares obtained; but you will get nothing if there are less than k shares being overlapped. Based on this concept, even though we get k-1 shares, we still do not know anything about the secret, which may cause the inconvenience of sharing information. Progressive visual cryptography can be utilized to recover the secret image gradually by superimposing more and more shares. In other words, if we only have a few pieces of shares, we get an outline of the secret; but by increasing the number of the shares being stacked, the details of the secret information can be revealed progressively.Previous researches of progressive visual cryptography were all based upon pixel-expansion, which not only causes the waste of storage space and transmission time but also gets a poor visual quality on the stacked image. Furthermore, Fang & Lin's research had a severe security problem that will disclose the secret information on each shares. In this paper we proposed a brand new sharing scheme of progressive visual cryptography to produce pixel- unexpanded shares. When stacking more shares, the contour of the secret image will get much clearer on the stacked shares. The objectives we have achieved in this paper include secure, better visual quality on the stacked image, smaller size of shares, and progressive transmission.In our research, the possibility for either black or white pixels of the secret image to appear as black pixels on the shares are the same, which equals to 1/n, therefore no one can obtain any secret information from a single share, which ensures the security. When superimposing k sheets of share, the possibility for the white pixels being stacked into black pixels remains 1/n, while for the black pixels the possibility are raised to k/n, which sharpens the contrast of the stacked image and the recovered secret image will become more and more obvious. After superimposing all shares, the color contrast rises to (n-1)/n which is better than the traditional ways of 50%, consequently a clearer recovered image can be achieved.起始頁-結束頁：99-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(1).0614篇名：以異常行為為基礎之即時惡意網頁偵測之研究並列篇名：Malicious Web Page Detection Based on Anomaly Behavior作者：侯雍聰(Yung-Tsung Hou);陳嘉玫(Chia-Mei Chen)關鍵字：惡意網頁;下載;異常行為;Malicious web page;Drive-by download;Anomaly behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著網際網路服務日益普遍，越來越多的網路應用程式可直接透過網路瀏覽器被使用。然而，大部分的網站於系統開發時，僅基於有限的安全考量而進行開發，而駭客便利用網路應用程式(Web Application)中的漏洞植入惡意腳本程式(script)至網頁中；瀏覽這些惡意網頁的電腦將會受到感染。傳統的惡意網頁檢測方式利用特徵比對(pattern-matching)、監控(monitoring)或改寫JavaScript 程式碼來檢查網頁的安全性。但是這些方式對於從未見過的惡意網頁不能有效的偵測，而有些方式則是利用動態分析的方式來分析出惡意網頁。然而目前缺乏一個用戶端、即時並可以偵測到未知惡意網頁的偵測機制。因此本論文提出一個惡意網頁偵測機制，根據本研究的觀察，惡意網頁相較於一般正常網頁有明顯不同之不尋常行為，此不正常行為通常是用來感染受害端主機或是用來逃避混淆防毒軟體的偵測。這些不尋常的行為，使得惡意網頁在某種程度上不同於正常良性網頁。本研究提出以異常行為分析為基礎的客戶端惡意網頁偵測系統，並使用模式基礎推論來描述及偵測網頁惡意程式碼的特殊語意與特徵。基於模式基礎推論與異常行為分析，本研究所提出之偵測法不但可以區別惡意與正常良性網頁在行為面上之差異，亦可以偵測到未知之惡意網頁。而實驗結果顯示，本研究所提出之方法可以有效辨別惡意網頁並警告網頁瀏覽者。英文摘要：Because of the convenience of the Internet, we rely closely on the Internet to do information searching, sharing, forum discussion, and online services. However, most of the websites we visit are developed with limited security knowledge, and it results in vulnerabilities in web applications. Unfortunately, hackers have successfully taken advantage of these vulnerabilities to inject malicious JavaScript into compromised web pages to trigger drive-by download attacks. Based on our observation of malicious web pages, malicious web pages have unusual behavior for evading detection which makes malicious web pages different from normal ones. Therefore, we propose a client-side malicious web page detection mechanism, Web Page Checker, which is based on anomaly behavior tracing and analyzing to identify malicious web pages. We also use model-base reasoning method to describe and detect malicious semantics of scripts in malicious web pages. The experimental results show that our method can identify malicious web pag es correctly and alarm the website visitors efficiently.起始頁-結束頁：117-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2010.12(4).0215篇名：網路論壇口碑強度、雙面訊息與口碑順序對說服效果之影響－產品涉入之干擾效應並列篇名：Persuasive Effects of Argument Strength, Message Sidedness and Order of Word-of-Mouth in On-line Forums: The Moderating Role of Involvement作者：徐淑如(Shu-Lu Hsu);董和昇(Her-Sen Doong);柳雅婷(Ya-Ting Liou)關鍵字：網路口碑;論點強度;訊息順序效果;說服效果;知覺可信度;產品涉入;Electronic WOM;Argument Strength;Message Order Effect;Persuasive Effect;Perceived Credibility;Product Involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：網路的普及帶動消費者言論的自由傳播，網路論壇中個人的評論與使用經驗已成為消費者重要的參考資訊。不同於人際口碑著重傳播者特性的探討，網路口碑在可匿名發表的情況下，難以明確判斷傳播者的身分，使得訊息在說服過程的角色更形重要。在訊息特性中，過去研究常就論點的強弱或是正、負面探討消費者認知的差異，然而在網路論壇中，消費者可能同時接觸正面與負面意見，根據雙面訊息與順序效果的觀點，消費者對於只提供正面觀點的訊息並不一定較同時包含正、負雙面論點的訊息有更高的說服效果，此外，消費者的認知亦可能受正、負面訊息出現的順序所影響，而訊息順序的效應，尚可能因消費者產品涉入程度不同而有差異。本文旨就論點強度、單面／雙面訊息與訊息順序等特性，探討網路論壇口碑的說服效果，其中，說服效果是以口碑知覺可信度、品牌態度與口碑傳播意圖為探討範圍，並考量消費者產品涉入程度是否影響口碑特性的說服效果。本研究採取實驗法，搜集網路論壇一真實品牌口碑，依據口碑論點強度（高與低）、單面／雙面訊息與正、負面口碑出現順序（正正、正負、負正）共分為六個實驗組。實驗結果顯示，口碑知覺可信度對消費者品牌態度的轉變與口碑傳播意圖具有正向的影響，強化口碑的論點將有助於提升消費者之知覺可信度，對於高產品涉入者的影響尤為顯著。相較於單面訊息，提供雙面訊息並未顯著增加口碑知覺可信度。最後，在正、負面口碑順序方面，採取先負後正的口碑順序，對低產品涉入者品牌態度的提昇具有較佳的效果。英文摘要：Through on-line forums, the Internet enables customers to engage in electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) communications. Different from traditional WOM of which research focuses on the effects of sources of WOM, eWOM needs more studies on the persuasive effects of characteristics of messages on consumers' attitudes and communication intentions.This study investigates whether the argument strength, message sideness and order of eWOM can affect consumers' perceived credibility, brand attitude and eWOM communication intention and how these effects are changed by consumer involvement. Several hypotheses are proposed, and an experiment is conducted that addresses these questions in the context of online consumer forums. The resulting analysis suggests that the argument strength may lead to perceived credibility of eWOM, especially for consumers with high product involvement. Further, the message sideness and the order of eWOMs only influence the low-involvement consumers' perceived credibility and the brand attitude, respectively. Finally, the brand attitude and the communication intention of eWOM are enhanced as the perceived credibility increases.起始頁-結束頁：135-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2010.12(4).0316篇名：國內第三代行動電話服務之需求預測並列篇名：Forecasting Demand for the Third Generation Mobile Service in Taiwan作者：廖俊雄(Chun-Hsiung Liao);陳俊偉(Chun-Wei Chen);張湄萱(Mei-Hsuan Chang)關鍵字：第三代行動電話服務;需求預測;二項羅吉特模式;巴斯擴散模型;Forecasting demand of 3G service;Bass diffusion model;Binary logit model;demand elasticity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究利用二項羅吉特模型探討可能影響第三代行動電話服務(3G)使用之因素，並與巴斯擴散模型相結合來預測國內用戶對於3G服務的需求。結果發現影響國內消費者使用3G服務之因素分別為強調手機在使用上方便性與容易操作性的「3G手機特性」，針對通話品質與業者服務口碑的「3G服務品質」，包含月租費、語音通話費率、影像通話費率、數據傳輸費率與優惠方案搭配的「3G使用成本」；同時發現有高意願使用3G服務的使用者為「高收入」與「高行動電話費用」特性的群體。最後，國內未來3G服務需求預測結果發現民國96年至100年將是3G服務發展迅速的成長期，3G服務的普及率也將會從24.86%提升至101.08%；而從民國101年至106年將是3G服務正式進入成熟期，普及率維持在100.05%，與2G服務的發展狀況相似。英文摘要：The study adopts binary logit model to analyze the influential factors and probability of using 3G service. Together with Bass diffusion model, this study then forecasts the annual demand of 3G service during the ten-year period of 2009 to 2018. The results hopefully provide useful suggestions to 3G operators while making operating strategy and marketing strategy. It is found that the influential factors of 3G service usage include ”3G handset features”, ”3G service quality” and ”3G service cost”. That is, more convenient and easier manipulative handset, higher call quality and better operator's reputation, and lower monthly rental/service rate and more attractive promotion increase mobile subscribers to use 3G service. Further, mobile subscribers with high income and high monthly expenses for service tend to switch to the 3G service. In the forecasting of future 3G service demand, it is found that the service will dastically grow during 2007 to 2011 with the 3G penetration rate from 24.86% to 101.08%. Then the 3G service will maintain in the highly mature status. Such a growth pattern is similar to that of 2G service.起始頁-結束頁：169-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2010.12(4).0417篇名：知識商務模式分析並列篇名：Analysis of Knowledge Business Model作者：陳宗義(Tsung-Yi Chen);蔡德謙(Der-Chian Tsaih);陳垂呈(Chui-Cheng Chen)關鍵字：商務模式;協同創新;知識商務;智慧資<U+7523>;Business Model;Collaborative Innovation;Knowledge Commerce;Intellectual Asset期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：現在的企業必須藉由更開放及創新的經營模式，有效利用創意和技術，以降低創新成本及新知識研發的風險。又多數企業之智慧資產經常閒置，未有效利用。因此，透過網路為基的知識商務，能夠提高知識的再使用率及延伸知識的價值，為企業獲取互補性知識的最佳管道之一。由於知識與實體商品本質上的差異，電子商務的經營模式可能不適用於交易智慧資產及知識的服務需求。為使知識交易能夠符合動態商務環境需求，本研究從分析知識交易的程序，初探知識商務模式，提出具反應知識市場供需能力的公平知識競標模式。藉由本研究有助於未來各種知識商務經營模式的進一步創新發展。英文摘要：Currently, enterprises must thus adopt an open innovative business model to reduce innovation costs and the risks associated with new knowledge development. Therefore, enterprises must import new knowledge or technologies via knowledge trading or exchange. Therefore, the electronic method offers one of the best methods for trading and exchanging desired and complementary knowledge among enterprises. Existing EC business models are inappropriate for trading knowledge, especially collaboratively constructed knowledge. This study identifies the knowledge trading processes and designs a fair knowledge bidding process. The study can promote the development of innovative knowledge business models in future.起始頁-結束頁：196-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(1).0118篇名：從社會資本的互惠規範觀點探討虛擬社群中知識品質的影響因素並列篇名：Investigating the Role of Norm of Reciprocity on Perceived Knowledge Quality in Virtual Community作者：蔡家安(Chia-An Tsai);康贊清(Tsan-Ching Kang);洪新原(Shin-Yuan Hung)關鍵字：知識分享品質;虛擬社群;社會資本理論;實證研究;Knowledge sharing quality;Virtual community;Social capital theory;Empirical study期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：知識是虛擬社群中極有價值的核心資產，影響到網路使用者對社群的評價，同時也影響到社群成員是否再來此社群的意願。虛擬社群中成員的互動及社會關係，猶如一個小型社會的縮影，並藉由資訊科技快速的累積成員所分享的知識，提供有價的知識給成員存取。因此虛擬社群所累積的知識對社群成員而言，是否具有某種程度的品質，也影響了成員對於社群知識品質的看法，瞭解有哪些因素會影響成員對於社群知識品質認知的差異，將有助於瞭解成員間所認定的有價知識如何形成，並對社群將來如何刺激社群成員貢獻對成員有用的知識有所幫助。本研究欲透過社會資本為基礎理論，並考量各構面間的潛在關係，來探討影響虛擬社群成員認知社群知識品質的原因為何。本研究針對國內某一以電玩遊戲為導向的虛擬社群，探討影響其虛擬社群成員認知社群知識品質的原因。實證結果顯示，成員間互動的關係會顯著地正向影響成員間的信任與認同；共享的願景則會顯著地影響成員間的互惠規範、信任與認同；而成員間的信任與認同則顯著地影響社群中成員彼此的互惠規範；成員對社群知識品質的認知則顯著地受到互惠規範所影響。本研究結果同時說明社會資本的各個構面間具有一定程度的相關性，成員間的共享願景、信任和認同都能增加社群間的互惠規範，而社群成員所感受的知識品質則隨著互惠規範的增加而增加。最後，期許本研究結果能做為後續學術與實務方面的參考依據。英文摘要：This study investigates the role of norm of reciprocity on perceived knowledge quality in virtual community. Based on the social capital theory, a research model was developed. A survey was conducted to empirically test the model. Three hundred and eighty-one responses were collected from an on-line game virtual community. Results indicated that interaction ties positively affect trust and identification; shared vision positively affects norm of reciprocity, trust and identification; trust and identification positively affect norm of reciprocity; norm of reciprocity positively affects perceived knowledge quality. These findings provide researchers how social capital factors improve members' perceived knowledge quality in virtual communities. Implications for academics and practitioners are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：217-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2011.13(1).0201篇名：The Impact of Earnings Management on the Choice of Debt Maturity Structure並列篇名：盈餘管理與債券到期日結構關係之探討作者：周德瑋(De-Wei Chou);林建榮(Philip J. R. Ling);詹佳縈(Chia-Ying Chan);張詩政(Shih-Cheng Chang)關鍵字：債券到期日;盈餘管理;長期績效;Debt Maturity;Earnings Management;Long-Run Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：這篇論文主要在於研究盈餘管理行為和公司債券到期日結構的關係。由於過去文獻已證實積極盈餘管理的公司會顯著地影響股價的表現，因此本研究將繼續探討該類公司對發行債券到期日結構之影響以及後續股價的長期績效。本研究結果指出，採取積極盈餘管理的公司為了避免外部頻繁的監控和較高的短期債券發行成本，傾向於發行到期日較長的債券。此外，本研究亦發現，採取積極盈餘管理的公司其股價的長期績效較差，此結果與過去關於盈餘管理（包括首次公開發行股票和現金增資）的文獻一致。也就是說，盈餘管理假設確實可應用在公司債券之發行。最後，本研究亦發現公司規模與債券到期日結構具有非線性之關係，而該關係在過去的文獻中並沒有太多的討論。英文摘要：The present study distinguishes itself from the prior related works by demonstrating the relationship between earnings management behavior and the debt maturity structures of firms. Since it is well documented that firms managing earnings aggressively result in significant impacts on stock performance subsequently, we also go on to measure the long-run stock performance subsequent to the debt offers.Our empirical evidences reveal that those firms which engage in the aggressive management of earnings have incentives to issue debt with longer-term maturity in order to avoid frequent outside monitoring and the higher costs involved in the issuing of short-term debt. We also find that the stocks of those firms characterized by such aggressive earnings management demonstrate long-run underperformance. This result is consistent with the findings in the majority of the prior studies within the literature on earnings management (including those on IPOs and SEO), that the earnings management hypothesis actually extends to debt offers. Moreover, our empirical results suggest that the firm size, which has not been examined rigorously in prior literature, is non-linearly associated with debt maturity structures.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.4.CHI.12篇名：The Effects of Consumers' Incidental Emotions on Their Perceptions of Advertised Reference Prices並列篇名：消費者情緒對廣告參考價格認知的影響作者：鄭尹惠(Yin-Hui Cheng);關復勇(Fu-Yung Kuan);莊世杰(Shih-Chieh Chuang);黃志成(Chih-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：正向情緒;負向情緒;參考價格;Positive Emotion;Negative Emotion;Reference Price期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：基於先前的研究發現，本研究主張消費者情緒將對廣告參考價格產生影響。本研究証實，藉由回憶而引發正向情緒的消費者比那些藉由回憶而發負面情緒的消費者對於廣告的參考價會有較高的交易價值。進一步，研究發現採用觀看影片的回憶方法所引發的情緒效果對廣告參考價亦有相同的影響。最後實驗証實，情緒對廣告參考價格的影響是來自於情緒對參考價格是視為是品質<U+72A0>牲或金錢的獲得所造成。英文摘要：Building on previous research, this study proposes that emotion affects the preference for advertised reference prices among consumers. The empirical results demonstrate that study participants in whom a transient positive emotional state is induced by the remembrance of a pleasant event or story tend to perceive a greater transaction value for an advertisement with a reference price than do those in whom a transient negative emotional state is induced. Viewing a short film increases the range of emotion that is experienced by participants beyond that experienced by those who only remember an event; however, both methods produce identical results in inducing an emotional state. Finally, this study suggests that the extent to which consumers use reference price information as an indicator of quality sacrifice or monetary gain is a function of consumer emotions.起始頁-結束頁：23-37資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.4.CHI.233篇名：銀行盈餘品質對其信用評等之影響－兼論各國資訊不對稱程度對上述關聯性之影響並列篇名：Effects of Bank Earnings Quality on Credit Ratings-Does Information Asymmetry Matter?作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：信用評等;盈餘品質;資訊不對稱;資訊揭露品質;法律與制度環境品質;Credit Rating;Earnings Quality;Information Asymmetry;Disclosure Quality;Institutional Environment Quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以2002至2008年間，來自於全球85國的3,473家商業銀行為樣本，探討銀行的盈餘品質是否影響其信用評等，以及國家的資訊不對稱程度對銀行的盈餘品質與其信用評等間原有的關聯性是否有不同的影響。發現在控制銀行的財務資訊以及國家特定變數後，信評機構仍給予盈餘品質不佳的銀行一較差的評等等級。當一國的訊息揭露品質或法律與制度環境品質佳，均能有效地降低盈餘品質不佳對信用評等的不利影響。此外，發現盈餘品質不佳對信用評等的不利影響，主要出現在資訊不對稱程度較嚴重的國家，與過去文獻結果一致，發現資訊不對稱程度較低的國家，個別企業的財務報表資訊可以解釋信用評等；相反地，資訊不對稱程度較高的國家，發行體評等卻主要決定於國家主權評等、銀行的規模，以及本文探討的盈餘品質變數。英文摘要：This paper uses the long-term credit ratings issued by Standard and Poor's from 86 countries during 2002-2008 as samples and investigates the effect of earnings quality on credit ratings and the effect of information asymmetry of a country on the relationship between earning quality and credit ratings. The results show: first, banks with worse earnings quality will be assigned a lower rating after controlling for the bank-specific and country-specific variables. Second, banks in countries with serious information asymmetry will aggravate the adverse effect of earnings quality on credit ratings. Third, consistent with previous studies, financial ratios are more relevant to the explanation of credit ratings in countries with less information asymmetry. By contrast, credit ratings are mostly determined by sovereign credit rating, bank size and earnings quality.起始頁-結束頁：39-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.4.CHI.394篇名：組織條件與購併後組織管理之構形關係：以台灣金融產業為例並列篇名：The Study of Configuration Relationship between Organizational Conditions and Post Merger Management: The Cases of Financial Industry in Taiwan作者：林尚平(Shang-Ping Lin);羅旭華(Shi-Hwa Lo);許書銘(Sue-Ming Hsu)關鍵字：金融機構購併;購併後整合;組織條件;構形關係;組織設計;Financial Institution Merger and Acquisition;Post-Merger Integration;Organizational Conditions;Configuration Relationship;Organizational Design期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以台灣金融機構為個案研究對象，旨在探究金融機構之組織條件，與購併之後進行組織管理之構形關係。經由文獻探討發現，購併發生時之組織條件主要有：（1）權力不對稱性、（2）結構相似性，與（3）業務相似性；購併後組織管理行為可分為：（1）高階經營團隊重組、（2）組織結構再設計，與（3）作業、服務、流程與系統整合。再經由4則金融購併個案之訪談與分析，本研究發現：（1）購併案宣佈後主併與被併組織進行整合，就購併後之整合目標重要性觀之，組織條件之三個自變數，對購併後整合組織管理之三個應變數的影響均為負向；而組織管理作為，其構形關係自下而上，弱化了購併之後組織進行組織管理作為之重要性。（2）購併案宣佈後主併與被併組織進行整合，就購併後之整合目標可行性觀之，組織條件之三個自變數，對組織管理之三個應變數的影響均為正向；而組織管理作為，其構形關係自上而下，強化了購併之後組織進行組織管理作為之可行性。英文摘要：This paper aims to reveal the Taiwanese financial institution organizational configuration relationship between organizational conditions and post merger management. Based on literature review, we find that the organizational condition when merger happen mainly are: (1) Asymmetry of power, (2) Similarity of structure and (3) Similarity of business. The post-merger organizational management behavior mainly is: (1) Top management team restructuring, (2) Organizational structure re-design and (3) The integration of operation, service, working process and system.After interviewing and analysis of 4 financial institution merger cases, we find that: (1) During the period of after-merger integration, in terms of ”importance of integration objective”, these three independent variables of organizational conditions negatively affect three dependent variables of organizational management of post-merger integration. Of three organizational management behaviors, from bottom to top in the light of configuration relationship, will weaken the importance of post-merger management. (2) During the period of after-merger integration, in terms of ”possibility of integration objective”, these three independent variables of organizational conditions positively affect three dependent variables of organizational management of post-merger integration. Of three organizational management behaviors, from top to bottom in the light of configuration relationship, will strengthen the possibility of post-merger management.起始頁-結束頁：63-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.4.CHI.635篇名：虛擬社群行為研究：中介效果與干擾效果之探討並列篇名：Membership Behaviors in Virtual Communities: An Investigation of Moderating and Mediating Effects作者：蔡顯童(Hsien-Tung Tsai);邱雅鈴(Ya-Ling Chiu)關鍵字：社群行為;社群認同;社群滿意度;社會影響;Satisfaction;Social Identification;Virtual Communities期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：虛擬社群行為是近年來備受重視的主題之一；然而，在過去的研究中，對於成員的社群行為了解相對有限。本研究主要從社會心理學的角度，探討影響社群行為形成的「前置因素」、「中介機制」、與「干擾效果」。在模型實證部分，本研究係針對國內一網路社群平台之成員進行問卷調查，佐以成員參與社群活動之真實行為資料，接著再以LISREL進行量化分析。本研究發現：成員的社群行為會受到心理層面及社會層面的中介機制影響。其次，本研究發現社群聲望、幹部投入程度、與娛樂性會透過此中介機制所影響成員社群行為。最後，本研究亦發現「知覺角色重要性」會干擾社群行為的形成。本研究發現對於社群管理者而言，具有深遠且重要的成員關係管理意涵。英文摘要：Relatively little research has examined moderating and mediating effects involved in the member participation process. This study thus proposes and tests a model in which prestige, perceived leader involvement, and entertainment affect member participation and loyalty through both community identification and satisfaction. Using multiple measurement sources, this study shows that three proposed antecedents can trigger member participation through community identification. In addition, satisfaction influences participation behavior through community identification. The results also show that perceived role importance positively moderates the relationships between mediators (i.e., identification and satisfaction) and participation behavior. The authors conclude with a consideration of the key managerial and research implications of these findings.起始頁-結束頁：97-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.4.CHI.976篇名：Corporate Governance: Directors' Liability and Board Structure並列篇名：公司治理：董監事責任與董事會結構作者：陳彩稚(Tsai-Jyh Chen);張瑞益(Jui-I Chang)關鍵字：公司治理;董事會結構;董監事責任;董監事暨重要職員責任保險;Corporate Governance;Board Structure;Directors' Liability;Directors' and Officers' Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文目的在於探討沙賓法案Sarbanes-Oxley Act（SOX）之後，董監事法律責任對公司治理之影響，以及分析董事會組成之決定因素。本研究以台灣上市公司2003－2007年之資料進行實證分析，研究結果顯示董事會之獨立性與董監事暨重要職員責任保險、負債比率、執行長之主導權以及高科技產業有顯著正向關係。董事長兼執行長之雙重領導現象（leadership duality）則與公司規模成反向關係，但與高科技產業成正向關係。此外，小型公司之董事會人數可能因有董監事責任保險保障而增加，但是在大型公司中則無此現象。整體而言，本研究結果顯示董監事之法律責任對於董事會的結構具有重要影響力，而其責任保險保障在公司治理上則可提供監督之功能。英文摘要：This paper attempts to investigate the effect of directors' liability on corporate governance and the determinants of the board after the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). Based on the data of public firms in Taiwan during 2003-2007, the empirical findings suggest that board independence is positively related to Directors' & Officers' (D&O) insurance, debt ratio, bargaining power of CEO and high technology industry. Board leadership duality is negatively related to firm size and positively related to high technology industry. The findings also show that board size is positively related to D&O insurance in small firms but unrelated in large firms. The results in general suggest that directors' liability is an important determinant of board structure and D&O insurance provides monitoring incentive for corporate governance.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.3.CHI.17篇名：家族與非家族企業之總經理替換與相對績效的關聯─以台灣上市公司為例並列篇名：The Relationship between Managerial Successions of Family-controlled and Non-family-controlled Businesses and Relative Performances: An Empirical Study of Taiwan Listed Companies作者：林穎芬(Ying-Fen Lin);洪晨桓(Chen-Huan Hong);陳羽甄(Yu-Zhen Chen)關鍵字：高階主管替換;相對績效;家族控制型企業;CEO Turnover;Relative Performance Evaluation;Family-controlled Business期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討強迫性高階主管替換與公司相對績效之關係，檢視公司績效不佳時，董事會是否會採取強迫高階主管替換的方式來改善公司績效。本研究以家族控制型與非家族控制型企業作為對照，觀察此二類企業在公司績效表現與總經理強迫性替換決策的關聯是否有所差異，以及當高階主管強迫替換後，是否能有效改善家族控制型或非控制型公司的經營績效。本研究採用Logistic迴歸與t檢定進行實證分析，研究結果得知會計基礎相對績效表現與總經理強迫替換有強烈關聯，然家族控制型企業之總經理則較不易因績效表現不佳而遭到替換；此外，非家族控制型企業在強迫總經理替換後公司績效表現逐漸提升，而家族控制型企業則無此顯著效果。英文摘要：This study explores the relationship between CEO turnover and a company's relative performance and examines whether the board adopts CEO replacement to improve company performance. This study compares family-controlled businesses with non-family-controlled businesses to find out if there a difference in relationship between company performance and CEO turnover. This study also investigates if managing performance of either family-controlled businesses or non-family-controlled businesses improves after going through CEO replacement. This study adopts Logistic regression and t-test to analyze the data. Result shows a strong relationship between accounting based relative performance and CEO turnover. However, CEOs of family-controlled businesses are less likely to be replaced. Also, the performance of non-family-controlled businesses is found progressively improved after going through CEO replacement, whereas such effect is not as significant for family-controlled business.起始頁-結束頁：25-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.3.CHI.258篇名：應收帳款管理風格與績效之關聯性研究─以台灣電子產業為例並列篇名：Management Style of Accounts Receivable and Performance of the Firms: Evidence from Taiwan Electronics Industry作者：洪志洋(Chih-Young Hung);高立翰(Li-Han Kao)關鍵字：應收帳款;管理風格;部份調整模型;經營績效;市場評價;Accounts Receivable;Management Style;Partial Adjustment Model;Performance;Market Valuation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：為強化價值創造的能力，企業必須充分及有效使用管理所擁有的各類資產，而應收帳款便是其中重要項目。本研究探索性的提出公司應收帳款政策敏感度（β），以及公司應收帳款調整控管能力（λ）兩項指標，並依此將公司的應收帳款管理風格分為四類。為進一步瞭解應收帳款管理風格，與公司經營績效及市場評價的關聯性，本研究利用兩個計量經濟模型進行估計及檢驗。實證結果指出，應收帳款管理風格與公司經營績效及市場評價具有顯著的關聯。其中對經營績效的影響，顯示公司除重視應收帳款政策擴張所產生的經營風險外，亦受到應收帳款控管能力強弱的正向影響。而市場評價的部分，則顯示應收帳款的調整控管能力較受到市場重視，亦對公司的評價產生正向的價值反映。因此，上述不同的模型估計結果，也支持了本文在應收帳款管理風格影響差異上的論點。英文摘要：To enhance the competiveness of its value creation, a business firm has to effectively allocate and efficiently utilize all of its assets. Undoubtedly, accounts receivable (A/R) is considered one of those major assets that a firm has to pay attention to. Though A/R plays an increasingly important role in nowadays business operations, researchers haven't made notable advancements in the study of A/R management in recent years. In this paper, we proposed a two-dimensional framework for the classification of A/R management style. Specifically, we assign firms into one of four styles of A/R management according to two attributes of the underlying firms. The two attributes are the sensitivity of the A/R policy change to the firms' sales (λ) and the firms' controllability over the A/R adjustment (β), respectively. To further investigate the plausibility of these two attributes, we constructed two empirical models to test four related hypotheses. Financial data and stock prices of the listed Taiwan's electronics firms over the time period from 1997 to 2006 were collected and used in the study. The major findings of our study are as follow: First, firms of different management style of A/R pose significantly diverse financial characteristics. Second, the sensitivity of the A/R policy has a significantly negative effect on the performance of the firm. Third, the controllability of the A/R adjustment has a significantly positive effect on the market valuation of the firm.起始頁-結束頁：49-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.3.CHI.499篇名：負面科技意會的前因與科技採用：台灣大車隊實證研究並列篇名：The Antecedents and Consequences of Negative Technology Sense-making: A Longitudinal Field Study of the Taiwan Taxi Fleet作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou);樊學良(Hsueh-Liang Fan)關鍵字：負面科技意會;科技採用;計程車;Negative Technology Sense-making;Technology Adoption;Taxi期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：科技意會是指科技使用者在科技使用時，對使用科技所賦予的意義與主觀詮釋。過往有關科技意會的研究，多數是在探討如何設計適合的科技特質，藉以誘發使用者對科技產生正面的心理詮釋；或者探討外部社會情境如何促成使用者對科技使用的正向意會。但事實上，個人在使用科技時，卻常常意外地對新科技產生負面的心理感受與意義詮釋，即負面科技意會。回顧過往文獻，甚少探討此種負面意會對個人科技使用所產生的影響。本文從負面科技意會觀點出發，以計程車司機使用GPS衛星派遣系統之真實研究情境，探討科技使用者產生負面科技意會之前因及其對科技採用的影響。本研究以180位台灣大車隊司機為研究對象，進行三個時間點的長期資料蒐集。研究發現，使用者產生負面科技意會之前因，受到個人前期負面使用經驗、對組織的負面認同，以及本身缺乏使用科技信心等三項因素所影響；同時，負面科技意會也會進一步對科技採用帶來負向影響。最後，根據本研究實證結果，分別提出相關的理論與管理實務意涵及具體建議。英文摘要：When individuals adopt a new technology in the workplace, a process of social construction takes place. Although previous research has described mechanisms related to technology sense-making and technology use in organisations, there has not been much research on how negative technology sense-making occurs, or on the consequences of negative technology sense-making on the technology adoption process. Grounded in sense-making theory, this research aims to examine the technology adoption behaviour of users by investigating the cabbies of the Taiwan Taxi Fleet, who were presented with a new Global Positioning System (GPS)-based automatic vehicle location and dispatch system in Taipei. Based on data collected from 180 taxi drivers through a longitudinal survey, this research discovers three antecedents of negative technology sense-making: prior negative experience, negative organisational identification, and lack of self-efficacy on the part of the user. The paper concludes with various implications for research and practice.起始頁-結束頁：73-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.3.CHI.7310篇名：合作網絡效益與高科技品牌建立之關聯模式分析並列篇名：Collaborative Network Effect as a Bridge to Lunch High-tech Brand作者：陳筱琪(Hsiao-Chi Chen);唐迎華(Jerry Tang);楊佳翰(Chia-Han Yang);羅佩文(Pei-Wen Lo)關鍵字：網絡關係;高科技行銷策略;品牌;決策實驗分析法;網路層級分析法;Network Relationship;High-tech Marketing Strategy;Brand;DEMATEL;ANP期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：隨著全球分工體系之發展，高科技企業已開始藉由網絡關係之綜效，達成資源共享與品牌創造。本研究以2007年台灣十大國際品牌中的IT企業為研究對象，利用決策實驗分析法與網路層級分析法，探討企業合作網絡關係、高科技行銷策略與品牌權益間的因果關聯性，進而分析各構面於品牌發展過程中的相對重要程度。研究結果顯示，高科技企業可透過網絡關係獲得「知識與技術之移轉」及「發展創新能力」，強化高科行銷策略中「技術創新」與「產品創新」的執行，進而建立企業的「專屬品牌資產」，藉此加速品牌價值之創造。最後，本研究以Z公司個案佐證本研究的理論成果，可發現Z公司之品牌建構策略與本研究提出的關聯分析結果相符。英文摘要：This research aims to investigate how corporate networking relationship will benefit their high-tech marketing strategies and brand value. Five Taiwanese IT branding companies are selected as our research objects to analyze their collaborative network effect for branding creation process. The DEMATEL (Decision Making Trial and Evaluation) method and the Analytical Network Process (ANP) are used to construct the causal relationship among network effect, high-tech marketing strategies and brand value, and further evaluate the relative weighting of each criterion for brand creation process. The results reveal that ”knowledge and technology transfer” and ”innovation capability development” driven by network relationship will enhance the operation of ”technology innovation” and ”product innovation” in devising high-tech marketing strategies, thereby building the ”propriety brand assets” in their branding creation process.起始頁-結束頁：93-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.3.CHI.9311篇名：Total Factor Productivity Following Share Repurchase Announcements並列篇名：公司購回庫藏股後之總和要素生產力作者：陳鴻崑(Hung-Kun Chen);黃俊傑(Jyun-Jie Huang);王衍智(Yan-Zhi Wang)關鍵字：庫藏股;總合要素生產力;訊息釋放假說;Repurchase;Total Factor Productivity;Signaling Hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：過去財務領域文獻裡，學者利用公司購回庫藏股之後的營運績效指標，探討庫藏股宣告的動機究竟為何。先前學者研究庫藏股宣告公司的資產報酬率，並測試訊息釋放假說（signaling hypothesis）和自由現金流量假說（free cash flow hypothesis）何者為真。然而，這些文章並無法得出一致性的結論。本文利用經濟文獻常用的另一個營運績效指標：總和要素生產力（total factor productivity），研究美國上市公司宣告購回庫藏股後的生產力變化。研究結果發現，總和要素生產力在公司購回庫藏股之後有顯著的提升，表示公司宣告庫藏股的目的為釋放公司未來營運績效提升的正面訊息，這與訊息釋放假說一致。英文摘要：This study investigates the motives behind share repurchase by examining the operating performance of firms in the literature related to this issue. However, a consensus on the effectiveness of share repurchase has yet to be reached: outperformance, underperformance, and maintenance of the operating performance of repurchasing firms have been observed. Thus, from this perspective, the motives behind repurchase remain unclear. Unlike previous studies examining return-on-assets, this paper uses total factor productivity, an important measure for operating performance in economics, to test the signaling against free cash flow disgorgement explanation. Our results suggest that the total factor productivity of repurchasing firms improves following the announcement date. Consequently, our results are more consistent with the signaling hypothesis in which a share repurchase program conveys information regarding the improved prospects of the firm.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.2.CHI.112篇名：世代影響與年輕女性消費偏好關係之研究－消費者社會化與品牌權益觀點並列篇名：Intergenerational Influences on the Consumer Preferences of Female Undergraduates: Consumer Socialization and Brand Equity作者：黃佑安(Yu-An Huang);董美戀(Mei-Lien Tung)關鍵字：世代影響;世代溝通;品牌意識;品牌忠誠;外表虛榮;Intergenerational Influences;Intergenerational Communication;Brand Consciousness;Brand Loyalty;Physical Vanity期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，世代影響受到消費者社會化研究領域的重視，Moore, Wilkie, and Lutz（2002）、Cotte andWood（2004）與Mandrik, Fern, and Bao（2005）等人的研究皆發現世代影響對年輕女性消費的品牌偏好有顯著影響。本研究則接續上列諸研究，對台灣的年輕女性消費者是否會傳承上一代母親的消費態度與行為作進一步審視。本研究根據消費者社會化與品牌權益理論，提出一個世代影響整合模式，將世代影響與母女的品牌偏好態度分為二組層次：母女間特質影響層次與母女間品牌偏好影響層次。透過對中部地區大專院校外宿女學生的問卷調查，採取母女對偶分析方法，回收有效問卷計257對。本研究進一步以結構方程模式分析對偶回卷，初步證實世代影響整合模式的可行性，並發現母女的世代溝通、母女的品牌意識、母女的品牌忠誠、母女的外表虛榮，這些特質是有傳承關係的，亦即是，母親的這些消費特質越強，女兒也可能有較強烈的相對應特質。本研究進一步發現，母女間的這些特質強度，對於母女間的品牌偏好皆同與品牌偏好皆不固定兩種態度類型各自產生相當程度的影響關係；其中以，母女的世代溝通強度與母女的品牌忠誠強度傳承關係對母女間的品牌偏好皆同有最明顯的影響關係。研究意涵建議廠商如能善用世代影響現象，可在維持既有客源時兼有開發新顧客的功效。英文摘要：In today's competitive battleground, attracting the brand preference between intergenerational transmissions remains as the most critical but yet elusive agenda for all marketers. However, to date relevant marketing literature continues to overlook how intergenerational influences can have impacts on purchase behavior. This research reports the integrated model of intergenerational influences on brand preference of mother-daughter dyads that shows four consumer characteristics suggested in past research to affect intergenerational product and brand preference: intergenerational communication, brand consciousness, brand loyalty, and physical vanity. Here the study uses a parallel survey of 257 mother-daughter dyads to quantify intergenerational impact on both daughter's consumer characteristics and brand preference of mother-daughter dyads. We find that our integrated model is workable. Results also indicate that intergenerational influences are positively related to daughter's consumer characteristics, whereas daughter's brand preference is partially similar with mother's one. Especially, the impact of mother-daughter dyads on both intergenerational communication and brand loyalty has a significant effect on brand preference of mother-daughter dyads. Implications and directions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：21-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.2.CHI.2113篇名：服務移轉行為之研究並列篇名：A Study of Service-Provider Switching Behaviors作者：羅<U+73CF>瑜(Jyue-Yu Lo);梁富梅(Fu-Mei Liang)關鍵字：服務移轉;顧客移轉行為;顧客關係管理;計畫行為理論;Service-Provider Switching;Customer Switching Behavior;Customer Relationship Management;Theory of Planned Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在了解服務業的消費者為什麼及如何從事服務移轉行為，所謂服務移轉行為係指消費者與特定服務業者中止關係，或與另一業者新增關係組合的改變行動。以計畫行為理論作為架構，延伸應用為「服務移轉前因→移轉意向→實際關係結果」路徑之計畫移轉行為。本研究採質性取向之個案研究法，以半結構式訪談來獲取研究資料，結合類別分析和情境分析來建立移轉行為過程之要素和其內在關聯。根據分析結果，本研究發展出消費者從事服務移轉之一般化模式，依不同的服務業，其服務移轉的類型包括「關係中止意向－單一關係忠誠」和「關係組合意向－多重關係發展」兩種，而服務移轉頻率也視不同的服務業而定。最後歸納提出新命題、管理意涵和未來研究方向。英文摘要：This study aims to understand why and how consumers engage in service switching. Service-provider switching is defined as the consumer terminating the relationship with a service provider or adding the relationship portfolio with a new provider. Based on the theory of planned behavior (TPB), the research explores the process of a consumer relationship switching model, and identifies motivations, intentions, and the actual outcomes of the relationship switching. A qualitative-oriented case study is conducted and the data of the study is gathered by semi-structured interviews. Employing both categorical and scenario analysis, we find the major constructs of customer switching behavior and the relationship between them. The results are used to develop the model of service-provider switching, ”relationship termination intention-single relationship loyalty” and ”relationship portfolio intention-multiple relationship loyalty”. Finally, the authors discuss the theoretical and managerial implications.起始頁-結束頁：51-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.2.CHI.5114篇名：多樣化服務策略、資訊科技與會計師事務所績效並列篇名：Service Diversification Strategy, Information Technology, and Accounting Firm Performance作者：陳玉麟(Yu-Lin Chen);黃美珠(Mei-Chu Huang)關鍵字：服務項目平衡多樣化策略;資訊科技;會計師事務所績效;Service balanced diversification strategy;Information technology;Accounting firm performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究檢視平衡多樣化服務策略對會計師事務所績效的直接與間接效果。利用2003-2005年174家國內會計師事務所合計522筆追蹤式（panel data）的實證資料，本研究發現平衡的多樣化策略有助於創造合夥與獨資會計師事務所的績效。而且，相關與非相關平衡多樣化策略均可提昇會計師事務所的績效。此外，IT投資與平衡多樣化策略的交互作用對合夥事務所績效較對獨資事務所有更加正向的影響。最後，IT投資正向調節相關、非相關平衡多樣化策略與合夥事務所績效的關係，但負向調節相關、非相關平衡多樣化策略與獨資事務所績效之間的關係。藉由檢視如何管理知識服務業，本研究的結果有助於檢視平衡多樣化策略文獻與IT報償研究的論點。英文摘要：This study examines the direct and indirect effects of service diversification strategies on CPA firm's performance. A total of 522 observations of 174 CPA firms in Taiwan provide panel data for the period from 2003-2005. The results of this study show a positive association between the balanced diversification strategies and firms' performance for both sole proprietorship and partnership CPA firms. Furthermore, the impacts of both balanced related balanced diversification and unrelated balanced diversification strategies on performance remain unchanged. Finally, IT investments positively moderate the association between both related and unrelated balanced diversification strategies and partnership CPA firms' performance, while IT investments negatively moderate the association between both related and unrelated balanced diversification strategies and sole proprietorship CPA firms' performance. By investigating the management policies of the professional service firm, this study contributes to the diversification strategy literature and IT payoff research.起始頁-結束頁：79-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.2.CHI.7915篇名：智慧財產權侵權警告函正、負向效應與競爭效能關聯：智慧財產權類型的干擾角色並列篇名：Relationships among Positive, Negative Effect and Competitive Efficiency on the Infringement Notice of Intellectual Property Rights: The Moderating Role of Categories of Intellectual Property Rights作者：施錦村(Chin-Tsun Shih)關鍵字：智慧財產權;警告函;競爭效能;競爭效應;Intellectual Property Rights;Infringement Notice;Competitive Efficiency;Competitive Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在驗證智慧財產權侵權警告函正、負向效應與競爭效能的關聯，及不同類別對競爭效能的干擾角色，有<U+522B>於過去智慧財產權及競爭法相關文獻，集中探討二者間之法律關係。本研究177件樣本來自台灣公平會1995年至2009年的案例，該等案例經由相關統計分析工具驗證，實證結果為：（一）實證模型中正向結構係數大於負向結構係數；（二）不同類型有不同的競爭效能，其高低依序為商標權、著作權及專利權。以上實證結果，可供實務界及競爭法主管機關處理類似案件時參考。英文摘要：This paper aims to validate the relationships among positive, negative effect and competitive efficiency on the infringement notice of intellectual property, and the moderating role of categories to competitive efficiency. The study is different from previous related documents of intellectual property and competitive law, which were concerned only with law relationships. A research sample of 177 cases, from 1995 to 2009, is sourced from the Taiwan Fair Trade Commission, and statistical analysis is conducted for validation. The results confirm that a positive structural coefficient of the empirical model is superior to the negative coefficient. Also, the different categories of property rights tend to produce different competitive efficiencies, namely, a trademark, a copyright, and a patent. The findings can provide references to business and authorities of competition law for handling similar cases.起始頁-結束頁：97-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.2.CHI.9716篇名：掌握價值活動重組契機－後進廠商的邊陲進入策略並列篇名：Capturing Value Activity Restructuring Opportunities-Attackers' Niche Entry Strategy作者：李仁芳(Jen-Fang Lee);高鴻翔(Hung-Hsiang Kao)關鍵字：互補性資產;價值活動重組;後進廠商;邊陲;進入策略;Complementary Asset;Value-Adding Activity Restructuring;Attacker;Niche;Entry Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究主要目的在於透過對台灣半導體領導廠商聯發科拓銷中國大陸手機晶片市場的個案研究，延伸Teece所提PFI架構中關於互補性資產的探討，以探討後進國的新興廠商，在技術落後、資金缺乏的情況下，如何成功地發展創新營運模式，於特定市場超越科技創新的國際廠商。本研究發現，後進國的新興廠商要成功地發展創新營運模式，於特定市場超越科技創新國際廠商，必須與產業新興勢力結合，發掘具成長潛力但被忽視的通路商品牌市場；並結合通路品牌廠商、善用產業價值鏈、調整企業本身能耐組合，以嶄新價值活動組合創造優勢；再以產品多樣性、迅速的市場反應速度、低廉成本塑造「整體方案價值」，進而從邊陲進軍主流市場。英文摘要：This study starts off by analyzing the case of MediaTek, a leading Taiwanese semiconductor manufacturer, to understand how it expanded into the Chinese mobile phone chipset market. By extending complementary asset of Teece's PFI framework, the study then explores into how technologically back-warded, capital-stressed market attackers adopt innovative operating models to effectively compete with leading international innovators in specific markets.According to the findings of this study, in order to develop a successful niche entry strategy to out-compete leading international innovators in specific markets, attackers of developing countries must partner with emerging forces of the industry to identify market spaces where channel brands have shown great potential for growth but have so far been neglected. In addition, these attackers must collaborate with channel brand players, leverage the industrial value chain, and re-structure their own capability mix to create distinctive edges with brand new value-adding activities, and then develop customer competitive advantages through product diversification, rapid market response, and low-cost operations, to finally break into the mainstream market.起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.1.CHI.117篇名：夥伴資源、創業策略與創業績效：以台灣資訊電子新創事業為例並列篇名：Partner Resources, Entrepreneurial Strategies, and Entrepreneurial Performance: A Study of Taiwanese Information and Technology New Venture作者：楊國彬(Kuo-Pin Yang);熊欣華(Hsin-Hua Hsiung)關鍵字：夥伴資源;創業策略;創業績效;科技新創事業;Entrepreneurial Partner resource;Entrepreneurial Strategy;Entrepreneurial Performance;High-tech start-up期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究基於創業策略實證研究不足所形成之文獻缺口，嘗試以資源基礎觀點探討科技新創事業在策略選擇上的前置因素，以及採行各策略所帶來的成長績效與風險意涵。本研究以台灣資訊電子新創事業為樣本，針對國際化、科技能力及產品市場成熟度三種創業策略，跨時觀察樣本廠商於創業期間的夥伴資源、創業策略及成長與風險間的結構關係。研究結果顯示創業夥伴資源除可提升國際化程度及科技能力水準外，亦有助廠商成長及分散風險。三種創業策略中，國際化及進入新興產品市場會同時提高創業廠商的成長與風險，提升科技能力有助於維持營運規模，但無助於成長，也無法降低風險。英文摘要：In light of the lack of empirical evidence regarding entrepreneurial strategies in developing countries, this study proposed a resource-strategy-performance framework with testable hypotheses to explore the antecedents of new venture strategies and examine the growth and risk implications of the strategies. Three entrepreneurial strategies were examined, namely, technology capability (follower vs. pioneer), target market (local vs. global), and product market maturity (emerging vs. existing). Our three-year observations of two hundred technology-based start-ups, operating between four to six years, confirmed the role of entrepreneurial partnership as a positive antecedent of entrepreneurial strategies. While the degree of internationalization and the entrance into emerging product market were positively related to growth and level of risk, technology capability did not help achieve rapid growth of sales, nor did it incur high levels of risks.起始頁-結束頁：17-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.1.CHI.1718篇名：部落格迴響一致性對讀者態度之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Comment Consistency on Blog Surfers' Attitudes作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou);陳怡伶(Yi-Ling Chen);練乃華(Nai-Hwa Lien)關鍵字：部落格;迴響一致性;迴響數量;部落格人氣;產品涉入;Blog;Comment Consistency;Comment Quantity;Blog Popularity;Product Involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：近年來，由於部落格的快速興起，消費者多了一條資訊蒐集的途徑，此一特殊途徑與以往訊息傳遞的方式有相當大的差異，來自部落格的訊息可能對消費者態度的形成產生不同影響。本研究旨在探討部落格的口碑效果，由於部落格上同時具有部落客口碑文章與網友回應，這兩種不同的口碑來源，故本文以迴響一致性為研究焦點，共進行兩個實驗，以檢視迴響一致性的直接效果，及迴響數量、部落格人氣、產品涉入之干擾作用。結果發現：迴響一致性可正向提升讀者對部落客口碑文章的信任，並使讀者對文中所分享的產品，產生較佳的品牌態度和購買意願，而迴響一致性的效果主要是發生於迴響數量少、部落格人氣低、或低產品涉入的情況。英文摘要：The aim of this study is to explore the effects of blog eWOM. Because there are two eWOM sources (i.e., the blogger's eWOM and the comments made by e-friends), this study focuses on the construct of comment consistency, investigating its impacts on blog surfers. Besides, this study also explores the moderating effects of comment quantity, blog popularity, and surfers' product involvement. The results indicate the following: comment consistency has positive effects on surfers' trust in eWOM, brand attitude, and purchase intention. When there are many comments, blog popularity is high, or surfers have high product involvement, the positive effects of comment consistency on surfers' attitude responses may be weakened. The implication of these and other findings are then discussed.起始頁-結束頁：41-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.1.CHI.4119篇名：重新探討零售業顧客滿意度：比較享樂型與功能型購物價值之差異並列篇名：Re-examining Customer Satisfaction with Retailers: Differences between Hedonic and Utilitarian Shopping Value作者：黃明新(Min-Hsin Huang);黃麗君(Li-Jiun Huang)關鍵字：滿意度;享樂型購物價值;功能型購物價值;Satisfaction;Hedonic Shopping Value;Utilitarian Shopping Value期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：顧客滿意度的提升是零售商於當前競爭激烈的市場環境下，確保公司長期獲利的重要策略，行銷文獻上也對零售商顧客滿意度提出眾多且廣泛的研究。本文引用環境心理學之M-R理論建立研究之實證模型，涵蓋零售商顧客滿意度的前因及後果，並以消費者調查資料，驗證且比較享樂型和功能型顧客對商店滿意度的差異。本研究採用巢式結構方程模組進行假說檢定，結果發現：相較於功能型購物價值，商店氣氛、產品多樣化和銷售人員表現會讓享樂型購物價值產生較高的滿意度；此外，對享樂型的購物價值而言，商店滿意度會帶來較高的再光顧意願、忠誠度和正向口碑。本文最後提出管理及研究上的意涵供業界及學界參考。英文摘要：Satisfaction continues to be an important measure of performance and retailing business success. This study compares the impacts of hedonic versus utilitarian shopping value of customers on satisfaction with the retailer. A conceptual framework of this study is proposed that considers repatronage intensions, loyalty and positive word of mouth as a consequence, and store atmospheres, assortments and salesperson performances as an antecedent of, satisfaction with the retailer. Nested structural equation modeling techniques are applied to data collected from customers in retail store to test the framework. Results of this study indicate that store atmosphere, product assortment and salesperson service affect satisfaction of hedonic shopping value more strongly than utilitarian shopping value. In addition, satisfactions affect hedonic consumers' repatronage intention, loyalty and positive word of mouth more strongly than utilitarian consumers'. The implications for retailing research and practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.1.CHI.5920篇名：以買方與賣方觀點探討內線交易對股票價量之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Insider Trading on Stock Price and Volume-Perspectives from Buyers and Sellers作者：陳振遠(Roger C. Y. Chen);王朝仕(Chao-Shi Wang);陳振宇(Chen-Yu Chen)關鍵字：內線交易;私有資訊;事件研究法;異常報酬;Insider Trading;Private Information;Event Study;Abnormal Return期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究援引法院判決內線交易之案例，以人工逐案蒐集內線交易相關資訊與交易時點，將其劃分為內線交易前、內線交易期間與內線交易後等三個階段，並根據其私有資訊內涵區分為買方與賣方內線交易行為，分別檢視內線交易對股票價量之影響。此直接觀察法的優點在於可增加事件研究法之檢測效力，以避免因估計期間未考慮到內線交易行為因素，致使異常報酬的衡量產生偏誤。實證結果顯示，事件股票的價量在內線交易三階段呈現出截然不同的變化。特別是在內線交易期間，價格已先行反應私有資訊，而交易量亦呈現顯著異常變化。值得投資人關心的是，不論是涉及買方或賣方內線交易的股票，在內線交易結束後階段皆由空方所主導。英文摘要：This study employs indicted insider trading cases, collects the relevant information and the event time of each case and divides the cases into three stages, i.e. the preceding, processing, and post-announcement periods. Moreover, we separate them into buying and selling insider trading according to private information and examine the effect of insider trading on price and volume respectively. The advantages of direct observation method are to improve the investigation effect of event study and to avoid the deviation in abnormal return measurement without considering the behavior factor of insider trading. The empirical results demonstrate the different reactions of the observed stocks on price and volume in different stages. Notably, the price of event stocks has changed in response to the private information during the processing stage, and the trading volume displayed an abnormal variation significantly. Finally, it is worthwhile for investors to note that selling trades will appear after insider trading.起始頁-結束頁：77-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.1.CHI.7701篇名：人際網絡對家計單位金融服務支出之影響：台灣家戶跨年度分量迴歸分析並列篇名：The Impacts of Interpersonal Networks on Households' Financial Service Expenditures: Cross-Year Quantile Regression Analysis for Taiwan Households作者：郭敏華(Min-Hua Kuo)關鍵字：人際網絡;金融服務支出;行為財務學;分量迴歸;Interpersonal Network;Financial Service Expenditures;Behavioral Finance;Quantile Regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：30卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究針對台灣2000年至2004年之全國家計單位調查資料，利用分量迴歸模型分析人際網絡密度對家計單位金融服務支出的影響。實證結果發現，即使在控制了家計單位的所得、平均年齡、風險態度、居住地、戶長性別、教育程度、職業別等變數下，人際網絡密度對家計單位的金融服務支出仍呈現顯著正向影響，表示人際網絡越密集的家計單位，金融服務支出越高，金融服務活動越積極。而且，分量迴歸分析的結果顯示，金融服務支出較高的家計單位，受人際網絡密度的影響比中、低家計單位更明顯，呈現出M型化社會的特質。英文摘要：Following the rise of behavioral finance, interpersonal networks have gradually earned attentions in Finance. Using the dataset of 2000~2004 National Survey of Households' Income and Expenditures in Taiwan, we construct quantile regression models to examine the impacts of interpersonal networks on households' financial service expenditures. According to our empirical analysis results, the more intensive is the interpersonal network, the more is expended in financial services. Moreover, the quantile regression models estimated demonstrate that the households of high quantile are more impacted by interpersonal networks than the median and low quantiles, indicating the characteristics of M-type society.起始頁-結束頁：95-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2011.30.1.CHI.9501篇名：從祖靈祭到Mgay Bari：當代太魯閣「傳統」祭儀的建構與詮釋並列篇名：From Ancestor-Spirits-Ritual to "Mgay Bari": The Construction and Interpretation of Contemporary 'Traditional' Ritual among the Truku作者：邱韻芳(Yun-Fang Chiu)關鍵字：太魯閣;祖靈祭;「傳統」祭儀;文化建構;正名運動;Truku;ancestor-spirits-ritual;"traditional" ritual;cultural construction;Name Rectification Campaign期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文將以過往有關太魯閣當代傳統祭儀的研究作為基礎，加上2007年到2009年太魯閣族”Mgay Bari”祭典活動的文字素材，來探討太魯閣菁英對當代「傳統」祭典的建構與詮釋。以往有關台灣原住民當代「傳統」祭儀的研究大多是放在觀光或正名運動的脈絡之下來作探討，由於分析的層面聚焦在當代，這些「傳統」祭儀常被視為是短期的操作，乃因應觀光或正名的需求而產生。不同於上述觀點，這篇研究的脈絡不只是侷限在當代，而是試圖從一個較深遠的歷史縱軸－亦即Truku人自主性地從南投東遷，擴展領域，與其他東部族群互動，一直到被日本殖民政權統治的過程，連結到當代受矚目的太魯閣族正名運動－來作分析。透過這些歷史過程的探討，一方面釐清「傳統」祭儀建構與太魯閣族正名運動之間的糾葛，另一方面則希望能藉此對於花蓮太魯閣人當代祭儀建構背後的社會文化動力，以及族群主體性的呈現有較深刻的剖析。英文摘要：This article, based on past studies of contemporary Truku ’traditional’ rituals and written materials of the ’Mgay Bari’ ritual from 2007 to 2009, investigates the construction and interpretation by Truku elites of contemporary ’traditional’ ritual. Past research regarding aboriginal ’traditional’ rituals in contemporary Taiwan were mostly analyzed within the contexts of tourism or name rectification campaigns. Due to their focus on the present, these studies often saw the construction of ’traditional’ rituals as short-term manipulations generated to meet the needs of tourism or name rectification. Unlike the above viewpoints, this study is not confined to the contemporary context. Instead the author attempts to analyze through a long-term historical perspective, including the Truku’s migrating from Natou to the east, expanding their territory, interacting with other eastern ethnic groups, living under Japanese colonial rule, and campaigning for Truku Name Rectification. Through analysis of these historical processes, this article aims to clarify the entanglements between the construction of ’traditional’ ritual and Truku Name Rectification Campaign, and to explore the social-cultural dynamics behind contemporary Truku ’traditional’ rituals.起始頁-結束頁：19-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.00192篇名：文化自我意識與傳統的再創造：以布農人為例的研究並列篇名：Cultural Self-Consciousness and the Reconstruction of Tradition among the Bunun of Taiwan作者：楊淑媛(Shu-Yuan Yang)關鍵字：布農人;打耳祭;傳統的再創造;文化觀光;傳統的政治;the Bunun;"malahtangia" ritual;reconstruction of tradition;cultural tourism;politics of tradition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文企圖理解傳統的再創造與文化的客體化對布農人的意義及其影響。筆者將傳統的復振置於國家挪用與文化觀光發展的脈絡中，探討布農人如何透過在當代對傳統的重新建構，來協商他們和國家與主流社會之間的關係。從對布農人的代表性祭典打耳祭細緻的民族誌分析，我們可以看到現代和過去之間最重要的連續性並不在於儀式象徵意義的複製，而在於霧鹿居民持續繁衍自己為布農人的獨特文化方式。從「傳統」在不同布農聚落所產生之不同政治效應的比較，本文指出傳統的復振與再創造可以是一種賦權（empowerment）的方式，有助於地方認同與社會性的建構，但它也可能讓布農人被納入對傳統的官僚化論述與商品邏輯之中，而更加被邊緣化。不同地區布農人不同的選擇，甚至同一個聚落中不同父系氏族的不同選擇，不僅呈現了「傳統」是布農人在特定歷史情境下之行動的產物，也讓我們期待布農文化未來會有更多發展的可能性。英文摘要：This article aims to understand the meanings and impact of the reconstruction of tradition and the objectification of culture among the Bunun, an Austronesian-speaking indigenous people of Taiwan. It situates the revival of tradition in the contexts of state appropriation and the development of ethnic tourism, and shows how the Bunun attempt to negotiate their relationship with the state and the dominant society by reconstituting tradition in the present. From in-depth analysis of the Bunun’s signature ritual, ”malahtangia”, we can see that continuity with the past lies not in the exact reproduction of the symbolic meanings of ritual, but in the culturally specific ways in which the Bunun sustain local identity and sociality by reproducing their concept of personhood. A comparison of tradition’s different political effects in several Bunun settlements shows that the revival of tradition can be a means of empowerment, but the politicization of culture also has the potential to draw the Bunun into the bureaucratized discourse of tradition which would result in their greater dependence on the state and a commodity logic that can further marginalize them. As the Bunun in different areas attempt to deploy culture as a conscious value and construct tradition as a product of their historically situated action, we can expect that Bunun tradition will become more diversified in the future.起始頁-結束頁：55-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.00553篇名：災難的永恆回歸：記憶政治與災難反覆的探討並列篇名：The Eternal Return of Disaster: A Study of Politics of Memory and the Repeat of Disaster作者：容邵武(Shaw-Wu Jung)關鍵字：記憶;災難人類學;921地震;公共論述;memory;anthropology of disaster;the 921 earthquake;public discourse期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討為什麼在台灣災難之後總是重覆著相似的模式。筆者贊成李丁讚（1997）所說的因為台灣尚未跳脫傳統主義的生活情境，行動模式受到未經反省的習慣決定，因此難以有清楚的意識和溝通。不過，本文探討國姓鄉南港村的二個例子並不缺乏李丁讚所言之第一步的情感建構階段，但是災難的「記憶」論述與再現，催化並轉化感情，使得情感建構階段很快消失，既沒能跨越到社會交互性論述，甚至成為官方合法性論述的動力。一個例子是「震爆點」上的九份二山國家地震紀念園區；國家以及專業規劃團隊投入相當大的人力與金錢，彷彿是國家直接在這個地景上銘刻它對921地震的記憶敘事。但是它從一開始就是龐大的官方記憶，要轉化在地的傷痛記憶。另一個例子是「鹿神祭活動」，相對於「九份二山國家921地震紀念園區」比較靜態、日常、官方、銘刻式的記憶，鹿神祭在表面上以Connerton（1989）著名的區分，則具有動態、特殊、地方、表演式的記憶。透過這二個例子，筆者要闡明的重點是，災難的重覆、災難論述的永恆回歸，是因為遺忘，社會記不起來、記不清楚，或更糟的是「被扭曲」的記憶，每次的敘說充滿了各式各樣的情感，然而這些情感似乎總像是第一次面臨災難，沒有真正變成溝通，並且進而發揮行動上或學習上的效果。英文摘要：This article studies why similar patterns of coping with disasters are repeated in Taiwan. To explore the issue, I take two cases in Nangang Village, Guoxing Township. The first case I examine is Jiufener Mountain National Earthquake Memorial Park, located at the epicenter of the 9/21 earthquake in the village. The state and the professional design teams put in place tremendous manpower and money to build the Park in a way that appears to inscribe onto the landscape the state’s grand narrative of the earthquake, which from the beginning aimed to convert local memories of suffering into an official memory. The second case is the ”Deer Deity Festival”, also held in the village after the earthquake. The Festival is distinguished from the Park, a fixed, routine, official, and inscriptive memorialization, by its dynamic, particular, local, and performative character, to use Connerton’s famous categorizations (1989). Through analysis of the two cases, I want to show that when a disaster strikes, discourses are easily transformed into official memory without the critical construction of social communication. When there is no learning and communication, a society may not act to change, and the patterns of coping with disaster are doomed to repeat.起始頁-結束頁：95-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.00954篇名：出家與在家：喇嘛在雲南藏區並列篇名：Becoming Lamas in Tibean Yunnan, China作者：余舜德(Shuenn-Der Yu)關鍵字：藏傳佛教;出家;雲南藏族;家屋社會;Tibetan Buddhism;lama;Yunnan;house society期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本篇論文以雲南藏區的民族誌討論喇嘛出家的課題。相較於過去的研究常以宗教的面向解釋藏族出家的現象，雲南藏區的民族誌研究顯示，在宗教氣息非常濃厚的金沙江峽谷山上，出家的現象反而不能單純地以宗教因素來解釋，而需要綜合世俗的面向方能深入瞭解出家當喇嘛背後複雜之社會文化過程。筆者強調，藏人的家戶經濟與親屬實踐－尤其是「家屋社會」的概念能夠更顯著地說明藏族青年及他們的家庭對於出家與在家的考量。英文摘要：This paper uses the ethnography of a Tibetan community on the hillside along Jinsha River in Yunnan, China, to discuss the issue of becoming lamas in Tibetan society. It argues that entering priesthood should not be understood solely from religious perspective; household economy and Tibetan local kinship practices, especially Levi-Strauss's concept of house society, provide a better perspective to comprehend how village youth and their families consider the issue of becoming lamas.起始頁-結束頁：135-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.01355篇名：Book Reviews: The Struggle for Sustainability in Rural China: Environmental Values and Civil Society作者：黃樹民(Shu-Min Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：162-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.01626篇名：Book Reviews: Religious Revival in the Tibetan Borderlands: The Premi of Southwest China作者：劉紹華(Shao-Hua Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：166-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.01667篇名：Book Reviews: The Medicalization of Society: On the Transformation of Human Conditions into Treatable Disorders作者：陳俊元(Chun-Yuan Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：169-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201112.01698篇名：Commemorating the Ancestors’ Merit: Myth, Schema, and History in the ”Charter of Emperor Ping”並列篇名：紀念祖先功績：《評皇券牒》中的神話、基模與歷史作者：伊萊(Eli Noah Alberts)關鍵字：瑤族;盤瑤;盤王;券牒;文化基模;Yao people;Iu Mien;King Pan;Yao charters;cultural schema期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文關注中國南部、越南、遼國和泰國地帶瑤族（特別是所謂盤瑤）流傳的一種文獻。該文獻以很多名稱出現，最常見的《評皇券牒》或《過山榜》；通常為卷軸形式，上有帝王印章、護符、皇帝和道教神明畫像、地圖等。由於和中國官府文件很類似、使用了帝國象徵和語言、以及其中蘊含的瑤族認同，過去的學者通場將之視為帝國授與瑤族領袖、允許他們在帝國山區自治的敕令。本文中，筆者將之視為原住民的創作，源自地方的瑤族領袖，他們操弄熟知的帝國文本慣例，為自己、族人和家人謀利。從清朝到二十世紀前半，瑤人（主要是湖南、廣西和廣東的盤瑤）流傳、複製、並為後代保存《評皇券牒》與類似的文件。本文探究其目的為何？最後，筆者分析瑤族社群創作券牒的傳統，說明其如何結合敘事和視覺特點紀念瑤族祖先的功績－無論是神話的或歷史的。那是瑤人宣稱其在國家和宇宙間位置的基礎。英文摘要：This paper focuses on a genre of text that has circulated in certain Yao communities in South China, Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand. It is known by a variety of names, but most commonly as the ”Charter of Emperor Ping” (pinghuang quandie 評皇券牒) and the ”Passport for Crossing the Mountains” (guoshanbang 過山榜). The Charter is usually in the form of a scroll, decorated with imperial chops, talismans, illustrations of emperors and Daoist deities, maps, and other images. Because of its resemblance to documents written by Chinese officialdom, the prevalence of imperial symbolism and linguistic usage, and the specific claims about Yao identity embedded in it, most past scholars have taken it to be an imperial edict once issued to Yao leaders, granting them autonomy in the mountainous spaces of the empire. In this paper, I view it instead as an indigenous production, one originally created by local Yao leaders who were familiar with imperial textualizing practices, who manipulated them to serve their own ends and the needs of their people and family members. From the Qing dynasty up through the first half of the twentieth century, Yao people, primarily Iu Mien or Pan Yao 盤瑤 from Hunan, Guangxi, and Guangdong, circulated the Charter and similar documents, made copies, and preserved them for their posterity. The question is, to what end. Finally, I analyze the ordering schema of the entire tradition of charter production in Yao communities and demonstrate how the narrative and visual features work in synergy to commemorate the merit of Yao ancestors, mythical and historical, which forms the basis of Yao (Mien) claims about their position in the state and the cosmos.起始頁-結束頁：19-65資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.00199篇名：Anthropologies of Enthusiasm: Charlotte Salwey, Shinji Ishii, and Japanese Colonialism in Formosa Circa 1913-1917並列篇名：熱忱的人類學：Charlotte Salwey, Shinji Ishii（石井真二），與1913年左右日本在台灣的殖民統治作者：音雅恩(Ian Inkster)關鍵字：殖民主義;東方主義;台灣;原住民;愛奴族;Colonialism;Orientalism;Taiwan;indigenous;Ainu期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以日本殖民統治台灣時期為例做文化人類學的探討。日本決心不只在台灣西部（靠中國側）藉國際貿易謀利，也欲擷取台灣東部的資源。東部主要居民為原住民，其與官府或地方上的漢人農民、生意人或墾戶長期以來關係緊張。本文主張日本殖民事業仰賴「日本殖民不但優於先前的漢人統治，大體上也優於西方殖民主義」的信念。在這個脈絡下，台灣原住民的歷史文化特色變得很重要，是日本人決心要掌控的。文中我們檢視了兩位專業觀察者熱忱的人類學研究：一位是英國人、另一位則是日本人，他們以不同的方式將台灣原住民塞進為大殖民工程服務的行列。很有趣地，我們發現英國人類學家採取非常堅定、支持日本的立場，而她的日本朋友兼同事立場較懸而未定，對原住民文化的本質和要求也較為敏感。更概括的來說，我們認為透過將帝國邊緣的原住民以某種方式再現可用以支持該帝國，歷史學者和文化理論家可能低估了這個面向。但此種操作若要有任何全球效應，則參與其中的人類學得在國際核心公開展演。我們檢視了Salwey和Ishii如何發展專業和大眾平台，將台灣原住民展演在西方帝國主義的心臟－倫敦的歷史細節。他們透過書寫以及在倫敦的網絡活動，將台灣文化以及日本殖民主義的前線，帶入流行的進步以及「東方主義」的論述中。因此，透過在台灣建構一個新的、更清楚的文明競逐的前線，日本殖民主義提供了成功追尋人類進化的文化量尺。當前線推進，進化也跟著達成。同時，本文中的人類學家提供了日本－相對於中國甚或西方對文明進化更有效率的證據。Ishii的立場很明顯的十分微妙、複雜、難以堅持。在宣揚新日本時，他同時也文化人類學式的描繪了發生在台灣的「寧靜戰爭」；相反的，Salwey則擅長使用原住民的文化和物質問題，來支持為何日本需要在東台灣獲勝。最後，Ishii的「戰爭」較確實的描寫日本在台灣前線擴張時的實際狀況－日人尋找樟腦和其他產品時加速侵入森林，導致日本重蹈他們之前認為是「中國特色」的情況－日本商人和代理人提供原住民廉價的酒，透過以物易物或買賣，供給「番人」槍枝和彈藥。在這個個案中，熱忱的人類學幫助創造了進步和文化變遷的圖像，但此圖像與實際上發生在台灣東－西部前線者不盡符節。英文摘要：This paper offers a brief case of anthropology in the service of a major colonial project. We argue that historians and cultural theorists have perhaps underestimated the manner in which the stipulated character of indigenous peoples on the edge of empire could be engineered to further the cause of such empire. In this case two observers, one Japanese the other British, both more or less in the guise of anthropologists, brought their foreign gaze to the interactive frontier of Han civilization and indigenous life in early 20th century Taiwan. In London, at the heart of the Western imperial enterprise, both used their observations to undermine any claims of the Chinese to legitimate rule over the indigenous east of Taiwan. Both, but in quite different ways, saw the treatment of aboriginal groups as a test case for Japanese colonialism-the one as an ameliorative process, the other as an example of Darwinian competition for resources among unequal ethnologies. By constructing a new, more clearly contested civilization frontier in Taiwan, Japanese colonialism provided measures of the successful pursuit of human progress.起始頁-結束頁：67-97資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.006710篇名：幽微的抵抗：馬太鞍原住民食物系統的變遷並列篇名：Changes of the Indigenous Food System in Fata'an Wetland, Taiwan作者：張瑋琦(Wei-Chi Chang)關鍵字：傳統食物系統;傳統生態知識;原住民觀光;社區總體營造;應用人類學;traditional food system;traditional ecological knowledge (TEK);indigenous tourism;community revitalization;applied anthropology期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：原住民的食物系統是與民族生態知識及環境永續密切相關的，近年來，由於環境災難不斷，如何重建原住民的食物系統，如何在生態與經濟發展中求取平衡的課題益發顯得重要。本研究以作者從1995年至今，在馬太鞍溼地從事研究調查而累積十五年的田野資料及歷史文獻資料，分析馬太鞍食物系統的變遷，以及馬太鞍人士透過生態觀光及風味餐推動溼地的保護的社區營造行動。本研究發現，殖民主義以及現代化發展是改變馬太鞍傳統食物系統的兩大力量；而近十五年來的社區營造成果雖再現了溼地的傳統食物系統，重建了溼地的價值，但卻難以改變溼地農民的處境。同時，本研究並針對如何將地方知識及地方飲食生產著床回地方社會與文化網絡中，重建地方食物系統提出操作建議。英文摘要：The indigenous traditional food system is considered to have a special relationship with ethnobiological knowledge and environmental sustainability. Currently, how to reconstruct the indigenous traditional food system and its connections to ecology and economy has become an important issue. This paper examines changes in the traditional food system and it's reconstruction from a historical perspective, through the case study of the indigenous Fata'an community in eastern Taiwan. The study finds that there are two forces for change affecting Fata'an's traditional food system-one is the progress of modernization as a project of colonization; the other is capitalist infiltration along with modernization. Although Fata'an people have succeeded in reconstructing the traditional food system in the wetlands and also re-building the value of wetlands through cultural revitalization and the development of eco-tourism, they still have difficulties influencing and changing the wetland farmers and their situation. The study suggests that it is important to embed local knowledge and local food in local society and cultural networks when reconstructing cultural food systems.起始頁-結束頁：99-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.009911篇名：論地方知識的所有權與研究職權：從詮釋人類學的觀點省思Lahuy的「論文返鄉口試」並列篇名：On the Ownership and Authority of Local Knowledge: The Reflections of Interpretive Anthropology on Lahuy's "Thesis Defense at Home"作者：林徐達(Hsu-Ta Lin)關鍵字：地方知識;詮釋人類學;反思民族誌;研究職權;深描;local knowledge;interpretive anthropology;reflexive ethnography;authority;thick description期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本篇論文以Clifford Geertz之〈詮釋人類學〉及思想為主要論述基礎，探討人類學研究如何彰顯、再現和反省部落的地方知識。其內容包含三項範疇︰深描所形塑在地者觀點下之文化意義、當代民族誌反思與田野工作中「研究者－報導人」二者之關係，以及在地人類學家的期許。得此，本論文一方面表達司馬庫斯青年Lahuy Icyeh「論文返鄉口試」所涉及之議題和省思，回應部落對人類學研究倫理的詢問和挑戰；另一方面藉由闡述地方知識的所有權與研究職權，本文強調現代民族誌的田野調查反思以及書寫職權的調整，說明現代人類學家與報導人交互主體式互動經驗，和在地人類學家的「族群自我與批判他者」雙重處境。本論文認為當代人類學的任務在於幫助吾人澄清或理解地方知識的觀點和意義，並期許以深度描述的方法和技術，釐清在地部落隱晦的文化情感、現象或規範。英文摘要：Drawing on Geertzian interpretive anthropology, this article elaborates how ethnographies reflect the fieldwork discipline, represent the native’s point of view and further reshape the understanding of local knowledge. Conventional ethnographic writing often displays a research dilemma, in that the anthropologist experiences his involvement as an observer of cultural activities and yet disappears from his own textual presentation. The arrival on the scene of interpretive anthropology in the 1960s and ’70s inspired the paradigm of ethnographic writing, in which rhetorical concerns - the ownership and authority of local knowledge, and self-reflection on fieldwork and ethnographic writing - were transformed into a cumulative, multifaceted representation of anthropological studies. Ethnographers came to doubt the legitimacy of fieldwork while the realization of intersubjectivity between anthropologists and their informants became a major concern. This essay suggests that the emergent task of current anthropology is to understand the meaning of the disguise and transfiguration of local knowledge, through which ”thick description” was launched as an intellectual method for eliciting cultural derivations from tribal sentiments, concealed norms, obscure portrayals, or ambiguous identities.起始頁-結束頁：147-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.014712篇名：Book Reviews: Passage to Manhood: Youth Migration, Heroin, and AIDS in Southwest China作者：周仁宇(Jen-Yu Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：188-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.018813篇名：書評：丁仁傑《當代漢人民眾宗教研究－論述、認同與社會再生產》作者：高怡萍(Yi-Ping Kao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：191-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.019114篇名：前言作者：余舜德(Shuenn-Der Yu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：196-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.019615篇名：一種閱讀身體意義的觀點作者：鄧育仁(Norman Y. Teng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：197-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.019716篇名：意義的修復與理解的美學：Mark Johnson的身體哲學作者：趙綺芳(Chi-Fang Chao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：201-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.020117篇名：Embodied cognition的觀點對認知人類學的啟發作者：余舜德(Shuenn-Der Yu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2011起始頁-結束頁：205-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201106.020501篇名：臺灣人力資本與薪資不均之研究並列篇名：Human Capital Andwage Dynamics: Evidence Fromtaiwan作者：黃芳玫(Fung-Mey Huang)關鍵字：人力資本;薪資不均;人口轉型;Human capital;Wage dynamics;Demographic transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討臺灣22-64歲不同技術水準之全職工作者，在1978-2008年間之薪資變動與其勞動力質與量變動之關聯性。實證結果發現，臺灣勞動者之實質薪資在1994年之前呈現大幅度成長，1994年之後，薪資成長率則大幅下降，其中高中職以下之工作者在1993年之後呈現逐漸擴大之負成長趨勢。勞動需求之下降超過勞動供給之下降，是其薪資負成長之重要因素。反之，專科以上工作者在2001年後，其勞動供給之大幅增加是其實質薪資在2001年之後呈現大幅負成長之重要因素。同時，人力資本存量之累積對各人口群組薪資成長之影響，扮演極<U+7232>重要的角色。其中，由學校教育所累積之人力資本存量對薪資之成長有顯著之正影響，尤其是對專科以上工作者之薪資成長影響較大。由潛在工作經驗所累積之人力資本存量，對高中職以下的勞動者之實質薪資成長有顯著之影響。而高中職以下勞動者之人力資本存量在1994年之後逐年降低，可能是影響其薪資<U+7232>負成長之另一重要因素。英文摘要：We examine the associations of both quantity and quality of human capital with the growth and the distribution of wages among full-time prime-age workers in Taiwan. Our results show that the annual growth rates of real wages for all demographic groups in Taiwan were substantially high before 1994, but then became negative for unskilled workers with 12 years of schooling and below since 1994 and for skilled workers with 14 years of schooling and above after 2001. The drops in labor demand outweigh the drops in labor supply of unskilled labor since 1994 are attributable to the negative growth in their wage rates. By contrast, after 2001, the rises in the labor supply of skilled workers outweigh the rises in their labor demand, which explains the decline in their wage rates. The growths of human capital both in education and working experience significantly explained the large amount of wage growth over the period of 1978-2008. The contributions of human capital to wage growth mainly come from the formal education for skilled workers, and from learning-by-doing for unskilled workers.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201110.00012篇名：臺灣不同族群薪資差異的世代變遷並列篇名：Accounting for Earnings Differentials between Second-Generation Immigrants and Natives in Taiwan作者：徐美(Mei Hsu);陳明郎(Been-Lon Chen)關鍵字：薪資差異;移民;本地人;Oaxaca分解分析;Wage differentials;Immigrants;Natives;Oaxaca decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：既存移民文獻大多是探討經濟移民，本文則是探討政治移民。本文比較1949年後由中國大陸移入臺灣的移民第二代相對於臺灣本地閩南人和客家人的薪資差異。本研究發現父親<U+7232>第一代移民的身分和父母族群婚配組成的不同對於子女薪資並無顯著的影響，移民子女融入勞動市場的速度，與母親是否<U+7232>本地人無關，但是與母親的教育程度有正向顯著的關係。本地人在公部門工作或是使用國語有顯著的薪資溢酬。其次，大陸移民與本地人之薪資差異顯著<U+7232>正但是幅度不大，造成薪資差異的主要來源是可解釋的部份（生產力的差異），無法解釋的部份（歧視）不僅是非常小，且結果顯示本地人在勞動市場中有工作上的優勢。族群內之世代薪資差異不但顯著，而且大陸移民和本地人族群間之世代薪資差異也非常明顯。但是大陸移民和本地人間之世代薪資差異會隨著出生世代的年輕化而縮減。英文摘要：Most existing research on immigrants has focused on immigrants with economic motivation. This paper fills the gap by studying political immigrants to Taiwan. We compare the labor market performance between the generations of the immigrants from China to Taiwan after 1949 and natives in Taiwan. Natives are represented by Hokkien and Hakka. Three main findings are as follows. First, the status of an immigrant's father being a first-generation mainlander and/or an immigrant's mother being a native has no significant effect on earnings of adult children. Instead, the status of being a more highly educated mother affects earnings of those second-generation children significantly. Meanwhile, as compared to their immigrant counterparts, natives have higher earnings if they work in the public sector or if they have language proficiency in Mandarin. Second, different from other countries, immigrants on average have wages higher than natives in Taiwan. The wage differential can be almost fully explained by explainable factors, the productivity differential in the labor market, rather than unexplainable or ”discrimination” factors. Finally, wage differentials within a specific ethnic cohort and between immigrants and natives across cohorts are significant, but the earnings gap between immigrants and natives have shrunk for younger cohorts.起始頁-結束頁：39-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201110.00023篇名：失業、非典型就業的人口組成與工資率分析並列篇名：A Study on the Demographic Composition and Wage Structure of Unemployment and Atypical Employment作者：江豐富(Feng-Fuh Jiang)關鍵字：失業;非典型就業;條件工資;Unemployment;Atypical employment;Conditional wage期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文採用2008年5月行政院主計處「人力資源調查」暨附帶之「人力運用調查」的個體資料，並以「兩階段估計法」估計臺灣勞工的就業機率（失業機率）與工資率，以及就業者從事典型與非典型工作的機率與工資率。研究結果顯示：(1)人力資本投資、工作身份、曾否退休、性別、婚姻狀態，以及主要工作場所從事行業等影響勞動供需的因素，不但是決定工資率的重要變數，同時也是決定個別勞工就業與失業的機率、以及其從事典型或非典型工作之機率的重要變數。(2)雖然無失業者工資的觀察值以估計其工資式，但本文試圖根據兩階段估計模型設算其「條件工資率」;設算結果顯示，全體失業者的平均潛在工資率至多只有就業者的12%。(3)非典型工作者的工資率並不一定比全職者來的差，但因其工時相對較少，才造成其薪資總所得遠不及於典型就業者;因此，這種因工時不足的低度就業問題，乃成<U+7232>有關非典型就業的一項重要課題。英文摘要：Using the data from Taiwan's 2008 manpower utilization survey, we explore the demographic composition and wage structure of unemployment and atypical employment. The results fromHeckman's two-step estimation approach can be summarized as follows: (1) A series of demographic characteristics, such as human capital, class of worker, retirement status, sex, marital status, and industry are not only an important component of the wage rate, but also an important element in affecting the probabilities of unemployment among labor force participants as well as atypical employment among the employed. (2) Imputing the wages of the unemployed based on the two-stage estimation model shows that the conditional wages that the unemployed are expected to receive are substantially lower than those that the employees could earn. (3) Since the wage rates of atypical workers generally are not lower than those of typical workers, the reason that the total earnings of atypical workers are lower than those of typical workers can be attributed to the concealed fact that the working hours of atypicalworkers are less than those of typicalworkers, thereby indicating that there is a significant portion of atypical workers are underemployed.起始頁-結束頁：75-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201110.00034篇名：一代比一代消費更多？國民移轉帳(NTA)方法對臺灣幼齡人口消費的估計並列篇名：Are Children Consuming More Over Time? An Application of the National Transfer Accounts Method作者：董安琪(An-Chi Tung)關鍵字：國民移轉帳;幼齡人口;消費;National transfer accounts;Consumption of children;Cost of children期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究利用國民移轉帳的創新方法，估算臺灣在1985、1995、2005年年齡別人均消費型態，並聚焦於文獻中較少討論的幼齡人口。文中發現，0-19歲之幼齡者實質人均消費愈來愈高，增幅超過其他年齡組，增加最多的是私部門的教育支出，而財源主要來自家庭內的移轉。這些結果不但開啟了許多新的研究可能，也含有豐富的政策涵義。從國際經驗來看，日本孩童平均消費的提高可能促使育齡人口生育率降低，而歐洲各高齡化國家之銀髮族因醫療費用高昂，其平均消費與總體消費都超過其他年齡組。臺灣現正面對少子化與高齡化的雙重趨勢，未來的勞動人口將減少，總體成長可能變慢，但老人福利政策正研議提高。未來社會資源應如何分配於各年齡組，值得深思與進一步探討。英文摘要：This study estimates the age profile of consumption patterns in 1985, 1995, and 2005 in Taiwan, using the new methodology of National Transfer Accounts, and presents new results on children's consumption. A major finding is that per capita consumption by children has increased rapidly, both absolutely and relatively by various standards, and has exceeded the increase of both prime-age adults and the elderly. The rising children consumption mainly comes from high education spending, and is increasingly supported by intra-familial transfer. These results carry important policy implications, given that the Taiwan is experiencing an extremely low fertility rate and rapid population aging on the one hand, and is pondering the implementation of more elderly welfare programs on the other. Thus the resource competition between age groups is expected to accelerate while long-term economic development may be unfavorably affected. These findings deserve further thoughts and invite deeper studies in the future.起始頁-結束頁：119-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201110.00045篇名：Examining Taiwan's Household Types and Their Functions from the Perspective of Parents' Living Arrangements並列篇名：從父母的居住安排探討臺灣家戶類型及其功能作者：陳肇男(Chao-Nan Chen);林惠玲(Hui-Lin Lin)關鍵字：社會支持;家庭;家戶;Social support;Family;Household期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：依照Sussman的建議，本研究旨在探討家戶類型對代間支持交換之影響。居住安排與婚姻狀況被用來歸類家戶類型，與父母同住者被命名<U+7232>「與受訪者同住」，其餘被分類<U+7232>「與受訪者之已婚兄弟姊妹同住」及「其他」。臺灣社會變遷2006年調查資料顯示，50%左右的受訪者是與父母同住，「與受訪者之已婚兄弟姊妹同住」之父與母所佔比例分別<U+7232>16%及19%，「其他」一類對父與母而言都約佔33%。三種家戶類型之代間支持交換型態都不相同。不與父母同住的兩種家戶類型都比與父母同住者提供父母較多的金錢支持與關懷，但從父母那裡得到的金錢與關懷則較少。在家務方面，不與父母同住的兩類家戶比與父母同住者不但提供較少家務支持，也取得較少父母的家務支持。綜合而言，父母與子女一旦分開居住就得自立，但彼此並不孤立。不同住子女還是儘可能會提供父母所需支持。上述不同代間交換型態是受到社會規範，交換特性、交換方向，與家戶類型之影響所致。英文摘要：Following Sussman's suggestion, this study aims to examine the impact of household separation on intergenerational support exchange. Living arrangements and marital status of respondent's siblings are used to classify household types. The respondents who live with their parents are referred to as ”co-residing with respondents”. The rest of the respondents are grouped as ”co-residing with respondent’s married siblings” and ”others”. The 2006 Taiwan Social Change Survey data show that about 50% of parents are living with the survey respondents. The shares of those co-residing with respondent's married siblings are 16% and 19% for fathers and mothers, respectively, while the share accounted for by ”others” is 33% for both fathers and mothers. The three types of household differ in terms of the pattern of intergenerational support exchange. Those co-residing with respondent's married siblings and ”others” provide more but receive less financial support and concern than the respondents who live with their parents. They, however, exchange less by way of household chores with parents than those living with parents. Generally speaking, children living in households separated from parents become autonomous but not isolated, or function well in providing support to parents. The differential support pattern is due to the influence of social norms, the task nature, exchange direction, and household type.起始頁-結束頁：149-174資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201110.00056篇名：Accounting for Taiwan's First Post-War Negative Economic Growth並列篇名：解析臺灣戰後的第一次經濟負成長作者：何泰寬(Tai-Kuang Ho)關鍵字：景氣循環會計方法;臺灣2001年經濟衰退;同期選擇摩擦;Business cycle accounting;Taiwan's 2001 recession;Intra-temporal wedges期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文應用景氣循環會計方法來分析臺灣在2001年所經歷的經濟負成長。這是臺灣在第二次世界大戰之後，所經歷的第一次經濟負成長。我們發現勞動（同期選擇）摩擦是導致2001年產出與勞動投入下跌的主要因素。反應國外需求衝擊的淨出口摩擦，則是導致投資下跌的主要因素。既有的文獻曾經指出國外需求衝擊的影響，但是卻未曾注意到勞動（同期選擇）摩擦的重要性。即便在考慮不同的生產函數設定與投資調整成本之後，我們的主要結果還是相當穩健。我們更進一步證實，營運資金的限制是產生勞動（同期選擇）摩擦的最可能因素。英文摘要：We apply the method of business cycle accounting to Taiwan's first postwar negative economic growth in 2001. We find that labor (intra-temporal) wedge was the most important factor causing the declines in output and in labor input. Net exports wedge, which represents foreign demand shock, was the most important factor causing the declines in investment. While the foreign demand shock has received attention in the literature, the importance of labor (intra-temporal) wedge to the 2001 recession is new to the literature. These findings are robust to the specification of the technology of the prototype model and the investment adjustment costs. Furthermore, we show that the presence of working capital constraint is the most plausible friction that has generated the observed labor (intra-temporal) wedge.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201103.00017篇名：小型開放經濟體系財政政策有效性之實證研究：以臺灣<U+7232>例並列篇名：Estimating the Effects of Fiscal Policy in a Small Open Economy: The Case of Taiwan作者：李麗華(Li-Hua Lee);霍德明(Teh-Ming Huo);朱浩民(Mau-Min Chu)關鍵字：小型開放經濟體系;結構式VAR;符號限制;財政政策衝擊;Small open economy;Structural VAR;Sign restrictions;Fiscal policy shocks期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文建立小型開放經濟體系的VAR模型，利用符號限制法(Sign Restrictions)認定財政政策衝擊，評估臺灣財政政策的總體經濟效果。符號限制法係利用對衝擊反應函數做符號限制的方式認定財政衝擊，對關心的變數如：實質GDP、民間消費、民間投資、貿易收支等變數對財政政策衝擊的反應則不設限制，讓資料來回答。本研究參酌Mountford and Uhlig (2009)及Ho and Yeh (2010)的方式認定總合供給衝擊、總合需求衝擊、貨幣政策衝擊、政府支出衝擊以及政府收入衝擊。研究結果發現，政府支出衝擊對民間投資短期會產生排擠效果，中長期（二十季）則有提振的效果。政府支出衝擊引發短期名目利率上漲，國外資金流入，實質有效匯率上升，貿易收支因而下跌。政府支出衝擊對於實質GDP一開始有正向效果，但排擠效果短期會使實質GDP下跌，一旦政府支出帶動中長期民間投資後，對實質GDP有正向效果，但並不顯著。政府收入衝擊短期對實質GDP、民間消費、民間投資有正向效果，中長期的效果為負。若以政府支出衝擊細項來看，政府消費支出衝擊對實質GDP有顯著提振的效果，政府投資支出衝擊對於實質GDP的助益十分有限。英文摘要：This study applies sign restrictions to identify fiscal policy for a small open economy in the case of Taiwan. We follow methods adopted by Mountford and Uhlig (2009) and Ho and Yeh (2010) to identify aggregate supply shock, aggregate demand shock, monetary policy shock, and fiscal policy shock (including government spending shock and government revenue shock). Several main findings are summarized. Government spending shock may induce crowding-out effects in private investment in the short-term, but will increase private investment in the mid-term and long-term. Government spending shock can also raise short-term interest rates, resulting in an influx of foreign capital into domestic country and subsequently increasing the real effective exchange rate and decreasing the trade balance. Government spending shock initially has positive effects on real GDP, and then lowers real GDP due to crowding-out effects in the short-term. Once mid-term private investment is driven up by government spending, it will produce positive effects on real GDP, but this is not significant.From the perspective of government revenue, government revenue shock has positive effects on real GDP, private consumption and private investment in the short-term, but has negative effects in the long-term.In a closer examination, by dividing government spending into two components, government consumption spending and government investment spending, it is found that significant effects on real GDP might be generated by government consumption spending shock, but not by government investment spending.起始頁-結束頁：51-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201103.00028篇名：技術交易策略在外匯市場無往不利？並列篇名：Are Technical Trading Rules Always Profitable in the Foreign Exchangemarket?作者：莊珮玲(Pei-Ling Chuang);林信助(Shinn-Juh Lin);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo)關鍵字：技術分析;日內交易;資料窺視偏誤;Technical analysis;Intraday trading;Data snooping bias期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文主要針對新臺幣兌換美元的外匯匯率，採用有效排除資料窺視偏誤的Superior Predictive Ability檢定來探究技術交易策略運用於臺灣匯市時，是否具有日內交易表現較好，且隨著決策時間愈短表現愈佳之特性；並藉此驗證<U+7232>何在現實生活中，投資人會隨著決策時間的縮短而使用更高比例的技術交易法則。我們的實證結果顯示：在現有資料長度限制下，技術交易策略於新臺幣／美元外匯市場上的日間交易，具有十分顯著的獲利能力；反之，在日內交易方面，不管資料頻率<U+7232>何（30分鐘、15分鐘、10分鐘、或5分鐘），皆不存在任何顯著的獲利性。整體而言，在臺灣的外匯市場中，我們沒有找到隨決策時間愈短，技術交易策略表現愈佳的證據。透過進一步的分析，我們發現兩個有趣的結果：第一、技術交易策略在日間交易與日內交易的獲利能力差異與匯價走勢的變化程度有關。第二、移動平均法則適用在馬可夫轉換模型的環境中。因此，在投資標的物價格可以由馬可夫轉換模型配適良好的前提下，投資人採用移動平均法則來從事投資決策應能有不錯的獲利表現。英文摘要：This paper investigates whether technical trading rules, when applied to Taiwan's foreign exchange market, perform better in intraday trading and gain better performance as the intraday decision horizon is shortened. To avoid data snooping bias, we adopt the Superior Predictive Ability (SPA) test to obtain robust results. Our empirical results show that technical trading rules enjoy significant profitability for the daily trading in the NTD/USD exchange rate market. In contrast, when applied to intraday data at various frequencies, none of the technical trading rules we test are significantly profitable. Overall, on Taiwan's FX market, we did not find evidence that technical trading rules are more profitable with a shorter time horizon. Further analyses lead to two interesting findings. First of all, differential performance of technical trading rules in daily trading versus intraday trading is related to the magnitudes of price-changes of foreign exchange rates. Second, the essence of the moving average trading rule can be captured by a Markov switching model. The implication is that, if the targeted asset prices could be better fitted by a Markov switching model, traders may obtain decent profitability by adopting the moving average trading rule in their investment strategy.起始頁-結束頁：95-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201103.00039篇名：Who Wins and Who Loses in Transparent Markets? Daily and Intraday Analysis of Taiwan Stock Market並列篇名：在更透明的市場誰獲益？誰損失？臺灣股票市場日間與日內之實證分析作者：陳秀桂(Hsiu-Kuei Chen);謝舒帆(Shu-Fan Hsieh);馬黛(Tai Ma)關鍵字：執行成本;價格衝擊;執行差額;交易前透明度;日內分析;Execution cost;Price impact;Implementation shortfall;Pre-trade transparency;Intraday analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究探討交易前透明度增加對於下市價單與限價單之法人、散戶福利變化之影響。<U+7232>瞭解投資人福利變化與市場透明度之關聯性，首先必須先驗證投資人因應市場透明度增加之行<U+7232>調整（下單積極性與委託單規模調整）。本研究發現散戶與法人在市場透明度增加後提供流動性之意願皆增加；散戶投遞限價單與市價單時之行<U+7232>皆更<U+7232>積極，且投遞更大規模之委託單；但法人相較於散戶因應透明度增加之行<U+7232>調整較<U+7232>保守，且投遞較小規模之委託單。本文以執行差額法(implementation shortfall)衡量投資人之福利；執行差額<U+7232>價格衝擊與機會成本之加權平均。實證結果顯示，對於流動性有需求之法人與散戶（特別是法人）在交易前透明度增加後獲益最多，然而散戶在更透明之市場提供流動性時反而蒙受損失。本文日內分析進一步顯示交易前透明度增加後，散戶在接近收盤時段提供流動性蒙受之損失最大；相反的，投資人（法人與散戶）於接近收盤時段對流動性有需求者因透明度增加獲益最多。英文摘要：This paper provides evidence regarding the welfare effect of pre-trade transparency according to investor and order type. In order to appreciate the manner in which welfare varies with market transparency, it is necessary to examine investors’ behavioral adjustments (aggressiveness and order size adjustments) with respect to market transparency. We find that both individual and institutional investors are more willing to supply liquidity following the enhancement of market transparency. Although individual investors behave more aggressively and submit larger orders when they supply and demand liquidity, institutional investors are relatively more conservative and submit smaller orders in an open environment. The welfare of investors is measured in terms of implementation shortfall, which is the weighted average of price impacts and opportunity costs. Our main conclusion is that both institutional and individual investors, but especially institutional investors, who demand immediacy benefit from pre-trade transparency; however, individual investors who supply liquidity lose on account of pre-trade transparency. Further, intraday analysis indicates that although transparency enhancement is most detrimental for individual investors providing liquidity during the period approaching market close, it is most beneficial for institutional and individual investors demanding liquidity during the period approaching the close of markets.起始頁-結束頁：127-178資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201103.000401篇名：Globalization and Beauty: A Historical and Firm Perspective並列篇名：全球化與美：史學與企業研究的視野作者：傑弗瑞•瓊斯(Geoffrey Jones)關鍵字：美;全球化;文化;Beauty;globalization;culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以美麗產業為例，探討全球化長久以來的影響。當近代第一波的全球化在十九世紀開展之後，全球對於美的觀念開始邁向同質化的趨勢，此趨勢多少延續至今，並對社會及文化帶來巨變，而企業也在這過程中扮演極為重要的核心角色。本研究探討企業家與企業如何將社會價值轉化成品牌，並將其推展至世界各地，最後進而改變整個社會對美的認知。本文也揭示，儘管在全球化最激烈的時刻，由企業所推動之全球同質化的成效相當有限，最後本文提出有力論據，證明全球化浪潮再次有助於當代美感觀念的更多元化發展。英文摘要：This paper uses the beauty industry to explore the impact of globalization over the very long run. When the first wave of modern globalization struck in the nineteenth century, a homogenization of global beauty ideals began- one which has, to some extent, continued until the present day. This has had enormous societal and cultural consequences, and business enterprises are at the heart of this process. The paper explores how entrepreneurs and firms translated societal values into brands, globalized them, and changed societal perceptions of beauty as a result. It also shows the limitations of the homogenization achieved by firms even at the high point of globalization, before making the case that contemporary globalization is working to facilitate greater diversity in beauty ideals again.起始頁-結束頁：885-916資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201112.08852篇名：Cross-National Evidence on Trends in Support for Working Mothers並列篇名：跨國分析民眾支持育兒婦女就業之程度作者：茱蒂絲•崔拉斯(Judith Treas);戴翠莪(Tsui-O Tai)關鍵字：育兒婦女就業;態度;跨國研究;maternal employment;attitudes;cross-national research期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：已婚婦女就業率的提高與性別態度的平等化，是形塑當代家庭的兩項重要發展。由於文化賦予母親在養育上有首要角色，本研究跨國、跨年分析社會大眾是否支持育有幼齡子女的母親從事給薪工作。一九八八年至二○○二年的「國際社會調查計畫」提供跨國資料，有利於檢視各國民眾支持育兒婦女就業之態度轉變，包含奧地利、德國、英國、匈牙利、愛爾蘭、荷蘭及美國。本文探討四個問題： （1）是否各國在支持育兒婦女就業的程度上有相似的趨勢變化？（2）哪些受訪者特質傾向支持育兒婦女就業？（3）這些特質與支持育兒婦女就業的關聯性是否隨時間改變？（4）人口組成的變遷（例如高等教育人口群的增加有利於婦女就業）是否影響性別態度的變遷？本研究發現，男女在支持育兒婦女就業的程度上皆有提升，幾項個人特質與性別態度之間的關聯強度大多未隨時間而有所變化，人口組成的變遷對於性別態度的平等化有些許影響。英文摘要：The rise in married women's labor force participation and the liberalization of gender attitudes are two developments shaping families around the globe. In light of the primacy in childrearing which cultures assign to mothers, this paper focuses on changes over time in approval of paid work by mothers with very young children. Cross-national data from the 1988 and 2002 modules of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP) permit us to analyze the mechanisms accounting for changes in attitudes toward maternal employment in seven industrialized countries- Austria, Germany (West), Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland, the Netherlands, and the U.S. We address four questions: 1) Did approval of maternal employment show similar change in all seven countries? 2) What respondent characteristics were associated with support for working mothers? 3) Did the association for any of these characteristics change over time? 4) To what extent did the demographic changes in population composition (e.g., the growth in a highly educated population segment more favorable to maternal employment) account for changes in attitudes? The analysis confirms widespread increases in approval of maternal employment for both men and women. Most relationships between individual characteristics and attitudes remained unchanged over the course of the study. On the whole, compositional changes in the populations contributed modestly to the liberalization of attitudes.起始頁-結束頁：917-947資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201112.09173篇名："Masking" and "Unmasking" Korean Adoptees-On Rick Shiomi's "Mask Dance"並列篇名：「遮蔽」與「揭露」韓裔養子女：談汐見瑞克的《面具舞》作者：古木圭子(Keiko Furuki)關鍵字：韓國面具舞;韓裔養子女;舞台上的面具;巫劇場;亞美劇場;Korean mask drama;Korean adoptees;masks on stage;Theater Mu;Asian-American Theater期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：巫劇場是汐見瑞克在一九九二年於美國明尼亞波里斯市建立的亞裔美人劇團，《面具舞》是第一部戲。汐見一直在尋找一個亞裔美國劇作家的身份，並探索明尼亞波里斯的亞美議題，儘管該市的亞美人口只占少數。不過，明尼蘇達州有逾千名的韓裔養子女，汐見想透過傳統韓國面具舞的形式來描繪他們對白人收養父母的複雜情感及自身的認同危機。韓國的面具舞十分質樸，但一向對優勢階級多所嘲諷；汐見的面具劇場雖然討論嚴肅的話題，同樣充滿嘲諷特質。本文想探究汐見如何藉由這種喜劇風格來描繪韓裔養子女所遭遇的問題。在《面具舞》裡，面具的使用亦是獨樹一幟。該劇以一個戴著面具的靈魂為敘述者。靈魂的角色頗具創新，它不僅遮蔽了韓裔養子女的意識，也吐露了他們深埋心中的情感。儘管汐見對面具的使用不同於希臘劇場的做法，他卻追隨其基本原則，用法符合彼得霍爾對於面具的定義，即「希臘劇場本身就是一個面具，用以遮蔽劇場外所有根本的或暴力的行動」。藉著面具向外遮掩並與主要角色的忿恨保持距離，汐見維繫了一個客觀的視角，並使亞美劇場有了不同的內涵。這齣戲因此可以被視為亞美劇場革命性的一步，因為它建立起一個表演的平台，將亞美議題、韓國傳統的面具戲以及古典劇場串連起來。英文摘要：Rick Shiomi's ”Mask Dance” marked the beginning of Theater Mu, an Asian-American theater company established in Minneapolis in 1992. Shiomi had been searching for his identity as a dramatist of Asian descent, and as such much valued explorations of Asian-American issues in Minneapolis, a city with a relatively small Asian-American population. Mask Dance commemorates the birth of Theater Mu.Reportedly, Minnesota has more than 1,000 Korean adoptees, and Shiomi portrays their complicated feelings for their white adoptive parents and their own identity crises, employing the form of a traditional Korean mask dance, ”Pongsan T'alch'um.” These Korean mask plays are colored with down-to-earth aspects, which often satirize the privileged class. Likewise, Shiomi's mask drama, despite its serious topic, contains many satirical features. This paper, consequently, aims to explore how Shiomi portrays the problems of the Korean adoptees by employing this particular comedic style.The use of masks is also quite pioneering in ”Mask Dance”; the play presents Spirit, wearing a mask, as its narrator. Spirit's role is innovative in the sense that it not only ”masks” the consciousness of the Korean children, but also ”unmasks” their buried feelings. While Shiomi's use of masks is set apart from their use in Greek theater, it follows the same fundamental nature. That is, it follows Peter Hall's extended definition of a mask, which posits that Greek theater, itself, is a ”mask” in the way in which it keeps ”all fundamental or violent action off stage.” By outwardly cloaking and distancing the main characters' agony through the use of masks, Shiomi maintains an objective viewpoint and brings substantiality to this Asian-American performance. This play, consequently, can be marked as a revolutionary step in American theater as it established common ground among Asian-American issues, Korean traditional mask drama, and the classical use of masks on stage.起始頁-結束頁：949-976資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201112.09494篇名：詹姆士的實用主義「實在」觀並列篇名：William James's Pragmatic Notion of Reality作者：鄭喜恆(Hsi-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：詹姆士;實用主義;實在;人文主義;多元論;William James;pragmatism;reality;humanism;pluralism期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文系統地詮釋了詹姆士《實用主義》第五、六、七講中有關「實在」的諸主張，整理出「觀念系統多元論」、「實在變動論」以及「人文主義『實在』觀」三大論點，統合命名為「詹姆士的實用主義『實在』觀」；本文並且指出，詹姆士是從知識論的角度，在他的「個人信念修改機制」與「三重實在」主張的架構下來詮釋與辯護這三個論點，而「三重實在」主張又建立在他的實用主義「實在」定義之上；本文最後考察了「對個人信念缺乏足夠的客觀約束」這個批評意見對於「個人信念修改機制」以及這三個論點所造成的衝擊。英文摘要：In this paper, it is shown that Lectures Five, Six, and Seven of William James's Pragmatism contain the following three interesting, but puzzling and often misunderstood, theses on reality: conceptual scheme pluralism, the thesis of the mutation of reality, and a humanist view of reality. Taken together, I consider these ”James's pragmatic notion of reality.” It is argued that James can be better interpreted as explaining and defending these three theses from an epistemological perspective, within a framework based on both his holistic model of belief revision and his notion of ”three-fold realities.” Finally, I investigate whether the objection that there are insufficient objective regulations on belief successfully challenges his model of belief revision and these three theses on reality.起始頁-結束頁：977-1021資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201112.09775篇名：公共領域的結構轉型：以美國著作權法的理論變遷與實務觀點為中心並列篇名：The Structural Transformation of the Public Domain-An Overview of the Theories and Practices of American Jurisprudence on the Transition of Copyright作者：黃居正(Chu-Cheng Huang);邱盈翠(Ying-Tsui Chiu)關鍵字：公共領域;著作權;資訊近用;市民社會;智慧財產;public domain;copyright;access to information;civil society;intellectual property期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷4期出版年：2011中文摘要：公共領域在概念上是一開放性的資訊空間，公眾可自由近用其內容物。於著作權法架構下，公共領域所支持的資訊近用自由，始終被認為與著作權的排他性權利處於相對的立場，惟其與社會通念未必相符。本文首先由美國著作權法下理論的探討出發，討論公共領域的本質特性、功能與範圍，其後以美國司法實務對於公共領域概念具備憲法層次見解的確立為基礎，分析司法權於具體個案中就公共領域範圍建構的相關論述，與學理論述互相檢視。文末對公共領域概念於美國著作權法理論與司法實務見解中的發展，作一全盤性的總評。英文摘要：Public domain is commonly conceived of as an informational open space in which the public may access content without consideration of any need to seek the right holders' permission. Interpreted in terms of the copyright framework, the public domain is usually treated as an opposite pole of the exclusive proprietary rights regime. However, social context may play a greater role than is usually thought. This article, therefore, intends to explore the essential character of the public domain, its function and category with reference to the theories and practice of the American jurisprudence, with a particular focus on constitutional perspectives. After which, an evaluation is offered of major currents of thought regarding the public domain.起始頁-結束頁：1023-1097資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201112.10236篇名：美國最高法院與就業上年齡歧視之禁止並列篇名：United States Supreme Court and the Prohibition of Age Discrimination in Employment作者：焦興鎧(Cing-Kae Chiao)關鍵字：就業上年齡歧視;一九六七年就業年齡歧視法;一九六四年民權法第七章;平等就業機會委員會;美國最高法院;age discrimination in employment;Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967;Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;Equal Employment Opportunity Commission;United States Supreme Court期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文之目的，是要對美國自一九六七年起所建構禁止就業上年齡歧視之法制，做一簡要之說明，並對該國聯邦最高法院過去四十多年所做之三十則相關判決，以三個階段為期做一全面之檢視，藉以評析其已解決之爭議，並找出未來仍可努力之空間，以供我國未來在處理相關問題時參考攻錯之用。全文主要內容共分五大部分：第一部分說明一九六七年就業年齡歧視法之制定背景、立法經過、重要條款與嗣後之修正及執行機構等。第二部分探討自聯邦最高法院在一九七六年做出第一則判決後，至一九八五年為止，在十一則判決中所處理之相關爭議。第三部分檢視一九八九年至一九九八年這段期間之另十一則判決。第四部分則是延續前二部分之作法，討論該院自二○○○年至二○○八年所做成之八則判決。第五部分試圖對該院在這些判決中所能發揮之作用，做一綜合性之評析，並提出美國在這方面之經驗可供我國攻錯援引之處。英文摘要：The purpose of this article is to provide a brief account of the legal regime governing the prohibition of age discrimination in employment in the Untied States. It examines in three stages in the development of that legal regime, taking account of thirty related decisions rendered by the U.S. Supreme Court over the past forty years, assessing the controversies resolved and issues as yet unresolved. The paper is divided into five sections. Section One discusses the background information, legislative history, important provisions, subsequent amendments, and the enforcement mechanism of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967. Section Two examines twelve cases ruled on by the Supreme Court from 1976 to 1985 to discuss the controversies it settled. Section Three evaluates twelve cases from 1989 to 1998. Section Four looks into eight cases rendered by the Court from 2000 to 2008. Section Five makes a general assessment of the impact of these decisions on the development of the American legal regime. Finally, the paper evaluates whether the American experience in this field can provide any guidance for Taiwan given its recent efforts to establish a similar legal system to combat age discrimination in employment.起始頁-結束頁：679-762資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201109.06797篇名：從歐洲人權法院Storck及Buck判決看其對德國法院之衝擊—私生活及住家隱私權之論辯並列篇名：How the European Court of Human Rights' Storck and Buck Judgments Impact German Courts: Debates on the Protection of Private Life and Home作者：廖福特(Fort Fu-Te Liao)關鍵字：私生活;住家隱私權;歐洲人權法院;Storck v. Germany;Buck v. Germany;private life;right to respect for his home;European Court of Human Rights;Storck v. Germany;Buck v. Germany期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文藉由分析Storck v. Germany及Buck v. Germany兩個案件，以探究私生活及住家隱私權之內涵及歐洲人權法院判決在此領域對德國法院之衝擊。本文對於歐洲人權法院在Storck案認定一九八一年之安置沒有侵犯當事人私生活權利，表示無法完全贊同。對於兩案中其他判決內容，本文認為正是權利保護者之積極呈現。但是本文亦認為，有關履行判決，當事人不必然得到完整之金錢賠償，甚至個案再次回到國內救濟都有困難。而歐洲人權法院之判決可能引導國內法律之修改，或是促使更加細密地適用法律。英文摘要：This paper probes the right to respect for private life and home by reviewing two cases: Storck v. Germany and Buck v. Germany. It also examines how the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights impact the German courts. This paper disagrees with part of the Storck judgment in which it was decided that the placement of the applicant in a psychiatric hospital in 1981 did not violate her right to private life. However, it considers the other parts of both judgements as positive right protectors. This paper argues that in these judgments, the applicants did not always receive full compensation. In one of the cases, the applicant was not even granted a monetary compensation as such needed to be enforced through the domestic courts, which would most likely be a long difficult road with much uncertainty. The judgments of the European Court guide the amendment of domestic laws; they also urge for a meticulous application of ECtHR rulings and domestic laws at the national courts.起始頁-結束頁：763-799資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201109.07638篇名：性別自主決定、婚姻自由與跨性別人權—試評德國聯邦憲法法院1 BvL 10/05 （2008）判決並列篇名：Gender Self-Determination, Freedom to Marry, and Transgender Rights: An Analysis of German Federal Constitutional Court's Decision 1 BvL 10/05 (2008)作者：陳宜倩(Yi-Chien Chen)關鍵字：變性;跨性別;男女二分主義;性別自主決定;結婚自由;Transsexualism;transgender;male-female dichotomy;gender self-determination;freedom to marry期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文受女性主義法學與性／別研究視角啟發，希望藉由分析德國聯邦憲法法院關於變性者權利之重要判決，從受壓迫之多元性別主體觀點出發，揭示基於生理性別、性別認同、性慾特質、婚姻狀況等歧視形式如何交互作用，而法律體系如何靜默甚或允許此多重歧視存在多年，以提供我國司法體系在面對有關跨性別族群權益案件時參考，避免法律淪為鞏固異性戀父權、壓迫性別少數之工具。英文摘要：This article employs view-points inspired by feminist legal theories and sexuality/gender studies, and seeks to unpack and analyze issues pertaining to sex, gender, sexuality, sexual orientation, the right to marry, and gender self-determination in the German Federal Constitutional Court decision on Transsexual Law. The author explores the possible impact of the decision on the transgender rights development in Germany and the potential influence on LGBTIQ (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transsexual, Intersex, Queer/Questioning) community in general. Furthermore, the author suggests a reconstruction of gender-sensitive jurisprudence, and facilitates diverse sexual subjectivities so that law, or legal systems in a broader sense, will not be used as a tool to reinforce heterosexual patriarchy ideology, or to oppress gender minorities.起始頁-結束頁：801-848資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201109.08019篇名：美國聯邦最高法院判決與內線交易內部人定義之發展—以O'Hagan案為核心並列篇名：Who is the Insider? O'Hagan and Other Cases in the U.S. Supreme Court作者：林志潔(Chih-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：內線交易;內部人;私取理論;insider trading;insider;misappropriation theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷3期出版年：2011中文摘要：美國的內線交易犯罪是各聯邦法院透過個案建立在證券詐欺下的概念。聯邦最高法院在一九八<U+3007>年代，恐內線處罰範圍過大，乃提出信賴關係理論以界定內部人範圍。然由於信賴關係理論過於狹隘，聯邦最高法院續於一九九七年做出United States v. O'Hagan案判決，提出私取理論，擴大內線交易行為人的定義。由於聯邦最高法院並未推翻先前內部人必須建立於信賴關係的理論，又主張「未向消息來源揭露，而擅用內部訊息進行證券交易」的私取理論，使得日後聯邦證管會以及各級法院必須界定：何等人員對消息來源者負有揭露交易計畫的義務，否則無從界定內部人範圍。在O'Hagan案後，聯邦證管會以及各巡迴上訴法院提出各種見解，試圖匡定內線交易罪的適用。本文即以O'Hagan案為中心，討論O'Hagan案前後，各聯邦法院如何界定內部人、並論述各種見解所面臨的困難與挑戰。英文摘要：The law against trading in security markets with the benefit of material, nonpublic information has been developed case-by-case under the Article 10b of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Act defines insider trading as security fraud. However, who is ”eligible” to be a fraudster/insider in insider trading has been a controversial issue. The U.S. Supreme Court in Chiarella applied a fiduciary theory to define insiders. Then in 1997, in O'Hagan, the Court applied misappropriation theory, holding that if an individual breaches a duty within a pre-existing relationship of trust or confidence with the source of the inside information, he is to be considered an insider. The Court, on the one hand, adopted a broader definition of insiders; on the other hand, it emphasized that O'Hagan did not overrule the aforementioned fiduciary theory in Chiarella. Therefore, after O'Hagan, the SEC and lower courts tried to clarify the matter by asserting that in situations in which a ”pre-existing relationship” exists, a fiduciary relationship is established between a tipper and a tipee. However, that issue is, as yet, unsettled despite a decade of argument.This article focuses on the tension between these two different theories. By analyzing recent cases in the lower courts, this article seeks to determine how the theories have been applied and interpreted after O'Hagan, and how the courts and SEC have responded to the challenges posed by security fraud.起始頁-結束頁：849-883資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201109.084910篇名：論歐洲化課題之各類研究取向及其限制並列篇名：Europeanization - An Evaluation of Research Approaches作者：黃偉峰(David Wei-Feng Huang)關鍵字：歐洲化;歐洲統合;新制度主義;比較方法;準實驗設計;Europeanization;European integration;new institutionalism;comparative methods;quasi-experimental designs期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：歐洲化課題自一九九○年代後期便逐漸成為歐洲研究之熱門課題。但「歐洲化」研究的核心爭議依然懸而未決。除了定義概念指涉不明外，因果關係亦尚未釐清。本文從方法論角度切入，檢視目前歐洲化研究中具代表性的研究取向，評估其概念假設、理論建構及經驗分析上的優勢和限制。本文發現既有「歐洲化」研究因著重國內體制與政策之變動，故有偏好新制度主義和比較政治學之嫌。在研究方法上則多採個案性質分析，和有限案例比較方法，鮮少採用量化統計方法去檢證大量經驗資料。然而，隨著案例增加及議題擴散，研究「歐洲化」當務之急則是在實證上釐清其因果關係。而歷史制度主義及動態功能整合模型非常適合被用來分析歐洲化的因果時序及互置現象。英文摘要：The study of Europeanization has been popular since the late 1990s. However, the core disputes of Europeanization remain unresolved, the definition of the field is much contested, and the causality of the process of Europeanization has not yet been clarified. This paper offers a methodological assessment of typical approaches currently employed in Europeanization studies, examining their merits and limitations based on their conceptualization, hypotheses, theoretical frameworks, and empirical analyses. Because Europeanization focuses on changes (or adaptations) in domestic polity and policy, the author finds that most researchers prefer approaches derived from new institutionalism and comparative politics-indeed, case studies and comparative methods dominate the research field of Europeanization and there have been very few quantitative studies aimed at verifying various causal hypotheses of Europeanization. Indeed, the most urgent research task in the field is to clarify the causal mechanisms of Europeanization. The author suggests that historical institutionalism and a dynamic functional integration model be used to clarify time-sequences and causal reversals of Europeanization.起始頁-結束頁：393-463資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201106.039311篇名：歐洲化與英國中央政府：布萊爾政府個案研究並列篇名：Europeanisation and UK Central Government - A Case Study of the Blair Government作者：黃琛瑜(Chen-Yu Huang)關鍵字：歐洲化;英國中央政府;布萊爾政府;Europeanisation;UK central government;the Blair government期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文旨在探討「歐洲化」對英國中央政府體系的衝擊與重要變革，並以布萊爾政府為個案研究。布萊爾政府於一九九七年開始執政後，對歐洲統合採取迥異於以往的親歐政策。布萊爾政府的親歐政策，象徵英國對歐政策的重大轉變，而布萊爾政府時期，英國中央政府體系在「歐洲化」的衝擊下，究竟產生何種重要變遷？此外，「歐洲化」研究近年來，已發展為歐盟研究的一項重要研究途徑，其要點著重歐盟與會員國之間的雙向影響過程。布萊爾政府的親歐政策，使布萊爾政府在歐洲化過程中，能夠更為正面接受與主動參與歐洲事務。布萊爾政府因而成為檢視歐洲化過程中，歐洲層面與英國國內層面雙向影響之一個值得探討的個案。本文將利用「歐洲化」的研究途徑，分析布萊爾政府時期歐洲化對英國中央政府的實證影響，復探求「歐洲化」的研究途徑，於解釋歐洲化之因果動力的理論優點與侷限。英文摘要：This paper examines the impact of Europeanisation on UK central government during the Blair government. The election of the Blair government in May 1997 marked a new start for the UK's European policy. Compared to its predecessors, the Blair government adopted a more positive approach to the EU. During the Blair government, what are the changes to UK central government under Europeanisation? Also, ”Europeanisation” has developed in recent years as an important approach in European studies, drawing special attention to the two-way interaction between EU and domestic levels in the process of European integration. A case study of the Blair government, which significantly shifted the UK's policy towards Europe, facilitates an examination of Europeanisation as a two-way process of interaction between European and national levels. This case study offers an opportunity to examine the top-down effect of how UK central government ”receives” changes from the EU, as well as the bottom-up effect of how UK central government ”projects” its interests into the EU. This paper is, therefore, designed with the dual purpose of examining the empirical changes to UK central government under Europeanisation during the Blair government, and examining the theoretical validity of Europeanisation against the empirical studies.起始頁-結束頁：465-495資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201106.046512篇名：歐洲化對法國的衝擊與調整並列篇名：Europeanization - Impact and Adaptation of France作者：藍玉春(Yu-Chun Lan)關鍵字：歐洲化;法國;歐元;申根區;軍售中國禁令;Europeanization;France;Euro Zone;Schengen Area;Arms Embargo on China期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文先嘗試釐清幾個關於相似或相悖的「歐洲化」學術論點，並以法國與歐盟的政策互動作為個案研究，進行單一國家、跨支柱的政策比較。在初創及中期，「共同體／歐盟」的宗旨、架構及大政方針相當程度是按照法國意志進行，可以說是歐盟的「法國化現象」；直至歐盟接納中東歐十國並同步進行法制三部曲之制度改革後，明顯衍變成（廣化及深化後的）歐盟對法國造成「歐洲化現象」。本文分別選擇第一支柱經貿政策的歐元發行、第二支柱外交安全的解除軍售中國禁令、第三支柱人員自由流通的申根區，來比較對這些共同政策制定及執行時，法國所遭受的「歐盟壓力」，並從三個面向研析：一、法國與歐盟政策之契合程度及壓力程度；二、法國法政部門與歐盟中介機制的偏好與動態實踐；三、法國因歐盟政策所做的行政／政策結構調整與改變，最後將在結論做綜合比較。英文摘要：This paper summarizes first the implications of Europeanization as a newly formulated theory and a practice evident in processes of EU integration. The paper then analyses the impact of Europeanization on France by examing three core EU policies: the Euro, the arms embargo on China, and the Schengen Visa Area. With reference to the process of Europeanization, the outcomes associated with these three policies in France, EU pressure, mediating actors, institutional adaptation and domestic changes will be explored. The finding presented in the conclusion is that France is paradoxically a victim of the successful EU policy. In fact, the sequence of Francification, Europeanization, Germanization might better explain the impact of the Euro on France; External factors, such as the influence of the US and China are decisive factors in determining whether or not to lift the arms embargo on China; Terrorism and EU eastward enlargement frame the dilemma of France regarding Schengen policy.起始頁-結束頁：497-545資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201106.049713篇名：歐洲化對歐洲聯盟平衡生技風險與貿易利益之影響並列篇名：Impact of Europeanization on the European Union's Effort to Balance Biotechnology-Related Risk and Trade Interests作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：歐洲化;基因改造食品;風險評估;預防原則;無基因改造生物區;Europeanization;GM food;risk assessment;precautionary principle;GMO-free zone期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：自一九八○年代以降，歐體／歐盟對於如何規範與管理GMOs的問題即十分困擾。困擾來自於歐體／歐盟多層次的本質、GMOs產品橫跨若干政策領域及其對經濟與產業的重要性，以及新型GMOs產品具有不確定性。為此，歐盟建立一套嶄新的法規體系，植基於三大主軸：GMOs產品特別立法、預防原則，與歐洲食品安全機構之設立。此一架構反映出重要的政策變革，與歐洲化的影響。然而，歐盟機構在規範管理生技產品方面，必須考慮到GMOs已非純屬技術問題。如何妥善回應大眾對於生技風險的關切，而非僅就狹隘的經濟考量來規範，對於歐盟決策者與立法者而言，乃是一大挑戰。英文摘要：The issue of how to regulate and govern GMOs at the EC/EU level has been troublesome since it first appeared in the 1980s. There are several reasons why this has been the case, related to the multi-level nature of the EC/EU; this nature of issue, which cuts across several policy domains; its economic and industrial importance; and uncertainties related to the novel organisms involved. Since the 1980s, the EU has been struggling to arrive at solutions by establishing a new regulatory framework along three lines: specific GMO-legislation, the precautionary principle, and the creation of the European Food Safety Agency. The framework reflects important policy changes and the impact of Europeanization. European institutions regulating biotechnology are faced with the fact that issues related to GMOs are by no means considered purely technical. EU policy and lawmakers are challenged by difficulties associated with responding to public concerns about the risks of biotechnology in ways not confined to narrowly defined economic considerations.起始頁-結束頁：547-603資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201106.054714篇名：從環境影響評估及團體訴訟制度看德國環境法的歐洲化衝擊並列篇名：The Impact of the EU on German Environmental Law under the Environmental Impact Assessment and Citizen Suit System作者：劉如慧(Ru-Huei Liu)關鍵字：歐洲化衝擊;環境影響評估;團體訴訟;impact of Europeanization;environmental impact assessment;Citizen Suit期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：歐洲整合迄今逾五十年，它所帶來的歐洲化衝擊遍及會員國的政府組織、行政運作、政策形成、法律架構、公民權利、國族認同，乃至社會文化、經濟金融秩序等。本文以歐盟環境法作為研究素材，並選擇德國作為研究對象，藉由環境影響評估制度以及團體訴訟制度的歐洲化歷程，比較研究德國環境法的適應情形。研究發現，適應良寙的因素主要在於新制度與既有制度之間的相容性以及行動者的態度。而且歐洲化有時並不等於單一化或一致化，在符合最低標準的前提下，各會員國可能呈現不同的風貌。英文摘要：European integration has proceeded for over fifty years, impacting various aspects of Member States of the European Union, ranging from governmental organization to administrative operation, policy formation, legal framework, rights of citizens, national identity, social culture, economic and financial order, and so forth. This article focuses on the environmental law of the European Union and its impacts on Germany. This article examines the adaptation of German environmental law, by comparing the processes of adjusting the Environmental Impact Assessment and the Citizen Suit System. The findings of the study reveal that decisive elements of adaptation depend on the compatibility of the old and new systems, and of actors' attitudes. Furthermore, integration does not necessarily entail uniformity or consistency across the systems of the Member States. Under the prerequisite of meeting the minimum standards, the systems of individual Member States may retain considerable differences.起始頁-結束頁：605-642資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201106.060515篇名：捷克入盟前環境政策之歐洲化學習過程並列篇名：Europeanization and EU Enlargement - Czech Republic Environmental Policy作者：楊三億(San-Yi Yang)關鍵字：歐洲化;捷克;環境政策;社會學習;經驗學習;Europeanization;Czech Republic;Environmental Policy;Social Learning;Lesson Drawing期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷2期出版年：2011中文摘要：歐洲化是理解新會員國加入歐盟的一個重要途徑，本研究指出，歐盟第五次擴張之發生與歐洲化過程息息相關，隨入盟與歐洲化過程逐步強化，新會員國的成本效益考量將逐步受到弱化，因此能夠支持歐盟與會員國法令一致性。本研究還指出，歐洲化動力來源主要由歐盟與新會員國兩方發動，歐盟透過法令與擴張過程之正當性產生政策共鳴以創造友善學習環境；新會員國內部經驗學習模式則成為另一種動力來源，透過內部政策調整需求、知識社群與規則交互使用可行性管道交互影響下完成學習過程，觀察捷克環境政策可看見此兩種模式相互推引的歐洲化過程。英文摘要：Policy adaptation of new members of European Union occupied a focal point in the European political development after the end of the Cold War, particularly during the eastward enlargement of the EU. The author argues that there is a strong correlation between EU enlargement and policy adaptation in the context of Europeanization. Drawing on learning theory, an explanation of policy adaptation is offered on the basis of two different sub-theories: the social learning theory model, which emphasizes the legitimacy of rules and process; and the lesson-drawing model, which focuses on Policy Dissatisfaction, epistemic communities, and transferability of rules. The environmental policy of Czech Republic provides evidence for applicability of the learning process hypothesis of European values and norms.起始頁-結束頁：643-672資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201106.064316篇名：Joseph Conrad-Postcolonialism and Imperialism並列篇名：康拉德：後殖民主義與帝國主義作者：羅勃．韓森(Robert Hampson)關鍵字：康拉德;阿切貝;《黑暗之心》;〈進步的哨所〉;Joseph Conrad;Chinua Achebe;"Heart of Darkness";"An Outpost of Progress"期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文伊始重新考量阿切貝將康拉德視為「徹頭徹尾的種族主義者」的著名批評。文章之初檢視阿切貝此一演講的脈絡，並透過閱讀阿切貝引用的兩位批評家－古拉與李維斯－來分析「康拉德」在當時所指為何。本文特別藉由仔細檢視古拉為新美國文庫出版的《黑暗之心》流行版本所撰寫的緒言，探究在阿切貝的批評介入前，這部作品在美國如何為人所閱讀，並將之與加耐特早先發表的評論相較。這樣的比較顯示古拉的心理學讀法袪除了這部小說中的非洲特色，並抹去了讀者原先閱讀這部作品時所涵概的主題的獨特性及政治性。本文接著仔細檢視阿切貝對《黑暗之心》的指控，並提供另類的閱讀，特別注重康拉德的敘事策略，他與帝國主義論述的交鋒，以及作品中不同語言的階序。文章繼而考量康拉德另一篇非洲故事〈進步的哨所〉，以支持《黑暗之心》的主角馬洛有別於作家康拉德的讀法，原因在於〈進步的哨所〉呈現了一個非馬洛式的「非洲意象」，讓我們更清楚看出馬洛觀看非洲的視角。本文進一步參照康拉德早期的馬來小說，將對他的非洲故事之讀法置於這個脈絡裡，文末並思考《諾斯楚摩》這部長篇小說與全球化的關係。英文摘要：This essay begins with a reconsideration of Chinua Achebe's famous criticism of Conrad as a ”thoroughgoing racist.” It starts by examining the context of Achebe's lecture and analysing what ”Conrad” meant at that time as a critical construction through a reading of the two critics Achebe cites-Albert J. Guerard and F. R. Leavis. It explores, in particular, how ”Heart of Darkness” was read in the United States before Achebe's intervention by a close examination of Guerard's Introduction to the popular edition of ”Heart of Darkness” published by The New American Library, and it compares this with the reading provided by Edward Garnett in his early review. The comparison shows how Guerard's psychological approach to the novella de-Africanises the novel and wipes out the topical specificity and the politics which were part of the novel's original reception. It then examines in detail Achebe's charges against ”Heart of Darkness” and offers an alternative reading of the novella, paying particular attention to Conrad's narrative strategies, his engagement with imperialist discourse, and the hierarchy of languages in the work. It then considers Conrad's other African story ”An Outpost of Progress” to support the reading of Marlow as distanced from Conrad: since ”An Outpost of Progress” presents a non-Marlovian ”image of Africa,” it allows us to see Marlow's perspective on Africa more clearly. The essay then contextualises the reading of Conrad's African fiction by reference to his earlier Malay fiction, and finally considers Nostromo in relation to globalisation.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.000117篇名：Affective Journey-National Emotion in Carlos Bulosan's "America Is in the Heart"並列篇名：情感之旅：卜婁杉《美國在心中》之情動國家作者：陳淑卿(Shu-Ching Chen)關鍵字：卡洛斯．卜婁杉;國家;生命政治;帝國親密;情感;Carlos Bulosan;nation;biopolitics;imperial intimacy;emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文討論菲裔美國作家卜婁杉《美國在心中》族裔移動的複雜結構。故事主人翁積極追尋國家理想，其追尋之旅深受殖民者與被殖民者之間親密接觸所產生的情感結構的影響與強化。我引用安．蘿拉．史托勒對「緊密而溫柔的牽繫」觀念的闡釋，及沙拉．阿蜜所謂的情感政治，來析論親密接觸如何縫合菲律賓移工國家信念與個人處境之間的鴻溝，他身處一個視他為濫性、禽獸一般難以同化的種族岐視社會，卻對國家抱持不可動搖的信心。本文認為源自於生命權力治理的情感政治，正是美國帝國主義得以確保其對來自殖民地的移工身體進行雙重統御的方式，這種權力機制以排除的方式來進行涵納，或者以涵納的方式來進行排除，使得權力的蹤跡得以遁形。卜婁杉的文本試圖揭露美國的種族主義與不公不義，但主人翁的抵拒能量往往被帝國的生命權力治理所抵銷，這種帝國「纏祟」既是菲裔美國文學傳統必須面對處理的議題及特色，也是一個值得持續追蹤的研究命題。英文摘要：This paper explores the complex structures of ethnic mobility in Filipino American writer Carlos Bulosan's ”America Is in the Heart”. The protagonist Carlos's active pursuit of a national ideal during the course of his journey is enhanced by the structure of feelings produced in the intimate encounters between the colonizers and colonized. I draw upon Ann Laura Stoler's conceptualization of ”tense and tender tie” and Sara Ahmed's exposition of politics of emotion to analyze the complex ways in which these intimate encounters help suture the gaps and contradictions between the peril of the Filipino migrant worker in a racist society that sees him as hypersexual, beast-like, and unfit for assimilation, and his steadfast faith in the Nation. This subtle biopolitical governance of the U.S. imperialism over the colonial/migrant bodies assures the double command of the empire which includes the colonized in the form of exclusion, or excludes in the form of inclusion and renders the trace of governance invisible. Bulosan's text seeks to expose the racism and injustice of the nation, but the force of resistance is often compromised by the biopolitical governance of empire. This imperial ”haunting” characterizes Filipino American literary tradition at its seminal stage, and remains an important subject of reflection in subsequent Filipino American literary intervention.起始頁-結束頁：47-86資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.004718篇名：Longitudinal Studies of Aging in the United States並列篇名：美國的老齡化貫時性研究作者：羅伯特．豪瑟(Robert M. Hauser);大衛．外爾(David Weir)關鍵字：老齡化;健康;退休;貫時性調查;生命歷程;aging;health;retirement;longitudinal surveys;life-course期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文以美國的威斯康辛長期追蹤調查（WLS）及健康與退休調查（HRS）為主軸，探討老齡化貫時性研究近年來的發展。美國這兩項調查研究呼應國際新趨勢，著重不同調查之間的協調整合，並建立貫時性的生理社會調查，在傳統的社會調查中加入生理性的測量。這兩項調查都蒐集DNA樣本，並朝向基因定型發展，以利於瞭解基因與環境對行為與健康的影響。這兩項調查也改良人格特質評量與認知能力測量。HRS擴大測量受訪者經濟消費的長期軌跡、退休金及社會安全年金財富，並且也蒐集心血管疾病危險因子的生理標誌。WLS則發展出一套整合的方法，有助於研究死亡與親人喪亡。此外，WLS也使用一項創新的方法，利用高中畢業紀念冊中的人像照片，探求受訪者在高中時期的健康狀態。英文摘要：This essay reviews recent developments in longitudinal studies of aging, focusing on the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Both studies are part of an international movement to establish longitudinal biosocial surveys-in which biological measurement is joined with traditional survey techniques- and a related trend toward greater harmonization across studies. Both studies have collected DNA samples and are working toward genotyping that would facilitate broadly based studies of genetic and environmental effects on behavioral and health outcomes. The studies have each also focused on improved measurement of personality and of adaptive measures of cognitive ability. The HRS has expanded its economic measurements to longitudinal trajectories of consumption and to broader-based measurement of pension and Social Security wealth. It has added biomarkers of cardiovascular risk. The WLS has developed an integrated approach to the study of death and bereavement and an innovative use of high school yearbook photographs to capture information about health early in the lives of its participants.起始頁-結束頁：87-179資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.008719篇名：EU-China Relations in the Age of Globalization and Regionalization並列篇名：全球化與區域化時代的歐盟與中國關係作者：丁偉(Wai Ting)關鍵字：全球化;區域化;武器禁運;多邊主義;和平發展;globalization;regionalization;arms embargo;multilateralism;peaceful development期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：直到二○○五年初，歐盟與中國關係的總體氣氛仍是相當樂觀，有人甚至認<U+7232>一個嶄新的「歐洲－中國」軸心正在形成，而歐盟對中國的武器禁運將會最終取消。但最近五年，歐洲與中國的關係卻充滿爭論與競爭，儘管合作仍是主調。隨著主要歐洲國家領袖更替，比如德國的默克爾總理及法國的薩爾科齊總理上臺，之前希拉克總統及施萊德總理執政時期歐中關係的「光芒」已逐漸消失。新領袖對中國的人權狀況及西藏問題等較具批判性，也對歐中貿易不斷增長的赤字勇於表露不滿。本文旨在研究中國如何在歐洲統治者設想歐洲前景時扮演一定的角色，並考慮四大因素：全球化對歐洲的意義、亞洲的區域化趨勢、中國的「和平崛起」以至「和平發展」、以及亞歐關係中的多邊主義。文章還會探討歐洲與中國如何考慮合作前景，兩者的合作及衝突對未來國際政治秩序帶來的政治涵意，還有在各個領域阻礙雙方合作的種種困難。英文摘要：Until the beginning of 2005, the ”mood” in EU-China relations was generally optimistic, boasting that a new ”Europe-China” axis was in the making, and the arms embargo might be lifted eventually. During the last five years the relationship between these two powers has been full of controversy and competition, though cooperation remains the main theme. With the change of leaders in the major European powers, notably the advent to power of Angela Merkel in Germany and Nicholas Sarkozy in France, the lustre that could be found in Europe-China relations during the days of Chirac and Schroeder gradually faded. The new leaders are more critical on the issue of human rights in China, the Tibetan problem etc., and also appear to be more ready to voice their dissatisfaction over the growing trade deficit with China. This paper will focus on whether and how China could play a role in the minds of European policy-makers in mapping the future of Europe, taking into consideration four contextual factors: the implications of globalization for Europe, regionalization efforts in Asia, the ”peaceful rise” or the subsequent ”peaceful development” of China, and multilateralism in Europe-Asia relations. The paper aims to investigate how political leaders in Europe and China think and proceed on the prospects for cooperating with one another, the political implications of their cooperation and conflict over the future international political order, and the difficulties ahead that might interfere with cooperation in various fields.起始頁-結束頁：181-220資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.018120篇名：WTO特殊與差別待遇條款的談判：歐洲聯盟的策略與影響並列篇名：Negotiations on WTO Special and Differential Clauses-EU Strategies and Impacts作者：周旭華(Hsu-Hua Chou)關鍵字：世界貿易組織;歐洲聯盟;特殊與差別待遇;杜哈發展議程;開發中國家;World Trade Organization (WTO);European Union (EU);Special and Differential (S&D) treatment;Doha Development Agenda (DDA);developing countries期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：歐洲聯盟（EU）在世界貿易組織（WTO）杜哈發展議程下，致力影響與「發展」攸關之「特殊與差別待遇」（S&D）條款談判。EU的整體策略脈絡，係在不挑戰WTO建制核心規範的前提下，增進本身於WTO下之利益。在策略運作上，EU採漸進方式，逐步呈現並強化「目的／手段」及「S&D差異化」等二項主要論述，藉以重新界定EU在WTO建制下所須承擔的S&D義務，期能限縮其義務範圍及程度，並為其S&D立場與相關作為，建立正當性基礎。此外，EU亦提出若干雙邊及單邊措施，以助推進其S&D主張。EU之策略作為，對開發中國家有關S&D之論述，及此議題未來談判方向，皆可能產生影響。英文摘要：Developing countries once had high expectations of the negotiations on Special and Differential (S&D) treatment under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The achievements realized have turned out to be more limited than they had hoped. The European Union (EU), employing comprehensive and active strategies, has impacted S&D negotiations. The EU's overall negotiation strategy regarding S&D has been that of maximizing its interests under the WTO without challenging the WTO regime itself, particularly the regime's basic norms such as ”development.” Tactically, the EU has taken a step-by-step approach to consolidate its ”ends/means” and ”S&D differentiation” arguments, so that it can legitimately redefine and minimize its S&D obligations under the WTO regime. It seems that EU's strategic behavior on S&D has decelerated the progress of S&D negotiations under the DDA, and may establish a framework for future negotiations on related topics.起始頁-結束頁：221-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.022101篇名：笛卡爾懷疑論論證的模態議題並列篇名：Some Modal Problems in Descartes' Sceptical Arguments作者：侯維之(Richard Wei-Tzu Hou)關鍵字：知態可能性;惡魔論證;脈絡原則;笛卡爾循環;epistemic possibility;the demon argument;contextualist principle;the Cartesian circle期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文在第二、三節試圖以知態可能性來分析笛卡爾的惡魔論證，主張該論證的重點，在於無法區分我們是在知態惡魔世界或正常世界。第四節探討笛卡爾的知態可能性概念，強調以知態可能性分析笛卡爾的知識概念，再佐以現行分析知態可能性的理論，會形成新的笛卡爾循環。第五節則討論笛卡爾循環在知態模態上的問題，指出除非訴諸導致新笛卡爾循環的知態原則，原有的循環依然成立。第六節針對笛洛思的詮釋，探討其嘗試以外在論來解決笛卡爾循環的問題；並再次指出，除非訴諸新笛卡爾循環，這種作法註定失敗。英文摘要：Unlike manyother sceptical arguments, little attention has been paid to Descartes' demon argument. This paper discusses how to analyse this argument via the notion of epistemic possibility, and claims that the momentum of the argument rests on our inability to determine whether we are in the epistemic demon world or in the normal world. It goes on to discuss a likely version of Descartes' epistemic possibilities, emphasizing that attempting to analyse Descartes' notion of epistemic possibility in terms of current theories creates a new Cartesian circularity. The epistemic modal problem of the old Cartesian circularity is discussed, and it is argued that the old circularity would linger unless the epistemic principle(s), on which the new circularity is based surplant it. The paper concludes with DeRose's interpretation of Descartes' sceptical arguments and of how the old circularity can be expelled. It will be shown that the problem of disposing of the Cartesian circularity in an externalist way. DeRose's strategy seems to function only because it makes an appeal to the new circularity.起始頁-結束頁：281-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.02812篇名：梅克爾大聯合政府立法決策體系中的黨政關係並列篇名：Party Politics in the Decision-Making System of German Merkel's Grand Coalition作者：劉書彬(Shu-Pin Liu)關鍵字：大聯合政府;德國政黨;梅克爾;否決者理論;grand coalition;German political parties;Merkel;veto player theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：41卷1期出版年：2011中文摘要：二<U+3007><U+3007>五年十一月，德意志聯邦共和國出現歷史上第二次大聯合政府，即使梅克爾大聯合政府中，兩大黨於聯邦議會的席次率將近73％，但仍出現聯盟黨與社民黨衝突不斷，社民黨之黨員數、政黨支持度大幅滑落，與兩大黨邦議會選舉結果大多不佳的狀況。另外，聯邦層面在野的自民黨、左黨、綠黨則各自保持約10％的實力，並蓬勃發展。五黨的政黨體系已經在聯邦與邦層面中生根，跨左右政黨分歧的聯合政府型態在邦政治中也不是新鮮事。針對前述大聯合政府不同於一般最小獲勝聯合政府的穩定情勢，本文先探究梅克爾大聯合政府的立法決策模式；並藉由<U+FF62>否決者理論<U+FF63>，依據否決者數量，否決者意識型態或立場的差距，與內部的融合度，來探討此一大聯合政府決策體系中的黨政關係、政策改變情形，和該時期政治體系的穩定度，以及該大聯合政府對德國政治之影響。英文摘要：Grand coalition parties-the Union Party (CDI+CSU) and SPD-currently hold approximately 73% of the seats in the German Bundestag, but are nonethelress beset by many conflicts and problems, including decreasing party membership, falling popular support and poor election results in local parliaments. Moreover, the three opposition parties-FDP, die Linke and the German Green party-can currently claim around 10% support in polls. In effect, since November 2005, there has been a five-party system in place not only at the federal level, but also contesting local government elections. Meanwhile, a CDU-Grunen coalition has emerged at the local level in Hamburg. These strange conditions make Merkel's grand coalition different from the minimum winning coalitions typically seen in stable political systems. This research considers the impact of Merkel's grand coalition on German politics, examining the political procedures and applying ”veto player theory”: number of veto players, distance of different ideologies, and intra-cohesion grade of veto plays. This provides insight into how Merkel's grand coalition operates, why its policies have changed and why there has been a decline in political stability.起始頁-結束頁：309-382資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201103.030901篇名：年齡與選舉參與：2008年總統選舉的實證分析並列篇名：Age and Electoral Participation:The 2008 Presidential Election in Taiwan作者：崔曉倩(Hsiao-Chien Tsui);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：年齡;選舉參與;連續變數;生命週期效應;age;electoral participation;continuous variable;lifecycleeffect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討民眾的選舉參與，是否因為年齡不同而產生顯著的差異？以往學術文獻大多假設年齡和選舉參與之間為簡單的線性關係，本文假設，依據「生命週期效應」（life-cycle effects）的觀點，年齡因素對於選舉參與的效應，應呈現正向但遞減的趨勢。為驗證此項研究假設，作者增列「年齡平方項」做為研究變數，藉由「2005年至2008年『台灣選舉與民主化調查』四年期研究規劃（IV）：民國九十七年總統大選民調案」（簡稱為TEDS 2008P）面訪調查資料，以「雙變數交叉分析」（cross-tabulation analyses）、「有序勝算對數模型」（ordered logit models），以及「勝算對數模型」（logit model），檢證年齡和「年齡平方項」對於選民在2008年總統選舉競選期間從事政治活動和投票參與的影響。實證結果顯示，年齡與選舉參與之間雖然呈現顯著的正向關係，但隨著年齡的增長，民眾從事政治活動的增加幅度則呈現下降趨勢。在結論中，作者摘述研究發現，並認為「年齡平方項」得成為政治學者進行實證分析時常設的社會人口特徵變數，藉此更清晰地描繪出民眾政治參與的整體分配特性。英文摘要：This study employs socio-demographic characteristics as explanatory variables for political participation, especially exploring the impact of age on electoral participation. In contrast to previous research based on a linear relationship between age and electoral participation, this study adopts the theoretical framework of life-cycle effects and hypothesizes that the correlation is positive but clearly nonlinear. Viewed in this light, the study takes advantage of the national survey of ”Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study” and examines the effects of ”age square” on campaigning activities and voting participation in the 2008 presidential election. The methodology adopted in this study involves cross-tabulation analyses, ordered logit models, and logit models respectively. As hypothesized, the results reveal that electoral participation increases steadily with age, but participation among the oldest age group declines presumably because these people are in poorer health and less mobile physically. In the conclusion, we summarize the major findings and propose some research suggestions for further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00022篇名：現代基因科技知識與基因科技風險態度之關係探討並列篇名：A Study on the Association between Knowledge of Modern Genetic Technology and Risk Attitude toward Genetic Technology among Taiwanese作者：陳清淵(Ching-Yuan Chen);謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：基因科技風險態度;現代基因科技知識;社經地位;潛在類別模式;多類別邏輯迴歸模式;risk attitude of genetic technology (RAGT);knowledgeof modern genetic technology (MGT);socioeconomic status (SES);latent class models;multinomial logit regression models期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的有三：（一）瞭解臺灣民眾的現代基因科技知識與基因科技風險態度的類型；（二）剖析臺灣民眾個人現代基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關連性；（三）探討臺灣民眾不同社會經濟地位者之基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關係之差異。使用中央研究院調查研究專題中心2005年所進行之臺灣地區基因體意向調查電訪第一波問卷資料為分析基礎，並採用潛在類別模式與多類別邏輯迴歸模式進行分析。分析結果顯示：臺灣民眾八成不具備現代基因科技知識，但其中的六成卻具有「安全環境都重視」的基因科技風險態度。整體而言，臺灣民眾個人的現代基因科技知識類型與其基因科技風險態度類型並沒有顯著的關連。中、高社會經濟地位者較傾向「安全環境都重視」及「只重視環境」之基因科技風險態度，但臺灣民眾現代基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關係並不因個人的社會經濟地位之不同而不同。英文摘要：This study explores the association between knowledge of modern genetic technology (MGT) and risk attitude of genetic technology (RAGT) among Taiwanese and assesses the role of socioeconomic status (SES) on shaping the association. We use data with 939 respondents from the Survey of Genomic Intention in 2005 conducted by Survey Research Center of Academia Sinica in Taiwan. Latent class models are utilized to identify respondent's latent types of knowledge of modern genetic technology and multinomial logit regression is applied to examine the effects of MGT on RAGT. We also pay particular attention to assess the influence of SES on the association between MGT and RAGT. Results suggest that the majority of Taiwanese are not equipped with knowledge of MGT, but have RAGT concerning both food safety and environmental impact produced by genetic technology. We find that there is no significant effect of MGT on RAGT when controlling for respondent's gender, age, and SES. It also shows that the effect of respondent's MGT on RAGT does not differ by the level of SES.起始頁-結束頁：45-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00403篇名：各項「接觸的社會資本」測量對現職地位、工作類別、收入與階級認同之影響並列篇名：The Effect of the Accessed Social Capital Measurements onCurrent Occupational Status, Work Type, Income, andClass Identificationi作者：黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：接觸的社會資本測量;工作類別;階級認同;accessed social capital measurement;work type;classidentification期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：在台灣社會中，就個人工作生涯的地位取得而言，除了職業地位之外，公私部門、是否高科技機構、非典型工作、老闆階級與失業所代表的工作類別也很重要，這都可能會影響到收入與階級認同；然而「接觸的社會資本」對現職地位、工作類別與收入、階級認同有何影響？筆者還沒看到先前國內研究曾做如此廣泛的探討。本研究定位在探討Lin（2001）以及熊瑞梅與黃毅志（1992）所提出的「接觸的社會資本」測量，對上述階層變項的影響，特別要討論兩項測量影響之異同。本研究運用2004年進行調查的「社會資本的建構與效應」全國性樣本資料做路徑分析，以探討上述問題；研究發現顯示：這兩項測量對現職地位、進高科技機構工作機率、收入與階級認同都有正向影響，對於家屬工作、為不同機構工作的非典型工作與失業的機率都有負向影響；不過熊瑞梅與黃毅志的測量之影響都大於林南的測量，特別是在對階級認同的影響上。英文摘要：Regarding status attainment in personal career in Taiwan, in addition to occupational status, different work types, such as working in public/private sector jobs, hi-tech institution, being nonstandard worker, employers, and the unemployed, also have substantial influence on income and class identification. However, what is the impact of accessed social capital on current occupational status, work type, income, and class identification? The author has not yet seen any research in Taiwan make an extensive investigation. This study aims to examine the effect of the two accessed social capital measurements developed by Lin (2001), and Hsung and Hwang (1992) respectively on the above variables. The similarities and differences between the two are particularly discussed. This research uses the 2004 Social Capital Construction and Effects Survey and conduct a path analysis to examine the above question. The findings show that both measurements have positive effects on current occupational status, the probability of entering hi-tech institution, income, and class identification whereas they have negative effects on the likelihood of being family workers, nonstandard workers, and the unemployed. However, the effects of the measurement developed by Hsung and Hwang are higher than Lin's, especially on class identification.起始頁-結束頁：81-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00764篇名：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統之信度分析並列篇名：The Taiwan Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System: Reliability Analysis作者：許勝懋(Shen-Mao Hsu);洪百薰(Baai-Shyun Hurng);洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hungrng)關鍵字：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統;內部一致性信度;再測信度;二元勝算對數模型;TBRFSS;internal consistency reliability;test-etest reliability;binary logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：介紹測量工具的信度的概念與評估方法，首先，探討受訪者個人特質回答穩定性的關係？其次，探討訪談語言與答案穩定性的關係？進而討論缺乏信度的工具對研究結果的影響，並以臺灣健康危害行為監測系統為例進行分析且提出建議。方法：2008年TBRFSS使用893個再測訪問個案，進行再次接觸且選擇五個題目進行測量。結果：在完訪的個案中，在信度檢測上，內部一致信度依照資料格式檢測，利用三高題目等名目尺度進行KR20信度值為0.374、利用自評健康與生活滿意度等順序尺度進行Cronbach's α信度值為0.477與利用身高、體重之等比尺度進行Guttman折半係數信度值為0.714，顯示內部一致性良好；再測信度則以test-retest信度測量，其中事實題型的Prevalence Adjusted Kappa值都在0.6以上，顯示再測信度的信度良好，但自評健康再測信度的Kappa值則為0.378，兩次回答一致的現象偏低，但若考慮程度差異的Weighted Kappa值則為0.665，顯示回答方向一致的穩定性。從二元勝算對數模型的分析可知，年齡、使用語言、語言與城鄉的交互作用與語言教育程度的交互作用都是影響民眾再測變化的主要原因。結論：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統具有良好之信度，本研究顯示再測信度改變與受訪者的年齡、訪談使用語言、訪談使用語言與受訪者居住城鄉之交互作用，以及訪談使用語言與受訪者教育程度之交互作用之間具有顯著相關。英文摘要：This purpose of this study was to develop and test reliability of the Taiwan Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System (TBRFSS) Questionnaire. Methods: In TBRFSS, 893 cases were selected for internal consistency reliability and test-retest reliability. Result: 7 core items were selected for internal consistency with examining by KR20 (0.374), Cronbach's alpha (0.477) and the Guttman split-half reliability tests. (0.714). It shows good reliability of the scale. In addition, 5 core items of the TBRFSS were selected for reliability with examining by test-retest reliability tests. It shows good reliability with kappa 0.824, 0.828 and 0.693, indicating adequate criterion. The binary logit model was used to identify factors significantly associated with adjusted odds rations: age, mixed language (Hainanese and Mandarin Chinese) and the interactions (such as county with language and education with language). Conclusion: The reliability depends on the level of random error measurement tools. The TBRFSS was confirmed to be reliable and it can be applied in future studies to enrich the existing system for evaluation of behavior risk factor surveillance system. It was significantly associated with the factors of age of respondent, response language, interaction with townships of respondent and response language, interaction with education of respondent and response language.起始頁-結束頁：123-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.01185篇名：Exploring the Relationship between Telephone Interviewers' Psychological Traits and Performance並列篇名：電訪員心理特質與訪問表現的關係作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang);于若蓉(Ruoh-Rong Yu)關鍵字：NEO-FFI人格量表;歸因型態;五大人格模型;電話訪問員;訪員表現;NEO-FFI;attributional style;five-factor personality model;telephone interviewer;interviewer performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：既有研究指出，個人的心理素質對其工作表現影響甚鉅。其中人格特質及個人對經驗的歸因型態，都跟個人的事業成就有密切的關係。然而，在調查研究領域，相關的研究不僅極為稀少，也找不到跟訪問品質相關的心理素質。由於銷售員與訪員的工作性質相近，我們借助銷售員相關研究的發現，假設人格特質中的審慎性及外向性較高的訪員，會有較佳的工作表現；在歸因型態方面則假設，對不愉快的經驗較不會做永久性、普遍性歸因的訪員，亦會有較佳的工作表現。我們蒐集52位電訪員的人格及歸因特質資料，並觀察這些人後續在三個電話訪問調查中的表現。由於訪員參訪的調查數目不等，實際用於分析的計有98筆人次資料。我們以訪員的完訪率／合作率與督導評量分數，分別作為其客觀與主觀的工作表現指標。研究結果顯示，愈會對不愉快經驗做暫時性而非永久性歸因的訪員，在各類指標上都有愈好的表現。而較外向的訪員，則傾向有較高的訪問合作率。對於本文的意涵與可能的限制，在文末也做了討論。英文摘要：Psychological traits are critical to job performance. Among the traits, both personality characteristics and attributional styles are closely related to career success. However, similar studies in the field of survey research are at most rare and fruitless. In this paper, we borrow from research results on salespersons and hypothesize interviewers who score higher on the Conscientiousness and Extraversion factors and who are less likely to make permanent and pervasive attributions for unfavorable experiences have better performance. We collected data from 52 telephone interviewers, who later participated in at least one and at most three, of three survey projects, obtaining a total of 98 observations. We used both response/cooperation rates and supervisor evaluations as the objective and subjective indicators, respectively. Results indicate that those who tend more to give temporary rather than permanent reasons for unfavorable events have better performance on all the measures. The Extraversion dimension of personality has a significant relationship with the cooperation rate. We discuss the limitations and implications of the study.起始頁-結束頁：7-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00076篇名：訪問品質與訪問速度及完訪次序的關係並列篇名：The Relationship of Interview Quality with Interview Order and Interview Pace作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang)關鍵字：訪問品質;完訪次序;訪問速度;非實質回答;受訪態度;interview quality;interview order;interview pace;non-substantive answers;respondent attitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：有經驗的訪員常有較高的完訪率，調查機構也珍惜有經驗的訪員。然而，一些研究發現，經驗跟問卷資料品質並不成正比；甚至在同一調查內，訪員的完訪經驗逐漸增多之後，其訪問或問卷資料品質都有下降的趨勢，使得完訪次序與品質成負相關。另一方面，亦有研究發現，訪員在同一調查內的完訪經驗愈增多，訪問所用的時間愈短，使完訪次序與訪問速度成正相關。然而，雖然調查專家早已強調訪員必須放慢速度，但尚未有研究真正觀察過，完訪次序與訪問速度，何者才是真正影響品質的因素？或兩者都各有其重要性？本文以「台灣地區社會變遷基本調查」第四期第二次的兩組問卷，利用多層線性模式(HLM)探討這個議題。訪問品質以受訪態度及非實質回答次數為指標。研究結果發現，當問卷內容貼近受訪者生活經驗時，訪問速度及完訪次序對於非實質回答各有顯著獨立的非線性關係；問卷內容過難時，速度及次序都沒有顯現對於非實質回答的影響。最後，兩問卷的受訪態度都與次序及速度無關。文末討論研究發現對調查實務的意義及研究限制。英文摘要：Experienced interviewers often have higher response rates than novice interviewers and thus are valued by survey organizations. Nonetheless, studies found that experienced interviewers did not necessarily have better data quality. Even worse, both data quality and interview quality became worse as the interviewer gained more experience during the field period. Other research found that later interviews had a quicker pace than earlier interviews. However, even though survey experts have advised interviewers slow down their pace, no research has attempted to examine if it is the interview order or the interview pace, or both, that are related to interview quality. This paper investigates the issue by analyzing the two data files of 2002 Taiwan Social Change Survey with HLM models. I use respondent attitudes when being interviewed and counts of non-substantive answers as two indicators of interview quality. The results suggest that, when the questionnaire contents are closely related to the respondents' life experience, both interview pace and interview order are independently related to the number of non-substantive answers. Respondent attitudes are not related to either interview order or interview pace. Limitations of the study and implications for survey practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：47-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00477篇名：複雜抽樣調查的資料分析及實務應用－以SAS、STATA為例並列篇名：Analysis of Complex Survey Data: The Application of SAS and STATA作者：侯佩君(Pei-Chun Hou)關鍵字：複雜抽樣調查;自由度;設計變項;設計效果;變異數估計;complex sample survey;degree of freedom;design feature;design effect;variance estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：在複雜抽樣調查資料廣為應用的今日，研究者仍舊慣常地忽略抽樣設計的特性對統計推論的影響，包括分層、分群及加權等因素；而此將導致偏差的標準誤估計及提高型Ⅰ誤差發生的機率。本文企圖彰顯不同的抽樣設計在變異數估計上的差異，以及此差異對信賴區間與檢定統計量等相關估計及推論上的影響；同時，也介紹SAS及STATA統計軟體在複雜抽樣調查資料上的應用。英文摘要：Since the analysis of complex sample survey data is widespread nowadays, the effect of sample design features on statistical inference such as stratification, clustering, and weighting should be seriously considered accordingly. However, most analysts routinely ignore this issue, resulting in biased estimates of standard errors, as well as increased possibility of Type Ⅰ errors. This paper attempts to illustrate the impact of sample designs on variance estimation, and thereby confidence intervals and test statistics. Also, appropriate software applications are briefly introduced.起始頁-結束頁：90-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00908篇名：台灣文官調查研究資料蒐集方法與調查品質：「訪員遞送與受訪者自填問卷」方法之探討並列篇名：Data Collection and Non-response in Surveying Taiwan's Bureaucrats作者：黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);施佳良(Chia-Liang Shih);謝忠安(Chung-An Hsieh)關鍵字：文官調查;資料蒐集;無回應;訪答效應;循證;Government bureaucrat survey;data collection;non-response;response effects;evidence-based期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討於2008年所執行「台灣文官調查」的調查過程與結果之品質，目的在瞭解透過新方式訪問公務員，是否能夠提升訪問品質，以期能對未來文官調查事務有所助益。有別於一般調查的對象，台灣文官具有保守性，較不願意表達自己的意見與接受外界的訪調，以避免帶來不必要的麻煩。為了克服傳統郵寄問卷無法確保填問卷者為受訪者本人的問題，台灣文官調查採取「訪員遞送、受訪者自填」的方式，經過資料分析發現，透過步驟更改，此次調查得到將近七成的回收率與較低的項目無反應率。基於本次研究結果，本文提出未來文官調查在規劃與執行上的建議。英文摘要：This article assesses the process and the quality of the Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey conducted in 2008. The main purpose of this article is to examine if the new methods of collecting data can enhance the quality of survey, and also to propose helpful suggestions for further survey on government bureaucrats. Different from general survey, government bureaucrats are more sensitive to politics and easily hesitate to express their opinions in interviews. To encounter the problems arising in a mail survey that those who fill the questionnaire may not be the ones sampled by the investigator, Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey adopted ”in person, self-administered” method to collect data. Our analysis demonstrates that the response rate reaches 70% and non-response rate in survey items is relatively low. Based on the findings, we propose suggestions for planning and implementing surveys on government bureaucrats.起始頁-結束頁：141-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.01411篇名：年齡與選舉參與：2008年總統選舉的實證分析並列篇名：Age and Electoral Participation:The 2008 Presidential Election in Taiwan作者：崔曉倩(Hsiao-Chien Tsui);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：年齡;選舉參與;連續變數;生命週期效應;age;electoral participation;continuous variable;lifecycleeffect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討民眾的選舉參與，是否因為年齡不同而產生顯著的差異？以往學術文獻大多假設年齡和選舉參與之間為簡單的線性關係，本文假設，依據「生命週期效應」（life-cycle effects）的觀點，年齡因素對於選舉參與的效應，應呈現正向但遞減的趨勢。為驗證此項研究假設，作者增列「年齡平方項」做為研究變數，藉由「2005年至2008年『台灣選舉與民主化調查』四年期研究規劃（IV）：民國九十七年總統大選民調案」（簡稱為TEDS 2008P）面訪調查資料，以「雙變數交叉分析」（cross-tabulation analyses）、「有序勝算對數模型」（ordered logit models），以及「勝算對數模型」（logit model），檢證年齡和「年齡平方項」對於選民在2008年總統選舉競選期間從事政治活動和投票參與的影響。實證結果顯示，年齡與選舉參與之間雖然呈現顯著的正向關係，但隨著年齡的增長，民眾從事政治活動的增加幅度則呈現下降趨勢。在結論中，作者摘述研究發現，並認為「年齡平方項」得成為政治學者進行實證分析時常設的社會人口特徵變數，藉此更清晰地描繪出民眾政治參與的整體分配特性。英文摘要：This study employs socio-demographic characteristics as explanatory variables for political participation, especially exploring the impact of age on electoral participation. In contrast to previous research based on a linear relationship between age and electoral participation, this study adopts the theoretical framework of life-cycle effects and hypothesizes that the correlation is positive but clearly nonlinear. Viewed in this light, the study takes advantage of the national survey of ”Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study” and examines the effects of ”age square” on campaigning activities and voting participation in the 2008 presidential election. The methodology adopted in this study involves cross-tabulation analyses, ordered logit models, and logit models respectively. As hypothesized, the results reveal that electoral participation increases steadily with age, but participation among the oldest age group declines presumably because these people are in poorer health and less mobile physically. In the conclusion, we summarize the major findings and propose some research suggestions for further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00022篇名：現代基因科技知識與基因科技風險態度之關係探討並列篇名：A Study on the Association between Knowledge of Modern Genetic Technology and Risk Attitude toward Genetic Technology among Taiwanese作者：陳清淵(Ching-Yuan Chen);謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：基因科技風險態度;現代基因科技知識;社經地位;潛在類別模式;多類別邏輯迴歸模式;risk attitude of genetic technology (RAGT);knowledgeof modern genetic technology (MGT);socioeconomic status (SES);latent class models;multinomial logit regression models期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的有三：（一）瞭解臺灣民眾的現代基因科技知識與基因科技風險態度的類型；（二）剖析臺灣民眾個人現代基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關連性；（三）探討臺灣民眾不同社會經濟地位者之基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關係之差異。使用中央研究院調查研究專題中心2005年所進行之臺灣地區基因體意向調查電訪第一波問卷資料為分析基礎，並採用潛在類別模式與多類別邏輯迴歸模式進行分析。分析結果顯示：臺灣民眾八成不具備現代基因科技知識，但其中的六成卻具有「安全環境都重視」的基因科技風險態度。整體而言，臺灣民眾個人的現代基因科技知識類型與其基因科技風險態度類型並沒有顯著的關連。中、高社會經濟地位者較傾向「安全環境都重視」及「只重視環境」之基因科技風險態度，但臺灣民眾現代基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關係並不因個人的社會經濟地位之不同而不同。英文摘要：This study explores the association between knowledge of modern genetic technology (MGT) and risk attitude of genetic technology (RAGT) among Taiwanese and assesses the role of socioeconomic status (SES) on shaping the association. We use data with 939 respondents from the Survey of Genomic Intention in 2005 conducted by Survey Research Center of Academia Sinica in Taiwan. Latent class models are utilized to identify respondent's latent types of knowledge of modern genetic technology and multinomial logit regression is applied to examine the effects of MGT on RAGT. We also pay particular attention to assess the influence of SES on the association between MGT and RAGT. Results suggest that the majority of Taiwanese are not equipped with knowledge of MGT, but have RAGT concerning both food safety and environmental impact produced by genetic technology. We find that there is no significant effect of MGT on RAGT when controlling for respondent's gender, age, and SES. It also shows that the effect of respondent's MGT on RAGT does not differ by the level of SES.起始頁-結束頁：45-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00403篇名：各項「接觸的社會資本」測量對現職地位、工作類別、收入與階級認同之影響並列篇名：The Effect of the Accessed Social Capital Measurements onCurrent Occupational Status, Work Type, Income, andClass Identificationi作者：黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：接觸的社會資本測量;工作類別;階級認同;accessed social capital measurement;work type;classidentification期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：在台灣社會中，就個人工作生涯的地位取得而言，除了職業地位之外，公私部門、是否高科技機構、非典型工作、老闆階級與失業所代表的工作類別也很重要，這都可能會影響到收入與階級認同；然而「接觸的社會資本」對現職地位、工作類別與收入、階級認同有何影響？筆者還沒看到先前國內研究曾做如此廣泛的探討。本研究定位在探討Lin（2001）以及熊瑞梅與黃毅志（1992）所提出的「接觸的社會資本」測量，對上述階層變項的影響，特別要討論兩項測量影響之異同。本研究運用2004年進行調查的「社會資本的建構與效應」全國性樣本資料做路徑分析，以探討上述問題；研究發現顯示：這兩項測量對現職地位、進高科技機構工作機率、收入與階級認同都有正向影響，對於家屬工作、為不同機構工作的非典型工作與失業的機率都有負向影響；不過熊瑞梅與黃毅志的測量之影響都大於林南的測量，特別是在對階級認同的影響上。英文摘要：Regarding status attainment in personal career in Taiwan, in addition to occupational status, different work types, such as working in public/private sector jobs, hi-tech institution, being nonstandard worker, employers, and the unemployed, also have substantial influence on income and class identification. However, what is the impact of accessed social capital on current occupational status, work type, income, and class identification? The author has not yet seen any research in Taiwan make an extensive investigation. This study aims to examine the effect of the two accessed social capital measurements developed by Lin (2001), and Hsung and Hwang (1992) respectively on the above variables. The similarities and differences between the two are particularly discussed. This research uses the 2004 Social Capital Construction and Effects Survey and conduct a path analysis to examine the above question. The findings show that both measurements have positive effects on current occupational status, the probability of entering hi-tech institution, income, and class identification whereas they have negative effects on the likelihood of being family workers, nonstandard workers, and the unemployed. However, the effects of the measurement developed by Hsung and Hwang are higher than Lin's, especially on class identification.起始頁-結束頁：81-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00764篇名：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統之信度分析並列篇名：The Taiwan Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System: Reliability Analysis作者：許勝懋(Shen-Mao Hsu);洪百薰(Baai-Shyun Hurng);洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hungrng)關鍵字：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統;內部一致性信度;再測信度;二元勝算對數模型;TBRFSS;internal consistency reliability;test-etest reliability;binary logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：介紹測量工具的信度的概念與評估方法，首先，探討受訪者個人特質回答穩定性的關係？其次，探討訪談語言與答案穩定性的關係？進而討論缺乏信度的工具對研究結果的影響，並以臺灣健康危害行為監測系統為例進行分析且提出建議。方法：2008年TBRFSS使用893個再測訪問個案，進行再次接觸且選擇五個題目進行測量。結果：在完訪的個案中，在信度檢測上，內部一致信度依照資料格式檢測，利用三高題目等名目尺度進行KR20信度值為0.374、利用自評健康與生活滿意度等順序尺度進行Cronbach's α信度值為0.477與利用身高、體重之等比尺度進行Guttman折半係數信度值為0.714，顯示內部一致性良好；再測信度則以test-retest信度測量，其中事實題型的Prevalence Adjusted Kappa值都在0.6以上，顯示再測信度的信度良好，但自評健康再測信度的Kappa值則為0.378，兩次回答一致的現象偏低，但若考慮程度差異的Weighted Kappa值則為0.665，顯示回答方向一致的穩定性。從二元勝算對數模型的分析可知，年齡、使用語言、語言與城鄉的交互作用與語言教育程度的交互作用都是影響民眾再測變化的主要原因。結論：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統具有良好之信度，本研究顯示再測信度改變與受訪者的年齡、訪談使用語言、訪談使用語言與受訪者居住城鄉之交互作用，以及訪談使用語言與受訪者教育程度之交互作用之間具有顯著相關。英文摘要：This purpose of this study was to develop and test reliability of the Taiwan Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System (TBRFSS) Questionnaire. Methods: In TBRFSS, 893 cases were selected for internal consistency reliability and test-retest reliability. Result: 7 core items were selected for internal consistency with examining by KR20 (0.374), Cronbach's alpha (0.477) and the Guttman split-half reliability tests. (0.714). It shows good reliability of the scale. In addition, 5 core items of the TBRFSS were selected for reliability with examining by test-retest reliability tests. It shows good reliability with kappa 0.824, 0.828 and 0.693, indicating adequate criterion. The binary logit model was used to identify factors significantly associated with adjusted odds rations: age, mixed language (Hainanese and Mandarin Chinese) and the interactions (such as county with language and education with language). Conclusion: The reliability depends on the level of random error measurement tools. The TBRFSS was confirmed to be reliable and it can be applied in future studies to enrich the existing system for evaluation of behavior risk factor surveillance system. It was significantly associated with the factors of age of respondent, response language, interaction with townships of respondent and response language, interaction with education of respondent and response language.起始頁-結束頁：123-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.01185篇名：Exploring the Relationship between Telephone Interviewers' Psychological Traits and Performance並列篇名：電訪員心理特質與訪問表現的關係作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang);于若蓉(Ruoh-Rong Yu)關鍵字：NEO-FFI人格量表;歸因型態;五大人格模型;電話訪問員;訪員表現;NEO-FFI;attributional style;five-factor personality model;telephone interviewer;interviewer performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：既有研究指出，個人的心理素質對其工作表現影響甚鉅。其中人格特質及個人對經驗的歸因型態，都跟個人的事業成就有密切的關係。然而，在調查研究領域，相關的研究不僅極為稀少，也找不到跟訪問品質相關的心理素質。由於銷售員與訪員的工作性質相近，我們借助銷售員相關研究的發現，假設人格特質中的審慎性及外向性較高的訪員，會有較佳的工作表現；在歸因型態方面則假設，對不愉快的經驗較不會做永久性、普遍性歸因的訪員，亦會有較佳的工作表現。我們蒐集52位電訪員的人格及歸因特質資料，並觀察這些人後續在三個電話訪問調查中的表現。由於訪員參訪的調查數目不等，實際用於分析的計有98筆人次資料。我們以訪員的完訪率／合作率與督導評量分數，分別作為其客觀與主觀的工作表現指標。研究結果顯示，愈會對不愉快經驗做暫時性而非永久性歸因的訪員，在各類指標上都有愈好的表現。而較外向的訪員，則傾向有較高的訪問合作率。對於本文的意涵與可能的限制，在文末也做了討論。英文摘要：Psychological traits are critical to job performance. Among the traits, both personality characteristics and attributional styles are closely related to career success. However, similar studies in the field of survey research are at most rare and fruitless. In this paper, we borrow from research results on salespersons and hypothesize interviewers who score higher on the Conscientiousness and Extraversion factors and who are less likely to make permanent and pervasive attributions for unfavorable experiences have better performance. We collected data from 52 telephone interviewers, who later participated in at least one and at most three, of three survey projects, obtaining a total of 98 observations. We used both response/cooperation rates and supervisor evaluations as the objective and subjective indicators, respectively. Results indicate that those who tend more to give temporary rather than permanent reasons for unfavorable events have better performance on all the measures. The Extraversion dimension of personality has a significant relationship with the cooperation rate. We discuss the limitations and implications of the study.起始頁-結束頁：7-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00076篇名：訪問品質與訪問速度及完訪次序的關係並列篇名：The Relationship of Interview Quality with Interview Order and Interview Pace作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang)關鍵字：訪問品質;完訪次序;訪問速度;非實質回答;受訪態度;interview quality;interview order;interview pace;non-substantive answers;respondent attitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：有經驗的訪員常有較高的完訪率，調查機構也珍惜有經驗的訪員。然而，一些研究發現，經驗跟問卷資料品質並不成正比；甚至在同一調查內，訪員的完訪經驗逐漸增多之後，其訪問或問卷資料品質都有下降的趨勢，使得完訪次序與品質成負相關。另一方面，亦有研究發現，訪員在同一調查內的完訪經驗愈增多，訪問所用的時間愈短，使完訪次序與訪問速度成正相關。然而，雖然調查專家早已強調訪員必須放慢速度，但尚未有研究真正觀察過，完訪次序與訪問速度，何者才是真正影響品質的因素？或兩者都各有其重要性？本文以「台灣地區社會變遷基本調查」第四期第二次的兩組問卷，利用多層線性模式(HLM)探討這個議題。訪問品質以受訪態度及非實質回答次數為指標。研究結果發現，當問卷內容貼近受訪者生活經驗時，訪問速度及完訪次序對於非實質回答各有顯著獨立的非線性關係；問卷內容過難時，速度及次序都沒有顯現對於非實質回答的影響。最後，兩問卷的受訪態度都與次序及速度無關。文末討論研究發現對調查實務的意義及研究限制。英文摘要：Experienced interviewers often have higher response rates than novice interviewers and thus are valued by survey organizations. Nonetheless, studies found that experienced interviewers did not necessarily have better data quality. Even worse, both data quality and interview quality became worse as the interviewer gained more experience during the field period. Other research found that later interviews had a quicker pace than earlier interviews. However, even though survey experts have advised interviewers slow down their pace, no research has attempted to examine if it is the interview order or the interview pace, or both, that are related to interview quality. This paper investigates the issue by analyzing the two data files of 2002 Taiwan Social Change Survey with HLM models. I use respondent attitudes when being interviewed and counts of non-substantive answers as two indicators of interview quality. The results suggest that, when the questionnaire contents are closely related to the respondents' life experience, both interview pace and interview order are independently related to the number of non-substantive answers. Respondent attitudes are not related to either interview order or interview pace. Limitations of the study and implications for survey practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：47-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00477篇名：複雜抽樣調查的資料分析及實務應用－以SAS、STATA為例並列篇名：Analysis of Complex Survey Data: The Application of SAS and STATA作者：侯佩君(Pei-Chun Hou)關鍵字：複雜抽樣調查;自由度;設計變項;設計效果;變異數估計;complex sample survey;degree of freedom;design feature;design effect;variance estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：在複雜抽樣調查資料廣為應用的今日，研究者仍舊慣常地忽略抽樣設計的特性對統計推論的影響，包括分層、分群及加權等因素；而此將導致偏差的標準誤估計及提高型Ⅰ誤差發生的機率。本文企圖彰顯不同的抽樣設計在變異數估計上的差異，以及此差異對信賴區間與檢定統計量等相關估計及推論上的影響；同時，也介紹SAS及STATA統計軟體在複雜抽樣調查資料上的應用。英文摘要：Since the analysis of complex sample survey data is widespread nowadays, the effect of sample design features on statistical inference such as stratification, clustering, and weighting should be seriously considered accordingly. However, most analysts routinely ignore this issue, resulting in biased estimates of standard errors, as well as increased possibility of Type Ⅰ errors. This paper attempts to illustrate the impact of sample designs on variance estimation, and thereby confidence intervals and test statistics. Also, appropriate software applications are briefly introduced.起始頁-結束頁：90-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00908篇名：台灣文官調查研究資料蒐集方法與調查品質：「訪員遞送與受訪者自填問卷」方法之探討並列篇名：Data Collection and Non-response in Surveying Taiwan's Bureaucrats作者：黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);施佳良(Chia-Liang Shih);謝忠安(Chung-An Hsieh)關鍵字：文官調查;資料蒐集;無回應;訪答效應;循證;Government bureaucrat survey;data collection;non-response;response effects;evidence-based期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討於2008年所執行「台灣文官調查」的調查過程與結果之品質，目的在瞭解透過新方式訪問公務員，是否能夠提升訪問品質，以期能對未來文官調查事務有所助益。有別於一般調查的對象，台灣文官具有保守性，較不願意表達自己的意見與接受外界的訪調，以避免帶來不必要的麻煩。為了克服傳統郵寄問卷無法確保填問卷者為受訪者本人的問題，台灣文官調查採取「訪員遞送、受訪者自填」的方式，經過資料分析發現，透過步驟更改，此次調查得到將近七成的回收率與較低的項目無反應率。基於本次研究結果，本文提出未來文官調查在規劃與執行上的建議。英文摘要：This article assesses the process and the quality of the Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey conducted in 2008. The main purpose of this article is to examine if the new methods of collecting data can enhance the quality of survey, and also to propose helpful suggestions for further survey on government bureaucrats. Different from general survey, government bureaucrats are more sensitive to politics and easily hesitate to express their opinions in interviews. To encounter the problems arising in a mail survey that those who fill the questionnaire may not be the ones sampled by the investigator, Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey adopted ”in person, self-administered” method to collect data. Our analysis demonstrates that the response rate reaches 70% and non-response rate in survey items is relatively low. Based on the findings, we propose suggestions for planning and implementing surveys on government bureaucrats.起始頁-結束頁：141-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.01411篇名：年齡與選舉參與：2008年總統選舉的實證分析並列篇名：Age and Electoral Participation:The 2008 Presidential Election in Taiwan作者：崔曉倩(Hsiao-Chien Tsui);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：年齡;選舉參與;連續變數;生命週期效應;age;electoral participation;continuous variable;lifecycleeffect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究旨在探討民眾的選舉參與，是否因為年齡不同而產生顯著的差異？以往學術文獻大多假設年齡和選舉參與之間為簡單的線性關係，本文假設，依據「生命週期效應」（life-cycle effects）的觀點，年齡因素對於選舉參與的效應，應呈現正向但遞減的趨勢。為驗證此項研究假設，作者增列「年齡平方項」做為研究變數，藉由「2005年至2008年『台灣選舉與民主化調查』四年期研究規劃（IV）：民國九十七年總統大選民調案」（簡稱為TEDS 2008P）面訪調查資料，以「雙變數交叉分析」（cross-tabulation analyses）、「有序勝算對數模型」（ordered logit models），以及「勝算對數模型」（logit model），檢證年齡和「年齡平方項」對於選民在2008年總統選舉競選期間從事政治活動和投票參與的影響。實證結果顯示，年齡與選舉參與之間雖然呈現顯著的正向關係，但隨著年齡的增長，民眾從事政治活動的增加幅度則呈現下降趨勢。在結論中，作者摘述研究發現，並認為「年齡平方項」得成為政治學者進行實證分析時常設的社會人口特徵變數，藉此更清晰地描繪出民眾政治參與的整體分配特性。英文摘要：This study employs socio-demographic characteristics as explanatory variables for political participation, especially exploring the impact of age on electoral participation. In contrast to previous research based on a linear relationship between age and electoral participation, this study adopts the theoretical framework of life-cycle effects and hypothesizes that the correlation is positive but clearly nonlinear. Viewed in this light, the study takes advantage of the national survey of ”Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study” and examines the effects of ”age square” on campaigning activities and voting participation in the 2008 presidential election. The methodology adopted in this study involves cross-tabulation analyses, ordered logit models, and logit models respectively. As hypothesized, the results reveal that electoral participation increases steadily with age, but participation among the oldest age group declines presumably because these people are in poorer health and less mobile physically. In the conclusion, we summarize the major findings and propose some research suggestions for further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00022篇名：現代基因科技知識與基因科技風險態度之關係探討並列篇名：A Study on the Association between Knowledge of Modern Genetic Technology and Risk Attitude toward Genetic Technology among Taiwanese作者：陳清淵(Ching-Yuan Chen);謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：基因科技風險態度;現代基因科技知識;社經地位;潛在類別模式;多類別邏輯迴歸模式;risk attitude of genetic technology (RAGT);knowledgeof modern genetic technology (MGT);socioeconomic status (SES);latent class models;multinomial logit regression models期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：本研究目的有三：（一）瞭解臺灣民眾的現代基因科技知識與基因科技風險態度的類型；（二）剖析臺灣民眾個人現代基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關連性；（三）探討臺灣民眾不同社會經濟地位者之基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關係之差異。使用中央研究院調查研究專題中心2005年所進行之臺灣地區基因體意向調查電訪第一波問卷資料為分析基礎，並採用潛在類別模式與多類別邏輯迴歸模式進行分析。分析結果顯示：臺灣民眾八成不具備現代基因科技知識，但其中的六成卻具有「安全環境都重視」的基因科技風險態度。整體而言，臺灣民眾個人的現代基因科技知識類型與其基因科技風險態度類型並沒有顯著的關連。中、高社會經濟地位者較傾向「安全環境都重視」及「只重視環境」之基因科技風險態度，但臺灣民眾現代基因科技知識與其基因科技風險態度的關係並不因個人的社會經濟地位之不同而不同。英文摘要：This study explores the association between knowledge of modern genetic technology (MGT) and risk attitude of genetic technology (RAGT) among Taiwanese and assesses the role of socioeconomic status (SES) on shaping the association. We use data with 939 respondents from the Survey of Genomic Intention in 2005 conducted by Survey Research Center of Academia Sinica in Taiwan. Latent class models are utilized to identify respondent's latent types of knowledge of modern genetic technology and multinomial logit regression is applied to examine the effects of MGT on RAGT. We also pay particular attention to assess the influence of SES on the association between MGT and RAGT. Results suggest that the majority of Taiwanese are not equipped with knowledge of MGT, but have RAGT concerning both food safety and environmental impact produced by genetic technology. We find that there is no significant effect of MGT on RAGT when controlling for respondent's gender, age, and SES. It also shows that the effect of respondent's MGT on RAGT does not differ by the level of SES.起始頁-結束頁：45-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00403篇名：各項「接觸的社會資本」測量對現職地位、工作類別、收入與階級認同之影響並列篇名：The Effect of the Accessed Social Capital Measurements onCurrent Occupational Status, Work Type, Income, andClass Identificationi作者：黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：接觸的社會資本測量;工作類別;階級認同;accessed social capital measurement;work type;classidentification期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：在台灣社會中，就個人工作生涯的地位取得而言，除了職業地位之外，公私部門、是否高科技機構、非典型工作、老闆階級與失業所代表的工作類別也很重要，這都可能會影響到收入與階級認同；然而「接觸的社會資本」對現職地位、工作類別與收入、階級認同有何影響？筆者還沒看到先前國內研究曾做如此廣泛的探討。本研究定位在探討Lin（2001）以及熊瑞梅與黃毅志（1992）所提出的「接觸的社會資本」測量，對上述階層變項的影響，特別要討論兩項測量影響之異同。本研究運用2004年進行調查的「社會資本的建構與效應」全國性樣本資料做路徑分析，以探討上述問題；研究發現顯示：這兩項測量對現職地位、進高科技機構工作機率、收入與階級認同都有正向影響，對於家屬工作、為不同機構工作的非典型工作與失業的機率都有負向影響；不過熊瑞梅與黃毅志的測量之影響都大於林南的測量，特別是在對階級認同的影響上。英文摘要：Regarding status attainment in personal career in Taiwan, in addition to occupational status, different work types, such as working in public/private sector jobs, hi-tech institution, being nonstandard worker, employers, and the unemployed, also have substantial influence on income and class identification. However, what is the impact of accessed social capital on current occupational status, work type, income, and class identification? The author has not yet seen any research in Taiwan make an extensive investigation. This study aims to examine the effect of the two accessed social capital measurements developed by Lin (2001), and Hsung and Hwang (1992) respectively on the above variables. The similarities and differences between the two are particularly discussed. This research uses the 2004 Social Capital Construction and Effects Survey and conduct a path analysis to examine the above question. The findings show that both measurements have positive effects on current occupational status, the probability of entering hi-tech institution, income, and class identification whereas they have negative effects on the likelihood of being family workers, nonstandard workers, and the unemployed. However, the effects of the measurement developed by Hsung and Hwang are higher than Lin's, especially on class identification.起始頁-結束頁：81-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.00764篇名：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統之信度分析並列篇名：The Taiwan Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System: Reliability Analysis作者：許勝懋(Shen-Mao Hsu);洪百薰(Baai-Shyun Hurng);洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hungrng)關鍵字：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統;內部一致性信度;再測信度;二元勝算對數模型;TBRFSS;internal consistency reliability;test-etest reliability;binary logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：26期出版年：2011中文摘要：目標：介紹測量工具的信度的概念與評估方法，首先，探討受訪者個人特質回答穩定性的關係？其次，探討訪談語言與答案穩定性的關係？進而討論缺乏信度的工具對研究結果的影響，並以臺灣健康危害行為監測系統為例進行分析且提出建議。方法：2008年TBRFSS使用893個再測訪問個案，進行再次接觸且選擇五個題目進行測量。結果：在完訪的個案中，在信度檢測上，內部一致信度依照資料格式檢測，利用三高題目等名目尺度進行KR20信度值為0.374、利用自評健康與生活滿意度等順序尺度進行Cronbach's α信度值為0.477與利用身高、體重之等比尺度進行Guttman折半係數信度值為0.714，顯示內部一致性良好；再測信度則以test-retest信度測量，其中事實題型的Prevalence Adjusted Kappa值都在0.6以上，顯示再測信度的信度良好，但自評健康再測信度的Kappa值則為0.378，兩次回答一致的現象偏低，但若考慮程度差異的Weighted Kappa值則為0.665，顯示回答方向一致的穩定性。從二元勝算對數模型的分析可知，年齡、使用語言、語言與城鄉的交互作用與語言教育程度的交互作用都是影響民眾再測變化的主要原因。結論：臺灣健康危害行為監測系統具有良好之信度，本研究顯示再測信度改變與受訪者的年齡、訪談使用語言、訪談使用語言與受訪者居住城鄉之交互作用，以及訪談使用語言與受訪者教育程度之交互作用之間具有顯著相關。英文摘要：This purpose of this study was to develop and test reliability of the Taiwan Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System (TBRFSS) Questionnaire. Methods: In TBRFSS, 893 cases were selected for internal consistency reliability and test-retest reliability. Result: 7 core items were selected for internal consistency with examining by KR20 (0.374), Cronbach's alpha (0.477) and the Guttman split-half reliability tests. (0.714). It shows good reliability of the scale. In addition, 5 core items of the TBRFSS were selected for reliability with examining by test-retest reliability tests. It shows good reliability with kappa 0.824, 0.828 and 0.693, indicating adequate criterion. The binary logit model was used to identify factors significantly associated with adjusted odds rations: age, mixed language (Hainanese and Mandarin Chinese) and the interactions (such as county with language and education with language). Conclusion: The reliability depends on the level of random error measurement tools. The TBRFSS was confirmed to be reliable and it can be applied in future studies to enrich the existing system for evaluation of behavior risk factor surveillance system. It was significantly associated with the factors of age of respondent, response language, interaction with townships of respondent and response language, interaction with education of respondent and response language.起始頁-結束頁：123-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201110.01185篇名：Exploring the Relationship between Telephone Interviewers' Psychological Traits and Performance並列篇名：電訪員心理特質與訪問表現的關係作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang);于若蓉(Ruoh-Rong Yu)關鍵字：NEO-FFI人格量表;歸因型態;五大人格模型;電話訪問員;訪員表現;NEO-FFI;attributional style;five-factor personality model;telephone interviewer;interviewer performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：既有研究指出，個人的心理素質對其工作表現影響甚鉅。其中人格特質及個人對經驗的歸因型態，都跟個人的事業成就有密切的關係。然而，在調查研究領域，相關的研究不僅極為稀少，也找不到跟訪問品質相關的心理素質。由於銷售員與訪員的工作性質相近，我們借助銷售員相關研究的發現，假設人格特質中的審慎性及外向性較高的訪員，會有較佳的工作表現；在歸因型態方面則假設，對不愉快的經驗較不會做永久性、普遍性歸因的訪員，亦會有較佳的工作表現。我們蒐集52位電訪員的人格及歸因特質資料，並觀察這些人後續在三個電話訪問調查中的表現。由於訪員參訪的調查數目不等，實際用於分析的計有98筆人次資料。我們以訪員的完訪率／合作率與督導評量分數，分別作為其客觀與主觀的工作表現指標。研究結果顯示，愈會對不愉快經驗做暫時性而非永久性歸因的訪員，在各類指標上都有愈好的表現。而較外向的訪員，則傾向有較高的訪問合作率。對於本文的意涵與可能的限制，在文末也做了討論。英文摘要：Psychological traits are critical to job performance. Among the traits, both personality characteristics and attributional styles are closely related to career success. However, similar studies in the field of survey research are at most rare and fruitless. In this paper, we borrow from research results on salespersons and hypothesize interviewers who score higher on the Conscientiousness and Extraversion factors and who are less likely to make permanent and pervasive attributions for unfavorable experiences have better performance. We collected data from 52 telephone interviewers, who later participated in at least one and at most three, of three survey projects, obtaining a total of 98 observations. We used both response/cooperation rates and supervisor evaluations as the objective and subjective indicators, respectively. Results indicate that those who tend more to give temporary rather than permanent reasons for unfavorable events have better performance on all the measures. The Extraversion dimension of personality has a significant relationship with the cooperation rate. We discuss the limitations and implications of the study.起始頁-結束頁：7-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00076篇名：訪問品質與訪問速度及完訪次序的關係並列篇名：The Relationship of Interview Quality with Interview Order and Interview Pace作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang)關鍵字：訪問品質;完訪次序;訪問速度;非實質回答;受訪態度;interview quality;interview order;interview pace;non-substantive answers;respondent attitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：有經驗的訪員常有較高的完訪率，調查機構也珍惜有經驗的訪員。然而，一些研究發現，經驗跟問卷資料品質並不成正比；甚至在同一調查內，訪員的完訪經驗逐漸增多之後，其訪問或問卷資料品質都有下降的趨勢，使得完訪次序與品質成負相關。另一方面，亦有研究發現，訪員在同一調查內的完訪經驗愈增多，訪問所用的時間愈短，使完訪次序與訪問速度成正相關。然而，雖然調查專家早已強調訪員必須放慢速度，但尚未有研究真正觀察過，完訪次序與訪問速度，何者才是真正影響品質的因素？或兩者都各有其重要性？本文以「台灣地區社會變遷基本調查」第四期第二次的兩組問卷，利用多層線性模式(HLM)探討這個議題。訪問品質以受訪態度及非實質回答次數為指標。研究結果發現，當問卷內容貼近受訪者生活經驗時，訪問速度及完訪次序對於非實質回答各有顯著獨立的非線性關係；問卷內容過難時，速度及次序都沒有顯現對於非實質回答的影響。最後，兩問卷的受訪態度都與次序及速度無關。文末討論研究發現對調查實務的意義及研究限制。英文摘要：Experienced interviewers often have higher response rates than novice interviewers and thus are valued by survey organizations. Nonetheless, studies found that experienced interviewers did not necessarily have better data quality. Even worse, both data quality and interview quality became worse as the interviewer gained more experience during the field period. Other research found that later interviews had a quicker pace than earlier interviews. However, even though survey experts have advised interviewers slow down their pace, no research has attempted to examine if it is the interview order or the interview pace, or both, that are related to interview quality. This paper investigates the issue by analyzing the two data files of 2002 Taiwan Social Change Survey with HLM models. I use respondent attitudes when being interviewed and counts of non-substantive answers as two indicators of interview quality. The results suggest that, when the questionnaire contents are closely related to the respondents' life experience, both interview pace and interview order are independently related to the number of non-substantive answers. Respondent attitudes are not related to either interview order or interview pace. Limitations of the study and implications for survey practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：47-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00477篇名：複雜抽樣調查的資料分析及實務應用－以SAS、STATA為例並列篇名：Analysis of Complex Survey Data: The Application of SAS and STATA作者：侯佩君(Pei-Chun Hou)關鍵字：複雜抽樣調查;自由度;設計變項;設計效果;變異數估計;complex sample survey;degree of freedom;design feature;design effect;variance estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：在複雜抽樣調查資料廣為應用的今日，研究者仍舊慣常地忽略抽樣設計的特性對統計推論的影響，包括分層、分群及加權等因素；而此將導致偏差的標準誤估計及提高型Ⅰ誤差發生的機率。本文企圖彰顯不同的抽樣設計在變異數估計上的差異，以及此差異對信賴區間與檢定統計量等相關估計及推論上的影響；同時，也介紹SAS及STATA統計軟體在複雜抽樣調查資料上的應用。英文摘要：Since the analysis of complex sample survey data is widespread nowadays, the effect of sample design features on statistical inference such as stratification, clustering, and weighting should be seriously considered accordingly. However, most analysts routinely ignore this issue, resulting in biased estimates of standard errors, as well as increased possibility of Type Ⅰ errors. This paper attempts to illustrate the impact of sample designs on variance estimation, and thereby confidence intervals and test statistics. Also, appropriate software applications are briefly introduced.起始頁-結束頁：90-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.00908篇名：台灣文官調查研究資料蒐集方法與調查品質：「訪員遞送與受訪者自填問卷」方法之探討並列篇名：Data Collection and Non-response in Surveying Taiwan's Bureaucrats作者：黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);施佳良(Chia-Liang Shih);謝忠安(Chung-An Hsieh)關鍵字：文官調查;資料蒐集;無回應;訪答效應;循證;Government bureaucrat survey;data collection;non-response;response effects;evidence-based期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：25期出版年：2011中文摘要：本文探討於2008年所執行「台灣文官調查」的調查過程與結果之品質，目的在瞭解透過新方式訪問公務員，是否能夠提升訪問品質，以期能對未來文官調查事務有所助益。有別於一般調查的對象，台灣文官具有保守性，較不願意表達自己的意見與接受外界的訪調，以避免帶來不必要的麻煩。為了克服傳統郵寄問卷無法確保填問卷者為受訪者本人的問題，台灣文官調查採取「訪員遞送、受訪者自填」的方式，經過資料分析發現，透過步驟更改，此次調查得到將近七成的回收率與較低的項目無反應率。基於本次研究結果，本文提出未來文官調查在規劃與執行上的建議。英文摘要：This article assesses the process and the quality of the Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey conducted in 2008. The main purpose of this article is to examine if the new methods of collecting data can enhance the quality of survey, and also to propose helpful suggestions for further survey on government bureaucrats. Different from general survey, government bureaucrats are more sensitive to politics and easily hesitate to express their opinions in interviews. To encounter the problems arising in a mail survey that those who fill the questionnaire may not be the ones sampled by the investigator, Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey adopted ”in person, self-administered” method to collect data. Our analysis demonstrates that the response rate reaches 70% and non-response rate in survey items is relatively low. Based on the findings, we propose suggestions for planning and implementing surveys on government bureaucrats.起始頁-結束頁：141-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201104.0141
