01篇名：不同人工神經網路架構在不動產大量估價之應用與比較並列篇名：Complex Structures of Artificial Neural Network Comparison and Application on Real Estate Mass Appraisal作者：沈育生(Yu-Sheng Shen);林秋瑾(Vickey Chiu-Chin Lin)關鍵字：人工神經網路架構;不動產大量估價;多元迴歸;分析多層函數連結網路;倒傳遞網路;輻狀基底函數網路;Real Estate Mass Appraisal;Structures of Artificial Neural Network;Back-Propagation Network;Multilayer Functional-Link Network;Radial Basis Function Network;Multiple Regression Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：不動產價格的高低與土地徵收補償、土地開發的成本及收益、房地產投資等密切相關，因此，如何準確地估算不動產的價格一直是地政相關領域所關注之焦點。以往已有不少結合不動產大量估價與人工神經網路之研究，但所建構的模式大多以倒傳遞神經網路為主，甚少考量其他的網路模式，而且，其網路架構多採隨機指定，未能有系統地比較和分析不同網路架構的差異。因此，本研究透過不同的人工神經網路模式與多元迴歸來建構不動產估價的分析預測模式，並透過台北市006、007、008年不動產實際交易案例的實證分析，來比較多元迴歸與不同人工神經網路模式間之差異，以及進一步地比較人工神經網路中不同網路架構之優劣，以提供作為未來估價實務的參考之用。實證結果顯示，由倒傳遞神經網路（BPN）、輻狀基底函數網路（RBFN）、多層函數連結網路（MFLN）所建構的人工神網路模式，在模式適合度指標與模式預測度指標的表現上，皆遠優於多元迴歸模式，其中又以多層函數連結網路模式（MFLN）表現最佳，該模式的預測準確度除超過一般實務要求水準外，更優於以往研究所建構的人工神經網路模式。另外，在網路架構的分析比較上，顯示隱藏層與其單元數的數目愈多，會使模式趨於複雜，進而使模式收斂較慢；而在模式適合度與預測度的表現上，除倒傳遞神經網路模式（BPN）顯示二層隱藏層的模式表現較佳外，輻狀基底函數網路（RBFN）與多層函數連結網路（MFLN），皆顯示一層隱藏層之模式表現較佳。英文摘要：Real estate prices affect the compensation of land acquisition, the cost and benefit of land development, and the investment of real estate. Thus, how to evaluate and predict the price of real estate precisely plays an important role in land economics research. This study uses both hedonic multiple regression method (MRA) and different artificial neural networks (ANN) to build models for evaluating and predicting on housing prices. We used the Year 2006 to 2008 data of housing transactions in Taipei City. The empirical results reveal that ANN can be a better alternative for predicting of housing prices. Among the different ANN housing prices models, the best predicting performance show at Multilayer Functional-Link Network (MFLN). In comparing network architecture, it indicates that more hidden layers and more attributes make the model more complicated and make the procedure converge slowly. In Back-Propagation Network (BPN), 2-layer model performs better than other network models in fitted-modeling and forecast accuracy, whereas it shows the performance of 1-layer model is better than 2-layer hidden model for both Multilayer Functional-Link Network (MFLN) and Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN).起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201205_15(1).00012篇名：農地多功能利用指標系統之建構並列篇名：Developing Multifunctional Farmland Use Indicators作者：王俊豪(Jiun-Hao Wang);方珍玲(Chen-Ling Fang);陳美芬(Mei-Fen Chen)關鍵字：分析層級程序法;多功能性;農地多功能利用;環境永續化;Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP);Environmental Sustainability;Multifunctionality;Multifunctional Farmland Use期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究鑑於農地為農業生產的基礎，嘗試將農業多功能性的觀念，轉換成農地多功能利用的分析架構，除評析歐盟多功能農業評估指標的發展現況之外，主要目的在於建構我國農地多功能利用的評估指標，並進一步探討農地多功能利用指標系統與不同農地利用方案的對應關係，以作為推動農地資源永續利用之參考依據。本研究以歐盟鄉村發展與農業環境統計年報為藍本，依據專家評分結果重新歸納為四大功能面向與12項功能指標，再引進五類重要的農地利用方案作為判準，以釐清不同開發強度的農地利用方案，對於農地多功能利用的影響程度。根據分析層級程序法的分析結果，發現在農地多功能利用的政策目標下，不同功能面向的權重，依序為環境永續化（0.481）、景觀生態化（0.195）、經營人力專業化（0.163），以及經濟多樣化（0.161）。其次，在個別的農地利用功能面向下，其權重最高的評估指標，分別為增加生態使用面積（0.195）、增加森林面積（0.101）、加強農業教育訓練（0.098），以及增加農業產值（0.077）。最後，本研究評比不同農地利用方案對達成各項功能指標的權重總值時，依其貢獻度的評比高低，依序為保育使用、觀光遊憩使用、集約使用、粗放使用，及興建農舍方案。其中，保育使用方案在多數的評估指標上，均呈現較高的評價權重；相對的，農地興建農舍方案的整體評價最低，最不利於農地資源的永續利用，也無益於農業多功能價值的展現。英文摘要：The term multifunctionality was initiated as theoretical considerations of agricultural policy reform by OECD and EU. Focusing on agricultural structure shifting, we attempt to integrate multifunctional agriculture development and farmland resources management accordingly. The main purpose of this research approaches to develop multifunctional farmland use indicators.We used European statistics reports of rural development and agricultural environment as the reference group to construct an international compartable multifunctional indicators system for Taiwan agriculture development. We employed the Analytic Hierarchy Process of Expert Choice software to verify the relative weights of different functional dimentions, indicators, and farmland use schemes.The results found that four dimentions for multi-functional agricultural development according to priority were increasing conservation area (0.195) for environment sustainability dimension (0.481), increasing forest area (0.101) for landscape ecology dimension (0.195), improving occupational education and training (0.098) for human resource specialization dimension (0.163), and enhancing market output value (0.077) for economy diversification dimension (0.161) respceptively.Furthermore, we compared five farmland use schemes with their importance to achieve different indicators. In proper order of contribution to agricultural multifunctionality as followed: conservational use, leisure and recreational use, intensive farming, extensive farming, and farm storage or house building. According to the overall evaluation, the government approved the farm buildings scheme that would disadvantage the multifunctionality of farmland resource. On the contrary, the conservational scheme may have the great contribution to the multifunctional farmland use policy.起始頁-結束頁：31-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201205_15(1).00023篇名：房貸還款衝擊信用風險之探討並列篇名：Credit Risks of Mortgage Payment Shock作者：劉依姿(Yi-Tzu Liu);蔡錦堂(Jing-Tang Tsay);林哲群(Che-Chun Lin)關鍵字：住宅增值參與證券;負權益;月付額短缺;HAPNs;Negative Equity;Payment Shortage期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在因次貸所引起的金融風暴後，金融界比過往更加重視信用風險的議題，而此風暴起源自房價的下跌導致房貸商品的大量違約。違約產生於兩個面向：無意願支付和無能力支付，有無意願支付和抵押品的價值有關；而有無能力支付則和家計的所得及月付額變動有關。過往的文獻多數是專注於分析前者，但事實上違約的發生，不僅牽涉於抵押品的價格，是否能還款的支付壓力更是一個重要的因素，換言之，估計房貸商品的信用風險，需要同時考慮還款支付壓力、房價趨勢、利率以及所得波動等因素。本研究對傳統型與非傳統型的房貸商品其信用風險進行比較，信用風險本身無形且難直接測量，所以必須找到一個衡量指標。本研究首先模擬這些房貸商品的現金流量，而後計算出兩個風險指標：負權益機率和月付額短缺機率，用以評估這些產品的信用風險。本研究結果顯示，次級房貸商品在壓力經濟情境下，將產生大量違約；而新金融商品住宅增值參與證券的發行則有穩定房屋市場的功能。英文摘要：After the financial crisis have been arisen from the subprime mortgage since 2007, the credit risk issue becomes more important than before. The crisis began with high default rate of mortgage products which resulted from house price slumped. The default occurs in two aspects, no willingness to pay and no ability to pay. ”Willingness to pay” is concerned with the collateral value and ”ability to pay” is concerned with household income and monthly payment variation. Prior literature indicates that most analyses focus on no willingness to pay. However, the default occurs due to not merely collateral value fluctuation but the payment shock. In other words, estimating the credit risk of the mortgage products should consider the payment shock, the trade of house price, interest rate and household income. This study chooses some mortgage products to compare their credit risk including traditional and non-traditional ones. The credit risk is invisible and hard to measure. To find a proxy to estimate the credit risk is a must. By simulating the cash flow of these mortgage products and computing two risk indexes, probability of negative equity (PnegQ) and probability of liquidity shortage in mortgage payment (PSHORT), we could make a fairy approximation toward the credit risk. The results show that subprime mortgage products would easily induce default in stress-level economy and HAPNs, a financial innovation, would help stabilize the house market.起始頁-結束頁：73-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201205_15(1).00034篇名：兩岸區域環境對臺灣製造業廠商研發區位選擇影響之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Impact of Regional Environments between China and Taiwan to Taiwanese Manufacturing Firms' R&d Locational Choices作者：邊泰明(Tai-Ming Ben);林淑雯(Shu-Wen Lin)關鍵字：研發區位選擇;區位優勢;區域環境;Locational advantage;Regional environment;R&D locational choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文在兩岸區位優勢差異下，分析影響臺灣製造業廠商兩岸研發區位選擇的因素，改善既往研究未同時討論臺商與兩岸議題以及偏重個案研究的情形，經實證結果發現，區位優勢、研發單位類型、市場規模、政策條件、產業群聚、知識流通及研發經費投入等變數為臺灣製造業廠商兩岸研發區位佈點的影響變數，除了市場規模及市場型研發單位與研發區位選擇呈現負向關係外，其他皆與區位選擇呈現正向關係，顯示除因臺灣市場規模太小造成臺商選擇至對岸設立研發據點外，臺灣在其他表現上皆較對岸具有吸引力，臺灣仍具有不可忽視的研發潛力，建議政府部門應在產業政策上有新作為，提供廠商各項研發所需要的協助，以吸引更多本土企業於臺灣設立研發部門，不斷累積及提升臺灣的研發競爭力。英文摘要：With the viewpoint of regional advantages, this paper analyzes the impact of R&D locational choices that manufacturing firms in Taiwan take under the differentiation of locational advantages between China and Taiwan as well as improves some points which are incompletely focused in the same study on Taiwanese firms, the cross-strait, and overweighing case-studies in the past. The empirical evidences bring that the impact of variables to locational distribution of Taiwanese manufacturing firms across the strait are many: locational advantages, the type of R&D unit, the scale of market, policical conditions, industrial clusters, knowledge flows and R&D investments. Except for the negative relationship between the scale of market/type of R&D unit and R&D locational choices, the rest variables have the positive relationship with R&D locational choices, which means that, barring that the scale of market in Taiwan is so small that Taiwanese firms choose to set up R&D spots in China, other variables in Taiwan are more attractive than those in China; Taiwan possesses innegligible energies of regional creativity. The suggestion is that the government has to take new actions on industrial policies, providing the assistance to R&D that enterprises need, in order to attract more and more local enterprises to set up their R&D functions in Taiwan for accumulating and advancing Taiwan's competitiveness continuously.起始頁-結束頁：95-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201205_15(1).00045篇名：地籍建物三維資料流通架構建立之研究並列篇名：Establishment of Data Exchange Framework for 3D Cadastral Building Model作者：江渾欽(Hun-Chin Chiang);馮怡婕(Yi-Chieh Feng)關鍵字：建物測量成果圖;三維建物模型;城市地理標記語言;資料流通架構;Result map of building survey;3D Building Model;City Geographic Markup Language (CityGML);Data Exchange Framework期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：數碼城市之建構在全球掀起一股熱潮，其中三維建物模型之建立更是近幾年國內外研究的熱門話題。多數的研究以三維建物之視覺化為主，但三維建物不應只有建物外觀的展現，而是應該能夠整合其他相關資訊加值應用。本研究以大比例地形圖資模塑LOD1-LOD2建物模型，以地政單位之建物測量成果圖等相關資料產製LOD3-4地籍建物三維模型，並遵循國際OGC CityGML標準，依地籍建物三維模型資料之內容與特性，設計一套地籍建物三維資料流通架構，並以開放式展示軟體驗證三維地籍建物資料流通的可行性。英文摘要：Establishment of Digital City has set off a boom in the world. Of which the construction of 3D building models has attracted great attentions in recent research topics. Most existing studies have focused on the visualization of 3D buildings. However, 3D building models shall not be confined to visual appearance only, but should be integrated with other information to add value for their applications.This study is built on the basis of large-scale topographic map data with LOD1-LOD2 building models, and the Result Map of Building Survey and other relevant information from the Land Department that constitute LOD3-4 3D cadastral building models. According to content and features of the 3D model data, an exchange framework that is compatible with OGC CityGML standard for 3D cadastral buildings has been designed. An open-source software platform has been developed to demonstrate the feasibility of the 3D building data exchange framework.起始頁-結束頁：127-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201205_15(1).000501篇名：台灣地方法院裁判評議制度之實證研究並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Judicial Deliberation in District Courts in Taiwan作者：王金壽(Chin-Shou Wang);魏宏儒(Hung-Ru Wei)關鍵字：評議制度;合議庭;法官;不同意見;judicial deliberation;panel;judge;dissent期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主要的目的在發現並討論評議制度，及其與實務間的差異與問題。對地方法院法官的深度訪談為本研究主要資料來源。由於法官評議經驗養成不一、蒞任不同風氣的法庭，及考績壓力等因素，影響評議制度在實際運作上的差異與制度上的缺陷。法官審判之評議制度乃為提升人民對司法的信賴，促使合議庭法官發揮民主審議效果，進一步達到民主可問責性。然而法袍下掩覆的評議過程，卻是人民無法檢視的。由於兩個附有不同意見書的判決出現，開啟本文對評議過程的了解。審判長、受命法官及陪席法官的分工，本為減輕負擔與更有效率的審判，但卻可能出現不閱卷的法官，或審判長左右判決，或受命法官一人獨斷的情況。本文亦發現評議簿功能不彰的問題。且當法官面對司法倫理或默示的俗慣，以及更直接現實的考績壓力，法官的獨立性在評議中很難不受到壓抑，甚至是自我壓抑。最後，這樣的評議結果與票決，雖然形式上是一人一票，但外在的壓力與內化的壓抑，以及法官間默示的俗慣，恐將產生不等值的結果。最後，我們發現不同意見的書寫與公開，可使合議實現實質合議與票決等值。英文摘要：This purpose of this study to understand what the reality of judicial deliberation in district courts is in Taiwan. The data in this study mainly came from the interviews of six judges in districts courts. There are several important findings in this paper. First, Training Institute for Judges and Prosecutors did not teach judges how to do judicial deliberation and what the related regulations are. Second, some panels may not really do judicial deliberation. Third, in some cases section chief judges have more power than the other two judges because they have power to evaluate the other judges in the same section. Puisne judge may have much less power in the panels because of unequal power relationship and information asymmetry. Fourth, judicial stratification may affect judicial independence during judicial deliberation. Finally, almost all interviewees agreed that judges should have a right to issue dissents.起始頁-結束頁：127-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00042篇名：從商品虛構到批判論述分析重新發現博藍尼的方法並列篇名：From Commodity Fiction to Critical Discourse Analysis A Rediscovery of Karl Polanyi's Method作者：許甘霖(Kan-Lin HSU)關鍵字：博蘭尼;經濟社會學;虛構商品;雙重運動;批判論述分析;karl polanyi;economic sociology;fictitious commodity;double movement;critical discourse analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012中文摘要：「虛構商品」是Karl Polanyi知識遺產裡最具啟發性的概念之一，也是其整體性分析的鋒銳。本文聚焦於Polanyi作品中一個與虛構商品有重要關聯卻未受重視的「商品虛構」概念，透過對這個概念的進一步釐清，重新發現Polanyi作品中的方法。作者認為，虛構商品體現了實質經濟與形式經濟學間在歷史上的偶連性相符，而商品虛構或商品框構則是這種相符得以實現的論述運動。商品虛構的重新發現揭示了Polanyi整體性方法學中長期被忽視的論述分析面向，同時也指向一個Polanyi式論述分析的可能性。英文摘要：〞Fictitious commodity〞 is one of the most heuristic concepts and critical edge in Karl Polanyi's integral analysis. This note aims to re-discover Polanyi's method inherent in his works by focusing upon the concept 〞commodity fiction〞 conventionally ignored yet significantly relevant and analytically complementary to 〞fictitious commodity.〞 〞Fictitious commodity〞 embodies the historically contingent coincidence between substantive economy and formal economics, while it was the discursive movement of commodity fiction that made the coincidence possible. A preliminary elaboration of the concept 〞commodity fiction〞 thus reveals in Polanyi's integral methodology the discourse analysis aspect and suggests a Polanyian approach to critical discourse analysis.起始頁-結束頁：171-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00053篇名：前路茫茫，還是柳暗花明？中華民族認同的危機與再造之反思並列篇名：On the Chinese Nation Identity Crisis and the Rebuilding in Chinese Mainland作者：姚新勇(Xin-Yong Yao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012中文摘要：中國大陸族群問題愈益激烈，原因是多方面的，但從認同角度言，日益激化的族群問題，恰是國家認同或中華民族認同合法性危機的表徵。此危機既表現為其他性質的認同的不斷出現、強化，同時也表現為國家重建新型中華民族認同合法性的努力。本文將重點從後一角度出發，考察近三十年來中國大陸中華民族認同合法性的危機和重建的基本情況，並為良性、有效的新型中華民族合法性認同的建構，提出一些方向性的建議。起始頁-結束頁：189-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00064篇名：超越國家單位的台灣抗瘧史－回應林宜平〈對蚊子宣戰〉並列篇名：Beyond the Scope of the State Anti-Malaria Campaigns in and out of Taiwan作者：吳易叡(Harry Yi-Jui Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：229-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00075篇名：「台鐵公共性事件」（上）專題引言並列篇名：The Critical Review of Taiwan Rail Public Sex Event: Part One作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：249-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00086篇名：上了火車之後並列篇名：After Getting on the Train作者：許人友(Jen-Yu Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：257-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00097篇名：主流之外的「不入流」並列篇名：Rethinking the Place of Outcasts作者：蔡育林(Yu-Lin Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：277-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00108篇名：台鐵性愛趴與壞性／別實踐所再現的罔兩基底－「反／猥褻」的性別正典與同志婚姻部署了哪些直未來想像並列篇名：How Gender-Normativity and Same-Sex Marriage Imagine-A "Straight" Future-Zone Where Penumbra Multitude Must Live Without作者：洪凌(Lucifer Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：291-309資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.00119篇名：性道德戒嚴下的罪與罰－台鐵公共性事件分析並列篇名：Crime and Punishment-Changes in Law under "Sexual Morals"作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：311-329資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.001210篇名：編輯室報告並列篇名：From the Editor期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000111篇名：反人口販運與母權政治－性產業的罪罰化並列篇名：Anti-Human Trafficking and Matriarchate Politics-Criminalizing the Sex Industry作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)關鍵字：法律保留原則;法律效力;規範;適用;牧領權力;例外狀態;人口販運;性工作;母權政治;兒童保護;雛妓;人權;the principle of legality;force of law;norm;applicability;pastoral power;state of exception;human trafficking;sex work;maternal power;child-protection;child prostitutes;human right期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012中文摘要：從《兒少條例》到《人口販運防制法》，台灣性工作者與性產業從業者的人權日益限縮，罪與罰卻不斷擴增。在特定團體「母性關懷」策略的主導下，不僅各種以保護兒少為名的矯正措施與安置程序，使當事人被迫接受國家強制性的監禁管理，也使性產業從業人員—包括成年性工作者、經營者、管理者及載送者等—都被視為法律懲處的對象。一種奠基在（性工作的）性低劣之上的「性優越」，促成了母權的威權化，其表徵就是調控個人性價值的法律，它具有懸置法律的特殊功能，靠的是將各種虛擬的性罪惡，落實為法律制度中的「社會公敵」宣告。本文將從法律保留原則的觀點，檢視法規範的「適用」如何使法律的管制成為「無法」的「例外狀態」（state of exception），並透過法律與暴力的關係，分析兒童的性論述如何導致台灣的法治國原則陷入爭議。英文摘要：Whereas sexual regulation reached out to children under the age of 18 according cultural ”need”, a second arena of anti-prostitution policy activism began as a universal effort to attenuate the sex industry. At the heart of the political agenda lay the assumption that improved laws would enhance human rights. Conceived by American Human Right Report, anti-human trafficking policy in Taiwan was promoted by the government, shaped by NGOs in an extensive anti-human trafficking campaign. Moreover, the Prevention of Antihuman Trafficking Act offered national assistance to NGOs to set up services for victim-protection, while criminalizing the sex industry. This thesis asserts that legal control on sex work has violated the principle of legality that safeguards a human right but also a fundamental defense in criminal law prosecution according to which no crime or punishment can exist without a legal ground. Indeed, real legal reform should entail rooting out the premises, prescriptions, and stigma that drive sexual regulations-not modifying the behavior and restricting the choices of women who need sex work to support their life.起始頁-結束頁：5-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000212篇名：巢起巢落－女同志親密暴力、T婆角色扮演與求助行為並列篇名：In the Beginning There Was a Nest-Lesbian Intimate Partner Violence, Butch-Femme, and Help-Seeking作者：潘淑滿(Shu-Man Pan);楊榮宗(Jung-Tsung Yang);林津如(Chin-Ju Lin)關鍵字：女同志親密暴力;T婆角色;女性主義;語言暴力;肢體暴力;恐同文化;求助行為;Lesbian intimate partner violence;roles of butch and femme;feminism;verbal abuse;physical abuse;homophobia;help-seeking期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣目前仍需更多女同志親密暴力之研究。本文在一年半田野資料收集過程，訪問了十六位經歷伴侶親密暴力的女同志及四位同志運動／服務的組織工作者，以女同志為主體的觀點詮釋女同志伴侶親密暴力，思考我國家庭暴力防治政策與服務措施對多元差異需求之適當性、性別分離主義親密暴力論述詮釋女同志親密暴力的適切性，以拓展本土女性主義對親密暴力的視野。本研究發現女同志親密關係受到異性戀霸權的影響，私密與社會空間被剝奪而傾向於共同築巢。但是可遇不可求的愛巢建立後，關係仍會受到圈內與圈外其他競爭者的威脅而生變，此情境下特別容易產生親密暴力。女同志親密暴力對《家暴法》的挑戰是：通報率偏低，偏低之原因是家暴防治體系仍舊籠罩異性戀思維，未能考慮女同志身份曝光與二度傷害的疑慮。女同志親密暴力現象對女性主義親密暴力論述的挑戰：不只是男性才有暴力行為，女性也可能成為施暴者。但是女同志親密暴力不同於異性戀女性主義的性別政治論述所談的暴力，施暴者不一定是陽剛的T，也不一定是擁有權力與資源的一方。暴力類型以語言暴力居多，通常自衛形成互毆，少涉及肢體或性暴力，若有肢體暴力亦非置之死地或形成重傷害。在沒有婚姻關係約束下，當親密關係演變成暴力衝突時，分手抉擇隨之而來，少有長期受暴的情況。英文摘要：This study investigates lesbian intimate violence, which is assumed to be not existent because feminists often believe that women are not socialized to be aggressive. We interviewed sixteen lesbians who experienced intimate partner violence and four helping professionals working for gay and lesbian advocacy groups. We found that due to a lack of private and social spaces, lesbians tend to cohabit. When the relationship was threatened by other pursuitors, such as other lesbians or heterosexual men, the relationship might turn sore and intimate violence take place. Beneath this dynamics underlies the subtle operation and cruel oppression of patriarchy and heterosexism. This study also provides implications for helping professional and policy makers by exploring why many instances of lesbian intimate violence are not reported. The reasons are fear of being discriminated against and the risk of exposing their lesbian identity. In addition, as the results indicate, the pattern of lesbian intimate partner violence is mostly verbal. Physical and sexual abuse is seldom and most physical abuse does not cause serious damage.起始頁-結束頁：45-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000313篇名：避「罪」之道？－從月經規則術引進看1970年代台灣墮胎史並列篇名：Evading the Law?-Abortion in Taiwan during the 1970s: A Case Study of Menstrual Regulation作者：吳燕秋(Yan-Chiou Wu)關鍵字：月經規則術;優生保健法;墮胎技術;驗孕;婦女健康運動;Menstrual Regulation(MR);Genetic Health Law;abortion techniques;preganency test;women's health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012中文摘要：戰後台灣禁止墮胎，至1984年《優生保健法》通過，方放寬墮胎的限制。早在1974年，便有婦產科醫師託詞懷孕六週內（即月經遲來兩週內）的驗孕誤差較大，於期限內施行月經規則術，或可規避墮胎罪。不過，在此之前，每年都有成千上萬次的墮胎發生，實際上僅有少數人獲罪。月經規則術引進台灣後，對墮胎罪判刑人數消長的影響亦不明顯。其最大貢獻，可能是讓婦產科醫師能堂而皇之地引介新技術以招睞婦女，比起過去在報上登小廣告正當許多，也創造更多的墮胎利潤。月經規則術的引進途徑，與樂普頗為類似。皆來自美國的國際人口組織贊助，透過民間管道引進的「節育」利器，在官方的合作或默許下進行。相較當時台灣的墮胎技術，月經規則術在效能上並無優越突出之處。換句話說，月經規則術並非客觀中立的技術，而是倚賴諸多有利的助力，才能在墮胎違法的環境下順遂發展。本文參考John Law對十五世紀葡萄牙海權擴張的分析架構，說明技術網絡建造者（technical network builder）如何在充斥敵意的社會情境中，聯結各種異質性的元素，如技術發明者、推廣技術的非營利國際人口組織、台灣的醫師社群、婦女、墮胎罪惡感、準確性較差的驗孕技術及法律，構築起月經規則術成功的技術網絡。月經規則術雖曾在台灣大受歡迎，近年來卻有走下坡之勢。該如何解讀此現象？是本文最後嘗試回答的問題。英文摘要：Abortion wasn't legal in Taiwan until the Genetic Health Law was passed in 1984. After 1974, some gynecologists strongly recommended ‘menstrual regulation'(abbr. MR) surgery so as not to break the abortion law. MR was performed in the first two weeks after LMP(the last menstrual period) when a pregnancy test would be too inaccurate to prove the existence of an embryo. In fact, the law was not effectively enforced and very few people were punished for abortion, and there were tens of thousands of abortions happening each year. Compared to the number of convictions for abortion before and after MR was introduced, the influence of MR is not obvious. The most significant contribution of MR for gynecologists perhaps was that it offered them more opportunities to make a fortune and to peddle the trade of abortion to women openly and righteously rather than advertising illegal abortion services in newspapers.The method by which MR was introduced into Taiwan in the 1970s was similar to that of intrauterine contraceptive devices(Lippes Loop). Both were sponsored by international organizations from the USA and distributed as ‘birth control material' through NGOs with the tacit consent of the government in Taiwan. MR was not superior to other abortive techniques in effectiveness in the same period. In other words, MR wasn't an objective and neutral technology, and it had the advantage of developing successfully in an environment where competitor techniques were illegal. This paper, adopting the analytical framework used by John Law to study Portuguese maritime expansion in the fifteenth century, interprets that MR developed in Taiwan as a technical network builder associated with many heterogeneous elements, such as the inventor of MR, the non-profit international population-control organizations which promoted MR, the communities of doctor in Taiwan, women, the guilt associated with abortion, the inaccuracy of pregnancy tests, and abortion law, to establish successfully the technological network of MR. Nonetheless, after it gained fame in the 1970s, MR has declined recently. How can this tendency be explained? This question will be resolved in the last section of this paper.起始頁-結束頁：103-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000414篇名：跨境婚姻－中國大陸台幹家庭的身分安排並列篇名：Citizenship Arrangement for Families of Taiwanese Expatriates with Chinese Spouses作者：鄧建邦(Jian-Bang Deng)關鍵字：跨境婚姻;大陸配偶;台籍幹部;移民;公民身分;Transnational Marriage;Mainland Chinese Brides;Taiwanese Expatriates;Migration;Citizenship期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012中文摘要：跨界通婚是當代國際遷移中一種重要的現象。本文從官方移入人口統計資料整理指出，由於經濟全球化及文化親近性，促成兩岸大量通婚現象，但並非所有跨界通婚下的個人都適合稱為「移入移民」，尤其是台籍工作者與大陸當地居民形成的通婚型態。藉由37位台籍工作者與大陸配偶訪談個案的類型分析，文章指出跨界婚姻的台幹家庭成員身分安排主要呈現為三種型態，即大陸配偶：（1）由農村戶口轉為沿海城鎮戶口，（2）維持本地的沿海城鎮戶口身分，（3）維持農村／內地戶口身分，但共通的是，台籍工作者在婚後的台灣公民身分並沒有改變，且大陸配偶也多沒有意願前來台灣長住，並因此取得台灣公民身分。本文進一步分析指出，經由跨界通婚去取得個人更佳生活機會的方式，在台籍工作者與大陸居民結縭的案例中，主要並非表現在透過婚配嫁入台灣社會，而是在大陸配偶的農村／內地戶口轉換上。當大陸居民與台籍幹部通婚後，透過買房入戶等方式，有機會由農村／內地轉為沿海城鎮戶口身分，即代表個人的向上社會流動，因而大幅降低進一步取得台灣公民身分的必要性。因此，以文化優勢態度面對婚配的中國大陸公民，顯然只是意識型態上的迷障。換句話說，相較於「婚姻移民」潛藏蘊含婚姻與移民彼此間的邏輯對應關係，使用「跨境婚姻」才能更合適描述經由台灣外派而與中國大陸居民結縭形成的兩岸婚姻，及理解行動者在跨境脈絡下，將彈性公民身分視為個人資本累積的文化邏輯意含。英文摘要：Marriage migration is an important phenomenon of international migration. Its rapid increase has to do with the development of capitalism and the ever increasing rate of cross-border movements in a larger context of globalization. In the past few years, the phenomenon of mainland Chinese brides has become increasing common and attracted much attention from the media and the public forums in Taiwan. However, statistics show that a great number of Chinese brides do not choose to reside in Taiwan. This is the case especially for those who are married to Taiwanese expatriates in China.This paper tries to give a more comprehensive understanding about why most Chinese spouses of Taiwanese expatriates choose to reside in China instead of Taiwan and how citizenship is arranged for families of Taiwanese expatriates with Chinese spouses. Result shows that there are three major types of citizenship arrangements chosen by Chinese spouses, which are 1) changing from a rural to an urban hukou (household registration), 2) remaining inherited urban hukou and 3) remaining inherited rural hukou. However, both Taiwanese expatriates and most of their Chinese spouses do not give up their inherited Taiwanese or PRC citizenship. Citizenship for Taiwanese expatriates with Chinese spouses becomes therefore a family-based ”dual citizenship” arrangement. The reason for Chinese spouses to maintain their PRC citizenship is mainly because of the opportunity for changing from a rural to obtain an urban hukou during the migratory process in the marriage with Taiwanese expatriates, which represents a personal upward mobility as a result of the great urban-rural differential treatment in China.The author suggests that the marriage of Taiwanese expatriates with Chinese spouses should be termed as transnational, instead of cross-border, marriage, which emphasizes marriage migrants as active agents in the migration process. Therefore the strategic attitude of Taiwanese expatriates and their Chinese spouses toward citizenship arrangement as means of cultural capital accumulation can be understood.起始頁-結束頁：173-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000515篇名：「正確放生」論述的形成－台灣戰後動物放生文化的歷史考察並列篇名：The Formation of "Correct" Captive Animal Release Practice Discourse-A Historical Study of Captive Animal Release Culture in Post-War Taiwan作者：林本炫(Pen-Hsuan Lin);李宗麟(Tsung-Lin Lee)關鍵字：放生;生態保育;論述分析;中華護生協會;Captive Animal Release;Nature Protection;Discourse Analysis;China Preserve Life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012中文摘要：纏繞種種有關「動物放生」說法裡，放生經常被談成一致與單一的現象。因此本文以台灣戰後為時間起點，將動物放生現象放在歷史脈絡考察，一來反省有關動物放生的知識建構；二來解析傳統放生與現代問題的辯證關係；最後闡述放生如何是問題和正確放生如何形成兩個大哉問。透過論述分析的方式，我們注意到兩種轉折。一方面，生態學界與放生團體不是完全對立而是相互演化，一來生態學知識會隨其內部關注焦點不同而產生新的認知；二來是雖然一部份宗教團體放棄從事放生活動，但仍有部分放生團體的放生論述越來越有「生態知識建構」意味，逐漸調整放生行為符合環保知識的要求，或是形成「對抗性論述」，自行發展因應策略因應外界批評。另方面，放生的「問題化」與「正確放生」的形成，一開始並非針對宗教團體的大量放生，而是經由濫捕動物和養殖業者棄養動物引發的生態浩劫而起，其後是在變動的生態學典範、環保意識、佛典詮釋及政經脈絡下交織而成。所以，在歷史動態過程中，理解放生與批評放生的知識憑藉都是脈絡性的，並在這樣的論述交織和社會運作中形成神聖／世俗、有害／無害（人為主體）、絕種／非絕種、保育／非保育、有害／無害（生物多樣性）、感應／沒感應的分類判準。也就是可放與不可放、正確與不正確的區別重點不在這是什麼動物，而是能否符應該脈絡下的分類標準。英文摘要：The phenomena of captive animal release are treated as unique and single in varieties of arguments about it. In this paper the phenomena of religious captive animal release are discussed in the historical contexts to reflect on the construct of the knowledge of captive animal release and the dialectical relationships between the traditional captive animal release and modern social problems. Finally, why and how the problem of captive animal release became a public issue and how to do a ”correct practice of captive animal release” are elaborated.By the method of discursive analysis, we find that the biological community and the religious groups practicing captive animal release are influenced by each other in the last two decades. on one hand, new recognitions about the social issues are formed according to the paradigmatic shift in the biological community. on the other hand, new practices of captive animal release are adopted by religious group to accommodate to the biological knowledge. And some kinds of ”counter-discourse” are developed among the religious groups who practice captive animal release.Therefore, for the phenomena of captive animal release to become a public issue and the emergence of correct practices of it is formed under the shifting articulation between biological paradigms, consciousness of environment-preservation, interpretation of religious texts and political-economic contexts in Taiwan. The knowledge of captive animal release and critics of it are both contextual.起始頁-結束頁：217-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000616篇名：「中國特色的民主主義」是否可行－對改革開放後中國黨國體制的「危機因素」和「社會主義領導權政治」的想像並列篇名：Is a "Democracy with the Chinese Character" Possible?-The Crisis of the Chinese Party-State Regime after the Reform and Opening, and an Imagination of "Socialist Hegemonic Politics"作者：曹喜<U+6616>(Hee-Yeon Cho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：267-311資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000717篇名：代前言並列篇名：Foreword作者：賴鼎銘(Ting-Ming Lai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：313-316資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000818篇名：從台灣社工基進化談理論與實踐的辯證並列篇名：Dialectics between Theory and Practice from the Experience of Radical Social Work in Taiwan作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：317-334資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.000919篇名：資本主義養成的如何批判／改造資本主義？－兼論公共衛生批判知識分子的形成並列篇名：How Can Those Cultivated by Capitalism Critically Analyze and Transform Capitalism?-On the Making of Public Health Critical Intellectuals作者：陳美霞(Meei-Shia Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：335-345資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.001020篇名：批判「批判知識分子的再生產機制」並列篇名：Critical Comment on "The Reproduction Mechanism of Critical Intellectuals"作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：347-350資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.001101篇名：從道德教養的角度談亞理斯多德論品性責任並列篇名：On Aristotle's Theory of Responsibility for Character-From the Perspective of Moral Habituation作者：王志輝(Zhi-Hue Wang)關鍵字：品性責任;道德教養;德性;疏失;情感;responsibility for character;moral habituation;virtue;negligence;feeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：40期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文打算藉亞理斯多德之道德教養理論，來討論我們該如何為品性（總性、惡習）負責的問題。事實上，品性責任與道德教養，在亞理斯多德倫理學中其實是不能獨立地被處理的議題，因為，他對於道德教養的基本看法，對如何解釋我們該為品性（尤其是惡習）負責，乃是潛藏的威脅：按照《尼各馬科倫理學》說法，我們品性養成的主要階段是孩童期－基於孩童時期的習慣與教養。但如此一來，品性責任便欠缺了論證基礎，因為在孩童時期，我們並無法掌控影響我們品性的因素；因此，若我們在離開孩童時期時已經養成一些牢固的惡習，那麼這應歸咎於幼年時的習慣與道德灌輸、而不是自己。本文打算藉由一種「兩階段式」的品性教養理論，來解決上述這個困難。本文打算論述，亞理斯多德固然極為重視幼年時期德性教養的重要性，但他基本上仍是將品性養成的關鍵時期放在成年。此外，本文將指出，解釋惡習責任之困難，可以藉由類似解釋疏失的責任問題加以解決。英文摘要：This article discusses Aristotle's theory of responsibility for character on the basis of his idea about moral habituation. In fact, responsibility for character and moral habituation are the topics which cannot be separately considered in Aristotle's ethics, for his conception of moral habituation is potentially a threat for his theory of responsibility for character: As the Nicomachean Ethics indicates, our states of character are formed mainly in our childhood, by our early education and habituation. However, if this is so, then the responsibility for character will be deprived of any justification, for we are not in control of the factors that influence our character development right from birth; our early educators are responsible for and in control of that. But then the patterns of habitual activity productive of our states of character would be already well entrenched in our dispositions by the time we emerge from the care of our early moral educators, and so it would be unreasonable to claim that it is up to us to develop the states of character we do. In order to resolve this difficulty in Aristotle's conception of responsibility for character, this article attempts to argue that according to Aristotle, the habituation we receive from our early moral education is insufficient to determine our slates of character; in his view, our states of character are formed both during the early stage of moral education and the adult age. For Aristotle, namely, the adult habituation is as much decisive for the character development as the early one. Moreover, this article will indicate that the difficulties as to the interpretation of the responsibility for vices can be resolved in a way analogol1s to that in which we answer the question of how to explain the responsibility for negligence.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120300400012篇名：從亞里斯多德《修辭術》中的三種說服論證解讀《利維坦》並列篇名：Logos, Pathos, Ethos: Aristotelian Rhetoric in Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan作者：胡全威(Chuan-Wei Hu)關鍵字：亞里斯多德;修辭術;《利維坦》;說服;霍布斯;Aristotle;rhetoric;Leviathan;persuasion;Hobbes期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：40期出版年：2012中文摘要：亞里斯多德《修辭術》對於霍布斯的政治科學主張有很深的影響。本文從亞氏《修辭術》中區分的三種說服論證：論理說服、情感說服與人格說服，來解讀霍布斯的《利維坦》。首先，從修辭術中的論理說服來看，霍布斯在《利維坦》中更進一步希望建立在精確定義、理性邏輯推理上，避免因為或然性造成的爭議不斷。而在情感說服上，霍布斯承繼亞氏對於情感左右人的行為之觀點，而特別重視多數人們對「恐懼暴死」的態度，霍布斯進而將此轉化為政治科學的立論根基。在人格說服上亞氏強調人們易於相信值得信賴的人，霍布斯則轉換為偏重攻擊對手的人格特質。特別是在《利維坦》的後半書中，因為宗教經文難解人們對神意爭論不休。霍布斯除了努力在經文解釋上作出其認為的正確詮釋外；另方面，嚴厲批評當時傳教士、羅馬教會人士的人格問題，藉以獲得讀者對自己的信任。本文認為以這種方式解讀《利維坦》，不但可以看到霍布斯對於亞里斯多德修辭傳統的繼承，也可以看到霍布斯運用與轉換了亞里斯多德修辭術中重要說服論證方式。此外，本文除了希望提供一種解讀角度，讓讀者更容易明白《利維坦》論證方式與章節安排。同時也希望藉此強調「修辭說服」面向的重要性，筆者認為這是當代政治思想、政治哲學所忽略之處。英文摘要：The paper aims to understand Hobbes' Leviathan through Aristotle's three modes of persuasion-logos, pathos, and ethos in his On Rhetoric Comparing with logos i.e. rhetorical argumentation, Hobbes further employed logical argumentation based on exact definition and right reasoning. He wants to avoid the ambiguity of the probability. But how could human affair be with necessity? The answer is to depend on passion Most of all, Hobbes built his theory of sovereign on the extreme passion, fearing of violent death. Similarly, Aristotle emphasized that men are greatly influenced by passions, pathos, to make different judgments Aristotle's emphasis of passion influenced Hobbes to regard it as the most important factor of human action. On the latter half of Leviathan, Hobbes used ethos, the characteristic argumentation to supply the interpretation of the Bible and also for his sovereign theory. Hobbes attacked the opposite's characters to make his readers not to trust them. Finally, I would claim that through Aristotle's three modes of persuasion makes us understand Leviathan better and reveals the importance of rhetorical persuasion than merely rational justification.起始頁-結束頁：55-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120300400023篇名：人權、政體轉型與記憶政治：一個轉型正義視角的檢討並列篇名：Human Rights, Transition of Regime, and Politics of Memory: An Examination of Transitional Justice Perspectives作者：陳瑋鴻(Wei-Hong Chen)關鍵字：轉型正義;人權;罪責;遺忘;記憶政治;transitional justice;human rights;guilty and responsibility;oblivion;politics of memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：40期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去20年來，「轉型正義」成為各國政治與國際社會刻不容緩的政治議程。目前人權活動者與理論研究大致採取兩種視角或途徑：一、是道德哲學與法學的普世人權規範；其次、是轉型學研究對轉型模式與政治菁英權力平衡的考量。道德哲學與法學視角要求加害者負起政治與法律的責任、對受害者的賠償與重新肯認，以及強調人權與責任對於重建民主與法治社會的重要性。轉型學則主要強調轉型過程的類型與時機，以及新舊菁英的權力對比，如何決定各國處理模式的差異。轉型學研究認為政治菁英間的權力平衡，以及第三波民主化協商式轉型的特色，務實地採用大赦、特赦與遺忘作為社會和解的代價。本文認為，上述兩種視角分別布其缺陷，也都同時忽略公民社會、象徵情感、集體選擇的角色，以及時間變化的向度；並且進一步提出記憶政治的視角去整合兩者，從公共論述與政治記憶的框架效果，以及論述－記憶與政策制度的互動來探討罪責意識的形式。近年來西班牙在轉型正義政策上的轉變，尤能見到政治記憶的框架理論有助於我們理解轉型正義的持續與變動，也更能讓我們理解正義實踐的可能性。英文摘要：For the past two decades, transitional justice has been a worldwide political agenda. The issue of how to deal with the past human rights violations is an important task to reconstitute democratic normality and reconciliatory relationships. Current researchers and human rights activists generally take two kinds of perspectives or approaches: one is the moral philosophy of universal human rights and law; and the other is transitology on types of regime change and balance of power elites Perspective of moral philosophy and law requests to take the political and legal responsibility of perpetrators, compensation for the victims and to emphasis on human rights and the reconstruction of democracy and the rule of law. About guilt and responsibility, they prefer to prosecute perpetrators of human rights violations. Transitology suggests the balance of political power matters most for transitional justice decision. They concern about the reality of political bargaining between old and new political elites. Most political scientists consider the character of the third wave democracy, and take practical use of amnesty and pardon. In other words, forget is the cost of social reconciliation. This article considers that they both neglect the role of the civil society, symbolic meanings, emotions, collective choices, and the effects of the passage of time. I theorize the framework of politics of memory and bring up the framing effect of public discourse and political memory. The interaction of discourse-memory and institutional decision contributes to realize the consciousness of guilt and accountability. Finally, Spain's case proves that politics of memory is a promising and useful perspective to observe transitional justice policy selection and change.起始頁-結束頁：95-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120300400034篇名：Mikhail Bakhtin的對話主義及其對批判論述分析的再延伸：以白玫瑰運動為例並列篇名：Mikhail Bakhtin's Dialogism and its Re-extension to Critical Discourse Analysis: The White Rose Movement as a Case作者：王孝勇(Hsiao-Yung Wang)關鍵字：巴赫汀;白玫塊運動;存在事件;再意義化;批判論述分析;對話主義;Mikhail Bakhtin;the White Rose Movement;Being-as-eνent;resignification;critical discourse analysis;dialogism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：40期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在從Mikhail Bakhtin的對話主義對批判論述分析進行理論與應用層面的再延伸。首先，透過閱讀「存在事件」與「言語互動」等概念，本研究指出日常性語言的脈絡化與主體化特質替對話主義提供了理論基礎。其次，藉由分析白玫瑰運動再意義化的語言過程，本研究發現日常性語言本身即存在著意識形態鬥爭的潛力，而Bakhtin的對話主義則有助於提出一個聚焦於語言形式及其動態整體過程的互動模式批判論述分析架構，用以分析當代社會文化中諸多周旋頡頏的話語實踐與行動。英文摘要：This paper aims to re-extend the theory and application of critical discourse analysis (CDA) by referring to Mikhail Bakhtin's dialogism. First, it read the concept of ”Being-as-event” and ”verbal interaction”, and argued that the character of contextualization and subjectivation of ordinary language should be regarded as the theoretical background for dialogism. Second, it analyzed the language process of resignification of the White Rose Movement, and explored the hidden possibility of ideological political struggle intrinsic into ordinary language. Based on the research findings, this paper concluded that Bakthin's dialogism not only contributes to propose an analytical framework of an interaction model to CDA which focuses on form of language and its moments, but also it could be appropriately used to analyze the bottom-up speech act and action in contemporary socio-cultural context.起始頁-結束頁：149-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120300400045篇名：「道德進步」：一本書與一種歷史觀－反思Steven Pinker著The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence has Declined作者：錢永祥期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：40期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：203-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201203004000501篇名：肥胖科學、醫療化與性別身體政治並列篇名：Science of Fat, Medicalisation and Gender Body Politics作者：鄭斐文(Fei-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：肥胖科學;性別身體政治;荷爾蒙;BMI;醫療化;fat science;gender body politics;BMI;hormone;medicalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：主流的醫學社群與世界衛生組織都認為，肥胖（obesity）與過重（overweight）是很嚴重的世界流行病。相對於主流肥胖科學與肥胖流行病學論述，本文問到肥胖身體如何在特定肥胖科學與生物醫學知識中被建構為疾病。本文企圖整合社會學、女性主義、批判肥胖研究、STS研究四取向，並統稱這些取向為「批判的肥胖研究」，指出肥胖並非一病理學的問題，而是一個在醫療化的知識、社會文化與道德建構下出現的疾病。本文一方面耙梳台灣於90年代後肥胖的醫療化過程及其內在問題，另一方面，以性別研究的觀點檢視女性肥胖如何在醫學論述中被再現為「偏差化」與「病理學」身體，以及其性別政治意涵。台灣的肥胖議題隨著醫療化的進展而被加強於個別主體身上。用來支持肥胖流行的科學知識有許多不確定性，例如肥胖與疾病、死亡率、以及藥物治療的關係。肥胖科學中的重要測量工具BMI並非是一客觀標準，而是代表著人口治理技術、藥物廠商的利益、正常／偏差的身體劃界等意涵。性別化的肥胖身體在醫學論述再現中主要與荷爾蒙失序、生殖、養育問題有關，而男性肥胖僅被侷限於泌尿科的「單一性器官化」以及勃起功能有關；肥胖男性的病理學身體主要由性器官與荷爾蒙失調來界定，肥胖女性的病理學身體則是與生殖功能以及相連帶的母職實踐失敗來定義。肥胖身體與荷爾蒙、生殖功能的自然化的連結，使得女性肥胖特別成為醫療凝視的對象，同時建構了兩性肥胖身體為不健康與偏差的他者。英文摘要：The mainstream medical community and the World Health Organization have defined obesity and overweight as an epidemic disease that presents a risk to health. The paper points out that the obesity and overweight is a social constructed disease rather than a pathological one. Contrary to the dominant discourse of science of fat and obesity epidemic, the article asks how the mainstream medical science constructs fat as an epidemical disease and fat people as the 'deviant' other. In recent years, scholars of the critical obesity research have given significant attentions to the issue of fat, they suggest that the obesity epidemic is much more than a natural phenomenon that described by science. Rather, the obesity science is a social idea, constructed within a complex of cultural 'tyranny of slenderness', gender ideal and scientific knowledge.This article suggests that obesity and overweight seen as an epidemic disease is scientific uncertain, which is influenced and constructed within the trend of (bio)medicalizaiton. BMI (Body Mass Index) as a tool of scientific measurement is not an objective index, rather, the establishment of BMI actually signifies a translative process between global and local medicalization of obesity science, which is correlated with global pharmaceutical interests. Furthermore, the BMI measurement can be said to construct the boundary of normal/deviant body with reference to idealized feminine body and masculine medical gaze within both popular culture and science.This article, one the one hand, analyzes the trend of (bio)medicalization of fat body after the 90s, on the other hand, examines gender representation and gender politics of fat people within medial discourse and popular culture. It is argued that fat woman's body is mainly related to hormone disorder, infertility, reproductive functions and the failure of motherhood; fat men's body has been related to sex organs and erectile dysfunction as the gender improper/deviant body. Thus, fat body is stigmatized within medical discourses through the naturalization of gender body and pathological body.起始頁-結束頁：9-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.00092篇名：流動的成年禮：中國西南的毒品與愛滋病並列篇名：Navigating Youthfulness: Heroin and AIDS in Southwest China作者：劉紹華(Shao-Hua Liu)關鍵字：愛滋病;毒品;青年;文化差異;中國;AIDS;Drugs;Youth;Cultural Difference;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：愛滋病可視為人類史上全球化程度至深且廣的一種流行病。但它在不同地區或人群間的傳播型態與應對方式卻極具差異。本文分析諾蘇年輕男子性別認同與生命轉型的過程，理解為何自1990年代以來，中國四川省境內一個貧窮偏遠、高海拔的少數民族聚落，成為海洛因與愛滋病問題的重災區。經過長達二十個月的民族誌田野調查，本研究認為這些問題之所以會出現，是當代中國面臨劇烈政治經濟變遷，由於文化衝擊與族群對立關係等複雜因素的糾葛，加上年輕人在生命轉型過程中發展主體性的嘗試時，所出現的一個不幸撞擊結果。這個複雜的社會過程突顯出一種全球的流行病，在多元文化的社會中可能出現的多重面貌。英文摘要：HIV/AIDS is regarded as one of the most globalized epidemics in human history. Yet its transmission patterns and the social responses to it have been diverse among various localities and peoples. By examining the masculine identity and life transitions among male youths, this article seeks to answer why the Nuosu people in high mountains of Sichuan Province in Southwest China has a disproportionately large number of heroin users and HIV positive individuals relative to other peoples since the 1990s. Based on over twenty months of ethnographic research in a rural community, this research posits these problems as an unfortunate consequence of a highly complex social process in which drastic political economic changes, cultural and ethnic conflicts, as well as rising individuality among the young are intertwined. This convoluted social process illustrates a distinct case of the so-call AIDS pandemic in a multicultural and multiethnic society.起始頁-結束頁：77-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.00773篇名：Better Sex and Better Conception? Eugenics and Reproductive Health in China, 1950-2000並列篇名：優性與優孕：優生運動與中國現代生育健康，1950－2000作者：鍾月岑(Yueh-Tsen J. Chung)關鍵字：優生;優育;一胎政策;公共衛生;市場;政府;Eugenics;One-child Policy;Public Health system;Market;State;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討中國優生的論述何以從1980年代非常負面的優生手段，例如對智障者施以強制結紮或者對農村婦女施以強制墮胎的案件中，過渡成1990年代後期強調「性愉悅」、「性高潮」的社會物質條件。本文分析三個歷史社會條件，第一，中國改革開放以來性技術的商品化和市場置入行銷策略，以及學術界的討論研究透過媒體的導引重構了城市男女的性知識；第二，一胎政策提倡優生優育的壓力下，不僅導致城鄉醫藥保險和醫藥服務設施不均等的窘境，也使得城市父母產生出無所不用其極的濫用科技、以求完美小孩的心理壓力；第三，生育健康也是中國婦女運動努力的目標和中國共產黨政權的合理化基礎，從1950年全民動員戮力從事城鄉婦女生育健康，到1990的生育健康的平權目標促成了優生法案的推行，使得城市婦女在國家的意識形態的共識下，擁有了法律保障、新進技術的便利和經濟力量的優勢，「性愉悅」是象徵四、五十年來全民動員生育健康運動的累積成就。英文摘要：In the 1990s, no historical connections were made between Chinese eugenics and the horrors of Nazism and the Holocaust. Yet the recent developments in Chinese eugenics of linking enhanced sexual performance and fertility treatment are intriguing in comparison with cases of compulsory sterilization of people with cognitive disabilities and forced abortion for rural women often reported in the international media in the 1980s. What constitutes such a diametrical shift from a negative approach to a rather benign presentation of eugenics in the 1990s? Three historical and social conditions have constituted such discursive shift. First, the commodification of sexual technology and media exposure of scholarly findings of the sexual behaviors of adults in China have been instrumental in reconstructing urban sexuality since the reform era. Second, the unintended consequences of promoting superior birth implicated in China's ”One-child Policy” have generated a social cleavage of healthcare accessibility between the urban and rural population, and a paranoia to terminate unwanted pregnancies among urban married couples and their desperate pursuit of possible technological aids. Third, sexual pleasure signifies an accumulative success of four decades of mass mobilization by the communist party for reproductive health since the 1950s.起始頁-結束頁：113-168資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.01134篇名：工程實驗室的陽剛化及穩定機制並列篇名：The Masculinization of an Engineering Laboratory作者：韓采燕(Tsai-Yen Han)關鍵字：工程實驗室;霸權陽剛;陽剛化;性別;Engineering laboratory;hegemonic masculinity;masculinization;gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：科技專業領域中懸殊的性別比例與權力關係是女性主義研究的焦點，本研究進入培育工程師的主要場域：高等教育工程實驗室中，透過在工程實驗室的田野參與觀察與訪談，試圖打開工程實驗室中的性別黑箱，理解工程實驗室如何成為陽剛化的場域？又是如何穩定化？本研究發現，工程實驗室透過技術物質網絡、訓練實作以及互動模式而被經驗為陽剛化的場域，標準化的陽剛工程師透過物質、論述與實作呈現，研究生必須在實驗室中打造人與物質構成的技術網絡，展現陽剛氣質，才能成為實驗室的主流，當多數男性在其中優游自得並掌握資源的同時，少數男性與女性被邊緣化逐漸成為無聲的圈外人。工程實驗室透過兩種霸權陽剛的權力運作機制穩定實驗室的陽剛化：一方面透過中心集權的垂直權力網絡維持陽剛化，使多數男性在其中取得資源並優游自得，另一方面透過分散式的凝視維持霸權陽剛化科技人樣態，達成對於實驗室中其他樣態的男性與女性的邊緣化。垂直的權力網絡是台灣工程實驗室的特徵，由於台灣工程實驗室多呈現金字塔型的分工（老師－博士生－碩士生），隨之而生階級分明的權力結構，在這種階層化的權力結構下，上位者的陽剛化訓練與實踐穩固了實驗室的陽剛化。而分散式的水平凝視隱形權力網絡，則展現在工程實驗室每日生活中以多數男性為主體的「虧」互動文化，以及對於異性戀情慾的再確認，透過這些實作持續穩固霸權陽剛的性別權力階序。英文摘要：The unbalanced gender ratio and power relationship in science and engineering professionals are important issues for feminist studies. This study is a preliminary attempt to explore the gender black box in engineering higher education. I examine the daily practice and trainings in an engineering laboratory and analyze how the engineering laboratory been constructed as masculine and how does it stabilize?I argue, the masculine laboratory has emerged through the discourse of hegemonic masculinity, mediation of objects, and teasing interaction. The ideal engineer is characterized by hegemonic masculinity, and is configured by objects, symbols, and discourse. Graduate students need to construct a human-material technology network to perform hegemonic masculinity and to be mainstream engineers. In this process, most men acquire resources while some men and most women become marginalized.Further, masculine engineering laboratories are produced and stabilized by two power mechanisms: the centralized vertical power network and the distributed horizontal gaze power network, which enable most men to acquire resources and contentment, while most women and non-mainstream men are marginalized. The centralized vertical power network is embedded in the pyramid hierarchy of engineering laboratories in Taiwan higher education. Under this hierarchical power relationship, the masculine training and the requirement of teachers produce and stabilize masculine engineering laboratory. Distributed horizontal gaze power network emerges from male-subjective teasing and heterosexuality reconfirmation in daily interactions. This practice stabilizes the gendered power hierarchy of hegemonic masculinity.起始頁-結束頁：169-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.01695篇名：如何克服公衛訴訟中因果推論的難題：法律系統面對風險社會的一個挑戰並列篇名：Overcoming Difficulties in Causal Inference in Public Health Litigations: A Challenge that Legal System Faces in a Risk Society作者：邱文聰(Wen-Tsong Chiou)關鍵字：因果關係;公衛訴訟;風險社會;RCA;證據能力;舉證責任;比例因果;causation;public health litigation;risk society;RCA;admissibility of evidence;burden of proof;burden of production;proportional causation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：人類雖因逐漸取得操弄自然的能力而降低人類生活的風險，卻也因為操弄自然而製造或促成人類社會生活中前所未見的不確定性與未知的新危害。當公衛與流行病學企圖在科學有限的認識能力下，放棄因果二分邏輯，務實地透過統計機率的歸納，呈現超越既有生活經驗的不確定性時，法律系統則面臨回應公衛與流行病學所標定之不確定性的挑戰，具體表現在新科技風險所引發的各類「公衛訴訟」案件中。本文指出，圍繞在公衛訴訟的因果課題至少牽涉證據資格、舉證責任與證明程度、因果關係理論等三面向。在面對複雜因果事件時，科學的有限認識能力雖提供各種可能但非確定的風險機率證據，但法律系統若為了降低此種證據本身的不確定性，在完美科學的想像下過度提高證據資格的門檻，將導致真正被害者無法獲償，也可能遲滯應有的管制作為。完美科學想像透過證據資格標準所產生的不利影響，雖在採取職權調查主義的制度下可稍微緩解，但仍不免因現行的舉證責任分配原則與證明程度標準，使原告被課予完成證明完美因果關係的不可能任務。然而調整舉證責任分配雖是克服公衛訴訟中原告舉證困境的常用途徑，但倘若沒有根本地改變建立在錯誤想像之上的因果概念觀，舉證責任的調整也僅是緣木求魚。正本之道則必須放棄將「事實上因果關係」認為僅具有單一本質的法學因果關係理論。任何因果概念觀都是特定社會、文化、制度與學科典範的價值判斷與取捨而然。法學的「事實上因果關係」作為伺服特定價值目的之工具必然具有實用主義性格，既然總是在避免第一型錯誤或避免第二型錯誤間做出價值決斷，沒有理由不能以更細緻的價值決斷而放棄全有或全無的因果二分模型，改採比例因果理論，重新依照「最有可能原因推論」中所使用的機率證據，決定複雜因果事件中的因果貢獻比例及應負的法律責任比例。英文摘要：While human capacity to manipulate nature has contributed to the reduction of major risks in social life, it has also produced new uncertainty and unprecedented risks that elude current scientific knowledge. Abandoning the dichotomic approach to causal inference, epidemiology with its statistical techniques attempts to characterize and assess the new uncertainty and therefore poses critical challenges to the legal system, which has long relied upon perfect science to proffer a clear answer to dichotomic causation. This paper argues that although the challenges to the legal system are commonly analyzed in three different aspects of public health litigations, including evidence admissibility, burden of proof, and the theory of causation, only when we recognize that even the conception of ”causation in fact” inevitably involves normative decisions and value judgment can we determine properly when the use of a certain kind of causal conception to avoid ”type I error” is justified to serve certain functions of law and when it is indeed more justifiable to accept a conception of proportional causation to serve different legal functions.起始頁-結束頁：227-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.02276篇名：STS教學心得分享：成令方副教授作者：曾凡慈期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：281-286資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.02817篇名：STS教學心得分享：吳嘉苓副教授作者：曾凡慈期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：287-292資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201204.028701篇名：性別與社會建構：初探社會工作系學生性別意識形塑並列篇名：Gender and Social Construction: Exploring the Shaping of Gender Consciousness among Social Work Students in Taiwan作者：廖美蓮(Miriam Mei-Lin Liu)關鍵字：女性主義;性別意識;社會工作教育;社會建構;feminism;gender-consciousness;social work education;social construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：25期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以台灣北部5所大學社工系學生為對象，瞭解她／他們對性別議題的認知與覺察能力，以及在性別意識形塑過程，受哪些生命經驗、知識及性別觀察的啟迪，核心議題在於檢視社工教育在學生性別意識養成過程的位置，藉此反思台灣社會工作性別教育訓練，分析課程編排，以期未來能提升社工系學生性別意識知覺能力與性別敏感度。研究結果發現，社工系學生性別社會化過程中，家庭、學校和社會期待都是重要的強化機制，不僅受原生家庭父母的形塑，還有耳濡目染的性別化家務分工、缺乏性別意識的教育課程，以及不同生活經驗與社會處境等，在在衝擊個體發展；研究亦發現，受訪者對性別議題的認識和性別敏感度相當匱乏，其性別論述呈現破碎、混淆與斷裂，受訪者的立場往往只是認知上該做或該說的，內化又是另外一回事；研究結論指出，教師性別意識會影響性別意識的傳遞且與其教學實踐關係密切。最後研究者對社工教育提出兩點建議：一、關切社工教師的性別意識；二、社工課程設計應重視性別教育。英文摘要：Previous research demonstrated that social work education plays a crucial role in increasing student professional development and self-understanding in the process of gender socialization. Based on my doctoral findings, Issues in Father-daughter Incest Intervention, this study explores the understanding of social-work students of gender equity and gendered consciousnesses. This study also analyses the transformational process of social work students' involvement in gender equity education programmes and their understanding of the content, effects, and processes associated with the development of gender consciousness. This study will help social-work students enhance their gender sensitivity, and increase the application of gender perspectives during work.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.25.012篇名：我國失能與失智人口及其所需照顧服務員人力之推估並列篇名：The Projection of Disabled Population, Population with Dementia, and Care Workers in Need in Taiwan作者：王雲東(Yun-Tung Wang);薛承泰(James Cherng-Tay Hsueh);鄧志松(Chih-Sung Teng);陳信木(Hsin-Mu Chen);楊培珊(Pei-Shan Yang);詹慶恩(Ching-En Chan)關鍵字：失能;失智;長期照護服務;推估;照顧服務員;disabled;dementia;long-term care service;projection;care worker期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：25期出版年：2012中文摘要：研究目的：一、透過現有資料庫及設定若干假設以進行長照（潛在）需求人口（包括失能與失智者）及照顧服務員人力的推估。二、透過地理資訊系統將上述研究結果，進行空間面向的呈現與分析，並提出具體建議，以作為我國規劃長照保險政策之重要參考。研究方法：本研究採用盛行率法進行對未來長照（潛在）需求人口的推估，同時對於未來照顧服務需求時數與照顧服務員人力的推估，採用「以需求為基礎的估算法」進行。研究結果：一、根據本研究推估，在2011年全國所有年齡層一項以上ADL的人數為347,548人（1.49%），其中65歲以上者占229,491人（9.00%）；若加上僅IADL與僅失智者，則全國所有年齡層長照潛在需求人數更將上升至610,768人（2.62%）。二、高齡女性的長照潛在需求人數超過男性，且隨著時間的推移，差距將持續拉大。三、照顧服務員人力推估呈現不足與不均的現象；但若是能將外籍看護工整合納入長照系統，則全國總共的照顧服務人力應可足夠。未來建議：一、透過長照服務網的建置與若干獎勵／鼓勵措施，讓照服員人力不足的地區能優先發展起來。二、儘速建置完整的長照資料庫，並確立跨部會管理的機制。三、儘速將外籍看護工整合納入長照系統，並將職前訓練規定納入相關法規中。四、儘速建立照服員與未來納入長照系統外籍看護工的在職訓練、定期證照檢覈等專業資格規範制度。英文摘要：Aims: This study uses databases and hypotheses to project the population in Taiwan who are likely to need long-term care services in the near future (including disabled people and people with dementia), and the number of care workers required providing such services. This study also presents findings by Geographic Information System (GIS), and gives some suggestions for long-term care insurance policy-making.Methods: This study uses the prevalence method in projecting the population who will likely need long-term care services. A demand-based approach is used for the projection of the caring hours and amounts of care workers required.Results: Based on the projection of this study, there will be 347,548 people (1.49% of total population) with at least one ADL in 2011 in Taiwan. Among them, there will be 229,491 people aged 65 and above (9.00% of this sub-population). Including the population with only IADL and dementia, there will be 610,768 people (occupying 2.62% of total population) with long-term care needs in 2011 in Taiwan. In addition, the female elderly population with long term care needs exceeds the male population, and the difference between these two will keep increasing in the near future. Furthermore, based on GIS analysis, the amount of care workers will become insufficient nationwide in many areas, yet foreign care workers could serve within the long-term care system to make up this shortfall.Implications: This study gives four suggestions: (1) An increase in domestic care workers in some regions by the establishment of a long-term care services network having some incentives is necessary; (2) Construction of an integrated and comprehensive long-term care database will assist in confirming the mechanism of communication and policy-making for the different ministries affecting the long-term care field; (3) Increasing the foreign care worker involvement in the long-term care system, and implementing prevocational training regulations for them, should be addressed by articles of law related to the long-term care field, and (4) The establishment of vocational training regulations, and a license/certificate renewing mechanism for domestic/foreign care workers should be initiated immediately.起始頁-結束頁：51-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.25.023篇名：機構安置少女復原力培育之行動研究並列篇名：Action Research of Cultivating Resilience of Teenage Girls in a Residential Setting作者：白倩如(Chien-Ju Pai)關鍵字：安置少女;復原力;復原力培育;teenage girls in a residential setting;resilience;resilience cultivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：25期出版年：2012中文摘要：復原力已被證實可透過環境互動培育；國內兒少安置機構亦被要求應提供更具積極性的專業服務，特別是結束安置兒少應要有面對威脅性生活環境之能力。本研究旨在透過與安置機構專業團隊的共同行動，進行安置少女的復原力培育，並期能歸納出執行條件與影響因素。本研究之行動場域是財團法人天主教善牧社會福利基金會附設台東縣私立德蕾之家，自2008年6月至2010年12月底止，歷時2年半，共歷經四個行動循環時期。研究結果顯示，安置少女的復原力是迴旋反覆的成長歷程，也是專業人員與少女雙向交互增進的復原歷程。培育的執行需以關係性保護因子為基礎，並同時運用環境保護因子，方能培育出少女之個人保護因子。故社工要能有交互運用復原力培育與直接服務技術的勝任能力、成熟的行為模範及對社會工作專業價值的認同與實踐力。此外，由於復原力培育涉及組織人力結構、資源分配、組織文化與專業哲學信念的轉變，亦即是組織的轉型過程；其中，安置機構負責人的管理能力、理念堅持與高層組織支持是左右轉型成敗的關鍵。英文摘要：It has been proven that resilience has can be cultivated through environmental interaction processes. In Taiwan, children's and juvenile social welfare residential settings are facing the challenge of provided more active and professional service, and developing teenagers' independent living ability to withstand adverse circumstances. The research goals of this study are to implement resilience cultivation with a residential group through collaborative action, as well as to generalize the implementation conditions and affecting factors. The action was carried out at Taitung County Telay Girls' Home of Good-Shepherd Social Welfare Services Foundation, a teenage girls' residential setting in east Taiwan, from June 2008 to December 2010. Through 4 phases of action cycles, the following results have been found. The process of teenage girls' resilience cultivation is an unstable but continually advancing process. It is also a mutual interactive development process between social workers and girls. The cultivation of individual protective factors should utilize relationships and environmental protective factors at the same time. Social workers should have professional skill competence, the ability to act as mature role models, and commitment to the professional values of social work. In addition, an organization shift is required, involving the redistribution of manpower and resources, and the change of the culture and philosophy of the residential professional group. The key elements that influence success or failure are the management capability and persistent faith of the chief manager, as well as the support of the upper stratum in the organization.起始頁-結束頁：103-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.25.034篇名：福利國家的重構：以德國長期照護保險制度的建置與改革為例兼論台灣可得之借鏡並列篇名：Welfare State Restructuring: Construction and Reform of Long-Term Care Insurance in Germany and Policy Implications for Taiwan作者：陳明芳(Ming-Fang Chen)關鍵字：長期照護保險;俾斯麥福利體系;新社會風險;福利國家結構重組;德國;long-term care insurance;Bismarckian welfare system;new;social risks;welfare state restructuring;Germany期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：25期出版年：2012中文摘要：長期照護發展為福利國家核心制度之一是非常晚近的事情。研究者認為，在新、舊社會風險共同出現與後工業社會經濟成長遲緩的條件下，成熟之民主福利國家雖然普遍面對財政緊縮的限制，但透過福利制度的重新結構具有因應環境變遷的創新性能力，而制度重新結構的形式與內涵主要受到福利體制所影響。本研究將分析德國長期照護保險制度的建置與2008年首次重大改革的核心內容、制度運作之成就、缺陷與挑戰。作為保守型福利體制的典型代表國家，本研究透過探討俾斯麥福利國家的核心制度特徵，以及該制度特徵在晚近新社會風險出現所面臨之危機，呈現俾斯麥福利國家如何在人口老化使得照護需求量與質的增加，伴隨著家庭與就業結構轉變導致之照護者可得性降低的情況下，透過照護政策的發展進行福利體系的現代化，並指陳因此衍生的問題。當台灣透過1990年代以來福利體系擴張，建立以俾斯麥模式為主的福利體系，德國的經驗對於台灣在規劃與實施長期照護保險制度上具有實質參考的意義。英文摘要：It has only quite recently been recognized that long-term care constitutes a core institution of modern welfare states. The author argues that while most of the mature welfare democracies are faced with fiscal restrictions, they do have adaptive ability to modernize themselves with system restructuring that is dominantly conditioned by the welfare regimes. This paper elaborates the construction of the long-term care insurance in Germany-a typical conservative welfare regime-and its major reform in 2008 with the illustration of core institutional contents, the analysis of achievements, shortcomings, and future challenges. With the demonstration of main characteristics of Bismarckian welfare systems and their potential crises resulting from the new social risks, this paper explores how the Bismarckian welfare state processes the system modernization with the development of mandatory social long-term care insurance when faced with the problems characterized by the fact that the ageing population increases the quality and quantity of care, but the transformation of family and employment structure decreases the possibility of informal care. Taiwan has built a newly emerging Bismarckian welfare state through the social policy expansion since the 1990s and is facing similar problems resulting from the new social risks; hence, lessons learnt from the development of the long-term care insurance in Germany will be especially important to Taiwan for system design and policy implementation.起始頁-結束頁：157-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.25.045篇名：社區特性與社區社會資本之研究並列篇名：A Study on Community Traits and Community Social Capital作者：黃源協(Yuan-Shie Hwang);莊俐昕(Li-Hsin Chuang);劉素珍(Su-Jen Liu);林信廷(Xin-Ting Lin)關鍵字：社區特性;近距連結型社會資本;遠距連結型社會資本;橋接型社會資本;community traits;short-distance linking social capital;long-distance social capital;community-bridging social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：25期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討社區特性與社區社會資本之間的變異性與相關性，在檢閱有關「社區」與「社會資本」相關文獻後，研究者自行設計結構式問卷，並以社區為單位，針對全國6,313個立案之社區發展協會領導者進行全面性郵寄問卷調查及集體填表，計收回有效問卷780份。社區特性包括社區基本特性與社區組織特性，社區社會資本包括橋接型社會資本、近距連結型社會資本，以及遠距連結型社會資本。研究結果顯示，社區人口變項、社區地理區位、社區家戶規模、社區組織狀況、社區活動狀況及社區領導者等特性，分別與各類型的社區社會資本有一定程度的變異性或相關性。在對研究發現進行討論與分析後，本研究最後提出七項建議以供後續社區政策規劃和實踐上的參考，包括：一、拉近不同社區類型之社會資本的落差；二、重新思考與界定社區的方式、範圍與規模；三、善用族群、宗教或文化（產業）特性激發社區的凝聚力與行動；四、強化社區領袖對社區的承諾與經營能力；五、均衡不同類型的社會資本，避免方案活動曇花一現；六、持續推展社區評鑑，累積社會資本存量；及七、促進社區相關活動，以提升社區社會資本。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the variance and relationship between community traits and community social capital. After reviewing literatures related to ”community” and ”social capital”, a structured questionnaire was designed by the researchers. Community was viewed as a research unit and all of the Registered Community Development Associations in Taiwan were surveyed 780 questionnaires were completed and analyzed. The outcome showed that the different types of community social capital varied and yet were related to agree in community demographic variables, community geographic attributes, community scales, community organizing, community activities and community leaders' attributes. After discussion and analysis, this study proposed seven suggestions for the reference of promoting community work for policymaking and practice, including: (1) closing the gap of social capital between various community types, (2) rethinking and redefining the way, scope and scale of community, (3) motivating community cohesion and activity by good using of the characteristics of ethnic, religion or culture (or industry), (4) enforcing community leaders' commitment and effort of community management, (5)balancing different types of social capital and avoiding meteoric community programmers, (6) continuing to promote community evaluation and accumulating the stock of social capital, and (7) advancing related community activities in order to promote community social capital.起始頁-結束頁：209-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.25.0501篇名：品牌關係：顧客價值與品牌愛慕並列篇名：Brand Relationship: Customer Value and Brand Love作者：沈經洪(Ching-Hung Shen);洪順慶(Shun-Ching Horng)關鍵字：品牌愛慕;品牌關係;顧客價值;brand love;brand relationship;customer value期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：顧客滿意是行銷觀念的核心，但滿足消費者不足以讓廠商在競爭中勝出，還要讓消費者愛上品牌方能維繫品牌關係。本研究目的包括：（1）探討藉由功能、體驗與象徵價值提升品牌愛慕與顧客滿意，並增進依賴與行為忠誠。（2）分析品牌愛慕與顧客滿意的關係，驗證二者在品牌關係架構中扮演的角色。（3）依據研究結果，提出學術與實務意涵以及未來方向。本研究以調查法蒐集北、中、南三所大學130位學生的書店體驗。實證結果顯示：（1）品牌愛慕是功能與象徵價值對依賴與行為忠誠的完全中介變數。（2）顧客滿意則是體驗價值對行為忠誠的完全中介變數。（3）品牌愛慕取代顧客滿意成為影響依賴與行為忠誠的主要變數。（4）假設模式較競爭模式更能解釋顧客品牌關係的變異。英文摘要：Customer Satisfaction is the core of the marketing concept. However, simply satisfying consumers is not sufficient for continuing success in maintaining an intimate relationship between customers and the brand. Companies have to make consumers falling in love with their brand. The purposes of this article are: (1) to explore the functional, experiential, and symbolic values to enhance brand love and customer satisfaction, and thus build brand dependence and loyalty. (2) To examine the relationship between brand love and customer satisfaction, and verify the relationship between these constructs. (3) According to research findings, the authors propose academic and practical implications as well as directions for future research. 130 complete questionnaires were collected from students of three metropolitan universities. The analysis of structural model shows that: (1) brand love is a pure mediator between customer value (functional and symbolic value) and brand relationship (dependence and behavioral loyalty) (H1a, H3a, H4a, H4b and H4c are supported; H2a is not supported). (2) Customer satisfaction fully mediates the relationship between experiential value and behavioral loyalty (H2b and H5b are supported; H1b, H3b, H5a and H6 are not supported). (3) Customer satisfaction is dominated by brand love which becomes a main precursor of dependence and behavioral loyalty. (4) The research model explains more variation of customer brand relationship than the competition model does.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.DEC.M122篇名：廠商層級與消費族群品牌形象知覺差異分析：以運動休閒用品ATUNAS品牌為例並列篇名：The Difference in Brand Image Cognition between Hierarchy of Firm and Consumer: An Example of Sports and Leisure Brand ATUNAS作者：林婷鈴(Ting-Ling Lin);蕭如伶(Ru-Ling Siao)關鍵字：品牌形象;隱喻抽取技術;品牌概念地圖;brand image;Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation Technique;Brand Concept Map期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：廠商創業時，品牌形象的構思與執行，常由創業者主導，隨環境改變與組織發展，廠商建構與消費者所認知的品牌形象，是否具一致性？為何以及如何尋求解決不一致性？成為本研究主要議題。本研究運用隱喻抽取技術（ZMET）與品牌概念地圖，對個案公司進行深度訪談。研究結果發現創業者品牌形象與創立時的願景最為接近，但易受自我強化而產生慣性。行銷主管對環境變化較敏感，認知的品牌形象，除較具新構思外且與市場較為貼近。門市人員雖遠離決策核心，但因與消費者互動，雖受自我主觀知覺影響，卻是企業傳達品牌形象的主要管道，因此將其認知到的消費者品牌形象知覺，納入修正公司所傳遞的品牌形象，有助於縮小公司與消費者之間的品牌形象差異。英文摘要：During the start of a new business, the entrepreneur often conceives the brand image and leads in its implementation. As the environment changes and the organization development, are the brands images built by corporations and perceived by consumers consistent? Why and how should this inconsistency be resolved are the main topics of this study. This study conducted in-depth interviews with case study companies using Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation Technique (ZMET) and Brand Concept Map. The results of the study discover that the founder's image of the brand is most closely aligned with the vision at the founding of the company; it is, however, vulnerable to inertia caused by self-reinforcement. Marketing managers are more sensitive to environmental changes. Their cognition of the brand image, asides from having new ideas, is also closer to the market. Front-line staff may be far from core decision-making, but because of their interaction with consumers, despite subjective influences, they are the primary channels in which corporations communicate their brand image. Therefore, including what front-line staff perceive consumer's brand image in the brand image conveyed by the corporation is the best means to narrow the differences between internal and external brand images.起始頁-結束頁：29-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.JAN.M83篇名：顧客關係類型與漲價理由可控制性對漲價態度之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Customers' Relationship and Controllability of Price Increase on Consumers' Attitudes toward Price Increase作者：張心馨(Shin-Shin Chang);林鈺婷(Yu-Ting Lin)關鍵字：漲價理由可控制性;交換關係;共有關係;controllability of price increase;exchange relationship;communal relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討當企業提高產品價格時，所提供漲價理由之可控制程度（高度vs.中度vs.低度）如何影響消費者對漲價行為的態度；其次，以顧客關係類型（共有關係vs.交換關係）為干擾變數，分析企業和顧客間的關係類型如何影響消費者之漲價態度。研究結果顯示：（一）當消費者面臨產品價格提高時，企業主動提供漲價的理由，相對於不提供任何理由，會使消費者有較好的態度。（二）消費者對於企業提供低度與中度可控制程度的理由，相較於高度可控制理由，有較佳之態度。（三）在漲價理由屬於高度及低度可控制情形下，兩種關係類型的消費者態度無顯著差異。（四）中度可控制程度的漲價理由時，共有關係的消費者對於漲價行為的態度，顯著優於交換關係的消費者。英文摘要：The objectives of this research are: (1) to investigate how the controllability of the reasons for price increase may affect consumers' attitudes, and (2) to explore how the type of customers' relationships with the companies may moderate the relationship between controllability of reasons for price increase and consumers' attitudes. The results from an experimental design are listed as follow: (1) When firms raise the price of their products or service, consumers have better attitude if firms provide price increase reasons; (2) Consumers have better attitude and higher acceptance when the firms' controllability degree of these price increase reasons are low and medium; (3) Under the condition of high and low degree of controllable price increase reasons, attitude and acceptance toward firms' price increase show no difference between customers who are of communal relationship and exchange relationship with the firms; (4) Under the condition of medium degree controllability price increase reason, communal customers have better attitude and higher acceptance toward firms' price increase behavior than exchange customers do.起始頁-結束頁：59-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.SEP.M74篇名：以品牌概念圖重新探討品牌向下延伸決策：建構品牌聯想為衡量指標並列篇名：Reexamining Downward Line Extension Decisions through Brand Concept Maps: Brand Associations as Measurement Indicators作者：黃哲盛(Je-Sheng Huang);潘婉欣(Wan-Hsin Pan)關鍵字：品牌向下延伸;品牌概念圖;品牌聯想;downward line extensions;brand concept maps;brand associations期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究運用品牌聯想的相關理論基礎，以事後觀點評析產品線向下延伸時使用「副品牌」或「新品牌」策略之適切性，及其可能的延伸風險。研究方法上，首次將John、Loken、Kim 與Monga（2006）所發展之品牌概念圖（Brand Concept Maps；BCM）運用在品牌延伸決策之探討，解析其品牌聯想內容與結構特性，建構衡量指標，分別是第一層品牌聯想的迴響性、相互關聯性、次級聯想數目與聯想強度，及跨品牌間跨層級的語意關聯性比較。本研究以精品業Prada推出之「新品牌」Miu Miu，及Giorgio Armani所延伸之「副品牌」Armani Exchange（A/E）為研究對象，並發展出如何診斷其延伸是否成功的命題。最後，學術貢獻與策略意涵、研究限制及後續建議，皆有深入討論。英文摘要：Based on the methodology of Brand Concept Maps (BCM) proposed by John, Loken, Kim, and Monga (2006), for eliciting brand association networks from consumers and aggregating individual maps into a consensus map of the brand, this article aims to identify the reciprocal spillover effects between the parent brand and its downward line extensions and to reexamine under what strategic concerns companies launch new products as line extension or as second brand. The authors have conducted both qualitative and quantitative comparisons of the cognitive structures between consumers' BCMs to parent brand and to line extension brands. Two cases illustrated these examinations, i.e., the downward line extensions from Prada to MiuMiu and those from Giorgio Armani to Armani Exchange, respectively. The authors have developed some propositions for measuring the performance of downward line extension as well. The prospect academic contributions, implications of global branding strategies, research restrictions and further studies are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：85-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.FEB.M115篇名：自我建構與調節焦點對衝動性購買行為之影響並列篇名：The Influences of Self-construal and Regulatory Focus on Impulsive Buying Behavior作者：蕭至惠(Chih-Hui Hsiao);蔡進發(Chin-Fa Tsai);許雅涵(Ya-Han Hsu)關鍵字：自我建構;調節焦點;衝動性購買;self-construal;regulatory focus;impulsive buying期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：探討消費者的自我建構與衝動性購買行為之研究並不多，本文從自我建構與調節焦點訊息來探討這兩者對消費者衝動性購買行為之影響。本研究以183位大學生為研究對象，採取2（自我建構：獨立我、相依我）×2（調節焦點：促進型焦點、預防型焦點）的受試間實驗設計，進行假說驗證。研究結果顯示，（1）當消費者的獨立我被促發時，將容易產生衝動性購買行為；（2）相較於預防型焦點訊息，若廠商提供促進型焦點的訊息類型，消費者將比較容易產生衝動性購買行為；（3）自我建構與調節焦點二變數之間有一個明顯的交互作用，當消費者處於獨立我狀態時，廠商提供促進型焦點的訊息類型，消費者將容易產生衝動性購買行為；但是當消費者處於相依我狀態時，此時廠商若提供預防型焦點的訊息類型，則較容易使消費者產生衝動性購買行為。英文摘要：There is rare research on consumers' self-construal and impulsive buying behavior. The aim of this study is to investigate the influence of self-construal and regulatory focus on consumers' impulsive buying behavior. Thus, a 2 (self-construal: dependent self-construal or independent self-construal) ×2 (regulatory focus: promotion focus or prevention focus) between-subjects design is used and 183 undergraduate students are our subjects. The results are as follows. First, when independent self construal is stimulated, consumers tend to have impulsive purchasing behavior. Second, the consumers tend to have impulsive purchasing behavior when provided with promotion-focus information. Third, there are significant interactions between self-construal and regulatory focus on impulsive purchasing behavior. Independent consumers tend to have impulsive purchasing behavior when provided with promotion-focus information. However, dependent consumers tend to have impulsive purchasing behavior when provided with prevention-focus information.起始頁-結束頁：119-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.AUG.M56篇名：海外直接投資對台灣生技廠商營運績效影響之研究並列篇名：Analysis of FDI on Performance of Taiwan's Biotech Firms作者：李揚(Yang Li);鄭舜仁(Shuenn-Ren Cheng);李威龍(Wei-Long Lee);夏松喬(Song-Chiao Hsiao)關鍵字：生技廠商;國際直接投資;研發;Biotech firm;FDI;R&D期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：人類基因體計畫於2003年完成人類基因解碼，開啟「後基因時代」。許多國家紛紛加速發展生技產業，擬定策略、推動各項計畫搶佔先機，台灣亦積極將生技產業列為「兩兆雙星」計畫的產業之一。台灣生技廠商除了在國內積極發展之外，亦從事海外直接投資（FDI）以期能夠提昇自身的競爭力與效率。本研究採用非射線差額變量模型探討海外直接投資對台灣生技廠商之經營績效影響，並進一步將其分解成純技術效率、規模效率、及混合效率。樣本取自於台灣經濟新報資料庫，包括63家廠商，共計188筆觀測值，研究期間為2003年至2005年。實證結果顯示：FDI可有效提升台灣生技廠商之混合效率及規模效率成分，且降低資本無效率；此外，台灣生技廠商較適當的研發策略為較高之研發投資以增加新產品研發成功之機會，或專注於製造生產之低度研發投資策略。其他發現包括：（1）台灣生技廠商的效率偏低，尚有73.75％的改善空間（2）若忽略混合效率，大約高估台灣生技廠商效率達37.91％；（3）無效率的主要來源為原物料無效率。英文摘要：After the completion of human genome project (HGP) in 2003, biology went into ”postgenome era.” Many countries have marked different approaches in craving out a niche in the biotech arena. Taiwan also proposed the ”Two Trillions, Twin Stars plan” to advance biotech industry. Taiwan's biotech firms not only expanded in the domestic market, but also engage in foreign direct investment (FDI) in order to enhance their competitiveness and efficiency. This study applies the slack-based measure (SBM) to analyze how FDI affects the operating efficiency of Taiwan's biotech firms. We further decompose the technical efficiency into three components: mixed efficiency, pure technical efficiency, and scale efficiency. The data set, obtained from Taiwan Economic Journal, consists of 63 Taiwan's biotech firms for 2003-2005. The empirical results indicate that FDI can effectively increase the mix efficiency and scale efficiency. In addition, the appropriate R&D strategies of Taiwan's biotech firms should either invest massively in R&D in order to enhance the likelihood of development of new products, or focus on production with a little investment in R&D. Other findings include: (1) On average, Taiwan's biotech firms could increase their efficiencies by 73.75 percent if all firms operated on the efficiency frontier; (2) If we omit the mix efficiency, we may overestimate technical efficiency about 37.91 percent; (3) The primary source of inefficiency results from the raw material inefficiency.起始頁-結束頁：151-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.JUL.R080407篇名：臺灣上市公司董事薪酬影響因子之研究並列篇名：The Determinants of Director Compensation of Taiwan Listed Companies作者：林穎芬(Ying-Fen Lin);洪晨桓(Chen-Huan Hong);陳佳成(Chia-Cheng Chen)關鍵字：次要代理成本;董事薪酬;代理衝突;secondary agency cost;director compensation;agency conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討我國上市公司董事薪酬的影響因素，使用新制董事薪酬揭露準則，將董事薪酬結構區分為非誘因性薪酬（董事報酬與董事業務執行費）與誘因性薪酬（董事酬勞與紅利）及總薪酬三類，以2005年及2007年在臺灣證券交易所掛牌上市公司為研究樣本，採用複迴歸分析檢測董事薪酬的影響因子。研究結果發現董事薪酬多寡會受產業相對績效所影響，代表公司會將競爭者或產業的績效水準納入考量；董事會的內部監督效果可以有效降低代理衝突，此時公司會減少董事薪酬水準以避免無效率之情形；外部監控效果與董事薪酬則扮演互補的治理角色，當主動機構投資人持股率越高，其董事薪酬水準也相對較高；最後，當公司未來成長機會越高時，股東可藉由議定較高之董事酬勞比例來激勵董事做出有利於公司未來成長的監督行為。英文摘要：This study investigates variables that influence director compensation of listed Taiwanese companies using the new disclosure rule for director compensation. We divided the compensation from its structure into three types: non-incentive compensation, incentive compensation, and total compensation. This study collected the research samples of companies listed in Taiwan Stock Exchange from 2005 until 2007. Using multiple regression analysis, we investigated the variables, which influenced the director compensation. Our results show that the amount of director compensation is influenced by the relative performance of the industry. These companies considered performance level of competitors or the whole industry. The monitoring effect of inside directors can reduce agency conflicts. The company will lower the levels of director compensation to avoid the inefficiency of its directors. It should also be noted that the outside monitoring effect and director compensation are complementary to each other in governing the company and the board of directors. If the active institutional investors of a company have a high percentage of ownership, the levels of director compensation would be relatively high. When the company has a high level of future growth, then the shareholders will encourage directors to monitor the company vigorously and contribute to future developments of the company by an increased director compensation.起始頁-結束頁：175-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.JAN.R100038篇名：新產品延期上市與零售商調適度關係之研究並列篇名：Explaining Retailers' Adaptation to Delays in New Product Introductions作者：顧萱萱(Hsuan-Hsuan Ku,);高雅晴(Ya-Ching Kao)關鍵字：新產品延期上市;行銷溝通;零售商調適度;new product introduction delays;marketing communications;retailers' adaptation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：為爭取市場先機，廠商常於新產品實際上市前發佈預告訊息。然受制各種內外在因素，新產品恐出現延期情形。而零售商身處製造商與市場間，發生延期事件時，其是否願意配合廠商採取因應措施減少延期事件的負面效應值得深究。本研究探討零售商如何基於發訊廠商、延期產品與延期訊息內容等特徵，以及因此引發之競爭彈性和市場容忍度，決定調適度。經151家台灣地區販售3C產品零售商實證結果，發現延期廠商市場支配性、預計延期時間、延期理由和產品相對優勢可藉由零售商知覺之市場容忍度影響其調適度，延期廠商市場支配性、預計延期時間亦可透過知覺競爭彈性發揮作用。此外，延期產品（品牌）重要性、預計延期時間對調適度之直接影響效果顯著。英文摘要：For benefiting from the advantages of being the first in the market, many companies deliberately release information about a product well in advance of the product actual introduction. However, very often we see how companies fail to deliver their new products on the promised introduction due dates. When preannounced product is delayed, firm may demand and create the need for retailers' adaptation in its favor. This study seeks to explain a retailer's adaptation to product launch delays. An empirical analysis based on 151 3C retailers in Taiwan showed that market dominance of the announcing firm, the expected length of delay, reason for delay, and product relative advantages indirectly influence a retailer's adaptation through their effects on retailer's perceived market tolerance. The market dominance of the announcing firm and the expected length of delay through perceived competitive elasticity as the key mediator also determine a retailer's adaptation. Additionally, the direct influence of category importance and the expected length of delay on a retailer's adaptation are significant.起始頁-結束頁：209-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.JAN.R100389篇名：當簡訊遇上前導：品牌熟悉度、互動性、個人化、誘因之好奇效果並列篇名：When Mobile SMS Meets Teaser: The Curious Effects of Brand Familiarity, Interactivity, Personalization, and Incentives作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou);練乃華(Nai-Hwa Lien)關鍵字：簡訊廣告;前導廣告;好奇;SMS advertising;teaser advertising;curiosity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：手機簡訊廣告已成為繼報紙、廣播、電視、網路以外的第五媒體，廠商紛紛利用此一最新途徑，進行低成本且快速的行銷溝通。本研究嘗試將文字簡訊做為前導廣告的傳播媒介，以消費者的好奇心為研究焦點，探討品牌熟悉度、廣告互動性、個人化程度、誘因等可能好奇線索，如何影響消費者的資訊缺口及好奇反應。實驗結果發現：（1）品牌熟悉度、互動性可增加消費者「已知道」資訊量、縮小資訊缺口；（2）個人化程度、誘因正向影響消費者「想知道」資訊量，惟只有個人化程度可明顯擴大資訊缺口；（3）消費者的資訊缺口與好奇反應間呈現倒U關係，中度缺口，相較於高度、低度缺口，可產生較強烈的好奇，另外，高度和高高度缺口，所產生的好奇反應相近。英文摘要：Mobile advertising has become the fifth media following newspapers, radio, TV, and the Internet. It provides companies and ad agencies with a new channel for low-cost and quick marketing communication. This study delivers a teaser ad via mobile Short Message Service (SMS), also referred to as text messaging, to test whether mobile advertising is an effective channel for teaser advertising. The authors focus on the construct of consumer curiosity and conduct two experiments to investigate the effects of possible curiosity clues, including brand familiarity, ad interactivity, the degree of personalization, and incentives, on the curious responses of consumers. The experimental results reveal the following. (1) Brand familiarity and ad interactivity positively affect ”what people already know,” thus reducing the information gap. (2) The degree of personalization and incentives in ads have a positive impact on ”what people want to know”; however, only the former clearly expands the information gap. (3) The size of information gap and curiosity intensity have an inverted-U relationship. A medium-sized information gap could lead to greater curiosity than a big-sized or a small-sized gap. Moreover, big-sized and bigger-sized information gaps generate similar curious responses. The implication of these and other findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：239-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.APL.R1002310篇名：增量、升級或折扣？促銷框架對成本配置及相對偏好的影響並列篇名：Bonus Pack, Upgrading or Price Discount? The Impact of Promotional Framing on Consumers' Cost Assignments and Relative Preference作者：劉信賢(Hsin-Hsien Liu);邱玉葉(Yu-Yeh Chiu)關鍵字：促銷框架;心理會計;增量促銷;promotional framing;mental accounting;bonus pack期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：作者基於心理會計以及促銷框架，主張消費者面對價格折扣促銷時，會將折扣與購買成本歸為同一個心理帳戶並視該促銷為「損失的減少」；反之，在面對增量促銷以及升級促銷時，會將促銷折扣與購買成本歸為不同的帳戶並視該促銷為「額外獲得的利得」，如此增量促銷及升級促銷相較於價格折扣促銷更具有顯著性及相對吸引力。作者執行三個實驗證實本研究主張，實驗一與二證實了消費者偏好增量促銷而非價格折扣促銷，這個結果是基於消費者面對不同促銷框架時會有不同的心理帳戶配置；此外，實驗結果也排除了一線生機法則的相對解釋。實驗三則採取組間設計，結果顯示，升級促銷相對於價格折扣促銷更具吸引力。作者最後討論本研究對行銷實務及理論的影響。英文摘要：In accordance with prior research into mental accounting and promotional framing, the authors suggest that consumers confronted with price promotions are more likely to integrate the discount into their purchasing costs and consider it a reduced loss. In contrast, consumers offered a bonus pack or an upgrade should separate the promotions into accounts other than purchasing costs and consider them extra gains. The bonus pack and upgrading promotions thus should be more salient and attractive than the price discount promotion. Three experiments examined these propositions: Experiments 1 and 2 showed that participants preferred bonus pack to price discount promotions, mainly because they differently assigned the discounts to specific mental accounts across two promotional frames. Moreover, the results excluded an alternative explanation related to the silver lining principle. Experiment 3 confirmed that upgrading promotion was more attractive than price discount promotion. This study thus offers key theoretical and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：269-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.MAR.R1004811篇名：聯合忠誠度方案對於消費者購買行為之影響探討並列篇名：The Impact of Multivendor Loyalty Programs on Consumer Purchase Behavior作者：蔡顯童(Hsien-Tung Tsai);邱雅鈴(Ya-Ling Chiu)關鍵字：聯合忠誠度方案;方案認知價值;知覺關係投資;multivendor loyaltyprograms;perceived program value;perceived relationship investments期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要在探討聯合忠誠度方案對於消費者購買行為的影響。透過問卷調查及真實購買行為資料，本研究發現聯合忠誠度方案認知價值包含了五個重要的價值構面，分別為「獎酬的現金價值」、「獎酬的選擇性」、「獎酬的吸引程度」、「感受到特別的待遇」、及「合作商店的多樣性」。其次，「方案的認知價值」會透過「方案發起廠商滿意度」與「移轉障礙」影響消費者的真實「購買量」與「購買次數」；然而，「合作廠商的關係投資程度」僅會透過「方案發起廠商滿意度」進而影響消費者的「購買量」與「購買次數」。最後，「親友共同集點的壓力」會明顯地促使消費者將其購買意願轉化成真實「購買量」與「購買次數」。英文摘要：As important components of firms' relationship management strategies, multivendor loyalty programs aim to deepen relationships by rewarding consumers for doing business with coalition firms. However, relatively little research has examined the factors and mediating mechanisms that underlie the relationship between the perceived value of loyalty programs and consumers' purchase behavior. This study proposes and tests a model in which perceived value affects purchase behavior (i.e., purchase volume and purchase frequency) through overall satisfaction and switching barriers. According to both self-reported and objective behavioral data, five proposed dimensions of loyalty programs significantly influence consumers' purchase behavior. In particular, cash value exerts the greatest effect on repurchase intention through both mediators (i.e., overall satisfaction and switching barriers). The results also show that group norms positively moderate the relationship between repurchase intention and actual purchase behavior. The authors conclude with some managerial and research implications of the study's findings.起始頁-結束頁：297-326資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.JAN.R1005512篇名：跳躍擴散模型下固定比例債務債券之評價、風險構面與其避險機制並列篇名：The Pricing, Credit Risk Decomposition and Hedging Analysis of CPDOs under the Levy Jump-Diffusion Model作者：江彌修(Mi-Hsiu Chiang);傅信豪(Hsin-Hao Fu);王聖元(Sheng-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：信用風險;固定比例債務債券;Levy跳躍擴散模型;credit risk;Constant Proportion Collaterized Debt Obligations;Levy jump-diffusion model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文承接Dorn（2010）中信用指數價差服從Levy跳躍擴散模型之假設，提供固定比例債務債券評價之封閉解及其動態避險參數。我們藉由訂立相關風險衡量指標，剖析此商品之風險構面，並建構其動態避險機制。研究結果顯示，信用市場風險平緩的情境下，此商品達成負債目標價之比率偏高，此時投資人雖然有較低的平均資產淨損失，但是其平均增額等候時間也相對增加，隱含投資人因放棄投資於相同給付條件之同等級債券所喪失的機會成本相對提高。當信用指數價差波動增劇，此商品達成負債目標之比率偏低，且因其資產負債之缺口過大而提前出場的機率大增，可能引發投資人蒙受平均資產淨損失甚鉅。本文最後提供此商品之避險成效分析，我們檢測動態避險策略在不同信用市場情境下的績效，並探討避險頻率的長短對其績效之影響。英文摘要：This research follows Dorn (2010) in assuming that credit index spread resembles a Levy-jump diffusion process, in order to derive the pricing formulae together with the hedging parameters in closed-form for Constant Proportion Collateralized Debt Obligations (CPDOs). By introducing risk measures that are of concerns to credit protection sellers, we analyze the embedded risk characteristics of CPDOs, and propose delta-neutral strategies that are feasible to hedge such products. Our numerical results show that, under a volatile market scenario, CPDOs exhibit low rates in achieving the Target Bond Price, and an increased likelihood of their Cash-out events due to aggravated Shortfalls can provoke substantial losses being incurred to investors. We finalize this research by providing benchmark measures for the proposed hedging strategies under different market scenarios and we discuss the impacts of different hedging frequencies on hedging performances.起始頁-結束頁：327-361資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.OCT.R1201713篇名：Board Characteristics and Real Earnings Management並列篇名：董事會特性與實質盈餘管理作者：楊朝旭(Chaur-Shiuh Young);蔡柳卿(Liu-Ching Tsai);陳家慧(Chia-Hui Chen);廖思婷(Ssu-Ting Liao)關鍵字：董事會特性;實質盈餘管理;門檻誘因;board characteristics;real earnings management;threshold incentives期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究結合實質盈餘管理誘因及公司治理二脈文獻，探討董事會特性是否影響管理者因為門檻壓力而從事實質盈餘管理。以2003年至2006年美國上市公司為樣本，本研究實證結果發現績效門檻（包括零盈餘、前期盈餘及分析師盈餘預測三項績效門檻）會誘發管理者從事實質盈餘管理。此外，當董事會的成員具備較高的獨立性或專業性時，可抑制績效門檻誘因所導致的實質盈餘管理幅度。本研究之實證結果符合以下觀點：董事會治理對於抑制實質盈餘管理，係扮演關鍵角色。英文摘要：This study combines the real-earnings-management literature and the corporate-governance literature to examine how board characteristics affect real earnings management induced by benchmark meeting/beating incentives. Using a sample of U.S. listed companies over the period of 2003-2006, we find that managers are more likely to exercise real earnings management in order to avoid negative earnings, sustain prior year's earnings or meet/beat analysts' consensus earnings forecast. With regard to the role of board characteristics, our results indicate that boards with higher independence and professionalism can effectively constrain earnings-thresholds-induced real earnings management. Our overall findings are consistent with the notion that board governance plays a vital role in restraining real earnings management.起始頁-結束頁：363-399資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2012.OCT.R1202714篇名：承銷新制對承銷價與承銷費用之影響並列篇名：The Effects of the New Underwriting System on Initial Public Offering Price and Underwriting Fees作者：陳勝源(Shen-Yuan Chen);林宇平(Yu-Ping Lin)關鍵字：承銷新制;承銷價;承銷費用;the new underwriting system;offering price;underwriting fees期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究配合承銷新制應用Black與Scholes選擇權評價模式設計2項指標，藉此探討IPO包銷案件承銷價與承銷費用之關係。實證結果發現IPO包銷案件的承銷價普遍低於訂價日當天股價，承銷商若以承銷新制所訂的包銷報酬上限收取承銷費用會有超額風險貼水；另在已知承銷價下，由於包銷風險很低，預計承銷商大多會依規定的最低作業成本500萬元來收取承銷費用；在已知承銷費用下，由實際收取的承銷費用估算承銷價，發現實際承銷價多為偏低。此外，我們也發現承銷案件適用承銷舊制或新制對於其承銷價相對價格有顯著的影響，且適用承銷新制者，其訂定的承銷價相對價格較低。至於配合承銷新制掛牌首五個營業日無漲跌幅限制的規定，檢定結果發現承銷價相對價格的高低與掛牌首五個營業日的最低股價是否會跌破承銷價有關，但並不影響掛牌首五個營業日的股價行為。意謂著承銷價訂定日股價對於訂定承銷價格可以提供相當的參考價值，來降低承銷商的包銷風險，而承銷新制放寬掛牌首五個營業日無漲跌幅限制的規定，確實能夠迅速反應市場認同的股價。英文摘要：In this study we applies Black and Scholes option pricing model to structure two indicators to determine the relationship between the IPO price and underwriting fees under the new underwriting system established in Taiwan in 2005. Our empirical study shows that in most cases, IPO prices are substantially lower than the stock price on the IPO pricing date. Underwriters normally gain excess risk premium through charging underwriting fees under the new underwriting system. Given that IPO prices are known, most underwriters will charge fees according to the regulated minimum operating expense of TWD 5M since the potential underwriting risk is fairly low. Assuming that underwriting fees are known, the IPO prices will be relatively lower when estimated through actual underwriting fee charges. In addition, we find a significant relationship existing between the underwriting system version and the relative IPO price, while the relative IPO prices are lower under the new underwriting system. In regards to the removal of price limits for the first five trading days, our testing result shows that the relative IPO price is correlated to whether the lowest price drops below the offering price, while no relationship exists with the price performance on the first five trading days. This indicates that the stock price on the IPO date can provide certain reference value for underwiters to lower their underwriting risk. Furthermore, the policy of removing the price limits on the first five trading dates can quickly reflect the justified price of the market.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0115篇名：廠商採取市場導向行為會有較佳的績效嗎？動態競爭觀點並列篇名：Does Firm's Market-Orientation Behavior Lead Better Performance? The Competitive Dynamics Perspective作者：喬友慶(Yu-Ching Chiao);蕭櫓(Lu Hsiao);黃俊儒(Chun-Ju Huang);廖仲威(Chung-Wei Liao)關鍵字：動態競爭;市場導向競爭性行動;察覺－動機－能力觀點;competitive dynamics;competitive actions of market-orientation;AMC perspective期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要目的在於結合市場導向與動態競爭的概念，並且進一步以察覺－動機－能力觀點探討廠商採取市場導向的競爭性行動對其績效的影響。透過台灣4大連鎖便利商店（即7-ELEVEN、全家、萊爾富與OK）為研究樣本，蒐集自知識贏家網路新聞資料庫2000年至2009年共計10年連鎖便利商店間的競爭新聞，並進一步將10年區分成40季進行分析，運用結構內容分析法（Structured Content Analysis）擷取連鎖便利商店1,477則新聞中之3,525則競爭行動加以分析。實證結果發現：（1）市場導向競爭性行動對競爭者行動數目呈現正向關係；（2）競爭者行動數目對焦點廠商績效呈現負向關係；（3）市場成長性會強化市場導向競爭性行動與競爭者行動數目的正向關係；（4）市場成長性會弱化競爭者行動數目與廠商績效的負向關係。英文摘要：This study aims to combine the concept of market-orientation with competitive dynamics theory, and investigate how competitive actions of market-orientation affect firm's performance. Top 4 Taiwanese chain convenience stores, which are 7-ELEVEN, FamilyMart, Hi-Life and OK are used as the samples, the news related to competitive actions between these stores during 2000~2009 are collected, and the news of 10 years are further separated into 40 quarters. Data are reached from Knowledge Management Winner database. Moreover, for convenience store's competitive actions, this study employs structured content analysis to construct competitive action database of top 4 chain convenience stores. The final 3,525 competitive actions are retrieved from 1,477 news. The empirical results show that:(1) a positive relationship between competitive actions of market-orientation and number of competitors' action;(2) a negative relationship between number of competitors' actions number and focal firm's performance;(3) market growth strengthen the positive relationship between competitive actions of market-orientation and number of competitors' action; and(4) market growth weaken the negative relationship between number of competitors' actions and focal firm's performance.起始頁-結束頁：27-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0216篇名：產學合作中的知識探索與利用並列篇名：Knowledge Exploration and Exploitation in the University-Industry Collaboration作者：陳宗權(Tzong-Chyuan Chen);林博文(Bou-Wen Lin);朱默庵(Mo-An Chu)關鍵字：產學合作;知識探索;知識利用;university-industry research collaborative (UIRC) projects;knowledge exploration;knowledge exploitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的是探討知識探索／利用、產學合作計畫性質對產學合作績效之間的關係。本研究蒐集了自2007年至2009年間1,703筆產學合作計畫為樣本，採用階層迴歸分析來驗證所提出之研究假設。研究結果顯示知識探索與產學合作績效有正向關係，而知識利用與利用型之產學合作計畫的交互作用對於產學合作績效具有正向影響。除了主作用與交互作用外，本研究也更進一步發現學術研究人員執行產學合作計畫時，並非要兼顧知識探索／利用二項能力才能提升績效。本文最後提出結論與建議，可做為企業界與後續研究者參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of knowledge exploration/exploitation and the types of university-industry research collaborative (UIRC) projects on the performance of UIRC projects. In this study, hierarchical regression analysis was used to test the hypotheses in a sample of 1,703 Taiwanese UIRC projects during the period from 2007 to 2009. The findings suggest that knowledge exploration is positively related to the performance of UIRC projects, while knowledge exploitation has positive interaction effect with exploitative UIRC projects on the performance. Furthermore, we also find that over and above their independent and interaction effects, academic researchers in UIRC projects may enhance the performance by a focus on managing imbalance between knowledge exploration and exploitation. Managerial implications and further research suggestions are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0317篇名：對抗制度的創新：策略行動者的能動性實踐並列篇名：Innovating Against the Institutional Constraints: The Agency of Strategic Actors作者：涂敏芬(Min-Fen Tu)關鍵字：制度興業;制度策略;鑲嵌性;脈絡;能動性;institutional entrepreneurship;institutional strategy;embeddedness;context;agency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：策略行動者在不同的脈絡情境下，會如何實踐能動性，來改變與創新制度呢？此問題背後所關注的是行動與結構兩股力量的互動與抗衡，對此，本研究將根據制度興業的理論觀點，探討行動者（興業家）如何運用策略，改變其所處的制度環境。因此，關注重點將置放於行動者實踐能動性之策略行動構面，以及其與所處脈絡環境所產生的鑲嵌性，並以場域的制度化程度與行動者位置這兩個構面，解構制度興業活動發生的起始脈絡條件，藉此整理文獻發展一個制度策略的整合架構，來解釋行動者（興業家）在不同情境下會如何創新不同的制度與帶動制度改變。英文摘要：How do strategic actors embody agency to change institutions in different contexts? To answer this question, the focus is on the interaction and counterbalance between action and structure. Thus, this paper draws on the literature of institutional entrepreneurship to examine how actors execute agency when engaging with micro-level strategic actions to change or transform institutional structures. I examine the interplay among the institutional entrepreneur, the institutional strategy, and the embedded environment to highlight the importance of embeddedness. I develop an integrative framework, comprising two dimensions-the degree of institutionalization and an actor's position within the field-to shed light on institutional change processes.起始頁-結束頁：87-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0418篇名：管理限制對企業成長之影響：管理者心力限制觀點並列篇名：Managerial Limitations to a Firm's Growth: The Perspective of Managerial-capacity Constraints作者：康敏平(Min-Ping Kang);陳雯虹(Wein-Hong Chen);陳柏元(Po-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：管理限制;Penrose效應;企業成長限制;managerial limitation;Penrose effect;limits on firm growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：企業成長的限制主要來自於管理限制。管理限制包含：管理者的心力限制、管理者能力的限制、以及管理資源補充的限制。本研究從管理者心力限制的角度，主張不同企業之管理者心力耗損程度不同，進而對企業成長的影響也有所差異。本研究以台灣349家上市（櫃）製造業為樣本，檢驗管理者心力耗損程度對企業成長之影響。本研究主張制度協調例規與人際協調例規發展較成熟之企業，管理者心力耗損於溝通協調的程度較低，企業的管理者愈能保持充沛的心力進行企業擴張規劃而持續成長。同時，當企業處理環境不確定性的經驗累積突破一定門檻，企業發展的經驗原則愈能節省管理者資訊搜尋、處理的心力，管理者因此愈能將有限心力用於規劃企業的擴張活動，企業成長愈不會受到限制。英文摘要：Managerial limitations constitute the primary internal constraint on the growth of a firm. Managerial limitations include managerial-capacity constraints, managerial-capability limitations, and managerial-supplement limitations. From the perspective of managerialcapacity constraints, we argue that the use of managerial capacities is diverse across firms and that managerial limitations imposed on growth are thus heterogeneous. Using a sample of 349 manufacturers in Taiwan, this study examines the effects of the use of managerial capacities on the growth of a firm. We propose that firms with a well-established set of program-coordinated routines and feedback-coordinated routines are more likely to economize the application of managerial capacities to authoritative communications than firms lacking such routines. Hence, firms can save unused managerial capacities for growth planning and avoid impediments to firm growth. In addition, firms that develop heuristics or rules to manage uncertainties are more likely than firms lacking such uncertainty-management tools to save managerial capacities regarding information collection and processing. Thus, managers will have more capacity for growth planning.起始頁-結束頁：119-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0519篇名：多國公司產品創新專案網絡構形與影響因素之探討並列篇名：Factors Affecting the Configuration of Multinational Corporations' Product Innovation Project-based Networks作者：曾淑婉(Shu-Woan Tseng);于卓民(Chwo-Ming Yu)關鍵字：多國公司;創新網絡;網絡類型;multinational corporations;innovation networks;types of networks期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：多國公司可透過與外部組織形成創新網絡以從事創新。過去的研究主要探討創新網絡的形成動機與造成的結果，鮮少探討創新網絡的構形（例如成員組成）。本研究從多國公司的觀點，探索影響產品創新專案網絡構形的因素。本研究採取多重個案研究取向，涵蓋突破式與漸進式兩類產品創新專案網絡。本研究根據參與產品創新專案的內部網絡規模與外部網絡規模兩構面，將產品創新專案網絡分類，發現產品多樣化程度、產品創新專案重要性、新穎性與技術複雜度，均會影響產品創新專案網絡類型。英文摘要：Multinational corporations (MNCs) can innovate with external organizations by forming innovation networks. Previous studies focus more on the motives or outcomes of innovation networks but pay less attention to configurations of innovation networks such as the members involved. Taking the perspective of an MNC, in this paper we explore the factors affecting the configuration of product innovation project-based networks. This study adopts a multiple cases study approach and both radical and incremental product innovation project-based networks are examined. We provide a typology to classify project-based networks based on the scale of internal members joining a project and the scale of external members joining a project. We find that diversity of products, importance of projects, newness of projects and complexity of technology affect the configuration of product innovation project-based networks.起始頁-結束頁：149-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0620篇名：Untangling the Emergence of Dynamic Capabilities: Variety-inducing Organizational Routines for Technological Innovation並列篇名：探究動態能耐的緣起：誘發多樣化的技術創新例規作者：文馨瑩(Sonya H. Wen);李吉仁(Ji-Ren Lee)關鍵字：動態能耐;策略更新;組織例規;dynamic capabilities;strategic renewal;organizational routine期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：究竟動態能耐是如何形成與演變的呢？這一直是動態能耐文獻上的核心議題。本研究嘗試從共同演化的觀點，勾勒企業如何交互運用策略更新與組織例規，轉化為技術創新的歷程，進而解構其創新能耐的組織內機制。實證上，我們採用質性研究方法，以台灣積體電路公司（以下簡稱TSMC）為研究個案，深度剖析其做為晶圓專業製造服務廠商，如何歷經開創期的成熟製程創新（1987－1998）、延展期的先進製程創新（1999－2001）、以及更新期的產品創新（2002－2007）等動態發展階段。根據此深度研究的過程，我們提出誘發多樣化與縮減多樣化兩種組合組織例規的構念，並進而歸納出不同創新策略與組織例規間，在同一時期互動的Y路徑，以及跨期互動的Z路徑，作為理解TSMC建構與轉化其創新能耐的機制。最後，歸結本研究對動態能耐文獻的貢獻，以及技術創新策略的管理意涵。英文摘要：How dynamic capabilities emerge and evolve in an organization has been a central inquiry in the literature on dynamic capabilities. Applying the lens of co-evolutionary dynamics, we explore how an organization undertakes strategic renewals and uses organizational routines in order to facilitate technological innovation, leading to the emergence of dynamic capabilities. We discuss our qualitative case study of the sequential strategic renewals that enabled a specialized semiconductor foundry (Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corp., TSMC) to transform from a technology-latecomer to a technology-leader. TSMC's co-evolutionary dynamics for technological innovation started in the creating phase of mature process-innovation (1987-1998), evolved to the extending phase of advanced process-innovation (1999-2001), and then to the modifying phase of product innovation (2002-2007). Each phase illustrates the role of variety-inducing and variety-reducing organizational routines and their interactive patterns co-evolving with core strategies of technological innovation. We show how the organizational mechanisms for the formation and transformation of dynamic capabilities in the TSMC case follow cross-sectional Y-paths and longitudinal Z-paths. Finally, we discuss our research contributions and the managerial implications that can be drawn from our research.起始頁-結束頁：189-220資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).0701篇名：廠商研發資產、信任與合作績效－以生物科技為對象並列篇名：The Effect of R&D Assets and Trust on Performance in Firm Cooperation-The Case of Biotechnology作者：邊泰明(Tai-Ming Bian);林淑雯(Shu-Wen Lin);王宜婷(Yi-Ting Wang)關鍵字：研發合作;信任;合作績效;研發資產;R&D Cooperation;Trust;Firm Performance;R&D Assets期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：面臨產業全球化時代，產品製造過程因專業化分工而逐漸形成緊密連結。以創新為目標的研發合作，廠商彼此間可分攤創新技術的開發成本和風險，並且有助於提高成員的學習能力；但在知識交流與資源共享基礎上，研發合作隱含著技術機密外洩與資訊盜用風險，故與合作夥伴間的信任建立是影響廠商研發合作與績效的重要因素。本文以生物技術產業為對象，探討廠商間研發合作之信任與合作績效的關係，透過問卷調查並利用結構方程模式進行分析，實證結果顯示廠商研發合作夥伴間特定資產關係、正式合約簽訂和廠商間非正式交換，均分別會影響廠商間信任的建立，三者產生的綜效結果與廠商間信任建立也呈現正向關係，廠商間信任的程度越高越有助於合作績效的表現。英文摘要：In the era of industrial globalization, tight linkages are gradually developed among firms in the product manufacturing process, as the result of specialization. Among all kinds of linkages, R&D cooperation aiming for innovation allows firms to share the costs and risks of innovative technology development and helps to improve the learning capabilities of members. However, as R&D cooperation based on knowledge exchange and resource sharing implies the risk of confidential technical information leakage and of misappropriation hazards, trust among partners becomes an important factor of R&D network and firm performance. Using questionnaires and Structural Equation Modeling to study biotechnology firms, this paper intends to identify the relationship between trust and firm performance in R&D cooperation. Our empirical results show that specific assets, formal contracts and informal exchanges among R&D cooperation partners all affect interorganizational trust. Meanwhile, R&D assets from combining above three factors also have a positive relationship with interorganizational trust, which could further promote firm performance.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201211_15(2).00012篇名：e-GPS水準測量精度研究並列篇名：Study on the Accuracy of e-GPS Leveling作者：林老生(Lao-Sheng Lin)關鍵字：e-GPS水準測量;神經網路;橢球高;正高;大地起伏;e-GPS Leveling;Artificial Neural Network;Ellipsoidal Height;Orthometric Height;Undulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：由e-GPS測量之點位橢球高h，係自橢球面起算至點位之垂直距離；然而，在台灣地區採用高程系統為正高H，係自基隆平均海水面（大地水準面）起算至點位之垂直距離。就某一點而言，由於橢球面與大地水準面不重合，所以兩面之間有一段分離量，稱為大地起伏N；N值可以由橢球高h與正高H計算之（N=h-H）。內政部曾經在台灣全島2065個一等水準點上實施GPS測量與水準測量；因此，這些水準點的橢球高h與正高H皆已知，因此可以計算2065個水準點的大地起伏N。再利用此2065個水準點的大地起伏，可以建構區域大地起伏模式。如果區域大地起伏模式建構完成，可以根據點位的平面坐標，內插其大地起伏N，則該點的正高H值，可以由e-GPS所測之橢球高h與大地起伏N相減求得（H=h-N）；此即e-GPS水準測量的意義。因此，本文將以內政部所提供的一等水準點資料以及台南市政府所提供的一等水準點上之e-GPS測量成果，探討e-GPS水準測量精度有關的議題：（1）建構區域大地起伏模式及有關精度分析，（2）在一等水準點上實施e-GPS水準測量，得到正高估值，再與已知正高值比較，分析e-GPS水準測量的精度。英文摘要：The ellipsoidal height (h) determined by e-GPS is referred to the ellipsoid surface. However, the orthometric height (H) used in engineering application is referred to local geoid. Since the ellipsoid surface and local geoid are not coinciding, the separation between these 2 surfaces for a specific point is defined as undulation N.In the Taiwan region, a new national vertical datum, TaiWan Vertical Datum 2001 (TWVD2001), was established using the varied observations of 2065 benchmarks between 2000 and 2003. Each benchmark has two types of heights, namely orthometric height H and ellipsoidal height h. Then, it is possible to generate a regional geoid model using data of 2065 benchmarks. Since e-GPS surveying work is relatively time-saving. Hence, if a regional geoid model can be generated from these 2065 benchmarks with an adequate degree of accuracy, then, it is possible to transform the ellipsoidal height h from the e-GPS to the orthometric height H. This procedure is defined as e-GPS leveling.In this paper, issues relating to the accuracy of e-GPS leveling are studied, such as the establishment of regional geoid models, the achieved accuracies of e-GPS leveling compared to the announced orthometric heights by Minister of Interior. The detailed test results will be presented in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：35-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201211_15(2).00023篇名：都市邊緣農村地景破碎化研究並列篇名：Rural Landscape Fragmentation in Urban Fringe Areas作者：李素馨(Su-Shin Lee);林敬妤(Jing-Yu Lin);吳治達(Chih-Da Wu)關鍵字：農村地景;破碎化;馬可夫模式;地景指標;生態系統服務;Rural landscape;Fragmentation;Markov model;landscape indices;ecosystem service期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：自2000年台灣通過農業開發修正條例，正式開啟農地自由買賣的紀元後，農村地景受到了極大的衝擊。為探究農村地景破碎化的問題，本研究以宜蘭縣三星鄉尾塹村、大洲村、大義村為研究區域，利用馬可夫模式預測未來地景變遷，並透過地景指標分析地景格局的變動，以探討農村地景破碎化的情形、因素及影響。研究結果有幾項發現：（1）1987－2009年間，農地為本區之地景基質，但比率逐年下降，若以2000－2009年之開發速度持續開發本區，迄2054年建地將取代農地成為本區最主要之土地利用方式。（2）1987－2000年時因道路網絡的建構，本區處於「分割」之破碎化階段，然至2000－2009年間，受到建地群集擴張的影響，致使本區之破碎化現象呈現「消散」並趨於「收縮」之形式。（3）由於2000－2009年之建地增長率較高，且其地景破碎化情形更形劇烈，故可判斷，農業政策對農村地景變遷具有影響力。（4）1987－2009年期間地景破碎化持續加劇，農村地景逐漸轉變成城郊地景類型，隨著農地急速消失，農產供給的匱乏將成為未來之隱憂，文化服務、調節服務、維持服務等生態系統服務價值，亦將隨著農村地景的變遷而受到損害，建議相關單位應予重視。英文摘要：Since the Agricultural Development Act Amendment has been enacted in 2000, the era of free trade in farmland began and brought great impact on rural landscape. In order to explore rural landscape fragmentation, three typical countryside villages such as Weiqian, Dazhou, and Dayi, of Sanxing Township were taken as the experimental areas. The Markov model was applied to predict future landscape changes, and landscape indices were used to analyze rural landscape pattern. There are several findings in this paper: (1) Farmland is the main landscape matrix of our research region during 1987~2009, but the ratio is declining. If we keep developing it based on the rate of 2000~2009, constructs would convert into farmland and become main land type in 2054. (2) Due to road network construction, landscape was in the stage of dissection of landscape fragmentation in 1987~2000. But in 2000~2009, because of constructs clustering, it was in the stage of shrinkage toward attrition. (3) Judging from higher increasing speed of constructs and severer phenomenon of landscape fragmentation, we suggest policy is an important factor to rural landscape fragmentation. (4) Rural landscape fragmentation became worse during 1987~2009 and transformed cultivation landscape into peri-urban landscape ,then ecosystem services including provisioning services, culture services, regulating services and supporting services have been destroyed. The Government should grapple with this phenomenon seriously, and take actions to solve the problems.起始頁-結束頁：59-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201211_15(2).00034篇名：垂直化大型購物中心業種多樣性之最適空間配置策略模型並列篇名：Modeling the Optimal Spatial Strategies for Tenant Variety within Vertically Structured Large-scale Shopping Centers作者：游舜德(Tony Shun-Te Yuo)關鍵字：不動產經營管理;承租商間外部效果;商品多樣性;零售不動產;零售聚集經濟;Inter-store externalities;Retail agglomeration economies;Real estate management;Product variety;Retail properties期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：緊緻城市的特色之一，是垂直化發展下的混合使用，這使得購物中心也面臨高層化發展，然而此一發展趨勢，打破了過去依循美式郊區型購物中心，以低樓層方式建立的理論基礎。本文對近年購物中心內承租商空間區位研究中，提出同業種應予以分散配置之策略，提出反思。此種分散配置的理論，雖在歐美國家個案普遍適用，但往往無法適用於台灣與當前亞洲高人口密度都市地區大多數的個案。本文認為，同業種承租商在分散或集中方式配置上，各追求不同的差異性目的：分散空間配置的目的，在於促進消費循環，增加承租商間的外溢效果，提升整體聚集經濟；另一方面，區位集中的部門化形式，可以降低消費者在複雜空間中迷失的可能性，降低遊逛者的總購物成本，增加複雜平面的可利用空間資源。依照本文所提出的情境模擬分析與基本模型，採取分散與部門化策略的關鍵，受到基本來客效果、來客外溢效果與有效樓地板效果三者的消長，且在配置上，應將核心業種配置於接近人潮的核心低樓層，而高樓層則應配置屬目的型的非衝動性商品。本文以地理資訊系統建構大型購物中心的樓面空間資料庫，以亞洲與歐美的30個個案，共146個樓層平面為研究對象，以多元迴歸、因素分析與二元logistic迴歸等方法進行三階段的實證分析。結果發現，當總樓層數愈高，空間愈複雜且有效樓地板面積比例愈低的個案，採行部門化配置的情形愈強；且經營管理者確實較傾向於將核心業種「流行時尚與女性用品」，配置於人潮易達的核心低樓層（1－3樓），而將目的性較高的「餐飲美食與主題運動」商品，配置於高樓層中；從基本模型中的概念來看，這些策略在垂直發展的個案中，能獲得最大的營運價值。英文摘要：One of the features of compact city is mixed-use under vertical building structures; therefore, retail properties also inevitably face the pressure going high-rise. Nevertheless, this vertical trend of retail property breaks some principles suggested under observations of out-of town, low-level shopping centers. A large-scale shopping center is the cluster of various retail tenants pursing the highest agglomeration economies. Operators or property managers achieve this goal through wisely allocate the scarce resource, namely the operational floor areas. This research reconsiders the placement strategy for retail tenants of the same type within vertically structured retail properties. Previous research suggested that the location of the same type of non-anchor retail categories should be dispersed. However, this is not easily observed in the cases in Taiwan and other Asian countries for their complexity and high-rise design and usage of floorspace. On the other hand, we suggested that spatially departmentalized retail categories is a necessity when floorspace with more complex layout. This paper established a GIS-based dataset containing 30 large-scale retail properties from Asian and Western countries, with 146 detailed floor plans. This paper tested the relationship among floor levels, space complexity, effective space ratio, and departmentalization index using regression models. A further factor analysis and logistic model is used to extract core and periphery retail categories within tenant mix of centers and examining the exact location the retail categories were situated. The results showed that floor plan should transform the non-purposive shopping route into a guided purposive shopping pattern by departmentalized allocation when retail property were extended vertically and high complexity. The results also reveal that the core factor ”Fashions and women products” tends to locate at the core levels and ”restaurant, sports and theme stores” tends to be situated at the high ends of floor levels. The results support the strategies within the basic model for maximizing the operational value for vertical shopping centers.起始頁-結束頁：87-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201211_15(2).00045篇名：從高齡者自評健康條件、家庭資源及社會參與探討高齡者期望之居住安排並列篇名：An Investigation of Preferences for Living Arrangements of the Elderly-From the Perspective of Self-Reported Health Conditions, Family Resources and Social Participation作者：陳彥仲(Yen-Jong Chen);陳靜怡(Ching-Yi Chen)關鍵字：不連續選擇理論;居住安排;社會參與;高齡者;邏輯特模型;Discrete Choices Theory;Living Arrangement;Logit Model;Older Adults;Social Participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：15卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文從高齡者之社經背景因素、自評健康條件、家庭資源與社會參與傾向，探討高齡者對於期待之居住安排方式之影響。其期待之居住安排替選方案包括：與子女同住（不論有無配偶）、僅與配偶同住、獨居，以及住於機構等四項。本文運用2005年「台閩地區老人狀況調查資料」。首先，從敘述性統計分析高齡者期待的居住安排方式。並以不連續選擇理論建立Logit實證模型。實證結果並輔以直接彈性與對數勝算比分析，瞭解影響因素變動，對於方案被選擇機率之變動百分比。實證結果顯示，（1）高齡者之社經濟地位較為獨立者，越期待獨立的居住安排方式；反之則較依賴與子代共居。顯示高社經地位高齡者較趨重視個人生活隱私。（2）高齡者自評健康條件愈不佳，愈不期待與子女共居，避免造成子代負擔。此一結果證實，高齡者之需要照顧需求對期望的居住安排的影響，以子代獲益較多。（3）高齡者若家庭資源越充分，則越期待與子女共居。顯示高齡者普遍仍相當重視家庭價值。最後，（4）高齡者的社會參與傾向越活躍，則在充分的社會支持下，高齡者也越期待較獨立的居住安排方式。顯示有愈多社會參與之高齡者，較不拘泥於傳統與子女共居之居住安排方式。英文摘要：The goals of this article are to investigate older adults' preferences for living arrangements including co-residing with children (with spouse or others), co-residing with spouse only, living alone and living in institution based on demographic factors, health factors, family resources and propensity for social participation. Using data from ”2005 Report on the Old Status in Taiwan and Fukien Area”, we analyze older adults' preferences for living arrangements through descriptive statistics and propose an empirical model based on discrete choice theory; then, we use direct elasticity and odds ratio to analyze the percent change of the probability of certain arrangement being chosen. Results reveal that elderly people (1) with higher socioeconomic status prefer independent living arrangements or otherwise rely on coresidence with children, which means that elderly people value more for individual privacy. (2) Those with poor self-reported health prefer to separate residence from their children to avoid being a burden. This suggests that parents display more altruistic behavior for their children. (3) Those with more family resources prefer to coreside with children, which indicates that elderly people highlight often the value of family. (4) Those with adequate social support prefer independent living arrangements, which demonstrate that elderly people would accept non-traditional living arrangements i.e. coresiding with children.起始頁-結束頁：127-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201211_15(2).000501篇名：做批判知識份子並列篇名：Being a Critical Intellectual作者：夏林清(Lin-Ching Hsia)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：351-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.00122篇名：狀況內的半個局外人－《發現成露茜》讀後並列篇名：An Inside Outsider-Thoughts on "Discovering Lucie Cheng"作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：87期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：355-360資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201206.00133篇名：專題導言：從克服分類／範疇先行之角度的閱讀與看見並列篇名：Papers That Might Counter the Preoccupation of Conventional Classifications/Categorizations: Readings in Initiating a Critical Dialogue作者：丘延亮(Fred Y. L. Chiu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.00014篇名：性別政治與原住民主體的呈現：夏曼．藍波安的文學作品和Si-Manirei的紀錄片並列篇名：Gender Politics and the Representation of Taiwan Indigenous Subjectivity: Writings by Syaman Rapongan and a Documentary作者：邱貴芬(Kuei-Fen Chiu)關鍵字：原住民;主體;文學;紀錄影像;夏曼．藍波安;Si-Manirei;indigenous;subjectivity;literature;documentary film;Syaman Rapongan;Si-Manirei期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012中文摘要：本論文從性別政治的角度切入，分析兩位達悟文化工作者（作家夏曼．藍波安和紀錄片女導演張淑蘭－Si-Manirei）在其文學、影像作品裡所呈現的原住民主體所隱含的深層意涵。原住民文學運動在1980年代中葉伴隨原住民運動興起，積極介入原住民問題（the indigenous question）的探討，於原住民主體建構的課題著墨尤深。達悟作家夏曼．藍波安堪稱代表。本論文先以性別政治角度切入夏曼所呈現的達悟主體論述建構，解析其中隱含的「男性社會慾望」（homosocial desire）的深層社會文化意義，以及如此「達悟男性主體」建構方式可能隱藏的性別政治意涵。論文後半段以達悟紀錄片女導演Si-Manirei的代表作《面對惡靈》作為參照，討論這部紀錄片如何在召喚倫理行動的影像紀錄過程中，呈現另外一種原住民主體建構的方式。除了作品預設的讀者／觀眾群不同之外，性別位置的不同也影響兩位達悟文化工作者對於原住民主體建構的處理方式。性別政治的關照有助於我們深入探究原住民主體再現的問題。英文摘要：Via a comparative study of the writings by Syaman Rapongan (a celebrated Tau indigenous writer) and a documentary film by Si-Manirei (a renowned Tau woman documentary filmmaker), this essay explores the gender politics of the representation of indigenous subjectivity. While the indigenous subjectivity formation in Syaman Rapongan's works is often informed by what can be called ”homosocial desire” as defined by Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Si-Manirei's documentary film And Deliver Us from the Evil represents indigenous subjectivity in terms of Levinasian ethical responsibility for the other. In addition to the difference in the intended function of the works, gender position in traditional indigenous society also contributes to the difference in the approach to the question of indigenous subjectivity. The essay contends that critical attention to gender politics helps shed light on the cultural representation of indigenous subjectivity.起始頁-結束頁：13-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.00025篇名：部落「姊妹」做性別：交織在血親、姻親、地緣與生產勞動之間並列篇名："Sisters" Making Gender: Between Everyday Work and Social Relations作者：林文玲(Wen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：「姊妹」;性別化勞動;社會成人;性／別的政治經濟學;"sisters";"cc's";gendered work;social adults;political economy of sex and gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012中文摘要：居住在部落（社群）的「姊妹」在生命的諸多向度上，因為不同環境與條件的多重交織，以及由此而來的具差異的身體展現與性別表達，使得生活在部落的原住民「姊妹」在性別構想以及性別的身體實踐上不同於「變裝」（CD: cross dresser）、「跨性別」（TG: transgender）或「男同志」（gay men）的性別身分。這些「差異」的產生及持續存在，其所座落的社會機制、文化環境與族群互動的經驗，讓這些差異得以顯現或產生轉化。尤其，部落（社群）的親屬關係紐帶確實連結或束縛所有有社會關係的人。部落生活所體現的親屬關係，實際上與政治、經濟、社會互動與宗教行為的種種緊密交揉。親屬關係的界限、規範或義務、責任的展現，多少說明了部落「姊妹」在性的實踐、性別的展演、社會連結以及家（戶）建立的可能或不可能。部落（社群）生活的當代情境以及政治經濟的差異，形塑著部落原住民「姊妹」們的生活與性別的種種表現。本文重點之一是透過人類學視角對「姊妹」（性別）作為一種（可能的）社會範疇、社會關係（的體現）以及社會結構、文化秩序，如何在固有的親屬關係版圖中，自我界定、轉化或符應既定的性別（及其規範），維護、修整其社會關係與網絡之連結，進行觀察。重點之二則聚焦在「姊妹」們有因親屬連帶或因「姊妹」的性別連帶，使得她們在社群生活、經濟生產與情感聯繫，攀附在既有的親屬組織與家（戶）單位之中，或隱或顯地連結彼此，發展了「姊妹」關係、鞏固「姊妹」情誼的同時，也讓家（情感與象徵的功能）與家戶（經濟與生產的功能），以及「姊妹」身分及其意涵的（再）生產，有了不同的出路與具體的另類實踐。英文摘要：”A-dju”, the indigenous sisters living in rural cities have their unique ways of gender performance and display of physicality that are ”different” from cross dressers, transgenders and gay men. This paper will explore the issue of how intersectionality of social institutions, cultural and physical environment, and interactions among different ethnic groups enables the evolution, the existence, and the transformation of ”a-dju”. To this end, my research will examine the social category, the embodiment of social relations, the social structure, as well as the establishing or sustaining cultural order of ”a-dju” from the perspective of anthropology, so as to build up a clear vision on the following concepts: (1) The formation and sustainability of ”a-dju” as a concept and a category within indigenous culture. (2) The establishment of a gender system and the operation of gender ideologies among different cultural conditions and social context.起始頁-結束頁：51-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.00036篇名：《南進台灣》：紀錄片作為帝國之眼並列篇名："Go Southward to Taiwan": Documentary as Imperial Eyes作者：蔡慶同(Chin-Tong Tsai)關鍵字：《南進台灣》;紀錄片;帝國之眼;再現真實;"Go Southward to Taiwan";documentary;Imperial Eyes;representing reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012中文摘要：回顧既有日治時期台灣電影史的經驗研究，較少論及紀錄片的類型及其階段性的差異，尤其是它與其他再現真實的技術，如何共同形構作為視覺的治理？因此，本文乃是以《南進台灣》為例，分析其生產的權力、紀錄的形式、環島的巡視、南進的視線等等面向，並透過它與其他再現真實技術之間的互動連結，進一步凸顯帝國主義是如何不斷再現被選擇的真實，以規訓著包括被殖民者與殖民者的觀看方式。英文摘要：Cinema in Taiwan during Japanese colonial rule was both a leisure and a propaganda (especially the genre of documentary). This paper examines ”Go Southward to Taiwan” as an example and argues that documentary during Japanese colonial rule is bested understood as the technique of representing reality just like exhibition and tourism. They all practice as Imperial Eyes to govern the looking both native and colonist.起始頁-結束頁：99-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.00047篇名：貧窮的文化反思：三位原住民的生命話語與意義並列篇名：The Cultural Reflections on Poverty: Ethnographic Depictions of Three Indigenous Lives among Taiwanese Aborigines作者：林徐達(Hsu-Ta Lin)關鍵字：經濟生活;底層社會;社會福祉;貧窮文化;原住民研究;economic lives;underclass;social welfare;culture of poverty;indigenous studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文通過民族誌田野調查，陳述三位原住民報導人的生活經驗與話語，闡釋底層人們的貧窮處境、價值認知與生命敘事，藉以反思統計分析模式的文化盲點，以及當代社會主流價值觀對於貧窮文化和底層生活的偏見。貧窮的經濟生活特徵一方面再現了現實環境的壓力、生活態度與道德價值、生命經驗的累積，和維持生存的必要妥協和適應等複雜因素，另一方面，藉由人類學對於「原初的豐裕社會」的理解，亦彰顯了在地的文化行為和生態經濟體系。同時，本文試圖釐清貧窮概念如何被納入社會福祉論述中，賦予框界、族群想像、福利補助等行動，並且認為主流社會價值長期以他者的文化和道德標準，評予底層人們的貧窮標籤，由此形塑出無法擺脫的文化創傷。通過Oscar Lewis對於貧窮文化的詮釋，本文主張貧窮的定義不單是某一社群在經濟處境上的剝奪，更是較大優勢的資本主義文化社會下的階級身分；貧窮文化正是處在邊緣位置的貧窮人們，在此一生活價值體系中所採取的適應方式和反應。英文摘要：Drawing on the ethnographic depictions of the economic lives among three Taiwanese aborigines, this essay intends to bring to light the culture of poverty of the underclass. By means of illuminating the concept of ”original affluent society”, this essay articulates the economic lives of Taiwan's aboriginal society, thereby revealing their eco-cultural system. This essay then criticizes the ways in which the social welfare policies and financial supports intensify a dismal impression of inferior abilities imprinted on the aborigines. The conceptualizations of multiculturalism and sustainability in turn insinuate a cultural image of victimization into people's minds. The definition of and understanding toward poverty is thus never simply comprehended as an economic deprivation, but a social status as well as cultural suffering inextricably supplemented by a predominant capitalist society. The essay asserts that with a low aspiration of living, the marginalized people adopt the mechanism of culture of poverty as a means to reduce frustration, and gain the confidence of identity and strength of survival.起始頁-結束頁：133-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.00058篇名：跨文化理解與翻譯：魯凱族田野經驗與閱讀原住民漢語文學之間的對話並列篇名：Cross-cultural Understanding and Translation: A Dialogue between Reflections on My Experience of Taiwan Rukai Indigenous Fieldwork and Remarks of Reading Rukai Indigenous Literature作者：王應棠(Ying-Tang Wang)關鍵字：跨文化理解;翻譯;對話;原住民漢語文學;cross-cultural understanding;translation;dialogue;indigenous literature期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文首先從我在魯凱族好茶部落田野中的「錯誤」與「錯愕」經驗出發，指出其中凸顯出的課題已經不再是一般的跨文化對話中的理解困境，而是連族群內部的人對自己族群傳統的認知都存在巨大差異的現象。然後轉到當時事件中的要角奧威尼在因緣際會之中，從「報導人」、「翻譯」與「顧問」等做為本族與他族的中介者，逐漸轉為魯凱族的作家，透過漢語書寫展開族群文化的紀錄與文學創作，以詩歌、散文、報導及小說等多樣的文類呈現，而創作之依據絕大部分係其對自身文化之採集與詮釋之成果，因此他的所有作品均可視之為自我書寫之民族誌來閱讀。穿梭在魯凱族好茶的田野經驗與閱讀奧威尼漢語書寫文本的體驗，我嘗試將「（魯凱族好茶部落）田野作為文本」與「（魯凱族作家奧威尼的漢語書寫）文本做為田野」併置，突出二者共同的跨文化理解的基本問題。接著論述奧威尼的具體書寫文本案例，討論原住民漢語書寫在生產與接受過程中，所涉及的語言與文化脈絡問題，並進一步討論以「翻譯作為跨文化理解的模式」對此一議題的啟示。作為初步結論，我以原住民漢語文學作為跨文化理解的媒介，並將翻譯作為跨文化理解的模式，讓我們可以透過「翻譯」，昭示了一種包含他者，並且邊界可以在跨文化對話的歷史進程中不斷擴大的特質。受到詮釋學的啟發，強調我們對自身文化的自我理解永遠需要走出自身，在遭逢差異中才能反思自身文化的未言明的前見，從而擴大對自己文化的理解。而在理解的過程中，初期所發生的「錯誤」、「錯愕」等不理解或誤解的現象，正是預設了彼此可以相互理解為前提。英文摘要：This study is aimed to give shape to the notion of ”translation as a model/metaphor of cross-cultural understanding”. I started this paper with a description of what I, an ethnic Han researcher, called the ”error and shock” events in my fieldwork with Rukai tribal communities in southern Taiwan. These ethnographic happenings led to the realization that disputes regarding the meanings of cultural tradition existed not only in cross-cultural encounters, but also among indigenous informants themselves. I then made a close reading of literature works done by a local Rukai informant, Auvini kadresengan, a free-lance writer devoted himself to record Rukai cultural tradition through various writing genres of report, poetry, essay and fiction. As such, Auvini kadresengan's literature works could be regarded as self-report ethnography. The highlight of this paper was to juxtapose my fieldwork with Auvini kadresengan's writings and envision them as dialogue to illuminate what it took to establish cross-cultural understanding. The dialogical arrangement was not merely a juxtaposition of concepts or categories, isolated from their social contexts. A conversation between two people always involves a third dimension, that is, the mediation of the embedded or unconscious cultural structures in language, terminologies, non-verbal codes of behavior, and assumptions about what constitutes the imaginary, real, and symbolic. Accordingly, I emphasized that aspects of language and cultural context are essential to the production, circulation and reception of indigenous literature, which can be embodied and labeled as ”translation as a model/metaphor of cross-cultural understanding”. Approaching indigenous literature as mediator of cross-cultural understanding, I interwove mine and Auvini kadresengan's ethnographic texts to indicate that every culture always includes the other and its boundary can be widened through cross-cultural dialogue. The ”error and shock” events involving misunderstanding is unavoidable in the beginning of cross-cultural encounter. Nonetheless, it is also a prerequisite to reach mutual understanding if dialogue is to be continued.起始頁-結束頁：179-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.00069篇名：編按：錢理群的毛澤東並列篇名：Editorial Introduction: Qian Liqun's Mao Zedong作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：207-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.000710篇名：足踏著中國的土地並列篇名：Feet on the Land of China作者：孫曉忠(Xiao-Zhong Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：211-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.000811篇名：歷史中的「個人」可以多「大」？以《毛澤東時代和後毛澤東時代》為中心並列篇名：How does the individual work throughout the history?: focus on The Mao Zedong Era and Post Mao Era作者：姚丹(Dan Yao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：225-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.000912篇名：面對當代史，我們需要什麼樣的勇氣和謙遜？從錢理群《毛澤東時代和後毛澤東時代》第一講談起並列篇名：Courage and Modesty in the Discourse of Contemporary History: A Tentative Discussion of the First Chapter of Qian Liqun's "The Mao Zedong Era and Post Mao Era"作者：何吉賢(Ji-Xian He)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：237-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001013篇名：「五七體制」的啟示並列篇名：On a Revelation of "57 System"作者：鈴木將久(Suzuki Masahisa)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：253-266資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001114篇名：自我的歷史構成：讀《毛澤東時代和後毛澤東時代》並列篇名：Make Youself Historical: After Reading "The Mao Zedong Era and Post Mao Era"作者：何浩(Hao He)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：267-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001215篇名：歷史書寫中的批判性與歷史性：讀錢理群先生著《毛澤東時代和後毛澤東時代（1949-2009）》並列篇名：A Critical Writing or Historical Writing?作者：程凱(Kai Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：291-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001316篇名：自由社會主義與媒介交叉補貼：從《傳播在中國》論起並列篇名：Liberal Socialism and Cross-subsidies of the Media: Reasoning with "Communication in China"作者：馮建三(Chien-San Feng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：317-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001417篇名：編按：淺井基文與陳映真的故事並列篇名：Editorial Introduction: The Story of Asai Motofumi and Chen Yingzhen作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：341-344資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001518篇名：我所認識的陳映真以及1960年代的台灣並列篇名：My Understanding of Chen Yingzhen and the 1960s Taiwan作者：淺井基文(Asai Motofumi);鄭宏(Hong Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：345-363資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001619篇名：淺井基文：就我而言的陳映真與一九六零年代（會後討論）並列篇名：My Understanding of Chen Yingzhen and the 1960s Taiwan (Discussion Session)作者：馮啟斌;胡清雅期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：86期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：365-377資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201203.001701篇名：認同與自決權－民族文化認同的價值，是否足以證成自決的權利？並列篇名：The Identity Argument for National Self-determination: Is the Interest in National Identity Sufficient to Justify the Right of Self-determination?作者：李心文(Hsin-Wen Lee)關鍵字：民族;民族主義;文化;認同;自治;自決;最高保障原則;nation;nationalism;culture;identity;self-government;selfdetermination;the optimal protection principle期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：41期出版年：2012中文摘要：許多哲學家主張，民族文化認同（national identity）的價值足以證成一個民族社群，建立一個屬於自己民族、主權獨立國家的初步權利（prima facie right）。我把這些論證統稱為「認同論證」。這篇論文裡，我先說明認同論證裡三個步驟，再逐一檢視它們是否足以推導出該論證支持者所想要得到的結論。我的看法是，這個論證的有效性依賴著「最高保障原則」（the Optimal Protection Principle），但是，該原則並不適用於保護一個民族的權益。此外，即使假設該論證成功地證成了民族自決權，這樣的論證方法下所推導出的權利，也沒有任何實質意義。最後，認同論證也會推導出「移民的民族也有自決權」這樣的結論，這個主張與近代反殖民思想有明顯衝突。因此，民族認同論證並沒有成功地證成一個民族自決的初步權利。英文摘要：Nationalists often appeal to the importance of national identity to justify the right of a national community to establish an independent, sovereign state. This type of argument is commonly referred to as the identity argument. In this paper I consider whether the identity argument is sound. I begin by explaining the three steps in this argument and then critically evaluate it. My examination reveals that the identity argument relies on the hidden premise that I call The Optimal Protection Principle. While this principle applies to cases of personal autonomy, it does not apply to the case of collective autonomy. In addition, even assuming that the interest in national identity was sufficient to justify a group's right to self-determination, such a right would be empty as any group with important interests would equally be entitled to the same right. Lastly, the identity argument would entail the implausible conclusion that even an immigrant, polyethnic group has the right to self-determination. Thus, the identity argument fails to justify the right of a national community to establish an independent state.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120600410012篇名：安寧緩和醫療條例中的末期病患與病人自主權並列篇名：Terminally Ill and Patient Right of Autonomy in Hospice Palliative Care Act of Taiwan作者：孫效智(Hsiao-Chih Sun)關鍵字：安寧緩和醫療條例;病人自主權;關係性自主;末期病人;共融決策;Hospice Palliative Care Act of Taiwan;patient right of autonomy;relational autonomy;terminally ill;collegiality of decision-making期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：41期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討第二次修法後的《安寧緩和醫療條例》所仍面對的重大倫理與法律議題。首先是第一條的修法所引發的問題，其次則是第七條修法的問題。第一條的修法看似無關宏旨，實則關係到病人自主權、關係性自主概念以及末期病人的爭議，也涉及到法規範次序之間的融貫性。第七條第二次修法新增了「最近親屬一致同意並經醫學倫理委員會審查通過後便得撤除病人心肺復甦術」的規定。本文將探討這個規定的理念以及它在執法層面上的問題。探討的基礎即本文前半部有關病人自主權及關係性自主的討論，該規定在執行面上是否窒礙難行以及問題該如何解決，都是本文所要探討對象。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to explore some of the most significant ethical and legal issues of the Hospice Palliative Care Act of Taiwan after its second amendment. The main questions are twofold. The first group of questions is related to problems surrounding art. 1, especially those concerning patient right of autonomy, the concept of relational autonomy and controversies about the definition of terminally ill patient, while the second one is concerned with questions arising from the second amendment of art. 7, which allows terminally ill patients who are unconscious and do not have signed any advance directive concerning DNR to have the life-supporting systems defined in art. 3 withdrawn with the consent of their family and the approval of ethics committee of the hospital. Based on the conclusions derived from the discussion in the first part of the paper, the ideas behind the new regulation of art. 7 are critically analyzed. The question as to whether there will be difficulties in the practices following the new regulation of art. 7 and how to solve them will also be dealt with.起始頁-結束頁：45-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120600410023篇名：合理觀點vs.民權觀點：維塔的反色情論證並列篇名：The Reasonable View vs. the Civil-rights View: Vadas's Anti-pornography Argument作者：鄭光明(Kuang-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：維塔;派倫特;德渥金-麥肯能法規;直接述詞轉換;Melinda Vadas;W. A. Parent;Dworkin-MacKinnon ordinance;direct predicate transfer;prepositional predicate transfer期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：41期出版年：2012中文摘要：女性主義者德渥金（Andrea Dworkin）及麥肯能（Catharine MacKinnon）曾起草一部反色情法規（本文稱為德渥金－麥肯能法規），其中把色情刊物定義為「經由圖像或文字，以性圖像的方式公然使得婦女遭到臣屬」，並據此主張查禁色情刊物。對該等主張，女性主義者維塔（Melinda Vadas）認為言之成理並加以辯護。本文則將針對維塔的辯護進行詳細檢驗，並將主張：德渥金—麥肯能法規對色情刊物的定義並無法推論出「查禁色情刊物」的結論。此外，本文還將主張：為了使得婦女不會因為色情刊物而遭到臣屬，訴諸「勸服」（persuasion）或「用更多言論與之對抗」（fight speech with more speech）策略，實較「強制」（coercion）或「查禁」（censorship）策略更站得住腳。英文摘要：Feminists Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon propose a definition of ”pornography” (henceforth D-M definition) which construes pornography as contributing to the creation of women as a subordinated people. Melinda Vadas attempts to show that D-M definition is logically defensible. The aim of this paper is to examine Vadas's defense of D-M definition. My paper divides into two parts. In the first section I will argue that Vadas offers no support for the thesis that pornography can subordinate women. Consequently we have as yet no reason to accept D-M definition and Vadas's account of the wrongness of producing or disseminating pornography. In the second section I will consider whether pornography that subordinates should be restricted by law. I will argue that it does not immediately follow from D-M definition that censorship is the best answer. What follows is that there is a conflict between liberty and equality. One possible response to this conflict might be to fight for equality in ways compatible with respecting the liberty of pornographers. But what Vadas has said leaves open that possibility.起始頁-結束頁：93-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120600410034篇名：社會／創新如何可能？一種塔德式的理解並列篇名：A Tardean Perspective on Social/Innovations作者：陳宗文(Tzung-Wen Chen)關鍵字：創新;社會創新;塔德;模仿律;社會律;innovation;social innovation;Gabriel Tarde;Laws of imitation;social laws期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：41期出版年：2012中文摘要：創新是一個世紀以前法國社會學家塔德（Gabriel Tarde）關心的社會現象之一，也因為他對此現象的相關討論，發展出塔德式（tardean）社會學。在社會學奠基的年代，涂爾幹以社會學主體性的立場，加上其所處之正統學術地位，將塔德跨學科的主張擠出主流傳統，也一併邊緣化創新的社會學研究。本論文以塔德的社會學基本理念為基礎，重新檢驗創新的本質與現象。依據塔德所提出的社會律與經濟心理學，社會是基於個人及個體之間的互動而生。對社會的理解，必須進入跨心智介面的層次，即塔德所謂的腦際互動與心際心理學，而以信念與欲望的傳遞為社會關係的基本單元。創新實則信念與欲望的改變。據此，創新不僅是社會基本現象，也是社會變化的條件，以致於社會可以常態性地同時承繼過往並不斷分化。根據塔德式創新理念，晚近一些對於創新的理論或有重新檢討之必要，特別是針對創新的治理，以及企圖區辨經濟與社會創新的作法等。英文摘要：Innovation is one of the major issues that Gabriel Tarde concerned in developing his general sociology more than a century ago. However, the fruit of Tarde's efforts upon this subject was ignored for quite a long time since his academic rival Durkheim gaining orthodox status of the sociological discipline. This paper is aimed at rediscovering Tardean sociology, or Tarde's point of view about society, and making connections with current studies of innovations. Tarde rejects Durkheim's abstract concept that a society exists external to individuals. He argues that only social laws, or laws of inter-psychological processes including imitation, opposition and adaptation, can form a society. By these laws, belief and desire are basic social quantities that transfer between individuals to constitute associations. Changes in belief or desire cause innovations. Innovations are therefore by nature basic elements in the process of society formation. Also as a driving force to social change, innovation contributes to the progress and differentiation of a society. Moreover, innovation is not necessarily a linear process. It can be multi-dimensional and discontinuous. A total and interdisciplinary perspective is therefore required to the study of innovation.起始頁-結束頁：153-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120600410045篇名：人類歷史的確是一部道德進步的歷史嗎？作者：謝世民期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：41期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：205-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201206004100501篇名：真的有精神病嗎？一個跨文化、跨領域精神醫療研究取徑的定位與反省並列篇名：Is There Really Mental Illness? Positioning A Cross-Cultural and Interdisciplinary Approach in Psychiatry作者：蔡友月(Yu-Yueh Tsai)關鍵字：跨文化精神醫學;反精神醫學;本體論;建構論;專業權力;cross-cultural psychiatry;anti-psychiatry;ontology of psychiatry;constructivism in psychiatry;professional power of modern medicine期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：精神醫學所診斷的精神疾病是一種「病」嗎？它是來自生物學上的醫學證據，還是後天環境產生的問題？1960年代開始，對於精神疾病究竟是什麼，精神醫學與反精神醫學形成激烈論戰，兩個陣營近乎各說各話，毫無交集。對照1960年代之後、半世紀以來雙方的這種爭論狀態，1977年至今一個涵蓋社會學、人類學、精神醫學等跨領域學者研究群所推展的精神醫療研究新取徑，他們努力進行跨文化、跨領域的合作溝通與知識建構，相當值得重視。本論文分四部分，前兩部分「無心靈精神醫學的發展」、「對疾病本質存而不論的反精神醫學取徑」，分析精神醫學與反精神醫學兩個對立陣營各自的發展。第三部分針對Arthur Kleinman及其同仁為首的跨文化、跨領域精神醫學的研究取徑，從本體的預設、方法論、知識與實踐的貢獻，定位這個取徑的集體研究成果。第四部分從理論化程度、知識實用性格與專業權力批判、全球政治經濟轉型與精神疾病等三方面的問題，分析這個取徑的限制與負面效果。最後綜結本文提出前瞻性的思考與提問，本文指出面對全球化的時代，必須從「跨文化精神醫學」（cross-cultural psychiatry）進展到「超越文化精神醫學」（trans-cultural psychiatry）。英文摘要：Is mental illness defined by psychiatry really ”disease?” Is its existence biomedically validated or derived from environmental factors? Since the 1960s, this has been the subject of heated debate between those who are for and those who are against psychiatry. Against a background of the continuing debate, my article reviews a significant approach in the study of mental illness advocated by a group of sociologists, anthropologists, psychiatrists, and suchlike. Their efforts to promote cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research cooperation and communication merit appreciation. The article consists of four parts. The first two parts on the development of mindless psychiatry and the anti-psychiatry approach that brackets off the essence of disease examine the evolution of the divided camps of pro- and anti-psychiatry. The third part positions the collective contribution of the cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research approach led by Arthur Kleinman and his colleagues in terms of its ontology, methodology, knowledge building, and social engagement. Focusing on their research findings, theorizing achievement, and pragmatic orientation and pointing out the importance of critiquing the professional power of modern medicine, changing global political economy, and transforming phenomena of mental illness, the forth part analyzes the limitations of this approach. I conclude with a recommendation for a way forward involving a movement from a cross-cultural psychiatry to a trans-cultural psychiatry that is vital in the era of globalization.起始頁-結束頁：11-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：從《王叔和脈訣》的爭議看明清醫學知識的建構並列篇名：Wang Shuhe Maijue (The Pulse-diagnostic Song of Wang Shuhe) Controversy and the Construction of Scholarly Medical Knowledge in Late Imperial China作者：謝柏暉(Po-Huei Hsieh)關鍵字：王叔和脈訣;中醫;醫學史;科學史;科學爭議;Wang Shuhe Maijue;Chinese Medicine;History of Medicine;History of Science;Scientific Controversy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：明清醫療史的研究，近來廣受學界的關注。本文將會指出，自明代中葉開始，隨著以行醫為職業的正統醫者群體輪廓愈趨明晰，醫家對何謂正統醫學知識，越來越感到有嚴格定義的需要。因此，在以《內經》為依歸的新標準檢驗之下，以往被視為理所當然的醫學知識，也有必須重新裁汰的必要。而在被指明剔除的醫學知識當中，《王叔和脈訣》無疑最為重要。不僅因為其診脈理論和「七表」、「八堙v、「九道」的脈象分類，自北宋以來，長期主導脈學的理論和實踐；更因為肇端自明代的新醫學理論，如膻中與手厥陰經的搭配、大小腸診的脈部位等等，都是奠基在對《王叔和脈訣》徹底的批判之上，而有以致之。明末醫家破而後立的新理論塑造，更導致了明清醫學知識建構大規模的變化，《瀕湖脈學》取代了《王叔和脈訣》及其脈象分類架構，成為新的診脈理論基礎。然而，由相似的理論爭議，在清代並未導致像明末一般的知識大變動，可以看出其實明清醫學知識的建構，與其說是要解決理論的錯誤，不如說是體現了在社會和文化上，區隔其他醫療競爭者，以定義並提升自身地位的意圖。英文摘要：The complicated aspects of the scholarly medical knowledge in late imperial times are on path to be the focus of attention in academic studies in the history of Chinese medicine. Among different facets pointed out by scholars, social and cultural distinction is highlighted to be an important driving force that motivated the scholarly physicians to construct and reconstruct the medical orthodoxy they held to be of utmost importance for their status and dignity. Since the middle of Ming dynasty, because of the increase in the number of medical practitioners, it's important for the scholarly physicians to establish their own orthodox tradition, to distinguish themselves from other practitioners in order to cement their status and clientele. This paper is tasked with indicating that, with this background, specific knowledge, i.e. Wang Shuhe Maijue (王叔和脈訣), was culled to be the target of repudiation. The reason why Wang Shuhe Maijue was crucial is because of its undoubted eminence in the history of Chinese medicine since its appearance in northern Song dynasty. From then on, Wang Shuhe Maijue was so popular that not only lowbrow practitioners practiced it to earn their living, but scholars who were familiar with medicine were also deeply affected by its pulse-diagnostic theory. Its popularity was not eclipsed by the continuous fulminations from scholars and physicians during southern Song and Yuan Dynasties for its vulgarity and peccadillo in theory. However, it's worth noting that only from the middle of Ming dynasty on that orthodox physicians contended to veto its status as legitimate knowledge of orthodox medicine. The repudiation of Wang Shuhe Maijue not only defined the orthodox medicine ever since then, but the orthodox medical knowledge invented by the orthodox physicians in late imperial China was also deeply influenced by the repudiation of Wang Shuhe Maijue. It is against this background that new orthodox knowledge was produced, and the boundary of the community of orthodox physicians was delineated.起始頁-結束頁：65-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201210.00653篇名：原因和本質：克普勒與伽利略科學思想的形上學差異並列篇名：Causation and Essence: The Discrepancies in Metaphysics of Scientific Thoughts Between Kepler and Galileo作者：戴東源(Dong-Yuan Tai)關鍵字：亞里斯多德;哥白尼;克普勒;伽利略;原因;本質;Aristotle;Copernicus;Kepler;Galileo;causation;essence期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文有兩重目的，一是提供克普勒與伽利略兩人疏離關係一個另類解釋，二是透過兩人思想差異的耙梳，呈現十七世紀初期科學變遷中，擁護相同理論的科學家彼此觀點的歧異，及其引領思潮的衝突與調和。克普勒和伽利略都是哥白尼學說的支持者，有過短暫交流，但科學見解少有交集，甚至觀點針鋒相對。為何如此？這問題吸引許多學者提出各種說法。本文從兩人形上學觀點差異的角度，尤其原因和本質的觀念，說明兩人關係的疏離的原因。另一方面，經由這種思想差異的分析，展示兩人各自支持哥白尼理論的不同想法，及十七世紀初科學哲學思潮的衝突與整合的來龍去脈。本文依序從問題背景、克普勒的天文學工作、行星軌道形狀、潮汐等主題，論述兩人科學思想的形上學差異。英文摘要：The aim of this paper is twofold. First, it offers an alternative explanation for the distant relationship between Kepler and Galileo through revealing their divergent ways of philosophizing. It shows the two Copernicans had their own metaphysical ideas, especially concerning their notions of causation and of essence which differed from each other. Without disclosing the differences in their metaphysical ideas, it is hard to understand why the two Copernicans were never able to work closely together. Second, by way of examining both men, it also illustrates that Kepler and Galileo embraced conflicting schools of thought which were in existence before the seventeenth century. The reconciliation of these schools including Platonism and Aristotelianism, essentialism and nonessentialism, animism and mechanism, with Copernican astronomy was an important part of Kepler and Galileo's work in the early seventeenth century now known as the scientific revolution.起始頁-結束頁：117-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201210.01174篇名：漂浮的技術地景：台灣生質能源計畫的技術選擇與規模的三重邊界並列篇名：A Floating Technoscape: The Threefold Boundaries of Biofuel Projects in Taiwan作者：李宜澤(Yi-Tze Lee)關鍵字：生質燃料;技術地景;規模與模型;農業生物技術;Biofuels;Technoscape;Scale and Model;Agricultural Biotechnology期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：這篇論文針對農業技術發展的全球化與在地性特質，以及國家政策之歷史因素，探討生質燃料計畫過程中相關行動者如何形成網絡，以及不同規模涉及的技術思維：包括行動者參與計畫的軌跡，農業轉型的想像，以及種植規模的討論。本文以能源作物發展的背景以及在台灣試驗的「失敗」，討論農地種植需求的實際考量，除了呈現政策設計與實際種植考量的差異，也討論不同參與者以歷史記憶，對專家論述的質疑與重塑。從台灣設置雜糧種植區的歷史背景，以及2005-2008年間以休耕雜糧區作為示範能源作物的種植為實例，討論技術使用在田間種植與實驗規模的不同。比較能源作物實驗田區計畫中農民與農政系統，國營與私人技術投資公司，以及生技實驗室研究人員的不同觀點。本文主要關注技術的敘說如何連結不同行動者，並且操作環境治理議題在地化的過程。整個台灣就是各種農業技術的實驗田區，透過對於不同規模操作上的差異和實際需求的問題，本文以三種生質能源運用模式，討論當代生質能計畫在禮物經濟，區域組裝，與生物資本間的不同。進一步指出脫離農民參與的農業生技成果，不易回到農業生產部門的困境，並以此計畫反省生質能源導向社區公共性的思考。英文摘要：In this paper, I take the innovative project of bioenergy in Taiwan as an example to show the case of problematic professionalism in applying agricultural materials for fuel production. The experiment of energy crop cultivation was promoted vigorously from 2005 to 2008 in Southern Taiwan based on the expectation of revitalizing dormant farmland into open lab for agricultural residues and coarse grains cultivation. My discussion delves back to the establishment of assigned coarse grain regions as a convenient but bounded scale for energy crop plantation under subsidy policies and local specialties. For the farmers in Southern Taiwan, their memories over massive plantation on sugarcane during Japanese colonial period resonate with personal evaluation of current project. Furthermore, the contested responses to the failed advocacy indicate diverse imagination on the efficacy of bioenergy and related environmental initiatives. This paper then focuses on the cacophony of different interest parties, including agricultural specialists, farmers, policy makers, biotech scientists, and venture-capital investors, among three types of bioenergy projects. Two points are discussed in the end of this article: First, the conflict between land application and biotech professionalism results in the miscalculation between ”scale” and ”model.” Second, responses of local communities transform biofuel project into new social common interests, and creates an arena for new perception on agrarian environment, turning the failed initiative into public awareness of alternative modernity.起始頁-結束頁：187-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201210.01875篇名：STS教學心得分享：林崇熙教授作者：曾凡慈期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：253-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：STS教學心得分享：郭文華副教授作者：張純芳期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：259-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：STS教學心得分享：楊弘任助理教授作者：洪靖期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：267-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201210.02678篇名：STS教學心得分享：傅大為教授作者：洪靖期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：273-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館DOI：10.6464/TJSSTM.201210.02739篇名：STS教學心得分享：雷祥麟副教授作者：王珮瑩期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：279-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館10篇名：SCOT的新發展與何謂「區域研究」—針對第十三期張國暉文獻評述的兩點意見與澄清作者：傅大為期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：285-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：比較親密伴侶殺人案之性別差異並列篇名：Gender Differences in Intimate Partner Homicide作者：馬宗潔(Tsung-Chieh Ma);廖美蓮(Miriam Mei-Lin Liu);洪惠芬(Hui-Fen Hung)關鍵字：性別差異;殺人;親密伴侶;gender difference;homicide;intimate partner期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：26期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視親密伴侶殺害案件之性別差異，以內容分析為研究方法，整理司法院法學資料庫從1998∼2009年之間的親密伴侶殺人案件，總樣本數224件，男性殺人案198件、女性殺人案26件，皆為異性戀。其研究問題為：親密伴侶殺人案件於雙方當事人關係、殺人動機、親密暴力史與殺人歷程之性別不同。研究結果發現，女性與男性殺人案的比率為1：8。男性親密暴力殺人者更傾向在分居以後出手、較高機率發生在公共場所、較多曾有使用暴力的紀錄、較頻繁的跟蹤行為、較常採用正面攻擊手法，以及較容易波及他人；反觀女性殺人案，多等對方睡覺後才下手，且殺人既遂率更高。男性殺人的主要動機為伴侶疑似或實質外遇、伴侶企圖離開關係而產生的嫉妒；而女性最主要的殺人動機為因害怕而自我保護下的攻擊。對於社會工作的涵義為，長期或連續遭受親密暴力是殺害親密伴侶者的前兆，對於兩性皆是被殺害的危險因子。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to compare the profiles and motives of women versus men charged with murder or attempted murder of their intimate partners. Content analysis was used as research method. The data was collected from the database of the Taiwanese Department of Justice; all court verdicts of intimate partner homicide and attempted homicide cases from 1998 to 2009 were reviewed by the researcher. The cases were coded with regard to relationship status, relationship state, location of the murder, history of violence, weapon used, motives, mental illness, and killed others beside partners. The total number of the cases was 224, including 198 male and 26 female offenders. Since the female offenders sample is relatively small (11% of the total), descriptive statistics and Chi-Square have been used in this analysis. The significant result of this study regard to gender differences of intimate partner homicide were as follow: (1) Women were significantly more likely to have actually killed their intimate partners, (2) Males were more likely to have murdered or attempted murder when the relationship were over and separated, however, women generally killed the intimate partners while still in a relationship with them. (3) Male attempted to kill their partners in public places, however, women only killed partners at home. (4) 40% of men (but just 10% of women) had abused their partners before killing. 42% of the women had been victims of battery prior to killing their intimate partners. (5) Among men, the risk of partner abandonment, sexual jealousy, and economic issues were the major motivations to kill; however, self-defense was the most common motivation among women. (6) Regarding to killing method, only men used beating and only women use poison. Because of the gun controlled policy, gun is not easily accessed, knife is the major weapon for both man and women. (7) And 20% man also killed someone who were not their partners, they were parents, children, sibling, boy friend and suspected boyfriends.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.26.012篇名：一條離原鄉愈來愈遠的路？：莫拉克颱風災後異地重建政策的思考並列篇名：A Road Far Away from the Aboriginal Hometown?-Rethinking the Post-disaster Relocation Policy of Typhoon Morakot作者：謝志誠(Jyh-Cherng Shieh);傅從喜(Tsungh-Si Fu);陳竹上(Jwu-Shang Chen);林萬億(Wan-I Lin)關鍵字：莫拉克颱風;異地重建;特定區域;永久屋;災後重建;Typhoon Morakot;post-disaster relocation;special areas;permanent housing;disaster recovery期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：26期出版年：2012中文摘要：2009年8月莫拉克颱風侵襲臺灣，造成中南部山崩、土石流及淹水等嚴重災情，不少原住民部落遭致嚴重損害。政府有別於過去的災後重建作法，首度將「強制遷居、遷村」納為法律條文，甚至成為稍後莫拉克風災重建政策的主軸。為緩和外界對於遷村條款強制手段的疑慮，經政黨協商後，特以「經與原住居者諮商取得共識」程序作為劃定特定區域的前提，並明確後續安置應該「尊重該地區人民、社區（部落）組織、文化及生活方式」，試圖減輕強制遷居與遷村對社區可能造成的傷害。本研究將遷村條款的執行過程分成三個階段：評估階段、諮商階段、安置階段，藉由分析相關文獻與檔案資料，及訪談重建關鍵人士，就莫拉克災後異地重建政策的執行實況進行探討。莫拉克風災過後，在政府追求重建速度與國土保育的雙重壓力下，重建過程爭議不斷，受災社區與民眾的參與和自主也成為重建過程中倍受關注的議題。面對災後的家園重建，受災地區的原住民部落與居民能有多少參與和自主的空間，以決定自己與部落的未來？本研究從異地重建的各個階段：原居住地安全勘查、原居地安全性認定與遷居、遷村安置方式的諮商過程、永久屋的申請、興建與分配入住等，一一深入探討。英文摘要：In August 2009, Typhoon Morakot hit Taiwan and caused severe disasters in Mid-Southern Taiwan, such as landslips, landslides, and flooding. Many aboriginal tribes were severely affected. In fear that disaster would strike again, the post-disaster relocation program was enacted. The government enacted ”Forced Resettlement or Village Relocation,” which became a pivotal point of post-disaster reconstruction policy. To allay public doubts on the compulsory village relocation policy, the procedure of ”Reaching Agreement by Consulting with the Original Tenants” was set as a requirement for ”Defining Special Areas.” The process of forced village relocation was divided into 3 phases: assessment, consultation, and settlement. This paper analyzes the present reconstruction and future post-disaster countermeasures by examining research, local reports, and documentation, interviewing the key figures of reconstruction, comparing official statements, and introducing and discussing the phases of post-disaster village relocation. The time pressure for recovery after Typhoon Morakot resulted in significant controversy during the reconstruction process. The participation and autonomy of the affected people is an important issue. This paper examines the recovery phases, including land security evaluations, negotiations for relocation, applications, and distributions of permanent housing, to explore the participation and autonomy of affected communities during the rebuilding process.起始頁-結束頁：41-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.26.023篇名：觀護人對測謊在性侵害加害人觀護效能之知覺研究並列篇名：Probation and Parole Officers' Perceptions of the Effectiveness of Polygraph Testing in Sex Offender Supervision作者：李育政(Yu-Jeng Li);林明傑(Min-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：性侵害加害人;測謊;觀護;觀護人;sex offender;polygraph;supervision;probation and parole officer期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：26期出版年：2012中文摘要：綜觀國內外探究測謊於性侵害加害人觀護與治療效益的研究，多以量化方式呈現，缺乏從質化的角度深入瞭解測謊的功能，以及其如何運用於性侵害加害人觀護中。因此，本研究旨從觀護人的視角，探究其如何覺知測謊在性侵害加害人觀護中的效能。研究者以分層立意抽樣法，選取七名觀護人進行深度訪談，並採取主題分析法作為分析質性資料的策略。本研究發現，測謊具有心理嚇阻的作用，而觀護人進一步運用該功能，將測謊作為制訂或調整觀護計畫的重要工具。惟囿於測謊有其限制存在，觀護人並未將測謊視為處遇加害人的唯一重要措施。另一方面，研究者以操作制約解釋測謊於形成加害人內在制約的歷程，並針對觀護人運作測謊的方式及所需注意的議題，進行討論。研究者亦一併提供未來研究的可行方向，以及相關處遇人員在測謊實務運作上之建議。英文摘要：Previous studies chiefly focused on the quantitative effectiveness of polygraph testing in sex offender supervision and treatment. However, qualitative studies examining the function and practical use of polygraph testing are in their infancy. Hence, the current study aims to explore how probation and parole officers perceive the effectiveness of polygraph testing in sex offender supervision from a qualitative perspective. Using stratified purposeful sampling, this study collected qualitative data from in-depth interviews with seven probation and parole officers. These data were further analyzed using thematic analysis. The findings indicate polygraph testing acts as a psychological deterrent, and therefore probation and parole officers utilize polygraph testing as an important tool in making or adjusting supervision plans. However, in light of the limitations of polygraph testing, probation and parole officers do not regard polygraph testing as the only important supervisory measure. On the other hand, operant conditioning is presented to explain the shaping process of the offender's internal conditioning resulting from polygraph testing. The ways probation and parole officers use polygraph testing and related issues are discussed. The authors also make recommendations for future research and practitioners' use of polygraph testing in sex offender supervision and treatment.起始頁-結束頁：87-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.26.034篇名：我是媳婦還是看護工？外籍媳婦照顧角色形成與照顧經驗之初探並列篇名：Am I a Daughter-in-law or a Care Worker?-A Study on the Formation of the Caretaking Role and the Caretaking Experience of Foreign Daughters-in-law作者：陳正芬(Chen-Fen Chen)關鍵字：外籍媳婦;長期照顧;家庭照顧者;照顧負荷;immigrant daughter-in-law;long-term care;family caregiver;care burden期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：26期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究關注是生活在台灣當代的「外籍媳婦」，他們於婚姻脈絡下如何看待自身照顧者的意義，並身處其中。國內累積至今對女性家庭照顧者的研究顯示，照顧責任的承擔與其所處的社會文化規範高度相關，照顧工作成為扮演「媳婦」角色難以逃避的課題，當代的媳婦的家庭照顧處境仍受制於性別角色傳統刻板印象；但當家庭內不只1位媳婦時，為何是由來自異國的外籍媳婦承接家庭照顧者角色？本研究旨在瞭解外籍媳婦成為失能親屬之照顧者的經驗，採取立意取樣，選取13位外籍媳婦為研究對象，以半結構式的訪談指引進行深度訪談，所得文本以主題分析法進行資料分析。歸結外籍媳婦照顧經驗為：一、為何是我？其他媳婦呢？二、我是媳婦還是看護工？三、媳婦、母親與妻子三難處境，相較於其他家庭照顧者，外籍媳婦的配偶常是家庭中經濟最弱勢者，娶妻多來自父母援助，致使外籍媳婦是等同看護工對待，當她們泣訴自己被說成「請來的……」話語，深刻描繪出外籍媳婦在照顧處境中需承擔「媳婦責任」卻又被區隔於「家人身分」之情境，造就了「身處其中的局外人」特殊圖像。本研究結果的呈現可增加長期照顧政策規劃者與服務提供者對外籍媳婦照顧者照顧負荷與壓力經驗的瞭解，進而發展以外籍媳婦照顧者當事人經驗本質結構為導向的照顧者支持策略。英文摘要：The purposes of this research include (1) analyzing the factors of foreign daughter-in-law status becoming a career; (2) understanding migrant daughter-in-law's feelings about the caretaking experience; (3) investigating immigrant daughter-in-law stress, and how they cope. Interview data was collected from 13 immigrant daughters-in-law who take care of their disabled parents-in-law. The interviewers were asked to reveal their caretaking experiences in order to discover the hidden meaning behind the phenomena. Data was collected using semi-structured in-depth interviews and scrutinized using thematic analysis. Three essential themes emerged: (1) Why me? How about other daughters-in-law? (2) Am I a daughter-in-law or a care worker? (3) Life becomes difficult for a daughter-in-law, a mother, and a wife at the same time. This study shows that foreign daughters-in-law have little to no support from their husbands' families, and that they feel they are treated more like care workers, or employees, rather than family. Our findings highlight the importance of long-term care policies for immigrant daughters-in-law and for policymakers and service providers to assist this group in relieving caretaker stress.起始頁-結束頁：139-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.26.045篇名：論照顧服務提供多元化存續的條件：日本介護保險制度監督機制因應經驗之啟示並列篇名：The Exploration for Subsisting Conditions of Diversifying Care Service Suppliers: Learning from the Practical Experience of Monitoring Systems in the Long-term Care Insurance System in Japan作者：莊秀美(Hsiu-Mei Chuang);周怡君(Yi-Chun Chou);賴明俊(Ming-Chun Lai)關鍵字：介護保險制度;日本;照顧服務提供多元化;監督機制;Multiplication of Care Service Suppliers;Long-term Care Insurance;Monitoring Systems;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：26期出版年：2012中文摘要：就國內推動社會福利服務民營化的實施經驗而論，委託對象難求、行政人力不足、輔導監督未盡落實等是經常遭遇的困境，其中，尤以後者之問題最為嚴重。因應未來長期照護保險制度之實施，擴大民間營利與非營利部門的參與是實現照顧服務提供多元化政策目標的趨勢策略。根據我國長期照護保險制度的服務提供體系建構之構想，未來將趨向採取特約業者（包括公立機構、非營利團體及民間企業）的方式擴充服務資源。屆時，如何監督不同屬性機構維持穩定的服務品質，並避免不法業者之不法情事，相關監督機制之建構乃是必要的配套措施。本文從日本建構照顧服務提供單位的監督機制之過程與實施經驗探討實踐照顧服務提供多元化政策落實的基本配套條件。內容包括日本介護保險制度的法定指導監督之規範、業者”COMSN”（Community Medical Systems & Netword）的不法事件及因應措施、後續的監督機制強化、現行的監督機制之體系與內涵、課題等，最後針對未來我國長期照護保險制度實施的監督機制建構之方向與原則提出建議。英文摘要：The difficulties in implementing the privatization of domestic social welfare services include requesting necessary objects and establishing a monitoring system. The second issue is especially serious. In accordance with the implementation of the care insurance system in the near future, the participation of profit and non-profit organizations would be expanded to realize the multiplication of care services. According to the perceptions of care service providers in Taiwan, contracts for special entrepreneurs (including public agencies, non-profit organizations, and profit enterprises) would be introduced. Simultaneously, the related state monitoring system should be established to monitor the service quality from different types of service providers and avoid illegal activity. This article discusses the basic terms of multiplication of care services by examining the experiences of the monitoring mechanism of care insurance in Japan. The content includes the legal regulations of care insurance law, illegal events of service providers ”COMSN (Community Medical Systems & Network)” methods of strengthening monitoring systems as the fallowing reaction from state, and the mechanisms of existing monitoring systems. Finally, methods regarding the orientation and principles for a monitoring system for implementing care insurance in Taiwan are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：183-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2012.26.0501篇名：台灣商業個人健康保險之核保循環：二階自我迴歸與馬可夫轉換模型並列篇名：An Analysis of the Underwriting Cycle in Taiwan's Private Health Insurance: The Second-Order Autoregressive Model vs. the Markov Switching Model作者：林兆欣(Chao-Hsin Lin);許碩芬(Shuo-Fen Hsu);陳思竹(Su-Chu Chen)關鍵字：商業個人健康保險;核保循環;馬可夫轉換模型;private health insurance;underwriting cycle;Markov switching model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主要目的在於探討台灣商業個人健康保險是否存在核保循環及其影響因素，並分析馬可夫轉換模型的損失率兩狀態，是否足以代表核保循環的軟硬市場變化。根據本文實證結果：整體資料期間顯示台灣商業個人健康保險不具二階自我迴歸（Second-order Autoregressive；AR（2））循環。但透過二階自我迴歸馬可夫轉換（Second-Order Autoregressive Markov Switching；MS-AR（2））模型發現台灣商業個人健康保險具備狀態循環。其次，比較線性迴歸與馬可夫轉換迴歸的實證結果發現，加入隱藏的狀態變數時，影響軟／硬市場損失率的變數並不相同，顯示在核保循環的不同階段（狀態）下，影響損失率的變數具時變性，且各項核保循環假說的驗證亦隨之產生差異。英文摘要：The main purpose of this paper was to validate the underwriting cycle in Taiwan's private health insurance, and to discuss the variables that influence it. The results of the AR(2) model and the Markov switching model are compared to determine the cyclical pattern and to verify if the characteristics of the underwriting cycle remain the same before/after the structure changes and under different regimes. The empirical results show that there is no AR(2) cycle. However, they also show that the cyclical behaviour can be captured by the Markov switching model with the two regimes representing the soft and hard markets of Taiwan's private health insurance market. In addition, we confirmed our hypothesis that the variables affecting the underwriting profit margin differ substantially across the regime switch. The hypotheses regarding the underwriting cycle in the literature cannot be fully explained by the linear model because the latent variable of state is omitted in regression. We demonstrated that the Markov switching regression model is well suited to capture the distinct characteristics of the loss ratio under different cycle stage with estimated time varying parameters.起始頁-結束頁：221-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).082篇名：實施全民健康保險對醫院經營效率影響之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Impacts of National Health Insurance on Operating Efficiencies of Medical Institutions作者：歐進士(Chin S. Ou);趙令海(Ling-Hai Chao);洪嘉聲(Chia-Sheng Hung);林惠美(Hui-Mei Lin)關鍵字：全民健保;公立醫院;經營績效;national health insurance;public medical institutions;operating performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣自民國八十三年立法實施全民健保，至今已邁入第十六年。但全民健保卻造成鉅額虧損，且虧損金額逐年上升。為此，政府已決定再次調漲健保費率以挹注此一資金缺口。解決全民健保虧損的途徑，除了調漲費率有開源的效果之外，提升醫院經營效率亦是重要途徑之一。各醫院所若能有效提升經營效率，則醫療資源能發揮更大效益，對全民健保則有節流的功效。因此在健保費率調漲之際，實有必要檢視全民健保對醫院經營績效之影響。故本文的主要目的是比較健保開辦前後醫院經營效率之差異，以評估健保開辦後醫院經營效率是否改善。本研究利用民國七十八年至八十七年之財務資料進行研究，比較健保實施前後醫院之經營效率，發現實施全民健保後醫院之經營效率並無顯著提升，本研究結果顯示政府主管機關在調漲健保費率之際，醫院經營之效率亦是一個值得注意的課題。英文摘要：It has been fifteen years since the National Health Insurance (NHI) was instituted. The financial deficit of NHI has been increasing steadily for the past years. The goal of this study is to examine the impacts of National Health Insurance (NHI) on operating efficiencies of medical institutions. The observations are composed of the public medical institutions during the period from 1989 through 1998. We compare the operating efficiencies between the pre-and post-NHI periods. Empirical results do not support the hypothesis that NHI has positive influences on operating efficiencies of medical institutions. When the government agency tries to raise the premium rate of NHI to cover the financial deficit, how to improve the operating efficiencies of medical institutions remains an issue to be investigated in the future.起始頁-結束頁：253-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).093篇名：國際動能策略與景氣循環風險：由季節性型態觀察之並列篇名：International Momentum Strategies and Business Cycle Risk: Evidence from Seasonal Patterns作者：陳獻儀(Hsien-Yi Chen);胡銘顯(Ming-Shien Hu)關鍵字：國際動能策略;季節性效應;景氣循環;international momentum strategies;seasonal effects;business cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：基於近來國際金融市場上以國家股市指數為標的之投資商品日益盛行，本文以較近期的資料探討國際指數動能投資組合策略的獲利性。另一方面，對於動能交易策略獲利性的成因，許多文獻均指出景氣循環因素可能是其中一項重要影響因子，在檢視其對動能策略影響力時，本文認為透過動能投資組合利潤的季節型態觀察，可能要比以往文獻慣用的總體經濟代理變數，更為直接明確。本文採用39個國家的股價指數報酬為實證樣本，研究期間涵蓋1992年7月至2008年10月止，實證結果顯示，國際動能策略在已開發與新興市場國家都展現出顯著的動能利潤。除此之外，進一步觀察國際動能利潤之季節性表現後，本文並未發現明確且一致性的季節性型態，表示景氣循環因素對於國際指數動能交易策略獲利性，可能較不具主宰性。英文摘要：Recent years have witnessed phenomenal growth in the number and size of index-based financial products in international financial markets. This paper employs more recent data to examine the profitability of index-based international momentum strategies. Several studies have documented that business cycles are a possible explanation for price momentum. An important difference between momentum profiting from seasonal patterns and macroeconomic variables was that the former examined the influence of business cycle risk as more direct and explicit. Using stock market index data from 39 markets between July 1992 and October 2008, we found significant profitability of international momentum trading strategies in developed markets and emerging markets. Furthermore, we had not found an obvious and consistent seasonal pattern in international momentum profit. Business cycle seemed to not play a substantial role in index-based international momentum strategies.起始頁-結束頁：277-308資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).104篇名：不同服務失誤情況下，歸因和補償對消費者知覺價格公平性之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Attribution and Price Compensation on Perceived Price Fairness under Various Service Failures作者：黃輝雄(Hui-Hsiung Huang);蘇宏仁(Hung-Jen Su);曾光華(Kong-Fah Cheng);張佳榮(Chia-Jung Chang)關鍵字：服務失誤;價格補償;知覺價格公平性;service failure;price compensation;perceived price fairness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以資源交換理論、歸因理論與遺留效應為基礎，探討三種服務失誤情況下，歸因與補償對消費者知覺價格公平性之影響。採取二個實驗設計法，結果發現如下：（1）消費者所認知的價格公平在「服務傳遞系統失誤」的情況下，分別低於「未能回應顧客失誤」與「員工個人行為失誤」的情況；（2）比較將服務失誤歸因於可控制與不可控制兩組消費者，歸因於可控制組的消費者其知覺價格公平性，受到「穩定因子」的影響大於歸因於不可控組的消費者；（3）針對將服務失誤歸因為「可控制且不穩定」的這群消費者，補償對這群消費者所認知價格公平性的影響，在「服務傳遞系統失誤」情況下，分別高於「未能回應顧客失誤」與「員工個人行為失誤」的情況下。英文摘要：Based on social exchange theory, attribution theory and carryover effects, this study postulated that consumers' perceived price fairness in service failure situations is influenced by the main effect and interaction effect of three factors: the causes of service failure, the types of service failures, and the compensation for service failure. Two experiments were conducted to test the hypotheses. The significant findings are as follows: (1) Consumers who participated in the study of employee response to service delivery system failures perceived lower price fairness as compared to participants in the study of employee response to customer needs and requests or unprompted and unsolicited employee actions. (2) The interaction effect of controllability and stability on perceived price fairness for three types of service failures is mixed. (3) If the service failure is attributed to be ”controllable” and ”unstable” and consumers were later compensated for the service failure, those participants who encountered a failure situation where employees fail to respond to service delivery failures perceived higher price fairness than either of the following: those who encountered a service failure caused by employee response to customer needs and requests or those who encountered a service failure caused by unprompted and unsolicited employee actions.起始頁-結束頁：309-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).115篇名：折價券轉售市場對製造商最適訂價、促銷與產品策略之影響並列篇名：The Optimal Pricing, Promotion and Product Strategies of a Manufacturer in the Presence of Coupon Resale作者：陳其美(Chyi-Mei Chen);周善瑜(Shan-Yu Chou);張奕虹(I-Hung Chang);蔡依琳(Yi-Lin Tsai)關鍵字：折價券轉售;產品品質設計;賽局理論;coupon resale;product strategy;game theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：22卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究分析價券轉售市場對獨佔製造商最適訂價、促銷與產品策略之影響。分析結果顯示折價券轉售市場的影響效果決定於高低端消費者是否有不同的機會接觸折價券轉售市場。當兩種消費者有相同的機會進入折價券轉售市場時，折價券轉售的活動就會對廠商造成傷害，且當折價券轉售活動對社會效率有越大的助益時，廠商所受到的傷害越大，此時折價券轉售市場的出現將會鼓勵廠商發展高端產品。反之，當高低端消費者有不同的機會接觸折價券轉售市場，且低端消費者較高端消費者在接觸折價券轉售市場上更具成本優勢時，折價券轉售活動可能有助於廠商區辨消費者，因而鼓勵廠商提供低端產品。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the optimal coupon and product strategies in the presence of coupon resale markets for a monopolist facing high-valuation and low-valuation consumers. The results show that the effects of coupon resale on the firm's product and coupon strategies depend crucially on whether the highs and the lows have differential access to the coupon resale market. When they have equal access, coupon resale hurts the manufacturer by reducing the optimal coupon face value, and the higher the social value of coupon resale, the more the manufacturer gets hurt. In this case, coupon resale encourages the manufacturer to develop a high-end item. When it is more difficult for the highs than for the lows to access the coupon resale market, coupon resale may facilitate screening for the manufacturer by reducing the effective redemption cost of lows, and may encourage the latter to offer a low-end item.起始頁-結束頁：341-367資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/2012.(22-2).1201篇名：張佛泉自由主義中的憲政與民主並列篇名：Constitutionalism and Democracy in Fo-chuan Chang's Liberalism作者：蕭高彥(Carl K. Y. Shaw)關鍵字：自由;人權;民主;憲政主義;張佛泉;Liberty;Human Right;Democracy;Constitutionalism;Fo-chuan Chang期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：張佛泉係跨越民國時期與中華民國在台灣時期的重要政治哲學家，其主要著作《自由與人權》被譽為中文世界最重要的自由主義經典。本文的主旨在於簡要敘述張佛泉的生平及其論述的歷史脈絡後，以《自由與人權》為主，張氏其他作品為輔，分析其理論邏輯，如何以「政治契約」（一種改良式的社會契約論）來證成憲政自由主義以確保人權。但本文指出，「政治契約」必須預設一種共和式審議民主的觀念。在文本層次上，張氏對此種民主的著墨雖然不多，而易為自由主義詮釋者所忽略；但經過耙梳之後，其理路仍清晰可見，並且可以幫助我們進一步理解1960年代台灣自由主義者所預設的政治概念。英文摘要：This article discusses Fo-chuan Chang's liberalism. His book Liberties and Human Rights is generally hailed as an indispensable classic on liberalism in the Chinese literature. In this article, I examine Liberties and Human Rights and other writings of Chang. Deploying Ernest Barker's idea of ”political contract,” he justifies constitutional liberalism and human rights. In addition to analyzing Chang's arguments, I demonstrate that there is a republican idea of liberty underlying Chang's liberalism, which is seldom noticed.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120900420012篇名：分析的轉向與實用主義─戰後台灣法理學發展史初探並列篇名：Analytical Turn and Pragmatism-A Preliminary Study of the Post-war Development of Legal Philosophy in Taiwan作者：顏厥安(Chueh-An Yen)關鍵字：分析;實用主義;法理學;自然法;法實證主義;奎因;形上學;行動;實踐;analysis;pragmatism;natural law;legal positivism;Quine;metaphysics;action;praxis期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文是以二戰後台灣法理學第一階段（至1990年左右）的發展狀況為研究對象，具體研究王伯琦、洪遜欣、馬漢寶、楊日然、林文雄五位學者的著作。第一部分是序論。第二部分藉由奎因「經驗主義的兩個教條」中的思考指出，奎因在挑戰「分析的」（analytic）概念時，同時推進了往實用主義哲學立場的發展方向，而本文所探討的這一段法理學發展史，隱隱顯示了一個非常類似的發展趨向。第三部分討論法理學的概念與範圍。第四部分討論分析哲學的影響。第五、六部分分別檢討各個學者立場與自然法論以及法實證主義的關係。第七部分處理實用主義思想在台灣法理學發展的地位。第八部分綜合檢討奎因的看法與法理學的關係，以及客觀形上學對法實證主義的檢討。最後是結論。英文摘要：By studying the works of five scholars: Wang Bo-Chi (王伯琦), Shiun-Shin Hong (洪遜欣), Herbert Han-Pao Ma (馬漢寶), Rih- Ran-Zan Yang (楊日然), Wen-Shiung Lin (林文雄), I elucidate the first phase of post war development of legal philosophy in Taiwan in this paper. After the introduction, in second part, I explain the main point of this paper: the first phase development of Taiwan's post war jurisprudence showed some traces similar to Quine's thought in his Two Dogmas writing: the breakdown of the two dogmas of empiricism leads to pragmatism. From third to seventh parts, I discuss the domain of jurisprudence; the influence of analytic philosophy; the natural law theory; the legal positivism; and the pragmatism respectively. In the eighth part, I discuss the relation of Quine's epistemology to Taiwan's legal theory in general, and the critique of legal positivism raised by Prof. Hong's objective metaphysics. The last part is conclusion.起始頁-結束頁：39-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120900420023篇名：從致命女人到「女人不存在」：紀傑克解析女人及其對性別教育之啟發並列篇名：From Femme Fatale to "Non-existence of Woman": Zizek's Analysis of Woman and Its Inspiration to Gender Education作者：蔣興儀(Hsing-Yi Chiang);魏建國(Chien-Kuo Wei)關鍵字：紀傑克;拉岡;陰性主體性;致命女人;性別教育;Slavoj Zizek;Jacques Lacan;Feminine Subjectivity;Femme Fatale;Gender Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以紀傑克的心理分析倫理學觀點為主，闡述「女人不存在」（Woman does not exist）之命題，並兼論它對性別教育之啟發。全文有四個要點。第一，男人眼中的美麗女人是個擬似（semblance）。擬似來自於男人的自戀：他投射自身的理想形象在女人身上。其目的是為了遮掩「女人不存在」，將她的存在之匱乏給予體面化（gentrify）。第二，19世紀後大量出現的致命女人（femme fatale）之形象是男人的幻象，但部分女性主義者卻把這個幻象視為女英雄。事實上，致命女人是基本幻象，男人藉此獲得受虐的享受。致命女人之形象並不只是男人秘密欲望的再現，而是超出了想像，展現為邪淫的倒錯。致命女人的逾越並沒有取消父權，反而弔詭地支撐了父權。第三，當女人脫離男人所投射的致命女人之形象時，她才真正地解放她自身。她突破了幻象，並且經驗到某種歇斯底里之崩潰。她承擔了她的命運，將自身暴露為存在之匱乏（lack of being）。她是絕對否定的無同一性，她不存在。第四，根據心理分析倫理學的啟發，性別教育需要去闡述父權社會塑造女人之刻板印象的複雜心理機制。更重要的是，性別教育需要澄清女人之主體性：女人之主體性不同於男性同一性之邏輯，而是「女人不存在」。英文摘要：Based on Zizek's psychoanalytical ethics, this essay focuses on ”Woman does not exist,” explicates this proposition and clarifies its inspiration to gender education. Essay includes four main points.First, beautiful woman that is seen by man is a semblance. This semblance comes from man's narcissism. Man projects his ideal image unto woman. The reason that motivates man's narcissistic projection is to dissimulate the nonexistence of woman and gentrify her lack of being.Second, plenty images of femme fatale that emerged since 19th are male fantasies. However, feminists overlook this fantasy-projection and treat her as a heroine. Femme fatale is the fundamental fantasy through which man obtains masochistic enjoyment. Images of femme fatale are not the simple presentation of man's secret desire but the perverse exhibition of obscenity beyond his imagination. Her transgression does not annihilate paternity but paradoxically sustain the latter.Third, woman can truly liberate herself by detaching herself from images of femme fatale that is projected by men, She breaks loose from male fantasy and experiences the hysterical breakdown. She assumes her destiny that is more terrifying than the fatality and exposes her lack of being. Woman does not exist. She is the absolute negativity without substantial fullness.Fourth, based on the inspiration of ethics of psychoanalysis, gender education explicates the complex psychological mechanism that is used by paternity to construct the stereotype of woman, moreover, it clarifies feminine subjectivity. Feminine subjectivity differs from itself and is without identity. Feminine subjectivity is the nonexistence of woman.起始頁-結束頁：101-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320120900420034篇名：科學、技術與自由民主政治秩序的變遷：近代美國政治體制的科學意識型態與現實政治並列篇名：Science, Technology, and the Transformation of Liberal-democratic Political Order: Modern American Scientific Ideology and Political Experience作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：自由民主;科技研究;政治秩序;科技官僚;美國政治;liberal democracy;science and technology studies;political order;technocracy;co-production;American politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文透過新興的科學及技術研究（science and technology studies, STS）領域，鎖定科學、技術與政治體制變遷的互動關係，簡介科學是如何藉由其實驗主義，從17世紀開始補充及強化自由民主政治體制的經驗發展及政治理論。本文也分析科學及技術在20世紀後是如何藉由自身內在的政治價值，而另外產生出一種具有科學及技術理念的政治體制意識型態及現實政治藍圖，進而挑戰自由民主政治制度。然而，自由民主政治體制卻又能另以相關政治機制，有效消解這些基於科學及技術之政治價值及論述的威脅。此外，本文亦指出20世紀後，因科學及技術發展所造成的政治問題，卻不斷地讓自由民主政治體制產生停滯、失靈，甚至是政治內爆的情形。但本文的主要發現是，拋棄自由民主體制來解決這些難題恐不是可行的途徑。反之，透過分析近年STS研究成果，進一步地精緻調整自由民主政治體制，應能有效消解由科學及技術所帶來各層次的政治難題考驗。英文摘要：After reviewing the role of science in the transformation of liberal-democratic order since the seventeenth century, this paper investigates how it worked with technology to help construct another political ideology that began to jeopardize the order in the early twentieth century. This political ideology, which also could be termed ”the republic of science and technology,” was even to raise a political movement to advocate its ideal political vision in terms of technocracy in the United States of America in the 1920s and 1930s. However, not only were science and technology incapable of building a different political order from liberal democracy, but they even created some serious political and social problems brought by their fast development. In light of the fruitful and useful knowledge produced by the emerging discipline of science and technology studies, this paper argues that liberal democracy should still be an appropriate institution to deal with the more and more complicated and nuanced politics relevant to science and technology. However, it needs to be improved over time. By working with political sociologists and political scientists, the field of science and technology studies could make some more contribution to help and solidify liberal democracy.起始頁-結束頁：153-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201209004200401篇名：從合法性、平等到人性尊嚴：論德沃金法哲學的道德基礎並列篇名：From Legality, Equality to Human Dignity: On the Moral Foundation of Ronald Dworkin's Legal Philosophy作者：莊世同(Shih-Tung Chuang)關鍵字：德沃金;法哲學;法理論;法律;合法性;整全性;平等;人性尊嚴;內在價值;Ronald Dworkin;legal philosophy;legal theory;law;legality;integrity;equality;human dignity;intrinsic value期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以德沃金晚近的法哲學理論為研究對象，嘗試對其理論的道德基礎，即從合法性、平等到人性尊嚴三個政治道德價值，進行分析考察與檢討反省。第二節介紹德沃金近來對法律的概念提出的類型區分，分析合法性價值作為法律之重要政治道德價值的理論意涵；第三節考察德沃金合法性價值觀的實質內涵，即整全性（integrity）與平等（equality）的政治道德價值；第四節進一步探討，德沃金以合法性、整全性及平等作為其法哲學理論的道德基礎，實際上是立基於一個更根本、但也饒富爭議的論述上，亦即他對於「人性尊嚴原則」的論述；第五節審視人性尊嚴原則在德沃金法哲學理論的關鍵地位，並檢討該論述所衍生出來的關於人是否有內在客觀價值的哲學爭議，同時提出一些初步的檢討與省思；最後，第六節除簡要總結本文論點外，也將概述德沃金對法律與道德之關係的最終看法。英文摘要：This essay attempts to explore and reflect the moral foundation of Ronald Dworkin's legal philosophy, that is, the political moral values from legality, equality to human dignity. Part 2 will introduce Dworkin's recent argument about different concepts of law and analyze the theoretical implication that treats legality as an important political moral value of law. Part 3 examines the substantive content of legality, i.e., the political moralities of integrity and equality. Part 4 argues that, the moral foundation of Dworkin's legal philosophy not only lies in the values of legality, integrity, and equality, it is also grounded on a more fundamental but controversial argument, namely, the argument about the principles of human dignity. Accordingly, Part 5 will further investigate the philosophical debate derived from the argument of human dignity. It is the debate about whether each person has an intrinsic value of life. Finally, Part 6 will briefly summarize the points of this essay and generally sketch Dworkin's concluding claim about the relation of law and morality.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320121200430012篇名：性別權、能力取向與變性政治並列篇名：Gender Right, Capability Approach and the Politics of Transsexuality作者：甯應斌(Yin-Bin Ning)關鍵字：性別權;能力取向;變性論;性別認同障礙;變性手術;女性主義;Gender Right;Capability Approach;Transsexualism;GID;SRS;Feminism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：跨性別運動倡導「性別權」，本文試圖從Martha Nussbaum的能力取向出發，提供性別權的理論基礎。本文提出性別作為人類核心能力，由此導衍出性別權與變性自主權。由此本文進一步論證，變性手術不應該透過「疾病認定—醫療保險」的途徑來資助，而應該得到類似一般社會福利的資助。最後，我嘗試從本文發展出來的觀點來討論變性政治中的一些爭議，並試圖回應女性主義對於變性手術與變性觀念的質疑。英文摘要：This essay argues for the position that gender(ing) is a socio-historically bound ”central human capability” (a concept developed by Martha Nussbaum's capability approach). In other words, the capability of gendering exists only in a gendered society. The functioning of this gender(ing) capability, meaning the realization of one's gender to achieve a dignified life, could be hampered by for example the binary gender system. From the viewpoint of this version of capability approach, the right to realize one's gendering capability is a basic human right that confers in general the gender right that the transgender movement and gender minorities demand, the transsexual's right to SRS in particular. Furthermore, the whole or partial operation fee should be paid by social service or welfare for those transsexuals who need SRS in order to make their gender capability function at all, analogous to the situation in which social service and welfare should be provided for the physically disabled to make their bodily capability function (such as moving around). This justification of public funding of SRS no longer requires GID for insurance purpose, which many think is its only redeeming value. Finally, I will touch upon some issues raised by the reconciliatory stance (towards the discordance between transsexualism and queer activism) of this paper in the gender politics of transsexuality, such as, the role of state/medical power and the knowledge-production of social work in constructing and disciplining the ”qualified” transsexuals, the feminist questioning of the very concept of transsexuality and objection to SRS, and the sexuality issue of transsexuality.起始頁-結束頁：37-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320121200430023篇名：康德論政治自由：對政治式詮釋的修正並列篇名：Kant on Political Freedom: A Commentary on Political Reading of Kant作者：周家瑜(Chia-Yu Chou)關鍵字：《道德形上學》;康德;政治自由;財產權;外在自由;The Metaphysics of Morals;Immanuel Kant;political freedom;property right;external freedom期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主旨在於闡明康德的政治自由，在康德政治哲學中，康德所討論的是什麼樣的自由概念？本文分析當代對康德《道德形上學》（The Metaphysics of Morals）之兩種不同取向的詮釋：其一為倫理式詮釋，主張這種取向的詮釋者傾向透過康德道德哲學的理論框架來理解其後期的政治著作；另一則為政治式詮釋，主要是因應倫理式詮釋所遇到的詮釋困難而興起，傾向給予康德後期政治著作較多獨立性。本文除了闡明當代對康德政治哲學的現狀外，亦探討當前討論最多的政治式詮釋－以Arthur Ripstein之共和式詮釋為代表－本文指出儘管此一詮釋成功因應了倫理式詮釋所遇到的困難，其本身仍有所疏漏，藉著指出「外在自由」在康德政治論述中的關鍵地位，本文期望對政治式詮釋提出修正。英文摘要：This article aims to answer a fundamental question about Kant's political philosophy: what is political freedom in Kant's political writings (especially in his mysterious The Metaphysics of Morals)? I argue in this article that what Kant intended to stress is the conception of external freedom as property right. To argue this, I first analyze two main contemporary interpretations of Kant's political philosophy, namely ethical reading and political reading of Kant. While the latter has resolved some of the interpretive difficulties that the former encounters, the political reading has its own internal difficulties. By drawing attention to Kant's oft-ignored conception of external freedom, I argue that these internal difficulties can be resolved.起始頁-結束頁：81-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320121200430034篇名：非正當性支配：韋伯論城市國家與現代國家之正當性基礎並列篇名：Non-legitimate Domination: Max Weber on the Basis of Legitimacy of City-state and Modern State作者：林子新(Zi-Xin Lin)關鍵字：韋伯;非正當性支配;現代性;城市;城市國家;現代國家;人民;Max Weber;non-legitimate domination;modernity;city;city-state;modern state;people期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：韋伯的城市史研究是理解文明現代性的重要窗口。韋伯指出，現代資本主義與現代國家之所以只崛起自西方，多少是因為作為現代文明之先驅的城市，不曾在西方以外的地區出現過。辨識西方城市（作為理念類型）的特殊性於是成為掌握現代性的關鍵線索。為此，韋伯曾將西方城市形容為「非正當性支配」，並認為城市領袖和現代政黨領袖一樣，都是非正當的統治者。不過，始終懸而未決的問題是：何謂非正當性支配？全文以重構非正當性支配之正當性基礎為主軸，先將市民團體的地域化確立為支配結構非正當化的歷史前提，接著說明地域團體崛起後在法律、行政以及軍事方面所掀起的革命，最後指出非正當性支配的正當性基礎在於訴諸地域團體－人民－的神聖不可侵犯性。英文摘要：Max Weber's urban study informs an important approach to modernity. It is argued that neither modern capitalism nor modern state had sprung from the Orient, since city with full meanings can be found only in the Occident. In the context, the Occidental city is deliberately deciphered as ”non-legitimate domination”, so as to distinguish from the Oriental city where legitimate authorities never lost their articulation. However, the question of what is the basis of legitimacy specific to the non-legitimate domination remains unanswered. To answer the question, this paper will deploy as follow: firstly, the revolutionary emergence of territorial associations (i.e. ”cities” in the past and ”nations” nowadays) will be confirmed as the precondition of the non-legitimate domination. Secondly, the revolution to which these territorial associations have led in terms of law, administration and military will be further documented. Finally, it will be concluded that the specific basis of legitimacy to non-legitimate domination is the sacrosanctity of territorial organization per se: the People.起始頁-結束頁：117-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201212004300401篇名：中國國際參與的西方文獻回顧：典則理論、理性調適與國際社會化的評估並列篇名：The Literature Review of China's Policy towards International Regimes: The Assessment of Regime Theory, Rational Adaptation and International Socialization作者：游智偉(Chih-Wei Yu)關鍵字：理性調適;典則理論;國際社會化;中國國際參與政策;Rational adaptation;regime theory;international socialization;China's policy toward international regimes期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以現實主義、自由制度主義與社會建構主義為架構區分學界對中國國際參與政策的研究，本文共區分為價值順從型、利益順從型、調適對抗型與內生戰略型等四類文獻。綜言之，本文認為現有文獻已對此進行相當多的辯論，但未能以更系統的推論或有力的證據佐證其對中國未來「意圖」的論述，本文認為或可透過長時間而大規模的研究設計，並佐以第一手的訪談資料，論證中國外交政策目標排序的變化對其參與政策變化的影響，藉此或可更完善這類議題的研究。英文摘要：This article discriminates the western academic studies on China's policy for international participation under the framework of realism, liberal institutionalism and social constructivism. This article distinguishes four types of literature: value oriented, interest oriented, optimized confrontation and inner based strategy. Overall, the author proposes that existent literature has undergone considerable amount of debate on the topic but neglected discussions on China's ”intentions” for the future. The author argues that studies on such topic may be improved through a large scale, long-term research supported by first-hand information through interviews to complement the impact of change in China's foreign policy of participation.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201212_55(4).00012篇名：中國公共外交中海外華人參與之研究：以歐美的一些組織與活動為例並列篇名：Overseas Chinese Participating in China's Public Diplomacy: Organizations and Activities in Europe and America as Examples作者：梁文興(Wen-Shing Liang)關鍵字：公共外交;海外華人;非政府組織;軟實力;public diplomacy;overseas Chinese;non-government organizations;soft power期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：在中國推動公共外交之前，海外華人已參與和公共外交相關事務，但他們的動機是出自於愛國與民族情感，中國乃加以運用，並推動僑務公共外交，鼓勵他們向當地政府及公眾介紹中國國情與政策，使中國的公共外交在官方絕對控管下，出現少有的一股民間力量。在歐美的華人參與尤其熱衷，他們以組織、社團或網路為平台，對當地政府決策與公眾輿論造成一定的影響，但由於多是自發與自主的行為，不願意受中國政府的管控的結果，使得他們的公共外交職能受限，也會損及整體公共外交的效能，這是中國想要納入非政府組織與公眾為公共外交的執行主體時，似乎須面對的問題。本文先歸納出中國海外華人在公共外交的參與背景、現況與特性，再從一、中國對華人參與公共外交的預期；二、中國在海外公共外交的運作；三、歐美公眾對中國形象的反應；來評析華人的參與效能及對中國公共外交的影響。英文摘要：Prior to China's promotion of public diplomacy, overseas Chinese have been involved in related affairs; their motives have been patriotism and national sentiment. China, thus, adapts such sentiment to promote the overseas public diplomacy by encouraging overseas Chinese to present China's national conditions and policies to foreign nationals. A strong, nongovernmental force - rarely seen under the absolute official control by China's public diplomacy - has emerged among the overseas Chinese.Particularly, the participation of overseas Chinese in Europe and America is the most keen. They establish organizations, associations or network as platforms to create certain impact on local government's policies and public opinions. Their activities are mostly autonomous, with intentions to overlook China's control. As a result, their activities lead to the restriction of China's public diplomatic functions and damage the overall effectiveness. This is the problem that China needs to face in relying on non-governmental organizations and the public as the main entity of public diplomacy implementation.This study first summarizes the background, current status and characteristics of overseas Chinese in participating public diplomacy. Through 1) China's expectation of overseas Chinese in the participation of public diplomacy, 2) China's operation in foreign public diplomacy, and 3) the responses of people in Europe andAmerica to the image of China, this study comments on the participation effectiveness of overseas Chinese and the impact towards China's public diplomacy.起始頁-結束頁：31-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201212_55(4).00023篇名：中國知識社群如何重構「柔性權力」理論：回顧與批判並列篇名：How China's Epistemic Community Remakes Soft Power: A Critical Literature Review作者：楊昊(Alan Hao Yang);蕭新煌(Michael Hsin-Huang Hsiao);趙<U+6667>嵎(Hao-Yu Chao)關鍵字：國際關係理論;理論本土化;中國特色;柔性權力;中國文化;international relations theory;theoretical localization;Chinese characteristics;soft power;Chinese culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：自改革開放以來，中國學界大量引進西方的國際關係理論，許多引介、轉譯西方國際關係理論的專著猶如汗牛充棟。但在此同時，隨著中國參與國際事務的程度不斷提升，佐以中國國際關係研究的快速發展，在1980年代後期開始出現關於「具有中國特色」國關理論或理論「中國化」、「本土化」的辯論系列，同時一直延續至今。有不少中國學者似乎亟欲脫離西方國關理論框架，開始嘗試建立中國的國關理論。為了要進一步探討相關知識累積的脈絡演進，本研究將以中國國內知識社群對於柔性權力的論辯為焦點，從批判性的角度深入探究中國如何重新詮釋和再製西方國關理論的發展軌跡，分析中國學界如何理解具有美式理論色彩的柔性權力，並進一步呈現中國柔性權力的內涵。本文將先探討「馬克思主義中國化」的思維，藉以理解中國知識社群對理論「中國化」的認知，並將中國國關學界針對理論「中國化」的知識累積進行梳理，試圖呈現中國學界對此議題的態度。在分析過程中，本文將以柔性權力理論的經典論述，作為解讀中國柔性權力論述的對照依據。最後，本文將整理中國學界與政界探討柔性權力的文獻，並藉著批判性的文獻回顧探索中國學界對於柔性權力理論的認知圖像。英文摘要：Since the 1980s, Western discourses on international relations theories had been introduced to China with the increasing volumes of publications on international studies. Accordingly, attention among China's IR epistemic communities was drawn upon the debate over the intellectual construction of China's international studies and the promotion of China's theoretical undertakings with local traits. New attempts, therefore, are initiated to draft and re-make China's perspectives of international politics. One of the significant issues is the introduction and reproduction of soft power in China. This article will begin by introducing intellectual continuity and ruptures on Marxism in China and its implication to the making of international relations theories with Chinese characteristics. Then, it will provide a critical assessment on how China's epistemic communities re-make the American concept of soft power with Chinese contents. It argues that China's discourse on soft power is correspondent to serving its national interests and grand strategy. Through the critical literature review, a general understanding of soft power with Chinese characteristics will be clearly framed.起始頁-結束頁：59-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201212_55(4).00034篇名：朝貢體系再現與「天下體系」的興起？中國外交的案例研究與理論反思並列篇名：Revitalization of the Tribute System and the Rise of the "Under-Heaven System"? Cases Studies and Reflections on China's Diplomacy作者：張登及(Teng-Chi Chang);陳瑩羲(Ying-His Chen)關鍵字：中國外交;朝貢體系;天下;國際關係理論;中國學派;Chinese Foreign Policy;Tribute System;Tianxia;Theories of International Relations;Chinese School期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：「中國崛起」現象的影響，以往被認為僅限於政策領域或現有國關理論選擇和修正的範疇，比如評估「權力移轉」的程度，或美中兩國「攻勢、守勢」的選擇。九十年代中國大陸學界曾提出的「中國特色」，不僅外界不予重視，即大陸國關學界也質疑連連。但近十年來，「中國崛起」現象的影響已經延伸到國關理論本體與方法的領域，使得所謂「中國學派」的呼籲，開始受到西方學界的注意。而「中國學派」發展的一項重要理論資源，即是古代中國外交與東亞國際關係的理念和實踐經驗。「朝貢體系」作為這段歷史中最突出的特徵，其實史學界早有許多研究，只是尚未與國關學界充分對話。但不管是學術研究還是一種道德指斥，卻已經有不少評論聲稱，北京正在營造「新朝貢體系」。本文因此根據古代朝貢史與有關理念，初步設計一套指標，驗證於當代中國周邊外交的四個案例。其結果顯示，「朝貢體系」與其「天下秩序」的理念部分，可以由當前的中國外交實踐局部證實。但若以此聲稱北京已有「天下體系」的外交方略，或說「中國學派」可以藉此確立其理論基礎，則還需要更多哲學、歷史與現實政策相結合的研究，才有發展的前景。英文摘要：The fact of ”China Rise” has been widely recognized as one of the most important impact on the current international order since the end of the Cold War. Various debates are developing surrounding subjects such as how and to what extent will China challenges the post-war order established by the West. This puzzle is not only haunting experts in the West, but also bothering IR researchers in China. The way the Chinese scholars addressed this issue in the past was the so-called ”IR theories with Chinese Characters” in the late 1980s. But this claim was jettisoned by mature, well-trained Chinese academics in the 1990s. The circle then experienced a period of learning western theories and doing empirical studies for a decade.The emergence of building a ”Chinese School” has gained new momentum since 2005. This trend accompanied Bush Administration's failure in both military as well as global economic areas. This time the Chinese drew support not from Marxist-Leninist teaching, but Confucianism and the experiences of ancient East Asian tribute system. This study focuses on this new drive of the ”Chinese School”, evaluates its theoretical adequacy, and tests it against Beijing's policy toward a few Southeast Asian countries where the Chinese influences are most vibrant. The result will help explain if the emerging ”Chinese School” for IR theories is valid intellectually and empirically.起始頁-結束頁：89-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201212_55(4).00045篇名：改革開放時期中共意識形態的結構與演變：由鄧小平理論、「三個代表」重要思想到科學發展觀的發展過程並列篇名：Structure and Evolution of the Chinese Communist Party's Ideology in the Reform Era: From the Deng Xiaoping Theory, the Important Thought of Three Represents and the Scientific Outlook on Development作者：陳述之(Shu-Chih Chen);江衍良(Yean-Liang Jiang)關鍵字：改革開放;意識形態;鄧小平理論;「三個代表」重要思想;科學發展觀;reform and opening up;Ideology;Deng Xiaoping Theory;The Important Thought of Three Represents;The Scientific Outlook on Development期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以拉卡托斯（Imre Lakatos）的「科學研究綱領方法論」（The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes），探討中共自1978年改革開放以後，由鄧小平、江澤民、胡錦濤三代中央領導集體分別建構的鄧小平理論、「三個代表」重要思想、科學發展觀等意識形態結構。本研究認為改革開放時期，馬克思列寧主義、毛澤東思想是中共意識形態不容挑戰與變更的硬核，在硬核的積極與消極誘導下衍生保護帶，保護帶包括實用論、社會主義初級階段論，以及中共執政與經濟發展兩個互賴的目標，在政經相輔的目標下發展出統籌觀點、和諧觀點、發展觀點、均衡觀點。保護帶會時有調整，以保衛硬核。面對改革開放後多元、變化的社會，中共在意識形態方面亦積極因應，力求上層建築與經濟基礎互相適應，其建構方針是力求中共領導與全民利益互為鑲嵌，將意識形態調整為更具經濟意涵，更且開放、彈性，以擴大連結、協商的方式試圖增加包容性，以求收編各方話語，滿足各方需求，以呵護經濟基礎，擴大正當性。但以馬克思辯證唯物論的動態觀點，以及二元對立辯證統一做為硬核的意識形態，本質上即有消解意識形態，以及二元結構發生衝突的可能性，此為中共當前在意識形態課題上遭遇的危機。在中共意識形態的未來發展上，本文認為可能順著統籌觀點的脈絡，往建構信任、建立溝通方面發展，以求一方面化解之前不均衡發展導致的社會不滿；二方面經由建立官民互信、全民互信，以強化全民在變動、多元社會中，提升對中共領導體制、政策、理念的認同。英文摘要：This paper discussed the ideology of the Communist Party of China from the perspective of ”The Methodology of Scientific Programmes” by Imre Lakatos. Since the reform and opening up in 1978, Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao had become three central collective leaderships. They constructed the Deng Xiaoping theory, the important thought of Three Represents and the Scientific Outlook on Development respectively. This paper concluded that during the reform and opening up period, Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong's thought became the unchallengeable and unchangeable hard core of CPC's ideology. The hard core's positive and negative deductions engendered ”protective belts”. Protective belt contained pragmatism, the primary stage of socialism and the mutual dependencies of political and economic development, from which the Holistic view, harmonious view, developmental view and balanced view were derived. In order to protect the hard core, CPC revised contents of the protective belts. When facing a multifaceted and changeable society after reform and opening up, CPC's ideology adjusted positively and actively. They combined the upper construction and the economic basis stably. Their goal was to mutually embed political leadership and people's interests. CPC's ideology had become more economic, open and flexible with the method of higher-level articulation and negotiation. Thus they could incorporate discourse and satisfy demands coming from different parts of the society. From the dynamic perspective of dialectical materialism by Marx and the ideology of hard core composed of binary opposition, the nature of ideological decline and the possibility of binary structures became the difficulties and crises of CPC's ideology. In the future, CPC may develop from the holistic perspective to construct trust and communication. Thus it can avoid the social discontent from unequal development. On the other hand, it can promote the identification of systems, policies and ideals by the mutual trust between the government and the people.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201209_55(3).00016篇名：後農業稅時代中國農村村幹部角色變化與地方治理並列篇名：The Abolition of the Agricultural Tax and Changes to Local Governance in Rural China: Observations from the Changing Roles of Village Cadres作者：于有慧(Yo-Huei Yu)關鍵字：中國農村;國家與社會關係;基層治理;村幹部角色;rural China;state and society relations;local governance;roles of village cadres期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文試圖從中國西部農村中村幹部作為國家與社會之「中介者」角色的歷史演變，論證不論國家政策如何變動，中介者作為「雙重代理人」的自主性從來未曾消失，中介者的利益動機與行為對地方治理具有關鍵影響。2000年以來，中共針對三農問題下猛藥，稅費改革、取消農業稅及一連串惠農補貼政策，中央意在跳過這基層代理人的剝削，使中央對社會的照顧能直補到戶。政策的非預期結果是鄉鎮被虛級化，國家基層政權上提至縣，在新的形勢下，「國家」再次退出農村，為村（地方）自治提供新契機，村幹部作為農村的「家長」，其角色扮演使地方治理成效出現分化，有些地區呈現無政府狀態，有些地方在村幹部的帶領下，利用巿場與政策的機會，走向良性治理。英文摘要：In 2000, China's central government noticed the severity of its rural development problems and started to implement reforms. The adoption of the tax-for-fee policy and the abolition of the agricultural tax were meant to relieve the heavy burden of peasants and to constrain the predatory behaviors of local cadres. The unintended consequence of these reforms was the withdrawal of power from the township government, leaving villages neglected by the state. On the other hand, villages gained renewed opportunities for self governance. In the absence of power, village cadres were free to resume their paternalistic roles and consequently their style of leadership had a profound impact on local governance. In some areas, local governance was anarchic, while in others villages developed by taking advantage of new polices and markets. This paper argues that the roles played by village cadres have been critical to the performance of local governance in less developed areas of rural China. As intermediaries between the state and society, the autonomy of the village cadres remained intact despite changes in state policies.起始頁-結束頁：35-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201209_55(3).00027篇名：想像的階層流動：中國大陸台灣學生的就學就業分析並列篇名：Imaginated Mobility: Taiwanese Students Studying in China作者：林平(Ping Lin)關鍵字：社會流動;移民;中國大陸;台灣學生;social mobility;migration;Mainland China;Taiwanese students期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：當大部分以國際學生為主題的研究，著重在已開發國家中的外籍學生時，本文是以進入開發中國家的學生為對象。根據筆者2004-2005年與2009-2011年對廣州、上海與北京三地大學全職就讀的台灣學生觀察，加上其他相關資料，筆者發現，影響台灣學生在兩岸間就學與就業意願的，表面上是務實的就學／就業機會，但深層的原因是對中國的想像以及階層上升的期望。早期當事人多成長於戒嚴時期，受到當時台灣社會的影響，對中國大陸有著「古典中國」的想像，偏好前往有一定歷史意涵的大學進修文史哲或中醫等類科，希望增進自己的內涵性文化資本。中期當事人受到台灣民主轉型以及中國經濟發展的影響，對中國大陸的沿海城市有著「現代中國」的想像，偏向從有歷史意涵的大學中選擇法律經貿醫學等實務類科，希望所增進的文化資本未來能轉換成經濟資本。晚期的當事人受到兩岸政治經濟發展的影響，對中國更有國際化的想像，是「小市民天堂」，更加偏向選擇就業導向的學科。然而當事人就學之後發現，經歷文革的「古典中國」，已經不是培育內涵性文化資本的好選擇；如果沒有足夠的當地社會資本，很難在看似迷人的「現代中國」生存；「小市民天堂」的中國，背後卻是大陸學歷的障礙，以及缺乏當地人脈的困難。最後，除了少部分當事之外，他們對中國的想像與向上流動的期望，都經不起現實生活的挑戰，陷入進退失據的情況。英文摘要：While social mobility and international migration are regarded as two irrelevant fields of studies, this author argues that both are important to illustrate the features of international students, especially Taiwanese college students in China. The author presents that their image of China and motivation for upward mobility as the crucial factors to explain their study in China. Respondents pursuing college degrees of the early stage(early 1990s) were fond of the image of Historical China in cities like Beijing. They aimed for the embedded Chinese cultural capital and treated it as the key element to define their positions in the social strata. Respondents of the mid stage(late 1990s-early 2000s)were attracted to the image of Modern China in cities like Shanghai. They expected to accumulate both the embedded and the institutionalized capital in order to have their own careers in China. Respondents after early-2000s are pragmatic. They stress on the education or training which will lead to profitable jobs in the future. However, few respondents reach their goals. Respondents of the early stage discovered that the authentic Chinese culture was gone, and China is no longer the proper place to enrich their Chinese cultural capital. Respondents of the mid stage eventually realized that social capital, instead of cultural capital, was vital to their own careers in China. The most recent respondents are still bothered because their Chinese degrees still are not recognized in Taiwan. Although most respondents enriched their lives via studying in China, they obtained less than what they originally expected.起始頁-結束頁：57-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201209_55(3).00038篇名：中國威脅論之解析－以日本相關研究文獻為例並列篇名：On "China Threat"-Perspective in Japanese Literatures作者：邵軒磊(Hsuan-Lei Shao)關鍵字：中國威脅論;亞洲身分認同;戰後日本;China Threat;Asian-identity;Post-war Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：由於中國國力快速成長，「中國威脅論」從20世紀末開始成為重要議題，不但成為全球學界爭論的焦點，甚至影響中國之外交政策。本文討論戰後日本學界、輿論界的中國威脅論。日本在三方面與台灣有較高的相似性：與中國有地緣相鄰關係、而又具有文化相似性、以及民主政治制度的社會。本研究整理戰後日本中國威脅論的系譜研究指出：日本中國威脅論有著獨特的面貌與思考邏輯，前期是以美國為軸心，後期則直接面對中國。英文摘要：Due to rapid growth of China's national power, ”China Threat” has become an important issue since late 20^th Century. It involves not only academic debates over power issue, but also China's diplomatic policy. This article, by examining academic and public opinions, discusses discourse of ”China Threat” in the post-World War II Japan. This essay argues that the ”China Threat” discourse in Japan had a unique development: in earlier stage it followed whatever discourse raised by the US in the context of the Cold War system, but in later stage Japan’s discourse originated from its direct engagement with China.起始頁-結束頁：85-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201209_55(3).00049篇名：中國大陸的分權改革與地方政府投資行為－財政誘因的觀點並列篇名：Decentralization and Local Investment Behaviors in China-A Perspective on Fiscal Incentives作者：曹海濤(Hai-Tao Tsao)關鍵字：中國大陸;財政分權;地方政府投資;財政誘因;China;fiscal decentralization;local investment;fiscal incentives期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究從財政誘因觀點詮釋轉型時期中國大陸地方政府的投資行為。給定地方政府追求稅收或預算極大化的前提，我們認為財政誘因是地方政府於不同轉型階段，呈現不同投資行為的根本原因。由於財政分權改革衍生差異性的稅收制度安排（包括稅率、稅種和稅收管理），導致地方政府可獲得之收益來源有所變化。為追求地方財政收益最大化，地方政府會偏向投資那些可以帶來大量財政收入的產業或部門。準此，地方政府在轉型的第一階段 （1978-1993）熱衷投資加工製造業；在第二階段（1994－迄今〉則積極投資於基礎設施。英文摘要：This paper analyzes local government investments durning China's reform era. Fiscal incentives are regarded as the principal factor in decisionmaking of local government investment. As the central-local fiscal relations change, the incentive structure of local governments have adapted to fiscal systems. Therefore, the salient differences in local government investments are to respond to the change of revenue resources. Consequently, local governments heavily invest in the processing and manufacturing industry under the revenue-sharing system（RSS）during the 1980s and the early 1990s. The tax-sharing system（TSS）reform in 1994, however, shifts local tax base to business tax and value-added tax. These taxes are closely associated with local infrastructure investment. Accordingly, local governments have plunged into local infrastructure investment since the mid- 1990s.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201206_55(2).000110篇名：中國勞動爭議處理與勞動合同法：程序法上觀點並列篇名：A Review of Labor Disputes Resolution and the Labor Contract Law in China: From the Perspective of Procedural Law作者：李錦智(Ching-Chin Lee)關鍵字：勞動爭議處理;勞動合同;勞動監察;勞動仲裁;resolution of labor disputes;labor contract;labor supervision;labor arbitration期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：中國勞動關係調整之法制架構分為事前規制、事後矯正二區塊。前者為實施勞動標準、推動集體合同、實行勞動合同制；後者則含勞動監察，與勞動爭議處理制度。歷次勞動法規制定過程中，勞動爭議處理規範向與勞動條件規範相應制定。蓋法諺云「有權利即有救濟」，中國勞動規範制定亦不例外，2007 年勞動合同法與勞動爭議調解仲裁法同年緊接制定，可謂典型。特別是，勞動爭議處理程序所受理之案件，將由勞工身分保障爭議轉向勞動合同履行爭議為主。勞動爭議調解仲裁法所建構爭議處理程序受理與進行，即需參照勞動合同法相關規定，始能理解爭議處理程序實然問題，及勞工保障實際情形。英文摘要：The transition of the legal system for labor relationship in China can be grouped under two categories: preventive regulations and remedial measures. The former includes implementation of labor standards, enforcement of collective labor contracts, and administration of labor contract system. The latter covers on labor supervision and labor disputes resolution regulations. During the establishment of China's labor laws, the labor disputes resolutions regulations tend to correspond with labor condition rules. The institution of labor contract law and the law of labor disputes mediation and arbitration in 2007 is a typical case. Besides, among the cases of labor disputes resolution procedure, the most common type of labor disputes has shifted from the protection of labor's status to the implementation of labor contracts. The law of labor disputes mediation and arbitration has been effective since 2008. To find out its impacts on labor protection, it is necessary to refer to the related regulations in labor contract law when studying the factors and the procedures of cases accepted in the labor disputes mediation and arbitration law.起始頁-結束頁：43-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201206_55(2).000211篇名：從全球治理的權力類型探究兩岸合作的可能模式並列篇名：Types of Possible Cross-Straits Cooperation: An Approach of Global Governance Power Typology作者：袁鶴齡(Hao-Lin Yuan);沈燦宏(Tsan-Hung Shen)關鍵字：全球治理;兩岸治理;權力類型;賽局理論;合作類型;global governance;Cross-Straits governance;power typology;gametheory;cooperation typology期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：對於權力的論述，傳統的國際關係理論皆強調一種垂直性的權力，然而，這種階層性垂直權力的特徵卻往往忽略了權力的水平特徵。從全球治理的視角，權力不再僅有單一的垂直特徵，還包含多層次、多結構的水平特徵，並在此種交織與貫穿的思維下孕育出全球治理的權力類型。因此，在兩岸治理的權力互動研究，亦須將垂直性與水平性的權力特徵同時納入考量。本文提出二個研究問題：一、如何看待兩岸之間的衝突與合作並存的現象？ 二、在何種條件之下，兩岸能走向合作治理或走向衝突？本研究發現，透過賽局理論的檢證，兩岸之間除了強制性權力下合作類型為兩岸治理的困境外，其餘的類型均可使兩岸合作治理成為可能。英文摘要：For traditional international theorists, power is treated as a vertical concept; however, such vertical power concept may neglect the horizontal power character. From the global governance perspective, power is characterized with multi-level, multi-dimension, and multi-structure. By taking vertical and horizontal power characters into account, power typology has been developed in the field of global governance. In the study of Cross- Straits governance, it is necessary to treat the concept of power from both vertical and horizontal characters simultaneously. This paper intends to answer the following questions:（1）How to explain the reality that there exist both conflict and cooperation characteristics during the interaction between Taiwan and China?（2）Under what conditions, can both sides move toward cooperative governance, or toward conflict? By using the framework of game theory, this paper argues that except for compulsive power (type one model), which may induce governance dilemma, other models show moves toward cooperative governance.起始頁-結束頁：75-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201206_55(2).000312篇名：台商對中國大陸直接投資的決定性因素分析：1998-2007並列篇名：Determinants of the Taiwanese Outward FDI in China: 1998-2007作者：王薇婷(Wei-Ting Wang);張國益(Kuo-I Chang);林晉禾(Chin-Ho Lin)關鍵字：海外直接投資;區位選擇;追蹤資料;foreign direct investment;location choice;panel data期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的主要目的在探討當台灣與中國大陸兩岸交流日趨頻繁，加上放寬投資條件與各項惠台政策的實施後，對於台商直接投資中國大陸各省決定因素的影響。本研究利用中國大陸27個省份在1998年至2007年期間的追蹤資料，採用隨機效果模型分析。實證結果顯示：在1998年至2007年期間，影響台灣產業前往中國大陸各省屬於正相關的投資因素包含中國大陸各省的國內生產毛額、勞動生產力及政府政策，而平均勞動工資與教育程度對於台商投資則是負相關。另外，廠商別的分析加強說明了平均勞動工資、母公司勞動生產力以及政府政策的相對不顯著影響結果。英文摘要：As cross-strait exchanges between Taiwan and mainland China become more frequent - by relaxation of investment conditions and implementation of policies - the main purpose of this study is to investigate the influence of Taiwan's foreign direct investment（FDI）in mainland China. In this study, panel data from 27 provinces in mainland Chinabetween 1998 to 2007 are analyzed by using random effect model. The empirical results show that from 1998 to 2007, the determinants of FDI are the gross domestic product of China, the average labor wage, labor productivity, infrastructure, and government policies, all with significant positive correlation, while the level of education for Taiwanese investments shows a negative correlation. In addition, we focus on the comparison of the FDI determinants among all firms and the industries.起始頁-結束頁：105-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201206_55(2).000413篇名：誰是明日之星？中共中央候補委員的政治潛力分析並列篇名：Who Are the Rising Stars in the 18(superscript th) CCP National Congress? A Study of PoliticalPotential of Central Committee Alternate Members作者：陳陸輝(Lu-Huei Chen);陳德昇(Te-Sheng Chen);陳奕伶(Yi-Ling Chen)關鍵字：中共中央委員;中共候補中央委員;政治潛力;制度化;政治菁英甄補;member of the CCP Central Commiltee;alternate member of the CCP Central Committee;political potential;institutionalization;political elites recruitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究從年齡、學經歷等各項指標，分析中共第十七屆中央候補委員的政治潛力。本研究認為，當中共政治菁英甄補的過程更加制度化，對於中共未來政治走向的觀察，應該延伸到對中央候補委員的分析。這些今日的候補委員，有很多人是明日政壇的閃亮之星。因此，透過系統性地觀察與統計分析，有助於解讀中共領導人政治甄補路徑、偏好與趨勢。英文摘要：In this paper, we employ factors such as age, education, faction, political career, and symbolic indicators to predict the probability of alternate members being recruited to the 18(superscript th) CCP central, committee. As the CCP elite recruitment has become more institutionalized, we should pay more attention on the 17(superscript th) alternate members of the CCP Central Committee who might have potentials to join the power circle in the future. Therefore, we observe and analyze these alternative members systematically, and this study intends to shed some lights on interpreting the preferences and tendencies of politicalelite recruitment in China.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201203_55(1).000114篇名：經濟整合與政治衝突的關聯性－以兩岸關係為例並列篇名：The Nexus between Economic Integration and Political Conflicts: The Case of Taiwan and China作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);劉冬威(Dung-Wei Liu)關鍵字：政治衝突;經濟整合;因果分析;外人直接投資;political conflicts;economic integration;causality analysis;foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來隨著兩岸經貿往來日益頻繁，台灣與中國大陸已經成為非常重要的貿易與投資夥伴。然而，兩岸悶不穩定的政治情勢對兩岸經貿交流的正常化造成一定程度的影響，同時兩岸政治情勢亦深受雙方經貿投資行為的影響。本文的目的，以1996年至2008年季資料嘗試利用經濟計量的方法來釐清兩岸經濟整合與政治衝突可能的政經互動關係，經由實證研究的分析結果，我們發現台商赴大陸投資與台灣對大陸出口之間呈現正向顯著的雙向因果關係，表示投資帶動出口，出口亦進一步帶動投資。另一方面，國內對兩岸關係友善程度增加對於大陸領導人對台友善的政治態度有顯著正面的影響，表示當國內民眾普遍認為兩岸關係較為友善峙，這樣的反應將使得中國領導人對台政治態度回以善意。綜合上述結果顯示，經濟變數僅影響經濟變數，政治變數僅影響政治變數，政經分離兩者並無直接的因果關係。在1996年至2008年台灣對中國大陸採取對立的政治態度與管控的經貿政策，但兩岸存在產業分工的市場經濟利益應是造成政經分離的主因。英文摘要：Since the surge of the cross-strait trade and investment in the 1990s, Taiwan and China have become major trading partners with each other. However, the persistent political conflicts across the Taiwan Strait have significantly influenced the trade flow of the two sides, and increasing close economic tie between the two has also generated profound effect on their political situation. The purpose of the paper is to empirically test the causal relationship between economic integration and political conflicts by using quarterly data from Taiwan and China pertaining to the 1996-2008 period. The estimation results show that there is a significant positive bi-lateral causality between Taiwanese firms' investment in China and Taiwan's export to China implying that foreign direct investment induced exports and exports attracted foreign direct investment, while the improvement in the cross-strait relations perceived by Taiwanese people has a positive causal effect on Chinese leaders' political friendly response. These results imply that no causal relationship between economic tie and political tension, i.e., economic variables are separated from political factors. Taiwan's restricted trade policy with political confrontation policy against China during the 1996-2008 period and the economic benefits through cross-strait industrial division of labor were likely the major reasons causing the separation of economic tie and political conflicts between Taiwan and China.起始頁-結束頁：23-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201203_55(1).000215篇名：中國對朝鮮半島地緣經濟戰略與其對中國與南北韓關係之影響並列篇名：China's Geo-economic Strategy towards the Korean Peninsula and Its Influence on China's Relations with the Two Koreas作者：河凡植(Bum-Sig Ha)關鍵字：地緣經濟學;地緣經濟關係;中國;南韓;北韓;中國對朝鮮半島影響力;geo-economics;geo-economic relations;China;South Korea;North Korea;China's influence over Korean Peninsula期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本論文的目的在於，分析中國對朝鮮半島地緣經濟戰略與目前中國與南韓、中國與北韓關係，探討中國對朝鮮半島影響力。東北亞大國當中，中國是建立與南北韓緊密合作關係的唯一國家，但因為東北亞國際政治的力學結構，中國對朝鮮半島的影響力仍然有所限制。但是，近年來，隨著各國的對外戰略追求經濟利益的趨勢日益顯著，經濟因素主導國際政治。根據南北韓對外經濟局面，中國成為南北韓對外經濟交流的最大國家，並且，南北韓經濟對中國依賴逐漸深化，中國對南北韓經濟影響力在擴大。進入21世紀，中國經濟作用引導朝鮮半島經濟發展的動力，因此，中國對朝鮮半島影響力是自然地依靠於經濟力量。但是， 隨著南北韓利用東北亞地緣經濟結構，以追求經濟發展，中國與南北韓在國家利益與對外經濟戰略土出現了競爭與摩擦，而且，這些競爭與摩擦因為聯繫到經濟利益與國家主權而難以解決。因此，中國與朝鮮半島合作發展仍然存在著威脅因素。英文摘要：The goal of this study is to analyze China's geo-economic strategy and contemporary relations with the two Koreas, and to probe China's influence over the Korean peninsula. China is the only country with friendly and cooperative relations with the two Koreas among the powerful states in Northeast Asia. Nevertheless, China's influence over the Korean peninsula was still limited because of dynamic composition of international politics in Northeast Asia. However, economic factor has recently become the focal point of international politics as each country's foreign strategy is drafted by the pursuit of its own economic interest. According to foreign economic situation of the two Koreas, China has become one of the two Koreas' biggest cooperative partner of foreign economic exchange. Moreover, on economic areas, China's influence over the two Koreas has been ex pending as the two Koreas' increasingly rely on China's growing economy. Since the start of the 21(superscript st) century, China's economy had been leading the two Koreas' economic development. However, new competition and friction on national interest and foreign economic strategy emerged, as the two Koreas start to exploit the geo-economic structure in Northeast Asia in pursuit of their economic development. These competition and friction are difficult to solve since economic interest and national sovereignty are involved. They are still lurking threats within China's cooperative relationships with the two Koreas.起始頁-結束頁：41-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201203_55(1).000316篇名：中國大陸製造業中，台港澳資本與外資直接投資技術外溢效果之比較研究並列篇名：Estimation of the Technology Spillover Effect of Foreign Capital and Capitals from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao: A Case Study of China's ManufacturingSector作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);陳思婷(Szu-Ting Chen)關鍵字：外人投資;技術外溢效果;中國大陸製造業;FDI;spillover effect;manufacturing sector of China期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：外人直接投資（Foreign Direct Investment, FDI）的技術外溢效果是有關外資投資產生間接效應的一個重要課題，也是被視為一國推動國內經濟發展有效的管道。中國大陸自改革開放以來，即積極的使用外資來推動經濟，經過三十年來努力的產業升級和結構調整，經濟實力不容小覷。中國大陸2007－2009年的統計資料顯示，外人直接投資品全社會固定資產投資約0.5%，所占比重雖然不大，但是對中國大陸的經濟發展與技術進步卻有非常顯著的影響。本文以中國大陸國家統計局進行年度「工業企業數據庫」調查1998－2006年製造業的廠商資料，運用STATA統計軟體進行跨時橫斷面分析，並將直接投資依照來源分為台港澳和外資兩個部分，研究其對中國大陸製造業技術外溢的效果和比較。主要研究發現為在整體製造業與輕工業方面，台港澳資企業具有負面的外溢效果，而外資企業會帶來正面的外溢效果，但是，在高技術產業和重工業中，由於大陸企業和外資技術差距太大，而導致外資有負的外溢效果，而港澳台資則會帶來正面的外溢效果；另外，在化學工業方面，則是港澳台資和外資均會產正的外溢效果。英文摘要：The spillover effect of foreign direct investment is not only an important issue for FDI but also seen as an efficient method to promote domestic economic development. Since Reform and Opening of China, FDI has been used as an active way to improve technology. According to statistical data from 2007 to 2009, FDI accounts for only 0.5% in total domestic investment in China. Though the proportion is relatively small, the using of FDI creates job opportunities, expands domestic demand and technology transfer.In this study, applying an annual industrial enterprise database in manufacturing firms from 1998 to 2006 conducted by National Bureau of Statistics of China, we employed an OLS model to estimate the spillover effect from foreign capital and capital from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao We found that in the overall manufacturing industry and in the light industry, Taiwan capital has a negative spillover effect while foreign capital has a positive spillover effect. On the other hand, in the high-tech industry and the heavy industry, foreign capital has a negative effect due to the high technology gap between foreign country and China, while capitals from Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao have a positive spillover effect. Finally, both foreign capital and the capitals from Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macao have a positive spillover effect in chemical industry.起始頁-結束頁：71-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201203_55(1).000401篇名：台灣青少年快樂發展之縱貫性研究：二階層線性成長模式的發現並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study of Teenagers' Development of Happiness in Taiwan: An Analysis of Hierarchical Linear Growth Model作者：巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu);陸偉明(Wei-Ming Luh);賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai)關鍵字：台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;正向組織;快樂感;固定樣本追蹤研究;憂鬱情緒;depressive mood;happiness;panel study;positive institute;Taiwan Education Panel Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：34期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解台灣青少年的快樂感隨時間變化之趨勢型態與成長速率，以及性別、憂鬱情緒及正向組織對快樂感的影響情形。研究資料係取自台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫所釋出之問卷與資料，以固定樣本追蹤設計對2001年的國一生樣本每隔二年進行追蹤，直至該生於2005年就讀高二（專二），橫跨三波次的追蹤樣本計有1,099人，採用二階層線性成長模式來分析資料。本研究結果顯示：（1）青少年的快樂感發展係呈現負成長的趨勢，亦即隨著年齡的增長而愈趨不快樂，快樂感隨三波遞移而下挫的趨勢是一致性且普遍性的現象；（2）憂鬱情緒與正向組織對青少年國一時快樂感的起始狀態具有解釋力，而兩性在快樂感上則沒有差異。由於青少年快樂感的發展變化已有不容忽視的效果，其憂鬱情緒與正向組織對快樂感亦有影響，故提供相關建議做為青少年輔導介入之參據。英文摘要：Teenagers' happiness is an important issue. The purpose of this study has twofold. The study explored the tendency and the growth rate of Taiwanese teenagers' happiness as it varied by time. In addition, the study investigated the effects of gender, depressive mood and positive institute on the initial status and the growth rate of happiness. Hierarchical linear growth model was applied to analyze the data of 1099 students from Taiwan Education Panel Survey. The data was collected over three waves from seventh grade in 2001 to eleventh grade in 2005. The results showed that: (1) The teenagers' happiness growth on average decreased across three waves. (2) Both the depressive mood and positive institute had significant effects on the initial status of teenagers' happiness. Given the present results, we provided some implications and suggestions for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201212.00012篇名：以「疏離」自「惘惘的威脅」中出走：張愛玲的心理傳記並列篇名："Alienation" as A Way Out of "Threat of Desolate": A Psychobiography of Eileen Chang作者：張慈宜(Tsz-Yi Chang);丁興祥(Shing-Shiang Ting)關鍵字：人格;心理治療;心理傳記;家庭;family;personality;psychobiography;treatment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：34期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以心理傳記學的取向，針對近代重要文學作家張愛玲的生命進行探究。張愛玲的文學創作經常籠罩在一種荒涼／蒼涼的意境之下，除了極少數的例外，她的人物總是在經歷各種掙扎與奮鬥之後，迎接令人失望的結局。為什麼張愛玲的作品人物費盡心力的掙扎最後總歸於徒勞？藝術創作的母題並非憑空出現，經常與創作者本人的生命歷程有高度的關連性。本研究藉由解答此一創作謎團的過程，逐步揭露張愛玲早年生活中與父親、母親（特別是母親）之間的愛恨糾葛，如何對張愛玲的精神生活帶來騷亂與傷痛，又如何進而發展出精神分析學者Horney所謂的疏離型人格。鑑於心理傳記學在國內仍是一門新興發展中的學問，本文亦針對心理傳記學的宗旨與方法做了初步的介紹。另外，我們也針對本研究之探究成果對於人格理論，及諮商、治療實務層面可能產生的貢獻或啟發進行討論，最後並提出我們的建議。英文摘要：This study was designed to explore the life of an important modern literature writer Eileen Chang using an psychobiography approach. The work of Eileen Chang is often shrouded in a desolate atmosphere. With very few exceptions, her characters are always struggling and fighting to earn a better life, but are encountered with futile results. Why are the characters of Eileen Chang devoting themselves to something that seems hopeless? The motifs of works do not appear out of thin air; instead, they are often highly related to the writer's own life course. This research provided answers to the mystery of creation, and revealed the life of Eileen Chang's early years with her parents (especially the mother) which were full of love-hate ambivalence. It also showed how the ambivalent feelings brought about disturbances and spiritual pain, and how Eileen Chang developed the detached personality described in Horney's psychoanalytic theory. Because psychobiography is a relatively new approach in Taiwan, this article began with the introduction of the purposes and methods of psychobiography. Relevant personality and counseling theories, as well as recommendations for interventions were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：19-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201212.00193篇名：諮商心理師團體諮商倫理信念與行為之探究並列篇名：Counseling Psychologists' Ethical Beliefs and Behaviors on Group Counseling作者：李佳儒(Jia-Ru Li);張勻銘(Yun-Ming Chang);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);楊淳斐(Chun-Feei Yang)關鍵字：倫理行為;倫理信念;團體諮商;ethical belief;ethical behavior;group counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：34期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討諮商心理師對團體諮商工作之倫理信念與倫理行為。先經立意取樣100位具諮商心理師身份之團體領導者進行第一階段資料蒐集，內容包括基本資料、團體諮商倫理信念與倫理行為，次就問卷初步分析結果，另行招募十位團體領導者，進行第二階段深度訪談。以SPSS12.0統計套裝軟體進行描述性統計、交叉表分析和T考驗，並針對分析結果進行質量資料整合、文獻比對與報告撰寫。研究結果發現教育程度、團體時數在部分倫理信念與行為表現上有顯著差異，整體而言，團體領導者在倫理信念與倫理行為上具有一致性。在時間界限和免受傷害類別題項共識度較低。在專業知能、知後同意、時間界限之部分題項上，知行衝突率較高。由深度訪談中發現，領導者在面對兩個以上權益衝突的情境時較易產生倫理困境；此外，領導者會基於成員個別化差異、團體氣氛、團體歷程階段、執行難易與實務現場之外在限制等考量因素，而決定其倫理行動。英文摘要：This study examined the ethical beliefs and behaviors of counseling psychologists on group counseling. A purposive sample of 100 Taiwanese counseling psychologists as group counselors responded to questionnaires eliciting demographics and information about the ethical beliefs and behaviors of group counselors. The information was then used to conduct a second stage in-depth interview with 10 recruited group counselors. Descriptive statistical analysis, cross table analysis and t-test were performed using SPSS 12.0 statistical package software. The obtained quantitative and qualitative data were integrated and compared with data in the literature. The results showed that the ethical beliefs and behaviors of counselors were generally consistent. However, ethical attitudes and behaviors were significantly influenced by education degree and group hours. Beliefs and behaviors also showed lower consistency in items pertaining to time boundary and non-maleficence. Ethical beliefs and behaviors showed conflict in items pertaining to professional competency, informed consent and time boundary. Specifically, qualitative data showed that group counselors were likely to experience dilemmas when two or more rights are in conflict with each other. When that happened, counselors based their ethical actions on the individual differences of group members, group atmosphere, group process, feasibility and limitations.起始頁-結束頁：53-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201212.00534篇名：心理劇中的自發性：以輔角經驗為對象的定性研究並列篇名：Spontaneity in Psychodrama: A Phenomenological Research of Being Auxiliary作者：游淑瑜(Shu-Yu You);李維倫(Wei-Lun Lee)關鍵字：心理劇治療;自發性;身體感;詮釋現象學;bodily feelings;hermeneutic phenomenology;psychodrama;spontaneity期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：34期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文的目的在於以詮釋現象學的方法，嘗試揭露心理劇「自發性」的經驗結構。本文的臨床操作是在心理劇治療場境中選取具自發性經驗的輔角五位，在心理劇治療過後，請輔角對其作為輔角的經驗進行經驗描述，而獲得經驗描述文本，研究者並以李維倫與賴憶隉]2009）提出之現象學分析方法針對經驗描述進行資料分析。本研究結果有二個發現，一是自發性經驗現象具有兩個行為向度，一是縱向聯繫作用：話語—身體感受，一是橫向聯繫作用：人際語言、非語言行動。在心理劇場景中，輔角受到心理劇場景設置的效果，或透過擬態扮演，或是在心理劇場景中與主角的互動對應中，輔角內在會經驗到自身身體、心理的感受，或是有想說出的話語，而輔角如果能據此身體感受對主角以語言及非語言行動進行適當的回應，此即是自發的經驗歷程。二也發現自發性經驗現象中，身體感的生發與表達是輔角自發及創造的關鍵因素。透過本研究，我們有機會從心理劇輔角的經驗，解明自發性經驗的現象，藉以擴大並充實心理劇治療的理論。英文摘要：This study aims at revealing the experiential structure of spontaneity in psychodrama using a phenomenological method. Five participants with the experience of being spontaneous auxiliaries in psychodrama were chosen and invited to describe their experience. Phenomenological analysis (Lee & Lai, 2009) was applied to the descriptions of experience. Two main findings were obtained. 1. The experiential structure of spontaneity in psychodrama consisted of two dimensions of behaviors. One was the vertical dimension, indicating the words-bodily feelings connection, and the other was the horizontal dimension, indicating the interpersonal verbal and nonverbal communication. Through the scene-setting, playing the role, or interacting with the protagonist, the auxiliaries in psychodrama came to experience psychological or bodily feelings and they might also feel urgent to speak out the experience in interpersonal realms. The auxiliaries experience themselves as being spontaneous as they can express what they felt bodily and psychologically. 2. In the experiential structure of spontaneity, the experience and expression of bodily feelings were the key. Through this study, various significant features regarding spontaneity in psychodrama were clarified.起始頁-結束頁：83-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201212.00835篇名：高中職學生家庭系統分化、自我概念對其人際衝突解決策略的預測研究─自我概念的中介效果並列篇名：Prediction of Resolution Strategy for Interpersonal Conflicts Arising from Family System Differentiation and Self-Concept of High School Students: Mediational Effects of Self-Concept作者：游淑華(Shu-Hua Yu);吳麗雲(Li-Yun Wu);蔡金蓮(Chin-Lien Tsai)關鍵字：人際衝突解決策略;自我概念;家庭系統分化;family system differentiation;interpersonal conflict resolution;self-concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：34期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在驗證家庭系統分化對人際衝突解決策略的預測效果，並檢視自我概念的中介效果。本研究係採用問卷調查法，並以台南縣市高中職學生為對象，共計1501人。研究工具包含「家庭系統分化量表」、「自我概念量表」及「人際互動量表」。研究結果分二方面說明，在直接預測效果上發現：（1）除「忍讓」策略外，「母子」、「父子」與「婚姻」次系統分化均能有效預測「競爭」、「逃避」與「協調」策略，但其影響力各有所不同（2）各次系統分化越好，越傾向採取理智性策略；反之，則較容易採取情緒性策略。其中值得注意的是，「婚姻」次系統分化對所有情緒性策略均具有預測力。至於自我概念的中介效果部份，則發現：（1）在「競爭」策略上，「個人我」無中介效果存在；但「關係我」則具有強力的中介效果。（2）在「逃避」策略上，「個人我」具有部分中介效果；但「關係我」則具有強力的中介效果。（3）在「協調」策略上，「個人我」與「關係我」均只具有部分中介效果。（4）在「忍讓」策略上，則「個人我」與「關係我」均無中介效果存在。此外，就整體效果而言，「關係我」的中介效果大於「個人我」，且其影響機制主要表現在情緒性策略上。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to test the effects of family system differentiation on the resolution strategy for interpersonal conflictsand to examine the mediational effects of self-concept. The study surveyed 1,501 students from senior or vocational high schools in Tainan City and County, Taiwan. The instruments used in this study included: (a) the Family System Differentiation Scale, (b) the Self-Concept Scale, and (c) the Interpersonal Interaction Scale. In terms of direct prediction effects, the results showed that: (a) Other than forbearance, mother-son, father-son and marital sub-system differentiation all effectively predicted the ”competition”, ”evasion” and ”coordination” strategies, although their influence varied. (b) The better the differentiation of respective sub-systems, the more likely the rational ”coordination” strategy was to be taken. Conversely, emotional ”competition” and ”evasion” strategies also tended to be taken. It is particularly noteworthy that marital sub-system differentiation was predictive of all emotional strategies. The influence of father-son differentiation outperformed that of mother-son differentiation in regard to employing a rational strategy, but the reverse was true for emotional strategies. In terms of the mediational effects of self-concept, it was found that: (a) with the competition strategy, the ”individual self” had no mediational effect, whereas the ”rational self” showed a strong mediational effect; (b) With the evasion strategy, the ”individual self” had some mediational effect, while the ”rational self” presented a strong mediational effect; (c) with the coordination strategy, the ”individual self” and ”rational self” only had a limited mediating effect; (d) With the ”forbearance” strategy, the ”individual self” and ”rational self” did not have a mediational effect. Furthermore, as a whole, the mediational effect of ”rational self” was greater than that of ”individual self”, and its influence mechanism was mainly applied to the emotional strategy. Implications and recommendations as well as directions for future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：113-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201212.01136篇名：失業經驗中的生涯韌性與韌力：對成年男性失業者之質性研究初探並列篇名：Career Resilience and Resiliency in the Experience of Unemployment: Inquire of a Qualitative Research作者：洪瑞斌(Jui-Ping Hung)關鍵字：失業;生涯韌力;生涯韌性;韌性;career resilience;career resiliency;qualitative research;resilience;unemployment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：34期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究企圖探索生涯危機與轉折中的韌性概念與因素，並具體聚焦於失業經驗。本研究對4位成年男性失業者進行深度訪談，收集其工作生命史及失業歷程經驗資料。而後針對失業發生經驗中個體的「保護因子」與「危險因子」進行分析與歸納。研究結果顯示，失業經驗中的生涯韌性因素分為四大類，包括環境危險因素、個人危險因素、環境保護因素、個人保護因素等。本研究進一步分類失業中的個人保護因素，並稱為「生涯韌力」（Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker, 2000），它包含失業初期的「緩衝力」、失業中期的「持續力」、失業後期的「轉換力」。緩衝力包括失業預期與轉業準備、正向情緒調適能力、增進控制感的行動策略；持續力包括安排生活與保持活力、肯定自我價值、正向價值觀與信念；轉換力則包括評估現實與生涯策略的能力、視框轉換與重建意義的能力、技能學習與適應新工作之能力。綜合而言，本研究初步提供了生涯韌性與生涯韌力之概念探索，未來可以更進一步精緻的概念化，以及延伸至不同族群或不同生涯阻礙的研究開展。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore adults' unemployment experiences with thefocus on their career crises and the importance of the resilience in this challenging transition. In-depth interviews with four jobless male adults were conducted to collect data on their work histories and unemployment experiences. Based on the interviews, both protective factors and risk factors were identified for the unemployed participants. The result showed that career resilience in unemployment experiences could bedivided into four categories-environmental risk factors, individual risk factors, environmental protective factors, and personal protective factors. Furthermore this study defined personal protective factors as ”career resiliency” (Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker, 2000), and career resiliency of unemployed participants consists of ”cushioning” at the initial stage of unemployment, ”persistency” in the middle of unemployment, and ”transformability” in the late stage. The Cushioning factor includes unemployment expectations, job-transfer preparation, positive emotional adjustment, and sense of control. The Persistency factor includes arrangements for life and vitality, positive self-esteem and positive values and beliefs. The Transformability factor includes the ability of to assess reality and career strategies, transformation of frames, the ability to reconstruct meanings, development of skills, and adaptation to new work environments. To sum up, the study explored the concept of career resilience and career resiliency. Future research is needed to refine the conceptualization, and extend it to different groups, or even to different career obstacles.起始頁-結束頁：143-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201212.01437篇名：幼稚園兒童夢境之調查研究並列篇名：The Survey Research of Kindergarten Children's Dreams作者：張治遙(Chih-Yao Chang)關鍵字：一般夢境;兒童夢;重複夢境;夢內容;夢主題;夢意象;夢魘;children's dreams;dream content;dream image;dream theme;general dreams;recurrent dreams;nightmares期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：33期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解幼稚園兒童重複夢境及夢魘的發生率，以及夢境的內容特徵。本研究訪談226位幼稚園兒童，蒐集有效夢境250個，其中一般夢境133個，重複夢境49個，夢魘83個，同屬重複夢境及夢魘的夢有15個。研究發現（1）幼稚園兒童重複夢境的發生率23%，夢魘的發生率45%；（2）一般夢境以開心情緒最多，佔52%；主要意象以父母最多，佔23%，夢境主題以家人一起玩或陪伴最多，佔24%；（3）重複夢境以害怕等負向情緒最多，佔71%；主要意象以鬼怪最多，佔36%；主題以「鬼怪驚嚇、攻擊或追逐」最多，佔39%；（4）夢魘情緒皆為負面，害怕情緒高達89%；主要意象以鬼怪最多，佔55%；主題以「鬼怪驚嚇、攻擊或追逐」最多，佔55%；以及（5）整體夢境情緒以害怕最多，佔48%；主要意象多寡依次是鬼怪、父母、手足、動物及朋友；主題多寡依次是「鬼怪驚嚇、攻擊或追逐」及「家人一起玩或陪伴」；夢境發生地點以家裡最多；整體夢境中具有威脅性的夢境佔60%，而在威脅性夢境中，兒童以獨自一人面對最普遍，因應方式以主動佔52%較多，夢境結局有50%成功脫離威脅。英文摘要：The aims of the study were to understand the prevalence of recurrent dreams and nightmares, and content characteristics of dreams in preschool children. A total of 226 preschool children (age 5 to 6) were interviewed individually. The final250 valid cases were included in the analysis. The findings were as follows. (1) The prevalence of recurrent dreams and nightmares were 23% and 45% respectively. (2) In terms of general dreams, the major emotion was happiness, and the most common dream image that emerged was parents (23%) with the most appearing theme as ”playing with or being accompanied by family members” (24%). (3) In terms of recurrent dreams, the major emotion was negative (71%) , and the most common dream images that emerged were ghosts or monsters (36%) with the most appearing theme was ”being frightened, being attacked or being chased by ghosts or monsters” (39%). (4) In terms of nightmares, the emotions were all negative, where horror and fright ranked as the highest (89%) ; the most common dream images that emerged were ghosts or monsters (55%) with the most appearing theme as ”being frightened, being attacked or being chased by ghosts or monsters” (39%). (5) Among all dreams, the major emotions were horror and fright (48%); the most common dream images that emerged were ghosts and monsters, followed by parents, where the most appearing themes was ”being frightened, being attacked or being chased by ghosts or monsters; the scenes that appeared most often was their own house; 60% of all dreams were threatening; and among the threatening dreams, the most common coping style is active, and 50% of the outcome of dreams are successful in escaping from the threatening situation.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201208.00018篇名：國中學生情緒智力、因應策略與行為困擾間之關聯研究並列篇名：Exploration of Emotional Intelligence, Coping Strategies and Adjustment Problems among Junior High School Students作者：歐慧敏(Hui-Min Ou)關鍵字：因應策略;行為困擾;國中學生;情緒智力;adjustment problems;coping strategies;emotional intelligence;junior high school students期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：33期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解國中學生之情緒智力、因應策略與行為困擾之現況、情緒智力及因應策略對行為困擾的預測力與其因應策略在情緒智力與行為困擾間所扮演之中介角色。本研究以全國國中生為母群體，採分層比例叢集抽樣，取得975名有效樣本，施以「國中小學生情緒智力量表」、「青少年因應策略量表」、「行為困擾量表」進行分析。其結果發現：（1）國中學生在四項情緒智力中，以「情緒覺察與瞭解」最高；使用因應策略的頻率上以「避免逃避」策略最高；在五項行為困擾以「學校生活困擾最」高；（2）情緒智力與因應策略等九個變項能有效預測六項行為困擾，其中以「避免逃避」因應策略最重要；以及（3）因應策略在情緒智力與行為困擾間扮演完全中介的角色。英文摘要：The purpose of the research was to explore the causal model of emotional intelligence, coping strategies and adjustment problems among junior high school students. The first aim is to understand the state of emotional intelligence, coping strategies and adjustment problems in junior high school students. The second aim is to explore relationships among emotional intelligence, coping strategies, adjustment problems of junior high school students. The third aim is to explore whether coping strategies could mediate the relationship between emotional intelligence and adjustment problems of junior high school students. The stratified-cluster sampling was used to obtain 957 junior high school students who participated in the study and completed a battery of structured questionnaire, which included ”Adjustment Problem Inventory” (API), ”Adolescent Coping Strategies Inventory” (ACSI) and ”Adolescent Emotional Response Inventory” (AERI). The obtained data were analyzed with repeated-measures ANOVA, Pearson product-moment correlation, hierarchical regression, and structural equation modeling (SEM). The main findings were as follows. (1) Among four emotional intelligences of junior high school students, the highest is the perception and understanding of emotion, followed by assimilating emotion in thought. Among five coping strategies used, the most frequent one is the avoid-negative strategies, followed by indirect confrontation strategies”; the least frequent one is the searching support strategies. Among the adjustment problems, the highest one is school-life problems, followed byself-concern problems. (2) All the emotional intelligences and coping strategies predicted adjustment problems, and avoid-negative strategy was the best predictor. (3) Coping strategies mediated the relationship between emotional intelligence and adjustment problems among junior high school students.起始頁-結束頁：25-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201208.00259篇名：全盲大學畢業生就業轉銜目標發展與就業轉銜需求之探究並列篇名：The Development of Job Goals and the Needs of School-to-Work Transition in College Graduates with Total Blindness作者：吳佳蒨(Chia-Chien Wu);張千惠(Chien-Huey Sophie Chang)關鍵字：全盲大學畢業生;刻板印象;就業轉銜需求;college graduates with total blindness;stereotypes;the needs of school-to-work transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：33期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探究全盲大學畢業生就業轉銜目標發展之因素與就業轉銜需求。研究者以多次且長時間（前後十四個月）的深入訪談方式，訪問3位全盲大學畢業生及其8位重要相關人士。本研究發現，影響受訪者就業轉銜目標發展的主因為：刻板印象及自我決策之信念。刻板印象是指，一般社會大眾認為視障者只能從事按摩或點字校對等傳統行業。同時本研究亦發現，研究參與者的就業轉銜需求包括：（1）培養專業工作技能（例：從事點字校對所需具備之專業工作技能為點字摸讀及點字校對能力），與核心就業技能（例：溝通能力、自我決策能力、與積極工作態度）；（2）需要接受職務再設計之服務，包括：視力協助員，盲用電腦輔具，調整工作方式及改善工作環境（出差單電子化、無障礙就業考試環境、參與不需視力的工作，例：與同事一起搬運重物）、營造無障礙之心理及物理工作環境、提供點字或有聲專業書籍及網路硬碟）；（3）需要培養獨立上下班之行動能力；以及（4）需要從事休閒活動。最後，本文亦說明研究限制與建議未來研究方向。英文摘要：The purpose of this qualitative case study was to explore factors that might impact the development of job goals and the needs of school-to-work transition in college graduates with total blindness. Multiple semi-structured interviews were conducted (during 14 months) with 3 college graduates with total blindness, and their 8 significant others. The major findings indicated that the ability of making self-determination, and ”stereotype” (meaning that blind people can only do some traditional jobs such as being massage therapists or Braille proof readers) were the major factors that influenced the participants' development of job goals. Additionally, the participants' needs for transition consisted of: (a) professional skills that were required by a certain job such as skills for proof-reading texts in braille, and prerequisite skills that could be applied to all kinds of jobs, for example, skills for communication, self-determination, and positive work attitude; (b) job accommodation, including assistants for visual tasks, assistive technology devices, adjusting work processes and improving work environments, barrier-free work environments, professional audio-books and books in braille; (c) mobility skills for independent commuting; and (d) leisure skills. Finally, the limitation of the study and the future research directions were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：53-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201208.005301篇名：日本矯正機構民營化之現況、課題與啟示並列篇名：Current Situation of the Privatization of Correctional Institutes in Japan: Challenges and Inspiration作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：矯正機構;監獄;民營化;民間財務啟動;公私協力;correctional institutes;prisons;privatization;private finance initiatives;public-private partnership期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：超額收容可以說是目前各國矯正機構所面臨的共通課題，藉由民間企業化的行動不但可使矯正機構的供需達到平衡，還可以快速有效地擴大監禁的容量。為了緩和超收情形，增建矯正機構自然被視是首要的解決方案，但是興建過程中所需的花費，卻又會使各國艱困的財政雪上加霜，因此乃意識到若能透過民營化或民間投資提案（Private Finance Initiative, PFI）的方式，導入民間的資金與專業，應可以有效協助解決超額收容的問題。基於上述，本文旨在探討日本矯正機構民營化所代表的意義與面臨之課題，以及可以作為我國參考與借鏡之處。研究結果發現，矯正機構民營化所代表的意義有四，分別是（1）機構問題得以暫時獲得解決；（2）「區域共生」經營理念的實踐；（3）活用民間專業技術打造新的矯正機構；（4）透過公私協力降低財政風險，達到財務平準化之目的。然而，在民營化實施的過程中卻也面臨不同組織文化和指揮命令系統衝突、責任範圍難以清楚劃分、不完全競爭市場，以及服務供給的不穩定等多項課題。作者認為，在參酌日本經驗後，我國應可以從民間參與矯正機構經營的可能性、理念的再思與經營之定位等三大面向獲得啟示與借鏡。英文摘要：Overcrowding of correctional institutes could be stated as the common problem faced around the world. The privatization of prisons not only strikes a balance between supply and demand, it also expands the rooms for prisoners effectively. In order to reduce prisons overcrowding, the first solution plan that the governors have in mind is to build more institutes, however, the expenses and costs would worsen states financial problem. It is up until then, that governors around the world realized that by privatization and PFI, making use of the money and professional talents of private sectors could help solve the problem of prisons overcrowding.Follow from the discussions above; this study aims to discuss the meanings and challenges of the privatization of correctional institutes in Japan, and to provide some references and lessons for Taiwan. Study shows that the privatization of correctional institutes means: (1) the problems of overcrowding could be temporarily solved; (2) the realization of ”regional coexistence” ideal; (3) to adopt professional skills from private sectors flexibly to build new correctional institutes; (4) lower financial crisis through public-private partnership in order to achieve the goal of financial equilibrium. However, in the process of privatization, the governors are to cope with different organization cultures and command systems that contradict with each other, the ambiguity as to the extent of ones' responsibility, imperfectly competitive market, and the instability of the service system, etc. The author holds that, after observing Japan's experience, Taiwan could gain some inspirations and references from their examples as to the feasibility of letting private sectors to manage correctional institutes, to rethink the ideal, and the repositioning of management.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201209_(43).00012篇名：南轅北轍的議題與路徑：政治轉型下台灣與香港文官中立機制之比較並列篇名：Divergent Agenda and Setting: A Comparative Study of Civil Service Neutrality between Taiwan and Hong Kong under Political Transition作者：蘇偉業(Bennis Wai-Yip So)關鍵字：香港;台灣;文官中立;政黨政治;政策政治;Hong Kong;Taiwan;civil service neutrality;partisan politics;policy politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣與香港在一九八○∼九○年代不約而同地面臨政治轉型，前者開展和平民主化，政黨輪替呈現；而後者則從英國殖民地回歸中國，實行一國兩制，港人治港。縱然兩者政治系絡之差異性，但因應兩地同步激化中的治理體制政治化，台港政府皆必須要建立文官中立制度，以確保政府運作之穩定及延續性。惟本文將指出，台港兩地文官中立制度並非建立在完全相同的價值取向上。本文利用Patrick Overeem提出的「政黨政治」（partisan politics）與「政策政治」（policy politics）分野作為分析架構，點出台灣在建立公務人員文官中立制度時僅理解為將公務人員排除於「政黨政治」外，而完全忽略公務人員涉入「政策政治」的問題。而香港的文官中立制度則涵蓋「政黨政治」及「政策政治」兩方面，但在制度問題的爭議上卻聚焦在「政策政治」上。為何在同時期發生的政治轉型過程下所建立的文官中立機制，會有如此不同的取向？本文將從兩地公共行政脈絡、相關人士對問題認知及歷史偶然因素解釋這歧異情況之發生原因。透過這比較，本文企圖就我國剛建立的公務人員行政中立制度作有意義的反思與啟示。英文摘要：Both Taiwan and Hong Kong witnessed political transition during the 1980-90s. The former launched peaceful democratization, expecting a ruling-party turnover; the latter experienced its sovereignty handover to Mainland China, with a colonial rule replaced by the ”one country two system” governed by local people. Despite their different political contexts, the governments of the two places coincidentally managed to establish a mechanism of civil service neutrality in response to their simultaneously rising politicization of public governance. This establishment could help maintain and stabilize the government's normal operation. This paper, however, indicates that the civil service neutrality mechanisms in the two places were not founded on the same value. Drawing on Patrick Overeem's distinction between ”partisan politics” and ”policy politics,” this paper argues that the civil service neutrality mechanism in Taiwan only focuses on ”partisan politics,” ignoring the dimension of ”policy politics.” The case of Hong Kong covers the two dimensions but the point of contention is more on ”policy politics.” Why do the approaches of the two civil service neutrality mechanisms installed in the same period diverge from each other? This paper will account for causes of the divergence in terms of their different public administration contexts and issue recognition, and an accidental historical factor. This comparison will contribute some significant insight to Taiwan's civil service neutrality.起始頁-結束頁：35-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201209_(43).00023篇名：政策移植與移植政策評估指標之建立—結合政策過程與知識應用之雙元演化觀點並列篇名：The Study of Policy Transfer and the Construction of Evaluation Indicators for Transfer Policies: A Dual Evolutionary Prospect of Integrating Policy Process and Knowledge Utilization作者：柯于璋(Yu-Chang Ke)關鍵字：政策移植;移植政策評估;政策過程;知識應用;政策移植之雙元演化過程;Policy transfer;evaluation of transfer policy;policy process;knowledge utilization;the dual evolutionary process of policy transfer期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：許多學者認為政策移植是一種新穎的政策制定模式，並針對政策移植的概念或方法提出討論；惟以往政策移植研究的概念分歧與理論建構並不完整，對移植政策的成敗或效果較少討論，欠缺公允的標準評估移植政策的成效。本文從厚實政策移植理論的角度，提出結合政策過程與知識應用的雙元演化觀點，主要有四項主張：第一，從理論建構觀點，政策移植不僅涉及政策制定，也涉及其他的政策過程；第二，政策移植的核心是資訊與知識的轉換與應用，是一連串的學習歷程；第三，政策移植涉及知識應用過程與政策過程，稱為政策移植之雙元演化過程；及第四，從實證觀點，本文提出移植政策之評估指標系統，並利用修正德菲法專家問卷方法協助建立評估面相與指標。這套指標系統應建立在知識應用的基礎，且涵蓋政策過程的不同多階段，包括資料蒐集、政策制定、執行與評估，藉以更完整、全面地評估移植政策的活動與成效。英文摘要：Many studies recognize policy transfer as a new form of policy formulation, and propose a variety of concepts and methods to discuss the idea. However, the existing studies have shortcomings such as diverse concepts, incomplete theory-building, less discussion with the effectiveness of policy transfer, and lack fair indicators for judging the effectiveness of policy transfer. This study proposes the idea of the evolutionary process of integrating policy process and knowledge to thick the theories of policy transfer. This study has three arguments as follows. First, from the prospective of theory building, not only does policy transfer involve policy formulation, but also include the other phases of policy process. Second, the core of policy transfer is the transfer and utilization of policy information and knowledge; policy transfer is a series process of learning. Third, policy transfer involves both knowledge utilization process and policy process, this study names this as the dual evolutionary process of policy transfer. Fourth, this study also proposes the evaluation indicators for transfer policies with different aspects with modified Delphi technique. These indicators should be based on the basis of knowledge and include different phases of policy process to evaluate the activities and effectiveness of policy transfer, more completely.起始頁-結束頁：63-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201209_(43).00034篇名：台南市政府文官公共服務動機與工作滿意、工作努力意願之實證研究—以個人／組織配適度作為調節變項並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Impact of PSM on Work Satisfaction and Willingness to Exert Effort in Tainan City Government: Person/Organization Fit as a Moderating Variable作者：吳宗憲(Chuang-Hsien Wu)關鍵字：公共服務動機;個人／組織配適度;工作努力意願;代理人理論;工作滿意度;Public Service Motivation;Person-Organization Fit;Willingness to Exert Effort;Agent Theory;Work Satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：一般民眾的印象，總認為我國公務員缺乏同理心以及自我犧牲的精神，因而使得政府的服務效能低落，也因此，執政者認為只要公務員具有「聞聲救苦」的精神，政府效能問題便可迎刃而解。本研究以公共服務動機量表為工具，針對台南市政府文官進行調查後發現，我國文官似乎並不如民眾所認知的缺乏公共服務熱忱，相反地，多數文官具有高度的公共服務動機，並且，高公共服務動機帶來了較高的工作滿意度以及工作努力意願。然而，經本文整理國外文獻之後也發現，公共服務動機並非完全對組織帶來正面的效果，具高度公共服務動機的文官，在其個人目標與組織目標不相符的情況下，會產生包括「另類代理人問題」及「降低努力」等兩種方向的負面行為，惟經台南市政府文官的實證調查發現，經驗上並未產生文獻中所提及的兩種負面影響。英文摘要：People normally have an impression on our public servants for lacking spirits of compassion and self-sacrifice. They consider it the reason of low governmental service efficiency. Therefore, it is believed that if public servants possess the spirit of compassion, the efficacy would easily improve. In this article, by conducting an empirical survey on the Tainan City Government staff, we find that, in fact, most of our subjects have high public service motivation (PSM). However, recent academic articles show that PSM not only brings positive effects, but also negative ones. The latter includes ”alternative principle-agent problem” and ”low effort”. In the result, we could not verify that PSM leads to the negative effects.起始頁-結束頁：91-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201209_(43).00045篇名：台灣亟需有遠見的再生能源政策與做法—德國經驗的啟示並列篇名：The Urgent Needs of Forward-looking Policies to Develop Renewable Energy in Taiwan- the Enlightenment from Germany作者：劉明德(Ming-Te Liu);徐玉珍(Yu-Chen Hsu)關鍵字：再生能源;太陽光電;能源政策;環境政策;永續發展;Environmental Policy;Energy Policy;Photovoltaic (PV);Renewable Energy;Sustainable Development期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：43期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣的自產能源非常缺乏，99%以上的能源仰賴國外進口，而且，大部分來自政治不穩定的中東地區，加上化石能源燃燒所排放的溫室氣體公認是全球氣候變遷的主因，而原油價格屢創新高，更對國家經濟、民眾生活造成沈重的負擔。有鑑於此，世界各國皆致力於發展再生能源，德國更是其中翹楚。在德國再生能源發展中，弗萊堡的太陽能產業發展是最為亮眼的成功經驗，其效益不僅呈現在綠色能源提供方面，更帶動相關產業發展，吸引旅客，促進地方人口成長。而此成功發展經驗，雖是以太陽能為主體，但其相關發展經驗應可適用於其他再生能源的發展上。本文即探討弗萊堡發展再生能源成功經驗的要素，並據此前瞻的政策規劃與成功的經驗做為我國發展再生能源的借鏡，提出我國再生能源發展可行方向的建議。本文發現弗萊堡太陽光電產業成功的因素包括：聯邦政府的政策支持、人民的環保意識和危機感、地方政府和議會的推動、全體市民的參與、完整的知識產業價值鏈聚落、不打折的執行力等等因素。我國規劃再生能源發展政策時應掌握這幾項要素，提出具遠見的發展政策與作法。英文摘要：Energy in Taiwan is scarce. More than 99% of the energy in Taiwan is imported mostly from the politically unstable Middle East. The emissions from fossil fuel combustion gases have been recognized as the main cause of global climate change. And the rising prices of crude oil have great impact on the country's economy and people's lives. In view of this, most countries are committed to the development of renewable energy. Among them, Germany plays a leading role. Of the development of renewable energy in Germany, Freiburg's solar industry enjoys most outstanding success. The effectiveness is not only salient in the provision of green energy, but also in the development of related industries, which has resulted in the increase of the number of visitors and promoting local population growth. Although this successful experience is based on solar energy, it has potential to be applied to other renewable energy development. This paper investigated the essential factors of Freiburg's successful experience, which can provide a useful reference for Taiwan.The result indicated that, Freiburg's successful elements in solar industry include: supports from the federal government's policy, people's environmental awareness and the public sense of crisis, promotion by both the local government and parliament, public participation, complete clusters of knowledge in the industry value chain, consistent execution and so forth. In planning forward-looking renewable energy policies and strategies, authorities in concern should therefore learn from Freiburg's successful experience.起始頁-結束頁：127-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201209_(43).00056篇名：立法委員特殊利益提案與中央政府計畫型補助款的分配：從民國94年至98年之資料探析並列篇名：The Relationship between Particularistic Benefit Bills Initiated by Legislators and the Geographic Distribution of Categorical Grants in Taiwan, FY2005-FY2009作者：羅清俊(Ching-Jyuhn Luor);詹富堯(Fu-Yao Chan)關鍵字：特殊利益提案;計畫型補助款;分配政治;分配政策;立法委員;Particularistic Benefit Bills;Categorical Grants;Distributive Politics;Distributive Policies;Legislator期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣立法委員在立法院的個人提案如果不併在政黨提案或是行政院提案，其實很少有機會能夠三讀通過成為正式法律。既然如此，為什麼立法委員仍然熱衷於此，而且一屆比一屆增加？尤其在具有成本分散且利益集中特質的特殊性利益（particularized benefit）提案數量上更是如此？除了象徵性地應付選區選民或利益團體的要求、證明他們在立法院的努力、增加知名度或是建立聲望之外，我們認為立法委員的特殊利益提案行為可能還具有其他更積極的功能。這種積極的功能在於傳達訊息給行政部門，告訴行政部門立法委員有多麼需要選區的利益，間接地要求行政部門分配超額的政策利益至他們的選區。基於這樣的假設，我們利用中央政府在95年至98年度分配至選區（縣市）的計畫型補助款進行分析，驗證區域立委的特殊利益提案行為與計畫型補助款分配額度之間的關係。統計分析結果發現，在控制相關變數之後，立委特殊利益提案比例越高的縣市，它們獲得的計畫型補助款的確也會越多。而其他過去分配政治研究常用的政治及制度性因素雖然沒有顯著的影響，但是我們仍然發現政治景氣循環現象存在的可能性。最後，我們也發現計畫型補助款在縣市的分配存在明顯的預算慣性，並且補助預算的分配也反映了地方財政結構以及補助需求。這些研究發現顯示行政官僚體系一方面雖然受到立法委員特殊利益提案的壓力而影響計畫型補助款在縣市的分配，但是以需求做為資源分配準據的防線仍能維持。英文摘要：Previous study showed that the number of particularistic benefit bills initiated by individual member of Legislative Yuan in Taiwan increased dramatically. However, these bills barely passed the whole legislative process and then became the public law. If initiating particularistic benefit bills were ineffective, why did legislators in Taiwan spend so much time and energy initiating these bills? In this paper, we argue that the reason why legislators initiate so many particularistic benefit bills is to send signals to bureaucracies how badly they need on particularistic benefits for their constituencies. Under this circumstance, one of the political consequences would be that rational bureaucracies distribute disproportionate benefits to greedy legislators' districts (cities or counties) so that the good relationship between the legislative and the executive branches can be kept. As we expect, the statistical results show that there is a positive association between particularistic benefit bills initiated by legislators and categorical grants that districts received from central government, in the sense that the more particularistic benefit bills that legislators initiated (measured by ratio), the more categorical grants flowed to their districts. While we find significant effect of legislator's bill-initiating behavior on the distribution of categorical grants, we still find that needs based criteria and budget inertia are at work. To some extent it means that bureaucracies are doing their job quite well, even though they compromise political pressure somewhat to greedy legislators.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201203_(42).00017篇名：台灣公共行政暨公共事務碩士生研究什麼及如何研究：以1997至2008年碩士論文分析並列篇名：The Topic and Method of Research Conducted by Graduate Student in Public Administration and Affairs: Study of Graduate Theses from 1997-2008作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);吳穎年(Yin-Nien Wu)關鍵字：研究領域;研究方法;碩士論文;內容分析;公共行政;research field;research method;master's theses;content analysis;public administration期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣公共行政的發展迄今僅有近50年，學門的研究重點與發展趨勢一直是值得關注的課題。本研究選擇以碩士論文為研究客體，期能從不同視角深入地檢視公共行政學門的發展現況。本文的主要目的包括：（1）藉由分析碩士論文的研究領域與研究方法，瞭解此一學門的發展以及檢視學門的教育現況；（2）在時間面向，藉由分析近12年來碩士論文的研究領域與研究方法的變化，瞭解此一學門在不同時期的演變趨勢；（3）在空間面向，藉由分析系所所在地區，對研究領域與研究方法的應用是否有差異，以瞭解此一學門的地方發展特色。本研究獲得幾個重要且值得討論的研究發現：（1）論文篇數呈現增長的趨勢，反映出公共行政學門的蓬勃發展，不過，超過半數以上的碩士論文集中在北部地區，東部地區的比例不及一成。（2）在研究領域方面，公共政策、公共管理與政治學為主要研究主題，但有關法制與政府預算方面的研究則仍嫌不足；另一方面，研究主題選擇在地理區域出現較大的差異性。（3）在研究方法方面，有半數左右屬於質性論文，使用量化研究方法的論文比例偏低。（4）在抽樣設計方面，多數論文採取非隨機抽樣方法；統計分析方法則以單變量分析和雙變量分析居多，仍有進一步提升的空間。英文摘要：Compare to United State, the study of public administration developed relative late during past 50 years in Taiwan, and it's worthwhile to track the focus and developmental trend of research conducted in this field. This research focus on the graduate theses, look at development of public administration from different angles. The subject of research includes: (1) Understand the development and present state of public administration education through analysis of research interest and method in graduate theses. (2) The analysis of changes in research interest and method in graduate theses over past 12 years in order to understand development of public administration faculties over that period. (3) The analysis of location of different schools to determine the divergence in research interest and method, in order to understand the characteristics of public administration development in different locations.This study concluded several important findings: (1) There are increases in number of theses published, which reflected the interest in public administration studies. However over half of the graduate theses take place in northern Taiwan, less than ten percent in eastern Taiwan. (2) Research interested focus on public policy, public administration and political science, but research on law and government budget are still limited. The choice of research topics shows significant divergence in geographic location. (3) Over half of the theses are qualitative, only small percentages of these are quantitative. (4) In sample designing, most theses choose non random sampling, statistical analysis method focus on univariate and multivariate analysis, still a lot of room for improvement.起始頁-結束頁：33-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201203_(42).00028篇名：危機情境與反應策略之研究－組織與受眾認知落差之分析並列篇名：A Study of Crisis Situations and Response Strategies: An Analysis of Perception Gaps between Organizations and Audiences作者：姚惠忠(Hui-Chung Yao)關鍵字：危機溝通;危機情境;反應策略;情境認知落差;期望落差;crisis communication;crisis situation;response strategy;situation gap;expectation gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以實驗法，探討可能存在政府與民眾之間的各種認知落差。研究發現，情境認知落差與期望落差皆普遍存在，且這些落差顯著負向影響政府的聲譽，並顯著正向影響民眾的負面口碑。民眾會根據其情境認知產生相對應之期望，若官員只根據其情境認知而作出決策，當兩造情境認知產生明顯差異時，就會產生期望落差。本研究發現，情境認知落差的存在，是期望落差產生之根源，也是導致政府形象重挫的原因。英文摘要：This study employed an experiment to explore various types of perception gaps that exist between the government and people during the natural disaster in Chile. The author finds that there existed conspicuous situation gap and expectation gap. The author also finds that these gaps reverse the effects of the government's image repair efforts. Due to the fact that both the public reactions and the governmental decisions are based on perceptions of situations, expectation gap is produced when the perceptions of the public and the government diverge. We find that situation gap leads to expectation gap, which explains why the government's image collapsed.起始頁-結束頁：73-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201203_(42).00039篇名：形式上還是實質上的「公私協力」：全民健康保險總額支付制度個案分析並列篇名：Tastes Great, Less Filling? An Evaluation of Public-Private Collaboration in the Payment System of Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI)作者：王千文(Chian-Wen Wang);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen)關鍵字：公私協力;循證的公共管理;總額支付制度;組織構型;成效評估;Public-Private Partnerships;Evidence-based Public Management;Organizational Frames (4Fs);Global Budget Payment System;Evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年公私部門協力關係的建立，成為政府整合服務輸送資源、滿足民眾需求的新興治理模式，然此模式是否真能有效達成政策目標，實令人好奇。對於公私協力執行成效的評估，國外已有研究討論，反觀國內相關的評估文獻卻屈指可數，基此，本研究將以執行成效評估的角度出發，以「循證的公共管理」（evidence-based public management）思維，評估健保局總額支付制度下公私協力的執行成效，藉此驗證何種因素對於公私協力成效具有影響。本文首先透過文獻檢閱，歸結過去研究所提出的執行成功要件，並建構一套評估指標系統，以總額支付委員會的124位委員進行面對面問卷訪問調查；本文發現：首先，不論健保局內部運作或醫事團體內部自主管理，保持上下與平行單位間暢通的溝通管道，將有助於協力執行的成效。再者，健保局內部點值監控的擬定，醫事團體內部專業審查人員的推派及相互監督機制的發揮等，亦會影響協力執行的成效。最後，本文針對成效評估結果，於末了提出三項政策建議：其一，健保局內部組織運作的調整、其二、強化醫事團體的自主管理、以及其三、委員會權利與義務的清楚界定等，提供政府部門在推行總額支付制度改革作為時之參考。英文摘要：In recent years, building public-private partnership (PPP) is the popular way to satisfy citizen demands through delivering government services Compared with other countries' experiences, there has been a problem of lacking systematic evaluations of various PPP applications in Taiwan. The purpose of this study is to utilize survey technique to evaluate the Global Budget Payment System of the Taiwanese National Health Insurance (NHI). First, an evaluating scheme is established from existing literatures. Second, the members of the Global Budget Payment Committee are face-to-face interviewed to evaluate the PPP. The eighty out of 124 members were responded and the response rate is around 65%.This research finds that the structural factors have positive influence on the effectiveness of PPP for both governments and medical associations. And, the symbolic dimension of public organization has a positive impact on the effectiveness of the partnership. Also, the dentist and Chinese medicine participants evaluate the partnerships better than those in hospitals and local clinics sections. However, the members from the southern section of the payment system have a lower evaluation of the partnership. Based on the above findings, this research concludes with three policy suggestions: some adjustments of internal operation in Bureau of National Health Insurance, increasing the autonomy of medical groups to manage their professional operations, and redefining and balancing rights and obligation of the Global Budget Payment Systems Committees.起始頁-結束頁：99-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201203_(42).000410篇名：五直轄市升格後跨區域整合治理之新課題與願景：國土規劃觀點並列篇名：A Discussion about the New Task & Vision of Cross-Regional Integration & Governance after the Operation of Five Special Municipalities: The View of National Spatial Planning作者：蕭閎偉(Hong-Wei Hsiao);林建元(Chien-Yuan Lin);白仁德(Jen-Te Pai)關鍵字：五直轄市;三大都會區;國土規劃;跨區域整合;跨區域治理;five special municipalities;three major metropolitans;national spatial planning;cross-region integration;cross-region governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：42期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣過去一直維持著北高南北兩直轄市並立的局面，然隨著北部「新北市」、中部的「臺中市」、南部之高雄縣市、臺南縣市合併升格為「高雄市」、「臺南市」，五直轄市成形逐漸確立了北、中、南部三大都會區並立的態勢。本文欲從國土規劃之角度，分別就全國、區域、地方階層探討五直轄市升格後對於跨區域整合及空間發展將形成之新局面及其所帶來之影響。發現升格後對於平衡北、中、南區域間發展、地方政府體系的有效運作等有所助益；反之，財政資源集中於五直轄市則會加劇與其他縣市間的城鄉落差等。英文摘要：Taiwan used to be in the situation of Taipei & Kaohsiung City exist side by side, but after the promotion of five special municipalities, beside the former two, Taipei County became New Taipei city. Greater Taichung City as the result of a merger of Taichung City & Taichung County, in the middle Taiwan; Tainan a merger of Tainan City & Tainan County; Kaohsiung a merger of Kaohsiung City & Kaohsiung County in the southern Taiwan. The situation of the coexistence of three regions, Northern, Middle & Southern Taiwan is gradually appearing. This paper deals with the cross-region integration & governance from the view of national spatial planning after the operation of five special municipalities, discussing the effects caused by the operation of five special municipalities in the level of national, regional & local apart. It shows some consequence such as balancing the regional development gap between the three regions, Northern, Middle & Southern Taiwan, & helping the smooth functioning of local government administratively also; on the contrary, the high concentration of fiscal resource into the five special municipalities can occur the development gap with other local governments.起始頁-結束頁：139-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201203_(42).000501篇名：半總統制「權力總統化」之比較研究並列篇名：Comparative Research on the "Power Presidentialization" of Semi-Presidentialism作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen)關鍵字：半總統制;總統化;黨權;國會凝聚;制度權力;semi-presidentialism;presidentialization;party leader;parliamentary majority;constitutional power期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：半總統制已經是當代最多國家採用的憲政類型，對於半總統制的研究也因此逐漸受到重視。由於半總統制被視為兼具議會制與總統制兩種憲政體制的特徵，因此在運作上也可能出現偏向議會制或偏向總統制的可能。然而，在相關的半總統制研究中，主要的文獻仍然集中在兩大區塊，其一是關於半總統制的定義；其二是單一個案或少量個案在運作上的類型比較。結合這兩類的研究探討半總統制轉型的相關研究顯得較為少見。本文以半總統制下政治權力朝向總統傾斜為研究主題，探討在分權型的雙元行政架構下，哪些因素提供了總統擴張其領導權的有利條件。基於行政與立法相互制衡的原則，所謂的總統化也意味著國會無力制衡，或是制衡的權力僅具表面形式化。因此，本文從黨權、國會凝聚度、以及制度上總統對政府與國會的影響力等，這三個變數來比較總統化的強度。其中，總統握有黨權、國會高度凝聚與總統一致、總統又具有制度上的影響力時，政治權力非常容易偏向總統來發展。相反的，總統不具黨權、國會高度凝聚但與總統不一致、總統又不具有影響政府與國會的制度性權力時，權力最不易朝向總統集中。其他的類型則分別提供總統或是總理相互競爭或合作的換軌可能。英文摘要：Semi-presidentialism gained a narrow plurality of all world countries. The research on the semi-presidentialism is therefore also more and more important. The semi-presidentialism is a constitutional structure which mixes presidential and parliamentary systems. The constitutional operation might tendency toward the presidential system or toward the parliamentary system. However, most literatures focus on either the definition of semi-presidentialism or the single case studies. The research of constitutional transition is relatively rarer. This paper tries to discuss the ”power presidentialization” of the semi-presidentialism. The presidentialization means that the president is superior in the dual executive system. And the supervise of the legislative is in name only. Three independent variables should be paid close attention to this issue. Firstly, if the president is the de facto leader of the ruling party or not; secondly, if there is a stable parliamentary majority or not; and thirdly, if the president is possessed great constitutional power or not. A semi-presidential system will tendency toward a presidential system if all these three conditions are positive.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201212.00012篇名：論法國2008年修憲有關憲法委員會之改革—兼論予我國人民聲請釋憲程序之啟示並列篇名：French Constitutional Revision of 2008 on the Reform of the Constitutional Committee- to Inspire Nationals Judicial Interpretation作者：徐良維(Liang-Wei Hsu)關鍵字：法國2008年憲法修改;憲法委員會;違憲審查;事前審查;事後審查;Amendment to the constitution of France in 2008;Constitutional Council;Constitutional review;Apriori review;Subsequent review期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：法國從1958年制定第五共和憲法至2008年歷經第五共和憲法第50周年的同時，法國以大幅度修改憲法來慶祝這部憲法成功運作半世紀。法國第五共和憲法的最初發展係以「優越之行政權」為目標，並以此為基礎來建立國民主權的優越地位，並藉由憲法委員會來控制立法權。隨後憲法委員會於實際運作中已逐漸成為人權維護者之角色。而2008年修憲就憲法委員會之變革方面，主要係賦予其擁有「事後審查」之權限，此意義在於憲法已使法國人民有提起釋憲之權利，本文即在此脈絡下探討其憲政定位。英文摘要：France formulated 5th Republic constitution from 1958, 2008 is the 50th anniversary of the Fifth Republic Constitution. The original development goals of the French Fifth Republic Constitution is ”The supremacy of Executive power” to establish the supremacy of national sovereignty, and to control the legislative power by the Constitutional Council. There has revises the Constitutional Council in 2008 to give Council own the power of ”investigation after judgment”, this is give French people have right to bring up constitutional interpretation.起始頁-結束頁：37-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201212.00373篇名：解釋台灣法院改革和檢察改革之差異—一個政治機會結構的觀點並列篇名：Explaining the Difference between the Court Reform Movement and the Prosecution Reform Movement in Taiwan: A Perspective of Political Opportunity Structure作者：王金壽(Chin-Shou Wang)關鍵字：司法獨立;司法改革;法官;檢察官;政治機會結構;Judicial Independence;Judicial Reform;Judge;Prosecutor;Political Opportunity Structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：在台灣民主化之後，台灣的司法改革的一個主軸就是追求司法獨立。但是同在廣義的司法體系中，法院與檢察體系改革卻有完全不同的進展：法院的改革不僅取得重大的改革成果和進展，而實際的參與改革人士也逐漸在司法體系上，扮演更重要的角色；相反的，檢察體系改革卻等到2006年法院組織法的修法，才有實質的進展。本文目的即在透過社會運動理論來解釋兩改革運動為何會產生如此差異。本文將指出：法院改革和檢察改革中參與者的生命歷程和運動策略與劇碼，兩者幾乎沒有顯著的差別，因此這些變項無法解釋兩種運動的差異。同樣的，兩改革行動所擁有的動員策略與網絡，也沒有多大的差異。相反的，是政治機會結構上的差異，決定了兩種改革運動的差異：對於法院改革而言，面對的是較有改革意識的司法高層菁英，檢察官改革面對的是強硬保守的領導高層。制度化政治系統對於法官改革運動是相對開放，但對檢察官改革則是相對封閉。英文摘要：A major issue in Taiwanese judicial reform has been the pursuit of judicial independence after democratization. The court reform movement and the prosecution reform movement developed differently even though they were similarly situated in the judicial system. The court reform movement made great progress in the 1990s whereas the prosecution reform movement made little progress until the revision of the Court Organization Law in 2006. This paper examines the factors that resulted in this difference between these reform movements, and argues that the activists' biographical backgrounds, mobilization networks, and collective actions were largely similar. Therefore, these factors do not seem to explain the difference between the two movements' development. However, it is clear that the movements faced different political opportunity structures. The court reform movement had access to a relatively open institutionalized political system and had an alliance with elites within the court system. The prosecution reform movement, while also having access to a relatively open institutionalized political system, had to contend with extremely conservative elites entrenched within the prosecutorial system.起始頁-結束頁：96-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201212.00964篇名：資訊公開的實務挑戰—石門水庫整治經驗省思並列篇名：The Challenges to Information Disclosure Practice: Reflections on the Shihmen Reservoir Catchment Conservation and Management Project作者：彭渰雯(Yen-Wen Peng)關鍵字：資訊公開;資訊近用;廣泛性透明;標的性透明;民眾參與;生態檢核表;information disclosure;access to information;comprehensive transparency;targeted transparency;public participation;eco-checklist期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：資訊公開是現代民主社會的核心價值，其不僅體現人民「知的權利」這項基本人權，也被視為改善治理的有效工具。2006年立法院三讀通過《石門水庫及其集水區整治特別條例》時，也將透明的精神明文列入條例之內。主管機關經濟部因此制定頒佈了〈石門水庫及其集水區整治計畫資訊公開作業要點〉，各相關單位專屬網站上也都設有「資訊公開專區」。不過，這些要點或措施執行的實際情形如何？成效如何（又如何評斷資訊公開成效好或不好）？執行過程遭遇到哪些阻礙或挑戰？這些問題不僅有助於我們系統性地瞭解石門整治計畫個案，也關乎更廣泛的透明治理法制的落實，因此亟需奠基於實踐經驗的檢驗與反思。本文彙整國外文獻的相關討論後，從「廣泛性」與「標的性」兩種途徑，回顧石門水庫的資訊公開實務作法。石門水庫的資訊公開機制主要仍參照我國政府資訊公開法，採取的是廣泛性透明途徑，但實際執行過程卻無法體現及時性、可近性、充分性等原則。另一方面，筆者也回顧了民間團體大力支持的「生態檢核表」工具，此一工具雖具有標的性透明的效果，降低民間團體資訊超載的狀況，但實際檢驗其推動成果，仍發現許多資訊疏漏與不足的現象，卻缺乏內部與外部監督。因此，筆者強調資訊公開的積極落實，除了制度規範的設計之外，仍必需從資訊供給者（公部門）與需求者（民間社會）的培力和資源重分配做起，以克服實務面的執行挑戰。英文摘要：Information disclosure is core democratic value in contemporary society. It not only embodies people's Right to Know, but also viewed as an effective tool for good governance. In 2006, when the Taiwanese Legislative Yuan passed the Special Act Governing the Management of Shihmen Reservoir and its Catchment Area, ”information disclosure” was also included as one of the objectives of the Act. The Ministry of Economic Affairs, which was in charge of the Act, hence promulgated the Guidelines to Information Disclosure for this project, and demanded that each and every public agency that were involved in implementing the Act had to build their websites for publishing information. Nevertheless, the results of the various information disclosure initiatives for this project are yet to be assessed. Moreover, how exactly shall we assess or evaluate the results is also a question to be explored, both for the Shihmen Project and other public policies or projects.This paper reviews and analyzes the Shihmen Experience in terms of the comprehensive vs. targeted transparency approaches. The Shihmen Project adopts both approaches, but neither fully realizes the normative ideals of timely, accessible, and sufficient information disclosure. In particular, although the eco-checklist is an innovative tool that embodies the idea of targeted transparency, the implementation of it is flawed and lacks of monitoring. In conclusion, the paper suggests that in addition to institutional design, there is urgent need of empowerment for both the information supply and demand sides, so as to overcome the practical challenges.起始頁-結束頁：141-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201212.01415篇名：我國一般性與計畫型補助款分配之政治經濟分析並列篇名：The Political-Economic Analysis of the Allocation of the General and Specific Grants in Taiwan作者：姚名鴻(Ming-Hung Yao)關鍵字：一般性補助款;計畫型補助款;地方財政;政黨政治;政治經濟;general grants;specific grants;local public finance;party politics;political economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文目的在檢視2003年通過「中央對直轄市及縣（市）政府申請計畫型補助款補助之處理原則」後，中央對地方政府補助款的分配是否受政治因素影響。利用2004年至2009年度期間中央對23個地方政府的補助款資料作實證分析，結果顯示一般性補助款的分配主要是受規範面因素影響，地方政府的老年人口及國民義務在學學生比例與地方政府的一般性補助款收入呈正相關；影響地方政府計畫型補助款收入的因素，除人口總數及人口密度外，在全國性選舉的年度，中央政府所編列的計畫型補助款預算規模顯著高於其他年度，顯示計畫型補助款的分配仍受政治面因素影響。英文摘要：Presidential election is the selection of the national leader. The 2004 presidential election had drawn a lot of attention from mass media. The extensive coverage by the mass media turned the candidates into the most prominent factor in the 2004 presidential election campaign, thus, the voters felt obligated to take the candidates' qualifications and perk highly of Chairman Lien Chan's prospective national performance also have a high ”feeling thermometer” towards him. According to research conducted in the United States, if the voter's ”feeling thermometer” towards the candidates are different, it can ultimately determine the voters' decision. The study further evaluates if the ”feeling thermometers” influence people's voting choices. In Taiwan, although the ”feeling thermometer” has an effect on people's voting behavior, the influence is far weaker when compared to America. Therefore, the voter's ”feeling thermometer” is not the most important factor. Party preference, candidate image and incumbent evaluation are all important factors in determining voters' decisions.起始頁-結束頁：191-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201212.01916篇名：如何觀看自由民主？源自儒家思想傳統的一種觀看之道—從清末學人談起為並列篇名：An Confucian Appraisal of Liberal Democracy: Comments on Some Late Qing Dynasty's Scholars' Democratic Thinking作者：許雅棠(Ya-Tang Hsu)關鍵字：以中觀西;自由民主;感通;選賢;liberal democracy;Chinese thinking mode of politics and governing;selection and election期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：源自西方的自由民主通常已視為人類政治在理念和實踐上所能達到的頂端體制，可以批評，可以一時權宜改變，但已難以取代或無法取代。本文則以清末學人為例，指出他們雖未能深入了解西方自由民主的真實精神和內涵，卻得以立足於中國政治傳統，從容評斷自由民主的得失，並且看到自由民主的選舉如何關聯於中國治道的意義。換言之，這是一種以中觀西的態度，有別於當前一面到倒的，以西觀中的做法。本文的初步工作，即是大略說明，西方自由民主不必已然立足絕頂，一覽眾山之小，中國自有一套不同於自由民主內涵的致治體認和內涵的「政治觀」，可以反觀，也可以評判。中西治道的相互觀看是本文隱涵的論點與期望。英文摘要：Liberal democracy, in its Western meaning or context, is usually taken to be the final human political establishment. This paper thinks the other way, it tries to say that there may exist another kind of political thinking, which found on the ancient Chinese political traditions (especially Confucianism), that can be taken as a framework of reference to evaluate the pros and cons of the liberal democracy. This is a big issue, this paper is only to introduce some suggestions from one case, i.e., the comments of some late Qing's scholars on the liberal democracy. Behind the discussion, there exists an implication that liberal democracy can be evaluated not only by its own way, but by other evaluative frameworks, e.g. the Confucian political thoughts.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.00017篇名：父母政黨偏好組合對大學生政黨偏好之影響－定群追蹤之研究並列篇名：The Influence of Parents' Political Party Preferences on College Students: A Panel Study作者：劉嘉薇(Jia-Wei Liu);黃紀(Chi Huang)關鍵字：政治社會化;政黨偏好;家庭;父母;學校;傳播媒介;political socialization;party preference;parents;family;college;mass media期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究運用調查研究資料分析大學生政黨偏好的形成，透過定群追蹤研究（panel study），本研究持續觀察與訪談大學生在進入大學後四年間政黨偏好的持續與變化。大學生四年間政黨偏好皆穩定者佔52.0％，其餘48％皆為變化者，政治社會化為解釋政黨偏好變化的原因之一，其中家庭父母政黨偏好更是主要影響子女政黨偏好變化的原因。父母政黨偏好相同時，對子女政黨偏好的影響最大。然而，即使父藍母藍，子女仍有可能較支持泛綠，但其係數較父藍母藍對子女支持泛藍影響小。另一方面，即使父綠母綠，子女仍有可能較支持泛藍，但其可能性較父綠母綠對子女支持泛綠影響小。再者，關於父母有一方具有藍或綠的政黨偏好，另一方為中立的情況下，父母政黨偏好組合對子女的影響又是如何。當父藍母中或父中母藍時，子女多數支持泛藍。相對來說，當父藍母中或父中母藍時，子女仍有可能較支持泛綠，但其可能性低於相同自變數對子女支持泛藍的影響，且這項差異表現在同一個體在不同時間點的差異。然而，當父綠母中或父中母綠時，子女仍有可能較支持泛藍，但其係數影響低於相同自變數對泛綠的影響，且這項差異表現在同一個體在不同時間點的差異。進一步而言，當父母政黨偏好相異時，對子女政黨偏好影響何者為大。父綠母藍對子女泛藍的影響大於父藍母綠的影響。再者，父藍母綠對子女泛綠的影響大於父綠母藍的影響，以上差異皆來自於不同個體之間的差異，而非不同時間點之間的差異，整體而言，母親政黨偏好對子女的影響大於父親。英文摘要：This article studies the continuity and change of college student's party preferences during their college career by analyzing a five-wave panel survey dataset. In our sample, 52% of students remain stable in party preferences while the rest 48% change during the four-year period. Political socialization no doubt is the major force behind this pattern of stability and change. Among all the agents of socialization, however, parents play significant roles. By dividing party preferences into pan-blue, pan-green and neutral, we find that whenever both parents share the same party preference their children tend to prefer that particular party camp. That said, children may still support pan-green parties even if both of their parents are pan-blue supporters, although such possibility is much lower. Likewise, children may still support pan-blue parties even if both of their parents are pan-green supporters, although again such possibility is much lower. It is interesting to see what happens to children if one of their patents does not identify with a particular camp, that is, remains neutral. We find that no matter whether father or mother has a clear party preference and the other remains neutral, their children tend to prefer that particular party camp also. Although there are cases deviate from this general pattern, for example, a father-blue-mother-neutral combination with a green-identifying child, they tend to be less likely to occur than the general pattern where a clear party preference dominates. It is even more interesting to know what if both parents have clear but opposite party stands. We find that a father-green-mother-blue combination is more likely to have a blue-preferring child, while a father-blue -mother-green combination is more likely to have a green-preferring child. It is worth noting that these patterns exist between subjects instead of within subject over time. In other words, mothers tend to have stronger influence on children's party preference when parents' party identification conflicts.起始頁-結束頁：37-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.00378篇名：來臺陸生統一態度變遷初探－政治社會化途徑與定群追蹤法之分析並列篇名：A Pilot Study on Attitude Change toward Unification of Chinese Students Studying in Taiwan作者：王嘉州(Chia-Chou Wang)關鍵字：兩岸關係;社會認同;社會接觸;制度認同;認知失調;cognitive dissonance;Cross-Strait relations;social identity;social contact;system identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：「主權」與「安全」乃兩岸政治紛爭的核心，其中又以主權議題最具關鍵。為促使來臺陸生成為兩岸和平的基石，本文以在臺短期研修的陸生為對象，以政治社會化為研究途徑，透過定群追蹤的問卷調查，探討其統一態度的變化與影響因素。本文研究發現，經過四個月的來臺生活與學習，陸生的統一態度總變動率為42.06％，其中9.35％往「儘快統一」變遷，32.71％往「維持現狀」變遷。有助來臺陸生統一態度往維持現狀方向改變的因素，包括互助頻率、觀選經驗、「離中愛臺」變遷程度等三項。驅動往儘快統一方向改變的因素，包括作客經驗、閱讀網路新聞頻率等兩項。英文摘要：”Sovereignty” and ”security” are at the core of the political disputes between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait. The issue of sovereignty is the more crucial of these. To encourage Chinese students studying in Taiwan to become cornerstones for peace between the two sides, this study according to political socialization theory and uses questionnaires to perform panel study on Chinese students who are in Taiwan for short-term study, investigating the factors that change and influence their positions on unification and independence. This study reveals that after four months of living and studying in Taiwan, 42.06% of all Chinese students have changed their attitude toward unification. Of these, 9.35% have moved toward ”unifying as soon as possible,” whereas 32.71% have moved toward ”maintaining the status quo.” Factors aiding students who come to Taiwan from China in shifting their attitudes on unification and independence toward maintaining the status quo include: ”frequency of mutual assistance with Taiwanese friends,” ”experience in participating in Taiwanese electoral activities,” and ”the degree of change in pro-Taiwan indicators.” Factors that influence a change in position of these students toward rapid unification include ”experience in being a guest at a Taiwanese friend's house” and the ”frequency of reading news on the Internet regarding the two sides.”起始頁-結束頁：85-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.00859篇名：環評制度中的專家會議－被框架的專家理性並列篇名：Expert Meetings in the Environmental Impact Assessment Process: The Framed Expert's Rationality作者：杜文苓(Wen-Ling Tu)關鍵字：風險管理;專家;環境影響評估;科學知識;公民參與;risk management;expert;environmental impact assessment (EIA);scientific knowledge;public participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：面對複雜難解的環境與科技風險問題，政府部門常倚賴專家評估，做為決策參考依據，使專家在現代風險決策中，扮演著舉足輕重的角色。但越來越多的研究顯示，憑恃專家的風險管理模式，也有許多的侷限。在台灣，環保署於2008年在環評專案審查過程中創設專家會議機制，希望以「公民參與、專家代理」方式，解決環評重大爭議，但實施至今，成效眾說紛紜。為瞭解專家會議於環評制度內的運作課題，本文檢視近年來幾件重大環評爭議中之專家會議，分析專家審議中的科學知識產製過程，討論專家在此機制中的角色定位，從而解析現行制度程序設計背後所隱含之風險詮釋與治理觀點。研究設計上，我們透過焦點座談與深度訪談汲取專家會議與會人士的經驗與觀點，進行第一手資料的研讀分析，並輔以相關會議記錄以及剪報等二手資料的蒐集整理，嘗試呈現政府環境風險的管理模式與制度特色。研究初步顯示，現行專家會議制度設計，並未能突破環評專案審查中的科學知識生產困境，而其功能與位階的定位不明，更將「專家會議」置放在一個與「公民參與」衝突的尷尬位置。本文進一步釐清現行制度安排的價值預設與運作困境，並在提升環評決策品質的前提上，指出制度調整與改善方向之建議。英文摘要：The government often relies on expert assessments as the basis for their decision making reference when faced with the intricate environmental and technological problems. But a growing number of studies have indicated that expert reliant risk management models are fraught with many limitations. Even so, experts still play a pivotal role in influencing the assessments and judgments of the decision makers and the public during the modern risk decision-making process. In Taiwan, the EPA has developed the ”expert meeting” mechanism in the EIA review process since 2008, hoping to resolve major environmental disputes with the ”citizen participation-expert representation” approach. But the effectiveness of this approach has remained controversial since its implementation. To understand the issue of how the expert meetings operate within the EIA system, this article investigates the expert meetings during the major EIA controversies; to examine the scientific knowledge production process, discuss the expert's role in the decision making mechanism, and to analyze the risk interpretation and governance viewpoint hidden behind the current system model. Through the in depth interviews and focus discussions on the experiences and viewpoints of the meeting experts and participants, with supplementation of relevant meeting minutes, newspaper clippings, and other secondary data, this paper intends to present the government's environmental risk management model and characteristics. The study revealed that the institutional design of existing expert meetings has failed to produce better scientific knowledge for environmental assessment. The ambiguity of its function and position has further placed ”expert meeting” in a conflicting and awkward position against ”citizen participation.” This article further recommends reform directions and system adjustments of the EIA process under the premise of quality improvement.起始頁-結束頁：119-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.011910篇名：批判性公民與民主赤字作者：黃信豪期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：157-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.015701篇名：國際人權體系與在地人權保障：檢視香港種族歧視條例的立法過程並列篇名：International Regimes and the Enforcement of Human Rights: The Legislative Process of the Racial Discrimination Ordinance in Hong Kong作者：黃秀端(Shiow-Duan Hawang);林政楠(Cheng-Nan Lin)關鍵字：種族歧視條例;迴力鏢模型;跨國倡議網絡;消除一切形式種族歧視國際公約;立法會;Race Discrimination Ordinance (RDO);Boomerang model;transnational advocacy network;International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;Legislative Council期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：為確保對個人人格尊嚴的了解與尊重，同時藉由消除種族壁壘，建立起一個沒有種族歧視的國際社會，聯合國先於1963年發表了《消除一切形式種族歧視宣言》，並於1965年正式通過《消除一切形式種族歧視國際公約》。香港在1997年回歸中國之前，其前宗主國英國為聯合國之成員，所以香港自然成為英國所簽署諸多國際公約中的當然成員；回歸中國之後，香港《基本法》中明文規定，原先適用於香港的國際協議仍繼續有效。由於《消除一切形式種族歧視公約》為其中之一，因此香港政府理應具有制定相關反歧視條約的國際責任。然而，港府卻遲未採取任何立法行動，直到2006年才正式向香港立法會提交《種族歧視條例》草案。本文以當時種族歧視條例的立法背景以及法案審查資料以及相關的文件為主，檢視並分析包括香港政府官員、立法會議員與相關社會團體在委員會審查中的發言內容，並輔以深度訪談之資料，期望藉由這些資料來了解影響香港政府推動立法的原因，以及立法過程中的爭議。本文發現，香港《種族歧視條例》的推動與內容的發展可以用Keck和Sikkink迴力鏢模型（boomerang model）的跨國倡議網絡來闡釋。由香港境內的非政府組織以及民主派立法會議員所組成之境內網絡，與跨國人權團體、國際組織所構成的境外網絡結合，對香港政府施加壓力，使得港府必須正視其境內種族歧視的問題，並進一步提出政策作為因應。英文摘要：The passage of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination in 1965 did not help Hong Kong to protect its citizens from discrimination at all, although Hong Kong has been a member of the convention since 1969. The H.K government had done nothing to deal with its racial discrimination problem for decades, either under Britain's rule or China's rule. However, some 40 years later in 2006, the H.K. government submitted a bill proposal to the Legislative Council which aimed to eliminate racial discrimination. This caused us to inquire why the H.K. government changed its mind to deal with the problem of racial discrimination. In this paper, we attempt to figure out the explanation by interviewing H.K. legislators, government officials and staff from NGOs, and analyzing discussions and debates during the legislative process. The results indicate that the enactment and the passage of the Race Discrimination Ordinance in Hong Kong can be explained by the boomerang model of the transnational advocacy network which creates tremendous pressure on the Hong Kong Government to take action. On the one hand, NGOs in Hong Kong that advocate the elimination of racial discrimination played an active role in lobbying legislators and pressuring the H.K. Government to enact a bill that can decrease the extent of racial discrimination in Hong Kong. On the other hand, these NGOs also established a strong connection with actors outside Hong Kong such as international organizations and the United Nations' Committees to force the H.K. government to pay attention to this issue and further to change their behavior. In short, the development of a transnational advocacy network among Hong Kong NGOs and the international regimes and international civil society has accelerated the enhancement of the Race Discrimination Ordinance and changed the policy of anti-racial discrimination of the Hong Kong Government.起始頁-結束頁：3-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201211.16(2).3-632篇名：檢測台灣民眾六分類統獨立場：一個測量改進的提出並列篇名：Re-Examining the 6-Itemed Measurement of Citizen's Preference on the Issue of Independence vs. Unification in Taiwan: A Proposed Advancement作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao);游清鑫(Ching-Hsin Yu)關鍵字：統獨立場;民意調查;測量效度;issue of unification vs. independence;public opinion survey;measurement validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：現階段以統獨立場六分類理解台灣民眾的統獨偏好，大致上是以單一面向的方式，將統一與獨立分置於面向的兩端，直接詢問民眾的立場位置，此途徑雖然測量語句相當簡潔，但結果卻有相當高比例的民眾選擇「維持現狀」。對此，部分學者提出「條件語句」的測量途徑，在「中共武力犯台」及「兩岸政經落差」的條件設定下，探詢民眾的統獨立場。此法不但能有效拆解「維持現狀」者的真實偏好，也得以釐清民眾在統獨偏好上「理念」與「務實」的考量。但在測量執行與資料處理上則較為複雜，且現實條件的設定極可能隨不同時空環境而改變。對此，本文嘗試在「保持單一面向」又能「有效拆解維持現狀」的前提下，利用「正面追問」及「反面探詢」的方式，重新建構民眾的統獨立場。透過實際的經驗資料檢證，新統獨六分量表不但比原有量表更能有效拆解「維持現狀」者的統獨偏好，呈現出統獨偏好的強弱遞移性，在測量效度的檢測上亦有較佳的結果。在方法論上，本文的嘗試有助於測量方法的改進，在問題本質上，也得以更精確地理解台灣民眾的統獨立場。英文摘要：It is commonly seen that the citizens' preferences regarding the issue of ”unification vs. independence” are determined by a six-itemed measurement placing unification and independence as the two ends of a one-dimensional continuum and four other related items in between. The citizens are directly asked to pick out one of the six items. This method has an advantage of being easily understood by citizens when answering questions. However, it has also led to a high proportion of citizens choosing the item referred to as ”maintaining the status quo.” In responding to this defect, scholars have introduced conditional terms, such as ”China's military invasion” and ”political and economic differences between the two sides” to decode the citizen's real intention to maintain the status quo. The method of adding conditional terms also carries a merit of exploring the citizen's ideological and pragmatic considerations on the issue of unification vs. independence. Unfortunately, this method might suffer from complicated measurements and variable processes on the one hand, and from failing to add new conditions effectively under changing environments on the other. In order to maintain the advantage of the one-dimension continuum and decoding the citizens' intention to maintain the status quo at the same time, this essay proposes an improvement by adding two follow-up questions regarding the citizens' second preferences and least-desired preferences on the issue of unification vs. independence after the measurement involving six items. The empirical evidence used in this essay would suggest that the new measurement has not only outperformed the previous measurement involving six items in decoding the citizens' maintenance of the status quo but also the transitivity among the six items. With validity, this new measurement has more explanatory power than the previous measurement. Methodologically, this essay has provided an improvement in the measurement of crucial variables. In essence, this essay has also made the understanding of citizens' preferences regarding the issue of unification vs. independence more perceptible.起始頁-結束頁：65-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201211.16(2).65-1163篇名：從環境正義觀點探討曾文水庫越域引水工程計畫並列篇名：Exploring the Tseng-Wen Reservoir Trans-basin Water Diversion Project from the Perspective of Environmental Justice作者：范玫芳(Mei-Fang Fan)關鍵字：環境正義;越域引水;水資源開發;環境風險;公民參與;environmental justice;water resource development;trans-basin water diversion;environmental risks;public participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究從環境正義觀點檢視曾文水庫越域引水工程計畫，探究水資源利益與環境風險分配的不公平、缺乏差異肯認與居民被排除在決策程序之間的交織影響。個案呈現不同專業社群之間多元的知識宣稱、在地知識與專家知識之間的衝突。官方將越域引水工程框架為南部區域供水與經濟發展議題，地方團體則質疑工程所牽涉龐大的土石利益、專家在水資源開發思維之侷限性，以及地方原住民不成比例地承擔環境風險。引水工程同時凸顯缺乏對「人」與「地方」適切肯認的問題。原住民部落所具特殊象徵意義與無形的文化資產被排除在環評報告之外，且決策過程欠缺充分告知同意和實質參與。越域引水工程具有高度爭議性與不確定性，對生態所造成的影響具有難以預測性與不可回復性，無法僅仰賴專家與技術官僚，必須肯認文化與地方差異並納入常民知識於知識生產與決策過程。本文主張水資源政策規劃應即早擴大社會參與並納入公眾審議的精神，透過跨文化與跨學科領域間持續的對話尋求共識，以及公民社會行動聯盟帶來轉變。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine the Tseng-Wen Reservoir Trans-basin Water Diversion Project from the perspective of environmental justice, and to explore the disputes on the distribution of interests and environmental risks of the project, and the policy implications of local action. It reveals the multiple perspectives of stakeholders on the project, the various knowledge claims among experts of different disciplines, and conflicts between local knowledge and the experts. The authorities have framed the project as either a water supply effectiveness issue or an economic development issue. However, environmental groups fear that the project involves extensive self-interest and bribery, consider the experts' thinking on water resource development to be limited, and are of the opinion that local aboriginal tribes suffer disproportionate environmental risks. It highlights the problem of a lack of recognition of people and place. The tribes' unique cultural meanings, invisible cultural assets, and their integrated relationship with nature are excluded from the EIA report, which lacks fully informed consent or substantial participation from local residents in the decision-making process. The project involves scientific controversy as well as unpredictable and irreversible impacts on the environment which cannot rely upon experts and technocracy only. It needs to recognize local particularities, and lay knowledge needs to be included in knowledge production and policy-making. This paper argues for the need for early involvement and public deliberation on water resource planning, for consensus seeking through continuous intercultural and interdisciplinary dialogue, and for alliance building to bring transformation.起始頁-結束頁：117-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201211.16(2).117-1734篇名：經濟投票與總統選舉：效度與內生問題的分析並列篇名：Economic Voting and Presidential Elections: An Assessment of Validity and Endogeneity作者：吳親恩(Chin-En Wu);林奕孜(Yi-Tze Lin)關鍵字：總統選舉;經濟投票;效度;內生經濟投票;presidential election;economic voting;validity;endogenous economic voting期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：透過分析1996年至2008年四次總統大選的面訪資料，本文檢視面訪中的回溯與前瞻經濟評估題組，是否適合用以推論經濟投票的存在。研究指出，回溯性與前瞻性社會經濟評估兩道題目，設定了一個詢問的時段，若在選後新政府上台後進行面訪，在概念上會產生效度的問題，特別是回溯性社會經濟評估，變成是對前後任政府施政的比較，問題較為嚴重。另外在實質的回答上，因為訪問時已經知道當選者是誰，選民的回答可能會受到政黨偏好或候選人偏好的影響，產生了內生的問題，產生因果方向的不確定性。與此相對，候選人經濟處理能力這一題，並不像回溯或前瞻社會經濟評估在題目上設定一個詢問的時段，所以不會出現回溯社會經濟評因為選後面訪，產生的效度問題。不過這個變項還是可能會內生的問題，在沒有更多資訊的情況下，文中建議至少要在模型中控制住政黨認同與候選人形象，這樣做可以控制這兩個變項對投票選擇與經濟評估的影響，以釐清經濟評估對投票的影響。英文摘要：We assess the retrospective and prospective economic survey questions by empirically examining the 1996 to 2008 TEDS presidential election surveys. We discuss which question is more appropriate in determining economic voting. Because the social economic assessment questions specify a time frame, they generate the validity problem when asked after the elected president has taken office. This problem is particularly severe for retrospective economic assessment. It induces respondents to compare the economic conditions of two consecutive presidential terms rather than the economic conditions one year before the election. In addition, because respondents already know those who have been elected, their answers are more likely to be influenced by partisan or candidate preferences, resulting in the problem of endogeneity. By contrast, the questions regarding the predecessor's and the candidates' handling of the economy do not specify a time frame. The validity problems are less severe. In actual fact, we demonstrate that the endogeneity problem goes with each set of economic assessment questions. To better examine the effect of economic assessment on vote choice, it is necessary to address the endogeneity problem. Without further information, researchers should at least control party identification and candidate image.起始頁-結束頁：175-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201211.16(2).175-2325篇名：Between Strategic Change and Ideological Adjustment: The DPP's China Policy Debate in the Aftermath of the 2012 National Elections並列篇名：在策略轉變與意識型態調整之間：2012年大選後民進黨中國政策的辯論作者：Gunter Schubert關鍵字：民進黨中國政策;兩岸關係;「九二共識」;2012國內選舉;「實用主義者共識」;DPP China policy;cross-strait relations;'1992 consensus';2012 national elections;'pragmatist consensus'期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在2012年總統大選之後，民進黨看來站在十字路口當中。面對海峽兩岸越益增加的互動與希望看到兩岸關係穩定的多數選民，它的歷史以及做為台灣最悠久的獨立政黨之身分，似乎已成為追求勝選的負擔。可以這麼說，大多的台灣人現在至少可以接受「一個中國，各自表述」的「九二共識」。由此，一些黨的領導人與顧問表達了民進黨必須調整它的中國途徑以容納「九二共識」與「一個中國原則」。其他人則拒絕這種說法，反而訴求從基層重建政黨，重啟它與民間社會的連結以及振興活化民進黨的民主價值。本文重建民進黨自從2008年政黨輪替後的中國政策。本文論道，民進黨從當年的挫敗「學習不少」，並主要地導致了策略的機動，而在2012年大選前期緩和了馬英九親中政策的效果。接著本文聚焦於民進黨因2012年選舉結果而無法避免的後果，也就是當前對政黨的中國政策的辯論，定出一種替代途徑的空間界線與衡量在政黨領導中是否可能有一種新的「實用主義者共識」正在興起。英文摘要：Following the 2012 presidential elections, the DPP seems to stand at a crossroads. Facing intensifying interaction across the Taiwan Strait and a majority of voters who want to see stable cross-strait relations, its history and identity as Taiwan's oldest independence party seems to have become a burden for electoral success. Arguably, most Taiwanese can now at least live with the '1992 consensus' of ”one China with different interpretations”. It is hence stated by a number of party leaders and advisors that the DPP must modify its China approach to accommodate the '1992 consensus' and the 'One China principle'. Others reject this and instead plead for a rebuilding of the party from the grassroots, reactivating its links with civil society and rejuvenating the DPP's democratic values. This article reconstructs the DPP's China policy since the change in ruling parties in 2008. It argues that the DPP ”learned little” from its defeat in that year and mainly conducted strategic maneuvering in the run-up to the 2012 elections to neutralize Ma Ying-jeou's pro-active China policy. The article then focuses on the current debate in the DPP on the necessary consequences of the 2012 election outcome for the party's China policy, demarcating the space for an alternative approach and pondering if there might be a new 'pragmatist consensus' rising in the party leadership.起始頁-結束頁：233-270資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201211.16(2).233-2706篇名：立法院積極議程設定之理論與經驗分析：第二至第六屆並列篇名：Positive Agenda Setting in the Taiwanese Legislature: Theory and Evidence (1993-2007)作者：邱訪義(Fang-Yi Chiou);李誌偉(Zhih-Wei Lee)關鍵字：立法院;議程設定;分立政府;多數聯盟;藍綠共治;Legislative Yuan;agenda setting;divided government期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：當前用於解釋美國國會立法過程的立法理論，皆假定立法機構中存在一多數黨，且無法對多數黨在黨內同質性與黨際分化程度發生變動時的積極議程設定權提出明確的預測。針對僅有單一立法樞紐（即多數黨或聯盟）的台灣立法院，本文提出一個積極議程設定理論模型，解釋此立法樞紐在不同條件下的積極議程設定權與立法成功。本文預測多數聯盟施展積極議程設定權的能力會受到提案推動成本（例如聯盟席次大小、單一政黨或多黨組成多數聯盟）與提案優先性的影響。這些由本文模型推導出的假設，在過去的研究中皆未曾被提出。為了更嚴謹檢驗這些假設並獲得更穩固的經驗分析結果，我們蒐集第二至第六屆（1993-2007）所有的立法提案。本文的假設在經驗分析與質性探討中獲得很高程度的支持，顯示出多數聯盟的積極議程設定權相當程度上受到協商成本與提案優先性的影響。此外，有別於過去的經驗分析結果，本文發現分立政府並未對行政院提案通過與否造成不利的影響。這些結果對於我們在理解台灣立法僵局與行政立法關係上有很大啟示，同時也推翻過去對藍綠無法共治的刻板印象。英文摘要：Existing legislative theories, which are developed to explain legislative dynamics in the U.S. Congress, presumes the existence of a majority party in a legislature and fails to provide predictions about positive agenda power of a majority under various degree of intra-party homogeneity and inter-party heterogeneity. Offering a theory of legislative majority coalition to explain its positive agenda power and proposal passage in the Taiwanese legislature, where only a single pivot exists, this paper hypothesizes that a majority coalition's ability to exert its positive agenda power depends on passage costs (e.g., a majority coalition formed by a single party or multiple parties and the size of a majority coalition) and priority of its proposals. We collect all the legislative proposals raised from the second through the sixth term (i.e., 1993-2007) to obtain more robust empirical results and examine the hypotheses derived from our model. Our empirical and qualitative analyses render strong support for all of our hypotheses. Moreover, in contrast to previous empirical findings, we find that divided government does not have any significant impact on government proposals. This finding has profound implications for our understanding of legislative gridlock and the legislative-executive relationship in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201206.16(1).1-587篇名：台灣司法政治的興起並列篇名：The Rise of Judicial Politics in Taiwan作者：王金壽(Chin-Shou Wang)關鍵字：司法政治;政治司法化;法官;檢察官;法院;judicial politics;judicialization of politics;judge;prosecutor;court期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文將指出司法政治是當代台灣政治的一個最新發展現象。但是，此波司法政治的興起，不同於一般法律學者強調，是來自大法官所推動的憲政改革（美國模式）；相反的，筆者認為，此波司法政治的興起，主要是由基層地檢署的檢察官和地方法院法官所發起，主要是針對貪污腐敗、賄選的偵辦、選舉糾紛，以及政治人物將司法作為另一種政治對抗的武器。台灣的這一波司法政治的興起，主要在兩個條件下才有可能：第一、過去由基層檢察官和法官所發起司法獨立改革運動取得一定的進展。第二、台灣民主政治的缺陷，此包括了台灣的侍從主義體系以及選舉過程所帶來的缺失。英文摘要：This paper will point out that the rise of judicial politics is a new phenomenon in Taiwan. However, unlike law scholars who characterize Taiwan's Constitutional Court justices as Taiwan's top constitutional reformers, I will contend that the rise of judicial politics is attributable mostly to the judicial reform led by young judges and prosecutors from the bottom of the judicial hierarchy. The main types of judicial politics include investigation on politician's corruption and vote-buying activities, rampant electoral disputation, and politicians' use of the law as a political weapon. Two main conditions promoted the rise of judicial politics in Taiwan: one was the judicial-independence reforms pursued by young reform-minded judges and prosecutors; the other was the deficiency of Taiwanese politics, including rampant clientelism and rampant disputations of elections.起始頁-結束頁：59-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201206.16(1).59-1178篇名：政治因素對於賄選訴訟案件的可能影響：司法專業人士的觀點分析並列篇名：Political Influences on Vote-Buying Verdicts in Taiwan: Perspectives and Evaluations from Legal Experts作者：孫銘鴻(Ming-Hong Sun);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：司法體系;法院;政治因素;賄選訴訟案件;國民黨;judicial system;court;political factor;vote-buying litigation;Kuomintang期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在台灣民主政治發展過程，儘管司法體系扮演的角色益形重要，然而社會大眾對其信賴程度似乎仍有待提升，受到政治因素影響法官獨立審判的質疑更是時有所聞。舉例來說，對於台灣選舉買票風氣的問題，民間普遍認定的賄選訴訟印象，譬如「法院是國民黨開的」、「一審重判，二審減半，三審不算」、「有關係就沒關係，沒關係就有關係」、「當選過關，落選被關」等，這些調侃性謔語對於司法公信具有相當的損傷。鑑此，作者檢視「政黨」、「司法程序」、「關係背景」、「當選與否」等因素，為何讓社會大眾產生「司法審判容易受到政治因素影響」的負面觀感，而且這些觀感是否成立？迥異於以往學術文獻著重實證量化分析，本文採取質性研究途徑，首先運用文獻分析，以備受社會關注的八件司法賄選審判為研究案例，蒐集賄選判決與新聞資料，探討法院審理令人產生受到政治因素影響的可能原因。其次，透過深度訪談，瞭解八位司法專業人士（包括律師、法官、法學教授、資深司法記者）對於備受社會關注之賄選案件訴訟的觀點，以及對於民間普遍認定負面印象的評價。根據訪談結果初步推論，社會大眾認為賄選判決經常受到政治因素影響的概括印象，乃與司法實際運作有所出入。在結論中，作者摘述本文要點，並詮釋研究意涵。英文摘要：In the trajectory of Taiwan's democratization, the judicial system has long been entangled in the political conflict, and the general public does not seem to trust the judiciary to be independent of political influences. Some folk sayings about the courts reveal the negative stereotypes of vote-buying verdicts; for example, ”the courts are dominated by the Kuomintang;” ”at the first trial a heavy sentence is passed, at the second trial the sentence is halved, and at the third trial the case is quashed;” ”those with good social connections won't have any problem, but those without connections will have big trouble;” and, ”those elected will be let off, but those losing the elections will be imprisoned.” This study investigates the impacts of political factors (including partisanship, judicial procedure, sociopolitical connections, and whether a defendant is elected or not) on three levels of court decisions on vote-buying litigation. In a departure from quantitative analyses in the preceding literature, this research employs a qualitative method. The methodology adopted in this study involves two steps. The first approach involves the use of documentary analyses; we intentionally select eight salient vote-buying cases, and review their court verdicts and news reports in order to inquire whether or not the judiciary is politically biased in its judgments. The second method employs face-to-face intensive interviews with eight legal experts (including three lawyers, one judge, three law professors, and one senior legal journalist), and asks the respondents questions designed to evaluate the political influences on vote-buying lawsuits and to assess this negative public impression of judicial verdicts. Contrary to expectations, the interview findings reveal that the effects of political factors have considerably less of an influence than expected on court decisions. In the conclusion, the key findings are reviewed, and suggestions regarding judicial politics are made for future research.起始頁-結束頁：119-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201206.16(1).119-1879篇名：哈伯瑪斯的溝通行動理論與國際關係建構主義的結合並列篇名：Habermas's Theory of Communicative Action and Constructivism in International Relations作者：林炫向(Hsuan-Hsiang Lin)關鍵字：理性主義;建構主義;哈伯瑪斯;溝通行動理論;社會化;說服;rationalism;constructivism;Jurgen Habermas;communicative action;socialization;persuasion期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：國際關係學中一個有名的爭論是發生在理性主義與建構主義之間，前者認為國家的行動是遵循「後果論的邏輯」，而後者則認為是遵循「適當性的邏輯」。近年來有些建構主義者嘗試引入哈伯瑪斯的溝通行動理論，主張國家的行動還遵循第三種邏輯—即「尋求真理或論證的邏輯」，其具體的表現是所謂的「溝通行動」。這些建構主義者認為引入哈伯瑪斯的溝通行動理論可以加強建構主義對於改變發生的「微觀機制」—即解釋國家的偏好與利益如何在互動中發生改變—的說明，並主張這種改變有可能是因為「較佳論據」所造成的。本文的目標是要探討建構主義者如何將溝通行動理論與國際關係的研究加以結合，並從經驗上檢視溝通行動是否確實在國際關係中發揮作用，進而探討這個結合會面臨什麼質疑，最後對這個研究領域的成果與限制做出評估。透過這樣的回顧與評估，本文試圖說明：溝通行動理論與建構主義的結合雖然開闢了一個新的研究綱領，但目前的實證研究結果顯示，建構主義的解釋並不必然優於理性主義的解釋。換言之，溝通行動理論與實證的建構主義的結合無可避免地會遭遇理性主義的質疑與挑戰。因此本文認為，既然國際哈伯瑪斯的學說本質上是一種批判理論，將它在國際關係學中做實證主義的應用並不是最好的方式。英文摘要：One of the well-known debates in International Relations is between rationalism and constructivism, in which rationalism submits that the actions of states observe ”the logic of consequentialism” while constructivism ”the logic of appropriateness”. In recent years a branch of constructivism attempts to appropriate Habermas's theory of communicative action and argues that the actions of states follow a third logic, the ”logic of truth seeking or arguing,” which takes the form of communicative action. These constructivists believes that the theory of communicative action can help to illuminate the ”micro-mechanism” through which states' preferences or interests change over the course of interaction, and they argue this change can be caused by ”the force of better argument”. This paper aims to explore how the theory of communicative action is appropriated by this branch of constructivism and examine whether communicative actions actually take place in international arena. It further investigates what challenges and queries that this approach may encounter, and then provides an assessment of the achievements and limits of this approach. By so doing this paper aims to show that even though the appropriation of the theory of communicative action by constructivists has produced a new research program, empirical studies suggest that constructivist explanation, which relies on the idea of communicative action, does not overwhelmingly prevail over rationalist explanation, which relies of the idea of strategic action, and constructivist explanations will continue to be beset by rationalist explanations. This leads to the conclusion that since Habermas's theoretical enterprise is by nature a critical theory, its positivist appropriation in IR is not very productive.起始頁-結束頁：189-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201206.16(1).189-23510篇名：Knowledge of the Electoral System and Voter Turnout並列篇名：選制知識對投票參與的影響作者：黃紀(Chi Huang);王宏忠(Hung-Chung Wang);林長志(Chang-Chih Lin)關鍵字：選制知識;投票;項目反應理論;內因解釋變數;political knowledge;electoral system;voting behavior;item response theory;endogenous explanatory variable期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：立法院在2008年第七屆立法委員選舉中，首次採用了單一選區兩票制（Mixed-Member Majoritarian Electoral System, MMM），其結合了單一選區多數決與政黨名單比例代表制兩種席次分配方式，與過去採用的「複數選區單記非讓渡投票制」（Single Non-Transferable Vote with Multi-Member-District system, SNTV-MMD）在制度特性上截然不同。本文主要目的是檢視選民對於新選制的瞭解，亦即選制知識的高低，是否將對選民之投票參與產生影響。從既有的文獻中發現，傳統研究或者假定選民對選制有充分的理解而無須納入分析，或者即便探討選制知識高低對投票行為之影響，往往將選民的選制知識本身視為外因變數（exogenous variable）。本文與過去既有之研究有三點主要的差異。首先，本文並不貿然假定選民對於兩票制的新選舉制度擁有充分的資訊與瞭解，而是以四個問卷題目來測量選民對新選舉制度的瞭解程度。第二，在選制知識的測量方法上，既有研究常直接加總選民答對題目的數目，作為選制知識高低的變數，本文則進一步運用項目反應理論（item response theory），建構一個「二參數項目反應模型」（two-parameter item response model）來估計各個測量項目對選制知識的區辨能力，進而建立一個屬於連續變數的選制知識測量。第三，本文認為選制知識在對投票行為的影響上，應是一個內因變數（endogenous variable），基於此一理論設定，本文結合兩個方程式同時估計選制知識高低的成因及其對選民投票的影響。分析結果顯示，選民的選制知識的確屬於內因變數，而在充分考量此一內因性後，證實選制知識對投票參有顯著的正效應：選民對新MMM選制越瞭解，參與投票的機率也越高；反之，對新選制越不瞭解，參與投票的機率也越低。英文摘要：Taiwan's new MMM legislative electoral system first implemented in 2008 was a sharp departure from the half-century long SNTV system. This paper examines effects of knowledge of the new electoral system on citizens' decisions to vote or not to vote.Existing literature on voting either assumes that voters are fully aware of the electoral system and thus ignores the effect of knowledge or at best assumes it is an exogenous factor. This study distinguishes itself from other related works in three respects. First, we do not assume that voters are fully aware of the new two-ballot electoral system and make their voting choices accordingly. Instead, we design a set of four survey questions to measure the degree to which citizens understand the new electoral rule. Secondly, instead of summing up the number of correct answers to these survey questions (i.e. the traditional ”raw score” approach) , we use a two-parameter item response model to estimate item loadings and then construct a continuous measure of latent knowledge. Thirdly, instead of assuming knowledge is exogenous, we build a two-equation simultaneous probit model to account for the effect of electoral system knowledge on voter turnout. This model is meticulously specified so that it allows for knowledge to be endogenous. We find that knowledge of electoral system is indeed endogenous and, in both SMD and PR ballot voting, higher knowledge of the new MMM system stimulates higher probability of voting after taking into account the endogeneity of knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：237-277資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201206.16(1).237-27701篇名：政府人事管理法令的管制品質分析並列篇名：Regulatory Quality of Public Personnel Policies and Laws作者：施能傑(Jay N. Shih)關鍵字：管制品質;管制影響評估;政府人事政策;策略性人力資源管理;regulatory quality;regulatory impact analysis;public personnel policy;strategic human resource management期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：55期出版年：2012中文摘要：相對於其他國家，臺灣政府人事管理的最大特色是高度依賴法律和法規命令進行。本文借用管制影響評估理論和機制，以及策略性人力資源管理理論，建構分析人事管理法令管制品質的三個觀點：合目的性、合效能性和合憲性，分別對應著公共行政領域分析的管理、政治和法律觀點。根據該架構，本文逐項分析臺灣現行人事管理法律的管制品質，結果顯示整體性和個別性的人事法律管制品質均不佳，一則忽略對增進政府競爭力和經營服務績效等核心公共價值的重視，二則主要人事管理領域內的核心管理措施並未和其政策目標間有密切連結，三則相對缺乏以保障公共利益模式為思考主體的合憲性思考。英文摘要：Quite different from OECD counties, public personnel management relies upon the regulatory approach mainly established by laws in Taiwan. This paper proposes three lens for analyzing the regulatory quality of personnel laws-effectiveness, instrumentality and constitutionality which combines arguments taking from both regulatory impact analysis and strategic human resource management. Results show that the regulatory quality is not good enough for public personnel polices. Public personnel laws currently in force have not set up clear strategic goals for enhancing government competitiveness and performance. Nor do those key measures of any functional personnel management law match its policy goal well. Lastly, the public service model is often not applied to design personnel management laws for maintaining their constitutionality.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201212.00012篇名：澳洲各州公益揭發保護立法比較分析並列篇名：A Comparative Analysis of Australian State-level Public Interest Disclosure Legislations作者：楊戊龍(Wu-Lung Yang);程挽華(Wan-Hua Chen)關鍵字：澳洲;公益揭發;揭弊者保護;Australia;Public Interest Disclosure;Whistleblower Protection期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：55期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討澳洲州級政府公益揭發/揭弊立法內涵，各州的立法名稱、概念界定、規範密度、實踐作法有其共通的原則亦有差異之處，在制度參照上提供多元觀點。公益揭發/揭弊保護在澳洲取得正當性而成為公共政策議題，在於政府誠實的回應公務員貪污醜聞調查中所曝露出揭發者受報復的困境，1989年「費茲傑拉報告」是最重要的催生因素。鼓勵及促進公益揭發、讓揭發情事受到調查與矯正、保護揭發者是立法的核心目標，但每個立法均有缺失，無最佳的實務模式。本文並從「適當的人員將公益資訊，向適當的組織為適當的揭發，則受到保護」之方向，對我國未來立法提出一些看法。英文摘要：This paper discusses Australian state-level public interest disclosure legislations and the extent to which legislative measures have been effective in protecting whistleblowers from workplace retaliation. It explores the identical and the different among legislations, which provide us multiple perspectives for reference in our future enacting a law. Whistleblower protection legislation becoming policy agenda and gaining advocates and acceptance derived from the Fitzgerald Report 1989, which indicated the needs to protect government employees who disclose wrongdoings relevant to public sector. To facilitate and encourage public interest disclosures, to ensure that disclosures are properly dealt with, and to ensure the protection of whistleblowers from reprisals are the core objects of those legislations. However, each existing law has its own weakness. There is no best practice model. The paper suggests our government to review the necessary to enact a similar law, and provides some initial opinions in legislation following the line that ”An appropriate disclosure of public interest information made by the proper person to a appropriate authority receives formal protection”.起始頁-結束頁：31-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201212.00023篇名：我國農產品產銷履歷政策之實證研究並列篇名：An Empirical Study on Taiwan's Agriculture and Food Traceability Policy作者：蔡憲唐(Hsien-Tang Tsai);蕭宏金(Luke Hsiao);洪嘉聰(Jai-Tsung Hong);陳彥鉛(Yen-Chien Chen)關鍵字：產銷履歷政策;農產品安全;關鍵成功因素;KANO法;Traceability Policy;Food Safety;Key Success Factors;KANO's Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：55期出版年：2012中文摘要：狂牛病、三聚氰氨、塑化劑、瘦肉精等事件相繼的發生，各界對於農產品安全的關注與要求與日俱增。政策可以引導農產品產業安全品質的發展，我國自2003年起陸續推動農產品產銷履歷系統平台，然而完整的履歷系統需要政府進一步跨部會整合、統合供應鏈中各個利害關係人並需投入龐大資源方能確保政策運作順暢，達成保障國民健康的目標。有鑒於此，目前農產品產銷履歷政策成效值得公共政策或公共管理學者進行有系統地研究。本文進行兩部份實證研究：第一部份以問卷與面談方式蒐集12位產、官、學、流通及檢驗不同領域專家的意見，再以層級分析法建構並實證我國推動產銷履歷之關鍵成功因素模式（包含六大構面與十八個子因素）；第二部份則透過272份消費者有效問卷以KANO法探討消費者對產銷履歷標章資訊的認知與對品質要素的需求。經研究發現，專家學者認為影響農產品產銷履歷推動的前三項關鍵成功因素的構面分別為「政府管理」、「生產及加工業運作」與「消費者認知」。另外在消費者問卷調查上，我們區別出六類標章資訊品質要素，並用結構方程模式驗證一維、魅力及必要品質要素對消費者選購具履歷認證農產品意願的影響程度。英文摘要：Due to the incidents of mad cow disease, lean meat powder, melamine, plasticizer, etc., public concern about food safety is increasing. By addressing food safety issues, our government had constructed and implemented Taiwan's Agriculture and Food Traceability (TAFT) policy since 2003. To assure TAFT's major target for guarding consumer's health, government needs to input massive resources such as cross departmental coordination, companies-wide alignment in food supply chains. However, the progress and effect are to be evaluated. In this article, we conducted two empirical studies: first, the key successful factors of the TAFT are explored by the AHP method through 12 experts' responses; second, the consumer's perception toward label information of TAFT-certificated products by KANO's model through 272 survey samples. The results show that management by government, operations by producer and manufacturer, and consumer's perception are three most important key successful factors among six; Besides, six KANO's quality-requirement categories were classified on the label information; and three categories of one-dimension, attractive and must-be have significant influences on consumers' attitude toward purchasing TAFT-certificated products.起始頁-結束頁：67-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201212.00034篇名：Neoliberal Diffusion and Regulatory Capture of Financial Rules: Lessons from the 2007-8 Global Financial Crisis並列篇名：新自由主義金融規則的擴散與管制擄獲：2007至2008年全球金融危機的教訓作者：李佩珊(Pei-Shan Lee)關鍵字：新自由主義制度鑲嵌;俱樂部標準;金融規則的管制擄獲;道德風險;系統性風險;2007至2008年全球金融危機;全球金融治理;embedded neoliberalism;club standard;regulatory capture of financial rules;moral hazard;systematic risk;the 2007-8 global financial crisis;global financial governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：55期出版年：2012中文摘要：2007年源自美國次貸危機的全球金融海嘯，使得金融體系系統性風險的全球與各國管制問題浮現。本論文回溯過去三十年新自由主義金融治理規則，提出一個新自由主義制度鑲嵌的理論架構，論述當前造成系統性金融危機的起源在於1980年代以來的管制擄獲，亦即私人金融資本、大到不能倒的大型銀行、信用評等機構與國際金融治理俱樂部，共同設計出由市場自我規範、風險自行估算的金融管制規則，形同放任被管制者自訂遊戲規則，由國際經濟組織背書，並向開發中國家推展新自由治理規則，擴張金融版圖。各國管制權威的效能不彰其實受制於金融先進國家彼此間的利益競爭，管制越鬆散的國家越能吸引跨國金融資本的高風險槓桿操作，以及名為金融創新，實為風險層層包裝以獲利的衍生性金融遊戲。此次金融危機迫使美國進行再管制，迅速通過新金融法案，歐盟則因決策架構複雜，有待時間推動其管制變革。新自由金融規則的演變仍在進行中。英文摘要：The 2007-2008 financial crisis that originated from the United States has caused global economic downturns in fear of plunging into a great recession. As situation evolves, regulatory problems of this systematic risk that spread from national to global levels should be detected and analyzed. This paper aims at tracing the origin and diffusion of neoliberal financial governance in the past three decades, which have paved way for today's financial disaster. A perspective that bridges domestic regulatory foundation and international diffusion of rules should be in place to better grasp the nature of current crisis. At domestic side, a perspective of ”regulatory capture” in which special interests, regulatory incompetence of public institutions and the dogmatic ideologies all together contributed to this crisis. The regulatory capture further constrains policy options and impacts the following path of financial sector restructuring. In the wake of the U.S. financial meltdown, the Obama administration has made efforts on reforming the financial sector. The latest reform bills signal U.S. government' attempts to tame giant financial institutions and tighten up government regulation. For global implications, the U.S. crisis may jeopardize the credibility of the current global financial norms that have been promoted by advanced countries. The advanced world is now divided on how much more regulation should be imposed on new financial activities. It deserves special attention on tracking how a new set of regulatory rules is to be reformulated for years to come.起始頁-結束頁：109-136資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201212.00045篇名：管制政策的分配政治特質：台灣環境保護訴願決定的實證分析並列篇名：The Distributive Attributes of Regulatory Policy作者：羅清俊(Ching-Jyuhn Luor);郭益玟(Yi-Wen Kuo)關鍵字：管制政策;分配政治;複數選區單記非讓渡投票制;票倉區;環保訴願;環境保護政策;Distributive Politics;Distributive Theory;SNTV;Environmental Protection Policy;Legislative Yuan期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以分配政治理論為基礎，觀察立法委員在複數選區單記非讓渡選舉制度時期（SNTV 制度，第二屆至第六屆立法院期間），立法委員選區內提出環保訴願的民營企業所獲得的訴願決定是否受到立法委員的政治力影響？由於SNTV制度下的立法委員會藉由積極建立和經營個人票倉區以獲得過門檻的票數來維持競爭優勢。所以，本論文特別關心提出環保訴願的企業是否會因為座落地點位於立法委員的票倉區內而獲得有利的訴願決定？多變量邏輯斯迴歸分析發現，第一，立委SNTV 選舉制度所衍生的票倉區現象對於立委肉桶行為產生影響。不管我們是以提出訴願的企業座落地「是否位於立委的票倉區」或是依照票倉區內立委人數規模將票倉區分為「零位」、「一位」或「兩位及兩位以上」，只要提出訴願的企業座落於立委的票倉區內時，該企業獲得訴願撤銷的機會將大於不是座落於立委票倉區內的企業。第二，票倉區立委人數規模的差異也會影響立委肉桶行為的強度。如果企業座落在僅有一位立委的票倉區，那麼他們獲得撤銷處分的機會更會大過於座落在兩位以及兩位以上立委票倉區的企業。第三、國會制度性權力對於環保訴願決定的影響不明顯。第四，不同的原因決定票倉區立委協助污染企業的動機。座落於票倉區內提出訴願的企業如果員工數越多、企業成立時間越短，則這些企業獲得撤銷裁決的機會比員工數少的企業或歷史悠久的企業較大。另外，沒有企業經營背景的立委比有企業背景的立委更傾向於協助其票倉區內的污染企業。第五，就時間上來說，第四屆與第五屆立院期間的撤銷比例相對於其他屆次來說明顯較高。歸結來說，立法委員會協助他們的票倉區內有污染事實的民營企業，而使這些企業免除或減輕因為污染環境所遭受的行政處分。環保訴願決定似乎成為討好企業的肉桶工具，因而使得環保管制政策具有分配政治的特質。英文摘要：This thesis explores the distributive attributes of regulatory policies in Taiwan. Generally speaking, if polluting industries are penalized by local EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) but remain unconvinced, industries may file an administrative appeal to the EPA of central government for remedies. The EPA of central government shall organize a committee to review cases and then decide either to dismiss the case or to keep the status quo in terms of necessary evidences. Based on the 365 cases of administrative appeal which have been filed by private-owned industries from 1993 to 2007, the authors ask whether the decisions of central government EPA are contaminated by distributive politics. Specifically we ask, under what conditions and to what extent, do legislators who are elected from the industries' location try to affect the decision so that the polluting industries might be better off (the case end up with dismissal)? Special attention is paid on how the SNTV system shapes legislators' motives to serve polluting industries' interest.Logistic regression is employed to estimate the factors that would affect the results of appeal. First of all, the results show that legislators do help the appealing industries, which located in legislators' vote-concentrated area, to get better appealing results, in the sense that legislator treats regulatory policy as the pork barrel to please the industries. Second, if only one legislator dominates the sub-district (vote-concentrated area) where the industries are located, then the appealing result is better than other appealing industries whose location either without any legislator's dominance or with more than one's dominance. Third, there are still some significant factors contributing to the appealing results such as the business background of legislators, operation duration and the amount of workers of appealing company etc.In sum, this thesis not only indicates that the regulatory policy has distributive attributes, but also reveals that the legislators' pork-barrel behavior is mostly affected by the sub-district where legislators' votes are concentrated. These findings have some implications on distributive politics under the SNTV system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201206.00016篇名：政府與客家社團協力指標之析探並列篇名：The Analysis of Indicator of Collaboration between Government and Hakka Associations作者：陳定銘(Ting-Ming Chen);陳樺潔(Hu-Chieh Chen);游靖宇(Ching-Yu You)關鍵字：新北市政府客家事務局;客家社團;協力;IAD架構;Hakka Affairs Department of New Taipei City Government;Hakka Associations;Collaboration;IAD framework期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究採用Bryson、Crosby與Stone提出的協力模型，並結合Ostrom的制度分析架構（IAD 架構）觀點，析探政府如何運用協力機制，提供決策與統合資源，而和客家社團一同傳承與創造新的在地客家文化。本研究以社會中心型的協力途徑，重視客家使命與目標、認同客家意識、強調客家公共價值、課責與參與，以及落實客家公民社會之實踐。研究發現（1）環境條件的需求與塑造：新北市客家事務局在推動客家文化扮演重要的角色，了解客家社團的需求進而予以協助，特別是政府提供之政策工具的優惠與鼓勵是協力合作的迫切需求項目。（2）資訊公開透明是影響互動關係的程度：新北市客家社團在協力過程中，社團與社團間彼此觀摩，相互經驗交流並密切互動，而客家事務局賦予客家社團一定的自主性，並做好行政溝通與建構信賴的活動網絡，讓協力機制能夠有效運作。英文摘要：This research studies how the government collaborates with Hakka associations under the framework combined collaboration model of Bryson, Crosby, and Stone with IAD framework (Institutional Analysis and Development Framework) proposed by Ostrom. It analyzes how the government manages the collaborative systems to offer policies, integrate resources, pass on Hakka traditions and create new local culture with Hakka associations. The research adopts the way of collaboration from sociocentric to discuss collaboration between Hakka Affairs and Hakka associations. It not only focuses on the mission and consciousness of Hakka, but emphasizes public value, accountability and public participation of Hakka. Furthermore, through public discussion, a Hakka civil society will be put into practice. The findings are as follows: First, the needing and making of the environment. Department of Hakka Affairs of New Taipei City Government plays an important role in promoting Hakka culture by understanding the needs of Hakka associations and offering assistance. Both preferential and encouraging policies provided by the government are part of the urgent demands. Second, open and see-through information affects the interaction. During the process of collaboration between Hakka associations in New Taipei City, inspecting and exchanging experiences with one another brings the associations close together. As to Department of Hakka Affairs, the collaborative system works better when giving the associations a certain degree of independency, making good administrative communication, and building a trustful activity network.起始頁-結束頁：41-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201206.00027篇名：歲入多元化與歲入穩定之研究：台灣地方財政之實證分析並列篇名：Revenue Diversification and Revenue Stability: Empirical Evidence from Local Governments in Taiwan作者：劉志宏(Louis Chih-Hung Liu);郭乃菱(Nai-Ling Kuo)關鍵字：歲入多元化;歲入穩定度;地方財政;revenue diversification;revenue stability;local fiscal reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：美國學界現在正興起一股地方政府的歲入多元化（Revenue Diversification）之研究風潮。根據現有文獻的分析探討，歲入多元化的衡量是以市場集中度指標Herfindahl-Hirschman Index（HHI）所修改而成的。而其假設則是認為歲入多元化對於地方政府的收入穩定有著極大的關係，亦即歲入結構愈多元化的地方政府，其收入也就更加地穩定。本研究嘗試著對現有的文獻進行全面性地的探討，並且以我國地方政府從民國90年到97年間的四大歲入來源，包括：自有稅課收入、統籌分配稅款收入、補助及協助款收入、以及其他收入，來進行分析探討。本研究的實證結果也顯示，我國地方政府的歲入多元化與歲入穩定存在著正相關性。而這樣的結果也說明了地方政府太過於依賴單一稅收來源可能會危及到其歲入結構之穩定。由於我國大部份的地方政府過於依賴府際移轉之收入，也使得歲入多元化的政策目標受到了考驗。因此，本研究也建議未來地方政府必須在自有稅課收入、以及其他收入方面能夠多加努力並提高其比例，以達到歲入多元化和歲入穩定之目標。英文摘要：There have been many researches on revenue diversification in the United States, and the concept of revenue diversification has also been considered as a desirable policy goal by many tax experts. In this research, we attempt to investigate the current study on the relevant issues and conduct an empirical study on the relationships between revenue diversification and revenue stability of Taiwan's local governments. We argue that the more the local revenue sources are diverse, the more the revenue structure is stable. Four major revenue sources of Taiwan's governments are identified: tax revenue, grant money, revenue from Centrally-Allotted Tax, and other revenue sources. The HHI index was adopted to measure the level of local governments' revenue diversification during the year of 2001-2008. Total revenue variance was adopted to measure the level of revenue instability of those local governments over the sampled years. Our research results indicate that the level of revenue diversification is positively associated with the level of revenue stability. Therefore, to pursue for a sound fiscal environment and to reduce the risk caused by instable revenue, local governments should not rely on single source of revenue.起始頁-結束頁：83-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201206.00038篇名：道德政策理論之應用：台灣寵物業管理政策之個案研究並列篇名：The Application of Morality Policy Theory: The Case Study of Taiwan Pet Industry Regulatory Policy作者：吳宗憲(Chuang-Hsien Wu)關鍵字：公益理論;俘虜理論;道德政策;道德政策理論;寵物業管理政策;Public Interest Theory;Capture Theory;Morality Policy;Morality Policy Theory;Pet Industry Regulatory Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：道德政策議題，在已開發國家中扮演越來越重要的角色。因為自認「道德」的一方，常將自身的價值觀強加到其他人身上，視對方為「罪惡政治」，而引起對方公開或私下的抵制，這是形成政策無效率的重要原因之一。台灣的政治發展在歷經早期轉型正義、憲政架構等國家結構議題，以及當代的治理效率改革之後，已逐漸邁向後工業世紀，在此類道德政策議題頻繁出現之時，道德政策研究卻付之闕如，亟需學界補強。本文透過「寵物業管理政策」運作的實證個案，顯示台灣公共行政學界慣常用來分析公共政策議題之理論，並不適合用來分析此政策的運作，而西方政治學界近年所建構的「道德政策理論」，則更能窺見政策運作的全貌。也因此，未來我政策學界及實務界除必須更關注「道德政策」議題外，並且需跳脫傳統政策思考的模式，引入「道德政策理論」的分析，才能更有效分析或解決政策問題。英文摘要：Morality policy issues play a more and more important role in developed countries. The major reason of policy inefficiency in these countries is that the members of ”morality party” impose their value on the members of other parties which are recognized as ”politics of sin”; as a result, it causes the opposite parties' boycott in public or in private.Taiwan has gradually entered postindustrial era after went through transactional justice, constitutional framework reform issues in the early age, and contemporary governance reform issues. With these morality policy issues appearing frequently, there is a need of academic researches in this field.Through the empirical case study of pet industry regulatory policy, we find these theories Taiwan public administration academic community usually use are inappropriate for this kind of policy. However, the ”morality policy theory” built by western politics academic community recently seems more appropriate for this policy.That is to say, our policy academic and practice communities have to concentrate more on ”morality policy issues” in the future. Besides, we have to escape out of traditional policy model, and introduce ”morality policy theory” perspective, so that we can analysis or resolve policy problem more efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：121-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系DOI：10.29865/PAP.201206.000401篇名：政府訓練機構運用個案教學法的執行分析：公務人員薦任升簡任官等訓練個案並列篇名：The Evaluation of Using the Case Method Teaching in the Government Managerial Promotion Training Program作者：施能傑(Jay N. Shih)關鍵字：個案教學法;參與者中心學習法;公務人員訓練;case method teaching;participant-centered learning;civil service promotion training期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：公務人員薦任升簡任官等訓練計畫中的部分課程，近兩年間開始執行個案教學方法，本文基於理論概念更有系統性檢視個案教學方法的執行過程和一般性評價。文中首先運用成人學習理論和計畫執行力的相關概念，提出個案教材內容、執行教學者、參與學習者和執行組織資源等四類影響個案教學方法效果的重要因素，再據以分別設計調查問卷。其次，本文就所有參加99年度薦任公務人員晉升簡任官等訓練者進行普查，並分析參與者對個案教學相關面向的主觀評價和差異性。最後，本文提出五個重要研究發現再進行討論，包括：個案教學獲致正面評價的背後隱憂課題、學習者為中心的參與行為不夠積極、實施片段式個案教學對訓練計畫意義的再思考、個案品質符合參與者需求價值的課題和教學者引導參與者為中心的互動課題。本文認為個案教學方法在公務人力訓練發展計畫中是值得繼續推廣，但不必獨尊以參與者為中心的哈佛模式個案教學方法，考量台灣公務人員的學習特性，如何讓參與者願意就實際個案問題積極討論，從問題分析討論中瞭解解決方案涉及的理論知識原理等，體現學習者和教學者共同為中心的個案教學方式，會是更為初步但有用的起點。英文摘要：The case method style of teaching has recently been adopted in a few courses of the government managerial promotion training program. This paper intends to analyze the preliminary results of these experiences by using a more systematic and theoretical approach. Firstly, this paper discusses adult learning principles which support the concept of case methods and outlines four major factors influencing the implementation of the case method approach. These four factors are case materials, instructors, participants and supporting resources. Secondly, a self-designed questionnaire measuring all four factors was sent to all participants of the 2010 managerial promotion training program. This paper reports the results of perception analysis and mean difference analysis. Finally, five major issues generated from the results have been further discussed. These issues include the possible gap between satisfaction and effect, the quality of the case materials, the insufficient active learning behaviors of participants, the preparatory quality of instructors and too few case method course hours. It is finally argued in this paper that the case method for Taiwanese civil service training may yield even better effect if both instructors and participants play equally active roles instead of the learner-centered approach suggested by the so-called Harvard Business School Model.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201212.00012篇名：從史托姆競爭性政黨行為理論探究梅克爾大聯合政府時期聯邦朝野政黨關係並列篇名：The Relationships between Oppositions and Government at Federal Level during the Period of Merkel's Grand Coalition: Through Theory of Competition Parties' Behavior from Kaare Strom作者：劉書彬(Shu-Pin Liu)關鍵字：梅克爾大聯合政府;政黨體系;黑紅聯合政府;德國政治;Merkel's grand coalition;party system;black-red coalition;German politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：2005-2009梅克爾組成了聯邦德國第二次的大聯合政府，執政的聯盟黨和德國社民黨在聯邦議會擁有近73%超高比例的席位。這段期間內，是否因為該結構性使然，在野小黨對執政黨之監督與制衡，就無用武之地？執政與在野各黨之間，是否就是壁壘分明之對立狀態？小黨勢力是否明顯受到壓制？事實證明並非如此，甚至出現大黨勢力衰退，小黨實力增長、執政選項變多的發展情勢。對此本文透過史托姆競爭性政黨行為理論的適用，就朝野政黨在國會的互動與政府官職取得進行討論。發現此一時期政黨領袖強度、政黨意識形態和邦政府的政黨執政選項，是影響朝野政黨實踐政黨目標的重要因素。此一時期，朝野政黨都以追求聯邦官職為目標，政黨實踐目標能力強者若與意識形態接近的執政黨接近，在立法政策議題上會有一定程度的夥伴合作，但監督關係則仍是朝野關係。官職追求上，除了左黨另行提出人選，其他四黨在2009年的聯邦總統選舉，和聯邦議會選舉爭取聯邦執政之位時，則打破原先的朝野界線，呈現傳統左右對抗之勢。如此一來，梅克爾大聯合政府時期的朝野關係極具特殊性，德國民主更為多元、責任政治也能落實。英文摘要：From 2005 to 2009 Merkel built her grand coalition, the second grand coalition in the history of the FRG. Her government parties (Union party (CDU+CSU)+SPD) had around 73% of the seats in the German Bundestag. Under this hegemonic coalition structure some questions are worth discussing, such as whether the opposition played no check and balance role, were the relations between the opposition and the government tense or did they fight each other, and were the small parties suppressed? In fact, the previous phenomena did not appear. Conversely, the government parties declined in size, lost many votes, and the opposition developed stark.By using Kaare Strom's theory of the behavior of competition parties, this paper discusses the parties' interactions in parliament (Bundestag and Bundesrat) and in federal offices (Federal president and Federal chancellor). The research shows there was intensity on the party leaders, and the policy position and coalition alternatives of local government s were key in impacting the party's goals. During this period, office-seeking was the common goal for all federal parties. This research includes several points: opposition and government parties had a certain degree of cooperation in the legislative processes, but the opposition played a good role to control the government. For office-seeking besides Link, parties, regardless of opposition or in power, built alliances on both the right and left and strived for the federal president and coalition. So the character of the parties' relations of Merkel's grand coalition is very unusual, but German democracy is more diverse and party accountability can also be implemented.起始頁-結束頁：51-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201212.00513篇名：總統國會制的一致政府與憲政運作：以馬英九總統第一任任期為例並列篇名：Unified Government and Constitutional Operation in President-Parliamentarism during the First Term of President Ma, Ying-jeou in Taiwan作者：蔡榮祥(Jung-Hsiang Tsai);陳宏銘(Hong-Ming Chen)關鍵字：半總統制;總統國會制;一致政府;憲政運作;semi-presidentialism;president-parliamentarism;unified government;constitutional operation期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：半總統制研究的傳統智慧指出，一致政府比少數政府更容易出現政治穩定和較少的政治僵局。然而，我們觀察台灣的一致政府運作，其還是出現了行政和立法部門之間的衝突或行政內部的分歧。為何一致政府會出現府、會不同調或府、院不協調的現象，以及這些現象對於半總統制的運作，產生何種的影響等問題是本文主要的研究關懷。本文研究發現如下：第一、一致政府時期，特定一些法案的通過彰顯國會對於總統或行政部門的制衡；第二、總統權力的延伸，限縮了行政院院長的權力和自主性以及促成內閣決策的非集體化；第三、總統化的現象，弱化政黨的功能；第四、雖然台灣的總統國會制並沒有經歷民主崩潰，但是這樣的體制即使在一致政府的型態下，還是不太容易運作。最後，本文透過台灣個案的分析，來挑戰總統國會制之一致政府較可能出現憲政運作順利的觀點。英文摘要：Conventional wisdom on semi-presidentialism has claimed that unified governments can entail more political stability and less political deadlock than minority governments. However, when we observe the operation of unified governments in Taiwan's semi-presidential trajectory from 2008 to 2012, we can identify political cleavages within the executive and political conflicts between the executive and legislative branches. Why do unified governments in president-parliamentarism still suffer serious political cleavages within the governing party? Our findings are below. First, Taiwan's parliament passed some controversial bills to rebel against the president's authority or preeminence over the parliament. Second, the enlargement of presidential real authority or power has curtailed the autonomy of the premier and cultivated non-collectivization of the cabinet. Third, the phenomenon of presidentialization has weakened the functions of the ruling party. Fourth, Taiwan as a president-parliamentary system, one subtype of semi-presidentialism, did not experience democratic breakdown but the system was difficult to operate even during the period of unified governments.起始頁-結束頁：121-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201212.01214篇名：不中間的中間選民：以質性方法初探有政黨傾向選民隱藏政黨傾向的原因並列篇名："Pure Independents" Reconsidered: Using the Qualitative Approach to Explore Why Independent Leaners Hide Their Partisan Orientation作者：劉正山(Frank C. S. Liu);朱淑華(Shu-Hua Chu)關鍵字：政黨認同;中間選民;選擇性接觸理論;媒介使用;party identity;independent voters;selective exposure;media use期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：在臺灣各項選舉的民意調查中，不少受訪者在被問及政黨認同時，選擇隱藏自己的政黨傾向。雖然他們宣稱自己是「中間選民」或「獨立選民」，但是在理論上他們很可能仍然是具有政黨傾向的選民。為什麼這些選民選擇不表態或隱藏政黨傾向？本文從電訪資料中找到具有政黨傾向卻宣稱為「中間選民」的受訪者之後，經過再接觸、深度訪談的方式，抽絲剝繭、探詢他們不表態的原因。我們發現，除了個人家庭和自身成長文化背景的影響外，其他重要的因素還包括了「保障個人自身安全避免與他人製造紛爭」及「避免造成社群人際關係緊張」等理由。這些發現除了呼應目前學術研究對密西根學派的補充觀點之外，深度訪談所得到的記錄，都值得關心「中間選民」的調查研究者及關心臺灣民主變遷及民主深化的有識之士進一步研究與探討。英文摘要：A significant number of voters self-report in polls and surveys that they are ”independents” who do not lean toward any political party. There is no sufficient theoretical base, however, to believe that they are pure independents. By proving that, we find some of such voters who claim to be independent but behave in a partisan manner, such as voting consistently for a party and/or consistently favoring a political talk show, but then, for reasons of hiding partisan orientation in polls and surveys, are interviewed. We find that, besides their family history that influences their attitudes towards revealing their partisanship publicly, social expectation and conflict avoidance are two important reasons of not revealing party identification. We discuss the findings and implications which are important to understand ”independents” in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：177-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201212.01775篇名：經濟利益與符號態度：解析臺灣認同的動力並列篇名：Economic Interest and Symbolic Attitudes: Analyzing the Dynamics of Taiwan Identity作者：陳陸輝(Lu-Huei Chen);陳映男(Ying-Nan Chen);王信賢(Hsin-Hsien Wang)關鍵字：兩岸關係;兩岸交流;認同;符號政治;理性抉擇;cross-strait relations;cross-strait exchanges;identity;symbolic politics;rational choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：2008年「五二○」以來，兩岸關係趨於和緩、交流也愈趨熱絡，而此種發展究竟對臺灣民眾的「認同」造成何種影響。本研究從「理性自利」及「感性認同」層面切入，探討2008年至2010年兩岸和解是否影響臺灣民眾「臺灣人認同」，並進一步分析影響臺灣民眾「臺灣人認同」的因素為何。研究結果發現，自2008年以來臺灣民眾的「臺灣人」認同的上昇趨勢不僅未改變且持續增加，而其中感性因素對「臺灣人」認同的影響力尤為顯著。因此，本文認為隱藏於「理性自利」背後的「感性認同」或許才是左右臺灣民眾認同的真正關鍵。英文摘要：Since Ma Ying-jeou's inauguration on May 20, 2008, cross-Strait exchanges have become more popular and frequent, and the relationship between Taiwan and Mainland China seems to be closer. However, there are two different hypotheses, i.e. ”symbolic politics” and ”rational choice” approaches, to explain people's identity. This study examines these two competing hypotheses to account for citizens' preferences on the ”Taiwanese/Chinese Identity” issue in Taiwan's electoral politics, finding out the factors affecting their identity. Employing survey data collected in Taiwan, the analysis of the people's preferences on the ”Taiwanese/Chinese Identity” issue shows that even though cross-Strait relations has tended to more harmonious, Taiwanese identity remains strong. Factors including the people's provincial origin, party ID, independence-versus-unification preference, and Taiwan economic interest are influential in shaping people's Taiwan identity. It shows that the two hypotheses provide valid explanations; however, symbolic attitudes clearly play dominant roles on influencing Taiwanese identity.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201209.00016篇名：從美中台戰略三角的演變看兩岸信心建構措施的建立並列篇名：Reviewing the Confidence-Building Measures between China and Taiwan through Changes of the Strategic Triangle of the U.S.A., China and Taiwan作者：袁鶴齡(Hao-Lin Yuan);沈燦宏(Tsan-Hung Shen)關鍵字：戰略三角;兩岸關係;美中台三邊關係;信心建立措施;strategic triangle;cross-Strait relation;the relationship of U.S.A.;China;and Taiwan;confidence-building measures (CBMs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：對於台海兩岸關係的研究，通常只可透過美（國）中（共）台（灣）戰略三角的理論途徑，以解釋兩岸之間的友善或敵對。為了對兩岸關係的變化更進一步的理解，本文嘗試在1987年至2011年之間，先將兩岸關係區分為六個時期，而後設定兩岸信心建立措施（confidence-building measures, CBMs）的五項指標，並據此統計各個時期兩岸CBMs正、反向總合數目。其次，在此統計數目基礎上，本文綜和比較兩岸CBMs發生的頻率、正負面性結果與指標分佈面積的意涵，並分析戰略三角類型對兩岸CBMs的影響。透過戰略三角聯結兩岸CBMs的研究途徑，本文發現確實能超越僅由單一戰略三角類型或僅由CBMs建構所能解釋的範圍。本文最後建議，透過此種連結的研究途徑，更能理解兩岸關係較細緻的動態變化。英文摘要：strategic triangle;cross-Strait relation;the relationship of U.S.A., China and Taiwan;confidence-building measures (CBMs)起始頁-結束頁：52-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201209.00527篇名：計畫趕不上變化？風險因素對台灣地方政府策略管理影響之研究並列篇名：Do Plans Ever Keep Up with Changes? A Study on the Impact of Risk Factors on Strategic Management in Taiwan Local Government作者：王俊元(Chun-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：不確定性;風險知覺;脆弱性;組織復原能力;地方政府;策略管理;uncertainty;awareness;vulnerability;organizational resilience;local government;strategic management期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去25年來，關於策略管理的討論與實務應用已在公部門產生重大影響，我國中央政府各部會亦於民國87年起引進策略管理的精神並實施中程施政計畫制度；然而，面對環境急遽的變化，例如全球金融風暴、歐債危機等，對公部門的策略管理者儼然也帶來新的挑戰，尤其對資源相對匱乏的地方政府而言，施政上面更是受到相當大的衝擊。儘管公部門中常存著「計畫趕不上變化」此一看似真理的看法，就公共行政的研究者而言，吾人更應藉由系統性的方式瞭解變化與計畫之間的關係，期能更有效的回應變遷迅速之環境。換言之，本文擬透過探索性的途徑，試圖探討組織內外的風險因素對於地方政府的策略管理會產生什麼影響。本文首先回顧了策略規劃應用於公部門之相關文獻，並檢視國內外地方政府在策略規劃的相關作法與主要困境。其次，從文獻中也發現公部門策略管理並非完全是線性或理性來進行的；換言之，組織的內、外環境所充滿的各種風險因素，將對策略過程與內容產生影響。這些風險因素包含有：不確定性、風險知覺、脆弱性與組織復原能力等。為回答上述研究問題，本文透過深度訪談以蒐集質性資料並加以分析。藉由1998-2007年各縣市政府「補助協助依存度」之平均值為依據，本研究選取9個縣市政府中的縣長、局處首長與副首長，及業務承辦單位主管等人進行深度訪談。綜合而言，本研究發現在資源與應變能力有限的情況下，地方政府面臨各項風險因素時，確實容易造成施政計畫的中止或重大改變。因此，本研究最後也提供地方政府強化組織能力來克服劇變環境挑戰之建議。英文摘要：”Plans never keep up with changes” seems a pervasive stereotype in public organizations; meanwhile, this proverb has also stimulated the author to raise two questions in this study. First, what kinds of change really do affect plans? The subsequent question is how those changes influence plans. Compared with the spirit of strategic planning and the mid-term planning applied by Taiwan's central government, the question of how the local government should upgrade their administrative capacity and efficiency by adopting strategic management is a key issue we should pay attention to. Therefore, the scope of this research highlights the discussion in the context of local government. This study first reviews the literature concerning the application and implications of strategic management in the public sector. The methods and challenges of local government to implement strategic management have also been reviewed. Second, strategic management of the public sector is not always linear and rational; some risk factors of organizational internal and external environments will influence the process and the contents of the strategy. These risk factors include: uncertainty, risk awareness, vulnerability, and organizational resilience. In order to figure out how the risk factors impact on strategic management of local government, this research carries out the exploratory research by conducting in-depth interviews. According to the average of the ”complement adhere degree” of Taiwan local governments from 1998-2007, this study has selected county magistrates, commissioners, and some section chiefs from different departments and bureaus in nine different city and county governments to conduct in-depth interviews. In general, this article finds that when risk factors have actually started to influence the public governance of local government, they often terminates or postpones strategic plans. Finally, this study provides policy recommendations for local government to build capacity, in order to overcome the challenges from environmental turbulence.起始頁-結束頁：109-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201209.01098篇名：咎責迴避的策略應用－以臺北國際花卉博覽會為例並列篇名：Application of the Blame Avoidance Strategies-A Case Study of the Taipei International Flora Expo作者：邱靖鈜(Jing-Hung Chiu)關鍵字：危機處理;問責;咎責迴避;高效組織;臺北國際花卉博覽會;crisis response;accountability;blame avoidance;high reliability organization;Taipei International Flora Expo期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：當代政府在面對內外在政經社文、氣候變遷迅速的環境之下，勢必要配備快速應變、處理危機及意外的能力，俾以及時有效地針對可能的風險及災難在事先預作防範，於事中將之妥善因應處置，並在事後予以復原重建，從中學習並汲取經驗。是以，職司者如何在危機發生之後，面臨外在問責壓力之際，展現出適當的處置，發揮出應有的治理效能，更是至為關鍵的課題。而且基於常態的心理，職司者在面對危機或災難時，自然會出現咎責迴避（blame-avoidance）的政治策略行為以有效控管損害，於是這項行為殊值得關注。本文嘗試從危機處理中的處置階段，建構出咎責迴避的架構，剖析產生的原因、屬性及可能形成的正負效應，並以臺北國際花卉博覽會為例，探討與解析職司者如何運用咎責迴避的策略，以回應外在利害關係人的質疑，並作出相對應的行為。基此，如何正確的建構與解讀它的發生與運作，進而提出正面與積極的策略，縮減對於公共治理與問責的負面影響，便是本文所關切的核心旨趣。最後，本文提出提升施政運作透明化、強化問責機制、倡導公開的政策論證及建構高效組織的政府，以降低信任赤字，冀能邁向良善治理的境界。英文摘要：Faced with rapidly changing political, economic, social, cultural, and climatic environments, the contemporary government organization should be equipped with the capacity to quickly respond to changes, crisis, and unexpected events, thus enabling it to prevent and respond, timely and effectively, to possible risks and disaster events, as well as to properly cope with and respond to events. Moreover, the government should be able to learn from circumstances and gather the necessary experience to attend to the necessary post-incident restoration work. Therefore, the key concern in this matter is the ability of the department heads to implement the right action in the event of a crisis situation or at the face of heavy responsibility and pressure and to manifest the necessary governance prowess. Moreover, the competent department head, under a regular frame of mind, may, at the face of a crisis or disaster situation, naturally manifest acts in line with the blame-avoidance political strategy, thereby effectively controlling loss and damages; such actions deserve careful attention. This paper attempts to establish a blame avoidance framework in the processing stage of the crisis response and to dissect the factors, attributes, and probable positive and negative results of the endeavor. Moreover, a study was conducted on the Taipei International Flora Expo to explore and analyze the means by which the department head may have employed blame avoidance strategies to cope with the suspicions of interested parties and to implement the right response action. The essential concern of this paper is to identify the proper framework and to interpret occurrences and operations, and thereafter to propose positive and aggressive measures that may reduce the negative impacts on public administration and accountability. Finally, this paper recommends the enhancement of transparency in government operations, the strengthening of the accountability system, and the promotion of open policy discussion and construction of a high reliability government organization, thereby reducing the confidence deficit of the government administration and paving the road towards good government administration.起始頁-結束頁：161-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201209.01619篇名：半總統制下總統的法案推動與立法影響力：馬英九總統執政時期的研究並列篇名：The President's Position Taking of Bills and His Influence on Legislation under Semi-presidentialism: The Experience of President Ma Ying-jeou作者：陳宏銘(Hong-Ming Chen)關鍵字：半總統制;馬英九;法案;一致政府;semi-presidentialism;Ma Ying-jeou;bill;unified government期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在台灣的半總統制之下，總統具有任命行政院院長的權力，是實權的國家元首。然而，迄今為止，學術界對於總統在法案推動上的角色和行為，缺乏實證性的研究，對於總統在立法和政策決定的實務行為所提供之訊息較為有限。有鑑於此，本文以馬英九總統在2008至2012年的經驗為例，探討我國總統的法案推動和立法上的影響力之表現。作者試圖將我國總統的立法推動行為放置在「總統優勢的半總統制」之憲政架構，以及國民黨的黨政關係型態下來理解。由於學術界對半總統制下總統立法推動行為，尚未發展出成熟的研究設計和測量方法，所以作者不揣淺陋，嘗試進行首次的探索。本文在方法上兼採量化和質化分析。作者在文章中首先就總統曾經表達過立場（偏好）的法案加以蒐集，系統性的歸納總統表達的場合或機制類型，並分析不同機制下的偏好強度，再析論其理論意涵。而後，進一步在此基礎上，觀察總統表達偏好法案的通過情形，特別是態度較強烈的法案，同時也分析總統對法案實質內容的影響情形。由於馬總統執政期間歷經不兼任及兼任國民黨主席的不同階段，因此「是否兼任黨主席」這項因素，也可供觀察國民黨黨政關係下總統法案推動的相關變化和影響。英文摘要：The president under Taiwan's semi-presidentialism is not a ceremonial head of state. On the contrary, he or she has considerable powers, including the power to appoint the premier. However, until now, there has been no paper exploring the president's role in the law-making process, allowing us to learn very little about the president's decision-making behavior. Based upon the experiences of President Ma Ying-jeou in 2008-2012 this paper tries to explore this question to improve the understanding of the role of the president beyond the words and design of the formal constitutional structure. The author first systematically explores the President's preferences of all important bills, and analyzes the mechanisms of the preference-making and the strength of his preference on each bill. Then this paper tries to observe the influence of the President's behavior on the law-making. Finally, the President may or may not be the chairman of the ruling party, so this factor is analyzed in relation to the central question as well.起始頁-結束頁：1-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201206.000110篇名：台灣與蒙古半總統制下政府型態的比較並列篇名：Government Types under Semi-presidentialism: The Case of Mongolia and Taiwan after the Third Wave of Democratization作者：許睆(Heng-Chen Hsu)關鍵字：半總統制;共治;Semi-presidentialism;cohabitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣與蒙古同屬第三波民主化下後列寧群集之新興半總統制國家，兩國同處亞洲、民主化時間相近、長期有相鄰強國的威脅，今日亦同時被美國自由之家評比為「完全自由」的國家。不過，兩國採用半總統制後有不同的政府型態與憲政運作：第一，蒙古在總統與國會不一致時歷經數次「共治」，而同樣的情況下台灣則出現「國會有多數的少數政府」與「國會無多數的少數政府」，本文認為原因包括憲法上總理產生是否需國會同意之規定、總統是否有將總理主動免職的規定、倒閣與解散權的配套設計、選舉花費、在野黨席次增減與選舉恩怨、國會議員選制、在野黨掌握國會多數席次比例的程度、民意支持等。第二，蒙古在2004年國會選舉結果兩大黨席次都接近半數時，組成了兩大黨聯合的「一致多數政府」，而台灣在國會選舉結果兩大黨席次近半數時卻沒有產生這樣的政府，本文認為原因則包括一國社會是否有重大社會分歧與危機、菁英是否有妥協的政治文化、政黨體系與光譜、憲法上關於獨立候選人參與組閣之規定、憲政慣例等。本文並提出總統與國會不一致之下，解釋四種政府型態出現的一般性成因。最後，本文從台灣與蒙古政府型態與憲政運作之比較提出兩國民主發展可互相參考之處。英文摘要：Taiwan and Mongolia are both belong to newly post-Leninist semi-presidential countries. Both countries also are located in Asia, been evaluated as ”free” by Freedom House, and have strong neighbors and democratized at almost the same period. However, these two countries have different government types. First, Mongolia has experienced ”cohabitation” under incongruence of president and parliament, but Taiwan has experienced ”minority government with parliament majority” and ”minority government without parliament majority.” Second, Mongolia has experienced coalition government as ”united majority government” by two major parties while Taiwan has not. This paper tries to explain these two questions by many institutional and non-institutional factors.起始頁-結束頁：71-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201206.007101篇名：差異政治的形成：1946年婦女保障名額制訂的歷史過程並列篇名：The Formation of the Politics of Difference: Reserved Seats for Women in the 1946 Constitution作者：黃長玲(Chang-Ling Huang)關鍵字：差異政治;保障名額;婦女參政;公民權;憲法;the Politics of Difference;Reserved Seats;Women's Political Participation;Citizenship;Constitution期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：52期出版年：2012中文摘要：選舉中的婦女保障名額是中華民國橫跨海峽兩岸的歷史中，最具有歷史延續性的體制之一。就體制設計的精神而言，婦女保障名額的設定，和當代差異政治的觀點非常相符。然而，差異政治的相關理論，是1960年代西方第二波婦女運動與新社會運動發展後的產物。相比之下，中華民國憲法本文中婦女保障名額的規定，就差異政治的實踐而言，有先驅性的意義。過去的歷史研究，往往將憲法本文中婦女保障名額的制定，視為婦女爭取參政權的一個連續過程，並未細究兩者之間的區別。然而，女性爭取成為平等的公民，和女性爭取成為政治代表的機會，無論在概念上或是實踐上，都並不完全相同。兩者之間，非但不見得同時出現，也不存在必然的歷史連續性。婦女保障名額的訴求為什麼會出現？在目前關於民國時期婦女參政的研究中，學界並沒有清楚或一致的看法，但是多半認為差異政治的思維是1930年代中期出現。本文重新檢視辛亥革命到制憲時期婦女參政運動的歷史，並且主張1920年初期五四運動的影響及孫中山聯俄容共的政策，使得政治代表應如何產生出現關鍵性的變化。1924年孫中山呼籲召開國民會議時，建議以9種社會團體產生代表，此一建議打破了辛亥革命以來以地域為基礎產生政治代表的慣例，也使得社會身份與政治代表之間產生聯結。這使得1924年到1925年間婦女爭取參與國民會議的運動，促成了婦女應成為一個社會類別的思維，也因此開啟差異政治的論述，最終形成對婦女保障名額的爭取。英文摘要：Reserving seats for women in elections was stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of China in 1946, and this constitutional practice has enjoyed historical continuities after the Republic of China government moved to Taiwan. As an institutional design, the reserved seats stipulation fits the contemporary discourse on the politics of difference. Theories of the politics of difference, however, are products of the new social movement of the 1960s in Western countries. The reserved seats stipulation in the Republic of China's constitution therefore, comparatively speaking, was a pioneering practice of the politics of difference. Previous studies on how the reserved seats became a constitutional stipulation tends to regard it as part of the struggle for women's suffrage. However, fighting for the rights to vote is different from fighting to have the opportunity to be political representatives.How did the idea of reserved seats emerge as a political appeal? The current literature does not have a clear answer for this question, but most studies show the emphasis of the difference between men and women emerged as a political discourse in the mid-1930s. This paper traces the history of the women's suffrage movement since 1911, when the Republic of China was established, and argues that the critical moment came in 1924. Influenced by the socialist thinking since the May Fourth movement and his policy on accommodating the Chinese Communist Party, in the mid-1920s Sun Yat-sen came to a different view on how political representatives should be elected. In 1924, when Sun called for a national conference and suggested that the conference should have delegates from nine different social groups, he made a major departure from the previous practice whereby representatives were mainly elected on a regional basis. It was the linkage between the social groups and political representation that prompted feminist activists to campaign on recognizing women as a social group. The campaign led to the emergence of the discourse on the politics of difference, and eventually to the constitutional stipulation on reserved seats for women in elections.起始頁-結束頁：89-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.52(89-116)2篇名：文官政治認知是否與行政中立行為衝突？2008年臺灣政府文官調查的初探性分析並列篇名：Are the Political Understandings of Bureaucrats Incompatible with the Weberian Model of Administrative Neutrality? A Study on the 2008 Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang)關鍵字：行政中立;民主治理;政治認知;政治與行政二分;Administrative Neutrality;Democratic Governance;Political Understandings;Politics-administration Dichotomy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：52期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究基於循證研究（evidence-based research）的立場，意圖從2008年台灣文官調查的資料，以價值衝突的角度，透過探索性因素分析、皮爾森積差相關分析與結構方程模型等方法，檢視台灣文官行政行為中是否存在政治認知與行政中立行為的價值競逐與衝突。根據分析結果，本研究的模式與研究假設均獲得資料的支持：全台灣的文官系統，特別是委任的文官，其偏差的政治認知對其行政中立的行為有直接且負面的影響效果。最後，本研究根據研究結果提出未來研究的建議。英文摘要：This paper attempts to address the research question: ”are political understandings of the bureaucrats incompatible with the Weberian model of administrative neutrality” by analyzing data from the 2008 Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey (TGBS) using exploratory factor analysis, Person's correlation and structural equation modeling (SEM) statistical techniques. Analysis on overall effect not only demonstrates that the theoretical model fits well but also indicates that the partisan political understandings of the bureaucrats leads to a significant negative effect on administrative neutrality. Finally, policy recommendations and a future research agenda are discussed in the conclusion.起始頁-結束頁：117-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.52(117-170)3篇名：政策網絡中的對偶互動及其解釋因素：以台中市都市發展政策的菁英網絡為例，1986－1922並列篇名：Explanatory Factors in Policy Networks: A Case Study of Elite Networks in the Taichung City Urban Development Policy Domain, 1986-1992作者：熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung);王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang)關鍵字：社會網絡;政策網絡;對偶關係;都市政治菁英;同質性;Social Networks;Policy Networks;Dyadic Relationship;Urban Political Elites;Homogeneity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：51期出版年：2012中文摘要：政策網絡（policy network）的研究焦點大多集中在行動者間的互動如何影響決策產出，鮮少探討是何種因素影響行動者間的互動關係。本研究以1986∼1992年間台中市都市發展政策為研究個案，以政策網絡中資源互賴（resource dependence）的觀點為研究架構，調查訪問78個關懷解嚴後台中都市發展重要事件的行動者，蒐集其對8個都市發展關鍵事件的看法與立場，及彼此間互賴關係所構築的都市事務討論網絡、信任關係網絡、技術諮商網絡、和資源交換網絡。在方法上，本研究先從四個社會網絡計算出行動者間社會關係的最短距離（path distance），再進一步將其轉換成行動者間6,006組對偶關係（dyadic relationship）的最短距離，透過相關，探討網絡成員的特質、部門、派系同異質性，以及運用邏輯斯迴歸嘗試探索何種因素會影響行動者間關係形成的機率。研究結果發現：第一，都市事務討論網絡對偶關係的最短距離和信任網絡對偶關係的最短距離相關度較其他者高。再者，解釋四種社會網絡對偶關係存在機率的模型時，國民黨、政府部門內部社會網絡聯繫頻繁；張派內部較常出現都市事務討論的關係聯繫，賴派內部較多技術諮商和資源交換的網絡聯繫。第三，派系間存在著頻且繁異質性跨界的弱聯繫互動關係，顯示台中市派系間的社會網絡並非封閉對立，在都市發展政策中跨派系建立網絡聯繫的機率較高，對偶互動的關係距離也較短。第四，都市菁英出現了教育程度低的菁英偏向與教育程度較高的菁英建立關係的現象。換言之，社會網絡中無論是自身或對方在都市發展政策網絡上具備影響力聲望，都會有較高的機率建立兩者間的互賴關係，且此兩者關係距離也偏短。由此可見，在政策網絡中與具備影響力的行動者建立互賴的對偶關係具有實質上的效益。英文摘要：This paper not only aims to analyze the characteristics of power distribution in urban politics after the lifting of martial law, but also seeks to explore the factors which can shape interactions between stakeholders. Based on the analytical perspective of resource dependency, we identified four networks (urban affairs discussion network, trust network, technical advice network, and resource exchange network), interviewing 78 important actors involved the development of Taichung City after the lifting of martial law on eight critical urban development events. By calculating dyadic path distance between actors and examining the different backgrounds of actors in the governmental sector, political parties, and local factions, the paper draws the following conclusions: (1) A short distance between actors in the urban affairs discussion network tends to be reflected in a similarly short distance in the trust network; (2) Actors from the KMT and the government have more frequent interactions than other actors. In addition, actors from the Chang faction have more interaction in the urban affairs discussion network, while those of Lai faction have more frequent interaction in the technical advice and resource exchange networks; (3) The different local factions in Taichung are not selfcontained and actors operate across factional divisions; (4) Actors with low levels of education are dependent on actors with high levels of education or a strong reputation.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.51(1-50)4篇名：鞏固支持或資源拔樁？解析中央對地方補助款分配的政治因素並列篇名：Consolidating Support or Targeting the Opposition? The Impact of Political Factors on the Allocation of Intergovernmental Grants作者：王志良(Chih-Liang Wang);詹富堯(Fu-Yao Chan);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：政黨政治;府際關係;分立政府;分配政治;中央補助款;Party Politics;Intergovernmental Relations;Divided Government;Distributive Politics;Central Governmental Grants期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：51期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來隨著全球化與民主化的發展，我國中央與地方政府之府際關係由過去的上下指導關係，逐漸朝向府際夥伴關係發展，地方政府被賦予的角色日益重要。然而直至今日，我國財政資源主要仍集中在中央政府，地方政府始終缺乏自主財源。由於中央集錢又集權，使得地方自治難以完全落實。倘若中央在分配財政資源時，出現帶有政治考量的策略運用，恐更加不利於地方發展。有鑑於此，探討中央對地方補助款分配之模式與影響因素便饒富意義。具體來說，中央執政黨可能會將較多的財政資源投入到中央與地方行政首長同一政黨，亦即「垂直式一致政府」（vertical unified government）的縣市，以藉此掣肘「垂直式分立政府」（vertical divided government）下不同政黨的縣市長之施政。此外，中央也可能會以總統選舉的勝敗做為優先考量，而在資源分配上策略性地鎖定特定的縣市，以求將有限的資源發揮最大效用。據此，本文以1999年至2009年期間，台灣省21縣市政府的補助款為研究對象，探討中央在補助款分配上的策略為何，以及若干政治因素（總統選舉前一年、縣市長選舉年、執政黨立委比例）可能的影響。經由實證分析所得到的初步結論，本研究發現，「垂直式一致政府」未必使得中央政府挹注過多的財政資源支持同黨執政之縣市；相較之下，中央在補助款的策略分配上，傾向以總統選舉之成敗做為首要考量，特別是將較多補助資源投入到反對團體與游移團體的縣市，以達到拉攏甚或拔樁的效果。當然，政黨政治與府際財政關係牽涉我國民主發展甚鉅，係值得研究者持續關注的議題。英文摘要：Globalization and democratization have changed the dynamics between central and local government in Taiwan from the previous hierarchical relationship to new forms of partnership, giving local governments a more prominent role. However, since most financial resources are concentrated in the central government, local governments still lack fiscal autonomy. With the central government controlling the money and power, it is hard to realize genuine local autonomy. If the central government takes political factors into account when allocating fiscal resources, this may be detrimental to local development. In this regard, it is meaningful to study what factors may affect the allocation of central governmental grants. Specifically, incumbent presidents may be inclined to favor magistrates and mayors of the same political party. On the contrary, in cases of vertical divided government where central and local governments are controlled by different political parties, local governments may lose their advantages in attaining central fiscal grants. Moreover, the central government may also have other political considerations when deciding on the allocation of grants such as winning more votes in presidential elections. By analyzing the allocation of intergovernmental grants among 21 counties and cities between 1999 and 2009, this study explores the effects of intergovernmental relations and political factors, such as election year (presidential and local) and the number of seats held by the ruling party in the Legislative Yuan, on the allocation of grants. The results reveal that the central government does not in fact over-reward local governments held by the same party. In addition, neither election years nor seat-share in the Legislative Yuan make a significant difference to grant distribution. In contrast, winning presidential elections is a top priority for the central government. Therefore fiscal resources tend to flow to local governments in areas in which the incumbent president lost or encountered a tight race in the preceding presidential election. This suggests that the central government tends to target opposition-held areas and areas where there is strong competition between the two parties with the hope of ”stealing” opposition support. Finally, this study argues that fiscal intergovernmental relations are an important factor in Taiwan's democratic development and deserve further attention from researchers.起始頁-結束頁：51-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.51(51-90)5篇名：日本地方政府促進非營利組織協力之理想與現實並列篇名：The Theory and Practice of Collaboration between Local Governments and Nonprofit Organizations in Japan作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：地方政府;非營利組織;協力;法制化;中介支援組織;Iocal Government;Non-profit Organizations;Partnership;Japan;Intermediary Organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：51期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文旨在分析日本地方政府促進非營利組織協力之理論基礎與具體作法，探討當治理觀點運用在地方政府層次時所帶來之轉變與可能產生之影響，並透過資料的蒐集分析來瞭解其施行的成果與困境，期望藉此提供我國地方政府今後在建構非營利組織發展環境時的參考與借鏡。研究結果發現，日本地方政府促進非營利組織的具體作法可分為協力事業法制化、協力參與環境的整備以及誘因制度的創設三大項。整體而言，這些促進方式雖涵蓋各種面向，但部分作法在實施一段時間後卻發現部分成果不如預期，並呈現出理想型協力和現實型協力之矛盾、中介支援組織的經營問題，以及融資制度、基金制度和事業提案制度等實施困境。不過，日本經驗卻也在「新公共」觀念的認知與建立、協力的制度環境之整備、協力的參與環境之建置，以及多元靈活的協力誘因制度等方面帶給我國新的啟示與參考。英文摘要：The main objectives of this study are to analyze basic theories and practices behind the promotion of partnerships with non-profit organizations (NPO) by local governments in Japan, examine how governance practices are adapted to the local government level, and gain a better understanding of the achievements and challenges of NPO partnership promotion. It is hoped that this study will provide a useful reference for the future collaboration between NPOs and local governments in Taiwan.This study identifies three methods by which collaboration between local governments and NPOs are promoted in Japan: the enactment of a legal framework for collaboration, establishing a suitable environment for collaboration, and the building of incentive systems. However, although efforts to promote collaboration have been extensive, many of its results have not met expectations, revealing a range of problems including discrepancy between the ideas behind and actual practice of collaboration between local governments and NPOs, as well as difficulties associated with intermediary organizations, financing, and the business proposal system. However, Japan’s experience with the idea of ”new public administration”, the development of an environment which promotes collaboration, and the use of diverse incentive systems offer an important reference for Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：91-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.51(91-128)6篇名：內在自由與外在權力的辯證：黑格爾論康德的權利國家觀並列篇名：The Dialectic between Inner Freedom and External Rights: Hegel's Understanding of Kant's Theory of Rechtsstaat作者：魏楚陽(Chu-Yang Wei)關鍵字：黑格爾;康德;自由;權利;國家;G.W.F. Hegel;Lmmanuel Kant;Freedom;Rights;State期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：51期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文透過黑格爾（G. W. F. Hegel, 1770-1831）對康德（Immanuel Kant, 1724-1804）權利國家（Rechtsstaat）理論的批判，探討個人的內在自由與現代國家所保障的外在權利之間的相互關係。康德透過內在道德自由的觀點，強調個人應該將其任意性的自然本性加以壓抑，以獲得真正的內在自由。但是在其國家理論中，他則放棄了應然性的道德要求，而將國家視為眾人之間相互協調以和平共處的政治機制。黑格爾指出此乃基於康德政治思想中內在道德性與外在合法性之間的對立。造成此一對立的根源，不在於康德有意讓實現內在自由的道德觀點退出政治的領域，而在於康德認為內在的理性國度與外在的經驗國度之間，存在著無法超越的鴻溝。本文探討黑格爾如何在哲學上將康德哲學中理性國度與經驗國度之間的對立加以化解，並論述黑格爾將內在道德性與外在合法性在國家制度中加以融合的嘗試，其意義不在於推翻康德將保障個人自由作為現代國家目的的觀點，而在於為康德的權利國家理論，尋找更深入的根基。英文摘要：In this research paper, the author discusses the relationship between inner freedom and external rights in the modern state using Hegel's critic on Kant's concept of Rechtsstaat. With the concept of moral freedom, Kant emphasizes that the arbitrary freedom of individual should be oppressed in order to gain real inner freedom. But in his political theory, he gives up the quest for inner moral freedom and treats the state as a political institution that secures peaceful coexistence between individuals. Hegel indicates that the different purposes of Kant's moral and political theory derive from the antinomy between inner morality and external legitimacy in his political thinking. According to Hegel, the reason for the antinomy is not Kant's intentional separation of the political from the moral, but the unsolvable contradiction between respublica noumenon and respublica phaenomenon in Kant's philosophy. The author discusses how Hegel philosophically overcomes the antinomy in Kant's philosophy and his consequent reconstruction of modern state theory. The author argues that Hegel's criticism is not a refutation of Kant's concept of Rechtsstaat, but rather an attempt to put it on a surer footing.起始頁-結束頁：129-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.51(129-159)7篇名：日本眾議院選舉政黨重複提名策略與效應：選區層次之分析並列篇名：Impact Evaluation of Party Dual Candidacy Strategies in Japanese House Elections-A District-Level Data Analysis作者：郭銘峰(Ming-Feng Kuo);黃紀(Chi Huang);王鼎銘(Ding-Ming Wang)關鍵字：日本眾議員選舉;小選區比例代表並立制;重複提名制度;政黨提名策略;獨立效果;運動效果;效應模型;Japanese House Election;Mixed-member Majoritarian Electoral Systems (MMM);Dual Candidacy;Party Nomination Strategy;Independent Effects;Contamination Effects;Treatment-effects Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：51期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來制度至關重要的論點，一直是學界關注各種政治行為形塑的重要變項，許多選舉經驗研究指出，包括政黨提名候選人策略與政黨間合作協調、國會議員立法行為與政策主張、候選人選區經營與競選活動、選民投票決策、甚或是政黨體系的變動等，均深受不同選制結構的影響。準此，探索政治場域上相關行為者的行為或動機時，不同選制架構內涵的影響效果，深值剖析。本文主軸鎖定於日本自1994年推行四大政改法案後，改採小選舉區比例代表並立制架構下之候選人重複提名制度，對於日本政壇主要政黨（包括自民黨、民主黨、社民黨）提名參選策略與其實質成效的影響。有別既有文獻分析兩票連動效果經常未顧及變項間內因性與非隨機選組機制因素，導致參數值估算偏誤的因果推論問題，本文爰引James J.Heckman建構之效應模型（treatment-effects model）進行準確校估。實證結果顯示：日本各主要政黨在歷屆眾議員選舉對單一選區候選人採重複提名參選的策略，其對政黨比例代表得票率的效應會因黨、因年而異；當中包括自民黨在2009年選舉、民主黨在2003年選舉，社民黨在2000年、2005年、2009年選舉，均以重複提名策略有效提升該黨的政黨比例代表得票率。此一分析結果，不僅適度佐證既有文獻對於日本政黨重複提名參選成效的預期，也吻合混合選制學理兩票連動效果的論點。英文摘要：In recent years, scholars have paid a great deal of attention to the influence of institutions on political behavior. The claim that ”institutions matter” in politics is widely accepted. Empirical studies show that electoral systems have a great impact on parties, candidates, and voters with respect to nomination, coordination strategies, legislative behavior, voting behavior, electoral campaigns, and the development of party systems. Accordingly, when we try to understand the behavior and motivations of political actors, it is necessary to examine institutional rules.After the electoral reforms of 1994, the single nontransferable vote (SNTV) was replaced with a mixed-member majoritarian (MMM) system. This paper seeks to evaluate the impact of this new electoral system based on district-level data. We are especially interested in the interaction effects (or the so-called ”contamination effects”) on the two-vote structure resulting from dual candidacy strategies adopted by political parties. To avoid causal biased estimation and capture the contamination effect more precisely, we apply Heckman's treatment-effects model to remove the endogeneity and self-selection problems. The result not only shows the dual candidacy strategies influence the interaction between two ballots, it also indicates the effect varies between different parties and different periods of time. More specifically, the dual candidacy strategy was especially beneficial to the Liberal Democratic Party's (LDP) PR vote in 2009, the Democratic Party of Japan's PR vote in 2003, and the Social Democratic Party's (SDP) PR vote in 2000, 2005, and 2009. In conclusion, this study supports the existing literature on dual candidacy and contamination effects in mixed-member electoral systems.起始頁-結束頁：161-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.51(161-215)01篇名：美國選舉經費規範的憲政爭議：防腐、言論自由與政治平等並列篇名：American Constitutional Disputes on Campaign Finance Regulation: Anti-Corruption, Freedom of Speech and Political Equality作者：張福建(Fu-Kien Chang)關鍵字：美國競選經費規範;防腐;言論自由;政治平等;American campaign finance regulation;anti-corruption, freedom of speech;political equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：選舉是當代民主的必經之途，其過程的廉正與公平，乃是選舉之所以具有正當性的重要因素。美國是民主的先驅，向來以輸出民主自豪，但長久以來選舉弊案頻傳，以及選戰經費之高屢創新猷，都是必須正視的問題。本文嘗試從政治思想的視角，首先回顧與檢視美國選舉相關規範的歷史，並具體討論最高法院在Buckley v. Valeo一案的審理及其引發的種種爭議。之後，文中將以羅爾斯及德沃金的相關評述，說明以平等作為規範選舉經費的考量具有一定的正當性，並指出言論與結社自由雖然至關重大，淨化選風、並確保一個公平的政治平台，卻也為健全民主所必須。英文摘要：Popular election is essential for democracy and, more often than not, is hastily treated as the equivalent of democracy. The presence of elections, nonetheless, is far from sufficient for a democratic regime, which, among other things, also requires the integrity and fairness of the process of election. The United States of America was one of the forerunners of democracy, and claims to have exported democracy. Her electoral process, however, has been filled with scandals, and the cost of campaigns has broken previous records in the recent national elections with, it seems safe to say, nowhere to stop. As has been argued, campaign finance reform is necessary to rejuvenate American democracy.Explicating the issue of campaign finance in terms of political thought, in the following discussion, I intend to, first, review briefly the history of American election campaign regulation and, in particular, examine the debates involved and implicated in the case of Buckley v. Valeo. Then, drawing on the ideas of both John Rawls and Ronald Dworkin, I argue that it is legitimate and tenable to regulate campaign finance by appealing to the principle of equality. In conclusion, while acknowledging the significance of freedom of speech and of association, I point out that the virtues of integrity and fairness in the political arena are also indispensable for a healthy and enduring democracy.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.54.012篇名：覆議制度保障了誰？從臺灣地方縣市覆議權之規範及行使經驗探討（1994-2010）並列篇名：Veto Power System for Whom? On the Regulations and Practices of Veto Power in Taiwan's Local Counties and Cities (1994-2010)作者：廖達琪(Da-Chi Liao);羅日春(Ri-Chun Luo)關鍵字：縣市覆議權;地方制度法;臺灣;地方議會;覆議制度行政;city & county veto power;Local Government Act;Taiwan;local legislative council;veto power institution期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文同時針對覆議權的法制規範面及經驗實務面，希冀探討覆議權在臺灣地方政府自1994以降，依據省縣自治法及直轄市自治法等二法，以及1999年整合改訂的地方制度法來行使，究竟能否達成其理論上之目的—保障行政權，及立法過程的周延性。綜合前面的分析，本文發現：第一，地制法對覆議權的相關規範確實較二法能保障行政權，但這樣的保障較二元民主典範美國總統覆議權的效力，相對仍不足；其次，地制法的善意規範，不見得對行政行使覆議權有利，而規範不清之處，又造成行使的疑義，亦未見得嘉惠於決策內容之周延。第三，覆議權的行使情境還必須剔除派系及黑金特別活躍的地方，才較能保障少數政府的行政權。所以如要能讓覆議制度較徹底的保障行政權，法規上對覆議權規範不夠明確，形成法律灰色地帶；或本為保障及提升行政權的，但實際上行政權並未得到應有益處等問題，應做適當的修正及調整。本文針對這些，提出4項未來地制法或可參考修訂之處。英文摘要：This article studies the veto power which resides in Taiwan's local governments both from the legal/ institutional and empirical perspectives. Three related Acts that have regulated local veto power since 1994 are examined in this study. They are: the Self-Governance Act for Provinces and Counties (SGAPC, 1994), the Self-Governance Act for Special Municipalities (SGASM, 1994), and the Local Government Act (LGA, 1999) that has integrated the two SGAs and become the currently enacted law. The article explores whether the regulations regarding veto power drawn from the two SGAs, as well as the LGA, and their consecutive implementation in practice, have been able to achieve the theoretical goals designated in veto power, i.e., to protect administrative power, on the one hand, and to improve the quality of legislation, on the other. After analyzing these three Acts and comparatively examining their realization between 1994 to 1999 and 2000 to 2010, the article uncovers the followings: First, although the veto power institution resided in LGA has been doing a better job than that in the two SGAs in terms of protecting administrative power, its practical function has not been as effective as that of the veto power institution designated by the American presidential system, which is the so-called model of dual democracy. Second, some regulations in the LGA that seemingly are intended to protect the administration have not really been beneficial to it in practice. Furthermore, some of them may be obscure in nature, and have, in fact, resulted in some confusion and debate when enacted. Neither have these kinds of rules been able to improve the quality of legislation. Third, the effective use of the veto power by the local administration has been limited to the countries & cities that are not subject to active factions or black money activities. In sum, if the veto power, as designated, aims to protect the administration, some ambiguities residing in the current LGA's regulations should be further clarified. Some regulations that are well intended but not substantially beneficial to the administrative power in practice may also need to be adjusted. This artlcle then provides four suggestions for the consideration of future LGA revisions.起始頁-結束頁：27-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.54.023篇名：施擬夏化（Sinicization）的文化機制：四位亞裔離散學者對中國的遭遇與選擇並列篇名：Cultural Sinicization: Encountering and Choice of Four Asian Diasporic Scholars on China作者：石之瑜(Chih-Yu Shih);吳昀展(Yun-Chan Wu)關鍵字：施擬夏化;中國崛起;入江昭;金淳基;譚中;黃朝翰;sinicization;rise of China;Samuel Kim;Akira Iriye;Tan Chung;John Wong期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文試透過這四位學者的中國論述歸納施擬夏化的文化機制，包括黃朝翰的科學觀、入江昭的中間主義、金淳基的綜合模式與譚中的地緣文明批判，來歸納這個盎格魯中華場域的兩個主要面向。簡言之，他們似乎都在設法答覆因為身為亞裔的英語作家而遭遇的兩個問題：第一，該如何於盎格魯中華這個場域中定位自己？亦即，中國是否應該屬於一個與身為研究者的自己相同的世界秩序？第二，實際上應該要如何評估中國？亦即，中國是否應該以歐美文明的價值為依歸？這兩個問題分別影射了與研究者本身身分直接相關的問題，是故，自己在論述上如何處理中國，涉及到他們在所屬社群中的自我定位。表面來看，金淳基與入江昭似乎因為在美國學界有深厚的關係，而傾向於將中國置於西方普遍性的價值之下，而黃朝翰與金淳基則同因自己的母國處在中國的邊陲，而傾向接受中國與自己處於同一種政治秩序中。譚中則因為未與美國學術圈來往而又出身於中國基層，對中國有一種近乎自然而然的與眾不同感。這四位遭遇不同文明脈絡的學者，仍不可避免地要對文化資源進行選擇性的挪用，賦予筆下的中國以某種意義。透過進入盎格魯中華的論述空間，他們所處的隱而不顯的位置，促成他們在學術論述與學者生涯中，選擇自己的認同策略，以便讓中國能適應於他們所處的世界，也讓他們能適應於關於中國現象的演化，這個相互構成的雙向過程，厥為「施擬夏化」。英文摘要：To understand the cultural mechanism of cultural Sinicization, discursive analysis of this article shows that the selected four academics consciously manage their liminal positions through scholarship: Kim's synthetic analysis, Iriye's centrist mediation, Tan's geocivilizational critique and Wong's scientific Chineseness. In their work on China, there appear at least two common puzzles that call for answers. How do they place themselves in the Sinic world: does China belong to an identical or a different ontological order? And how do they want China to be evaluated: should China conform to a Western standard expressed in values that are claimed to be universal? Kim's and Iriye's professional affiliations in the United States seem to push for a universalist prescription for China's place in the world; the peripheral relationship between Kim's and Wong's home on the one hand and China on the other hand pushes instead for a shared ontological identity. By contrast, freed from both American affiliation and a sense of belonging to the periphery leaves Tan with a different and more innocent sense of China. Given the constraining civilizational positions in which they found themselves and the empowering cultural resources at their disposal, all four scholars have to decide, discursively, professionally as well as personally, how to formulate their own identity strategy and style.起始頁-結束頁：57-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.54.034篇名：中新自由貿易協定的貿易安全連結並列篇名：Trade-Security Nexus in China-Singapore FTA作者：左正東(Chen-Dong Tso)關鍵字：新加坡;中國;中新自由貿易協定;貿易;安全;Singapore;China;China-Singapore Free-Trade Agreement (CSFTA);trade;security期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：54期出版年：2012中文摘要：對於雙邊自由貿易協定的洽簽，除了眾所周知的貿易需要之外，晚近的研究開始注意到其安全和外交動機。雖然，自由貿易協定所創造的貿易效果，經濟學者早有研究，但對其所帶來締約國之間安全關係的改變，既有的研究仍然相當有限。為此，本文以中新自由貿易協定為對象，從貿易和安全兩方面，檢視此一協定從談判到生效，新中兩國之貿易與安全關係發生如何的變化，自由貿易協定又在此一變化過程扮演如何之角色。本文的研究發現，中新自由貿易協定之談判開啟，是新國經濟動機和中國安全動機相互融合的結果。然而，就其所產生之影響，促進兩國雙向投資和外商對新國投資，以及由此帶來提振新國對中國出口的效果，相當顯著。至於新中兩國在自由貿易協定談判其間開展的軍事交流，雖然其對拉近兩國安全距離的效果有限，但其象徵意義非同小可。本文的個案研究提出和過去文獻不同的觀點，即認為安全利益之追求，比安全損害之避免，更能解釋自由貿易協定之形成。英文摘要：On bilateral free trade agreements, recent research starts to pay attention to security and diplomatic motivations, in addition to trade interest that conventional wisdom sees as the key. While the trade effect of free trade agreements is well studied by economists, the security effect is obviously understudied. In order to narrow the gap, this article chooses China-Singapore FTA (Free-Trade Agreement) as a case study. In doing so, it focuses on two aspects - trade and security, and investigates how China-Singapore relations evolved during the course of FTA negotiation and the role of FTA in the bilateral relations. Through this research, it is found that the start of the negotiation was a product of convergence between Singapore's economic motivation and China's security motivation. The agreement itself brings about visible impact on mutual investment and stimulates Singapore's export toward China. However, the defense cooperation that commenced during the negotiation carries symbolic importance while generating limited substance. The finding of this article distinguishes itself from past research by pointing out that pursuing security interest, rather than curbing security diseconomy, provides a better explanation for the formation of the China-Singapore FTA.起始頁-結束頁：81-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.54.045篇名：中國大陸「小產權房」的政治經濟學─基於產權理論的分析並列篇名：The Political Economy of "Minor Property Right" Houses in Rural China: An Analysis of the Property Rights Model作者：曹海濤(Hai-Tao Tsao)關鍵字：小產權房;地方政府;產權模型;集體土地產權;農村集體組織;collective ownership;local governments;minor property right houses;property rights model;rural collective organization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以產權理論研究中國大陸的「小產權房」議題，並集中討論「小產權房」的供給者─村集體組織（即村民委員會）的關鍵角色。透過一個簡單的產權模型，我們將中國大陸轉型過程中的兩個重要的制度安排─土地產權機制和「中央－地方」財政關係，與「小產權房」的產生加以整合。本文的分析指出，「小產權房」興起的一個重要因素源於農村土地的集體所有制。政府對集體土地的控制（用途管制和強制徵收），剝奪了農民和農村集體組織參與市場交易的權利。產權的管制類似於價格控制，給集體產權的所有者造成潛在的巨額損失。這一損失的很大部分，以土地財政收入的方式被由地方政府代表的國家所攫取。然而，交易成本的存在，使國家不可能控制集體產權的所有屬性。作為理性的行為者，農村集體組織和農民能夠採取行動操縱集體土地產權的其他屬性，將損失最小化。「小產權房」正反映了中國大陸農民和農村集體組織試圖擺脫現存制度安排束縛的理性選擇。英文摘要：The purpose of this article is to analyze ”minor property right” houses in rural China. As the suppliers of ”minor property right” houses, the key role of rural collective organization- village committees is discussed in the article. Land property right system and central-local fiscal relations have important effects on the emergence of ”minor property right” houses in transitional China. With respect to a simple property rights model, the article integrates the two factors in order to explain the behavior of rural collective organization. Farmlands are collectively owned in rural China. The non-agricultural use and conveyance of farmlands are strictly prohibited by the state. The coercive policies of farmland expropriate rights and opportunities of peasants to participate in real estate market. The regulation of farmland property rights is equivalent to price control and would bring about rent dissipation and benefit loss to Chinese farmers. The existence of transaction costs prevents the state from controlling overall attributes of collective ownership of farmland. Therefore, collective organization, peasants, and rational individuals are all able to manipulate some attributes of collective land to minimize loss of property rights control. ”Minor property right” houses are thus the consequence of rational choice made by Chinese farmers to mitigate institutional constraints.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.53.016篇名：美中貿易博弈：以智慧財產權保護為例並列篇名：U.S.-China Trade Bargaining under the WTO Regime: A Case Study of Intellectual Property Rights作者：高佩珊(Pei-Shan Kao)關鍵字：爭端解決機制（Dispute Settlement Body, DSB）;相互依賴;美中關係;國際建制;貿易爭端;Dispute Settlement Body (DSB);interdependence;international regime;trade disputes;U.S.-China relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著全球貿易的日趨密切與活絡，國家之間因此產生許多貿易歧見與摩擦；換言之，全球貿易不單只給國家帶來益處，它同時帶來了許多問題，使得國家必須正視以避免貿易大戰（tradewar）的發生。在美國與中國的關係裡，貿易議題之敏感程度與重要性恐怕不低於人權議題；儘管美中兩國一直保持著高度相互依賴的經貿關係，有助於雙方關係之維持熱絡。舉例而言，美國目前是中國第一大貿易夥伴和第一大出口國家；2010年，兩國雙邊貿易額為4,568 億美元；然而雙方問題產生於在過去10年裡（2001 年到2010 年），美國對中國的貿易赤字亦呈現逐年增高的趨勢，從830億美元飆升至2,731億美元。此貿易赤字成為美國與全球各國貿易往來最大之赤字，因此成為美中雙方關係往來裡最大之衝突點。換言之，儘管藉由貿易的相互往來能為國家帶來許多利益，並帶給消費者便利舒適的生活，然而貿易有時亦會為國家帶來問題並產生衝突，進而導致貿易戰爭的發生。在此情況下，若要避免貿易戰爭的發生並順利解決貿易衝突，就端視國家之間如何進行協商與談判。自中國於2001年加入世貿組織以來，美中之間雖產生多次紛歧，然並未因此產生貿易大戰。因此，本文旨在檢視世界貿易組織（World Trade Organization, WTO）對於國家之間貿易衝突解決之有效性，並藉由分析美中雙方於WTO機制下貿易爭端協商過程，進而瞭解國際建制對於國家談判之影響。由於智慧財產權爭議為美中貿易最為重要及影響深遠之議題，因此本文將以美國向世貿組織控告中國智慧財產權保護案不利一事做為個案研究（案號DS362）。為確保貿易數據與資料之正確性，本文將大量蒐集並比較美國與中國雙方提供之資料與數據，以求資料來源之正確性。英文摘要：Under globalisation, no country can be isolated from the world, there are more and more trade contacts among states; that is to say, sates' trade and economic relations have been highly interdependent. However, in U.S.-China relations, trade, has been considered as one of the most sensitive issue areas in addition to human rights. For instance, the United States now is China's first trading partner and largest export destination; in 2010, the bilateral trade was $456.8 billion. However, in the past ten years, namely from 2001 to 2010, the US trade deficit with China was sharply increased annually as well, except for 2009 due to the global financial crisis. The deficit grew from $83 billion in 2001 to $273.1 billion in 2010. The US trade deficit with China is the largest in the world; this certainly has brought about many trade disputes between the two. That is, although trade can generate benefits and interests to states, and a comfortable and convenient life to consumers, it can also bring many disputes to states; this sometimes will develop into an open trade war if states do not resolve problems successfully. This indicates that the resolution of disputes greatly relies on states' bargaining. Since China joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, although there have been many disputes between the two, fortunately, trade war has not happened yet. Therefore this article aims to examine the effectiveness of the regime on states' bargaining. Since the issue of the protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) has been the most sensitive and complicated problem in U.S.-China trade relations, this article chooses their bargaining on IPR, the case number DS 362 to be the case study. By means of examining and investigating the process of their bargaining, one can clearly appreciate not just the function but also the effectiveness of the WTO regime on states' negotiation. To ensure the correctness of the related figures and statistics, the article will collect and compare data and materials from both the United States and China.起始頁-結束頁：29-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.53.027篇名：自民黨為何於2009年失去政權之探討並列篇名：The Further Study on Why Had Japan's LDP Lost Political Power in 2009作者：吳明上(Ming-Shan Wu)關鍵字：出口調查;自民黨政權;投票行為;政權輪替;眾議院選舉;Diet Election;exit poll;LDP regime;transfer of political power;voting behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主要是補充論述自民黨為何在2009年的眾議院選舉中再度失去政權。2009年8月的眾議院選舉結果，自民黨大敗，民主黨取代自民黨執政，「自民黨為何再度失去政權？」成為日本政治過程研究的焦點。既有的研究主要集中在二個面向：一為論述2009年政權輪替的意義；二為利用「出口調查」的統計資料，分析選民的投票行為，特別針對中間選民與自民黨支持者的投票行為，造成政權輪替的現象提出具有說服力的論述。然而，既有的研究對於自民黨「為何」失去中間選民與自民黨支持者支持的原因，並未提出充分的說明；再者，本文研究發現，自公兩黨選舉合作的鬆動也是造成自民黨再度失去政權的重要因素。英文摘要：The main purpose of this article is to further discuss why Japan's LDP had lost political power once again. The current analysis on LDP's failure of the 2009 Election is centered on two perspectives: one is to look for implications of party transition in t he government due to the result of the 2009 Election; the other is to employ data of exit poll focus on electorate voting behavior, in order to show that party transition in the government is a result of decreased vote from median voters and LDP supporters. However, the existing studies lack explanation to the main reasons of why the LDP was unable to maintain continual endorsement from median voters and LDP supporters. Further, this article argues that the collapse of LDP-Komeito electoral alliance is one other critical cause for the LDP to lose political power once again.起始頁-結束頁：47-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.53.038篇名：呂惠卿《道德真經傳》與《莊子義》中的思想三論並列篇名：Three Theses on the Philosophy of Ruling in Lu Hui Qing's "Commentary of Dao Der Zhen Jing" and "Significance of Zhuang Zi"作者：林俊宏(Chun-Hung Lin)關鍵字：有與無;國家建構;復性;無為;經與變;being and non-being;non-action;permanence versus changes;revivification of nature;state formation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：53期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文認為，藉由注經活動中的論述，發展出支持改革的正當性論理基礎，是呂惠卿政治思想的基調。作為熙寧變法重要的成員之一，呂惠卿透過注經的活動，將他所屬政治集團的政治理念，以注文的形式進行論述，在多方交融對話的形式中，將北宋新學關於「變」的政治理解明確地揭示。他透過注經，討論了「經」與「變」的關係，呈現在「道物」、「經變」與「治理」等三個面向，三者又有彼此的關聯性。這種「變不易常」或是「變不離經」的態度，其實是混雜著復古與變易的雙重學思風格，包括在方法與思維的層次上都是如此，這種仿古、擬古的復古思維，卻又處處展現向政治現實靠近的思考，表現出一種「依經為常」與「權宜為變」的思維。進而，這批以知識份子為核心的新興官僚，也借由這種「以經注我」的學術風格，呈現其政治主張、強化自身的影響力與政治權力，形成一種與皇權共享權力、且迥異隋唐帝國的國家形態。英文摘要：This article deals with the internal context of philosophy of two books- ”Commentary of Dao Der Zhen Jingand” and ”Significance of Zhuang Zi” written by Lu Hui Qing (呂惠卿). The purpose of the discourse in these commentaries is to gain the legitimacy of reform by initiating or producing a metaphysical system. As an important member of the XI-Ning reform (also as one member of Xinxue in North Sung Dynasty), Lu Hui Qing, through the activity of making commentaries of the Taoist texts, declared the core political philosophy of change of the political group to which he belongs. Through the commentaries, he discussed the dialectical relationship between ”classics” and ”change.” And he made further discussions into the three domains what dwelled in the complex relations seen in ”The Way and the mass,” ”Change versus Permanence” and ”the methodology of governance.”He emphasized that changes can be normal and have the legitimacy just under the qualification by following the great rule (Tao or permanence). There won't be any variations that should alter the ultimate. And this is valid not only in the sphere of daily living, but also valid in the sphere of governing. In turn, these intellectuals as the core of the emerging bureaucratic, through this ”scriptures postil the commentators” style, revealed their political ideas, strengthened their influence and shared power with the emperor. And all of these had formed a different type of state comparing with that of Sui-Tang Empire.起始頁-結束頁：63-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2012.53.0401篇名：以科學讀寫模式提升國小學童論證能力之研究並列篇名：A Study of Adopting the Scientific Reading and Writing Model to Promote Elementary Pupils' Argumentation Ability作者：李如偉(Ju-Wei Lee);蘇明洲(Ming-Chou Su);黃湃翔(Pai-Hsiang Huang);呂仲誠(Chung-Cheng Liu);高慧蓮(Huey-Lien Kao)關鍵字：科學讀寫;海洋教育;論證能力;Scientific Reading and Writing;Marine Education;Argumentation Ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要以科學讀寫模式進行海洋資源議題教學，藉以探討學生論證能力的改變情形以及教師所使用的教學策略和歷程改變。研究參與者為30位五年級學生，以「海洋資源」為教學主題，採用科學讀寫為主要教學模式並融入促進學童論證之教學策略，其中利用圖片、影片、互動式短片、辯論會片段及社會性科學議題等多元的素材，編寫適合的教材與閱讀文本，並設計論證式科學寫作單，其中以開頭引語、短文填空、關鍵詞的提示等方式做為題目的引導，以期達提升學童論證能力之教學目標。研究過程中進行論證式科學寫作單之撰寫，並將學童之論證式科學寫作單內容及得分進行質化和量化的分析和比較。研究發現教學後學生理由之陳述具因果關係性，亦能歸納文本中相關的訊息，使得理由更趨完整與正確；學生能以個人經驗為基礎，並考量經濟及生態等觀點，做為主張的基礎，增加論點數目；反駁的次數增加且能提出理由；能主張完整的陳述，且提出反駁觀點，豐富了論證的組成。經由統計結果顯示，教學初期與教學後期的論證總分有顯著差異，表示論證能力有顯著的提升；學生在理由的正確性、論點數目的多寡、反駁出現的次數、論證組成的多寡等四個論證面向的得分皆有顯著差異，且都具有高效果量。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was mainly to explore the change of students' argumentation ability situation by integrating the Scientific Reading and Writing (SRW) model into marine resource teaching. In addition, the study also explored teaching strategies that the teachers used and recorded changes of process. The participants were 32 fifth graders. The researchers adopted the SRW as mainly teaching model and integrated the teaching strategy of promoting students' argumentation ability. The researchers made use of diverse materials, such as pictures, films, interactive short films, debate fragments, and socio-scientific issues, to compile appropriate teaching materials and reading texts in order to foster the students' argumentation ability. The researchers developed Scientific Argumentation Writing Sheets (SAWS) with the questions guided by the beginning quotation, fill-in-the-blank and keyword prompt. The students were asked to write them down during the teaching process. The contents and scores of the students' SAWS were analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively respectively. After the teaching, major findings in the study were as follows: (1) The students' warrant statements included the causal relationship. They could also summarize related message in the text to make their warrants more complete and correct; (2) Students could base on their personal experiences, and consider the economic and ecological standpoints as the basis of the claims to increase the amounts of argument; (3) The frequency of students' rebuttal increased and they could put forward their warrants; (4) Students could make complete statements for their claims, propose rebuttal viewpoints, and therefore the components of argumentation were more abundant. Moreover, the statistics results showed that there were four significant large effects on students' argumentation ability, including the accuracy of warrant, the amounts of argument, the frequency of rebuttal, and the amounts of argumentation components.起始頁-結束頁：483-514資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2006.012篇名：國小學童科學探究學習策略量表的編製與發展並列篇名：The Design and Development of a Scale for Assessing Learning Strategy during Scientific Inquiry for Elementary Students作者：羅淑瓊(Su-Chiung Luo);林曉雯(Sheau-Wen Lin)關鍵字：科學探究;國小學童;量表編製與發展;學習策略;Scientific Inquiry;Elementary Students;Design and Development of Scale;Learning Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在編製一份評測工具，以瞭解國小學童於科學探究學習歷程中所使用的學習策略。以高雄市國小高年級學生為母群，採用分層叢集抽樣，獲得有效母群1,107人。研究者邀請科教專家及資深國小自然科教師進行量表審查，依據審查結果進行修訂並確認其內容效度；並經由探索性因素分析及驗證性因素分析檢核該量表之建構效度。結果顯示該量表包括學生在科學探究歷程（察覺與確認問題、蒐集資料、設計及探索、形成與傳達解釋）中的複製學習、機械式學習、連結與監控，以及時間與資源掌控四大面向，共23題，具有穩定結構。在信度考驗方面，總量表之內部一致性Cronbach's α係數值為 .90，分量表內部一致性Cronbach's α係數值介於 .75 ~ .84之間，顯示本量表之內部一致性信度良好。研究結果並描述國小高年級學生在科學探究歷程中使用學習策略的情形及比較分析。最後提出國小教師進行學習策略教學及未來研究之建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a scale which subjected to assess fifth- and sixth-graders' learning strategy during scientific inquiry (LSSI scale). Eleven hundred and seven participants selected through cluster sampling from Kaohsiung area responded the scale. Experts of science education research and elementary science teaching were invited to establish the content validity. The exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were also used to establish construct validity of the instrument. Finally the total twenty-three items of LSSI scale were ascertained. In this study, the learning process during scientific inquiry (identifying questions, gathering information, designing and conducting scientific investigations, and formulating and communicating explanations) composed of four subscales: copying learning, rote learning, connecting and monitoring learning strategy, and time and resources management. The result of factor analyses showed and confirmed that the four factor model of the scale could explain more briefly and stably about the structure of the LSSI scale. The Cronbach's α value of internal consistency of the subscales of this scale ranged from .75 to .84 and the Cronbach's α value of the LSSI scale was .90. The students' learning strategies during scientific inquiry were described and compared. Finally, some suggestions for scientific inquiry-based learning strategy instruction and future research were proposed according to the results.起始頁-結束頁：515-538資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2006.023篇名：理論與實務持分者對不同身分國小教師所需數學教學專業知能觀點之比較研究並列篇名：Professional Knowledge/Competence of Mathematics Teaching of Different Elementary Teacher Identities: The Compare of Theory and Practice Stakeholders作者：李源順(Yuan-Shun Lee);林福來(Fu-Lai Lin);陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen)關鍵字：國小教師;理論持分者;實務持分者;數學教學專業知能;Elementary Teacher;Theory Stakeholder;Practice Stakeholder;Professional Knowledge/Competence of Mathematics Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的是以小學教師數學教學發展標準（Standards for Development in Elementary Mathematics Teaching, SDEMT）為工具，探究理論持分者（數學教育學者）與實務持分者（輔導團團員）對不同身分國小教師所需具備知能的觀點。研究採問卷調查法，調查34位對國小數學教育有培育或研究經驗的學者，以及全省75位國小數學輔導團成員。研究發現，學者和團員對學生教師所要修讀的科目與教師專業發展的時程大致相同。但是理論持分者採實務型觀點，實務持分者採理想型觀點，造成不同身分教師所需要具備的專業知能，團員的觀點比學者的觀點高約一個身分的知能。英文摘要：This paper reported the mathematics teaching professional knowledge/competence of Elementary Teacher Identities between the view of theory stakeholder (educators) and practice stakeholder (advisers) with the tool of Standards for Development in Elementary Mathematics Teaching (SDEMT). This research was based on questionnaire. We surveyed 34 educators who have nurtured or study experiences of elementary education, and 75 advisers of elementary mathematics education. The research found that educators and advisers have the same view about the curriculum of student teachers to learn. But the results that theory stakeholder with practice view and practice stakeholder with ideal view make advisers' view one level higher than educators' view about the professional knowledge/competence of teacher identities.起始頁-結束頁：539-562資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2006.034篇名：結合鷹架教學與非例行性數學問題發展學生數學解題能力之研究並列篇名：The Study of Developing Problem Solving Ability through Scaffolding Instruction and Non-Routine Problems作者：簡清華(Ching-Hua Chien);蔡佳霏(Chia-Fei Tsai)關鍵字：非例行性問題;數學解題能力;鷹架;Non-routine Mathematical Problems;Mathematical Problem-Solving Ability;Scaffolding期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的在於探討教師及同儕鷹架，影響學生解非例行性數學問題時的解題表現及解題思維。研究個案是從屏東縣某國小二年級學生中，依據在校數學成績，篩選三位學生，其中兩位為數學高程度，一位是中程度；由三人組成一共同學習小組，安排每週一次約一小時的非例行數學問題解題學習，研究時間為期十週。研究期間，研究者透過教室觀察、訪談記錄、文件蒐集……等多元方式來蒐集資料。研究所得結果如下：一、鷹架的運作提升學生對於題意的理解；二、透過學生的近側發展區，鷹架之運作有助於提升學生數學建模及解題能力到達他們自力難以到達的程度；三、鷹架運作能提升學生問題表徵的能力；四、在多元解題的數學同儕鷹架運作下，學生的解題歷程更加精緻化；五、透過不同層次鷹架的搭建，有助於多元化學生的解題策略及提升學生的解題表現。英文摘要：The focus of this research is on the impact of teacher (expert) scaffolding and peer scaffolding on students' problem solving performances and thinking processes on non-routine mathematics problems. Three second graders students at the local elementary school in Pingtung County in southern Taiwan were selected based on their mathematics achievement. Two of them are high-achievement students when the third one is a middle-achievement student. Subjects were grouped together to receive one hour non-routine mathematics problem solving training once a week for ten weeks. The research used qualitative research method in data gathering and analysis. The study obtained following findings: 1. Scaffolding enhances students' understanding of meaning of these non-routine questions. 2. Scaffolding helps students promote their problem solving abilities through their proximal development zone. 3. Scaffolding stimulates students' problem-solving thinking, and helps them to build suitable mathematics model to solve mathematics problems. 4. Peer scaffolding enhances diverse mathematics problem solving strategies and students' problem solving performances.起始頁-結束頁：563-586資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2006.045篇名：網路化檔案評量環境下教學者評量之信度與效度並列篇名：Reliability and Validity of Instructor Assessment in a Web-Based Portfolio Assessment Environment作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);吳炳宏(Bing-Hong Wu)關鍵字：信度;效度;電子化學習歷程檔案;網路化學習歷程檔案;網路化檔案評量;Reliability;Validity;e-Portfolio;Web-Based Portfolio;Web-Based Portfolio Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討網路化檔案評量環境下，教學者評量的信度與效度。研究對象為某高職二年級修習「計算機概論」課程的兩個班級學生，共72人。學習者使用網路化檔案評量系統進行個人檔案的製作、觀摩、自評與同儕互評，教師則透過系統檢視學習者的檔案並評量其學習表現。結果顯示：（1）網路化檔案評量準規具足夠之信度；（2）網路化檔案教學者評量有很高的評分者間信度及評分者內部信度，是可以展示足夠信度的評量方式；（3）網路化檔案評量準規具足夠之效度；（4）教學者檔案評量分數與學生的測驗成績具有高度的一致性，顯示網路化檔案教學者評量方法具良好效度。建議未來研究可針對簡報軟體、文書處理軟體、網頁製作軟體等建置的自我建構式數位化學習檔案來製定可行的檔案評量準規並檢驗其信、效度。英文摘要：This study investigates the reliability and validity of instructor assessment in a web-portfolio assessment environment. The research target group consists of seventy-two students who take ”Introduction to Computer” course of the second grade in some vocational high school. During experimental period, the students use the Web-based portfolio assessment system for creating their portfolio, emulating peers' portfolio, and doing self-assessment and peer-assessment. The teacher uses the system for inspecting and assessing students' learning performances. The results reveal that the rubric of the Web-based instructor assessment has an adequate reliability. The web-based instructor assessment has a high reliability between assessors as well as a high internal reliability within one assessor. Therefore, it is an assessment method with high reliability. In regard to validity, the rubrics of the web-based portfolio assessment have an adequate validity. The consistence between portfolio instructor assessment score and test score is high, which means the web-based instructor assessment has a high validity. Finally, the study recommends to develop the rubric of self-constructed e-portfolio created by PowerPoint, Word and FrontPage software and to investigate its reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：393-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2005.016篇名：國中科學教師的學科教學知識與科學教學導向之探討並列篇名：Exploring the Middle Science Teachers' Pedagogical Content Knowledge and Science Teaching Orientations作者：張世忠(Syh-Jong Jang);蔡孟芳(Meng-Fang Tsai);陳鶴元(Ho-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：國中教師知覺;科學教學導向;專業發展;學科教學知識;Middle Teachers' Perception;Orientations to Science Teaching;Professional Development;Pedagogical Content Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：科學教師的學科教學知識（PCK）發展被熱烈討論與研究，它是教師知識的核心，也是有效教學的基礎。本研究的目的是根據Magnusson, Krajcik與Borko（1999）發展的PCK模式，設計一套有效評量PCK的工具來評估目前臺灣現職國中科學老師的PCK樣貌，以及檢驗教師的科學教學導向和PCK組成因素之間的關聯。結果發現科學教師的最高平均值是科學課程知識，最低值為評量與科學素養知識。在性別上，只有在科學課程知識有顯著的差異，男性教師認為他們在科學課程知識是明顯的高於女性教師。依教學經驗不同，所得三個因素科學課程知識、學生理解科學知識、和評量與科學素養知識及PCK整體在統計上有顯著差異。而目前科學教師使用最頻繁的教學導向是講述方式，而講述式受試教師群當中，在教學策略知識和科學教學導向之間有統計上顯著性相關，然而其相關性為弱的並且是負相關；研究亦發現評量與科學素養知識和活動導向式教學有顯著相關性；本研究的發現與建議可作為未來在職教師發展科學教師之PCK與教學導向的參考。英文摘要：Science teachers' Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK) has gathered great importance in recent years. PCK is the core of teacher knowledge and the base of effective teaching. Following the model of Magnusson, Krajcik, and Borko (1999), an instrument was developed with satisfactory content and construct validity in this study. The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship exists between all orientations to science teaching and PCK components, and explore whether the PCK of middle science teachers differ significantly according gender, and teaching experience in Taiwan. We found the highest mean score regarding PCK of science teachers is the Knowledge of Science Curricula (KSC), whereas, the lowest mean score is the Knowledge of Assessment of Scientific Literacy (KASL). The results indicated that KSC was found to be significantly different by gender, and science teachers' overall PCK and three components (i.e., KSC, KSUS and KASL) were significantly different according to teaching experiences. On the other hand, the didactic orientation was the most commonly used method of science teaching in Taiwanese middle schools. According to the Pearson correlation analysis, it was found the didactic orientation was negatively related to KIS. We also found KASL was significantly correlated to activity-driven orientation. Research implications of this study are provided along with suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：413-433資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2005.027篇名：在科學課堂中應用爭議性議題教學促進國小六年級學生道德思考並列篇名：Fostering the Sixth Grade Students' Moral Thinking through the Instruction of Controversial Issues in Science Classroom作者：林樹聲(Shu-Sheng Lin)關鍵字：六年級學生;爭議性議題;道德判斷;道德思考;The Sixth Grade Students;Controversial Issues;Moral Judgment;Moral Thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在利用爭議性議題的教學促進國小六年級學生進行道德思考並為自己的主張做辯護。樣本為一位教學年資七年的教師與32位學生。研究採取單組前後測設計，教學介入五週，每週兩節課，同時使用涵蓋三個爭議性議題情境的道德思考問卷和個別訪談收集資料。分析結果發現：學生於教學後的道德思考達顯著進步（p＜.01），為自己主張做辯護的理由變得更精緻，顯示學生的道德思維變得更縝密。而教學介入對學生的道德判斷會產生一些影響，尤其是當學生站在他人的立場做出判斷時。此外，學生提出道德判斷時傾向只考慮到行為的結果而非行為的動機；學生的道德判斷會帶有情意層面的考量，而且會隨著情境的不同或採取立場的不同而改變。英文摘要：The study explores the contribution of an intervention of the instruction for controversial issues. The instruction was based on the discussions of moral dilemmas in fostering moral thinking of the sixth grade students. The participants included one experienced teacher and 32 students who were received the instruction that lasted five weeks, two hours each week and consisted of a combination of discussions of moral dilemmas and teacher's questioning. One questionnaire about moral thinking was administered before and after the teaching intervention. Several students were individually interviewed followed by the teaching. The results revealed that there is statistically significant improvement in the scores of moral thinking. The students' justifications for moral judgments become more elaborated after the teaching. Moreover, the students' moral judgments to some degree are affected by teaching intervention, especially as taking perspectives of others. Their moral judgments are mainly based on the consequence of the action, which are involved in affective consideration and would vary across different socioscientific contexts or according to different perspective-taking (self vs. the others).起始頁-結束頁：435-459資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2005.038篇名：以任務特性觀點探討創新創意專案的學習效果並列篇名：Investigating Learning Effectiveness of Innovative and Creative Project-A Task Characteristic Perspective作者：施教旺(Chiao-Wang Shih);張淑娟(Shu-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：任務特性;任務─專業適配;創新創意課程;學習效果;Task Characteristic;Task-profession Fit;Innovative and Creative Course;Learning Effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：創造力的培養在知識經濟時代備受重視，國內的各級學校都鼓勵學生創新創意，而且視為重要課程目標。本研究探討在創新創意課程中，教師要求產出創新創意作品，對修課學生的學習效果，並且建立模式以找出影響學習成效的創新創意任務特性。資料的搜集使用問卷調查法，共有146位接受完整課程訓練，並產出創意作品的學生參與。資料的分析使用多元迴歸，來檢定研究模式及假說。研究結果顯示：（1）要求學生產出創新創意作品對於學習效果有所裨益；（2）影響學習效果最重要的二個任務特性為任務─專業適配度以及任務清晰度；（3）事後分析顯示創新作品型態與性別扮演重要任務特性影響學習效果的重要調節變數。研究貢獻主要有二方面：（1）對理論貢獻為透過任務觀點來瞭解學生在專案中的學習效果；以及（2）對教學實務貢獻為提供教師指導學生的建議，像是指導學生的專題競賽或科展比賽的創意性專案。英文摘要：It is getting more important to cultivate creativity in modern knowledge-based economic society. Both higher and elementary education in Taiwan, students are encouraged to bring innovation and creativity into full play as the objectives of courses. This research investigates the learning effects that teachers require students conducting innovative projects in the course of innovation and creativity. A research model underlying task characteristics was developed to understand student's learning effects. Empirical data were collected from 146 students who were instructed completely and requested to accomplish an innovative and creative work. Multiple regression technique is employed to test research model and hypotheses. The primary findings include that (1) students are benefited from conducting innovative project, (2) task-profession fit and task clarity are two critical task characteristics influencing learning effectiveness, and (3) a post-hoc analysis shows that gender and task type are important moderators intervening the relationships between task characteristics and learning effectiveness.起始頁-結束頁：461-482資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2005.049篇名：小組建立假設的合作探究策略－以網路環境為例並列篇名：Collaborative Inquiry Strategies of Team Hypotheses Building in a CSCL Environment作者：張秀美(Hsiu-Mei Chang);陳斐卿(Fei-Ching Chen);曾仁佑(Ren-Yow Tzeng)關鍵字：大氣科學;合作探究策略;建立假設;接應投入;電腦支援協作學習;Atmospheric Science;Collaborative Inquiry Strategy;Hypothesis Building;Responsive Engagement;Computer Supported Collaborative Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文研究小組成員在「建立假設」階段共同發展的「合作探究策略」。研究場域是大氣科學為主題的82個小組網路合作探究活動，每個小組大約五至六人，歷經長達兩週的「建立假設」活動。首先分析650筆高中生在此階段的合作探究困難，再以合作探究成果較好的五個小組討論區共652篇討論文章為例，分析成員的「合作探究策略」。資料的分析層次有三，以單篇為單位的「探究行動」、以跨篇為單位的「探究策略」、以及隱藏在探究策略背後、以成員間接應投入為單位的「合作探究策略」，本文聚焦於第三層次。結果顯示五種化解探究困難之「合作探究策略」：一、「開啟」與「跟隨」創造出共同對話；二、刻意引起注意及共鳴；三、收斂時機的相伴催促；四、扼要而深入的追問；五、不同觀點的查核考驗。研究探究學習的多數文獻是聚焦在「探究行動」與「探究策略」等層面，本文指出：合作較為成功的小組並非徒具有效的「探究策略」，尚須深掘成員間互動脈絡的「合作探究策略」，才能勾勒更為完整與真實的小組合作探究圖像，這些「合作探究策略」可以作為教學者鷹架小組合作探究活動的參考。英文摘要：Scientific inquiry learning is not unproblematic. Previous research on learners' collaborative inquiry has heavily focused on the cognitive aspects of inquiry strategies. We know little about how the inquiry strategies were accomplished collaboratively. In other words, the dynamic process of inquiry involving several people has received little attention. Taking the stage of hypotheses building as an example, this study examined the responsive engagement of learners engaged in inquiry activities in small groups. Two research questions were raised. First, what are the difficulties of engaging in collaborative hypothesis building? Second, what strategies do productive groups develop to deal with these difficulties? Three different levels of analysis were used to identify collaborative strategies when encountering difficulties of hypotheses building: inquiry action, inquiry strategy, and collaborative inquiry strategy. To be specific, this study is aimed to challenge the traditional perspective on the overwhelming emphasis on cognitive aspects of inquiry. Instead, the results of this study revealed the importance of collaborative inquiry strategies developed among group members. The results identified five key collaborative inquiry strategies related to responsive engagement: ”Initiation and follow-up as opportunities for developing communal topics,” ”Drawing attention purposely in order to focus on or resonate with,” ”Pushing collectively for convergent dialogue,” ”Concise and sharp questioning,” and ”Checking out the ideas of complicators.” Some methodological and practical consideration concerning collaborative inquiry activities were further discussed.起始頁-結束頁：295-317資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2004.0110篇名：數學建模評量規準之研究並列篇名：Study on a Rubric for Assessing Mathematical Modeling Performance作者：楊凱琳(Kai-Lin Yang);林福來(Fou-Lai Lin);蕭志如(Chih-Ru Hsiao)關鍵字：概化理論;實作評量;數學建模;Generalizability;Performance Assessment;Mathematical Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：數學建模問題是一種具有真實或逼真的情境問題，不同的解題者可能會有不同的考量和方法完成這樣複雜的任務。因此，數學建模問題也是一種能啟發學生主動學習的開放性任務。此外，在考量給予適當的評量規準有助於促進學生的數學學習之下，本研究想藉由實作評量與概化理論來探討評量數學建模表現的評量規準。首先，參考文獻上提出的建模歷程共同元素，再透過數學建模專家與國中數學教師的意見調整元素及其內涵，希望此規準能夠涵蓋數學建模中各種想法的共同元素，以完整地評量各種想法的長處與不足。形成數學建模表現評量規準後，基於概化理論檢驗此評量規準的變異來源並計算不同評分人數的概化係數和可靠性係數。最後，以準實驗研究檢驗其對學生數學建模表現的影響。結果顯示，在引模、探模和展模問題中，評分者在各個面向給分的一致性還不錯，而且如果有兩位評分者時，概化係數和可靠度係數皆能達至.86的水準。另外，在學生尚未參與建構本評量規準的情況下，提供實驗組評量規準的學生數學建模表現仍顯著優於未提供本評量規準的對照組學生。英文摘要：Mathematical modeling problems are problems with real or realistic situations. Different problem solvers may use diverse methods to solve the same modeling problems, and thus we assumed that modeling problems are the type of tasks that can elicit students' active learning. Moreover, taking into account that providing appropriate assessment is helpful to facilitate students' learning of mathematics, this study aimed at constructing a rubric for assessing mathematical modeling performance based on generalizability theory and performance assessment. In order to construct a complete rubric which could be used to assess the strength and weakness of varied ideas for solving modeling problems, we firstly referred to the elements of modeling process in literature. Next, we modified the elements and their content according to a mathematics modeling expert and mathematics teachers’ opinions. After formulating the rubric, its generalizability and dependability was evaluated by the generalizability theory, and a quasi-experimental study was implemented to assess its effect on students' performance in mathematical modeling. The results show that the agreement among the raters was good and both the generalizability coefficient and the dependability index with two raters were above .86 for each rating facet of each modeling task. Moreover, students who were provided this rubric performed better on the modeling task than students who were not provided this rubric.起始頁-結束頁：319-342資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2004.0211篇名：在社會性科學議題情境下應用鷹架教學提升國小六年級學生論證能力並列篇名：Improving Sixth Graders' Argumentation Skills through Scaffolding Instruction in Socio-scientific Contexts作者：蘇衍丞(Yen-Cheng Su);林樹聲(Shu-Sheng Lin)關鍵字：社會性科學議題;國小六年級學生;論證能力;鷹架教學;Socio-scientific Issues;Sixth Grade Students;Argumentation Skills;Scaffolding Instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：The purpose of the study was to improve the argumentation skills of a sample of sixth graders through scaffolding instruction in socio-scientific contexts. The study utilized a quasi-experimental design. One experimental group (N = 32) received the instruction with oral and writing scaffoldings. The other experimental group (N = 33) received the instruction with only oral scaffoldings. The control group (N = 30) received traditional instruction that contained no specific scaffolding. Each group subsequently completed three argument questionnaires that involved different socio-scientific contexts at the beginning and the end of the instruction. The teaching intervention was six hours for each group. The results showed that the two experimental groups significantly outperformed the control group in the posttest scores of constructing arguments, counterarguments, supplementary warrants and rebuttals (p ＜ .01). Both experimental groups offered more elaborated and multi-perspective warrants than the control group. There was no statistically significant difference between the two experimental groups in any posttest scores (p ＞ .05). However, more students receiving the instruction with oral and writing scaffoldings constructed at least two more valid rebuttals than those receiving the instruction with only oral scaffoldings could.英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to improve the argumentation skills of a sample of sixth graders through scaffolding instruction in socio-scientific contexts. The study utilized a quasi-experimental design. One experimental group (N = 32) received the instruction with oral and writing scaffoldings. The other experimental group (N = 33) received the instruction with only oral scaffoldings. The control group (N = 30) received traditional instruction that contained no specific scaffolding. Each group subsequently completed three argument questionnaires that involved different socio-scientific contexts at the beginning and the end of the instruction. The teaching intervention was six hours for each group. The results showed that the two experimental groups significantly outperformed the control group in the posttest scores of constructing arguments, counterarguments, supplementary warrants and rebuttals (p ＜ .01). Both experimental groups offered more elaborated and multi-perspective warrants than the control group. There was no statistically significant difference between the two experimental groups in any posttest scores (p ＞ .05). However, more students receiving the instruction with oral and writing scaffoldings constructed at least two more valid rebuttals than those receiving the instruction with only oral scaffoldings could.起始頁-結束頁：343-366資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2004.0312篇名：運用明示和暗示科學本質文本對七年級學生學習演化單元的效益並列篇名：The Learning Effect of Using Different Science Texts Regarding Nature of Science (Explicit or Implicit) in the Unit of Evolution for the 7(superscript th) Graders作者：林淑梤(Shu-Fen Lin);葉辰楨(Chen-Chen Yeh);張文華(Wen-Hua Chang);陳素芬(Su-Fen Chen)關鍵字：科學文本;科學本質;演化;閱讀;Scientific Text;Nature of Science;Evolution;Reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討將明示或暗示科學本質的文本的學習活動融入原來演化單元的教學，對學生科學本質觀、學習成就和對科學的態度之影響。一位個案教師選擇三個國一班級共105位學生，分別在演化單元實施三種不同的教學策略（閱讀和小組討論明示科學本質文本、閱讀暗示科學本質文本融入一般教學、一般教學）。多元研究資料來源包括學生在科學與教育觀點問卷中科學本質的觀點、兩題開放式科學本質問題、對科學的態度問卷、演化單元的成就測驗和學生的半結構式訪談。量化問卷資料採用t檢定和共變數分析。質性問卷資料和半結構性訪談資料則經過編碼和敘述性統計，前者還採用卡方檢定，最後提出詮釋性主張。研究結果顯示，使用科學本質文本的兩組學生在科學知識的確認議題上，均朝向當代的科學本質觀。尤其，他們也瞭解到參考文獻在形成科學知識上的重要性。當學生面對專家所提出的說法時，這兩組學生也較能利用證據、解釋或驗證的方式作為判斷的標準。但是，兩組在科學方法、想像力和主觀性的議題上不易改變。反之，控制組學生可能因觀看影片，在想像力的議題上有顯著地改變。三組學生對科學的態度和學業成就均有顯著提升，但三組之間無顯著差異。然而，因學生關注與課本相關的知識甚於科學本質的概念，加上低成就學生感受到部分討論問題較難，以及其習慣閱讀短篇幅文本，使得文本閱讀在科學本質的學習成效上受到限制。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the learning effect of using the explicit and the implicit Nature of Science (NOS) texts as a reading activity for improvement of students' understanding of NOS, academic achievement, and attitudes toward science. One teacher used 3 kinds of teaching strategies (reading an explicit NOS text with group discussion, integrating the implicit NOS text reading activity into the general teaching, general teaching) to 3 similar classes (105 students) in the unit of evolution. Multiple data resources included students' responses of the Views On Science and Education (VOSE) questionnaire, an open-ended questionnaire, the Attitude Toward Science in School Assessment (ATSSA) questionnaire, and an academic test regarding evolution, and students' semi-structured interviews. Quantitative analysis methods included t-test and analysis of covariance. Qualitative data were coded and analyzed through descriptive statistics and chi-square test. It was found that the two experimental groups using the texts had more understanding than the control group on the issues of validation of scientific knowledge and on the importance of references on the process of knowledge formation. Moreover, the two experimental groups were able to use evidence, explanation or verification to judge the diverse theories derived from experts better than the control group. However, their views on the issues of scientific method, imagination, and subjectivity were changed little. By contrast, the control group's views might be influenced by watching an evolution video tape to make significant change on the issue of imagination. Three groups had significant improvement on academic achievement, and attitudes toward science. However, the NOS learning effect of reading explicit NOS texts is limited, because students' concern on textbook-related knowledge was more than on the NOS concepts and low achievers perceived that some discussion questions were difficult and preferred short texts to long texts.起始頁-結束頁：367-392資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2004.0413篇名：科學新聞資訊呈現形式及其對閱聽眾資訊接收的影響－以科學知識觀點與認知基模理論來探討並列篇名：Features of Science Reporting and Their Influences-An Exploration Based on Structures of Scientific Knowledge and Schema Theory作者：張卿卿(Ching-Ching Chang)關鍵字：科學新聞;科學傳播;媒介影響;新聞報導;Science News;Science Communication;Media Effects;News Reporting期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討科學新聞資訊呈現形式及其對閱聽眾新聞接收的影響。主要有兩個研究目的：第一、從知識相關理論為基礎，描繪出科學知識的類型與特質，並援引基模相關理論，彙整可能幫助閱聽眾接收科學新聞的訊息呈現方式，並探究其普遍性。第二，從認知心理角度探討前述不同訊息呈現方式對新聞接收可能產生的影響。針對第一個研究目的，本研究以內容分析方式，探究四大報在報導科學新聞時，各類訊息呈現方式的普遍性，包括：「知識概念是否有解釋」、「知識概念的雙語化呈現」、「流程圖的應用」與「多元意見的提供」，結果顯示大部分的研究有解釋其知識概念（82.87%），但僅有少部分研究以雙語方式呈現核心概念（24.19%），使用流程圖（4.90%）或提供多元意見（39.83%）。針對第二個研究目的，本研究以實驗方式探討這些訊息呈現方式可能產生的影響，從三大影響面向來探討：「新聞注意度」、「新聞理解度」與「議題相關性」。實驗結果顯示，在「新聞注意度」部分，提供流程圖產生顯著正向效果；在「新聞理解度」部分，有解釋核心概念和提供中英對照名詞顯著的降低理解困難度。在「議題相關性」部分，解釋核心概念有顯著提升相關性感知。研究結果對於新聞記者如何呈現科學新聞可以提供實務上的價值。英文摘要：This paper had two objectives. The first objective was to explore the potential problems associated with science reporting by asking the following questions: whether the news provided concept explanations, whether the news included English terms for the concepts, whether the news provided procedural graphs and whether the news offered multiple perspectives. The second objective was to examine that when news stories differed in terms of these information features, how readers' understanding of the story and perceptions of the issues varied. To achieve the first objective, we conducted two content analyses, which found that even though most news provided concept explanations (82.87%), only a small percentage of news stories included English terms of the featured issue or concept (24.19%), provided procedural graphs (4.90%) and offered multiple perspectives (39.83%). For the second objective, we conducted an experiment to test the influences of these news features on news attentions, news comprehension and perceived issues relevance. The findings suggested that in terms of news attentions, the presence of procedural graphs was a positive and significant predictor; in terms of news comprehension, the presence of concept explanations and English terms were positive predictors; and with respect to issues relevance, the presence of concept explanations was a positive predictor. Findings reported herein may have practical values for journalists in their science news reporting.起始頁-結束頁：193-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2003.0114篇名：國小數學教師專業標準之建構並列篇名：The Development of Professional Standards for Elementary Mathematics Teachers作者：鍾靜(Jing Chung);張淑怡(Shu-I Chang);陳幸玫(Hsing-Me Chen);陸昱任(Yu-Jen Lu);戴坤邦(Kun-Pang Tai)關鍵字：專業標準;數學教師;Professional Standards;Mathematics Teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以五套國外國家層級之數學教師專業標準為基礎，並考量國內現況，期在橫向涵蓋上考量標準內容的全面性、重要性與可行性，縱向發展上作為國小數學教師專業發展之依據。研究過程包括三階段：階段一進行文獻內容分析以初步擬定標準，階段二徵詢專家學者及現場教師意見以修訂標準，階段三訂定標準內部各項指標的具備程度。主要採用內容分析、焦點座談以及調查研究等方法。本研究最後形塑出的「國小數學教師專業標準」包括3個層面、11項標準與26條指標，每一指標項下尚有說明內容及不同對象具備程度。本研究結果指出，職前教師應強調專業知能的養成；隨著生涯的發展，專業實踐會更加受到重視；至於專家教師應更加重視專業特質的要求。英文摘要：This study reports the development of ”Professional Standards for Elementary Mathematics Teachers” (PSEMT). Based on national standards used in other countries, the proposed PSEMT were developed in three steps: (1) a complete analysis of literature was conducted to form a draft of the standards; (2) opinions of experts and teachers were consulted to modify the standards; and (3) the level expected to meet the goals of each standard was set. The PSEMT development utilized content analysis, focus group discussions and survey data. The resulting standards contain three domains, eleven standards and twenty-six indexes including detailed information and expected achievement levels for different subjects on each index. In developing the PSEMT we found that teacher candidates must strengthen their professional knowledge because, as their career developed, how to put their knowledge into practice is considered more importantly. As for excellent teachers of mathematics, they may need to emphasize on their professional attributes.起始頁-結束頁：217-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2003.0415篇名：主宰性別主宰科技？科技性別化現象分析並列篇名：The Dominant Sex Dominates Technology? An Interpretation of the Gendered-Technology Phenomenon作者：王雅玄(Ya-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：女性主義;女科技人;性別氣質;科技性別化;科技社會學;Feminism;Female Technologists;Femininity/Masculinity;Gendered Technology;Sociology of Technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：科技性別化現象古今中外皆然。本文回應性別主流化政策，問題意識起於對歷史以來造成科技領域性別傾斜的因素有所質疑並進行批判。針對女性在科技領域中的位置，從鉅觀社會脈絡到微觀個人氣質，深入探討科技性別化現象的形成，從科技社會學與女性主義取向反省科技性別疆界的鞏固與流動可能性。文章首先分析科技性別化的歷史成因解釋及其對女性科技學習之影響，歸納七種科技性別化論述─能力說、選擇說、社會說、教育說、氣質說、文化說、知識論旨趣說，並提出三種解構科技性別化的途徑－女性進入科技、善用女性特質、發展女性科技或另類科技。本文透過重新反省科技／性別的關係，藉由質疑主宰性別主宰科技發展主宰科技主宰性別論述之可能，並提出未來研究建議，或許女性可能透過主宰科技成為主宰性別，但本文更期待多元共存的性別－科技關係。英文摘要：The technology-gender gap and gendered-technology is a continuing issue in education. This paper focuses on gender-technology relations to address the policy of gender mainstreaming. The awareness of the issue is based on my critique and question for the historically gender inequality in the field of technology. It also questions the ”technology as a masculine culture” and ”technology as a male institution.” Based on the sociological and feminist theories, this paper aims to rethink the female position in technology in order to articulate the formation of the gendered-technology phenomenon. It concludes seven gender-technology discourses mirrored from the gendered structure in the wild society-the discourses of ability, preference, socialization, education, femininity/masculinity, culture, and epistemology. It offers various explanations of why gendered-technology appears and how it reflects the schooling and societal expectation outside the education. It then proposes three ways to deconstruct the gendered-technology phenomenon. Finally, it suggests some directions for further research on breaking the gender-technology boundary.起始頁-結束頁：241-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2003.0216篇名：國三學生數學觀念之研究並列篇名：Ninth Grade Students' Conceptions of Mathematics作者：李浩然(Hao-Jan Lee);柳賢(Shian Leou)關鍵字：性別差異;數學成就;數學觀念;Gender Different;Mathematics Achievement;Conceptions of Mathematics期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：從數學教育的相關研究可發現，學生的數學觀念會影響其數學學習與解題。因此本研究的目的在於探討國中學生的數學觀念，研究者選取高雄市某國中三年級4個班級共122位學生進行研究，並將所蒐集的晤談資料以現象描述分析法進行分析。研究結果發現，學生的數學觀念包含元素、計算、工具、建模、抽象思考與理解等六個主要焦點面向，若再加以區分可以細分成十種數學觀念類型。此外在性別與數學觀念這兩個因素間並未達到顯著差異，但是在數學成就與數學觀念間，研究者發現高數學成就的學生比低數學成就的學生抱持更為寬廣的數學觀念，而中數學成就的學生之數學觀念則以應用與建模為主，且已達顯著差異（p =.000）。本研究中除了驗證先前的相關研究外，還更深入的分析國中學生的數學觀念，與初步探討國中學生數學觀念與性別和數學成就間的關係；藉此寄望研究結果能提供數學教師與研究者，更瞭解學生對於數學的看法，進而能協助其數學的學習。英文摘要：It is well established in the research literature that student's conceptions of mathematics influence their mathematics learning and problem solving. The purpose of this study was to explore junior high school students' conceptions of mathematics. Interview data from 122 junior high school students in Kaohsiung were collected and analyzed using phenomenographic methods. Data from the interviews suggests that students' conceptions of mathematics focus on six dimensions: elements, calculation, instrument, modeling, abstract thinking and understanding. Analysis of the data showed no gender differences on the various dimensions; however, a significant difference between mathematics achievement and conceptions of mathematics (p = .000) was observed. The analysis also suggests that high achieving mathematics students hold broader conceptions of mathematics than low achieving mathematics students and that middle achieving mathematics students appear to focus on application and modeling. It is hoped that the results of this study will provide insight for mathematics teachers and researchers into the views students hold about mathematics and the basis for helping students improve their mathematics learning.起始頁-結束頁：267-294資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2003.0317篇名：教室是平的？一位國小自然科教師的敘說探究並列篇名：Is the Classroom Flat? A Narrative Inquiry into a Primary School Science Teacher作者：顏膺修(Ying-Hsiu Yen);吳為聖(Wei-Shen Wu);張惠博(Huey-Por Chang)關鍵字：敘說;教學信念;教學實務知識;Narrative;Teacher Beliefs;Practical Knowledge of Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以敘說方式探究一位受學生歡迎的國小自然科教師之教學實務知識，包括這位教師對教學信念、學科教學知識、學習環境經營的獨特觀點。研究者扮演參與觀察者角色，歷時兩年收集該位教師的訪談紀錄、教學部落格、課室觀察及學生訪談等資料。透過敘說這位教師的成長背景與教學故事，並參照文獻與反思，歸納可供其他自然科教師借鏡的科學教學實務知識，諸如：掌握教學內容、熟悉學生的心智發展、營造一個接納與快樂的學習環境、促使學生主動學習、體會學習的快樂。最後，討論本研究發現對現行國小自然科教學之意義。英文摘要：This study aims to identify a senior primary school science teacher’s distinctive practical teaching knowledge including their teaching beliefs, pedagogical content knowledge, and knowledge of learning environment management. As a participatory observer, the researchers collected multiple data within the science teacher's classrooms such as interviews with the teacher and his students, a teaching blog, and classroom observations over two years. Results illustrated the exemplary practical science teaching knowledge manifested by this science teacher: creating a productive and enjoyable learning environment in which the teacher is apt at covering the curriculum and promoting students' conceptual development despite their frustrations toward science learning. Finally, implications and suggestions for K-12 science teaching are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：97-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2002.0418篇名：專家島嶼之萌發：探究父母的教學策略並列篇名：The Emerging of Islands of Expertise: Exploring the Guiding Strategies of Parents作者：侯天麗(Tien-Li Hou)關鍵字：家庭學習;專家島嶼;鷹架;Family Science Learning;Islands of Expertise;Scaffolding期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：專家島嶼理論相信，幼兒的興趣可在父母的支持下進入深度的學習。本研究從社會文化論出發，擬瞭解專家島嶼萌發初期，父母所扮演的角色及介入的情形。研究者以恐龍為主題，追蹤15個家庭的教學情形與幼兒的學習表現，對照分析其間的關連性，以追溯專家幼兒的父母教學策略。研究結果發現，專家幼兒父母的教學特色如下：（1）內容知識方面，他們能超越物種、特色與行為的說明，並進一步連結生態系統的知識。（2）鷹架策略方面，他們使用多種策略，尤其高層次的「推理」與「監控」是有效教學的關鍵。（3）內容知識與鷹架策略對幼兒學習表現的影響，有階段性的差異：較年幼的孩子依賴父母的內容知識，而年長的孩子依賴高層次的鷹架策略。英文摘要：The islands of expertise theory suggests children's interests may transition into expertise with the ongoing support of parents in the context of everyday life. Using a socio-cultural lens, the researcher explored the role of parents and their guiding strategies to support the emerging of islands of expertise. Around the topic of dinosaurs, fifteen families with children between the ages of 4 and 6 years were recruited. The interaction of parents and children and the learning performance of children were tracked, and through contrasting analysis, the guiding strategies of parents of expert children were traced. The results included: (1) The content knowledge of parents with expert children was already beyond the level of identification and declaration of dinosaurs' features and behavior. These parents tended to connect their dinosaur knowledge to ecology. (2) Parents with expert children employed a variety of scaffolding strategies. Above all, reasoning and monitoring were crucial to these expert children's learning. (3) Parents' content knowledge and scaffolding strategies were both correlated to children's learning performance. While younger children were more dependent on their parents' content knowledge, older children were more dependent on their high-level scaffolding.起始頁-結束頁：119-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2002.0119篇名：以論證活動探討國小學童論證能力和科學本質之表現並列篇名：Exploring the Impact of Argumentation Ability on Elementary School Students' Understanding of the Nature of Science作者：楊桂瓊(Kuay-Keng Yang);林煥祥(Huann-Shyang Lin);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：科學本質;論證能力;論證教學;Nature of Science;Argumentation Ability;Argumentation Instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：This study was designed to explore pupils' argumentation ability, and understanding about the nature of science flowing from the argumentation activities. A quasi-experimental method with equivalent group pretest-posttest design was employed. One class of 5th graders (N = 22) was selected as the experimental group with 8-week argumentation instruction, and the other class (N = 22) with the similar backgrounds taught with traditional instruction served as the control group. Two instruments: the Argumentation Ability test and the Nature Of Science (NOS) questionnaire were used in pre- and post-tests. The result indicated that the experimental group students outperform their counterparts in argumentation ability. However, there was no significant difference between the two groups on their understanding about the nature of science. Further analysis reveals that the experimental students with a contemporary view of NOS make progress differently from those holding a traditional view of NOS.英文摘要：This study was designed to explore pupils' argumentation ability, and understanding about the nature of science flowing from the argumentation activities. A quasi-experimental method with equivalent group pretest-posttest design was employed. One class of 5th graders (N = 22) was selected as the experimental group with 8-week argumentation instruction, and the other class (N = 22) with the similar backgrounds taught with traditional instruction served as the control group. Two instruments: the Argumentation Ability test and the Nature Of Science (NOS) questionnaire were used in pre- and post-tests. The result indicated that the experimental group students outperform their counterparts in argumentation ability. However, there was no significant difference between the two groups on their understanding about the nature of science. Further analysis reveals that the experimental students with a contemporary view of NOS make progress differently from those holding a traditional view of NOS.起始頁-結束頁：145-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2002.0220篇名：國小師資生應用Big6技能於自然領域探究式教學的學習與改進並列篇名：Pre-Service Elementary Teachers Use of Big6 Skill for Learning and Improving their Science Inquiry Teaching作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu);戴文雄(Wen-Hsiung Tai)關鍵字：Big6技能;師資生;探究式教學;錨定式教學;Big6 Skills;Pre-service Teachers;Inquiry Teaching;Anchored Instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以91名師資生為研究對象，探討他們如何應用Big6技能於自然領域進行探究式教學（著重在錨定式教學），同時比較自然系與非自然系背景，是否會影響其專業成長。首先教授理論課程，其次觀摩3部教學案例，接著應用Big6技能設計教案、修正教案，然後進行微型教學和國小試教。結果顯示：（1）師資生感受Big6技能之搜尋策略、取得資訊與使用資訊等學習最為深刻。（2）自然系師資生應用Big6技能設計教案優於非自然系師資生，主要在於搜尋策略、取得資訊與整合資訊。（3）有52.1%師資生進行探究式教學時，能利用圖片傳達提問效果、或從圖片尋找並印證科學、以及創造出問題解決的情境。（4）有25.8%師資生不瞭解國小學童的背景知識，無法將影片內容結合課程播出，無法指導學童參與實驗設計，產生科學知識的另有概念。英文摘要：In this research we investigated how ninety-one pre-service elementary teachers used Big6 skill in learning and improving their science inquiry teaching (with a focus on anchored instruction). We also explored whether their learning background as science and non-science majors affected their professional growth. First, the researcher taught theoretical courses including showing pre-service teachers three teaching case films. Then, the researcher asked pre-service teachers to use Big6 skills when designing and implementing their teaching plans. Last, the researcher had them teach in micro-teaching and elementary schools. The results showed that (1) Pre-service teachers developed a strong commitment to using Big6 skill to identify teaching strategies, to collect information and to use the information which they had collected. (2) Pre-service teachers who had a science learning background designed better teaching plans than non-science background pre-service teachers. Science background teachers could better search teaching strategies, collect information and integrate varied information, by using Big6 skills in designing their teaching plans. (3) 52.1% of pre-service teachers could use pictures to convey questions or to confirm scientific inferences. When they used the Inquiry teaching method to teach students, they could also design a problem based learning situation. (4) 25.8% of pre-service teachers did not understand elementary school students' knowledge background, This created a problem for combining the teaching movie with science contexts, and made these teachers unable to direct some students experiments, causing students to develop alternative conceptions of science phenomena.起始頁-結束頁：171-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2002.0301篇名：親職壓力、社會支持與生活品質之關係研究：身心障礙者家長與普通家長之比較並列篇名：Relationships among Parenting Stress, Social Support, and Quality of Life: Comparisons of Parents of People with and without Disabilities作者：陳瑋婷(Wei-Ting Chen)關鍵字：生活品質;身心障礙;社會支持;家長;親職壓力;quality of life;disabilities;social support;parents;parenting stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：有鑑於親職壓力與社會支持皆是影響身心障礙者家長與普通家長生活品質的重要因子，本研究乃結合後設分析、路徑分析與聯合t檢定等方法，探討與比較兩組家長在親職壓力、社會支持與生活品質之間的關係。研究結果發現，兩組家長的親職壓力與社會支持間有負相關，親職壓力與生活品質間有負相關，社會支持與生活品質間則是正相關；兩組家長的親職壓力不僅均對生活品質產生直接負向效果，也會透過社會支持對生活品質產生間接負向效果；而且儘管兩組家長在親職壓力對社會支持的負向效果差不多，身心障礙者家長在社會支持對生活品質的正向效果及親職壓力對生活品質的負向效果等卻不及普通家長。綜上所述，本研究建議未來宜持續發展與實施能有效減緩家長親職壓力及增進社會支持品質的具體方案，以利提升家長的生活品質。也由於身心障礙者家長的親職壓力與社會支持對生活品質的預測效果並不高，建議未來研究應持續探討其他預測因子，以利擴充家長生活品質的理論基礎。英文摘要：Purpose: Parenting stress and social support are essential factors that influence quality of life (QOL). This study examines and presents a comparison of the relationships among parenting stress, social support, and the QOL of parents of people with and without disabilities in Taiwan. Methods: I used 35 studies that examined parents of people with disabilities and 18 studies that examined parents of people without disabilities from 1987 to 2011. Thereafter, methods of meta-analysis, path analysis, and t test were applied. Findings: The meta-analyses indicated that the correlation coefficient between parenting stress and social support was -.25 (k = 22, N = 2,478), the correlation coefficient between parenting stress and QOL was -.37 (k = 24, N = 2,746), and the correlation coefficient between social support and QOL was .34 (k = 15, N = 1,276) among parents of people with disabilities. Among parents of people without disabilities, the correlation coefficient between parenting stress and social support was -.25 (k = 9, N = 2,830), the correlation coefficient between parenting stress and QOL was -.45 (k = 8, N = 3,966), and the correlation coefficient between social support and QOL was .49 (k = 5, N = 969). Moreover, parenting stress had direct negative effects on social support (γ = -.25) and QOL (γ = -.30), but social support had direct positive effects on QOL (β = .26) among parents of people with disabilities. Among parents of people without disabilities, parenting stress had direct negative effects on social support (γ = -.25) and QOL (γ = -.35), but social support had direct positive effects on QOL (β = .40). Examination of the structural equation modeling (SEM) of the 2 groups indicated that the path coefficients of parenting stress on social support were equal. However, the path coefficients of social support on QOL and parenting stress on the QOL of parents of people with disabilities were significantly smaller than those of the other group. Conclusions/Implications: Researchers and policymakers were advised to reduce parents' parenting stress and raise their social support to improve their QOL because they had significant influences. However, parenting stress and social support only explained 20% of variance of QOL on parents of people with disabilities; thus, exploring other predictors to improve QOL theories regarding parents was beneficial.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201211.37030012篇名：初級與次級國語文介入對弱勢低學力學校的成效研究：不同介入長度的比較並列篇名：The Effects of a Tier 1 Plus Tier 2 Reading Intervention on Low-Achieving Disadvantaged Schools: The Comparison between Different Intervention Durations作者：陳淑麗(Shu-Li Chen);曾世杰(Shih-Jay Tzeng);蔣汝梅(Lu-May Chiang)關鍵字：反敗為勝;弱勢學童;補救教學;語文低成就;disadvantaged students;low-achieving students;remedial reading intervention;TASP期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究在五所偏遠地區國小執行一個反敗為勝方案，提供初級及次級的國語文介入，初級介入目標為提升普通班的教學品質，次級介入則提供低成就學生密集的補救教學，研究旨在檢驗此方案能否有效地解決弱勢學校國語文成就低落的問題。本研究共有1,471位學生參與，分為三組，其中有兩組為實驗組，分別提供一年和兩年的介入，有一組為對照組。主要研究發現有三：一、在初級和次級兩層級學生語文能力的進展，整體而言，實驗組比對照組好，但成效主要在識字層次，高層次的閱讀理解成效則不明顯；二、初級介入：整體而言，實驗組兒童發生閱讀困難的機率較對照組低，達同儕水準的機率則較對照組高；在次級介入補救教學層級，實驗組兒童發生閱讀困難的機率則明顯較對照組低；三、介入時間愈長，成效愈好，介入兩年的學校成效整體比介入一年者好；介入的時間愈長，兒童發生閱讀困難的機率愈低。國內目前極為看重弱勢學生成就低落的問題，但介入努力的層次大多停留在班級或個別學生的短期介入，少見全校動員的長期介入。本研究結果指出，在全校動員、普通班及補救教學班級合作的情況下，全校兒童的語文能力都有較佳的進展，發生閱讀困難的機率降低，而且方案執行的時間愈長，成效愈佳。方案的成效目前僅限於識字層次，閱讀理解教學是否有成效？仍待更長時間的觀察。本研究提供了一個執行的範例，只要方法得當，即使是最偏遠、弱勢的學校，也有機會把兒童的國語文能力帶起來。英文摘要：Purpose: In Taiwan, providing low-achieving disadvantaged students with effective remedial intervention has been one of the major concerns in the education administration and research communities. Most intervention efforts were short-term and took place at class-wise or student-wise level. Attempt of long-term school-wise intervention is rare. This study provides a ”Turn Around School Project (TASP)” to 5 elementary schools in a remote area in Taiwan where most students are both socio-economically and culturally disadvantaged. The TASP has Tier 1 and Tier 2 reading intervention. The purpose of Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention is to improve the teaching/learning quality in regular classes, and provides intensive remedial intervention program to low-achieving students, respectively. And the objective of our study is to assess if TASP can effectively improve the students' Chinese literacy performance. Methods: Eight schools with 1,471 students participated in our study and were assigned to 3 different groups, 2 treatment groups and 1 control group. The 2 treatment groups provide 1-year and 2-year intervention, separately. Descriptive statistics were used to describe characteristics of the participated schools and the students and distributions of test scores. ANCOVA and GLMM are used to compare intervention effects of the 3 groups by the grade. Findings: In Tier 1 ANCOVA analyses, the treatment effect for the character dictation is significant in Grade 2 and Grade 3 and the treatment groups outperform the control group; the effect for word recogntion is significant for Grades 2 to 5; the effect for reading comprehension achieves statistical significance in Grade 5. In Tier 2 ANCOVA analyses, the treatment effect is significant for character dictation in Grade 2, for accuracy of sight characters in all grades except in Grade 5, for word recognition in Grade 4 and Grade 5, for reading comprehension in Grade 3 and Grade 6. In Tier 1 GLMM analyses after controlling for IQ, the odds of having reading difficulty is lower and the odds of returning to the peer-level is higher in the treatment groups than those in the control group. Similarly, the GLMM analyses in Tier 2 show that the odds of having reading difficulty is lower in the treatment groups than those of the control group. Conclusions/Implications: Overall, the schools in the treatment groups have better progress in the Chinese literacy performance in comparison with that of control group; but most of the progress is observed in character and word level; The treatment effect in the reading comprehension is not significant. Our findings also indicate that the treatment does reduce the chances of students developing reading difficulty and increase the chances of returning to peer-level compared with the control group. The longer the intervention duration, the better results and lower the odds of students developing reading difficulty.起始頁-結束頁：27-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201211.37030023篇名：口吃兒童音韻能力與構音能力之研究並列篇名：Comparing the Phonological and Articulation Abilities between Stuttering and Nonstuttering Mandarin-Speaking Children作者：陳緯玲(Wei-Lin Chen);楊淑蘭(Shu-Lan Yang)關鍵字：口吃兒童;字韻歷程;非詞複誦;音韻能力;構音能力;聲韻覺識;stuttering children;phonological process;non-word repetition;phonological ability;articulation ability;phonological awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：構音障礙與音韻障礙為口吃兒童最常被研究之言語障礙，有關說中文口吃兒童之構音能力與音韻能力，則尚無研究加以探討，因此本研究之目的在探討口吃兒童與一般兒童在音韻能力與構音能力的差異情形。研究者以24名口吃兒童及24名非口吃兒童，共計48名為研究對象，施測修訂中文口吃嚴重度評估工具（兒童版），篩選出口吃兒童與非口吃兒童，再進行語言樣本分析，之後施測聲韻覺識測驗、音韻覺察測驗、非詞複誦和電腦版構音／音韻異常篩選測驗，二組資料以獨立樣本t檢定進行統計考驗，探討口吃兒童與一般兒童在音韻能力與構音能力的差異情形。本研究結果發現：口吃兒童與一般兒童僅在音韻能力表現之「聲韻覺識測驗」之聲韻結合分測驗得分、「音韻覺察測驗」總分和「非詞複誦」正確率達顯著差異，皆是一般兒童得分高於口吃兒童，而其他之音韻能力測量二組並無顯著差異；在構音能力表現，二組則無顯著差異，因此本研究的結論口吃兒童似乎在部分音韻能力的表現不如一般兒童，但在構音能力的表現並沒有異於一般兒童。建議在評估兒童口吃時，應將音韻能力列為評估項目之一，尤其是有關聲韻拼合、音韻分辨和非詞複誦的能力。英文摘要：Purpose: The Covert Repair Hypothesis (CRH) proposed by Postma and Kolk (1993) states that disfluencies reflect the interfering side effects of covert and pre-articulatory repairing of speech programming error during an ongoing speech. Moreover, covert repair occurs during the formulation of the phonetic plan and prior to the translation of articulatory commands into speech movements by the motor system (Postma & Kolk, 1993). These researchers suggested that people who stutter have more deficits in their phonetic plans, thus, more occasions for error correction, which result in the breakdowns of their speech; that is, stuttering is a normal reaction of detection and repair to an abnormal phonetic plan and the formulation of speech (Kolk & Postma, 1997). Based on the CRH, children with stuttering have inferior abilities in phonological processing and articulation abilities compared to children without stuttering. Therefore, we compare the phonological and articulation abilities between stuttering and non-stuttering school-age children that speak Mandarin. Methods: All the participants were assessed with the Revised Stuttering Severity Instrument-3 for children (SSI-3, Mandarin Edition), which resulted in 24 pairs of stuttering and non-stuttering children. Furthermore, the measures of Phonological Awareness Inventory (PAI) and Phonological Perception Inventory (PPI) were collected. All children's Nonword-Repetition (NR) performances including the Accuracy Ratio and Stuttering Syllable Ratio were calculated, and their speech samples were analyzed to find their phonological processes (PP). The correct percentages of consonant, vowel, and tone were obtained with the Articulation/Phonological Disorder Screen Test (A/PDST) to measure articulation abilities. Thereafter, t tests were employed to examine whether differences existed in the collected phonological and articulation measures between the 2 groups. Results/Findings: The results indicated that nonstuttering children had better phonological abilities through the Phoneme Blending assessment of PAI, the Total Score of PPI, and the Accuracy Ratio of NR, than those of the stuttering school-age children. However, no differences appeared in the articulation abilities of the stuttering and non-stuttering groups. School-age children with stuttering may have had inferior performances, compared to children without stuttering, for several phonological abilities including phoneme blending, total discrimination, and phonological working memory. Nevertheless, the 2 groups performed similarly for articulation ability tests. Conclusion/Implications: The etiology of stuttering may originate from the deficits that exist in phonological processes rather than the articulation skills of children with stuttering. We compare the findings of this study to those of previous studies (English) and propose several interpretations. In addition, we discuss the limitations of our study and worthwhile suggestions for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：59-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201211.37030034篇名：國小學生內在動機、學科知識與創造力表現關聯之研究：教師創造力教學的調節效果並列篇名：The Relationship among Intrinsic Motivation, Subject Knowledge, and Creative Performance of Students: The Moderating Effect of Teachers' Creativities in Teaching Behavior作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：內在動機;創造力表現;創造力教學;學科知識;intrinsic motivation;creative performance;creativity teaching;subject knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：大約近十年，社會科學領域的學者多已接受了組織現象是宏觀因素與微觀因素相互影響的多層次現象，並將此觀念應用於實證研究。但整體來看，多層次分析仍屬相對少數，國內教育界有關國小學童的創造力研究涉及多層次的論述更是少數。本研究以學生個體層次的內在動機、學科知識與教師層次的創造力教學為自變項，探討三者對學生創造力表現的影響，其中教師創造力教學包含提升創造力意向與增進創造力技能兩大構面，而學生的創造力表現則以共識評量技術邀請三大類型專家衡量之。本研究採用問卷調查法，針對43所學校中333位國小教師以及3,330位國小高年級學生的調查，使用階層線性模式分析變項之間的關係，分析步驟包括虛無模式、隨機參數迴歸模式、截距預測模式以及斜率預測模式。分析結果顯示內在動機、數理知識以及提升創造力意向對創造力表現有顯著的直接影響效果，且此影響為正向的影響效果。進一步的脈絡調節分析顯示，提升創造力意向於內在動機與創造力表現間具有正向的調節效果，代表內在動機高的學生原本創造力也會較高（正向關係），而在教師高度強調提升創造力意向的班級中，這樣的助益效果更強。但創造力意向在數理知識與創造力間扮演著負向的調節效果，代表教師的提升創造力意向教學對於高學科知識學生的加乘效果並不如低學科知識的學生。依據上述結果，本研究針對學生的創造力發展提出對學校及教師的相關建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Improving creativity is an increasingly important national goal in Taiwan for meeting the challenges of knowledge-based economies. In recent years, numerous competitions for encouraging creativity were funded by public and private sectors, and several government programs targeted the cultivation of innovative power. The interest in multilevel research has just begun in Taiwan. The objectives of this research are twofold. Researchers of organizational behavior and administrative school management have increasingly emphasized the importance of multilevel research. Furthermore, psychologists from various fields have recently highlighted the importance of creativity in educational settings. Recent studies have also indicated that factors other than intelligence such as personality traits (e.g., intrinsic motivation and subject knowledge) or teachers' traits such as creativity teaching are predictors of students' creativities. Studies regarding creativity have identified critical individual and contextual variables that contribute to creative performance. However, the psychological mechanisms through which these factors influence creative performance were not systematically investigated. In this study, the influences of intrinsic motivation and subject knowledge are individual-level variables, and creativity teaching is a group-level variable when examining the creativity of students. Thus, the purpose of this study is to analyze elementary school students' creativities using multilevel analysis. Methods: The sample used in the study consists of 333 teachers and 3330 students from 43 elementary schools in Taiwan. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) was used to test the moderating effect of creativity teaching for teachers because the individual level and teacher level are analyzed in this study. Findings: Findings showed that the intrinsic motivation, subject knowledge, and promotion of creative intentions directly affected the creativity of students. Conversely, the promotion of creative intentions had positive moderating effects on the relationship between intrinsic motivation and creativity. Furthermore, the promotion of creative intentions had negative moderating effects on the relationship between subject knowledge and creativity. Conclusions/Implications: The important relationship factors were the intrinsic motivation, subject knowledge, and the promotion of creative intentions. Furthermore, the promotion of creative intentions had different moderation roles. These findings have important implications for families, teachers, and especially for those immediately involved in nurturing the creativity of children such as parents and teachers. This study provides several discussions and suggestions based on these results.起始頁-結束頁：89-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201211.37030045篇名：循著中介系統的脈絡來探討特教與幼教老師在自然情境中的合作歷程並列篇名：Education Teachers and Preschool Teachers from the Mesosystem Perspective作者：劉凱(Kae Liu);曾淑賢(Shu-Hsien Tseng)關鍵字：中介系統;合作歷程;自然情境;特教巡迴輔導老師;學前融合教育;mesosystem;collaboration;natural environment;itinerant special education teacher;early inclusion期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以質性研究取向深入探討特教巡迴輔導老師和幼教老師在融合情境中的合作歷程。<U+784F>究者提供自然情境教學支持的特教巡迴輔導，進入11所沒有特教資源的私立托兒所達三年。由於特教老師和特殊幼兒構成一個微觀系統，幼教老師和特殊幼兒也形成一個微觀系統，兩者之間聯繫而成的中介系統為本<U+784F>究提供了分析與詮釋的思維脈絡。<U+784F>究資料主要來自<U+784F>究者參與觀察的個人札記、訪談三位特教巡迴輔導老師和五位幼教老師所得到的資料以及相關記錄文件。整個合作歷程展現出：一、合作關係不會自然發生，必須先了解彼此的需求與期待；二、初入場域，建立以解決問題為取向的關係是關鍵；三、啟動中介系統的趨近過程能夠化解專業衝突，堅持溝通與投入時間是不可或缺的轉化要素；四、專業合作的關係往正向發展時，特教老師和幼教老師也獲得專業成長。除了特教老師和幼教老師合作歷程的主軸故事之外，又浮現另一個值得重視的主題：同儕與督導支持對於新手特教巡迴輔導老師的專業發展與專業合作有相當幫助。英文摘要：Purpose: In Taiwan, increasingly more children with special needs attend regular preschool classrooms. In response to the trend of early inclusion, the itinerant early childhood special education (ECSE) teacher has become an important support for children with special needs and preschool teachers. We view the child with special needs as a developing individual within nested systems. The child and his ECSE teacher form one microsystem, whereas he and his preschool teacher form another microsystem. The mesosystem consists of the connection between the two microsystems. This study follows the context of the mesosystem to explore the collaborative process between ECSE teachers and preschool teachers. Methods: We trained itinerant teachers to provide services for 3 years, based on the naturalistic approach, to 11 private preschools that have no special education resources. This study adopted the qualitative approach to explore the collaborative process between ECSE teachers and preschool teachers. The data were collected through participation, observations, documents, and interviews with 3 itinerant ECSE teachers and 5 preschool teachers. Results/Findings: The results of this study indicate (1) collaboration did not occur spontaneously and it was necessary for ECSE teachers and preschool teachers to understand each other's needs and expectations. (2) It was important to gain entry based on a problem-solving approach. (3) Activating the proximal processes was crucial for solving professional conflicts and this took time. (4) Teachers' professional development was facilitated once their connection in the mesosystem moved in a positive direction. In the collaboration process between ECSE teachers and preschool teachers, a discovery about novice ECSE teachers emerged; peer coaching and mentoring support are important for their professional growth and collaboration. Conclusions/Implications: Children with special needs learn through ongoing interaction within their natural contexts rather than in isolated sessions. Early inclusion provides various and abundant opportunities for children with special needs, but preschool teachers need support from ECSE teachers to incorporate daily routines into their teaching. Collaboration is important despite the fact that there might be different professional backgrounds and perspectives between ECSE teachers and preschool teachers. Successful collaboration takes time to work out and does not occur accidentally. This study emphasizes that the key to collaboration success is not a simple formula such as two teachers sitting side by side, but arises from two teachers working together toward a common goal, that is, helping the child with special needs. Leadership was not sufficient and sometimes decentralization and equalitarianism yield better results during this process. When itinerant services became a regular and stable support for preschool teachers, some aspects changed such as the teacher role, interaction, and relationships between ECSE teachers and preschool teachers. The child with special needs benefits the most. In addition, a novice ECSE teacher who has support from peers or mentors does better than one who faces a mesosystem alone.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201207.37020016篇名：社交技巧訓練對高功能自閉症及亞斯柏格症者介入成效之後設分析並列篇名：A Meta-Analysis of Social Skills Intervention for Individuals with High-Functioning Autism and Asperger Syndrome作者：吳佳蒨(Chia-Chien Wu);鈕文英(Wern-Ing Niew)關鍵字：社交技巧訓練;高功能自閉症;亞斯柏格症;後設分析;social skill intervention;high function autism;Asperger syndrome;metaanalysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討2000至2011年國外33篇高功能自閉症及亞斯柏格症者社交技巧訓練單一個案研究的現況，並以不重疊比率，後設分析在不同參與者特徵、介入作法和評量情境上成效是否有差異。結果發現多數參與者為男性、國小學生，學前及高中職以上者較少，無國中生。學前的效果高於國小，高中職以上者成效很好；女性的成效不如男性。單一介入者的篇數和效果皆高於多重；成人中介（家長最少）多於同儕及兩者結合，成人及同儕中介成效中等。大多採個別介入，團體加個別介入效果極佳，個別為中等效果，團體介入則稍有效。模擬情境和其中包含自然情境成分的介入最多，效果中等，而自然情境介入無效。採認知行為取向最多，它和行為取向皆為中等效果，認知取向稍有效。多數介入一種技巧，其中社交認知者較少，且僅稍有效；沒有單獨介入非語言溝通，多將之結合其他三種（社交起始、互惠及認知）；介入三種效果極佳，其次是一種，兩和四種僅稍有效。模擬情境評量優於自然，分屬中等和稍有效果。習得成效中等，短期類化稍有效；而短、長期維持及長期類化無效。由此結果建議結合認知和行為取向優點的社交技巧訓練，促進其維持與類化成效；加強社交技巧介入信實度和社會效度的實施，團體結合個別的社交技巧訓練研究，並探究在自然情境實施有效介入和提升自然情境評量效果的方式。英文摘要：Purpose: This study used meta-analysis to explore the application and effect of 33 social skill interventions on individuals with high functioning autism and Asperger syndrome.Methods: Meta-analysis was adopted to analyze studies published in peer-reviewed journals in English between 2000 and 2011. The studies used single case designs. Percentage of non-overlapping (PND) was employed to calculate effect sizes. Findings: Most participants were males from elementary school. Fewer participants came from preschool, high school, or postsecondary school and none came from junior high school. Social skill interventions were more effective on participants from preschool than from elementary school. The effects on high school and postsecondary students were high; however, the effect on female students was less than on males. Single interventions were more frequent than were multiple ones, and the effect of the former was better than was the latter. Adult interventions (less parental participation) were more frequent than peer interventions and more frequent than a combination of both types of interventions. The effects of adult and peer mediated interventions were moderate. The individual format was used widely. The effect of an intervention delivered by combining the group format with the individual format was excellent; the effect of the individual format was moderate, and the group format alone was mild in effectiveness. Simulated settings with authentic components were employed and had moderate effects; natural settings had no effect. A cognitive behavioral approach was most often employed and was moderately effective. A behavioral approach was also effective. However, a cognitive approach had only a mild effect. Most studies targeted only one type of social skill; a few studies targeted social cognition with mild effect No study targeted nonverbal communication alone. However, certain studies targeted nonverbal communication combined with other types of social skills. Studies that targeted any 3 types of social skills were highly effective. Studies that targeted only 1 type of social skill were the next most effective. Studies targeting 2 or 4 types of social skills were mildly effective. Interventions had a greater effect when the assessment was held in simulated settings versus natural settings. Simulated settings were moderately effective, whereas natural settings had no effect. Finally, the effect of acquisition was moderate, and the effect of short-term generalization was mild; however, short-term and long-term maintenance and long-term generalization had no effect. Those studies that collected treatment integrity and social validity data had effects that were better than studies that did not collect these data. Conclusions/Implications: first, increasing social skills studies of intervening preschool, secondary, postsecondary, and female individuals with high functioning autism and Asperger syndrome, social cognition, by group format and combining group with individual format, with peers and families' participation. Second, implementing social skills studies which emphasize treatment integrity and social validity, analyze maintenance and generalization effects, inquire into the methods of advancing intervention effects at natural settings.起始頁-結束頁：29-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201207.37020027篇名：共享式注意力多元介入方案療效研究：三名學前中高功能自閉症男童的探究並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Multi-Component Joint Attention Intervention in Three Middle-to-high Functioning Boys with Autism作者：江淑蓉(Shu-Jung Chiang);彭雅凌(Ya-Lin Peng);姜忠信(Chung-Hsin Chiang);林家慶(Chia-Ching Lin)關鍵字：共享式注意力介入;自閉症兒童;家長訓練;區別嘗試訓練;環境教學模式;Joint attention intervention;autism;parent training;discrete trial training;milieu teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：共享式注意力（joint attention, JA）為自閉症兒童的核心缺陷之一，且與語言、社會互動、遊戲及模仿能力的發展有密切關係。本研究旨在探討使用合併取向，同時納入家長訓練的模式，對中高功能自閉症兒童進行JA介入的直接與伴隨能力成效。本研究採多重個案設計，以3名4歲2個月至4歲6個月的中高功能自閉症男童為對象，進行每週3次、每次30-45分鐘、為期兩個月共24次的介入。介入採取結合區別嘗試訓練與環境教學的模式，並加入家長訓練。介入成效由獨立於介入的施測者，以標準化與半結構式工具評估能力變化，並紀錄家長自陳式報告。評量時間點分為介入前、後與介入後3、6個月追蹤共4次，療效認定是將介入能力的進步程度與過去團體研究的顯著進步值相較，等同或超過該數值時，定義為具療效。結果發現，此介入模式能有效促進受試兒童的JA進展並達類化效果，特別是主動性JA的提升最明顯，且受試兒童的注意狀態與家長的回應性能力有正向關係。此外，JA介入也帶來語言理解、象徵性遊戲、社會互動能力的伴隨成效，能力進展的維持期約在3-6個月之間。總結來說，本研究的JA介入法確能對自閉症兒童帶來直接及伴隨能力的成效，與先前團體研究結果類似，但伴隨成效的維持期相對較短。未來研究可探討維持療效的因子，亦可以實驗法擴大樣本並納入控制組、受試對象可以降低年齡，安排不同訓練頻率與密集度，來探究介入成效。英文摘要：Purpose: Joint attention (JA) is one of the core deficits in children with autism, associated with other developmental abilities such as language, play, social ability, and imitation. The current study uses multiple-case design with a combined approach for a JA intervention program including parent training to investigate the effects of JA and its collateral abilities for 3 children with middle-to-high functioning autism. Methods: Three 4- year old boys (CA = 48-52 months, MA = 26-30 months) with middle-to-high functioning autism were diagnosed with DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ADOS (Lord et al., 2000) by a multidisciplinary team including a psychiatrist, pediatrician, and psychologists. The children and their mothers participated in this individual program, conducted in 24 sessions and followed up 3 and 6 months later. The program included discrete trial training (DTT) and milieu teaching method adapted from Kasari et al. (2006, 2010). Parent training sessions were also simultaneously included in the program. Each child training session was approximately 30 minutes, 3 times per week, for a total of 24 sessions. The DTT and milieu teaching approaches were used on the table time and floor time separately. The JA intervention program for parents was based on the authors' clinical experience and followed the Parent JA Intervention Manual (PJAIM). For the first half of the parent training from session 1 to 12, the interventionist used the PJAIM as a reference to explain to the parent what was going on from a one-way mirror while parents observed their child's training session in the playroom. From sessions 13-24, the parent was invited to the playroom to interact with the child, guided by the interventionist for 15 minutes after the child's training session. The intervention outcomes were collected through standardized tools/tasks, structured and unstructured activities by independent testers, and from parent reports. The threshold for intervention efficacy defined by these gain scores in our measurements equaled or exceeded those values in the interventional group of previous published studies. Findings: The results show that the 3 children improved their JA skills and joint engagement state after the JA intervention program. The children improved from pointing for requesting an object to showing/giving an object to a person, and developed from unengaged or object engagement to supported joint engagement in the postintervention test. Similar improvements are shown in the three-month follow-up test. Parent responsiveness was also highly associated with joint engagement between parents and children. Other collateral effects on relevant abilities including receptive language, symbolic play, and social ability were also noticeable, and were maintained 3-6 months. Conclusions/ implications: The results support that children with autism receiving our JA intervention program improved their JA skills, joint engagement state, and relevant abilities, similar to previous studies; however, the maintenance was shorter. Further studies need to explore the variables that influence the effects maintained, and to include a large sample and a control group to extend to younger children with autism, and to evaluate efficacy while arranging different intensities or frequencies of parent training sessions.起始頁-結束頁：59-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201207.37020038篇名：亞斯柏格症學生在魏氏兒童智力量表－第四版（WISC-IV）的表現並列篇名：The Performance of Students with Asperger Syndrome in the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Fourth Edition (WISC-IV)作者：吳沛璇(Pei-Hsuan Wu);張正芬(Cheng-Fen Chang)關鍵字：亞斯柏格症;智力;認知組型;魏氏兒童智力量表－第四版;Asperger syndrome;intelligence;cognitive profile;Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Fourth Edition期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去國內外關於亞斯柏格症（以下簡稱AS）認知表現的大型研究不多，適逢WISC-IV（中文版）出版之際，藉由本研究瞭解AS學生的認知表現情形，並且進一步探討不同年齡階段AS學生，是否有不同的認知特質表現。本研究選取國小一到三年級、國中七到九年級各25名通過鑑定之AS學生作為研究樣本，為了避免練習效果，所有受試者在兩年內沒有施測過魏氏兒童智力量表，且性別比例接近過去的調查數據。主要的研究結果如下：1.不同年齡組的AS學生表現並無顯著的差異，但發現AS學有獨特的認知組型。不論是國小組或國中組的AS學生，其全量表智商表現均高於平均數，其中以語文理解指數（VCI）的表現最好，高於平均數1∼1.5個標準差，知覺推理（PRI）次之；處理速度指數（PSI）的表現最弱，明顯低於平均數，分測驗的表現結果也呈現一致的趨勢。2.內在差異部分，AS學生VCI-WMI、VCI-PSI以及PRI-PSI三組因素指數間呈現顯著差異，代表AS學生跟常模兒童相較起來，有比較大的內在差異。而在AS團體中，也發現四個因素指數間有達到統計上的顯著差異，代表AS學生內在能力的表現較不一致且差異值在常模中屬罕見。另外，在三組分測驗比較和歷程分數差異比較上，只有少數的AS學生呈現有顯著差異的情形，較沒有一致的發現。AS學生在認知組型上，有顯著的優弱勢表現及內在差異，這樣的訊息，可以提供相關人員在進行教學及教材設計時，能夠從其語言優勢出發，並且針對他們思考及提取速度的部分，進行彈性調整，以利AS學生更有效的學習。英文摘要：Purpose: Previous studies have revealed a unique cognitive profile in Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs). In this study, we determine the intellectual performance of students with Asperger syndrome (AS), and uncover whether different qualities of cognitive performance exist between different ages of students with AS. Methods: We adopted the Chinese version of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children - Fourth Edition (WISC- Ⅳ) Chinese version to evaluate intellectual performance of students with AS. Twenty-five students with AS from 1st to 3rd grade (elementary school student group) and 7th to 9th grade (junior high school student group) were selected as the study participants, who were identified as persons with AS by hospitals and educational committees. To avoid training effect, participants were all requested not to use the WISC in the last two years. The sex ratio of participants close to that of previous investigations. Findings: This study found that (1) Although no statistically significant difference existed in the IQ scores and 14 subtest performances between the two groups of students with AS, the WISC-Ⅳ found unique cognitive patterns. Whether the students with AS was from elementary school student group or junior high school student group, their performance in the full-scale IQ was higher than the mean value. Among the 4 factor indices, students showed the best performance on the Verbal Comprehension Index (VCI) the weakest on the Processing Speed Index (PSI). Among the 14 subtests, the subtests in VCI have the best performance as well, whereas performance on symbol substitution and symbol search in the PSI was relatively weak. (2) In internal performance differences, significant differences showed up in the performance of students with AS on the VCI-WMI, VCI-PSI, and PRIPSI. The score gap reveals relatively large internal differences in the comparison between students without AS. For the AS group, statistically significant differences existed between the 4 factor indexes, showing inconsistent performance in the intrinsic ability of students with AS. The variation is rare in the norm. In addition, there were few students with AS showed a significant difference without consistence in the comparison of the 3 subtests and process score difference. Conclusions/Implications: This study shows that the students with AS have higher intellectual performance than normal group, particularly in VCI indices. Of the 4 factor indices, students with AS only showed a significant weakness on the PSI. Consistent results also appear in subtests. As a result, we have a better knowledge of how to design educational programs. For example, using more descriptions about new knowledge, and increasing thinking and responding time.起始頁-結束頁：85-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201207.37020049篇名：臺、美「特殊教育導論」教科書之比較探究並列篇名：Comparative Study of "Introduction to Special Education" Textbooks in Taiwan and the United States作者：劉芷晴(Chih-Ching Liu);林文田(Wen-Tien Lin)關鍵字：比較教育;特殊教育;特殊教育導論;教科書;comparative education;special education;introduction to special education;textbooks期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的在分析並比較臺灣與美國兩地之「特殊教育導論」教科書，以臺灣（十三所）與美國（十所）設有特殊教育系所開課之「特殊教育導論」指定教科書為研究對象，選取臺灣與美國各六本教科書進行比較與分析。本研究先以選取之教科書進行數據指標分析，接著分析各書內容之特教教師的基本能力內涵、特殊教育重要主題的涵蓋程度及各書的特色，最後輔以教科書作者之訪談分析。研究結果發現：一、臺灣特教導論教科書在頁數、章節數、每章之圖表數、引用文獻量、每章引用文獻量，以及10年內文獻比例，均低於美國特教導論教科書。二、美國特教導論教科書能提供不只一種特教教師基本能力指標作為編寫教科書之依據，臺灣則無。三、臺灣教科書整體而言涵蓋主題的層次較美國教科書低，但無論臺、美特教導論教科書，其內容均能反映出當代特教議題與趨勢。四、臺、美特教導論教科書各具特色。五、造成臺、美特殊教育導論差異之可能原因主要有特教發展趨勢、教科書需求量及學術生態等不同。最後，提出國內在編撰、選用及出版特教導論教科書及未來研究方向之建議。英文摘要：Purpose: The course of ”Introduction to Special Education” is getting more and more important for today's teacher education, and the textbooks play the critical role. This study analyzes and compares ”Introduction to Special Education” textbooks in Taiwan and in the United States. Methods: The authors focused on 6 textbooks, both in Taiwan and in the United States, chosen from ”Introduction to Special Education” syllabi. These syllabi were gathered from 13 special education departments in Taiwan and the top 10 special education graduate schools or departments in the United States in 2010. The study processes are as follows: First, the authors reviewed the content of these textbooks to examine the statistical data, including the numbers of pages, chapters, tables, figures, total numbers of tables and figures, tables and figures per chapter, reference, references per chapter, and the proportion of references. Second, the authors also analyzed the contents of each textbook by the criteria of CEC's Initial Content Standards for Special Educators. The 10 standards are the foundations, development, and characteristics of learners, individual learning differences, instructional strategies, learning environments/social interactions, language, instructional planning, assessment, professional and ethical practice, and collaboration. Next, the authors analyzed the contents of each textbook by the main topics of ”Issues and Trends in Special Education”. The 12 topics include related laws, classification and education, the least restricted environment and free appropriate education, inclusion, a barrier-free environment, assistant technology, early intervention, IEP, career transition, teamwork, parent involvement, and welfare. Lastly, the authors interviewed 2 textbook writers in Taiwan. Findings: (1) Of the textbooks in Taiwan, the numbers of pages, chapters, tables, and figures per chapter, reference, references per chapter, and the proportion of references in a decade were less than in the United States. (2) Textbooks in the United States are based on more than one indicator of the basic special education teacher skills, but the textbooks in Taiwan are not. (3) The main topics of ”Issues and Trends in Special Education” in Taiwanese textbooks are less completed than in U. S. textbooks; however, both reflect the issues and trends in contemporary special education. (4) Taiwanese and U.S. textbooks possess some special characteristics individually. Conclusions: The reason for the differences between textbooks of the 2 countries may be the diverging tendency of special education in each country, different market demand amount of special education textbooks, and the diverse states of the special education academic community. Finally, the authors suggest practices for editing, composing, and using the ”Introduction to Special Education” textbooks in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201203.370100110篇名：延長言語時長與刻意停頓對痙攣型腦性麻痺兒童言語清晰度的影響並列篇名：Effect of Prolonged Speech and Deliberate Pauses on the Speech Intelligibility of Adolescents with Spastic Cerebral Palsy作者：張曉涵(Hsiao-Han Chang);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：言語自然度;言語清晰度;痙攣型腦性麻痺;說話速度;調整說話速度;speech naturalness;speech intelligibility;spastic cerebral palsy;speaking rate;rate control期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討延長言語時長和刻意停頓訓練方案介入對痙攣型腦性麻痺兒童言語清晰度與言語自然度的影響。採前後測實驗設計，實驗組為十六位痙攣型腦性麻痺兒童，接受延長言語時長和刻意停頓訓練方案；另外十四位痙攣型腦性麻痺兒童為對照組，接受互動式語文訓練方案。分別於訓練前、訓練結束後三天內、訓練結束三週後收錄受試者的語言樣本，進行聽知覺評估與聲學分析，以了解延長言語時長和刻意停頓訓練的介入效果與短期保留效果。研究結果顯示：一、延長言語時長和刻意停頓訓練的介入有效提升腦性麻痺兒童言語清晰度，且提升效果顯著優於互動式語文訓練方案；此外，亦可降低說話速度，且其音節時長、停頓時長與停頓數量隨之增加，但言語自然度則會受影響而略為降低；對照組前後測言語清晰度與自然度的表現雖達顯著差異，但清晰度進步幅度有限。經共變數分析結果顯示，實驗組提升言語清晰度、放慢說話速度的效果皆較控制組佳。二、經三週的追蹤，實驗組在言語清晰度、說話速度及時間性聲學特徵仍持續保留介入效果；對照組的言語清晰度同樣有保留介入效果。經共變數分析，實驗組在維持期的言語清晰度表現顯著地優於控制組。綜合來看，雖然延長言語時長和刻意停頓訓練會使受試者言語自然度受到影響而稍有降低，但此訓練方案卻可有效且明顯的提升腦性麻痺兒童的言語清晰度。本研究針對此訓練方案對腦性麻痺兒童言語清晰度與言語自然度的可能影響原因加以討論，並對未來語言治療介入與研究提出建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This study explores the effect of prolonged speech and deliberate pause training on the speech intelligibility and naturalness of adolescents with spastic cerebral palsy. Methods: For the sample, we selected 16 adolescents (10 boys, 6 girls) with spastic cerebral palsy, who had received 8 sessions of prolonged speech and deliberate pause training. An additional 14 adolescents (9 boys, 5 girls) with spastic cerebral palsy, who had participated in the interactive language program, were recruited for the control group. Before and after the interventions, the participants' speech samples (including nine 6- to 12-word sentences and one short essay of 71 words) were collected using the same procedure to assess their speech intelligibility, speech naturalness, speaking rate, and temporal acoustic features (i.e., syllable duration, pause duration, and pause frequency). Changes between the pre- and post-training phases were measured to evaluate the training effects. Results/Findings: The results showed that (1) the prolonged speech and deliberate pause training was effective for improving the participants' speech intelligibility, reducing their speaking rate, lengthening their syllable duration, and increasing their pause duration and frequency. However, we observed that a few participants' speech naturalness decreased after undergoing the training. Although the control group experienced significant differences regarding speech intelligibility and naturalness, the effects of the interactive language program for increasing speech intelligibility were limited. Based on the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) results, the post-training performances of the experimental group differed significantly from those of the control group. This shows that the effect of the training for improving speech intelligibility was greater in the experimental groups than in the control group. (2) After 3 weeks of follow-up session, the effects of the prolonged speech and deliberate pause training on the participants' speech intelligibility and speaking rate were maintained. The speech intelligibility of control group was also maintained. According to the ANCOVA results, during the maintenance period, the speech intelligibility of the experimental group was significantly superior to that of the control group. Conclusions/Implications: The results of this study indicate that prolonged speech and deliberate pause training can improve the speech intelligibility of speakers with spastic cerebral palsy in clinical settings. A slight reduction in speech naturalness may be an acceptable sacrifice for a significant improvement in speech intelligibility. The effect of the interactive language program on speech intelligibility and naturalness among speakers with cerebral palsy still requires further investigation. Future studies can emphasize identifying slowing speaking rates that are effective for increasing speech intelligibility while simultaneously retaining naturalness. Finally, this study presents a discussion on the effect of this training program for improving speech intelligibility and presents suggestions for future speech training program designs.起始頁-結束頁：27-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201203.370100211篇名：學前聲韻處理、快速唸名與視覺記憶能力預測小一學童識字困難效能之檢測並列篇名：The Accuracy of Predicting Grade-1 Character Reading Difficulties of 5-year-old Kindergarteners Using Phonological Processing, RAN, and Visual Memory作者：宣崇慧(Chung-Hui Hsuan);蘇政輝(Cheng-Hui Su);陳必卿(Bi-Chin Chen);余孟儒(Mong-Ju Yu);王涵(Han Wang);張文真(Weng-Chen Chang);邱郁芬(Yu-Feng Chu)關鍵字：快速自動唸名;視覺記憶;預測指標;聲韻處理;識字困難;RAN;visual memory;predictors;phonological processing;character reading difficulties期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究是一個追蹤研究，探討幼兒大班時四類認知技能，即聲韻處理（包括聲韻覺識與聲韻解碼）、快速自動唸名、視覺記憶對一年級下學期識字困難的預測效果。研究者從兒童幼稚園大班下學期開始（4－6月），為330名學前幼兒進行相關認知技能的測量，當同一批兒童國小一年級上學期開始（9月）及下學期結束時（6月），再以標準化測驗測量其識字量，扣除流失人數後，第二年總人數為269人，研究者針對識字困難的37人（Z分數低於-1者）及識字正常的50人（Z分數介於0至0.5者），共87人進行區辨分析。結果顯示，識字困難學前顯著預測變項為聲韻解碼、快速自動唸名（Rapid Automatized Naming，RAN）、以及視覺記憶，總正確性為79.3%。在增進識字困難者的預測效能並降低假陰性方面，其重要性由高而低依次為RAN、視覺記憶、以及聲韻解碼。若輔以一上識字（9月），則可使識字困難者預測正確率增加至100%。最後根據本研究結果，在未來預測指標的驗證與應用上提出建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Early reading-related cognitive skills and abilities are proven to be crucial for later reading development. In addition, children's reading abilities can be improved more efficiently if they are diagnosed and addressed earlier. Thus, this study analyzes the effect of predicting which children are likely to experience character reading difficulties during kindergarten to first grade using several reading-related cognitive skills. Methods: The cognitive skills assessed were phonological awareness, phonological decoding by the Tzu-Yin system, rapid automatized naming (RAN), and visual memory. During the last semester of kindergarten, from April 2009 to June 2009, the reading-related cognitive skills of 330 children were assessed. The same cohort of participants was followed through first grade, although only 269 remained. The character reading ability of these children was assessed from September 2009 to June 2010. Discriminant function analysis was employed to identify the best kindergarten performance predictors. We analyzed the data of 87 participants, including 37 children who experienced difficulty reading characters (their Z score for grade 1 character reading was below -1) and 50 children from the control group (their Z score ranged between 0 and 0.5). Results: The results revealed that the significant performance predictors for first graders who experienced difficulty reading characters were phonological decoding, RAN, and visual memory. The total correction rate was 79.3%. Approximately 70.3% of the children who experienced difficulty recognizing characters at the end of first grade had been identified when they were 5 years old as being likely to experience difficulties. Among the predictors, RAN was the most significant variable for predicting which children would experience difficulties reading characters, followed by visual memory and phonological decoding. Nevertheless, 29.7% of the participants predicted to be poor character-readers exceeded expectations (false negative). Additionally, 14% of the children were incorrectly predicted to be unlikely to experience difficulty reading characters (false positive). When associating with the children's character reading performance in September, the accuracy of the prediction rate reached 100%. Additionally, the false negative rate was 0, and the false positive rate gradually declined from 14% to 6%. Conclusions/Implications: This study longitudinally predicted which children were likely to experience difficulties with character recognition by observing the phonological processing, RAN, and visual memory performance of 5-year-old kindergarten students. The main contribution of this study is the development of criteria for identifying children who are likely to experience difficulty developing character recognition abilities during the initial stages of learning to read. The most useful early predictors are the cognitive skills of RAN, visual memory, and phonological decoding, in association with initial character recognition. In this study, children's phonological decoding skills were assessed using the Tzu-Yin system, which is widely employed to connect sounds with words for young children in Taiwan. Thus, the decoding performances may differ when assessing the phonological decoding skills of children who have never used the Tzu-Yin system previously.起始頁-結束頁：53-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201203.370100312篇名：「國小資優生創造傾向量表」之編製研究並列篇名：Development of a Creative Tendency Scale for Gifted Students in Taiwan Elementary Schools作者：李偉清(Wei-Ching Lee)關鍵字：創造傾向;資優生;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;creative tendency;gifted students期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：37卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在針對國小資優生編製一份具有信、效度之創造傾向量表，並比較不同背景資優生在此一測量工具上是否具有組間的不變性。該量表乃根據Williams（1980，1993）的創造傾向理論並參考林幸台和王木榮（1994）的「威廉斯創造性傾向量表」所編製而成，採分層隨機與叢集取樣合併之抽樣方式共獲得有效樣本894份，再依分析的需要將此一樣本隨機分為三等分。先以第一組樣本作探索性因素分析和項目分析，再以第二組樣本進行結構方程模式之驗證性因素分析，然後用第三組樣本做此一測量模式之複核效化，最後則採多群組分析進行逐漸嚴苛之多層次檢驗。結果顯示：本量表之因素結構良好具有建構效度，信度考驗也達到令人非常滿意的標準，且蒐集的資料適配提出的理論模式，而模式的穩定性也通過了最寬鬆至最嚴苛複製策略之統計考驗，另本研究也證實了此一測量工具對不同背景之資優生而言均具有測量的恆等性。英文摘要：Purpose: This study constructs a reliable and valid creative tendency scale for gifted students in Taiwan elementary schools and compares whether groups invariance exists for the different backgrounds of gifted students in this scale. Methods: Based on the theories by Williams (1980, 1993) and referring to the Williams Creative Tendency Scale by Lin and Wang (1994), a designed scale, the Creative Tendency Scale for Gifted Students of Elementary Schools, was used to survey gifted students in Taiwan elementary schools. A total of 894 valid samples were collected by stratified random sampling and cluster sampling. The samples were divided into three sets by a random procedure. The first sample set was analyzed by item analysis and exploratory factor analysis to discover the best theoretical construction and most appropriate items. The second sample set was analyzed by confirmatory factor analysis using structure equation modeling to evaluate the goodness of fit between collected data and the proposed theoretical model in this study. The third sample set was tested by cross-validation. Finally, the different strictness levels in multi-groups were analyzed. Results: The results show factors with great structures and the presence of construction validities in this scale. The reliabilities of the data were also satisfactory. The collected data fitted to the theoretical model and this model stability passed the statistical tests from most loose to most tight replication strategies. Conclusions/ Implications: Based on the previous results, 3 conclusions were made, listed as follows: (1) The Creative Tendency Scale for Gifted Students of Elementary Schools has good reliability and validity and can be used to evaluate the creative tendency of gifted students in Taiwan elementary schools. (2) The Williams (1980, 1993) relational model of creative tendency is a stable, predictive, and valid model. (3) The Williams (1980, 1993) relational model of creative tendency between gifted and regular students of elementary schools is the same. In this study, measurement invariance is confirmed for gifted students with different backgrounds. The study has the following 5 recommendations: (1) This scale only applies to the analysis of creative tendency for gifted students and can not be used to assess cognitive aspects of creativity. (2) This study suggests amending and improving poor indicators of this scale to enhance the individual item reliability of observable variables of this scale. (3) Objects of this study can be extended to other stages of education or other types of gifted students, to assess whether a validity extension is still present in this measurement tool. (4) This study suggests conducting a multi-group analysis for other background variables of gifted students to understand whether measurement invariance exists in this scale. (5) The study suggests adopting a two-stage (pilot study and main study) random sampling of research procedures to view and verify whether this scale possesses appropriate reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：79-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE201203.370100401篇名：行為動力論對提高國小輕、中度智能障礙學童清潔工作之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Behavioral Momentum on Cleaning Behavior for Elementary Students with Mild and Moderate Mental Retardation作者：王識敦(Shih-Tui Wang);林坤燦(Kun-Tsan Lin);王大延(Ta-Yen Wang)關鍵字：智能障礙;非服從行為;清潔工作;類比功能分析多因素設計;區別增強其他行為;行為動力論;刺激控制;mental retardation;noncompliant behavior;the design of analogous multielements;DRO;behavioral momentum;stimulus control期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：36期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討行為動力理論對提高國小輕、中度智能障礙學童清潔工作之影響。受試者為臺北市某國小特教班輕、中度智能障礙學童三名。本實驗研究設計有三：試探性類比功能分析多因素設計，跨受試者多基線設計與ABAB倒返實驗設計。研究結果：實驗一，試探性類比功能分析結果，受試者不願做清潔工作的非服從行為功能在於逃避指令；實驗二，以15秒、10秒、5秒之固定時距區別增強其他行為介入受試者在實驗一所發現逃避指令之非服從行為之功能，研究結果明顯的降低受試者逃避做清潔工作指令之頻率；實驗三，應用行為動力理論以受試者喜愛之遊戲為高可能性行為，帶動低可能性之清潔工作行為，結果明顯提高三位受試者清潔工作的頻率。研究建議：行為動力與區別增強策略可應用在處理智能障礙的非服從行為；輕、中度智能障礙者可應用本研究方法，提高清潔工作效率；行為動力理論可配合刺激控制，建立刺激類化行為。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to explore the effect of behavioral momentum on enhancing the cleaning behavior of elementary school children with mild and moderate mental retardation. Three subjects participated in the study. The experiment included three parts. First, the function of participants' noncompliance has been analyzed by adopting analogous multi-elements. Second, the participants' escape behavior has been reduced by utilizing DRO, using multiple-baseline design across participants. Finally, behavioral momentum has been employed with reversal design in investigating participant's cleaning behavior. The findings were as followed: (a) The participants' behavioral function was to escape from orders; (b) DRO decreased participants' escape behaviors down to objective; (c) The behavioral momentum increased the target behaviors. According to the results of this study, some reflections were made: (a) It is very likely to decrease the noncompliance by using strategy of behavioral momentum and the differential reinforcement of other behaviors; (b) It is suggested that children with mild/moderate mental retardation's cleaning behaviors can be enhanced by utilizing the methods implemented in this study; (c) It is highly recommended that the behavioral momentum, which stimulates the generalization, can cooperate with the design of stimulus control.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201212.00012篇名：A Family-Centered Positive Behavior Support Approach to Intervene Food Refusal Behavior for a Child with Autism並列篇名：家庭本位之正向行為支持方案對自閉症幼童拒食行為之介入成效作者：朱思穎(Szu-Yin Chu)關鍵字：自閉症;拒食;居家介入正向行為支持;autism spectrum disorder;food refusal;in-home intervention;positive behavior support期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：36期出版年：2012中文摘要：研究上指出，自閉症幼兒經常在用餐時出現拒食或偏食行為。本研究旨在評估，藉由家庭為本位的正向行為支持以改善自閉症幼童拒食行為之成效。使用功能性評量的結果，研究人員與家長共同合作、評估、設計、以及執行居家介入方案。根據個案家庭需求，本研究選擇晚餐時間為研究情境，並採以單一受試法之實驗設計探究四個依變項之改變成效。研究結果顯示，幼童嘗試不喜愛食物的比例增高，用餐時間的行為問題也明顯降低。社會效度、家庭品質量表、以及家庭關係量表均顯示正向結果。英文摘要：Empirical research revealed that positive behavior support technique can promote meaningful lifestyle changes across a wide spectrum of persons with disabilities and settings. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of a family-centered positive behavior support approach in the treatment of extreme food refusal behavior in a child with autism spectrum disorders. This single subject study used multiple measurement procedures to monitor the dependent variables and to document implementation of independent variable (i.e., intervention procedure). The researcher served as the primary interventionist throughout the study and collaborated with the family on intervention development and implementation activities. The dinner routine was selected for assessment and intervention. Four dependent variables were measured, and observation data were gathered across baseline, intervention, maintenance, and follow-up phases. The results showed improvement in aberrant behaviors, the increase of acceptance of bite consumption, and successful participation in targeted meal routine from baseline to intervention phases. Further evidence of efficacy of this support approach was found in the modest improvement in social validity, family quality of life, and parental stress. The findings of this investigation indicated that the ecological behavior intervention provided through parent-professional collaboration was acceptable and affective. Moreover, family-professional collaboration provides appropriate frameworks for planning, designing, and implementing positive behavioral support intervention, and for documenting its impact, specifically in the context of early intervention.起始頁-結束頁：37-60資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201212.00373篇名：學前特定型語言障礙兒童進入小學的追蹤研究：語言、識字表現之探討並列篇名：A Longitudinal Investigation of Language and Reading Outcomes in Mandarin Chinese-Speaking Children with Specific Language Impairments作者：錡寶香(Paoh-Siang Chi);張旭志(Xu-Zhi Zhang);洪書婷(Shu-Ting Hung)關鍵字：特定型語言障礙;語言;追蹤研究;specific language impairments;language;longitudinal investigation期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：36期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在追蹤5歲時被鑑定為特定型語言障礙的兒童，在進入學一年級時的語言與閱讀表現。研究參與對象為21名特定型語言障礙兒童，及21名同年齡、同性別、同社經地位配對之一般兒童。這些兒童在進入小學第一學期完成10週注音符號課程之後，接受注音符號能力測驗之施測；並於第二學期期末時接受兒童口語理解測驗、識字流暢性、自編形聲字測驗之施測，以及故事重述敘事語料之蒐集。本研究發現：（1）學前被鑑定為特定型語言障礙的兒童，在小一時（約為二年後）仍有高達57%者的語言表現同樣是符合低於平均數-1.25個標準差或是在百分等級10以下的特定型語言障礙鑑定標準，而剩下未達特定型語言障礙鑑定標準的兒童的語言表現也不盡理想，與常模相較都是位於百分等級20左右；（2）特定型語言障礙兒童的口語理解與表達能力都顯著落後於控制組的一般兒童；（3）相較於一般兒童，特定型語言障礙兒童的注音符號能力、識字能力皆有較大問題。本研究結果支持國外長期追蹤研究的發現，顯示對於特定型語言障礙兒童來說，發展語言常是他們一生持續需要面對的困難。此外，他們在小學開始接受正式讀寫教育時，也出現顯著之識字與閱讀之問題。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to investigate the language and reading outcomes of first graders with and without a history of specific language impairments. Twenty one children diagnosed as SLI at age 5 and 21 control children with normal language development participated in this longitudinal study. Participants' oral language comprehension, oral narratives, and reading abilities were measured. The results indicated that (1)The SLI group performed significantly worse than the normal language development group in oral language comprehension test and oral narratives analyses in terms of story structure; (2) 57% of SLI children identified at age 5 still fitted into SLI diagnosis criteria at age 7; (3)The SLI group performed significantly worse than the normal group in Chinese phonetic symbol task, Word fluency task, and phonogram task, which indicated that a higher risk for reading disabilities for children with SLI. Therefore, the results provide support for the assumption that preschool language impairments represent significant risk factors for future advanced language and literacy development.起始頁-結束頁：61-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201212.00614篇名：視障者在臺北市空間中的移動經驗並列篇名：Spatial Movement in Taipei City for People with Visual Impairments作者：蘇怡帆(Yi-Farn Sue);黃國晏(Kuo-Yen Huang);畢恆達(Herng-Dar Bih)關鍵字：視覺障礙者;空間移動;空間認知;定向行動;people with visual impairments;spatial movement;spatial cognition;orientation and mobility期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：36期出版年：2012中文摘要：視障者在城市中的移動經驗，受到個人身體特質、科技輔具、社會關係、空間規劃與設計等因素之相互作用而得以實踐。本研究以臺北市為研究場域，訪談九位性別、視障狀況不同的視障者，並輔以身心障礙統計、相關法規與媒體報導等二手文本之分析，冀望能夠看見視障者身體的多元樣貌、視障者空間移動的策略與能動性，以及他們的身體認同與抵抗。研究指出來自公共空間環境的限制主要在於空間訊息以視覺為主，造成視障者取得空間訊息的困境；而社會的對應與控管策略，未能體察視障者的身心處境與個體差異，也為視障者在空間中移動帶而困難。接著，特別以公車與捷運此兩種主要大眾交通工具為例，說明視障者因應環境限制的回應策略。最後，則針對視障者空間移動的獨立性與公共性，以及視障者的公民能力與權益，進行討論。英文摘要：The moving experiences of people with visual impairments in cities are affected by the interaction between body, technological objects, social relations, spatial planning design, etc. From perspectives of environmental psychology, existing disability literature has been focused on the environmental barrier and regards people with visual impairments as victims of social and spatial structure. Based on in-depth interviews and observation, this research tried to identify and analyze the various characteristics of the body, strategies and agency of mobility, as well as body identity and resistance for people with visual disability.起始頁-結束頁：93-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201212.00935篇名：啟智學校學生聽力損失出現率初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Study on the Occurrence of Hearing Loss among Students with Intellectual Disability作者：陳小娟(Hsiao-Chuan Chen);鍾勁(King Chung);林珮宇(Pei-Yu Lin);呂文琬(Wen-Wan Lu);蔡志浩(Chih-Hao Tsai)關鍵字：聽力損失;發生率;智障;唐氏症;自閉症;hearing impairment;prevalence;intellectual disability;Down's syndrome;autism期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：35期出版年：2012中文摘要：Persons with intellectual-disability have higher prevalence of hearing impairments. Appropriate hearing examination can effectively identify these problems and prevent the possible harmful consequences in communication, learning, and adaption. The purpose of the study was to investigate hearing status of students with intellectual disability, their pass-rates in different hearing related examinations, the prevalence of hearing loss and the correlation between the prevalence and the various categories of classifications. Subjects were 60 intellectual- disabled students, 45 male and 15 female, who attended a special school in Kaohsiung. Their averaged age was 16.37 (SD = 2.32, range = 7 to 20). Otoscopic examination, tympanogram, and distortion product otoacousitc emissions (DPOAE) were administered. If an abnormal test result was found in any of these examinations, a play or behavioral observation pure-tone audiometry followed. Fifty-one subjects successfully completed these examinations and 9 subjects, 15%, could not be tested for at least one test. ”All normal” was defined as no occlusion in the external canal, type A tympanogram, and hearing within normal limits. Normal hearing was considered as either passing the DPOAE or the averaged hearing threshold at 500 and 2kHz was at 25dB or below. Among the 51 subjects, 26 subjects, 51%, were considered all normal, whereas 22.7% had normal hearing but failed at lest one hearing examination. Eleven subjects, 21.6%, were hearing impaired, 26.3% of the males and 7.7% of the females. When different classification was used, 12.0% of all students tested had mild to moderate hearing loss and 30.0% had severe to profound hearing loss. The prevalence of hearing loss was 100% among students with Down syndrome and 16.6% among students without Down syndrome, 25.0% among students with autism and 20.9% among students without autism, 41.7% among students with multiple handicap and 15.4% among students without multiple handicap. The chi-square showed that the prevalence of hearing loss was related to Down syndrome and the presence intellectual-disabled. It was not related to gender or autism. Only one student was known to have hearing loss prior to the test. Ten more students were found to have hearing loss after the test. The above results revealed that the prevalence of hearing loss was high among students with intellectual disabilities and their hearing loss was often masked by the presence of other disabilities. It is hoped that special education schools and government agencies would be aware of the need and the ramifications of hearing loss on communication and learning. Care takers and teachers' awareness about haring loss is important. In addition, establishing educational audiologist positions and regular hearing service programs to these students are urgently needed.英文摘要：Persons with intellectual-disability have higher prevalence of hearing impairments. Appropriate hearing examination can effectively identify these problems and prevent the possible harmful consequences in communication, learning, and adaption. The purpose of the study was to investigate hearing status of students with intellectual disability, their pass-rates in different hearing related examinations, the prevalence of hearing loss and the correlation between the prevalence and the various categories of classifications. Subjects were 60 intellectual- disabled students, 45 male and 15 female, who attended a special school in Kaohsiung. Their averaged age was 16.37 (SD = 2.32, range = 7 to 20). Otoscopic examination, tympanogram, and distortion product otoacousitc emissions (DPOAE) were administered. If an abnormal test result was found in any of these examinations, a play or behavioral observation pure-tone audiometry followed. Fifty-one subjects successfully completed these examinations and 9 subjects, 15%, could not be tested for at least one test. ”All normal” was defined as no occlusion in the external canal, type A tympanogram, and hearing within normal limits. Normal hearing was considered as either passing the DPOAE or the averaged hearing threshold at 500 and 2kHz was at 25dB or below. Among the 51 subjects, 26 subjects, 51%, were considered all normal, whereas 22.7% had normal hearing but failed at lest one hearing examination. Eleven subjects, 21.6%, were hearing impaired, 26.3% of the males and 7.7% of the females. When different classification was used, 12.0% of all students tested had mild to moderate hearing loss and 30.0% had severe to profound hearing loss. The prevalence of hearing loss was 100% among students with Down syndrome and 16.6% among students without Down syndrome, 25.0% among students with autism and 20.9% among students without autism, 41.7% among students with multiple handicap and 15.4% among students without multiple handicap. The chi-square showed that the prevalence of hearing loss was related to Down syndrome and the presence intellectual-disabled. It was not related to gender or autism. Only one student was known to have hearing loss prior to the test. Ten more students were found to have hearing loss after the test. The above results revealed that the prevalence of hearing loss was high among students with intellectual disabilities and their hearing loss was often masked by the presence of other disabilities. It is hoped that special education schools and government agencies would be aware of the need and the ramifications of hearing loss on communication and learning. Care takers and teachers' awareness about haring loss is important. In addition, establishing educational audiologist positions and regular hearing service programs to these students are urgently needed.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201206.00016篇名：藍芽盲用筆電在盲聾生母子溝通對話之個案研究並列篇名：A Pair of Deafblind Mother-and-Child Communication by the Use of Bluteeth Laptop Computer Assistance: A Case Study作者：曾怡惇(Yi-Tun Tseng)關鍵字：盲聾;盲用筆電;溝通對話;個案研究;deafblind;blind-use computer;communication dialogue;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：35期出版年：2012中文摘要：盲聾生因視覺及聽覺管道的缺損，詞彙概念的學習，是以觸覺為主要輸入與輸出管道。本研究以藍芽盲用筆電為盲聾生母子溝通對話的主要輔具，研究目的，藉由盲用筆電的使用，探討盲聾生學習溝通對話時，詞彙概念的理解與表達之發展情形，及母親如何引導盲聾生學習詞彙以發展概念，如何引導盲聾生發展表達能力。本研究結果發現有：（1）盲聾生雖有聽障，仍配戴助聽器學習聽辨語詞的音，練習聽打點字，建立其語言理解與表達能力。從單詞、短句、長句，進而輔以點字卡，練習回顧一天的生活，記錄當天的生活日誌；（2）母親的引導方法，先讓盲聾生觸摸、聞嗅，善用多感官知覺及興趣原則，再以點字詞彙當場教導仿寫，認識物品名稱，繕打正確點字符號，並加強聽覺辨識能力；（3）盲聾生透過盲用筆電的摸讀與確認，有助學習詞彙的正確點法與名稱。盲聾生母子的溝通對話能力，於藍芽盲用筆電使用前後，有諸多的變化與發展。使用藍芽盲用筆電時，須調整之處，本研究亦提出相關建議，以供後續研究之參考。英文摘要：Due to visual and hearing impairments, deafblind students use tactile channel as their input and output main channel to learn vocabulary concept. This study use a blue-teeth laptop computer for the blind as the main communication tool between a deafblind child and his mother. The aim of this study was to explore how the deafblind student develops his vocabulary recognition and expression when he uses the computer for the blind to execute interactive dialogue communication, how the mother guides the child to learn vocabulary words so as to develop his concepts, and how she guides her child to develop the expression abilities. Research findings indicated that this deafblind student used the computer for the blind to touch-read and to confirm the correct vocabulary Braille and the name. Besides, the mother guided the deafblind child to touch-read, smell first to train him sensory perceptions first, and then use the Braille vocabulary to teach him copy the words and recognize the name of the object, type correct Braille signs, and improve his hearing recognition ability. Although he suffered hearing loss, he still wore a hearing aide to learn how to distinguish words between phrases and how to practice typing Braille by dictation. From single word, short sentence, long sentence, and then using the Braille card as an aide, the deafblind student reviewed his one day life as the daily log. The interactive communication ability between the mother and the deafblind child, after this student's using the blue-teeth computer for the blind, showed much change and progress. Suggestions concerning accommodations when using the blue-teeth laptop computer for the blind are made for future researchers' references.起始頁-結束頁：23-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201206.00237篇名：新移民子女資優生學校適應問題之研究－以北部三縣市為例並列篇名：Students from New Immigrant Families at Elementary Schools in Taipei City, New Taipei City, and Taoyuan County作者：黃彥融(Yan-Rong Huang);盧台華(Tai-Hwa Lu)關鍵字：新移民子女資優生;學校適應;文化殊異資優生;gifted students from new immigrant families;school adaptation;culturally diversegifted students期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：35期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討新移民子女資優生的學校適應問題，參與研究之資優生有108名，先選取臺北市、新北市（研究期間仍為臺北縣）及桃園縣之54名新移民子女資優生，再以配對方式另選取54名相同類別、性別與年齡之一般家庭資優生，以研究者自編之「我的學校適應」問卷為研究工具進行問卷調查。最後根據問卷結果，以立意取樣選出新移民子女資優生個案及其資優班教師各四名進行深度訪談。量表及問卷資料以獨立樣本t考驗及單因子變異數分析等方式進行統計考驗，訪談結果則進行內容分析處理。本研究主要結果如下：（1）參與本研究之新移民子女資優生於問卷中的學習方面、同儕互動、師生關係、行為規範、自我概念的五個分量表及整體總分得分皆顯著低於一般家庭資優生，且由新移民子女資優生之高低分得分發現部分新移民資優生確實有學校適應之困難；（2）本研究中之新移民子女資優生雖不因其性別、就讀資優班類型、家庭文化背景及社經地位不同而有學校適應上的差異，但於訪談中發現新移民子女資優生在學校適應方面最需要被關懷的問題為同儕較為不佳且價值觀較為負向，且家庭支援系統對其學校適應頗為重要。最後，研究者根據本研究之結果，針對教育行政機關、教師及未來研究提出重要之建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the school adaptation problems of gifted students from new immigrant families. The researchers investigated all elementary schools at Taipei City, New Taipei City, and Taoyuan County and found 54 new immigrant students receiving gifted programs. By using paired sampling, 54 students of non-new immigrant families from same areas were also participated in this study. A self-designed questionnaire was administered to those 108 subjects. After that, four gifted students of the new-immigrant group and their teachers received in-depth interviews. Data were analyzed by t-test, ANOVA, and the analytic induction. Major findings were as following: (1) The results of the school adaptation problems questionnaires indicated that gifted students from new immigrant families were significantly lower than the gifted students from non-new immigrant families. (2) The findings of the school adaptation problems questionnaires also indicated that no differences in gender, gifted class type, cultural diversity and social status were found among these new-immigrant gifted students. The interview results showed that inter-personal relationship and negative value concepts were the lowest parts which needed to be enhanced. According to the findings, some suggestions were made to the future development of gifted education and following studies.起始頁-結束頁：47-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201206.00478篇名：桃竹苗地區特殊教育教師對於性別平等教育課程執行情形及教學需求之研究並列篇名：The Study of the Implementation and Teaching Needs of Gender Equality Education Curriculum for Special Education Teachers in Taoyuan, Hsinchu, and Miaoli Areas作者：關陵曦(Ling-Si Guan);黃榮真(Yung-Chen Huang)關鍵字：特殊教育教師;性別平等教育課程;執行情形;教學需求;special education teacher;gender equality education curriculum;situation of implementation;needs of teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：35期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在針對桃園、新竹、苗栗地區國小、國中、高中職之資源班、特教班及啟智/特殊教育學校842位特殊教育教師進行問卷調查，並針對21位特殊教育教師進行訪談，藉此分析特殊教育教師性別平等教育課程執行情形及其教學需求。本研究採取問卷調查及半結構式訪談等兩種研究方法，量的統計分析，分別採平均數、標準差、百分比、排序等方式進行資料分析，在質的方面，依研究主題加以編碼，並以恆常比較法進行資料異同之間的比較分析。本研究結果得知：（1）92.1%的特殊教育教師表示支持對自己任教班級學生實施性別平等教育；（2）29%特殊教育教師及六位受訪特殊教育教師認為應從啟蒙的學前教育階段開始實施性別平等教育；（3）教師需要校外支援方面，91.7%參與研究的特殊教育教師優先勾選需要「由相關課程研發單位，編製一系列課程教材」；（4）資源需求方面，93.1%特殊教育教師優先勾選「由相關課程研發單位編製一系列課程教材」之資源需求；（5）研習內容方面，84.9%特殊教育教師優先勾選「性別平等教育教材教法」之研習核心內容；（6）受訪21位特殊教育教師均希冀相關學術單位編製一套性別平等教育課程。兩位研究者依據研究結論，針對學術相關單位及未來研究提出具體建議。英文摘要：This study investigated the current situation of implementation and teaching needs for teachers of gender equality education curriculum in primary schools, secondary schools, vocational high schools with special education classes, resource classes, and special education schools for mental retardation in Taoyuan, Hsinchu and Miaoli areas. Eight hundred forty two questionnaires were collected and 21 teachers were interviewed. Questionnaires and semi-structural interviews were the research methods in this study. Mean, standard deviation, percentage, and rank were used for documental analysis. Coding with topic and constant comparison method were used for qualitative analysis. The results of this study were: (1) 92.1% special education teachers agreed to implement gender equality education; (2) 29% special education teachers and 6 interviewed special education teachers agreed that gender equality education should be implemented in kindergarten, beginning stage of learning; (3) 91.7% teachers chose to design a series of curriculum from ”related curriculum development unit” as the priority; (4) 93.1% special education teachers chose ”a series of curriculum from ”related curriculum development unit”; (5) 84.9% special education teachers chose ”gender equality education teaching materials and methods” as the study core contents; (6) all 21 interviewed special education teachers hoped a series of gender equality education curriculum to be designed by related researcher unit. Two suggestions to academic units and future studies based on the results of this study were provided.起始頁-結束頁：79-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6768/JSE.201206.007901篇名：模糊統計在試題難度上的應用並列篇名：Applying of Fuzzy Statistics in Item Difficulty作者：謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh);吳柏林(Ber-Lin Wu)關鍵字：試題難度評量;模糊統計;模糊相對權重;assessment for test difficulty;fuzzy relative weight;fuzzy statistics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：試題難度評量一直是許多人研究的課題。但傳統方法的五點量表問卷只提供固定尺度的選擇，似乎無法完整地表達受測者真實且複雜的思考。因此本研究將以模糊統計的角度進行試題難度的探討。過去許多研究應用模糊平均數、模糊眾數或模糊中位數等概念於試題難度評量。而本文將以此為基礎，定義一種新的距離， 再透過一些轉換取得試題的難度指標，進而比較各試題之間難度的差異。本研究的另一個重點，是各個不同難度因子的向度來決定各試題的難度。再以模糊相對權重的概念，對各向度的難度指標作加權，進而比較、分析。在此研究中，模糊難度的數值，和IRT的難度b值與試題通過率P值之相關達到一定水準。代表此方法所得出的結果，已有相當程度的驗證。英文摘要：The traditional method of using the Likert scale in questionnaires provides researchers with information of fixed scale choices, which does not allow participants fully express their candid and complex thinking. The current paper applies fuzzy statistics to examine item difficulty of questionnaires. Concepts such as fuzzy mean, fuzzy mode or fuzzy median are applied. Based on the conceptions of fuzzy statistics, we try to define a new distance, which was transformed to obtain an item difficulty index that allows the comparisons between test items. Another focus of this paper is to determine the difficulty level of test items by examining various dimensions of difficulty factors. The weights of the dimensions of the item difficulty were compared and analyzed with the concept of fuzzy relative weight. The fuzzy difficulty index derived from this study shows promising features that is highly correlated with traditional difficulty indices.起始頁-結束頁：207-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201111022篇名：「堅守原則」還是「入境隨俗」：情境與軍事社會化對道德疏離與道德判斷的交互作用效果並列篇名：The Interaction Effects of Military Socialization, on Moral Judgemnets, and Moral Disengagement: Interaction of Scenarios作者：余一鳴(Yi-Ming Yu)關鍵字：情境;道德判斷;道德疏離;moral disengagement;moral judgement;scenario manipulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以兩個子研究探討影響道德脫離的情境及其背後機制。研究一（N=194）以問卷操弄「情境」，並測量受試者之「軍事社會化及「道德疏離」的程度。結果發現在戰時情境下，軍事社會化程度愈高，道德疏離愈高；但在平時情境下，軍事社會化程度愈高，道德疏離程度愈低。研究二（N=197）進一步探討此一現象之內在機制：結果顯示：在戰時情境個體傾向以結果論做為道德判斷的基礎，在平時情境則傾向以義務論做為道德判斷的基礎。整體而言，本研究顯示：軍事社會化程度和情境對道德疏離有交互作用效果，且此種效果是由於道德判斷的差異所引起，在戰時情境下軍校生以結果論做為道德判斷的基礎，因此有較強的道德疏離傾向：在平時的情境下則回歸以義務論為原則的道德判斷，因此道德疏離傾向較弱。英文摘要：This study used research project consisting of two sub studies to explores the scenario and mechanism sthat of influenceing moral disengagement and potential moral judgements. The first one Study I used questionnaire to explore manipulate the scenarios of military socialization to examine the effects of the manipulation on the relationships between scenario and participants' perception of military socialization and moral disengagement and measured participants' degree of military socialization. The results showed that during wartime the higher the perceived military socialization, the higher the moral obstruction disengagement in wartime. However, during peacetime the higher the military socialization, the lower the moral disengagement in peacetime. The results of the second Study 2 one showed that people tend to use teleology as the basis of moral judgement in wartime and tend to deontology during as the basis of moral judgement in peacetime. Furthermore, the impact of moral judgement on moral disengagement were all been verified. Regarding the Interpreting the findings of the current studies, the researcher believe different scenarios effect on have different moral disengagement through its effect on are caused by the differences of moral judgement. In wartime, this is, cadets of military academy used teleology as the basis of moral judgement. In the peacetime, they used regression deontology as the principles of moral judgement for wartime and peacetime, respectively.起始頁-結束頁：229-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201111043篇名：台灣中文字詞教學研究之文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：Review of Literature on Character and Vocabulary Instruction Studies in Taiwan作者：王瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Wang)關鍵字：文獻回顧;詞彙教學;識字教學;character instruction;literature review;vocabulary instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：無論就閱讀簡單觀點模式、訊息處理理論、閱讀發展或是讀寫障礙者的核心問題來看，個體的字詞能力皆是閱讀理解的關鍵要素。因此，如何進行有效的字詞教學是很重要的閱讀研究議題。本文旨在回顧國內1997年到2008年間中文字詞教學研究的現況，文獻來源為發表在有審查制度的期刊論文，共有18篇。結果發現字詞教學研究主題和對象都呈現偏態，咸少對小學四年級以上的學生進行字詞教學；研究主題多是探討融入字理，或降低認知負荷的教學介入，對閱讀困難學生讀寫字的影響，或將閱讀理解納入成效評量的並不多。建議未來的研究可以考慮發展小四以後的字詞補救教學；探究文本調整、自由自主閱讀對字詞學習的影響；識字和寫字能力的關連性；以及比較不同取向之詞彙教學成效。英文摘要：Accuracy and fluency of word identification is essential component of reading comprehension, which is a consensus among researchers from variable theoretical perspectives, including simple view of reading, information processing, and reading development, as well as the core deficit of and special education for individuals with dyslexia. The purposes of this literacy review was conducted to examine the findings and limitations of studies on Chinese character and vocabulary instruction published in academic journals from 1997 to 2008, and to offer some suggestions for future research on reading instruction, including to examine effects on word identification caused by expanding the age range of reading instruction participants, exploring the impact of text accommodation, free voluntary reading on word learning, and comparing the effects of different vocabulary instruction approaches.起始頁-結束頁：253-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201111094篇名：情緒調節在青少年人際依附與心理困擾之中介角色分析研究並列篇名：Attachment, Emotion Regulation, and Psychological Distress: Examining Mediating Effects among Taiwanese Adolescents作者：王櫻芬(Ying-Fen Wang)關鍵字：人際依附;心理困擾;青少年;情緒調適;憂鬱;adolescent;attachment;depression;emotion regulation;psychological distress期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在檢驗國中生的情緒調節能力在其人際依附與心理困擾間的中介角色，以2124名國三學生進行研究。結果發現（1）男生在「依附逃避-母親」、「依附逃避-好友」、「依附焦慮-父親」與「學校生活困擾」上的得分較女生為高；（2）青少年對父親與對母親的依附間呈中度正相關，而對好友的依附與對父母的依附間之相關則較為微弱；（3）與不同對象的依附逃避和依附焦慮和青少年自陳行為困擾、憂鬱情緒間呈顯著正相關；（4）青少年情緒調節能力與自陳行為困擾，憂鬱情緒間呈顯著負相關；（5）對父親與母親的依附焦慮與依附逃避可直接影響自陳心理困擾，亦可透過情緒調節間接影響自陳心理困擾；（6）對好友的依附焦慮可直接亦可透過情緒調節間接影響自陳心理困擾；然而，與預期不同的，好友依附逃避對青少年自陳心理困擾之整體效果未達顯著。本研究結果顯示父母依附和同儕依附與青少年心理困擾間有著不同關聯，依此發現作者提出後續研究以及實務介入上的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the current study was to examine the mediating effects of emotion regulation on the attachment-psychological distress link among Taiwanese adolescents. A sample of 2124 9th graders from Kaohsiung City, Taiwan was recruited to participate in the study, and the structural equation modeling technique was applied to analyze the data. Findings were as followings. First, boys scored higher than girls on Attachment Avoidance-Mother, Attachment Avoidance-Best Friend, Attachment Anxiety-Father, and School Life Disturbance. Second, there existed significant moderate correlations between attachment toward mother and attachment toward father. Yet, the correlations between attachment toward the best friend and attachment toward parents were weak. Third, two dimensions of attachment toward three different targets were significantly and positively related to adolescents' self-reported disturbances and depression. Forth, emotion regulation was significantly and negatively associated with disturbances and depression. Fifth, attachment toward parents had not only direct effects on adolescents' distress but also indirect effects on distress through emotion regulation. Finally, attachment anxiety toward the best friend was directly and indirectly related to distress through emotion regulation. However, attachment avoidance toward the best friend had no significant total effect on distress. Based on these findings, suggestion for future research and implications of interventions on improving adolescent mental health were provided.起始頁-結束頁：273-293資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201111295篇名：親子遊戲治療於家外安置兒童與寄養家庭之依附關係成效與療效因子之分析並列篇名：Intervention Effect and Therapeutic Factors with Filial Therapy in Out-of-Home Placement Treatment作者：張高賓(Kao-Pin Chang)關鍵字：依附關係;家外安置;親子遊戲治療;親職壓力;親職功能;attachment relationship;filial therapy;out-of-home placement;parent stress;parental function期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究乃以單一受試實驗設計，藉由修正式Landreth'親子遊戲治療方案之介入， 視寄養父母為治療代理人，透過方案進行以修復寄養兒童的依附關係，改善親子互動，並減輕其親職壓力，此外也了解療效因子為何。本研究共有寄養家庭四戶參與。寄養父母為三女一男，平均年齡45歲。寄養兒童則為二男三女，平均年齡5歲。研究工具包括Landreth'親子遊戲治療方案、親子遊戲治療技巧檢核表、親子互動關係量表及親職壓力量表。並透過視覺分析與統計分析獲得研究結果。研究發現親子遊戲治療對於增進寄養父母的親職功能、促進親子互動以改善依附關係及滅輕親職壓力有顯著的立即與維持效果。此外增進依附關係的療效因子包括完全的注意／感興趣、隨著直覺行動、避免給建議、避免問問題、將責任回歸給孩子、當孩子投入遊戲時靠近一些、當孩子邀請時能加入遊戲、反應孩子的語言（內容）、反應孩子的感覺／想法／希望、聲調符合孩子的強度／情感、簡短且互動式的回應、表情符合孩子的情感、使用鼓勵／建立自尊的回應。英文摘要：The study was investigated the effects of the modified filial therapy treatment program on parental function, attachment of the adopted children, parent-child relationship, and parent stress of for the adopted children, and foster family, and their with interaction relationship and to test whether the filial therapy treatment program can improve the parental function, attachment of the adopted children, parent-child relationship, and decrease parent stress. The single-subject research design was used in this study. There were The single-subject study was conducted with four foster families involved in this study with three female and one male parents at the average age of was 45 and four the adopted children at the average age was 5. Each family took the Filial therapy program was implemented in each family for ten weeks, and their interaction would be observed and recorded for twenty weeks. The data were as analyzed with the method of visual analysis and statistical analysis. As the result of The study revealed that the data of filial therapy show from three subjects had significant intervening and maintaining efficacy on the parental function, parent-child relationship, and parent stress on three of four participants. In addition The study identified effective the therapeutic factors of the filial therapy, including conveying ”be with” attitudes, allowing child to lead, following child's lead, reflecting child's nonverbal play behavior, reflecting child's verbalizations, reflecting child's feelings/wants/wishes, voicing tones matched child's intensity/affect, responding were briefly and interactive, facial expressions matched child's affect, used encouragement/self-esteem-building responses.起始頁-結束頁：295-321資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201112286篇名：現實治療團體對期貨交易者之交易負向情緒、交易制控信念與交易績效之輔導研究並列篇名：The Effects of Reality Therapy Group Counseling on Futures Traders' Negative Trading Emotions, Trading Locus of Control, and Trading Performances作者：蔡明芳(Ming-Fang Tsai);丁原郁(Yuan-Yu Ting)關鍵字：交易制控信念;交易負向情緒;交易績效;現實治療;期貨交易者;futures traders;negative trading emotions;reality therapy;trading Iocus of control;trading performances期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討現實治療團體對期貨交易者之交易負向情緒、交易制控信念與交易績效之輔導效果。本研究採準實驗設計，以「交易負向情緒量表」、「交易制控信念量表」之施測與1週交易績效之紀錄進行前後測，及團體結束後4週之追蹤測，所得資料以單因子共變數分析。研究結果顯示：1.現實治療團體能立即與持續使實驗組成員降低交易負向情緒、提升交易制控信念。2.現貨治療團體對實驗組成員之交易績效具有立即提升的輔導效果，但不具有持續提升的輔導效果。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to examine the effects of reality therapy group counseling on futures traders' negative trading emotions, trading locus of control, and trading performances. The research used quasi-experimental design and adopted ”Negative Trading Emotion Scale” and ”Trading Locus of Control Scale” for pre- and post-therapy evaluations. In addition, participants' pre- and post-therapy weekly trading performances were also collected. The post-therapy evaluation was to measure 1 week trading performance and conducted a follow-up test 4 weeks after participants' completion of the group therapy. The data were analyzed by using one-way ANCOVA and the result show that : (a) the reality therapy group counseling had significant and continuous effects on reducing experimental group's negative emotions and enhancing their trading locus of control; (b) the reality therapy group counseling had immediate, yet not continuous effects on improving experimental group's trading performances.起始頁-結束頁：323-348資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201203027篇名：探究想像力的意涵與特徵—探索性與驗證性因素分析之發現並列篇名：Meaning and Characteristics of Imagination: Findings from Exploratory Factor Analysis and Confirmatory Factor Analysis作者：許育齡(Yu-Ling Hsu);梁朝雲(Chao-Yun Liang)關鍵字：探索性因素分析;想像（力）;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;exploratory factor analysis;imagination期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在釐清想像力的意涵與能力特徵，並進一步建構與驗證再造性與創造性想像的理論模型。本研究首先分析整理1960-2011年間與想像力研究相關的文獻，釐清想像力的內涵與可能面向，接著，針對兩個教育領域樣本，共計782名受測者調查所得。進行探索性與驗證性因素分析，研究結果印證了「想像力雙因素運作模型」為適切的理論模型。亦即想像力可區分為「創造性想像力」 （creative imagination）與「再造性想像力」（reproductive imagination）：創造性想像力之能力特徵包括：探索力、直覺力、感受力、新穎力、專注力、生產力；再造性想像力則包括：具象力、辯證力、轉用力、有效力；兩者於學習者而言有所差異，然仍具備一定程度之相關。本研究最後針對研究結果，導出想像力進一步研究的理論論題與建議。預期透過能力特徵的引導，進一步帶動領域研究之創新，亦帶動實證研究之進行，創新學理運用與實務延展的新風貌。英文摘要：This study aimed to clarify the meaning and characteristics of imagination, and further construct and confirm the theoretical model of productive and creative imagination. In order to clarify the meaning of imagination and identify its potential characteristics, we first reviewed the literature on imagination between 1960 and 2011 , Next, we surveyed two samples consisting of 782 participators, and performed exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis on the data. As a result two dimensions and 10 characteristics of imagination were emtracted from the data. The first dimension was named creative imagination, including the characteristics of exploration, intuition, sensibility, novelty, concentration, and productivity. The second dimension was named reproductive imagination including the characteristics of crystallization, dialectics, effectiveness, and transformation. The two dimensions show discriminative validity as well as a certain level of correlation. Finally, suggestions for the future research were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：349-372資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201203218篇名：大專校院學生節能減碳行為意圖之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Pro-Environmental Behavioral Intention of Post-Secondary School Students作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);傅惠筠(Hui-Yun Fu)關鍵字：行為意圖;計畫行為理論;節能減碳;behavioral intention;pro-environmental behavior;theory of planned behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要是利用計畫行為理論模式作為基礎論，並參考相關文獻提出延伸變項， 探討大專校院學生的利社會行為、節能減碳認知、價值、主觀規範、知覺行為控制及態度對於節能減碳行為意圖的影響。本研究採用自編之「大專校院學生節能減碳行為意圖問卷」進行施測，共取得有效樣本800份。所得資料以描述性統計、積差相關、徑路分析進行考驗。研究結果顯示整體模型契合度良好，就直接效果而言，個人的知覺行為控制越高，節能減碳的行為意圖就越強烈。就間接效果而言，主觀規範、利社會行為或知覺行為控制越高，皆可導致較佳的節能減碳態度，並造成較高的節能減碳行為意圖。另外，對節能減碳的認知越多並不會導致越佳的態度，而擁有越佳的節能減碳態度則節能減碳行為意圖亦會越強烈。英文摘要：The aim of This study is aimed to the discussion of uncover how environmental awareness, values, subjective norm, perceived behavior control, attitude, and prosocial behavior affect the intention of pro-environmental behaviors. The proposed extension variables were based on the theory of planned behavior (TPB) and related literature. This study implemented a survey with An edited version of the ”Questionnaire on the Pro-environmental Behavioral Intention of Post-secondary School Students” was conducted and obtained a sample of 800 valid samples participants. The obtained data were analyzed with using descriptive statistics, multiple regression analysis, Pearson correlation, and path analysis. Regarding direct effects, the higher the perceived behavioral control is of an individual, the stronger his or her intention is in pro-environmental behaviors. In terms of indirect effects, the higher the subjective norm, prosocial behavior, and perceived behavioral control are the more positive an attitude an individual's attitude will have is, and the stronger his or her intention is in pro-environmental behaviors. Where as a more positive attitude results in stronger intention in pro-environmental behaviors. However, being more profound knowledge able about pro-environmental behaviors does not necessarily lead to a more positive attitude; while a positive attitude results in stronger intention in pro-environmental behavior.起始頁-結束頁：373-387資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201203269篇名：想像力構念之初探並列篇名：The Exploratory Study on the Construct of Imagination作者：邱發忠(Fa-Chung Chiu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);林耀南(Yao-Nan Lin);涂莉苹(Priscilla L.-P. Tu)關鍵字：超越現實;想像力;想像感受;想像產生;beyond reality;imagination;imagination production;imagination sense期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在探究想像力的構念。研究1由蒐集想像力的文獻，及詢問198位大學生對想像力的定義來蒐集想像力的詞彙，並歸納出14類的想像力詞彙，以編製「想像力概念評定作業」。之後，邀請8位創造與想像力專家被要求以配對比較方式，對想像力詞彙進行相異性評定。經由多向度量尺分析發現，想像力包含「想像產生」、「超越現實」及「想像感受」三個成份。研究2要求參與者在進行想像作業時儘量以超越現實的標準來生產點子，而研究3則要求參與者進行想像思考。結果發現，實驗二、三實徵支持了想像力定義模式的超越現實與想像感受構念。本研究所得之想像力構念可引導未來是想像力研究與實務。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the construct of imagination. In Experiment 1, we collected the imagination-related phrases from the reldrted references, as well as 198 undergraduates' definitions of imaginataion. We classified the imagination-related phrases into 14 categories 10 establish ”Imagination Concept Evaluation Task (ICET)”. ”In addition, Eight experts of imagination were asked 10 use paired comparison 10 evaluale the distinctions among the imagination-related phrases. The results of Multidimentional Scaling analysis show that imagination contains three components: imagination production, beyond reality, and imagination response. In Experiment 2, the participants were either required to apply the ”beyond reality” skill to create ideas. In Experiment, the participants were or required to perform imagination thinking. The results of Experiment 2 and 3 support that in the Model of Imagination Definition involves the constructs of both beyond reality and imagination. The construct of imagination which we obtained from this study can be as used a guidance for the future studies and the practices regarding imagination.起始頁-結束頁：389-410資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012040210篇名：個別團體成員人際歷程評量表（IGIPS）修訂之研究並列篇名：Modification of the Individual Group Member Interpersonal Process Scale (IGIPS)作者：李正源(Cheng-Yuan Lee);卓紋君(Wen-Chur Cho);謝秋雯(Chiu-Wen Sieh);王琮瑞(Tsung-Jui Wang)關鍵字：個別團體成員人際歷程評量表;團體歷程研究;歷程研究工具;group process research;IGIPS;process research tool期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的在於修訂IGIPS-III，增加團體歷程研究的質用性，取得可接受的信、效度。研究者先對原量表的某些項目進行高、中、低顯著性區段的操作型定義，然後對質際團體的逐字稿進行評分，根據人際歷程的原則進行討論、修改、整併、以及新增項目。後邀哥哥四位圍內具團體質務經驗的學者，進行專家效皮的檢核，再根撥專家的意見進行修訂。 修訂完成後， 再取約三十分鐘團體歷程，以考驗其一致性信度。 研究結果，在效度方面， 專家的CVI平均為0.84（0.71∼0.94），而各項目的CVI則介於0.67∼1.00。在信度方面，ICC介於0.73∼0.97（當高、中、低顯著性分別設定為1，2，3時），以及介於0.63∼0.98（當高、中，低顯著性分別設定為1，3，5時）；以上均顯示修訂後的最表具有良好的信、效度。之後，研究者編寫使用手冊後， 訓練一位修習過團體心理治療的博士班學生，ICC係值（0.51∼0.94）顯示本量表具備研究質務上的實用性。本量表業經不斷地討論與修訂，不僅在信、效度上已得到實務上運用的價值，且修訂後的量表不論在實務上以及理論上都更具有實用性。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to modify the IGIPS-III to enhance its applicability, and to improve its reliability and validity. First, some items from the original scale were divided into high, medium and low significant segments, and the respective operational definitions were delineated. Actual transcripts from the group were then rated. Finally, the researchers evaluated the result based on the interpersonal process theory, and items were then revised, combined, or added. Four group counseling experts in Taiwan were invited to review the revised version. Their comments were used to modify the scale again. Once the modification was completed the modified version was applied to rate a thirty-minute group process to examine its reliability For validity, the experts' average of CVI is 0.84 (0.71~0.94) and the CVI of each item falls between 0.67 and 1.00. For reliability, the ICC falls between 0.73 and 0.97 when high, middle, and low segments are set to be 1, 2, and 3; while the ICC falls between 0.63 and 0.98 when high, middle, and low segments are set to be 1, 3, and 5. Results show that the IGIPS-III-R possesses adequate validity and reliability. Furthermore, after the researchers finished editing the training manual, a doctoral student who has studied advance group counseling class was trained to use the modified Scale. The ICC falls between 0.51and 0.94, suggesting that the modified Scale has stronger applicability for training and group process research.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011060711篇名：探究繪本融入情緒教育活動對幼兒情緒認知與調節能力之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Emotional Learning on Kindergartners' Emotional Understanding and Emotion Regulation: The Effects of Children's Picture Books作者：翟敏如(Min-Ju Tsai)關鍵字：情緒教育;情緒認知;情緒調節;繪本;children's picture books;emotional learning;emotion regulation;emotional understanding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的旨在探討繪本融入情緒教育活動對五至六歲幼兒情緒認知與情緒調節能力的影響力。 本研究以「準實驗」之實驗設計，來分析實驗效果是否因為不同之實驗處理（教學內容）而有所差異。 本研究實驗對象為高雄市某國小附設幼稚園中三個大班幼兒。本實驗隨機將三班幼兒分為：實驗組一：進行情緒繪本和與情緒無關的英文字母活動；實驗組二：進行情緒繪本和測量工具包括情緒認知問卷知與情緒調節量表。研究結果發現，於不同組別的教學活動前後，施測者運用情緒認知問卷測驗幼兒的情緒認知，各組間前後測的改變量具有顯著差異，其中實驗組二前後測的改變最顯著高於控制組，教師使用情緒調節量表評量幼兒的情緒調節能力上，各組間前後測的改變量也均發現具有顯著差異，實驗組一和二前後測改變量均顯著高於控制組。文末則針對繪本融入幼兒情緒教育活動研究做討論，並提出相關建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of emotional learning, which applied children's picture books to the emotional understanding and emotion regulation of 5-and 6-year-old students. A quasi-experimental design was employed to examine the effectiveness of different treatments on children's emotional understanding and emotion regulation between treatment groups. The treatment groups were consisted of three kindergarten classrooms in the kindergarten of Siaogang elementary school, which is suited in Kaohsiung city. Three treatments conditions were randomly assigned to each treatment group: Experimental Group One was given children's picture books related to emotions and extra activities related to the English alphabet; Experimental Group Two was given children's picture books and extra activities related to emotions; and the control group was given children's picture books related to animals and extra activities related to the English alphabet Instruct ion assessments used in this study included the Emotion Recognition Questionnaire (ERQ), which measures children's emotional understanding and the Emotion Regulation Checklist (ERC), which assesses children' s emotion regulation. The results of the ERQ showed that there are differences between treatment groups. The mean difference (posttest minus pretest) for Experimental Group Two was significantly higher than that for the control group. The results of ERC showed that a statistically significant difference arose among the three treatment groups. The mean difference (posttest minus pretest) for Experimental Groups One and Two was significantly higher than that for the control group. Discussions and suggestions related to findings were offered.起始頁-結束頁：27-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011070412篇名：環境目標結構與控制－價值信念對學業情緒之效果並列篇名：The Effects of Environmental Goal Structures and Control-Value Beliefs on Academic Emotions作者：林宴瑛(Yen-Ying Lin);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：控制－價值信念;學業情緒;環境目標結構;academic emotion;control-value belief;environmental goal structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：情緒對於學習十分重要，但相較於認知與動機，學業情緒仍未被廣泛探討。基於此，本研究目的如下：（1）考驗本研究所建構的「正/負向情緒控制－價值模式」是否受到觀察資料的支持；（2）分析環境目標結構對控制－價值信念的效果，及其透過控制－價值信念對學業情緒之間接效果；（3）驗證期望－價值理論主張之價值對於動機歷程影響較期望為大之論點。為完成上述研究目的，本研究抽取台灣地區635名國中生，接受「學業情緒量表」、「環境目標結構量表」與「控制－價值信念量表」的測量。所蒐集資料以結構方程模式、模式比較法進行分析。研究結果顯示：（1）正/負向情緒控制－價值模式具有理想的整體適配度與內在品質，適合用來解釋國中生的資料。（2）環境目標結構對控制－價值信念具有直接效果，並透過控制－價值信念對學業情緒產生開發效果。（3）工作價值對正向情緒的效果要比自我效能對正向情緒的效果大；兩者對負向情緒的效果則無不同。本研究根據研究結果在理論及實務上的涵義進行討論，並提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：The impact of emotions on learning is an important topic. Yet, compared to cognition and motivation constructs, academic emotion has not been widely explored. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to: (a) test the fit between empirically observed data and the control-value model of positive/negative emotions proposed by the authors; (b) analyze the effects of environmental goal structures on control-value beliefs and the indirect effects on academic emotions through control-value beliefs; and (c) confirm the proposition that value constructs has greater effect on motivational process than expectancy constructs of the expectancy-value theory. Participants were 635 junior high school students. The instruments used in this study included the Academic Emotion Scale, the Environmental Goal Structure Scale, and the Control-value Belief Scale Observed data were analyzed by SEM and model comparison approach. Results of this study were as follows: (a) There is adequate fit between the observed data and the theoretical models; (b) The environmental goal structures have direct effects on control-value beliefs, and have indirect effects on achievement emotions through control-value beliefs; (c) Task value has greater effect on positive emotions than self-efficacy; however, both of them have no difference in effects on negative emotions. Implications for theory, instructional intervention and future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：49-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011071113篇名：家庭治療四步模式中治療任務與治療進程之分析研究並列篇名：The Therapeutic Tasks and Therapeutic Process in the Four Step Model of Family Therapy作者：許皓宜(Hao-Yi Hsu)關鍵字：任務分析法;治療任務;治療進程;家庭治療四步模式;task analysis;the four step model of family therapy;therapeutic process;therapeutic tasks期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的，是以任務分析法開展家庭治療四步模式的理念為治療師從事家庭治療時的具體任務，試圖了解治療師在四步模式理念下如何實際介入、及案家在會談過程中所出現象徵任務有效的行為特徵。研究參與者為自願前來的5個家庭，由研究者自行擔任治療師， 對家庭提供5到9次的家庭治療。研究方法依任務分析法之步驟，先整理出四步模式的理念任務，接著蒐集實際治療行為的資料文本，輔以對案家的訪談，以質性取向之內容分析法比對理念任務與實際治療行為。研究結果開展出13項進行四步模式時的治療師任務、43項象徵任務有效的案家改變特微，並對任務間的動態關係進行探討。研究結論包括：1.使用探索性語言有助於在治療中推展四步模式理念；2.使用介入型治療技巧有助於步驟二和步驟三對家庭深層訊息的探索；3.案家在步驟四中的改變挑戰治療師對完美家庭的迷思。研究者根據研究結果反思何謂家庭治療的終點行為、及主訴問題對治療歷程的影響，並對家庭治療實務工作、訓練及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：In this study, task analysis was applied to the four-step model of family therapy to understand how family therapists intervened and the behavioral characteristics clients showed during the consulting process. Five families volunteered as research participants. Researcher of this study was also the family therapist who provided between five to nine therapy sessions to the respective families. Task analysis was applied to delineate the four-step conceptual tasks, followed by collecting transcripts based on actual therapeutic behaviors in counseling sessions. Content analysis was used to compare the conceptual tasks and actual therapeutic behaviors. Results revealed 13 therapist tasks related to the four-step model, 43 task characteristics that indicated effective change, and interactive relationships related to therapeutic tasks. This study concludes that: 1. Exploratory language in the therapeutic process is helpful to implement the four-step conceptual model; 2 Interventionist skills in step 2 and step 3 can promote more in-depth exploration of family messages; 3. Client changes in step 4 challenged therapist's myth of what constituted a perfect family. Based on the results, researcher reflected on what the ultimate behaviors of family therapy is and how client problems affect the therapeutic process. Suggestions for family therapeutic tasks, training, and future research were offered.起始頁-結束頁：73-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011071314篇名：數學成就表現與閱讀理解的關係：以TIMSS 2003數學試題與PIRLS 2006閱讀成就測驗為工具並列篇名：The Relationship between Mathematics Achievement and Reading Comprehension: TIMSS 2003 and PIRLS 2006 Test Items as Measuring Instruments作者：張建妤(Chien-Yu Chang);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko)關鍵字：數學成就表現;閱讀理解;mathematics performance;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究採用IEA設計的TIMSS 2003和PIRLS 2006的測驗試題，探討四年級學童數學成就表現與閱讀理解的關係。調查結果顯示：參與本研究的四年級學童的測驗結果與TIMSS 2003台灣學童表現的分佈大略一致，男女學童在各數學內容領域表現的優劣有不一致的情形。 進一步將學童依數學成就表現的分數分成低分組、中分組和高分組學童，在數學成就表現與閱讀理解關係的分析發現：數學成就表現越好的學童，四種閱讀理解的表現也越好，但閱讀理解較能解釋低分組和中分組學童的數學表現。對於高分組學童的表現建議考量其他相關的數學知識和技能，對於低分組學童應加強其閱讀能力的培養。起始頁-結束頁：95-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011080115篇名：台灣高中生的生涯興趣結構分析－以大考中心興趣量表為例並列篇名：The Structure of Vocational Interests of Taiwanese High School Students-The Case of the College Entrance Examination Center Interest Inventory作者：區雅倫(Ya-Lun Ou);翁儷禎(Li-Jen Weng);李庚霖(Keng-Lin Lee)關鍵字：生涯輔導;興趣量表;Holland環狀結構;Gati興趣階層模式;career counseling;Gati hierarchical mode;Holland circumplex model;interest inventory.期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：Holland的環狀結構強調興趣六型的固定順序關係，而Gati認為在Holland模式之上應具有興趣階層模式。本研究主要探索台灣高中生的興趣測驗資料，能否同時具有Holland的環狀結構與Gati的階層模式，且找出階層模式分群方式。研究中隨機抽樣受測「大學入學考試中心興趣量表」（簡稱CEEC興趣量表）的10,626名高中生，分為二隨機樣本。以第一樣本進行第一階段因素分析，發現量表因素結構符合Holland六個類型。以第二樣本的興趣分數進行第二階段因素分析，顯示測驗分數具有Gati的興趣階層模式，存在二因素與三因素模式，三因業模式與Gati的三群組RI，AS與EC分群方式相同。群集分析、多向度量尺法與隨機化考驗分析則發現第二階層模式呈現RI, ASEC兩群組或Gati的三群組。最後參考興趣組別與科系組別命中率的研究結果，顯示RI興趣組別的命中率較高，但AS，EC興趣組別作為輔導分類指標不如ASEC興趣組別。再分析問卷了解輔導教師的認知結構中，亦隱含與統計結果相近的興趣結構。本研究結果應可以支持台灣高中生在CEEC興趣量表分數上，消楚呈現Holland與Gati之理論，二階層中分為RI與ASEC兩群組或RI，AS，EC三群組，在實務應用上，兩群組較為合適。英文摘要：The present study employed the College Entrance Examination Center (CEEC) Interest Inventory to examine the structure of vocational interests among high school students in Taiwan. Holland's simple circular and calculus hypotheses as well as Gati's hierarchical model and two-group partition model were tested. Data from 10,626 Taiwanese high school students were randomly divided into two samples, (Sample A and Sample B). Factor analysis on sample A revealed a six-factor structure consistent with the RIASEC types. Sample B was used to vigorously test Holland's hypotheses and Gati's models. Holland's simple circular hypothesis and the calculus hypothesis were supported by multidimensional scaling and randomization test, respectively. Gati's hierarchical model was supported by factor analysis and hierarchical c1ustering on six interest type scores Also, Gait's three-group partition model (RI, AS, EC) as well as a two-group partition model (RI, ASEC) were found by factor analysis, multidimensional scaling. hierarchical clustering, and randomization test. Research findings reported by Ou (2011) were used to examine the practical usefulness of the partition models. It was suggested that the two-group partition model might be more useful for career counseling among high school students in Taiwan than the three-group partition model. A survey suggested that the structure of the vocational interests perceived by high school counselors were similar to those found in the analyses, supporting Holland's hypotheses and Gati's models.起始頁-結束頁：117-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20110815.116篇名：管教責任性、服從義務性與服從管教並列篇名：A Preliminary Investigation of Responsibility of Guan-Chiao, Obligation of Obedience, and Obedience of Guan-Chiao作者：林惠雅(Huey-Ya Lin)關鍵字：父母管教權概念;服從管教;服從義務性;管教責任性;conceptions of parental power of guan-chiao;obedience of guan-chiao;obligation of obedience;responsibility of guan-chiao期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的是探究在不同生活領域中，孩子知覺母親管教責任性、服從義務性與其服從管教的情形及關聯。本研究對象為居住於台北市和新北市就讀5至8年級學生，共計525人。研究工具為「管教責任性量表」、「服從義務性量表」與「服從管教量表」。研究結果顯示，「管教責任性」、「服從義務性」和「服從管教」呈現「品德領域」的程度或頻率都是最高，「朋友領域」則是最低。至於「管教責任性」、「服從義務性」對於「服從管教」的作用，「品德領域」方面，「服從義務性」的「品德領域」、「學習領域」有顯著解釋力；「生活領域」方而，「管教責任性」的「生活領域」、「服從義務性」的「生活領域」和「學習領域」有顯著解釋力；「學習領域」方面，「管教責任性」的「學習領域」、「服從義務性」的「學習領域」有顯著解釋力；「朋友領域」方面，「管教責任性」的「朋友領域」、「服從義務性」的「朋友領域」有顯著解釋力。本研究結合本土母親管教與社會領域的觀點，進一步釐清孩子對於母親管教權限的看法和反應。英文摘要：The aims of the present study were to investigate the current states of and the relationships among responsibility of guan-chiao, obligation of obedience, and obedience of guan-chiao. Participants were 525 5th to 8th students. The measures used include ”Responsibility of Guan-Chiao Scale”, ”Obligation of Obedience Scale”, and ”Obedience of Guan-Chiao Scale”. The results showed, for all of ”responsibility of guan-chiao”, ”obligation of obedience”, and ”obedience of guan-chiao”, highest level or frequency was the ”moral character domain”, and the lowest level or frequency was the ”friend domain”. As for the relationships among the above variables, ”living affairs domain” and ”learning domain” of ”obligation of obedience” were significantly related to ”moral character domain” of ”obedience of guan-chiao”, ”Iiving affairs domain” of ”responsibility of guan-chiao”, as well as ”Iiving affairs domain” and ”learning domain” of ”obligation of obedience” were significantly related to ”living affairs domain” of ”obedience of guan-chiao”, ”learning domain” of both ”responsibility of guan-chiao” and ”obligation of obedience” were significantly related to ”learning domain” of ”obedience of guan-chiao”, as well as ”friend domain” of both ”responsibility of guan-chiao” and ”obligation of obedience” were significantly related to ”friend domain” of ”obedience of guan-chiao”, The present study integrated the perspectives of social domain and Taiwanese mothers' parenting, and results help further clarify children's attitudes and responses toward mothers' parenting.起始頁-結束頁：139-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20110815.217篇名：大學生心理健康與多元生理回饋並列篇名：A Study of the Relationships between Mental Health and Biofeedback for NTNU Students作者：陳李綢(Lee-Chou Chen)關鍵字：心理健康;生理回饋;精健量表;樂活量表;壓力知覺量表;biofeedback;LOHAS for youth;mental health;mental health scalc;the perceived stress scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要在探討大學生在不同壓力情境下的生理回饋反應與心理健康表現。並且探討心理健康、生理回饋指數與壓力間的關係。本研究以師大大一學生1410名為對象，實施心理健康量表，再從其中篩選60名心理健康指數低於80分以下學生，再隨機分派兩組參與生理回饋反應實驗。本研究結果：1.編製的大學生精健量表是一個穩定及有效量表，可以分析大學生的自我悅納、人際關係、家庭和諧、情緒平衡及樂觀進取五種分數及總分。2.在不同壓力情境下，實驗組與控制組的生理回饋反應有顯著差異；但實驗組與控制組的心理健康反應沒有差異。3.生理回饋的肌電位反應可有效預測當時壓力達18%；幸福感與氣質的心理反應可有效預測平時壓力達39%。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore biofeedback responses and mental health of university students under different pressure situations, and the relationships among mental health, biofeedback responses, and pressures. 1410 NTNU freshmen completed a mental health assessment measure; 60 students who scored lower than 80 points on the mental health measure were selected and randomly assigned into two groups for biofeedback response experiment. Results indicate that: 1. The mental health scale (five scale scores and total score) for university student is a stable and valid measure for analyzing student's self-accept, interpersonal relationship, family harmony, emotional balance, and optimism; 2. There is a significant difference in biofeedback responses between experimental and control groups under different pressure situations, but there is no difference in mental health scores between experimental and control groups. 3. There is a significant correlation between students' EMG and test pressure, and students' EMG's prediction of test pressure reached 18%. There is a significant correlation between well-being and general pressure, with well-being's prediction of general pressure exceeded 39%.起始頁-結束頁：159-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011091418篇名：國中生學校學習與家庭關係困擾之群體異質性分析：以IRT Mixture Model並列篇名：Heterogeneity Analysis of Learning Disturbances in Middle School and Family Relationship at Home: Applications of IRT Mixture Models作者：王郁琮(Lawrence Yu-Chung Wang);溫福星(Fur-Hsing Wen)關鍵字：混合模式;異質性分析;國中生學校與家庭困擾;behavioral disturban;heterogeneity analysis;lRT mixture model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在利用試題反應理論混合模式（IRT Mixture Model），探討國中生家庭與學校生活適應因素結構，並藉由潛在異質性分析，進一步瞭解家庭關係與學校生活適應困擾之潛在次群體。研究樣本為中部某市立國民中學全校一至三年級各18班共1703位學生。結果發現，二類別二因子IRT Mixture測量恆定模式在一系列競爭模型中，展現出最佳模式適配。其中，二因子代表學校學習與家庭適應困擾，二類別反應高家庭困擾與低家庭困擾，二族群的學習困擾分數無顯著差異。比對試題區辨度發現，IRT Mixture與IRT估計維持一致。與潛在類別分析（LCA）分類結果交叉分析發現，IRT Mixture分類著重於家庭困擾程度。文末並針對本研究結果在輔導與諮商實務意涵以及應用IRT Mixture於實徵研究資料所面臨之挑戰，做出具體討論與建議。英文摘要：The study utilized IRT Mixture Model to investigate latent heterogeneity of school learning and family relationships to differentiate latent classes and disturbance severity of middle school students. Four statistical models were examined, including IRT, LCA, IRT Mixture (parameters constrained) and IRT Mixture (parameters non-constrained). Results show that two-class two-factor IRT mixture model with constrained parameters provides the best fit of our data. Two factors are school learning and family relationship, and the two classes are high-risk and normal groups. Estimations of IRT Mixture Model are comparable to those of IRT and LCA. In conclusion, mixture models demonstrate more modeling flexibility compared to those of traditional statistical models, but they require larger sample size, longer computer running hours, and more difficulties in reaching algorithm convergence.起始頁-結束頁：185-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011101419篇名：完美主義與學習困擾、正負向情感之關係：反第思考之中介效果並列篇名：The Relations among Perfectionism, Learning Problem, and Positive and Negative Affect: The Mediating Effect of Rumination作者：方紫薇(Tzu-Wei Fang)關鍵字：反芻思考;正負向情感;完美主義;學習困擾;learning problem;perfectionism;positive and negative affect;rumination期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：研究目的：1. 檢視完美主義各分量表之分數對學習困擾及正負向情感之預測。2. 檢證反芻思考在完美主義與正負向情感間、或完美主義與學業困擾間之中介效果。研究方法：本研究針對大學生進行調查研究，共施測941位大學生（426男，515女）。研究結果：經統計分析後其結果顯示 1. 完美主義各分量表之分數對正負向情感及學習困擾皆能有效預測，其中尤以自我批評之預測力最高。2. 功能性反芻在正向完美主義與正向情感具有部份中介之效果。反思反芻在負向完美主義與負向完美主義與負向情感、學習困擾間皆具有部份中介之效果。憂思反芻不只在正向完美主義與正向情感間具有部份中介之效果，並且在負向完美主義與負向情感間、學習困擾間皆具有部份中介之效果。英文摘要：Two purposes of this study were (a) to understand which variables of perfectionism can effectively predict the scores of learning problem and positive/negative affect; (b) to examine the mediating effectiveness of rumination on the relationships between perfectionism and learning problem, and between perfectionism and positive/negative affection. In this study, we conducted a survey of 941 undergraduate students (426 males and 515 females). Results: (a) Most of the perfectionism subscales can effectively predict the scores of learning problem and positive/negative affection. Especially, self-critical is the strongest predictor of the scores of learning problem and positive/negative affection. (b) Whereas functional rumination partially mediated the relationship between positive perfectionism and positive affection, reflective rumination partially mediated the relationship between negative perfectionism and negative affect/learning problem. Finally, brooding rumination partially mediated both the relationship between positive perfectionism and positive affect and the relationship between negative perfectionism and negative affect/ learning problem. The implications of the findings, limitations and future research directions were discussed at the end of this paper.起始頁-結束頁：735-762資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011030220篇名：兩岸大學生對教師教學領導能力認知之比較分析並列篇名：College Students' Cognition of Teachers' Instructional Leadership-Analyzing and Comparing with the Cross across the Taiwan Straits作者：陳羿君(I-Jun Chen)關鍵字：大學生;兩岸教育;教學領導能力;教學領導能力類型;college students;education across Taiwan Strait;instructional leadership;instructional leadership styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，海峽兩岸教育與文化的交流頻繁，但因為中心思想的不同，導致教育結果呈現也有所差異。本研究運用量化研究法，並以立意抽樣模式，分別調查台灣和上海地區之大學院校，以了解兩岸大學生對其教師教學領導能力的認知情況。 研究結果顯示：（1）整體上，台灣學生對其教師領導能力的認同度要高於上海地區。（2）兩地不同年齡及學院之學生對其教師教學領導能力認知度不同。（3）上海地區及各學院別對教師教學領導能力認知具有預測力。本文建議兩岸的大學教師應該在課程開始時多了解學生的需求，以引起學生的學習渴望，且兩岸教師間應加強交流、相互學習，以提升學生的學習成效。英文摘要：In recent years, educational and cultural communications across the Taiwan Strait were frequent. However, differences in two educational ideologies have led to different educational outcomes. In this study, we adopted a quantitative approach with purposive sampling and recruited college students in both Taiwan and Shanghai as our participants. The present study aimed to examine college students' cognition of teachers' teaching-leading ability of both sides. The results showed: (1) teachers' instructional leadership was perceived as more effective by the college students in Taiwan as compared to those in Shanghai; (2) In both Taiwan and Shanghai, there were significant correlations between students' demographic variables, particularly their age and fields of study; (3) The area (Shanghai versus Taiwan) and field of study are predictive of the students' perception of teachers' instructional leadership. As such, we suggested that, in order to inspire their learning desire, teachers in both sides should understand students' need in the beginning of courses. In addition, teachers of both sides should enhance their communications for improving students' learning effectiveness.起始頁-結束頁：763-782資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011030701篇名：運用芝加哥模式之網路藝術教學：以國小四年級社會學習領域為例並列篇名：CAPE Model Integrated with Net-Arts: An Application Research of Fourth-Grade Social Studies作者：鄭月秀(Yueh-Hsiu Giffen Cheng)關鍵字：藝術融入教育;社會學習領域;網路集體藝術創作;芝加哥模式;arts infused education;social studies;collaborative online art creation;the CAPE model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以芝加哥模式( CAPE model ) 的探究、合作、紀實以及省思等步驟做為教學設計的架構，發展出藝術融入課程設計的模式理念，再以此模式做為網路藝術導入社會學習領域的課程設計依據。以行動研究為執行的方法，透過插角國小和鎮南國小四年級社會學習領域授課教師與學童的合作參與過程，完成「網路集體藝術創作融入課程」的行動方案。本研究之特色在於，以新媒體藝術型態融入課程的概念，結合CAPE模式與大觀念統整課程模式，將網路集體創作的四項特色:參與的遊戲性、作品形式的成長變化性、藝術的動詞性，以及作者槽的移轉性等概念，轉化成國小四年級社會學習領域的能力指標，讓學童經由藝術參與的過程，提升資訊素材使用的能力、培養美學素養的內化、增加學習樂趣、提升學習成效，進而培養出具備創新和創意的二十一世紀人才。期望藉此研究的執行，得以引入並測試CAPE模式的在地化運用，提出藝術融入學科的具體教學策略與可行性，做為未來相關學術和教學的實務參考。英文摘要：To develop an art s intergraded curriculum model, this study used the CAPE model's inquiry collaboration, documentation, and reflection as a teaching framework, and then combined features of online arts into the curriculum design of social studies classes. Through partnership with Chajiao and ZhenNan Elementary Schools, this action research involved the students and teachers from the fourth-grade classes in the process of completing the ”Online Collaborative Arts Creation Infused Curriculum.” The concept of four online features of collaborative creation, such as the playing participation, the growth of the art form, the verbality of art, and the transferring of author ship, was transformed and integrated into an Academic Attainment Indicators of the forth-grade social studies classes. Due to the implementation of this new curriculum model, the students not only gained academic knowledge, but also became more capable of using information materials and hi-tech products. They also internalized artistic sensitivities and increased interest in learning, thus enhancing the effectiveness of their learning ability. This in turn, might help cultivate creative and innovative talents for the 21st century.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820121258040012篇名：學業控制因素、學業自我效能及學業緊張因素與國中生初次作弊行為之關聯性分析並列篇名：Correlation Analysis on Academic Control Factors, Self-Efficacy, Strain Factors and the Onset of Junior High School Students' Cheating Behavior作者：張楓明(Feng-Ming Chang);譚子文(Tzyy-Wen Tan)關鍵字：作弊行為;參與;抱負;自我效能;緊張;onset of cheating;involvement;commitment;self-efficacy;strain期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:4期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去國內有關校園裡偏差行為之相關研究，較少聚焦於國中生的作弊行為，尤其是學業因素對國中生初次作弊行為問題的影響。因此，本研究目的即在瞭解學業層面之參與、抱負、自我效能及緊張因素與國中生初次作弊行為之關聯性。抽樣對象為嘉義市所有市立國民中學，主要採用叢聚抽樣方式，有效分析樣本共380 名學生，並採用巢式邏輯迴歸模型分析所蒐集的數據。研究結果發現，學業自我效能及學業緊張因素中之負擔壓力對國中生初次作弊行為具有影響效應；此外，低自我控制並未與國中生初次作弊行為產生關聯性。最後，本研究並依據研究發現，就實務及學術上提出建議。英文摘要：There are few empirical research studies focused on the cheating behavior of junior high school students. Moreover, the relationship between academic factors and the onset of junior high school students' cheating behavior has largely been ignored. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the correlation between academic factors, including involvement, commitment, academic self-efficacy and academic strain, and the onset of junior high school students' cheating behavior. As sample of 380 students, was selected from all public junior high schools in Chiayi City using a cluster method. A nested logistic regression model was used to analyze the collected data. The result s showed that academic self-efficacy and the burden and pressure from study had an impact on the onset of junior high school students' cheating behavior. Otherwise, low self-control was not related to the onset of junior high school students' cheating behavior. Finally, this study also provided some practical and academic suggestions based on the research findings.起始頁-結束頁：51-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820121258040023篇名：德國高等教育治理之改革動向並列篇名：Trends of Higher Education Governance Reforms in Germany作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：德國大學;教育改革;治理;German universities;educational reform;governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:4期出版年：2012中文摘要：當代德國高等教育正處於劇變轉型過程，改革政策不斷地湧現，此來自其陷入危機，因而冀由改革方案汰舊換新。本研究先釐清治理的意涵與機制，再進一步探析其陷入危機之背景、改革內容，並於最後提出評析。本研究從治理角度探究此議題，係著眼於「治理」涵蓋多元之調控機制，較能對改革動向有一整全觀照。德國大學治理改革內容包含:一、國家管制鬆綁，尤其是預算編列方式與大學法律地位之變革;二、透過目標協議與高等學校校務諮詢委員會，強化外部利害關係人之調控;三、增強競爭態勢，此包含續效導向之資源分配、卓越計畫，以及教授薪資制度;四、強化行政上自主調控，並縮減學術自治之相關權限。惟高等教育經費依然拮据，且相關績效指標過於抽象。但競爭態勢則已明顯提升。英文摘要：Higher education in Germany today is in a stage of great transformation. Due to the educational crisis, new reform policies are constantly emerging to replace former ones. This study began with a clarification of the significance and mechanisms of governance, and then presented a deeper analysis of the background of the crisis, reform measures, and concludes with a concluding discussion. The reform measure s of university governance in Germany include: 1) Deregulation of state control, particularly in terms of budgeting and stipulation of university regulations; 2) Enhancing the authority of external stakeholders through the higher education advisory committee and negotiations regarding university objectives; 3) Bolstering competitive advantages , including performance-based resource allocation, excellence initiatives, and faculty salaries; 4) Enhancing in dependent regulation of administrative affairs and decreasing the authority accorded to academic self-governance. Although funds for higher education remain insufficient and relevant performance indicators are overly abstract, there has already been a marked increase in competition.起始頁-結束頁：91-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820121258040034篇名：經濟、教育預算與政策：英國中等教育於「方案分析與檢討」（PAR）機制運作下的歷史演變（1970-1977）並列篇名：Economy, Education Budget, and Policy: The Historical Transformation of British Secondary Education under Programme Analysis and Review (PAR), 1970-1977作者：劉子菁(Sunniva Tzu-Chin Liu)關鍵字：教育經費;中等教育;預算;財政部;方案分析與檢討;education expenditure;secondary education;budget;the Treasury;programme analysis and review期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討英國保守黨政府於1970年起所引進的「方案分析與檢討」預算機制，促使中等教育改革與經濟發展進一步連結的歷史經驗。此機制觸及中等教育經費評估標準、教育目的，以及課程控制等改革面向，在英國經濟相對衰退，以及1970年代初期石油危機所帶來的財政壓力下，中央能力組透過此機制展開跨部門審核活動，進一步控制教育預算評估標準與改革方向。本研究探歷史研究取向，檢視「方案分析與檢討」機制內涵與運作過程，以解釋1970年代初期《1944年教育法》共識基礎所遭受的經濟衝擊，並探討中央能力組的預算策略及觀點如何催生工黨首相Callaghan於1976年所建立的新教育共識，繼而揭開1980年代Thatcher政府新右派教育改革路線的序幕。英文摘要：This paper examined budgetary strategy known as Programme Analysis and Review (PAR), which was implemented by the Conservative Government in Britain in 1970, and revealed the historic al context between secondary-education reform and economic development. This budget system involved various assessment standards, educational objects, and curriculum regulations. It was implemented by the central government through interdepartmental evaluations, in order to control educational budget evaluation standards and future reforms. These measures took place during a time of British economic slowdown and the oil crisis of the early 1970 s. This study adopted a historic al approach to examine the mechanism and operation of the PAR system. In addition to explaining the economic obstacles encountered by the 1944 Education Act during the early 1970s, it also explored how the central government's budgetary policies led perspectives led to the new educational consensus established by Labour Prime Minister Callaghan's government in 1976. Finally, it shed light on the emergence of the educational reforms by Thatcher's New Right government in 1980s.起始頁-結束頁：139-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820121258040045篇名：自律學習策略與自我效能、學習興趣、學業成就的相關研究並列篇名：An Empirical Study of the Relationships among Self-Regulated Learning Strategies, Learning Interests, and Academic Achievements作者：趙珮晴(Pei-Ching Chao);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：自律學習策略;自我效能;學習興趣;學業成就;self-regulated learning strategy;self-efficacy;learning interest;academic achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討自律學習策略與相關學習因素的關係，並進一步探討其在性別和本國籍與新移民子女間的差異。本研究以自編問卷對北臺灣五所國民小學四年級學生進行施測，統計分析方法包含皮爾遜積差相關、結構方程式模型之多樣本分析、單因子多變量變異數和最小平方法迴歸分析。研究發現自律學習策略，與各科目自我效能和學習興趣之間具有正向顯著關係存在，而且與提升各科學業成就和縮短國文、英文科目的寫作業時間有關。另外，自律學習策略在兩性之間呈現差異，且以女生優於男生；至於本國籍與新移民子女之間，則未達顯著差異。最後，自律學習策略，在自我效能和學業成就之間，具有部分的中介效果。根據上述研究結果，本研究一併提出相關結論與建議以供參考。英文摘要：Recently much focus has been given to studies regarding the presence of self-regulate d learning strategies. This study examined the relationship between self-regulated learning strategies and various learning factors. Additional considerations to self-regulated learning strategies had been also placed on gender differences as well as the differences between local Taiwanese children and new immigrant children. Participants were fourth grade students from five primary schools in Northern Taiwan. Student participants were asked to fill out a questionnaire with regards to their study habits. Data analysis included Pearson correlation, multi-group analysis of structural equation modeling, ordinal least squares regress ion analysis, and one-way multivariate analysis of variance. Results showed that there existed a significant positive relationship between self-regulated learning strategies, learning interest, and self-efficacy of students. The findings also suggested that self-regulated learning strategies successfully reduced the completion time of English and Chinese homework. Additional analysis showed that female students practiced more self-regulated learning strategies than their male counterparts; however, there existed no significant difference between the local Taiwanese and new migrant children. Finally, the partial mediating effect of self-regulated learning strategies between self-efficacy and academic achievement was confirmed. According to these results, some conclusions and suggestions were proposed for practical application and future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012090016篇名：大學應屆畢業生的背景變項、職場能力與其初職位置取得之相關研究並列篇名：A Study of Relationships among College Graduates' Backgrounds, Occupational Competency, and the Attainment of Their First Occupational Status作者：陳淑敏(Amy Shu-Min Chen)關鍵字：大學畢業生;初職位置取得;職場能力;教育機會;高等教育;college graduates;first occupational status;occupational competency;education opportunity;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討我國大學應屆畢業生的背景變項（性別、族群、學校類型）、職場能力變項與其初職位置取得之關聯性，係以臺灣高等教育整合資料庫之調查進行資料分析與探討。研究發現包括：一、大學應屆畢業生的初職位置取得以「助理專業人員、技術員」所占比例最高，其次為「事務工作人員」，而選擇繼續進修的比例為三成一，尚未決定者亦高達一成三；二、大學應屆畢業生對職場能力的知覺上，專業能力以「專業知識和技術」表現最佳，通識能力以「團隊合作能力」最高；三、大學應屆畢業生職場能力表現有群聚現象，且因背景變項和學校類型的不同，其職場能力表現有所差異；四、整體模型具有二成二左右的解釋力，然而，背景變項的作用相當強烈。最後，本文提出後續實務和研究之建議。英文摘要：This article analyzed the relationships among college graduates' backgrounds, occupational competency, and the attainment of their first occupational status. The author used the Taiwan Integrated Higher Education Survey Database to analyze the issue. The research found that (1) the highest percentage of the college graduates' first occupational status was ”assistant and technical professional,” while the second highest percentage was ”administrative personnel.” About 31% of college graduates planed to go on to further education, and 13% were undecided concerning occupational decisions. (2) most college graduates in this study believed that ”professional knowledge and skills” was the best indicator of the professional competency, while ”team-work” was the best aspect of the general competency. (3) based on the variables of background and school type, the occupational competency of the college graduates demonstrated significant differences. (4) although the logic regression model accounted for about 21.9% of college graduates' first occupational status , the background variables still demonstrated strong influence. This paper also provided suggestions for further research and practical application.起始頁-結束頁：33-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012090027篇名：原住民完全中學的實施現況與挑戰：以蘭嶼高級中學為例並列篇名：The Implementation and the Challenges Involved in Indigenous Integrated Secondary Schools in Taiwan: A Case Study of Lan-Yu High School作者：張如慧(Ju-Hui Chang);譚光鼎(Guang-Ding Tan)關鍵字：原住民教育;完全中學;蘭嶼;原住民社區本位教育;indigenous education;integrated secondary school;Lan-Yu;indigenous community-based education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:3期出版年：2012中文摘要：建立以原住民為主體，符合原住民需求的教育體系，是原住民社區本位教育的重要理念，而此理念亦納入我國的《原住民族教育法》中。本研究以全國第一所原住民完全中學─蘭嶼高級中學為例，進行個案研究，希望由原住民社區本位教育的理論觀點出發，瞭解在地師生及居民的經驗和想法，重新解讀該校在完全中學原訂目標上的實施現況，及其面臨的挑戰。研究時間為2007年8月至2008年7月，蒐集資料的方法以師生和社區人士的訪談為主，並輔以部分時間的田野觀察。研究結果發現，蘭嶼成立完全中學的成效包括：提供最弱勢學生的升學和學習機會；透過完全中學經費的溢注，提高城鄉高中教育均衡發展的可能性；以及透過文化融入課程與相關活動，促進學校社區化等。然而因為社區和在地參與仍有限，所以官方的政策或經費運用，無法完全符合當地真正的需求，更遑論激發社區對教育的主體性和能動性。英文摘要：Indigenous community-based education argues that indigenous peoples are the subject of educational systems and institutions whose needs should be fulfilled. This concept is also reflected in Indigenous Education Law in Taiwan. This case study is based on the theory of indigenous community-based education and focuses on the first indigenous integrated secondary school in Taiwan, Lan-Yu High School, trying to understand the implementation of the school and the challenges it faced. The research was conducted from August 2007 to July 2008. Its data was collected through interviews with teachers, students, and community members, as well as by participant observation. The findings showed that the integrated secondary school improved educational equality for the most disadvantaged students, that the financial subsidies helped to promote balanced development of secondary education, and that the cultural curriculum improved the relationship between the school and the community. However, neither the policy nor the budget could totally fit local needs because there was limited participation from the community and the schools. Therefore, the indigenous community remained to be mobilized and empowered to participate in the running of the school.起始頁-結束頁：73-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012090038篇名：宋代科舉報考人數與錄取人數失衡問題因應對策之分析並列篇名：On the Numerical Imbalance between Participants and the Successful Test-takers of the Sung China Civil Service Examination and the Strategies for Fixing the Imbalance Strategies作者：周愚文(Yu- Wen Chou)關鍵字：解試;省試;解額;特奏名;宋代科舉;prefecture examination;metropolitan examination;civil service examination;quota system;Sung Dynasty期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文係探討宋代當科舉考生數日增，但錄取人數無法大幅提昇，出現「少取黜落多，多取濫冗多」兩難，所採因應對策。經分析宋解額、報考與錄取數變化，可知宋解額是由比例制改為定額制。新制當報考數增，必造成落榜數及比例大增。因官學生續增致潛在考生日增，雖增解額但幅度有限，以致錄取率下降，失衡問題延至省試，遂採固定及管控名額，以致通過之舉人比例大降，讓解試成為主要瓶頸。對此宋採取明訂解試解額、小幅增加解、省試額、拉長開考週期、增加殿試、及提供解、省試落第者疏散管道等策略。但其只治標且有副作用。因迫於形勢，只能既容忍大量考生報考以籠絡之，又借延長開考週期，增加考試層級等逐批淘汰差者，以舒緩落榜者的失望與不滿。失衡問題延續到明清，其所採因應策略仍與宋相近。英文摘要：When the participants of the civil service examination gradually increased along with the population in the Sung Dynasty, and the numbers of those who passed were thus intentionally increased by the Sung emperors, the numerical imbalance between the participants and those who passed intensified. If the government allowed more participants to pass, then the officials would be in surplus; if it allowed fewer to pass, then too many would fail. The ways in which the Sung government coped with this dilemma are the focus of this paper. The Sung tried to fix and regulate the number of successful test-takers in the prefecture and metropolitan examinations, but these regulations did not work. So, while the Sung government still accepted participants, they adopted certain strategies, such as limiting the placement of successful test-takers, extending the period between examinations, increasing the palace examination, and providing alternative channels of work for those who failed. However, there was no one permanent solution; the validity of any solution was temporary. The examination system continued, and the imbalance continued to exist along with it. Strategies similar to those taken by the Sung were later adopted by the Ming and Ch'ing.起始頁-結束頁：105-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012090049篇名：敘事課程界定與論述基礎之探究－提升學童語文識能的取徑並列篇名：Exploring the Definition of Narrative Curriculum and Its Theoretical Foundations: An Approach to Improve Children's Literacy作者：簡良平(Liang-Ping Jian)關鍵字：識能;敘事;敘事課程;literacy;narrative;narrative curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:2期出版年：2012中文摘要：學童語文識能（literacy）包含識字、閱讀與寫作的基本能力，透過閱讀課程與教學規劃，可以有效提升學童識字、理解策略及書寫的能力。本文為提升學童語文識能發展敘事課程，此處目的在界定敘事課程的意義及其基礎論述，做為課程實踐依據。本文的敘事課程偏重選擇敘事文本為發展語文識能的媒介，課程目標在發展學童敘事理解與敘事能力表現。本文探討何種敘事文本最具價值，納入敘事課程，討論有關文本選擇及組織的原理原則。敘事課程的實施，以促進學童與文本的交互作用、規劃學童發展閱讀思考及敘事能力、鼓勵學童發展批判詮釋能力等活動為原則。本文多引述敘事學、言說心理學研究、社會－文化觀點，論述敘事的特質，討論應用理論於敘事課程目標、內容、實施等項目的考量。最後結語關注敘事課程實踐要素，包含課表時間規劃、觀察與評量學生語文識能發展實況、討論教師課程知能及教學策略、課程實施環境條件等要素之間的關聯性，以能具體達成提高學童語文識能的目標。英文摘要：Children's literacy includes basic abilities of words acquisition, reading, and writing. By means of reading lessons and plans, the development of children's literacy can be significantly improved. This essay was aimed to explore the meaning of narrative curriculum and its theoretical foundations for classroom use in the context of developing children's literacy. The narrative curriculum referred to in this essay focused on texts as a medium for literacy development, and the objective of curriculum was to improve children's narrative comprehension and their narrative competences. This essay also discussed which narrative texts are the most valuable for forming curriculum content and explored the principles of text selection and organization. The principles of learning activities design were to promote children's interactions with texts, to improve their reading, thinking, and narrative skills, and encourage them to develop their critical thinking about the content of narrative texts. This essay drew heavily on narratology, cognitive psychology, socio-cultural perspectives and the characters of narrative and discussed how these theories could be applied to deliberate the objectives, contents, and implementation of narrative curriculum. In the end, the elements of curriculum practice were taken into consideration, such as the planning of schedules, the methods how to assess children's literacy, and the teachers' lesson plans/teaching strategies, and the environments of curriculum implementation, and then to think about how to connect the elements to achieve the goal of improving children's literacy effectively.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820120600110篇名：效用、基本善與能力發展－論「平等」的多元視野及其教育蘊義並列篇名：Utility, Primary Goods, and the Capabilities Approach: Multiple Perspectives on ”Equality” and Their Educational Implications作者：王俊斌(Chun-Ping Wang)關鍵字：Sen;效用;基本善;能力取向;社會正義;Sen;utility;primary goods;capabilities approach;social justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文之目的係在Sen〈什麼樣的平等？〉一文的基礎上，藉由效益論、正義論與能力取向理論等相關文獻之分析，深入探究「效益平等」、「總體效用平等」、「Rawls的基本善平等」，以及「基本能力平等」等四種不同觀點之內涵及其侷限性。相較於能力取向理論在福利經濟學與倫理學領域已累積的大量文獻，能力取向理論之教育應用研究卻仍極為有限。因此，本文最後嘗試提出「平等」的多元思維取向，期待能夠為未來教育公平議題研究提供更妥適的倫理學基礎。英文摘要：This essay, based on the foundations laid out by Amartya Sen in his article ”Equality of what?” as well as other related literature and studies on utilitarianism, theory of justice, and the capabilities approach, delved into the contents and limitations of four different ”equality” viewpoints which encompassed ”utilitarian equality,” ”total utility equality,” the ”Rawlsian equality of primary goods,” and the ”basic capability equality.” A large amount of research had been previously conducted on the application of the capabilities approach to welfare economics and ethics, but research on the educational applications of the capabilities approach remained comparatively sparse. To address this problem, this essay proposesin its concluding section multiple perspectives on ”equality” and attempted to provide an ethical foundation that would better suite the discussions of educational equality in the future.起始頁-結束頁：37-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820120600201篇名：表現標準設定之擴大參與：教學現場效度證據並列篇名：Extending Participation in Standard Setting: A Validation Study from School Teachers’ Perspective作者：林世華(Sieh-Hwa Lin);謝佩蓉(Pei-Jung Hsieh);謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh)關鍵字：對照組法;表現標準;切截分數;效度覆核;contrasting group method;performance standard;cut score;validation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，效度證據的思維已更加廣泛而多元。本研究希冀透過「以人為中心」的對照組法，擴大納入教學現場教師的參與，作為2010年採用「以試題為中心」書籤標定法所進行四年級自然科標準設定結果的效度覆核。研究對象為全臺八位國小自然科教師及其任教班級的四年級學生233人。研究工具為自然科表現水準評定表和自然科單一題本標準化測驗，前者供教師逐一評定每位學生的自然科學習表現，屬於基礎以下、基礎、精熟、或者進階之其中一群；後者則是施測於教師所任教班級的學生以連結既有量尺。研究資料採用一般化部分給分模式將學生的二分類作答反應和教師判斷的多分類結果同時估計。結果發現，教師心中所認知最低通過標準，比書籤標定法所得的標準寬鬆，而最高通過標準，則較書籤標定法嚴格。此外，教師判斷整體命中率達52.36%，各表現標準的命中率分別達26.32%、57.14%、58.00%以及54.55%，提供一定程度的外部效度證據。最後提供數項建議供未來研究參考。英文摘要：The concept of validity evidence has become diverse and multifaceted in recent years. The purpose of the present study is to examine the external validity of science assessment standard setting for 4th grade, which was implemented with the bookmark method in 2010. This study uses ”contrasting group method”, an examinee-centered method, to set performance standards. The participants were eight elementary school teachers and their 233 students. The instruments were classification sheet and a particular form of science test. Teachers were instructed to judge the performance of students based on the performance level descriptors and mark in the classification sheet with four levels (basic, basic, proficient, and advanced). In order to link the existing scale and teachers' grading, the particular form of science test was administered to students. Generalized partial credit model was applied to estimate the dichotomous and polytomous data. The results revealed that the minimum standards of basic level set by contrasting group method was lower than that of the bookmark method, while the standard of advanced level by contrasting group method was higher than that of the bookmark method. Besides, the general hit rate was 52.36%, while hit rates of the performance classifications were 26.32%, 57.14%, 58.00%, and 54.55%. In the conclusion, suggestions for further studies are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00012篇名：大學生心理資本量表編製及其相關因素之研究並列篇名：The Construction and Application of Psychological Capital Scale for College Students作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);湯雅芬(Ya-Fen Tang)關鍵字：心理資本;結構方程式模型;交叉驗證;情緒幸福感;臺灣憂鬱症量表;psychological capital;structural equation model;cross-validation;emotional well-being;Taiwan Depression Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在編製大學生心理資本量表，並評估自編量表之品質。本研究採用問卷調查，研究一共計1,126位大學生，所蒐集的資料用來進行驗證性因素分析、交叉驗證分析、效標關聯效度及評定量尺模型；研究二共計1,540位大學生，所蒐集的資料用來修訂研究一量表題目，進行驗證性因素分析與競爭模式整體適配分析。研究發現：1.根據驗證性因素分析，心理資本為「自我效能」、「希望」、「復原力」及「樂觀」等四個因素所組成的二階因素結構。2.交叉驗證分析下相關適配度指標支持測量穩定性之假設，表示本量表具有模型穩定性。3.本研究以「情緒幸福感量表」作為外在效標，發現心理資本與情緒幸福感之間具有顯著的正相關，顯示本量表具備不錯的外在效標關聯效度。4.具有不同程度心理資本得分的大學生，其憂鬱程度有顯著差異。最後本研究提出相關建議以供未來研究參考英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to confirm a second-order four factor model of college students' psychological capital and then evaluate the quality of this self-reported scale. Data in Study 1 were collected from a sample of 1,126 college students. The sample was used to examine the factor structure of the scale by confirmatory factor analysis, cross-validation analysis, criterion-related validity, and rating scale model. Data in Study 2 were collected from an efficient sample of 1,540 college students which was used to examine the factor structure of the scale by confirmatory factor analysis. Competing models were established and evaluated. The findings can be summarized as follows: 1. According to the confirmatory factor analysis, the results supported that psychological capital was composed of four latent factors, named as ”self-efficacy”, ”hope”, ”resilience”, and ”optimism”. 2. The cross-validation analysis with split-half samples showed well constructed stability model. 3. This study adopted the emotional well-being scale as an external criterion for validity confirmation. The results showed the psychological capital had significant relationship with the emotional well-being. 4. The different levels in psychological capital have significant differences in depression. Finally, several suggestions were proposed for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：19-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00023篇名：以Rasch Model GSP表及GSM結構圖進行試題修正：以企業倫理與職業道德課程之測驗為例並列篇名：The Use of Rasch Model GSP Chart and Grey Structural Model Analysis for Vocational Education and Training Courses: Taking Enterprise Ethics and Professional Ethics Courses as an Example作者：許天維(Tian-Wei Sheu);曾建維(Jian-Wei Tzeng);梁榮進(Jung-Chin Liang);王柏婷(Bor-Tyng Wang);永井正武(Masatake Nagai)關鍵字：Rasch Model;GRA;S-P表;GSP表;GSM結構圖;Rasch Model;GRA;S-P Chart;GSP Chart;GSM Figure期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以Rasch Model的參數模式，運用灰關聯分析方法GRA（grey relational analysis），與S-P表的方式建立Rasch Model GSP（grey student problem）表，並且以結合灰色結構模式GSM（grey structural model）建立GSM結構圖，這種方法突破了傳統S-P表的圖形表達方式，讓複雜的數據可以簡單化進行分析，同時成為有系統的結構組織。本研究內容是依據臺灣某上市公司，內部員工之職業教育訓練課程-企業倫理與職業道德之試題，進行分析研究，而實質獲得了受測者與試題的鑑別度「α」，以及受測者測驗平均值與試題難度「β」，而從「γ」的分佈圖，可以清楚辨識受測者的得分率和試題答對率情形，針對教師進行學習者程度與試題難度修正之依據。透過GSM結構圖進行研究解析，從圖形的方向性（digraph），可以清楚了解試題的分群狀態，根據評量所得到的數據資料進行計算，可以鑑別出相同類型的試題，成為命題改進的依據，仍是教師進行難度相似試題刪減之依據。實驗驗證Rasch Model GSP表與GSM結構圖的研究組合，是一種提供教師進行測驗後試題修正的創新方法。英文摘要：The paper aims at the application of Rasch Model, Grey Relational Analysis (GRA) and S-P chart to establish the Rasch Model GSP (grey student-problem) figure. With the combination of Grey structural modeling, the GSM (grey structural model) figure could be established. This approach breaks through the traditional graphical representation of S-P chart; therefore, the complicated data analysis could be simplified into a systematic structural organization. In accordance with a listed company in Taiwan, the paper analyzed the internal staff training courses, including business ethics and ethical questions. Based on the findings, the GSP chart can be set up with discrimination from students and items, and it is used as discrimination parameter . The average of item difficulty and the average of examinees’ scores could be used as difficulty parameter . The lowest score and the lowest rate of correct test items could be recognized as guessing parameter . According to the analysis, the levels of the learners can be assessed, and the difficulties of the questions revised. Through the GSM figure and the direction of the graph (digraph), the structural components of the clustering state can be analyzed. Through the analysis of GSM figure, it is possible to understand test item clustering based on the directions of the graphs. Also, according to the assessment data, the same type questions and test items with similar difficulty can be identified, which can not only be the basis of test design, but also become the reference for test item deletion. In brief, the experiment shows that the combination of Rasch Model GSP chart and GSM figure is an innovative method for teachers' remedial teaching after testing.起始頁-結束頁：53-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00034篇名：利用折刀程序估計隨機效果p×(i:h)設計的變異成分估計量與誤差變異數估計量的標準誤並列篇名：Estimating Standard Errors of Variance Component Estimators and Error Variance Estimators in Random Effects p×(i:h) Designs by Using Jackknife Procedure作者：馮文俊(Wen-Chun Feng)關鍵字：折刀法;靴環法;標準誤;變異成分估計值;概化理論;jackknife;bootstrap;standard errors;variance component estimates;generalizability theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：概化理論中，G研究設計的變異成分估計量的標準誤估計是一個重要議題；因為有關受試者就學、就業的判定以及選擇一個最適當的D研究設計都與從G研究設計中所得到的變異成分估計量的準確性高度相關。本文提議一個用以估計隨機效果p×(i:h)設計的變異成分估計量標準誤與誤差變異數估計量標準誤的折刀程序，並且將此程序應用於模擬的常態、二分與多分資料以檢查此折刀程序的可行性。研究結果顯示：不論資料型式為常態、二分或多分，本文所提折刀程序在估計p×(i:h)設計的五個變異成分估計量的標準誤以及絕對與相對誤差變異數估計量的標準誤都相當準確。英文摘要：Obtaining information about the variability of variance component estimates in G study designs is a very important issue in generalizability theory because the decisions to be made about examinees, or the choices of the most appropriate D study designs, are highly dependent on the accuracy of variance component estimates derived from G study designs. In this article, the jackknife procedure for estimating standard errors of variance component estimates and error variance estimates in random effects p×(i:h) designs is proposed and applied to the simulated normal, dichotomous, and polytomous data with specified variance components. The simulation results show that the proposed jackknife procedure performs quite well for all three types of data under studied sample sizes.起始頁-結束頁：81-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00045篇名：科技校院教師評鑑的阻礙與因應並列篇名：The Barriers and Solutions for Faculty Evaluation in Colleges and Universities of Technology作者：曾淑惠(Shu-Hui Tseng)關鍵字：教師評鑑;科技校院;評鑑阻礙;faculty evaluation;college and university of technology;barriers of evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：雖然國外大學教師評鑑制度已施行有年，然而由於我國科技校院的設立較晚，且在大學法中也自2005年起才開始規範高等教育機構需要實施教師評鑑，因此教師評鑑在當前科技校院中尚屬新興的議題。本研究旨在探究科技校院教師對教師評鑑阻礙與因應策略的知覺，為達研究目的，本研究共訪談11位科技校院教師評鑑制定單位的主管，並經10位科技校院各職級資深教師審查以提出補充意見，再經三位具有教師評鑑相關研究的學者進行審查確認，最後以問卷調查，獲得580位科技校院教師的回應。研究結論包括：1.教師評鑑阻礙的因素模型包含教師認知與態度、評鑑標準信效度、資料呈現與登錄、行政管理與程序、結果公布與使用、以及辦法制度完整性六類別，經驗證結果模式適配情形良好；2.科技校院教師對教師評鑑在「評鑑標準信效度」與「資料呈現與登錄」兩類別呈現高度阻礙的知覺；3.教師評鑑阻礙之44項因應策略獲得科技校院教師的高度認同;4.不同背景科技大學教師對於部分教師評鑑阻礙的知覺程度具有差異。最後提出五項建議供參。英文摘要：Faculty evaluation has been implemented for years overseas, but because the establishment of colleges and universities of technology in Taiwan was later development, faculty evaluation has only be regulated by University Act since 2005. Faculty evaluation in an institute of technology seems like a new issue compared with other institutes. This study aimed to explore the perception on the barriers and strategies of solution for faculty evaluation in colleges and universities of technology. To achieve the objective, 11 administrators responsible for faculty evaluation were interviewed, 10 senior faculties were invited to examine the interview data and provide supplementary suggestions. Lastly, 3 experts in faculty evaluation reviewed the process. 580 faculty members of institute of technology participated in the questionnaire investigation. The conclusions are as follows: 1.The barriers in faculty evaluation can be grouped into six categories which are faculty members' cognition and attitude, validity and reliability of evaluation standard, data presentation and document filling, administration management and procedures, announcement and handling of evaluation results, completeness of related regulations. Confirmatory factor analysis shows that the model achieves a good fit. 2. Faculty members showed high perception on ”validity and reliability of evaluation standard” and ”data presentation and document filling”. 3. 44 strategies of solutions were highly recognized by faculty members. 4. Faculty members with different background have different perception on faculty evaluation barriers. Five suggestions are provided as a reference.起始頁-結束頁：109-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00056篇名：大學生學業應得權益感研究：量表發展與相關變項關係分析－以臺灣北部與中部地區八所大學為例並列篇名：The Study of Academic Entitlement: Development of Measurement Scale and the Relationships between Relational Variables among Taiwan University Students- Eight Colleges in North and Central Taiwan as an Example作者：洪福源(Fu-Yuan Hong);邱素玲(Su-Lin Chiu);鄭光燦(Kuang-Tsan Cheng)關鍵字：學業應得權益感;外控信念;人格;自尊;父母教養方式;academic entitlement;external locus of control beliefs;personality;self esteem;parenting style期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來在美國高等教育，學業應得權益概念的探討已被視為一種重要的課題，然而學業應得權益感之測量工具與概念卻存在一些問題有待釐清，再加上國內學業應得權益感研究付之闕如，本研究將編製測量工具、驗證量表之信效度，進而分析學業應得權益感概念與其他相關變項間的關連性，以提供後續高等教育教學與相關研究之參考。本研究以臺灣916位大學生為樣本進行探究，研究結果顯示：（一）經因素分析歸納出大學生學業應得權益感的三個因素：「剝削的學業應得權益信念」、「非剝削的學業應得權益信念」、「個別化的學業應得權益信念」，且一階驗證性因素（變項間存在相關）和二階驗證性因素模式的配適度均佳，觀察資料的模式適配度呈現良好結果，顯示這三個因素所構成的量表具有良好的信效度；（二）大學生在學業應得權益感的現況方面是屬「中程度」；（三）大學生學業應得權益感與外控信念、社會外向、自卑感、神經質、焦慮性、憂鬱性、雙親教養態度之保護均具有正相關；（四）男學生的剝削的學業應得權益信念、非剝削的學業應得權益信念、個別化的學業應得權益信念、整體學業應得權益信念得分均明顯高於女學生。最後，本研究進行討論並對未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：In higher education in the United States, academic entitlement has been regarded as an important educational issue in recent years. However, academic entitlement measurement tools and concepts have some shortcomings. So far the research of analyzing the relationships between academic entitlement in domestic university students is lacking. This study will develop university students' academic entitlement scale, and verify the reliability and validity of this scale for the reference of teaching and related research. There were 916 university students that participated in this study and the findings are as following: (1) three latent variables contain ”exploitative academic entitlement”, ”non-exploitative academic entitlement”, and ”individual academic entitlement”. The first order and the second order confirmatory factor analysis as well as observation data showed the best fit.; (2) university students have a middle degree of academic entitlement; (3) academic entitlement had significantly positive relationships with external locus of control beliefs, social extraversion, inferiority, nervousness, anxiety, depression and parenting style; (4) male students would perceive more exploitative academic entitlement, non-exploitative academic entitlement, individual academic entitlement and total academic entitlement than female students. Based on the findings of this study, discussion and suggestions were made for practical work for the school and for future research.起始頁-結束頁：141-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00067篇名：教師對主管的滿意度、信任與承諾之間的關係：各種理論模式之比較並列篇名：The Relationships among Satisfaction, Trust, and Commitment of Teachers towards Supervisors: The Comparisons of Various Theoretic Models作者：丁學勤(Shueh-Chin Ting);謝明倫(Ming-Lun Hsieh)關鍵字：滿意度;信任;承諾;關係品質;satisfaction;trust;commitment;relationship quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：滿意度、信任與承諾三者是關係品質研究最常被探討的概念，在過去研究中大多只納入三者之中的兩個變項，欠缺三者因果關係的整合研究。其次，有關滿意度與信任、滿意度與承諾之間的影響關係，至今仍未有定論。再者，關係品質的研究多是關注買者與賣者的關係，較少是教師與主管之間的關係。因此，本研究同時將滿意度、信任與承諾納入研究中並根據三者的相互影響關係，發展出八種可能理論模式，以實證資料驗證並比較各種可能理論模式，藉此找出最佳模式。亦即本研究旨在了解滿意度、信任及承諾之間的影響關係，找出描述滿意度、信任及承諾三者間關係的最佳模式。以臺南縣市、高雄縣市國小教師為研究對象，採取分層抽樣，共抽取600名教師進行問卷調查，有效回收問卷484份，有效回收率80.7%。正式問卷先通過驗證性因素分析，確認其具有信效度，再利用結構方程模式，比較八種可能理論模式，找出最佳模式。研究結果顯示，本研究的最佳模式是滿意度影響信任、滿意度影響承諾、信任影響承諾，意即滿意度為信任與承諾的共同影響來源；滿意度與信任會同時影響承諾。最後，本研究根據研究結果提出相關的建議供實務應用與後續研究參考。英文摘要：The concepts most often discussed in the research of relationship quality were satisfaction, trust and commitment. Most of the previous research explored only two variables among them but lacked integrated research of causal relationship of the three variables. Secondly, there was no definite conclusion about the relationship of satisfaction and trust, satisfaction and commitment. Furthermore, nowadays the research of relationship quality focuses on the buyer-seller relationship and to a lesser extent on the teacher-supervisor relationship. Therefore, this study included satisfaction, trust and commitment simultaneously and developed eight different theoretic models according to the possible relationships of the three variables. This study used the empirical data to test and compare various theoretic models in order to identify the best model.The purpose of this study was to understand the relationship among satisfaction, trust and commitment and propose the best model. The subjects of this study were elementary school teachers in Tainan and Kaohsiung. 600 teachers were selected to participate in questionnaire survey by stratified sampling. Valid questionnaire had 484, and the valid return rate was 80.7%. Scales were confirmed to have reliability and validity by confirmatory factor analysis. Following, this study used structural equation modeling to compare eight theoretic models and identify the best model. Empirical results indicate that the best model is that satisfaction positively influences trust, satisfaction positively influences commitment, and trust positively influences commitment. On the other hand, satisfaction is the common antecedent of trust and commitment. Also, combination of satisfaction and trust positively influences commitment. Finally, according to the results, this study provides some suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：175-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201212_8(4).00078篇名：臺灣近十年學校創新經營研究之分析與展望：以期刊與學位論文為主並列篇名：The Analysis and Prospects of Research on ”School Innovation Management” in Taiwan: From Journals, Theses, and Dissertations (2002-2010)作者：黃建翔(Chien-Hsiang Huang);吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu)關鍵字：內容分析法;創新經營;學校創新經營;content analysis;innovation management;school innovation management期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：為了解臺灣地區有關學校創新經營研究之現況及趨勢，本研究以2002年至2010年間為範圍，整理歸納我國學校創新經營研究之期刊與學位論文，做為分析探討的對象。本研究首先論述學校創新經營之意義，並建構「學校創新經營之內涵架構」作為分析的基礎；其次，透過近十年來176篇期刊及學位論文之整理，從研究主題、研究年代、研究對象、研究方法及研究取向等面向，作為研究架構來進行剖析，以探究我國學校創新經營之現況發展；最後，依據研究現況與分析結果，歸納六項結論並提出建議：（一）開展多面向之學校創新經營主題探究；（二）擺脫政策導向思維，進行長期性的縱貫研究；（三）擴充較少之研究組織對象以促使研究對象多元化；（四）採用質性與量化兼顧的整合性研究方法；（五）加強新興管理理論的應用以擴展研究視野；（六）注入創新活水來營造永續發展的優質學校。英文摘要：In order to analyze the recent studies and theoretical vs. empirical trends on the topic of ”school innovation management” in Taiwan, this study takes journal articles, theses, and dissertations published between 2002 and 2010 for the main research objectives. Firstly, the authors discuss the meanings of ”school innovation management”, and build the framework of ”school innovation management” for the basis of analysis. Secondly, the authors collect 176 journal articles, theses, and dissertations in order to analyze in the perspective of research topics, periods, objectives, methods, and orientations. There are six findings in this study: (1) Multi-dimensional research topics should be provided. (2) Along with short-term political impact, longitudinal studies should be conducted. (3) The objectives of researches should be more diverse. (4) Mixed methods should be employed. (5) Contemporary management theories should be introduced. (6) Building sustainable development and quality schools with innovation.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).00019篇名：都市大型國民小學重建領導經驗之個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study of Turnaround Leadership Experiences in a Large Urban Elementary School作者：賴志峰(Chih-Feng Lai)關鍵字：都市學校領導;重建領導;家長式領導;urban school l leadership;turnaround leadership;paternalistic leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：都市大型學校面臨複雜的環境，校長經常面臨許多挑戰與困難，都市學校領導的研究逐漸受到關注。本研究為質性個案研究，選取臺灣都會地區一所大型公立國民小學為研究對象，以訪談、參與觀察和文件分析進行資料蒐集。該校曾擁有輝煌的歷史，但過去幾年的聲望比較低迷的，校長上任之後，領導學校迅速建立辦學特色，重現學校風華與聲望，展現成功的重建領導。本研究有三個主要發現，首先，校長具有刻苦耐勞、嚴謹正直的個人特質，以及深厚的法學素養，鍛鍊出清晰思路的表達能力。其次，校長具有家長式領導風格，並運用漸近目標、資訊科技、課程與教學領導等作為，強化行政團隊及教學團隊，營造團結和優質環境。最後，校長領導的成效，廣泛獲得內外部的肯定，但都市學校教師的專業自主較高，對於校長的領導風格，難免有兩極的評價。英文摘要：Due to the complicated settings of large urban schools, principals from urban schools are often confronted with challenges and difficulties. Consequently, research on urban school leaders has gradually aroused academic attention. This article reports the findings of a qualitative study with a large urban public elementary school as its subject. Data were collected through interviews, observations, and document analysis. Despite its splendid history, the case school has been on the decline in recent years. After his assumption of duty, the principal of the case school devoted himself to developing the school features and demonstrating successful turnaround leadership; thus, the school regained its previous reputation. First, in addition to diligence and a candid spirit, the principal has a background in law and strong communication skills. Second, the principal adopts paternalistic leadership, in addition to strategies such as setting progressive goals, utilizing information technology, and demonstrating curricular and instructional leadership, to develop a professional administration, teaching staff, and a harmonious and high-quality campus. Finally, the leadership effectiveness of the principal earns intramural and extramural recognition; however, because of the high professional autonomy of teachers in urban schools, the leadership styles of the principal inevitably receive mixed reviews.起始頁-結束頁：31-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).000210篇名：我寫故我在：案例撰寫在教育行政與領導學程的實施探討並列篇名：I Write therefore I Am: A Study of the Implementation of Case Writing in Educational Administration and Leadership Program作者：陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen)關鍵字：案例撰寫;案例教學法;教育行政與領導;case writing;case method;educational administration and leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：案例教學法發軔於法學教育，但卻能一路挺進勝出，逐步受到其他不同學門的青睞，自當有其引領流行、獲致各家共鳴的獨特策略。而近年來正方興未艾，崛起於教育行政與領導人才培育學程的案例教學法即是案例撰寫。本研究採用質性的行動研究方法，以研究者所服務的教育行政與領導學程為教學現場，透過案例撰寫的融入教學歷程，發展行政與領導相關課程的教學方向，以及初步探討其對於學員所產生的行政領導知能的可能影響。根據研究發現，學程學員的行政領導知能新體驗，分別展現在「多元架構的思維」、「理論實務的對話」、「共時貫時的反思」三方面。本研究據以提出若干建議供教育人員與未來研究做參考。英文摘要：In recent years, the pedagogy of case writing has being increasingly adopted in enhancing the teaching in the educational administrators and leaders preparation program. Employing a qualitative action research methodology, this study investigated the field of educational administration and leadership program where the author has served, incorporating the case writing into the instructional process, developing the direction of curriculum, and monitoring how it affects cohorts' leadership skills and intelligences. Based on the results, the new understanding of cohorts emerged in the three themes of ”multiple framework thoughts,” ”dialogue between theory and practice,” as well as ”diachronic and synchronic reflection.” This study concluded by proposing several suggestions for educators and researchers in the future.起始頁-結束頁：61-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).000301篇名：想像力量表之編製並列篇名：The Development of an Imagination Scale作者：曹筱玥(Saiau-Yue Tsau);林小慧(Hsiao-Hui Lin)關鍵字：幻想;創造力;想像力;想像力激發機制;驗證性因素分析;fantasy;creativity;imagination;the arousing mechanism of imagination;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在發展「想像力量表」，視其信度與效度，全量表共包含13題開放式題項。研究者透過項目分析、Cronbach’s α、重測信度、個別項目信度、成分信度、組合信度及驗證性因素分析等統計方法來分析處理實證資料。根據驗證性因素分析結果顯示，實證資料尚且支持Vygotsky之想像力概念理論（Vygotsky’s theoretical conceptions of imagination）暨想像力激發機制（the arousing mechanism of imagination）之「想像力量表」的假設模式，兩者適配尚稱符合。本研究初步發現「想像力量表」可分為「發想力」、「流暢力」、「變通力」，以及「獨創力」四個分量表，而四個分量表分數表徵之一級潛在因素，可以被「想像力量表」解釋的百分比分別為 .46、 .96、 .55、 .20。英文摘要：This study develops and examines the reliability and validity of an imagination scale (IS) with 13 open-ended items categorized into 4 subscales: initiation, fluency, flexibility, and originality. Item analysis and confirmatory factor analysis are used to determine Cronbach's α, test-retest reliability, individual item reliability, composite reliability, and criterion-related validity of the IS. Second-order confirmatory factor analysis shows that there was an acceptable goodness-of-fit among the IS, Vygotsky's theoretical conceptions of imagination, and the arousing mechanism of imagination. The IS accounted for .46, .96, .55, and .02 of the variance associated with the 4 subscales.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學2篇名：數學低成就學習動機之類型與區別分析：中小學弱勢學生與一般學生之比較並列篇名：Discriminating Math Low-Achievement Motivation Patterns: Comparing Disadvantaged and Other Students in Elementary and Junior High School作者：李宜玫(Yi-Mei Lee)關鍵字：弱勢學生;區別分析;集群分析;數學學習動機;disadvantaged students;discriminant analysis;cluster analysis;math learning motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在比較與分析低成就學生數學學習所呈現的不同動機類型，以作為弱勢學生補救教育的評估與學習輔導之參考。取樣依照地區與學校規模分層抽樣新北市中小學，先選攜手班的弱勢生，再請原班導師協助，參考上學期數學總成績以及同性別的一般生進行配對取樣，共得有效樣本764人（男426人、女338人；一般生428人、弱勢生336人）。測量工具為自我效能、期望成功、知覺難度、內在動機、逃避策略、堅持與自制力七種變項。透過二階段集群分析、區別分析、獨立樣本變異數分析與卡方考驗進行統計分析。結果顯示：一、所有學生可以區分並命名為樂在其中、隨性鬆散、習得無助、穩定謹慎等四組；二、區別分析可得兩種函數，分別命名為「內評情感」與「外評意志」，可以有效區分上述四組學生；三、弱勢學生和一般學生在「樂在其中」與「隨性鬆散」兩種類型中的比例有差異存在。綜而言之，本研究分析與比較低成就學生數學學習動機四種不同類型，並建議補救教學教師據以區辨弱勢學生的數學學習動機，並能強化隨性鬆散型學生養成自我管理的學習習慣，以及提供習得無助型學生更多的心理支持。英文摘要：This study assesses math-avoidant motivation patterns of disadvantaged students to determine whether they require remedial education and learning guidance. The study includes 764 elementary and junior high school students (426 male and 338 female, and 428 normal and 336 disadvantaged). The students were sampled by region and school size in Taiwan. These students completed the Math Avoidance Motivation Scale, including variables measuring ”self-efficiency,” ”expectancy of success,” ”perception of difficulty,” ”intrinsic motivation,” ”avoidance strategies,” ”resistance,” and ”self-control.” Two-stage cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, analysis of variance, and x^2 (chi-square analysis) were used as statistical methods. The results of the study show that students are divided into 4 clusters: enjoyment, permissiveness, helplessness, and carefulness. Discriminant analysis of the 7 observed variables identified 2 functions: affection and conation. These 2 functions differentiate between the 4 student clusters. The results also show that differences occur between the proportion of enjoyment and permissiveness clusters in the disadvantaged and normal student groups. This study explores 4 math avoidant motivation patterns and proposes that teachers recognize student styles. Teachers can encourage permissive students to form self-governing learning habits and support helpless students psychologically with remedial education programs.起始頁-結束頁：39-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學3篇名：高二學生在理想氣體多重表徵教學前後心智模式的改變並列篇名：The Evolution of the 11th Graders' Mental Models of Ideal Gas作者：鍾曉蘭(Shiao-Lan Chung);邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu)關鍵字：心智模式;多重表徵;氣體粒子模型;mental models;multi-representational modeling teaching;gas particle models期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：學生在日常生活中的觀察，常無法察覺與體驗理想氣體的次微觀行為，易因氣體行為在巨觀現象中的表現而產生許多迷思概念或另有概念。本研究分析39位學生經過多重表徵模型教學（高二上學期的課程中實施，總計八節課，每節50分鐘）學習理想氣體相關概念（粒子觀、氣體體積定義、氣壓成因、影響氣壓因素、剛性粒子、氣體粒子分布／運動等）的想法改變情形，並利用14位標的學生（8位男生、6位女生）三次晤談（教學前、中與後）之口語及繪圖資料，進而探討學生心智模式的類型及演變情形。研究結果發現：經由具體動態的粒子模型教具及電腦動畫教學後，全體學生與14 位晤談學生在氣體粒子觀、剛性粒子及氣體粒子分布／運動情形的迷思概念已修正為正確概念，然而在氣壓成因與影響氣壓因素兩個概念仍有一些迷思概念較難移除，或是產生概念回歸的情形。在心智模式的演變上，教學前僅有1位學生為科學模式，教學中有11位學生演變成科學模式（共有12位，85.7%）。教學後，11位學生中有2位學生回歸成重量模式、1位學生演變成引力模式，仍有8位學生的心智模式保持科學模式（共有9位，64.3%）。晤談資料顯示，教學前學生的心智模式多半具有融貫性、情境相依的特質，教學成效則支持多重表徵模型教學有助於學生氣體粒子觀的建構，同時學生亦能持續持有正確的觀點，此教學法可作為未來課室教學策略之參考。英文摘要：Students often face tremendous challenges when learning ideal gas concepts. This is probably because it is difficult for students to experience the microscopic concepts in ideal gas models in their daily observations, and several misconceptions or alternative concepts occur as a result. Thirty-nine Grade 11 students participated in this study. Students were exposed to eight 50-min teaching periods, 14 students (8 males and 6 females) were interviewed, and their verbal and drawing data were collected. This study analyzed concepts related to ideal gas (particle view, gas volume definition, pressure effect, factors affecting pressure, rigid particles, and the distribution and motion of gas particles) in 14 students by using verbal and graphic data retrieved from 3 interviews (before, during, and after instruction). We also analyzed types of ideal gas mental models that the students use, and the evolutionary processes they follow. The results indicate that dynamic particle model concrete teaching aids, ideal gas model slides, and a computer animation and simulation program changed the 14 student conceptions of gas particle views, rigid particles, and the distribution and motion of gas particles. However, 2 incorrect conceptions-causes of gas pressure and factors of gas pressure-hardly changed and even regressed to their pre-instruction conceptions. The evolution of mental models shows that only one student used the scientific model before instruction. After 4 periods of multi-representational modeling teaching activities, 11 students changed their conceptions from incorrect ideal gas models to scientific models (12 students or 85.7%). Of the 11 students, 2 students reverted to the weight model, 1 student used the attractive force model, and 8 students still held the scientific model after 8 teaching periods.起始頁-結束頁：73-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學4篇名：國小學童科學學習動機、父母創意教養與科技創造力關聯之研究並列篇名：Science Learning Motivation and Creative Parenting Effects on Student Technological Creativity作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：父母創意教養;科技創造力;科學學習動機;創造力傾向;創意生活經驗;creative parenting;technological creativity;science learning motivation;creativity intention;creative life experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以1,808名國小四至六年級學童為研究樣本進行分析，以瞭解科學學習動機、創造力傾向、父母創意教養與創意生活經驗等因素對科技創造力的直接影響，以及科學學習動機透過創造力傾向的中介、父母創意教養透過創意生活經驗的中介，對科技創造力所造成的間接影響，並以結構方程模式加以檢驗。經由結構方程模式統計檢定後，整體模式所獲得的指數顯示模式可被接受。對整體效果的分析顯示，創造力傾向、父母創意教養以及創意生活經驗對科技創造力具直接影響；科學學習動機透過創造力傾向對科技創造力間產生間接影響；以及父母創意教養透過創意生活經驗對科技創造力產生間接影響。最後，針對分析結果，本研究提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：This study uses data from 1,808 student participants. We explore the relationships among creative parenting, science learning motivation, creativity intention, creative life experience, and technological creativity. The study uses the structural equation model to show that creative parenting, creativity intention, and creative life experience affect technological creativity. Creativity intention also has a significant mediating effect on the relationship between science learning motivation and technological creativity. Creative life experience has a significant mediating effect on the relationship between creative parenting and technological creativity. We discuss these results and provide suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：103-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學5篇名：Student Question-Generation: The Learning Processes Involved and Their Relationships with Students' Perceived Value並列篇名：學生出題的學習歷程及其與工作價值感之相關作者：于富雲(Fu-Yun Yu);吳純萍(Chun-Ping Wu)關鍵字：學習方法;學習策略;工作價值感;學生出題;learning approach;learning strategy;perceived task value;student question-generation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目前學生出題相關研究主要採用實驗設計法或行動研究法，以驗證此教學策略的學習成效。雖然學生出題已有理論以及實證基礎雄厚，有關學生出題的學習歷程以及其與工作價值感之相關性為何，目前尚少研究深入探究與瞭解。考量上述議題具學生出題教學意涵，且有其實證、研究方法與理論之重要性，本研究鎖定以下議題探究：一、以訊息處理與學生學習方法理論解析學生出題的內在運思歷程；二、建立單一學習情境下多重學習方法的實證基礎，並瞭解不同學習方法下，學習策略運用與學生出題價值感的差異情形；三、探究學生出題價值感、學習策略運用與學習方法間的關係。採調查研究法，針對50位教育學程修課學生，以信度與效度俱全的研究工具蒐集相關資料。主要研究發現：一、學生出題情境下，學生傾向採用學習策略與深層學習方法；二、特定情境下多重學習方法現象確實存在；三、不同學習方法採用者在學生出題價值感與學習策略上有顯著不同；四、學生出題價值感愈高者愈傾向採用深層的學習方法。文末，提出本研究在理論、研究方法與實證上的貢獻，以及教學實施與未來研究建議。英文摘要：Studies on student question-generation have mainly emphasized its value as an instructional intervention and examined its effects using experimental or action research methods. Although the theoretical foundations of student question-generation are sound and its empirical bases are solid, issues with regard to the nature of the enacted learning processes and their relationships with perceived value remain largely unexamined empirically. These issues should have important instructional implications, as well as empirical, methodological, and theoretical significance. Therefore, this study aims to reveal the nature of student question-generation learning processes using information processing and student approaches to learning theories; establish empirical evidence for multiple learning approaches and investigate whether any learning strategies and task value differences exist among different learning approaches; and examine the relationships among learning strategies, learning approaches, and task value. This study uses a survey research method and incorporates a student question-generation component into an undergraduate course that is part of a teacher preparation program. Instruments with established reliability and validity are used. This study has four major findings. First, within a student question-generation context, learners tend to activate learning strategies and use a deep learning approach when studying. Second, students may commit themselves to more than one learning approach during a specific task. Third, learners with different learning approaches are found to have statistically significant differences in their use of learning strategies and perceived task value. Fourth, learners who perceive more value in student question-generation tend to adopt a deep learning approach. The theoretical, methodological, and empirical significance of this study is highlighted, followed by suggestions for instructional implementations and future work.起始頁-結束頁：135-162資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學6篇名：任務描述對幼兒目標設定管控之激發並列篇名：Examining Effects of Task Descriptions as External EF for Young Children作者：邱淑惠(Shu-Hui Chiu)關鍵字：幼兒;目標設定;任務描述;非結構性任務;管控功能;children;goal-setting;task description;ill-structured problem;executive function期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究回顧與大腦前額葉相關的管控功能（Executive Function）發展後，結合與解決非結構性任務相關的研究和教學現場觀察，提出教育應用假說：任務描述是否能涵蓋相關領域知識的提示，可影響幼兒對非結構性任務的詮釋，進而影響目標設定管控功能的發揮。本研究以實驗的方式讓幼兒挑選與蝴蝶成長相關的照片進行敘事創作，實驗組接受較明確的任務描述，控制組接受較模糊的任務描述，觀察兩組幼兒目標設定管控功能的發揮有無顯著差異。本研究以幼兒的照片挑選、選圖理由、創作內容條理與創作主題評量幼兒的目標設定管控。由不同面向觀察到的結果都支持，實驗組接受有助相關領域知識提取的任務描述後，幼兒的創作行為比控制組更具方向性。最後，本研究提出教育應用建議。英文摘要：This study reviewed the development of executive function during the preschool period and proposed an educational hypothesis: young children possess a relatively immature goal setting EF; therefore an explicit goal description may serve as an external EF for them. An experimental design was applied to examine the effects of task descriptions on children's story-authoring behaviors. Sixty kindergarteners aged 5.1 to 6.2 years participated in this study. Participants were randomly assigned to the experimental or the control group. Children in pairs were required to complete an ill-structured problem where children selected photos and recorded their narratives for each selected photo. As compared to the control group, the instructor gave a more explicit task description to the children in the experimental group. Children in the experimental group were asked to ”use these photos to show us how butterflies grow up.” Children in the control group were asked to ”use these photos to tell us about butterflies.” As expected, children in the experimental group were more concise in photo selection than children in the control group. The former also displayed greater logical order in arranging selected photos than the latter. Evidences derived from children's behaviors and reasoning were consistent. Children's narratives derived from the experimental group were also rated better in photo-story consistency and subject clarity than children's narratives derived from the control group. Findings suggest that a precise task description may facilitate young children's problem representation process; therefore, young children may have a clear goal in mind to guide them in completing tasks.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學7篇名：當西方遇見東方：一位西方外籍教授與臺灣大學生的教室互動初探並列篇名：When West Meets East: The Classroom Interaction between a Western Professor and Taiwanese Undergraduate Students作者：張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);王采薇(Tsai-Wei Wang);黃秀雯(Hsiu-Wen Huang);林慧絢(Huei-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：大學教學;西方外籍教授;教室互動;臺灣大學生;university teaching;western professor;classroom interaction;Taiwanese undergraduates期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解一位來自歐洲具有心理學專業背景的外籍教授Alex（化名），在臺灣教學與學生互動的歷程。研究方法包含教室觀察、師生訪談，以及相關文件資料蒐集。研究發現，語言隔閡和文化差異會影響Alex與臺灣大學生的互動。Alex認為大學時期的知識應由對話中建構而來，因此邀請學生與他辯論、甚至挑戰他的權威，然而，臺灣學生對老師威權的順從，以及課堂教室的靜默，令Alex 相當震驚，但他透過個人幽默的教學方式、主動關心學生，逐漸建立起雙方的理解與互信，從教室內的對話延伸至教室外的互動，經過1年多的磨合，Alex與學生也建立了良好的互動關係。本研究最後針對外籍教授在臺灣的教學提出建議。英文摘要：This study examined the teaching experiences of Alex, a professor of Greece, who taught in a psychology-related field in a Taiwanese university. This study found that linguistic barriers and cultural differences regarding teaching and learning posed major challenges for Alex. For example, because of his belief in the importance of critical thinking, Alex insisted that the students question his comments. However, the Taiwanese students, used to playing a passive role in the classroom, were initially reticent to Alex's dialogical style. Through his sense of humor and friendliness inside and outside of the classroom, Alex gradually developed a mutual understanding with the students.起始頁-結束頁：27-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學8篇名：世代分析：教育部體適能政策推展績政之追蹤評估並列篇名：Cohort Study: A Follow-Up Performance Evaluation of the Ministry of Education's Physical Fitness Promotion Programs作者：施致平(Chih-Pin Shih);李俞麟(Yu-Lin Lee);羅晨溦(Chen-Wei Lo);謝靜瑜(Ching-Yu Hsieh)關鍵字：世代分析;潛在成長曲線模式;績效評估;體適能;cohort study;latent growth curve modeling;performance evaluation;physical fitness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：教育部推展學生體適能政策迄今已逾10年，在挹注諸多資源執行之後，其成效為何？應是政府單位與推動計畫者最為關注之議題。因此，本研究乃在於瞭解教育部體適能政策推展之現況，分析體適能檢測成效，探討不同變項學生對體適能評量之差異分析，並以潛在成長曲線模式分析與評估教育部體適能政策推展之執行效益。本研究以98學年度入學之七∼九年級學生為研究對象，依各縣市學生人數比例，採用分層叢集隨機方式進行抽樣，共回收有效樣本3,797筆。具體之研究發現為：一、校園體適能推展情形良好，然學生運動參與情形及身體活動量仍嫌不足；二、男女生體適能檢測成績呈現下滑趨勢；三、國中生於體適能認知測驗、態度及規律運動自我信心上，存在差異情形；四、潛在成長曲線模式驗證達適配性，僅在體適能認知測驗呈現正成長，在體適能態度與規律運動自我信心則為負成長。有鑑於此，政府相關部門應再重新審視體適能之推展活動與策略，並加強有效之追蹤考核，以提升校園體適能之執行效益。英文摘要：The Ministry of Education (MOE) has promoted school fitness programs for over 10 years. After shifting resources to implement these programs, the results were examined. These are important issues concerning both the government and promoters. The purpose of this study was to establish the status of the MOE in promoting fitness programs, analyzing student fitness results, probing differential analysis among student fitness tests, and using Latent Growth Curve (LGC) analysis to evaluate the benefits of the implementation of the fitness programs. Middle school students who were in the seventh, eighth, and ninth grade in 2010 were the subjects of our study. Stratified cluster sampling was used to collect data and was based on the proportion of students per county. The study collected 3,797 validation samples with a validation rate of 95.88%. The following results were obtained: (1) The promotion of school fitness programs was successful, but physical activity and sport participation needed improvement. (2) Both young men and women showed a marked decline in their fitness test performances. (3) Middle school students in various demographics showed varying results in their fitness cognition tests, attitudes, and self-confidence. (4) The fitness LGC model showed a positive slope of 3.00 in fitness cognition tests, but slopes for fitness attitude and exercise self-confidence were negative (-0.05 and -0.08, respectively). Consequently, to reap the benefits of school fitness, the government must reexamine the fitness promotion activities and strategies used and strengthen the effectiveness of the fitness assessments.起始頁-結束頁：59-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學9篇名：國小六年級學生犯罪軟體防治之教材發展與評鑑：以恐懼訴求為教學設計原則之研究並列篇名：The Use of Fear Appeals in the Development and Evaluation of an Anti-Crimeware Courseware for Taiwanese Sixth Graders作者：鄧達鈞(Ta-Chun Teng);周倩(Chien Chou)關鍵字：犯罪軟體;系統化教學設計;防治教材;恐懼訴求;國小六年級學生;crimeware;systematic instructional design;prevention courseware;fear-appeals;Taiwanese sixth grader期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究之目的為發展國小六年級學童犯罪軟體防治教材，並探討其學習成效。本教材以系統化教學設計進行，並以傳播學領域之「恐懼訴求」為教學設計方式。在實驗設計中分別以不同高低之感受性及嚴重性設計四類不同訴求教材，作為教學實驗之自變項，以探究130位六年級學生之犯罪軟體防治態度、認知概念、問題解決及課後繼續行為之學習成效。研究結果指出：整體而言，接受高感受及高嚴重教材之學生的學習成效優於其他組別。本研究結果可提供未來相關研究、教學設計之參考。英文摘要：This study describes the development of an anti-crimeware courseware for schoolchildren in Taiwan and examines its pedagogical effectiveness. The instructional design adopted the ADDIE model and integrated the fear appeals approach. A 2-by-2 factorial experimental design was used to test the four possible combinations of two levels (high and low) and two factors (perceived-susceptibility and severity) of fear appeals. The participants in this study included 130 sixth graders. Using immediate and delayed individual tests, this study examined their anti-crimeware attitudes, cognitive concepts, and problem solving skills. The results indicated that the High- Susceptibility/High-Severity (H-Su/H-Se) group outperformed the other three groups. Further explanations and interpretations of the results are provided, and suggestions for future research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：91-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學10篇名：科幻小說與科幻影片對激發國中生產品設計創意的效益並列篇名：The Stimulating Effects of Science Fiction Books and Films on the Product-Design Creativity of Middle School Students作者：林坤誼(Kuen-Yi Lin)關鍵字：科幻小說;科幻影片;國中生;產品設計創意;認知風格;science fiction books;science fiction films;middle school students;product-design creativity;cognitive styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的主要目的著重在探究透過科幻小說與科幻影片以激發八年級學生產品設計創意的效益，而為了達到此一目的，本研究主要採用準實驗研究的不等組前後測設計，並針對四個班級共137位八年級學生進行教學實驗。依據本研究資料分析的結果，主要獲致以下研究結論：一、善用科幻影片較科幻小說能有助於提升國中生的產品設計創意；二、依據國中生的圖像型認知風格以規劃適性的科幻影片實作活動，有助於提升其在產品設計創意的表現；三、不同認知風格的國中生在產品設計實作活動中，未必皆能妥善運用其表徵方式以解決問題，故教師在實作教學過程中仍需要給予適切的引導與協助。英文摘要：For this study, we compared the stimulating effects of science fiction books and films on the design creativity of eighth grade middle school students. Four classes totaling 137 students participated in the study. We compared the design creativity of 2 learning groups: one group read science fiction books, whereas the other watched science fiction films. This study adopted a quasi-experimental design, using a creativity assessment packet as a pretest and a product-design creativity scale as a posttest. An analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) showed that (1) the effective use of science fiction films stimulated students' design creativity more than did science fiction reading; (2) planning suitable activities based on students' visual cognitive styles was effective in improving students' design creativity; and (3) because of differences in cognitive style, not all students could apply their ideas when solving problems. Therefore, teachers needed to offer guidance and help students during hands-on learning activities.起始頁-結束頁：121-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：補習與教學型態對數學低成就生之文字題表現的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Cram Schooling and Teaching Approaches on Mathematics Underachievers' Word-Problem Solving Performance作者：白雲霞(Yun-Hsia Pai)關鍵字：低成就生;補習;數學文字題;閱讀理解;cram school;math word-problem;reading comprehension;supplementary school education;underachievers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要在探討有無補習之高年級低成就學生在數學文字題學習成就上的差異，與其學校及補習班教師教學型態對數學文字題的影響。本研究之五、六年級低成就生分別接受該年級之數學文字題測驗，該測驗由低、中、高閱讀理解難度文字題組成，有補習低成就生的補習班與學校教師分別接受教學型態量表。研究結果主要發現如下：（一）補習與未補習之五年級數學低成就生在數學文字題測驗總分及其學習保留量皆沒有明顯差異；但有補習的六年級低成就生數學文字題總表現顯著高於沒有補習者，並較具學習保留效果；（二）補習僅對於六年級數學低成就生在低、中閱讀難度文字題得分有顯著的幫助。（三）對五年級低成就生而言，補習班教師愈傾向使用建構教學取向，有補習者的數學文字題成就總分及中、高難度文字題的作答表現則越高，而其直接教學取向對中難度題具有負向預測力；在六年級部分，智力對六年級低成就生的數學文字題總分有正向預測力，而教學型態則不具預測力。但對低閱讀難度的數學文字題而言，智力與學校教師越不採用直接教學取向的程度可共同預測低成就生數學文字題低難度題得分，其解釋力為20%；而補習天數對五、六年級數學低成就生的數學文字題測驗總分皆沒有顯著預測力。英文摘要：This study investigates differences in mathematics word-problem solving performance among 5th and 6th grade mathematics underachievers with and without cram schooling, and the effect of their elementary school teachers' and cram school teachers' teaching approaches on word-problem solving performance. The word-problem test is comprised of three parts, including problems requiring low, average, and high level of reading comprehension. Participants were given word-problem tests appropriate to their grade level. Students' mathematics teachers in cram schools and elementary schools were given a questionnaire on their teaching approaches. First, there were no significant differences in math word-problem solving performance and learning retention between 5th grade mathematics underachievers with and without cram schooling. However, word-problem solving performance and learning retention of the 6th grade underachievers with cram schooling were significantly better than those without. Regression analysis of math word-problem performance in 5th grade underachievers revealed that the more cram school teachers used a constructivist teaching approach, the higher their scores were on the total, average, and high level math word-problem tests. In contrast, the more cram school teachers used the direct teaching approach, the lower scores math underachievers got on the average level word-problem tests. The 6th grade math underachievers' performance can be explained by their intelligence. Moreover, the direct teaching approach was demonstrated to have a negative effect on underachievers' performance solving low level word-problems. In addition, word-problem solving performance was not related to the number of hours per week they learned mathematics in cram schools.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.00012篇名：幾何證明文本閱讀的眼動研究：圖文比重及圖示著色效果並列篇名：Eye Movements during Geometry Proof Reading: Text Contrasting With Figure and the Colored Effects作者：陳琪瑤(Chi-Yao Chen);吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu)關鍵字：眼動;幾何證明;數學閱讀;eye movements;geometry proof;mathematics reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：幾何證明的文本具有圖示參照的特性。透過眼動追蹤技術可以瞭解圖文的閱讀比重以及圖示著色對閱讀歷程與理解的影響，以探究閱讀幾何證明的圖文整合歷程。本研究採四道國中的幾何證明為材料，操弄附圖上是否著色，以學過但不熟稔幾何證明的31位大學生為受試者，蒐集其閱讀幾何證明時的眼動資料，隨後立即進行紙筆回憶測驗。結果發現，（1）受試者有一半的凝視時間落在圖區，且單位畫素凝視時間圖區較文區長，閱讀幾何證明相當依賴讀圖的現象，說明了圖示提供建構與整合各幾何元件空間關係之訊息，且此訊息因空間工作記憶的限制而需重複閱讀。此外，圖示也提供憶取幾何性質之線索，有助於讀者進行橋接論證，顯示讀圖的教學是個值得著力之處。（2）圖示著色縮減關鍵區的初始理解時間，但不影響其回視時間，也未造成回憶表現的差異，顯示著色影響大學生閱讀幾何證明的視覺化歷程，但對幾何推理歷程以及最終的理解記憶影響不大。亦即圖示著色是個可以影響幾何證明閱讀效率的表徵方式，在文本呈現與教學上有其意義。（3）結論處也指出幾何閱讀的眼動研究尚須確認數學詞彙單位、處理圖文來回時意外落點的技術，以及閱讀軌跡的分析方式等基礎研究。英文摘要：The reading comprehension of geometry proofs necessitates a coherent mental representation of all the information conveyed in the figure and text. Eye movements can be used to assess the perceptual and cognitive processes, and how colored figures affect the integration of text and figures during comprehension. For our experiment, we used four junior high school level geometry proofs with colored/uncolored figures to examine 31 undergraduate students who had learned but have not mastered geometry proofs. First, the participants' eye movements were recorded during reading. A paper-and-pencil recall test was then administered to the participants after the reading procedure. The data reveal that half of the fixations were located on figures, and the proportion of fixations to the pixels of the figures was greater than that of the texts. The results suggested that the reading of geometry proofs depended more on figures that organized the statements using a specific status and provided cues for the geometry proof properties compared to text. Working memory limitations increased the regression time for figures. Additionally, figures provided utility cues for recalling geometric properties, which assisted readers in performing deductions and verifications. Colored figures influenced the visualization of undergraduate students when reading geometry proofs. This reduced the initial reading comprehension time of one theorem, but did not affect the regression time and comprehension exhibited in the recall tests. Valid analyses of eye movements when reading geometry proofs must be supported by definitions of mathematical words and data-screening skills.起始頁-結束頁：35-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.00353篇名：阿德勒取向團體諮商對於青少年網路成癮的諮商成效並列篇名：The Effects of Adlerian Group Counseling on Adolescents with Internet Addiction作者：廖俞榕(Yu-Rong Liao);連廷嘉(Ting-Chia Lien)關鍵字：自我概念;社會興趣;阿德勒學派團體諮商;網路成癮行為;Adlerian group counseling;Internet addiction;self-concept;social interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討「阿德勒學派團體諮商」對網路成癮青少年在網路成癮行為、自我概念、社會興趣等之立即性與長期性諮商效果。本研究採等組前後測實驗設計，係以新竹某國中18名國二學生為對象，分為實驗組及控制組，實驗組成員接受每週一次，每次120分鐘，共八次之團體諮商。本研究以網路成癮量表、自我概念量表、社會興趣量表為評量工具，兩組成員在團體開始一週前進行前測，團體結束一週內進行後測，並於團體結束第四週進行追蹤測。實驗組成員於團體前七次結束時填寫回饋表，並於團體最後一次結束時填寫總回饋表，研究者在團體結束後進行實驗組成員個別訪談，以暸解成員在參與團體後的改變情形。本研究發現阿德勒學派團體諮商對網路成癮青少年在網路成癮總量表和戒斷反應向度，自我概念，以及社會興趣中連結性向度皆具有立即性諮商效果；在網路成癮中時間管理向度，以及自我概念具有長期性諮商效果。本研究根據上述結果，提出若干具體建議，以作為輔導應用與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to explore the immediate and follow-up counseling effects of Adlerian group counseling on Internet addiction, self-concept, and social interest of adolescents with Internet addiction. The study used the quasi-experimental design. The subjects consisted of 18 adolescents with Internet addiction. They were eighth graders from a junior high school in Hsinchu. They were selected based on their report of Internet use through the Internet-Use Scale and interviews conducted by the researchers. These adolescents were assigned to an experiment group and a control group. The experiment group was treated with 8 sessions of Adlerian group counseling. Instruments for measuring the effects included Chen Internet Addiction Scale (CIAS), Self-Concept Scale, and Social Interest Scale. All the data were analyzed by one-way ANCOVA. Furthermore, the feedback and interview results of the experiment group members were both used to support the quantitative results of this research. The major findings of this study were: First, Adlerian group counseling had significant immediate effects on the subjects' Internet addiction, withdrawal symptoms of Internet addiction, self-concept, and connection of social interest. Second, Adlerian group counseling had significant long-term effects on the subjects' time management problems of Internet addiction, and self-concept. In light of above findings, recommendations are offered for counselors and for future research.起始頁-結束頁：67-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.00674篇名：家中第一代大學生的就學經驗、學習成果與畢業流向：與非第一代相比並列篇名：First-Generation College Students: A Study of Their College Experiences, Learning Outcomes, and Destination after Graduation作者：劉若蘭(Ruo-Lan Liu);林大森(Da-Sen Lin)關鍵字：畢業流向;第一代大學生;就學經驗;學習成果;college experiences;destination after graduation;first-generation college students;learning outcomes期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討第一代大學生就學經驗、學習成果與畢業流向的關係，並與非第一代大學生作比較。研究對象為填答高等教育資料庫94學年度大三、畢業前、畢業後一年等三份問卷者，共21,671人。其中個人就學經驗包括課業與抱負、社會資本、財務資本與文化資本等四個面向，學習成果包括畢業成績與職場能力，畢業流向則包括全職就業、全時在學與未就業三項。研究結果發現：第一代大學生在財務、文化資本上明顯低於非第一代大學生，社會資本中僅社團參與低於非第一代大學生。在全職就業方面，第一代與非第一代大學生中，女性、工作時數多、職涯規劃能力較佳者，傾向全職就業；而第一代大學生家庭收入較高、不打算進修、人際關係較佳者，全職就業的比例較高；非第一代大學生中，則是不參加補習與工作態度佳者，全職就業比例較高。在全時在學方面，第一代與非第一代大學生中，打算進修、課業投入高、參加補習與畢業成績較佳者，傾向全時在學；但是，第一代大學生具閱讀廣度者，全時在學的比例卻較低。本研究之分析成果，能為大學規劃促進第一代學生學習品質與就業相關措施提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the relationships between college experiences, learning outcomes and destination after graduation for first-generation and non-fist-generation college students. Survey data from the ”higher education database” built by the NTNU Education Research and Assessment Center were used for data analysis. The present study specifically adopted data collected in School Year 2005 on third-year students and the data from tracking students in the senior year and one year after graduation. The college experiences consisted of academic and aspiration, social assets, financial assets, and cultural assets. And the learning outcomes include graduation rating and employability. Results of the study show that, the financial assets and cultural assets of first-generation college students are lower than that of non-first-generation college students and there is no significant difference in social assets between the two groups. First-generation college students who had low educational aspiration, longer work hours, positive peer relationship and career planning capabilities had a higher percentage rate of working full time within one year of graduation. For both first-generation and non-first-generation college students who had higher educational aspiration, more academic involvement, and those who went to cram school and had higher graduation rating also had a higher percentage rate of studying full time after graduation. However, first-generation college students who read a wider range of books had a lower percentage rate of studying full time after graduation. Finally, recommendations for planning effective programs and promoting first-generation students' learning quality and employment are presented.起始頁-結束頁：97-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.00975篇名：國小優質科學教師教學專業發展指標及權重分配系統之建置：科學教師社群之觀點並列篇名：A Study on Developing Exemplary Science Teachers' Professional Development Evaluation Indicators and a Weighting System for Taiwanese Science Teachers in Elementary Schools作者：彭文萱(Wen-Hsuan Peng);林容妃(Lung-Fei Lin);陳景期(Ching-Chi Chen)關鍵字：改良式階層分析法（A-AHP）;國民小學優質科學教師;評鑑指標;德懷術;Alternative Analytic Hierarchy Process (A-AHP);Delphi Method;evaluation indicators;exemplary science teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在依據不同背景（包括國民小學職前、在職科學教師及師培機構培育科學師資的教授）之科學教師的觀點，探討國小優質科學教師所應具備的能力，以建構國小優質科學教師教學專業發展指標，樣本採立意取樣，共得161份有效問卷。研究中以德懷術建立指標，將指標中的「向度」編制為權重調查問卷，由科學教師社群選填重要程度，以改良式階層分析法（A-AHP）計算權重分配，藉以比較不同背景之差異。研究結果顯示職前科學教師、在職科學教師與科學師資教授認為科學教師所應具備最重要的能力皆有不同，分別為「自然科之班級經營與實驗室管理能力」、「自然科之教學專業知能」、「自然科之專門學科知能」。經權重分析後整體能力分配數值為「自然科之教學專業知能」達20.22%最高，其次為「自然科之專門學科知能」16.13%及「自然科之班級經營與實驗室管理能力」16.13%。最後作者提出討論與建議。英文摘要：The research aims to construct an indicator for exemplary science teachers' professional development and to explore which capabilities are to be possessed by exemplary science teachers in primary schools based on the perspectives maintained by science teachers with different backgrounds (science teachers prior-to and under employment in primary schools as well as professors in pre-service training institutions). By employing the Delphi Technique, the research establishes its indicator and compiles the ”dimensions” in the indicator into a weighted survey to study the dimensional differences among science teachers' perspectives. Purposive sampling was adopted as science teachers are invited to rate the degrees of importance for items listed in the questionnaire and 161 valid questionnaires are collected and ranked based on the dimensional importance. Alternative Analytic Hierarchy Process (A-AHP) is applied to calculate the weight distribution so that the differences among raters of various backgrounds and the resulting overall capacities identified can be compared. The results of the research show that ”classroom management and lab management”, ”professional teaching skills,” and ”expertise related to science” are the most important capabilities for a science teacher according to the viewpoints shared by science teachers of different backgrounds. The weight analysis results show that the overall capabilities of an exemplary science teacher may be determined by their professional teaching skills which accounts for the highest weight (20.22%) of the overall capabilities, followed by science expertise (16.13%), and the classroom and lab management (16.13%).起始頁-結束頁：131-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.01316篇名：利用結構式引導反思工具探討在職科學教師之專業成長並列篇名：An Exploration of the Professional Development of a Science Teacher through Structured Reflection作者：黃琴扉(Chin-Fei Huang);劉嘉茹(Chia-Ju Liu)關鍵字：反思;科學教師;教學資源－策略表;reflection;resource folios;science teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在透過結構式引導反思工具，探討科學教師之專業成長，個案教師為台南某國中自然科教師，教學年資為六年，該教師具備反思之潛能，且對修正教學策略以提升專業發展具高度認同，適合為本研究之個案教師。個案教師需於教學前撰寫「教學資源－策略表」（Resource Folios），以本身的先備知識與教學經驗，預測教學中可能發生的情況，並據此設計教學策略；實務教學後，教師據教學實況與自身預測進行整合反思，經過經驗、知識與實務的統整獲得專業成長。本研究蒐集「教學資源－策略表」、課室觀察、錄影、學生回饋單與晤談之轉錄文字檔等資料進行分析。研究發現如下：（1）個案教師的初始教學觀點與策略主要包含兩項，第一是認為教師的角色為學習促進者，而促進學生學習的首要任務是提升學習動機，但是其教學策略無法有效反應教學觀點，第二是採用頻繁的考試為固定教學策略，但由於缺乏完善的概念檢討，使考試流於形式；（2）個案教師運用結構式引導反思工具，強化教學預測與教學實務衝突之感受，促進個案教師聚焦反思，並經由背景知識、經驗與教學實務之整合，促進教學觀點與策略的轉變，獲得專業成長。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to investigate the professional development of a science teacher through structured reflection. The participant in this case study is a junior high school science teacher who has taught science for 6 years. Before teaching, the participant needed to write the resource folios and to design teaching strategies; after teaching, the participant reflected the teaching practice by comparing the design of teaching strategies with resource folios. Data collection includes resource folios, classroom observations, students' feedback, and interviews. The results show: (1) The science teacher had two viewpoints of teaching. The first point of view is to identify the role of teachers as learning promoter and students' learning motivation needs to be promoted. However, the strategies employed during teaching practice did not reflect his viewpoints of teaching. The second viewpoint is to use frequent testing as the main teaching strategy, however without thorough discussion of important concepts, students fail to learn from the tests; (2) by using structural reflection instrument the science teacher in this case study could focus on the reflection of the conflicted views of teaching and teaching practice, and this reflection can improve professional development. Some suggestions are discussed in this study.起始頁-結束頁：163-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.01637篇名：教師之抗爭意識以及專業自主意識與其參加組織意願的關連：以台東為範圍並列篇名：The Associations between Teachers' Consciousness of Resistance, Professional Autonomy, and Their Inclination to Participate in Teachers' Organization: A Study of Taitung作者：蘇船利(Chuan-Li Su);黃毅志(Yij-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：抗爭意識;教師工會;教師公會;專業自主意識;resistance consciousness;teachers' organization;the consciousness of professional autonomy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：2010年6月工會法修正，教師取得組織工會的合法地位。不過各別縣市要有超過一半的教師加入，教師工會才具有協商權。目前對教師工會的研究，大都在探討未來運作可能面臨的問題，對於也很重要之影響教師參加教師工會意願的因素，卻較少涉及。本研究運用「2008年台東縣全體專任教師普查」資料對教師參加教師組織意願的影響機制作路徑分析。主要發現如下：（1）台東地區教師願意參加教師工會的比率為20.8%，願意參加教師公會的比率為42.1%。（2）服務年資16年以上教師，參加教師公會意願較0-5年低；兼行政教師參加教師工會意願較專任教師低，而代理教師參加教師公會意願也較專任教師低。（3）教師抗爭意識與專業自主意識愈高，參加教師工會與教師公會的意願都愈高。（4）擔任主任教師因抗爭意識較低，而降低參加教師工會的意願；代理教師因專業自主意識較低，而降低參加教師公會的意願。英文摘要：After the Labor Union Act revision in June 2010, teachers may legally form teachers' unions. However in a county or city, the participation rate of teachers' unions must be higher than 50% to be legally qualified with negotiating rights. Most studies on teachers' unions focused on potential forthcoming problems while the factors affecting teachers' inclination towards participating teachers' unions were less investigated. The present study uses the 2008 full-time teachers' census data in Taitung and conducts a path analysis on the influence mechanism of teachers' inclination to participate in organizations. The major findings are: (1) 20.8% of teachers in Taitung show inclination to participate in teachers' unions whereas 42.1% of them incline to join teachers' associations. (2) Teachers with more than 16 years of service are less inclined to join teachers' unions than their counterparts with 0-5 years of service; teachers with administrative responsibilities and substitute teachers are less inclined to join teachers' unions than full-time teachers. (3) The higher the teachers' resistance consciousness and consciousness of professional autonomy, the higher the inclination to participate in teachers' unions and associations. (4) Teachers who take director positions are less inclined to join teachers' unions because they have lower resistance consciousness; substitute teachers show lower inclination to participate in teachers' unions due to lower consciousness of professional autonomy.起始頁-結束頁：195-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.01958篇名：學校分散式領導構面之探析：領導者、追隨者與情境三元互動之檢證並列篇名：Exploring the Dimensions of School Distributed Leadership: Verification of the Triarchic Theory of Interaction among the Leaders, Followers, and Situation作者：張奕華(I-Hua Chang);顏弘欽(Hung-Chin Yen)關鍵字：分散式領導;教育領導;測量模式;distributed leadership;educational leadership;measurement model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探析學校分散式領導的因素構面，並據以檢證其因素結構。首先，經相關文獻之探討，本研究以領導者、追隨者與情境三元互動做為理論之架構，進而發展測量題項。其次，以1027位台灣地區公立國民小學教師為研究樣本，並隨機分為測定樣本、效度樣本、與複核樣本進行分析。經探索性因素分析，本研究確立學校分散式領導測量模式包含「校長的開放思維」、「成員的正向信念」、「成員的積極參與」與「學校的情境氛圍」等四個因素構面；再者，經模式競爭之比較，本研究發現多因素斜交模式與二階因素模式均適合用以詮釋學校分散式領導之因素結構。本研究之結果，提供後續研究一個明確的理論架構，並能據以測量，以進一步瞭解學校分散式領導的現況。英文摘要：This study explores the dimensions of school distributed leadership, verifying its factor structure. First, based on discussions in related literature, this study used the triarchic theory of interaction among the leaders, followers, and situation as the basis of its theory before developing the measurement items. Second, 1,027 teachers from public elementary schools in Taiwan were selected for data collection, and were randomly divided into calibration sample, validation sample, and cross-validation sample. Using exploratory factor analysis, four factor dimensions (open-minded principal, members' positive beliefs, members' positive participation, and school atmosphere) for the measurement model were determined. To further validate the appropriateness of the measurement model, we compared the strategies of the competing models, finding that the multiple-factor oblique model and the hierarchical model were the appropriate measurement models for school distributed leadership. The results of this study provide a theoretical framework and can be used to measure and to better understand the status of school distributed leadership.起始頁-結束頁：225-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201212.02259篇名：杜威芝加哥實驗學校道德實踐課程之探析並列篇名：A Study on Dewey's Moral Practice Curriculum in the Laboratory School of the University of Chicago作者：鄭玉卿(Yu-Ching Cheng)關鍵字：杜威;芝加哥實驗學校;道德實踐課程;John Dewey;moral practice curriculum;the Laboratory School of the University of Chicago期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：杜威主張教育就是生活本身的信念，道德應該是身體力行民主生活的學習經驗。他批評傳統學校教育將道德作為一個學科，灌輸道德知識的教學，是錯誤且無效的教育。本文從教育史的角度，透過第一手史料，說明杜威在芝加哥實驗學校中進行道德實踐課程與教學的理念與實際作法，藉以說明杜威民主社會的道德教育之主張。全文共分杜威實驗學校中的道德實踐課程的內容與教學方法，杜威實驗學校作為其道德教育理念的具體行動，以及實驗學校的道德課程在教育史上的意義等重點進行探究，期能透過杜威實驗學校以生活為核心的道德實踐課程，一方面呈現芝加哥實驗學校的道德教育觀，一方面透過歷史事實提供教育人士有關學校生活中落實道德教育的可能性之參考。英文摘要：Moral education is a learning experience by taking part in life. It is the faith of Dewey who proposed education is life itself. He criticized it was wrong and useless in traditional education system which defined moral education as a subject and infused the moral knowledge into students. This article will review the curriculums and teaching in the Laboratory School of the University of Chicago established by Dewey from the point of view of educational history. The author tries to explore the ideas of Dewey's moral education and achievements of practice in the laboratory school. There are three major parts in this article, including the moral ideas and practice in laboratory school, Dewey's criticism of moral education in traditional schools, and the real value of moral practice curriculum in the laboratory school in education history. The author hopes this article will provide readers to know the ideas of 'learning by doing' about moral practice education. And finally, the author would like to illustrate the viewpoint of moral education in the laboratory school and share thoughts about how to carry out moral education by practicable curriculums and teaching to educators who are concerned with moral education in school.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201206.000110篇名：建構主義取向之國語文作業指導原則與技巧並列篇名：Principles and Skills of the Constructivist Approach in Guiding Mandarin Assignments作者：潘世尊(Thie-Tzuen Pan)關鍵字：建構主義;國語文作業指導;國語文教學;constructivism;guidance of Mandarin assignments;Mandarinteaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：國語文作業指導，乃小學教師及課後照顧機構教保人員，重要工作項目之一。本文以建構主義取向國語文作業指導原則與技巧為探究焦點。除參考相關文獻，筆者還反思自我的實踐經驗，並透過文件蒐集、觀察及訪談等方式，取得相關資料。後者，資料蒐集對象為一所運用建構主義之原理進行作業指導之小學，一到六年級教師之作業指導實務。筆者分析潛隱於這些資料之中的建構主義取向作業指導原則與技巧。總結本文研究結果：首先，針對兒童作業可能出現的問題類型－含「未經思考或不知其意的抄寫」、「做錯」、「不會而空白」及「寫得不完整或可再精簡」四類，提出建構主義取向國語文作業指導原則與技巧。其次，就這四類問題類型之共通性指導原則與技巧，加以闡明。綜合言之，教師在作業指導過程中，可彈性運用理解性、質問性及提示性的提問，若有需要，再進行講解、說明或示範之教學活動。再者，教師宜讓兒童有思考探究及自行發現與解決問題之空間，且可引導兒童先說出自我的想法，再進行書寫之活動。這些指導原則與技巧之運用，不但可協助學生改正錯誤與解決問題，還可讓其發展出較高層次心理能力，且有益學生主動探究與認真習寫態度之培養。英文摘要：Guiding Mandarin assignments is a vital task for elementary school teachers and practitioners of after-school care and education programs. This paper focused on the guiding principles and skills of the constructivist approach for Mandarin assignments. In addition to citing relevant literature, the author reflected on his own experience and obtained related data through document collection, observation, and interviews. An elementary school where instructors employ the theories of constructivism in guiding students' assignments has served as the data collection site; the assignment guiding practices of the instructors from grade one through six were gathered. The author then analyzed the assignment guiding principles and skills of the constructivist approach implicated in these data. This paper concludes by proposing guiding principles and skills for Mandarin assignments, targeting four types of inadequacies students commonly demonstrate: ”thoughtless and meaningless copying,” ”mistakes,” ”inability to accomplish,” and ”incomplete or could be condensed.” To summarize, teachers may flexibly use comprehensive, interrogative, and prompted questions in the process of guiding assignments. Explanation and demonstration could also be used if necessary. Meanwhile, teachers must create opportunities for pupils to think and explore as well as discover and solve problems independently. Moreover, teachers may guide and encourage pupils to voice their thoughts aloud before writing. These guiding principles and skills may not only assist students in correcting their inadequacies and solving their problems, but may also help develop higher-level mental functions. Such principles and skills are also beneficial in cultivating the attitudes of inquiring actively and writing seriously.起始頁-結束頁：29-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201206.002911篇名：國中基測英語科題組結構與學生表現之分析並列篇名：Structures and Examinees' Performances of the Reading Tasks on the English BasicCompetence Test for Junior High School Students作者：盧雪梅(Sheue-Mei Lu)關鍵字：國中基測英語科;閱讀評量;PISA 閱讀評量架構;English Basic Competence Test for Junior High School Students;PISA reading literacy framework;reading assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究參酌學生能力國際評量計畫（PISA）閱讀評量架構探究90至98年基測英語科題組選文和試題歷程類型的分佈，並分析學生在不同層面的表現，主要發現摘述如後。在選文類型的分布上，連貫文本、非連貫文本和混合文本出現率分別為72.6%、22.1%和5.3%，連貫文本以敘事、對話、記述居多數，三類合起來達85%，非連貫文本以資訊表單和廣告為大宗，兩類合起來達70%。在試題歷程的分布上，典型閱讀測驗題組以提取資訊類試題出現率最高（75%），其餘各歷程之合才約25%；克漏字題組文意選填和動詞時態試題約各占50%。在全體考生表現方面，考生在連貫文本、非連貫文本和混合文本的表現沒有顯著差異出現，但在不同試題歷程上則有顯著差異出現，考生在提取資訊的表現顯著高於解釋文本和動詞時態，在文意選填的表現也顯著高於解釋文本和動詞時態。在不同成就水準學生的表現方面，高分組、中間考生和低分組考生之平均通過率分別為.96、.70和.28，各層面的分析結果也一致顯示大幅度的學習落差存在不同成就水準者之間，特別是低分組皆遠遠落後在高分組和中間考生之後。篇末根據研究發現提出建議供相關人員參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to adopted the PISA reading literacy framework to investigate the structures of reading tasks on the English Basic Competence Test for Junior High School Students (BCTEST) and to analyze the examinees' performances on different reading texts and processes from 2001 to 2009 administrations. Major findings were as follows. In terms of the distributions of text format, the percentages for continuous, non-continuous and mixed texts respectively were 72.6%, 22.1% and 5.3%. Among continuous texts, the most frequent categories were narration, conversation and description, with a total around 85%. Among non-continuous texts, the most frequent categories were information sheets and advertisements, with a total around 70%. As for item cognitive processes, the most frequent category for typical reading tasks was retrieving information (75%). For cloze reading tasks, the percentages for reading comprehension and verb tense items respectively were about 50%. In terms of examinees' performances, there were no significant differences among the performances on different reading text formats; however, there were significant differences for the performances on different processes. As for the performances of different achievement level examinees, the average items passing rates for high achieving (top 25%), average (middle 50%) and low achieving students (bottom 25%) respectively were .96, .70 and .28. Besides, the results showed that large achievement gaps were found among different achieving examinees without exceptions. Implications based on the findings of this study were proposed for test developers, educators, researchers, and policy makers.起始頁-結束頁：67-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201206.006712篇名：大三生心理社會發展、人際滿意度與課外經歷對其畢業後就業力之預測並列篇名：The Impact of Psychosocial Development, InterpersonalRelationship Satisfaction, Extracurricular Experienceson College Juniors' Employability作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao);方斌(Pin Fang);陳雯蕙(Wen-Hui Chen)關鍵字：人際滿意度;心理社會發展;就業力;課外經歷;employability;extracurricular experience;interpersonal relationship atisfaction;psychosocial development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以臺灣高等教育整合資料庫所釋出的「2005學年度大三學生問卷調查」及「2005學年度大學畢業後一年問卷調查」共12,749位學生為研究樣本進行分析，以瞭解大三生的心理社會發展、人際滿意度、課外經歷等因素對於就業力的直接影響，以及心理社會發展透過人際滿意度與課外經歷兩個中介變項對於就業力所造成的間接影響。經由結構方程模式分析後，整體模式所獲得的指數顯示模式可被接受。對整體效果的分析顯示，心理社會發展對人際滿意度、就業力；人際滿意度對課外經歷；與課外經歷對就業力皆有顯著影響，而這些影響除了可透過直接效果之外，心理社會發展對就業力的影響路徑還可透過人際滿意度與課外經歷的中介影響而形成。英文摘要：The research aims to explore the relationships among psychosocial development, interpersonal relationship satisfaction, extracurricular experience and juniors' employability in university. The samples are drawn from the survey of juniors of 2005 academic year and 2005 university graduates in the Taiwan Integrated Postsecondary Education Database (TIPED), in which a total of 12,749 are included in the sample. By using Structural Equation Model (SEM), the results shows that the influence of psychosocial development on interpersonal relationship satisfaction and employability, interpersonal relationship satisfaction on extracurricular experience and employability, and extracurricular experience on juniors' employability are evident. Further more, interpersonal relationship satisfaction and extracurricular experience have a significant mediating effect on the relationship between psychosocial development and juniors' employability.起始頁-結束頁：97-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201206.009713篇名：一次單元網路諮商運用於大學生網路成癮之症狀變化與成效並列篇名：The Application of Single-Session Web-Based Counseling Model to College Internet Addicts:Changes of Symptoms and Effectiveness作者：張勻銘(Yun-Ming Chang);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);陳彥如(Yen-Ju Chen);楊淳斐(Chun-Feei Yang)關鍵字：一次單元諮商模式;網路成癮;網路諮商;cybercounseling;internet addiction;Single Session Counseling Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究採用多重個案研究法探討網路成癮大學生透過網路參與一次單元諮商模式之經驗。經召募二位網路成癮大學生，給予一次單元諮商模式網路個別諮商與追蹤。研究者於每次諮商與追蹤收集陳氏網路成癮量表之分數，諮商結束後以訪談收集當事人的諮商經驗，再透過文本編碼、反覆閱讀與討論文本、擷取意義與概念、建立內部一致性、發展編碼架構之程序以分析資料。結果發現一次單元諮商模式對於大學生網路成癮有所改善，生理層面從疲憊無神轉為建立規律維護健康、認知層面從自責無望轉為具備自信抱持希望、情緒層面從罪惡焦慮轉為平靜放鬆愉快正向、行為層面從失控上網轉為控制自律外拓活動；研究並發現一次單元諮商模式之五項策略有益於改善網路成癮：（1）肯定當事人求助行為，提升處理問題的勇氣；（2）促進當事人覺察與認知網路成癮的潛在原因；（3）提升當事人生命價值，建立達成生活目標的信心；（4）協助當事人發展替代活動，累積正向改變的行為；（5）諮商後追蹤當事人，提醒活用諮商所學。英文摘要：This research employed a multiple case study approach to explore the experiences of two college Internet addicts who participated in a single session web-based counseling. The Chen Internet Addiction Scale was used to measure the symptoms of Internet addiction during the counseling session and again in a follow-up session to record changes. In-depth interviews were conducted to collect the participants' experiences of online counseling. The data were coded, reread and interpreted. After establishing inter-coder reliability, the researchers developed a coding framework. Results indicated that Single Session Counseling Model was effective in making positive changes in Internet addicts. Physically, the participants were no longer fatigued and returned to regular living; cognitively, they changed from self-blame to self-confidence; emotionally, they changed from anxiety to calmness; and behaviorally, they changed from out-of-control to autonomy. Single Session Counseling Model strategies that were helpful in alleviating the symptoms of Internet addiction were: (1) Affirm the participants' help-seeking behavior and develop their courage for dealing with problems; (2) Promote the participants' self-awareness and cognition of the negative impact of Internet addiction; (3) Enhance the participants' perception of life meaning and develop their confidence in achieving life goal; (4) Assist the participants in developing alternative activities and accumulating positive changes; and, (5) After counseling termination, use the follow-up session to remind the participants of lessons learned during counseling.起始頁-結束頁：131-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201206.013114篇名：「學習者主導」影片教學模式應用於師資生「生命教育」課程之初探並列篇名：An Exploratory Study on Learner-Oriented Movie-Teaching Approach for a Life Education Course in Teachers' Education作者：王千倖(Chien-Hsing Wang)關鍵字：生命教育;師培課程;影片教學;film-teaching;life-education;teachers' education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文描述應用「學習者主導」之影片教學於師培「生命教育」課程的教學研究。教學研究者發現：（1）反映學生生命經驗的影片和尊重學生思維的思辨性對話是促進學生信念與態度轉變的要素；（2）「學習者主導」之影片教學引導學生進入「主動」思考與意義建構的學習歷程，並透過作中學的經驗，思考實施影片教學所需關注的要素；（3）參與本次研究的師資生在擬定討論議題、提問與引導技巧的方面出現較多的問題，推測關鍵在於教學策略中缺少引導師資生針對擬定討論議題、提問與引導技巧進行反思性練習。有鑑於此，後續研究宜針對「提升師資生擬定討論議題、提問與引導技巧」的策略進行探究。英文摘要：This paper describes the application of learner-oriented movie-teaching to a Life Education course. The teacher-researcher identifies two key elements to facilitate the change of students' beliefs and attitudes: showing movies relevant to students' life experiences and engaging students in dialectic conversation within the climate of respect. By incorporating these elements with the learner-oriented approach, students are engaged in the process of active thinking and meaning construction. Furthermore, learner-oriented movie teaching enables learners to learn by doing and to think about the key elements of teaching with movies. However, the study also reveals that the students encounter difficulties regarding proposing issues for discussions, posing questions, and leading discussions. The possible reason might be the lack of guided instructional strategies during the process. Thus, future research can focus on strategies that can promote those abilities of the pre-serviced teachers.起始頁-結束頁：163-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學DOI：10.6776/JEPR.201206.016301篇名：課程研究範式：量性研究和質性研究之整合並列篇名：Paradigms of Curriculum Research: Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Research作者：霍秉坤(Ping-Kwan FOK);胡婧菁(Jingjing HU)關鍵字：課程;範式;量性研究;質性研究;curriculum;paradigm;quantitative research;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：課程研究範式一直備受學者關注。在這一問題上，一些學者建議應綜合運用量性課程研究範式和質性課程研究範式，以彌補單一課程研究範式的不足。本文旨在探討整合兩種課程研究範式的建議，同時提出整合時必須關注的事項。在探討這一建議之前，本文首先簡介不同的課程範式，並分析量性和質性研究範式的差異。本文對整合兩種課程研究範式的探討圍繞三方面展開：（1）質性和量性本質的綜合；（2）建構實在論的可行性；（3）研究內容的性質。筆者認為，整合兩種課程研究範式極具吸引力，但是卻難於處理基本哲理的差異。英文摘要：The paradigms of curriculum research have been the major concern of many researchers. Some researchers suggest the integration of quantitative and qualitative curriculum research paradigms for supplementing each other. This article aims at discussing the suggestion on their integration. First, the article gives a brief introduction of curriculum paradigms, and analyzes the differences between quantitative and qualitative research paradigms. Then, it will discuss the integration of the two research paradigms in three aspects: (a) integrating the essence of qualitative and quantitative research; (b) the feasibility of constructive realism; and (c) the nature of research content. The article concludes that it is an attractive attempt to integrate the two paradigms, but it is hard to deal with the differences between their basic philosophies.起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：教師的課程理論化：從詩性智慧到A/r/t並列篇名：An Alternative Approach to the Curriculum Theorizing of Teachers作者：歐用生(Yung-Sheng OU)關鍵字：辯證;存有論;詩性智慧;遊藝誌;dialectic;ontology;mythopoetic;a/r/tography (A/r/t)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去，教師在課程理論化方面多採取認識論或方法論的觀點，結果課程理論無法與實際產生辯證關係，教師亦不能發展自己的實踐智慧。最近詩性智慧和A/r/t的概念企圖依據存有論的典範，從詮釋學、美學和藝術的觀點，探討教師課程理論化的新途徑。本文主要探討詩性智慧和A/r/t的概念及其內涵，並由此提出存有論的辯證觀，以作教師課程理論化的另一途徑。英文摘要：Traditionally, the ways of how teachers theorize their curriculum practices were usually developed through the epistemological and methodological approaches. However, the dialectical relationship between curriculum theory and practice seemingly never happened through these approaches while teachers theorized their curricula. Based on the ontological paradigm, such as those of hermeneutics, aesthetics, and view of arts, an alternative approach to teachers' curriculum theorizing might be developed through the concept of mythopoetic and a/r/tography (A/r/t). Focusing on the dialectic between theory and practice, this study attempts to explore the concepts of mythopoetic and A/r/t, and discusses the implication on the curriculum theorizing of teachers.起始頁-結束頁：15-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：課程美學研究在台灣：議題與問題並列篇名：Aesthetic Inquiry of Curriculum in Taiwan: Issues and Problems作者：周淑卿(Shu-Ching CHOU)關鍵字：課程美學;美感經驗;教學的藝術性;美學探究;curriculum aesthetics;aesthetic experience;artistry of teaching;aesthetic inquiry期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣「課程美學」的研究課題近年來蔚然成風，成果可觀。由目前研究的主題歸類，大致分為四個取向：1.以鑑賞與評論方法進行的課程教學現象探討；2.視教與學的經驗為美感經驗，據此探討課程中的美感經驗性質及實踐途徑；3.主張教師為藝術家，探討教學的藝術性；4.借用藝術教育的架構或方法進行教學，並探討其教育效果。然而，由於各研究者對課程美學內涵的理解並不相同，令「課程美學」的概念顯得模糊不清。本文認為，目前台灣的課程美學研究有兩個主要問題：一是相近概念的交互混用，二是美學理論的詮釋與應用失當。本文最後指出未來研究可再<U+7740>力的方向。英文摘要：Aesthetic inquiry of curriculum (or curriculum aesthetics) has become the focus of educational research in Taiwan for recent years, and the research achievement is significant. According to the collected papers, the author divided the related research into four categories: 1. To inquire into the phenomenon of curriculum and teaching by connoisseurship and criticism that Eisner proposed; 2. To explore the features of aesthetic experience in teaching and learning, and the ways of practice; 3. To explore the artistry of teaching based on the supposition of ”teacher as artist”; 4. To inquire into the effect of teaching based on the framework of art education. However, these researchers may have different conceptions and explanations to curriculum aesthetics, making the research category and related concepts to be vague. The author pointed out that the two main problems of the curriculum aesthetics research were: first, the concepts or terms of aesthetics used in curriculum studies were confusing; second, the interpretation of aesthetics theory and its application to curriculum phenomenon were improper. Finally, the author indicated the future directions for curriculum aesthetics research.起始頁-結束頁：31-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：台灣課程美學研究之現況與未來趨勢並列篇名：The Present and Future of Research on Curriculum Aesthetics in Taiwan作者：楊宏琪(Hong-Chi YANG)關鍵字：課程美學;概念分析;Gadamer詮釋學;curriculum aesthetics;conceptual analysis;Gadamer's hermeneutics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在台灣，近年「課程美學」一詞可謂掀起了課程研究的一股新潮流，除了教育研究院以此為名舉辦了一系列讀書會與專題講座外，在台灣的學術社群亦出現了某些專以美學概念為首，進而探究教育或課程等的實務現象。在這些學術先進持續努力下，課程美學的研究逐漸有了一些成果。然而，本文在檢視過去相關的研究成果時，卻發現了有關論文或文章有一些共同弊病，即在於它們大都忽略了說明為何要使用美學概念來研究課程或教育。因此，本文採用概念詮釋方式進行研究，一方面發現當前課程美學研究的動機均指向課程結構太過密集、考試引導教學等情況，以致不適合學生情意面的學習；另一方面亦指陳出這些研究忽視課程美學的本質性問題。本文藉由Gadamer的哲學詮釋學概念，認為台灣未來的課程美學研究可以朝三方面探究：（1）課程與美學的概念性研究；（2）課程與美學方法的實徵性研究；（3）課程與美學論述形構的脈絡性研究。英文摘要：The idea of ”curriculum aesthetics” has led a new trend in curriculum studies in Taiwan recently. Not only has the National Academy for Educational Research been holding a series of study groups and subject talks about curriculum aesthetics, the academic communities in Taiwan has also inquisited with some concepts of aesthetics into the research on education or curriculum. With these research efforts, fruitful results have been achieved in the area of curriculum aesthetics. However, when examining the related past research, all did not give any explanation on why using the idea of aesthetics in studying curriculum or education. This article uses the method of conceptual analysis to investigate into the research on curriculum aesthetics in Taiwan. It was found that the current curriculum structure of Taiwan is too intensive and examination-oriented, thus not conducive to the affective dimensions of students' learning. Also, the essential nature of curriculum aesthetics was ignored in the past research. Therefore, based on Gadamer's hermeneutics, this article proposes three approaches for the research on curriculum aesthetics in Taiwan: (1) conceptual study of curriculum and aesthetics; (2) empirical study of curriculum and aesthetics; and (3) contextual study of discourse formation of curriculum and aesthetics.起始頁-結束頁：45-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：課程理論與實踐：教師的視角並列篇名：Curriculum Theory and Practice: Teacher's Perspective作者：張爽(Shuang ZHANG);林智中(Chi-Chung LAM)關鍵字：課程理論;課程實踐;教師觀點;curriculum theory;curriculum practice;teacher's perspective期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：對於從事課程研究的人來說，課程理論是甚麼？它與實際的課程和教學工作有何關係？這些都是重要問題，不少學者也曾討論。身為課程與教學實踐工作者，教師如何看待這兩個問題？他們在前線實踐工作上又如何應用課程理論呢？本文是一項探索性研究，通過調查就讀教育碩士班的現職教師，嘗試勾劃他們對這些問題的看法。英文摘要：What is curriculum theory? How is it related to the practice of curriculum and teaching? These are two very important questions for people engaging in the study of curriculum. Many scholars have been actively discussing these questions, but how do teachers, as practitioners of the curriculum, understand the above questions? How do they apply the curriculum theory into practice? This article descripts an exploratory study which reveals how teachers perceive these issues through questionnaire survey of a group of teachers taking a master of education program.起始頁-結束頁：67-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：中國數學課程改革十年歷程並列篇名：The Ten-year Curriculum Reform of Mathematics in China作者：馬雲鵬(Yunpeng MA)關鍵字：數學課程;課程改革;課程設計;課程實施;mathematics curriculum;curriculum reform;curriculum design;curriculum implementation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：中國內地數學課程改革十年發展的歷程，是整個課程改革進程的一個縮影，從中亦折射出許多課程改革與探究的問題。數學課程最初設計的模式與理念，反映了世紀之交課程研究的理念與探索；課程實施帶來的變化成為改革的標誌；實施過程中的問題與討論反映不同群體的價值取向；課程的修訂與審議過程力求使課程完善或達到平衡。數學課程改革十年的歷程，是課程改革的演進歷程，亦是課程研究真實的實踐歷程。英文摘要：The ten-year development of mathematics curriculum reform in the Chinese mainland is a microcosm of the whole curriculum reform process. It reflects many of the problems of curriculum reform and exploration. The initial model and philosophy of the mathematics curriculum design reflects the idea of curriculum research in the beginning of the 21st century. The changes resulting from implementation of the curriculum signify the reform. The problems and discussions in the implementation process reflect the value orientations of various parties. Curriculum review and revision aims to improve the curriculum or reach a balance. The ten-year curriculum reform of mathematics is the course of its evolution and also the real practice of curriculum studies.起始頁-結束頁：79-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：學校管理層及教師對「能力導向」新高中中國語文科課程的理解：個案研究並列篇名：School Management and Teachers' Understanding of ”Competency-based” Approach of the Chinese Language Curriculum in the New Senior Secondary Curriculum Reform: Case Studies作者：陳健生(Jacqueline Kin-Sang CHAN);霍玉英(Yuk-Ying FOK)關鍵字：能力導向;中國語文科課程;高中課程改革;competency-based approach;Chinese language curriculum;secondary school curriculum reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：2009年的新高中課程改革，中國語文科課程無論在目標、架構、教與學等方面，處處顯示以「能力導向」為課程的重點設計，旨在於中國語文學習中培養學生的共通能力、態度及價值觀，提升其讀、寫、聽、說能力。本文選擇三所不同的中學作個案研究，就中文科新課程邀請校內各層人員訪談，探討學校如何理解及規劃新高中中國語文科的「能力導向」課程，最後概括按「能力導向」設計中文科課程的問題，以作未來實施的考慮。英文摘要：Since 2009, the New Senior Secondary school curriculum has adopted an approach emphasizing competencies in the Chinese language curriculum, with a view to nurture students' generic skills, attitudes and values and to enhance their reading, writing, listening and oral skills. This article, based on the interview of different change agents of the new curriculum in three secondary schools, explores how schools understand and plan the ”competency-based” Chinese language curriculum under the New Senior Secondary school reform. The article concludes that there exist some perplexities in the competency-based design of the Chinese language curriculum for future implementation considerations.起始頁-結束頁：95-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：探索院校協作中實踐共同體的建設：香港優質學校改進計劃「職校教師專業發展日」的個案研究並列篇名：Construction of Communities of Practice in the Context of University-School Collaboration - A Case Study of ”Joint School Staff Development Day” of Quality School Improvement Project作者：趙志成(Chi-Shing CHIU);張佳偉(Jiawei ZHANG)關鍵字：院校協作;學校改進;實踐共同體;university-school collaboration;school improvement;communities of practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：40卷1-2期出版年：2012中文摘要：學校改進的研究與實踐均指出，院校協作扮演舉足輕重的角色。院校協作項目常涉及眾多項目學校，加強項目學校之間以及項目學校與大學之間的聯繫，是院校協作項目能夠持續發展的重要條件。本研究以香港優質學校改進計劃所舉辦的「聯校教師專業發展日」為個案研究對象，借助「實踐共同體」的理論視角，從理念層面、人際層面、實踐層面，分析「聯校教師專業發展日」這一實踐活動對於院校協作項目中建設實踐共同體的作用。英文摘要：Improving the quality of education through university-school collaboration carries strong theoretical and practical significance for the area of school improvement. A university-school project always involves many project schools. Endeavors in uniting these project schools are important conditions for the sustaining of school improvement project. The project under investigation in this study is Joint School Staff Development Day (JSSDD), a big event of the Quality School Improvement Project (QSIP) of Hong Kong. Through the lens of communities of practice (Cops), this study aims to explore the role of JSSDD to the construction of Cops for QSIP from three perspectives, namely domain, community, and practice.起始頁-結束頁：115-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：後設分析─貝氏方法在混合效果模式上的應用並列篇名：Meta-analysis: A Bayesian Method for the Mixed-Effect Models作者：洪來發(Lai-Fa Hung)關鍵字：加權最小平方法;後設分析;混合模式;蒙地卡羅法;Markov Chain Monte Carlo;meta-analysis;mixed model;weighted least squares期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：後設分析（Meta-analysis）主要在將個別獨立研究結果以組合的觀點進行系統性的評估與檢視。在研究實例中，心理學效果量指標值通常為Hedges（1981）之標準化平均差異效果量，醫學效果量指標值多為Odds Ratio（OR），而管理學文獻大都以相關係數為效果量指標值。本研究從文獻間不同的資料蒐集方法、資料屬性及不同的效果量指標值加以探討及分析，期使研究結果更為可信。在混合效果模式（mixed-effect model）下，本研究採古典方法與貝氏（Bayesian）方法估計參數，並比較模式之配適（model-data fit）。古典方法主要介紹加權最小平方法（WLS），貝氏方法主要介紹蒙地卡羅法（MCMC）。WLS取其應用上簡單易行，估計時以SAS/IML程式進行。貝氏MCMC取其在複雜階層模式中卻能直接抽樣的便利性，並以WinBUGS軟體進行。研究發現：文獻間存在異質性變異時，WLS（random model）與MCMC（random model）的參數估計結果近似，但與固定效果模式下之參數估計結果則明顯不同；反之，當文獻間存在同質性變異時，則古典方法和貝氏方法的參數估計結果幾乎相同。英文摘要：Meta-analysis refers to methods for combining the results of independent studies into effectiveness of medical treatments, or into the impact of environmental or other health risks, and so form a prior evidence base for planning new studies or interventions. Two alternative approaches (classical and Bayesian) provide different estimates for a random effects model. In classical approach, the true effect sizes under study are taken from a larger population of effect sizes. In Bayesian analysis, the observed data is used to modify the prior beliefs, with the updated knowledge summarized in a posterior density. The classical method, such as weighted least square estimation, present an alternative to Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, which provides some promise for parameter estimation with complex models. MCMC may have advantages in handling issues which occur in meta-analysis, such as choice between fixed-effects vs. random-effects models, robust inference for small studies or non Normal effects. The resulting MCMC (fixed model)、WLS (random model) and MCMC (random model) parameter estimates were comparable.起始頁-結束頁：487-511資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201212.04872篇名：概念構圖策略後設分析資料庫建置之初探研究並列篇名：Study of Establishment of Meta-Analytic Database of Concept Mapping作者：謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh)關鍵字：系統性文獻評閱;後設分析;概念構圖;圖形組織體;concept mapping;graphic organizers;meta analysis;systematic review期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的在建立概念構圖教學及學習策略後設分析資料庫，本文除陳述建置過程及指標理論基礎外，並就編碼數據對照國內范瑞東（2005）以及國外Nesbit與Adesope（2006）的後設分析結果，以作為資料庫建置效度的內部及外部證據。研究者以數個關鍵字就國內資料庫進行搜尋後，得到896篇文獻，經對照納入、排除準則，最後，研究者共建檔154篇博碩士論文及期刊；接續，研究者以資料庫提供的效果量對照范瑞東、Nesbit與Adesope的整合結果，分析顯示本資料庫與前者效果量的相關係數，具有0.855的高度關聯，而各調節變項分析結果與後者教學整合成效的顯著性傾向，大多非常一致。整體而言，本資料庫是提供具一定水準的效度之過程及內、外部證據。最後，研究者就資料庫的使用及發展，提出建議供未來參考。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to establish meta-analytic database regarding concept, knowledge and mind mapping. Besides review of procedural and theoretical foundation of indicators, researcher like to provide internal and external evidences of validity via comparisons with Fan (2005) and Nesbit & Adesope's (2006) meta analysis.After searching PerioPhat-index to Chinese Periodical Literature, and Electronic theses and dissertation system with several keywords and screening according to inclusion and exclusion criteria, 154 dissertations and journal articles were coded. The analyses indicated a high correlation coefficient of 0.855 between effect sizes from database and Fan were obtained, and the results of moderators between database and Nesbit & Adesope also showed a moderate coincidence. To conclude, the process used to build database was sound and the effect size could be treated valid for meta analysis. Recommendations for database usage and development, foundation of evidence library were proposed for future research.起始頁-結束頁：513-546資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201212.05133篇名：「國中生未來目標量表」之建構與信、效度分析並列篇名：The Reliability and Validity Analysis of a Future Goal Scale for Junior High School Students作者：彭淑玲(Shu-Ling Peng);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：內在目標;外在目標;未來目標;extrinsic goal;future goal;intrinsic goal期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究之目的在編製一份適合國內國中生的「未來目標量表」。此量表包含未來內／外在目標兩個向度、七個分量表，全量表共計38題，施測時間約12分鐘。本研究以臺灣地區1,122名國中生進行信、效度考驗，結果顯示：（1）「未來目標量表」的內部一致性係數極佳，間隔六週的重測信度結果也顯示量表的穩定性係數良好；（2）探索式與驗證性因素分析結果顯示：「未來目標量表」包含七個分量表，且可進一步區分為內在目標與外在目標兩向度，支持本研究建構的「未來目標二階驗證性因素分析模式」；（3）「未來目標量表」對兩個效標測驗（自我決定動機、自我調整學習策略）的效標關聯效度也相當理想。本研究根據研究結果進行討論後提出進一步研究建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop a Future Goal Scale (FGS) suitable for junior high school students in Taiwan. The FGS consists of 38 scale items divided into 7 subscales for measuring two theoretical dimensions: future intrinsic goal and future extrinsic future goal. With 12-minutes administration time, the participation of 1,122 junior high school students completed the examinations of explorative factor analysis (EFA), internal consistency and re-test reliability, confirmatory factory analysis (CFA), and criterion-related validity. The specific analysis results revealed that (a) the current FGS has high internal consistency reliability and 6-week-interval re-test reliability; (b) the suggested 7 subscales of the FGS by both EFA and CFA to the scale items postulate the discriminability of the FGS for future intrinsic goal and future extrinsic goals by which a constructed 'two-level confirmatory factor analysis model of future goal' is tentatively sustained; (c) further, the criterion-related validity of the FGS to two criterion tests: the Self-Determination Motivation Scale and Self-Regulation Learning Strategies Scale was found considerably satisfactory. Theoretical and extendable study implications based on the present research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：547-579資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201212.05474篇名：「中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」之編製及其信、效度報告並列篇名：The Development of Chinese Word Remote Associates Test for College Students作者：黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);劉政宏(Cheng-Hong Liu)關鍵字：創造力測量;創造歷程;遠距聯想;creative process;measurement of creativity;remote association期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：Mednick（1962）將創造力界定為，將有用的、不尋常、原創的想法相互連結的過程，愈有創意者愈能將不相關的事物連結在一起，亦即愈能進行遠距聯想，據此，Mednick發展了「遠距聯想量表」（RAT）。本研究最主要之目的為編製「中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」（CWRAT）。在預試的80道試題中，依項目分析結果挑選出60題作為正式試題，並將之區分為難度相同的甲、乙兩式題本。在信度考驗上，兩版本試題間具有 .610的相關，內部一致性係數依序為 .808與 .801。在效度考驗上，以頓悟性問題進行效標關聯效度考驗，顯示有正相關存在（r依序為. 506與. 404）；以「新編創造思考測驗」進行區辨效度考驗，顯示與各指標皆無相關存在（r介於-.056與.082之間）。可知，CWRAT具有良好的信度與效度，可有效測量個體的遠距聯想與創造潛能。英文摘要：Mednick (1962) defined creativity as the process of putting useful, unusual, original ideas together. The more creative person, the more he could associate unrelated, remote ideas. According to this definition, Mednick developed Remote Association Test (RAT) as an objective tool for assessing creativity. The main purpose of our research is to develop Chinese Word Remote Associatives Test (CWRAT). According to the results of item analysis, we choose 60 items from pilot study and divide into Form A and From B with same difficulty. In the reliability, the correlation between two forms is .610, and the coefficiencies of Cronbach's α are .808 and .801 in order. In the validity, the correlations between two Forms and Insight Problems are .506 and .404 (ps ＜ .05). No correlation was found between two Forms and New Creativity Test for Use (rs between -.056-.082, ps ＞ .05). In conclusion, CWRAT could effectively measure remote association ability and creative potential with good reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：581-607資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201212.05815篇名：教師創意教學衡量中共同方法變異問題之探討並列篇名：Common Method Variance in the Measurement of Teachers' Creative Teaching作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao);涂志賢(Chih-Hsien Tu)關鍵字：共同方法變異;創意教學;構念效度;common method variance (CMV);construct validity;creative teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：雖然近年來有許多研究強調調查研究中的共同方法變異問題，但教育領域對此一議題的討論卻相當缺乏。有感於近年國內外對於教師創意教學的重視，但有關的衡量量表卻從未討論共同方法變異可能造成的嚴重性，所以本文以MTMM、CFA-MTMM方法，探討「教師創意教學衡量量表」的共同方法變異問題。本研究藉由不同的資料蒐集方式，進而討論共同方法變異發生的程度，並採用教師自評、學生評量及同事評量等三種資料蒐集方式，採MTMM、CFA-MTMM的統計分析方法，結果顯示，本研究所使用量表的方法變異為8.3%，特質變異為0.7%，測量誤差為91%，雖不如過去研究所認為的嚴重，但希冀能由此引起國內教育學者對此問題的重視。最後，針對上述結果，本研究將提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：Despite recurring concerns about common method variance (CMV) in survey research, the educational research community remains largely uncertainties of the extent of such potential bias. To address this uncertainty, this research attempts to systematically examine the impact of CMV on the inferences drawn from survey research in the education area. The purpose of this study is to inquire the creative teaching performances of elementary school teachers. Besides, if only one type of survey questionnaire is administered to a single sources of respondents and the questionnaire contains both the antecedents and outcome variables, then it is very likely that this research suffers a methodological problem termed common method variance (CMV). CMV will inadequately inflate the relationship between variables, resulting in an increase of statistical significance. Thus this paper tests the problem by the different resources of questionnaire. We use MTMM and CFA-MTMM analysis. The results indicate that the average amount of trait, method and error variance is 0.7%, 8.3%, and 91% for creative teaching performances. The purpose of this study is to appeal for readers' attention to the CMV problem and to handle it more effectively in future research program. There is room for improvement for our education community to do research without CMV and, eventually, to accumulate our knowledge more accurately. Based on the results, the study also provide some discussions and suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：609-639資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201212.06096篇名：修訂中文成人口吃嚴重度評估工具並列篇名：The Revised Stuttering Severity Instrument-4 for Mandarin Speaking Adults作者：楊淑蘭(Shu-Lan Yang);莊淳斐(Chune-Fei Chung)關鍵字：口吃成人;口吃伴隨行為;口吃時長;口吃評估;口吃頻率;口吃嚴重度;physical concomitant;stuttering adults;stuttering assessment;stuttering duration;stuttering frequency;stuttering severity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究修訂Riley（2009）的「口吃嚴重度評估工具」（第四版）之成人部分，以評估說中文成人之口吃嚴重度。修訂過程包括：（1）材料編製：繪製二幅看圖說話的彩色圖片，並改寫閱讀的短文二篇；（2）口吃嚴重度區分：依人口比例招收口吃成人80名，除了以Riley的施測程序蒐集語言樣本外，另以有時間限制的回答問題法蒐集第二份語言樣本，之後認定口吃事件，依照受試者原始分數建立百分等級對照表，並將嚴重度分為九個等級；（3）進行信、效度考驗：信度方面，三個分測驗及總分的評分者內一致性皆達 .97以上，而評分者間一致性則皆達 .95以上；效度方面，口吃與非口吃成人在三個分測驗及總分皆達顯著差異，另外，本工具與「愛荷華口吃嚴重度量尺」和「口吃式不流暢」的效標關聯效度分別為 .92和 .94。英文摘要：This study aimed to revise Riley's (2009) Stuttering Severity Instrument-4 for the adults who speak Mandarin. The main tasks had been accomplished as follows: 1. rewriting 2 readings and redrawing 2 pictures as stimuli for oral expressions; 2. recruiting 80 stuttering adults from 4 different areas according to the population ratio distributed in Taiwan; 3. identifying stuttering events in the speech samples collected by the time-limited question answering method and the researcher-initiating conversation method, separately; 4. calculating the stuttering frequency, stuttering duration, and physical concomitants for establishing the normative data and dividing them into 9 stuttering severities; 5. calculating the intra- and inter-reliability that are .97 and .95, respectively; 6. deriving the criterion-related validity between RSSI-4 and The Iowa Scale for Rating Severity of Stuttering, and SLD are .92 and .94, respectively. In addition, the significant differences were found between stuttering and non-stuttering adults on the 3 subtests (stuttering frequency, stuttering duration and physical concomitant) and the total score by t tests. The norm and 9 stuttering severities also were offered.Based on the data mentioned above, this Revised Stuttering Severity Instrument-4 for Mandarin Speaking Adults provide an objective and useful tool to assess the severities of the stuttering adults who speak Mandarin. Some suggestions were also proposed for using the instrument.起始頁-結束頁：641-666資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201212.06417篇名：一因子高層次試題反應理論模式之評估並列篇名：An Evaluation of the One-Factor Hierarchical Item Response Theory Model作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);謝典佑(Tien-Yu Hsieh);吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);林佳樺(Chia-Hua Lin)關鍵字：一因子高層次試題反應理論模式;多向度試題反應理論模式;單向度試題反應理論模式;multi-dimensional item response theory;one-factor hierarchical item response theory model;uni-dimensional item response theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要是探討，當資料具備一因子高層次試題反應理論模式結構時，誤用單向度試題反應理論模式估計高層次量尺分數，或多向度試題反應理論模式估計次級量尺分數，對於參數估計所造成的影響。模擬研究考慮受試者樣本數、試題數、次級量尺間相關程度，以及題間與題內多向度測驗，結果顯示：1. 當資料具備一因子高層次試題反應理論模式結構時，一因子高層次試題反應理論模式於試題參數、高層次量尺分數與變異數的估計效能，優於單向度試題反應理論模式。2. 當資料具備一因子高層次試題反應理論模式結構時，一因子高層次試題反應理論模式於試題參數、次級量尺分數與變異數－共變異數矩陣的估計效能，近似於多向度試題反應理論模式。英文摘要：In this study, some simulation experiments were conducted to evaluate how the abilities, regressions and item parameters are affected by means comparing the accuracy of one-factor hierarchical item response theory model to that of one-dimensional and multi-dimensional item response theory models. There were four different factors such as sample sizes, item lengths, correlation between domain abilities, and model specifications considered in this study. The results showed that:1. With hierarchical data structure, the accuracy of one-factor hierarchical item response theory model outperformed that of uni-dimensional item response theory model for estimating the variance of the overall ability, the overall ability, and item parameter.2. With hierarchical data structure, the accuracy of multi-dimensional item response theory model was similar to that of one-factor hierarchical item response theory model for estimating the variance-covariance between domain abilities, domain abilities, and item parameter.起始頁-結束頁：329-348資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201209.03298篇名：漸進隨機選題之最大優先指數法在電腦化適性測驗之應用與選題控制成效之檢驗並列篇名：Effect of the Progressive Maximum Priority Index Method on Item Selection Constraint in Computerized Adaptive Testing作者：黃宏宇(Hung-Yu Huang)關鍵字：試題曝光控制;電腦化適性測驗;選題限制;題庫安全;computerized adaptive testing;item bank security;item exposure control;item selection constraint期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在發展一個新的電腦化適性測驗選題方法，稱之為「漸進隨機選題之最大優先指數法」（progressive maximum priority index method, PG-MPI），以期能同時達到選題條件限制的控制、題庫安全性的維持，與提升題庫使用率。透過一系列的模擬研究，操弄的情境包含題庫大小與測驗題長，並比較PG-MPI與其他四種選題法（MPI法、PG法、最大訊息法與隨機選題法）之差異。結果發現在11種限制條件之下，MI法與PG-MPI法能提供最佳的選題限制之控制，且能完全控制最大試題曝光率於設定的標準內；當加速度參數設定較低的數值時，PG-MPI能提供尚佳的能力估計精準度；PG法與PG-MPI法能提高題庫的使用率。綜合上述發現，PG-MPI法兼顧PG法與MPI法的優點，不但能滿足所有選題限制，維持題庫安全、提升題庫使用率，更能保有不錯的能力估計精準度。最後，研究者也提出若干建議供未來研究參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to develop a procedure for severely constrained item selection with improving item pool usage rate in computerized adaptive testing. The authors proposed the progressive maximum priority index method (PG-MPI) to combine the maximum priority index method (MPI) with the progressive method (PG). Through a series of simulation, independent of pool size and test length, it showed that compared with the other four item selection methods the PG-MPI is able to accommodate various non-statistical constraints, lead to fewer constraint violations, provide better pool security maintaining, and increase the item bank utility simultaneously with little loss in measurement precision when the acceleration parameter is set to lower value. Finally, study limitations are noted and suggestions for future investigations are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：349-372資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201209.03499篇名：「大學生學習投入量表」之發展並列篇名：Development of Learning Engagement Scale for College Students作者：林淑惠(Shu-Hui Lin);黃韞臻(Yun-Chen Huang)關鍵字：大學生;探索性因素分析;複核效化;學習投入;驗證性因素分析;college students;confirmatory factor analysis;cross-validation;exploratory factor analysis;learning engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在發展「大學生學習投入量表」，而後驗證量表之信度、效度與複核效化穩定性。過程中首先參酌相關文獻並建立量表，接著針對預試結果進行項目分析；正式施測對象之有效樣本為1,644位大學生，隨機將之分為三組獨立樣本。先以第一組樣本進行探索性因素分析，了解量表的因素結構，再以第二組樣本進行驗證性因素分析，架構量表模型並確立整體契合度，以及考驗內在結構；最後以第三組為效度樣本，以複核效化檢驗量表之穩定性。研究結果發現，所編製20題、五構面之學習投入量表模型有良好之契合度，同時具有良好的信度、聚合效度、區別效度及效標關聯效度，最後經複核效化檢驗顯示量表模型具有穩定性。總結：本研究發展之「大學生學習投入量表」有良好之信度、效度以及穩定性，是一個符合實證的測量工具，可提供教育工作者做為評量學生投入程度之運用，後續研究者亦可應用本研究所架構之量表進行相關研究。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a learning engagement scale for college students, and to validate the scale by performing exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and cross-validation. The preliminary scale was developed based on reviewing the relevant literatures, and the formal scale was established after items analysis. The 1,644 valid samples were divided into 3 independent groups randomly. The first group was used to perform exploratory factor analysis in order to investigate the factor structure; the second group was applied to the confirmatory factor analysis for checking the model fitness; finally, the cross-validation for the model was examined on the third group. Some of the major findings are as follows: The constructed scale contains 20 items with 5 factors, not only having good fit but also having good reliability, convergent validity, discriminate validity, and criterion-related validity. The proposed scale has stability after checking the cross-validation. Therefore we can conclude that the ”Learning Engagement Scale for College Students” is a practical tool with good reliability, validity, and stability. It can be offered to the educators for evaluating college students' learning engagement and proceeding further researches.起始頁-結束頁：373-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201209.037310篇名：「多元快樂來源量表」之編製並列篇名：The Multifacet of Happiness作者：于文正(Wen-Cheng Yu);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：正向心理學;真實的快樂;真樂;authentic happiness;positive psychology;Sukha期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：目前既有的快樂量表能提供人們快樂情緒程度的指標，但籠統的數值無從區別快樂情緒的類型，使得深入探討快樂的心理現象不易開展。本研究希望能發展一個涵蓋多元快樂經驗，且從經驗發生頻率、帶來快樂感受的強度，與快樂持續的時間等三個向度來評量快樂的量表，以強化目前在快樂測量上的不足。本研究利用自編的「多元快樂來源量表」，針對565位不同年齡的受測者進行施測，經因素分析獲得11個不同因素，可視為不同的快樂類型。該量表內部一致性係數為 .92。此外，針對不同對象探討本量表的區別效度發現，不同宗教信仰、靜坐經驗和年齡層的受試者，在不同的量表向度上有顯著差異，支持本量表的區別效度。英文摘要：The existing scales of happiness can only indicate the level of happiness rather than identifying the types of happiness, which has impeded the current research on happiness as a psychological phenomenon. To overcome such disadvantage in the existing scales, the present study developed the Scale of Multiple Happiness encompassing three dimensions of happy experiences: the occurrence frequency, the level of happiness, and the duration of feeling happy. The scale was later administered to 565 participants from different age groups. The factor analysis resulted in eleven factors, reflecting different types of happiness. The coefficient of the internal consistency is .92. Moreover, participants with different religious beliefs, meditation experiences, and ages revealed significant differences in the dimensions of the scale, which supports the discriminant validity of the scale.起始頁-結束頁：397-427資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201209.039701篇名：臺灣幼兒園課綱美感領域學習指標發展初探－以戲劇指標與量表之建構歷程為例並列篇名：The Development on the Learning Indicators of Aesthetic Domain for Kindergarten Curriculum in Taiwan-Using the Construction of Drama Indicator and Scale as Example作者：林玫君(Mei-Chun Lin)關鍵字：幼托課綱;幼托整合;美感領域;學習指標;戲劇行為量表;preschool and kindergarten curriculum guideline;integration of preschool and kindergarten;Aesthetic Domain;learning indicators;drama behavior scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：為因應臺灣幼稚園與托兒所整合後的幼兒園教保活動課程大綱，教育部於2006∼2008年底委託國內學者，針對幼托新課綱的六大領域學習指標，進行研究計畫。本研究是以「美感領域」的實徵研究成果為基礎，透過其中「戲劇面向」之指標和量表建構歷程，來呈現「美感領域」指標的發展訂定。第一年研究，先經由文獻探討美感及戲劇遊戲之理論基礎，建構美感領域戲劇量表與指標之初稿。接著，經過專家效度與兩階段預試，完成量表之定稿。之後，透過分層隨機抽樣，在全國25個縣市（含離島）中抽取1,330位3∼6歲不同年齡之幼兒（3歲、4歲和5歲），進行全國施測。回收樣本以12.0版SPSS軟體進行統計分析，瞭解不同年齡層幼兒在各項戲劇扮演能力之表現。第二年將資料轉換成「美感領域」戲劇學習面向之指標，以施測中70%以上幼兒可以達到的能力，轉換成文字敘述。最後，透過幾次全國專家諮詢會議，持續修正美感指標。研究者希望研究成果奠定「美感領域」在學前階段臺灣幼兒發展之基礎研究，而指標建構的歷程及實徵研究資料可提供後續研究之參考。英文摘要：In order to prepare for the Curriculum Guideline after the integration of preschool and kindergarten in Taiwan, the Ministry of Education commissioned some scholars to construct the learning indicators for six learning domains in the new preschool and kindergarten curriculum guideline between 2006 and 2008. Based on the empirical research findings, this paper is intended to use the process of constructing a drama indicator and scale as an example to show the development of the Aesthetic learning indicators. In the first year, preliminary drafts of the drama scale and learning indicator were individually built through literature reviews on theories of Aesthetic Domain and Dramatic Play. Then, the drafts were validated and revised by experts in the field. Meanwhile, those drafted scales were revised through pilot tests in two different phases. Afterwards, a national survey was conducted through stratified random sampling in 25 cities and counties in Taiwan (including small islands outside Taiwan) in which 1,330 young children at 3 different age level (3's, 4's and 5's) were involved. Through statistical analysis with SPSS software, the performances of Dramatic Play behaviors of children at different age levels were analyzed. In the second year the statistical data which reflected 70 percent of the children's behaviors meeting the standards for Dramatic Play at different age level were converted into the drama learning indicators in the Aesthetic Domain. The new draft of indicators was under further revisions through several national expert advisory conferences. It is hoped that the findings will provide foundations for theory and studies in both the Aesthetic Domain of young children in Taiwan and the process of constructing learning indicators, and that the empirical data will provide references for the follow-up study.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2004.012篇名：國小學童習得中文形音對應一致性的發展性研究並列篇名：The Developmental Trajectories of Orthography-to-Phonology Mapping Consistency in Learning to Read Chinese作者：曾郁琳(Yu-Lin Tzeng);李佳穎(Chia-Ying Lee)關鍵字：形音對應;聲旁覺識;識字發展;orthography to phonology;phonetic awareness;reading development期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究透過建立國小學童各年級習得生字量與形聲字形音對應資料庫，建立各年級形聲字的規則性與一致性指標，並透過操弄頻率（高、低）、一致性（高、低）與刺激字類型（規則字、不規則字，以及聲旁單獨不成字的形聲字，本實驗簡稱聲旁非字組），探討中文形音對應關係的發展趨勢。結果發現，四、五、六年級的學童都已可掌握表音規則性，但對於表音一致性的掌握，在不同類型的形聲字上則有不同的發展順序。一致性效果最早可以在四年級的學童唸規則字時觀察得到，但對於不規則字與「搖」這類聲旁單獨不成字的這兩類形聲字，則尚未發生。五年級的學童對規則字與不規則字都展現一致性的效果，但對於聲旁單獨不成字的形聲字，則得等到六年級才有穩定的一致性效果發生。上述結果顯示，聲旁若能單獨成字，將有助於聲旁的解離，因此成為影響聲旁覺識的重要因素。整體而言，這些研究證據都支持了學童學習中文字的發音，並不完全是透過一字一音的配對關聯。一字一音的策略也許發生在識字的早期階段，但隨著字彙量的增加，學童逐步掌握文字的結構，在不同的發展時序上逐步習得並應用聲旁表音規則性與一致性的統計對應關係。這些證據可做為識字習得的統計學習理論基礎，應用於教學策略、電腦輔助教學系統，或補救課程的設計上，以協助有閱讀困難的學童。英文摘要：The present study aims to examine the developmental trajectories of how Chinese school children acquire different kinds of meta-linguistic knowledge of phonetic radicals. A corpus to index phonetic consistency and regularity was established on the basis of the Chinese-language textbooks used in Taiwanese elementary schools. Then, children from the fourth to sixth grades were invited to participate in a naming experiment in which frequency (high and low) and consistency levels (high and low) and character type (regular, irregular, and independent phonogram) were manipulated. The results show that the phonetic-consistency effect emerged in fourth-grade children in reading regular characters. The consistency effect was not found in reading irregular characters until the fifth grade. By the sixth grade, the consistency effect was found in reading all three types of phonograms. The results are congruent with the perspective of statistical learning and suggest that children will gradually realize the function of phonetic radicals, including phonetic regularity and consistency, by learning to read a large number of Chinese characters. These findings can serve as the theoretical foundation for developing effective teaching strategies, computer-assisted instructions, and remedial programs for children with difficulties in learning to read Chinese.起始頁-結束頁：45-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2004.023篇名：以繪本《紙袋公主》結合教育戲劇實踐批判閱讀教學之自我研究：陶造與再陶造戲劇慣例的運用並列篇名：A Self-Study of Using "Paper Bag Princess" and Drama-in-Education for Teaching Critical Reading: Crafting and Re-Crafting the Use of Drama Conventions作者：譚寶芝(Po-Chi Tam)關鍵字：自我研究;批判閱讀素養;性別議題;教育戲劇;戲劇慣例;繪本教學;self-study;critical reading literacy;gender issues;drama-in-education;drama conventions;picture books instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究嘗試以繪本《紙袋公主》結合教育戲劇，先後在香港兩所小學實踐批判閱讀教學，期望學生能藉著認識另類公主故事脫離迪士尼公主童話的宰制。為瞭解及改善教育戲劇的教學效果，研究者陶造及再陶造這兩次教學中戲劇慣例的選取與編排，並進行自我研究，以便反思、改進及革新自身對教育戲劇和批判閱讀教學的認識和觀念。研究運用教學歷程檔案紀錄和分析教學過程中所遇的變化、困頓，矛盾與得失，結果發現，第一次教學著力引導學生認同另類公主，反而造成另一種權威與操控，到了第二次教學時，由於修改後的戲劇慣例能為學生提供了層層深入的戲劇結構、變動的架構，以及中介角色，學生的批判閱讀素養才逐漸萌生。是次研究揭示，教師若只要求學生以指定的批判方式，又或單一的角度來閱讀，只會令教學無異於主流。此外，學生身分認同的形成往往變動不居，運用教育戲劇來實踐批判閱讀教學須給予學生自主、深入、多角度和不同層面的戲劇經歷，以多元開放來抵抗單一封閉的閱讀方式。英文摘要：The better to understand and perfect the effect of teaching with drama-in-education, the author crafted and re-crafted the choices and arrangement of drama conventions when employing critical reading teaching in two primary schools, and later conducted a self-study from which she further reflected, advanced and renewed her knowledge and belief in drama-in-education and critical reading teaching. Coupled with drama-in-education, a picture book, ”The Paper Bag Princess”, was used in these two teaching sessions in the hope that pupils would disconnect from the hegemony of Disney Princess Craze by exploring the story of 'alternative princess'. In the self-study, teaching portfolio was employed to record, analyze and examine the changes, worries, conflicts and results in the teaching. The author found that, in the first session, directing the pupils to acknowledge the 'alternative princess' has led to another form of authority and control. Later in the second session, the author re-crafted the drama conventions which offer drama structures in stages, changing frames and bridging roles, and that critical reading literacy has then been yielded. The self-study reveals that when a teacher requests pupils to read a text with a prescribed critical approach or a particular angle, the teaching is nothing but mainstream education. In addition, the formation of identities always remains volatile. Thus, the critical reading teaching with drama-in-education should engage the pupils to some drama experiences which are self-directed, in-depth and carry various angles and perspectives. It then allows these pupils, who are now equipped with openness and multiple viewpoints, to defend against a single and closed way of reading.起始頁-結束頁：85-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2004.034篇名：論全球公民教育與其教學實踐－以大學生的學習為例並列篇名：Global Citizenship Education and Its Pedagogical Practices: An Example of Undergraduates Learning作者：陳淑敏(Amy Shu-Min Chen)關鍵字：反思學習;全球化;全球公民;教學實踐;經驗學習;experiential learning;globalization;global citizenship;pedagogical practices;reflexive learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：全球化引發激烈的社會變遷、風險與危機等影響，並進而使個體生活經驗連結至全球層次之事件上。考量此趨勢，本研究考察全球公民屬性的變遷與探討全球公民之學習構面，且聚焦於全球公民教育之教學實踐的相關面向，並以大學生的學習為例加以探討。主要探討重點為：一、全球化脈絡下以全球公民做為個體行動之參照架構的因由；二、建構全球公民之學習構面與相關理念；三、闡述全球公民教育之教學實踐的論述依據與內涵；四、就探討結果提出結論與後續深入研究方向。英文摘要：Globalization has contributed a strong influence on social movements, risks and crisis and further embeds individual life experiences in global events. Regarding current trends, this paper investigates the features transformation of global citizenship and analyzes the learning dimensions of global citizenship. This study focuses on pedagogical practices which refer to the related aspects in global citizenship education and gives an example of undergraduates learning. The article examines the following: (1) Illustrating the backgrounds of global citizenship as a framework of individual actions in the context of globalization. (2) Constructing the learning dimensions and related concepts of global citizenship. (3) Discussing the theoretical foundations and contents of pedagogical practices toward global citizenship education. (4) The paper also gives conclusions and suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：121-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2004.045篇名：書評－《情緒學手冊》並列篇名：A Book Review on Lewis, M., Haviland-Jones, J. M., & Barrtett, L. F. (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions作者：溫明麗(Sophia Ming-Lee  Wen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：155-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心6篇名：「沒有字怎麼讀？」：幼兒閱讀無字圖畫書中之圖像語言並列篇名：Young Children's Reading of Visual Elements in Wordless Picture Books作者：林慧娟(Hui-Chuan Lin);周婉湘(Wan-Hsiang Chou)關鍵字：幼兒;無字圖畫書;圖像元素;讀者反應;圖像識讀;young children;wordless picture books;pictorial elements;reader response;visual literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探究幼兒對於無字圖畫書中圖像元素的觀察及解讀。鑑於在圖像、影像充斥的科技世代，國內仍將識讀（literacy）的重點放在文字的閱讓及書寫上，鮮少以幼兒對圖像元素之閱讀反應做為探究圖畫書的研究議題，因此研究者選定三本無字圖畫書－《狼來了》、Rainstorm，以及The Grey Lady and the Strwberry Snatcher做為共讀書籍，並以八名幼稚團大班幼兒為研究對象，與幼兒進行圖畫書故事述說、半結構式訪談，以及讀後繪畫作品創作及討論，試圖探究幼兒如何觀察、解讀無字圖畫書之圖像元素以建構圖像故事之意義。研究結果發現：一、幼兒對於圖畫書封面觀察細微，但忽略其他近文本設計內容；二、幼兒對於顏色、線條、形狀等多項圖像元素觀察豐富，且在讀後作品中能重現個人對於無字圖畫書內容及構圖的觀察結果；三、幼兒對於框架、線條、形狀、肢體動作等圖像元素，能依循故事情節並有多元的解讀。最後，並將研究結果與國外文獻對照，以期能開啟國內對幼兒圖像閱讀研究之對話。英文摘要：Visual messages are the dominant form of communication today, and the meaning of literacy has been broadened to include the language of images and other modes. Yet, in most early childhood education settings in Taiwan, the emphasis of literacy education is still on the reading and writing of words. This study aimed to fill this gap by investigating how Taiwanese young children observe and interpret images in wordless picture books, and compared the findings to studies done in the West. Eight 6-year-old children read three wordless picture books-Wolf, Rainstorm and The Grey Lady and the Strawberry Snatcher-with the investigator individually. They read the pictures and told the stories in their own words, followed by interviews which asked about their interpretation of the pictorial elements in the books. The children also drew pictures of the things that impressed them the most from the books, and this activity was followed by interviews with the researcher about the drawings. The findings showed that young children's reading experiences played an important role in how they read the peritextual features of picture books Young children observed more than ten different kinds of visual elements in the wordless books. Both the stories they told and their drawings showed how they perceived the visual elements and pictorial compositions in the books. Moreover, the children made sense of the wordless books by constructing a coherent plot, and they had diverse interpretations towards certain elements in the books.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2003.017篇名：國小幾何教材內容之比較：以臺灣與芬蘭為例並列篇名：The Content Analysis of Geometry Material in the Elementary Mathematic Textbooks of Taiwan and Finland作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu);董修齊(Hsiu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：內容分析;國小;幾何教材;教學教科書;content analysis;elementary school;geometry instructional materials;mathematics textbooks期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討臺灣與芬蘭國小數學教科書，在幾何教材內容呈現的異同。研究對象為臺灣康軒版和芬蘭WSOY版教科書，採用內容分析的方法，以課程目標和數學問題為分析單位，依研究者設計的分析類日，來分析兩國幾何教材目標和內容呈現的特色。研究結果顯示，在幾何教材目標上，兩國皆強調透過操作來理解幾何形體的性質，在幾何教材內容上，兩國教科書中的幾何問題都以幾何形體的辨識與建置最多，不論是在教材目標和內容上，兩國空間幾何內容所占的比例都偏低。此外，本研究也發現，臺灣幾何問題多使用圓形和文字來呈現，並意圖經由解題結果來歸納和發現幾何形體的特色或定義，而芬蘭幾何問題的呈現則以圓形為主。兩國教材中，幾何概念呈現的順序和結構大致符合van Hiele幾何思考和發展的理論。英文摘要：This study compared the geometry content of instructional materials used at the elementary school level in Taiwan and Finland. The instructional materials reviewed were the Kang Hsuan textbooks used in Taiwan and the WSOY textbooks used in Finland. The methodology employed was content analysis with curriculum objectives and mathematics problems as the analytic units. The analytic categories used in the data analysis were researcher designed and were subsequently used to comparatively analyze the curriculum objectives and the characteristics of the geometry instructional materials in the textbooks. The findings showed that understanding the features of geometric shapes through operations was emphasized in the curriculum objectives of both countries， textbooks. With regard to the mathematical content of the instructional materials, most of the problems in both textbooks were classified as ”identification and establishment of geometric shapes,” with many fewer objectives and problems classified as ”spatial geometry” Data also showed that Taiwan's textbooks used pictures along with text to present geometric problems, and intended students to conclude and discover the features and definitions of geometric shapes through problem solving, while Finland's textbooks mainly used pictures to present problems. The sequence and structure of geometric concepts in the textbooks of both countries were very consistent with the theoretical principles set forth by van Hiele on geometric thinking and development.起始頁-結束頁：39-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2003.028篇名：Charles Taylor「內在性框架」之概念及其對教育的啟示並列篇名：Charles Taylor's Concept of the "The Immanent Frame" and Its Implications for Education作者：林京霈(Ching-Pey Lin)關鍵字：Charles Taylor;內在性框架;自我授權;超越性;靈性;Charles Taylor;immanent frame;self-authorization;transcendence;spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：「內在性框架」（the immanent frame）是加拿大哲學家Charles Taylor（1931－）在《世俗時代》（A Secular Age）中相當重要的概念，用來說明由工具理性所主導的現代社會框架。然而，Taylor主張，吾人於「內在性框架」中生活，並不代表封閉了向超越性開放的可能，就Taylor的立場而言，向超越性開放的生命，較之於封閉式的立場來得圓滿。基於此，對於囿於封閉性內在框架的現代教育， Taylor「內在性框架」的概念與其向超越性開放的立場，應有重要的價值與啟示。是以，本文首先探討Taylor「內在世框架」的概念；其次，說明封閉性內在框架的核心理念；復次，分析Taylor對封閉性內在框架之迷思的解構，指出圓滿的人生與人類靈性的開展，必須回歸本體論與倫理學的討論；最後，根據Taylor的本體論與靈性論，提出三點對教育的啟示：一、考量教育對象具有向超越性開放的傾向；二、教育哲學應納入肯定超越性的「垂直面向」思維；三、重視發展內在資源與靈性的教育實踐。英文摘要：”The immanent frame” has been proposed by Charles Taylor (1931-), a prominent philosopher of the contemporary world, in his book A Secular Age, to illustrate a modern society governed by instrumental or scientific reason. However, Taylor argues that living within ”the immanent frame” does not necessarily entail sloughing off transcendence. According to Taylor; a life open to the transcendent is significantly richer than a life that is closed to it. For modern education deeply embedded in the closed immanent frame, Taylor's concept of ”the immanent frame” and his assertion of opening to the transcendent may have substantial implications This paper is divided into four parts: first, to expound upon Taylor's concept of ”the immanent frame”; second, to shed light on the critical connotations of the closed immanent frame's ”self-authorization”; third, to analyze Taylor's arguments on the inadequacies of the closed immanent frame, and the claim that the discussions on ontology and ethics should certainly be revisited to achieve a fuller life and develop spirituality finally, this paper ends with some suggestions regarding Taylor's perspectives on education. They are as follows: to consider the human inclination to the transcendent; to include the vertical dimension in the philosophy of education, and to emphasize educational practices which can improve the development of student's, inner resources and spirituality.起始頁-結束頁：87-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2003.039篇名：A Critical Examination of the Appropriateness of Characterising Character Education in Terms of the Incu1cation of Virtues並列篇名：以「德目教學」界定「品格教育」之適當性探討作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：品格教育;德目教學;德目錦囊法;品格個殊化;道德品格;character education;the inculcation of virtues;the "bagof virtues" approach;the individualisation of character;moral character期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：品格教育研究者首先面臨的棘手問題便是「品格教育」概念本身，明確界定所探討的品格教育派別於是成為他／她責無旁貸的責任。筆者利用兩個現成的分類架構，挑選出最盛行、最富影響力的版本，即以「品格教育的根本義」做為批判性檢視的對象，一般是從「德目教學」的角度予以界定。相較於「品格」這個微妙、難以捉摸的偌大概念 ，「德目語詞」顯得較為具體、容易操作，因此論述焦點由品格轉向德目似乎是可以理解的，這同時說明了以「德目教學」界定品格教育的表面信度。然而，本文旨在論證為了品格教育更有成效地進展，這種（過度）簡單的界定所產生的一些疑慮與缺失，需要被納入充分考量與適度補救。首先，它容易給人「品格教育不過是「德目錦囊法」的翻版」的錯誤印象。其次，這種品格教育觀在強調培養各種殊德的同時，未能適當關照德目教學必然生成的後果－（道德）品格的個殊化與道德人格的多樣性。最後，有鑑於品格的多義性及其倫理意涵的首要性，筆者認為「品格教育的根本義」是可以證成的，惟須特別強調的是，精確而言，當代品格教育關心的是「道德品格」，而非「品格整體」。英文摘要：A troublesome question that first confronts a researcher into character education is the concept itself. In other words, it is incumbent of one to specify the particular version under consideration. The purpose of this study was to draw on two ready-made frameworks for classification, of which the most popular and influential version, i.e. character education in a non-expansive sense, which is generally characterised in terms of the inculcation of virtues, is chosen as the target of discussion. In contrast to the elusive large concept of character, terms related to virtue are more concrete and easier to operationalise, and it seems to make sense to shift the focus from character virtues, and characterise character education in terms of the inculcation of virtues. However, the case is made that for character education to precede more productively, some misgivings and shortcomings of this (over) simplified characterisation needs to be taken into full account and properly remedied. The most important issue is that character education runs the risk of giving 也e false important that it is nothing more than a duplication of the ”bag of virtues” approach. Secondly, the cultivation of the various virtues is emphasised at the cost of paying due consideration to the inevitable outcome, namely, the individualisation of (moral) character and its sister thesis of the varieties of moral personality. Finally, considering the multiple senses of character and the primacy of the ethical sense of character, it is argued that non-expansive character education is defensible with the caveat that it is ”;moral character” rather than ”character as a whole” that is at issue.起始頁-結束頁：129-169資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2003.0410篇名：書評－《論Amartya Sen能力取向理論與教育中的社會正義》並列篇名：A Book Review on Walker, M., & Unterhaler, E. (Eds.), Amartya Sen's Capability Approach and Social Justice in Education作者：王俊斌(Chun-Ping Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：171-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心01篇名：從Web2.0數位工具的創新應用看華語教學設計之重要：以僑務委員會華文網路種子師資班之應用為例並列篇名：On the Significance of Instructional Design in Chinese Language Teaching through Innovative Web2.0 Applications: Using the Chinese Language Teachers Online Training Program Used by the Overseas Chinese Affairs Council as an Example作者：林翠雲(Tsui-Yun Lin)關鍵字：Web2.0工具;華語教學設計;數位學習;Web2.0;instructional design for Chinese language teaching;digital learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的主旨在於以99年度華文網路種子師資班國外華語教師之實際應用為例，研究者以觀察者角度，歸納並分析在Web2.0華語數位學習影響下，課程教師陳姮良如何透過教學設計的強調及引導，帶領受訓教師創新應用Web2.0工具，並藉此應用實例進一步闡釋教學設計在華語數位學習中的重要性，而非為數位而數位地使用軟體工具而已。本研究架構包含：一、文獻探討與研究目的，說明近年華語教學在Web2.0工具應用的概況、問題點及本研究之目的；二、研究方法與應用資料分析，包括ADDIE設計本位研究法、研究範圍及應用資料分析；三、Web2.0工具應用分類及其教學設計，統整聽力、口語、閱讀、寫作、打字數位工具在華語教學上的對應運用，以及相關教學設計可能的發揮；四、研究結果，檢視教師工具應用與教學設計之離合關係，並從以下幾個面向來說明研究結果：（一）應用工具時是否關注其目的為何，以及能否達到教學目標；（二）選用的工具在教學活動中扮演的角色為何，以及能否有效促進學習；（三）不同教學環節所應用的工具是否有機串聯之間的教學關係；（四）評量工具的選用及設計是否能評估學習成效。最後，期望藉由本研究之反思，強調以教學設計主導數位工具之應用，以達資訊真正「融入」華語教學之核心精神。英文摘要：This study analyzes how the characteristics of Web2.0 can be applied to instructional design in innovative ways for Chinese language teaching programs. Taking overseas Chinese language teachers who participated in the 2010 Chinese Language Teachers Online Training Program as an example, the study examines the process through which instructor Chen Heng-Liang led the trainees in using Web2.0 applications through emphasis on and direction of instructional design, and provides an overview of instructor-selected software, and their related instructional designs. The case study illustrates the significance of instructional design in digital Chinese language learning. The present study is structured thus: 1. Literature review and research purposes, which outlines recent Web2.0 applications for Chinese language education, raises research questions and purposes of this study; 2. Methodology and data analysis, which includes ADDIE designed based research method, research area, and data analysis; 3. Categories of Web2.0 applications and their respective instructional designs; digital tools (listening, speaking, reading, writing, and typing) and their application in Chinese language education; possible extensions of related instructional designs; 4. The interdependent relationship between software application and instructional design, in which instructional design determines the suitability of the software and the effects resulting from different degrees of incorporation. This study aims to demonstrate the following significance of instructional design in digital Chinese language education: (1) Whether the objectives of software applications are achieved and whether instructional objectives can be achieved; (2) The role of the selected software applications in teaching and whether it enhances learning; (3)Whether it is possible to connect the relationships among the different software applications chosen for different stages of teaching; (4) Whether the tools and design for evaluation correctly reflect the results of learning. Finally, this study hopes to stress the instructional-design-based use of digital tools as a way to realize the core value of truly integrating information technology into Chinese language teaching.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20121004040012篇名：資訊科技融入國民小學自然與生活科技領域之月亮單元教學研究並列篇名：The Study of Information Technology Integrates into the Moon Unit of Science and Life Technology Curriculum of the Elementary School作者：潘淑琦(Shi-Chi Pan);黃秀霜(Hsiu-Shuang Huang)關鍵字：自然與生活科技;資訊科技;資訊科技融入教學;science and life technology;information technology;information technology integrates into teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探究資訊科技融入國民小學四年級自然與生活科技領域月亮單元教學，師生反應及教師教學省思。研究對象為96、97、98及99學年度，共四屆的四年級學生，進行為期4年的研究。蒐集資料方面以問卷調查、訪談、教學觀察、學習回饋單、教師省思札記等，藉由多元資料來源及對象，來進行三角檢測，以提高效度與信度。研究結果顯示：一、資訊科技融入國小四年級自然與生活科技領域之月亮單元教學，可提升學生的學習興趣及成效；二、資訊科技可以輔助學童對於比較抽象或與生活經驗不易連結的自然現象，提供快速及便捷的知識獲取途徑；三、教師認為本身的天文專業知能之精進，有助於月亮單元教學；四、教師認為善用資訊科技有助於月亮單元教學；五、充足的資訊科技設備對月亮單元教學成效具舉足輕重的地位；六、資訊科技是目前教學不可或缺的輔具及利器，但卻不是教學的全部，教學仍須透過師生互動、教師引導，進而由學生自行建構知識才是有意義的學習，但不可否認的是，妥善運用資訊科技融入教學，是未來教學的一項重要課題。英文摘要：This research's goal was to study of student's reacting and teacher's pondering on this teaching course that incorporate information technology into the moon unit of science and life technology curriculum of elementary school, and the research object is students of grade four of elementary school. The research's object was the fourth-grade students of 96,97,98,99 school year and carried out the four-year study reflection. The way of collect data was by questionnaires, interviews, classroom observations, learning feedback sheets, teacher reflection journals, and in order to improve the validity and reliability, taking triangulation by diverse data sources and objects. The results show that: 1. The information technology integrates into the science and life curriculum can promote student's study interest and the effect; 2.The information technology can be assisted students for more abstract or difficult to link with the life experience natural phenomena, providing fast and convenient access to knowledge the way; 3. Teachers think itself contribute to the teaching of the moon unit on the sophistication of the professional knowledge of astronomy; 4. Teachers think that the use of information technology can help the teaching of the moon unit; 5.The adequate information technology equipment was important to the teaching effectiveness of moon unit; 6. The information is an important and sharp weapon for teaching. But the teaching must interact by way of the teachers and students, and by student constructs voluntarily the knowledge. It will be an important topic in the future teaching that using properly the information technology integrates into the science curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：25-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20121004040023篇名：A Study on the Relationship among Learning Path, Computer Self-efficacy, and E-learning Performance並列篇名：學習路徑、電腦自我效能與數位學習績效之研究作者：莊永儒(Yung-Ju Chuang);沈家成(Chia-Cheng Shen);蔣秀清(Hsiu-Ching Chiang)關鍵字：activity e-learning;computer self-efficacy;Kolb learning style;learning path;電腦自我效能;Kolb 學習風格;學習路徑期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：As the applications of information technologies gain more and more popularity; e-learning has been an important tool in education. E-learning has become one of the fastest-moving trends and aims to provide a configurable infrastructure that integrates learning material, tools, and services into a single solution to create and deliver training or educational content quickly, effectively, and economical. Besides traditional instructions, e-learning needs appropriate guidance and support to enhance learners' learning effectiveness. This study aims to investigate the impact of e-learners' learning paths, and their computer self-efficacy on their leaning performance. The major findings can be listed as follows: 1. Path-controlled learning method performs significantly better than random method; 2. Sequential and iterative learning paths perform significantly better than free method. Consequently, it's very helpful for the e-learning website designers to provide useful guidance and support, as well as manipulate properly the learning paths to enhance learners' learning performance consequently.英文摘要：資訊科技的應用日益普及，數位學習已成為教育領域的重大應用。電子學習已經成為最快速的趨勢之一，主要目的在提供一個可配置的基礎設施、整合的學習材料、工具和服務，以及以一種有效和經濟的的解決方案來進行創造和提供快速的教育內容。有別於傳統的實體教學，數位學習有賴對學習者適當的引導與輔助，以提升學習效能並達成教學者規劃的目標。本研究主要探索數位學習者在學習網站中的學習路徑，以及個人的電腦自我效能對於學習績效的影響。主要結論可列舉如下：一、路徑控制學習方式顯著優於隨機學習方式；二、循序型學習路徑在學習績效上顯著優於自由型。研究結論建議後續教學網站設計者，如果能提供適當的引導與輔助，經由掌控適當的學習路徑，必能有效提升數位學習者的學習績效。起始頁-結束頁：53-70資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20121004040034篇名：建構大學生能力本位之學習歷程資訊平臺架構：以多元課程為取徑並列篇名：Developing Undergraduate Competence-based E-portfolio in Multiple Curriculum Approaches作者：陳淑敏(Amy Shumin Chen)關鍵字：大學生;高等教育;能力素養;課程;學習歷程資訊平臺;undergraduate;higher education;competence;curriculum;e-portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學校院如何發展與建構大學生的學習歷程資訊平臺之架構與內涵，以善用資訊管理的機制來掌握學生學習成效。為能全面地涵蓋大學生豐富的學習經驗與學習成果，因此，特別由多元課程取徑為參照架構，包括正式課程、非正式課程和潛在課程等，凸顯大學生獲得能力的多元來源。討論重點為：一、如何以多元課程類別為依據，規劃大學生學習歷程資訊平臺之架構；二、如何呈現大學生在不同課程途徑所獲得的能力並進行檢視或回饋；三、透過實際範例學校規劃學生學習歷程資訊平臺的歷程，針對相關議題與思維，進行討論與分析；四、提供研究結果作為制定學生學習歷程資訊平臺的參考，並指出後續值得深入探討的方向。英文摘要：This article aims to investigate the frameworks and contents of planning, constructing and checking undergraduates' e-portfolio by exploring multiple curriculum approaches. The multiple curriculum approaches include formal curriculum, informal curriculum and hidden curriculum categories to demonstrate undergraduates' abundant learning experiences and outcomes. The research findings are: 1. to build undergraduates e-portfolio by multiple curriculum structures; 2. to illustrate, review and feedback the undergraduates' competences by formal, informal and hidden curriculum learning experiences; 3. to reflect and discuss the core issues of utilizing information and technology supporting resources in supporting undergraduates' learning, and 4. to show conclusions in implementing e-portfolio into application and carry suggestions for future researches.起始頁-結束頁：71-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20121004040045篇名：不同探索式遊戲學習策略對國民小學流行性感冒防治概念學習之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Inquiry-Based Gaming Strategies and Self-Regulation on Sixth-Graders' Performance in Learning Influenza Prevention Concepts作者：黃皓伶(Hao-Ling Huang);陳明溥(Ming-Puu Chen);邱寶萱(Pao-Hsuan Chiu)關鍵字：自我調整;流行性感冒防治;探索式學習;遊戲式數位學習;self-regulation;influenza prevention;inquiry-based learning;digital game-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同探索式遊戲學習策略（錨式情境、自我探索）與自我調整（高自我調整、低自我調整）對國小學生流行性感冒防治概念學習成效之影響。本研究採因子設計之準實驗研究，研究對象為國小六年級學生。研究結果發現，自我探索之探索式遊戲學習策略能提升學習者在流行性感冒防治概念的學習成效。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of inquiry-based gaming strategies and self-regulation on elementary learners' performance in learning influenza prevention concepts from educational game-playing. Ninety-seven sixth-graders participated in the three-week influenza prevention learning activity. A quasi-experimental design was implemented. The results revealed that the self-exploration of inquiry-based strategy facilitated learners' performance in learning influenza prevention concepts from game-playing.起始頁-結束頁：1-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120704030016篇名：語音辨識技術融入國民小學英文諺語學習之設計與探討並列篇名：Preliminary Study of Applying Automatic Voice Recognition Technology for English Proverbs Learning in Primary School作者：王怡萱(Yi-Hsuan Wang);楊叔卿(Shelley Shwu-Ching Young)關鍵字：英語學習;電腦輔助語言學習;語音辨識技術;english learning;computer assisted language learning;automatic voice recognition technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究從教學科技結合語音辨識技術融入國民小學（下稱國小）英語課程的觀點出發，經由兩階段研究設計，首先蒐集並分析學習者對於語音辨識學習系統之期待功能，接著將初步分析結果融入語音辨識學習系統之開發，最後進行國小學習者初步使用性評估。研究發現，國小學習者期待透過科技輔助學習之方式，提供多元的英語單字與對話發音訓練，並以綜合多媒體方式，提供學習者除了語音聲波圖型的詳細系統學習回饋以輔助學習者修正學習錯誤外，就整體系統使用經驗而言，此學習系統對於國小英語學習助益包含：一、提供學習者接觸並熟悉英文諺語學習之機會；二、提供學習者彈性英語口說學習與練習路徑；三、以階層方式輔助學習者從單字及句型口說練習過程逐步認識英文諺語；四、提供學習者口說練習的學習隱密性，減緩同儕壓力及學習焦慮。此外，學習者亦提出相關建議，作為研究者後續開發改進依據，包含：一、英文諺語的內容對於國小學習者較為陌生，在整體系統流程設計應輔以清楚中文說明；二、提供英語口說測驗機會，讓學習者進行自我學習檢測。英文摘要：The study approaches the research goal from the aspect of associating instructional technology with automatic voice recognition technology (ASR). The authors first collected targeted learners' required functions toward the ASR-based system, then integrating the collected data into system design and did a preliminary evaluation. The result indicated that learners need more opportunities of practicing English vocabulary and pronunciation. They prefer multimedia feedback to indicate their language utterance errors. From learners' primary evaluation, it reveals that the system could provide learners with more flexible speaking opportunities and record learners utterance as speaking learning profile. Moreover, the system formed a self-learning environment in which students will not feel pressure or anxiety while speaking English. Some suggestions are made from the study such as providing more Chinese explanation and the opportunity of oral self examination.起始頁-結束頁：17-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120704030027篇名：大學生學習方法對網路學習態度的影響：以某科技大學為例並列篇名：The Impacts of the Learning Methods on Web- Based Learning Attitudes for University Students: Taking a Technology University as an Example作者：陳儒晰(Ru-Si Chen);杜佳靜(Chia-Ching Tu);邱方晞(Fang-Hsi Chiu)關鍵字：大學生;網路學習;學習方法;university students;web-based learning;learning methods期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以中北部地區某科技大學學生為研究對象進行問卷調查，探討其對學習方法與網路學習態度的影響關係。研究者自編「學習方法與網路學習態度量表」問卷，包括「學習方法」、「情感支持」、「資源運用」、「網路學習價值」和「網路使用效益」五個層面，運用結構方程模式探討大學生對此議題的想法。統計分析結果顯示，問卷的假設因素構念之測量模式檢定具有合理適配，結構模式的檢定結果指出研究假設均成立；研究結果顯示大學生使用不同的學習方法處理學習任務，此意向影響同儕情感支持與資源運用管理的學習行為，並增進運用網路學習模式解決學習問題與提升學習成效的態度。最後，研究者針對研究發現進行討論並提出未來研究的參考。英文摘要：This study explored a technology university's students' attitudes towards the relationships of learning methods and web-based learning intentions in North-central region, Taiwan, by survey study. The questionnaire about Learning Methods and Web-based Learning Attitudes was developed, consisted of five factors, including learning method, emotional support, recourse employment, web-based learning value, and web-based using benefit. According to the analysis by structural equation modeling, this measurement model with confirmatory factory analysis indicated the reasonable quality, and the analysis of structural model confirmed the study hypotheses. The results showed that university students could use different learning methods to deal with their tasks. Their preferences of peer emotional supports and resources using also influenced their attitudes toward web-based learning to solve learning questions and advance their performance. Finally, the implications derived form this study were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：35-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120704030038篇名：Social Networking Environment and Collaborative Learning: An Exploration of iCamp Project並列篇名：社會網絡環境與數位協作學習－以iCamp為例作者：曾淑芬(Shu-Fen Tseng);詹前隆(Chien-Lung Chan);黃柏偉(Po-Wei Huang)關鍵字：activity theory;collaborative learning;iCamp;social networking sites;活動理論;協作學習;iCamp;社群網站期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：An increasing number of worldwide higher education experiments are combining computer-supported collaborative learning delivery with social software and social networking sites. However, there is little research empirically detailed educational benefits associated with use of social software and social networking sites (SNS). The main objective of this study is to investigate the secondary data (evaluation reports) of well-known web 2.0 e-learning trial case (iCamp project) to explore relationship between new social software applications and outcomes of collaborative learning. In particular, theoretical principles of activity theory are applied to examine three-stage trials of iCamp project. We used seven major components (subject, object, instruments, rules, community, division of labor, and outcome) of activity theory to evaluate 3 trials of iCamp project, this analysis allows us to explore requisite elements of learning activity in a social networking environment. This study concludes user-generated topics and shared interests among members to keep high motivation, structured social media tools usage in facilitating specific learning tasks and processes, a peer-to-peer social pressure system to monitor and sanction actions, and a clear delineation of role expectation during the process are important elements for collaborative learning. Moreover, group identity and reputation system design to induce commitment and punish free riders are critical features for social networking sites to keep their members collaboratively engaged.英文摘要：近年來，全球出現了許多將社群軟體及社群網站（Social Networking Sites, SNS）應用在高等教育的研究與實驗，但目前對於社群網站的學習成效評估之實證研究仍屬缺乏。因此，本研究以歐盟發起的iCamp三階段試驗作為分析標的，蒐集其各階段之評估報告，並以活動理論的七個向度（主體、目標、工具、規則、社群、分工與成效）對其成果評估報告進行分析。本研究分析iCamp三階段試驗評估報告之結果發現，如果沒有將Web 2.0相關工具在各教學設計及協同合作步驟中做完整而明確的整合，那麼社群網站所能發揮的協作學習或自主學習的功效將相當有限。在iCamp試驗報告中發現，雖然Web 2.0工具被引入學習過程裡，但各工具卻零散的缺乏組織，無法明確地對應到其所進行的學習任務。藉由活動理論中的七個向度，我們發現以使用者共同興趣所組成的成員及使用者互動產生的內容來提升成員之間較高的參與動機是相當重要的關鍵。另外，建置一套同儕名譽系統的管理機制來篩選及獎懲成員的行為，並在學習過程中做明確的角色界定及學習工作分配，以及建立一個群體的認同感等方式將有助於增進社群網站中的學員主動參與及學習成效的提升。起始頁-結束頁：61-76資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120704030049篇名：操作制約在網路支援合作學習環境下之應用並列篇名：Fostering Positive Behaviors in a Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Environment: The Mechanisms of Operation Conditioning作者：陳秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Chen);朱麗蓉(Li-Jong Chu);蔡承岳(Cheng-Yue Tsai)關鍵字：網路支援合作學習;資訊科技融入教學;操作制約;computer-supported collaborative learning;integration of ICT into classroom;operation conditioning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：過往有關網路支援合作學習（computer-supported collaborative learning, CSCL）的文獻，大多援引建構主義的觀點，主張學習者於網路學習環境的主體性。然而，從行為主義的觀點來看，學習者於網路學習情境中的正向行為，也會受到CSCL環境中之各項外在增強物所觸發。本研究綜合操作制約與動機觀點，主張外在增強物亦能激發個人在網路學習情境中的內在學習動機及團隊合作行為。透過妥適之操作制約相關機制的設計，應能有效改善學習者的學習成效與同儕互動。本研究最後提出相關建議供後續研究與教學實務上的參考。英文摘要：Prior literature on the computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) has focused on a constructivism view and proposed that individuals are active agents that they are purposefully seeking and constructing knowledge within a meaningful context. However, individuals' learning motivation and their behaviors can be stimulated by external positive reinforcement or information within the CSCL environment. By integrating the theory of motivation and operation conditioning, this paper suggests several mechanisms of external positive reinforcement and punishments to stimulate students' positive behaviors in the CSCL environment. Students' motivation in learning motivation and collaboration would be improved through this mechanism. At the end of this paper, several theoretical and practical suggestions are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201204040200110篇名：角色扮演遊戲融入5E學習環對國中化學式相關概念學習之影響並列篇名：The Effects of RPG Jointed 5E Learning Cycle on Junior High School Students' Chemical Formula Learning作者：翁韻婷(Yun-Ting Wong);陳明溥(Ming-Puu Chen);羅怡帆(Yi-Fan Luo)關鍵字：5E學習環;化學式相關概念;自然先備知識;角色扮演遊戲;5E learning cycle;chemical formula;prior knowledge;role-playing game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在驗證沉浸式角色扮演遊戲融入5E學習環實施於化學式相關概念教學的可行性，探討不同5E學習環教學模式對不同先備知識程度的八年級學習者，在化學式相關概念的學習成效與理化學習動機之影響。研究樣本為新北市八年級學習者105人。研究結果發現：一、5E學習環之演練範例式教學策略有助於學習者在化學式相關概念學習成效表現；二、高先備知識學習者有較佳的化學式相關概念學習表現；三、不同先備知識程度的學習者對於本遊戲式學習活動皆持正向的動機表現。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of instructional approach and prior knowledge on eighth-graders' performance and motivation towards science by implementing 5E learning cycle and 3D immersive RPG. Types of instructional approaches, demonstration and non-demonstration, and prior knowledge were employed in this study. There were 105 eighth-graders participated in this study. The results revealed that: 1. 5E learning cycle with demonstration was helpful to eighth-graders in promoting science learning achievement; 2. students with high prior knowledge achieved better learning performance; and 3. all participants held positive motivation towards using this game-based learning activity for learning science.起始頁-結束頁：23-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201204040200201篇名：交叉壓力、意見表達與政黨認同：2008年立法委員選舉的實證分析並列篇名：Cross-Pressures, Opinion Expression, and Party Identification: Lessons of the 2008 Legislative Yuan Elections in Taiwan作者：劉自平(Tzu-Ping Liu);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu);戴士展(Shih-Chan Dai)關鍵字：社會人際網絡;交叉壓力;意見表達;政黨認同;interpersonal network;cross-pressure;opinion expression;party identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討，在不同的人際互動關係之下，是否會影響民眾的政治表達？不同於以往研究政治參與偏重的「社會人口因素」（sociodemographic factor）與「政治動員」（political mobilization）等解釋途徑，本文援引「交叉壓力」（cross-pressures）作為研究架構，分析在2008年立法委員競選期間，個人處於交叉壓力之下，特別是自己的政治立場與其他家人不同時，對於意見表達的影響。作者採用「2005年至2008年『選舉與民主化調查』四年期研究規劃（III）：2008年立法委員選舉面訪案」（TEDS2008L）資料，將民眾區分為四種類型，以「政黨認同」（party identification）作為「意見表達」的代理變數，利用「雙變數交叉分析」（cross-tabulation analysis）與「多項勝算對數模型」（multinomial logit model）進行檢證，探討四種類型選民與政黨認同意見表達的相關性。研究結果顯示，在考量其他變數的效應之下，四種類型民眾與意見表達的關係，大致相符研究預期。換言之，儘管若干民眾抱持特定政治偏好與立場，然而受到交叉壓力的影響，因此在面訪調查時，往往委婉拒絕表達政治態度或者表示其政黨偏好，並回答不支持任何朝野政黨，而被歸類為屬於政治中立的獨立選民。這印證本文所提出的研究假設：在社會人際網絡中，較能處理交叉壓力的選民，其從事政治表達的機會較高；反之，較無法處理交叉壓力的選民，其直接表達政治立場的可能性較低。英文摘要：This study examines whether people's interpersonal relationship and social environments are important resources, which affect individuals' opinion expressions. Different from the approaches such of ”socio-demographic factors” and ”political mobilization” in the existing literature on political participation, this study uses ”cross-pressures” as its theoretical framework, analyzing the influence posed by cross-pressures on persons' inclination to express their own political opinions in the 2008 Legislative Yuan elections. The cross-pressures might be especially salient when their political positions are different from those of their family members. We employ the 2008 Taiwan Election and Democratization Study (TEDS 2008) survey data, using ”cross-tabulation analyses” and ”multinomial logit models” to investigate the association between four-type respondents and political expressions. Note that the variable of ”party identification” is employed as the proxy for tapping the concept of political expression. The findings reveal that the variables of gender, age, ethnicity, Taiwanese/Chinese consciousness, unification/independence preference, cross-pressures, and four-type respondents are the significant factors associated with an individual’s expression of party identification, and most of them run in the expected directions. More importantly, some respondents refuse to express their real partisan preferences and therefore report themselves as ”independents” during face-to-face interviews when they are under social interactions with cross-pressures. The results confirm the major hypothesis of this research: individuals having homogeneous social interactions and under low-level cross-pressures are predisposed to talk about politics, while people in cross-pressures involving greater political disagreement are less likely to express their political preferences.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.02.01-362篇名：政黨認同、負面資訊的競爭與選民投票抉擇：2010年五都選舉的實證研究並列篇名：Party Identification, Negative Information, and Voting Choices: An Empirical Analysis of Municipal Mayoral Election in 2010作者：張傳賢(Alex C. H. Chang)關鍵字：負面競選;負面資訊;政黨認同;動機推論;native campaigning;negative information;party identity;motivated reasoning期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在選舉競爭的場域中，負面競選成為政黨與候選人間愈來愈常用的競選手段。從學理的角度來看，學者認為負面訊息對選民投票行為的影響，甚至更大於正面資訊。然而在實證上，絕大多數的選民都不認為他們的投票受到負面資訊的影響。為了理解理論與實證上的差距，本文重新探索負面訊息與選民投票行為的關係。筆者認為，由於選民慣於依賴政黨認同傾向做為篩選政治資訊的捷徑，因此政黨認同的強度不但影響了選民的投票決定，也左右了選民在負面資訊接受上的方向與多寡。我們進一步利用結構方程式模型分析TEDS2010C在台北、台中、高雄三個直轄市長選舉後所進行的調查資料，統計結果不但顯示受訪者的政黨認同影響了他們的投票抉擇及在負面資訊上的接收方向與程度，同時也進一步證明負面資訊對於選民投票行為的影響實為有限。英文摘要：In modern electoral campaign, especially that in most single member districts, negative campaigning has become a popular strategy for most candidates. They broadcast negative information about their opponents in order to discourage their supporters and hence garner, if any, electoral advantage and maximize chances of election. Despite its prevalence, scholars still have not achieved an agreement on whether negative campaign is determinant to voting behavior. Especially, while statistics shows that receiving negative information is negatively associated with voting decisions, we found that interviewees generally asserted that the messages did not affect their voting decisions at all. To solve the self-contradictory puzzle, following conventional wisdom, we assert that voters apply party identification as a shortcut to sift political information. Thus, they ignore the negative information about their preferred candidate but reinforce their detestation of the candidates they do not like. We further examine our theory by incorporating the TEDS2010C data with structural equation model. The analytical result supports our hypotheses and shows that voters' party identity and voting decision significantly influence the negative information they received. Nevertheless, the negative information does not have significant influence on voters' voting decisions.起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.02.37-703篇名：廢票為何發生？兼論臺灣選舉無效票之空間效應，1992-2008並列篇名：What Causes the Invalid Votes? With a Concurrently Discussion of Spatial Analysis of Invalid Votes in Taiwan's Elections, 1992-2008作者：鄧志松(Chih-Sung Teng);吳親恩(Chin-En Wu);柯一榮(I-Jung Ko)關鍵字：無效票率;空間自相關;空間異質;追蹤分析;空間迴歸;invalid vote;spatial autocorrelation;spatial heterogeneity;panel data analysis;spatial regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：有關選舉無效票（即廢票）的研究很少，主要原因是無效票比率通常不高，對選舉結果的影響不大；而且無效票一般被視為是「疏失」造成，並非選民「意志」的表現，因此很少人探討其發生的原因。作者考察我國1992至2008年，37個不同類型的選舉，結果發現無效票率的空間分布並非隨機，且有一定的模式。不同類型的選舉，無效票率的高低有跡可尋，代表無效票率其實是可以被解釋的，其背後有社會與制度因素存在。經由無效票率的追蹤分析（panel data analysis）後，發現選舉法規、選舉複雜程度、選舉受重視程度、選舉年度及經社背景變數（教育年數、老年人口、人口密度比及原住民人口比例），約可解釋34%之無效票率變異。作者進一步以空間迴歸模型探討，發現無效票率存在正向之空間自相關情形，部分地區則有明顯空間異質現象，極有可能是該地區民眾長期對政治冷漠使然，如果我們要提昇民主的內涵，則這些無效票率特別高的地方值得關注。英文摘要：The issue of invalid votes receives few scholarly attentions. Many consider invalid votes as the result of unintended behavior and do not explore the factors that may influence the incidence of invalid votes. We examine 37 elections of different levels between 1992 and 2008 in Taiwan by using panel data analysis. We find that the distribution of invalid votes are not random but are influenced by institutional and socioeconomic factors. Regarding institutional factors, the elections codes, the complexity of elections, the importance of elections, and years after the democratic transition are the main influencing factors. Years of education, the percentage of elders, population density, and percentage of indigenous citizens are the main socioeconomic variables that affect the incidence of invalid votes. The two strings of factors can explain about 34% of the variance in invalid votes. In addition to the pooled OLS model, we also employ spatial lag model and spatial error model. The two models show that the distribution of invalid votes exhibit positive spatial autocorrelation. In addition, some areas also exhibit spatial heterogeneity, which is likely to be attributed to the alienation of voters in the districts. We might need to pay special attention to these areas to enhance the quality of democracy.起始頁-結束頁：71-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.02.71-1004篇名：選舉、制衡與公共支出配置：我國地方政府的實證分析並列篇名：Elections, Checks and Balances and the Allocation of Public Expenditure: An Empirical Analysis of Local Government in Taiwan作者：黃瓊如(Chiung-Ju Huang);何艷宏(Yuan-Hong Ho);林姿吟(Tzu-Yin Lin)關鍵字：政治預算循環;制衡;公共支出配置;一般化動差模型;political budget cycle;checks and balances;public expenditure allocation;generalized method of moments期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：傳統關於政治預算循環（political budget cycles）的實證研究大都在探討選舉對一國總預算支出的影響，忽略了執政者可以在總支出水準維持不變或不增加財政赤字的情況下，經由支出項目的更動來達到勝選目的。除此之外，傳統的實證研究也大多假設行政部門對預算有完全的行政裁量權（discretionary power），而忽略了立法部門扮演否決者（veto players）對行政裁量權的制衡功能（checks and balances）。目前國內尚無立法制衡指標的建立，所以本文主要目的之一是建構完成地方立法機關的有效制衡指標。首先，參考Henisz（2005）建構我國21縣市立法機關的政治限制指標（political constraint index）作為否決者的衡量；利用國際風險指南（International Country Risk Guide）資料庫所公布的台灣法治指標（law and order index）作為衡量台灣遵循法律的程度，然後結合這兩種指標，建構完成台灣省21縣市立法機關從1984年到2009年的有效制衡指標。本文依據所建構完成的地方立法機關之制衡指標，配合地方政府預算支出及選舉相關變數，從1984到2009年的縱橫資料，採用一般化動差法（generalized method of moments）進行實證分析，探討地方選舉對公共支出項目的影響，以及地方立法機關制衡功能對地方政治預算循環的影響效果。實證結果顯示，執政者確實於選舉期間調整預算支出細項來達成勝選目的，譬如刪減一般政務支出預算移向社會福利支出預算。實證結果也顯示，加入有效的立法制衡，確實可減緩或消除政治預算循環的影響，而且不論地方首長有無自由裁量權，並不影響立法機關的制衡能力。英文摘要：Previous empirical work on political budget cycles focused solely on the dynamics of overall budget, and implicitly assumes the executive has full discretion over fiscal policy. This study goes beyond traditional political budget cycles models and shed light on the case study of 21 local governments in Taiwan over the 1984-2009 periods.To explore how the level of checks and balances can explain the size of the political budget cycles, the political constraints index for the 21 local governments in Taiwan province is developed following the coding procedure of Henisz(2005). The law and order index from the International Country Risk Guide are used to measure compliance with the law. The proxy for effective checks and balances on executive discretionary power over the 1984 to 2009 period are established with the combination of the political constraints index and the law and order index. The impacts of elections, checks and balances on the allocation of local public expenditures over the period of 1984 to 2009 are then explored by using the generalized method of moments developed for dynamic models of the panel data of Taiwan's 21 local governments.The empirical results show that the government would indeed adjust the budget expenditures contents to achieve their goals in the election period. Such as, the deletion of the general government budget expenditures towards the social welfare expenditure budget. By incorporating effective legislative checks and balances into the model, the effect of political budget cycles can indeed be moderated or counteracted. Regardless of whether the local government has discretion or not, it does not affect the checks and balances ability of the legislature.起始頁-結束頁：101-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.02.101-1285篇名：台灣立法委員政見資料庫之建置並列篇名：The Establishment of Taiwanese Legislators' Campaign Promise Database作者：廖達琪(Da-Chi Liao);林福仁(Fu-Ren Li);黃郁慈(Yu-Ci Huang);劉子昱(Zi-Yu Liu);李承訓(Cheng-Xun Lee)關鍵字：立法院;立法委員;政見資料庫;資料探勘;多重標籤分類;Legislative Yuan;legislators;campaign promise database;data mining;multi-label classification期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣的國會選舉中，一向規定個別立法委員候選人需提出政見，並刊載在選舉公報上。雖然目前坊間主流意見多認為政見，尤其登之於公報上的政見，一般選民根本不看，與候選人當選與否亦應是關係不大，所以相關的研究並不多。但本研究認為公報上的政見，既是候選人正式的選前承諾，不應積非成是，在研究上就理所當然予以忽視；反而應藉由探討這些承諾與選後國會中表現的聯結情形，來強化選民對代表的「課責性」；也希望因而能促進各方對公報上「政見」的重視，形成民主政治的良性循環。為了達到上述目標，本文針對我國第六、第七屆立委選舉政見，建構「第六及第七屆立委政見資料庫」，希望藉此資料庫的建置，未來探討如立委選前政見與選後立法表現等相關研究議題。本文主要說明此資料庫的建構過程，包括所用的人工登錄方式和資料採礦的資訊技術，特別是新進發展的多重標籤分類方式；本文並企圖透過這兩種方式的比對，未來能引進資訊技術，對每一次選舉的公報政見，能做相當程度的自動化分類處理。英文摘要：In Taiwan's legislative elections, candidates running for office are required to submit campaign promises to be published in the Electoral Bulletin. This research considers that campaign promises published in Electoral Bulletins are the official commitments of the candidates and should not be disregarded as insignificant and unworthy of research. Moreover, the connection between the candidates' campaign promises and their performances after being elected should be studied in order to monitor their ”accountability” to voters. It is our hope that more emphasis is placed on ”campaign promises” printed in Electoral Bulletins, which would help to create a positive influence on the creation of a democracy.In order to achieve the above stated goal, this paper has established the ”Sixth and Seventh Legislative Campaign Promise Database” based on campaign promises by candidates during Taiwan's sixth and seventh term legislative elections. Hopefully this database would facilitate the research on issues related to the connection between campaign promises and the legislators' on-job performance after being elected.This paper will mainly cover the establishment process of this database, including the manual coding method and the latest information technology used for data mining, namely the multi-label classification method. This paper also attempts to compare and contrast these two methods and hopes to bring in the most advanced information technology to conduct a certain level of automated classification for campaign promises printed in Electoral Bulletins in every election.起始頁-結束頁：129-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.02.129-1586篇名：初體驗與粗體驗：台灣民眾對立委新選制的認知、參與及評價並列篇名：First and Nascent Experience: Citizen's Perception, Participation, and Evaluation of the New Legislative Electoral System in Taiwan作者：游清鑫(Ching-Hsin Yu)關鍵字：複數選區單記非讓渡投票制;混合式選舉制度;政治知識;滾動調查;定群調查;SNTV-MMD;msixed member system;political knowledge;rolling poll;panel survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣2008年的立委選制從複數選區單記非讓渡投票制改為混合式選舉制度，面對新舊選制的差異，多數學術界的討論集中在新選制如何影響政黨或是候選人的選舉，較少探索民眾對新選制的知識以及選制知識如何影響其參與行為，本文透過選前30天的滾動調查瞭解民眾對新選制的認知程度以及在不同時間的變化情形，發現民眾對新選制的瞭解程度不算高，但隨著投票日的接近，瞭解程度也有增加的趨勢；而且民眾的年齡、教育程度、媒體接觸、政治興趣以及政黨認同等因素，與民眾對選制知識的累積有密切的關聯性。其次，由選後的定群調查發現，當民眾選制知識愈高時，也愈會在選舉時投票。再者，與原有選制相比，民眾對新選制同時有正面與負面的評價，民眾認為新選制有利於提高候選人的素質與有利台灣民主的發展，但卻會增加社會對立，其中，民眾的政黨認同是影響選制評價的重要因素，但選制知識的高低則沒有顯著關聯性。在討論與結語部分，本文提醒2008年的選舉乃是台灣民眾對新選制的第一次經驗，隨著經驗的增加，其選制知識也會跟著增加，並藉由紐西蘭選制改革的經驗以及本文的分析結果，說明政府的宣傳資訊以及政黨在選舉期間的動員策略，皆會影響民眾對新選制的認知與評價。英文摘要：Taiwan has adopted a new mixed member system which carries significant differences from the long-implemented SNTV-MMD system for the election of legislators in 2008. Mainstream literature continues to discuss the electoral impacts on political parties and candidates by the new system while citizen's knowledge of the new system and its concomitant effects on citizen's behavior are less concerned. The purpose of this essay is to explore citizen's perceptions, participations and evaluations of this new system. Based on a 30-day rolling poll data, it firstly examines the distribution and change of citizen's knowledge of the new electoral system. It finds that citizen's knowledge of the new electoral system is not high. Also, citizen's knowledge is increased as election approaches when more campaign information is provided. It is followed by a discussion that citizen's age, education, media exposure, political interests, and party identification are closely associated with citizen's increase of knowledge. Then, by way of analyzing post election panel survey data, this essay makes clear that an increase of citizen's knowledge also contributes to citizen's intention to vote in election. However, citizen maintains a mixed assessment of the new electoral system that, compared with the SNTV-MMD system, the new electoral system is good for recruiting better candidates and the development of democracy but fears for causing social tensions. It also finds citizen's party identification plays a significant role in the assessment while citizen's knowledge of new system does not. In the discussion and conclusion section, it suggests a cautious perspective that citizen in Taiwan has only one experience of the new system. It is reasonable to argue that citizen's knowledge may increase as more elections are implemented under the new system. Meanwhile, based on the New Zealand experience and findings of this essay, more information of the new system, either from the government, mass media, or political parties, will contribute to citizen's knowledge of new system.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.01.01-327篇名：民眾對立法委員選舉之政黨不分區名單的認知與影響：以2008年立法委員選舉為例並列篇名：People's Perception of the Party Lists in Taiwan's 2008 Legislative Election and It's Effect作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao)關鍵字：單一選區兩票並立制;立法委員選舉;封閉式政黨名單;投票抉擇;mixed-member majoritarian system;legislative election;closed party list;voting choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣2008年立法委員選舉，首度採取「單一選區兩票並立制」（Mixed-member majoritarian system, MMM）。選民同時握有兩張選票，一票投給區域候選人，另一票則是投給政黨。理論上，選民對政黨票的投票抉擇，應該考量各政黨提名名單的良窳，做出最終的投票決定。只是在政黨的實際政治操作，及多數民眾並不瞭解新選制內容的情形下，民眾對主要政黨不分區名單的認知情形如何？能否對名單做出印象偏好？尤其對政黨票的投票抉擇是否具有影響力？本文利用「台灣選舉與民主化調查」在2008年立法委員選舉後，所進行的全國面訪計畫（TEDS2008L）進行分析。結果發現，台灣民眾對主要政黨不分區名單的認知程度並不高，也有近半數民眾對不分區名單不具印象偏好。但即便如此，當民眾對某政黨不分區名單的認知程度提高，或是對某政黨名單有較佳的印象時，即有顯著偏高的機率將票投給該政黨。這顯示，政黨若提高不分區名單的素質並加強宣傳，將有助爭取民眾的選票支持。英文摘要：The mixed-member majoritarian system was first adopted in the 2008 legislative election in Taiwan. In accordance with this electoral system, each voter has two ballots to cast at the same time. The first ballot is for the candidates in the single member district, and the second is for the party list, which determines the seats each party receives. Theoretically, voters' decision on the second ballot depends not only on his or her party identification but also on the quality of party list. Since the two ballots system was recently adopted in 2008, most people are not familiar with the mixed-member majoritarian system. Therefore, this article attempts to examine the voters' perception of the party list and their preference, and furthermore to assess whether their perception and preference would affect their voting choice on the second ballot. The empirical survey data of TEDS2008L is analyzed in this article to answer these questions. It is found that while most voters can neither recognize the names on the lists of the two major parties nor indicate their preference among the lists. However, voters are significantly more likely to vote for the party list they recognize or prefer. This result indicates that parties should make every endeavor to enhance the quality of the party list in order to receive more votes in this newly adopted electoral system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：33-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.01.33-678篇名：探討總統施政評價如何影響地方選舉─以2009年縣市長選舉為例並列篇名：The Impact of President's Performance on Taiwan's Local Elections - Analyzing the 2009 Magistrate Elections作者：俞振華(Eric Chen-Hua Yu)關鍵字：回溯性投票;公民複決式投票;地方選舉;施政評價;retrospective voting;referendum voting;local election;assessment of job performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：國民黨在2008年立委及總統大選雖然大獲全勝，從民進黨手中取回政權，但勝選的氣勢卻沒有維持多久，很快地在隔年縣市長選舉中就以「小敗」收場。解釋2009年縣市長選舉結果的觀點不外乎下列兩者：第一、執政黨的支持者冷漠不出來投票，第二、部分原本支持國民黨的選民轉向支持民進黨。而不論是哪一種觀點，所立基的假設皆為：民眾對執政黨的施政評價影響了他們在地方選舉中的投票行為。本研究旨在探討上述假設，認為即便是地方選舉，民眾仍會回溯中央政府的施政表現，並做為其在地方選舉中是否持續支持執政黨的依據。本研究分析選舉前的民意調查資料後發現，民眾對馬英九的滿意度、民眾對中央政策是否影響其個人經濟情況、及民眾對整體經濟情況的評估等三項因素，皆會影響他們的投票意向。總之，本研究發現，「公民複決式」的投票模型適當地解釋了2009年縣市長選舉中的選民行為，即執政者的施政績效對於「期中」地方（次級）選舉中的選民投票行為具有舉足輕重的影響力。英文摘要：Taiwan's ruling party, Kuomintang (KMT), handed a loss to the opposition party, Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), in the 2009 Magistrate Elections. The conventional wisdom suggests two competing arguments to interpret the election results-while some argued that the KMT's loss was mainly due to the lack of partisan mobilization within the KMT, some posited that it was because a significant proportion of voters changed their voting preferences from the KMT to the DPP between the 2008 national and 2009 local elections.In fact, both arguments share the same premise: there exists a linkage between the performance of the ruling party (in the central government) and its electoral prospect in local elections. Specifically, the performance of President Ma has a substantial impact on the 2009 local election. This study utilizes survey data to verify such premise. Our data analysis shows that a voter's assessments on President Ma's job performance as well as on general and personal economic conditions affect his/her voting intention. In other words, we found that the ”referendum voting model,” in which voters caste their votes in midterm elections on a basis of their evaluations of the ruling party, properly explains voting behavior in Taiwan's midterm elections such as the 2009 local elections.起始頁-結束頁：69-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.01.69-959篇名：穩定與變動：台灣民眾的「台灣人／中國人」認同與統獨立場之分析並列篇名：Change and Continuity: An Analysis of Taiwanese/Chinese Identity and Position on the Cross-Straight Relations作者：林瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Lin)關鍵字：台灣人／中國人認同;統獨立場;定群追蹤資料;Taiwanese/Chinese identity;issue of Unification/Independence;panel study期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文使用台灣選舉與民主化調查計畫於2004-2008年的定群追蹤資料，探討台灣民眾的「台灣人／中國人」認同是否確實比民眾的統獨立場態度更具穩定性，並進一步討論和態度穩定／變動相關的社會人口學變項為何，最後試圖檢視兩個重要政治態度之間的影響方向。研究結果發現民眾的「台灣人／中國人」認同穩定性相對來說確實比較高，但受訪者態度一致性也僅屬於中度一致。和受訪者在此兩個議題態度變化或穩定具關聯的因素，包括個人的教育程度、政治世代，以及是否具有大陸經驗。教育程度較低、屬於第一世代和沒去過大陸者有較高的比例在態度上發生改變。進一步檢視受訪者「台灣人／中國人」認同與統獨立場的影響關係發現，在模型中，同時考量受訪者2004年的統獨立場和其「台灣人／中國人」認同，研究發現「台灣人／中國人」認同對於受訪者2008年的統獨立場仍具有重要解釋力，因此本文認為「台灣人／中國人」認同不僅較統獨立場穩定，並且影響個人的統獨立場。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine the test-retest reliability of two important political attitudes, i.e. Taiwanese/Chinese identity and issue of Unification/ Independence (UI issue), among the Taiwanese electorate by analyzing the 2004-2008 panel data from the Taiwan Election and Democratization Study. This paper further explores the socio-demographic factors that might affect the consistence of one's Taiwanese/Chinese identity and the position of the issue of Unification/Independence. This paper then examines the relationship between the two political attitudes.The findings suggest that one's Taiwanese/Chinese identity demonstrates higher stability than his/her position on the UI issue. People who identified themselves as Chinese changed to having a ”joint identity”. Those who hold a ”joint identity” have changed to identified themselves as Taiwanese. The factors that affect one's attitude consistency include education, political generation and China experience. Those with less education, the oldest generation and have been to China are more likely to change their attitudes. Moreover, findings from the statistical model show that one's Taiwanese/Chinese identity influences one's position on the UI issue.起始頁-結束頁：97-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2012.19.01.97-12701篇名：敘事取向諮商師運用敘事概念後生命經驗改變歷程之研究並列篇名：The Transforming Process of the Narrative Counselor After Practicing the Concepts of Narrative Counseling作者：張琦芳(Chi-Fang Chang);金樹人(Shuh-Ren Jin)關鍵字：生命經驗;改變歷程;敘事諮商;諮商師發展;counselor development;life experiences;narrative counseling;transforming process期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：33期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討敘事取向諮商師運用敘事概念後生命經驗的改變歷程。研究者以三位敘事取向諮商師為訪談對象，採取敘說研究法之「整體－內容」分析，探究敘事取向諮商師運用敘事概念後的改變歷程，並進一步瞭解其對於自身改變歷程的理解與再敘說。研究結果發現：（一）敘事取向諮商師運用敘事概念後的改變歷程如同V的循環改變歷程：以外在的學習為起點，向內觸碰個人生命經驗，再向外化為所用。研究參與者的轉變內涵，包含以下數點：（1）由「諮商師」到「全人」；（2）從理論到「人師」；（3）諮商師角色與態度的轉變；（4）正向自我認同的建構歷程；（5）以「個人認同」為體，「專業認同」為用；（6）透過重要他人的見證與回饋，鞏固自我新故事；以及（7）由技巧到精神，再到技巧。（二）敘事取向諮商師對自身改變歷程的理解與再敘說可分為以下三個層次：（1）見證已知：過去主線故事的豐厚與再確認；（2）發現未知與新知：支線故事的浮現與新知的建構，創造現在的發展；以及（3）指引未來：以現下的見證與發現作為支點，舉起未來的方向。最後，提出本研究的限制及具體建議，以做為未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study aimed at understanding the transforming process of the narrative counselor after practicing the narrative concepts. The study adopts the holistic-content method of narrative research. The researcher had interviewed three narrative counselors. By analyzing their stories, the researcher looks into the effects that the narrative counseling has on them, and tries to understand how they interpret and re-narrative those changes happening to them. Several findings are as follows: (1) The transforming process of the narrative counselor after practicing the narrative concepts is similar to our writing of the letter ”V”: This process starts from the counselor's ”learning from the outside”, then gradually he/she turns inwards to personal life experience, finally he/she merges the two to create a new way to interact with the world. The transformation contents are as follows: (a)The change from a ”counselor” to a ”complete person”. (b)The change from ”learning from theory” to ”learning from people”. (c)The transformation of the counselor's role and attitude. (d)The construction process of the positive self-identity. (e)The development of ”personal identity” and its extension as ”professional identity”. (f)The witness provided by the feedback from important others and client can help sustain the re-writing process of one's own story. (g)The shift of focus from skills to values and the development of new skills based on these values. (2)The interpretation and re-narrating of a narrative counselor's transforming process by him/herself can be divided into three layers: (a) to prove the already known, (b) to discover the unknown, and (c) pointing to the future. In the end, the study limitations and implications are provided for further research.起始頁-結束頁：119-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201208.01192篇名：性騷擾過後：女性性騷擾因應處理之衍生性衝擊並列篇名：After Sexual Harassment: Secondary Harm from Women Coping with Sexual Harassment Incident作者：羅燦煐(Tsun-Yin Luo)關鍵字：人際疏離;父權體制;性騷擾;衍生性傷害;消音歷程;揭露焦慮;機構性虐待;disclosure anxiety;institutional abuse;patriarchy;secondary harm;sexual harassment;silencing process;social isolation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：33期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討性騷擾受害女性的因應與處理，如何導致衍生性衝擊，以瞭解性騷擾作為父權壓迫，如何透過意識型態及社會場域之運作，持續對受害女性進行壓迫與消音。本研究深度訪談九位經歷過性騷擾事件之女性，發現受訪女性的性騷擾樣態及因應方式，相當多元，但多受制於父權的社會場域，其因應及處理結果通常對受害女性造成衍生性傷害，如：對命名性騷擾的猶豫、對揭露事件的焦應、應對性騷擾的自責、面質騷擾者的反挫、申訴歷程的機構性虐待，及人際關係的破損與疏離等衍生性傷害。據此，本研究認為，父權場域的性別意識型態，經常透過下列機制，對性騷擾受害女性造成多重「雙綁」困境：受害女性符合父權文化的陰柔因應，卻通常導致對自我的質疑與責備；受害女性展現主體的面質與申訴，卻經常引發騷擾者的惡意反制、社會網絡的背棄及機構性的虐待；受害女性掙扎存活及復原的心理資源，卻經常面臨人際關係受創的折損。然而，本研究亦發現，父權體制對性騷擾受害女性的「消音」歷程，並非滴水不漏，部分受訪女性仍採面質及申訴等積極的因應性騷擾事件。此外，受害女性對衍生性衝擊的覺察與批判，似乎辯證性地提供女性顛覆父權宰制的契機。英文摘要：While most sexual harassment literature in Taiwan focus on the primary impacts of sexual harassment incident, this study examines nine women survivors' secondary harm resulting from coping with sexual harassment. This study found that survivors experienced various types of sexual harassment and engaged in various coping styles. Nevertheless, due to the patriarchal culture, their coping of sexual harassment often resulted into secondary harms, such as disclosure anxiety, self-blame for confusion, backlash from confronting the harasser, institutional abuse in the complaint process, as well as destruction and isolation in social relationship. Although the main findings support radical feminist contention of sexual harassment as patriarchal oppression on women, this paper also noticed that women's discourse on the secondary harm from sexual harassment reveals their resentment with and resistance to sexism in Taiwan, which might represent a possible subversion to patriarchal oppression.起始頁-結束頁：155-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201208.01553篇名：團體領導能力量表之編製與信、效度建構並列篇名：Development of the Group Leadership Competence Sca作者：吳秀碧(Sophie Woo);許育光(Yu-Kung Hsu)關鍵字：能力評量;領導能力;諮商師;團體治療;團體諮商;團體領導者;competence assessment;counselor;group counseling;group leader;group psychotherapy;leadership competence期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：32期出版年：2012中文摘要：The study was aimed at developing an instrument for measuring trainees' competencies in leading counseling and psychotherapy groups. Foundation of the original 60 items of Group Leadership Competence Scale (GLCS) were proposed mainly based on group theory, researchers' previous research findings, group counselor training practices, and literature reviews. After evaluated by six professionals for content validity, three items CVI lower than .70 were deleted and two similar items were integrated into one, then the version of remaining 56 items were used. 258 valid samples were gathered for analyzing the critical ratio and test their internal consistency. 7 items were deleted and only 49 items were left for examining the validity and reliability. The reliability of internal consistency correlation α =.97 0, and split-half correlation γ (subscript xx) = .935. The validity of GLCS showed a 8-factors structure by factor analysis, and that were competence of Change and Action Facilitating, Cohesion Facilitating, Group Depth Enhancing, Process Leading & Facilitating, Individual Depth Enhancing, Norm Building, Process Obstacle Breaking through, and Terminating & Change Intensifying. Furthermore, Pearson's correlation with the ”Professional Ability Scale for Group Counseling Leader” γ = .697. Based on those well acceptable evidences for the validity and reliability of the instrument, its advanced application in practice and research were discussed and recommended.英文摘要：The study was aimed at developing an instrument for measuring trainees' competencies in leading counseling and psychotherapy groups. Foundation of the original 60 items of Group Leadership Competence Scale (GLCS) were proposed mainly based on group theory, researchers' previous research findings, group counselor training practices, and literature reviews. After evaluated by six professionals for content validity, three items CVI lower than .70 were deleted and two similar items were integrated into one, then the version of remaining 56 items were used. 258 valid samples were gathered for analyzing the critical ratio and test their internal consistency. 7 items were deleted and only 49 items were left for examining the validity and reliability. The reliability of internal consistency correlation α =.97 0, and split-half correlation γ (subscript xx) = .935. The validity of GLCS showed a 8-factors structure by factor analysis, and that were competence of Change and Action Facilitating, Cohesion Facilitating, Group Depth Enhancing, Process Leading & Facilitating, Individual Depth Enhancing, Norm Building, Process Obstacle Breaking through, and Terminating & Change Intensifying. Furthermore, Pearson's correlation with the ”Professional Ability Scale for Group Counseling Leader” γ = .697. Based on those well acceptable evidences for the validity and reliability of the instrument, its advanced application in practice and research were discussed and recommended.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201204.00024篇名：個人知覺與團體脈絡之團體氣氛：多層次潛在變數分析應用並列篇名：Application of Multilevel Latent Variable Models on Perceived and Contextual Group Climate作者：王郁琮(Lawrence Y. Wang);陳尚綾(Shang-Ling Chen);王麗斐(Li-Fei Wang);林美珠(Mei-Ju Lin)關鍵字：多階層驗證性因素分析;團體氣氛;團體諮商;group climate;group counseling research;multi-level confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：32期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在採用適合團體多階層資料特性與團體氣氛變項屬性之多階層驗證性因素分析模式，探究團體氣氛量表簡式中文版（GCQ-S）在國內團體諮商情境中之個人層次與團體層次的因素結構。本研究整合國內三項研究之資料樣本，共得團體樣本數82組，團體成員744人，以符合多階層分析法對樣本數的規範。試題分析結果顯示GCQ-S中文版的第6題與第8題題項，不論在因素負荷量或變異量解釋百分比皆不理想，故在進行多層次驗證性因素分析時予以刪除。多階層因素分析結果進一步顯示，GCQ-S無論在個人或團體層次之因素結構皆支持MacKenzie（1983）的「投入、逃避與衝突」之三因素構念，另在競爭模型分析結果發現GCQ-S的多層次因素結構，最可能的模式是個體層次為斜交三因素模式、團體層次也為斜交三因素之「三三因素」模式；次佳者是個體層次為斜交三因素模式、團體層次則為斜交二因素之「三二因素」模式。本研究結果雖是有條件地支持MacKenzie的團體氣氛三因素理論，但卻是近年來國內外實徵研究中少數驗證團體氣氛三因素理論。研究者進一步依據研究結果對於團體諮商實務、量表應用與未來研究提出若干建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the factorial structure of the Group Climate Questionnaire-Short Form (GCQ-S) by using multilevel confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) taking into account the nested nature of group counseling data. For meeting the sample size requirement of multilevel analysis, an integrated data set was drawn from three independent studies resulting in a total of 82 groups and 744 members. Results from item analysis show that the sixth and the eighth items of the GCQ-S performed poorly with non-significant factor loadings and small amount of variance explained. Results from the multilevel CFA after excluding the sixth and eighth items indicated that MacKenzie's three-factor theory was supported both at the individual level and at the group level. Specifically, while constraining individual level data to be three correlated factors, group level data could be modeled by either three correlated factors or two correlated factors. Though both models provided satisfactory model fit, the three-three-factor model was superior to the three-two-factor model. This study was among the very few empirical studies that support MacKenzie's theory of group climate. The results of this investigation provided practical implications for group counseling research.起始頁-結束頁：33-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201204.00335篇名：現實治療團體諮商對急重症護理人員之壓力反應與因應策略之影響並列篇名：Reality Therapy Groups: It's Effect on the Stress Reactions and Coping Strategies of Female Nurses in the Critical Care Units作者：王韋琇(Wei-Hsiu Wang);丁原郁(Yuan-Yu Ting)關鍵字：工作壓力;因應策略;急重症護理人員;現實治療團體;壓力反應;coping strategies;nurses in the critical care units;reality therapy groups;stress reactions期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：32期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討現實治療團體諮商對急重症護理人員之壓力反應與因應策略之影響。研究場域為中部某區域教學醫院，採單組前後測設計，用「工作壓力量表」篩選出七名高工作壓力之急重症護理人員，對其進行為期八週、每週一次及每次兩小時之現實治療團體。團體開始前對這七名研究對象進行「壓力反應量表」和「因應策略量表」前測。團體結束後，再對其實施「壓力反應量表」和「因應策略量表」後測。將這兩份量表所得分數輸入統計軟體SPSS for Windows 12.0處理，進行無母數魏克遜配對組符號等級考驗。此外，團體結束後行焦點團體訪談法，蒐集研究對象參與本研究之經驗，協助探討現實治療團體對其工作壓力之影響。本研究發現有：（1）現實治療團體對急重症護理人員之壓力反應和因應策略有正向諮商效果；以及（2）透過訪談分析出「共融關係」、「樂趣成長」、「整體行為」和「評量性問句」等四個主題，可作為輔助支持現實治療團體對研究對象之影響。綜合研究結果，研究者提出對現實治療團體帶領者、護理行政主管與未來研究之建議，作為未來實務或研究之參考。英文摘要：The study was designed to examine how Reality Therapy affected the stress of the ER/ICU nurses in critical care units, and to develop suitable medical treatments in accordance with the research findings. Applying the one-group pretest-posttest design, seven participants who matched the criteria were selected from a regional teaching hospital located at the central region of Taiwan. Participants received Reality Therapy two hours a week for eight weeks. Quantitative data were collected by using the Working Pressures Sheet and the Stress reactions Sheet in the pre-test and the Coping Methods Sheet and the Stress reactions Sheet in the post-test. We conducted wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test to explore parts of research findings. Also, using the Focus Group approachwas used to collect qualitative data on the perceptions of participation in the academic research, which helps to demonstrate the effectiveness of the Reality Therapy in reducing participants' occupational stress. The results showed that the Reality Therapy had positive effects either to stress of the ER/ICU nurses in critical care units or the corresponding strategies. Furthermore, four pillars of the consultative subjects which include love and belonging, fun, total behavior and self-evaluation may be serve as valuable auxiliaries when putting the Reality Therapy into practice. Recommendations based on the results were addressed for future research.起始頁-結束頁：57-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201204.00566篇名：人母難為？一位從事寄養服務母親之敘說研究並列篇名：Hard to Be a Mother? A Narrative Study of a Mother Who Engages in Foster Family Services作者：顏姿吟(Tzu-Yin Yen);廖鳳池(Feng-Tsu Liao)關鍵字：家庭寄養服務;敘說研究;foster family service;narrative methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：32期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探究寄養兒童進入後，寄養家庭母親對原生母子間的互動變化，以及因應歷程的知覺。研究採取敘說研究之「整體－內容」方式進行資料分析，關注時間、地點，以及人與社會等三個向度，整理詮釋一位具有獨生子，並曾從事寄養服務工作的母親經驗面貌。寄養兒童被安置到獨生子女的寄養家庭時，不僅改變整個家庭系統，並擴張原本的關係變數。研究者先整理系統各成員在決定成為寄養家庭時的角色與互動面貌，作為理解原生母子次系統的起點。其次，分析母子次系統的衝擊，包括「圍城般的困頓」、「擴展距離的起風」、「驚濤駭浪的揚帆」、「暴雨小浪接踵而至」、「風雨後的驚蟄」與「各就各位的航行」等六個階段，以及「束縛與黏膩」、「擔憂與享樂」、「震驚不斷的生活戰場」、「愛與資源的爭戰」、「情感紛亂又掙扎」、「尋回漸逝的信任」與「重構親子關係」等主題意義內涵；並歸納母子間相互影響力量的消長變化情形。最後，根據研究結果提出具體建議，以應用在母子諮商、寄養服務，以及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to explore, after accepting the foster child, the interactional changes between the foster mother and her own child as well as her perception of the adapting process. The data was analyzed using the holistic-content of the narrative methodology, focusing on three dimensions: time, location, and people and society. This study interpreted the experiences of a mother who had a son and had previous experience in foster family services. When a foster child was placed into a family with an only child, not only does the whole family system change, but the original relation variables were also expanded. The researcher started by clarifying the system members' roles and interacting conditions before deciding to become a foster family, which in turn would serve as the starting point to understanding the subsystem of the biological mother and child. Then the impact of the subsystem of biological mother-son was analyzed, including the six stages: ”the besieging plight,” ”the expanding, starting wind,” ”sailing in huge waves,” ”the subsequent storms and breakers,” ”disillusioned from the storm,” and ”sailing to one's own.” Seven themes were obtained: ”bondage and attachment,” ”worry and rejoice,” ”life battlefield with frequent shocks,” ”jostling for love and resources,” ”tangled and struggling emotions,” ”restoring the lost trust,” and ”reconstructing parent-child relationship.” The mutual influences and changes between parent and child are also induced. Finally, according to the findings, suggestions are provided for parent-child counseling, foster family service, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：85-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201204.00847篇名：社經背景、幼年受管教經驗與教養價值觀對學前教育階段家長管教子女方式的影響並列篇名：Impact of Socio-economic Backgrounds, Experience ofbeing Disciplined in Early Childhood, and Parenting Value on Parenting Styles of Preschool Children' s Parents作者：林俊瑩(Chunn-Ying Lin);邱欣怡(Hsin-Yi Chiu);葉芝君(Chih-Chun Yeh)關鍵字：子女管教方式;幼年受管教經驗;代間傳遞;社經背景;社會化;教養價值觀;學前教育;experience of being disciplined in early childhood;intergenerational transmission;parentingstyles;parenting value;preschool education;socio-economic Backgrounds;socialization期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：32期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去研究發現家長管教子女方式對孩子日後的身心發展、學習與生活適應影響甚鉅，不過到底是什麼因素影響到家長對子女的管教方式，由過去相關研究並不容易得到較清楚的答案，特別是針對學前教育階段所進行的研究仍不多見。基於此，本研究於2008年以問卷方式收集了986位花蓮縣市幼稚園所學生家長資料，建構一個解釋影響學前幼兒家長管教子女方式的因果模式，並以「教養價值觀」做為中介變項，來解釋不同社經背景與幼年受管教經驗的幼兒家長之管教子女方式有所差異的原因，及檢視其管教子女方式是否受到社會化與代間傳遞作用的影響。本研究結果為：（1）幼兒家長普遍較常使用「理性開通」的方式來管教子女，但使用「威權責罰」的管教情形也很常見，另外，相較之下，現在的家長比其父母更常運用「理性開通」，而較少運用「威權責罰」的方式來管教子女；（2）不同社經背景的幼兒家長之管教子女方式並沒有太大的差異；（3）幼年受管教經驗與家長的教養價值觀對其現在管教子女方式具有顯著的影響；以及（4）幼年受管教經驗不同的幼兒家長之管教子女方式有所差異的原因，可部分歸因於其子女教養價值觀有所不同。以上結果顯示學前幼兒家長管教子女的方式，有明顯地社會化與代間傳遞的效果。英文摘要：Previous studies have shown that parental parenting styles have significant influence on children's future physical/mental development, learning, and life adaptation. However, the factors that affect parenting styles have not been well researched in these studies, and studies that focus on the preschool stage are particularly rare. Therefore, this study collected data from 986 parents whose children were in kindergartens in Hualien County/City, Taiwan during 2008. A path model was tested on factors hypothesized to affect parenting styles of preschool children's parents. Parenting value was included in the model as the mediator in the relations of socio-economic backgrounds and experience of being disciplined in early childhood to parenting styles. We also explored if parenting styles were affected by socialization and intergenerational transmission. Major findings are as follows: (1) Most of the parents adopted the ”enlightened” style to discipline their children, but the ”authoritarian and punitive” style was also commonly used. Compared with their own parents, these parents adopted the ”enlightened” style more frequently than the ”authoritarian and punitive” style. (2) Parenting styles had less significant difference among socio-economic background variables. (3) The experience of being disciplined in early childhood and parents' parenting value were associated with their current parenting styles. (4) The difference in parenting styles among parents with different experience of being disciplined in early childhood could partly be attributed to their parenting value. The above results suggest that parenting styles of preschool children's parents are significantly affected by socialization and intergenerational transmission.起始頁-結束頁：123-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201204.01218篇名：父母支持性的性溝通、溝通信念與親子性溝通關係之探討—以台北市高中、職親屬為範例並列篇名：The Relations between Supportive Sex Communication,Communication Beliefs, and Parent-child Sex Communication作者：鄭其嘉(Chi-Chia J. Cheng);晏涵文(Han-Wen Yen);劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu);張興榮(Hsing-Jung Chang)關鍵字：支持性溝通;親子性溝通;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;parent-child sex communication;supportive communication期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：32期出版年：2012中文摘要：過往親子性溝通的研究多半注重溝通的量，而忽略溝通的質，使研究結果無法告訴父母該如何溝通。本研究旨在了解溝通因素對父母親子性溝通之影響，以做為學校或機構設計親職教育與輔導之參考。研究樣本為159位台北市高中職父母。研究工具包括：性溝通主題、支持性的性溝通（Supportive Sex Communication）量表、家庭性溝通信念、性溝通態度、溝通過程與人口學變項等。支持性的性溝通量表驗證性因素分析（Confirmatory Factor Analysis）顯示量表符合理論架構。統計分析控制性別、年齡、社會經濟地位等人口學變項。研究發現，性溝通議題可依據其敏感程度分為三類：廣泛性議題、狹義性議題與禁忌性議題，其中廣泛性議題溝通頻率最高，禁忌性議題率最低。複迴歸控制社會人口變項後顯示，影響這三類議題的因素不同，其中支持性的性溝通分數愈高，則廣泛性議題與狹義性議題溝通頻率亦愈高。母親以及對自己的溝通效果愈沒有期待的，廣泛性溝通頻率亦愈高。對禁忌性議題而言，沒有一個變項具有預測力。另外，支持性性溝通分數高的父母對孩子較信任、對溝通效果較沒有期待、溝通過程較願意開放自己、較尊重孩子想法，其性溝通滿意度亦愈高。本研究對研究限制提出討論，並對親職教育如何協助父母跟孩子談「性」，以及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to investigate the relationships between parental supportive sex communication, family sex communication beliefs, sex communication attitude, and parent-child communication about sex topics. Participants were 159 parents of high school students from a senior high school and a vocational high school in Taipei City, Taiwan. Research tools included the Supportive Sex Communication Scale, Sexual Communication Topic Questionnaire, Parental Beliefs about Family Sex Communication Scale, and General Sex Communication Attitude Scale. An exploratory factor analysis of the sexual communication topics generated three factors: General sex topics, Specific sex topics, and Taboo sex topics. General sex topics obtained the highest communication frequency mean score and the Taboo sex topics obtained the lowest. Multiple regression analyses controlling for demographic variables indicated that the three sex topics differed in predictor variables. Supportive communication was positively related to communication frequencies on General sex topic and Specific sex topics. The less expectation parents held for their talks, the more frequently they talked about General sex topics. However, none of the predictor variables significantly predicted communication frequencies on Taboo sex topics. Furthermore, ANCOVA and chi-square analyses showed that supportive parents were characterized as being more open and honest, having more trust toward their children, having more respect for their children's opinions, and having less expectation for effects of their talks. They also had higher satisfactory scores on parent-child sex communication. Suggestions for future research and school parental education and counseling programs were also made according to research findings.起始頁-結束頁：151-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.7082/CJGC.201204.014801篇名：規範性的戰略？－民主社會化下的新思維作者：徐子軒期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：165-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.01652篇名：世界民主大事紀 2012年4－6月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：173-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201209.01733篇名：從個人貪腐到組織腐化的歷程探索－以Bandura的道德疏離理論為分析架構並列篇名：The the Process from Person's Corruption to Corruption of Organization: An Analysis Model of Moral Disengagement作者：余一鳴(Yi-Ming Yu)關鍵字：認知失調;環境荷爾蒙;道德疏離;cognitive dissonance;endocrine disrupting chemicals;moral disengagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：政治學傳統上對貪腐問題的宏觀研究方法，正面臨不同學科研究成果的挑戰，有必要引入其他學科的觀點，改進政治學在貪腐研究上的困境。事實上，腐化不僅是一種不正常的組織行為，更是一種人際心態的轉變歷程。因此本文主要藉由Albert Bandura（1986）的「道德疏離」（moral disengagement）理論典範，探討個體心理機制在組織腐化過程中扮演的角色，及其後續與組織交互作用後產生的效應，目的在於說明為什麼公務員會從社會期待的公平正義的維護者，轉變為維謢自身利益的貪污者，以補充政治科學研究在這方面研究的不足。經由理論的推導，本文初步發現，道德疏離的心理機制，的確容易導引組織朝向腐化發展，這些效應再經由社會化與制度化歷程，使得組織腐化變為文化及結構的一部份。英文摘要：In fact, corruption is not only an abnormal organization behavior, but also a change of attitude. This study explores how the role of individual mental mechanism plays in the process of individual corruption based on the theory of Albert Bandura (1986). However, the researcher found the influence of moral disengagement on corruption behavior affect not only mental phenomena but also the interaction of modern organization characteristics. Based on the theory of moral disengagement and the views of organization sociology, this research aims to study how corruption behavior spread from mental effect of individual to organization and how corruption inlay in organization through interaction and socialization. The research intends to explore the following questions: (1) How mental mechanisms of moral disengagement affect one's decision? (2) To explore the interaction between moral disengagement and organization characteristics and the process of individual corruption behaviors?起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.00014篇名：通往議會制之路－德國國會的憲政定位與政黨政治並列篇名：The Way to a Parliamentary System: Constitutional Orientation and Party Politics of the German Parliament作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen)關鍵字：德國;國會;政黨政治;議會民主;Germany;parliamentary democracy;Weimar Republic;basic law democratization;party politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：德國是歐洲少數歷經兩次民主轉型的國家。整個民主建構的過程中，可以視為從行政核心往議會民主的目標前進。從19世紀開始，國會的發展慢慢進入政治場域，並逐步取得核心地位，整個過程大致分為三個階段：從十九世紀到威瑪共和建立為止，是國會（帝國眾議院）的初步建構階段；威瑪共和時期則是第一次民主轉型，並嘗試以國會為核心，企圖建立立法權（帝國眾議院）和行政權二元化的發展階段；1949年透過《基本法》進行第二次的民主建構迄今，則可以視為整個議會民主的成熟階段，在這個階段中，國會（聯邦眾議院）成為行政權的正當性來源，並成為德國民主運作的核心單位。對照這三個階段的發展清楚發現，雖然歷經波折甚至有過失敗經驗，但每個階段和前一個時期相較之下，都是更往議會中心的方向改革。本文以德國政黨政治為觀察點，討論三個階段的政黨體系與國會的制度定位，來比較三個階段中，議會民主的啟蒙、首次的運作以及日趨穩定的過程。英文摘要：Germany is an important European country with two instances of democratization. The constitutional development of Germany started with a strong executive system after the unification of Germany in 1871. However, a parliamentary democracy was not the main goal. Rather, it can be defined as a period of enlightenment towards parliamentary democracy. The first attempt towards democratization followed the end of World War I, where a semi-presidential system was established in the Weimar Republic. This could be considered the first time that the parliament was the key organ in the political arena. It was also the first time a democracy with a legislative-executive dual system was built. However, the Weimar Republic was broken down in 1933, leading to the ascent of the Nazi Party and, eventually, World War II. In 1949, West Germany adopted basic law. Even today, the operation of the parliamentary democracy continues to be stable and successful. This paper discusses the development and constitutional orientation of the German parliament as a result party politics in three stages. Overall, constitutional development and party politics in Germany continue to lean towards a stable, parliamentary democracy.起始頁-結束頁：39-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.00395篇名：政治意識及政治菁英的論述對於台灣民眾議題立場的影響－對Zaller之主流效應及極化效應之檢證並列篇名：The Impact of Political Awareness and Elite's Discourse on Taiwanese's Issue Positions: A Simple Test of Zaller's Mainstream Effect and Polarized Effect作者：王宏忠(Hung-Chung Wang)關鍵字：民意;政黨認同;議題立場;政治知識;Public Opinion;Party Identification;Issue Position;Political Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：民意的形成與變遷長期以來一直是政治學界關注的焦點，政治學者不斷從中探索究竟是那些因素影響民意的走向。其中，美國學者Zaller在民意調查與分析上之研究對於該領域有著深遠的影響。Zaller認為民眾的政治意識以及政治菁英的論述是影響民意形成的兩項重要因素，並因此形成所謂的主流效應與極化效應。本論文為一初探分析，主要目的在於檢測Zaller之主流效應與極化效應是否可適用於台灣民眾的議題立場之上。透過分析台灣民眾在「台灣獨立vs.兩岸統一」、「大幅改革vs.社會安定」以及「環境保護vs.經濟發展」等三項議題的立場，筆者發現台灣民眾在部分政治議題的立場上並不必然與政治菁英一致；同時，民眾的政治意識的高低對其議題立場與政治菁英論述一致程度的影響亦不顯著。簡言之，Zaller的理論並不能全然適用於台灣民眾的政治行為之上。英文摘要：How people form and change their political preference has attracted scholars' attention for a long time. Political scientists continue to investigate what factors make a great impact on public opinion. John Zaller is one of the most influential scholars on this issue. Zaller argues that public opinion is significantly affected by individuals' political awareness and political elite's discourse, proposing ”mainstream effect” and ”polarized” effect to interpret the correlation between individuals' issue position and elite's discourse. The target of this research is to conduct a simple test of Zaller's mainstream effect and polarized effect, examining whether his theory is applicable to the Taiwanese public. By analyzing respondent's position on the issues of Taiwan independence vs. reunification with China, large scale reform vs. social stability, and environmental protection vs. economic development, I find that the Taiwanese public does not necessarily take the same position with political elite on certain issues. Moreover, political awareness does not make a significant impact on the correlation between individuals' issue position and elite's discourse. In short, the formation and change of public opinion in Taiwan can not be perfectly interpreted by Zaller's theory.起始頁-結束頁：71-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.00716篇名：都市內分權與環境治理機制－以台中市大雪山社區為例並列篇名：Intra-City Decentralization and Environmental Governance System: A Case Study of Dasyueshan Community in Taichung City作者：陳建仁(Chien-Jen Chen);周柏<U+5F63>(Po-Wen Zhou)關鍵字：都市內分權;環境治理;永續發展;社區賦權;夥伴關係;intra-city decentralization;environmental governance;sustainable development;community empowerment;partnership期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：永續發展係環境治理之最終目標，而都市內分權則是其重要基石。以環境政策為主軸的都市分權治理不僅強調社區賦權與住民參與，亦同時重視公私協力夥伴關係。環境治理與民主分權密不可分。本論文的研究目的即是從都市內分權與環境治理機制的角度出發，透過深度訪談法與參與觀察法，探討台中市和平區大雪山社區在環境治理中所遇到的實務問題、制度困境、以及社區與政府之間的關係，從而檢視台灣的永續社區發展政策。英文摘要：Sustainable development is the final goal of environmental governance, and intra-city decentralization is the basis of urban environmental governance. The decentralized urban governance for environmental policy not only emphasizes community empowerment and citizen participation, but crucially also public-private partnership. The purpose of this paper is to discuss the practical difficulties, system problems, and relationships between government and community of the Dasyueshan community in Taichung city. In order to get first-hand information, the research methods of this paper are in-depth interviews and participant observation.起始頁-結束頁：124-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.01247篇名：社會資本與社區安全推動之關聯性－以台北市內湖安全社區為例並列篇名：A Research on the Association between Social Capital and Community Safety Promotion: The Case of Neihu Safe Community in Taipei City作者：陳痗v(Hen-Chin Chen);林家慧(Chia-Hui Lin)關鍵字：社區安全;社會資本;結構方程模式;安全社區認證;community safety;social capital;structural equation model;safe community designation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：社區安全日益被重視，世界衛生組織因此積極鼓勵各國推動安全社區認證。此外，社會資本常被視為推動認證成功的重要因素之一。基此，本文以台北市內湖安全社區為個案，以驗證性方式，探討社會資本與安全社區計畫推動之關連性。文內先轉化Ansell and Gash所提出之協力治理模型，以作為研究架構。之後，先進行問卷調查，運用相關分析、多元迴歸與結構方程模式等統計方法。最後再運用訪談內容，說明實證發現。研究結果顯示，內湖社區確實存有豐厚的社會資本。許多社區問題之無法獲得改善，並非執行力不足，而是溝通認知存有落差使然，若能強化推動單位之領導風格，不僅可改善地方政府與居民的關係，亦可強化社區安全功效。英文摘要：Recently, social safety related issues are being emphasized more than ever. The World Health Organization has been actively promoting safe community programs for decades. Social capital has always been recognized to be an essential factor. The main question is to explore the relationship between social capital and community safety promotion. This paper first of all transfers the model of collaborative governance by Ansell and Gash. It conducts both quantitative and qualitative approaches. The former includes Pearson correlation analysis, multiple regression analysis and structural equation model. The latter applies depth interview with the main stakeholders to support the finding. The finding indicates that Neihu safe community is truly rich in social capital, and social capital is crucial to getting the certification of safe community. Moreover, bad communication is found to have caused most of the community problems which remain unsolved over a long time. To empower the key department's facilitative leadership can not only improve the relationship between local government and community residents, but also escalate the possibility of community mobilization to more safety.起始頁-結束頁：166-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.01668篇名：書評：2008年與2010年選舉的變遷與持續並列篇名：Book Review: Change and Continuity in the 2008 and 2010 Elections作者：劉嘉薇期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：218-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.02189篇名：書評：將選民置放於他們的地方上—英國的地理與選舉並列篇名：Book Review: Putting Voters in Their Place: Geography and Elections in Great Britain作者：林昌平期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：223-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.022310篇名：世界民主大事紀 2012年1-3月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：233-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201206.023301篇名：階級不同不相為謀：大陸台灣人社會融入狀況之研究並列篇名：Birds of a Feather Flock Together: Social Class and Social Assimilation of the Taiwanese in Mainland China作者：林瑞華(Rui-Hua Lin)關鍵字：階級;台灣人／台商;社會融入;同化;兩岸關係;social class;Taiwanese/Taishang;social assimilation/incorporation;cross-strait relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：對於兩岸問題，學界一向從總體層面探討，忽略宏觀結構的變化，但比較前瞻的見識，有時必須建立在微觀基礎之上。本文以大上海和大東莞地區的台灣人為研究對象，試圖釐清兩岸人民接觸之後的社會融入。研究發現，影響台人與當地人接觸交往的關鍵在「階級」，其影響主要透過「消費能力」和「生活方式」兩種機制發揮，前者決定人與人間客觀的「相遇機會」，後者則決定個人主觀的「接觸觀感」。階級相近的人群一方面常有機會在生活場域中相遇，另一方面則因消費偏好以及行為、思考模式趨同，接觸之後往往願意／能夠進一步深交；反之則難以認同彼此。由此關照兩岸未來，則唯有當大陸的經濟發展和人民素質與台灣趨近之際，雙方人民的接觸才能帶來正向效果，否則交流恐無助於社會融合，反而深化彼此惡感。英文摘要：Most analyses addressing cross-Strait relations focus on the macro-level and few really touch upon micro-level processes such as personal contacts and sequent attitudinal changes. Yet it is normally difficult to predict macro-level consequences without referring to detailed observations of the micro-level changes. The aim of this paper thus is to clarify whether the Taiwanese, who have lived alongside of the Chinese for years, have been assimilated into the local mainland society. If they have, what factors lead to those changes? To know the answers, in the summer of 2009 the author interviewed more than 200 Taiwanese who have settled in greater Shanghai and Dongguan. With this data, which was the most extensive survey ever done, the author finds that social class instead of personal identity plays the key role in determining Taiwanese's social assimilation. Such influences could be exerted via two mechanisms: one is consumption ability and the other lifestyle. The former determines the objective chances of interactions while the latter establishes the subjective willingness to make or avoid contacts. By the same token, if inter-group contacts are not based on similar life culture, they will not do any good to facilitate social assimilation. From this point of view, people-to-people contacts can contribute to cross-Strait integration only when the level of development and lifestyle of the ”people” get equal otherwise, these contracts can only lead to pride and prejudices.起始頁-結束頁：127-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201206.01272篇名：三種自由觀再探並列篇名：Three Conceptions of Liberty Revisited作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：消極自由;積極自由;共和主義式自由;negative liberty;positive liberty;republican liberty期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在政治理論裡的三種不同的對於自由的理解當中，消極自由無疑居於最核心之主軸地位，但其他兩種自由觀（亦即積極自由與共和主義式自由）亦有其不容輕忽之意義。艾賽亞．伯林對消極自由的申辯固然有振聾發聵之效，但若能借助積極自由與共和主義式自由之正面元素，當能使民主社會裡之自由處境更臻善境。本文試圖指出，消極自由、積極自由以及共和主義式自由並不是存在於同一個平面或層次，而是各自指涉著不同的平面與層次。易言之，其彼此之關係並不是同一個平面或層次裡的零和關係，亦不是一者之增長必造成另一者之損失或萎縮。相反地，注重共和主義式自由，才能使消極自由更得以被有效確保；而重視個體意義下的積極自由，則更能深化消極自由之實質內涵。亦即，積極自由以及共和主義式自由實可做為消極自由之內部的及外部的輔助機制。英文摘要：Liberty is without doubt one of the fundamental political values in modern political life. The lack of liberty not only threatens tremendously the legitimacy of a polity, but also diminishes the desirability of living in it. Though a good in itself, liberty is until now a concept without a precise definition that everyone agrees with. On the contrary, there are at least three major understandings of it in political theory, i.e., negative, positive and republican liberty. This article compares the distinctness of these liberties and examines the possible connections among them, with the hope of providing a better theoretical insight into finding a firmer ground upon which a more heuristic human interaction could stand. Finally, this article also endeavors to defend negative liberty in its individual sense, which Isaiah Berlin, though with good intent, has crudely and unconvincingly suppressed in his famous dichotomy of liberty.起始頁-結束頁：169-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201206.01693篇名：媒體報導對企業型政治立法成敗的影響並列篇名：Media Coverage and Legislative Success of Entrepreneurial Politics作者：盛杏湲(Shing-Yuan Sheng)關鍵字：企業型政治;顧客型政治;媒體;立法成功;entrepreneurial politics;client politics;mass media;legislative success期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：多數與少數的利益分配一直是政治研究的重要課題，顧客型政治，一說分配政治，亦即那些利益集中在特定少數人，但成本是由多數人負擔的立法，長久以來被認為適切地描述了台灣的立法政治。本研究並不在於駁斥此一傳統的觀點，然而，不同於以往的研究，本研究旨在指出企業型政治，亦即成本集中在特定的少數人，而利益是分散給普遍多數人的立法，在某種條件下可以成功的完成立法。本研究以第六屆立法院的立法提案為觀察的對象，研究發現指出：企業型政治的立法提案相較於顧客型政治的立法提案，較不容易通過；然而若企業型政治的立法提案獲得媒體青睞而大幅報導，將會獲得大眾的關注，如此使得以連任為目的的立法委員與政黨有極高的動機要推動立法，從而使得該提案通過的可能性大增。此一發現提供觀察國會政治的一個視角，並就媒體對公共政策的影響提供經驗的證據。英文摘要：Benefit distribution between the majority and the minority has been an important issue in political research. Client politics, also known as distributive politics, in which with some small groups of people get benefits at the cost of the majority, has provided a good description of Taiwanese legislative politics. This article does not try to refute this conventional argument. Instead, this article tries to show under some conditions a legislative initiation of entrepreneurial politics, in which benefit confers to the public while cost is concentrated on a small group of people, can have a good chance of legislative success. Based on the bills initiated in the Sixth Legislative Yuan, this research shows that legislation of entrepreneurial politics is more difficult to be passed than those of the client politics. However, if a legislation of entrepreneurial politics can get the attention of the mass media and be reported intensively, it will catch the attention of the public. At that moment, reelection minded legislators and political parties will have a strong intention to pass the legislation and hence it has a great chance of success. This finding offers an angle of legislative politics and shows how mass media affects policy-making.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201203.00024篇名：台灣民眾的機構信任：以媒體信任為分析焦點並列篇名：Institutional Trust in Taiwan: An Analysis on Media Trust作者：林聰吉(Tsong-Jyi Lin)關鍵字：新聞媒體;政治信任;機構信任;媒體信任;終身學習模型;mass media;political trust;institutional trust;media trust;lifetime learning model期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文承續政治學界有關政治信任的理論傳統，將新聞媒體視為政治機構的一種，探討民眾媒體信任的來源。研究中引用機構信任的相關文獻，假設民眾對民主的支持、新聞媒體的表現皆可能會左右民眾對媒體的信任。利用電話訪問法所得到的民意調查資料，研究首先檢視民主支持、媒體表現兩類變項的民意分布。結果顯示，台灣民眾對民主政治的支持程度頗高，不支持／支持的比例各約佔一成八、七成五；相對地，社會大眾對新聞媒體各方面的表現卻多不滿意。本文測量媒體表現共計使用六項指標：設定重要議題、可信度、多元性、第四權、自主性、政治興趣。針對這六項指標，多數民意在設定重要議題、可信度、自主性、政治興趣等，皆顯示負面的評價；僅在多元性、第四權是正面多於負面的看法。其次，若把民主支持與測量媒體表現的六項指標納入統計模型，結果發現只有第四權未對媒體信任具顯著影響力。此一研究結果大致證實本文假設，也印證了終身學習模型應是解釋台灣民眾媒體信任較為合適的理論。在控制變項方面，本文發現男性、年齡較大的世代皆傾向不信任媒體。另外，具泛藍認同、居住北部與東部的民眾，則傾向較信任媒體。英文摘要：This study treats mass media as one of the political institutions in a democratic system and attempts to explore sources of people's trust in mass media. Based on the literature of political trust, this work proposes the hypothesis that both democratic support and media performances might benefit media trust.First, the study describes opinion distribution of democratic support and media performances. Mass support for democracy is pretty high. Nearly 75% of Taiwanese agree that democracy is the best political system. However, public evaluations toward media performances are much lower. Among six indicators concerning media performances, merely pluralism and the fourth power receive more than a 50% positive evaluation. In contrast, most people show negative attitudes toward four indicators, which include setting significant issues, media credibility, media autonomy, and political interests. Second, the study examines effects of democratic support and six indicators of media performances on media trust. Except for the fourth power, democratic support and five indicators of media performances reveal significant impact on media trust. The result proves the author's hypothesis. The lifetime learning model apparently could be applied to explain sources of media trust. In addition, males and elder generations are inclined to distrust the media. However, pan-blue identifiers and people in either northern or eastern areas tend to trust media.起始頁-結束頁：43-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201203.00445篇名：論穆芙對審議式民主的批判並列篇名：A Reflection on Chantal Mouffe's Critics on Deliberative Democracy作者：陳朝政(Chao-Cheng Chen);曾志隆(Chih-Long Tseng)關鍵字：穆芙;審議式民主;爭勝式民主;基進與多元民主;Chantal Mouffe;deliberative democracy;agonistic democracy;radical and plural democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：穆芙（Chantal Mouffe）對審議式民主的批判不但直接追溯其思想源頭—羅爾斯（John Ralws）和哈伯瑪斯（JurgenHabermas），更從否定本質論（essentialism）出發，質疑審議式民主講究的「理性共識」根本是不足取與不可欲，同時提出其「爭勝式民主」（agonistic democracy）理論，認為真正的民主應該回歸政治性（political），承認在敵我關係必然存在的實然狀況下，政治對手之間的爭勝應該在認同民主的前提之下。爭勝式民主理論同時與她後馬克思主義的主張—以民主認同取代馬克思主義的階級認同—相連結，故而顯現她大破大立的格局。然而，穆芙對審議式民主的批判是否真的有其道理，又有其價值？其對理性共識壓抑多元與異議的批評，固然值得吾人進一步觀察審議式民主的實踐過程，但卻也忽視了審議式民主的其他價值，諸如實踐公民參與及擴大個人視野等。此外，其所信奉的多元政治觀有敵友區分之問題，其所提出之爭勝式民主並沒有解決代議民主的問題，還帶來了新的問題—強權政治的問題、民主不穩定的問題。英文摘要：Chantal Mouffe's critiques on deliberative democracy not only tracked back to the sources of such idea, namely Jurgen Habermas and John Rawls, but also challenged it from essentialism, arguing that the ”rational consensus” highly cherished by deliberative democracy as worthless and undesirable. Meanwhile, she founded a theory of ”agonistic democracy”. According to her theory, genuine democracy shall drawback to ”political”. While admitting the necessary existence of antagonism, political rivals shall compete with each other under the prerequisite of identification with democratic institutions. Her theory of ”agonistic democracy” agrees with her post-Marxist claim to replace Marxist identification with class with the identification with democracy.However, are Mouffe's critiques on deliberative democracy really reasonable and valuable? A reflection from the experience aspect finds her critiques presenting merely partial facts, while her critiques method is seen in the trap of using ontology to criticize ontology as well as the issue of differentiating rivals from friends. Her critiques are limited to rational consensus, the focus of deliberate democracy, and ignore other values of deliberate democracy, such as carrying out citizen participation and enlarging individual visions, etc. Besides, her theory of ”agonistic democracy” does not solve the problems of representative democracy, and may lead to new problems such as power politics and unstable democracy.起始頁-結束頁：80-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201203.00816篇名：民間參與捷運場站土地開發制度之委託代理分析並列篇名：A Principal-Agent Analysis of the Private Participation in MRT Station Development作者：簡龍鳳(Lung-Feng Chien);賴宗裕(Tsung-Yu Lai)關鍵字：民間參與;自償能力;委託代理;場站開發;private participation;self-liquidating ratio;principal-agent;station development期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：促進民間參與公共建設法賦予民間機構從事開發交通建設所需用地，藉以提高交通建設之財務自償能力。回顧目前國內所推動之高速鐵路及捷運建設BOT案，均藉由土地開發收入以挹注建設成本，惟土地開發收入取決於開發規模及代理人努力效果等因素，在政府與民間機構存在對土地市場價值資訊不對稱下，恐衍生委託代理問題。本文嘗試以代理理論作為民間參與捷運場站土地開發制度之立論基礎，探究法制代理結構下之變量關係，進而建構政府與民間機構之委託代理模型。本文模擬案例發現，委託代理模型具可操作性並可運用於實務界，且場站開發收入為促進民間參與捷運場站建設之關鍵。英文摘要：”Law for Promotion of Private Participation in Public Infrastructure Projects” provides a mechanism for the private sector to develop the land for any public infrastructure project so as to increase the financial self-liquidating ratio. The financial concept of BOT projects in Taiwan, such as HSR and MRT, is to recoup the cost of the infrastructure project by land development revenues. However, the revenues depend on the scale of development and effect of the agent's efforts. While the information asymmetry exists, there may arise the issues of agency. This study attempts: First, to analyze the private participation in MRT station development based on the agency theory. Second, to explore the variable relationship under the agent structure of the law. Third, to establish an agency model for both the government and private sector serves to solve agency issues. Case simulation found that the agency model is available. In addition, the MRT station development revenues will be a key for promoting the private participation in the MRT station construction.起始頁-結束頁：134-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系DOI：10.6418/SJPS.201203.013501篇名：保加利亞「議會化半總統制憲法」的設計與運作並列篇名：The Design and Operation of Bulgaria's Parliamentarized Semi-Presidential Constitution作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen)關鍵字：半總統制;議會化;政黨體系;總統權力;保加利亞;Semi-presidentialism;Parliamentarized Semi-presidentialism;Party Politics;President;Bulgaria期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：58期出版年：2013中文摘要：半總統制兼具總統制與議會內閣制的特徵，在運作上也存在往總統制或往議會內閣制偏移，甚至轉型的可能。在實際的經驗上，有些國家維持了半總統制的制度框架，實質運作依照議會內閣制的憲政秩序；有些國家則是經過修憲，徹底將制度規範調整為議會內閣制。以實際個案的分佈來說，議會化的半總統制以歐洲地區民主運作穩固的國家居多，例如奧地利、芬蘭、冰島、愛爾蘭等。而後共地區的半總統制國家，則大多呈現總統化、或是總統與總理競爭、甚至高度不穩定的狀態。雖然如此，仍有少數的後共國家在過去幾年來的憲政運作逐漸趨於穩定，並且往議會制傾斜。其中，保加利亞就是一個持續往議會制傾斜的顯著個案。半總統制在後共國家出現了系統性的發展歷程，和民主轉型後的政黨體系發展、總統權力的擴張或限縮有關。本文認為，總統權力的設計、政黨體系的發展、以及總統－總理的黨政關係，是影響半總統制往總統或是往議會偏移或深化的關鍵，本文以保加利亞為分析個案，討論議會化的半總統制日益穩定的原因，就是建立在總統實質權力限縮，政黨體系穩定，以及以總理為黨政關係樞紐的基礎之上。英文摘要：Semi-presidentialism is a mixed form with the essences of parliamentary and presidential systems. The constitutional operation of semi-presidentialism thus may be similar to parliamentary (parliamentarized semi-presidentialism) or presidential (presidentialized semi-presidentialism) systems. Generally speaking, ”parliamentarized semi-presidential” countries are mostly found in Europe, including Austria, Finland, Iceland, and Ireland. In addition, many post-communist countries are tending toward presidentialized semi-presidentialism or are unstable because of the keen competition between president and prime minister. But there are still a few post-communist countries in which the constitutional operation is tending toward a parliamentary system. Bulgaria is one example. Under semi-presidentialism, factors that affect constitutional operation include party politics and the president's constitutional power. This paper examines constitutional operation in relation to party politics, the president's power, and the relationship between president and prime minister. Bulgaria is developing into a parliamentarized semi-presidential system on the basis of a stable party politics, a president with limited power, and the prime minister as the party leader.起始頁-結束頁：17-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.58(17-46)2篇名：美國國關學界對中國之評估：以攻勢現實主義與權力轉移論為例並列篇名：Evaluations of China in American International Relations Scholarship: Offensive Realism and Power Transition Theory作者：唐欣偉(Hsin-Wei Tang)關鍵字：中國崛起;攻勢現實主義;權力轉移論;軍費開支;Rise of China;Offensive Realism;Power Transition Theory;Military Expenditures;GDP期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：58期出版年：2013中文摘要：除權力轉移論者外，美國國際關係理論家在21世紀前幾乎都不認為中國的實力會趕上美國。直到北京的實力已無法忽視，才將之描繪成美國最大的對手。從權力政治觀點出發的攻勢現實主義者，認為強大的中國必將挑戰美國，所以華府要阻撓其發展。但同樣重視權力的權力轉移論者則主張，新興強權若對國際現狀感到滿意，就不會挑戰，所以美國應與中國合作。這兩派對國際體系本質、國力衡量方式，與國家意圖是否值得探究的看法都不同。對國家意圖看法的差別，使它們對華府提出了截然相反的政策建議。英文摘要：Before the 21st century, very few international relations theorists in the United States believed that China would become almost as powerful as the United States. Scholars only started to depict China the most significant rival to the United States when its rise had become undeniable.On the basis of power politics, offensive realists claim that a powerful China will challenge the United States, so Washington should obstruct China's growth. However, power transition theorists use the same power politics to argue that a satisfied emerging power will not challenge the international status quo. Therefore, the United States should cooperate with China. These two schools disagree about the nature of the international system, the measurement of national capabilities, and the issue of national intentions. The disagreement over China's intentions has led to opposing policy recommendations to Washington.起始頁-結束頁：47-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.58(47-70)3篇名：解決領土爭端的一條出路：折衷安排及其背後領土原則之建構並列篇名：One Way to Resolve Territorial Disputes: Compromise Arrangements and the Construction of Their Underlying Territorial Principles作者：劉弘迪(Hong-Di Liou)關鍵字：領土爭端;結構;折衷安排;爭端地區領土非互斥原則;國家主權;Territorial Disputes;Structure;Compromise Arrangement;The Principle of Non-exclusivity in Territorial Disputes;National Sovereignty期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：58期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文闡明，在現有政治和法律體系下，基於領土排他性原則來處理領土爭端，其潛藏著結構性矛盾，且具有以相對價值阻礙爭端解決的結構效應，最終把某些爭端引入結構性困境之中。於是，從結構上審視爭端，就自然衍生了這樣一個內合理論對話的問題：是否有其它方案比由其中某一方獨佔爭端地區更為合理？但這是一個偽問題，因為在現有體系中其它方案不存在進行理論對話的身份。於是，本文以折衷安排為切入點來分析領土爭端，逐層深入，建立了一個領土原則的理論架構，並最終定義了「爭端地區領土非互斥原則」。在各方面能夠對上述新原則進行支撐，以擴展現有政治和法律體系的情況下，上述偽問題就成為了真問題。整體來看，包括折衷安排在內的更多爭端解決措施具有了實踐自身的基礎和空間；具體來看，爭端地區領土非互斥原則在特定意義上可以理解成領土排他性原則的一種特殊形式，弱化的形式，在此基礎上，比較折衷安排與排他性措施，它們沒有領土原則上的本質矛盾，前者同樣是後者的一種特殊和弱化形式－這開闢了路徑，藉此理解並實現了對這兩類措施之間對立的調和。這兩方面顯示出本文關於自身目標的整體規劃是，以個例性的具體措施引導制度建構，並以制度之邏輯和力量為具體措施的現實實踐提供制度性推動。英文摘要：This article argues that under the existing political and legal system, the application of the principle of territorial exclusivity to deal with territorial disputes leads to hidden structural contradictions. In addition, the same values hinder the resolution of disputes. meaning that many disputes end up in structural quagmires. Therefore, when we look at disputes from a structural perspective, an important question naturally arises: are there any solutions that are more reasonable than either side simply occupying the disputed territory? However, this is only a theoretical question, as under the current international system, other proposals are not represented in the dialogue. Therefore, this paper uses compromise arrangements as a starting point to analyze territorial disputes, and on this basis, puts forward a theoretical framework for the territorial principle, establishing the ”principle that territorial disputes are non-exclusive.” When each side supports the above principle and the expansion of existing political and legal systems, the theoretical question above becomes a real question. Overall, space is created for alternative dispute resolution proposals, including compromise arrangements. Specifically, the non-exclusivity principle for disputed territory can be understood as a special or weakened form of the principle of territorial exclusivity. On this basis, there is no essential contradiction between compromise arrangements and exclusivity. The former is simply a special and weakened version of the latter. From this perspective, we can understand how these two conflicting approaches are reconciled. These two approaches reveal the overall goal of this article to use specific measures to guide the construction of the system, and apply the power and logical of the current system to promote concrete practice.起始頁-結束頁：71-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.58(71-108)4篇名：全球化潮流下台灣公私部門組合型態的制度性安排並列篇名：Institutional Arrangements for Public-private Configuration in Taiwan under Globalization作者：孫煒(Way Sun);蕭全政(Chyuan-Jenq Shiau)關鍵字：全球化;公私部門組合型態;行政院組織改造;政府再造;Globalization;Public-private Configuration;The Organic Reconstruction of the Executive Yuan;Reinventing Government期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：58期出版年：2013中文摘要：全球化潮流讓世界性的資本主義穿透民族國家的界線，並使西方國家的跨國公司，以全球一體化的政經特性考量，而訂定其持續積累資本的經營策略。此一模式促成特定國家改變其經濟發展目標，並以新自由主義為理論基礎，進行新公共管理運動主導下的政府再造；政府大量引入市場的制度性邏輯與企業的管理技術，就強制與私部們發展協力的夥伴關係以提供公共服務與執行公共任務，但是卻也逐漸模糊了公私部門之間組合型態的規範性分際。本文首先將討論全球化對於公私部門組合型態的衝擊；其次、本文繼而將政府行政組織分為資本性、公共性與社會性三種，並討論它們在全球化衝擊下分別履行管制性、分配性與輔導性業務，而採取解除管制、私有化與市場化措施時，對於三種行政組織的影響，及可能衍生的問題。再其次、本文亦討論在台灣各階段的政經結構下，整個公私部門之間組合型態的制度性安排與調整，尤其是在全球化年代所表現於行政院之組織改造者。最後，本文主張台灣的行政組織應引入第三部門的制度性邏輯與安排，包括進行資本性行政組織、公共性行政組織，以及社會性行政組織的制度性轉型，以平衡政府再造中過於重視企業化的傾向。英文摘要：Globalization has not only caused capitalism to diffuse beyond the borders of nation-states, but also enabled Western multi-national enterprises to accumulate capital by utilizing global strategies. This model has led states to reorientate their economic development goals and participate in the movement to re-invent government guided by the neo-liberal theory of new public management. Governments have introduced the logic of the market economy and the management know-how of enterprises, and stressed the importance of establishing partnership with the private sector to provide public services and implement public tasks. However, this has made the public-private configuration increasingly blurred.This article, firstly, discusses the concept of globalization and its impact on the public sector, and then, secondly, divides the government's executive organizations into three categories according to their nature, namely capital, public, and social. These organizations are in charge of regulation, distribution, and guidance provisions respectively. Attempts are also made to examine the impacts of de-regulation, privatization and marketization witnessed under the new public management at the global level on these three categories of executive organizations as well as possible ensuing problems. Thirdly, this article analyzes institutional arrangements and rearrangements in the public-private configuration in Taiwan against the historic context and political/economic structure at different stages, in particular the impact of globalization on the organic reconstruction of the Executive Yuan. Furthermore, this article proposes that the executive organizations and the third sector in Taiwan should borrow from each other's institutional logic and arrangements, including the institutional transformation of capital executive organizations, public executive organizations, and social executive organizations, in order to balance out the excessive inclination toward corporatization in the re-inventing of government processes.起始頁-結束頁：109-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.58(109-138)5篇名：公平正義的實踐及其困境：比爾．霍尚維隆的福利國家理論並列篇名：The Practice of Social Justice and Its Predicament: On Pierre Rosanvallon's Theory of the Welfare State作者：蔡英文(Ying-Wen Tsai)關鍵字：福利國家;社會正義;保險原則;民主團結;羅爾斯;霍尚維隆;Pierre Rosanvallon;John Rawls;the Welfare State;Social Justice;the Principle of Insurance;Democratic Solidarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：歐洲國家自二戰後實施福利政策法案，經歷無數的變革與政治理念（或意識型態）的爭論，直至今日面臨最嚴重危機，如國債高築、失業率居高不下、經濟成長遲緩。針對福利國家的這段經歷，本文闡明歐洲福利國家的形態及其正當性的論據。依此脈絡，闡釋當代法國政治思想家比爾．霍尚維隆（Pierre Rosanvallon）如何援引羅爾斯的「差異原則」，證成福利國家的正當性論證，並透過法國福利政策的分析，說明福利國家面臨的困境。依如上的解釋，本文論證如下的主題：福利國家雖具正當性，但其維繫必須依賴高度的經濟成長、高的稅率以及政府有效的行政能力，一旦這些條件減弱或消失，國家必須縮小福利措施的範圍，減輕個人福祉對國家的依賴，福利國家所具有的社會主義的傾向必須受古典自由主義的調節。英文摘要：Since 1945, European states have been transformed into welfare states through an effort to realize social justice. However, these states have also encountered a series of economic, social and political problems, leading to the so-called contemporary ”crisis of the European welfare state.” The present article tries to interpret Rosanvallon's theory of the welfare state in the light of this crisis, focusing on two areas. The first is Rosanvallon's analysis of the present crisis of European welfare states, the second is the arguments he elaborates for the legitimacy of the welfare state. Rosanvallon's major contribution to the understanding of the welfare state, as the present article argues, lies in his endeavor to reconcile the manifold conflicts between different ideals of social justice, for example, the conflict between justice as impartiality and justice as caring for the differences in individual basic needs, through the principle of insurance, which he considers one of the basic characteristics of the welfare state. As regards to question of how to resolve the present crisis facing European states, the article explains Rosanvallon's ideas concerning the decentralization of the state's social welfare and services and the re-embedment of solidarity in civil society.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.57(1-34)6篇名：「民之不牧者，非吾民也」：《管子》「經言」的禮論與《荀子》的禮治論並列篇名：The Theory of Rituals and Social Norms in the Core Chapters of the "Guanzi" and Its Relationship with the "Xunzi"作者：佐藤將之(Masayuki Sato)關鍵字：《荀子》;《管子》;「經言」;禮義;"Xunzi";"Guanzi";Jingyan (the core chapters);Li and Yi (rituals, social norms and morality)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文將《荀子》哲學看作與戰國諸子思想的「交流」和「綜合」之思想體系，並以此為探討的前提，試圖闡明《荀子》「禮治」思想的特質，及其在古代中國政治思想發展上之意義。具體而言，本文以《管子》中的「經言」為主要線索，來探討《荀子》禮治思想和戰國齊國的禮學之間的關係。首先，本文評述過去對《管》、《荀》關係論之主要觀點而指出：學者較少注意「四篇」以外的篇章對《荀子》的可能影響。據此，本文試圖探討《管子》「經言」的思想特色及其與《荀子》思想的關係。根據本文分析所獲得的見解可歸納為如下兩點：第一，在管理人民的問題上，「經言」諸篇的作者之主要目標是，培養人民的「恥」或「度」之態度。第三，在建立社稷安定的問題上，「經言」諸篇提倡由「義」之準則來使朝臣能遵守「儀禮」、「爵等」、「服飾」之實際規定。雖然從〈牧民〉到〈乘馬〉中「禮義」一詞並沒有出現，以上兩點的主張實際上也個別構成《荀子》「禮治思想」中「義」和「禮」之部分。因此，本文推測，《管子》「經言」中所見的「義」和「儀」的思想，可能是《荀子》哲學中，具有核心意義的「禮治思想」的來源之一。英文摘要：One salient characteristic of Xunzi's theory on li (rituals and social norms) is its comprehensiveness. This article aims to elucidate this aspect of Xunzi's thought by means of analyzing a possible influential relationship between Guanzi's concept of li and that of ”Xunzi”. This article also aims to shed some lights on the role of the concept of li in the system of political thought contained in the ”Guanzi”. This article demonstrates that the ”core chapters” of the ”Guanzi” argue that the attainment of the peace and the order of a country should be predicated on (1) a cultivation of people who possess a sense of morality and shame; and (2) the establishment of appropriate court decorum, ranks and titles, and costumes. Although the ”Guanzi” does not use the term liyi (rituals, social norms and morality) in describing this ideal picture of statecraft, the aforementioned two elements show a striking similarity with the Xunzi's proposals concerning the realization of an ideal society. Based on this observation, the article argues that to the extent that the concept of li (rituals and social norms) is the central idea in the political philosophy of the ”Xunzi”, the Guanzi's conception of court decorum, ranks and titles, as well as costume as means of materializing one's moral excellence, should be regarded as a major source for Xunzi's philosophy.起始頁-結束頁：35-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.57(35-68)7篇名：選舉式威權政體：選舉競爭度、穩定性與民主化並列篇名：Electoral Authoritarianism: Electoral Competitiveness, Stability, and Democratization作者：李冠和(Kuan-Ho Lee)關鍵字：選舉式威權;霸權式威權;競爭式威權;選舉競爭性;政體穩定性;Electoral Authoritarianism;Hegemonic Authoritarianism;Competitive Authoritarianism;Electoral Competitiveness;Regime Stability期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：冷戰結束後，「選舉式威權」（electoral authoritarianism）成為最普遍的威權政體型態，因此越來越多的研究開始探討選舉對於威權政體的影響。然而學者們的看法分成了兩派：一派認為選舉本質上是威權統治者的工具，目的使威權政體更加穩固；另一派認為選舉弱化了威權統治，使民主化的可能性提高。威權政體的選舉是鞏固了威權統治，還是弱化了威權政體？本研究認為選舉的作用會隨著不同的脈絡情境改變；而關鍵的脈絡背景在於選舉競爭度的高低。低度競爭的政體，選舉能鞏固威權統治；相反地，高度競爭的情況下，選舉才可能成為民主化的助力。本文以選舉式威權政體為研究對象，收集1975∼2007年的時間序列橫斷面資料，以檢驗本研究的論點。實證資料顯示，同樣舉行選舉但競爭程度不同的「霸權式威權」（hegemonic authoritarianism）與「競爭式威權」（competitive authoritarianism）存在動態性的差異。競爭式威權政體不僅比霸權式威權政體較為不穩定，同時也比較容易發生民主化或是民主程度的倒退。英文摘要：After the Cold War, electoral authoritarian regimes have become a modal type of authoritarian regime. As a result, an increasing number of studies have begun to explore the effect of elections on authoritarian regimes. However, there is disagreement between scholars on the effects of elections. One camp argues that such elections are an instrument used by rulers to stabilize authoritarian regimes; another camp argues that elections undermine authoritarian regimes and make democratization more likely. Do authoritarian elections foster or weaken authoritarian regimes?This article argues that the function of elections depends on the context, and that the key contextual factor is the level of electoral competitiveness. Under low level electoral competition, elections consolidate authoritarian regimes. In contrast, under high level electoral competition, elections provide an opportunity structure for the opposition to achieve democratization. The main unit of analysis is electoral authoritarian regimes from 1975-2007. The research employs a time-series cross-sectional analysis to test the research hypotheses and discuss the dynamic differences between two subtypes of electoral authoritarianism: hegemonic authoritarianism and competitive authoritarianism. The two subtypes of authoritarianism both hold elections but their dynamic behaviors are distinct in terms of the level of electoral competitiveness. The empirical result reveals that competitive authoritarian regimes are unstable. In addition, they are not only more likely than hegemonic authoritarian regimes to democratize, but also more likely to undergo autocratic reversal.起始頁-結束頁：69-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.57(69-114)8篇名：國民黨國家機器在臺灣的政治秩序起源：白色恐怖中對左翼勢力的整肅（1948－1954）並列篇名：The Kuomintang State Apparatus and the Sources of Its Political Order in Taiwan: The Purging of Leftists during the White Terror (1948-1954)作者：蘇慶軒(Ching-Hsuan Su)關鍵字：國家社會關係;國家基礎權力;政治秩序;白色恐怖;中國共產黨臺灣省工作委員會;State-Society Relations;State Infrastructural Power;Political Order;the White Terror;the Work Committee of Taiwan Province (WCTP) under the Chinese Communist Party期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國國民黨在遷臺後，並非僅靠美國的外部庇護就得以生存，還需探究國民黨如何鎮壓臺灣共產黨地下組織的過程，才能回答國民黨何以能夠存續的問題。然而，過往關於國民黨國家建制與白色恐怖的研究，將國民黨專制權力的效能與綏靖的成果直接連結起來，而忽視理論上過度的國家鎮壓可能會失去統治正當性，反而激發更為廣泛的抵抗。為何國民黨國家機器在白色恐怖時期，能以國家暴力有效綏靖共黨地下組織（臺灣省工作委員會及相關組織），卻又不至於激發其他的反抗，成為本文所要研究的主題。本文嘗試透過官方文件與口述歷史，說明五○年代白色恐怖中國家與社會關係的轉變是國民黨國家機器綏靖成功的關鍵。1949年國民黨與共黨地下組織在臺灣相互對峙，觀望對峙的臺灣社會成為國民黨與共黨地下組織所要爭取的對象。然而，韓戰的爆發與美國介入臺灣海峽使觀望的臺灣轉向與國民黨合作，國家基礎權力因此得以發展，在國家與社會的合作下，國民黨國家機器無須過度鎮壓。相對的，反抗的共黨地下組織則不斷受到國家與社會的擠壓，因此無法長久隱蔽於臺灣社會而瓦解，國民黨在臺灣才得以鞏固其一黨專政的政治秩序。英文摘要：The question of why and how the Kuomintang (KMT) could have survived and persisted after it relocated to Taiwan cannot be answered solely by highlighting the role of the United States during the Cold War era. Past studies on KMT state building and the White Terror linked the effectiveness of the KMT state despotic power to the successful outcome of the repression, discarding the theory that excessive state repression might also damage the political legitimacy of a regime and incite wider resistance. So in this article, I probe further by examining how the KMT state apparatus successfully repressed the underground Work Committee of Taiwan Province (WCTP), a sub-organization of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), without provoking opposition from other parts of the society. I used oral histories and official documents to show that the key to the KMT state apparatus's effective repression was the transformation of the state-society relations during 1950s: when the two political organizations, the KMT and the WCTP/CCP, were in a standoff in 1949, the Taiwanese society as an onlooker had the option to align itself with either of the two sides. However, the advent of the Korean War decisively tilted the balance in favor of the KMT. Taiwanese society could chose to cooperate with the KMT regime, knowing now that the CPP could no longer attack the KMT state due to the U.S. Navy's presence the Taiwan Strait. Taiwanese society's change of attitude accelerated the defeat of the WCTP/CCP in Taiwan, which could no longer hide in a society where assistance was nowhere to be found. Abetted by close state-society relations and absent of the need to resort to excessive repression, the KMT was able to solidify its infrastructural power and consolidate the one-party system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：115-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.57(115-146)9篇名：用過核燃料之國際多邊化管控趨勢：兼論我國處理用過核燃料策略的契機並列篇名：The Development of Multilateral Approaches to Spent Fuel and Opportunities for Taiwan's Spent Fuel Management Strategy作者：曾雅真(Yea-Jen Tseng)關鍵字：核燃料循環;用過核燃料;多邊化;國際原子能總署;國際安全;Nuclear Fuel Cycle;Spent Fuel;Multilateralization;International Atomic Energy Agency;IAEA;International Security期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：在核不擴散之國際安全的考量下，2005年IAEA發佈專家小組報告，啟動核燃料後端循環多邊化倡議，促成美國提出綜合核燃料服務（CFS）規劃，更引發俄國的積極回應。我國用過核燃料（spent fuel）數量相當可觀，如何在不違逆國際核治理相關規範暨核不擴散機制下，處理用過核燃料，已然是我國核能政策所面臨的重大挑戰。核燃料循環的多邊化倡議，已是國際核能法學界的熱門課題，但於我國學界仍屬陌生。為此，本文擬觀察國際核燃料後端循環多邊化發展趨勢，並評估此種發展對我國相關管理政策的挑戰與契機。英文摘要：Aiming to strengthen global nuclear non-proliferation, in 2005 the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Expert Group issued a report on multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, beginning international efforts to manage the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle. The United States has proposed the comprehensive fuel services (CFS) initiative under the International Framework for Nuclear Energy Cooperation (IFNEC), while Russia has also put forward the concept of global nuclear power infrastructure (GNPI). In order to ensure compliance with the global nuclear regime when dealing with spent fuel, Taiwan must adapt to these new initiatives. However, although the internalization of the nuclear fuel cycle has become an important topic in international nuclear law, Taiwan is still unfamiliar with this agenda. This article tries to evaluate the impact of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle on Taiwan's spent fuel management strategy.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.56(1-38)10篇名：魯曼觀察理論與政治論述解讀並列篇名：Niklas Luhmann's Theory of Observation and the Interpretation of Political Discourse作者：黃鉦堤(Jeng-Ti Huang)關鍵字：魯曼;觀察理論;超級理論;二階觀察;政治論述;Niklas Luhmann;Observation Theory;Supertheory;the Second Order Observation;Political Discourse期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：政治的學術研究真的不應只是一個經驗取向的政治理論，也應該取向於探討民眾與政治人物如何觀察政治。本文引用魯曼觀察理論解讀政治論述。魯曼根據史賓塞－布朗的「形式法則」，定義觀察是藉由一個區別所進行的標示，在此的區別是指一組運算。他並且區分一階觀察與二階觀察。前者是對事物的觀察；後者則是對觀察的觀察。整體而言，魯曼觀察理論預設弔詭作為最後形式，因此是一種具有自我套用邏輯的「超級理論」。二階觀察者深知，藉由「再進入」的解讀結果是弔詭的且偶連的。英文摘要：Political science should not only be concerned with empirically oriented political theory, but should also consider how politicians and citizens observe politics. Accordingly, this paper uses Niklas Luhmann's observation theory to interpret political discourse. According to George Spencer-Brown's ”laws of form,” Luhmann defines observation as indicating something by means of a distinction. Moreover, Luhmann divides observation into ”the first order observation” and ”the second order observation.” The former observes things; the latter observes observation. Luhmann's observation theory postulates paradox as the latter form, and therefore can be regarded as a ”supertheory” characterized by autologic. The second order observer fully understands that all interpretation results derived by means of ”re-entry” are paradoxical and contingent.起始頁-結束頁：39-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.56(39-90)01篇名：教師利用科學博物館之轉化學習歷程─國立自然科學博物館三位榮譽教師比較研究並列篇名：Teacher Transformative Learning of Utilizing Science Museums: Studies on Three "Honor Teacher" Awarded by National Museum of Natural Science作者：蔡怡君(Yi-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：非制式教育;教師利用科學博物館;教師轉化學習;博物館教育;轉化學習;Non-formal Education;Teacher Utilize Science Museum;Teacher Transformative Learning;Museum Education;Transformative Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：教師利用科學博物館資源輔助學校教學已蔚為風氣，成功之道在於教師能否改變學校制式的教學信念以因應博物館非制式的學習情境。本文旨在瞭解教師運用博物館的能力養成過程中，其慣性觀點轉化歷程與其影響因素。本文以成人轉化學習為理論觀點，深度訪談三位曾獲自然科學博物館「榮譽教師」之中、小學教師，探討個人學會利用博物館之成功經驗與觀點突破轉化之歷程。研究結果顯示，三位教師轉化歷程雖不盡相同，皆經歷醞釀觸發、反思探索及統整實踐三個關鍵階段，其轉化歷程也深受個人、博物館與學校三大情境脈絡所影響。本文最後根據上述結果提出綜合討論與建議，以助教師有效轉化觀點以利用博物館資源與提升科學教學專業。英文摘要：It becomes popular that teachers use museum resource to assist teaching, however, the key of success relies on whether teachers would change their habitual teaching perspectives in order to adjust non-formal educational environments of museums. Therefore, this study explores teachers' learning experience of utilizing science museums, focusing on how teachers change their customary assumptions into more inclusive, discriminating and integrative perspectives on the use of museum resources. The study adopted Mezirow's transformative learning theory as the theoretical framework, and used qualitative, in-depth interviews with three ”Honor Teacher” awarded by National Museum of Natural Science. The findings showed that the natures of teachers' transformative learning experience are varied, however, they all include three key elements, such as gestation and catalysis, reflection and exploration, integration and action. This study also found that teachers' transformative learning experiences are influenced by contextual factors, namely teacher personal, museums and schools. Finally, suggestions were made regarding how to help teachers to transform their teaching beliefs in order to use museum resources more successfully and effectively.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2001.012篇名：小美在數線上關於分數基準化問題的解題表現並列篇名：Amy's Problem Solving Performance for Fractional Norming Problems Situated on Number Lines作者：劉祥通(Shiang-Tung Liu);康淑娟(Shu-Juan Kang)關鍵字：分數問題;數線問題;數學解題;Fractional Problems;Number Line Problems;Mathematical Problem Solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究是個案研究，個案小美是一位小六學生，在校的數學成績還不錯，且程序性知識頗為完備，但是對於解較難或課外的數學問題卻是沒有信心，因此，研究者以非例行性分數問題作為研究主要施測工具，例如以工作單為基準量不是1，而尋找分數落點的問題，來瞭解小美的解題表現，並藉助結構式工作單的晤談法進行資料蒐集。研究者特別從個案作圖時的下筆順序，以觀察她的解題行為，而綜合討論則從資源、捷思、監控與信念系統四個向度來分析小美的解題表現。主要發現有：（1）資源：擁有完備的工具性理解，但關係性理解不夠，（2）捷思：未能利用等值關係與新單位量以發展解題策略，（3）監控：解基準量是分數的問題時，未對計畫與決策的大方向有監控的表現，（4）信念系統：忽視了已存在的隱藏約定，屢次有自行設定單位長的想法。英文摘要：The research subject, Amy, is a sixth grader. She is used to getting high scores in mathematics. However, she does not have enough confidence to deal with non-routine problems. In order to observe how she overcame obstacles during problem solving, she was given some number line problems involving unfamiliar situations. These fractional problems involving both reference quantity and target quantity had not been taught yet at her school. This case study adopted structurally task based interviews to collect data. To capture her critical thinking in solving problems, the researchers observed how she located each fractional number, especially the sequence of pinpointing all related numbers on number lines. The conclusions of this study were drawn from the aspects of resource, heuristic, control and belief systems. The major findings are as follows: 1. Though Amy had a resourceful instrumental understanding, her relational understanding was insufficient for problem solving. 2. Amy did not utilize the equivalent fractions and new units to develop problem solving strategies. 3. When the reference quantities were fractions, Amy did not control well the planning and decision-making needed for problem solving. 4. Amy didn’t realize the implicit constraints of number line problems. As a result, she often ignored the given unit system and created another unit system which was confused with that conventionally used.起始頁-結束頁：23-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2001.023篇名：國小教師實踐社會性科學議題教學之教師知識成長與比較並列篇名：The Comparison of the Novice and Experienced Teachers' Knowledge Construction about Socioscientific Instruction before and after Actual Implementation作者：林樹聲(Shu-Sheng Lin);靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin)關鍵字：社會性科學議題教學;國小教師;論證能力;學科教學知識;SocioScientific Issue Instruction;Elementary School Teachers;Argumentation Skills;Pedagogical Content Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在比較資深與資淺國小教師在從事社會性科學議題的單元設計與教學前、後，其知識建構的異同及影響其知識建構的因素。研究為質性取向，利用繪製概念圖和訪談收集資料。四位教師教學年資的分布為四至十七年。分析結果顯示：教學設計前，教師對議題知識與論證知識的整合相當有限，其中資深教師以學生需求為主，資淺教師則以教學需求為考量。而教學設計與實踐促進教師內化和組織知識，四位教師不但將論證知識與議題知識統整在一起，而且也融合了教學知識，形成個人教導社會性科學議題的學科教學知識。教學後，資深教師比資淺教師多建構出有關教學困難、學生學習困難或評量方面的知識；與學生互動的課室經驗是影響教師知識建構的主要因素，它促進教師進行深層的反思並調整已建構的議題知識與教學知識，以應付實際教學的需要。起始頁-結束頁：41-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2001.034篇名：池南自然教育中心一日型方案「天空之翼」對於六年級生環境素養之成效分析並列篇名：The Effects of a One-day Environmental Education Program on Sixth Graders' Environmental Literacy at Chih-Nan Nature Center作者：許世璋(Shih-Jang Hsu);徐家凡(Chia-Fan Hsu)關鍵字：角色扮演;非正規環境教育;課程評估;環境素養;環境學習中心;Role Play;Nonformal Environmental Education;Program Evaluation;Environmental Literacy;Environmental Learning Center期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討池南自然教育中心一日型方案「天空之翼」對於提升六年級生環境素養的成效。本研究採不等控制組設計，實驗組1（n＝78）接受以講述與提問為主的「講述提問法」，實驗組2（n＝115）接受以角色扮演與模擬遊戲為主的「角色扮演法」，控制組（n＝105）則不接受池南自然教育中心的課程。結果發現「講述提問法」僅提升環境知識；然而，「角色扮演法」能提升環境知識、環境敏感度、環境態度、內控觀、與環境行動，並在一個月後仍保有延宕效果。最後根據研究結果，針對池南自然教育中心的課程發展與教學策略提出建議。英文摘要：This study assessed the effects of a one-day environmental education program, ”Wings in the Sky”, at Chih-Nan Nature Center, on sixth-grade students' environmental literacy. A nonequivalent control group design was used. Experimental group one (n = 78) received didactic instruction with teachers' explaining and questioning. Experimental group two (n = 115) received a method emphasizing role-play and simulation games. The control group (n = 105) did not receive any instruction at Chih-Nan Nature Center. The findings showed that the didactic instruction significantly promoted environmental knowledge only. However, the role-play method significantly promoted environmental knowledge, environmental sensitivity, environmental attitudes, internal locus of control, and environmental action. These effects were still maintained one month after the end of the program. Implications of the research findings for program development and instructional practice of Chih-Nan Nature Center are described.起始頁-結束頁：69-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2012.2001.0401篇名：諮商心理師倫理判斷與倫理行為之調查研究並列篇名：A Survey Study on Ethical Judgments and Behavior of Certified Counseling Psychologists作者：盧怡任(Yi-Jen Lu);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：倫理行為;倫理判斷;諮商心理師;counseling psychologist;ethical behavior;ethical judgment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究之目在探討諮商心理師之倫理判斷、判斷信心程度與倫理行為之現況。以自編之「諮商心理師倫理判斷與倫理行為問卷」，經立意取樣邀得103位諮商心理師完成調查問卷。研究發現：一、諮商心理師普遍認為合乎倫理者有6項，分屬不同層面；諮商心理師普遍認為不合乎倫理者，分屬於「非性雙重關係」、「性雙重重關係」、「知後同意」、「諮商心理師專業與倫理責任」等層面；倫理判斷信心指數高兩，包恬「性雙重關係」、「保密及保管的限制」、「知後同意」、「非性雙重關係」及其他層面。上述倫理議題乃是諮商心理師最有共識與較為熟悉者。二、倫理判斷意見相左且判斷信心程度低者，多屬「收費議題」，此可能為國內專業倫理教育與研究侷限之處。三、在倫理行為方面，諮商心理師最少出現的行為有30項，顯示諮商心理師在相關倫理行為甚為嚴謹；諮商心理師最常出現的行為包括「保密及保密的限制」、「非性雙重關係」、「技術使用之適切性」及其他等層面，相關議題值得注意。四、諮商心理師倫理判斷與倫理行為大部分相符，但其中仍有8項倫理行為與倫理判斷不一致，值得倫理教育與研究做後續探討。英文摘要：The study aimed to explore ethical judgments, degree of confidence in judgments, and ethical behaviors of counseling psychologists. The survey was conducted by way of purposeful sampling and 103 counseling psychologists were invited to compete the self-designed ”Ethical Judgment and Behavior Questionnaire for Certified Counseling Psychologists”. The findings of the survey are as follows: (1) Among those different aspects covered, there are six items conceived by the psychologists as generally ethical, while items conceived as unethical appertain to ”non-sexual dual relationship”, ”sexual dual relationship”, ”informed consent”, ”professionalism and ethical responsibility of the counseling psychologist”. Items with high confidence in ethical judgments include ”sexual dual relationship”, ”confidentiality and confidentiality limits”, ”informed consent”, ”non-sexual dual relationship”, and so on. The above-mentioned issues were where the counseling psychologists gained the most consensus and familiarity; (2) Items with discrepancies in the opinions of ethical judgments and low confidence in judgments mainly fell on the ”charging issue”, which may be a limitation of professional ethical education and research of Taiwan; (3) In terms of ethical behaviors, 30 items appeared least in counseling psychologist, suggesting their prudence in ethical related behavior. The most frequent behaviors appeared among the counseling psychologists include ”confidentiality and confidentiality limits” , ”non-sexual dual relationship”, ”technique appropriateness”, and so on, with notable relevant issues; and (4) Most ethical judgments and behaviors met with each other, while eight discrepancies emerged to be worth further discussion in the area of ethical education and research.起始頁-結束頁：783-803資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201103152篇名：高中數理資優班學生心理特質與大腦結構之研究並列篇名：Psychological Traits and Brain Structures of Mathematically and Scientifically Senior High School Talented Students作者：郭靜姿(Ching-Chih Kuo);張馨仁(Hsin-Jen Chang);張玉佩(Yu-Pei Chang);周坤賢(Kun-Hsien Chou);林燁虹(Yeh-Hong Lin);陳雪君(Hsueh-Chun Chen);林慶波(Ching-Po Lin)關鍵字：大腦結構;心理特質;灰質密度;過度激動;數理資優;brain structure;gray matter density;mathematically and scientifically talented;overexcitability;psychological traits期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本例究受試者為高中數理資優班學生36人及普通學生37人，研究工具包括：「高中學校能力測驗」、「國中基測」、「我的特質量表」、MRI及SPM的像素形態分析方法（VBM），所得之資料以SPSS及VBM進行統計考驗。主要發現如下：（一）數理組在成就及智力測驗表現皆顯著優於普通組。（二）數理組僅在智能過度激動特質作答得分顯著高於普通組，且智能過度激動特質與成就、智力間有顯著相關。（三）以Jung與Haier（2007）的頂－額整合理論為基礎，在智力與推理歷程中，數理組和普通組處理訊息的區塊有所不同。（四）數理組有在左半球多處區域灰質密度高於普通組，普通組在右半球多處區域灰質密度高於數理組。（五）語文智力與右上頂小葉的灰質密度有顯著負相關。（六）數學成就、自然成就各與多處大腦區域之灰質密度有顯著正相關或負相關存在。（七）五種過度激動特質亦各與大腦某些區域的灰質密度有顯著正相關或負相關存在。英文摘要：This study attempted to explore the psychological traits and brain structures of mathematically and scientifically talented (MST) students. The subject participants were 36 MST students and 37 regular (RG) students from five senior high schools in Taipei city. Research instruments included ”Otis-Lennon School Ability Test (OLSAT)”, ”Basic Competence Test”, ”The Me Scale”, ”MRI scan” and ”voxel based morphometery of SPM (Statistical Parametric Mapping) ”, the data gathered were processed by t-test, Pearson correlation, and VBM. The main findings were as follows: (1) The MST students got significantly higher scores than RG students on math-science achievement and intelligent test. (2) MST students got higher scores than RG students only on the subscale of intellectual OE (TOE) and TOE was found significantly correlated with achievement and intelligence. (3) By adopting theory of Parieto-Frontal Integration (P-FIT) of intelligence which identifies a brain network related to intelligence, the researchers surmised the difference in brain information processing between MST and RG students. (4) The MST students had greater gray matter density than RG students in many left hemispheres regions, but the RG students had greater gray matter density than MST students in many right hemispheres regions. (5) Negative correlation was found between verbal IQ and gray matter density in right superior parietal lobule. (6) The results of the correlation between math scores of Basic Competence Test and gray matter density showed positive correlations in left BA 22 and right cingulate gyrus, and a negative correlation in left BA 6. (7) The results of the correlation between science scores of Basic Competence Test and gray matter density showed positive correlations in left BA 37, left BA 10 and right BA 22, and negative correlations in left inferior occipital gyrus, right inferior parietal lobule, left cingulated gyrus. (8) There existed a negative correlation between EOE and gray matter density in left BA22 and positive correlations between TOE and gray matter density in left BA 22, bilateral BA 40, between SOE and gray matter density in left superior temporal gyrus, and between MOE and gray matter density in right BA 40 and right supramarginal gyrus.起始頁-結束頁：805-831資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201103303篇名：學校社會工作員參與學生輔導工作之實務策略並列篇名：Practical Strategies of Social Workers as Student Guidance in Secondary Schools作者：胡中宜(Chung-Yi Hu)關鍵字：實務策略;學生輔導;學校社會工作;practical strategies;school social work;student guidance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的係探討學校社會工作員參與學生輔導工作時所運用的實務策略，以訪談方法，共訪問十二位學校社工作員。研究結果顯示學校社會工作員常用的工作策略包括直接策略（教育、干預、調解）與間接策略（諮詢、合作、倡導）：工作層面包括與學生個人以及生態系統對象（家庭、學校、社區）。據此，學校社工員提供學生輔導服務以生態系統觀點作為評估架構，運用多元的工作策略，並針對學生個體與相關生態系統對象作為服務標的，而且社工服務與輔導團隊中的諮商師、教育輔導人員有所差異。最後建議強化專業分工與合作，善用生態系統與觀點多元策略，以提供有效的專業服務。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore practical strategies that social workers used in student guidance in secondary school, In-depth interviews were conducted to collect data from 12 school social workers. Two types of strategies were found: Direct strategies (education, intervention, and mediation) and indirect strategies (consultation, cooperation, and advocacy). And two targets of treatment were found: the individuals and their ecological systems (family, school, and community). Thus, school social workers provided professional service with both individual and ecological targets, and also used several strategies which were different from counseling and education. Lastly, several suggestions were recommended for future practice: (1) division and cooperation of multi-professional practitioners; (2) working from an ecological system perspective with multi-strategies.起始頁-結束頁：833-854資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20110412.14篇名：回饋類型、問題呈現方式與練習對問題解決的影響並列篇名：Effects of Feedback Type, Problem Presentation, and Practice on Problem Solving作者：黃麗分(Li-Fen Huang);吳庭瑜(Ting-Yu Wu);侯世環(Shih-Huan Hou);洪瑞雲(Ruey-Yun Horng)關鍵字：肯證性回饋;問題呈現方式;問題解決;診斷性回饋;練習;confirmatory feedback;diagnostics feedback;practice;problem presentation;problem solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在探討回饋類型、問題呈現方式、與練習對問題解決的影響。147位大學生被隨機分派至3（回饋類型）x 2（問題呈現方式）的質驗情境中重複解決三個問題三次後，他們的解題時間及正確率顯示，相對於僅有文字敘述的問題，有提示圖表的問題呈現方式可以顯著的降低解題時間並提高正確率。此外，診斷性回饋可使參與者解題時間不致隨練習下降。且可提升解題正確率，但效果在兩次練習之後才會顯著。肯證性回饋的作用和無回饋的情況相似，會使解題的時間隨練習次數而快速下降，但正確率的提升則十分有限。以兩空間四階段的問題解決模式分析其中71位學生解題時的大聲思考資料則發現，若參與者的解題嘗試得到了肯證性回饋時，對問題的理解活動會下降，但在解答演算方面，其數值分析則會隨練習而增加。相對之下，診斷性回饋則會使參與者將重點放在問題的理解與定義等概念階段。此研究結來顯示，在解決低結構問題時，數值性的解題活動是在問題已清楚定義後才會出現。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of feedback type, problem presentation, and practice on problem-solving. One hundred and forty-seven college students were randomly assigned to 3 (feedback type) x 2 (problem presentation) experimental conditions to solve three problems for three times. The results showed that when word problems were presented with graphic representational cues, the time would decrease significantly and the accuracy increased Repetitive practice alone did not improve the performance. In addition, only when practice was augmented with diagnostic feedback would the accuracy rate increase and efforts to solve the same problem repetitively be sustained, but such effects would be significant only after two rounds of practice. The effects of confirmatory feedback on problem-solving were similar to the control group in that it speeded up problem-solving, but there was little improvement in accuracy across practices. Analyses of 71 participants' problem-solving protocols according to a two-space four-stage model showed that diagnostic feedback would direct participants' cognitive activities to problem comprehension and problem definition, while confirmatory feedback would induce participants to put more efforts in computational analyses. This pattern of findings suggests that in solving ill-defined problems, numerical analysis is conducted only when the problem has been clearly defined.起始頁-結束頁：855-874資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20110412.25篇名：國中與高中職階段生涯測驗使用現況之分析研究並列篇名：Analysis of Career Development Tests in Secondary, High, and Vocational High School作者：宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Tien);鄭育文(Yu-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：生涯測驗;生涯諮商;性向測驗;興趣測驗;aptitude test;career counseling;career test;interest test期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：生涯發展是一連串決定的過程，而適切的決定有助於個人之生涯發展。國中與高中職階段的學生畢業後，不論在升學或職業選擇上，均面臨重大的生涯決定。而生涯相關測驗是作為學生、教師或家長進行生涯決定或生涯輔導之工具。本研究透過序列混合設計，結合焦點團體、內容分析與問卷調查方式，探討國中與高中職階段生涯發展測驗使用現況。研究結果發現，目前常用之生涯相關測驗為性向測驗與興趣測驗，但測驗工具在使用、應用及工具本身仍有其限制。針對上述問題，本研究提出關於生涯測驗編製、增進輔導教師使用測驗的效能及政策三方面之建議，若能加以規劃與實踐，將有助於國中與高中職階段學生的生涯發展，並對廣大教師們於輔導工作上產生莫大的助益。英文摘要：Career development involves a series of decision-making. Competent decision-making is pertinent to an individual's career development. During the high school and vocational high school, the students encounter their first and major career decisions in life. A qualified career development test could play an important role in the process of decision-making. Career development test is an important tool to students for career decision-making. It also helps their teachers and parents in providing career counseling. The purpose of this study was to explore the use of career development tests in schools. This study utilized a sequential mixed design with focus-group, content analysis and survey research. The results showed that aptitude test and interest test are used most frequently in all career tests, but there are still limitations and problems in their applications. Based on the findings, some implications were discussed. Finally, suggestions to the construction of career tests were provided. We also provided some suggestions to enhance the effectiveness of counseling and policies.起始頁-結束頁：875-898資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201105136篇名：團體帶領者僵局經驗之初探性研究並列篇名：Group Therapists' Experience of Group Impasse作者：林淑君(Shu-Chun Lin);王麗斐(Li-Fei Wang);謝珮玲(Pey-Ling Shieh)關鍵字：團體諮商與心理治療;團體氣氛;團體帶領者／治療者;僵局;質性研究;group atmosphere;group counseling and psychotherapy;group leaders/therapists;impasse;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：文獻至今對於團體帶領者僵局經驗的探究仍甚少，基於瞭解團體僵局經驗之目的，本研究以發現取向之質性研究方法，採半結構式一對一深度訪談方式進行，探討團體帶領者僵局經驗之本質。本研究共邀請22位帶領者自願參與研究，分享他們印象最深刻的團體僵局經驗。研究參與者年齡在25－46歲之間，平均年齡34.4歲；團體諮商工作資歷在1個月黑17年之間，平均年資為7.3年：諮商與心理治療相關專業工作年資在1個月至20年之間，平均專業工作年資為9.5年；其中4位男性，18位女性。研究結果發現，國內團體帶領者的僵局經驗主要可區分為五大類型：團體氣氛凝滯、成員反抗帶領者、成員間衝突、成員展現問題特質、以及帶領者間衝突等五類型的僵局經驗。有效的介入方式則包括：涵容自己的負面情緒、聚焦於此時此地，直接面對僵局現象與回應成員的感受與需求等。最後研究將針對上述僵局經驗進行描述與討論，並針對實務與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The current study was to explore the group therapists' experience of group impasse. There were 22 group therapists (4 males and 18 females, age 25-46. mean age=34.4) with mean group counseling experience of 7.3 years and mean counseling experience of 9.5 years. Data were collected by individual in-depth interviews and analyzed by a discovery-oriented qualitative method. The findings indicated that there were five major types of group impasse experience: (a) group atmosphere impasse; (b) members' resistance against group therapists; (c) conflicts between members, (d) members' problematic characteristics, and (e) conflicts among therapists and co-therapists. The effective interventions were: (a) restraining negative feelings, (b) focusing on here and now, (c) directly facing group impasses and members' affects and needs. The detailed results and suggestions for further research and practice were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：899-919資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201105167篇名：A Phenomenological Approach to Taiwanese Mothers' Recollections of the Sudden Deaths of Their Children in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣母親對驟逝子女的思念－一個現象學取向之研究作者：王純娟(Chun-Chuan Wang)關鍵字：子女驟逝;台灣的母親;母親的思念;mothers' recollections;sudden death of a child;Taiwanese mothers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在理解母親對驟逝子女思念經驗之本質。本研究驟逝之子女乃因台灣九二一大地震而喪生；母親對已逝子女的思念，具體而微地呈現在本研究的哀傷田野中。本研究以現象學取向理解母親對驟逝子女的思念。在資料蒐集步驟，研究者以個人中心取向（Rogers, 1961, 1980）對八位喪子女母親進行個別深度訪談，在資料分析方面，本研究採用Moustakas（1994）所發展的現象學分析步驟，研究結果一綜合性的脈絡性─結構性的描述（composite textual-structural description）呈現母親對驟逝子女思念經驗之本質。台灣母親對驟逝子女的思念的獨特性表現在兩股力量的拉扯：母親自然而然地思念著自己的孩子，宗教民俗「為了孩子在另一個世界過得好，不要思念他，也讓他走得開」的相信反而阻卻了母親對孩子的思念。本研究針對母親思念的重要本質─兩難，以及文化差異與宗教信仰進行討論。英文摘要：This study aimed to understand mothers' recollections of the sudden deaths of their children in an earthquake that hit Taiwan on September 21, 1999. A phenomenological approach 10 mothers' recol1ections was conducted through person-centered process (Rogers, 1961, 1980) of data collection, and a Moustakas's (1994) data analysis that led to a composite textual-structural description. This experience is unique in a way that has made Taiwanese mothers seemingly torn between the contradictory forces of their natural tendency to recall their deceased children and the widespread hearsay that recollection ought to be forbidden for the sake of the deceased's benefit in the afterworld. The paradoxical nature of mothers' recollections and the issues of cultural differences and religious beliefs were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：921-941資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201105118篇名：影響督導工作同盟發展之要素:督導雙方之觀點並列篇名：The Critical Factors in the Development of Supervisory Working Alliance: Perspectives of Supervisors and Supervisees作者：蔡秀玲(Shiou-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：受督者;督導工作同盟;督導者;影響因素;critical factors;supervisee;supervisor;supervisory working alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在從督導者與受督者的角度檢視影響督導工作同盟發展相關要素。本研究共邀請七組督導配對在督導初期與後期分別進行深度訪談，所收集的訪談資料採用開放性譯瑪的進行分析，結果發現影響督導工作同盟的因素包括督導結構、督導者行為、受督者投入狀態以及督導成效等四大類別，督導雙方均肯定清楚的場面構成、諮商取向適配、催化性督導者行為、受督者的開放、督導成效與受督者個人表現焦慮對督導工作同盟影響。此外，受督者更是提到督導者對受督者個人的關心有助於同盟，模糊的督導架構、督導者的嚴肅與對受督者的質疑，以及受督者對督導關係的焦慮有礙同盟；督導者則強調受督者的主動性與持續督導同一個案對工作同盟的重要性，以及受督者不表達需求有礙督導工作同盟。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the critical factors in the development of supervisory working alliance from both perspectives of the supervisors and supervisees. Seven supervisor-supervisee dyads participated in the study. Each of supervisors and supervisees was interviewed to Identify specific factors influencing the alliance formation at the beginning and final stage of supervision. Four domains including supervision structure, supervisor's behaviors, supervisee's involvement, and supervision effects were emerged. Supervisees emphasized that supervisor's care for them was helpful for alliance-building, whereas vogue supervision structure, supervisor's seriousness, and supervisee's anxiety for the supervisory relationship were hindering factors. Supervisors highlighted the importance of supervisee's active involvement and continual discussion of a same client, and hoped that supervisees could express their needs in supervision. The implications of these findings and suggestions for future research as well as supervision training and practice were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：547-566資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201010209篇名：父母自我分化對青少年子女身心健康影響模式探討並列篇名：An Exploration on the Causal Model between Parent's Self-Differentiation and Adolescent's General Health作者：歐陽儀(Yi Oyang);吳麗娟(Li-Chuan Wu)關鍵字：代間傳遞;自我分化;身心健康;親子三角關係;family triangulaiton;general health family;intergenerational transmission;self-differentiation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討父母自我分化對青少年子女身心健康影響的兩個模式。以台北縣市國中七到九年級1010組父親、母親、國中青少年為研究樣本，運用問卷調查法蒐集資料，所用的研究工具為「自我分化量表」（包含父親版、母親版、學生版）、「親子三角關係量表」、「一般健康量表」。以青少年子女自我分化為中介變項，在父母各自的自我分化對青少年子女身心健康影響之結構方成模式部分的重要發現是：父母各自自我分化，會經由青少年子女自我分化，影響青少年子女身心健康，而且父親的自我分化影響力，與母親的自我分化影響力是相同的。此一結果支持Bowen認為自我分化會代間傳遞，並且父母自我分化會影響子女身心健康的理論。此外，以親手三角關係為調節變項、青少年子女自我分化為中介變項，在父母各自自我分化對青少年子女身心健康影響之結構方程模式部分，發現親子三角關係程度高分組與低分組，在父、母自我分化對青少年子女的自我分化之關係上不具有調節效果。英文摘要：This study investigated two causal models between Parent's Self-Differentiation and Adolescent's General Health. Then: were nearly 1010 father-mother-child teams investigated. The each participants (father. mother and student) were evaluated by using The Differentiation of Self Inventory. The Family Triangulation Inventory and The General Health Questionnaire. In the causal model, the influence of each parent's self-differentiation on adolescent's general health was observed by using the adolescent's self-differentiation as a mediator. Result indicated that, each parent's self-differentiation positively affect the adolescent's self-differentiation which may also affect the adolescent general health. The effect of father's and mother's self-differentiation on adolescent general health was observed to be similar. Our result also confirmed Bowen's theory about the intergenerational transmission of self-differentiation, and each parent's self-differentiation positively affect the adolescent general health. In the causal model, the influence of each parent's self-differentiation on adolescent's general health was observed by using the family triangulation as a moderator and the adolescent's self-differentiation as a mediator. Result indicated that, in high score ream the adolescent involved in the family triangulation affect in same way as the low score team by which each parent's self-differentiation influences adolescent self-differentiation. Thus the moderator effect o f the family triangulation was not supported.起始頁-結束頁：567-589資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010112410篇名：完形取向督導中受督者知覺之督導重要事件與督導者之介入的初探分析並列篇名：Supervisee's Perception of Critical Incidents and Supervisor's Interventions during the Gestalt Approach Supervision作者：張玉鈴(Yu-Ling Chang);蔡秀玲(Shiou-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：完形取向督導;現象場;接觸;督導介入;督導重要事件;critical incidents;contact;gestalt approach supervision;phenomenological field;supervisory interventions期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討受督者在完形取向督導中知覺的督導重要事件內涵，並理解督導者在督導重要事件中的督導介入內含。研究方法採用重要事件技術，研究對象以一組督導者－受杜導者配對，連續進行13次的個別管督導。研究資料取自受督者之13次督導重要事件問卷，以及督導者之13次督導歷程與反思紀錄，輔以督導晤談錄音以以內容分析進行資料分析。研究結果發現受督者在形取向督導中知覺之重要事件類別，包括「勝任能力情緒干擾與曾能」；「進入案主現場，形成個案概念化」；「覺察與客服諮商困境中的接觸干擾」；「現象場問話與空椅技術學習」；「專業角色與發展反思」；「督導關係影響」；「其他基礎諮商技能學習」。督導者在督導重要事件中的督導介入包含五個範疇，以「增進接觸」為核心者，包括增進督導者與受督者的接觸、增進受督者與案主接觸、增進案主自我接觸之完型技術教導等四個範疇，另有其他基礎諮商技能之範疇，以協助受督者在自我與專業的成長。依據研究發現，本研究提出對完形取向督督導與未來研究之建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the supervisee's percept ion of critical incidents and the supervisor's interventions during the gestalt approach supervision process. One supervisor-supervisee dyad participated in the study. There were thirteen intensive supervision sessions. After each supervisory session, supervisee finished Critical Incident Questionnaire and supervisor recorded the reflection of supervisory session to understand their personal experiences. The critical incidents technique and content analysis were used. Results showed that critical incidents from supervisee's perception included seven categories: competence and empowerment, entering the phenomenological world and conceptualization of client's problem, awareness and victory over the contact interruption, gestalt psychotherapy techniques, professional development, supervisory relationship, and basic counseling techniques. Five dimensions of supervisory intervention were also found: assisting the contact of supervisor and supervisee, assisting the contact of supervisee within himself assisting the contact of supervisee and client, assisting the contact of client within himself and relative gestalt psychotherapy techniques learning, and basic counseling techniques learning. Implications for future research and practice were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：591-611資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010120611篇名：兒童說服策略發展之研究並列篇名：The Development of Children's Persuasive Strategies作者：廖靜宜(Ching-Yi Liao);金瑞芝(Jui-Chih Chin)關鍵字：兒童;說服對象;說服策略;children;persuadee;persuasive strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在於探究兒童說服策略發展，以年齡、性別與說服對象為變項，探討兒童說服策略的種類、數量和層次的差異。研究發現幼稚園比國小兒童更無法明確敘述自己的請求，但是隨著年齡增長，兒童較能考慮到說服對象的願望。在要東西任務說服同儕和好友時，幼稚園兒童的說服策略數量大於國小兒童。國小兒童在說服成人及說<U+8132>同儕收拾玩具，所提出的說服策略層次大於幼稚園。在性別差異方面，即男生比女生更常重複表述請求及願望。關於不同說服對象方面，兒童在面對成人時較無法明確敘述自己的請求，但能說服時反映成人願望；而在說服同儕和好友時較能描述<U+9039>到目的後的情況；而在面對同儕時，更說明靖求與願望的理由及能察覺對方可能反駁的論點而事先說服。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore how the development of children's persuasive strategies varied as a function of age, gender, and persuades. The subjects consisted of 60 five- and six-years old, and 60 first-and second-grade children in Taipei. The results indicated that kindergarteners were less able to state requests explicitly than elementary children. On the other hand, elementary children were able to phrase requests that acknowledged persuadees' desires. Elementary children used higher levels of strategies more than kindergarteners, when persuading adults for buying stuff as well as persuading adult and peer for cleaning up. When persuading peer s and best friends for sharing toys. kindergarteners used more strategies than elementary children. Regarding gender differences, boys used simple requests more than girls. Furthermore, children were more able to ac know ledge adults' desire s. On the other hand, when persuading peers and best friends, they were more able to elaborate details of proposal. When persuading peers, they were more able to exp lain the reasons of requests/desires or to deal with counterarguments in their requests.起始頁-結束頁：613-632資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010121012篇名：雙核心動機模式測量指標的建立及跨年級的檢驗並列篇名：Establishment of Indicators and Cross-grade Comparison for the Dual-Core Motivation Model作者：劉政宏(Cheng-Hong Liu)關鍵字：學習行為;學習動機;雙核心動機模式;leamlng behavior;learning motivation;the Dual-Core Motivation Model (DCM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：劉政宏（2009）提出雙核心動機模式（dual-core motivation model，簡稱DCM）來說明學習動機包含的成分，及其對學習行為的影路徑，其中認為學習動機包含價值、預期、情感與執行意志四個不同成分，但其中僅有情感與執行意志兩個核心成分對學習行為有直接影響力，價值與預期等成分則是經由雙核心成分的中介，間接對學習行為產生影響。先前研究顯示DCM在概念架構與檢驗證據上仍有改善空間，因此本研究目的在進一步闡述與確定DCM中各動機成分的概念與測量指標，並以1203位小六至國三學生資料針對修正後的DCM進行檢驗跨年級比較。使用的工具包含「國中學習動機量表」與「國中小學習型微量表」，資料則透過LISREL進行結構方程模式分析。分析結果發現，相較於先前結果，修正後的DCM獲得觀察資料的支持，其整體適配度與內在品質皆大幅提昇，同時不同年級的中小學在DCM大多數結構係數上並未有差異。本研究根據研究結果在理論與實務上的涵義進行討論，並提出結果應用及未來研究的建議。英文摘要：The Dual-Core Motivation Model (DCM) proposed by Liu (2009) suggests that there are four different motivation components of value, expectation, affect, and executive volition. Or the four components, only affect and executive volition which are supposed to be core motivation components influence learning behavior directly. However, the effects of the value and expectation component on learning behavior are indirect and mediated by the two core components. Previous findings showed the DCM could be improved in terms of theoretical structure and supportive evidence. Thus, this study aimed to confirm the subcomponents and indicators for the four motivation components, and test and make cross-grade comparison on the revised DCM. A total of 1203 validated sixth-grade and junior high school students in Taiwan were involved in this study and instruments employed were the ”Learning Motivation Scale” and ”Learning Behavior Scale” for primary and junior high school students. Data collected were analyzed by structural equation modeling using the LISREL computer program. Results showed that the fit indices of overall model and internal structure of the revised DCM improved obviously. Besides, as to most of the structure coefficients, there were no significant differences among sixth to ninth grade students. Based on the findings, possible implications for educators and suggestions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：633-656資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2010122213篇名：大學生人際互動情緒表達壓抑的探究並列篇名：The Suppression of Emotional Expression in Interpersonal Context作者：江文慈(Wen-Tzu Chiang)關鍵字：人際互動;表達壓抑;情緒表達;情緒調整;emotion expression;emotion regulation;expressive suppression;interper sonal context期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：西方的情緒研究與臨床心理實務指出，情緒表達壓擤不利於個體的身心健康，且有礙人際關係的發展。然而，在華人社會裡，卻希望個體要能克制情緒不要任意表達，以免破壞人際關係。情緒表達壓抑在華人社會人際互動中所存在心理現象，其背後的原委值得探究。本研究旨在瞭解人際互動中情緒表達壓抑的現象與原因，研究範圍聚焦在大學生的人際脈絡，採取質化研究取向，運用個別訪談與情緒札記來蒐集資料，共訪談24位大學生，另外也蒐集22篇情緒札記，參考紮根理論的方法進行資料分析。研究結果發現：情緒表達壓抑的原因相當複雜多樣，壓抑負向情緒表達的原因歸納有：「維持和諧關係」、「理性克制衝動」、「避免場面尷尬」、「考量利害後果」、「符合倫理禮節」、「表達無濟於事」以及「不知如何表達」等。而壓抑正向情緒表達的原因，則有「避免過於炫耀」、「擔心嫉妒惹厭」、「考量對方感受」和「不習慣表達」等。人際互動中的情緒是否表達或者壓抑，端賴與互動對象在人際互動中也是一種冒險，表達不當則有害人際關係，所以處於說與不說、露與藏之間，的確有許多層面的考量。在講究關係的社會裡，「人前留一線，日後好相見」是人際互動中情緒表達壓抑的一個貼切寫照。英文摘要：Researcher s and practitioners alike have noted that emotion suppression has been associated with poor psychological and physical health, and negative social consequences. Nevertheless, Chinese culture encourages emotional suppress ion in circumstance s Where there is in an effort to preserve relationships. Harmonious social relationships are of utmost importance in Chinese culture, forbearance has been considered as a common and valued emotional regulation strategy in interpersonal conflicts. This study attempted to understand why people suppress their emotion expression. The scope focused on college students' interpersonal context. A qualitative approach using semi-structured interview and emotion journal was applied to get data. In addition to analyzing 22 emotional journals, there were 24 undergraduates participated to interview. Results showed there were many reasons for suppressing the negative emotions, including maintaining harmonious relations, avoiding the negative consequence of expression, controlling impulse rationally, adhering to ethical etiquette, emotion expression is useless, and poor in emotional expression. The suppression of positive emotion expression were due to avoiding show off too much, worrying about others' jealousy, considering the feelings of others, and being not used to express. In addition, whether people express emotions or suppress them, depends on the communal relationship and immediate situation. The stronger the relationship is, the more possible to express the emotions. In many contexts, expressive suppression appears to be a risk form of emotion regulation, but in some of contexts, the outcome may well be worthwhile to take the risk. In light of these analysis, this study suggest that, in Chinese culture, the critical question becomes not whether it is generally better to express or suppress emotion, but when, where, and with whom it is advantageous to suppress rather than express one's emotions.起始頁-結束頁：657-679資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011010714篇名：孕產婦之母嬰連結經驗探討並列篇名：A Study on the Experi Ences of Mother-Infant Bonding作者：謝珮玲(Pey-Ling Shieh);應宗和(Tsung-Ho Ying);曾英珍(Ying-Chen Tseng);薛媛云(Yuan-Yun Hsueh);張孝純(Hsiao-Chun Chang);許芳綺(Fang-Chi Hsu);林信佑(Shin-Yo Lin)關鍵字：母嬰連結;母嬰關係;母職;依附;產後焦慮;attachment;motherhood;mother-infant bonding;mother-infant relationships;postpartum anxiety期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：「母嬰連結」是母親對寶寶付出的意圖，國內目前對孕產婦母嬰連結經驗的系統性探索尚屬有限，本研究的目的乃在探索孕產婦母嬰連結經驗的內涵。藉由質性典範之發現取向研法，以支持性的半結構式會談進行資料收集，並對會談紀錄進行內容分析。研究對象包括住院中的產婦與安胎孕婦共77名，其中又以產婦68名為主。結果發現孕產婦的母嬰連結包括有「照顧的承諾」、「對寶寶與親職的想望」、「珍惜憐愛與察覺個體性」、「身心負荷與在焦慮中摸索」等四個主題。研究結果除了具有文獻所描繪的母嬰連結內涵外，還指出母親在照顧嬰兒、被嬰兒所「喚起」時的身心狀態。此外，孕產婦對寶寶的母嬰連結中，同時包著正向與非正向經驗。由研究結果，研究者指出未來研究可繼續探討母嬰連結感的發展、相關因素與影響，並編製適合國人之母嬰連結評估工具，在實務上則應對母親之身心負荷感加以關注與支持。英文摘要：The phenomenon of ”mother-infant bonding” is defined as ”the mothers' emotion and cognition toward their babies, as well as their commitment for babies' wellbeing”. The exploration of ”mother-infant bonding” is limited in Taiwan. The study aims on initial understanding of its nature. Based on the qualitative paradigm and discovery-oriented approach, the authors collect data by a scheme of semi-structured supportive interview. Content analysis was applied in the data analysis. Seventy-seven women who stay at one obstetric unit for childbirth or tocolysis participated in our study, in which in which the majority of participant consisted of women who gave birth to children (N = 68). Four domains of mother-infant bonding, including ”commitment”, ”representation of the child and motherhood”, ”cherish and the awareness of individuality” and ”burden, and explore with anxiety” were revealed. Not only the similar nature of mother-infant bonding was found in Taiwan mothers, we also delineate their psychological and physical status in thinking of or caring of their babies. Both of sweetness and bitterness were found in mothers' experiences. We suggest further explorations of the development, relevant factors and influences for mother-infant bonding are needed. A valid mother-infant bonding scale would be helpful in the assessment. The practitioners should pay more attention and caring in mothers' physical and psychological distress.起始頁-結束頁：681-700資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20110224.115篇名：事件威脅性、關係親近性與謙虛取向對大學生橫向傑出成就之人際歸因的影響並列篇名：The Effects of Threat of Event, Closeness, and Modesty Orientation on College Students' Interpersonal Attribution for Horizontal Distinctiveness作者：韓貴香(Kuei-Hsiang Han)關鍵字：人際歸因;事件成脅性;橫向傑出;謙虛;關係親近性;closeness of relationship;horizontal distinctiveness;interpersonal attrihution;modesty;threat of event期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視大學生對自身成就的人際歸因方式和歸因動機，是受成就事件本身的類型（橫向傑出，較無社會比較意涵）或人際關係的特性（事件威脅性與關係親近性）影響，同時探討成就者的歸因方式是否受其內化的謙虛取向影響。本研究以新北市一所私立大學的200位大學生為對象，回收有效問卷計192份。研究採情境實驗法，以事件威脅性與關係親近性為主要變項設計相關的橫向傑出成就情境。依變項為測量研究參與者在該情境下的人際歸因方式和歸因動機，並測量其謙虛取向程度。採卡方分析的研究結果顯示：當自己的成就會威脅到對方，研究參與者多將成就歸因於外在因素（運氣）：當成就不會威脅對方，研究參與者對成就的歸因，則受雙方關係的親近程度影響。當對方為關係親近者，傾向將成就歸因於內在因素（努力、能力）、當對方為非關係親近者，則是將成就歸因於外在因素（運氣）。採t考驗對謙虛取向分數的分析發現，大學生只有在自己的成就不會威脅到對方，且和對方為關係親近者時，其對成就採內在或外在的人際歸因方式才和個人謙虛取向分數有關。在此情況下，謙虛取向分數愈高者愈傾向採外在因素歸因自己的成就。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine how college students' interpersonal attribution for their success was affected by the type of achievements and the characteristics of the interpersonal relationship as well as their modesty orientation. Two hundred undergraduate students participated in this study and 192 valid questionnaires were collected. Adopting scenario experimental method, this study manipulated the variables of ”threat of successful event” and ”closeness to the interacting target” in an achievement of horizontal distinctiveness. The dependent variables were participants' choice of attributional reason and motivation, and in addition, their modesty scores were measured as well. The results of X2 analyses showed that when the success was a threat to the interacting target, participants would attribute their success to ”luck” with a motivation of ”empathy”. When the achievement was not a threat, participants would attribute their success to ”effort” and ”ability” with intimates with a motivation of ”sharing glory”, but to ”luck” with acquaintances with motivation of ”obeying social modest norm”, Moreover, the results of t-test revealed that when the success was not a threat to the intimate, the modesty orientation scores of those who attributed their success to external factors were significantly higher than those who attributed their success to internal factors.起始頁-結束頁：701-716資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20110224.216篇名：「教師學習社群」發展對話式形成性評量實務及其對學習成效之影響並列篇名：The Development of Formative Assessment Practice through Teachers' Professional Learning Community and Its Impact on Student Learning Achievement作者：張景媛(Ching-Yuan Chang);鄭章華(Chang-Hua Chen);范德鑫(Der-Sin Fun);林靜君(Jin-Jun Lin)關鍵字：形成性評量;教師專業發展;學習社群;數學對話;formative assessment;learning community;mathematics discourse;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：43卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究透過專業學習社群提昇國中數學教師對話式形成性評量實務，從而促進學生數學學習成效。其具體作為在於協助教師整合教學與評量於一堂課中，而即探查學生的學習進展與需求，做出立即回饋幫助學生數學學習；本研究也分析學生的數學學習成就是否受益於教師形成性評量實務的改進，以期對教師專業成長理論有所貢獻，研究者一方面以Mehan（1979）的課堂架構理論分析數學課堂師生對話現況以及教師在學習社群中對話式形成評量實務進步的歷程，另一方面以單因子共變數分析瞭解實驗組學生的學學習成就是否顯著高於對照組學生。研究發現：一、在學習社群初期，參與教師是以低層次問題進行師生對話，沒有給予學生充分待答時間：二、以三階段循環模式運作學習社群可以有效幫助教師改進對話式形成性評量實務，以高層次問題查與釐清學生想改進。最後，本研究報告學習社群對於教師個人專業成長的影響、提出教學建議以及後續研究的建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to improve mathematics teachers' formative assessment practice in junior high schools through a teacher professional learning community. Teachers learned to integrate instruction and assessment ill a lesson in which they examined students' learning progress by questioning and then gave students immediate feedback accordingly to push students learning forward. In addition, this study examined whether or not students' learning achievement in mathematics benefits from the improvement of teachers instruction. The researchers applied Mehan's (1979) theoretical framework to analyze teacher-student discourse in mathematics classrooms and to inspect the progress o f participating teachers' questioning/ reedbuck. Students' mathematics learning achievement in (he treatment group was compared with that or students in till: control group ill term s of one-way ANOVA. Results suggested that: (1) In the he-ginning, the participating teachers tended to use low-level questions to conduct teacher-students discourse and did not allow students enough time to answer the questions; (2) While the teacher professional learning community was operated in terms of a three-stages and cyclic model, teachers' formative assessment practice was improved effectively. Participating teachers began to probe and to clarity students thinking by posing high-level questions with an aim to guide students learning step-by-step: (3) Students' mathematics learning achievement benefited from the development of their teacher's teaching. This study also reported the influence of the learning community on the participating teachers ' personal professional learning and provided suggestions for teacher instruction as well as suggestions for subsequent studies.起始頁-結束頁：717-733資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011031801篇名：以科學探究精神開展通識教育：Schwab在芝加哥大學的超越與實踐並列篇名：Transforming General Education through Scientific Enquiry: The Curriculum Development and Implementation of Schwab at the University of Chicago作者：陳鏗任(Ken-Zen Chen);蔡曉楓(Hsiao-Feng Tsai)關鍵字：Schwab;通識教育;芝加哥大學;Schwab;general education;University of Chicago期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:2期出版年：2012中文摘要：美國大學通識教育在二十世紀兩次大戰之間快速繁盛，戰後又迅速萎縮。本文回顧1940年代以降，Schwab（1909－1980）在芝加哥大學所推動的一系列融合科學家的探究（enquiry）精神，其將Hutchins等人高懸的通識教育理想具體開展實現為大學教學課程的歷程。儘管1960年代之後，學院（The College）面臨萎縮，讓通識教育的理念無以為繼，但是，芝加哥大學推動通識教育的經驗在其他學校的通識課程中成為參考的元素。而在學院中與學術同儕共同發展通識課程的慎思籌劃經驗，也鑄成了日後Schwab在課程理論的實踐論述。英文摘要：Reforms of and reflections on general education in colleges of the United States thrived from the end of the First World War to the Second World War. This essay provides a detailed overview of the general education reform led by Joseph Jackson Schwab (1909-1980) from the 1940s to 1960s at the University of Chicago, where he transformed the ideals of Robert Maynard Hutchins et al. into a reality. Schwab devoted himself to expanding the place of science in the general education of undergraduate students and placed particular emphasis on biological sciences. Even though his practices were too hard to continue, his insightful legacy has become a critical point of reference when discussing the ultimate aims and practical methods of general education. Eventually, his latter theoretical ”Practical” essays in curriculum studies were partly motivated and then came to mature due to his curriculum deliberation experience with his colleagues at Chicago.起始頁-結束頁：71-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012060032篇名：透視官方知識之生成－高中「生活科技」教科書政治脈絡分析並列篇名：Examining the Formation of Official Knowledge: A Contextual Analysis of the Politics of High School ”Living Technology” Textbooks作者：王雅玄(Ya-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：生活科技;官方知識;教科書政治;課程變革;Living Technology;official knowledge;textbook politics;curriculum reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究從課程綱要轉化為課程文本的教科書政治中，透視官方知識的生成。為釐清政策形塑背後各種利益團體的微觀政治，本研究以多重方法檢視高中生活科技新課程綱要對不同對象的意義，包括訪談四大出版社教科書編寫者與經理八位、分析國立編譯館教科書審查意見55件、電話調查全國高中教科書選用209所，分析教科書編寫、審查與選擇政治。歸納教科書編審選之制度外政治有立委與企業界，制度內政治有教科書政策、國立編譯館、出版社、學校、學科專家、教師。受制於眾多政治性因素，專家學者與出版社妥協於制度外力量，學校教師終究淪為學科邊緣化的幕後推手。總結此次生活科技的課程變革，仍是由上而下的威權建構形式，並未彰顯解構威權與挑戰菁英的草根改革。臺灣科技教育仍移植美國模式與知識建構的威權運作，缺少自己的本質與主動性。英文摘要：This research examined the formation of official knowledge through textbook politics, which transformed curriculum guidelines into curriculum texts. In order to clarify the micro-politics of different interest groups hidden behind policy formation, this research employed multiple methods to examine what the new curriculum guidelines of high school Living Technology meant to different interest groups. The methods included individual interviews with 8 textbook writers and managers from 4 major publishers, document analyses of 55 textbook reviews by the National Institute for Compilation and Translation (NICT), and telephone surveys of textbook feedback from 209 high schools across Taiwan. The goal was to shed light on the politics of textbook writing, reviewing, and selection. The research data indicated that the system of textbook writing, reviewing, and selection was shaped by both extra-institutional forces, such as those from legislators and private industries, and institutional forces, such as those from textbook policies, NICT, publishers, schools, experts, and teachers. Under the influence of several political factors, however, experts, scholars, and publishers bowed to extra-institutional forces, which in the end relegated school teachers to an invisible and marginalized force behind the formation of Living Technology. In conclusion, the current Living Technology curriculum reform still embodied a top-down mode of power construction and did not demonstrate the bottom-up plans to deconstruct authority and challenge those at the top. In Taiwan, technology education remained a reproduced version of its American counterpart, in which knowledge construction was operated in an authoritative way. Subjectivity and spontaneity were still missing from Taiwanese technology education.起始頁-結束頁：109-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012060043篇名：大學生就業力發展之縱貫性分析並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study on the Employment Competency Development of University Students作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao);涂志賢(Chih-Hsien Tu)關鍵字：縱貫性研究;臺灣高等教育整合資料庫;就業力;多層次分析;longitudinal survey;TIPED;employability;multi-level analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在瞭解大學生就業力的成長情形及其相關影響因素，利用臺灣高等教育整合資料庫的四波調查，應用二層次的階層線性模式分析，研究10,899位大學生就業力的初始狀態及成長曲率。研究結果發現，大學生整體的就業力存在個體間的差異，且成長曲線呈現上升的趨勢。在大學生就業力得分的全體變異量中，來自個體間的變異量占37%，而成長速率的變異中有24.32%來自於時間變項的解釋；同時，本研究所討論的層次二變項所能削減的成長曲率變異數比例僅有1.69%。除此之外，女大學生、社團參與程度高者、有工讀經驗以及技職學生的就業力成長曲率也較高。針對上述結果，本研究提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to explore the relationship between the employment competency growth of university students and the relevant influencing factors. Based on a four-wave survey of the Higher Education Database, this study applied a two level HLM analysis to study the initial status and growth curvature of the employment competency of 10,899 university students. The research results show that, in general, there are inter-individual differences in the employment competency of university students, and that the growth curvature shows a rising trend. With regard to the overall variance in employment competency scores of university students, the variance from inter-individual factors accounted for 37%, while time variables explain for the 24.32% of the variance in the growth speed. The Level-two variable discussed in this study, furthermore, only contributed to 1.69% of the reduced growth curvature variance. In addition, a higher growth rate was also noticed from female university students, as well as students with higher participation in student-club activities, part-time work experience or previous learning experience in vocational schools. Based on the above research results, the researcher has provided relevant opinions and recommendations.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012030014篇名：Benner改革教育學之探究並列篇名：A Study on Dietrich Benner's Reform Pedagogy作者：梁福鎮(Fu-Chen Frank Liang)關鍵字：Benner;改革教育學;常規教育學;Dietrich Benner;reform pedagogy;normal pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究採用教育詮釋學的方法，探討Benner改革教育學的思想淵源、主要內涵、優劣得失，以及重要啟示。Benner深受Rousseau教育學思想、Kant批判哲學、Herbart普通教育學、Humboldt語言哲學、Hegel辯證哲學、Schleiermacher教育理論、Fink存在現象學、Derbolav實踐學和Kuhn科學哲學的影響，注重改革教育學與常規教育學的關係、教育學與政治學的關係、改革教育學歷史撰寫的形式、現代教育學在德國的發展、西方占領區和西德的國家學校改革及學校實驗等問題的探究，具有擴大改革教育學的探討範圍、轉變改革教育學的撰寫方式、澄清改革教育學的核心關係、充實改革教育學的實質內涵，以及指出教育改革運動的優劣得失等優點。儘管Benner改革教育學存在著一些問題，但是，仍然可以做為我國建構教育改革理論和進行教育改革活動的參考，在學術研究和教育實務上，值得我們加以重視。英文摘要：This study explored the thinking background and major contents of Benner's reform pedagogy and analyzed its advantages, disadvantages, and significant implications through the methodology of educational hermeneutics. Dietrich Benner was deeply influenced by the thinking of various ideologists including Rousseau's pedagogy, Kant's criticism, Herbart's general pedagogy, Humboldt's linguistic philosophy, Hegel's dialectics, Schleiermacher's educational theories, Fink's existential phenomenology, Derbolav's praxeology, and Kuhn's philosophy of science. His research focused on the correlation between the reform pedagogy and the traditional pedagogy, and between pedagogy and political science, as well as the style of history-writing for the reform pedagogy, the development of modern pedagogy in Germany, the reform and educational experiment in national schools in Allied-occupied and West Germany, etc. His research has contributed to the expanded study of reform pedagogy, facilitated changes in its writing style, clarified its core relations, enriched its contents, and highlighted the advantages and shortcomings of this initiative. Benner's reform pedagogy is not without its defeces, but it offers worthwhile information in terms of both academic research and educational practice, when we endeavor to construct theories or design activities for educational reform in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：39-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012030025篇名：德國師資培育兩階段學位學程發展之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Two-Stage Diploma Program in Germany for Developing Teaching Professionals作者：張炳煌(Ping-Huang Chang)關鍵字：德國師資培育;師資培育學程;Bologna進程;課程模式;teacher education in Germany;teacher education program;Bologna process;curricular model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:1期出版年：2012中文摘要：Bologna進程帶動德國高等教育學位制度的改革，也牽動德國師資培育制度的變革。德國師資培育制度由傳統以國家考試為畢業資格的單一階段學程架構，轉而區分為學士階段與碩士階段的學程架構。本研究旨在探討德國師資培育兩階段學位學程的引進，闡述其制度架構與改革進展，並透過官方政策文件與相關研究文獻，分析改革議題的討論。本研究總結德國師資培育兩階段學位學程改革的特點為：普遍採用整合性學程模式、結合高等教育與師資培育的雙重改革、呈現傳統與創新並存的風貌，以及多元課程模式的增生，最後根據研究結論提出對於臺灣師資培育改革之建議。英文摘要：The Bologna Process has led to the reform of the higher education diploma system in Germany, which in turn triggered changes in the country's teacher-development system. The two-stage diploma program (bachelor and master programs) has replaced the traditional one-stage structure, where a national qualification test was used as the single criteria for the teacher-development system. The purpose of this research was to explore the introduction process of the two-stage diploma program and explain its system structure and reformative progress. An analysis on the relevant reformative issues was also conducted by studying the official policy documents and relevant research papers. In sum, the two-stage diploma program in Germany is characterized by the extensive adoption of an integrated program model, while in the meantime enforcing a two-fold reform in both the higher education and the teacher-development system. This approach allowed the co-existence of traditional and new systems, leading to increased and diversified course models. According to the above results, the researcher made some suggestions about the reform of the teacher-development system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：71-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/102887082012030036篇名：德國文化教育學在日治時期臺灣的傳播與發展（1920－1940）並列篇名：The Development and Interpretation of Cultural Pedagogy of Germany during Japanese Colonial Period in Taiwan (1920-1940)作者：祝若穎(Jo-Ying Chu)關鍵字：日治時期;文化教育學;Spranger;教育思想;Japanese colonial period;cultural pedagogy (Kulturpadagogik);E. Spranger;educational discipline期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：58:1期出版年：2012中文摘要：觀看臺灣教育思想的發展，1920年代是劃時代的時期，社會狀態處於近代化的萌芽期，對於外來思想採取開放積極的態度。本研究以德國文化教育學為主軸，分析1920至1940年《臺灣教育》、《臺灣》等期刊，發現該學派當時已出現相關的專論，歸納引進臺灣的理論，包括重視文化價值之傳承與六項類型、強調體驗與共鳴之內涵、對臺灣同化主義之批判、教育愛之理論系統化與著重思考教育之本質。從該學派傳入臺灣之變化來看，偏向高階知識學院化、較少出現變質的軍國式文化教育學說，且未出現確切的教學法。受到戰爭爆發的影響，其學說漸趨沒落，並與戰後的教育思想之間存在無延續性的斷裂。然因該學說曾出現於臺灣，是以，我們必須正視由日本、中國、臺灣學者引進的西方教育思想，才能使現今的臺灣開出更璀璨多元的教育學術花朵。英文摘要：The 1920s was a milestone in the development of pedagogical thought in Taiwan, when society was in its early stage of modernization and was open and positive toward foreign ideas. This study focused on the exploration of the German Kulturpadagogik and analyzed various periodicals from 1920 to 1940, including Taiwan Education Review and Taiwan, etc. It was found that there had been relevant discussions on this sect during that period, and the relevant theories introduced to Taiwan were summarized below: the emphasis on the inheritance of cultural values and the six related types, the importance of experience and sympathy for education, the criticism of the Assimilation theory in Taiwan, systemized theories on educational love, and the increasing thinking on the essence of education. In terms of the changes that occurred when such theories were introduced to Taiwan, they were mostly applied as a high-level knowledge basis for academic research. There was no significant evidence suggesting the distorted militarism-based theories on cultural education. There had not been any clearly-defined teaching methodology developed, either. The outbreak of World War II led to the gradual fading of the theories, as well as a non-continuous disruption between them and post-war educational theories. Notwithstanding these facts, we must bear in mind that the German Kulturpadagogik was introduced to Taiwan. To create a more diverse and productive environment for educational research in Taiwan, we must pay sufficient respect and attention to the western educational theories introduced by scholars from Japan, China, and Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：105-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820120300401篇名：大專校院學生進行教師教學評鑑之干擾因素研究並列篇名：The Disturbing Factors of College Teacher Evaluation: Exploring It from Students' Perspective作者：陳麗如(Li-Ju Chen)關鍵字：大專;教師評鑑;教學評鑑;評鑑干擾;評鑑偏差;學生評鑑;college;evaluation bias;evaluation disturbance;students evaluation;teacher evaluation;teaching evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：我國大專校院學生進行教師教學評鑑之制度自1980年代即開始執行，然而其評鑑工作之信效度受到諸多質疑。本研究從學生自省探討在填寫教師教學意見調查表時，所存在可能影響準確度的干擾因素，以自編之「教師教學評鑑資料填寫態度問卷」為工具，取得來自臺灣北中南東34所學校，共1128位大專學生樣本資料，探討其對教師教學評鑑時可能影響準確度之干擾現象，進而了解其中對干擾因素之預測變項。結果發現大專學生進行教師教學評鑑受到的干擾情形並不高，但比較之下仍依學生不同背景條件而在部份干擾因素上有不同的評鑑干擾情形，且某些變項對於評鑑干擾仍具預測現象。本研究最後提出教師教學評鑑工作之建議，以做為各大專校院教學資源中心相關單位規劃教師教學評鑑工作及應用學生進行教師教學評鑑結果之參考。英文摘要：Evaluation of teacher' teaching performance by students in Taiwan began in 1980s. But the reliability and validity of evaluation have been doubted. This study was to explore the existing disturbing factors of teacher evaluation in colleges. The participants included 1128 college students of 34 colleges from Taiwan. It was found that: (1) The involvement of disturbing factors was not as high as expected. (2) There were some variables which significantly increased the evaluation disturbance. (3) There were some variables which strongly predict the evaluation disturbance. Findings indicate implications for practice and further studies on teacher evaluation.起始頁-結束頁：91-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).00042篇名：教育、經濟發展與政治民主之關聯研究：跨時間數列的探索並列篇名：Test of the Relationships among the Educational, Economic Development and Political Democracy: Time Series Exploration作者：張芳全(Fang-Chung Chang)關鍵字：教育發展;經濟發展;政治民主;現代化理論;人力資本理論;educational development;economic development;political democracy;modernization theory;human capital theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：基於現代化理論及人力資本理論，本研究旨在瞭解各國教育發展（初等教育與中等教育在學率）、經濟發展（包括國民所得與都市化程度）與政治民主（包含政權指數、民權指數與新聞自由）之關聯性。本研究建立理論模式，納入分析的國家有145個，透過結構方程式模式分析，獲得結論如下：各國教育發展對政治民主，以及各國政治民主對教育發展都有正向顯著影響，而各國經濟發展對於政治民主則沒有明顯影響。上述代表了各國教育擴充有益於政治民主提升，而政治民主也對於教育擴充有正面助益，經濟發展則否。最後，OECD國家的教育在學率、國民所得、都市化程度、政治民主化的程度高於非OECD國家；而非洲國家在上述的發展變項均明顯低於各地理區，而以歐洲國家的表現最好。英文摘要：Based on the modernization theory and human capital theory, the purpose of this study is to explore the relationships between the educational development (e.g. the enrollment ratio of primary education, the enrollment ratio of secondary education), economic development (e.g. per capital income, urbanization), and political democracy ( e.g. political index, civil liberty, media freedom). Data are gathered from 145 countries. Relationship model was tested using the Structural Equation Modeling (SEM). Results show that there exist a positive significant relationship between educational development and political democracy. In addition, time-lag effects were also found between educational development and political democracy. However, economic development is found to have no influence on political democracy. Finally, results show that Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries performed significantly better than non- OECD nations with regards to their enrollment ratio of education, per capital income, urbanization, and political democracy. In particular, African countries performed the poorest, while European countries are ranked as the best in the world with regards to the above mentioned variables.起始頁-結束頁：123-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).00053篇名：大學經營文化創意產業園區關鍵成功因素之探討並列篇名：Key Success Factors in a University-Operated Cultural and Creative Park作者：黃美賢(Mei-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：文化創意產業園區;關鍵成功因素;文化創意產業;大學經營;層級分析法(AHP);cultural and creative industry park;key success factors;cultural and creative industries;university management;analytic hierarchy process (AHP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：文化創意產業為當今全球性熱門的重要經濟力，且常以產業群聚的文化創意產業園區為區域策略。園區的經營者，除政府外，也有以大學為經營主體。大學經營文化創意產業園區，具有人才及研發的優勢，但也有其身份及資源限制，究竟其關鍵成功因素為何?這是值得探究的課題。本研究旨在探討大學經營文化創意產業園區的關鍵成功因素。主要運用層級分析法（AHP），透過專家個別訪談與問卷調查，獲得結論如下：（一）大學經營文化創意產業園區的關鍵成功因素，含有管理行銷、產業聚落、學校投入、政府支持、及環境設施5個構面與31項指標。（二）歸納所有因素指標的重要程度，人才能力資源因素重要於資產資源因素。（三）5個構面中，以「管理行銷」構面最重要。（四）每一構面中最重要指標，相對為經營團隊能力、提供進駐廠商優惠、文化創意人才，協助園區土地取得、以及創意氛圍塑造。（五）經營團隊能力也為整體因素的最重要指標。最後，根據研究成果，本研究分別針對學校、政府、產業、後續研究者提出相關建議。英文摘要：The cultural and creative industry is vital to current global economic power. This industry is promoted through cultural and creative parks, often government-operated, although the parks are also operated by universities. A university-operated cultural and creative industrial park has the advantages of talent and R & D, but also has the constraints posed by its own identity and resources. The purpose of this article is to relate the success factors in a university-operated cultural and creative ark, derived from exploration, using the analytic hierarchy process (AHP), individual interview and expert questionnaires. The researcher provides five conclusions: 1.The key success factors in a university-operated cultural and creative park can be grouped into five categories - marketing management, industry cluster, university investments, government supports, and environmental facilities - and 31 assessment indicators. 2. Human capacity is more important than tangible assets. 3. Management and marketing are the most important of five key success factors. 4. The most important assessment indicators of each category are marketing management, industry cluster, university investments, government supports, and environmental facilities. 5. Management team capabilities are the No. 1 factor of all assessment indicators. Finally, the researcher also provides some suggestions for university, government, industry, and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：163-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).00064篇名：歐洲哥本哈根進程之探討及其啟示並列篇名：Discussion and Reflection on the Copenhagen Process in Europe作者：于承平(Cheng-Ping Yu);林俞均(Yu-Jun Lin)關鍵字：終身學習;職業教育與訓練;哥本哈根進程;品質保證;lifelong learning;vocational education and training;Copenhagen process;quality assurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文採文獻分析及文件分析法探討分析歐盟哥本哈根進程所獲致成果，其基於職業教育與訓練為基礎發展歐洲公民終身學習歷程，藉此強化各國間更緊密的合作關係，並就研究分析結果提出四點精進策略，包括一、建立非正規及非正式之終身學習成就認證機制；二、發展生涯歷程檔案為終身學習護照；三、積極建構產業所需人才之國家資歷架構；四、品質保證機制融入職業教育與訓練。除上述建議外，政府機關及學術機構更應破除本位主義，積極合作，並融入社會文化發展系絡，推展符合我國國情所需職業教育與訓練為基礎之終身教育與訓練政策，以期在既有優良之基礎下，發展創新的教育與訓練策略。英文摘要：The article through literature review and document analysis method explores the EU Copenhagen process - the process of lifelong learning vocational education and training, strengthening of closer cooperative relations among nations. According to the four points aggressive strategy, a non-formal and informal lifelong learning achievements recognition mechanism, the development of career portfolios for lifelong learning passport, actively building industry and required personnel for the National Qualifications Framework and blending quality assurance mechanisms into vocational education and training are discussed. In addition to the above proposal, selfishness should be eliminated from government agencies and academic institutions, active cooperation, and integration into the social and cultural development context should be promoted, to take forward in line with Taiwan's national conditions required for vocational education and training based life-long education and training policy, in order to achieve excellent basis for the development of both innovative education and training strategy.起始頁-結束頁：199-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201209_8(3).00075篇名：國際人權教材之比較分析研究並列篇名：A Study of Comparative Analysis of International Human Rights Teaching Materials作者：洪如玉(Ruyu Hung);鄭惠觀(Huey-Guan Cheng)關鍵字：人權教育;人權課程;人權教學;世界人權宣言（UDHR）;human rights education;human rights curriculum;teaching and learning for human rights;Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：人權教育是當代世界各國所重視的教育目標之一，也是我國教育要努力的目標之一，然我國對於人權教育之推動尚在起步階段，必須藉助其它推動人權教育以及發展人權教材具有長久歷史國家的經驗。基於上述，本文目的在於透過對於不同國家人權教材的比較與分析，探討建構人權教材之適切架構，作為我國教育工作者發展在地性課程與教學實踐之參考。本文採取之研究方法為文件分析與內容分析，研究取向為比較批判，針對國外七份人權教材進行分析、批判與比較，本研究發現在於歸納出五點學習人權的重要因素：一、家長在人權教育推動中佔重要地位；二、區域性獨特歷史地理因素；三、少數族群的人權問題與教育；四、人權的普遍價值與內涵；五、多元化的教學方式。根據前述，本文在結論提出下述四點建議作為我國發展人權教材之參考：一、人權教育教材應具全球化視野；二、人權教育課程應納入當代人權議題；三、發展在地人權教育教材與課程應注意本土人權問題的地理歷史脈絡因素；四、人權教學之方式應多元化。英文摘要：Human rights education is one of the issues receiving much attention around the world as well as in Taiwan. As Taiwan is at the beginning stage of implementing human rights education in schools, it is necessary for us to learn from theorists and practitioners in other countries where human rights education has been implemented for a longer time. Hence, this article aims to conduct a comparative study on international human rights materials. The results may help the practitioners to develop their own teaching materials on human rights. Methods used in this study are the Content Analysis and Literature Analysis. This paper adopts international comparative and critical approach. Overall, the findings can be summarized as follows: 1. parents play an important role in human rights education; 2. the specific historical and geographical factors are decisive in human rights education; 3. the minority rights are significant in human rights education; 4. there are universal values and concepts in human rights education; and 5. the implementation of human rights education does not depend on acquisition of knowledge. In the final section, the authors make suggestions based on the above findings: 1. development of human rights curriculum should include global perspective; 2. contemporary human rights issues should be included as parts of curriculum; 3. historical and geographical contextual elements should be considered in the process of developing curriculum; and 4. means, instruments, and methods of teaching and learning human rights should be diverse.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).00016篇名：教科書中美好生活概念之分析：以國小國語課文主角人物為例並列篇名：The Concept of Good Life in Mandarin Chinese Textbooks: Content Analysis Based on Main Characters作者：梁雲霞(Yun-Hsia Liang);陳彥芮(Yen-Jui Chen);徐超聖(Chao-Sheng Hsu)關鍵字：教科書;內容分析;美好生活;textbook;content analysis;good life期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小國語教科書中主角人物所呈現的美好生活概念之內涵。本研究選取康軒、翰林、南一三個版本國語教科書中的主角人物，並以心理學家King的研究架構為基礎，發展出「美好生活概念類目表」，以分析國語教科書主角人物所展現的美好生活要素。本研究發現：在國語課文中，透過主角人物的描述，呈現的美好生活要素以「意義」與「快樂」出現比率最高，「努力」、「工作成就感」和「人際滿足感」次之，「金錢」則是最低。其次，教科書中對主角人物的描述也偏重在「重視滿足」、「實現目標」、「淡泊名利」、「勤奮不懈」、「獲得重要專業成就」、「重視社會公眾」的層面，顯示出積極正向、道德至善的美好生活觀，但在多元價值和真實生活上的連繫上較薄弱。根據本研究結果提出建議做為國語教科書編輯者、教學現場教師與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to analyze the concept of good life presented by the main characters in Mandarin Chinese textbooks. Based on King's research framework on good life, this study developed a coding scheme as a tool to conduct analysis on textbooks. The main results of this study included: (1) The most prevalent elements of good life found from the description of main characters in textbooks were meaning and happiness, followed by effort, work fulfillment and relationship fulfillment. Money was significantly underrepresented among all the elements of good life. (2) Textbooks tended to emphasize good life with gratification, realization of the goal, hard work, having significant professional achievement and commitment to the society, but paid less attention to money (3) Overall, textbooks showed an inclination to highly positive stand and moral concerns regarding to presenting idea of good life to young learners, resulting in a weak connection of these diverse values with daily life. Finally, based on the findings, suggestions were proposed to textbook editors, school teachers and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：31-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).00027篇名：文化創意世代中美感教育的課程圖像並列篇名：The Curriculum Implication and Development of Aesthetic Education in the Cultural Creativity Era作者：洪詠善(Yung-Shan Hung)關鍵字：文化創意;美感教育;課程圖像;cultural creativity;aesthetic education;curriculum implication;curriculum development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以臺灣於2010年1月立法院三讀通過文化創意產業發展法為背景，探討文化創意世代中美感教育的意涵，及如何透過美感教育促成文化創意之發展。首先，分析當前文化創意產業中學校實施美感教育的問題；其次從字源義、西方美學思想發展、及美感教育之演變歷程，並提出當前臺灣文化創意產業與美感教育之相輔關係。最後，從主要美感教育課程論述與Schwab的課程四共同要素歸納美感教育的課程圖像，並提出身體課程、遊戲精神與文化行動實踐路徑，作為文化創意世代中美感教育課程建構與實施之參考。英文摘要：In accordance with the Act of Cultural Creativity Industry legislated in January, 2010, the paper is to explore its curriculum implication and development of aesthetic education in the cultural creativity era. At first, the paper analyzes the problems of aesthetic education in the current policy of cultural creativity industry. Secondly, it explores the research and practice of aesthetic education in Taiwan, especially by its literal implication and from the progressing development of aesthetics and aesthetic education in the West. Then the paper discusses the co-relationship between cultural creativity industry and aesthetic education. At last, based on the commonplace of Schwab-teachers, students, materials, and environments, soma-curriculum, play, and cultural action are proposed for the reference of curriculum praxis of aesthetic education in cultural creativity era.起始頁-結束頁：61-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).00038篇名：國中學生線上閱讀素養發展現況調查並列篇名：The Survey of Junior High School Students Online Reading Literacy作者：張貴琳(Kuei-Lin Chang)關鍵字：閱讀素養;ICT;線上閱讀素養;Rasch模式;數位典藏;reading literacy;ICT;online reading literacy;Rasch model;digital archive resource期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究兼顧閱讀素養構念和資訊與通訊科技（ICT）媒介特色，發展國中學生線上閱讀素養評量工具，同時描述國中學生的線上閱讀素養發展現況。線上閱讀素養評量以PISA電子閱讀評量架構為主要依據，評量素材取自數位典藏資源，測驗系統架構在WWW平台，虛擬線上閱讀環境。研究中以臺南市地區601位國中二年級學生為常模樣本，使用Rasch試題反應模式進行題目參數估計與受試者量尺分數估計，並以描述統計呈現全體學生的線上閱讀素養表現概況。結果顯示：（1）線上閱讀素養評量工具的難度適中，呈現良好的幅合與區別效度。（2）全體國二學生的線上閱讀素養表現中等，多數學生達水準3，能擷取單一網頁的明確資訊、跨數個網頁擷取一到多個資訊、整合數個指定網頁的明確資訊或搜尋問題關連的網頁，評鑑線上資訊的表現相對較不理想。未來研究宜擴充評量題庫，以提供更精確的測量，同時針對導航表現進行計分，釐清線上閱讀素養的導航內涵。加強青少年線上文本資訊的批判素養將是提升線上閱讀素養表現的重要方向。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop an online reading literacy assessment by adopting construct of reading literacy and information and communication technology, and to portrait junior high school students' online reading literacy performance. The online reading literacy assessment is based on the PISA electronic reading assessment framework, questions containing two units from digital archive resource that are placed on the Internet. A total of 601 second graders of junior high school in Tainan City participated in this study. This study uses Rasch IRT model to calibrate the item parameter and scale scores. Descriptive statistics analysis is also used to present the online reading performance. The results indicated: (1) online reading literacy assessments had adequate difficulty level, reasonable convergent, and discriminant validity; (2) majority of students' proficiency falls into level 3. Future studies may broaden the item bank of online reading literacy assessment and provide the navigation scoring. Promoting adolescents' critical literacy of online reading is an important aspect for improving their online reading performance.起始頁-結束頁：87-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).00049篇名：九年一貫課程脈絡底下之教師角色論述形構，1994-2005：Foucault的論述分析觀點並列篇名：The Discursive Formation of Teachers' Role in Grade 1-9 Curriculum, 1994-2005: Foucault's Discourse Analysis作者：陳俞余(Yu-Yu Chen)關鍵字：九年一貫;教師角色論述;論述形構;Grade 1-9 Curriculum;the discourse of teacher's role;discursive formation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以九年一貫課程革新教師角色為題之書籍、期刊、論文與研究報告為文本，運用Foucault的論述形構尋找九年一貫教師角色論述的形成。構繪九年一貫課程革新脈絡底下的教師角色論述，筆者以教改聲浪期間、九年一貫課程試辦、學者詮釋下的教師角色三部份來進行，描繪九年一貫革新課程的教師角色論述形構歷程，針對學者詮釋下的教師角色匯整出四種教師角色聲明，探究不同教師角色聲明所形成的網絡關係。筆者發現，聲明的各自表述與相互引用，促使教師角色聲明得以消長，而九年一貫新課程底下的教師角色被以專業表述，塑造應邁向教師專業自主發展的角色論述。在闡釋九年一貫課程教師角色知識的歷程裡，政治與學術成了教師角色論述形構的重要推手。最後，筆者將從政策推動與實施層面，理解九年一貫課程革新底下的教師角色論述，討論四散的角色聲明呈顯之意義。英文摘要：This paper employed the concept of Michel Foucault's discursive formation introduced in his book The Archaeology of Knowledge to analyze the teachers' role in Grade 1-9 Curriculum reform. From the concept of Foucault's discourse, the object of discourse analysis and the position of subject are analyzed to discover how discourse of teachers' role in Grade 1-9 Curriculum was formed and transformed. Texts collected for discourse analysis included: books, academic journal papers, theses & dissertations, research papers et cetera, which used the teachers' role of Grade 1-9 Curriculum as the theme since 1994-2005. Three parts show the discursive formation of teachers' role in Grade 1-9 Curriculum: the wave of the education reform, the new Grade 1-9 Curriculum, and scholars' statements of teachers' role. By explaining the concepts of Grade 1-9 Curriculum, the academic community takes the important position in the discourse of teacher's role. There are four main statements in the discourse of teachers' role. Moreover, the teacher of Grade 1-9 Curriculum is enunciated by professional images. This paper discusses the discourse of teachers' role under the new Grade 1-9 curriculum from the point of view of curriculum promotion and implementation.起始頁-結束頁：119-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).000510篇名：造成原漢族群高中入學考試基測成績不同之影響機制：以臺東縣國三生為例並列篇名：The Causal Mechanism of Different BCT Results between Aborigines and Hans: The Case of Ninth Graders in Taitung County作者：林慧敏(Hui-Min Lin)關鍵字：原漢族群;基測成績;精緻文化;不利文化風格;學科補習;aborigines and Hans;BCT (Basic Competence Test);refined culture;disadvantageous cultural style;cramming期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：國內探討學生家庭背景透過中介變項對教育成就影響的研究很多，不過探討原漢族群學生家庭背景透過中介變項對基測成績影響的研究則較少。本研究選擇臺灣地區基測成績最差，社經背景最低落，且原住民比率最高的臺東縣國中學生為對象，探討族群家庭背景透過各項資本對基測成績影響的因果機制。研究結果發現，臺東縣原住民學生平均基測成績總分較漢人低45.29分，其中的32.35分可歸因於原住民學生家庭背景較漢人低之外，還擁有較多的「不利嗜好」、較低的「父母學歷期望」、較少的「學科補習」也是原因。此外也發現，臺東縣國中生擁有「精緻文化」對提高基測成績有利，不過「父母指導電腦」對基測成績不利；學生擁有「不利文化風格」會對基測成績有不利影響。英文摘要：There were many previous studies investigating the influence of student family background on student academic achievement through intervening variables in Taiwan. However, only a few studies examined the influences of aboriginal and Han family background on BCT scores through intervening variables. This research, hence, chose junior high school students in Taitung County as study subjects to investigate the causal mechanism of family background influencing BCT results through intervening variables. By comparison with other regions in Taiwan, students in Taitung have the lowest BCT scores and relatively low socioeconomic status while there is highest proportion of aboriginal students among them. The analysis shows: the average BCT result of aboriginal students is 45.29 points lower than the BCT result of Hans. 32.35 points could be explained by the poorer family background of aboriginal students. In addition, having more disadvantageous hobbies, lower parental expectation towards students' educational achievement, and lower enrollment rates in cram schools also account for their poorer BCT results. Besides, refined culture helps junior high school students in Taiwan to perform better in BCT. Nevertheless, parental instruction on computer has negative impact on BCT results. Disadvantageous cultural style also has negative influence on BCT results.起始頁-結束頁：151-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).000601篇名：以事件相關腦電位探討二維和三維圖形辨識之研究並列篇名：Using ERPs to Investigate Two-Dimensional and Three-Dimensional Image Recognition作者：劉寶元(Bao-Yuan Liu);劉嘉茹(Chia-Ju Liu)關鍵字：二維圖形;三維圖形;事件相關腦電位;圖形辨識;two-dimensional images;three-dimensional images;event-related potentials;image recognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在以事件相關腦電位探討二維與三維圖形辨識作業的腦機制，以瞭解不同維度的圖形辨識中大腦運作的異同。研究分別以二維和三維圖形設計任務刺激進行實驗，並同步蒐集受試者之腦波進行離線分析。研究對象為20位自願參加的高中職學生。研究結果發現，二維圖形的答對率優於三維圖形，反應時間也比三維圖形短；二維與三維圖形在中線區的N1振幅和P300振幅有差異；在枕顳區的P1振幅與潛伏期有差異。因此，研究推論由視網膜傳遞不同維度的視覺訊息在視知覺的成分上已經有差異，三維圖形在視網膜上不僅只是投射二維的視覺訊息，而是有更多的視覺訊息誘發大腦的運作。本研究提供圖形辨識歷程神經生理的證據。英文摘要：Debates and arguments about the differences and similarities between two-dimensional and three-dimensional image recognition have long existed. This study aims at using event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the mechanisms of human brains and the differences and similarities of brain functions when the operation of two-dimensional and three-dimensional image recognition is triggered. The experiment for this study was practiced by performing ERP tasks designed separately by using two-dimensional and three-dimensional images. Simultaneously, off-line analyses of collected brain-wave data of the experimental subjects were performed. The subjects in the experiment were 20 volunteer senior high school and vocational school students. The results of this study suggest significant differences between the amplitude from N1 and P300 in the central midline sites and from P1 in the occipitotemporal cortex while two-dimensional and three-dimensional images were displayed to the subjects. Therefore, the researchers in this study infer that because the visual sense elements of the different dimensional visual messages passed from the retina are dissimilar, what the retina receives are not simply two-dimensional visual messages projected by three-dimensional images; there is even more visual information to stimulate the cortex. Therefore, this study provides evidence of neurophysiology to confirm image recognition.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學2篇名：高中數理能力優異班學生與普通班學生大腦結構及性別差異之研究並列篇名：Sex Differences in Brain Structure between Students Talented in Math and Science and Developed Peers作者：郭靜姿(Ching-Chih Kuo);林慶波(Ching-Po Lin);張馨仁(Hsin-Jen Chang);周坤賢(Kun-Hsien Chou);曾琦芬(Christine Chi-Fen Tseng);張玉佩(Yu-Pei Chang);林燁虹(Yeh-Hong Lin)關鍵字：灰質容積;性別差異;磁振造影;數理能力優異;gray matter volume;sex difference;magnetic resonance imaging (MRI);talent in math and science期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究參與者包括36位高中數理能力優異學生（16男，20女）及37 位普通學生（20男，17女）。研究工具含：「高中學校能力測驗」、「國中基測成績」與「磁振造影」（MRI）。MRI係以SPM的像素型態分析方法（VBM）進行統計。研究結果顯示：一、數優組與普通組在多個皮質區灰質容積有差異。數優組在IQ及數理能力相關的皮質區灰質容積高於普通組；而普通組在動作及高級感覺皮質區灰質容積高於數理能力優異組。二、性別在多個皮質區灰質容積有差異。男生組在計算能力相關、訊息連結、負面情緒記憶等皮質區灰質容積顯著高於女生組；而女生組在認知、高級感覺等皮質區灰質容積顯著高於男生組。三、綜合能力與性別的比較，研究者推估先天能力與後天學習都與大腦發展有關。英文摘要：In this study, we compare the sex differences in brain structure between math- and science-talented (MST) students and their typically developed (TD) peers, involving 36 MST (16 male and 20 female) and 37 TD (20 male and 17 female) students. The research instruments used in this study were the ”High School Intelligence Test,” the ”Basic Competence Test for Junior High School Students,” and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI data were processed with voxel-based morphometery (VBM) implemented in statistical parametric mapping (SPM). The results show that (1) MST students displayed larger gray matter volumes than TD students did in the cortical regions related to intelligence and math/science achievement scores; TD students showed larger gray matter volumes than MST students did in motor and somatosensory cortical regions; (2) Male students showed greater gray matter volumes than female students did in the cortical regions involved in mathematical tasks, information processing, and negative emotions; female students showed larger gray matter volumes than their male counterparts did in higher cognitive and somatosensory cortical regions; (3) The results of this study indicate that both innate and acquired abilities might affect brain development.起始頁-結束頁：25-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學3篇名：運動對孩童認知功能及學業表現的影響：文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：The Effect of Exercise on Cognitive and Academic Performance: A Review and Prospect作者：王駿濠(Chun-Hao Wang);張哲千(Che-Chien Chang);梁衍明(Yen-Ming Liang);邱文聲(Wen-Sheng Chiu);洪蘭(Daisy L. Hung);曾志朗(Ovid J. L. Tzeng);阮啟弘(Chi-Hung Juan)關鍵字：有氧適能;身體活動量;兒童;認知神經科學;學業表現;aerobic fitness;physical activity;children;cognitive neuroscience;academic performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，許多的科學證據均指出，運動或身體活動的參與確實能夠改善大腦及認知功能的表現。而此效益亦能從孩童的認知及學業上的表現觀察到。然而，隨著科技的進步及文明帶來的便利，使得孩童的身體活動日趨減少。重要的是，不活動的生活型態除了會造成孩童健康上的問題之外，更有研究發現，較低身體適能的孩童在認知或學業表現上也較差。因此，讓社會大眾瞭解運動對孩童的效益是有其重要性。有鑒於此，本研究回顧運動或身體活動對孩童課業表現的影響之相關文獻，並從認知神經科學的角度來探討其效益的神經生理機制，最後針對現今的研究發現剖析、整合並對未來研究提出可行的方向。研究者希望藉此呼籲臺灣教育學界與體育學界重視這些研究並提出未來重要的研究方向，更期待這些知識可對教育學界、體育學界及大眾健康上有實質的助益。英文摘要：An increasing number of studies have suggested that exercise is associated with improvements in cognitive and brain functioning, and this facilitating effect is also evident from observing cognitive and academic performance in children. However, with the advance and prevalence of science and technology in today's culture, children have become increasingly sedentary. Importantly, sedentary habits during childhood not only influences physical health but also cognitive and academic performance. Based on these findings, we review and discuss the associations between physical activity and exercise, as well as their effects on children's academic performance. We also review studies in the field of cognitive neuroscience to discuss the underlying neural mechanisms of the positive effects of physical exercise. We hope by doing so that this review would draw more attention to this topic from the fields of education and physical education and would generate ideas for future research. It is also our wish that this knowledge would provide practical benefits to the fields of education, physical education, and public health.起始頁-結束頁：65-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學4篇名：大學運動設施提供社區休閒服務績效評估之研究並列篇名：Performance Evaluation Indicators of Communalized Recreation Services for Public University Sports Facilities作者：廖尹華(Yin-Hua Liao);鄭志富(Chih-Fu Cheng)關鍵字：休閒服務;運動設施;模糊分析層級程序法;績效評估;recreation service;sports facilities;Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP);performance evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學運動設施提供社區休閒服務之績效評估，研究方法採問卷調查法，研究對象包括專家模糊權重分析、提供構面之大學體育室管理單位與使用構面之社區居民。首先以專家德爾菲法（Delphi Method）建構學校運動設施社區化休閒服務績效評估之指標類目，並經模糊分析層級程序法（Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process, FAHP）分析指標權重值，同時將指標類目編製成「大學運動設施社區化休閒服務績效評估研究問卷」，抽取32所公立大學校院，分別對「休閒服務提供構面」之管理單位大學體育室（有效問卷83份，回收率86.5%）與「休閒服務使用構面」之社區居民（有效問卷560份，回收率87.5%）進行調查。研究發現：一、本研究建構之指標類目在休閒服務提供構面共獲得六個主指標和二十三個次指標；另在休閒服務使用構面，共獲得五個主指標和十八個次指標。二、指標權重值經FAHP分析結果顯示：提供構面首重「設施安全管理」；使用構面則最注重「服務人員服務滿意情形」。三、經問卷調查所得，提供構面在休閒服務重要性認同度之指標排序與FAHP所獲之權重值排序相同，顯示管理單位之實務面與專家學者看法一致。使用構面則在「服務人員服務滿意情形」和FAHP所獲一致認為最重要，顯示消費者最在意被服務時的互動愉悅感受。四、使用構面在休閒服務評估項目之重要性認同度平均數皆高於實際的滿意度，顯示管理單位在休閒服務的提供仍有很大的改進空間以彌補期望落差。依此研究結論，提出運動休閒服務應重視設施之安全管理，提供專業服務人力以符合社區居民所需，提高服務滿意度並在體育專業服務上貢獻所長。英文摘要：This study shows the performance of communalized recreation services of sports facilities in public universities. Participants of this study were expert scholars, sports facility managers of athletic departments in public universities, and community residents. This study used the Delphi method for the literature review to categorize a series of systematic evaluation indicators. These indicators were further applied to develop an instrument. A questionnaire was distributed to the respondents, sports facility managers (recovery rate was 86.5%), and community residents (recovery rate was 87.5%) to evaluate the performance of recreation services in public universities. The instrument used in this study was developed using the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process Questionnaire (FAHP) for evaluating the performance of recreation services in university athletic departments. The results are described as follows: (1) We found 6 major and 23 minor indicators regarding services offered and identified 5 major and 18 minor indicators on recreation services usage; (2) Loading for each hierarchy showed that the security of facility management and community resident satisfaction were the most important factors; (3) The order of indicators for the importance of recreation services was the same as the order for FAHP. This finding shows that participant responses for the importance of recreation services in actual situations are consistent with theoretical situations; and (4) The response of participants on the importance of recreation services in usage is higher than user satisfaction; this shows that improvement in recreation services is still needed. These results suggest that university athletic departments should promote recreation services and focus on facility management security and professional development for personnel to improve recreation services.起始頁-結束頁：95-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學5篇名：心算教學活動實踐於小一數學課室之研究並列篇名：Mental Computation Activity Implementation into First-Grade Mathematics Classes作者：楊德清(Der-Ching Yang);黃瓊賢(Cyong-Slan Huang)關鍵字：心算;加減法問題;國小一年級;mental computation;addition and subtraction problems;first-grade期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究採質性研究法探討國小一年級學生進行心算教學活動之成效、策略改變情形及教學活動的實施歷程。研究樣本為實驗組學生21人，進行二位數加減一位數的心算策略教學。對照組學生16人，依照教科書規劃的方式進行二位數加減一位數的教學，兩班各進行12節課教學。研究結果顯示：教學後實驗組學生在心算之表現顯著優於對照組學生。同時，結果亦顯示教學後實驗組學生能夠發展多元之解題策略，如分離策略、集合策略，以及整體策略等。相反地，對照組學生在教學前、後，所使用之策略以數數策略、圖像與直式心像為主，改變較少，且少有心算策略的使用。教學過程中，藉由高分組學生的回答帶動中分組與低分組學生的思考，同時學生對於能夠上臺分享自己的策略感到興奮。最後根據研究結果，針對心算教學活動融入一年級數學課程及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study employs a qualitative approach to investigate the effect of mental computation activities integrated into first-grade mathematics classes. The mental computation activities, including 2-digit addition and subtraction problems, were used in an experimental group comprising 21 students. The control group comprised 16 students who were following textbook activities, including 2-digit addition and subtraction problems. The teaching intervention lasted for 12 periods for both groups. The results show that students in the experimental group experienced improved performance for mental computation than students in the control group following intervention. Additionally, data indicate that students in the experimental group can develop and use multiple mental strategies, such as separation, aggregation, and holistic strategies following intervention. Conversely, students in the control group preferred using counting and pictorial strategies, as well as images of written computation. Fewer mental strategies were used in the control group. During the instruction of mental computation, students' problem-solving ability in the mid- and low-level can be improved by high-level students' explanations. The teaching, learning, and curriculum design of mental computation, as well as directions for future studies, are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：125-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學6篇名：解析設計研究法的架構與實施：以科學教育研究為例並列篇名：Exploring the Framework and Implementation of the Design Research Method in Science Education作者：許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu);莊福泰(Fu-Tai Chuang);林祖強(Tzu-Chiang Lin)關鍵字：科學教育;教育研究法;設計研究法;science education;educational research;design research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，教育研究者著力於發展出可以應用在實務現場的理論，並倡議研究時系統性分析實務現場的研究資料，藉以建立教學設計和教育理論間的關聯，進而改進教學。因應上述的風潮，學者提出了設計研究法，此新興研究法的優點是能針對有理論基礎的設計進行深入研究，透過多次的循環歷程精緻化設計，進而修改原來的理論或發展原形理論。本文詳細介紹設計研究法的四大特性：一、經落實有理論基礎的設計於實務來檢視理論的適用性或提出原形理論；二、詳實紀錄研究歷程與系統中的互動情形；三、具有循環修正的歷程並彰顯修正過程的價值；四、運用系統性分析探討不同層次間的交互作用。再分析30篇發表於SSCI期刊科學教育相關的實徵論文來探索設計研究法的實施步驟，並輔以實例說明如何實施設計研究法。最後，進一步指出設計研究法與其他研究法的異同，以及應用設計研究法於教育研究上所面臨的一些限制，試圖釐清設計研究法的架構和具體的實施步驟，以作為未來檢視創新教學成效的另一種可以考慮採行的研究法。英文摘要：In recent years, educators have explored the relationships between instructional designs and educational theories by systematically analyzing research data to improve teaching quality. Therefore, the design research method was proposed to enable researchers to modify an original theory or develop a prototype theory by sophisticating the design of cyclic procedures through repeated trials. This study explicates the features of the design research method, such as (1) examining the appropriateness of theories or proposing prototype theories by implementing theory-based designs into practice; (2) maintaining records of the research process and within system interactions; (3) featuring and emphasizing the value of cyclic processes; and (4) systematically analyzing interactions between various levels. Using the 30 collected studies published in SSCI journals, this study explores the steps involved in implementing the design research method. Furthermore, this study also discusses the homogeneity and heterogeneity between the design research and other research methods and the limitations of applying the design research method to research in the educational field. By clarifying the characteristics and implementation procedures of the design research method, the possibility of applying the design research method to educational research for innovative designs is enhanced.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學7篇名：缺失資料在因素分析上的處理方法之研究並列篇名：Missing Data Techniques for Factor Analysis作者：王鴻龍(Hong-Long Wang);楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang);陳俊如(Chun-Ju Chen);林定香(Ting-Hsiang Lin)關鍵字：台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;缺失資料;探索式因素分析;蒙第卡羅－馬可夫鏈（MCMC）插補法;邏輯斯迴歸插補法;TEPS;missing data;exploratory factor analysis;MCMC imputation;logistic regression imputation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：因素分析常用來研究問卷及量表。當資料缺失過多或缺失機制為非完全隨機時，分析所得的共同因素個數或因素負荷常有偏差。本研究使用「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」，將其中的完整資料視為基準資料，並根據原有缺失結構，建構一至五倍缺失比率的資料集，以探討因素分析對缺失插補的敏感度。研究者比較了四種缺失處理法，包括：可用個體法、完整個體法、邏輯斯迴歸插補法與蒙第卡羅－馬可夫鏈（Monte Carlo Markov Chain, MCMC）插補法。結果顯示，缺失比率愈高時，所估計出來的變異數矩陣與基準資料的矩陣差異愈大。可用個體法在缺失比率較高時，萃取的共同因子的個數比基準資料多。在因素負荷上，可用個體法的誤差最嚴重，而完整個體法雖然和其他兩種插補法的誤差接近，不過會因缺失比率的增加與基準的誤差而隨之變大。研究者建議在缺失比率20%∼30%或以上時，使用邏輯斯迴歸插補法或是蒙第卡羅－馬可夫鏈插補法後再進行因素分析會有較小的誤差。英文摘要：Factor analysis is frequently employed to analyze scales and questionnaires. However, when the proportion of missing data is high or the missing data are not random, the number of factors extracted can be biased. We used the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS) and constructed 5 data sets with different missing proportions to assess the effects of missingness on factor analysis imputation. Complete observed data were used as a baseline for comparison. We compared the 4 treatments: available case method (AC), the complete case method (CC), MCMC single imputation (MCMC), and step-wise logistic regression single imputation (LR). The results show that the higher the missing proportion, the greater the discrepancy between the covariance matrix of the constructed data set and that of the baseline. For the AC method, the higher the proportion of missing data, the more the number of extracted factors exceeds that of the baseline. The AC method possessed the largest bias in factor loadings. The bias in factor loading of the CC method increased as the missing portion also increased. Thus, we recommend not applying the list-wise deletion method for factor analysis when the missing proportion is 20% or more.起始頁-結束頁：29-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學8篇名：重複觀測量數之分析多群體多變項線性成長模式的估計並列篇名：Data Analysis of Repeated Measures: Estimating a Multi-Group Multivariate Linear Growth Model作者：溫福星(Fur-Hsing Wen)關鍵字：多群體分析;追蹤資料;巢套;階層線性模式;線性成長模式;multi-group analysis;longitudinal data;nested;hierarchical linear modeling;linear growth model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究利用「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」的一般分析能力與數學分析能力的四波調查結果，配合男、女學生樣本進行多群體多條追蹤資料的線性成長模式估計。在考慮重複觀測資料誤差項在不同時點的變異數非同質與不同時點間的共變數非獨立情況下，以及男、女學生的不同成長軌跡，將誤差項結構設為無限制結構，利用虛擬變項交互項法與虛擬變項多樣本法同時估計不同性別、不同能力的線性成長軌跡變化。由於全部追蹤資料樣本存在遺失值的情形，本研究以階層線性模式（hierarchical linear modeling, HLM）軟體對完整資料2,806位學生進行分析，其估計結果發現，在完整資料的兩條成長軌跡模式中，男、女學生誤差項共變異數矩陣結構相同，但線性成長軌跡不恆等。除此之外，本文並對競爭模式比較的結果在文章最後進行討論並提出相關的建議。英文摘要：This paper demonstrates the data analysis of the repeated measures from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS). Based on the four data waves on the TEPS, we consider two abilities (general and mathematic) and two population groups (male and female students) to construct a multi-group multivariate linear growth model. Because the two-group multivariate repeated measures belong to the different populations and the different research variables, the residual terms of linear growth models may imply heterogeneity of the error covariance structure. We treat the error covariance structure as an unrestricted structure to compare the various types of models. The results from the HLM on the complete data (2,806 students) reveal that the male and female students in this study have the same error covariance structure but have distinct linear growth trajectories. In addition, comparisons of the competitive models and related suggestions are discussed in the results and conclusion sections.起始頁-結束頁：51-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學9篇名：非同步網路數學教學案例討論之互動歷程研究並列篇名：Communication of Elementary School Teachers in an Asynchronous Discussion Net Environment作者：陳彥廷(Yen-Ting Chen)關鍵字：非同步;教學案例;溝通模式;asynchronous;teaching case;communication pattern期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究結合教師自省與同儕互動之特質，並運用網路具互動性與豐富性之優點，布置一個以數學教學案例為主軸，供國小教師進行非同步線上討論的網路平臺，以探究7位國小教師在14週三次教學案例討論的互動過程中，所呈現的溝通模式與互動內涵。蒐集的資料為教師對三次教學案例所進行非同步網路討論的語料。研究主要發現如下：一、藉由非同步網路數學教學案例討論，教師的溝通模式逐漸從「不對稱的互動」走向「對稱的互動」；二、教師互動的內涵亦從「教學策略知識」朝向「數學知識」與「數學教學知識」發展。當教師間的互動型態朝向地位均等的「對稱的互動」方向邁進，他們所討論的內涵也會因不同成員平等的發言，而呈現更多元且豐富的樣貌。最後，本研究亦針對研究發現提出未來研究之相關建議。英文摘要：This study analyzes the communication processes of 7 elementary school teachers in an asynchronous discussion net environment. Content analysis was used to determine what communication patterns appeared and what teachers discussed. The results showed that: (1) teacher communication patterns changed from ”asymmetric interaction” to ”symmetric interaction”; (2) the discussion content of teachers changed from teaching strategy knowledge to mathematics content knowledge and mathematics pedagogical content knowledge. Finally, this study provides suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：79-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學10篇名：Two Self-Developed Mentoring Models for Mathematics Teaching in Taiwan並列篇名：臺灣兩個自行發展的數學教學輔導模式作者：鄭慧儒(Fui-Due Tee);金鈐(Chien Chin)關鍵字：實習教師;自行發展;高中數學;教師輔導;probationer;self-developed;senior high school mathematics;teacher mentoring期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在臺灣，教師輔導制度已經從1994年開始執行，但是，國內很多輔導教師似乎都沒有接受過訓練，所有的相關輔導模式都是自行發展的。由兩家學校所收集的資料，本文作者檢驗這兩家學校的數學教學輔導模式，並且將結果拿來和四個國際知名的模式相比較：學徒模式（apprenticeship）、能力本位模式（competence-based）、Anderson和Shannon（1988）的模式、Furlong和Maynard（1995）的模式，以及Jaworski 和Watson（1994）的聯合輔導理念（ideas of co-mentoring）。本研究採用個案研究與紮根理論並行的質化研究方法。研究結果顯示：這兩家學校的模式與上述四個知名模式有共通之處，不過，集體輔導的部分則離聯合輔導關係（co-mentoring relationship）理念尚遠。英文摘要：Since 1994, the teacher mentoring system in Taiwan has been compulsory; however, numerous teacher mentors remain untrained, and the related mentoring models are self-developed. Using data from two public senior high schools in Taiwan, this study investigates their mentoring models for mathematics teaching and compares them against four significant models, that is, apprenticeship mentoring model, competence-based mentoring model, Anderson and Shannon's (1988) mentoring model, and Furlong and Maynard's (1995) mentoring model, and with Jaworski and Watson's (1994) ideas of co-mentoring. This study employed a qualitative approach that combines a case study and grounded theory. The findings revealed that, without training, the two cases in this study include one-on-one mentoring and team mentoring. Both cases share a number of similarities with the four significant mentoring models; however, the team mentoring approach differs substantially from that of co-mentoring.起始頁-結束頁：113-144資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：「關係性自我概念量表」之發展與編製並列篇名：The Development of the Self-with-Significant-Others Scale作者：程景琳(Ching-Ling Cheng)關鍵字：青少年;重要他人;關係性自我;關係性自我概念量表;adolescents;relational self;self-with-significant-other scale;significant others期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以「關係性自我」理論為基礎，並根據臺灣本地研究對象之自我敘述內容，編製適用於青少年階段之「關係性自我概念量表」。本研究以325位國小高年級學生進行量表的預試，經由項目分析程序，確定出各有10題之五個分量表，以分別表示五種重要他人之關係脈絡（即母親、父親、手足、老師與好朋友）；全量表共有50題，以Likert五點方式填答。再以780位五、六年級學生為研究對象，進行本量表之信度與效度檢驗。在信度方面：全量表之內部一致性為 .94，各分量表之Cronbach's α介於 .81與 .93之間，間隔二週的重測信度在 .53與 .88之間。在效度方面：以「田納西自我概念量表」與「國小學童生活適應量表」檢驗本量表之效標關聯效度，以年級與性別進行差異考驗，並以探索性因素分析進行效度評估。研究結果顯示，本量表具有良好的信度與效度，可用以評估臺灣青少年之關係性自我概念。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop the Self-with-Significant-Others Scale (SWSOS) to measure the relational self of young adolescents at Taiwan. A total of 325 fifth and sixth graders participated in the pilot study. By means of item analysis procedure, five subscales - representing five types of significant relationships (i.e., mother, father, siblings, teacher, and best friend) where the self is involved-were selected to be included in the SWSOS. This measurement, with 10 items each in five subscales, is a self-report five-point Likert-type scale. Another sample of 780 students was used for examining the psychometric quality of the SWSOS. The internal consistency (Cronbach's α= .81-.93) and test-retest reliability (r = .53- .88) of the SWSOS are satisfactory. The procedures of concurrent validity and exploratory factor analyses were conducted to examine the construct validity of the SWSOS. The results indicated that the SWSOS with both good reliability and validity is qualified for assessing the relational self concept of young adolescents at Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：429-450資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201209.04292篇名：「國民小學教育人員情緒勞務量表」之發展與編製並列篇名：The Development of Emotional Labor Scales for Elementary School Teachers作者：李安明(An-Min Li);黃芳銘(Fang-Ming Hwang);呂晶晶(Ching-Ching Lu)關鍵字：國小教師;情緒勞務;情緒勞務量表;教育人員;紮根理論研究法;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;educators;elementary school teachers;emotional labor;emotional labor scale;grounded theory method期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在編製與發展「國民小學教育人員情緒勞務量表」，其採取「先質後量」的研究方法，第一階段經由文獻分析、發展訪談大綱與半結構式訪談之紮根理論研究，挖掘情緒勞務要素。第二階段量表經由專家意見審查之邏輯分析與Aiken（1980, 1985）的實證分析後，進行探索性因素分析與驗證性因素分析。情緒勞務量表包括了「學生焦點情緒勞務量表」與「工作焦點情緒勞務量表」兩部分。學生焦點情緒勞務由「表層演出」、「深層演出」以及「真情流露」三個潛在變項所組成，而工作焦點情緒勞務由「情緒勞務規範」與「情緒勞務多樣性」兩個潛在變項組成，其因素萃取、模式適配度、區別效度與聚合效度均良好。在信度方面，α係數及組合信度亦屬良好，所建構的「國民小學教育人員情緒勞務量表」符合信效度之檢定。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to construct and develop emotional labor scales for Elementary School Teachers by applying both qualitative and quantitative approaches. We have mainly applied the grounded theory method in the first stage of the study. This study is formed by involved literature reviews followed by development of the interview guide and semi-structured in-depth interviews. In the second stage of the study, the high reliability and validity of the questionnaires for the emotional labor scales of elementary school educators are achieved by first executing Aiken's two quantitative methods: content validity coefficient and homogeneity reliability coefficient, and then conducting alternative tests of exploring factor analysis and confirmation factor analysis.Emotional labor scales for Elementary School Educators can be divided into two parts which are respectively ”student-focused emotional labor” and ”job-focused emotional labor.” From the results of confirmatory factor analysis, ”student-focused emotional labor” is potentially composed of three factors which are respectively surface acting, deep acting, and genuine expression. For ”job-focused emotional labor”, it is composed of regulations of emotional displays and variety of emotional displays. The performance of variance factor extraction, model fitting validity, convergence validity, and discriminance validity are all accurate. In the reliability analysis, coefficient and composite reliability all behave accordingly. Based on these mentioned analyses, the constructed emotional labor scales for elementary school teachers fit with the modeling conducted in this study.起始頁-結束頁：451-486資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201209.04513篇名：階層多變項線性模式與其新應用：多群體階層線性模式並列篇名：The Hierarchical Multivariate Linear Modeling and Its New Application: Multi-Group Hierarchical Linear Modeling作者：溫福星(Fur-Hsing Wen)關鍵字：多群體階層線性模式;恆等性;階層多變項線性模式;階層線性模式;調節效果;equivalence;hierarchical linear modeling;hierarchical multivariate linear modeling;moderation;multi-group hierarchical linear modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在介紹階層多變項線性模式，與提出一個新的階層線性模式研究方法的概念：階層線性模式的多樣本分析多群體階層線性模式，利用階層線性模式中的階層多變項線性模式延伸應用在這新的研究領域。以階層多變項線性模式來處理多個結果變項的多層次模式，除了可以比較迴歸係數的差異比較外，尚可用來比較多群體階層線性模式中的結構係數，以達到不同以往交互作用的調節效果的迴歸係數恆等性比較。透過24家公司664位員工資料，利用組織創新氣氛為組織層次解釋變項，員工組織承諾、性別為個體層次解釋變項對三個結果變項工作滿意、公司績效與工作表現的影響外，亦以性別區分為兩個群體，進行組織創新氣氛、組織承諾對工作表現影響的多群體恆等性比較。最後討論階層多變項線性模式與多樣本分析在應用上的相關優勢與限制。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to provide a new research method and concept of the hierarchical linear modeling: multiple-samples analysis or MGHLM (multi-group hierarchical linear modeling). In this article, we introduce how to use the HMLM (hierarchical multivariate linear modeling) module of HLM software to analyze the multiple outcome variables in multilevel research and extend it to multiple-group HLM. Through the demonstration of innovation climate, organizational commitment, employees' gender and 3 outcome variables of 664 employees from 24 organizations, we can simultaneously estimate the within-group and between-group correlations among variables and compare their fixed effects. In addition, we separate the sample into male and female groups and use HMLM to do MGHLM and examine the invariance of hierarchical structure models. Finally, we conclude the advantages and limitations of HMLM and MGHLM.起始頁-結束頁：157-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201206.01574篇名：「學前兒童疑問句回應測驗」之編製並列篇名：The Development of Test of Wh-Question Response for Children作者：林方琳(Fang-Lin Lin);林月仙(Yueh-Hsien Lin)關鍵字：ROC曲線;疑問句;語言發展遲緩;學前兒童;children with language delays;preschool children;ROC curve;wh-question期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在編製一套用來評量學前兒童疑問句回應能力的測驗，並探討其信效度。以371名三至五歲兒童為研究對象，主要研究結果有五：（1）本測驗具有良好的內部一致性、重測信度、評分者間及評分者內信度；（2）受試者在本測驗之得分和「語詞表達測驗」（曾進興，1996）有中高度相關；（3）不同年齡組受試者在本測驗得分有顯著差異，五歲組優於四歲組，四歲組優於三歲組；（4）疑問詞屬性和有無圖片參照對學前兒童回應疑問句表現的影響有交互作用；（5）語言發展遲緩兒童在本測驗得分顯著低於一般兒童，並根據ROC曲線分析結果，提供三個年齡組篩選語言發展遲緩兒童的切截點。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a standardized test to assess the abilities to respond to wh-questions for preschool children. Three hundred and seventy-one children aged 3 to 5 participated in the study. The main results of the study are listed as follows. First, Test of Wh-Question Response (TWQR) was characterized with excellent internal consistency, retest reliability, inter-rater reliability, and intra-rater reliability. Second, the participants' scores on TWQR correlated well with scores on Word Expression Subtest (Tseng, 1996) of the General Test Battery of Children's Cognitive Abilities (Wu et al., 1997). Third, the scores on TWQR increased with age as expected. Fourth, there was a significant interaction effect between kinds of questions and presence of referent pictures. Finally, children with language delays performed less well than typically developing children on TWQR. In addition, we offered cutoff points for screening out children with language delays for three age groups.起始頁-結束頁：187-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201206.01875篇名：心理測驗工具應用在國中學生選習技藝教育課程之研究並列篇名：The Research of Applying Psychological Tests on Junior High School Students While Taking Technical Arts Program作者：徐昊杲(How-Gao Hsu);武曉霞(Hsiao-Hsia Wu);徐美鈴(Mei-Ling Hsu);羅珮瑜(Pei-Yu Lo);虞邦敏(Pang-Min Yu);楊惠娟(Hui-Chuan Yang)關鍵字：心理測驗;生涯發展教育;國中技藝教育學程;career development education;psychological tests;Technical Arts Program of junior high schools期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在了解國三學生選習技藝教育課程時，學校所使用心理測驗工具種類及探討心理測驗解釋結果與技藝教育課程中十三職群間的對應關係。研究結果除提供推薦輔導學生選擇職群依據外，且有效協助學生進行生涯試探，奠定生涯發展的基礎。本文以自編調查問卷，除對全國國民中學進行普查外，並召開專家會議與焦點團體會議進行測驗內涵與職群對應分析。獲致二項主要結論：（1）全國國三學生選讀技藝教育課程時，可參考三個主要心理測驗：「我喜歡做的事」、「國中生涯興趣量表」，以及「多因素性向測驗」；（2）根據三項主要心理測驗與國中技藝教育學程十三職群對應的解釋，學校可推薦輔導學生選擇職群時的主要參據。英文摘要：The objective of this study was not only to discover psychological test tools but also to discover the relationships between 13 groups of Technical Arts program and test results which are applied by school counselors. The result showed that it effectively processed career exploration and established the base of career development. By mining the census questionnaire of national wide junior high schools, the expert discussion conference and focus group data, it analyzed how the 13 groups correspond to test contents. The data could support the results of the study which were listed as follows: (1) While students took Technical Arts program, they consult 3 primary psychological tests. (2) Based on evaluations of 3 primary psychological tests corresponding to Technical Arts program, those psychological tests could be the essential references while recommend students to choose these 13 groups.起始頁-結束頁：219-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201206.02196篇名：常見字流暢性測驗編製研究並列篇名：Construct Study of the Assessment of Sight-word Reading and Fluency作者：洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung);陳秀芬(Hsiu-Fen Chen);王瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Wang);張郁雯(Yu-Wen Chang)關鍵字：流暢性;常見字;評量;學齡學童;識字能力;assessment;character-recognition;fluency;graders;sight-word期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本測驗依識字能力測量的趨勢，編製五種不同難易度的版本，旨在評估學生常見字的正確性與流暢性，供識字能力評估之參考。本研究先說明測驗編製過程，測驗內容為適合一年級到九年級學生不同年級之五種版本，B1、B2、B34、B57、B89，每版本均有60個字，利用看字讀音、造詞之施測方式，以正確讀音與時間計算流暢性，以正確讀音造詞的題數為正確性。各版本在各年級均有理想的信度，係數與折半信度均在.90 以上，間隔兩週的重測信度也在.80 以上。效度方面，本測驗與識字量估計測驗的識字量有顯著中高度相（r = .50∼.78），與「中文年級認字量表」相關也在.57∼.85，以及與閱讀理解篩選測驗相關在.56∼.64（改為小數點二位），與閱讀理解能力之相關亦在.47∼.78，與其他閱讀相關能力也都有顯著低度相關，此差異性的相關肯定本測驗的效度。透過本測驗之難度適當且試題通過率多見隨年級有成長，同一版本間也見得分隨年級增加，肯定本測驗編製之理念。本測驗不同版本在區分較小的年級或低能力學生間也具區別診斷之功能。另對適性版本標準、各版本間的轉化等實施方式的運用提出考驗和說明，最後並針對實務與研究提出建議。英文摘要：The Assessment of Sight-word Reading and Fluency (ASWRF) is constructed on the basis of the trend of the assessment of decoding. Based on the frequency and grades, five different forms are designed to assess the different sight-word size for different graders: B1, B2, B34, B57, and B89. Each of them consists of 60 characters to ask students to read the character and make a word with the character and the accuracy of the character-recognition (CR) and fluency of CR are scored and get the result from the national norm or East-Taiwan norm. The study aims to reported the idea of the design of the ASWRF and confirm it with the reliabilities, validity, and utilities. The internal reliabilities of each form in each grade are above .90, and 2-week stable correlation coefficients are above .80. The internal validity and construct validity are reported with satisfactory evidence. The principles of assessment administrated are reported with the convincing data to support it, and the utility of the assessment in the diagnosis of the poor readers is approved from the intra-sample comparison and case study. To improve the comparison of the different forms of the ASWRF, the competence-equivalent scale is provided for follow-up studies. The recommendation of practical application and future studies are made in the end.起始頁-結束頁：247-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201206.02477篇名：學系精博特徵與學職契連特徵：從類型論到特徵論並列篇名：Program Breadth-Depth Characteristic & School-Work Correspondence Characteristic: Moving from Typological Theory to Characteristical Theory作者：王思峰(Sy-Feng Wang);黃思聞(Szu-Wen Huang)關鍵字：生涯;社會參與;特徵模式;高等教育;career;characteristic model;community engagement;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：高等教育向來有兩種原型：文理、專業。2000∼2005年間，「文理－專業」亦成為卡內基高等教育機構分類之重要類別，以反映社會對高等教育的不滿。然而，「文理－專業別」是一種相對粗略的說法，不僅混雜了多重面向，也將複雜現實過於簡化為「類別」。本研究以O*NET知識量尺為工具，採用O*NET資料庫與大考中心全國學系調查之次級資料，建構出學系「精博特徵」與「學職契連特徵」之測量指標。研究結果顯示，此二學系特徵在信度、聚斂效度、區別效度與效標關聯效度皆有良好表現，而且，相較於文理－專業別，學系特徵對進修與求職兩類效標，有更高、更穩定與更細緻之預測力。最後，本文亦討論了實徵結果對教育政策之意涵，以及文理基礎學科的因應策略。英文摘要：In histories, there are two archetypes in higher education: Liberal Art & Science school (LA&S) and Professional school (PROF). In 2000-2005, in order to reflect the public un-satisfaction to higher education, Carnegie Foundation began to add the LA& S-PROF dimension into her classification of institutions of higher education. However, LA&S-PROF type is a rough concept. It not only mixes multiple meaning, but also simplifies the continuous scale into nominal scale. Using the survey data of College Entrance Examination Center (CEEC), the knowledge scale and the database of O*NET, this paper try to propose two department characteristics and their measurement index: ”Program Breadth-Depth Characteristic & School-Work Correspondence Characteristic”. Empirical results show that these two department characteristics have good performance in stability reliability test, convergent validity test, discriminant validity test and criterion-related validity test. Moreover, these two department characteristics have better, stable and meticulous predictive power than LA&S-PROF type at the two kind of criterion variables: job seeking behavior and acceptance rate of graduate program. Implementations for higher education policy and for LA&S school are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：277-301資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201206.02778篇名：具性別恆等測量基礎的空間能力性別差異並列篇名：Gender Differences in Spatial Ability Based on Gender-Invariant Measurement作者：鄭海蓮(Hi-Lian Jeng);林建宏(Chien-Hung Lin)關鍵字：臺灣高一學生;多樣本結構方程模式;性別恆等性;空間能力的性別差異;測量恆等性;first-year senior high school students in Taiwan;gender differences in spatial ability;gender invariance;measurement invariance;multi-group structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究應用多樣本結構方程模式與性別恆等性檢驗，探討臺灣高中一年級學生在空間能力的性別差異。本研究使用標準化空間能力測驗之常模資料，共計樣本為1,639人，其中男生865人，女生774人；本測驗為「空間視覺」與「空間定位」雙因素結構、四題型、共計18 題選擇題的紙筆式測驗。研究結果顯示，雙因素結構的標準化空間能力測驗具有性別恆等性，亦即具有跨性別的形貌、因素負荷量、截距、測量誤差、因素變異數以及因素共變數恆等；男女的雙因素潛在平均數與觀察平均數均達顯著差異，亦即男女在「空間視覺」的潛在平均數與觀察平均數均達顯著差異，在「空間定位」的潛在平均數與觀察平均數亦均達顯著差異，並且皆為男優於女。綜合而論，臺灣高中一年級男生的空間視覺與空間定位能力均顯著地優於女生。潛在平均數結構分析較觀察平均數分析能夠更客觀且合理地反應出不同群組的水準差異。具恆等性的測驗得分之組間差異，可用潛在平均數與觀察平均數分析，兩者結果將為一致；但若測驗不恆等，則無從得知僅使用觀察平均數進行組間差異比較的後果。本研究結果為標準化空間能力測驗擴增性別比較的效度基礎與推廣應用性，也確認該測驗能提供品質良好且具性別恆等基礎的測驗資料。英文摘要：The study tested gender invariance of the Standardized Spatial Ability Test (SPAT) with multi-group structural equation modeling (MG-SEM) to compare gender differences of the first-year senior high school students in terms of spatial ability latent factor means as well as observed means.The study utilized the norm data of SPAT whose final effect sample size of students is 1,639 (865 boys and 774 girls). The structure of SPAT is two-factor (spatial visualization and spatial orientation). There are 18 multiple-choice items classified into four item types. The results showed that the tests of gender invariance (configuration, factor loadings, item intercepts, error variances, factor variance matrices, and factor covariance matrices) are satisfied, and there are significant differences between genders in their latent factor means and observed means. That is, the latent means and observed means of spatial visualization and spatial orientation were significantly different between genders with the same direction that boys were better than girls in all of the differences. In conclusion, the spatial ability of first-year senior high school boys is better than that of girls in terms of spatial visualization and spatial orientation.The latent mean structure analyses can provide more reliable and reasonable group comparisons than observed mean analyses. These two analyses would provide the same result of difference comparisons when a test is confirmed invariance; however, when a test is not confirmed invariance, there is no way to tell the consequences of using only observed mean analyses for group difference comparisons. The results of the study increase the validity of gender comparisons of SPAT and its applications, and provide evidences of gender-invariant and quality measurement for SPAT.起始頁-結束頁：303-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201206.03039篇名：插補法在檢測試題差異功能的效果並列篇名：The Effects of Imputation Methods on the Detection of Differential Item Functioning作者：鄒慧英(Hue-Ying Tzou);江培銘(Pei-Ming Chiang)關鍵字：DIF;MH;SIBTEST;插補;遺失值;DIF;imputation;MH;missing data;SIBTEST期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究為一模擬研究，旨在探討不同遺失比率、插補法對偵測差別試題功能（DIF）的影響，藉以了解插補法在回復資料完整性後，是否有助於DIF試題的偵測。研究中比較四種處理遺失值的方法（整筆刪除、零插補、雙向插補、多重插補），並以兩種DIF偵測程序（MH、SIBTEST）進行檢驗，在不同DIF強度及遺失比率下，檢視DIF偵測的型一誤差率與檢定力，藉以評估插補法在DIF偵測的效益。研究結果顯示，整筆刪除會降低DIF偵測之型一誤差率與檢定力，DIF強度可提高DIF偵測之型一誤差與檢定力，MH與SIBTEST的偵測結果具一致性，不同插補方法對回復DIF偵測之型一誤差與檢定力有不同效果，零插補與多重插補在中度DIF有較佳的回復性，在重度DIF則是在少量遺失比率的回復性較佳，雙向插補的表現較不穩定。英文摘要：The study is intended to investigate the impact of missing data rate and imputation method on the detection of DIF. The study compares the performances of four imputation methods (listwise deletion, zero imputation, two-way imputation, and multiple imputation w/NORM) and two DIF detection methods (Mantel-Haenszel and SIBTEST) under three missing rates (10%, 20%, and 30%) and two DIF magnitudes (0.5 and 0.8), using Type I error and the statistical power of DIF detection as comparison criteria. Several conditions are set as follows: a sample size of 1,000 used for both the focal and reference groups; missing completely at random set for the missing data mechanism; and uniform DIF throughout the study. Findings show that the listwise deletion method results in lower Type I error rate as well as power. When the DIF magnitude is medium, Type I error and power can be boosted, or namely recovered, by imputing the missing data with zero imputation and multiple imputation. In short, each imputation method has different efficacy. Furthermore, there is no much difference between the two targeted DIF detection methods, Mantel-Haenszel and SIBTEST, in terms of Type I error rate and power.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201203.000110篇名：廣義逐次機率比檢定在等第制分數評量的應用並列篇名：Application of Generalized Sequential Probability Ratio Test to Ranking Evaluation作者：盧宏益(Hung-Yi Lu)關鍵字：多重逐次檢定;等第制;廣義逐次機率比檢定;generalized sequential probability ratio test;grade ranking evaluation;sequential multi-hypothesis test期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：教育部規定，國民中小學的評量需要轉換為「五等第」分數，避免學生因為些許的分數差距而進行惡性競爭與比較，以培養學生更多元的發展。等第制分數的評量，可以轉換為統計上多重逐次檢定問題。本研究使用廣義逐次機率比檢定處理多重逐次檢定問題，並進一步應用至電腦化測驗中等第制分數的評量。研究結果顯示，在不限制測驗題數下，分類正確率皆達八成以上；而當等第類別數增加時，分類正確率相差不大，主要的影響反應在測驗題數的增加。而在有限制測驗題數的測驗情境下，利用概似比的檢定概念，更能有效處理在測驗終止時無法評定考生能力的問題。英文摘要：To avoid destructive competition among students, Ministry of Education would like to transfer the grading system from continuity scoring system to ranking system, in which it uses only five different ratings to evaluate student's ability. Grade ranking evaluation can be viewed as a sequential multi-hypothesis test problem. In this paper, we apply generalized sequential probability ratio test (GSPRT) to solve the problem of grade ranking evaluation. We found that the correct decision rates of GSPRT is over 80% when using GSPRT to solve grading ranking evaluation problem. Moreover, we identity that using the idea of likelihood ratio to solve the problem, it usually fail to evaluate student's ability during the test period.起始頁-結束頁：33-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201203.003301篇名：大專青年就業力、就業職能與職場職能之內涵探究並列篇名：An Investigation of Employability, Employability Skills and Workplace Competencies of Students Enrolled in Higher Education作者：吳芝儀(Chih-Yi Wu)關鍵字：就業力;就業職能;職場職能;employability;employability skills;workplace competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在於探究日益受到我國高等教育體系重視的「就業力」、「就業職能」或「職場職能」之內涵，據以勾勒出「本土化核心就業力指標」，以作為發展有效評量工具之基礎。本研究採取文件分析和焦點團體為研究方法，研究者廣泛地蒐集我國政府部門有關「就業力」、「就業職能」或「職場職能」之文件資料，包括政府相關部門出版品、學術論文與研究報告等，針對上述名詞的內涵進行比較分析，佐以世界先進國家有關「就業力」（employability）、「就業力技能」（employability skill）、「職場職能」（workplace competency）或「關鍵職能」（key competency）之論述，歸納出初步分析結果，作為焦點團體座談之輔助資訊；進一步邀請國內大學校院兼任就業輔導或職涯輔導單位之主管，或政府青年輔導部門相當關注大專青年就業力或核心職能議題的九位學者專家，召開一場專家諮詢會議；最後統拉歸納出「本土化核心就業力架構」，包括「個人特質／態度」、「學習／思考」、「人際／社會」和「職涯發展」等四個類別，涵蓋表達溝通、問題解決、團隊合作、終身學習、自我管理、創新應變、科技應用、職涯規劃、職場認知和國際宏觀等10項核心就業力，以提供我國政府部會訂定青年就業培育計畫或核心職能培育政策之參考。英文摘要：In light of the rapid change in global economic conditions, youth employability has become one of the most crucial issues in youth policies among various developed countries. Enhancing the employability of students enrolled in higher education has gained the attention of many researchers and practitioners. This has led to a greater impact on ideological formation and practice within the higher education system in Taiwan. This study aims to construct a localized framework for a valid assessment of core employability skills among Taiwanese students enrolled in higher education. Components such as ”employability”, ”employability skills”, and ”workplace competency” were investigated. Document analysis of government publications, academic articles and research reports among Taiwan and various other developed countries was conducted by delineating core meaning and components among relevant terms including ”employability,” ”employability skills,” ”workplace competency,” and ”key competency.” The results address four major domains and core components of youth employability skills. Based on such findings, a focus group interview was conducted with nine experts, including directors of career development centers in higher education settings, scholars with expertise and concern in youth employability, and directors who are responsible for the national career development project from the National Youth Commission. Then, a localized framework to address core employability skills applicable for higher education was proposed. The core employability skills framework consists of four major domains: personal attributes/attitudes, learning/thinking skills, interpersonal/social skills, and career development abilities. Ten core employability skills were included in the framework: communication, problem solving, teamwork, life-long learning, self-management, creativity & adaptability, technology, career planning, workplace cognition, and global vision. The framework of this study will provide a reference to the government of Taiwan for establishing projects and policies relevant to the fostering of youth employability.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心2篇名：小學課堂中分享式筆記與提問複習之效益並列篇名：Effects of Shared Note-Taking and Questioning Review in Elementary School Computer Classes作者：陳政煥(Cheng-Huan Chen);邱瓊慧(Chiung-Hui Chiu);吳秋儀(Chiu-Yi Wu)關鍵字：寫筆記策略;分享式筆記;分享式提問複習;小學課室;note-taking strategies;shared note-taking;shared-questioning review;elementary school classes期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：寫筆記活動包括兩個部分，一是產出筆記的「筆記」過程，另一是檢閱筆記的「複習」過程。本研究旨在探討於小學資訊課課堂教學中導入分享式筆記與提問（含回答）復習的效益。為促進筆記和提問的編輯與分享，本研究並以blog為基礎平台，建置相關的功能和介面。本研究由臺南市某小學二個六年級班級共54位學生參與，實驗教學的內容包括四個單元，歷時四週，於該校的電腦教室進行，由該校的資訊教師講授，學生以二人為一組，相鄰而座，並於聽講時，各自以blog記下筆記，再於其後進行提問複習。過程中，學生均可透過blog或彼此的螢幕檢視對方的筆記及提問內容，既可以透過blog給對方意見，也可以直接與對方進行口頭討論。為瞭解分享式提問複習的效果，本研究另於同校安排二個六年級班級共56位學生也進行分享式筆記活動，不過，其複習方式則由學生自行檢閱筆記。研究發現，學生透過分享，能在聽講時記下25.80%∼37.43%的重點；學生在進行分享式提問複習時，雖能提出理解類的問題，不過，答案多未完整。研究也發現，學生的筆記品質對提問、回答品質有顯著的效益；先備知識、答案品質對學習也有顯著的立即與保留成效。不過，分享式提問複習與自行檢閱筆記對學生立即與保留學習效益則並無顯著差異。英文摘要：A note-taking activity involves two main processes: taking notes and reviewing notes. This study investigated the effects of integrating shared note-taking and questioning review (including answering) in elementary school computer classes. A blog platform was adopted and modified to allow students in a group to create and share notes and questions.Fifty-four student s from 2 sixth-grade classes at an elementary school in southern Taiwan comprised the shared-questioning review group of this study. The experiment included 4 units and lasted 4 weeks in total. Each lesson was conducted in a computer classroom by a computer teacher at the participants' school. Students worked in pairs and sat next to each other to take notes individually while listening to a lesson. The students then proposed questions themselves to review the lesson. During the experiment, students could view the notes, questions, and answers of their partner via the blog or computer screen, give comments on the blog, or discuss the notes, questions, and answers with their partner directly. To understand the effects of shared questioning, this study formed another group of 56 students from 2 sixth-grade classes at the same school to engage in a shared note-taking activity without shared-questioning review, but had students read their own notes independently in the review process.Our findings showed that the students in the shared-questioning review group could comprehend 25.80%-37.43% of the ideas presented during the lectures, and could pose comprehensive questions, but most students answered their questions incompletely. We also found that the quality of students' notes had a significant effectiveness on the quality of the students' questions and answers, and prior knowledge and the quality of students' answers had a significant effectiveness on immediate achievement and retention. However, no significant differences in immediate achievement and retention were found between the shared-questioning review group and the independent note-reading group.起始頁-結束頁：47-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2002.023篇名：小六學生不同代數表徵的解題表現、教師布題順序與代數教學信念之研究並列篇名：The Study of Six Graders' Problem-Solving Performance, Teachers' Problem Posing and Teaching Beliefs in Different Algebra Problems作者：劉家樟(Chia-Chang Liu);楊凱琳(Kai-Lin Yang);許慧玉(Hui-Yu Hsu)關鍵字：符號優先教學觀;代數教學信念;符號題;文字題;故事題;symbol-precedence view;teaching beliefs in algebra;equation problems;word-equation problems;story problems期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要探討三個問題，包括：第一是臺灣國小六年級學生在不同代數試題表徵（故事、文字、符號）的解題表現：第二是國小數學教師對這三類試題表徵的教學布題序列及背後的教學信念：第三是學生的解題表現與教師信念間之一致性檢驗。研究結果發現：一、在相同數學內涵之下，國小六年級學生在符號題表現最好，故事題表現最差。但進一步分析後發現，學生雖在符號題的答題較佳，代數思維的發展仍未臻成熟。二、約80%國小數學科教師的布題順序為符號、文字、故事，且具有符號優先教學觀（symbol-precedence view）。這些教師認為，學生在符號題表現較好，文字題應直接教導正確解題法或先熟悉符號操作過程，也較贊同代數方程式是解決故事或文字題最有效的方法。剩下20%的教師則是認為，應先教學生故事題， 其教學信念明顯偏向非符號優先與非示純解題法的教學觀。三、進一步比較教師布題順序及代數教學信念與學生解題表現間的一致性，結果發現，教師無法完全準確地預測學生的答題表現。更有甚者，教學信念偏向非符號優先與非清楚示範解題法的教師，預測學生的答題表現最不準確。英文摘要：This paper presents three investigations related to algebra problems: (1) Taiwanese sixth graders' problem-solving performance on story problems, word-equation problems, and equation problems; (2) Taiwanese mathematics teachers' posing sequences towards these problems and their hidden teaching beliefs: and (3) the relationship between students' performance and teachers ' beliefs. These analyses revealed that sixth graders performed the best on equation problems and the worst on story problems. Further investigation indicated that although students performed better on equation problems, their algebraic thinking was still not well-developed. Second, about 80% mathematics teachers posed problems with the sequences of equation problems, word-equation problems, and story problems, respectively; they preferred the symbol-precedence view. They thought equation problems were easiest for students, and that word-equation problems should teach students how to directly find algebraic solutions and the procedures of algebraic operations. They also agreed that algebraic equations were the most effective way to solve story problems and word-equation problems. The remaining teachers, who expressed a non-symbol-precedence view, believed that story problems should be taught first. Third, the comparisons showed the inconsistency between students' performance and teachers' predictions, especially those teachers with a non-symbol-precedence belief made the worst predictions.起始頁-結束頁：93-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2002.034篇名：偏遠地區泰雅族與漢族中學生中文識讀能力之分析並列篇名：Chinese Reading Literacy in Atayal and Han Junior High School Students in a Remote Area of Taiwan作者：孔淑萱(Shu-Hsuan Kung);白芸凌(Yun-Ling Pai);蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su);吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu)關鍵字：社經地位;泰雅族學生;閱讀理解;識字量;聽覺理解;Atayal students;Chinese character size;listening comprehension;reading comprehension;socioeconomic status期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：識讀能力意指理解與使用書面語言的能力，其主要成分包括閱讀理解、聽覺理解， 以及識字量。為了探討單一偏遠地區泰雅族與漢族學生在中文識讀能力的表現與差異，並分析相關因素（例如族群、社經地位、性別，以及日常閱讀經驗）對閱讀理解的預測力，本研究以北部偏遠地區中學七年級的66名泰雅族學生及76名漢族學生為對象，受測學生均屬社經地位最低等級，兩族群沒有顯著差異。測驗結果發現，泰雅族學生在聽覺理解的表現不僅低於全國常模，更顯著低於漢族學生，其閱讀理解表現則僅低於全國常模，而與背景相近的偏遠漢族學生相當，其識字量不僅與偏遠漢族學生相當，也與常模無差。細究測驗的子成分顯示，泰雅族學生相較於漢族學生，其主要的困難在於高階的統整與推理能力。在迴歸分析中，識字量及聽覺理解表現能顯著預測閱讀理解能力，至於族群、背景因素與日常閱讀經驗等變現對閱讀理解多半不具預測力，顯示在選取區域鄰近的施測對象下，降低了社經地位等因素的差異，致使族群對閱讀理解就不具預測力。此一結果指出，以往識讀能力的族群差異可能與社經地位有關，但宜留意原住民學生較弱的聽覺理解對學習的影響，而偏遠地區中學生中文識讀的教學重點，應著眼在高層次的推理能力上。英文摘要：Literacy typically involves the ability to comprehend and manage text language. This study investigated Chinese reading literacy in Atayal and Han students from a single remote area in Taiwan by analyzing possible factors (i.e., ethnicity, socioeconomic status, gender, and daily reading experiences) associated with reading comprehension. A total of 66 Atayal and 76 Han seventh grade students, from the same remote, low socioeconomic status area of northern Taiwan. The results revealed that the listening comprehension performance of the Atayal students was significantly worse than both the national norm and the performance of Han students who participated in this study. Regarding reading comprehension, Atayal students performed significantly worse than the national norm but at the same level as their Han peers. However, Atayal students remained highly similar to both the national norm and their Han peers in terms of the performance of Chinese character size. A further analysis showed that compared to Han students, the main difficulty of Atayal students was advanced reading tasks such as integrating and inferring. Moreover, regression analysis revealed that Chinese character size and listening comprehension were significantly associated with student performance in reading comprehension. After controlling for socioeconomic status by examining the performance of students from adjacent areas, no association was found between literacy and ethnicity, family background, and daily reading experience. The findings suggest that the difference in literacy abilities between ethnicities may be related to socioeconomic status; yet, listening comprehension also plays a vital role in Atayal students' literacy learning. Consequently, literacy teaching of junior high school students in remote areas should emphasize higher-level abilities, for example, integration and inference.起始頁-結束頁：135-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2002.045篇名：書評－《杜威：我們這個時代的教育哲學家？》並列篇名：A Book Review on Pring, R., John Dewey: A Philosopher of Education for Our Time?作者：單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：171-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心6篇名：日本中小學教師換證制度實施之評析與啟示並列篇名：Analyses and Relevance of Implementing the Teacher License Renewal System in Japan作者：林雍智(Yung-Chin Lin);吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu)關鍵字：教師換證制度;教師證照;日本;teacher license renewal system;teacher license;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：日文稱為「教員免許更新制」的日本教師換證制度，是自2000年開始研議的一項確保教師資質能與時俱進的品質保障方案，該制度經2007年修法通過後，於2000年正式實施。其實施目的除確保師資的素質外，亦具提高教師專業能力意涵。依該制度之規定，日本公私立中小學教師及持有教師證書者，在教師證書持照每滿 10 年時，需赴文部科學省所認可之大學參加30時以上的換證講習課程，成績及格後才得申請換證。本研究之主旨即在於介紹日本教師換證制度，經從相關文獻中分析其成立經過、內容架構及實施前後在制度、執行與配套等層面之檢討，並提出「解決換證制度問題應回歸調整師資培育系統」、「政策理念及目標要與配套周延設計」、「行政機關與大學在換證制度中應負一定責任」與「重新檢視我國是否需要實施教師換證制度」等啟示，期能提供我國在規劃相關政策時之參考。英文摘要：The current teacher license renewal system in Japan was introduced to enhance the quality assurance program that had been in place since the year 2000. The program was established to ensure that teachers' professional knowledge and skills would be maintained, and further developed to keep pace with the changing times. This system was established with laws upgraded in 2007, and set forth in 2009. The purpose of implementing this system was not only to ensure teachers' professionalism, but also to upgrade teachers' professional skills. According to the regulations of this renewal system, all public and private school teachers and license holders in Japan are responsible for satisfying the renewal system requirements by enrolling in government approved college or university networks for at least 30 hours of lectures every ten years and passing tests related to each lecture. Teachers need to document the completion of the courses when applying to renew their teaching licenses at local boards of education. By analyzing the legislative process, content, structure, critiques, and supporting policies of the renewal system from related documents, this paper aims to introduce the Japanese system, and provide four recommendations to authorities in Taiwan in regards to the necessity for establishing teacher License renewal policies.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2001.017篇名：成為女孩：少女雜誌作為女孩培力與性別教育之資源並列篇名：Becoming a Girl: Teen Megazines as a Resource for Empowerment and Gender Education in Girls作者：楊幸真(Hsing-Chen Yang)關鍵字：身體;慾望;陰柔特質;性別認同;培力;body;desire;femininity;gender identity;empowerment期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究運用民族誌，企圖瞭解女學生在學校閱讀少女雜誌的情境脈絡與意義，從中獲得哪些性別學習與建構性別認同。本研究發現，女學生消費少女雜誌的主因是，它觸及了她們生活中所存在的真實問題和苦惱。這些苦惱包括需要友情與同伴、需要面對自己的身體變化，以及對性、愛和美好未來的想望。少女雜誌是她們減輕個人苦惱與面對慾望的文化資源，並能提供一些可能的解決之道與希望，以成就一個符合社會和個人期望的女性身體與自我。在校園生活中，親近少女雜誌是成為「夠格女孩」與投注異性戀陰柔特質阻力最小的一條路。身為女孩，意味著必須不斷和各種論述，尤其是支配性性別論述進行協商。少女雜誌的父權意識型態與身體美學，對她們雖具有影響性，卻不是絕對的支配性。本文強調，青少女透過消費少女雜誌所做出的身體與情慾實踐，應將它視為一種女孩力量，也就是一種企圖去掌握、主導身體未完成性的力量，企圖借助自己所擁有的資源去銘刻自己的身體和實作性別。這種力量是一種自我培力的方式，來自於日常生活中活生生的性別經驗與奮鬥，這種女孩力量應該被看見和重視。英文摘要：This study uses ethnography to explore the context and significance of female students reading teen magazines in schools; it also determines the sexuality and gender knowledge and methods for constructing gender identification girls derive from these magazines. The findings of this study indicate that young females read teen magazines because teen magazines touch upon the daily fears and uncertainties of these young girls. These fears and uncertainties include eagerness for friendship and company, bodily changes, and desires for sexual experiences, love, and a bright future. Teen magazines serve as a cultural resource through which girls can calm their fears and face their desires. They also provide possible approaches and hope for solving problems, aiding in the achievement of body shape and identity fulfilling social and personal expectations. In a school setting, reading teen magazines is the easiest way for these girls to feel ”girlie” and display heterosexualized femininity. During the process of becoming a girl, females must continually negotiate various sexual and gender discourses, especially the dominant versions of these discourses. Although patriarchal ideology and body aesthetics in teen magazines may influence teenage girls to some extent, these girls are not completely dominated by these ideas. This study emphasizes that the realization of body and desire teenage girls exercise through teen magazines should be considered a type of girl power; it is an attempt to grasp and dominate the not yet completed power of the body, and an attempt to control the body and practice gender using the resources at hand. This girl power is a method of empowerment that develops from the gender experiences and struggles of daily life; it must be recognized and valued.起始頁-結束頁：41-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2001.028篇名：尋找最大公約數？－高中歷史教科書編寫與審查互動過程分析並列篇名：Searching for the Greatest Common Denominator: Analysis of the Compilation and Review Process for High School History Textbooks作者：卯靜儒(Chin-Ju Mao)關鍵字：教科書;教科書審定制度;審查制度;高中歷史課綱;textbooks;review and adoption system;textbook censorship;high school history curriculum guidelines期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探究在教科書一綱多本政策下，高中歷史教科書編寫與審查制度運作過程中的編審互動歷程與經驗。研究方法以訪談及文件分析為主，訪談對象包括四家出版社的教科書編寫者與編輯各一位，教科書審查委員四位，共訪談12位，文件分析以國立編譯館建檔的審查文件為主。研究發現，在目前編審制度運作下，編審之間的權力行使關係、對課綱的認同不一、對歷史知識與教學之間的爭議，以及對核心能力解讀的不同，皆會影響編寫者與審查者的互動歷程與經驗。在目前編審制度運作下，看似對立的編審互動過程也揭露出編寫者與審查者多方不同意見的差異。在為「完成任務」的時間壓力下，編審兩造逐漸發展出解決爭議的「最大公約數」之原則。然而，此原則卻也將新課綱強調的四大核心能力的培養與教學精神，無意識地排除於教科書編寫討論過程中。編審教科書的討論過程仍是「文本為中心」勝於「學習者為中心」的思考邏輯。教科書如何成為橋，幫助教師與學生渡到新課綱的知識學習典範，是迫切的教科書編審課題，但卻也是目前編審制度運作下被忽略的。英文摘要：This study explored the personal interaction and process of compiling and reviewing high school history textbooks under the textbook policy of ”one guide for multiple texts.” The primary research methods were interviews and document analysis. Twelve individuals were interviewed for this study, including four textbook writers, each representing a different textbook, four editors, each from a different publishing company, and four members of the textbook review committee. Document analysis was based on the National Institute for Compilation and Translation's history textbook review documents. The analysis discovered that under the current censorship system, the power relations among writers and reviewers, disagreements over the new curriculum guidelines, disputes regarding historical knowledge and teaching methods, and interpretations of the core competencies affected the interaction between the writers and reviewers. The seemingly antagonistic editorial process of the current censorship system also showed that the views of the writers and reviewers differed significantly. However, the ”greatest common denominator” principle was developed between both parties to resolve disputes under time constraints and for the need to ”complete the mission.” However, this principle indirectly avoided the issue of how to cultivate and teach the four core competencies emphasized by the new curriculum guidelines. Furthermore, a ”text-centric” instead of ”learner-centric” logic is still employed during the textbook compilation process. Making a new kind of history textbooks which can be a bridge leading teachers and students to a new paradigm in learning history is a crucial step for accomplishing the goals of the new curriculum. However, this topic has been ignored in the current editorial process.起始頁-結束頁：83-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2001.039篇名：小學中年級學童詞素覺識與閱讀理解之相關研究並列篇名：The Relationship between Morphological Awareness and Chinese Reading Comprehension in the 3rd and 4th Grade Students in Taiwan作者：王宣惠(Hsuan-Hui Wang);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung);辜玉旻(Yu-Min Ku)關鍵字：詞素覺識;閱讀理解;國小學童;中文閱讀;morphological awareness;reading comprehension;primary students;Chinese reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討詞素覺識與閱讀理解的關係。研究中以大臺北地區共 277名國小三、四年級學童為研究對象，採取相關分析之設計，探討全體學生詞素覺識、詞彙量以及閱讀理解之間的關係。詞彙覺識綜合文獻所涵蓋的成分包括「詞素區辨覺識」、「語意部件覺識」、「釋詞覺識」、「構詞覺識」與「構詞規則覺識」等五類，資料採皮爾森積差相關、淨相關、不同的迴歸分析進行分析與解釋。本研究主要發現詞素覺識對閱讀理解具有獨特預測力，詞素覺識與閱讀理解不僅有顯著相關，且在控制智力與詞彙量因素後，對閱讀理解仍具有獨立的解釋力，五個成分中，以釋詞覺識、構詞覺識、語意部件覺識三變項對閱讀理解有最穩定的預測關係，而以釋詞覺識之預測力最佳，在不同的控制條件下，詞素覺識對閱讀理解之預測解釋量各有不同。本研究並根據研究結果及限制，對詞素覺識之概念與其在未來研究以及教育工作提出相關建議。英文摘要：The study aims to investigate the relationship between morphological awareness and Chinese reading comprehension. Participants were composed of 277 the 3rd- and 4th- grade students from the primary schools in the northern Taiwan. All the participants were administrated with the Chinese morphological awareness, including the assessment of morpheme discrimination, semantic radical awareness, morpheme interpretation, morpheme construction, and construction rule awareness. The data was analyzed by the Pearson's correlation and multiple regression to investigate the relationship between morphological awareness, vocabulary, and reading comprehension. The major findings indicate that morphological awareness is not only significantly correlated with reading comprehension, but also makes significant unique contribution to reading comprehension even after controlling intelligence and vocabulary. There are three components of morphological awareness to significantly predict reading comprehension: morpheme interpretation, morpheme construction, and semantic radical awareness. The most powerful predictor is morpheme interpretation. While controlling IQ or vocabulary to delete the co-variation of these variables, the contribution of morphological awareness to the reading comprehension slightly varies.According to the findings, recommendations for future studies and pedagogy are made.起始頁-結束頁：123-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2012.2001.0410篇名：書評《不為營利：民主社會為何需要人文涵育？》並列篇名：A Book Review on Nussbaum, M. C., Not for profit: Why democracy needs the humanity?作者：林逢祺(Ferng-Chyi Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：165-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心01篇名：知覺易用性、知覺有用性與社會影響的交互作用對網路學習效率之研究並列篇名：The Research of Perceived Ease of Use, and Perceived Usefulness Moderating Social Influences on Electric Learning Efficiency作者：廖珮妏(Pei-Wen Liao);謝俊義(Jun-Yi Hsieh)關鍵字：知覺易用性;知覺有用性;社會影響;網路學習效率;perceived usefulness;perceived ease of use;social effect;electric learning efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：全球邁向資訊化及提倡終身學習的同時，網路學習科技大量運用在企業或學校運作。網路學習為一種科技中介的學習，學習者可以透過資訊科技建構的環境來學習知識。本研究的主要目的即在於以科技接受理論為基礎，結合社會影響的因素，欲了解其對網路學習效率之影響。特別加以探討知覺易用性、知覺有用性兩者與社會影響的交互作用是否對網路學習效率產生不同影響。透過問卷調查法，選取臺灣地區之大學生作為施測對象，回收有效樣本600份。統計分析採用階層迴歸分析，以檢定本研究之假設。研究結果發現：知覺易用性、知覺有用性及社會影響對網路學習效率皆有顯著正向影響，但在知覺易用性及知覺有用性兩者與社會影響之交互作用效果對網路學習效率產生負向顯著影響。不論在知覺易用性或知覺有用性的認知上，具有高度社會影響的大學生，當他們的知覺易用性愈高，愈具有高度的網路學習效率；反之將產生較差的學習效率。英文摘要：When global progresses towards an information technology society and promotes lifelong learning, web-based learning technologies have been widely used in private business or school. Web-based learning is a technology-mediated learning that learners acquire knowledge through the information technology environment. The purpose of this study based on technology acceptance model is to explore perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness moderating social influences on electric learning efficiency. The valid responses, 600 undergraduates studying around Taipei universities are our survey subjects. This study uses hierarchical regression analysis to test our hypotheses The results were found as follows: perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, and social impact study have significant positive impacts on the effectives of electric learning. But perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness interacting social impact on the effectiveness of e-learning has significant negative impact. That mean, when the higher social impact students who perceived ease of use or perceived usefulness more highly and learning efficiency to be better, contrary result will poor learning efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：39-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120404020032篇名：以擬題活動作為教學策略提升重修班學生學習的動機並列篇名：Problem Posing as Instruction Strategy Motivates Student's Learning in Mathematics Make-up Course作者：廖經益(Ching-Yi Liao);翁瑞鋒(Jui-Feng Weng);曾憲雄(Shian-Shyong Tseng);陳明溥(Ming-Puu Chen)關鍵字：補救教學;解題策略訓練;試題結構;數學擬題;學習診斷;make-up course;problem solving strategy;item structure;problem posing;learning diagnosis期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在高中數學的代數解題過程中，題目分析能力是解題的重要關鍵。研究者觀察發現，數學低學習成就的學生中，有大部分的原因是不能辨識問題的類型，導致無法連結數學概念擬訂解題策略。因此，研究者提出以數學試題結構表（Mathematic Item Structure Table, MIST）制定代數試題模板，來訓練學生問題分析與類型辨識的能力，而學生透過擬題活動，精熟解題策略與其可應用問題的變化。學生藉由MIST的協助，將問題解構成：題目的情境（S）、給定的已知值（G）、變數（V）、題目特徵關鍵字提示（K）與解題策略的數學算式（F），來分析與辨識代數問題。本研究由36位數學重修班學生參與了MIST的擬題活動，學生將所擬的試題透過Facebook（FB）網路社群進行分享、討論、評論。實驗後經訪談結果發現，MIST的擬題活動可以提升學生的理解力、學習成就感與學習動機，而老師也可以透過MIST擬題活動發現學生的學習障礙。英文摘要：The capability of problem analysis is important for students while solving algebra in senior high school. With our observation, most of the reasons of low achievement students are hard to recognize the problem type, and can not associate the related concept to solve the problem. In order to train students' ability of problem analysis and recognizing, the Mathematic Item Structure Table (MIST) is proposed to model the classic algebra problem. Meanwhile, through the problem posing activity, the student has acquired mastery of solving strategy and the variation of the problem which the solving strategy is available. MIST assists students' problem analysis and recognizing by deconstructing the algebra problem into Scenario(S), Given value(G), Variable(V), Key word prompt(K), and Function expression(F). In the experiment, 36 students of make-up course are participated in the MIST problem posing activities, and the posed problems are share, discuss and commented through the Facebook(FB) network community. The result from the interview with students shows the MIST problem posing activity can promote students' comprehension, learning satisfaction and motivation, and the teacher can also discover the student's learning obstacle through MIST problem posing activity.起始頁-結束頁：63-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120404020043篇名：電腦輔助合作學習於分數概念教學之研究並列篇名：A Study of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning on the Conceptual Learning of Fraction作者：林秋斌(Chiu-Pin Lin);蘇怡慈(Yi-Tsu Su);李美萱(Mei-Shung Lee)關鍵字：小組協作軟體;分數;電腦輔助合作學習;Group Scribbles software;fraction;computer supported collaborative learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在探討以電腦輔助合作學習模式融入分數學習活動，對國小三年級學童分數概念學習成效與學習態度之影響。實驗以電腦輔助合作學習（computer supported collaborative learning, CSCL）方式進行教學，使用與美國SRI International及新加坡NIE共同開發的Group Scribbles（GS）2.0版軟體支援此合作學習活動。經測驗與問卷統計分析，研究結果顯示，CSCL學習方式對學生分數概念的學習具有學習成效與保留效果。GS輔助軟體結合合作學習的教學模式深受學生喜愛，對於學生的數學學習成效與信心有正向的幫助。CSCL使教師有更多元化的教學選擇。同儕之間互相指導與合作，增加許多學生間良性互動的機會，能提高學習專注力。英文摘要：The study focused on exploring the effects of the performance and attitude in learning fraction concepts by using computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) for the 3rd grade students. This experiment assists cooperation with computer approach teaching by using Group Scribbles (GS) 2.0 software to support collaborative learning. The statistical analysis of test and questionnaire indicated that CSCL for learning the concept of fraction had the effects of the learning effectiveness and learning retention. The GS-based learning that combined with cooperative learning is loved by the students. Computer supported teaching could provide a diversity teaching model. Group members rely on and help with each other, and could elevate the pupils' motivation and concentration in learning.起始頁-結束頁：1-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120104010014篇名：探究低成就學童的數學加法遊戲之圖像式思考歷程並列篇名：Investigation on Graphic Thinking Process of Mathematics Addition Games for Underachievement Elementary School Students作者：徐玉軒(Yu-Hsuan Hsu);廖冠智(Guan-Ze Liao)關鍵字：低成就學童;補數遊戲;圖像思考;數概念加法遊戲;underachievement students;the complement games;graphic thinking;mathematics addition games of number concepts期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：補數（complement）的概念廣泛地應用於計算機、心算、珠算等範疇。其中10的補數概念，可作為學童發展「內嵌數」（embedded numbers）的數概念時，輔助其計算的方式之一。本研究旨在以自行設計的「10的補數之天平遊戲」為主，探究以遊戲介面的圖像引導低成就學童，使其發現若干組兩數相加會變成10的群組概念，並進行質化觀察與記錄低成就學童的操作與學習歷程。研究成果提出數學加法遊戲中，圖像介面對低成就學童操作與學習歷程中的影響，作為未來數學加法遊戲設計之參考。英文摘要：The concept of the complement is widely applied in the calculator, mental arithmetic, abacus calculation, and etc. The 10's complement game may also be helpful when children was calculating and developing their number concepts of ”embedded number”. This study aims to guide students to realize the concept of 10's complement by the game interface of graphic thinking, and survey the process of observation in order to review observing underachievement students' playing by the qualitative study. The results of study present the influences on the game interface for graphic thinking of operational process to underachievement students in mathematics addition games, and can be used as future reference for math addition game design.起始頁-結束頁：17-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120104010025篇名：應用科技接受模式探討情境式博物館導覽訓練之學習系統並列篇名：Applying Technology Acceptance Model to Examine a Context-Simulated Learning System for Museum Docents Training作者：陳鴻仁(Hong-Ren Chen);楊玉笙(Yu-Sheng Yang);陳貴未(Kuei-Wei Chen);吳婷婷(Ting-Ting Wu);黃悅民(Yueh-Min Huang)關鍵字：志工訓練;科技接受模式;博物館導覽;volunteer training;technology acceptance model;museum docent期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，兼具教育與休閒功能的博物館成為提供非正式學習（informal learning）的重鎮。為幫助參觀者對於博物館展品有更深入之了解，各博物館已普遍提供導覽解說服務，由於此服務涉及專業性，因此職前訓練之加強有其迫切性及必要性。為將訓練過程與真實情境配合，本研究將為平均年齡偏高的博物館志工建置一套情境式導覽訓練學習系統，並利用科技接受模式探討志工們對於系統的接受度，同時透過統計方法，針對研究架構中所提出的各項變數進行資料分析。研究結果顯示，電腦使用經驗與電腦自我效能對於認知有用性與認知易用性均有正向顯著影響；電腦焦慮對認知有用性與認知易用性有負向顯著影響；認知有用性、認知易用性與個人數位學習經驗對於系統的使用意圖均有正向顯著影響；而性別對於系統的使用意圖則不具顯著影響性。英文摘要：In recently, museums which provide both educational and leisure functions have gotten the key position of informal learning. For helping visitors gain real understanding of exhibits, museums generally have provided docents and interpretation services. Because this service involves professional knowledge, it has the urgency and necessity to strengthen the pre-employment training. This study developed a context-simulated learning system to connect the training process with the real contexts, and used Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) to examine the system acceptance of volunteers. Each variable of the framework was analyzed by statistical methods, and the results show there is a positive relationship between the experience of using computer and computer self-effectiveness toward Perceived Usefulness (PU) and Perceived Ease-of-Use (PEOU). The computer anxious user has negative relationship with Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease-of-Use. For the guides who show interested in using digital training, the Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease-of-Use have positive impact.起始頁-結束頁：43-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20120104010036篇名：從資訊融入教學探討高等教育教師工作壓力並列篇名：In the Perspective of Information Technology Integrated into Teaching to Explore the Work Stress of Higher Education Teachers作者：胡秋帆(Chiu-Fan Hu);岳修平(Hsiu-Ping Yueh);張玨(Chueh Chang)關鍵字：工作壓力;高等教育;資訊融入教學;數位學習;work stress;higher education;technology integrated into teaching;e-learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：4卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：資訊科技蓬勃發展帶動國內外數位學習的趨勢，教師運用各類資訊科技規劃、設計與實施教學活動，並透過網路科技的特性，營造多元的教學環境與溝通互動管道，因而發展出現今高等教育中多元類型的教學型態，然而在此趨勢發展下，應用資訊科技的過程中，教師面臨的教學問題與負擔也是不容忽視的。有鑑於此，本研究採質化研究之個案研究方法，選取一所研究型大學作為研究場域，並以立意取樣，選取六位教師進行深入訪談，旨在了解個案教師資訊融入教學的情形，進一步探究個案教師應用資訊科技於教學歷程中所面臨之工作壓力、因應策略、所需要的教學支援與資源，以及問題解決的管道，最後針對研究結果提出建議，希望能對教師專業發展之相關研究有所貢獻，並可提供高等教育機構與教師規劃與實施提升教學品質策略時之參考。英文摘要：The development of information technology promotes e-learning internationally. Teachers not only can use all kinds of information technology to plan, design, and implement instructional activities, but also can create diverse instructional environments and communication channels through the network. A variety of teaching pedagogies with instructional technology thus were developed accordingly and applied in higher education. However, under this trend, problems with adopting instructional technology and possible burdens came along that teachers would face emerged. In view of this, the present study used qualitative research and case study method and conduct in-depth interview with each of the six professors with purposeful sampling. The purpose of this study was set to understand how the university professors integrated information technology into their teaching, and further investigate the difficulties faced, the support and resource needed, as well as how they solve technology adoption related problems. Results of this study provided suggestions to future researches of faculty professional development, and to higher education institutions and teachers who plan to implement quality instructional strategies with information technology integration in teaching.起始頁-結束頁：63-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201201040100401篇名：政治因素對於法院審理之影響分析－以臺灣選舉誹謗司法案件為例並列篇名：Political Factors and Judicial Verdicts: Defamation Litigation in Taiwan作者：吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu);李伊婷(Yi-Ting Lee);孫煒(Way Sun)關鍵字：司法體系;選舉誹謗案件;法院;政治因素;國民黨;judicial system;defamation in campaign;court;political factor;Kuomintang期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在臺灣激烈選戰過程中，採取「負面競選」（negative campaigning）是頗為普遍的手法，也因此經常引發選舉誹謗訴訟案件。對於這類涉及高度政治敏感性的司法案件，其判決結果是否會受到政治因素的影響？鑑此，作者藉由「司法院法學資料檢索系統」，蒐集各級法院（地方法院、高等法院、最高法院）在2000年1月至2011年3月期間選舉誹謗案件判決，透過「政黨因素」、「當選與否」、「關係網絡」、「審判層級」等四個指標，利用量化統計與質性研究兩種途徑，藉此檢證政治因素是否會影響選舉誹謗案件的判決結果。分析結果顯示，除了當選者較易被判無罪之外，其餘三個指標（政黨因素、關係網絡、審判層級）與法院判決之間並不必然存有因果關係。總體而言，本文初步研究以為，民間普遍認定的審判印象，譬如「法院是國民黨開的」、「當選過關，落選被關」、「有關係就沒關係、沒關係就有關係」、「一審重判，二審減半，三審不算」等，這些觀點與實際情形有所出入。在結論中，作者摘述分析要點，並詮釋司法政治的理論意涵及其研究建議。英文摘要：Negative campaigning is a common characteristic in Taiwan's electoral politics, and therefore often leads to cases of defamation in campaign. Because of highly political issues of such judicial cases, the general public does not seem to trust the judiciary to be independent of political influence. In this study, we collect data on the decisions of campaign defamation in Taiwan's three-tiered court system (district courts, high courts, and the Supreme Court) from January 2000 to March 2011. Data analyzed in this study are collected from ”the Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China Law and Regulations Retrieving System.” By employing a mixed quantitative and qualitative method (including cross-tabulations and documentary analyses), this study investigates the impacts of four political indicators (partisanship, elected or not, sociopolitical networks, and judicial procedure) on litigations of campaign defamation. In the quantitative analyses, results reveal that the three factors (partisanship, sociopolitical networks, and judicial procedure) do not necessarily have a causal relationship with judicial verdicts except that those elected are more likely to be found not-guilty. In the part of qualitative analyses, little evidence proves that political factors systematically influence court decisions. We find that the negative stereotypes of the judicial system do not tally with the empirical findings, for example, ”the courts are dominated by the Kuomintang;” ”those elected will be let off, but those losing the elections will be imprisoned;” ”those with good social connections won't have any problem, but those without connections will have big trouble;” or, ”at the first trial a heavy sentence is passed, at the second trial the sentence is halved, and at the third trial the case is quashed.” Taken as a whole, the effects of political variables exert considerably less influence than expected on defamation verdicts. In conclusion, the key findings and research limitations are reviewed, and suggestions of judicial politics are proposed for future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.00012篇名：立法委員選舉的賄選誘因與效果－從SNTV到FPTP並列篇名：The Incentives and Effectiveness of Vote-Buying: A Comparison of SNTV and FPTP作者：吳親恩(Chin-En Wu)關鍵字：賄選;立法委員選舉;單一選區;SNTV;vote-buying;legislator election;single member district;SNTV期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以第六與第七屆立委選舉賄選一審判決資料，分析影響立委選舉賄選的因素以及影響候選人當選的原因，重心放在選制變項的作用。實證發現，選制除了與賄選誘因顯著相關之外，也影響到賄選對當選的助益，在賄選誘因方面，首先在SNTV下，選區中候選人的數目或應選名額增加，或當選高門檻降低時，候選人進行賄選的機率跟著增加；不過在FPTP下，同一選區候選人數目增加時，候選人進行賄選的機率並不會跟著增加。與此相關，實證也發現，同一選區中同黨參選人數目多少也是預測賄選出現機率的顯著變項。而在影響當選的因素方面，在SNTV中，進行賄選會增加當選的機率；不過在FPTP下，賄選對增加當選的機率並沒有明顯的幫助。其次，在SNTV中，候選人或其樁腳在過往的參選經歷中曾有賄選案件被起訴或判刑，並不會影響其當選的機率，不過在FPTP下，候選人過往賄選記錄會降低其當選的機率。英文摘要：This article examines the effect of electoral system on vote-buying incentives and the effectiveness of vote-buying. By assembling judicial records, this article compares on the 2004 and 2008 legislative elections, which undertake SNTV and FPTP respectively. It shows that greater number of candidates in a given district, larger district magnitude, or higher effective threshold are all associated with higher instances of vote-buying behaviors. In those districts, candidates face intense intraparty competition and only needs to gather a small portion of votes to be elected, both factors contributing to prevalent vote-buying. As for the 2008 election, the number of candidates in a given district and effective threshold are no longer significant predictors of vote-buying. Since under FPTP two major parties dominate the election, the effective numbers of candidates are identical across districts, rendering the two factors not significant. As for the effectiveness of vote-buying, we find that vote-buying is positive and significant only under SNTV. On the other hand, vote-buying records hurt candidates' subsequent election performance only under FPTP.起始頁-結束頁：41-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.00413篇名：台灣立委選制變遷的新制度論解釋並列篇名：A New-Institutionalist Explanation for Taiwanese Legislative Electoral Change作者：謝易宏(Ek-Hong Sia)關鍵字：選制變遷;新制度主義;理性選擇制度論;關鍵時刻;脈絡化認知;electoral change;new institutionalism;rational choice institutionalism;critical juncture;contextualized cognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文採用理性選擇制度論對「理性自利行為者」（rational self-interest maximizer）的預設，輔以歷史制度論的「關鍵時刻」（critical juncture）的概念，以及社會學制度論對行為者「脈絡化認知」（contextualized cognition）的強調，用以解釋台灣立委選舉制度變遷「如何發生」、「為什麼在2004年」、「為什麼是MMM制出線」這三個環環相扣的問題。本文主張：立委選制變遷的「關鍵時刻」是「2004年3月的總統大選後」至「同年12月的立委選舉前」這段時間。總統選舉結果帶來的新訊息，使得民進黨與國民黨從消極地維持舊選制轉變為推動選制改革的主要力量；外生壓力與選舉邏輯兩者形成「可信的威脅」（credible threat），徹底屈服了兩個小黨以及個別立委對新選制的抗拒。選舉制度只可能在這關鍵時刻的時段內產生變遷，在2004年總統大選前不可能變遷，過了這段關鍵時刻後變遷也成為不可能。MMM制之所以成為國民黨與民進黨共同接受的新選項，原因在於：國民黨想藉由MMM制扳回一城兼收合併親民黨之效；而民進黨則想藉由MMM制達成完全執政兼收消滅台聯之效。親民黨與台聯最終仍對國會改革法案投下贊成票，乃是忌憚「反改革的代價」之緣故。英文摘要：This article formulates a synthesized new-institutionalist framework to explain three interlocking questions concerning Taiwanese legislative electoral change, i.e. ”how did it happen?”, ”why was the year 2004?”, and ‘why did MMM system be chosen?’ by adopting the presupposition of ”rational self-interest maximizer” in rational choice institutionalism, the concept of ”critical juncture” in historical institutionalism, and the emphasis of ”contextualized cognition” in sociological institutionalism. The ”critical juncture” of Taiwanese legislative electoral change was the very period from the end of presidential election in March, 2004 to the legislative election in December, 2004. This is the only timing feasible for the electoral change. This electoral reform can not succeed either before the 2004 presidential election or after the 2004 legislative election. The result of 2004 presidential election transformed the preferences of both KMT and DPP for the electoral change from preserving the existing system to promoting a new one. KMT and DPP, as two major parties, shared so similar political logic that MMM system became their common alternative for electoral system. By adopting MMM system, KMT envisaged its victory in the coming legislative elections and the political engineering of merging PFP, while DPP anticipated to gain full power from becoming the majority in Legislative Yuan and to cripple TSU. The convergence of exogenous pressure and electoral logic, serving as a ”credible threat”, dissolved the resistance to the electoral change from two minor parties as well as most legislators. For PFP and TSU (even as well as most legislators in two major parties), the stigma of ”anti-reformer” was unbearable in the coming legislative election. That is why these two minority parties voted for electoral change eventually.起始頁-結束頁：81-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.00814篇名：政治制度與金融改革－台灣與韓國的比較並列篇名：Political Institution and Financial Reform: A Comparison between Taiwan and South Korea作者：黃宗昊(Tsung-Hao Huang);歐陽睿(Ray Ouyang)關鍵字：政治制度;制度配套;金融改革;陳水扁;金大中;political institution;financial reform;Kim Dae-Jung;Chen Shui-Bian期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣與韓國分別從2000年與1998年開始進行了類似的金融改革，但成效差異甚大，韓國的改革成效卓著，台灣的改革卻成效不彰。何以如此？兩國的政治制度影響頗巨。政治制度會引導行動者進行政治互動，並型塑出政策過程的普遍特徵。金大中利用韓國政治制度的特點，建構出國會的多數聯盟以推動政策，這是何以韓國的金融改革能成效卓著。陳水扁則受台灣政治制度的引導走向少數政府，欠缺穩定的國會多數支持，這也導致台灣的金融改革成效不彰。英文摘要：South Korea initiated major financial reforms from 1998 to 2000. Taiwan also enacted similar reforms from 2000 to 2006, but the effects were vastly different. In short, the reforms of South Korea were comprehensive and effective compared to the reforms made in Taiwan. Why were the results so different? The key is whether the political leaders of each country obtained stable support from a congressional majority as they endeavored to implement policies. Obtaining stable support in congress is essential for effective policy implementation, and such support is conditioned by political institutions in these two countries. Kim Dae-jung successfully applied the characteristics of the political institutions in Korea to construct a majority coalition in congress to support his policies. The financial reforms in Korea thus thrived. On the other hand, Chen Shui-bian in Taiwan was forced to form a minority government by way of the political institutions in Taiwan. Without a majority of the congress to support his policies, financial reforms in Taiwan were ineffective.起始頁-結束頁：143-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.01435篇名：茉莉花革命浪潮下對當前中國國家：社會關係的再檢視－網路政治中的公民維權與黨國維權雙重分析視角並列篇名：Revisiting China's State-Society Relations against the Backdrop of Jasmine Revolution: Perspectives from Both Civil and Party: State Oriented Wei-Quan in Internet Politics作者：陳柏奇(Po-Chi Chen);洪敬富(Chin-Fu Hung)關鍵字：茉莉花革命;新媒體;網路政治;議題設定;中國國家社會關係;維權;asmine Revolution;new media;internet politics;agenda-setting;China's state-society relations;wei-quan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：發生於北非、中東的一系列「茉莉花革命」引起了當前學術界新一波關於網路通訊科技推進威權政體民主化議題的爭辯。本文即在此脈絡下，以「網路政治」中的「維權」視角，探析新媒體「如何」（how）且在「多大程度」（to what extent）上衝擊並影響當代中國威權政治的發展，並據以檢視當前黨國政體下的中國國家－社會關係。本文「維權」所指涉的是「權力」與「權利」雙重層次：其一為中國政府維繫並鞏固黨國權威與統治力；另一為中國人民（網民）捍衛憲法所賦予公民的基本權利。本文認為，新媒體的中介平台角色，使得舊有國家－社會間的「強國家，弱社會」關係模式正快速地受到衝擊。中國網路政治下的政治發展新圖像將是一種從網民到公民、從統治到良治的新圖像。它重塑了「新」媒體時代下的中國國家－社會關係，亦為中國公民社會健康發展和推進民主轉型提供了根本而重大的基礎。英文摘要：The Jasmine revolution resulting from North Africa and the Middle East has triggered a new wave of scholarly debates on the roles of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in contributing the democratic development and changes in authoritarian states. Against this backdrop, this article studies the political development and democratization of China, with the aim to enhance a higher level of understanding of ICT's impact and influence on China's politics. Considering the politics of the so-called wei-quan (rights protection) movements waged by both Netizens and the party-state, this article argues that the ICT has indeed facilitated the emergence of civil society in China, making the democratic transitions in the PRC possible in the age of new media.起始頁-結束頁：195-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.01956篇名：皇后的貞操－法治的迷思、偽善與其他可能作者：蘇彥圖期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：245-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.02457篇名：法律解釋理論的重新建構－機制取徑與系統性的成本效益分析？作者：林春元期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：255-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.02558篇名：世界民主大事紀 2011年10-12月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：269-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會DOI：10.6448/TDQ.201203.026901篇名：美國共同核心州課程標準倡議之探討並列篇名：An Analysis on Common Core State Standards Initiative of the United States of America作者：詹紹威(David Chan)關鍵字：共同核心州課程標準;美國教改;CCSSI政策;Common Core State Standards;educational reform of USA;CCSSI polices期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：《有教無類法》法案(No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, NCLBA)簽署後，2002年各州為了逃避學生學業成績未達標準會遭受嚴厲懲罰，紛紛降低要求標準，使得1994年所訂的全國標準權威性和實效性大打折扣。2006年PISA(Programme for International Student Assessment)成績公告後，美國學生的科學與數學素養的測評結果表現均低於OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development)國家的平均水準。因此，2010年6月2日美國全國州長協會(National Governors Association, NGA)和各州教育長官委員會(Council of Chief State School Officers, CCSSO)設立全國統一的「共同核心數學和英語州立標準」定稿並公布，其目的在統一美國K-12年級課程標準，以確保學生做好「升學和就業的準備」，從而提升美國在國際上的競爭力。本文依據文獻、文本分析與個案研究法等方式探究，參酌美國政府與相關教育團體的文件、期刊與有關研究，探討美國推廣課程標準的研制、推動與經驗，可作為臺灣推動「12年國民基本教育」制定各階段學力測驗之參考。英文摘要：Those states who reduced the educational standards for avoiding the discipline of The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 in the United States of America (USA). Therefore, the authority and effectiveness of The National Educational Standards in 1994 slightly decreased. In 2006, student performance on the Programme for International Student Assessment in the United States of America was below the average of Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. For above reasons, National Governors Association and The Council of Chief State School Officers claimed: to enforce the Common Core State Standards for K-12 students in June 2, 2010, in order to insure the competitiveness of the USA, which lays a solid foundation for each student in the future. The analysis discusses the issues of the Common Core State Standards Initiative of the United States of America by the intertextual analysis of literature, government documents, (electronic) periodicals, journals, case studies and the results of the study. Such practices and polices carry important references for the enterprises of 12-years basic education in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：183-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201206_8(2).00072篇名：大學與學校專業夥伴合作之個案研究－以專業學習社群為焦點並列篇名：A Case Study on the Professional Partnership between University and School: Focusing on the Professional Learning Community作者：張素貞(Su-Chen Chang);吳俊憲(Chun-Hsien Wu)關鍵字：專業夥伴;專業學習社群;教師專業發展;professional partners;professional learning community;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學與學校專業夥伴合作的發展歷程與運作情形，並聚焦於專業學習社群的觀點，瞭解學校團隊如何進行課程發展、教學設計、行動研究及促進教師專業發展。研究場域選擇北部一所國中為個案學校，該校連續三年半執行九年一貫課程與教學深耕計畫而組成參與團隊，一直以來和大學教授保持良好互動，目前正逐漸轉型且持續運作（本研究稱為轉型團隊）。研究目的在於瞭解學校參與專業夥伴攜手計畫之團隊發展及轉型概況，以及大學教授與學校轉型團隊的互動方式、合作成果與專業學習社群的關係。研究方法採個案研究取徑，資料蒐集方式包括現場觀察、深度訪談、焦點團體訪談、文件分析及研究者省思札記等。研究發現：（一）學校參與專業夥伴攜手計畫之團隊由綜合活動領域教師組成，經常共同討論合科教學及分享心得，並積極尋求轉型，以提升教師專業能力；（二）大學教授與轉型團隊的互動奠基於信任與互惠關係，並促使理論與教學實務產生連結；（三）大學教授與轉型團隊合作設計教學，促使教學內涵更加豐富多元；（四）轉型團隊教師組成學習型組織，一面進行專業成長，也聚焦於學生學習。最後，針對個案學校及後續研究提出建議。英文摘要：The current study is to explore the cooperative process of implementation of professional partnerships between university professors and schools, focusing on the ”professional learning community”. The purpose of the study consists of four dimensions, including school team development and transformation conditions for school participation in professional partnership programs, interaction methods and progress for university professors and school teams undergoing transformation, and the relationship of cooperation and professional learning community. Main data-collection instruments used in this study were classroom observation, in-depth interviews, focus team interview, document and expanded notes analysis. These findings form the basis of further suggestions for all parties involved: the school, participating team and the administrative authorities. 1. School professional partnership is composed of the teachers of comprehensive activities course. They frequently discuss how to implement integrative instruction and share teaching reflections. Moreover, the teachers of comprehensive activities course seek for instructive transformation and promote professional proficiency. 2. The interaction of the university professor and school teams undergoing transformation is based on the trust, which elicits the combination of theories and teaching practices. 3. The University professor and school teams undergoing transformation design the courses cooperatively which should lead to enrichment of the contents of instruction. 4. The teachers of school teams undergoing transformation form learning community which not only promote professional development for teachers but also focuses on students' learning.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).00013篇名：國小實習教師同儕專業成長團體實施效果之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Effects of Implementation of the Professional Development Peer Group作者：古明峰(Ming-Feng Guu)關鍵字：教育實習;實習教師;同儕專業成長團體;student teaching;student teacher;peer development group期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探究國小實習教師同儕專業成長團體實施之成效。團體運作實施流程分成：擬訂教學計劃、進行觀察教學、同儕團體回饋、反思與心得分享四個循環階段。以2009年參與教育實習11位國小實習教師為對象，共實施14次同儕團體教學成長課程。研究結果發現11位實習教師對於成長團體實施均表滿意。主要收穫有：1.團體成員相互觀摩與支持。2.團體對話與討論能協助釐清自己教學的盲點。3.增進對自我的認識與反思。4.能將所學教學理論與實務結合。5.很多有經驗的教師所給予的教學指導。輔導教師、教務主任及校長認為本團體對於實習教師的幫助有：1.視實習教師為主動思考與反思行動的「知識生產者」。2.聚焦於教學專業對話，提供實習教師聚焦在教學中重要歷程的反思。3.加速實習教師進入教學職場之準備。英文摘要：The main purpose of this case study was to explore the effects of implementation of the professional development peer group. The model was based on social constructivism and the researcher's experience as a student teaching supervisor. The process of the peer development group was operated through four circular steps: writing up of the lesson plan, classroom observation, getting feedback from the peers, as well as reflecting and sharing. The participants included 11 elementary student teachers who participated in 14 sessions of the peer development group. The result of the study revealed that the 11 student teachers gained growth on professional knowledge and skills. They placed high recognition of this model. The main accomplishments included: 1.The group members were able to work together by observing and supporting one another's practice; 2.The group members were able to conduct group dialogues and discussions, helping to clarify the blind spots and gain new experiences; 3.They acquired self-understanding and reflective thinking; 4.They could combine teaching theory with the practice; and 5. They received guidance from experienced teachers. The mentor teacher, the administration director and the principal reported that the contributions of the development group are as follows: 1.Regarding the student teacher as the active thinker and reflective ”knowledge producer”; 2.Focusing on professional dialogue about teaching and leading the teacher trainee to focusing on the reflection on the teaching process; and 3.Accelerating the teacher trainee's preparation for entering the teaching work place.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).00024篇名：我國大學教師專業發展之現況、困境與展望並列篇名：The Status, Difficulties and Prospects of Teacher Professional Development in Higher Education in Taiwan作者：鄭博真(Bor-Jen Jeng)關鍵字：大學;高等教育;教師專業發展;教師發展;專業發展;higher education;professional development;teacher professional development;teacher development;university期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討我國大學教師專業發展之現況、困境與展望。目前我國大學院校幾乎都設立了負責教師發展的相關單位。大多數學校辦理教師發展，以一天以內的研習會為主，且大多是單一次的活動。教師發展實施方式，大致包括：新進教師研習、專業成長研習會或工作坊、專業社群、傳習薪傳制度、優良教師教學經驗分享、教學諮詢，以及相關補助措施等。教師發展內容大多以教學發展為主，研究發展次之，很少個人及組織發展。教師發展需求大多與教學專業知能相關。在困境部份，包括教師發展制度欠缺周延、負責單位編制尚未健全、教師發展欠缺系統規劃、教師心態不夠積極主動、教師發展成效有待評鑑、全國資源未能有效整合、教師發展缺乏研究基礎等。展望我國大學教師專業發展，本研究提出可以從健全大學教師專業發展制度、強化教師專業發展組織編制、加強教師專業發展整體規劃、促進教師主動積極持續發展、教師發展納入學校辦學績效、有效整合大學教師發展資源、推動大學教學與學習學術化、獎助大學教師發展學術研究等八方面著手。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to explore the status, difficulties and prospects of teacher professional development in higher education in Taiwan. Nearly all universities set up the teacher development department. Most schools hold one-day teacher development activity. The types of teacher development include new teacher program, workshops, professional community, mentor and manatee, good teachers' experiences sharing, teaching consultation, and related subsidy measure. Most of the contents of teacher development were teaching development, the personal and organizational developments were very few. The most development needs of university teachers were teaching professional knowledge and skills. The difficulties included: the teacher development system was not perfect, the organization of department was not fully prepared, the teacher development lacked systematic planning, the teachers' attitudes were not active, the teacher development effectiveness needed to be evaluated, the national resources were not effectively integrated, and the teacher development lacked the research-based foundation. The study proposed some strategies as follows: First, improvement of the teacher development system. Second, revision of the teacher development organization. Third, strengthening of the teacher development corporate planning. Fourth, promotion of active and sustained development of the university teachers. Fifth, integration of the teacher development and the school performance. Sixth, integration of the national teacher development resources. Seventh, promotion of scholarship of teaching and learning in universities. Eighth, implementation of grant system for the university teacher development research.起始頁-結束頁：61-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).00035篇名：美國加州檢核職前教師表現制度之研究並列篇名：A Study on the System for Examining Pre-service Teachers’ Performance in California作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)關鍵字：檢核職前教師表現制度;表現本位;教學表現期待;加州教學專業標準;examining pre-service teachers' performance;performance-based assessment;Teaching Performance Expectancies;California Standards for the Teaching Profession期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文蒐集美國加州官方文件和相關研究文獻，並以King主張比較之研究架構，先描述後詮釋的階段分析，用以了解美國加州檢核職前教師表現制度之情形，以及可為臺灣師資培育啟發之處。首先，本文分析美國強調教師素質與標準本位師資培育政策的脈絡下，加州檢核制度係以《教學專業標準》為核心文件，據以發展職前階段《教學表現期待》表現指標，以引導檢核職前教師表現活動之進行。其次，本文分析現行檢核加州表現評量三種模式，加州教學表現評量、加州教師表現評量、Fresno實習學生表現評量之內涵。復次，本文評析加州檢核職前教師表現制度七項議題，包括凝聚標準的共識以達目的、傳統評估教師候選人方式之困境、具效度且反映出教師在教學脈絡的複雜能力、展現多元證據的思維、以學習者為中心的評量方式、統整師資培育課程與學習經驗、實施問題等等。最後本文提供九點加州檢核職前教師表現制度之經驗，提供臺灣現行師資培育制度之參考。英文摘要：The trend of innovation of teacher quality since 1980s in the United States has been to assess teacher education accountability by performance-based evidence. This article aims to understand the system of examining pre-service teachers' performance in California, as well as the three models of examining pre-service teachers' performance and relative issues for performance assessment. King's comparative method is used to describe and interpret by documents review and relative studies analysis to achieve the above mentioned aims. Secondly, due to three models of examining pre-service teachers' performance, seven issues including reaching consensus to standards, dilemma of traditional test, presentation of the complex competence in teaching context, showing evidences from multiple ways, assessment of the teacher candidate in center, integration of teacher education curriculum teaching and learning, and the problem of practice are analyzed to better understand the performance assessment. Finally, this paper provides 9 results and discussions of performance assessment for reference in teacher education policy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：93-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).00046篇名：澳洲與紐西蘭高等教育教學認證課程之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Australia and New Zealand Accredited Teaching Certificate Programs in Higher Education作者：陳琦媛(Chi-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：教學專業發展;教學認證;澳洲高等教育;紐西蘭高等教育;postgraduate certificate;teaching development programs;higher education;higher education in Australia;higher education in New Zealand期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著近年來各界對於高等教育教學品質的重視，各國大學開始設置長期性的高等教育教學訓練課程，以提升教師教學能力，對於完成課程修習的教師授予高等教育教學認證，甚至將此教學認證視為教師聘任和升等的基本條件。此類課程由英國最早開始推行，近年來其他國家有越來越普遍的趨勢，澳洲、紐西蘭等國之大學皆開設有此類型的教師教學訓練課程。本研究主要目的在了解澳洲與紐西蘭高等教育教學認證課程的做法以供我國參考。首先說明高等教育教學認證課程之內涵與相關研究，探討澳洲與紐西蘭對於高等教育教學發展之相關政策，並以英國時報增刊世界大學排名為依據，選取於大洋洲排名前八所澳洲和紐西蘭的大學做為研究樣本，分析其所開設高等教育教學認證課程之課程目標與修業規定、課程內容、課程類型、評量方式、完成課程之益處、初階及進階課程，研究結果除對澳洲和紐西蘭大學的高等教育教學認證課程的實施方式與課程內容有初步了解外，亦分析於我國實施高等教育教學認證課程之可行性，最後提出澳洲與紐西蘭做法可茲借鏡之處以供我國規劃高等教育教學發展政策之參考。英文摘要：Over the last decade, there has been an emphasis placed on higher education with a focus on teaching excellence and student learning outcomes. Some countries began to implement professional development programs to assist in developing teaching methodology. Teachers who have completed the programs would be awarded teaching certificate. Some countries use this certificate as a necessary condition for teacher probation, evaluation and promotion. These programs began in the United Kingdom and have gained in worldwide popularity recently. Nowadays, the universities in Australia, New Zealand, Singapore and Hong Kong offer these teaching training programs to their teachers. The purpose of this research is to explore the graduate certificate programs in learning and teaching in higher education in Australia and New Zealand. To achieve this purpose, the aims, content, curriculum and assessment of the programs in the top eight higher education universities in Australia and New Zealand were analyzed. Some suggestions for developing the teaching professionalism of teachers in higher education in Taiwan were proposed based on the results of the analysis.起始頁-結束頁：125-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).00057篇名：臺灣公立大學教師彈性薪資制之研究並列篇名：The Study of Faculty Merit Pay System for Taiwanese Public Universities作者：黃曙東(Shu-Tung Huang)關鍵字：大學教師彈性薪資制;教師評鑑;教師薪資;the university faculty merit pay/performance-related pay system;faculty evaluation;faculty compensation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在建構一套臺灣公立大學教師彈性薪資制之實施內涵及其推動之策略。透過薪資激勵以強化大學教師素質進而提昇機構效能，自1980年代中期起即是各國政府高等教育最優先作為；教師彈性薪資制，意即透過教師評鑑產出具辯證力的評鑑結果，並據此與薪資、獎勵政策連接，讓教師薪資直接且實質地激勵教師效能的提昇。為達研究目的，本研究採專家訪談及德懷術等方法；首先經由文獻探討以瞭解大學教師彈性薪資制理論與各國推動實務；其次依據文獻探討結果草擬訪談大綱並據以進行11位專家之訪談；再者依據文獻探討與訪談結果草擬問卷初稿，再經由3位專家審查以定稿；最後邀請17位學者專家組成焦點團體小組，並施以3次德懷術之問卷調查，以確定我國公立大學教師彈性薪資制之實施內涵，包括獎勵範疇、經費來源、獎勵幅度與人數、推動的權責單位與設計流程等，以及有關政府與大學的建議策略與作為，以做為臺灣推動大學教師彈性薪資制之重要參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to construct the faculty merit pay system for Taiwanese public universities, and to create the strategies for utilizing the system to improve faculty quality by faculty evaluation and compensation systems. Salary awards from merit pay system appear to be an appropriate means of directing faculty better performances and their accountabilities; precisely, most governments have endeavored to implement merit pay system to enhance their higher institutions' effectiveness since the mid-1980s. The research methods used experts' interviewing and Delphi technique. First, the author interviewed eleven experts to form the questionnaires, and then asked three experts to ensure their validity. Second, the author invited seventeen specialists to panel a focus group, and then used the Delphi technique method for the group members to construct the merit pay system as well as to investigate how Taiwan's public universities accurately implemented their systems and what problems existed; finally, based on the research outcomes, the conclusions and recommendations to governmental bodies and higher education institutes were presented.起始頁-結束頁：157-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).00068篇名：當代大學面臨之挑戰與發展機會及對國內高等教育發展之啟示並列篇名：Challenges and Opportunities of Universities and Implications for Higher Education Development in Taiwan作者：陳素琴(Su-Chin Chen)關鍵字：大學;高等教育;高等教育發展;挑戰與機會;university;higher education;development of higher education;challenges and opportunities期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討邇來大學所面臨的挑戰與可能的機會。首先透過文獻資料之蒐集，探討當前大學所面臨之內、外在環境的挑戰，外在環境變化來自全球化下的國際競爭日趨激烈、知識經濟、科技發達與創新、市場化的衝擊、回應社會與對教育品質及績效責任的要求、政府角色的轉變等；內在環境變化則出現了高等教育規模的擴充與學習生態的改變、大學角色的轉變、專業管理人員的出現及教師聘任方式的改變，以及自籌財源的壓力與財務結構的轉變等。針對這些挑戰本研究提出大學可能的發展機會：彰顯高等教育的產業性、財源開發多元化與化零為整的資源分配、把握時機發展自我定位與市場區隔、成為區域經濟的推動者，以及提供多樣化的服務以滿足異質化的顧客需求等，最後則從組織發展的角度提出對國內高等教育發展之啟示。英文摘要：This paper firstly offers analysis to the present issues that challenge universities due to the changes from internal and external environment. Those which come from external environment include increasing international competitiveness on account of the globalization, knowledge economy, technology and innovation, marketization, responses to the education quality and accountability, as well as the changing role of the government. Meanwhile, the expansion of higher education and the transformation of learning conditions, role of university, managers and employment of faculty, pressure from raising funds and changing financial structure are the main changes from internal. Some opportunities are proposed afterward to cope with these challenges that can help universities to be more adaptive and competitive, including the increase of higher education productivity, diversified resources and allocation, position and segmentation, as promoter of regional economy, supplier of various services to satisfy the diversified demands of customers. It ends with a sketch of the main implications for the development of higher education in Taiwan in terms of organizational development.起始頁-結束頁：189-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.201203_8(1).000701篇名：「青少年人際認知成熟量表」之發展研究並列篇名：The Development of Adolescent Cognitive Competence of Interpersonal Relationship Scale作者：劉奕蘭(Yih-Lan Liu)關鍵字：人際關係三向模式;人際關係認知能力;複核效化;驗證性因素分析;adolescent cognitive competence of interpersonal relationship;confirmatory factor analysis;cross-validation;the Tripartite Interpersonal Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要根據Selman 等人（1992）的人際關係三向模式理論，發展一份能測量15歲以上青少年人際關係認知能力的量表。量表係經過一系列嚴謹的分析程序：第一階段的樣本為台灣北區417位高中、職一年級的學生，所蒐集的資料用來進行項目分析、驗證性因素分析、內在結構適配檢測、重測信度與效標關聯效度分析；第二階段的樣本為來自相同地區663位高中、職一年級學生，所蒐集的資料用來進行複核效化檢測。驗證性因素分析中經過一系列模式競爭分析之後，結果顯示，二階單因子模式最能解釋人際關係認知能力量表。此一模式經過信效度分析之後，顯示模式之觀察值與潛在變項有良好的信度、聚合效度、區別效度及效標關聯效度。此外，複核效化的檢定也證實此模式具有穩定性及預測力。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop Adolescent Cognitive Competence of Interpersonal Relationship Scale based on Selman et al.'s (1992) the Tripartite Interpersonal Model. A series of analyses were conducted to examine the scale's reliability and validity. The first sample set including 417 10th graders from Northwestern Taiwan was used to examine the factor structure of the scale by confirmatory factor analysis. The result of competing models indicated that the second-order factor model was the most efficient one. The internal-component evaluation of the model found that latent variables have good reliability, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and construct validity and criteria validity. The second sample set including 663 10th graders from the same areas were used for the cross-validation. The results confirmed the model's stability and predictive power.起始頁-結束頁：49-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201203.00492篇名：畫人測驗在大學生輔導之應用：以畫人測驗篩選適應不良的學生並列篇名：Draw-A-Person Test and Its Application in Counseling for Screening University Students作者：朱錦鳳(Gin-Fon Ju)關鍵字：Koppitz;情緒困擾;畫人測驗;適應不良指標;學業成績;academic performance;DAP;emotional disturbed;Koppitz;maladjusted indicator期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：畫人測驗過去幾乎僅應用於臨床個案，早期常當作非語文智力測驗用來診斷智能不足的兒童，近代則多作為投射測驗使用，用以評估個案的情緒困擾、適應不良、衝動、腦傷等症狀。畫人測驗的計分系統大致可分為量化計分及整體指標解釋等兩種。本研究的主要目的是將投射性畫人測驗應用於一般大學生，同時使用兩種計分方式探索適應不良的學生。本研究抽樣兩班大學生團體施測畫人測驗，以個別晤談及行為觀察的實證方式，探索畫人測驗在篩選適應不良學生的應用。研究結果顯示：（1）畫人測驗以Maloney與Glasser簡易的適應不良指標即可有效篩選適應不良的學生；（2）大學生和研究生在畫人測驗的表現略有差異，建議畫人測驗在針對不同發展階段的族群時，其結果解釋應審酌其不同的特性及含意；（3）男生和女生在畫人測驗的表現亦有差異，建議畫人測驗在針對不同性別時，其結果解釋應有不同的常模標準；（4）大學生的畫人測驗在Koppitz認知發展分數上與其在校學業成績呈顯著正相關，但與其DAP: SPED情緒困擾分數及入學指考成績呈顯著負相關，與「瑞文氏高級圖形推理測驗」則無相關；（5）畫人測驗具有良好的再測信度。英文摘要：The Draw-A-Person (DAP) test has been used for evaluating children's IQ. When DAP was used as a projective test, it may also evaluate the client's emotional disturbance, impulsivity, and brain impairment. The scoring method of DAP can be classified to quantitative and qualitative system. The purpose of the research is to use Maloney & Glasser's maladjusted indicators on DAP to screen maladjusted students in university and evaluate its effectiveness by applying individual interview and behavior observation, and also figured out their Koppitz's developmental scores and DAP: SPED scores. The results showed that (1) DAP can be an efficient measure to screen the maladjusted students by simply using the four indicators of Maloney & Glasser; (2) when comparing the differences on DAP for university and graduate students, it was found that DAP yielded the same screening effect; (3) when comparing the gender differences on DAP, it was found that male yielded higher percentage of maladjusted and emotional disturbed than female; (4) the Koppitz's scores on DAP were positively related to the academic performance but negatively related to the DAP: SPED scores and the entrance exam scores, and no relationship with APM for university students; (5) DAP yielded a good test-retest reliability.起始頁-結束頁：75-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201203.00753篇名：台灣物質主義測量暨信效度評估並列篇名：The Scale Development of Taiwanese Materialism作者：林耀南(Yao-Nan Lin)關鍵字：物質主義;物質占有;量表編製;台灣;material possession;Materialism;scale;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在多元文化與特有經濟脈絡下，台灣消費文化中之物質主義確實不同於西方之既有概念。因此，本研究主要目的在於發展適用台灣消費價值觀之「台灣物質主義量表」（Taiwanese Materialism Scale, TMS），藉此探討在台灣特有消費文化下之物質主義面貌。量表之最初發展題目共計57題，在進行項目分析等刪題步驟後，正式之量表題目共計27題，其中包含「迎合世俗」、「占有愉悅」、「物質滿意」，以及「金錢至上」等四個分量表。在信度檢驗方面，本量表之內部一致性係數為.90；再測信度為.76。在效度檢驗方面，本研究首先以驗證性因素分析探討本量表之建構效度，並進行聚合與區辨效度之檢驗。在效標關聯效度方面，則以Richins與Dawson（1992）所發展之「物質主義量表」進行分析參照。上述檢驗結果均顯示本研究發展量表之信效度皆佳。整體而言，本研究所建構之「台灣物質主義量表」，符合台灣與華人文化之物質主義本質脈絡，且例如「迎合世俗」之概念，確實與西方原有向度建構不同。因此，透過本量表，可有效進行在台灣及華人社會有關物質主義價值觀測量之研究。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop the Taiwanese Materialism Scale (TMS). This study reviewed the construct and clarified the concept of materialism in the Taiwanese culture. And then developed the Taiwanese materialism scale. 57 items were built in the original questionnaire. After the factor analysis, item-to-response, and correlation analysis, 27-item scale was developed. It consists of the following four dimensions: ”conformity”, ”possession pleasure”, ”material satisfaction”, and ”money first”. The Cronbach's α of the scale is .90. Test-retest reliability is .76. After the confirmatory factor analysis, the results showed TMS has stable construct validity. It also has appropriate convergent validity and discriminate validity. The scale built by this study can be applied in measuring the Taiwanese attitudes in materialism.起始頁-結束頁：103-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201203.01034篇名：學生評鑑教師教學題目安排順序不同對學生評鑑教師的影響：MI與MMI分析取向並列篇名：The Effects of Question Order Difference on Student Ratings of Instruction: MI and MMI Analysis Approaches作者：曾明基(Ming-Chi Tseng);張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);羅寶鳳(Pao-Feng Lo);邱于真(Yu-Zhen Qiu)關鍵字：多層次測量恆等性;測量恆等性;學生評鑑教師教學;Measurement Invariance;Multilevel-Measurement Invariance;Student Ratings of Instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要探討學生評鑑教師教學量表的題目在安排順序不同時，對學生評鑑教師教學的影響。研究對象為東部某大學的大學部182班學生，各班級人數介於11和92人之間，總樣本數為6,568人。每班學生隨機分為A組和B組，A組學生填寫學生評鑑教師教學題目安排在總量表之前的問卷，簡稱A組；B組則剛好相反。經測量恆等性檢定發現，題目安排順序不同對學生評鑑教師教學的分數在學生層次保持恆等，在班級層次因為聚合後產生的共線性而出現無法解釋的現象，因此後續分成兩部分加以深入探究。首先，在控制母體組間變異數的情況下，發現因素構念及學生填答分數仍具有恆等性；其次，在跨層級的分析架構下，其結果依舊保持恆等。本研究依照研究發現，對學生評鑑教師教學提出相關建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of question order difference on student ratings of instruction. The sample consisted of 182 undergraduate classes from a university in the east coast of Taiwan, class size ranging between 11 and 92, and the total sample were 6,568 students. There were two forms (Form A and Form B) of the Student Ratings of Instruction (SRI) Instrument. Form A, the student ratings of instruction items were placed before the student self-evaluation items. On Form B, the question order was opposite to the order of Form A.The measurement invariance test revealed that subjects in a different order on the SRI at the student level scores remain identical, but at the class level the result was influenced by a high degree of polymerization of linear without clear explanations. Therefore, the follow-up analysis was discussed in two parts to explore them in depth.First, in the case of the model in the control group variance, SRI construct factors and scores were found to be identically equal. Second, in cross-level analysis framework, the results also remain identical. Based on the results of this study, some suggestions were provided for the practice and the future study as well.起始頁-結束頁：131-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會DOI：10.7108/PT.201203.013101篇名：負向顧客事件頻次與樂觀性格對情緒勞動的預測效果：服務關係長短的調節效果並列篇名：The Effects of Frequency of Negative Customer Events and Optimistic Personality on Emotional Labor: The Moderating Effect of Length of Service Relationship作者：劉心瑜(Hsin-Yu Liu);吳宗祐(Tsung-Yu Wu)關鍵字：情緒勞動;表層演出;深層演出;樂觀性格;負向顧客事件頻次;emotional labor;surface acting;deep acting;optimistic personality;frequency of negative customer events期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討兩種情緒勞動（即表層演出與深層演出）的前置因素，包含負向顧客事件頻次與樂觀性格，並檢視員工對顧客的服務關係長短對於上述前置變項與兩種情緒勞動的關係的調節效果。透過問卷調查法，本研究蒐集了208位第一線服務人員的問卷。階層迴歸分析結果顯示，負向顧客事件頻次分別與表層演出、深層演出有正、負向關係；樂觀性格分別與表層演出、深層演出有負、正向關係。此外，服務關係長短會調節負向顧客事件頻次與表層演出、深層演出之關係；在員工需要與顧客建立長期關係的情況下，負向顧客事件頻次與表層演出、深層演出之關係較強。再者，服務關係長短會調節樂觀性格與深層演出之關係，但不會調節樂觀性格與表層演出之關係；在員工需要與顧客建立長期關係的情況下，樂觀性格與深層演出的關係則較弱。本研究之理論意涵、實務貢獻、研究限制、及未來研究方向，將在最後提出討論。英文摘要：The current study explored the antecedents of two types of emotional labor (i.e., surface acting and deep acting), including frequency of negative customer events and optimistic personality, as well as examined the moderating effect of length of service relationship on the relationship between antecedents and two types of emotional labor. Using questionnaire survey, the data were collected from 208 first line service employees. Results of hierarchical regression showed that frequency of negative customer events were positively related to surface acting and negatively related to deep acting; optimistic personality was negatively related to surface acting and positively related to deep acting. In addition, length of service relationships moderated the relationship between frequency of negative customer events and surface acting as well as deep acting, such that the relationships were stronger under long-term service relationships. Also, the length of service relationships moderated the relationship between optimistic personality and deep acting, not surface acting, such that the optimism-deep acting relationship was weaker under long-term service relationships. The theoretical implications, practical contributions, limitations, and future research directions were discussed at the end.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1204.012篇名：自己人更優惠，或是更辛苦？領導部屬交換關係中的矛盾並列篇名：Do In-Group Employees Get More or Pay More? The Antinomies in Leader-Member Exchange Relationships作者：熊欣華(Hsin-Hua Hsiung);陳欽洲(Ching-Chou Chen)關鍵字：領導部屬交換理論;工作負荷量;工作考績;工作壓力;工作不滿意;leader-member exchange theory;workload;job performance rating;job stress;job dissatisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：領導部屬交換理論（Leader-Member Exchange Theory，簡稱LMX理論）早期強調高品質LMX關係對部屬工作績效與工作態度的正面影響。然近年來此領域的研究者開始注意到LMX關係中的潛在矛盾，以及員工異質的心理感受。為釐清這些矛盾與感受，我們提出一理論模型以分析兩組對立的路徑。首先，我們檢視了LMX對部屬考績的直接與間接影響路徑，以瞭解當主管給予自己人部屬高分考績時，是否會先考慮部屬的辛勞程度。其次，我們檢視了LMX對部屬工作壓力與工作不滿意度的直接與間接影響路徑，以瞭解LMX是否對部屬心理感受會有相反的效果。本研究蒐集210組主管與部屬配對資料，以結構方程模式分析本理論模型以及工作負荷量在LMX歷程中的中介角色。研究結果顯示，LMX品質對工作考績具有直接且正向的影響效果，對工作壓力與工作不滿意具有直接且負向的影響效果。然而，LMX並沒有經由工作負荷量的中介而影響到後果變數。英文摘要：Early perspective from Leader-Member Exchange Theory (LMX theory) emphasizes the positive effects of high-quality LMX relationships on subordinates' job performance and job attitudes. However, recently some researchers in this field have begun to notice the potential antinomies and the employees' heterogeneous feelings in LMX relationships. To clarify these antinomies and feelings, we proposed a theoretical framework to analyze two sets of contradictory paths. First, we examined the direct and indirect paths from LMX to subordinate job performance rating to understand whether supervisors would take account of the amount of labor when they give high performance ratings to in-group employees. Second, we examined the direct and indirect paths from LMX to job stress and job dissatisfaction to understand whether LMX would have antithetical effects on subordinate psychological feelings. We collected data from 210 supervisor-subordinate pairs and used the structural equation modeling method to analyze the theoretical model and the mediating role of workload in LMX processes. Results showed that LMX quality had a direct, positive effect on subordinate job performance rating, and had a direct, negative effect on job stress and job dissatisfaction. However, LMX did not influence outcome variables through the mediation of workload.起始頁-結束頁：29-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1204.023篇名：運用網路程序分析法探討甄選管理師與工程師之關鍵人格特質－以C國營事業為例並列篇名：Discuss the Key Personality Trait of Selecting the Administrator and the Engineer Using ANP-Take C Government-Owned Enterprise as an Example作者：胡宜中(Yi-Chung Hu);王仁宏(Jen-Hung Wang);易慧珍(Hui-Chen Yi)關鍵字：人格特質;網路程序分析法;personality trait;analytic network process (ANP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：企業營運深受人力資源所影響，因此，企業如何有效地甄選，則為相當重要之使命。過去研究提及人格特質理論時，大都以五大人格特質理論為主，據此，本研究便以五大人格特質理論之構面與準則作為雛型架構之主要參考依據，並透過具有實務經驗與專業知識之專家，進行訪談，進而建構正式衡量架構。此外，本研究因考量構面間與準則間存在著相依性，因此，透過網路程序分析法（Analytic Network Process, ANP）探討甄選管理師與工程師時之關鍵構面與關鍵準則。實證結果顯示，C國營事業甄選管理師與工程師時，皆重視「嚴謹性」、「親和性」與「開放性」，亦皆較不重視「外向性」與「神經質」，其中，甄選管理師首重「嚴謹性」，而甄選工程師首重「親和性」。英文摘要：Business operation is deeply influenced by human resources; consequently, how to select effectively for business is the most important mission. When the past researches mentioned personality trait theory, they mainly focused on Big-Five. Therefore, this study takes the aspects and the criteria of Big-Five as the major reference for the preliminary framework, and interviews the experts who have practical experience and professional knowledge to construct the final framework. In addition, there are dependences among the aspects and the criteria; hence, the authors take Analytic Network Process (ANP) to get the key aspects and the key criteria. The results reveal that when C government-owned enterprise selects the administrator and the engineer, it takes account of conscientiousness, agreeableness, and openness, and does not give weight to extraversion and neuroticism; especially, conscientiousness is the most important personality trait for the administrator and agreeableness for the engineer.起始頁-結束頁：53-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1204.034篇名：師徒怎麼配？論師徒功能、員工知識分享與創新行為關係中師徒類型之調節角色並列篇名：The Relationships among Mentoring Functions, Employees' Innovation Behavior, and Knowledge Sharing Considering the Moderating Role of Mentoring Types作者：李昭蓉(Jau-Rong Li)關鍵字：師徒配對;師徒功能;知識分享;員工創新行為;types of mentoring;mentoring function;knowledge sharing;innovative behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：師徒制是促進資深師父與資淺徒弟之間的知識與經驗交流的方法，透過師徒制的運作，組織得以提升員工能力與創新，為組織帶來成長與創造新獲利機會，進而促使組織不斷地創新與成長。本研究以徒弟觀點為出發，探討師徒功能與員工創新行為及知識分享之關係。並且探討不同師徒制類型（正式／非正式」、「直屬／同儕」以及「同性／跨性別」三類）是否在提供師徒功能方面有所差異，以及師徒類型是否會調節師徒功能對員工創新與知識分享之影響。本研究以金融服務業徒弟員工為問卷發放對象，根據324份有效樣本所進行的分析結果發現，由直屬主管擔任師父的師徒配對在職涯支持功能與角色楷模功能兩方面、以及徒弟知識分享與創新行為方面，都顯著高於同儕師徒關係之情境。而師徒功能中的職涯支持與角色楷模功能，對員工創新行為有顯著正向影響。在師徒類型的調節效果方面，則發現直屬／同儕師徒類型會調節職涯功能與角色楷模對於知識分享與員工創新行為之影響。在直屬配對師徒運作下，職涯功能與角色楷模功能與員工創新行為之關係，都比同儕師徒來得強。本文並針對研究結果在理論與實務上的意涵進行討論。英文摘要：Mentoring relationships is an effective means to facilitate the exchanges of knowledge and experience between senior mentors and junior proteges. Through mentoring relationships, employees can develop professional abilities and be innovative, which increases the competitive edge for the company. Using the protege's perspective, this study examined the relationships among the type of mentoring relationships, mentoring functions proteges received and protege knowledge sharing and innovative behaviors. Furthermore, we examined the moderating role of the type of mentoring relationships in the relationship between mentoring functions and proteges' knowledge sharing and innovative behaviors. We collected data from employees in the financial industry and obtained a total of 324 valid observations. The findings of this study include: First, compared to peer mentoring, proteges in supervisory mentoring received more career and role modeling mentoring functions. Second, mentoring functions positively related to protege knowledge sharing and innovation behaviors. The type of mentorship moderated the positive relationships between career functions and role modeling and proteges' innovation behavior such that the positive relationships were stronger in supervisory mentoring. Theoretical and practical implications of our findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：81-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1204.045篇名：心理契約實現知覺與回任人員組織承諾、離職意圖關係之研究：以組織信任為中介變數並列篇名：A Study on the Relationships between Fulfillment of Psychological Contract and Organizational Commitment & Turnover Intention among Repatriates: Organizational Trust as a Mediator作者：陳淑貞(Shu-Chen Chen)關鍵字：心理契約實現知覺;組織承諾;離職意圖;回任;組織信任;fulfillment of psychological contract;organizational commitment;turnover intention;repatriation;organizational trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：對多國籍企業而言，海外工作任務是一重要研究議題，然而大多數的國際企業相關研究均強調外派，較少討論海外派遣工作任務的另一相關議題：回任，本文聚焦於回任者回任母公司的情境，探討回任者對母公司心理契約實現知覺與回任者的組織承諾及離職意圖的關係。研究中提出心理契約實現知覺與組織承諾、離職意圖的直接關係，以及組織信任的中介效果。本研究是以台灣16家多國籍企業中135位回任人員為研究對象，其平均的外派時間為2.5年，平均回任至今的時間為1.5年。以層級迴歸分析法進行實證，研究結果支持本文研究假設，我們的研究發現：回任者知覺母公司實現心理契約的程度，與離職意圖以及組織承諾間存在直接效果。此外，本研究發現回任者對母公司的組織信任，是母公司實現心理契約知覺與離職意圖間的中介變數；同時亦是實現心理契約知覺與組織承諾間的中介變數。研究結果之管理意涵亦在文中討論之。英文摘要：International assignments for multinational companies (MNCs) are important managerial issues. However, much more emphasis has been on the factors related to expatriation than those related to repatriation. This paper aimed to focus on the context of repatriation to discuss the relationships between repatriates' perceived fulfillment of psychological contracts, their turnover intention, and organizational commitment. This study proposed a direct effect of the above relationships and a mediating effect by trust. A total of 135 repatriates from 16 multinational companies in Taiwan completed the survey. Average expatriate tenure was 2.5 years and average tenure after repatriation was 1.5 years. Hierarchical regression analysis was used to test our hypotheses. Results supported the proposed, since direct relationships between perceived fulfillment of psychological contracts and turnover intent and organizational commitment were found. The results also indicate a mediating effect by organizational trust. Recommendations for future research were proposed, and managerial implications were discussed in this paper as well.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1203.016篇名：企業應用線上社群推廣內部行銷對組織公民行為展現之影響－線上社群參與程度的調節作用並列篇名：Influence of Applying Online Community to Promote Enterprise Internal Marketing in Organizational Citizenship Behavior-Moderating Effect of Online Community Participation作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);陳哲緯(Che-Wei Chen)關鍵字：內部行銷;組織公民行為;線上社群參與程度;調節效果;internal marketing;organizational citizenship behavior;online community participation;moderating effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究利用層級迴歸探討內部行銷對組織公民行為之影響及線上社群參與程度之調節效果。以問卷調查方式對T公司共發出200份問卷，有效回收問卷178份。實證結果顯示，（1）內部行銷對組織公民行為有正面的影響。（2）內部行銷的溝通與激勵、教育訓練、管理支持構面對組織公民行為有正面的影響，其中，教育訓練的影響最大。（3）線上社群參與程度對內部行銷與組織公民行為的關係具有正向的調節效果。（4）線上社群參與程度對內部行銷的教育訓練、管理支持構面與組織公民行為的關係具有正向的調節效果。英文摘要：This study explores the influence of enterprise internal marketing on organizational citizenship behavior and the moderating effect of online community participation. The study used the questionnaire survey method and distributed 200 questionnaires to the T Company, and was received 178 usable responses. Results of hierarchical regression analyses show that (1) internal marketing was positively related to organizational citizenship behavior; (2) communication and incentive, training and managerial support of internal marketing were positively related to organizational citizenship behavior, and the relationship with training was strongest; (3) online community participation moderated the relationship between internal marketing and organizational citizenship behavior; (4) online community participation moderated the relationship between training and managerial support of internal marketing and organizational citizenship behavior, and between internal marketing and protecting enterprise resource of organizational citizenship behavior.起始頁-結束頁：23-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1203.027篇名：以社會網絡方法分析工作世界：科系就業樣態與職能潛在通性的探索並列篇名：To Analyze the World-of-Work Network by Social Network Analysis Method: The Exploration of Employment Pattern and the Latent Generality作者：劉賢文(Hsien-Wen Liu);王思峰(Sy-Feng Wang)關鍵字：職涯;工作世界地圖;社會網絡分析方法;職業興趣代碼;職能潛在通性;career;world-of-work map (WWM);social network analysis method;Holland Code;latent generality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以輔大心理系學生為樣本，探索科系的職業樣態與職能潛在通性。首先以職業本質建構工作世界網絡地圖，描繪心理系範疇中的職業間關係與脈絡，進而使用社會網絡分析方法對就業空間進行職業關係層次上的分析。結果指出，從專業課程預測學生實際的就業樣態效果並不理想（R^2＝0.03），心理系學生實際從事的職業網絡呈現多元的樣態，主要可分成助人、工商與媒體藝文三個主要職群，而大部分的職業都分別聚集在助人與工商專業職群，職群間有著一種職能潛在通性：擁有注重關係的價值觀與良好的洞察、觀察、組織及規劃能力；豐富的心理、教育、人際與服務知識；並具備問題解決、人際影響技能。研究結果對學生而言，可以協助探索，讓學生更認識自己，發展有意義的職涯；對管理者而言，可以打破科系名義分類甄選的窠臼，以科系的實質通性來甄選具有潛力的社會新鮮人。英文摘要：This study used students from the Department of Psychology, Fu Jen Catholic University as samples to explore the occupational pattern and the latent generality of occupational competence in a particular department. Firstly, the World-of-Work Network was constructed in accordance with the essential characteristics of work to illustrate the relationships and contexts between occupations in the work filed of the Department of Psychology. Further, the study analyzed the relationship structure in the occupation space by the Social Network Analysis Method. The results show only 3% of the realized work pattern covariance was predicted by the professional courses of school (R^2=0.03). It is a multi-dimensional pattern, which include three occupational clusters: Helping, Business & Industry, and Media & Art. Most occupations gather in the Helping and Business & Industry. There is a latent generality between these two clusters: One is equipped with the work value of relationships; good ability of insight, observation, organization and plan; sufficient knowledge of psychology, education, interperson and service; well skill of problem solving, interpersonal influence. For students, the result will be available to help them to further know themselves and helping in their career exploration and meaningful development. For management, it is meaningful in breakthrough of the stereotype of the new comer selected by the nominal department category. Instead of to select a fresh graduated by the real generality of occupational competence.起始頁-結束頁：51-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1203.038篇名：以Kano模式探討派遣員工之工作品質與員工滿意並列篇名：Using Kano's Model to Explore the Work Quality and Satisfaction of Dispatched Workers作者：陳珍珍(Chen-Cheng Chen);黃佩鈺(Pei-Yuh Huang);林冠廷(Guan-Ting Lin)關鍵字：人力派遣;Kano模式;員工滿意;dispatched workers;Kano's model;employee satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：由於人力派遣業的興起，帶來了管理上的新議題。為了要取得競爭的優勢，組織必須妥善管理各種型態的員工。從過去以來，員工滿意一直都是以正職員工為對象，針對派遣員工的研究相對缺乏，此外在員工滿意及其影響因素之間往往也是以線性關係為前提。本文導入Kano的多元品質模式，找出派遣員工對各個工作品質項目的品質屬性認知，以作為改善員工滿意時的參考。若屬「必需品質」的項目，不充足時會導致員工不滿，所以一定要維持。若是「線性品質」項目，條件的充足可以提升滿意度；若是「魅力品質」項目，當需要大量提升員工滿意時可以考慮。此外還結合重要度－滿意度分析（ISA），以識別出提升員工滿意時的優先順序，以利於人力資源的有效運用。英文摘要：In recent years, with the rise of dispatching employment, the combination of labor force in organization has been increasingly diversified. And this tendency brings new challenges to organizations that want to keep the competitive advantage of HRM. Employee satisfaction has been an important issue within HR area. However the target of the research has been on permanent employees. In addition, linear relationship between employee satisfaction and work quality is often assumed. In the present research, we focus on dispatched workers, and used Kano's model to develop and categorize each work quality item. This result will help to identify work quality item for improving employee's satisfaction effectively. At the same time, we introduced an importance-satisfaction model to identify which one-dimensional work quality item should be at the first priority to undertake for considering the limited organizational resource.起始頁-結束頁：75-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1203.049篇名：從印象管理觀點探討組織個體政治技巧與建言行為之關係並列篇名：From Impression Management to Explore the Relationship between Political Skill and Voice Behavior作者：洪贊凱(Tsang-Kai Hung);曾鈺雯(Yu-Wen Tseng)關鍵字：政治技巧;人際信任;建言行為;political skill;interpersonal trust;voice behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去有關建言行為的研究多著重於情境因素，少有研究去探討個體層次因素與建言行為間之關係；且少有研究去檢視到底誰為個體建言之對象。過去研究顯示，個體建言之對象應該是目標敏感的，可分為對同事提出建言及對主管提出建言兩者。因此本研究欲探討政治技巧與建言行為間之關係，以及人際信任在此關係間之關鍵角色。本研究以臺灣一般公、民營企業員工及主管為研究樣本，採取便利抽樣方式進行。共計發放120組，每組發放三份問卷（包含職員、職員的部門同事及職員之主管），問卷採配對方式進行，扣除無效樣本後，實際回收有效問卷共243份（81組），有效回收率為68%。研究結果發現，不論建言之對象為部門同事或主管：（1）政治技巧與建言行為間具有正向關係；（2）政治技巧與人際信任間具有正向關係；（3）人際信任與建言行為間具有正向關係；（4）人際信任在政治技巧與建言行為間具有完全中介之效果。最後，本研究依研究結果針對實務界提出具體的管理意涵，並提供後續研究者未來研究的參考方向。英文摘要：Previous most studies mainly focus the situational factors on voice behavior, but the individual factor (e.g., personality) and to whom employees are likely to voice their thoughts has remained rarely examined. Extant literature indicates that voice behavior is target-sensitive and there are two types of voice behavior: Speaking out (voice toward peers) and speaking up (voice toward the supervisor). Present study examines the role of interpersonal trust in the relationship between political skill and voice behavior. We examined our hypotheses by collecting the data of employees, employees' peer, and employees' supervisor from 243 Taiwanese (eighty-one set) in different organizations. The valid return rate was 68%. Results of hierarchical multiple regressions revealed: 1. Political skill was positively related to voice behavior; 2. Political skill was positively related to interpersonal trust; 3. Interpersonal trust was positively related to voice behavior; 4. Interpersonal trust is fully mediated the relationship between political skill with speaking out and speaking up. Finally, according to the result, implication for practice and further research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1202.0110篇名：兩岸直航影響外派人員離職傾向研究並列篇名：A Study of Cross-Strait Direct Flights Effect Expatriates Turnover Intention作者：胡昕昀(Hsin-Yun Hu);王偉安(Wei-An Wang);范錚強(Cheng-Kiang Farn)關鍵字：兩岸直航;外派人員;離職傾向;外派距離;工作家庭衝突;cross-strait direct flights;expatriates;turnover intention;expatriate remoteness;work-family conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著兩岸平日包機直航所帶來的時間大幅縮短，各種外派類型員工之工作家庭衝突與離職傾向是否能有效減低，成為重要的議題。本研究參考Ahuja離職傾向模型，加入「外派距離」構念，並將外派人員區分成「常駐且家在大陸」、「常駐而家在台灣」、「出差型」三種外派類型，以台灣外派人員作為研究對象，利用問卷調查，共回收145份樣本。研究結果顯示，「外派距離」與「工作家庭衝突」有正向關係，並且「外派距離」與「工作家庭衝突」關係受到「外派類型」顯著的調節效果，其中常駐型員工的外派距離為近時，工作家庭衝突程度較低，顯示出直航帶來的距離縮短產生工作家庭衝突下降的效益；「組織承諾」及「工作耗竭」與「離職傾向」分別有負向和正向關係。英文摘要：After an absence of sixty years, ”direct flights across the Taiwan Strait” commenced on July 4, 2008. Subsequently, it has changed from weekend chartered flights to daily chartered flights, and finally daily scheduled flights, and has been intensifying gradually. Thus, the remoteness between Taiwan and mainland China has been closing dramatically. This study takes this changing opportunity to look into whether changes in remoteness in expatriate assignments affects work-family conflict, and whether it in-turn result in a change in turnover intention. This study adopts Ahuja's turnover intention model, and supplemented with an ”expatriate remoteness” construct. In the proposed model, expatriates are divided into three types, namely, ”long-term expatriates with family in China,” ”long-term expatriates and family in Taiwan” and ”business travelers.” Taiwanese expatriates of various types were used as mail questionnaire samples in this study. A total of 145 convenient samples were collected. Results show that, as expected, ”expatriate remoteness” is positively associated with ”work-family conflict” while the association is moderated by ”expatriate type.” For ”long-term expatriate with family in China,” and ”long-term expatriate with family in Taiwan,” the association is positively but at different degree. In other words, direct flights shorten the distance and may effectively decrease work-family conflict. In addition, ”Organization commitment” is negatively associated with ”turnover intention,” while ”work exhaustion” is positive associated with ”turnover intention.”起始頁-結束頁：25-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1202.0211篇名：中年危機？角色壓力、健康壓力與就業力對職場退縮傾向的影響並列篇名：Mid-Life Crisis? The Impact of Role Stress, Health Stress and Employability on Withdrawal Intention作者：廖慈惠(Tzu-Hui Liao);溫金豐(Jin-Feng Uen)關鍵字：中年危機;角色壓力;健康壓力;就業力;職場退縮;mid-life crisis;role stress;health stress;employability;withdrawal intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著生育率下降與提早退休的趨勢，勞動人口結構正產生了變化，近十年中，臺灣40至54歲工作者佔總勞動人口由34%升至37%，中年工作者在工作場所佔比重逐漸提高，因此，中年工作者相關議題日益受到重視，以往人力資源策略對於中年員工管理，經常對於其績效管理、甄選與訓練等方面投以關注，甚少由中年工作者自身的各項主觀或客觀感受觀察，現代生活似乎無法避免壓力，而且角色壓力、健康壓力和就業力與工作績效有密切的關係，中年工作者在職場發生退縮傾向，可能降低工作績效，透過中年工作者自身觀點，針對他們的角色壓力、健康壓力與就業力造成退縮傾向，進行深入的研究，從而發展有效的人力資源管理策略，促使組織更具能力因應快速變化的環境。本研究以40至54歲之全職工作者為研究母體並回收有效問卷205份進行驗證，實證結果發現：健康壓力、角色壓力與中年工作者的職場退縮傾向呈正向關係，就業力與職場退縮傾向呈負向關係。英文摘要：By the trend of decreasing baby-bust and early-retirement, the labor force structure has changed. The middle-age workers will become prevalent in the work place. The impact of middle-age workforce raises the height-light issuers facing employees today. Attention is mainly given to the human resource policies which may impact middle-age workers such as performance management, selection and training, etc. Less research has focused on attitudes toward held by middle-aged adults themselves. The stress seems an inescapable part of modern life. The role stress, health stress and employability are negative to job performance. Withdrawal behaviors refer to a set of attitudes and will be less participative. The middle-age workers' withdrawal intention is costly and result in decreased performance. This research aims to explore on middle-age workers and withdrawal intention in depth in order to development the best human resource practices.起始頁-結束頁：49-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1202.0312篇名：Work-Family Conflict and Work Exhaustion for IT Employees: The Moderating Effect of Social Support並列篇名：IT員工工作家庭衝突之探討：社會支持的調節效果作者：周惠文(Huey-Wen Chou);張秀華(Hsiu-Hua Chang);李哲毅(Che-Yi Lee)關鍵字：工作家庭衝突;IT員工;工作耗竭;社會支持;work-family conflict;IT employee;work exhaustion;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：許多組織愈來愈依賴資訊科技，這種現象迫使IT員工面臨延長的工時及在晚上或週末將額外的工作帶回家，造成工作及家庭生活的界線變的模糊。本研究旨在調查IT員工工作家庭衝突對工作耗竭的影響及工作家庭衝突的前置因素（IT使用、角色模糊、角色衝突及工作涉入），而社會支持在工作家庭衝突及工作耗竭關係的調節效果也將被檢視。為了進一步探索工作家庭衝突的前置因素的影響，及工作家庭衝突對工作耗竭的作用，本研究根據工作頭銜（技術及管理職務）進行比較。採用問卷調查法收集404位台灣IT員工的資料，我們發現工作家庭衝突的前置因素：IT使用、角色模糊、角色衝突及工作涉入皆與工作家庭衝突顯著相關，而有較高工作家庭衝突的IT員工則遭受更高的工作耗竭。此外，高階主管的支持顯著調節了工作家庭衝突及工作耗竭的關係。工作家庭衝突的前置因素在兩個不同工作頭銜分群中有不同的影響，在管理職務的子群體中，四個前置因素都顯著影響工作家庭衝突；在技術職務的子群體中，只有工作模糊及工作衝突對於工作家庭衝突有顯著影響。研究限制及管理意涵將在文中提出討論。英文摘要：Many organizations are becoming increasingly dependent on information technology (IT). This phenomenon forces IT employees to face extended work schedules and to bring additional work home at night or on weekends, blurring the boundary between work life and family life. This study aimed to examine the effect of work-family conflict (WFC) on work exhaustion and its antecedents (IT usage, role ambiguity, role conflict, and job involvement) for IT employees. The moderating effect of social support on the relationship of WFC and work exhaustion was also examined. To further probe the impacts of the four antecedents of WFC and the effects of WFC on work exhaustion, two sub-samples classified by job title (technical and managerial position) were contrasted. A self-administered survey was conducted to collect data from 404 Taiwanese IT employees. We found that the antecedents: IT usage, role ambiguity, role conflict, and job involvement were all significantly related to WFC. IT employees with greater WFC experienced more work exhaustion. In addition, supervisors' support significantly moderated the WFC-work exhaustion relationship. There were variations in the influence patterns of the four antecedents on WFC in two job title groups. In the managerial subgroup, all four antecedents significantly affected WFC. In the technical subgroup, role ambiguity and role conflict were the only factors to have significantly impacted on WFC. The research limitations and managerial implications conclude the paper.起始頁-結束頁：67-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1202.0413篇名：工作場域中的情感雙歧：探討服務人員情感雙歧與其服務品質及工作滿意度之關係並列篇名：Affective Ambivalence in Work Place: Examining the Relationships between Service Workers' Affective Ambivalence, Service Quality, and Job Satisfaction作者：紀乃文(Nai-Wen Chi);張火燦(Huo-Tsan Chang);黃仙麗(Hsien-Lier Huang)關鍵字：情感雙歧;服務品質;工作滿意度;工作情感;affective ambivalence;service quality;job satisfaction;affect at work期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：以往工作情感的文獻常單獨探討正、負向情感狀態對個人行為與態度的影響；但一天之中的情感並非一成不變，Fong（2006）提出「情感雙歧」的概念，指出當個人在短時間內經歷到高度正、負向情感狀態時，將有助於提升個人對周邊情境的敏感度與對情境的感受，進而影響個人的行為表現與創意。由於第一線服務人員直接面對來自顧客的各種要求與對待，對於顧客的需求與想法必須非常敏感，故基於情感雙歧的觀點，本研究探討工作場域中，225位第一線服務人員在短時間內經歷的正負向情感，對其服務品質和工作滿意度之影響。本研究實證結果發現，高度正向情感與高負向情感交互作用下，會讓服務人員有較佳的服務品質與工作滿意度。最後，本研究亦發現服務人員的情感雙歧狀態，是透過提升其工作滿意度、進而反應在服務品質之上的。本研究亦針對理論貢獻與管理意涵加以討論之。英文摘要：To provide excellent service, the frontline service workers have to cope with various needs from customers, which might result in negative affect experienced during the service delivery and influence service workers' job attitudes and performance. Based on Fong's (2006) affective ambivalence perspective, we examine whether the interaction between negative and positive affect experienced within a short period predicts service quality and job satisfaction using a sample of 225 service workers. The results showed that the interaction between high positive and negative affect leads to higher levels of service quality and job satisfaction. Moreover, service workers' job satisfaction partially mediated the interactive effect between positive and negative affection on service quality. Theoretical and practical implications of our findings are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1201.0114篇名：工作要求、工作資源與員工工作態度之關聯：以勤勉審慎性及主動性人格為調節變項並列篇名：The Associations among Job Demands, Work Resources and Work Attitudes: Conscientiousness and Proactive Personality Traits as Moderators作者：陳佳雯(Jia-Wun Chen);陸洛(Luo Lu);許雅玉(Ya-Yu Hsu)關鍵字：工作要求;工作資源;勤勉審慎性人格;主動性人格;work demands;work resources;conscientiousness personality;proactive personality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要的目的以JD-R模式為基礎，探討（1）工作要求（工作負荷）、工作資源（高承諾人力資源措施）與員工個人工作態度（工作滿意及組織承諾）之間的關聯；（2）勤勉審慎性及主動性人格對工作要求、工作資源與員工工作態度之關係的調節效果。本研究採用結構式問卷調查，共計完成446份有效問卷，調查對象為台灣地區各類組織之全職工作者。研究結果發現：高承諾人力資源措施與工作滿意及組織承諾等後果變項間皆有顯著的正相關。此外，我們亦發現勤勉審慎性人格對工作負荷及組織承諾、主動性人格對工作負荷與工作滿意間的關係具調節作用。本文建議：企業除了提供員工適度的工作資源與適當的工作要求之外，更需將勤勉審慎性及主動性人格納入甄選員工的標準。因為，選對的人才將更能有效的協助企業，提升效率與績效。英文摘要：Based on the job demand-resources (JD-R) model, the purposes of this study are to explore: (1) the associations between work demands (workload), work resources (high commitment human resource management practices), employees' work attitudes (job satisfaction and organizational commitment); (2) the possible moderating effects of conscientiousness and proactive personality traits on the above relationships. Using structured questionnaires, a diverse sample of 466 full-time employees drawn from a variety of organizations in Taiwan was surveyed. We found that high commitment human resource management practices were positively associated with work attitudes (job satisfaction and organizational commitment). Furthermore, conscientiousness as a personality trait moderated the relationship between workload and organizational commitment, while the proactive personality trait moderated the relationship between workload and job satisfaction. It is thus recommended that organizations need to challenge employees with optimal levels of workload and equip them with sufficient work resources. More importantly, recruiting employees who have high conscientiousness and proactive personality traits may also help organizations to achieve greater efficiency and better performance.起始頁-結束頁：23-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1201.0215篇名：形象商圈組織依附對組織氣候與組織績效之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Organizational Attachment to Organizational Climate and Organizational Performance in Image Business District作者：朱國光(Kuo-Kuang Chu);尤詩怡(Shih-Yi Yu);潘思羽(Si-Yu Pan)關鍵字：形象商圈;組織依附;組織文化;組織氣候;image business district;organizational attachment;organizational culture;organizational climate期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：形象商圈在台灣的觀光業上扮演舉足輕重的角色，在歷經傳統商圈式微與轉型後，成員除了實質的考量外，是否重視組織與員工在情感和價值觀上的相符，以產生高度的組織依附。依附理論是人和特定對象之間深富情感的連結，並從特定對象中獲得心理上的滿足，過去的研究鮮少加以探討。因此，本研究以台灣形象商圈成員為研究對象，並採用迴歸分析，藉由組織文化來了解形象商圈成員對於組織依附的影響，且分析組織依附對於組織氣候與組織績效的影響，更進一步探討組織依附中介效果。研究結果顯示，組織依附在當中具有中介效果；而組織文化對組織依附、組織氣候和組織績效具有正面的影響，組織依附對組織氣候與組織績效亦有顯著影響。英文摘要：Attachment theory is an extension from psychological theory that is an emotional connection between individual and specific object, and gain a psychological satisfaction. Previous studies have rarely used to discuss the view of attachment theory. Therefore, this study is based on the view of attachment to explore the relationship between organization and its members. And understanding by members of the organization to meet the psychological and emotional needs, so that members can be attached to the organization and enhance organizational performance. In this paper, the study samples are members of Taiwan's image business district. Image business district in Taiwan's tourism industry plays an important role, by different organizational culture to discuss the impact of district members for the attachment and examine the organization attachment on organizational climate and organizational performance for the impact. The results indicate that organization culture has positive effects on organizational attachment which has also positive effects on organizational climate and organization performance. Besides, organizational climate is positively associated with organization performance.起始頁-結束頁：51-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1201.0316篇名：Identifying the Intellectual Structure of Organizational Psychology Studies: Influential Contribution並列篇名：探索組織心理學研究之智慧結構作者：杜培寧(Pauline Pei-Ning Tu)關鍵字：書目計量學;組織心理學;共同引文分析;社會網路分析;智慧結構;Bibliometric;organizational psychology;author co-citation analysis;social network analysis;intellectual structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：12卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究應用書目計量學之引文及作者共引文分析及社會網路分析技術為研究方法；以1998年至2007年在SSCI及SCI期刊發表有關組織心理學議題之研究文獻為對象，期間總共分析803篇文獻及43,425筆參考文獻資料。本研究之目的在於探索當代組織心理學研究文獻之智慧結構，以了解在過去十年內，組織心理學研究的演化過程。其研究結果以圖表呈現當代組織心理學研究領域最具影響力的學者和文獻及其中的相關性，並描繪出當代組織心理學研究領域之智慧結構的發展與變化。英文摘要：With the large number of studies being conducted in the area of organizational psychology, it has become increasing important to be able to effectively identify the most influential and representative collection of research articles. Previous research on citation relationships in organizational psychology literature has focused on investigating the impact of certain authors and/or publications as opposed to the intellectual history of organizational psychology. This manuscript employs bibliometric tools and social network analysis methodology to analyze citation relationships, showing trends and patterns in organizational psychology research and highlighting the most influential authors. Author co-citation analysis is conducted of 43,425 references from 803 articles found in the SSCI and SCI databases during the ten years from 1998 to 2007. In order to examine the possible evolution of research interests in the past 10 years, this study is divided into two separate five-year period are examined. The objective of this study is to provide valuable direction for future researchers to identify key themes and their relationships, thus demonstrating the effectiveness of utilizing bibliometric epistemology while also proposing an objective means of establishing the relative importance of different knowledge nodes in the recent development of the organizational psychology field.起始頁-結束頁：75-112資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2011.1201.0401篇名：北宜地區遷移行為之再檢視－以國道5號動工事件做例證並列篇名：Reexamining the Expected Migration Flow after Shea-San Tunnel's Opening on National Highway 5作者：黃寶祚(Bao-Tzuoh Huang);陳麗貞(Lee-Chen Chen);黃文灝(Wen-Hao Huang)關鍵字：V型人口遷移;事件評估;混合方法取向;type V population move;event assessment;mixed methods approaches期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：45期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以國道5號高速公路或「雪山隧道」宣布動工事件為檢視對象，針對此觀測區域內多數產官學者認為將有大量人口會遷移至宜蘭，與形成V型遷徙行為之理由。本文以質性量化混合方法做檢析，首先援引當時國內外區域人口遷徙之經驗，為此型遷徙行為做先期概念模圖建置。依據此建置完竣的關係架構，接著採以配適的指數平滑公式，以反應動工宣告之後所產生的人類適應性預期行為；質言之，將針對已建置V型遷徙行為，做合宜的平滑調整程序。由本文檢析的結果發現，目前蘭陽地區的實際人口，未見先期所推演的強迴流人口數，雪隧效應的達成率僅約八成而已。顯然宜北地區的人口遷徙動向，與各區的人口流動經驗不符，此有「滯後」條件約制之L型區域人口成長型態，與北宜地區人流較有「壓力與協調」之長學習過程有關。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to empirically examine the difference between the expected and realized migration flow after the Shea-San tunnel's opening on national highway 5. This paper firstly supplements the cross-region assessment of the domestic type V population movement with the related foreign relocation experiences. A precedent for the type V conceptual frameworks is reassessed as another mixed type U construct in embeddedness with the weighted data of net migration based on exponential smoothing estimation. Our quantitative and smoothing results afford the expected outcome of the type V move to improve the unmeasured state. Finally, the realized type L relocation behavior amended by the current data is offered to reexamine the above mixed-method approaches, aiming at reaction to the stress of contingent events and the move for sluggish adjustment.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.92篇名：臺灣區域人口遷徙的再分析：「遷移轉型」概念之運用並列篇名：Re-Analysis of the Population Migration of Taiwan: The Application of the "Mobility Transition" Model作者：劉一龍(Yi-Long Liu)關鍵字：遷移轉型;集群分析;區域發展;人口分布;mobility transition;cluster analysis;regional development;demographic distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：45期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣人口已轉變至低出生率、低死亡率水準，符合「人口轉型」（demographic transition）理論的發展，同時，人口遷徙發展也有轉變。Zelinsky（1971）曾整合與界定經濟發展、現代化、生命率和遷徙之關係，發展成「遷移轉型」（mobility transition）假設。熊瑞梅（1987）、邊瑞芬（1991）和Chen（1991）都認為臺灣人口能符合假設發展，指出1980年代是轉型的第三階段，只是「人口轉型」和「遷移轉型」無法密切對應。爾後臺灣區域人口遷移的發展又是如何？由於Zelinsky（1971）之論點只是觀察歸納的結果，我們改以Jones（2005）的概念探討臺灣人口是否符合假設發展。首先，調整邊瑞芬（1991）的作法，透過集群分析法將所有縣市劃分成六組區域，計算檢證1980年、1992年、2002年和2007年人口遷移狀況是否吻合Jones（2005）概念。結果發現，臺灣於1990年代初期進展至轉型第四階段，同時，「人口轉型」和「遷移轉型」也可對應發展；然而，自2000年開始，遷徙歷程未如Zelinsky（1971）和Jones（2005）概念發展，主因是臺灣人口遷徙方向仍是北部為主，社會經濟發展相對進步的縣市也集中在北部地區，故能持續吸引人口移入，人口增加又帶動社會經濟發展，在社會、經濟和遷徙相互影響下，除了臺北市之外，新興之桃園縣、基隆市和傳統的新北市都持續崛起，未來臺灣人口將難均衡分布。英文摘要：The population in Taiwan has already undergone a demographic transition, entering a period with a low birth rate and low death rate, while population migration patterns have also been changing at the same time. Zelinsky (1971) integrated and defined the relationship of economic development, modernization, vital transition, and migration, and arrived at a model of migration known as ”mobility transition.” Hsung (1987), Bain (1991), and Chen (1991) indicate that the higher the economic development level, the higher the in-migration rate, and they believe that the socioeconomic development and the migration pattern of the population of Taiwan corresponds to that proposed in the Zelinsky model, stating that the 80s was the third stage ”late transitional society;” however, they also find that the development of ”demographic transition” and ”mobility transition” are not closely parallel in Taiwan. Will the development of population migration in Taiwan keep on following Zelinsky's idea? Since the viewpoints of Zelinsky (1971) were just the conclusion based on his observation, we used Jones' idea (2005) instead to discuss whether the population in Taiwan corresponds to the ”mobility transition” model of development or not. First of all, the study method of Bain (1991) was adjusted, and cluster analysis was used to divide all cities and counties into six regions. The population migration situations of 1980, 1992, 2002, and 2007 were calculated and examined for agreement with Jones' idea (2005). The results showed that while both the natural increase rate and the territory migration rate keep on decreasing, Taiwan developed into the fourth stage of transition at the beginning of the 90s. At the same time, ”demographic transition” and ”mobility transition” also corresponded to the development. However, the actual migration progress does not follow the development proposed by Zelinsky (1971) and Jones (2005), mainly because the major migration direction of Taiwan's population is still toward the northern part, as the cities and counties with rather advanced social and economic development are also concentrated in Northern Taiwan; thus, the population is continuously motivated to migrate to Northern Taiwan. The increase of population also promotes social and economic development. Through the mutual influence of society, economy, and migration, Taoyuan County, Keelung City, and New Taipei City also continue to develop in addition to Taipei City; thus, the population of Taiwan is unlikely to be evenly distributed in the future.起始頁-結束頁：35-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.103篇名：小區域死亡率推估之研究並列篇名：A Simulation Study of Small Area Mortality Projection作者：王信忠(Hsin-Chung Wang);金碩(Shuoh Jin);余清祥(Jack C. Yue)關鍵字：小區域死亡率推估;人口老化;修勻;標準死亡比;電腦模擬;small area mortality projection;population aging;smoothing methods;standard mortality ratio;computer simulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：45期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣人口結構漸趨老化，由於老年人使用較多醫療等社會資源，人口老化勢必牽動政府政策與資源分配，然而臺灣各縣市的人口老化速度不一（陳政勳、余清祥2010），因此有必要針對各地方特性發展適當的小區域人口推估方法。小區域推估面臨的問題可歸納為四個方向：「資料品質」、「地區人數」、「資料年數」與「推估年數」，資料品質有賴資料庫與制度的建立，而後三者則與過去資料與推估未來的變異程度有關。本文考量在上述後三個問題的影響下，探討修勻（graduation）相關方法是否可提高小區域死亡率推估的穩定性。本文使用屬於隨機推估的區塊拔靴法（block bootstrap），以電腦模擬評估推估結果，因為小區域人口數較少，本文也使用Whittaker及標準死亡比（standard mortality ratio）等修勻方法，降低因為地區人數較少引起的震盪。另外，小區域推估通常可用的資料時間較短，未來推估結果的震盪也較大，本文針對需要過去幾年資料，以及未來可推估年數等兩項因素進行研究，希冀結果可提供臺灣各地方政府的推估參考。除了電腦模擬外，本文也以實證分析檢驗修勻的成效，將修勻套用至臺南縣、臺東縣等縣市層級的死亡率。研究發現，修勻方法可降低小區域死亡率推估的震盪，如有過去十五年資料可獲得較可信的推估結果，而未來推估年數盡量不超過二十年；相對而言，與人口數比較，小區域與大區域的死亡率差異對修勻的影響較為有限。英文摘要：The population size plays a very important role in statistical estimation, and it is difficult to derive a reliable estimate for small areas. The estimation is even more difficult if the geographic and social attributes within the small areas vary widely. However, although population aging is a common phenomenon globally, the problem is not the same for different countries. The aim of this study is to explore the mortality projection for small areas, with the consideration of the small area's distinguishing characteristics. In addition to data quality, the difficulties for small area population and mortality projection are threefold: population size, number of base years, and projection horizon. Smoothing methods can be applied to improve the stability and accuracy of small area estimation. In this study, the block bootstrap and smoothing methods are combined to project the mortality of small areas in Taiwan, using the cohort component method. We found that the smoothing methods can reduce the fluctuation of estimates and projections in general, and the improvement is especially noticeable for areas with smaller population sizes. To obtain a reliable mortality projection for small areas, we suggest using at least fifteen years of historical data for projection and a projection horizon of not more than twenty years. Also, the population size has a bigger influence than the discrepancy of mortality rates between small and large areas.起始頁-結束頁：77-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.114篇名：孝道的認同與實踐－以「成年兒子與父母同住決策」為分析對象並列篇名：Identification and Implementation of Filial Norms: Adult Sons' Decision to Live with Elderly Parents作者：魯慧中(Huei-Chung Lu);鄭保志(P. C. Roger Cheng)關鍵字：孝道;同住決策;單變數probit模型;部分可觀察資訊之雙變數probit模型;filial piety;co-residence;univariate probit;bivariate probit with partial observability期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：45期出版年：2012中文摘要：孝道的「認同」和「實踐」分屬於兩種不同的表現層次，前者為「心理」層次，後者則屬於「行為」層次。本研究使用「華人家庭動態資料庫」（Panel Study of Family Dynamics, PSFD）的兩代配對資料，以實證的角度檢視臺灣社會中，親、子兩代對於「婚後同住」以及「奉養父母」之孝道觀念是否存在認同差異，並觀察兩代的孝道認同度是否會深刻影響到兩代同住的實踐。我們發現，子代不論在「同住觀念」或是「奉養觀念」上的認同度均比親代來得高，因此並不支持「傳統孝道觀念逐漸消失」的論點。另一方面，考慮父母在「同住決策」中可能扮演的角色，我們分別應用「單變數probit模型」及「部分可觀察資訊之雙變數probit模型」進行比較分析；估計結果發現，子代對「婚後同住」孝道的認同度確實會影響到其與父母同住的意願。英文摘要：Identification and implementation of filial piety differ from each other, as the former is a psychological issue and the latter is a behavioral one. This study examines whether a higher level of identification with filial piety concepts by both generations significantly increases the propensity toward coresidence using PSFD (Panel Study of Family Dynamics) data. Considering that elderly parents may participate in the co-residence decision, we adopt not only a conventional univariate probit model but also a bivariate probit model with partial observability to explain the nuclearization of the family structure in modern Taiwan. Our empirical results show that filial piety is not diminishing in Taiwan's society, and that the strength of filial norms has a positive impact on adult sons' propensity to live with their parents.起始頁-結束頁：111-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.125篇名：「他山之石：國外人口研究中心參訪經驗座談會」紀實作者：廖明中;黃佳媛期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：45期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：155-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.136篇名：Salient Features of Vietnamese and Filipina Brides of American Citizens: Findings Based on the Micro Data of Recent American Community Surveys並列篇名：美籍丈夫之越南與菲律賓新娘的特徵：基於近期美國社區問卷調查之發現作者：廖高禮(Kao-Lee Liaw);黃汀(Ting Huang)關鍵字：越南與菲律賓新娘;美國;教育;工作;收入;Vietnamese and Filipina brides;America;education;employment;income期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012中文摘要：此文通過2005年至2007年美國社區問卷調查的微觀合併數據，來研究嫁給美國公民的越南和菲律賓外籍新娘的教育，工作，和收入之特徵。研究發現要點如下。由於越南新娘，在教育程度和英文能力上比菲律賓新娘低很多，所以導致了：（一）越南新娘的受僱傭率比菲律賓新娘的受僱傭率更低；（二）越南新娘在其經濟利基（沙龍業）獲得的收入比菲律賓新娘在其經濟利基（醫療服務業）獲得的收入要低。通常受過較高教育的新娘可獲得較高的機會嫁給受過較高教育的丈夫，所以越南新娘的美國丈夫之教育程度是低於菲律賓新娘的美國丈夫之教育程度。但丈夫們的教育程度之落差較新娘們的教育程度之落差則小很多。其原因是除了教育程度外，外貌和性格同時也是新郎在挑選新娘時考慮的重要因素，而外貌和性格則與教育程度無關。此兩組新娘之家庭收入差距更不大，部分原因則是越南新娘強烈地傾向於高攀婚姻。一個令人欣慰的發現是嫁給美國公民的越南和菲律賓新娘均很少落入貧困階層。這發現則與人種學研究常發現的那些在高收入亞洲國家的外籍新娘之不幸情況正好相反。文獻中的一個想法是，低收入國家的女性願意通過嫁給比自己的教育程度低的外籍丈夫來獲得融入高收入社會的機會。此想法在菲律賓新娘上只得到中度的支持，而在大多數的越南新娘上則是被否定。英文摘要：This paper studies the educational, employment, and income status of Vietnamese and Filipina brides of American citizens, based on the merged micro data of the 2005, 2006, and 2007 American Community Surveys. We found that the Vietnamese brides tended to be much less educated than the Filipina brides. This difference, together with the fact that the former tended to be much weaker in English language ability than the latter, contributed to (1) the finding that the Vietnamese brides had a lower employment rate than did the Filipina brides, and (2) the finding that the economic niche of the employed Vietnamese brides (in the salon sector) tended to yield substantially lower wages than did the economic niche of the employed Filipina brides (in the medical service sector). Since better-educated brides had a better chance to get married to better-educated husbands, we naturally found that the husbands of the Vietnamese brides tended to be less educated than the husbands of the Filipina brides. However, the gap in educational attainment between the two groups of husbands was substantially smaller than the corresponding gap between the two groups of the brides. Underlying this gender difference was the fact that in addition to educational status, beauty and pleasant personality were also important criteria for selecting wives, and the possibility that beauty and pleasant personality were not positively correlated with educational status. With respect to household income, the gap between the two groups of brides was not large, partly because of the strong tendency of the Vietnamese brides toward hypergamy. A nice finding was that both Filipina and Vietnamese wives of American citizens were at rather low risk of being in poverty. The rather negative images of foreign brides in higher-income Asian countries conveyed by many ethnographic studies have been countered by our more sanguine finding about the Vietnamese and Filipina brides in the United States. With respect to the idea that women in lower-income countries tend to accept hypogamy at the personal level in order to achieve hypergamy at the societal level, it was moderately supported by the Filipina cases but largely negated by the Vietnamese cases.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.17篇名：住宅自有率對生育率之長短期影響－追蹤資料共整合分析應用並列篇名：Long- and Short-Term Influences of Homeownership Rates on Fertility Rates: An Application of the Panel Cointegration Model作者：彭建文(Chien-Wen Peng);蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：生育率;住宅自有率;追蹤資料;共整合分析;fertility rate;homeownership rate;panel data;cointegration test期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012中文摘要：在臺灣生育率持續下降的同時，住宅自有率卻呈現長期上升的趨勢，到底家戶的生育決策與購屋決策是否有關聯？或僅是時間數列上的巧合？本文發現生育率與住宅自有率、家戶可支配所得、有偶率、女性高等教育比率之間具有共整合的長期均衡關係，其中住宅自有率、家戶所得、有偶率在長期對生育率有正向影響，而女性高等教育比率在長期則對生育率有負向影響。生育率的短期變化除具有顯著的負向自我相關外，最為相關的因子就是家戶所得與女性高等教育比率，生育率與前一年和前兩年的所得都為正向相關，與前一年和前兩年的女性高等教育比率則為負向相關，但生育率與住宅自有率的短期關係不顯著，可能是因為住宅自有率對生育率的正負向關係相互抵銷所造成。英文摘要：Taiwan's fertility rates have decreased over the past three decades, making it one of the lowest-low fertility countries in the world. However, its homeownership rates exhibited an opposite trend, increasing during the same period. Are these two time series trends related or merely coincidental? Our empirical results reveal that fertility rates are co-integrated with homeownership rates, household income, proportion of married couples, and percentage of higher educated females, which means there exists a long-term equilibrium relationship among these variables. In the short-term, in addition to a significant negative autocorrelation, fertility rates were mostly affected by lagging household income and the percentage of more highly educated females, but the influence of lagging homeownership rates was not significant.起始頁-結束頁：57-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.28篇名：勞動市場條件對結婚率下降之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Labor Market Conditions on Marriage Rates in Taiwan作者：郭祐誠(Yu-Chen Kuo);林佳慧(Jia-Huey Lin)關鍵字：婚姻;女性勞動需求;產業結構變遷;人口政策;marriage;female labor demand;industrial structure change;population policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣地區近年來未婚及晚婚趨勢十分明顯，本文利用1982-2008年人力運用調查資料，分別透過集體層次以及個別層次資料，分析社會經濟層面中，勞動市場之經濟條件改變與女性結婚傾向之間的關連，以及哪些經濟因素與結婚率的下降最為相關。本研究主要實證結果發現，一地區的男性及女性的平均就業情形，與當地女性的結婚態度存有明顯關聯性。若一地區婚姻市場有利於男性就業，則當地女性結婚的可能性會提高，此一結果某一程度而言，支持Wilson（1987）所主張當婚姻市場上適合結婚的男人多時，有助於婚姻形成的假說。另一方面，本文實證結果也發現在女性在有較多工作機會的地區，女性傾向延長其搜尋潛在伴侶的時間，不婚的可能性也會提高，此一結果間接支持女性經濟獨立的論點。而本文關於男女就業率對於結婚率的發現，即使在考慮計量模型可能存有的內生性問題下，在透過工具變數法估計後，實證結果依舊沒有改變。英文摘要：A growing number of individuals have postponed their first marriage and are currently single in Taiwan. This paper employs the Manpower Utilization Survey (MUS) during the period of 1982-2008 to investigate the connection between local marriage propensity and local labor market conditions. Our empirical results indicate that young women are more likely to get married in an area with a higher male employment rate and a lower female employment rate. Women tend to stay single longer when the labor market for women improves or the labor market for men worsens. These findings remain even after we adopt the instrument variable estimation to consider the potential endogeneity problem of local male or female employment rates in the settings.起始頁-結束頁：87-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.39篇名：世代的空間尺度認同之研究並列篇名：The Scales of Spatial Identity among Generations作者：<U+51C3>函君(Han-Chun Tu);蘇淑娟(Shew-Jiuan B. Su)關鍵字：地方認同;尺度;世代;place identity;scale;generations期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012中文摘要：居處背景相異者，在適應或調適的長久歷程中因迥異的物質與人文基礎，形塑出地方認同的區域差異。就認同的時間尺度而言，世代或個人生命歷程的時間尺度如何影響認同形塑及其結構機制為何，確實是個黑盒子，但是個人做為特定世代的一分子，如何透過鑲嵌於特定時間與空間下的個人生活實踐，而突顯時間在認同形塑的意義，是重要而待釐清的問題；以認同空間的尺度差異而言，個人的視界影響地方認同，受環境識覺影響的視界也決定著人們對特定或多重尺度的敏感與認同方式，這問題固然重要但是缺乏論證。這些研究隙縫有待補齊，說明了地方認同的研究不應侷限於單一的時間或空間、或空間與地方的二元尺度觀點。本文旨在探究空間尺度的多元性如何作用於認同，並將地方認同的建構歸因於水平的區域空間性與垂直的世代性之間的複雜共構形塑中，兼具時間空間尺度流動性的世代概念，有益於本研究檢視易變不居的動態世界下，地方認同在形式與內涵上的多樣性。為瞭解認同形塑的複雜再現歷程，本研究採質性訪談與問卷分析，並梳理地方認同、世代／生命歷程的辯證概念。基於理解不同經濟型態的社區之地方認同之異同，本研究選定的研究區包含高雄市轄內的：旗津區中洲地區漁村社區、三民區河堤中產階級社區與楠梓區中油高雄煉油廠職工宿舍區。研究結果呈現情境的生活經驗影響人們觀看的視界與認同尺度的大小，而世代概念則能彰顯地方認同異同的時間作用歷程。英文摘要：Research on identity often takes place within one single space or scale. The regional differences, time scales and spatial scales of identity, however, are often ignored. From a regional identity perspective, people of diverse contexts form a complicated regional identity and a place symbol due to varied material and humanistic foundations. As time scales are concerned, how generation and individual life course affect identity formation is truly a black box. However, it is important to clarify how an individual of a specific generation transmits the meaning of time through his or her personal life embedded in a particular time and space. About spatial scales of identity, the horizons of individuals determine the sense of place and identity, and the horizons are affected by environmental perceptions. This paper fills this research gap. It also illustrates that such study should not be confined to the concept of unitary time-space. The aim is to explore how multiple scales work on identity and to attribute place identity to the complexity of horizontal spatiality and vertical generation. We suggest a generation concept containing both the time and space scales. This consideration is helpful for examining the multiplicity of place identity in dynamic generations (time) and areas (space).To understand the complicated process of identity formation, this paper uses qualitative interview and questionnaire results to solve the dialectical time-space concept of place identity and generation/life course. To differentiate place identity, we selected three communities in Kaohsiung City: (1) a fishing village in Chi-jin, (2) an upscale riverbank community in Sanmin, and (3) the Chinese Petroleum Corporation employee housing complex in Nanzih. The findings show that the experience of living situation influences people's horizons and scales of identity, so as to highlight the effect of time on place identity.起始頁-結束頁：125-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.410篇名：亞太地區國際與國內遷移之關聯性探究作者：黃佳媛;姜蘭虹;陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：171-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.511篇名：世界銀行Das Gupta研究員演講紀實作者：林明仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：183-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.612篇名：Book Review作者：Irina Kalabikhina期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：191-194資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.713篇名：書評作者：楊文山期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：44期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：195-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2012.801篇名：編輯報告作者：黃長玲期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：31期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室2篇名：專題說明作者：李玉珍期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：31期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：iii-vi資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室3篇名：教義與性別－論佛教小乘、大乘與密乘中的女性身分演變並列篇名：Religious Doctrine and Gender: The Changes of Women Status from Early Buddhism, Mahayana Buddhism to Tantric Buddhism作者：劉婉俐(Wan-Li Liu)關鍵字：佛教;佛教女性;性別;女性觀;Buddhist women;Buddhism;gender;view of women期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：31期出版年：2012中文摘要：由於佛教主張「眾生皆有佛性」的平等思想，相較於世界上其他宗教「男尊女卑」的教義與規範，較無明顯的性別歧視。但隨著1960年代第二波女性主義運動興起，歐美一些女性主義佛教學者開始關注佛教體制中的女權問題，例如美國學者葛羅絲（Rita Gross）在其《父權之後的佛教：佛教的女性主義歷史、分析、與重構》中，便廣泛探討佛教史與僧團中所存在的貶抑女性問題，指出南傳佛教出家女性無法受比丘尼戒、佛教史上女性地位的低落、「八敬法」、大乘佛教經典對女身的貶抑<U+22EF><U+22EF>等議題。（Gross, 1992）近年來，台灣的佛教學界也不乏對這些議題的討論，並舉出台灣尼師僧團的積極、入世經驗，做為佛教性別平權的有力參照，也凸顯了台灣尼師僧團關懷、參與社會議題的特質。沿著當今學界重探佛教女性觀的理路而下，本文旨在探討佛教史上不同時期教義對性別關係的影響，尤其是教義所折射出的不同女性觀；透過對印度佛教小乘、大乘與密乘時期不同女性身分與地位的耙梳，來闡述佛教教義與性別關係的緊密連結。藉此，可發現隨著大乘教義的開展，女性的身分有了大幅進展與變化，尤其是在密乘中，呈現出迥異於原始佛教與小乘佛教的性別平等觀，具體展現了佛教眾生平等的核心教義。對佛教研究中較被忽略的性別範疇而言，此論題不僅具有開啟宗教與性別跨領域對話的指標意義，也可回應西方學界女性主義佛學研究對佛教女性身分認同議題的批判，並反映出佛教性別觀的某種「緣起」色彩，即教義依受法對象的認知差異而權宜通變的多元、包容、與開放性。英文摘要：Buddhist teachings expound that all sentient beings are endowed with Buddha nature, which indicates the concept of gender equality in terms of Buddhism; therefore, Buddhism seems less sexist than other world religions. But since the rise of the second feminist movement in the 1960s, Buddhist feminists have raised several women issues relevant to Buddhist institutions and history. In ”Buddhism after Patriarchy: A Feminist History, Analysis, and Reconstruction of Buddhism”, Gross surveys discriminative attitudes toward women in Early Buddhism, Buddhist scriptures, and monastic systems. Recently, some scholars of Buddhist studies in Taiwan have been aware of those issues as well, and tried to take the examples of Taiwanese nunneries as evidences of gender equality in Buddhism. This is especially true of Taiwanese Humanistic Buddhism, which emphasizes the role of nuns and women in Engaging Buddhist Activities of modern society. This paper is aimed to discuss the relationship between Buddhist doctrines and gender during different stages of Indian Buddhism-from Early Buddhism to Mahayana Buddhism to Tantric Buddhism-to explore that Buddhist doctrines do influence the Buddhist views of women. That is, as Mahayana Buddhism established and developed gradually in history, the status of women in Buddhism had improved significantly and then got a huge, dramatic turn in Tantric Buddhism which represented Buddhist doctrine of equanimity fully. The discussion and analysis in this paper show that Buddhism is truly concerned with equality and impartiality, which indirectly reply to feminist critics of Buddhist patriarchy. Also, it reflects the interdependent tendency of the Buddhist view of gender which is plural, flexible, and updated with time and the audience.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.31.14篇名：從改宗之西方穆斯林女性的觀點看伊斯蘭之性別平等並列篇名：Gender Equality in Islam: Perspectives from Female Muslim Converts in the West作者：蔡芬芳(Fen-Fang Tsai)關鍵字：性別平等;伊斯蘭;改宗;gender equality;Islam;conversion期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：31期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以西方學者的實證研究資料為分析基礎，探討西方國家改信伊斯蘭教的女性，其性別平等觀點之形成背景與社會文化脈絡，並從西方與伊斯蘭在性別平等方面所顯現的差異，來找尋西方女性改宗的動機與軌跡。在西方論述與媒體再現中，伊斯蘭教常被建構為壓制女性且性別不平等的宗教。然而，身處西方的女性卻受到伊斯蘭教中有關性別議題的觀點吸引，例如穩定的性規範與兩性秩序，認可兩性具有平等價值但有天生的本質差異，同時明確肯認女性做為母親與照顧者的能力。本文首先從改宗者普遍不為所處社會接受的改信伊斯蘭教行為，討論一般非穆斯林與西方論述中的伊斯蘭意象，並從性別與宗教交織的觀點探討女性受到壓迫的情形，這些雖反映出女性目前在伊斯蘭世俗政權中遭遇的問題，卻無助於我們真正且完整地瞭解伊斯蘭如何看待女性，因此實有探尋古蘭經婦女觀之必要，以釐清伊斯蘭對女性的看法。然而，相當值得注意的是，雖然她們身處的社會充滿對伊斯蘭的負面觀感，這些西方女性卻選擇走向伊斯蘭，因她們認為重新選擇的宗教所闡明的性別概念、性別平等、女性特質與母職身分，能夠符合她們的認知與需求，其主要意義在於公平與合理之平等對待。此外，身為行動主體的改宗女性所處的社會文化脈絡，會影響她們對伊斯蘭教之性別相關觀點，且有內部差異，因而彰顯出伊斯蘭教並非同質單一的宗教，因為信仰者在不同社會文化背景下所產生的實踐與所詮釋的意義，會建構出多樣的面貌與動態圖像。英文摘要：Based on empirical data from scholars in Western countries, this study explores how female converts to Islam in the West view gender equality in Islam by investigating the backgrounds, social and cultural contexts, and motives of conversion, particularly regarding differences in gender equality between the West and Islam. Generally speaking, in Western discourse and media representation, Islam is considered a religion with gender inequality that oppresses women. However, Western women who convert to Islam are captivated by the gender issues of Islam, such as stable gender norms and order, and the recognition of ”equal but different” between genders. Moreover, in most Western societies people devalue housewives, but Islam recognizes women as mothers who take care of family and children. That women's conversion to Islam is usually unacceptable entails discussing the image of Islam in the eyes of non-Muslims and in Western discourse. The argument in which oppressed women are the symbols of maintaining religious and ethnic boundaries is also worthy of investigation. Subjugation and oppression imposed on Muslim women reflect the problems of secular regimes; however, this does not fully clarify how women are regarded in Islam. Therefore, examining women in the Quran is necessary to delineate the Islamic perspectives regarding women. Despite the negative attitude toward Islam in the West, mainly concerning oppression of female Muslims, the female converts examined in this study nevertheless embrace Islam, thus being grounded in the concepts of gender, gender equity, womanhood, and motherhood in Islam to meet their particular needs. The central meaning of gender equity focuses on being fair and reasonable in a manner that treats everyone equally. Furthermore, the social and cultural contexts in which female converts are involved influences their perspectives regarding gender in Islam, in which internal differences exist. In conclusion, the perceptions and understandings of female converts to Islam in the West on gender equality in Islam render Islam not homogeneous and unitary, but rather dynamic and full of diversity in that Muslims from various social and cultural backgrounds redefine and refresh the meaning of Islam through their practices and interpretations.起始頁-結束頁：39-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.31.395篇名：北歐普及照顧制度的實踐與變革－從女性主義觀點回顧及批判並列篇名：Scandinavian Universal Care Policy and Recent Development: A Critical Review from Feminist Perspective作者：劉毓秀(Yu-Hsiu Liu)關鍵字：性別平等;北歐普及照顧福利制度;充分就業;民主組合主義;新公共管理;Scandinavian universal care policy;full employment;democratic corporatism;new public management;gender equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：31期出版年：2012中文摘要：將近二十年前，一部分台灣婦女運動人士開始在台灣推動師法北歐普及照顧制度及其民主組合決策機制。於此期間，北歐福利國家面臨來自內部與外部的重大挑戰，並因此而經歷劇烈的變革，造成制度模型、價值、效應的多重自相扞格；這對於台灣（以及其他國家）師法北歐之舉的理論層面與實踐層面，都增加很高的複雜度，但也拉開較大的可能性，因為新變革所帶來的新元素雖然有損普及福利模式的原有完整性，卻也使它與其他模式產生融合作用，變得比較容易想像與效法。影響前述變革之方向的主要力量之一為新公共管理，這套治理哲理與辦法已透過各種國際經貿協約而廣泛滲入當今舉世各國（包括我國）的制度與價值的紋理之中。對於北歐各國晚近力行新公共管理之效果的女性主義角度檢驗，也或許有助於我們覺察這套治理術對於台灣（女性）的影響。英文摘要：In Taiwan, approximately 20 years ago, some feminists began promoting the universalist care policy of the Scandinavian model, as well as its democratic corporatist mechanism of decision making. During this period, the Scandinavian welfare states faced internal and external challenges, experienced subtle and striking changes, and emerged in the new millennium as mixtures of different models with numerous contradictions. Paradoxically, this level of complexity has rendered the Scandinavian welfare states more imaginable and attainable to the rest of the world, although it has damaged the integrity of their original model. One of the primary forces behind these changes is new public management (NPM). NPM has become embedded into the values, as well as the economic and political systems of numerous countries (including Taiwan) through multilateral trade agreements. The feminist investigation of the influence of NPM on the Scandinavian model can help increase our understanding of the influence NPM has for Taiwanese women.起始頁-結束頁：75-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.31.756篇名：台灣當代女性藝術的性別覺醒與創作蘊意並列篇名：Gender Consciousness and Its Implications for Contemporary Women's Art in Taiwan作者：許如婷(Ju-Ting Hsu)關鍵字：女性藝術;女性主義;婦女解放運動;性別意識;visual art;women's art;feminist;women's liberation movement;gender consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：31期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究藉由台灣當代女性藝術，包括傳統藝術（雕刻、油畫、版畫、素描）與影像藝術（電影為主）等主題，探討台灣當代女性藝術創作者如何以創作展現自我的性別意識。台灣當代女性藝術在七○年代的婦女解放運動與女性主義思潮中醞釀而生；女性藝術家經過性別覺醒、解放歷程，開始積極參與個展／聯展等活動，試圖展現藝術創作，並企圖批判長期由男性霸權操控的藝術環境。本研究運用文本分析與深度訪談法，探究台灣當代女性藝術創作中的性別意識，同時援引婦女解放運動、女性主義理論為基本觀點，分析當代女性透過藝術創作所展現的性別意涵。研究發現，台灣當代女性藝術創作者，歷經婦女解放運動的賦權與性別意識覺醒的過程，開始藉由身體展演、扮裝等方式，企圖製造一種性別流動與非二元對立的觀看位置；同時也以肯定自我生命經驗的創作方式，透過「女性意象」來表達女性的情感、經驗與情慾。此外，更積極地，她們勇敢挑戰傳統藝術史對女性的漠視，試圖透過藝術創作，為女性的生命經驗書寫與編纂歷史。英文摘要：This paper attempts to discover how female Taiwanese artists present their gender consciousness through their work. We examine contemporary women's visual art in Taiwan, including carvings, canvases, prints, sketches, and films. The women's liberation movement and feminism in the 1970s gave birth to contemporary women's art in Taiwan; female artists began to progressively hold exhibitions after undergoing the process of actualizing their gender equality. They attempted to critique the artistic field, which had been manipulated by men or had been under the influence of patriarchal hegemony. To obtain a better understanding of gender consciousness and its implications for these artists and their works, we first reviewed the literature on feminism and critiques of the women's liberation movement, and then used documentary analysis and in-depth interviews as our research method. The results show that through 3 major forms, these artists attempted to effectuate a particular method of feminist seeing. The first form of feminism is women's manner of displaying their bodies to subvert a series of binary oppositions formed by the patriarchal unconsciousness. In addition, by recognizing their own life experiences, women used ”female images” to express female emotions, experiences, and desires. Finally, women challenged the absence of female artists in canonical art history with their creations and writings, and they constructed their own art history.起始頁-結束頁：123-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.31.1237篇名：體育系學生的學習經驗與性別關係之探究並列篇名：Gendered Learning and Gender Relations in the Departments of Physical Education作者：游美惠(Mei-Hui You)關鍵字：性別與體育;性別與運動;陽剛;陰柔;恐同;gender and physical education;gender and sports;masculinity/masculinities;femininity/femininities;homophobia期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：30期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究針對正在體育系就讀的學生及畢業生進行訪談，蒐集相關資料，探究體育系的男、女學生（選擇）進入體育系就讀之動機，並探究其相關的學習經驗；此外，同學們在體育類科系求學的過程中，其性別經驗與同儕間之性別關係為何？陽剛與陰柔分別如何展現？性別是被社會文化建構而成，陽剛與陰柔特質如何在社會中各個場域、各種實踐被「建構」，是近年來性別研究常探討的主題。陽剛特質不只由性別社會化所造成，我們更須進一步留意實踐、情境脈絡、體制性的權力和論述場域如何同時生產出「性別」。研究者藉由探討學生進入體育系的學習歷程，瞭解過往的體育訓練給了他們什麼性別歷練與經驗；以體育系學生所處的學習環境來說，集體陽剛的次文化，加上日常體能訓練的肉身打造實作，對於男女學生造成不同的衝擊和影響。研究發現分為五點呈現：（一）「我就是想要當體育老師！」（二）「男生女生都一樣很努力啊！」（三）體育系男生都「很MAN」？（四）「體育系的男生會有光環。」（五）「體育系女同志<U+22EF><U+22EF>不是秘密吧！沒有公開，但大家都知道。」本研究探究體育系學生的學習經驗與性別關係，希望能對「性別與體育」以及「陽剛建構」等相關議題之探究提供一些具體的經驗研究成果。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the learning experiences of students in the department of physical education. Physical education plays an important role in influencing attitudes toward the body, and in enhancing the development of bodily strength. It is also a prime field for exploring the social and cultural construction of body and gender relation. Students who choose physical education as their major may also have to overcome a number of obstacles in their learning, and in their daily school lives. This research is concerned with examining students' learning experiences within the department of physical education from gender analytical perspective. The researcher has conducted interviews to understand students' views and experiences. Focusing on students' learning experiences in the department of physical education, the researcher examines the following questions: How do students identify themselves when they choose physical education as their major? How do these university students interpret their gender relations within the department of physical education? Finally, this study emphasizes that researchers working in the field of gender and physical education must consider the construction of masculinity and femininity. This research may provide theoretical and practical implications in the field of gender and physical education, which requires more empirical inquiries to be developed.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.30.18篇名：與青少年「搏」性別：戲劇課堂中的性／性別動力與教學實踐並列篇名：Struggling with Youth Sexuality: Gender and Sexual Dynamics in Drama Classes作者：林昱瑄(Yu-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：戲劇教育;被壓迫者劇場;性／性別文化;性別教育;批判教育學;drama education;theater of the oppressed;sexuality/gender culture;gender education;critical pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：30期出版年：2012中文摘要：當代的性別與學校教育研究都相當重視學生的性／性別（sexuality/gender）文化，因為只有從學生文化的角度，瞭解青少年性／性別學習與認同的建構，才能從事對學生而言有意義的性／性別教育。不過，如何讓學生們能在安全、溫暖的氛圍下自在地展現自己的性／性別認同，同時又挑戰他們的霸權性認同，這是女性主義教師必須面臨的一大挑戰。本研究以台北市一所私立高職某班做為研究田野，研究期間為一學年（2009年月－2010年6月）。我們同時採取學生個別訪談、戲劇教育和教室觀察等研究方法，以瞭解學生的生活世界和想法。戲劇教育在本研究的作用，既是一種用來探究青少年複雜的認同與生活世界的研究方法，也是一種解放性的課程實踐。本文將呈現戲劇課中與學生性／性別認同有關的兩個片段，討論學生在其中呈現的性／性別認同，以及教師如何進行解放性的教學實踐。在第一個場景中，學生集體創作出一封給AV女優的信，信中大量投射了學生自身對性的慾望和想像，本文將藉這份文本討論青少年與色情媒介間的關係，以及具有女性主義意識的教師可以如何回應、面對青少年真實的性慾望。另一個場景則是關於女學生間的隱性霸凌，這個段落將透過一樁班上正在進行的霸凌事件，探討女孩間的性別文化，並呈現教師可以如何透過戲劇教育處理類似的隱性霸凌。英文摘要：Contemporary research on gender and education frequently emphasizes the culture of sexuality/gender among students. This is because educators can make sexuality/gender education more meaningful for students only by understanding young people's sexuality/gender learning and identity from the perspective of students' culture. However, how to make students feel comfortable expressing their sexuality/gender identity in a safe and benevolent environment, on the one hand, and challenging their hegemonic identity, on the other hand, is a challenge feminist teachers must confront. This study takes a class at a private vocational high school in Taipei as its research field. The research period spans one academic year (September 2009-June 2010). The methods in this study include interviews, drama education, and classroom observations. In this study, drama education is both a research method used to investigate students' complicated identity and life world and as an emancipatory curriculum. The article will present two situations in drama class, showing of the sexuality/gender identity students present, and discussing how teachers can engage in a more emancipatory pedagogical practice. In the first situation, students produce a letter to an adult video actress, and they project their sexuality and desire in the letter. The paper will discuss how youth perceive pornography through the letter and how teachers can respond. The second situation reveals hidden bullying among female students. I will examine these girls' gender culture and provide some pedagogical suggestions for teachers.起始頁-結束頁：47-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.30.479篇名：同志教育進／出校園之間：以台灣同志諮詢熱線的實作方式為例並列篇名：Analysis of LGBT Education Practiced in Gender Equity Education作者：蔡宏富(Hung-Fu Tsai)關鍵字：性別平等教育;同志教育;台灣同志諮詢熱線;gender equity education;LGBT education;Taiwan Tongzhi Hotline Association期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：30期出版年：2012中文摘要：性別平等教育法於2004年通過至今，有許多性別議題在校園中蓬勃發展，包括同志教育。然而，同志教育雖受到法律保護得以在校園實行，但在實際操作面上，並不如其他性別議題一般容易。本文以台灣同志諮詢熱線為研究對象，分析其進入校園實行同志教育的過程所遭遇的困境，以期能指出目前性別教育中的各種性別議題有中心－邊陲的關係出現。本文發現在整個性別教育當中，同志教育仍處於邊緣位置，此邊緣化的現象並非理所當然。在入班演講上，教師必須處理上級、同儕與家長所帶來的壓力與質疑；在教師研習上，重複的法令規定與議題的一魚多吃，獨厚性騷擾與性侵害防治教育。現實校園中，許多教育者也只把性別教育當成兩性平等，此種以「兩性」平權為核心思維的性別教育觀念，無形中將同志議題邊緣化。最後，本文肯認性別平等教育法的立法初衷，但要再進一步落實同志教育，則需有更為建制化的師資培育與有系統的同志課程融入，才能讓同志教育更有力地現身在教室中。英文摘要：The Gender Equity Education Act of 2004 marked the beginning of gender equity education in schools, including LGBT education. However, the practice of LGBT education has not been successful in Taiwan schools. This study observes the Taiwan Tongzhi Hotline Association (TTHA) as its focus. Through the experiences of TTHA's LGBT movement in schools, this work discusses the gap between the law and practice. The findings show that LGBT education remains marginal in gender education. In practice, the curriculum arrangement of a school limits LGBT education, and many educators have considered gender education as a matter of sex equality, which marginalizes LGBT education. Lastly, this study recognizes the original intention of the Gender Equity Education Act. LGBT education would be practiced in classes if it had more institutional developments of teachers and systematic LGBT courses.起始頁-結束頁：83-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.30.8310篇名：管理性別：陽剛職場中的女檢察官並列篇名：Managing Gender: Female Prosecutors in Masculinized Organizations作者：莊玲如(Ling-Ju Chuang);成令方(Ling-Fang Cheng)關鍵字：檢察官;做性別;管理性別;陽剛特質;prosecutor;doing gender;managing gender;masculinity期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：30期出版年：2012中文摘要：檢察官被期待是客觀中立的法律工作者，檢察官的工作環境也應該是無性別歧視的。很多人都會同意「檢察官的工作與性別無關」的說法。本研究就是要挑戰這個說法，擬從三個面向來探討。首先，由制度組織面檢視檢察官的工作，探討其制度中暗藏以男性工作者為中心的性別化工作內涵。其次，從組織文化面分析，檢查機構如何透過崇尚陽剛特質、貶抑陰柔特質的過程，建構了有利於男性的陽剛組織文化？陽剛的組織文化如何使女檢察官在與警察夥伴辦案時陷入困境？最後，從個人行動的面向來看，女檢察官面對陽剛組織文化的張力，又如何以「管理性別」（managing gender）的策略來順從或反抗規範？本研究採取質性研究法，以個別深入訪談法（訪談資深與資淺檢察官女性5人，男性3人）和參與觀察法研究，研究結果歸納如下：檢察官的工作是非常性別化的。組織控制了性別、性屬與身體的運作。與女性性屬相關的，都被貶低或邊緣化。組織所推崇的價值與檢察官的形象，均屬陽剛特質，更透過各種機制的運作來正當化組織中男性性屬的優勢。陽剛的組織文化對於女性檢察官的行為與穿著，存在著不是太陽剛就是太陰柔的弔詭標準，使得女性檢察官很容易陷入進退兩難的困境。在工作場域的互動過程中，女性檢察官必須做「管理性別」的工作，以調和或挑戰陽剛化的組織。她們為了協調同時身為「女性」和「檢察官」二者之間的張力，依不同場合而有不同的互動對象，隨時轉換各種行為策略。以上研究顯示，檢察官在一個性別不平等的環境中工作，其環境文化是以男性利益為優勢的父權文化。本研究提出「管理性別」的說法，以便貼切呈現組織中的女性工作者，在面臨父權社會與陽剛組織的雙重期待時，所採取的回應與生存策略，為「做性別」的概念增添解釋力。英文摘要：Prosecutors are expected to behave objectively and neutrally, and workplaces are expected to be free from gender bias. Many people would accept the view that prosecutors' work is gender irrelevant. To challenge this view, this paper explores gender-bias from the following perspectives: (1) Institutional and organizational: to explore the work of prosecutors is male-centered. (2) Organizational culture: to scrutinize the dominance of masculine culture as constructed by privileging masculinity and devaluing femininity, and to examine how female prosecutors address difficulties when working with police; and (3) Individual action: to examine how female prosecutors adopt strategies of ”managing gender” in accepting or resisting masculine norms as they experience the strain of masculine domination. The adopted research methods are in-depth interviews and long-term participant observation. This study enlisted 8 participants: 5 female and 3 male prosecutors in junior and senior positions. The findings are as follows: Prosecutors' work is very much gendered. Women's bodies, reproduction, and sexuality are frequently subjected to surveillance, and their femininity is devalued and they become marginalized in the organization. Conversely, images of male bodies and masculinity are set as the norm; the domination of masculinity is institutionalized. The behavior and dress code of female prosecutors are easily trapped in a paradoxical state of being either too masculine or too feminine. Female prosecutors must learn to ”manage gender” and to assimilate or challenge the masculinized organization. They adopt appropriate strategies according to specific situations to address various issues that create tensions between being a prosecutor and being a woman. This research shows that prosecutors are working in an environment that is subject to gender inequality. Its culture is heavily male privileged and patriarchal. The term ”managing gender” is introduced to detail the coping strategies adopted by female prosecutors to address the constraints of working in patriarchy but also masculinized organization, which is expected to enrich the concept of 'doing gender'.起始頁-結束頁：137-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.30.13711篇名：想像跨界社群：晚近香港電影中的中國移動女性並列篇名：Conceiving Cross-Border Communities: Mobile Women in Recent Hong Kong Cinema作者：黃宗儀(Tsung-Yi Michelle Huang)關鍵字：香港電影;中港關係;中國移動女性;北進;想像社群;邊界流動;Hong Kong cinema;Sino-Hong Kong relationship;Mobile Women from China;northbound movement;imaginary communities;border-crossing期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：30期出版年：2012中文摘要：在中港合作日趨頻繁的經濟與文化脈絡下，近年處理跨界主題的香港電影中，《香港有個荷里活》（2001）、《神經俠侶》（2005）、《我不賣身，我賣子宮》（2008）、《天水圍的夜與霧》（2009）與《單身男女》（2011）具有一定的代表性，提供了重思香港北進論述複雜意涵的切入點。這些電影中的角色可粗略分為社會寓言意義下的兩種主要類型：無出路的香港成年男性與內地的移動女性。前者象徵受困的在地，後者則是香港對照中國來定義自身的他者。透過將在地男性與移民女性對比的再現手法，影片呈現了香港在地主體面對新的想像社群時不同的協商策略。片中各階層的香港男性與不同類型的中國女性的互動，譜寫了當代複雜多變的北進故事，而影片中的內地女性則常作為不同階段的中港關係的隱喻。本文聚焦跨境來港之中國女性，透過分析其形象的社會文化意涵，以理解香港自我書寫中的跨界慾望與焦慮。我將說明，中國移動女性的再現由妓女轉為妻子與母親，顯示中港關係更為緊密但也益發緊張；電影在呈現大眾焦慮的同時，亦試圖反思議題或建立接納他者的可能；近年出現的白領菁英女性形象，則投射了香港參與中國經濟發展的想像。總體而言，這些跨界抵達香港的各類中國移動女性成為影片中的連結角色，她們重新定義了當代香港的想像共同體，也扮演了述說香港與中國之間或連結或斷裂的修辭工具。作為文化文本，晚近的香港電影持續反映中港關係的轉變，提供大眾理解並思考北進的當代意義。英文摘要：This paper argues that the possibility of geographical collaboration between China and Hong Kong is a major concern in recent Hong Kong cinema. The discussed Hong Kong films that are representative of the border-crossing issue are Hollywood, Hong Kong (2001), Crazy n' the City (2005), True Women for Sale (2008), Night and Fog (2009), and Don't Go Breaking My Heart (2011). The characters in these films can be placed into two categories of social allegorical meaning: beset manhood as a symbol of the local under siege, and ”mobile women” from mainland China as the Other against which Hong Kong defines itself in relation to China. The mobile women who cross the border from China into Hong Kong serve as the figures of linkage for the films to redefine the imagined community of contemporary Hong Kong, acting as a rhetorical vehicle to articulate connections and contradictions between Hong Kong and China. From prostitutes to wives and mothers, the transformed images of Chinese women point to a closer and also more tension-ridden Sino-Hong Kong relationship. While reflecting collective anxieties, the films under discussion also entertain the possibilities of a new imagined community. The representations of Mainland professional women become the anchor for Hong Kong to imagine participating in China's economic development. The contrast between male locals and female migrants thus constitutes the setting in which the Hong Kong audience can experience the possibilities of rejection, acceptance, questioning, and the confrontation of the challenges inherent in cross-border unions, conjugal or otherwise. The seemingly banal gender ideology that assumes a dichotomy between China as the feminized Other and Hong Kong as a masculine subject brings about new narratives of border-crossing in response to the changing dynamics of capitalism development in Hong Kong and China over recent years.起始頁-結束頁：187-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.30.18712篇名：家庭主婦的偵探冒險：從文學作品中的主婦偵探形象談女性主義之流變並列篇名：An Adventure of the Housewife as a Detective: The Development of Feminism through Representation of the "Housewife Detective" in Literary Works作者：施舜翔(Shun-Hsiang Shih)關鍵字：第一波女性主義;第二波女性主義;家庭主婦;女性偵探;女性漫遊者;後女性主義;First-wave feminism;second-wave feminism;housewife;female detective;flaneuse;postfeminism期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：30期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文將從不同時期文學作品中的「主婦偵探」（housewife detective）形象，來討論女性主義運動的發展。首先將簡述並回顧女性主義之流變，接著討論三部文學作品中的主婦偵探如何和女性主義運動產生呼應。主婦偵探雖屬於女性偵探，卻不是傳統上以偵探工作為主要職務、或至少視之為專業的女性角色。主婦偵探仍是一名家庭主婦，但卻知道如何以自身的女性知識，去觀察家庭內、乃至郊區生活中隱藏的各式符碼，進而化身為隱性的女性偵探，跳脫男性偵探小說的敘事傳統。格拉斯拜（S. Glaspell）為了回應第一波女性主義而創作的舞台劇《芝麻小事》（Trifles），可說是「主婦偵探」的早期代表作品。接下來，雷文（I. Levin）的小說《超完美嬌妻》（The Stepford Wives），則延續了主婦做為隱性女性偵探的敘事模式，並於同時反映了第二波女性主義興起時，女性主義者自覺的處境與可能做出的各種反抗。值得一提的是，在都會女性文學（chick flick）興起的當下，韋納（J. Weiner）雖同樣以主婦偵探為主角，寫出《晚安，無名小卒》（Goodnight, Nobody）一書，卻帶出女性處於消費社會中對外在打扮的焦慮與自我反射，暗示九○年代以後，後女性主義的崛起與女性形象的轉變。英文摘要：This article reflects on the development of the feminist movement through analyzing the changing images of the ”housewife detective” in literary works. The current article first reviews the feminist movement before discussing how the ”housewife detectives” in literary works respond to its development. The ”housewife detective” differs from the ordinary ”female detective,” who treats detective work as her main occupation or profession. The housewife detective is still, broadly speaking, a ”housewife,” but she knows how to read the hidden signs within her house, or the community she lives in, with her female knowledge and her unique life experience, to further become a detective figure. The housewife detective cannot be, therefore, defined by the narrative traditions of male detective fiction. American playwright Susan Glaspell's ”Trifles”, which responds to the first-wave feminist movement, can be seen as the early representation of the housewife detective. In 1972, Ira Levin furthers the significance of the housewife detective with his thriller ”The Stepford Wives”, in which he also echoes the manifesto of the second-wave feminist movement and demonstrates how a woman can resist oppression from men with various strategies. Finally, along with the rise of post-feminism and the changing image of the modern woman after the 1990's, Jennifer Weiner portrays a housewife detective, who is highly aware of her appearance in the consumerist society, with her bestselling chick flick ”Goodnight, Nobody.”起始頁-結束頁：225-249資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2012.30.22501篇名：從「昭和摩登」到「戰時文化」－〈趙夫人的戲畫〉中大眾文學現象的觀察與省思並列篇名：From "Shouwa Modern" to "Wartime Culture" -The Observation of and Reflection on the Mass Literature Phenomenon in "Madame Chou's Giguwa"作者：柳書琴(Shu-Chin Liu)關鍵字：龍瑛宗;〈趙夫人的戲畫〉;大眾文學;閱讀反應;女性讀者;Long Ying-tsung;"madame chou's giguwa";mass literature;reader response;women readers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012中文摘要：日治時代臺灣各種現代知識或概念的傳播途徑中，傳播力最大、影響結果也最難以評估的一種即是大眾讀物。本文企圖以龍瑛宗（1910－1999）為案例，觀察一位純文學中堅作家對大眾文學元素的援用，分析這種策略出現的背景與必要性。龍瑛宗選擇了特殊的形式，獨特的角度，也選擇了一個特別的年代。〈趙夫人的戲畫〉成功捕捉了時代轉換期裡大眾文化在殖民地盛極將衰的片段，也傳達了作者對當時讀書市場及閱讀現象的批評。本文首先將分析這部具形式實驗意圖的反諷小說，如何透過雙層敘事、多角敘事和輕質感風格構成獨特形式？其次，探討它如何透過大眾文學元素的引入、中間色彩的營造，嘗試現實主義文學的虛構化？第三，探討它如何透過讀者閱讀反應的類型，描繪當時大眾文學盛行的現象，以及這種現象對女性教養及社會價值傾向產生的影響？第四，介紹龍瑛宗對於流行文化將衰、戰爭文化正起之文化轉換期的時代風景捕捉；第五，歸納他對日本大眾讀物影響殖民地讀書市場此一現象的整體觀察和省思，以及他透由大眾小說議題所欲傳達的殖民文化批判觀點。英文摘要：In Japanese colonial time, among various means of the communication of modern knowledge and concepts, popular readings was the most powerful medium, but it was also the most difficult to evaluate its influence. This study attempts to take Long Ying-tsung(1910-1999) as an example, analyzing the background and necessity of the use of mass literature by observing an important pure literature writer's application of mass literature. Long chooses a special method, a unique angle, and an extraordinary period of time. ”Madame Chou's Giguwa” successfully captures fragments of the time of transformation when mass literature throve to the utmost and was going to decline in the colony. It also conveys the author's criticism on the reading market and the reader responses at that time. This paper will first analyze how, with formal experiment intention, this ironic novel constructs its unique form through double-layer narratives, multi-perspectives narratives, and a light texture style. Second, it will explore how this novel experiments on the fictionalization of realism by the introduction of the elements of mass literature and the building of intermediate colors. Third, it will discuss how it depicts the prospering phenomenon of mass literature through the description of the reader's response, and what impact this phenomenon has on women's parenting and social value orientation. Fourth and fifth, it will induce the author's reflection upon the reading market in Taiwan and other related social and cultural phenomena in the transformation period when popular culture was about to decline and wartime culture was rising.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00012篇名：評鑑的制度化與制度的評鑑化－一個以台灣社會學者為對象的研究並列篇名：Institutionalized Evaluation and Evaluationalized Institution-A Case Study on the Sociologists in Taiwan作者：蘇碩斌(Shuo-Bin Su)關鍵字：系所評鑑;制度;社會學家;新制度理論;program evaluation;institution;sociology faculty;Neo-institutionalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文論證2006年至2011年間大學學風出現轉變，且與教育部委託高教評鑑中心進行的系所評鑑有關。研究以社會學相關教師為對象進行，透過數十人次的焦點團體及個別訪談，應用新制度理論的觀點，勾勒系所評鑑由單一活動成為完整制度的過程。研究發現，源自新自由主義精神、講求可課責性的系所評鑑，一方面委由學界進行同儕主觀性的自主審查，一方面則由中心協助建置客觀性的效標，成為目的曖昧但流程嚴格的「制度化的評鑑」。制度化評鑑的客觀計分指標，再被大學複製成為內部教師評鑑的準則，並將教學研究的內涵化約為全面性、定期性、數量性的評比獎懲，成為「評鑑化的制度」。這個過程形塑了新的制度性環境，迫使教研人員放棄傳統師生倫理的教育理念，轉而追求具有制度正當性的出版績效。英文摘要：This paper argued that changes in the academic climate from 2006 to 2011 was related to the ”Program Evaluation” to the universities in Taiwan, which was commissioned by the Ministry of Education and executed by the Higher Education Evaluation & Accreditation Council of Taiwan. This study interviewed 23 sociology-related faculties (through focus groups and individual interviews) as research objects, and used Neo-institutionalism theory to figure out how the Program Evaluation event transformed into a austere institution. This research found that the Program Evaluation, which was at first based on neo-liberalist concept of ”accountability”, on the one hand invited the professional scholars as subjective peer reviewer, on the other hand built a set of objective index to guide the professional. As a result, an ”institutionalized evaluation” emerged, with ambiguous ends and clear-cut means. The institutionalized evaluation with objective scoring indexes then was be copied into the universities' internal review institution to evaluate their teachers. As a result, an ”evaluationalized institution” emerged with comprehensive, regular, and quantitative rating sanctions. This formation process of a new institutional environment forced the faculty to pursue the specific publication efficiency instead of following the traditional teacher-pupil ethics.起始頁-結束頁：47-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00023篇名：曖昧的歸屬，策略性的協商－在台東南亞新移民女性的國族認同並列篇名：Ambiguous Belonging, Strategic Negotiation-National Identification of Southeast-Asian Immigrant Wives in Taiwan作者：王翊涵(Yi-Han Wang)關鍵字：新移民女性;國族認同;國族界線;認同協商;immigrant wives;national identification;national boundaries;identity negotiation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012中文摘要：認同一直是台灣學術研究新移民女性現象時被忽略的一環，本文在國族認同的議題下，探討東南亞新移民女性跨海結婚來台以後的形構樣貌。相關文獻已指出環境裡的權力運作與個體認同之間的息息相關，特別是女性常在國族建構裡被賦予邊界標誌，女性移民更易承接來自接待社會對原生國家強加的標誌烙印。台灣社會對於新移民女性「排她」地刻畫國族界線，生活於此脈絡中，這群女性將形構出怎樣的國族認同？透過深入訪談18位新移民女性，本文發現她們來台以後都多少經驗著「排她」，不過「與原生家庭的情感連結」、「既嫁從夫」、「成為母親」以及「移動前後情境交錯」有著重要的影響力，她們的國族認同因此是在台灣與母國的跨國座標裡定義參照，多數形構出「我是台灣人，我也是越南／印尼／柬埔寨人」的認同，甚至有「我要做台灣人，我不要當柬埔寨人」的歸類。但是「排她」經驗難以抹滅，「我是印尼人，不是台灣人」的類型因而產生，「認同台灣」與「認同母國」也在「排她」的脈絡下被視為是種政治性的協商策略。本文研究成果不僅助於了解東南亞新移民女性在「認同／不認同」「台灣／母國」裡既曖昧又協商的國族認同面貌，亦指出歸化國籍與產生國族認同之間非等號的關係，更期能對台灣的同化論述與國族優越宣稱提出反省意義。英文摘要：This article explores national identification of Southeast-Asian women who migrated into Taiwan by marriage. It has been demonstrated that the identification of the individual is closely linked to structural power. Feminist scholarship also reveals ways in which idealized images and real bodies of women serve as national boundaries; accordingly immigrant women are more easily stigmatized in the host country. Taiwanese society portrays Southeast- Asian immigrant wives as ”problem-makers”; thus, this article mainly asks how these women can define themselves and construct a sense of belonging after marrying into Taiwan. Based on in-depth interviews, I first address that these immigrant wives' national identification is multiply, ambiguously, resistantly and politically (re)defined not only within transnational fields (that is, ties with homeland, mothering experiences in Taiwan, and living conditions before and after migration), but also by discriminatory gaze in Taiwan that regards them as ”outsiders”. It is also found that having Taiwanese citizenship unlikely draws forth immigrant wives' Taiwanese identity. These research results remind ”superior Taiwan” of self-examination.起始頁-結束頁：83-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00034篇名：常民參與對醫療知識與衛生政策的貢獻－職業病認定與補償之爭議的歷史分析並列篇名：Lay Participation in the Construction of Medical Knowledge and Health Policy-A Historical Analysis of Workers' Compensation and Recognition of Occupational Diseases作者：王實之(Shih-Chih Wang);吳怡伶(Yi-Ling Wu)關鍵字：醫療知識的社會建構;社會參與模式;常民流行病學;工人運動;職業病認定與補償;social construction of medical knowledge;social participatory model;lay epidemiology;worker's movement;recognition ;compensation of occupational disease期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文論證在公共衛生的範疇中，「常民參與」對醫療科學知識及衛生政策的貢獻，特別以台灣工人運動對職業病議題的參與經驗為例，說明職業病的社會建構特性。職業病問題有其特殊社會意涵，西方歷史經驗指出，工人以「社會參與模式」同時對疾病知識的建構與相關政策進行改革：除了疾病的發現之外，在認定和補償的爭議中，工人對生物醫學知識為典範的「科學／專家主義」模式提出質疑和挑戰，進而主張常民流行病學的觀點，且透過集體的行動督促補償制度的逐步改善。透過檢視三個頗具代表性的工人集體爭取職業病補償案例，本文呈現社會參與模式在台灣的幾個特性：包括常民發現、集體行動的產生、職業病認定的爭議、制度的改革。最後，本文強調常民流行病學與工人運動，在職業病的知識發展和相關衛生政策改革上，扮演不可或缺的角色。英文摘要：This paper demonstrates the contributions of 'lay participation' to the knowledge of medical science and health policy. By taking the example of workers' movement on the issues of occupational disease in Taiwan, this paper illustrates the social construction of occupation diseases. The specific social implication of occupation disease, as it has been discovered in' social participatory model' in western history, is that workers participated the construction of knowledge and simultaneously reformed the relevant policy. Apart from the discovery of a occupational disease, workers questioned and challenged the 'scientific expert only model' which takes biomedical knowledge as a paradigm, in their dispute over recognition and compensation. Instead, they contended the perspective of lay epidemiology, and urged to reform the compensation system through collective actions. By examining three significant cases of collective worker's compensation claims for occupational disease, this paper exhibits some characters of the social participatory model in Taiwan, including: lay discovery, collective action, dispute over disease recognition, and the policy reform. Finally, this paper emphasizes the indispensable role of lay epidemiology and workers' movement in the knowledge development of occupation disease and the reform of relevant health policy.起始頁-結束頁：127-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00045篇名：為什麼要讀陳映真？並列篇名：Reasons to Read Chen Seriously作者：趙剛(Kang Chao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：185-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00056篇名：2012東亞批判刊物會議－處於2012年的東亞，尋找另類發展模式並列篇名：2012 East Asian Critical Journals Conference-Searching for Alternative Mode of Development in the 2012 Context of East Asia作者：白永瑞(Young-Seo Baik)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：199-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00067篇名：開會辭並列篇名：Opening Remarks作者：白樂晴(Nak-Chung Paik)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：203-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00078篇名：東亞國際主義的理想與現實－「國際」與「民際」並列篇名：The Idea and Reality of East Asian Enternationalism-"International" and "Inter-people"作者：崔元植(Won-Shik Choi);王艷麗(Yan-Li Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：209-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.00089篇名：東亞批判刊物會議的軌跡並列篇名：The Path of East Asian Critical Journals Conference作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：223-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.000910篇名：311之後並列篇名：After 311作者：池上善彥(Yoshihiko Ikegami);鄭納無(Na-Wu Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：241-249資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001011篇名：中國人的「世界想像」及其最新變遷並列篇名：The Chinese Imagination of the World and Its Recent Changes作者：李雲雷(Yun-Lei Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：251-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001112篇名：讓「民際」鮮花盛開……讀崔元植《東亞國際主義的理想與現實》並列篇名：May "Inter-people" Blossom-A Response to Choi Won-Shik's "The Ideal and Reality of East Asian Internationalism"作者：賀照田(Zhao-Tian He)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：259-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001213篇名：馴服與抵抗－高教危機與新工會主義並列篇名：Discipline and Resistance-Emerging New Unionism in the Crisis in Higher Eduction作者：戴伯芬(Po-Fen Tai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：265-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001314篇名：關於高教市場化的批判並列篇名：Some Reflections on the Marketization of Higher Education in Taiwan作者：陳政亮(Cheng-Liang Chen);林敏聰(Minn-Tson Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：269-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001415篇名：雙薪教授是高教亂源並列篇名：Double-income Professors Turn out to be the Chaotic Cause of Higher Education作者：周平(Ping Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：281-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001516篇名：大學教師是否可能被大量解雇？－高等教育教師聘用問題之法律問題分析並列篇名：Could Mass Redundancy to Teachers in Higher Education Come True?-The Analyze of Legal Relationship between University and Teachers作者：吳明孝(Ming-Haw Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：297-312資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001617篇名：學術工廠中的新工會主義－高教工會的經驗省思並列篇名：New Unionism in Academic Manufacturing-The Experience of Taiwan Higher Education Union作者：戴伯芬(Po-Fen Tai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：89期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：313-329資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201212.001718篇名：台北市人行空間治理與徒步移動性並列篇名：The Governance of Pedestrian Space and Walking Mobility in Taipei City作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：移動;步行;人行空間;都市治理;治理術;台北;mobility;walk;pedestrian space;urban governance;governmentality;Taipei期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012中文摘要：徒步不僅是憑靠身體的移動，也是社會關係與文化規範的操作場域，更是現代都市治理課題，涉及技術、知識／權力和主體化。本文回顧戰後台北市的人行空間治理，歸結出三股於不同時期出現、但彼此重疊複合的趨勢：（1）以效率和秩序為主導理念，規訓身體動作的機動城市之控制；（2）以商業和休閒為主導理念，教化身體感知的消費城市之體驗；（3）以安全和權利為主導理念，釋放身體能力的市民城市之正義。機動城市、消費城市和市民城市等三種都市意義的形構，正是人行空間治理與徒步移動性轉變的結構動力。這三股治理趨勢和都市意義底下，則有邁向文明化和現代化的共同主題，但以不同型態的安全裝置為核心，呈現了從管理主義城市到企業主義城市，以及從威權式治理到消費者—效能導向治理，乃至於反身自控式治理的轉折，交織成為控制、體驗和正義的變奏曲。最後，著眼於行走空間及經驗的區域差異與社會差異，本文重申徒步移動性的政治和倫理意涵。英文摘要：Walking is a field of social relation and cultural regulation as well as an issue of modern urban governance which involves various technologies, knowledge/power complex and subjectification. There are three trends of governance of pedestrian spaces historically emerged in different periods but overlapped with each other in postwar Taipei City: (1)the controlling of automobile city and disciplining of body movement with efficiency and order as dominant ideas and technologies; (2)the civilizing of perception and pleasurable experience in a consumer city with commercial interest and leisure as dominant technologies; (3)taking safety and rights as dominant concepts to justify the a city for citizens and releasing pedestrians' bodily capability. The formative processes of automobile city, consumer city and citizen city are the structural drives towards transformation of the governance of pedestrian space and walking mobility in Taipei City. Under these three modes of governance of pedestrian space, there is the tendency of civilization/modernization that focuses on different safety devices, but also a transition from managerial city to urban entrepreneurialism, or from authoritarian governance to consumer-efficiency oriented governance, and towards self-reflexive governance. In conclusion, the author reaffirms the political and ethical significance of walking mobility by way of the geographical and social difference of pedestrian space and experience.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.000119篇名：大稻埕異托邦－百年城市史裡的「福科問題」與文化閒逛並列篇名：Dwaduedia Heterotopias Exploring "the Foucault Question" in the Hundred Years' Urban History with Cultural Flaneur作者：石計生(C. S. Stone Shih)關鍵字：大稻埕;臺灣歌謠;異托邦;福科問題;閒逛者;地理資訊系統;夢址;城市文化;dwaduedia;taiwanese ballad;heterotopias;the foucault question;flaneur;geographic information systems;dream sites;urban culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012中文摘要：延續過去作者臺灣歌謠的研究，本文著力於流行歌的主要展演空間臺北三市街的大稻埕，探討其中城市史的文化活動與理論對話意義。通過「福科問題」，以異托邦六點原則進行大稻埕城市文化史的理論與實踐研究。理論層次上，將福科與諸理論對話後提出一個新的補充原則創見：把異托邦神秘的空間能動，回歸到人的能動性，由具有辯證印象與刺點能力的閒逛者帶領進入空間探究。方法上通過行走的視覺經驗和主體之刺點感受，又有著運用歷史文獻、地理資訊系統和田野訪談等知面的理性導引，本文發現大稻埕異托邦街衢空間內有諸多相互關連的刺點：社會空間結構（如霞海城隍廟、陳天來洋樓）；臺灣歌謠文化（如永樂座、圓環）和全球經濟茶葉文化（新芳春行）等，印證異托邦的「反位址」「並置位址」與「夢址」與交織性的空間存在。大稻埕作為戰前「本島人市街」、戰後「臺北老區」，這「夢址」是被國家權力控制篩選過濾後的地域秩序，所刻意劃分的差異空間，是資本流動以追逐較高利潤所拋擲的場域，是隨時可能遊行，聚會與暴動的需要被監視提防的地域。流動如歌的閒逛者在其中自覺觀看與詮釋，於城市文化史裡尋求深具主體認同的「自身空間」，時時等待重新造訪，溫習與創造想像。英文摘要：To consider ”Dwaduedia” as our research object as mainly performing area for Taiwanese ballad, this paper focused on the urban culture complexities in the Taipei three cities region's process becoming a ”heterhotopias” via the realization of the Foucault Question. After debating with other theorists, I add one supplementary principle into the original six principles developed by Foucault. That is, we discover ”heterotopias” are places strolling and seeing, by flaneur in where inspired our space imagination to recognize the importance of counter sites, juxtaposing sites and dream sites and their relations to the Dwaduedia urban spaces. Dream sites are places being intentionally divided or excluded by the state's power, flaneur is the only actor who can find the correspondences of heterotopias in those spaces. Other findings are that as ”the islander” s street' and ”the old quarter in Taipei”, Dwaduedia is not only a culture historical site full of punctum, such as the site for performing Taiwanese ballad, but also contains different dynamics of spaces for developing the ”selfspace” consciousness for Taiwanese identification.起始頁-結束頁：41-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.000220篇名：現代社會「教改」論述的演變及其發展的結構性條件　以台灣暨德國的教改論述為例並列篇名：The Evolution of Discourses of 〞Educational Reform〞 and Its Structural Conditions in Modern Society A Comparison between Taiwanese and German Educational Reform作者：齊偉先(Wei-Hsian CHI)關鍵字：教改;第三部門;市場;國家;效率;人本價值;educational reform;the third sector;market;state;efficiency;humanistic idea期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：88期出版年：2012中文摘要：儘管台灣和德國的社會文化背景極其迥異，研究觀察卻發現兩個國家教制的歷史演變呈顯有許多雷同性可供進一步思考及比較。透過跨國的比較，本文試圖說明兩個不同文化及政治背景的現代社會，在其現代化發展的過程中呈顯了什麼樣值得關注的共同特徵。本文從國家、市場及民間團體的這三個影響面向切入，發現不論在台灣或在德國，市場及民間團體這兩造對社會中「教育」的看法及定位有越來越重要的影響。其中也發現兩國教改訴求的基調都呈現有相同的轉向：由強調人本價值轉而變成效率導向的基調。此外，研究進一步指出，國家教育決策根本上面對的是「效率考量」和「人本價值」的兩難困境，而這正是現代社會內在結構運作邏輯一體兩面的張力展現。結論將指出，這內在矛盾的結構性張力將無法由國家政府獨自承擔及解決，第三部門的教改論述在現代社會中將會持續扮演一個重要角色。英文摘要：Some similarities can be found between the educational reform in Taiwan and Germany, which continue to occur in different cultural and political background. The similarities shall be viewed as the common characteristics of the modern societies. This study starts with analyzing three important agents in relation to the discursive construction of educational reform, i.e. the state, market and civil organizations. It shows that the market and civil organizations are becoming much more important nowadays. In addition, I shall argue that the criteria of 〞efficiency〞 and 〞humanistic idea〞 are intrinsically in conflict with each other in the educational discourses of modern societies. In conclusion, I shall clarify that the state will not play and should not play the dominant role in regulating the state educational policy any more. The balance between market and the influences of civil organizations becomes a key issue in the discourse of the state educational reform. The civil organizations shall continue to play an important role in the discursive production of educational reform.起始頁-結束頁：89-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.201209.000301篇名：主編的話作者：傅仰止期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：2-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.i2篇名：醫療化理論的後進國批判：以台灣慢性腎病治理的知識、專業與體制轉變為例並列篇名：The Medicalization of a Latecomer Society: A Critique Based on the Case of Knowledge, Profession, and Transformation of a Medical Regime in Taiwanese Chronic Kidney Disease Governance作者：林文源(Wen-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：醫療化;後進;科技治理;專業宰制;慢性腎病;medicalization;latecomer;professional dominance;technological governance;chronic kidney disease (CKD)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣慢性腎病防治體制在近十年間迅速建立。相較於以先進國經驗發展的醫療化理論，本文以此案例挑戰其缺乏國際與在地互動面向的盲點，指出其中「自我後進化」的後進國醫療化。本文引入科技與社會研究的科技治理觀點，深入本地脈絡，分析其中的知識、專業策略與體制特質，並藉此批判醫療化理論的全稱式命題。2001 年後，面臨透析醫療體制壓力的腎臟專業，藉由政策機制賦予規劃、執行、評估合一的地位，忽視在地現實，以國際統計發展新國病論述並黑盒化充滿爭議的臨床指標，迅速建立慢性腎病防治體制。此體制的影響為：專業上，造成腎臟專業內部分化卻轉變其地位的專業擴權；體制上，惡化既有院所失衡問題；臨床上，對篩檢出的病患支持不足，可能造成「醫源病」。本案例凸顯「自我後進化」的後進國醫療化模式為：計畫導向的政策機制，賦予醫療專業制度機會；醫療專業以片面知識與論述策略，型塑問題與解決方案，以扭轉地位；爭議中的知識則在此過程中，被黑盒化為先進、普遍知識而應用於後進化的在地。英文摘要：A national chronic kidney disease (CKD) prevention system was established between 2001 and 2011 in Taiwan. Instead of following the theory of medicalization developed in the context of advanced countries, this paper draws on the perspective of technological governance from science, technology, and society studies and analyzes how a medical profession ”promotes” the disease and transforms its status and the medical regime in a latecomer country. This study criticizes medicalization theory for ignoring this latecomer context. Since the millennium, the Taiwanese nephrological profession, faced with financial and professional pressure in the dialysis regime, has promoted a ”new national disease” discourse on the basis of international statistics and the black-boxed clinical index of eGFR. The discourse and index facilitate the implementation of a CKD regime in a project-oriented policy-making mechanism at the expense of ignoring clinical, professional, and social complexities. This regime has the following consequences: It reverses the status of the nephrological profession but causes internal diversification; it worsens the imbalance between hospitals and local clinics; and its insufficient understanding of and support to diagnosed patients might cause iatrogenesis. In conclusion, this study specifies the ”self-latecomerization” characteristics of the profession, knowledge, and policy-making mechanisms of latecomer medicalization.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.13篇名：非關上網？台灣的數位落差與網路使用的社會後果並列篇名：Anything but Online? The Digital Divide and Social Consequences of Internet Use in Taiwan作者：林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin)關鍵字：網際網路;數位落差;社會網絡;所得不平等;社會運動;Internet;digital divide;social network;income inequality;social movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文將有關網際網路使用與社會不平等關係的理論區分為三類，包括：(1)有科技決定論嫌疑、認為上網能夠減少社會不平等的數位烏托邦論，(2)認為數位落差導致社會不平等惡化的數位控制論（數位反烏托邦論），以及(3)認為原先的社會不平等塑造數位落差，反之卻不然的懷疑論（社會形塑論），並且指出這三種理論文獻對上網如何影響社會網絡、所得差異、政治行為以及社會運動有不同的經驗預測。本文以2000-2010年的「台灣社會變遷基本調查」數據為基礎，探討影響數位落差的因素，以及個人上網時數對社會網絡大小、每月所得、投票行為與社會運動參與的影響。統計分析結果發現：階級、年齡與城鄉差異造成數位落差的擴大，而上網時數對社會網絡的大小、所得高低或投票行為並無重大影響。最後，上網抗議行為而非上網本身，與實際參與社會運動有關。總之，上網時數對台灣民眾的政治經濟差異或社交生活的影響似乎有限，本文統計結論更支持懷疑論（社會形塑論）的觀點，也就是原先的社會不平等塑造了民眾上網時數的數位落差。英文摘要：The article examines the relationship between Internet use and social networks as well as social inequality in Taiwan. I divide the literature into three approaches: Cyber-utopian, Cyber-dystopian (control theory), and skeptical (social-shaping aspect) and illustrate their different hypotheses regarding social inequality, social networks, political behavior, and collective action. The Cyber-utopian approach claims that the diffusion of Internet use reduces information cost, equalizes market opportunity, and increases social capital, but the Cyber-dystopian approach claims that Internet use empowered ordinary political and economic elites. Both approaches focus on the social impacts of Internet use and imply technological determinism, while the skeptical approach focuses on the social inequality of Internet use, especially on the digital divide. According to a national survey (TSCS) conducted in Taiwan during the 2000-2010 period, I investigate hypotheses derived from the three approaches. The empirical findings confirm that inequalities still created digital divides of Internet use, but the effect of average time online per day is insignificant or ambiguous on the size of social network, income distribution, voting behavior, and participation in social movements. In sum, most empirical results support the skeptical approach rather than the two forms of technological determinism.起始頁-結束頁：55-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.554篇名：助人專業與多元情緒勞動：社工員與常民助人者服務外籍配偶的比較研究並列篇名：Helping Professions and Multidimensional Emotional Labor: A Comparative Analysis of Foreign Spouse Services between Social Workers and Lay Helpers in Taiwan作者：黃克先(Ke-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：社工員;情緒勞動;助人專業;外籍配偶;個案管理;social worker;emotional labor;helping professions;foreign spouses in Taiwan;case management期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012中文摘要：情緒勞動雖廣泛應用在許多研究，但多數僅討論短暫反覆的互動中涉及的單元情緒勞動，也多聚焦在資本主義組織內的剝削性情緒勞動。我以服務外籍配偶的社工員與常民助人者為例，彰顯當代日盛的助人專業中獨特的多元情緒勞動、專業體系如何動員各元素以實現多元情緒勞動，以及其解放意涵實現的過程與限制。研究發現，社工員在服務被污名化的案主的過程中，主要從事三種實作，各有不同類型的情緒勞動：首先，行如所感地展現正向情緒以建立信任關係；其次，為做專業評估而維持情感抽離；再者，為培養案主能力而刻意展現負向情緒。然而，這種協助解放意涵實現的情緒勞動，當落實於基層社工實踐，不但隱然帶著再種族化外配的危險，使服務發放有階級盲點；同時顯示了異化的專業語言在實務運用上的窒礙之處；最後，培力在福利公辦民營化的背景下也可能淪為控制成本的工具，而原專業的助人承諾反弔詭地由遊走體制邊緣、看似無力或無意進行情緒勞動的非專業草根人力來彌補。英文摘要：Although many investigations on various occupations have been conducted to address the concept of emotional labor, the emphasis has been placed on simple emotional labor practiced by employees exploited under capitalist firms' surveillance and discipline. Little has been done to explain the multidimensional complexity of emotional labor manifested in the helping professions, which must maintain long-term, close relationships with clients; involves subtle emotional management; and has emancipation-facilitating implications. This comparative analysis between social workers and lay helpers in Taiwan aims to fill this empirical gap. Meanwhile, it suggests that the entire professional system orchestrates different tools- including collective-ritual-like seminars, professional knowledge, the institution of supervision, and tempo-spatial segmentation-to facilitate the multidimensional emotional labor. The results show that social workers delivering services to the stigmatized clients of foreign spouses engage in three distinct types of emotional labor: First, social workers must show positive emotions ingenuously; then maintain detached, free-emotion selves for objective judgments; and finally display unpleasant emotions to empower clients. In reality, however, the emancipatory promise of the profession is compromised as follows. Social workers are observed to reracialize foreign spouses and enact a welfare system that prejudices against lower classes; the professional language seems alienating to front-line practitioners; and finally, in the process of privatizing welfare services, social workers are likely to reduce the amount of services in the name of empowerment. Paradoxically, these exhausted professionals turn to lay helpers for ingenuously caring for clients, a group over which the professional system has little control and that seems unable to perform the required emotional labor.起始頁-結束頁：99-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.995篇名：南傳佛教在台灣的發展與影響：全球化的分析觀點並列篇名：The Development and Influence of Theravada Buddhism in Taiwan: A Globalization Perspective作者：陳家倫(Chia-Luen Chen)關鍵字：全球化;台灣佛教;南傳佛教;原始佛教;內觀;globalization;Taiwanese Buddhism;Theravada Buddhism;Original Buddhism;Vipassana期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012中文摘要：全球化是影響當代台灣宗教變遷一個不可忽視的因素，然而探討全球化與台灣佛教變遷之間關連的研究卻相當有限。本文以南傳佛教為例，採取全球化的研究取向，檢視外來佛教來台的原因、在台的發展概況、及其對台灣佛教的影響。本文將與南傳佛教有關的團體區分為四類：南傳在台中心、內觀團體、原始佛教團體、以及選擇性採用的漢傳教團。這四類團體在傳播路徑、實踐南傳佛教的方式、佛教認同的立場、服務對象特質和運動形式等面向，有所不同，顯示南傳佛教在台灣發展的多元性和異質性。本研究發現，就南傳佛教來台的傳播路徑而言，台灣佛教菁英主動引進南傳佛教的動力，大於移民需求和南傳佛教的主動宣教。其次，選擇性應用或經過轉化的南傳佛教對台灣佛教的影響，勝過於原初或完整的南傳佛教。此外，大部分外籍南傳法師在台的生活和佈教，採取了各種在地化的適應。整體而言，南傳佛教對台灣佛教的影響是多面向的：增加台灣佛教的多元性和競爭性，創造新的佛教認同和選擇性，促進漢傳佛教的創新，以及提升台灣佛教的全球性。英文摘要：Globalization has been a visible factor in Taiwan's religious changes. There is little research, however, on the relationship between globalization and the changes of Taiwanese Buddhism. Based on the globalization perspective, this paper investigates Theravada Buddhism, including its introduction, its development in Taiwan, and its influence on Taiwanese Buddhism. This paper proposes an analytical framework and identifies four types of groups that are related to Theravada Buddhism: Theravada Buddhist centers in Taiwan, the Insight Meditation Movement, the Original Buddhist Movement, and some Chinese Buddhist groups that have adopted Theravada Buddhism selectively. Among these groups, there are variations in routes of introduction, ways of practice, positions of Buddhist identity, characteristics of participants, and types of movements. The diversities among these groups demonstrate the multiplicity and complexity of the development of Theravada Buddhism in Taiwan. This paper finds that the import of Theravada Buddhism initiated by the needs of Taiwanese elites weighs more heavily than that introduced by Southeast Asian immigrants, foreign workers or missionaries of Theravada Buddhism. Further, the selected or transformed Theravada Buddhism is more popular than the original or full-scale Theravada Buddhism. I also find that most foreign Theravada Buddhist monks have adjusted their ways of everyday life and dharma preaching in Taiwan. In sum, the influence of Theravada Buddhism on Taiwanese Buddhism is multifaceted, increasing the pluralism and competition among Buddhist groups, offeringmore alternatives of Buddhist identities and selection, stimulating the innovation of Chinese Buddhism in Taiwan, and enhancing the globality of Taiwanese Buddhism.起始頁-結束頁：155-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.1556篇名：Comparing Organized Labor, Comparing Korea and Taiwan作者：Hwa-Jen Liu期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：207-219資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.2077篇名：Rethinking about Comparative Research on East Asian Labor Politics: Author's Response to Hwa-Jen Liu's Review of Militants or Partisans作者：Yoon-Kyung Lee期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：24期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：220-224資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.24.2208篇名：主編的話作者：張晉芬期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：23期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：2-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.23.i9篇名：資本、國家與宗教：「場域」視角下的當代民間信仰變遷並列篇名：Capital, State, and Religion: The Transformation of Contemporary Chinese Popular Religion in the Perspective of ”Field”作者：陳緯華(Wei-Hua Chen)關鍵字：資本;場域;國家;靈力生產;民間信仰;capital;field;state;magical power;popular religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：23期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著社會的不斷變遷，當代台灣民間信仰究竟發生了什麼樣的改變？目前有關民間信仰變遷的各種描述，背後都存在某種特定的界定民間信仰的方式。因為對民間信仰的界定不同，不同研究者所描述出來的變遷圖像便不盡相同。本文嘗試以「場域」這個新的視角來理解與描述當代民間信仰變遷，並且透過「靈力生產」的觀點將考察的焦點放在場域對神明靈力的關注上。在布迪厄「場域」的視角下，民間信仰場域的變遷主要呈現為資本結構的改變。在傳統的社會資本、文化資本、經濟資本與象徵資本之外，當代民間信仰場域出現了新型態的文化資本以及象徵資本，從而改變了場域的結構，也因而改變了當代民間信仰活動的面貌，使靈力生產模式從傳統的「自發型網絡模式」轉變為「建構型網絡模式」。而定義出新的資本類型的，則是擁有「元資本」的國家。經由「靈力生產」這個概念，本文嘗試說明民間信仰傳統的延續與變遷之間的關係，並且透過布迪厄有關場域自主性的觀點，提供一種理解國家力量如何影響民間信仰的不同視角。最後，本文透過「資本」的概念，也嘗試對去地域化、世俗化等民間信仰活動變遷做出初步的詮釋，希望這個視角也能在一定程度上解釋這些現象。英文摘要：What happened to contemporary Taiwanese popular religion as society changed? This article presents a new perspective to comprehend and depict changes in contemporary Taiwanese popular religion. Through this perspective, the changing profile of popular religion can be depicted clearly and simply, and various current descriptions of popular religion can be understood in the same framework. This article uses Bourdieu's theory of ”field” to describe changes in popular religion and suggests that the nuclear change is the transformation of the types of capital and their deployment. There are new forms of cultural and symbolic capital emerging, thus transforming the religious field. This is the main reason why contemporary popular religion shows a new appearance. It is the force of the state, which owns the meta-capital, that comes into religious field and redefines the types of capital and the relations among them. This article provides a different view of the changing pictures of popular religion, such as ”deterritory” and ”secularization” through the mastery of the nature of new capitals. This article also illustrates the relationship between continuity and change in popular religion by describing its practical logic. Through Bourdieu's view of religion as an autonomous field, this article provides an alternative perspective for understanding how the state can influence religion.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.23.110篇名：行動中的川流發電：小水力綠能技術創新的行動者網絡分析並列篇名：Green Energy in Action: ANT Analysis of the Innovation of the Micro Hydropower System in Taiwan作者：楊弘任(Hung-Jen Yang)關鍵字：工業地方知識;行動者網絡理論;技術創新;後進技術框架;綠能;industrial local knowledge;actor-network-theory;technological innovation;latecomer technological frame;green energy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：23期出版年：2012中文摘要：綠能時代來臨之後，相較於歐、美、日等技術先進國家，做為技術後進國家的台灣社會，有沒有可能在「綠能技術移轉」之外，也有自身獨特的「綠能技術創新」？如果有，這樣的技術創新，會有哪些技術與社會之特質？本文由技術社會史深度描述入手，刻畫台灣社會技術後進狀態下技術創新之特質。分析架構上則以行動者網絡理論(ANT)為主軸，適度納入技術的社會建構(SCOT)之挑戰與修正，追溯並分析一位戰後初期出生於雲林農村，小學畢業、低制式學歷、高地方知識的本土發明家兼中小企業主；這位在地綠能技術創新者以全台灣遍布農田水圳為基礎，發明全世界獨一無二的「川流式水力發電」水輪機系統。創新者原係鐘錶師傅背景，多年拆解、組裝與改良鐘錶，不斷面對外來技術物「以物瞭悟」原理之後，演變出後進社會獨特的技術課題與技術解答。藉由這樣的「後進技術框架」與「工業地方知識」，川流發電系統逐漸形成更多人與非人之異質聯結，並在協商過程中嘗試強化新萌生網絡之穩固性。英文摘要：In the age of green energy, is it possible that Taiwan, as a latecomer compared with European countries, the United States, and Japan in terms of technology, can have its own unique ”green technological innovation” instead of merely relying on ”green technology transfer”? If the answer is yes, then what are the characteristics of such innovation, specific to Taiwanese society? This paper starts with a deep description of the social history of technology, elaborating on the characteristics of technological innovation in such a latecomer society as Taiwan, by tracing and analyzing the story of a native of Yun-lin County, Taiwan, who, born shortly after WorldWar II, is an inventor as well as an entrepreneur. The analytical frame of this paper is based on actor-network-theory (ANT), while applying and revisioning the social construction of technology (SCOT).With little formal education, but a large amount of industrial local knowledge, this green-energy technological innovator invented ”small-scale water current turbines,” based on traditional irrigation systems, an infrastructure constructed all over Taiwan. This innovator began his career by repairing clocks and watches, and after many years, he identified technological problems and developed technological solutions unique to a latecomer society, by constantly confronting himself with and developing his knowledge of foreign objects. Through the ”latecomer technological frame” and ”industrial local knowledge,” small-scale water current turbine systems have gradually formed heterogeneous associations between humans and nonhumans and have attempted to negotiate and thus stabilize the emerging network.起始頁-結束頁：51-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.23.5111篇名：每下愈況或漸入佳境？：夫妻婚姻品質之變化與相互影響性並列篇名：Worse or Better?: Trajectories of Marital Quality and Their Mutual Influence among Taiwanese Married Couples作者：謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh);周玉慧(Yuh-Huey Jou)關鍵字：婚姻品質;變遷軌跡;夫妻對偶關係;對偶成長曲線模式;多層次分析;marital quality;change trajectory;marital couples;dyadic growth curve modeling;multilevel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：23期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在於探討台灣夫妻婚姻品質各自的變化軌跡及其影響因素，並探討婚姻品質變動軌跡在夫妻間的相互關連性和影響性，以及是否因不同婚齡而有所差異。婚姻品質包括充實感、後悔感和婚姻品質總和三種測量。研究對象為台北地區328 對不同婚齡，連續三年參與追蹤研究的夫妻。採取夫妻對偶成長曲線多層次模式，將夫妻個人隨時間變動共變項、個人不隨時間變動共變項，及夫妻家庭特性變項納入分析。結果發現，僅考慮時間因素時，夫妻充實感、後悔感和婚姻品質總和均隨時間變動，充實感與婚姻品質隨時間下降，但後悔感隨時間上升。夫妻的身心健康、衝突知覺對夫妻婚姻品質的變化有顯著影響。夫妻的教育、主觀經濟生活、丈夫父母同住和子女數分別對不同婚齡的夫妻婚姻品質的變動有顯著影響，但不同婚齡家庭中，有顯著影響的變項並不一致。夫妻婚姻品質的變動軌跡有差異，且夫妻變動軌跡之間存在相當強的相互關連性與影響性。同時，夫妻婚姻品質變動軌跡因婚齡而不同，婚齡較短的夫妻婚姻品質維持平穩，婚齡較長的夫妻婚姻品質卻明顯下降，與國外研究結果並不相同，可能反映臺灣夫妻的世代差異。英文摘要：This paper explores couples' trajectories of marital quality and their determinants among Taiwanese families, examines the inter-relationship and mutual influence between wives and husbands' trajectories, and tests the differences in couple's trajectories among various marital-duration groups. The measurement of marital quality includes satisfaction, regret, and total quality. A total of 328 marital couples in the Taipei area having consecutive three waves of data are analyzed. Dyadic growth-curve multilevel analysis is employed to analyze the trajectory and the effect of individual time-varying and time-invariant covariates and family common variables on changes in marital quality. Marital satisfaction and total marital quality show a linear decline, but marital regret shows a linear increase in trajectories, for both wives and husbands. Changes in the trajectory of marital quality vary by their mental and physical health and perceived conflict, and they also vary by level of education, subjective economic life, living with husband's parent, and number of children in various marital-duration groups. The trajectories of marital quality differ between wives and husbands, but show a strong inter-relationship and the mutual influence of a couple. Finally, trajectories of marital quality and its relationship and the mutual influence of a couple shows an inconsistent pattern among couple groups with different marital durations. Whereas the marital quality does not significantly decline for new married couples in the first three years, the marital quality shows a significant decrease for couples with marriage durations longer than three years.起始頁-結束頁：101-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.23.10112篇名：科學本質主義的復甦？基因科技、種族／族群與人群分類並列篇名：The Revival of Scientific Essentialism? Genetic Technology, Race/Ethnicity, and Human Classification作者：蔡友月(Yu-Yueh Tsai)關鍵字：種族;族群;基因;認同政治;本質主義;race;ethnicity;genetics;identity politics;essentialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：23期出版年：2012中文摘要：晚近生物醫學涉入人類起源、種族／族群分類與認同政治的現象，是一個新興而值得研究的議題。面對越來越多生物醫學家提出「科學證據」、宣稱族群間的生物差異時，本文強調社會學家不應只停留在強調族群的社會建構性質，而無視於分子生物醫學基因科技的新挑戰。本文的目的，在於綜合既有的研究文獻，分析、批判這個新興現象的主要性質與趨向、知識前提與操作邏輯等，希望有助於我們理解新一波科學研究與知識進展潛在的社會衝擊，並展示社會學面對基因科技的挑戰可能的貢獻與反省。本文首先釐清這個新興科學研究與知識進展帶來的兩個變化：種族／族群概念混淆，以及基因化、生物科技對國族建構的作用，並指出晚近的生物醫學強化了人群分類的本質化，潛藏的科學本質主義可能帶來不良的社會後果。接著本文從科學知識社會學的分析角度，從主觀認同與客觀身分、統計平均值與絕對類別、種族／族群內的變異與種族／族群間的變異、單一基因與複雜的社會因素、人群分類的生物標準與社會文化慣行五方面的各自區分，分析生物醫學關於種族／族群概念的操作邏輯、知識基礎，以及方法論與認識論上的限制與盲點。文章結論指出，科學難以完全隔絕政治、社會及文化的作用，生物醫學的種族／族群研究，凸顯出當代族群問題與認同政治的複雜性，社會學分析批判與科學社群交流對話的意義即在於形成不同典範的相互競爭與批評的「交叉檢查系統」，有助於加強我們對於種族／族群概念的認識論警覺，以避免將社會人群差異的本質化、集體認同基因化。英文摘要：Biomedicine's involvement in issues of human origins, racial/ethnic classification, and identity politics is new and worth studying. Focusing on increasing biomedical claims about racial/ethnic biological difference based on ”scientific evidences,” this article emphasizes that sociologists must not limit themselves to dwelling on the social constructedness of race/ethnicity and turn their back on the new challenge that the genetic technology of biomedicine poses. With a view to explore the social impact that the new scientific trend brings and to demonstrate how sociology can contribute to understanding this trend, the article draws on existing research literature to analyze and critique the main characteristics of the growing phenomena, as well as the knowledge presumptions and logic of practice involved in them. First, the article examines two major changes the new scientific trend has brought about: the conceptual confusion about race and ethnicity and the effects of biotechnology on the construction of national identity. It also investigates the potential negative social consequences of scientific essentialism underlying the human classification buttressed by biomedicine. Second, from the vantage point of the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK), the article exposes the knowledge presumptions, logic of practice, and epistemological and methodological limits or fallacies latent in biomedical conceptions of race and ethnicity in terms of five aspects: subjective identity vs. objective classification, statistical mean vs. absolute categorization, intra-racial/ethnic variation vs. inter-racial/ethnic variation, a single genetic attribute vs. complex social factors, and biological criteria vs. socio-cultural conventions. In conclusion, the article contends that science is not free from political, social, and cultural influences, as attested by the biomedical involvement in the contemporary identity politics of race/ ethnicity. The article also highlights the importance of a ”system of crosschecks” proposed by Pierre Bourdieu, which can be made possible by the dialogue between sociologists and biomedical scientists, for avoiding essentializing differences among social groups and geneticizing collective identity.起始頁-結束頁：155-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.23.15513篇名：評介《台灣的教育分流、勞力市場階層結構與地位取得》作者：紀金山期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：23期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：195-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2012.23.19501篇名：住宅負擔能力與住宅自有率之長期關係─追蹤資料共整合分析應用並列篇名：Long-term Relationships between Housing Affordability and Homeownership Rates: An Application of Panel Cointegration Model作者：彭建文(Chien-Wen Peng);蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：住宅自有率;住宅負擔能力;房價;所得;追蹤資料共整合分析;homeownership rate;housing affordability;house price;household income;panel cointegration期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文透過追蹤共整合模型檢視住宅自有率的影響因素，發現住宅自有率與家戶所得、遷徙率、老年人口比率、有偶率等變數具有長期共整合關係，但與房價、家戶變動率、租金成長率沒有整合關係，住宅自有率與房價所得比的均衡關係亦僅在台北縣存在。然而，若將時間趨勢納入住宅自有率模型時，則會得住宅自有率與房價、房價所得比、租金成長率等變數間都有整合關係的結果。此外，從共整合向量可發現，老年人口比率與有偶率等人口屬性變數的影響大於房價與所得，但不同都市住宅自有率的最重要影響變數不同。英文摘要：This paper uses the panel cointegration model to investigate the determinants of long-term homeownership rates for four cities in Taiwan. The results show that a long-run equilibrium relationship exists between homeownership rates and household income, the percentage of married couples, the percentage of elderly people, and mobility rates. No long-run cointegration relationship is found to exist between homeownership rates and house prices, changes in the number of households, or rental costs. In addition, homeownership rates and the house price-to-income ratio are cointegrated only in Taipei County. However, if we consider long-term trends in the model, then all variables are cointegrated with homeownership rates. Furthermore, the results of the cointegration vectors show that the influences of the percentage of elderly people and the percentage of married couples on homeownership rates are more significant than that of house prices and household income. However, the most important variables influencing homeownership rates differ in each of the four cities.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201212.00012篇名：Contrarian Effect of REITs and the Sources of their Profitability並列篇名：不動產投資信託基金反向效應與其獲利來源作者：廖源星(Y. Chris Liao)關鍵字：不動產投資信託基金;反向效應;過度反應;跨自我相關;橫斷面變異;REITs;contrarian effect;overreaction;cross-autocorrelation;cross-sectional variations期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文分析不動產投資信託基金之反向效應與其獲利來源。本文貢獻在於探討除了投資人過度反應外，是否有其他因素造成了不動產投資信託基金反向效應。分析結果如下：首先，不動產投資信託基金反向投資組合的確可以產生正的異常報酬率。其次，除了投資人過度反應之外，另有兩個因素對反向效應有顯著影響：跨自我相關效應與橫斷面報酬變異效應。此外，如果跨自我相關效應不存在，則反向投資組合報酬率將會比實證上所觀察之報酬率來得更大。另外，橫斷面報酬變異降低了反向投資組合之報酬率。綜合而言，過度反應並不是造成不動產投資信託基金反向效應的唯一因素，跨自我相關效應與橫斷面報酬變異效應都會減少不動產投資信託基金反向投資組合之獲利。英文摘要：The current literature documents that the contrarian effect in the REIT markets can be attributed to investor overreaction. The objective of this article is to explore whether factors other than investor overreaction may also cause the REIT's contrarian effect. We find that, first, the contrarian portfolios in the REIT markets are still profitable even after we control for the risk of these portfolios. Second, by decomposing the contrarian returns of REITs, we show that three factors account for this contrarian phenomenon: investor overreaction, the cross-autocorrelation effect, and the crosssectional return-variation effect. Our analysis suggests that the observed REITs' contrarian returns would have been even larger if the cross-autocorrelation effect were absent. The cross-sectional return-variation effect significantly decreases the contrarian profitability of REITs. Overall, our research indicates that investor overreaction is not the only factor explaining the REITs' contrarian effect. Both the cross-autocorrelation effect and the cross-sectional variation effect contribute to the contrarian profitability of REITs.起始頁-結束頁：29-45資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201212.00293篇名：利用實質選擇模型來評估不動產價值與最適租金─以台北小套房為例並列篇名：Applying the Concept of Real Options to the Pricing of Houses and Rent in Taipei作者：洪志興(Chih-Hsing Hung)關鍵字：實質選擇權;租金;不動產定價;不動產價值;real option;rent;pricing housing value;real estate theoretical value期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：過往探討不動產價值的文獻，僅是從租金收益的單一角度去衡量不動產價值，並未以實質選擇權的角度來考慮未來不動產預期的出售價格，所以本研究是以實質選擇權的方法，同時考慮租金收益與未來預期的資本利得情況下，並且假設投資人在極大化自己財富，則評估出不動產的最適出售價值，再根據不動產的最適出售價值來估計不動產的實質價值與合理租金，並且探討不動產泡沫化程度。本研究發現租金與不動產價格的波動率越高，則不動產的實質價格會越大。當租金成長的速度小於不動產價格成長的速度，則會造成不動產的價格泡沫化。本研究根據台北市不動產資料為模擬基礎，發現台北市的租金價格可能被低估，也就是台北不動產的價格可能被高估。英文摘要：This study not only focuses on fundamental models that derive the market housing price as a sum of the expected present value of rental income, but also focuses on real estate capital gains. This study applies the concept of real options to future housing prices, and uses the real options pricing model to price the houses. It assumes that the real estate investors are rational, that they will maximize their own wealth, and that they will then appraise the real estate in terms of the most suitable sales value, the real estate theoretical value and the extent of the real estate bubble. This study discovers that the higher is the rent and the volatility of real estate prices, then the higher will be the theoretical price of real estate. When the interest rate is lower, then the interest rate and the theoretical value of real estate will be negatively correlated. However, when the interest rate is rising over time, the interest rate and the real estate theoretical value will not necessarily have the same relevance. This study, which is based on Taipei real estate data, not only discovers that Taipei rental prices are underestimated, but also finds that Taipei real estate prices are overestimated.起始頁-結束頁：47-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201212.00474篇名：不動產價值逆折舊之探討並列篇名：Reversion on Real Property Depreciation作者：梁仁旭(Jen-Hsu Liang)關鍵字：折舊;再開發價值;特徵價格模型;depreciation;redevelopment value;hedonic price model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：折舊係指資產價值隨時間經過而降低者；於不動產市場中普遍認知，因建築物發生實質毀損致使不動產價值呈現遞減趨勢。折舊之相關實證研究中，許多研究以屋齡及屋齡平方為自變數進行迴歸分析，兩者之係數往往達顯著性水準，顯示不動產價值在建築物耐用年數期間呈現價值先降後升的逆折舊現象，致使不動產價值遞減的折舊觀點受到質疑。本文以台北市房地產交易價格與租金資料進行複迴歸分析，於分別建立價格模型與租金模型後，自不動產交易價格中分離出使用價值與再開發價值，進行屋齡效果分析。研究發現不動產價值逆折舊現象，導因於不動產使用價值與土地再開發價值的交互作用，致呈現先降後升之現象。英文摘要：Depreciation reflects the decline in an asset's value over time. The value of real estate will decrease gradually due to the building's physical deterioration. Most empirical studies thus adopt age and age-squared as proxies to measure depreciation, and the variables are often statistically significant. The empirical results suggest that there exists an upturn in the value of a property following a period of falling values over the property's economic life. Doubt is therefore cast on the conventional belief of a downward-only trend in property value. This article adopts multi-regression analysis to examine the pattern of use value and the redevelopment value of properties in Taipei City. The results show that the reversion of real property depreciation is due to the interaction of use value and redevelopment value. Therefore, a higher building age might yield a greater land redevelopment value.起始頁-結束頁：71-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201212.00715篇名：社會住宅：過去、現在和未來並列篇名：Social Housing: Pasts, Presents and Futures作者：Ray Forrest;黎德星(William Der-Hsing Li)關鍵字：社會住宅;國民住宅;social housing;public housing期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本專題演講發表於2011年住宅學會年會，受邀講者為香港城市大學公共與社會行政學系系主任/講座教授Ray Forrest，以國民住宅的東西方社會發展經驗為題，探討國民住宅之意義與作用。首先就國民住宅的定義開始，說明國民住宅與社會住宅之異同，其次針對國民住宅的相關理論進行回顧，說明國民住宅與社會之關係，並從國宅的發展階段進行討論，包括新自由主義對國宅發展的影響，最後他強調國宅目前仍可扮演更積極的角色。英文摘要：This speech was given by Professor Ray Forrest at the 2011 annual meeting of the Taiwan Housing Society held at Dong Hwa University in Taiwan. It focuses on the development of social housing from a global perspective. The address commences by first clarifying the terms ”social housing” and ”public housing”, to be followed by a theoretical review of the development of social housing that shows how social housing is related to society at large due to its social and economic impact. The neoliberal development of social housing is also addressed and so are its impacts. It is argued that social housing still can play a critical role under the current economic turmoil.起始頁-結束頁：91-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201212.00916篇名：貝氏多層次模型在台灣不動產市場估價之應用─以台北市住宅建物為例並列篇名：An Application of Bayesian Inference in the Real Estate Market-A Case Study of Taipei Collective Housing作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);馬毓駿(Yu-Chun Ma)關鍵字：特徵方程式;貝氏分析;馬可夫鏈蒙地卡羅法;hedonic equation;Bayesian inference;Markov Chain Monte Carlo期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在房地產價格估計的領域當中，特徵方程式是最常被應用來估計建物價格的工具之一，然因特徵估價法是建構在線性迴歸的基礎之上，對於建物特徵與建物價格關係的描述過於簡化，同時實務上存在諸多無法量化的因素，致使模型容易產生異質變異的現象，而現有的非參數模型有時過於複雜，且使用上的限制亦多。針對上述問題，本文嘗試採用多層次貝式模型來彌補線性模型的缺陷，有別於多數研究將區位視為建物特徵之一的假設，本文由區位不同造成異質變異的角度切入，重新呈現建物特徵與建物價格的非單調性關係。實證結果指出多數的建物特徵對建物價格的影響，多因區位而產生變化，且時呈不同方向，同時在異質變異現象獲得舒緩後，建物價格估價的精確度亦獲得顯著提升。英文摘要：How to estimate housing prices precisely has always been an important issue in the real estate market. Most studies adopt parametric or non-parametric methods to deal with problems such as heteroskedasticity or non-monotonic phenomena which come from less influential attributes or from characteristics which can not easily be realized. Researchers have attempted to adopt certain methods such as non-parametric methods to recover from these failures but they still do not work well. This paper therefore tries to re-examine the issue of heteroskedasticity in the housing price model. By using data for collective housing-type buildings in Taipei, this study employs the Hierarchical Bayesian model to bridge the relationship between attributes and housing prices. By means of a random effect device, the location effect gives rise to a non-monotonic effect on regressors that affect housing prices. Besides, capturing the heteroskedasticity effects results in the Bayesian model providing a better estimation than OLS.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201206.00017篇名：建蔽率與容積率管制誘發開發商建築違建現象之探討─台南市新建透天住宅之實證分析並列篇名：Influence of Building Coverage Ratio and Floor Area Ratio on Illegal Constructions of Developers: An Empirical Study of Newly-Built Townhouses in Tainan City作者：曾鵬光(Pong-Kuang Tseng);陳佳欣(Chia-Hsin Chen)關鍵字：住宅;建蔽率;容積率;違章建築;開發商;羅吉特模型;housing;building coverage ratio;floor area ratio;illegal construction;developer;logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在1997年台灣全面實施容積管制後，違章建築比例逐漸增加。以台南市為例，至2004年經查報之違章建築比例甚至超過40％。在諸多違章建築行為當中，法定空地違建、陽台違建及屋頂平台違建等三種行為係直接增加了建築物內部之樓地板面積，本研究稱之為「容積誘發之違建行為」，諸多開發商將此類之違建行為歸究於都市計畫之建蔽率與容積率管制。本研究以台南市開發商新建透天住宅產品為研析樣本，將開發商違建行為之影響因素區分為土地與建築物等二項因素，針對因容積管制而誘發之三種違建行為進行分析。藉由二項羅吉特模型對各類型之違建行為，分別進行是否違建之模型建構，並以次序羅吉特模型分析違建現象之嚴重程度。實證結果發現法定建蔽率與容積率對法定空地違建有顯著負面影響效果；意即法定建蔽率與容積率越高者則法定空地違建之機率越低，土地單價則有顯著正面影響。而在陽台違建與屋頂平台違建部分，則發現土地使用條件的影響效果並不明顯，只有土地單價對屋頂平台違建有正面影響效果。在違建嚴重程度部分，本研究發現，法定建蔽率與容積率有顯著負面影響效果，而土地單價則有正面影響。英文摘要：Since floor area ratio(FAR) controls were first implemented in 1997, the proportion of illegal constructions in Taiwan has been increasing. In Tainan City, for example, structures erected without building permission exceeded 40 percent of all structures until 2004. Construction on statutory vacant land and the addition of balconies or rooftop structures without building permits directly and illegally increases the overall floor area of buildings. This study refers to these as ”FAR-induced” illegal constructions. Many developers have ascribed the growth in these constructions as being due to the building coverage ratio (BCR) and FAR controls imposed by urban planning. This study adopts newly-developed townhouses in Tainan City as the study sample. The factors influencing illegal constructions by developers were divided into land factors and building factors, and the analysis was conducted on the ”FAR-induced” illegal constructions. Using a binomial logit model, we constructed a model to reflect illegal constructions. With an ordered logit model, we investigated the severity of this illegal phenomenon. The empirical results of this study revealed that BCR and FAR have a significant negative impact on construction on statutory vacant land. This indicates that a higher BCR and FAR would lower the likelihood of developers building on statutory vacant land. In addition, the unit land price was found to have a significant positive impact on illegal constructions. In regard to the addition of balconies or rooftop structures without building permits, the impact of land use conditions was not significant, while the unit land price had a positive impact on illegal additions of rooftop structures. In terms of the severity of illegal constructions, this study concludes that the statutory BCR and FAR have a significant negative impact and that the unit land price has a positive impact.起始頁-結束頁：19-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201206.00198篇名：集合住宅使用衝突與管理維護績效關係之探討並列篇名：Analysis of the Relationships Among Usage Conflicts and Management Performance of Condominiums作者：朱芳妮(Fang-Ni Chu)關鍵字：公共財;使用衝突;管理維護績效指標;public goods;usage conflicts;indicators of management performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：集合住宅社區共同使用部份屬於住戶分別共有的「共有資產」，具有類似公共財的特性，可能會產生相關使用衝突課題，減損多數願意配合社區事務的住戶之使用效益。因此，使用衝突與管理維護績效間的相互關係及影響因素為何？為本文主要探討課題。本文使用台北市集合住宅管理維護現況調查的問卷資料，以三階段聯立方程式模型建構使用衝突指標與績效指標之關係。實證結果顯示，管理組織運作的客觀效率與使用衝突之間具有反向的相互影響關係；住宅面積混合與使用類型混合分別是使用衝突的直接與間接影響因素。經本文研究可知，面對社區集體行動課題時，除運用制度途徑並配合有效的衝突管理機制外，妥善發揮社會途徑的功能亦應有助於管理維護績效的提升。英文摘要：Common property belonging to all owners of a condominium may cause usage conflicts, such as free-rider problems, due to the characteristic of quasi-public goods diminishing most residents' utility or benefits. The main topics of this paper include discovering the relationship between usage conflicts and the management performance of condominiums, as well as understanding the underlying factors influencing such conflicts and performance. Data collected from a postal questionnaire survey were used in the empirical analysis. A simultaneous equations model with three-stage least squares (3SLS) estimates was employed to form the connections among indicators of usage conflicts and management performance. The empirical results show that negatively reciprocal causation exists between usage conflicts and management efficiency. Housing mix and usage mix might be determinants of usage conflicts in a direct and indirect way, respectively. When facing the problems of collective action, institutional approaches and conflict management mechanisms should be implemented, and management performance can also be improved if the social approach is effectively applied.起始頁-結束頁：37-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201206.00379篇名：公共設施、環境品質與不動產景氣對住宅價格影響之研究─兼論不動產景氣之調節效果並列篇名：The Influence of Public Facility, Environmental Quality, and Real Estate Business Cycle on the Housing Price-Real Estate Business Cycle as a Moderator作者：李春長(Chun-Chang Lee);游淑滿(Shu-Man You);張維倫(Wei-Lun Chang)關鍵字：房價;不動產景氣;公共設施;環境品質;調節效果;housing price;real estate business cycle;public facility;environmental quality;moderation effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文採用2006年度內政部營建署住宅狀況調查資料，分析台北地區住宅價格。從公共設施、環境品質及不動產景氣探討對住宅價格之影響，並討論不動產景氣對於住宅價格的調節效果。實證結果顯示，公共設施構面之休閒與運動滿意度明顯的影響房價高低。景氣與面積的乘積之係數為-0.010，達到5%之顯著水準。表示面積愈大，房價愈高，然在景氣之下面積愈大，其增加之房價亦愈少。即景氣對於面積對房價之影響具有調節效果。景氣與屋齡的乘積之係數為-0.062，達到5%顯著水準，景氣與屋齡平方乘積之係數為0.001，亦達到5%之顯著水準。表示景氣狀態越佳之下，屋齡愈高，則房價下跌的幅度更多，但其降低的幅度愈來越小。景氣與北縣郊區的乘積之係數為-0.204，達到10%之顯著水準。顯示北縣郊區房價比其他地區低，然而在景氣狀態佳之下，則北縣郊區房價比其他地區低的更多。表示景氣對於北縣郊區與其他地區房價之差異具有調節效果。英文摘要：This article uses the 2006 questionnaire survey of housing conditions from the Construction and Planning Agency, Ministry of Interior, for the analysis of housing prices in the Taipei area. The main purpose is to discuss how public facilities, the quality of the environment, and real estate cycles affect housing prices, as well as how the cycle affects the moderation of housing prices. The model proves that the degree of satisfaction with leisure and sports significantly affects the level of housing prices. The product of cycle and area coefficients is -0.010, which achieves a significance level of 5 percent. Instead of increasing the living area, it raises the housing price. Under the cycle, the increase in area raises the housing price by less. This situation is evidence that the influence of the cycle affects the area and the housing price has a moderation effect. The product of the cycle and housing age coefficients is -0.062, which achieves a significance level of 5 percent, while the product of the cycle and the square of housing age is 0.001, which achieves a significance level of 10 percent. The product of the cycle and the county suburban coefficients is -0.204, which achieves a significance level of 5 percent. It indicates that the Taipei county suburban price is lower than prices in other areas; moreover, the price is lower than the others under the expanding cycle situation. Thus, the cycle that affects the difference in housing prices between Taipei's suburban areas and the other areas has moderation effects.起始頁-結束頁：67-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會DOI：10.6375/JHS.201206.006701篇名：婚暴防治社工「案主自決」觀點之初探並列篇名：Preliminary Study on "Client Self-Determination" Perspective of Social Workers of Marital Violence作者：沈慶鴻(Ching-Hung Shen)關鍵字：社工處遇;案主自決;婚暴防治;client self-determination;marital violence;treatment of social work期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的研究目的在了解婚暴社工有關受虐婦女「自決」的觀點、了解落實「案主自決」原則的困境，以回應婚暴防治工作中受虐婦女「高危機、低意願」的實務現況。為了達到上述目的，研究者採質性研究取向，利用「非結構」的個別訪談法，收集10位曾參與「家庭暴力安全防護網」之婚暴防治社工的意見。研究者發現：雖有部份受訪者表示尊重受虐婦女選擇的自由，然而多數受訪者卻認為受虐婦女在長期受虐、有限資源和高危機的狀況下，並沒有「自決」的空間，其並對「案主自決」原則被社工誤解和濫用的情形感到憂心；此外，多數受訪者雖認為應用「案主自決」原則有其前提，然彼此間對「案主自決」原則的應用前提看法並不一致，研究者並在資料歸納的過程中發現，婚暴社工在落實「案主自決」原則時，會受到案主、工作者、組織結構和暴力特性等因素的干擾。因此，研究者建議釐清「案主自決」原則的定義、使用前提，建立原則使用的評估機制，是減輕婚暴社工處遇壓力、解決「案主自決」原則濫用的當務之急。英文摘要：The study aims to explore the views of ”client self-determination” and its difficulties while implementing to abused women in order to help social workers of marital violence practice with ”high risk and low intention” abused women. Qualitative research approach was conducted in the study. The opinions of ten social workers who have participated in ”security and prevention network of domestic violence” were: gathered by unstructured individual interview. The study finds that most of the participant s express the abused women lack of opportunity of using ”client self-determination” as suffering long -term abuses, limited resources and high risk situation, albeit some participants respect the autonomy of client's self-determination. Moreover, they worry about misunderstanding and abuse of ”client self-de termination” principles in their practice. Additionally, although most of them agree at some prerequisite for applying ”client self-determination” but lack of agreeable opinion, and ”client self-determination” in marital violence prevent ion is influenced by the clients, workers, organization structures as well as violence characteristics. Thus, the researcher suggest that define the principles and prerequisite for using ”client self-determination” clearly, as well as set up evaluative procedure are the critical point of releasing social worker pressure and coping with the abuse of its principles in marital violence.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201212.00012篇名：變遷中的歐洲社會模式：考察歐盟年金政策的發展並列篇名：Changing European Social Model: Exploring the Development of EU Pension Policy作者：施世駿(Shih-Jiunn Shi);梁婉玲(Wan-Ling Liang)關鍵字：歐洲聯盟;歐洲社會模式;年金改革;里斯本議程;開放協調法;European Social Model;European Union;Lisbon Agenda;Open Method of Coordination;pension reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去20年以來，歐洲統合的過程深刻影響會員國的福利制度。本文以晚近的歐盟年金政策為例，視察歐洲社會模式的論述與歐盟社會政策的發展：進而探討2000年後興起的里斯本議程，如何影響歐洲社會模式的理念內涵，並形塑一個以勞動參與為核心理念的政策綱領。當前歐盟年金政策的發展，具體呈現主流論述中的歐洲社會模式精神，<U+5F3A>調傳統年金體系的現代化以及積極勞動參與獲取年金權。歐盟年金政策的理念與治理方式，在性別平等、人員自由遷徙、單一保險市場面向上對於會員國的年金制度有具體影響；再輔以開放協調法的運用，間接呼應並強化當前歐洲國家年金改革方向的正當性。藉此本文嘗試理解晚近歐洲年金改革的歐洲化面向，思考歐洲老年經濟安全政策的變遷，以及對台灣年金政策的意涵。英文摘要：In the past two decades Euro pea n integration ha s profoundly influenced the welfare institutions of the member states. With the example of EU pension policy, this article sets out to examine the discourses on the European Social Model and the relevant development of EU social policy, in an attempt to comprehend how the Lisbon Agenda has formulated the idea of European Social Model and moulded a policy programme centred upon labour participation . The development of EU pension policy is a concrete epitome of the European Social Model as dictated in the mainstream EU discourses, which stress the modernization of traditional pension systems as well as the acquisition of pension entitlements through active labour participation. In its governance of pension policy, the EU has indirectly intervened in the pension institutions of its member states in various domains such as gender equality, free movement of labour, and single European insurance market. The increasing utilization of the Open Method of Coordination in this policy area further echoes, indeed justifies, the legitimacy of recent Euro pea n pens ion reform direct ions. Upon this analysis, this article attempts to highlight the dimension of the Europeanization of pension reforms, and reflects on their implications for the changing old-age security in Europe.起始頁-結束頁：47-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201212.00473篇名：政府政策對老人退休前後所得分配之影響：世代別的探討並列篇名：The Effect ofaThe Effect of Government Policy on the Income Distribution of Elderly People before and after Retirement: A Cohort Study Government Policy on the Income Distribution of Elderly People Before and After Retirement: A Cohort Study作者：洪明皇(Ming-Hwang Hong);林怡婷(Yi-Ting Lin)關鍵字：所得分配;世代分析;政府移轉;income distribution;cohort analysis;government transfers期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣人口老化快速，退休後的所得水準以及不同時期老人經濟安全政策對老人所得分配的影響，值得關注。西方研究指出，退休後老人所得分配變化因福利體制而異：而台灣尚未有研究關注不同世代老人退休前、後所得分配的變化及其與福利政策間的互動關係。本研究使用家庭收支調查搭配世代分析法，探討在1989－2009年經歷退休前與退休後的三個世代之所得分配變化。研究結果為：1. 中老年人邁入老年過程中，所得不均度在退休前不斷擴大，但於65歲之後不均度下降，主因是不均度高的工作所得比重下降。2. 退休金制度扮演的是「不均化」因子，退休金制度惡化所得分配的效果正逐年擴大。3. 愈年輕世代的老人所得不均度愈高，部份原因是政府移轉的失靈，老農津貼的利富效果大於敬老津貼與國保保證年金「些微的助貧效果」。英文摘要：The population of Taiwan is aging rapidly. Income level s after retirement and the effect that the economic security policies of various era s have had on the income distribution of elderly people are issues worthy of attention. Western studies have indicated that changes in the income distribution of elderly people after retirement vary with welfare systems. In Taiwan, no studies have explored the interaction between welfare policies and changes in income distribution before and after retirement. Combining the result s of the Survey of Family Income and Expenditure and a cohort analysis, we discussed variations in the income distribution of three generations before and after retirement from 1989 to 2009. The results of this study are as follows: (1) As middle-aged and elderly people age, income inequality increases continuously prior to retirement. However, this income inequality decreases after they reach the age of 65 because the prop ort ion of high inequality occupational income decreases. (2) The pension system is a contributor factor that increases inequality. The pension system's effect in worsening income distribution increases annually. (3) Younger generations of elderly people experience greater income inequality. This phenomenon is partially attributed to malfunctioning governmental transfer or transformation. The pro-rich effect of old-age farmer annuity surpasses the ”trivial poor-supporting effects” of old-age allowance and national annuity.起始頁-結束頁：95-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201212.00954篇名：日本勞動派遣社會政策之探討：由勞工保護的觀點分析勞動派遣事業的角色與影響並列篇名：An Analysis of Labor Dispatch Social Policy in Japan from the Perspective of Labor Protection作者：黃義銓(Yi-Chuan Huang);蔡昌言(Chang-Yen Tsai);林昌平(Chang-Ping Lin)關鍵字：規制緩和;勞動派遣事業;不安定僱用;勞動條件低下;Deregulation;labor dispatching enterprises;unstable employment;inferior working conditions期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文從勞動派遣事業的角度，探討日本政府以勞動派遣的社會政策來促進勞動市場彈性化，卻造成派遣勞工處於不安定僱用和勞動條件低下之要因。研究結果顯示，勞動派遣政策的規制緩和以促進勞動派遣事業的興起，使得勞動派遣業界競爭趨於激烈，造成勞動派遣事業將其壓力轉嫁給派遣勞工。首先，勞動派遣事業配合短期勞動派遣契約，與派遣勞工簽訂定期勞動契約，該勞動派遣事業的角色，將對派遣勞工的僱用安定形成明顯的負面影響。其次，不管派遣費用增減，勞動派遣事業決定服務費以及派遣勞工薪資的角色，將對派遣勞工的薪資穩定增加有明顯的負面影響。本研究的發現，可為台灣及日本的勞動派遣社會政策發展提供參考與反思。英文摘要：The deregulation of labor dispatch in Japan was intended to promote a flexible labor market but in fact has led dispatched workers to unstable employment and inferior working conditions. From the research conducted in this paper, the result shows that the deregulation o f labor dispatch makes dispatching enterprises a booming market, which in turn puts more pressure on dispatched workers to survive in the fierce competition among dispatching enterprises. The reasons are as follows: firstly, in order to meet the demand s for short-term labor dispatch contracts, dispatching enterprises make a fixed-term contract with dispatched workers, which has a significant negative impact on stable employment: secondly, regardless of the increase or decrease in dispatch expenditure, the decision-making role that dispatching enterprises play in dispatched workers' service fee and salary has a significant negative effect on steady salary increase. The findings of this paper can be used as a reference as well as introspection for the development of labor dispatch social policy in both Taiwan and Japan.起始頁-結束頁：141-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201212.01415篇名：金融危機對台灣社會政策的衝擊：仍然是路徑依賴嗎？並列篇名：Financial Crisis and Social Protection Reform in Taiwan: Path Dependence?作者：陳盈方(Ying-Fang Chen);呂建德(Jen-Der Lue)關鍵字：金融危機;社會保障改革;路徑依賴;生產性褔利;台灣;financial crisis;social protection reform;path dependence;productive;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：2008／2009年受到美國次級房貸風暴之影響，全球面臨了嚴重的金融海嘯危機。台灣亦在此波危機中遭受嚴重的衝擊，不僅失業潮創下歷年新高，勞動市場亦掀起一波無薪休假潮，人民所得差距擴大、Gini係數增加、消費支出和儲蓄率減少，致使諸多勞工面臨就業、所得縮減與貧窮的風險。傳統悲觀論者、樂觀論者或是制度主義學者對全球化和金融危機下，福利支出的擴張和限縮有不同的看法。但多數研究早已喪失了國家角色在處理金融危機的治理能力之關注。因此，本文試圖將國家的角色帶回來，並探討台灣政府在此次危機中，其社會保障的回應策略為何？並檢討其社會保障因應措施，是延續或改變既有的制度規範，以及其改革方向是否能有效因應金融海嘯所帶來的衝擊，進而改變過去的生產性福利介入方式。然而，本文發現台灣政府在此次改革過程中，仍受限於過去的生產主義式福利提供模式，著重在經濟政策的介入，社會保障制度則次之。且這些介入方式和財政擴張卻是短暫的，並在後金融危機時期開始限縮，主要係受制於不斷攀升的舉債壓力。觀諸政策的成效，政府著重在刺激經濟成長的策略，受薪階級似乎無法享受到成長的果實：利用租稅來減少貧富差距的效果，卻10年來幾乎毫無變化。因而，政府於此次危機的角色，仍依循過去生產主義式的路徑依賴，並未產生制度轉型的現象，且短期利益的社會給付模式仍是現行社會政策發展的路徑。長遠來說，政府若不改變既有的社會福利介入模式，並積極思考技術結構轉型和建立完善的社會安全網之問題，將迫使人民的生活更不穩定。必須要有系統性與典範性的思考才能解決台灣福利結構性失衡的問題。英文摘要：The financial crisis in 2008/2009 hit most of countries in the world. Taiwan also faced serious recession, such as high unemployment rate, increasing income inequality and poverty rate. A large number of workers were excluded from labor market and suffered poverty risk. Conventionally, efficacy theory and complementary approach hold opposite opinions about how the welfare state responses to globalization or financial crisis. However, they ignore that the state has the capacity of governance on social protection. In this article, we bring the role o f the welfare state back into analysis to elucidate how the Taiwanese government dealt with the 2008/2009 financial crisis. Was the reform a path dependence or a paradigm change? In conclusion, we find that social protect ion reform s in Taiwan were constrained by productivism. Economic growth will eventually lift people out of poverty. Thus, the government concentrated resources on the financial and bank sectors, but social protection received less attention. Although government expenditure expanded during the crisis period, it was temporary. After the crisis, the government cut social expenditure. Promoting economic growth and cutting tax did not have positive impacts on working class and income inequality. Although the income transfer programs helped to reduce income inequality in 2008/2009, the government is reluctant to further income transfer programs. Thus, we concluded that the welfare reforms did not transform the Taiwanese welfare state toward social investment welfare state, but still stuck to productivism. In the long run, the Taiwanese social security system will be not sufficient to protect people if the government does not overhaul the social security system.起始頁-結束頁：191-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201212.01916篇名：臺灣親密關係暴力危險評估表（TIPVDA）之建構與驗證並列篇名：The Development and Validation of Taiwan Intimate Partner Violence Danger Assessment (TIPVDA)作者：王珮玲(Pei-Ling Wang)關鍵字：親密關係暴力;致命危險;危險評估;TIPVDA;intimate partner violence;lethality;risk assessment;TIPVDA期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究的目的在發展一份本土親密關係暴力致命危險評估工具，提供第一線實務工作者於處理案件時運用，據以作為判斷被害人危險處境之參考。本研究參的相關文獻、評估工具以及本土80件親密關係殺人案件資料，並與相關領域之實務專家、學者討論，據以整理出重要之危險因素，作為發展施測問卷之基礎。正式施測係透過全國22個縣市、計51個警察分局與醫院之協助，當親密關係暴力被害人至警察單位報案、或是至醫療單位驗傷採證時，邀請被害人參與本研究填答問卷，共計獲得773份有效樣本。後依據分析結果篩選出重要之致命危險因素15項，建構出「台灣親密關係暴力危險評估表」（TlPVDA），並將加總分數8分以上歸為「高危險組」。TlPVDA之內部一致性、區辨效度、校標關聯效度及準確度之檢測結果表現良好，可作為實務上進行危險評估之重要參考。最後針對TlPVDA在實務之應用，本研究亦提出建議。英文摘要：This study aims to develop an intimate partner violence lethality assessment instrument which will be provided to the practioner, including police officer, social workers and health ca re providers etc., to assess the likelihood of lethality or near lethality of victims. Based on reviewing literature, exited danger assessment instruments, and archival information or 80 femicide and attempted femicide cases, and discussing with practioners ancl scholars, this study constructed a pool of potential predictors, and formed a questionnaire. The samples (N=773) are intimate partner victims who asked for help from 51 police precincts and hospitals in 22 cities and counties. As a result of empirical analyses, a 15 items scale was constructed and named Taiwan Intimate Partner Violence Danger Assessment (TIPVDA). The TIPVDA score above 8 is the index of high risk category. The empirical resilts suggest that the TIPVDA was administered reliably, and they provide significant evidence of the concurrent, discriminant, and criterion-related validity of this instrument Implicaitons for future research and utilization of the TIPVDA are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201206.00017篇名：超越形式化性別平等：美國女性政經影響力與女性權益關係之研究並列篇名：Beyond Symbolic Representation: Women's Political and Economic Influences on Women's Rights and Benefits in the United States作者：鄭麗嬌(Lee-Joy Cheng)關鍵字：形式代表;實質代表;女性權益;性別平等;線性結構關係模式;descriptive representation;substantive representation;women's rights and benefits;gender equality;LlSREL期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在各工業先進國家中，美國給予婦女的權益與福祉，相對各國是最微薄的。許多文獻從職場上的兩性應然比例觀點，論述合理或不合理的女性比例與女性權益之關係，但本研究則超越消極形式比例的性別平等論述，自積極實質代表觀點，採用LISREL分析方法，探討美國女性政治、經濟實力與女性權益政策、生活安全保障等四大構面之間的結構關係。主要研究發現如下：1. 女性的經濟實力確能促進較佳女性權益政策之推動，也有助女性政治實力的增強，但對女性生活安全的保障並無直接的影響效果。2. 女性政治實力對女性生活安全保障，雖然有直接的正向影響效果，但效果不大：惟如透過女性政策的有效推動，則效果較佳。英文摘要：Among affluent industrialized nations, the United States provides the fewest rights and benefits for women. While previous literature focused on examining gender ratios in every aspect of the labor market and exploring the relationship between the ratio of female representation and benefits, this study chooses an active representation approach that goes beyond describing gender equality. In this study, LlSREL model statistical analysis is employed to examine the structural relationship between women's political and economic power, policy performance and social security in the United States. Concretely, the major findings are: (1) women's economic power promotes better welfare policy performance for women and enhances the political power of women, while exerting an indirect positive effect on their social security; (2) though the degree of political power of women has a direct, but moderate, positive effect on their social security, better effects may be obtained through more effective performance of welfare policies.起始頁-結束頁：59-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201206.00598篇名：再探Jane Addams的社區工作理念並列篇名：Rereading Jane Addams's Theory of Community Work作者：張英陣(Ying-Chen Chang);鄭怡世(Yi-Shih Cheng)關鍵字：Jane Addams;社區工作;社會改革;Jane Addams;community work;social reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：社區雖然在1990年代以後再度成為各種公共服務的主要政策方向，但向來宣稱社區工作是基本工作方法之一的社會工作專業，在當前社會工作實務中卻將社區工作日趨邊緣化。當前公共服務社區化深受新自由主義的影響，比較著重於服務供給，這似乎有達社區工作先驅Jane Addams的理念。本丈嘗試透過Jane Addams的傳記、著作、討論其生平事蹟的專書與文章，以及諸多討論睦鄰運動及赫爾館的文章，來重新書寫她的社區工作理念。本文認為Jane Addams理解社區以及社區居民的位置與觀點，其實是「回到社區」本身，透過「與社區居民／受苦者共同生活」來觀察、聆聽以及共同行動，藉此回應社區居民/受苦者的需求，這是一種以人為本的思維與實踐。此外，對Jane Addams而言，社區不只是一個提供福利服務的地方，同時也是居民相互了解促進社會融合的地方；社區的居民不只是福利服務的案主，更是參與問題解決的公民；同時，社區是一個公共領域，也是實踐社會改革與社會民主的地方。我們相信Jane Addams社區工作的理念，對臺灣當前的社會民主、鄰里認同、社會改革、以及大學與社區的關係具有相當的啟發。英文摘要：Community has reemerged as a main policy framework in many areas of public services since 1990s. Community work was one of the most important practice methods in the social work profession. However, community work is becoming marginalized in social work practice now. Contemporary community-based public services are strongly influenced by the Neo-liberalism. Neoliberals focus more on the service provision in the community rather than community participation. The current Neoliberal community practice contradicted Jane Addams's ideas of community work. We reinterpret Jane Addams's theory of community from the autobiography and from biographies and publications on her or on settlement house movement. We explore Jane Addams's philosophy of pragmatism and how her philosophy was practiced at Hull-House. According to Jane Addams, community is not only a place for welfare provision, but also a field for social inclusion. The residents of community are not clients of welfare, but are citizens of participating in public affairs Community is a public sphere that promotes social reform and socializes democracy. We believe that Jane Addams's ideas of community work are heuristic for social democracy, neighborhood identity, social reform, and community-university partnership for Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：87-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201206.00879篇名：原住民社會工作文化能力內涵之初探：以花蓮縣為例並列篇名：A Preliminary Exploration of Cultural Competence in Indigenous Social Work: A Case Study of Hualien County作者：莊曉霞(Hiu-Ha Chong)關鍵字：原住民社會工作;文化能力;質性研究;cultural competence;indigenous social work;qualitative research method期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：文化能力是社會工作重要的實踐，會影響服務品質和社會正義的實現。目前，臺灣關於原住民社會工作文化能力之研究十分匱乏，極需要建基於實證基礎的研究豐富其內涵。本研究透過與2位學者、19位在花蓮縣原住民部落提供服務的社會工作者和8位原住民服務使用者的深度訪談，了解在部落中，社會工作文化能力的內涵。研究發且也部落社會工作文化能力要從六大面向進行思考，包括具有文化認同與文化排除機制的語言；以歷史情感脈絡及部落整體為考量的關係；以人本和文化尊重為基礎的態度價值；重視專業、文化知識和知識整合；強調專業與文化反應的技術策略；以原住民族權利、生存發展為考量的文化安全。這些面向強調在助人的過程中，要同時注重個體及群體維度。文化能力不應只是一個強調有效服務的過程，更是一個在政策、專業和實務各個層面上反映原住民族主體性，以民族、部落長遠發展、生存權利及文化安全為考量的一個過程。本文最後針對原住民社會工作教育與訓練、原住民族政策及原住民社會工作文化能力研究提出建議。英文摘要：Cultural competence is vital to effective Indigenous social work practice, affecting service quality and the realization of social justice. A review of literature suggested that there is little knowledge of cultural competence in Indigenous social work in Taiwan, and there is a lack of consistent view on its definition and intellectual construct. By using a qualitative research method, 21 service providers and 8 Indigenous service users were interviewed in Hualien county to explore their understanding of cultural competence in Indigenous social work . The research reveals that six interrelated dimensions, including language, relationship, attitudes and values, knowledge, s kills and cultural safety are important components of the framework. The further analysis suggests that cultural competence is not only a process of achieving effective practice, but also a process of recognising Indigenous people's subjectivity, promoting Indigenous development and ensuring their rights and cultural safety at policy, professional and practice levels. This paper ends by drawing implications for Indigenous social work education and training, Indigenous social policies and further research.起始頁-結束頁：133-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201206.013310篇名：臺灣推動醫療照護產業化之分析：政策學習的觀點並列篇名：Industrialization of Medical Care: Perspectives of Policy Learning作者：劉宜君(I-Chun Liu)關鍵字：醫療觀光;政策學習;全民健康保險政策;醫療照護;產業化;medical tourism;policy learning;national health insurance policy;medical care;industrialization期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著經濟全球化、便捷的國際航空技術及電信網絡迅速發展，讓過去限於地域性的醫療照護服務出現顛覆傳統的服務模式，醫療照護產業成為全球成長最快的產業之一。相較於全球醫療照護產業的蓬勃發展，有些國家政府同意醫院可以發行股票上市或是廣告行銷，臺灣醫療照護產業化推動的起步較晚，必須學習他國經驗。本研究透過深度訪談參加「醫療服務國際化旗艦計畫」第一階段的醫院，分析其對於醫療照護產業化的意見。研究發現受訪醫院認知產業化的優點與發展限制，不論是實質獲益或是提高競爭力，以及先天條件的不足。研究建議政府能以政策學習觀點理解醫療服務業者的認知與動機，整合政府資源協助醫院在國際上競爭；建議在確保國內病患權益的前提下，適度開放對於醫療廣告的管理規範，及國際自費服務的經營方式。英文摘要：As the economy becomes increasingly globalized, international air travel becomes more convenient, telecommunication develops more rapidly, health care services are no longer limited to a single region. With the global health care industry thriving, some national governments have stipulated that hospitals cannot only issues tocks, but also promote their services to patients worldwide. Because Taiwan is a relative newcomer to the area of medical tourism, the Taiwan government must study the experiences of other countries regarding the development of their medical tourism industries. The International Medical Services Flagship Program has been part of the government's strategy to promote both the quality and the image of Taiwan's health care industry, as well as to develop related industries and boost the domestic economy. The purpose of this study is to analyze the industrialization of health care services in Taiwan, based on semi-structured interviews with hospital representatives of the International Medical Services Flagship Program. We found that hospitals can benefit from industrialization, whether by gaining national recognition or international competitiveness, or by caring for more international patients. Simultaneously, these policies must both be profitable and be conducted within the budget. Consequently, hospitals have a strong incentive to develop policies to promote medical tourism because this will help develop the market. The study suggests that the relevant government units can study policy to understand the thinking and motivation of the medical service providers. Given that hospitals ensure that domestic patients' rights, the government could open up the standards for health care advertising, as well as the mode of operation of international services.起始頁-結束頁：183-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201206.018311篇名：臺灣社會工作專業制度：本土模型的構思並列篇名：Professional Social Work System in Taiwan: Constructing an Ideal Model作者：秦燕(Yen Chin)關鍵字：社會工作師;社會工作專業制度;社會工作師考試;社會工作專業組織;社會工作倫理;social worker;professional social work system;social worker licensing examination;professional social work organization;social work ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文介紹社會工作專業證照制度的國內外現況、回顧臺灣社會工作發展的重要階段並提出本土社工專業制度的架構模型及對未來發展的建議。專業化趨勢下各國逐漸孕育發展出各自的社會工作證照制度，我國社會工作師考試是依據社會工作師法於1997年開始舉辦，國外社工專業認證制度大致可分為考試與註冊兩大類，考試認證以美國發展最成熟，日本、臺灣、中國亦採考試制度。註冊制度以英、德、法發展較久，香港、新加坡亦明確規劃及管理。我國的社會工作發展階段可分為社會工作引進、蘊育開拓、形象塑造、法制化、以及2007年進入社會工作發展的關鍵期。社會工作專業制度建立及運作的現況可以教、考、用、訓、專業組織、社會認可、專業文化、及國際交流的八個層面來建立臺灣社工專業制度的本土模型，以此來檢視所面臨的挑戰並提出建議。英文摘要：This paper introduces social worker licensing system in different countries and reviews the development process of social work system in Taiwan, by which the author proposes an ideal model of the indigenous professional social work system and makes suggestions for the future development in accordance. In the trend of professionalization, different countries have established step by step their own professional social work systems. In Taiwan, national social work examination was first held according to The Professional Social Worker Act in 1997. Social worker licensing system is, in general, divided into two categories: examination and registration. The licensing system based on examination has come to the most mature stage in USA. Japan, Taiwan, while China also adopts the licensing system on examination. The licensing system based on registration has long been adopted by UK, Germany, and France. Hong Kong and Singapore also have their own well-designed and well-managed registration system. The developing process of social work system in Taiwan can be defined in five stages: the import from the western world, initiating stage, formation stage, legalization, the critical developing stage since 2007. The establishment and operation of the professional social work system in Taiwan can be conducted with a model constituted with eight aspects: education, examination, employment, continual training, professional organization, social consensus, professional culture, and internationalization, to all of which the author makes suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：233-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201206.023301篇名：高低學費差距對於大學教學與研究表現的影響並列篇名：Impact of Tuition Fees on Teaching and Research Performance at Universities作者：涂光億(Kuang-I Tu)關鍵字：學費差異;大學表現;畢業標準;學生稟賦;Tuition Differential;Universities' Performance;Graduation Standards;Student Intellectual Endowment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：大學的目標是追求極大化教學與研究的整體表現，因此大學必須適當地將經費分配於教學與研究的活動上。而大學的主要的經費來源則為大學的學費收入與來自政府或其他機構的補助。因此，本文放寬 Del Rey（2001）的設定，假設兩所大學的學費與受到的補助可能不相同之下，探討大學間學費的差距如何影響大學教學與研究的總體表現。本文發現不論大學對於研究的重視程度如何，高學費的大學將會訂定較高的學生畢業標準，且大學收到的定額補助並不會影響兩所大學訂定的畢業標準、招生人數或是平均學生稟賦。其次，若大學間收到的補助差距不大，且大學均較重視研究表現時，低學費大學的教學與研究的整體表現會較高學費大學為優；然而，當大學重視研究的程度較低時，高學費大學的整體表現將會較優。最後，本文發現縮小大學間的學費差距可以縮小兩大學整體表現的差距，但卻會使原本表現較佳的大學的整體表現變差。英文摘要：The goal of universities is to pursue an overall robust performance in research and teaching. Given that student tuition differentials exist between universities, this paper explores how student enrollment numbers and graduation standards can be employed to maximize a university's overall performance. We further explore the impact of lowering student tuitions' differential upon this overall performance. We find regardless of the degree offered that a university stresses research first, and those universities with higher tuition fees have established higher graduation standards. Fixed governmental subsidies do not impact the establishment of university graduation standards or recruitment figures, nor determine the intellectual endowment of the students. Second, when government subsidies are equivalent between two universities, then among the universities that stress research it is those schools which charge a lower tuition that tend to have superior overall performance. However, when schools do not stress research, then the schools charging higher tuition tend to have a superior overall performance. Lastly, this paper demonstrates that reducing the tuition differential between universities also cuts the overall performance differential of these universities. Nevertheless the tendency remains that schools which formerly enjoyed good overall performance tend to perform more poorly as time progresses.起始頁-結束頁：191-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201207.00012篇名：期貨最適避險比率之估計－Bias-Corrected EWMA法並列篇名：Estimation of Optimal Hedge Ratio for Stock Index Futures: Bias-Corrected EWMA Method作者：張簡彰程(Chang-Cheng Chang Chien);林楚雄(Chu-Hsiung Lin);趙婉辛(Wan-Hsin Chao)關鍵字：最適避險比率;誤差修正指數加權移動平均;指數加權移動平均;一般化誤差分配;冪指數加權移動平均;Optimal Hedge Ratio;Bias-corrected EWMA;Exponentially Weighted Moving Average;Generalized Error Distribution;Power EWMA期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文提出以誤差修正指數加權移動平均（bias-corrected exponentially weighted moving average, Bias-corrected EWMA）模型取代Harris and Shen（2003）使用冪指數加權移動平均（power exponentially weighted moving average, Power EWMA）模型估計避險比率，其目的除了仍保有指數加權移動平均（exponentially weighted moving average, EWMA）模型在動態避險策略上易於估計的優點外，另外可避免使用Power EWMA模型時需事前主觀假設資產報酬率的分配型態而可能降低避險的效果。為驗證Bias-corrected EWMA模型的避險績效，本文以四種股價指數期貨為實證研究的對象，檢測三個不同研究期間下Bias-corrected EWMA模型、EWMA模型及Power EWMA模型的績效。整體而言，實證結果顯示 Bias-corrected EWMA模型相較於EWMA模型與Power EWMA模型有較佳的避險績效。英文摘要：We propose the Bias-corrected EWMA model to estimate optimal hedge ratios for stock index futures. Our proposed method not only retains the easy usage characteristic of the EWMA model on dynamic hedge strategies but also captures the non-normality situations of the returns on assets. Using four stock index futures and three sample periods, we compare the optimal hedge ratios and hedge performances with the Bias-corrected EWMA model, EWMA model and Power EWMA model. Our empirical results show on average that the Bias-corrected EWMA model outperforms the EWMA and Power EWMA models.起始頁-結束頁：225-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201207.00023篇名：資訊科技、資訊分享與銀行授信並列篇名：Information Technology, Information Sharing and Bank Lending作者：周秀霞(Hsiu-Hsia Chou);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：資訊科技;資訊分享;信用報告機構;銀行授信;跨國債權;Information Technology;Information Sharing;Credit Registry;Bank Lending;Foreign Claims期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文目的在探討資訊科技、資訊分享與銀行授信規模之關係，樣本包括2005年至2008年，全球99個國家。資訊科技攸關銀行顧客關係管理中，花費於資通訊器材與使用等之成本；資訊分享則影響銀行取得客戶資料，所花費之徵信相關成本。實證結果顯示，資通訊科技進步，銀行跨國授信及對國內私部門授信規模增加，隱含資訊成本降低，有助於擴大信用市場規模；信用資訊分享功能對國內私部門授信的影響受衡量指標影響，對跨國授信則無顯著影響。英文摘要：This paper investigates the relationship between information technology, information sharing and bank lending in 99 countries from 2005 to 2008. Information technology-related costs contain the expenses from communication costs during customer relationship management activities. Credit information-related costs measure the costs for collecting borrowers' credit information. The empirical results show that advancements in technology improvement are positively correlated with larger foreign claims and domestic lending. This implies that a reduction of information costs results in an enlargement of credit markets' scale. However, the impacts from credit information sharing on domestic lending depend on the measures of information sharing. No significant relationship is found between information sharing and foreign claims.起始頁-結束頁：253-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201207.00034篇名：能源效率之衡量及其與環境政策工具的關聯並列篇名：Measurement of Energy Efficiency and Its Linkage to Environmental Policy Instruments作者：楊晴雯(Chin-Wen Yang)關鍵字：能源效率;能源生產力;總量管制與排放交易;技術效率;配置效率;Energy Efficiency;Energy Productivity;Cap and Trade;Technical Efficiency;Allocate Efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：提升能源效率是減少溫室氣體排放議題中至為關鍵的策略之一，大多數國家都以能源生產力衡量總體層級的能源效率，在運用時未曾細究此一指標的經濟內涵與適用性，直至2008年12月的第十四屆締約國會議（Fourteenth Session of the Conference of the Parties, COP14）中，聯合國氣候變化綱要公約（United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, UNFCCC）首度呼籲各國重視能源效率的衡量問題。本文指出，傳統的能源生產力指標因受多種與使用技術及配置效率無關之他種因素的影響，並不適合用做為衡量能源效率的指標，而只適合衡量為達特定實質國內生產毛額（gross domestic product, GDP）水準的能源成本有效性。本文也同時檢討技術效率及相關指標的問題，並提出一個新的能源效率指標，除可避免其他指標可能出現的不一致性問題之外，亦可反映缺乏效率的來源、以及廠商在不同環境政策工具下的能源效率差異，並用以評估外生變數變動對能源效率的影響。英文摘要：Improving energy efficiency is one of the critical strategies to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Energy productivity, as an indicator of energy efficiency, is pervasively used worldwide. However, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP14) has noted that the economic meanings and suitability of this indicator need to be explored. This paper points out that the traditional energy productivity could measure only the cost effectiveness of energy in order to achieve a given level of real gross domestic product (GDP), but not the energy efficiency ”per se”. After critically reviewing a number of existing indicators, I propose a new one and show its difference from energy productivity and other indicators which may cause inconsistency between technical efficiency and cost efficiency. Furthermore, the origins of the inefficiency can be decomposed and in response to alternative environmental regimes.起始頁-結束頁：287-317資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201207.00045篇名：應用共同邊界函數探討OECD與APEC諸國總體生產效率並列篇名：A Study on Production Efficiency Using a Metafrontier Function Approach for the Member States of OECD and APEC作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);陳盈秀(Ying-Hsiu Chen);鍾銘泰(Ming-Tai Chung)關鍵字：共同邊界生產函數;技術缺口比率;生產效率;產量彈性;Metafrontier Production Function;Technology Gap Ratio;Production Efficiency;Output Elasticity期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：為避免因國家間生產技術水準不同，在比較各國生產效率差異時可能產生偏誤，本研究採向共同邊界生產函數（metafrontier production function），並建構產出成長率模型，進行各國總體生產效率之研究。蒐集1985年至2004年經濟合作暨發展組織（Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD）與亞太經濟合作組織（Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, APEC）組織共計36國資料，區分為四個不同技術群組國家－七大工業國（Group of Seven, G7）、非七大工業國（Non-group of Seven, Non-G7）、亞洲四小龍（newly industrialized countries, NICs）和非四小龍（non-newly industrialized countries, Non-NICs），主要證實結果有三：（1）以NICs群組具有規模報酬遞增特性，其餘三群組皆出現規模報酬遞減情形；（2）平均技術缺口比率（technology gap ratio, TGR）以G7群組最高，顯示其採用的生產技術相對最為先進，但NICs與Non NICs兩群組TGR值逐年提升，逐漸縮小與最先進技術的差距；（3）平均共同技術效率亦以G7群組位居第一，而NICs群組則敬陪末座。未來若欲提升實際產出水準或共同技術效率，G7與Non-G7群組應以提升生產技術水準為首要目標，而NICs與Non-NICs群組則應以改營企業管理能力與策略，致力提高自身群組技術效率。英文摘要：This paper proposes a stochastic metafrontier production function model, in which all variables are expressed in the form of a rate of growth to eliminate the potential nonstationarity of the variables, to estimate the production efficiency of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) members in terms of the technology differences during the period 1985-2004. The evidence indicates that on average: (1) scale economies prevail in the newly industrialized countries (NICs), while the remaining three groups exhibit decreasing returns to scale; (2) the mean values of the technology gap ratio vary from about 0.98 (Group of Seven, G7) to 0.92 (NICs), implying that G7 countries employ superior levels of production technology compared to the remaining groups; and (3) the G7 states achieve the highest metafrontier technical efficiency score of 0.958, on average, or about 96% of the potential Outputs defined by the metafrontier production function.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201201.00016篇名：談判與通貨膨脹並列篇名：Bargaining and Inflation作者：江秀燕(Hsiu-Yen Chiang)關鍵字：談判;通膨;貨幣政策;Bargaining;Inflation;Monetary Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文藉由工會與央行談判，來研究時序不一致的議題。本文發現央行官員對通膨的偏好權數提高，造成社會福利水準的變化無法確定。然而，工會對通膨的關心程度提高，以及央行的談判力量增加，社會福利水準卻會提升。本文也發現通膨與產出波動彼此無抵換關係，再者，央行官員對通膨的趨避程度無法引起通膨與產出波動變化。英文摘要：This paper investigates the time inconsistency issues by considering a bargaining process between a union and a central banker. It is found that an increase in the weight assigned to inflation by the central banker may improve or worsen the social welfare. However, the social welfare is certainly enhanced if (i) the union raises its concern about inflation; or (ii) the bargaining power of the central banker increases. It is also found that there is no policy trade-off between the inflation and output stability. Moreover, we find that the inflation aversion of the central banker plays no role in the inflation or output fluctuations.起始頁-結束頁：51-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201201.00027篇名：即期匯率目標區下的蜜月效果分析－即期匯率與股價雙預期變數的考量並列篇名：Graphical Analyzing the Honeymoon Effect of Spot Foreign Exchange Rate Target Zones-The Dual Expectations Consideration of the Spot Foreign Exchange Rate and Stock Price作者：廖培賢(Peir-Shyan Liaw)關鍵字：即期匯率目標區;蜜月效果;布朗運動;Nominal Income Target Zone;Honeymoon Effeect;Brownian Motion期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文企圖結合Eaton and Turnovsky（1982, 1984）考量遠期外匯市場的開放經濟一般均衡模型與Blanchard（1981）兼顧股票市場的封閉總體經濟理論架構兩者特色，進而建構一個可以詮釋即期外匯市場、遠期外匯市場與股票市場互動關係的開放總體經濟模型，在民眾對即期匯率與股價的未來變動同時存在預期的前提下，來進行一旦貨幣當局宣佈實施即期匯率目標區政策，即期外匯市場的干擾是否對即期匯率、遠期匯率、股價、本國物價與本國利率等相關總體經濟變數具有安定的效果？結果得到：貨幣當局即期匯率目標區政策的實施對本國物價與本國利率必定具有安定效果，但對即期匯率、遠期匯率與股價卻未必具有安定效果，而決定對相關總體經濟變數只有安定效果的重要關鍵因素也與既有文獻有很大的不同。英文摘要：This paper constructs a stochastic open macroeconomic model of the spot foreign exchange rate and stock price expectations as characterized by the Eaton and Turnovsky's (1982, 1984) general equilibrium approach of the forward foreign exchange market model and Blanchard's (1981) dynamic adjustment model. We use the ”new graphical approach”, which is offered by Lai et al. (2003), to determine whether the monetary authority executes the spot foreign exchange rate target zone policy, and what will be the effect of spot and forward foreign exchange rate market exogenous disturbances on the possible honeymoon effect of relevant macroeconomic variables.The major findings are: (i) the spot foreign exchange rate target zone policy is not always effective in stabilizing the fluctuations in the spot foreign exchange rate forward foreign exchange rate and stock price, for the key factors that determine whether the former macroeconomic variables exhibit the honeymoon effect differ from the findings in the existing literature; and (ii) the spot foreign exchange rate target zone policy is always effective in stabilizing the fluctuations in the domestic price and interest rate.起始頁-結束頁：81-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201201.00038篇名：美國股市及其總體經濟變數間關連性與波動性之研究－VEC GJR DCC-GARCH-M之模型應用並列篇名：An Investigation on Volatility and the Interrelationship between the US Equity Market and Macroeconomic Variables--An Application of the VEC GJR DCC-GARCH-M Model作者：劉祥熹(Hsiang-His Liu);涂登才(Teng-Tsai Tu)關鍵字：股價指數;總體經濟變數;共整合檢定;VEC GJR DCC-GARCH-M模型;Stock Price Index;Macroeconomic Variable;Cointegration Test;VEC GJR DCC-GARCH-M Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣經貿與證券投資情形常隨美國經濟景氣與股市投資有連動關係，瞭解美國股市及其經濟變數關聯性與波動效果之相關資訊能提供國內外投資人在股市投資決策上有所助益，又國內外文獻大多認為股票市場與總體經濟具有互動性。因此，本文嘗試建立VEC GJR DCC-GARCH-M (vector error correction GJR dynamic conditional correlation-GARCH in mean) 模型以進行美國股價與其總體經濟變數間關連性、波動性、不對稱現象及風險變動效果之質證研究。基於該項上述研究動機與目的，本文研究變數分別選取美國那斯達克（National Association of Securities Dealers Automaled Quotation, NASDAQ）綜合指數、消費者物價指數（consumer price index, CPI）、貨幣供給量（M(下標 1b)）與美元指數進行實證分析。基本上，質證結果發現本研究所選取之總體經濟變數皆能預測美國股價報酬率之走勢，且亦證實美國股票市場為該國景氣的領先指標。本研究亦同時驗證美國股市具有高風險高報酬之風險溢酬效果。另外，波動性效果方面，美國股價報酬率變異數會受其本身前一期之影響，此意謂美國股價報酬率之波動性具備GARCH效果且可藉由本身前一期的條件變異數加以預測。至於美國國內波動之外溢效果，負向非預期衝擊將比正向非預期衝擊引起更大之波動，故美國股價報酬率與匯率變動率變異數存在波動不對稱性之槓桿效果（leverage effect），此意謂好壞消息造成股價波動有不同的效果，大抵而言壞消息波動效果大於好消息之波動效果。英文摘要：The trading and investment activities in Taiwan usually vary with the business cycle and equity investment in the US. Many studies indicate that the equity market is closely related to the macroeconomic environment. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to construct a multivariate VEC GJR DCC-GARCH-M model to investigate the volatility and the interrelationship between the US equity market and macroeconomic variables. The variables chosen in the empirical analysis include the US NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation) price index, the CPI (Consumer Price Index), M1b and the exchange rate of the US dollar. Furthermore, the empirical results of this study signify that the US stock rate of returns can be forecasted by the behavior of the macroeconomic variables and the US stock index leads the indicators of the business cycle in the US. The evidence verifies the existence of a risk premium effect in the US equity market. The empirical results also indicate that the stock volatility exhibits a GARCH effect and can be forecasted by the previous period's conditional variance. Finally, we also find that there are significant effects of volatility clustering and asymmetric volatility (the leverage effect) in the US equity market.起始頁-結束頁：139-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系DOI：10.29765/TEI.201201.000401篇名：A Model-Based Survey of Physical Health in Community-Dwelling Older Adults並列篇名：以理論架構為基礎之社區老人身體健康調查作者：陳桂敏(Kuei-Min Chen);林美惠(Mei-Hui Lin);王月琴(Yueh-Chin Wang);黃欣婷(Hsin-Ting Huang);李純華(Chun-Huw Li)關鍵字：日常活動功能;老人;身體健康;生理狀態;activities of daily living;older adults;physical health;physical status期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　對老人身體健康狀態有周全性的了解，將有助於設計老人活動方案，以維護及促進他們的健康。目的　本研究旨在探討社區老人身體健康，並比較不同年齡群、性別及運動習慣者，其身體健康狀況的差異。方法　此調查性研究以分層隨機抽樣方式，遴選384位台灣社區老人參與本研究。以「老人健康模式」為基礎，其測量變項含：日常活動功能（6項指標）和生理狀態（14項指標）。資料則以ANOVA、獨立樣本t檢定分析。結果　多數研究對象的身體健康指標均在正常範圍內，除中廣型肥胖（男性：42.90％，女性：80.30％）、異常血壓（收縮壓：47.10％，舒張壓：7％）、肺活量偏差（男性：59.30％，女性：70.70％）。無論是日常活動功能或生理狀態，65－74歲之初老老人及有運動習慣者，都比85歲以上之老老人及無運動習慣者佳（p＜.05）。男性老人則在生理狀態方面優於女性老人（p＜.05）。結論／實務應用　保持活躍的生活型態及規律性的運動，對延緩老化而言相當重要，而老年人之身體負荷度、功能狀態、教育程度和性別差異等因素，則應納入老人健康促進計畫設計之考量。國家衛生政策則建議以活躍老化及健康老化為目標，積極提升老人健康。英文摘要：Background: Having a better comprehension of older adults' physical health can help healthcare professionals better design program activities to maintain and promote the health of this population.Purpose: This study investigated the physical health of community-dwelling older adults and compared physical health differences among different age subgroups, gender, and exercise habits.Methods: Using stratified random sampling, 384 Taiwanese community-dwelling older adults were recruited in this survey research. Researchers used the Health Model of Older Adults to measure activities of daily living (6 indicators) and physical status (14 indicators). Analysis of variance and independent t test analyzed the data.Results: Most participant physical health indicators were within normal ranges. Exceptions included central obesity (men: 42.90%, women: 80.30%), abnormal blood pressure (systolic: 47.10%, diastolic: 7%), and deteriorated lung capacity (men: 59.30%, women: 70.70%). Young-old subgroup participants (65Y74 years old) and exercisers performed better in their activities of daily living and had better physical status than old-old subgroup participants (9 85 years old) and nonexercisers (all p＜.05). Men had better physical status than women (all p＜.05).Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Maintaining an active lifestyle and exercising regularly are essential to delaying or preventing the deterioration of natural aging. Physical tolerance, functional ability, educational level, and gender differences should be considered when designing a health promotion program for this population. It is essential for national health policy to enhance older adult health and promote active and healthy aging.起始頁-結束頁：239-248資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31827365712篇名：Predictors of Sleep Quality in Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Northern Taiwan並列篇名：北台灣地區社區老年人的睡眠品質預測因子作者：楊秋月(Chiu-Yueh Yang);邱愛富(Ai-Fu Chiou)關鍵字：功能狀態;老年人;靜態生活型態;睡眠品質;functional status;older people;sedentary lifestyle;sleep quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　睡眠品質不良會對老年人的身心健康造成負面影響，甚至增加死亡率。然而，在台灣地區探討老年人睡眠品質的相關研究仍然有限。目的　本研究目的欲探討北台灣地區社區老年人的睡眠品質情形及其預測因子。方法　採橫斷式研究設計，以結構式問卷訪談160位六十歲以上的社區老年人，問卷量表包括：人口學資料、健康狀況、巴氏量表、匹茲堡睡眠量表、短版老年憂鬱量表、短版健康調查量表及老年身體活動量表。結果　研究發現41.9％北台灣社區老年人有睡眠不佳的情形。睡眠品質與夜尿、頭暈症狀、高血壓、使用降壓藥和胃藥、功能狀態不佳、憂鬱、及靜態生活型態有相關性。邏輯式迴歸顯示，夜尿、靜態生活型態、及心理健康為睡眠品質的最重要預測因子。結論／實務應用　睡眠品質應評估個人的生理、心理、及社會狀況，護理人員應教導老年人如何處理生理症狀和維持活躍的生活型態以改善睡眠品質。英文摘要：Background: Poor sleep quality may have a significant and negative impact on physical and mental health. Poor sleep quality also increases the risk of all-cause mortality. Few studies have explored the sleep quality of community-dwelling older adults in Taiwan.Purpose: This study examined the prevalence of sleep disturbance and potential factors of influence in community-dwelling older people in Taiwan.Methods: We used a cross-sectional design to recruit a total of 160 individuals 60 years of age or older from an urban area in northern Taiwan. All subjects completed a structured questionnaire that included demographic data, physical health status, a social activity/habit survey, as well as the Chinese versions of Barthel's index, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, short form of the Geriatric Depression Scale, the SF-36 Health-Related Quality of Life Survey, and the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly.Results: Participants reported a rate of sleep disturbance of 41.9%. Sleep disturbance was associated with nocturia and dizziness, hypertension, increased use of medications such as antihypertensives and gastric medicines, poor self-reported functional status, depression, and sedentary lifestyle. Logistic regression showed nocturia, sedentary lifestyle, and mental component summary score as significant predictors of sleep disturbance.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Sleep disturbance should be examined within the context of an individual's physical, mental, and social status. Symptom management education and an active lifestyle are necessary to promote sleep quality in older people.起始頁-結束頁：249-260資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31827364613篇名：Development of Frailty Indicators for the Community-Dwelling Older Adults並列篇名：社區老人老化衰弱指標之發展作者：郭梅珍(Mei-Chen Kuo);陳靜敏(Ching-Min Chen);鄭綺(Chii Jeng)關鍵字：老化衰弱;老化衰弱指標;多元研究法;frailty;frailty indicator;triangulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　高齡化社會的快速到來，使老化衰弱問題成為重要議題。儘管認同老化衰弱的評估在進行照護規劃的重要性，但目前對於老化衰弱的評估並沒有一致的看法。目的　藉由進行老化衰弱之質性與量性結果交叉比較，以初步建立臺灣老年人老化衰弱的指標。方法　兼顧質性及量性研究法，在2010年8月至9月期間，於北臺灣六所老人服務中心方便取樣10位社區住民。研究者用深度訪談及錄音來收集資料，同時根據生理、功能和心理社會健康三層面之質化分析結果，研究者以擬定之一系列健康評估逐一評估受訪者，並記錄其量化結果。結果　本研究共訪談及評估10位女性老人，依成功老化的定義，呈現在「整體功能能力」、「心理健康」及「生理健康」之三個主題下之老化衰弱經驗和感受。進一步將受訪者的老化衰弱狀況與老化衰弱感受進行比較，以確認質化和量化結果的一致性。結果發現，雖然評估結果顯示受訪者雖處於相對健康的狀態，但在訪談中仍有許多關於老化衰弱的主訴，顯見現有評量工具之限制。結論／實務應用　老化衰弱指標的建立，可作為評估個案整體性健康的表現，期望本結果可使醫療照護人員能夠深入的瞭解老年人老化衰弱過程。英文摘要：Background: Faster than anticipated increases in population, aging is making the issue of frailty among the elderly increasingly important. Despite general agreement that a frailty assessment is important for planning care for the older adults, a lack of consensus remains regarding the best methodology to use for frailty assessments.Purpose: The aim of this study was first to cross-examine results between perception of frailty and physical assessment outcomes then try to establish frailty indicators for elderly people in Taiwan.Methods: This study used both qualitative and quantitative methods. From August to September 2010, researchers recruited a convenience sample of 10 community older adults from six different elderly centers in northern Taiwan. Qualitative in-depth interviews were conducted in Mandarin or Taiwanese and audiotaped. After the in-depth interview, researchers conducted a series of physical assessments on the participants.Results: Ten elderly women were interviewed and assessed. The three themes identified by this study related to frailty perception included overall physical function performance, psychological health, and physiological health. These reflected the concept of successful aging. Participant frailty was compared with subjective perceptions to identify and/or check for consistency between qualitative and quantitative results. Although quantitative results revealed that participants were in fairly good health, there were many complaints about frailty during the qualitative interview. Better sensitive measures reflecting frailty changes are thus needed.Conclusions: These indicators can be considered as an integration of all maintained functions. We hope that results will provide better insights into understanding the process of frailty among the older adults.起始頁-結束頁：261-271資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318273652b4篇名：Nonimaging Clinical Assessment of Impaired Swallowing in Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Taiwan並列篇名：以非影像方式評估台灣社區老人之吞嚥障礙作者：陳妙言(Miao-Yen Chen);林麗嬋(Li-Chan Lin)關鍵字：社區老人;吞嚥障礙;吞嚥評估;community-dwelling older adults;impaired swallowing;swallow assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　吞嚥障礙常出現於腦神經功能損傷、退化性疾病以及老年病患者。社區老人的吞嚥問題應用簡易精確的評估方式確認其吞嚥障礙，及早提供吞嚥照護計畫，以提升居家長者的生活品質。目的　透過簡易吞嚥評估方式，以非影像方式評估社區高齡個案吞嚥功能及估計吞嚥障礙盛行率。方法　採調查研究法，主要評估工具為吞嚥檢查及問卷量表、吞嚥測試以及末梢動脈血氧飽和分析器與喉部表面肌電圖等，以瞭解高齡族群吞嚥功能及其吞嚥障礙盛行率。研究對象為台灣北部某行政區年齡大於65歲以上之社區民眾，進行吞嚥評估，共收案216位。結果　以吞嚥問卷檢查表及吞嚥測試（water test）進行吞嚥功能檢測發現，吞嚥障礙比率為9.5％。以年齡區分發現，四組比較年齡越大其吞嚥速度越緩慢。One-way ANOVA分析四組間之吞嚥速度達統計顯著差異（F＝6.478, p＜.00），以Scheffe事後比較發現，吞嚥時間在年齡60－69歲組與70－79歲、80－89歲組間有統計之顯著差異。吞嚥障礙與研究變項之複迴歸分析發現，年齡標準化相關係數為0.163，達統計之顯著差異（t＝2.328; p＝.021）。羅吉式迴歸統計分析自變項中年齡的Wals檢定值達統計之顯著差異（p＝.007）；而吞嚥障礙與SaO2下降＞2％同意度分析Kappa＝0.307。結論／實務應用　年齡越大吞嚥功能越容易退步，本研究成果能提供台灣社區老人發生吞嚥障礙比率，可作為臨床護理指引並提供評估吞嚥障礙客觀性之參考。英文摘要：Background: Impaired swallowing is common in elderly patients as well as those with neurological disorders and degenerative diseases. Convenient and accurate assessments should be available to community-dwelling older adults to diagnose and provide early management and care of swallowing difficulties, an important factor of influence on elderly life quality.Purpose: This study used convenient nonimaging methods to assess swallowing functions in community-dwelling older adults and estimated the prevalence of swallowing difficulties.Methods: The study adopted a survey method and recruited 216 community-dwelling older adults over 65 years old in northern Taiwan. Researchers used tools including a swallowing test, questionnaire, water test, peripheral arterial pulse oximeter, and laryngeal S-EMG to assess participant swallowing functions and the prevalence of impaired swallowing.Results: We found a 9.5% prevalence of impaired swallowing based on swallow questionnaire and water test results. Age correlated negatively with swallowing speed. A one-way ANOVA showed a significant difference in swallowing speed among the four age groups (F=6.478, p＜.00). A post hoc Scheffe comparison showed significant differences in swallowing time between the 60- to 69- and 70- to 79-year-old groups and 60- to 69- and 80- to 89-year-old groups. Multiple regression of impaired swallowing on various independent variables showed a significant standardized coefficient of 0.163 for age (t=2.328, p=.021). Logistic regression showed a significant Wals test value for age (p=.007). The Kappa value was 0.307 for agreement analysis between impaired swallowing and SaO2 value reduction of more than 2%.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Swallowing function deteriorates with age. Results of this study provide an assessment of the prevalence of impaired swallowing in community-dwelling older adults in Taiwan. Results can help guide clinical nurses to enhance their objective assessment of impaired swallowing to improve patient quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：272-280資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31827364ec5篇名：The Effects of a Spiritual Learning Program on Improving Spiritual Health and Clinical Practice Stress among Nursing Students並列篇名：靈性學習方案對提升護理學生靈性健康與實習壓力之成效作者：蕭雅竹(Ya-Chu Hsiao);江惠英(Hui-Ying Chiang);李香君(Hsiang-Chun Lee);陳素惠(Su-Hui Chen)關鍵字：靈性健康;實習壓力;護理學生;靈性學習方案;spiritual health;clinical practice stress;nursing student;spiritual learning program期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　已有許多研究發現靈性與健康結果有關，但以靈性介入探討提升靈性健康與降低壓力之研究較為罕見。目的　本研究旨在探討靈性學習方案對護理學生靈性健康與護理實習壓力之影響。方法　採類實驗設計，方便取樣選取某護理學校學生為母群體，再以簡單隨機抽樣分派實驗組（39人）與對照組（46人）。學習方案介入後，以靈性健康量表、實習壓力量表與實習成績探討兩組得分差異。前測資料（T1）收集後，實驗組參加八周、每次50分鐘的課程介入，接續收集後測（T2）資料；後測（T3）資料於兩組完成4周臨床實習後完成。結果　所有研究對象皆為女性、平均19.4歲（標準差1.3歲）。以一般估計模式（GEE）統計方法評估實驗介入成效，實驗組靈性健康提升、實習壓力降低，比對照組顯著（p＜.01, p＜.05）；同時，實習成績也高於對照組（t＝3.771, p＜.001）。結論／實務應用　8周的靈性學習方案以講述、討論、反思與靈性活動練習，有助於研究對象將壓力事件與個人生命目的做聯結並賦予意義，進而增進護理學生靈性健康與降低實習壓力。本研究結果可以做為降低護理學生實習壓力輔導，以及規劃靈性相關課程之參考。英文摘要：Background: Numerous studies have indicated an association between spirituality and health outcomes. However, little information is available about interventions that have been shown to enhance spiritual health and decrease stress.Purpose: This study examined the effects of a spiritual learning program (SLP) on nursing student-perceived spiritual health and clinical practice stress.Method: A convenience sample of nursing students currently enrolled at a nursing school in northern Taiwan were recruited to participate in this quasiexperimental study as participants to experimental and control groups via simple random sampling. Results from a spiritual health scale and a perceived clinical practice stress scale, together with the score for clinical nursing practice, were compared between the groups. Baseline data were collected from all participants. The experimental group participated in 8 weeks of 50-minute per week SLP, which included lectures, discussion, reflection, and spiritual practices. A second data set was collected from all participants after the intervention. A third data set was collected after all participants had performed 4 weeks of nursing clinical practice.Results: Participants were all women. Average age was 19.4 years (SD=1.3 years). Generalized estimating equation analysis showed SLP to have a significant short-term effect on improving the total score for spiritual health (p＜.01). Significantly greater improvement in clinical practice stress scores was also seen in the experimental group as compared with the control group (all p＜.05). The experimental group obtained a higher score of the final clinical practice than the control group (t=3.771, p＜.001).Conclusion: The SLP may encourage participants to see stressors as meaningful events that are connected to individual life purposes. The program developed in this study may be used to improve spiritual health and reduce stress in nursing students' clinical practice. This SLP may be referenced when designing similar spirituality-related courses and applied to nursing student counseling.起始頁-結束頁：281-290資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318273642f6篇名：Qualitative Assessment of a Blended Learning Intervention in an Undergraduate Nursing Course並列篇名：混成學習介入大學護理課程之質性評估作者：許麗齡(Li-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：混成學習;護理課程;質性研究;護理倫理;blended learning;nursing course;qualitative study;nursing ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　全球健康照護環境的發展及變遷，使得護理人員面臨新的倫理議題。由於混成學習的多元性，使其適用於傳遞有意義的學習經驗。因此，運用混成學習於護理倫理教育是必要的，得以協助護理學生揣摩專業護理人員的角色。然而，經文獻查證少有研究探討護理學生參與混成學習倫理課程的學習經驗。目的　本研究在於瞭解護理學生對混成學習於倫理課程之反應及對學習之影響。方法　研究方法採質性研究。以深度訪談法訪談28位已修習護理倫理課程的女性護理學生；訪談時間約50－100分鐘。研究者於2009年以深度訪談進行資料收集。結果　內容分析顯示，護理學生結合混成學習於倫理課程經驗，可歸納出六個主題及十三個次主題，包括：增強思考能力、改進問題解決技能、引發實務反思、知覺作業負荷、鼓勵主動學習、識別護理價值。總結護理學生對混成學習於倫理課程之經驗是肯定的。結論／實務應用　大部份學生於學習過程變得更主動，而且思考更具批判性，學會後設認知能力及決策能力之運用。此外，護理學生之學習經驗將可作為未來混成學習模組規劃之指引方向。英文摘要：Background: Nurses are experiencing new ethical issues because of global developments and changes in the healthcare environment. Blended learning is one of the various methods used to deliver meaningful learning experiences. Well-designed, properly administered nursing ethics education is essential for nursing students to visualize the role of professional nurses. However, a literature review shows that only a few existing studies have touched on the subject of nursing student experiences with blended learning in a nursing ethics course.Purpose: This study examines how undergraduate nursing students respond to a blended learning approach in a nursing ethics course and how blended learning affects the learning process.Methods: We used a qualitative research design with in-depth interviews. Participants included 28 female undergraduate nursing students who had completed the nursing ethics course. Each interview lasted 50-100 minutes. The researcher conducted all interviews in 2009.Results: The researcher identified six major themes and 13 subthemes from the data. The six themes included (a) enhancing thinking ability, (b) improving problem-solving skills, (c) reflecting in and on practice, (d) perceiving added workload, (e) encouraging active learning, and (f) identifying the value of nursing. Participants felt that the blended learning experience was a generally positive experience.Conclusion: Most participants appreciated the opportunity to take a more active role in the learning process, think about issues profoundly and critically, and exercise metacognitive powers in the thinking and decision-making process. Study findings may suggest productive ideas for fine-tuning blended learning models.起始頁-結束頁：291-299資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31827363bc7篇名：Exploring the Association between Nurse Workload and Nurse-Sensitive Patient Safety Outcome Indicators並列篇名：護理人員工作負荷與病人安全敏感性護理成果指標相關性之探討作者：劉麗芳(Li-Fang Liu);李選(Sheuan Lee);賈佩芳(Pei-Fang Chia);紀淑靜(Shu-Ching Chi);尹裕君(Yu-Chun Yin)關鍵字：護理人員工作負荷;病人安全;護理敏感性指標;nursing workload;patient safety;nurse-sensitive patient outcome indicators期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　護理人力確實衝擊到病人安全，而國外研究均顯示護理人力與醫療失誤息息相關，然衛生署卻未考量到醫療機構設置標準中的護理人力。目的　本研究旨在探討醫療機構護理人員之工作負荷與病人安全相關之護理敏感性成果指標之相關性。方法　研究採橫斷式量性設計，以自擬之『護理工作負荷與病人安全相關之護理敏感性成果指標』日誌記錄個人工作情況兩週，以台灣省地區醫院以上層級之急性醫療機構護理人員為母群體，由台灣省21縣市公會中以醫院層級隨機分層取樣，共發出問卷1,500份，回收1,373份，有效問卷1,358份，有效回收率為90.5％。資料以描述性統計包括平均值、標準差、百分比及推論性統計包括Spearman相關及風險分析。結果　超時工作時數與病人安全的敏感性護理成果指標：病人跌倒、褥瘡、幾近給藥錯誤、給藥錯誤、插管滑脫、住院後感染肺炎及泌尿道感染有顯著性正相關；當病人—護士比超過7時，病人跌倒、褥瘡、插管滑脫、住院後感染肺炎及泌尿道感染等指標風險增大。實務應用　研究結果可作為未來衛生主管機關訂定醫療機構設置標準及護理人力決策之參考。英文摘要：Background: Nurses affect patient safety. Although studies have associated patient safety with nurse staffing levels, Taiwan's Department of Health does not yet support changing nurse workforce standards for medical institutions.Purpose: This study was designed to gain insight into the workload of nurses employed at medical institutions and to determine the relationship between nurse workload and nurse-sensitive patient safety outcome indicators.Methods: This study adopted a cross-sectional quantitative method and collected data using a self-designed logbook. The study population comprised nurses from acute medical institutions, including medical centers and regional and district hospitals. One thousand five hundred logbooks were distributed to participants selected by random sampling from 21 city/county nursing associations across Taiwan. One thousand three hundred seventy-three questionnaires were retrieved; the 1,358 valid responses yielded a valid response rate of 90.5%. Nurses used the logbook to record individual working conditions for 2 weeks. Descriptive statistics included mean values, standard deviations, and percentages; inferential statistics included the Spearman rho correlation and odds ratios.Results: Nurse overtime working hours were positively associated with the following nurse-sensitive patient safety outcome indicators: patient falls, decubitus/pressure ulcers, near errors in medication, medication errors, unplanned extubation, hospital-acquired pneumonia, and hospital-acquired urinary tract infections; risks of patient falls, decubitus/pressure ulcers, unplanned extubation, hospital-acquired pneumonia, and hospital-acquired urinary tract infections significantly increased when the patient-nurse ratio exceeded 7:1.Conclusion: Nurse workforce and nurse-sensitive patient outcome indicators are positively correlated. The results of this study will help professional nursing groups define suitable nursing workforce standards for medical institutions.起始頁-結束頁：300-309資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31827363638篇名：Psychological Distress in Women Who Have Experienced Intrauterine Insemination並列篇名：人工授精治療婦女之心理困擾作者：林嘉玲(Jia-Ling Lin);林雅慧(Ya-Hui Lin);闕可欣(Ke-Hsin Chueh)關鍵字：婦女;心理困擾;人工授精;women;psychological distress;intrauterine insemination期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　雖然過去實證研究結果已知，心理困擾會以不可預期與不典型的方式呈現其症狀，但卻少有研究著重在探討這些症狀在人工授精治療婦女之呈現。目的　本研究目的為了解台灣接受人工授精治療婦女的心理困擾比率，並分析這群婦女的人口學特性、人工授精治療身體症狀對其心理困擾之影響。方法　本研究採橫斷式研究設計，以北部某教學醫院117位接受人工授精治療婦女為樣本，採簡式健康量表做為評估心理困擾的工具，以量表總得分大於5為具輕度以上心理困擾者。並以人口學特性、人工授精治療之身體症狀分析影響心理困擾之重要因素。結果　發現32.5％的人工授精治療婦女達到輕度以上心理困擾程度。這些婦女若其配偶為家中獨子、過去一週曾使用藥物、學歷為大學以下、及有頭暈症狀，都是心理困擾症狀之高危險群。結論／實務應用　本研究結果可瞭解人工授精治療婦女心理困擾之重要影響因素，並可提供實證研究結果做為未來心理健康與婦女健康治療研究參考。英文摘要：Background: Despite evidence that psychological distress manifests itself in underreported and atypical ways, few studies have assessed these symptoms in women who have experienced intrauterine insemination (IUI).Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine the prevalence of psychological distress and explore the relationships among psychological distress, various demographic characteristics, and somatic symptoms in women who had received IUI treatment in Taiwan.Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used in this study. The 117 participants were recruited from a teaching hospital in northern Taiwan. The brief symptom rating scale (BSRS-5) was used as the measurement instrument, and scores of more than 5 on the BSRS-5 were used to mark the boundary between milder and more severe psychological distress. Demographic characteristics and somatic symptoms of IUI that contributed most significantly to psychological distress were identified from the data.Results: Thirty-eight (32.5%) participants experienced psychological distress. Psychological distress was most common in participants (a) with husbands who were an only son, (b) who had taken medication during the previous week, (c) with an education level below college or university, and (d) who reported feeling faint.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The factors studied are important to understand psychological distress in women who have undergone IUI treatment.起始頁-結束頁：310-315資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182748f269篇名：Measuring Nursing Care Time and Tasks in Long-Term Services and Supports: One Size Does Not Fit All並列篇名：長期照護服務與支持機構的護理照護時間與任務測量作者：Janet Prvu Bettger;Julie A. Sochalski;Janice B. Foust;Cynthia D. Zubritsky;Karen B. Hirschman;Katherine M. Abbott;Mary D. Naylor關鍵字：長期照護;護理;測量;long-term care;nursing;measurement期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　雖然有相當多數在長期照護服務與支持機構（long-term care service and supports, LTSS）的工作人員是護理人員，但提供護理的測量方法尚未被開發。目的／方法　本研究以質性研究，並包括三角交叉研究法，分析來自於三個獨立來源的數據，探討與瞭解跨不同類型的長期照護服務與支持機構。結果　在測量跨不同類型的長期照護服務與支持機構時，發現六個主要的問題點，包括：（1）不同的護理和組織類型，如：整天時間使用的細節、使用時間的量、不同護理任務類型的詳細程度；（2）臨床記錄和管理數據庫的時間記錄和任務；（3）書面和電子兩種形式的數據；（4）整合多項訊息的來源，以建立整體護理照顧的全貌；（5）提供給合約醫療院所的資訊可及性不一致；（6）缺乏來自於非專業醫療照護人員（如家屬）的照護記錄。本研究發現，觀察到不同護理之家在輔助生活設施、家庭和社區為基礎的服務有所差異，此差異亦被發現在不同機構的設置之內，設置和組織之間的一個共同性是提供電子存檔的照護計畫，具體說明個別性需求與需求如何未被滿足的可利用性。結論　本研究結果顯示，跨三個不同類型的長期照護服務與支持機構資料的可利用性與明確性之變異。本研究為初步測量三個不同類型的長期照護服務與支持機構之護理照護任務的過程，以便進一步探討長期照護服務與支持機構住民的護理照護需求之範圍及其需求滿足的現況。英文摘要：Background: Although most staff in long-term care services and support (LTSS) are nursing care personnel, a method for measuring the provision of nursing care has not yet been developed.Purpose/Methods: We sought to understand the challenges of measuring nursing care across different types of LTSS using a qualitative approach that included the triangulation of data from three unique sources.Results: Six primary challenges to measuring nursing care across LTSS emerged. These included (a) level of detail about time of day, amount of time, or type of tasks varied by type of nursing and organization; (b) time and tasks were documented across clinical records and administrative databases; (c) data existed in both paper and electronic formats; (d) several sources of information were needed to create the fullest picture of nursing care; (e) data were inconsistently available for contracted providers; and (f) documentation of informal caregiving was unavailable. Differences were observed between assisted living facilities and home- and community-based services compared with nursing homes. Differences were also observed across organizations within a setting. A commonality across settings and organizations was the availability of an electronically stored care plan specifying individual needs, but not necessarily how these would be met.Conclusions: Findings demonstrate the variability of data availability and specificity across three distinct LTSS settings. This study is an initial step toward establishing a process for measuring the provision of nursing care across LTSS in order to explore the range of nursing care needs of LTSS recipients and how these needs are currently fulfilled.起始頁-結束頁：159-168資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318263d97710篇名：A Pilot Study of the Telecare Medical Support System as an Intervention in Dementia Care: The Views and Experiences of Primary Caregivers並列篇名：失智症照顧者使用遠距照護支援系統經驗之先導研究作者：周歆凱(Hsin-Kai Chou);甄瑞興(Sui-Hing Yan);林怡君(I-Chun Lin);蔡明足(Ming-Tsu Tsai);陳楚杰(Chu-Chieh Chen);翁林仲(Lin-Chung Woung)關鍵字：失智症;遠距照護支援系統;科技輔助;醫療資訊;dementia;telecare medical support system;technological aid;medical informatics期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　失智症病患因病情的改變，早中期常出現記憶減退、妄想、幻覺、遊走等神經精神症狀，疾病後期更因日常生活能力減退及依賴情形，往往造成家庭照顧負擔。國外遠距照護支援系統應用於失智症照護早已行之有年，也非常成功，然而在台灣卻可能因為就醫文化等原因而窒礙難行。目的　本研究欲探討失智症主要照顧者使用遠距照護支援系統的經驗及感受，包含認知系統的易用性及有用性，並進一步討論該系統運用於失智症家庭之具體效益。方法　選取30戶失智症主要照顧者家庭為研究對象，在使用六個月的遠距照護支援系統後，研究人員透過質性研究方式，進行一小時的深度訪談以收集資料，並由四位資深護理人員進行內容分析。結果　本研究有63.3%屬於輕中度的阿茲海默氏症病患，且大部份患有些許的行為或精神問題。使用系統六個月後，大部分的個案對系統有用性及易用性均表示讚許，認為系統可自動偵測病人安全、提供照顧者照護輔助及心理支持，並能穩定失智患者的病情及情緒。結論　遠距照護支援系統確實對失智症有具體的貢獻，可提供患者家庭全天候照護決策的支援與生活關懷服務，讓主要照顧者感到不再是一人孤軍奮戰，且可透過資訊科技讓醫療照護無所不在。英文摘要：Background: As a progressive degenerative illness, dementia can reveal itself through a variety of symptoms such as intellectual deterioration, loss of recent memory, loss of cognitive ability, and psychological and behavioral problems. The telecare medical support system (TMSS) has been a part of dementia care in many countries for many years. Although worth considering, the TMSS model is difficult to directly implement in Taiwan because of cultural and social issues.Purpose: This study explores the ease of use and usefulness of TMSS from the perspective of primary caregivers and assesses the benefits of TMSS in home dementia care.Methods: We used a qualitative research method to explore the experience and perceptions of 30 primary caregivers who each used TMSS for 6 months in dementia care. Data were collected using 1-hour in-depth interviews. Four senior nurses conducted the content analysis.Results: Approximately two thirds (63.3%) of the participants were primary caregivers of patients with Alzheimer's disease in the mild to medium stage of their illness. After using TMSS for the 6-month study period, participants held generally positive views of its usefulness and ease of use. Participants generally appreciated the ability of TMSS to self-diagnose care recipient conditions; provide reminders, care, and emotional support; and help stabilize the care recipient's condition and emotions.Conclusions: We showed TMSS as an effective tool that helps reduce primary caregiver isolation and uncertainty and provides round-the-clock care management and safety checks using advanced technology and a professional care team. TMSS can effectively enhance dementia care.起始頁-結束頁：169-180資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318263d91611篇名：The Efficacy of Using Self-Monitoring Diaries in a Weight Loss Program for Chronically Ill Obese Adults in a Rural Area並列篇名：於偏遠地區使用自我監測日誌於慢性病併有肥胖成人之減重方案成效作者：王琪珍(Chi-Jane Wang);Susan J. Fetzer;楊宜青(Yi-Ching Yang);王文玲(Wen-Ling Wang)關鍵字：肥胖;減重;自我監測;日誌;偏遠地區;obesity;weight loss;self-monitoring;diary;rural area期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：Background: Self-monitoring is part of many weight-loss programs and is widely accepted as effective. However, there is a lack of research related to the efficacy of various self-monitoring instruments in meeting the needs of individuals with limited mobility or access to healthcare providers, especially those with limited education living in rural settings.Purpose: This study examined the efficacy of using self-monitoring diaries in a weight loss program targeting chronically ill and obese rural-dwelling adults.Methods: A community-based intervention program using a pretest and posttest design examined the effect of using self-monitoring diaries on weight loss. Fifty participants were enrolled from the chronic disease clinic of a district health center with limited medical resources in a remote village in southwestern Taiwan. All participants were diagnosed with diabetes and/or hypertension, had body mass indices between 27 and 32 kg/m^2, and had a minimum educational level of junior high school. Mean participant age was 43.7 years. Participants were randomly assigned to the intervention or control group. All attended a mandatory 12-week weight loss program. The intervention group received instructions on how to record diet and exercise details in a structured, graphics-based diary provided by the researchers. Body weight and percentage of body fat were measured before and after the program, and data were analyzed by chi-square and ANCOVA.Results: The intervention group significantly lost more weight than the control group (5.7 kg vs. 2.1 kg; p G .05). The participants of 88% in the intervention group lost 5% or more of their baseline weight greater than the 23% in the control group. Both groups achieved the mean of body fat reductions by comparing pretest and posttest.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Self-monitoring diaries can have a significant impact on weight loss in individuals living in rural communities. Healthcare providers and health promotion agencies can use the suggested checklist method to improve weight loss promotion programs in isolated rural communities with limited medical resources.英文摘要：Background: Self-monitoring is part of many weight-loss programs and is widely accepted as effective. However, there is a lack of research related to the efficacy of various self-monitoring instruments in meeting the needs of individuals with limited mobility or access to healthcare providers, especially those with limited education living in rural settings.Purpose: This study examined the efficacy of using self-monitoring diaries in a weight loss program targeting chronically ill and obese rural-dwelling adults.Methods: A community-based intervention program using a pretest and posttest design examined the effect of using self-monitoring diaries on weight loss. Fifty participants were enrolled from the chronic disease clinic of a district health center with limited medical resources in a remote village in southwestern Taiwan. All participants were diagnosed with diabetes and/or hypertension, had body mass indices between 27 and 32 kg/m^2, and had a minimum educational level of junior high school. Mean participant age was 43.7 years. Participants were randomly assigned to the intervention or control group. All attended a mandatory 12-week weight loss program. The intervention group received instructions on how to record diet and exercise details in a structured, graphics-based diary provided by the researchers. Body weight and percentage of body fat were measured before and after the program, and data were analyzed by chi-square and ANCOVA.Results: The intervention group significantly lost more weight than the control group (5.7 kg vs. 2.1 kg; p G .05). The participants of 88% in the intervention group lost 5% or more of their baseline weight greater than the 23% in the control group. Both groups achieved the mean of body fat reductions by comparing pretest and posttest.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Self-monitoring diaries can have a significant impact on weight loss in individuals living in rural communities. Healthcare providers and health promotion agencies can use the suggested checklist method to improve weight loss promotion programs in isolated rural communities with limited medical resources.起始頁-結束頁：181-188資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318263d89b12篇名：Characteristics and Underlying Meaning of Hoarding Behavior in Elders with Alzheimer's Dementia: Caregivers' Perspective並列篇名：從照顧者角度探討阿茲海默氏症失智老人的藏匿行為之構成要素與背後意義作者：王靜枝(Jing-Jy Wang);Karen Feldt;張文芸(Wen-Yun Cheng)關鍵字：阿茲海默氏症;失智;藏匿／囤積行為;安全感需求;Alzheimer's disease;dementia;hoarding behavior;security needs;elders;caregivers期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　失智症及其相關問題行為一直以來困擾著家庭照顧者與專業照顧者。探討患者干擾行為的構成要素與背後代表意義，可為提供以患者為中心照護的第一步。雖然藏匿／囤積行為看似不具立即傷害性，若忽略之，過度的藏匿／囤積對患者本身與照護者的健康與安全仍是有威脅的。目的　本研究的目的是從家屬照顧者的角度，探討阿茲海默型失智老人藏匿／囤積行為的構成要素與背後代表意義。方法　本研究採質性探索性研究設計，以立意取樣方式，深度訪談12位阿茲海默型失智老人的家庭照顧者，並以內容分析法分析資料。結果　資料分析出三項影響藏匿／囤積行為的構成要素概念，含過去與現在症狀的影響、內在個性習慣的再現、過去經濟危機感的重現。這些概念代表除患者目前生活情境外，其過去社會與家庭背景也強烈影響該行為。而藏匿／囤積行為的背後意義代表著患者對安全感的企求。討論　本研究結果可提供家庭或專業照顧者對失智相關問題行為之瞭解，提升照顧者對患者行為的瞭解能增進其彼此的互動與溝通。如此一來，照顧者較能找到滿足患者需求之門路。英文摘要：Background: Dementia and its associated problem behaviors remain bothersome to family and professional caregivers. Exploring characteristics and the underlying meaning of disruptive behaviors in elders with Alzheimer's dementia can be a first step to pursuing patient-centered care. Although hoarding is relatively harmless, unattended excessive hoarding can create health and safety issues for both patients and caregivers.Purpose: This study examined the characteristics and underlying meaning of hoarding behavior among Taiwanese elders with Alzheimer's dementia from the perspective of family caregivers.Methods: We used an exploratory research design and purposive sampling. A total of 12 family caregivers of elders with Alzheimer's dementia received qualitative interview. We used one-on-one in-depth interviews to collect data and content analysis to analyze data.Results: Three main characteristics related to hoarding behavior emerged from the data were ”influence of former and current symptoms,” ”recurrence of the original personal characteristics and habits,” and ”re-experiencing past economic crises.” These three characteristics reflected patients' past social and family background and the current life situation. We elicited ”a desire for security'' as the underlying meaning of hoarding behavior.Conclusion: Findings of this study provide a reference for family and professional care providers to understand dementia-related problem behaviors. Improved caregiver understanding of dementia patient behaviors may help improve caregiver-patient interaction and communication and help caregivers better meet patient needs.起始頁-結束頁：189-196資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318265613213篇名：Hospital Nurse Knowledge of and Approach to Dementia Care並列篇名：醫院護理人員失智症照護知識與方式作者：林佩昭(Pei-Chao Lin);謝美慧(Mei-Hui Hsieh);林麗嬋(Li-Chan Lin)關鍵字：失智症;醫院;知識;瞻妄;以人為中心照護方式;dementia;hospital;knowledge;delirium;person-centered approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　英國衛生局提倡透過一個國際性的失智症照護策略以促進急性醫院的失智症照護品質。策略其一為評估護理人員是否有適當的知識及以人為中心的照護方式，以促進醫院的失智症照護品質。目的　本研究目的在評價醫院護理人員的失智症照護知識與失智症照護方式，並探討護理人員的特性、其失智症照護知識及失智症照護方式的相關性。方法　以16題的問卷，評估台灣南部某一教學醫院內的124位護理人員的失智症照護知識；另以13題有關護理人員對晚期失智症照護方式的問卷，評估受試的護理人員提供照護的方式傾向現實導向或以人為中心。結果　護理人員的失智症照護知識平均得分為10.8分（標準差2.0），答題結果顯示，多數護理人員無法區辨失智症與瞻妄。護理人員對晚期失智症照護傾向於現實導向的照護方式。有愈多年工作經驗的護理師其失智症照護知識的得分愈高。護理人員的年齡與工作經驗皆傾向現實導向的照護方式呈負相關。結論／實務應用　多數醫院護理人員具有正確的失智症照護知識並且傾向於採現實導向的照護方式。這是一份初步瞭解南部某醫院的失智照護現況調查。未來需增進護理人員對瞻妄與失智的區辨能力，且進一步探討失智照護品質與醫院護理人員的失智照護知識及方式的相關性。英文摘要：Background: The U.K. Department of Health recently proposed an international dementia strategy to enhance the quality of dementia care in acute hospital care settings. To implement such a strategy, it is necessary to first assess whether nurses have the knowledge and person-centered approach essential to enhancing hospital-based dementia care quality.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate hospital nurse knowledge of and approach toward dementia care and to explore the relationship between nurse demographic characteristics and these two issues.Methods: We distributed a 16-item questionnaire on dementia care knowledge to 124 nurses at a teaching hospital in southern Taiwan. We also distributed to the same participants a 13-item questionnaire designed to assess the approach, either reality oriented or person centered, of participants in providing care to advanced dementia patients.Results: The total mean score for participant dementia care knowledge was 10.8 (SD = 2.0). Results indicated that most nurses confused dementia with delirium. The advanced dementia care questionnaire suggested care tended to be reality oriented. Licensed registered nurses with more working experience had higher dementia care knowledge scores. Age and working experience both negatively correlated with a realityoriented approach toward care.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Most participants had accurate dementia care knowledge and tended to use a reality-oriented approach. Nurse competency in differentiating delirium from dementia should be enhanced. This study provided initial insight into the dementia care situation at a single hospital in southern Taiwan. Future studies should further explore the relationship between dementia care quality and hospital nurses’ knowledge and approaches, respectively.起始頁-結束頁：197-207資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318263d82e14篇名：Health-Related Quality of Life and Healthcare Resource Utilization in Taiwanese Women with Menopausal Symptoms: A Nation-Wide Survey並列篇名：有停經症狀之臺灣婦女的健康相關生活品質與醫療資源利用—全國調查作者：徐育愷(Yuh-Kae Shyu);潘潔馨(Chieh-Hsin Pan);劉偉民(Wei-Min Liu);薛瑞元(Jui-Yuan Hsueh);許淳森(Chun-Sen Hsu);蔡佩珊(Pei-Shan Tsai)關鍵字：停經症狀;健康相關生活品質;醫療資源利用;healthcare resource utilization;health-related quality of life;menopausal symptoms期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　不同文化與種族背景的婦女其停經經驗不同，且可能會影響生活品質。停經症狀嚴重的婦女會尋求醫療協助來減緩症狀。目的　本研究探討有停經症狀之臺灣婦女的人口學特徵與健康相關生活品質，以及停經症狀與健康相關生活品質及醫療資源利用的相關性。方法　此橫斷性研究使用2005年國民健康訪問暨藥物濫用調查多段分層系統抽樣設計資料，分析35至64歲婦女共4,437位，以多元邏輯斯回歸分析與停經症狀婦女有關的變項，及有停經症狀比無停經症狀婦女發生差的健康相關生活品質及醫療資源利用的機會。結果　有846位（19.1%）婦女曾有停經症狀。年齡、宗教、吸菸、運動及共病情形與出現停經症狀有關。在控制傾向分數後，有停經症狀的婦女比無症狀的分別有1.85、1.66、1.39、1.73、1.44及1.36倍機會出現較差的身體與心理健康相關生活品質、使用門診、中醫與急診服務及住院。結論　35至64歲的臺灣婦女約有五分之一有停經症狀。在控制可能的干擾因子後，有停經症狀的婦女其健康相關生活品質較差且醫療資源利用增加。英文摘要：Background: Menopausal experience differs among women with different cultural and ethnic backgrounds and may impact quality of life. Some women with severe menopausal symptoms seek medical help to alleviate menopause-related symptoms.Purpose: This study examined the demographic characteristics and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) of Taiwanese women experiencing menopausal symptoms and examined associations between menopausal symptoms and, respectively, poor HRQOL and healthcare resource utilization.Methods: This cross-sectional study used data from the 2005 National Health Interview Survey in Taiwan, which used a multistaged stratified systematic sampling scheme. A total of 4,437 women aged 35-64 years were analyzed. We used multivariable logistic regression models to identify variables significantly and independently associated with the presence of menopausal symptoms. We also used the model to assess the odds of poor HRQOL and healthcare resource utilization in women with menopausal symptoms compared with those without.Results: Eight hundred and forty-six women (19.1%) reported experiencing menopausal symptoms. Age, religion, smoking, exercise, and comorbidity were independently associated with the presence of such symptoms. The propensity score-adjusted odds ratio of poor physical HRQOL, poor mental HRQOL, use of outpatient, traditional Chinese medicine and emergency room services, and hospitalization for women with menopausal symptoms were 1.85 (95% CI [1.54, 2.21]), 1.66 (95% CI [1.40, 1.97]), 1.39 (95% CI [1.18, 1.63]), 1.73 (95% CI [1.37, 2.18]), 1.44 (95% CI [1.15, 1.81]), and 1.36 (95% CI [1.02, 1.81]), respectively, compared with those without symptoms.Conclusions: Nearly one fifth of women aged 35-64 years in Taiwan experience menopausal symptoms. The presence of menopausal symptoms increases the likelihood of poor HRQOL and healthcare resource utilization even after controlling for possible confounders.起始頁-結束頁：208-218資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318265619b15篇名：Nursing Student Perceptions of Spirituality and Spiritual Care並列篇名：護理學生對靈性與靈性照護感知的影響因素探討作者：吳麗芬(Li-Fen Wu);廖玉貞(Yu-Chen Liao);葉大成(Dah-Cherng Yeh)關鍵字：護理學生;靈性;靈性照護;感知;nursing student;spirituality;spiritual care;perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　靈性是生命的必要成分，靈性照護是指滿足受照顧者靈性需要的活動，護生需要得到教導，以培養評估及提供靈性照護的能力。目的　探討台灣高年級護理學生對靈性和靈性照護的感知，以及相關影響因素。方法　採橫斷式描述性目的取樣，調查全台22所五專護理科的男女高年級護生，以中文版靈性與靈性量表為工具，發出260份，收回239份，回收率91.92%。結果　年齡平均19.48歲，45.61%沒有宗教信仰，65.69%不參加宗教活動，94.56%對護理有興趣，52.72%還沒確定畢業後成為護理人員，3.35%表示不願意成為護理人員。有46.44%在學校學過靈性相關課程，53.56% 學過靈性護理相關課程。護生對靈性及靈性照護的整體感知為「清楚」，不贊成靈性只適用於有宗教信仰的人，但不確定護理人員可以提供靈性照護，以及需要提供個別化的護理。推論統計結果發現，學過靈性或靈性照護課程的學生、對護理有興趣、以後要從事護理工作的學生，對靈性的知識及靈性護理的態度優於其他參與的學生。結論／實務應用　本研究發現，教育、經驗以及對護理的志趣，會影響護理學生靈性與靈性照護的感知，而且沒有性別上的差異。由於護理學生是未來全人照護的提供者，建議護理科（系）將靈性及靈性照護融入課程規劃，以保證未來護理師的照護品質。英文摘要：Background: Spirituality is a necessary component of life. Spiritual care includes the activities necessary to meet the spiritual needs of clients. Nursing students must receive appropriate training to develop their abilities to provide spiritual care.Purpose: This study explored student nurse perceptions of spirituality and spiritual care and related factors.Methods: We used a cross-sectional descriptive design and purposive sampling. Participants were senior nursing students of both genders from 22 schools. The Chinese version of a spirituality and spiritual scale was the research tool. A total of 239 participants returned the questionnaires, giving a response rate of 91.92%.Results: Average participant age was 19.48 years; 45.61% reported no religion; 65.59% did not participate in religious activities; 94.56%reported having an interest in nursing; 52.72% were undecided about pursuing a nursing career; 3.35%did not want to be nurses; 46.44% had taken spirituality courses in school; 53.56% had taken spiritual care courses. Participants' overall perception of spirituality and spiritual care was ”clear.” This runs contrary to the idea that only religious people are spiritual and that nonreligious nurses may be less able to tend to the spiritual needs of their patients. Participants who had taken spirituality or spiritual care courses had an interest in nursing and were willing to become nurses had, on average, significantly better spirituality knowledge and spiritual care attitudes than other participants.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study found that education, experience, career interest in nursing, and career choice affects nursing student perceptions of spirituality and spiritual care. We also found that this effect was independent of gender. Nursing students should be holistic care providers. Integrating spirituality and spiritual care into the standard nursing curriculum is recommended to improve nursing care quality.起始頁-結束頁：219-227資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318263d95616篇名：The Development of an Evaluation Tool to Measure Nursing Core Curriculum Teaching Effectiveness: An Exploratory Factor Analysis並列篇名：護理核心課程之教學效果評量工具的發展與評價作者：張淑芳(Shu-Fang Chang)關鍵字：護理核心課程;教學評量;核心能力;項目分析;探索性因素分析;nursing core curricula;teaching evaluation;core competencies;item analysis;exploratory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景　有鑒於過去相關實證（evidence-based）研究，較少針對以護理專業核心能力為內涵，發展護理專業核心課程評量工具。因此，研發具有客觀性與專業性的護理核心課程教學評量工具，有其需要與重要性。目的　本研究目的主要是藉由項目分析及探索性因素分析，初步發展以護理專業核心能力為內涵之教學評量工具。方法　本研究共分四階段，包括：問卷內容初擬、專家效度、隨機抽樣及進行探索性因素分析（exploratory factor analysis, EFA）。結果　探索性因素分析共包括三個因素，分別為「教學準備與進行」、「教學促進」、「教學評量」，各分量表解釋變異量為43.1%、12.9%、7.5%，共可解釋63.5%。整體量表的信度為.904，各分量表相關係數皆為中度正相關。結論　研究結果顯示，此量表具有良好信度與效度，將能做為評量教師在護理專業課程教學成效的客觀性指標。英文摘要：Background: There have been few evidence-based assessments of nursing education core curricula. To conduct such assessments effectively, researchers need an objective professional tool that addresses the principal competencies of the nursing profession.Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop a preliminary assessment tool to improve teaching effectiveness in nursing core curricula.Methods: This study was divided into four stages: (a) initial questionnaire content proposal, (b) expert validation, (c) random sampling, and (d) item and exploratory factor analysis.Results: We used exploratory factor analysis to analyze three factors, namely (a) learning preparation, (b) advancement of competence, and (c) learning evaluation. These three factors explained, respectively, 43.1%, 12.9%, and 7.5% of total variance; the three together explained 63.5% of total variance. Overall questionnaire reliability was .904. All correlation coefficients displayed moderately positive relationships among subscales.Conclusions: The assessment tool developed in this study showed reliability and validity in the evaluation of teaching outcomes for nursing core curricula.起始頁-結束頁：228-236資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318265616617篇名：The Menopause Transition Experiences of Chinese Singaporean Women: An Exploratory Qualitative Study並列篇名：以質性研究探討新加坡華人婦女於更年期轉換過程經驗作者：林暉觀(Hui-Koon Lim);Sandra Mackey關鍵字：更年期;新加坡;亞洲;質性研究;經驗;menopause;Singapore;Asian;qualitative research;experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 婦女更年期是指中年時發生排卵期結束的階段性過程。更年期的含義及婦女如何體驗這種過渡期，可能受到文化規範與社會影響，或者受到個人對更年期理解的影響，然而亞洲婦女的更年期經驗鮮為人知。目的 深入了解新加坡華人婦女更年期過渡經驗。方法 於2010年，對14名年齡在40至60歲之間的更年期和更年期後的新加坡華人婦女，進行質性設計的錄音面談，並對訪談內容進行分析。結果 呈現兩大主題：（1）更年期症狀的經驗；（2）處理更年期症狀的經驗。訪談結果最常見的症狀是不正常出血、潮熱和情緒變化。大多數參與者描述她們的過渡期為平淡和普通，並伴隨多項顯著症狀。婦女處理更年期症狀的的策略包括：醫療和傳統的方法、以及尋求家人和朋友的支持。結論 本研究提供了有關新加坡華人婦女更年期過渡生活的新見解。結果將有助於醫護人員更了解更年期婦女的需要，和提供護理人員在促進照顧婦女健康的參考。結論／實務應用 種族因素不一定會影響更年期婦女的症狀經驗，更年期婦女的健康教育，應具體建立在文化的實踐上。在新加坡醫院和社區的護理人員在照顧更年期婦女時，評估設置應包括西醫中醫和自我使用的藥物。英文摘要：Background: Menopause, a developmental occurrence that takes place in midlife, marks the end of a woman's fertile phase. Cultural norms, social influences, and personal perceptions related to menopause may influence its meaning and how each woman experiences this transition. Little is known about the menopausal experiences of Asian women. Purpose: This study explores the menopause transition experiences of ethnic Chinese women in Singapore. Methods: Using a qualitative design, the researchers conducted audio-taped interviews in 2010 with 14 menopausal and postmenopausal Chinese Singaporean women aged 40-60 years. Thematic analysis was used to analyze interviews. Results: Two main themes were identified: (a) experiencing symptoms and (b) managing symptoms during menopause transition. The most commonly reported symptoms were abnormal bleeding, hot flushes, and emotional changes. Most participants described their transition to be uneventful and ordinary and reported two significant symptoms at most. The strategies women used to manage their transition included using Western and traditional Chinese medical interventions and seeking support from family and friends. Conclusions: This study provides new insights into how ethnic Chinese women in Singapore experience menopause transition. Findings can assist nurses and healthcare workers in the local context to better understand menopausal women's needs and guide nurses to implement suitable health promotional strategies for women under their care in both hospital and community settings. Implications for Practice: Although ethnicity is not necessarily a determinant of symptom experience during menopause transition, health education for menopausal women should be based on knowledge of culture-specific practices. Nurses caring for menopausal women in hospital and community settings in Singapore should evaluate the use of medications prescribed by Western and Chinese herbal medical professionals as well as those that are self-prescribed.起始頁-結束頁：81-89資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318254eb2518篇名：Gender-Related Differences in the Human Rights Needs of Patients with Mental Illness並列篇名：精神病患者在人權需求性別之差異作者：Poreddi Vijayalakshmi;Konduru Reddemma;Suresh Bada Math關鍵字：性別差異;人權;需求評估;精神疾病;gender differences;human rights;needs assessment;mental illness期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：Background: Individuals with mental illness commonly experience human rights violations while seeking to meet their basic needs. There is lack of research in developing countries on gender-related differences in human rights needs. Purpose: This study investigated gender differences in perceived human rights needs at the family and community levels in individuals with mental illness in India. Methods: This descriptive study surveyed 100 asymptomatic individuals with mental illness at a tertiary care center. Subject selection employed a random sampling method. Data were collected using face-to-face interviews based on a structured needs assessment questionnaire. Data were analyzed and interpreted using descriptive and inferential statistics. Results: Subjects enjoyed a satisfactory level of fulfillment in the physical dimension of human rights needs, which included food, housing, and clothing. Men expressed lower satisfaction than women with perceived human rights needs fulfillment in the emotional dimension. This included fear of familymembers (X^2 = 9.419, p ＜ .024) and being called derogatory names (X^2 = 8.661, p ＜ .034). Women expressed lower satisfaction than men with perceived human rights needs fulfillment in social and ethical dimensions. The former included freedom to leave the home (X^2 = 11.277, p ＜ .010), and the latter included sexual abuse by family members (X^2 = 9.491, p ＜ .019). Men felt more discriminated than women due to perceptions of mental illness in the community domain (X^2 = 10.197, p ＜ .037).Conclusion: This study suggests that family members and communities need to be educated regarding the human rights needs of people with mental illness and that legislation must be strengthened to meet the human rights needs of this disadvantaged population.英文摘要：Background: Individuals with mental illness commonly experience human rights violations while seeking to meet their basic needs. There is lack of research in developing countries on gender-related differences in human rights needs. Purpose: This study investigated gender differences in perceived human rights needs at the family and community levels in individuals with mental illness in India. Methods: This descriptive study surveyed 100 asymptomatic individuals with mental illness at a tertiary care center. Subject selection employed a random sampling method. Data were collected using face-to-face interviews based on a structured needs assessment questionnaire. Data were analyzed and interpreted using descriptive and inferential statistics. Results: Subjects enjoyed a satisfactory level of fulfillment in the physical dimension of human rights needs, which included food, housing, and clothing. Men expressed lower satisfaction than women with perceived human rights needs fulfillment in the emotional dimension. This included fear of familymembers (X^2 = 9.419, p ＜ .024) and being called derogatory names (X^2 = 8.661, p ＜ .034). Women expressed lower satisfaction than men with perceived human rights needs fulfillment in social and ethical dimensions. The former included freedom to leave the home (X^2 = 11.277, p ＜ .010), and the latter included sexual abuse by family members (X^2 = 9.491, p ＜ .019). Men felt more discriminated than women due to perceptions of mental illness in the community domain (X^2 = 10.197, p ＜ .037).Conclusion: This study suggests that family members and communities need to be educated regarding the human rights needs of people with mental illness and that legislation must be strengthened to meet the human rights needs of this disadvantaged population.起始頁-結束頁：90-98資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318257b57b19篇名：The Coping Process in Adults with Acute Leukemia Undergoing Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation並列篇名：接受幹細胞移植的成人白血病患者之適應過程作者：Zahra Farsi;Nahid Dehghan Nayeri;Reza Negarandeh關鍵字：適應;紮根理論;白血病;長期追蹤質性研究;幹細胞移植;coping;grounded theory;leukemia;longitudinal qualitative design;stem cell transplantation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 雖然越來越多的血癌患者接受造血幹細胞移植（Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation，HSCT）而存活，然而他們仍面臨許多挑戰。鮮少文獻探討這群血癌患者的因應歷程，瞭解他們面對此威脅情境的因應歷程，將有助於健康照護人員提供整體性照護。目的 本研究的目的，在於瞭解接受造血幹細胞移植的成人急性血癌患者其因應歷程。方法 本研究為縱貫性的紮根理論質性研究，於2009至2011年進行。從伊朗Shariati hospital in Tehran招募共十位罹患急性血癌並接受HSCT的病人參與本研究。分別於移植前、後，在HSCT的單位進行一系列的訪談，最後一次的訪談時間安排在移植後的2至6個月，於門診單位進行。結果 從訪談資料中可形成五個類目，分別為感受威脅、在恐懼與希望中游移、重生、脈絡因素與因應策略。雖然病人在因應光譜中移動（從反抗到默許），但最終「發現意義」的經驗作為其能夠有效因應的指標。結論／實務應用 罹患血癌並經歷HSCT對病人來說是獨特的經驗。這些威脅生命的情境，嚴重影響病人的覺知，並造成他們生活上短期或永久的改變。護理人員能夠協助病人因應這些情境，從中發現意義與希望，並透過有效的介入措施減少恐懼與壓力。英文摘要：Background: The increasing numbers of leukemia cancer survivors treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) face numerous challenges after their transplant procedure. Little information has been published regarding the coping process of this population. Understanding how they cope with this life-threatening disease can assist healthcare professionals to provide holistic care.Purpose: This study was designed to elicit the coping process of adults experiencing acute leukemia who underwent HSCT therapy.Methods: This longitudinal qualitative study and grounded theory took place during 2009-2011. Ten adults with acute leukemia scheduled for HSCT were recruited from Shariati Hospital in Tehran, Iran. A series of pretransplant and posttransplant interviews were held in the hospital's HSCT units. Final interviews took place 2-6 months posttransplant in the hospital's outpatient clinic.Results: The five categories that emerged from the data included perceived threat, suspension between fear and hope, rebirth, contextual factors, and coping strategies. Although patients vacillated within the coping spectrum (i.e., the ”buffer zone” between fighting and acquiescing), ”finding meaning” was identified as the final outcome of their experience that indicated effective coping.Conclusions/Implication for Practice: Each patient perceives leukemia and HSCT therapy uniquely. This life-threatening disease can significantly affect patient perception and change patient lives both temporarily and permanently. Nurses can apply effective interventions to help patients cope with their unique situation, find meaning and hope, and allay fear and stress.起始頁-結束頁：99-109資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318257b5e020篇名：The Relationship between Nutritional Status and Physical Function, Admission Frequency, Length of Hospital Stay, and Mortality in Old People Living in Long-Term Care Facilities並列篇名：養護機構老人營養狀況與身體功能、住院次數、住院天數及死亡之相關性探討作者：林欣潔(Sin-Jie Lin);黃信彰(Shinn-Jang Hwang);劉介宇(Chieh-Yu Liu);林惠如(Hung-Ru Lin)關鍵字：養護機構;營養狀況;住院次數;住院天數;死亡;long-term care facility;nutritional status;admission frequency;hospital stay duration;mortality期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 養護機構中，老人營養狀況的問題普遍存在，在台灣，長期照護機構老人營養不良比率高達20%。目的 本研究之目的為調查養護機構中老人營養狀況、身體功能、住院次數、住院天數、死亡情形及其相關性。方法 採回溯性研究設計和方便取樣方式收案174位，年齡為67歲－105歲（平均年齡：82.5歲），居住於台北市北投區合法立案之老人養護機構的住民，由病歷中查詢研究所需之基本人口學資料、過去一年的健康檢查抽血報告、體位測量、身體功能、住院次數、住院天數及死亡原因進行資料收集。研究對象自收案日期回溯入住養護機構達一年以上，含回溯入住一年當中已死亡之個案。結果 結果顯示，過去一年中，養護機構老人在身體功能狀況及小腿圍的變化較明顯，且身體功能狀況與小腿圍具有顯著相關。過去一年的住院狀況與管灌飲食有相關，而進食方式與小腿圍、白蛋白值、膽固醇值具有顯著相關。推論營養狀況中，小腿圍、白蛋白值、膽固醇值與過去一年住院狀況有間接相關。本研究中，年紀越大與管灌飲食的個案，越有住院發生的可能性，且管灌飲食的個案住院天數也較長。此外，小腿圍與血色素營養狀況不良個案與死亡有相關性。結論／實務應用 透過研究結果，建議機構需要更加重視養護機構老人營養狀態，以減少住院及死亡之情形發生，進而能減少其他相關的醫療費用，提昇照護品質。英文摘要：Background: Nutrition is an important issue for elderly residents of long-term care facilities (LTCFs). About 20% of elderly LTCF residents in Taiwan are malnourished. Purpose: This study investigated correlations between nutritional status and physical function, admission frequency, hospital stay duration, and mortality in elderly LTCF residents. Methods: Researchers used a retrospective study design and convenient sampling to enroll 174 subjects aged 67 to 105 years (average, 82.5 years) who were living in legally registered LTCFs in Beitou District, Taipei City, Taiwan. A review of LTCF resident files provided data on subjects’ demographics, physical examination laboratory results for the most recent 1-year period, anthropometry, physical function, admission frequency, hospital stay duration, and causes of admissions. Subjects had lived in their LTCF for more than 1 year before their enrollment date. Subjects who died during and after the study period were also included in analysis. Results: Results showed significant changes over the study year in subjects’ nutritional status, physical function, and calf circumference. Physical function was found significantly correlated with calf circumference, hospitalization status was found correlated with nasal-gastric tube feeding status, and eating pattern was found correlated with calf circumference and levels of both serum albumin and cholesterol. Nutritional status, calf circumference, albumin level, and cholesterol level also correlated significantly with hospitalization status. In this study, the likelihood of hospitalization increased with age and nasal-gastric tube feeding use. Hospital stay duration for subjects receiving nasal-gastric tube feeding was longer than that for those receiving oral feeding. Also, weak nutritional status scores for calf circumference and hemoglobin levels were factors associated with increased mortality risk.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings recommend that greater attention should be paid to the nutritional status of elderly persons living in LTCFs to reduce hospitalization and death risks, cut medical expenses, and improve quality of care.起始頁-結束頁：110-121資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318254eac901篇名：The Psychometric Testing of the Diabetes Health Promotion Self-Care Scale並列篇名：糖尿病健康促進自我照顧行為量表的發展及信、效度檢測作者：王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang);林麗英(Li-Ying Lin);鄭中平(Chung-Ping Cheng);許敏桃(Min-Tao Hsu);高家常(Chia-Chan Kao)關鍵字：糖尿病健康促進自我照顧行為;量表發展;第2型糖尿病;diabetes health promotion self-care;instrument development;Type 2 diabetes期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 健康促進行為對促進及維持第2型糖尿病病人的健康是重要的，但少有量表測量糖尿病病人健康促進自我照顧行為。目的 發展糖尿病健康促進自我照顧行為量表並檢測其信、效度。方法 由高雄市四間醫院內分泌科門診選取489位第2型糖尿病病人，採用探索性及驗證性因素分析，評估健康促進自我照顧行為的建構效度，以健康促進自我照顧行為與糖尿病生活品質生活滿意度次量表、糖尿病賦權量表、及糖化血色素的相關性檢測同時效度，並以內在一致性及再測信度檢測量表的信度。結果 以二階段驗證式因素分析結果顯示，以含七個次量表共26題的量表最契合收集的資料；七個次量表分別為：人際關係、飲食、自我監測血糖、個人責任、運動、遵循服藥及足部護理。量表總分與生活滿意度、糖尿病賦權呈顯著正相關。糖化血色素僅與健康責任次量表呈顯著正相關。總量表及各次量表Cronbach's α在.78至.94間；再測信度的組內相關係數值（intraclass correlation coefficient）在.76至.95間，顯示此量表具有良好的信度。結論／臨床應用 糖尿病健康促進自我照顧行為量表具有良好的信、效度，健康專業人員可運用此量表評估糖尿病病人健康促進自我照顧行為，並依此提供適當的介入措施。英文摘要：Background: Health-promoting behavior is an important strategy to maintain and enhance health of patients with Type 2 diabetes. Few instruments have been developed to measure health promotion self-care behavior of patients with Type 2 diabetes. Purpose: Developing and psychometric testing of the Chinese version of the Diabetes Health Promotion Self-Care Scale (DHPSC) for patients with Type 2 diabetes. Methods: Four hundred and eighty-nine patients with Type 2 diabetes were recruited from endocrine clinics in four hospitals in Kaohsiung City in southern Taiwan. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were used to assess the construct validity of the scale. Correlations between the DHPSC and the satisfaction subscale of Diabetes Quality of Life, Diabetes Empowerment Scale, and HbA1c were calculated to evaluate concurrent validity. Internal consistency and test-retest reliability were used to assess the reliability of the scale. The study was conducted in 2007 and 2008. Results: A proposed second-order factor model with seven subscales and 26 items fit the data well. The seven subscales were interpersonal relationships, diet, blood glucose self-monitoring, personal health responsibility, exercise, adherence to the recommended regimens, and foot care. The DHPSC statistically significantly correlated with the satisfaction subscale of Diabetes Quality of Life and the Diabetes Empowerment Scale. HbA1c only statistically significantly correlated with the subscale of health responsibility. Reliability was supported by acceptable Cronbach’s alpha (range, .78-.94) and testYretest reliability (range, .76-.95). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The DHPSC has satisfactory reliability and validity. Healthcare providers can use the DHPSC to comprehensively assess the health promotion self-care behaviors of patients with Type 2 diabetes.起始頁-結束頁：122-130資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318254eb472篇名：Knowledge, Attitudes, Experiences, and Confidence of Nurses in Completing Advance Directives: A Systematic Synthesis of Three Studies並列篇名：護理人員對「預立醫療指示」的知識、態度、經驗和信心：三項研究之系統性綜合文獻回顧作者：Diane Ryan;Mary Ann Jezewski關鍵字：預立醫療指示;臨終;護理人員;系統性綜合;advance directives;end of life;nurses;systematic synthesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 「預立醫療指示」是病人在臨終前表達想要的治療方式之一；然而，目前在提升預立醫療指示的完成率方面，尚無有效且一致的解決方法。文獻查證發現，美國有三項研究以完全相同的研究方法但針對不同護理人員探討此議題。這些研究探討的概念包括護理人員對預立醫療指示的知識、態度、經驗及信心。目的 此系統性文獻回顧歸納此三項分別針對腫瘤科、重症單位及急診室護理人員之研究調查結果。方法 本文探討兩大研究問題：（1）護理人員在預立醫療指示之知識、態度、經驗和信心為何？（2）變項間的關係為何？此三項研究皆以預立醫療指示之知識、態度及經驗之問卷調查來收集資料。結果 調查結果顯示，護理人員的知識水準有60%正確，對預立醫療指示有中度信心，且對預立醫療指示的討論都很有經驗並予以支持。「倡護」是這些研究中所呈現的一個重要概念，且多數護理人員同意身為護理人員應維護病人的意願。時間是完成預立醫療指示的障礙，重症單位護理人員對預立醫療指示的認識優於腫瘤科或急診室護理人員，但造成此差異的原因尚不清楚。這些研究建議，討論病人的預後，在護理人員及醫師的預立醫療指示進階教育和培訓相當重要，以便護理人員對病患提供預立醫療指示的衛教，並介紹各種臨終照護方式。結論／限制 態度量表信度偏低，限制了所收集資料之統計分析，且本研究乃根據已發表之研究結果作二次分析，故亦限制了研究結果之統整與分析。護理人員需加以改善並提昇與病患討論預立醫療指示中所扮演的角色，臨終討論應是護理人員與各醫療團隊相互合作的過程。英文摘要：Background: Advance directives (ADs) are one of the few means for patients to indicate their end-of-life (EOL) treatment option preference. An effective and consistent solution for increasing the AD completion rate remains elusive. A literature search revealed three studies completed in the United States that employed an identical methodology and focused on registered nurses (RNs). These studies examined a variety of concepts, including nurses’ knowledge, attitudes, experience, and confidence with regard to ADs. Purpose: This review completed a systematic synthesis of reported results from three survey studies that focused, respectively, on oncology, critical care, and emergency RNs who were members of various professional nursing organizations. Methods: Our investigation addressed the following research questions: What are the knowledge, attitudes, experience, and confidence of RNs with regard to ADs, and what is the relationship among these study variables? Each study used the Knowledge, Attitudes, and Experiential Survey on Advance Directives Instrument to obtain findings. Results: Findings indicated that level of knowledge of nurses was about 60% correct and that nurses reported a moderate level of confidence related to ADs. Nurses stated they were experienced in AD discussions and agreed with attitude statements indicating support of ADs. Advocacy was a theme in the findings of these studies, as most nurses agreed with the statement that nurses should uphold patients' wishes. Time was identified as an impediment to AD completion. Critical care nurses had higher levels of awareness of ADs, as compared with oncology and emergency room nurses, although the cause of this difference is unclear. Although RNs provided AD education and explanations and described the various types of EOL care, these study subjects suggested that discussions of patients’ prognoses may be an intervention more appropriate for nurses or other clinicians with advanced education and training. Conclusion/Limitations: The low Cronbach's alpha values in the attitude scales within the survey instrument posed limitations in the original research on the use of attitude scale scores in statistical analysis. The data examined in this study was obtained from published reports, which limited the synthesis and analysis of study findings. Nurses need to refine their role in AD discussions with patients. End-of-life discussions should be an interwoven process between RNs and the multidisciplinary team.起始頁-結束頁：131-141資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318256095f3篇名：Clinical Nurse Preceptor Teaching Competencies: Relationship to Locus of Control and Self-Directed Learning並列篇名：護理臨床教師內外控人格、自我導向學習及自評教學能力之相關性研究作者：陳雅琳(Ya-Lin Chen);許麗齡(Li-Ling Hsu);謝素英(Suh-Ing Hsieh)關鍵字：護理臨床教師;內外控人格;自我導向學習;教學能力;clinical nurse preceptor;locus of control;self-directed learning;teaching competence期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 一位有效護理臨床教師可提供學習者豐富之學習經驗，護理臨床教師常提供床邊指導及臨床教學，唯較欠缺有效教師應有之教學能力。此外，亦缺乏與教學能力相關因素之研究。目的 本研究之目的在探討：（1）基本資料屬性不同對護理臨床教師自評教學能力之差異；（2）內外控人格特質對護理臨床教師自評教學能力之影響；（3）自我導向學習與護理臨床教師自評教學能力之相關性；（4）探討護理臨床教師自評教學能力之預測因子。方法 本研究為描述性及相關性之設計，採橫斷性調查法，調查北部一所醫學中心243位護理臨床教師，回收242份有效問卷，回收率99.6%。以SPSS 18.0進行資料分析，採用描述性統計（descriptive statistics）、單因子變異數分析（one-way ANOVA）、曼惠二氏U檢定法（Mann-Whitney test）、及多元線性迴歸（multivariate linear regression）等方法來進行統計分析。結果 本研究發現，護理臨床教師自評教學能力平均得分為4.03分（最高為5分），能力已達中等程度以上。年齡愈大、已婚、護理工作年資愈資深、非單位主管指派及內控人格特質的護理臨床教師，教學能力較高；自我導向學習則與護理臨床教師教學能力呈中度正相關（r = .62）；自變項之年齡、婚姻、擔任護理臨床教師工作年資、擔任護理臨床教師意願、內外控人格特質、及自我導向學習，可共同解釋33.6%護理臨床教師之臨床教學能力。結論／實務應用 此結果可提供醫院管理者，了解影響護理臨床教師教學能力之相關因素與特質，期望護理臨床教師展現有效教學能力，將可協助護理人員及學生達成學習成效。起始頁-結束頁：142-151資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318254ea724篇名：Preceptor-Guided Clinical Practica and the Learning Experiences of Nursing Students並列篇名：護理學生臨床選習之學習經驗作者：姜如珊(Ru-Shang Jiang);周傳姜(Chuan-Chiang Chou);蔡碧藍(Pi-Lan Tsai)關鍵字：高年級護生;臨床選習;實習經驗;senior nursing student;preceptorship;clinical practice experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 據統計，在台灣將近三分之一的護理應屆畢業生，第一份護理工作做不滿三個月，而且可能此後也不會再從事護理工作。由於傳統的臨床實習設計無法提供學生足夠的獨立工作機會，有相當多的護理科系高年級學生，雖然已完成各科實習，卻對自己的技術缺乏信心，對每日護理工作的實際運作也不熟悉。為了改善這樣的狀況，因而產生了護理臨床選習的設計。目的 本研究目的在探討護理學生之臨床選習實習經驗。方法 以現象方法學，探究十三位廿歲女性護生的臨床選習經驗，所有的訪談錄音後轉為文字記錄，並以Colaizzi現象方法學分析。結果 得到以下四個主題：（1）過多的資訊與新經驗同時出現、（2）經歷孤單和緊張的生活、（3）嚴師出高徒？（4）開始覺得像一位護理師了。結論／實務應用 護理教育者有責任提供清楚的護生臨床選習輔導指引，並須對護生及臨床輔導員的角色做清楚的描述與介紹，並在整個實習過程中給予雙方充分地支持與鼓勵。英文摘要：Background: In Taiwan, nearly one third of newly graduated nurses quit their first nursing job within 3 months and many never return to nursing. Because traditional clinical practice designs do not offer adequate opportunities for students to work independently, many senior nursing students lack selfconfidence in their nursing skills and are not familiar with the day-to-day realities of nursing even after completing all their required clinical practica. A model for a preceptor-guided clinical practicum was designed to address this concern.Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the learning experiences of senior nursing students who worked with preceptors during their clinical practica. Methods: Thirteen female nursing students were interviewed to discover their perceptions of their preceptor-guided clinical practicum. All interviews were tape recorded and transcribed. Descriptions were analyzed using Colaizzi's phenomenological methodology. Results: Four themes emerged from the data that described the preceptorship experience in the clinical practicum: (1) information and new experience overload, (2) feelings of loneliness and stress, (3) questioning whether strict preceptors achieve the best results, and (4) beginning to feel like a nurse.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings suggest that it is important for nurse educators to be clear and precise about the expectations of the preceptorship experience. Orientation for both preceptors and students is essential. Support and encouragement throughout the entire practicum experience for preceptors and students is necessary to ensure program success.起始頁-結束頁：152-157資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318256091d5篇名：Effects of Nurse Staffing Ratios on Patient Mortality in Taiwan Acute Care Hospitals: A Longitudinal Study並列篇名：台灣急性醫院病房護理人力配置對住院病人死亡率影響之縱貫研究作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);蔡淑鳳(Shwu-Feng Tsay);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen)關鍵字：護理人力配置;病人死亡率;廣義估計方程式;nurse staffing ratio;patient mortality;generalized estimating equation (GEE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 台灣護理人員的工作負荷約為美國等其他開發國家護理人員的2─7倍。研究指出，護理人員工作負荷過重是病人可預防死亡的原因之一，然而，台灣迄今未見護理人力對病人死亡影響之研究。目的 探討台灣急性醫院病房護理人力配置對病人死亡率的影響。方法 本研究以2006年底健保特約並通過醫院評鑑地區教學醫院層級以上之441家西醫院為研究母群體，透過分層隨機抽樣，選取32家醫院108個病房，連續收集7個月的資料。在控制醫院屬性及病人嚴重度後，以廣義估計方程式估計logistic模型，藉以檢視護理人力配置對病人結果的影響。結果 高病護比病房相對於低病護比病房，發生死亡事件的母體平均勝算比為3.617（95% CI= [1.930, 6.776]），意謂著高病護比病房發生死亡事件的風險將高於低病護比病房。結論 護理人力配置影響病人結果，面對護理人力配置不當的困境，政策制定者應建立以班別為基礎的護理人力配置標準。此外，除考量護理人數外，也應將其他護理人力特性（如學歷）一併納入考量。英文摘要：Background: The nurse workload in Taiwan averages two to seven times more than that in the United States and other developed countries. Previous studies have indicated heavy nursing workload as an underlying cause of preventable patient death. No studies have yet explored the relationship between nurse staffing ratio and patient mortality in Taiwan.Purpose: This study explored the effect of nurse staffing ratios on patient mortality in acute care hospitals in Taiwan and considered the implications in terms of policy.Methods: Using stratified random sampling, 108 hospital nursing units in 32 of Taiwan's 441 accredited Western medicine district/regional hospitals and medical centers were included in the study. Variables were retrospectively measured from 108 wards by using monthly data during a 7-month period. A generalized estimating equation logistic model was used to obtain more precise estimates of the nurse staffing effect by controlling for hospital characteristic and patient acuity variables.Results: The population-averaged odds ratio for the incidence of death between the low and high patient-nurse ratio groups was 3.617 (95% CI = [1.930, 6.776]). The risk of death in the high patient-nurse ratio group was significantly higher than in the low patient-nurse ratio group.Conclusions: Nurse staffing levels affect patient outcomes. Faced with the problem of inadequate nurses for hospital healthcare needs, Taiwanese policymakers should work to implement a legislatively mandated minimum patient-nurse ratio on a shift-by-shift basis to regulate nurse staffing. In setting guidelines for nurse staffing, policymakers must consider nursing staff characteristics in addition to the number of nurses.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182466ddc6篇名：Nursing Work Stress: The Impacts of Social Network Structure and Organizational Citizenship Behavior並列篇名：社會網絡結構與組織公民行為對護理工作壓力之影響作者：曾盛恕(Seng-Su Tsang);陳姿吟(Tzu-Yin Chen);王詩鳳(Shih-Fong Wang);戴辛翎(Hsin-Ling Tai)關鍵字：工作壓力;資源;社會支持;組織公民行為;社會網絡;work stress;resources;social support;organizational citizenship behavior;social network期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 職場裡工作壓力往往無法避免，護理工作壓力相對其他職場尤為顯著，先前的研究顯示，組織內資源無論是有形或心理層面都可有效的降低工作壓力，但有形資源容易掌控，而心理層面的資源例如：同事的支持，卻難琢磨與藉管理手段發揮其作用。目的 探討護理人員的社會網絡所可以提供的資源，對工作壓力的減輕效果。方法 透過問卷量測台灣台北市某醫學中心血液透析部門之護理人員的工作壓力、滿意度、組織公民行為與社會網絡結構，其次因社會網絡結構的資料為二維矩陣資料，須藉由UCINET軟體將資料轉為護理人員在網絡中的中心性指標，再藉由Partial least squares（PLS）分析研究架構的路徑關係與假說檢定。結果 路徑分析結果顯示，護理人員的社會網絡可有效衍生組織公民行為，此利他行為直接促成滿意度；另一方面亦藉工作壓力的減輕，間接提升工作滿意度。結論 管理者可藉由人員的社會網絡確認；將合適的人來進行組織資源的有效分配，使組織公民行為在組織裡有效的發生以減輕壓力。此外由於友誼網絡可以提供有效的心理支持，如可以讓高中心性的人員接受適當的諮商訓練，應可以在必要時發揮社會支持作用。英文摘要：Background: The nursing workplace imposes significantly more stress on its employees than other workplace settings. Organizational resources, both physical and psychological, have been recognized in prior studies as important alleviators of nursing workplace stress. Whereas physical resources are less difficult to manipulate because of their tangibility, psychological resources, particularly psychological support from colleagues, are typically not deployed to greatest effect.Purpose: This article investigated the alleviation of nursing work stress using resources already extant in coworker social networks.Methods: Researchers conducted a survey in a dialysis department at medical center located in Taipei City, Taiwan. This survey measured nurse work stress, satisfaction, organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) and social network structures. Researchers employed UCINET to analyze the network structure data, which were in dyadic matrix format to estimate nurse network centralities and used partial least squares analysis to estimate research construct path coefficients and test extrapolated hypotheses. Result: The level of OCB induced by nurse social ties was satisfactory and did not only directly increased work satisfaction but also alleviated work stress, which indirectly boosted work satisfaction.Conclusions: Findings suggest that managers may be able to use social network analysis to identify persons appropriate to conduct the distribution of organizational resources. Choosing those with multiple social connections can help distribute resources effectively and induce higher OCB levels within the organization. In addition, staff with strong friendship network connections may provide appropriate psychological resources (support) to coworkers. If those with high friendship network centrality receive proper counseling training, they should be in a good position to provide assistance when needed.起始頁-結束頁：9-18資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e318247bf117篇名：The Effects of Information Systems Quality on Nurses' Acceptance of the Electronic Learning System並列篇名：資訊系統品質對護理人員接受數位學習系統之影響作者：程永明(Yung-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：系統品質;資訊品質;服務品質;使用者介面設計品質;護理人員對數位學習系統之接受程度;system quality;information quality;service quality;user-interface design quality;nurses' acceptance of the e-learning system期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 為確保健康照護供應的品質，護理人員必須透過繼續教育以不斷地提昇自身之專業知能。與傳統學習比較起來，數位學習能更具彈性地提供護理人員在職學習。因此，數位學習將在提供護理人員繼續教育方面扮演一個關鍵性的角色。目的 本研究主要目的乃是檢驗系統品質、資訊品質、服務品質與使用者介面設計品質等前因，是否會透過護理人員的信念，進而影響其使用數位學習系統之意願。方法 本研究採橫斷面設計以調查資訊系統品質對護理人員接受數位學習系統之影響。樣本乃收集自台灣三所醫院之護理人員。共發放450份問卷，得有效回卷320份，有效回卷率為71.1%。所收集資料以結構方程式模型進行分析。結果 系統品質、資訊品質、與使用者介面設計品質對知覺有用、知覺易用與知覺有趣造成顯著影響，且服務品質對知覺有用與知覺易用造成顯著影響。此外，知覺易用對知覺有用與知覺有趣造成顯著影響，且知覺有用、知覺易用與知覺有趣對使用意願造成顯著影響。結論／實務應用 使用者介面設計品質，為對護理人員的知覺有用與知覺有趣造成顯著影響之最關鍵前項，醫療機構應更致力於透過設計有用與有趣的介面特性，來發展更友善的使用者介面，以吸引護理人員使用數位學習系統。此外，系統品質為對護理人員知覺易用造成最大影響的前項，故醫療機構應有效提昇系統品質，透過降低系統複雜性，從而傳遞利益與趣味以促進護理人員使用數位學習系統的意願。英文摘要：Background: To ensure the quality of healthcare provision, nurses must continuously enhance their professional knowledge and competencies via continuing education. As compared with traditional learning, electronic learning (e-learning) is a more flexible method for nurses' in-service learning. Hence, e-learning is expected to play a key role in providing continuing education for nurses.Purpose: The main purpose of this study was to examine whether system quality, information quality, service quality, and user-interface design quality as the antecedents to nurse beliefs can affect nurses' intention to use the e-learning system.Methods: A cross-sectional design was used to investigate the effects of information systems quality on nurses' acceptance of the e-learning system. This study gathered sample data from nurses at 3 hospitals in Taiwan. A total of 450 questionnaires were distributed, and 320 effective questionnaires were analyzed in this study, indicating an effective response rate of 71.1%. Collected data were analyzed using structural equation modeling.Results: System quality, information quality, and user-interface design quality had significant effects on perceived usefulness (PU), perceived ease of use (PEOU), and perceived enjoyment (PE), and service quality had significant effects on PU and PEOU. Moreover, PEOU had significant effects on PU and PE, and the effects of PU, PEOU, and PE on intention to use were significant. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: User-interface design quality is the most key antecedent that can make significant impacts on nurses' PU and PE, and more efforts should be made to develop a friendlier user interface via designing useful and enjoyable features to induce nurses to use the e-learning system. Moreover, system quality can make the greatest impact on nurses' PEOU; thus, medical institutions should effectively enhance system quality to deliver benefits and pleasure to boost nurses' usage intention of the e-learning system via reducing the complexity.起始頁-結束頁：19-31資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31824777aa8篇名：Pathways to Care and Help-Seeking Experience Prior to Self-Harm: A Qualitative Study in Taiwan並列篇名：自傷前求醫途徑與求助經驗：一項台灣質性研究作者：吳佳儀(Chia-Yi Wu);Rob Whitley;Robert Stewart;劉珣瑛(Shen-Ing Liu)關鍵字：自我傷害;求助行為;社會支持;求醫途徑;deliberate self-harm;help-seeking behavior;social support;pathways to care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 求助行為是自我傷害的一個保護因子，但鮮少有研究探討自傷者如何及為何求助於一般人與專業人員的協助。目的 探索台灣自我傷害者於自傷前之求助經驗與就醫途徑。方法 本研究運用質性訪談及內容分析法，藉由選樣方格選取參與者，並以標準訪談指引，深度訪談二十位介於18－55歲的自傷者之求助歷程與求醫經驗。結果 受訪者表示，求醫歷程中的轉介者包括了朋友、家人、健康醫療工作者或是透過其自行就醫。求助經驗與護病關係、社會支持及治療遵從性有關，這些亦是受訪者提到影響求醫過程最主要的主題。結論／實務應用 來自一般非正式與醫療照護的支持性態度和持續性照護，可能是促進求助行為最重要的因素，但來自重要他人的負面影響可能會引發自傷行為。自殺／自傷防治策略中，應特別注意與多重就醫有關的存藥行為及重要他人的負面關係影響所導致的自傷行為。英文摘要：Background: Help-seeking behavior may protect people from harming themselves. However, few studies have discussed how and why people access lay or professional help prior to self-harm.Purpose: This study explored the subjective experiences of individuals with deliberate self-harm in terms of help-seeking behavior and medical care pathways.Methods: Researchers performed qualitative in-depth interviews and content analysis and used a sampling grid to recruit participants. Twenty emergency attendees between the ages of 18-55 years were interviewed on their help-seeking pathways and experiences using a standardized topic guide.Results: Participants identified friends, family members, healthcare personnel, and their own initiative as the primary medical care pathways. Analysis showed help-seeking experiences significantly related to the physician-patient relationship, social support, and treatment adherence. These factors were also identified as prominent themes related to medical help-seeking behavior.Conclusions: Supportive attitudes and continuous care from formal and informal sources of help may facilitate help-seeking behavior, whereas negative influences from close friends or relatives may trigger a self-harm episode. Medication stockpiling and the negative aspects of close relationships should be addressed and minimized to raise the effectiveness of self-harm or suicide prevention efforts.起始頁-結束頁：32-42資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182466e649篇名：Exploring the Zen Meditation Experiences of Patients with Generalized Anxiety Disorder: A Focus-Group Approach並列篇名：禪坐經驗與歷程─台灣廣泛性焦慮症病人焦點團體研究作者：呂雀芬(Chueh-Fen Lu);羅蘭史密斯(Lorraine Nancy Smith);高千惠(Chen-Huei Gau)關鍵字：廣泛性焦慮症;禪坐;焦點團體;海德格詮釋現象學;generalized anxiety disorder;Zen meditation;focus groups;Heidegger's interpretative phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 有關禪坐的研究已超過半世紀，然主要以量性研究為主，其效果仍在爭論，欠缺主體經驗之理解。台灣禪坐普及且廣泛性焦慮症之流行率頗高，故以此類患者之禪坐經驗為本研究焦點。目的 廣泛性焦慮症病人之禪坐經驗分析。方法 採目的性取樣於一教學醫院之精神科門診為研究場域，以海德格（Heidegger）詮釋現象學理論視框為本研究之中心研究法。研究參與者共兩組（N = 9及12），先後各進行六次的禪坐課程及焦點團體。資料收集的方式包括焦點團體、日記及田野筆記，並運用研究者及資料三角校正、長期參與、持續觀察、參與者檢核等方法，以增加研究之嚴謹度。結果 顯現「禪坐歷程」之主要主題詮釋禪坐歷程之轉換現象，包含努力尋求寧靜、進步徵象以及個別化歷程三類目。其中進步徵象包括：尋找個人化的方式增進專注、對時間感受的改變及調整禪坐目標三個徵象。結論／實務應用 本研究詮釋了禪坐對廣泛性焦慮症患者的意義，包括研究參與者之此有狀態對禪坐經驗之形塑以及呈現禪坐歷程多樣貌的現象。禪坐之過程性面向詮釋，可補充量性研究結果，並可為另類療法如指導廣泛性焦慮症病人禪坐之參考。英文摘要：Background: Most of the many studies on the efficacy of meditation on anxiety disorders over the past half century have been quantitatively studied and lacked consensus. Studies into the experiences of meditation practitioners are lacking. Taiwan has a high prevalence of generalized anxiety disorders (GAD), and Zen meditation is popular.Purpose: This study provides a deeper understanding of Zen meditation practice experience among patients with GAD in Taiwan.Methods: The study site was a psychiatric outpatient department in a general hospital in Taiwan. Two groups of adult patients with GAD (n = 9) and without any kind of meditation experience (n = 12) enrolled in and attended a Zen meditation program. Heidegger's phenomenology was the core framework used to guide data interpretation. Researchers used six-session focus groups, diaries, and field notes to collect data. To boost trustworthiness, researchers applied investigator triangulation, data triangulation, prolonged engagement, persistent observation, and group debriefing (feedback).Results: A major theme, ”The process of Zen meditation,” emerged. It was underpinned by the three categories: ”struggling to reach a state of calm,” ”signs of improvement,” and ”an individual process.” Signs of improvement included ”finding a personal way to enter a state of calm,” ”changing the sense of time,” and ”adjusting Zen meditation practice goals.”Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The there-being state (dasein) of participants shaped their understanding of Zen meditation practice. Findings revealed the diverse ”phenomena-featuring process” aspect of Zen meditation practice. Findings provide a better understanding of essential elements of Zen meditation complementing quantitative studies and may be used by professionals who intend to apply Zen meditation as an alternative therapy for patients with GAD.起始頁-結束頁：43-52資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182466e8310篇名：Comparison Study of Postdischarge Care Provided to Suicide Patients by Family Members in East and South Taiwan並列篇名：比較台灣東部及南部家屬照護自殺病患作者：孫凡軻(Fan-Ko Sun);柯貞如(Chen-Ju Ko);張幸齡(Shing-Ling Chang);江純瑛(Chun-Ying Chiang)關鍵字：自殺;家屬;居家照護;茁根理論;護理;suicide;family caregivers;home care;grounded theory;nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 自殺病人的復原受家屬照顧影響很大，目前研究較少著重於台灣不同區域的家屬對自殺病患之照護。目的 本研究主要目的是探索台灣東部及南部最近才剛出院之企圖自殺病人家屬所提供之照護。方法 本研究採茁根理論研究法，以三年時間分別在兩個不同區域訪談兩組個案。每一組個案均包括15位曾經自殺病人及家屬，收集之資料是採用開放、主軸及選擇性編碼來分析。結果 研究發現：（1）台灣東部居住條件比南部貧乏。（2）台灣東部企圖自殺方式比南部具致命性。（3）台灣東部喝酒情形比南部多，家暴的經驗也比南部多，所以導致東部家屬比南部家屬較不照顧自殺病人的安全。（4）台灣東部自殺病人所獲得家人支持比南部自殺病人少。結論／實務應用 雖然台灣東部自殺病人所獲得家屬照護比南部自殺病人少，但仍應衛教所有自殺病人家屬如何提供最好最適合的照護，此研究可做為臨床護理人員提供自殺病患家屬衛教之參考。英文摘要：Background: Care provided by the families of those who have attempted suicide affects their healing and recovery process. Data on care provided by families to suicidal individuals in different areas of Taiwan are extremely limited. Purpose: This study explored care provided by families living in eastern and southern Taiwan to relatives admitted to hospitals and subsequently discharged after a suicide attempt. Methods: The study used a grounded theory approach. Interviews were conducted in two distinct geographical areas in 3 years and included two sample groups. Group 1 comprised suicidal participants (n = 15) and family caregivers (n = 15) in East Taiwan. Group 2 comprised suicidal participants (n = 15) and family caregivers (n = 15) in South Taiwan. Data were analyzed using open, axial, and selective coding.Results: The East Taiwan group was less prosperous than the South Taiwan group. Suicide attempt methods were more lethal in eastern than in southern Taiwan. Alcohol and family violence were more important factors in suicides in eastern than in southern Taiwan. Consequently, families in East Taiwan focused less on protecting the safety of suicidal family members than families in South Taiwan. Participants in East Taiwan received less support from their families than those in South Taiwan. Conclusions/Implication for Practice: Suicidal participants in East Taiwan received less care from family caregivers than did participants in South Taiwan. However, all families require education to provide optimal care for suicidal relatives. Study results may help promote more appropriate education for clinical nursing professionals with a responsibility to care for suicidal patients.起始頁-結束頁：53-65資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182466da211篇名：Research Utilization in a Multicultural Nursing Setting in Saudi Arabia: Barriers and Facilitators並列篇名：沙烏地阿拉伯多元文化護理之研究應用：障礙與促因作者：Tagwa Omer關鍵字：障礙;研究應用;實證實務;barriers;research utilization;evidence-based practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 臨床決策在實證方法引導下才具最大效益。臨床護理必需以實證來提升護理品質與成本效益，但文獻指出應用研究結果於護理實務一直都很少，研究證據及實務應用的差距，為一個亟需關注的議題。目的 本研究目的在探討研究發現應用於護理實務之障礙及促因，以及障礙因素與護理人員人口學特性之相關性。方法 本研究採量性、非實驗性、描述性、相關性設計。採方便取樣選取來自Riyadh、Jeddah及Al-Ahsa三個城市，於Saudi National Guard Hospitals的護理人員為研究對象。研究工具是以障礙量表（Barriers Scale）來收集參與者之量性及部分質性結構性相關問題。結果 在障礙量表中，有將近三分之二的項目被研究對象評為中度至高度之實務應用障礙。其中以組織因素名列障礙得分最高、其餘依序為溝通、護理人員、及創新因素。質性資料呈現其他的障礙因素包括：缺乏時間、權威、醫生合作、以及實證教育。參與者建議：提高組織的支持度、以及創造以實證為基礎的組織文化，為實證研究應用於實務的主要促進因素。結論 政策制定者與行政管理者的支持，對於促進研究結果應用於護理實務非常必要，同時亦需要提升護理人員對使用最佳科學證據實務重要性之認知。英文摘要：Background: Clinical decision making is most effective when guided by the latest evidence-based methods. Although policies governing modern nursing clinical practice advocate the need for evidence-based practice (EBP) to maximize quality and contain costs, the literature indicates a persistently low utilization of research findings in nursing. The gap between available research evidence and the use of this evidence in practice is an issue that requires attention.Purpose: This study explored barriers to and facilitators of research finding utilization in nursing practice and examined the associations between these barriers and nurse demographic characteristics. Methods: This study employed a quantitative, nonexperimental, descriptive, and correlational design. Researchers used the Barriers to Research Utilization Scale, which contains quantitative and some qualitative structured questions, and recruited a convenience sample of nurses working in Saudi National Guard hospitals in the three cities of Riyadh, Jeddah, and Al-Ahsa.Results: Participants rated nearly two thirds of the Barriers to Research Utilization Scale items as moderate to strong barriers to utilizing research in practice. Organization factors had the highest perceived barrier scores, followed by communication, adopter, and innovation factors, respectively. Themes emerging from the qualitative data indicated the presence of other barriers such as lack of time, lack of authority, lack of physician cooperation, and lack of EBP-related education. Participants suggested the importance of increasing organizational support and creating an organizational culture based on EBP to further promote utilization of research findings in nursing practice.Conclusions: Policymaker and administrator support is necessary to promote the utilization of research findings in nursing practice. Further initiatives are needed to raise awareness of the importance of using the best scientific evidence in practice.起始頁-結束頁：66-73資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31824777d812篇名：A Comparative Study of Breastfeeding during Pregnancy: Impact on Maternal and Newborn Outcomes並列篇名：懷孕期間母乳哺餵的比較型研究：對母親及新生兒結果的影響作者：Farah Madarshahian;Mohsen Hassanabadi關鍵字：哺乳;懷孕;嬰兒餵食;出生體重;流產;breastfeeding;pregnancy;infant feeding;birth weight;abortion期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：背景 儘管許多文化上證實，懷孕期哺乳仍是常見的，其存在的副作用仍不清楚。目的 本研究比較有進行懷孕期哺乳及未進行懷孕期哺乳的多胎懷孕婦女，其足月生產的成功率及新生兒體重的情形。方法 本研究為一進行九個月的比較型研究，比較在伊朗Birjand兩個醫院的產科門診的兩組婦女。第一組為80位懷孕期哺乳超過30天或以上的婦女，第二組為240位懷孕婦女未進行懷孕期哺乳。兩組婦女在年齡、生產次數、醫療／助產上的問題、及懷孕期營養的改變的分布情況均相似。兩位經過訓練的護理師使用自擬的問卷進行資料的收集。結果 本研究結果顯示，兩組婦女之足月生產率沒有統計上差異。我們進一步發現，足月產與非足月產新生兒，其出生體重在兩組間亦無統計上差異。結論／實務應用 研究結果建議，懷孕期哺乳並不會增加母親及新生兒不良結果的危險性。護理師或助產士應提供準媽媽適合的實證指引及著重懷孕期間哺乳的適當營養攝取。英文摘要：Background: Despite widespread cultural vilification, lactation-pregnancy overlap remains common. Its actual adverse effects remain uncertain.Purpose: This study compared rates of success in reaching full-term delivery and newborn birth weights between two groups of multiparous pregnant women: those who breastfed during pregnancy and those who did not.Methods: This was a comparative study conducted over 9 months, which examined two groups of women in the maternity units of two hospitals in Birjand, Iran. The first group comprised 80 women who breast-fed for 30 days or more during pregnancy; the second group comprised 240 women who did not. The two groups had similar distributions in terms of maternal age, parity, medical/midwifery problems, and nutritional changes during pregnancy. Two trained nurses used a self-developed questionnaire to collect data.Results: Results found no significant difference in full-term or non-full-term births rates and mean newborn birth weight between the two groups. We further found no significant difference between full-term or non-full-term births and mean newborn birth weight for those who continued and discontinued breastfeeding during pregnancy in the overlap group.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Results suggest that breastfeeding during normal pregnancy does not increase chance of untoward maternal and newborn outcomes. Nurses and midwives should give expectant mothers appropriate evidence-based guidance and focus attention on promoting proper nutritional intake based on lactation status during pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：74-80資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e31824777c101篇名：探索風險投資的社會機制：社會資本與股市、共同基金的參與並列篇名：Exploring Social Mechanisms behind Risky Financial Investments: Social Capital and Participation in Stock Markets and Mutual Funds作者：李宗榮(Zong-Rong Lee)關鍵字：社會資本;風險;投資;股市;基金;social capital;risk;financial investments;stock market;mutual fund期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：股市與共同基金等高風險的投資活動日益普及，近年來已形成不容忽視的社會現象。然而相關的社會學研究仍然鮮少。本文主張社會資本可視為是鑲嵌在人際關係中的專業化訊息能量的一種指標。擁有較好的社會資本，將更有機會獲取社會等級制的位置中價值較高的專業化訊息；在資訊的誘因結構以及理性行動的自利前提下，這類資訊被啟動以從事投資的可能性也更高。本文透過台灣社會變遷基本調查的資料，肯證此一理論臆測。本文並評估從社會網絡與社會資本架構研究金融投資等經濟活動的可能性，並從研究設計與測量等面向提出建議。英文摘要：Recent mass participation in risky financial investments has demonstrated a huge social change both in Taiwan and around the globe. Yet, sociological studies to better account for such financial investments are still limited. This paper reconsiders the concept of social capital and proposes that social capital can be deemed as an index of the capacity of professional information embedded in social relationships. Better social capital may enable the individual to acquire better and thus more valuable professional information that is often located in the networks of social hierarchy. Individuals equipped with better social capital may therefore be likely to activate such information for financial investments when rational self-interest utility is assumed. Statistical analysis on survey data from TSCS 2007 confirms this theoretical conjecture. Suggestions on research design and measurements from the perspective of social networks and social capital are provided.起始頁-結束頁：439-467資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201212.04392篇名：臺灣反傾銷控訴效果之實證分析並列篇名：The Effect of Antidumping Filings: Evidence from Taiwan作者：林家慶(Chia-Ching Lin)關鍵字：反傾銷;廠商利潤;事件研究法;antidumping;firms' profits;event study期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目前仍缺乏研究臺灣整體反傾銷控訴效果之文獻。本研究使用事件研究法，以1991<U+223C>2008年17件臺灣反傾控訴案例為研究對象。研究結果指出，不管最終判決結果如何，平均而言，臺灣廠商對國外廠商提出反傾銷控訴可使其超額報酬提高約4.7%<U+223C>6.1%。進一步影響提控超額報酬高低的因素，除了反傾銷稅稅率高低以外，主要決定於廠商特性。例如，較具競爭力或內銷比率較高的廠商，將可由反傾銷控訴中得到較多的好處。這些研究結果可作為臺灣廠商提出反傾銷控訴時的參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the impact of antidumping (AD) filings on profits of the firms in the subject industries with 17 Taiwanese AD cases over the period 1991-2008. Using an event study approach, we find that the Taiwan AD investigations yield an average abnormal gain of about 4.7%-6.1% to domestic firms producing the investigated products. In addition, the magnitude of the abnormal gains is determined by AD duties as well as the internal characteristics of the firms.起始頁-結束頁：469-496資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201212.04693篇名：民主治理中準政府組織的公共性與課責性：對於我國政府捐助之財團法人轉型的啟示並列篇名：Publicness and Accountability of Quasi-autonomous Non-governmental Organizations in Democratic Governance: The Inspiration for Reinventing the Government-sponsored Non-governmental Organizations in Taiwan作者：孫煒(Way Sun)關鍵字：準政府組織;民主治理;公共性;課責性;政府捐助之財團法人;quasi-autonomous non-governmental organizations;democratic governance;publicness;accountability;government-sponsored non-governmental organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：在民主治理為主導的學術思潮與政府改造之下，當代民主國家行政部門的範疇與職能發生顯著轉變，介於公部門與私部門之間的準政府組織大量出現，其具備授權化與彈性化的特質，成為政策執行的主要機制，但也引發反映人民主權的立法機關對於準政府組織，進行有效政治控制的疑慮。本文首先界定準政府組織的意義與特性。其次，本文根據民主政治的授權理論，探討由立法機關授權準政府組織執行公共政策的理由，以及可能衍生的問題，並分析以公共性作為判斷準政府組織設置使命的基礎，以及課責性作為考核準政府組織績效的準據，以落實對於準政府組織進行政治控制的機制。之後，本文將以我國中央政府捐助之財團法人為例，分析此種特殊的準政府組織的發展系絡與性質，並討論如何在符合民主治理的原則之下，應用相關的理論建構與制度設計，提升政府捐助之財團法人的公共性與課責性，並提出具體政策建議以及最新發展，以更適當地設計我國政府捐助之財團法人的制度安排。英文摘要：With the academic thinking and the reinventing government of democratic governance, the executive branch's scope and function are also undergoing apparent changes in democratic states. There has been a massive surge of quasi-autonomous non-governmental organizations (Quangos) having qualities such as delegation and flexibility, while becoming the main mechanism in policy implementation. However, this also raises concern in the legislative branch about controlling Quangos. This article will first provide the definition and features of Quangos. Secondly, this article will use the theory of delegation to discuss the reasons for the legislative branch delegating authority to Quangos to implement public policies and the problems derived from them, and will analyze the use of publicness as the basis for the missions of such organizations, as well as the use of accountability to evaluate the performance of such organizations. Furthermore, this article will use Taiwan's government-sponsored non-governmental organizations to analyze the development and characteristics of this kind of special organization. There will also be discussion on the establishment of related theories and the designation of systems to increase the publicness and accountability of these organizations and provide concrete suggestions for more adequate institutional arrangement of Taiwan's government-sponsored non-governmental organizations.起始頁-結束頁：497-528資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201212.04974篇名：社會正義、差異政治、以及溝通民主並列篇名：Social Justice, Politics of Difference, and Communicative Democracy作者：郭秋永(Chiu-Yeoung Kuo)關鍵字：分配典範;差異政治;社會正義;民主政治;溝通民主;distributive paradigm;politics of difference;social justice;democracy;communicative democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：「公民」原本就是超越「差異性」而邁向「普遍性」的一個概念。然而，「公民」概念所在標榜的「普遍性」，實際上隱藏著其所要超越的或其所要拋棄的「差異性」，從而常使一些社會運動人士陷入「普遍性的弔詭」或「差異性的弔詭」：在一方面，為了求得公平對待，必須否認差異性（或強調普遍性）；在另一方面，為了能夠矯正不利處境或獲得補償，則需強調差異性（或否認普遍性）。顯而易見的，這種「普遍性的弔詭」或「差異性的弔詭」，密切關連著社會正義與民主政治的重要議題。民主政治中的社會正義，究竟意指執政者應該依據「普遍性」的公民觀念，「平等而無差異地公平對待所有公民」，還是意指執政者應該根據「差異性」的公民觀念，「濟弱扶傾地差別對待所有公民」呢？本文企圖透過Iris Marion Young倡議的「差異政治」，評述社會正義與民主政治之間的密切關連。英文摘要：'Citizenship' is originally a concept of surmounting the idea of 'difference' and marching toward the idea of 'universality'. However, the idea of 'universality' implies the idea of 'difference', thus it often makes some social movements fall into the 'dilemma of universality' or the 'dilemma of difference': on the one hand, in order to try to achieve fairness, they must deny the idea of difference (or emphasize the idea of universality), but on the other hand, in order to correct some unfavorable situations of the oppressed, they need to emphasize the idea of difference (or deny the idea of universality). Obviously, this dilemma is closely connected to the important topics of social justice and democracy. Does the concept of social justice in a democracy mean that the authorities should equally treat all citizens, or that the authorities should differently treat all citizens and create the greatest benefit for the least advantaged? This article seeks to present a systematic interpretation of the relationship between social justice and democracy by examining Iris Marion Young's theory of 'politics of difference'.起始頁-結束頁：529-574資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201212.05295篇名：革命的幽靈：兩個「反激進主義」觀點並列篇名：Specters of Revolution: Two "Counter-Radical" Perspectives作者：陳宜中(I-Chung Chen)關鍵字：革命;政治激進主義;憲政;民主;聯邦制;revolution;political radicalism;constitutionalism;democracy;federalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探究當代大陸思想界的兩個「反激進主義」觀點，及其背後「漸進實現憲政民主」的問題意識。李澤厚從告別革命的出發點，通過對辛亥革命、政治激進主義、激進主義思潮的批評，以強化「革命有害無利」、「漸進道路可能成功」等政治見解。袁偉時則從思想啟蒙的視野，結合自由民主與聯邦共和理念，通過對孫中山的「革命幼稚病」、政治激進主義的批評，以肯認中國「需要思想觀念的徹底變革」、「應實現自由民主與聯邦共和」等主張。本文視李、袁的政治言說為當代大陸反激進主義思潮的兩個重要案例，並對其進行思想性的探討。本文分析指出：李、袁皆採取借古諷今、以史載道的言說策略，皆把歷史上的「漸進失敗」主要歸因於、並歸咎於「政治激進主義」。實則，李、袁的政治言說皆立基於中國當下，且各有其獨特的政治關懷。李澤厚認為六四後中國的最大危險，來自於可能導致革命的政治激進主義；袁偉時則把政治激進主義界定成一種反自由、反民主、反法治、主張黨國集權的意識型態。本文並從「漸進實現憲政民主」的視角指出：李、袁之極度強調「反激進」、「反革命」，帶來了一些值得商榷的言說效果。特別是，革命思想被凸顯為「漸進失敗」的最主要因素，甚至單一因素；其他制約漸進道路的政治社會因素，則未能得到同等的重視。英文摘要：This paper examines two influential ”counter-radical” perspectives on modern Chinese politics and history, especially in relation to Sun Yat-Sen and the Revolution of 1911. One version regards the Revolution of 1911 as a political mistake made by Sun and his followers. According to this view, what caused the Revolution had been, above all else, Sun's ”political radicalism,” which obstructed the ”constitutional monarchy” alternative that would presumably be superior to a revolutionary break. The other version, focusing on what immediately followed the Revolution, has it that Sun's addiction to endless revolution, an infantile disorder, was chiefly responsible for the failure of post-revolutionary constitutionalism and parliamentary politics, as well as for the dissolution of the devolutionary federalist movement of the 1920s. This paper argues that both ”counter-radical” perspectives are at best partial. In ascribing to ”political radicalism” too much causal weight that is dubious, both versions tend to sidestep important questions pertaining to political sociology, while overestimating the powers stemming from ”radical thought.” Furthermore, as a negation of political radicalism, both fail to grasp that under certain circumstances even the seemingly rather mild scenario of ”gradual realization of constitutional democracy” could itself be condemned as politically radical. This implies that the very dramatic opposition between ”political radicalism” and ”democratic gradualism,” as evident in both versions, is largely unsustainable. Thus, both are found to be wanting as an account of politics and insofar as the democratic future of China is concerned.起始頁-結束頁：575-608資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201212.05756篇名：論規範遵循之可期待性的理性基礎—試從對話倫理學的應用問題論道德、法權與政治責任的規範效力差異與互補並列篇名：On the Warranted Expectation of Norm Following Outlining an Architectural Integration of Moral, Legal and Political Responsibility from the Perspective of Application Discourse in Discourse Ethics作者：林遠澤(Yuan-Tse Lin)關鍵字：對話倫理學;應用討論;法治國;合適性;可期待性;責任倫理學;discourse ethics;application discourse;rule of law;appropriateness;warranted expectation;ethics of responsibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：在實踐哲學的研究中，倫理學、法學與政治學似乎已經逐漸發展成互不相干的學科。但在日常的生活實踐中，我們卻又發現，如果不能清楚地理解介於道德、法律與政治責任的規範要求之間的關係，那麼我們將無法正確地回答「我們應當怎樣做才對？」這個實踐哲學最根本的問題。本文將透過阿佩爾與哈伯瑪斯的對話倫理學，說明他們如何在「規範應用的情境合適性」與「規範遵循的可期待性」的應用問題討論中，提出以政治策略責任與民主法治國理念，來為道德的可應用性奠定基礎，並從而能為介於道德、法律與政治責任之間的規範效力差異與互補，提出融貫一體的實踐理性建築學架構。英文摘要：Ethics, jurisprudence and politics may seem disconnected from each other in the study of contemporary practical philosophy, but when we want to correctly answer the question ”What is right?”, then some kind of structural understanding about the interrelations between moral, legal and political responsibility is still very necessary for us. In this paper, an architectural outline of these interrelations will be described through the detailed study of Karl-Otto Apel's ethics of political strategic responsibility and Jurgen Habermas's discourse theory of law and Democracy which are used for justification of warranted expectation of norm following in their discussion of application problems in discourse ethics.起始頁-結束頁：285-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201209.02857篇名：臺灣家庭政策的形成：家計承擔與兒童照顧的整合並列篇名：Integrating Breadwinning and Childcare in the Family Policy Formation in Taiwan作者：黃志隆(Chih-Lung Huang)關鍵字：家計承擔者模式;兒童照顧;公共財;社會投資;理念;breadwinner model;child care;public goods;social investment;idea期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣近年來關注的少子女化問題，不僅涉及家戶中的男女在家計上的分擔，同時更與兒童照顧責任的歸屬有關。如何透過家庭政策的形成，整合家計承擔與兒童照顧的責任，以期在解決少子女化問題的同時，能兼顧性別平等目標，是臺灣當前的重要課題。本文擬就既有兒童照顧政策規劃與現行方案中的政策理念與政策工具進行分析，以理解其所欲形塑的家計承擔者模式，和對性別平等目標可能產生的影響。研究結果顯示，臺灣在既有的殘補式社會安全體系結構影響下，主要採用以公共財為主的理念和政策工具，並朝向修正式的蠟燭兩頭燒模式前進。這種家計承擔者模式的移轉與可能引發的問題，除了顯示臺灣在性別平等目標的追求仍有改善的空間外，並提供了未來臺灣在相關政策理念和政策工具上可能的思考方向。英文摘要：The baby bust problem in Taiwan is not only related to the question of the undertaking of breadwinning between man and woman in the household, but also the allocation of child care responsibility. The integration of breadwinning and child care through family policy formation is expected to resolve the baby bust problem and gender equality at the same time in Taiwan. This article analyzes the policy ideas and instruments of child care policies and its planning. We try to understand the process of restructuring the pattern of the original model and the goal of gender equality behind policy development. The research results show that the main policy idea and instrument are public goods, and the modified burnout model should be reshaped under the institutional legacy of Taiwan's Social Security System. The transformation of the breadwinner model and the related problems show room for improvement and ways for the direction of rethinking under the goal of gender equality as well as related policy ideas and instruments.起始頁-結束頁：331-366資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201209.03318篇名：影響臺灣民眾重分配政策偏好的因素並列篇名：The Determinants of People's Preferences on Redistributive Policies in Taiwan作者：陳文學(Wen-Hsueh Chen);羅清俊(Ching-Jyuhn Luor)關鍵字：公民意識;重分配政策;政策偏好;政黨認同;貧富差距;Citizenship;economic inequality;party identification;policy preference;redistributive policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文藉由2010年「公民意識與社會正義」調查資料，以多變量統計模型分析臺灣民眾的個人客觀特質、主觀認知以及所處政治經濟環境（所居住的縣市）對於重分配政策偏好的影響。統計分析結果發現。第一，教育程度越高、家庭每月總所得越低、越具有平等價值觀、認同泛綠政黨、認為貧富差距嚴重、公民意識越高等特質的民眾，都越偏好重分配政策。第二，相較於公平正義的觀點，理性自利的觀點比較適合用來解釋臺灣女性偏好重分配政策的理由。第三，民眾的公民意識越強而且認同泛綠政黨時，將會更偏好重分配政策。第四，相較於個人層次的影響因素，本文並沒有發現民眾所處政治經濟環境差異對於重分配政策偏好的影響。這些研究發現對於瞭解臺灣民眾的政策偏好以及反省政府相關政策都具有重要啟示與意義。英文摘要：Based on survey data on citizenship and social justice, this paper explores the factors affecting people's preferences on redistributive policies in Taiwan. Specifically, we ask whether and how one's socio-demographic characteristics, personal beliefs and attitudes, and for environmental factors (economic and political) around them influence their needs on redistributive intervention from government.First of all, the findings show that people who are well-educated, with lower family income, or females with lower family income tend to favor redistributive policies. Furthermore, those who have strong egalitarian values or perceive economic inequality as serious are likely to prefer government's redistributive intervention. Finally, people who identify with the pan-green party, or who so Identify and also have a higher sense of citizenship, are also inclined to support redistributive policies. While the variables of individual level are better predictors, we do not systematically find significant effects of environmental factors on people's distributive preferences.These findings may have some implications on assessing current people's preferences on redistributive policies and the critical role that government should play in the near future in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：367-397資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201209.03679篇名：醫院與大學在家族企業集團股權鏈之角色：制度與資源依賴觀點的辯證並列篇名：The Role of Hospitals and Universities in Share-holding Chains in Family Business Groups: A Dialogue between Institutional and Resource Dependence Viewpoints作者：鍾喜梅(Hsi-Mei Chung);鄭力軒(Li-Hsuan Cheng);詹淑婷(Shu-Ting Chan);林佳慧(Chia-Hui Lin)關鍵字：家族企業集團;制度理論;資源依賴理論;非營利組織;金字塔股權結構;family business group;institutional theory;resource dependence theory;non-profit organization;pyramidal ownership structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：家族經營為企業常見的治理摸式，而大型家族企業集團內的金字塔股權結構設計，攸關控制家族能否有效掌握跨足不同產業範疇的子公司。本研究從制度理論與資源依賴觀點，以台灣七個家族企業集團為分析對象，透過近二十年的跨時資料，嘗試了解家族企業集團興辦醫院或大學除了公益目的之外，是否存在強化家族控制權，避免股權分散，以及永續掌握企業股權的其他目的。研究結果顯示，在涵括醫院、大學與企業等不同場域的家族企業集團當中，家族對集團自行成立的醫院與大學有很強的控制程度，家族可透過設立醫院或大學，達到永續掌握企業經營權與股權之目的。家族可透過家族成員、基金會或核心公司直接持股醫院或大學，由於醫院或大學可能是集團內核心公司或其他子公司的股東，因此家族可透過醫院或大學，間接持有核心公司與其他集團內重要子公司的股權。設立醫院或大學，是家族企業集團股權控制方式的一種可能選擇。本研究對於思考醫院與大學在家族企業集團控股關係中所扮演的角色，具有相當意義與價值。英文摘要：Family governance is a kind of typical governance structure in large business groups and small to medium-sized business enterprises around the world. One distinctive phenomenon in family business groups in Taiwan is that some may utilize hospitals or universities in a cross-sharing role in a pyramidal ownership structure. This research tries to examine the role of hospital and the University in the pyramidal ownership structure in a family business group from the institutional and the resource dependence theory viewpoints. Analyzing over 20 years of data, the results indicate that the controlling family may own the hospital or university's shares by family members or associations directly. Furthermore, the hospital or the university is usually the majority shareholder of key affiliate firms in the family business group. Therefore, the controlling family may utilize the hospital or university to sustain the shareholdings and management in those key affiliate firms in this family business group. This research provides insights in discussing the hospital and the university role in control and strategic implications in large family business groups.起始頁-結束頁：399-438資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201209.039910篇名：選舉地理如何影響臺灣縣市長候選人的當選機率：1989－2009並列篇名：The Estimation of a Hybrid Model on Political Geography: The "Regional Effect" of County Magistrate Elections in Taiwan from 1989 to 2009作者：徐永明(Yung-Ming Hsu);林昌平(Chang-Ping Lin)關鍵字：政治版圖;政治地理;縣市長選舉;空間迴歸模型;政黨與選舉;political blocs;political geography;county election;spatial probit model;party and election期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文嘗試以選舉結果的空間分布與政治版圖的比較出發，探討與深化「地區性」因素對於個別候選人當選機率的影響。進一步針對「地區性」因素的性質，將之區分為三項不同的方向：（1）強調該候選人所在地區本身的獨特性、（2）強調候選人所在地區之間的相互作用，以及（3）強調「政治」特質上的相互作用會較「地理」特質上的相互作用更為有意義。嘗試提出一項整合模型，並使用臺灣1989-2009年六屆縣市長的候選人層次選舉資料進行分析。期望透過不同「地區性」因素分析的檢視，觀察各項「地區性」因素對縣市長當選的影響性，並同時探討地方層次的選舉，全國性層次因素是否會對選舉結果造成影響，對未來選舉研究形成全新的視野。本文認為影響候選人當選機率的原因，並不完全在於個人的特質與政治條件，這裡引入地區性因素，說明地區本身的獨特性（significant differences），仍受到候選人的黨籍與空間關係的相互作用（interaction）所影響。透過政治版圖整合模型（空間迴歸）的回饋效果，估計結果顯示縣市長當選因素的影響效果應較為正確，因為其包含了直接效果與間接效果的部分。此外，全國性層次因素（所屬政黨與中央執政黨相同）會對該項期中選舉結果造成負向影響，可看出中央執政黨的表現會影響民眾對於地方縣市長候選人的評價，地方執政黨的執政則有助於該屆同黨，縣市長候選人的競選，本文雖然僅處理1989-2009的選舉資料，但由2010年底舉行的臺灣五都大選結果來看，仍舊可以觀察到此現象。英文摘要：This paper aims to compare the differences between political geography analysis and political blocs analysis. We re-examine the effect of region by three definitions: (1) the significant differences of regions, (2) the neighborhood interaction of regions, (3) the interaction of region in social networks. The empirical result of Taiwan's county election data during 1989-2009 with the spatial pro-bit model shows that the interaction of region in social network is more important than the neighborhood interaction of region. The most important attribute of this paper is that we re-define the meaning of the effect of region in county election. The conclusion shows that the interaction of region must be considered in election analysis. However, the interaction in social network is more important than the neighborhood interaction. Although this article only deals with the election data of 1989-2009, but by the end of 2010 5 municipalities TAIWAN of view, this phenomenon can still be observed.起始頁-結束頁：121-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201206.012111篇名：有線電視市場結構與經營區調整政策並列篇名：Market Structure and Cable Franchise Policy Reform作者：施俊吉(Jun-Ji Shih)關鍵字：有線電視;市場結構;經營區政策;cable television;market structure;cable franchise policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討台灣有線電視系統市場的產業結構，並分析NCC之經營區調整政策。研究發現：2009年時每一系統的平均訂戶數為8.8萬戶，平均營收為6.2億元，全國的總營收為372億元，總毛利為156億元，毛利率為42%。至於有線電視系統市場則屬高度集中之市場，其HHI指數高達8,372。此外，經營區調整政策固然能提供跨區經營的機會，但是系統經營者卻不一定會跨區經營，反而會合併成一家跨區獨占的大系統或繼續維持分區獨占的局面。因此建議NCC應該從「增加其他類型之電視對有線電視之競爭」及「做好有線電視獨占管制工作」等方面著手治理有線電視因為分區獨寡占所衍生的問題。英文摘要：The study aims to investigate the market structure in Taiwan's cable television industry and assess the National Communication Commission (NCC)'s approach to reforming Taiwan's cable franchise policy. The study finds that in 2009, the average number of household subscribers per cable system was 88,000, and the average revenue per system was NTD620 million; the total revenue of Taiwan's cable system market was NTD37.2 billion, with a gross profit of NTD 15.6 billion and a gross profit margin of 42%; the market was a highly concentrated one with an HHI of 8,372. While cable franchise policy reform may provide an opportunity for cable system operators 10 expand their operation across multiple franchises, they will not necessarily do so. It is more likely cable systems will either merge into a larger player having exclusive control over several franchises or remain as a monopoly in their respective franchise markets The study therefore recommends the NCC should seek to address problems rising from cable franchise monopolies by two approaches: ”increasing inter-modal competition by introducing other types of television services,” and ”implementing good regulation to manage a monopolistic/oligopolistic cable industry.”起始頁-結束頁：165-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201206.016512篇名：不平等的災難：921地震下的受災風險與社會階層化並列篇名：Unequal Disaster: Hazard and Social Stratification in an Earthquake作者：張宜君(Yi-Chun Chang);林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin)關鍵字：社會脆弱性;災難;階級;族群;社會階層化;處方迴歸;social vulnerability;disaster;class;ethnicity;social stratification;treatment regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以1999年臺灣921地震為例，討論社會不平等如何導致受災風險的差異，以及災後重建對社會不平等的影響。從社會脆弱性的觀點出發，我們認為階級、族群與城鄉差距是造成民眾受災風險差異的主要因素，並且造成了災後的社會不平等。本研究採用「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」（Taiwan Education Panel Survey）2001年調查之第一波國中學生及家長問卷，該調查標示了部分受災戶。我們發現地震災害的風險確實不是中立的，首先，臺灣的低技術工人與自營作業者（包括部分農民）特別容易受災、資本家與經理人則較少受災，原住民與客家族群在地震中傷亡比率也偏高；此外，城市居民的受災風險遠低於鄉村居民。其次，為了同時控制風險分布並估計災後重建的影響，我們引進了處方迴歸模型來估計在地震發生兩年之後，受災戶與非受災戶兒童的幸福感以及心理憂鬱程度、家戶所得、家庭遭受經濟危機的機率的差異。結果發現，雖然受災戶家庭及學童在上述四個方面都比非受災戶更糟，但是將受災風險隨機化之後，災後重建的過程並沒有導致上述指標的惡化。換句話說，災區內的社會不平等不是來自災後重建過程，而是來自受災風險的不平等，易於受災使得弱勢者更弱勢。這個結論建議，災後重建不應只給予受災戶補償，而應改善災區的社會不平等。英文摘要：Taking the aftermath of Chi-chi earthquake in 1999 as an example, the article investigates the social stratification of disaster hazard and its consequences on social inequality. Following the literature on ”social vulnerability,” we argue that class, ethnicity and uneven rural-urban development shaped the unequal distribution of disaster hazards, which led to social inequality in the affected area. We use the first wave of the Taiwan Education Pan el Survey (TEPS), a national dataset of high school students collected in 2001, and identified the affected households in the statistics. It is found that the hazard is not neutral but is robustly associated with class, ethnicity and the rural areas. The households from the working class, peasants and self-employed origins were more likely to be affected, while those from the capitalist and manager origins suffered less from the earthquake. Minorities from aboriginal and Hakka were more likely to suffer, while urban resident s were less likely to be affected the disaster.To estimate the redistributive effects in the process of reconstruction, we introduce the treatment regression mode l for the control of the risk inequality. Modeling the household income, economic crisis, self-reported happiness and depression, we find that the victims were worse off two years alter the earthquake. However, once the treatment model randomized the hazards, the differences between the affected families and the non-affected families disappeared. The outcomes suggest that the deterioration of social inequality mostly result s from the unequal distribution of hazard rather than the redistribution in the reconstruction. The conclusion also implies that for reducing the unequal hazard, the reconstruction strategy for the affected area should focus not only on the compensation of the victims, but also on the re forms of primarily social inequalities.起始頁-結束頁：193-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201206.019313篇名：醫療救治品質存在週末效應？並列篇名：Do Hospitals Provide Lower Quality Care on Weekends?作者：李淑芬(Shu-Fen Li);林宜靜(I-Ching Lin);蔡偉德(Wei-Der Tsai)關鍵字：週末效應;死亡率;醫療利用;再住院率;急性心肌梗塞;阻塞性中風;出血性中風;weekend effect;mortality;medical care utilization;readmission;AMI;ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：醫院的醫療照護人力在一週之中的每一天並非均等分配，週末假期常有醫護人力短缺、緊急或重症醫療救治支援不足的問題，因而文獻上指出週末假期就醫者有較差的醫療結果或所謂的“週末效應”，但是以往探討週未效應的實證研究並未控制個別醫院醫療救治能力的差別，也沒有追蹤病患求診醫療利用的效益。藉由1998-2007年全民健康保險資料庫中急性心肌梗塞、出血性中風與阻塞性中風等急重症病患的資料，本研究控制醫院的固定效果、病患特性、季節性與時間趨勢等因素，並區分醫學中心與非醫學中心醫院，實證分析台灣的醫院是否存在週末效應，亦即在週末或農曆春節求診的病患是否有較高的死亡率，以及存活病患是否有較差的醫療利用效率。我們的實證結果發現病患在週末及農曆春節求診者，均相對於平日求診者有較高7天、30天與180天的死亡率，而且此負面醫療結果的週末效應，主要出現於非醫學中心醫院，醫學中心的週末效應並不明顯。另一方面，在存活的病人中，週未及農曆春節求診者，依疾病類別的差異，或多或少出現較長的當次住院日數、較少的當次醫療花費（經住院日數校正）與較高的出院後30天再住院率，而且醫學中心或非醫學中心醫院皆有此種週末求診低醫療效率的現象。雖然醫學中心在週末仍保有與平日相同的緊急救治能力，但是週末就診之病患的醫療利用效率仍較平日就診者差，隱含這些人力與設備最齊全的醫院在週末的醫療照護仍未達平日應有的成本效益水準；非醫學中心的週末效應非常明顯，並且該週末效應主要來自區域醫院－而非地區醫院－週末救治的負面結果，病患就診的安全性與救治效率值得相關單位的重視。本文的研究結果可提供衛生署擬定醫療照護品質規範時的參考。英文摘要：This paper aims to investigate whether a weekend effect is present among Taiwan's hospitals. Previous literature has shown that admission to the hospital during the weekend is associated with a higher mortality rate or worse clinical outcomes than those admitted on weekdays. This is the so-called ”weekend effect”, which arises because of a lower staffing level and the absence of ancillary medical support during weekends. Past studies of the weekend effect, however, did not account for the heterogeneity in hospitals' abilities in treating patients with severe conditions, or examine patients ' medical utilization when hospitalized. Using the patient-level data extracted from the 1998-2007 National Health Insurance Database, we empirically investigate whether there is a weekend effect for patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke. The treatment outcomes are measured by 7-day, 30-day and 180-day mortality since admission. In addition, patients' length of stay, medical expenditures, and readmission within 30 days after discharge represent patients' medical care utilization when hospitalized. We further distinguish hospitals by their accreditation level. After controlling for hospital heterogeneity via fixed effects, we found that weekend admissions are associated with higher mortality rates, especially for patients admitted to nonmedical centers. Moreover, among those surviving patients, longer length of stay, lower medical expenditures and a higher readmission rate within 30 days after discharge are found for patients admitted on the weekend. The weekend effect that we found among non-medical centers arise mainly from regional hospital patients' unfavorable outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：233-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201206.023314篇名：核課期間與租稅逃漏並列篇名：Tax Assessment Period and Tax Evasion作者：黃則強(Che-Chiang Huang);翁<U+5803>嵐(Glen K. L. Ueng)關鍵字：核課期間;租稅逃漏;所得不確定性;tax assessment period;tax evasion;income uncertainty期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文設定一個包含核課期間的租稅逃漏模型來探討納稅人的逃漏稅行為。與傳統模型不同的是，納稅人在進行租稅逃漏時，核課期間的存在將使得納稅人課稅後的可支配所得遞延實現，這個性質將可能導致納稅人的消費決策受到扭曲，進而影響到其逃漏稅決策。依據本文的研究顯示，相對傳統文獻，納稅人的租稅依從率較高， 亦就是說，忽略核課期間會高估租稅逃漏的程度，這個結果正可解釋為何實務上觀察到的租稅逃漏程度遠比理論模型所預測的輕微這個困惑。此外，考慮核課期間後，稅務機關的預期稅收較高，納稅人的預期效用水準較低。英文摘要：This paper explores the influence of the tax assessment period on tax evasion. As the tax assessment period is considered, the disposable income of a tax evader is not realized until the period has passed. This characteristic will distort evaders' consumption decisions and thereby change their evasion decisions as well. According to our analysis, the tax compliance rate is higher than that in traditional models. That is to say, neglecting the impact of tax assessment period will overestimate tax evasion behaviors of taxpayers. Hence, we offer another explanation about ”the puzzle of tax evasion”, which says that the estimated tax evasions in reality are much less serious than those predicted in conventional literature. In addition, government revenues are increased and taxpayers' expected utility levels are decreased as far as the tax assessment period is concerned.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201203.000315篇名：國家與公共研究機構在產業技術升級過程中的角色及演化：台灣工具機業並列篇名：The Evolving Roles of the State and Public Research Institutes in the Technological Upgrading Process of Industries: The Case of Taiwan's Machine Tool Industry作者：陳良治(Liang-Chih Chen)關鍵字：發展型國家;公共研究機構;技術升級;工具機業;台灣;developmental states;public research institutes;technological upgrading;machine tool industry;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文重點是在討論國家，特別是國家所設立之公共研究機構在新興工業國家產業技術升級中的角色及演化。有別於許多文獻強調國家以及公共研究機構在後進國家產業技術追趕進程中的決定性影響，透過探討台灣工具機業升級過程中，公私部門間的互動內涵及其演變，本文認為國家對這個產業由上而下的成功干預，極大部分需歸功於國內廠商由下而上的努力， 其巧妙地利用國家貧乏的工具機產業政策，使之朝向至對該產業有利的方向，也因此讓國家在台灣工具機業升級的過程中的建設性角色得以浮現。同時，本文更分析一個能力較為受限的公共研究機構，如何受益於私部門夥伴的支持，使其能夠看似有效地發揮其被國家賦予的政策功能，並隨著與產業互動關係的改善，逐漸找到其在支持後進國家產業轉型過程中的功能性角色。英文摘要：Most literature on industrialization of East Asian newly industrializing countries (NICs) focuses on the NIC states as the dominant factor explaining latecomers' accelerated technological catch-up. Through studying the dynamics within the public-private interactions during the upgrading process of Taiwan's machine industry, this paper rejects the emphasis on the decisive role of the state or, more specifically, its public research institute (PRI), in directing the process of late industrialization, and argues that, in the case of the Taiwan 's MT industry, it is the bottom-up efforts of local firms, which ingeniously utilized and redirected the state's poorly formulated policy measures to work in their favor, that made possible the emergence of a seemingly constructive role of the state in the upgrading of an NIC industry. In addition, this study shows how a PRI with inherent limited capabilities has benefited from the improvement of its relationship with the private partners and gradually found its functional position in supporting the technological advancement of the industry.起始頁-結束頁：19-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201203.002116篇名：臺灣IC產業的創新機制：以2001年、2005年臺灣IC產業專利的發明人網絡為例並列篇名：Innovation Mechanisms in Taiwan IC Industry: The Case of the Patent-Based Inventor Networks in 2001 and 2005作者：官逸人(Yi-Ren Guan);熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung);林亦之(Yi-Jr Lin)關鍵字：IC產業;專利;發明人網絡;結構洞;地位訊號;IC industry;patent;nventor network;structuraI holes;status signal期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：lC（積體電路）產業是臺灣過去三十多年來發展最完整、且在世界上最具有競爭力的創新型產業。研發與技術專利成長快速，也代表這個產業的技術創新成果。臺灣IC產業技術創新和專利的研究累積了一些成果，但較缺乏使用研發創新發明人網絡所做的分析。本研究使用IC產業專利發明人網絡資料，從結構洞（structura l ho les）和地位訊號（status signal）這兩個過去西方半導體和生物科技等創新產業研究中，最能解釋創新行動者與網絡系統和創新表現理論機制的學術研究累積成果出發， 並反省臺灣特有lC產業分工技術利基位置，發展出專利發明人網絡對專利發明成果影響機制之模型。英文摘要：The IC (integrated circuit) industry has been the most complete, competitive and innovative industry in Taiwan over the past three decades. The rapid growth of patents in this field demonstrates the marvelous outcomes of technological innovations. A huge amount of patent-based research has been accumulated in this industry, but only a little is related to the inventor network. Structural holes and status signal are two competing perspectives in explaining the dynamic mechanisms between innovative actors and network systems of the most innovative industries, semiconductor and biotechnology, in advanced countries. We use these two theories and network data of patent-based inventors to discuss the specific niche of vertical disintegration in Taiwan IC industry, and develop models on mechanisms of how inventors' networks affect the outcome of inventors' patents.起始頁-結束頁：51-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201203.005317篇名：台灣外籍配偶與本籍配偶的生育數量與品質並列篇名：Comparisons of Fertility Rate and Birth Quality between Native and Foreign-Born Women in Taiwan作者：楊靜利(Ching-Li Yang);黃奕綺(I-Chi Huang);蔡宏政(Hung-Jeng Tsai);王香蘋(Hsiang-Ping Wang)關鍵字：外籍配偶;年齡別生育率;婚齡別生育率;出生時健康狀況;foreign spouse;age-specific fertility rate;marriage-years-specific fertility rate;health status at birth期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：為釐清一般大眾對外籍配偶高生育率以及低生育品質的想像，我們利用2007年戶籍登記資料、2003年「外籍與大陸配偶生活狀況調查」與1998年第八期「台灣地區家庭計畫與生育力調查（KAP VlII）」，來呈現外籍配偶與本籍配偶的「婚齡別」 生育率差異，並利用2003年至2007年出生通報，比較外籍配偶與本籍配偶的新生兒出生時之健康狀況，包括死產、體重不足、先天缺陷、早產以及Apgar評分五項指標。研究結果顯示外籍配偶的生育率不但不高，還低於台灣有偶婦女的生育水準；至於新生兒健康狀況，不論是從死產、體重不足、先天缺陷、早產或是Apgar評分的比例來看，她們也沒有比較差，其中死產、體重不足與早產三項指標上的表現甚至於更好。英文摘要：In order to clarify public misunderstanding, this study explores the real situation of foreign spouses' fertility rate and the birth quality of their babies. By employing household registration data in 2007, the Survey of Foreign and Mainland Spouses in 2003, and the eighth survey of knowledge, attitude, and practices of family planning and reproductive health in 1998 (KAP VIII), we present the differences of marriage-duration specific fertility rates between foreign and Taiwanese women. We also compare the birth quality of foreign spouses with that of Taiwanese women in terms of the indexes of stillbirth, low birth weight, birth defects, premature birth, and Apgar score by the birth notification data between 2003 and 2007.Contrary to public understanding, our study shows that the fertility of foreign spouses is actually lower than that of Taiwanese married women. Furthermore, their birth quality is also not worse than that of Taiwanese women. As a matter of fact, the qualities of foreign spouses' babies are even better than those of Taiwanese women in terms of the indexes of stillbirth, low birth weight and prematurely born.起始頁-結束頁：83-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心DOI：10.6350/JSSP.201203.008501篇名：編輯室的話：無分者與弱勢者的位置在何處？並列篇名：Where is the Place for the Placeless and the Weak?作者：劉紀蕙(Joyce C. H. Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：4-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00012篇名：台灣國家愛滋教育之國族身體形構與情感政治：以世界愛滋病日為線索並列篇名：World AIDS Day, National Pedagogy and the Politics of Emotion in Taiwan作者：黃道明(Hans Tao-Ming Huang);陳柏旭(Po-His Chen)關鍵字：愛滋;國家教育;性熱帶;導向;身體;情感;AIDS;national pedagogy;sexual tropics;orientation;body;emotions期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以1990年代以降世界愛滋病日的官方民間宣導活動為場域，審視了台灣的國家愛滋教育論述，企圖分析其所形構的國族身體與時空，並探究其中的情感政治。在後解嚴時期的地緣政治脈絡裡，我標誌了國家愛滋教育的正規「性導向」，顯示愛滋防治教育在將國族身體導向單偶伴侶理想的同時，也導引此正規身體遠離布滿病體的危險「性熱帶區」。我進一步顯示，全球在地化的物件諸如愛滋被單和愛滋水燈，是如何被在國家愛滋教育裡被大幅地傷感濫情化，而當關懷愛滋的紅絲帶形變為象徵接納感染者的人性圈圈時，我則揭示這個愛的氛圍其實是一個當下台灣政體威權性管制下的憂鬱狀態產物。最後，本文提出了一個關於感染者哀悼的記憶政治，來詰問這樣一個將感染者軀體與愛滋歷史性排除於未來的國族想像。英文摘要：By way of looking at some key moments of the World AIDS Day campaigns conducted by the government and NGOs since the 1990s, this essay maps out the terrain of Taiwan's national AIDS pedagogy, attempting to examine the production of the national body, time-space, and the politics of emotion therein. Situating the official AIDS policy within the context of the post-martial law geopolitics, I mark out the 'sexual orientation' of national AIDS pedagogy as one that orientates the national body towards the monogamous ideal while steering it away from the diseased sexual tropics. Further, I look into the affective directive of such orientation organised under the rhetoric of love by showing how glocalised objects such as the quilt and the waterlily lantern come to be massively sentimentalised. With the Red Ribbon morphed into the circle of humanity that claims, as a gesture of social inclusion, to safeguard people living With AIDS/HIV, I elucidate how this affective climate of compassion is nothing but a product of a melancholic state that fosters intense sexual moralism. Finally, this essay offers a politics of mourning and remembrance as enacted by people living with HIV/AIDS themselves, in order to contest the national imagination that forecloses the historicity of the AIDS body from its futurity.起始頁-結束頁：9-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00023篇名：卡蘿的疾病誌：失能主體的思辯並列篇名：Frida Kahlo's Pathography: Study of the Subjectivity of the Disabled作者：孫小玉(Hsiao-Yu Sun)關鍵字：脆弱主體;超人主體;失能論述;疾病誌;賤斥體;vulnerable subject;super(wo)man subject;disability studies;pathography;abject期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：本篇論文將自失能、女性、族群等弱勢身分探討卡蘿（Frida Kahlo）的疾病書寫與主體認同，以失能研究（disability studies）為論述主軸。失能研究繼性別、族群、種族等弱勢族裔研究後，已在歐美人文學界蔚為一新興學門，而失能者的生命書寫於本世紀初已成為傳記出版的最大宗。卡蘿的生命故事其實就是一部疾病誌，本篇論文以卡蘿的失能與疾病書寫為主題，探討卡蘿如何書寫或展現失能身體，如何表述她的主體，如何呈現失能的文化意義。論文參照卡蘿的畫作、傳記、日記、以及訪談，自心理分析的角度，剖析卡蘿如何銘刻與建構自我之身體與身分認同。簡言之，論文透過疾病誌及失能研究的角度，再現卡蘿因失能與意外所形成的脆弱主體，對比她在文化藝術上所表徵的超人主體，並開展失能者之為脆弱主體或超人主體的對話與思辯；據此，本文析論並再現失能主體如何在文化論述中被形塑建構。英文摘要：Disability studies, along with studies on gender, age, race, and other such classifications, has been in the making since 1970s as a new field of study to redress the social voicelessness and institutional neglect of the disabled people. Based on this study, the essay tackles Frida Kahlo's illness narrative to examine the construction of the disabled as vulnerable subject or super(wo)man subject, and by doing so, it intends to neutralize the dehumanizing effects of societal discriminations against the disabled. The essay examines Kahlo's letters, diary, and paintings to access her unique psychic lives and subjectivity, with special emphasis on her feelings of experiencing the other or the abject. Indeed, Kahlo's life writing can be also read as pathography. Her body, wounded, pierced, or distorted, however, is not only the center of agony but also the ideal place for sublimation and transcendence. The essay concludes by undermining the cultural presumption or stereotypical pinning down of the disabled as a vulnerable subject, and, instead, it highlights the uncertainty and variability of the subjectivity of people with disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：43-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00034篇名：情感的輔具：弱勢，勵志，身心障礙敘事並列篇名：Affect as Prosthesis: Minority, "Inspirational Literature," and the Disability Narrative作者：紀大偉(Ta-Wei Chi)關鍵字：弱勢;勵志;輔具;鄭豐喜;杏林子;幾米;身心障礙;the inspirational;prosthesis;affect;Sound of Colors;disability;minor literature期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：這篇文章旨在為勵志性平反。長久以來國內外知識界習慣輕視具有勵志性的文本，順便忽略了往往具有勵志色彩的身心障礙敘事。然而本文建言，「身心障礙人文研究」的基本材料就是身心障礙敘事，而跟身心障礙敘事難以割離的勵志性應該受到正視。不但如此，在身心障礙意象紛紛被挪用當作「常人」社會的「輔具」時，勵志性正好可以策略性地當做身心障礙者及其文本的情感層面輔具。在情感經濟體系中，下肢障礙者鄭豐喜的《汪洋中的一條船》和蔣經國時代的黨國機器互相以勵志性支援；跟鄭豐喜同時在威嚴時代進入文壇的輪椅族作家杏林子卻在寫作歷程中摸出脫逸黨國、改與宗教結盟取暖的另類路徑；21世紀幾米繪本《地下鐵》則展示了一個不強調勵志性的獨立盲女，因而引發改編者渴望勵志性的焦慮。英文摘要：This article attempts to focus on the inspirational character of the inspirational literature, a genre into which Taiwan disability narratives are habitually pigeonholed. As the inspirational literature is often too commercialized to be respected in academe, the article suggests not to throw out the baby with the bath water but to recognize that such a minority as the disabled might strategically adopt the inspirational texts as prosthetic devices to maneuver in the economy of affect. The article analyzes three famed texts in Taiwan that are central to the said economy. First, One Lonely Boat on the Boundless Sea, a book-length memoirs by Feng-hsi Cheng, an amputee whose work was appropriated by the Chiang Ching-ko regime for its quasi-national-allegory-like signification for Taiwan. Second, the personal essays by Hsing-Lin Tzu, a wheel-chaired writer whose essays, contemporaneous with the aforesaid Cheng, reveal endeavors of deterritorialization from the state apparatuses and those of reterritorialization with Christianity. Third, Sound of Colors, a graphic book by Jimmy Liao, a cancer survivor, whose work critically suspends the necessity of the inspirational.起始頁-結束頁：87-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00045篇名：再現弱勢：從《月亮的小孩》到《水蜜桃阿嬤》並列篇名：Representing Minority: From "Moon Children" to "Honey Peach Grandma"作者：蔡慶同(Chin-Tong Tsai)關鍵字：紀錄片;弱勢;參與觀察;再現美學;再現政治;documentary;minority, participant observation;aesthetics of representation;politics of representation期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文藉由分析兩部再現弱勢的紀錄片，包括它被產製與觀看的社會脈絡，進而探討以弱勢作為被攝者的紀實音像，尤其是其中參與觀察的再現美學，為何與如何衍生出不同的再現政治之影響，甚至改變了原有再現美學之意義。1990年的《月亮的小孩》（吳乙峰導演），乃是以白化症者及其家庭為對象，作為公共電視的節目製作，尤其是它從產製、文本到巡映的實踐，不僅已使紀錄片成為溝通與對話的媒介，更使得紀錄片作為互動與連結的行動，因此，以參與觀察再現弱勢衍生了政治性的效果。2007年的《水蜜桃阿嬤》（楊力州導演），則是以自殺遺族及其家庭為對象，作為商業媒體的委製影像，它卻因被納入到公益慈善的體驗行銷之中，尤其是其中消費及其交換的邏輯，不僅因此引發了道德倫理的爭議，更使得參與觀察的再現美學，走入了美感化的局限。換句話說，這兩部紀錄片皆是透過參與觀察來再現社會弱勢並傳達人道關懷的文本類型，然而，藉由本文的兩相對照，正可以讓我們進一步釐清，紀錄片作為文化生產，再現美學與再現政治之間的辯證關係。英文摘要：Focusing on the documentary of representing minority through observational and participatory mode in Taiwan, this essay traces the genealogy since 1990s. It is contented that for realizing new concept of reality, ”Moon Children”(1990) innovated not only aesthetics but also politics of representation. It is further argued that since this kind of documentary played the role of marketing of charity, ”Honey Peach Grandma”(2007) thus presented property of aesthetic. The author concludes by suggesting that the relationship between aesthetics and politics of representation should be reformulated.起始頁-結束頁：117-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00056篇名：荒蕪的生命、茂盛的影像：論蔡明亮電影的內框與平行主義並列篇名：Deserted Life and Exuberant Picture: On the Internal Frame and Parallelism in Tsai Ming-Liang's Films作者：楊凱麟(Kai-Lin Yang)關鍵字：蔡明亮;影像;內框;平行主義;身體;Tsai Ming-Liang;image;internal frame;parallelism;body期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：蔡明亮的電影以影像的多重內框及平行並置構成其最獨特的風格。本文首先分析其影像內框所呈現的條紋空間，電影在此成為極特殊的框線審美經驗，這是關於框－影像的「感性分享」。影像內框的平行接剪則構成敘述的多重系列，每個鏡頭幾乎都以複式的構成倍增影像的可能性與擴延影像既有的維度。人物表面上從事著最簡單素樸的生命行為，但此行為卻奠基於繁複的影像形式之中。而性愛、飲食與哭泣則總是展現蔡明亮電影中最高張的身體能量與流動。生命的荒蕪與影像的茂盛在蔡明亮的作品中交織纏繞、相互增強，最後共同鎔鑄台灣90年代之後最原創的電影作品。英文摘要：By the internal frames of the image and their parallelism, the work of Tsai Ming-Liang gave an extraordinary style. This paper analyzes first the striated space of the image, made by the intra-frames, the film becomes an aesthetic experience of the framming. This is a ”partage du sensible” of the picture-frame. The parallel arrangement of these images consists of the multiple series of the story. Each plan can double image and expanding its dimensions. Apparently, the characters live to do nothing, but ”nothing” is based on the most complex form of the image. The desert of life and exuberance of the image are intertwined and one intensifying the other, which ultimately forge the most original work of Taiwanese cinema.起始頁-結束頁：147-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00067篇名：Gesture.net：零度網路中的精神姿態並列篇名：Gesture.net: The Spiritual Gesture of Zero-Point Network Place作者：林欣怡(Hsin-I Lin);賴雯淑(Wen-Shu La)關鍵字：列斐伏爾;零度空間;精神姿態;重複;生三成異;網絡;Henri Lefebvre;zero-point space;spiritual gesture;repetition;Thirding-as-Othering;network期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文旨在以列斐伏爾的「零度空間」與日常節奏分析為主軸，以及從此主軸衍生等相關討論與「生三成異」概念，考察網路空間的零度化現象，以「程式語法－重複動作－精神姿態」三個概念節點作為中樞文義佈署，探究網路空間日常重複動作如何藉由二值化類語言結構、身體動作的重複操所生產的「精神姿態」，成為抵抗系統化、「生三成異」動能。首先論述列斐伏爾如何藉由羅蘭．巴特零度書寫概念轉向為零度空間的論式，視為反抗日常恐怖主義的實踐場域，以及其如何延伸為指向生三成異的「彼外」空間。接續分析二值化類語言與身體動作的重複性，透過馬場馬術的概念，指出動作如何經由重複轉變為姿勢節奏，進而成為抽象象徵，闡述日常節奏為某種在重複內的運動和差異，最後以此節奏差異所生成的精神姿態，分析網路作品中身體與程式重複如何驅向生成某種擾亂生態之流，達至「生三成異」動能的可能。英文摘要：This paper studies the attributes of zero-point cyberspace using Lefebvre's concepts of ”zero-point space” and rhythm analysis discourse as its central structure. The paper further elaborates on the concept ”Thirding-as-Othering”, which has evolved from the previous two concepts. Using the three theoretical elements ”Programme-RepeatAction-Gesture” as context nodes, the authors point out how the binary numeral system, body positions, and continual repetition of movement have become a spiritual gesture producing the kinetic energy of ”Thirding-as-Othering” and turning it into an anti-systematic force. Following that, the paper examines how the concept of Lefebvre's ”zero-point space”, elaborated from Roland Barthes' ”zero-point writing”, creates a field of cultural revolution and practice space for everyday life, and how it extends into ”Thirding-as-Othering” and then into the ”other-than” space. Afterwards, it discusseshow binary programming language, continual repetition of body movements, and the rhythm of work, have become an abstract spiritual gesture. Finally, in analyzing net artworks by re-engaging them from the perspective of ”Thirding-as-Othering”, we present the energy possibilities within zero-point cyberspace.起始頁-結束頁：169-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00078篇名：「是都市更新，還是空間戰爭？」論壇導言並列篇名：Introduction to "Urban Renewal or the War for Space?"作者：王志弘(Chi-Hung Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：203-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00089篇名：從公共化到產權化：都更城市淪亡記並列篇名：From Public City to Private City: Falling of Taipei in the Fever of Urban Renewal作者：黃麗玲(Li-Ling Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：206-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).000910篇名：台北的身世．都更的身分：作為「營建經濟」的都市更新政策、私有權與公共之辯並列篇名：Debating the Urban Renewal Policy in Taipei: Construction Economy, Private Ownership and Public Interests作者：台灣都市更新受害者聯盟(Taiwan Alliance for Victims of Urban Renewal)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：220-229資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001011篇名：「掠奪」資本城市中的都市保存並列篇名：Urban Conservation in the Booty Capitalist City作者：康旻杰(Min-Jay Kang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：230-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001112篇名：行走台北的形成並列篇名：Walking Taipei作者：莊雅仲(Ya-Chung Chuang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：242-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001213篇名：民主的都更，多元的城市並列篇名：Building a Multi-Cultural City through Democratic Urban Renewal作者：李丁讚(Ding-Tzann Lii)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：248-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001314篇名：台灣戰後現實主義文化運動的流變：以吳耀忠為線索的考察並列篇名：Transformations of the Realist Cultural Movement in Taiwan after the Second World War: Researches Inspired by Wu Yao-Zhong's Life and Paintings作者：陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：272-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001415篇名：何謂「現實」？：試論吳耀忠與台灣繪畫的左翼伏流並列篇名：What does "the Real" Mean? A Brief Discussion of Left-Wing Movement and Wu Yao-Zhong's Paintings作者：蔣伯欣(Po-Shin Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：290-303資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001516篇名：台灣現實主義文藝思潮的過去、現在、未來：由吳耀忠的寫實美學出發的對話並列篇名：The Past, Present and Future for Realism in Taiwan: A Dialogue with Wu Yao-Zhong's Realist Aesthetics作者：陳建忠(Chien-Chung Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：304-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001617篇名：影像介入現實的政治話語能力：檢視戰後台灣的紀實攝影與紀錄片並列篇名：The Engagement in Realities and its Discursive Strength in Politics of the Post-War Taiwan's Documentary Photographs and Films作者：郭力昕(Li-Hsin Kuo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：316-325資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001718篇名：人與歷史，敘事與現實主義繪畫並列篇名：Man and History: On Narrative and Realist Painting作者：蕭阿勤(A-Chin Hsiau)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：326-334資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001819篇名：Jacques Ranciere伉儷訪台誌記並列篇名：Jacques Ranciere, Taiwan Experience作者：楊凱麟(Kai-Lin Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：336-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).001920篇名：何謂美學？並列篇名：What Aesthetics Means?作者：Jacques Ranciere;關秀惠(Hsiu-Hui Kuan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：338-349資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).002001篇名：政治、民主與當前並列篇名：Politics, Democracy and the Present作者：Jacques Ranciere;薛熙平(Hsi-Ping Shive)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：350-367資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00212篇名：虛構之政治並列篇名：The Politics of Fiction作者：Jacques Ranciere;陳克倫(Ko-Lun Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：368-385資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00223篇名：影像的政治並列篇名：Politics of the Image作者：Jacques Ranciere;楊成瀚(Chen-Han Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：386-405資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00234篇名：「與洪席耶面對面：洪席耶作品與思想座談會」紀錄並列篇名：Vis-a-vis Ranciere: A Seminar on Jacques Ranciere's Thoughts and Works作者：楊成瀚(Chen-Han Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：406-431資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00245篇名：「挫敗」、「歧視」與「控訴」的永續言說：北海道愛努族人的第四世界參與並列篇名：Persistent Discourse on Inferiority, Discrimination and Accusation: On Participating in the Fourth World of the Ainu People作者：謝世忠(Shih-Chung Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：432-453資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00256篇名：《房間》：一些有關繪畫痕跡的裝置與延伸並列篇名："A Room": Traces of Drawing, an Installation and beyond作者：羅婉儀(Yuen-Yi Lo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：454-473資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00267篇名：每個人都在找他心裡的一頭鹿－蔡明亮訪談並列篇名：Everyone Has a Deer in His/Her Heart: An Interview with Tsai Ming-Liang作者：楊小濱(Xiao-Bin Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：474-497資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00278篇名：在「世界書局」遇上「共存大師」：評儂曦《論思想的交易：書本與書店》並列篇名：An Encounter with the "Master of Being-with" While Browsing at the Global Bookshop: A Review of Jean-Luc Nancy's "On the Commerce of Thinking: Of Books and Bookstores"作者：陳克倫(Ko-Lun Chen);蘇哲安(Jon Solomon)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：498-515資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).00289篇名：評介Helen Tilley’s ”Africa as a Living Laboratory: Empire, Development, and the Problem of Scientific Knowledge, 1870-1950”並列篇名：A Review of Helen Tilley's "Africa as a Living Laboratory: Empire, Development, and the Problem of Scientific Knowledge, 1870-1950"作者：李尚仁(Shang-Jen Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：516-522資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).002910篇名：從2012年ICSA年會看膜拜團體研究的新動向並列篇名：The New Trend in Cultic Studies: Observations on ICSA 2012 Annual Conference作者：陳天嘉(Tian-Jia Chen);任定成(Ding-Cheng Ren)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：15期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：523-535資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201209_(15).003011篇名：從「人的知識」到東亞公共議題—編輯室報告並列篇名：From "Anthropo-logy" to Public Concerns in East Asia作者：劉紀蕙期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000112篇名：不只是行動，公共人類學的介入與思辯並列篇名：Beyond Action: Intervention and Deliberation of Public Anthropology作者：林文玲期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：8-10資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000213篇名：課堂如田野：以導論課程作為公共人類學實踐場域並列篇名：Classroom Teaching as Fieldwork: Practicing Public Anthropology in Introductory Courses作者：呂欣怡(Hsin-Yi Lu)關鍵字：人類學教學;批判式多元文化論;可能性;anthropological pedagogy;critical multiculturalism;possibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文呼籲，導論教學應被視為公共人類學的一種實踐方式，理由有二：首先，導論課程是學院當中少數可以超越專門化知識生產的藩籬，融合各個次領域研究成果的場域，負責導論教學的教師，必須能清楚掌握人類學的核心概念，以及其在當代仍舊保有的活力；其次，導論教學面對的是初次接觸人類學知識的年輕世代，他們在課程中的學習狀況與回應，正可用來研判與調整學科知識的公共化成效。然而，如果我們以公共人類學的立論來定義導論課程，則在課堂場域中所傳遞的人類學知識（包括核心議題的選擇、理解的框架、以及教學的方式），自然應該隨著我們面對的公眾—學生—而做調整。也就是說，導論課的設計必須建基於學術研究的根本初衷—「什麼是這個時代、這個社會、這個文化最重要的議題？」，幫助我們的公眾—學生—從貫時性（演化／歷史）與共時性（異文化）的比較中理解自身存在處境並且思辯突破困境之道。這篇文章首先評述過去一個世紀之間具代表性的英美人類學教學著作，從跨時代的文獻比較中歸納出人類學教師共同的核心關懷，以及隨著時代氛圍而遞變的教學重點。其次，筆者以自己在三個不同時期、針對不同族群、以及不同的教育環境之中的導論教學經驗作為研究材料，檢視人類學知識究竟／是否提供了何種洞見，協助這三個不同「文化」的學生族群重新理解其所身處的時代課題。最後，筆者提出關於當代人類學導論教學的兩項芻議：1）重新檢視文化相對觀的當代意涵；2）以具前瞻視野與切身相關性的「文化可能性」取代靜態無感的「文化多樣性」。英文摘要：In this article I propose a pedagogical vision of introductory anthropology that is socially relevant and engaged. I argue that effective teaching in introductory anthropology is based on the instructor's ability to disseminate academic knowledge in a publicly accessible fashion. In addition, the learning outcome and feedback from students taking the introductory course are good indicators as to where or how the classroom material is relevant to public concerns. Therefore, an ideal introductory course should provide insights that help our public-the students-to better comprehend the challenge and hope in their personal existence. In other words, this article is a quest for a public anthropology suitable for contemporary Taiwan society via pedagogical discussion on introductory teaching.The main body of this article is composed of three sections: firstly, I provide a literature review on the three most significant publications in anthropological pedagogy. Secondly, I reflect on my teaching experiences in three different universities settings and examine critically how anthropological concepts have been understood in respective contexts. Lastly, I provide a critique of canonical concepts in anthropology textbook, namely cultural relativism and cultural diversity. I argue that these two concepts have lost their original critical edge and risk being appropriated by the market ideology. Rather than valorizing them as canonical concepts, we need to pay attention to their temporal dimension and investigate how horizons of possibility can emerge from cultural unfamiliarity that so characterizes the nature of introductory anthropology.起始頁-結束頁：11-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000314篇名：人類學學識、影像的展演╱介入與公共化策略：民族誌影展在台灣並列篇名：The Curation/Intervention and Publicization Strategy of Anthropological Knowledge and Images: The Ethnographic Film Festival in Taiwan作者：林文玲(Wen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：民族誌影展;影像介入;公共場域;原住民影片;ethnographic film festival;image intervention;public sphere;indigenous film期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：「公共人類學」與「視覺人類學」從不同出發點對人類學的知識生產、傳播、流通以及知識的樣態與對象所進行的討論，有頗為類近的反省思辯，兩者交迭之處正好描繪出本文主體「民族誌影展在台灣」，所觸及的視覺媒體、人類學知識的公共化以及公共人類學所意圖彰顯的題旨與意涵。透過第一屆至第五屆（2001-2009年）台灣國際民族誌影展活動之參與觀察，本文聚焦此影展如何推出各種再現－事件，並藉由公共教育、倡議式與反身性的公共化策略之不同取向，演繹人類學公共化的不同關切與參與面向。人類學影片關於他者／文化的知識與視野，經由民族誌影展的實施，在觀眾、被拍攝對象與影像工作者齊聚一堂的同時，於「共同在場」（co-present）所搭建的溝通空間中，相當程度提供更廣大群眾，省思族群互動的歷史經驗以及認識不同再現、記憶與多重敘說相互競逐的有效途徑。公共人類學關注人類學知識的普及化，在普及化的過程中與受眾接觸而有所碰撞，指出人類學知識的專業特性以及（潛在）服務的對象，並顯現人類學學科的核心預設及其知識生產的權力關係。2007年台灣國際民族誌影展以「在地發聲」為主題，企圖呈現原來是受眾也是被拍攝／研究對象的原住民族群，轉而拿起攝影機拍攝自己。原住民族攝製自己／族群的影片，一方面質疑並挑戰人類學學識或民族誌影片的既定框架，另一方面經由原住民影片製作的介紹、放映與交流，觀察到原住民族（自我）發聲、反嗆與賦權的真實效應。進一步來說，民族誌影展作為一項媒體／社會實踐，活絡了與公眾的接觸和對話，而來自於大眾的反響、回應或詰問，有助於人類學以及民族誌影片的自我省思、架構調整與學術專業的振興或社會參與。英文摘要：”Public anthropology” and ”visual anthropology” whilst from different starting points, share similar reflections and interrogations on the production, dissemination, circulation, and characteristics of anthropological knowledge. This overlapping is present in the ethnographic film festival in Taiwan, which addresses the objectives and implications of visual media, publicized anthropological knowledge, and public anthropology. Through participant observation of the Taiwan International Ethnographic Film Festival, 2001 to 2009, this article focuses on how the film festival launch a variety of representation-event, and how it relies on diverse strategies including educational, advocate, and reflective approaches to elaborate on the concerns and dimensions of public anthropology. The film festival provides a communicative space wherein audience, filmmakers, and film characters are co-present. It is an effective way for the public to reflect together on the historical experiences of ethnic interaction and learn the contestation of different representations, memories, and narratives.Public anthropology is concerned about popularization of anthropological knowledge and the encounters with audience during the process of popularization. Public anthropology pointed out the institutionalized nature and concealed service objects of anthropological knowledge; it also revealed the discipline's core presumptions and power relations of knowledge production. The 2007 Taiwan International Ethnographic Film Festival used ”Indigenous Voice” as the theme, in an attempt to the work of indigenous people who were the previous audience as well as the shooting objects. Celebrating the phenomenon of aboriginals filming themselves, the festival challenges the established framework of anthropological knowledge and ethnographic film. Moreover, it observes the real effect of aboriginal voices, talk-back, and empowerment through introducing, showing, and discussing indigenous films. Furthermore, the Ethnographic Film Festival as a media/social practice enacts active engagement and dialogue with the public. The feedbacks, responses, or interrogations from the public audience, furthermore, are helpful for the self-reflection, framework adjustment, and social participation of the profession of anthropology and ethnographic films.起始頁-結束頁：53-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000415篇名：死刑戰爭：法律人類學的中介並列篇名：War over Death Penalty: Legal Anthropology's Engagement作者：容邵武(Shaw-Wu Jung)關鍵字：死刑;法律人類學;公共人類學;正義;人權;death penalty;legal anthropology;public anthropology;justice;human rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：公共人類學反映一股人類學知識生產與散布的新方式，以及承認人類學家有責任將他們的知識貢獻給有廣大公共意涵的議題。本文針對「廢除死刑」論爭中法律人類學可以提出什麼樣的新問題，投入這場公共辯論裡，而這個新問題有可能讓論辯各方（包括人類學者）有多一些看待世界的方式。本文指出，目前主張「廢除死刑」的論述裡，太過依賴人權、民主理論作為廢除死刑主要理由的不足。而法律人類學家一直透過田野調查並且比較分析，可以傳遞地方的法律知識來形塑死刑存廢的討論內容，進而在公共的討論中，讓常民和主要來自於西方的法律理念有實質以及有想像的對話。本文認為法律人類學對「廢除死刑」論爭可以提出二個新問題，投入這場公共辯論裡。一個是貼近並掌握文化（對於生死）的信仰體系，另一個是找尋轉化的機制，消解死亡所造成的「債」。透過這個例子筆者結論說明法律人類學家既是中介者，更是提出問題者，最後更希望能夠成功指出公共人類學的幾個可能性。英文摘要：Public anthropology may be seen as a new way that produces and distributes anthropological knowledge, and it also reflects the acknowledgement among anthropologists that the anthropological knowledge could have contributed more to the issues relevant to the public interests. This article takes the case of the debates over the death penalty and demonstrates the extent legal anthropology may engage in the debates by putting up new questions for different parties involved. I argue that the major theme underlying the abolition of death penalty is one of human rights and democracy, which is Western derived, and this creates difficulty in translating it to the public. Instead, legal anthropology bases its findings on ethnographic investigation and comparison, thereby being able to connect indigenous legal knowledge into the public forum such that the popular and the Western belief may be in a channel of communication to reshape the debates over the death penalty. In this regard, I propose two new questions legal anthropology can do to bring to attention to the public. One is being able to close to the belief systems within culture (especially with regard to life and death). Second, transformation mechanisms could be constituted for substituting the debt generated out of the crime. I conclude that legal anthropology’s engagement may rearticulate the public debate, one of the ways public anthropology can do to the public interests.起始頁-結束頁：101-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000516篇名：進入公共空間的私密創傷：台灣「慰安婦」的見證敘事作為療癒場景並列篇名：Secret Trauma Going Public: Testimonial Narratives of Taiwanese "Comfort Women" as Healing Scenes作者：彭仁郁(Jen-Yu Peng)關鍵字：慰安婦;歷史創傷;療癒;見證敘事;精神分析;公共化;Comfort women;historical trauma;healing;testimonial narrative;psychoanalysis;publicization期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：1992年2月，台北市婦女救援基金會（婦援會）設立前台籍「慰安婦」申訴專線，開啟了封存近半世紀的私密創傷，使其獲得進入公共領域的機會。從精神分析觀點出發，筆者自2007年末，援用人類學田野研究方法，觀察婦援會自1996年起開辦的「阿嬤身心照顧工作坊」（原名：慰安婦心理治療工作坊），期待探問個人史與集體史之間的辯證關係如何影響主體對於自身創傷經驗的理解，不意在此「臨床田野」當中，察覺到「慰安婦」個人創傷敘事的公共化在社會動員過程中扮演的重要角色。藉由對於環繞著前台籍「慰安婦」所形成的二個社會動員層次的觀察（一、替戰爭性奴役受害者爭取人權、國際正義，要求日本負起戰後責任等的跨國倡議及訴訟活動；二、為生活困頓的慰安婦「阿嬤」提供日常照顧和團體心理治療的社工和心理處遇），筆者試圖描繪「慰安婦」女性戰爭創傷主體進入公共領域的幾個重要場景，觀看這些殖民政權與父權暴力的「受害者」如何在NGO社會動員所搭造的多重現身場景中，逐漸向「倖存者」、「見證者」發聲位置挪移的學習歷程。據此，筆者亦嘗試探討私密創傷在公開場域的現身如何對創傷的心理療癒帶來助力、抑或造成限制。總言之，透過「慰安婦」敘事場景的回顧和檢視，本文意欲彰顯精神分析式聆聽對於主體認納與歷史銘印的著重，或許能為臨床實踐者提供另一條理解「症狀」與「療癒」的路徑，將心理創傷重新置回社會關係的脈絡中。英文摘要：In February 1992, the Taipei Women's Rescue Foundation (TWRF) set up a complaint hotline searching for former ”comfort women” in Taiwan, allowing the historical trauma kept in secret for half a century to enter into public space. From 2007, I started a fieldwork on the ”Psycho-physical Caring Workshop for 'Ah-Ma'” (formerly known as ”Psychotherapy Workshop for Comfort Women”) organized by TWRF since 1996. Based on a psychoanalytical approach, my initial intention was to interrogate how the dialectic relationship between personal history and collective History would affect subject's understanding of one's own traumatic experience. Through this ”clinical fieldwork”, I unexpectedly discovered the crucial role played by the publicization of traumatic narratives in social mobilization. I have then been focusing my observations on two levels of mobilization around the Comfort women issue: firstly, the transnational advocacy movement looking for international recognition and urging the Japanese government to take its postwar responsibility by delivering formal apology and compensation to the victims; secondly, the social care and psychological treatment provided by TWRF to the ”Grandmas”, mostly living in poor condition. Based on these observations, I will describe and analyze some major scenes in the publicizing process of comfort women's stories, showing how these old ladies learned from public appearances settled by NGOs to move from the position of ”victim” to that of ”survivor” and ”witness”. Furthermore, I will discuss if the going public has facilitated healing or, on the contrary, impeded it. To sum up, by re-examining the formation of comfort women's narrative, I intend to highlight the importance of subject's recognition and historical inscription, both pivotal for psychoanalytic understanding of trauma. That might offer clinical practitioners another path to consider symptoms and healing, and to bring psycho-trauma back to social relational context.起始頁-結束頁：139-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000617篇名：倫理規範的發展與公共性反思：以美國及台灣人類學為例並列篇名：Making the Code of Ethics Public and a Priority: The Cases of US and Taiwan Anthropologies作者：劉紹華(Shao-Hua Liu)關鍵字：倫理規範;倫理審查;公共人類學;台灣人類學;美國人類學;code of ethics;ethical review;public anthropology;Taiwan anthropology;American anthropology期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以美國及台灣兩地人類學會倫理規範的發展過程為例，探討當前台灣的研究倫理討論中所呈現出的公共性問題。理解兩國人類學在發展過程中所面臨的特殊堅持，以及因而引發的倫理價值爭論與困境，有助於我們思考學術規範法制化所形塑的倫理意義與限制。在社會變遷的浪潮中，人類學的學科特性不斷提醒學者在面對倫理挑戰時，必須透過困惑、思索、掙扎，以謀求符合學科核心價值，但亦應參酌個人特殊情境與經驗的倫理決定。對於學科價值的論辯、對於非主流者的理解、以及對於多元文化的敏感性，是人類學倫理思考的根本。專業倫理規範應成為推動研究倫理的重心，並據此展開公共討論。英文摘要：This article reveals the problem of publicness during the establishment of ethical oversight of human research in Taiwan. Through examining the development of anthropological codes of ethics in the United States and Taiwan, we come to understand the particular concerns of anthropology in these two societies, and that insight helps us reckon with the significance and constraints of institutionalizing research ethical oversight. Anthropology generally reminds scholars of their individual responsibility to grapple with ethical challenges in the context of cultural difference and social change. Constantly reflecting on the disciplinary cores, understanding the subaltern, and remaining sensitive to cultural difference constitute the fundamental ethical guidance of anthropology. The anthropological code of ethics should become the essence when making the discussion on research ethics public.起始頁-結束頁：197-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000718篇名：論詮釋人類學的修辭轉向、當代批評與全球化挑戰並列篇名：On the Rhetorical Turn of Interpretive Anthropology with Regard to Its Comments and the Contemporary Challenges of Globalization作者：林徐達(Hsu-Ta Lin)關鍵字：詮釋人類學;人類學諷刺;民族誌寓言;超現實主義;全球化;interpretive anthropology;anthropological irony;ethnographic allegory;surrealism;globalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文闡述詮釋人類學的跨學科理論與文本修辭旨趣，試圖澄清當代批評者的論點和回應全球化之挑戰。詮釋人類學是一門關於人類學知識生產的應用詮釋學訓練，其修辭轉向一方面解構了民族誌書寫的主體性，另一方面則檢視民族誌寫作在道德疑慮上的自我懷疑和倫理批判。是故，詮釋人類學的修辭轉向開展了一條自我批判風格的反思路徑，並且藉自文學揭露了文化文本中原先認為微不足道的複雜認識與人類學家的文化感知，其中包括田野工作技藝、民族誌實踐和職權、人類學諷刺、寓言式的疊加意義等主題。同時，通過超現實主義民族誌在並置、拼貼與去熟悉化技術下所獲得的諷刺張力和去穩定性，使得描述資料以一種干擾的操作方式，凸顯其獨特的文化概念和社會價值。於是，詮釋人類學的修辭轉向，作為一項持續自身知識生產樣態的自我察覺，將有助於釐清全球化下有關異質性與同質性交混的文化多樣性。英文摘要：This essay elucidates the cross-disciplinary appropriations of interpretive anthropology and its rhetoric interests, thereby responding to the current critical comments and the contemporary challenges of globalization. Drawing on the Geertzian initiation, interpretive anthropology, rather than a specialty or subdiscipline, is a hermeneutic discipline as a vehicle of meaning toward the very center of anthropological reproduction. The rhetorical turn of interpretive anthropology then comes to deconstruct the subjectivity of ethnographic writing, and to examine the authorial self-doubt on moral hypochondria in writing. Illuminated by the rhetoric perceptions in literatures, the interpretive anthropology therefore motivates self-reflexivity as an autocritique which shifts the methodological craft of fieldwork to a subject of ontology, reevaluates the authority of ethnographic writing, and reveals the idea of anthropological irony as well as the superimposed allegorical meanings. The ethnographic surrealism additionally reinforces the tension of irony and destabilization, by means of juxtaposition, collage and defamiliarization, thus challenging the stereotypically fixed understanding of cultural order and social values. The rhetorical turn of interpretive anthropology hence sheds light on the sensibility of cultural diversity undergoing globalization and the selfawareness during the production of ethnographic knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：229-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000819篇名：面向海洋，成為西洋：「海國」想像與日本的亞洲論述並列篇名：Facing the Sea, Becoming the West: The Imagination of Maritime Nation and the Discourse of Asia in Japan作者：藍弘岳(Hung-Yueh Lan)關鍵字：日本;西洋;海國;海權;亞洲論述;Japan;the West;maritime nation;sea power;discours e of Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文將從「陸權國家」與「海權國家」鬥爭的世界史構想出發，從18、19世紀日本知識人話語中，去看日本如何從一個「島國」變成向外開放的商業文明的「海國」乃至「海權國家」，及最後欲成為「陸權國家」而終至失敗的過程。主要以釐清日本之「海國」想像知識系譜，以及進一步探究日本的「海國」想像與其在近代亞洲的擴張之關連為論文目的。因為日本從自覺其為「海國」開始，逐漸不再以「島國」之姿模仿彼岸「陸國」之政治與軍事等的制度，而是改以渡海而來的西方國家為典範，向其周邊的海洋、大陸與島嶼擴張。就此意義而言，近代日本的「海國」想像是與亞洲大陸的「陸國」差異化，其脫亞意識的根源之一。另一方面，當日本企圖以「海國」之姿展開擴張之時，其所能擴張的範圍亦只有亞洲的近鄰諸邦而已，是以「海國」的想像、建構與欲成為「海權國家」與「陸權國家」的亞洲論述纏繞在一起。也就是說，「海國」想像與「脫亞」思想、擴張主義型亞洲論述等三種思想複雜地交錯在一起。本文欲從思想史的角度，釐清此一交錯的思想狀況。藉此，希望能對亞洲主義的形成與發展開提供—思考方向。又，此一複雜的思想狀況當從江戶思想史的內部來探究起的，故本文將檢討林子平、本多利明等江戶後期思想家的言論，然後探討福澤諭吉等明治思想家與亞洲主義團體東邦協會相關之諸種「海國」想像與其亞洲論述。而且，亦將討論東邦協會所譯介馬漢(Alfred Thayer Mahan)的《海權論》（The Influence of Sea Power upon History,1660-1783）與近代日本之亞洲論述的關連。英文摘要：When European maritime powers occupied most of sea spaces, they began to trade with Asian countries, and gradually to colonization of large areas of land in the 18th and 19th centuries. In the meantime, the border was invented in the Asia, and a few Japanese intellectuals gradually started to argued about the border of Japan, to recognize Japan's characteristics and advantages as a maritime nation (海國).And they imaged Japan as a maritime nation as a way to make differences from China. So In the 18th century, a few Japanese intellectuals who imaged Japan as a maritime nation no longer imitated the political and military systems of continental nations (陸國, notably China); rather, they took the Western maritime powers as a model to build the nation and expand territories. In this sense, to imagine Japan itself as a maritime nation was a step, or maybe a turning point, in Japan's attempt to de-Asianize (Escape from Asia, 脫亞), also, it was a step in the development of the Asianism (especially of those expansionist thoughts of Asianism).That is to say, the cultural border between Europe and Asia was invented by the modern Japanese intellectuals, at the same time, they break the border of the Asian nations to become the west. So In this paper, I would like to argue that Japan's imagination of being a maritime nation was an important factor in Asianism's emergence in modern Japan. For this purpose, I will examine the discourses of Japanese intellectuals concerned with building up Japan as a maritime nation from the 18th century. And then I will discuss Afred Thayer Mahan's sea power theory served as one of the factors that lead to the emphasis on military overseas expansion in Japan's (expanisionist) Asiaism. At last, as China is urging to get the sea power of the Asia-Pacific region, want to rebuild China as a maritime nation recently. I will discuss the conflict of the two maritime nations in the border of seas.起始頁-結束頁：273-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).000920篇名：「越境與移動」專題導言並列篇名：Introduction to "Border Transgression and Movement"作者：藍弘岳期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：317-319資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).001001篇名：從「世界城市」到「全球城市」並列篇名：From "World City" to "Global City"作者：伊豫谷登士翁(Toshio Iyotani)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：320-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00112篇名：新殖民主義論之射程並列篇名：The Trajectory of Neo-Colonialism作者：西川長夫(Nagao Nishikawa)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：338-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00123篇名：從「移動」來看新市鎮並列篇名：A View of the New Town from the Perspective of Movement作者：西川祐子(Yuko Nishikawa)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：352-361資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00134篇名：殖民地的過去與後殖民的現在及未來並列篇名：The Colonial Past in the Post-colonial Imagination作者：平田由美(Yumi Hirata)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：362-383資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00145篇名：病毒感染爆發的社會性效用：SARS並列篇名：The Social Utility of the Explosion of Virus Infection: SARS作者：美馬達哉(Tatsuya Mima)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：384-404資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00156篇名：「核寓／預言：反思核子現代性」專題導言並列篇名：Introduction to "Allegory/Prophesy: Nuclear Modernity Reconsidered"作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：406-407資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00167篇名：災難、共同體與文化國家的走向：有關日本大地震的思考並列篇名：Disaster, Community and the Cultural Nation: Reflections on the 3/11 Tohoku Earthquake in Japan作者：趙京華(Jing-Hua Zhao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：408-416資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00178篇名：核與現代日本動畫並列篇名：Nuclear Power and Modern Japanese Animation Films作者：秦剛(Qin Gang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：417-432資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).00189篇名：從「幻想」回歸「歷史」：「寓言」失效的時代與吉卜力工作室的動畫表現並列篇名：From Fantasy to History: Gibili's Animation Films in the Age of Allegory Dysfunction作者：大塚英志(Eiji Otsuka)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：433-443資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).001910篇名：反稀土廠／核電廠即是反獨裁並列篇名：Resisting Lynas is Resisting Nuclear Power Plant and Dictatorship作者：李健聰(Chean-Chung Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：14期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：444-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201206_(14).002011篇名：呼喚紈褲女的隱藏名字？：1920年代柏倫妮斯．艾比特的同女作家肖像攝影並列篇名：Calling the Hidden Name of the Female Dandy?: Berenice Abbott's Portrait Photographs of the Lesbian Writers in the 1920s作者：劉瑞琪(Jui-Ch'i Liu)關鍵字：柏倫妮斯．艾比特;紈褲女;肖像攝影;社會網絡;生產;接受;Berenice Abbott;female dandy;portrait photography;social network;production;reception期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012中文摘要：柏倫妮斯．艾比特（Berenice Abbott, 1898-1991）在1920年代下半葉，拍攝了一些旅居巴黎河左岸的美國女同性戀文學家肖像，這些著名肖像經常作為插圖出現在當時與後世的許多書籍、期刊與影片當中，卻沒有任何論文深入探索它們的歷史、社會與文化意涵。本文將從生產與接受的角度，來探索這些肖像攝影在當時是以哪些特殊策略建構女同性戀的社會主體性？筆者在耙梳這些女同性戀文學家的研究之後，發現了攝影學者們尚未提出的事實：這些肖像攝影潛伏著當時河左岸女同性戀的社會網絡。筆者將藉由重建與揭示這些網絡，來作為分析這些肖像攝影的歷史、社會、與性／別意涵的基礎。艾比特拍攝這些女同性戀文學家的肖像，經常展現留短髮、穿著男性化的套裝與配飾的公眾形象。為了解讀這類公眾形象，筆者將追溯紈褲子（dandy）的系譜學，以及探析目前散見各處的紈褲女（female dandy）論述，以建構轉化自紈褲子外觀的紈褲女形象，從19世紀末到1920年代的遞變。筆者將分析，艾比特如何與美國女同性戀文學家合謀，透過對19世紀紈褲子形象的再詮釋與擴充，以生產／再現她們紈褲女的自我再現？而當這些紈褲女的形象在當時透過社會網絡的綿延，轉變成她們的公眾形象之時，觀者是如何接受這些公眾形象？在1920年代的巴黎與倫敦，紈褲女的形象是否就是女同性戀的標誌？從奔絲朵克（Shari Benstock）到朵安(Laura Doan)，女性主義學者對這個問題的探討有戲劇化的發展。奔絲朵克在1980年代中期提出，在當時的巴黎河左岸文藝圈，外表男性化的女人展現了「女同性戀主義最普遍的意象」。朵安在1990年代末期，卻一反這個很多人相信的說法，強調從1918到1928年，在英法女性陽剛不一定就是女同性戀的標誌。筆者將藉由分析艾比特的紈褲女肖像攝影，從接受的角度對這個論辯作出回應，提出這些紈褲女的肖像其實建構了女同性戀又現又隱的社會主體性。也就是說，這些肖像攝影以「矇混的」（passing）時尚，將拍攝對象的女同性戀認同隱藏在顯而易見的地方，呼喚那些知道如何觀看的人們，看到紈褲女的女同性戀指涉，但是那些不知道如何觀看的人們，卻只看到既優雅又時髦的現代女性文人肖像。英文摘要：Berenice Abbott (1898-1991) took portrait photographs of American lesbian writers of the Left Bank Paris in the 1920s. These famous portraits, as illustrations, appear in many books, journals, and films, but no articles have examined their historical, social, and cultural significations. This paper explores how these portraits construct the social subjectivities of these lesbian writers from the perspectives of production and reception. After investigating historical materials on these lesbian writers, I discover a hidden fact which has not been pointed out by photography scholars. Abbott's lesbian clients came from the same social networks of the Left Bank. My interpretations of these portraits are based on a re-construction of these social networks.Abbott produced the public images of these lesbian writers donning short hair, masculine suits and accessories. I trace the genealogy the female dandy from the late 19th century to the 1920s, which has been acknowledged by scholars only on a piecemeal basis, in order to interpret such public images. I analyze how Abbott colluded with these lesbian writers to produce their self-representations as female dandies through reinterpretating and expanding the images of the dandies in the 19th century? I also explore how the spectators might have received these portraits of female dandies, which tuned into their public images through the expansion of social networking?Was the imagery of the female dandy the mark of the lesbians in Paris and London in the 1920s? Feminist scholars, from Shari Benstock to Laura Doan, have had a dramatic debate on this issue. In the middle of the 1980s, Benstock claimed that ”[t]he most pervasive image of lesbianism in these years is of women who appear at first glance to be male.” At the end of the 1990s, Doan, challenging Benstock's line of thinking, emphasized that one could not tell if female masculinity was the mark of the lesbians in Paris and London from 1918 to 1928. I respond to this debate through reading Abbott's portraits of female dandy from the perspective of reception. My thesis is that these portraits constructed these lesbian writers' social subjectivities that shifted between visibility and invisibility. By the strategy of the passing fashion, these portraits called those who knew how to read the lesbian codes of female dandyism to see these writers' lesbian identity. However, for those who did not know how to look at the lesbian codes of female dandyism, these portraits only exhibited elegant, chic, and modern women writers.起始頁-結束頁：7-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000112篇名：施明正，書寫的身體政治與政治身體的書寫並列篇名：Shi Ming-Zheng: The Body Politics of Writing and Writings on the Political Body作者：楊凱麟(Kai-Lin Yang)關鍵字：施明正;性－政治布置;浪蕩子;身體政治;書寫;Ming-Zheng Shi;sex-political dispositif;dandy;body politic;writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012中文摘要：施明正的小說呈顯一種性－政治的布置，這是透過文學致使政治與性特質在威權體制下不可區辨，是摻入性愛雜質的政治抗議文學，亦是佐以最恐怖政治氛圍所寫就的羅曼史。作為一種浪蕩子的文學，施明正的小說擁有一整個獨特的感官世界，其透過風格化的文筆建構「我」的日常生活中，甚至滲入讓「我」既喪膽又屈服的鎮壓式政治機器裡，以一種反覆遮掩、揭露、歌頌與批判的神經質語言構成他最特異的文學風格，最終使得文學等同於書寫的身體政治學。施明正的第一人稱小說很巧妙地使他得以往來於真實生命與語言虛構之間，他的小說代表著虛構與真實同一的世界，不僅是他身處的白色恐怖時代總是一再羅織、編派各種子虛烏有的「叛亂」與「顛覆政府」事件，也不僅是國民黨正全面啟動各種文工力量粉飾與創造一整部「復興基地與反共堡壘」的領袖神話，更不僅是施明正（以及許多因文字賈禍的政治犯）曾因此真實地被囚禁與監控的冤獄史實，而且更在於施明正作品中以獨特風格所曝現的怪異現實，這是比虛構更虛假的現實，也是比真實還逼真的虛構。英文摘要：The work of the Shi Ming-Zheng demonstrates a sex-political dispositive that is indistinguishable from politics and sexuality in the era of political repression. This is a literature of protest mixing sexuality, but also a romance in an era of white terror. As the literature of dandyism, the work of Shi has a singular world of sensibility that relates to a haptic of the everyday world. This world, described by a schizophrenic language, transforms the literature to a body politic.The novel, written in first person, goes and returns between real life and verbal fiction. Shi's work represents the identity of fiction and reality. It is a fiction more real than reality, a reality more fictional than fiction.起始頁-結束頁：57-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000213篇名：陳黎詩作的「拉美」：翻譯的跨文化與互文研究並列篇名：The "Latinamerica" in Li Chen's Poetry: An Investigation into the Cross-Cultural and Intertexual Translation作者：陳正芳(Cheng-Fan Chen)關鍵字：陳黎;現代詩;文化翻譯;拉丁美洲;Li Chen;modern poetry;cultural translation;Latin America期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012中文摘要：譯詩、論詩又寫詩的作家在台灣並非異數，但能在譯介對象歐、亞、非、美洲兼顧的詩人大概非陳黎莫屬。陳黎的譯作跨越不少國界，而其創作則是跨越不同文化（音樂、繪畫、外國文學），在講究全球文明對話的時代，陳黎多樣越界的選擇裡，對形式的大膽實驗，對女性、少數族群和第三世界的關切，是很值得我們留意的。現今已有數篇論文以後現代主義和後殖民論述處理陳黎的作品，在其又本土又前衛的特質裡，陳黎確實建構了一則台灣詩學的奇景。然而，若是透過跨文化的理解，陳黎作品彰顯的意義應當不只本土和前衛。本文將就其翻譯的大宗－拉美新詩為討論的起點，思考陳黎在創作中所受到的影響。詩人自認從拉美詩的翻譯，而有了模擬轉化之作，這種把拉美文化暗渡到台灣的文學工作，如何解消將美國化當作國際化的迷思？經過文化翻譯之後，陳黎的挪用／改寫如何構成其詩作的獨創性？透過譯詩和創作的剖析，又能達成怎樣的文化比較面向？凡此種種，皆是本文的研究重心，期待透過陳黎的詩翻譯與再創造，闡釋翻譯的跨文化和互文研究，進而建構詩人自身的詩美學。英文摘要：A number of Taiwanese authors can write, comment on, and translate poetry. However, Li Chen, among others, is probably the only one who translates poetry with different origins, covering Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. Li Chen's translations cross national boundaries, and his own works (including music, painting, and foreign literature) also cross various cultures. With the rise of global civilization, Li Chen's works deserve more critical attention owing to his integration of various cross-cultural topics, innovative experimentation on the form, and great concern about women, minority groups, and the third world.Li Chen's works have been discussed from the perspectives of postmodernism and postcolonialism. Exhibiting both local and avant-garde features, Li Chen's works have constructed the spectacle of Taiwanese poetics. However, through the interpretative lens of cross-culturalism, we discover something more than local and avant-garde in Li Chen's works. Starting with the discussion of Li Chen's substantial translations of Latin American poetry, this article examines how Li Chen's translations influence his creative writing.Li Chen regards his experience of translating Latin American poetry leads him to mimic and transform the poems. This article seeks to address the following questions. How can we explicate Li Chen's attempt of transferring Latin American culture into Taiwanese literature as a way to break the myth of treating Americanization as Internationalization? After cultural translations, how does Li Chen create the unique features of his poetry by appropriating and rewriting Latin American poetry? Which perspective of comparative culture can be generated from examining Li Chen's translated poems and his own works? By analyzing Li Chen's poetry translation and creation, we hope to construct Li Chen's cross-cultural and intertextural poetics.起始頁-結束頁：81-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000314篇名：基督新教與西拉雅族的第一次接觸：論荷蘭亞米紐斯主義者在福爾摩莎的傳教事工（1627-1643）並列篇名：The First Contact of Protestants and Siraya: On Arminianists' Missionary Work in Formosa between 1627 and 1643作者：張孝慧(Hsiao-Hui Chang)關鍵字：荷蘭東印度公司;福爾摩莎;西拉雅族;基督新教;亞米紐斯主義;Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie;or VOC);Formosa;Siraya;Protestantism;Arminianism期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012中文摘要：為了發展在中國、日本與東南亞的貿易，聯合東印度公司於西元1624年登陸大員（今台南安平）。荷蘭人原本的目的只是以大員為貿易據點，無意統治福爾摩莎全島。然而，入主大員之後，福爾摩莎肥沃的土地、豐盛的漁獲量及鹿產，吸引聯合東印度公司著手經營福爾摩莎。經營此島的首要工作就是與靠近大員一帶的原住民－西拉雅族－維繫友好關係，同時培養人力。這份任務落在由聯合東印度公司派遣至福爾摩莎的傳教士肩上，基督新教因此傳入福爾摩莎。受歐洲宗教改革的影響，荷蘭本國於17世紀仍有許多基督教義之爭；其中亞米紐斯主義與加爾文主義的爭論深深影響傳教士在福爾摩莎的傳教事工。1627至1643年赴福爾摩莎的傳教士多為亞米紐斯主義者。此一時期，傳教士認為自己必須學習原住民的語言，為他們創造一套羅馬拼音的文字，進而帶領他們認識基督信仰。在學習文字的同時，西拉雅族閱讀了基督教義文本，接受基督信仰的人口比例不斷提高，甚至有全村受浸成為基督徒的案例。筆者將分別考察荷蘭人與西拉雅族的宗教與文化背景，分析其中異同，並且輔以漢人為參照對象，探究原住民歸信基督教的過程以及在17世紀的福爾摩莎形成的一種原－荷融合的文化。英文摘要：The Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie, or VOC) landed in Dayuan on Formosa in 1624 in order to establish a base for conducting trade in China, Japan, and Southeast Asia. At first, the VOC only maintained a stronghold in Dayuan. However, Formosa's fertile land and abundance of fish and deer prompted the company to expand its operations. Expansion required developing friendly relations with aborigines on the island, a task which fell to Dutch missionaries sent by the VOC. It was through these missionaries that Christian teachings first reached Formosa. Doctrinal disputes within Dutch Protestantism between Calvinism and Arminianism deeply affected missionary work in Formosa. Most of the missionaries who arrived between 1627 and 1643 were Arminianists. During this period, the missionaries' first task was to develop written script for aboriginal languages so that aborigines could read Christian texts. Through learning written forms of their languages, aborigines were exposed to Christian teachings and many were baptized as Christians. This paper examines the religious and cultural backgrounds of both Dutch settlers and indigenous peoples in 17th century Formosa and the hybrid Dutch/indigenous culture that emerged through the process of aboriginals' conversion to Christianity.起始頁-結束頁：129-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000415篇名：移動的美術館：20世紀初中國的書籍裝幀設計與商業美術並列篇名：Movable Museums: Book Design and Commercial Arts in the Early Twentieth-Century China作者：林素幸(Su-Hsing Lin)關鍵字：封面設計;商業美術;陶元慶;錢君匋;陳之佛;book cover design;commercial art;Tao Yuanqing;Qian Juntao;Chen Zhifo期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012中文摘要：近代中國書籍裝幀設計的興起，除了和西方工業革命及中國民族經濟發展等有關外，其風格演變更與當時的考古發現和美術思潮等有著互為表裡，不可分割的關係。民初的書籍裝幀一般是指「封面設計」，而不包括書脊、書背或扉頁等其它部分。20世紀初的1910到1930年代，在市民階級成立的同時，大眾藝術終於綻放了異彩，那是可以製作書籍封面、海報、插畫、版畫等多數作品的印刷藝術，比繪畫更親近大眾生活的藝術，並滲透一般大眾的生活中，滿足人人追求藝術的渴望。因為旅遊的逐漸普遍，書籍、雜誌常常隨著人們攜帶出門而流通，封面上的設計作品也就宛如美術館動態般地巡迴展演，影響力常常是無遠弗屆。這些當時被稱作「二流藝術」，社會地位較低的作品，因為不受習慣與傳統拘束，可以各自追求獨特的表現，反而成為一種新興藝術而大獲人心。書籍裝幀設計的重要性，不論在現代藝術史、設計史或民智啟蒙的影響，都有著不可忽視的地位。英文摘要：In the early twentieth century, rapid industrialization had changed the character of the major cities in China. When new business ventures, such as Commercial Press and the Kaiming Book Company, became successfully established as modern companies, a new category of professional artists, like graphic designers, was created. To carve and profit from a new market niche in the booming publishing industry, many designers seized the new popular trend of art, and were active in disseminating art and culture through the print media. Not only was the emergence of Chinese design tied to the industrial revolutionand the prevalent artistic trend in the West, like Art Deco, but also to the archeological finds then. Yet, the significance of the art of book cover design had been under-examined in the past.In this paper, I will scrutinize the trend of book cover design in the early Republican period, examine the characteristics of representative designers, such as Qian Juntao and Tao Yuanqing, at the time, and analyze their role and contribution in the modern Chinese art.起始頁-結束頁：163-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000516篇名：缺席：艾未未問題並列篇名：Absence: The Question of Ai Wei-Wei作者：文化研究期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：229-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000617篇名：由展覽談起並列篇名：Taking the Exhibition as a Starting Point作者：林志明(Chih-Ming Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：238-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000718篇名：艾未未的「公共．藝術」並列篇名：Ai Wei-Wei's "Public Art"作者：顧爾德(Gould)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：242-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000819篇名：作為論壇的艾未未並列篇名：Ai Wei-Wei as Forum作者：徐明瀚(Austin Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：248-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).000920篇名：艾未未：一個總體藝術及其弔詭體系並列篇名：Ai Wei-Wei: A Total Artwork and its Paradox System作者：劉紀蕙(Joyce C. H. Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：256-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).001001篇名：污名的比較：殘障與性並列篇名：The Case for Comparison: Stigma between Disability and Sexuality作者：文化研究期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：264-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00112篇名：打造一個夠落後的烏托邦：海澀愛的污名連線政治與罔兩問景並列篇名：A Backward Enough Utopia: Heather Love's Stigma as Coalitional Politics作者：劉人鵬(Jen-Peng Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：266-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00123篇名：污名的比較：殘障與性並列篇名：The Case for Comparison: Stigma between Disability and Sexuality作者：海澀愛(Heather Love)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：282-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00134篇名：污名：政治性的凝視與同情並列篇名：Stigma: A Stigmatization through Gazing and Sympathizing Politically作者：陳柏偉(Bo-Wei Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：296-306資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00145篇名：老年同志的三重污名：老年、同志、性並列篇名：The Stigma of Elderly Gay Men: Aging, Homosexuality and Sex作者：喀飛(Gofyy)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：308-312資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00156篇名：污名作為隱喻：如何重構污名的連線並列篇名：Stigma as Metaphor: Thoughts on Coalition Building across Stigmas作者：游靜(Yau Ching)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：314-322資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00167篇名：逆流酷兒並列篇名：Against the "Queer " Current ?作者：甯應斌(Yin-Bin Ning)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：324-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).00178篇名：惑亂生養處，魍魎滋長式：閱讀《置疑婚姻家庭連續體》的不連續罔兩親密組模與旁若家居結構並列篇名：Where the Anti-Normalising Multitude Builds Partial Habitations: A Review of "Querying Marriage-Family Continuum"作者：洪凌(Lucifer Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：13期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：338-342資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201203_(13).001801篇名：大擘劃家陳拱北教授並列篇名：A Great Planner of Taiwan Public Health History: Dr. Kung-Pei Chen作者：翁瑞宏期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：499-501資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-012篇名：進口美國牛肉的科學、法律以及政治爭議：牛海綿狀腦病的討論作者：廖舜右;張照勤期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：502-511資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-023篇名：極端高溫健康預警系統之國際文獻回顧並列篇名：A Literature Review of Action Plans for the Impact of Heat Waves on Health作者：林于凱(Yu-Kai Lin);林沛練(Pay-Liam Lin);李明旭(Ming-Hsu Li);黃鈴雅(Ling-Ya Huang);宋鴻樟(Fung-Chang Sung);王玉純(Yu-Chun Wang)關鍵字：熱浪;溫度;死亡;預警系統;heat wave;temperature;mortality;warning system期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：國內外研究顯示極端高溫及其連續數日事件顯著增加健康風險，本研究彙整2004-2012年間關鍵字為氣象、事件、高溫、預警及死亡等之國際主要文獻與報告，統整各國高溫預警準則及預警系統之架構，以作為本國未來相關系統建置之參考依據。都會區是氣象-健康預警系統之基本空間單位。建立預警系統前，需先了解溫度與敏感族群健康之相關性。目前熱預警系統定義之高敏感性族群以糖尿病、無行為能力者、藥癮酒癮者、腎臟疾病及腦血管、心肺疾病等慢性病病患為主。熱預警計畫由政府衛生單位、氣象單位及專家學者共同界定地區氣象預警項目及規範，氣象單位負責氣象預報並發布預警工作，衛生單位則負責熱應變計畫工作（如：建議敏感性族群提升個人主動防護及行為措施）及風險溝通工作。各地區採用之溫度指標及應變項目略有不同，宜因地制宜。研究證實熱預警系統建置可有效降低熱相關死亡及就醫。因此，在全球暖化趨勢下，我們應即早規劃適用本國之高溫預警應變系統。英文摘要：Many studies have associated episodes of extremely high temperature and prolonged heat waves with increased risks in terms of mortality and morbidity. This study investigated the various health warning systems regarding heat waves that had been proposed by Western countries and reviewed worldwide publications and reports available from 2004 to 2012. Temperature-health associations should be identified before establishing a heat wave warning system. Patients with diabetes mellitus, renal diseases, disabilities, and chronic cardiopulmonary diseases are highly vulnerable to extremely high temperatures. A national weather system is expected to disseminate the heat warning accurately and in a timely fashion. The regional health authority is the lead agency responsible for public health responses to heat and the communication of risks to the public. Application of the temperature index and responses to heat wave warnings vary among areas depending on weather conditions and socio-demographic status. Based on our evaluation, a heat wave warning system would be expected to significantly reduce the impact on health from extremely high temperatures. Studies of temperature-health associations and heat wave warning systems should be established in Taiwan to mitigate the impact of global warming.起始頁-結束頁：512-522資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-034篇名：含酒精提神飲料的職業安全健康危害：現況問題與政策因應並列篇名：Effects of alcoholic energy drinks on occupational safety and health: current conditions and intervention policies作者：鄭婉汝(Wan-Ju Cheng);鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：含酒精提神飲料;職業安全;職業健康;政策;alcoholic energy drinks;occupational safety;occupational health;policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：含酒精提神飲料的飲用是台灣勞力工作者特有的職場文化。國外已有不少研究報告指出，酒精與提神飲料併用會增加安全與健康上的風險，但國內有關此類飲品健康危害的本土學術研究卻仍相當不足。本研究採文獻分析法，回顧國際與台灣有關含酒精提神飲料的實證研究各51篇及8篇，以瞭解此類飲料的盛行狀況、飲用行為與其安全健康危害。結果發現，西方國家大多以大學生為主要飲用族群，台灣則以勞力職業族群為主，特別是在營建業勞工中，約20%有飲用習慣。含酒精提神飲料的飲用，與工作傷害、危險行為及酒癮等問題有正相關，但台灣仍缺乏追蹤性研究以證實其因果關係。回顧近十年來國際間有關含酒精提神飲料政策之發展趨勢，可發現大多數國家的管理政策傾向於全面禁止其銷售。反觀台灣，雖然近年來衛生主管單位陸續提出管理與標示政策，但顯然仍有不足，亟需大幅改進。英文摘要：The consumption of alcoholic energy drinks is a unique feature among manual workers in Taiwan. Growing evidence indicates that mixing energy drinks with alcohol increases safety and health risks; however, the situation in Taiwan has not been well understood. We conducted a systematic review to understand the prevalence, drinking behaviors, and the risks associated with alcoholic energy drinks. A total of 51 international studies and 8 Taiwanese studies were reviewed. Results showed that alcoholic energy drinks were popular among college students in Western countries, while in Taiwan such drinks were consumed mostly by manual workers, especially by construction workers, 20% of whom were habitual drinkers. The consumption of alcoholic energy drinks was found to correlate with the occurrence of occupational injuries, risky behaviors, and alcohol dependence, yet the causal relationships should be confirmed by longitudinal studies. Governmental policies in selected countries concerned about alcoholic energy drinks are moving towards a complete ban on the sale of such drinks. In Taiwan, recently issued regulations on the sale and labeling of alcoholic energy drinks are insufficient and should be improved.起始頁-結束頁：523-534資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-045篇名：台灣18歲以下未成年人交通事故住院發生率與醫療資源耗用之相關因素並列篇名：Incidence of and factors associated with medical costs of traffic injury-related hospitalization of children in Taiwan作者：張筑禎(Chu-Chen Chang);林蕙欣(Hui-Hsin Lin);林志銘(Chih-Ming Lin)關鍵字：交通事故;發生率;住院天數;醫療費用;未成年人;Traffic accidents;Incidence;Length of stay;Medical expense;Children期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：分析台灣18歲以下未成年族群因交通事故住院之發生率，並探討個人、疾病及醫院因素與醫療資源耗用之相關性。方法：採用國家衛生研究院建置的2007-2009年健康保險住院醫療費用資料檔，依外因分類碼擷取診斷欄位為交通事故且年齡低於18歲之住院傷患，總計樣本19,781人。我們估計全國未成年人口交通事故住院發生率，並以對數轉換後之住院天數與醫療費用為結果變項，以多變項迴歸研析其與年齡、性別、醫院層級、手術處置與共病數等潛在相關因子之相關性。結果：台灣未成年人在這3年因交通事故導致19,781筆住院總計1,117.7千人日，醫療費用7.1億元。平均年住院發生率為105.9/105，平均住院天數與醫療費用分別為5.65天與35,903.5元。15-17歲男孩有最高之住院發生率(445.5/105)與醫療費用(41,029.2元)。年齡較大、女性、手術處置、高醫院層級與多共病數顯著增加住院天數。然而在調整住院天數後，除手術處置與高醫院層級外，男性、嬰兒與單純性傷害反而是造成醫療費用增加的因子。結論：台灣未成年人交通事故傷害耗用具體之健康照護資源，每年花費的住院醫療支出達2.37億元，且有許多相關因子值得後續研究。英文摘要：Objectives: To study traffic injury-related hospitalization of children under 18 years of age in terms of incidence and factors related to medical costs. Methods: The 2007-2009 National Health Insurance Research Database was used to identify a total of 19,781 children under 18 years of age who were hospitalized with an external cause (E code) of traffic injury. The incidence of traffic injury-related hospitalization among children was estimated. The associations between potentially significant covariates (age, gender, accreditation level of hospital, surgical intervention, number of comorbid conditions) and log-transferred hospitalization cost and length of stays (LOSs) were examined with multivariate regression analysis. Results: The 19,781 traffic injury-related hospitalizations among children under 18 years of age from 2007 to 2009, resulted in more than 710 million NTD in inpatient charges and 1117.7 thousand person-days of hospitalization. The annual incidence rate of hospitalization was 105.9/105. Mean (SD) LOSs and hospital charges were 5.65 (6.57) days and 35 903.5 (77 358.0) NTD, respectively. Male adolescents aged 15 through 17 had the highest hospitalization rates (445.5 per 100 000) and medical cost (41029.2 NTD). Older age, being female, having a higher number of comorbid conditions, surgical intervention and a higher hospital accreditation level were significantly associated with longer LOSs. In addition to surgical intervention and accreditation level of the hospital, those who were male, infants, or without other comorbid conditions tended to incur higher hospital charges after adjustment for LOSs. Conclusions: Traffic injuries among children incur a substantial health care burden, with an annual cost for hospital care exceeding 237 million NTD. Many related factors are worthy of further study.起始頁-結束頁：535-543資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-056篇名：評論：台灣18歲以下未成年人交通事故住院發生率與醫療資源耗用之相關因素作者：白璐期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：544-544資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-117篇名：高估或低估？自我評核與評鑑委員評核結果的一致性探討：以2009年護理之家評鑑資料庫為例並列篇名：Higher or Lower? Agreement between Self-evaluation and External Evaluation Regarding the Outcome of Nursing Home Accreditation: An Analysis of the 2009 Nursing Home Accreditation Survey作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);蔡淑鳳(Shwu-Feng Tsay);鄭瑛琳(Ying-Lin Cheng);林育秀(Yu-Hsiu Lin)關鍵字：護理之家;評鑑;一致性;Kappa檢定;Nursing home;accreditation;agreement;Kappa test期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在瞭解首次台灣一般護理之家評鑑自評結果及委評結果之一致性，並探討影響一致性之相關因素，做為主管機關未來修訂評鑑實施方式及內容與經營管理者準備評鑑工作參考。方法：本研究為一橫斷式研究，以2009年「台灣護理之家評鑑資訊網資料庫」中之351家一般護理之家為研究對象，進行次級資料分析。採一致性百分比與Kappa檢定分析受評護理之家自評與委評於評鑑結果之一致性，並以邏輯斯迴歸探討影響自評結果與委評結果一致性之因素。結果：評鑑基準五大面向與總評結果之自評結果與委評結果Kappa值介於0.086-0.291，一致性百分比介於40.17%-65.53%。護理之家開業年數、負責人角色為合夥股東型態者顯著增加自評結果與委評結果的一致性；所在區域為南區及高屏區的護理之家其自評結果與委評結果一致性顯著低於東區的護理之家。結論：整體而言，kappa值介於輕微至尚可之間，顯示護理之家自評者與評鑑委員對於評鑑項目達成認知的一致性不高。建議主管機關未來修訂評鑑指標應力求清晰明確，並舉辦評鑑後論壇，探討當年度評鑑自評結果與委評結果不一致之可能原因及改善方案；機構自評者應多參加評鑑前說明會與評鑑後論壇，透過標竿學習，提昇自評結果與委評結果的一致性。英文摘要：Objectives: This study examined the agreement between self-evaluation and external evaluation regarding the outcome of nursing home accreditation and factors related to that agreement. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study using data from the 2009 Taiwan Nursing Home Accreditation Survey. A total of 351 nursing homes were included. Percentage agreement and Kappa tests were used to measure the agreement between self-evaluation and external evaluation. Multivariate logistic regression was used to identify factors associated with agreement. Results: The Kappa ranged from 0.086 to 0.291, and the percentage of agreement from 40.17% to 65.53%. After controlling for other variables, multivariate logistic regression showed that years of nursing home operation (OR=1.078, 95% C.I.=1.006-1.156), the owner's role (OR=2.540, 95% C.I.=1.062-6.077), and region of the nursing home's location (OR=0.262, 95% C.I.=0.075-0.913; OR=0.197, 95% C.I.=0.055-0.705) were significantly associated with agreement. Conclusions: As a whole, agreement between self-evaluation and external-evaluation regarding the outcome of nursing home accreditation was only slight to fair. A clear and specific accreditation index and the use of benchmarks to encourage nursing home employees to identify best practices are suggested as ways to promote agreement between self-evaluation and external-evaluation. Additional training of self-evaluators and external-evaluators may be useful in increasing the rates of agreement between these groups.起始頁-結束頁：545-555資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-068篇名：醫師的安眠藥物處方行為之初探：一項質性研究並列篇名：A preliminary investigation of hypnotic prescribing behavior by physicians: a qualitative study作者：郭淑珍(Shu-Chen Kuo);陳怡君(Yi-Chun Chen);楊雪華(Hsieh-Hua Yang)關鍵字：安眠藥物;處方行為;醫師;失眠;hypnotics;prescribing;physician;insomnia期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：台灣過去有關安眠藥物使用的研究，大多是對處方內容作分析，較難瞭解醫師臨床處方之考量。本研究透過深度訪談，探索醫師的安眠藥物處方行為。方法：研究對象經由從事醫療工作的朋友引見，以質性深度訪談，訪問17位有開立安眠藥物處方的執業醫師；資料的分析採用編輯式分析法。結果：影響醫師是否處方安眠藥物之考量因素包括有：醫師的專業科別、病人期待藥物的效果、恢復及維持病人的社會功能、建立和鞏固醫病關係；受訪醫師雖表示不見得會順應病人對藥物的要求，然而醫病之間的長久熟識，可能使得醫師較難抗拒病人對於藥物需求的習慣性期待。在藥物選擇上，病人過去用藥史，如果曾經使用安眠藥物，受訪醫師會處方原來的藥物給病人繼續服用；如果是首次藥物使用者，醫師大多處方非苯二氮平類的安眠藥物；對於非苯二氮平類藥物的信心，使得醫師易忽略使用這類藥物的風險。醫師對於處方訊息的告知，最常透露的是藥物名稱、服藥時間等；醫師認為病人可能不想獲得太多訊息，因此對於藥物各種作用的詳細說明、持續用藥追蹤諮詢與評估等，並未確實執行。大部分受訪醫師對於非藥物治療失眠方式所知有限，又因健保給付制度的影響，治療失眠仍以藥物為主。結論：醫療專業特質、社會規範、醫病互動以及保險支付制度對於醫師處方行為皆有影響，相關政府單位如能規劃論質計酬的支付方式，提供多元的治療選項，同時在醫師的繼續教育中，安排非藥物治療方式訓練，使得醫師可以擬定適合治療計畫，減低非必要的藥物使用。英文摘要：Objectives: In Taiwan, the bulk of studies about hypnotics have focused on the content of prescriptions, with relatively less emphasis on the physician's clinical considerations. The objective of this study was to explore hypnotic prescribing behavior by physicians. Methods: Referred by friends engaged in medical work, 17 physicians who prescribed hypnotics consented to in-depth interviews. Data were subject to editing style analysis. Results: Factors influencing hypnotic prescribing behavior included physician specialization, patient expectation of drug effects, maintenance of social functioning of the patient, and the doctor-patient relationship. The physician might not want to respond to a patient's request, but the long-term doctor-patient relationship might still influence prescription behavior and the physician would prescribe the same drug again. If the patient were a first-time user, the physician would prescribe benzodiazepine receptor agonists. Because of confidence in non-benzodiazepine drugs, physicians would ignore the risk of using these drugs. Some physicians believed that patients did not want to get too many messages, and told their patients only the name of the medication and the time of ingestion, but not a detailed description of the effects or the need for continuous follow-up evaluation and consultation. Other than their impact on the health care payment system, most of the physicians had limited knowledge about non-pharmaceutical treatments for insomnia. As a result, the treatment of insomnia still heavily relies on prescription medications. Conclusions: Based on the results, we suggest that the government might adopt pay for performance to cover the cost of alternative medical treatments. To reduce the unnecessary use of hypnotics, physicians are encouraged to learn about other non-pharmaceutical techniques during continuing medication education, apply these techniques in clinical settings, and create proper treatment plans for patients with insomnia.起始頁-結束頁：556-569資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-079篇名：台灣民眾有類流感症狀時戴口罩之行為意圖及其相關因素探討：H1N1新型流感大流行與後大流行期間之比較並列篇名：The Prevalence of and Factors Associated with Intention to Wear a Face Mask during an Influenza-like Illness: A Comparison between the Influenza A/H1N1 Pandemic and the Post-pandemic Phase作者：莊淑如(Shu-Ru Jhuang);黃俊豪(Jiun-Hau Huang)關鍵字：H1N1新型流感;大流行;後大流行;戴口罩意圖;健康信念;influenza A/H1N1;pandemic;post-pandemic;intention to wear a face mask;health beliefs期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：比較新型流感大流行與後大流行期間，台灣民眾有類流感症狀時戴口罩之行為意圖與相關健康信念之差異，並探討不同流行期間民眾健康信念與其戴口罩行為意圖之關係。方法：於2009年及2010年10月，分別依縣市進行分層隨機抽樣，採用電腦輔助電話訪問進行全國調查，訪問年滿15歲之民眾以蒐集健康信念及戴口罩之行為意圖等資訊，分析樣本分別為1,079人及1,067人，電訪完成率分別為68.5%及66.0%。結果：民眾有戴口罩之行為意圖的盛行率，於大流行與後大流行期間分別為95.9%及93.7%。大流行期間，自覺戴口罩非常有效（AOR=4.88）、自覺戴口罩不太困難（AOR=9.23）或一點也不困難（AOR=25.29）及近期無類流感症狀者（AOR=3.55），較傾向戴口罩。反觀後大流行期間，認為疫情有點可能持續擴大（AOR=3.07）、自覺戴口罩有點有效（AOR=5.29）或非常有效（AOR=9.61）及自覺戴口罩不太困難（AOR=10.09）或一點也不困難者（AOR=14.55），較傾向戴口罩。結論：未來針對民眾採取疾病預防行為之衛教計畫，可強調採取該行為之效果，並降低採取該行為可能之障礙。於大流行期間，無需過度強調疫情嚴重度，然於後大流行期間，則需定期提供疫情資訊，使民眾持續採取預防行為。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated and compared intention to wear a face mask during an influenza-like illness (ILI) and associated factors in the general Taiwanese population during the phase-6 influenza A/H1N1 pandemic (pH1N1) and the post-pandemic phase. Methods: Two national surveys using the computer-assisted telephone interview method were conducted in Taiwan during October in 2009 and 2010. Stratified random sampling by region was used to select these two national samples of participants aged 15 years or older. Participants were asked about their intention to wear a face mask during an ILI and their related health beliefs. The final samples consisted of 1,079 and 1,067 participants, resulting in response rates of 68.5% and 66.0%, respectively. Results: Nearly 96% of the participants intended to wear a face mask when having an ILI during the pandemic phase, whereas only 93.7% intended to do so during the post-pandemic phase. Multivariate logistic regression indicated that factors associated with intention to wear a face mask and the strengths of these associations were different during these two phases. During the pandemic phase, participants who considered wearing face masks to be very effective in preventing pH1N1 [adjusted odds ratio (AOR) =4.88], who considered wearing face masks to be not very difficult (AOR=9.23) or not at all difficult (AOR=25.29), and who did not have influenza-like symptoms during the previous month (AOR=3.55) were more inclined toward wearing face masks. By contrast, during the post-pandemic phase, participants who perceived that the pH1N1 outbreak would expand (AOR=3.07), who considered wearing face masks to be effective (AOR=5.29) or very effective (AOR=9.61), and who considered wearing face masks to be not very difficult (AOR=10.09) or not at all difficult (AOR=14.55) were more inclined to wear them. Conclusions: These findings suggest that future health education campaigns should emphasize evidence-based information regarding the effectiveness of the recommended preventive behavior, while perceived barriers should be better understood, addressed, and hence minimized. The seriousness of the disease should not be overplayed during the pandemic phase; however, communication campaigns in the post-pandemic phase should provide regular updates about the outbreak to keep the public alert in order to maintain good preventive health behavior practices.起始頁-結束頁：570-580資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-0810篇名：促進小學生健康飲食行為之研究：整合跨理論模式及問題導向學習模式並列篇名：Integrating the Transtheoretical Model and Problem-based Learning Strategies to Improve Students' Dietary Behaviors作者：邱詩揚(Shy-Yang Chiou);陳富莉(Fu-Li Chen);劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu)關鍵字：健康飲食;飲食行為;跨理論模式;問題導向學習模式;小學生;healthy eating;dietary behavior;Transtheoretical Model;Problem-based Learning;elementary students期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討「整合跨理論模式及問題導向學習模式之教學模組」促進學生健康飲食行為之效果，期能發展國小融入式健康飲食教學模組以增進學生的飲食與健康問題覺識、飲食認知、預期結果評價、增強管理技巧、社會支持、自我效能及健康飲食行為。方法：本研究採「不相等實驗組、控制組實驗設計」，立意選取宜蘭縣內一所國小為實驗學校，一所國小為對照學校，並分別於該校選取五年級的學生為研究對象。本研究之評量包括形成評量、過程評量及成效評量，並以前後測問卷調查收集量性之成效評量資料。結果：研究結果顯示教學介入可有效增進國小學童的「飲食與健康問題覺識」、「飲食議題認知」、「增強管理技巧」、「自我效能」及「健康飲食行為」，且在一個月後仍能維持增進「健康飲食行為」的延宕效果。結論：研究結果可作為未來推動國小健康飲食及教師在職訓練之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of a teaching module about healthy dietary behaviors based on the Transtheoretical Model and Problem-based Learning on elementary school students in Taiwan. This module was expected to increase students' awareness about dietary and health issues, dietary knowledge, outcome expectancy, reinforcement and management skills, social support, self-efficacy, and healthy dietary behaviors. Methods: A nonequivalent experimental-control group design was used with 5th grade classes from two elementary schools in Ilan County. The experimental group received instruction in healthy eating during the intervention period, while the control group received no intervention during the same period. Evaluations of formation, process, and outcome were done with questionnaire surveys to collect quantitative data. A closed-ended pretest-posttest questionnaire and another closed-ended follow-up test questionnaire were used to evaluate the outcome effects. Results: The results supported the hypothesis that this module could produce a positive increase in students' awareness about dietary and health issues, dietary knowledge, reinforcement and management skills, self-efficacy, and healthy dietary behaviors. A follow-up test provided support for continued educational effects on students' healthy dietary behaviors. Conclusions: The results of this study provide a new perspective for future research and teacher training with regard to healthy eating in elementary schools.起始頁-結束頁：581-596資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-0911篇名：影響台灣不同世代老人存活相關因子探討並列篇名：Factors Related to Survival Rates of the Elderly in Different Cohorts in Taiwan作者：林正祥(Cheng-Hsiang Lin);劉士嘉(Shih-Chia Liu)關鍵字：老人健康調查;存活狀況;Cox模式;脆弱模式;survey of health and living status of the elderly;survival rates;Cox proportional hazard model;frailty model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷6期出版年：2012中文摘要：探討台灣不同世代老人存活趨勢變化差異及影響老年人口存活相關因子。方法：本研究利用國民健康局「台灣地區中老年人身心社會狀況長期追蹤研究調查」自1989年至2007年之六次訪查資料，以Cox脆弱加權模式分析探討老年人口存活相關因素並比較不同出生A、B世代（1915-1929、1929-1943）分別於1989-1993年及2003-2007年存活趨勢變化差異。結果：就兩世代樣本特性言，以性別及族群差異較大，其他影響世代存活相關因子間差異，A世代抽菸人數與體能、自評健康狀況及自認經濟狀況好者較B世代為多，顯現世代間之健康行為及其對身心狀況的感受亦有所差異；罹患糖尿病與高血壓的比例B世代較A世代為多，具呼吸疾病的比例則以A世代老人較高。其餘疾病如中風、心臟疾病及胃潰瘍或胃病等差異不大。另經統計模式選擇結果發現年齡、住地類型、自評健康、體能狀況、有無糖尿病及抽菸為影響台灣不同世代老人存活趨勢變化差異之重要指標。結論：在不同世代存活4年趨勢變化差異上，較為年輕B世代老人，由於經濟情況的改善及全民健保的實施，相較於A世代老人，生活條件較好並享有較為優質的醫療照顧；經相關變項調整後，B世代死亡風險為A世代的0.601倍；兩世代老人的存活情況，受性別、族群、嚼檳榔及社團參與的影響不大，糖尿病則為影響不同世代60-74歲老人存活之主要慢性疾病，然未來時日增長，增加較多調查數據時，情況亦可能有所變化，有待進一步探討。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the factors related to the survival rates of the elderly in two different cohorts in Taiwan. Methods: Data derived from six waves of the survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan from 1989 to 2007 were used to compare the survival rates of the elderly during 1989-1993 and 2003-2007 between two different birth cohorts (1915-1929-Cohort A and 1929-1943-Cohort B). The weighted Cox frailty model with time-dependent covariates was used for data analysis. Results: There were differences in gender and ethnicity between two cohorts. The rates of smoking, good physical condition, self-rated health and economic situation were higher in cohort A than in cohort B. The rates of diabetes and hypertension were higher in cohort B than in cohort A. Conversely, the rate of respiratory system diseases was higher in cohort A. For other chronic diseases, e.g. stroke, heart disease, gastric ulcers, and stomach ailments, there were slight difference between the two cohorts. Based on Cox model selection, age, residential location, self-rated health, physical function, diabetes, and smoking were significant factors related to the survival of the elderly in both cohorts. Conclusions: By the results of Cox frailty model, four-year survival rates differ a lot between cohort A and cohort B. This difference might be due to improved economic conditions and the implementation of national health insurance, which resulted in a better living standard and medical care for the elderly in cohort B compared to cohort A. In addition, after adjusting for related covariates, the risk ratio of cohort B to cohort A was about 0.601. Gender, ethnicity, chewing betel nut, and social activity were insignificant for both cohorts. Diabetes was the main disease related to survival for both cohorts. Some factors may become significant if more data is included in a future study. This issue requires further investigation.起始頁-結束頁：597-611資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-06-1012篇名：台灣發展WiMAX之潛在健康風險與風險治理探討並列篇名：Potential Health Risks and Risk Management Issues as a Result of Introducing WiMAX Technology in Taiwan作者：王瑞庚(David Walther);周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou)關鍵字：WiMAX;電磁場（波）;射頻輻射電磁場;電磁場（波）健康影響;風險治理;WiMAX;magnetic wave;radiofrequency electromagnetic fields;magnetic wave health impact;risk governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：台灣2004年規劃以WiMAX為骨幹建設全國「寬頻無線網路」系統，其投資高達260億元。然而考察近年來一些國際上之射頻輻射健康影響研究，除了已知知識的部分提到：無法證明射頻輻射有健康危害，尚有一些研究具有知識上的不確定性以及隨之而來的科學解釋與價值判斷的爭議，因此也不能完全排除其潛在健康風險之可能。Stirling提出的知識不確定矩陣，區分出已知知識、知識不確定性以及模稜兩可的科學解釋與價值判斷，已知知識可以採用傳統的風險評估工具，但其他範疇則需要風險溝通等不同方法來進行管理。研究發現我國WiMAX計畫之決策和執行過程，缺乏公衛、醫學等多元專家參與決策或徵求健康評估相關計畫，未對其健康風險進行良好風險溝通並開放公民參與管道，政府委託研究無法影響既定之政策，政府也並未遵循研究建議，改善現有治理架構。本文建議WiMAX應參考加州與歐盟對行動通訊電磁波之風險治理實踐作法，進行擴大科學審查和公民參與等新興風險治理典範，以形塑優質的科技決策。英文摘要：WiMAX is a brand new mobile communication technology whose impact on health and the environment has never been fully researched and evaluated by Taiwanese academia or regulatory departments such as the Environmental Protection Administration (EPA). This article introduces WiMAX technology, reviews the international scientific literature, investigates the potential health risks of WiMAX, considers risk management in Taiwan, and applies the concept of Uncertain Matrix of Knowledge. We found that the government used insufficient scientific evidence prior to drawing up and implementing WiMAX policy. The principles of deliberative and participatory democracy in Taiwan were eroded and ignored. By introducing the concept of the Uncertain Matrix of Knowledge and the methodology of the California EMF Program and SCENIHR, we addressed the problems of risk management and WiMAX policy making in Taiwan and also gave suggestions such as extended peer communities, technological democracy and risk communication.起始頁-結束頁：399-411資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0113篇名：青少年之睡眠問題與物質使用的關係並列篇名：The Relationship between Sleep Problems and Substance Use in Adolescents作者：林立寧(Linen Lin);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen)關鍵字：青少年;睡眠問題;物質使用;adolescent;sleep problem;substance use期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：「睡眠問題」和「物質使用」是目前青少年最常見的兩種精神疾患，且與其他精神疾患有群聚現象，但是過去的文獻中，較少有系統地同時討論，為了促進青少年的健康，有必要進一步瞭解兩者間的關係。青少年的睡眠問題包括：睡眠時間不足、入睡困難、睡眠持續問題、睡眠周期不規律、日間疲倦等，可能會導致他們使用各種物質。反之，青少年的物質使用包括：飲酒、吸菸、使用含咖啡因物質、吸食大麻、使用古柯鹼、使用含安非他命物質、使用鎮靜安眠藥物、使用含鴉片類物質藥物、使用俱樂部用藥等，對他們的睡眠也有影響；嚼檳榔和使用吸入劑對睡眠的影響則不確定。本文藉由文獻回顧，證實青少年「睡眠問題」和「物質使用」之間可能有互為因果的關係，但台灣學者探討兩者因果關係的不多，並發現「睡眠問題」導致「物質使用」的研究多以心理及行為層面為主，而「物質使用」導致「睡眠問題」的研究則涵蓋生理、心理和行為等層面，因此未來在青少年健康促進的研究，除了要注重本土特色外，也應該同時顧及多元觀點，才能將研究成果轉譯為具體的政策。英文摘要：Sleep problems and substance use are the most prevalent mental health issues in adolescents. Moreover, individuals with these two problems may also be susceptible to other psychiatric disorders. A lack of systematic understanding of the relationship between sleep problems and substance use hinders our ability to promote health in adolescents. Sleep problems, such as inadequate total sleep time, difficulty in falling sleep and in maintaining sleep, irregular sleep patterns, and excessive daytime fatigue, may subsequently contribute to substance use in adolescents. Conversely, the use of substances, such as alcohol, tobacco, coffee or caffeine, marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, sedatives or hypnotics, opioid containing prescriptions, and club drugs, affects sleep in adolescents. The effects of betel nut chewing and administration of inhalants on sleep are undermined. This review suggests a bidirectional relationship between sleep problems and substance use. The paucity of causal studies in Taiwan and the lack of biological evidence for sleep problems leading to substance use should prompt further research among native adolescents from multidimensional perspectives in order to determine practical policies to address both problems.起始頁-結束頁：412-424資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0214篇名：生活飲食習慣與壬基苯酚暴露－夫婦樣本的觀察結果並列篇名：Nonylphenol Exposure in Married Couples as Measured by Urinalysis作者：陳志郎(Jyh-Larng Chen);呂宗<U+70DF>(Chung-Yen Lu);童寶玲(Pao-Ling Torng);楊友仕(Yu-Shih Yang);馬一中(Yee-Chung Ma)關鍵字：壬基苯酚;夫婦;飲食;尿液;nonylphenol;married couple;foodstuffs;urine期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：壬基苯酚（nonylphenol, NP）是一種廣流布在環境中的內分泌干擾物，人體暴露深受關切。本研究以橫斷式研究探究不孕治療之夫婦的飲食和生活習慣與尿液壬基苯酚暴露的相關。方法：經由婦產科對53對就診夫婦進行調查，每名應允參加者均填答一份問卷提供人口、社經、生活與飲食習慣等資料，41位男士和49位女士提供了尿樣。結果：男士年齡較大，身體質量指數較大，也較多抽菸和飲酒，但尿樣的壬基苯酚含量平均值並無男女差別（分別為1.26±0.39對1.28±0.31 μg/g creatinine，p = .821; Pearson correlation相關係數 r= .31, p= .012）。比較所有人口，社經及生活型態、食物變項，只發現多服食保健食品者的含量明顯高(1.35±0.34對1.16±0.34 μg/g creatinine) (p = .012)。多喝高脂奶者亦有較高的含量，但不顯著。結論：此為首次以共同生活的夫婦樣本為對象，討論生活飲食習慣與人體壬基苯酚暴露濃度的關聯的論文，男性與女性的尿液壬基苯酚含量無顯著差別，多服食保健食品者的尿液壬基苯酚含量較高，其餘生活飲食習慣與尿液壬基苯酚含量無明顯關聯。英文摘要：Objectives: Nonylphenol (NP) is an endocrine disrupter with wide distribution in the environment, particularly in foodstuffs and polluted water. Human exposure to NP has been of concern. This study evaluated the NP levels in couples with infertility, by using urinary 4-nonylphenol (4-NP) as a biomarker. Methods: Subjects were 53 married couples who were visiting the obstetrics and gynecology clinic. Of these, 41 men and 49 women provided urine samples. Each participant also completed a self-reported questionnaire to provide information about sociodemographic status and life style including diet. Results: Men were older, had a higher body mass index and were more likely to smoke, drink and use betel nut; however, the mean urinary NP levels were similar in men and women, 1.26 (SD 0.39) vs. 1.28 (SD 0.31) μg/g creatinine (p= .821; Pearson correlation r= .31, p= .012). Among all measured sociodemographic and life style factors, only those individuals who had consumed more healthy food had significantly higher urinary NP levels than did subjects who had consumed less or did not consume healthy food at all. (1.35 (SD 0.34) vs. 1.16 (SD 0.34)) μg/g creatinine (p= .012). Those who consumed more whole milk also had higher mean urinary NP levels, but this finding was not statistically significant. Conclusions: Our findings demonstrated that married couples had similar exposure to NP from the consumption of foodstuffs. Eating healthy food was associated with higher urinary nonylphenol levels. Other eating habits showed no significant correlation.起始頁-結束頁：425-435資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0315篇名：評論：生活飲食習慣與壬基苯酚暴露－夫婦樣本的觀察結果作者：李俊璋期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：435-435資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-1016篇名：作者回覆：生活飲食習慣與壬基苯酚暴露－夫婦樣本的觀察結果作者：陳志郎(Jyh-Larng Chen);呂宗<U+70DF>(Chung-Yen Lu);童寶玲(Pao-Ling Torng);楊友仕(Yu-Shih Yang);馬一中(Yee-Chung Ma)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：435-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0417篇名：Maternal Mobile Phone Use and Children's Neurocognitive Development並列篇名：母親手機使用與孩童神經認知行為發展作者：吳佩璇(Pei-Hsuan Wu);林靜君(Ching-Chun Lin);廖華芳(Hua-Fang Liao);曹峰銘(Feng-Ming Tsao);謝武勳(Wu-Shiun Hsieh);陳保中(Pau-Chung Chen)關鍵字：產前暴露;手機;神經認知行為發展;孩童;prenatal exposure;mobile phone;neurocognitive development;young children期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：手機使用已越趨頻繁，然而手機之電磁波對於孩童健康發展之不良影響仍有爭議。本研究之目的為，描述從妊娠期到產後一年之母親手機使用情形，並進一步探討其手機使用量和孩童神經認知行為發展之影響。方法：自2004年至2005年間，收集來自大台北地區不同醫療院所的產婦及其新生兒為研究對象，最終納入133對產婦及其新生兒進行分析。我們使用「嬰幼兒綜合發展測驗」（Comprehensive Developmental Inventory for Infants and Toddlers,簡稱CDIIT）以及「魏氏兒童智力量表第四版」（Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Fourth edition,簡稱WISC-IV）評估孩童之神經認知行為發展。另外，我們也使用「瑞文氏圖形推理測驗」（Standard Progressive Matrices, 簡稱SPM+）評估母親智力。藉由自填式問卷評估母親的手機使用量，再使用迴歸模式進行統計分析。結果：從妊娠期至產後一年，多數的母親每天手機的接聽通數皆少於3通，且每通電話之通話時間皆少於3分鐘。研究結果並未發現手機暴露對於孩童的神經行為發展有不良之影響。結論：目前仍未有明確的證據足以證明手機之暴露會造成孩童神經行為之不良影響，未來仍需要更多的研究針對此議題進行探討。英文摘要：Objectives: Today, mobile phone use is common and has increased rapidly in many countries. The health effects of exposure to mobile phone use on children are controversial. We described maternal mobile phone use from pregnancy until the 12 months post-birth and examined the association between exposure to mobile phone use and the children's neurocognitive development in the general population in Taipei, Taiwan. Methods: The study was a part of the Taiwan Birth Panel Study. A total of 133 pairs of parents and their singleton child were recruited into this study. We used the Comprehensive Developmental Inventory for Infants and Toddlers (CDIIT) and Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Fourth Edition (WISC-IV) to assess child neurocognitive development. We also assessed the intelligence of the mothers using the Standard Progressive Matrices Plus (SPM+). Mothers completed questionnaires to report their mobile phone use. Regression modeling was used to estimate the association between mobile phone exposure and children's neurocognitive development. Results: Most of the mothers answered less than 3 phone calls per day, and the call duration was less than 3 minutes for each phone call from pregnancy until 12 months post-birth. We found no significant association between maternal mobile phone use and neurocognitive development in young children. Conclusions: There is no convincing evidence that maternal mobile phone use has an adverse effect on the neurocognitive development of young children. Prospective research using a personal exposure assessment is needed to elucidate a causal relationship.起始頁-結束頁：436-445資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0518篇名：居家失能老人之經濟狀態對居家護理使用及照護品質之影響並列篇名：The Impact of the Economic Status of the Disabled Elderly Dwelling at Home on the Use of Homecare and the Quality of that Care作者：張淑卿(Shu-Ching Chang);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：失能老人;居家護理;經濟狀態;照護品質;全民健保;Disabled elderly;Home nursing;Economic status;Care quality;Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to determine the effects of the economic status of the disabled elderly on the risk of too infrequent use of homecare and the quality of long-term care. Methods: The subjects of the study were a retrospective cohort of disabled elderly in Taiwan who received homecare services for the first time and were covered by the National Health Insurance from 2002 to 2006. A generalized estimate equation (GEE) used for the logistic regression was utilized to analyze the factors affecting the risk of fewer homecare visits (＜3 times per year). The factors affecting the risks of infection-related hospitalization or pressure sore-related hospitalization were analyzed with a comprehensive Cox regression. Results: A total of 44,856 disabled elderly received homecare for the first time from 2002 to 2006. After the confounding variables were controlled, the comparative risks between different economic status groups were as follows: the risk of fewer homecare visits for the disabled elderly with high economic status was lower than the risk for those with low economic status (Odds ratio [OR]=0.92; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.86-0.99, p=0.0307). The risk of infection-related hospitalization for the disabled elderly with high economic status was lower than the risk for those with low economic status (Hazard ratio [HR]=0.95, 95% CI:0.92-0.98, p=0.0025). The risk of pressure sore-related hospitalization for the disabled elderly with high economic status was lower than the risk for those with low economic status (HR=0.92, 95% CI:0.85-1.00, p=0.0422). Conclusions: The disabled elderly of low economic status made less use of homecare services and received a lower quality of homecare even though it was provided by National Health Insurance for free. Based on these findings, we suggest that policy makers provide a traffic subsidy to the economically disadvantaged disabled elderly who receive homecare services, improve household sanitation, and promote specialized instruction about homecare during discharge planning and home visits.英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to determine the effects of the economic status of the disabled elderly on the risk of too infrequent use of homecare and the quality of long-term care. Methods: The subjects of the study were a retrospective cohort of disabled elderly in Taiwan who received homecare services for the first time and were covered by the National Health Insurance from 2002 to 2006. A generalized estimate equation (GEE) used for the logistic regression was utilized to analyze the factors affecting the risk of fewer homecare visits (＜3 times per year). The factors affecting the risks of infection-related hospitalization or pressure sore-related hospitalization were analyzed with a comprehensive Cox regression. Results: A total of 44,856 disabled elderly received homecare for the first time from 2002 to 2006. After the confounding variables were controlled, the comparative risks between different economic status groups were as follows: the risk of fewer homecare visits for the disabled elderly with high economic status was lower than the risk for those with low economic status (Odds ratio [OR]=0.92; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.86-0.99, p=0.0307). The risk of infection-related hospitalization for the disabled elderly with high economic status was lower than the risk for those with low economic status (Hazard ratio [HR]=0.95, 95% CI:0.92-0.98, p=0.0025). The risk of pressure sore-related hospitalization for the disabled elderly with high economic status was lower than the risk for those with low economic status (HR=0.92, 95% CI:0.85-1.00, p=0.0422). Conclusions: The disabled elderly of low economic status made less use of homecare services and received a lower quality of homecare even though it was provided by National Health Insurance for free. Based on these findings, we suggest that policy makers provide a traffic subsidy to the economically disadvantaged disabled elderly who receive homecare services, improve household sanitation, and promote specialized instruction about homecare during discharge planning and home visits.起始頁-結束頁：446-459資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0619篇名：醫院創新之外部知識來源使用與影響因素並列篇名：Exploring the Use of External Sources of Knowledge for Hospital Innovation作者：翁瑞宏(Rhay-Hung Weng);曾雅禎(Ya-Chen Tseng);吳宗晉(Tsung-Chin Wu);黃靖媛(Ching-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：醫院創新;外部知識;知識獲取;hospital innovation;external knowledge;knowledge acquisition期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：外部知識的使用為影響醫院創新之關鍵因素，本研究試圖探討醫院進行創新發展時，對於各外部知識來源之使用程度，並深入分析影響外部知識來源使用度的因素。方法：研究採用問卷調查方式，以全國地區醫院級以上之高階主管為研究對象，共回收問卷211份；以皮爾森相關、複迴歸及邏輯斯迴歸來進行研究分析。結果：研究結果以醫院評鑑標準、全民健保相關法規，及衛生政策相關標準與法規三個專業知識項目使用度最高，而使用度最低的則為市場知識中的外部醫藥研發實驗室或公司、顧問與顧問公司，及機構知識中的營利性公司機構；根據迴歸分析結果顯示，醫院規模、正式化程度、學校附設醫院會影響外部知識使用。結論：醫院在進行創新發展時對外部知識來源使用度由高而低順序分別為：專業化知識來源、其他知識來源、機構知識來源、市場知識來源。在影響因素方面，醫院規模越大、正式化程度越高、學校附設醫院在進行創新時，對外部知識使用程度較高。英文摘要：Objectives: The use of external knowledge is a principal factor in hospital innovation. This research explored the use of external sources of knowledge for hospital innovation. Methods: We employed a self-administered mail survey to collect data and selected top managers in hospitals accredited as district hospitals and above as key informants. We then utilized multiple regression and logistic regression methods to analyze our data. Results: Among the external sources of knowledge, hospital accreditation standards, National Health Insurance regulations, and health policy regulations were the most frequently cited. Pharmaceutical laboratory or company data, consultants or consultancy firms, and profit-making institutions were the least used sources for hospital innovation. In addition, hospital size, hospital formalization, and hospitals affiliated with medical schools were factors which significantly affected the use of external sources of knowledge. Conclusions: The ranking of the kind of external knowledge important for hospital innovation was: specialized knowledge, other knowledge, institutional knowledge and market knowledge. In terms of influencing factors, this study found that hospitals with larger size and a higher degree of formalization or hospitals affiliated with medical schools were more likely to use external sources of knowledge for hospital innovation.起始頁-結束頁：460-472資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0720篇名："SAFE"教育方案對居家護理個案用藥安全之成效並列篇名：The Effect of the "SAFE" Education Protocol on the Facilitation of Safe Medication Administration for Home Healthcare Clients作者：許淑敏(Shwu-Miin Hsu);賈佩芳(Pei-Fang Chia);陳淑娟(Shu-Chuan Chen);杜淑雲(Shu-Yun Tu);高寶蓮(Pao-Lien Kao);陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen)關鍵字：衛生教育;居家護理個案;用藥安全;health education;home healthcare clients;safety medication期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究主要目的是發展“SAFE”教育方案並評估對居家護理個案用藥安全之成效。方法：採單組前後測類實驗設計，立意取樣南部某醫院附設居家護理所34位個案與其主要照顧者為研究對象，接受團隊研擬“SAFE”教育方案，包括標準化安全用藥衛生教育流程（Standardizing health education about safe medication administration; S）、評估用藥適當性（Assessing medication adequacy ; A）、促進一個用藥安全的環境（Facilitating a safety medication environment; F）與評值是否執行安全用藥（Evaluating whether practicing safety medication; E）等四項過程，每個月一次，為期三個月。並在教育方案介入前與介入完成後一個月，分別進行前測及後測評量。結果：34位個案用藥安全問題於衛生教育前件數7件，經介入完成後一個月降至1件，McNemar檢定達顯著下降（X^2 =4.17, p＜0.05）。介入完成後一個月，主要照顧者的用藥安全認知由介入前的6.7分提升至8.4分，成對樣本檢定達顯著上升（t= -5.5, p＜0.01）。結論：“SAFE”教育方案確實顯著降低居家護理個案的用藥安全問題，並有助於主要照顧者對個案用藥安全認知程度之提升，其可作為居家護理實務的參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this article was to examine the effect of the ”SAFE” education protocol on improving safe medication administration for home healthcare clients. Methods: We used a quasi-experimental design and subjects were a convenience sample of thirty-four home healthcare clients recruited from a homecare center in a hospital in southern Taiwan. The group received the ”SAFE” education protocol, including Standardizing health education about safe medication administration, Assessing medication adequacy, Facilitating a safe medication environment, and Evaluating medication safety (acronym: SAFE). The program was held once a month, for 3 months. The outcomes were measured before intervention and 1 month post-intervention. Results: The results showed an average of 7 medication problems in home healthcare clients before intervention and one, 1 month post-intervention (X^2 =4.17, p＜0.05). The scores for perception of medication safety by caregivers increased from 6.7 before intervention to 8.4 at 1 month post-intervention (t= -5.5, p＜0.01). Conclusions: The ”SAFE” education protocol may effectively decrease the medication problems experienced by home healthcare clients and increase the perception of medication safety by caregivers.起始頁-結束頁：473-484資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-0801篇名：台灣地區出監毒癮者接受美沙酮替代療法18個月之再犯率追蹤並列篇名：Evaluation of Recidivism in Addicts who Received Methadone Maintenance Treatment in Taiwan for 18 Months作者：陳泉錫(Chuan-Hsi Chen);季延平(Yan-Pin Chi);詹中原(Chung-Yuang Jan)關鍵字：美沙酮替代療法;減害;毒品危害防制中心;再犯率;資料探勘;Methadone Maintenance Treatment;Harm Reduction;Drug Abuse Prevention Center;Recidivism;Data Mining期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷5期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：台灣地區於2005年8月引進美沙酮替代療法（Methadone Maintenance Treatment, MMT），目前是我國防制一級毒品之重要策略。但在引進替代療法後，截至2010底毒品人口並未明顯降低，再犯率亦未有效改善。原因究竟是替代療法療效不佳？或推行仍不普遍？本研究進行大範圍實證研究，以事實數據作為毒品政策成效檢驗之客觀參考。方法：本研究採非實驗設計研究方法，以2009年上半年出監的一級毒品毒癮者3343人為研究對象，以實際資料庫比對分析之計量方法為主，文獻探討為輔。樣本分為持續接受MMT療法與未接受MMT療法2組，分別追蹤18個月。結果：研究發現持續接受MMT療法組再涉毒品案件比率為30.57%。未使用MMT組為42.03%，效果顯著（P值為0.0084）。在降低財產、暴力再犯率亦呈現效果。惟樣本中替代療法涵蓋率僅19.86%，參加替代療法者在18個月後維持率僅23.64%，對整體再犯率改善之影響有限。結論：MMT療法經證實具有降低再犯毒品效果但留置率低，且在治療初期降低再犯毒品之效果並不顯著，其執行方式之妥適性待進一步探究。英文摘要：Objectives: In August 2005, the Taiwanese government introduced Methadone Maintenance Treatment (MMT), one of the major strategies in fighting drug abuse; however, as of 2010, the MMT strategy still had not demonstrated effectiveness in reducing the addicted population or the recidivism rate. The aims of this study were to determine whether MMT was effective in Taiwan and to provide objective evidence to authorities before more resources were invested in this protocol. Methods: This study used a non-experimental design approach. A total of 3343 drug abusers released from correctional facilities during the first half of 2009 were divided into adaptive and non-adaptive MMT groups. Follow-up observation was done over 18 months and included drug recidivism and both property and violent crimes for each group. Results: The drug recidivism rate for the MMT group was 30.57%, whereas that for the non-MMT group was 42.03%. The lower rate of the MMT group was expected, but the efficacy of MMT was not evident at the 6- and 12-month observational periods. Only 23.64% of the addicts remained in MMT therapy. Conclusions: The adequacy of MMT implementation and its supporting measures in Taiwan must be further examined.起始頁-結束頁：485-497資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-05-092篇名：美國癌症登記及老人醫療保險資料庫之發展與應用－論台灣癌症登記與健康保險聯結資料庫之可行性並列篇名：Development of the TCDB-NHIRD Linked Database: What Can We Learn From The SEER-Medicare Database In The United States?作者：潘憶文(I-Wen Pan);簡君儒(Chun-Ru Chien);施雅真(Ya-Chen Tina Shih)關鍵字：癌症登記;醫療保險;行政申報資料庫;Cancer Registry;Medicare;Claim database期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：根據美國國家癌症研究中心的統計，到2011年1月止，運用美國癌症登記（Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program，簡稱SEER）及老人醫療保險（簡稱Medicare）行政申報資料庫連結資料庫發表在同儕審查期刊的文章已超過650篇以上，在癌症醫療品質及成本相關的研究有卓著的成果。我國全民健康保險自1995年開始辦理，全民健康保險資料庫業已廣泛應用，另一方面我國癌症登記資料庫也漸趨成熟。若能將兩者結合，應可發揮相當程度的綜效。本文的目的是希望藉由他山之石，提供我國未來整合癌症相關資料庫供臨床、學術研究應用及政策評估之參考。本篇文章將針對以下內容作介紹：資料蒐集之行政層級及架構、資料庫的結構、附加應用軟體及程式介紹、資料庫驗證（Validation）與申請費用、資料庫的使用限制與病人個別資料保護，並以乳癌為例，說明該資料庫在臨床研究、醫療品質及癌症治療成本研究方面之應用，並提供建議。英文摘要：In the United States, the SEER-Medicare data link cancer patients in the SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) Program with Medicare enrollment to identify cancer patients who are eligible for Medicare and to provide Medicare Claims for these patients. Statistics from the National Cancer Institute show that there are over 650 peer-reviewed publications using the SEER -Medicare database. This database has been the primary data source for health services research in oncology since its inception, and it has made tremendous contributions to policies related to cancer control, treatment, and surveillance in the United States. The National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD), established at the initiation of the Taiwan's National Health Insurance program in 1995, is a claims database. The Taiwan Cancer Database (TCDB), based on the Taiwan Cancer Registry, was established in 2002. The creation of a TCDB-NHIRD linked database could produce a SEER-Medicare-like database and has the potential to become an invaluable resource for cancer as well as policy researchers in Taiwan. This paper introduces the SEER-Medicare database, including data collection, software, applications of the database, data elements, structure, validation, the data request and application process, limitations of the database, and privacy and confidentiality issues. We then use a previously published breast cancer study to demonstrate the procedures involved in generating research from the SEER-Medicare database, followed by recommendations for the future development of a database that links TCDB to the NHIRD.起始頁-結束頁：299-310資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-013篇名：評論：台灣癌症登記與全民健康保險連結資料庫之可行性作者：賴美淑期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：311-313資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-024篇名：全民健康保險補充財源初探並列篇名：A Pilot Study on Supplemental Revenue Sources for National Health Insurance作者：郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo);何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho);林翠芳(Tsui-Fang Lin)關鍵字：全民健康保險;補充財源;National Health Insurance;supplemental revenue sources期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文藉由回顧文獻及討論相關法令研修議題，尋找全民健康保險可能之補充財源，並探討這些財源的可行性與合理性。本文建議政府考慮開徵或加徵有害物質健康福利捐。此外，將部分奢侈稅稅收做為全民健康保險之補充財源有劫富濟貧的作用，與社會保險之重分配目標不謀而合。最後，考量肥胖、博弈及汙染活動對健康產生的醫療外部成本，將肥胖稅、博弈稅與健康相關之汙染稅收專用於日益成長的醫療費用，有其合理性。在面臨調整保費費率不易，保險給付範圍不斷擴大的情況下，尋求補充財源為規劃我國全民健康保險財務政策不可避免的趨勢。英文摘要：The aim of this paper was to explore potential sources of revenue for National Health Insurance (NHI). Potential revenue sources considered were earmarked taxes on various substances including cigarettes, alcoholic beverages and betel nuts. A fat tax, a green tax, a luxury tax and a gambling tax were also considered. We reviewed the literature in this area of research, examined relevant financing policies in other countries, and discussed the benefits and costs associated with the proposed revenue sources. We suggest that the government raise the tax rates on tobacco and alcohol consumption to finance NHI. In addition, the government can tax sin goods such as betel nuts and sugar-sweetened beverages. In light of the negative externalities associated with gambling and pollution activities, the government can use parts of the green tax and the gambling tax to finance NHI. Finally, a luxury tax is also a good financing alternative due to its redistributive nature. We contend that, due to NHI's growing financial burden, it is imperative to find supplemental sources of revenue.起始頁-結束頁：314-325資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-035篇名：青少年性騷擾受害經驗與身心適應之相關－以基隆市國中學生為例並列篇名：Psychological Distress and Experiences with Sexual Harassment among Junior High School Students in Keelung City作者：簡苑珊(Yuan-Shan Chien);陸玓玲(Dih-Ling Lun);李鴻森(Hung-Sheng Li);洪百薰(Bai-Syuan Hurng)關鍵字：性騷擾受害經驗;身心適應;sexual harassment victimization;psychological distress期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：瞭解基隆市國民中學在學學生之性騷擾受害經驗，並探討性騷擾受害經驗與身心適應之關係。方法：以自行發展之結構式問卷為工具，針對基隆市國民中學，以班級為單位隨機抽出75班，由訪員至班級教室施測，學生以不具名方式填答，回收1,846份有效問卷為本次分析樣本。性騷擾受害經驗係依據美國大學婦女協會(簡稱AAUW)之建議分別詢問八種性騷擾狀況，「曾發生性騷擾事件且覺得不舒服」視為有性騷擾。以BSRS-5測量身心適應狀況(分為良好、輕度、中度、重度情緒困擾四類)。使用多分類邏輯斯迴歸進行統計分析。結果：（1）過去一年至少發生過一項以上的性騷擾受害經驗之整體比率為46.9%，沒有性別差異；（2）整體而言，調整性別、因應方式及其他壓力狀況後，性騷擾受害經驗者發生輕度及重度情緒困擾之比率分別是無性騷擾受害經驗者1.65及2.28倍，性騷擾受害經驗與身心適應狀況之關係因性騷擾類型及性別而異。結論：將近半數國中學生自述在過去一年曾有過性騷擾受害經驗，且此經驗與其身心適應有顯著相關，建議公共衛生及教育單位應關心性騷擾受害學生後續之身心適應狀況，並適時提供相關之輔導。此結果可作為衛生及教育單位進行性騷擾防治計畫之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The purposes of this study were to determine the prevalence of sexual harassment victimization (SHV) among junior high students and to analyze the relationship between SHV and psychological distress. Methods: Trained interviewers went to randomly selected junior high school classrooms in Keelung City, and administered a structured questionnaire to collect data anonymously. A total of 2,282 students took the survey but 1,846 were excluded due to incomplete data. Sexual harassment was defined as a situation with sexual overtones that felt uncomfortable (American Associaction of University Women, AAUW). The BSRS-5 was used to measure coping strategies and to classify psychological distress as none, mild, moderate, or severe. Polytomous logistic regression was used to analyze the data. Results: Almost half (46.9%) of the students experienced at least one episode of sexual harassment in the previous year. There was no gender difference in this. After adjustment for gender, coping style, and other stressful conditions, victims of sexual harassment had higher rates of mild and severe psychological distress, 1.65 and 2.28 respectively, than did the non-victims. The relationships between SHV and psychological distress varied with SHV type and gender. Conclusions: Nearly half of junior high students in Keelung City experienced sexual harassment in the previous year and there was a significant relationship between sexual harassment and psychological distress. Health and education authorities need to develop effective strategies to prevent sexual harassment in the schools.起始頁-結束頁：326-335資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-046篇名：家戶主要清潔者的蟲媒相關知識與環境風險知覺－高雄市不同登革熱流行程度社區之比較並列篇名：Vector-Related Knowledge and Environmental Risk Perceptions among Household Hygiene Keepers - A Comparison of Communities with Different Levels of Dengue Attack in Kaohsiung City作者：李芳盈(Fang-Ying Li);蔡瑜珍(Yue-Chen Tsai);丁志音(Chih-Yin Lew-Ting)關鍵字：登革熱;環境風險知覺;孳生源;殺蟲劑使用;戶外環境;Dengue;Environmental Risk Perception;Breeding Sites;Pesticide Use;Outdoor Environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究之目的為瞭解並比較不同登革熱流行程度社區之居民對登革熱相關的認知與環境風險知覺。方法：本研究為一橫斷性的調查。首先將高雄市所有的里按登革熱的流行程度區分為高、中、低三種層次的組別，之後再以等距抽樣於三組中各抽出兩個里進行家戶資料收集，並特別挑選家戶主要清潔者進行面訪。結果：總計訪問598個家戶。研究結果顯示，高流行程度社區的居民對登革熱相關蟲媒知識有一定程度的了解，且對於登革熱的流行與被感染的可能有所意識，然而他們卻仍低估家戶外環境不佳將導致的風險。相對的，低流行社區的居民雖然自覺最不受到登革熱的威脅，但仍最為戒慎恐懼，且認為疾病防治需同時從環境與自我防護著手。而中流行社區之民眾的知識最差，對登革熱的流行也最不憂心，且他們在疾病防治上相當依賴政府的噴藥措施。結論：處於登革熱流行程度不同社區之民眾，對登革熱蟲媒相關認知與環境風險知覺確有不同，登革熱的預防與控制應該設計因地制宜的介入方案。英文摘要：Objectives: To examine and compare vector-related knowledge and the perceptions of environmental risk among residents living in communities exposed to different levels of dengue attack. Methods: This study was a cross sectional survey. The magnitude of the dengue epidemic was calculated for all communities (Li, the basic administrative unit) in Kaohsiung City and was further differentiated into three levels (low, medium, and high). Two communities were selected from each level by systematic sampling. Interviews were carried out with the person responsible for domestic hygiene in each household. Results: A total of 598 valid household interviews were conducted (low=194, median=200, high=204). Residents with a high level of dengue attack were knowledgeable about dengue vectors. They were also conscious of the possible adverse effects of dengue infection; however, they tended to pay inadequate attention to the outdoor environment. In contrast, residents in low magnitude communities perceived the least threat of dengue, but they were the most alert, and believed in the dual necessity of environmental management and self-protection to prevent dengue. For respondents residing in communities of a medium magnitude of epidemic risk, their vector-related knowledge was the poorest and they had the least anxiety about dengue infection. They also believed that the use of pesticides by the government was the most efficient strategy for fighting against dengue. Conclusions: Vector-related knowledge and the environmental risk perceptions for dengue varied with the severity of neighborhood dengue epidemics. Strategies for dengue prevention and control should be developed and tailored to the needs of residents based on the risk of dengue attack.起始頁-結束頁：336-346資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-057篇名：「西醫基層總額分科計畫」實施前後門診醫療利用差異之研究並列篇名：Differences in Healthcare Utilization before and after Implementation of the Departmental Clinics Global Budget Program作者：陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);李卓倫(Jow-Leun Lee);林玉惠(Yu-Hui Lin)關鍵字：總額預算;醫師行為;差異中取差異;Global Budgeting;Physician's Behavior;Difference-in-differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究的主要目的在於評估中區健保分局實施「西醫基層總額分科計畫」前後門診醫療利用的差異，藉以探討基層醫師因應此項醫療政策的行為。方法：本研究的資料來源為全民健康保險研究資料庫的2005年承保抽樣歸人檔，為了釐清「西醫基層總額分科計畫」對醫療利用的影響，我們將樣本分為普通個案與高價個案兩個族群。我們使用差異中取差異法，針對「西醫基層總額分科計畫」實施前後的醫療利用差異進分析。結果：實證結果顯示「西醫基層總額分科計畫」僅對高價個案的每次門診給藥日數有顯著的抑制效果，但對於普通個案的各項醫療利用（每次門診申請金額、藥費、部分負擔以及給藥日數）的影響卻不降反升。結論：「西醫基層總額分科計畫」由不同專科別醫師的同儕制約力量，藉以控制醫療費用的效果應屬有限。健保局應針對某些特定指標（包括病患當月就診次數、給藥日數、藥費、部分負擔）進行監控，藉以抑制基層醫師回應支付制度改變的醫療行為。英文摘要：Objectives: To evaluate the differences in healthcare utilization before and after implementation of the Departmental Clinics Global Budget Program (DCGBP), and to investigate physicians' behavior in response to the DCGBP. Methods: Data were obtained from the 2005 Longitudinal Health Insurance Database. In order to determine the impact of DCGBP on healthcare utilization, the samples were separated into two groups, a high utilization group and a low utilization group. We used the difference-in- differences method to analyze the difference in healthcare utilization before and after implementation of the DCGBP. Results: Our empirical results showed that the DCGBP decreased drug days per visit in the high utilization group, but it impacted healthcare utilization (such as claimed expenditure, drug expenditure, co-payment, and drug days) positively in the low utilization group. Conclusions: The Bureau of National Health Insurance should monitor specific indices such as the numbers of outpatient visits per month, drug days, drug expenditure, and co-payment per visit to determine if physicians' behaviors change in response to change in the payment system.起始頁-結束頁：347-360資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-068篇名：影響家長讓小孩接種肺炎鏈球菌疫苗之相關因素：網路調查之應用並列篇名：An Internet Survey of Factors Related to Parental Decisions Regarding Pneumococcal Vaccination for Preschool Children作者：廖彩涵(Tsai-Han Liao);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang)關鍵字：侵襲性肺炎鏈球菌感染症;幼童肺炎鏈球菌疫苗;健康信念模式;Invasive pneumococcal disease;Pneumococcal vaccination;Health Belief Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究在探討影響家長讓幼童接種肺炎鏈球菌疫苗接種之認知、態度等相關因素。方法：本研究以健康信念模式自擬結構式網路問卷，透過親子網站，邀請平時會於網路上搜尋相關醫療資訊，且育有五歲以下幼童之家長，上網填答。調查時間為2011年4月20日至5月10日，有效樣本566份。資料先以卡方、威爾克森符號等級、克-瓦二氏單因子等級檢定分析後，再以羅吉斯迴歸分析檢定影響家長是否讓小孩接種疫苗的相關因素。結果：566位家長完成有效樣本，其中382位（68%）已讓小孩接種肺炎鏈球菌疫苗；多數家長對疾病知識有一定程度的了解，但是對於疫苗效價和政府補助方案較不清楚；疾病知識分數高、自覺行動利益高、自覺行動非經濟障礙低、自覺行動經濟障礙低、小孩滿一歲、家長年齡介於30至34歲、曾有醫療人員建議或曾看過院所宣傳單者，較傾向讓小孩接種疫苗。結論：本研究顯示家長對於肺炎鏈球菌疫苗之認知，以及對於接受疫苗接種的自覺障礙，皆與幼童是否接受疫苗有關，研究結果可供主管機關規劃相關政策時之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: This study analyzed parental attitudes and behaviors related to pneumococcal vaccination for their preschool children. Methods: We first developed a structured questionnaire based on the Health Belief Model (HBM) and then invited those who were used to searching for medical information on the internet and were raising children younger than 5 to answer the questionnaire. A total of 566 web-based questionnaires were completed from April 20th to May 10th, 2011. Hypotheses were tested using Chi-squares, Wilcoxon rank sum tests and Kruskal-Wallis tests. Factors associated with pneumococcal vaccination were identified with multivariate logistic regression analysis. Results: Of the 566 parents who completed a valid questionnaire, 382 (68%) had taken their children for vaccination against invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD). Most of these parents had acquired knowledge about IPD but few of them understood the vaccination subsidy program. Parents who had a greater understanding about IPD and perceived more benefits and fewer barriers to vaccination, were between 30 and 34 years old, advised by medical staff, had read an IPD information sheet at a hospital, or had children one year old or older tended to have their children vaccinated. Conclusions: Parental knowledge about self-perceived barriers to pneumococcal vaccination were significantly associated with whether their children were vaccinated or not.起始頁-結束頁：361-370資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-079篇名：花蓮縣偏遠與非偏遠地區民眾對於基層醫療保健服務的使用與需求之比較並列篇名：A Comparison of the Utilization of and Needs for Primary Healthcare Services among Residents in Non-Remote and Remote Areas of Hualien County作者：葉婉榆(Wan-Yu Yeh);陳志聖(Chih-Sheng Chen);鄒欣縈(Xin-Ying Zou);劉宜華(Yi-Hua Liu);吳柏樺(Bo-Hua Wu);曹雅琪(Ya-Chi Tsao);呂佳容(Chia-Rong Lu)關鍵字：偏遠地區;基層醫療衛生保健;服務需求;需求評估;remote area;primary health care;service needs;needs assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：探討並比較花蓮縣偏遠與非偏遠地區民眾對基層醫療保健的使用情形及服務需求。方法：運用量性調查問卷詢問人口背景、基層醫療使用情形、醫療／預防保健／衛生教育服務之需求程度和原因，於花蓮縣偏遠地區選取六個鄉鎮，非偏遠地區選取三個鄉鎮民眾參與，共回收573份有效問卷（回收率97%）；另邀請10位偏遠／非偏遠村里代表參與訪談，收集質性資料。結果：偏遠民眾對醫療資源充足度有49.3%認為「不足」，非偏遠民眾僅佔16.6%。鄉鎮應強化之醫療科別，偏遠民眾首需「眼科」，非偏遠民眾則為「家庭醫學科」。鄉鎮應加強之醫療服務，偏遠民眾首需「巡迴醫療」，非偏遠民眾則為「降低醫療自付費用」。訪談另發現，村里長積極程度對村里醫療資源多寡影響極大。結論：本研究發現偏遠與非偏遠地區至基層醫療據點的可近性差異不大，但偏遠民眾的服務滿意度明顯較低，建議衛生主管機關對於偏遠地區醫療保健資源的規劃，在服務項目與服務品質方面需考量民眾需求來實質提升。英文摘要：Objectives: This study compared the utilization of and requirements for primary healthcare services for residents living in remote and non-remote areas of Hualien County. Methods: We used quantitative questionnaires to survey 6 townships in remote areas and 3 townships in non-remote areas of Hualien County. The questionnaire gathered data about demographics, utilization of primary healthcare services, and the needs for medical care, preventive care, and health education services. A total of 573 valid questionnaires were retrieved for a response rate of 97%. In addition, 10 village heads of villages in remote/non-remote areas were invited to participate in qualitative interviews. Results: The results indicated that 49.3% of residents in remote areas thought that medical resources were inadequate, while only 16.6% of the residents in non-remote areas held the same opinion. Results also showed a need to strengthen various departments of healthcare services in villages and townships. Ophthalmology was the most needed medical service in remote areas, while family medicine was the most needed in non-remote areas. Mobile medical services were also needed for residents living in remote areas, while those living in non-remote areas emphasized a need for the reduction in payments for medical care. The qualitative in-depth interviews showed that the attitudes of village or neighborhood leaders were highly correlated with the availability of medical resources. Conclusions: Access to primary health care centers was similar in remote and non-remote areas; however, the residents in remote areas had a relatively lower level of satisfaction with health care services. We suggest that healthcare authorities consider specific service items and quality when determining the deployment of health care services in remote areas.起始頁-結束頁：371-387資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-0810篇名：雪山隧道通車對宜蘭縣急性心肌梗塞病患救治結果之影響並列篇名：Did The Treatment Outcomes for Yilan's Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI) Patients Improve after the Opening of the Hsuehshan Tunnel?作者：林宜靜(I-Ching Lin);李淑芬(Shu-Fen Li);蔡偉德(Wei-Der Tsai)關鍵字：雪山隧道;急性心肌梗塞;死亡率;再住院率;Hsuehshan Tunnel;Acute Myocardial Infarction;Mortality;Readmission期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在分析2006年6月雪山隧道開通，對宜蘭縣急性心肌梗塞病患的短期死亡率與再住院率之影響。方法：以2004年6月至2008年6月之宜蘭縣急性心肌梗塞住院病患資料，利用羅吉斯特迴歸模型分析雪隧通車是否影響宜蘭縣急性心肌梗塞病患的醫療結果；並以花蓮縣病患為對照組，利用差異中的差異分析方法，比較宜蘭縣與花蓮縣病患救治結果的平均差異。結果：雪隧通車後，宜蘭縣急性心肌梗塞病患的出院後30天內死亡率顯著降低；相較於花蓮縣，雪隧通車後宜蘭縣急性心肌梗塞病患死亡率確實獲得改善；但對再住院率則無顯著影響。結論：透過重大交通建設縮短交通距離與時間，有助於提升醫療資源與人力流動的便捷性，最終使病患的救治結果獲得正向影響。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this paper was to investigate whether there was an improvement in the treatment outcomes for AMI patients in Yilan County after the opening of the Hsuehshan Tunnel on June 16, 2006. The Hsuehshan Tunnel connects Taipei City with Yilan County and substantially cuts down the traveling time between the two regions. It may facilitate the migration of medical manpower between the two regions and increase accessibility to medical center hospitals for Yilan's inhabitants. Methods: By using the 2004-2008 National Health Insurance Database, we estimated the changes in the 30-day mortality rate and readmission rate of Yilan's AMI patients via the logistic regression model and difference-in-differences. Results: We found that 30-day mortality rates for AMI patients in Yilan County did decline after the opening of the Hsuehshan Tunnel. This finding persisted when AMI patients in Yilan County and Hualien County were compared via difference-in-differences. There was also a decline in the readmission rates; however, it was not statistically significant. Conclusions: The treatment outcomes for Yilan's AMI patients did improve after the opening of the Hsuehshan Tunnel. Transportation facilities have a positive effect on the treatment outcomes for AMI patients living in less accessible areas because of the migration of medical manpower to regions with improved transportation.起始頁-結束頁：388-397資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-04-0911篇名：他山之石－美國和澳洲執行「公開揭露」機制之經驗與啟示並列篇名：A Comparative Study of the "Open Disclosure" Policy in the United States and Australia: Lessons for Taiwan作者：林東龍(Dong-Long Lin);陳郁雯(Yu-Wen Chen)關鍵字：公開揭露;醫療不良事件;醫療傷害;由上而下;由下而上;Open Disclosure;Medical Adverse Event;Medical Injury;Top-down;Bottom-up期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：歐美先進國家陸續採行公開揭露機制，以公開、分析，以及學習的態度處理醫療不良事件，期待降低醫療訴訟成本和不良事件再發生的可能性。美國是最早實施公開揭露機制的國家，澳洲則在整體政策發展的最為完整。因此，本文希望藉由耙梳美澳兩國公開揭露制度的發展歷史與現況，思索該制度對台灣建構醫療不良事件處理機制的啟發。從美澳兩國經驗來看，本文建議有二：第一，衛生主管機關應規劃執行大型醫療不良事件流行病學研究，促使醫療體系正視醫療傷害問題；第二，結合多元的社會行動者建立配套的社會立法和推動教育宣導，使台灣朝公開揭露醫療不良事件的目標邁進。英文摘要：In Europe and North America, a few developed countries have gradually implemented an ”open disclosure” mechanism characterized by openness, analysis, and learning in dealing with adverse medical events, so that the cost of medical litigation and the reoccurrence rate of adverse medical events can be decreased. The United States was the earliest country to implement an open disclosure mechanism, while Australia has developed the most comprehensive policy. This paper reviewed the histories and current status of the open disclosure mechanism in the United States and Australia to derive implications for constructing a disclosure mechanism for adverse medical events in Taiwan. Two suggestions were made after a review of the two countries' experiences. First, the dominant Department of Health should plan and conduct large-scale epidemiologic research on adverse medical events to force the medical system to face the issue of medical injury seriously. Second, social action supporters in various areas should be mobilized to propose comprehensive social legislation, promote education, and advocate for Taiwan to move toward the goal of dealing with adverse medical events with open disclosure.起始頁-結束頁：205-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0112篇名：使用混合藥物Polypill作為心血管疾病的預防策略之評估並列篇名：Evaluation of the Effectiveness of a "Polypil" as a Strategy for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease作者：莊筱婷(Hsiao-Ting Juang);簡國龍(Kuo-Liong Chien)關鍵字：藥物;Polypill;心血管疾病的預防;drugs;Polypill;cardiovascular disease prevention期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：雖然利用生活習慣的改變是防治心血管疾病的基石，但是大多數人無法長期有效地持續進行行為矯正，來維持促進心血管健康。因此，利用包含aspirin、降血壓及降血脂藥物的混合藥劑“Polypill”來預防心血管疾病成為一個值得注意的預防策略。目前關於Polypill的藥效及不良反應之臨床試驗結果顯示出，Polypill是預防心血管疾病的良好策略，並且在醫師及病人對於使用Polypill的態度也顯示有一定可行性。然而，對於Polypill藥物中的組成成分、劑量及藥物的效果和安全性仍需更多的研究來評估，而且也需要進一步地研究Polypill是否能降低心血管疾病發病率及在發展中國家的成本效益分析。英文摘要：The prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD) is an important component of health promotion. Although behavioral lifestyle change is considered to be the first priority and the basis for several management modalities, many individuals cannot continue behavioral modification effectively for a long period of time. Therefore, a combination of multiple generic drugs, including aspirin, and blood pressure and cholesterol-lowering medications, becomes an appealing approach to CVD prevention. ”Polypill” is a single pill combining several drugs that could reduce cardiovascular risk. Evidence from the results of randomized clinical trials for the efficacy and adverse effects of ”Polypill” have recently become available. The data showed that ”Polypill” may be a good strategy for the prevention of CVD, and the acceptance of ”Polypill” by some primary care physicians and patients appears to be moderate to high; however, additional studies and more systematic evaluations of the optimal component drug dosage, combination formulae, and the efficacy and safety of the ”Polypill” are needed. Further studies are also warranted in order to determine if the ”Polypill” can reduce the incidence of CVD and is cost-effectiveness for developing countries.起始頁-結束頁：217-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0213篇名：台北市居家廢棄藥物檢收調查研究並列篇名：Investigation of the Disposal of Expired and Unused Medicines in Households in Taipei作者：陳怡靜(I-Chin Chen);姜郁美(Yu-Mei Chiang);陳立奇(Lih-Chi Chen)關鍵字：剩藥;廢棄藥物檢收;unused medicines;disposal medicine return期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：民眾普遍遇有剩餘藥品不知如何處理之現況，潛藏用藥安全、環境污染、及醫療資源浪費等問題，本研究針對民眾對於廢棄藥物認知及剩餘藥品原因進行分析及探討，據以參考改進及減少民眾家中剩餘之藥品。方法：在全市十二行政區內的社區藥局及醫院藥局設置「居家廢棄藥物檢收站」，由專業藥師協助市民進行居家廢棄藥物的分類與檢收，同時抽樣進行問卷調查。結果：於2010年4月1日至12月31日，共有2,012名民眾完成問卷調查，統計廢棄藥物主要來源是「看診領藥」（80.6%），產生剩藥的主要原因是「自覺病情或症狀改善」（23.7%）及忘記服藥（19.3%）。廢棄藥品主要種類為口服藥品（91.8%），依藥理分類區分則以「腸胃道用藥」（15.8%）及「心血管用藥」（13.4%）最多。結論：研究結果顯示大多數民眾服藥依順性仍有待改善，且多數藥品應為未服用放在家中放到過期才檢收。建議藥師對民眾多加宣導應依醫囑用藥，如為慢性病用藥不可自行停藥，非慢性病用藥若不須開藥可與醫師溝通，避免浪費健保資源。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to determine the reasons why households kept unwanted medicines. Methods: A questionnaire was completed by patients or their families when they returned unused medicines for disposal to pharmacies in the community or to hospitals in Taipei. The reasons why medications were unused and the ways in which they were disposed were recorded and analyzed. Results: A total of 2,012 people completed the questionnaire. The way that they knew about returning unwanted medications was, ”walked by and saw the return box” (30.1%). The way they had previously disposed of unwanted medicines was to ”dispose in the trash can” (61.8%). The reasons for possessing unused medication were: ”felt well already” (35.7%) and ”forgot to take the medicines” (19.3%). The most commonly returned items were medications for ”gastrointestinal” (15.8%) and ”cardiovascular” (13.4%) problems. Conclusions: The results showed that medication adherence could be better. We suggest that pharmacists could do more patient education about chronic illness, following orders, not stopping the medication without asking the doctor; and, if they don't need medications for common illnesses, patients should discuss this with their doctor in order not to waste health insurance resources.起始頁-結束頁：228-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0314篇名：醫師臨終之醫療資源耗用：醫師病人是否不同？並列篇名：Physicians' Medical Resource Consumption at the End of Life: Do Physician-Patients Behave Differently?作者：連怡甄(Yi-Jen Lien);楊長興(Chiang-Hsing Yang)關鍵字：生命末期;知情消費者;醫師病人;同儕禮遇;全民健保資料庫;end stage of life;informed consumer;physician-patient;peer courtesy;National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：比較醫師與一般民眾在生命末期之醫療資源耗用是否有差異，並探索影響醫師生命末期醫療資源耗用之因素。彌補醫師病人生命末期醫療資源利用是否有差異之研究缺口。方法：利用1999至2003死因資料檔與全民健康保險資料庫中基本資料檔及住院檔加密後串聯，以醫師性別、死亡年齡、原死因別進行1:10配對抽樣選出對照組樣本（一般民眾），並利用複迴歸以及邏輯斯迴歸比較醫師與一般民眾死亡前六個月住院醫療耗用以及特殊醫療利用是否有差異。結果：醫師死亡前六個月住院總醫療費用、每次住院醫療費用、加護病房利用率、加護病房總住院天數等，均顯著皆高於一般民眾。結論：醫師在生命末期時其醫療費用顯著高於一般民眾。醫師成為病人時角色既獨特且具挑戰性，他們的醫師可能基於情誼給與同儕禮遇，在挽留同儕生命所做的決策可能與照護一般民眾有異。英文摘要：Objectives: To assess the differences in medical resource consumption at the end of life between physicians and the general public, and to explore possible reasons for this in order to help fill the gap in research on medical resource consumption by physician-patients at the end of life. Methods: The data were drawn from encrypted Death Registry and National Health Insurance claims from 1999 through 2003. A sample of the general public (the comparison group) was drawn at a ratio of 10:1 relative to the physician sample, and was matched by gender, age and primary cause of death. Both multivariable linear regression and logistic regression analyses were conducted to compare hospital care and specific services used in the six months prior to death by the two groups. Results: Total hospital care expenses, expenses per admission, the utilization rate of intensive care units, and the length of stay in the six months prior to death were significantly higher for physicians than for the general public. Conclusions: Physicians account for substantially higher expenses at the end of life than does the general public. Physicians, as unique and challenging patients, may influence their treating physicians to adopt special lifesaving strategies out of fellowship or courtesy.起始頁-結束頁：236-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0415篇名：台灣腦中風病人急性後期照護需要之探討並列篇名：The Need for Post-Acute Care for Stroke Patients in Taiwan作者：吳冠穎(Kuan-Ying Wu);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu);洪燕妮(Yen-Ni Hung);吳君誠(Chun-Chen Wu);林麗嬋(Li-Chan Lin);胡漢華(Han-Hwa Hu)關鍵字：急性後期照護;腦中風;超長住院;再住院;Post-Acute Care;Stroke;Prolonged Hospital Stay;Readmission期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：推估腦中風病人急性後期照護（Post-Acute Care，以下簡稱PAC）需要，並探討影響腦中風病人PAC需要之相關因素。方法：採回溯性世代研究法，自2005年健保申報資料擷取腦中風新個案為對象，以超長住院（≧29天）、再住院（1、14日內）、合併當次住院超長及再住院為概似指標（proxy）推估腦中風病人PAC需要。採用多層次分析（multilevel analysis）探討病人特質與醫院特質對PAC需要之影響因素。結果：腦中風病人以男性、年齡≧80歲、蜘蛛網膜下腔出血、有共病、入住復健科、有手術者，較有PAC需要；入住醫學中心者超長住院風險較高，入住地區醫院者較容易有再住院情形。腦中風病人約10.11（以當次住院超長估算）-23.13%（以合併當次住院超長及14日內再住院估算）有PAC需要；PAC人日占率為16.94-44.68%。實施PAC後平均每人約可節省急性醫療天數2.06-8.17天；估算病床之使用約可減少306-1,210張。結論：約10.11-23.13%腦中風病人可能需要PAC，衛生主管機關思考實施PAC支付／給付制度之可行性，以撙節急性醫療資源。英文摘要：Objectives: To estimate the need for post-acute care (PAC) and to determine the factors related to that need for stroke patients in Taiwan. Methods: All new cases of stroke reported to the National Health Insurance Database (NHID) in 2005 were identified in this retrospective cohort study. Prolonged hospital stay (PHS, <U+2265>29 days), readmission within 1 to 14 days, and combined PHS with readmission were the proxies for estimating the need for PAC. Multilevel analysis was used to examine the relationships among patients, hospital characteristics, and the need for PAC. Results: Risk markers for the need for PAC in stroke patients included male gender, age over 80, subarachnoid hemorrhage, comorbidity, index hospitalization in a division of rehabilitation medicine, and strokes related to surgery. Stroke patients hospitalized in medical centers were more likely to receive PHS while those hospitalized in district hospitals were more likely to be readmitted. Stoke patients with a prolonged hospital stay or readmission within 14 days were used as indicators to estimate the need for PAC; these accounted for 10.11-23.13% of stroke patients. PAC days accounted for 16.94-44.68% of the total length of stay. The hospital days per stroke patient may be reduced by 2.06-8.17 days, and hospital bed occupancy may be reduced by 306-1,210 beds after implementation of PAC. Conclusions: As many as 10.11-23.13% of stroke patients may need PAC. PAC payment/reimbursement policy may be considered in order to reduce acute medical expenditures.起始頁-結束頁：251-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0516篇名：長期照護機構高風險群老人跌倒因素與防跌課程介入成效之探討並列篇名：Risk Factors Associated with Falling and the Effects of Fall Prevention Programs for the Elderly in Long-Term Care Institutions作者：曾雅梅(Ya-Mei Tseng);余承萍(Cheng-Ping Yu);賴冠郎(Kuan-Lang Lai);高森永(Sen-Yeong Kao)關鍵字：長期照護機構;高風險老人;跌倒;危險因子;預防跌倒課程;long-term care institution;high risk elderly;falls;risk factor;fall prevention program期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：Objectives: The prevention of falls in elderly adults is an important issue. The aims of this study were to investigate the risk factors for falling and the effects of fall prevention programs for the high risk elderly in long-term care. Methods: There were two stages in this study from 2009/09 to 2010/2. In the first, we collected data on demographics, health status, history of falling, the geriatric depression scale, knowledge and behavior about preventing falls, and the mini-mental status examination (MMSE) with a structured questionnaire. The second stage was a pre-post study design with a 12 week fall prevention program that included health education and exercise. Results: The first stage was a cross-sectional study design and involved a sample of 286 aged 65 and older, high risk elderly. Of these, 33.9% had fallen at least one or more times in the past year. The main risk factors were use of analgesics (OR=3.75, 95%C.I=1.40-10.01), use of hypnotics (OR=2.71, 95%C.I=1.32-5.57), no regular exercise (OR=2.19, 95%C.I=1.00-4.68) and avoidance of activity due to a fear of falling (OR=2.61, 95%C.I=1.39-4.91). In the second stage, 69 subjects completed the 12-week fall prevention program which focused on reduction of the incidence and fear of falling, improvement in health-related quality of life, ability to balance, and strengthening the lower-extremities. Conclusions: The fall prevention program improved fear of falling, quality of life, and partial body function among the elderly in long-term care institutions. This study offers our suggestions and clinical interventions as the basis for future studies with more subjects in other long-term care institutions.英文摘要：Objectives: The prevention of falls in elderly adults is an important issue. The aims of this study were to investigate the risk factors for falling and the effects of fall prevention programs for the high risk elderly in long-term care. Methods: There were two stages in this study from 2009/09 to 2010/2. In the first, we collected data on demographics, health status, history of falling, the geriatric depression scale, knowledge and behavior about preventing falls, and the mini-mental status examination (MMSE) with a structured questionnaire. The second stage was a pre-post study design with a 12 week fall prevention program that included health education and exercise. Results: The first stage was a cross-sectional study design and involved a sample of 286 aged 65 and older, high risk elderly. Of these, 33.9% had fallen at least one or more times in the past year. The main risk factors were use of analgesics (OR=3.75, 95%C.I=1.40-10.01), use of hypnotics (OR=2.71, 95%C.I=1.32-5.57), no regular exercise (OR=2.19, 95%C.I=1.00-4.68) and avoidance of activity due to a fear of falling (OR=2.61, 95%C.I=1.39-4.91). In the second stage, 69 subjects completed the 12-week fall prevention program which focused on reduction of the incidence and fear of falling, improvement in health-related quality of life, ability to balance, and strengthening the lower-extremities. Conclusions: The fall prevention program improved fear of falling, quality of life, and partial body function among the elderly in long-term care institutions. This study offers our suggestions and clinical interventions as the basis for future studies with more subjects in other long-term care institutions.起始頁-結束頁：263-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0617篇名：國際台北花卉博覽會展場空氣中微生物菌種與濃度分布並列篇名：Profile of Airborne Microbes at the Taipei International Flora Exposition作者：陳郁婷(Yu-Ting Chen);張靜文(Ching-Wen Chang);洪念慈(Nien-Tzu Hung)關鍵字：花卉博覽會;空氣;真菌;細菌;Flora exposition;air;fungi;bacteria期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the concentration and distribution of airborne microbes at the Taipei International Flora Exposition. Methods: Airborne bacteria and fungi were quantified and categorized at indoor pavilions (Expo Dome and Pavilion of the Future) and outdoor locations (Floral Rainbows, Flower Landscape and Flower Base under a Tree). Results: The highest fungal concentration (394.9±326.9 cfu/m3) was found at Pavilion of the Future. This was significantly greater than that at the Expo Dome (177.6±74.6 cfu/m3) (p＜0.05). Seven percent of the samples obtained from Pavilion of the Future exceeded the level of fungi (1000 cfu/m3) suggested by the Taiwan EPA for good indoor air quality. The highest bacterial concentration was found at Flower Base under a Tree (340.3±187.6 cfu/m3), followed by the Expo Dome (299.6±171.5 cfu/m3). Bacterial concentration at the Expo Dome was significantly higher than that at Floral Rainbows (149.7±74.7 cfu/m3) (p＜0.05). Gram positive rods (67.5%~82.7%) were dominant at every site studied, followed by Gram positive cocci (7.9%~14.6%). The most identified fungi were Cladosporium (68.6%~73.7%), followed by Penicillium (41.3%~27.7%). Conclusions: Our results demonstrated no significant increase in the level of airborne microbes at the Flora Exposition. Only a few samples exceeded the level of airborne microbes suggested by the Taiwan EPA for good air quality. This finding supports the observation that airborne microbes may be efficiently controlled through proper air conditioning and environmental management.英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the concentration and distribution of airborne microbes at the Taipei International Flora Exposition. Methods: Airborne bacteria and fungi were quantified and categorized at indoor pavilions (Expo Dome and Pavilion of the Future) and outdoor locations (Floral Rainbows, Flower Landscape and Flower Base under a Tree). Results: The highest fungal concentration (394.9±326.9 cfu/m3) was found at Pavilion of the Future. This was significantly greater than that at the Expo Dome (177.6±74.6 cfu/m3) (p＜0.05). Seven percent of the samples obtained from Pavilion of the Future exceeded the level of fungi (1000 cfu/m3) suggested by the Taiwan EPA for good indoor air quality. The highest bacterial concentration was found at Flower Base under a Tree (340.3±187.6 cfu/m3), followed by the Expo Dome (299.6±171.5 cfu/m3). Bacterial concentration at the Expo Dome was significantly higher than that at Floral Rainbows (149.7±74.7 cfu/m3) (p＜0.05). Gram positive rods (67.5%~82.7%) were dominant at every site studied, followed by Gram positive cocci (7.9%~14.6%). The most identified fungi were Cladosporium (68.6%~73.7%), followed by Penicillium (41.3%~27.7%). Conclusions: Our results demonstrated no significant increase in the level of airborne microbes at the Flora Exposition. Only a few samples exceeded the level of airborne microbes suggested by the Taiwan EPA for good air quality. This finding supports the observation that airborne microbes may be efficiently controlled through proper air conditioning and environmental management.起始頁-結束頁：277-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0718篇名：2011年台灣地區幼稚園兒童血中鉛濃度與影響因素初探分析並列篇名：Distribution and Determinants of Blood Lead Levels in Kindergarten Children in Taiwan, 2011作者：林宜萱(Yi-Hseun Lin);林佳玉(Chia-Yu Lin);王怡人(I-Jen Wang);黃耀輝(Yaw-Huei Hwang)關鍵字：幼稚園兒童;血液;鉛;kindergarten children;blood;lead期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：Objectives: Children's growth and intellectual development are affected by low-level lead exposure. The aims of this research were to measure the concentration of lead in the blood of the kindergarten children in Taiwan and to explore the relevant determinants in order to prevent future lead exposure. Methods: Random sampling was done at various administrative levels such as district, city, town, and village. Kindergartens from administrative areas that were randomly selected were then invited to participate in this project between April and October 2011. A total of 934 children from the participating kindergartens in the selected areas took part in this study after their parents signed a statement of consent. Blood lead level was determined with inductively coupled plasma. Results: The geometric mean level of lead in the blood of kindergarten children was 1.86 μg/dL (geometric standard deviation =1.55). The percentage of blood lead concentrations exceeding 4 μg/dL was 3.7%. In terms of geographical areas, subjects from the off-shore islands had the highest geometric mean blood lead concentration (2.59 μg/dL), while those in northern Taiwan had the lowest (1.53 μg/dL). Among the counties, children from Kinmen (2.80 μg/dL) and Changhua (2.53 μg/dL) presented with the highest blood lead levels while those in Taoyuan (1.28 μg/dL) and Hsinchu (1.32 μg/dL) had the lowest. Blood lead concentration was negatively correlated with household income and level of parental educational (p ＜ 0.0001). Children whose fathers worked in the industries of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries tended to have higher blood lead levels (＞ 2.20 μg/dL). Conclusions: There is an international consensus to further lower the safety threshold for children's blood lead levels since damage to the brain and nervous system has been reported with blood lead levels less than 10μg/dL. Therefore, even though the blood lead levels of kindergarten children have generally been reduced to 1~3 μg/dL in Taiwan, a referential threshold of 4 μg/dL was suggested in order to enhance the prevention of lead exposure for people at high risk, with efforts on eliminating health disparities and inegualities in the general population.英文摘要：Objectives: Children's growth and intellectual development are affected by low-level lead exposure. The aims of this research were to measure the concentration of lead in the blood of the kindergarten children in Taiwan and to explore the relevant determinants in order to prevent future lead exposure. Methods: Random sampling was done at various administrative levels such as district, city, town, and village. Kindergartens from administrative areas that were randomly selected were then invited to participate in this project between April and October 2011. A total of 934 children from the participating kindergartens in the selected areas took part in this study after their parents signed a statement of consent. Blood lead level was determined with inductively coupled plasma. Results: The geometric mean level of lead in the blood of kindergarten children was 1.86 μg/dL (geometric standard deviation =1.55). The percentage of blood lead concentrations exceeding 4 μg/dL was 3.7%. In terms of geographical areas, subjects from the off-shore islands had the highest geometric mean blood lead concentration (2.59 μg/dL), while those in northern Taiwan had the lowest (1.53 μg/dL). Among the counties, children from Kinmen (2.80 μg/dL) and Changhua (2.53 μg/dL) presented with the highest blood lead levels while those in Taoyuan (1.28 μg/dL) and Hsinchu (1.32 μg/dL) had the lowest. Blood lead concentration was negatively correlated with household income and level of parental educational (p ＜ 0.0001). Children whose fathers worked in the industries of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries tended to have higher blood lead levels (＞ 2.20 μg/dL). Conclusions: There is an international consensus to further lower the safety threshold for children's blood lead levels since damage to the brain and nervous system has been reported with blood lead levels less than 10μg/dL. Therefore, even though the blood lead levels of kindergarten children have generally been reduced to 1~3 μg/dL in Taiwan, a referential threshold of 4 μg/dL was suggested in order to enhance the prevention of lead exposure for people at high risk, with efforts on eliminating health disparities and inegualities in the general population.起始頁-結束頁：285-298資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-03-0819篇名：傳染病與國家競爭力作者：羅秀雲;李政益;楊祥麟;莊人祥;張峰義期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：97-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-0120篇名：國際間學齡前兒童生長體位標準之現況分析並列篇名：A Current Review of the International Growth Standards for Preschool Children作者：陳姿媛(Tzu-Yuan Chen);盧立卿( Li-Ching Lyu)關鍵字：兒童;營養評估;生長曲線;身體質量指數;z分數;children;nutrition assessment;growth chart;BMI;z-score期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：兒童期的生長發育，為奠基未來生長與健康發展的重要時機，因此此時期用以評估生長發展及營養狀況的體位標準，包括生長曲線百分位、身體質量指數及z分數等方式，更是一不可忽視的課題所在。本文整理國際組織及各國公共衛生單位針對學齡前兒童生長體位標準之現況進行探討撰述，主要議題為生長曲線（growth chart）之比較分析，此部分資料來源為台灣、美國、英國、日本、中國及世界衛生組織等相關文獻；續而則針對身體質量指數（body mass index, BMI）及z分數（z score）使用進行相關陳述。在臨床及公共衛生領域中，評估兒童生長狀況的方法不可勝數，因此於繁多的評估指標中選用正確的估量工具，將是個複雜且益顯重要的議題。國內公共衛生、小兒科及營養學界對於兒童生長體位標準之評估文獻尚屬缺乏，期盼未來有更多相關研究投入於評估指標的信效度精進與推廣，藉此以使兒童的生長歷程整體評估更斟全面完善。英文摘要：Growth and development in childhood are pivotal for future health and well-being. Therefore, anthropometric assessments using growth standards including growth charts by percentiles, BMI and z-scores are important for the evaluation of nutritional status. This article reviewed the current international growth standards for preschool children as published by public health agencies in Taiwan, the Unitd States, the United Kingdom, Japan, China and the World Health Organization. We then compared and discussed the applications of the growth chart, the BMI and the z-score for assessing growth and nutritional status during childhood. Since there are various methods for assessing children's growth status, the choice of assessment tools is a complex issue. In the fields of public health, pediatrics, and nutrition in Taiwan, there has been very limited study of growth standards. We hope that this research will increase awareness about the issue and make nutritional assessments of children much more comprehensive.起始頁-結束頁：105-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-0201篇名：影響護理之家評鑑結果之因素研究：以2009年台灣首次全國護理之家評鑑為例並列篇名：Factors Associated with the Outcome of Accreditation of Nursing Homes: Results from the 2009 Taiwan Nursing Home Accreditation Survey作者：蔡淑鳳(Shwu-Feng Tsay);林育秀(Yu-Hsiu Lin);梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang)關鍵字：長期照護;護理之家;評鑑;Long-term care;nursing home;appraisal期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在瞭解台灣一般護理之家評鑑結果，並探討通過評鑑之影響因素，作為護理之家經營者及評鑑制度未來修正參考。方法：本研究為一橫斷性研究，以2009年「台灣護理之家評鑑資訊網資料庫」之351家一般護理之家為研究對象，進行次級資料分析；本研究將評鑑結果「特優」、「優」及「甲」者定義為「評鑑通過」，再以邏輯斯迴歸探討影響評鑑通過之因素。結果：受評鑑的護理之家中有169家（48.15%）通過評鑑，182家（51.85%）未通過評鑑；邏輯斯迴歸分析發現，設立區域、經營所有權、規模、負責人教育程度、負責人角色、競爭程度及占床率顯著影響護理之家是否通過評鑑。結論：主管機關應加強輔導護理之家，提升健康照護、人員管理、經營管理及安全環境四面向；提供機構管理者完整務實的繼續教育，提升機構經營成效。護理之家負責人除積極提昇本身經營管理知能外，也應重新思考護理之家本身的市場定位及發展方向，審慎評估護理之家組織特質之適當性。英文摘要：Objectives: This study examined the results of the Taiwan Nursing Home Accreditation Survey and analyzed the factors related to qualifications for accreditation. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study using data from the 2009 Taiwan Nursing Home Accreditation Survey Dataset. A total of 351 nursing homes were analyzed. Passing accreditation was defined as obtaining a rating of ”especially excellent”, ”first-rate”, or ”A-grade”. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to identify factors associated with passing accreditation. Results: Among the 351 nursing homes appraised, 169 (48.15%) passed and 182 (51.85%) did not. Significant factors associated with passing were: region, ownership, scale, owner's educational background, owner's role, competition, and occupancy rate. Conclusions: Policymakers should help nursing homeadministrators improve their performance in the provision of care, treatment services, human resources, management, and environment of care, and provide comprehensive continuing education to assist administrators in improving operational efficiency. Nursing home administrators should develop their management skills and reconsider their market position, development, and structural appropriateness.起始頁-結束頁：119-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-032篇名：評論：影響護理之家評鑑結果之因素研究：以2009年台灣首次全國護理之家評鑑為例作者：劉慧俐期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：133-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-043篇名：作者回覆：影響護理之家評鑑結果之因素研究：以2009年台灣首次全國護理之家評鑑為例作者：蔡淑鳳;林育秀;梁亞文期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：135-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-054篇名：台灣醫院網頁公開揭露財務資訊決定因素並列篇名：Determinants of Financial Disclosure at the Websites of Hospitals in Taiwan作者：何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho)關鍵字：自願性公開揭露;網際網路;財務資訊;voluntary disclosure;web information;financial information期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：近年各界呼籲醫療機構提高財務透明度，而網際網路提供一個有效且低成本的資訊傳播工具。本研究探討影響醫療機構在網路公開揭露財務資訊程度，及影響揭露行為的因素。方法：建立醫院在網頁公開揭露財務資訊的量表，並調查230家醫院在網頁公開揭露財務資訊情況。財務資訊揭露指標分為財務資訊類型、財務資訊品質、財務資訊易取得性及網頁揭露總指標。然後分別以4項資訊揭露指標為應變數進行迴歸分析，探討影響醫院在網頁公開揭露財務資訊的因素。結果：公立醫院在網頁公開揭露財務資訊的程度最高，其次為非營利醫院，營利醫院公開揭露程度最低；區域醫院公開揭露財務資訊程度高於地區醫院。醫學中心的財務資訊易取得性與揭露總指標顯著高於地區醫院；市場集中度愈高，網頁公開揭露財務資訊種類與資訊品質也愈高；醫院新聞能見度愈高，其網頁資訊易取得性較高。結論：實證顯示醫院自願性公開揭露財務資訊的誘因甚低，若要達成醫療機構全面公開揭露財務資訊，需要透過強制性規範。英文摘要：Objectives: Internet reporting has gained in popularity in recent years because of its low cost and wide reach. This study investigated the differences in online disclosure of financial information by hospitals under different ownership and the quantity, quality and accessibility of financial information on the websites of hospitals in Taiwan. Methods: The financial information disclosure index was constructed based on the data from the web-sites of 230 hospitals in Taiwan. The index included three parts: the categories of financial disclosure, the quality of the disclosed financial information, and the convenience of the internet search. Results: This study demonstrated significant differences in the online disclosure of financial information by hospitals under different types of ownership. Public hospitals had the highest degree of disclosure followed by not-for-profit hospitals and for-profit hospitals. The general information index was higher for metropolitan hospitals than for local community hospitals. General information and information accessibility for academic medical centers were both higher than those for local community hospitals. The index of financial categories and quality increased as the medical market concentration increased. Information accessibility from the websites of hospitals was positively correlated with visibility by the press. Conclusions: The incentives for voluntary online financial information disclosure are inadequate. Therefore, mandatory disclosure is a more effective way to increase the availability of financial information about hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：136-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-065篇名：氫離子幫浦抑制劑輔以衛生教育介入對胃食道逆流性疾病及其症狀影響尺度改善之探討並列篇名：The Effect of Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs) along with Health Education Intervention on Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) and the Disease Impact Scale作者：黃勇傑(Yung-Chieh Huang);朱恆成(Heng-Cheng Chu);高森永(Sen-Yeong Kao)關鍵字：胃食道逆流性疾病;氫離子幫浦抑制劑;衛生教育介入;改良型胃食道逆流性疾病影響尺度（mGIS）;Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease;Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs);health education intervention;modified Gastroesophageal Impact Scale (mGIS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：現行臨床針對胃食道逆流疾病（Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease, GERD）病人之治療僅著重內科藥物之投予或採外科手術治療，鮮少提供衛教介入之輔助性治療或評估衛教介入之成效。因此，本研究旨在探討臨床上投予氫離子幫浦抑制劑（Proton Pump Inhibitor, PPIs）輔以衛生教育介入，以6－8週之追蹤期間了解其對GERD病人之危險因子、疾病認知、態度與行為、改良型GERD症狀影響尺度（mGIS）及內視鏡嚴重度改善之成效，進而探討mGIS改變量（ΔmGIS）之預測因子。方法：本研究為隨機控制試驗（Randomized Controlled Trial, RCT）並追蹤6－8週，將181位GERD病人隨機分派至實驗組（N＝92）或控制組（N＝89）。實驗組接受PPIs治療及衛生教育介入措施；控制組則接受PPIs治療及門診常規照護。結果：實驗組與控制組於飲食、生活習慣或行為、GERD認知、態度與行為及mGIS之改善情形達顯著差異。經多元逐步迴歸分析後顯示：實驗組提升GERD認知（β＝1.221，t＝2.716）、避免吃甜食（β＝0.101，t＝3.644）及睡覺枕頭刻意墊高（β＝0.539，t＝=12.344）為ΔmGIS之預測因子。結論：本研究證實PPIs輔以衛教介入可有效改善GERD病人部分不良飲食習慣及生活習慣或行為，並增進對疾病相關認知、態度與行為及減少受疾病影響之程度。其中實驗組於衛教介入後改善不良危險因子者，其受疾病影響程度呈顯著減少。英文摘要：Objectives: Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) has become a public health issue in Taiwan; however, current clinical treatment focuses only on surgery or drugs to inhibit gastric acid secretion, and seldom takes into consideration the effect of concurrent health education which includes diet, lifestyle modification, and disease knowledge, attitude and practice (KAP). The aims of this study were to evaluate the concurrent effects of health education and Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs) on diet, lifestyle changes, KAP, the modified GERD impact scale (mGIS), and severity of the condition as determined by endoscopy, and to further explore the predictors of difference on the modified GERD impact scale (ΔmGIS). Methods: A 6-8 week randomized controlled trial was conducted at a medical center between 2010 and 2011. This involved 181 gastroenterology outpatients with GERD. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two treatment strategies: 89 in the medication management (PPIs) only group and 92 in the medication management (PPIs) plus concurrent health education group. Results: The experimental group was significantly better than the control group in avoiding or decreasing related risk factors, increasing disease KAP, and decreasing mGIS. Multiple linear regression (stepwise) analysis showed that improved knowledge (β=1.221, t=2.716), sleeping with the head of the bed raised (β=0.539, t=12.344) and avoiding or decreasing eating sweets (β=0.101, t=3.644) were ΔmGIS predictors. Conclusions: PPIs and concurrent health education may be the best way to improve patients' diet, lifestyle, and disease related KAP, and reduce the severity of clinical symptoms.起始頁-結束頁：152-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-076篇名：非正式社會支持網絡在全民健康保險實施前後對健康檢查服務利用之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Informal Social Support Networks on the Use of Health Examination Services Before and after the Implementation of National Health Insurance作者：朱僑麗(Chiao-Lee Chu);陳肇男(Chao-Nan Chen)關鍵字：社會支持;戶基護航網絡;健康檢查服務利用;Social Support;household-based convoy;Health physical examination services utilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：檢視非正式社會支持網絡對健康檢查服務利用的影響。方法：非正式社會支持以戶基護航網絡概念為基礎，檢視不同網絡型態對健康檢查服務利用的影響。戶基護航網絡由家戶型態、常連絡不同住家人、常連絡親屬及常連絡朋友等四圈所構成。分析資料來源，為1993年、1996年與1999年國民健康局的台灣中老年人身心狀況調查資料。結果：控制了其它相關影響變項，全民健保實施後，1999年資料分析結果顯示具有常連絡朋友網絡者，會顯著的增加其健康檢查服務利用，但是兩代或以上家戶、不同住家人、與親屬之網絡則無顯著影響；而1996年與1999年資料分析結果則顯示戶基護航網絡圈數越多者，亦會傾向利用健康檢查服務。結論：朋友的社會支持可以促進老年人健康檢查服務的利用。英文摘要：Objectives: To examine the effect of informal social support structures on the use of physical health examination services. Methods: A household-based convoy was used to reflect an individual's informal social structure. This variable included four circles: type of household, and frequent-contact non-co-residing family members, relatives, and friends. Data were obtained from ”The Health and Living Conditions of the Middle Aged and the Elderly” complied by the Health Promotion Bureau of the National Health Administration in 1993, 1996, and 1999. Results: In 1999, after the implementation of National Health Insurance, frequent-contact friends had a significant positive effect on the use of physical health examinations when other relevant factors were controlled; however, two generations or more households, and non-co-residing family members or relatives did not have a significant effect. In addition, the analytical results of 1996 and 1999 data indicated that respondents with more circles were more inclined to have physical health examinations. Conclusions: Social support received from relatives and friends were able to promote the use of physical health examination services.起始頁-結束頁：164-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-087篇名：修正簡易營養評估量表（MNA）以改善其評估血液透析患者營養風險之效能並列篇名：Modifying the Short-form Mini-Nutritional Assessment to Improve the Prediction of Nutritional Risk in Patients on Hemodialysis作者：許智怡(Chih-Yi Hsu);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：血液透析病患;營養評估;簡易營養評估量表;Hemodialysis patients;Nutritional assessment;Mini Nutritional Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：改良MNA（Mini-Nutritional Assessment）使其更適用於血液透析（hemodialysis, HD）患者的營養評估。方法：本研究徵求中部某地區醫院門診洗腎中心血液透析患者100名（18－97歲，男43女57名）。經同意後，以短式及長式MNA－台灣二版評估營養狀況並與生化指標比較。MNA台灣二版為採用台灣老人體位指標的改良版。版本之修正以選擇較能反應HD病情的非短式題項（如O題）與較不反應HD病情的短式題項（如E題）互換題位，並檢定其改良成效。以Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test進行事後檢定，比較短式MNA台灣二版各改良版本與長式MNA台灣二版的評估結果。以Pearson's相關分析長式及各短式MNA台灣二版的總分與血清白蛋白、血清肌酸酐、住院天數、及急診次數的相關性。結果：本研究發現短式MNA台灣二版用於評估血液透析病患時，以量表O題（自評營養狀況）取代（對換）E題（失智），最能改進評估功能，且其評估成果與長式MNA台灣二版相當一致。結論：本研究的結果顯示MNA量表以O題（自評營養狀況）取代（對換）E題（失智）或D題（精神壓力）最能改進其血液透析患者的評估功能。此簡單的改良，使短式MNA量表可適用於台灣的血液透析患者。英文摘要：Objectives: To modify the Mini-Nutritional Assessment (MNA) so that it would be suitable for use in hemodialysis (HD) patients. Methods: Subjects were 100 HD outpatients (18-97 years of age, 43 men and 57 women) recruited from a district hospital in Central Taiwan. With their consent, we rated the nutritional status of each subject with the long-, short-, and modified short-form versions of the MNA and measured their biochemical values. We examined various alternative short-form versions of the MNA based on the dietary characteristics of HD patients. The study used the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test, Pearson's correlation analysis and the crosstabulation test to evaluate the ability of the short-form versions to predict the long-form MNA (T2). Results: Results showed that a modified short-form version that exchanged item O (selfrated nutritional status) for item E (dementia) improved the predictive ability of the MNA in HD patients. The modified short-form performed well compared to the long-form. Conclusions: The study demonstrated that replacing item O for E or D in the MNA can best improve the functionality of the MNA. This simple revision makes the short-form suitable for assessing the risk of malnutrition in patients on hemodialysis.起始頁-結束頁：176-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-098篇名：「中文健康識能評估量表」簡式量表的發展與效度檢測並列篇名：Development and Validation of the Short-form Mandarin Health Literacy Scale作者：李守義(Shoou-Yih D. Lee);蔡慈儀(Tzu-I Tsai);蔡憶文(Yi-Wen Tsai);郭耿南(Ken N. Kuo)關鍵字：功能性健康識能;中文健康識能評估量表;簡式量表發展;functional health literacy;Mandarin Health Literacy Scale;short-form scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：目前國內已發展出一套中文健康識能評估表，用以評估成年民眾的功能性健康識能，瞭解民眾閱讀、理解及應用健康資訊之能力。本研究的目的是根據「中文健康識能評估表」來發展出簡式量表，檢驗原始量表和簡式量表測量模式的適配性，並進行簡式量表的信度及效度檢核。方法：本研究為橫斷性研究設計，以面訪方式進行資料收集。樣本對象為全國成年民眾，採三階段分層、抽取率與單位大小成比例之等機率抽樣設計，有效樣本共計3,491。測量模式的檢驗是以AMOS 19.0統計軟體進行驗證性因素分析。結果：簡式量表的題目是選擇與原始總量表之間的皮爾森相關係數最高的兩題組，題目由原始量表的33題文字性題目減少成8題，17題數字性題目減少到3題。驗證性因素分析結果支持簡式量表為單一構面的模式。適配度測量結果顯示，簡式量表的增值適配度及精簡適配度指標均比原始量表有更好的配適性表現，有達到模式的簡約原則。簡式量表與原始量表間的相關達0.97，簡式量表的內在一致信度係數為0.94。以「教育程度」、「閱讀健康訊息的能力」、「他人協助讀寫的需求」、「健康知識」、「自覺健康狀態」進行簡式量表的幅合性效度和已知群組效度檢定，所有相關係數均達到顯著。結論：綜合各種心理計量方法分析，結果確認這份中文健康識能簡式量表可取代原始健康識能評估表，應用於使用華文的族群，進行功能性健康識能相關研究或臨床評估。英文摘要：Objectives: A Mandarin Health Literacy Scale (MHLS) has been developed and validated to assess Taiwanese adults' functional health literacy in terms of their ability to read, comprehend, and utilize basic health information in making personal health decisions. The purpose of this study was to develop a shortened version of the MHLS, the short-form Mandarin Health Literacy Scale (s-MHLS), and to examine the psychometric qualities of the shortened instrument. Methods: The study sample consisted of 3491 Taiwanese adults who were randomly selected using the threestage stratified sampling design with a sampling rate proportional-to-size within each stage. The measurement models were examined using AMOS 19.0. Results: Item selection was determined by the correlation between the question sets and the total scores on the MHLS. The MHLS was reduced from 33 text-reading items to 8 and 17 numerical items to 3. Confirmatory factor analysis supported the unidimensionality of s-MHLS. Measurement model analysis revealed that s-MHLS yielded a better fit than MHLS. The Cronbach's correlation between the MHLS and s-MHLS was 0.97, and the s-MHLS had satisfactory internal reliability (Cronbach's alpha=0.94). The s-MHLS was significantly correlated with education, reading ability, need for reading assistance, health knowledge, and perceived health status, suggesting that the shortened instrument had good convergent and known-group validity. Conclusions: The s-MHLS is valid and reliable. It could be employed in clinical and research settings to assess functional health literacy in the Mandarinspeaking population. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012;31(2):184-194)起始頁-結束頁：184-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-109篇名：台灣酒精性疾病死亡率之空間聚集分析並列篇名：Spatial Clustering of Alcohol-attributed Disease Mortality in Taiwan作者：林志銘(Chih-Ming Lin);林文苑(Wen-Yen Lin)關鍵字：酒精性疾病;性別;空間統計;空間聚集;alcohol-attributed disease;gender;spatial statistics;spatial clustering期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：建立台灣酒精性疾病死亡之地理分佈與空間聚集型態，並探討男女不同性別之死亡風險聚集差異。方法：採用台灣地區2002－2006年的全國死亡診斷登記系統之電腦資料檔，依據ICD-9CM進行酒精性疾病死亡分類，總計台灣本島349鄉鎮市區有30,669之15歲（含）以上死亡人口，以2002年為標準人口分別計算男女性酒精性疾病標準死亡比（SMR）及進行Global G與Local Gi*空間統計量分析死亡風險之空間聚集分佈。結果：酒精性疾病死亡主要風險族群為男性（佔68%），男女性在各鄉鎮市區年死亡中位數分別為8.8與4.5人。在地理分佈方面，高風險空間聚集區域多位於非都市之偏遠鄉鎮，其中女性死亡風險顯著較高且不同於男性空間聚集之區域，係以宜蘭縣南澳鄉及以雲林縣台西鄉為中心的兩個區域。結論：本研究驗證台灣酒精性疾病死亡風險存在性別與地理城鄉聚集之差異，透過這些地域的鑑別，未來輔以相關社會人口資料變項的分析，將有助於獲得影響男女酒精性疾病死亡風險因子的進一步釐清。英文摘要：Objectives: This research analyzed the geographical distribution and spatial clustering of alcohol-attributed disease mortality in Taiwan, and determined the gender differences in this clustering. Methods: Using 2002-2006 data from the national death-diagnosis registration system and categorizing alcohol-attributed disease mortality by ICD-9CM diagnoses, we calculated the number of alcohol-attributed, disease related deaths of those aged 15 and older to be 30,669 in 349 townships on Taiwan's main island. This research utilized 2002 data as the standardized population to calculate the alcohol-attributed disease standard mortality ratio (SMR), and applied the SMR to Global G and Local Gi* statistics to determine the spatial clustering of deaths by geographical distribution. Results: Sixty-eight percent of alcohol-attributed disease related deaths were males, and the median numbers of males and females were 8.8 and 4.5, respectively. From the results of spatial analysis of geographical distribution, statistically significant highnumber pockets tended to cluster in remote townships. There were more females than males in two independent pockets (NanAo and Taisi townships). Conclusions: Results from this research demonstrated that alcohol-attributed disease mortality did show gender and spatial clustering differences in Taiwan. By indentifying the high risk areas and analyzing related demographic variables, we may be able to provide further insight into the alcohol-attributed disease mortality factors for men and women in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：195-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-02-1110篇名：台灣醫療保健支出成長率的分析：醫療通膨，質量與公平性並列篇名：An Analysis of the Growth of Healthcare Expenditure in Taiwan: Healthcare Inflation, Volume-intensity, and Equity作者：文羽苹(Yu-Ping Wen);黃旭明(Shiuh-Ming Huang);江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)關鍵字：醫療保健支出;醫療通貨膨脹;人口老化;醫療保健質量;醫療安全差距;nominal national healthcare expenditures;healthcare inflation;aging;healthcare volume-intensity;disparity in healthcare security期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，台灣醫療支出不斷擴張，經濟發展卻幾見負成長，本研究旨在檢視不同因素對醫療保健支出成長率的影響以及不同所得家戶的醫療安全差距變化，以供健保改革政策參考。本研究利用Schieber and Poulier的分解方法，假設名目醫療保健支出受醫療保健物價、人口數量等因素影響，殘值為醫療保健質量。利用健保保障率及受益率兩指標，分析不同所得族群之醫療安全變化；所有原始資料來自政府部門公開統計及家庭收支調查。結果顯示：（1）21世紀以來，名目醫療保健支出年增率4.49%，主要來自醫療通貨膨脹（2.43%）及人口老化（1.68%）；調整人口老化後醫療保健質量的成長幾乎呈現停滯。（2）隨著自付醫療費用增加，全民健保的保障率由68%下降至66%。（3）雖然就健保受益率而言，窮人仍舊受益最多（5.27至5.05倍），但家戶所得越高，健保給付增加越快（2.13至2.33倍），現在貧富之間的醫療安全差距已相對擴大。建議未來政府在推動健保改革時，應重視醫療品質的確保，通貨膨脹的影響以及醫療安全差距擴大的挑戰。（台灣衛誌 2012；31（1）：1－10）英文摘要：Taiwan's healthcare expenditures have increased in recent years despite occasional periods of negative growth in national income. This study examined the contributions of price, population, and volume-intensity to the growth of healthcare spending, and the change in healthcare expenditure security across income groups. We followed the method of Schieber and Poulier to break down the growth of nominal national healthcare spending into increases in healthcare prices and population. Volume-intensity was calculated as a residual and was affected by aging of the population. Healthcare expenditure security was defined by the rate of National Health Insurance (NHI) coverage and the benefit-premium ratio, and was compared across income quartiles. All data were based on public government statistics and the Survey of Family Income and Expenditure. Results indicated that: (1) Since the beginning of the 21th century, nominal growth in health care spending has stayed around 4.49% and came mainly from health care inflation (2.43%) and population aging (1.68%). Volume-intensity grew sluggishly. (2) The NHI coverage rate declined from 68 to 66% with an increase in out-of-pocket spending. (3) In terms of the benefit-premium ratio, NHI remained generally pro-poor (5.27 to 5.05 times); however, disparity in healthcare security widened because the NHI benefit-premium ratio increased faster for the rich (2.13 to 2.33 times). We suggest that future NHI reform should focus on quality assurance, the effects of inflation, and equity in healthcare security. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):1-10)起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0111篇名：人類安全與亞太經濟合作會議衛生議題之制度發展並列篇名：Human Security and Institutional Development of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Health Issues作者：廖舜右(Shun-Yo Liao);張照勤(Chao-Chin Chang)關鍵字：亞太經濟合作會議;人類安全;衛生任務小組;衛生工作小組;議題聯結;APEC;Human security;Health Task Force;Health Working Group;Issue linkage期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以人類安全觀點解釋「亞太經濟合作會議（APEC）」之演變，說明「衛生任務小組（health task force; HTF）透過議題聯結方式結合衛生安全、經濟安全、食物安全，以及緊急應變議題，由臨時編組轉化為「衛生工作小組（health working group; HWG）」正式編制之過程。首先，本文就人類安全概念進行探討，闡述此一概念在後冷戰國際事務之應用與相關實踐。其次，檢視APEC衛生安全議題及HTF之演進，說明該項機制在區域衛生安全合作的主要功能，以及人類安全觀點如何解釋HTF之演變。最後，結合人類安全與APEC衛生安全機制相關討論，評估台灣參與APEC衛生合作機制之可能成效，並提出拓展台灣衛生外交之現階段與中長期具體策略。（台灣衛誌2012；31（1）：11－20）英文摘要：This article, inspired by the concept of human security, studies the development of health issues within the framework of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)by looking at the institutional evolution of the Health Task Force (HTF) from a temporary task force to a permanent Health Working Group (HWG). Issues linking health, economics, food, and emergency preparedness are examined. We discuss the broad concepts of human security and their applications to international affairs. After a review of APEC health issues, the human, security perspective is applied to describe the historical phases of the HTF. This study combines viewpoints from human security and the health regime to evaluate the effectiveness of Taiwan's participation in APEC health issues. Policy suggestions are also provided. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):11-20)起始頁-結束頁：11-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0212篇名：行動功能指標「日常生活功能」及「工具性日常生活功能」預測台灣老年人跌倒風險之探討並列篇名：Predicting the Risk of Falling Based on ADLs and IADLs in Older Taiwanese作者：鄭秀瑮(Hsiu-Li Cheng);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：日常生活功能;工具性日常生活功能;跌倒風險;老年人;ADL (Activities of Daily Living);IADL (Instrumental Activities of Daily Living);Risk of fall;Elderly期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：Objectives: To determine the association between functional ability as indicated by ADLs (Activities of Daily Living) and IADLs (Instrumental Activities of Daily Living) and the risk of falling in older Taiwanese. Methods: Data were drawn from the 2003 and 2007 datasets of ”The Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were 3778 participants who completed both surveys. Logistic regression analysis was employed to determine the association of ADL and IADL status with the risk of falling in 2003 and 2007 after controlling for demographic, lifestyle and health-related variables. Results: In cross-sectional analysis, IADLs but not ADLs were significantly associated with the risk of falling during the prior year. Those who had 1-2, 3-4 or 5-6 dependencies in 2007 had 1.49 (1.17-1.89, p＜0.001), 1.71 (1.20-2.25, p＜0.003) and 2.10 (1.31-3.38, p＜0.002) times the risk of falling, respectively, during the previous 12 months when compared to those who had no dependency. Mild (1-2 dependencies) or moderate (3-4 dependencies) ADL dependency was not associated with the risk of falling and severe (5-6 dependencies) ADL impairment was negatively associated with the risk of falling. Longitudinal analysis showed that neither IADLs nor ADLs could predict the risk of falling four years later. Conclusions: Results suggested that IADL but not ADL status predicted the current or near term risk of falling; however, neither was a predictor of the risk four years later. These results highlight the importance of maintaining the functional ability of the elderly through regular exercise, proper nutrition, and routine monitoring of functional status. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):21-30)英文摘要：Objectives: To determine the association between functional ability as indicated by ADLs (Activities of Daily Living) and IADLs (Instrumental Activities of Daily Living) and the risk of falling in older Taiwanese. Methods: Data were drawn from the 2003 and 2007 datasets of ”The Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were 3778 participants who completed both surveys. Logistic regression analysis was employed to determine the association of ADL and IADL status with the risk of falling in 2003 and 2007 after controlling for demographic, lifestyle and health-related variables. Results: In cross-sectional analysis, IADLs but not ADLs were significantly associated with the risk of falling during the prior year. Those who had 1-2, 3-4 or 5-6 dependencies in 2007 had 1.49 (1.17-1.89, p＜0.001), 1.71 (1.20-2.25, p＜0.003) and 2.10 (1.31-3.38, p＜0.002) times the risk of falling, respectively, during the previous 12 months when compared to those who had no dependency. Mild (1-2 dependencies) or moderate (3-4 dependencies) ADL dependency was not associated with the risk of falling and severe (5-6 dependencies) ADL impairment was negatively associated with the risk of falling. Longitudinal analysis showed that neither IADLs nor ADLs could predict the risk of falling four years later. Conclusions: Results suggested that IADL but not ADL status predicted the current or near term risk of falling; however, neither was a predictor of the risk four years later. These results highlight the importance of maintaining the functional ability of the elderly through regular exercise, proper nutrition, and routine monitoring of functional status. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):21-30)起始頁-結束頁：21-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0313篇名：台灣高血壓用藥之問題處方及其影響因素的研究並列篇名：A study on the Inappropriate Prescription of Medications to Treat Hypertension in Taiwan作者：陳世欽(Shiu-Ching Chen);蔡文正(Wen-Chen Tsai):黃昱瞳(Yu-Tung Huang);謝儀靜(Yi-Chung Hsieh);黃光華(Kuang-Hua Huang)關鍵字：高血壓;問題處方;重複用藥;交互作用;超量處方;hypertension (HTN);inappropriate prescription;duplicated medication;drug-drug interaction;over-dosage期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：高血壓是心血管疾病的重要危險因子，不僅威脅民眾健康，更是公共衛生重要議題，本研究目的為利用全民健保資料庫分析，瞭解我國高血壓用藥之問題處方，並探討其影響因素。方法：資料來源為「全民健康保險學術研究資料庫」之2005年100萬人承保抽樣歸人檔。本研究分析2004至2008年之申報資料；採用ATC分類系統原則，進行健保藥品之藥理分類；擷取ICD-9-CM前3碼為401至405之高血壓門診個案為研究對象；問題處方分為重複用藥、交互作用及超量處方。結果：2004年至2008年共有161,003位高血壓患者，高血壓門診處方共有3,988,024人次。問題處方方面，重複用藥發生率為2.1%，交互作用高達33.41%，超量處方為12.39%。高血壓問題處方影響因素方面，在「公立及私立醫療機構」、「男性醫師」及「醫師年資越低」等特性之發生率較高。結論：本研究呈現台灣2004至2008年健保高血壓門診問題處方之現況結果，希望提供衛生政策決策者有效的資訊，以制訂用藥相關政策，俾利提升高血壓病患之用藥安全。（台灣衛誌 2012；31（1）：31－42）英文摘要：Objectives: Hypertension (HTN) is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and not only is a major health threat for the general population, but is also an important public health issue. Using National Health Insurance (NHI) claims data, this research investigated the inappropriate prescription of medications to treat hypertension under NHI in Taiwan. Methods: The data for 2004 to 2008 were collected from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) published by the National Health Research Institutes. The dataset contains information about 1,000,000 beneficiaries randomly sampled from the year 2005 Registry for Beneficiaries of the NHIRD. The NHI Pharmaceutical Subsidy Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical classification system was used to extract the pharmaceutical classification records. The study subjects were identified based on major diagnoses of ICD-9-CM codes 401.xx-405.xx. Inappropriate prescriptions were defined as duplicate medications, drug-drug interactions, or over-dosage. Results: There were 161,003 patients with hypertension and 3,988,024 prescriptions from 2004 to 2008. For inappropriate prescriptions, the frequencies of over-dosage, duplicate medications, and drug-drug interactions were 2.1%, 33.41%, and 12.39%, respectively. The incidence of inappropriate prescriptions was considered high, and most were prescribed by public and private medical facilities, male physicians, and physicians with low seniority. Conclusions: This research demonstrated the inappropriate prescription of medications to treat HTN from 2004 to 2008 under NHI in Taiwan. It may provide useful information for policy-makers to enact relevant policies to ensure prescription safety for HTN patients. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):31-42)起始頁-結束頁：31-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0414篇名：藍領移工健康問題之初探性研究：以南部某健康服務站的諮詢移工為例並列篇名：Migrant Workers' Health in Southern Taiwan: An Exploratory Study Based on the IACT Health Service Project作者：尤素芬(Su-Fen You);鄭惠珠(Huei-Chu Cheng);劉浩熏(Hao-Hsung Liao)關鍵字：移工;健康諮詢;健康工人效應;台灣國際醫療行動協會;migrant worker;health consultation;healthy worker effect;IACT期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：台灣在客工政策之下，對於移工的健康管理主要目的在於傳染病管控，然而，藍領移工大都從事所謂三K行業的工作，職災發生率遠高於本國勞工，加上普遍超時工作，故其健康情形值得關注。方法：本研究以台灣國際醫療行動協會在北高雄所執行的健康服務方案為基礎，以歷年累積的諮詢單資料作為主要分析素材，針對菲律賓籍為主的移工族群之健康問題進行初探，並著重全面性健康的社會脈絡分析。結果：本研究發現，楠梓地區移工的血壓有偏高現象，其隱含著移工在身心健康狀況可能也比較有問題。統計值中，教育程度較低、男性、工廠組裝移工的血壓較容易偏高，這可能和移工的工作性質、生活適應及住宿條件等有關。此外，移工在生活適應與權益保障部分，也很欠缺制度性協助與資訊取得管道。結論：移工的健康問題是相當多樣化的，移工健康問題應扣連到移工的勞動社會處境，政府需要正視與回應移工的需求，而職業健康的風險應該納入成為雇主與社會的健康成本。（台灣衛誌 2012；31（1）：43－57）英文摘要：Objectives: Because of the guest worker policy in Taiwan, health management for migrant workers focuses on controlling infectious disease rather than protecting the right to health. Many migrant workers in Taiwan are engaged in so-called 3K industries where there are higher occupational injury rates, and they generally work overtime. This study, therefore, explored the extent to which migrant workers suffered from health hazards. Methods: This study was based on the IACT (International Action and Cooperation Team) project concerning health consultation outreach to migrant workers, the majority of whom are Filipinos, in North Kaohsiung. It analyzed the health consultation charts accumulated over almost three years, and focused on the social context of health issues. Results: The migrant workers in this study tended to have higher blood pressure, suggesting that they might also have other physical and mental problems. Workers who were less educated, male, and working in manufacturing plants were liable to have higher blood pressure, and this phenomenon may be related to their working conditions, environmental adaptation, and accommodations. In terms of social well-being as part of the complete meaning of health, migrant workers were short on access to institutional information and assistance. Conclusions: The health issues of migrant workers are diverse and intertwined with their social and working conditions. The government should response to the health needs of migrant workers, and employers and society should bear the cost of dealing with workers’ occupational health risks. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):43-57)起始頁-結束頁：43-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0515篇名：人口老化趨勢下的健康均等與醫療照護公平性之年齡比較並列篇名：Health Equality and Equity of Healthcare Utilization in Different Age-groups Given the Trend of an Aging Population作者：陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);林玉惠(Yu-Hui Lin);梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang)關鍵字：人口老化;偏集中指數;健康不平等;水平不公平;aging population;partial concentration index;health inequality;horizontal inequity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討人口老化所達「健康均等性」與「醫療照護公平性」之年齡趨勢假說。其中，「健康均等性」之年齡趨勢假說為：人口老化所達健康分佈均等性之年齡趨勢，應呈現所得相關的健康不均度，將隨著年齡增加而逐漸縮小的趨勢。而「醫療照護公平性」之年齡趨勢假說為：人口老化所達醫療照護公平性之年齡趨勢，應隨著年齡的增加，在考量健康分配差異下，所得相關的醫療利用不公平性，將逐漸縮小，並呈現為「扶貧」分配。方法：我們估計健康生產函數與醫療利用函數，並使用其估計係數計算健康偏集中指數與醫療利用偏集中指數。結果：我國的醫療照護系統，在健康均等性的部份無法達到「健康均等性」的年齡趨勢假說，但醫療利用公平性的部份應能符合「醫療照護公平性」的年齡趨勢假說。結論：全民健保的實施達到人口老化之醫療利用公平性的年齡趨勢後，未來的改革應將國民群體間健康分配不平等的議題列為最重要之考量。（台灣衛誌 2012；31（1）：58－70）英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to investigate two hypotheses about the fairness of healthcare for an aging population. These two hypotheses were (1) the health equality hypothesis, i.e. income-related health inequality should decrease as age increases; (2) the equity of healthcare utilization hypothesis, i.e. given the same health condition, income-related utilization inequity should decrease and tend to be pro-poor as age increases. Methods: We estimated the functions of health production and healthcare utilization, so that these estimates could be used to calculate the partial concentration indices of health and healthcare utilization. Results: Our results indicated that Taiwan's healthcare system failed to meet the standards proposed by the health equality hypothesis, but satisfied the requirements of the equity of healthcare utilization hypothesis for the aging population. Conclusions: Taiwan's healthcare system has reduced the income-related inequity of healthcare utilization due to implementation of National Health Insurance. Healthcare reform should now focus on decreasing health inequality. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):58-70)起始頁-結束頁：58-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0616篇名：喪偶、休閒活動與中老年婦女身體功能之長期分析並列篇名：Widowhood, Leisure Activity, and Physical Function among Middle-aged and Older Taiwanese Women: Relationships over Time作者：詹帛勳(Bo-Syun Jhan);喬芷(Chi Chiao)關鍵字：中老年婦女;休閒活動;身體功能;喪偶;廣義估計方程式;middle-aged and older women;leisure activities;physical function;widowhood;GEE期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：本研究應用壓力過程模式，探討喪偶在中老年婦女的休閒活動與身體功能間長期關係，以進一步瞭解喪偶對台灣中老年婦女是否為負向的生活事件。方法：使用「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」資料庫，以1996年50－66歲的中老年婦女（1,070人）追蹤至2003年的資料為研究對象。考慮樣本重複測量的相依性，多變項迴歸以廣義估計方程式進行分析。結果：研究顯示中老年婦女休閒活動與身體功能間具有正相關。相較於已婚的中老年婦女，喪偶者參與社交性與宗教性休閒活動的比例較高；喪偶者的身體功能並沒有顯著較差。結論：休閒活動的參與會提昇中老年婦女的身體功能，喪偶的中老年婦女可藉由參與休閒活動，減少身體功能障礙的可能性，調適喪偶的衝擊。喪偶對中老年婦女未必是長期負向的生活事件，建議衛生與社會福利相關單位在制定中老年婦女健康政策時，考量在生活事件對中老年婦女衝擊下，休閒活動參與對其身體功能提昇的可能。（台灣衛誌 2012；31（1）：71－82）英文摘要：Objectives: In order to explore whether being widowed was a negative life event for older women, we employed the stress process model to examine the associations between widowhood, leisure activities, and physical function among middle-aged and older Taiwanese women. Methods: This study was based on data from the Taiwan Longitudinal Study of Aging (TLSA), a nationally representative sample (n=1,070) of middle-aged and older women aged 50-66, begun in 1996 and with 7-year follow-ups. Generalized linear modeling with GEE estimates was used due to repeated measures. Results: The results showed a significant, positive association between leisure activities and physical function in middle-aged and older women. The widowed women were more likely than married women to participate in social and religiously related leisure activities, and their physical function was not significantly poorer than that of the married women. Conclusions: The findings suggested that participation in leisure activities promoted physical function in the study population. Being widowed was not a negative life event in terms of function for middle-aged and older Taiwanese women. Social welfare and health-related policies that aim to promote well-being should consider participation in leisure activities as an important mechanism through which widows can maintain their physical function. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):71-82)起始頁-結束頁：71-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0717篇名：年輕女性性工作者危險行為與工作內容及對性病與愛滋病防治政策之建議並列篇名：Risky Behaviors of Young Female Sex Workers and Policy Recommendations for the Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections in Taiwan作者：許嘉芳(Jia-Fang Syu);丁志音(Chih-Yin Lew-Ting);顏慕庸(Muh-Yong Yen);莊苹(Peing Chuang);季瑋珠(Wei-Chu Chie)關鍵字：年輕性工作者;性病與愛滋病防治;young sex workers;prevention and control of sexually transmitted infections期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：目標：探討年輕女性性工作者進行性交易時，所面臨的實際情況與危險性行為發生的原因，並探討公共衛生政策能夠介入的方向。方法：研究族群以30歲以下的女性性工作者為主，以滾雪球方式邀請，使用質性研究的方式，運用深入訪談收集訪談資料；訪談內容主要在了解年輕女性性工作者在職場危險與性病、愛滋病的關係。訪談內容分析的方式，是根據訪談內容的逐字稿，歸納受訪者共同經驗，訪談時間約90∼120分鐘，視情況會二度或是三度訪談。結果：訪談個案總計19人，研究發現受訪的年輕女性性工作者，保護自己免於感染的能力不夠完整與健全。由於年輕女性的社會化不足或教育程度有落差，造成與顧客談判磋商的能力低落。錯誤的自我保護措施與不完整的性觀念，使得年輕女性性工作者，在性行為頻繁的狀況下，罹患性病的機會增加。結論：在性傳染疾病的防治策略上，可選擇減害的思維，建立諮詢站提供諮詢，教導安全性行為觀念以及與顧客磋商的技巧，配合全面篩檢以遏止性傳染疾病的盛行。（台灣衛誌 2012；31（1）：83－94）英文摘要：Objectives: This study assessed the actual situations that young female sex workers must face in order to provide policy advice for the prevention and control of sexually transmitted infections. Methods: We conducted tape-recorded in-depth interviews with female sex workers under 30 years of age by snowball sampling. The main content of the interviews included working conditions and the actual use of condoms. We spent about 90 to 120 minutes for the first interview, and extended to second or third interviews if necessary. We analyzed the tape recordings to summarize the common experiences of the participants. Results: A total of 19 young female sex workers participated in this study. We found that the participants had little ability to avoid sexually transmitted infections. They had inadequate socialization skills and minimal knowledge obtained from school; therefore, they had little ability to negotiate with their customers. Incorrect measures of self-protection further increased their opportunity to get infected. Conclusions: We recommend a preventive strategy of harm reduction by establishing a peer-consultation model to deliver correct knowledge and bargaining skills, combined with passive, comprehensive screening to help young sex workers prevent and detect sexually transmitted infections. (Taiwan J Public Health. 2012; 31(1):83-94)起始頁-結束頁：83-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0818篇名：評論：年輕女性性工作者危險行為與工作內容及對性病與愛滋病防治政策之建議作者：楊靖慧期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：95-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-0919篇名：作者回覆：年輕女性性工作者危險行為與工作內容及對性病與愛滋病防治政策之建議作者：許嘉芳;丁志音;顏慕庸;莊苹;季瑋珠期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：96-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2012-31-01-1001篇名：「人權研究」專號導言作者：魏千<U+5CEF>期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷4期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201212.00012篇名：兩公約實施兩週年的檢討：以司法實踐為核心並列篇名：An Examination on the Implementation of the Two Covenants After Two Years: With a Focus on Judicial Practice作者：張文貞(Wen-Chen Chang)關鍵字：兩公約;人權;國家義務;公民與政治權利國際公約;經濟社會文化權利國際公約;Human Rights;State Obligations;ICCPR;ICESCR期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：二○○九年三月底，我國立法院正式批准《公民與政治權利國際公約》及《經濟社會文化權利公約》，兩公約施行法於同年底正式生效。學界及人權團體開始大力推廣、鼓吹兩公約於內國的實際運用，總統府人權諮詢委員會於二○一一年等著手撰寫國家人權報告，於隔年正式公布。雖然兩公約的實施已有不少成果，但其實際成效究竟為何，這是必須從兩公約賦予國家之義務出發，來作為判斷及檢討的基礎。兩公約第二條規定締約國之國家義務，包括國家須尊重人權、建立人權保障機制、避免人權受侵害、提供基礎服務及設施、以及提倡人權教育。而國家之司法部門，更應該積極地將這些義務於內國法中加以體現。本文在深入從立法、行政、司法等層面探討兩公約施行成效，發現許多亟待改善之處。不但還有數十件法案待修正以符合兩公約，為數眾多的行政政策也尚未能依照兩公約作修正檢討。至於司法實踐上，我國各級法院僅於極少數的判決中引用兩公約。值得肯定的是，部分刑事判決明確肯認於解釋內國法時，須將兩公約人權的保障意旨納入考量，尤其在生命權的保障上，最為明顯。整體言之，兩公約於我國之實踐，仍待政府與民間共同投注更多之心力，以充分實現人權立國之旨。英文摘要：In 2009, Taiwan ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). An Implementation Act was also passed to make the rights enshrined in the two Covenants directly applicable. The initial reports on the two Covenants were released in April 2012. Despite these seeming accomplishments, the implementation of the Covenants still requires a close examination from a legal perspective.Having examined the practice of legislative, administrative and judicial branches on their respective implementations, this Article finds that there remains much space for improvements. Many laws and policies stay unchanged even after two years of implementation. While courts began to apply the two Covenants, the number of such direct application - albeit on a steady rise - is still not enough. The most referenced right concerns the right to life in criminal cases. This Article concludes by calling for greater attention on the implementation of the two Covenants in order to improve human rights protections in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：7-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201212.00073篇名：香港人權發展之現況及其隱憂並列篇名：Situations and Worries on Hong Kong's Human Rights Development作者：莊耀洸(Yiu-Kwong Chong);郭曉忠(Hiu-Chung Kwok)關鍵字：人權;《基本法》;一國兩制;民主;法治;Human Rights;Basic Law;"One Country, Two Systems";Democracy;Rule of Law期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：香港作為已發展地區，人權狀況卻未達至國際社會的基本水平。香港回歸中國後的人權發展，與下列因素有密不可分的關係：香港作為中國的一部分、「一國兩制」的實施及香港政府與商界及公民社會的互動。本論文建基於聯合國各核心公約監察機構就香港部分的審議結論，從三方面剖析香港人權的發展與隱憂：(1) 香港與中央政府在「一國兩制」下的互動，中央政府逐步加強干預香港，削弱香港市民應享有的公民和政治權利；(2) 港府欠缺誠意推動人權，香港的人權保障機制不足及平等機會法例欠缺實效；(3) 加上港府信奉市場主導的經濟政策，商界盡享政治經濟特權，造成社會不公，加劇貧富懸殊。本論文指出在現時香港的政治經濟結構下，香港缺乏真正的民主制度，市民未能以普選形式選出行政長官及全體立法會議員，是香港人權發展難有長足發展的關鍵原因。英文摘要：As a developed region, the human rights situations of Hong Kong are not up to standard. The development of human rights after the handover of Hong Kong to mainland China is closely connected to the following factors: Hong Kong as part of mainland China, the implementation of ”One Country, Two Systems” and the interaction between Hong Kong Government, business sector and civil society.With reference to the Concluding Observations adopted by various United Nations Human Rights Treaty Bodies, this article analyzes situations and worries on Hong Kong's human rights development. These include (1) interactions between Hong Kong's and Chinese Government under the principle of ”One Country, Two Systems”, (2) the Hong Kong Government is not sincere in promoting human rights; and (3) the Hong Kong Government believes in market-Ied economic policy and the business sector is allowed to enjoy political and economic privileges.This article points out that under current political and economic structure, lack of genuine democracy in Hong Kong, no universal suffrage is the main obstacles of Hong Kong's human rights development.起始頁-結束頁：45-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201212.00454篇名：從中共的施政綱領觀察其人權立場並列篇名：The Chinese Communist Regime's Human Rights Position Based on Its Policy Programmes作者：鄭宇碩(Joseph Yu-Shek Cheng)關鍵字：人權立場;施政綱領;中共對權力的壟斷;經濟發展;維穩;Human rights position;policy programmes;Chinese Communist Patty's monopoly of power;economic development;maintenance of stability期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主旨在探討胡錦濤、溫家寶的施政綱領，從而瞭解其對人權的基本立場。胡、溫執政十年，經濟發展方面頗多建樹，但領導階層無意放棄中共對權力的壟斷。胡、溫的方程式是經濟成長，再加覆蓋全民的社會保障網，以及沒有民主的良治。中國領導階層瞭解急速經濟發展對社會穩定會造成極大衝擊，社會一旦經濟起飛，人民會有種新的訴求，當這些訴求難以滿足，就會產生不滿，影響社會穩定性。一方面是既得利益的阻撓，但領導階層同樣不願意一黨專政受到輿論和人大系統的有力制衡。結果是胡、溫主政初期，媒體和各級人大尚有多少進步，但自北京奧運迄今，整個政治生態是收緊了，而不是趨於寬鬆。在是收緊的政治環境下，異見分子和維權運動受到更大的壓力。中國領導階層顯然是希望形成一種嚇阻作用。從劉曉波的得獎，到艾未未、陳光誠等事件，均可以看到中國領導階層願意付出國際形象受損的代價，以維持這種恐嚇力量。一方面花費鉅資開拓中國的軟實力，另一方面願意接受國際形象受損，這自然是基於優先次序的考慮，畢竟打擊對一黨專政的威脅最為重要。英文摘要：This article aims to understand the Hu Jintao administration's position on human rights through an examination of its policy programmes. Chinese leaders understand that rapid economic development has a severe impact on social stability. Vested interests pose resistance to liberalization; but the leadership is also reluctant to accept effective checks and balances mechanisms limiting the Party regime. As a result, media freedom and the role of the people's congress system expanded little in the initial years of the Hu administration. In this context, dissidents and the human rights movement have encountered greater pressure. The Chinese authorities intend to create a deterrence effect. From the boycott of Liu Xiaobo's Nobel peace prize to the suppression of Ai Weiwei and Chen Guangcheng, Chinese leaders are willing to pay the price in terms of damages to China's intentional image to maintain the deterrence. While China spends substantial resources to develop its soft power, it accepts the tarnishment of China's image, thus reflecting the regime's priorities. After all, suppressing the threats to the Party regime is regarded most important.起始頁-結束頁：123-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201212.01235篇名：朱子「中和四札」年代研究並列篇名：A Study of the Writing Year of Zhu-Zi's "Zhong He Four Letters"作者：黃鴻文(Hong-Wen Huang)關鍵字：朱子;中和四札;南軒;何叔京;束景南;Zhu-Zi;"Zhong He Four Letters";Nan-Xuan;He-Shu-Jing;Shu-Jing-Nan期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：歷來討論朱子「中和四札」寫作年代的文獻龐雜，線索多頭，束景南的《朱子大傳》算是較新的研究成果，但他主要的論據，仍沿著王懋竑的《年譜》而來，即是以〈答何叔京〉四札來確定「中和四札」的年代，陳來的《朱子哲學研究》也是如此。他們都依據〈答何叔京〉第三札裡的「天性人心，未發已發，渾然一致」，要來牽合「中和四札」的思想，卻不察這三句話其實是可視為儒者在心性論上所追求的共通境界，並無涉於工夫理論之異同，再加上他們忽略了〈答何叔京〉四札中尚有不少懷念故師李延平的文字，而這樣的情緒是與「中和四札」不類的，所以〈答何叔京〉四札之在丙戌，恰可做為「中和四札」不在丙戌之反證。既然證明「中和四札」不在丙戌，則可順錢穆之說而置於戊子。至於其它的種種佐證，或是由說話的語氣來分析，或是由常情常理來推論，亦都可隨之重新詮釋，藉此扼要地還原「中和四札」的時空背景。英文摘要：Heretofore, the has been a lot of complicated archives and clues to discuss the writing year of Zhu-Zi's ”Zhong He Four Letters”. They both use a sentence from the third letter in ”Da He-Shu-Jing”, which says ”The enlightended or unenlightended mind is the same mind”, to comply with the thought of ”Zhong He Four Letters”. The kind of saying doesn't mention ways of real practice and ignores that the above guoted sentence should be regarded as a common pursuit to a stable state of mind for Confucian followers. Besides, they neglect that there are many words in ”Da He-Shu-Jing” in memory of their deceased teacher Li-Yan-Ping. This emotion contradicts ”Zhong He Four Letters”. Since it is proven that ”Da He-Shu-Jing” was written in 1166, it is then proven that ”Zhong He Four Letters” was not written in 1166. As a result, we can follow Qian-Mu's textual research that ”Zhong He Four Letters” was written in 1168.起始頁-結束頁：159-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201212.01596篇名：情感與社會批判：人類社會行動的情感解釋並列篇名：Emotions and Social Critiques: Emotional Explanation of Human Beings' Social Actions作者：張雅貞(Ya-Chen Chang)關鍵字：二元論;規範性;動機;悲憫;道德想像;dualism;normative;motivation;compassion;moral imagination期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：當人們進行社會批判時，情感的角色應該要被妥適強調。藉由回顧理性與情感的二元對立傳統，以及爬梳思考理性與情感關係的三種取向：包含傳統取向、批判取向及基進取向，本文重視情感的智能，即情感：有所意欲指涉的對象、能反映出一個人的信念、與價值有關、關注每一個人的繁盛發展。於此同時，論及道德哲學裡的規範性思維等概念；隨後將情感，特別是在本文脈絡下的道德性情感，與人類的社會行動相關連起來。以政治性憤怒與社會運動、悲憫與利他行為為例，說明情感促動人們去進行社會批判，情感幫助人們去改變世界，以契合施為者的理念。最後，將論述延伸至道德想像與照顧的倫理，鼓勵人們於社會世界裡，發揮道德想像的能量去關懷即使是發生在遠方的苦難，並且以照顧的形式引領人類於日常生活中實踐情感。英文摘要：The role of emotions should be properly emphasized while people conducting social critiques. By reviewing the debate about the dualism of reason and emotion, and relationships between them, the intelligence of emotion is highly recognized in this article. Meanwhile with addressing concepts of normative thought in moral philosophy, later the connection between emotions, especially moral emotions in this context, and human beings' social actions is being made. That is emotion motivates people conduct social critiques, and emotion helps to change the world to fit performers' ideas. Finally, by extending the thoughts to moral imaginations and the ethic of care, to further support the idea of everyday practice emotions to care in this social world.起始頁-結束頁：179-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201212.01797篇名：學術後勤與教育前線之間：大學系務秘書的橋接勞動並列篇名：Between Academic Logistics and Education Frontline: The Bridging Labor of College Administrative Secretaries作者：陳怡孜(Yi-Tze Chen);王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：秘書;橋接勞動;情感勞動;高等教育;劃界;secretary;bridging labor;emotional labor;higher education;boundary-making期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以某私立技術學院為例，分析系務秘書的勞動處境和因應之道。本研究既與企業秘書在科層制度和性別刻板印象下的勞動處境對照，也關注高等教育市場化和績效化趨勢下，秘書夾在學術後勤工作和照管學生的教育前線之間，如何發揮應付多重領域工作的橋接勞動。研究發現，秘書承擔繁雜事務，但也位處組織運作的核心。在操持行政事務、科層程序和情感勞動中，秘書面對不同的社會關係，形成特殊的應對策略和心態。秘書在地下主任、管家婆、系辦天使等形象之間轉換，操弄和維護著邊界，藉以自我保護和協調工作，也產生情感的馴化和抵抗。再者，秘書不見得是勞雇關係中的弱勢，資深秘書倚仗多年經驗，可能牽動權力關係，迴避工作壓力。然而，系務秘書多半從事個人化的抵抗，以及團體的情緒宣洩，尚未組織成為有協商勞動條件能力的團體。英文摘要：This article examines the labor conditions and responses of the college administrative secretaries, and focuses on their bridging labor of coping with multi-domains works between academic logistics and education frontline under the trends towards marketing and performance efficiency in higher education. Facing the administrative tasks, bureaucratic processes and emotional labor demands, these secretaries involved diverse social relationships and formed particular responses and mindsets of themselves. These secretaries take different images of ”underground director”, the housekeeper or the office-angel, trying to manipulate and maintain the boundaries for self-protection and negotiation, and leading to the domestication of emotions or emotional resistance. And the senior secretaries might count on their experience and knowledge to exercise power and avoid job stress. However, they tend to individual resistance rather than organize themselves into a group with negotiating power.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201209.00018篇名：臺灣國小兒童的麥當勞消費：一個以焦點團體為中心的社會文化研究並列篇名：The Consumption of McDonald for Primary School Children: A Social-Cultural Study on Focus Groups作者：王俐容(Li-Jung Wang);賴守誠(Shau-Cheng Lai);馮敏惠(Min-Hui Fang)關鍵字：兒童;消費;麥當勞;速食研究;飲食社會學;children;consumption;McDonald's;fast food;the sociology of food期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：兒童消費逐漸成為一個重要議題：經由當代蓬勃發展的大眾媒體的各種置入性行銷與廣告的洗禮，兒童難以避免的在整個物質社會中，不斷受到來自於商業廣告的「教化」，教導他們如何消費。本文以麥當勞的消費為切入點，探索臺灣國小兒童消費的經驗與問題，特別以桃園市的國小做為研究對象，以解釋臺北大都會區之外，已經脫離農村生活，逐漸工業化與商業化的小型都市裡，國小兒童（四年級與六年級學生）速食消費的狀態；並特別側重於消費的學習與社會再生產；以及親子關係與家庭教養的問題。本研究發現，家庭的經濟、社會與文化條件的差異都會影響孩童消費麥當勞的經驗。就輕齡孩童而言，在消費麥當勞的外食抉擇上，身負教養照顧職責的父母親仍為主變數。對大齡的兒童來說，廣告媒體有較大的影響力，以當前臺灣的孩童成長的環境而言，生活的社會化與媒體消費者的社會化有極大的部分是彼此相互重疊的。兒童的消費也回應Bourdieu的理論，是將消費的符號、象徵和價值與社會身分團體的概念相結合，不僅表達了經濟的差異，同時更是一組社會與文化的實踐，建立了社會團體間的差異。英文摘要：Childhood consumerism is viewed as an important issue in the educational arena. Contemporary children have increasingly abundant knowledge regarding advertisements, brands, commodities, and mass media; and their knowledge and desire for commodities are becoming a new challenge for families and educators. This paper discusses the consumption of McDonald's products by primary school children in Taiwan. Basing our research on focus groups, we will explore the problems of consumption learning and social reproduction: and the parent/child relationship. This paper argues that the economic, social and cultural differences of families influence the McDonald's experience. For younger children, parents are the driving force behind McDonald's consumerism, and there is little or no negotiation between the two generations. For older children, however, the impact of mass media and advertising is clearly seen in their consumer choices regarding McDonald's. These differing influences bear out Bourdieu's theory that McDonald's consumption is a social or cultural practice that does more to establish social differences than economic ones.起始頁-結束頁：51-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201209.00519篇名：觀光凝視作為文化治理：「兩蔣」、「陸客」與觀光的（去）政治化並列篇名：Tourist Gaze as the Cultural Governance: Jiangs, Mainland Tourists and the (De)Politicization of Tourism作者：胡俊佳(Chun-Kai Woo)關鍵字：觀光凝視;臺灣;陸客;兩蔣;文化治理;Tourist gaze;Taiwan;Mainland Tourist;Cultural Resort of the Jiangs;Cultural governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討臺灣政府及媒體的觀光政策論述所建構的「兩蔣」和「陸客」，其所體現的「陸客」觀光凝視，如何（去）政治化的再現大陸觀光客和臺灣地方景點的象徵意義，並為兩岸的跨境觀光流動進行文化治理。「陸客」凝視的論述強調觀光客和觀光地景的出現所帶來的經濟利多，藉此為觀光牽涉的兩岸關係和跨界活動和提供「去政治化」的經濟想像，從中隱藏兩者背後引申的政治想像，也作為規劃兩蔣文化園區和吸引大陸觀光客到訪的合法性依據。當以經濟想像去政治化的再現「兩蔣」和「陸客」時，其中潛藏著許多再政治化的可能。當中，「兩蔣」代表的蔣氏政權能以觀光消費再鞏固其「領袖」、「偉人」政治想像，而「陸客」身分則陷入兩岸之間經濟發展和政治爭議的張力。在兩岸經貿互動日漸頻繁之際，本文嘗試釐清觀光論述下的經濟想像和資本流動涉及的政治再現，以及由此引申兩岸之間的政治爭議，從中突顯兩岸關係中的政治、經濟、社會和文化等層次對兩岸關係和人民互動的重要性。英文摘要：Regarding tourism gaze as cultural governance, this paper analyses the official and media discourses about the planning of the Cultural Resort of the Jiang and the opening of Main land Tourist to Taiwan and discusses how tourism discourses represent otherness in the tourist landscape. I find that discourses provide an economic imagination by highlighting policies' economic benefit and concealing their political meaning in order to depoliticize the political aspects of Cross-Strait tourism. In the context of depoliticized economic imagination, Taoyuan County Government promotes the concept of ”Jiangs” as a tourism theme image and emphasize the economical benefit of ”Jiangs” to the local as well as the state, while the hidden is the political controversy of Jiangs' governance in Taiwan. Also, the ruling Kuomintang government, insisting on the principle of ”shelving differences”, regards the visiting of Mainland Tourist as an economic opportunity for the Cross-Strait tourism development and depoliticizes the political controversy in the trans-border mobility of Mainland Tourist. However, the political controversy cannot be shelved but only concealed. Allowing Mainland Tourist to tour Taiwan independently reveals the contradiction between the economic integration and political controversy in the Cross-Strait relation.起始頁-結束頁：97-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201209.009710篇名：國族主義中的文化再製與性別：論德國少數民族索勃人之性別化民族計畫並列篇名：Cultural Reproduction and Gender in Nationalism: On the Gendered Nationalist Project of the Sorbian Minority in Germany作者：蔡芬芳(Fen-Fang Tsai)關鍵字：索勃人;國族主義;文化再製;性別;傳統服裝;The Sorbs;nationalism;cultural reproduction;gender;traditional costumes期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以性別、國族與國族主義之交織關係作為理論架構，梳理德國少數族群索勃人民族計畫中所涉及的性別面向。從索勃菁英所創造出「索勃母親」概念並賦予女性護衛與傳遞語言與傳統的責任，可以看到索勃女性被放置與涉入該計畫的過程。索勃女性在索勃論述中被型塑為索勃文化、語言、傳統與族群性的承載者，藉由傳承索勃語言與傳統，以及穿著傳統服裝以抵禦德意志化的壓力，鮮明地標示出「索勃性」（Sorbian-ness），以此突顯與德意志民族之間的界線並維護索勃民族存續與認同。然而，從以索勃女性生活經驗為基礎的實證資料發現，原被視為文化的「自然存在」內容的傳統，已不再理所當然地被視為過去的延續，而是社會實踐的展現。傳統因此不再是靜止不動的族群文化屬性與本質，而是在重新創造與重新詮釋的過程之中被建構而生，並為動態的且持續變化的。身為索勃傳統服裝穿著者的女性也因而不再全然是索勃文化的代表，而是具有能動性的行為主體，她們的衣著實踐可說是社會互動與生活經驗交織的呈現。因此索勃傳統服裝的意義，從原為僅僅蘊含單一的族群認同層面的象徵，擴及至可能包含性別、族群、文化、社會等多重認同。英文摘要：Drawing on the intersections of gender, nation and nationalism, this study aims to disclose the gendered aspect involved in the Sorbian national project in Germany. The process in which Sorbian women are integrated and get involved in national project is rendered visible in the concept of ”serbska ma<U+0107>” (the Sorbian Mother) who are made the bearers of the Sorbian culture, language, tradition and ethnicity in the Serbian discourse. However, as the empirical data based on women's life experiences shows, the concept of tradition usually deemed as ”the given” content of culture is transformed from the continuity of the past to social practice. Tradition is no longer a static ethnic and cultural essence and attribute, but rather engendered in the process of reinvention and re-interpretation, and it is dynamic and changing. Sorbian women dressed in traditional Sorbian costumes are not seen as the representatives of Sorbian culture any more, rather the acting agents whose dress practices illustrate the intertwining of social practices and life experiences. The connotation of the traditional Serbian costumes thus extends from the single dimension of ethnic symbol to multiple identities constructed by the intersections of gender, ethnicity, culture and society.起始頁-結束頁：141-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201209.014111篇名：論世代正義並列篇名：On Intergenerational Justice作者：黃忠正(Chung-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：世代;正義;世代正義;社會正義;應用倫理學;Generation;Justice;Intergenerational justice;Social justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：世代間的利與不利，要如何分配，始為正義？在當代，「世代正義」已經成為最熱門的焦點之一。本文研究世代正義，而試圖回答三個問題：一、何為「世代正義」？二、為何「世代正義」？三、如何「世代正義」？首先，「什麼是世代正義？」亦即世代正義的概念澄清；其次，「為什麼世代正義？」亦即世代正義的倫理基礎；再其次，「如何世代正義？」如何在制度上保障世代正義？亦即世代正義的制度保障。就第一個問題，本文作者以為：「世代」為在某一特定之時間內曾生存、現生存或將生存之特定年紀的一群人，而「世代正義」就是在追問世代間的利與不利要如何分配始為正義。就第二個問題，本文作者以為：「正義」的核心是平等，而「世代正義」的核心就是世代間生存機會的平等。就第三個問題，先就憲法的是否保障世代正義而言，作者以為：我國憲法無明文，憲法原則中導不出規定，修憲不可能；再就憲法以外如何保障世代正義而言，作者建議：在立法院的委員會中設立未來世代委員會是臺灣目前比較可行的方法。英文摘要：How should the resources between the generations be distributed in order to be considered just? Today, ”intergenerational justice” has become the most discussed topics in various fields. In the present article, I aim to answer the following key questions: I. What is intergenerational justice? 2. Why is intergenerational justice important? 3. How do we en sure intergenerational justice? First of all, what is intergenerational justice? With this question, I aim to clarify the concept of intergenerational justice. The second question seeks to discuss the ethical foundation of intergenerational justice. Next, I plan to shed light on how intergenerational justice should be ensured in the (social) system. Finally, I will make suggestions about how we can ensure intergenerational justice in the (social) system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：185-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201209.018512篇名：民國學術從移植到國際化的歷程：讀王汎森等著《中華民國發展史．學術發展》並列篇名：A Review Essay on "The Development History of the Academic Discipline in the Republic of China" Edited by Fan-Sen Wang作者：區志堅(Chi-Kin Au)關鍵字：民國學術史;中華民國發展史;學術移植;學術國際化;The Academic Discipline in the Republic of China;internationalized the academic product;transplant the academic discipline期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：近代學術主要呈現向學術院及專業化的發展方向，學科專業知識的培養，有賴高等院校設計有系統學科及課程、專業學會的承認，及學者在學術刊物上發表研究成果，新術得以推陳出新，而二○一二年剛好是中華民國建國一百年，臺灣政治大學為使民眾「認識中華民國創立與發展經過，與世人同享中華民國的卓越成就之宗旨，特邀集大型工作團隊」，執行《中華民國發展史》撰寫工作，整套叢書按「學術發展」、「政治與法制」、「社會發展」、「文學與藝術」、「教育與文化」六大範疇，分冊分章詳述一九一二至二○一二年，民國建元至今，政治、經濟、社會、學術、文化等各方面的發展，其中「學術發展」冊由王汎森教授主編，分為上下兩冊。而昔日研究及探討民國學術發展的論著，多談及單一項專科的發展，這些研究成果也多屬於人文及社會科學發展史的範疇，未如此冊，由多位專家學者合力撰寫一套包舉民國百年文理、法醫、社會及圖書館學等專業學科的論集，讀者閱讀此套書可以宏觀及微觀暸解民國百年各學科的發展歷程，各位作者也成功標舉學術隆興為民族文化的重要依據，尤以近年中國大陸興起研究臺灣學術風尚，大陸學者可以多閱讀此書，加深及全面暸解臺灣學術界自成體系發展的特色。英文摘要：The direct ion of recent academic trends tends towards professionalism. Undoubtedly, tertiary institutes play a crucial role in nurturing professionals of various academic disciplines by developing programmes and courses systematically, recognising professional bodies, and publishing scholarly work. While the Republic of China celebrated the centenary of her establishment in 2012, the National Chengchi University formed a sizeable team to write and edit ”The Development History of the Academic Discipline in the Republic of China”, aiming at letting more people know the establishment and development of the Republic of China and share with people the Republic's outstanding achievements. ”The Development History of the Academic Discipline in the Republic of China” consists of a series of six books, covering different areas including: ”academic development”, ”politics and legal systems”, ”social development”, ”literature and arts”, and ”education and cultures”. The books provide valuable information about the development of the Republic in different aspects since her establishment, from 1912 to 2012. In particular, the two books about ”academic development”, edited by Professor Fan-Sen Wang, provide readers with both macro and micro views on the Republic's development in various academic disciplines through assembling the view points from different scholars. Through reading these books, readers would have a more thorough understanding of the unique character of the academic development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：211-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201209.021113篇名：日本人的辛亥革命觀：「趁火打劫」與「同舟共濟」之間的論爭並列篇名：The Japanese Views of the 1911 Revolution of China: The Controversies between the Concepts of "Looting a Burning House" and "Lending a Helping Hand"作者：黃自進(Tzu-Chin Huang)關鍵字：辛亥革命;日中關係;中國革命;the 1911 Revolution of China;Sino-Japanese Relations;Chinese Revolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：面對辛亥革命，日本社會依認知及立場的不同，而有各異的評價與對應。日本政府認為，「君主政治」本屬東亞世界共有的政治體系。一旦中國革命思潮流行，否定「君權神授」的理論，勢必危及日本皇室的存續，甚至動搖已納入日本疆域的韓國之秩序。是以，（1）反對革命；（2）誘導清廷實施憲政改革；（3）藉機拓展在華權益，乃成為日本政府在辛亥革命爆發之初的基本立場。另一方面，日本民間社會除少部分擁護政府主張外，大多抱持同情辛亥革命的態度。寄以同情的緣故，因人而異，如有些退役軍人曾參與新軍訓練，視新軍有如己出，為了保護參與革命的新軍不至於毀滅，乃挺身投入革命。又如部分社會主義信徒，對中國革命理想有所共鳴，遂積極支持之。另有在野黨人士，視辛亥革命為反面教材，藉機警告日本政府不可忽視民意，也利用聲援辛亥革命的機會，作為統合在野力量的圖騰。但整體上，值此中國從帝國邁向國民國家轉型的關鍵時刻，日本政府卻不能在中國革命運動困頓之際雪中送炭，與革命黨建立合作關係，使中日兩國錯失了建立互信基礎的良機。英文摘要：Different appraisals and corresponding attitudes coexist, based on different cognitions and positions, toward the 1911 Revolution of China in the Japanese society. The Japanese government believes during the time that denying the divine-right theory of kingship would be bound to jeopardize the survival of the Japanese royal family, as well as the order in Korea under Japanese ruling. Thus, three principles listed below have formed the basic stance of the Japanese government during the outbreak of the Revolution: (1) oppose the revolution; (2) induce the Qing government to implement constitutional reform; (3) expand the Japanese rights and interests in China.On the other hand, in the Japanese society, in addition to a small portion of its people in favor of the government policies, most of them held the attitude of sympathy toward the Chinese Revolution. Activities in support of the revolution, which varied from person to person, include the participation of training of the new Chinese army, thinking of the new army as among one of them, or even participating in the Revolution personally in order to protect the new Chinese army joining the Revolution from destruction. In addition, some socialist followers also had resonance with the Chinese revolutionary ideals and thus actively supported the Revolution.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201206.000114篇名：關鍵的一九九一：論「中華民國在臺灣」的誕生並列篇名：The Crucial Year 1991: On the Birth of "the Republic of China on Taiwan"作者：陳儀深(Yi-Shen Chen)關鍵字：「中華民國在臺灣」;臺獨黨綱;國統綱領;務實外交;李登輝;"the Republic of China on Taiwan";Taiwan independence platform;the Guidelines for National Unification;pragmatic diplomacy;Lee Teng-hui期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：一九九一年結束動員戡亂、國民大會開始全面改選，不但是臺灣內部民主化關鍵的「元年」，而且是臺灣海峽兩邊政權在憲法法理上「一分為二」的開端，其實也是民進黨從原來擁抱臺獨、然後準備走向轉型的開始。由於一九九一年對臺灣政治而言是如此具有分水嶺的作用，那麼在二十一年後的今天，回顧這一年的改變如何發生，本身就很有意義；尤其，當年最主要的決策者李登輝總統的改革事蹟被稱作「寧靜革命」，他在任內屢次公開使用「中華民國在臺灣」－也就是把一句話（a sentence）變成一個專有名詞（a term）－的概念，企圖解決國號與領土不相符合的矛盾，其結果到底是「化解了」臺獨或是「實踐了」臺獨？也許有不同角度的解讀空間，但是先確實理解一九九一年最主要的政治勢力國民黨、民進黨內部發生了甚麼事，以及美中臺三角關係如何重新界定，應是解答此一臺灣政治史之重大課題的先決條件。英文摘要：The ending of the mobilization to repel rebellions and the beginning of full-scale re-election of the National Assembly members in 1991 was not only the crucial ”first year” for internal democratization in Taiwan, but also the initiation of ”one divided into two” constitutionally legitimate regimes on the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, as well as the first preparation in the transformation of the Democratic Progressive Party (the DPP) from its originally embraced position of Taiwan Independence. President Lee Teng-hui he himself during his term of presidency had already publicly used the phrase ”The Republic of China on Taiwan”, and in so doing he had managed to change a proposition into a specific terminology-namely, a concept, in an attempt to solve the incompatibility between the name of the nation and its territory, with the resulting effect that has raised the two-pronged query whether this has either ”dissolved” or ”realized” the issue of Taiwan Independence.The first thing that has to be ascertained here concerns the following: (1) what happened inside the most important political forces in Taiwan including the KMT and the DDP? (2) how to redefine the triangular relationships among the U.S.A., mainland China and Taiwan (the ROC)? The answers to these questions are indeed the pre-conditions for responding to the major issue raised here in Taiwan's political history.起始頁-結束頁：33-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201206.003315篇名：臺灣文化協會與《臺灣民報》共塑公共領域：以文化講演會為中心一九二三∼一九二六並列篇名：The Taiwan Cultural Association and The Taiwan Min Bao Shaped Public Domain: Base on Cultural Lectures During 1923-1926作者：賴莞頻(Wan-Ping Lai)關鍵字：臺灣文化協會;臺灣民報;文化講演;文化運動;Taiwan Cultural Association;Taiwan Min Bao;cultural lecture;cultural movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：臺灣文化協會與《臺灣民報》在日治時期的抗日運動中，不但因共同的理念相互結合為抗日共同體，並且共同拓展文化講演會的活動，以期為抗日運動爭取更廣大的民眾基礎力量。本文的立論要旨乃是指出，抗日運動雖然是由知識階級領導，但透過兩者共同發展的文化講演運動，不僅發展了大眾參與抗日的機會，也在民眾的積極參與中，創造了知識階級反省運動方向的空間。這就是本文所要討論的公共領域的形成過程與發展，其形成要素主要來自於文化講演會與平面媒體的傳播力量，共同塑造一個開放於外，論辯被殖民政府剝削的各種權利與民族自覺的議題。在利益與共的條件下，促成民眾對公共領域的熱情回應與集體參與，從而在一九二五至一九二六年發展出文化講演的高成長期，同時也在一九二六年發生了通霄講演事件，引發各地的抵抗聲援以及知識分子對抗日運動的重新思考。英文摘要：Based on the same idea, the Taiwan Cultural Association and the Tai wan Min Bao got together during the period of Japanese rule and expanded the activities of cultural lectures to have more popular support for the anti-Japanese movement.The argument of this paper is that the cultural lectures, on the one hand, expanded the opportunity to participate in the anti-Japanese movement for ordinary people which is leaded by intellectuals, and created the spaces to reflect the direction of the movement for intellectuals who leaded the anti-Japanese movement, on the other hand.It is a process of formation and development of public sphere. The two key elements are the cultural lectures and print media. They together shaped a public forum for civil right and national self-determination. Because of the common benefit, people joined the forum aggressively. Therefore, there were lots of cultural lectures during 1925-1926, but the Tongxiao lecture event make the intellectual reconsidered the strategy of anti-Japanese movement.起始頁-結束頁：59-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201206.005916篇名：單身：十九世紀法國社會的「痲瘋病」並列篇名：Celibacy: A "Leprosy" of French Society in the Nineteenth Century作者：陳樂元(Yueh-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：單身;公共衛生學;退化;身體;celibacy;public health;degeneration;body期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：十九世紀的法國公共衛生學，將單身定義成是一種社會公害，甚至以痲瘋病來指稱單身，認為應針對單身者採取古老的痲瘋病患排除措施。本文旨在提供一個有助於理解關於單身的科學性知識之形成的歷史脈絡，著重在探討十九世紀公共衛生學所建構起的身體，以及描述該建構的模式與過程，所要掌握的是單身問題在什麼時候以全新的模式出現，這個新的模式有何特殊性，在這個新的模式當中，單身問題又是如何與其他的問題相連結：人口成長率衰退的問題、社會的犯罪率居高不下的問題、國家種族退化的問題等。十九世紀公共衛生學對單身問題的處理，突顯出單身問題之重要性，單身問題位於現代文明社會的身體建構之中心點，是個人的身體規範與集體的身體規範之交會處，表達出十九世紀法國社會的文明化進程之重心：合宜的婚姻、家庭和性關係。英文摘要：In studies of French public health in the nineteenth century, celibacy was referred to as a public nuisance to society. It was eve n regarded as leprosy, and celibates were supposed to be treated and segregated as the leprosy patients. This article aims to provide a historic context that helps to understand formation of scientific knowledge concerning celibacy. It focuses on the concept of body constructed by the science of public health in the nineteenth century, and describes the model and process of that construction. This article attempts to grasp when the celibacy problem appears in a novel model, what specific properties this novel model possesses, and how celibacy is related to other issues: the depopulation problem, high crime rate problem, national degeneration problem, and so on.起始頁-結束頁：109-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201206.010917篇名：論《禮記正義》的注疏形式與意義，兼論魏晉六朝的文學意識與創作實踐並列篇名：Discussion on Commentary Forms and Their Meanings in "Lijizhengyi"; the Literary Thinking and Creation Practice through Early Medieval Age作者：陳志信(Chih-Hsin Chen)關鍵字：講經;禮記正義;文化圖譜;初唐經學;魏晉六朝文學;Jing-commentary banquet;"Lijizhengyi";cultural linage;Early-Tang Jingxue;Weijin Liuchao Literature (Early Medieval Chinese Literature)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：當透過悉心體察先儒注經情狀的進路來從事經學個案研究時，或因同情共感儒者解經的深刻信仰與神迷經歷，我們往往能有幸觸及注解形制涵蘊的，那閎闊深沉的，特屬某時代士子的文化意識與信念。本文的研究即如是：藉由對《禮記正義》注疏形式的細密解讀，我們瞭解《正義》實是依循諸記文篇目章句次第，展演一次次的講經論辯場景；這些多是預擬，卻教人實在感受其中講、聽、問、答的活潑語境，將帶領所有讀《記》人與古今禮之同好共聚一堂，分享曉聞那遠承先代的禮儀精義。由是吾人發現，《禮記正義》注疏形制的操演，其對《禮記》經旨的開示和講談，或是該批士子心中文化圖譜流衍不息信念的具體落實；是種文化永續不輟的意志，實與通貫魏晉六朝的文學理念與創作實踐緊密呼應、共相映襯。要之，藉著對《禮記正義》注解形制的研讀，我們碰觸到魏晉以降愈加興旺的文化不朽意志，這或者是該時士子汲汲進行諸符號活動的力量淵藪所在。英文摘要：The purpose of this essay is to represent scenarios of the Jing-commentary banquets through Early Medieval Age (from Weijin Period to Early Tang Dynasty). By examining the commentary forms in ”Lijizhengyi”, we see that the notes, titles, chapters, and sentences, arranged in sequence, are actually the representation of such scenarios. Though they are composed in advance, we can figure out from these vivid scenes the ways how the scholars speak, listen, inquire and respond to each other. The images also lead them to share their understanding for the essence of the long-inherited etiquette together with other ancient and contemporary Liji devotees. We get the ideas that the practice of these forms are the ways how the contemporary Confucians carry out their beliefs in everlasting cultural linage. The determination to make culture incessant also echoes to the literary field. In brief, by inspecting ”Lijizhengyi”, we can see the burning will from Weijin to make culture enduring. Maybe it is the undying will that causes scholars or writers to cast their devotion to various symbol activities.起始頁-結束頁：143-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201206.014318篇名：反身性運作：「觀察」臺灣社會理論生成之可能性並列篇名：Reflexive Operation: Observation on the Genesis of Indigenous Social Theory作者：劉育成(Yu-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：反身性;系統理論;本土化;俗民方法學;實在;reflexivity;social systems theory;indigenization;ethnomethodology;reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文嘗試釐清長久以來有關臺灣社會理論生成的問題與可能性。社會學或社會理論的本土化爭議一直是學術界關注的議題。儘管尚未獲得顯著的成果，但有許多研究者長期思考相關的問題，並且提出可能的看法與分析。「社會學」或「社會理論」已是西方思想與文化發展的產物，如何能生成臺灣觀點的「社會學式」思考至今還是一個未解的爭議。本文的主要觀點是，「本土化」或者是對西方理論應用於東方社會現象之討論，關注的應是主體性能動的建立與養成。一旦該特質運作為自我生產之系統，並且持續透過反身性與自我觀察的運作，那麼對於上述問題的討論或許才能跳脫既有的思維模式，尋求創新與創造的可能性。本文將以葛芬柯的俗民方法學研究與德國社會學家魯曼所開展的社會系統理論觀點作為出發點，對「本土化」進行觀察。然而，「觀察」並非借用，「觀察」意指的不過是一種「選擇」、一種「區別」，以及一種「溝通」的可能性。這樣的觀察將有助於我們對「本土化」、「西方／東方」等概念進行深刻且另種的思考。英文摘要：This article investigates the emergence of social theory indigenized in Taiwan. Roughly, the argument base itself on two foundations: A micro foundation of social theory presented by ethnomethodology on the one hand and a macro one of social systems theory on the other. It will be argued that philosophical decisions made on the indigenization of social theory to interpret the social phenomena of a specific society will result in different sociological implications. This will be demonstrated by re-examining the notion of reflectivity adopted by Harold Garfinkel and Niklas Luhmann. The analysis of their thoughts will be settled in the context of the long-lasting debates about the emergence of indigenized social theory in Taiwan. Following this, it will suggest that both theoretical approaches develop respectively the concept of reflexivity that renders self-production and self-observation of the indigenization of social theory possible. It will be demonstrated further by the examples adopted from certain classical Chinese literatures for the purpose that it could contribute to our understanding of the genesis of indigenous social theory in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：193-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201206.019319篇名：從基礎邁向上層建築：英國左派理論與政治的變革並列篇名：From Base to Superstructure: Revisions and Developments of the British Left's Theory and Politics作者：楊子政(Tzu-Chen Yang)關鍵字：英國左派;英國工黨;英國共產黨;社會主義;馬克思主義;British Left;British Labour Party;British Communist Party;socialism;Marxism期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討一九六○年代至一九八○年代末期，英國左派引用葛蘭西之文化霸權理論對古典馬克思主義之基礎／上層建築概念所進行的辯論與修改，以及所引發之政治路線的改變。本文將由理論以及經驗討論兩個部分，說明尋求改革的英國左派人士從一個細微的理論修改出發，進而質疑經濟決定論以及工人階級的革命領導權，挑戰了傳統階級政治與工會運動的理論基礎，最後在一九八○年代發展出與傳統左派運動歧異頗大的政治路線與政治實踐，重新定義了所謂社會主義政治的內容，並促成了英國左派政治運動的重組。本研究透過對英國左派發展的分析，呈現英國左派對於葛蘭西理論的不同詮釋版本，檢視其面臨變局思索出路的歷史過程，說明政治論述與政治實踐的辨證互動關係。英文摘要：This article focuses on the theoretical and political revisions within the British Left in the period 1960s to the late 1980s. Its central theme examines the way in which the British Left's theory and politics were conceived and elaborated, in response to the shifting social and political contexts of the time. The article also shows how far a theoretical revision influenced the practice of the British Left, and how these issues were debated. By appropriating Gramsci's idea of hegemony, the British Left revised the orthodox Marxist concept of base/superstructure, challenged economic determinism, and redefined the contents of the socialist politics. Political theory and practice are thus intertwined and interlinked. In conclusion, this article argues that it was the name of Gramsci rather than the detailed contents of his ideas that was most influential. The British Left' interpretations and use of Gramsci's ideas reflected their need for legitimatization and self-identification.起始頁-結束頁：1-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201204.000120篇名：古埃及智慧文學中的「形象表達」並列篇名：The Figurative Expressions in the Ancient Egyptian Wisdom Literature作者：徐詩薇(Shih-Wei Hsu)關鍵字：古埃及;智慧文學;比喻;隱喻;比較物;Ancient Egypt;wisdom literature;comparison;metaphor;tertium comparationis期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：「形象表達」是一種修辭法，意指運用「比喻」法和「隱喻」法來表達一件事物和另一件事物，而其兩件事物有一定的相關性。「形象表達」在任何時代的任何語言中都是不可缺少的修辭技巧，在古埃及文中也不例外。「形象表達」在每一種不同的文章類型都會出現，但只有多與寡的差別。然而，智慧文學在古埃及的文學作品中扮演了舉足輕重的角色，它是一種箴言和訓誡式的文章，通常由長者藉由自己的人生經驗告誡後輩該注意以及遵循的教規。智慧文學從古王國時期開始，就有少些篇幅，但是較殘缺不全，所以「形象表達」的運用也較為不全。從中王國初期開始，智慧文學的體制和內容也越來越豐富，相對的，「形象表達」的使用也越來越廣泛。本篇將要探討智慧文學中的「形象表達」的運用、目的和「比較物」的種類等等。英文摘要：The figurative language is a rhetorical style that consists of the comparison and metaphor. Figurative expressions appear almost in all languages and at all times and can be categorized as groups of words that include a comparison or a figurative sense. The ancient Egyptian texts, no wonder, use also figurative languages. Type and quantity of figurative expressions vary depending on the genre of text. The wisdom texts play an important role in the ancient Egyptian literature. The main point of these texts is that the older give young people many useful advices and show them the right ways. The wisdom texts are witnessed since the Old Kingdom, unfortunately they are not totally preserved. Until up the early Middle Kingdom the wisdom texts are more complete and the figurative language is also more used than before. This article focuses on the figurative language and the categories of tertium comparationis in the wisdom texts and discusses its purpose and usage.起始頁-結束頁：71-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201204.007101篇名：殺熟：一個臺灣金融吸金詐騙集團的分析並列篇名：Deceived by Trust: The Analysis of a Financial Fraud Gang in Taiwan作者：吳宗昇(Chung-Shen Wu);林丞閎(Cheng-Hong Lin)關鍵字：信任;老鼠會（龐氏騙局）;吸金詐騙;金融社會學;trust;Ponzi scheme;financial fraud;financial sociology期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：吸金詐騙，是動員社會關係最多的詐騙形式。它具有時間長、組織性及金融專業形象的特性。在社會信任的脈絡下，本研究提問吸金詐騙為何不會消失，以及其內在的運作機制為何。本研究以訊號理論為策略工具，分析臺灣著名的詐騙案件。採用深入訪談法與次級資料收集詐騙案成員的互動資料。本研究發現吸金詐騙透過既有的人際網絡吸收新成員，操弄社會金融制度、專業認證以及財富象徵的符號，展現金融投資的擬態。另一方面，則以情感、集體激情和反抗主流規範的方式維護擬態的有效性。處在核心的成員，往往同時具有受害人和欺騙者兩種身分，因此形成強烈連帶而難以脫離。本研究認為吸金詐騙生於社會，依附在社會制度和網絡之上，與金融活動和社會共生而存在。英文摘要：Financial fraud (Ponzi scheme) is disguised as long-lasting and professional financial investment, and initiated by deceivers who utilize signals from social networks, institutions and general values to attract investors who are in a familiar network. Our data came from both in-depth interviews and secondary materials. We found that financial fraud attracts members from existing social networks, and it manipulates signs in order to exhibit a successful financial investment. Deceivers rouse the quasi-family emotion to consolidate relationships among core groups, by both holding special activities to build up collective effervescence and creating an impression of counterculture to, therefore, maintain the legitimacy of mimicry. Members of fraud gang encounter a dilemma of simultaneously being both a deceiver and a dupe, which makes it very difficult to leave the gang. We conclude that financial fraud was born with society, and sticks to both the surface of institutions and the interior of social networks, thus coexisting with financial activities and society.起始頁-結束頁：101-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201204.01012篇名：華僑學校在韓國的法律地位變化與生存策略（一九七八至二○一○）並列篇名：The Legal Status and Survival Strategies of Overseas Chinese Schools in Korea (1978-2010)作者：王恩美(En-Mei Wang)關鍵字：韓國華僑;韓國華僑學校;華僑教育;法律地位;生存策略;overseas Chinese in Korea;overseas Chinese schools in Korea;overseas Chinese education;legal status;survival strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：韓國華僑學校教育已有一百多年的歷史，華僑學校不但是在韓國當地最早設立的外國人學校，亦是目前數量最多的外國人學校。一九七○年代前，華僑學校在韓國並未編入法律體系中。一九七○年代，華僑學校並非是以學校而是以「外國人團體」資格，首次取得法律上的合法地位。一九九○年代末期，韓國陷入金融風暴與經濟危機，政府當局為吸引外國投資者，放寬對外國人的限制，取消「外國人團體」登記規定，致使韓國華僑學校的法律地位，由過去的「外國人團體」，轉變為「各種學校」。這是華僑學校首次在韓國取得「學校」的法律地位。本稿主要探討韓國華僑學校的法律地位變化與其對華僑學校帶來的影響，並說明華僑學校面臨的困境與生存策略。英文摘要：With a history that can be traced back for more than a century, overseas Chinese schools are not only the earliest but also currently the most common foreign schools in Korea. Before the 1970s, these schools were not governed by the laws of Korea. It is only in the 1970s that overseas Chinese schools were legally recognized, not as schools but as ”foreign organizations”. Due to the financial and economic crisis at the end of the 1990s, the Korean Government loosened its restrictions on foreigners and rescinded the registration rules for ”foreign organizations” in the hope to attract more foreign investors, changing the legal status of overseas Chinese schools from ”foreign organizations” to ”schools of varied types”. As a result, overseas Chinese schools obtained their legal status as ”schools” in Korea for the very first time. In this paper, the change of legal status of overseas Chinese schools in Korea and its influences on the schools will be investigated, along with a discussion on the dilemma faced by the schools and their survival strategies.起始頁-結束頁：147-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201204.01473篇名：語言人類學對跨文化研究的啟示並列篇名：The Heuristic Implications of the Approaches Linguistic Anthropology Exercised on Cross Cultural Studies作者：翟本瑞(Ben-Ray Jai)關鍵字：語言人類學;音素;語言相對主義;哲學;Linguistic Anthropology;phoneme;linguistic relativism;philosophy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：哲學與社會理論因為具有系統性及邏輯上的一致性，往往能夠自圓其說，得到論證上的合法性。然而，系統性與邏輯上的一致性並非真理的保證。從語言人類學對跨文化比較的研究，我們可以得見理論的相對性格，所有的理論、思維架構、概念範疇、推論模式，都是在特定歷史與文化的場域中孕育出來的，因此，沒有那一套理論可以宣稱其絕對性。理論的絕對性，是建立在思維者所接受的心智模式與文化架構之上，將其放到歷史與比較文化的脈絡中檢視，其絕對性就喪失了客觀基礎，只能在相對主義立場上堅持其絕對性。語言的局限就是思維的極限，人們是透過語言架構來認識世界。語言人類學研究，不急於建構理論，以務實態度認識文化，值得其他學科參考尊重。哲學與社會理論不能再躲在象牙塔裡，而應面對真實世界。英文摘要：By its systematic and logical uniformity, philosophy and social theories get their argumentation legitimacy. However systematic and logical uniformity should not be the warranty and criteria of the truth and the legitimacy of human cultures. The approaches Linguistic Anthropology exercised on cross cultural studies make the relativity obvious. All theories, frameworks of thinking, conceptual categories, inference patterns, are conceived in the specific historical and cultural fields, therefore, not that a theory can claim its absolute nature. The absolute nature of a theory, is built on the ground of the mental model and cultural architecture he who accepted, and will loss its objective basis when we put it back to its historical contexts and exam it from comparative cultural perspectives. It can insist on its absolute nature only base on the condition of relativism. The limitations of a language are the limits of its speakers; people comprehend the world through the architecture of a specific language. Linguistic anthropology, base on a pragmatic attitude and not hurrying to build a theory prematurely, is worthy to respect for all other disciplines. Philosophy and social theories should not be knowledge in the Ivy Towel anymore.起始頁-結束頁：191-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201204.01914篇名：論自然權利與法定權利概念下的「宗教自由」並列篇名："Religious Liberty": On the Concept of Natural Rights and Legal Rights作者：釋昭慧(Chao-Hwei Shih)關鍵字：社會契約論;自然法則;自然權利;法定權利;自由原則;the theory of Social Contract;natural law;natural rights;legal rights;the Principle of Liberty期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：50卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文依各種政治哲學中，可以將人民自由，作最大化考量的「自然權利」與社會契約論，來回應部分佛教人士的質疑：「宗教立法將干涉宗教自由」。「宗教自由」既是一種自然權利，也是一種法定權利。但兩者不在同一層次－前者是與生俱來且永不可被剝奪的，後者既受到法律的保障，同時基於外部條件與內在因素的考量，會受到了法律的規範。將「宗教立法」視同「干涉宗教自由」，是將「宗教自由」之自然權利等同於法定權利，而將「天賦人權」與「社會契約」的雙層次論述，放在同一層次以等量齊觀。依於生命倫理學體系的「原則主義」，歸納出四個普世性的道德原則：自律原則、不傷害原則、仁愛原則與公正原則，「宗教自由」的法律概念，不妨依此四大原則而作檢核。宗教立法並不必然牴觸宗教自由。宗教立法是否涉及「干涉宗教自由」，端視它有否依於人們信仰自由的「自然權利」，而保障人們在這方面的「法定權利」。倘若立法得宜，它才真正能落實人們信仰自由的「法定權利」，且將建構一套讓宗教與社會友善互動且相互尊重的遊戲規則，從而維護最大化的「宗教自由」。英文摘要：This article utlizes the theories of ”natural rights” and ”Social Contract”, a political philosophy that maximizes people's liberties, to respond to criticisms from Buddhist clerics that religious legislation will interfere with religious freedom.Since religious freedom is a kind of natural right, it is also a kind of legal right. But the two rights are not equivalent - the former is an inherent right and can never be removed, while the latter safeguards people with legal protection, However, at the same time people must operate within the limits of that legislation.To regard religious legislation as interfering with religious freedom, is to confuse the natural right of religious freedom with the legal right of religious freedom, as well as to equate natural rights and social contracts.Therefore, religious legislation is not guaranteed to conflict with religious freedom. If the religious legislation is properly written, it will actually protect people's legal right to religious freedom, and it will construct suitable regulations to promote friendly interaction between religious people and secular people, so as to maintain maximum religious freedom.起始頁-結束頁：235-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社DOI：10.6431/TWJHSS.201204.023501篇名：Stock Liquidity and the Choice between Public Offerings and Private Placements並列篇名：股票流動性與公開募集或私下募集之選擇作者：洪崇文(Chung-Wen Hung);徐政義(Cheng-Yi Shiu);魏慧珊(Hui-Shan Wei)關鍵字：私下募集;公開募集;股票流動性;Private placements;public offerings;liquidity期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以臺灣股票市場628個現金增資為樣本，探討股票流動性是否會影響發行公司選擇公開募集或私下募集。研究結果發現，具有高股票流動性的公司傾向以公募的方式來發行新股，而股票流動性差的公司則傾向選擇私募。此外，私募的公司在現金增資之前有經營績效不佳的現象。本文的實證顯示，私募扮演著替代的角色，當發行公司無法在公開市場募集資金時，會選擇以私下募集的方式來替代。英文摘要：This study attempts to verify whether stock liquidity is an important determinant of the choice between public offerings and private placements. Using a sample of 628 SEOs in Taiwan stock market, we find that, ceteris paribus, firms with highly liquid stocks prefer public offerings, whereas firms with illiquid stocks tend to engage in the private placement of new shares. We also find that issuers experience poor operating performance prior to the private placements. Our findings suggest that private placements serve as a substitute for public offerings when the issuing firms are unable to gain access to the public market.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(4).12篇名：Determinants of Overseas Expansions for the Top 1,000 Global Banks: Application of Eclectic Theory並列篇名：全球千大銀行海外擴張因素－折衷理論驗證作者：蔡淵禮(Yuan-Li Tsai);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：海外擴張;折衷理論;全球千大銀行;Overseas expansion;eclectic theory;top 1,000 global banks期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文使用全球1,000大銀行至51個重要城市設立海外據點資料，以折衷理論為基礎，探究全球大型銀行海外擴張策略思維與吸引大型銀行進入投資之一般性誘因。結果發現所有權、內部化及區位等三項優勢因素皆會影響銀行海外擴張動機或投資地點的選擇。我們亦發現來自不同所得、銀行發展程度與地區等國家的銀行會有不同的海外擴張思維。英文摘要：We investigate the determinants of the overseas physical expansions of large global banks from the perspective of eclectic theory, using bank-level data of the top 1,000 banks. Results show that most ownership-specific, internalization and location advantage factors positively affect large banks' expansion motives or location choice, such as a bank's size and operational performance, commercial trade relationship, and environments with more banking opportunities, higher accessibility to the market, lower information costs, and famous financial centers. We also find that large banks from countries with different national income, bank development, or regions have different thoughts and strategies on overseas expansion.起始頁-結束頁：23-57資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(4).23篇名：Are Mutual Fund Tournaments Beneficial to Shareholders?並列篇名：共同基金間之競賽是否有利於投資人作者：林美珍(Mei-Chen Lin)關鍵字：共同基金;競賽;績效;基金流量季節性;投資人利益;Mutual fund;tournament;performance;seasonality in fund flow;shareholders' interests期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討共同基金間之競賽是否有利於投資人？結果顯示基金經理人於競賽過程中改變風險承擔行為，未必對投資人有利；缺乏資產管理能力之基金經理人無法只透過提高風險而打敗具備資產管理能力之基金經理人。資金流入共同基金市場於一月時特別明顯，此季節性現象可能源於個人所得與消費行為之季節性變化以及季節性的情緒失調。英文摘要：This paper empirically examines the consequences of competition-like tournaments. This study shows that changes in risk-taking do not serve the best interest of some fund investors. Losers cannot reverse their losing status only by taking riskier positions. Fund flows into the mutual fund market are more prevalent in January than in other months. The phenomenon of seasonality in fund flows can be attributed to seasonal changes in the personal income and consumption as well as seasonal affective disorder (SAD).起始頁-結束頁：59-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(4).34篇名：Valuation of Ratchet Equity-Indexed Annuities並列篇名：獲利保障型指數連動年金之評價作者：邱于芬(Yu-Fen Chiu);謝明華(Ming-Hua Hsieh);蔡政憲(Cheng-Hsien Tsai);陳威光(Wei-Kuang Chen)關鍵字：指數連動年金;選擇權定價;Black-Scholes模型;Equity-indexed annuities;option pricing;Black-Scholes model期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：指數連動年金（EIAs）是近年來頗受歡迎的創新產品，而其中獲利保障型指數連動年金（Ratchet EIAs）由於具有保障最低報酬率的特性，因此最受投資人青睞。然而要評價此種獲利保障型指數連動年金也是困難的。本文在Black-Scholes的架構下推導出目前為止涵蓋最多商品條款的獲利保障型指數連動年金的封閉解及詳細的數值分析結果。這些結果將有助於分析各商品條款對保單價值的影響。英文摘要：Ratchet EIAs are the most popular equity-indexed annuities (EIAs) because returns are credited periodically with a guaranteed minimum and the account value never decreases once the return is credited. Pricing ratchet EIAs, however, is challenging. This paper derives pricing formulas that cover more contract features of ratchet EIAs than any in the literature. We obtain closed-form solutions in the Black-Scholes framework for both compound and simple versions of annual-reset ratchet products that may have a return cap and employ two types of geometric return averaging. Our numerical results demonstrate the impacts of individual contract features on contract value and the interactions among these features.起始頁-結束頁：89-107資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(4).45篇名：Effects of Nonlinearity and Multi-Period Lags on Basu (1997) Measure並列篇名：盈餘之非線性與多期落後反應對Basu（1997）measure之影響作者：林純央(Chun-Yang Lin);劉啟群(Chi-Chun Liu)關鍵字：條件式穩健;不對稱及時性之非線性;盈餘對好壞消息之差異反應;盈餘之落後反應;Conditional conservatism;nonlinearity in asymmetric timeliness;differential earnings responses;earnings lag期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文檢視盈餘之非線性與多期落後反應對Basu（1997）measure之影響。我們發現盈餘反應隨消息事件之絕對大小而變化；因而其不對稱及時性在較大程度消息發生時較顯著。我們檢視盈餘對好壞消息的多期反應，發現當落後期間拉長時，不對稱及時性的符號由正轉負。本文同時提出當考慮盈餘之非線性與多期落後反應時，如何比較公司間穩健性的觀念。英文摘要：This paper examines impacts of nonlinearity and multi-period lags on Basu (1997) measure. First, we predict and find that earnings responses increase with absolute magnitudes of news; therefore, asymmetric timeliness is more pronounced when news of large absolute magnitudes occur. Next, we examine lagged earnings responses to good and bad news and hypothesize that differences between them persist and turn negative as lag increases. Concepts to compare extents of conservatism when considering nonlinearity and lags are also provided. Our empirical results suggest that nonlinearity in earnings responses and multi-period earnings responses should be considered to compare conservatism more validly.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(3).16篇名：Major Foreign Currency Futures Hedging During the Financial Crisis並列篇名：金融危機期間主要外匯期貨之避險作者：曾仁清(Jen-Ching Tseng);林哲彥(Jer-Yan Lin);賴奕豪(Yi-Hao Lai)關鍵字：外匯;避險;馬可夫轉換;金融危機;Foreign currency;hedge;copula;Markov-switching;financial crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文檢視相關轉換（Dependence-Switching, DS）模型在不同估計視窗下對歐元、日圓、英鎊之避險績效。結果顯示，在金融危機期間，DS模型對日圓與英鎊而OLS模型對歐元有較好的樣本外績效。而各外匯最佳模型之估計視窗為120或180週，此可供避險交易者參考。最後，DS模型在市場動盪期間，對波動大且避險比率變化較劇烈的外匯商品提供較好的避險績效。英文摘要：This paper examines hedging performance of Dependence-Switching (DS) model with different estimation window sizes for the futures of three foreign currencies (EUR, JPY and GBP). The results show that the DS model for JPY and GBP survives during the crisis and has better out-of-sample performance, while the OLS model is better for EUR. Moreover, the best survival model for each currency has the window size of 120 or 180 weeks, providing a guideline for the practitioners involving the hedging transactions. Conclusively, the DS model performs better for the turmoil periods, the volatile currencies and the currencies with volatile hedge ratios.起始頁-結束頁：33-47資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(3).27篇名：The Valuation of Mortgage Insurance Contracts under Housing Price Cycles: Evidence from Housing Price Index並列篇名：房價循環下不動產抵押貸款保險之評價：房價指數之實證作者：林士貴(Shih-Kuei Lin);蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai);陳明吉(Ming-Chi Chen);莊明哲(Ming-Che Chuang)關鍵字：報酬不對稱;EM演算法;房價指數;馬可夫狀態轉換模型;不動產抵押貸款保險契約;波動叢集;Asymmetry;expectation-maximization algorithm;housing price index;Markov regime-switching model;mortgage insurance contracts;volatility clustering期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：不動產抵押貸款保險係指保險公司支付給遭受違約之貸款銀行一筆有上限補償金之保險契約。由於房價指數報酬具有房價循環、報酬不對稱與波動叢集等性質，Black-Scholes模型不適用於訂定保險價格，因此本研究利用馬可夫狀態轉換模型來更精確地描述房價報酬之性質並計算保費。最後，敏感度分析指出房價循環為影響不動產抵押貸款保險價格之重要因素。英文摘要：Mortgage insurance (MI) is a contract under which an insurance company has an upper limit to compensate the default losses of mortgage banks or investors. Previous studies evaluate the MI premium under the Black-Scholes framework. However, the returns of the HPI exhibit housing price cycles, asymmetry and volatility clustering. In this paper, we utilize the Markov regime-switching framework which is more suitable than Black-Scholes model to address these characteristics of return. Finally, based on the sensitivity analysis, the housing price cycles of the HPI return is an important factor that influences MI premiums.起始頁-結束頁：49-70資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(3).38篇名：Does Debt Guarantee Improve Corporate Financing Conditions? An Information-Based Perspective並列篇名：負債擔保是否改善公司融資條件？以訊息為主之觀點作者：陳昌志(Chang-Chih Chen);李育嘉(Yuh-Jia Lee)關鍵字：負債擔保;競爭訊息不完備;融資促進;信用增強;Debt guarantee;competition-information incompleteness;financing promotion;credit enhancement期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文建構一靜態結構模型用以分析競爭訊息之不完備性對於公司融資及擔保交易間的內生性互動之影響。本文模型證明公司融資決策最佳化與擔保交易供需均衡間存在若且惟若之關係。該模型亦利用訊息不完備之觀點說明擔保交易之訂價對於信用市場競爭結構變化之意涵。本文發現信用市場競爭訊息之不完備性導致了擔保交易之獨占訂價使得信用擔保無法有效發揮其改善公司融資條件之功能：例如融資促進、信用增強等。英文摘要：We develop a static structural model that endogenizes debt guarantee trading over a firm's financing decision in the context of incomplete competition information. The model proves the coexistence of a firm's optimal capital structure and guarantee-trading equilibrium. Drawing on arguments concerning information incompleteness, we show that the underlying guarantee price accounts for the economic implications of changes in the market's competition-structure. Also, we find that information incompleteness leads to a monopoly charge for the guarantee, and further seriously destroys the effectiveness of guarantees with respect to credit enhancements and financing promotions.起始頁-結束頁：71-104資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(3).49篇名：Hurricane Derivatives: Valuation in a Warming Environment並列篇名：颶風衍生性金融商品：暖化環境中的訂價作者：Carolyn W. Chang;Jack S. K. Chang關鍵字：全球暖化;颶風期貨和期貨選擇權;毀滅性力量;隨機抵達密度;選擇權訂價;三重二項樹;Global warming;hurricane futures and futures options;destructive power;stochastic arrival intensity;option pricing;triply-binomial tree期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：全球暖化造成大部分熱帶海洋的表面溫度升高，導致極端強烈颶風和颱風的數量增加。自從颶風卡崔娜（Hurricane Katrina）之後，新的颶風衍生性金融商品應運而生，以利保險公司和相關團體降低氣候異常造成的風險暴露。我們從Gerber（1984, 1988）的雙重二項式架構加入第三個二項式過程而延伸發展出三重二項式的創新訂價模型，以納入隨機來臨的颶風。接著，我們模擬全球暖化伴隨強烈颶風數量增加的情況，將如何突顯這類衍生性商品在避險功能上的價值。英文摘要：Global warming has caused the surface of most tropical oceans to warm up, inducing an increasing number of deadly hurricanes and typhoons. Since Hurricane Katrina, new hurricane derivative contracts have been introduced for insurers and related parties to mitigate their climate risk exposures. We develop a novel triply-binomial valuation model as an extension of Gerber's (1984, 1988) doubly-binomial framework with a third binomial process to subsume stochastic hurricane arrivals. We subsequently simulate how global warming with an increasing number of deadly tropical cyclones has made these derivative contracts more valuable in performing their hedging function.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(2).110篇名：Estimation Risk and Optimal Portfolio Construction in a Lognormal-Securities Market: A Simple Rule並列篇名：對數常態證券市場下考慮估計風險後的最適投資組合建構作者：湯美玲(Mei-Ling Tang);陳松男(Son-Nan Chen);江彌修(Mi-Hsiu Chiang)關鍵字：最適投資組合建構;對數常態資本市場;估計風險;漸進方法;Optimal portfolio construction;lognormal-securities market;estimation risk;asymptotic property期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：基於對數常態資本市場之假設，本文透過漸近方法的應用，發展出在放空限制下考量了估計風險後的簡單投資組合配置法則。本文研究顯示，估計風險的存在對於建構最適投資組合有實質的影響，無估計風險下得出的最適投資組合，不必然是存有估計風險下的最適投資組合。而本文所發展的簡單法則，能使投資組合具有較佳的樣本外績效。英文摘要：As being in a lognormal-securities market, this study develops a simple rule in constructing optimal portfolios with regard to the situation that the probability distribution of portfolio returns does not have finite moments. By means of asymptotic properties when short sales are not allowed, the simple rule incorporating estimation risk can be derived accordingly. Our numerical example specifies optimal portfolios with estimation risk are not equivalent to those without estimation risk considered. In addition, portfolios constructed based on the simple rule are examined to present a better out-of-sample investment performance relative to its counterparty and a naive benchmark.起始頁-結束頁：19-53資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(2).211篇名：A Comparative Study of Publications in Financial Journals in the Greater China Region並列篇名：大中華區於財務領域期刊發表之比較作者：李翎竹(Ling-Chu Lee);莊雲雯(Yun-Wen Chuang);洪文琪(Wen-Chi Hung)關鍵字：顯示性比較利益;洛卡定律;科學生產率;文獻計量分析;Revealed comparative advantage;Lotka's Law;research productivity;bibliometric analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以2000-2008年財務領域優良SSCI期刊的發表為樣本分析大中華地區之財務學術表現。依據發表期刊特性，了解台、港、中在財務研究範疇的相對優勢議題領域；並透過科學生產率的估計，了解在財務研究目前的研究能量及未來成長空間；與藉由國際合作分析，了解在財務領域的研究網絡；與提供學術研究機構在國際上之財務領域的排名。英文摘要：This study samples research papers in the top SSCI financial journals from the year 2000 to 2008 and conducts a multi-faceted analysis of academic performance of finance field in Greater China. The aims of this study include: (1) Explore comparatively advantageous category of financial research in Greater China; (2) Provide an assessment of the latent capacity for financial research and the scope for future development; (3) Render an understanding of the research communities in the financial field; (4) Compare universities in Greater China with international benchmarks, providing the information of corresponding academic positions in finance among representative universities.起始頁-結束頁：55-81資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(2).312篇名：Valuation and Motivation of Equity Carve-Outs並列篇名：股權分割之評價與動機作者：徐啟升(Chi-Sheng Hsu);鄭揚耀(Lee-Young Cheng);李秀綾(Shiou-Ling Lee)關鍵字：股權分割;不對稱訊息假說;分割利得假說;價值錯估;Equity carve-outs;asymmetric information hypothesis;divestiture gains hypothesis;mispricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討台灣企業股權分割活動之動機，實證結果顯示母公司之價值相對被高估，而子公司之價值相對被低估。此外，母、子公司短、長期股價異常報酬呈顯著正向，且母、子公司之異常營運績效於分割後顯著提升。最後，橫斷面迴歸分析顯示股權分割前後之異常營運績效變動與長期異常報酬呈顯著正向關係，支持分割利得假說。英文摘要：This research explores the motivation of equity carve-outs in Taiwan. We find that carve-out parents are significantly overvalued and the subsidiaries are significantly undervalued. In addition, parents and subsidiaries earned positive abnormal announcement-period returns, and outperformed appropriate benchmarks over a threeyear period following the carve-outs. The abnormal operating performance of subsidiaries improved after carve-outs, and parent operating performance outperformed matching firms. These results are consistent with the divestiture gains hypothesis. Furthermore, cross-sectional regression shows that there exists a positive relationship between abnormal operating performance and long-run abnormal return, providing further support for the divesture gains hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：83-119資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(2).413篇名：資訊揭露評鑑成績對市場波動性與買賣單不平衡之抑制效果並列篇名：The Monitoring Effect of the Score of Information Disclosure and Evaluation System on Market Volatility and the Degree of Order Imbalance作者：張眾卓(Chong-Chuo Chang);王元章(Yung-Jang Wang);陳振遠(Roger C. Y. Chen);湯惠雯(Hui-Wen Tang)關鍵字：公司治理;資訊透明度;市場微結構;市場波動性;買賣單不平衡;資訊不對稱;Corporate governance;information transparency;market microstructure;market volatility;order imbalance;information asymmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在探討資訊揭露評鑑成績與市場微結構之關聯性。本研究發現「資訊揭露評鑑系統」公佈之資訊揭露評鑑成績，對市場波動性與買賣單不平衡皆具有顯著的影響，當資訊透明度愈高時，資訊不對稱的程度愈低，將致使市場波動性愈低與買賣單不平衝程度愈低；此外，控制權與現金流量權偏離程度增加時，將降低資訊揭露評鑑成績對市場波動性與買賣單不平衡程度之抑制效果。因此，提升企業的資訊透明度與強化公司治理將可有效降低公司資訊不對稱的程度，同時減緩市場波動性與買賣單不平衡程度。英文摘要：This study attempts to explore the relationship between the score of information disclosure and evaluation system and market microstructure. The empirical results show that the score of the information disclosure and evaluation system has negative influence on market volatility and the degree of order imbalance. Moreover, the raise of deviation between voting rights and cash-flow rights could diminish the score of the information disclosure negative influence market volatility and the degree of order imbalance. Consequently, advancing information transparency and enforcing corporate governance may reduce firm's information asymmetry and, meanwhile, mitigate its market volatility and the degree of order imbalance.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(1).114篇名：Effective Duration Analyses on the Policy Reserves of Life Insurance並列篇名：壽險保單準備金之有效存續期間分析作者：詹芳書(Linus Fang-Shu Chan);蔡政憲(Cheng-Hsien Tsai)關鍵字：有效存續期間;保單準備金;總準備金;effective duration;policy reserve;aggregate reserves期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：鑑於解約率會受到利率的影響，壽險保單責任準備金的利率風險應使用有效存續期間來衡量。本研究採用一般化的反正切利差解約率模型與CIR模型，並根據保單儲蓄成分的不同來設定解約率對利差的敏感度。我們分析死亡險、生存險與生死合險，計算三者在不同保單年度下之一張保單準備金與其總準備金的有效存續期間，並分析在不同業務銷售比重下，其總準備金之有效存續期間。分析發現保單準備金與其有效存續期間並未維持同號，且三種保單準備金之有效存續期間與保單到期期限的類雙曲線關係並非完全一致。最後，包含三個險種的一籃子保單總準備金之有效存續期間缺口會隨利率下降而擴大。英文摘要：Life insurers need to employ effective duration to measure the interest rate risk of policy reserves because the surrender rate depends on interest rates, which makes cash flows interest-rate-sensitive. This study uses a general surrender rate model and CIR interest rate model, besides assuming different interest rate sensitivities according to product characteristics. Products analyzed include term life insurance, endowment and pure endowment. We first calculate the effective durations of these products’ reserves by policy years. Then we calculate effective durations of reserves aggregated by products, and across products. Our results identify a new pattern of effective durations of policy reserves with time to maturity on three types of policies not reported by Tsai (2009). Furthermore, the gap between duration of using Treasury bonds to match policy reserves broadens as the interest rate falls.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(1).215篇名：Director Affiliations and Shareholder Wealth during the Announcement of Acquisitions並列篇名：由購併宣告對股東財富之影響分析主併公司其獨立董事兼任的差異性作者：陳家偉(Chia-Wei Chen);J. Barry Lin關鍵字：董事會;董事兼任;企業購併;Board of directors;Multiple directorships;Mergers and acquisitions期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：忙碌董事（獨立董事兼任兩席或以上之其他董事席次）是否影響股東財富？以往研究針對此議題提供了豐富但卻分歧的看法；然而，鮮少有文獻質疑各別忙碌董事的差異性可能對企業價值產生的不同影響。透過美國市場於1998至2004年共計854筆的購併樣本，本文發現：於主併公司內，身兼大型公司總裁或不同產業董事之忙碌董事，並未如其他忙碌董事般對於主併公司在購併宣告時之股價產生負面的影響。潛在性的，忽略個別忙碌董事的特質，可能引致誤解或甚至低估了部份獨立董事與股東財富之間的相關性。英文摘要：Expanding on earlier findings that outside director characteristics are significant factors on firm performance, this paper focuses on the significance of their leadership role and affiliations. Examining market reaction to acquisitions, we find acquirers with busy outside directors holding a CEO title in S&P 500 firms or holding diversified directorships obtain higher cumulative abnormal returns during the announcement date than firms with other busy outside directors. While multiple directorships could lead to ineffective monitoring, our finding highlights the potential advantage of certain busy outside directors. Large firm leadership position and diverse experiences appear to be associated with significant positive impact.起始頁-結束頁：63-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(1).316篇名：Valuation of Rate of Return Guarantees under a Defined Contribution Pension Plan Considering the Choice of Retirement Age並列篇名：退休年齡選擇下確定提撥退休金制度收益率保證之評價作者：唐俊華(Chun-Hua Tang);楊曉文(Sharon S. Yang)關鍵字：退休金制度;確定提撥制;收益率保證;美式選擇權;Pension plan;defined contribution;rate of return guarantees;American options期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討確定提撥退休金制度收益率保證之評價，在考量退休年齡選擇下，收益率保證有類似於財務美式選擇權的特性，因此，有別於文獻上將收益率保證視為歐式選擇權來評價，我們在退休金制度中退休年齡可選擇的情況下來評價，並以臺灣勞退新制做為範例。現行臺灣勞退新制提供之保證收益率為二年期定存利率，本研究以Heath et al.（1992）的架構來描述利率過程，並假設資產價格服從幾何布朗運動，使用Longstaff and Schwartz（2001）提出的最小平方蒙地卡羅模擬法（Least Squares Monte Carlo）進行評價。研究發現：在提早退休的情況下，收益率保證選擇權的價值較低，而延後退休會增加收益率保證選擇權的價值，因此在評估保證成本時，應考慮退休年齡的影響。英文摘要：This paper studies the valuation of the rate of return guarantee under a DC pension plan considering the choice of retirement age. In this setting, the rate of return guarantee can be referred to as the American option. We carry out a simulation study using the Least Squares Monte Carlo (LSM) approach proposed by Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) to calculate the value of the rate of return guarantee. We also compare the results with the case where the retirement age is fixed. We illustrate the valuation of the rate of return guarantee for the new Labor Pension Plan in Taiwan. The numerical analysis demonstrates that the guarantee value is lower with early retirement but higher with late retirement. The effect of the retirement age on the value of the rate return guarantee is significant.起始頁-結束頁：91-113資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2012.20(1).401篇名：Optimal Monetary Policy for Taiwan: A Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Framework並列篇名：動態隨機一般均衡（DSGE）架構下之台灣最適貨幣政策分析作者：黃俞寧(Yu-Ning Hwang);何佩螢(Pei-Ying Ho)關鍵字：動態隨機一般均衡（DSGE）;貨幣政策;信用管道;Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE);Monetary policy;Credit channel期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文藉由比較在一具有銀行部門的動態隨機一般均衡（DSGE）模型中，採行貨幣成長率法則與泰勒法則下之福利水準來評估台灣的最適貨幣政策。研究結果顯示，對台灣而言，貨幣成長率法則較泰勒法則更能有效地促進經濟穩定而達到較高的福利水準。主要原因在於貨幣總量具有與消費直接相關的流動性效果，透過控制貨幣總量的成長率將可有效地降低通膨與產出的波動性。此結果在不同的模型設定下皆成立，且與Teo（2009）在一DSGE模型下估計所得之台灣當前的貨幣政策大致上一致，但最適貨幣政策在穩定通貨膨脹率與匯率上的效果較佳。英文摘要：The objective of this paper is to investigate the monetary policy of Taiwan by using a micro-based dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model with a banking sector. Because Taiwan's central bank has claimed to use the M2 aggregate growth rate as the monetary target since 1992, this study essentially centers on the welfare assessments of the optimized money growth rate rule and the alternative Taylor-type interest rate rule. We find that the money growth rate rule plays a better job in stabilization and is welfare dominating over the interest rate rule for all types of real shocks. Due to the liquidity effects that the monetary aggregate supplies for consumption, controlling the growth rate of the monetary aggregate can successfully reduce both the inflation and output volatilities. The welfare superiority of the monetary aggregate rule holds for alternative specifications of the model, including the frictionless credit market, the lower international capital mobility and lower nominal rigidity. The current monetary policy, estimated by Teo (2009), follows in a similar fashion to the optimized monetary policy that this study suggests, but has smaller effects in stabilizing the CPI inflation and exchange rates. Reinforcing its endeavors in inflation and exchange rate stabilization can be welfare improving.起始頁-結束頁：447-482資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201212.00012篇名：Bayesian Estimates of Potential Output and the NAIRU for Taiwan並列篇名：以貝式估計法推估台灣之潛在產出與自然失業率作者：陳馨蕙(Shin-Hui Chen);林金龍(Jin-Lung Lin)關鍵字：潛在產出;自然失業率（NAIRU）;貝氏方法;季節單根;正向濾波;反向取樣法;馬可夫鏈蒙地卡羅法;Potential output;NAIRU;Bayesian approach;Seasonal unit root;Forward Filtering Backward Sampling (FFBS);Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去文獻指出自然失業率（NAIRU）與潛在產出的推估會伴隨著相當高的不確定性。為了讓模型允許較多的不確定性，本文分別為Watson's decomposition與Apel and Jansson's system approach建立了相對應的貝式抽樣演算法（sampling algorithms），同時亦設計了一系列的蒙地卡羅分析以驗證抽樣演算法的正確性與效率性。本文更進一步將此演算法運用於推估台灣未經季節調整的潛在產出與自然失業率，並將季節單根的觀念引入模型中。模擬分析與實證結果均顯示，相對於傳統的最大概似估計法（maximum likelihood estimate），貝式估計法允許參數有較大的隨機變異（stochastic variation），且後驗分佈（posterior distribution）確實能容許較高程度的不確定性，並提供更為攸關的訊息供台灣政府執行政策之參考。英文摘要：Previous literature indicates that the NAIRU and potential output are measured with large degree of uncertainty. To account for this large estimate uncertainty, this paper develops the corresponding Bayesian sampling algorithms for Watson's decomposition method and Apel and Jansson's systems approach. We assess our algorithms by conducting a series of Monte Carlo simulation experiments. To illustrate the practical relevance of our algorithms, we also apply them to Taiwan's seasonally unadjusted data and incorporate the idea of seasonal unit root into our Bayesian framework. Simulation and empirical analyses show that our Bayesian sampling algorithms are flexible and do not merely duplicate the maximum likelihood estimates. We find that the maximum likelihood estimate generally understates the parameter variability and puts too little weight on the variance. A Bayesian approach allows for more stochastic variation in the permanent and cyclical components. Our analysis demonstrates that the posterior distribution facilitates assessment of the parameter uncertainty such that a Bayesian approach is rich enough to cope with model specification issues and provides more relevant information for conducting monetary and fiscal policies.起始頁-結束頁：483-523資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201212.00023篇名：通貨膨脹持續性─分量自我迴歸模型之應用並列篇名：Inflation Persistence: The Application of Quantile Autoregression Model作者：林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin);彭竣永(Jun-Yong Peng)關鍵字：通貨膨脹持續性;分量自我迴歸;分量單根檢定;Inflation persistence;Quantile autoregression;Quantile unit root test期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文使用Koenker and Xiao（2006）的分量自我迴歸模型（quantile autoregression model）以及Koenker and Xiao（2004）所提出的分量單根檢定，嘗試分析20個OECD國家1958-2010年的通貨膨脹持續性。實證結果發現OECD國家的通貨膨脹率較低時，通貨膨脹率為定態，且通貨膨脹不具高度持續性；而通貨膨脹率較高時，通貨膨脹率轉為非定態，通貨膨脹具有高度持續性。即通貨膨脹持續性依通貨膨脹率的高低呈現不對稱狀況，且通貨膨脹率同時具有定態與非定態性質。英文摘要：This paper investigates inflation persistence by using the quantile autoregression model of Koenker and Xiao (2006) and the quantile unit root test of Koenker and Xiao (2004). The data of 20 OECD countries from 1958-2010 were employed. Our empirical result shows that inflation persistence varies with inflation for all OECD countries. Inflation is stationary and not highly persistent for low inflation, and is nonstationary and highly persistent for high inflation. This shows that inflation persistence is asymmetric across quantiles of the inflation.起始頁-結束頁：525-558資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201212.00034篇名：經驗解構法與台灣經濟成長之預測並列篇名：Empirical Decomposition and Economic Growth Forecasting作者：葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh);程英賓(Nick Y. P. Cheng);王景南(Jying-Nan Wang)關鍵字：經濟成長;HP濾波法;預測方法;經驗解構;Economic growth;H-P filter;Forecasting;Empirical decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文應用Huang et al.（1998）針對非線性及非定態時間序列的經驗解構法（empirical mode decomposition, EMD），對台灣實質國內生產毛額序列解構並進行預測。我們發現經驗解構法能成功地將台灣實質國內生產毛額序列分解成數個正交、定態循環的實證基底數列，以及潛在可能存在非線型的局部時間趨勢（local trend）。特別的是，EMD所解構出來的本質模態函數（intrinsic mode functions, IMF），可以在總體經濟研究中被廣為使用的HP濾波法（Hodrick-Prescott filter）特定的參數下找到相對應的分身。不僅如此，由於所得的基底數列遵循一定的定態循環走勢，利用定態時間序列對基底函數建模，可以容易地對該原始非定態數列進行預測。因此，本文的方法與一般先差分再對差分數列（成長或報酬率）配適模型、預測的常規有本質上的不同：因為經驗解構，我們得以考慮、納入原始數列解構後所有成份數列所反映的動態性質與資訊內涵於預測，而避免因為對資料差分造成對預測有攸關性的資訊漏損，從而影響預測績效。在實證上，我們以國內實質生產毛額為對象，直接將預測表現與近來文獻上不同的經濟預測方法做比較。我們的初步結果顯示，應用EMD解構台灣經濟成長進行相關的預測，不僅簡單而且有不錯的預測表現。英文摘要：We use the empirical mode decomposition (EMD), specifically designed for decomposing nonstationary and nonlinear series by Huang et al. (1998), to disentangle and forecast Taiwan's real GDP growth. We find that the real GDP could be decomposed into six stationary and near-orthogonal intrinsic mode functions (IMFs), along with a nonlinear trend. Specifically, some IMFs have cyclical patterns similar to the Hodrick-Prescott filtered real GDP series under certain smoothing parameters. Based on the empirical stationarity and near-orthogonality of the IMFs, we can estimate and forecast these component series easily through simple time series models. In particular, our approach differs from the typical difference-first-then-fit recipes in that it retains all information and dynamic content of the original series instead of discarding partial information, which can be relevant for anticipating futures, due to differencing. By comparing with the other popular methodologies, linear or nonlinear, in predicting Taiwan's real GDP quarterly growth, our empirical results confirm the superior yet simple forecasting performance of the new approach.起始頁-結束頁：559-598資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201212.00045篇名：外部融資溢酬、台灣房屋市場與景氣波動並列篇名：External Finance Premium, Taiwan's Housing Market, and Business Fluctuations作者：陳南光(Nan-Kuang Chen);鄭漢亮(Han-Liang Cheng)關鍵字：動態隨機一般均衡模型;房屋外部融資溢酬;房屋價格;Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model;External finance premium on housing;House price期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：根據Aoki et al.（2004）與Bernanke et al.（1999）的動態隨機一般均衡模型，將借貸限制運用在房屋市場，藉由房屋投資的借貸契約所產生的金融加速效應，試圖捕捉台灣房屋市場循環與總體經濟之間的相關性。模擬結果顯示，本模型呼應實際資料的幾項觀察：房屋投資相對於資本設備投資的波動來得高、房屋投資與產出的相關性比資本設備投資與產出的相關性來得低、房屋價格的波動比產出的波動大、以及房屋外部融資溢酬與景氣循環呈反向的關係。最後，透過金融加速效應，房屋外部融資溢酬對於房價與房屋投資的波動扮演了重要的傳導機制。英文摘要：Using a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model modified from Aoki et al. (2004) and Bernanke et al. (1999), we apply credit frictions to the housing market and attempt to capture the characteristics of Taiwan's housing market and business fluctuations. Calibrating the model to Taiwan's data, the model generates several important properties that echo empirical observations: housing investment is more volatile than capital investment, the correlation of housing investment with GOP is lower than that of capital investment with GOP, the house price is more volatile than GOP, and the external finance premium on housing exhibits counter-cyclical movement. Finally, by way of the financial accelerator, external finance premium on housing acts as an important transmission mechanism in the fluctuations of house price and housing investment.起始頁-結束頁：307-341資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201209.00016篇名：International Economic Linkages between Taiwan and the World: A Global Vector Autoregressive Approach並列篇名：台灣與世界各國的貿易關聯－GVAR模型之應用作者：陳淑玲(Shu-Ling Chen);黃朝熙(Chao-Hsi Huang);黃裕烈(Yu-Lieh Huang)關鍵字：Global Vector Autoregression (GVAR)模型;貿易關聯;台灣;Global Vector Autoregression (GVAR) model;International linkage;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主要是利用Pesaran et al.（2004）以及Dees et al.（2007）所設定的GVAR（global vector autoregression）模型來探討當台灣主要貿易國家（例如美國、日本以及中國大陸）發生外生衝擊時，透過各國之間彼此的貿易關聯，如何影響台灣國內總體經濟。不同於現有文獻，GVAR模型因為多考量了國與國之間的關聯性，因此該模型可以更深入地去描述各國之間的經濟相關情況。而我們的實證結果也證實，相較於傳統的VAR（vector autoregression）模型，GVAR模型所得到的結果比較合乎經濟理論的結果。英文摘要：This paper applies the global vector autoregression (GVAR) model proposed by Pesaran et al. (2004) and Dees et al. (2007) to analyze how a shock to the economies of Taiwan's major trading partners (such as U.S., Japan and China) affects Taiwan economy and the rest of the world. In contrast to existing literature on the standard vector autoregression (VAR) model of Taiwan economy, this study emphasizes the modeling of intricate interrelationships across economies in the world while evaluating the impacts of domestic and global shocks on Taiwan economy. Our results indicate that the performance of the GVAR model is encouraging in the sense that the effects of various macroeconomic shocks on core macro variables of interest are generally consistent with the predictions based on standard macroeconomic theory.起始頁-結束頁：343-375資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201209.00027篇名：台灣經濟成長率預測在景氣循環中的不對稱行為偏誤現象並列篇名：Asymmetric Behavioral Bias on Taiwan's Economic Growth Rate Forecasts作者：謝子雄(Zi-Xiong Xie);徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：經濟成長率;景氣循環;預測誤差;預測行為偏誤;偏誤修正預測;Economic growth rate;Business cycle;Forecasting error;Behavioral bias;Bias-corrected forecast期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究建立了一個新的分析架構，藉由預測誤差來認定預測機構在「景氣循環」波動中的兩種可能「行為偏誤」現象－意圖性的樂觀或悲觀的預測態度而造成的行為偏誤與非意圖性地對新進訊息反應不及或反應過度而造成的行為偏誤，並透過此架構分析台灣經濟成長率的預測表現。我們的實證結果顯示，台灣的官方機構（行政院主計處）除了對景氣循環波動中的訊息反應不及而產生預測誤差外，在景氣擴張時期還會因過度悲觀而低估經濟成長率；而民間機構（中華經濟研究院）的預測則因為滲入更多意圖性的行為偏誤而導致其預測值較不準確，其於擴張期低估成長率的原因主要來自於過度悲觀及對訊息反應過度，而於衰退期高估的原因則來自過度樂觀和反應不及兩種行為偏誤。除此之外，我們還發現，行政院主計處的預測在2001年前後期有相當大的轉變，2001年之後預測行為偏誤現象更為顯著且伴隨較大的預測誤差波動。最後，我們建立相對應的「行為偏誤修正模型」，修正所認定出行政院主計處的行為偏誤並進而提出修正後的經濟成長率預測值。其中，修正了景氣循環過程中每一階段可能產生的行為偏誤。修正後的預測值明顯優於行政院主計處的預測值及文獻上利用大量訊息而建立的更新預測值。由於我們的分析架構僅需預測機構的預測值序列即可操作，因此我們認為，本文所提出的分析架構除了在相關研究上有所貢獻外，應可作為研究者於進行經濟預測時的另一項新選擇。英文摘要：In this study, we propose a new approach to investigating forecasters' behavioral biases during business cycles via inspecting and analyzing one-step-ahead forecasting errors. For Taiwan's economic growth rate, the effects of optimism/pessimism and overreaction/under-reaction to the news on forecasts during the expansion and contraction periods of real activity are identified in the proposed framework. Overall, our empirical results discover that Taiwan's government usually under-reacts to the news during business cycles, and tends to be pessimistic, especially in expansions. Besides, these behavioral biases in the post-2001 period are much more significant than those in the pre-2001 period. On the other hand, when comparing the government to the private sector in Taiwan, these behavioral biases affect the private sector's forecasts much more severely. Moreover, in our in-sample and out-of-sample experiments, the forecast performance improves significantly after correcting the identified behavioral biases of the Taiwan government's forecast. Because the proposed approach needs only time series data of forecasts, it is easy to implement, and thus might be a good alternative to the existing approaches of economic forecasts.起始頁-結束頁：377-416資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201209.00038篇名：匯率與市場取價－台灣人造纖維梭織布出口實證並列篇名：Exchange Rate and Pricing to Market: Evidence from Taiwan's Exports of Woven Fabric of Synthetic Fiber作者：黃恩恩(En-En Huang);藍青玉(Ching-Yu Lan);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo)關鍵字：市場取價;匯率轉嫁;紡織業;人造纖維梭織布;Pricing to market;Exchange rate pass-through;Textile industry;Woven fabric of synthetic fiber期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文在實證上檢視台灣人造纖維梭織布針對美國、中國、香港、印尼及越南等五大出口目的國的市場取價（pricing to market）行為，以及該產業在國際市場面臨的競爭程度。市場取價行為乃出口商面對匯率變動時，依據不同出口目的國的需求與競爭情形，採取又不同幅度的成本加成調整比例。然由於匯率變動也同時影響廠商的生產成本，如何區隔匯率對成本的影響，也就成為市場取價實證研究上必須控制的變數。本文利用了紡織業上、中、下游定位清楚，且成本來源相對單純的特性，而得以更精確地掌握成本變數。這使我們得以克服過去如Knetter（1995）以時間虛擬變數取代成本資料，而無法檢驗理論的重要實證意涵的問題。我們發現，台灣人造纖維梭織布的出口，存在顯著的市場取價行為。尤其利用2005年紡織品配額制度取消的政策改變，我們發現在配額取消後，我國針對美國與印尼的出口，確實面臨更嚴峻的競爭狀況，而必須更大幅度的在匯率變動時調整其成本加成幅度。英文摘要：This study empirically investigates the pricing to market behavior of Taiwan's woven fabric of synthetic fiber exports to 5 major foreign markets, including the U.S., China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and Vietnam. Pricing to market refers to adjustment of exporter's markup to exchange rate movements, thus depending on degree of competition facing exporters in any particular market. Nevertheless, change in exchange rates also induces change in marginal cost of production. The novelty of our paper lies in an ability to differentiate the effect of change in exchange rates on the markup adjustment from that on the marginal cost, by making use of the simple cost structure in the textile industry. Without applying time dummies as proxies for cost as in Knetter (1995), the empirical validity of the restrictions on parameters implied by theory can now be formally tested. We find significant evidence for the pricing to market behavior of Taiwan's exports of woven fabric of synthetic fiber. Of more interest is the finding that producers adjust their markups to a greater extent for exports to the U.S. and Indonesia in the absence of quota protections, suggesting higher competition.起始頁-結束頁：417-446資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201209.00049篇名：垂直專業分工，福利及政府政策並列篇名：Vertical Specialization, Welefare and Government Policy作者：林柏生(Po-Sheng Lin);黃士真(Shin-Chen Huang)關鍵字：垂直專業分工;離岸生產;李嘉圖模型;福利;政府政策;Vertical specialization;Offshoring; Ricardian;Welfare;Government policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文利用納入外生性切割技術之李嘉圖模型，探討垂直專業分工如何影響參與國的福利水準，並探討當本國政府進一步眼科特定生產階段外移時，兩國的福利水準會如何變化。研究結果發現，本國廠商將生產階段移到外國執行，有助於提高外國福利，至於對本國福利的影響則會受到兩國之間的生產技術及勞動稟賦差異而有所不同；此外，若本國政府限制特定生產階段外移，其會對兩國福利產生不同方向的影響，且影響方向決定於該生產階段使用勞動力的程度高低。英文摘要：We incorporate a fragmenting technology into a two-country Ricardian model to investigate whether countries gain from fragmentation, and how government restrictions on the offshoring of a certain stage influence both countries' welfare. We illustrate that the targeting country can gain from fragmentation but the welfare variation of the offshoring country is uncertain. The relative labor endowment and production technological difference across countries are crucial in determining the welfare variation of the offshoring country. Moreover, we demonstrate that the government restrictions will influence both countries’ welfare in opposite directions, and the relative labor use of the restricted stage compared with the other stages is the critical factor.起始頁-結束頁：163-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201206.000110篇名：股市的長期風險管理與總體經濟基要並列篇名：Long-run Risk and Macroeconomic Fundamentals作者：葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh);黃泰翔(Tai-Shiang Huang)關鍵字：長期風險;總體經濟基要;Spline-GARCH;經驗模態解構;風險管理;風險值;Long-run risk;Macroeconomic fundamentals;Spline-GARCH;Empirical mode decomposition;Risk management;Value-at-risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以Engle and Rangel（2008）提出的spline-GARCH為基礎，建構納入總體經濟基要變數的長期波動度新模型與預測長期風險的方式。我們利用Empirical Mode Decomposition（EMD）方法拆解GDP與CPI季資料得到去除長期趨勢後數個不同頻率且互相正交的數列，檢驗長期下股票市場風險與總體經濟環境的關聯，以及總體景氣狀態變數在股市風險結構轉換中所扮演的角色。我們的實證結果顯示，利用這些總體市場基要成分建立的模型使得財務市場的總風險（波動度）得以自然地隨著總體經濟狀況作結構性轉換調整而無需依賴特定門檻效果或者馬可夫轉換等機制，本文之模型結構轉換的觸發取決於總體經濟環境的改變。我們進一步利用此架構預測金融海嘯後2008與2009年為期兩年的樣本外99%信心水準下的風險值期限結構，結果顯示適度地納入長期總體經濟環境的資訊於風險模型中不僅有助於降低極端損失風險，而且用時加入實質面與名目面的資訊內涵對長期風險危機預警會更有效。英文摘要：Generalizing the component GARCH by Engle and Rangel (2008), this paper proposes a new modeling and forecasting strategy for systemic risk both in the short term and long-run. Utilizing the orthogonally decomposed stationary regularity series from real quarterly GDP and CPI by EMD (Empirical Mode Decomposition), an empirical adaptive decomposition method that aims to entertain nonlinear and nonstationary time series, we demonstrate the close coupling relationship between long-run stock market volatility and the business cycle fluctuations. As these component series preserve the most primary information in the macroeconomic state variables sampled at lower frequencies, the long-run component volatility is capable of generating regime shift behaviors in daily volatility without resorting to Markov switching or other regime switching mechanisms. Moreover, the prediction of future volatility at various horizons is easy within the framework by taking advantage of the decomposed stable cyclical pattern of these macroeconomic series. By further examining the relative contribution of 3 factors (namely long-term, medium-term and short-term) comprising the long-run risk to the overall volatility, we find that the median frequency factor in long-run volatility explains the turbulent market variations during periods of recession. Our empirical applications in hedging and evaluating VaR reveal that incorporating information from lower frequency macroeconomic fundamentals did provide incremental value toward the modeling of long-run risks.起始頁-結束頁：199-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201206.000211篇名：決定台灣私人教導支出的影響因素－父母時間與金錢投入關係並列篇名：The Determinants of Private Tutoring Spending in Taiwan: The Relationship between Parents' Hands-on Tutoring and Spending作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);陳晏羚(Yeng-Ling Chen)關鍵字：人力資本;私人教導;工具變數;邊際效果;Human capital;Private tutoring;Instrumental variable;Marginal effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文採用「華人家庭動態資料庫」實證檢測各種家庭因素對於子女私人教導支出的影響，並探討私人教導金錢支出與親力親為的身教究竟為相輔相成，抑或以金錢取代時間的替代關係。實證結果發現家長教育成就與所處世代、在都市居住或在公部門工作將顯著影響對子女的私人教導支出：同時發現父母花費私人教導支出與投入教導時間兩者間呈互補而非替代關係。考慮投入教導時間的內生性並採工具變數法估計後，平均而言每週多增加一小時的親自私人教導，一年將增加私人教導支出約5,400元。英文摘要：Using Taiwan's data from the Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD), this paper empirically tests a variety of family factors on children's private tutoring expenditure, and further explores the relationship between private tutoring spending and parents' hands-on tutoring. Empirical results show that parents' educational achievements, parents' cohort, and living in the city or working in the public sector will significantly affect their spending on children's private tutoring; we also found that private tutoring spending and parents' hands-on tutoring are complements rather than substitutes. Considering the possible endogeneity property of private tutoring spending, we use the instrumental variables method for estimation, and the results show that on average a one hour per week increase in parents' hands-on tutoring will increase private tutoring spending by about NT$5,400.起始頁-結束頁：237-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201206.000312篇名：Pricing Dynamic Guaranteed Funds under a Double Exponential Jump Diffusion Model並列篇名：在雙指數跳躍擴散過程下動態保本型商品之評價分析作者：張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);連雅慧(Ya-Huei Lian);蔡明宏(Min-Hung Tsay)關鍵字：動態保本型基金;跳躍擴散模型;雙指數跳躍擴散模型;拉普拉斯轉換;Dynamic guaranteed funds;Jump diffusion model;Double exponential jump diffusion model;Laplace transform期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文在假設標的基金價格服從雙重指數跳躍擴散的過程下，來擴展過去文獻對於動態保本型基金之評價分析。首先，本文推導出動態保本型基金價格拉普拉斯轉換之封閉解，並進一步應用Gaver-Stehfest演算法進行拉普拉斯逆轉換，以求得動態保本型基金的價格。從文章中之數值結果，我們發現本文所提出之評價方法相較於蒙地卡羅模擬法更具有效率性但卻不失準確性。另一方面，本文亦研究在考處價格跳躍的情況下，動態保本型基金之價格改變行為，和連續型動態保本基金價格與間斷型動態保本基金價格之差異分析。最後，本文亦提供動態保本型基金價格與柏閱模型參數之敏感性分析。英文摘要：This paper complements the extant literature to evaluate the prices of dynamic guaranteed funds when the price of underlying naked fund follows a double exponential jump diffusion process. We first derive the closed-form solution for the Laplace transform of dynamic guaranteed fund price, and then apply the efficient Gaver-Stehfest algorithm to Laplace inversion to obtain the prices of dynamic guaranteed funds. Based on the numerical pricing results, we find that the proposed pricing method is much more efficient than the Monte Carlo simulation approach although it loses a sufficiently small accuracy. On the other hand, we also provide an investigation on the behavior of prices of dynamic guaranteed funds when jump is taken into consideration. In addition, the sensitivity analyses of the prices of dynamic guaranteed funds with respect to jump-related parameters and the relative errors between the prices of continuous-monitored and discretely-monitored dynamic guaranteed fund are given in this paper as well.起始頁-結束頁：269-306資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201206.000413篇名：重置成本保險與道德危險─台灣汽車竊盜損失險實證分析並列篇名：Replacement Cost Insurance and Moral Hazard: Empirical Evidence of Automobile Theft Insurance in Taiwan作者：劉俊廷(Chun-Ting Liu);何佳玲(Chia-Ling Ho);謝淑慧(Shu-Hui Hsieh)關鍵字：重置成本保單;實際現金價值保單;道德危險;汽車竊盜損失險;Replacement cost policy;Actual cash value policy;Moral hazard;Automobile theft insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文透過台灣汽車保險市場重置成本保單與實際現金價值保單的理賠分析，驗證重置成本保單的保障是否會誘發道德危險。研究發現重置成本保單在保單到期前最後一個月的失竊率顯著高於實際現金價值保單，確認重置成本的保障確實會誘發道德危險。另一方面，若干被保險汽車的特徵與投保人特徵可能是引發道德危險的根源，透過迴歸分析的實證發現，國產車、70－79.9萬元的被保險汽車、前二年的新車、18－29歲的年輕族群存在較嚴重的道德危險問題。然而，透過有效的核保政策可望達到控制汽車竊盜損失險在重置成本保障下誘發的道德危險。英文摘要：Based on claim analysis of the replacement cost policy and the actual cash value policy in the automobile insurance market, this paper examines whether the protection of the replacement cost policy can induce moral hazard. The results show that the loss theft rate is higher one month before the replacement cost policy expires than that of the actual cash value policy. We confirm that the protection for the replacement cost will result in moral hazard. In addition, some characteristics of the insured car and policyholder may be the root cause of moral hazard. According to empirical findings based on regression analysis, there may be a moral hazard with policyholders for domestic cars, insured cars of 700 to 799 thousand NT dollars, the first two years of new cars, and younger policyholders from 18 to 29 years old. However, an effective underwriting policy can be adopted to control the moral hazard induced from protection for the replacement cost of automobile theft insurance.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201203.000114篇名：區域貿易協定對台灣的貿易效果－引力模型的實證分析並列篇名：Trade Effects of Regional Trade Agreements on Taiwan: An Empirical Study Using Gravity Model作者：劉宗欣(Zong-Shin Liu);賴美穎(Mei-Ying Lai);陳至還(Chih-Huan Chen)關鍵字：區域貿易協定;引力模型;進口轉向效果;出口轉向效果;追蹤資料;Regional trade agreement;Gravity model;Import diversion effect;Export diversion effect;Panel data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：自1990年代初以來，台灣主要貿易國紛紛簽訂臣域貿易協定（RTA），台灣皆非會員園，此對台灣的貿易效果為何？是否會影響與台灣的貿易關係？先前研究大多只評估RTA的平均貿易效果，無法據以正確評估對台灣的效果。本研究為首次針對台灣與主要貿易國的貿易，建立一精簡的引力模型，並以1980－2008年21國的追蹤資料，實證探討主要貿易國所簽訂的五個RTAs對台灣的貿易效果。結果發現：NAFTA、EU及ANZCER對台灣皆有顯著進口轉向效果，其中NAFTA也有顯著出口轉向效果；AFTA及CEPA皆會增加自台灣進口及對台灣出口。以淨貿易效果而言，AFTA及CEPA會增進與台灣的貿易關係，NAFTA、ED及ANZCER則會減少與台灣的貿易關係。此外也發現，大多數RTAs自生效起即會對台灣產生貿易效果，各RTA不同會員國對台灣的貿易效果也有明顯差異。依實證結果，台灣若能與美國及東協各國簽訂雙邊FTA，應有助於拓展對外貿易。英文摘要：Since the early 1990s, the major trading partners of Taiwan consecutively signed Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs). Taiwan, however, is not a member of those RTAs. What trade effects do those RTAs have on Taiwan? Do they affect trade relations of Taiwan with its trading partners? Most previous studies merely evaluate the average trade effects of RTAs, which cannot be applied to correctly assess the trade effects on Taiwan. This study is the first to construct a parsimonious gravity model, focusing on the trade between Taiwan and its trading partners, and uses panel data covering 21 countries from 1980 to 2008 to empirically investigate the trade effects on Taiwan of five RTAs signed between its trading partners. The major findings are summarized as follows: NAFTA, EU and ANZCER have significant import diversion effects on Taiwan, where NAFTA also exhibits an export diversion effect. In contrast, both AFTA and CEPA have positive effects on imports from and exports to Taiwan. Regarding the net trade effects, both AFTA and CEPA can enhance trade relations with Taiwan, but NAFTA, EU and ANZCER do the opposite. Moreover, most RTAs are found to have significant trade effects on Taiwan since they went into force, and each member of all RTAs has different trade effects on Taiwan. According to the results, it should be helpful for expanding external trade if Taiwan could sign bilateral FTAs with the U.S.A. and ASEAN countries.起始頁-結束頁：35-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201203.000215篇名：教育配額、累進稅和長期產出並列篇名：Education Quotas, Progressive Taxes, and Long-Run Output作者：張<U+701E>云(Jing-Jun Chang)關鍵字：教育配額;累進稅;同儕效果;聯考補習;Education quotas;Progressive taxes;Peer effect;Cramming for examination期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：累進稅（progressive tax）是許多國家採行的稅制，但現有理論分析會認為：累進稅因降低人們累積人力資本或技術勞力工作的誘因，而不利於長期經濟表現。本文嘗試提出一個可能：稅制若能使窮人家的聰明小孩，取代當有人家的比較不聰明小孩，獲得招生名額有限的高等教育機會，或許有助於窮人家跨代向上流動（upward intergenerational mobility）；並藉由窮人家小孩的聰明才智與其所發揮的同儕效果，也有益於提升社會整體的人力素質與長期產出。文中設計一個包含高等教育名額有限、學生為聯考而補習和勞動供給內生決定的二期疊代模型，並以數值模擬來呈現上述論點。英文摘要：Theoretical studies often suggest that progressive taxes, when compared to flat-rate taxes, are harmful for economic performance. This paper attempts to provide an alternative. We show that progressive taxes might be good for long-run output and upward intergenerational mobility in a society with education quotas. Since the number of students of a university is limited, progressive taxes might result in more talented children of the poor going to universities instead of the untalented children of the rich. This might stimulate the educated workers to accumulate more human capital by peer effects. Therefore the positive effect of human capital accumulation on output might outweigh the negative impact of work hour reduction in some situations and have higher output in the long run.起始頁-結束頁：79-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201203.000316篇名：銀行的所有權類型對借款企業多重往來關係之影響－以台灣的微小型企業與中大型企業為例並列篇名：Bank Ownership Types and Multiple Relationships with Corporate Clients作者：郭碧雲(Bih-Yun Kuo);陳錦村(Jing-Twen Chen)關鍵字：債權銀行的所有權類型;多重往來關係;借款企業的信用紀錄;往來依賴程度;資訊不對稱;Bank ownership types;Multiple relationships;Enterprise credit record;Dependence level of the client to the creditor bank;Information asymmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究旨在藉著「債權銀行的所有權類型」和「借款客戶對債權銀行的依賴程度」，探討兩者的多重往來關係。實證發現：（1）銀行偏好資訊透明度高的微小型企業。負責人的信用評分念高，微小型企業愈不迫切多重往來關係的建立；信用紀錄不良的微小型企業，愈困難建立多重往來關係。外資銀行充分供應微小型企業資金，使得這些企業不積極開拓多重往來關係，明顯與Berger et al.（2008）的實證結果相反。微小型企業愈多向民營金控及非金控業者舉債，其愈積極發展多重往來關係，此或反映每家民營銀行給予的授信額度與往來關係不為穩定所致。（2）中大型企業向外資銀行愈多舉債，往來家數愈少；惟若是向民營銀行愈多舉債，則愈積極建立多重的往來關係。而民營銀行給予的授信額度與往來關係，又比公營銀行還不穩定。台灣的公營銀行對微小型企業的融資貢獻，不亞於民營銀行，此點雖與Kumar and Francisco（2005）的結果相反，但公營銀行對中大型企業的資金供應不如民營銀行。（3）銀行面對大量投注研發支出的中大型企業，願意全力支持，使其免於開拓新的往來銀行。惟當研發支出率大於1.8%時，這些企業不再過度倚賴扮演間接金融的銀行提供資金，而是利用本身的經營優勢，發行票券、普通公司債及海內外的可轉換公司債取代之。（4）規模愈大的民營金控業者，流動性愈充足，支應企業融資需求的能力愈優於民營非金控銀行，所以民營金控融資給予中大型企業愈多額度時，會使這些企業顯著減少往來銀行的家數。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the multiple relationships of creditor banks and their clients through ”the ownership of the creditor bank” and ”the dependence level of the client to the creditor bank”. The empirical results are as follows: (1) the banks prefer to have relationships with micro-enterprises with a high level of information transparency. The higher the score of the credit rating of the chairperson, the less desire there is to build the multiple relationships with the micro-enterprise; and micro-enterprises with bad credit have more difficulty to build up the multiple relationships. Due to the foreign bank supply, the microenterprises with sufficient funds do not develop multiple relationships aggressively; these results are obviously opposite to the findings of Berger et al. (2008). The more lending there is from a private financial holding company or non-financial holding company, the more they tend to develop the multiple relationships. The implication shows that the banks provide insufficient funds, and the banking relationship is unstable. (2) The more the medium and large companies borrow from foreign banks, the fewer relationship banks they have; but the opposite result shows that the more they borrow from private banks, the more they intend to build up the multiple relationships with banks. The results also show that credit availability and relationships are less stable for private banks than state-owned banks. The contribution to the micro-enterprises by state-owned banks is not less than the private banks in Taiwan; this finding is contrary to the finding of Kumar and Francisco (2005), and we also find that state-owned banks have less intention to provide funds than private banks. (3) Banks tend to support medium and large companies with huge fund investment in R&D to avoid their effort in finding new relationship banks. When the R&D expenditure ratio is more than 1.8%, these companies do not need to depend on the indirect financing through banks, and use their own advantages to issue commercial paper, corporate bond or issue CB domestically or abroad. (4) the larger the size of the private financing holding companies, the more liquidity they have to provide sufficient funds to meet the corporate financing needs than the private banks; therefore when private financing holding companies provide more credit availability to medium and large companies, the latter have a significant decrease in the number of the relationship banks.起始頁-結束頁：111-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29628/AEP.201203.000401篇名：台灣銀行業在兩次金融改革期間的競爭與存、貸戶福利的變化並列篇名：The Impact of Financial Reforms on Competition and Consumer Welfare in the Taiwan Banking Industry作者：黃景沂(Ching-I Huang);莊<U+664B>祥(Ching-Hsiang Chuang)關鍵字：需求估計;消費者福利;異質產品;銀行業;demand estimation;consumer welfare;heterogeneous products;banking期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文分析台灣在2002年到2008年之間實施兩次金融改革在銀行業造成的政策效果。第一次金改的目標在於提升資本適足率與降低逾放比，第二次金改則是鼓勵銀行進行合併。本研究的重點在於探究金改政策對於產業競爭程度與存、貸款戶福利水準的影響。藉由估計存款與放款需求模型得出銀行屬性對於存、貸款戶效用的影響,我們發現提升資本適足率能提升存、貸款戶的效用，但降低逾放比則沒有顯著影響。估計出來的利率彈性顯示在實施這兩次金改的期間，市場競爭程度大致趨緩，而存款與貸款消費者的福利水準都下降。至於金改政策本身造成的直接效果則可透過反事實分析（counterfactual experiments）的方式來排除其它因素的影響，我們發現第一次金改的政策對競爭程度的影響很小,但同時提升了存款與放款消費者的福利。第二次金改的直接效果則降低了市場競爭程度，雖然提高了存款者福利但卻減低了放款者的福利。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the effects of the two waves of financial reforms implemented between 2002 and 2008 in the Taiwan banking industry. The first financial reform aimed to raise capital adequacy ratios and reduce nonperforming loans. The second financial reform encouraged banks to merge. We investigate the impact of the reforms on market competition and consumers' welfare. Using a structural demand model for saving and borrowing in a differentiated market, we find that a bank's capital adequacy rate has a positive impact on the utility of both savers and borrowers. Contrarily, the ratio of non-performing loans has no significant effect. During these reform periods, market competition tended to decline while consumers' welfare dropped for both savers and borrowers. Nonetheless, when we use counterfactual experiments to isolate the direct effect of reform policies from other factors, we find that the first reform had almost no effect on market competition while raising both savers' and borrowers' welfare. On the other hand, the second reform reduced market competition, increased savers' welfare, but decreased borrowers' welfare.起始頁-結束頁：421-460資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.404.12篇名：能源稅、所得稅與雙重紅利效果並列篇名：Energy Taxes, Income Taxes and Double Dividend Effects作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);吳家瑋(Chia-Wei Wu);陳顗文(I-Wen Chen)關鍵字：能源稅;所得稅;雙重紅利效果;英倫式小型開放經濟;energy taxes;income taxes;double dividend effects;british small open economy model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文建構一個英倫式小型開放經濟模型（British small open economy model，此一經濟「小」到不能左右進口能源的價格; 卻「大」到足以影響出口最終財的價格）,探討課徵能源稅對實質匯率、所得稅率、勞動就業及能源進口量的影響。根據相關變數之比較靜態分析，研究提升就業之雙重紅利效果的要件。分析發現: 家計單位的消費邊際效用彈性、原先的能源和勞動相對份額、污染佔能源使用量的比例、勞動供給彈性與國外對本國出口品之需求彈性的相對大小，是課徵能源稅能否產生雙重紅利效果的關鍵。基於關鍵參數是來自：消費者的「主觀心態」、一國景氣榮枯、租稅結構及生產技術發展程度; 故當局在考慮藉由課徵能源稅產生雙重紅利效果時，必須注意本國產品特性、民眾消費習慣、財政收支、經濟景氣以及本國與外國的生產技術相對發展程度等條件。英文摘要：This paper develops a ”British” small open economy (i.e., this kind of economy is too small to affect the world price of its imports but large enough to affect the price of its exports of final goods) to investigate the effects of an energy tax on real exchange rates, income tax rates, the employment of labor, and the imports of energy. Based on the comparative static analysis of these relevant variables, the conditions for obtaining an employment double dividend are derived. This study shows that the relative magnitude among the households' elasticity of marginal utility to consumption, the initial relative share of labor and energy inputs, the proportion of pollution outputs to energy inputs, the elasticity of labor supply, and the elasticity of export demand are the critical determinants of whether there may be a double dividend effect. The results imply that the consumer's subjective attitude, the structure of the tax, the status of the current economy, and the relative degree of domestic economic development compared to abroad should be considered when the government attempts to achieve a double dividend through the imposition of an energy tax.起始頁-結束頁：461-480資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.404.23篇名：高中教育生產函數的估計—學校品質與家庭資源的投入產出分析並列篇名：Estimates of Education Production Functions: The Effectiveness of School Inputs and Parental Financial Resources作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(Wehn-Jyuan Tsai)關鍵字：教育生產函數;附加價值;學校資源;高中;education production function;value-added specification;school resources;high school期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：學校品質與父母資源的投入對學生教育成就產出的生產技術長久以來一直是教育政策的核心議題。本文主要使用2001－2003年的大學聯招考生成績檔，研究高中應屆考生教育生產函數中各種投入的相對重要性及其成效。本文採取附加價值的設定方式，以學生大學學測成績做為其前期的教育結果，同時並使用各高中的師生比衡量學校的財務資源、各高中應屆考生大學學測的平均成績衡量學校聲譽的投入、補習費用衡量父母財務資源的投注，且估計各投入對學生大學指定科目考試成績的影響。實證結果顯示在學生平均能力較高的學校，師生比的增加對學生所有指定科目考試的成績除了生物成績之外皆具有加值效果。父母財務資源的投入則主要影響學生指定科目考試文學社會相關學科的成績。英文摘要：A key element of the policy discussion surrounding schools has been the effectiveness of additional resources in raising student achievement. This study uses the 2001-2003 Taiwanese Joint College Entrance Examination (JCEE) files to estimate a value-added production function for achievement by high school students. We use the score on a compentency test as a student's lagged test score and use teacher-student ratios to measure school expenditure, the average score on the competency test within schools to measure school rankings and cram schooling expenditure to measure parental financial resources. The empirical results suggest that for the most prestigious schools higher school expenditure (higher teacher-student ratios) raises the standardized JCEE scores of high school graduates. Moreover, the estimates show that an increase in parental financial resources increases the standardized scores on Chinese, English and History.起始頁-結束頁：481-513資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.404.34篇名：創新與研發、知識外溢之因果分析—以G20國家集團為例並列篇名：Causal Analysis in Innovation, R&D and Knowledge Spillovers: The Case of G20 Countries作者：印永翔(Yung-Hsiang Ying);陳思遐(Szu-Hsia Chen)關鍵字：G20國家集團;空間計量;知識外溢效果;G20 countries;spatial econometric models;knowledge spillover effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以Griliches（1979）所發展之知識生產函數為基礎，並採用G20國家集團1997－2008年追蹤資料為樣本，分析知識產出與知識外溢的關聯性。並應用晚近Krugman（1991）所發展之新經濟地理學架構，以空間誤差模型估計知識產出與研發投入、人力品質、政府政策、產業聚集之因果關係。實證結果顯示，當G20各國增加研發經費、每人平均收入、研發人員數量與產業聚落之際，各國知識產出將產生顯著正面之直接影響。本文另一重點為知識外溢效果，當鄰近國家增加研發經費、高等教育入學率、高等教育經費支出，對G20集團國內知識產出產生正面影響。值得注意的是知識外溢所產生的負面效果，當鄰近國家大量延攬研發人才與他國產業聚落興起之際，將導致G20國家知識產出之下降。英文摘要：Based on the Knowledge Production Function developed by Griliches (1979), this research analyzes the relationships between knowledge production and knowledge spillovers for open economies. The empirical study applies G20 countries panel data for the period of 1997 through 2008. Also incorporated in the theoretical framework is Krugman's New Economic Geography theory (1991), which employs a spatial error model to estimate the causal relationships between R&D investment, human qualities, government policies, industrial agglomeration, and knowledge production. The results of this study show that R&D funding, per capita income, the number of researchers, and industrial agglomerations have positive direct effects on domestic knowledge production for G20 countries. Another important finding is the spillover effect from the neighboring countries: R&D funding, education enrollment, and education expenditures from neighboring countries have a positive impact on domestic knowledge production for G20 countries. However, when a large number of researchers are recruited by neighboring countries and industrial agglomeration in neighboring countries rises, a significant negative impact on knowledge production is observed.起始頁-結束頁：515-538資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.404.45篇名：動態隨機一般均衡（DSGE）模型在貨幣政策制定上的應用：一個帶有批判性的回顧與展望並列篇名：DSGE Models and Policy Making: A Critical Review作者：陳旭昇(Shiu-Sheng Chen);湯茹茵(Ju-Yin Tang)關鍵字：動態隨機一般均衡（DSGE）模型;貨幣政策;中央銀行;DGSE model;monetary policy;central bank期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，動態隨機一般均衡（Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium, DSGE）模型受到世界各國中央銀行重視與採用，據以做為貨幣政策分析以及經濟預測之工具。然而，美國於2007年第三季所爆發的次貸危機擴散到全球，進而造成世界各國陷入景氣衰退的陰影，使得DSGE模型因為無法預測甚至解釋這次危機，受到多方的責難。本文以一個批判的觀點來檢視DSGE模型在貨幣政策制定上的應用。首先我們回顧DSGE模型發展沿革以及該模型與貨幣政策制定之間的關係，並解釋何以DSGE模型會在近年來受到各國央行的青睞。接下來，我們討論DSGE有關模型設定與估計方法的最新發展，以及提供對於最新的DSGE模型的幾點批判，藉以說明為何DSGE模型依然不宜做為貨幣政策制訂的依據。最後，我們以DSGE模型未來發展願景做為結語。英文摘要：This paper provides a critical review of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models and policy making. After a brief discussion on historical developments in DSGE models, we focus on criticism of using DSGE models for monetary policy making. We also discuss how to improve DSGE modeling from the perspective of policy analysis.起始頁-結束頁：289-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.403.16篇名：台灣實施所得稅單一稅率制度之探討並列篇名：A Study on the Implementation of a Flat Rate Income Tax Reform in Taiwan作者：孫克難(Keh-Nan Sun);羅時萬(Shi-Wan Lou)關鍵字：稅負分配;單一稅率制;單一免稅額;兩稅獨立;Gini係數;tax-burden distribution;flat tax;single allowance;separate system;Gini coe<U+FB03>cient期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：所得稅單一稅率制（The Flat Tax）主張取消累進課徵改採單一比例稅率，刪減租稅優惠改行單一個人免稅額，有助於稅制簡化、公平與效率，故而受到全球關注。台灣自2010年起，營所稅已調整為17%單一稅率；但綜所稅仍採累進課徵並給予多種減免，顯得複雜且不公平。本文旨在從稅負分配公平觀點，藉由我國2004年所得稅申報核定資料，分析綜所稅改採單一稅率制的可行性。實證主要發現：（1）給予較高單一免稅額，有助於稅負公平分配；採比例稅率課徵，會產生稅負累退性。（2）就整體單一稅率制言，具有相對較高之免稅額與稅率的制度，比相對較低免稅額與稅率者具租稅公平性。（3）在一定的條件下，台灣若將綜所稅改為20%單一稅率與每人單一免稅額34萬元，應能有助於所得公平分配並簡化稅政。英文摘要：A flat tax system is a system with a single proportional tax rate, instead of a system of progressive tax rates. It is a tax system with a simple personal allowance, instead of a system with various tax preferences. In Taiwan, corporate income tax is based on the adoption of a 17% single tax rate, but individual income tax has remained progressive and is characterized by various types of tax relief, which have made the current system appear both complicated and unfair. We thus analyze the feasibility of adopting a flat tax system in Taiwan to replace the current system in order to create a fairer and more simple tax system. This paper derives several results. Firstly, the higher the allowance in a flat tax system, the fairer is the tax system. In addition, a proportional tax system results in regressive taxes. Secondly, as for the introduction of a flat tax system, a system with a relatively high tax rate and a higher allowance will be fairer than a system with a relatively low tax rate and a lower allowance. Thirdly, if Taiwan adopts the flat tax system with a single tax rate of 20% and a single allowance of NT$340,000, it can promote tax equity and simplify the tax administration.起始頁-結束頁：325-367資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.403.27篇名：Share-Based Schemes, Efficiency Wages and Economic Growth並列篇名：分紅制度、效率工資與經濟成長作者：劉嘉瀅(Chia-Ying Liu)關鍵字：收益分紅;效率工資;資本使用;經濟成長;Revenue sharing;efficiency wages;capital utilization;economic growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文建立一個考慮收益分紅工資制度，與勞動生產力及資本使用的內生成長模型。在不具任何生產的外部性之下，若將收益分紅視為一效率工資，此種制度將可提高勞動生產力，並進一步成為經濟成長的動力。然而，越積極的分紅工資制度並不必然能增進就業、資本使用或經濟成長。本研究也顯示，資本使用與經濟成長存在一正向關係，而就業與資本使用及經濟成長則是基於不同的衝擊，可能呈現順循環或反循環。英文摘要：This study establishes an endogenous growth model characterized by a revenue sharing scheme and two variable factor utilizations, namely, labor productivity and the capital utilization rate. The results indicate that if revenue sharing acts as an efficiency wage, performance pay seeking can be a driving force behind labor productivity and in turn economic growth without any factor externalities. However, a more intensive sharing scheme may not necessarily increase employment, capital utilization, or economic growth. The current analysis also shows that capital utilization and economic growth always exhibit a positive relationship with each other, whereas employment may be either pro-cyclical or countercyclical in relation to capital utilization and balanced growth rates, which crucially depend on different shocks.起始頁-結束頁：369-388資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.403.38篇名：台灣遺產稅短漏報的實證分析並列篇名：Noncompliance with the Estate Tax in Taiwan作者：胡世唐(Shih-Tang Hwu);吳世英(Shih-Ying Wu)關鍵字：遺產稅;短漏報;稅務稽核;the estate tax;tax noncompliance;tax audit期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：逃漏稅不僅影響政府財政的健全，同時也造成稅負上的不公，但受限於資料的缺乏，以及理論架構的不足，遺產稅的逃漏稅行為相對受到較少的探討。本研究估計國內遺產的漏報行為，利用民國82－87年和民國92－94年國稅局遺產申報的稽核資料，估計稅率、稽核程度和遺產總額對於漏報行為的影響。本研究發現，納稅人漏報的遺產會隨邊際稅率和遺產總額提高而增加，但面對較嚴密的稽核或較高的稽核機率，則會降低漏報的遺產。此一結果與相關文獻的結論一致，認為較高的稅率提高遺產漏報成功的邊際報酬，因此導致較多的漏報行為，而稅務機關投入的人力物力，則能有效抑制逃漏稅行為。惟本研究所依據的稅務機關稽核後的遺產申報資料，僅能呈現實際短漏報的一部份。英文摘要：Tax noncompliance affects not only government revenue but also the fairness of the tax system. However, empirical studies on noncompliance with the estate tax are rare. This study utilizes the audited estate tax returns for 1993-1998 and 2003-2005 from Taiwan's National Tax Administration to analyze the determinants and magnitude of the underreporting of estates. We find that the underreporting of estates increases with marginal tax rates and the amount of the estate, but declines with tax auditing. The results are consistent with most of previous theoretical and empirical studies on non-compliance with the income tax and the estate tax. Previous studies generally find that a tax increase raises taxpayers' incentive to underreport estates owing to a higher marginal reward of successful evasion. In contrast, a higher tax audit probability can effectively deter taxpayers' underreporting behavior. One limitation of this study is that the data from audited tax returns may reveal only a part of actual noncompliance.起始頁-結束頁：389-420資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.403.49篇名：不請自來的銀行信用評等有向下偏誤的現象嗎？－配對方法並列篇名：Are Unsolicited Bank Credit Ratings Biased Downward?-A Matching Approach作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang);張元(Yuan Chang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：不請自來的銀行信評;選擇偏誤;配對方法;Unsolicited Bank Credit Ratings;Self-selection Bias;Matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文根據惠譽的銀行個別評等（Fitch's Bank Individual Ratings，FIRs），利用2002至2005年全球91國3881個銀行觀察值為樣本（其中3433個觀察值為付費以取得之信用評等，448個觀察值獲得的是不請自來的信用評等），分析兩類型銀行之信評的相對績效高低來判斷不請自來的銀行信評是否相對低於付費（主動）以取得之信用評等。我們應用Ruin（1973）與Rosenbaum and Rubin （1983，1985a，b）的配對方法，透過將兩類型銀行樣本之財務特性修正至近似，以改善既有文獻中未處理的樣本選擇偏誤問題。我們發現在樣本配對前，獲得不請自來信評之銀行的許多財務績效指標相對低於付費取得信評之銀行，這解釋了為什麼前者之信評相對較低的原因；在樣本配對後即控制了兩類型銀行的財務特性之後，大部分的證據顯示不請自來的銀行信評仍然相對較低。因此本文發現，即使考慮並處理了樣本的選擇偏誤，不請自來的銀行信評仍然存在向下偏誤的現象。英文摘要：This paper examines whether there is downward bias in Fitch's unsolicited bank credit ratings relative to solicited ratings using a matching approach. The sample for this study consists of those banks that had Fitch's Bank Individual Ratings (FBRs) during 2002-2005. There are 3,881 observations from 91countries, including 3433 solicited ratings and 448 unsolicited ratings. By employing marching methods developed by Rubin (1973) and Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983, 1985a,b), four matching algorithms, Nearest, Caliper, Mahala and Mahala Caliper, are used to match the financial characteristics of two groups of banks in order to correct for sample selection bias. Our evidence shows that before sample matching, banks received unsolicited ratings have weaker financial profiles and this could partially explain why they also get lower ratings. Based on after-matching samples, most of the evidence suggests that unsolicited ratings are still biased downward after controlling for differences in key financial characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：149-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.402.110篇名：三七五減租對農場經營效率的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Three-Seven-Five Rent Reduction on the Management Efficiency of Taiwan's Rice Farms作者：葉淑貞(Shu-Jen Yeh)關鍵字：三七五減租;技術效率;配置效率;調整利潤成本比;定額租;定率租;three-seven-five rent reduction;technical efficiency;the ratio of adjusted profit to adjusted cost;fixed rent tenancy;share tenancy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探究台灣實施三七五減租後的1950－1951年，佃耕農場的經營效率相對於自耕農場來說，是否高於戰前1925－1927年。研究結果發現三七五減租並未增進佃農的工作意願，使佃農的技術效率提高得比自耕農來得多。利用difference-in-difference法，得到若固定農家身份、時代、稻種及經營地面積大小，戰後初期相對於日治時代1925－1927年，自、佃耕農場調整利潤成本比無顯著差異。三七五減租之後，自、佃耕農場經營效率之所以無顯著差異，與以下幾個因索有關：（1）三七五減租也是定額租制度；（2）三七五減租後，自、佃耕農場的生產函數及所面臨的價格無顯著的差異；（3）三七五減租未干預佃農的經營權。英文摘要：This article explores whether or not the improvement in management efficiency from 1925-27 to 1950-51 was greater in tenanted farms than in self-cultivated farms, focusing on the possible impact of the Three-Seven-Five Rent Reduction reform implemented in 1949. The empirical results, based on the difference-in-difference approach, suggest that the impact is likely to be limited as the change in management efficiency between the two periods for the tenanted farms is highly similar to that for the self-cultivated farms. This finding is inconsistent with Chen Cheng's statement that the reform enhanced tenants' work incentive. Further results show that the impact of the reform on a more general efficiency index, measured by an adjusted profit-cost ratio, does not differ between the two types of farm after farm type, time period, rice type, and farm size are controlled in the estimations. Possible reconcilations for the neutrality of the policy effects could be (1) the reform resulted in a fixed rent tenancy system for the tenanted farms; (2) there was no substantial difference in the production function, factor prices or price of product faced by the two types of farm after the reform; and (3) the reform did not interfere with the management entitlement of the tenanted farms.起始頁-結束頁：189-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.402.211篇名：貿易自由化與中間財市場結構並列篇名：Trade Liberalization and Intermediate Goods Market Structure作者：涂光億(Kuang-I Tu);邱俊榮(Jiunn-Rong Chiou)關鍵字：貿易自由化;中間財;市場結構;trade liberalization;intermediate goods;market structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文關心進口國存在中間財市場時，探討最終財貿易自由化的效果。本文發現即使外國最終財廠商尚未因關稅的降低而開始出口至本國時，本國中間財價格即會因關稅的降低而快速下跌，而本國最終財廠商的產量與利潤則反而會因貿易自由化而增加，這與一般的認知有很大的不同。此外，在考慮本國存在中間財市場且市場結構外生之下，本國的最適關稅水準會較沒有中間財市場下來得低。但若本國中間財市場結構係內生決定，則本國政府會在一定範圍內藉提高關稅來保護本國產業；但若本國中間財廠商的固定成本很高，則本國政府反而應將關稅降到比中間財市場結構外生時更低，並讓外國廠商獨占市場。英文摘要：The effects of trade liberalization on the final product are analyzed when the importing (domestic) country possesses an intermediate goods market. It is assumed the intermediate goods provided by the domestic upstream firm are indispensible for producing the domestic final goods. This paper finds that even though the foreign final-product firm has not yet started exporting goods to the domestic market, the domestic input price may slump quickly because of the tariff reduction. Consequently, the output and profit of the domestic final-product firm will increase due to trade liberalization. This finding contradicts what is commonly believed. In addition, if the home country has an exogenous market structure for intermediate goods, the optimal tariff for the domestic country would be lower than that without an intermediate goods market. However, if the domestic intermediate goods market structure is endogenous, then the domestic government should raise the tariff within a certain range to protect the domestic industry. Yet, if the domestic intermediate good firm has a very high fixed costs, then the domestic government should do the reverse by reducing the tariff to a level that is lower than when the intermediate goods market structure is exogenous and let the foreign firm monopolize the market.起始頁-結束頁：235-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.402.312篇名：再探台灣匯率制度並列篇名：Revisiting to Taiwan's Foreign Exchange Rate Policies作者：吳致寧(Jyh-Lin Wu);黃惠君(Hui-Chun Huang);汪建南(Chien-Nan Wang);吳若瑋(Ro-Wei Wu)關鍵字：央行干預;匯率制度;匯率波動;經濟成長;名目匯率錯置;Intervention;exchange-rate system;exchange-rate volatility;economic growth;exchange-rate misalignments期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：貨幣高估或低估取決於均衡匯率與名目匯率間之相對變化。本文以考慮Balassa-Samuelson效果之貨幣學派模型，重新探討台灣1980年以來的匯率制度與政策，分析匯率干預是否有助於匯率穩定與經濟成長，及探討央行匯率干預的利潤與損失。實證結果指出央行在1980：12-1987：05之期間採新台幣阻升政策，在1987：06-1997：11之期間採阻貶政策，然在1997：12-2010：06之後亞洲金融危機期間則採維持匯率均衡穩定政策。新台幣阻升政策使名目匯率波動加劇，使央行蒙受巨額之干預損失，然阻升政策有助於經濟成長。在後亞洲金融風暴期間（1997：12-2010：06）及全樣本期間下，匯率干預大致縮小名目匯率波動，且央行在此二時期之干預利潤為正。英文摘要：The undervaluation or overvaluation of domestic currency depends on the relative movement of the nominal exchange rate and its equilibrium rate. This paper adopts a monetary model with Balassa-Samuelson effects to investigate Taiwan's exchange rate policies since 1980. Specifically, we examine if the central bank adopts different exchange rate policies during different sub-periods, analyze if intervention stabilizes the nominal exchange rate and promotes economic grow, and discuss the profitability of intervention. Empirical results show that the central bank adopted devaluation policies during the period of 1980:12-1987:05, revaluation policies over the period of 1987:06-1997:11, and exchange are stabilization policies during the post Asian financial crisis period, 1997:12-2010:06. The devaluation policy over 1980:12-1987:05 increased nominal exchange rate volatility and resulted in significant unrealized loss, but it promoted economic growth. In addition, during the period atter the Asian financial crisis (1997:12-2010:06) and over the whole period, official intervention tended to stabilize nominal exchange rates and led to significant profits.起始頁-結束頁：261-288資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.402.413篇名：乾淨用水對長期健康及教育成就的影響：以1909－1933年日治時期台灣的水道建設為例並列篇名：The Effect of Clean Water on Long Term Health and Education Outcomes: Evidence from Japanese Colonial Taiwan 1909-1933作者：林明仁(Ming-Jen Lin);賴建宇(Chien-Yu Lai)關鍵字：乾淨用水供給;教育程度;老年健康;工具變數;clean water provision;education level;elderly health;instrumenral variable期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以台灣日治時期水道建設為例，連結當時總督府統計與現代人口普查及中老年身心調查資料，研究出生時期乾淨用水取得機會的增加，是否與日後的教育、健康與婚姻狀況有正向關係。我們發現，在OLS估計下，出生時水栓供水戶數（每千人）對日後教育年數、完成某一階段學業（如國中畢業）、仍維持良好婚姻與降低老年患病的機率等變數皆有顯著的正向關係。為了解決OLS內生性偏誤的問題，我們也提出以前一年的營業稅與雜種稅作為水栓供水戶數（每千人）的工具變數的作法。兩階段迴歸估計顯示，水栓供水戶數（每千人）仍與教育、婚姻與健康有顯著的正向關係，且2SLS的估計值大於OLS估計結果。整體來說，本文結果顯示嬰幼兒時期乾淨用水的取得確有長期影響，亦對早期嬰幼兒干預政策的成本效益分析，提供了討論的基礎。英文摘要：We use Taiwan's pipe water construction in the early 20th century as a natural experiment. By linking hisrorical Japanese colonial era data and contemporary population census and survey of the elderly data, we examine whether the number of households with hydrants per thousand people at birth will affect education, health, and marriage status years later. OLS estimates show that the number of households with hydrants per thousand people is positively correlated with education, marriage status and the health of the elderly. To solve the endogeneity problem, we use one-year lagged sales and miscellaneous taxes as instrumental variables. 2SLS still shows the positive correlation between clean water and later developmental outcomes. And its effect is larger than that of OLS. Overall, our evidence confirms the existence of long term effect of clean water access infancy, and provides a basis for the discussion of early childhood intervention policy.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.401.114篇名：租稅、企業組織型態和效率損失並列篇名：Taxation, Organizational Form and Efficiency Loss作者：吳世英(Shih-Ying Wu)關鍵字：租稅;組織型態;兩稅合一;效率損失;taxation;organizational form;tax integration;efficiency loss期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：租稅對企業組織型態選擇所產生的影響以及其造成的福利損失，不論是理論上的探討或實證上的估計都非常重要，但針對台灣租稅制度對企業所造成的組織型態選擇影響，則缺乏相關研究。本研究利用財政部以行業和組織型態區分的營利事業所得稅申報資料，估計台灣所得稅制對企業組織型態選擇的影響。本研究發現，組織間的所得稅差異會影響企業在不同組織型態間的分配，惟其影響主要是企業的營收和應說所得，對企業家數的影響則較有限。本研究並利用估計值推估組織選擇扭曲所產生的效率損失，兩稅合一前企業投資所得面臨營利事業所得稅和個人所得稅的重復課稅，但獨資企業無法像公司一樣，利用保留盈餘規避個人所得稅，因此面臨較高的有效稅率。此一租稅差異因此導致顯著的效率損失。兩稅合一後，投資所得不再重複課稅，獨資企業投資所得的有效稅率已接近公司投資所得的有效稅率，因此不同型態問所得稅差異所造成的效率損失已明顯降低。英文摘要：Previous studies document the taxation effect on firms' organizational choice and the welfare losses associated with this organizational distortion. However, studies examining firms' organizational distortion due to Taiwan's tax system are rare. This study utilizes industry-level data from profit-making enterprise income taxes to estimate the tax effect on firms' organizational choice. The estimates reveal that the ratios of sales and taxable income in each organizational form are affected by the tax gaps between organizations, implying that the distribution of the firms' business activities among different organizations are affected by the tax gaps. Based on the estimates, this study also evaluates the efficiency of firms' organizational distortion from tax differentials between organizations and finds that the efficiency loss was substantial before the 1998 tax integration bur was lessened by the tax integration.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.401.215篇名：補習對考大學真的有用嗎？並列篇名：The Effects of Cram School on the Performance in the College Entrance Examination in Taiwan作者：銀慶貞(Ching-Chen Yin);陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);洪嘉瑜(Chia-Yu Hung)關鍵字：補習;高中生;學科能力測驗;基本學力測驗;cram schooling;senior high school student;general scholastic ability test;basic competence rest for junior high school students期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：相較於過去分析補習成效的文獻，本文主要有兩項差異，一是增加考慮高中畢業生的「起始能力」。這個變數以高中入學的基測成績表示。二是採用Heckman「兩階段自我選擇的模型估計法」。研究結果顯示家庭背景對於補習參與有正向影響；末考慮自我選擇的OLS估計會高估補習的功效。若針對補習者分析，在不考慮自我選擇的情況下，補習具顯著正向效果。但在控制起始能力後，補習雖仍有成效，然幅度大蝠減弱，顯著性也降低。若同時考慮自我選擇與起始能力，不論線性或允許遞減的補習成效都大幅下降，且都不顯著。最後，我們估算補習者若不補習、以及不補習者若補習的預期成績，結果顯示兩者成績都會退步，顯示兩者都已自我選擇各自較有利的學習途徑。總之，若不考慮自我選擇，不僅會高估補習者的補習效果，亦會誤以為不補習者若補習可提高學測成績。英文摘要：Unlike existing studies on cram schools, the present study considers both the role of initial ability and corrects for self-selection bias. Initial ability is represented by the score of the basic competence test taken when the student enters senior high school. The present study finds that family background determines participation in cram schools, and the OLS results might overestimate the effect of cram schooling. If initial ability is not controlled, the participation in cram schooling increases the score on the general scholastic ability test (GSAT) for those who participate. After controlling for initial ability in the regression, cram schooling still increase the GSAT, but the magnitudes and degree of significance of the effect substantially decline When both self-selection and initial ability are considered, the effect of cram schooling is not significant, regardless of whether the effect of cram schooling is specified as linear or decreasing. Finally, both students who participate in cram schooling and those who do not earn higher scores on GSAT than if they had chosen differently. Without considering self-selection, the effects of cram schooling are overstated, leading to the incorrect conclusion that students who do not participate in cram schooling would enhance their GSAT score if they participated.起始頁-結束頁：73-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.401.316篇名：年齡被接受度的性別差異－以年齡偏好的雙向配對擇偶模式評估並列篇名：Estimating Gender Difference in Age Acceptance Rates in Mate Selection Using a Two-Sided Age Preference Matching Approach作者：張榮富(Jung-Fu Chang);陳玫瑜(Mei-Yu Chen)關鍵字：結婚機會;婚姻市場;年齡;配對;marriage opportunity;marriage market;age;match期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：40卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文以雙向配對的模擬方法，利用擇偶網站的篩選資料的功能，以兩性「初始的年齡偏好」在既存的各年齡層未婚人口結構之下進行互選，得出兩性各年齡的「年齡被接受度」（符合模擬擇偶者年齡偏好的異性中有多少比率會接受模擬者的年齡）。研究結果顯示：（1）兩性的「年齡被接受度」皆隨著自己年齡的增加而先升後降，最高峰都在29歲，但是女性被接受度劇降的關鍵年齡在30歲而男性在36歲。（2）29歲之前年輕女性的年齡被接受度遠大於男性，29歲之後兩性的被接受度相差不多。本文分析後認為「年齡與資源的交換」（男性較女性易用隨年齡增長的所得替代隨年齡下降的外貌）才是年長男性比年長女性較具擇偶優勢的主因，而非「兩性初始的年齡偏好」、「年齡層未婚人口數」及「未婚男女性別比」。英文摘要：This paper applies a two-sided matching simulation approach to estimate the ”age acceptance rate” (the percentage of people of the opposite sex who would accept one's age given that one accepts their age), using individual level data including screening criteria on ”initial age preference” in a matching website in Taiwan. The main findings are: (1) Both males and females have their highest age acceptance rate at the age 29, but female's acceptance rates decline quickly after 30, while male's don't decline until 36. (2) Before age 29, young female's age acceptance rates are much higher than young male's. After age 29, both males and females have similar decreasing rates After comparing the ”availability index”, this paper suggests that the advantage of older men in the marriage market may be based on ”age and resource exchange” (a male can use his increasing income to substitute for his decreasing physical attractiveness easier than a female), and nor an ”initial age preference ” or ”population demographics” (the sex ratio and age difference in the unmarried population).起始頁-結束頁：119-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2012.401.401篇名：植基於區塊漸進還原之非擴展式視覺機密分享並列篇名：Block-based Progressive Visual Secret Sharing作者：侯永昌(Young-Chang Hou);官振宇(Zen-Yu Quan);蔡志豐(Chih-Fong Tsai)關鍵字：視覺機密分享;漸進式視覺機密分享;機密影像區塊;藏密學技術;Visual Secret Sharing;Progressive Visual Secret Sharing;Secret Block;Steganography期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：在目前漸進式視覺機密分享（PVSS）的研究中，Wang et al.（2007）和Wang（2009）都是採用逐步還原不同機密影像區塊的方式來進行，不過在他們所提出的分享模式中，都會產生分享矩陣的設計沒有規律性、浪費儲存空間、還原影像品質不佳，以及不適合應用於灰階或彩色影像等缺點。為了解決上述的缺點，本研究提出一個應用影像區塊進行漸進式還原的非擴展式視覺機密分享模型，稱之為 Block-based Progressive Visual Secret Sharing（BPVSS）。其做法是將機密影像切割成n個不重疊的影像區塊，當重疊t（2 <U+2264> t <U+2264> n）張投影片後，疊合影像上會有t個影像區塊內的機密內容會被完全還原。相較於其他學者的研究成果，本研究具備下列幾項優點：（1）本研究的分享模型的概念簡明、容易實作，並且參與機密資訊分享的人數不會受到限制。（2）在分享投影片為雜訊式的內容時，還原影像上可以產生出50%的黑白色差，使得機密資訊能清楚地為人眼所辨識。（3）分享投影片也可以轉換成有意義的偽裝影像，因此可以提高分享投影片的安全性，並且在偽裝影像與還原影像上皆有25%的黑白色差。（4）本研究的機密影像適用於灰階與彩色影像。（5）每一張分享投影片大小皆與機密影像相同，不需要擴展。英文摘要：In the related works of progressive visual secret sharing (PVSS), Wang et al. (2007) and Wang (2009) all have the following drawbacks: (1) The design of the dispatching matrices is not regular. (2) Shares are m-times larger than the original secret image. (3) Restored image's quality is poor. (4) Their schemes are not suitable to apply in grayscale and color secret images. In order to solve the above limitations, we propose a non-expanded PVSS approach, in which the recovery method is based on secret blocks, namely Block-based Progressive Visual Secret Sharing (BPVSS). We divide a secret image into n non-overlapped image blocks, and an additional portion of secret will be restored after superimposing one more transparency. When superimposing any t shares, there have t (2<U+2264>t<U+2264>n) secret blocks being restored. Compared with other related works, BPVSS has several advantages: (1) The concept of this model is concise, easy to implement, and the number of participants will not be restricted. (2) In the situation of noise-like shares, the contrast of the restored image is 50%, which means that the hidden message can be clearly recognized by the naked eyes. (3) When transparencies are shifted from noise-like into meaningful, the contrast of the stego-image and the restored image will be 25% which is still superior to other related studies. (4) Our scheme is more suitable for grayscale and color secret images than previous related studies. (5) The size of transparencies is the same as the size of secret image.起始頁-結束頁：575-595資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(4).012篇名：Incorporating Robust Authentication Scheme in P2P E-Commerce Applications並列篇名：應用安全強固的驗證機制於對等互聯網路電子商務環境作者：蔡建華(Chien-Hua Tsai);蘇品長(Pin-Chang Su)關鍵字：身分驗證;對等互聯網路;橢圓曲線密碼學;Authentication;Peer-to-peer networks;Elliptic curve cryptography期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著點對點式（P2P）的技術崛起，使用者已運用這種互聯網的架構快速與便利的從事各種電子商務（EC）上的應用。雖然這種網路架構具有自我組織的能力和彈性，不過仍面臨來自開放通訊環境的威脅及挑戰，例如動態的拓撲結構、無線的連結、自主漫遊的環境，均暴露其危險與弱點。如何辨識身份及使用端互相確認，實為重要的安全議題。本文提出了一種運用橢圓曲線密碼學的計算原理，並植基於身分加密的認證機制，適用於這類P2P無線及有線電腦通訊網路的環境，亦提供了增進安全強度、快速且低耗量效果的優點，藉由本文認證機制加值於P2P的架構，可以強固EC環境的安全性顧慮。英文摘要：Due to lack of effective trust management mechanism, heaps of deceptions exist in peer-to-peer (P2P) e-commerce (EC) environments, which seriously damage authenticity and availability of the systems. There are various challenges that are faced in the open autonomous environments. These existing challenges are mostly owing to the scarcity of correct authentication in P2P networks. Generally speaking, structured P2P networks are assumed to be accessible by allowing heterogeneous nodes or clients to interact and share one another. The identity (ID) authentication problem for this type of network has now become important. The paper presents a specific authentication key exchange scheme for P2P networks. Theoretic analysis shows that, a robust evaluation scheme based on elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) is proposed for P2P e-commerce networks with better secure identifying-and-authenticating features.起始頁-結束頁：597-617資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(4).023篇名：衡量3G行動通訊加值服務提供商之網路服務品質並列篇名：Evaluating the e-Service Quality of 3G Mobile Communication Value-Added Service Providers作者：胡宜中(Yi-Chung Hu);翁梓維(Tzu-Wei Weng);王仁宏(Jen-Hung Wang)關鍵字：3G行動通訊;加值服務;服務品質;模糊積分;模糊測度;3G Mobile Communication;Value-Added Service;Service Quality;Fuzzy Integral;Fuzzy Measure期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：從3G行動通訊開始營運之後，便成為全球通訊產業產品的重要發展趨勢，此代表3G行動加值服務係值得探討的重要議題。本研究之主要目的在於分析3G行動通訊加值服務之網路服務品質的關鍵構面與關鍵準則，並提供給電信業者作為提升服務品質之參考依據。然而，由於網站與傳統實體商店之經營模式有所差異，因此，建構適合衡量加值服務之網路服務品質之架構有其必要性與重要性。此外，本研究考量構面或準則之間或多或少具有相依性，故使用非加法型之模糊積分與模糊測度進行分析關鍵構面與關鍵準則。研究結果顯示，各消費群所重視的關鍵構面分別為：中華電信－利益性／經濟性、安全性／隱私性、保證性；台灣大哥大－系統可用性、安全性／隱私性、便利性；遠傳電信－安全性／隱私性、保證性、有形性。英文摘要：3G mobile communication has become an important development trend of global communication products. The 3G mobile value-added service is a worth discussing issue. The main purpose of this study is to analyze the key aspects and the key criteria of the e-service quality of 3G mobile communication value-added service, and to offer the results to the telecommunication proprietors to enhance their service quality. Due to the operational modes are different between website and physical shops, constructing the framework that can suitably measure the service quality of value-added service is essential and important. There are more or less dependence among the aspects and the criteria. Therefore, the study takes fuzzy integral and fuzzy measure to analyze the key aspects and the key criteria. The results reveal that the key aspects of each consumer group are: (1) Chunghwa Telecom Group-Benefit, Security/Privacy, and Assurance; (2) Taiwan Mobile Group-System Available, Security/Privacy, and Convenience; (3) Far Eastone Telecommunications Group-Security/Privacy, Assurance, and Tangible.起始頁-結束頁：619-656資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(4).034篇名：應用整合型科技接受模式與創新擴散通用模型於企業導入數位學習之多層次分析並列篇名：An Exploration of Multilevel Linear Modeling of IDT General Model and UTAUT on e-Learning作者：廖珮妏(Pei-Wen Liao);余鑑(Chien Yu);于俊傑(Chin-Cheh Yi)關鍵字：數位學習;創新擴散通用模型;整合型科技接受模式;多層次線性模式;e-Learning;IDT General Model;UTAUT;Multilevel Linear Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：數位學習已成為企業實施教育訓練與知識傳承的重要工具。使用者接受企業數位學習系統是實現數位學習系統成功的第一步，加上個體是鑲嵌於組織中，不同的組織因素將造成個體使用者之行為差異。因此數位學習實施涵蓋兩個層面，組織層級與個體層級均影響員工的接受程度。本研究以整合型科技接受模式為個體層級理論基礎，擴展組織層級理論的創新擴散通用模型，運用兩大學理基礎，發展出一個「創新擴散通用模型與整合型科技接受模式的多層次模型」。研究工具採問卷設計，正式問卷以配對樣本每家公司選取1名主管和30位員工，最終有效配對回收問卷，主管共33份、員工共860份，採階層線性模式進行多層次分析。研究結果發現：（1）組織層級的科技創新特性、環境開放特性會對創新科技採用決策產生正向直接影響，且亦對行為意願存在中介效果。（2）在個體層級方面，績效期望、努力期望與群體影響對行為意願皆具有正向直接影響。（3）創新科技採用決策的調節效果，將強化努力期望對個人行為意願之影響。因此建議組織在導入數位學習系統工具時，除了個體使用者因素，亦應多瞭解外部環境分析；並可運用相關策略管理工具，以促進員工對於組織創新科技決策的認知。本文期望研究結果對於企業導入數位學習時的需求評估能有極大助益。英文摘要：e-Learning system as an important training and knowledge transfer tool to cultivate new and existing stuff competence and enhance enterprise competitiveness. Users' acceptance is the first step to achieve a successful e-Learning system. Owing to the individual is embedded in organization, organization factors also contribute to the individual behavior differences. In the words, both of the organizational factors and employee factors affect the individual acceptance. In this study, unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) was the foundation theory to study the individual level factors. The innovation diffusion theory general model (IDT general model) was applied to explore the organizational level factors. With the two theories and literature review, the study constructed an integrated multi-level model analysis of IDT General Model and UTAUT. The research conducted a questionnaire survey. Subsequent statistical data analysis included SPSS17, LISREL8.8, and HLM6.06. The formal questionnaire selected paired samples of one manager and 30 employees to each organization. With a total of 33 managers and 860 employees valid pairing questionnaires, multiple regression analysis and hierarchical lines model were adopted for multi-level analysis. The research has shown: (1) In the organizational level, the factors of technology innovative and environment opening characteristics have obvious positive influences on the adoption of innovation technology and indirect positive influences on behavior intention. (2) In the Individual level, the performance expectations, efforts expectations and social influence have obvious and positive impact on the behavior intention. (3) The factor of Innovation technology adoption strengthens the positive influence of the performance expectations on individual behavior intention. Therefore, organization should realize more about not only the individual user factors but also the external environment factors on importing e-Learning system. Enterprise could promote employees' understanding of innovation technology adoption by using strategic management tools. Hopefully, the results might provide enterprise with useful suggestions on doing needs assessment on introducing e-Learning system.起始頁-結束頁：657-687資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(4).045篇名：線上遊戲玩家心理特質與轉換意圖：檢驗多樣化搜尋與風險承受的干擾效果並列篇名：Online Gamers' Psychological Traits and Their Impacts on Switching Intention: Examining the Moderation Effects of Variety Seeking and Risk Taking作者：徐世同(Shih-Tung Shu)關鍵字：線上遊戲;品牌轉換意圖;多樣化搜尋;風險承受;On-line Game;Brand Switching Intention;Variety Seeking;Risk Taking期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文探討付費與非付費線上遊戲玩家心理特質之多樣化搜尋與風險承受的交互作用對影響遊戲滿意之服務品質、人際關係與轉換成本、替代者吸引力與轉換意圖的關係之干擾效果。研究對象為多人角色扮演線上遊戲玩家，實證結果顯示，付費玩家的轉換成本負向影響轉換意圖，替代者吸引力正向影響轉換意圖，心理特質未具干擾效果。非付費玩家轉換意圖僅受替代者吸引力正向影響，干擾效果檢驗顯示：多樣化搜尋、風險承受、以及多樣化搜尋與風險承受的交互作用，在替代者吸引力對轉換意圖的影響皆具有正向干擾效果。研究指出付費與非付費群族的轉換行為具有差異性，有助於遊戲業者在產品開發策略與行銷資源配置上的參考依據。英文摘要：This research examines the moderating role of online gamers' psychological traits-variety seeking and risk taking on the relationship between gamers' perception of service quality and interactive relations, switching cost, alternative attractiveness, and their switching intention. In addition, this study further segments on-line gamers into payment and nonpayment subgroups, and examines the difference of their moderation. Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game players were used for empirical testing. For the payment group, the results show that switching intentions tend to increase as the attractiveness of the alternative games increases. On the other hand, player switching intentions tend to decrease when they perceive high switching costs. However, the moderation effects of the psychological traits were not supported in this group. For the nonpayment group, the results show that switching intentions tend to increase when the attractiveness of alternative games increases. Both variety seeking and risk taking positively moderates the relationship between alternative attractiveness and switching intentions. Furthermore, the interaction effect of variety seeking and risk taking moderates the relationship between alternative attractiveness and switching intention. The results offer online gaming companies strategic insights concerning the product development strategy and the deployment of marketing resources.起始頁-結束頁：689-722資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(4).056篇名：公司承諾實施綠色資訊科技之探討－以筆記型電腦產業為例並列篇名：The Companies Commitment of Green Information Technology Implementation in Notebook Computer Industry作者：朱文禎(Wen-Chen Chu);洪鈴雅(Ling-Ya Hong)關鍵字：綠色資訊科技;紮根理論;內容分析法;筆記型電腦產業;Green Information Technology;Grounded Theory;Content Analysis;Notebook Computer Industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著企業、政府與民間的綠色意識日益提升，善盡環境社會責任逐漸成為企業共識。企業實施綠色資訊科技可以減少營運成本，提升企業形象和財務績效，因此綠色資訊科技的實施，對於現代企業來說已經變成首要努力的目標。本研究透過文獻探討，以紮根理論歸納綠色資訊科技27項活動指標，整合生命週期四大面向與管理策略三大途徑，提出承諾實施綠色資訊科技架構。然後以16家國內筆記型電腦產業與跨國筆記型電腦品牌商的企業社會責任報告書為對象，以內容分析法分析公司承諾實施綠色資訊科技程度與策略。並提出兩部分命題：國內部分包含「國內筆記型電腦產業承諾實施綠色資訊科技主要著重於戰略途徑」等七個命題；跨國部分包含「台灣筆記型電腦品牌商在深度綠化途徑承諾實施綠色訊科技之意願較不足」等五個命題。英文摘要：With the rising of green awareness, practicing environment social responsibility has dominated a common consensus among enterprises. Green information technology (IT) benefits many enterprises with a promotion of good images as well as a reduction of operation cost. This study categorizes 27 indicators into the four product life cycles and three green approaches with a support of literature reviews of grounded theory. Then, this paper conducts the content analysis from the corporate social responsibility (CSR) report of 16 companies including note book (NB) industry chain and brand vendors in Taiwan, USA, Japan and Korea. The paper proposes seven propositions for domestic notebook industry chains, one of which is they focus on committing the strategic approach to implement green IT. In additions, it presents five propositions for international NB brand venders. One of which is brand vendors in Taiwan tend to show lower commitments to implement the deep green approach when comparing with international NB brand venders.起始頁-結束頁：723-742資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(4).067篇名：網路品牌個性知覺定位分析探究並列篇名：A Study of Online Brand Personality: Positioning and Analysis作者：江義平(I-Ping Chiang);林志穎(Chin-Ying Lin)關鍵字：網路品牌;網路品牌個性;多元尺度法;網路行銷;e-Brand;e-Brand Personality;Multidimensional Scaling (MDS);e-Marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來許多網路公司如Google、eBay等紛紛成功崛起，網路品牌已經漸漸形成一股不可小覷的力量，但是過去對網路品牌之深入研究卻仍顯不足。因此本研究旨在歸納網路品牌的特性及其組成要素，以找出適用於描述網路品牌的品牌個性，並萃取出品牌個性的衡量構面；其次，探究各網路品牌之品牌個性組合分布；最後，依據品牌個性組合之分布異同，探討各網路品牌之間競合關係。本研究以21個台灣網路知名品牌為研究對象，透過探索性因素分析找出網路品牌個性之構面組合，再以多元尺度法描繪與分析各網路品牌之品牌個性組合分布狀況。實證研究獲致下列研究發現：（1）網路品牌個性由信任、吸引力、分享、創新、有用性及積極等六大構面組成；（2）21個知名網路品牌在六種品牌構面組合下，形成四個不同品牌個性組合類型的競合群體；（3）根據各網路品牌間的品牌特性組合分布，提出網路品牌經營策略之分析與應用建議。英文摘要：As Internet surges, several successful e-brands such as Google, eBay become a major force recently. However, still very few studies focus on in-depth review of e-brand personality. Thus, the purpose of this study first induces the composition of e-brand personality and find out the key factors of e-brand personality. In addition, this study tries to explore the e-brand personality for major e-brands in Taiwan, and discuss the possible competition or cooperation among these e-brands. This study analyzes 21 major e-brands to find out 6 key dimensions of e-brand personality, including trustworthiness, attraction, share, innovation, usefulness, and aggressiveness. Moreover, the result of the multidimensional scaling illustrates 4 types of e-brand personality mix among 21 major e-brands. Finally, based on 4 different type of e-brand personality mix, this study provides several in-depth discussions and implications for future e-brand management.起始頁-結束頁：383-410資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).018篇名：資訊超載對網路購物決策之影響—中介效果之探討並列篇名：The Mediating Effects of Internet Information Overload on Internet Shopping Decision作者：張愛華(Ai-Hwa Chang);曾忠蕙(Chung-Hui Tseng);黃育盈(Yu-Ying Huang)關鍵字：決策正確性;決策信心;資訊超載;資訊結構;Decision Accuracy;Decision Confidence;Information Overload;Information Structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究從決策的觀點，探討虛擬網路環境中網路資訊超載對消費者線上購物決策的影響。本研究提出一資訊超載中介影響模型，探討方案選擇數與產品屬性水準數所構成的資訊結構的前置影響、資訊超載的中介角色、時間限制下的情緒反應與網路使用經驗對資訊超載的影響、以及資訊超載對決策正確性與決策信心的影響。本研究採實驗設計，並模擬網路購物情境。結果發現：（1）資訊超載會受到方案選擇數、情緒反應、網路使用多寡所影響。（2）資訊超載對決策正確性與決策信心皆有負向影響。（3）資訊超載對資訊結構的方案選擇數與決策正確性間產生部份中介影響。（4）資訊超載對情緒反應與決策信心間產生中介影響。（5）資訊超載在網路使用多寡與決策信心間產生中介影響。英文摘要：The main purpose of this research focuses on the effect of information overload on internet from a decision perspective. This study proposes a model of information overload, including number of alternatives, number of product attribute level, emotion and internet use, information overload, decision accuracy and decision confidence on internet shopping. Experimental design is adopted, and a situation of virtual internet shopping is designed to examine the effect of information overload. Findings are summarized as below. (1)The degree of information overload is influenced by number of alternatives, emotion and internet use. (2)Degree of information overload has a negative effect on decision accuracy and confidence. (3)Degree of information overload plays a partial mediating role between number of alternatives in information structure and decision accuracy. (4)Degree of information overload makes a mediating effect between emotion and decision confidence. (5)Degree of Information overload mediates the relationship between internet use and decision confidence.起始頁-結束頁：411-440資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).029篇名：以代理人及網路供餵技術支援非同步式網路互動及建構電子商務應用並列篇名：Adopting Web Feed and Agent Technologies for Supporting Asynchronous Web Interactions and Constructing E-Commerce Applications作者：張譽騰(Yu-Teng Jang);張樹之(Ernest Shu-Chih Chang);蔡明軒(Ming-Hsuan Tsai)關鍵字：電子商務;Web 2.0;網路供餵;代理人;非同步式網路互動;E-Commerce;Web 2.0;Web Feed;Agent;Asynchronous Web Interaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著電子商務的發展以及網路經濟的起飛，越來越多的使用者除了使用網際網路（Internet）取得所需的資訊外，亦開始透過各式手持裝置進行多樣化的網路交易（如：Amazon/Yahoo!/淘寶網 線上購物、Apple iTunes/App Store線上數位內容<U+22EF>等等）而獲取各形式之資訊、產品及服務。在使用者進行網路交易的過程中，若電子商務的服務因為伺服器軟硬體故障或網路連線問題而導致服務中斷，原可取得的訂單將隨之消失，亦無法取得消費者的信任。本研究以網路供餵技術為基礎，搭配代理人的使用設計出一套能夠應用在可攜式裝置上，並具有使用簡單、高度可用性、輕量化，可用以支援非同步式網路互動之電子商務容錯服務架構。採用此架構可以改善企業服務並提高電子商務網站的彈性及可用性，讓企業把握住每一個可能的交易機會。英文摘要：With the continuous development of e-commerce and Internet economy, more and more people not only obtain necessary information through the Internet but also adopt various portable devices to conduct online transactions (such as Amazon/Yahoo!/Alibaba online shopping, Apple iTunes App Store, etc.) to acquire various information, products, and services. However, if the service is interrupted due to any server or network connectivity or availability problems while performing online transaction tasks, an e-commerce website might lose business opportunities and even their customers' trust. The main purpose of this study is to utilize the Web Feed technology together with agent technology to design simple, highly available, and light weight e-commerce fault tolerant service architecture applicable in a multimodal pervasive environment for supporting asynchronous Web interactions. This framework may be utilized to enhance enterprise services and improve the flexibility and availability of e-commerce websites, thus retaining more business opportunities.起始頁-結束頁：441-470資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).0310篇名：應用於網路銀行交易確認的簡訊單次密碼機制並列篇名：Transaction Confirmation with Short Message Service-One Time Password Scheme for Internet Banking作者：黃景彰(Jing-Jang Hwang);許義昌(Yi-Chang Hsu);蔡景乘(Ching-Cheng Tsai)關鍵字：網路銀行;交易確認;簡訊;單次密碼;Internet Banking;Authentication;Short Message Service;One-Time Password期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：為了確保網路銀行之交易安全，限單次使用的交易密碼〔簡稱OTP（One-Time Password）〕已經是被廣泛使用的方法。OTP可以由使用者擁有的密碼產生器（Passcode-Generation Token）來產生，或是由系統端以簡訊的方式傳送給使用者。經常造成使用者不方便的一個情形是輸入時按錯了按鍵，這種情形，傳輸到網路銀行系統端的OTP會被判定為錯誤；如果錯誤的次數達到規定的限制，系統會暫停該使用者帳號的權限，使用者必須攜帶身分證件親赴銀行的服務據點，才能解除帳號權限的鎖定。錯誤輸入的OTP，與正確的OTP一般而言差異很小，攻擊者可能由竊聽或側錄的OTP經過一些猜測及修正後，成功的入侵網路銀行系統。本研究以簡訊傳送OTP的機制為基礎，提出一個改進的機制，包含以下特點：（1） 用戶端的裝置先計算出使用者登錄在系統端的手機號碼並顯示於用戶端的螢幕上，提供使用者目視判斷以確認系統端的真實性；（2）若使用者判斷顯示的手機號碼為正確，則用戶端裝置要求使用者輸入OTP並進行驗證，只有經用戶端驗證為正確的OTP才會傳送給系統端。所以，本研究提出的改進機制，可以提昇使用者的方便性，也可以讓使用者確認系統端不是假冒的網站；另外，若系統端接收到不正確的OTP，則可以推論遭到入侵者之攻擊，而對傳回OTP的來源採取防禦措施。英文摘要：One-Time Password (OTP) is widely used to ensure transaction security in internet banking. The OTP is generated by a Passcode-Generation Token in the possession of the user, or is generated on the system side and then is sent as a short message to the user. The user must enter the OTP and send it back to the system for confirmation. One scenario that often causes user inconvenience is that the user carelessly inputs an incorrect OTP which would result in a rejected transaction request. After a given number of rejections, the system will suspend account access, requiring the user to present identification documents in person to the bank to restore access privileges. The differences between correct and incorrect OTP inputs are usually small, and attackers can potentially eavesdrop on OTP inputs and, through speculation and trial-and-error, successfully attack the system.This study proposes an improved OTP scheme that utilizes short message service. The proposed scheme has the following new features: (1)The client device computes the user's registered mobile phone number and displays it on the device's screen for inspection by the user to ensure the system is authentic. (2)After the displayed phone number is verified as correct, the user input the OTP which he received on his mobile phone. Next, the input OTP is verified by the client device and only a correct OTP input is transmitted to the system side.This proposed scheme not only offers the user greater convenience but also allows users to verify that the system side is not an imposter. In addition, if the system receives an incorrect OTP, the system can assume it is under attack and take defensive measures.起始頁-結束頁：471-492資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).0411篇名：愛合購之線上合購社群參與動機研究分析並列篇名：Analysis of Motivations on Ihergo's Online Group Buying Community作者：陳志萍(Chih-Ping Chen);王薇婷(Wei-Ting Wang)關鍵字：線上合購社群;價格與便利導向;附加價值導向;共同目標與歸屬感導向;成就感導向;Online group buying community;Price and convenience-driven;Additional value-driven;Common goals and affiliation-driven;Achievement-driven期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：線上合購網站在國內外曾掀起一陣熱潮，卻皆因經營不善而倒閉。近年來，這股熱潮在台灣捲土重來，尤其是2007年創立的愛合購（ihergo），將「社群」的概念帶進線上合購的經營模式中，集結眾人的力量爭取對廠商議價的能力，成為現今最夯的線上購物團體。根據以往文獻發現，學者們將「價格」視為消費者參與線上合購的主因，然而近來有些學者認為除了價格之外，應仍有一些潛藏的動機尚未被發掘，此乃引發本研究探索之關鍵。研究結果發現，線上合購社群之參與動機主要分為：價格與便利導向、附加價值導向、共同目標與歸屬感導向、成就感導向。因此，研究建議相關業者或學術人員應正視線上合購社群之參與動機不再只有「價格」單一因素主導其社群成員消費行為。英文摘要：Online group-buying websites had ever been popular both at home and abroad, but they were eventually closed down by their poor operations. In recent years, the rage has come back again -”ihergo”-which founded in 2007 in Taiwan, bringing the concept of ”community” into its business model. According to previous literature, scholars regarded ”price” as the main reason why consumers took part in online group buying. However, more and more phenomena are showing that the processes of online group buying, such as qualification, product choosing and norms simply cause from group decision-making. For those reasons, we argued that there must be some potential motivations that have not been revealed. Therefore, this study aims to explore what motivations emerge on ihergo's online group buying community. Finally, the results found that motivations can be mainly divided into four genres: price and convenience-driven, additional value-driven, common goals, and affiliation-driven and achievement-driven. This study suggests that the relevant industries or academic staffs should notice the price is no longer to see as a participation motivation single factor on consumer behavior of the online group buying community members.起始頁-結束頁：493-512資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).0512篇名：飲食保健推薦機制之設計與實作—以中國飲食療法為例並列篇名：The Design and Implementation of a Curative Food Recommendation Mechanism Using Chinese Food Therapy as a Case Study作者：羅濟群(Chi-Chun Lo);陳志華(Chi-Hua Chen);呂志健(Chih-Chien Lu);程鼎元(Ding-Yuan Cheng)關鍵字：飲食治療;疾病分類;本體論;資訊檢索;Food Therapy;Disease Classification;Ontology;Information Retrieval期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著資訊發達，飲食保健療法及其他另類療法的觀念普及化，消費者的健康意識逐漸提昇，投資於身體機能保健、養生等意願更為積極，開始關心自身飲食健康狀況。然而，在目前現有的資訊系統中卻缺乏一套有效的推薦機制，以提供飲食保健療法（Dietary Therapy, DT）推薦。有鑑於上述未來趨勢之需求，本研究提出一個以動態本體論（Dynamic Ontology, DO）為基礎去針對飲食保健療法（Dietary Therapy, DT）設計一個推薦機制—飲食保健療法推薦機制（Dietary Therapy Recommendation Mechanism, DTRM），主要提供健康又安全的推薦服務。使用者可以透過本推薦機制，就能根據使用者自身期望的飲食需求或是使用者本身所患有的疾病，找到最適合自己需求的飲食保健療法種類，達到讓使用者均衡、健康飲食之目標。本論文針對所提出的飲食保健療法推薦機制（DTRM）設計了兩個實驗，分別對（1）羹湯類飲食保健療法和（2）肉品類飲食保健療法進行推薦結果準確率（Precision）的評估。實驗結果顯示使用飲食保健療法推薦機制（DTRM）去取代舊有方法後，推薦結果準確率（Precision）在16、64、256三種樣本數底下具有50%~80%的準確性，相較於使用舊有的本體論方法，只有20%~50%的準確率有著大幅的提昇。證明了本論文所提出的一個以動態本體論為基礎之飲食保健療法推薦機制（DTRM）比使用舊有的本體論所建制出來的推薦機制還要來的更優秀。英文摘要：The rise of the quality of life index together with the improvement of medical technology lead to a longer life expectancy. Thus a better Health Diet Recommendation Service (HDRS), especially for elderly, is needed. However, to date, there are only a few Decision Support Systems (DSS) to provide HDRS for Dietary Therapy (DT) according to user's diseases and retrieve the diet limitations.For this reasoning, we propose the Dynamic Ontology (DO) which includes Medical Ontology (MO) and Food Therapy Ontology (FTO) to build the HDRS. For ontology description and building, we refer ICD (International Classification of Diseases) and dietitian's recommendation to define and classify the diseases into MO and the foods into FTO, respectively. Moreover, we propose a curative food recommendation method, the Dietary Therapy Recommendation Mechanism (DTRM), which combines DO, Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), Latent semantic analysis (LSA), and Self-Organizing Map (SOM) for DT to provide the HDRS. The DTRM considers the user's physiology state and diet preference to infer user's diseases and retrieve the diet limitations according to DO. Afterward, The DTRM infers the optimum food collocation to provide relevant HDRS to user.In this paper, we design two test cases using Chinese food therapy to evaluate the DTRM. The Case 1 considers the ”soup class” to provide the HDRS by DTRM, and the Case 2 considers the ”meat class” for DT. The experimental results show that the recommendation precisions of DO-based DTRM and Static Ontology (SO)-based diet recommendation are 75.00% and 46.88% in Case 1. The recommendation precisions in Case 2 with DO and SO are 71.86% and 37.50%, respectively. Therefore, the DTRM based on DO is better than SO in both cases for DT.起始頁-結束頁：513-548資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).0613篇名：探討ERP廠商併購對企業ERP專案風險因素評估之影響並列篇名：Exploring the Effects of ERP Company Mergers and Acquisitions on Risk Factors in Enterprise's ERP Projects作者：黃士銘(Shi-Ming Huang);華<U+701E>萱(Jing-Shiuan Hua);吳徐哲(Hsu-Che Wu);蔡玉雪(Yu-Hsueh Tsai)關鍵字：併購;ERP專案;風險因素;模糊層級分析法;Mergers and Acquisitions;ERP Project;Risk Factor;Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來，全球ERP廠商併購案例不斷發生，使得企業對ERP專案的風險因素評估須更須謹慎小心。由於ERP專案風險評估會受評估者之風險意識與認知變化影響，故在不同環境情況下會有很大的差異，且易受評估者主觀認知的模糊性左右，因此屬於複雜與模糊的決策問題。本研究參考相關文獻彙整出ERP專案風險因素，並經由專家問卷評選適當之因素，再運用模糊層級分析法，對個案公司之30位ERP專案小組人員進行問卷調查，以探討ERP廠商併購對企業ERP專案風險因素評估的影響。本研究分析歸納出各項風險因素於ERP廠商被併購前後的重要性排序變化，並顯示不同專業背景之ERP專案主導人員，對專案的風險認知與管理也不同，因此研究結果除了提供企業評估與控管ERP專案風險之參考，也協助企業預防與修正因不同專業背景專案主導人員之主觀意識而產生的風險誤判，以減低ERP專案失敗之機率。英文摘要：Cases of ERP company mergers and acquisitions occur frequently in recent years. Consequently, enterprises must evaluate risk factors in ERP projects more cautiously and carefully. Since risk evaluation is affected by evaluators' risk consciousness and perception, the evaluation results vary in different situations and are easy affected by evaluators' fuzzy subjective perception. Therefore, risk evaluation is a complex and fuzzy decision problem. Through literature review, the risk factors in ERP projects were proposed and later modified by using the expert review questionnaire. Thirty ERP project team members in the case company were invited to appraise the risk factors and assign the relative weight by using fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (FAHP). Accordingly, the effects of ERP company mergers and acquisitions on risk factors in enterprise's ERP projects can be explored. This study analyzed and generalized the importance variations of the risk factors before and after ERP company mergers and acquisitions. It was found that leaders in ERP projects from different specialized field have various risk perceptions and managements. Research results are able not only to provide a reference for evaluating and controlling ERP project risks, but also to assist in preventing and correcting leaders' risk misjudgement due to their subjective consciousness. The probability of failure in ERP projects can therefore be reduced.起始頁-結束頁：549-573資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(3).0714篇名：臺商赴大陸投資造成臺灣產業空洞化的迷思？並列篇名：Does Taiwan's Foreign Investment in China Cause Hollowing-out of Taiwanese Industries?作者：賴素鈴(Sue-Ling Lai);張秀雲(Hsiu-Yun Chang)關鍵字：臺商赴大陸投資;產業空洞化要產業結構升級;ARIMA轉移函數;Taiwan's foreign investment in China;hollowing-out of industries;industry structural upgrade;ARIMA transfer function期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究探討臺商赴大陸投資對產業空洞化，包括失業率、貿易出口總值及製造業勞動生產力等三項驗證指標之動態關係，以闡述臺商赴大陸投資對產業空洞化是否產生影響關係。應用ARIMA轉移函數之實證結果顯示，臺商赴大陸投資對失業率、貿易出口總值及製造業勞動生產力沒有負面影響，未造成臺灣產業空洞化現象；反而促使製造業勞動生產力提升，產生臺灣產業結構升級之效果。本文不僅驗證臺商赴大陸投資對臺灣失業率、貿易出口總值及製造業勞動生產力的相關效應，並且釐清臺商赴大陸投資與產業空洞化的爭議。英文摘要：This study explores the dynamic effect of Taiwan's foreign investment in China on three indicators of hollowing-out of industries including unemployment rate, total exports amount, and manufacturing labor productivity. Empirical results show that Taiwan's foreign investment in China does not negatively affect unemployment rate, total exports amount, and manufacturing labor productivity, meaning Taiwan's foreign investment does not cause the hollowing- out of Taiwanese industries. The influx of Taiwanese businessmen's investment in China in fact leads to a rise in labor productivity of manufacture and the structural upgrade of industries in Taiwan. This study not only explores the effect of Taiwanese businessmen's investment in China on Taiwan's unemployment rate, total exports amount, and labor productivity of manufacture, but also clarifies the controversy over the relationship between Taiwanese businessmen's investment in China and the hollowing-out of industries.起始頁-結束頁：233-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(2).0115篇名：探討綠色產品消費意願：環保標章之調節效果並列篇名：Exploring Green Product Consumption Intentions: The Moderating Effect of Eco-Label作者：范懿文(Yi-Wen Fan);方毓賢(Yu-Hsien Fang);蔡明峰(Ming-Feng Cai)關鍵字：綠色消費;綠色產品購買意願;綠色產品推薦意願;台灣綠色標章;台灣碳標籤;Green Consumption;Green Product Purchase Intention;Green Product Recommendation Intention;Taiwan Green Mark;Taiwan Carbon Label期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究整合環保行為理論與消費者行為研究來探討綠色消費意願，並納入台灣現行的兩種環保標章（台灣綠色標章、台灣碳標籤），以問卷調查法探討：（1）消費者對環保標章的覺察現況；（2）影響綠色消費意願之前因；（3）環保標章認知對於綠色消費意願之調節效果。本研究回收408份有效樣本，從中挑選已認知台灣綠色標章的消費者為子樣本（N=358）進行迴歸分析以檢定假說。研究發現：（1）消費者對於兩種環保標章的覺察有所差異；（2）消費者具有的環保行為態度是影響綠色產品購買意願及綠色產品推薦意願的正向前因；（3）消費者之環保標章認知對於環保行為態度－綠色產品推薦意願之間的關係具有正向調節效用。英文摘要：This study integrates environmental behavior theory and consumer purchase decision framework to propose a research model and to explore: (1) current status of awareness of consumer toward two eco-labels (i.e., Taiwan Green Mark and Taiwan Carbon Label); (2) the determinants of green production consumption intentions; (3) the moderating effect of eco-label toward green product consumption intentions. A survey research methodology is utilized to collect a validate sample of 408 respondents. Among this sample, 358 of them have seen Taiwan Green Mark. Further regression analysis of this subsample (N=358) finds: (1) Taiwan consumers have differential awareness toward those two eco-labels; (2) the attitude toward environmental behavior is a positive determinant of both green product purchase and recommendation intentions; (3) consumer's cognition of eco-label positively moderates the relationship between the attitude toward environmental behavior and green product recommendation intention.起始頁-結束頁：257-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(2).0216篇名：整合雲端運算技術與服務導向架構（SOA）建構審計支援系統並列篇名：Developing Audit Support System: Integrated Cloud Computing and Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)作者：盧正宗(Cheng-Tsung Lu);李大千(Ta-Chien Lee);林靖傑(Ching-Chien Lin)關鍵字：審計失敗;服務導向架構;雲端運算;審計支援系統;Audit Failure;Service Oriented Architectures;Cloud Computing;Audit Support System期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的在於整合雲端運算技術及服務導向架構，進一步開發一套符合國內會計師事務所的審計支援系統，俾降低審計失敗的可能性。該系統之主要功能包括建立產業別之審計知識庫、審計知識之分享機制、與專家意見輔助功能等。本研究應用實際公司之原始資料給審計人員從事測試，進一步得出以下結論：（1）本研究所開發的審計支援系統顯著縮短審計底稿的編製時間；（2）具整合異質系統下審計資料之功能；（3）系統具提醒審計人員應注意的審計程序、與主動提出審計建議；（4）主動提供會計調整分錄之功能；（5）系統之設計可以減少非故意的審計失敗情況發生。英文摘要：In this research, we design an audit support system implemented service-oriented architecture (SOA) and cloud computing, cloud SOA audit support system, that tailor-made for Taiwan's audit firm. The main functions of cloud SOA audit support system: to shorten the production time of the audit papers, the establishment of audit knowledge base, knowledge sharing and decision aids. The cloud SOA audit support system has been tested for companies accounting data and had been analyzed professional questionnaires. The cloud SOA audit support system can significantly reduce the production time of audit papers, auditors can focus on professional accounting and auditing, but also can reduce audit failure led to unintentional human error occurs, timely to remind the auditors should pay attention to and advises of adjusting entries, and other related proposals.起始頁-結束頁：281-306資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(2).0317篇名：線上消費者再購行為的實徵研究並列篇名：An Empirical Research of Online Consumers' Repurchase Behavior作者：何靖遠(Chin-Yuan Ho);賴宜楓(Yi-Feng Lai)關鍵字：再購行為;RFM模型;賣方評價;實徵研究;Repurchase Behavior;RFM Model;Seller's Rating;Empirical Research期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：「開發一個新顧客的代價是留住一個現有顧客的五或六倍」已經成為互動式行銷的一則格言。準此，了解線上消費者的再購行為，有助於電子商務業者找出潛在的回流顧客，進而以具成本效益的方式增加營收。目前我們只能找到線上再購意圖或忠誠意圖的文獻，線上再購行為的研究則付之闕如。本研究結合行銷領域的RFM模型以及拍賣網站所提供評價資訊，建立線上再購行為影響因素的研究模型。研究者使用網頁內容探勘的方式，蒐集台灣Yahoo!奇摩拍賣中T恤類別商品在2011年3月份的真實交易資料以及買賣雙方的歷史交易資料。我們以六個月有效回購時間定義再購，邏輯迴歸分析顯示自我因循的從眾行為包括交易的時間間隔、買賣雙方交易總次數以及前次交易買方給予賣方的評價對於再購行為有顯著的影響。最後針對研究發現進行討論和事後分析，並提出管理實務意涵。英文摘要：'Acquiring a new customer is five/six times more costly than retaining an existing one' has turned into a maxim of interactive marketing. Accordingly, understanding the online consumers' repurchase behaviors can facilitate an e-business to identify potential returning customers and increase revenues in a more cost-effective way. Literature of online repurchase intention or loyalty intention can be found, but not for repurchase behavior. We established a research model of online consumers' repurchase behavior and its antecedents using the RFM model and ratings provided by auction website. Using web content mining technique, we collected real transaction data of T-shirt category from Taiwan's Yahoo! Auction website in March, 2011 and the historical data of those buyer-seller pairs found in March transactions. Six-month is used to define valid repurchase cycle and through the logistic regression analysis, we found that the self-herding behavior, including the recency and the frequency of past buyer-seller transactions, and the rating given by the buyer have significant impacts on buyer's repurchase behavior. Finally, we discuss the findings with post-hoc analysis, and provide practical/managerial implications of this study.起始頁-結束頁：307-328資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(2).0418篇名：Exploring the Effects of Sharing Information on Expected Cost under the VMI Model並列篇名：探討VMI模式下之資訊分享對預期成本的影響作者：梁慧玫(Huei-Mei Liang);莊建富(Chan-Fu Chuang);陳秋妙(Chiu-Miao Chen)關鍵字：資訊分享;ARMA;VMI;Information Sharing;ARMA;VMI期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文藉由VMI模式，探討供應商與零售商之資訊分享程度對供應商預期成本的影響。本文假設建立顧客需求是ARMA（1，2）的時間序列，不同程度的資訊分享為：完全沒有資訊分享、部分資訊分享及完全資訊分享等模式，對供應商存貨運送量變異數、最適運送量上限（optimal delivery-up-to level）及預期成本的影響。同時，在不同的資訊分享程度下，供應商存貨運送量變異數、最適運送量上限及預期成本對前置時間（l）、當期銷售與前期銷售的相關係數（ρ）、前一期和二期的誤差對顧客當期銷售的影響程度（θ1與θ2）等四個參數，來進行敏感度分析，並利用數值模擬加以驗證。其結果有下列主要發現：（1）分享需求資訊不僅會讓供應商運送量穩定，亦降低供應商的最適運送量上限及預期成本。（2）在每一種程度資訊分享下，各參數對供應商之運送量變異數、最適運送量上限及預期成本均有正向的影響。（2）資訊分享程度與所有參數對於降低預期成本都有加乘效果。其中又以l與ρ的影響最顯著。換言之，當l愈小或是ρ愈大時，資訊分享愈多對降低預期成本效果最為顯著。英文摘要：This paper was to discuss the effects of information sharing between the vendors and the retailers. Assuming the underlying demand process was followed by auto-regressive moving average ARMA(1,2) in vendor managed inventory (VMI). Considering different information-sharing levels, such as no information sharing, partial information sharing, and full information sharing, with the factors of the lead time, the correlation coefficient between demand prediction and current demand, and the correlation coefficient between prediction error terms and demand, this research was to find the importance of single and multiple effects on the vendors' delivery variance, delivery-up-to level, and expected cost. Through the sensitivity analysis, the effects from the single and multiple factors at different information-sharing levels could be observed. Moreover, the numerical simulation examined the findings as follows. (1)Information sharing stabilized delivery variance and delivery-up-to level as well as reduced expected cost. (2)At any information sharing level, all factors influenced the vendor’s delivery variance, delivery-up-to level, and expected costs. (3)At any information sharing, the factors of a smaller lead time and a larger coefficient between demand prediction and current demand had more significant effects on minimizing inventory and cost.起始頁-結束頁：329-352資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(2).0519篇名：虛擬組織資訊科技發展架構影響績效之研究並列篇名：The Study of the Development Architecture of Information Technology Impact the Performance for the Virtual Organization作者：陳佑全(Yu-Chuan Chen);唐順明(Shung-Ming Tang);陳美菁(Mei-Ching Chen);黃國賢(Kuo-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：資訊科技;協調機制;成本機制;虛擬組織績效;夥伴選擇;Information Technology;Coordinate Mechanism;Cost Mechanisms;Performance of Virtual Organizations;Partner Selection期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究是探討台灣集團企業資訊科技發展架構如何影響虛擬組織績效。以台灣地區250家集團及3531家子公司為研究母群體，郵寄問卷調查，運用結構方程模式驗證實際資料與理論模式之契合度。研究發現：資訊科技對協調機制、協調機制對成本機制與虛擬組織績效皆有正向顯著影響；成本機制對績效也有正向顯著影響；其次，協調與成本機制是資訊科技影響績效的中介變數。夥伴選擇對協調與成本機制有正向顯著的干擾效果，高程度夥伴選擇會強化協調機制對成本的正向影響力。虛擬組織透過慎選夥伴，藉由資訊科技增進溝通協調，降低營運成本，進而影響虛擬組織績效。本模式是以台灣集團企業為背景，提供企業邁向虛擬組織運作模式的參考。英文摘要：The aim of this paper is to examine the information technology how to impact the organizational performance for virtual organization. We used the random sampling method to select the co-operation of 3531 individual suppliers for nearly 250 business groups as the research objectives. We also used the questionnaire mail survey on this research. Then, we verified the research model and hypotheses using structural equation modeling. The present results revealed that Information technology had significant effect on coordinate mechanisms. Coordinate mechanisms had significant effect on both cost mechanisms and performance. The cost mechanisms also had significant influences on the performance. Secondly, we examined the mediating effects of coordinate mechanisms between information technology and performance was obtained support. There was also significant mediating effect of cost mechanisms between information technology and performance. Partner selection had a moderating effect on the coordinate mechanisms and cost mechanisms, while the high level partner selection, the positive moderating effect between coordinate mechanisms and cost mechanisms will be stronger. Therefore, the virtual organizations will reduce the cost of operation to affect the performance by way of partner selection and information technology which promote communication and coordination.起始頁-結束頁：353-382資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(2).0620篇名：資訊通訊科技與地理群聚對供應鏈關係品質之研究：探討產品模組化的調節效果並列篇名：The Impact of Information and Communication Technology and Geographic Clustering on Supply Chain Relationship Quality: The Moderating Effect of Product Modularity作者：陳至柔(Chih-Jou Chen);林松江(Sung-Chiang Lin)關鍵字：供應鏈關係品質;資訊通訊科技;地理群聚;產品模組化;Supply Chain Relationship Quality;Information and Communication Technology;Geographic Clustering;Product Modularity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在今日高度動態與競爭的環境中，廠商必需面對產品生命週期縮短、產品發展成本增加、產品的多樣化與客製化的挑戰。增進與供應鏈夥伴的關係及產品結構模組化設計等策略性決策已廣泛被廠商運用來因應此議題；廠商運用電子化媒介及地理群聚來與供應商及客戶主動、溝通以促進供應鏈關係品質的提昇。然而，較少有研究探討產品模組化對供應鏈關係品質的調節效果；因此本研究主要探討資訊通訊科技及地理群聚是否對供應鏈關係品質的提昇有直接效果與交互效果，並探討是否受到產品模組化調節效果的影響。以台灣製造業廠商為研究對象，共計發放1156份問卷，回收274份有效問卷；本研究所提出之研究架構及假設利用驗證性因素分析、集群分析、Scheffe檢定及階層迴歸分析，並使用LISREL 8.7及SPSS 13等軟體進行驗證與檢定。研究結果顯示資訊通訊科技及地理群聚對供應鏈關係品質都呈現正向的顯著關係，並且彼此有正向交互作用，此外資訊通訊科技較地理群聚對供應鏈關係品質的影響程度為大。而廠商地理群聚對供應鏈夥伴間關係品質的影響程度隨產品模組化程度增加而下降，產品模組化調節效果呈顯著關係，研究結果相當支持本研究所提出之概念化模式。本模式以台灣製造業廠商為背景，提供企業在產品模組不同程度下，資訊通訊科技與地理群聚影響供應鏈關係品質的有效參考。英文摘要：In today's highly dynamic and competitive environment, manufacturers have to cope with short product life cycles and rapidly increasing development costs, high variety and customization of product. The quality of the supply chain relationship and the notion of modularity in product architecture have been widely suggested as strategic decisions to deal with this issue. Manufacturers facilitate the supply chain relationships by electronically mediated interactions with suppliers and customers and geographic clustering. However, few studies have focused on the moderating effect of product modularity on supply chain relationship quality. Focusing on the relationship quality of supply chains in manufacturing firms, this report investigates if information and communication technology (lCT) and geographic clustering have impacts on supply chain relationship quality and whether or not the product modularity moderates these relationships.A total of 1156 questionnaires were dispatched to manufacturing companies in Taiwan and 274 valid questionnaires were obtained. The model and hypothesized relationship are empirically tested using the CFA、Cluster Analysis、Hierarchical Regression Analyses and Scheffe test, supported by LISREL 8.7 and SPSS 13 software. The empirical results support the main effects of ICT and geographic clustering on supply chain relationship quality. Besides, the moderating effect of product modularity on the geographic clustering-supply chain relationship quality is supported. Investing in ICT is found to be favorable over geographic clustering for supply chain relationship quality. Moreover, ICT and geographic clustering strengthen each other. The results of this study provide considerable support for our conceptual model. In the future, the findings of the study can supply effective reference to take advantage of the proper ICT and geographic clustering to enhance supply chain relationship quality under different degrees of product modularity.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).0101篇名：Designing Fast Identification Algorithm in the RFID System for Known Tag Sets並列篇名：快速辨識無線射頻電子標籤演算法之設計作者：蔡佳勝(Chia-Sheng Tsai);王昱晟(Yu-Cheng Wang)關鍵字：無線射頻辨識;防碰撞機制;電子標籤識別;電子標籤碰撞;Radio Frequency Identification;Anti-Collision Scheme;Electronic Tag ldentification;Electronic Tag Collision期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：無線射頻辨識是一種自動辨識技術，這種技術利用無線電頻率去獲得電子標籤內的資訊。在多個電子標籤的環境中，數電子標籤同時回應讀取器將會成碰撞的問題而危及識別的速度。故此，某些為調解衝突與改善讀取時間的機制是必要的。本文提出一個新的機制以改善上述問題。另外，此機制可以被訓練來加快辨識已知的電子標籤。僅管有一些相似的機制能夠達到同樣的效果，但此機制可以識別未知的電子標籤等罕見狀況。在模擬情況中，本文針對數個電子標籤防碰撞機制進行績效評估。更精確而言，本文著重在完成讀取所須的時間和訊息數。我們觀察得知本機制能有效減少讀取時間和讀取訊息。在最佳情況下，相較於詢問樹演算法本機制能節省50％的時間；相較於二元樹演算法本機制能節省70％的時間。這些改善不只加快了讀取的速度，也節省了讀取器中之電力。英文摘要：RFID is an automatic identification technology which exercises the radio frequency to retrieve the information saved in electronic tags. In a multi-tag environment, the collision problem caused by a number of tags simultaneously responding to a reading will jeopardize the speed of identification. Some scheme is necessary to reconcile the conflict and improve the reading time. A novel scheme is proposed in this paper to address this collision problem. In addition, our scheme can be trained to accelerate the identification of a subset of the known tags. Although there are similar schemes capable of achieving this function, our proposal accommodates rare presence of those tags outside the known set. In the simulation, we evaluate the performance of several tag anti-collision protocols. Specifically, we focus on the total reading time and the amount of messages required accomplishing the reading process. We observe that our scheme can effectively reduce both the reading time and the number of reading messages. In the best case, the proposed scheme saves 50% and 70% time when compared with the query tree algorithm (QTA) and binary tree algorithm (BTA) methods respectively. These improvements not only accelerate the reading speed but also save the on-board power in the reader.起始頁-結束頁：35-51資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).072篇名：適用於行動設備的數位權利管理系統並列篇名：Digital Right Management Suitable for Mobile Equipments作者：葉禾田(Her-Tyan Yeh);陳玉音(Yu-Yin Chen)關鍵字：數位權利;數位權利管理機制;串流;數位內容;Digital Rights;Digital Rights Management System;Streaming;Digital Content期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在這個資訊快速傳遞的時代，行動設備與通訊網路也日趨健全，人們可以不再受限於較大型的電腦設備及有線網路，透過行動設備與通訊網路的結合，可以讓更多的人不再因時間、地點與空間的限制，更快速取得所需資訊進行娛樂、商務、學習等各項活動。而在這些活動之中，經由數位權利管理的保護，讓使用者在利用各式的行動設備擷取數位內容時更加安全。本研究主要目的為利用行動設備所使用串流傳輸的特性，簡化已購買過的串流媒體再度播放流程與接續上一次多媒體播放的時間點，且當使用者們在取得串流傳輸的數位內容後，可以隨心所欲使用已購買的數位內容以及如何去鞏固使用者自身的權利，另外，保障數位內容提供者的權益，免除數位內容被惡意的傳播造成利益的損害。透過本系統，行動設備可以更加便捷取得所需資訊，同時也讓數位內容的使用可以更加的安全與有彈性。英文摘要：In this rapidly information transferred era, the development of mobile devices and communication network has become mature. Individuals are no longer restricted by time, location and space in obtaining online information due to the use of larger personal computer and cable networks. Instead, users are now able to obtain information more quickly and effectively to undertake entertainment, business and learning activities through the consolidation of mobile devices and wireless communication network.? In these behaviors, the transferred digital contexts are protected by the digital rights management, which provides better security to users capturing the digital information with various mobile devices.The purpose of this study is to utilize the characteristics of streaming identity of mobile devices to reduce the time of replaying purchased streaming media and continuing broadcasting previous play for multimedia players. In addition, after users obtain streaming digital contents they could use these purchased digital contents as their desire, and protect the rights of users and content providers in order to avoid the malicious content spreading and the benefit loss. The digital right management system not only enables the mobile devices to obtain information more conveniently and effectively, but also improves the safety and flexibility of the use of digital contents.起始頁-結束頁：53-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).083篇名：從訊號理論與推敲可能性模式探討線上社群信任與忠誠度之研究並列篇名：Investigating Trust and Loyalty toward Online Community from the Perspectives of Signal Theory and Elaboration Likelihood Model作者：陳冠霖(Guan-Lin Chen);楊書成(Shu-Chen Yang);馮文賢(Wen-Hsien Feng);唐順明 (Shung-Ming Tang);戴逸民(Yi-Ming Tai)關鍵字：訊號理論;特質焦慮;市場行家;推敲可能性模式;社群信任;Elaboration Likelihood Model;Market Maven;Online Community Trust;Signal Theory;Trait Anxiety期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：網際網路上充斥著各式各樣的主題性社群，如何脫穎而出，成功的經營並取得社群成員對於線上社群的信任以及忠誠度，將是社群經營者的重要課題。由於資訊泛濫與資訊不對稱的問題，網路使用者在選擇社群時，通常充滿高度的不確定性。本研究欲透過訊號理論（signal theory）為基礎，提出兩個訊號—「資訊價值」與「主觀規範」來探討其對社群信任形成的影響，並以「推敲可能性模式」為架構，將前者定義為中央訊號，後者定義為周邊訊號，並且藉由「市場行家」與「特質焦慮」兩項個人特質做為調節變數，探討線上社群成員是否會因為其本身特質的不同，影響其對於線上社群信任形成之過程。此外，本研究並探討在不同產品涉入程度的狀況下，網路使用者對社群的信任與忠誠度之間的關係是否將有所差異。本研究採用問卷設計方式收集資料，發放對象為曾經瀏覽過「Mobile01.com 」線上社群之學生族群。根據329份回收資料的分析結果發現，具有高度市場行家特質的網路使用者主要透過中央路徑來形成其社群信任，而低度市場行家特質的網路使用者則是透過周邊路徑來形成其社群信任。高度特質焦慮的網路使用者主要透過周邊路徑來形成其社群信任，而低度特質焦慮的網路使用者則是同時透過中央路徑以及周邊路徑來形成其社群信任。另外，產品涉入程度對於信任與忠誠度間關係並沒有顯著的調節影響。本研究針對分析結果，提出一些理論及實務意涵，以供未來研究及管理上的參考。英文摘要：It is most challenging for an online community vendor to make his/her community stand out among various topical communities on the Internet and successfully earn the community members' trust and loyalty. Due to abundant information and information asymmetry, Internet users hardly know how to choose among various online communities under high uncertainty. This study thus proposes two signals-information value and subjective norm and investigates the effect of these two signals on online community trust formation from the perspective of signal theory. We also employ elaboration likelihood model to define information value and subjective norm as central cue and peripheral cue respectively. The market maven and trait anxiety are employed as moderators to explore whether the Internet users with different characteristics form their trust toward online community through different routes from the perspective of elaboration likelihood model. In addition, the study also explores whether product involvement mod erates the relationship between online trust and loyalty toward the community. This study collected data through questionnaire design held in several universities in southern Taiwan. Analyses are based on data collected from 329 respondents who have browsed ”MobileOl.com”. Results show that the members with ”Higher Market Maven” mainly establish their trust toward online community through central cues. On the other hand, the members with ”Lower Market Maven” mainly establish their trust toward online community through peripheral cues. Members with ”Higher Trait Anxiety” mainly use ”peripheral cues” to establish their trust toward online community, and members with ”Lower Trait Anxiety” simultaneously use both ”central cues” and ”peripheral cues” to establish their trust toward online community. However, product involvement does not significantly moderate the relationship between online trust and loyalty toward online community. These findings and their theoretical and practical implications are also addressed.起始頁-結束頁：73-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).094篇名：以擴充的科技接受模式探討行動英語學習之接受度並列篇名：Extending the Technology Acceptance Model for Mobile English Learning Acceptance作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);顏啟芳(Chi-Fang Yan)關鍵字：知覺便利;行動學習;科技接受模式;個人數位助理;Perceived Convenience;Mobile Learning;Technology Acceptance Model;PDA期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究將知覺便利擴充至Davis的TAM，以探討影響行動英語學習接受的因素以及這些因素之間的關係。本研究以台灣中部地區158位技術學院的學生為對象，實際使用PDA進行行動英語學習兩週之後，使用量表收集構面資料，並以SmartPLS軟體作為SEM分析的工具。研究顯示知覺便利、知覺易用及知覺有用，是影響行動英語學習接受的前置因素。其中，知覺便利、知覺易用及知覺有用正向顯著影響朝向使用態度；知覺有用及朝向使用態度正向顯著影響持續使用意願。整體來說，本研究的模式對行動英語學習接受度之預測和解釋力良好。英文摘要：This study extends perceived convenience to Davis' technology acceptance model (TAM) to discuss the factors influencing mobile English learning acceptance and relationships among these factors. Participants of this study were 158 students in a technical college located in Central Taiwan. Two weeks after the students were involved in an English learning program through PDA, the researchers collected the construct data through questionnaires. SmartPLS was used as the SEM analysis tool. Research findings show that perceived convenience, perceived ease of use, and perceived usefulness are the antecedents of mobile English learning acceptance. Specifically, perceived convenience, perceived ease of use, and perceived usefulness positively and significantly influence attitude toward using; perceived usefulness and attitude toward using positively and significantly affect continuance intention. Overall, findings of this study showed fine predictive and explanatory power of users' mobile English learning accep tance.起始頁-結束頁：97-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).105篇名：視覺密碼學分享模型之新設計法並列篇名：New Designs for Visual Secret Sharing作者：侯永昌(Yaung-Chang Hou);廖欣音(Hsin-Yin Liao);官振宇(Zen-Yu Quan)關鍵字：秘密分享;視覺密碼學;藏密學;Secret Sharing;Visual Cryptography;Steganography期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：有別於傳統密碼學（cryptography），視覺密碼學（visual cryptography）是由Naor和Shamir（1995）所提出的一項與影像分享相關的加解密技術。此項技術結合密碼學與資訊分享的概念，將機密影像經加密為n張雜亂無章（noise-like）的分享影像（share），並且將分享影像分配給n個參與者，每人一張。視覺密碼學主要的精神在於解密時，毋需倚賴任何複雜的數學計算以及大量的電腦運算能力，亦不需任何密碼學知識，僅需將k張或k張以上的分享影像重疊，並利用人類視覺系統即可辨識、解碼，重建出原始影像，進而取得所需的機密訊息。本研究是透過藏密學（steganography）的技術，將一張機密影像嵌入到兩張分享影像中。在分享影像上所看到的內容是偽裝影像的資訊，無法直接辨識出機密影像。當分享影像疊合時，將會凸顯出機密影像的內容，而偽裝影像反而會隨著疊合而消失。在實做上，本研究針對2X2的擴展模型提出四個類型、16種不同的分享新模型。並且無論在分享影像或疊合影像上，都能夠產生出25％或50％的黑白色差，因此可以輕易且清楚地辨別出偽裝影像或機密影像的內容。最後，本研究的分享模型的概念簡明且容易實作，使用者可以根據需求來調整影像的黑白色差，以及藏入偽裝影像與機密影像的位置。而在（4,2）／（4,2）分享模型中，分享影像和疊合影像的黑白色差皆為50％，這個結果優於其他學者的研究成果。英文摘要：Visual secret sharing (VSS) is a kind of image cryptography, proposed by Naor and Shamir (1995), which integrating the concepts of the cryptography and the information sharing. It encodes a secret image into n pieces of noise-like shares and dispatches these shares to the corresponding participants. The main advantages of VC is that it no longer needs complicated computation and specialized knowledge to decrypt the secret, the hidden message will be revealed by naked eyes after superimposing k or more than k pieces of shares.In this paper, we embedded two camouflage images into shares according to the theory of steganography, each share's profile is meaningful and it has no way to reveal secret. Besides, the outline of stacked image will be the secret content and the camouflage images were disappeared along with it. In practice, we proposed four approaches (16 models) to implement it. On the other hand, the black-white contrast of shares and stacked image is either 25% or 50%, that's means that the camouflage images and secret image is easy to recognition. Lastly, our proposed models are easy to implement, and the contrast and embedded location can be adjust according to users need; moreover, both the contrasts of shares and stacked image are better than other researches in the (4, 2)/(4, 2) model.起始頁-結束頁：121-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).026篇名：適用於電子商務系統之多文件簽密法設計並列篇名：A Design of Multi-signcryption for E-commerce System作者：蘇品長(Pin-Chang Su);高嘉言(Chia-Yen Kao)關鍵字：電子商務;<U+6955>圓曲線密碼學;多文件簽密;E-commerce;Elliptic Curve Cryptosystem;Multi-Signcryption期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：網際網路盛行，全球資訊網出現，造就電子商務時代來臨，商業交易興盛與否，必須仰賴電子文件與數位簽章來確立其權利與義務，資訊的完整性、鑑別性及不可否認性則是電子簽章所提供的功能，因此每份傳遞出來的文件必經過嚴格簽章或加密的作業，然而數以萬計的文件往來勢必經過數以萬次的簽章或加密運算，所耗費的時間甚鉅，本研究以研究橢圓曲線快速運算為基礎，其計算效率比現行其他公開金鑰演算法快速，且運用背包型態提出多份文件一次簽密之應用方法，能夠大量減少企業間商用文件的簽章次數，達到提升效率縮短作業時間的效益。英文摘要：With the prevalence of the Internet, World Wide Web emerged, creating e-commerce era, the rise of commercial transactions, and otherwise must rely on electronic documents and digital signatures to establish their rights and obligations, authenticity of information, authenticity and non-repudiation is provided by the electronic signature function, digital signature technology affect the development of e-commerce. This paper is to study fast computing based on elliptic curve cryptosystem, computational efficiency than other existing public key algorithm quickly, and make multiple copies of documents used a signcryption method of application, this method can significantly reduce the number of commercial paper encryption and signature, to enhance the efficiency of the benefits of reduced operating time.起始頁-結束頁：143-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).037篇名：A Longitudinal Analysis of Trust and Customer Loyalty in Online Shopping: The Mediating Effects of Perceived Risk and Commitment並列篇名：信任與顧客忠誠在網路購物之縱斷面研究：認知風險及承諾之中介效果作者：吳立偉(Li-Wei Wu)關鍵字：信任;認知風險;承諾;顧客忠誠;網路購物;Trust;perceived risk;commitment;customer loyalty;online shopping期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：信任與顧客忠誠的關係具時間相依性，因此，本研究利用縱斷面的分析資料來建立信任與顧客忠誠之間的動態性關係，並顯示時間如何影響認知風險及承諾中介效果的相對重要性。研究結果發現信任、認知風險、承諾及顧客忠誠從一時段至另一時段的遺留效果具顯著效果。除此之外，當關係與時俱進的發展，承諾在信任與顧客忠誠的中介效果會逐漸增加，反之，認知風險的中介效果會因而減弱。換句話說，信任在關係初始階段扮演降低風險機制的角色，惟隨時間推進，信任會演進成為承諾的分享關係、及顧客及網路零售商二者間的互惠與關懷。英文摘要：The relationship between trust and customer loyalty is time-dependent. Thus, this study uses longitudinal analysis from panel data to establish the dynamic relationship between trust and customer loyalty and demonstrates how the effect of time changes the relative importance of the mediating effects between perceived risk and commitment. As a result, the carryover effects of trust, perceived risk, commitment, and customer loyalty from one period to another are significant. In addition, as a relationship is developed over time, the mediating effect of commitment between trust and customer loyalty increases, while the mediating effect of perceived risk diminishes. In other words, trust begins as a risk reduction mechanism and may evolve over time into a strong relationship with a genuine sharing of commitment, mutuality of interest and concern for customers and e-retailers.起始頁-結束頁：161-186資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).048篇名：結合TOPSIS與AHP法於網路服務信任評估之研究並列篇名：Web Services Trust Evaluation Model Using TOPSIS and AHP作者：羅濟群(Chi-Chun Lo);程鼎元(Ding-Yuan Chen);葉靜蓉(Ching-Jung Yeh);陳志華(Chi-Hua Chen)關鍵字：網路服務信任評估;網路服務推薦;使用者偏好;Web Service Trust Evaluation;Web Service Recommendation;User Preference期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：隨著網路服務所提供的功能越來越多且複雜，網路服務處在網際網路的開放式環境下，其資訊安全問題也日益受到重視。有鑑於此，本研究提出“網路服務信任評估機制（Web Service Trust Evaluation Mechanism, WSTEM）”，包含有使用者端、服務提供者之簡易物件通訊協定伺服器、以及網路服務登錄中心（Registry）。WSTEM選擇適當的網路服務評估準則，同時考慮主觀與客觀的安全因子，以使用者的安全等級要求為基礎，使用理想解類似度偏好順序評估調整法（Modified Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution Method, TOPSIS）做為網路服務推薦方式，並支援回饋修正機制，以信任區間取得可靠之網路服務內容滿意度，再運用層級分析法（Analytic Hierarchy Process, AHP）取得使用者之回饋權重，建立一個信任的網路服務推薦機制。在系統模擬實驗中，本論文模擬一可支援WSTEM之信任網路服務推薦系統（Trusted Web Service Recommendation System, TWSRS），由模擬結果中可發現，本論文提出之WSTEM可有效避免存取到惡意服務。英文摘要：In recent years, Web Services (WS) are becoming more complex and popular, and their security issues are also important. However, WS-Security standards only support the WS transaction security during transmission and do not consider the WS content (e.g., reliability). In this paper, we propose a novel Web Service Trust Evaluation Mechanism (WSTEM) which uses the appropriate WS evaluation criteria and considers the security factors in subjective and objective. WSTEM which is based on the user's WS-Security requirement uses Modified Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution Method (TOPSIS) and Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) to compute the trust values of WS according to users' feedback and trust value revision for trusted WS recommendation.In the simulation stage, we propose a system, Trusted Web Service Recommendation System (TWSRS), which is based on WSTEM. The results show that users can avoid invoking the insecure WS through WSTEM. The aim is to improve WS-Security for the evaluation of WS content security and providing more trusted WS to users.起始頁-結束頁：187-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).059篇名：Development and Validation of A Scale to Measure Blog Service Quality並列篇名：部落格服務品質量表之建置與驗證作者：吳有龍(Yu-Lung Wu);陶幼慧(Yu-Hui Tao);楊倍箕(Pei-Chi Yang):李京圃(Ching-Pu Li)關鍵字：部落格;網站服務品質(E-SQ);量表建置;Blog;E-Service Quality (E-SQ);Scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：近年來部落格數目與影響力迅速的成長，使得部落格成為近來一個熱門的研究議題。然而，正式文獻中僅有一些涉及顧客滿意及服務品質的模式研究，缺乏專門探討部落格網站的服務品質的研究，對已普及化的Web 2 .0網路工具之一而言，學術研究的進展上遠不及實務應用上的需求。本研究首先彙整相關之文獻進行評判分析，從中推導出適用於部落格服務品質概念之基本題項，並建構多階段之量表發展程序，以檢驗並揭露出評量部落格網站服務品質之因素結構。研究結果顯示由21個題項所萃取出的系統功能性、安全與回應、個人化、有效性以及娛樂性五個構面，為影響部落格網站服務品質之關鍵因素。本研究提出實務面與管理面之意涵和建議，預計不但可填補學術研究上對於部落格於網站服務品質深化知識之不足，更可提供部落格網站、使用者及後續學術研究的一個有效衡量基礎工具。英文摘要：Blogs have become an appealing research topic due to their rapid growth and increasing influence. However, there are only a few literatures concerning the customer satisfaction of bloggers and the service quality of blog websites, which indicates that the development of blog websites as a popular Web 2.0 tool has fallen far behind the dictates of academic research. To address this issue, this study first conducted a critical analysis by aggregating relevant literature and by deriving the basic items applicable to the concept of blog service quality. A multi-stage scale development process was then constructed to investigate and to identify factors needed in evaluating the service quality of blog websites. The results showed that System Functionality, Security/Responsiveness, Personalization, Efficiency, and Enjoyment were the five key factors affecting the service quality of blog websites. This study proposed managerial and practical implications, which are expected to fulfill the research gap in the service quality literature of blog websites, as well as to provide an effective and robust evaluation tool for blog websites, users, and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：211-232資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2012.14(1).0601篇名：財務會計準則中的機率詞彙解釋並列篇名：Interpretation of Uncertainty Expressions in Financial Accounting Standards作者：杜榮瑞(Rong-Ruey Duh);黃朝信(Chao-Hsin Huang)關鍵字：機率詞彙;財務會計準則;機率詞彙的解釋;審計結構;Uncertainty Expressions;Financial Accounting Standards;Interpretation of Uncertainty Expressions;Audit Structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：我國的上市、上櫃與興櫃公司自2013年開始必須依據國際會計準則編製財務報表，採用國際會計準則面對的第一個問題，乃國際會計準則以英文為主要語言，需要翻譯成中文俾利企業遵循。國外研究指出，對於準則中的機率詞彙之解讀，因人而異，而對解讀已有岐異的英文詞彙所翻譯的中文詞彙，其解讀是否亦因人而異，了解其解釋變異情形，將有助於評估準則制定的結果是否容易遭到誤解。本研究首先探討審計人員、會計準則制定委員對中文機率詞彙的解釋，發現二者對相同的機率詞彙之解釋存在變異。其次，本文探討降低解釋變異的可能方法，發現透過相互溝通能夠降低解釋變異，透過審計結構則增進解釋共識，但主要來自對三個機率詞彙的解釋變異之降低。另外，教育亦有助於降低解釋變異。英文摘要：Starting in 2013, all listed companies in Taiwan are required to prepare financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The first issue facing this policy is the translation of English IFRS into Chinese. Prior research indicates that variations exist among auditors when interpreting English uncertainty expressions. But the extent of variations in interpreting Chinese uncertainty expressions has not been extensively examined. Using 158 experienced auditors (partners, senior managers and managers) as participants, this study finds that variations in interpreting 14 uncertainty expressions exist at the individual and audit firm levels. Extending prior research, this study finds that communication can mitigate such variations and audit structure can improve consensus, but only limited to three uncertainty expressions. Finally, education level is negatively associated with the variations for some uncertainty expressions.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.4.CHI.12篇名：公司興業精神有多重特性：追求績效的方式不同？並列篇名：Corporate Entrepreneurship has Multiple Attributes: Exhibiting Varied Way of Pursuing Performance?作者：蔡政安(Cheng-An Tsai);鄭居元(Chui-Ruang Cheng)關鍵字：多構面公司興業精神;廠商績效;風險平衡;Multi-Dimensional Corporate Entrepreneurship;Firm Performance;Risk-Balanced期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：公司興業精神行為模式採用興業導向來衡量廠商的興業精神，大部分實證研究把不同構面興業導向彙總成單一變數。但有學者認為興業導向基本上應該是多構面變數，是有獨立變化的可能，因而興業導向與廠商績效間關係會有不同型態。過去的實証研究以創新性、風險承擔及主動性的興業導向為主，本研究首先提出擁有公司興業精神的廠商會表現出創新性、主動性、風險承擔及機會追求等策略行為。以台灣222家廠商為樣本的研究結果證實：「創新性、主動性、風險承擔及機會利用」等都是「公司興業精神」的四個次構面；創新性興業導向、機會追求興業導與廠商績效皆成正向關係；風險承擔興業導向與廠商績效的倒U字型關係較為特殊，這是本研究所提出風險平衡的觀點，迴異於傳統公司興業精神有關風險承擔的看法。英文摘要：The behavior model of corporate entrepreneurship (CE) adopts the entrepreneurial orientation (EO) to measure the firm's entrepreneurship. Most studies combined different dimensions of EO into one single factor. However, some scholars have argued that EO should be a multi-dimensional variable and vary independently. As a consequence, the dimensions of EO may relate differently to firm performance. Past empirical studies mainly focused on three dimensions of EO, including innovativeness, proactiveness and risk-taking. This study suggests that firm with entrepreneurship have four dimensions of innovativeness, proactiveness risk-taking and opportunity-pursuing strategic behaviors. Through conducting an empirical survey of 222 samples in Taiwan industry, this study verifies that these dimensions of innovativeness, proactiveness risk-taking and opportunity-pursuing are four subdimentions of corporate entrepreneurship. Moreover, inonvativeness EO or opportunity-pursuit EO has positive relationship with firm performance respectively. Risk-taking EO has an inverse U shape relationship with firm performance. This study proposes a unique view of risk-balanced, which is quite different from the traditional perspective of CE in risk-taking.起始頁-結束頁：29-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.4.CHI.293篇名：Modeling and Assessing the Quantity Flexibility Contracts for Seasonal Products with High Demand Volatility並列篇名：建立高需求波動週期性商品數量彈性訂單之評價模型作者：黃明官(Ming-Guan Huang)關鍵字：數量彈性訂單;數量彈性;實質選擇權分析法;Quantity Flexibility Contract;Quantity Flexibility;Real Options Approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：數量彈性訂單可緊密地調適順應一現有產品的市場需求量，且為一可規避高度不確定需求的有效工具，然而，一項關鍵問題產生，在風險共擔的基礎上，當給予買方訂購數量選擇權時，應如何合理適當補償賣方其承擔轉移自買方的需求不確定風險。有鑑於此，本研究即試圖準確地建構與評價數量彈性訂單，為了達成此一研究目標，本研究首先建立一既有產品的需求預測模型，接著，評估買方由數量彈性訂單中可獲得的期望利益。繼之而來，本研究乃利用實質選擇權分析法發展出數量彈性訂單評價模型。最後，執行數值實例分析以確證本研究所建議之數量彈性訂單評價模型的有效性與實用性。英文摘要：Quantity flexibility contracts can closely adapt to the market demand for established products and thus are an effective instrument for hedging against highly uncertain demand. However, a crucial issue is how, on the basis of risk sharing, sellers are adequately compensated for bearing the risk of demand uncertainty transferred from buyers when giving buyers option on order quantity. Accordingly, this study aims to properly model and assess the quantity flexibility contracts. To this end, this study first models demand forecast for the given product and then evaluates the expected gain acquired by the buyer from quantity flexibility contract. Subsequently, the assessing model is developed using real options approach. Finally, a numerical example analyses are performed to verify the reasonability and practicability of the proposed assessing model.起始頁-結束頁：49-65資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.4.CHI.494篇名：策略聯盟研究主題近三十年來之變遷並列篇名：Changes in the Intellectual Structure of Strategic Alliance Research, 1980-2009作者：林財源(Tsai-Yuan Lin);程運瑤(Yun-Yao Cheng)關鍵字：策略聯盟;書目計量學;共同引用分析;社會網絡分析;Strategic Alliance;Bibliometrics;Co-citation Analysis;Social Network Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究由SSCI與SCI資料庫收集1,518篇策略聯盟研究論文及82,614篇參考文獻，運用書目計量學與多變量分析來客觀量化的探討近30年策略聯盟研究主題之變遷，再以社會網絡分析將核心研究間無形的智慧架構具體化呈現。結果顯示在1980-1999策略聯盟研究議題主要為全球化與競爭策略、交易成本與聯盟的治理架構、聯盟的動機與學習、組織經濟與國際企業的合作策略等。而2000-2009近十年之研究著重於學習能力與聯盟價值創造、聯盟關係的穩定與績效、夥伴關係的成功特質，與策略聯盟的形成等主題。維持聯盟關係之穩定及發揮聯盟效益是主要研究方向，而夥伴之間的學習與吸收能力對聯盟績效之探討更是30年來持續不墜的議題。解釋聯盟組成與績效的理論也由交易成本、資源相依、資源基礎觀點，進而由關係論來探討。英文摘要：This study is to explore changes of intellectual structure of strategic alliance research between 1980 and 2009. A total of 1,518 articles with 82,614 cited references were extracted from the Science Citation Index and the Social Science Citation Index. By using bibliometric methods, the citation and co-citation counts obtained were analyzed and then mapped with multivariate analysis and social network analysis techniques to visualize the invisible knowledge network among those core research works. During 1980-1999 main research themes of strategic alliance studies include: globalization and competitive strategy, transaction cost and governance structure of alliance, motivations and learning capability of alliance, economics of organizations and cooperative strategy for international business. For the period of 2000-2009, four core research themes are identified. They are business value and learning capability, stability of interorganizational relationship and performance measurement, characteristics of partnership success and strategic alliance formation. For last 30 years, how to maintain the stability of alliance relationships and gain better performance through strategic alliance are main research directions. Studies that explore the relationship between learning and absorptive capability and alliance performance have prevailed all the time. The applied theories about alliance formation and performance have been extended from transactional cost, resource dependence and RBV perspective to relational view. The results can help researchers identify the linkages among different publications and the major research themes as well as theories applied in strategic alliance research. This study also provides a useful channel to access the publications in this field and to identify research directions of strategic alliance studies.起始頁-結束頁：67-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.4.CHI.675篇名：銀行放款行為之順景氣循環現象：機構記憶假說之檢測並列篇名：The Procyclicality Phenomenon in Bank Lending Behavior: An Empirical Test of Institutional Memory Hypothesis作者：陳家彬(Chia-Pin Chen);許治文(Chih-Wen Hsu);賴怡洵(Yi-Hsun Lai);連琮勛(Tsung-Hsun Lien)關鍵字：放款行為;機構記憶假說;順景氣循環;Lending Behavior;Institutional Memory Hypothesis;Procyclicality期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：銀行業主要功能為提供各種金融中介服務，協助經濟發展與促進景氣繁榮，然而過去十餘年各國學者由不同角度研究發現銀行業可能因各種不同因素造成景氣循環波動擴大，因而提出順循環之現象。本文歸納有關順循環之諸多文獻並引用一個新興發展的理論來分析與探討台灣地區銀行放款的順景氣循環行為，機構記憶假說認為在銀行的放款過程中，放款人員經驗能力的衰退會導致放款標準的寬鬆，進而可能引起銀行放款行為的循環性。以民國76年至96年台灣地區的銀行為樣本，使用panel data方法進行實證分析。研究結果發現機構記憶假說確實能夠解釋台灣地區銀行放款標準的順景氣循環行為，也就是隨著距離上次放款危機的時間越來越遠，存放款利差與擔保放款比率則會逐漸降低；然而，銀行的放款成長率經穩健測試後較無一致性結果。此外，機構記憶假說對小銀行的放款行為有較佳的解釋，且對於仰賴軟資訊類型放款的影響較仰賴硬資訊類型放款的影響來得大。英文摘要：The banking industry provides a variety of intermediary services to assist in economic developments and recoveries. However, many studies of different countries have explored the phenomenon that banks may amplify business cycle volatilities due to various reasons. This is the concept of ”pro-cyclical”. This paper summarizes extensive literature regarding procyclicality, and examines this phenomenon from a new hypothesis that may help explain the procyclicality of Taiwan's bank lending. The institutional memory hypothesis is driven by deterioration in the ability of loan officers over the bank's lending cycle that results in an easing of credit standards, even the procyclicality of bank's lending behavior. We test this hypothesis for the individual Taiwan banks over 1987-2007 and analyze the samples using panel data methods. The results show that the institutional memory hypothesis is able to explain the procyclicality of Taiwan's bank lending behavior. It means that loan spread will reduce as well as the proportion of secured loans as time passes since a bank's last bust. However, the robust test appears to provide no consistent evidence for loan growth. The findings also indicate that the institutional memory hypothesis explains better the lending behavior at small banks than large ones. Finally, as expected, the institutional memory hypothesis is more supported by soft-information-intensive loans than hard-information-intensive loans.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.3.CHI.16篇名：專案團隊內創意構想守門與創新績效之關係探討並列篇名：Gatekeeping Creative Ideas and Innovation Performances作者：項維欣(Wei-Hsin Hsiang);吳思華(Se-Hwa Wu);楊舜慧(Shun-Hui Yang);陳東賢(Alan Tung-Hsien Chen)關鍵字：創意構想守門;守門能耐;體制規則;創新績效;Gatekeeping Ideas;Gatekeeping Capabilities;Institutional Routines;Innovative Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：當社會進入以創意為主的經濟型態，如何促成豐沛創意快速衍生，成為大眾關注的焦點，也是企業興衰的關鍵。創意始於創造新構想者，許多文獻多著重以探究創意者的角度出發，卻忽略創新實為創意者、守門者、社會系統互動所建構。因此，本研究嘗試以整合性守門觀點，探討其內涵與創新績效的關係，釐清具篩選創意構想功能的守門活動，是阻礙創新的絆腳石，還是促進創新的關鍵。本研究以結構方程，分析專案團隊創意構想守門之守門能耐及體制規則與創新績效的關係。本研究以具創意構想守門經驗之專案團隊為研究對象，自433家公司回收111份有效問卷。結果發現，創意構想守門能耐及創新型體制規則與創新績效呈正相關，且體制規則會調節守門能耐與創新績效之關係。英文摘要：Nowadays, economic growth in our society is from creative ideas. Thus, people care about how to promote rapid growth abundance in creative ideas. In addition, creative ideas allow firms to survive serious competition. Since the sources of creative ideas are brilliant creators, researchers of innovation management often begin their studies from the creator's perspective. Rarely do researchers start their research from another actor's view. However, this perspective ignores that creativity is the interaction among creators, gatekeepers, and the whole society. Therefore, the aim of this article is to explore how ”gatekeeping” and innovation performance are related. This research involved a survey, comprised of three sets of questionnaires concerning gatekeeping capabilities, institutional routines, and innovation performances. 111 project teams participated in the study. The quantitative analysis of the questionnaires was conducted through descriptive statistics, Pearson correlation, and structural equation modeling in order to indicate the nature and direction of relationships among the three sets of variables. Results of this study showed a medium level of consistence among the three variables of gatekeeping capabilities, institution routines, and innovation performances. To conclude, this study may be of importance in explaining the relationship between gatekeeping and innovation performance, as well as in providing researchers and managers with a better understanding of how gatekeeping in creative ideas relate to innovative performance.起始頁-結束頁：21-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.3.CHI.217篇名：領導者特質、企業文化與品牌個性間之關係初探－長期歷史觀點並列篇名：The Relationship between a Leader's Traits, Corporate Culture, and Brand Personality: A Longitudinal Viewpoint作者：別蓮蒂(Lien-Ti Bei);陳明怡(Ming-Yi Chen);劉吉傑(Chi-Chieh Liu)關鍵字：領導者特質;企業文化;品牌個性;長期分析;內容分析法;Leader's Traits;Corporate Culture;Brand Personality;Longitudinal Analysis;Content Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究目的是從長期歷史發展觀點，探討領導者的社會我個性與企業文化和品牌個性間的關係。根據國內四家本土企業品牌－義美、金車、大同與巨大，自1967至2008年共212篇關於企業領導者和企業文化的報導，及自1981至2009年共569則電視和平面廣告之內容分析結果，並參考相關理論，推導出以下命題：領導者特質中的「正直誠信」、企業文化的「正直誠信」與品牌個性的「真誠」間有正向關係；領導者特質的「開放性學習」、企業文化的「卓越創新」與品牌個性的「興奮」間有正向關係；領導者特質的「可信度」、企業文化的「科學求真」與品牌個性的「能力」間有正向關係；領導者特質的「權力需求」與企業文化的「團隊精神」為負向關係。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the relationship between corporate leader's traits, corporate culture, and brand personality from a longitudinal viewpoint. Based on the dimensions of the major constructs suggested in previous literatures, content analysis was utilized on the 212 newspaper and magazine articles regarding corporate leader traits and corporate culture from 1967 to 2008, and 509 advertisements from 1981 to 2009 for the brand personality of four local companies-I-MEI Food Co., King Car Food Industrial Co., Tatung Co., and Giant Bicycle Inc. Several propositions were conducted based on the results. Positive relationships were observed between 1) the ”personal integrity” dimension of a corporate leader's traits, ”integrity” dimension of corporate culture, and ”sincerity” dimension of brand personality; 2) the ”openness to experience” dimension of a corporate leader's traits, ”excellence and innovation” dimension of corporate culture, and ”excitement” dimension of brand personality; and 3) the ”dependability” dimension of a corporate leader's traits, ”scientific proof” dimension of corporate culture, and ”competence” dimension of brand personality. Also, there was a negative relationship between the ”need for power” of a corporate leader's traits and ”teamwork spirit” of corporate culture. The results of this study could provide marketers and academic researchers a view of the longitudinal development and determinants of brand personalities.起始頁-結束頁：49-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.3.CHI.498篇名：房屋仲介公司品牌忠誠度之研究－以購屋者的觀點並列篇名：Brand Loyalty to Housing Brokerage Firms-From Buyers' Viewpoint作者：李春長(Chun-Chang Lee)關鍵字：轉換成本;資訊揭露;品牌忠誠度;房屋仲介公司;Switching Cost;Information Disclosure;Brand Loyalty;Housing Brokerage Firms期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究主要探討影響購屋者對於房屋仲介公司品牌忠誠度之因素，根據國內外影響品牌忠誠度相關文獻，提出五個因素來做為研究模型。透過線性結構方程模式（structural equation model；SEM）探討這些因素對於房屋仲介公司品牌忠誠度的影響。本研究受測對象為曾透過房屋仲介公司購屋之消費者為主，針對高雄市十一個行政區進行發放問卷，共計發放問卷數為700份，有效問卷342份，有效回收率為48.89％。研究顯示：（1）品牌信任與顧客滿意度對品牌忠誠度皆有直接正向影響；（2）資訊揭露對品牌忠誠度並沒有直接影響效果，但透過品牌信任、認知風險與顧客滿意度等間接影響品牌忠誠度；（3）認知風險對品牌忠誠度有直接負向影響效果。英文摘要：This study focuses on factors affecting consumers' brand loyalty toward housing brokerage firms. According to literature review, this study proposed five factors as the research models, and applied the structural equation model (SEM) to explore how these factors affect brand loyalty of realtors. The research subjects were the consumers who have purchased houses through housing brokerage firm in Kaohsiung City, Taiwan. A total of 700 questionnaires were released and 342 valid questionnaires were retrieved. The effective response rate was 46.21%. The findings indicted that: brand trust and consumer satisfaction have positive influences on brand loyalty; information disclosure has no direct impact on brand loyalty effect, but has indirect influence on brand loyalty through brand trust, perceived risk, and customer satisfaction; perceived risk has negative influence on brand loyalty.起始頁-結束頁：73-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.3.CHI.739篇名：中國市場品牌經營與行銷佈局－Fashion Guide之創新運用虛實媒體並列篇名：Brand Management and Marketing Maneuvering in theChina Market: Fashion Guide's Innovative Way of Utilizing Integrated Marketing Communication作者：黃莉婷(Li-Ting Huang);陳純德(Chun-Der Chen);陳美如(Mei-Ju Chen);王嘉珍(Chia-Chen Wang)關鍵字：品牌經營;整合行銷;策略聯盟;社群網站;美妝品認證標章;Branding;Integrated Marketing Communication;Strategic Alliance;Online Social Network Community;Certification Mark of Cosmetics期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在大陸經營美妝品社群網站一段時間卻不見Fashion Guide在大陸有著似台灣的認同感與知名度，為了企業的發展與成長，Fashion Guide 反覆思量把台灣的成功經營模式複製到大陸是否合適？Fashion Guide在仔細評估台灣與大陸美妝品市場與消費者之後，認為唯有以與專家達人合作的方式，方能將Fashion Guide「時尚美妝的諮詢專家」的品牌價值成功地打動消費者。雖然Fashion Guide不能複製成功經驗，但在台灣累積的Know-How以及整合虛擬與實體媒體與借力使力的方式，推動了新的行銷策略，使得Fashion Guide能夠在短時間內成功地在大陸建立了新的品牌價值與知名度。Fashion Guide挾著在消費者心中的品牌知名度，成功地協助供應商將產品鋪到通路上，也帶動了通路上的買氣。Fashion Guide不僅針對消費者，亦串連了美妝品供應鏈的上下游─供應商與通路商。英文摘要：Fashion Guide (FG), the well-known cosmetic discussion community in Taiwan, had been implementing the same business model in China for a while. However, the degrees of user commitment and brand popularity derived from China market were not as higher as those acquired from Taiwan. Such phenomena forced the manager of FG to think deeply and repeatedly the appropriateness of Taiwan FG model in China. By carefully evaluating the cosmetic market and consumer differences between the above two places, it is evident that the exclusive way to be ”the best consulting expert for fashion and cosmetic” for FG brand value and touch consumers' hearts is to cooperate with cosmetic professionals in several ways. Though FG advanced a new path for China market, the non-duplicable cosmetic know-how and the nimble way for virtual integration and media arrangement had formed a flash new marketing strategy and it made FG to generate its new brand value and popularity in a relative short period successfully. By possessing greater brand popularity supported by Chinese consumers, FG helps upper-stream suppliers, disseminates their products to diverse retailing channels in China, and promotes great sales revenues from them, thereby integrating the whole cosmetic supply chain closely and lucratively.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.110篇名：鴻元食品－創新食品供應鍊並列篇名：Hong Yuan-An Innovative Food Product Supply Chain作者：張四薰(Sze-Hsun Sylcien Chang)關鍵字：烘焙業;改良式創新產品;供應鍊;延遲策略;Baking Industry;Reformed Innovative Products;Supply Chain;Postponement Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：烘焙業屬傳統行業的零散型產業，林立在街頭巷尾。遇到2007年原物料飛漲、2008年金融海嘯，麵包店倒風四起，鴻元食品陷入經營困境。鴻元茆總經理檢視烘焙業的供應鍊，調整營運模式。除了代理原有的原物料、半成品和提供烘焙技術服務外，也代理日本卡通人物<U+FF62>哆啦Ａ夢<U+FF63>造型小蛋糕的成品，推展烘焙成品代理銷售業務，進入賣原料也賣成品的新營運模式。整個供應鍊利用熟食快速冷凍方法解決鮮食庫存問題，並在麵包店再做「最後一哩」的加熱加值，即時供應色香味俱全的烘焙熱食，滿足市場顧客的需求。鴻元利用產品創新，從產品中找出「常溫」與「預烤」，以及「方便」與「美味」的不同區隔，組合出新通路來成功地解決通路衝突的問題，並利用差異化的行銷模式與合作夥伴華信食品，實現合作共贏的局面。英文摘要：The baking industry, which can be seen at every street corner, belongs to a non-mainstream industry among traditional industries. As a result of the sky-rocketing prices of raw materials in 2007 and the financial crisis in 2008, a great number of bakeries went bankrupt and Hong Yuan's business was mired in difficulties as well. Mr. Mao, the general manager of Hong Yuan, thus examined supply chain for his bakery business and adjusted its operational model. In addition to acting as an agent for the original raw materials and semi-finished products, as well as offering a baking technology service, Hong Yuan also served as the agent for small cakes depicting the Japanese cartoon character ”Doraemon” and promoted the sales business of various finished baking products, thereby developing a new operational model for Hong Yuan; selling both raw materials and finished products.On the one hand, the whole supply chain adopted a rapid-freezing method in cooked food in order to solve the inventory problems of fresh food. On the other hand, Hong Yuan also made use of the value-added heating method ”of the latest mile” in the bakeries so as to provide delicious, tasty hot food in order to satisfy the needs of customers and the market.With the innovation of products, Hong Yuan discovered a distinctive segmentation between ”room temperature” and ”pre-roast”, ”convenience” and ”deliciousness”, and, therefore, instigated new channels to solve the existing supply chain problems of channel conflict. In short, Hong Yuan cooperated with its partner, the Hwa-Sin Food Company, to achieve a win-win situation by using a differentiated marketing mode.起始頁-結束頁：19-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.1911篇名：CoCo都可茶飲－合縱連橫進入中國市場並列篇名：CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice-Collaborative Entry Mode into Chinese Market作者：李雨師(Yu-Shih Lee);吳文傑(Wen-Chieh Wu)關鍵字：進入新市場;合資代理人;通路選擇;垂直整合;Entry into New Markets;joint venture representative;Channel Selection;Vertical Integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：CoCo都可茶飲藉由研發創新和緊密的供應關係，在競爭激烈的連鎖茶飲業裡，建立高門檻的進入障礙。CoCo都可茶飲在全球已有近600家門市，在台灣、大陸、香港及美國都有成立門市。在成功打入兩岸三地及美國東岸之後，現在正加速拓展到世界其它地區，並有計劃地前進東北亞、東南亞、中東、美加、紐澳等區域。本個案著眼於CoCo都可茶飲進入大陸市場的過程，分別從下列三個面向探討之。（1）CoCo都可茶飲選擇何種進入策略跨足中國大陸市場，並說明選擇的理由。（2）CoCo都可茶飲通路選擇決定因素，以及如何建構大陸市場通路。（3）CoCo都可茶飲如何進行策略性垂直整合，以強化其經營模式與競爭地位。藉由個案，學生可對連鎖企業進行國際化之議題有更深的認識與了解，使其能體會企業在進入國際市場時，其進入策略和選擇通路之考量因素與實際做法，以及不同類型的垂直關係及其效益。英文摘要：CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice invests much money in R&D and innovation and collaborates with suppliers to build high threshold of entry barriers in competitive chain store industry. CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice has around 600 chain stores in Taiwan, China, Hong Kong and United States. Now CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice plans to expand its business in Northeast Asia, Southeast Asia, the Middle East, Canada, New Zealand and Australia.This case highlights the process of entering Chinese market, and focuses on three issues. The first issue is what kind of entry strategy CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice chooses to enter Chinese market. The second issue is what determinants affect channel selections, and how CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice builds the channels in Chinese market. The third issue focuses on how CoCo Fresh Tea & Juice engages in vertical integration.Through the case, students will realize the issue of internationalization, and figure out the considerations of entry strategies and channel selections. Different types of vertical relations and the effect of vertical integration will be also realized.起始頁-結束頁：39-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.3912篇名：精技電腦：第二物流中心並列篇名：Unitech Computer Co., Ltd.: The Second Distribution Center作者：王俊如(Chun-Ju Wang);鍾志明(Chih-Ming Chung);官志亮(Jyh-Liang Guang)關鍵字：物流中心;存貨週轉率;Distribution Center;Turn-over期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本個案以一家3C產品之經銷與物流業者為例，討論物流中心的地點、容量與人力需求決策。在本個案時點，由於公司原有之物流中心已接近滿載，因此考慮成立第二個物流中心。該公司之儲備幹部受部門主管之命，就第二物流中心之地點、容量與人力需求，提出規劃。本個案除簡要介紹公司之概況外，主要描述公司內部就第二物流中心規劃的會議狀況，藉由對話內容揭露資訊並傳達觀念。經由本個案之討論，學員可學習：一、如何在考量公司營業狀況、客戶地理分布及競爭者狀況下，選擇物流中心之地點；二、了解平行倉和主從倉的概念，以及其對各種物流成本可能造成的影響；三、如何運用銷售資料、存貨週轉天數及其他物流中心營運效率資料，規劃物流中心的大小與人力配置。英文摘要：This case is about the location and space capacity decisions of the second distribution center (DC) in a 3C products distribution firm. Because existing DC is almost full loaded, top management of the firm are considering construct a second DC. A junior manager of the distribution center is asked to propose a preliminary planning for the location, space capacity and human resources of the second DC. In addition to the basic company background, this case discloses necessary decision information and relevant concept through describing the dialogs in a company conference. Through this case, students are supposed to: 1. Learn how to decide the location of a DC, considering company goals, competition and geographical distribution of the customers. 2. Understand different DC designing concepts and their influence on physical distribution costs. 3. Learn how to calculate the necessary space capacity and human resources of the DC using history data, especially the sales, turn-over rate and other operational efficiency records of a firm.起始頁-結束頁：61-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.6113篇名：無名小站－We Come, We See, We Blog並列篇名：Wretch.cc-We Come, We See, We Blog.作者：林芬慧(Fen-Hui Lin);蕭羽廷(Yu-Ting Hsiao)關鍵字：部落格;社群媒體;印象管理;口碑行銷;網路群體行為;Blog;Social Media;Impression Management;Word-of-Mouth Marketing;Online Group Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文介紹台灣最大的部落格「無名小站」的媒體現象，包括發展歷程、部落客的創作與商業代言、社群集體行為、以及面臨新興社群網站的挑戰。網友在部落格自由發表評論或感想，不必經由編輯的篩選，也不必花費昂貴的製作成本，改變傳統的媒體、編輯、作者及讀者的結構；知名部落客成為名作家或是意見領袖，自然衍生了口碑行銷的商機。此外，虛擬社群產生的集體行為，例如「人肉搜索」，引起社會廣泛的注意。本個案教學主題為：（1）以「印象管理」及「自我呈現」的概念，探討部落客的創作現象，進而衍生的口碑行銷議題；（2）部落格具有的公共性，可與商業性進行比較和反思；(3)新興社群網站蓬勃發展，無名小站要如何面對挑戰。英文摘要：This case introduces the media phenomena of the largest blog platform in Taiwan, Wretch.cc, which includes its history, blogger advertising endorsements, ”human flesh searches” and the challenge emanating from the new social websites. A blog is a new form of media where Internet users post their criticisms about current issues or share their feelings and thoughts on daily trivia without the need for editorial permissions or expensive production costs. Gradually, popular blogs have become a good channel for word-of-mouth marketing. Besides the commercial aspect, blogs group writers and readers to form a virtual community with communal norms and various group behaviors. The ”human flesh search” that originated from Asia has also become an Internet phenomenon and has given rise to many social concerns and discussions. The three teaching themes in this case are: (1) to analyze the theories of ”impression management” and ”self-presentation” when interpreting bloggers' motivation and to further discuss the commercial issues of blog word-of-mouth marketing; (2) to understand the social meaning of group behavior in a virtual community; (3) to examine the niche strategy of Wretch.cc when confronted with the challenge of new social media websites.起始頁-結束頁：81-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.8114篇名：華碩與和碩之分割減資歷程並列篇名：The Case of Split between ASUS and Pegatron作者：黃宜侯(Alex Yi-Hou Huang);沈惠玲(Hui-Ling Sheng)關鍵字：減資;品牌與代工;華碩;事件研究法;和碩;Capital restructuring;OBM vs. OEM;ASUS;Event study;Pegatron期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本論文探討華碩電腦股份有限公司，於2009年12月宣佈，與和碩聯合科技股份有限公司進行股權實質切割的個案，該案以2010年6月1日為基準日，華碩分割75%之和碩控股權，以每千股換150股華碩股票及404股和碩股票的計算方式轉由股東持有。本個案宣佈後引起市場極大的反應，華碩的股票連續兩天以跌停收市。本文首先討論華碩電腦的成長背景，進而分析其經營優勢與核心能力，並描述其面臨的品牌與代工衝突之困境，本文配以教學手冊，以此分割減資的實例，引導學生探討企業經營策略與財務管理上的互動，包括企業減資的目的與意義，以及品牌與代工的決策分析，同時示範研究方法之中，事件研究法之原理與應用。英文摘要：This article studies the case of split between ASUS and Pegatron where ASUS officially announced the split in December, 2009. The split was practically carried out on June 1, 2010 with each 1,000 share holder of ASUS stock will then hold 150 and 404 shares of stock for ASUS and Pegatron, respectively. Such case of split/capital restructuring puzzled the market participants and the stock price of ASUS dropped to the trading floor two days in a row after the announcement. This paper first introduces the rise of ASUS and its core compentences, and then the issue between branding and OEM (original equipment manufacturer) for ASUS is discussed. Using this case as example, the teaching note of this paper leads students through the analyses of capital structure decision and business stragegy. Specific issues of focus includes why business choose to deduct their levels of capital and how to differenciate a business between OBM (own branding & manufacturing) and OEM. The teaching note also demonstrates the use of event study to quantify the stock market impact of the case.起始頁-結束頁：99-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.9915篇名：快樂遊網站行銷個案－結構化專案工作規劃之應用並列篇名：Case of the "HappyTour" Website-Project Planning Using Structured Method作者：宋餘俠(Yu-Hsieh Sung);劉士豪(Su-Houn Liu);廖秀莉(Hsiu-Li Liao)關鍵字：專案管理;工作分解;資源分配;Project Management;Work Breakdown Structure;Resource Allocation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本個案教導同學在專案管理課程中，透過個案討論，學習由下而上的結構化工作規劃步驟。這個專案描述一個政府專案的執行單位，如何透過有效的專案規劃，來因應客戶突發的需求。為了讓學生能夠在有限的時間內充分掌握學習重點，本個案將實際的情境相當程度的簡化，但是擷取了關鍵資訊讓學生可以掌握工作規劃各個步驟的進行。個案除了本文之外，分成四個階段共六個討論問題，分別讓學生學習1.工作項目分解；2.工作合理化；3.加入支援流程；4.資源投入規劃，等四個階段的工作規劃程序。這個結構化的專案工作規劃程序，可以讓學生在未來面對一個全然陌生的專案類型時，可以透過這一套由下而上的工作規劃程序來確保專案能如期、如質、符合預算地達成。英文摘要：Project planning is always considered the keystone of a successful project management. Project planning is the process to identify a sequence of steps to be completed which can ensure the project can be finished on-time, on-schedule and on-its-budgets. This case study is written for the junior and senior undergraduate students in college of management. The major purpose is for students to learn the process about how to set up a planning for their project before it had started. On this case study, a structured method on project planning was introduced using a case on a government website development project. The case study was formatted to permits a focus on practical issues on bottom-up approach on project planning.起始頁-結束頁：119-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.2.CHI.11916篇名：雲端運算服務之風險分析並列篇名：Risk Assessment of Cloud Services作者：王平(Ping Wang);羅濟群(Chi-Chun Lo);趙國銘(Kuo-Ming Chao);王子夏(Tzu-Chia Wang)關鍵字：風險分析;雲端運算;雲端運算服務;模糊派翠網;Risk Assessment;Cloud Computing;Cloud Services;Fuzzy Petri Net期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：雲端運算（Cloud Computing）透過網際網路的連結，透過大型資訊平台佈署及提供資訊服務，但雲端上商業資料可能成為網路攻擊的目標，故如何消除企業對雲端運算服務（cloud services）之資安的疑慮，使企業對網際網路資料中心（Internet Data Center, IDC）的資訊安全管理產生信心，是導入雲端運算的重要事務。若企業忽視雲端運算服務的資訊風險，將可能造成隱私資訊外洩並嚴重影響商譽。因此，企業須要有一套營運風險分析方法，系統化評選IDC 所提出的解決方案；現有風險分析方法較適用於資訊資產個別威脅事件為基礎之風險分析，面對雲端運算作業採用分散式服務架構，須分析多重網路攻擊事件間之交互影響，故本風險模式改以資訊資產之作業流程為基礎，運用模糊派翠網（Fuzzy Petri Net, FPN）理論完整分析作業的威脅流程，估算資產之各項作業的風險，將原有風險分析導入動態運作環境，搭配ISO／IEC 27001之資訊安全管控，系統化分析資訊資產的風險。最後舉一雲端運算服務平台風險分析為例，說明所研提的方法，探討案例中分散式佈署及資訊更新時所帶來的風險。英文摘要：Cloud computing adopts the Internet to deliver information services to open networks via deployment of large scale of platforms, in which commercial data on the clouds might become targets of network attacks. How to eliminate the worries about information security on cloud services, raise the confidences on information security management of IDC is a crucial issue in cloud computing. It might lead to disclosure of confidential information and serious damage to business reputation, if enterprises neglected assessing the risks of cloud services. Thus, enterprises need systemically assess the operational risks with the proposals of IDC by comparing distinct cloud provider solutions, when decided to adopt the cloud services. Available risk models are more suitable for assessing the risk of information assets based on a series of specific threat events. It is necessary to adjust the risk model to effectively assess the risks of cloud services via analyzing the effects of multiple interleaved attacks from the view of asset operation flow perspective. Therefore, a fuzzy risk assessment model is proposed to evaluate the risks of cloud security in a dynamic environment using Fuzzy Petri Net (FPN) by adopting ISO/IEC 27001 standard. Finally, an illustration case of risk assessment of cloud services in Internet Data Center (IDC) is given to demonstrate our approach. From numerical illustrations, our approach effectively outranks the risks of cloud services, especially when they are deployed and updated their information in a distributed deployment.起始頁-結束頁：1-19資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.1.CHI.117篇名：子公司外部網絡鑲嵌之決定因素與影響效果並列篇名：The Determinants and Consequences of SubsidiaryExternal Embeddedness作者：陳律睿(Lu-Jui Chen);蔡顯童(Hsien-Tung Tsai);劉峰旭(Feng-Hsu Liu)關鍵字：多國企業;子公司;外部網絡鑲嵌;子公司重要性;Multinational Enterprise;Subsidiary;External Embeddedness;SubsidiaryImportance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：子公司的外部網絡鑲嵌關係是維持其長期競爭優勢的重要基礎。本研究旨在探討子公司外部網絡鑲嵌之前置因素與其結果。在實證部分，本研究透過229家多國企業在台投資子公司的問卷調查資料，利用LISREL進一步驗證所提出之研究模型。本研究主要發現有三：第一，國際化策略以及資源落差會影響到子公司外部網絡的發展程度；第二，子公司外部網絡鑲嵌程度會正向影響子公司在企業內的重要性；最後，子公司談判力會受到子公司外部網絡鑲嵌程度的影響，但其重要性並不會因為子公司的談判力大小而有所影響。整體而言，本研究發現子公司在地主國經營時會受到內部連結關係以及外部關係的影響，據此提出相關理論貢獻及管理意涵。英文摘要：This study investigates how foreign subsidiaries' external embeddedness comes from and how it relates to the subsidiary importance. Using detailed questionnaire on 229 subsidiaries of multinational enterprises in Taiwan, our analysis revealed three significant findings. First, the headquarters' internationalization strategy and resource gap have the positive effect to subsidiary external embeddedness. Second, external embeddedness is also related positively to the subsidiary importance. Third, subsidiary's bargaining power is caused positively by external embeddedness, but subsidiary importance have no significant effect from subsidiary's bargaining power. Overall, our results provide strong evidence that the internal linkage to subsidiary external embeddedness facilitates subsidiary bargaining power and importance.起始頁-結束頁：21-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.1.CHI.2118篇名：影響閱讀行為的因素：以日系時尚女性雜誌讀者為例並列篇名：Determinants of Viewing Behavior: A Study on JapaneseFashion Magazine Readers作者：楊喻婷(Yu-Ting Yang);盧鴻毅(Hung-Yi Lu);侯心雅(Hsin-Ya Hou)關鍵字：期望與評價;態度;社會規範;喜愛;流行時尚感;Expectancy and Evaluation;Attitude;Subjective Norms;Appreciation;Perception of Fashion期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本橫斷面調查研究以台灣地區大學女生（n＝627）為研究對象，分析影響日系時尚女性雜誌閱讀行為的因素。多元階層迴歸分析發現，「對日系時尚女性雜誌的期望與評價」、「態度」、「社會規範」、「對日本流行時尚的喜愛程度」與「自我知覺的日本流行時尚感」均正向地預測受訪者的日系時尚女性雜誌閱讀行為。本研究也建議，後續研究可探究不同世代女性的時尚女性雜誌閱讀行為。英文摘要：This study aims to examine determinants of viewing behavior of Japanese fashion magazines among Taiwanese female college students. Using a multistage cluster sampling plan, respondents were drawn from ten colleges randomly selected from a pool of 156 colleges/universities in Taiwan. Six hundred and twenty female college students successfully completed the questionnaire. The results show that expectancy-value of characteristics of Japanese fashion magazines, attitude toward viewing Japanese fashion magazines, subjective norms, appreciation of Japanese fashion, and perceptions of Japanese fashion significantly predict viewing behavior of Japanese fashion magazines, respectively. This study also suggests that determinants of viewing behavior related to Japanese fashion magazines of different generations needs to be investigated in the future.起始頁-結束頁：45-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.1.CHI.4519篇名：網路廣告點選的共識地圖與構念評估並列篇名：Consensus Map of Click-Through and Constructs' Evaluation for Internet Advertisements作者：劉明德(Ming-Te Liu);蔡政安(Cheng-An Tsai)關鍵字：網路廣告;點選;隱喻抽取概念技術;理想解類似度順序偏好法;共識地圖;Internet Advertisements;Click-Through;ZMET;TOPSIS;Consensus Map期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：31卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：網路廣告已被視為一個重要的互動行銷媒介，影響商業的發展，同時也讓廣告業的商業模式產生轉變。網路廣告的呈現方式有許多的創意性，廣告內容也明顯影響網路消費行為，目前網路瀏覽者的消費經驗大幅增加，吸引及喚起瀏覽者的興趣，讓他們第一眼便能看到網頁上的廣告，已成為廣告製作的重要課題。因此掌握瀏覽者點選網路廣告的想法脈絡來進行網路廣告策劃，已成為廣告設計者、廣告主及廣告代理商的共同想法。本研究有別於傳統行銷研究所採用的口語訪談，選擇以圖像為訪談基礎的隱喻抽取概念技術（ZMET）為研究方法，藉由隱喻探究的方式，共抽取34項共同構念，來建立瀏覽者點選網路廣告的共識地圖，此共識地圖呈現瀏覽者的想法核心及對於點選網路廣告的深層思維。共識地圖中的共同構念分為起始構念、連結構念及終結構念等三類，本研究進一步將此三類共同構念運用理想解類似度順序偏好法（TOPSIS）來進行排序，分別求得各分類中共同構念的優先序。此研究結果，可以讓網路廣告設計或策劃依據共同構念的排序，並參照構念間的因果關係，再依據廣告主的想法及商品特色來進行構念交叉搭配，以促成更佳的網路廣告互動，提昇點選率。英文摘要：Internet advertisements have been considered as an important interactive marketing media to affect business development. They also changed the business model in advertising industry. Internet advertisements have presented in many patens with creativities to affect consumer behavior. The shopping experience of web surfers are increasing obviously at present. The surfers look the internet advertisements on the webpage whether can attract and arouses their interest becoming the critical issue. Therefore how to understand web surfers’ consensus about internet advertisements click-though and ranking has become a common issue for advertising designers, advertising companies and advertisers while they are planning internet advertising. This research used the Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation Technique (”ZMET”) which focuses on pictures instead of traditional linguistically-based in-depth interviews in marketing research. By means of ZMET, 34 common constructs showing web surfers' core thoughts for click-though of internet advertisements were found and used to establish a consensus map. The 34 common constructs are classified into originator constructs, connector constructs and destination constructs and become the basis of the ranking. The technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (”TOPSIS”) was utilized to figure out the ranking of different categories. The above-mentioned findings about the causal relation among common constructs and ranking of web surfers' consensus can be utilized in internet advertisements designing or planning. Furthermore, advertisers' thoughts and the characteristics of goods or services must be taken into consideration together with the findings to enhance the interaction of internet advertisement and click-thought rate.起始頁-結束頁：65-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2012.31.1.CHI.6501篇名：The Missionary Gaze: The Social Biography and Archiving of Dr. David Landsborough IV's Photographic Collections並列篇名：傳道者的凝視：蘭大弼醫師照片蒐藏的社會傳記與其檔案化作者：吳易叡(Harry Yi-Jui Wu)關鍵字：照片引談法;社會傳記;社會檔案;傳道醫療;物質文化;photo elicitation;social biography;social archive;missionary medicine;material culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本論文以視覺人類學的照片引談法以及歷史人類學的相片研究理論，分析醫療宣教者蘭大弼醫師（1914~2009）所蒐藏之家族相簿。將傳教士的照片蒐藏視為一宗歷史檔案，分析其社會傳記的特性，以及其置身於更大社會檔案脈絡中所具有的意義，企圖提供臺灣的醫療傳道史另一種研究材料選擇。配合宣教史檔案中的其他相片、相本以及圖像材料，分析照片內容所蘊涵的內外部敘事以及其社會文化脈絡，企圖以社會傳記的方式呈現醫療傳道在傳統帝國殖民史之外面貌。首先，本文簡介了歷史學及人類學界藉由照片研究物質文化的成果，並申論晚近視覺人類學者發展出相片「社會傳記」分析的特色及優點，接著分析蘭大弼醫師四代、跨兩世紀的家族相片收藏。藉由傳統視覺詮釋、照片引談法所得致的口述歷史內容、社會文化脈絡的梳理，以及照片做為一種技術史以與實踐的分析，本文認為分析對象體現了其身置年代包含大英帝國、日本殖民以及地方文化，至少三種元素的競爭或揉合。傳教士的認同也在其中呈現了界域性，歷經一連串的轉變以及本土化。這種混雜的特性足以挑戰當前殖民醫學書寫所呈現的二元對立基調。此外，藉由分析發生於一九二八年「切膚之愛」的故事，作者分析傳道醫療典範如何藉由各種形式的視覺技術和特性建構而成，以及此典範的塑造在多層次殖民脈絡與醫療市場中的歷史含義。文末則著重於此批照片的社會傳記與歷史檔案意義，除了運用現有的視覺人類學理論之外，考察了蘭氏家族四代的職業傳承，論證此分析對象再現了傳教士做為一個特別的知識社群，他們嗜好的攝影、蒐藏及交換所再現的日常生活實作、儀式與社交網絡。此外，本文也討論了此新興研究觸及的倫理與文物歸返等問題。英文摘要：This research showcases the ’social biography’ and significance of missionary photographs and the archives in which these images were deposited. I explore the internal and external narratives of the photographas-artifact, which was generated within the practice of missionary medicine from the end of the nineteenth century to the early period after the Second World War. In particular I examine the photo collection of Dr. David Landsborough IV (1914-2009, also known as 蘭大弼), with reference to other visual records produced by medical missionaries and other historical accounts. Drawing upon theories of historical anthropology and engaging the collector by the method of photo elicitation, I show how photographs present researchers with a new window on missionary medicine, one alternative to those of imperial or colonial history. Landsborough’s collection reveals the mixed and hybrid material culture of British and Japanese colonialisms and the local folk of Taiwan. It also shows the transformation and localization of missionaries’ identities over time. By showcasing the story ”A Skin-Graft with Love,” this paper analyses the process by which a paradigm of missionary medicine was illustrated and projected through photography and other graphic forms. It also attests to the necessity of such projection in the contested medical marketplace of multiple colonial cultures. In addition, by tracing the career history of the Landsboroughs from natural historians to medical missionaries, this paper suggests that photography can be seen not only as a method of documentation, but also as a way to represent cultural and ritual life in the social networking of certain intellectual communities. Lastly, this paper discusses the problems researchers might encounter, including ethical and cultural repatriation issues, when using photographs as resources for historical enquiry.起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.00012篇名：情緒的技藝：以花蓮一家葬儀社員工對死亡事物的恐怖感為例並列篇名：Techniques of Emotion: A Study of the Fear of Funeral Home Workers in Hualien towards Death Related Matters作者：羅正心(Chen-Hsin Lo)關鍵字：恐怖感;身體實踐;象徵分類;世界觀;情緒的技藝;fear;bodily practice;symbolic classification;worldview;techniques of the emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：在所有族群中，死亡都是一特殊文化現象，除了許多社會－文化論述外，並有各種喪葬儀式處理，且具有繁複的社會禁忌規範；同時，死亡與鬼魂，及其相關物事，在民間也常引起恐怖，或焦慮、不安，或不舒服的感受。本研究調查經常且實際接觸死者的殯葬員工經驗。透過參與觀察以及深度訪談台灣花蓮市一家民間葬儀社六位工作者，分析他們對死亡相關物事的感受與相應行為，以瞭解他們如何面對在職業上不可避免的殯葬事務，而形成其日常生活的情緒體驗，包括心理狀態、過程與調適方法。本文發現，越資深者越沒有恐怖感，越資淺者則越表現出恐怖或「怪怪的」感覺。資深員工不但不覺恐怖，且能敘說不恐怖的理由，甚至能提出具體因應辦法以教導資淺者，助其抒解恐怖感。探索六位殯葬工作者的心理過程，可以發現殯葬工作者對於死亡相關物事，並非全然不怖畏，卻有一種將恐怖感減少到不影響工作的實踐方式。此方式的應用成功與否，決定他們能否在此職業中繼續工作。這一實踐方式包含一套機制，而與認知的轉化、巫術的應用，以及無傷害的親身體驗密切關聯。可以說，殯葬工作者對於文化習性中，不可避免的「恐怖感」因應，在於建構一世界觀，濡化一精神氣質，並且藉諸身體實踐，培育出一種「情緒的技藝」。本研究亦由此「恐怖感」案例，進一步探討情緒的文化建構面，指出恐怖並非立基於人類自然生理本質，因之，本文拒絕情感與認知、感覺與思想、無意識與有意識等二元斷裂的理論趣向，從而建議個體的情緒實與個體生活所在社會的象徵分類、秩序、意義的「文化分類系統」，有相生相成的關係。本文分成四部分：第一部份解釋「恐怖感」以及「死亡的恐怖感」的意義，並做死亡的文獻回顧；第二部份說明本研究對象葬儀社及其員工的一般工作概況，並呈現六位殯葬工作者的訪談資料；第三部份探討恐怖情緒是習得的或天生的、區辨六名員工恐怖感的差異實踐，再描繪恐怖感背後的世界觀或文化分類，以顯示秩序與意義觀念；第四部份為結論。英文摘要：Death is a universal cultural fact among all peoples. Besides many socio-cultural discourses about death, there are various funeral rites and complex taboos to handle and regulate it. Meanwhile, death, ghosts and other related matters constantly arouse fear, anxiety, unease, or uncomfortable feelings among people. Cross cultural studies about death have analyzed the presentation and function of death or funeral rites. They assert that death is not only a natural phenomenon, but a cultural one which coexists with themes of ritual and taboo, and modes of burial and mourning. Similarly, this research maintains that the fear of death is just like death itself; it is not only a biological phenomenon, but also a cultural one. This research examines the experience of funeral home workers, who frequently have contact with the dead. Through participant observation and in-depth interviews with six workers at a local funeral parlor in Hualien City, Taiwan, the author analyzes their feelings and correspondent behaviors regarding death-related events and other things, in order to understand how they face their emotions, which they cannot eschew occupationally and which form part of the emotional experience of their daily lives, including their psychological states, processes and adaptations. The author finds that among the six workers, the more senior they are, the less fear they have. However, while the more junior staff experience more fear or ”weird” feelings, the senior workers can explain and address their means of coping with the job and teach the junior staff members how to relieve their fear. By inquiring into their psychological processes, the author finds that the workers’ attitudes toward death-related matters are not entirely without fear. However, they have certain practices to minimize this fear so that it does not affect their day-to-day work. The success or failure of these practices determines if they can remain in this occupation or not. These practices consist of a set of mechanisms closely related to the transformation of perception, the application of magic and the bodily experience of essentially coming to no harm. We might argue that these mechanisms constitute a worldview, encapsulating an ethos, and furthermore, by way of personal experience, thus nurture ”techniques of the emotion.” These techniques enable funeral home workers adjust their habits and create a calm skill to cope with the dead body. In this case study, the author further investigates the cultural construction aspect of emotion, and suggests that the behavior, thinking, perception, and sensation of fear are not based on human physical nature. Therefore, this study rejects the theoretical dualism of emotion and cognition, feeling and thought, the conscious and the unconscious. This study suggests that individual emotions are correlative to ”cultural classification system” constructed jointly by symbolic classification, order and meaningThis article consists of four parts. The first part explains the ”feeling of horror” and ”the horrible feeling of death” followed by the literature review. The second part introduces the studied funeral home and general working conditions of its workers, followed by interviews with the six funeral workers. The third part explores whether the feeling of horror is acquired or innate, as well as distinguishing the different feelings of horror of the six workers. There then follows the worldview or cultural classification behind these feelings of horror that manifest concepts of order and meaning. The fourth part is the conclusion which points out how funeral home workers construct a worldview, encapsulate an ethos, as well as cultivate ”techniques of the emotion,” through their bodily experiences, which correspond to their occupational requirements.起始頁-結束頁：59-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.00593篇名：從夢、神話到儀式展演：中國貴州侗人的自我意象與象徵形構並列篇名：From Dream and Myth to Ritual Performance: Self-Image and the Formation of Symbolism among the Guizhou Kam in China作者：林淑蓉(Shu-Jung Lin)關鍵字：夢;神話;儀式展演;精神分析;侗族;dream;myth;ritual performance;psychoanalysis;the Kam期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：Freud將夢及其詮釋看成是一種潛意識（unconscious），是一種被壓抑的慾望（disguised desire）的表面化（resurface）或外顯化的行動（acting out）。然而，此種詮釋夢的理論是否適用於非西方社會？與精神分析一樣，人類學強調詮釋與意義的理解，將神話的論述與儀式行動都看成是一種可比擬為精神分析的外顯化的行動（acting out），可作為理解一特定文化的象徵性，以及生活於該社會中的自我（個人的與集體的自我）。本文以回歸Freud並延伸Freud的精神分析學者Lacan的理論作為分析架構，關注語言與象徵性的建構，來探討侗人的夢、神話與儀式展演等脈絡如何建構中國侗人的自我意象。居住在中國貴州黔東南地區的侗族人，以父方交表婚作為建構社會的理想，形成了討妻者與給妻者必須歷經隔代方得以完成雙方的婚姻交換關係。人類學者在處理自我與人觀概念時，強調社會性（sociality）的重要意涵，亦即不同於精神分析所關注的內在建構機制，以事件、活動（包括行動與行為）、語言（包括說話與論述）等外在化的機制，來形構個人的與集體的在社會關係中的意象與主體位階。因而，自我意象的建構（個別的或集體的）乃是坎嵌於社會生活中。我試圖從侗人的夢、神話（有關祖母神信仰的神話傳說）、以及儀式行動（尤其是百口儀式）來分析侗人的身體、象徵性、與自我認同的建構等之關係。我認為侗人是以日常生活的實踐（禁忌、信仰、論述、行動）來形構與展演其自我。本文最終的目的，在處理夢、神話與儀式等範疇如何以其各自的形式來連結幻想（或想像的）與社會事實之差距，而象徵性則是接合三者的重要機制。英文摘要：There has long been debate among cross-cultural researchers on whether Freudian dream interpretation is applicable to non-Western societies. Psychoanalysts and anthropologists alike stress the significance of dream interpretation and meaning when dealing with myth and ritual action discourses, both of which can be addressed as examples of acting out, and both of which are viewed as vividly revealing symbols of cultures, especially the subjectivity of the collective self. In this paper I use Lacanian psychoanalytical perspective (esp. language and symbolism) to examine how the Kam people of Guizhou, China interpret dreams, myths, and ritual performances for purposes of understanding their senses of self/personhood and cultural symbols. The Kam have traditionally practiced patrilineal cross-cousin marriage, which requires two generations of wife-takers and wife-givers to complete a marriage exchange cycle. When dealing with issues of the self and personhood in anthropology, sociality is central to any analysis of the relationship between wife-takers and wife-givers. Whereas psychoanalysts would likely emphasize the aspect of inner self when analyzing this practice, anthropologists are more likely to focus on the external mechanism for establishing self/personhood from such embedded contexts as events, social activities (actions and behaviors) and language (speech and discourse) to locate the position of a subject. In other words, ways that the self and personhood are constituted, either individually or collectively, are embedded in social life. There are various mechanisms (e.g. myths, taboos, social exchange and ritual performance) in Kam society to inform men and women that they have to learn and to practice an appropriate form of self/personhood. For example, wei33 keh55 is an social exchange between two villages which can be understood as a reflection and an act of performance the completion of marriage transaction between two social groups. First, I describe a dream account told by a Kam woman which foretold an occurrence of death in the village. A dream is not only a social reality but also carries the cultural message to inform Kam men and women to enter marriage exchange practice. Then, I move to the Kam songs performed by Kam men and women during social exchange activities. Through the lyrics and symbols contained in the Kam songs, men and women express their loves, emotions and desires towards their desirable marriage partners. Although Kam song singing is an institutional mechanism, individual men and women are able to convey their internationality [1] by selecting suitable songs to express their personal desires and situations. Third, I discuss how taboo observations constitute the Kam self, one is aimed at pregnant women (birth) and the other towards the surviving family of a dead person. It is through the taboo practices that the Kam people complete their transformation of sociality: from birth to death or from death to social reproduction. In addition, I examine Kam myths and their practices of sa323 goddess [the goddess of a Kam female ancestor] worship to further my discussion of the significance of marriage exchange. In the myths and ritual performance to honor sa323goddess, 12 male representatives of Kam clans enter the sa323 goddess shrine to worship sa323 and then to engage in drinking and eating which I regard as an imitation of marriage exchange or social reproduction. Finally, I describe the content of ritual action performed by the Kam people whenever a disharmonious event occurs in the family or in the village. Pa55 kou323, which refers to empty words, is the ritual practiced constantly by the Kam people to prevent ”being gossiped or being talked about” by other people, including either the living or the deceased. Although ritual practice such as pa55 kou323 is an external action, however, it is effective in the constitution of the Kam self by reminding people not to engage with actions of ”empty words” or ”being gossiped about.” That is, the ritual of pa55 kou323 is not only a symbolic action but also serves as a regulatory mechanism to constitute the Kam self. My conclusions are (a) dream accounts and cultural interpretations of dreams foretell Kam social realities; (b) myths as story-form of living reality legitimate ritual action and verify the effectiveness of social practices; and (c) rituals as fictions and imitations of social reality serve as imaginary social ideals for Kam cultural ideology. Dreams, myths and rituals all contain some characteristics of fantasy and imagination but are all able to express, articulate and verify what social realities are in their own ways. Symbols are the basic mechanisms which have the capacities to connect fantasy and imagination with social realities. In sum, dreams, myths and rituals provide the inner, subjective and the imaginary of social realities, and its significance is no less than that of the external, objective and practical aspect of social realities. For human society to move on from generation to generation, it needs both operating mechanisms: the imaginary and the practical.起始頁-結束頁：101-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.01014篇名：文化與歷史的透視鏡：中國農村婦女呼新奎的生命史敘說並列篇名：A Lens into Culture and History: A Chinese Peasant Woman Hu Xinkui's Life Narrative作者：劉斐玟(Fei-Wen Liu)關鍵字：生命敘說;口述史;婦女研究;中國;文化變遷;life narrative;oral history;women;China;cultural change期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文透過湖南省江永縣一個平凡農婦呼新奎的生命史敘說，來鋪陳中國1949年解放前後，乃至集體時期（人民公社）與二十一世紀的文化變遷，包括裹小腳、童養媳、抽兵、哭嫁等習俗，以及解放後一連串的政治運動。藉此，一則籲請人類學界正視生命史作為資料蒐集工具所蘊藏的理論與方法論意涵；二則反思如何同時援引多重敘說文類，以避免生命史敘說「偏、失、誤、溢」之弊。蓋生命史訪談所標誌的並非僅止於敘說主體的個人生命感知，而是敘說主體、對話對象、研究者、乃至鑲嵌情境，彼此之間的共同織緯與交互論述。本文即以呼新奎為主軸，透過她的敘說以及她與女兒、女婿、老伴之間對話，開展出一個文化歷史場景：這個場景不僅映照出呼新奎的生命經歷，更映照出後輩子孫對「前人歷史」的理解與註解。生命史敘說於是成了歷史與文化的交匯點，從這個交匯點向外輻射，歷史因之脈脈長流，文化也因之賡續薪傳。英文摘要：Using a Chinese peasant woman, Hu Xinkui's 呼新奎, as a looking lens, this article unfolds the socio-cultural change of rural China in the transitional period from around Liberation in 1949 up to 1978, and even into the twenty-first century, covering a wide range of issues regarding footbinding, child brides, forced conscription, bridal lamentation, communist collectivization, and a series of political movements such as land reform, the Great Leap Forward, the Socialist Education Movement, the Four Clearing-ups Movement, and the Poor and Lower-Middle Peasants Association. Hu Xinkui, born in 1934 in Jiangyong County of Hunan Province in south China, was a child bride who was promoted as a director of Women's Affairs after Liberation because of her suppressed inferior status. It was also because of the Liberation-implemented new marriage law that laid the foundation for her husband to divorce her in 1959, for the reason of her apparent infertility and lack of romance, as well as her concern for an unmarried brother, which preoccupied her to the detriment of her own marriage. She remarried in 1964 and retired from her active political life after she had children; since then she has committed herself to being an extremely hard-working housewife. With her husband being an active and honest party cadre (including being the deputy to the 9th Party Congress in 1969), she had to find every possible source to maintain the family finance in order to receive a great deal of visiting guests and peasants, at a cost of neglecting the education of her children, two of whom were addicted to gambling. Her life story manifests how an ordinary village woman engaged with local women's expressive traditions, called 女書 (women's script) and女歌 (women's song), and how her personal life changed along with the transformation of China. Also worth noting, the life history interviews with Xinkui were conducted in the company of her daughter and son-in-law, who have assisted my nushu research for more than a decade-and they had never learned about Hu Xinkui's past until then. Their participation throws additional reflective light on Xinkui's life experiences in China's changing rural context. With Hu Xinkui's life history as the axis, this article aims to draw attention to the life narrative approach as a tool for collecting ethnographic data and to bring about a rethinking of its use as a conceptual framework. Recognizing the possible limitations of life narrative in terms of its partiality, lapses, mistakes, and exaggeration, I employ narratives from multiple subjects and diverse resources (e.g., literary composition, local oral traditions, and historical documents) to open up the dialogical horizon of a life narration. I demonstrate that life history as a lived experience and an account of life not only speaks to a person’s lifeworld; it is also an intertextualization of the voices of multiple subject-positions: narrating subject, addressee, researcher, and the embedded context. In the case of Hu Xinkui, her life narration not only encodes her history and historiography, but also manifests how the next generation, especially her daughter, decodes her story and writes it onto their own. Life narrative in this sense is a convergence of history and culture, whereby history continues and culture persists.起始頁-結束頁：139-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.01395篇名：Book Reviews: Where is Home?作者：陳祥水期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：198-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.01986篇名：Book Reviews: The Senses in Self, Society, and Culture作者：羅正心期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：201-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.02017篇名：Book Reviews: La Chine en Afrique作者：戴麗娟期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：205-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201212.02058篇名：50 Years of Field Research in Taiwan: An ”Involved” Anthropologist at Work作者：Bernard Gallin期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.00019篇名：Laws of the Jungle: Conflicts Between International-National Environmental Law and Taromak Rukai-Environment Relations並列篇名：自然環境治理法則多元構向的衝突作者：波開樂(Caleb D. Portnoy);蔡志偉(Awi Mona)關鍵字：國際法;規範體制;環境永續;原住民族;世界觀;international law;regulatory regime;environmental sustainability;indigenous peoples;worldview期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：國際組織與國家政府在環境治理規範的建構上，已然發展一套有別於先於國家建立前已存在之地方社群的環境價值觀。實則，中央政府的法律規範主導並支配了國土治理與自然資源政策，因而限制了地方社群與原住民族的基本權益。由於國際規範、國家法律與原住民族傳統習慣所形構在環境治理法則上的多元構向，本文採以國際環境法制的發展論述，作為探究此間所存在衝突的分析框架。本文旨在透過環境規制體系在國際、國家與地區性之發展的比較研究，冀以賦權臺灣魯凱族之傳統習慣與環境世界觀，作為具有建設性的規範機制。魯凱族所具有之集體且以社群為基礎的治理內涵，是本文所關注的焦點，亦係建構原住民族社群與臺灣政府間，對於環境治理合作關係的基石。英文摘要：International organizations and national governments have developed environmental management values that differ from and often conflict with pre-existing local community-environment relations. Because central government legislation dominates current land and natural resource policies, the interests of local and indigenous peoples are often sacrificed. Due to the complexity of pluralistic international-national and indigenous legal systems, an overview of international environmental legal discourse may furnish a useful conceptual framework. This paper seeks to empower the constructive formation of customary institutions and environmental worldviews for Taiwanese indigenous Rukai people by conducting a comparative study of the institutions of international, national, and local environmental regulatory regimes. The collective, and community-based characteristics of this entity will be a major issue and critical to a constructive and cooperative relationship between indigenous communities and the Taiwan government.起始頁-結束頁：21-50資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.002110篇名：災難、遷村與社會脆弱性：古茶波安的例子並列篇名：Disaster, Relocation and Vulnerability: The Case Study of Kucapungane作者：台邦．撒沙勒(Sasala Taiban)關鍵字：災難;遷村;莫拉克颱風;社會脆弱性;禮納里部落;disaster;relocation;Morakot;vulnerability;Rinari期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：莫拉克災後，政府將大社、瑪家和好茶三個部落集體遷移到瑪家農場，在這個面積約30公頃的地方，共有三個部落、近五百戶人口居住，是目前原住民人口最多的集合村落。本文擬以瑪家農場的遷村為例，嘗試從局內人角度檢視這場遷村，探討族群與部落衝突、災難與社會的脆弱性，並從族人的語意中解讀這個集體行動在文化中的意義。本文以這次受災最為嚴重的古茶波安（好茶）部落為例子，探討他們在遷村過程中與國家官署之間的權力拉扯，剖析在災難歸因與咎責中被忽略的社會脆弱性問題。同時藉由災難現場的考察，討論家園、部落、傳統領域對這些族人的象徵意義，以及為什麼遷村與永久屋政策，會遭受族人強烈的反對和批判？災難過後，族人如何迅速從災難中組織、動員、彼此召喚來恢復他們的生活。當中是什麼樣的動能，支撐他們從災難中復原？本研究發現，好茶遷村的悲劇，來自於當初政府對現代化的浪漫想像及錯誤決策，導致一連串的社會和文化變遷，不僅社區逐漸解體，文化系統也面臨傳承的困難。莫拉克災後的重建政策，刻正複製從前的錯誤想法，以為只要提供安全的住居環境即可。本研究認為政府應該檢討遷村的模式，審慎面對遷村地所帶來包括土地、文化、教育、生計等問題，並長期的關懷和投入資源，幫助遷村的部落建立文化再發展的基地。英文摘要：After the 2009 Typhoon Morakot, the Taiwanese government relocated three indigenous villages, Dashe, Majia, and Haocha, to an area of about 30 hectares. At present, now christened Rinari and with a total population approximately 1500, this area is the most populous indigenous community in Taiwan. Using the Rinari community’s Haocha Village (Kucapungane) as a case study, this paper examines conflict and social vulnerability as they are brought about by relocation. In Kucapungane’s case, this is not the first time in recorded history that the village has been relocated, and many reconstruction policies appear to be constructed around the same notions as the earlier relocation: the government continues to believe that simply providing indigenous disaster victims with a safe place of residence will do. This study investigates the significance of space to the community, using internal viewpoints to discuss post-disaster government actions regarding resettlement, relocation, and other issues of political significance. Why did the state, which attempted to protect indigenous peoples, promote the continuation of cultural traditions, tribal integrity, and sustainable development through relocation and provision of permanent housing, not only fail to get the support of tribesmen, but also recieved criticism and backlash from the community? When disaster strikes, how can the residents of a community reorganize and mobilize? In what ways does disaster reconstruction play a role in restoring their lives, and what effect does it have on culture? In fact, due to populations residing in different ecological and social environments, they adapt differently to natural disasters and strain. Therefore, in disaster research, if one does not start from within the study population to understand the practical implications of the disaster in a specific cultural context, and if one is unable to separate oneself from subjective social and cultural contexts, one’s analysis will deviate from the facts and will not help understand the root causes of the disaster. As for the long-standing interdependent relationship between indigenous people and the land, it includes a community’s life experiences, material culture and collective memory. Once indigenous people are removed from their ancestral living space and traditional territory, their livelihoods as well as interpersonal relationships are difficult to maintain. History has proved that relocation not only affects space, productivity and social structure, it also has effects on cultural preservation. Political compromise shaped Rinari, just as the geography of the administrative enclave includes both cultural heterogeneity and the ability of the community to live together in conflict as recorded in history. Miscellaneous factors may lead to both ethnic cooperation as well as continued conflict in the future. Rinari’s crowded living space, and an obvious shortage of arable land, are sufficient to cause new problems and difficulties in industrial development. The future, if one considers the difference and particularity of the individual ethnic groups in language, culture and lifestyle, and uses a generalized mode of thinking to simplify complex ethnic issues, most likely holds another disaster, this time of another sort.. In post-disaster reconstruction it is not just ”housing” that must be settled, or the construction of public facilities. The reconstruction process must also factor in the consideration of the people’s mentality, health, culture and society. Our research suggests that relocation methods should be reviewed and due consideration be given to land, culture, education, and economic livelihood issues in newly established areas. Policies that determine fundamental considerations and make use of detailed assessments to carry out practices may minimize the negative impacts of relocation and resettlement on indigenous cultural survival, and form a base for cultural development.起始頁-結束頁：51-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.005111篇名：全球化下的地方性：臺南西港刈香中的時間、空間與村際網路並列篇名：Locality at Large: Time, Space, and Inter-Village Networks in Tainan's Saikang Koah-hiu Procession作者：丁仁傑(Jen-Chieh Ting)關鍵字：民間信仰;地方性;西港刈香;真確化;王爺;folk religion;locality;"Saikang Koah-hiu";authentification;royal lords期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：地方與全球化的關係是什麼？地方能否抗拒資本的流動？本文藉由提出與經驗性檢驗「大型地方性」的概念，嘗試以新的角度來理解漢人民間信仰大型區域性聯庄活動在當代社會堛熒N義與位置。新概念的提出一方面有助於對祭祀圈與信仰圈宗教實踐背後的認知與情感基礎進行探討，一方面也希望藉著對與現代性概念形成對比的地方性概念的考察，可以更深入掌握當代民族國家和全球化歷程下的地方宗教現象。而已為學界多所研究的西港刈香，則在新概念的輔助下，有助於達成本文概念建構與理論分析上的旨趣。西港刈香起源於人們對曾文溪流域水患與瘟疫的恐慌，而產生了大範圍的集體性聯盟，後來地方土地資源變遷（新的墾殖地與新聚落的出現）歷程中產生的聚落衝突，不但沒有解構集體聯盟，出於「單一地方」對於「大型的地方性」更迫切的需要（象徵性的「真確化」的需求），反而讓這個集體性工程的規模愈來愈宏偉，大型地方性的內在結構也愈趨完備。而當「大型的地方性」進入現代國家，它開始有更多與外界的協商與拉扯，西港刈香由非常實際的多社區間強烈的「真確化」之追求，扣連到現代民族國家底下的歷史感（尋找與建立靜態或動態性的文化遺產），國家將其納入到現代國家動員機制中，現代商業活動也將流動性的資本引入傳統文化活動。在多方面的承接點上，原僅是國家邊陲的農業區塊，處在一個新的既邊陲又核心的位置。本文最後，就「地方性」、「大型的地方性」、和「進香中心」三者間進行對比，並分別討論其各自與現代國家或全球資本主義間的關係。英文摘要：What is the relationship between locality and globalization? Can locales resist the flow of capital? By using the concept ”locality at large”, this paper tries to examine these issues empirically, and tries to shed light on the ”very big” inter-village communal festivals within the Han Chinese folk religion within the modern global arena. Under the nationalist situation and global economy, people tend to think more about the security of their particular place in the world. Places then are the ”contested terrain of competing definitions”. Nevertheless, to discuss the contemporary place, we still need to look back at our traditional place. This paper tries to explore the issue of traditional place through a new lens. The ”Saikang Koah-hiu” procession in Southern Taiwan is a very large local festival which involves more than ninety palanquins and troupes. It originated from the terror of floods and plagues in the Tsengwen river area; thus a large inter-village communal ritual cooperation began to emerge. Even the change of regional land measurements and boundary disputes haven’t disrupted this cooperation. Furthermore, historically, the function of conferring a newly emerging village’s authenticity through building up a ”large communal locality” has become crucially important. Once every three years, the ”Saikang Koah-hiu” takes place within a large festival combining several other rituals, including a Daoist ”Lord offering” ritual, a ceremony that emulates etiquette within imperial yamens (higher level government offices), a Boat-burning ritual, and a three-day inter-communitarian territorial procession. During the period of about one week, it is believed that the Jade Emperor sends three of the Gods of Pestilence (among twelve) to ”Saikang” to control pestilence and recover social justice. This festival has continued to be held in this area for more than 200 years. We offer a model, ”Ecology of Authentification”, which can explain how a village accomplishes its village production and reproduction through not only political and economic institutions, but also through ”traditional institutions”. This model of ”Ecology of Authentification” explains how, under each specific natural and social ecology, a village can attain authenticity through a process of ritual confirmation and public demonstration. The mechanism of the ”large locality’s” conferring function is the special yet typical lesson we learn from the ”Saikang” case. In particular, we offer several parallel concepts to substantiate our analyses: authentification of magic power vs. authentification of the reciprocal side; and master authentification vs. subauthentification. When this ”large locality” enters into the modern national state, there are a lot of confrontations and negotiations. This ”large locality”, with its original function of conferring authentification, now plays the role of static and dynamic cultural heritage for the nation-state; and also the possible role of accumulating capital for global capitalists. Within these interstices, the formerly very marginal agricultural region ”Saikang”, re-enters as a nexus between the core and the periphery. Finally, we make a comparison between locality, large locality and pilgrimage center, and discuss of how traditional ways of reproducing locality can be relevant to modern nationalist institutions and the global economic system.起始頁-結束頁：93-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.009312篇名：Writing Women/Reading the Self: An ”Itinerary of Thinking” about Hsin Hsing Village, Taiwan並列篇名：寫作中的女性與自身反思閱讀：研究臺灣彰化縣新興村的一個思考歷程作者：葛瑞黛(Rita S. Gallin)關鍵字：女性主義;新馬克思主義;全球資本主義父權化;反思;對立的論述與反抗;Feminism;Neo-Marxism;Global Capitalist Patriarchy;reflexivity;oppositional discourse and resistance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文根據筆者過去50年在台灣中西部彰化縣新興村的研究，所經歷過三波『婦女與發展』理論典範的變遷。由於所採取的認識論與反思的立場，而導致這些變遷的理論直接影響其研究論述與觀點。建基於深度民族誌的資料上，筆者一方面陳述由於不同的認識論所提供的視界框架，使能看到不同時期中農村婦女不同的『真實』面貌。而另一方面由於採用反思的立場，進而不斷挑戰自己的觀點。認識論的轉變，將筆者導向不同的真象，而反思的立場，則讓她理解真象的不確定性。換言之，本文指出：對新興村婦女的描述可能反映出局部的真象，但筆者對這些現象的解釋，卻完全受其學術主流理論的影響。英文摘要：The author introduces three major paradigm shifts in theories of women and development in Taiwan over the past 50 years when she was involved in research in Hsin Hsing, a rural community in west-central Taiwan. This paper explores the way theory has been engraved in her work by adopting an epistemological and reflexive stance. On the one hand, based on nuanced ethnographic data, the author explicates how different epistemological stances provided her the lenses with which she presented the ”reality” of women during different stage of her research. On the other hand, a reflexive stance compelled the author to confront her own processes of thinking. The epistemological choices led her to produce a number of different ”truths”, but the reflexivity challenged her to admit that. In sum, the author argues that while her ”descriptions” of Hsin Hsing women’s lives mirrored reality, her interpretation of the meanings attributed to them were profoundly shaped by the theory that guided her thinking.起始頁-結束頁：159-173資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.015913篇名：Book Reviews: Historical Archaeology of Military Sites: Method and Topic作者：陳伯楨期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：176-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.017614篇名：Book Reviews: On the Edge of the Global: Modern Anxieties in a Pacific Island Nation作者：劉子愷期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：180-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.018015篇名：Book Reviews: Emotions in the Field: The Psychology and Anthropology of Fieldwork Experience作者：簡美玲期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：185-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.018516篇名：記憶解決了政治難題？對於容邵武〈災難的永恆回歸：記憶政治與災難反覆的探討〉之思考作者：呂詠彥期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：190-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.019017篇名：回覆作者：容邵武期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：193-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所DOI：10.7115/TJA.201206.019301篇名：Stock Series Holiday Regressors Generated from Flow Series Holiday Regressors並列篇名：存量與流量節日變數之研究作者：David F. Findley;Brian C. Monsell;侯介澤(Chieh-Tse Hou)關鍵字：投資時間序列;季節調整;節日效果;移動節日;預測;復活節效應;中國農曆春節效應;X-12-ARIMA;X-13ARIMA-SEATS;Inventory time series;Seasonal adjustment;Holiday effects;Moving holidays;Forecasting;Easter effects;Chinese new year effects;X-12-ARIMA;X-13ARIMA-SEATS期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：存量時間序列變數，例如：月底的庫存，即為每月之流入與流出量所產生之累計之加總，亦是為每月淨流量之累計。藉由類似存量交易日迴歸變數的計算方式，本文介紹如何經由流量序列之節日迴歸變數的累加，計算出存量序列之節日迴歸變數。當流量變數具有標準特性時，則可利用本文所提出之簡單且實用的方法導出存量序列之節日迴歸變數。本文分別檢驗復活節效應對美國製造業存貨量的影響，以及中國農曆春節效應對臺灣經濟指標存貨量的影響。本文為了上述分析所建構的模型、預測和圖形結果，皆顯示此方法可以有效的處理存量節日效果。亦如流量的節日變數分析，本文的估計結果顯示，存量的節日效果通常大於交易日效果，但小於季節性效果。英文摘要：Stock economic time series, such as end-of-month inventories, arise as the cumulative sum of monthly inflows and outflows over time, i.e., as accumulations of monthly net flows. In this article, we derive holiday regressors for stock series from cumulative sums of flow-series holiday regressors. This is similar to how stock trading day regressors have been derived. The stock holiday regressors from this approach have a very simple and appealing form when the flow regressors have standard properties. The modeling, forecasting and graphical results we present, for Easter effects in U.S. manufacturing inventories and for Chinese New Year effects in economic indicator inventory series of Taiwan, confirm the utility of this first general approach to modeling stock holiday effects. As with estimated holiday effects from flow series, we find that stock holiday effects are usually larger than trading day effects but smaller than seasonal effects.起始頁-結束頁：71-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201210.00012篇名：The Timing and Magnitude Relationships between Month-to-Month Changes and Year-to-Year Changes that Make Comparing Them Difficult並列篇名：從時點與量解析月變動率和年變動率反向變動的矛盾作者：Benoit Quenneville;David F. Findley關鍵字：景氣循環;增益及相平移函數;成長率;移動平均;Business cycle;Gain and phase shift functions;Growth rates;Moving averages期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：當一個經濟月指標出現數個月劇烈收縮後開始復甦時，發佈的年成長率和月成長率可能會出現相互矛盾的訊號－年成長率呈現降低而月成長率則出現增加，或反之亦然。這種現象係季節調整專家眾所周知的，如參閱Shiskin（1957）。在本文中，我們重新深入分析、闡明、並解釋出現這種潛在矛盾的現象。例如因為與上年同月的差分是當前水準值與之前11個月差分的總和，且全年的加總有一個5.5個月的相平移，年差分落後月差分5.5個月。本文先對全年加總作增益及相函數的基本理論推導，然後輔以實際資料解析。英文摘要：When a monthly economic indicator series contracts sharply for a few months and then starts to recover, the published annual and monthly growth rates can give conflicting signals: the annual growth rate can indicate a decrease and the monthly growth rate an increase or vice versa. This is well known to the seasonal adjustment community, see, for example, Shiskin (1957). In this paper, we revisit, illustrate and then explain this potential for conflict more analytically. For example, the annual differences lag the monthly differences by five and a half months because the same-month-year-ago difference is the sum of the current and eleven preceding monthly differences, and the annual sum has a phase shift of five and a half months. Illustrative examples are followed by an elementary formal mathematical derivation using the gain and phase functions of the annual sum.起始頁-結束頁：119-138資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201210.00023篇名：Seasonal Adjustment of the UK Labour Force Survey: Correcting for Effects of the Phase Shift, Moving Holidays and the 2010 Leap Week並列篇名：英國勞動力調查的季節調整－相平移、移動節日、以及2010年閏周的效果修正作者：Daniel Ayoubkhani關鍵字：季節調整;先驗調整;勞動力調查;RegARIMA;Seasonal adjustment;Prior adjustment;Labour force survey;RegARIMA期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：英國國家統計局（ONS）所發佈的重要統計數字大多是經過季節調整後的結果，以期有助於解讀及詮釋時間序列的變動。季節調整的目的在於去移因季節性所產生的影響（比如聖誕節的高銷售金額）或來自於日曆排定的影響（如復活節可能出現在3月或4月）。每一年的12個月份在英國勞動力調查（LFS）中均以一個「4周」或「5周」長的調查月表示，故時間序列必須透過regARIMA模型的「日曆化」，來改進季節調整估計的品質。這樣的步驟一直被檢測著，直到2010年10月，英國LFS受限於一個1周的調查空窗期，或稱「閏周」，以便它們的報告期間與歐盟其它國家一致，也因此出現了一個新奇的問題。本文解釋LFS如何以先驗調整及必要的後續調整，來克服2010年閏周引起的額外複雜性。英文摘要：In the Office for National Statistics (ONS), most headline statistical outputs are seasonally adjusted to aid interpretation of movements within the time series. Seasonal adjustment aims to remove effects associated with the time of the year (for example, higher sales at Christmas) or the arrangement of the calendar (for example, Easter moving between March and April). Each of the 12 Gregorian calendar months is represented in the UK Labour Force Survey (LFS) by a four-or five-week-long survey month, and the time series must therefore be ”calendarised”, through the application of regARIMA modelling, in order to improve the quality of seasonally adjusted estimates. This process is tried and tested but, in October 2010, the UK LFS was subject to a one-week-long survey break, or ”leapweek”, in order to align its reporting periods with those of the rest of the European Union-which presented a novel problem. This article explains how LFS prior adjustments are constructed in general, and the adaptations necessary to overcome the additional complications caused by the 2010 leap week.起始頁-結束頁：139-170資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201210.00034篇名：Using High Frequency Data to Model Moving Holiday Effects: An Empirical Investigation of Taiwanese Monetary Aggregates並列篇名：應用高頻資料估計移動節日效應－臺灣貨幣總計數的實證分析作者：劉淑敏(Shuw-Miin Liou);林金龍(Jin-Lung Lin);彭俊能(Chun-Neng Peng)關鍵字：中國新年;節日效應;流量迴歸量;積存量迴歸量;貨幣供給量;Chinese new year;Holiday effect;Flow series regressor;Stock series regressor;Monetary aggregates期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：中國新年在臺灣是一個重要的節日，並且在經濟活動上具有相當程度的影響。新年假期的時點是由農曆決定，使得每年農曆年節期間對照在陽曆時，會變成具有移動節日效果的現象，如此之下，在臺灣的部分經濟變數則將隨農曆年節的移動而改變。另一方面，本文嘗試使用日資料建構月的節日迴歸量變數來分析固定季節因子中的移動季節因子。一般而言，在無日資料可以使用之下，都是假設在節日期間每日的影響程度都是一樣的。在分析的時候，本文定義影響節日效應的變數分別為「節日前」、「節日期間」和「節日後」這三種。分析的資料則是以臺灣的貨幣供給量，分別比較在沒有節日變數下、用標準的節日變數和用日資料建構的節日變數這三種。在迴歸量建構的方式上，考慮積存量迴歸量和流量迴歸量這二種迴歸量。實證結果顯示，在控制移動節日效應方面，使用日資料下可以更精確的描述節日的影響效應，但改進的幅度不是非常大。英文摘要：Chinese New Year is the most important holiday in Taiwan and strongly affects economic activities. The holiday is based upon lunar calendar and becomes a moving holiday in Gregorian calendar. We propose to use daily data to construct monthly holiday variables to distinguish the moving holiday factors from the regular seasonal components. With the availability of daily data, one is exempted free from being forced to assuming equal effect for each day within the holiday interval. We define three holiday variables: ”before”, ”during”, and ”after” the holiday effect. We analyze four monetary aggregates in Taiwan and compare the performance of three methods: no holiday variables, holiday variable without using daily data, and holiday variables using daily data. Two types of daily average holiday regressors are presented, one type modeled after flow holiday regressors and the other type modeled after stock holiday regressors. Empirical analysis confirms the importance of controlling for moving holiday effect and daily data does help improve the precision of estimating holiday effect though the margin is not large.起始頁-結束頁：171-192資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201210.00045篇名：能源價格衝擊與臺灣總體經濟並列篇名：Energy Price Shocks and Taiwan's Macroeconomy作者：陳虹均(Hung-Chun Chen);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo);林信助(Shinn-Juh Lin)關鍵字：能源價格;因果關係檢定;自我迴歸分配落後模型;Energy price;Granger causality test;Autoregressive distributed lag model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：自1970年代以來有許多研究指出，能源價格衝擊對於一個國家的總體經濟表現有顯著的影響。但對於能源價格究竟是以何種形式，以及透過什麼管道對總體經濟產生影響，卻沒有一致的看法。同時，經濟決策者對於能源價格變動的反應，常因為不確定性的存在而有延後反映的現象。本文利用臺灣1981年到2009年的能源價格，建構數種對稱性與不對稱性之能源價格變動測度，以Granger因果關係檢定探討能源價格變動與臺灣其他相關的總體經濟變數間的關係;並透過自我迴歸分配落後模型（autoregressive distributed lag model，ARDL）模型估計能源價格變動與臺灣實質產出之間的長期關係式。我們的實證結果顯示:能源價格變動，相較於臺灣的總體經濟體系，具有外生性。能源價格成長率以及能源價格漲跌率均對於臺灣總體經濟變數並沒有顯著的影響力，但是能源價格波動率卻對臺灣的實質GDP成長率有顯著的負面影響。另外，ARDL模型估計結果則顯示，能源價格波動率與臺灣實質GDP之間存在一個反方向變動的長期均衡關係。本結果隱含1981年之後，能源價格可能透過不確定性與部門移轉這兩種不對稱性管道影響臺灣產出成長率。英文摘要：Since the 1970s, numerous studies have demonstrated that energy price changes can have a significant impact on a country's macroeconomy. However, there is no consensus regarding in what form, or by which channel can energy price changes affect the macroeconomy. In addition, economic decision makers often respond to energy price changes with a time lag due to the existence of uncertainty. This paper constructs several indicators of symmetric and asymmetric energy price changes based on the energy prices in Taiwan for the period from 1981 to 2009. We employ Granger's causality test to examine the relationship between energy price changes and related macroeconomic variables; and utilize the Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) model to estimate the long-run relation between energy price changes and the real GDP of Taiwan. Our empirical results show that energy price exhibits exogeneity relative to important macroeconomic variables; neither the energy price growth rate, nor the energy price net increase/decrease has a significant impact on real GDP, while the energy price volatility has a negative impact on the real GDP of Taiwan. Furthermore, the estimation result of the ARDL model indicates the existence of a long-term inverse relation between energy price volatility and the real GDP. These imply that, since 1981, uncertainty and sectoral shift may have been the two possible asymmetric channels through which energy price shocks affected Taiwan's output growth rate.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.00016篇名：瓶頸部門、瓶頸資源與經濟成長並列篇名：Bottleneck Sectors, Bottleneck Resources, and Economic Growth作者：李高朝(Kao-Chao Lee);李秀娟(Shiou-Jiuan Lee);林師模(Shih-Mo Lin)關鍵字：瓶頸部門;瓶頸資源;經濟成長;Bottleneck sectors;Bottleneck resources;Economic growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究以1991─2004年的產業關聯表為基礎，估算1991─2004年之間的產業替代係數（R值）及加工深度係數（S值），再以RAS方法推估我國2005─2015年的投入係數表，據以建立靜態資源利用及規劃模型。接著，利用歷史資料推估各產業部門單位產值所需之勞動人數（勞動投入係數）、水資源使用係數、電力資源使用係數及資本使用係數，並將之納入多部門資源利用及規劃模型，同時利用靜態模型評估2009年及2015年的可能瓶頸部門及可能的瓶頸資源。研究結果顯示，2009年及2015年可能的瓶頸資源主要為體力操作工，顯示引進適量的外籍藍領勞動有其必要；另外，在目前所推估的農業用水移轉量及廠商自行取水的數量之下，在2009年時水資源略有不足；電力資源則在2015年會有不足的可能性。在瓶頸部門方面，2009年可能的瓶頸部門為礦業部門，惟礦業產品若能夠提高進口比例，且在進口來源不虞匱乏下，將不至於成為經濟體系的生產瓶頸；到了2015年雖然模擬結果顯示無瓶頸部門，但有關單位仍應儘早規劃，否則若部門的最低最終需要值高於模型設定值，一旦發生生產不足而又無法由進口取得足夠的進口量時，便會影響其他產業的生產，不利於經濟發展。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the current and future resource utilization situation of Taiwan. We use a static resource utilization model to identify the possible bottleneck sectors and bottleneck resources for 2009 and 2015. We use the input-output tables of 1991 to 2004 to estimate the R and S values between two specific periods, which are then used in conjunction with RAS method to project input coefficients tables for 2009 and 2015. These tables, in turn, are used to develop the resource utilization and planning models. Simulation results using the static model indicate that blue-collar labor will be insufficient in 2009 and 2015. Power supply, on the other hand, will become a bottleneck resource only in 2015. For the bottleneck sectors, the Mineral sector will be a possible bottleneck sector in 2009. Therefore, the government should design suitable (import) policies to avoid these bottlenecks so as to maintain a reasonable level of economic growth.起始頁-結束頁：37-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.00027篇名：新臺幣美元外匯市場價格發現之研究並列篇名：An Investigation on the Price Discovery of the Nt-dollar Foreign Exchange Market作者：高崇瑋(Chung-Wei Kao);萬哲鈺(Jer-Yuh Wan)關鍵字：價格發現;訊息比例;衝擊反應分析;變異數分解;Price discovery;Information share;Impulse response analysis;Variance decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文主要討論新臺幣美元外匯市場之元太外匯與臺北外匯兩家外匯經紀公司，所具有的價格發現能力與影響此能力的市場因素。透過Hasbrouck（1995）的訊息比例模型以及Kingetal.（1991）之變異數分解與衝擊反應分析，實證結果顯示元太外匯擁有的訊息比例明顯比其占有的市場交易量比例為高，此外元太外匯價格變異為共同隨機趨勢變異解釋的比例與其價格反應恆常衝擊的速度等，也比臺北外匯的水準與反應為快，這顯示元太外匯的價格發現能力高於臺北外匯。而迴歸分析的結果指出，元太外匯擁有的訊息比例與價差、成交量以及價格波動等呈現反向變化關係，此除進一步支持元太外匯價格發現能力高於臺北外匯的結果外，也同時顯示出交易制度的差異與央行的干預行為，為造成元太外匯價格發現能力高於臺北外匯的主要原因。再多加入日期效應與總體經濟資訊公布的虛擬變數後，上述迴歸分析的結果依然可以成立，這顯示出本文的實證結論具有穩健性。英文摘要：This paper investigates the price discovery role of two markets in the NTDollar foreign exchange market, the Taipei Forex Inc. (TFI) and the Cosmos Foreign Exchange International Co. (CFE). By applying the information sharemodel of Hasbrouck (1995) and variance decomposition and impulse response analysis of King et al. (1991), the empirical results show the price discovery role of CFE is greater than that of TFI. From the regression analysis of CFE’s information share on spread, volume and volatility, the results of regression further support that CFE plays a major price discovery role in the NT-Dollar foreign exchange market. When considering the calendar effect and the macro-announcements effect, the empirical results above can still hold.起始頁-結束頁：81-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.00038篇名：垂直式與水平式產業內貿易決定因素之實證分析—臺灣主要製造業之驗證並列篇名：Measurement and Determinants of Vertical and Horizontal Intra-Industry Trade: Evidence from Taiwan's Main Manufacturing Industry作者：李宥蒼(You-Tsang Lee);張國益(Kuo-I Chang)關鍵字：產業內貿易;國際分工;直接投資;Intra-industry trade;Fragmentation;Foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究採用1997－2006年間，臺灣與六個主要貿易對手國的10種製造業做為研究的對象，並以HS前六碼作為計量的單位，透過Grubel and Lloyd（1975）及Greenaway et al.（1994，1995）的定義，將產業內貿易（intraindustry trade，IIT）拆解成IIT指標、垂直型IIT（vertical IIT，VIIT）指標、水平型IIT（horizontal IIT，HIIT）指標、高品質VIIT（high quality VIIT，HVIIT）指標、低品質VIIT（low quality VIIT，LVIIT）等五種指標，用來測量臺灣與6國IIT的發展程度與國際分工的關聯，再進一步去了解影響IIT發展的決定因素。本研究發現臺灣與中國、南韓、日本、新加坡的IIT與VIIT的貿易額及程度都有劇增的現象。然而，IIT的程度與份額大增，主要是由VIIT所貢獻，而HIIT占IIT的份額較低。近年來臺灣與主要貿易國間IIT程度中，主要是以VIIT占IIT的份額與貢獻最大，HIIT則占IIT的份額甚微。值得注意的是，實證分析發現FDI分別在臺灣與六個主要貿易對手國的IIT、VIIT以及HIIT等三種貿易型態上，皆扮演了重要的促進角色。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the intra-industry trade (IIT) development of ten manufacturing industries based on a six-digit HS code between Taiwan and six major trading partners in 1997 to 2006. The investigation conducts four types of G-L index decomposition into Vertical IIT (VIIT) index, Horizontal IIT (HIIT) index, High quality VIIT (HVIIT) index, and Low quality VIIT (LVIIT) index to measure the fragmentation of production, and further determines the correlation of ten manufacturing industries in intra-industry trade.The result shows that Taiwan has a significant increase in IIT volume with China, South Korea, Japan, and Singapore. In the recent trading, VIIT represents a great proportion compared with HIIT on IIT. LVIIT has the highest rate out of VIIT among ten manufacturing industries. However, China appears to have a higher HVIIT rate in VIIT. The study concludes that foreign direct investment (FDI) plays an important role in the development of IIT, VIIT, and HIIT.起始頁-結束頁：119-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.00049篇名：壹、2012年臺灣經濟情勢總展望－2011年12月29日記者會新聞稿作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：155-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.000510篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：陳宜廷;簡錦漢;張靜貞;蔡文禎;林常青;周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：157-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.000611篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012起始頁-結束頁：181-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所DOI：10.29629/TEFP.201203.000701篇名：Under the Shadow of Mackenzie King?-Narrative Spatialization as Working-Through in Kerri Sakamoto's The Electrical Field並列篇名：敘述空間化與創傷消解：<U+5742>本凱莉的《電場》作者：劉紀雯(Kate Chi-Wen Liu)關鍵字：<U+5742>本凱莉;敘述空間化;創傷敘述;Kerri Sakamoto;narrative spatialization;trauma narrative期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：<U+5742>本凱莉的《電場》呈現主角朝子藉由敘述同時「展演」與「消解」她的創傷，而這個敘述空間就好像是一個電場一般，在破碎的敘述中充滿情感與歷史因素之糾葛。「展演」與「消解」在受創者心中是兩個並存也互相衝突的力量，而非二元對立，或先後出現。因此，朝子的敘述同時展演了她的創傷症狀和反應她如何逐漸消解創傷。首先，她的受創症狀（如痲痺自保、情緒爆發、縈迴夢境與自我合理化）既反映了她所受到的限制，也表達她對重建人際關係的慾望。其次，以空間角度閱讀朝子的敘述－也就是閱讀她的空間化的敘述與空間實踐－可以看出她如何逐漸消解自己的創傷：藉由敘述編織一個複雜卻寬廣的社會因果脈絡，因此得以由多元角度了解與接受死亡及創傷，同時肯定人我之溝通與分享。英文摘要：The novelistic presentation of ”the electrical field” in Kerri Sakamoto's eponymous novel-that is, the emotional entanglement of the characters as filtered through Asako's mind-can be seen as the narrative space of its protagonist-narrator, Asako, through which she both acts out and works through her traumas. Instead of being binary opposites (with one superseding the other), acting out and working through are ”countervailing forces” in Asako's traumatized mind, functioning against one another as they overlap. Asako's fragmentary narration thus reveals both the symptoms of her traumas and her difficult means of working through them. The symptoms include protective numbing, emotional outbursts, and repeated dreams and rationalization, which are seen as both responses to her social constraints and expressions of her desire for social interaction. Asako's narrative working through is then read ”spatially”; that is, in terms of its spatial form (with narrative fragments and recurrent motifs) and of Asako's spatial practices in the yard, on and beyond the electrical field, and on Mackenzie Hill. Her narrative spatialization, in other words, is her way of working through traumas and weaving a complicated network of causality, motif and human connection, through which trauma and death are understood from multiple perspectives, while communication and sharing are confirmed.起始頁-結束頁：591-634資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201212.05912篇名：意志、審慮與信念：詮釋詹姆士的〈信念意志〉並列篇名：Will, Deliberation, and Belief-Interpreting William James's "The Will to Believe"作者：鄭喜恆(Hsi-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：詹姆士;知識論;意志;信念;審慮;William James;epistemology;will;belief;deliberation期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文所詮釋與發展的是詹姆士的〈信念意志〉在「情感與意志等非知性因素在個人決定信念之過程中能夠扮演正面角色」這條核心思想路線上的主張。對於〈信念意志〉的流行詮釋指出，只有在特定條件得到滿足時，個人才有正當性使用非知性因素來決定信念。但是本文提出的新詮釋指出，雖然非知性因素無法證成信念，但是在個人信念決定過程的三個階段中（決定審慮哪些議題、審慮之過程、以及審慮之結束）可以有不同種類的非知性因素來扮演各自的正面角色，協助讓個人信念決定下來。這個新詮釋不僅可免除流行詮釋所面臨的質疑，而且進一步發展了〈信念意志〉中的許多核心洞見。英文摘要：This paper interprets and develops one of the main issues dealt with in William James's ”The Will to Believe”: the issue of what positive role non-intellectual factors such as passions and volitions play in an individual's deliberative process of belief formation. A popular way of interpreting ”The Will to Believe” holds the controversial view that individuals can legitimately use non-intellectual factors such as passions and volitions to determine their beliefs only when a certain set of conditions are satisfied. However, the interpretation offered in this paper, accepting that non-intellectual factors provide no epistemic justification for beliefs, contends that various kinds of non-intellectual factors can legitimately play distinctively positive roles in an individual's deliberative process of belief formation and thus contribute to the settlement of belief. This new interpretation not only avoids many problems facing the above-mentioned popular interpretation, but also further develops some of the central insights in ”The Will to Believe.”起始頁-結束頁：635-671資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201212.06353篇名：歐盟新一代自由貿易協定政策之研究並列篇名：The EU's Policy on the New Generation Free Trade Agreements作者：洪德欽(Der-Chin Horng)關鍵字：歐盟;自由貿易協定;韓國;里斯本條約;世界貿易組織;EU;FTA;South Korea;the Treaty of Lisbon;WTO期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：歐盟自由貿易協定（FTA）政策乃其共同貿易政策之一環，歷經長期實踐，已發展出很多種類之FTA，以及非常複雜的層級式貿易關係。歐盟自2006年起已選擇性針對韓國、印度、巴西、ASEAN等對象，優先推動新一代FTA。新一代FTA強調服務、投資、競爭、政府採購等領域的市場開放、非關稅障礙排除，以及智產權的保護及公平貿易，以提昇歐洲企業及產品的競爭力，並對歐洲就業及經濟成長有所貢獻。新一代FTA簽署對象國家很多皆為台灣在歐盟市場的主要競爭對手，更是值得重視。本文將從法律文義解釋及國際政治經濟學政策研究等觀點，分析歐盟FTA的發展背景、目標與種類，並以歐韓FTA個案研究，說明歐盟新一代FTA對非會員國的影響，以及對WTO帶來的挑戰。英文摘要：The promotion of Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) is an active policy among of the Common Commercial Policy (CCP) conducted by the European Union (EU). The EU has developed many different types of FTAs, and maintains a very complicated hierarchy in its external trade relations. The EU introduced a policy on the latest generation of FTAs on 3 October 2006. South Korea, India, Brazil and ASEAN are identified as priorities for new generation FTAs with the EU. The new generation FTAs are very comprehensive with regards to trade liberalization in a number of fields, including the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers, further liberalization in services, investment, competition, enforcement of intellectual property rights, and so on. Many of the EU's potential partners for new generation FTAs are major trade rivals of Taiwan in the EU market. This article takes the EU-Korea FTA as a case study to examine the following core issues: the historical background of the EU's trade policies, legal bases and decision-making procedures of new generation FTAs, the main contents and special features of the EU-Korea FTA, and the impacts of the EU-Korea FTA on the WTO and third countries. For the future development of EU FTA policy, this article also proposes an open regionalism approach to make the new generation FTAs compatible with the spirit of WTO multilateralism.起始頁-結束頁：673-752資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201212.06734篇名：歐盟對外經貿法之發展：法律與政策變遷並列篇名：The Evolution of EU External Economic Law-Legal and Policy Changes作者：吳建輝(Chien-Huei Wu)關鍵字：歐盟對外經貿法;里斯本條約;共同商業政策;權限分配;全球歐洲;EU external economic law;Lisbon Treaty;common commercial policy;distribution of competence;Global Europe期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷4期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文從歐洲整合之沿革，探討歐盟對外經貿法之發展。首先，基於里斯本條約將共同商業政策納入歐盟對外行動脈絡，歐盟對外經貿政策亦須受到聯盟對外行動之目標與原則所導引之考量，本文首先釐清歐盟之對外經貿政策應受何目標與原則所規範。其次，本文從條約修正與案例法之發展，探討歐盟對外經貿權限之擴張與取得。本文並進而從制度性運作面向，探討歐盟對外經貿協定談判之政策擬定與政策形成。其後並從政策延續與改變之角度，探討歐盟對外經貿協定政策之演變。英文摘要：This article investigates the historical development and evolution of EU external economic law and policy. Firstly, it explores the expansion of the EU external economic competence by virtue of treaty revision and case-law. It then deals with policy aspects of EU external economic relations and delineates the changes and continuity thereof. In view of the coming into being of the Common Foreign and Security Policy by virtue of the Maastricht Treaty, and by locating the Common Commercial Policy in the context of EU external actions with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, this article explores what objectives and principles should guide the external economic policies of the European Union.起始頁-結束頁：753-839資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201212.07535篇名：Globalization and Varieties of Modernity並列篇名：全球化與多樣化的現代性作者：娑菲珥•沃爾比(Sylvia Walby)關鍵字：現代性;階級;性別;就業;社會福利;modernity;class;gender;employment;welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：全球化進程正以錯綜複雜的方式重新形塑著不平等。由於社會發展之路徑依賴的本質，及現代性的多樣化，導致全球化對於各社會型態有著不等的衝擊。各種多樣化的現代性，包含新自由主義與社會民主主義，皆涉及多種型態之性別政權與資本主義。在階級議題之外再納入性別不平等的考量，將改變我們檢視不平等的本質及其不斷改變的型態。本文使用OECD成員國的資料，探討在就業與社會福利供給中，各種型態的性別與階級不平等彼此對應的程度。本研究發現兩者有顯著差異，進而導出這樣的結論：要概念化並分析多樣化的現代性時，必須包含性別層面，而不該假設可將其簡化為階級議題。英文摘要：Global processes are restructuring inequalities in complex ways. Globalization has uneven impacts on social formations as a consequence of the path dependent nature of societal development and variations in the forms of modernity. The multiple varieties of modernity, including neoliberalism and social democracy, involve diverse forms of gender regime as well as diverse forms of capitalism. Including gender inequalities in addition to class alters how we see the nature and changing patterns of inequalities. The paper investigates the extent to which variations in the form of gender and class inequalities in employment and in welfare provision map onto each other, using data from OECD countries. Significant points of divergence are found, leading to the conclusion that conceptualisation and analysis of varieties of modernity should include a gender dimension and not presume that this is reducible to class.起始頁-結束頁：391-417資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201209.03916篇名：Illegal Noise-The Sound of Change in H. T. Tsiang's "And China Has Hands"並列篇名：非法噪音：蔣希曾《出番記》中改變的聲音作者：喬爾•溫德蘭(Joel Wendland)關鍵字：文學;華裔美國人;蔣希曾;聲音;literature;Chinese-American;H. T. Tsiang;sound期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文研究聲音在蔣希曾1937年作品《出番記》中所扮演的角色。聲音，以及其辯證對偶－噤聲，在此作品中創造了一個「聲音地景」，可於其中勾勒出身分、群體、政治派系、壓迫與抵抗的認知地圖。蔣希曾對於聲音的運用，為文本增添了新的聽覺層面，這是習於西方閱讀模式的讀者所常忽略的。本文檢視蔣希曾如何在被強迫的沈默中敘事，強調中華文化中口語的價值與限制。在國際主義勞動階級運動一片追求解放，操控種族、族裔、國家與語言分歧之際，這些限制反而激發蔣希曾追尋新的旋律與節奏。英文摘要：This paper examines the role of sound in H. T. Tsiang's 1937 novel ”And China Has Hands.” Sound, and its dialectical partner, silence, work in this novel to create a ”sonic landscape” in which a cognitive map of identity, community, political affiliations, oppression and resistance might be sketched. Tsiang's use of sound adds an aural dimension to the text which is typically ignored by readers accustomed to Western modes of reading. This paper examines how Tsiang produced a narrative that emerges from enforced silence to emphasize the value and limits of orality in Chinese culture. Those limits cause Tsiang to seek new cadences and choruses within an internationalist working-class movement modulated by racial, ethnic, national, and linguistic differences, in a common struggle for liberation.起始頁-結束頁：419-457資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201209.04197篇名："I Eat; Therefore I Am"-Molly and Food並列篇名：「我吃故我在」：莫莉與飲食作者：周幸君(Hsing-Chun Chou)關鍵字：莫莉．布盧姆;《尤利西斯》;食物;社會實踐;性別;Molly Bloom;Ulysses;food;social practice;gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：莫莉在〈潘尼洛普〉一章的意識流動當中充滿了飲食；飲食構成了「莫莉．布盧姆」其人主要且重要的一部分，也呈現了一幅描繪其生活既細膩又寫實的畫作。食物乃是一種符號。對食物的資格權可顯示家庭的財政狀況。此外，食物也提供莫莉有關布盧姆的個人訊息，並且讓她與家人、過去、都柏林社區作一連結。參與種種飲食活動使莫莉得以投入都柏林的社區生活。飲食行為因此構成了莫莉．布盧姆的主體。「她吃故她在。」儘管並未完全拋開社會文化之束縛，莫莉仍然顛倒了傳統上男性等同消費者而女性等同消費品的性別角色，品嘗食物與性慾帶來的歡娛，同時暗示消耗食物所引發的身體機能乃是自然且必然之現象。英文摘要：Molly's streams of consciousness in ”Penelope” are filled with food and eating, which make up a major and crucial part of the person ”Molly Bloom” and present a detailed and realistic picture of her life. Food acts as a sign. The rights of entitlement to food signify the financial condition of a household. Moreover, it conveys to Molly private coded messages concerning Bloom, and enables her to make connections with her family, her past, and the community in Dublin. In taking part in various food-related activities, Molly also participates in the communal life of Dublin. Dietary practices thus constitute a part of the identity of Molly Bloom. She eats; therefore she is. Not entirely free from sociocultural constraints, Molly nevertheless reverses the traditional gender roles of man as consumer and woman as the consumed, savors the pleasures brought about by food and sexuality, and suggests the naturalness and inevitability of bodily functions engendered by food consumption.起始頁-結束頁：459-496資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201209.04598篇名：Repositioning "Asia"-The Problematics of Liminality and Transpacific Imaginary in Theresa Hak Kyung Cha's Dictee並列篇名：求索「亞洲」：閱讀車學敬《聽寫》的閾境性與跨太平洋意象作者：劉于雁(Yu-Yen Liu)關鍵字：冷戰;閾境性;跨太平洋意象;亞洲;亞裔美國研究;Cold War;liminality;transpacific imaginary;Asia;Asian American Studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：南韓近代境遇與其地緣政治、冷戰美蘇對峙息息相關。以冷戰議題重思亞裔美國研究可凸顯帝國、種族、政治符號操縱如何肇始、形塑今日「美國」與「亞洲」概念。本論文循此脈絡閱讀韓裔美籍女作家車學敬的《聽寫》：爬梳文本中南韓與歐亞帝國主義、殖民霸權的糾葛，剖析這異質混雜文本的「閾境性」與「跨太平洋意象」如何串接、嵌鑲、構築，求索「亞洲」。即，探求思索「亞洲」作為政治勢力交鋒、斡旋場域背後的歷史殊異與意識形態。《聽寫》是個跨太平洋的族裔故事、「隱喻」「紀實」更迭，也是個「非此、亦非彼」，既「離索」又「趨近」身分認同<U+5611>隙迴游的「閾境」書寫。其兼容卻悖反的「亞洲」描摹，指涉「亞洲」論述非侷限於探討亞裔性之弔詭或何謂亞洲之論戰；而是關乎「亞洲」作為論述交錯、或扞格、或協商之軸域如何左右亞－美政治文化意義生產之洞見觀瞻。英文摘要：This paper intends to posit the importance of thinking through historical specificities as instrumental to understanding the particularities and ideologies that constitutes ”Asia” as site of negotiation and intervention. This paper contends that a (re-)investigation of the Cold War discourse will make visible the imperial logic and shifting historical stakes under and through which the threatening presence of U.S. hegemony in Asia invites a careful reexamination of the invention not only of ”American” but of ”Asian.” Viewed in light of this argument, Theresa Hak Kyung Cha's Dictee is both a complicating text that illustrates historically how the present (East) Asian American identity and culture are preconditioned by American empire and Japan's imperialist past, and an intriguing text that metaphorically cultivates the problematics of liminality and transpacific imaginary. Cha uses mixed media to convey the very intricacies of the interrelated discourses on Korean identity, Korean American, and the transpacific imaginary of ”Asia.” As such, to analyze Dictee within the context of the Cold War discourse is to call attention to the hidden narratives and complex textualization that underlie the dichotomized understanding of ”Asia.” In reading this subtle and abstruse text alongside the Cold War politics, this paper then addresses the issues of how ”Asia” becomes the very site where various kinds of forces converge, intertwine, and hybridize, and where new ways of making meanings have been engendered and called into question.起始頁-結束頁：497-534資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201209.04979篇名：十八世紀英國「宗教藝術」重建的契機：從對拉斐爾圖稿及二則宗教圖像的論辯談起並列篇名：Towards Rehabilitating "Religious Art" in Eighteenth-Century England: Defending Raphael's Cartoons and Religious Images作者：謝佳娟(Chia-Chuan Hsieh)關鍵字：拉斐爾圖稿;宗教圖像;宗教藝術;繪畫理論;十八世紀英國教會;Raphael's Cartoons;religious images;religious art;theory of painting;eighteenth-century Church of England期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷3期出版年：2012中文摘要：英國自十六世紀中宗教改革後，宗教與藝術的關係長期冷淡，甚至幾度格格不入。到了十八世紀，開始出現轉機：羅馬教會圖像「拉斐爾圖稿」成為歷史畫典範，部分英國教會人士則援用繪畫理論來辯護宗教圖像的益處，顯示分隔已久的藝術與宗教有了重新交會的可能。本文旨在探討此項轉變得以發生的概念基礎，以及「宗教藝術」在英國重新發展的意義。文中首先闡述當時論者對拉斐爾圖稿的詮釋，繼而分析教會人士對宗教圖像的辯護，最後導出當時的繪畫真理觀，指出此觀點使宗教圖像得以在新的文化框架下建立其藝術價值論述。英文摘要：Since the Reformation in the mid-sixteenth century, religion had been out of tune with-or even hostile to-art in England. During the eighteenth century, new channels began to appear which made possible reuniting long-separated art and religion: the Raphael Cartoons, originally produced as Roman apologetics, became canonical for history painting in Protestant England, while religious imagery was defended by some Anglican clergymen who put forth arguments based on contemporary theories of painting. This article aims to explore the conceptual basis for this change and the significance of this re-introduction of ”religious art” in England. It first examines the ways in which English commentators dealt with religious and artistic questions concerning the Raphael Cartoons, and then analyzes some clergymen's defences of religious images, prompted by certain controversies over the use of images in churches. Finally, it argues that a certain conception of truth in painting was formulated, which helped validated a discourse of artistic value of ”religious images” in a new cultural framework.起始頁-結束頁：565-590資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201209.056510篇名：Cognitive Skills and Survey Nonresponse-Evidence from Two Longitudinal Studies in the United States並列篇名：認知能力與拒絕受訪的關係：以美國的兩個貫時性社會調查為例作者：傑瑞米•費理茲(Jeremy Freese);艾蜜莉亞•布蘭尼根(Amelia Branigan)關鍵字：認知能力;拒絕受訪;貫時性研究;cognitive skills;cognitive ability;survey nonresponse;longitudinal surveys期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本研究分析受訪者參與貫時性社會調查的持續性是否與認知能力的高低有關。「威斯康辛長期追蹤研究」多次追蹤一批於1957年高中畢業的學生至今。筆者分析這項調查資料發現，能持續多次參與長期追蹤調查的受訪者，通常認知能力較高，而且這個關係並不受家庭背景的影響。只有在控制受訪者的教育成就、職業地位及社會參與程度之後，這兩者之間的關係才略為降低。然而，在「美國1979年青少年長期追蹤研究」（NLSY79）之1998年波次的資料中卻呈現相反的關係：認知能力較高的人比較可能拒絕參與調查。筆者進一步分析NLSY79的資料發現，其實認知能力較低者，一開始也是比較容易拒絕參與調查，只是後來被訪員所說服，轉變成願意參與調查。NLSY79提供金錢誘因，使部份剛開始表示拒絕受訪的人，後來能願意接受訪問。然而WLS並沒有提供這樣的金錢誘因。這或許能解釋為何這兩項資料會呈現不同的研究結果。英文摘要：This study examines the relationship between general cognitive skills (i.e., those measured by intendedly general tests of ability or aptitude) and cooperation with requests for continued participation in longitudinal studies. Using the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) of 1957 high school graduates, we find a consistent monotonic relationship in which those with higher measured skills are less likely to refuse to participate. Analyses indicate that this result cannot be explained by family background measures and is only slightly attenuated by the inclusion of measures of subsequent educational and occupational attainment and social participation. Meanwhile, in the 1998 wave of National Longitudinal Study of Youth in 1979 (NLSY79), the opposite relationship is observed: those with higher cognitive skills are somewhat more likely to refuse to participate. Further analyses reveal that this is due to some aspect of refusal conversion, as the pattern of initial refusals in the NLSY79 is similar to that of ultimate refusals in the WLS. One important difference between the refusal conversion efforts in the two studies is that NLSY79 has used significant financial incentives and WLS does not, which may explain the difference.起始頁-結束頁：221-247資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201206.022111篇名：Marital Power Relations and Family Life in Transnational Marriages-A Study of Asian-French Couples Residing in France並列篇名：跨國婚姻中的權力關係與家庭生活：以法國的亞－法婚配伴侶為例作者：柯瓊芳(Chyong-Fang Ko)關鍵字：跨國婚姻;婚姻關係;亞－法婚配;transnational marriage;marital relationship;Asian-French couples期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文引用深度訪談資料，分析居住在法國的亞裔與法裔婚配（或同居伴侶）的家庭生活與婚姻權力關係。所有的受訪者均是透過學校、工作或其他個人社交網絡而認識對方，也都認為這樣的夫妻／伴侶關係提供了家的溫暖與歸屬感。除了社會與經濟資源以外，部分受訪者利用自己原生國的文化資產與子女作為夫妻關係中的賦權工具。絕大多數的受訪者均滿意於目前的關係，但有部分受訪者認為如果自己可以經濟獨立、取得在法國的合法居留權，或者子女身心成熟到可以接受父母離異所帶來的生活改變，他們也願意終止目前的婚配或同居關係。訪談資料顯示，維繫這段跨國婚配或同居關係的主要關鍵，在於日積月累共同生活中所衍生出之錯綜複雜的共生與相互依存關係。絕大多數的亞裔受訪者滿意於能將亞洲文化與法國文化共融於日常生活中，雖然難免有價值觀點歧異之處，但是導因於宗教信仰或傳統價值觀的嚴重衝突，並未在他們的關係中出現。英文摘要：In-depth interview data are used to analyze family life and marital power relationships among Asian-French couples residing in France. All informants met their spouses/partners through personal networks or chance encounters at schools, workplaces, or social gatherings- none met through marriage agencies. All agreed that their conjugal relationships made them feel at home and a sense of belonging. In addition to social and economic resources, some of the individuals reported feeling empowered by their cultural capital or children. Some foreign spouses expressed a willingness to terminate their relationships if they could achieve financial independence, retain legal residency in France, or felt that their children could handle the trauma of divorce. The informants' narratives indicate that conjugal relationships may have been established and sustained due to mutual dependence. No significant value conflicts in terms of religious beliefs or traditional social norms were observed. Most of the foreign spouses appeared to enjoy a mixture of cultural values in their daily routines.起始頁-結束頁：249-279資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201206.024912篇名：從經濟效果論優惠性原產地規則之適法性及其未來發展並列篇名：The Legality and Development of Preferential Rules of Origin from the Perspective of Economic Effect作者：蔡孟佳(Meng-Chia Tsai)關鍵字：區域貿易協定;優惠性原產地規則;原產地規則協定;迂迴貿易;貿易限制性;regional trade agreements;preferential rules of origin;Agreement on Rules of Origin;trade deflection;trade restrictiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：儘管雙邊優惠貿易協定談判已為國際經濟活動之主流，然相關成效卻往往受到其原產地規則寬嚴之制約。過去相關研究有從法律面向討論優惠貿易協定相關問題，或純從經濟角度看優惠性原產地規則對於貿易或投資可能影響，而本文乃係同時結合法律與經濟之探索，特別是根據GATT第24條第5、8項規定來釐清關於優惠性原產地規則之適法條件，並透過經濟之量化估算來作為上述適法條件落實之基礎。最後研究發現，若所訂定之優惠性原產地規則過於嚴苛，則可能將對於非會員之貨品進口較先前更具限制性，且同時對絕大多數在會員國家加工出口之貨品構成歧視，致不符合GATT第24條第5、8項之規定。英文摘要：This paper explores the legality of preferential rules of origin based on regulations relating to Article 24 of the GATT 1994 and from the perspective of economic effect. The preferential rules of origin- originally intended to be a neutral instrument to protect against trade deflection- were abused by preference-granting countries seeking policy instruments with which to protect their own political and economic interests. With the stagnation of the WTO Doha Round Negotiations, bilateral negotiations and the preferential trade arrangements have become the leading international economic activities. The preferences created through the above preferential arrangements, however, have been eroded substantially by the implementation of the rules of origin. It is therefore increasingly important to investigate whether the rules of origin contained in such preferential arrangements are consistent with the related regulations of the Article 24 of the GATT 1994. We find that it is possible that these are inconsistent with Article 24 (5) and 24 (8), if the rules of origin are too restrictive. Accordingly, we suggest that it would be better for Taiwan in future RTA/FTA negotiations to adopt looser rules of origin on account of networked global supply chains.起始頁-結束頁：281-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201206.028113篇名：論歐洲聯盟國際投資政策之法律規範並列篇名：The Legal Norms on the European Union's International Investment Policy作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：共同商業政策;外人直接投資;專屬權限;最低投資平台;證券投資;Common Commercial Policy;foreign direct investment (FDI);exclusive competence;Minimun Platform on Investment;portfolio investments期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷2期出版年：2012中文摘要：里斯本條約首度明文規定歐盟在外人投資方面之專屬權限，並將投資納入共同商業政策之範圍。儘管如此，歐盟對外投資政策之適用範圍仍有欠明確。倘若歐盟之專屬權限涵括投資保障與自由化，歐盟則有必要制定投資協定範本以適用於未來之自由貿易協定投資專章。2010年執委會提出兩項草案：第一、一項規則草案用以解決因投資權限移轉至歐盟層級而產生的真空狀態；第二、倡議新歐盟投資政策之函示，針對歐盟對外洽簽投資協定或自由貿易協定投資專章的問題，提供談判權限。歐盟在投資領域之新權限勢必將在會員國、執委會與歐洲議會之間引起熱烈討論。英文摘要：The Lisbon Treaty establishes for the first time an exclusive competence over foreign investment by including it in the scope of the Common Commercial Policy. Nevertheless, the scope of application of the EU foreign investment policy is not yet clear. If EU exclusive competence covers both investment protection and liberalization, the EU will need to address the question of an EU model agreement to be applied in any future investment chapters in free trade agreements. In 2010, the European Commission brought forward two proposals: (1) a draft regulation to fix the vacuum created by transferring FDI competence to the EU-level, and (2) a communication proposing the new EU investment policy which feeds into negotiating mandates for EU investment agreements or investment chapters in free trade agreements. The EU's new investment competence will lead to fervent discussions in and among Member States, the Commission and the Parliament.起始頁-結束頁：339-389資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201206.033914篇名：An Unnatural Alliance? Political Radicalism and the Animal Defence Movement in Late Victorian and Edwardian Britain並列篇名：天生盟友？英國維多利亞與愛德華時期之動物捍衛運動與政治激進傳統作者：李鑑慧(Chien-Hui Li)關鍵字：反殘酷運動;反動物實驗運動;動物權;世俗主義運動;社會主義運動;anti-cruelty movement;anti-vivisection movement;animal rights;secularist movement;socialist movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：十九世紀英國動物保護運動與政治激進傳統間之關聯至今尚乏深入研究；本文藉由檢視維多利亞與愛德華時期之動物保護運動與世俗主義運動以及社會主義運動間之關係發展，對之進行初步探索。本文指出，世俗主義運動以及社會主義運動對於深具道德改革傳統色彩之動保運動儘管存在正面支持，基於意識形態上之差異，早期亦多存有疑慮。然而至十九世紀末，部分動保人士開始積極挪用此二激進運動中之激進思想以及語彙，有意識地挑戰主流動保運動之價值，推動了動保運動在意識型態、論述語彙以及改革目標等層面之激進化現象。此一來自世俗主義以及社會主義之影響，亦讓動保運動在道德改革傳統整體於十九世紀末漸趨衰微時，得以順利轉型為一俱備現代屬性之運動，於二十世紀持續發展。英文摘要：This article explores the still understudied relationship between nineteenth-century political radicalism and the animal defence movement by examining, respectively, the relations between the movement and the secularist and socialists strands of political radicalism in the nineteenth and early twentieth century. It points out that although positive secularist and socialist support existed for the animal cause, the relationship between them and the animal defence movement was far from smooth and cordial due to ideological differences. Nonetheless, from the late nineteenth century onward, with the efforts of freethinkers and socialists in the animal defence movement to draw on radical political ideas in reaction against the ideologies of the mainstream animal defence movement, sections of the movement underwent radical change in terms of character, ideology and objectives. The article regards the change as a move away from the moral reform tradition and towards political radicalism, and argues that this transformation helped sustain the movement into the twentieth century as it struggled to keep apace with the progressive currents of the new age.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201203.000115篇名："Between Nature and Art"-The Alchemical Underpinnings of Margaret Cavendish's Observations upon Experimental Philosophy and The Blazing World並列篇名：「自然與人為孰勝」：以鍊金思想解讀《實驗科學之我見》與《炫麗異世界》作者：趙恬儀(Tien-Yi Chao)關鍵字：瑪格麗特•柯芬蒂詩;十七世紀文學;鍊金術;自然科學;Margaret Cavendish;seventeenth-century literature;alchemy;natural philosophy期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：本論文探討十七世紀女作家瑪格麗特•柯芬蒂詩著作《實驗科學之我見》與《炫麗異世界》，當中關於自然與人為兩者優劣之分的論述。儘管兩書在內容、寫作風格和架構等方面均不相同，卻都呈現作者的自然觀及相關哲學論辨，其中尤以自然與人為之辨，為當代鍊金論述的重要主題之一。文藝復興與十七世紀的鍊金術師時常思考爭辯自然與人為力量之間的關係，著作當中提出各種不同的見，討論鍊金術的人為之力究竟能夠改善、甚至改造自然到何種程度。本論文揭示《實驗科學之我見》與《炫麗異世界》之間具有互文性，應視為整體的論述觀之；不僅如此，二書亦與當代鍊金論述具有互文性，分別以哲學和文學來處理自然與人為的課題，透過理性科哲思考與感性文學想像的雙重手法處理爭議性的論述，讓作者柯芬蒂詩對於上述議題的見解躍然紙上。儘管柯芬蒂詩批判鍊金術，但卻受到中世紀與早期現代某些鍊金思想的影響，而這些思想主張的即是自然之力勝過人為力量。英文摘要：This paper examines the discourses on nature and art in Margaret Cavendish's Observations upon Experimental Philosophy and The Blazing World. Despite profound differences in content, style, and structure, both texts address the intricate relationship between nature and art: a popular topic in contemporary alchemical treatises. The art-nature debate was frequently pursued by Renaissance and seventeenth-century alchemists, whose writings and drawings presented diverse views on the extent to which alchemy was capable of improving on, or even re-creating, natural entities through human artifice. My study reveals that Observations and The Blazing World should be read together and alongside the works of specific alchemical authors. In addition, the philosophical and fictional musings on nature and art in the two texts participate in highly provocative discourses that present the author's insights into literature and natural philosophy. Despite her dismissal of alchemical practices, Cavendish was influenced by some medieval and contemporary alchemical theories that celebrated the idea of ”nature before art.”起始頁-結束頁：45-82資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201203.004516篇名：程序主義與反思（身）法典範之爭：從哈伯馬斯對韋伯法理論之批判談起並列篇名：Disputes over Proceduralist and Reflexive Paradigms of Law-Analysis of Habermas's Critique of Weber's Legal Theory作者：李俊增(Chiun-Tseng Lee)關鍵字：形式法律;實質法律;反思（身）法律;程序主義法典範;社會法;formal law;deformalized law;reflexive law;proceduralist paradigm;social law期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：在《經濟與社會》乙書中，韋伯討論現代法律隨著社會理性化出現之形式性質，並強烈質疑福利國家出現導致之法律的實質化。韋伯此一有關形式法律與實質法律之原創性的分析引發了此後數十年的論戰。面對福利國家法律實質化產生之問題，法律社會學家屠布涅亦從系統論之觀點，提出反思（身）法之法律形式，企圖以之取代實質法律。哈伯馬斯則提出程序主義法典範，希望能有效解決其中之論爭。本文從哈伯馬斯對於韋伯法社會學之詮釋、批判與回應為起點，進一步以程序主義法典範為中心，來探討程序主義與反思（身）法典範之論爭。英文摘要：With the emergence and development of the modern welfare state, classical liberal conceptions of the legal norm have been undermined to a great extent. This trend has provoked a heated debate between sociologists, political scientists and legal scholars. Since publication, Max Weber's famous discussion of antiformal tendencies in modern law, in Economy and Society, has defined the terms of the debate over welfare state law. In response to the problems resulting from the law's materialization, G. Teubner proposes a reflexive law model. J. Habermas offers his proceduralist paradigm of law and hopes it will satisfactorially answer the debates between the liberal, social-welfare and reflexive models. This paper hopes to show that Habermas's paradigm proves to be a creative force while raising some questions.起始頁-結束頁：83-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201203.008317篇名：歐洲化衝擊的差異：羅馬尼亞與保加利亞加入歐盟期間推動人權保障之進展比較並列篇名：The Differential Impacts of Europeanization-A Comparative Study of Progress on Human Rights Protection in Romania and Bulgaria during EU Accession Negotiations作者：李正通(Albert C. T. Li)關鍵字：歐洲化;政治條件;影響力;社會學習;Europeanization;political conditionality;leverage;social learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：42卷1期出版年：2012中文摘要：「歐盟會籍」使得歐盟對於亟欲加入的國家具有明顯影響力，準會員國為爭取加入歐盟，往往願意接受歐盟的政治條件作為入會前提，亦即在入會前接受歐盟的諸多改革要求，進行「歐洲化」。然而，「歐盟會籍」對於不同準會員國的影響程度並不相同，呈現出「歐洲化」衝擊的不同結果。羅馬尼亞與保加利亞在加入歐盟前人權保障進展的範圍與程度差異，說明了準會員國「歐洲化」的範圍與程度，是「歐盟會籍」此一外部誘因與準會員國國內政治交互作用的結果。英文摘要：The EU enjoys significant leverage over ”members-in-waiting.” Candidate states tend to accept the EU's political conditionality as a prerequisite for accession. In other words, states tend to be acculturated to the EU before becoming EU members. However, the process of Europeanization does not produce exactly the same results in all candidate countries. This comparative study of the progress made on human rights protections in Romania and Bulgaria before their accession to the EU suggests that the differing scope and extent of Europeanization in candidate countries is reflective of the interplay of the comparative strength of domestic politics in the candidate states and leverage that can be exerted with the promise of EU membership.起始頁-結束頁：167-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201203.016701篇名：Cognitive Autonomy in Adolescence: A Cross-Cultural Comparison of American and Taiwanese High School Students並列篇名：青少年時期之認知自主性：美國與台灣高中生之泛文化比較作者：Troy E. Beckert;Chien-Ti Lee;J. Mitch Vaterlaus關鍵字：認知自主性;青少年時期;文化差異;潛在類別分析;cognitive autonomy;adolescence;cultural differences;latent class analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：28期出版年：2012中文摘要：大多數青少年自主性的研究者，只單一地將其研究焦點放在西方文化脈絡底下，專注在行為與情緒的自主面向上。本研究提供了從兩個文化的比較觀點，進行認知自主研究的獨特見解。本研究的樣本中，有來自美國的330位青少年，以及來自台灣的376位青少年，共同填寫一份名為「認知自主與自我評量」的問卷；該問卷是設計用以評估「認知自主」的五個面向。根據潛在類別分析（Latent ClassAnalysis）的結果，本研究發現：無論是美國或台灣的資料，或是男性或女性的資料，都符合兩個類別的認知自主發展模式。台灣的青少年，在認知自主的其中兩個面向：即「意見表達」和「自我評價」上，無論男女，都較不可能給自己較高的評分；反觀，美國的青少年，較不可能在「評斷性思考」上，給自己較高的自主性評分。而這兩個不同文化的青少年，在「比較性的確認」上，自我評分都偏低。性別差異的情況在台灣青少年的資料中顯著，但在美國青少年的資料中則無此現象。最後，本論文以本研究之發現在「同儕壓力」與「風險行為」方面的可能應用，進行討論。英文摘要：Most often, researchers of adolescent autonomy focus on behavioral and emotional aspects of autonomy within western cultures. The current study provides insight on cognitive autonomy from two cultural perspectives. Adolescents from the United States (n = 330) and Taiwan (n = 376) completed the Cognitive Autonomy and Self-Evaluation (CASE) inventory, designed to assess five domains of cognitive autonomy. Latent Class Analysis (LCA) resulted in a two-class model of cognitive autonomy development across both culture and gender. Taiwanese females and males were less likely to self-rate high in cognitive autonomy areas including voicing opinions and self-assessing whereas American youth had lower probabilities to be highly autonomous in evaluating thinking. Adolescents from both cultures self- rated lower in comparative validation. Gender differences were observed among Taiwanese youth but not Americans. We conclude with a discussion of implications toward peer pressure and risky behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：7-45資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201210.00072篇名：氣候變遷的認知與友善環境行為：紀登斯困境的經驗測試並列篇名：Climate Change, Public Awareness and Pro-environmental Behaviors: An Empirical Test of the Giddens's Paradox作者：施奕任(Yi-Jen Shih);楊文山(Wen-Shan Yang)關鍵字：紀登斯困境;氣候變遷;環境行為;時間貼現;公共財;Giddens's paradox;climate change;environmental behavior;temporal discounts;environmental public goods期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：28期出版年：2012中文摘要：因應氣候變遷及其不利影響是關鍵的國際環境議題，AnthonyGiddens探討氣候變遷政治之時，認為民主國家因應氣候議題面臨著紀登斯困境（Giddens's Paradox）的挑戰，也就是民眾對於氣候變遷的認知，與友善環境行為有所落差，難以成為國家氣候決策的民意基礎。本文以紀登斯困境的概念為基礎，討論氣候變遷相關的風險認知、全球公共財及時間貼現等三個特性與民眾採取友善環境行為的關係，進而利用台灣社會變遷基本調查2010年第六期第一次調查計劃問卷二環境組的實證資料進行統計迴歸分析。本文發現紀登斯困境中不同的因素會對於不同的環境行為產生不同的影響，氣候風險認知僅會對於民眾願意提高物價有所改變，相較之下公共財以及時間貼現則會影響民眾願意承受提高物價、增加稅收以及降低生活水準的意願。英文摘要：How to respond to climate change and its adverse effects has become one of the most important international environmental issues since the 1980s. Anthony Giddens argues that most democratic countries face the challenges of the so-called Giddens's Paradox when it comes to climate policy decision-making. In other words, the public awareness of climate change does not reflect their behaviors, therefore it is not ideal to be used as a reference for making policies related to climate change. This study aims to explore the relationship between the elements of Giddens's Paradox, particularly climate risks, environmental public goods and temporal discounts, and Taiwanese respondents' environmental behaviors. The data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey 2010 round 6 Environment Module's dataset is used in this analysis. Findings show that these three elements of Gidden's Paradox have different influence on pro-environmental behaviors. The element of climate risks tend to only affect respondents in terms of their willingness to pay higher prices for commodities, while public goods and temporal discounts increase people's willingness to pay higher commodity prices and higher taxes and accept cuts in the standard of living to avoid environmental degradation.起始頁-結束頁：47-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201210.00473篇名：Survey Response in the Presence of Others: An Analysis of Social Normative and Sensitive Questions並列篇名：第三者在場的調查回應：社會規範暗示性與敏感性題目的分析作者：杜素豪(Su-Hao Tu)關鍵字：回答品質;回答傾向;第三者在場效應;第三者在場;訪問地點;response quality;response tendency;the third-party effect;the presence of third-parties;interview place期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：28期出版年：2012中文摘要：訪問調查時很重要的前提是確保訪員與受訪者進行訪談時的個人隱私。但現實中很難避免第三者在場的訪問情境。相關研究結果雖然分歧（Blair, 1979; Hartmann, 1995），一些針對高敏感與社會規範性題目的研究仍發現顯著的第三者在場效應（Taietz, 1962; Aquilino,1993; Smith, 1997），只是從不同性質的第三者在場深入探討其對訪問回答的影響。本研究探討相較於事實性題目的回答時，三面向的第三者在場（分別是不同類型的第三者、在場人數與在場的期間）是否較容易造成受訪者被詢問敏感性及社會規範性題目時提供偏差的回答（例如：低報，社會規範的回答方向）。研究資料來自一項針對大都會地區的調查，對象是戶籍設在台灣，年滿20歲的民眾。分析的結果顯示，有50-60%的訪問是在有第三者在場情況下進行的，在場人數多半是1人。約40%的第三者在場是持續到整個訪問結束為止。在個人收入與性經驗題目的回答中，相對於無偏差的實質回答，偏差回答較容易受到一到三個面向的第三者在場的影響。在回答傾向方面，無論是偏差回答刪除之前或之後的實質回答分布，顯著的第三者在場效應多發生在同居、婚外情、墮胎、未婚媽媽、個人收入、以及政黨支持等題目的回答，尤其個人收入的偏差回答均受到三面向第三者在場顯著的影響。本研究再次確認第三者在場對社會規範性與敏感性題目的回答品質與回答傾向之影響符合理論解釋，也呼應前人研究的提示，情境效應會因問卷題目的性質不同而有差異。英文摘要：The assurance of confidentiality in a dyad interview (private interview) is central to survey interviewing, and it is a premise of such interviewing. In reality, however, the presence of third-parties, a situational variable in the interview, is hard to avoid. Despite the mixed results found in previous studies (Blair, 1979; Hartmann, 1995), some findings were supportive of a significant third-party effect, especially those with a high degree of sensitivity and social norms (Taietz, 1962; Aquilino, 1993; Smith, 1997). Furthermore, scant attention has been paid to the in-depth nature of the presence of others. Three dimensions of the presence of others, respectively the number of others, the types of others and the duration of their presence, were examined in this study under the assumption that they would lead the respondents to underreport or to provide socially desirable answers to sensitive or social normative questions, as seen in comparison with factual questions.Data from a regional survey of metropolitan residents aged 20 or older in Taiwan were used. The results indicated that 50-60% of interviews carried out when third-parties were present, mostly one person. About 40% of third-parties were present all the time. Concerning personal income and sexual experience, in contrast to bias-reduced substantial responses, biased responses are more likely to occur in the interviews characterized by one to three dimensions of third-party presence. In terms of response tendency, significant third-party effects were found among substantial responses and bias-reduced substantial responses to the questions including cohabitation, extra-marital relations, abortion, unmarried women, personal income, and political-party identification. In particular, the third-party effect on biased response to personal income was consistently found significant across three dimensions of the presence of others. The present findings reconfirm the theoretical expectations for the third-party effect on response quality and response tendency to social normative and sensitive questions. They also echo what the previous studies have indicated: the situational effect varies with questions of different nature.起始頁-結束頁：79-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201210.00794篇名：偏差友伴與偏差行為：友伴的影響效果確實存在嗎？並列篇名：Friends and Delinquency: Is Deviant Peer Influence Real?作者：李文傑(Man-Kit Lei)關鍵字：偏差友伴;偏差行為;影響性效果;選擇性效果;投射性效果;deviant peers;delinquency;influence effect;selection effect;projection effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：28期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去的實證研究已經一再地指出，偏差友伴與個人偏差行為間具有強的關連性。但，當今社會學和犯罪學領域的研究中，卻有兩個相互競爭的觀點嘗試解釋兩者間的關連。一為「影響性效果」，此觀點認為偏差友伴確實地影響著個人的偏差行為發展；另一個觀點為「選擇性效果」，主張個人會選擇跟自己相似的人結交朋友，或個人會「投射」認為朋友的行為應跟自己是相似的，基於此觀點，偏差友伴與個人偏差行為的高相關性只不過是「自我選擇」下的產物。本研究使用2,280位來自於「台灣青少年計畫」的台灣青少年樣本，並配上以班級為單位的友誼網絡資料，用以檢測偏差友伴和個人偏差行為間的實際連結。為了排除「選擇性」及「投射性」的偏誤，本文除了使用貫時性資料外，並且使用兩種不同偏差友伴的測量方法，一為傳統的自陳式測量，另一種為社會網絡測量的技術。分析結果顯示，縱使「選擇性」、「投射性」和「樣本流失性」的偏誤排除後，偏差友伴和個人偏差行為間仍具有實際的關連性。另外，本文進一步發現，自陳式測量相較於社會網絡測量法，更有可能高估偏差友伴對偏差行為的解釋力。根據分析之結果，本研究建議，當使用自陳式測量的偏差友伴預測個人偏差行為時，應同時在分析模型中考慮「自我控制」和「父母監控行為」對個人偏差行為的效果，用以減低自陳式測量所造成的「投射性」偏誤。英文摘要：Consistently, empirical findings have indicated that the presence of deviant peers is one of the strongest predictors of adolescent delinquency. While this association is widely accepted, the mechanisms at work have been disputed. Two competing approaches, the influence and selection approaches, have received the most scholarly attention. The influence model argues that an association with deviant peers has a real and causal impact on adolescent delinquency. Conversely, the selection model posits that perceived associations are the result of homophily, as people tend to form or select friendships with others who share similar characteristics. Using a sample of 2,280 Taiwanese adolescents from the Taiwan Youth Project along with friendship network data, this study reexamines the association between deviant peers and delinquency. In order to rule out potential biases, this study uses both perceptual and direct measures of deviant peers. The perceptual measure of deviant peers refers to an individual's report of his or her friends' delinquent behavior, whereas the direct measure is formed through an analysis of the friendship network data. Controlling for selection and projection effects, the results show that the effect of deviant peers on delinquency remains significant. The results also indicate that using a self-report measure of deviant peers, in contrast to a social network analysis, potentially overestimates the deviant peers-delinquency relationship. Finally, this study's results support the combined use of both self-report measures of deviant peers in conjunction with self-control and parental monitoring measures to best account for the influence of deviant friendships on delinquency.起始頁-結束頁：119-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201210.01195篇名：2000年普查資料在臺灣原漢通婚研究之潛力與應用並列篇名：The Application and Merit of Census Data in the Study of Ethnic Intermarriage between the Indigenous and Han People in Taiwan作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu);章英華(Ying-Hwa Chang)關鍵字：族群通婚;原住民;普查資料;ethnic intermarriage;indigenous;census data期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：27期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文係運用2000年臺閩地區戶口及住宅普查，建構原住民有偶人口配對資料，並論析該配對資料的特性與長處，說明此資料在原漢通婚研究應用上的長處、特性與適用性。研究發現如下：（1）說明普查資料配對的流程，除針對配對資料進行特性說明外，亦對未能配對資料進行資料特性推估；（2）較之國外普查配對資料的處理，本文建構之普查配對資料更涵蓋了其他親屬配對，比較單純以戶長配對與其他親屬配對在資料結構特性上的差異；（3）運用一對以上的家戶配對資料，進行代間婚配模式的初步分析，發現父母的婚配對子女的婚配形式有所影響；（4）利用普查配對資料比對全台原住民調查資料，釐清原住民婚配模式與外婚傾向上的異同，突顯普查配對資料的代表性與重要性。若能進一步運用此配對資料探討臺灣原漢通婚現象，或可補充現今族群通婚研究中相對缺少的原住民與漢族通婚區塊，以使臺灣族群關係及通婚論述更為完備。英文摘要：In this paper, we use data from the 2000 Taiwan population census to demonstrate the potential and merits of the data in studying ethnic intermarriage between the indigenous and Han people. The main findings are as follows. (1) By interpreting the data matching process, we can better understand the characteristics of the matched data and also speculate as to the characteristics of the unmatched ones. (2) In contrast with the existing comparable studies, our pair data include not only household heads and their spouses but also the other kinship couples in the household. Hence, after comparing the social demographic attributes between different kinship couples, we are more confident of the data quality. (3) Including other kinship couples within households, we can observe the changing marital patterns between generations and reveal how intermarriage parents affect their children's out-marrying propensity. (4) Moreover, under cross-examination of the intermarriage trend with other ethnic survey data, we highlight the representative nature and importance of census pair data. Base on the main findings, we make some suggestions for the future research of applying census pair data and hope to enrich the literature on relatively understudied indigenous and Han Chinese intermarriage in particular and ethnic intermarriage research in general.起始頁-結束頁：7-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201204.00026篇名：臺灣城鄉後物質價值觀的差異與變遷並列篇名：An Empirical Analysis of Value Change between Urban and Rural Areas in Taiwan作者：葉晉嘉(Chin-Chia Yeh)關鍵字：後物質主義;價值觀變遷;城鄉屬性;台灣社會變遷基本調查;交互作用效果;post-materialism;value change;urban attribute;Taiwan Social Change Survey;interaction effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：27期出版年：2012中文摘要：由於Inglehart論及價值觀變遷時並未考慮城鄉差異的影響，然而環境是影響價值觀的可能因子。因此本研究以價值觀與城鄉屬性與所得之間的關係，針對價值觀在城鄉屬性上各時期的轉變，其結果顯示自1985到2005的20年之間，臺灣後物質價值觀逐漸產生變化，從早期都市組較城鎮組與鄉村組傾向後物質價值，到後期都市組與城鎮組無顯著差異。其次再利用二因子變異數分析，進一步對於所得與城鄉屬性兩個因子，對於價值觀所產生的影響進行分析。除了1985年缺乏所得資料無法進行分析，2005年的資料顯示所得與城鄉屬性會產生交互作用，然而1995年卻不具有交互作用，這可能代表著城鄉價值觀與所得的交互作用雖然存在，但是並不穩定。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to discuss the relationships among values, urban attributes and income. The Theory of Value Change by Inglehart does not investigate the effects of the difference between urban and rural areas, and the environment difference between the two areas is a possible factor influencing the value change. To address this shortcoming, this study first reviewed the values transformation within different periods in the urban attributes. The results demonstrated that post-material values in Taiwan changed from 1985 to 2005. The urban group showed more tendency toward post-material values than the town group and village group did early in this period; however, there was no significant difference of post-material values between the urban and town groups late in the period. Second, this study used two-way ANOVA to further analyze how the two factors, income and urban attributes, influenced the values. The data analysis shows that there is an interaction between urban attributes and income in 2005, but this is not found for 1995. It is suggested that an interaction between urban attributes and income does exist, but is unstable.起始頁-結束頁：52-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201204.00477篇名：騎驢找馬與劈腿：以「多對多」連續性搜尋模型分析兩種擇偶模式的配對成功率並列篇名：A Simulation Study of a Continuous Searching Model of Two Mate-Selection Patterns作者：張榮富(Jung-Fu Chang);張宗文(Tsung-Wen Chang)關鍵字：擇偶;約會劈腿;擇偶策略;囚犯困境;模擬配對;mate selection;extradyadic dating;mating strategy;prisoner's dilemma;simulation match期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：27期出版年：2012中文摘要：過去的連續性搜尋擇偶模型常只是假設在一個特殊的「一對多」（一個擇偶者多位異性連續出場）的情況下進行，例如「古典的嫁妝最大化問題」（Mosteller, 1965; Ferguson, 1989）。本文加入「婚姻賽局」模擬配對的概念，建構一個「多人對多人互選配對」的連續性搜尋模擬婚姻市場，根據Gale and Shapley（1962）的極大化配對規則，在當期中進行多對多的互選配對，並在跨期中進行連續性的配偶搜尋。本文在此婚姻市場下嘗試兩種常見的連續性搜尋模式的模擬。第一種為「騎驢找馬」，每位擇偶者均暫時先與眼前的一位異性交往，如果在下一期遇到更好的對象，就淘汰現在交往的對象。第二種為「劈腿」，每位擇偶者最多可暫時與兩位異性交往，但劈腿時有被抓到而失去所有交往異性的一個風險機率存在。本文以電腦模擬兩模式各100次，得出擇偶者的平均配對成功機率。研究結果顯示：雖然對個人而言，當自己採取劈腿策略而他人採取騎驢找馬策略時，劈腿策略是較優勢的擇偶策略選項。但是，當全社會的每一個擇偶者都採取劈腿策略（劈腿模式）時，擇偶者配對成功率卻較在騎驢找馬模式之下低，出現了劈腿的「合成謬誤」。本文引用賽局理論中的「囚犯困境」討論這種擇偶現象的可能性。英文摘要：There have been two approaches to simulation mate-selection research. One has focused on one agent's continuous searching in multiple periods (e.g., Mosteller, 1965; Ferguson, 1989). The other has focused on multi-agent matching in a marriage market in the same period (e.g., Gale and Shapley, 1962). The current study combines these two approaches in a new model. Using the new multi-agent continuous- searching simulation match model, this study simulates the following two mating strategies. A ”one-mate dating strategy” (OMS) means dating with one mate while searching for another, better one. An ”extra-dyadic dating strategy” (EDS) means secretly dating with two mates at the same time while searching for a better one. In a tenperiod limited searching situation, after 100 simulation iterations in the new model, the results show that the success rate of mating in an ”OMS society” (with everyone applying OMS) is higher than in an ”EDS society”. This phenomenon is called ”a fallacy of composition in mate-selection”. EDS is a more unfaithful strategy than OMS, and EDS looks like a better strategy if others are applying OMS. However, in a marriage market when every individual applies EDS in mating, the results become worse. We suggest that this fallacy can be explained by the prisoner's dilemma of game theory.起始頁-結束頁：80-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201204.00758篇名：社會距離與平衡型態度量表的回答模式並列篇名：Social Distance and Response Styles in Balanced Attitudinal Scales作者：杜素豪(Su-Hao Tu)關鍵字：回答誤差;回答模式;平衡型量表;訪答效應;社會距離;response bias;response style;balanced scale;response effect;social distance期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：27期出版年：2012中文摘要：本文比較受訪者在完全平衡型量表與最低平衡型量表中發生極端回答、中立回答與默從的傾向，並分析此三種回答模式受到受訪者、訪員、社會距離以及訪問情境等相關因素的影響，以確定回答模式對兩類型量表信效度的影響程度。比較分析以面對面訪問的問卷中跨不同主題且五刻度同意形式的量表為例，資料來自台灣社會變遷基本調查四期四次國家認同問卷組。配對樣本t檢定結果顯示，三種回答模式的傾向在最低平衡型量表中明顯的較高。兩階層的波爾松迴歸與線性迴歸模式的分析結果顯示，社會距離對三種回答模式有明顯的影響，包含對極端回答有影響的性別、婚姻、教育與年齡距離；對中立回答有影響的性別、婚姻與年齡距離；以及對默從有影響的婚姻與年齡距離。極端與中立回答在最低平衡量表中的社會距離效應比較明顯，默從則無類似的發現。雖然最低平衡型量表同樣可以偵測到回答模式，比較建議的仍是較不會產生回答誤差的完全平衡型量表。英文摘要：In order to explore the extent to which response styles reduce the reliability and validity of attitudinal scales, this article compares three types of response styles including extreme response, middle response, and acquiescence, and their associations with the characteristics of the respondent and the interviewer, social distance and interview situation between fully balanced and minimally balanced scales. Five-point agreement scales across different contents in a questionnaire collected from a face-to-face survey were employed as the example. Data analyzed is from the Taiwan Social Change Survey concerning national identity. A paired-samples t test indicated that response styles are more frequent in minimally balanced scales than in fully balanced scales. Two-level Hierarchical Poisson and Linear Regression Models showed that response styles are significantly affected by social distances. Extreme response is influenced by gender, marital status, education and age distances, while middle response is affected by gender, marital status and age distances. Marital status and age distances influence the tendency to acquiesce. The social-distance effects on extreme and middle response are more significant in minimally balanced scales than in fully balanced scales. Similar results were not found on acquiescence. Although minimally balanced scales can detect response styles, fully balanced scales are recommended due to less response bias in comparison with minimally balanced scales.起始頁-結束頁：112-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心DOI：10.7014/TCYCFFYYY.201204.0107
