01篇名：汙染清理費用優先權之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Environmental Cleanup Lien作者：黃健彰(Chien-Chang Huang)關鍵字：土壤及地下水污染整治法;水污染防治法;全面性環境應變補償及責任法;污染清理費用優先權;風落果實優先權;費用性優先權;廢棄物清理法;優先權;聯邦優先權;Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA);Environmental cleanup lien;Expense lien;Federal lien;Lien, Soil and Groundwater Pollution Remediation Act;Waste Disposal Act;Water Pollution Control Act;Windfall lien期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：廢棄物清理法第七一條第一項規定：「不依規定清除、處理之廢棄物，直轄市、縣（市）主管機關或執行機關得命事業、受託清除處理廢棄物者、仲介非法清除處理廢棄物者、容許或因重大過失致廢棄物遭非法棄置於其土地之土地所有人、管理人或使用人，限期清除處理。屆期不為清除處理時，直轄市、縣（市）主管機關或執行機關得代為清除、處理，並向其求償清理、改善及衍生之必要費用。屆期未清償者，移送強制執行；直轄市、縣（市）主管機關或執行機關得免提供擔保向行政法院聲請假扣押、假處分。」第三項規定：「第一項必要費用之求償權，優於一切債權及抵押權。」土壤及地下水污染整治法第四九條規定：「依第四十三條、第四十四條規定應繳納之費用，優先於一切債權及抵押權。」水污染防治法第七一條第一項規定：「地面水體發生污染事件，主管機關得命污染行為人限期清除處理，屆期不為清除處理時，主管機關得代為清除處理，並向其求償清理、改善及衍生之必要費用。屆期未清償者，移送強制執行。」第三項規定：「第一項必要費用之求償權，優於一切債權及抵押權。」依據上開規定，該等費用均優先於一切債權及抵押權，其他債權人與抵押權人的受償次序劣後，其法理依據何在、如何妥適地解釋適用，亟待研究。本文參考美國全面性環境應變補償及責任法與相關文獻探討之。英文摘要：The first paragraph of Article 71 of Waste Disposal Act provides, ”Where waste clearance and disposal conducted in noncompliance with the regulation, the RAML or RAML or the Implementing Agencies may order the enterprise, commissioned waste clearance and disposal organization, agent for illegal waste clearance and disposal organization, land owner, manager or user who allows illegal dumping of waste or serious misconduct that leads to illegal dumping of waste on its land to clear and dispose of the waste in specific time period. The RAML or RAML or the Implementing Agencies may clear and dispose of the waste for them when no clearance or disposal is done within the specified time period and request for compensation for the clearance, improvement and necessary fees sustained from this action. Failure to effect the payment before expiration date, compulsory enforcement shall be imposed. The RAML or RAML or the Implementing Agencies may apply to the administrative court for probational lien or probational attachment without providing collateral.” The third paragraph provides, ”The RAML or RAML or the Implementing Agencies may authorize a suitable publicly or privately owned waste clearance and disposal organization when clearing and disposing of the waste prescribed in Paragraph 1.” Article 49 of Soil and Groundwater Pollution Remediation Act provides, ”The payment of fees pursuant to Paragraphs 43 and 44 shall take precedence over all creditor rights and collateral rights.” The first paragraph of Article 71 of Water Pollution Control Act provides, ”The competent authority may order the polluter to perform clearance and disposal within a limited period for the occurrence of a pollution incident on a surface water body; when the clearance and disposal is not performed by the deadline, the competent authority may perform clearance and disposal in place of the polluter and seek compensation from the polluter for necessary clearance and disposal, improvement and derivative expenses.” The third paragraph provides, ”The right to seek compensation for necessary expenses in Paragraph 1 shall take precedence over all creditor rights and collateral rights.”The payment of fees pursuant to the provisions above shall take precedence over all creditor rights and collateral rights. Other creditors and mortgagees are subordinated. It is necessary to study the jurisprudence and the way to explain properly. This study explores the issues by reference to the CERCLA.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201305_16(1).00012篇名：房價之不對稱均衡調整：門檻誤差修正模型應用並列篇名：Asymmetric Adjustment of House Prices: An Application of Threshold Error Correction Model作者：蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai);陳明吉(Ming-Chi Chen)關鍵字：不對稱;共整合;房價;門檻模型;誤差修正模型;Asymmetric;Cointegration;Error Correction Model;House Prices;Threshold Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在房價時間序列的變動中，有一個實務上常見但文獻上少有討論的現象是，房價追漲不追跌或所謂房價抗跌的情況，此特性若存在則隱含著，傳統的房價誤差修正模型中，所估計的單一均衡調整係數，將無法適當捕捉房價向上與向下之不對稱動態調整，因此引發了本研究分析房價調整速度不對稱之動機。本文首先解釋房價均衡調整之非線性現象可能是來自於不動產投資的兩個特性，其一為市場交易者之非理性，另一則為市場流動性在景氣與不景氣下的變化。續而，本研究使用線性與非線性整合分析觀察，是否房價對均衡狀態的調整有上下不對稱的情況，最後，本文使用門檻共整合及不對稱門檻誤差修正模型，發現房價的修正的確是存在向上與向下整合差異的情況，且其向上修正速度顯著比向下修正快速，驗證房價有追漲不追跌，即抗跌的現象存在。英文摘要：A house price behavior that few studies discussed is over-reaction in upturn but under-reaction in downturn. This phenomenon will cause an incorrect estimation of error correction term in traditional linear error correction term model. Therefore, it is important to analyze asymmetric adjustment of house prices. Our study first uses behavioral theory and illiquidity characteristics to explain the asymmetric adjustment. We estimate both traditional and threshold error correction model, and compare the coefficients of the error correction terms. We have a more significant error correction term in threshold model and indeed house price is asymmetrically adjustment. House price tend to overreact in upturn and underreact in downturn.起始頁-結束頁：37-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201305_16(1).00023篇名：土地徵收條例中協議價購之性質及收回權之行使並列篇名：The Lawnature and the Redemption of Agreement Concerning the Amount of Compensation作者：王珍玲(Chen-Ling Wang);顧明河(Ming-Her Ku)關鍵字：土地徵收;行政契約;收回權;協議價購;the compulsory purchase;Administrative contract;the redemption;an agreement concerning the amount of compensation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：土地徵收係國家為興辦國防、交通、公用等公共事業時，基於公益之需要，在事業必須使用之範圍內，依法定程序剝奪人民財產權之手段。我國土地徵收於土地法及其他法規中之規定並不一致，為統一徵收程序，民國89年制訂土地徵收條例，該法第1條規定：「為實施土地徵收，促進土地利用，增進公共利益，保障私人財產，特制定本條例。土地徵收，依本條例之規定，本條例未規定者，適用其他法律之規定。其他法律有關徵收程序、徵收補償標準與本條例牴觸者，優先適用本條例。」第11條規定：「需用土地人申請徵收土地或土地改良物前，除國防、交通、水利、公共衛生或環境保護事業，因公共安全急需使用土地未及與土地所有權人協議者外，應先與所有權人協議價購或以其他方式取得；所有權人拒絕參與協議或經開會未能達成協議者，始得依本條例申請徵收。」土地徵收條例嗣為土地徵收之準據。惟協議價購之性質，是否如實務一向見解所認為單純之私法契約，或因其隱藏於背後之目的，而具有公法行政契約之性質？此外，依該條例第9條規定，徵收完成後，需用土地人怠於執行興辦計畫，或雖依原核准計畫辦理後，於一定年限內不依原計畫繼續使用徵收之土地時，原土地所有權人得依法申請繳回原徵收價額後，買回其被徵收之土地。則協議價購之原所有權人於該土地有前開情形時，是否亦享有收回權？該等問題為本文研析之重點，並試提出相關理論依據及研究心得，以為土地徵收條例修正時之參考。英文摘要：To meet the requirement of public welfare the state may compulsorily purchase private land for installations of national defense and communication enterprises and public utility enterprises, but the area of land to be compulsorily purchased shall be limited. However, Taiwan's land expropriation in the Land Law and other laws and regulations are not consistent. In order to impose uniform compulsory purchase procedures, the Government developed The Compulsory Purchase Act in 2000. Rule 1 of the Act states: ”The purposes of this Act are to implement the land expropriation, to promote land utilities, to increase public profits, and to protect private properties. According to this Act, the land expropriation must obey the regulations of this Act. If it is not stipulated by this Act, the regulations stipulated by other laws are suitable. The compulsory purchase procedures stipulated by other laws and the compulsory purchase compensation standard violated this Act are first suitable to this Act.” Rule 11 of the Act stipulates: ”People who needs the lands should first obtain the agreement with land owners or acquire the lands by other ways. This action must be completed before applying for the land compulsory purchase or the improvement to land. The exemption is: due to the requirement of the public security, such as national defense, public traffic, water conservancy, public health, and environmental conservation, there is no time to obtain the agreements with the land owners to acquire their lands. If the land owners refuse to attend the meeting or cannot reach the agreements, the administrations can apply for the land compulsory purchase according to this rule.” The Compulsory Purchase Act is the standards for the land expropriation. Whether the characters of the agreement concerning the amount of compensation likes the practical opinions that simply belong to the contracts of private laws, or due to the reasons in the behind have the characters of the administrative contract of public laws? In addition, Rule 9 of this act also stipulates that after the accomplishment of the land expropriation, if the people who need land can not implement the plan or, execute the plan in accordance with the approved one, but no longer follow the original plan to continue to use within a certain time period, the original landowners can pay back the original amount of the compensation for its redemption. Whether the original land owners have the rights to pay back the original amount of the compensation for its redemption under the above condition? The purpose of this paper is to study the aforementioned questions. The related theories and research attainments will be demonstrated. The results can be the references for the amendments of the Compulsory Purchase Act in the future.起始頁-結束頁：59-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201305_16(1).00034篇名：利用多重影像產生之點雲的精度評估並列篇名：Accuracy Assessment of Point Cloud Generated by Multiple Images作者：黃金聰(Jin-Tsong Hwang);陳思翰(Szu-Han Chen)關鍵字：近景攝影測量;光達;點雲;Close-range Photogrammetry;Lidar;Point Cloud期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目前已經有多款利用網路雲端技術進行三維模型建構的軟體發表，並提供免費使用，其中以微軟最早於2008年推出的Photosynth最被常使用。該軟體是運用Scale-Invariant Feature Transform（SIFT）以及Structure from Motion（SfM）的技術，將同一場景不同位置拍攝的影像進行特徵萃取及匹配後，重建攝影站位置以及被拍攝物體的三維空間坐標，再結合瀏覽器供3D場景展示。由於操作簡單且運算快速，可以讓使用者使用消費型數位相機輕易建構出虛擬實境，也提供物件嵌入網頁分享成果給其他使用者。本研究透過相關實驗數據探多重影像以Photosynth方法進行物空間坐標重建時定位可達之精度，藉由實驗設計分析相關數據，以全測站經緯儀測算的覘標點三維坐標為依據，並將本文提出之方法的成果與近景攝影（Close-range photogrammetry）、光達等其他空間資訊重建方法的成果做比較，以瞭解運用該法時的三維空間定位精度，並瞭解此方法的限制與可能面臨的問題。本文所提之方法是利用一般消費型數位相機進行拍攝預先佈設控制覘標的實驗區，並利用與已知覘標點坐標差異的RMSE為精度評估指標。實驗顯示，在適當的拍攝因素控制下，檢核點精度之三維精度分別為±0.027m、±0.065m以及±0.012m左右。建構出適宜應用精度的三維模型，經濟、便利且可靠的完成空間樣貌紀錄，對於建物保存工作將有所助益，亦提供未來建構三維模型的另一種選擇。英文摘要：There are many of 3D model reconstruction software based on cloud computation technology released recently. Photosynth is the earliest one which based on Scaleinvariant feature transform (SIFT) and Structure from Motion (SfM). SIFT gives function of invariance of scale, rotation, perspective and lighting for feature point extraction. This kind of approach is automatic feature point extraction and matching. SfM can restore camera station and acquire space coordinates by continuous photos. In 2008, Microsoft released a free software named Photosynth which combined with SIFT and SfM technology. It can analyze digital photographs and generate a 3D point cloud of a photographed object.In this paper, the accuracy was estimated by the index of RMSE of the point cloud generated from Photosynth, Lidar, and close-range photogrammetry by using some empirical data. The results indicate that the 3D positioning accuracy of Photosynth approach under well control is about ±0.027m, ±0.065m, and ±0.012m respectively. The result is used to compare to that of close-range Photogrammetry and Lidar. We found out the restriction and the problem in this method either.起始頁-結束頁：81-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201305_16(1).000401篇名：意識形態的幽靈：問題架構的源起與演變並列篇名：The Specter of Ideology-The Genesis and Transformation of its Problematic作者：于治中(Chih-Chung Yu)關鍵字：觀念學;意識形態;象徵體系;無意識;馬克思;Ideology;ideology;symbolic;unconscious;Marx期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文將意識形態概念置於思想與知識型構變遷的脈絡之中，在認識論的層次上闡明，語言問題如何制約德拉西的觀念學與馬克思的意識形態理論，以及康德所開啟的批判哲學對意識形態議題的影響。這三者將問題意識分別建立在「觀念」（德拉西）、「主體」（康德）及「現實」（馬克思）的架構之上，正好代表了西方知識體系如何從古典進入現代並穿越現代的歷程。德拉西雖然將觀念學建立在語言的基礎之上，可是他卻視語言是一種透明性的存在，將語言等同於觀念，這種前現代模式的語言觀完全無法支撐他所企圖建立的學科。取而代之的康德批判哲學，雖然克服了古典時期認識論的限制，開啟了現代知識體系，可是其問題意識與語言完全無關，基本上是建立在一個先驗主體的架構之上。不僅導致自我既是認識的主體，同時又是認識的對象，使現代的知識體系立足在一個悖論的與不穩定的地基之上，並且遮蔽了語言與意識形態的關係。馬克思顛倒了康德以主體作為認識基點的模式，他從現實的勞動分工的議題架構中，導引出了意識形態的概念。他雖然認識到語言對意識形態的重要性，然而受制於其時代有關語言知識的限制，無法深入問題的核心，造成其意識形態理論中存在著一個結構性的矛盾。雖然他在後期討論商品拜物教時，將商品比擬為語言，觸及了此一問題。日後語言的問題像幽靈般糾纏著馬克思主義者或非馬克思主義者的意識形態理論。最後，本文進一步指出，語言非但是構成意識形態的前提條件，同時也是進入象徵的維度與無意識領域的門徑，這二個面向不僅擴展與加深了語言與意識形態關係的內涵，也為理解意識形態的運作機制提供了另類可能性。英文摘要：This paper proposes to explore, on the epistemological level, how the problem of language restricts de Tracy's Ideology and Marx's concept of ideology, and how Kant's Critical philosophy influences upon the development of this issue. These three problematics, based separately on the idea (de Tracy), the subject (Kant) and the reality (Marx), represent the trajectory of the western knowledge from the classical to the modern period. De Tracy establishes Ideology on the basis of language, yet he equates language with idea and treats language as transparency, this pre-modern conception of language can't sustain the science that he wants to create. Although Kant's philosophy overcomes the limits of the classical episteme, his problematic is reposed on a transcendental subject, not on the language. It causes that not only the modern human sciences are based on a contradictory and unstable ground, but also cover the internal relation between the language and ideology. From the division of labor existed in the reality, Marx inverts the problematic of Kant. He understands the importance of language for the theory of ideology, but under the historical constrains, he can't advance to the core of this issue, although he touches this problem in discussing the concept of fetishism. Finally, this paper tries to explain that language is not only the condition of possibilities of the ideology, but the approach of entering the symbolic dimension and the unconscious. These two aspects enlarge and deepen the content of ideology, and provide another way for understanding the mechanism of ideology.起始頁-結束頁：141-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：中國特色的抗議並列篇名：Protests with Chinese Characteristics作者：劉世鼎(Shih-Diing Liu)關鍵字：社會抗爭;中央－地方;國家;帝國－諸眾;social protest;central-local;the state;empire-multitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013中文摘要：目前學術界有些關於「全球社會運動」的普遍性說法，和我們所觀察到的實際情況有很大的出入。本文將圍繞著《帝國》作者MichaelHardt及Antonio Negri的研究，從中國抗議的經驗出發對他們的觀點提出批評。本文指出，兩位作者對於社會抗爭的期待，非常局限于歐美地區的經驗，而且對其他語境缺乏具體分析。他們的歐美中心主義觀點假定了世界歷史的發展是同質化的、是沒有地區差異的，無法幫助我們理解中國的抗爭文化。本文主要側重於中國抗議活動的一些特點，特別是與《帝國》作者所描繪的圖像究竟有何不同。其中最大的不同在於國家的角色，以及抗議者與國家之間的曖昧和親密關係。英文摘要：Currently there are some general notions of the global social movement that greatly differ from the actual situations we have observed. This study critically examines Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri's works, in particular Empire, by referring to the contemporary experience of Chinese protests. This paper indicates that Hardt and Negri's hopes for social struggle are very much limited to European and American experiences, and there is a lack of concrete analysis for different contexts. The Euro-American-centric view held by Hardt and Negri assumes that the development of world history is homogenous and lacks regional differences; therefore, it runs the risk of omitting the histories, traditions and strategies of different regions. This paper pays attention to the main characteristics of Chinese protests, and demonstrates how they differ from the picture portrayed by Hardt and Negri. The main difference lies in the role of the state and the ambivalent relationship between Chinese protesters and the state.起始頁-結束頁：183-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：批判「專科社工師」並列篇名：The So-Called Specialized Licensed Social Worker a Critique作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：201-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：當考試成為社工的緊窟咒：社工師考試現形記並列篇名：When Examination Becomes a Tight Curse Cave for Social Work-Making Social Worker License Examination Visible作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：203-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：我們如何製造了專業化的趨勢並列篇名：How to Fabricate a Trend of Professionalization by ”We”作者：王行(Shane Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：225-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：社會工作專精化深化制度性壓迫的思辨並列篇名：Institutional Oppression in Social Work作者：陶蕃瀛(Frank Fan-Ying Tao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：245-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：完整看見案主才是真正的社工專業－一位資深精神社工的觀點並列篇名：Seeing the Client as a Whole is the Real Professional-The Perspective of a Senior Psychiatric Social Worker作者：王美懿(Mei-Yi Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：257-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：考不上證照的「他者」異議：誰是「社工」？又誰的「專業／專精」？並列篇名：Subverting the Otherness Who do not Have License-Who is Social Worker? And Who Defines Professional?作者：郭志南(Chih-Nan Kuo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：267-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：抵殖民教育－原住民族教育的主體生成並列篇名：Decolonization of Education: Generating the Subjectivity of Indigenous Education作者：廉兮(Nancy Lien)關鍵字：抵殖民;原住民族教育;非學校教育;主體性;家園;基進民主;解放教育;decolonization;indigenous education;deschooling;subjectivity;homeplace;radical democracy;liberatory education期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討原住民族教育與當前學校教育之間的殖民關係與文化治理政治。作者申論學校教育一方面以維護強勢族群的政治、經濟利益為出發點，製造社會同質的想像，建構族群污名。另一方面以社會福利資源，整合中產階級的道德論述與教化，進行內在殖民。以致原住民兒童上學後，成為學校的孩子，在內造主流社會建構的成功圖像中，回鄉之路反而日漸遙遠。作者建議非學校（deschooling）的學習歷程，是抵殖民的原住民族教育主體生成的開始。原住民族教育應與社區生活結合、在家庭勞動分工中學習成為照顧者。以家園作為抵抗殖民的空間，回復共有的、情感的、學習的、生活實踐的知識與態度的原住民族教育，是抵殖民教育的內涵。作者建議，原住民族教育工作的挑戰是欲望的逆轉；是貧窮生活的重看；是主體的生成；是人民在差異處境中相互理解、連結與反思的社會抵抗行動。英文摘要：This research intends to explore the manifestation of colonization in the cultural politics of indigenous education and schools. The researcher addresses issues around schools which aim to protect the political and economic interests of the mainstream society. Schools, on the one hand, produce the illusion of social progress and stereotyping ethnic minority cultures. On the other hand, schools use social welfare as resources to enhance the ideology of modernity and capitalist mindset. The mechanism of internal colonization embedded in schools teaches indigenous children become school's children whose desire for better life and society are colonized. Thus, the researcher suggests that indigenous education should begin with de-schooling, in order to regenerate education for indigenous people. Indigenous education should links to community lives, teach children to learn from families who work together to take care of each other in the community. Homeplace should be seen as a site for decolonization in order to regain the passionate, educative, practical knowledge and values in indigenous education. The researcher concludes that the challenges of indigenous education is to reverse desire, rethink poverty, become subject, connect to homeplace, and develop reflexive social resistance.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：疆域走出來－原住民傳統領域之身體行動論述並列篇名：Walking through Ancestral Lands: Visual Representations of Taiwan's Aboriginal Movements in Defense of Traditional Territory作者：林文玲(Wen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：傳統領域;走路;體現技能;原住民運動;traditional territory;walking;embodied skills;aboriginal movements期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013中文摘要：「祖居地」、「舊部落」、「傳統領域」經常是台灣原住民族各類社會、文化活動的主要訴求議題。每個「重返舊遺址」或「舊部落勘查」事件，多少都意味著原先居處的不在，後代子孫依循老人家的指示，翻山越嶺尋覓著祖先活動與生活的地方。「移動身體去到某處」成為這些活動事件的共同主題與主軸，而每次走動的路徑都成為可能的疆域範圍。原住民對祖居地的一再重訪，用身體勞動將老人家口中的「原鄉」具體、實體化，這與當下社會生活中空間越來越非物質化的現象，有著完全不同的感受與表達，其中的深刻意涵將是本文聚焦之所在。本文將透過三部關於土地、部落地圖、爬山以及尋找原居地的台灣原住民族紀錄影片，所開啟的三個不同層次場所／地方營造的參與可能：一為拍攝過程中人事物遇合所營造的場所╱地方；二為鏡頭媒介下的某種再製、再現的場所╱地方；第三則是影片文本所提供對場所╱地方的認識、想像或理解的可能。進而探討三個相互關聯的問題區塊：（1）紀錄影像中的走路、身體活動與透露的感官經驗，如何去呈述關於土地、領域與族群故事的主題。（2）鏡頭前後的走路與身體行動，表述了何種有別於文字的或幾何、國家式的繪圖論述行動。（3）走路、身體行動所展現的與土地、傳統、文化與環境的倫理互動關係。透過本文分析與探討之核心議題，本文最終企圖帶出原住民傳統領域之身體行動論述以及透過影片所彰顯出來的視覺主權。英文摘要：Ancestral place, ”old tribe”, and ”traditional territory” have often been the main appeal issues of aboriginal social and cultural activities in Taiwan. With the illustration of several Taiwan aboriginals documentaries on topics of land, tribal maps, hiking and searching for the original habitat, this essay investigates the following three inter-related questions through the embodiments and multiple sensory experiences evoked by the visual medium: (1) How do the walking, body movement and sensory experiences shown in the documentary footage narrate the themes of land, territory and ethnic legends? (2) What graphic-discursive actions are articulated by the walking and bodily movements shown in the documentaries, which differ from literal, geometrical and national discourse? (3) What are the interacting ethical relationships between land, tradition, culture and environment as expressed in these walking and body actions? By investigating and analyzing these core issues, this essay attempts to foreground the aboriginal body movement discourse of traditional territory and the visual sovereignty as manifested in these documentaries.起始頁-結束頁：33-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：走調的音符－台灣少數基層社會工作者的發聲、行動與期盼並列篇名：Mistuned Melody: Voices, Praxis and Prospect of a Few Grassroots Social Workers in Taiwan作者：王行(Shane Wang)關鍵字：社會工作發展;國家建制化;基層社工人員;專業主體;social work development;national institutionalization;grassroots social workers;Professional Subjectivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣社會工作長期性與國家機器發生密切的關聯，而80年代之後的發展也是寄託於「國家建制化」而希望走向專業，然而此種發展的路線，卻妨礙了專業自主性的成長。在社會工作教育工作者的位置上，作者在日常生活中常有與基層社工人員互動來往的經驗，而有機會認知到一小撮工作者的不滿與不適應狀態，正反映出台灣社會工作專業發展的路線問題。本文即透過這一小撮工作者各自所書寫的文本，以及小群體的行動紀錄，再現出社會工作的另類想像與價值信念，以突顯台灣社會工作發展中「專業性」與「建制化」之間的矛盾、「國家化」與「助人理想」之間的衝突，藉此反思社會工作實踐主體的發展路線。英文摘要：The development of social work is bounded by the state apparatus in Taiwan for many years. Since 1980, the progress of social work professional development has highly conditioned by the state institutionalization. Under these circumstances, although the professional identity of social work has been established, the development of social work professional autonomy is therefore limited. Based on the interaction in working with those grassroots social workers, I have realised their professional difficulties, outrages and self-doubts. The mechanics of the system has been recognized as a problem not of the individual worker but of the social environment in which people work. It reflects on the difficulties encountered by professional development that determines the context for social work practice in Taiwan. A key theme arose from the analysis of these narrative texts that written by these grassroots practitioners is represented the alternative value and belief that is different from the mainstream profession that has been institutionalized. The critical issues of the conflicts between the helping profession and the institutional apparatus are also highlighted by this paper.起始頁-結束頁：93-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：從「天然足會」到「解纏會」－日治初期台灣的女體政治（1900-1915）並列篇名：From "Natural Feet Societies" to "Footbinding Liberation Societies": The Politics of Female Body in Early Colonial Taiwan (1900-1915)作者：苗延威(Yen-Wei Miao)關鍵字：纏足;纏足解放運動;天然足會;解纏會;身體政治;footbinding;the anti-footbinding movement;Natural Feet Societies (tianranzu huis);Footbinding Liberation Societies (jiechan huis);body politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013中文摘要：相較於中國，台灣的殖民政府很早就展開了全面而有效的「解放纏足」措施。纏足人口從1905年女性「本島人」總人數的57%（八十萬人左右），下降到十年後的17%（二十八萬人左右）。在1915年的戶口調查裡，四十七萬六千多名的台灣婦女，被註記為「解纏足」；其中，絕大多數是在1910年代初期的斷髮解纏風潮和保甲制度造成的社會監控壓力之下，除去了她們的裹腳布。一旦「纏足」成為公共議題和集體行動標的，女性的私密身體即已淪為既是帝國施行規訓和懲罰手段的對象，同時又是證成帝國「教化」政績的從屬他者。為了更細膩、更具體地解析這段歷史過程，本研究分析和比較了台灣纏足解放運動歷程裡的兩個發展階段－「天然足會時期」（1900-1903）與「解纏會時期」（1911-1915）以發掘其中的歷史社會學意含。整體而言，本文認為，相較於天然足會時期，解纏會時期的團體組成及相關活動，反映了若干嶄新的社會變遷特質，尤其是，天然足會時期自始至終都是男人的舞台；而在解纏會時期，包括菁英婦女們的組織動員、意見交換，以及關於解纏前後的身體操演，開始成為女性專擅的場域，男性則逐漸在纏足議題上隱身於後台。此外，解纏會時期的本土菁英做為一個整體，呈現了明顯的複式動員，不論是解纏剪辮等傳統文化實踐，全都被整併到所謂的風俗改良運動議程之中，並反映了當時社會在文化認同的多重化、社會控制的個體化，以及身體政治的社區化等向度上所發生的歷史演變。英文摘要：This research aims to explore the historical sociological implications of the process whereby the anti-footbinding movement in early colonial Taiwan developed from the period of Natural Feet Societies (NFSs, ”tianranzu huis”, 1900-1903) to the period of ”Footbinding Liberation Societies (FLSs, ”jiechan huis”, 1911-1915). Several signs of social change are noted. First, while NFSs emphasized in the idea of the natural body for little girls, FLSs asked most of footbound women to unbind their feet immediately. Second, while NFSs remained a men’s movement, it seems that women of elite classes began to stand on the stage and more or less ”opened up” a space for public participation during the period of FLSs. Third, compared to the activists of NFSs, native elites as a whole were more successfully motivated and mobilized for FLSs. Based on these observations, this article examines and discusses some tendencies that became more identifiable in the period of FLSs, including: elite women began to expect themselves and to be expected by their husbands to play a significant role in the public sphere; a new, multiple-dimensioned cultural identity was formed; social control, both from the colonial state and from the native elites, over the private body became more remarkable; and, the body politics exemplified by FLSs became more localized and ritualized.起始頁-結束頁：125-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：在東亞彈出一席之地－性別、獨立、與流行搖滾影視並列篇名：Strumming a Place of One's Own: Gender, Independence, and East Asian Pop-Pock Screen作者：蔡如音(Eva Tsai);申鉉準(Hyun-Joon Shin)關鍵字：音樂電影;流行搖滾;獨立搖滾;性別;性表達;東亞;music movies;pop-rock;indie-pop;gender;sexual expression;East Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013中文摘要：二十一世紀之初，日本、韓國、台灣競相推出了各種流行搖滾（pop-rock）影視作品，它們主要為再現流行歌手、搖滾樂團、與木吉他彈奏的電影、紀錄片與電視劇。本文探索東亞流行搖滾影劇的媒介與文化生產條件，並分析作品中的性別結構與性表達。每一部流行搖滾影視作品，都是性別文本，指向具體的性別認同路徑。本文討論幾類鮮明的認同位置與區隔，像是失意搖滾漢（韓國）、從創作中實踐真誠性的吉他男孩（日本）、舞台上炫麗的搖滾女孩（日本）、獨立音樂圈中的音樂女神（韓國），以及宛若說書人的吉他少女（台灣）。透過三地的參照，本文思考西方流行搖滾樂的神話，在東亞流行文化間發生了怎樣的轉換。本文發現，東亞的流行搖滾音樂敘事，並沒有複製西方搖滾神話的反抗性格，更多時候，它回應在地的音樂文化與性別生產條件，提供了異托邦，而非烏托邦的想像。英文摘要：The first decade of the 21st century has seen a concurrent rise of pop-rock screen productions in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, particularly feature films, documentaries, and TV series informed by the guitar and/or band culture. This paper probes such popularization of pop-rock in the region and asks what gender and sexual expressions have been mobilized in the productions and representations. The paper juxtaposes dominant gender tropes, such as the failing male rocker in search of rebirth (Korea), romantic youth pursuing authenticity (Japan), dazzling but also bedazzled rocker-girl on stage (Japan), indie music goddesses in control of subdued femininity (Korea), and peripheral girl-with-acoustic-guitar who chronicles boys' sorrow (Taiwan). Responding to the familiar myth of rebellion in pop-rock discourses, our inter-referential analysis suggests that East Asian pop-rock screen is about the making of heterotopias rather than of utopias.起始頁-結束頁：175-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：團結經濟在中國大陸的實踐並列篇名：Pratices of Solidarity Economy in Chinese Mainland作者：古學斌(Hok-Bun Ku);嚴海蓉(Hai-Rong Yan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：205-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：流走邊緣、團結創業－雲南流動社群合作生計的實踐初探並列篇名：Solidarity at the Margins: An Exploration of Cooperative Livelihood among Migrant Communities in Yunnan作者：蘭樹記(Shu-Ji Lan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：213-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：社區婦女有力量－農民工社區的「同心希望家園」並列篇名：Women's Empowerment through Solidarity: A United Home of Hope for Migrants in Suburban Beijing作者：羅加鈴(Chia-Ling Luo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：223-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：婦女、手藝與合作經濟－一個西南村落的實踐案例並列篇名：Women, Handicrafts and Cooperative Economy: A Case in a Yunnan Village作者：古學斌(Hok-Bun Ku)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：241-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：內發型社區發展－山西永濟社會經濟案例並列篇名：A Community Economy in Yongji, Shanxi Province作者：何宇飛(Yu-Fei He);居正(Zheng Ju)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：261-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：沒有夢想，我們還能活得幸福嗎？並列篇名：With No Dream, Can We Live Happily?作者：丁華明(Hua-Ming Ding)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：91期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：281-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：原住民族傳統智慧創作之歸屬與運用：集體財產管理制度之探討並列篇名：Entitlement and Applications of the Indigenous Traditional Cultural Creations: An Overview of the Collective Management System作者：黃居正(Chu-Cheng Huang);邱盈翠(Ying-Tsui Chiu)關鍵字：原住民族傳統智慧創作;原住民族傳統智慧創作保護條例;集體管理;集體財產;特殊權利;indigenous traditional cultural creations;protection act for traditional intellectual creations of indigenous peoples;collective management;collective property;sui generis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013中文摘要：於原住民族財產意識中，個人勞動的價值以及最後勞動成果的歸屬，取決於部族哲學對於該生產結果之評價。此由內含大量社群文化元素與族群共同歷史記憶的原住民族傳統智慧創作，在實踐上時常是以集體管理之方式被呈現與運用，可以得證。是以，其歸屬、利用、揭露與管理收益，並不能單以市民法下的智慧財產權觀念加以判斷，而必須輔以多元文化主義及原住民族人權保障的觀點。原住民族傳統智慧創作不應單純套用市民法智慧財產權制度之解釋，被無條件地視為完全供所有人自由近用之公共領域。基此，本文首先探討原住民族財產權意識的特殊性，以及原住民族傳統智慧創作之歸屬與市民法下著作權權利歸屬之歧異。接續論述在運用原住民族傳統智慧創作的過程中，集體管理制度成型的制度背景，除佐以相關國際制度之發展外，亦比較台灣於「原住民族基本法」、「原住民族傳統智慧創作保護條例」等法規接連制定後之制度現況。然後分析對特定無體財產權採取集體管理制度之實例，以及在集體管理制度下，運用原住民族傳統智慧創作進行商業性及非商業性應用、授權之個案與模式，透過實證分析，對原住民族傳統智慧創作集體管理制度，提出政策面向與部落內部管理面向上的建議。文末則是以關於台灣本土具體實踐的討論，呈現台灣原住民族傳統智慧創作集體管理制度之願景。英文摘要：Under the indigenous property consciousness, the entitlement and conferment depend not upon the insertion of labor, but the evaluation and measurement of the tribal community through their communal philosophy. Therefore, consensus over such conferment is usually reflected in their collective management system over communal property, which includes the formality of ownership, the ways of utilization, and the benefit sharing. Multiculturalism and indigenous human rights consequently play indivisible roles in determining the entitlement, which also evidences the scope of public domain would not be decided upon single factor such as economic efficiency only.This article will start with the peculiarity of the indigenous property system including the traditional cultural creations, mainly their diversity to the civil law IP regime. Then the formation and context of collective management system would be deplored by way of comparing domestic and international materials. Finally, some field researches over current collective management practices pertaining to the application and licensing in the indigenous community in Taiwan will be introduced, so to conclude with suggestions both policy-wise and infrastructural-wise.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：人口販運、娼妓制度與不平等並列篇名：Trafficking, Prostitution, and Inequality作者：凱瑟琳•麥金儂(Catharine A. MacKinnon)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：44期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130300440012篇名：全球化風險挑戰下發展型國家之治理創新－以台灣公民知識監督決策為分析並列篇名：Governance Innovation of Developmental State under the Globalized Risk Challenges-Burgeoning Civil Knowledge on Risk Policy Supervision inTaiwan作者：周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou)關鍵字：治理創新;創新遲滯;僵局風險治理;反身性治理;全社會學習;社會創新;governance innovation;innovative delay;hung risk governance;reflexive governance;societal learning;social innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從全球化風險威脅產生之鉅變角度，探討如何透過治理典範與制度創新，來引領國家與社會朝向系統性的的變革，以促進快速變遷之轉型社會朝向不斷學習的、創新的、參與的發展。作者檢視我國政府治理在發展型國家歷史形構中之轉型能耐的弔詭，並指出專家政治在當今全球化科技與風險不確定性下之決策困境。尤其，透過近年來四個重大政策爭議案例之類型化整理，可以看到，公民認識論在目前我國治理創新的重要性：為確保決策的正當性與挽回公眾的信任，政府應當重新審視風險不確定性下之風險分配與社會公平，並建構透明、開放、民主參與的風險溝通機制將強健的社會監督能量─公民知識與價值論述納入決策的機制。最後，從引介主要國際組織與國家之科技治理典範與制度變革，作者建議政府應從價值、制度與實踐進行系統性的治理變革，透過擬定科技治理白皮書、修訂科技基本法、建立科技對社會影響評估機制來確立治理創新的制度路徑。特別是重大的議題上，政府在政策研議、政策可行性評估、政策執行三階段需即刻進行透明的風險溝通變革，以重構政府與社會共同對抗全球化風險威脅挑戰之夥伴關係，同時彌補過去我國創新遲滯造成的僵局治理鴻溝。英文摘要：Based on the perspective of global risk threats, this paper probes into how, by the innovation of regulatory paradigms and institutions, could a country and society moves toward a systemic reform into learned, innovative and participative development from a rapidly changing society. The author not only examines the paradox of our government’s transformative capacity that under the historical construction’s developmental state, but also points out the dilemma of decisionmaking of technocracy in contemporary global with the uncertainties of technology and risk. Especially, through classification of four recent policy controversies, we could see the importance of civil epistemology:for assuring the legitimacy of decision-making and retrieving the trust of public, the government should re-examines the risk distribution and the social fair under uncertain risk. Also, constructs a transparent, democraticparticipatory communication mechanism of risk to include the robotic social surveillance–civil knowledge and value discourses, into decisionmaking mechanism.Finally, by introducing the governance paradigms of technology and institutional reforms from major international organizations and countries, the author suggests that the government should start up form values, institutions and practices to a systemic governance reform. We should study up the governance of technology on a white paper, revise the basic technology law and build the mechanism of social impact assessmentof technology to establish the institutional approach of governance innovation. Particularly on important issues, the government should immediately operates an open reform on the risk of communication in the steps of policy discussions, policy feasibility assessments and policy executions, to re-build the partnership between the government and the society on facing global risk threats and challenges, and recuperates hung governance gap caused by innovative delay.起始頁-結束頁：65-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130300440023篇名：海德格爾與〈德國大學之自我主張〉並列篇名：Heidegger and "The Self-Assertion of the German University"作者：李克寰(Keh-Hwan Li)關鍵字：大學;知識分子;科學;哲學;真理;university;intellectual;science;philosophy;truth期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：大學向來被德國的知識分子視為指引文化、照亮人性的燈塔，尤其在民族危殆的時刻，大學的本質更受到高度關注；海德格爾以〈德國大學之自我主張〉為題所做之校長就職演說，便是基於此一歷史脈絡而提出的教育方針。演說內容由科學的本質切入，並將教育和民族命運相互聯繫，著重的是藉追問存在之真理始獲開展的人之本質及精神世界，以區別標榜理智計算與工具知識的現代科學，一種奠基於笛卡兒「我思故我在」形上學、把人當作主體而形成之世界圖像。為力挽早已失去根源之各門科學，海德格爾乃訴諸古希臘哲學，重新思考真理的本質。值得留意的是，這篇演說不僅帶有很濃的「歷史性」觀點，更可循此深究海德格爾對存在之真理所產生的洞見、其於真理探索中所凸顯的思想「轉向」，以及他在思想和科學教育上另闢之蹊徑。英文摘要：Describing a university as leading the way for culture and illuminating humanity, German intellectuals have always compared it to a lighthouse. Moreover, in the face of national crisis, the essence of a university is more emphasized than earlier. This study discusses Heidegger’s rectoral address entitled ”The Self-Assertion of the German University,” which is an educational policy devised within such a historical context. The main concern of this address is the essence of science that coalesces with the national destiny. Heidegger asserts that only by questioning the truth of Being can human beings unfold essentially and create a truly spiritual world different from the structure of modern culture characterized by rational calculation and useful information. In the modern culture founded on Descartes’ metaphysics ”cogito ergo sum,” the human being is taken as a subject, and the world, as a picture. To save the dispersed sciences from their atrophied rootedness, Heidegger resorts to ancient Greek philosophy and rethinks the essence of truth. His rectoral address has gained a distinguishable “historicality” flavor that may shed light on how we can grasp his insight about the truth of Being. As the study progresses, topics on Heidegger’s ”turning” and his unique thought-provoking educational approach are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：149-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130300440034篇名：對存在感受之治－以《荀子•禮論》中喪、祭二禮的分析為例並列篇名：Governing of the Feeling of Existence: An Example through the Analysis of Funeral and Sacrificial Rites in Xunzi's on Rites作者：簡良如(Liang-Ju Chien)關鍵字：荀子;存在感受;感性變異;禮;自我;Xunzi;the feeling of existence;Rites;variability in sensibility;Self期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：為使人民能夠獲致對自身存在境況的正面感，儒家政治思想提出了許多相應主張。其中，荀子通過分析一般現實人情所形成的禮治原則，因不以德性人格或特定主體特質為前提，直接面對現實中人情之詭變與不善，而值得特別關注。本文透過《荀子•禮論》喪、祭二例所呈現的感性變異，說明內在的人、我相對意識，超出實際境況，更深刻主導人們存在感受的事實；為政者故應以對眾人自我之承擔，作為施政要務。荀子並指出：人因自我所導致的種種看似主觀、任意之反應，背後都有一定的原因。自我及其背後所反應的人、我相對意識，因而仍非無理或無意義之造作；相對地，它們是人本身真實的存在事實，也有必然的本末和趨向。英文摘要：For Xunzi, sensibility is the root of human nature that is of Man in Genenral, and variability in sensibility acts often as the reason for badness in man. In our paper, through the response of Rites to such variability, we try to determine the inner mechanism of the function of sensibility, and that is, the mode of operation that in all situations man necessarily distinguishes I and the other and treats as basic its own self-feeling. The badness of man arises when its self-feeling turns negative, and that has forresult the variability of sensibility. Through the above analysis, we explain in brief the nature and end of Rites, the general difficulties of the Self, as well as its positive ground, the effectiveness of the education of Rites, and the reason why evilness in human nature still can have good deeds.起始頁-結束頁：185-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130300440045篇名：後現代社會中的部落考察：Maffesoli的遊牧主義進路並列篇名：The "Tribe" in Post-Modern Society: Maffesoli's Thinking Path on Nomadism作者：李威霆(Wai-Ting Lee)關鍵字：馬菲索利;後現代;部落;遊牧主義;Maffesoli;post-modernity;tribe;nomadism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在考察法國社會學家Michel Maffesoli 的後現代社會學理論。Maffesoli 的社會學延續後涂爾幹學派觀點，聚焦於現代社會中的「後現代性」，其研究重點包括社會形態與社會連結的形式、小眾的發生、集體情感的動力、日常生活的慣習、影像與行動的關連等問題。在「部落」的類比基礎上，Maffesoli 試圖建構一種根著於日常生活的類型知識，以描述群體聚集的初始動力，並分析社群形塑質變過程中的影像、符號、情感與集體認同。藉此，Maffesoli 提出「對立偶合」（coincidentia oppositorum）的模態解釋和「循環往復」（va-et-vient cyclique）的非線性思維作為後現代部落社會的遊牧圖式。其中有關集體向心力和離心力的分析，是最具原創性和顛覆性，也最值得國內社會學界借鏡的觀點。英文摘要：This article aims to focus and develop the sociological thesis of Michel Maffesoli on the initiate nomadic conditions of post-modern society. From a post-durkheimian view, Maffesoli endeavored toinvestigate the ”post-modernity” in our contemporary society, and developed an analytical framework focalizing on the forms of social solidarity, the emergence of minority organizations, the reason forcommunalized empathy (Einfuhlung), the habitus in everyday life, and the relations between image and action. Maffesoli takes steps on an analogical basis, developing the concept of ”tribe” to construct a typicality of knowledge penetrated our everyday life. By this way he schematized a nomadic scenario leading to a ”coincidentia oppositorum” modality for segmental communities wherein the members’ psychic energy consist of centripetal and centrifuge forces. Finally, these forces are cyclicallyoscillating and alternating (va-et-vient cyclique).起始頁-結束頁：219-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201303004400501篇名：誰是盲人：台灣現代盲人的鑑定、分類與構生並列篇名：Who Are the Blind? Assessment, Categorization, and the Making Up of the Blind in Modern Taiwan作者：邱大昕(Ta-Sing Chiu)關鍵字：視力鑑定;視覺障礙;動態唯名論;vision assessment;visual impairment;ANT;dynamic nominalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：盲，大概是人類歷史上最早被區辨出來身心障礙類別之一。然而不同時期盲人的判斷與分類方式有著非常大的差異，因此盲人的「本質」也有很大差異。從行動者網絡理論（Actor Network Theory）的觀點來看，盲人置身的網絡不斷改變，因此包括「盲人」在內的所有的行動者其實也都在變化。然而各個時期的盲人又有其相對穩定的存在，本文採取Ian Hacking的「動態唯名論」（dynamic nominalism），作為的行動網絡理論的一個補充，來理解過去百年來台灣盲人的誕生與演變過程。國家制度與物質實作形成現代盲人，而被分類的盲人又透過行動與參與知識生產，反過來改變鑑定方式與分類。「盲人」由個別化定義的盲人，變成不同制度定義的多重存在，再轉變成單一的類別。我們在撰寫某種「人為類別」的歷史時，必須仔細考慮到這些類別的動態建構本質。英文摘要：”Blindness” is among the first disability categories recognized in human history. Yet are the blind in the past the same as the blind in modern society? What is the history of the blind in Taiwan? This study adopts Hacking's ”dynamic nominalism” as a supplement to Actor Network Theory to explore the transformations in the procedures for assessing and classifying the blind in Taiwan. In the past 120 years, institutional and material practices have ”made up” modern blind people, and the categorized blind in turn changed the means of assessing and classifying blindness through their action and participation in the process of knowledge production. The networks in which the blind are situated continuously changin, and so are the actors in these networks. ”The blind” as a category has gone through various stages of definitions from individuals, to institutions, and to a modern unified definition by the state and medical experts. Therefore, we should not assume that there is one homogeneous ”human kind,” in writing their history.起始頁-結束頁：11-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：定位與多重越界：回首重看STS與科哲並列篇名：Positioning and Multiple Boundary-Crossings: A Reconsideration of STS and Philosophy of Science作者：傅大為(Dai-Wie Fu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：David Bloor近來接受訪談，認為「科學哲學」是人文社會領域中抗拒STS最頑固的一個學科。Joseph Rouse最近也發表論文，認為科學哲學與STS過去的關係雖然不好，但未來卻大有可為，值得開闢交易特區（trading zone）來交流。陳瑞麟則認為，過去許多人都誤解了二者的關係，STS本身的理論發展與分化過程，其實哲學是不可或缺的。另外我們知道，十多年前的「科學戰爭」使得STS忙著處理她與科學，乃至科哲的危機關係。雖然在東亞或台灣，科學戰爭的爭議並沒有如此嚴重，但隨著STS的成長，她與科哲的關係，對一個源自科學哲學的STS人－筆者而言，仍感到有許多問題需要研究與發言。本文的書寫策略，除了重新思考STS、科哲二者的定位，還有她們與當代科技的關係之外，筆者使用兩個重要的「越界」例子來思考STS與科哲的關係。一個是技術哲學家Langdon Winner如何批評並且使用STS，另一個則是SSK的領航者David Bloor如何策略性的使用（科學）哲學。本文所欲呈現STS與科哲的關係，不像一般所說的，如雙方合作或共構、交流或溝通、共創理想未來等「跨領域外交」上的常見概念，而要指出另外一種比較單方面的，但也許更具穿透與反省效果的「越界」策略。這可以是單方面地來批評、挪用與徵召STS的策略（如Winner），或者反之（如Bloor），是對科哲進行單方面的分類轉換（如重新界定誰是哲學界中的社會學家）與論點轉換（如哪些科哲其實蘊涵豐富的社會學靈光），從而達成Winner的技術哲學或Bloor的SSK在研究發展上的成果，以及滋生更多跨領域行動中的好策略與好分析。英文摘要：This paper reconsiders the relationship between STS and philosophy of science. First it tries to understand the relationship by comparing their respective relationships to science. If, as joke has it, philosophy of science to science is just like meteorology to meteors, then what is STS to science like? It turns out that their respective relationships to science are much more complicated and sophisticated. Secondly, instead of going for constructing a safe and diplomatic ”trading zone” for exchanging ideas between STS and philosophy of science, this paper suggest some more radical and perhaps more fruitful strategies, whose lessons are to come from two case studies. One is about how a philosopher of technology (Langdon Winner) independently criticizes and appropriates STS, and the other is about how a SSK scholar (David Bloor) skillfully criticizes and appropriates philosophy of science/mathematics. This paper ends with some further dialogue with a Taiwanese philosopher of science (Chen Ruey-Lin) about why philosophy of science is not a necessary condition for the conceptual developments of STS, but sometimes it can do more than simply a necessary condition.起始頁-結束頁：49-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：當核能系統轉化為科技政體：冷戰下的國際政治與核能發展並列篇名：How a Technopolitical Regime Evolved from the Pursuit of Nuclear Power: The International Politics and Nuclear Development during the Cold War作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：科技政治;科技政體;冷戰;核能;福島核災;technopolitics;technopolitical regime;Cold War;nuclear power;Fukushima disaster期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文透過科學史、科技史、科學與技術研究（science and technology studies）的發展趨勢評述近年來科技史對研究冷戰（Cold War）的一個新概念：科技政治（technopolitics），並藉此對東亞的核能發展進行初步分析。基本上，透過科技的權力展現即是科技政治，指涉一種利用科技的設計或使用，進而建構、執行及具體化某些政治目的的策略性操作。亦即，特定政治目標的達成必須實質性地仰賴這些物質性及人造性的產物。科技政治承襲及進一步發展了若干科技史重要概念，但在概念層次上與技術的社會建構論卻出現若干扞格，並恐欠缺技術內生政治性的考量。不過，科技政治當中關於「文化及政治脈絡」上的洞見，應可做為一個檢視福島核災的重要途徑。雖然目前東亞各國社會已因福島核災而對核能發展有更進一步的檢討，但除了技術性議題外，仍恐難帶給東亞各國政府與人民在文化及政治脈絡上的根本改變，亦即東亞各國的科學發展早已不只是手段，更是深化為國家目的。本文建議東亞的核能發展可跳脫東亞各國國內的架構，而從跨國角度檢討，進而發展更具歷史縱深及區域整合的觀點，並可藉科技政治的看法，檢視國際政經及歷史文化結構下的東亞核能「科技」及「科技家」是可能如何地扮演政治行動者。英文摘要：This article reviews a new historical concept of technopolities during the Cold War, by which it aims to offer a technopolitical perspective on the nuclear development in East Asia after the Fukushima disaster. In addition to introduce Gabriel Hecht's research of nuclear technopolities in France, the first part of this article analyzes the concept of technopolities with some recent accounts from history of international relations, history of science and technology, and science and technology studies. Hecht's concept shared a contextualist approach with some critical accounts such as the idea of large technological system in history of technology, but her arguments suggest paying more attention on exploring the cultural and political contexts embedded within technology. Accordingly, the idea of technopolitics shows some dissatisfaction with those explanations about the Cold War history of technology offered by the theories of social construction/shaping of technology and history of international relations. In the second part, this article applies the heuristic concept of technopolitics to explore the development of nuclear power in East Asia. It argues the Fukushima disaster might bring limited impacts on projects for nuclear power and/or weapons in countries such as China, South Korea, North Korea, Japan and Taiwan. In addition to the technological momentum of large nuclear systems that keeps pushing these countries to pursue their nuclear projects, their intensive international relations in terms of hostile military and economic competition to each other leave them little room to make a difference. However, the Fukushima disaster has generated some discussions in societies such as in Taiwan to rethink if they should build their national visions on projects of nuclear development.起始頁-結束頁：103-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：Beyond Celestial Toys: Orreries and Public Astronomical Lectures in the Eighteenth Century並列篇名：太陽系儀與十八世紀大眾天文演示作者：黃相輔(Hsiang-Fu Huang)關鍵字：太陽系儀;天文演示;十八世紀;科學傳播史;天文史;orrery;planetarium;astronomy display;eighteenth century;history of science communication;history of astronomy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：太陽系儀是十八世紀以降在西歐迅速發展的太陽系機械模型，被廣泛應用在當時的自然哲學演講，用以展示各種天文現象原理。十八世紀中葉後，隨著教學及推廣的需求，低價的簡化小型太陽系儀問世，使太陽系儀成為新興的中產階級人士也能負擔得起的商品，不再僅是極少數富裕貴族的珍藏。十八世紀的大眾自然哲學演講與儀器製造行業的興盛密不可分；太陽系儀的發展與此兩者緊密相扣，是揭露當代天文推廣及物質文化的絕佳線索。本論文以十八世紀自然哲學演示及儀器行業為脈絡，論述太陽系儀在其中扮演寓教於樂之角色。除歷史論述外，並選取英國格林威治皇家天文台的部份館藏太陽系儀實物，考察製造者及相關文獻紀錄予以佐證。研究結果顯示在所選取的實物中，其中兩件太陽系儀（館藏編號AST1055、AST1066）最可能在當年的大眾天文演示場合使用。其他實物則可能為家庭或私人收藏之用。英文摘要：This article introduces a selection of orreries collected in the Royal Observatory, Greenwich/National Maritime Museum, London. Eight items were investigated in this study. As important visual aids of astronomy developed in the eighteenth century and used in contemporary public philosophical lectures, the orreries provide a good case study through which to investigate the material culture in eighteenth-century Britain. A joint collaboration between instrument business and philosophical lecturing was formed in the eighteenth century marketplace, and this market was promoted by the politeness pursuit. This study shows how the orreries combined instruction with entertainment in eighteenth century polite culture context. Most of the orreries in the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, are small portable types. Among the eight selected items, William Lacy's orrery (AST1066) is the most unique and was designated to be used in specific demonstration of the Saturn system. Item AST1055 made by W. and S. Jones was also probably for public demonstration. Other items were most likely for domestic use or private possession.起始頁-結束頁：161-222資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：當助產士成了熱門影集的主角並列篇名：TV Series Reviews: "Call the Midwife:" Reflections on Midwifery's History and Future作者：黃于玲(Yu-Ling Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：223-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：大體器官募集制度的倫理學與政治哲學：辯護「認定同意制」並列篇名：The Ethics and Political Philosophy of Organ Procurement: A Defense of an Opt-Out System作者：謝世民(Ser-Min Shei)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：235-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：謝世民〈大體器官募集制度的倫理學與政治哲學：辯護「認定同意制」〉讀後並列篇名：Response to Shei, Ser-Min' "The Ethics and Political Philosophy of Organ Procurement: A Defense of an Opt-Out System"作者：祝平次(Ping-Tzu Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：257-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館8篇名：從歷史與社會科學觀點反思器官移植：回應〈大體器官募集制度的倫理學與政治哲學：辯護「認定同意制」〉並列篇名：Presumed Consent of Organ Transplantation: Some Reflections作者：李尚仁(Shang-Jen Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：267-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：在櫃子裡搖頭：青年男同志之用藥經驗與調適策略初探並列篇名：Shaking Their Heads in the Closet: Drug Use Experiences and Coping Strategies of Young Gay Men作者：莊登閔(Deng-Min Chuang);沈慶盈(Ching-Ying Shen)關鍵字：用藥經驗;因應策略;男同志;搖頭丸;drug use experiences;coping strategy;MSM;MDMA期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：27期出版年：2013中文摘要：用藥男同志因其擁有同志與用藥兩種身分，非常可能遭遇到社會邊緣化與社會排除的困境，因此，本研究探討男同志開始使用搖頭丸的狀況、影響其用藥的因素、所遭受到的壓力及其因應壓力所用的調適策略，希望透過此研究能瞭解男同志的用藥經驗與調適策略。本研究從研究者的人際網絡開始，以滾雪球方式來尋找研究樣本，共深入訪談了8位目前正在使用MDMA、年齡介於18∼30歲之間的男同志。研究結果發現，男同志初次用藥主要是以個人的好奇與網友帶領為主。影響男同志持續用藥的因素則包括對藥物的正向感受、心理依賴和網絡關係。此外，使用搖頭丸除了帶來憂鬱、疲倦等負面影響，還遭遇伴隨用藥與同志身分而來的外在環境壓力，包含傳播媒體、同儕與法律。本研究進一步探討用藥男同志調適藥物副作用與環境壓力的策略，並針對用藥男同志之宣導、保護與未來研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) users among Men who have sex with men (MSM) are often marginalized and excluded from society. As a result, this study investigates why MSM use, how they cope with pressure and develop relevant strategies. This study carries out qualitative research. Data were collected from 8 MSM aged between 18 and 30 who have used or have been using MDMA by in-depth interviews and data analysis.The results show that individual's curiosity and so-called 'e-pals' are the leading factors leading to use of MDMA for the first time. The reasons for continued use of MDMA include positive cognition, psychological addiction and related relationship benefits. However, some stresses come with drug use, including depression, fatigue and pressure from media, peers and the law. This study further explores different strategies use by MSM to cope with the negative impacts of MDMA use. The final part of this study focuses on how to raise awareness among MSM who use MDMA and how to protect them. We also point out possible issues for further research.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.27.012篇名：兒童津貼之合理性與可行性研究並列篇名：Study on Rationale and Preliminary Planning of Child Allowance作者：王舒芸(Shu-Yung Wang);鄭清霞(Ching-Hsia Cheng);王正(Cheng Wang)關鍵字：生育率;兒童津貼;財源籌措;child allowance;fertility;source of finance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：27期出版年：2013中文摘要：實施兒童津貼的合理性與可行性，是本研究的兩大目的。就合理性而言，本研究主張三大要素：首先就國家的角度，兒童津貼應可部分回應家庭能量與人口結構的變遷及婦女就業之兩難。其次，就家長的立場，兒童津貼展現國家分擔育兒家戶之經濟責任與保障兒童經濟安全的決心。第三，就兒童的角度，兒童津貼視兒童為準公民與未來社會共同的資產。不過，本研究強調，權衡育兒需求與財政負擔，規劃合乎國情的兒童津貼，是國家保障兒童經濟安全與分擔育兒責任的開端，卻不應是唯一的政策，健全兒童照顧體系與強化育兒家庭穩定就業等相關支持性措施，應視為並列順位。就實施兒童津貼的可行性，本研究針對給付條件、領取水準、財務來源、費用估算等面向釐清相關議題後，提出以下主張：兒童津貼應為基本人權，故採均一給付，不因家戶所得、胎次別而有差異。給付範圍應以〈兒童及少年福利與權益保障法〉所訂12歲以下兒童為對象，但衡量國家財政狀況，短期以0∼3歲為優先，中長期逐步擴展到6∼12歲兒童。給付水準有兩個指標：國家對準公共財的最低責任是分擔養兒直接支出的25%；或基於代間正義，比照政府對老年給付的保費負擔40%。因此設在3,000∼5,000元範圍。至於財源籌措，若以0∼3歲以下為對象，每月給付3,000∼5,000元，需提高營業稅0.50∼0.83個百分點；若以保險費融通，以勞工保險為例，折合保險費率為0.59∼0.98%。英文摘要：The fertility rate in Taiwan has dramatically plummeted, posing a negative impact on the future labor force, economic, and demographic structures. There has been much discussion on policies for encouraging fertility. Among which, the implementation of child allowance policy, with the objective of sharing the financial burden of parents with young children, is highly debated.This study aims to demonstrate that child allowance is just one strategy in the entire child welfare package, which illustrates the government's willingness to share the responsibilities of rearing children. The major goal of child allowance is to protect the basic rights of children. Therefore, in addition to exploring the possibility of implementing child allowance, this study emphasizes the importance of introducing other child welfare policies at the same time.On the basis of the study results, we recommend that there should be universal entitlement of child allowance at a flat rate ranging between NT$3,000-NT$5,000. According to the sources of finance, two strategies are proposed. One is to increase business tax by 0.5%-0.83% if the benefit is to be financed by general tax; and the other is to increase contribution rate of social insurance by 0.59%-0.98% if the benefit is to be financed by insurance premium.起始頁-結束頁：45-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.27.023篇名：學校社工員在生態系統中工作的目標與策略：衝突解決系統取向之初探作者：胡中宜關鍵字：生態系統;系統取向;學生輔導;學校社會工作;衝突解決期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：27期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要目的在初探學校社工員在生態系統中工作的目標與策略，運用焦點團體方法，立意選取6位學校社工員，結果顯示，權力失衡、能力缺乏、封閉疆界、資源不足和目標迥異是常見的系統衝突形式。處遇目標則有降低系統緊張、平衡系統權能與解決系統問題；最後，這些目標下常見有12種工作策略，包括危機介入、陪同安撫、召開會議、專業諮詢、調整界限、增強權能、辨識權力、維權倡導、資源連結、個案管理、發展方案和形成政策。起始頁-結束頁：93-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.27.034篇名：跨國境後之主體形成：婚姻移民單親母親的在地與跨境協商並列篇名：Subject Construction after Cross-Border: Immigrant Lone Mothers and Their Local and Cross-Border Negotiation作者：潘淑滿(Shu-Man Pan);楊榮宗(Jung-Tsung Yang)關鍵字：在地與跨境協商;多元家庭支持方案;婚姻移民單親母親;跨境母職;local and cross-border negotiation;multiple family support programs;immigrant lone mothers;transnational mothering期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：27期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究根據20位婚姻移民單親母親的訪談資料，探討婚姻移民對於跨國婚姻抉擇的考量，及其妻職→母職→單親母親的身分轉換過程，如何突破角色限制，展現主體。研究發現，在主流形塑「經濟道德」氛圍下，受訪者傾向隱藏不符合社會期待的慾望，婚姻關係中的角色扮演，更是受到照顧長輩影響。迥異於本籍婦女和非單親婚姻移民之策略運用，不需要照顧長輩的受訪者，傾向運用延展式角色協商策略；需要照顧長輩的受訪者，則傾向運用妥協式角色協商。成為單親母親後，角色兼顧的策略，明顯受到子女年齡影響。子女在學齡前階段，普遍運用跨境協商或調整工作時間與地點；子女在學齡階段，則發展在地資源或調整工作。成為母親後，「他者」身分可能鬆動，所以「成為母親」絕非缺乏主體的經驗。女性主義的母職論述，無法反映弱勢婚姻移民單親母親的經驗，傳統「好媽媽」論述未必規範母職實踐，跨境協商讓「親職」呈現多元。跨境協商凸顯親職是兩代女人的事，男人依舊從親職中缺席。本研究提出三項建議：一、解構傳統母職論述；二、建構多元家庭支持方案；三、發展「比例制」勞動規範與配套措施。英文摘要：Drawing on in-depth interviews with 20 immigrant lone mothers, this paper presents their experiences of local and cross-border negotiation of motherhood. Before becoming lone mothers, marriage immigrant women's strategies of motherhood negotiation are contingent on their responsibility to care for elderly members of their husband's family. If marriage immigrant women are not responsible for caring for the elderly in their husband's family, they tend to resort to extended negotiation of motherhood. If they are responsible for caring for the elderly, they tend to employ compromised negotiation of motherhood. After becoming lone mothers, marriage immigrant women's strategies of practicing motherhood depend on the age of their children. If their children are of pre-school age, immigrant lone mothers tend to use cross-border negotiation or adjustment of their working schedule and location. If their children are of school age, immigrant lone mothers tend to develop local resources or change their jobs. This paper argues that current feminist discourse on mothering and traditional discourse on the good mother cannot adequately interpret these motherhood strategies. These strategies not only challenge traditional and feminist discourses of motherhood but also reveal the empowerment of cross-border negotiation. However, this negotiation only involves immigrant lone mothers and their own mothers still living in their country of origin, the father in Taiwan remains absent. Facing global migration and increasing divorce rate and single parent families, this paper proposes: (1) presenting new discourse on mothering; (2) conducting multiple family support programs; and (3) providing social benefits for (multiple) part time jobs.起始頁-結束頁：135-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.27.045篇名：非營利組織在社區照顧服務的協調合作：以社區照顧關懷據點為例並列篇名：The Coordination of Nonprofit Organizations in Community Care Service: A Research for the Community Care Stations作者：王仕圖(Shu-Twu Wang)關鍵字：社區型非營利組織;社區照顧關據點;協調合作;資源網絡;community-based nonprofit organization;community care station;coordination;resource network期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：27期出版年：2013中文摘要：社區照顧關懷據點是結合在地組織的力量，達成社區老人在地老化的理想。本研究透過組織提供社區老人福利服務過程中，瞭解其如何形成服務的資源網絡；探討社區服務過程中如何進行協調合作，以服務社區中的老年人口。本研究以設立社區關懷據點之非營利組織為研究對象。分析結果顯示，志工人力、社區鄰里居民為重要的人力資源；政府提供的補助是據點最主要的募集管道；社區關懷據點主要以社區發展協會為其運作的組織。在網絡的連結方面，組織的董（理）事仍有擔任其他組織相關角色者。最後，有關據點的協調合作關係中，主要仍以非正式的協調合作為主，影響據點運用非正式協調合作關係的因素，包含人力資源與財務資源的多元化、機構屬性、服務的資源連結。而影響正式的協調合作關係的因素，除了人力資源與財務資源管道的多元化，據點成立時間也是重要的影響因素。英文摘要：Community care stations combined with the strength of local organizations to reach the ideal community for aging in place. The author intends to understand how these organizations establish their resource networks of services through the process of elderly welfare services delivery in communities. It explores how the coordination works in the process of community service in terms of serving the elderly in community. This study focuses on the nonprofit organizations that set up community care stations. The results indicate that volunteers and residents of the neighborhood are important human resources. Grants from the government are the major financial sources of the care stations. Most of the community care stations are run by community development associations. Regarding the network connections, the board members of community organizations often serve related positions in other organizations. Finally, the collaborative relationships among community care stations are mainly informal. Factors that impact the utilization of informal collaborative relationships include the diversity of human resources and financial resources, attributes of organizations, and resource linkage of the services. Besides the diversity of human resources and financial resources, time of the establishment of community care station is also a critical factor that affects formal collaborative relationships.起始頁-結束頁：185-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.27.0501篇名：Directors' and Officers' Liability Insurance, Debt Contracting, and Earnings Conservatism並列篇名：董監事責任險、債務契約與盈餘保守性作者：許文馨(Audrey Wen-Hsin Hsu);林玟君(Wen-Chun Lin)關鍵字：董監事責任保險;債務契約;盈餘保守性;D&O insurance;debt contracting;earnings conservatism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討董監事責任保險是否影響我國企業會計盈餘保守性，並進一步研究債務契約的影響是否得以解釋董監事責任保險對於企業會計盈餘保守程度的差異。本研究假設，當公司購買董監事責任保險時，代理衝突的增加會產生更多的會計盈餘保守性。實證研究結果顯示，購買董監事責任保險的企業中，承受較高外部融資壓力的公司報導更顯著的會計盈餘保守特性。本研究結果支持債務契約需求導致盈餘保守性假說，亦即會計盈餘保守性的實務需求主要來自於債權人對於降低代理衝突與促進契約效率有關。英文摘要：This study evaluates whether earnings conservatism increases when firms with high debt contracting demands purchase directors' and officers' insurance (D&O). We expect that the purchase of D&O insurance is positively associated with earnings conservatism only when firms have higher debt-based contracting demands. We find that firms having D&O insurance and higher external demand for debts report more earnings conservatism. These results are consistent with prior studies (Ahmed, Billings, Morton, & Stanford-Harris, 2002; Watts, 2003) that debtholders demand greater earnings conservatism as a means of addressing agency problems. This study also provides evidence that debtholders appear to be the primary driver of the demand for earnings conservatism.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.APR.R130042篇名：台股外資分析師報告預測目標價之正確性與影響因素分析並列篇名：Target Price Accuracy in Foreign Analysts' Reports for Taiwan Stocks作者：謝文良(Wen-Liang G. Hsieh);李進生(Chin-Shen Lee);王芊儒(Chien-Ju Wang)關鍵字：分析師報告;目標價;投資評等;analysts' reports;target price forecasts;stock recommendation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探究台灣市場外資分析師報告對目標價格預測之可信度，及影響目標價誤差的因素。文中使用五年共11,446份報告，觀察不同評估期間下的目標價達成率和目標價高估與低估的程度。主要發現有四點：一、目標價平均達成率不到五成，發布後三個月內即達成的比率高於更晚才達成的比例，負向評等的達成率高於正向評等。二、正向評等報告傾向過度樂觀，目標價誤差大於負向評等。三、外資機構的持股部位與分析師報告建議相符，傾向持有目標價過度樂觀的股票，這顯示分析師報告具有影響力，且使用者不易判別報告中的預測誤差。四、目標價格有系統性的高估或低估現象，包括高估中間評等的大型公司股價、高估分析師報告較少關注的股票、對高市價淨值比股票過度樂觀、以及對低市價淨值比股票過度悲觀。英文摘要：The study analyzes the accuracy of target price forecasts published by foreign analysts for listed Taiwan stocks. Using data in 11,446 analysts reports issued over the period of 2006 to 2010, we measure whether target prices are achieved and to what extent the target prices over- or under-estimate the actual stock prices. For the overall sample, less than 50% of target prices were achieved by the actual prices within one year, of which, a dominant proportion was achieved in 3 months after report issuing. Reports with favorable recommendation have lower percentage of achievement and tend to be over optimistic in target forecasts. The study finds that foreign institutions held relatively more shares of stocks that analysts over-forecasted. This suggests that the target prices do affect the portfolio decision of the buy-side clients, who were unable to tell the systematic bias in the forecasts. We also find that target price forecasts tend to overvalue large firms receiving modest recommendations, stocks with fewer analyst reports, high price-to-book ratio stocks, but under-estimate low price-to-book ratio stocks.起始頁-結束頁：43-70資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.AUG.R130053篇名：專業影評之發行商偏誤及影評方向對消費者影評接受度之影響：以消費者－發行商認同為干擾因素並列篇名：Impact of Professional Critics' Distributor Bias and Critic Valence on Consumers' Acceptance of their Reviews: Moderating Effect of Consumer-Distributor Identification作者：王仕茹(Shih-Ju Wang);陳明輝(Ming-Huei Chen)關鍵字：發行商偏誤;影評方向;消費者—發行商認同;distributor bias;critic valence;consumer-distributor identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以歸因理論觀點出發，探討專業影評方向與發行商偏誤如何影響消費者的影評接受度，並以「消費者—發行商認同」為干擾因素。本研究採行2（有／無發行商偏誤）×2（正面／負面影評）×2（高／低發行商認同）受試者間實驗，變異數分析結果顯示，雖然正面影評的接受度高於負面影評，但影評人發行商偏誤和低發行商認同兩者皆會消弭正負面影評接受度的差異，高發行商認同則會擴大兩者間的差異。此外，當影評人出現發行商偏誤時，高發行商認同的消費者仍較為接受正面影評而非負面影評，但是低發行商認同的消費者則正好相反。本研究的發現豐富了有關專業影評影響力的研究領域，並為電影行銷人員未來策略性管理電影評價提供了具備理論基礎的建議。英文摘要：Based on the attribution theory, this study explores the impact of distributor bias given different critic valence on consumers' acceptance of critics' reviews. The authors also incorporate ”consumer-distributor identification” as an important moderator since consumers' reaction toward a critic's distributor bias will depend on their prior attitude toward the distributor. An experimental study was conducted where a critic's distributor bias and critic valence were manipulated and consumer-distributor identification was matched in a between-subject factorial design. The results suggest that consumers' acceptance of positive critics are higher than negative ones, but critics with distributor bias and low consumer-distributor identification will both diminish the differences, while high consumerdistributor identification will inflate them. In addition, when exposed to critics with distributor bias, positive critics are more influential than negative ones for consumers with high consumer-distributor identification, however, negative critics are more influential than positive ones for consumers with low consumer-distributor identification. Our findings enrich the current research streams regarding the impact of professional critics and deepen their theoretical foundations, with important managerial and marketing implications for movie marketers who need favorable consumers' movie evaluations.起始頁-結束頁：71-100資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUN.C404篇名：吃硬不吃軟：觸覺資訊對消費者品質預期與折價券使用意圖之影響並列篇名：Influences of Haptic Information on Consumers' Quality Expectations and Coupon Redemption Intentions作者：楊俊明(Chun-Ming Yang)關鍵字：觸覺資訊;折價券;品牌熟悉度;haptic information;coupon;brand familiarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：實務資料顯示折價券發行量極大，但回收率有待提昇，如何提昇折價券使用意圖成為企業的重要議題。但過去的研究卻未曾探討感官資訊對於折價券使用的影響。本研究以資訊處理觀點探討非診斷性觸覺資訊的折價券紙張挺度如何影響消費者對促銷產品的品質預期與折價券使用意圖。實驗一發現，整體而言挺度較高紙張所印製之折價券會帶來較高的品質預期與折價券使用意圖，但此效果受消費者自發性觸摸需求特質與品牌熟悉度之調節，且品質預期會在特定情況下中介紙張挺度對使用意圖之影響。實驗二則透過操弄認知資源限制，驗證高自發性觸摸需求的消費者會在資訊處理過程中排除與品質判斷無關的觸覺資訊。本研究根據實驗結果提供理論與管理意涵。英文摘要：The author examines the effects of non-diagnostic haptic information (i.e., the paper stiffness) of promotional coupons on consumers' product quality expectations and coupon redemption intentions. On the basis of the two-stage information processing model, the author proposes that coupons printed on stiff paper will produce higher quality expectation and redemption intentions compared to those printed on soft paper. However, not all consumers or brands are equally affected by such non-diagnostic haptic cues. Results from experiment 1 show that consumers' level of autotelic NFT and brand familiarity moderate the relationship between the paper stiffness and quality expectations. Moreover, quality expectation mediates the effects of the paper stiffness on redemption intention. Further, by restricting cognitive resources, experiment 2 demonstrates that high-autotelic NFT consumers are less affected by the paper stiffness, because they are able to rule out its potential biases in the second stage of information processing. Thus, the findings of this research have both theoretical and managerial implications.起始頁-結束頁：101-127資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAY.C045篇名：消費者認知基礎之企業綠品牌形象衡量模式發展並列篇名：A Consumer-Cognition-Based Measurement Model of Corporate Green Brand Image作者：張愛華(Ai-Hwa Chang);洪敘峰(Hsu-Feng Hung)關鍵字：綠品牌形象;量表發展;MIMIC模型;corporate green brand image;scale development;MIMIC model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：消費者環保主義已漸成為市場上的主流思維，然而企業綠品牌形象的衡量模式仍有待建立，本研究先應用質化方法探索消費者企業綠品牌形象的潛在反映因素與形成因素，發現前者包括企業綠政策、企業綠識別以及企業環境導向，後者包括產品綠特徵、綠認證、綠推廣活動、綠訂價策略、綠通路規劃以及綠產品特徵等。再利用量化方法以MIMIC（Multiple Indicators Multiple Causes）模式驗證企業綠品牌形象衡量模式。本研究並利用兩家企業及代表性品牌產品進行實證，確認此衡量模式具備適當的信、效度與區辨力。英文摘要：In recent years, green consumerism has become a major force in consumer market. A company with green brand image may create favorable opportunities to increase consumer purchase intention and behavior. This study uses a mixed method to develop a measurement model of corporate green brand image. A qualitative method is first used to find the major factors of corporate green brand image, which comprises reflective factors and formative factors. The former includes corporate green policy, corporate green identification, and corporate environmental orientation. The latter includes green product category, green certification, green promotional actions, green pricing strategies, green channel planning, and green product features. Then, a quantitative method is used to verify the corporate green brand image model as a multiple-indicators-multiple-causes (MIMIC) model. The result shows the consumer-cognition-based corporate green brand image model has acceptable reliability and validity. The application of this model also successfully distinguishes between the green brand image of The Body Shop and that of L'oreal.起始頁-結束頁：129-154資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUN.C086篇名：不同型式改良產品之顧客選擇行為並列篇名：Consumer Choices for Various Types of Enhanced Products作者：張心馨(Shin-Shin Chang)關鍵字：改良產品;調節焦點;product enhancement;self-regulatory focus期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討不同類型的改良產品會因為調節焦點導向之差異，產生不同之消費者偏好。本研究主張促進焦點者由於對風險敏感度較低且較能接受新奇性高的產品，因此在面對相同屬性結構之改良產品時，促進焦點者選擇集中改良型產品（相對於全面改良型產品）的機率高於預防焦點者；而在面對相同與相異結構兩種改良產品時，促進焦點者選擇相異結構改良產品之機率也高於預防焦點者。本研究採實驗設計，兩項研究之結果支持本研究假設。英文摘要：This research explores the impact of self-regulatory focus on consumer choices of various types of product enhancements. It is argued that distinct risk aversion orientation between promotion focus and prevention focus may frame diverse perspectives on gain and loss, thereby leading to different choice behavior when facing focused enhancement vs. general enhancement, and when facing alignable enhancement vs. nonalignable enhancement. Two experiments are employed in this research, and the results support the proposed hypotheses.起始頁-結束頁：155-172資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUL.C377篇名：情緒發洩、報復與利他：服務失誤後之線上負面口碑並列篇名：Emotional Episode, Retaliation and Altruism: Negative Online Word-of-Mouths after Service Failure作者：汪志堅(Chih-Chien Wang);吳宜環(Yi-Huan Wu)關鍵字：負面口碑;情緒;服務失誤;negative word-of-mouth;emotion;service failure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討消費者在遭遇服務失誤後，產生的情緒對線上負面口碑傳播之影響。本研究共進行四次實證研究，實證研究結果顯示，服務失誤後，失望情緒會產生基於幫助／警告他人的利他口碑傳播意圖，以希望其他人能免受同樣的遭遇；生氣情緒則會讓消費者產生懲罰業者的心態，基於報復意圖而散佈負面口碑；此外，本研究發現報復人格特質和報復口碑傳播意圖有顯著正相關。英文摘要：This research focuses on the influence of emotions and intentions on consumer negative word-of-mouth (WOM) communications when service failure occurred. The paper conducted four empirical studies to examine the relationship between emotions, intentions, personality trait and negative WOM communications. The results revealed that the disappointed customers were usually with altruism intention, and would with higher intention to help/warn others; whereas consumers with a higher level of anger had more revenge intention to engage in negative WOM after service failure.起始頁-結束頁：173-205資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUL.C118篇名：The Effect of Regulatory Focus on Conformity Behavior並列篇名：調節焦點對消費者從眾行為影響作者：鄭尹惠(Yin-Hui Cheng);高登第(Danny T. Kao);莊世杰(Shih-Chieh Chuang);陳淑惠(Shu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：調節焦點;從眾行為;認知負載;conformity;regulatory focus;cognitive load期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要在驗證調節焦點對消費者從眾行為之影響。實驗1研究影響當消費者處於預防焦點的情況下，將比處於促進焦點的情況下產生更明顯的從眾行為。進一步，實驗2發現調節焦點對消費者從眾行為之影響是由資訊及規範常模中介所造成的。最後，實驗3發現節焦點對消費者從眾行為之影響在高認知負載下將會消失。英文摘要：This article examines the influence of regulatory focus on conformity. Three experimental situations are developed to examine the effect. Experiment 1 reveals that regulatory focus influences conformity, with the effect being more obvious under a prevention-focused condition, in which people conform more strongly with others, than under a promotion-focused condition. In Experiment 2, the effect of regulatory focus on conformity is mediated by informational influences and normative influences. The results of Experiment 3 show that under a high cognitive load, the effect of regulatory focus on conformity disappears.起始頁-結束頁：207-232資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUL.C189篇名：成立專屬保險公司對企業長期績效的影響並列篇名：The Impact on the Company's Long Term Performance with the Establishment of Captive Insurance Company作者：趙志偉(Chih-Wei Chao);林問一(Wen-Yi Lin);劉亞秋(Y. Angela Liu)關鍵字：專屬保險;長期績效;captive insurance;long term performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢驗企業成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司後，長期績效是否改善。我們以1960年到2007年間，在百慕達註冊成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司的美國公開上市公司為樣本，同時引進沒有成立任何型態專屬保險公司的配對公司作比較。結果發現，企業成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司後，企業的長期績效表現比成立前佳；並且有成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司企業的長期績效，優於沒有成立任何型態專屬保險的配對公司。英文摘要：This study examines whether the establishment of a pure single-parent captive insurance company can effectively better the parent company's long term performance. We employ data of U.S. exchange-listed firms that have pure single-parent captive insurance companies registered in Bermuda between 1960 and 2007. Using matched pairs of firms with and without captive insurance companies, our findings show that the long term performance of the parent firm is significantly improved due to the establishment of a pure single-parent captive insurance subsidiary, suggesting such actions provide additional benefits to parent companies.起始頁-結束頁：233-256資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAR.R0805010篇名：新產品延期上市與競爭者反應強度關係之研究並列篇名：Determinants of Magnitude of a Competitor's Reaction to a New Product Introduction Delay作者：顧萱萱(Hsuan-Hsuan Ku);方儷諭(Li-Yu Fang)關鍵字：新產品延期上市;行銷溝通;反應強度;new product introduction delays;marketing communications;reaction magnitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：為爭取市場先機，廠商常於新產品實際上市之前，即發佈預告訊息。然受制於各種內外在因素，新產品恐出現延期情形。面對其他廠商新產品延期上市，競爭者反應強度可能影響延期廠商遭致的負面效應。據此，本研究探討競爭者如何基於發訊者因素、延期產品因素與自身特徵決定反應強度。實證分析對象主要為180家台灣地區電子業製造商，研究結果顯示發訊者市場支配性、發訊信譽、攻擊集中度、預計延期時間長短、延期理由、競爭者市場支配性、產品創新能力與產能可利用率是決定競爭反應強度的主要原因。英文摘要：For benefiting from the advantages of being the first in the market, many companies deliberately release information about a product well in advance of the product actual introduction. However, very often we see how companies fail to deliver their new products on the promised introduction due dates. The negative consequences that a firm, which is delaying a new product introduction, suffers may depend in part on the magnitude of competitors' responses. On this ground, our interest lies in examining the determinants of magnitude of a firm's reaction to a new product introduction delay. An empirical analysis based on 180 manufacturers of electronics industries in Taiwan showed that reaction magnitude can be jointly explained by factors that are sender related (market dominance and signaling reputation), product related (centrality of attack, expected duration of delay, and controllability of the delay), and receiver related (market dominance, product innovation ability, and capacity utilization).起始頁-結束頁：257-283資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.FEB.R1102811篇名：稅法不確定對營利事業短漏報所得之影響：台灣之實證並列篇名：The Influence of Uncertain Tax Positions on Tax Compliance: Considering Taiwan's Business Income Tax作者：陳俊哲(Chun-Che Chen)關鍵字：稅法不確定;稅務遵循;查核品質;uncertain tax positions;tax compliance;audit quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討稅法不確定對納稅人之稅務遵循，稅務申報代理人之處罰責任，及稽徵機關之查核品質的影響。實證結果發現：在稅法不確定下，納稅人以避稅手段產生未確定稅負，稅務申報代理人協助納稅人逃漏稅，但是，加重稅務申報代理人之處罰責任，對納稅人之稅務遵循，沒有明顯的助益。此外，稅法不確定、稅務人員之素養與操守不佳等因素是國內稅務遵循風氣敗壞的主因。當稅法不確定現象存在時，加強稅務人員之素養與操守，對稽徵機關之查核品質，有顯著的影響。英文摘要：This paper explores the impact of uncertain tax positions on the tax compliance of taxpayers, penalties for tax agents, and audit quality of tax authorities. The findings are as follows: When tax positions are uncertain, taxpayers' intentions to avoid taxes and engaging in sheltering activities are more obvious, and tax agents assist taxpayers in evading taxes. However, increasing penalties for tax agents may not intensify tax compliance. Additionally, uncertain tax positions, poor audit quality, and low integrity of tax officials are the main reasons of decreased tax compliance. Furthermore, when tax laws are ambiguous, improving the integrity of tax officials has a significantly positive effect on the audit quality of tax authorities.起始頁-結束頁：285-319資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAR.R1101712篇名：Star Funds, Spillover Effect and Fund Advertisements: From the Viewpoint of Individual Funds and Fund Families並列篇名：明星基金、外溢效果與基金廣告關聯性之探討：個別基金觀點與基金家族觀點作者：傅英芬(Ying-Fen Fu);康信鴻(Hsin-Hong Kang);劉海清(Hai-Ching Liu)關鍵字：基金廣告;明星基金;外溢效果;fund advertisements;star funds;spillover effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文採用Panel Data Approach與Logistic Regression法，分別站在個別基金與基金家族觀點來探討基金廣告對個別基金及其家族的影響。本文的研究顯示採家族廣告對個別基金與基金家族而言都會是一個不錯的選擇。而單一基金廣告可能造成個別基金間的衝突，因為單一基金廣告佔用了家族的資源，但是只對被廣告的基金有利，卻無法創造出外溢效果。除非被單一廣告的基金是明星基金，才可得到更佳的廣告效果與外溢效果，因此明星基金被單一廣告的機率亦大為提高。此外，無論是在整體市場中或是家族內，只要能位居績效或是流量的明星或贏家地位，該基金被單一廣告的機率都將大幅提高，此點印證了符合家族利益的基金，在家族有限的資源中，將得到家族給予更多資源支持的論點（Chevalier and Ellison, 1997）。英文摘要：This study adopts the Panel Data Approach and Logistic Regression to examine the effect of fund advertisements from the viewpoint of both individual funds and fund families. Our empirical results show that adopting family advertisements is a good decision both for individual funds and their families. However, there exists a conflict between individual funds when the individual fund advertisement is executed. The individual funds do not respond well to individual fund advertisements of other funds within the same family because it consumes the resources of the family and does not have a spillover effect. One exception is star funds. The individual fund advertisement of star funds not only results in more flows but also has a spillover effect, which thus brings the star funds a higher probability of being individually advertised. As long as the funds are performance (flow) star and winner funds within the whole stock funds or only the performance (flow) star and winner funds within the family, their advertisement probability is raised. This is consistent with the argument that if the funds confirm the benefit of the family, the family may decide to distribute more limited resources to these funds (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997).起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.OCT.R1102113篇名：我國上市櫃公司採行34號公報第二次修訂規定之誘因：以交易目的的股票重分類為備供出售為例並列篇名：The Incentives of Listed Companies to Adopt the Second Revisions on the Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No.34: An Example of Reclassification of Trading Stock Investments to Available for Sale Investments作者：張嘉文(Chia-Wen Chang);陳明進(Ming-Chin Chen)關鍵字：金融資產重分類;債務契約限制;盈餘管理;reclassification of financial assets;debt covenants restriction;earnings management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討我國上市櫃公司採行財務會計準則34號公報第二次修訂規定進行金融資產重分類之誘因。本文的實證分析結果顯示，債務契約限制會影響公司傾向選擇將交易目的股票投資之金融資產重分類為備供出售金融資產，且重分類前盈餘低於前期盈餘之上市櫃公司，基於避免報導盈餘減少之結果，亦較傾向採行該項重分類規定以增加當年度盈餘。其次，本文研究亦發現債務契約限制愈大及重分類前盈餘低於前期盈餘之上市櫃公司，其將交易目的股票投資金融資產重分類為備供出售金融資產之部位較大。本文的結果提供我國上市櫃公司在金融風暴時期選擇金融資產重分類誘因之實證解釋。英文摘要：This study examines the incentives of listed companies to adopt the second revisions on the reclassification of financial assets of Financial Accounting Standard No.34 (FAS 34). The second revisions on FAS 34 allow firms to reclassify trading stock investments from financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss to available-for-sale financial assets during the 2008 global financial crisis. The empirical results of this study show that debt covenants restriction is a significant factor affecting firms' decision to reclassify trading stock investments to available-for-sale financial assets. Further, companies which would report a decline in earnings from the previous year's before the reclassification of trading stock investments are more likely to reclassify those assets to available-for-sale financial assets. Further, the results also show that the amount of reclassified trading stock investments is related to the debt covenants restriction and the reluctance to report a decline in earnings. Our results provide evidence on the incentives of Taiwanese listed companies to reclassify financial assets that are exposed to the reporting risk of fair value accounting during a global financial crisis.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.R.1101214篇名：Financial Distress, Return Volatility and Hedging並列篇名：財務危機風險、報酬波動與避險作者：賴怡洵(Yi-Hsun Lai);林霖(Lin Lin);戴維芯(Vivian W. Tai)關鍵字：避險;風險移轉;風險管理;hedge;risk-shifting;risk management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以2005年至2009年所有台灣上市櫃公司為樣本，以Tobit迴歸檢定權益波動與避險比例的關係，探討不同財務危機風險下的企業避險動機。提出三個假說，分別為高財務危機風險下的「風險移轉假說」、接近財務危機風險下的「風險管理假說」及低財務危機風險下的「風險－報酬抵換假說」。研究發現在高財務槓桿樣本群，在考量選擇性偏誤、是否處於金融風暴期間、不同的避險比例衡量方式以及不同的槓桿比例財務危機風險指標下，其權益波動與避險比例都具有顯著負向關係，故支持高財務危機風險公司具有風險移轉行為。在低財務槓桿樣本群，除在不同避險工具考量選擇性偏誤的結果外，多數的結果都呈現權益波動與避險比例具有顯著負向關係，部分支持低財務危機風險公司在風險－報酬抵換考量下會選擇高風險而少避險的決策。而高、低財務危機風險之間的群組，其權益波動與避險比例具有正向影響，但部分未達顯著，故微弱地支持風險管理假說。本研究透過實證釐清財務危機風險與權益波動以及其交互作用對企業避險行為的關係。英文摘要：We adopt Tobit Regressions to examine the hedging behavior of the listed firms in Taiwan during 2005-2009. With the concern of bankruptcy and risk-shifting motivation of the firm, the risk-shifting, risk management, and risk-return-trade-off hypotheses are then reviewed and tested. The results show that return volatility is significantly negative to hedge ratio for distressed firms, controlling for the selection biases, time period of catastrophe (i.e. the Financial Crisis started from 2008), and the model sensitivity to different definitions of financial distress. It strongly supports the risk-shifting phenomenon for distressed firms. Significant negative relationship between hedge ratio and return volatility for non-distress group can also be observed in most tests, apart from some models for the Heckman tests for controlling selection biases. These findings partly support the risk-return-trade-off hypothesis. For the firms being in-between extreme distress levels, the return volatility is positive to hedge ratio, showing a weak support to risk management hypothesis. Our empirical results clarify the impacts of financial distress, return volatility, and their interaction term on corporate hedging behavior.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.NOV.D0315篇名：Basu （1997）盈餘不對稱及時性觀念下，盈餘落後反應對穩健性比較之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Earnings Lags on Comparing the Extent of Conservatism Based on Basu's (1997) Asymmetric Timeliness Concept作者：林純央(Chun-Yang Lin);劉啟群(Chi-Chun Liu)關鍵字：穩健性;盈餘不對稱及時性;盈餘落後反應;conservatism;asymmetric timeliness;earnings lags期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢視Basu（1997）盈餘不對稱及時性觀念下，盈餘落後反應對穩健性比較之影響。根據盈餘之落後反應、盈餘之不對稱反應以及兩者交互作用之結果，我們預期盈餘的不對稱及時性不僅存在好壞消息發生之當期，亦存在短暫的落後期間，因此以盈餘報酬間關係作為比較公司間穩健性之指標時，須同時考慮當期及累積期之不對稱性大小，亦須同時考慮盈餘落後反應之期間長短。本文以盈餘多期反應模型捕捉盈餘對好壞消息之落後多期反應，預期盈餘的不對稱及時性在當期及落後較短期間為正，在盈餘落後期間拉長、壞消息對盈餘的影響完全反應完後會轉為負。本文以美國74,550筆公司－年之樣本檢視上述預期，而實證結果均與預期相符。英文摘要：This paper examines the effect of earnings lags on estimating and comparing the extent of conservatism based on Basu's (1997) asymmetric timeliness concept. Based on earnings lags and earnings asymmetry, as well as the interaction between these two, we assert that any comparisons of the extent of conservatism should take the magnitude of both concurrent and cumulative asymmetric timeliness into consideration. The length of recognition lag should also be considered. In the present study, we construct a multi-period model to capture lags in earnings response to good news as well as to bad news. We predict that positive asymmetric timeliness exists in the current period and with short lags. We also predict that asymmetric timeliness turns negative as lags increase. Using a sample of 74,550 U.S. non-financial and non-utility firm-years, empirical results are consistent with our predictions. Results are also robust to several changes in model and sample specifications.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.NOV.R.1102616篇名：台灣券商發行之權證市場品質及造市績效評比並列篇名：Market Quality and Market Making Performance: Evaluating the Issuers of Warrants in Taiwan Stock Markets作者：詹場(Chang Chan);池祥麟(Hsiang-Lin Chih)關鍵字：市場品質;買賣價差;權證;market Quality;bid-ask Spread;warrants期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究針對台灣各券商發行之權證的市場品質、造市機制實施後各券商發行權證之價差及深度進步幅度、以及各券商造市成效進行評比。由一年半樣本期間、20家券商、8千3百檔權證，共1千2百萬筆日內交易資料所得之評比結果為：1.發行權證之市場品質最佳的5家券商為寶來、凱基、元大、群益及統一；2.造市機制實施後價差及深度進步幅度最大的5家券商為日盛、工銀、元富、統一及兆豐；3.造市成效最佳的5家券商為寶來、工銀、元大、統一及凱基。綜合而言，實施造市機制使得台灣權證市場價差下降2/3，深度提升3倍，平均每年為權證投資人節省63億之交易成本。投資人選擇價差最高的5家券商發行之權證，其交易成本是價差最低的5家券商發行之權證的3.6倍，致使其報酬率減少11%；深度最高的5家券商發行之權證深度是深度最低的5家券商發行權證的6.5倍。英文摘要：In order to improve the liquidity of the warrant market, Taiwan Stock Exchange announced operation directions, requiring the issuer (securities firm) of the warrants to perform the market making obligations after 1st January, 2009, i.e., to provide liquidity for the warrants that it issues. The aim of the paper is to evaluate the issuers of the warrants. We explore the following three questions. First, we ask how the market quality of the warrants varies across issuers for our overall sample period between 1st July, 2008 and 31st December, 2009. Second, we compare the market quality of the warrants before and after 1st January, 2009 across issuers, i.e., to examine whether or not the market quality is improved due to the operation directions, and if so, to what extent this goes on across issuers. Third, we examine the performance of the market making across issuers after 1st January, 2009. Our samples consist of twenty securities firms, 8,300 warrants, and about 12,000,000 intraday transaction data. The findings show that the top five issuers with the best market quality for the overall sample period are Polaris, KGI, Yuanta, Capital, and President, respectively; the top five issuers with the biggest improvement in market quality due to the operation directions are Jihsun, IBT, Masterlink, President, and Mega, respectively; the top five issuers with the best market making performance after 1st January, 2009 are Polaris, IBT, Yuanta, President, KGI. In summary, the market making mechanism amazingly reduced the bid-ask spread of the warrant market by nearly two-thirds, increase the depth by three times, and thus save investors the transaction cost about 6.3 billions on average. The transaction cost of the top five issuers with highest bid-ask spread is 3.6 times as high as that of the top five issuers with lowest bid-ask spread. The depth of the top five issuers with highest depth is 6.5 times as high as that of the top five issuers with lowest depth.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.SEP.D1017篇名：Process Innovation and Improvement: A Competitive Dynamics Perspective並列篇名：從動態競爭觀點審視作業流程管理的創新與改進作者：陳立民(Li-Ming Chen);劉妍(Yan Emma Liu);楊曙榮(Shu-Jung Sunny Yang)關鍵字：process innovation;process improvement;competition;operations strategy;作業流程創新;作業流程改進;競爭策略;營運策略期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：Operations and strategy literatures have consistently promoted the best practice of accredited management standards for process efficiency and effectiveness. Based on the capability theorizing, studies have investigated how a following firm can improve its operational performance by learning from a leading firm's best practices. Our study extends this research stream by applying competitive dynamics perspective from strategy literature to the context of process development and management. We develop insights by applying a dynamic, computational model based on an extensive appraisal of the history of process innovation and improvement in the global automobile industry and draws on the underlying theoretical relationships in the empirical literatures on operations and strategy. The core proposition in our study is that a follower firm's investment in process innovation capabilities for long-term growth will provoke strong retaliation from leading firms using the current best practice. We demonstrate that the leading firm can publicly signal its best practice to induce the follower firm to invest in process improvement capabilities but only for short-term survival, not for long-term purposes or goals. In this way, the leader firm maintains its leading edge. Our results also underscore the importance of competition in determining the firm-level process development and management practices.英文摘要：營運暨策略管理文獻已廣泛討論透過採用業界認可之最佳管理實務來提升作業流程效率及效力。過去相關研究主要探討一家處於追隨者地位的企業，如何學習該產業標竿企業的最佳作業流程實務來發展並積累自身組織能耐，用以改進其營運績效。本研究引用策略管理文獻之動態競爭觀點來深耕此研究脈絡。根據全球汽車產業的作業流程創新與改進歷史和相關管理文獻的理論框架與實證研究，本文發展出一個動態模型並藉此得到作業流程創新與改進的管理意涵。文章主要命題如下：雖然追隨企業可以投資作業流程創新能耐來追求長期組織成長，但此舉將引起標竿企業的激烈競爭性回應。為保持業界領先地位，標竿企業具有強烈的策略意圖來公開其最佳作業流程管理實務以供追隨企業學習和採用；其目的在於誘導追隨企業投資短期見效的作業流程改進能耐進而喪失創造嶄新業界作業流程管理實務的機會。本文闡述動態競爭對作業流程發展及管理實務的重要性並影響業界最佳實務的演進與開創。起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.A103-04718篇名：中國會計師事務所經營效率分析：合併的影響並列篇名：The Operating Efficiency of Chinese CPA Firms: The Effect of Merger作者：林孝倫(Hsiao-Lun Lin);卓佳慶(Chia-Ching Cho)關鍵字：會計師事務所;合併;資料包絡分析法;CPA firms;mergers;Data Envelopment Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：中國註冊會計師協會為提升境內事務所之規模與品質，推動「會計師事務所做大做強」計畫，該計畫促使中國會計師事務所展開合併風潮。但會計師事務所透過合併擴張規模的同時，其經營效率是否亦有所提升，尚未有文獻分析。本文以資料包絡分析法分析會計師事務所之經營效率，並以麥氏生產力指數分析事務所經營效率之變化。實證結果顯示，涉及合併的事務所跨期間經營效率的提升較未涉及合併的事務所高。本文進一步將涉及合併的事務所依據合併前是否具有「證券、期貨相關業務許可證」加以區分，發現兩家以上具有證券、期貨相關業務許可證之事務所合併，對於經營效率的提升才有顯著正向的影響。此外，本文將合併前事務所總所所在地是否在同一省份加以區分，實證結果顯示，若合併前事務所總所位於不同省份，事務所間業務區域互補性高，對於事務所經營效率的提升有顯著正向的影響。綜上所述可知，中國近期涉及合併事務所的效率提升較未合併者顯著，但並非所有事務所都可以透過合併來達成做大做強的效果，在推動政策與事務所在進行合併決策時，應審慎評估事務所合併對於經營效率的影響。英文摘要：Developing larger and more competitive Chinese CPA firms is the objective of Chinese government. The Chinese government supports CPA firms to achieve scale growth through merger. This study examines the relationship between operational efficiency and the merging of CPA firms. We measure operating efficiency by applying Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Using revenue and human resource data in China for the 2004-2009 period, we find firms that are involved in mergers have significantly higher productivity growth than their peers. However, not all mergers have positive effects. Mergers occur between two (or more) CPA firms that are licensed to audit listed companies and mergers occur between two (or more) CPA firms that headquarter are in different provinces have significantly higher productivity growth. The findings of this study have policy implications for regulators in China and the Chinese CPA firms.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.R1100519篇名：台灣地區大學教授薪資待遇之合理性初探：大、中、小學教師之比較研究並列篇名：On the Equity of University Professor's Compensation: A Comparative Study on Compensations of University Professors and High/Elementary School Teachers in Taiwan作者：吳清在(C. Tsing-Zai Wu);施念恕(Nien-Su Shih);朱靜玉(Ching-Yu Chu)關鍵字：大學教授薪資;教師待遇制度;退休金;professor's compensation;teacher's compensation systems;pension期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：大學教育是國家發展之火車頭，高級人才之培育與研究發明均以是賴。然而台灣地區目前大學教授之待遇，不僅趕不上歐美先進國家，甚至亦比鄰近之香港、日本、韓國及大陸地區重點大學之實質薪資為低。台灣地區各級公立學校（包括大學、中學、小學）之教師待遇係由教育部統一按照「公立學校教師暨助教職務等級表」及大學教授與中小學教師分別之「學術研究費表」敘薪，同年齡之大學教授之月薪幾無異於中、小學老師之薪酬，但由於大學教授必須耗費長時間之教育投資以取得博士學位，因而進入職場時間較晚，退休年資較短，退休給付較少。本研究以一位欲進入教職之大學畢業生，利用「淨現值法」推算其選擇當大學、中學以及小學教師之一生所得淨現值，以探究何者為其擇職之最佳決策方案。研究結果發現，大學教授一生所得之淨現值，比同齡退休之中小學老師為低，尤以自費出國留學之大學教授其一生所得之淨現值為最低。英文摘要：Higher education is the locomotive of a country's development. The breeding of qualified manpower and the nation's research inventions rely on higher education. However, the compensation of university professors in Taiwan is relatively low compared to that in the developed countries in American and Europe, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea and key universities in China. In Taiwan, all public instructors (including university professors, high and elementary school teachers) are compensated in accordance with the same pay schedule called the ”Salary Rank of Public School Instructors and Teaching Assistants” and the respective ”Academic Research Stipends” made by the Ministry of Education. As a result, the compensation of a university professor is not substantially different from that of elementary and high school teachers at the same age. Nevertheless, the pension payments of professors are lower than that for elementary and high school teachers due to shorter service periods. This study simulates three scenarios for an undergraduate who plans to enter the educational industry. The decision criterion is the NPV (Net Present Value) of his/her life-time compensations for being a university professor, high school teacher or an elementary school teacher. The results of this study show that the NPV of a university professor's life-time compensations is far less than that of a high or an elementary school teacher at same retirement age. Specifically, a university professor studying abroad has the lowest NPV for his life-time compensations if he/she services in a university in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院20篇名：併購與策略聯盟在公司理財文獻之回顧與展望：亞洲市場之研究並列篇名：Review of M&A and Joint Ventures in the Field of Corporate Finance: Asia as the Case Study作者：翁鶯娟(Ying-Jiuan Wong);張紹基(Shao-Chi Chang)關鍵字：併購;策略聯盟;合資;公司理財;m&a;alliance;joint venture;corporate finance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：企業需藉由不同投資決策，以達成追求成長與永續經營等目的。當內部成長例如創新投資和資本投資等方式受限，無法達到成長目的時，併購、權益性策略聯盟如合資，或非權益性策略聯盟等外部成長方式遂成為組織達到擴張的重要方式。本文主要聚焦於公司外部成長之投資決策，回顧2000~2015間以亞洲市場資料為樣本，並發表於TSSCI或A級SSCI財務期刊中關於併購、合資與策略聯盟的文獻，依文獻之研究方向分為併購以及策略聯盟二個議題，系統性整理與分析各議題的發展與成果。此外，台灣市場具有家族企業普遍、網絡關係密切的產業供應鏈和集團企業等特性，這些特性提供台灣學者未來發展以台灣樣本為基礎之併購與策略聯盟研究的良好利基。本文希望透過系統性的整理分析，進而指出以台灣資料特性為樣本以及未來可能之研究方向，提供予後續研究者參考。英文摘要：A firm needs to engage in various corporate investments in order to grow and ensure sustainable operations. When opportunities for internal growth (innovation investment or capital investment) are limited and financial goals are not achieved, a firm may then turn to external growth methods (M&A, equity-based alliances such as joint ventures, and nonequity- based alliances) to achieve its growth objective. This study focuses on external growth strategies by revisiting the relevant literature that sampled data from the Asian market, and was published in TSSCI or A Tier SSCI financial journals from 2000 to 2015. Journals that touched upon M&A, joint ventures and strategic alliances were targeted. Following the research format within these journal articles, topics were then divided into two categories: M&A and alliances. Additionally, Taiwanese companies have a prevalence of family businesses, supply chains with closed networks and business groups. These unique characteristics of Taiwanese companies give scholars an opportunity to develop research focused on M&A and alliances. Taiwanese companies provide good data on niche acquisitions and alliances for researchers to examine. This study, through a systematic analysis, sheds light on potential future research topics and studies related to M&A and alliances based on data collected in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.NOV.25104-00301篇名：水梯田濕地生態與景觀之保育與價值評估並列篇名：Valuation of Wetland and Landscape for Terraced Paddy Conservation: The Case of New Taipei City and Hualien County作者：洪鴻智(Hung-Chih Hung);李承嘉(Chen-Jai Lee);詹士樑(Shih-Liang Chan);林華慶(Hwa-Ching Lin);蕭婷允(Ting-Yun Hsiao);文嬿翔(Yan-Siang Wun)關鍵字：水梯田;濕地;景觀;條件評價法;生態服務給付;農業多功能性;Terraced paddy;Wetland;Landscape;Contingent valuation method;Payment for ecological services;Multifunctional agriculture期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：水梯田因喪失農業生產競爭力與勞動力缺乏，漸從糧食生產退位，惟其蘊含的濕地生態與文化景觀功能開始受到關注。本文應用條件評價法，從農業多功能角度，評估水梯田具有的濕地生態與景觀價值，及解釋重要影響因素。透過新北市與花蓮縣居民的調查發現，受訪者認為水梯田保育具有的農業多功能性非常重要，且認為水梯田保育對於個人、社區與後代皆有顯著效益。影響受訪者付費保育水梯田意願的主要因素，為受訪者對於水梯田的認識、對水梯田濕地生態景觀價值認同、對於水梯田保育滿意度，及所得、教育程度、性別、年齡與居住區位。另估計結果顯示受訪者保育水梯田平均每年願付價格為318元，估計每年總效益約5億1,360萬元，此等發現可提供水梯田保育嶄新的政策思考方向。英文摘要：The functions of wetland and landscape feature with terraced paddies have received more attentions, while many of terraced paddies have been abandoned due to loss of competitiveness in agricultural production and shortage of laborers. In a view of multifunctional agriculture, this article aims to assess the values of wetland and landscape associated with terraced paddies conservation using a contingent valuation method. Through a case study in New Taipei City and Hualien County, the evidence indicates that most residents recognized the importance of multifunctional agriculture and social benefits provided by terraced paddies. Findings also show that the determinates of residents' willingness to pay for terraced paddies conservation are the levels of understanding and recognition of wetland and landscape values associated with terraced paddies, as well as residents' income, age, sex, education levels and residential location. The estimated willingness to pay for each household to sustain terraced paddies on wetland and landscape preservation functions is on annual average about NT$ 318, and about NT$ 0.51 billion in total. These findings will provide a novel direction for existing agricultural management policy in preserving terraced paddies.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201311_16(2).00012篇名：玉山國家公園景觀變遷的驅動機制剖析並列篇名：The Driving Mechanism Analysis of Yushan National Park's Landscape Change作者：周鶴樹(Ho-Shu Chou)關鍵字：景觀格局;景觀變遷;景觀指數;landscape structure;landscape changes;landscape indices期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：玉山國家公園的複雜、破碎之森林生態系統及其呈現的動態、不規則之土地紋理，為因應全球氣候暖化的趨勢，宜解析其景觀格局與變遷背後的驅動機制，以有效掌握其土地使用之影響衝擊，方能提出更合宜的規劃與經營策略。因此，本研究假設玉山國家公園森林生態環境係造成其景觀格局與變遷的顯著因子，採用遙感探測、地理資訊系統與景觀指數的整合性研究方法，從玉山國家公園森林景觀格局在時間和空間的結構與量之變化及趨勢，剖析其景觀變遷的驅動機制。研究過程係以植被多樣性、破碎性、網絡與廊道、踏腳石等整體景觀結構特性，及綴塊尺寸、數量、位置、邊緣結構、形狀等植群景觀特性，建立景觀指數分析之研究架構；以1972、1979、1990、2000及2010年遙感探測之影像判讀資料，呈現其景觀格局特徵與動態；再以景觀指數解析其景觀格局變遷的驅動機制與意涵。研究中發現整體景觀結構的植群多樣性，呈現不均勻分佈，聚集程度降低等特性；植群破碎性呈現內部棲地減少等特性；植群網絡與廊道呈現連結性低之特性；踏腳石呈現接近性增加之特性；植群景觀特性的綴塊尺寸，呈現邊緣棲地比例增加，重新連結機率增加等特性；綴塊數量呈現綴塊密度增加之特性；綴塊位置呈現綴塊孤立作用降低，重新拓殖性增加，距離穩定等特性；邊緣結構呈現綴塊形狀不規則、複雜化等特性；綴塊形狀呈現綴塊伸展程度漸增，惟變化幅度不大之特性。最後，整體研究結論表明，玉山國家公園的整體景觀結構，“粗細交錯、疏密有秩的景觀結構”是生態物種與能量流動的良好運作基礎，關鍵是“物種與能量的流動”；植群景觀特性上，“婉轉有形、聚散合宜的格局韻律”是生態位置與型態組合的健全運作機制，關鍵是“位置與型態的組合”，而這物種與能量運作基礎及位置與型態操作機制的組合架構，即玉山國家公園景觀變遷的驅動機制之雛形，也就是本研究所設定的目的與成果，除提供作為玉山國家公園永續經營的具體環境資訊，後續將進一步建立台灣高山國家公園之永續規劃架構與空間分析技術。英文摘要：For the complex, fragmented ecosystem and dynamic, irregular landscape texture of Yushan National Park, the park authority should analyze the driving mechanism behind the landscape pattern and changes, for responding to the global warming trend, to effectively grasp the impact land use change and suitably propose the planning and managing strategy. Therefore, assuming that the forest ecological environment of Yushan National Park is the significant factor causing its landscape pattern and changes, this research adopts the integrated research method of remote sensing, geographic information systems and landscape indices, studying the changes and trends of forest landscape pattern in temporal and spatial structure, to analyze the driving mechanism of its landscape change. This research first established the landscape indices analysis framework by the overall landscape structure characteristics of vegetation diversity, fragmentation, networks and corridors, stepping stone, and the vegetation landscape characteristics of patch size, number, location, edge structure, shape, then, presented the landscape pattern characteristics and dynamic by the 1972, 1979, 1990, 2000 and 2010 remote sensing interpretation data, finally, analyzed the driving mechanism and implications of its landscape pattern and changes by the landscape indices. The research found that the vegetation diversity in the overall landscape structure presents the nonuniform distribution and aggregation reduction characteristics; vegetation fragmentation presents internal habitat reduction of characteristics; vegetation networks and corridors presents low connectivity characteristics; stepping stone presents proximity increased characteristics; the patch size in vegetation landscape characteristics presents the edge habitat proportion increased and relink probability increased characteristics; patch amount presents patch density increased characteristics; patch location presents isolation reduction, re-colonization increased and distance stability characteristics; edge structure presents irregular patch shape and complexity characteristics; patch shape presents patch stretching increased characteristics. Finally, the research conclusion first indicates that the thick and thin, sparse and dense staggered landscape structure is the well-functioning basis of ecology species and energy flow, for the overall landscape structure of Yushan National Park. The key issue is the flow of species and energy. Then, the circumlocutory pattern with gather, dispersed relationship and rhythm landscape pattern is the perfect operation mechanism of ecological location and pattern combination, for the landscape ecological characteristic of Yushan National Park. The key issue is the combination of location and pattern. Therefore, the combination framework of species-energy operation basis and location-pattern operation mechanism should be the driving mechanism of landscape pattern and change of Yushan National Park, which is the prospective study result of this research. This research excepted provides the specific environment information for the sustainable management of Yushan National Park, further establishing the sustainable planning framework and spatial analysis techniques for Taiwan Alpine National Park in future.起始頁-結束頁：23-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201311_16(2).00023篇名：都市政治與都市計畫之政經結構分析－以南科樹谷園區為例並列篇名：The Political and Economic Structural Analysis of Urban Politics and Urban Planning-Case Study of the Tree Valley Estate of the Tainan Science-Based Industrial Park作者：鍾麗娜(Li-Na Chung);徐世榮(Shih-Jung Hsu)關鍵字：成長機器;都市政權;權力結構;台南科學園區;樹谷園區;Growth Machine;Urban Regime;Power Structure;Tree Valley Estate;Tainan Science-Based Industrial Park期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：在台灣，最重要的空間形塑主體是政府。政府形塑空間的理念與實踐的手段，乃是展現在它所制定的相關土地政策之上，在這些政策中，都市計畫之擬訂與實施是政府對於都會地區空間塑造較具有影響力的手段之一。唯此空間塑造並非是處於真空的狀態，它充滿了政治、經濟、利益等複雜及糾葛因素，很值得予以剖析。爰此，本文藉由都市政治之理論分析架構，並以南科樹谷園區報編開發案為例，探究地方、中央政府與資本利益團體等如何透過都市計畫的手段，操控地方空間資源的分配與消費，及其各行動主體間之互動關係與權力結構問題，並進一步審視現行土地政策執行之困境。英文摘要：In Taiwan, the state plays the most important role in shaping the development of urban space. The state owns relative autonomous power, and it employs powerful land use policies to shape urban space. Among them, urban planning is one of the most specific and prominent means used by the state. It is important to note the intention, design, and implementation of urban planning is definitely not in a vacuum condition. It is full of politic, economic and interest considerations, not solely decided by planning experts or bureaucratic administrators. This is the valuable reason to explore and understand it. Accordingly, this paper discusses the theoretical framework of urban politics and takes the Tree Valley Estate located within the Tainan Science-Based Industrial Parkas a good example for study. Interactive relations and power structure among local government, central government, and interest groups are detail investigated. The ways that they manipulate the distribution and consumption of urban space are also examined. The paper will also show that it is because of the unequal power structure which creates the dilemmas of land use policy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：63-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201311_16(2).00034篇名：臺北市財產稅公平性之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Equity of Property Tax in Taipei作者：陳德翰(Te-Han Chen);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：水平公平;地價稅;垂直公平;房屋稅;財產稅;累退性;Horizontal equity;House tax, Land value tax;Property tax;Regressive;Vertical equity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：16卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究實證分析台北市2007至2009年不動產交易資料，結果顯示臺北市財產稅之實質稅率大多集中在0.04%至0.09%之間，實質稅率之中位數為0.066%，就水平公平性而言，台北市整體具有水平不公平的現象，且以舊市區較嚴重；垂直不公平部分，整體具有累退性的問題，且低價位不動產的實質稅率差異程度較大。整體財產稅實質稅率呈現累退性的主要原因是地價稅之累退性造成的，低價位不動產之高實質稅率與差異程度大的主要來源則是房屋稅。故財產稅的改革方向，於地價稅部分應改善整體累退性情況，提高中高價位不動產的評估價值，促使中高經濟地位住戶負擔更多的地價稅負；於房屋稅部分應降低低價位不動產的評估價值，並改善不一致情況。英文摘要：This study investigates property tax equity in the city of Taipei by analyzing the real estate transaction data from 2007 to 2009. The results show that the effective property tax rates of most houses were between 0.04% and 0.09%. The median effective property tax rate was 0.066%. The horizontal inequity did not hold in Taipei and there was more inequity in the old city center area. The results also show that the property tax was regressive, especially for low-cost houses, because of the regressivity of land value tax. The house tax contributed to the high variation and high level of effective property tax rates of low-cost houses. Therefore, the city government can improve the regressivity of property tax by reducing the assessment value of low-cost houses, and by raising the assessment value of high-cost houses.起始頁-結束頁：89-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201311_16(2).000401篇名：打出機會：原住民成為棒球選手的社會流動和訓練體制並列篇名：Contest Mobility: An Essay on the Social Mobility and Disciplinary Regime of Indigenous Baseball Players作者：林文蘭(Wen-Lan Lin)關鍵字：社會流動;訓練體制;競賽遊戲;苦練意識;階序意識;social mobility;disciplinary regime;athletic games;consciousness of hard disciplinary practices;hierarchical consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013中文摘要：為什麼原住民會去追求職棒選手這種生涯短暫的工作？本文分析原住民取得職棒工作的前置訓練過程和運動機會結構的流動歷程。針對台東原住民基層球隊進行九個月的參與觀察，訪談76位報導人，分析球員訓練日記，檢視球員的訓練軌跡、運動社會化、競賽遊戲與文化、意識形態的監管機制，勾繪原住民為何樂於擁抱隱形產出和不確定報酬的棒球訓練，從而打造自我剝削和規訓的苦練意識。研究發現原住民落入變形化的受教處境，在追求績效和競爭求存的過程中，球場不僅是運動專業化的所在，更是球員經歷、回應、抵抗甚至肯認階序意識的競技場。此外，在地位取得更呈現兩種分殊樣貌—邁向專業化之路、受限的替代出路。成功案例晉身職棒，塑造社會流動的開放假象，造就原住民運動成就的自我認同與社會形象，更遭逢短暫職涯和離職之困。效忠訓練體制的規則，對敗退者亦發揮社會控制的力量，模塑其自我說服的心理機轉，提供社會不平等現狀的解釋正當性。直言之，原住民球員的社會流動機會被綁縛在訓練體制所形塑的階序意識、運動升遷空缺鏈和短暫職涯的風險中。打棒球造成原住民在教育和謀職選擇的類聚趨勢與社會堆疊效果，更建構出原住民競爭有限空缺的淘汰鏈。英文摘要：Why do the indigenous peoples aspire to become professional baseball players? a career that is so short? This study explores the disciplinary process and the social mobility through the sport opportunity structure that indigenous adolescents must undergo beginning professional careers. Through nine months of ethnographic observation, this study observed the indigenous players' regular training processes and competitions. These observations were also accompanied with the players' training diaries and in-depth interviews with 76 informants. By examining the space-time trajectories and sport socialization in their training process, as well as examining disciplinary process, athletic games and culture, and surveillance mechanisms regarding their mental and ideological states, the reasons why they enthusiastically embrace the intangible output and uncertain reward of baseball training and why they consciously cultivate a sense of self-exploitation and hard practice can be discovered. The following conclusions were obtained: Indigenous baseball players have come up through an nonstandard educational situation and therefore possess a ”survival of the fittest” mentality. Under this formation of their dispositions and through competing for survival, the baseball field is not simply a place that these indigenous players learn athletic socialization and professionalism. It also becomes an arena where these athletes experience, react to, resist and recognize conventional hierarchical consciousness. Moreover, the indigenous players show characteristics of social mobility differentiation-pursuing the professional baseball career, but with limited alternative opportunities. The comparatively higher ratio of successful cases of indigenous players advancing to professional baseball careers represents the false illusions of the social mobility attainable through this sport, and produces a sport where indigenous peoples find self-identity and where a social image about indigenous sport achievement is presented, while enhancing social control on the unsuccessful cases and providing them with the justification and mental rationalization of the idea of social inequality. In a nutshell, the social mobility of indigenous players are limited by the hierarchical consciousness resulting from the disciplinary regime, the opportunities available in the chain of advancement in the sport, and the risk of a short-period professional career. Besides creating an occupational homogeneity of ethnic trend and social stacking effects amongst indigenous peoples in regard to their educational choices and occupational attainment, playing baseball also becomes a chain of survival or elimination-for indigenous peoples as they compete with each other for limited opportunities.起始頁-結束頁：43-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：販賣服務：戰後台北市街道家具營造的歷史分析並列篇名：Selling Service: The Commercialization of Taipei Street Furniture after World War Ⅱ作者：翁註重(Ju-Joan Wong);鄭育芬(Yu-Feng Cheng)關鍵字：街道家具;景觀史;文化研究;新自由主義;street furniture;landscape history;cultural studies;neoliberalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013中文摘要：二次大戰之後，台灣在工業化過程中獲得巨幅經濟成長；大批城鄉移民則促成台北都市化快速發展。然而，相對衍生的公共服務設施卻付之闕如；街道家具往往因陋就簡，任由非正式部門自力營造所填補，呈現了都市集體消費供應不足的狀態。直到1980年代，台灣政治從威權轉型到民主時代，公共服務始成為市府施政著力點。1994年，首任民選市長設定交通移動、運輸服務作為重要施政議題，街道家具成為展現政績的政治造景。此一時期，台北市也膠著在「去工業化」後，追求經濟再發展的掙扎中。對應到英、美「新自由主義」的展開，台北市街道家具被開發成為可獲取經濟租金的商品，並且連結到西方現代化都市美學意象。因此，街道家具映照著都市關鍵作用者，在不同時期基於不同的治理思維，採取消極／積極行動，使其表現出不同的樣貌。本文以台北市街道家具變遷為線索，耙梳都市治理的不同面向。循此，全文歷史縱深涵蓋二次戰後迄今，著墨重點則集中於1994年市長民選之後。最後，東亞「發展型國家」的威權，在市民社會崛起後普遍遭到挑戰；人們分從個人游擊或社區營造，加入了這場角力戰。在政府、資本和人民的拔河中，街道家具乃各種力量的辯證體現。英文摘要：During the early postwar period, the economic policies adopted by Taiwan were export-oriented with huge economic growth achieved. A large number of rural-urban migrants contributed to the rapid development of urbanization in Taipei. Pitifully, there was no corresponding public service facility available. Street furniture was often humbly crude, only made and fulfilled by 'informal sectors'. It showed the deficient supply status in response to urban collective consumption. Till 1980s', when the political status in Taiwan transformed from authoritarian to democratic governances, public service became the new emphasis of city governmental policies. In 1994, the first people-elected mayor focused his political effort on transportation services, street furniture started to become a landscaping for political achievement. During this period, Taipei was also stalemated in the struggle for economic redevelopment after the deindustrialization in 1980s'. In contrary to the neoliberalism in Britain and U.S., the street furniture on Taipei City had been developed as the commodities with economic rent available. Furthermore, they were linked to the aesthetic intentions of Western modern urban.Consequently, street furniture mirrored the key roles of city. During different times with different governance thinking, both negative/positive actions were taken to unravel different facades. In this paper, street furniture on Taipei was viewed as the clues reflecting different aspects of urban governance. As such, this article covered the full historical depth during the period from post-World War II till now, especially focusing on the times after city mayor were elected democratically. Finally, the authority of developmental state in Taiwan was extensively challenged after the rise of civil society. Citizens joined the tussle through individuals or organized communities. In the tussle among governments, capitalists and citizens, street furniture meant the embodiment of divergent dialectical forces.起始頁-結束頁：115-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：「C／娘」的爭戰指涉、怪胎展演與反抗能動性：檢視「蔡康永C／娘事件」中的「性別平等教育女性主義」論述並列篇名：C/Niang's Contested Signification, Queer Performativity and Resistant Agency: Rethinking Gender Equity Education Feminist Discourses within the Kang-Yung Tsai C/Niang Event作者：林純德(Dennis Chwen-Der Lin)關鍵字：C／娘;爭戰指涉;怪胎展演;反抗能動性;敢曝／露淫;性別平等教育;女性主義;sissy;contested signification;queer performativity;resistant agency;camp;gender equity education feminism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013中文摘要：發生於2009年的「蔡康永C／娘事件」乃意指因著已出櫃男同志藝人蔡康永與其搭檔主持人小S在電視綜藝談話節目「康熙來了」中使用「娘」字指涉一群自我肯認為異性戀的男性來賓的性／別氣質後所引發兩位「性別平等教育女性主義」（簡稱「性平女性主義」）學者及某些具有性平女性主義意識的男同志針對蔡康永的「C／娘展演」及「C／娘觀點」所進行一連串的批評、質疑，以及蔡康永在其部落格／博客與電視節目中的回應。藉由檢視此一事件中的性平女性主義學者及男同志的「C／娘」論述，並解析蔡康永個人的「C／娘觀點」及「康熙來了」、「娘娘駕到」節目中的主持人與來賓之間的「敢曝／露淫」的性／別互動，本文作者提出「C／娘」的爭戰指涉、怪胎展演與反抗能動性的相關論點，並藉此揭露性平女性主義在「C／娘」論述上的盲點。本文採取質性研究的取徑，並以文本分析為主要研究方法。英文摘要：The Kang-Yung TSAI C/Niang Event, happening in 2009, refers to so-called gender equity education feminists' and gay men's criticisms against the openly gay celebrity Kang-Yung TSAI and to Tsai's striking back in his blog and in the TV talk shows 'Here Comes Kang-Xi' and 'Here Comes the Sissy' after Tsai and his co-presenter Little S used the term 'C/Niang' (sissy) to signify self-identified male heterosexual guests in 'Here Comes Kang-Xi'. This paper suggests a queered approach, characterized by contextuality, complexity and radicality, so as to look carefully at the term C/Niang's contested signification, queer performativity and resistant agency and, therefore, to point out the weakness of the feminist argument that the very term stands for nothing but humiliation. By dint of examining the C/Niang-negative discourses among the feminists and gay men and of exploring the 'campy' interactions among the presenters and the guests in 'Here Comes Kang-Xi' and 'Here Comes the Sissy', this paper argues that in many ways C/Niang's contested signification and queer performativity can be deployed by sissies in order to empower themselves so that they become able to disrupt gender/sexual norms and to fight against sissyphobia. In methodology, this paper employs qualitative textual analysis.起始頁-結束頁：163-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：書寫是為了克服絕望：「未完」的〈蘋果樹〉並列篇名：To Write is to Face the Despair Squarely: Rereading Chen Yingzheh's "The Apple Tree"作者：趙剛(Kang Chao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：215-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：開門見山：面對公民社會的矛盾並列篇名：Straight to the Point: Confronting Contradictions in the Civil Societies作者：夏曉鵑(Hsiao-Chuan Hsia)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：241-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：公共與集體利益的可能並列篇名：The Possibilities of Public and Collective Interests作者：徐進鈺(Jinn-Yuh Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：243-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：社區與社群的爭議：以地下社會事件為例並列篇名：Communities in Dispute: Live House 'Underworld' as an Example作者：何東洪(Tung-Hung Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：255-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：兒少保護與再生產：性少數的「最後解決方案」？並列篇名：Reproducing Child-protection: Final Solution for Sexual Minorities?作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：261-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：媒改運動路上的曲徑與折射：從反媒體壟斷運動切入並列篇名：Rethinking the Anti-Media: Monopoly Movement作者：魏玓(Ti Wei)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：279-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：林書揚的一生及其信念並列篇名：Lin Shu-Yang: A Life of Convictions作者：藍博洲(Po-Chou Lan);呂正惠(Cheng-Hui Lu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：90期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：287-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：政治學改造運動的爭議和啟發：從「通則」到「脈絡」的轉向並列篇名：Indications in the Perestroika in Political Science: Turning from Generalization to Contextualization作者：徐振國(Chen-Kuo Hsu)關鍵字：改造運動;方法論;通則;脈絡;論述轉向;周全科學的政治學;Perestroika movement;generalization;context;discourse turn;textual content analysis;an ecumenical science of politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：2001年美國政治學年會爆發了一場類似政變的政治學「改造運動」，指摘理性抉擇和實證量化研究形成聯合「霸權」，扭曲了政治學的發展方向，故要求進行改造。就方法論的訴求而言，改造者從「理論負載」和「問題驅策」等訴求，形成一條明確的批判主軸。然而彼等的重建主張卻很單薄，許多方面是在重複後行為主義政治學革命的論調。本文發現，在改造者和其他批判者言語的字裡行間，透露了不少對「脈絡」的殷切需求。而此一需求和1960年代開啟的諸多知識「轉向」有呼應關係，旨在開啟更寬廣而有系統的脈絡探索之學。基於此，本文特別強調當代語言學的「論述轉向」，認為政治學可以從偏重「通則」轉向偏重「脈絡」。如此，將有助於達成改造者所揭示的方向：「周全科學的政治學」。英文摘要：The Perestroika Movement in political science reflects the long existed ”fractured” situation in the discipline and confusion for the future development in the post-cold war era. Perestroika activists accuse that quantitative-oriented positivism and rational choice have conformed a united ”hegemony” in the discipline as distorting research resource and developmental courses. This article contends that the so called ”hegemony” refers to the superior of knowledge status based on the logic foundation of the nomological model of explanation. Perestroika activists present strong criticisms on this problem. However, they did not see the much more serious problem of the short of ”context” in the discipline and thus can not give good suggestion of reconstructing. For reversing this biased view, this article suggests that the discipline should take the way of ”discourse turn” to follow the new perspective of the post-positivism and to adopt the new research methods such as textual content analysis and textual narrative analysis. Eventually, it may enhance the dialectical interactions between empirical science and interpretative science in the discipline. And hopefully it may help to reach the goal of ”an ecumenical science of politics” stated by the Perestroika activists.起始頁-結束頁：1-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130600450012篇名：什麼是言論自由：一軸觀點並列篇名：What Is Freedom of Speech?-A Single Axis Theory作者：鄭光明(Kuang-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：言論自由的三軸;魏斯特;德渥肯;理解要求;three axes of freedom of speech;Caroline West;Ronald Dworkin;the comprehension requirement期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：自由主義者德渥肯（Ronald Dworkin）認為把言論自由視為一種「積極自由」會得出荒謬的結論，因此不能成立。對此，魏斯特認為其「理解要求」（the comprehension requirement）可使得言論自由不變成「積極自由」，因此可成功回應德渥肯的質疑。筆者將證明德渥肯的主張言之成理，至於魏斯特的「理解要求」則仍會使得言論自由變成「積極自由」，因此無法成立。此外，筆者也將主張：我們必須以自由主義的「機會」（opportunity）概念來理解言論的散播，而且此一「機會」概念必須是一種「全有或全無」（all-or-none）的概念，以避免使得言論自由變成一種「積極自由」。英文摘要：Feminists Caroline West and David Braddon-Mitchell argue that speech can be free insofar as its distribution is permitted or enabled, it can be understood, and it is not prevented from being considered. But Ronald Dworkin argues that the right to free speech, according to the feminist view, would be a ”positive” right which liberals are unlikely to want to accept. West believes that her comprehension requirement will put some constraints by which we will acquire a conception that is consistent with the liberal conception of free speech. The central aim of this paper is to show why West's comprehension requirement is mistaken. This suggests that the right to free speech should be a ”negative” one, which does not impose unacceptably illiberal duties on hearers. One way of expressing the right to free speech, in the familiar liberal language of negative rights, is this: that were speakers to speak, and were hearers to want to hear the idea the speaker expressed by so speaking, there is no government agent whose actions deprive speakers the opportunity for distributing that idea.起始頁-結束頁：63-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130600450023篇名：Robert Jackson的「全球共約」理論與柏林的價值多元主義：兼論國際關係英倫學派的古典途徑並列篇名：Robert Jackson's "Global Covenant" and Isaiah Berlin's Value Pluralism: A Study on the English School's Classical Approach to International Relations Theory作者：葉浩(Hao Yeh)關鍵字：英倫學派;多元主義;團合主義;國際社會;人道干預;詮釋性規範理論;English School;pluralism;solidarism;international society;humanitarian intervention;interpretative normative theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：強調國際社會的英倫學派近年來成為國際關係理論的主流學派之一，向來有「多元主義」與「團合主義」路線之爭。Robert Jackson的《全球共約》（The Global Covenant: Human Conduct in a World of States）乃多元主義路線近年來的公認鉅著，不僅旨在捍衛英倫學派的古典方法論，同時也藉由援引伯林的後設倫理學主張「價值多元主義」來深化該路線的哲學基礎。本文將指出，Jackson實際上並未準確掌握價值多元主義與英倫學派多元主義路線的理論親近性，因此，所提出的全球共約理論不僅違背伯林的思想精神，同時也偏離了英倫學派的方法論。藉由分析Hedley Bull關於方法論的著作，本文首先闡釋英倫學派古典途徑的「詮釋性規範理論」特色，以及「國際社會」基本概念，並且指出該學派在理論傳承上所具有的創造性轉化特色。以此理解為基礎，本文將解釋Jackson如何運用歐克秀與伯林的思想，一方面實踐英倫學派的方法論，另一方面對於「國際社會」和「多元主義」兩個概念進行改造。隨後，本文將聚焦於《全球共約》一書如何介入英倫學派的路線之爭，捍衛多元主義路線，並且指出當前兩條路線正在朝向處方性政治哲學理論發展的趨勢。最後則進一步指出全球共約理論如何同時背離英倫學派的古典途徑方法論及伯林的價值多元主義之精神，也會提出Jackson尚未注意到所存在於Bull與伯林之間的親近性。英文摘要：The English School of international relations has recently become a mainstream theory in the field. It is characterized by an emphasis on international society, as well as the debates between the school's solidarist and pluralist members. Robert Jackson's ”Global Covenant” is generally considered to be a major contribution to the pluralist strand, in that it not only defends the school's classic approach to theorizing but also grounds the pluralist vision of international society on a philosophically sophisticated foundation derived from Isaiah Berlin's meta-ethical value pluralism. This article argues that Jackson does not fully grasp the affinities between value pluralism and English School, and therefore his theory of global covenant deviates from both the spirit of Berlin's political thought and the school's methodology. By analyzing Hedley Bull's writings, it will first explicate the ”interpretative-normative” nature of the English School's Classical Approach, as well as the fundamental idea of ”international society”, and it will indicate the tendency for creative transformation in the way members of the school implement thisapproach. With this understanding in place, this article will explain how Jackson employs the thoughts of Michael Oakeshott and Isaiah Berlin to, on the one hand, practices the School's methodology, and on the other hand transforms the idea of ”international society” and ”pluralism”. Thereafter, it focuses on how ”The Global Covenant” enters the School's internal debates and defends its pluralism. Also will be indicated is a trend towards prescriptive political philosophy in both the solidarist and the pluralist camp. In the end, this article will spell out how the theory of global covenant deviates from both the School's Classical Approach and the spirit of Berlin's value-pluralism. And in doing so, some affinities between Bull and Berlin will also be identified.起始頁-結束頁：111-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130600450034篇名：哲學家兼修辭家？論修辭學在霍布斯政治理論中的功能並列篇名：A Philosopher and a Rhetorician?-On the Purpose of Rhetoric in Thomas Hobbes's Political Theory作者：梁裕康(Yu-Kang Liang)關鍵字：湯瑪斯•霍布斯;修辭;自由意志;脈絡;Thomas Hobbes;rhetoric;free will;context期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：霍布斯被描繪成一位根據嚴謹的科學方法以建構其學說的哲學家。然而史欽納（Quentin Skinner）從所謂的脈絡主義（contextualism）觀點出發，認為綜觀霍布斯的一生，科學並非如一般而認為地全方位決定其思想。除了科學以外，霍布斯還帶有強烈的人文主義（humanist）色彩。這種人文主義的影響，在他晚期也是他最成熟的著作《利維坦》（Leviathan）中表露無遺。史欽納認為，這種詮釋最重要的證據，在於霍布斯作品的敘事風格歷經了極明顯的轉變：由重視論證過程的嚴謹與否，轉向強調論證影響力的修辭（rhetoric）效果。本文嘗試對史欽納的說法是否能有效詮釋霍布斯，提出若干不同觀點。在認識論上，哲學家與修辭家無法被視為合成或綜合（synthesis）的概念，但是可以被視為行為者在不同的語言－遊戲中所扮演的不同角色。因此，史欽納所謂的哲學家兼政治家，必須是指後者。英文摘要：Thomas Hobbes' conception of scientia civilis has often been presented as if it is a straightforward application of his views about natural sciences. Quentin Skinner, according to his contextual analysis, contends that it is his humanist root rather than sciences that permeates through his later works, notably Leviathan. The most evident sign of this is Hobbes converting from science to rhetoric. This essay is to argue that Skinner's account of Hobbes can not sustain in the epistemological terms, since it is not compatible with Hobbes' view about free will. However, this does not prevent his argument from being valid in other terms, since in a sense rhetoric does play some pragmatic role in terms of speech-act theory. That is, Skinner's contextual analysis can account for the extent to which Hobbes's application of rhetoric is valid in different language-games rather than which his theory of rhetoric is compatible with philosophy in epistemological terms.起始頁-結束頁：175-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201306004500401篇名：關懷立場論的知識優勢：背負關懷價值的強客觀性並列篇名：Epistemological Privilege of Caring Standpoint Theory: Care-Laden Value as Strong Objectivity作者：吳秀瑾(Shiu-Ching Wu)關鍵字：關懷倫理學;立場論;強客觀性;知識優勢;事實／價值／德行;ethics of care;feminist standpoint theory;strong objectivity;epistemological privilege;fact/value/virtue期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：關懷倫理學（the ethics of care）和立場論（standpoint theory）都是發展於70與80年代的重要女性主義理論，兩者都是根據女性身處的社會邊陲位置來對道德與科學的中心主導思想進行批判，進而鼓吹不同於主流的另類道德與科學研究典範。在近三十年的理論與實務發展中，兩理論各自循著道德和科學領域，不斷補充修正各自理論的缺失以因應內外的質疑與批評，並且持續強化其理論內涵以彰顯性別化研究在道德與科學上的正當性與必要性。同樣的，發展至今，兩理論在各自的領域中仍然是非主流的研究取向，關懷倫理學往往被視為德行倫理學（virtue ethics）的輔助理論，而立場論的科學哲學觀則越來越趨向與女性主義經驗主義（feminist empiricism）合而併之。兩理論所各自標榜的「不同聲音」也似乎就要同樣的再度埋沒於道德和科學主流的概念架構中。本文主旨在於彙整關懷倫理學和立場論，從而建立關懷立場論（caring standpoint theory），據而闡述關懷立場論對於知識生產的正面意義，辯護其所具有的知勢優勢與客觀性，主張事實／價值／德行（fact/value/virtue）不可分而論之的科學模式，彰顯知識証成應該背負關懷價值，關懷價值的實質內容不是開放所有可能的價值，而是能夠達於人類共善而具有的知識顯著性。英文摘要：Ethics of care and Feminist standpoint theory have been two of the leading feminist theories since 1970s and 80s, both of which are based upon women's marginal social positions as caretakers in the households and care-related works across all levels of society, and both theories have been challenging against mainstream (malestream) moral traditions, as well as mainstream for the scientific tradition, in terms of making plausible an alternative moral and scientific research paradigm. For the past three decades, care ethicists and standpoint theorists have been constantly taking upon critiques from all sides (feminists and non feminists) so as to make theoretical revisions necessary for the legitimacy of gendered research both in moral and scientific discipline. Ethics of care is taken to be supplementary to virtue ethics, whereas standpoint theory is inclined to merge with feminist empiricism. As it turns out, two contemporary leading feminist theories, to my judgment, are gradually fading away from their distinctive voices in the dominant moral and scientific conceptual systems.This paper aims at uniting ethics of care and feminist standpoint theory by cross referencing upon each other, and from there, I propose that the two views merge into what I will call caring standpoint theory. To that purpose, I will elaborate the substantial contents of caring standpoint theory insofar as how they can make intelligible the conception of strong objectivity. Moreover, I will defend the merged view in terms of its contributions to knowledge productions, in particular the view that the confirmation of knowledge should be laden with caring value. Likewise, different from the dominant view that have kept separate science, society (values) and ethics, caring standpoint theorists, as I conclude, are committed to the values of common good closely tied to labor of love, for the reason that they are epistemically significant to scientific objectivity.起始頁-結束頁：9-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：馬路如虎口：《申報》的上海車禍論述，1921－1937並列篇名：Watch Out for Cars: The Car Accident Discourse of Shenbao in Shanghai, 1921-1937作者：施沛杉(Pei-San Shih)關鍵字：汽車;汽車夫;車禍;《申報》;汽車增刊;cars;drivers;car accidents;Shenbao;Automobile Topics Weekly期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：汽車是現代文明的象徵物之一，然而，從汽車引進中國之初，並不是人人喜愛的便利物品。汽車的社會形象多變，除了文明象徵、奢侈品之外，亦為威脅民眾生命的「市虎」。本文以《申報》的「汽車增刊」與「自由談」、「本埠新聞」、「常識」之車禍報導、評論作一對比，觀察上海民眾對於「汽車」這一洋玩意的態度轉變。顯示了近代城市形成過程中「人」、「車」的利益衝突，「人」已不再享有空間的優先利益，透過國家公權力的介入，尋求法規上的人車平衡，逐漸形成今天我們習以為常的交通觀念。英文摘要：Cars have been the symbols of modern civilization. However, in the beginning of the introduction of cars in China, they had not been favorite things for everyone in Republican China. The social image of cars had been complicated, including the symbols of civilization, luxury goods, and the dangerous tigers in cities. This article had compared the car accident discourse with Automobile Topics Weekly and the other sections in Shenbao. It had shown the changed attitudes about cars of the Shanghai people, from rejection, compromise to searching for the regulative balance between people and cars. It also had shown the conflicts of interest between people and cars. The people had legally given way to cars in distribution of the urban space, and developed the habitual conception of traffic safety.起始頁-結束頁：59-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：衍生物、舊東西與變種：台灣間熱式電鍋炊煮系統，1950s－1970s並列篇名：Derivations, Mutations and Conventional Appliances: The Indirect Heating Rice Cooker in Taiwan, 1950s-1970s作者：秦先玉(Hsien-Yu Chin)關鍵字：家務技術;電工工程師;間熱式電鍋;東芝ER-4;炊煮系統;household technologies;electrical engineers;indirect heating rice cookers;Toshiba ER-4;cooking systems期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以戰後台灣家庭廚房電氣化試金石－間熱式電鍋為例，探討家庭物質生活變遷、家務科技發展與消費社會的關係。首先本文探究產業與加工技術的演變。1950年代電工業從以「重電、國防與電力」相關製造為主，到擴及家電，經歷一明顯的轉變。從這個脈絡，本文進一步分析國家與電工業者，如何建構間熱式電鍋消費的社會。繼之，本文進入電鍋的「製造與生產」階段，從科技形塑與科技傳播的觀點，指出台灣電鍋的在地化，是製程技術、米食文化、電力供給、各種炊煮系統與使用者的互動的結果。奠定在電鍋設計分析的基礎上，本文指出工程師預設了城市居民為初期使用者，其所締造的電鍋炊煮文化，與電鍋多功能蒸煮設計相互構成。台灣因此朝向「蒸、煮」並行，發展成與日本「煮飯」中心殊異的電鍋炊煮系統。英文摘要：The indirect heating rice cooker is an important hallmark in the electrification of the household in postwar Taiwan. Using it as an example, this paper examines not only the material changes it brought about in domestic life, but also the interconnected relationship between the formation of a consumer society and household technological development. The paper first explores the development of the electrical machinery and equipment manufacturing industry and demonstrates the remarkable transformation it has undergone. This is the context from which the paper argues that the KMT government, as well the manufacturers, contributed to the construction of a consumer society based around the indirect heating rice cooker. Secondly, this paper demonstrates that, by means of the social shaping of technology and technological diffusion, Taiwanese rice cookers were localized. By looking at the design choices behind the Taiwanese indirect heating rice cooker in the 1960s, we see that the adaption of Japanese rice cookers for the Taiwanese consumer was a social process, conditioned by manufacturing technology, rice and food culture, government policies in regards to power supply, competing cooking systems and consumer choice. The paper ends by exploring how engineers considered the size and design they felt would be most inviting to urban families unaccustomed to indirect heating rice cookers. Manufacturers hoped consumers would view rice cookers not only as a pot for cooking rice, but also as a versatile multi-cooker. After urban families embraced this idea, manufactures further integrated the idea of a multi-cooker into their subsequent designs. It demonstrates rice cookers and society and mutually constitutive.起始頁-結束頁：127-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：在醫療與社會模式之外：盲人棒球技藝形成的行動者網絡分析並列篇名：Beyond Biomedical and Social Models: An Actor-Network Analysis of the Construction of Beep-Ball Players' Techniques作者：曾柏嘉(Po-Chia Tseng)關鍵字：盲人棒球;技藝;視障者;障礙;行動能力;行動者網絡理論;beep-ball;technique;vision impaired person;disability;agency;Actor-Network Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：盲棒技藝如何可能？由STS取徑探討盲棒技藝能指出什麼不同於既有障礙研究的理論意涵？既有的障礙研究以生物醫療模式與社會模式作為界定障礙的兩種主要模式，但這兩種觀點反映了「生物／社會」的二元論框架。從視障者轉變為盲棒球員的過程，本文認為以盲棒技藝為分析焦點有其經驗上與理論上的重要性。本文提出「異質中介模式」，試圖與前述兩種模式進行對話：當障礙的狀態透過各種實作而轉換、連結為能體現新技藝與行動能力的異質網絡，有助於凸顯著眼於障礙的生物性本體和社會性本體的僵固與不足。本文藉由廣義對稱性方法研究盲棒技藝的形成，企圖指出行動能力與障礙二者在本體論意義上的共構。本文對「聽力網絡」與「定位能力網絡」萌生的分析，指出盲棒技藝的形成，是透過各種實作使異質行動者相互結盟、形成一致目標的異質網絡化過程。由此，障礙並非本質性或不可轉變的存在，而是如同技藝與行動能力，皆於特定異質網絡中轉換與構成。這對於障礙研究的二元框架有其貢獻。英文摘要：How can beep-ball playing techniques be realized? What are the theoretical implications STS can offer to disability studies in studying beep-ball playing techniques? Among the disability studies, biomedical model and social model imply the ”either biological or social” dualism on how should disability be defined, however, biological and social ontology of disability do not work well in understanding the transformation of becoming a beep-ball player. This article explores the process of turning a vision impaired person into a beep-ball player in order to propose an alternative ”heterogeneous mediation model”.When studying the construction of beep-ball playing technique, this article applies the general symmetry method to examine the ontological co-constitution of disability and agency. The analysis on the emergence of hearing and locating networks suggests that the construction of the techniques is achieved in the practices of rearranging heterogeneous actants into a single ally. Accordingly it is argued that disability is neither inherently natural nor inherently social. The case of turning the impairment into specific techniques and agency indicates an alternative theoretical approach to the dualistic disability studies.起始頁-結束頁：187-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：訴諸「效益」、「相互性」與「社群價值」以證成認定同意制並列篇名：Supporting Rresumed Consent Based on Utility, Reciprocity and Communitarian Value作者：蔡甫昌(Fu-Chang Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：233-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：藝術與社會工作實務並列篇名：Art and Social Work Practice作者：汪淑媛(Shu-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：社會工作;社會工作實務;藝術;social work;social work practice;art期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：28期出版年：2013中文摘要：儘管社會工作概論教科書經常界定社會工作是科學也是藝術，但藝術並沒有反映在知識理論建構、實務方法，以及社會工作教育層面。藝術的本質與功能，例如：喚起人類深層的愛與情感、引人勇敢面對真實自我、批判性思考，以及使人平靜與快樂等，皆呼應社會工作價值與目標。社會工作實務本身是一種藝術，乃因社會工作服務對象與情境個別性，社會工作者的工作就像藝術家一樣需要有某種程度的創新途徑，才能有效因應問題情境。社會工作需要能觸動人心、喚起情感，才能引發個體與社會的改變動力。社會工作依賴社會工作者本身的自知之明和個人風格，以及強調表達、溝通與服務對象之間的關係，這些特質清楚說明社會工作實務本身的藝術性。本研究結論指出，藝術訓練對於社會工作者有重要的價值與功能，研究者呼籲社會工作專業能重視藝術涵養教育，落實服務藝術化。英文摘要：Though introductory social work textbooks commonly define social work as an art as well as a science, the artistic side receives little attention today in social work theory, method, or education. The author found the essence and function of art echo social work values and goals, such as evoking deeper human love and feelings, facing up to the real self and leading an authentic life, critical thinking and making individuals peaceful and happy. Also, the practice of social work is very much an art in the sense that each problem situation it undertakes to remedy is invariably unique and one-of-a-kind. To be effective in dealing with unforeseen problems that arise on the job, a social worker must to some extent take the same creative approach the artist does in approaching each new work of art. The solution needs to be beautiful, in the sense that it is felt by everyone involved to be right and to be fitting. The primary resource for success needs to be the ability of the individual social worker to respond from her deepest, most authentic self in a way, and with a degree of self-knowledge, that engages and draws into play the same in the client. Examining these and other similarities between art and social work, this paper concludes by listing various ways in which it would benefit social workers if their education placed more stress on the artistic side of their profession.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.28.012篇名：臺灣愛滋感染者權能增強影響因素之研究並列篇名：The Correlates of Empowerment for People Living with HIV/AIDS作者：莊登閔(Deng-Min Chuang);宋麗玉(Li-Yu Song)關鍵字：愛滋病;愛滋感染者;權能;HIV;people living with HIV/AIDS;empowerment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：28期出版年：2013中文摘要：愛滋感染者深受社會烙印且處於社會邊緣，在面對自身權益遭受侵犯時，往往難以看到該人口群為自己或社群發聲與行動；因此，本研究希冀瞭解愛滋感染者的權能及可能的影響因素，藉此激發感染者的權能。本研究採問卷調查法，以臺灣目前的愛滋感染者為主要對象，抽樣方法為立意抽樣，共回收379份有效問卷。研究中檢驗的預測因子為生活滿意度、愛滋內在烙印、參與類型、愛滋知識與服藥狀況，並經由雙變項分析和多元迴歸分析檢驗整體模式對權能的解釋力。愛滋感染者整體權能分布在常模中下區間，社會政治權能最高，但實踐權能的參與行動卻偏低；分析感染者次團體的差異檢定時，性別與環境變項在藥癮愛滋感染者中達顯著。另一方面，迴歸分析顯示整體模式解釋36%的變異量，生活滿意度、社區代表參與、愛滋知識與服藥順從度為顯著的影響因素。次團體的分析中發現，愛滋內在烙印在同性間性行為愛滋感染者中為顯著的解釋變項，但在藥癮感染者中並沒有達到統計上的顯著。依據研究結果，建議未來實務與政策投入相關資源探討並促進愛滋感染者生活滿意度和社區代表參與以激發其權能。英文摘要：People living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) are marginalized because of the social stigma for HIV. However, these people seldom speak for themselves or fight for their rights. Thus, this study aims to explore the factors correlated with empowerment in PLWHA.Participants recruited through purposive sampling in all areas in Taiwan, filled out the standard questionnaire to reveal their empowerment scores. The variables associated with empowerment included life satisfaction, HIV internal stigma, types of participation, HIV/AIDS knowledge, medication and demographic data. To test the explanatory power of our model, bivariable and multiple regression analyses were performed. Participants were further classified as intravenous drug users (IDU) or homosexuals.A total of 379 non-repetitive questionnaires were completed. According to statistical analyses, the mean score of empowerment was low. Among all participants, the score was higher on the social-political dimension than on personal and interpersonal ones. Empowerment scores differed by gender and environment variables only for IDU but not for homosexuals. Regression ana-lyses revealed life satisfaction, participation as community representative for residents, HIV/AIDS knowledge and medication compliance were independent factors affecting higher empowerment scores. Our model accounted for 36% of the variance for these variables. For homosexuals but not IDUs, internal HIV stigma was significant in regression analyses.In conclusion, addressing the independent factors in PLWHA and reducing the internal HIV stigma for homosexuals may help to empower PLWHA.起始頁-結束頁：47-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.28.023篇名：「善爸」甘休？「育爸」不能？與照顧若即若離的育嬰假爸爸並列篇名：An Exploratory Study on Fathers' Use of Paid Parental Leave in Taiwan作者：李庭欣(Ting-Hsin Li);王舒芸(Shu-Yung Wang)關鍵字：育嬰假爸爸;性別角色期待;照顧圖像;請領動機;parental leave fathers;gender role expectation;caring experiences;application motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：28期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究關注於臺灣社會中仍屬少數的育嬰假爸爸，希望透過瞭解他們的請領動機與育兒行為，作為未來提升男性參與照顧時的參考。研究發現主要分為兩大主軸。首先「善爸」甘休，發現促使男性請育嬰假的因素大致可分別為「個人」、「家庭」、「社會環境」、「職業結構」及「時機出現與問題浮現」等五大因素，彼此間具有層級關係，因此導致部分父親是「想要請領」，有些則是「需要請領」，更有些是「不得不請領」。第二部分「育爸」不能，點出育爸即使請了育嬰假，仍未能成為主要照顧者，其生活擁有彈性的時間分配，同時在家務與照顧工作上也有較大的豁免權與協商權，使照顧像一場接力賽，隨時有人可接手，一起完成。整體來說，傳統社會對性別角色的刻板印象仍緊緊鑲嵌在社會結構中，無形中箝制著個人的行為，本質上仍期待男性成為養家者，女性則為照顧者，也因不同的角色期待，所以同樣的照顧工作，對不同的性別則有不同的標準。即使育爸做出了不同於當代多數男性的選擇，但在改變的同時，某部分的態度與行為實際上仍隱含著傳統思維的運作模式。英文摘要：Taiwan's Parental Leave policy was set up in 2002, and most of the applicants are still women. Even though the parental leave allowance has been provided since 2009, the duty of care is still mostly undertaken by women. Therefore, the main purpose of this study is to understand the motivations and model of care of fathers who take parental leave.This study uses qualitative research and then interviews nine parental leave fathers to find two main points. First, there is a hierarchical relationship among the main five factors for taking parental leave, including ”personal”, ”family”, ”social environment”, ”occupational structure” and ”the emergence of the problem”. These factors make some fathers ”want to” take, others ”need to” take, and others ”have to” take parental leave. Second, parental leave fathers differ from mothers who are often responsible for the same care work at home. Because fathers can use their time flexibly, they can also clearly separate care work and house work, whereas mothers need to take them all. For most parental leave fathers, caring for a child is just like a relay race, because they can easily pass the baton to the next person. In other words, parental leave fathers still fail to become the primary caregiver, even when they apply for parental leave.Overall, the traditional social stereotypes of gender roles are still firmly embedded in the social structure and they also shape personal behavior. This therefore has a great influence on expecting men to become the breadwinners and expecting women to become the caregivers.起始頁-結束頁：93-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.28.034篇名：臺灣家庭照顧者多面向評量與工具建構之初探並列篇名：An Exploration of Multi-Dimensional Assessment and Tools Construction for Family Caregivers in Taiwan作者：黃志忠(Chih-Chung Huang)關鍵字：多面向評量工具;長期照顧;家庭照顧者;照顧者支持性服務;multi-dimensional assessment tools;long-term care;family caregivers;supportive services期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：28期出版年：2013中文摘要：近來衛生醫療與長期照顧政策均傾向社區照顧模式，強調去機構化的概念，改以支持家庭與社區為基礎的照顧形式。但這類模式的發展卻是依靠家庭照顧者相當程度的貢獻與犧牲來成就，這些個人才是現今長期照顧體系的核心骨幹（backbone）。然而，當這類模式正強加壓力在家庭成員與親友等照顧角色的同時，卻未曾思考可能帶來的負面效應。家庭照顧者儘管承受相當程度的財務、情緒與生理負荷，卻仍須持續家中失能成員的照顧工作。儘管政策制定者與實務工作者覺察到他們在長期照顧中扮演著重要角色時，卻未能系統化地評量他們的處境與需求，協助決定所需的協助與服務。因此，提供家庭照顧者評量是協助家庭照顧者獲取維持健康與福祉服務重要的第一步。此項評量工具的重要功能在協助實務工作者瞭解家庭照顧者日常照顧狀況、其壓力與負荷來源和背景，以規劃出適切的支持性服務。評量的運用不僅可決定照顧者支持性服務的使用資格，也可作為家庭照顧者照顧服務計畫成效之實證基礎。本研究的主要目的在於闡述家庭照顧者多面向評量的重要性與功能，以及家庭照顧者評量與支持性服務之關連性。最後，本研究將探討規劃家庭照顧者評量工具的理論架構與內容，以及執行上的相關議題，作為未來相關立法與實務建議的根據。英文摘要：Recent shifts in long-term care policies have move away from hospitalization to care in the community and emphasize deinstitutionalization in favor of home- and community-based care options. Success often depends on the essential contribution of family and informal caregivers, who are the backbone of the long-term care system. However, this progress continues to put pressure on family members and friends to take on caregiving roles, despite the risk of negative consequences. These caregivers-generally wives and adult daughters-bear most of the financial, emotional, and physical strain of locating, organizing, and providing care to family members and friends. While policy makers and practitioners increasingly recognize the central role that families play in coordinating and providing long-term care services to frail elders and people with disabilities, these professionals have dedicated little effort to systematic assessment of the situation and the well-being of family members or informal caregivers to determine what assistance they may need. Therefore, an assessment can be the first step toward helping caregivers obtain the information and services they need to maintain their own health and well-being in the face of the caregiving tasks before them. Caregiver assessment may determine eligibility for caregiver support services and can serve as a basis for a care plan and services to support and strengthen family caregivers. This article focuses on assessment from a new perspective, that of the family caregiver. It also justifies the connections between caregiver assessment and supportive services for family caregivers. This article also discusses implications for policy, practice, and further research.起始頁-結束頁：137-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.28.045篇名：International Social Work Practicum in Gerontology: An Example of a Taiwan-US Partnership並列篇名：老人領域國際社工實習：臺大社工系與美國機構之合作案例分析作者：楊培珊(Pei-Shan Yang);Phyllis Erlbaum-Zur;王麗容(Lih-Rong Wang)關鍵字：國際社會工作;老人社會工作實習;全球化;社會工作課程設計;社會工作教育;international social work;social work practicum;globalization;social work curriculum design;social work education期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：28期出版年：2013中文摘要：作為促進臺灣社會工作教育國際化的一項新興項目，臺灣大學社會工作學系碩士班提供MSW學生至紐約老人機構國際實習的計畫自2006年起舉行，由臺灣大學社會工作學系與美國老人生活照顧機構合辦。本研究為一小型探索性研究，於2010年深度訪問美國實習機構主管2人、實習督導3人，及歷年參與此機構實習學生共4人，訪談資料逐字稿參考紮根理論進行分析。本研究為檢視此實習計畫至今之過程與實際效益。結果顯示，國際實習的核心概念是整合。學生能融入實務與在地生活、詳細的事前規劃，以及主辦與合作單位專責的實習聯絡人，是提升學生國際實習方案成果的關鍵因素。研究者認為，透過國際實習沉浸在跨文化的社會工作領域之實踐經驗，使學生更加能夠整合社會工作的知識、價值觀和思辨力。然而，社工學生國際培訓資源相較其他學系學生而言是相當短缺的，研究者建議，為培育具有國際觀的社工人才，急需爭取更多資源投入國際社會工作實習。英文摘要：A pioneer international practicum in gerontology offered to MSW students from Taiwan was initiated by a Taiwan-US partnership in 2006. This study examines the process and outcomes of this practicum. In depth interviews were conducted to two US field agency administrators, three field supervisors, and four MSW students in 2010. Data analysis applies grounded theory. Results indicate that integration is the core of international practicum. Immersion, detailed planning and liaison persons are key components to maximize students' learning. The authors assert that immersion in cross-cultural social work practice enables students to synthesize knowledge, values, and critical thinking. However, with the shortage of resources for international training, the authors suggest that budget allocation for international social work education be given increased priority.起始頁-結束頁：175-201資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2013.28.0501篇名：重隨機假設下動態違約相關性之描述及其資訊內涵：以指數型信用擔保債權憑證為例並列篇名：On the Characterization and Information Contents of Dynamic Default Correlation under the Doubly Stochastic Assumption: The Case of iTraxx CDO Tranches作者：江彌修(Mi-Hsiu Chiang);邱信瑜(Hsin-Yu Chiu);王盈心(Ying-Hsin Wang)關鍵字：動態違約模型;混合卜瓦松跳躍過程;資產動態存活機率;default correlations;mixed Poisson jump processes;contagious effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文建立信用資產債權群組之動態違約相關性模型。其中，我們允許異質性信用風險事件之抵達由雙重（Autonomous）混合型卜瓦松跳躍過程（Mixed Poisson Jump Processes）所描述，且藉由跳躍幅度（Jump Sizes）反映信用事件之於信用資產池（Reference Pool）聯合存活機率（Joint Survival Probabilities）的危害程度。本文藉由提供驅動信用事件發生之頻率（Default intensity）服從一雙參數伽瑪（Gamma）及帕雷圖分配（Pareto Distribution），以描述不同市場情境下信用事件發生之密集性。我們以市場指數型擔保債權憑證iTraxx Europe為例，驗證模型之市價擬合度，且藉由校準市價反推求得各分券之隱含相關性（Implied Correlation），進一步闡述隱含相關性於分券風險特徵及信用交易策略上所呈現的意涵。英文摘要：In this paper we present a tractable model that dynamically characterizes the correlation structure for a portfolio of credit entities. Heterogeneous credit events are modeled as the arrivals of mixed Poisson jump processes and magnitudes of jumps represent the associated impacts of credit events on the joint survival probabilities of the credit portfolio. We assume that the default intensities of both sources of risk are driven by a combination of two-parameter Gamma and Pareto distributions as to capture the clustering effects of default events under different market scenarios. We conduct calibration of the model to iTraxx Europe as an example and verify the goodness of fit between the arket spreads and the model spreads of ours. We extract the implied jump-sizes that reveal information on the correlation structure, and further explore their impacts on the risk characteristics of CDO tranches.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.APR.D082篇名：專業影評之發行商偏誤及影評方向對消費者影評接受度之影響：以消費者－發行商認同為干擾因素並列篇名：Impact of Professional Critics' Distributor Bias and Critic Valence on Consumers' Acceptance of their Reviews: Moderating Effect of Consumer-Distributor Identification作者：王仕茹(Shih-Ju Wang);陳明輝(Ming-Huei Chen)關鍵字：發行商偏誤;影評方向;消費者－發行商認同;distributor bias;critic valence;consumer-distributor identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以歸因理論觀點出發，探討專業影評方向與發行商偏誤如何影響消費者的影評接受度，並以「消費者—發行商認同」為干擾因素。本研究採行2(有／無發行商偏誤)×2(正面／負面影評)×2(高／低發行商認同)受試者間實驗，變異數分析結果顯示，雖然正面影評的接受度高於負面影評，但影評人發行商偏誤和低發行商認同兩者皆會消弭正負面影評接受度的差異，高發行商認同則會擴大兩者間的差異。此外，當影評人出現發行商偏誤時，高發行商認同的消費者仍較為接受正面影評而非負面影評，但是低發行商認同的消費者則正好相反。本研究的發現豐富了有關專業影評影響力的研究領域，並為電影行銷人員未來策略性管理電影評價提供了具備理論基礎的建議。英文摘要：Based on the attribution theory, this study explores the impact of distributor bias given different critic valence on consumers' acceptance of critics' reviews. The authors also incorporate ”consumer-distributor identification” as an important moderator since consumers' reaction toward a critic's distributor bias will depend on their prior attitude toward the distributor. An experimental study was conducted where a critic's distributor bias and critic valence were manipulated and consumer-distributor identification was matched in a between-subject factorial design. The results suggest that consumers' acceptance of positive critics are higher than negative ones, but critics with distributor bias and low consumer-distributor identification will both diminish the differences, while high consumer-distributor identification will inflate them. In addition, when exposed to critics with distributor bias, positive critics are more influential than negative ones for consumers with high consumer-distributor identification, however, negative critics are more influential than positive ones for consumers with low consumer-distributor identification. Our findings enrich the current research streams regarding the impact of professional critics and deepen their theoretical foundations, with important managerial and marketing implications for movie marketers who need favorable consumers' movie evaluations.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院3篇名：死亡威脅下人生觀對享樂與實用消費之影響並列篇名：Under the Mortality Salience: Effect of Life Philosophy on Hedonic and Utilitarian Consumption作者：謝致慧(Chih-Hui Shieh);凌儀玲(I-Ling Ling)關鍵字：死亡威脅;人生觀;消費傾向;mortality salience;outlook on life;consumer tendency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究應用恐懼管理理論探討人們面臨死亡威脅時其消費行為之傾向。共進行兩個實驗，實驗一分析死亡威脅對享樂消費和實用消費之傾向，結果顯示當人們面臨死亡威脅時，呈現較高享樂消費傾向。實驗二採二因子混合實驗設計，加入人生觀此一個人特質，探討死亡威脅對消費行為之調節效果，結果顯示對悲觀者而言，相較於低死亡威脅，高死亡威脅會有較高的餐飲消費傾向，以及有較低的投資理財傾向，然而對樂觀者而言卻無顯著差異。有趣的是，本研究亦發現，無論面臨高死亡威脅或處於低死亡威脅，人們的壽險消費傾向無顯著差異。英文摘要：Based on the Terror Management Theory, this article examines the effects of mortality salience and outlook on life on consumer behavior. Two experiments were conducted. In experiment 1 the results indicate that individuals in the mortality salience condition allocate more money to their hedonic consumption than their utilitarian consumption; however, individuals in the control condition allocate more money to their utilitarian consumption than their hedonic consumption. In experiment 2 the results show that individuals who have a pessimistic outlook on life tend to spend more money on catering consumption, and spend less money on investment funds when they face the possibility of death. Specifically, there is no significant difference of buying life insurance between the high and low mortality salience condition.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JAN.GE.474篇名：Can Audit Committee Improve Earnings Quality More than the Supervisors in Taiwan?並列篇名：審計委員會是否較監察人更能提升盈餘品質作者：許文馨(Audrey Wen-Hsin Hsu)關鍵字：審計委員會;監察人;盈餘;audit committee;supervisors;earnings quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要探討從監察人制度轉換成審計委員會制度之公司，其盈餘品質是否提升。比較採用審計委員會制度的公司前、後期間之盈餘品質，相對於維持監察人制度之公司兩個時期的盈餘品質之變化，本文發現採用審計委員會制度之公司較能提升盈餘品質。此發現表示公司採用審計委員會制度者會比維持監察人制度之公司較為注重股東的權益。英文摘要：This study examines whether companies that are allowed to switch to the audit committee from the supervisors can achieve better earnings quality. I compare earnings quality for firms that switch to the audit committee between pre-adoption and post-adoption periods, relative to the corresponding change for a matched sample that retain the supervisors. I find that firms can improve earnings quality after they switch from the supervisors to audit committee. My findings suggest that firms adopting audit committee can embrace shareholder primacy to a larger extent than those that retain the supervisors.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JUN.R110025篇名：The Real Options Perspective on Exploration, Exploitation, and Firm Performance: Test of a Mediation Model並列篇名：以實質選擇權觀點探討探索性與利用性活動對公司績效之影響：中介效果模型作者：趙雨潔(Yu-Chieh Chao);鄭鈞云(Chun-Yun Cheng);湯明哲(Ming-Je Tang);黃逸平(Yi-Ping Huang)關鍵字：exploration;exploitation;real options perspective;firm performance;探索性;利用性;實質選擇權;公司績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：Theoretical debate on how firms can balance exploration and exploitation activities to achieve better performance remains inconclusive, and very few empirical studies offer guidance on how to delineate contradictory theoretical debates. We adopted a real option perspective in viewing exploration as creating real options and exploitation as executing those options. In the face of uncertainty, holding real options can bring firms future opportunities but may not lead to superior performance. Firm performance can be enhanced only if firms execute these real options. Using 25 years of data on semiconductor firms in the United States, this study examines the influence of uncertainty on exploration and exploitation and the mediating effect of exploitation on the relationship between exploration and firm performance. This study adopts a novel lag structure model to explicitly consider the time-lag factor in measuring the effects of exploration on firm performance. This study finds that (1) uncertainty is positively related to exploration; (2) exploitation mediates the relationship between exploration and firm performance. The results support the real-options perspective in elaborating exploration, exploitation, and firm performance.英文摘要：過去文獻認為公司必須平衡探索性與利用性活動以達到最佳績效，然而對於如何「平衡」這兩類本質上存在矛盾關係之活動仍未有定論。截至目前為止，探討探索性、利用性活動與公司績效關係之實證研究仍十分稀少。本研究採用實質選擇權觀點，論述當公司面對不確定的環境時，探索性活動可視為替公司創造實質選擇權，而利用性活動則視為執行實質選擇權。實質選擇權帶給公司探索未來的機會，但未必會對公司績效有直接且正面的影響。惟有當執行實質選擇權時，才能將機會轉化為實質效益，提升公司績效。本研究以美國半導體公司25年的實證資料，檢視不確定性對利用性與探索性活動之影響，並探討利用性活動對於探索性活動與公司績效的中介效果。本研究採用創新的延遲結構(Lag Structure)模型，以在衡量探索性活動對公司績效之影響時，將時間延遲因素納入模型中考量。本研究發現：(1)不確定性對探索性活動具正向顯著影響；(2)利用性活動對於探索性活動與公司績效存在完全中介效果。此實證結果支持以實質選擇權觀點論述探索性與利用性活動對公司績效之影響。起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.FEB.A102-0596篇名：專業經理人職位的代理意涵：台灣電子業家族企業之實證分析並列篇名：The Agency Implication of a Professional Manager's Position: An Empirical Study of Family Businesses in Taiwan's Electronic Industry作者：李卉馨(Hui-Hsin Lee);詹淑婷(Shu-Ting Chan);蘇怡方(I-Fang Su);鍾喜梅(Hsi-Mei Chung)關鍵字：家族企業;專業經理人;家族股權結構;family business;professional manager;family ownership structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：家族式經營是華人企業普遍的治理模式，電子產業的家族集團企業由於產業競爭特性，家族勢必要依賴專業經理人協助企業經營，另外，隨著集團企業的擴張，家族透過層層股權控制鍊掌握分子企業的決策權，因此，電子產業家族企業所衍生的代理問題與治理機制受到重視。本研究從代理理論觀點，以台灣63家電子業家族上市公司為對象，嘗試從長期角度分析高階經理人擔任董事職位，對家族股權結構與績效之間關係的影響。結果顯示，家族直接持股愈高，對績效有正向影響，同時，專業經理人董事愈多，將強化家族直接持股與績效間的正向關係，以及弱化家族間接持股對績效的負向影響。研究結果對於討論專業經理人職位之代理意涵，以及電子產業家族企業治理議題，具有相當之意義。英文摘要：Family governance is a typical governance structure in publicly traded firms in Taiwan and around the world. The founding family of a firm can choose direct ownership or a pyramidal ownership structure to achieve control over a publicly traded family business or a family business group. In addressing performance issues in family businesses, the family ownership structure could generate positive or negative impacts on performance. Thus, determining the contingent condition that will moderate the relationship between family ownership and performance is a key concern in family businesses. Utilizing longitudinal data in family businesses in Taiwan's personal computer industry, this study examines the relationships between the roles of professional managers on the board, the family ownership structure, and the firm's performance from agency theory viewpoint. The results indicate that the professional manager's position on the board will moderate the relationship between the family ownership structure and performance. Specifically, the professional managers serving as directors will enhance the positive impact from family direct ownership on performance and mitigate the negative performance impact from family pyramidal ownership. This study extends the principal-agent and principal-principal agency arguments by further considering the role of the professional manager's position in family businesses.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.MAY.R.110347篇名：官官相護？訴訟當事人身分影響稅務訴訟結果之初步證據並列篇名：Do Judgments on Tax Litigations Show Partiality for the Government as a Litigant?-Preliminary Evidence on Tax Case Adjudicated Decisions作者：黃士洲(Shih-Chou Huang);簡銀瑩(Yin-Ying Chien);林世銘(Su-Ming Lin)關鍵字：司法管理;稅務行政訴訟;政府優勢理論;judicial management;tax litigation;government advantage theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之實證結果顯示，當最高行政法院在決定是否受理稅務訴訟上訴案件時，若上訴人為稽徵機關，最高行政法院實體審理而不加以程序駁回的機率，顯著高於當上訴人為個人或法人時；而經最高行政法院實體審理後的判決結果，稽徵機關獲得有利判決的機率亦顯著大於個人或法人。這種稽徵機關在稅務訴訟過程中所享有的優勢，即便納稅人延聘了專業的會計師、律師作為訴訟代理人之後仍然存在，惟會計師、律師的確有助於降低納稅人被程序駁回之機率。綜合統計分析之結果，本文無法向民眾提供稅務行政訴訟沒有官官相護之證據。英文摘要：Our empirical results show that relative to the appeals launched by individuals and corporate entities, appeals lodged by the tax authorities have a significantly higher probability of being heard at the Supreme Administrative Court (SAC). Appeals lodged by individuals and corporate entities, on the other hand, are likely to be procedurally dismissed by the SAC. In addition, in the cases adjudicated by the SAC, the tax authorities have a considerably higher chance of winning than do individuals and corporate entities, even when the latter have engaged lawyers or CPAs as their legal representatives. Our univariate and probit analyses consistently indicate that case judgments adjudicated by the SAC demonstrate partiality for the tax authorities, consistent with the assumptions of government advantage theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JAN.R.110388篇名：面試官與應徵者的性別組合對面談評價之影響：大學教師甄選面談的實證並列篇名：The Effects of Interviewer-Applicant Gender Combination on the Interview Evaluation: An Empirical Study on Interviews of University Faculty作者：羅新興(Hsin-Hsin Lo);林韶姿(Shao-Tzu Lin);劉佩玲(Pei-Ling Liu)關鍵字：女王蜂症候群;性別組合;面談評價;queen bee syndrome;gender combination;interview evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：過去實證研究發現性別是影響面談評價的重要因素，但有關面試官與應徵者性別組合對面談評價的影響，尚未出現一致性的研究發現。為解答此不一致，本研究指出面試官年齡對於面試官與應徵者性別組合與面談評價的關係存在干擾作用。問卷調查大學教師擔任教師聘用面談的經驗，分析218份有效問卷獲得以下發現：高於四十歲的女性面試官對女性應徵者的評價顯著低於其它性別組合，而低於四十歲的面試官則未出現上述現象。換言之，本研究結果顯示「女王蜂症候群」較存在於相對較高年齡的女性，然而此結果是否反映不同世代的差異，仍有待後續研究釐清。英文摘要：Past empirical studies found that gender is one of the important factors that influence interviewers' evaluations on interviewees. But research findings regarding the impact of interviewer-applicant gender combination on interview evaluation has not been consistent. To resolve the inconsistency, this study proposed that the relationship between interviewer- applicant gender combination and interview evaluation is moderated by the interviewer's age level. We sampled 218 professors in universities and the results showed that female interviewers tend to give lower evaluations to female applicants as opposed to other interviewer-interviewee gender combination when the interviewer was above forty years old. Our study results evidenced the so-called 〞queen bee syndrome〞 existing in a relatively high age group. However, whether this finding was due to differences across generations deserves more investigations.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.APR.R.100259篇名：臺指選擇權非同步交易時段之資訊內涵並列篇名：Information Content of Nonsynchronous Trading for Taiwan Stock Index Options作者：莊益源(I-Yuan Chuang);賴靖宜(Jing-Yi Lai);王雅晴(Ya-Ching Wang);薛愛潔(Ai-Jie Xue)關鍵字：非同步交易;指數選擇權;隱含波動;nonsynchronous trading;index options;implied volatility期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：透過臺指選擇權市場較現貨市場提早開盤與延後收盤的非同步交易時段資訊內涵的分析，可揭露來自策略交易者的額外交易訊息。本文假設非同步交易時段的資訊內涵隱藏於選擇權隱含波動率之中，實證結果發現，選擇權市場提早開盤時段的資訊內涵與現貨隔夜報酬有顯著的負向變動關係，表示資訊交易者面對選擇權市場的私有資訊可能採取負面看法，於現貨市場開盤時操作而造成隨後開盤的現貨價格（隔夜報酬）下跌；該時段的資訊內涵會持續影響現貨市場開盤後的表現至少15分鐘，但隨交易時間遞延其影響幅度及顯著性皆會逐漸下降。而前一交易日現貨市場收盤後的選擇權資訊內涵與現貨市場報酬則無顯著關聯。英文摘要：The study investigates whether the extension of trading hours for Taiwan Stock Index Options contains information about the dynamics of future spot returns. Assuming that useful information is retrievable from the option-implied volatility, we found that the information content from the pre-open options trading is significantly negative related to the overnight returns in the spot market. This implies that a lower overnight spot return is expected because informed traders might react negatively to such private information from pre-open options trading. The pre-open option trades also contain useful information in explaining subsequent spot returns up to 15 minutes during the trading day, while the size and significance of the impacts decrease as the trade continues. No significant relationship is evident between information content in post-close options trading and spot returns on the following trading day.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.AUG.D0610篇名：External Ties of Managers and Firm Performance in an Emerging Industry並列篇名：經理人外部連結對新興產業內公司之表現影響作者：陳寶蓮(Pao-lien Chen)關鍵字：社會資本;人力資本;進入表現;social capital;human capital;entry performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢視經理人的外部連結對進入新興行業之廠商的表現差異影響。從1983年至1998年間進入美國手機通訊服務業公司的實證，本文得到以下發現。首先，經理人與產業協會之連結會正向調節經理人的產業內經驗對公司手機用戶成長的影響。但這種正向的調節作用會隨著產業年齡增長而下降。其次，經理人與同業競爭者之連結也會正向調節經理人的產業內經驗對公司手機用戶成長的影響，而且此正向調節作用不會隨產業年齡而改變。最後，經理人的產業外連結不具前述調節作用。英文摘要：This paper examines the impact of managerial ties on the performance difference among entrants in an emerging industry. Empirical findings from firms that entered the cellular-phone service industry between 1983 and 1998 suggest the following. First, managers' ties to an intra-industry association positively moderated the relationship between managers' intraindustry experience and an entrant's new subscribers at the early stage of the focal industry; however, this effect decreased as the industry aged. Second, managers' ties to intra-industry competitors positively moderated the relationship between managers' intra-industry experience and an entrant's new subscribers regardless of industry age. Finally, mangers' external ties to other firms outside the industry exhibited no moderating impact.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.APR.A103-00711篇名：Star Funds, Spillover Effect and Fund Advertisements: From the Viewpoint of Individual Funds and Fund Families並列篇名：明星基金、外溢效果與基金廣告關聯性之探討：個別基金觀點與基金家族觀點作者：傅英芬(Ying-Fen Fu);康信鴻(Hsin-Hong Kang);劉海清(Hai-Ching Liu)關鍵字：基金廣告;明星基金;外溢效果;fund advertisements;star funds;spillover effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文採用Panel Data Approach與Logistic Regression法，分別站在個別基金與基金家族觀點來探討基金廣告對個別基金及其家族的影響。本文的研究顯示採家族廣告對個別基金與基金家族而言都會是一個不錯的選擇。而單一基金廣告可能造成個別基金間的衝突，因為單一基金廣告佔用了家族的資源，但是只對被廣告的基金有利，卻無法創造出外溢效果。除非被單一廣告的基金是明星基金，才可得到更佳的廣告效果與外溢效果，因此明星基金被單一廣告的機率亦大為提高。此外，無論是在整體市場中或是家族內，只要能位居績效或是流量的明星或贏家地位，該基金被單一廣告的機率都將大幅提高，此點印證了符合家族利益的基金，在家族有限的資源中，將得到家族給予更多資源支持的論點（Chevalier and Ellison, 1997）。英文摘要：This study adopts the Panel Data Approach and Logistic Regression to examine the effect of fund advertisements from the viewpoint of both individual funds and fund families. Our empirical results show that adopting family advertisements is a good decision both for individual funds and their families. However, there exists a conflict between individual funds when the individual fund advertisement is executed. The individual funds do not respond well to individual fund advertisements of other funds within the same family because it consumes the resources of the family and does not have a spillover effect. One exception is star funds. The individual fund advertisement of star funds not only results in more flows but also has a spillover effect, which thus brings the star funds a higher probability of being individually advertised. As long as the funds are performance (flow) star and winner funds within the whole stock funds or only the performance (flow) star and winner funds within the family, their advertisement probability is raised. This is consistent with the argument that if the funds confirm the benefit of the family, the family may decide to distribute more limited resources to these funds (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997).起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.OCT.R1102112篇名：Financial Distress, Return Volatility and Hedging並列篇名：財務危機風險、報酬波動與避險作者：賴怡洵(Yi-Hsun Lai);林霖(Lin Lin);戴維芯(Vivian W. Tai)關鍵字：避險;風險移轉;風險管理;hedge;risk-shifting;risk management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以2005年至2009年所有台灣上市櫃公司為樣本，以Tobit迴歸檢定權益波動與避險比例的關係，探討不同財務危機風險下的企業避險動機。提出三個假說，分別為高財務危機風險下的「風險移轉假說」、接近財務危機風險下的「風險管理假說」及低財務危機風險下的「風險－報酬抵換假說」。研究發現在高財務槓桿樣本群，在考量選擇性偏誤、是否處於金融風暴期間、不同的避險比例衡量方式以及不同的槓桿比例財務危機風險指標下，其權益波動與避險比例都具有顯著負向關係，故支持高財務危機風險公司具有風險移轉行為。在低財務槓桿樣本群，除在不同避險工具考量選擇性偏誤的結果外，多數的結果都呈現權益波動與避險比例具有顯著負向關係，部分支持低財務危機風險公司在風險－報酬抵換考量下會選擇高風險而少避險的決策。而高、低財務危機風險之間的群組，其權益波動與避險比例具有正向影響，但部分未達顯著，故微弱地支持風險管理假說。本研究透過實證釐清財務危機風險與權益波動以及其交互作用對企業避險行為的關係。英文摘要：We adopt Tobit Regressions to examine the hedging behavior of the listed firms in Taiwan during 2005-2009. With the concern of bankruptcy and risk-shifting motivation of the firm, the risk-shifting, risk management, and risk-return-trade-off hypotheses are then reviewed and tested. The results show that return volatility is significantly negative to hedge ratio for distressed firms, controlling for the selection biases, time period of catastrophe (i.e. the Financial Crisis started from 2008), and the model sensitivity to different definitions of financial distress. It strongly supports the risk-shifting phenomenon for distressed firms. Significant negative relationship between hedge ratio and return volatility for non-distress group can also be observed in most tests, apart from some models for the Heckman tests for controlling selection biases. These findings partly support the risk-return-trade-off hypothesis. For the firms being in-between extreme distress levels, the return volatility is positive to hedge ratio, showing a weak support to risk management hypothesis. Our empirical results clarify the impacts of financial distress, return volatility, and their interaction term on corporate hedging behavior.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.NOV.D0313篇名：台灣券商發行之權證市場品質及造市績效評比並列篇名：Market Quality and Market Making Performance: Evaluating the Issuers of Warrants in Taiwan Stock Markets作者：詹場(Chang Chan);池祥麟(Hsiang-Lin Chih)關鍵字：市場品質;買賣價差;權證;market Quality;bid-ask Spread;warrants期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究針對台灣各券商發行之權證的市場品質、造市機制實施後各券商發行權證之價差及深度進步幅度、以及各券商造市成效進行評比。由一年半樣本期間、20家券商、8千3百檔權證，共1千2百萬筆日內交易資料所得之評比結果為：1.發行權證之市場品質最佳的5家券商為寶來、凱基、元大、群益及統一；2.造市機制實施後價差及深度進步幅度最大的5家券商為日盛、工銀、元富、統一及兆豐；3.造市成效最佳的5家券商為寶來、工銀、元大、統一及凱基。綜合而言，實施造市機制使得台灣權證市場價差下降2/3，深度提升3倍，平均每年為權證投資人節省63億之交易成本。投資人選擇價差最高的5家券商發行之權證，其交易成本是價差最低的5家券商發行之權證的3.6倍，致使其報酬率減少11%；深度最高的5家券商發行之權證深度是深度最低的5家券商發行權證的6.5倍。英文摘要：In order to improve the liquidity of the warrant market, Taiwan Stock Exchange announced operation directions, requiring the issuer (securities firm) of the warrants to perform the market making obligations after 1st January, 2009, i.e., to provide liquidity for the warrants that it issues. The aim of the paper is to evaluate the issuers of the warrants. We explore the following three questions. First, we ask how the market quality of the warrants varies across issuers for our overall sample period between 1st July, 2008 and 31st December, 2009. Second, we compare the market quality of the warrants before and after 1st January, 2009 across issuers, i.e., to examine whether or not the market quality is improved due to the operation directions, and if so, to what extent this goes on across issuers. Third, we examine the performance of the market making across issuers after 1st January, 2009. Our samples consist of twenty securities firms, 8,300 warrants, and about 12,000,000 intraday transaction data. The findings show that the top five issuers with the best market quality for the overall sample period are Polaris, KGI, Yuanta, Capital, and President, respectively; the top five issuers with the biggest improvement in market quality due to the operation directions are Jihsun, IBT, Masterlink, President, and Mega, respectively; the top five issuers with the best market making performance after 1st January, 2009 are Polaris, IBT, Yuanta, President, KGI. In summary, the market making mechanism amazingly reduced the bid-ask spread of the warrant market by nearly two-thirds, increase the depth by three times, and thus save investors the transaction cost about 6.3 billions on average. The transaction cost of the top five issuers with highest bid-ask spread is 3.6 times as high as that of the top five issuers with lowest bid-ask spread. The depth of the top five issuers with highest depth is 6.5 times as high as that of the top five issuers with lowest depth.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.SEP.D1014篇名：台灣地區大學教授薪資待遇之合理性初探：大、中、小學教師之比較研究並列篇名：On the Equity of University Professor's Compensation: A Comparative Study on Compensations of University Professors and High/Elementary School Teachers in Taiwan作者：吳清在(C. Tsing-Zai Wu);施念恕(Nien-Su Shih);朱靜玉(Ching-Yu Chu)關鍵字：大學教授薪資;教師待遇制度;退休金;professor's compensation;teacher's compensation systems;pension期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：大學教育是國家發展之火車頭，高級人才之培育與研究發明均以是賴。然而台灣地區目前大學教授之待遇，不僅趕不上歐美先進國家，甚至亦比鄰近之香港、日本、韓國及大陸地區重點大學之實質薪資為低。台灣地區各級公立學校（包括大學、中學、小學）之教師待遇係由教育部統一按照「公立學校教師暨助教職務等級表」及大學教授與中小學教師分別之「學術研究費表」敘薪，同年齡之大學教授之月薪幾無異於中、小學老師之薪酬，但由於大學教授必須耗費長時間之教育投資以取得博士學位，因而進入職場時間較晚，退休年資較短，退休給付較少。本研究以一位欲進入教職之大學畢業生，利用「淨現值法」推算其選擇當大學、中學以及小學教師之一生所得淨現值，以探究何者為其擇職之最佳決策方案。研究結果發現，大學教授一生所得之淨現值，比同齡退休之中小學老師為低，尤以自費出國留學之大學教授其一生所得之淨現值為最低。英文摘要：Higher education is the locomotive of a country's development. The breeding of qualified manpower and the nation's research inventions rely on higher education. However, the compensation of university professors in Taiwan is relatively low compared to that in the developed countries in American and Europe, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea and key universities in China. In Taiwan, all public instructors (including university professors, high and elementary school teachers) are compensated in accordance with the same pay schedule called the ”Salary Rank of Public School Instructors and Teaching Assistants” and the respective ”Academic Research Stipends” made by the Ministry of Education. As a result, the compensation of a university professor is not substantially different from that of elementary and high school teachers at the same age. Nevertheless, the pension payments of professors are lower than that for elementary and high school teachers due to shorter service periods. This study simulates three scenarios for an undergraduate who plans to enter the educational industry. The decision criterion is the NPV (Net Present Value) of his/her life-time compensations for being a university professor, high school teacher or an elementary school teacher. The results of this study show that the NPV of a university professor's life-time compensations is far less than that of a high or an elementary school teacher at same retirement age. Specifically, a university professor studying abroad has the lowest NPV for his life-time compensations if he/she services in a university in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院15篇名：以樂透觀點檢視現金增資股票申購需求並列篇名：Using the Lottery View to Analyze the Subscription Fads of SEOs作者：王朝仕(Chao-Shi Wang)關鍵字：現金增資股票(SEOs);樂透;申購;seasoned equity offerings;lottery;subscription期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：現金增資股票（SEOs）市場有三個引起廣泛討論的課題，包括折價發行、高度資訊不對稱，以及初期績效不佳等，而這些因素令其相當適合詮釋Kumar（2009）定義的樂透股。基於SEOs可能含有樂透特徵，而本研究主要目的即係以此觀點解釋投資人需求的差異，以及後續績效表現，期望能擬定具體交易策略。實證結果顯示，當SEOs具有高度樂透特徵時，有助於引起申購熱潮；即使控制總體經濟環境與公司個別基本條件，上述關係仍獲支持。值得注意的是，本研究另發現到一些證據，指向舊股東財富卻會因為公司發行樂透SEOs而呈現較明顯的衰退，說明此政策會形成剝削效果。英文摘要：The seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) market demonstrates three significant characteristics: underpricing, high levels of information asymmetry, and low initial performance. Based on these characteristics, SEOs can be defined as lottery-type stocks described by Kumar (2009). Because SEOs can evince lottery-type characteristics, this paper investigates the relationship between SEOs similarity to the lottery and investor demand. The paper also measures SEOs performance after purchase to establish a trading strategy. Empirical results show that, along with the lottery-type characteristics, SEOs result in subscription fads. Statistical results remain significant even when a macroeconomic perspective and conditions for individual firms are introduced into the examining model. Finally, this paper analyzes evidence that the wealth of original shareholders is negatively affected when a firm issues lottery-type SEOs, in what is called an exploitation effect.起始頁-結束頁：113-141資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院16篇名：東亞地區商業銀行效率之實證分析並列篇名：The Efficiency Analysis in East Asia Commercial Bank作者：盧永祥(Yung-Hsiang Lu);王俊賢(Chun-Hsien Wang);蔡芳梅(Fang-Mei Tsai)關鍵字：商業銀行;共同邊界DEA模型;技術缺口率;commercial bank;Metafrontier DEA model;technology gap ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在衡量2004∼2007年臺灣、香港、中國、日本及南韓的220家商業銀行在技術效率與生產技術之差異，並揭露各地區銀行在資源運用及生產水準之差異，以提供東亞地區銀行相互學習之標竿；為了進一步考量各地區銀行在不同生產技術之差異，本研究摒除環境變數與銀行特性之影響，以合理評估五個地區商業銀行的技術差異。實證結果顯示，經濟快速發展的中國及金融業居領導地位的日本，分別在共同技術效率及技術缺口率有較佳的表現；民營銀行及新銀行在效率表現及技術缺口率，平均優於公營銀行及舊銀行；另一方面，未摒除環境變數與銀行特性之影響，效率值及技術缺口率均呈現低估現象，且各地區在效率值及技術缺口率之排序上，亦有明顯之差異。英文摘要：The primary purpose of this paper is to measure the differences in technology and production efficiency among 220 commercial banks in Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Japan, and South Korean during 2004-2007. This will enable us to explore the differences in resource operation and production level so as to establish a mutual learning benchmark for the East Asian regional banks. To further consider the differences in the production technology of different regions, this study eliminates the impact of environment variables and banking features and examines the differences in technology efficiency and production efficiency in these regions. The empirical findings show that both the Metatechnology efficiency and the technology gap ratio are significantly well-performed take place in China and Japan. In addition, the efficiency performance and technology gap ratio in the private and new banking sectors are significantly greater than those in the public and old banking sectors. However, if the effects of environmental variables and banking features are not eliminated, we find that both efficiency values and technology gap ratio may have been underestimated and the ranking of technology efficiency and the technology gap ratio are significantly different from region to region.起始頁-結束頁：143-173資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院17篇名：蓬生麻中，不扶而直：社群歸屬感和科技使用之效果並列篇名：With the Good We Become Good: The Effect of the Sense of Community Belonging on Technology Use作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou);樊學良(Hsueh-Liang Fan)關鍵字：社會基層職業;社群歸屬感;科技使用;dirty work;sense of community;technology use期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：社會一線工作是人類生活專業分工下必然存在的職業，是驅動產業發展和國家經濟的重要基礎。但是，目前文獻甚少探討此種職業從業人員之工作行為和管理意涵。本研究以計程車業為研究情境，探討計程車駕駛在加入衛星派遣車隊後，如何對所隸屬的社群、所從事的工作，和個人所使用之衛星派遣科技產生正向的態度和認知反應，以及科技使用對社群歸屬感與正向心理產出間的調節效果。研究對象為台灣大車隊107位駕駛。研究發現，成員之社群歸屬感越高越會對所隸屬的社群，和所從事的工作產生正向知覺。此外，科技使用對社群歸屬感與信任、工作滿足，和科技使用信心間之關係有調節效果。最後，根據前述分析結果，適度輔以訪談資料，討論其理論和管理意涵。英文摘要：Given the division of labor inherent to modern society, it is inevitable that some people end up doing society's ”dirty work.” However, little research has been done to enhance our understanding of such occupational contexts. This study aims to explore how individuals working at jobs with negative or dirty associations may achieve positive psychological outcomes by joining a community. Data are collected over three time periods from 107 cabbies in Taipei; the cabbies are all affiliated with the city's largest taxi fleet, which makes use of the Global Positioning System dispatching technology. The study helps build our understanding of the relationship between the sense of belonging to a community and the resulting positive psychological outcomes (i.e., trust on the part of individuals for the management team of the community, job satisfaction, and confidence belief in technology use). In addition, we also investigate the moderating role of technology use. The results show that the sense of belonging to a community has positive effects on trust and job satisfaction. The moderating effects exist that technology moderates the relationship between the sense of belonging to a community and trust, job satisfaction, as well as confident belief in technology use.起始頁-結束頁：175-210資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院18篇名：非營利醫院負債融通與捐贈收入的關聯性並列篇名：The Relation between Debt Financing and Not-for-Profit Hospitals' Donations作者：郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo);何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho);羅光達(Kuang-Ta Lo)關鍵字：非營利醫院;負債融通;捐贈;not-for-profit hospital;debt financing;donation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：在Magnus, Smith, and Wheeler（2003）與Yetman（2007）提出非營利組織以負債融通將對其捐贈收入會產生排擠效果的假說後。本文為首篇探討非營利組織負債融通與捐贈收入關聯性的實證研究。本文分析台灣38間醫療財團法人在2000－2006年資料。研究結果顯示，當醫療財團法人的負債比率較低時，若採用負債融通對其捐贈收入有正向的擠入效果；然而負債比率較高的法人，持續採用負債來融通資金，則對其捐贈收入出現排擠效果，指出兩者間存在非線性關係。至於負債對於醫療財團法人捐贈收入的整體影響，取決上述兩項力量互抵後的效果而定。本文發現臺灣醫療財團法人採用負債融通對其捐贈收入普遍存在擠入效果。我們認為Magnus et al.（2003）與Yetman（2007）僅考慮高負債比率對捐贈收入的排擠效果，而忽略擠入效果。英文摘要：Debt financing has been discussed extensively in corporate finance; however, previous studies seldom apply it to not-for-profit hospitals. Magnus et al. (2003) and Yetman (2007) argued that debt financing would have a negative impact on the charitable donations of not-for-profit hospitals, but they did not provide empirical evidence. This study is the first paper to investigate the relationship between debt financing and donation revenue by using 38 not-for-profit hospitals from 2000 to 2006 in Taiwan. According to our empirical results, we have proved that debt financing has both a crowd-in effect and crowd-out effect on not-for-profit hospitals' donations. The crowd-in effect tends to exist in low debt ratio hospitals, while the crowd-out effect is often found to exist in not-for-profit hospitals with higher debt ratios. We therefore conclude that Magnus et al. (2003) and Yetman (2007) only proposed the crowd-out effect of debt financing for not-for-profit hospitals; however, they did not consider the possible crowd-in effect of debt financing as we have demonstrated in this study.起始頁-結束頁：211-239資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院19篇名：台灣電子業家族經理人之外部董事會連結與公司創新：論控制家族代理問題之影響並列篇名：Family Executives' External Directorate Ties and Corporate Innovation in Taiwan's Electronics Industry: The Role of Controlling Family Agency Problems作者：蔡柳卿(Liu-Ching Tsai);楊朝旭(Chaur-Shiuh Young);許慧雯(Hui-Wen Hsu)關鍵字：外部董事連結;家族經理人;創新;控制家族;directorate ties;family executives;innovation;controlling family期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：家族經理人因為排外繼承而有異質性不足、創新觀點受限的問題。植基於資源依賴理論，家族經理人可經由外部董事會連結，俾取得多元化資訊以提升公司創新。鑑此，本研究首先檢測家族經理人外部董事連結和公司創新之關係。其次，當家族控制權與所有權愈偏離時，代理問題愈大，家族經理人從事外部董事連結可能植基於本身及其所屬控制家族的利益，使派出公司之創新成效受到負面衝擊。據此，本研究進一步檢測家族代理問題對「家族經理人外部董事會連結與公司創新關聯性」的影響。以2000到2006年台灣電子業上市家族公司之家族經理人為樣本，實證結果發現，家族經理人之外部董事會連結與公司創新呈正向關係；然而，控制家族之代理問題越嚴重時，削弱了外部董事連結對公司創新的正面效果。英文摘要：Top management teams of family firms are often characterized as having less diversity and professionalism, which could limit corporate innovation. Based on the Resource Dependence Theory, to build external directorate ties is one approach to accessing different resources and information which can benefit firms' innovation. However, controlling families' external directorships may bring two distinct effects on firms due to, on the one hand, their strong needs for heterogeneous ideas and, on the other hand, the potential agency problems related to family firms. Given the prevalence of family firms in Taiwan's information and electronics industry, we first examine the relationship between family executives' directorate ties and innovation. Next, considering the controlling families' ownership structures, we further examine how the controlling family's agency problem affects the aforementioned relationship. Using a sample of family firms in Taiwan's information and electronics industry, we predict and find a positive association between the quality of family executives' external directorate ties and firms' innovation performance. Moreover, we find this positive association to be offset by controlling families' entrenchment incentives arising from their divergence between control and cash flow rights. These results imply that family firms with greater agency problems allow their family-member executives to accept at-will external directorships while ignoring firms' overall benefits.起始頁-結束頁：241-272資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院20篇名：公司治理結構與股東常會可接近性之關係並列篇名：The Relationship between Corporate Governance Structure and the Accessibility of Annual Shareholder Meetings作者：張力(Li Chang);侯啟娉(Chi-Ping Hou);林翠蓉(Tsui-Jung Lin);許蕙欣(Wen-Hsin Shu)關鍵字：公司治理結構;股東常會;可接近性;corporate governance structure;annual stockholder meeting;accessibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：股東常會是小股東行使權利及落實股東行動主義的最佳場所，因此股東會可接近性愈高（如地點之便利性愈佳），代表公司治理機制愈落實。本文依據我國公司治理機制結構，並以2001年至2007年上市上櫃公司共計6926筆觀察值，探討公司治理機制變數與公司股東常會開會可接近性之關係。實證結果顯示，外部董事比例越高以及機構法人持股比例越高之公司，其股東常會之召開愈具可接近性，而控制權與現金流量權偏離程度越高的公司，其股東常會之召開則愈不具可接近性。英文摘要：The annual shareholder meeting is the only place that minority shareholders can exercise their own rights and communicate with directors and top managers. Therefore, the easy access to a shareholder meeting (e.g., a location is easy to reach) implies that the company has a better corporate governance structure. This paper examines the relationship between corporate governance and the accessibility of annual stockholder meetings. Our samples include firms listed on the Taiwan Stock Market from 2001 to 2007. The results show that both the proportion of outside directors and the percentage of institutional ownership affect the accessibility of the annual general meeting, and they are positively related. The degree of divergence between control rights and cash flow rights also affects the accessibility of the annual general meeting; however, they are negatively related.起始頁-結束頁：273-308資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院01篇名：阿瑪蒂亞．森的正義觀：一個批評性考察並列篇名：Amartya Sen's Idea of Justice: A Critical Notice作者：陳曉旭(Xiao-Xu Chen)關鍵字：可行能力方法;實質自由;先驗方法;比較方法;制度主義;the capabilities approach;substantive freedom;transcendental approach;comparative approach;institutionalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：阿瑪蒂亞．森在過去30多年來提出並辯護了可行能力方法，並在近年來提出一種新的正義觀以替代羅爾斯的正義理論。本文旨在批評地考察森的正義觀，文章分兩部分，第一部分檢視森的正義觀之「質料」，即可行能力方法中的核心概念，論證其可行能力概念和實質自由概念過於模糊和不確定無法為一個正義概念提供公共標準和明確內涵。第二部分檢視森的正義觀之「形式」，即森的正義的比較方法，論證森對先驗方法和制度主義的批評並不令人信服，比較方法並未提供對羅爾斯正義理論的範式轉換，也非更好的替代方法。「質料」之模糊與「形式」之缺陷使得森的正義觀需要進一步發展，否則無法得到證成。英文摘要：For the past 30 years, Amartya Sen has been arguing for a version of the capabilities approach as an alternative approach to Rawls' theory of justice. More recently, he proposes a so-called-comparative approach to social justice to depart from what he calls the transcendental approach. This paper gives a critical view of Sen's idea of justice. On the one hand, the core concepts in his version of the capabilities approach are extremely vague and indeterminate. He fails to provide a criterion to distinguish between valuable and trivial capabilities from the point of view of justice. His conception of freedom is too intrusive and cannot be a useful concept to develop an approach to social justice. On the other, he fails to provide a convincing argument against what he calls ”transcendental approach” in that he is not clear about what transcendental means. He also fails to make a good case for the focus on people's behavioural patterns. So this paper concludes that his idea of justice need to be further developed in order to be justified.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130900460012篇名：從「道地」到「對道地的想像」：媒介社會中一種社會自我觀察的可能起點並列篇名：From "Authenticity" to the "Imagination of Authenticity": An Alternative Point of Departure for Society's Self-Observation作者：劉育成(Yu-Cheng Liu);曹家榮(Chia-Rong Tsao)關鍵字：道地;不道地;地方;媒介社會;加速;透明社會;authenticity;inauthenticity;place;media society;acceleration;transparent society期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：何謂「道地」（authenticity）？「道地」（或不道地）的論述又是從何而來？如果道地與否關乎的是主觀感受，而非客觀標準的話，那麼試圖從客觀角度來檢視道地與否的問題具有何種意涵？如果僅將道地與否簡化為社會建構的產物，那麼我們如何理解人類社會從古至今在不斷想要釐清、爭辯、解決道地與否之問題上的努力？本文將從Charles Taylor對「本真性」的討論出發，輔以班雅明、David Harvey等人的論述，最後則以Vattimo有關「透明社會」的討論，試圖論述以下觀點：這個時代也許不需要「道地」，我們只需要有對道地的「想像」。本文也將論述，日常生活社會本身具有的道地性，在速度吊詭所開展的辯證過程中，也加深、增廣了對道地之想像的需要。更甚者，社會越是有對道地進行觀察與描述的需要，就越有可能生產出不道地的論述，並且透過不道地的論述來認識道地性。假如社會中不存在純然的道地性，或者我們不再有機會觸及道地性，為什麼我們仍必須將其視為日常生活與社會中重要的面向？我們對道地的想像又是如何關連於社會對自身的觀察與描述呢？英文摘要：What is ”authenticity”? Why do we need ”authenticity”? How do people know whether it is authentic or not? The questions mentioned above are concerned with the relationships between people, people and society, and connect closely to how people and society understand themselves. The experience of authenticity/inauthenticity implies not only subjective knowing but also objective formation and understanding of it. This essay examines the concept of authenticity and its opposite, and suggests an alternative to access it. Through the lens of Charles Taylor, Walter Benjamin, David Harvey, we extract some shared thoughts among their discussion of the concept of authenticity/inauthenticity. At the last part of this article we suggest that, pace Gianni Vattimo's questioning of the ”transparency” of modern/media society, there is no need to find or to testify ”authenticity”, rather there exists and requires only the ”imagination” of it. To a great extent influenced by technological advancements it is not unnecessary to access authenticity, instead the requirement of it has been broadens and deepens than ever before. The more we need to pursue authenticity, the more we fall into the production of inauthentic discourses. This will be another starting point in understanding how modern society describes and observes itself.起始頁-結束頁：37-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320130900460023篇名：建構RCA事件調查的因果推理─結構因果與模型逆推法的取向並列篇名：Constructing a Causal Reasoning for the RCA Event-An Approach Based on Structural Causation and Abduction作者：陳瑞麟(Ruey-Lin Chen)關鍵字：科技與社會;RCA 事件;因果關係;科學推理;科學哲學;STS;RCA event;causation;scientific reasoning;philosophy of science期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文應用科學方法論最新發展的「模型逆推法」來回答一個科技與社會的爭議：曾在美國無線電公司任職的女性勞工罹患癌症，是否是因為該廠使用三氯乙烯、四氯乙烯等有機溶劑所造成的？台灣的毒理學家、公衛學家和流行病學家已針對上述和其他相關的問題發表九篇科學論文，但其多數結論模棱兩可，互不相容─因為流行病學傳統使用的統計調查方法所預設的因果觀念是「律則性的因果觀念」，這個因果觀念和它相關方法學很難回答「獨一無二」、「資料不全」事件發生的原因，也不能完整考慮此問題發生的社會脈絡。筆者嘗試發展出一個「結構因果觀念」，並結合「模型逆推法」，應用到這個問題上，由此推出一個假設。本文把這個方法得到的結論與使用流行病學調查方法的結論做比較；再使用現有流行病學調查得到的統計資料，以檢驗「模型逆推法」推出的假設。全文的結論是，「曝露於有機溶劑是RCA女性勞工罹癌的原因」是一個比相反結論更好、更可靠的假設。英文摘要：This paper develop a new pattern of reasoning to solve a science, technology and society (STS) problem: Were the organic solvents such as trichloroethene and tetrachloroethene the factors that caused the cancer incidence of female workers who had worked in Radio Company of America (RCA) during the 1970s? Up to 2009, nine toxicological and epidemiological papers addressing to this and other derived problems had been published in different international journals. Most of those papers suggested uncertain, ambiguous, and incompatible answers. In this paper, I analyzes that the statistical methodology presupposed by those epidemiological papers implies the regularity notion of causation. I argue that this notion cannot solve the RCA problem. To get a reliable and convincing solution, I propose a notion of structural causation with the abduction based on models. According to the reasoning pattern, ”the organic solvents were the causes of the cancer incidence of female workers in RCA” is a better hypothesis than its negation.起始頁-結束頁：81-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201309004600301篇名：員工每日情緒對情緒勞動之影響：情感事件理論的觀點並列篇名：The Impact of Daily Emotion on Emotional Labor: The Perspective of Affective Events Theory作者：蕭婉鎔(Wan-Jung Hsiao)關鍵字：情感事件理論;正負向情緒;情緒勞動;affective events theory;positive and negative emotion;emotional labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究從情感事件理論的觀點探討第一線服務人員每日正負向情緒對個人情緒勞動的影響，設計日記式報告，觀察受試者每日的情緒變異對工作行為的影響；並納入自我監控特質，探討其對負向情緒與情緒勞動的調節效果。本研究蒐集124位有效受試樣本，記錄25個工作天的資料，共3261筆每日記錄。研究結果發現，第一線服務人員每日情緒變化會對情緒勞動策略產生影響，且自我監控特質會干擾負向情緒與情緒。長期而言，深層偽裝策略有助於顧客導向行為的發生。根據研究結果，分別提出理論與管理上的貢獻與建議。英文摘要：The present study adopted theoretical perspective of affective events theory to explain the relationship between emotion and emotional labor. Diary reports are conducted to examine the relationships between daily positive and negative emotion (PA and NA, respectively) and emotional labor. Self-monitoring theorized at a between-subjects level would moderate the within-subjects relationships. With a sample of 124 frontline sales employees and 3,261 observations across 25 working days, results show that daily PA and NA had a significant within-subjects main effect on daily emotional labor strategy. In addition, between-subjects self-monitor moderated the relationship between NA and deep acting. The current findings shed light on the daily emotion labor consequences of daily emotion and provide important theoretical and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：309-341資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.DEC.R120022篇名：Directors' and Officers' Liability Insurance, Debt Contracting, and Earnings Conservatism並列篇名：董監事責任險、債務契約與盈餘保守性作者：許文馨(Audrey Wen-Hsin Hsu);林玟君(Wen-Chun Lin)關鍵字：董監事責任保險;債務契約;盈餘保守性;D&O insurance;debt contracting;earnings conservatism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討董監事責任保險是否影響我國企業會計盈餘保守性，並進一步研究債務契約的影響是否得以解釋董監事責任保險對於企業會計盈餘保守程度的差異。本研究假設，當公司購買董監事責任保險時，代理衝突的增加會產生更多的會計盈餘保守性。實證研究結果顯示，購買董監事責任保險的企業中，承受較高外部融資壓力的公司報導更顯著的會計盈餘保守特性。本研究結果支持債務契約需求導致盈餘保守性假說，亦即會計盈餘保守性的實務需求主要來自於債權人對於降低代理衝突與促進契約效率有關。英文摘要：This study evaluates whether earnings conservatism increases when firms with high debt contracting demands purchase directors' and officers' insurance (D&O). We expect that the purchase of D&O insurance is positively associated with earnings conservatism only when firms have higher debt-based contracting demands. We find that firms having D&O insurance and higher external demand for debts report more earnings conservatism. These results are consistent with prior studies (Ahmed, Billings, Morton, & Stanford-Harris, 2002; Watts, 2003) that debtholders demand greater earnings conservatism as a means of addressing agency problems. This study also provides evidence that debtholders appear to be the primary driver of the demand for earnings conservatism.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.APR.R130043篇名：台股外資分析師報告預測目標價之正確性與影響因素分析並列篇名：Target Price Accuracy in Foreign Analysts' Reports for Taiwan Stocks作者：謝文良(Wen-Liang G. Hsieh);李進生(Chin-Shen Lee);王芊儒(Chien-Ju Wang)關鍵字：分析師報告;目標價;投資評等;analysts' reports;target price forecasts;stock recommendation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探究台灣市場外資分析師報告對目標價格預測之可信度，及影響目標價誤差的因素。文中使用五年共11,446份報告，觀察不同評估期間下的目標價達成率和目標價高估與低估的程度。主要發現有四點：一、目標價平均達成率不到五成，發布後三個月內即達成的比率高於更晚才達成的比例，負向評等的達成率高於正向評等。二、正向評等報告傾向過度樂觀，目標價誤差大於負向評等。三、外資機構的持股部位與分析師報告建議相符，傾向持有目標價過度樂觀的股票，這顯示分析師報告具有影響力，且使用者不易判別報告中的預測誤差。四、目標價格有系統性的高估或低估現象，包括高估中間評等的大型公司股價、高估分析師報告較少關注的股票、對高市價淨值比股票過度樂觀、以及對低市價淨值比股票過度悲觀。英文摘要：The study analyzes the accuracy of target price forecasts published by foreign analysts for listed Taiwan stocks. Using data in 11,446 analysts reports issued over the period of 2006 to 2010, we measure whether target prices are achieved and to what extent the target prices over- or under-estimate the actual stock prices. For the overall sample, less than 50% of target prices were achieved by the actual prices within one year, of which, a dominant proportion was achieved in 3 months after report issuing. Reports with favorable recommendation have lower percentage of achievement and tend to be over optimistic in target forecasts. The study finds that foreign institutions held relatively more shares of stocks that analysts over-forecasted. This suggests that the target prices do affect the portfolio decision of the buy-side clients, who were unable to tell the systematic bias in the forecasts. We also find that target price forecasts tend to overvalue large firms receiving modest recommendations, stocks with fewer analyst reports, high price-to-book ratio stocks, but under-estimate low price-to-book ratio stocks.起始頁-結束頁：43-70資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.AUG.R130054篇名：專業影評之發行商偏誤及影評方向對消費者影評接受度之影響：以消費者－發行商認同為干擾因素並列篇名：Impact of Professional Critics' Distributor Bias and Critic Valence on Consumers' Acceptance of their Reviews: Moderating Effect of Consumer-Distributor Identification作者：王仕茹(Shih-Ju Wang);陳明輝(Ming-Huei Chen)關鍵字：發行商偏誤;影評方向;消費者—發行商認同;distributor bias;critic valence;consumer-distributor identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以歸因理論觀點出發，探討專業影評方向與發行商偏誤如何影響消費者的影評接受度，並以「消費者—發行商認同」為干擾因素。本研究採行2（有／無發行商偏誤）×2（正面／負面影評）×2（高／低發行商認同）受試者間實驗，變異數分析結果顯示，雖然正面影評的接受度高於負面影評，但影評人發行商偏誤和低發行商認同兩者皆會消弭正負面影評接受度的差異，高發行商認同則會擴大兩者間的差異。此外，當影評人出現發行商偏誤時，高發行商認同的消費者仍較為接受正面影評而非負面影評，但是低發行商認同的消費者則正好相反。本研究的發現豐富了有關專業影評影響力的研究領域，並為電影行銷人員未來策略性管理電影評價提供了具備理論基礎的建議。英文摘要：Based on the attribution theory, this study explores the impact of distributor bias given different critic valence on consumers' acceptance of critics' reviews. The authors also incorporate ”consumer-distributor identification” as an important moderator since consumers' reaction toward a critic's distributor bias will depend on their prior attitude toward the distributor. An experimental study was conducted where a critic's distributor bias and critic valence were manipulated and consumer-distributor identification was matched in a between-subject factorial design. The results suggest that consumers' acceptance of positive critics are higher than negative ones, but critics with distributor bias and low consumer-distributor identification will both diminish the differences, while high consumerdistributor identification will inflate them. In addition, when exposed to critics with distributor bias, positive critics are more influential than negative ones for consumers with high consumer-distributor identification, however, negative critics are more influential than positive ones for consumers with low consumer-distributor identification. Our findings enrich the current research streams regarding the impact of professional critics and deepen their theoretical foundations, with important managerial and marketing implications for movie marketers who need favorable consumers' movie evaluations.起始頁-結束頁：71-100資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUN.C405篇名：吃硬不吃軟：觸覺資訊對消費者品質預期與折價券使用意圖之影響並列篇名：Influences of Haptic Information on Consumers' Quality Expectations and Coupon Redemption Intentions作者：楊俊明(Chun-Ming Yang)關鍵字：觸覺資訊;折價券;品牌熟悉度;haptic information;coupon;brand familiarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：實務資料顯示折價券發行量極大，但回收率有待提昇，如何提昇折價券使用意圖成為企業的重要議題。但過去的研究卻未曾探討感官資訊對於折價券使用的影響。本研究以資訊處理觀點探討非診斷性觸覺資訊的折價券紙張挺度如何影響消費者對促銷產品的品質預期與折價券使用意圖。實驗一發現，整體而言挺度較高紙張所印製之折價券會帶來較高的品質預期與折價券使用意圖，但此效果受消費者自發性觸摸需求特質與品牌熟悉度之調節，且品質預期會在特定情況下中介紙張挺度對使用意圖之影響。實驗二則透過操弄認知資源限制，驗證高自發性觸摸需求的消費者會在資訊處理過程中排除與品質判斷無關的觸覺資訊。本研究根據實驗結果提供理論與管理意涵。英文摘要：The author examines the effects of non-diagnostic haptic information (i.e., the paper stiffness) of promotional coupons on consumers' product quality expectations and coupon redemption intentions. On the basis of the two-stage information processing model, the author proposes that coupons printed on stiff paper will produce higher quality expectation and redemption intentions compared to those printed on soft paper. However, not all consumers or brands are equally affected by such non-diagnostic haptic cues. Results from experiment 1 show that consumers' level of autotelic NFT and brand familiarity moderate the relationship between the paper stiffness and quality expectations. Moreover, quality expectation mediates the effects of the paper stiffness on redemption intention. Further, by restricting cognitive resources, experiment 2 demonstrates that high-autotelic NFT consumers are less affected by the paper stiffness, because they are able to rule out its potential biases in the second stage of information processing. Thus, the findings of this research have both theoretical and managerial implications.起始頁-結束頁：101-127資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAY.C046篇名：消費者認知基礎之企業綠品牌形象衡量模式發展並列篇名：A Consumer-Cognition-Based Measurement Model of Corporate Green Brand Image作者：張愛華(Ai-Hwa Chang);洪敘峰(Hsu-Feng Hung)關鍵字：綠品牌形象;量表發展;MIMIC模型;corporate green brand image;scale development;MIMIC model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：消費者環保主義已漸成為市場上的主流思維，然而企業綠品牌形象的衡量模式仍有待建立，本研究先應用質化方法探索消費者企業綠品牌形象的潛在反映因素與形成因素，發現前者包括企業綠政策、企業綠識別以及企業環境導向，後者包括產品綠特徵、綠認證、綠推廣活動、綠訂價策略、綠通路規劃以及綠產品特徵等。再利用量化方法以MIMIC（Multiple Indicators Multiple Causes）模式驗證企業綠品牌形象衡量模式。本研究並利用兩家企業及代表性品牌產品進行實證，確認此衡量模式具備適當的信、效度與區辨力。英文摘要：In recent years, green consumerism has become a major force in consumer market. A company with green brand image may create favorable opportunities to increase consumer purchase intention and behavior. This study uses a mixed method to develop a measurement model of corporate green brand image. A qualitative method is first used to find the major factors of corporate green brand image, which comprises reflective factors and formative factors. The former includes corporate green policy, corporate green identification, and corporate environmental orientation. The latter includes green product category, green certification, green promotional actions, green pricing strategies, green channel planning, and green product features. Then, a quantitative method is used to verify the corporate green brand image model as a multiple-indicators-multiple-causes (MIMIC) model. The result shows the consumer-cognition-based corporate green brand image model has acceptable reliability and validity. The application of this model also successfully distinguishes between the green brand image of The Body Shop and that of L'oreal.起始頁-結束頁：129-154資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUN.C087篇名：不同型式改良產品之顧客選擇行為並列篇名：Consumer Choices for Various Types of Enhanced Products作者：張心馨(Shin-Shin Chang)關鍵字：改良產品;調節焦點;product enhancement;self-regulatory focus期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討不同類型的改良產品會因為調節焦點導向之差異，產生不同之消費者偏好。本研究主張促進焦點者由於對風險敏感度較低且較能接受新奇性高的產品，因此在面對相同屬性結構之改良產品時，促進焦點者選擇集中改良型產品（相對於全面改良型產品）的機率高於預防焦點者；而在面對相同與相異結構兩種改良產品時，促進焦點者選擇相異結構改良產品之機率也高於預防焦點者。本研究採實驗設計，兩項研究之結果支持本研究假設。英文摘要：This research explores the impact of self-regulatory focus on consumer choices of various types of product enhancements. It is argued that distinct risk aversion orientation between promotion focus and prevention focus may frame diverse perspectives on gain and loss, thereby leading to different choice behavior when facing focused enhancement vs. general enhancement, and when facing alignable enhancement vs. nonalignable enhancement. Two experiments are employed in this research, and the results support the proposed hypotheses.起始頁-結束頁：155-172資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUL.C378篇名：情緒發洩、報復與利他：服務失誤後之線上負面口碑並列篇名：Emotional Episode, Retaliation and Altruism: Negative Online Word-of-Mouths after Service Failure作者：汪志堅(Chih-Chien Wang);吳宜環(Yi-Huan Wu)關鍵字：負面口碑;情緒;服務失誤;negative word-of-mouth;emotion;service failure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討消費者在遭遇服務失誤後，產生的情緒對線上負面口碑傳播之影響。本研究共進行四次實證研究，實證研究結果顯示，服務失誤後，失望情緒會產生基於幫助／警告他人的利他口碑傳播意圖，以希望其他人能免受同樣的遭遇；生氣情緒則會讓消費者產生懲罰業者的心態，基於報復意圖而散佈負面口碑；此外，本研究發現報復人格特質和報復口碑傳播意圖有顯著正相關。英文摘要：This research focuses on the influence of emotions and intentions on consumer negative word-of-mouth (WOM) communications when service failure occurred. The paper conducted four empirical studies to examine the relationship between emotions, intentions, personality trait and negative WOM communications. The results revealed that the disappointed customers were usually with altruism intention, and would with higher intention to help/warn others; whereas consumers with a higher level of anger had more revenge intention to engage in negative WOM after service failure.起始頁-結束頁：173-205資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUL.C119篇名：The Effect of Regulatory Focus on Conformity Behavior並列篇名：調節焦點對消費者從眾行為影響作者：鄭尹惠(Yin-Hui Cheng);高登第(Danny T. Kao);莊世杰(Shih-Chieh Chuang);陳淑惠(Shu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：調節焦點;從眾行為;認知負載;conformity;regulatory focus;cognitive load期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要在驗證調節焦點對消費者從眾行為之影響。實驗1研究影響當消費者處於預防焦點的情況下，將比處於促進焦點的情況下產生更明顯的從眾行為。進一步，實驗2發現調節焦點對消費者從眾行為之影響是由資訊及規範常模中介所造成的。最後，實驗3發現節焦點對消費者從眾行為之影響在高認知負載下將會消失。英文摘要：This article examines the influence of regulatory focus on conformity. Three experimental situations are developed to examine the effect. Experiment 1 reveals that regulatory focus influences conformity, with the effect being more obvious under a prevention-focused condition, in which people conform more strongly with others, than under a promotion-focused condition. In Experiment 2, the effect of regulatory focus on conformity is mediated by informational influences and normative influences. The results of Experiment 3 show that under a high cognitive load, the effect of regulatory focus on conformity disappears.起始頁-結束頁：207-232資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUL.C1810篇名：成立專屬保險公司對企業長期績效的影響並列篇名：The Impact on the Company's Long Term Performance with the Establishment of Captive Insurance Company作者：趙志偉(Chih-Wei Chao);林問一(Wen-Yi Lin);劉亞秋(Y. Angela Liu)關鍵字：專屬保險;長期績效;captive insurance;long term performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢驗企業成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司後，長期績效是否改善。我們以1960年到2007年間，在百慕達註冊成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司的美國公開上市公司為樣本，同時引進沒有成立任何型態專屬保險公司的配對公司作比較。結果發現，企業成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司後，企業的長期績效表現比成立前佳；並且有成立純粹獨資專屬保險公司企業的長期績效，優於沒有成立任何型態專屬保險的配對公司。英文摘要：This study examines whether the establishment of a pure single-parent captive insurance company can effectively better the parent company's long term performance. We employ data of U.S. exchange-listed firms that have pure single-parent captive insurance companies registered in Bermuda between 1960 and 2007. Using matched pairs of firms with and without captive insurance companies, our findings show that the long term performance of the parent firm is significantly improved due to the establishment of a pure single-parent captive insurance subsidiary, suggesting such actions provide additional benefits to parent companies.起始頁-結束頁：233-256資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAR.R0805011篇名：新產品延期上市與競爭者反應強度關係之研究並列篇名：Determinants of Magnitude of a Competitor's Reaction to a New Product Introduction Delay作者：顧萱萱(Hsuan-Hsuan Ku);方儷諭(Li-Yu Fang)關鍵字：新產品延期上市;行銷溝通;反應強度;new product introduction delays;marketing communications;reaction magnitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：為爭取市場先機，廠商常於新產品實際上市之前，即發佈預告訊息。然受制於各種內外在因素，新產品恐出現延期情形。面對其他廠商新產品延期上市，競爭者反應強度可能影響延期廠商遭致的負面效應。據此，本研究探討競爭者如何基於發訊者因素、延期產品因素與自身特徵決定反應強度。實證分析對象主要為180家台灣地區電子業製造商，研究結果顯示發訊者市場支配性、發訊信譽、攻擊集中度、預計延期時間長短、延期理由、競爭者市場支配性、產品創新能力與產能可利用率是決定競爭反應強度的主要原因。英文摘要：For benefiting from the advantages of being the first in the market, many companies deliberately release information about a product well in advance of the product actual introduction. However, very often we see how companies fail to deliver their new products on the promised introduction due dates. The negative consequences that a firm, which is delaying a new product introduction, suffers may depend in part on the magnitude of competitors' responses. On this ground, our interest lies in examining the determinants of magnitude of a firm's reaction to a new product introduction delay. An empirical analysis based on 180 manufacturers of electronics industries in Taiwan showed that reaction magnitude can be jointly explained by factors that are sender related (market dominance and signaling reputation), product related (centrality of attack, expected duration of delay, and controllability of the delay), and receiver related (market dominance, product innovation ability, and capacity utilization).起始頁-結束頁：257-283資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.FEB.R1102812篇名：稅法不確定對營利事業短漏報所得之影響：台灣之實證並列篇名：The Influence of Uncertain Tax Positions on Tax Compliance: Considering Taiwan's Business Income Tax作者：陳俊哲(Chun-Che Chen)關鍵字：稅法不確定;稅務遵循;查核品質;uncertain tax positions;tax compliance;audit quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討稅法不確定對納稅人之稅務遵循，稅務申報代理人之處罰責任，及稽徵機關之查核品質的影響。實證結果發現：在稅法不確定下，納稅人以避稅手段產生未確定稅負，稅務申報代理人協助納稅人逃漏稅，但是，加重稅務申報代理人之處罰責任，對納稅人之稅務遵循，沒有明顯的助益。此外，稅法不確定、稅務人員之素養與操守不佳等因素是國內稅務遵循風氣敗壞的主因。當稅法不確定現象存在時，加強稅務人員之素養與操守，對稽徵機關之查核品質，有顯著的影響。英文摘要：This paper explores the impact of uncertain tax positions on the tax compliance of taxpayers, penalties for tax agents, and audit quality of tax authorities. The findings are as follows: When tax positions are uncertain, taxpayers' intentions to avoid taxes and engaging in sheltering activities are more obvious, and tax agents assist taxpayers in evading taxes. However, increasing penalties for tax agents may not intensify tax compliance. Additionally, uncertain tax positions, poor audit quality, and low integrity of tax officials are the main reasons of decreased tax compliance. Furthermore, when tax laws are ambiguous, improving the integrity of tax officials has a significantly positive effect on the audit quality of tax authorities.起始頁-結束頁：285-319資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAR.R1101713篇名：購屋者投資機率預測模型之探討並列篇名：A Prediction Model for Housing Investment Probability作者：邱于修(Yu-Shiou Chiou);周美伶(Mei-Ling Chou);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：購屋行為;購屋投資者;預測機率模型;homebuyer's behavior;housing investor;probability prediction model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文採用「住宅需求動向調查」2006Q4至2007Q3之已購屋者問卷，以二元羅吉特模型之機率預測模型，分析投資者與自住者在住宅屬性、購屋搜尋行為與購屋者屬性之差異，並探討不同機率界限下，預測可信度最高之最適機率界限值。實證結果顯示，購買區位在中心都市、高單價、小面積產品、預售屋、中古屋與法／銀拍屋之購屋者，其為投資目的機率較高。此外，投資者具有搜尋時間短、年齡較長、男性、無固定職業及家庭平均月收入較高等特徵。本文運用貝氏定理得出當機率界限值為0.7時，模型預測可信度最高（投資者達72.22％，自住者達80.06％）。以2007Q4的資料作樣本外驗證，投資者預測可信度為65.52％，自住者預測可信度為84.51％。最後，模擬不同權重下，應貸而未貸以及違約與提前清償的誤差，對於金融機構個別可能造成的損失，模擬結果同樣顯示0.7為損失最少的機率界限值。英文摘要：This study investigates the government-conducted ”Housing Demand Survey” from 2006Q4 to 2007Q3 to establish a binary logit model to analyze the housing attributes, search behaviors, and investors and owner-occupiers' personal characteristics for financial institutions prediction in determining house buyer motivation and reducing the loss incurred when payment is not advanced or is defaulted. The empirical results show that the locations, prices, sizes, and types of houses are the dominant factors affecting investment probability. Investors tend to select houses located downtown with high unit prices and small in size. They also tend to buy pre-sale, resold, and auction houses. The individual attributes of buyers, such as gender, age, occupation, and income, also play an important role in investment decisions. The proposed model has the highest prediction accuracy when the probability cutoff point is 0.7 and the investors' hit rate is 65.52 % in contrast to the owner-occupiers' 84.51%, as indicated by the out-sample test. This study also determines that financial institutions incur the least loss with a cutoff point of 0.7 under different weights, when payment is not advanced or is defaulted.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.JUN.R1001814篇名：為何台灣的競價拍賣逐漸式微於初次上市市場？並列篇名：Why Taiwanese Auctions Fail in IPOs?作者：江淑貞(Sue-Jane Chiang);吳桂燕(Kuei-Yen Wu)關鍵字：初次上市;承銷方式;價格發現;IPO;underwriting method;price discovery期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：競價拍賣自1995年引進台灣股市以來，2003年只剩1家公司採用，儘管許多文獻都認為競價拍賣的價格發現功能最佳，為何實務上卻不受青睞？本文從價格發現的角度，探討台灣的競價拍賣逐漸式微的原因。實證結果顯示：相較於「全數公開申購」，台灣的競價拍賣雖具有價格發現功能，但卻有落後的情形，即在「部分競拍、部分公開申購」下，透過競拍所獲得的市場訊息因受限於「承銷價上限」之規定，無法反應在承銷價的訂定，反而是遞延到上市後導致過度反應。由本文結果推論：在台灣的競價拍賣制度下，遞延的價格發現功能，可能是競價拍賣式微的重要原因。英文摘要：From the viewpoint of price discovery, we analyzed the reason why the Taiwanese auctions decreased to only one case in 2003 since the IPOs were first allowed to use the hybrid auctions in 1995. The empirical results showed that there was no price discovery in the fixed priced offer method, but the price discovery delayed until aftermarket because there is price ceiling in the hybrid auctions. That is, the aftermarket overreaction was due to the fact that the market information from Taiwanese auction bids did not react in setting the offer price. The results suggested that the delay in price discovery was the reason why Taiwanese auctions vanished in IPOs.起始頁-結束頁：29-64資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.SEP.R1005915篇名：經理人過度自信對企業發生財務危機之影響：以家族企業特性為調節效果並列篇名：The Impact of Managerial Overconfidence on Financial Distress and Moderating Effect of Family Business Characteristics作者：洪榮華(Jung-Hua Hung);王文聖(Wen-Sheng Wang);李易政(I-Cheng Li);陳香如(Hsiang-Ju Chen);張瑋珊(Wei-Shan Chang)關鍵字：家族企業;過度自信;財務危機;family business;overconfidence;financial distress期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討經理人過度自信及家族企業特性對於企業發生財務危機的影響，並以家族企業特性做為調節變數。樣本包含2002至2007年的台灣上市櫃公司，利用Logit迴歸來檢測。結果發現，過度自信的非家族企業經理人與不具過度自信的家族企業經理人分別可降低企業發生財務危機的可能性。然而，經理人過度自信與企業發生財務危機間之關係會受到家族企業特性的正向調節，亦即過度自信的家族企業發生財務危機的可能性升高，本研究更進一步發現，此一調節效果主要來自於家族企業所聘用的家族成員經理人（家族CEO）。英文摘要：This study examines the effect of managerial overconfidence and family business characteristics on financial distress. We then investigate whether family characteristics can moderate the effect of managerial overconfidence on financial distress. Finally, we try to clarify whether there is a moderating effect related to family or non-family CEOs. The sample includes Taiwanese listed and OTC companies, and Logit regression is used for analysis. The empirical results show that overconfident CEOs in non-family businesses and non-overconfident CEOs in family businesses are significantly and negatively correlated with financial distress, respectively. However, the relationship between managerial overconfidence and financial distress is positively moderated by family business characteristics and this moderating effect is mainly caused by family CEOs.起始頁-結束頁：65-96資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.SEP.R1004316篇名：財務會計準則第35號公報與財務報表公佈時效性並列篇名：Taiwan SFAS No. 35 and Timeliness of Financial Reporting作者：范宏書(Hung-Shu Fan);林彥廷(Yan-Ting Lin);陳慶隆(Ching-Lung Chen)關鍵字：第35號公報;財務報表時效性;固定效果非平衡追蹤資料迴歸分析;SFAS No.35;financial reporting timeliness;unbalanced panel data regression analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以我國之財務會計準則第35號公報為對象，探討該公報實施後對財務報表公佈時效性的影響。文獻指出管理當局有動機為延緩資產減損之負面影響而與會計師進行協商，且若企業認列資產減損存在盈餘管理動機，預期會計師為減少其審計風險，亦會與公司針對資產減損進行協商，本研究預期此協商程序將延遲財務報表公佈。本研究實證結果顯示有認列資產減損損失的公司，相對於未認列資產減損損失的公司，會較晚公佈其財務報表，且認列減損損失金額越高的公司，其延遲公佈財務報表的時間越長。此時間落差可能擴大投資者之間資訊不對稱的程度，為新財務準則實施的潛在負面經濟效果，可提供證券主管機關評估與留意新財務會計準則公報公佈實施之可能影響。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the impact of SFAS No. 35, which regulates the accounting for the impairment of assets, on financial report lags. Prior studies document that the recognitions of asset impairments would drive stock prices down. In addition, managers might recognize the asset impairments to manipulate earnings, and earnings management would increase audit risk. To reduce this negative influence on stock prices for listed firms and audit risk for auditors, they have motivations to negotiate over the recognition of asset impairments, which, in turn, delays declaring the financial statements. Based on the unbalanced panel data-fixed effect models, the empirical results of this study support the hypothesis that financial report lags increase because of the recognition of an asset impairment, and the larger amount of the asset impairment causes the longer financial report lag. These results provide some evidence to understand the possible economic effect of SFAS No. 35 on financial reporting timeliness.起始頁-結束頁：97-131資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.SEP.R1005017篇名：員工意見表達行為：前因及其對主管績效評量之影響並列篇名：Employee Opinion Expression Behaviors: Their Antecedents and Influences on Supervisory Performance Evaluation作者：熊欣華(Hsin-Hua Hsiung);蔡年泰(Nien-Tai Tsai);陳建安(Jian-An Chen)關鍵字：建言;異議;犬儒;voice;dissent;cynicism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：管理文獻中常見意見表達方式有建言、異議與犬儒。過去研究並未深入了解不同形式之意見表達行為的性質，與其影響前因和後果的差異。因此，本研究的目的在於探討每種意見表達行為的前因與其對績效評估的影響後果，並且分析員工與主管在意見表達行為上是否具有不同觀點。本研究蒐集配對資料，以281組中學行政人員與其直屬主管為研究對象。結果發現：（1）從員工角度來說，自我效能是產生建言和異議行為的重要前因；（2）從主管角度來說，員工的自我效能與三類意見表達行為均無顯著關係，組織情感承諾才是影響意見表達的重要前因；（3）就員工角度而言，建言對主管績效評量有正向影響，異議與犬儒行為則無影響；（4）就主管角度而言，員工不同的意見表達形式會使他們給予員工不同的績效評分：建言對主管績效評量有正向影響，異議則無影響，但犬儒會有負向影響。本研究據此提出理論與實務管理之意涵。英文摘要：In management literature, voice, dissent, and cynicism are the expression forms usually mentioned. Previous studies neither deeply understand the different natures of these opinion expression behaviors, nor discuss the differences of their antecedents and outcomes. Therefore, the objective of this study is to examine the antecedents of opinion expression behaviors, investigate their influences on supervisory performance evaluation, and explore whether subordinates and supervisors have different perspectives on these behaviors. This study analyzes paired data collected from 281 administrative personnel and their direct supervisors in junior high schools. Results show that: (1) from subordinates' perspective, self-efficacy is an important factor in facilitating voice and dissent behaviors; (2) from supervisors' perspective, employee self-efficacy is not related to three kinds of opinion expression behaviors, but organizational affective commitment could affect these behaviors; (3) from subordinates' perspective, voice has a positive effect on supervisory performance evaluation, but dissent and cynicism has no effect; (4) from supervisors' perspective, various employee opinion expression behaviors result in different appraisals of employee job performance: voice has a positive effect, dissent has no effect, and cynicism has a negative effect. This study discusses the implications of these results for theory and practice.起始頁-結束頁：133-163資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.SEP.R1006118篇名：工業性產品市場製造商與客戶關係交換模型之研究並列篇名：A Dyadic Relational Model of Manufacturer-Customer in Industrial Markets作者：楊台寧(Tai-Ning Yang)關鍵字：關係承諾;關係依賴;關係價值創造;relational commitment;relational dependency;relational value creation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：在關係行銷領域有關買賣雙方之關係的文獻中，多數研究的焦點都在探討買方或賣方的單邊（One Side）關係交換，甚少探討雙邊成對關係（Dyadic Relationship）及「認知」在雙邊互動過程中對「關係交換」的影響，亦甚少研究探討關係交換理論在工業性產品市場對製造商與客戶間「關係價值創造」之適用性。本研究以關係交換理論、社會資本理論為基礎建立模型，採用台灣和大陸地區電腦、消費性電子、及通訊設備三種產業共115家製造商與其客戶之雙邊成對資料 （Dyadic Data），針對工業性產品市場廠商交易具有連續性交換（易）的特質，驗證關係交換理論的核心概念，同時探討「關係承諾」發展的循環強化過程。實證結果顯示，製造商（客戶）與其客戶（製造商）間的「關係承諾」會影響雙方的「關係依賴」，進而影響「關係價值創造」的績效，在關係發展時，依附於「關係交換」而投資的特異性（專屬性）資源會影響廠商對交換夥伴的「關係承諾」，因循環互動而逐漸強化的「關係承諾」，會受到雙方間「信任」的影響，「溝通成效」及「共同價值觀」的認知會影響雙方的「信任」。英文摘要：Most previous studies about the relationship between buyer and seller in the field of relationship marketing were mainly focused on unilateral (one side) relationship exchange. However, there are only a few studies that have investigated the applicability of relationship exchange theory to the relational value creation and explored the impact of ”cognition” on dyadic relationship exchanges process in the industry markets. This research is seeking to develop a model which applies relational exchange theory and social capital theory as conceptual foundation. It also adopts the dyadic data from 115 manufactures among the industries of computers, consumptive electronics, and communication apparatus in both Taiwan and Mainland China, with the expectation that will help to test the core notion of the dyadic relational exchange theory, in order to address the characteristics of continuing exchange between manufacturers and buyers in industrial markets. This study also intends to investigate the reciprocal process of the relational commitment between the manufacturers and buyers. The findings show that the ”relational commitment” has significant influence on their ”relationship dependency”, thereby affecting the performance effectiveness of relational value creation. In addition, the specific (exclusive) resources from investment will have impact on increasing ”relational commitment” of exchange partners. Commitment in industrial market acts as a function of a reciprocal cycle of each party's perception of the other party's commitment and is related with each partner's trust in the other. The ”communication effectiveness” and the cognition of ”share value” have impact on their ”trust” between the manufacturers (buyers) and buyers (manufacturers).起始頁-結束頁：165-198資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.OCT.R1101919篇名：區位優勢、吸收能耐與創新績效：研發子公司之觀點並列篇名：Locational Advantages, Absorptive Capacity and Innovation Performance: The R&D Subsidiary View作者：張元杰(Yuan-Chieh Chang);李亭林(Ting-Lin Lee);簡文強(Wen-Chiang Chieng);秦子閔(Tzu-Min Chin)關鍵字：區位優勢;吸收能耐;創新績效;locational advantages;absorptive capacity;innovation performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：在跨國企業漸赴開發中國家佈局研發的趨勢下，台灣也成為跨國企業研發佈局的重鎮。然而，目前研究較少以系統動態學探討跨國企業海外研發中心如何吸收地主國區位優勢，進而改善其創新績效之動態與複雜現象。經文獻探討四大區位優勢與吸收能耐相關理論，提出了區位優勢－吸收能耐－創新績效之研究架構，並進一步根據經濟部國外研發中心2003－2008年的資料，以系統動態（System Dynamics）模型模擬至2013年，本研究發現：（1）海外研發中心對地主國區位優勢的吸收能耐，對其研發績效有正向的影響；（2）研發中心爭取到更多的當地政府補助金額，會提升其新產品開發數與營收，並進一步帶動在地主國下一波研發投資的良性循環。最後，對海外研發子公司的管理與地主國政策 提供建議。英文摘要：In the rise of multinational enterprises (MNEs) establishing overseas R&D centers in the developing countries, Taiwan has become one of favorable destinations. However, there is little research to discuss how overseas R&D centers absorb locational advantages of the host countries and, in turn, enhance their innovation performance. Through literature reviews, this paper examines absorptive capacity and synthesizes four types of locational advantages: (1) industrial clusters, (2) talent pool, (3) research base, and (4) government support. Then, a system dynamic model of locational advantage-absorptive capacity-innovation performance is proposed. Via MOEA's MNE R&D Center Program Database and interviews with top managers of MNE R&D centers, the dataset of 38 MNEs R&D centers from 2003 to 2008 is gathered. The systemic dynamic simulations reveal: (1) all four absorptive capacities corresponding four locational advantages positively influence innovation performance of R&D centers; (2) government subsidy significantly increases R&D hires, and R&D networks with local innovative actors. Finally, some managerial and policy implications for MNEs R&D subsidiaries to absorb locational advantages in Taiwan are provided.起始頁-結束頁：199-231資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.OCT.R1005320篇名：The Majority/Minority Effect on Product Judgment: Moderation of Involvement and Source Relevance並列篇名：多數／少數效果對產品判斷的影響：涉入與資訊來源相關性的干擾效果作者：簡怡雯(Yi-Wen Chien);蕭中強(Chung-Chiang Hsiao);邱玉葉(Yu-Yeh Chiu)關鍵字：多數／少數效果;來源相關性;涉入;majority/minority effect;source relevance;involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討多數／少數效果對產品態度的影響，是否會受到涉入程度以及訊息相關性的干擾。我們認為在不同涉入程度之下，多數／少數訊息來源對產品態度的影響能扮演不同角色。在低涉入之下，多數／少數訊息來源被視為一種週邊線索，可以直接影響產品態度；在中涉入之下，多數／少數訊息來源會影響消費者處理產品訊息的程度；在高涉入之下，當多數／少數訊息來源與判斷產品的品質相關時，就會被視為是核心論點之一，並會偏誤對所有核心論點的處理。本文為首先提出整合架構，解釋多數／少數效果在低中高三種涉入程度下以不同機制影響產品判斷的研究。英文摘要：This study investigates the majority/minority effects on product attitudes with involvement and source relevance as moderators. We posit that the majority/minority source can play different roles affecting product judgments at different involvement levels. It can serve as a peripheral cue directly influencing product attitudes under low involvement; it can alter the processing amount under moderate involvement; finally, it can serve as a central argument and bias processing if it is perceived as relevant to judging the true quality of the target product under high involvement. The current study is the first to provide an integrated framework to explain the different mechanisms by which the majority/minority may influence product judgments under three involvement levels (low, moderate, and high).起始頁-結束頁：233-261資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.NOV.R1000101篇名：族群發展導向積極賦權行動與原住民族並列篇名：A Theory of Affirmative Action for Group Development and Indigenous Peoples作者：陳張培倫(Pei-Lun Chen Chang)關鍵字：積極賦權行動;升學優待;原住民族;族群發展;自決權;affirmative action;preferential admission;indigenous peoples;group development;self-determination期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：針對正當性備受爭議的原住民升學優待或保障議題，本文嘗試從原住民族權利內涵之發展，以及本土與美國社會相關議題之演進，建構一套以原住民族自決權為基礎的族群發展導向積極賦權行動理論。在此理論詮釋下，升學優待已非單純的個人權利問題，而被賦予了集體權利性質。亦即該政策正當性，主要係基於培育民族發展人才藉以實踐原住民族自決權此一理由。在此理論觀照下的升學優待政策，較有可能避免以往單純就個人權利思維所衍生難以解決的諸多爭議。當然，基於其為民族自決的一個環節，勢必要求政策受益者展現一定的族群認同與責任，其政策設計方向也要有相應之變革。英文摘要：Based on the development of indigenous rights and social context in Taiwan and US, a new theory about affirmative action for indigenous development could be constructed. In this new theory, because the preferential admission policy is one part of indigenous self-determination, it is primarily a policy implementing collective rights of indigenous peoples. The policy based on this new theory could resolve traditional disputes focus only on the perspective of individual right. Of course, in order to fulfill the aim of self-determination, the new preferential policy will require indigenous applicants showing their group identity and obligation to indigenous peoples.起始頁-結束頁：1-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320131200470012篇名：從審議民主到後國族民主：哈伯馬斯民主理論的發展與反思並列篇名：From Deliberative Democracy to Postnational Democracy: Reflections on Jurgen Habermas's Democratic Theory作者：陳閔翔(Min-Siang Chen);黃瑞祺(Richard Ruey-Chyi Hwang)關鍵字：哈伯馬斯;審議民主;後國族民主;溝通自由;公共領域;Jurgen Habermas;deliberative democracy;postnational democracy;communicative freedom;public sphere期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文企圖沿著「審議民主」到「後國族民主」的發展脈絡，對哈伯馬斯的民主理論進行更寬廣的闡釋，以揭示其對政治實踐的應用意義。當代民主理論的發展過程中，「審議民主」是一個廣受推崇的概念，而哈伯馬斯則是完整構築審議民主理論的學者之一：一方面，他的「審議民主」強調公民社會的自由溝通與行動，補強了選舉式民主的制度侷限；另一方面，「審議民主」透過公民會議及各種生活世界的參與途徑，成為具實踐特質的民主理論。更為重要的是，晚近面對全球化的國際秩序變化與歐盟整合，哈伯馬斯也積極做出回應，進一步提倡「後國族民主」，來作為超越民族國家界線的政治理念。藉由追溯哈伯馬斯從「審議民主」到「後國族民主」之間的民主思想軌跡，我們可以看到哈伯馬斯如何貫徹他為溝通自由提供一個政治制度框架的努力。換言之，疏理其民主理論的後續發展是必要的，因為近幾年哈伯馬斯關注國際局勢，主要的理論目標正是在思考如何構想從國內到國際的合理政治架構，以符合且實現他對公民參與公共領域的溝通理想，因此，本文最後也會針對他的民主理論進行階段性的反思與評價。英文摘要：This article aims to trace the development from deliberative democracy to postnational democracy in Jurgen Habermas. For Habermas, deliberative democracy is not only an institutional project of modernity but also one of the well-known theories of modern democracy. At the start of the 21st century he suggests a new political idea, postnational democracy, which is beyond the nation-states in a globalized age. This article tries to re-examine Habermas's democratic theory from deliberative democracy to postnational democracy and points out its implications. There are three parts of our arguments. The first part investigates the communicative reason, communicative freedom, discourse, and explores the significance of public sphere and civil society for deliberative democracy. The second part is its praxis, we focus on constitutional patriotism and postnational democracy in order to analyze the international application of democracy. The final part of this article is the reflections of democracy, which articulate the contributions and limitations of Habermas's democratic theory by discussing two questions: ”Is there any difference between deliberative democracy and constitutional democracy?” and ”Is postnational democracy a universal concept?”.起始頁-結束頁：65-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320131200470023篇名：人格權威與政治秩序的形成：論權威與權力之區分在Carl Schmitt秩序理論與民主理論中的意義並列篇名：The Personal Authority and the Formation of Political Order: On the Significance of the Distinction of Power/Authority in Carl Schmitt's Order and Democratic Theory作者：鍾芳樺(Fang-Hua Chung)關鍵字：權力;權威;代表;政治秩序;民主;authority;power;representation;political order;democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文想要指出，Schmitt如何透過權力與權威這組概念的區分，來解釋秩序如何形成與維持的問題，並且進一步指出這個區分對於Schmitt民主（作為一種政治形式）理論的意義。Schmitt在他的理論中，區分開權力與權威兩種維持秩序的方式：權力是指獲取保護與服從關係的機制，而權威則是指能代表民族秩序理念，進行政治判斷的人格權威。從秩序理論的觀點來看，權力成為秩序內在性的基礎，而人格權威提供了秩序所需要的超越性基礎，表徵了秩序總體，解決了機械論、內在論秩序觀的問題；針對民主理論，Schmitt透過權威與權力的區分，說明了他的領袖民主制，並且證立了領袖在民主制度下的重要性。權威與權力的區分指出權威領袖的重要性，這也是Schmitt理論所要達成的意識形態目的。英文摘要：The distinction of concept of authority and power plays an important role in Carl Schmitt's theory of order and democracy. As Ernst R. Huber says, it is Carl Schmitt's important contribution for Germany theory of State. In Schmitt's political theory, power and authority are two different ways to constitute and preserve the political order. The function of power is to build the relation of the protection and obedience, and this relation establishes the foundation of the political order. The transcend authority of political leader can represent the idea of political order, and to prevent the abuse of technical power. In Schmitt's theory of democracy, the distinction of concept of authority and power legitimate the theory of leader-democracy (Caesarism). Leader, who owes the authority of political community, can direct the political orientation of people, and make the decision in extraordinary situation.起始頁-結束頁：119-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201312004700301篇名：The Majority/Minority Effect on Product Judgment: Moderation of Involvement and Source Relevance並列篇名：多數／少數效果對產品判斷的影響：涉入與資訊來源相關性的干擾效果作者：簡怡雯(Yi-Wen Chien);蕭中強(Chung-Chiang Hsiao);邱玉葉(Yu-Yeh Chiu)關鍵字：多數／少數效果;來源相關性;涉入;majority/minority effect;source relevance;involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討多數／少數效果對產品態度的影響，是否會受到涉入程度以及訊息相關性的干擾。我們認為在不同涉入程度之下，多數／少數訊息來源對產品態度的影響能扮演不同角色。在低涉入之下，多數／少數訊息來源被視為一種週邊線索，可以直接影響產品態度；在中涉入之下，多數／少數訊息來源會影響消費者處理產品訊息的程度；在高涉入之下，當多數／少數訊息來源與判斷產品的品質相關時，就會被視為是核心論點之一，並會偏誤對所有核心論點的處理。本文為首先提出整合架構，解釋多數／少數效果在低中高三種涉入程度下以不同機制影響產品判斷的研究。英文摘要：This study investigates the majority/minority effects on product attitudes with involvement and source relevance as moderators. We posit that the majority/minority source can play different roles affecting product judgments at different involvement levels. It can serve as a peripheral cue directly influencing product attitudes under low involvement; it can alter the processing amount under moderate involvement; finally, it can serve as a central argument and bias processing if it is perceived as relevant to judging the true quality of the target product under high involvement. The current study is the first to provide an integrated framework to explain the different mechanisms by which the majority/minority may influence product judgments under three involvement levels (low, moderate, and high).起始頁-結束頁：233-261資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.NOV.R100012篇名：運用能力集合擴展規劃產品生產程序並列篇名：Competence Set Expansion for Production Process Planning作者：蔡榮發(Jung-Fa Tsai);王佩淳(Pei-Chun Wang);蔡宛玲(Wan-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：能力集合擴展;生產程序規劃;最佳化;competence set expansion;production process planning;optimization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究運用能力集合擴展概念，視一生產系統中所有生產程序為解決產品製造問題所需的能力集合，依據生產規劃所需考量的目標分別提出三項產品生產程序規劃模型：單一產品之生產程序規劃模型、多廠合作之生產程序規劃模型以及技術水準最佳化之生產程序規劃模型。此外，本研究求解生產程序規劃模型之多重解，以提昇生產程序規劃的彈性。本研究之主要貢獻為：（1）運用能力集合擴展方法以解決產品生產程序規劃問題；（2）求解三項生產程序規劃模型之多重解並以推導圖呈現所得之結果。研究結果顯示所提出的方法確實可有效解決生產程序規劃問題，並找出所有的最佳生產程序以增加使用上的彈性，推導圖所呈現之結果更進一步強化使用的方便性，範例說明也驗證了所提方法之正確性與可行性。英文摘要：This study utilizes competence set expansion to solve production process planning problems by treating all production skills as the competence set of the production system. Aimed at different objectives, three models are formulated such as manufacturing cost minimization model, production collaboration model of multi-plant facility and multi-level skill model of manufacturing process optimization. Furthermore, multiple solutions of the problems are derived to find out all alternative manufacturing processes. The main contributions of this study include applying competence set expansion to solve production process planning problems, obtaining multiple optimal solutions of the constructed models and visualizing the obtained results by deduction graphs. The research results reveal that the proposed method can effectively solve the production process planning problems and get all optimal production processes. The deduction graph also enhances the usability of the presented method. Moreover, several examples are used to illustrate the correctness and usefulness of the proposed methods.起始頁-結束頁：263-296資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.FEB.R100153篇名：部屬親信關係知覺對其行為的影響：正義知覺的中介角色並列篇名：The Influences of Chinxin Relationship Perceptions on Subordinate Behaviors: Justice Perceptions as a Mediator作者：許金田(Chin-Tien Hsu);廖紘億(Hong-Yi Liao);胡秀華(Hsiu-Hua Hu);游謦銘(Ching-Mine Yu)關鍵字：親信關係知覺;正義知覺;員工行為;chinxin relationship perceptions;justice perceptions;organizational citizenship behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以華人社會特有的差序格局理論為基礎，探討部屬本身與主管的親信關係知覺對其行為（即：組織公民行為與組織政治行為）的影響，並檢視正義知覺的中介效果。研究者透過問卷調查法針對南部地區中醫院所的中醫師與護理人員之配對樣本進行研究，共計回收有效配對問卷236份。研究結果顯示，部屬的親信關係知覺愈佳，其正義知覺與組織公民行為愈多，而其組織政治行為愈少；此外，正義知覺在親信關係知覺與組織公民行為間具有部份中介效果，而在親信關係知覺與組織政治行為間則具有完全中介效果。最後，討論本研究的意涵、研究限制及未來研究方向。英文摘要：Adopting a perspective of difference matrices theory, the aim of this paper was to examine the association among chinxin relationship perceptions, justice perceptions, organizational citizenship behavior, and organizational political behavior. This study used data collected from a field survey of 236 doctor-nurse matched dyads from Chinese medical clinics of southern areas in Taiwan to test a framework of influences of chinxin relationship perceptions. Results indicated chinxin relationship perceptions positively related to employees' justice perceptions and organizational citizenship behavior, but negatively related to their political behavior. Furthermore, justice perceptions partially mediated the relationship between chinxin relationship perceptions and organizational citizenship behavior, and fully mediated the relationship between chinxin relationship perception and political behavior. Finally, the implications, limitations and suggestions for future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：297-325資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.DEC.R100474篇名：「組織內與組織間治理」的本質與策略意涵並列篇名：Intra-and Inter-organizational Governance: The Nature and Strategic Implications作者：莊正民(Cheng-Min Chuang);方世杰(Shih-Chieh Fang)關鍵字：組織治理;雙元治理;治理策略;organizational governance;dual governance;governance for strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷S1期出版年：2013中文摘要：有關「治理」的概念，一直都是組織研究學者持續關注的課題，治理問題之存在，本質上乃基於組織內與組織間分工、並進行交換與生產活動，所必然衍生之管理課題。唯由於「治理」所涉及之研究領域與課題極廣，長期以來組織研究學者對於此一概念之理論與實務意涵，尚未有一致之共識。建立在組織經濟學之基礎上，本文將以組織內與組織間之交換與生產活動為主軸，嘗試釐清組織研究學者所稱「組織治理」之本質與理論意涵。此外，本文亦將進一步以組織策略研究領域為例，論述「治理」之策略性觀點及其在策略課題研究之角色，進而簡要地概述本專刊所刊登五篇論文之組織治理議題的內涵與理論邏輯。最後，則針對專刊論文並未涉獵，唯對未來具潛力之研究議題，提出研究主題與方向上之建議與結論。英文摘要：Regarding the idea of ”governance” is still attracting continuously concerns by researchers of organization studies. The existence of governance problems derived from the division of labor, exchange and production activities within and between organizations. Owing to the scope of governance related research fields and issues is broad, there is no consistent agreement about the theoretical and practical implications of governance for a long time. Based on organizational economics, this paper tries to clarify the nature and theoretical background of organization governance by the perspectives of exchange and production activities within and between organizations. Moreover, this paper further discusses the strategic perspectives of governance and the role of governance in strategy research to introduce the content and theoretical logics of organization governance issues in the five published paper of this special issue. Finally, we provide suggestions and conclusion for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAR.OG5篇名：Board Structure and Firm International Diversification: The Moderating Effects of Institutional Forces並列篇名：董事會結構與企業國際多角化：體制力量的調節效果作者：謝存瑞(Tsun-Jui Hsieh);鍾憲瑞(Hsien-Jui Chung);黃佑安(Yu-An Huang)關鍵字：董事會結構;國際多角化;體制理論;board structure;internationa diversification;institutional theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷S1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討董事會結構與企業國際多角化的關係，並且檢測董事會規模、國際董事、獨立董事與機構董事對於企業國際多角化的影響；除此之外，本文亦進一步探討體制力量對於董事會結構與企業國際多角化的調節效果。本研究以台灣上市企業為樣本，實證結果發現董事會規模、國際董事、獨立董事與機構董事會影響企業國際多角化，而且體制力量對於董事會結構與企業國際多角化的關係具有部份的調節效果；本文之研究發現對於目前公司治理、國際多角化以及董事會策略決策程序的相關文獻具有理論與實證上的貢獻。英文摘要：This paper investigates how board structure affects firm international diversification and examines the effects of board structure, including board size, international director, independent director, and institutional director on firm international diversification. This study further investigates the moderating effects of institutional forces on the relationships between board structure and firm international diversification. Using a sample of Taiwanese firms, the results show that board attributes are significantly associated with firm international diversification and that institutional forces partially moderate the relationships between board structure and firm international diversification. This study contributes to the growing literature in the field of strategic management by demonstrating the effect of institutional forces on the strategic board decision-making process.起始頁-結束頁：25-56資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.SEP.OG0126篇名：醫院治理機制與效能之研究並列篇名：Hospital Governance Mechanisms and Hospital Governance Effectiveness作者：嚴玉華(Yu-Hua Yan);楊鎮維(Chen-Wei Yang)關鍵字：醫院治理;治理機制;治理效能;hospital governance;governance mechanism;management effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷S1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在發展並實證醫院治理理論模型，為此，本研究整合組織治理與代理理論文獻並檢驗醫院治理機制（董事會結構、資訊揭露透明及決策機制）與醫院治理效能（財務、顧客、內部流程、學習與成長及社會責任效能）的關係。本研究以次級資料分析102家醫療法人醫院之醫院治理相關指標，實證結果發現：（1）董事會決策機制及醫院資訊揭露愈透明，對於醫院治理效能具有正向影響；（2）董事會治理結構、董事會規模、家族實務意涵並建議未來研究方向。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to develop and examine the theoretical model of hospital governance. For this purpose, this study integrates the literature of organizational governance and agency theory to empirically test the relationship between hospital governance mechanisms (structure of board of directors, information disclosure, and decision making) and hospital governance effectiveness (financial, customer, internal process, learning and growth, and social responsibility). This study empirically tested hospital governance related indices from 102 hospitals by using secondary data. The results find that (1) information disclosure and decision making of hospital governance mechanisms are positively related to its governance effectiveness, and (2) the relationship between the structures of board of directors and its governance effectiveness is non-significant. The theoretical and managerial implications and suggestions of future study are provided at the end of this study.起始頁-結束頁：57-82資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.SEP.OG0187篇名：組織間統治之雙面兼具：價值創造與價質保護並列篇名：Ambidexterity in Interorganizational Governance: Value Creation and Value Protection作者：楊舒蜜(Shu-Mi Yang);周家慧(Chia-Hui Chou)關鍵字：組織間統治;雙面兼具;知識交換與保護;interorganizational governance;ambidexterity;knowledge exchange and protection期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷S1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在組織間關係中，同時兼顧知識交換與合併（價值創造）以及核心專屬知識的保護（價值保護）是相當重要的組織間統治課題。揆諸過去相關的研究可發現，學者大多視知識交換與合併以及知識保護為相互排斥的活動，因此鮮少探討合作廠商應設計哪些統治機制以達雙面兼具。本研究將組織雙面兼具之概念延伸應用至組織間關係之情境中探討，並依據認知觀點與關係基礎觀點提出有助於組織間合作之雙面兼具（知識交換與合併以及知識保護）之程序性統治機制。經本研究實證發現，共同認知活動的先驗知識分享與共同詮釋有助於知識交換與合併；相互承諾的聯合活動有助於知識保護，而互惠投資對於知識保護無顯著影響；雙面兼具（知識交換與合併以及知識保護）正向影響合作利益之創造。最後，本研究就理論與實務意涵加以討論，並提出未來研究的建議。英文摘要：Facilitating knowledge exchange and combination and simultaneously safeguarding core proprietary knowledge are important in interorganizational relationship. However, prior studies have often regarded knowledge exchange and combination and knowledge protection as two conflicting activities. Few studies have discussed the mechanisms that can help firms achieve both of them. In this study, we extend the concept of ambidexterity to the interorganizational relationship context and suggest some mechanisms that can enhance knowledge exchange and combination and knowledge protection. According to the empirical results, prior knowledge sharing and shared interpretation are positively associated with knowledge exchange and combination. Joint actions influences knowledge protection, while reciprocal investment has no effect on knowledge protection. Besides, ambidexterity (the product term of knowledge exchange and combination and knowledge protection) has significant effect on cooperative benefits. Finally, we discuss implications of this research and offer suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：83-110資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.OCT.OG0238篇名：知識治理研究理論之反思：活動基礎觀點並列篇名：A Theoretical Reconciliation for Knowledge Governance Research: An Activity-Based Perspective作者：蔡旻恭(Heavens Min-Kung Tsai);張婉菁(April Wan-Jing Chang);戴士欽(Shih-Chin Tai)關鍵字：知識治理;微觀基礎;活動基礎觀點;knowledge governance;microfoundations;activity-based perspective期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷S1期出版年：2013中文摘要：源自交易成本經濟學之組織治理論學者，嘗試將組織知識議題納入理論中，而發展出知識治理觀點。但其二大基本前提─理性資訊處理認知觀暨方法論個體主義－均面臨哲學與實務之爭議，進而衍生出解釋矛盾及邏輯兩難。同時亦導致跨層次闡釋、整合交易成本經濟學與知識基礎觀點之嘗試未竟全功。本文擬提出以活動為基礎架構之論述，紮深哲學基礎以確立活動在本體論暨認識論之地位，檢視以資訊處理認知模式為主之知識治理觀點，重新探討以活動為基礎之知識治理機制，最後提出豐實組織研究理論暨實務意涵之立論。英文摘要：Governance theorists, rooted in transaction cost economics (TCE), tend to integrate the issues of knowledge-based views (KBV) into their theory development, and then knowledge governance approach (KGA) emerges. Since relying upon two underlying assumptions-rational information processing perspective and distinct microfoundations, KGA advocates have confronted with the challenge in respective of philosophical and practice issues. Relying on the explanation model advocated by James Coleman, KGA theorists face a dilemma of accepting methodological individualism or committing logical fallacies. Since the theoretical and practical foundations are not revisited through deliberating the underlying philosophy and addressing the arguable fundamental issues, the attempt at explaining organizational phenomena across different levels and integrating TCE and KBV has not succeeded yet. In this article, we attempt to provide an activity-based perspective (ABP) for some reorientation of the philosophical stands in organization studies, to build up the ontological and epistemological foundations of activity, and to situate the contextualized activities at the core of theoretical development. We, then, discuss issues of underlying philosophical positions and the theoretical reconstruction of knowledge governance, and finally conclude with implications of the new perspective for organization study.起始頁-結束頁：111-134資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.MAR.OG0279篇名：網絡組織間關係治理的搭架：行動者網絡理論的動態觀點並列篇名：Structuring of Interorganizational Relationship Network Governance: A Dynamic Perspective from Actor-Network Theory作者：周信輝(Hsin-Hui Chou);蔡志豪(Chih-Hao Tsai)關鍵字：網絡組織間關係治理;行動者網絡理論;IC半導體產業;IORs of network governance;actor-network theory;Taiwan's semiconductor industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：23卷S1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本網絡組織間關係治理的相關研究不但受到廣泛的注意，且已發展出重要的理論觀點。然而，過去研究對於組織間關係的浮現歷程與網絡結構搭架（Structuring）的為何與如何卻缺乏相關深入的論述，以致於難以認識網絡組織間關係治理的本質與內涵。本研究透由行動者網絡理論的動態與歷程觀點，詮釋組織間關係的發展乃是異質行動者在行動展演與轉譯下，如何對問題建立共識，進行利益配置並且相互拉攏以形成穩定的網絡秩序之歷程。本研究以半導體技術引進與技術發展歷程作為田野資料，描繪組織間網絡治理的搭架歷程，提出以下兩點不同於傳統治理觀點的研究發現。第一，網絡組織間關係治理結構是行動者轉譯機制下的生態演化；第二，非人的行動者是網絡關係發展的內生變數。最後，本研究亦藉此提出相關的理論與實務意涵，進一步充實組織間網絡治理觀點的內涵。英文摘要：Research on interorganizational relationship (IORs) network governance has received wide attention and has led to some important theoretical perspectives. Nevertheless, past research on the whys and wherefores of the ”emerging” process of IORs and its network structuring has lacked relevant in-depth discussion, making it difficult to understand the nature and content of IORs network governance. Our research uses the dynamics and process perspectives of actor-network theory (ANT) to explain the development of IORs as a structuring process, which was performed and translated by heterogeneous actors in action to build consensus, deploy interests and enroll each other to form a stable network. Our research uses field data on the introduction and development of technology in Taiwan semiconductor industry to describe the process of structuring IORs network governance. Accordingly, we propose the following two findings that differ from the traditional view of governance. Firstly, the structuring of IORs network governance evolves from the actors' interaction with their environment through the mechanism of ”translation.”; secondly, nonhuman actors are endogenous variables in the development of IORs. Also, we raise some relevant theoretical and practical implications to augment the IORs network governance perspective.起始頁-結束頁：135-163資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2013.DEC.OG02801篇名：從「實驗田」到「遍地開花」：中國開發區制度傳散的社會學新制度論分析並列篇名：From "Experimental Field" to "Springing Up all over the Place": A Sociological Neo-Institutional Account of the Diffusion of "Development Zone" in China作者：陳明祺(Ming-Chi Chen)關鍵字：開發區;制度傳散;新制度論;政治社會正當性;認知正當性;development zone;institutional diffusion;sociological neo-institutionalism;socio-political legitimacy;cognitive legitimacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：改革開放以來，闢建開發區招商引資在中國逐漸制度化成為主流地方發展策略，一方面帶動了快速的經濟成長，但同時也因為大規模圈地拆遷，造成不少失地農民與對抗衝突的事件。此一主題雖然重要，但關於開發區做為一種地方經濟發展的制度的研究卻是不多，既有的研究主要從政治經濟學的觀點出發，分析開發區從少數人探索採行的「實驗田」到各地不顧本身條件紛紛仿效而造成的制度擴散的過程，兩個主要觀點分別強調地方之間的競爭和地方官員因為對上級審批的預期而採行相關行動。「地方競爭論」和「分段解除管制論」各著重水平的「地方─地方」和垂直的「中央─地方」兩條分析軸線之一，對於開發區制度傳散的起伏也未能提供全面的解釋。本文採取社會學新制度論的觀點，以「正當性」為核心概念分析開發區做為一種制度在中國傳散的過程。本文追溯開發區制度的演進過程，提出相關數據資料分析，並以蘇南開發區群為例來說明「社會政治正當性」和「認知正當性」各自的效果以及其交互作用如何塑造開發區制度擴散的動態。英文摘要：Ever since the beginning of the reform era, building development zones to attract foreign capital has gradually institutionalized and become the mainstream strategic choice for many localities in China. This strategy has propelled China's fast economic growth, one the one hand. On the other hand, out of the hunger to develop these zones, Chinese local governments have requisitioned the farm lands and dispossessed the farmers, which led to many protests and social disturbance. Existing analyses mostly examine the diffusion of development models from the perspectives of political economics. The ”local competition” model argues that it is the competition among localities that lead to the ”zone fever”, while the ”segmented deregulation” framework stresses that local governments saw zone building as a critical strategy to internationalize their local economies in anticipating approvals from their superiors in the provincial governments. Both views explain only parts of the social process of institutional diffusion. This paper employs the sociological neo-institutionalism and analyzes the zone fever resulting from institutional diffusion of development zones in China. The legitimacy of the development zone plays a key role in this diffusion process. This paper distinguishes between cognitive and sociopolitical legitimacy -two distinct yet intertwined sources of institutionalization. These arguments are empirically tested by using quantitative as well as qualitative methods. Research found that new institutional sociological perspective gains more support than the other two.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201312_56(4).00012篇名：中國大陸建政初期的「黨政分工合作」模式之探討並列篇名：Party-State Relations in China in the Early 1950s: A Model of Collaboration作者：趙建民(Chien-Min Chao);張鈞智(Chun-Chih Chang)關鍵字：三反運動:政務會議:黨政分工合作;黨組;Party Committee;Party-State Relations;the State Council;Three-Antis Campaign期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：1980年代中國大陸開始改革經濟體制前，其政治制度最為人詬病的，便是「黨政不分」或「以黨代政」的問題。然而，中共建政之初並非如此，當時的黨政關係既非一元也非二元，而是一種極為特殊的黨政分工合作模式，這種特殊的黨政模式，使得1950年代初期中國大陸得以兼顧經濟發展與群眾動員的雙重目標。當時政府內的黨組與非政府的黨組織有某種程度的分工，使得政務得以持續推展，黨組織的主要任務，在於指導群眾動員工作，黨政維持正常運作。本文以1951-1952年「三反」為例，說明建政初期政務推動和群眾動員之間互動關係。「三反」期間，新成立的「中央人民政府節約檢查委員會」和「中共中央一級機關總黨委」負責群眾動員，但「政務院黨組幹事會」與「政務院政務會議」的合作未受到太大影響，政務院不僅能主導經濟政策，也發揮了恢復社會秩序的重要功能，避免群眾運動的擴大化和激進化。英文摘要：Before economic reforms in the 1980s, the fact that the CCP played too dominant a role at the expenses of the government has been the most troubling phenomenon in China's political system. Based on the case of the ”Three-Antis” campaign in the early 1950s, the article finds a different scenario. Contrary to the prevailing totalitarian model developed during Mao's era, the article argues that the two, the party and the state, were actually collaborative to the achievements of economic development and mass mobilization simultaneously. This collaborative mode was made possible because the State Council's Party Committee, or ”dangzhu”, acted as the agent of the CCP sheltering the work of the government from being disrupted by the Party, whereas cooperative nonetheless in conducting mass movements with the Party leading the charge. The case of the ”Three-Antis” campaign elucidates the mechanism of the division of labor. Two agencies-the Commission for Frugality Inspection in the Central People's Government and the General Committee of the Departments under the CCP Central Committee-were established for the purpose of mass mobilization. In the meantime, the State Council's Party Committee was able to fully cooperate with the Council. In the end, the mass were not agitated and radicalized as many other similar campaigns had exhibited later on.起始頁-結束頁：37-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201312_56(4).00023篇名：誰在乎人民幣？並列篇名：Who Cares about Renminbi?作者：黃志典(Jyh-Dean Hwang)關鍵字：人民幣;東亞貨幣;權重推估法;綜合推估法;Renminbi;East Asian currencies;Weight-inference approach;Flexibility-inference approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：由於中國在世界經濟上的影響力與日俱增，加上中國政府近年來積極推動人民幣國際化的政策，人民幣是否能成為主要國際貨幣已經成為世人矚目的焦點。本文目的在探討人民幣在東亞匯率關係中所扮演的角色，藉由「權重推估法」（weight-inference approach）與結合「權重推估法」與「匯率浮動程度推估法」（flexibility-inference approach）之「綜合推估法」（the synthesized approach），以2005年7月24日到2012年4月30日的日資料、週資料及月資料進行實證分析，並對實證結果進行一系列的穩固性檢定，包括迴歸結果的穩定性檢定、剔除離群值（outliers）的影響、使用「拔靴法／自助法」（bootstrap method）進行5,000次重覆抽樣並重新進行迴歸、使用不同的計價標準（numeraire）、使用不同期間的樣本、取消通貨籃內定錨貨幣的權重總和等於1的限制、使用週平均匯率與月平均匯率重新進行估計，以確認本文的實證發現與結論是否可信。本文實證結果顯示，美元在東亞地區仍然位居主導地位。先前研究這個議題的論文幾乎都使用日資料進行分析，並得出中國在2005年7月21日實施匯率改革之後，人民幣對東亞地區的匯率已經有舉足輕重的影響，在東亞地區成為僅次於美元的國際貨幣的結論。本文發現，以日資料進行分析，人民幣對東亞地區的匯率影響確實相當可觀，但是一旦使用週資料進行分析，人民幣對東亞地區的匯率影響力其實相當小，如果使用月資料進行分析，人民幣則毫無影響力。本文研究結果顯示人民幣對東亞匯率的影響力相當有限，除了在極短期之外，人民幣對東亞的匯率決定並沒有扮演重要的角色。本文的發現與既有文獻截然不同，基於正文解釋的兩個理由，本文的發現應該比較合理與可信。人民幣成為主要國際貨幣的潛力誠然相當可觀，但是現在還很難看到人民幣影響東亞匯率關係的痕跡。英文摘要：The growing importance of the Chinese economy, coupled with the policy initiatives taken by the Chinese government to internationalize the Chinese renminbi, has raised the possibility of a rise of the renminbi as an international currency. Built on the weight-inference approach and a synthesis of the weight-inference and flexibility-inference approaches, this paper investigates the role of the Chinese renminbi in the exchange rate arrangements in East Asia. Daily, weekly and monthly exchange rate data from July 24, 2005 to April 30, 2012 are used for empirical analysis. To sharpen our estimation results, we have done extensive robustness checks: the CUSUM test of the least-square residuals is employed to check if the estimated coefficients are stable; outliers are identified using the studentized residuals (RStudent) and models are re-estimated excluding the outliers; models are re-estimated using moving-block bootstrap method with 5,000 repetitions; models are re-estimated using alternative numeraire; models are re-estimated using contiguous data; models are re-estimated without imposing the adding up constraint on the weights of the anchor currencies in the currency basket; models are re-estimated using weekly average and monthly average data. Our results reaffirm the dominant position of the US dollar in East Asia. In sharp contrast to the results reported in previous studies using daily data, we find that the Chinese renminbi has little influence on the exchange rate movements of East Asian currencies when weekly data are used for analysis and does not have significant weighting for any of the East Asian currencies when monthly data are used. Our results indicate that beyond the very short term, the renminbi does not play a significant role in the exchange rate determination in East Asia. Compared with previous studies, our findings are more reasonable in view of the reasons detailed in the preceding text. There is no doubt that the Chinese renminbi has tremendous potential to become a major international currency, yet its footprint on the exchange rate arrangements in East Asia can hardly be seen now.起始頁-結束頁：67-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201312_56(4).00034篇名：中國大陸對外投資的動機與差異化戰略分析並列篇名：Analysis of the Motivations and Differentiation Strategies in the Chinese Outward Foreign Direct Investment作者：郭建中(Jiann-Jong Guo);王國臣(Guo-Chen Wang)關鍵字：對外直接投資;追蹤資料模型;中國大陸制度分析;差異化戰略;Outward Foreign Direct Investment (OFDI);Panel Data Model;Institutional Analysis with Chinese Characteristics;DifferentiationStrategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文建構中國大陸企業對外投資的政策分析架構，並運用一般化最小平方法，檢證中國大陸企業海外投資的動機與策略。研究時間為2003年至2010年，對象包括128個國家。實證結果顯示：中國大陸企業海外投資的動機符合政策目標，並呈現差異化現象，即鎖定先進國家的市場、戰略資產與技術，而開發中國家則為天然資源。同時，中國大陸政府還給予開發中國家外援，降低其企業在當地的政治風險。換言之，中國大陸對外投資政策與制度具有影響力。英文摘要：The aim of this study is to apply the policy analysis approach with Chinese characteristics, and to adopt the generalized least squares (GLS) method to examine the motivations and strategies of the Chinese outward foreign direct investment (OFDI) in 128 foreign countries (regions) during 2003-2010. The primary findings are that the Chinese OFDI motives are in line with its state policy objectives and also appear to contain differentiation strategies. It means that the Chinese OFDI aimed at the markets, strategic assets and technology in the advanced countries; while looking for natural resources in developing countries. In addition, the Chinese government applied the official development assistance (ODA) to the developing countries in order to reduce local political risks for its OFDI. In general, the Chinese state policies and institutions have influences on its OFDI abroad.起始頁-結束頁：97-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201312_56(4).00045篇名：中國大陸七大地區外人直接投資於電子業之生產效率與技術外溢效果之研究並列篇名：An Analysis on Production Efficiency and Spill-Over Effect by Foreign Direct Investment on Electronic Industry in Seven Major Regions of Mainland China作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);郭芳倩(Fang-Cian Guo)關鍵字：外人直接投資;隨機邊界分析;技術外溢效果;foreign direct investment;stochastic frontier approach;spill-over effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：外人投資（FDI）在中國大陸經濟發展過程中，一直都扮演著重要的角色，其中台資企業在大陸投資電子業的影響更是顯著。然而，外資在大陸投資電子產業有很明顯的區位差異，因此，本文主要目的在探討大陸七大地區三資企業投資電子產業，所帶來的生產效率與技術外溢效果是否有所不同。本文運用1998-2006年中國工業企業統計數據庫中之電子業廠商71,547個樣本點，建構追蹤資料模型（panel data），並運用隨機邊界法（stochastic frontier approach）估計中國大陸本資、台港澳資及外資企業生產效率，藉以衡量FDI之技術外溢效果。根據實證結果發現，三資企業對於大陸電子產業的生產效率有明顯的提升及技術外溢效果，而且外資企業的生產效率比台港澳資企業高；但是，台港澳資企業的整體技術外溢效果較大。同時，不同地區對於外人直接投資所帶來之外溢效果及技術移轉效果有很大的不同。英文摘要：Foreign direct investment (FDI) has played a crucial role in the economic development of mainland China. Among others, the Taiwanese investment in electric and electronic industry (EE industry) is a significant one. Since there is a vivid regional discrepancy for Taiwanese investment in EE industry in mainland China, the purpose of this paper is to study the impact of FDI in EE industry on production efficiency and technology spillover effect for seven major regions in mainland China. This study employed a data set with electronic firms from ”Chinese Industrial Enterprises Database”. We applied a panel data model and a stochastic frontier approach to estimate the production efficiency for domestic firms and foreign firms in EE industry in seven major regions with Chinese, Taiwanese, Hong Kong, Macanese and other foreign enterprises. The empirical results shown that there are positive spill-over effects and technology transfer from foreign direct investments in the Chinese electronic industry; however, the net effects are different from regions.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201309_56(3).00016篇名：中國大陸金融二元性與城鄉收入差距之共整合分析並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Cointegration and Causality of the Urban-Rural Financial and Income Gaps in China作者：黃俞寧(Yu-Ning Hwang)關鍵字：城鄉收入差距;金融發展;二元金融;共整合分析;urban-rural income gap;financial development;financial efficiency;cointegration期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國大陸經濟自改革開放以來經歷了快速的成長，但城鄉收入差距卻隨之擴大；金融體系亦在快速發展之後呈現巨大的城鄉差距，農村金融規模與效率皆遠低於城市而形成金融的城鄉二元性。此金融體系的城鄉差距可能為城鄉收入差距惡化的重要原因之一。本文以城鄉金融效率之比與城鄉居民人均收入之比進行共整合分析發現，金融二元性與城鄉收入不均之間具有顯著的正向關係；Granger因果檢定結果亦顯示金融二元性會Granger影響城鄉收入差距。由此可知，欲減少城鄉收入差距，應致力於促進城鄉金融效率的均衡。英文摘要：The Chinese economy has experienced rapid growth, accompanied by the enlarged urban-rural inequality, since the open and revolution in 1978. The development of the financial system has played an essential role in the progress. However, significant urban-rural inequality, particularly in the financial efficiency, is embodied in the Chinese financial system. The financial efficiency in the rural areas has remained at a much lower level than the urban areas in the past 30 years. By using the data from 1985 to 2008, we examine whether the urban-rural income gap is cointegrated with the urban-rural financial gap. We find that the urban-rural financial gap is significantly cointegrated with the urban-rural income gap. The Granger causality analysis also shows that the urban-rural financial gap Granger causes the urban-rural income gap. As a result, the improvement of the rural financial efficiency can effectively help reduce the urban-rural income inequality.起始頁-結束頁：19-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201309_56(3).00027篇名：影響中國大陸地方政府行政事業性收費收入因素之實證研究並列篇名：The Empirical Evidence on Determinants of Administrative and Operating Fee Revenues of Chinese Local Government作者：吳文傑(Wen-Chieh Wu)關鍵字：稅費改革;行政事業性收費;預算外資金;租稅收入短絀;tax for fee;administrative and operating fee;extrabudgetary fund;insufficient tax gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：在中國大陸1994年分稅制實施之後，由於地方政府租稅收入不足以應付所需支出，因此開始擴張預算外資金收入，其中又以行政事業性收費收入占預算外資金收入的最大宗。過去農民被視為是行政事業性收費最大的負擔者之一，因此中國大陸在2000~2005年當中，進行一連串農村稅費制度改革。本文利用中國大陸2005~2010年省級跨時追蹤資料或稱縱橫資料（panel data），實證檢視在農村稅費改革之後影響各省行政事業性收費收入的因素。綜合隨機效果模型（Random Effect Model）以及雙向固定效果模型（Two-way Fixed Effect Model）的估計結果，我們發現農村在行政事業性收費上面扮演的角色不再重要。取而代之的是國內外企業，特別是以製造業為主的企業，他們躍升成為主要的貢獻者。我們也發現地方政府的租稅收入短絀是行政事業性收費收入擴張的重要因子。至於以往認為行政事業單位的人事退休成本可能是造成行政事業性收費擴大的論點，並沒有獲得本文實證證據的支持。這或許反映中國大陸在行政事業單位逐步精簡改革之後，這些公家單位人事成本不再是地方政府需積極找尋財源的重要原因。最後我們發現沿海經濟發展程度相對較高的省分，其個別省分固定效果較低；而偏遠且經濟發展較落後的省分，其個別省分固定效果較高。這符合我們普遍的預期，也就是 說行政事業性收費收入對於偏遠落後省分而言是相對比較重要的補充性財源。英文摘要：The Chinese local government began to raise its reliance on extrabudgetary revenues because its local tax revenues were not sufficient for budgetary expenditures after the 1994 tax reform. The administrative and operating fees have been the major sources of extrabudgetary revenues. In the past decades, farmers were considered as the major victims of these fees; so China had conducted a series of fee reforms in rural areas during the period of 2000~2005. Using the panel data covering 31 provinces between 2005 and 2010, this paper empirically tests whether the determinants of administrative and operating fee revenues have changed in China. Our empirical results obtained from both random effect model and two-way fixed effect model suggest that farmers in the rural areas no longer play the major contributing roles of administrative and operating fees. Alternatively, both domestic and foreign manufacturing enterprises now play more acting roles. Moreover, we find the insufficient tax revenues significantly raise the administrative and operating fee revenues of local government. Furthermore, the sizes of administrative and operating units are not significantly associated with administrative and operating fee revenues. Finally, we find the provincial fixed effects are larger for those inland and less-developed provinces, suggesting administrative and operating fee revenues are relatively more important sources for these provinces.起始頁-結束頁：45-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201309_56(3).00038篇名：科技時代下中國宣傳體系之嬗變與調適：以「甕安事件」中的網路評論員為例並列篇名：The Transitions and Adaption of China's Propaganda System in the Information Age: The Internet Commentator in the Case of Weng'an Incident作者：洪敬富(Chin-Fu Hung)關鍵字：宣傳體系;網路評論員;甕安事件;議程設定;輿論引導;propaganda;Internet commentator;Weng'an incident;agenda-setting;opinion-channeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：自毛澤東時代，中國的「宣傳體系」（propaganda）已成為宣揚政府當局黨國教條及大規模政治或社會動員的主要媒介。然近幾年來，當中國大陸持續對外開放與深化經濟改革的同時，其社會歷經了前所未有的內外在衝擊。伴隨傳媒部門的全球化、商業化、與集團化，舊有的宣傳體系已不若以往具有完全的政治宣傳成效，但它仍企圖在網路時代下持續扮演導引及形塑公眾輿論的權威角色。因此，網路時代下的中國新宣傳體系發展出「網路評論員」的機制，寄望仍能不斷地監控和引導網路線上空間的討論，積極營造一個有利於黨國思想統治的網路輿論環境，強化北京政府對虛擬世界的網路治理。準此，本文將論述「網路評論員」在中國網路世界的崛起，論證「網路評論員」的設置與運用漸次成為當前中國政府在網路時代，強化其有效治理的一個新形態、且至關重要的統治補充機制，俾以持續進行宣傳教育、鞏固黨國政體和進行（政治）思想工作。本文以發生於2008年貴州「甕安事件」做為研究案例，藉以在實證層次上探究中國宣傳體系在網路時代下的運作與調適，並提出網路評論員的政治意涵。固然其宣傳與治理成效難以在（中）短期內有所定論，但黨國政府意圖重新取得媒體與資訊環境的主導地位卻是無庸置疑，更值得學術關注、研究。英文摘要：Propaganda has been the primary vehicle for indoctrination and mass mobilization of Chinese citizens since the Mao era. In the past few years, however, China has experienced an unprecedented boom and liberalization of the media sector since the reform policies and opening to the outside. While the propaganda regime continues in attempting to play the role of guiding and shaping public opinion, the conventional propaganda apparatus is not as effective as it used to be. This has given rise to a renewed governing mechanism that employs Internet commentators to direct cyber discussions and create favorable online opinions about the Party-State. Accordingly, this paper addresses the rising Internet commentator's phenomenon and argues that the setup and increased utilization of Internet commentators has provided the Chinese government in Beijing an updated governing tool to disseminate and solidify Party ideology in the Information Age. A case study of the Weng'an incident is investigated to illustrate China's propaganda regime in the Information Age.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201306_56(2).00019篇名：領導格局轉換下的成文規則演變：以1978年至2006年中共黨內幹部管理法規為例並列篇名：The Dynamics of Official Regulations under Power Shifts of Chinese Leadership: 1978-2006作者：黃意植(Yi-Chih Huang)關鍵字：規則演變;領導格局;個人領導;集體領導;黨內法規;rule dynamics;rule change;political structure;CCP rules期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：一個組織中的成文規則雖然不是歷史演變的完整紀錄，但是卻透過規定的制定、修改與廢止留下了的「痕跡」，而這些痕跡就變成了分析組織規則變化的實證數據來源。本文將研究重點放在中共黨內法規的「產生」（rule birth）上，再輔以規則的內容分析，從權力領導格局的變化切入，觀察黨內法規的演變軌跡。從政治領導的角度觀之，中共依賴個人權威的領導模式到了1994年鄧小平退居幕後開始有所轉變，以江澤民為首的第三代領導核心之中沒有人擁有「獨霸」的力量可以左右政局，因此領導菁英之間必須仰賴相互合作、相互妥協，有時候甚至是相互牽制才能維持權力的運作。歸納所有的觀察，發現中共的規則史具有一定的發展趨勢，主要分成兩個部分：第一，規則是組織在面對問題或應付壓力時的解決之策，簡言之，規則是因應問題而生的；第二，規則是組織自我強化的展現，也就是說，組織為了克服自身的弱點，會透過規則的制定來改善。英文摘要：Written rules leave historical traces when they are created, revised, and eliminated. They shape organizational events and are shaped by them. We are trying to uncover the historical traces in the written rules of CCP in this paper through ”rule birth.” We observed that the rule traces in the Deng period were different from those during the period of Jiang or his successors. There are two trends of the dynamics of the rules in CCP: the rules adapt to history through problem-solving, and through experience-learning.起始頁-結束頁：31-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201306_56(2).000210篇名：從家戶特性變化看中國沿海及內陸城市的所得分配與不均度並列篇名：The Coastal-Inland Income Disparity in Urban China: From the Perspective of Changing Household Characteristics作者：唐正道(Cheng-Tao Tang);徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu);李紹瑋(Shao-Wei Lee)關鍵字：所得分配;不均度;分量迴歸;擬真分析;income distribution;income inequality;quantile regression;counterfactual analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：不同於以往文獻上針對中國大陸所得分配與不均度的探討方式，本研究採用中國大陸1986年、1997年與2006年三個年度間的「城市住戶調查」資料，從家戶特性變化的角度切入，仔細探討沿海區域與內陸區域城市間的家戶總所得分配變動與差異。為了解區域之間所得分配的差異性，我們除了以線性迴歸模型估計家戶特性對於家戶總所得的平均影響效果外，也利用分量迴歸模型深入探討家戶所得在各分量之間的變化。同時，為了能更清楚瞭解家戶特性在區域間所得分配變動時所扮演的角色，我們進一步採用Machado and Mata（2005）的方法，泝重建大陸城市家戶所得的邊際分配以及擬真分配，並據此進行跨區域間所得分配以及不均度的比較。實證結果顯示，我們所考慮的個別家戶特性，如戶長的性別、婚姻狀態以及所得收入人數等，對於所得分配的變動皆具有一定的重要性，並且隨著不同年代而有不同影響。此外，我們也發現，沿海與內陸區域間家戶特性的差異雖然是造成沿海區域所得不均度較高的原因之一，但此影響已呈現逐年遞減的趨勢。英文摘要：Using urban household surveys in 1986, 1997, and 2006, this paper studies the changes of household income distribution of urban China and investigates the regional income inequality along the coastal-inland dichotomy. For household income, we estimate both linear and quantile regressions and analyze the effects of household characteristics. Furthermore, we apply the method of Machado and Mata (2005, Journal of Applied Econometrics) and conduct counterfactual decomposition. This technique attributes change in distribution or inequality into two broad sources. The first change is the economic structure-the coefficients effect; the second change is the household characteristics-the covariates effect. Our primary finding is that the household head's gender, marital status, and family population with income are important determinants for estimating household income, and these effects may vary across periods. As for income inequality between these two areas, the change in household characteristics does play a role, although this effect is diminishing over time.起始頁-結束頁：45-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201306_56(2).000311篇名：大陸「兩稅合一」稅制改革之意涵與其影響並列篇名：The Impact of Reforms for Enterprise Income Tax Law in China作者：張敏蕾(Ming-Lei Chang);黃智聰(Jr-Tsung Huang)關鍵字：大陸企業所得稅;所得稅改革;有效稅率;租稅負擔;enterprise income tax in China;income tax reform;effective tax rate;tax burden期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討大陸於2008年實施的新制企業所得稅法－《中華人民共和國企業所得稅法》，對大陸產業與內外資企業的影響。大陸新制企業所得稅法改變舊制兩法分立的課稅方式，將內、外資企業所得稅法加以統一。本研究透過實證資料，分別以新稅法施行前後各三個年度，就不同產業以及是否為外資企業等層面，分析大陸上市企業在新稅法施行前後，平均有效稅率的差異變化。研究結果發現，整體上市企業在新稅法實施後，其平均有效稅率呈顯著下降；而各產業因優惠方式不同而呈現上升與下降不一的情況；至於內資企業的平均稅負則呈顯著下降，而外資企業則顯著上升；但外資企業的平均稅負仍舊低於內資企業。另一方面，複迴歸分析結果亦顯示，企業在新稅法實施後，其平均有效稅率顯著較兩稅合一前為低；同時有效稅率與企業規模、期末存貨呈顯著正向關係，而與長期投資額、資本密集度、發行H股、國有股持股比例、外資持股比例以及資產報酬成長率呈顯著反向關係。英文摘要：The main purpose of this research is to compare the tax burden of listed companies in China before and after the adoption of the ”Enterprise Income Tax Law” in 2008. Through empirical data, we find that after the implementation of the new enterprises income tax law, the average effective tax rate (ETR) significantly decreased. However, if we separate all sample into two groups, the average ETR increased for foreign enterprises group and decreased for the group of domestic enterprises during 2005-2010. The average ETR of foreign enterprise are still lower than that of domestic enterprises even after reforms of the enterprise income tax system. On the other hand, we investigate the relationship between effective tax rates and corporate characteristics. The empirical results show that firm size and inventory concentration have significant positive associations with ETR; state-owned shares, foreign shares, capital intensity, long-term investment, issuing H shares and growth of return on assets have significant negative associations with ETR.起始頁-結束頁：79-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201306_56(2).000412篇名：鑲嵌與自主：反壩運動中的大陸環保組織並列篇名：Embeddedness and Autonomy: Chinese Environmental NGOs in the Anti-Dam Campaigns作者：汪莉絹(Li-Chuan Wang)關鍵字：環保組織;反壩運動;國家與社會關係;國家在社會中;environmental NGOs;anti-dam campaigns;state-society relation;state-in-society approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：自推行經濟體制改革以來，中國社會歷經巨大變遷，大量社會組織的出現，是最重要和意義重大的變化之一。1990年以來，學者把社會組織發展作為探討中國國家與社會關係變化的指標，並發展出組合主義、市民社會等理論架構，但這些理論解釋力有限。組合主義和市民社會等理論途徑有助了解當前大陸民間組織發展的特殊面貌，但組合主義雖有效掌握中共國家自上而下的控制本質，卻無法說明社會的政經變化；市民社會則過於強調民間組織的自主性，忽略中共國家控制本質，而實際上當前的中國也未建立起真正的市民社會。這兩種途徑的解釋，都無法真實反映出當前大陸民間組織與國家之間互動的複雜圖像。本文擬利用Joel S. Migdal的「國家在社會中」途徑，結合深入訪談所獲資料，探討大陸民間環保組織在反壩運動中與不同層級政府的互動過程，從民間環保組織的行動策略和特性，檢視大陸民間組織的鑲嵌與自主性，既非受國家完全控制，也不是與國家對抗，而是鑲嵌在中國現有的威權體制之中。同時，也將指出當前中國的國家與社會關係是在持續的互動過程中相互形塑。英文摘要：Since the beginning of the economic reforms in the late 1970s, profound changes in China's society have taken place. The impressive upsurge of China's social organizations (NGOs) in the last two decades is one of the most significant and meaningful events in the transformation. Since the 1990s, scholars have examined the relationship between the state and society in China by examining the development of social organizations (NGOs). Much of the discussion of state-NGO relations in China has been viewed through theoretical frameworks such as corporatism and civil society. The corporatism and civil society approaches help us understand the differences in NGOs' power arrangements with state as well as in their specific organizational features. The corporatism approach captures well the top-down nature of control in the system, but it does not account for the important elements of social change. The civil society approach enables us to see structural change, but it overemphasizes the autonomy of social organization. By examining the actions and efforts of the environmental NGOs in a series of anti-dam campaigns since 2003, in this paper, I argue that state-NGO relations are becoming more complex and dynamic to be captured by any one of these frameworks. This paper adopts the state-in-society approach to explain the embeddedness and autonomy of NGOs in current China's authoritarian context. At the same time, it shows the interpenetration and mutual shaping of state and society, and suggests that their interrelationships are symbiotic and constantly adapting.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201303_56(1).000113篇名：制度化下的中共菁英晉升：接班人栽培的觀點並列篇名：Elite Promotion of the CCP under Institutionalization: A Notion of Successor Cultivation作者：黃信豪(Hsin-Hao Huang)關鍵字：中共;菁英晉升;接班人栽培;中央委員;量化分析;Chinese Communist Party;elite promotion;successor cultivation;central committee members;quantitative analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以社會流動觀點出發，透過對菁英晉升模式的歸納來理解中共幹部任命的特色。在當前制度化的脈絡下，筆者認為中共的幹部任命已出現「接班人栽培」的思維：包括「早期挑選」與「能力測試」兩面向。從菁英流動來看，包括被甄拔的年齡以及工作的輪調與安排，可視為黨如此措施的具體表徵。本研究以十五屆至十七屆中央委員會成員為研究案例，證實了接班人栽培的相關成分能系統性的解釋中共菁英晉升的結果。此外，本文也嘗試以如此的接班人栽培概念，界定2012年中共十八大可能晉升的菁英群體。英文摘要：Based upon the perspective of social mobility theory, this paper attempts to identify the nature of CCP's cadre appointment system by depicting the pattern of elite promotion. Deriving from the current political context that is being institutionalized, the paper proposes a notion of successor cultivation combining the two aspects-early selection and capability testing. From the perspective of elite mobility, the age for being selected and work arrangement/transfer would be a battery of representations under this notion. The empirical evidence of this study is based on the CC members for the period from the 15th to 17th Party Congresses, and the author confirms how the two parts of successor cultivation can explain the outcomes of elite promotion. Following the notion of successor cultivation, this paper also suggests several candidates for leadership promotion at the CCP's 18th Party Congress in 2012.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201303_56(1).000214篇名：中國大陸黨管幹部原則下的公務員體制並列篇名：Public Service System and The Nomenklatura System In China作者：桂宏誠(Hung-Chen Kuei)關鍵字：大陸公務員;中共幹部人事制度;黨管幹部;PRC public servants;CCP cadre personnel system;nomenklatura system期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要論旨在於說明，中國大陸2006年開始實施《中華人民共和國公務員法》所建構的公務員體制，本質上仍屬於中共原有幹部體制的一部分。尤其，不僅中共黨機關工作之人員亦屬公務員，且該法第4條還明定了「堅持黨管幹部原則」，皆表明了認識中國大陸此一具有「中國特色」的公務員制度，首須了解幹部的意義及其與公務員的關係。然而，目前台灣就此課題的研究成果尚屬缺乏，以致於對中國大陸公務員制度的認識容易造成若干程度的誤解。有鑑於此，本文首先分析了大陸所稱之「幹部」和台灣的認知並不相同，進而說明大陸的公務員範圍幾乎等同於「幹部」中的「黨政幹部」。再者，本文針對若干台灣研究者誤認大陸最高人事行政或公務員的主管機關，根據《中華人民共和國公務員法》研擬及審議過程的意見及相關法規文獻，具體指出中共中央組織部才是大陸公務員的最高主管機關。最後，本文介紹中共建政不久即開始實施至今的「幹部職務名稱表」制度，除藉以解釋《中華人民共和國公務員法》中若干條文定有「按照管理權限」規定的涵義外，更用來強調了解此一落實「黨管幹部」的具體做法，才是正確認識大陸公務員制度的前提。英文摘要：This article elaborates that the main spirit of the public servant system-based on the Public Servant Law of the People's Republic of China (PRC) implemented in 2006-is not different from that of the cadre personnel system of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). It is because that the PRC's public servants belong to a group of CCP's party cadres, and based on the principle that the CCP assumes the responsibility for cadre management affairs, the difference between party cadres and public servants is limited. This article first indicates that the term of party cadres is not what most Taiwanese scholars think about, and the category of PRC's public servants is almost equal to that of CCP's party cadres. Secondly, this article clarifies some misunderstandings among Taiwan's academic circles and indicates that the highest responsible authority in charge of PRC's public servants is the Department of Organization-which is responsible for researching and reviewing the Public Servant Law. Finally, this article explains that some regulations in the Nomenklatura System are applicable to the Public Servant Law and that the concept of party assuming the responsibility for cadre management affairs is the main foundation of the Law.起始頁-結束頁：61-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201303_56(1).000315篇名：殘缺的產權、土地財政與基層政府－解釋中國大陸的「小產權房」現象並列篇名：Truncated Property Rights, Land Finance and Grass-Root Governments-A Case Study of China's "Minor Property Rights" Housing作者：曹海濤(Hai-Tao Tsao)關鍵字：小產權房;集體所有制;殘缺產權;土地財政;鄉村集體組織;minor property right houses;collective ownership;truncated property rights;land finance;grass-root governments期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究從土地制度和「中央－地方」關係，探討中國大陸的近年出現的「小產權房」現象。藉由關注基層鄉鎮政府與村集體組織在「小產權房」產生過程中的角色，本文指出，殘缺的土地產權和財權事權不對等的財政體制是「小產權房」興起的制度基礎。一方面，現行土地制度限制了農村集體土地的轉讓，阻礙農民和農村集體組織分享經濟成長過程中土地增值收益；另一方面，財政分權改革衍生的土地財政，只是為地方政府帶來巨額利益，面對龐大支出責任的基層鄉鎮政府和農村集體組織，卻得不到相關收入。準此，「小產權房」反映了農民和農村集體組織試圖擺脫現存制度束縛的理性選擇。作為一種制度安排、以及制度安排往往具有多重功能的特性，「小產權房」既有增加住房供給、降低租值耗散的效率意涵，也有因鄉村幹部利用權勢操控集體土地產生的尋租問題。英文摘要：The main purpose of this paper is to discuss institutional foundations of ”minor property right” houses emerging in rural China. The land property right system and the central-local fiscal relations exert substantial influences on ”minor property right” houses' supplier, namely the grass-root governments. On the one hand, collective ownership and management of rural land are strictly regulated by the state. The coercive policies expropriate rights and opportunities of Chinese farmers to participate in land market. On the other hand, the current fiscal system has prevented grass-root governments from obtaining land revenue. However, the state has no control over all attributes of collective land due to transaction costs. The grass-root governments and peasants are able to manipulate some attributes of land to minimize the loss of property rights. Accordingly, ”minor property right” houses are the rational choice for grass-root governments to mitigate institutional constraints. However, as an institutional arrangement with multiple functions, ”minor property rights” houses also have effects on income redistribution. In other words, village cadres take advantage of their power to manipulate the collective land for rent-seeking.起始頁-結束頁：91-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201303_56(1).000416篇名：列寧式黨國體制與中國貪腐問題的發展並列篇名：The Leninist Party State System and the Development of China's Corruption Problem作者：于有慧(Yo-Huei Yu)關鍵字：貪腐;列寧式黨國體制;巿場轉型;地方幹部行為;corruption;Leninist party state system;market transition;local cadres期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國貪腐問題是當前中國治理上的重大難題。過去研究開發中國家的貪腐問題主要從「巿場或民主（制度）轉型」、國家「權力過度集中」及「國家能力」衰弱等角度分析，在解釋中國的貪腐問題時皆有所不足，顯示中國的情況與一般發展中國家並不相同。目前雖然有不少研究論及中國的情況，惟單獨探討中國貪腐問題者仍屬少數，Barrett L. McCormick（1990）、Melanie Manion（2004）、Minxin Pei（2006）及Xiaobo Lu（2000）在分析中國的貪腐問題時，雖然同意中國歷經巿場轉型與中央與地方關係轉變（地方分權），使地方有更多貪腐尋租的機會與誘因，然而中國貪腐問題的出現與未來發展前景係深受列寧式黨國體制因素所制約。四位作者著重的角度不同，對於中國貪腐問題的發生邏輯與後果則有不同的分析內涵，但加入體制因素分析對於中國貪腐問題的性質確實更有解釋力。英文摘要：It is recognized that the issue of corruption has been becoming more serious in China. Although China's Central government has taken some action to deal with this problem, it remains doubtful whether this has been effective. Most literature on corruption in developing countries has adopted theories about market transition, power concentration, and weak state capabilities as explanatory tools. However, while partially useful, these theories still have explanatory weaknesses. In addition, there is little reference in the literature to the issue of corruption in China, issue of which has arisen in different circumstances to other developing countries. The four books under review -Barrett L. McCormick (1990), Melanie Manion (2004), Minxin Pei (2006), Xiaobo Lu (2000)-all agree that due to market transition and the transformation of relations between central and local governments, local cadres are provided with more chances and incentive to be corruptive. Nevertheless, they emphasize the role of the Leninist party state system in bringing about the corruption problems as well as constraining its future solution. The four authors look at the party state system from different angles and have therefore come to different conclusions. The more persuasive arguments in explaining China's corruption problem are those that consider the role of the party state system.起始頁-結束頁：127-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201303_56(1).000501篇名：八八風災後心理減壓工作成效與介入經驗之探究並列篇名：Effectiveness of Post Typhoon Morakot Disaster School Mental Health Interventions and Reflection on the Process of Implementation作者：劉志如(Chih-Ju Liu)關鍵字：天然災害;創傷後壓力症侯群;natural disaster;post trauma stress syndromes期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的目的在描述八八風災後於災區協助當地學童進行創傷後安心輔導心理減壓工作的經過，研究目的分為兩大部分，其一為了解此服務的成效，另一部分則呈現外地來的心理師進入災區與當地中小學進行此工作的經驗。研究方法分為問卷調查法暨訪談法；調查法對象為災區中的國中小學生，共計2,137名，並以階層線性成長模型分析其於創傷後壓力量表的得分變化。訪談法對象為提供服務的心理師，共10名，以紮根理論分析法進行資料分析，探究其於災區進行減壓服務的經驗。綜合二者的資料，本研究重要發現包括：首先，外地心理師至災區進行的減壓服務能有效降低創傷壓力反應的分數；其次，服務對象不只包含學生，也需將中介人（學校教師）視為服務及合作的對象；最後，心理師需具備尊重文化差異的精神暨外展服務的彈性，除心理減壓的專業知能外，亦需加強文化敏感度及自我的照護。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the effectiveness of a team of psychologists' post disaster mental health interventions on reducing the traumatic stress of children in the affected areas. The study contains two parts. One is to discern the effectiveness of such a psychological rehabilitative work delivered by the psychologists and the other is to describe the process of such work in relieving psychological trauma for the children. The research methods included questionnaires and interviews. For the quantitative component of the study, the participants included 2,137 students and the analysis was conducted using Hierarchical Linear Models (HLM) to answer the question: ”Does the interventions program effectively reduce the traumatic distress index reported by the participants?” Additionally, the researcher interviewed 10 psychologists and asked them to describe the entire experiences of implementing the post disaster mental health program in the affected areas. This study identified some important findings. First, the traumatic distress index scores of the participants were significantly reduced after the mental health interventions. Second, it is recommended that the interventions program should be directed towards school teachers as additional targets of the service. Lastly, it is essential that the psychologists engaging in such a post-disaster interventions work to possess the qualities and the skills of culture sensitivity, self care, and clinical flexibility.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：治療關係對學校霸凌受害者諮詢效果之個案研究並列篇名：The Effects of Therapeutic Relationship on an Adolescent Victim of Bullying: A Case Study作者：張曉佩(Hsiao-Pei Chang)關鍵字：自我傷害;治療關係;霸凌;bullying;self-injury;therapeutic relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要目的在於探討治療關係對學校霸凌受害者的諮商效果。研究對象為一位遭受霸凌經驗的國二學生，並以自我傷害做為因應霸凌事件的方法。研究者透過回溯性訪談法喚起個案的諮商經驗以蒐集資料，並以內容分析方法進行資料分析。研究發現包括：（1）真誠的關心與深度的同理是建立有效諮商關係的關鍵因素，亦是引發個案後續改變的前置性因素；（2）平等的諮商關係能協助個案在諮商歷程中愈來愈自在，也更願意去嘗試不同的問題解決方法；（3）諮商心理師讓個案愈清楚知道其意圖與感受，亦即提高透明化程度，能讓個案在獲得充分資訊的情況下，提高自我控制感；以及（4）在信任的諮商關係中倡導系統的改變，是促使個案改變以自我傷害做為因應模式的關鍵因素。最後依據結果進行討論並提出建議以供未來研究與實務工作者參考。英文摘要：This case study aims to explore the counseling experiences of an adolescent who was bullied for an extended period of time in high school, with the focuses on how he used self-injury behaviors as a coping strategy and how therapeutic relationship factors contributed to the counseling work with this client. A counseling psychologist worked with the client by using the concept of the relational depth over 18 sessions. After the terminal of the counseling, the client was interviewed retrospectively to elicit his recall of the therapy experiences over the entire counseling process. The interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed in its entirety. The author used content analysis approach to analyze the data. Four facilitative factors were identified based on the data analysis. They include: a) counseling with relational depth to encourage client to engage in different cope strategies in dealing with the bullying instead of self-injurious behaviors; b) genuine caring and empathy on the part of the counselor; c) an equalitarian client-counselor relationship; and d) possessing the qualities of transparency and advocacy in the counseling work. The clinical implications of the findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會3篇名：國小輔導教師實務內涵初探：從困境與期待分析進行對話並列篇名：An Exploratory Examination of the Practices of Taiwan Elementary School Counselors: A Dialogue about Their Difficulties and Expectations作者：許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)關鍵字：諮商輔導;學校諮商;學校諮商師;專業發展;輔導教師;counseling and guidance;guidance teacher;professional development;school counseling;school counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著學生需求與校園輔導工作介入之需要，以及近期國中小輔導教師專聘政策，輔導教師之專業發展議題急需加以探討。本研究以焦點團體方式，於兩個縣市進行調查訪談，每團體約進行三小時，分析18位國小輔導教師（6位男性、12位女性；年齡介於26至45歲之間；服務年資平均為7.9年）之實務困境及其對專業或體制的期待；研究於資料意義標示與初步類別分析編碼一致性達.89，而後依據細項類別將困境與期待歸納為七個範疇，再依此撰寫描述文本。研究結果在實務困境方面發現：輔導教師實務層面之困境類別，可分為個人專業狀態模糊與自信缺乏、個別與團體等實務接案，以及和家庭與教師等系統介入；而體制層面的困境則包括：角色職責與輔導教師制度之不明，以及學校輔導運作概念與行政資源之不足；而輔導教師之專業期待方面發現可分為：在實務層面為對專業成長，以及進修與督導之期待；體制層面則為對於輔導制度與團隊資源建構之期待。研究從三級預防輔導架構和多 元專業合作概念，探討國小教師其實務困境與專業期待之意涵，並朝向可能的實務內涵、專業發展與培育、體制建構，以及後續研究等課題提出相關建議。英文摘要：In view of the increasing need for student guidance and the recent policy of hiring full-time school counselors in the junior and the elementary school levels in Taiwan, the issue of professional development for school counselors has become a critical subject calling for more attention and exploration. Eighteen elementary school counselors, 6 males and 12 females, age 26-45, with an average of 7.9 years of professional experiences, were invited to participate in two focus groups. The groups focused on the difficulties the participants had encountered in their practices and their expectations of the larger school system and of their profession. The reliability of rating consistency of the meaning units and thematic categories by the raters was .89. Seven thematic categories emerged from the data analysis and were the basis of the present paper. The results showed participants' difficulties at two fronts: at the personal-professional front and at the system front. The reported difficulties included a lack of self confidence, professional role ambiguity, demand to offer responsive service of individual and group counseling, and critical need to engage in system-wide interventions involving parents and teachers. At the system level, the difficulties were reflected in the structure of the guidance and administrative systems, the profession role, duty and policy for school counselors, and the deficiency in supporting resources and infrastructure. On the other hand, the participants expressed expectations for professional development to include continuous training and supervision and enhancement in resources and team building from administration or the larger system. Based on the tertiary model of mental health intervention, the issues concerning multidisciplinary collaboration, implications of the identified difficulties and the expectations, the movement toward the practice of school guidance counseling, counselor professional development, training and instruction, enhancement of current guidance systems, and further research are proposed and discussed.起始頁-結束頁：57-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：大學生在死亡相關詞彙的Stroop干擾效應之前導性研究並列篇名：A Pilot Study of the Stroop Interference Effects on Death-related Words among Undergraduate Students作者：蔡明昌(Ming-Chang Tsai)關鍵字：干擾效應;Stroop作業;死亡;死亡焦慮;death;death anxiety;interference effects;Stroop task期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：自陳式的死亡焦慮量表是測量死亡焦慮最常見的方式，然而，此種自陳式量表需要建立在受試者誠實坦白的前提上。由於死亡對大多數人而言，具有某種程度的威脅，因此，即使受試者無意欺瞞，但卻可能在不自覺情況下受到防衛機轉、正向錯覺、社會期待等因素的影響而減低其準確度。基於此，本前導性研究嘗試採取不同於死亡焦慮自陳式量表的情緒性Stroop作業之研究典範，透過對十位大學生進行實地訪談，建立死亡相關詞彙Stroop作業的基本架構，根據此架構，由50位大學生提供死亡相關詞彙，發展死亡相關詞彙的Stroop作業，並招募106名大學生參與測試，試圖初步瞭解死亡相關詞彙對大學生反應時間產生Stroop干擾效應的情況，並探討其與傳統自陳式量表測量結果之關係，以做為未來進一步研究之參考。本研究發現死亡相關詞彙對受試者反應時間產生干擾效應，但與自陳式量表測量結果之關係並不顯著，且二者的性別差異方向恰好相反。研究者對於此結果進行討論後，提出後續研究的具體建議。英文摘要：Self-reported scale is the most commonly used measure of death anxiety. However, the validity of self-reported scale rests on the presumption of honesty on the part of the respondents. For most people, death carries a certain degree of threat. Consequently, even if the respondents do not intent to be deceptive, their responses are unconsciously influenced by defense mechanism, positive illusion, and/or social expectation. In view of the above, the presented pilot study attempts to adopt the research paradigm based on emotional Stroop task, which distinguishes itself from a self-report scale. Through interviewing 10 undergraduate students, the investigator of the study formulated the structure of a death-related words Stroop task. The task was further developed based on death-related terms provided by another 50 undergraduate students. Later, 106 undergraduate students participated in the test of the Stroop task. The results of the pilot study revealed that the death-related terms influenced the interference effect of the participants, but the effect did not correlate with the participants' score on the self-reported scale. In addition, the pattern of gender difference on the Stroop task was in direct oppose of that based on the self-reported scale. The results of the study are discussed and concrete suggestions for further research are put forward.起始頁-結束頁：91-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會5篇名：督導關係量表之編製與信、效度建構並列篇名：Development and Validation of a Supervisory Relationship Scale作者：吳秀碧(Sophie Woo)關鍵字：受督者;量表編製;督導;督導關係;developing inventory;supervision;supervisee;supervisory relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a valid and reliable measure of supervisory relationship from the perspective of supervisees. Qualitative data obtained from a previous study and information generated from a review of the literature were used to construct a 78 item self-report questionnaire measure. After an evaluation by six professionals who used a constructive model to analyze the content validity of the scale, 4 items were combined into 2 and 24 items with CVI lower than .80 were deleted, resulting in a 52-item original version of Supervisory Relationship Scale (SRS). The scale was administered to 198 counseling supervisees with diverse background characteristics on gender, training level, affiliated universities, institutions, and geographical areas. The principal components analysis identified seven components for the construct of SRS. Due to having only one single item, the seventh component was removed. Finally the SRS was comprised of six components and 51 items in total. The components were labeled: ”Safe Supervisory Environment and Personal Characteristics”, ”Trustworthy Supervision and Professional Traits”, ”Supervision Intervention Facilitating Cognitive Development”, ”Formative Feedback and Role Modeling”, ”Helping Awareness and Situated Intervening”, and ”Supervisor Self Disclosure” . The amount of variance in SRS explained by the six factors was 61.715%. The results of the analyses for the scale's concurrent validity, internal consistency and split-half reliability were favorable. The SRS demonstrated good concurrent validity (γ=.871, p＜.001), high internal consistency (α=.978), and good split-half reliability (γxx=.959). On the basis of the findings of the study, the applications of this instrument for counselor and supervisor training and for future research are forwarded.英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a valid and reliable measure of supervisory relationship from the perspective of supervisees. Qualitative data obtained from a previous study and information generated from a review of the literature were used to construct a 78 item self-report questionnaire measure. After an evaluation by six professionals who used a constructive model to analyze the content validity of the scale, 4 items were combined into 2 and 24 items with CVI lower than .80 were deleted, resulting in a 52-item original version of Supervisory Relationship Scale (SRS). The scale was administered to 198 counseling supervisees with diverse background characteristics on gender, training level, affiliated universities, institutions, and geographical areas. The principal components analysis identified seven components for the construct of SRS. Due to having only one single item, the seventh component was removed. Finally the SRS was comprised of six components and 51 items in total. The components were labeled: ”Safe Supervisory Environment and Personal Characteristics”, ”Trustworthy Supervision and Professional Traits”, ”Supervision Intervention Facilitating Cognitive Development”, ”Formative Feedback and Role Modeling”, ”Helping Awareness and Situated Intervening”, and ”Supervisor Self Disclosure” . The amount of variance in SRS explained by the six factors was 61.715%. The results of the analyses for the scale's concurrent validity, internal consistency and split-half reliability were favorable. The SRS demonstrated good concurrent validity (γ=.871, p＜.001), high internal consistency (α=.978), and good split-half reliability (γxx=.959). On the basis of the findings of the study, the applications of this instrument for counselor and supervisor training and for future research are forwarded.起始頁-結束頁：117-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會6篇名：大專校院自殺／自傷危機處理之探討：以臺灣北區四所私立大學為例並列篇名：An Investigation of Crisis Management for Suicide/Self-injury: The Experiences of Foar Private Universities in Northern Taiwan作者：陳莉榛(Li-Chen Chen);胡延薇(Yen-Wei Hu);張雅惠(Yea-Huey Chang)關鍵字：校園自殺／自傷危機處理;緊急個案管理;學校諮商員;campus suicide/self-injury crisis intervention;emergency case management;school counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：校園危機處理為心理諮商專業之必要工作，自殺／自傷危機又是學校諮商員最常處理的事件之一。為因應校園自殺／自傷危機日增的局勢，台灣教育當局所頒布之學生憂鬱及自殺／自傷防治處理機制流程圖中，以三級預防的概念明訂校園中相關單位之自殺／自傷危機處理工作。本研究以台灣北區四所不同特色之大學諮商輔導單位及其諮商員為研究對象，探討各校自殺／自傷危機處理之個案管理所遇到的困難與解決方式，期盼透過此研究補充教育部頒訂之危機處理程序，以涵蓋更多元校園文化之處理流程。為此，本研究透過檔案研究與焦點團體的方式，依照緊急個案管理模式中之評估、轉介、聯繫、通報、召開會議、後續輔導等工作層面，收集各校在自殺／自傷危機處理程序中所遭遇的困難與因應策略。結果發現就自殺／自傷處理程序而言，受訪的學校輔導單位部分採取教育部頒布的處理流程並編製具體內部流程。而就諮商員的自殺／自傷危機個案管理實務工作上，訪問結果發現在評估、轉介與就醫方面，各校皆遇到執行的困難並發展相關的行動策略。聯繫與通報之個案管理工作則因校園行政文化發展不同處理策略。本研究依照上述困難中各校的解決策略，擬定一個調整後的自殺／自傷危機處理流程圖。英文摘要：Campus crisis management has become a necessary aspect of a counselor's job. Specifically, management of suicide/self-injury crises is one of the most common occurrences faced by university-based counselors. In responding to the increasing suicide/self-injury incidences across campuses, the Ministry of Education in Taiwan stipulated a student depression and suicide/self-injury prevention and management flowchart based on the tertiary prevention concept. By studying the experiences of four university counseling centers in Northern Taiwan, this study explored the obstacles faced and the solutions adopted by each of these universities in managing crises. It is hoped that this study can help supplement the crisis management procedures formulated by the Ministry of Education and that the unique culture of the various universities can be incorporated into the emergency management procedures to help each campus responding to crises. The present study analyzed case files as well as conducted focus groups to collect information related to obstacles encountered during crisis and the corresponding management strategies used in each of the campuses. The specific elements of assessment, referral, liaison, reporting, meeting, and follow-up counseling indicated in the emergency case management model were examined. Results of the study suggest that difficulties in carrying out assessment, referral and medical treatment were found across campuses and each university has developed its own unique responding strategies. Approaches to liaison and reporting were found to be divergent across campuses due to differences in the administrative culture of each university. On the basis of the above results, the current study forwards a modified version of the suicide/self-injury crisis management reference flowchart to help address concerns across campuses.起始頁-結束頁：149-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會7篇名：儒家文化中的倫理療癒並列篇名：Ethical Healing in Confucian Culture作者：黃光國(Kwang-Kuo Hwang)關鍵字：文化視盲;含攝文化的理論;倫理療癒;核心價值;工具性價值;中學為體，西學為用;cultural blindness;culture-inclusive theories;core values;ethical healing;instrumental rationality;"Chinese learning as substantive rationality and Western learning as instrumental rationality"期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以作者所建構的「含攝儒家文化的理論」重新解釋收錄於《中華諮商與輔導學報》本期專刊中的各篇論文，藉以說明儒家文化中的倫理療癒。本文的析論顯示：「含攝儒家文化的理論」可以彰顯出儒家文化的核心價值，而且可以會通量化的實徵研究（empirical research）與質化的事件分析（event analysis）。西方理論雖然亦可以用來理解華人社會行動的某些層面，但卻只有工具性價值。若是妥適運用兩者，可以收到「中學為體，西學為用」的效果；若是只偏用西方理論，則會造成文化視盲（culture blindness）英文摘要：In order to illustrate the ethical healing in Confucian culture, this article reinterprets research findings of the articles presented in this special issue from the framework the Confucian Culture-Inclusive Theories proposed by the author. The analysis of this article shows that the Confucian Culture-Inclusive theories may reveal the core values of Confucian culture and the theories can be examined through both quantitative empirical research as well as qualitative event analysis. While Western theories may also be applied to explain Chinese social actions at a certain level of analysis, their utility is limited to instrumental rationality or purposes only. An appropriate and balanced application of both Confucian Culture-Inclusive theories and Western theories may lead to the consequence of ”Chinese learning as substantive rationality and Western learning as instrumental rationality”; however, the one-sided application of Western theories may lead to culturally insensitivity or even cultural blindness.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會8篇名：傳統喪葬儀式中的哀悼經驗分析：以往生到入殮為例並列篇名：The Analysis of Mourning Experiences in Traditional Funeral Rituals: From Death to Encoffining Ceremony作者：洪雅琴(Ya-Chin Hung)關鍵字：民族誌;哀悼;喪親家庭;傳統喪葬儀式;bereaved families;ethnography;mourning;traditional funeral rituals期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文藉由研究者的主位研究資料，揭露2001年歲暮之際，台灣中部鄉鎮地區某喪親家庭從親人往生到入殮過程中，在傳統喪葬儀式過程中所經歷的社會文化歷程與個人哀悼經驗。研究採民族誌方法，以參與觀察為主，輔以半結構式的深度訪談。研究結果顯示傳統喪葬儀式蘊含了悲傷哀悼與文化療癒功能，具體內涵包括：（1）儀式和程序協助家屬確認並接受親人死亡的事實；（2）儀式抑制了家屬個別性的哀悼情緒，但也催化了集體悲悼情緒的宣洩；（3）傳統喪葬儀式建置了悲悼療癒的空間；（4）治喪事宜使家屬獲得親友的實質照顧與心理支持；（5）家屬在儀式中經歷其與逝去親人關係的轉化與再連結；（6）華人家庭呈現出避談生死、恐懼死亡的態度。英文摘要：The researcher applied the emic approach to examine social and cultural processes of traditional funeral rituals and mourning experiences of a family living in the central Taiwanese rural area. Ethnography was adopted in this research. Participant observation was the major method and semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted. The result showed that traditional funeral rituals contain functions of mourning and cultural healing. The concrete connotations of these functions were addressed as follows: (1) these rituals and procedure help bereaved family confirm and accept the fact of death; (2) rituals suppress the family members' individual emotion and facilitate the expressing of collective emotions; (3) traditional funeral rituals establish a space for grief healing; (4) these rituals enable the bereaved family to obtain substantial care and psychological support from family relatives; (5) the bereaved family experiences the transition and reconnection of relationship with the dead family member; and (6) the bereaved family reflects the attitude of reluctance of discussing death and fear of death.起始頁-結束頁：55-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會9篇名：失根的大樹：從文化觀點探究親密暴力殺人者的生命敘說並列篇名：The Tree without Root: Exploring the Life Narratives of Intimate Homicide from Cultural Perspectives作者：邱獻輝(Hsien-Huei Chiou);葉光輝(Kuang-Hui Yeh)關鍵字：多元文化諮商;建構主義研究典範;敘說研究;殺人;親密暴力;constructivism;homicide;intimate partner violence;multi-cultural counseling;narrative期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究想要澄清「平時沒有肢體暴力傾向卻突發嚴重親密暴力（殺死伴侶）」的心理機制；此類罪犯過去在親密暴力分類上並沒有適當的界定，加上探究個體的心理內涵宜有文化考量，故本研究擬從多元文化諮商觀點出發，進行親密暴力殺人者的生命敘說探究。本研究遵循建構主義研究典範，邀請一位無前科、平時無親密暴力、獄中適應良好、然其卻在殺死妻兒後自殺未遂的罪犯參與，進行敘說研究資料的搜集；在資料分析過程中，邀請四位相關領域的研究者擔任協同分析者，以實踐建構主義的知識共構精神。本研究根據訪談逐字稿、判決書、社工訪談紀錄、個性特徵量表施測結果等文本，從文化觀點會同協同分析者進行分析，共整理出四個範疇：「困頓中茁壯的生命毅力」、「山雨欲來風滿樓：殺妻的脈絡」、「男性角色負擔：殺妻的相關信念」、「掙脫過去遠眺未來」。本研究並從親密暴力者的分類架構、性別角色負擔、華人雙元文化等角度進行討論。英文摘要：This research was designed to probe the psychological mechanisms of a suddenly serious violence criminal (intimate homicide) but with no regular inclination towards physical violence. This kind of crime did not have a suitable category in intimate violence typologies and there were no considerations of cultural influence and cultural change in past litevatuves. The study tried to explore the life narratives of a male who committed intimate homicide from a multicultural counseling perspective. The inquiry followed a constructivism paradigm. A criminal was invited as an interviewee who had no crime record, no intimate violent characteristics, behaved well in jail, but he killed his wife, sons, and then tried to committed suicide. During the data analysis, four graduate students were recruited to co-analyze. The texts included transcripts of interview recordings, written verdicts, records made by social workers, and the result of Chinese Personality Disorders Inventory. The results presented 4 themes, namely: (1) life willpower in difficult situations; (2) the context of intimate homicide; (3) the beliefs related to intimate homicide; and (4) escape from the past and look forward to the future. Results were discussed and suggestions were made from the perspectives of intimate typology, gender role, and Chinese bi-culture phenomena.起始頁-結束頁：89-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會10篇名：優勢中心取向生涯諮商歷程與改變經驗之敘事研究並列篇名：The Therapeutic Effectiveness and the Change Process of a Strength-Centered Career Counseling Model作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang)關鍵字：生涯諮商;目標;敘事分析;優勢中心取向;雙生涯成人;career counseling;dual-career adult;goal;narrative method;strength-centervd期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探究優勢中心取向生涯諮商歷程與改變經驗。研究參與者為四位已婚、每周上班時數超過30小時之雙生涯成人，其中男性兩位，女性兩位，年齡介於34到41歲之間。參與者為透過招募自動報名，每人接受三次以建構意義目標為導向之優勢生涯個別諮商，結束後一個月再接受一至二次、共計70－90分鐘之半結構深度訪談。三次諮商和諮商後訪談錄音檔均謄為逐字稿，並以質性研究中的敘事方法進行分析，研究結果分別呈現出四位參與者之故事主題、諮商歷程、改變經驗以及諮商後的影響。最後根據結果提出討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the therapeutic effectiveness and the change process of a strength-centered career counseling (SCC) model. The participants (N = 4) were married dual career adults who were main home-care providers workinged more than 40 hours per week. The participants were two women and two men between the age of 34 to 41. They enrolled in the study after seeing recruitment posters. Each participant received three individual SCC treatments. One month after the treatments, they had one or two individual semi-structured depth interviews that took 70 to 90 minutes. The transcripts of three counseling sessions and the interviews were analyzed via the narrative method. The results included participants' story, counseling process, change experience, and impact after counseling. Results and recommendations for future study were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：125-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：電子化跨域治理影響因素之研究：多個案之探索並列篇名：Influential Factors of Electronic Cross-Boundary Governance: An Exploratory Study with Multiple Cases作者：胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu);曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng);張智凱(Chih-Kai Chang);黃榮志(Rong-Chih Huang)關鍵字：電子治理;跨域治理;電子化政府;後端平台整合;跨組織系統;electronic governance;cross-boundary governance;e-government;back-office integration;interorganizational system期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著全球與社會環境的快速變遷，公共事務的範疇和內涵日趨複雜，依據傳統社會型態所形成的政府組織架構，顯已不足以應付劇烈變動下所衍生的許多有賴透過跨機關或跨部門合作等「跨域」方式加以解決的棘手性議題。但在已習於部門化和專業分工的政府部門中處理跨域問題，實是當前公共治理中的一大挑戰。在民眾向政府申辦的案件處理上，同樣面臨跨域問題的挑戰，因此政府部門亟思透過資通科技的協助，藉以改善傳統組織分工下的跨域治理問題。但在引入資通科技後，政府真能解決現階段後端組織整合之問題？有哪些因素對於跨機關整合具有關鍵性的影響？甚者，業務相互關聯的機關間是否真有其意願採納跨域服務整合的觀念？爰此，本研究之主要目的，即在於由電子治理的角度，耙梳歸納當前理論文獻針對電子跨域整合所討論的相關影響因素，並進而檢視我國目前在電子化服務中跨域整合管理的代表性個案所呈現之影響成敗的關鍵因素，以期透過此理論與個案的交互對話補充，提出更為廣博的電子化跨機關整合服務之影響因素架構，作為電子化跨機關整合在實務推動或理論研究時參照與思辨的基礎。英文摘要：Accompanying with the rapid evolution of information and communication technologies, customer service delivery has been confronted a radical transformation in both the public and private sectors. One-stop service with inter-organizational integration, even joined-up government, has become a beautiful vision as well as desired expectation of future public service. As a strong body of literature in business process reengineering and interorganizational system presents the possibility of ubiquitous public service delivery, however, we still do not have a clear idea in terms of what factors that may influence agency’s decision to adopt or not to adopt electronic cross-boundary initiatives. Still, we remain unclear about the critical success factors of such electronic cross-boundary public initiatives.Therefore, the present paper aims to explore the factors which may influence public agency's intention of adopting electronic cross-boundary initiatives to provide integrated public services. On the other hand, the critical success factors of such back-office reforms in the public sector will be examined as well. In addition to the literature reviews of business process reengineering and interorganizational system theories, multiple case studies in Taiwan's government agencies along with in-depth interviews and focus group interviews were employed as the primary methods of the study. Research findings and implications for the application of electronic cross-boundary governance in Taiwan will be discussed at the end of the present paper.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201309_(45).00012篇名：跨域加值公共建設財務規劃方案問題之探討並列篇名：The Issues on Project for Cross-Field Value-Adding in Public Works Financial Planning作者：賴宗裕(Tsung-Yu Lai);蘇偉強(Wei-Chiang Su)關鍵字：財源籌措;自償率;外部效益內部化;租稅增額融資;新制度經濟學;fund-raising;self-liquidation ratio;external benefit internalized;tax increment financing;new institution economics期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：公共建設資金需求龐大，在地方政府財政普遍困窘的情況下，勢必需要透過中央補助，以支應其不足。然而，當各地方皆具有補助需求時，中央反而面臨資金不足分配的難題。因此，行政院經建會推動「跨域加值公共建設財務規劃方案」，期望以自償率門檻審查，要求地方政府將公共建設的外部效益內部化，以提高計畫財務自償性。外部效益內部化的具體策略，包含增額容積、租稅增額財源等，屬於預期性財務規劃，亦即將預期收益納入財務計畫中，作為財政補助的依據，或可視為財政資源分配的籌碼。然而，此一制度亦將衍生各面向的經濟問題亟需思考與解決，首先是中央忽略地方官僚各種自利動機所產生的共有財競爭問題；其次為各種財源籌措工具隱含不確定性所產生的交易成本問題；最後則為地方傾向美化財務效益所造成的道德危機問題。因此，本文建議進行制度調整，面向包含成立資訊共享與協商平台、降低不確定性、置入激勵機制、建立監督管理機制等，藉以預防中央與地方的不一致與衝突，促使地方進行穩健的財務規劃，避免財務缺口之發生，進而才能有效地紓緩政府預算編列負擔。英文摘要：Under the situation of financial difficulty, local governments confront huge demand of public funds for infrastructure projects. They need subsidies from the central government. However, the central government also faces the problem of lacking funds to meet the need of local governments. Therefore, the Council for Economic Planning and Development (CEPD) implements ”Project for Cross-Field Value-Adding in Public Works Financial Planning” to decide the amount of subsidies through requesting local governments to internalize external benefit and to raise the self-financing ability of project. The specific strategies include raising the average FAR (floor area ratio), tax increment financing and these expected benefits will bring into the financial plan as the basis of grant. However, this mechanism will also cause some new economic problems. First, it neglects the tragedy of the commons. Second, it will arise more transaction cost which results from uncertainty. Finally, local governments may beautify the financial benefits that will result in the moral hazard. Hence, this paper suggests to establish the information sharing and consultation platform, reduce uncertainty, set up the incentive mechanism and supervision mechanism in order to prevent the conflicts between the local and central government, to promote the local governments to do a financial planning steadily to avoid financial gap and further to relieve the government budget burden.起始頁-結束頁：41-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201309_(45).00023篇名：公共行政領域碩士論文主題與方法的研究趨勢－多層次分析觀點並列篇名：Research Trends in the Topics and Methods of Public Administration Graduate Theses in Taiwan: A Multilevel Perspective作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);張順全(Shun-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：多層次分析;脈絡變數;縱橫資料;公共行政研究;碩士論文;multilevel analysis;contextual variable;panel data;public administration research;Graduate theses期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：45期出版年：2013中文摘要：從研究方法的觀點，欲探討某一學術領域之論文寫作的研究趨勢，倘若不考慮時間因素，祇是單純合併不同時間點之資料進行分析，會拘泥於橫斷面的觀察，僅能利用靜態比較方式反映出研究主題與方法選擇的差異，恐無法檢證時間遞移對論文研究趨勢變化的具體效應；另一方面，若祇單純考慮時間序列資料的分析方法，仍未將環境系絡的結構因素納入考量，則又無可避免地會喪失攸關縱橫時空之資料（panel data）的完整訊息。因之，本研究嘗試以台灣公共行政領域的碩士論文為分析標的，提出一個有待檢驗的基本命題：雖然影響各校相關公共行政系所碩士論文總產量，如招生人數或畢業生多，論文數量自然就會增加，但是，論文產量研究趨勢的歷年變化會依研究主題、研究方法、研究對象而有所不同；尚且，由於各校發展時空環境不同，如學校所在區域、公行系所歷史、指導教授背景等屬結構性總體脈絡變數仍存有交互影響的效果。本研究利用多層次分析（multilevel analysis）的方法，檢證出各校公共行政碩士論文產量的增加，並不全然是隨著時間而等比例增加，而是依<U+784F>究主題、資料分析方法、<U+784F>究對象而有不同比例的增加趨勢，反映了議題與方法選擇的消長變化；且伴隨著結構性脈絡變數的變化也可能會影響論文產出，而非單純取決於研究生個人的興趣。經由此篇應用多層次分析方法的引介，不但可對台灣公共行政學領域相關校系的長期研究走向的變異來源和意涵提供更深刻的理解，也可確認總體層次與個體層次的變數對論文產量的影響大小及方向。英文摘要：From a methodological point of view, when examining the overall research output and trends of a growing academic discipline, the effects of time should be taken into consideration, for otherwise analysis is reduced to cross-sectional, comparative static analysis of differences in research topics and methods. On the other hand, if time effects were the only variables taken into account, analysis would also, inevitably, squander vast information that is contained in various contextual variables affecting research production. The fundamental proposition of this paper is that the choice of research topic and method is strongly influenced by contextual and other environmental factors. Using graduate theses in Taiwan public administration as data, this study seeks to investigate not only the dynamic interaction of time-environment effects, but also those contextual factors that shape Taiwanese students' selection of research topics and methods.Our research includes both micro-level variables (i.e., research topic and method) and macro-level variables, such as background of students' thesis advisors, location and historical background of graduate programs and institutes. By taking a multilevel perspective, this study demonstrates that the number of graduate theses in public administration does not necessarily increase proportionally over time; rather it is subject to the growth and decline of research topics and methods. Moreover, thesis output is also influenced by structural changes in the contextual variables, and does not entirely hinge on students' personal research interests. We conclude that the introduction of multi-level analysis does not only provide a deeper understanding of the sources of variation in long-term research trends, but also can determine the impact -both size and direction-of macro- and micro-level variables on graduate thesis production in Taiwan's public administration.起始頁-結束頁：75-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201309_(45).00034篇名：確保公共官僚組織成為民主的守護神並列篇名：Ensure the Public Bureaucracy to Become the Guardian of Democracy作者：曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：45期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：109-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201309_(45).00045篇名：臺灣小兒科醫療資源空間可接近性分析並列篇名：Spatial Accessibility to Pediatric Services in Taiwan作者：廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao)關鍵字：小兒科醫師人口比;空間可接近性;地理資訊系統;「兩階段流動搜尋法」;空間自相關分析;pediatric physician-to-population ratio;spatial accessibility;geographic information system;enhanced two-step floating catchment area method;spatial autocorrelation analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究利用「進階式兩階段流動搜尋法」（enhanced two-step floating catchment area method）針對臺灣各村里小兒科醫療資源空間可接近性進行評估，並透過敘述統計、單因子變異數分析與Scheffe檢定，檢測不同都市發展類型間在醫療資源可接近性是否有顯著差異。此外，本研究透過Anselin's LISA及Getis-Ord's Gi*(d)進行空間自相關分析，找出臺灣小兒科醫療資源缺乏的集中區域。最後，在空間分析的部分，根據健保局101年巡迴醫療資訊，繪製出服務涵蓋區域的地圖；並與先前所完成評估結果進行對照，評量其對於臺灣小兒科醫療資源空間可近性改善的程度。研究結果顯示小兒科資源缺乏的村里多位於偏遠鄉鎮、農業市鎮或是高齡化市鎮。空間自相關分析則發現，小兒科醫療資源特別缺乏的群聚區域大致分布在中央山脈沿線、雲嘉南沿海與北部竹苗等地區附近之村里。此外，健保局在101年度巡迴服務提供的範圍，大致有回應到實際的情況，並未出現過多資源錯置現象。然而，仍然約有將近27%的小兒人口，位在醫療資源不足的區域，並可能無法取得巡迴醫療服務。因此，未來透過跨區域資源整合的觀點，針對群聚性較高的醫療資源缺乏區域，重新思考小兒科醫療資源缺乏區域的改善政策，有其必要性。英文摘要：This study uses a geographic information system to calculate a geographically modified pediatrician to population ratio by using a two-step floating catchment area method which incorporated two different distance-decay functions to evaluate pediatrician resources in Taiwan. The result of Scheffe and spatial analysis shows that there is a gap between urban and rural areas in spatial accessibility. The spatial autocorrelation analysis finds that the clusters of pediatric shortage areas are located near Central Mountain Range, southwest coast, Hsinchu and Miaoli. Although the Bureau of National Health Insurance's policy does cover some shortage areas, there are still nearly 27% of the people under eighteen within pediatrician shortage areas. Therefore, it is very important to use cross-boundary policy to improve the shortage of pediatric resources in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201303_(44).00016篇名：臺灣財政永續性之研究：政府角色的反思並列篇名：The Study of Fiscal Sustainability in Taiwan: A Reflection of the Role of Government作者：蔡馨芳(Hsin-Fang Tsai)關鍵字：財政永續性;跨期預算平衡;預算赤字;財政政策;非定態時間序列模型;fiscal sustainability;intertemporal budget constraint;budget deficit;fiscal policy;non-stationary time-series model期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：全球各國政府2009年為因應金融危機採行積極性財政政策之代價，引發政府債務快速累積及長期財政不健全之危機。以政府角色來觀察，此乃過去服膺凱因斯主義，強調政府在遭遇經濟衰退時，主張採用「赤字預算」來穩定經濟，而積極介入市場的後果。臺灣各級政府過去20年來，長年依賴舉債支應財政赤字，累積未償債務餘額佔GDP之比率不斷上升，特別是2000年後累積速度加快，財政情況加速惡化。本研究之目的旨於檢驗臺灣近年來財政變數是否仍滿足財政永續之條件，做為財政政策是否持續之判準。研究發現臺灣近20年多來政府實質歲出及歲入已無法滿足跨期平衡條件，顯示自從1989年政治、經濟及社會轉型之後，政府運用財政政策所造成之財政赤字規模已太大，無法透過自動調整機制回復均衡。政府必須審慎檢視政策方向變更之必要性，以確保財政之永續發展；同時，支出結構僵化及財政弱化，致使政府陷入既無法勝任凱因斯學派主張的成長領航者角色，亦無法保守地擔任古典學派所謂市場守護者角色的兩難困境。英文摘要：In response to the financial crisis around the world, governments in different countries have started implementing various economic revival programs since 2009. The cost of the positive fiscal policies was the aftermath of rapid accumulation of government debts and long term fiscal crisis. Moreover, this is the consequences of the adoption to Keynesian which stressed the concept of ”deficit budget.” How to rconsolidate the fiscal stability has become a very important subject to every government. In the past twenty years, Taiwan government has been relied on borrowing to meet fiscal deficits. The accumulated outstanding debt balance proportion of GDP on the increase, especially after 2000, accelerated deteriorating fiscal situation. The purpose of this paper intends to verify if the conditions of intertemporal budget constraint that Barro proposed has been fulfilled in Taiwan. The finding was that the actual expenditure and revenue in Taiwan have been unable to meet the intertemporal equilibrium in the past twenty years. The research finding revealed that the budget deficit was too large to adjust through automatic mechanism during 1989. The evidence also showed that the contemporary reactive fiscal policies should not be continued. The expenditures structurization and fiscal weakening lead to a dilemma, neither qualified for the role of economic growth steerer, nor as a guardian of market.起始頁-結束頁：41-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201303_(44).00027篇名：政府創新的類型與分佈：我國地方政府1999-2010年間的觀察並列篇名：Types and Distribution of Local Government Innovation作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：創新;地方政府;創造力;政策競爭;創新擴散;innovation;local government;creativity;policy competition;diffusion of innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：在政府績效模型中，「創新」或「創造力」的重要性與地位受到了普遍的認同，如何提昇政府創造創新的能力，也成為學界與實務界共同關心重要議題。不過相當可惜的是，我國過去對於創新的相關研究，一方面以私部門的討論為主，少數政府創新的研究，若不是未對創新進行比較明確的概念化與操作化，就是多以個案式討論為主，忽略整體面的觀察，以致於到目前為止，仍有我國政府曾經出現多少創新？什麼特質的政府有較多的創新？我國的地方政府以發展哪一類型的創新為主？什麼因素可能影響地方政府創新的產生？…等多個問題待解答。本研究以「政府創新」為主題，以地方政府為範圍，透過1999年至2010年間的新聞資料庫搜尋，指認出755個地方政府的「創新」，細部 分析這些創新的內容之後發現，這些創新大多集中在臺北市、臺北縣、高雄市、與桃園縣等地區，而創新的類型大多是屬於「一般性的服務」，產品性、概念性、程序性與組織結構性創新較少。而公務人員數量越多、資源越多、分工化程度越高的地方政府，比較會有較多創新出現。這個研究結果，在學術上可以進一步作為政府創新擴散研究的基礎，在實務上也可以做為擬定提升政府創新能力的策略參考。英文摘要：The growing importance of policy innovation has drawn very much attention from both academia and practice. It is widely believed that the policy innovation capacity is a main source of government performance. By censusing local policy innovations within 1999-2010, the first purpose of this paper is to classify the innovations that are invented from the local government. The second purpose is to display the distribution of policy innovations among local governments. The findings of this paper will become the base for developing an innovation-creation casual model.起始頁-結束頁：73-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201303_(44).00038篇名：「科技訊息分群圖譜」導入政府決策支援系統之應用並列篇名：Applications of the "Science & Technology Message Grouping Map" for Government Decision Support Systems作者：戴元峰(Yuan-Fung Dai);吳騏(Chi Wu);薛義誠(Yih-Chearng Shiue)關鍵字：文字探勘;資訊視覺化（圖像化、可視化）;環境偵測（環境掃描、環境監視）;決策支援系統;科技訊息分群圖譜;text mining;information visualization;environmental scanning;decision support systems;science & technology message grouping map期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：44期出版年：2013中文摘要：掌握全球各國科技發展狀態是國家科技政策制定的重要工作，其成功關鍵就在於如何取得、呈現、處理相關資訊以提供決策者使用。然而目前國內外皆缺乏這類政府實務研究。因此，本研究提出政府科技政策的資訊蒐集、呈現、分析的重要性，並引入「國際科技政策觀測系統」，它是典型的政府科技決策支援體系，能有效蒐集資訊、減少決策環境的不確定性，這種環境偵測系統可作為環 境預測與前瞻的基礎，對政策的學習與推動、科技的競爭與發展有正面助益。其次，我們透過文字探勘技術以及「增長階層式自組織映射圖」（growing hierarchical self-organizing map, GHSOM）群聚分析方法，將「國際科技政策觀測系統」中以文字型式呈現之文件資料，轉換為以圖像型式呈現的「科技訊息分群圖譜」（science & technology message grouping map, STMGM），建立「政策觀測圖像化模式」（policy patterns observed image, PPOI）應用，研究文字探勘結合圖譜之應用與潛在價值，以提升科技決策支援工作。本研究發現「科技訊息分群圖譜」、「政策觀測圖像化模式」在政策觀測工作上之應用，有助於提升決策者清楚、簡略、迅速了解國際科技政策發展概況的需求，完成強化系統的環境監視功能。這種將人類智能與資訊科技組合的應用，在科技政策領域將開啟新的決策支援模式，並啟發未來其他領域的政府決策支援工作思維。英文摘要：Getting hold of the development information in other nations is an important task in the process of national science and technology policy making. The key of success resides in how to obtain, process and present related information for decision makers. However, this kind of practical governmental work is hardly found in both local and foreign researches. This research emphasizes the importance of the collection, presentation, and analyses of related information for Science and Technology policy makers. It also introduces the International Science and Technology Policy Observing System (ISTPOS), a typical government science & technology decision support system, that aims at collecting information efficiently, whilst reducing the uncertainty in decision-making environment. As an environmental detection system, it acts as the basis of environmental prediction and science and technology foresight, greatly helping learning / promoting of policy and competition / development of such. Furthermore, we employ the cluster analysis of the Growing Hierarchical Self-Organizing Map (GHSOM) to illustrate the applicability of text mining and mapping on science & technology decision support task. This transforms document wording into graphic presentation of the Science & Technology Message Grouping Map (STMGM), to set up the Policy Patterns Observed Image (PPOI) applications. It in turn works on the application and potentiality of combining text mining and mapping to promote the decision support system. This work finds that by applying the STMGM and PPOI to policy observations, decision-makers can better understand the development/trends in international community, to strengthen the development of systematic environmental scanning. It is also encouraging to see the support approach, combing human intelligence and information of science and technology to adopt the PPOI in other fields of government decision support system in other fields in the near future.起始頁-結束頁：113-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201303_(44).00049篇名：規範與繁文縟節並列篇名：Rules and Red Tape-A Prism for Public Administration Theory and Research作者：陳重安(Chung-An Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：44期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：161-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201303_(44).000501篇名：主編的話作者：趙永茂期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：兼容並蓄或拼裝上路？－從內閣制與總統制優劣辯論檢視半總統制的利弊並列篇名：A Beneficial Combination or a Detrimental Mixture? Evaluating the Effect of Semi-Presidentialism on the Basis of the Debates on the Virtues and Vices of Presidentialism and Parliamentarism作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su)關鍵字：半總統制;內閣制;總統制;總理總統制;總統議會制;semi-presidentialism;presidentialism;parliamentarism;premierpresidentialism;president-parliamentarism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：半總統制是1990年代以來許多新興民主國家採行的憲政體制，新興民主國家採行半總統制後，往往會期待半總統制這種混合式的憲政體制，可以結合總統制與內閣制的優點，並迴避總統制與內閣制的缺點。然而，就某些半總統制國家的實際憲政運作來觀察，半總統制這種混合式的憲政體制，並不見得是結合了總統制與內閣制的優點，反而同時匯集了總統制與內閣制的缺點。我們可以問的問題是，相較於內閣制與總統制，究竟半總統制是一種兼容並蓄的憲政體制，還是一種拼裝上路的憲政體制？是什麼因素使得若干國家的半總統制能夠幸運地成了兼具總統制與內閣制之長的「結晶體」？相反地，又是什麼因素使得若干國家的半總統制不幸地成了兼具總統制與內閣制之短的「拼裝車」？本文希望以1990年代以來關於內閣制與總統制優劣的辯論為基礎，檢視並評估半總統制這種混合制的利弊得失。英文摘要：Semi-presidentialism, a hybrid constitutional system from presidentialism and parliamentarism, has been adopted by many nascent democracies since 1990s, and is usually supposed to combine the advantages that presidentialism and parliamentarism have. However, looking into the actual constitutional practice of the countries adopting semi-presidentialism, this hybrid constitutional system may not integrate the advantages, but rather gather the disadvantages of presidentialism and parliamentarism. Here comes a question: compared with presidentialism and parliamentarism, is semi-presidentialism a beneficial combination or a detrimental mixture? Why can semi-presidentialism in certain countries fortunately be a benign composite which embraces the advantages of both presidentialism and parliamentarism, while in some countries it may unfortunately turn into a malign entity which possesses the disadvantages from both? This study hopes to inspect and evaluate the pros and cons of this hybrid constitutional system on the basis of the debates on advantages and disadvantages of presidentialism and parliamentarism since 1990s.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：俄羅斯半總統制下普金歸位與民主發展之探討並列篇名：Analysis of Putin's Return to Presidency and Democratic Development under the Semi-Presidential System in Russian Federation作者：許菁芸(Jing-Yun Hsu)關鍵字：俄羅斯;普金;總統大選;國會;合法性;Russia;Putin;presidential election 2012;state Duma;legitimacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：在憲法的半總統制的框架下，俄羅斯高度人治的現象也讓西方學者認為是政治威權的再現，嚴重影響俄羅斯的民主進程。俄羅斯於2011年12月4日舉行國會大選，5日公布大選結果，執政的統一俄羅斯黨（United Russia Party）在大選中勉強獲得近5成的選票，但是，如從2011年的俄羅斯國會大選結果分析，民眾對於俄羅斯政府（或普金的執政）的執政確實帶著不滿情緒，但卻也不是對政權合法性的質疑，因此，2012年總統大選，普金成功歸位。因此，本文之研究目的在於解析俄羅斯半總統制下普金歸位對俄羅斯民主之影響與展望。研究發現俄羅斯即使實施中央再集權政策，卻仍以民主為名（主權民主），而其非制度性策略的實施，也是以制度性策略作為包裝，而制度性因素，包含國會與政黨、公民社會與反對團體的立法規範（無真正之反對力量），再加上俄羅斯人對於民主的特殊看法與期望，使得普金成功三任總統職位，但是，在未來的六年任期間，面對抗議與支持率的降低，如何超越自己前面的政績，將俄羅斯帶往人民所期望之「民主」與強大國家願景，將是普金三任總統後必須直接面對的課題。英文摘要：Under the Constitutional framework of Semi-presidentialism, the phenomenon of Putin Regime of long standing makes Western scholars believe that Russia is back to authoritarianism and has serious impact on Russia's democratic processes. Russia held the parliamentary election on December 4, 2011, and announced the election results next day. Although the ruling United Russia party was leading with 49.5 per cent of the vote, it was a sharp drop which compared with the previous vote that landed the party a two-thirds majority in the state Duma. Anyway, when analyzing the results of State Duma elections, we may find that Russians are really discontent with Putin Regime, but not the regime's legitimacy questioned. Therefore, in 2012 Putin return to the presidency successfully. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to analyze the structural institutional factors and non-institutional factors of Putin's return to presidency and the impact on Russian democratic development. The study found that the implementation of recentralization in Russia is still under the name of democracy (sovereign democracy). That is, using the institutional strategy as the package of non-institutional policy enforcement. The institutional factors, including the control of State Duma and political parties, the legislation to regulate civil society and oppositions, and the special views and expectations of the Russians for democracy, made the success of Putin's return to presidency. But, how Putin can lead Russia to the ways of Russian people's expectations of ”democracy” and ”strong state” beyond his previous achievements, will be the main issue, Putin must face directly during his tenure under the pressure of the protests against corruption and the reduction of his support rate in the next six years.起始頁-結束頁：49-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：盧梭推論戰爭權利的途徑－從共和自由到萬民法並列篇名：Rousseau's Approach to the Rights of War: From Republican Freedom to the Laws of Nations作者：陳嘉銘(Chia-Ming Chen)關鍵字：盧梭;義戰;萬民法;自由;共和主義;Rousseau;Just War;Laws of Nations;Freedom;Republicanism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去對盧梭戰爭思想的評論認為，盧梭關於共和國該如何因應戰爭之惡的處方，不是他評估難以實現的聖皮耶的永久和平論，就是他給科西嘉和波蘭的孤離主義建議。他們普遍沒有認真看待盧梭關於戰爭權利的思考。從當代義戰議題引出的困惑出發，並從《愛彌兒》中的萬民法基本原則著手，本文主張盧梭在《戰爭狀態》一文採取了具有一致性的推論戰爭權利的理論設計。基於共和國間免於恣意依賴的共和自由理念，盧梭先提出共和國相關戰爭難以改變的行動理由、原則和模式，然後在這些自然關係基礎上建立戰爭權利。共和國應以這些戰爭權利為基礎，組成邦聯對抗侵略。未來研究值得繼續發展盧梭的共和主義途徑，和當代國際契約論以及義戰議題對話。英文摘要：Most commentaries on Rousseau's thoughts on international relations tend to see that his prescriptions regarding war consist in primarily his evaluation of Saint-Pierre's project for perpetual peace, and his harsh, isolationist foreign policies proposed for Corsica and Poland. Little attention has been paid to Rousseau's approach to the rights of war. This essay begins with the difficulty of situating his strange thesis of the rights of war in the contemporary debates of just war. And it demonstrates that Rousseau's approach to the rights of war, or more generally, his approach to the laws of nations, is clearly stated in Emile and carefully executed in The State of War. The foremost principle of the rights of nations is the same as that of social contract, that is, the republican ideal of none arbitrary dependence. To apply such principle to the international relations, Rousseau first analyzes the unavoidable reasons, principles and patterns of behaviors regarding war among the ideal republics. It is these ”natural relations” that constitute the fundamental ground of the rights of war. The rights of war provide the foundation and possibility for small republics to form confederations against unjust aggression. It shall be interesting in the future to explore dialogues between Rousseau's approach and the contemporary global social contract theories, as well as the issues of just war.起始頁-結束頁：93-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：多元的公民審議如何可能？－程序主義與公民社會觀點並列篇名：Inclusion in Public Deliberation: Proceduralism and Civil Society Perspectives作者：林國明(Kuo-Ming Lin)關鍵字：審議民主;公民會議;公共領域;公民社會;組織場域;deliberative democracy;public deliberation;consensus conference;public sphere;civil society期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：各類形式的公民審議論壇蔚為民主實踐的風潮。現實世界的公民審議，是否符合審議民主的規範理想，具有包容與慎思的特性而呈現多元觀點？對於這個問題，程序主義和公民社會觀點提供不同的解答。程序主義觀點，著重於理性言說的溝通形式，試圖透過結構化的程序規則，來創造理想的審議情境。公民社會觀點的審議模式，則容許比較彈性的溝通形式，關注公民社會場域中非結構化的公開討論，如何塑造公共意見。本文試圖結合「程序主義」與「公民社會」的觀點，來分析哪些條件促成和阻礙理想的審議情境。本文以台灣舉辦過的六場公民會議為案例，來說明、分析一般公民參與的審議論壇，如何利用程序規則的操作，試圖在審議過程中呈現多元觀點。本文也借用「組織場域」（organizational field）的概念，從介入特定議題領域的社會團體的動員密度、差異程度和審議傾向等三個面向，來分析公民社會的特質，如何影響公民會議程序原則的運作。本文的分析指出，在特定議題領域中，如果存在著眾多異質的公民團體，能夠接近政府決策和政策資源，且再現各種差異觀點，表示這個議題具有「多重公共領域」，那麼，公民會議的運作，比較可能邀請代表不同立場、專業，又能抱持開放態度進行討論的社會團體人士，參與指導委員會的運作；也會有更多背景不同的公民，因為關注高度動員的議題，而主動報名參加公民會議；各個團體所再現的差異觀點，也成為公民會議所提供的閱讀資料的論述來源；會議所提供的專家的聲音，也比較能夠達到周延與多元的要求。英文摘要：The normative ideas of deliberative democracy hold that diverse views ought to be included in public discussion. How can the ideal of inclusion be realized in actual practice of public deliberation? The approaches from proceduralism and civil society offer different answers. The procedural views, emphasizing rational form of communication, attempt to create ideal situations of deliberation by establishing structured rules. The civil society perspectives focus on the formation of public opinions through flexible, unstructured forms of communication in multiple layers of civil society. This paper combine two approaches to analyzing the conditions for facilitate and inhibit the inclusion in public deliberation.In this paper I use six concensus conferences held in Taiwan as empirical cases. I analyze what the procedural rules were put into practice to include plural viewpoints in deliberation and how they worked. I also adopt the concept of ”organizational filed” to investigate how the characteristics of civil society, defined by the intensity of mobilization, diversity of positions and power relations to the state, affect the working of the procedural rules of deliberative forum like consensus conferences that attempt to create ideal situations of deliberation. I conclude that in specific issue areas, if there exist a highly mobilized sector of social groups representing plural views and gaining access to decision-making power, the public deliberation would be more inclusive.起始頁-結束頁：137-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：書評：在舊世界崩壞前－新憲政主義與賀修的霸權維持理論並列篇名：Book Review: Toward Juristocracy: The Origins and Consequences of the New Constitutionalism作者：黃丞儀期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：185-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：主編的話作者：趙永茂期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：從對話到對立的民主化實踐－Mikhail Bakhtin對話主義的理論轉折與政治方案之初探並列篇名：From Dialogue to Confrontation: A Preliminary Study on the Theoretical Transition of Mikhail Bakhtin's Dialogism and its Political Program for the Practice of Democratization作者：王孝勇(Hsiao-Yung Wang)關鍵字：巴赫汀;民主化;正當性論述;形式主義;對立;對話主義;Mikhail Bakhtin;democtratization;legitimate rhetoric;formalism;confrontation;dialogism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在藉由勾勒Bakhtin對話主義的理論轉折，初步規劃民主化實踐的政治方案。首先，透過閱讀Bakhtin對形式主義的批評與再思，本研究試圖還原對話主義的核心關懷。其次，藉由進一步參照Bakhtin晚期狂歡節語言所揭示出的再意義化與民主觀，本研究試圖說明對話主義從日常性對話到政治性對話的轉折，並以2011年台北同志遊行的正當性論述作為例說。研究發現，對話主義將既定的規範轉化為未定，並在偶然性的歷史機緣與脈絡中重構對立的意識形態之意義迴圈，正是民主化實踐的政治方案。英文摘要：This paper aims to propose the political program for the practice of democratization by outline the theoretical transition of Mikhail Bakhtin's dialogism. First, it read Bakhtinian critique of Russian formalism and revisited the core issues of dialogism by referring to the concept of carnival. Second, it attempts to elaborate the theoretical transition of dialogism by contrasting ”daily dialogue” with ”political dialogue” and analyze the legitimate rhetoric of the 2011 LGBT pride in Taipei furthermore. Based on the research findings, the paper concluded that the political program of democratization which dialogism embodies is to transform the pre-given social norms to the not-yet-to-be-given, thereby constructing a confrontational ideology under contingent historical context.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：陳水扁時期的台灣政商關係－少數政府、個人化網路與金融改革並列篇名：State-Business Relations of the Chen Shui-Bian Presidency in Taiwan: Minority Government, Personal Network and Financial Reforms作者：黃宗昊(Tsung-Hao Huang)關鍵字：政商關係;陳水扁;少數政府;個人化網絡;金融改革;state-business relations;Chen Shui-bian;minority government;personal network;financial reforms期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從歷史制度論出發探討政商關係，將政商關係視為非正式制度，連結權力結構與經濟治理，並深受歷史遺緒的影響。在2000年政黨輪替執政後，國民黨失去權力，長期以來的黨商聯盟衰亡，給予民進黨建構政商關係的機會。在少數政府的權力結構下，民進黨政府並未發展出制度化機制以管理政商關係，而是出現了以總統陳水扁為核心的個人化網絡，政商關係並逐漸變質為替總統的個人利益服務，導致「扁案」的出現。此種扭曲，具體反映在金融改革的過程中，造成爭議不斷、弊案連連。金融改革的失誤，正是陳水扁時期政商關係不當的具體事證。英文摘要：From historical institutionalism, we regard the state-business relationship as an informal institution, constructed by political institutions and historical legacy, linking political governing and economic governance. After the party turn-over of 2000, the dominance of the Kuomintang's (KMT) party-business alliance declined and the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) had the chance to build its own state-business relations. Under a minority government, the DPP developed crony capitalism and president-enterprise collusions around President Chen Shui-bian instead of building institutional mechanisms to manage state-business relations. Under the circumstances of maximizing personal political interests, the president has the incentive to intervene policy for monetary endowments and/or personal financial gain from the support of various enterprises. The president can transfer this money as political capital to keep influence after completing his term in office. This logic is the reason why the financial reforms during the Chen Shui-bian presidency were filled with scandals and corruption. The distortion of financial reforms is evidence of improper state-business relations during the Chen Shui-bian presidency.起始頁-結束頁：41-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：「兩岸關係因素」真的影響了2012年的台灣總統大選嗎？並列篇名：Did the Cross-Strait Relations Really Affect the 2012 Presidential Election in Taiwan?作者：湯晏甄(Yen-Chen Tang)關鍵字：兩岸關係;理性選擇理論;符號政治理論;cross-Strait relations;rational choice approach;symbolic political theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：「兩岸關係因素」真的影響了2012年的台灣總統大選嗎？這是本文的問題意識。以往學術研究對於「兩岸關係因素」大都著重在民眾預期兩岸經貿開放所帶來的經濟效應，本文嘗試釐清「兩岸關係因素」的概念意涵並賦予新的定義，同時檢視兩岸實施ECFA後，民眾確實感受到的整體與個體之經濟利弊。本文使用「2012年台灣選舉與民主化調查研究」的資料，以「勝算對數模型」（logit model）進行檢證。實證結果顯示，「兩岸關係因素」對此次台灣總統大選確實有影響。支持「九二共識」的選民，比較不會投給民進黨候選人；愈肯定ECFA經濟效應的選民，愈不會投給民進黨候選人。本文進一步發現，「兩岸關係因素」中的經濟因素，對於中立選民的影響最大，弱民進黨支持者次之。但是，「台灣認同」在這次總統大選並沒有發揮作用，此結果與過去研究發現截然不同。英文摘要：Did the cross-Strait relations really affect the 2012 presidential election in Taiwan? This article deals with this problem. Previous research regarding cross-Strait relations mostly focused on the expectations of the public for the economic effects brought about by the launch of the cross-Strait economic and trade policies. This article clarifies its implications and redefines it. In the same time, this article also examines the advantages and disadvantages felt by the general public after the implementations of the ECFA. This study uses the data of the national survey of ”Taiwan Election and Democratization Study” and tries to take advantage of it by adopting the logit model to examine. The empirical results support the hypothesis that cross-Strait relations affecting the 2012 presidential election in Taiwan. Voters who supported the ”1992 Consensus” are less likely to vote for DPP candidates. The higher the degree of advantages voters felt regarding ECFA, the less likely they are to vote for DPP candidates. Furthermore, we also find that economic factors in the cross-Strait relationship have the largest influence on independent voters, followed by weak DPP supporters. However, the empirical results indicate ”Taiwan Identity” did not have impacts on this year's presidential election which was quite different from those findings of the previous studies.起始頁-結束頁：91-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：台灣政黨的持續與變遷：理論與資料的對話並列篇名：Change and Continuity in Taiwan's Political Parties: Dialogue between Theory and Data作者：吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201312.17(2).1-142篇名：「選舉機器」政黨轉型路線與黨政關係的建構：中國國民黨的經驗（2000－2012）並列篇名：Party Transformation Toward "Election Machine" and the Construction of Its Relationship with Government: The Experience of KMT(2000~2012)作者：陳宏銘(Hong-Ming Chen)關鍵字：政黨轉型;選舉機器;國民黨;半總統制;party transformation;election machine;KMT;semipresidentialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文試圖探討中國國民黨在2000年至2012年政黨的轉型與黨政關係的建構情形。本文分析國民黨在這段時期轉型的一項核心議題，即以「選舉機器」為主要目標的轉型企圖和實際的轉型結果，以及與其並存發展的黨政關係模式，特別是關於2008年重新執政後總統是否兼任黨主席之政黨關係的建構問題。從當代政黨的研究議題而言，本研究跨越「政黨組織」以及「政黨與政府」這兩個面向。研究發現，「選舉機器」雖為國民黨領導菁英內的主流意見，但其內涵並不夠具體，因此雖然在2000年之後國民黨確實也某種程度進行組織的改革和精簡，但若從學術界對「選舉機器」的定義來衡量，國民黨的轉型內涵與選舉機器相去甚遠，以此目標來看，至2012年時國民黨仍未實質轉型。儘管國民黨為囊括式政黨，但根本上並未轉型成選舉專業型政黨，仍維持原來濃厚的大眾官僚型政黨性格。半總統制下的執政黨，可能成為一單純的「選舉機器」嗎？從國民黨的經驗來看，並不是如此。最後，在2008年國民黨重新執政後，面對建構黨政關係的挑戰，國民黨黨主席由總統擔任，其結果是強化了總統對政黨的控制。英文摘要：This study tries to explore KMT's transformation and type of its relationships with government from 2000 to 2012. This paper discusses one of the most important issues during this period: the transformation with a major purpose of becoming ”election machine”, and the relationships between party organization and government caused by this transformation, especially about constructing problems of whether president should be the chairman of the ruling party at the same time when KMT held the reins of government again in 2008. From contemporary research issues on political parties, this study deal both with ”political organizations” and ”political parties and the government”.The findings reveal that the transformation of KMT to become ”election machine” is the dominant opinion within the party, however, the contents of it are not specific enough. And, though after 2000 there was a certain degree of organization reform in KMT, but using the academic definition of ”election machine” to measure it, KMT has not put the concept into practice, which explains why KMT was not essentially transformed before 2012. Furthermore, though the KMT is a catch-all party, but it did not fundamentally transformed into a electoral-professional party and still maintains the feature of a mass bureaucratic party. But the ruling party under semi-presidentialism could become a mere ”election machine”? From the experience of the KMT, it is not the case. Finally, after KMT became the ruling party again in 2008, its elites faced with the challenge of building party-government relationship. The President Ma Ying-jeou served as the party chairman which strengthened president's control of political parties.起始頁-結束頁：15-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201312.17(2).15-693篇名：A Primary Study on Party Membership of the Kuomintang in Taiwan: From the Party Workers' Perspectives並列篇名：國民黨黨員之研究：黨職人員之觀點作者：林瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Lin)關鍵字：黨員身分;政黨黨員;誘因;參與度;membership;party members;incentives;involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：對政黨而言，黨員是相當重要的資產。政黨黨員協助政黨推動平時政務，也於選舉期間協助競選工作的推動，沒有黨員，政黨難以展現其存在性。是以，黨員的重要性，無庸置疑。本文藉由分析國民黨中央和地方黨部的深入訪談資料和調查資料，試圖探索誰是國民黨黨員？加入政黨的原因為何？國民黨黨員參與政黨活動的情形為何？根據分析資料顯示，過去十年來國民黨的黨員人數逐漸增加，展現國民黨在吸收支持者方面的動員能力。整體而言，國民黨黨員年齡高於一般選民，性別方面以男性居多，此也反映出黨員和選民之間的年齡和性別的差距。多數黨員表示是基於認同政黨的理念和議題政策而加入國民黨，然而團結凝聚性誘因和物質性誘因在吸納黨員方面也扮演著一定的作用。黨員的參與度因不同地方黨部而所不同，也和黨員年齡和國民黨於該地的政治實力而有所差異。在非都會區的黨員參與度較都會區來得高，年長的黨員參與情形也較為積極，國民黨選舉優勢區的黨員參與情形也較高。英文摘要：Party members are important assets to a political party, for without their help in running the daily affairs and campaigns, a party cannot be seen to exist. Therefore, there is no doubt that the party members are important. By analyzing data from in-depth interviews with central and local party branches, as well as questionnaires directed at party workers, this article aims to examine who the party members of the Kuomintang (KMT) are. Why do they join the party? What is the level of involvement of the members. The data reveal that KMT membership has been increasing steadily over the past decade, which indicates the KMT's capacity to draw support from voters. In general, KMT members tend to be older than the electorate on average, and most of them are male, reflecting that gender and age gaps exist between the KMT members and the electorate. While many KMT members are motivated by the party's ideas and issue orientations, to some extent, solidary incentives and material incentives also play a role in recruiting new members. The level of activism varies among the different local branches, with different degrees of participation in terms of age, region, and the party's political strength being found. Members in rural areas participate more than those in the cities, while older members participate more than the others. Members also participate more if the KMT retains a dominant status at the national level or in the local districts.起始頁-結束頁：71-114資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201312.17(2).71-1144篇名：把「政黨」找回來：台灣選舉研究的失衡與未來發展並列篇名：Bring the Parties Back In: The Imbalance and Future of Electoral Studies in Taiwan作者：劉從葦(Tsung-Wei Liu)關鍵字：政黨;小樣本研究;集合理論;比較政黨計畫;Political Parties;Small-n;Set Theory;ICPP期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以內容分析法檢視台灣六份主要政治學期刊中關於選舉的文章，發現多數文章都以「選民」為研究對象、研究方法上以「大樣本的抽樣調查」為主流、並一面倒地使用「統計分析」。對於這樣的集體現象，本文從研究對象、研究方法與分析方法三個面向來探討如何讓選舉研究有更多的選擇並且多元發展。首先，政黨不應該在選舉研究中被忽視，因為選舉是政黨爭取選民支持的過程，忽視政黨就無法勾勒完整的選舉過程。第二，抽樣調查不是研究方法的唯一選擇，尤其是關於研究政黨時經常會遇到因為樣本數少而導致抽樣與資料變異程度不足的困難，其實可以採用由偏重個案取向的小樣本研究社群所提出的方法論來解決。第三，統計分析並不是分析經驗資料的唯一方法，當資料的樣本數少且低度變異時，統計分析往往派不上用場，集合理論反而是比較有效的分析工具。最後，要讓政黨成為研究焦點，除了引入更多研究方法與分析方法外，短期內最重要也最有效的方法就是建置政黨資料庫供學者使用，因此介紹目前規模最大的國際比較政黨計畫（International Comparative Political Parties Project, ICPP）以及以其為範本的台灣政黨體系的持續與變遷整合型計畫。英文摘要：This paper examines articles on elections published in six Taiwanese journals on political science by using content analysis. The results show that what these articles have in common is that they focus on 'voters', using 'survey data', and they analyze data using 'statistical methods'. This research therefore argues, firstly, that political parties should not be ignored in electoral studies, because elections are the process by which political parties try to attract voters. The picture of electoral competition will not be complete without political parties. Secondly, a survey is one, and not the only, method of collecting data. Collecting large-n samples is usually not possible when studying political parties, and so the case-oriented method of small-n may be more appropriate. Thirdly, statistical methods are not the only way to analyze data. When encountering data for small-n samples with a low degree of variance, set theory is better than statistics. Finally, in order to pursue methodological plurality, the most important and efficient strategy in the short term is to establish a data base on political parties. In closing, this paper discusses the International Comparative Political Parties (ICPP) and the integrated project on Change and Continuity in Taiwan's Political Parties (CCTPP).起始頁-結束頁：115-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201312.17(2).115-1635篇名：解析台灣民眾統獨偏好：一個兩難又不確定的選擇並列篇名：Analyzing Taiwanese Public Opinion toward Future Cross-Strait Relations: Choice under Ambiguity and Uncertainty作者：俞振華(Eric Chen-Hua Yu);林啟耀(Kah-Yew Lim)關鍵字：統獨偏好;抽樣分配;價值衝突;不確定性;變異數不等選項模型;unification-independence preference;sampling distribution;ambivalence;uncertainty;heterogeneous choice model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去諸多與台灣民眾統獨偏好相關的研究發現，「價值衝突」及「不確定性」可謂為民眾統獨偏好的兩大主要特質。本研究的目的即在探討該兩項機制如何影響台灣民眾的統獨偏好。以兩岸整合的各項層面為例（包括兩岸經濟、生活、思想、或政治條件相同），本研究利用條件式問卷題組及，分析在務實面考量下，各條件的變化如何影響民眾統獨偏好的測量值的點估計及其離散程度。具體的發現包括以下兩點：首先，就偏好測量值的點估計而言，情感或理念的因素，譬如台灣人或中國人認同等，對於民眾的統獨偏好仍具有決定性的影響；而務實面的考量中，譬如對大陸日後政治或經濟發展走向的評估等，亦對民眾的統獨立場有所影響。換言之，感性與理性層面的考量皆可能左右民眾的統獨偏好。其次，就測量值的變異程度而言，本研究發現，受訪者針對各種條件問句所作的回答其變異數並非均一。透過變異數不等選項模型的分析，我們發現影響變異數不等的主要原因反映了上述兩項統獨偏好的特質：第一，由於民眾統獨立場背後的價值衝突程度不一，造成價值衝突程度高的人對統獨議題表態時陷入立場矛盾的兩難困境（變異數大）。第二，民眾對於兩岸議題的資訊充足程度亦可能影響統獨態度的變異數，即愈有能力理解兩岸議題或愈具備相關資訊的受訪者，其表態時的不確定感自然降低，則其統獨態度的變異程度自然較小。不過，最後這項論點並沒有獲得全面的驗證。英文摘要：This article analyzes the extent to which ambiguity and uncertainty affect Taiwanese public opinion toward future cross-Strait relations. With respect to different conditions for future integration across the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, we adopt a set of survey questionnaires to explore Taiwanese unification-independence preferences. Then, by assuming that the latent sampling distributions of such preferences may comprise different means and unequal variances, we form a set of heterogeneous choice models to investigate the factors that may contribute to explaining the differences among means (i.e., differences among locations of responses) and the factors that may result in variations in the variances (i.e., differences among distributions of responses). Our findings are mainly three-fold: first, a respondent's Taiwanese identity and assessment of mainland China's economic prospects as well as political development have significant impacts in terms of determining his/her unificationindependence preference. Second, a respondent could form ambivalent attitudes toward future cross-Strait relations due to his/her conflicting (or competing) values regarding cross-Strait relations. Finally, the more knowledge (or information) about cross-Strait issues a respondent possesses, the less uncertain he/she may become when expressing his/her unification-independence preference. However, this uncertainty argument is not fully supported by our empirical data.起始頁-結束頁：165-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201312.17(2).165-2306篇名：台灣文官人力資本、生涯選擇及目標與升遷狀況的性別差異：以2008年台灣文官調查為例並列篇名：Taiwanese Civil Servants' Gender Differences in Human Capital, Job Choice/Career Goal, and Career Advancement: A Case of the TGBS, 2008作者：黃煥榮(Huan-Jung Huang);方凱弘(Kai-Hung Fang)關鍵字：升遷;人力資本;工作價值觀;性別差異;玻璃天花板效應;promotion;human capital;work value;gender difference;glass ceiling effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：不論是在公部門或是私部門，近年來已有許多研究證明「性別」是影響生涯發展的一項重要因素。然而，針對台灣文官所進行之性別研究中，至今尚未出現以全體文官為對象所進行之循證分析。本文使用2008台灣文官調查（Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey, TGBS）的資料，希望能夠透過以循證調查為基礎之分析，了解性別因素如何影響台灣文官的升遷狀況。透過交叉分析、t檢定、變異數分析以及階層迴歸等統計方法，本研究所提出的兩個假設大致獲得支持，亦即性別差異對於工作年資、教育程度、工作選擇與工作目標皆有顯著影響，而上述四項變數對於升遷結果與升遷阻礙也都具有顯著影響，其中，屬於人力資本因素之工作年資與教育程度，對於升遷結果與升遷阻礙的影響又更為關鍵。英文摘要：Studies in recent years have found that gender is an important factor affecting career advancement both in the public and private sectors. However, existing gender studies on Taiwanese civil servants have never been conducted based on survey results targeting all Taiwanese civil servants as the population. This paper intends to perform evidencebased analysis using survey data collected from the Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey (TGBS) in order to better understand how gender differences have affected the promotion of public officials in Taiwan. Based on the results of the crosstabs, t-tests, ANOVA, and hierarchical multiple regression analyses, both of the hypotheses have been accepted. It is found that gender differences affect the seniority, level of education, the officials' reasons for entering public service, and the officials' desire to work. It is also found that these four factors have impacts on both the officials' current ranking and the length of time the officials have been in their current position. However, it should be noted that the factors of human capital, including seniority and the level of education, have a greater impact on both the officials' current ranking and the time they have been in their current position.起始頁-結束頁：231-282資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201312.17(2).231-2827篇名：試探「歐體／歐盟」與「歐洲自由貿易協會」之貿易自由化的競爭並列篇名：A Preliminary Analysis of Competition for Trade Liberalization between the EC/EU and EFTA作者：黃偉峰(David W. F. Huang)關鍵字：歐體／歐盟;歐洲自由貿易協會;競爭性自由化;自由貿易協定;世界貿易組織;EC/EU;EFTA;Competitive Liberalization;Free Trade Agreements;WTO期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：「競爭性自由化」雖是近來揭櫫之政策概念，但是「歐體／歐盟」與「歐洲自由貿易協會」（European Free Trade Association, EFTA）之間貿易自由化的競爭卻自第二次世界大戰後便已存在。過去研究大多聚焦於歐體／歐盟與美國間的「競爭性自由化」現象，卻鮮少探究歐體／歐盟貿易自由化對EFTA所造成的競爭壓力，進而促使EFTA對外洽簽自由貿易協定。本文旨在彌補既有文獻的缺憾，初步探索歐體／歐盟與EFTA之間貿易自由化的競爭。本文運用EFTA與第三國長期貿易量的客觀資料，以及1960年至2002年EFTA部長理事會記錄之主觀資料，並建構統計模型，試圖說明歐體／歐盟貿易自由化與EFTA對外洽簽自由貿易協定的共變相關性。從客觀貿易量資料來看，本文發現EFTA會員國內部彼此貿易占其總貿易量比例越小，或EFTA與歐體／歐盟貿易占EFTA總貿易量比例越大，則EFTA越可能對外洽簽自由貿易協定。另一方面從EFTA部長理事會記錄之主觀資料來看，EFTA理事會越強調自由貿易協定相關概念字組，則越容易對外洽簽自由貿易協定。惟此主觀變項在控制EFTA客觀貿易量變項後就變得統計上不顯著。此外，EFTA理事會越關注其會員國加入歐體／歐盟事宜，則越可能對外洽簽自由貿易協定。本文發現EFTA主觀上考量是否對外洽簽自由貿易協定，除了因貿易量變化外，亦可能為其組織存續，尋求功能正當性，進而對外洽簽自由貿易協定。惟本文屬初探性質，又因資料母體數目所限，無法控制多項干擾因素，亦未建構細緻的因果模型去呈現歐體／歐盟與EFTA貿易自由化之雙向競爭，此乃本文之限制。英文摘要：Competition for trade liberalization is best explained by the concept of ”competitive liberalization”. The concept is used to analyze whether the EC/EU's trade liberalization has affected the decision of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) to sign free trade agreements (FTA) with third countries. In order for ”competitive liberalization” to be initiated and imitated, we suggest that it is critical for decision-makers to attribute their countries' lack of competitiveness to the liberalization measures of competitors. At the same time, decision makers must believe that the only way to rectify the situation is to join the competitive race by signing FTAs with trade partners. This being so, not only must objective trade data be used, but the subjective evaluations of decision makers must also be included to verify the competitive liberalization hypothesis. By analyzing covariations of long-term trade data and the 1960-2002 EFTA Council records, we find that the EC/EU's signing of an FTA increases the likelihood of EFTA signing an FTA. This is the case even when we control for trade variables. Moreover, the data from EFTA Council records suggests that the greater the emphasis that ministers place on FTA ”word strings”, the greater the likelihood that the EFTA will sign FTAs with other countries. This effect disappears if we control for trade data. Finally, we find that the more concerned EFTA ministers are with a state's application for EC/EU membership, the more likely it is that an FTA will be signed. Thus, subjectively speaking, the EFTA ministers' decision to sign FTAs with other countries may be more complicated than argued by theorists of ”competitive liberalization”.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201306.17(1).1-558篇名：三種私有財產證成中的問題及其盲點並列篇名：On Three Types of Justifications of Private Property: Their Problems and Blind Spots作者：孫善豪(Shan-Hao Sun)關鍵字：洛克;唐君毅;諾齊克;私有財產;錢;Locke;Tang;Nozick;private property;money期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：私有財產之本務論的或定言式的證成（相對於目的論或假言式的），大約可以有三種：勞力、自由，與權利。這三種證成本身都有若干問題，而且各自也都是對方的反命題。若仿效康德「二律背反」的方式，則可以顯示：這個矛盾的狀況，其實來自對於「消費財」與「生產財」的區別的忽視、從而「個人」作為「財產擁有者」與「被別人擁有者」之間的混淆。兩者之所以混淆，又來自於「錢」之作用－後者之作用在於：（一）使人與自然之關係同質，（二）使財產同質，（三）使人與人同質。正是在最後這個「使人與人同質」的基礎上，才樹立了自由主義。英文摘要：Other than ontologically or hypothetically, the ownership of private property may be justified deontologically or categorically in roughly three ways: by labor, by freedom and by rights, each of which has some inner unresolvable problems, and each of which confronts the others as its outer anti-theses. By means of the Kantian Antinomies it is recognized that such a contrast arises due to the indifference between capital goods and consumption goods, and therefore results in the very confusion over the individual being the property owner and the individual being the property owned by others. This confusion can be traced backwards to the functions of money, which reduce to equality the relations between (1) man and nature, (2) different kinds of properties, and (3) man and man. Basing the function of money on the last relation results in liberalism.起始頁-結束頁：57-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201306.17(1).57-1059篇名：從日本參議院全國選區談日本政黨與利益團體的關係並列篇名：Parties, Interest Groups, and Upper House Elections in Japan作者：林超琦(Chao-Chi Lin)關鍵字：日本政治;侍從主義;利益團體;組織動員;參議院選舉;監督機制;Japanese politics;clientelism;monitoring mechanism;upper house elections;Liberal Democratic Party (LDP);mobilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：長期以來，日本參議院全國選區的議員多半是全國性利益團體代表，而且還是「利益團體推薦、政黨提名」的模式。值得注意的是，日本參議院全國選區的選舉制度，並沒有規定席次必需按照社會背景與職業來分配。如果不是正式制度所規定，為什麼大部分參議院全國選區的議員會是利益團體的代表？又為什麼會發展出「利益團體推薦、政黨提名」的模式？本文以為若要比較完整地了解日本參議院全國選區為什麼會成為政黨與利益團體合作的場域，必須要從政黨與利益團體整體的關係，尤其是自由民主黨與利益團體的侍從主義關係去了解。侍從主義強調特殊性，恩庇主只會將資源分配給「有支持我、投給我」的人，因此，能被分配到利益的前提是：追隨者必須要表現支持或是承諾未來會支持。雖然眾議院選舉是影響執政的關鍵，但是因為選制設計的關係，眾議院無法顯現全國性利益團體的投票情形。反而是參議院選舉全國選區，儘管選制改革，一直是以全國為一選區，使得特定利益團體的動員情形得以有機會展現，反而可以做為一種監督機制（monitoring mechanism），讓自民黨知道利益團體是否有按照承諾投票支持。此外，透過利益團體的動員與分擔選舉所需要的花費，無形中也解決了政黨競選的困境，參議院選舉全國選區成了政黨與利益團體合作的雙贏場域。本文並檢證過去參議院全國選區的情形，以瞭解為什麼會有自民黨有組織動員優勢的說法。最後，本文並討論政黨輪替對於日本政黨與利益團體關係可能的影響。英文摘要：For a long time, a majority of elected candidates in the national district for the upper house elections have not only been backed by interest groups but have been representatives of nationally-organized interest groups. Interestingly, in Japan, there are no laws requiring that upper house members be vocational representatives. How has the pattern ”interest groups endorse and parties nominate” almost become a norm? Some analyses already point out that this is because interest groups with sound, vertically-integrated organizations have advantages in mobilizing votes and can redress parties' mobilization weaknesses. While it is true that parties without sound local chapters have difficulties campaigning effectively, this paper argues that the pattern ”interest groups endorse and parties nominate” should be understood in a broader context of clientelism where the LDP dominated Japan over a long period and, as a patron, used public policy to promise and deliver benefits in exchange for the electoral support of interest groups, namely, the client. However, a clientelistic exchange is contingency-based and is not simultaneous, and a monitoring mechanism is therefore needed to know whether or not the client voted for the patron as promised. Although lower house elections are critical, due to electoral rules, votes by different groups for a particular candidate cannot be easily investigated in lower house elections. By contrast, a nationwide district in relation to the upper house elections (1947-1980) has allowed nationally organized interest groups to show their ability to mobilize votes. As a result, the national district in regard to the upper house elections has inadvertently served as a monitoring mechanism for parties to investigate votes by different groups. This paper also investigates how both parties and interest groups have adapted themselves to the subsequent electoral rule changes of 1983 and 2001, and have continued to use a nationwide district in the upper house elections to serve as a monitoring mechanism. In conclusion, this paper discusses possible changes in the relationship between parties and interest groups in Japan that resulted from the change in government in 2009.起始頁-結束頁：107-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201306.17(1).107-18310篇名：欲迎還拒：臺灣民眾對政黨必要性與政黨信任的態度分析並列篇名：Yes and No: Citizen's Attitudes toward Party Necessity and Party Trust in Taiwan作者：林聰吉(Tsong-Jyi Lin)關鍵字：政黨必要性;政黨信任;政黨功能評價;政黨表現滿意度;政黨認同;party necessity;party trust;evaluation of party functions;satisfaction with party performance;party identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：有別於過去以政黨認同為研究主題的文獻，本文嘗試以政黨必要性、政黨信任做為觀察民眾政黨態度的新視角。研究中提出三項假設：（一）多數民眾肯定政黨在民主政治的必要性，但卻普遍對政黨不信任；（二）政黨功能評價對於民眾在政黨必要性的態度有正面影響；（三）政黨功能評價、政黨表現滿意度二者，皆會對政黨信任產生正面效果。本文的研究結果顯示，上述三項假設均獲得證實，其中意涵值得吾人深思。首先，與世界多數民主國家類似，台灣民眾普遍對政黨存有欲迎還拒的矛盾情結；一方面肯定政黨有其存在的必要性，另一方面又不信任政黨。其次，在本文的研究中，政黨功能評價被證實可影響政黨必要性的態度。政黨功能的沒落是近年來學者在探討傳統西方民主的案例時，屢屢提及的一個方興未艾的現象。一旦政黨功能的沒落擴散到更多的民主國家，恐怕會挑戰、甚至進一步改變政黨傳統上在民主體系所具有的樞紐地位，這將是所有民主國家未來發展所必須正視的問題。最後，本文發現政黨功能評價、政黨表現滿意度皆會左右政黨信任。事實上，民眾對政黨功能、政黨表現的看法應與民眾對政治人物長、短期以來的各項評價密不可分；畢竟政黨只是一個抽象的政治機構，其運作良窳還是有賴政治人物的具體作為。從此一角度觀之，朝野政治人物的言行皆不得不慎，因為其影響所及，無論是長期或是短期性的效果，皆會左右民眾對政黨的信任。英文摘要：Unlike studies using party identification to examine citizens' attitudes toward political parties, this essay introduces the concepts of party necessity and party trust to explore citizens' attitudes toward a political party. Three assumptions are provided and tested based on the existing literature and Taiwan's experiences. First, in a democracy, the majority of citizens confirm that a party is a necessity while maintaining a widespread distrust toward parties. Second, the citizens' evaluations of party functions will have effects on party necessity. Third, the citizens' evaluations of party functions and satisfaction with party performance will also generate effects on party trust. The findings confirm these hypotheses and several implications are of special importance. In the discussions on party change in western democracies, the phenomenon of party function decline has been regarded as a potential contention of a party’s pivotal status. Yet, from the perspective of a functioning democracy, a political party does play an indispensable role in the operation of a democracy. As in most democratic counterparts, citizens in Taiwan maintain an ambivalent attitude towards political parties. While citizens acknowledge the necessity of political parties for the operation of a democracy, they also maintain a rather high degree of party distrust. In terms of party necessity, this essay finds that citizens' evaluations of party functions will affect their attitudes toward the necessity of having parties. Citizens are more likely to accept the necessity for parties as they uphold more positive evaluations of party functions. In addition, this essay also finds that citizens' evaluations of party functions and party performance will affect the citizens' trust in the party. It is argued that the citizens' evaluations of party functions and party performance are closely associated with the citizens' assessments of politicians' respective performances. The functioning of a political party depends on the behavior of individual politicians who belong to the party. To some degree, therefore, the assessment of the politicians' performance will become one of the sources of the citizens' trust in the party.起始頁-結束頁：185-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201306.17(1).185-22601篇名：政府委託研究案代理問題之探討：一個結合賽局理論與代理人理論的研究取向並列篇名：The Study of Agency Problems of Government Commissioned Studies: An Approach to Integrating Game Theory and Agency Theory作者：柯于璋(Yu-Chang Ke)關鍵字：政府業務委外;委託研究案;代理問題;賽局理論;代理人理論;Government commissioned studies;government affairs contracting out;agency problems;Game Theory;Agency Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：政府委託研究案愈來愈多，但是也引發不同的問題，其中代理問題是大家較為關注的議題；以往探討政府業務委外的代理問題有幾項缺失，例如後設、靜態、欠缺對於重複賽局的考量。本研究特別提出整合賽局理論與代理人理論的研究取向，並利用文獻蒐集、內容分析與個案研究方法，探討高雄市溫室氣體減量策略計畫委託研究案的代理問題。本研究一方面從文獻整理提出代理問題的三大類型與七大代理問題，另一方面利用賽局理論探討政府委託研究案（賽局）的參與者、規則、策略與報酬。研究結果顯示，結合賽局理論的研究取向，對於代理問題的產生有較好的解釋力，也揭示委託人與代理人基於理性的策略互動是代理問題產生的主要原因之一。最後，本研究結果對於未來如何降低政府委託研究案的代理問題也有具體的建議與對策。英文摘要：There has been more government commissioned studies causing a variety of problems. Agency problems are one of the problems that attract most attention. There are some shortcomings for previous studies that focused on the agency problems of government commissioned studies, such as meta- and static approach, and the lack of repeated games. Therefore, this study proposes an approach to integrating Game Theory and Agency Theory, and then uses literature review, content analysis and case study to explore the agency problems of the commissioned study of the Kaohsiung City GHG Strategy Program. On one hand, this study proposes three types of agency problems and seven agency problems; on the other hand, this study integrates Game Theory to explore the participants, rules, strategies, and payoffs of government commissioned studies. The research results show that the research approach of integrating Game theory presenting players' strategy interdependence is one of the most important causes for agency problems. The results also show that not only the integration of Game Theory can describe the agency problems better, but also addresses the strategies and actions that few studies ever addressed. Lastly, this study also proposes concrete suggestions and solutions to the agency problems of government commissioned studies起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：社會網絡分析在公共政策權力途徑上應用之初探：以全民健保的重要政策事件為例並列篇名：The Application of Social Network Analysis on Power Pathway Measurement in Public Policy: The Case Study of National Health Insurance's Crucial Policy Events作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang)關鍵字：社會網絡分析;權力途徑;中心性;全民健保;公共政策;social network analysis;power approach;centrality index;National Health Insurance (NHI);public policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：在多數政治環境中，決策是集體行動的結果，也是政策產出最重要的影響因素之一，探究誰統治（who governs）？誰掌控政策產出？或是決策過程中的權力分佈（power distribution）如何系統化的測量與圖像化（visualisation）？影響權力分佈的因素為何？一直是古老、核心且無可避免的研究議題，對上述研究問題的重視也導致學術界與實務界對於測量權力路徑的需求。但過去對於集體決策的研究，都難以清楚從質、量化的方法，掌握決策權力運作的機制與特質。本論文以理論發展為始，並以1998年到2012年間四個重要的健保財務改革政策為討論個案，透過文獻資料，深度訪談蒐集相關研究資料，企圖從結構分析（structure analysis）的角度，以社會網絡分析法（social network analysis）為分析工具，並運用程度中心性指數（degree centrality index）及圖像化的方式，對健保政策近十年來的改革進行影響力機制的分析，並探討權力分佈是鑲嵌政策參與者何種互動結構之中，以及是否對政策產出的結果造成影響。在理論的企圖上，本文展示了社會網絡分析法作為一親近現實決策權力分佈分析工具的可能性；在實務的企圖上，本文也透過社會網絡分析法，對健保政策複雜的治理機制進行一系統化的分析，並提出相關的政策建議。英文摘要：Policy-making process, without any doubt, can be always translated into a language of power. In order to explore how policy is made, numerous scholars in Politics. Public Administration, and Policy Science have attempted to find the best approach to measure power distribution and its impact factors in policy-making processes. However, none of these approaches can help us to grasp the constant changes of ”power map” systematically. In Sociology, or more specifically, Political Sociology, the development of social network analysis technique seems to shed the light to supplement the gap. Based on social network analysis, power distribution can be understood by the perspectives of not only relation between actors but also position in a bounded network structure. This study attempts to follow this idea to study the power distribution and its impact factors of Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) sustainability between 1998 and 2012. In regard to research methods, in-depth interviews have been used to collect data. In conclusion, first, for those who are searching for ”localised power map” to analyse policy processes in Taiwan, this study is a primary but useful beginning for applying social network analysis. Second, with regard to the most powerful actors of Taiwan's NHI domain, there is no doubt that the alliance between the public sectors and the providers show critical influence in the policy making process.起始頁-結束頁：37-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：歐元的全球角色：機會與限制並列篇名：The Euro's Global Role: Opportunities and Limitations作者：羅至美(Chih-Mei Luo)關鍵字：歐元;全球角色;貨幣治理;經濟決定因素;地緣政治與體制因素;the euro;global role;monetary governance;economic determinants;geopolitical politics and institutional factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的目的旨在檢視歐元的全球角色與其未來的發展展望。檢視國際使用現狀，歐元在創建的第一個十年中，已成為全球最重要的區域貨幣，此一區域優勢是否可進一步成長為全面性的全球貨幣？需視其在經濟與非經濟決定因素上的優劣勢。就經濟性指標而言，隨著未來歐元區的擴大以及此所伴隨的經濟規模與貿易力量擴張的趨勢、單一金融市場可望漸次實現、網絡外部性對新貨幣興起的限制性降低、以及貨幣穩定性等有利因素而言，歐元的全球角色發展應是偏向成長的有利方向。就非經濟決定要素而言，政治與體制性因素形成歐元國際化的主要限制。歐元若未能籍由全球金融危機與歐債危機的處理經驗，克服並改善其在體制上的內部治理缺陷，輔以歐盟官方立場的干預推動，歐元的全球角色將難見大幅躍升。英文摘要：This paper aims to analyze the global role of the euro and its prospects. Reviewing its international use, the euro has become the most important regional currency in its first decade. Whether this regional advantage can further develop into a full-scale international currency depends on its strength and weakness in economic and noneconomic determinants. By economic criteria, with the favorable conditions such as the enlargement of the euro area and the following expansion of its economic and trading area; the gradual implementation of the single market in financial sector; the less constraints of the network externalities on the rise of new currencies, and currency stability the economic prospect seems more inclined to the euro's favor. The major constraints to the internationalization of the euro derive from non-economic determinants-political and institutional factors. Unless the lessons of the crisis management revealed in the global financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis can be learn and weakness in monetary governance can be improved accordingly, accompanying with the official intervention and promotion, it would be difficult to witness any significant advance in the euro's global role in the foreseeable future.起始頁-結束頁：91-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：原住民族公務人員會比較關心原住民嗎？台灣原住民族積極代表性的實證分析並列篇名：Do Indigenous Public Servants Care More about Indigenous Peoples?-An Empirical Analysis of Active Representation of Indigenous Peoples in Taiwan作者：陳文學(Wen-Hsueh Chen)關鍵字：代表性官僚;官僚行為;原住民族公務人員;原住民族政策;bureaucratic behavior;indigenous civil servants;indigenous people's policy;representative bureaucracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：57期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文藉由問卷調查法，蒐集原住民族地區8個鄉（區）公所公務人員的問卷，以個人為分析單位，運用多變量統計方法，探究何種特質的公務人員會有較高的原住民族積極代表性。原住民族積極代表性是指公務人員在態度上會偏好有利於機關外部原住民與機關內部原住民員工的論點，並且在實際的決策與服務行為時，也會如此。經過統計後，本文發現：第一，原住民族公務人員確實比漢人公務人員具有較高的原住民族積極代表態度與行為。換言之，原住民族公務人員不僅態度上會比較關心、重視與支持原住民族議題（權益），在行為上亦是如此。第二，性別、年齡、政黨認同、原住民機關服務年資，以及原住民同事等因素也不同程度影響原住民族積極代表性。第三，基於Thompson（1976）社會氛圍影響官僚行為的論點，我們也發現當公務人員愈能感受外在行動者重視原住民議題時，會連帶使他們更關注、重視與支持原住民族相關議題。對此，本文進一步分析發現，原、漢公務人員對於當前政策環境是否有利於原住民的看法，存在著顯著差異。最後，基於研究發現提出討論。英文摘要：Active representation of indigenous peoples is defined as public servants favoring content ions which benefit indigenous peoples both inside and outside of the agency, as well as acting in the policy interests of indigenous peoples when making decisions and providing services. This study examined what characteristics contribute to public servants' active representation of indigenous peoples. Using the individual as the unit of analyses, we conducted multivariate analyses on questionnaire data from public servants serving in 8 indigenous townships.The results showed that (a) indigenous public servants demonstrated higher levels of active representation of indigenous peoples in attitudes and behaviors compared to their Han counterparts, in other words, indigenous public servants not only cared more about, placed more emphasis on, and showed more support for issues (rights) of the indigenous peoples than Han public servants, but also acted in consistent with their attitudes; (b) a wide variety of factors in both individual and organizational levels, including sex, party identification, years of service in the indigenous organizations, and the experience of working with indigenous colleagues, exerted different impacts on active representation of indigenous people; and (c) the degree to which public servants cared about, laid emphasis on, and showed support for issues surrounding indigenous peoples was positively related to their perceived levels of external actors' attention paid to those issues, which was the main contribution of the study. Further analyses revealed that there were significant differences between indigenous and Han public servants' perspectives in whether the present policies arc advantageous to indigenous peoples Theoretical implications were discussed based on these findings.起始頁-結束頁：129-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：電子治理中政府對企業計畫（G2B）評估架構並列篇名：An Evaluation Framework for Government to Business Programs (G2B) in Electronic Governance作者：朱斌妤(Pin-Yu Chu);蕭乃沂(Nai-Yi Hsiao);楊禮榮(Li-Zong Yang)關鍵字：電子治理;政府對企業;績效評估;層級分析法;e-governance;government to business (G2B);performance evaluation;Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：電子化政府在世界各國已形成風潮，並朝向電子治理發展，然而電子治理的績效評估目前仍多為概念探討，尤其欠缺從利害關係人角度出發的績效指標與實證研究。本研究綜合國家型電子治理評估、網頁感知品質型評估、滿意模型評估與利害關係人等評估指標文獻，同時以G2B電子治理計畫為例，發展計畫評估架構與指標。本研究進一步透過層級分析法，展示此評估架構與指標體系的應用，透過問卷蒐集萃取學者與實務專家的經驗，決定各層級G2B評估指標的權重，並比較各階段構面以探討其權重強弱的可能解釋。最後本段將以上述成果為基礎進行深入討論，並提出相關實務與研究建議。英文摘要：E-Governance has been introduced and promoted for a long period of time; however, there still remains a number of questions regarding the performance evaluation of various e-government programs, particularly, lack of performance index from the perspective of stakeholders and extensibility of empirical studies. Through literature related to e-governance, perceived quality of web services, and satisfaction modelsl, an E-Governance evaluation framework for eovernment to business (G2B) programs has been developed. Based on framework, in-depth interviews, and the method of Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), we compare subjective expert judgments made by policy decision-makers, industrail experts, and academic scholars. Policy implications are further discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：地方政府電子治理成效認知評估研究並列篇名：An Evaluation Framework of Perceived Performance of Local E-Governance作者：潘競(Ching-Heng Pan);蔣麗君(Li-Chun Chiang)關鍵字：電子治理;電子化政府;成效評估;層級分析法;德菲法;local e-governance;e-government;performance evaluation;Delphi method;analysis of hierarchy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：我國政府推行電子化已多年，從國際評比中已見中央政府之成效，惟針對地方政府電子治理成效之評估研究則相對少見。本研究目的之一在於建構合宜之地方政府電子治理評估架構與工具，以充實此研究領域之文獻。目的之二在於運用此一評估架構設計問卷，對我國22縣市政府進行成效認知之實務調查，透過調查發現，提出增進地方政府電子化治理成效之相關實務建議。本研究之評估架構採組織價值成效評估三層次分析結構，即目標領域（Goal Area，簡稱GA）、主要績效領域（Key Performance Area，簡稱KPA）與主要績效指標（Key Performance Indicators，簡稱KPI）三層評估架構。評估內容概念的發展依序從GA先定義評估的主要目標範圍，範圍確定後進一步劃分評估構面也就是KPA，然後再發展出衡量指標KPI。先藉由文獻探析歸納出適合地方政府電子化治理之面向，繼而採用層級分析法結合德菲法，確立評估目標、構面與指標之項目與計分權重。從四項績效領域之評估調查分析，發現受訪者認為電子化在提升公民導向的成效給予相對最高評價，此調查結果可能與政府近年來倡議顧客導向服務以及民主行政有關；而受訪者對電子化的品質給予相對最低分數，此結果可能與資訊人力不足及經費短絀有關。本研究成果主要提供地方政府自我評估之工具，而調查結果與建議可做為改善地方電子化政府運作效能之重要政策參考。英文摘要：Evaluating e-governance is an underdeveloped area whether in academia or governmental practice. Taiwan's e-governance performance at the national level has been recognized by several credible global evaluation reports. At the local level, however, the conditions and natural endowments vary, which makes objective performance evaluation more challenging. The authors argue that it is misleading to use evaluation instruments that generate absolute performance scores of ranking across localities. This study establishes a self-evaluation framework by adopting a three-level model: goal area (GA), key performance area (KPA), and key performance indicator (KPI). Using Delphi method combining Analytical Hierarchical Process, two weighted GAs, four KPAs, i.e., citizen-centered functionality (CCF), organizational integration (OI), perceived quality (PQ), information security (IS), and their subordinate KPIs were developed. As an exploratory study, a nationwide survey based on the framework was conducted to investigate local public servants' perceptions of e-governance performance of the local governments in which they worked. It is found that CCF is by and large perceived the best performer, while PQ the least satisfying. The findings about CCF may result from recent administrative reforms that emphasize customer-oriented services and democratic administration. The result about PQ is likely related to the widespread problem of lacking information technology manpower and budget.起始頁-結束頁：43-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系7篇名：性別多元化與組織績效之研究：女警比例會影響犯罪發生率嗎？並列篇名：Gender Diversity and Organizational Performance: The Study on the Relationship between Policewomen Proportion and Criminal Rate作者：李俊達(Chun-Ta Lee)關鍵字：多元化;性別;女警;犯罪率;追蹤資料模型;diversity;gender;policewomen;organizational performance;panel data model期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：多元化為二十一世紀公共行政的重要課題之一，而既有研究也指出多元化足以揚升組織績效。然而，基於警察勤務深具「危險性、機動性、辛勞性」，國內警察機關的女警比例相當低落。本研究以2001年至2009年臺灣省各縣（市）警察機關的相關數據進行實證分析，探究女警比例與犯罪發生率之間的相關性。追蹤資料模型的分析結果顯示，針對「刑案發生率」、「竊盜案發生率」與「暴力犯罪發生率」等三種不同的犯罪類型，各縣（市）犯罪發生率的情況皆未因為女警比例提高而增加，相反地，女警比例與犯罪發生率之間呈現顯著的負向關係，顯見對警察機關而言，性別多元化對組織績效同樣有其正面效益。英文摘要：The gender diversity in Taiwan's police departments is extremely unbalanced due to the presumption of risk, mobility and toil of police's duty which generally believed that the male is more competent than females. This study analyzes the relation between the policewomen proportion and criminal rate empirically by gathering relevant variables and data of 21 counties in Taiwan during the period 2001 to 2009. According to the panel data model, the policewomen proportion has remarkable positive relevance with the decrease of crimes in a county, including the criminal cases, larceny and violent crimes. Hence this study will be a practical reference to promote gender diversity in public services in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：85-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系8篇名：Policy Change or Policy Intractability in Post-Crisis Landscape?-The Fukushima Explosion and Comparative Nuclear Energy Policy並列篇名：災變事件後政策的變遷或停滯？福島核災與比較核能政策作者：簡赫琳(Her-Lin Chien)關鍵字：災變;政策變遷;政策學習;核能政策;敘事政策分析法（NPA）;crisis;policy change;policy learning;nuclear energy policy;narrative policy analysis (NPA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：許多學者研究發現，災變是許多爭議性高之政策變遷的催化劑，但除此之外，災變究竟如何影響政策制訂方向還未被仔細檢驗，例如：不同國家之政策制定者面對相同的災變，其政策回應到底是相同還是不同？本研究使用敘事政策分析法（NPA）來比較多國在2011年福島核災後核能政策走向的相異，共有六國在本研究中被分析：美國、法國、印度、瑞士、台灣與義大利，前三國在災後並沒有顯著核能政策變遷，後三國則在災後經歷核能政策改變。此研究發現，災變並不總像過去研究發現的必為政策帶來變遷，許多政策縱使在經過災變後仍是停滯，政策學習也不一定是必然。英文摘要：Many scholars argue that a crisis can serve as a catalyst to prompt a previously controversial policy change. However, many of the effects of a crisis on policy changes or policy intractability remain uninvestigated. Do policy-makers in different countries react similarly or differently to the same crisis? This paper uses a narrative policy analysis to conduct comparative case studies to examine how the 2011 Fukushima nuclear explosion affected nuclear energy policies in different polities. Six cases are selected: the United States, France, India, Switzerland, Taiwan and Italy. Whereas the first three countries listed do not exhibit nuclear policy changes in the post-crisis landscape, the latter three have experienced a policy reversal. This research finds that crises do not always serve as a catalyst to induce policy changes as conventional wisdom predicts. Many policies exhibit its intractability even after a major crisis whereas policy learning is not automatic neither.起始頁-結束頁：117-145資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：立法院消極議程控制的邏輯與經驗分析，1993－2011並列篇名：The Logic of Negative Agenda Control in Taiwan's Legislature, 1993-2011作者：邱訪義(Fang-Yi Chiou);李誌偉(Jhih-Wei Lee)關鍵字：立法院;消極議程控制;動員;黨紀;Legislative Yuan;negative agenda control;mobilization;party discipline期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：消極議程設定權意指將法案阻擋於院會二讀之前的權力，在數個國會中被認為是多數黨最穩固的立法權力。過去的研究顯示消極議程設定權在形塑立法動態上的重要性，但由於台灣立法院特有之制度，如二讀前有多個能阻擋提案之審查階段以及每一委員會有多個召委，既有理論意涵與經驗分析方式並不適用於台灣立法院。有鑑於此，本文建立一個融入台灣立法院制度特性的新理論架構以推導其消極議程設定權的運作與策略。本文主要論點是政黨考量院會二讀時須付出較高昂的動員與黨紀成本，所以偏好於二讀前之審查階段阻擋提案，並選擇其中動員成本最低之階段作為主要之阻擋手段。黨團協商制度在第三屆的改變為本文提供更多檢驗理論機會。我們蒐集立法院第二至第七屆（1993－2011）未通過提案之資料及其停留階段，分析結果顯示本文所提出之六個假設皆獲得資料的強力支持。整體結果彰顯黨紀與動員成本在立法院消極議程控制上關鍵性角色。英文摘要：Negative agenda setting, which is defined as a power to block a bill from being considered on the floor for its second reading, has been found to be a majority party's most robust legislative power in several legislatures. While existing theories have greatly contributed to our understanding of how such a power shapes legislative dynamics, they are not quite applicable to Taiwan's legislature. This paper develops a new theoretical framework for negative agenda setting by incorporating Taiwan's unique legislative institutions, i.e., more pre-floor stages and multiple chairs of each committee. With considerable costs of disciplining and mobilizing party members on the floor, each party has strong incentives to kill a bill before the second reading, with their efforts focusing on the stage entailing least mobilization costs. The institutional change of party negotiation empowers us to derive additional important hypotheses. Overall, our hypotheses gain vast empirical support from newly collected data from 1993 through 2011, implying that party discipline and mobilization costs play a key role in negative agenda setting in the legislature.起始頁-結束頁：1-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：立法院委員會運作與資訊立法模式：以「下水道建設」之立法議題為例並列篇名：The Information-driven Lawmaking Process in the Legislative Yuan's Committees: A Case Study of Sewage Treatment Infrastructure in Taiwan作者：邱師儀(Albert Shih-Yi Chiu)關鍵字：下水道;立法委員;肉桶立法;分配政治;資訊立法模式;Sewage treatment;legislators;pork barrel;distributive politics;informational model期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：民主國家的國會立法研究，核心理論不外乎三個部分：選舉考量、政黨因素與立法所需要的資訊成本。本文呼應國內立法研究認為黨團協商恐已取代委員會的專業審查功能，並針對委員會是否仍具有專業性來進行量化與質性的探究。本文從美國資訊立法理論出發，針對立法院現況，逐一修正並提出能夠詮釋立法院委員會立法過程的資訊立法理論；並且主張立法院委員會在面對絕大部分事務性立法的情況下，會依賴資訊立法為主，選區與政黨考量為輔的「多重決策模式」。文中以同時具有選區與專業立法性質的下水道立法議題為例，發現立委在院內，尤其是在委員會當中，會傾向以資訊交換的角度來進行立法，立法產出並且與「非母選區」與「全國性」的下水道立法議題有關。但是當立委回到選區中，又會回到著重談論母選區下水道議題的選舉模式。同時，本文也發現在立法院內，委員會不但是資訊立法的中心，並且在主審下水道立法的兩個委員會－分別是「內政」與「社福及衛環」委員會當中，「不分區立委」與「召委」扮演著資訊交流中心的角色。本文的經驗證據提供了立法院委員會存在著資訊立法模式的論述基礎。英文摘要：There are three major theories regarding explicating congressional lawmaking process in democracies. These theories includethe partisan theory that is based on the consideration of election and the information theory that takes into account the informational cost of lawmaking. The third one is the partisan theory with emphasis on the partisan influence in Congress. In reconsidering the prevalentargument that the party caucus negotiation system has replaced committees' function to review bills in Taiwan's Legislative Yuan, I argue that committees still serve as a place for de facto communication among legislators. That is, the informational model explains committees' process when it comes to many bills that are not politically controversial. In taking into account Taiwan's local context, I revise several key assumptions of the informational model that originally flows from the U.S. Congress. I argue that the informational model accounts for most variance of lawmaking dynamic in the Legislative Yuan, and in the meantime, the constituenttheory and partisan theoryhelp to explain the rest of the variance. In the case study of sewage treatment lawmaking, Iempirically findthat legislators across the aisle tended to focus on the expertise required for this specific lawmaking; in addition, legislators werelikely to be free of constituent influence and tended toconsider national interest. Yet, when legislators left the Legislative Yuan and served their voters in their own districts, they changed their strategy by dramatically switching their attention to the issues that were only related to their districts'sewage treatment.In other words, these legislators' concern becomes parochial. As far as other independent variables are concerned, I find that party list of proportional representatives and the chairs of some committees played a critical role of facilitating information exchange. The empirical finding demonstrates theconditional explanatorypower of the informational model in Taiwan's legislature.起始頁-結束頁：71-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：選票的政治地理測量及其立法影響：以2012年臺灣大選與瘦肉精議題為例並列篇名：Electoral Geography and Legislative Behavior: The 2012 Taiwanese Election and the Case of Animal Leanness Drugs作者：徐永明(Yung-Ming Hsu);吳怡慧(I-Hui Wu)關鍵字：空間分析;選舉地理;族群聚集;總統選舉;立委選舉;分裂投票;立法行為;瘦肉精;蔡英文;spatial analysis;electoral geography;ethnic cluster;presidential election;legislative election;legislative behavior;animal leanness drugs;Tsai Ing-Wen期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：傳統在進行政治地理的空間分析時，多使用樣本之間的「鄰近關係」來進行空間自相關的討論，鄰近關係雖然能解釋人為活動於空間中的表現，但是否是最具有解釋力的一項變數，仍是許多文獻所質疑的，因此本文以2012年民進黨總統與立委選舉的選票分布，與四種關係矩陣：「鄰近關係」、「區域版塊」、「社經地位」及「省籍關係」之間的空間自相關性，證實了「省籍關係」比「鄰近關係」更具有政治地理的解釋力。並且藉由政治地理冷熱區的測量，以驗證立法行為的三個「地理連結」，即：「當蔡英文選票的熱區出現在該選區時，該區國民黨立委當選人越有立法自主（立法反叛）的趨勢」；「當民進黨立委候選人選票的冷區出現在該選區時，該區國民黨立委當選人越不會有立法自主（立法服從）的趨勢」；以及「蔡英文選票比該區民進黨立委候選人選票多的熱區出現在該選區時，該區國民黨立委當選人立法服從或反叛的趨勢較不明顯」。有趣的發現是，民進黨總統立委選票分裂行為的政治地理特性，相當程度預測國民黨立委在瘦肉精議題的立法行為。結果證明，政治地理的冷熱區分布，的確對立委立法行為有相當的影響，形成政治地理的選舉連結。英文摘要：By comparing adjacent geographical area, administrative divisions, socioeconomic stratification, and ethnic clusters to estimate consistence and splitting of Tsai Ing-Wen's presidential votes and DDP legislative votes in the 2012 election, hot and cold spots are identified in each legislative districts. In terms of internal makeup of hot and cold, KMT legislators' rebel or loyalty choice on the case of animal leanness drugs can be explained. In this electoral connection way, ”geographical connection” can be established to predict further legislative behavior.起始頁-結束頁：161-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：克勞塞維茨軍事啟蒙思想及其未完成理論之可欲性並列篇名：Clausewitz’s Military Enlightenment Thought and Desirability of His Unfinished Theory作者：李黎明(Li-Ming Lee)關鍵字：克勞塞維茨;戰爭論;啟蒙;反啟蒙;Clausewitz;Enlightenment;counter-Enlightenment;On War期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：克勞塞維茨的《戰爭論》為一本「未完成的」著作，是受到十八世紀啟蒙與反啟蒙兩種思想衝擊影響下的著作。就普遍性理論建構可欲性的方法論意義而言，克氏欲建構戰爭理論的終極目標能否達成？學界極少關注。甚至，對克氏思想的定位，亦呈含混不明且有分歧的現象，以致難以建立共識作進一步研究。如果克氏的思想是反啟蒙屬性，則在理論上，他仍無法克服理念上的矛盾而建構理論；如果克氏的思想是啟蒙屬性，則他應該可以融合精神與物質兩種概念，最終達成建構普遍性戰爭理論的目標。因此，本文擬就克氏究屬啟蒙或反啟蒙思想定位分歧的現象，進行初步探討以釐清，最後嘗試指出克氏理論建構可能的方向。本文採用Isaiah Berlin對反啟蒙的解釋觀點作為依據，對上述分歧的現象進行觀察分析。在論述架構上，除了前言與問題意識，首先陳述啟蒙與反啟蒙的哲學分界，以作為一種分析觀察的指標。其次討論學者對克氏思想在此分界上的三種定位。最後，就這些學者的觀點，提出定位分歧原因的綜合分析，並依此提出克氏理論建構可能性的前瞻思考方向。英文摘要：Carl von Clausewitz's On War is an ”unfinished” work. The reason, it is generally believed, is that it was impacted by both Enlightenment and counter-Enlightenment thought in the 18th century. Clausewitz desired to construct a war theory. As far as the methodology of constructing desirability by a universal theory is concerned, could his ultimate goal be completed? This, however, has drawn little attention by researchers. Moreover, researchers are ambiguous or even disagree with each other over what Clausewitz's idea was. Therefore, a consensus is very difficult to build for further study.In the case that Clausewitz's thought was based on the counter-Enlightenment, then, in theory, he still could not reconcile a contradiction in his concept to construct a theory. In the case that Clausewitz's thought was influenced by the Enlightenment, then he should blend both the spiritual and the material to ultimately achieve his goal of constructing a universal war theory. This study attempts to clarify whether Clausewitz was an Enlightenment or a counter-Enlightenment thinker, and finally to indicate a desired direction for construction in his theory.This study adopted Isaiah Berlin's explanation of the counter-Enlightenment for reference and proceeded to observe and analyze the conflicting arguments. In respect to narrative structure, apart from the introduction and the question of consciousness, this study begins by stating a line of demarcation between Enlightenment philosophy and counter-Enlightenment philosophy to serve as an indicator for analysis. Then, I discuss three possibilities of Clausewitz's thoughts. Finally, this study is summarized by proposing a comprehensive analysis and pointing out a proactive thinking direction for constructing Clausewitz's theory.起始頁-結束頁：209-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：德國出兵政策的國際關係理論再檢視－從科索沃到阿富汗的國會辯論探討並列篇名：Rediscovering International Relations Theories on German Use of Force Policies-Parliamentary Debates and Decision Making through Kosovo and Afghan作者：王順文(Shun-Wen Wang)關鍵字：德國出兵政策;科索沃;阿富汗;國際關係理論;German use of Force Policy;Kosovo;Afghanistan;IR Theories期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢視德國從科索沃到阿富汗出兵政策的核心考量，並從聯邦議會的辯論過程中，探討不同政黨於不同時期之間所主張的核心考量與立論依據，進而回應國際關係理論對於德國出兵政策適用上的爭議。本文發現，新制度主義一如多數學者所主張的，在相關論述上確實是最常被提及的，其次才是現實主義，相對而言，歷史文化論的主張確實是在論述上較少提及。但是我們也可以看到另外一種現象，在任務開展之時，現實主義反而是最重要的論述，而一旦任務開展之後，現實主義與歷史文化論的論述便明顯下降，而變成新制度主義論述一枝獨秀。這樣的說法，與John S. Duffield（1998）的說法大致符合，也顯示德國出兵政策的系統性與一致性。英文摘要：This research tests theories for explaining German decisions on use of force policies from Kosovo to Afghanistan. It examines the main discourses of German politicians through debates in the Bundestag (German Parliament). With cross-cases and cross-parties examination, results indicate the strength of neo-institutionalism and the weakness of historical-cultural analysis. Also, results show differences between the start and the extension of mission authorization. German politicians tend to use realist discourses at the first mandate of missions, but neo-institutionalism at the mandate of mission extension. This study concludes that German decision making vis-a-vis use of force policies is stable and systematic as John S. Duffield's findings showed in 1998.起始頁-結束頁：1-62+64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：多黨總理總統制民主的政府類型與憲政運作的衝突－以斯洛維尼亞、斯洛伐克、克羅埃西亞、立陶宛為例並列篇名：Government Type and Constitutional Conflict in Multiparty Premier-presidential Democracies: Comparing Croatia, Lithuania, Slovakia, and Slovenia作者：蔡榮祥(Jung-Hsiang Tsai)關鍵字：多黨總理總統制;斯洛維尼亞;斯洛伐克;克羅埃西亞;立陶宛;multiparty premier-presidential democracies;Croatia;Lithuania;Slovakia;Slovenia期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的問題意識為多黨總理總統制的政府組成主要是由總統主導或是由國會主導以及多黨總理總統制中，不同的政府類型如何產生權力機關之間不同程度的衝突。本文以斯洛維尼亞、斯洛伐克、克羅埃西亞、立陶宛等四個多黨總理總統制民主國家不同的政府類型與憲政衝突為例。首先，本文研究發現以總統主導或國會主導兩種牽引力的拉扯來看的話，在多黨總理總統制的政府組成經驗中，總統主導的比例遠高於國會主導的比例。這個結果顯示在多黨總理總統制的運作中，大多數的情況下，還是由總統來主導政府組成，總理負責的主要對象是總統，而不是國會。其次，政黨國會席次的分配、總理政黨屬性和總理負責對象的不同，會影響多黨總理總統制中不同政府類型之憲政運作的衝突程度。以發生憲政衝突的程度高低來進行排序，少數政府最容易出現憲政衝突、國會式政府次之、聯盟多數政府接續、共治政府衝突程度較低。最後，本文並非全面主張多黨總理總統制很難運作，而是分析在什麼條件和情況下，多黨總理總統制可能會面臨運作上的困難。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore whether cabinet formations in multiparty premier-presidential democracies are more induced by the president or by the assembly and how different government types produce various degrees of constitutional conflicts. The findings are below.First, in the perspective of balance of power, the president prevails over the assembly on the formation of cabinets in multiparty premier-presidential democracies. More cabinets are formed by the president than by the assembly. Second, the constellation of parties in the assembly, the partisan affiliation of the premier, and authority patterns can affect different degrees of constitutional conflicts in multiparty premier-presidential democracies. This paper illuminates a causal mechanism by comparing four multiparty premier-presidential democracies: Croatia, Lithuania, Slovakia, and Slovenia.起始頁-結束頁：65-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：主計人員在關說、角色間衝突與規範性承諾關係之探討並列篇名：The Study on the Association among Illegal Lobbying, Interrole Conflict, and Normative Commitment of Governmental Accountants作者：杜佩蘭(Pey-Lan Du);黃英忠(Ing-Chung Huang);張肇松(Chao-Sung Chang)關鍵字：關說;角色間衝突;組織承諾;規範性承諾;主計人員;illegal lobbying;interrole conflict;organizational commitment;normative commitment;accountant期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：關說為法律制定以後，企圖影響執行者的態度。關說對於行政單位來說，是個普遍存在卻隱而不談的問題，只要和大眾利益有關的事務，都會有相同的困擾。主計人員工作不僅在於防止弊端，同時也確保各項政務順利推展，由於資源有限，各方爭取資源都很積極，期望以更多的資源來推動政務，因此經常會有民意代表及機關長官等的關說，使得主計人員必須在承受相當大的壓力之下，而能作出正確的決策，因而造成的角色間衝突，亦會影響主計人員的規範性承諾。本研究以高雄市政府主計處外派主計人員為研究對象，主要目的在於探討這些外派主計人員的關說、角色間衝突和規範性承諾的關係，並瞭解外派人員在面對關說的壓力後形成角色間衝突的程度，和關說造成角色間衝突後，對主計處本處及派駐機關規範性承諾的影響。本研究採用普查方式，共回收373份有效問卷，並以結構方程模式檢測其間的關係。研究結果顯示：（1）外派主計人員的規範性承諾與「關說」呈顯著負相關，而「關說」則與角色間衝突呈顯著正相關；（2）外派主計人員的角色間衝突對於「關說」與「對主計處之規範性承諾」之關係呈完全中介效果，但對「關說」與「對派駐機關之規範性承諾」關係則呈部分的中介效果。英文摘要：Illegal lobbying is defined as the attempt to influence an administrative decision-making process politically when the decision under review has important implications in many public administrative sections, especially those concerning public benefits. Government officers often experience great pressure to make the right decisions when facing such illegal lobbying from either councilors or higher administrators, especially in situations where resources are limited. These illegal lobbying pressures initiate interrole conflicts and may affect the officer's commitment.This study was designed to examine the effect of illegal lobbying on interrole conflict and normative organizational commitment of accountants of the Kaohsiung Bureau of Accounting and Statistics (KBAS). These accountants are employees of the KBAS, but are also associated with their respective units, and therefore are committed to two separate organizations. A total of 373 accountants over various branch offices or units were enrolled for study. Our results show that illegal lobbing has a significant positive correlation with the accountant's interrole conflict and a negative correlation with their normative organizational commitment. Using Structural Equation Modeling, we found that interrole conflict has a complete mediation effect on the relationship between illegal lobbying and the accountant's normative organizational commitment to the KBAS and a partial mediation effect to their assigned units.起始頁-結束頁：117-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：臺灣民主化後主要政黨不忠誠研究中國國民黨與民主進步黨的比較分析並列篇名：Party Disloyalty in Post-Democratization Taiwan: A Comparative Analysis of the KMT and DPP作者：鄭龍水(Long-Shui Cheng);陳明通(Ming-Tong Chen)關鍵字：民主化;民主鞏固;政黨不忠誠;國民黨;民進黨;democratization;democratic consolidation;party disloyalty;KMT;DPP期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣作為一個新興民主國家，20多年的民主化受到舉世的稱許，但也產生了如Shelley Rigger所言的諸多重大難解問題。面對這些持續惡化卻又束手無策的難題，國人對民主還有信心嗎？還相信臺灣適合實施民主政治嗎？臺灣會不會像近世紀幾波民主化國家，出現威權統治回潮的現象？這是本論文所最為關心的主題，從而透過政黨不忠誠概念導引出本論文的研究議題。在研究操作上，本論文透過專家學者焦點座談，篩選出這20多年來國民兩黨所主導與論文主題有關的33件重大事件。然後選擇菁英作為詢問的對象，立意選樣40位藍綠陣營各半的知名意見領袖，徵詢他們的看法。研究結果顯示，情況並沒有那麼悲觀，這些意見領袖對臺灣的民主仍具有信心，僅有41.9%評估次數認為有嚴重程度不一的忠誠問題，58.1%認為沒有不忠誠問題或與忠誠無關。若進一步進行政黨比較，國民黨所主導的事件在正當性上負面評價略高於民進黨，其餘的合憲性、共利性及安全性差異則未達顯著水準。如果分層次來看，在政治共同體層次及政府體制層次，民進黨所主導的事件受到較大的批評；國民黨則在統治權威角色上，受到較大的非議。在政策層次的對外政策上，國民黨在安全性上受到較大的質疑，民進黨則在合憲性上較國民黨為低，在共利性上國民兩黨都受到相當大的責難。在政策層次的大陸政策上，受訪菁英對國民兩黨的作為都給予高度的肯定，不過民進黨比國民黨受到更大的好評。英文摘要：Taiwan's transition to democracy 20 years ago was universally heralded. But as scholars like Shelley Rigger have pointed out, democratization brought with it a host of formidable problems. As some of these problems have worsened and appear intractable, it is worthwhile to ask if Taiwanese still believe in democracy. Do they still have faith that democratic politics are suitable for Taiwan? Could Taiwan experience backslide toward authoritarianism like some other third wave democracies? This paper tries to shed light on these questions by examining elite views of the level of disloyalty to democracy exemplified by Taiwan's major political parties in the 20 plus years since democratization.This research first assembled focus groups of scholars and relevant experts to identify major actions directed by the two major political parties, the Kuomintang (KMT) and Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), in the post-democratization era. 33 party-led actions were selected for analysis. A sample of 40 well-known opinion leaders was then taken. Among the 40 elites comprising the sample, 20 identified with the KMT-led pan-blue political camp and 20 identified with the DPP-led pan-green camp. These opinion leaders answered survey questions designed to measure their opinions regarding the 33 party-led actions and whether they viewed these actions as evidence of disloyalty to democracy.The results of this research suggest there is reason for optimism regarding democratic consolidation in Taiwan. The elites surveyed demonstrated a continued faith in democracy. Only 41.9% of survey responses showed major variations in perceptions of whether party-led actions had demonstrated disloyalty to democracy while 58.1% indicated that disloyalty was not a problem or was not relevant. If we compare the two parties, KMT-led actions rated slightly higher overall for disloyalty than DPP-led actions. This difference resulted from KMT-led actions being viewed more negatively in terms of legitimacy. The results showed little difference in perceptions of the constitutionality, common interests and security of the two parties' respective actions.If examined at the levels of political community and political system, DPP-led actions were viewed more negatively; KMT-led actions scored lower at the level of governing authority. At the foreign policy level, KMT-led actions rated lower in terms of security while both parties received low marks with respect to common interests. Respondents expressed positive opinions of both parties' actions toward China but DPP-led China policies received higher approval overall.起始頁-結束頁：1-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：選擇投票制與英國國會選制改革並列篇名：Alternative Vote and UK Electoral Reform作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su);王業立(Yeh-Lih Wang)關鍵字：選擇投票制;單一選區相對多數決制;英國國會;選制改革;alternative vote;first-past-the-post system;UK Parliament;electoral system期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：英國國會議員選舉長久以來採行單一選區相對多數決制，這種選舉制度固然有助於形成政治責任清楚的單一政黨政府，但這種選舉制度最受詬病之處，在於此制會產生嚴重的「比例性偏差」（disproportionality）問題，使英國各政黨在選舉中所獲得的選票，無法在國會的席次中真實地反映出來。2010 年國會大選後，英國終於出現國會選制改革的契機，選後由保守黨與自由民主黨共同組成的聯合政府，提出了選擇投票制（alternative vote）的國會選制改革方案，並於2011 年5 月就是否改變國會選舉制度舉行公民投票。但是，最終公投結果仍未通過選制改革方案。本文的目的在於檢視英國國會選制改革契機曙光乍現而終致功虧一簣的過程。本文介紹了英國選制改革方案—選擇投票制的內涵與可能效應，分析了英國政府提交公投的選制改革方案為何是選擇投票制而非其他方案的緣由，並詳述了英國國會選制改革公投最終無法成功的原因。從英國此次國會選制改革失敗的經驗可以發現：受到現行選舉制度制約的政黨體系，仍有可能在現行選舉制度下找到突破的空間，而跳脫選舉制度長期以來的束縛，反過來去改變既有的選舉制度。以英國為例，英國的兩黨制長期受到單一選區相對多數決制的塑造與制約，使得小黨生存空間有限。然而，在2010年國會選舉中，在單一選區相對多數決制下仍例外地出現了各黨不過半的格局，使得自由民主黨在現行選制下找到突破點，有機會促成選舉制度的改變，只是最終未能成功。儘管英國此次選制改革最後以失敗收場，但從長期趨勢看來，隨著小黨得票率與席次率的增加，英國目前的兩黨制正處於不穩定的階段，將來國會大選仍有可能出現各黨不過半的格局。在此格局下，國會選制改革的運動未來仍有機會捲土重來。英文摘要：The UK parliamentary election system adopted the first-past-the-post system (FPTP) a long time ago. This electoral system helps build up a single-party government with clear political responsibilities, but it also creates a serious ”disproportionality” problem where the parliamentary seats each party gets are not proportional to the votes it receives. After the parliamentary election in 2011, there was finally a chance to make electoral reforms. The coalition government established by the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democratic Party submitted an electoral reform proposal to adopt alternative vote system, and decided to hold a referendum on changing the electoral system. The referendum was held in May of 2011; however, the result is that the proposal was not approved.This paper aims to review the reasons why the electoral reform in the UK failed when originally there seemed to be the possibility to change the electoral system. The paper illustrates the constituent of the alternative vote and the possible effects it would have, analyzes the reasons why the government in the UK proposed alternative vote system rather than other options for electoral reform, and explains the result of the referendum. From the failure of the UK’s electoral reform, we can see that even if the party system is confined by the current electoral system, it still has a chance to get rid of the restraint of the current electoral system and change. In the UK, the two-party system has been molded and confined by FPTP over a long period of time. As a result, the electoral system makes it difficult for small parties to survive. Nevertheless, in the parliamentary election in 2010, the exceptional phenomenon where none of the parties received more than half of the total seats occurred under FPTP, and it prompted the Liberal Democratic Party to face the problem and attempt to change the electoral system. However it did not succeed in the long run. Even though the electoral reform ended with failure, with the increase in votes and seats that small parties get now and the current unstable two-party system, there is still a great possibility that none of the parties will have more than half of the total seats after a future parliamentary election, and, in all likelihood, electoral reform will emerge again.起始頁-結束頁：71-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系10篇名：Exploring the Use of Performance Information in Municipal Governments-Modeling from the Two-Stage Heckman Selection Estimation並列篇名：地方政府運用績效評估資訊之探討－使用二階段Heckman篩選模型進行分析作者：陳思先(Ssu-Hsien Chen)關鍵字：績效資訊;Heckman篩選模型;預算過程;策略規劃;Use of performance information;Heckman selection,budgeting process;strategic planning;citizen-government communication期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：績效資訊係由系統化的測量設計所建構，用以提升公共服務的產能、效率及回應性。在實務上，績效評估資訊常與預算、策略規劃以及政府資訊作連結，用以檢視公共服務的成本、調整長程的規劃，並促進政府與民眾的溝通。地方政府運用績效評估資訊之動機究竟為何？本研究探討影響績效資訊運用的相關變項，並試圖解釋績效資訊的影響因子。分析對象採用美國「Stateof the Profession」（2006）調查資料庫，有效問卷樣本數為2870，並運用二階段Heckman probit 篩選模型以避免採樣誤差（sampleselection bias）。第一階段統計分析納入績效評估的背景變項，用以預測地方政府的政策採用行為；第二階段統計分析運用改良式的probit 模型，用以檢驗各假設變項與績效資訊用途的關係。分析結果指出，「策略計劃的實際操作」以及「對公民負責」這兩個變項對績效資訊的運用有正面的影響；然而，基於個人利己主義及有限理性的關係，「策略規劃的參與者」對績效資訊的運用反而有負向的影響。英文摘要：Performance information is constructed by systematic-measuring designs toward productivity, effectiveness and responsiveness. In practice, performance information could be linked with the budgeting process, strategic planning and citizen information; whereas decision-makers can undertake cost reduction, long-term planning as well as citizen-government communication. Why do municipal governments use performance information? This paper attempts to answer this question by examining factors affecting the application of performance information in the U.S. municipal governments. Data are from International City/County Management Association (ICMA) ”State of the Profession” survey in 2006. The two-stage Heckman probit selection models are employed to avoid sample selection bias. The first step is a selection procedure which takes into account the adoption factors to estimate performance measurement adoption. The second step uses a corrected probit model to estimate the factor effect on performance information. The statistical results show that operation of strategic planning and concerns for citizen accountability have a positive and significant effect on the application of performance information. Due to individual egoist and bounded rationality, participants in strategic planning negatively affect the application of performance information.起始頁-結束頁：139-203資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：民主必然促進人權？東南亞人權保障之實證分析並列篇名：Can Democracy Promote Human Rights?-An Empirical Analysis of Southeast Asia: 1981-2008作者：顏永銘(Yung-Ming Yen)關鍵字：「民主－人權」命題;制度民主;人身自由權;東南亞;國際規範;外援;Institutional Democracy;Personal Integrity Rights;Southeast Asia;Torture;CIRI Dataset;Official Development Assistance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：1993年聯合國世界人權會議所通過的〈維也納宣言和行動綱領〉（Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action）指出，民主、發展、以及尊重人權和基本自由之間有著相互依賴的彼此強化的關係。然而，這樣的主張究竟是有其實存的基礎支持？抑或僅為規範性理想的陳述？本文主要的目的，在於從實證的視角檢視東南亞地區自1980年代以來的人權政治實踐，分析影響東南亞地區人身自由權保障的內外因素。研究發現，國內因素較國際因素更能夠解釋東南亞地區人權保障的行為模式。常見的「民主－人權」命題並非單一絕對，對於不同類型的人身自由權，民主的抑制效果並不盡相同。甚至在劇烈的政治變遷過程中，酷刑虐待出現的機率反而上升，這意味著在面臨國際人權的理念壓力時，不同的壓制策略之間可能出現彼此替代的效果。英文摘要：The 1990s witnessed the rise of the Asian values debate as governments in Southeast Asia rejected the idea of universal human rights. Nevertheless, critical developments in human rights promotion and protection have occurred in the last decade across countries in the region. This article offers an empirical analysis of human rights politics in Southeast Asia from 1981 to 2008. With a focus on personal integrity rights, it is found that domestic-level factors are more critical than external forces in understanding the actual level of rights protection in Southeast Asian countries. Human rights treaty ratification and foreign aid fail to facilitate rights protection. Additionally, the constraining effect of democracy on human rights violation is not uniform. The results suggest that the relationship between democracy and human rights varies from one type of personal integrity rights to another, and implies the substitutability of repressive strategies employed by state authority toward its people.起始頁-結束頁：91-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.56(91-118)2篇名：臺北市與高雄市住宅財產稅之比較：兼論兩市財稅努力之差異並列篇名：A Comparison of Effective Property Tax Rates and Their Implications for Fiscal Effort in the Cities of Taipei and Kaohsiung作者：王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang);曾彥閔(Yan-Min Zeng)關鍵字：財產稅;房屋稅;地價稅;財稅能力;財稅努力;累退性;公平性;Property Tax;House Tax;Land Value Tax;Fiscal Capacity;Fiscal Effort;Regressive期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣的財產稅制係對不動產的土地及建物分別課徵地價稅及房屋稅，本研究定義財產稅為不動產所有權人在持有期間繳納之地價稅及房屋稅的總合。本文分析臺北市及改制前高雄市在2007年的交易個案，結果顯示臺北市與高雄市住宅的財產稅實質稅率平均數分別為0.066%及0.131%，臺北市與高雄市內的財產稅不具水平公平性，高雄市內的財產稅則不具垂直公平性，此外，兩市的最低價住宅皆負擔了較高的財產稅實質稅率。此外，本文也探討中央政府以地方政府實徵之自有財源數為依據來補助地方的一些問題，筆者認為最大的問題是實徵的自有財源包含了財政能力及財政努力兩個變數，實徵的自有財源多，中央政府並不能知道這是因為財稅能力大或是努力較多所造成的，本文的研究結果顯示高雄市住宅的實質稅率幾乎為臺北市住宅的兩倍，但臺北市2007年的財產稅收入卻大約是高雄市的三倍左右，這顯示臺北市潛在的財稅能力較大，即臺北市轄區內不動產的總市值是較大的，使得臺北市能夠以較低的估價比率，即較低的財稅努力，課徵到較多的財產稅收。若臺北市付出與高雄市一樣的財稅努力，臺北市的稅課收入應可增加許多，因此，臺北市是以較低的財稅努力，使實際收取的自有財源低於正常財稅努力下的水準，進而獲得較多的補助，因此自有財源數並不是一項好的分配基礎。中央政府應計算各縣市的財產稅的實質稅率，並且改善中央政府補助地方政府的公式，避免以實徵之自有財源數為分配基礎，而應發展更好的財稅能力及財稅努力指標，來作為分配的依據。英文摘要：This study compares effective property tax rates in the cities of Taipei and Kaohsiung. The results show that the mean of the effective property tax rates was 0.066% in Taipei and 0.131% in Kaohsiung in 2007. Horizontal equity is not achieved in either Taipei or Kaohsiung as the property tax is regressive in both cities. Although effective property tax rates are lower in Taipei, its property tax revenue is much higher than Kaohsiung. This is because Taipei City has a higher fiscal capacity due to its higher real estate values. As a result, tax revenue collected by local governments is not a good indicator of fiscal effort because it mixes up fiscal capacity and fiscal effort.起始頁-結束頁：119-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.56(119-156)3篇名：說服與判斷：古典修辭對當代民主的啟發並列篇名：Persuasion and Judgment: Modern Democracy from the Perspective of Classical Rhetoric作者：胡全威(Chuan-Wei Hu)關鍵字：修辭;說服;民主;判斷;審議民主;Rhetoric;Democracy;Persuasion;Judgment期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從古典修辭觀反省當代民主政治。首先指出修辭在古典民主中的重要性與必要性。其次指出當代民主因為主客觀環境的變化，使得當代民主在政治溝通上，與古典民主運用修辭、訴諸群眾的互動模式有類似之處，因此可以引為借鏡。本文主要論點認為，古典修辭觀在「說服」與「判斷」兩項特質上，可以與當代盛行的審議民主理論作比較參照。由於當代審議民主過於強調理性言說、證成、審議等特質，因而無法貼近解釋現實政治，形成實踐與理論上的差距。當視角轉換到古典修辭觀時，反而更能理解當代民主的面貌，進而提供規範性的修正意見。總的來說，本文認為基於當代民主政治的發展趨勢，政治人物言說越顯重要，理論上的漠視，並不會使煽動、蠱惑、顛倒是非的政治人物消失。理論或規範層面上，必須正視這個現象。而本文認為古典修辭觀對於政治人物言說，提供極佳的規範概念，也更貼近政治實踐，易於借鏡，值得成為民主政體中公民教育的重要內涵。英文摘要：This paper reflects on contemporary democracy from the perspective of classical rhetoric. I argue that persuasion and judgment, the two main elements of rhetoric, are better concepts for understanding and critiquing actual democratic processes than rational speech and justification in deliberative democratic theory. Rational speech and justification claims a higher degree of abstraction, making it impractical in the real world and producing a gap between theory and practice. On the other hand, rhetoric provides a more feasible normative approach to scrutinizing public speeches, and provided a more attractive model of proper persuasion. The process of ”persuasion” is distinctive from that of ”justification.” Persuasion assumes greater attention to the specific audience and use of easily understood language. I contend that it also implies a form of ”equality in speech” that is concerned with the specificity of the audience. In contrast, deliberative democrats presumes a universal and abstract audience, ignoring differences between audiences. This assumption of sameness sacrifices the power of persuasion. Furthermore, classical rhetoric emphasizes the importance of judgment; in particular, ”arguing on both sides” allows the audience to better understand the issues and make decisions that are more robust. In conclusion, the paper shows that ignorance of theory means that political demagogues disappear. Classical rhetoric provides a normative and practical guide to the realities of democracy, and should be made a part of civic education in a democratic regime.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.55(1-32)4篇名：俄羅斯聯邦「競爭性威權」體制下之公民社會「管理」與民主走向並列篇名：The Management of Russian Civil Society and Democratic Development under Competitive Authoritarianism作者：許菁芸(Jing-Yun Hsu);郭武平(Wu-Ping Kwo)關鍵字：普金;競爭性威權;國家杜馬;公民社會;網路社群;Putin;Competitive Authoritarianism;State Duma;Civil Society;Internet Community期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：俄羅斯於2011年12月4日舉行國會大選，5日公布大選結果，執政的統一俄羅斯黨（United Russia Party）在大選中勉強獲得近5成的選票，驚險獲勝，但反對黨及觀察員指控這次大選，執政黨有做票及舞弊嫌疑，並透過臉書（Facebook）和推特（Twitter）串聯，成功號召近萬名民眾上街抗議，反對普金長達12年的執政，結果有500多名民眾遭警人拘捕，還包括多名記者。俄羅斯於3月4日的總統大選後，也隨即發生大規模選舉舞弊示威抗議，反對勢力宣稱此抗議會繼續延燒至普金宣誓就職日。可以很明顯的看到，茉莉花革命浪潮並非沒有影響到中央再集權的俄羅斯，而普金「歸位」與此次俄羅斯大選的舞弊事件催促了茉莉花開，但是俄羅斯的民主脫軌是否會重上回到軌道上，卻仍是個未知數。因此，本文首先探討此次的俄羅斯國會大選與總統大選結果對於俄羅斯政局的影響，分析俄羅斯政府對於示威抗議和公民團體的控制與因應方式，俄羅斯媒體與網路生態，並探討俄羅斯政府如何主導「競爭性威權」混和體制下的公民社會建構，和俄羅斯對於電視媒體與網路的管控，居於少數的社會反對派勢力如同寒冬的壟罩，畢竟，冬天不是茉莉花的時節，俄羅斯的民主之路尚須未來的醞釀與考驗。英文摘要：Russia held its parliamentary election on December 4, 2011, and announced the election results the next day. Although the ruling United Russia party led the polls with 49.5% of the vote, this represented a sharp drop compared with the previous elections that landed the party a two-thirds majority in the state Duma. Election observers and opposition parties accused the ruling party of cheating and vote rigging, and used Facebook and Twitter to mobilize nearly ten thousand people the streets in protest. During the protests, five hundred people were arrested, including several reporters. After the presidential election of March 4, 2012, large-scale protests and demonstrations against election fraud erupted again. The protests have clearly had an impact on the re-centralizing Russian state. Putin's return to presidency and election fraud were the main factors behind the protest. However, the question remains as to whether Russia's derailed democracy can get back on track. Therefore, this paper examines the results and political impact of the Russian parliamentary and presidential elections, the current state of the Russian media and online networks, the Russian government policies in response to the protests against state control of media and restriction on the activities of the opposition, and how the Russian government manages civil society under ”competitive authoritarianism.”起始頁-結束頁：33-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.55(33-84)5篇名：歐盟對外簽署自由貿易協定之文本分析與類型研究並列篇名：A Categorization and Content Analysis of EU Free Trade Agreements作者：黃偉峰(David W. F. Huang)關鍵字：歐洲聯盟;自由貿易協定;「全球歐洲」;世界貿易組織;政策涵蓋率;European Union;Free Trade Agreement;Global Europe;World Trade Organization;Policy Coverage Rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：根據歐盟執委會資料，歐盟迄今（2011年11月止）與其主要貿易伙伴共簽署28個自由貿易協定（free trade agreement，FTA）。然而，過去針對歐盟所簽署FTA之內容分析大都屬個案研究或少數案例之比較研究。缺乏有系統地整理與分析所有歐盟FTA所涵蓋的政策項目和性質差異。於是我們的知識仍停留在特定歐盟FTA的內容為何、爭議何在，及其政策衝擊大小等問題上。無法進一步將已知的FTA個案資料予以通則化。本文旨在彌補上述知識空白，採用Horn、Mavroidis及Sapir所發展出的52項政策議題分類，再將其整合成WTO-plus（14項）及WTO-extra（38項）政策類別。據此來分析目前所有歐盟自由貿易協定的文本內容（共28份）。找出每一歐盟FTA涵蓋政策項目多寡，並試圖解釋歐盟FTA之政策涵蓋率高低的背後原因為何。本文發現歐盟所簽署的大多數FTA較偏向WTO plus政策類型。而與其WTO plus政策涵蓋率相關的解釋變數包括簽署年份順序、2006年傀儡變項、對手國的人口總數及經濟規模、對手國過去已簽署的FTA數目、簽約時歐盟會員國數目，以及對手國是否國界緊鄰歐盟會員國等。英文摘要：According to the Commission of the European Union (EU), there have been to date (November 2011) twenty-eight Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) signed between the EU and its trade partners. However, most existing studies of existing EU FTAs are either single-case studies or limited-case comparative studies. As a result, our knowledge is confined to which policy provisions each of the EU FTAs included or omitted, what legal and political controversies were attached to each of the FTAs, and the economic impact each FTA had on its signatories. There have been few attempts to generalize the existing knowledge derived from case studies on these FTAs. This paper aims to fill this gap in the literature by systematically categorizing and analyzing the content of EU FTAs. Using Horn, Marvroidis, and Sapir's classification framework, which categorizes fifty-two policies into either WTO plus (fourteen items) or WTO extra (thirty-eight items) policy areas, the paper seeks to identify the policy areas included in each of the twenty-eight EU FTAs, at the same time as developing hypotheses to explain policy coverage rates for EU FTAs. The paper finds that most EU FTAs can be classified as WTO-plus type, in the sense that they include higher proportions of WTO-plus policy items. In addition, the following explanatory variables are found to be correlated with the appearance of a WTO-plus policy focus: the chronological order in which FTAs are signed, the 2006 dummy item, the population and economic size of the trade partner, the number of FTAs previously signed by the trade partner, the number of EU members when the FTA is signed, and whether the trade partner is geographically adjacent to EU member states.起始頁-結束頁：85-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.55(85-118)6篇名：「容忍」或「預防攻擊」：核擴散問題下的策略選擇與策略互動並列篇名："Tolerance" or "Preventive Strike": Strategic Choice and Strategic Interaction in the Context of Nuclear Proliferation作者：楊凱皓(Kai-Hao Yang)關鍵字：核擴散;預防攻擊;賽局理論;北韓核武危機;伊拉克戰爭;Nuclear Proliferation;Preventive Strike;Game Theory;North Korea Nuclear Crisis;Iraq War期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：自核武科技的發展以降，「核擴散」（nuclear proliferation）問題便一直為國際所關注。對特定國家而言，核擴散將因非官方核武國家可能發展或取得核武，而對其安全構成威脅。故對擴散國（proliferator）發展核武潛在可能之因應，便成為其安全戰略的重要一環。可能的因應策略包括容忍並給予經濟誘因、制裁、以及「預防攻擊」（preventive strike）。然而在不同的策略選項間，存在一定程度的取捨關係。本文之目的，即在於探討在此一情境下，影響反擴散國與擴散國所採行之策略的因果機制，將國家的策略選擇與策略互動進一步一般化與理論化，並提供核擴散問題的研究些許理論基礎。本文將以「賽局理論」（Game Theory）之途徑建構核擴散情境下的理論模型，並推導該模型的均衡解，由均衡的「比較靜態分析」（comparative static analysis）進一步延伸理論命題的實質意涵。此外，本文將以「兩次北韓核武危機」、以及「伊拉克戰爭」，作為經驗案例的對照，延伸理論之經驗意涵（empirical implications），並由案例初步驗證所建立並推導的理論模型。本文的研究結果發現，擴散國受到的安全威脅及其技術條件、給予或終止制裁與經濟誘因的條件、反擴散國預防攻擊的成本及其攻擊能力以及雙方之預期將影響此一情境下衝突爆發之可能性。英文摘要：Since the outset of the development of nuclear technology, nuclear proliferation has been a widespread concern in international society. Many states feel that their security is threatened by nuclear proliferation as non-official nuclear states acquire nuclear weapons. Thus, responses toward the proliferators have become an important component of security strategies. Possible responses include granting economic incentives, sanctions, and preventive strikes. However, there is a tradeoff between these strategic choices. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the causal mechanisms that impact the strategic choices of both counter-proliferators and proliferators and to generalize as well as theorize strategic choices and strategic interactions. The paper develops, solves, and analyzes a game-theoretical model to identify equilibrium points, and enumerates the substantive meanings using comparative static analysis. Furthermore, the paper analyzes the cases of the North Korea Nuclear Crisis and Iraq War as empirical counterparts, extending the empirical implications of the theoretical model and provide preliminarily verification for the model. The paper finds that the degree of threat and the technology constraints faced by proliferators, the incentives offered by the counter-proliferators, the cost of launching an attack, the damage caused by an attack, and the expectations of each side affect the likelihood of an outbreak of conflicts under such situations.起始頁-結束頁：119-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.55(119-163)01篇名：社區發展、市民社會與生態政治－以恆春半島灰面鷲的參與式保育為例並列篇名：Community Development, Civil Society, and Ecological Politics: The Case of Participatory Grayfaced Buzzard Conservation in Hengchung Peninsula作者：湯京平(Ching-Ping Tang);張元嘉(Yuan-Chia Chang)關鍵字：社區營造;社基保育;生態旅遊;生態現象的社會建構;Community Building;Community-based Conservation;Eco-tourism;Social Construction of Nature期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：自然資源保育的問題攸關在地居民長期利益和人類共同的利益，但可能和個人的短期利益發生衝突。因此，在經濟利益相對重要的發展中國家，如何克服個人的抗拒，推動保育，不但在學術上是個令人好奇的議題，在實務上也至關重要。本文以屏東滿州鄉的灰面鷲保育過程為例，首先從建構論的觀點分析居民獵鷹「野蠻行為」的在地邏輯，然後描繪在地理解與價值觀重塑的過程，並進一步檢視促成行為轉變的條件與因素。本研究顯示，保育的努力要有成效，必須改變地方居民對於生態現象的理解，進而認同保育的價值。這種生態現象的社會重構，在居民覺得「公道」的狀態下，比較容易進行。臺灣的「社區營造」，提供了適當的誘因機制，能夠降低民眾的敵意與抗拒，讓重構的倡議得以進行；而營造的集體行動往往也有助於改變社區居民對於生態現象的價值觀，並在人際網絡的壓力下，有效保地改變相關行為，讓保育的成果可能隨著社區營造的成功而得以大幅改善。英文摘要：Hunter is by nature the enemy of the conservationist. Under what condition, however, a hunter would surrender the hunting rifle but engage in conservation by applying his knowledge about the prey? Since hunting is a self-interest action in contrast to conservation that is driven by public-spirited incentive, a transition like this the rise of civil society and thus the course itself and the factors behind it is worthy of careful examination. Conservation is to pursue the interest of a larger society at the costs of economic opportunity of local communities. A workable action theme therefore needs to combine the interests of both by putting conservation and community development under the same framework for contemplation. This study examines the case of conserving Gray-faced Buzzard in Manzhou County where local folks consider the bird as the gift from the God to help them survive the economic difficulty. It takes more means than simply banning such activities. External resources are mobilized and sophisticated scheme has been deployed with involvement of governmental agencies, voluntary associations, and academia. How these actors interact to depict a complicate picture of ecological politics at grassroots level.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.56.012篇名：規範認知與實然參與的罅隙：臺灣民眾在直接民主治理機制下的分析並列篇名：The Gap between Citizens' Cognition of Referendum and Their Participation: An Analysis from the Experience of Direct Democracy & Governance in Taiwan作者：郭銘峰(Ming-Feng Kuo);詹富堯(Fu-Yao Chan);王鼎銘(Ding-Ming Wang)關鍵字：直接民主;公民投票;政治效能感;民主治理;Direct Democracy;Referendum;Political Efficacy;Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣政治民主化歷程中，2004年公投制度之落實，是繼1996年總統開放直選、2000年首度政黨輪替後，跨越民主治理的另一項嶄新里程碑。本文以2004年落實的公投制度為例，探析民眾對直接民主治理機制之規範面評價認知與實然面參與狀況。依據民眾的認知與參與行動，本文歸納出四種不同類型群眾：贊同公投治理之知行合一、贊同公投治理之知行不一、反對公投治理之知行不一、反對公投治理之知行合一等四種，並透過2004年「臺灣社會變遷基本調查」面訪資料的輔助，解析這些不同行為模式的影響機制。實證結果顯示：若單純考量省籍、政黨認同、統獨意識等選舉因素，確實如一般文獻之主張會對民眾參與公投機制具重要影響；惟若進一步考量民眾對政治參與影響的公民意識效能，與其對政治人物回應性的態度，原本由統獨意識所驅動的影響效果，卻被大幅沖淡。此一結果，反映民眾對公投的評價與參與，並不完全囿於藍綠或統獨意識對抗之爭，而是相當程度肯定其具有擴大政治參與、改善政府治理的功能。透過本研究，除凸顯近年來民眾對於政治人物與政策回應性的期待，會直接反映在其參與直接民主機制的行為，也再次說明未來國家的治理模式，應更擴大與強化民眾各種參與公共政策制定的管道。英文摘要：After the general presidential election in 1996 and the peaceful transfer of political power in 2000, the Referendum Act was passed in 2003 and its first realization in 2004 was regarded as a milestone for Taiwan's democratic development and public governance. This article analyzes Taiwan citizens' cognition of and participation in referendum for the first time in the 2004 election. Specifically, we try to explore whether the citizens' participation is driven by their expectation of the substantive policy issues and political efficacy, or is simply motivated by other non-policy factors such as unification-independence ideology and party identity. Four categories of how respondents' cognition of referendum and their participation in reality converge or diverge are identified. In addition, the underlying mechanism influencing their behaviors are analyzed. By analyzing the 1,781 respondents from Taiwan Social Change Survey (2004), we find that in consistence with the current literature, national ideology and party identity did influence the acting and participation in referendum. However, if we take the normative attitude toward policy-making into account, the influence of national ideology will be diminished dramatically. The result reveals two important policy implications. First, people expect strongly that public opinion should play an important role in policy-making process. This expectation will furthermore affect their willingness of participation in the direct democracy. Second, people are extremely anxious for more channels of participation in policy-making. Effective governance for a modern democracy therefore is to expand and reinforce more diversified channels of participation in policy-making for the public.起始頁-結束頁：27-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.56.023篇名：地緣政治與國家主權的關係研究－以車臣和科索沃獨立省思臺海兩岸問題並列篇名：An Analysis on the Relations between Geopolitics and State Sovereignty-Comparative Case Studies on Chechnya, Kosovo and Taiwan作者：許菁芸(Jing-Yun Hsu);宋鎮照(Jenn-Jaw Soong)關鍵字：地緣政治;國家主權;車臣;科索沃;臺灣;Geopolitics;Sovereignty;Chechnya;Kosovo;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：科索沃於2008年宣布脫離塞爾維亞獨立，馬上得到美歐國家的承認，但車臣分離獨立問題卻被漠然以對。為何美歐國家對此兩個獨立事件在態度落差與對國家主權的差異性上表現如此不同的反應，這選擇性思考的因素特別值得深思。本研究試從「區域途徑」著手，試圖從地緣政治角度來分析國家主權，並從國內、國際及全球層次來建構地緣政治模型，並以這兩個個案車臣與科索沃，來探討地緣政治和國家主權關係，再由此以批判性的思考觀點，省思臺海兩岸的問題。英文摘要：The NATO's intervention in Kosovo in 1999 and the independence of Kosovo in 2008 have provoked a storm of criticisms and controversies in the policy communities across Europe and Russia. In contrast with the realities and the subsequent controversies with respect to Kosovo, the independence movement of Chechnya has been relatively overlooked by the Western countries. Clearly, the referring different Western response to the crisis over Chechnya cannot be explained solely by reference to the norms of sovereignty or non-intervention. Rather, a more complete understanding of the differences requires a closer examination of what have led to conflicts over Chechnya, and the ways in which conflicts were framed--both in Russia and in the West. Specifically, more attention is to be paid to the geopolitics and balance of power. Therefore, this article intends to propose a geopolitical model, using ”regional approach” spanning across the domestic, international and global levels. Exploring the cases of Chechnya and Kosovo, this article will re-examine the ideas of state sovereignty through the lens of Critical Geopolitics. The findings will then be applied in a critical manner to look into cross-strait relations, in the context of regionalization and globalization.起始頁-結束頁：55-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.56.034篇名：再思《東西文化及其哲學》並列篇名：Rethinking "Eastern and Western Culture and Its Philosophy"作者：余帛燦(Po-Tsan Yu)關鍵字：梁漱溟;心;我;生活;文化;Liang Shuming;Mind;Self;Culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：56期出版年：2013中文摘要：反對將理性視為唯一的普遍真理而強行推廣，是梁漱溟與許多近現代思想家的共同立場。拙文以為，梁漱溟的思想有其特別的結構，梁氏以他對本體、心、我這三個觀念的認定，導出對「歷史的始終」、「人的能力」、以及「問題的根源與解決動力」的理解，由此確立了他對於人類文明（成就）、乃至於社會變遷進程的獨特見解。英文摘要：Like many major thinkers in the contemporary world, Liang Shuming (1893-1988) was opposed to the view that all differences caused by the particularities of culture, tradition, language, and history, must be transcended by way of directly engaging universal truths unmediated by particulars. By reviewing the work and life experience of Liang, this article suggests that Liang's understanding of three issues-he beginning and end of history, the ability of mankind, and the ultimate cause of all problems and the dynamics of solving them for mankind-was based on his epistemology of the following three central ideas: the nature of being, human mind (xin), and self. This understanding led to his unique perspectives on human civilizations, social changes in general, and the cultural as well as social development of China in particular.起始頁-結束頁：79-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.56.045篇名：美國總統款項否決權的爭議：聯邦最高法院Clinton v. City of New York一案之判決及其影響並列篇名：The Controversial Issues of Presidential Line Item Veto in the United States: The Case Study of Clinton v. City of New York作者：李奕廷(Yi-Ting Lee);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：否決權;逐項否決權;分立政府;聯邦憲法之呈送條款;分權;veto power;Line Item Veto Act;divided government;Presentment Clause;separation of powers期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：為了避免重蹈1980年代國庫財政赤字的覆轍，國會於1996年4月9日通過了《款項否決權法》，並經由William J. Clinton簽署施行。依據該法，總統得以針對預算法案之個別款項進行否決，遏止國會議員以「肉桶立法」與「滾木立法」方式挾帶預算法案。1997年Clinton總統開始使用款項否決權，隨後控告《款項否決權法》違憲的訴訟接踵而來，紐約州首先控告Clinton總統取消紐約州為醫療健保而附加的稅款為違憲。聯邦最高法院於1998年4月27日對本案受理審查，在6月25日做出最後判決，以六比三之票數宣告款項否決權違反憲法規定；主要理由如下：款項否決權破壞《憲法》原有的行政與立法權力平衡機制，國會不得將部分立法權，訂立新法予以授權總統更改國會已通過之法律，因此宣告違憲。本文將透過Clinton v. City of New York案件，探討款項否決權憲法之爭端始末及其政治影響。英文摘要：In order to avoid recommitting the financial deficits that the American government had made in the 1980s, the Congress enacted the Line Item Veto Act in 1996. According to the Act, presidents are empowered to veto budgetary items including discretionary budget authorities, new direct expenditures, and even limited tax benefits. In addition, presidents could take advantage of the line item veto to restrain congressmen from pork-barrel legislations or logrolling. In 1997, President William J. Clinton started to exercise the line item veto, and subsequently the litigation of unconstitutionality followed. In Clinton v. City of New York (1998), the Supreme Court held that the procedures of cancellation in the Act had violated the Presentment Clause and the principle of separation of powers as well. In this study, we elaborate the controversial issues of the line item veto, and then review two lawsuits PresidentClinton was involved in to examine whether the Line Item Veto Act would violate the Presentment Clause and the principle of separation of powers. With this end in mind, we evaluate the political consequences of presidential line item veto, and conclude this article by offering some perspectives on presidential veto power.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.55.016篇名：批判國際政治經濟學的發展、途徑與啟示並列篇名：The Development, Approaches and Inspiration of Critical International Political Economy作者：曾怡仁(Yi-Ren Dzeng);李政鴻(Cheng-Hung Lee)關鍵字：不列顛學派;批判國際政治經濟學;美國學派;國際政治經濟學;American School;British School;Critical International Political Economy;International Political Economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：現代國際政治經濟學（International Political Economy, IPE）是試圖在國際層次上進行國家、市場與社會互動關係之整合研究。美國學者吉爾平（Robert Gilpin）最早針對IPE提出經濟民族主義、自由主義與馬克思主義等三個不同的意識形態觀點，近年來的IPE研究則趨向多元發展，包括學科定位、研究議題與方法論等面向。特別是，IPE美國學派（American School）和不列顛學派（British School）之間的爭辯，進一步展現了IPE研究的獨特性與學術社群的成熟化。批判國際政治經濟學（Critical International Political Economy, Critical IPE）是不列顛學派的核心，也是對主流美國學派的反思，然而學者對其解釋並不一致。本文從IPE跨大西洋分歧當中耙梳Critical IPE的發展進程，探討學者如何界定「批判性」（critical）一詞，以及Critical IPE主要研究途徑（女性主義、環境主義、建構主義和新葛蘭西主義）的特色，並探求這些研究途徑的共性關聯。最後，本文總結Critical IPE對於整體IPE發展的貢獻與啟示，希冀有助於國內讀者理解IPE這門學科的新發展。英文摘要：The subfield of International Political Economy (IPE) tries to integrate political, societal and economic aspects into studying international economic issues. Robert Gilpin was the first scholar to pay much attention to IPE research, who identified three major ideologies in IPE: Liberalism, Economic Nationalism and Marxism. The recent debates between the American School and the British School of IPE mean that an increasing number of issues, approaches and methodologies have been adopted by academic community. In other words, the IPE has become a well-developed discipline, with its own independent characteristics distinct from IR. Critical International Political Economy is the central part of British School which undertakes critical perspective to defy mainstream IPE. However, scholars have not had a general consensus about ”what is Critical IPE?” yet. The first purpose of this article is to clarify the academic context of IPE from which Critical IPE is derived. Secondly, this article tries to summarize the statements of the term ”critical” by scholars; furthermore, we will discuss those meanings on theory and practice of IPE. Third, this article intends to examine four critical approaches of Feminism, Environmentalism, Constructivism and Neo-Gramscianism and find some commonalities among them. Finally, we would conclude how the Critical IPE has inspired and contributed to the study of IPE. Hopefully, this article could help readers to further understand the recent developments of IPE.起始頁-結束頁：27-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.55.027篇名：臺灣農地政策變遷之探討：關鍵時刻觀點並列篇名：A Study of Agricultural Land Policy Change in Taiwan: Perspective of Critical Juncture作者：陳恆鈞(Hen-Chin Chen);詹茗荏(Ming-Ren Jhan)關鍵字：農地政策變遷;路徑依賴;關鍵時刻;農村再生條例;結構方程模式;Agricultural Land Policy Change;Path Dependence;Critical Juncture;Regeneration of Rural Villages;Structural Equation Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣早期經濟發展係以農業為主要產業結構，因此與農地政策息息相關，惟產業結構轉為工商業之際，農地政策隨之發生變遷。本文主要探討影響《農村再生條例》制定的關鍵因素有哪些？以及《農村再生條例》與「小地主大佃農政策」之間的變遷是否具有因果關係？理論探討聚焦於路徑依賴理論，尤其是產生政策變遷時的「關鍵時刻」，所運用的研究途徑則包括質化與量化。研究結果發現我國農地政策，在不同的關鍵時刻分別受到不同重大因素影響：政治考量、經濟發展、生態保護以及農村社區參與等等。就《農村再生條例》而言，四項關鍵因素的相對重要性（亦即解釋力高低），最高者為農村社區參與因素，最低者為政治因素。至於《農村再生條例》與「小地主大佃農政策」之間的變遷具有因果關係。英文摘要：Agriculture is the main industrial sector in the early stage of economic development in Taiwan, therefore the agricultural land closely associated with agricultural development is even more important. However, as the industrial structure gradually shifted to industry and commerce, the agricultural land policy has produced many problems. Thus, this article aims to apply the path dependence theory, especially the perspective of critical juncture, to analyze the influential factors of changing agricultural land policy. This article adopts both quantitative and qualitative methods: it first of all applies documentary analysis and pre-interview with the main actors. Then this artcile uses the quantitative method, including factor analysis and structural equation model to explain the results of questionnaire investigation. The findings indicate that the key factors influencing the change of the agricultural land policy at different critical juncture are affected by four factors in turns, including political, economic, ecological, and community participation factors. Among these factors, the most important one is community participation, and the least important one is political factor. Besides, there is an association found between the ”Small Land-owners and Big Landlord” and ”Regeneration of Rural Villages.”起始頁-結束頁：53-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.55.038篇名：爭辯國家安全：日本核能發展與政策爭論的分析並列篇名：Arguing National Security: An Analysis of the Development and Debates of Nuclear Power Policy in Japan作者：林文斌(Wen-Pin Lin)關鍵字：日本;國家安全;能源安全;核能;福島事故;Japan;national security;energy security;nuclear power;Fukushima accident期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：55期出版年：2013中文摘要：日本是一個缺乏天然資源的國家，尤其缺乏維持基礎設施和促進經濟活動所需的石化燃料能源。因此日本在二次大戰之後，每年主要能源來源八成以上幾乎都仰賴進口。日本政府和擁護核能發電者宣稱核能發電有穩定供應、成本低廉和發電過程不排放CO2的種種好處，因此極力發展核電以求能源自給自足，而成為擁有10處核能發電廠區和54組核能反應爐的核電大國。然而2011年3月11日的東日本大地震重創福島核能發電廠，導致史上第二次的七級核能事故，使政府和擁核人士聲稱之核能發電種種好處被反核人士所質疑。擁護核電派認為核電是體現能源政策三目標之安定性、經濟性和環保性的「三位一體」；反、廢核電派則否定之。本文由國家安全理論分析日本對核電的正反辯論，認為對現下的日本政府而言，不「廢核電」是考量電力供應後的務實選擇，但政府也不能低估，甚至忽視日本民眾反核的聲音和力量。唯有發展出更安全的核電科技、處理和防護技術，或再生能源科技具有經濟效益，才能脫出擁核和反核的困境。英文摘要：Japan is a country lacking indigenous natural resources, especially fossil fuels resources that are needed in the maintenance of infrastructure and rising economic activities. Japan therefore imported over 80% of its primary energy every year since WWII. The government and proponents of nuclear power claimed the advantages of nuclear power included stable power supplies, lower power cost, and no CO2 produced in power generation, As such, Japan sought energy autarky by developing nuclear power enthusiastically and became a country with 10 nuclear power plants with 54 nuclear reactors. However, the eastern Japan earthquake damaged the Fukushima nuclear power plant in March 11 2011, which resulted in the second level 7 accident of the International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale in history. The proponents of anti-nuclear power camps challenged the claimed benefits of nuclear power by government and nuclear power adherents. Based on the theory of national security, this article analyses the debates between pro-nuclear power and anti-nuclear power: while the former claims nuclear power is a ”holy trinity” of energy security, economic efficiency and environment protection, the latter treats nuclear power as a ”unholy trinity.” No Ausstieg (nuclear power phrasing out) may be pragmatic for Japan government in case of electricity supply now, however, the government should not underestimate and overlook the voice and power of anti-nuclear power camp. The only way to get rid of the dilemma between the two camps is developing safer nuclear power technologies, management skills and protection from radiation, or the technological breakthrough making renewable energy costeffective.起始頁-結束頁：85-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2013.55.0401篇名：國小教師的數學教學專業知能成長研究─以PPt在因數與倍數教學上的應用為例並列篇名：A Research of the Growth of Elementary School Teachers' Mathematical Teaching Expertise-An Example of Applying PPt to Teaching Divisor and Multiple作者：吳金聰(Chin-Tsung Wu);劉曼麗(Man-Li Liu)關鍵字：因數與倍數;國小教師;專業成長;數學教學;簡報;Divisor and Multiple;Elementary School Teacher;Professional Growth;Mathematical Teaching;PowerPoint期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討，國小教師參與「以簡報（Power Point, PPt）應用在因數與倍數教學」的專業知能成長鷹架歷程與成效。參與成長團隊的老師有四位，但進行教學試驗者有二位。本研究以行動研究進行專業知能成長，蒐集與分析質化與量化資料瞭解教師的成長歷程與成效；為了進一步瞭解教師的成長是否反映在學生身上，更蒐集教學前後學生喜歡上數學課的情形進行卡方考驗，使用試卷蒐集學生前後測資料進行共變數分析。研究發現：教師可在「教材理解、設計轉化、教學反省、再教學反省」之成長模式下，在團隊安排的垂直與水平鷹架策略及避免負向因素與營造正向因素下，進行因數與倍數的教學簡報專業成長，不但解決了專業成長問題且精進教師的數學專業知能；而教師的知能精進，也進一步帶動參與教學之學生的數學學習成績與喜愛態度之改善，且達到顯著水準。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore elementary school teachers' expertise process and effectiveness in participating in the project--teaching divisor and multiple by applying PowerPoint (PPt). Two of four teachers in the team conducted teaching experiment, in which one of them served as the subject of this research. This study conducted action research on theme of expertise, collected quantitative and qualitative data to analyze the impacts on growing process and effectiveness, further, to realize whether the growth of teacher reflected on students' learning, this research conducted chi-square test on analyzing the preference of taking math class, and conducted covariance analysis on data collected pre/post test. From the result, it showed that teacher could follow the growing model of ”comprehension of teaching matters, transformation of teaching design, the first teaching practice and reflection, and the second teaching practice and reflection” with the pre-arranged vertical and horizontal scaffolding strategy, avoiding negative factor and creating positive factor, the PPt teaching of divisor and multiple not only solved the problem of professional growth, but improved the expertise of teacher. In addition, such improvement on teachers also brought up the advancement on students' learning performance and attitude on math with significant level.起始頁-結束頁：371-400資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2104.012篇名：大學普通生物學實驗課程應用探究鷹架自我評估策略對學生探究能力表現之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Using Scaffolding and Self-Assessment Strategy on College Students' Scientific-Inquiry Ability in a General Biology Curriculum作者：何宗穎(Tsung-Ying Ho);王敏男(Maynard Min-Nan Wang);謝佩妤(Pei-Yu Hsieh);郭幸宜(Hsin-Yi Kuo);趙大衛(David Chao);黃台珠(Tai-Chu Huang)關鍵字：科學探究能力;科學探究評分準則;學習鷹架;Scientific-Inquiry Ability;Scientific Inquiry Scoring Rubrics;Learning Scaffolding期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採準實驗研究法，以南部某國立大學生物科學系修習「大學普通生物實驗」課程的學生為研究對象，實驗組班級人數22人，對照組班級人數20人。研究過程中，實驗組學生實施「探究鷹架自我評估策略」，先給予「探究式實驗指示單」作為說明，再給予「科學探究能力評分準則」作為學習鷹架，與對照組學生進行相同的實驗課程，研究者再以「科學探究能力評分準則」評量實驗組與對照組學生在實驗報告中探究能力的表現。研究結果顯示：（一）前測兩組學生的探究能力得分均偏低，代表學生的起始探究能力不佳；（二）經由共變數分析發現，實驗組的整體探究能力得分明顯優於對照組；（三）進一步從科學探究能力的各向度及各分向度看來，實驗組在形成問題、處理數據兩向度的得分均明顯優於對照組，並在概念的運用、問題的形成、數據的適切性、數據的紀錄、數據的組織、數據的轉換等分向度實驗組的得分均優於對照組；（四）在學生感受方面，多數的學生（95.5%）認為使用「科學探究能力評分準則」對他們的學習是有幫助的。英文摘要：This quasi-experimental study aimed to examine the effect of using a self-assessment strategy on college students' ability of scientific inquiry. Two classes of biology major students from a university in southern Taiwan were selected as an experimental group (22 people) and a control group (20 people). The experimental group read scoring rubrics before starting a biology practical course. The control group did not read scoring rubrics before starting another similar course. Students' scientific-inquiry ability and reactions toward the course were collected at the beginning and the end of the courses. The results showed that although both groups of students showed poor ability in scientific inquiry at the beginning of the courses, students in the experimental group made larger progress than the control group. The improvement had six dimensions of ”forming a question,” ”completing procedures,” ”collecting sufficient data,” ”organizing data,” transferring data,” and ”revising and evaluating.” In addition, 95.5% of the students in the experimental group showed positive attitudes toward the usage of scoring rubrics to scaffold learning.起始頁-結束頁：401-429資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2104.023篇名：數位化學習歷程檔案對自我調整學習之影響─學習目標設定的作用並列篇名：Influences of e-Portfolio in Self-Regulated Learning-Effect of Learning Goal Setting作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);廖悅媚(Yueh-Mei Liao)關鍵字：自我調整學習;數位化學習歷程檔案;學習目標設定;學習歷程檔案;Self-regulated learning;e-Portfolio;Learning goal setting;Portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討使用數位化學習歷程檔案進行學習目標設定對自我調整學習之影響。研究對象為高職資料處理科修習「網頁設計」課程的二年級81位學生。男生36人，女生45人。教學實驗為期十週，學生使用數位化學習歷程檔案進行學習目標設定。結果顯示學生使用數位化學習歷程檔案進行學習目標設定之後的自我調整學習顯著優於使用之前的自我調整學習，學習目標設定越好則自我調整學習越佳，顯示使用數位化學習歷程檔案進行學習目標設定對學生自我調整學習有顯著正面的影響。英文摘要：The study explored the effects of learning goal-setting using e-portfolio in self-regulated learning. The participants were 81 students of eighth grade in the ”Webpage Design” class at a vocational-technical high school. There were 36 males and 45 females. During the experiment of 10 weeks, the students used e-portfolio to set their learning goals. The results revealed that self-regulated learning after using e-portfolio to set learning goals was significantly better than those before using e-portfolio to set learning goals. It implied that using e-portfolio to set learning goals had a positive effect in self-regulated learning. The better the performance of learning goal setting was, the better the self-regulated learning demoed. It implied that the performance of learning goal setting had a positive effect in self-regulated learning.起始頁-結束頁：431-454資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2104.034篇名：不同性別七年級學生論證科學新聞之學習效益並列篇名：Gender Differences in Science News Instruction Performance作者：蔡佩穎(Pei-Ying Tsai);張文華(Wen-Hua Chang);林陳涌(Chen-Yung Lin);張惠博(Huey-Por Chang)關鍵字：性別差異;科學新聞;寫作學科學;論證;Gender Difference;Science News;Writing to Learn Science;Argumentation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：培養科學素養包含培養判讀科學新聞的能力，於教學中運用科學新聞是達成此目標的有效途徑，但選用不同類型科學新聞進行教學，可能對學生有不同的效益。因此，本研究擬探討不同性別七年級學生論證科學新聞之差異，以及論證不同類型科學新聞對不同性別學生所產生的學習效益。本研究中，62位學生（男生33人，女生29人）參與融入自然課程的論證科學新聞寫作。資料來源包括對六篇科學新聞（「說明科學研究」與「敘述科學事件」新聞各三篇）的論證寫作，以及協調恆定、生殖遺傳、演化3個學習主題的概念成就測驗。研究者運用Toulmin's argument pattern提供論證科學新聞的架構，並形成編碼基準來評量學生論證科學新聞的表現。對共計372份科學新聞論證寫作的ANOVA分析結果顯示，在科學新聞論證整體表現、辨識資料、引用根據與提出反駁，女生的表現顯著優於男生。此外，論證不同類型科學新聞的表現與其相關單元概念成就測驗之逐步迴歸分析顯示，「說明科學研究」的論證分數可預測女生的概念成就，「敘述科學事件」的論證分數可預測男生的概念成就。本研究建議教師運用科學新聞來協助學生整合學習內容，且應兼用說明科學研究與敘述科學事件的新聞文本以營造兩性均平的學習環境。英文摘要：Being a scientific literate citizen shall be able to interpret news reports about science progress critically. The structure of science news articles may affect readers' ways of engagement as well as comprehension of the content. This present study aims to examine gender difference on writing to argue with science news authors and the association between their argumentation performance and cognitive outcomes. Sixty-two students (33 Boys, 29 Girls) from two classes in one secondary school in middle Taiwan took part in the study. Data sources included students' measures on three achievement tests- Regulation-Homeostasis, Reproduction-Genetics, and Evolution, and their written argumentation about three science news articles that exposit current science research progress and three science news articles that narrate events of science. Toulmin's argument pattern was applied to develop a writing frame for students to analyze selected news articles. A coding scheme was developed for each news article, and then was applied to grade students' written artifacts. The results of ANOVAs indicate that boys and girls performed as well on all three cognitive tests. Girls outperformed boys on the overall quality of written argumentation, recognizing data, formulating warrants, and proposing rebuttals. Moreover, step-wise regression analyses reveal that the scores of written argumentation about the 'exposit science research progress' type of news articles better predict boys' cognitive learning outcome of corresponding learning unit; whereas, the scores of written argumentation about the 'narrate science events' type of news articles better predict girls cognitive learning outcomes. Based on the results, it is suggested that teacher should utilize news articles systematically and carefully in order to facilitate students' learning through arguing with the author of the science news article. Selecting both expository and narration types of science news articles will assist to establish a gender-inclusive argumentation learning environment.起始頁-結束頁：455-481資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2104.045篇名：發展一延伸性CIPP課程評鑑模式運用於高瞻計畫課程－以高中機器人課程為例並列篇名：The Development of an Extended CIPP Curriculum Evaluation Model Using in High Scope Program-A Case of High School Robot Curriculum作者：林建良(Chien-Liang Lin);黃台珠(Tai-Chu Huang);莊雪華(Hsueh-Hua Chuang);趙大衛(David Chao)關鍵字：背景輸入過程成果模式;課程評鑑;機器人課程;CIPP Model;Curriculum Evaluation;Robot Course期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文呈現一個整體性評鑑的個案研究，在高瞻計畫的支持下，運用Stufflebeam的CIPP（Context, Input, Process and Product）評鑑模式，來進行南臺灣某高中機器人創新課程的評鑑。研究者採取「使用個案圖」進行課程的系統分析，界定出CIPP評鑑模式中背景、輸入、過程及成果四個評鑑層面的範圍，並定義研究資料蒐集的方式及來源，包含相關人員的晤談、教學錄影、會議記錄、問卷回覆、課程作品、課程網站及學生網誌等資料。兩位大專教授及兩位高中教師先就多元的資料記錄分析及編碼，再運用Atlas.ti質性分析軟體獲取一致的編碼。根據個案研究結果修正並發展出一個評鑑高中創新課程的延伸性CIPP課程評鑑模式。從課程發展的核心價值開始，分析課程目標、課程規劃、課程活動及學習產出，並依據不同的資料來源及評鑑措施，進行背景、輸入、過程及成果四個評鑑層面的驗證。延伸性CIPP課程評鑑模式可作為高瞻計畫其他高中發展相關創新課程，改善課程設計、發展及應用的主要指標。英文摘要：This article presented a case study of a holistic evaluation of the development and implementation of a high school innovative robot curriculum in southern Taiwan with the support of the High Scope Program (HSP) in line with Stufflebeam's context, input, process and product (CIPP) evaluation model. The researchers applied user cased diagram to identify the scopes of context, input, process, and output four evaluation domains of CIPP model systematically, and to categorize the data source, such as interviews, instruction video analysis, records of group meeting, questionnaire responses, course artifacts, the course website, and students' blogs. Two college professors and two high school teachers analyzed and coded the transcripts of multiple resource records, then discussed for coherent codes with Atlas.ti qualitative analysis software supportively. According to the result of this case study, an extended CIPP evaluation model was developed for the implementation of high school innovative curriculum under the analysis framework of the context, input, process, and product. That model is derived from the core value of the curriculum development to analyze the course objectives, curriculum planning, curriculum activities and learning outcomes; then to authenticate the four evaluation levels upon context, input, process and outcome via different data sources and evaluation steps. The extended CIPP evaluation model could serve as principal guides for other similar innovative curriculum affiliated with High Scope Program (HSP) to improve the design, development, and implementation of such curricula.起始頁-結束頁：237-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2103.016篇名：國小數學教科書數學問題類型與呈現方式之比較分析－以臺灣、芬蘭、新加坡為例並列篇名：A Comparison and Analysis of the Types and Representations of Mathematical Problems in the Elementary Mathematics Textbooks of Taiwan, Finland and Singapore作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu)關鍵字：內容分析;問題表徵;認知需求;數學教科書;數學問題;Content Analysis;Problem Representation;Cognitive Demand;Elementary Mathematics Textbooks;Mathematical Problems期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以臺灣、芬蘭與新加坡國小數學教科書為對象，針對三國教科書中的數學問題進行分析。研究對象為三國使用最普及的數學教科書，採內容分析法，依數學問題的類型和呈現方式進行分析。結果發現，三國在問題的數量上有顯著的差異，以芬蘭的問題最多，臺灣的問題最少。各類型問題所佔的比例上，三國之間則有一致的現象，都明顯地偏重無連結程序的問題。臺灣數學問題的呈現以文字型態為主，芬蘭以數學型態為主，新加坡則兼顧不同型態的呈現。在例題上，臺灣多呈現不同的解題思考與歷程，芬蘭以定義和示範的方式來呈現，新加坡以示範和結構引導的方式來呈現。在練習題上，芬蘭和新加坡設計較多開放性、探索性、和腦力激盪的問題給學生。英文摘要：The focus of this study was to explore how mathematical problems are presented in the most popular elementary school mathematics textbook series of Taiwan, Finland and Singapore using content analysis. Mathematical problems were the unit of analysis and they were classified based on their cognitive demand and representational form. There was a significant difference in the number of problems presented in the textbooks of these three countries with more problems presented in Finland's textbooks than in those of Singapore and Taiwan. We found the ratio of different types of problems in the textbooks is similar across the three countries with most of the problems being classified as 'procedure without connection' in each country. When the representational form of problems was examined, we found that most problems were presented in a contextual form in Taiwan, but most frequently in a purely mathematical form in Finland. There was balanced arrangement among different representation forms in Singapore. Our analysis of example problems in the textbooks showed that Taiwan's textbooks usually presented different possible thinking processes and strategies for each example problem, while Finland's textbooks tended to present examples in a more definitive or demonstrative way. Singapore's textbooks used a combination of demonstration along with structural guides to present their examples. With regard to practice problems, there were more open, challenging, and explorative problems presented in the textbooks of Finland and Singapore than in those of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：263-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2103.027篇名：三∼六歲幼兒的天真古生物學－恐龍的結構與行為並列篇名：Naive Paleontology: Young Children's Reasoning about the Structures and Behaviors of Dinosaur作者：莊麗娟(Li-Chuan Chuang);侯天麗(Tien-Li Hou)關鍵字：天真生物學;心理本質論;因果推理;行為;結構;Naive Biology;Psychological Essentialism;Causal Reasoning;Behaviors;Structures期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：基於晚近心理本質論的新發現，認為人類生命早期可能存有一種抽象的推理架構，協助幼兒進行生物因果推理。本研究進一步從較具挑戰性的角度，以幼兒不具經驗的古生物著手，模擬考古歷程，設計問題情境，深入的追蹤80名三∼六歲幼兒對恐龍的結構與行為的原發性推理。研究結果發現：（1）在結構方面，三歲已能從一系列化石結構的圖片，推測生物的類別，並能初步組合化石片斷，重構外形，推測恐龍的類別，此能力在六歲時接近成熟；（2）在行為方面，三歲已能依據各部位的骨骼造型，推測恐龍的外在行為，並能初步推測較適合生存的內在機制，此能力在六歲時尚在發展中。整體而言，在鉅觀的遠古物種系統中，幼兒的推理呈現本質論的思考傾向，並隨年齡增長而變異。英文摘要：The newly emerging psychological essentialism suggested there might be an innate abstract framework in early human life to assist children in making biological reasoning. Based on this notion, this study posed a challenge to previous research and aimed to explore young children's rudimentary reasoning about the structures and behaviors of dinosaurs, with special considerations of children's lacking of knowledge of prehistoric life. Eighty 3-to 6- year-old children without knowledge and experience of dinosaur were tested with task questions in simulated situations of the paleontologists' fossils reconstruction and children's biological reasoning was traced. The result revealed: (1) Pertaining to structures, 3-year-olds were able to identify some kind of the living things from the serial of pictures of bones fossils. And 3-year-olds were able to piece together the fossils pictures and then make rough differentiation for dinosaur kinds preliminarily. Until 6 years of age, this ability was getting mature. (2) Pertaining to behaviors, 3-year-olds appeared to make inference about the behaviors of dinosaur based on the parts of bone fossils. Furthermore, they were able to predict the inside mechanism for sustaining life preliminarily. Around age 6, this ability was still under development. Conclusively, our findings suggested young children showed a tendency for essential thinking when they made biological reasoning within the macro-system of prehistoric species. However, childhood essentialism might have variations over the development of children, when children's knowledge and experience increase.起始頁-結束頁：291-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2103.038篇名：國小學童月亮數位遊戲學習之發展與學習成效之評估並列篇名：A Study of Developing a Computer Educational Game for Elementary Science Teaching on Moon and the Effectiveness作者：廖家瑜(Chia-Yu Liao);連啟瑞(Chi-Jui Lien);盧玉玲(Yu-Ling Lu)關鍵字：月亮;延伸學習;數位遊戲;學習成效;學習單;Moon;Advanced Learning;Computer Educational Game;Learning Effectiveness;Worksheet期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：月亮相關概念之教與學是小學自然科中的一項困難課題。本研究旨在發展一個能作為小學月亮單元延伸學習之數位教材與教學模式，以有效增進學生月亮及相關概念的理解。本研究自行研發3D月亮數位遊戲，結合教學學習活動單來引導學生進行探究，從而評估教學成效。研究對象為國小四年級學童2班共60人。教學工具包括自行發展的3D月亮數位學習遊戲軟體（3D Educational Game-Fly to the Moon，3DEG-FM）及活動單，供學生進行延伸教學；評量工具則包括自編的「月亮概念成就測驗」、「月亮實作評量」、「半結構性晤談」，用以評估學童學習成效與此輔助學習教材的適用性。結果發現，進行月亮數位遊戲延伸學習，不論是以傳統紙筆評量或實作評量觀察，學習成效皆顯著優於使用一般教學的學生。此顯示本研究發展之三維度月亮數位遊戲輔以學習活動單之教學可適合國小四年級的學生使用，學生能在高學習動機中，藉由模擬各種視角觀察，從擬真中獲得天體間之相互運動關係的直接經驗並形成概念，適宜作為國小月亮單元課程後的延伸學習。英文摘要：Teaching and learning about concepts relating to moon have been regarded as a difficult part in elementary science. The purposes of this study were to develop an auxiliary teaching approach and to evaluate its effectiveness on improving students' learning. A 3D-computer educational game (3D Educational Game-Fly to the Moon, 3DEG-FM) and its worksheets were developed for students to use after traditional class learning, as advance investigation activity. There were 60 fourth-graders from two classes involved in this study and who were assigned into experimental group and control group. Self-developed ”Moon Relating Concepts Test,” ”Moon Relating Performance Assessment,” and ”Semi-structure Interview” were used to monitor students' learning. The results showed that the auxiliary approach developed in this study significantly improved students' learning, both in concepts and performance assessments. These, combing with students' interview data, indicated that learning through the 3DEG-FM and its worksheets enables students to learn the movement of celestial bodies with operable experiences through virtual reality, and then achieves better learning.起始頁-結束頁：317-344資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2103.049篇名：八年級學生在科學問題本位學習歷程的自我導向學習行為表現並列篇名：Self-Directed Learning Behaviors in Science Problem-Based Learning Processes of Eighth Graders作者：陳毓凱(Yu-Kai Chen);張賴妙理(Miao-Li Chang Lai);楊坤原(Kun-Yuan Yang)關鍵字：自我導向學習;探究取向的學習;問題本位學習;問題解決;Self-Directed Learning;Inquiry-Based Learning;Problem-Based Learning;Problem Solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採個案研究法探討桃園縣國中八年級一個班級的學生（共38人）在科學問題本位學習（Problem-Based Learning，PBL）歷程的自我導向學習（Self-Directed Learning，SDL）行為表現。各種質性資料分析發現，在遭遇結構模糊的問題後，各組學生便運用先備知識並經腦力激盪而擬定小組的學習議題與行動計畫。依據小組的行動計畫，每位組員分工搜尋各類學習資源以進行自我學習，並透過小組討論自由地分享和比較彼此的想法，逐步培養互信並進行知識建構。最後，各組運用電腦將解題歷程與解決方案加以呈現，再以自評表和組員互評表來評鑑、反思自己與其他組員的學習表現。由PBL提供之真實性問題情境及主動學習、小組討論等活動可使學生從學習中體會科學知識的實用價值並提升自我效能，因而激發和維繫其學習動機，驅使各組學生運用各種SDL技能以完成解題任務。這些發現顯示PBL有助於發展八年級學生的SDL技能。起始頁-結束頁：345-370資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2103.0510篇名：以概念演化樹探討跨年級學生理想氣體心智模式之發展歷程並列篇名：Investigating Students' Mental Models of Ideal Gas across Grade Levels via the Conceptual Evolutionary Approach作者：邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu);吳文龍(Wen-Lung Wu);鍾曉蘭(Shiao-Lan Chung);李雪碧(Hsueh-Pi Li)關鍵字：心智模式;支序學;系統發育分類學;理想氣體定律;概念演化樹;Mental Model;Cladistics;Phylogenetic Classification;Ideal Gas Law;Conceptual Evolutionary Tree期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以問卷調查跨年級學生理想氣體概念發展狀況，並利用系統發育分類學（或支序學）方法建立學生概念演化樹，以探討學生理想氣體概念發展的可能歷程。本研究之研究對象為大臺北地區七到十二年級國、高中學生，總人數為646人。本研究有三項研究目的：一、調查跨年級學生理想氣體概念分布；二、透過文獻分析將學生常見之心智模式進行分類及編碼，以系統分類學方法找出概念演化樹；三、比較前述兩項研究結果，建立可能的概念發展路徑。本研究計有三項研究工具，分別為「理想氣體概念編碼工具」：包含13個認知特徵及8種的認知狀態；「理想氣體測驗」：目的為找出跨年級學生認知特徵分布比例；「系統分類學統計軟體PAUP 4.0」：為廣泛運用於系統演化學的統計分析軟體。研究結果顯示概念演化樹43中有兩個發展階段包含粒子本身的特性及粒子間的交互作用，所呈現的概念演化歷程符合相關氣體粒子文獻的發展研究，且對實徵的跨年級概念調查結果也具有相當的解釋力。由概念發展的歷程來看有許多關鍵的概念發展點（包含粒子觀、剛性粒子、隨機運動與分布及粒子間交互作用），其概念容易被學生誤解而發展成不正確的概念。藉由本研究之概念演化樹可提供教師瞭解學生概念發展的歷程，以作為教學和撰寫教科書之參考。起始頁-結束頁：135-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2102.0111篇名：融入批判思考策略與工具之網路學習環境對護生臨床實習之影響並列篇名：The Effects of the Web-based Learning Environment with Critical Thinking Strategies and Tools on Nursing Students' Clinical Learning作者：賴錦緣(Chin-Yuan Lai);陳勝美(Sheng-Mei Chen)關鍵字：批判思考;網路學習;臨床實習;護理教育;Critical Thinking;Web-Based Learning;Clinical Practicum;Nursing Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在建構一個融入護理批判思考策略的web-based網路學習環境，來輔助學生在臨床護理的實習。研究主要以Tanner的臨床判斷模式為架構，結合網路教學的特性，發展出培養護生臨床批判思考的網路教學模式，並探討其對學生批判思考和護理能力成長之影響。研究參與者為8位修習99學年度某一梯次「精神科護理實習」課程之二專二年級學生，實習指導教師是一位從事護理臨床與教學工作超過25年之資深教師，實驗情境為中部某精神科醫院。研究蒐集量化與質化的資料，透過前、後測瞭解學生批判思考和護理能力之成長。研究結果發現：一、學生經過三週的實習後，其批判思考分數和護理能力分數皆顯著進步；二、整體來說，不管是批判思考分數，或是護理能力分數，教師評和學生自評分數之一致性皆達到顯著水準；三、從學生瀏覽系統各項功能的次數分析，發現本研究所開發的系統可提供學生有系統地建立專業e-portfolio（數位化學習歷程檔案）；學生也大致認為使用系統對其臨床實習是有幫助的。可見結合護理批判思考策略和工具的網路教學模式對護生批判思考能力的培養是有效的。後續研究可以針對學生的其他瀏覽行為進行分析，以提供適性的網路教學。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the effects of the web-based learning environment with critical thinking strategies and tools on students' learning in nursing clinical practicum. Based on Tanner's clinical judgment model, we developed critical thinking activities for a threeweek nursing clinical practicum session. The participants are eight female students enrolled in a psychiatric nursing practice course in 2010 from a two-year nursing college. The instructor is a senior lecturer who has worked in nursing teaching and practice for more than 25 years. The clinical practicum setting in the study was a private middle-size mental hospital located in central Taiwan. The analysis from quantitative and qualitative data showed that students' critical thinking and nursing competence improved significantly. As to the overall assessment scores of critical thinking and nursing competence, the agreement between instructor and student self-assessment was significant. The analysis of frequency of visits on each functions appeared that the web-based learning environment provided students with professional e-portfolios to allow them to construct their learning systematically. Furthermore, students admitted that using the system is helpful to their clinical practicum. The results showed that the web-based learning environment with clinical reasoning strategies and tools is effective for the development of critical thinking among nursing students. Future research may explore students' other browsing behaviors to provide adaptive web-based learning.起始頁-結束頁：163-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2102.0212篇名：高級中學自然科學術性向測驗編製並列篇名：The Development of Natural Science Academic Aptitude Tests for High School Students作者：侯雅齡(Ya-Ling Hou)關鍵字：自然科學;測驗編製;資優學生;題目反應理論;Natural Science;Test Development;Gifted/Talented Students;Item Response Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：科學資優是相當受到重視的學術性向資優領域，臺灣許多高中都設有科學資優班，以提供科學資優學生適性的教育服務。科學資優學生的鑑定方式之一，乃需要透過標準化的科學性向測驗以瞭解學生是否具有優異的科學潛能。本研究目的在編製適用於高中學生的自然科學術性向測驗，以作為鑑定科學資賦優異學生的工具。試題以科學思考與推理能力（scientific thinking and reasoning）的評估為核心，區分為物理、化學、生物、地科四範疇，所有題目皆經過嚴格的內容審查，並以全國高一學生為母群，抽取1,878名學生進行預試。正式測驗計有35題，其內部一致性Cronbach’s α信度為 .813，間隔三週的重測信度為 .898，與「國中基本學力測驗的自然科學成就」的相關為 .782。以差異試題功能（differential item functioning）檢驗男女生在各試題的表現，並未有嚴重性別偏失的試題。最後以1,033位高一生為常模樣本，建立百分等級及常態化T分數常模。英文摘要：Scientific talent is an important category of giftedness. An excellent indicator of scientific talent is standardized aptitude tests. The purpose of this study was to develop a Natural Science Aptitude Test for identification of scientific talented students. The test developer established a common scale for the three parameters logistic test model by test equating. Tests editing applied item response theory. The content domains included Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Earth Scienceknowledge. Coefficient of internal consistency (Cronbach's α) was .813. Coefficients of stability for three weeks achieved .898. The criterion-related validity evidence from estimate of the correlation between ”The Basic Competence Test” scores and ”The Natural Science Aptitude Tests” scores was .782. In the study of gender differential item functioning (DIF), results showed that all of items did not display gender DIF. Percentile rank and normal T-score norm of test was based on 1,033 High School Students.起始頁-結束頁：189-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2102.0313篇名：奈米科技教育融入課程實施的支持系統研究並列篇名：A Study on Supporting System in Nanotechnology Education Integrated into Curriculum Practice作者：楊文森(Wen-Sen Yang);張美玉(Mei-Yu Chang);葉孟考(Meng-Kao Yeh)關鍵字：支持系統;奈米科技;新興議題;夥伴學校;Support System;Nanotechnology;Emerging Issue;Partner School期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討研究單位（大專院校）和夥伴學校以合作方式，規畫奈米科技新興議題融入到學校的課程實施，其所產生的支持系統覺知和需求程度問題。研究者利用問卷，對參與本研究的中北區夥伴學校：國小4所、國中3所、高中1所，共21位教師進行施測，同時對其中的9位教師進行深度訪談，並對照本計畫所實施的工作報告、檢討會紀錄及成果發表等資料。研究結果發現：各階段的夥伴學校老師在從事奈米科技教育，對於外部機構所提供的支持系統多感到滿意，而學校內部則有大半的教師表示沒有特別感受，但對於六大支持系統均表示有強烈的需求程度，同時在此之外的渴望需求部分則希望學校能給推動的教師有充份的發展空間，而高中的夥伴學校除了上述的需求，對於自然界奈米現象、奈米科技產品研發和使用須知等「教材」有特別的需求。最後建議：外部的支持機構要多以夥伴學校需求評估進行支持系統的建構，同時遴選臨近研究單位（即大專校院）且真正有意願合作、可長期互動的高中、國中、小學校成為計畫合作的夥伴學校，並建置與夥伴學校合作的奈米科技計畫實施平臺，以加強夥伴學校間的資源分享、資訊宣傳與經驗交流。英文摘要：This study is aimed to investigate the awareness and demand degree caused by the supporting system which was produced in the way of cooperation between partner schools and research organizations (universities and colleges) to plan the emerging Nanotechnology issue integrated into the implement of school curriculum. The researcher adopted a questionnaire to construct examination to 21 teachers of partner's schools in the central north district and take depth interview with 9 of them at the same time, and compare to the work report, self-criticism and achievement presentation. The research findings include: The partner school teachers in each stage were almost satisfied with the supporting system provided by the external agencies but more than half of the teachers showed no special feeling about the supporting system provided within the school when they engaged Nanotechnology education. But they showed intense demand degree to the six supporting systems. Besides, some hope schools can give promoting teachers sufficient space for development. In addition to the above demands: The senior high school partner schools have special need for teaching material about natural phenomenon of Nanotechnology, Nanotechnology R & D and the use of notes. Final suggestion: The external supporting agencies must consider the partner schools' needs assessment when constructing supporting system, choose the approaching research units (i.e., universities and colleges) which have the wish to cooperate, long-term interaction of schools to become partner schools and build Nanotechnology implement platform to enhance the sharing of resources, information advocacy and exchange of experience between partner schools.起始頁-結束頁：215-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2102.0414篇名：一個同儕教練為基礎之發展模式對國中科學教師PCK之影響：以〈熱與溫度〉單元為例並列篇名：Exploring the Peer Coaching-Based Developmental Model on PCK of Middle Science Teachers: An Example of "Heat and Temperature"作者：張世忠(Syh-Jong Jang);李俊毅(Jun-Yi Lee);謝幸芬(Hsin-Fen Hsieh)關鍵字：同儕教練;專業發展;學生知覺;學科教學知識;Peer Coaching;Professional Development;Students' Perceptions;Pedagogical Content Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：科學教師PCK是教師專業發展的核心。本研究選擇〈熱與溫度〉為單元內容，主要的目的在於探討一個發展的同儕教練為基礎模式，對科學教師的PCK之影響。三位中學科學教師和他們教授8年級學生參與本研究，資料蒐集包含學生對教師學科教學知覺問卷前後測試，每位科學老師針對模式中指派的問題和作業、同儕教練會議、科學教師所作的反思日記、和科學老師的晤談。採用質性、量化分析研究法。研究發現學生對老師的PCK知覺在整體的得分上沒有達到顯著差異水準，在四個向度中，只有教學表徵達顯著差異水準；為了更加清楚教師之PCK改變的情境和狀況，研究者加以描述各向度內單題之變化情形。有關同儕教練對教師之「教學表徵」之改變內涵說明，則可以由以下四方面：「運用熱對流與幅射的模型」、「熱脹冷縮的示範活動」、「以量筒粗細比喻比熱的大小」和「增加圖片解說海陸風形成的原因」等。本研究的發現與建議可作為未來在職教師發展科學教師之PCK的參考。英文摘要：Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK) of in-service teachers is an important issue for current teacher education in Taiwan. The purpose of this study was to examine the current PCK of science teachers, and explore peer coaching to affect the PCK development of science teachers. The topic of heat and temperature was chosen, and a peer coaching-based model was developed in this study. Three certified science teachers and three classes of eighth graders participated in this study. We used a mixed methods design, incorporating both quantitative and qualitative techniques. The main data included peer coaching meeting, questionnaires of students' perception of teacher's PCK, written assignments, reflective journals and interviews. The findings of this study showed students' overall perception of their teacher's PCK from the pretest to the posttest did not attain the significant difference level; In four dimensions of questionnaire, the only one with significant difference is the representational repertoire (RR) dimension. In order to understand more about the change of teachers' PCK based on contexts and situations, we further describe the change of each item within each dimension. The change of science teachers’ RR influenced by peer coaching can be explained through the following four aspects: ”Apply the thermal convection and radiation model,” ”demonstrate the examples of heat expansion and contraction,” ”use the size of cylinder to explain specific heat capacity” and ”use some pictures to illustrate the reasons cause land-sea breeze.” The research implications of this study are provided along with suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2101.0115篇名：國小教師數學教科書使用之初探並列篇名：An Exploratory Study of Mathematics Textbook Use by Elementary School Teachers作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu)關鍵字：國小教師;教科書使用;數學教科書;Elementary School Teacher;Textbook Use;Mathematics Textbook期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的目的在瞭解國小教師數學教科書使用的情形與其使用時的考量因素。以7位不同教學經驗和背景的教師為對象，採個案研究法，透過教學觀察和訪談來蒐集資料，以數學問題為分析單位，來瞭解教師使用數學問題和教科書的一致性。結果發現，教師偏向忠實呈現教科書的內容，內容的忠實度高於程序的忠實度，且中年級教師教科書使用的情形較為一致。教科書扮演的權威和基本的角色，使教師偏向忠實呈現教科書的內容，不過也會依據個人的數學教學信念和知識、學生的學習程度和特性、評量等因素，對教科書中數學問題的內容和呈現方式進行調整，且高年級教師以考量個人因素為主，低年級教師考量學生因素為主，中年級教師則因教學主題不同而有不同的考量。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to deepen our understanding of how elementary school teachers use the mathematics textbooks in their classrooms, as well as to identify factors they considered in determining their use. The methodology adopted was case study. Seven teachers, teaching in different regions and each with different teaching experience and background, were chosen as study subjects. Teaching observations and personal interviews were the main data sources and they were collected during the 2009-2010 school year. Mathematical tasks were used as unit of analysis to determine the consistency with which the teachers followed the textbook. Data from this study indicated that teachers tended to implement the mathematical tasks in their textbooks faithfully with respect to mathematical content and presentation. The fidelity of task content was higher than the fidelity of tasks presentation. And the 3rd and 4th grade teachers exhibited higher consistency in textbook use than other teachers. Interview data showed that the teachers in this study tended to use the textbook faithfully because of the authoritative and basic role that textbooks play in the national curriculum. However, they did occasionally adjust the content and presentation of the tasks, as well as add more practice tasks, due to their teaching beliefs, knowledge of mathematics, students' learning performance and habits, and school assessment policies. The teachers who teach 5th or 6th grade primarily considered their personal teaching beliefs and their mathematical knowledge in determining how they would use the textbook. The first grade teacher was influenced more by students' learning abilities and characteristics. The 3rd or 4th grade teachers had different considerations when they taught different mathematics topics.起始頁-結束頁：25-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2101.0216篇名：數位遊戲融入幼兒教學活動的認知因素與應用效能之影響關係並列篇名：The Relationships between Perceived Factors and Applied Efficiency in the Digital Games Integrated into Instructions for Young Children作者：陳儒晰(Ru-Si Chen);邱方晞(Fang-Hsi Chiu)關鍵字：幼兒;教學活動;認知因素;數位遊戲;應用效能;Young Children;Instructions;Perceived Factors;Digital Games;Applied Efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討新竹與苗栗地區幼教人員對數位遊戲認知因素與教學應用效能的關係，運用結構方程模式分析問卷資料。研究者自編「數位遊戲教學應用態度問卷」，涵蓋「悅趣性」、「體驗性」、「認知易用」、「認知實用」與「應用效能」等5個層面，問卷因素構面的測量模式與結構模式具有合理適配，統計分析結果支持研究假設之成立。研究結果顯示幼教人員重視數位遊戲的悅趣學習、生活體驗和即時互動回饋等特性，強調數位遊戲的使用與操作之簡易性，認同數位遊戲對增進幼兒發展問題解決與認知思考能力之教學輔具效益，此態度影響其運用數位遊戲融入幼兒教學活動的課程設計與應用作為之表現。最後，研究者針對研究發現進行討論並提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study explores early childhood teachers' attitudes toward perceived factors and instructional applied efficiency about digital games by survey study with structural equation modeling in HsinChu and MiaoLi Area. The questionnaire consists of five factors, including game-based, experience, perceived ease of use, usefulness, and applied efficiency. The statistical results of measurement model and structural model with latent constructs from questionnaire survey indicate the reasonable quality of model fit, and prove the study hypotheses. The results show that early childhood teachers support the gamed-based learning value, life experiences, and instant feedbacks by digital games. They acknowledge the instructional advantages and perceived ease of use by digital games, and consider young children's performances of solving problems and cognitive development with the aids of digital games. Their attitudes also influence the performance of curriculum designing and applied behaviors about digital games integrated into young children's instructions. Finally, the researchers propose the follow-up discussions and implications derived form this study.起始頁-結束頁：49-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2101.0317篇名：高中教師在創新科學課程專業學習社群中的發展歷程並列篇名：High School Teachers' Development Process in a Professional Learning Community of the Innovative Science Curriculum作者：林孟郁(Meng-Yu Lin);鍾武龍(Wu-Lung Chung);張月霞(Yueh-Hsia Chang);李哲迪(Che-Di Lee);陳穎儀(Ying-Yi Chen)關鍵字：分散式領導;教師專業發展;專業學習社群;課程發展;Distributed Leadership;Teacher Professional Development;Professional Learning Community;Curriculum Development期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討教師在參與國科會專案型計畫中，為了研發新興科技課程與實施探究式教學，所建構出的教師專業學習社群及其互動所形塑之專業領導歷程。資料蒐集係透過13位參與計畫教師進行訪談、焦點團體討論及文件分析法。本研究以專業學習社群中的實踐系統作為研究理論分析架構，並以在實踐系統中歸納出協同合作、專業發展、課程與教學創新三個子系統為發展主軸，進一步分析教師們在專業學習社群中如何分享、合作以及共同發展課程，並實施創新教學活動。根據資料分析，發展歷程可區分為「探索─規劃─研發」及「磨合─實踐─發展」兩階段，在不同的發展階段中，教師在上述三個實踐子系統中亦出現不同的表現：（1）協同合作：從強調完成團隊既定目標轉變為檢示自我在社群的角色定位；（2）專業發展：從需引進專家學者強化知能轉變為能進行教學演示並推廣創新課程；（3）課程與教學創新：從以符合「探究式教學法」理論為導向轉變為以改變學生學習模式並進而提升學習成效為導向。本研究藉由分析教師成員在社群互動中研發科學課程知識的發展歷程，做為教師專業發展、課程與教學創新和社群運作改進之反思與參考。英文摘要：From 2006 to 2010, the vocational high school in this study joined a national science education project and developed an innovative biomass energy curriculum. This study aims at investigating the professional learning community formed by 13 teachers involved in the project, especially the process of creating and developing professional leadership through their interaction. Research methods include interviews, focus group discussion and documentary analysis. Data analysis shows that the process of developing the learning community can be divided into two stages. The former one can be described as ”Exploration-Planning-Research” and the latter one is ”Coordination-Implementation-Development.” Some changes can be found between these two stages and they are as follows: (1) Collaboration: The focus of the learning community shifted from an emphasis on achieving the goals of the team to an individual reflection on his/her role in the community. (2) Professional development: In the beginning, the community members relied on the professionals to strengthen their capacity, and gradually they were able to give teaching demonstrations and promote the innovative curriculum. (3) Curriculum Innovation: At first, the teachers managed to follow inquiry teaching approach closely, and then they found it more important to change students' learning styles in order to enhance their learning results.起始頁-結束頁：75-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2101.0418篇名：臺北市中小學校長科技領導之創新關切與科技接受度研究並列篇名：Research on Concern Based Adoption Model and Technology Acceptance Model of Principals' Technology Leadership of Elementary and Secondary in Taipei作者：戴建耘(Chien-Yun Dai);陳宛非(Wan-Fei Chen);韓長澤(Charng-Tzer Harn);賴慕回(Mu-Hui Lai);高曼婷(Man-Ting Kao)關鍵字：科技接受模式3;科技領導;關切階層;Technology Acceptance Model 3;Technology Leadership;Concern-Based Adoption Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著資訊科技的發展與成熟，教育單位需因應時代潮流，透過資訊科技來融入教學、建置數位化學習環境與管理平臺。學校領導者需具備新思維高度關切科技發展趨勢，運用科技管理能力，提升學校經營管理成效，因此具體展現科技領導能力，成為校長重要關鍵能力之一。本研究旨在瞭解臺北市中小學校長在參加科技領導研習營後之「關切階層」與「科技接受」之程度，以及瞭解不同背景變項在依變項間之差異。研究方法是採用問卷調查法輔以訪談，以臺北市226所公立中小學中，參與研習營且全程參與的43位校長填答，有效樣本共40位，達93.00%。研究發現，校長對科技領導之關切程度，以「結果關切」為最高；擔任校長年資「4年以下」、「5∼8年」及「13年以上」者，在「電腦趣味性」之表現顯著的優於擔任校長年資「9∼12年」者；在校長任職階層以「高中」的校長在「結果關切」與「主觀規範」之表現優於擔任「國小」者；學校規模「24班以下」和「49班以上」的校長，在「合作關切」、「知覺易用性」之表現顯著的優於學校規模「25∼48班」者。英文摘要：As information technology develops, in order to respond to the current trend, educational organizations use information technology in teaching and establish digital learning environment and management platform. School leaders require a new concept to be highly concerned about the trend regarding to technology development. They have to use their technology management ability to promote school management efficiency. Therefore, showing technology leadership ability concretely becomes one of a principal’s vital key abilities. The aims of the study lie in understanding the levels of ”Innovation Concern” and ”Technology Acceptance” after the principals in Taipei city participated in the Technology Leadership Workshop, and understanding the differences in terms of various background and dependent variables. This study primarily involved questionnaire survey complemented with interviews. Among 226 elementary, junior and senior high schools in Taipei City, there were 43 principals participating in the Technology Leadership Workshop, there are 40 effectives, reaching 93.00%. The results showed that, in terms of the principals’ Innovation Concern level toward technology leadership, the level of result concern was the highest. For principals with the career duration of less than four years, 5 to 8 years and over 13 years, their performances in computer playfulness were significantly better than principals with the service duration of 9 to 12 years. In terms of the level of school the principals served, the performances of senior high school principals in result concern and subjective norm were better than those of elementary school principals. For principals within school size of less than 24 classes and over 49 classes, their performances in collaboration concern and perceived ease of use were better than principals with school size of 25 ~ 48 classes.起始頁-結束頁：97-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2013.2101.0501篇名：建構特殊教育學系學生專業能力指標及其應用並列篇名：Constructing and Applying Professional Competency Indicators for Special Education Students作者：胡心慈(Shin-Tzu Hu);朱尹安(Yin-An Chu);蔡碩穎(Shou-Ying Tsai);林秀瑋(Hsiu-Wei Lin)關鍵字：生涯發展;師資培育;特殊教育;專業能力指標;德懷術;career development;teacher education;special education;indicators of professionalism;Delphi technique期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究分兩階段進行，第一階段先建立專業能力指標，第二階段則依此指標編製自評量表，並加以實際應用。其中，第一階段之研究先經由文獻探討、兩次專家會議，再透過兩回合德懷術之專家意見調查而達成共識。指標內容分成四個向度，包括知識與認知、職能導向、個人特質，以及價值／倫理。第二階段則由此專業能力指標編製成「特殊教育學系學生專業能力指標自評量表」，並以北部某一大學之特殊教育學系學生為對象，實施全系學生之自我評量。結果發現，各年級之總平均數隨著年級的升高，大致呈增加的趨勢，且職能導向向度有年級間之差異；全體學生在個人特質以及價值／倫理向度的分數高於知識與認知、職能導向的分數。第二年之得分亦均較第一年為高，且四個年級在四個向度上之得分均有差異，顯示本量表能合理反映學生自我覺知之專業成長，表示此一專業能力指標之建構具有實用價值。研究者並對參與本研究之特教系、其他大學之特教系及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to construct and apply the pre-service special educator professional competency indicators (PSEPCI) for special education students. This study was conducted in 2 phases. The first phase involved constructing the professional competency indicators for special education students by integrating the opinions of special education teachers and professors, and the second phase entailed developing and validating the professional competency indicator self-rating scale, based on the PSEPCI constructed at the first phase. Method: The professional competency indicators were drafted by the authors after reviewing relevant literature and collecting the opinions of special education teachers and professors during 2 meetings. These professional competency indicators were validated by conducting 2 rounds of using the Delphi technique to gather expert opinions. In the second phase, the Self-rating Scale for Assessing the Professionalism of Special Education Students, a 6-point Likert-type scale, was derived from the PSEPCI and piloted with students studying Special Education at a university in Northern Taiwan. Results: These professional competency indicators for special education students include 4 dimensions: professional knowledge, professional functioning, special behavior or attitude, and professional ethics. In general, the overall average scores of all of the students increased according to higher grade level. Furthermore, the average score of the person's special behavior or attitude of all students were higher than the average scores of the professional knowledge and the professional functioning. The students' scores in the second year were higher than in the first year. Conclusion/Implications: The professional competency indicators for the special education students included the professional competencies of special education teachers, college students, and the developmental tasks of undergraduate students. The opinions between special education teachers and professors showed no differences. These indicators, developed as a self-assessment scale, could reasonably demonstrate the professionalism growth of the students' self-recognition in professional knowledge, professional functioning, special behavior or attitude, and professional ethics. The results show that the scale is valuable for authentic practice, we can utilize this scale based on PSEPCI to help special education students self-recognition in the professionalism growth. In accordance with the results of this study, some suggestions were made to the departments of special education, and some suggestions for the future research were also given.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201311.38030012篇名：逆風前行就業路：一名自閉症學生就業轉銜的行動歷程並列篇名：A Student with Autism Spectrum Disorder Struggling during Employment Transition作者：李玉錦(Yu-Chin Lee);張正芬(Cheng-Fen Chang)關鍵字：自我決策;自閉症;就業轉銜;self-determination;students with autism spectrum disorder;employment transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：王威是我任教高職綜合職能科的自閉症學生，他在面臨就業轉銜挑戰時，尋求我的協助，繼而展開這歷時約兩年的就業行動。本研究旨在藉由王威就業轉銜歷程，呈現王威在職場所面臨的挑戰、困境與解決之道。本研究主要採用行動研究法，藉由觀察、訪談及採取以自我決策為主軸的行動方案並透過循環修正的歷程，與王威共同度過面試、就業輔導員離職、被顧客投訴、偷拍及瀕臨被裁員等職場險境。歷程中發現，王威受限於拙劣的社會人際互動、注意力缺陷及類化能力不足等，而經常在職場面臨人際衝突、工作效能不佳致瀕臨被裁員之危機。研究結果顯示：一、合作夥伴的重要性，例如：行動前期的陳就輔員、行動中期的王威母親及王威的上司，他們都扮演重要的支持角色。尤其是王威的上司，他和我的合作關係一直延續至行動後期，他扮演的職場在地支持者的同理協助，使王威免於被裁員的命運；二、採取以自我控制、問題解決、自我管理等自我決策為主軸的行動方案，逐步提升王威做選擇、問題解決及自我倡導的能力；三、行動策略的表單設計、角色扮演內容及行為契約的訂定，均依據王威的工作內容或行為問題不斷地進行修正和調整，有效地克服其類化能力不足的限制。未來，自閉症學生的就業轉銜仍須仰賴學校及轉銜機構的努力合作，以使自閉症學生的就業之路更為順利。英文摘要：Purpose: According to Hendricks and Wehman (2009), people with autism face considerable difficulties in the course of their employment transition, including a lack of successful transition experience, low employment rates, adjustment problems, low pay, and difficulty in getting hired. Previous studies have shown that self-determination leads to successful transition and that transitional planning is a major factor in ensuring successful employment for students with disabilities. In Taiwan, a vocational high school graduate named Wang Way faced employment transition challenges after graduating from vocational high school. After seeking the researchers' assistance, who studied Wang Way for two years as he confronted the challenges of employment transition, and the researchers assisted him in developing self-determination processes. Method: The methodology used in this study was action research, which involved observing, intervention program of self-determination skills and interviewing Wang Way, his mother, and his colleague. The researchers assisted Wang Way in implementing strategies of self-determination, self-control, and self-management. Role playing and other problem-solving strategies were also used. Findings: The results showed that (a) the cooperation of all parties involved in the study (i.e., the researchers, transitional support staff, Wang Way's mother, and his section chief of hypermarket in particular) was crucial throughout the study. (b) Wang Way's abilities in decision making, problem solving, and self-advocacy gradually increased after the researchers assisted Wang Way in confronting the challenges of his job by implementing several strategies for self-determination, which including self-control, problem solving, and self-management. (c) Wang Way's generalization ability improved because the researchers repeatedly adjusted the strategies of self-determination which contained problem-solving skills, self-management skills, decision making skills, choice-making skills, self-awareness, self-knowledge, goal-setting with attainment skills, self-advocacy skills, role playing, and the contracts which included work requirements and reinforcement. Conclusion/Implications: To ensure a smooth and successful employment transition, students with autism must rely on the collaborative efforts of schools, employment transition agencies, and their parents. School administrators should emphasize the importance of self-determination ability, which should be taught and practiced with cooperation from teachers and parents. Agency cooperation models for a community-based support system, such as that by Leheman, Clark, Bullis, Rinkin, and Castellanos (2002), and the interactive inter-agency cooperation model by Wehman (2006), emphasize that students-centered and schools with labor administration units should share resources, thus providing a valuable reference for employment transition establishments.起始頁-結束頁：29-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201311.38030023篇名：提升教育優先區國民小學一年級學生的讀寫能力－多層級教學介入模式之探究並列篇名：Improving the Reading and Writing Abilities of First-Grade Students in Educational Priority Areas Schools-A Multi-Tier Teaching Intervention Model作者：曾世杰(Shih-Jay Tzeng);陳淑麗(Shu-Li Chen);蔣汝梅(Lu-May Chiang)關鍵字：多層級介入;早期介入;注音;補救教學;multi-tier intervention;early intervention;Zhuyin Fuhao;remedial intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究在台東縣5所教育優先區國民小學執行一個學校本位的語文能力提升方案，對一年級學生提供初級及次級的國語文介入，初級介入目標在提升普通班的教學品質，次級介入則在提供低成就學生密集的補救教學。研究檢驗這個早期多層級的介入方案，是否能有效提升教育優先區學校學生的基礎語文能力。初級介入共有239位學生參與，實驗組134人；對照組有3所國小參與，105人；次級介入中的實驗組和對照組分別有29人及17人。主要研究發現有三：一、在初級和次級兩層級，學生注音和識字能力的進展，在整體上，實驗學校比對照學校好，成長趨勢也比對照組學校好。智力對注音和識字能力的前測分數有影響，但在介入後，智力對後測分數的影響就近乎消失，尤其在次級介入層級，智力對後測更不具影響力。二、初級介入：實驗組學生在「脫離讀寫困難」和「達同儕水準」兩項指標均有良好表現，實驗組的識字能力介入前有54%的學生符合研究者界定的讀寫困難評準，介入後，僅剩下12.9%的學生仍為讀寫困難，有71.8%的學生達到同儕水準。三、次級介入：實驗組學生發生讀寫困難的比率明顯較對照組低，介入後，實驗組的拼音和識字分別有62.1%和58.6%的學生回到同儕水準，但未經介入的對照組學生，其後測的識字能力達同儕水準的比率，反而低於前測。英文摘要：In recent years, the poor reading and writing abilities of students with socially- and economically-disadvantaged background have become a major concern of educators, researchers, and decision makers in Taiwan. Considerable resources, such as the Project for the Implementation of Remedial Instruction by the Ministry of Education, have been allocated to provide intervention to the students who have poor literacy competence. However, providing intervention to only the last-ranking students may be insufficient in remote areas, because almost all the students there have reading and writing difficulties. Thus, a successful resolution should not only offer supplemental remedial programs to the weakest, but also include school-wide preventive intervention programs aiming at effective literacy instruction in regular classrooms. This study assesses a 2-tier, school-based Chinese literacy intervention program provided to first-grade students in five elementary schools in an educational priority area in Taiwan. Both tiers adopted effective remedial principles supported by empirical research. Tier 1 was conducted to improve the teaching and learning quality of regular classes, whereas Tier 2 provided a systematic and intensive remedial intervention to the 6 last-ranking students in each class. This study investigates whether an early multi-tier intervention program can effectively improve the students' Chinese literacy skills and prevent them from developing reading and writing difficulties. Methods: Eight schools with 239 students participated in this study. We assigned these eight schools to two different groups: a treatment group of five schools (134 students) and a control group of three schools (105 students). In Tier 2, the treatment and control groups had 29 and 17 students, respectively. We used descriptive statistics to describe the characteristics of the schools and students, and their test score distributions. We used ANCOVA, MANCOVA, and HLM to assess the intervention effects. Findings: The intervention effects for Zhuyin Fuhao (ZYFH; Mandarin phonetic symbols) skills and Chinese character size were significant for both tiers in both semesters of the trial period, and the treatment group outperformed the control group. Although intelligence quotient (IQ) scores have a significant effect on the pre-tests of ZYFH dictation, Chinese character size, and sight word accuracy, this effect diminishes in the corresponding post-tests. The post-intervention percentages of students without reading and writing difficulty and returning to the peer-level in ZYFH dictation were significantly higher than the corresponding pre-intervention percentages for both groups. In Chinese character size, only percentages in the treatment group with same directions were observed and significant. The Tier 1 and Tier 2 results of the HLM growth model also show that the scores for ZYFH skills and Chinese character size in the treatment group were significantly higher than those in the control group after controlling for IQ scores. Conclusions/Implications: In both tiers, the students in the treatment group exhibited better overall progress in ZYFH and Chinese character size than those in the control group. Tier 1 intervention: More than half of the students in the treatment group had reading and writing difficulties before the intervention. After the intervention, the percentage of students in the treatment group without reading or writing difficulties and returning to the peer-level was significantly higher. Tier 2 intervention: Students in the treatment group had a lower percentage of with reading or writing difficulties than students in the control group. After the intervention, more than half of the students in the treatment group returned to the peer-level in ZYFH dictation and Chinese character size. In summary, this rarely-seen school-wide experiment shows that, regardless of student IQ scores, a 2-tier intervention program can effectively improve the Chinese reading and writing abilities of disadvantaged first graders, and prevent them from having reading or writing difficulties.起始頁-結束頁：55-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201311.38030034篇名：學習障礙兒童線上閱讀歷程：來自眼球移動的證據並列篇名：Reading Patterns of Learning Disability Children during Text Reading: Evidence from Eye Movements作者：陳明蕾(Ming-Lei Chen);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko)關鍵字：眼動型態;篇章閱讀;學習障礙兒童;eye movements;text reading;learning disability children期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以眼動儀記錄國小三至六年級經鑑定之學習障礙兒童在閱讀不同文體時，詞彙之特徵對他們眼動型態的影響。研究結果顯示，不論是第一次連續凝視時間（first gaze）、重新回視的總時間（rereading gaze）或總閱讀時間（total reading time），其眼動型態都受詞頻效果的影響，與Chen和Ko（2011）所研究的一般兒童讀者的眼動型態相似。但是，若和一般兒童閱讀篇章之眼動資料比較，本研究也發現，學習障礙學童閱讀篇章時的眼動行為，並未隨著年級漸增而有逐漸成熟的發展曲線。整體而言，文體和詞彙特徵對學習障礙兒童的閱讀雖有影響，但他們的閱讀時間比一般兒童要來得長，且停留在國小三至四年級的閱讀型態。研究者根據此結果進行討論，並針對未來教學與研究提出建議。英文摘要：Chen and Ko (2011) found that older students treat word units as the primary reading unit, regardless of whether they read words at a high or low frequency. Younger students, such as second grade students, do not treat words as primary processing units when they encounter low-frequency words. Rather, they read according to characters. These findings suggest that a word-based processes strategy is adopted by Chinese children; however, when presented a word with low word frequency, younger Chinese children tend to read systematically according to character. This raises the question of whether Chinese learning disability (LD) children adopt words as reading units when they read text. Young children with reading difficulties may exhibit weak word-level processing skills rather than comprehension deficits alone. In this study, we investigated and compared the eye movement patterns of LD and non-LD children while reading text. Methods: One hundred LD students (from third to sixth grade) participated in the study. All were native speakers of Mandarin and had either normal or corrected vision. The participants in this research were referred from the pool of students with learning disabilities maintained by the bureau of education of a local county government. The participants' eye movements were recorded using an SR Eyelink 1000 eye-tracking system at the rate of 1,000 Hz. The participants were tested individually in two sessions. In the first session, the participants were administered tests to assess their reading fluency. In the second session, the participants were asked to carefully read four passages and were told that they would have to answer comprehension questions after finishing each reading. Because the materials used in this study were identical to those used in by Chen and Ko (2011), we were able to compare the eye movement patterns of the LD and non-LD readers. Findings: We focused on the ways LD students differed from non-LD students in first pass of processing and subsequent processing. In general, both the LD and non-LD elementary school children exhibited the effects of word frequency. However, the LD students required a longer fixation duration than the non-LD students did, both during the first pass and at subsequent processing stages. One phenomenon worth noting is that no difference was found among LD students in different grades. However, the non-LD students showed a significant difference between the fifth and sixth grades. The non-LD 6th students fixated on LF words significantly shorter than did those of fifth grade students during both the first pass and subsequent processing. Conclusion/Implications: Overall, the data in this study showed that the word-frequency effect appeared while the LD students read during the first pass and in subsequent processing. This suggests that LD students process texts according to word even when they have relatively slow word-decoding skills. Based on the pattern of data, it appears that the reading ability of the LD students in this study did not change as they grew older. This implies that when LD students have reading difficulties, their difficulties continue as they matriculate grades. Could specially designed readings make a difference? This will be an important topic in educational settings and will require more study before a stronger instructional program can be designed.起始頁-結束頁：81-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201311.38030045篇名：家長支援療育方案對零至三歲幼兒與家庭之成效研究並列篇名：Effectiveness of a Parent Support Program for Families with Developmentally Delayed Children Aged 0 to 3 Years作者：王天苗(Tien-Miau Wang)關鍵字：早期療育;跨專業合作;家長支援;early intervention;transdisciplinary teaming;family support;PCI;GAS期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：基於零至三歲發展遲緩幼兒早期療育的重要，本研究為期兩年，以跨專業合作方式運作家長支援療育服務模式，主要目的在探究本療育方案的成效。本研究共有20名發展遲緩幼兒及其家人、15名個案管理老師及8名專業小組成員參與，幼兒入案年齡介於二至三十五個月，參與療育的時間從七至二十個月不等。以「速率改變指標」（PCI）和「目標達成評量」（GAS）分析的量化資料及訪談家長的質性資料，探究本療育方案對幼兒與家庭成果的效果。由結果可知，除生理或情緒問題較嚴重的四名幼兒進步較有限外，大多數幼兒均在發展與行為上有明顯增長，也達成療育目標，對家長在心理、教養和資訊上的幫助上更顯現正向的效果。本研究結果不但肯定此一家長支援療育服務方案的可行性，更帶動社區化早期療育資源中心之設立。惟如何改變家長對直接服務與過度療育的迷思，以及如何提供家長個別化的支援，將是早療工作者未來須面對的挑戰。英文摘要：Purpose: The purpose of this 2-year study was to investigate the effectiveness of an early intervention parent support program emphasizing team collaboration and empowering parents of developmentally delayed children aged 0 to 3 years. Methods: Twenty families, 15 case managers with childcare backgrounds, and a group of 8 professionals, including special educators, physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, and nurses, were involved. Each case was assigned a case manager who met parents once each week and joined group sessions once each month. The intake time varied from 2 to 35 months, and the duration of the intervention varied from 7 to 20 months. Child and family outcomes were analyzed using the Proportional Change Index (PCI), Goal Attainment Scaling (GAS), and data from parent interviews. Results: Based on the results of PCI and GAS analyses, only 3 of 20 children in the program did not show significant developmental gains in the subscales or total score of the Comprehensive Developmental Inventory for Infants and Toddlers (CDIIT) and did not achieve the expected outcomes of intervention goals. The effects of intervention were evident in the parent support group as a whole, but few or no developmental gains or accomplishments of intervention goals were found in cases of children with severe and profound physical or emotional disabilities, such as epilepsy, heart disease, or emotional disorders. According to the interviews of 19 parents, the program resulted in obvious changes in either the behavior or the developmental ability of the children, positive impacts on the emotional adjustment of the families, improvements in parenting skills, and increased information access. Conclusion/Implications: Both quantitative and qualitative data in this study indicate that this early intervention parent support program is feasible and may be translated into practice by establishing community-based early intervention resource centers. In this program, early childhood teachers with limited experience working with parents of children with disabilities or developmental delays can competently act as case managers using support and consultation from other professionals. However, early interventionists must also confront challenges from parents who rely on excessive therapy and direct services for their children rather than responsive interaction in daily activities. It is also crucial for early interventionists to provide individualized support for parents with varied needs.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201307.38020016篇名：不同性別注意力缺陷過動症與普通學童之注意力表現差異探究並列篇名：Gender Differences in the Attentional Performance of ADHD and Normal Students作者：林鋐宇(Hung-Yu Lin);李柏森(Posen Lee);張文典(Wen-Dien Chang);洪福源(Fu-Yuan Hong)關鍵字：分配性注意力;多向度注意力;性別差異;注意力缺陷過動症;持續性注意力;multi-dimensional attention;attention deficit hyperactivity disorder;gender difference;sustained attention;divided attention期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在比較不同性別注意力缺陷過動症（ADHD）與普通學童於注意力表現之差異，以探究性別因素在不同群體學生注意力功能所扮演的角色。研究者將258位國小學童依男性ADHD學生（90位，平均年齡8.4歲）、女性ADHD學生（39位，平均年齡8.5歲）、男性普通學生（90位，平均年齡8.4歲）與女性普通 學生（39位，平均年齡8.5歲）區分成四組受試者，所有學童均接受多向度的注意力量表（國小兒童注意力量表）測試，除探究學童整體注意力表現外，亦進一步分析集中性、持續性、選擇性、交替性與分配性等注意力向度之表現。研究結果顯示，在整體注意力表現上，不論男性或女性ADHD學生的整體注意力表現均較普通學生差，且達顯著差異。在性別因素的探究方面，性別因素對ADHD學生不同向度的注意力表現產生程度不一之影響，但不同性別普通學生的注意力表現並未呈現此差異性。不同性別ADHD學生在注意力缺陷的向度數目（量）與注意力缺陷的嚴重程度（質）上，都存在差異。在量的差異方面，伴隨三種注意力向度缺陷（持續性、交替性與分配性注意力）的男性ADHD學生，比伴隨兩種注意力向度缺陷（持續性與分配性注意力）的女性ADHD學生呈現更多元的注意力缺陷特徵；在質的差異方面，雖然男、女ADHD學生均呈現持續性與分配性注意力缺陷，但女性ADHD學生的持續性注意力缺陷程度比男性ADHD學生嚴重，而男性ADHD學生的分配性注意力缺陷則較女性ADHD學生嚴重。英文摘要：Purpose: This study investigated gender differences in comparing the attention performance of students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with that of normal students to determine the role that gender plays in student attentional functioning among different student groups. Methods: A sample comprising 258 students was divided into 4 groups: (a) 90 male ADHD students (average age 8.4 years); (b) 39 female ADHD students (average age 8.5 years); (c) 90 normal male students (average age 8.4 years); and (d) 39 normal female students (average age 8.5 years). All of the participants were asked to take a multidimension attentional test, the Attention Scale for Elementary School Children, which is used to assess not only the general attentional functioning of children but also their performance in 5 dimensions of attention: focused, sustained, selected, alternated, and divided. Findings: The results indicated that both male and female ADHD students exhibit lower general attentional performance than normal students do. In addition, our results showed that gender differences existed in various dimensions of attention among the ADHD students but not among the normal students. The number of dimensions (quantity) and severity (quality) of attention deficit suffered by the ADHD students differed between genders. Quantitatively, the male ADHD students with attention deficit in 3 dimensions (sustained, alternated, and divided attention) exhibited characteristics of attention deficit that were more diverse than those of the female students with attention deficit in 2 dimensions (sustained and alternated attention). Qualitatively, despite both genders of the ADHD students suffering attention deficit in sustained and divided dimensions, the female students were more deficient in sustained attention than the male students, and the male students were more deficient in divided attention than the female students. Conclusion/Suggestions: Although the statistical analysis results of the multidimensional attention test used in this study showed no gender differences in various dimensions of attentional performance among the normal students, we confirm that the gender factor influenced the attentional performance of the ADHD students.起始頁-結束頁：29-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201307.38020027篇名：家長回應能力的改變與自閉症幼兒發展的關聯性研究並列篇名：Parental Responsiveness Change and Developmental Outcomes of Young Children with Autism作者：林初穗(Chu-Sui Lin);張淑慧(Shu-Hui Chang);潘惠銘(Huey-Ming Pan);邱俊皓(Chun-Hao Chiu)關鍵字：自閉症;早期療育;家長回應能力;親子互動;關鍵性行為;autism;early intervention;parental responsiveness;pivotal behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的主要在探討家長回應能力改變與自閉症幼兒發展的關係。本研究以33位參與親子互動訓練的自閉症幼兒及其家長為研究對象，並以「家長行為量表」（Maternal Behavior Rating Scale-Revised）中的回應能力（responsiveness）的改變，將家長分為兩組，其中18位家長的回應能力在前、後測有改變，故為改變組，另15位家長在前、後測的回應能力無改變，即為無改變組。本研究以此兩組幼兒前測的發展能力為共變數，並以單因子多變量共變分析（MANCOVA）統計檢定比較兩組自閉症幼兒在後測與六個月後追蹤的表現。若達顯著差異者，本研究則更進一步做事後比較。研究結果發現，改變組自閉症幼兒在「口語」、「社交」、「象徵性行為」或是「關鍵性行為」發展上，都比無改變組為佳；而這差異在有些領域的發展上可維持至追蹤期，或是在後測時，兩組間有些領域的發展上差異不顯著，但在追蹤期才達顯著。本研究成果顯示家長回應能力的改變與自閉症幼兒的發展具顯著關係，家長回應能力的改變可列為自閉症幼兒早期介入服務時的重要參考因子。英文摘要：Purpose: This study was originally designed to compare 2 parent-child interaction curricula in young children with autism. Results showed no reliable differences between the 2 curricula groups regarding measures of child development or parent-child interaction. We then decided to further compare the effects of both interventions combined based on whether the mother followed through with the intervention (i.e., became more responsive during intervention). Methods: Thirty-three young children with autism (M=36.61 months) were recruited from 2 child psychiatric clinics in Chung-Gung Memorial Hospital and Tao-Yuan Mental Health Center, Taiwan for 2 years. Twelve children with autism and their caregivers participated in the first year study, and 21 children with autism and their caregivers participated in the second year study. This study used the Maternal Behavior Rating Scale-Revised (Mahoney, 1999) to determine if the caregiver had become more responsive from the pretest to the posttest. One group was found to be the responsiveness-change group (N = 18), and the other group was found to be the responsiveness-no-change group (N = 15). Multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA) was used in this study to examine the differences in the developmental outcomes of these 2 groups on their posttests and six month follow-ups. Communication and Symbolic Behavior Scale-Developmental Profile (CSBS-DP; Wether by & Prizant, 2002), Chinese Child Development Inventory (CCDI; Hsu, 1978), and Child Behavior Rating Scale (CBRS; Mahoney, 1999) were used in this study to measure the developmental outcomes of young children with autism. Results: The results of this study showed that there were significant differences between two groups. That is, children in the responsiveness-change group did better on cognition, communication, and social development in either their CCDI/CSBS-DP posttests or follow-ups. The results also revealed that in some areas, the significant differences between two groups were not visable in posttests but were noticeable in follow-ups. Besides, the significant differences between two groups were also found on their pivotal behavior development from CBRS. The pivotal behavior of children with autism in the responsiveness-change group were significantly lower on their pre-tests but were higher in their posttests and follow-ups when their caregivers' responsiveness changed from pre-tests to posttests. Implications: The results of this study indicated that when the mothers followed through, the effects on the children's cognition, communication, and social functioning were significant. The effects of responsiveness appear to be related to children feeling encouraged using more pivotal behaviors that are foundational for children's developmental learning. A change in parental responsiveness is an important factor related to the development outcomes of children with autism in early intervention.起始頁-結束頁：53-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201307.38020038篇名：職務再設計的輔具應用對肢體障礙者工作狀況之影響：以手工業為例並列篇名：Using Assistive Technology in Job Redesign on the Craft-Working Ability of Craftworkers with Physical Disabilities作者：張玉山(Yu-Shan Chang)關鍵字：肢體障礙者;手工業;輔具;職務再設計;physical disabilities;craft;assistive technology;job redesign期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的包括：一、了解肢障工作者從事手工業的工作特性與困境；二、分析手工業肢障工作者對輔具的需求，並進行輔具應用與調整；三、探討職務再設計的輔具應用對肢體障礙者（肢障者）工作的影響。透過三個肢障個案的探究，以及實地為其中一位個案Z發展與應用輔具，再以深度訪談為主要的資料蒐集方法，透過歸納式分析及持續比較法來分析資料，並以三角檢證建立研究的可信度。本研究主要的研究結果包括：一、本研究個案從事手工業的基本工作內容，與一般人無異；創作前端的設計與構思，與常人相同；所需創作技巧與加工技術，多是從工作中（師徒制）習得；所使用之工具也大多與一般創作者一樣，少數是自行改裝；手工業創作的工作要求與專注度很高，會直接與間接受到肢障的影響。本研究個案從事手工業所遭遇到的挫折，包括收入較低、欠缺親友精神支持，以及特殊創作材料取得不易。二、身體機能的缺陷會造成本研究個案在活動上的限制，甚至會引發其他生理上的傷害；會引起自卑、憂鬱、消極等心理狀態；影響創作工作的勞力表現與技術表現。不僅影響工作效率，也影響就業率。三、本研究個案需要借助特殊的工具來完成工作，包括自行改良的手工具以及搬運用的電動工具；輔具的應用，有助於改善工作效率、方便、安全及品質；具體的輔具需求是支稱背脊的支架、搬物器具，以及舒緩臀部疼痛的坐墊。四、本研究個案的問題在腰、臀、腿的支撐力不足與疼痛、搬運物件困難、工作環境距離、與通道高低落差等問題。本研究結果指出，經討論採用的改善方法，包括改善工作方法、改善工作設備、改善工作環境，以及使用輔具。而經持續調整輔具與追蹤發現，其工作時間明顯增加、可創作的作品尺寸或幅度明顯加大、工作疲憊與生理痛苦減輕，也提高工作的滿意程度。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examined the effects of using assistive technology in job redesign on the working ability of craftworkers with physical disabilities. The purposes of this study were as follows: (a) to investigate the characteristics and difficulties faced by people with physical disabilities when engaged in craftwork; (b) to discuss the assistive technology needs of people with physical disabilities when engaged in craftwork; (c) to advise the participant to use and adjust assistive technology in job redesign when engaged in craftwork; and (d) to discuss the effects of using assistive technology in job redesign on the working ability of craftworkers with physical disabilities. Methods: There were 3 participants in this study. A set of assistive technology was developed for one of the subjects. In-depth interviews were administered to collect data. Inductive analysis and constant comparison were used to analyze the data. Data were confirmed using constant comparison and triangulation. Results: (a) Craftworkers with physical disabilities designed and produced craftworks with the same competency as most people without physical disabilities. The idea generation and concept-designing skills of people with physical disabilities were equivalent to those of most people without physical disabilities. The skills needed to produce products were learned through job experience. Although most tools used by the participants in craftwork were the same tools used by people without disabilities, the participants refined some tools independently. Craftwork involves numerous job requirements and a high degree of working concentration, and these qualities were influenced by physical disabilities both directly and indirectly. Many limitations in producing craftworks were caused by physical disability. Frustration commonly occurred because of low income, lack of spiritual support from relatives and friends, and difficulties in obtaining special materials for craftwork. (b) Disability of physical function had negative effects on the work performance and work effectiveness of participants. In addition to physiological damage, physical disabilities can cause psychological states of inferiority, depression, and passivity as well. This not only affected the work efficiency, but also the employment rate. (c) The participants needed to use special tools for craftwork. These tools included hand tools and power tools. Effectiveness, convenience, safety, and quality of the craftwork of people with physical disabilities can be improved using assistive technology. One participant needed specific facilities including body supports, carrying facilities, and a cushion to relieve pain. (d) The participant faced problems of insufficient support and pain in the lumbar region, buttocks, and legs. Thus, it was difficult for the participant to carry objects when working. Other problems included the distance of different places in the overall working environment, and the high and low drops of passages. Conclusion and Implications: Numerous strategies of using assistive technology for job redesign in craftwork were adopted to solve the identified problems of the participant. These strategies included refining working methods as well as the facilities and the environment, and using assistive technology. The results of this research indicate that, after continually using and refining assistive technology, the participant was able to work longer, produce larger products, feel less pain and fatigue, and become more satisfied with the work by using assistive technology in job redesign in craftwork.起始頁-結束頁：77-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201307.38020049篇名：小魚也能開潛水艇：極重度多重障礙學生電動輪椅介入之行動研究並列篇名：Small Fish Can Also Drive the Submarine: Action Research for Powered Wheelchair Intervention for a Student with Profound and Multiple Disabilities作者：林珮如(Pei-Ju Lin);林真悌(Chen-Ti Lin)關鍵字：極重度多重障礙;電動輪椅;輔助科技設備;輔助科技服務;profound and multiple disabilities;powered wheelchairs;assistive technology device;assistive technology service期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在經由行動研究的歷程，解決極重度多重障礙學生在行動參與上的困難。參與學生就讀特殊教育學校國小部一年級，疑罹患脊髓型肌肉萎縮症，全身肌肉萎縮無力，移行與操作活動均需他人協助，且因動作嚴重受限，使得學生在校園行動與參與活動時遭遇困難。本研究有系統地運用輔助科技服務的流程來提供電動輪椅的介入，包括學生各項能力和需求的評估、電動輪椅的評估、選配、試用、修改、電動輪椅個別操控訓練、電動輪椅融入校園和校外真實情境等，以解決學生在行動參與上的困難，並探討電動輪椅介入的歷程和成效。研究結果發現：一、透過行動研究的歷程，團隊合作有系統地運用輔助科技服務的流程來提供電動輪椅的介入，以解決極重度多重障礙學生在行動參與上所遭遇到的困難；二、電動輪椅介入對學生的影響包括有校園行動能力與參與度提升、主動探索環境的意願提升、動作控制的能力日趨進步、主動與同儕互動的頻率增加、自我決策的意識提高、成就感與自信心提升、表達意願與詞彙增加、生活經驗拓展等表現；三、電動輪椅介入的行動歷程對家長和主要照顧者均有正面的影響，且能促進特教工作者的教學省思與成長。英文摘要：Purpose: This study suggests a method for assisting students with profound and multiple disabilities to overcome their difficulties in mobility through the process of active research. Methods: The participant in this study was a first grade elementary student of a special education school who was diagnosed with spinal muscular atrophy, which causes muscle atrophy and muscle weakness throughout the participant's body, limiting his ability to ambulate and participate in activities within the school. Therefore, we conducted a series of systematic processes to provide the participant with an appropriate assistive device to aid in mobility. This process included evaluations to identify the skills and needs of the participant, modifications of the assistive device to fit the participant's needs, training sessions in the use of the device, and practice sessions in real-life contexts. Results/Findings: The results of this study indicated that (1) through the process of action research, a systematic collaboration between professions to provide powered wheelchair services can help students with profound and multiple disabilities overcome difficulties in mobility; (2) the use of a powered wheelchair can help students increase their level of participation within school, and the willingness to explore the environment, motor control abilities, active interactions between peers, awareness of self-determination, level of confidence and self-fulfillment, willingness to express themselves, and life experience; (3) the use of a powered wheelchair can make parents and foreign caregivers have a positive attitude toward the powered wheelchair, learned to let go gradually, and believing in their child; and (4) the use of a powered wheelchair can encourage special educators to reflect on and improve their work, including changes to the environment, the importance of assistive technology service and parental participation, the struggle between letting go and offering assistance, the dilemma of pull-out and integration, and the importance of a barrier-free environment. Conclusion/Implications: Through the process of action research, we provided systematic powered wheelchair intervention to help a student with profound and multiple disabilities overcome difficulties in mobility. The use of a powered wheelchair can help students in all aspects of development. The use of a powered wheelchair can have positive influences on parents and foreign caregivers, and can encourage special educators to reflect on and improve their work. Based on the results of this study, suggestions for future practice and research are proposed. This study suggests that we can use teamwork to provide assistive technology services and emphasizes parental participation. In addition, powered wheelchair intervention enhances mobility and all aspects of development of students with profound and multiple disabilities. The powered wheelchair driving training is provided by the related departments of university interns or volunteers, caregivers, and parents. Suggestions for the research design are provided for future research.起始頁-結束頁：99-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201307.380200510篇名：資源匱乏地區發展遲緩兒童社區療育據點服務實施情形之探討並列篇名：The Study of Community Based Services for Children with Developmental Delays in Low Resource Communities作者：林雅容(Ya-Jung Lin)關鍵字：早期療育;社區療育據點;發展遲緩兒童;early intervention;community intervention settings;developmental delays期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在檢視資源匱乏地區之社區療育據點服務實施概況，以2010年接受中央政府單位補助辦理據點服務之四個機構為研究對象，透過實地訪視及文件分析蒐集研究資料，輔以電話訪談釐清文件資料有疑慮之處。研究結果發現：一、機構與政府單位的協調、專業人員與服務使用者的互動，以及專業人員間的支持，有助於據點服務的推展及滿足兒童及其家庭的需求，顯見於據點設置、定點式及走動式服務規劃、專業人力協調之相關討論；二、機構與據點設置區域的社會服務單位建立合作關係，提供早療服務，從中增進家長之資源使用的近便性。囿於目前未有相關法規釐清機構間合作的權責，資源的連結及共享大多建立在機構的努力及彼此的信任和配合；三、「家長參與」此一理念對於服務成效具正向影響，但是，專業人員需顧及兒童及其家庭之特質與作息，避免造成家長的親職壓力。由於政府單位並未提供家庭支持性服務的費用，使得專業人員不易推展相關服務；而現有的服務也鮮少與區域特質有所連結；四、政府現有對據點服務的補助遠低於機構式的服務，每名兒童補助金額差距高達6,056.67元至17,390.47元。最後，研究者依據研究結果，提出五項實務工作的建議：一、政府單位應關注療育資源匱乏的地區；二、政府單位宜採納跨部門之合作方式，協助機構辦理據點服務；三、政府單位宜提供家庭支持性服務的補助經費，增強機構對於家庭的關懷；四、機構宜落實專業團隊會議，增強團隊成員對於服務內容的了解；五、機構宜關注服務使用者的個人經驗，具體呈現服務成效。此外，本研究亦對於未來研究提出兩項建議：一、宜呈現兒童及其家庭或社區居民的服務使用經驗及主觀感受；二、應呈現服務承辦機構與在地機構的合作情形。英文摘要：Purpose: In Taiwan, non governmental organizations have implemented the community based services in recent years. Until 2009, the R.O.C.'s Children's Bureau Ministry of the Interior declared a trial program of home- and community-based services for children with developmental delays and provided subsidies for non profit organizations to execute services in low resource communities. This study explored current situation of community based services for the purpose of early intervention in low resource communities. Methods: Data were collected from four case management centers brought by the trial program for community based services in 2010. The data were collected through practical field observation, document analysis and telephone interview. This study recruited seven research participants, professionals within this research field, to attend practical field observation. And their speech was also recorded and analyzed. Findings: The results of this study indicate (1) the coordination between social service agencies and governments, the effective interaction between professionals and service users, and the positive cooperation between professionals were important for implementing services and satisfying the needs of children and their families. Additionally, this study also suggests that the establishment of community intervention settings, the practice of fixed point and mobile services and the collaboration between professionals are factors needed to be concerned. (2) Four centers cooperated with local social service agencies to offer early intervention services and to increase the service accessibility for families. However, community resource connecting and sharing was currently basing on the acceptance among agencies due to a lack of policy planning for interagency collaboration. (3) Even though parental participation has positive effects on service effectiveness, professionals should concern about the characteristics and daily activities of children and their families and avoid raising parental stress. Due to the shortage of government subsidies for professionals to provide family supportive services, existing services were less relative to local culture. (4) Government subsidies for community based services were found less than those for centered based services which means the difference of subsidies for each child was from NT$ 6,056.67 to 17,390.47 per year. Conclusion/Implications: The following implications for practices were suggested: governments should concern about low resource communities; to assist community intervention and to provide subsidies for family supportive services, meanwhile, co-organizers should understand services for each family through team meetings and pay attention to service using and effectiveness. Future study is needed to provide more information about the experiences and subjective perception of children, family and local residents and to discover about the cooperation between co-organizer and local agencies.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201303.380100111篇名：中文字形與音韻周邊預視效益：於較佳閱讀能力失聰者之證據並列篇名：The Parafoveal Preview Benefits of Chinese Orthography and Phonology among Deaf Readers with High Reading Abilities作者：邱倚璿(Yi-Shiuan Chiu);吳銘達(Ming-Da Wu)關鍵字：失聰;字形;周邊視野預視;音韻;眼動;deaf;orthography;parafoveal preview;phonology;eye movements期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：失聰者之閱讀能力往往較低，本研究欲瞭解教育程度較高之失聰者在受到不同語言訓練（口語、非口語）後，如何影響中文閱讀時周邊視野詞彙的字形與音韻之運作。實驗使用眼動邊界典範與眼動誘發呈現改變技術（Rayner, 1975），研究假設受試者若可在周邊視野擷取到詞彙相關訊息，則當眼睛通過設定邊界使得預視詞立即取代為目標詞時，眼睛凝視目標詞的處理便會受到影響。實驗操弄目標詞與預視詞的字形與音韻相關性，受試者必須閱讀句子並判斷合理性。透過中文字形及音韻可分離的特性，可釐清失聰者詞彙中音韻的激發情形。結果是：字形預視效果在聽人、失聰口語組（第一凝視時間、凝視時間與總凝視時間）與失聰非口語組（總凝視時間）中發現；音韻助益在聽人（第一凝視時間、凝視時間）與口語失聰組（凝視時間）中發現，但在非口語失聰組中未出現；將前凝視點位置區分為遠近時，字形效果可發現於聽人與失聰非口語組的遠、近凝視點之眼動指標，以及失聰口語組的遠凝視點指標；音韻效果發現於聽人近凝視點（第一凝視時間）與遠凝視點（為凝視比例），以及失聰口語組遠凝視點（第一凝視時間），而失聰非口語組則未有音韻效果。由此可見，失聰口語組於遠凝視點發現音韻效果，聽人則於近凝視點發現，反映出失聰口語組與聽人在周邊視野中擷取語言表徵歷程有所差異；失聰非口語組未激發音韻表徵，反映出失聰者語言背景會影響其詞彙表徵激發；兩組失聰族群皆能正確地判斷句子語意，則顯示音韻表徵之激發與閱讀理解之間並非必然的對應關係。英文摘要：Purpose: Deaf people frequently have poor reading skills. This study consisted of deaf people with high reading abilities with Chinese oral training (DO) and non-oral training (DnO), and investigated orthographic and phonological preview benefits while reading Chinese. The dissociation of orthography and phonology in Chinese characters provides a useful tool to examine phonological processing in deaf people. This study used a boundary and display change technique (Rayner, 1975) in which a preview word was replaced by a target word when the reader's eyes crossed an invisible boundary. We hypothesized that, if readers obtain partial lexical information from a preview word in the parafoveal area, they acquire preview benefits when fixing the target word. Methods: This study recruited 30 hearing-enabled students, 28 DO participants, and 19 DnO participants. This experiment manipulated the orthography and phonology similarities between the target and preview words. The experiment contained 60 reasonable sentences (preview words), 20 identical reasonable sentences (unchanged words), and 40 unreasonable sentences (unchanged words). Each sentence was composed of 14 to 20 Chinese characters, and the target words were located between the third and eighth characters. The participants had to decide whether a sentence was reasonable (yes response) or unreasonable (no response) based on their comprehension of the entire sentence. Findings: By considering the previous fixation location, preview benefits for orthography were located in first fixation duration (FFD), gaze duration (GD), and total viewing duration (TVD) for both the hearing-enabled and DO participants, and in the TVD for the DnO group. The phonological effects were shown in FFD and GD for the hearing-enabled participants and in the GD for the DO group, but not for the DnO group. Considering the possibility of an enhanced perceptual span for deaf readers, the pre-fixation locations were divided into near and far fixations. The results showed that orthography effects were found in the near pre-fixation and far pre-fixation for the hearing-enabled and DnO groups, and in the far pre-fixation location (FFD, GD) for the DO group. The phonological preview benefit was evident in the far pre-fixation location (FFD) for the DO group, whereas it was located in near pre-fixation location (FFD) for the hearing-enabled group. No phonological effect was found for the DnO group. Conclusions/Implications: The results demonstrated that linguistic presentation processing in the parafoveal area may be different between hearing-enabled and deaf people. Although phonological preview benefits were only shown the OD group, both deaf groups correctly comprehend and assessed the sentences. The findings suggest that the differing language backgrounds of deaf people entail varying representation activations, and that the activation of spoken language-based phonological codes is sufficient, but not required, for reading comprehension.起始頁-結束頁：31-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201303.380100212篇名：臺灣國民中小學資優資源班運作基本模式之探究並列篇名：Implementation Models of Resource Rooms for Gifted Learners in Elementary and Junior High Schools in Taiwan作者：陳偉仁(Wei-Ren Chen);黃楷茹(Kai-Ju Huang);陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen);陳長益(Charng-Yi Chen)關鍵字：資優資源班;運作模式;resource rooms for gifted learners;implementation models期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣資優教育歷經將近40年的耕耘，在資優概念的擴展、教育政策的改變、教師專業的精進、社會結構的轉變中，逐漸發展出本土特色的經營。鑑此，本研究勾勒出目前臺灣國民教育階段學校資優資源班經營的樣貌，以做為資優教育永續發展的參考。研究整合問卷調查結果、焦點團體訪談、相關文件資料的蒐集，並進一步分析八所案例學校資優資源班的運作實務。結果發現，臺灣資優資源班的經營可歸納為四種基本運作模式，包括：一、教師專業團隊模式；二、行政主導模式；三、教師與行政攜手並進模式；四、學生需求本位模式。不同的運作模式，呈現出學校資優教育工作者在臺灣資優教育發展脈絡、學校生態、社區資源、教師團隊組成及資優生特質間的權衡，以建構出資優教育在該校中適切的經營取向。本研究並從模式選擇、框架解構、經營型態等三方面，進行討論並提出相關建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Gifted education has been implemented for approximately 40 years in Taiwan. Gifted education has become more localized with the expansion of concepts regarding giftedness, change of education policies, teacher professional development, and the revolution of social structures. The purpose of this study is to outline the implementation models for gifted learners in elementary and high schools in Taiwan. These models can provide frameworks for educators who desire designing and implementing appropriate and innovative programs for gifted learners. Methods: Multistage methods were used to construct fundamental implementation models for gifted learners in Taiwan. First, a nationwide survey was conducted to collect relevant information such as commonalities and difficulties when implementing gifted education. Second, a focus group interview was conducted with 11 gifted-education educators. Thereafter, the 4 dimensions (student, teacher, administration, and background) and elements of implementation models were discussed. Third, 8 resource rooms for gifted learners (6 elementary and 2 junior high schools) from exemplary cases were further analyzed to verify and elaborate these dimensions and elements. Findings: 4 fundamental implementation models were found: (a) teacher professional team model: gifted education is successfully implemented based on teacher collaboration and professional development; (b) administration model: administrators have essential roles and incorporate resources to establish gifted programs; (c) teacher-administration collaboration model: teachers work with administrators to manage the development of gifted education and supportive/curriculum systems; and (d) student needs-based model: the supportive/curriculum system is constructed by teacher teams, and flexibly and continually adjusted based on students' needs. Thus, these 4 models are educators' contextualized approaches that they consider gifted education trends, school ecology, community resources, teacher teams, and traits of gifted learners. Conclusions/Implications: The model choice and implementation issues are discussed in accordance with the findings. First, model choice is an eclectic process in which school educators evaluate and make decisions regarding local resources, the development of resource rooms, and qualities of gifted educators in schools. Appropriateness is an essential characteristic of school educators' leadership when gifted education is concerned. Moreover, implementation models are dynamic frameworks rather than rigid standards. Gifted educators are advised to deconstruct standardized programming, but also to make supportive/service systems possible for individualization. Finally, the various methods for programming resource rooms can be considered because diverse educational resources and ecologies exist in the different districts of Taiwan. The flexible programming of gifted education in local districts and careful accountability evaluation from government administration is the recommended route for gifted education.起始頁-結束頁：55-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201303.380100313篇名：探究教學對國中資優學生科學推理類型轉變之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Inquiry-based Instruction on the Changes of Junior-high Gifted Students' Science Reasoning作者：王翠妃(Cui-Fei Wang);余忠潔(Chung-Chieh Yu);段曉林(Hsiao-Lin Tuan)關鍵字：科學推理;探究教學;資優教育;scientific reasoning;inquiry-based teaching;gifted students期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：38卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：學生以探究的方式學習科學，不但能發展出各種推理類型，並能增進推理能力，尤其是資優生，更適宜採探究教學來引導，以增進其推理能力。本研究目的在探討實施巢狀探究教學模式對於國中資優生的推理類型發展之影響，並分析其影響的因素。研究者選取中部某公立國中資優班（28名學生），由該班科學教師在八年級至九年級上學期（一年半）於理化課程中進行巢狀探究教學。研究者選取九位同學課堂錄影轉錄的文字稿，以質性研究法分析課室中的對話內涵，探討學生科學推理類型在研究歷程中的轉變，並與其他資料（學習單、反思心得、研究者的教案設計、觀察札記、訪談紀錄）進行分析與比較之三角校正。研究發現，在探究教學情境下，資優生在第一階段只展現分析式與推論式的推理類型，在第二階段則展現分析式、推論式與對話式等較多推理類型，到了第三階段，更發展出分析式、推論式、對話式、評價式、統整式的多元推理類型。不但如此，個案學生亦能活用各種推理類型於探究活動中。其中，對話式推理一直占有相當比例，此類型的推理扮演促使學生發展各種類型推理基礎。對話與討論提供給資優生驗證自己想法、批判與思考他人意見的機會，這能增進學習者本身論證的信心，進而到達更高階推理的層次。本研究建議，教師應長期針對資優生進行探究教學，且應不斷地與學生對話並引導學生討論，如此，才能促進資優生運用推理進行科學探究。英文摘要：Purpose: Inquiry-based teaching can improve the cognitive skills, learning motivation, and scientific achievements of students. However, few studies explore inquiry-based teaching's influence on gifted students, especially their scientific reasoning. Therefore, this study examines the effects of inquiry-based teaching on the development of scientific reasoning in gifted students from a junior high school. Methods: A gifted science class (28 gifted students) from a government school in central Taiwan was selected for this study. The first author who was also the science teacher for this class, applied Nest-Inquiry teaching model (Tsai, Tuan & Chin, 2007) to this gifted science class from the first semester of eighth grade to the first semester of the ninth grade. Several topics from the science textbook were modified to fit the Nested-Inquiry teaching model: sound waves, distinguishing elements, reaction rates, acids, bases and salts, circular motion, work, and energy. The case teacher used inquiry-based teaching to help students familiarize themselves with science inquiry, conduct experiments, group discussion, data analysis, and communicate their findings. Nine gifted students were selected in this study to analyze their findings. There were various sources of data: classroom observation, videotaping of all the inquiry-based teaching, interviews of student groups after each inquiry-based teaching, students' worksheets, students' reflections, and case teachers' lesson plans and reflection notes, videotaping of students' lab experiment skills test, and so on. We employed Halpern's (1996) argumentation criteria and Hogan and Fisherkeller's (1999) categories of scientific reasoning to analyze 9 students' data for the entire duration of the study period. Two researchers independently analyzed data and discussed their findings to reach a consensus (Erickson, 1986). Findings: This study revealed that the various types of students' reasoning (analytical, inferential, dialogical, evaluative, and integrative reasoning) gradually transformed during 3 stages of the study period. Students' reasoning patterns during inquiry activities possessed the following pattern during the first stage: analytic reasoning (47%), inferential reasoning (30%), and no reasoning (17%). Students' reasoning pattern during the second stage: no reasoning disappeared, analytic reasoning (43%), inferential reasoning (43%), and their dialogical reasoning (11%). Students' reasoning pattern during the third stage: analytic reasoning (32%), dialogical reasoning (22%), inferential reasoning (29%), evaluative reasoning (10%), and integrated reasoning (7%). Moreover, students also simultaneously displayed diverse reasoning forms. Dialogical reasoning was the underlying component that facilitated the competency of students' scientific reasoning. Conclusions/Implications: Investigating the impact of inquiry-based teaching on the development of scientific reasoning in gifted students from a junior high school was the purpose of this study. Findings indicate that long-term inquiry-based teaching can enhance gifted students' various reasoning performances. Dialogical reasoning can manifest during student-student interactions and teacher-student interactions. Students can develop higher-order reasoning abilities with dialogical reasoning. This study suggests that future science teachers implement long-term inquiry-based teaching to gifted classes to enhance the development of students' reasoning abilities.起始頁-結束頁：79-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201303.380100401篇名：國小資優學生認知－情意交織特質介入方案成效之研究並列篇名：Effects on the Co-Cognitive Traits Intervention Programforthe Elementary Gifted Students作者：王琡棻(Shu-Fen Wang);盧台華(Tai-Hwa Lu)關鍵字：國小資優學生;資優行為;認知－情意交織特質;認知－情意交織特質介入方案;Elementary Gifted Students;Gifted Behaviors;Co-Cognitive Traits;Co-Cognitive Traits Intervention Program期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在探究認知－情意交織特質介入方案對提升國小資優學生認知－情意交織特質與資優行為之成效，係以187位國小資優生為受試對象，進行介入方案實驗研究。採用結構方程模式進行潛在變項共變數分析，以了解實驗處理對提升學生之認知－情意交織特質與資優行為之直接與間接效果。茲將研究發現分述如下：（1）認知－情意交織特質介入方案能有效提升國小資優學生整體認知－情意交織特質，其直接效果值為.23；（2）教師與學生均認為認知－情意交織特質介入方案能有效提升國小資優學生之整體資優行為表現，而實驗處理對教師評定與學生自評資優行為的直接效果值分別為.37與.13；（3）就資優行為各分量表而言，教師認為認知－情意交織特質介入方案可有效提升國小資優學生的語文表達、分析性思考、正向動機、創意思考、敏感性、快速學習、人際互動與情緒表達等各項資優行為，而對風趣幽默則無顯著效果；（4）國小資優學生認為認知－情意交織特質介入方案可有效提升其分析性思考、正向動機、創意思考、敏感性與情緒表達等各項資優行為，而對語文表達、風趣幽默、人際互動與快速學習則無顯著效果；（5）認知－情意交織特質介入方案之成效為先藉由提升學生之認知－情意交織特質，再進而提升其資優行為。英文摘要：The main purposes of this study were to explore the effects of a self-designed co-cognitive traits intervention programon enhancing the co-cognitive traitsand gifted behaviors of the elementary giftedstudents. A hundred and eighty seven gifted students from various Kaohsiung Elementary Schoolswere selected as experimental subjects to participate in the co-cognitive traits intervention program. The main findings were as follows: (a) The co-cognitive traits intervention program could significantly enhance both the overall co-cognitive traits and the effect size was .23. (b) Both teachers and gifted students thought the co-cognitive traits intervention program could effectively improve gifted behaviors and the effect size were .37 and .13. (c) Teachers thought gifted students had positive performances on gifted behaviors. Among them, ”language expression, analysis thinking, positive motivation, creative thinking, sensitive, rapid learning, interpersonal relationship, emotional expression” were obviously shown but ”sense of humor” was the weaker one. (d) These gifted students believed that they presented positive performances on gifted behaviors. Among them, ”analysis thinking, positive motivation, creative thinking, sensitive, emotional expression” were obviously shown but ”language expression, sense of humor, interpersonal relationship, rapid learning” were the weaker. (e) The program effects showed that gifted students' gifted behaviors were increased after their co-cognitive traits improved.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系2篇名：臺南市國民中小學特教班體育教學現況與需求調查之研究並列篇名：An Investigation of Physical Education Teaching-Needs and Execution for the Special Education Classesat Elementary and Junior High Schools in Tainan City作者：吳谷忠(Gu-Jhong Wu);詹士宜(Shih-Yi Chan);洪雅惠(Ya-Huei Hong)關鍵字：特教班;體育教學;特殊體育;適應體育;國中小;physical education;special classrooms;adapted physical education;elementary school;junior high school期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討臺南市國民中小學特教班實施體育教學的現況，並分析不同背景教師在體育教學「需求」與「執行」的差異情形。本研究對象包含138位臺南市國民中小學特教班教師。本研究以「特教班體育教學現況與需求調查問卷」進行調查，問卷內容包含「課程與教學」、「目標訂定與評量」、「專業知能與合作」、「行政支持與教材設備」四個向度，以及教師個人背景變項。本研究的發現如下：（1）就教師基本資料而言，九成五以上的特教班教師是大學畢業，並受過特教專業訓練，目前有六成以上的教師擔任體育教學工作，八成以上的教師曾經教過體育課程，但有九成八的教師不具相關特殊需求者體育教育背景，五成以上的教師未修習相關研習或學分；（2）就整體層面而言，國民中小學特教班教師在體育教學的需求方面達到「很需要」的程度，但在執行方面只達到「部分做到」的程度；（3）就各向度而言，教師在需求方面「課程與教學」、「目標訂定與評量」、「專業知能與合作」、「行政支持與教材設備」達到「很需要」的程度，教師在執行方面「目標訂定與評量」與「課程與教學」達到「大致做到」的程度，而在「行政支持與教材設備」和「專業知能與合作」只達到「部份做到」的程度；（4）不同教育階段的國中小特教班教師，在整體的體育教學需求上，小學教師的需求程度高於國中教師，不同體育專業知能的國中小特教班教師，參加過相關研習的教師其體育教學之執行程度比未曾參加研習的教師高。英文摘要：This research aimed to investigate the ”the needs” and ”the execution” of the physical education (PE) for the special education classes at elementary and junior high schools. The subjects included 138 special education teachers. A ”Questionnaire of Teaching Needs and Execution of the Physical Education for the Special Education Classes”, including ”Curriculum and Instruction”, ”Goal Setting and Assessment”, ”Professional Knowledge and Cooperation”, and ”Administration Supports and Instructional Equipment” domains, was used. The findings were as the following. First, over 80% of them had taught PE. However, 95% of these teachers didn't have related adaptive PE backgrounds, and over 50% of them did not received related trainings or credits. Second, the degree of needs to teach adaptive PE for special education teachers reached ”very high” level, but the field stayed only at ”partially done” level in practice. Third, the teachers responded that the needs at the four domains were all at very high level, but some of them were partial completion. Finally, the elementary school teachers recognized that they had more needs of adaptive PE than those of junior high school teachers. In addition, the teachers participated the adaptive PE had higher executive performance.起始頁-結束頁：31-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系3篇名：「行事曆系統」在盲聾生時間概念教學之行動研究並列篇名：An Action Research Study on Teaching a Deaf-BlindStudent Time Concept by Utilizing a Calendar System作者：曾怡惇(Yi-Tun Tseng)關鍵字：盲聾生;行事曆系統;時間概念;deaf-blind students;calendar system;time concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究是以「行事曆系統」為主要教學策略，採盲用筆記型電腦為溝通互動輔具，並佈置實物教學材料於行事曆箱中，於溝通互動情境，教導盲聾生時間概念詞彙。研究目的為探討盲聾生學習時間概念之表現情形，以及教師使用「行事曆系統」教學策略的心得與反思。研究參與者有二位，一位為明眼的惠明學校盲聾部特教教師，一位為11歲的先天盲聾學生。研究方法採行動研究法，分析師生溝通對話內容，瞭解「行事曆系統」教學策略之可行性。研究結果發現「行事曆系統」不僅有助盲聾生學習時間概念，人際互動的接觸範圍也擴大，對話表達之平均句長增加。同時也發現，在教導盲聾生操作電腦文書處理系統時，如果以行事曆系統的時間順序概念導入，盲聾生很容易理解電腦操作流程，學會電腦文書編輯的方法；甚至，在數學文字題的解題，因為用人物貼片的表徵方式說明題目，盲聾生更容易掌握題意，以完成解題的工作。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to explore the effectiveness of using a calendar system in teaching time concept to a deaf-blind student and to report the teacher's feedbacks and reflections. The main participants were an 11-years-old deaf-blind student and a teacher from a private special school for deaf-blind students. The research tools used included a calendar system, including real teaching objects in the calendar box for time concept instruction, and a laptop computer designed for interaction and communication use. Research methodwas action research methology. Interactions between the teacher and student were analyzed to understand the accessibility of teaching strategies of the calendar system. Research finding was that the calendar system not only expanded the deaf-blind student's understanding of time concept, interpersonal interaction range, and expressive mean length of utterance (MLU), but also increased his understanding and executing of the computer word processing system. Furthermore, the study also found that it was easier for the deaf-blind student to understand the meaning of math questions and to answer the questions when the teacher used character/person sticks in presenting math questions.起始頁-結束頁：55-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系4篇名：公立高級中學身心障礙資源班教師角色期望與角色實踐之調查研究並列篇名：Survey on Role Expectation and Role Performance of Resource Room Teachers in Public Senior High School作者：蔡佳伶(Jia-Ling Tsai);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：角色期望;角色實踐;資源班教師;高級中學;role expectation;role performance;resource room teacher;senior high school期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：38期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討公立高級中學身心障礙資源班教師之角色期望與角色實踐情形，並分析資源班教師在角色期望與實踐間之差距。以自編「公立高級中學身心障礙資源班教師角色調查問卷」，針對全國設有不分類身心障礙資源班之59所公立高級中學進行調查，並以各校之特殊教育行政主管人員、普通班教師及資源班教師作為調查對象，共發出問卷311份，回收問卷281份，問卷回收率達90.35%。調查資料以次數分配、百分比、平均數、標準差、t考驗、單因子變異數分析等統計方法進行資料處理。研究結果有：（1）學校人員在「鑑定與評量」、「教學與輔導」的角色期望程度最高，「行政與計畫」的期望程度最低；（2）不同背景變項之行政主管人員、普通班教師對資源班教師的角色期望沒有顯著差異；（3）不同「高中資源班服務年資」之資源班教師在五個向度上的角色期望有顯著差異；（4）高中資源班教師在「教學與輔導」、「行政與計畫」的角色實踐程度最高，「鑑定與評量」的實踐程度最低；（5）不同「高中資源班服務年資」、「行政職務經驗」之資源班教師在五個向度上的角色實踐有顯著差異；及（6）高中資源班教師在「鑑定與評量」、「教學與輔導」、「支援與宣導」、「諮詢與溝通」之角色期望顯著高於角色實踐。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to explore the role expectation and role performance of resource room teachers in public senior high school and to analyze the differences between role expectation and performance. A self-developed questionnaire, The Senior High School Resource Room Teacher Role Investigation Scale, was sent to 59 public senior high schools, asking the administrators, class room teachers and resource room teachers to respond to it. Three hundred and eleven questionnaires were sent out and 90.35% of them responded (281 participants). The main results were as follows: (1) On the resource room teachers' role expectations, school staffs with different capacities considered ”Assessment & Evaluation” and ”Instruction & Counseling” as the most important roles and considered ”Administrative affairs & Program planning” as the least important one; (2) For the influence of the resource room teachers role expectations among administrators and class room teachers, there was no significant difference across various background variables; (3) Resource room teachers with different seniorities in senior high schools had considerably different role expectations; (4) On the resource room teachers' role performances, ”Instruction & Counseling” and ”Administrative affairs & Program planning” hit the highest performance level, the ”Assessment & Evaluation” reached the lowest performance level; (5) Resource room teachers with different seniorities in senior high schools and different experiences of administrative capacities had different role performances; and (6) The role expectations were significantly higher than the role performances on ”Assessment & Evaluation”, ”nstruction & Counseling”, ”Support & Advocate”, and ”Consultation & Communication”.起始頁-結束頁：83-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系5篇名：增進視覺障礙學生社會技巧的認知行為團體介入效果研究並列篇名：The Effects of Cognitive-Behavioral Group on Improving Social Skills of Students with Visual Impairments作者：林香秀(Hsiang-Hsiu Lin);張景然(Ching-Jan Chang);劉郁玨(Liew-Yee Chiat)關鍵字：社會技巧;視覺障礙生;認知行為團體;cognitive-behavioral therapy group;social skills;students with visual impairments期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的目的在探討認知行為團體方案對於增進視障生的社會技巧的效果，以及團體效果是否能持續。方案的設計主要是採取等組前後測的準實驗設計，總計22名國三至高三自願參加的學生，被安排進入實驗組與對照組。實驗組的成員每週接受一次認知行為取向的團體，每次90分鐘，前後為期10週；對照組不接受實驗的處理。實驗前及團體實施後，以及團體結束六週後，兩組皆分別由學生自我及導師填寫「基本社會技巧量表」。團體進行中，每次皆有兩位觀察員填寫「成員行為觀察評估表」，使用t檢定、單因子變異數分析和魏氏－曼－惠特尼考驗，以了解認知行為團體是否具有增進成員社會技巧的效果。本研究的主要發現（1）整體來說，認知行為團體方案對提升視障生的社會技巧，具有立即的輔導效果，就導師評量認為團體方案能幫助學生提升社會技巧，但就學生自我覺察只有主動性分量表具有立即效果，其餘分量表不具有立即效果；（2）從導師的評量以及學生的自我覺察兩方面，都可以得知認知行為團體方案，對於提升視障生的社會技巧均具有持續效果；（3）從兩位觀察員填寫的「成員行為觀察評估表」得知，認知行為取向之團體隨著團體次數的增加，視障生社會技巧也漸漸隨之提升，雖不是隨著每次團體次數的增加而增加，但整個趨勢卻呈現上升的情形；（4）認知行為團體作業單執行的情形與視障生社會技巧的增進顯著相關，亦即團體介入的效果需同時配合回家作業的執行，方可收到效果。本研究依據研究結果提出具體建議，供諮商實務工作者與未來研究者參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the cognitive-behavioral group program for students with visual impairmentsto enhance their social skills and to examine whether the effects of group counseling could carry on or not. The study used before and after quasi-experimental design, the experimental group (n = 11) received weekly cognitive-behavioral group counseling once every 90 minutes for 10 weeks while the comparison group (n = 11) did not receive any experimental treatment. Before and after the implementation, students and tutors from both groups filled out the ”basic social skills scale.” During the group program, two observers filled out the ”members of the behavioral observation evaluation form” to see whether the members of the group's social skills had been increased followed each group program or not. The t-test, ANOVA, and Mann-Whitney U test were used to analyze research data.The main findings of this study were as followed. First, overall, cognitive-behavioral group programs enhanced social skills of students with visual impairments by showing immediate counseling effects. From teachers' assessments, the group could help students improve social skills. Nevertheless, from students' self-awareness tests, only initiative subscale showed immediate counseling effects, the remaining components of the table did not show any immediate counseling effects. Second, the results from the assessment made by the instructors and the student's self-awareness showed that students with visual impairmentswere gaining social skills from the cognitive-behavioral program continuously. Third, the ”members of the behavioral observation assessment form” made by the two observers showed that along with cognitive-behavioral group's implementation, students' social skills had gradually improved. Although the improvement was related to the times of the group implementation, the trend was going up on the whole. Fourth, the implementation of cognitive-behavioral groups and the visually impaired students' social skills were moderately related. Based on the findings of this study, suggestions for practitioners and future research were provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系6篇名：以結構方程模式驗證高職階段中度智能障礙學生自我概念與自我擁護之關係並列篇名：Using Structural Equation Modeling to Validate the Relationships between Self Concept and Self Advocacy for Vocational High School Students with Moderate Intellectual Disabilities作者：林美玲(Mei-Ling Lin);吳訓生(Shiunn-Sheng Wu)關鍵字：中度智能障礙;自我概念;自我擁護通;moderate intellectual disabilities;self concept;self advocacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究根據理論與相關研究提出高職階段中度智能障礙學生自我概念與自我擁護模式，該模式假設個體之自我概念與自我擁護具有相關性。因此，研究者以自編問卷針對臺灣地區347位的高職階段中度智能障礙學生進行調查，並以結構方程模式評鑑蒐集的資料是否適配本研究所提出之理論模式。結果發現研究者所建構之高職階段中度智能障礙學生自我概念與自我擁護模式得到驗證與支持，自我概念與自我擁護是二階因素概念，自我概念與自我擁護的相關為.81，顯示高職階段中度智能障礙學生的自我概念與自我擁護具有相關性。最後，根據研究結果提出各項建議，以供高職階段中度智能障礙學生、家長、教師與輔導工作者實務上及未來研究參考。英文摘要：Based on relevant theories and earlier studies, this study proposed a ”self concept and self advocacy model” of vocational high school students with moderate intellectual disabilities. This model assumed that individual’s self concept and self advocacy were correlated. Self-designed questionnaires were used to survey vocational high school students with moderate intellectual disabilities in Taiwan. The sample set was analyzed by structure equation modeling in order to evaluate the fit between the collected data and proposed theoretical model. The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) supported a two-order factor model for self concept and self advocacy. A relationship between self concept and self advocacy was .81. Implications of the results were discussed and suggestions were made regarding vocational high school students with moderate intellectual disabilities, parents, teachers, vocational high school counselors, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：29-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系7篇名：高中職資源班教師角色知覺與角色實踐之調查研究並列篇名：A Survey Study on Role Perception and Role Performance of Resource Room Teachers in Senior/Vocational High Schools作者：卓曉園(Hsiao-Yuan Cho);詹士宜(Shih-Yi Chan)關鍵字：高中職資源班教師;角色知覺;角色實踐;Senior/Vocational High School resource room teacher;Role perception;Role perfomance期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在了解高中職資源班教師角色知覺與角色實踐現況，並探討阻礙角色實踐之因素及增進角色實踐的方式。本研究採問卷調查法，以研究者自編之「高中職階段身心障礙資源班教師角色知覺與角色實踐調查問卷」為研究工具，所得之資料以描述統計與推論統計進行分析，並以開放式問題探討阻礙資源班教師角色實踐之原因與可增進資源班教師角色實踐之方式。本研究發現高中職階段資源班教師於八個向度之角色知覺程度介於「重要」與「非常重要」之間，以「輔導」最高，「鑑定與診斷」為最低；實踐程度則介於「部分做到」與「大致做到」之間，以「行政與計畫」最高，「諮詢」為最低，八個向度均有知覺程度顯著高於實踐程度的現象。分析阻礙資源班教師角色實踐之原因與增進角色實踐之方式發現人力困窘是阻礙角色實踐之主要原因，增進角色實踐之方式則可略分為促進各校經驗交流與觀摩、連結校內外相關資源與合作、加強教師與行政人員之特教知能、資源班教師本身的專業成長等。增進角色實踐之所需支援則可大略歸納為增聘資源班師資、推動法規明確化、補助宣導活動經費、建置資源班資源分享平台等。最後本研究依據結果分析提出建議，供實務工作及未來研究參考。英文摘要：The main focus of this study was to investigate the role perception and role performance of high school resource room teachers. The purpose of the investigation was also to identify the factors that hinder role performance and to provide approaches to promoting role performance. In the study, the subjects were required to fill up the questionnaire designed by the researchers. There were two parts in the questionnaire: the first part included eight dimensions in the questionnaire; in the second part, there were open-ended questions for the subjects. Descriptive statistics and inferential statistics were used to analyze the data collected. The findings of this study were summarized as follows: Most resource room teachers in senior/vocational high schools rated role perception between ”important” and ”very important” on all eight dimensions of the questionnaire, and viewed ”counseling” as the most important dimension in role perception and thought of ”identification and assessment” was rated as the least important one. The resource room teachers in senior/vocational high schools rated their role performance between ”partly-done” and ”approximately-done” on the eight dimensions of the questionnaire and regarded ”administration and planning” as the most important dimension while ”consultation” as the least important one. The result indicated there was great significance between role perception and role performance as far as junior high school and senior/vocational high school resource room teachers were concerned. Senior high school resource room teachers referred to uncertainty as the obstacle to the role perception and performance and heavy workload was another factor. The common approaches to enhancing the resource room teacher’s role performance included taking part in the professional seminars, establishing the community of professional growth, and meeting consulting professionals and experienced teachers. The common support to help improve the resource room teachers’ role performance was the setting of international websites, the support from administration system, and the increase of counseling and support staff. Based on the results of the study, recommendations were provided for the practitioners work and feature research.起始頁-結束頁：61-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系8篇名：高中職身心障礙學生生活自理能力影響因素之階層線性模式分析並列篇名：Using Hierarchical Linear Model to Analyze the Factors Influencing Living Skills of Senior High School Students with Disabilities作者：黃彥融(Yan-Rong Huang)關鍵字：高中職身心障礙學生生活自理能力;階層線性模式;特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫;living skills of senior high school students with disabilities;Hierarchical Linear Model (HLM);Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study (SNELS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討高中職身心障礙學生生活自理能力之影響因素。本研究中所探討之跨層次的效果，包括個體層次及總體層面對於生活自理能力的影響關係，以階層線性模式（Hierarchical Linear Model, HLM）進行統計分析，來驗證這些層次效果，希冀建構與驗證高中職身心障礙學生生活自理能力之影響因素。本研究對象為我國建立之特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫（special needs education longitudinal study, SNELS）所登載之98學年度問卷資料，經過嵌套（nested）配對後，選出有效樣本為學校數264所，學生數2,065人。最後，針對研究結果提出具體建議，以提供國內特殊教育政策制定與修正、教育實務應用及未來研究之參考。本研究主要的研究發現（1）高中職身心障礙學生其性別、年級、障礙類別及自我決策能力等個人背景因素對其生活自理能力有顯著之影響；（2）高中職身心障礙學生不因其學校性質與學校類型等學校背景因素而對其生活自理能力有所影響；（3）高中職身心障礙學生其年級、障礙類別及自我決策能力等個人背景因素受到學校類型之調節作用，而在生活自理能力上產生影響；（4）在各模型中以完整模型的適配性最高。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the factors influencing living skills of senior high school students with disabilities. The research examined the inter-level effects, which included the effects of individual factors and the collective effects on the factors. Hierarchical Linear Model (HLM) was adopted for the analyses. This study adopted the empirical data from Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study (SNELS) in 2009. After the data had been nested and matched, effective sample included 264 schools with 2,065 students, wishing to construct and verify a model which could effectively predict living skills of Taiwan senior high school students with disabilities. According to the findings, some suggestions were made to the future development of special education and following studies. Major findings were as follows: (1) Student-level factors (gender, grade, categories of disabilities, and self-determination skills) had direct effects on senior high school students with disabilities. (2) School-level factors had no differences on senior high school students with disabilities. (3) Student-level (grade, categories of disabilities, and self-determination skills) and school-level factors had cross-level interactions effects on senior high school students with disabilities. (4) The full model was the best model to analyze the factors influencing living skills of senior high school students with disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：93-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系9篇名：高中職以下身心障礙學生自我決策能力之探究－跨性別、教育階段及障礙類別之分析研究並列篇名：Investigating Level and Characteristics of Self-Determination Skills of School-Age Students with Disabilities: A Cross-Gender, Educational Stage, and Type of Disability Research作者：趙本強(Pen-Chiang Chao)關鍵字：自我決策;身心障礙學生;性別;教育階段;障礙類別;self-determination;students with disabilities;gender;educational stage;type of disability期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的主要目的係評估國小至高中職階段間全體及不同障別身心障礙學生的自我決策程度與特質，並評估學生的性別、教育階段及障礙類別彼此在影響其自我決策程度之交互作用情形，另亦比較不同背景變項中各群組決策程度之差異情形。本研究採隨機抽樣方式從我國各地理區域募集小五至高三間之各類身心障礙學生（n = 1,458）及普通生（n = 187）參與研究，後者的資料主要係做為比較的標準。本研究使用的工具係趙本強於2011 年所發展的一份信效度頗佳的標準化自我決策評量工具─「學齡學生自我決策量表」，其可用於評估學生在自我瞭解、心理賦權、自我調整及獨立自主四個向度的能力及整體的自我決策能力。資料分析法包括描述統計、「自我決策能力指標圖」之視覺分析、t 考驗及變異數分析。研究結果顯示，全體或單一障別身障生的自我決策程度皆為偏低的程度，另不同性別、教育階段及障礙類別樣本呈現的自我決策組型不一，即各有其獨特的決策優勢情形。此外，在三變項中，僅性別與障礙類別兩者係以交互作用的形式影響學生的自我決策程度。整體而言，不同性別及障礙類別學生彼此自我決策程度的差異情形不一，然學生隨其就讀的教育階段升高而呈現自我決策程度上升的趨勢。本研究最後針對研究結果進行討論並提供相關建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate the level and characteristics of self-determination skills of school-age students with disabilities, examine whether students’ gender, educational stage, and type of disability have interaction effects on their self-determination skills, and compare the differences of the level of self-determination skills between students with varied demographics. Subjects were students with disabilities (n = 1458) and those without disabilities (n = 187) between 5th and 12th grade, selected from each county in Taiwan by using the probability sampling method. The latter were used as an comparison group to evaluate to which extent that level of self-determination skills of students with disabilities is lower than that of their peers without disabilities. The measurement used in the present study is a standardized scale, Self-Determination Scale for School-Age Students (Chao, 2011). According to the author, the scale have appropriate reliability and validity. Self-Determination Scale for School-Age Students is a scale developed to assess the self-determination skills in four areas including self-realization, psychological empowerment, self-regulation, and autonomy. Scores of each area could be summed up to form a total score, with higher scores indicates the higher level of self-determination. Data collected were analyzed using varied methods including descriptive statistics, t test, visual analysis, one-way analyses of variances (ANOVAs), and two-way ANOVAs. Findings showed that students with disabilities demonstrated a significantly lower level of self-determination skills compared to their peers without disabilities. In terms of characteristics, students with different gender, educational stage, and type of disabilities showed varied self-determination patterns. That is, different strengths and weakness. Additionally, gender and type of disabilities had an interaction effect on self-determination skills. In summary, students across different demographics demonstrated varied levels and characteristics of self-determination. Nonetheless, students’ self-determination skills increased as they grew older. Suggestions and implications were provided.起始頁-結束頁：113-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系01篇名：幾何圖形歸類判斷作業的認知行為表現與神經活動區域並列篇名：Cognitive Behaviors and Neural Bases of Geometrical Categorization作者：姜自強(Tzu-Ching Chiang);吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu);蕭世朗(Sigmund Hsiao);劉金昌(Gin-Chung Liu)關鍵字：後側扣帶迴;幾何圖形;認知神經科學;cognitive neuroscience;geometrical figures;posterior cingulated cortex期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究藉由行為實驗與腦功能核磁造影探討幾何圖形歸類之判斷作業的認知行為表現與神經活動區域。結果發現，概念類別、正／非例，和典型性會交互作用地影響反應時間，不論哪一種變因的效果都不是跨情境一致的，即使典型例的反應時間也未必在所有情況下都較非典型例來得短，可能因資料分析限定在正確率達98%的「三角形」與「四邊形」概念類別所致。而正／非例和典型性都未顯現特定腦區的差異，僅從事「三角形」與「四邊形」判斷作業時，均會產生後側扣帶迴的抑制反應，且兩概念類別所涉及的後側扣帶迴區域有明顯地重疊，雖然兩者也有引發不同的腦區，如「四邊形」作業還會抑制上顳葉（BA41）與前運動皮質（BA6）的活動，而「三角形」作業則無。上述結果意味著，幾何圖形概念的提取與比對可能獨立於圖例的處理，但都涉及到後側扣帶迴。英文摘要：The study aimed to examine cognitive behaviors and the corresponding brain areas via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while people categorize geometrical figures. The results showed categorization tasks, positive/negative examples, and typicality interactively influenced reaction times. It indicates that the effects of one variable were not constant across different variables. For instance, the reaction times (RTs) in the typical examples were not quicker, in all conditions, than that in the atypical examples. It may be the results of filtering out the accuracy below 98%. However, the corresponding brain areas were only found for the categorization tasks. Both ”Triangles” and ”Quadrangles” categorization tasks deactivated the posterior cingulated cortex and there were significantly overlapped areas in BA31. ”Quadrangles” categorization task additionally deactivated superior temporal lobes (BA41) and premotor areas (BA6) but ”Triangles” did not. The results suggested the retrieval of geometrical concepts and the comparison to the stimuli examples would be associated with the posterior cingulated cortex, which may be independent from the processing of stimuli examples.起始頁-結束頁：141-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20130222.12篇名：共讀童書文字指引策略對幼兒認字之影響並列篇名：Print Referencing Strategies in Shared Book Reading: Effects on Preschoolers' Word Recognition作者：陳惠茹(Hui-Ju Chen);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：中文;文字指引策略;共讀;認字;mandarin;print referencing;shared book reading;word recognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以94位就讀於桃園縣龜山鄉公私立托兒所3至5歲幼兒為對象，將幼兒均分為兩組，分別以文字指引策略及對話式共讀帶領實驗組及控制組幼兒共讀20本童書，探討成人採用文字指引策略帶領共讀活動對幼兒認字能力的影響。研究結果發現：（1）採用文字指引策略共讀童書較對話式共讀能顯著提升幼兒整體的認字能力。（2）共讀童書文字指引策略能提升幼兒認字及目標字彙辨識能力。（3）成人在帶領幼兒共讀童書過程中，特別針對某些字彙的字形、字音、和字義加以說明，並提供詞素覺識訓練，可以顯著提昇幼兒對這些目標字彙的辨識能力。英文摘要：A total of 94 preschool children aged 3 to 6 from three nursery schools in Tao-Yuan County participated in this study. Children were evenly divided into an experimental group and a control group. Children in both groups read with an adult together for a total of 20 story books twice a week for ten consecutive weeks, using print referencing reading and dialogic reading methods in the respective groups. Results indicated that (1) children that participated in print referencing reading group showed a significant improvement in word recognition than their counterparts in the dialogic reading group; (2) the print referencing method in shared book reading elevated children's word recognition and target word identification abilities; and (3) adult instruction of orthography, sound, and meaning of target words in the storybooks and provision of morphological training associated with those words substantially increase the children's abilities of target word identification.起始頁-結束頁：157-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201303043篇名：主動／被動拖延者之後設認知信念、期限壓力及在高／低成就回饋後之情緒困擾變化並列篇名：Active/Passive Procrastinators, Metacognitions, and Emotion Variety after Achievement Feedback作者：李介至(Jie-Zhi Lee)關鍵字：主動／被動拖延;成就回饋;期限壓力;情緒困擾;後設認知信念;active/passive procrastinators;achievement feedback;deadline pressure;emotional distress;metacognitive belief期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：大學生拖延議題一直為許多學者所關心，但新近學界發現某些拖延者實際表現並不差，此類拖延者被稱為主動拖延者，其後設認知信念、外顯拖延行為及在成就回饋前後之情緒困擾是否異於傳統拖延者卻鮮少研究加以探究。本研究以叢集取樣抽取646名大學在學生，研究工具包含拖延行為檢核表、主動拖延量表、後設認知信念量表及情緒困擾量表。研究結果顯示：1. 主動／被動拖延者分別具有較高之正向及負向後設認知信念。2. 主動／被動拖延者在成就評價前二週具有相似程度之外顯拖延行為，但主動拖延者在成就評價當週會減少拖延行為，被動拖延者則否，情緒亦較困擾。3. 主動／被動拖延者在高成就回饋後會減少情緒困擾，在低成就回饋後會增加情緒困擾，其中以主動拖延者為甚。4. 在高成就模型中，三次測量顯示被動拖延者在高成就回饋後會減緩其心中情緒困擾，主動拖延者變化幅度則會高於被動拖延者。在低成就模型中，主動／被動拖延者情緒困擾分數呈現有意義之上升。本研究根據研究結果在理論上及實務上進行討論，並針對未來研究及教學提供建議。英文摘要：This study examined the difference of metacognitive belief, deadline pressure, and emotional distress among active and passive procrastinators. The participants were 646 students from 12 universities and research tools included a procrastination check list, an active procrastination scale, a meta cognitive belief scale, and an emotional adaption scale. Questionnaires were analyzed by a t test, two-way ANOVA, Cohen's d and latent growth model. The results of this study were as follows: (1) active procrastinators reported a high degree of positive meta-cognition, but passive ones reported a high degree of negative meta-cognition; (2) active procrastinators decreased procrastination and reported lower emotional adjustment before achievement evaluation, but this was not the case for passive ones; (3) both procrastinators' emotions after the low achievement feedback were significantly worse, especially for the active procrastinators; and (4) two different procrastinator types revealed different levels of emotional distress. Implications for theory, practice were research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：175-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201303064篇名：英漢雙語學童聲韻覺識及構詞覺識與英漢認字能力之相關研究並列篇名：Predictors of Chinese-English Biliteracy: Phonological and Morphological Awareness in Two Languages作者：張苾含(Pi-Han Chang);胡潔芳(Chieh-Fang Hu);陳俊光(Fred Jyun-Gwang Chen)關鍵字：英語字彙;後設語言覺識;漢字認讀;構詞覺識;聲韻覺識;雙語教學;bilingual education;meta-linguistic awareness;morphological awareness;phonological awareness;reading English;reading Chinese期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討雙語一年級及五年級學童聲韻覺識、構詞覺識與英、漢語認字的相關性，以及上述兩種覺識能否跨語言預測文字認讀。英、漢聲韻覺識測驗皆採用聲母刪音測驗。英語構詞覺識採複合詞測驗及派生詞測驗；漢語構詞覺識採同音詞素測驗及複合詞測驗。結果顯示，以語言內的預測力而言，聲韻覺識與漢字認讀相關，但在控制了構詞覺識後，其相關性變得不顯著。相反的，漢語構詞覺識在控制了漢語聲韻覺識後，仍能有效預測漢字認讀。在英文認字方面，其結果與漢字認讀相似。英語構詞覺識比英語聲韻覺識有更好的預測力。以跨語言的預測力而言，英語派生詞覺識可以跨語言預測漢字認讀，而此預測力獨立於漢語聲韻覺識與構詞覺識之上，所以英漢覺識的綜合指標比單一漢語覺識能更有效的預測漢字認讀。英文摘要：The present study investigated the contributions of phonological and morphological awareness to predicting word reading within and across languages Participants were 61 first-grade and fifth-grade Chinese-English bilinguals, who had lived and studied in English-speaking areas for at least 3 years before they studied in Taiwan. Phonological awareness was measured by deletion tests in both Chinese and English. Morphological awareness of English was measured by compound construction and derivational morphology; morphological awareness of Chinese was measured by homophone sensitivity and compound construction. The results showed that among predictors of each language, Chinese phonological awareness was associated with Chinese character reading, but its significance disappeared after controlling for morphological awareness of Chinese. However, morphological awareness of Chinese made a significant unique contribution to Chinese character reading after taking phonological awareness of Chinese into account. Similar patterns of results were obtained in predicting English word reading, where morphological awareness of English, rather than phonological awareness, was the unique predictor of English word reading. Across languages, awareness of English derivational morphology predicted unique variance in Chinese character reading over and above phonological and morphological awareness of Chinese. These results suggested additionally involving awareness of English derivational morphology can better predict Chinese character reading than involving Chinese measures alone.起始頁-結束頁：201-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201303085篇名：學前到學齡兒童的語音區辨能力發展及其與詞彙理解的關係並列篇名：The Development of Speech Discrimination in Preschool and School-Aged Children: Association with Word Comprehension作者：劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu);曹峰銘(Feng-Ming Tsao);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang);徐儷玲(Li-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：詞彙理解;語音知覺;語音區辨;聲調知覺;lexical tone perception;speech discrimination;speech perception;word comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討華語跨學前到學齡階段兒童的語音區辨能力隨年齡增加而變化的情形，以及兒童語音區辨和詞彙理解之間的關連性。研究對象為150名語言發展正常的四到八歲兒童，分為五個年齡層（各30名），參與三項華語語音特性對比的AX區辨作業（包含塞音不同構音部位、舌面音不同構音方式、和聲調對比），並以「畢保德圖畫詞彙測驗」評估口語詞彙理解能力。結果發現，四到八歲兒童的語音區辨正確率和敏感度呈現隨著年齡成長而增加的趨勢，顯示語音知覺能力在跨學前到學齡階段仍持續發展中。檢視同一群兒童在三項語音區辨作業上的表現差異，發現聲調和塞音構音部位的區辨正確率明顯高於舌面音塞擦音和擦音構音方式對比的正確率，顯示此階段兒童的聲調和塞音構音部位區辨能力的發展優於塞擦音和擦音的區辨。相關分析顯示兒童的塞音和聲調區辨敏感度與口語詞彙理解有顯著關連性，回歸分析也顯示聲調和塞音區辨能力可以解釋口語詞彙理解的變異量，支持了兒童語音知覺發展和詞彙能力有關連的論述。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to explore the developmental changes of speech discrimination abilities in Mandarin-speaking children across preschool and school ages. This study also examined the relationship between speech perception abilities and word comprehension in childhood. 150 Mandarin-speaking 4-8 year-old children (30 for each age group) participated in AX phonetic discrimination tasks constructed by three phonetic contrasts with different speech acoustic features (i.e., stops with different articulation places, affricate vs. fricative, lexical tone 2 vs. 3). The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) was used to assess children's word comprehension ability. The results that older children performed better speech discrimination and perceptual sensitivity than the younger ones on all three phonetic discrimination tasks indicated the progress of speech perception abilities during 4-8 years of age. In examining the phonetic contrast effects on the speech perception abilities, the results showed that children performed better on the lexical tone sensitivities than the affricate vs. fricative discrimination. In addition, the phonetic discrimination performance was positively correlated with the PPVT score, and the regression model showed that both lexical tone and stop consonant sensitivity contributed to the variance of PPVT scores, especially the lexical tone sensitivity contribute to word comprehension more than the stop consonant sensitivity. These results showed the improving sensitivity in discriminating native phonetic contrasts in 4-8 year-old children, and suggested that speech perception plays an essential role in word comprehension development in Mandarin-speaking children.起始頁-結束頁：221-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201305276篇名：大學生緣觀構念研究與對本土化諮商的啟示並列篇名：A Preliminary Study on the Construct of Yuan with College Students and Its Implications for Indigenous Counseling作者：徐欣萍(Hsin-Ping Hsu);黃光國(Kwang-Kuo Hwang)關鍵字：文化智慧;本土化諮商輔導;緣;緣份;聯想分析;associative group analysis;fate in relationships;indigenous counseling;practical intelligence;yuan-feng期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：華人文化中的生活智慧經常透過日常溝通用語呈現而出，進而塑造本土社會民眾普遍的心理特色，故能成為建立本土化諮商輔導模式的重要基礎。而在諸多生活語言中，「緣」是經常出現的口語詞彙，常被用來處理各種關係適應問題，亦為「關係主義」社會特有的心理防衛機轉與思維信念。本研究旨在針對「緣」的文化結構與重要心理知覺表徵進行探索，除欲初步驗證先前理論的概念合理性，同時也可做為後續多元尺度分析與測量工具發展參考。研究分為兩階段，首先進行詮釋學取向的文本分析（Berger，1995；Fairclough，1995），呈現「緣」的傳統定義與類別；其次再以社會文化互動觀點，以310位大學生為研究對象，透過「聯想組合分析法」（Kelly，1985）蒐集詞語資料，並應用數學法則「布萊德福律」篩選有效字詞後進行分析。結果發現，「緣」的文化結構能持續重現於當代社會，且明顯與各種關係互動議題有關，故有潛在的本土化諮商實務價值。本研究初步歸結出「緣」的文化與心理結構，文末並提出省思與建議。英文摘要：Yuan(緣) is one of the most frequently used words in the Chinese language. People use this term to express their thoughts and feelings. This study aimed to explore the cultural structure and the psychological meaning of Yuan from both traditional and contemporary perspectives. Additionally, this study also tried to verify the corollaries of a tentative theory describing the operation processes of yuan-fen. In stage one, we used contextual analysis (Berger, 1995) to present the traditional characteristics of Yuan. In stage two, we used Associative Group Analysis (Kelly, 1985), a free associative recall technique, to measure the mental representation of Yuan. Data were gathered in a sample of 310 college students. The results suggested that the cultural structures of Yuan can reproduce in contemporary society. Meanwhile, Yuan is related to any kinds of guanxi issues which makes it have a potential functional role contributing to indigenous counseling practice. The construct of yuan which we obtained from this study can be used as a reference to study Yuan for subsequent studies.起始頁-結束頁：241-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201306037篇名：Explorations of Composite Scores under the Multivariate Proficiency Distribution Using IRT並列篇名：運用試題反應理論計算多向度能力分配中量尺總分之探討作者：章舜雯(Shun-Wen Chang);滕欣(Shin Teng);盧家鋒(Chia-Feng Lu)關鍵字：多向度能力分配;量尺總分;測量誤差;測驗組合;試題反應理論;composite score;IRT;multivariate proficiency distribution;measurement error;test battery期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究使用實徵資料，探討應用試題反應理論計分模式在多向度能力分配上，對於測驗量尺總分的計分效果。本研究的目的在使用Kolen、Wang和Lee（2012）的方法建立以試題反應理論模式為基礎的程式，在測驗組合、各學科所測量能力彼此互為相關的情境下，計算量尺總分，然後再對所得總分不同的特性進行分析與探討。本研究使用國中基測2008年第一次測驗5,000筆考生的隨機資料；評鑑的標準包含考生在多向度能力分配裡所得量尺總分之描述統計值與分數分配圖形、總誤差量、信度值，以及測量標準誤。研究結果顯示國中基測各學科所測量的能力彼此存在高度的相關，Kolen等人的試題反應理論計分程序有令人滿意的表現。對於合併使用兩種或兩種測驗以上作影響性決定的大型測驗而言，如何將不同的測驗分數結果整合是相當重要的議題；本研究建立多向度能力分配、使用實徵資料，探討以Kolen等人的模式計算量尺總分的效果，相信研究的結果已提供了更多有關量尺總分的測量特性，對於日後使用試題反應理論模式，在多向度能力情境中計算考生能力的相關研究上也提供了更有力的基礎。英文摘要：This study was designed to explore the composite scores under the multivariate distribution of latent proficiencies using a procedure based on IRT for empirical data. The purpose was to employ the IRT models under the multivariate ability distribution in order to investigate the composite scores with the consideration that correlations existed among the examinees' proficiencies. This research followed Kolen, Wang, and Lee’s (2012) method for the development of the IRT-based procedure. The five tests of the Basic Competence Test were used, with a random sample of 5,000 examinees obtained in 2008. The analyses included the descriptive statistics and frequency distributions of the composite scores, overall SEM and reliability values, as well as the CSEMs. The findings indicated that there existed strong relationships between pairs of the proficiencies of the five tests and the results of Kolen et al.'s modeling were satisfied. For large-scale testing programs that rely on two or more tests to make high-stakes decisions, the issue of combining individual scores into a single total score is critical. Through the employment of Kolen et al.'s model for deriving the composite scores under the multivariate distribution, and along with this research utilizing the real data, the results of this study have revealed more of the psychometric features of the composite scores and have also helped lay a more solid foundation for many studies to embark on the estimation of examinees' ability levels in the multivariate proficiency setting via IRT.起始頁-結束頁：261-278資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20130222.28篇名：多層面Rasch模式在數學實作評量的應用並列篇名：An Application of Many-Facet Rasch Model to Evaluate Mathematics Performance Assessment作者：謝如山(Ju-Shan Hsieh);謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh)關鍵字：多層面Rasch模式;評分者信度;實作評量;many-facet Rasch;performance assessment;rater reliability期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採用多層面的Rasch分析，來評估學生在實作評量所具備的潛在能力。本研究所使用的測驗內容在測量學生對數學的數感及生活應用的數學能力，總共有四個考題，三百一十四位四到六年級的學童，與三位評分者參與本研究。結果顯示即使評分者接受訓練並依據規準來進行評分，不同評分者之間的嚴厲度也確實存在差異，透過多層面的Rasch模式分析，可以將評分嚴厲度加以考量，並能協助研究者，偵測評分者不合常規的評分現象，而數據中所呈現之標準化殘差值大致為隨機分布，顯示評分並無明顯的系統性誤差存在。由本研究結果可看出多層面Rasch模式在分析實作評量上相當有用，值得其他教育工作者參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to evaluate student's potential ability on mathematics ability using Many-facet Rasch Model. The test students took consisted of four ranking levels. Three hundred and fourteen elementary students, and three raters were participated in this study. The results show that even with training and delineating a standard for grading, there remained differences in grader severity among the raters. Many-facet Rasch analysis enabled calibration of grader severity for researchers to detect grader irregularities. Data showed that the standard residuals were randomly distributed, indicating that there were no obvious systematic errors. Overall, the study show Many-facet Rasch model can be quite a useful analytic tool in performance assessment.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20121101.19篇名：心情對了，創意就來了－情緒對發散性思考與頓悟問題解決的不同影響並列篇名：Right Moods, Right Creativities: Differential Effects of Emotional States on Divergent Thinking and Insight Problem Solving作者：蔡秉勳(Ping-Hsun Tsai);林緯倫(Wei-Lun Lin);林烘煜(Hung-Yu Lin)關鍵字：情緒狀態;創造力;激動程度;發散性思考;頓悟問題;arousal;creativity;divergent thinking;emotional states;insight problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：去探討情緒與創造力間關係的研究未能獲致一致或完整的結論，有些研究發現僅正向情緒能促進創造力、另一些研究發現負向情緒的促進效果，也有研究顯示正、負向情緒皆有助於創造力表現。然而，過去研究並未區分不同程度的情緒操弄以及不同類型的創造力作業。依據成就動機理論，最適激動程度會依作業性質而有所不同；研究也顯示開放式的發散性思考與封閉式的頓悟問題解決涉及不同的歷程。本研究中將200位參與者隨機分派至不同程度的情緒影片操弄組中（高度正向、中度正向、中性、中度負向、高度負向），分別進行發散性思考測驗或頓悟問題解決作業。結果顯示，不同的情緒操弄會對兩類創造力作業造成不同影響：中度的正向情緒最有利於頓悟問題的解決；而發散性思考表現則與激動程度成正相關，亦即不論正、負價性，越高度的情緒越能增進其表現。此研究結果有助於澄清情緒與創造力的關係，並可作為進一步探討情緒影響創造力的機制或創造力提升方法研究的基礎。英文摘要：Previous studies investigating the relationships between emotional state and creativity reveal inconsistent and inconclusive results. Some found that positive emotional state enhanced creativity performance; some supported the facilitative effect of negative emotions; while others showed that positive and negative emotional states can both improve creativity. These inconsistencies might be attributed to the problems that the lack of differentiation between levels of emotional states and no distinction is made between different types of creativity tasks in the previous studies. According to achievement motivation theory, optimal arousal level is a U-shaped function of the nature of performance task, and different tasks require different levels of arousal for optimal performance. Past research also indicated that different creativity tasks, says, open-ended divergent thinking and closed-ended insight problem solving, involved distinct processes. In the present study, 200 participants were randomly assigned to five emotional manipulation conditions-high degree of positive emotion, medium degree of positive emotion, neutral, medium degree of negative emotion, and high degree of negative emotion. Half of the participants in each condition performed divergent thinking test, while the other half performed insight problem-solving task. The Results showed that different emotional states have different effects on the two creativity measures. While medium positive emotional state can mostly improve insight problem solving, divergent thinking performance is positively related to the degree of arousal-regardless of positive or negative valence, -the higher the emotional arousal, the more enhanced the performance. These Results help to clarify the relationships between emotion and creativity. Results also establish the basis to explore the mechanism by which emotions influence creativity and the means by which creativity can be enhanced.起始頁-結束頁：19-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012111610篇名：Rasch模式建置國小高年級閱讀理解測驗並列篇名：The Development of Reading Comprehension Test for 5th and 6th Graders Using the Rasch Model作者：林怡君(I-Chun Lin);張麗麗(Lily Chang);陸怡琮(I-Chung Lu)關鍵字：閱讀理解測驗;Rasch模式;NAEP;rasch model;reading comprehension test期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：「國小高年級閱讀理解測驗」係根據NAEP閱讀理解評量架構，以Rasch部份給分模式建置適用於高年級一般學童之文本閱讀理解測驗。研究對象係採分層隨機抽樣取得之高屏地區國小五、六年級學童1,052人。測驗共39題，含文學及訊息文本、選擇題及建構反應題，測「尋找和回憶」、「整合和解釋」及「批判和評鑑」三個閱讀理解認知層次。計量分析的結果顯示：Rasch模式建置之測驗符合客觀測量特性（閱讀理解構念為單向度、具性別及年級恆等性）、建構反應題之等級間距適切且呈階層關係、試題難度分配廣且與學童能力相對應、閱讀理解認知層次具階層性、測驗具合理之聚斂與區辨相關且能區辨不同次群體（年級、性別、語文能力）、測驗具理想之分隔信度及評分者信度。本文亦針對測驗應用、Rasch模式應用，以及後續研究提出建議。英文摘要：The Reading Comprehension Test, based on NAEP reading framework, was developed for 5th and 6th grade students using the Rasch measurement model. The participants of this study were 1,052 5th and 6th graders sampled from Kaohsiung and Pingtung counties using stratified random sampling procedures. The 39-item test, including both multiple-choice and construct-response items, measures three cognitive levels (i.e., locate / recall, integrate / interpret, and critique / evaluate) of literary and informational texts. Results show: a) the underlying trait defined by the reading comprehension test holds the characteristics of an objective measurement (i.e., the construct measured by the test is unidimensional and invariant across genders and grades); b) the rating scales for construct-response items are appropriate in terms of their order and distance; c) items spread reasonably well along the latent continuum and are aligned with various ability levels; d) the three reading cognitive levels show hierarchical structure as expected; e) the test converges and discriminates various measures appropriately; f) the test is able to discriminate group differences by gender, grade, and ability level; and g) the test has satisfactory person separation and rater reliability. Discussions and suggestions regarding test application, the application of the Rasch model, and future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：39-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012112811篇名：目標結構知覺對成就目標取向、學業表現、及學習策略的預測力：期刊文獻的後設分析研究並列篇名：The Predictive Effects of Goal Structure Perception on Achievement Goal Orientation, Academic Performance, and Learning Strategy: A Meta-Analysis of Journal Articles作者：許崇憲(Chong-Shiann Hsu)關鍵字：目標結構;成就目標取向;後設分析;學習策略;學業表現;academic performance;achievement goal orientation;goal structure;learning strategy;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採用後設分析，檢驗目標結構知覺對成就目標取向及學業表現的預測力。本文搜集中英文期刊論文，成就目標取向部分有30篇研究，提供219個效果量；學業成就部分有13篇研究，提供33個效果量；學習策略部份有8篇研究，提供21個效果量。採用隨機效果模式計算平均效果量並進行顯著性考驗。結果顯示成就目標理論的各項預測大部份獲得支持，精熟目標結構知覺正向預測學生的趨向精熟目標取向及趨向表現取向，表現目標結構知覺正向預測趨向表現及逃避表現取向。精熟目標結構知覺正向預測學業表現，表現目標結構無顯著預測力。精熟及表現目標結構知覺皆能正向預測認知策略及後設認知策略，但精熟目標結構知覺對後設認知策略的預測力顯著大於表現目標結構知覺。目標結構知覺對個體目標取向的預測力，部分因為取向量表、參與者教育階段、及文化而有所差異。表現目標結構知覺對學業表現的負向預測僅出現於個人主義文化參與者。最後討論本文意義及未來研究方向。英文摘要：This study examined the predictive effect of goal structure perception on achievement goal orientation, academic performance, and learning strategies using meta-analysis. Computerized database searches in Chinese and English journals were performed. There were 30 studies on achievement goal orientation with 219 effect sizes, 13 studies on academic achievement with 33 effect sizes, and 8 studies on learning strategy use with 21 effect sizes. The random effect model was used to calculate and examine the mean effect sizes. It was found that the perception of mastery goal structure positively predicted approach goal orientation and that the perception of performance goal structure positively predicted performance goal orientation. Mastery goal structure perception predicted academic performance positively. Perceptions of mastery and performance goal structure both positively predicted cognitive and meta-cognitive strategies. The prediction of goal structure perception on achievement goal orientation was partly moderated by orientation scale, educational level, and culture. Performance goal structure perception negatively predicted academic performance in individualistic participants. Implications and further research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：63-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012112912篇名：以磁共振造影取向探討身體活動與神經認知功能老化：回顧與展望並列篇名：Exploring the Relationship between Physical Activity and Aging of Neurocognitive Functioning Aging: A Magnetic Resonance Imaging Approach作者：張育愷(Yu-Kai Chang);祝堅恆(Chien-Heng Chu);王俊智(Chun-Chih Wang);楊高騰(Kao-Teng Yang)關鍵字：身體適能;執行功能;結構性磁共振造影;認知神經科學;健身運動心理學;cognitive neuroscience;executive function;exercise psychology;physical fitness;structural magnetic resonance imaging期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：許多研究指出，身體活動在減緩因年齡導致之認知功能衰退扮演重要的角色；其中，以認知神經科學取向探究身體活動、認知功能及大腦的關連，已成為國際間研究最為新穎的主流發展之一。本文之目的係以磁共振造影取向之研究為主軸，整理與分析國際間在身體活動、認知功能老化及大腦結構的研究成果。結果發現，身體活動對於大腦有其正面效益，而近十年國際間對該議題已採用多元方向，包括橫斷式與縱貫式之流行病學與實驗研究等進行探究。具體而言，研究可依據變項或分析方式區分為身體適能、心血管適能、灰質與白質、神經聯繫、特定大腦結構或中介分析等方向探討。為達到與國際間研究之接軌，國內研究者應重視當前跨領域研究發展的趨勢，並建議可從身體適能的次成分、競技與健身運動型態、認知功能與測驗的選擇、調節因子、以及更嚴謹的研究設計等方向作進一步探究。英文摘要：Considerable research has indicated that physical activity plays a significant role in delaying aged-related cognitive decline. Among these studies cognitive neuroscience is one of the most contemporary approaches used to exploring the relationships among physical activity, cognitive functionings, and human brain status. The purpose of this review is to compare and analyze studies that the applied of magnetic resonance imaging studies regarding on physical activity, aging of neurocognitive functioning, and brain structures. Results reveal that physical activity has beneficial effects on brain structure, and international research has been employed by examining multi-directional dimensional analysis, including cross-sectional, longitudinal, epidemiological and experimental approaches. Specifically, based on the variables and analysis approaches utilized, these studies can be categorized according to measurements of physical fitness, cardiovascular fitness, white and gray matter statuses, neuron connectivity, specific brain structure variations, and mediational analysis. To achieve international status, research in Taiwan need to focus on issues that address the sub-components of physical fitness, including sport and exercise modalities, cognitive functionings and their measurements, and the status of the moderators using, using more rigid research designs in future studies.起始頁-結束頁：83-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013011413篇名：大學生親職化現象、個體化程度與身心健康指標之相關研究並列篇名：Examining the Relationships of Parentification, Individuation, and Health among College Students in Taiwan作者：陳慧珊(Hui-Shan Chen);吳麗娟(Li-Chuan Wu)關鍵字：大學生;身心健康;個體化;親職化;birth order;college students;gender;health;individuation;parentification期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學生（1）不同性別、出生序之大學生親職化現象差異；（2）親職化現象與身心健康指標的關係；（3）親職化現象與個體化程度的關係。本研究採立意抽樣從全國公私立大專院校中，抽出287名大學生作為研究對象，以問卷調查法進行資料蒐集，所使用的研究工具包括「親職化量表」、「個體化量表」與「一般健康量表」。本研究主要發現如下：（1）不同性別之大學生的親職化現象有顯著差異，差異主要表現在「不公平性」上，且男性高於女性。不同出生序之大學生的親職化現象有顯著差異，差異主要表現在「功能性照顧」上，且老大高於老么。（2）大學生的親職化現象與身心健康之間的關係呈現出大學生若表現出較少的「功能性照顧」、較多的「情感性照顧」以及較多的「不公平性」，其身心狀況就越不健康。（3）大學生的親職化現象與個體化程度之間有二個關係組型存在。第一組的關係組型呈現出大學生有高度不公平感受時，雖外表獨立堅強、其內心仍感衝突矛盾與不平，亦即大學生有高度不公平感時，雖其外的行為在功能、態度和情緒上表現獨立自主，但心理與父母情感分離的衝突仍是大的。第二組關係組型主要呈現出當大學生擔任較多照顧家人的情緒責任時，則其個體化程度較低。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships among parentification, individuation, and general health among college students in Taiwan. A total of 287 students from colleges in Taiwan participated in this study. Participant completed a questionnaire composed of ”Parentification Scale”, ”Individuation Scale”, and ”General Health Scale”. The obtained data was analyzed by MANOVA, Pearson's product-moment correlation, and canonical analysis. The main findings were as follows: (1) There was a significant gender difference on parentification, with men scoring significantly higher on ”unfairness” than women. There was also a significant birth order difference on parentification, with oldest children scoring significantly higher than youngest children on ”instrumental care-giving”. (2) Canonical analysis revealed one significant correlation between canonical variate of parentification and health. Less instrumental care-giving, more emotional care-giving and more unfair treatments were associated with worse health. (3) Parentification was significantly correlated with individuation. We found two significant correlations between canonical variates of parentification and individuation. The first one showed that more unfairness was associated with more functional independence, more attitudinal independence, more emotional independence, but less confliction of independence. In the second one, more emotional caring for the family was associated with lower individuation. Finally, based on the results of this study, we discussed suggestions for future research and implications for counseling and parent education.起始頁-結束頁：103-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013012114篇名：不執著量表在台灣之中文化信、效度分析及其與心理健康之關係並列篇名：The Reliability and Validity of the the Chinese Version of the Nonattachment Scale: Reliability, Validity, and Its Relationship with Mental Health作者：趙舒禾(Shu-He Chao);陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen)關鍵字：不執著;中庸思維;主觀幸福感;自我決定;焦慮;壓力知覺;anxiety;nonattachment;perceived stress evaluation;subjective well-being;zhong-yong thinking style期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討以東方文化所發展出來之心理建構－不執著（nonattachment）；研究目的在於檢驗「不執著量表」（Sahdra, Shaver, & Brown, 2010）中文化之信、效度，並探討其與心理健康之關係。本研究採用調查法，研究對象為國軍部隊之官士兵313人。研究結果顯示：「不執著」與「自我決定」、「主觀幸福感」有顯著之正向關係，與「焦慮」和「壓力知覺」有負向關係。此外，本研究亦特別針對華人文化中具有重要地位的「中庸思維」與「不執著」進行概念區辨的考驗。以驗證性因素分析結果顯示：「不執著」能與「中庸思維」有所區辨，且「不執著」對各心理健康指標之預測力均優於「中庸思維」。整體研究結果顯示：「不執著量表」之中文化，獲得可接受之信、效度支持；而此一概念在諮商實務及心理健康上亦具有重要價值。研究者期望此一概念及其測量，能對未來相關研究及諮商實務有所貢獻。英文摘要：Recently, a scale was developed to measure the Buddhist notion of ”nonattachment,” which means ”release from mental fixations” (Sahdra, Shaver, & Brown, 2010, p. 116). We investigated the validity and reliability of the Chinese version of the Nonattachment Scale and explored its relationship with a variety of psychological constructs in Taiwan. We administered to a total of 313 military soldiers a package of scales. The results showed that the Chinese version of the Nonattachment Scale reached acceptable levels of reliability and validity. Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) showed that nonattachment was related but distinguishable from the Chinese construct of zhong-yong thinking style. Nonattachment was positively correlated with the majority of the positive constructs, including subjective well-being and self-determination, and was negatively correlated with negative constructs, including state-trait anxiety and perceived stress evaluation. The implications of how nonattachment and its measurement may contribute to counseling practice were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：121-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20121101.215篇名：圖形組體對消除「誘人細節效應」之成效研究並列篇名：The Effects of Using Graphic Organizers in Reducing Seductive-Details Effect作者：蔡暉展(Hui-Chan Tsai);吳慧敏(Huei-Min Wu)關鍵字：誘人細節效應;圖形組體;graphic organizers;seductive details effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：相關研究指出，當在文本中加入與教材主題相關，但叉與教材主要學習內容無關的趣味性內容時，會對學習產生負面影響，此即所謂「誘人細節效應」。另一方面，有關圓形組體的相關研究指出圓形組體對學習有正向影響，本研究旨在探討在文本（T）中加入「誘人細節（SD）」與「圓形組體（GO）」及其安排對學習成效、學習興趣與閱讀文本時間的影響。本研究採實驗研究法，將207位國小四年級學生隨機分派為六組，分別為：趣味組（SD+T）、趣味前置圓形組體組（SD+GO+T）、趣味後置圓形組體組（SD+T+GO）、基本前置圓形組體組（GO+T）、基本後置圖形組體組（T+GO）與控制組（Control），各組觀看（閱讀）完教材後，受試者依序進行學習興趣量表與學習成效後測的填答。研究結果，顯示：（1）加入誘人細節確實會降低學習成效。（2）在有誘人細節的情況下，前置圓形組體雖有助提昇學習成效，但並無法完全消除誘人細節效應。（3）加入誘人細節對學習興趣無顯著影響。（4）加入誘人細節會使學習者花費在閱讀正文文本的時間減少。英文摘要：Previous studies have reported that the inclusion of interesting details that are related but not directly relevant to the learning material (i.e. seductive details) was often at the expense of learning important or target material. The major purposes of the present study were to examine whether the use of graphic organizer (GO) would eliminate the seductive details effects and whether the inclusion of seductive details (SD) had a positive effect on students' learning interest and learning time. The participants were 207 fourth grade students. The target learning material was a passage (T) about insects. The participants were randomly assigned to one of the following conditions: (a) watched a video, and then read the target material (SD+T), (b) viewed a graphic organizer, and then watched a video followed by reading the target material (SD+GO+T), (c) watched a video, and then read the target material followed by viewing a graphic organizer (SD+T+GO), (d) viewed a graphic organizer followed by reading the target material (GO+T), (e) read the target material followed by viewing a graphic organizer (T+GO), or (f) only read the target material (Control). After reading the passage, students completed a learning interest scale and a quiz. The major findings are as follows: First, the present study supported the seductive details effect (i.e. including interesting but not directly relevant details hindered learners' reading comprehension). Second, the inclusion of graphic organizers mitigated but did not eliminate the seductive-details effect. Third, providing seductive details had no significant effect on learning interest. Finally, the inclusion of seductive details led to less time committed to read the target material.起始頁-結束頁：751-771資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系16篇名：網路成癮是一種心理疾病嗎？從實證與論述文獻的脈絡檢視並列篇名：Is Internet Addiction a Mental Disorder? A Review of Empirical and Conceptual Studies作者：許韶玲(Shao-Ling Hsu);施香如(Hsiang-Ju Shih)關鍵字：心理疾病;心靈避難;有問題的網路使用;強迫性網路使用;網路成癮;compulsive internet use;internet addiction;mental disorder;problematic internet use;psychic retreat期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要目的乃在透過文獻的回顧與整理，從實證與論述文獻的脈絡，梳理出學術研究看待網路成癮現象的視框轉變情形，結果發現，從病態的疾病觀到非病態的適應觀之視框轉變趨勢正在形成。一方面，疾病觀點的本質探究使得物質依賴之視框逐步挪移到目前受到最多研究支持的衝動控制疾患，另一方面，受到共病研究發現的影響，網路成癮是一個獨立存在疾病的這個視框成為尚待檢驗的命題；此外，非疾病觀點的其他主張也逐漸匯集成幾種不同論述，有問題的網路使用則成為繼網路成癮之後，另一個普遍被使用的辭彙，多向度與連續光譜的檢視角度亦在成形中。因此，我們建議未來研究應以開放的態度探究此一問題的各種形貌與特徵、並加入對網路使用者及網路使用脈絡情境的檢視。在臨床實務上，我們則建議從更開放的視角理解當事人、並從內在精神層次理解有問題的網路使用之心理意涵。英文摘要：This paper aimed to sort out how researchers' view of the internet addiction phenomenon evolved by providing an integrated review of the related empirical and conceptual studies. We found there was a transition from a pathological disease perspective to a non-pathological adaptation perspective. On the one hand, the view point about internet addition's essence of disease was moving from substance abuse to the impulsive control disorder which is supported by majority of researches; on the other hand, due to the researches on comorbidity, whether internet addiction is a solitary disorder or not needs to be further examined. Besides, other non-pathological assumptions were discussed in this paper. ”Problematic internet use” is becoming the popular term as multidimensional and continuum spectrum perspectives toward IAD were sprouted in related references. Therefore, we recommend that future researchers exam the internet addiction phenomenon with broader perspectives taking into account the users and using conditions to figure out its various appearances and characteristics. For clinical practice, we recommend counselors to understand clients with an open mind and to explore their meaning of internet use at the inner psychological level.起始頁-結束頁：773-792資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系17篇名：以多層面Rasch分析的角度來評估標準設定之變異性並列篇名：Evaluating the Variability in Standard Setting Using Many Faceted Rasch Model作者：謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh)關鍵字：多層面Rasch;標準設定;Yes/No Angoff;many facet Rasch;standard setting;Yes/No Angoff期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：執行標準設定時，研究者常需檢視標準設定成員之間的變異性。研究者希望標準設定成員在設定切斷分數時，彼此之間對於決斷分數的判斷能夠達到一致性，也就是成員之間的變異性越小越好。此外，在舉行標準設定時，成員之間為了要能夠達到共識，必須經過好幾輪的討論。因此，如何提供有用的訊息回饋，供標準設定成員參考，以節省成員的討論時間，也是研究的重點。在本文中，將多層面Rasch分析應用於標準設定上，並使用Yes／No Angoff的方法來進行操作，研究發現透過多層面Rasch之分析，除了能檢視標準設定成員之間的變異性，也可提供有用的訊息供標準設定成員參考。除此之外，對於標準設定成員自身內的衝突決定亦能提供有效率的檢視。英文摘要：When conducting the standard setting, the variability of judgments between standard setting panelists is always an issue needed to be addressed. The researcher has to examine whether the variability between panelists is under the accepted range. In addition, standard setting is a time-consuming process. It usually takes several rounds to discuss the judgments. How to provide the useful feedback for panelists to review their judgments is crucial. In this study, the many facet Rasch model was applied on the Yes/No Angoff standard setting procedure. The result shows that the many facet Rasch model has advantages on examining the variability between panelists. It also provides useful feedback to review the internal conflict decisions within each panelist.起始頁-結束頁：793-811資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系18篇名：醫學生臨床倫理經驗之分析：結構式「關鍵事件報告」之應用並列篇名：Analysis of Medical Students' Ethical Experience in Their Clerkship: The Application of Structured Critical Incident Report作者：李錦虹(Gin-Hong Lee);王志嘉(Chih-Chia Wang);鄒國英(Kuo-Inn Tsou);邱浩彰(Hou-Chang Chiu);林明德(Ming-Teh Lin)關鍵字：倫理困境;臨床實習;關鍵事件報告;醫學生;clinical clerkship;critical incident report;ethical dilemma;medical student期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：醫學生在實習過程中的倫理經驗，常常成為教師探討與教學的主要內容。過去，醫學教育者常常讓學生以自由書寫的作業方式整理其實習經驗，沒有問固定的格式要求。本研究首度嘗試以「關鍵事件報告」的形式，深入分析學生面對臨床倫理問題時的各種認知與心理反應。研究參與者：臺灣北部某大學醫學系六年級修習必修科目「醫學倫理」學生26位，其中男生17位，女生9位。工具：Griffin（2003）所設計的「關鍵事件報告」，其中包含「事件」、「情緒」、「原因」、「分類」、「一般意涵」、「專業標準」、「個人立場」、「行動」八個結構式欄位。研究過程：修習醫學倫理課程的某醫學院六年級學生，依教師要求，用「關鍵事件報告」的格式書寫五年級實習期間一件印象深刻的倫理事件， 徵求同意後納為本研究之分析對象。資料分析: 專家先為每個事件列出相關的倫理原則，再比較研究者與學生在倫理原則歸類土的一致性，並進行有關情緒、信念及行動等作業內容的質性分析。結果：（1）醫學生與專家在倫理原則歸類上的一致性並不高，（2）倫理事件及衝突大多與「不傷害」、「尊重自主」倫理原則有關；（3）學生對倫理事件的信念為以病人為本位、醫師應其備專業素養、醫師應重視病人身心的全人照護；（4）學生常見的情緒包括：對病患的困惑為難與同情不捨之感受；對醫師的生氣、不認同、及失望感受；（5）學生面對倫理問題的行動意向主要是「溝通」。結論：醫學生的臨床倫理經驗包含內容豐富的認知、個人信念、情緒及行動意向。結構式的「關鍵事件報告」有助於學生完整的呈現這些經驗，增進教師對於學生臨床倫理經驗的理解，提升臨床倫理教師的教學品質。英文摘要：Background: In the past, teachers used to ask medical students to reflect on their clinical experience through free-form writing. In this study, a structured form called ”Critical Incident Report” was implemented. Through systematic and multi-dimensional writing, better understanding of students' psychological and cognitive reactions toward clinical ethical problems could be expected.Methods: Twenty-six medical school students who were taking the compulsory course ”Medical Ethics” participated in the current study. Seventeen of them were males and 9 of them were females. Participants were asked to each complete a Critical Incident Report (CIR) (Griffin, 2003) on an ethically sensitive event they had found unforgettable during their practicum in their 5th year of medical school. The CIR contained eight columns: what, emotions, why, classification, general meaning, professional standards, position, and actions. The data obtained from the CIR written by these 26 students with consent was subjected to a qualitative analysis. Both the experts' and the students' classification of the events on their CIRs were compared to ethical principles listed by medical ethics experts according to each student's event report.Results: 1. There was a significant difference between the medical students and the experts in the ethical principles they categorized the events into. 2. The most remarkable ethically sensitive events and conflicts experienced by the students were most frequently related to ”non-maleficence” and ”autonomy”. 3. Beliefs that students held toward ethical\y sensitive events included patient-centered practice, professionalism, and holistic health care. 4. Students' emotions about the events included confusion and sympathy toward patients, and negative feelings such as anger, disapproval or disappointment toward clinical physicians. 5. When faced with ethical dilemmas, students usual\y adopted ”communication” as the primary strategy.Conclusion: Medical students' experience with medical ethics in the clinical setting involved a broad range of issues including cognition, personal beliefs, emotions, and intentional actions. The CIR helped students record and present these experiences, which could also serve as a reference for future improvement of medical ethics education and research.起始頁-結束頁：812-828資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系19篇名：大學生同性友誼品質之內涵驗證及性別差異分析並列篇名：The Confirmation of the Connotation of Same-Sex Friendship Quality and Analysis of the Gender Differences among University Students作者：趙梅如(Mei-Ru Chao);王世億(Shyh-Yih Wang)關鍵字：友誼品質;同性友誼;性別差異;friendship quality;gender difference;same-sex friendship期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：友誼是社會關係中很受重視的人際關係。若依據Erikson的觀點，個體生命的發展任務直到青年期，真正進入與人建立關係的「親密對疏離」，就目前的年齡而言，大學生正是這個時期的發展個體。如果友誼在個體的生命實現中如此重要，那麼，在台灣地區的大學生會有怎樣的友誼品質？友誼有性別差異嗎？大部分的研究顯示女生的社會情感興趣高於男生，重視彼此的親密分享與感受；男生則著重於社會工具性，對於從事具體活動較為活躍。本研究旨在探討同性友誼品質之內涵驗證及性別差異分析，並以台灣地區463位大學生為研究對象。本研究結果發現如下：1.同性友誼品質之內涵為交心、義氣、默契、扶持；2.除了義氣顯現無差異外，其餘交心、默契與扶持之同性友誼品質，女生皆高於男生；3.對於同性友誼品質之重視，男生依序為交心、扶持、義氣、默契，女生依序為扶持、交心、義氣、默契；不論男生或女生，交心與扶持皆為最被重視的同性友誼品質，而默契皆為四項同性友誼品質中之最後者。從研究結果發現台灣地區大學生的同性友誼與國外的發現有著相異的趣味。英文摘要：Friendship is the most respectful relationship among social relations. According to Erikson's conceptual theory, an individual's life mission develops until the adolescent age. University students are at the stage of constructing the relationships among people's ”intimacy vs. isolation”. If friendships are such important aspects of one's life, what are the friendship qualities for Taiwanese university students? Are there gender differences in friendships? Most of the studies have shown that girls are interested in the social situations and respect each other's intimate sharing and feelings more than boys and; boys focus more on social tools and are more actively engaged in specific activities. The goal of this study is to confirm the connotation of same-sex friendship quality and analyze gender differences based on 463 university students in Taiwan. The results indicated: (1) The connotation of same-sex friendship quality includes genuineness, personal loyalty, tacit understanding, and support. (2) Except personal loyalty, female students show higher agreement on the connotation of the same-sex friendship quality, such as genuineness, tacit understanding, and support, than male students. (3) In terms of the importance of these same-sex friendship qualities, for male students, the order is as follows: genuineness, support, personal loyalty, and tacit understanding. For female students, the order is support, genuineness, personal loyalty, and tacit understanding. Across both genders, genuineness and support are the most emphasized same-sex friendship qualities, and tacit understanding is the least emphasized one among the four same-sex friendship qualities. Based on the research results, Taiwanese university students' same-sex friendship values have interesting differences compared with studies from other countries.起始頁-結束頁：829-852資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系20篇名：融入基督信仰的靈性諮商課程暨成果評估並列篇名：Teaching a Course on Integrating Spirituality into Counseling作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);程玲玲(Lin-Lin Cheng);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan);莊雅婷(Ya-Ting Juang)關鍵字：基督徒諮商員;靈性諮商課程;Christian counselor;course on integrating spirituality into counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的為對基督徒諮商員設計一個融入靈性於諮商的課程，並瞭解參與成員對此課程的反應。共有27名基督徒諮商員參與本課程，其中男性3人，女性24人。本研究所建構的課程目標包括：增加諮商員對靈性自我發展的覺察、增加諮商員對於靈性議題的知能、及增加諮商在諮商中與案主探討靈性議題及介入處理的知能。根據課程目標共分為11個主題，39小時進行。成員反應的資料來源包括每次課程及全部課程結束後的回饋單，以及三階段共12個焦點團體的訪談。研究結果顯示成員在回饋單上對各主題的評定都是正向的，焦點團體的結果也發現成員有多樣性的收穫，包括開放對話、獲得新刺激與開眼界、經驗相互印證、問題帶出思考與澄清、形成共識、更加整合、將靈性融入實務工作。成員提出對於課程的建議，包括增加討論時間、增加真體的操作與技巧方法、案例討論與演練等文末提出建議作為未來相似課程設計與研究的參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to introduce a course integrating spirituality into counseling for Christian counselors and to explore their feedback of the course. A total of 27 Christian counselors, 3 males and 24 females, participated in the study. The course included three goals which were to enhance the awareness of spiritual development, to increase the knowledge of spiritual issues, and to enhance the intervention skills of integrating spiritual issues into counseling. In order to reach the goals, 11 themes were included in the 39-hour course. To explore the reactions of the participants toward the course, feedback sheets were designed and distributed at the end of each session. Twelve focused groups were also conducted at three different time points. Positive reactions were indicated from the feedback sheets and focused groups. Participants were benefited from having open dialogues, exchanging diverse perspectives, validating each other's point of view, generating and clarifying new thoughts, obtaining consensus, and integrating spirituality into counseling. Suggestions were made by participants to include more discussions, concrete implementation and skill training, case discussions, and roleplays. Recommendations for future course design and research were also proposed.起始頁-結束頁：853-874資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系01篇名：國小學校領導動力及其學校效能的差異分析並列篇名：A Study of School Leadership Dynamics and Their Differences on School Effectiveness in Elementary Schools作者：林明地(Ming-Dih Lin);連俊智(Chun-Chih Lian)關鍵字：校長轉型領導;教師自我管理;學校效能;學校領導社群;學校領導動力;principals’ transformational leadership;teachers' selfmanagement;school effectiveness;leadership community of school;leadership dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要探討國小學校領導動力及其學校效能的差異情形，其中，學校領導動力為校長轉型領導、教師自我管理，以及學校領導社群等變項之組合。以臺灣地區國民小學為母群，抽樣調查45所樣本學校，每所學校均抽取具代表性的樣本，分析其在校長轉型領導、教師自我管理及學校領導社群的組合情形，以及不同領導動力學校之學校效能的差異情形。本研究發現，依學校領導動力各面向之特性，學校可被群集劃分為動態整合學校、行政垂直學校、教師水平學校，以及靜態固著學校等四種類型。其次，動態整合及教師水平二類學校所呈現的學校效能較高，顯著高於行政垂直學校與靜態固著學校的效能。最後，學校領導動力的概念有助於整合校長轉型領導、教師自我管理及學校領導社群所形成的個人與團體領導動力，更重要的是，它明確地指出校長領導努力的重心最好是透過校長轉型領導營造優質的學校領導社群，進而提升教師自我管理能力。英文摘要：The purpose of this study were is to analyze the school leadership dynamics and differences they produce in terms of the effectiveness of elementary schools. The school leadership dynamics is are a variable that combines the scores of principals’ transformational leadership, teachers’ self-management and the leadership community at the school. This study chose 45 sample elementary schools in Taiwan. A representative sample,including teachers and administrators, was selected from each school, to answer a questionnaire that consisted of 14 dimensions. The study utilized Cluster Analysis to classify the 45 schools based on their leadership dynamics, and it was found that the schools could be divided into four types: the Dynamic Integrated School, the Administrative Vertical School, the Teacher Horizontal School and the Static Inertia School. Significant differences were found among the four types of schools in terms of school effectiveness. The school effectiveness in the Dynamic Integrated School and the Teacher Horizontal School were higher than the Administrative Vertical School and the Static Inertia School. Finally, the concept of leadership dynamics is helpful to integrate principals’ transformational leadership, teachers’ self-management and the leadership community at the school. Most importantly, it indicates specifically that the principal leadership should focus on building the leadership community at the school and on helping to increase teachers’ self-management abilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820131259040012篇名：從八年研究實驗課程經驗反思高中課程改革的挑戰並列篇名：Challenges of the High School Curriculum Reform: Reflections from the Experimental Curriculum Experience of the Eight-Year Study作者：宋明娟(Min-Chuan Sung);甄曉蘭(Hsiao-Lan Sharon Chen)關鍵字：高中課程;八年研究;課程改革;課程實驗;high school curriculum;the Eight-Year Study;curriculum reform;curriculum experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:4期出版年：2013中文摘要：高中課程改革的問題牽涉多端，本文旨在藉由美國二十世紀30至40年代之著名教育實驗「八年研究」中的課程議題，反思高中課程改革所面臨的挑戰。論述架構主要分為四個層面，首先回顧八年研究實驗課程的歷史意義與評價，其次討論八年研究推動過程中所涉入的課程實務議題；繼之據以提出八年研究實驗課程經驗的批判反思，來釐清課程改革之目的、定位、意義與價值的重要；最後則延伸探討其對高中課程改革的啟示，藉之，希冀能為臺灣高中課程改革議題，提供不同的思維面向，以促進更審慎、更周延的高中課程改革決策。英文摘要：High school curriculum reform involves many complicated issues. This study aims to discuss the challenges of high school curriculum reform by addressing the curriculum issues reflected in the Eight-Year Study, the well-known educational experiment conducted in the United States from 1930s to 1940s. Firstly, the authors review the historical significance of the experimental curriculum and the recommendations rendered by the Progressive Education Association at the end of the experiment. Then, this study discusses the issues involved in the implementation of the experimental curriculum in the Eight-Year Study. Additionally, the authors offer some critical reflections to rethink the curriculum experiment experience of the Eight-Year Study. Finally, this study addresses the implications of the issues and recommendations for the current high school curriculum reform in Taiwan. It is hoped that through the review of the historical curriculum events, this paper can provide different perspectives for more thoughtful deliberation in the policy making of the current high school curriculum reform.起始頁-結束頁：47-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820131259040023篇名：The Doctrine of the Unity of the Virtues and its Implications for Character Education並列篇名：德行一體說對於品格教育的啟示作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：character education;the ”bag of virtues” approach;the unity of the virtues;品格教育;「美德袋」取徑;德行一體期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:4期出版年：2013中文摘要：A doubt often cast on the common practice of defining character education in terms of the inculcation of virtues is that it is simply a duplication of the ”bag of virtues” approach, as derogatorily dubbed by L. Kohlberg. To dispel this misgiving, it is imperative to expound the relationship between the virtues, which was addressed in the controversial doctrine of the unity of the virtues in the past. After the author argue for a more plausible interpretation of it, some implications for character education are drawn in this study. Firstly, since the integration of the virtues is integral to the inculcation of virtues, it is problematic to teach the virtues in a compartmentalized way. Instead, it is necessary to learn how to confront a complex moral situation where more than one moral requirement is (are) demanded of the moral agent. Secondly, it is made explicit that the cultivation of moral dispositions and the learning of (evaluative) knowledge requisite for the various virtues are the two major tasks of the inculcation of virtues. Lastly, the unity thesis backs up the idea of the ”varieties of moral personality,” i.e. virtuous people are actually of different sorts, and hence the important topic of the individualization of moral character is brought to the fore.英文摘要：對於以「德行教學」界定品格教育的常見質疑是：品格教育不過是被L. Kohlberg戲稱為「美德袋取徑」的翻版而已。為了消除這項疑慮，必須闡明各德 行之間的關係。此論題過去是在具爭議性的「德行一體說」中被探討的。在為一種可信度較高的德行一體說辯護後，筆者歸結出該學說對於當前品格教育的重要啟示，包括：一、既然德行之間的整合是德行教學中必不可少的重要環節，則以分隔化的方式來教導各個德行是有問題的，尚須教導學生處理道德要求多於一種的複雜的道德情境；二、道德氣質的培養以及各德行所需的（評價性）知識的學習，乃是德行涵養的兩個主要任務；最後，「道德人格的多樣化」獲得該學說的支持，亦即，有德的人實際上是各具特色、多樣類型的，「道德品格的個殊化」這項重要議題也因而獲得彰顯。起始頁-結束頁：81-112資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820131259040034篇名：大學治理轉型與政府角色：荷蘭高等教育系統之個案研究並列篇名：The Transformation of University Governance and the Role of Government: A Case Study on the Dutch Higher Education System作者：謝卓君(Chuo-Chun Hsieh)關鍵字：大學治理;教育政策;歐洲高等教育;university governance;education policy;European higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:4期出版年：2013中文摘要：受到全球化和區域化的影響，許多國家高等教育系統的治理結構出現明顯的改變，臺灣也不例外。鑑於在大學治理結構轉型的過程中，我國面臨不少問題，本文從政策聚合的觀點，透過個案研究法，探究在國際上表現優異的荷蘭高等教育系統進行大學治理轉型的過程，旨在透過國外成功經驗以對我國發展提供借鏡。本文採公共政策取徑，分析荷蘭從1980到2005年之間高等教育政策改革的過程，以及國家政府在此過程中扮演的角色。研究結果將荷蘭高等教育治理轉型的經驗分成三個階段，並發現在訴求市場化機制和遠端操控的治理轉型過程中，荷蘭政府並沒有於政策決策過程中缺席，反倒靈活地運用不同治理策略，有效地提升大學品質。文章最後將依據研究發現，對投身大學治理的國家政府和學者提供相關建議。英文摘要：Many national higher education systems have undergone substantial shifts in their structures of governance in recent decades, because of the influence of globalization and regionalization. Taiwan is no exception: It has encountered problems in its higher education system in the process of transforming university governance. This article aims to provide suggestions for dealing to deal with with this difficulty, by applying the perspective of policy convergence and Also, the suggestions are based on an empirical study of a successful national case, the Netherlands. By examining public policies, this study analyzed the Dutch developments in higher education governance and the changing role government from 1980 to 2005. The process of the governance shift was divided into three stages. Even with the use of market mechanisms and a steering from a distance strategy are advocated, the evidence shows that the Dutch government continued to govern in the years under investigation, flexibly employing a variety of governance strategies. Finally, this paper offers suggestions, based on the findings, for the government and scholars involved in university governance.起始頁-結束頁：113-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820131259040045篇名：善的至高性與脆弱性：Murdoch與Nussbaum的立場及其德育蘊義並列篇名：Sovereignty and Fragility of Goodness: A Study of the Ethical Perspectives and Implications of Moral Education as Postulated by Murdoch and Nussbaum作者：王俊斌(Chun-Ping Wang)關鍵字：至高性;脆弱性;想像;道德教育;觀照;sovereignty;fragility;imagination;moral education;attention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:3期出版年：2013中文摘要：面對當前倫理困境與道德教育問題，傳統道德哲學總不免會獨斷地認定「善」只能有一種普世定義，而激進後現代卻是不給「善」的觀點任何討論的餘地，兩者顯然同樣忽略有關「善自身」的超越性特質，以及人之所以能覺察「善」的心理哲學問題。有鑑於此，本文將分析兩種「善」的觀點及其道德教學方法之具體主張。就前者而言，英國著名文學家暨哲學家Murdoch無疑是柏拉圖主義的重要代表人物，她認為「善」由於擁有諸如「完美」的「超越性」特質，故具備「至高性」，也唯有藉由「美學觀照」方法才能掌握「完美善」之特質。就後者而言，Nussbaum做為一個新亞里斯多德主義者，她則是藉由希臘悲劇與 哲學中的道德運氣問題來論證「善」的「脆弱性」特質，故應強化「敘事想像」能力以體現「具同情心之公民素養」。就倫理觀比較而言，若將「善的至高性」視為一種堅定的道德情操，這當然是一種擇善固執的態度，而將對「善的脆弱性」看成「透過實踐來追求幸福人生」之倫理行動，這個行動不只是獨善其身，更是具有促進社會正義之積極性。本文認為，兩種「善」的觀點看似矛盾，實則應為一種互補或共存之關係，這種整全的倫理觀點應可對當代倫理問題提供更妥適的實踐基礎。英文摘要：With regard to contemporary ethical plights and the possibility of problems in moral education, the most serious issue within traditional moral philosophy is its dogmatic universal idea of ”goodness.” In contrast to this extreme, the predicament of radical postmodern ethics is its naive romantic-relative idea of ”goodness,” which is itself another extreme. Both of the ideas of ”goodness” neglect the transcendent character of ”goodness in and of itself” and the philosophical and psychological issue of ”awareness of goodness.” Unlike these two extreme points of orientation, this article analyzes two perspectives on what ”goodness” is and how it is embodied in moral education methods. The first perspective analyzed is that of Iris Murdoch, a British litterateur, philosopher, and scholar of Platonism. Murdoch believes ”sovereign good” is ”transcendent” and can be embodied through her moral method of ”aesthetical attention.” Martha Nussbaum, a scholar of neo-Aristotelian philosophy, espouses a second viewpoint. She argues that dilemmas of moral luck as illustrated in Greek tragedy demonstrate ”the fragility of goodness,” and emphasizes (Does the verb ”emphasizes” belong with ”Nussbaum” as in ”she emphasizes” OR is the author trying to say ”the dilemmas of moral luck... demonstrate..., and emphasize...”) the importance of ”cultivating compassionate citizenship” as addressed by her moral method of ”narrative imagination.” From these two different moral viewpoints, the pursuit of ”sovereign good” is likened to going on a pilgrimage, meaning that people should choose what is good and hold fast to it. On the other hand, recognizing ”the fragility of goodness” and taking it as an foundation for action in the pursuit of happiness this is not an individual moral action, but an action for fostering social justice. The researcher suggests that, if we could agree that the relationship between these two ideas of goodness is not mutually absolute or contradictory, and that the two notions can be complementary and co-exist, then this kind of holistic moral perspective would offer practical and applicable wisdom for solving contemporary ethical issues. The researcher suggests that these two ideas of goodness are not contradictory, but can be integrated. Such holistic moral perspective would offer practical and applicable wisdom for solving contemporary ethical issues.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130959030016篇名：Can an Individual Be Held Responsible for His/Her Own Personal (Moral) Character: How Moral Luck Challenges the Notion that Individuals Are Responsible for Their Own (Moral) Character並列篇名：可要求個人為品格負責嗎？道德運氣對於個體品格責任的挑戰作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：character development;responsibility for character;moral luck;品格建構;品格責任;道德運氣期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:3期出版年：2013中文摘要：It has long been an unwritten rule that individuals are responsible for the development of their personal moral character. However, the way in which people typically develop moral character is often the result of habits and moral upbringing, which are imposed before individuals start to shape their moral character by conscious effort. If this is the case, an individual should not be held completely responsible for his or her own moral character. This paper draws on the idea of “moral luck” to designate non-voluntary variables such as one’s background, circumstances, upbringing, temperament, and other similar factors, which one cannot control but which can have substantial influence on the formation of moral character. Moral luck and its challenge to the notion that one must always be responsible for his or her own moral character helps to clarify the degree to which one should be held responsible for his or her own moral character. This paper concludes that the formation of moral character is not entirely under the control of an individual. Instead, it can be impacted by a wide variety of conditions; the formation of one’s character cannot be solely accomplished by the nature of one’s individual actions, but is rather a collaborative process. Lastly, this paper specifies how one can take responsibility for his or her own character based on an Aristotelian developmental conception of voluntariness and personal responsibility.英文摘要：道德品格的建構向來被視為個體的責任，但在主體有意識地選擇成為什麼樣子的人以前，其道德品格似已受習慣養成、道德教養的影響，而大致成形。就此而言，我們如何能夠主張個體應為自身的道德品格負責？究竟在何種程度上，個體可為自身的道德品格承擔責任？本文即以「道德運氣」這個概念來指稱諸如外在環境、道德教養、個人稟賦等對道德品格的型塑具有實質影響力，但卻屬於個人自主控制能力以外的因素。道德運氣對於「品格建構之個體責任」的挑戰，當有助於釐清個體可為自身的道德品格負責的真正意涵與限度。明確而言，品格的建構既非為主體所能全然掌控，也非絲毫不受任何條件所囿限；品格建構本質上就是一種協同合作的事業，無法由主體單獨完成。最後，透過Aristotle關於自主性與責任的發展性觀點，可明確說明個體是如何擔負起品格建構的責任。起始頁-結束頁：35-64資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130959030027篇名：臺灣家長對高等教育服務品質特性歸類與評價之研究並列篇名：How Parents in Taiwan Evaluate and Classify Higher Education's Quality and Other Characteristics作者：湯堯(Yao Tang);蘇建洲(Chien-Chou Su)關鍵字：Kano二維品質模式;高等教育服務品質;重要度—滿意度分析模式;Kano's two-dimensional quality model;quality of higher education service;importance-satisfaction analysis model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的主要在於評估臺灣家長對於高等教育服務品質之意見，以提供大學行政決策之參考依據。本研究文獻基礎是透過國內外期刊等，進而探討高等教育服務議題，並分別整理出課程教學、學習支援與職涯輔導等品質構面，以及其所屬要素題項，做為高等教育服務品質評估量表之建構基礎。本研究之方法依據為透過焦點團體與驗證性因素分析（confirmatory factor analysis, CFA）檢驗量表信效度，其次透過857位家長的意見蒐集，使用Kano二維品質模式與其改良模式結合重要性—滿意度模式，探討我國家長對於高等教育服務品質特性之歸類與評價。本研究發現，學校可參考家長意見，提升課堂內外的課程教學規劃與品質管控、加強就業升學輔導與其成效檢核調整，以及審慎評估學生經濟援助政策與學生事務投資效益。最後，本研究依據研究發現提出相關之建議，俾利於評估與提升高等教育服務品質之參考依據。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to assess the opinions that parents have of higher education in Taiwan, and further help universities in Taiwan make pertinent administrative changes. This study collected data and analyzed findings from previous studies on higher education; subsequently, the results of the analysis generated a scalogram to illustrate overall quality of institutions of higher education in Taiwan. Three major dimensions of quality were identified: curriculum and teaching, learning support and career counseling, each of which included sub-categories. The research method adopted in this study was to test the validity and reliability of the scalogram by organizing focus groups and performing confirmatory factor analysis. The second step involved interviewing 857 parents to evaluate how they perceived higher education, using Kano's two-dimensional quality model and the importance-satisfaction analysis model. The analysis of the parents' opinions revealed that universities should enhance their programs and quality control for extracurricular activities, (students') coursework as well as the teaching skills of faculty members; reinforce, evaluate, and adjust career counseling vis-a-vis employment and studies; and assess financial assistance policies for students and investment returns on student affairs. Lastly, this study offers suggestions for assessing and enhancing the quality of higher education in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：65-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130959030038篇名：足量運動及運動時間點對高中生體適能、創造思考能力與數學學科成就之影響並列篇名：The Effect of the Sufficiency and Timing of Physical Exercise on High School Students’ Physical Fitness, Creative Thinking, and Mathematics Achievement作者：吳品錞(Pin-Chun Wu);楊雅婷(Ya-Ting Carolyn Yang);楊宜青(Yi-Ching Yang)關鍵字：足量運動;運動時間點;體適能;創造思考能力;數學學科成就;sufficient exercise;timing of physical exercise;physical fitness;creative thinking;mathematics achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的在探討足量運動與運動時間點對高中生體適能、創造力思考能力及數學學科成就之影響，採前後測準實驗設計，以抽取臺北市都會型女子高中三個高一班級，共113位學生為樣本，進行三種教學策略之評估—傳統體育課組（對照組）、足量運動且非數學課前運動組（實驗組一）和足量運動且數學課前運動組（實驗組二），所蒐集的資料以單因子共變數分析及多變量變異數分析考驗三組在各向度總分與分向度分數之異同。研究結果顯示：一、在體適能方面，兩組實驗組總分均高於對照組，除柔軟度分向度外，兩組實驗組的肌耐力、瞬發力及心肺耐力分向度皆高於對照組。二、在創造思考能力方面，實驗組二總分優於實驗組一與對照組，兩實驗組在流暢力、標題力、精密力及開放力分向度皆優於對照組；實驗組二在獨創力及創造優異潛能分向度均優於實驗組一與對照組。三、在數學學科成就方面，實驗組二在低認知層次的知識及理解分向度高於實驗組一與對照組；三組在高認知層次（分析及綜合分向度）無顯著差異。本研究根據研究結果進行討論，並提出未來教育政策擬定與實施和相關研究之建議。英文摘要：This paper explores the impact of the sufficiency and timing of physical exercise on physical fitness, creative thinking, and mathematics achievement. A pretest-posttest quasi-experimental design involved 113 tenth grade students from three senior high school classes in the Taipei metropolitan area to investigate the effects of three instructional strategies-traditional physical education (comparison group), sufficient exercise earlier in the day (experimental group 1), and sufficient exercise immediately before mathematics class (experimental group 2). The collected data were analyzed by ANCOVA and MANCOVA to evaluate any differences among total and sub-scale scores for the three research groups. Our findings demonstrate: (1) Total physical fitness scores were higher for both experimental groups than for the comparison group. Both experimental groups’ subscales scores for muscular endurance, power, and cardiorespiratory endurance outperformed those of the comparison group. (2) Total creative thinking scores for experimental group 2 were higher than those of experimental group 1 and the comparison group. Both experimental groups’ subscale scores for fluency, abstractness of titles, elaboration and resistance to premature closure were higher than those of the comparison group. (3) Math achievement scores, including the lower level cognitive domain subscales of knowledge and comprehension, were higher for experimental group 2 than experimental group 1 and the comparison group. However, no differences were found among the three groups for higher level cognitive domain subscales, including analysis and synthesis. Based these findings, suggestions for further implementation of educational policies and research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：101-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130959030049篇名：美國哥倫比亞大學師範學院中國學生博士論文分析（1914-1929）並列篇名：An Analysis of Doctoral Dissertations from Chinese Students at Teachers College, Columbia University (1914-1929)作者：劉蔚之(Wei-Chih Liou)關鍵字：哥倫比亞大學師範學院;教育史;教育學者;Teachers College (Columbia University);history of education;educational researcher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究由中國近代教育學發展史角度，以影響中國教育學最深遠的美國哥大師院15篇中國學生博士論文與檔案為史料，進行歷史探究。結果發現：一、教育哲史類出現時間早、數量偏少，均以中國為主題，且對美國實用主義教育哲學探討有限；教育心理學類數量最多，均以Thorndike學派研究典範為依歸，主要成果在心理與教育測驗等方法與工具層面；教育行政類多運用調查與統計法，重視移植與採借。二、指導教授多為各領域發展史的關鍵人物，以Strayer指導三篇論文居冠，但師承淵源、研究主題、方法與典範均以Thorndike學派影響最大。三、教育文化發展視野上，各領域論文共同呈現樂觀天真的「學習－移植」時代色彩。本研究透過關鍵史料分析，所得研究成果與目前多數研究背後「凡由哥大師院學成返國者，均深受杜威影響」基本假定有根本差異，實修正及補充中國近代教育學發展史另一重要面向。英文摘要：This article analyzes 15 doctoral dissertations by Chinese students in the subfields of educational theory, educational psychology and educational administration from the year 1914 to 1929 at Teachers College, Columbia University. The results showed that dissertations in Chinese educational history and philosophy were the first topics to have appeared. However, they were relatively few in number, and all of them focused on China, with limited degrees of examination into educational pragmatism in the United States. Dissertations in educational psychology were the most numerous, with strong influences from Thorndike's Paradigm. The results mainly focused on the methodologies and tools for psychological and educational tests. Dissertations in educational administration mainly used quantitative and survey research methods, with a strong focus on direct applications in China. Advisers, such as Thorndike and Strayer, were the most important figures in the respective areas. The influences from Thorndike were particularly strong. The dissertations in this period of time were full of the optimistic and naive Zeitgeist of the 1920's. The outcome of this study is critical in terms of the impact of American education on the history of Chinese modern education. It provides a very contrary historical picture from the popular assumption of many related studies which state that Chinese students returning back from Teachers College must have been deeply influenced by John Dewey.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201306590200110篇名：現代康德能無憾否？－德國大學教師之人事改革評析並列篇名：What Would I. Kant Think? -Recent Personnel Reforms at German Universities作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：人事制度;教育改革;德國大學;personnel system;educational reform;German university期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:2期出版年：2013中文摘要：德國大學教師人事制度遲至21世紀初，才有較大幅度的改革。本文以文件分析法探究此波改革之相關法制與政策，首先探究大學教師之人事結構，而後評析改革的內容與問題。由於德國大學中非教授之學術人員比例超過八成，因而使得學術後進間的競爭態勢加劇，以「私聘講師」的處境為例，其邁向教授職位的攀登過程猶如天路歷程。而講座教授制度源自中世紀時期行會組織，傳統的「講座教授大學」在1960年代已轉移為「組群大學」。再則，教授之徵聘須遵守「留校任教禁止」，且過去必須通過「教授備選資格」。20世紀末，大學引進有期限的「初級教授」，且教授的薪俸由「照顧原則」漸轉向「續效原則」，由W制薪資取代C制薪資。但前述改革仍充滿險阻，包含傳統組織文化難以撼動、「成本中立」下經費拮据、留校任教禁止原則鬆動而有近親繁殖疑慮、績效基準難確立等。英文摘要：ide-scale reform of the faculty system used at German universities only began during the 21st century. This paper used document analysis to investigate these reform policies, beginning with the system used for appointing professors. Over 80 percent of the academic personnel at German universities are non-professor staff, giving rise to intense competition between promising young academics. Special attention is given to the difficulties faced by a ”private lecturer” climbing the academic ladder. Also included is a discussion on how the professorial chair system developed out of medieval guilds, and how during the 1960s the universities controlled by tenured faculty were transformed into group universities. This paper also discussed the ban on universities from offering teaching positions to its former students, as well as the previous system of habilitation. Also covered was the introduction of short-term junior professorships during the latter part of the 20th century, as well as the gradual introduction of a performance-based pay scale. This paper concluded with a discussion of the problems related to these reforms, including organizational inertia, budgetary shortfalls in a cost-neutral situation, concerned about inbreeding as a result of the relaxing of the regulations preventing the hiring of former students as teaching staff, and the difficulty in evaluating performance.起始頁-結束頁：49-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201306590200201篇名：課室專注力量表之建構並列篇名：The Development of the Concentration Questionnaire作者：楊雅婷(Ya-Ting Carolyn Yang);陳奕樺(I-Hua Chen)關鍵字：課室專注力量表;驗證性因素分析;測量恆等性;concentration questionnaire;confirmatory analysis;measurement invariance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以Knudsen（2007）注意力功能成分模型為理論架構，研究目的在於：（1）建構刺激過濾、感官控制、競爭選擇與工作記憶之四因素課室專注力量表；（2）以此量表比較高中與高職學生課室專注力的差異。本量表採非隨機分層立意抽樣，依序經過探索性（140名高中學生）、驗證性因素分析（918名高中學生）與測量恆等性（918名高中與967名高職學生）等分析方式。研究結果顯示：（1）本量表整體測量模型與實徵資料具理想適配，量表內部信、效度良好，且量表在日間精神狀態與一般情境下注意力功能的外部效度證據上亦獲得支持。在測量恆等性的結果方面，高中與高職學生在課室專注力量表上具有測量恆等性；（2）在高中與高職學生課室專注力差異的分析中，高中生在課室專注力的四個因素皆達理想程度，而高職學生僅在刺激過濾與感官控制達理想，且高中生在四個因素的平均得分均高於高職學生。本研究依據結果，提出四點未來研究的建議。英文摘要：The aims of this study were to develop a concentration questionnaire and to compare the difference of the two groups of senior and vocational high school students in this questionnaire. The concentration questionnaire was based on Knudsen (2007)'s model, functional components of attention (FCA), including four factors: salience filters, sensitivity control, competitive selection and working memory. The data were collected by the stratified non-random sampling. The samples were divided into three sets: exploratory analysis (140 senior high school students), confirmatory analysis (918 senior high school students) and the analysis of measurement invariance (918 senior high school students and 967 vocational high school students). The results shows: (1) The collected data fit to the measurement model and there are great construct validity and reliability in this questionnaire. The evidence of criterion-related validity on the daytime mental state and the ability of attention is also provided. Moreover, measurement invariance is confirmed for the senior and vocational high school students. (2) Two major differences between senior and vocational school students on the concentration questionnaire are competitive selection and working memory. Based on the results, four suggestions for the future studies are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420131209040012篇名：多元智能職涯探索量表之發展並列篇名：Development of the Multiple Intelligences Occupational Scale作者：朱錦鳳(Gin-Fon Ju)關鍵字：Gardner;多元智能理論;多元智能職涯探索量表;Holland;六角形理論;Gardner;multiple intelligences theory;the Multiple Intelligences Occupational Scale;Holland;hexagon theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：一個人未來的成就與其天生智能、人格特質及後天學習息息相關；一個人的成就高低與其喜好、能力、人格特質及環境適配也有其絕對關係。本研究旨在發展一份兼具Gardner提出的多元智能理論及Holland提出的六角形職能理論共同特色，並能兼顧受試者之智能、興趣及人格特質綜合評估的多元智能職涯探索量表。研究結果顯示多元智能職涯探索量表經焦點訪談編撰題目後歷經兩次項目分析修正後定稿，並進行Cronbach's α及再測信度的信度分析，及內容效度、建構效度、效標關聯效度等效度驗證，結果皆符合理論架構及預期。多元智能職涯探索量表未來期能鼓勵學校教育因材施教，達到開發個別優勢特長的目標，並對即將畢業之學生發揮生涯探索及規劃的功能。英文摘要：A person's achievement is related to his/her intelligences, interest, and personality. Gardner's multiple intelligences theory supports the mutually interactive contribution of intelligences, personality and education, as it emphasizes individualized learning to maximize his/ her potential. Besides, Holland, who has been devoted to career survey and created a hexagon theory, has also mentioned that our personality, interest, ability, and environment are all critical variables for our success. The purpose of the research is to develop the Multiple Intelligences Occupational Scale (MIOS) which consists of all of the three attributions (intelligences, interest and personality) together. The MIOS processed the complete procedures of scaling development, two stages of item analysis, reliability and validity verification. The results all yielded the predicted perspectives. The MIOS is expected to be a useful scale for senior students searching for suitable career choice.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420131209040023篇名：抗壓性格量表之編製及信度、效度的建立並列篇名：The Development and Psychometric Properties of the Dispositional Stress-Resistance Scale作者：涂冠宇(Kuan-Yu Tu);翁嘉英(Chia-Ying Weng)關鍵字：堅韌性格;性格彈性量表;抗壓性格量表;hardiness;dispositional resilience scale;dispositional stress-resistance scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在發展適用於華人之堅韌性格評估工具，除翻譯15題版的性格彈性量表（Dispositional Resilience Scale，DRS；Bartone,1995），並依據Kobasa（1979,1982）對堅韌性格理論的定義，增編題目形成23題抗壓性格量表（Dispositional Stress-resistance Scale，DSS）預試題本。本研究施測DSS預試題本於309名學生樣本，先檢驗DRS中文版之信度，並以結構方程模型（structural equation model，SEM）檢驗測量模式之配適度表現，結果顯示DRS中文版信度與配適度表現不佳。本研究依據DSS預試題本進行選題，保留15題編成DSS正式題本。SEM結果顯示，DSS具有良好的配適度表現且施測於另一個學生的樣本群體（n=318），信度及配適度表現仍具跨樣本的穩定性。此外，DSS與貝克憂鬱、貝克焦慮、壓力知覺與狀態自尊量表分數的相關性，符合理論預期及過去文獻已證實的方向性關係。綜合上述結果，顯示「抗壓性格量表」具有可接受的信度與效度，為評估華人之堅韌性格之適合測量工具。英文摘要：Previous research has shown that the 15-item Dispositional Resilience Scale (DRS-15) is a reliable and valid self-report tool to measure hardiness. However, the Chinese version of DRS-15 did not display acceptable reliability and validity for the Chinese group. The purpose of this study was to develop the Dispositional Stress-resistance Scale (DSS) and evaluate its psychometric properties. First, the DRS-15 was translated to Chinese version and the other 8 items based on definitions of Hardiness were added to create the 23-item item pool. The item pool was administered to 309 college students, and 15 best items were selected by item analysis to form the DSS. The results showed that DSS has good psychometric properties: 1. Adequate and stable internal consistencies, 2. Acceptable model fit, 3. Relations and directions with the other scales (BDI, BAI, PSS, Psychophysical symptoms, Chinese Multidimensional Trait Self-esteem) were consistent with theory and previous literature. The Dispositional Stress-resistance Scale is expected to be an acceptable and efficient tool to assess hardiness in the Chinese group.起始頁-結束頁：57-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420131209040034篇名：工作興家庭衝突的概念、測量及分析：臺灣地區國民小學教師的實證研究並列篇名：The Concept, Measurement and Analysis of Work and Family Conflict: An Empirical Study of Elementary School Teachers in Taiwan作者：顏弘欽(Hung-Chin Yen)關鍵字：工作與家庭衝突;工作對家庭衝突;家庭對工作衝突;family-to-work conflict;work-family conflict;work-to-family conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以臺灣地區國民小學教師為對象，據以探討工作與家庭衝突的概念。首先，確立工作與家庭衝突的概念架構，其次，採用模式競爭的策略，確認最適切的測量模式，此外，針對教師工作與家庭衝突的知覺現況進行分析。依據研究結果，本研究確立教師的工作與家庭衝突包含四個因素，測量題數為12題。在因素結構上，則為四因素的斜交模式。在知覺程度方面，男性、兼任主任之教師，在部分因素層面具有較高的衝突知覺。最後，本研究針對學校實務與後續研究提出建議，以做為探討教師工作與家庭衝突之參考。英文摘要：This research is aimed at discussing the concept of work-family conflict. Elementary school teachers in Taiwan were selected as research subjects. First, the conceptual framework of work-family conflict is established through literature review. Then, the most adequate measuring model is ascertained by way of the strategy of model competition. In addition, the perception of work-family conflict is analyzed. The research results conclude that teachers' work-family conflict includes four factors with 12 measuring questions. In terms of the factorial structure, it is a four correlated factorial model. Regarding the level of awareness, male teachers, teachers holding concurrent positions of school directors have higher level of awareness of conflict in some factors. Finally, this research offers practical suggestions for schools and suggestions for further research, which may serve as reference for future discussions of teachers' work-family conflict.起始頁-結束頁：81-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420131209040045篇名：應用成長混合模式剖析臺灣青少年憂鬱發展軌跡的異質性：六步驟策略性模式發展機制研究並列篇名：Application of Growth Mixture Model to Heterogeneous Trajectories of Depressive Moods of Adolescents: A Six-Step Strategic Model Development Mechanism作者：王郁琮(Yu-Chung Lawrence Wang)關鍵字：成長混合模式;青少年憂鬱發展軌跡;GMM模式建構;growth mixture model;developmental trajectory of depression of adolescence;GMM model development mechanism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：新興成長混合模式（Growth Mixture Model，簡稱GMM）針對可能存在的潛在異質次群體，進行多元發展軌跡估計，故比起傳統潛在成長曲線模式（Latent Growth Curve Model）基於同質性假設而僅以單一軌跡進行整體成長歷程描述，顯得更加詳盡但模式結構也更複雜。當研究者進行GMM分析卻缺乏一套策略性建構機制時，極易造成過度依賴資料探索，並遭致模式無法收斂的窘境。本研究旨在發展一套步驟明確的GMM標準化建構策略，做為實徵應用分析研究的參考準則；並以臺灣青少年研究從國一至高三所蒐集之六波段憂鬱症狀實徵資料進行示範分析。研究結果顯示，作者所發展的六步驟GMM建構機制，除了兼顧理論驗證與分類實質意義，並可有效地提升模式收斂。實徵資料分析結果發現，臺灣青少年從國一到高三的憂鬱發展軌跡可以分為三種類型，包括：持續低孤獨鬱卒感的「合群快樂型」（82.3%）、先低後高的「晚發憂鬱型」（7.7%）、以及先高轉低的「早發憂鬱型」（9.9%）。GMM是目前少數提供具有統計模式基礎的縱貫軌跡分類，針對如何客觀區分發展軌跡次群體，本文的GMM策略發展機制具重大實用意涵。英文摘要：The recently developed Growth Mixture Mode (GMM) provides multiple trajectories to account for the heterogeneity of population, and is therefore more comprehensive than Latent Growth Curve Model (LGCM) that uses a single trajectory to describe development of all subjects, based on its homogeneity assumption. Nonetheless, without a strategic model development mechanism, researchers often encounter convergence problem with GMM, due to model complexity and flexibility. The aim of this study was to fulfill this deficiency by establishing a standardized step-by-step model development procedure. Results from empirical data showed that the six-step procedure improved the likelihood of model convergence significantly. Results from empirical analyses concluded three classes of developmental trajectory of depression among Taiwanese adolescents including stably low depression, named ”cheerful” (82.3%); ”start low end high”, named ”late onset depression”(7.7%); and ”start high end low”, named ”early onset depression” (9.9%). GMM is a promising method with model-based longitudinal classification, and the mechanism proposed makes a significant contribution to GMM application.起始頁-結束頁：119-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420131209040056篇名：大學教師教學專業發展策略之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Teaching Professional Development Strategies for the University Faculty作者：陳琦媛(Chi-Yuan Chen);蘇錦麗(Jin-Li Su)關鍵字：大學教師專業發展;教學專業發展策略;高等教育;faculty professional development;teaching professional development strategies;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國內外主要大學教師教學專業發展策略之內涵與實務，並分析國內外實務做法之異同。本研究採用文件分析法，以世界大學排名系統為基礎，選取北美洲、歐洲及亞太地區前百大的大學，以及我國受頂尖大學計畫及教學卓越計畫補助的大學各15所，共60所國內外大學為樣本。研究發現工作坊與研討會的辦理、教學專業資訊的提供為各大學最普遍採用的教學專業發展策略。北美洲的大學較重視個別教師諮詢服務與教學研究經費；歐洲的大學首重教學專業課程；亞太地區較重視教學優良教師的獎勵與教學專業課程；國內大學最常採用教學優良教師的獎勵，以及人力、技術及經費支援兩類策略，較偏重於單次、短期的團體共同參與方式，且設置教學成長團體的比率高於其他國家，但在教學專業課程與教學研究經費兩類策略的採用比率低於其他國家。最後提出若干建議供我國大學未來發展教學專業發展策略方向之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the theory and practice of teaching professional development strategies of universities around the world. To achieve this purpose, this study adopted the document analysis method and sampled universities based on the Times Higher Education world university rankings. Each of the top fifteen universities of North America, Europe, and Asia-Pacific were selected as the international sample universities; a total of sixty subject universities. Fifteen universities in Taiwan were also selected as the national sample universities. The main findings of the study include: (1) The most prevalent strategies that the universities used were ”teaching and learning information”and ”workshop and seminar”; (2) The universities in North America placed an emphasis on ”teaching consultation”and”grant and founding”; (3) The universities in Europe preferred the teaching development certification programs; (4) The universities in Asia-Pacific put more effort on ”teaching excellence award” and ”teaching development programs”; and (5) The most prevalent strategies that the universities in Taiwan used were ”teaching excellence award” and ”manpower, technology, and finance”. When comparing with other universities around the world, the teaching research grant and teaching development certification programs were not sufficient for Taiwanese universities, but more Taiwanese universities adopted teaching development group as the teaching development strategies than the ones in other countries.起始頁-結束頁：146-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420131209040067篇名：科技大學教師評鑑影響性評估量表發展之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Development of Faculty Evaluation Influence Assessment Scale for Universities of Science and Technology作者：張媛甯(Yuan-Ning Chang)關鍵字：教師評鑑;評鑑影響性;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;evaluation influence;faculty evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在發展科技大學教師評鑑影響性之評估量表，透過文獻探討分析國內外有關教師評鑑與評鑑影響性的理論與實務，以建立構念和發展題項，經過專家學者修正與項目分析來進行題項的篩選與確認，建立初步的量表結構與測量題項。本研究立意抽樣七所科技大學之教師為施測對象，有效問卷共247份，首先運用探索性因素分析以純化測量工具，再透過驗證性因素分析進行競爭模式的比較以選擇最簡效模式，繼而進行該模式的信效度檢定。研究結果發現，本量表證實具有二階層模式的因素結構，其整體模式適配度評估皆符合建議水準，評鑑投入、評鑑活動與評鑑影響性三個分量表分別包含三個潛在變項，總計35個測量題項。最後，根據研究結果對科技大學及後續研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop faculty evaluation influence assessment scale for universities of science and technology. The construct and measuring items were developed according to the literature review of faculty evaluation and evaluation influence. After experts' modifications and item analysis, the factor structure and items of the preliminary scale were confirmed. After collecting 247 samples from seven universities of science and technology, exploratory factor analysis was first conducted to purify the dimensions and measuring items of faculty evaluation influence. Secondly, confirmatory factor analysis was employed to choose the best model by comparisons of model fits, and further its reliability and validity was tested. Results showed that the two-hierarchical factor structure of the scale was verified, and its goodness-of-fitness conformed to standard. The 35 items were divided into three subscales which included evaluation input, evaluation activity and evaluation influence, and each subscale had 3 latent variables. Lastly, suggestions were offered for universities of science and technology and future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130909030018篇名：高等教育政策工具之探析：大學評鑑結果與政府經費分配之連結並列篇名：An Analysis of Policy Instruments for Higher Education: The Connection between the Results of University Evaluation and the Allocation of Funding作者：劉秀曦(Hsiu-Hsi Liu)關鍵字：高等教育;政策工具;大學評鑑;經費分配;higher education;policy instrument;university evaluation;allocation of funding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：為促使大學回應社會大眾對績效責任的要求，西歐國家與我國政府近年所推動的高等教育財政改革政策，皆出現一種以大學評鑑結果作為政府經費分配基礎的趨勢。此種作法雖可激勵大學對其表現負起責任，有助於高等教育品質之確保與提升；但若實施不慎，也可能導致政府過度干預高等教育運作，戕害大學自主與多元發展。爰此，本研究以大學評鑑結果與政府經費分配之連結為題，分別就西歐主要國家與我國之實施現況，與遭受批評進行文獻分析與討論。此外，並透過焦點團體座談會議的召開，瞭解利害關係人對於兩政策工具相互連結之看法，最後根據研究發現提出以下結論：（一）大學評鑑與競爭經費皆為政府政策工具，惟其中蘊含政府意志，恐有礙大學自主與創新發展；（二）將評鑑結果與獎懲機制連結雖具有爭議，但仍被各國政府視為是對大學遠端調控的重要工具之一；（三）將評鑑結果與經費分配連結，西歐國家多採取間接方式，然在我國已有法源依據並付諸行動。英文摘要：To respond to the growing public demand for the accountability of higher education, the Taiwanese government, along with Western Europe, tends to allocate funding according to the results of university evaluation. This trend can be captured from the recent educational policy reforms. This way of allocating funding, however, still has its pros and cons. Namely, it has drawn much attention to the responsibility of universities in terms of education quality improvement, but university autonomy, as a possible trade-off, would be threatened and/or undermined due to government intervention. Given the situation, this study analyzes the connection between the results of university evaluation in Taiwan and some major western European countries and the allocation of their educational funding. In addition, by adopting the method of focus group interview, this study also aims to understand the perspectives of the policy stakeholders on the aforementioned issue in Taiwan. Based on the findings, some suggestions for policy makers are provided.起始頁-結束頁：31-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130909030029篇名：公民素養融入大學通識課程之實踐經驗研究：以「探究多元文化中的自我」課程為例並列篇名：On the Research of Infusing Civic Literacy into a General Education Curriculum: An Example of ”Self-Exploring within a Multicultural Context”作者：徐敏雄(Min-Hsiung Hsu)關鍵字：公民素養;通識教育;課程與教學;融入式課程;civic literacy;general education;curriculum and instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：為瞭解公民素養如何融入通識教育，本文以研究者開授之「探究多元文化中的自我」課程為例，將公民素養融入其中，並以質性研究方法記錄實踐過程。研究發現，教師若能善用電影廣告媒體、與學生切身相關議題，或足以引發生命反思與情緒感動的媒材，便可讓學生在經驗與價值碰撞過程中擴展知識與經驗，覺察自己、他人與外在社會文化框架的權力關係。若欲將課程成效發揮更佳，教師還必需在適當課程主題與團體氛圍下，適切地融合多元教學設計，才能讓學生因曖昧與衝突的價值與經驗碰撞，學習理性表達、尊重、包容等民主素養，反思各種社會與生命倫理、生活與身體美學，以及媒體意識型態之合理性。英文摘要：In order to understand the possible strategies and their effects of nurturing civic literacy from the curriculum of general education, I took an example from the class of ”Self-exploring within a multicultural context” taught by myself in the general education center, with qualitative research method, to record whole practice processes. The findings were that if making use of movies and commercial films, troubling issues that are pertinent to the students, or materials that are sufficient to trigger reflection on life, there were chances for students to make their own interpretations and constructions with one another, with possibility to expand knowledge and experiences, as well as the values presetting and power structures among oneself, other people and society. Besides this, if to extend better effects on the implementation of curriculum, there were requirements to make auxiliary of teaching designs, such as lecture, Socratic teaching, guided and groups discussions, role play and cooperative learning et al. During the process due to differences, as well as the collision of vague and conflicting values and experiences, students might learn the literacy of democracy such as rational expression, respect and tolerance, and reflect on the various kinds of social and human ethics, life and body aesthetics, and the rationality of ideology implied in the media.起始頁-結束頁：59-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201309090300310篇名：創業精神與大學發展並列篇名：Study on Entrepreneurship and Development of Universities作者：陳素琴(Su-Chin Chen)關鍵字：創業精神;大學;創業型大學;高等教育;entrepreneurship;university;entrepreneurial university;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文之目的在於瞭解近來影響大學經營管理之創業精神，及其與大學之間的發展關係。為達此，本文首先探討創業精神的意涵，繼之從歷史脈絡來探尋大學與創業精神之關係，並分析現代大學走向創業精神的背景，包括大學與產業間從他利到互利的關係、大學面臨自籌財源的壓力、市場運作思維的引進與應用、學術資本論的興起，及大學對區域經濟發展的責任。本文最後根據研究結果提出結論，並從組織特性及機會而提出對大學在發展上的啟示，包括創業精神可作為一種組織轉型的推動力，以及提供大學更多發展的機會與面向。英文摘要：This paper aims to analyze the entrepreneurship and development of universities. The meaning of entrepreneurship will be probed firstly, and the relationship between entrepreneurship and university will be tracked historically as well. Moreover, some factors to promote contemporary universities toward being entrepreneurial are also explored: the mutual-beneficial relation between university and industry; the pressures on universities to earn funding; the application of marketization; the rise of academic capitalism, and the responsibility for regional economic development. It ends with a sketch of the main implications for the development of university in terms of the characters of organization and opportunities, i.e. entrepreneurship serves as a motivation of organizational transformation and can provide more opportunities and dimensions for development of universities.起始頁-結束頁：87-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201309090300401篇名：「成果導向學習」與大學教學的品質提升：以中文學科的實踐為例並列篇名：Outcome-Based Learning and the Quality Enhancement of University Teaching: The Practices of Chinese Teachers作者：梁佩雲(Pamela Pui-Wan Leung)關鍵字：大學教學;成果導向學習;多元評估;建設性調準;學習成果;university teaching;outcome-based learning;multiple assessments;constructive alignment;learning outcomes期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：「成果導向學習」是源自西方的教育理念，在中文學科實施的先例並不多見；要同一學系內全體教師參與先導實踐，更不是易事。為此，本研究報告的是一所香港高等院校中文學科的教學實踐經驗。通過對照修訂前後的科目教學大綱，輔以師生對教學嘗試的迴響，本研究採用質量並重的內容分析法，剖析「成果導向學習」對提升教學素質的作用。研究發現：「成果導向學習」強調落實學習成果、教學活動與評估的緊密聯繫，較傳統的教學模式更能為學生提供優質學習經驗。要維持優質課程，辦學機構必須支援教師的持續專業發展，並注意在追求素質保證與教師自主之間取得平衡；而教師則要不斷反思，調節教學安排，力求貫通課程各層面的預期學習成果，以訂定適量而有效的評估設計。英文摘要：”Outcome-based learning” (OBL) is a western approach to education and has not been widely adopted in Chinese teaching practices. Few precedents of Chinese OBL programs have been found in the literature and engaging entire teaching staff in the same department for piloting this approach is difficult. Therefore, this study describes how a higher education institution in Hong Kong promoted OBL to Chinese students. We compared pre- and post-revision course outlines and feedback obtained from teachers and students in the experiment and adopted qualitative and quantitative content analysis methods to examine the effects of OBL on enhancing teaching quality. The findings indicated that the influence of OBL on the close alignment of learning outcomes, teaching activities, and assessments has facilitated improved student learning experiences more than traditional teaching approaches have. To sustain a quality OBL program, institutions should support the ongoing professional development of teachers and maintain a balance between quality assurance and teacher autonomy. In addition, teachers should consider their daily practices, adjust various teaching arrangements, ensure that expected learning outcomes based on various program aspects are aligned, and establish appropriate and effective assessments.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(4).012篇名：工程及科技教育認證制度下的學生核心能力與評估：大學教師、系主任、院長的觀點並列篇名：A Study of Students' Core-Competence Evaluation in Engineering Education Quality Assurance: The Perspectives of Faculty Members, Program Chairpersons, and Deans作者：林妙真(Miao-Chen Lin);張佩芬(Pei-Fen Chang)關鍵字：工程教育認證;品質保證;核心能力;評分規準;engineering education accreditation;quality assurance;core competences;rubrics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：歐美國家近幾年皆已建立不同程度的品質保證體系，而國內工程及科技教育認證實施9年，偏向檢視整體教育的品質，缺乏對評估機制的深度檢視。本研究旨在探究工程及科技教育認證對學生核心能力的影響，並瞭解目前國內各工程系所評估學生核心能力的方式。以問卷調查和深度訪談蒐集院長、系主任與教師意見，有效回收問卷共471份，受訪對象計20位，並以一般歸納法（a general inductive approach）分析質性資料。研究發現：工程系所教師對於學生核心能力的評估仍是陌生的，且大多數系所尚未發展適當的評估工具。本研究以其中1所學校為例，該校將評分規準（rubrics）與數位平臺運用於教學與評量中，一則減輕教師的負擔；二則充分落實學生學習成效品質保證機制，可作為國內成果導向認證提供最佳實務（bestpractice）。最後針對目前工程系所落實持續改善之困境與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to illustrate the impact of engineering education accreditation on evaluations of students' core competences in Taiwan. The data were collected using a questionnaire survey and in-depth interviews. 471 valid questionnaires were analyzed and twenty engineering faculties, program chairpersons, and deans were interviewed afterwards. The results indicated that engineering faculties are unfamiliar with methods of core-competence evaluation. Therefore, the outcomes-based teaching and assessment approach of one university was used to demonstrate how rubrics can be implemented to maintain continuous improvement in curriculum planning and to minimize the workloads of teachers while they prepared for the self-study report during the accreditation process. This study is the pioneer to explore a best practice for the outcome-based accreditation approach in Taiwan. Finally, the implications and future directions of this study are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：37-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(4).023篇名：支援教育品質管理之整合式資訊系統建構與研究並列篇名：Design, Implementation and Study of an Integrated Information System for Educational Quality Management作者：羅孟彥(Mon-Yen Luo)關鍵字：高等教育;教育品質;教學卓越計畫;整合資訊系統;higher education;education quality;teaching excellence program;integrated information system期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：面對外在全球化的高度競爭，與對內高等教育的快速擴張，高等教育品質保證成為近年來備受各方關注的議題。目前雖有相當多關於教育品質內涵、品質保證制度、品質評鑑指標等相關文獻，然而如何能夠有效落實相關機制的研究卻尚不多見。全面落實教育品質管理需要許多人、組織層級的配合，而這也是教育品質管理機制能否成功的重要因素。本研究旨在探討如何以教育品質為核心理念來設計一個整合式支援資訊系統，本研究以行動研究的方法，實際支援某幾所大專院校的教學卓越計畫之實施，嘗試以學理依據來引導實務工作的變革與改進，規劃與施行時間超過4年，並經由衡量教學卓越成效的問卷來驗證系統實施的成效。本研究主要的結論為：經由全面教育品質管理與成果導向理論的結合，可以發展出一個整合資訊系統的脈絡與架構，得以引領許多原本各自獨立的系統能夠整合，且有效地提升教學品質。由於近年來各大專院校均致力於建置相關資訊系統，本研究可以增進資訊系統工作者對於教育實務工作的理解，本研究的經驗與結果也可作為規劃相關資訊系統的參考，另外也提出許多創新議題值得教育研究者進一步探索。英文摘要：Under the severe competition of globalization and the rapid expansion of higher education institutions, educational quality has become an important research issue. Although the studies have been conducted extensively on the content of educational quality, mechanism design, and educational quality indicators, little attention has been paid to the deployment of educational quality management and support of information system. In this study, we discuss the design, implementation, enforcement, and initial results of an integrated information system designed around the concept and theories of educational quality. The proposed system has been deployed in a university for four years. Some conclusions of this study are explored. Based on the theory of educational quality and outcome-based education, we can design a framework to guide the design and integration of information systems related to teaching and learning. The initial results indicate that such a system can improve educational quality. This study can serve as a reference design for educational institutions that want to build information systems related to teaching, learning, and educational quality assurance.起始頁-結束頁：69-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(4).034篇名：日本學校治理模式之變遷及其評析：以學校理事會為例並列篇名：Analyses and Changing Models of School Governance in Japan: School Council Cases作者：林雍智(Yung-Chih Lin);吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu)關鍵字：日本;學校治理;學校理事會;Japan;school governance;school council期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：日本受近年教改思潮與歐美學校改革的影響，以及在政治上地方分權等運動的推波助瀾下，開始對僵化的學校制度與架構進行變革。改革過程中實際導入的方案，除對應教育分權的需求，將教育上的權力由中央下放至地方、再至學校外，受到最多探究的即是屬於學校治理模式的變遷議題。日本的學校治理經歷了一連串分權改革，如強化學校經營自主權、引進外部人士參與學校事務，甚至設立學校理事會等取得學校決策權之變革後，不但改變了學校權力結構，也讓既有的學校治理模式產生結構性改變。日本「學校治理」議題的討論，在我國尚不多見，值得探究。因此，為理解日本學校治理模式之變遷，實施現況及未來動向，以及對我國學校革新的參考，本研究首先分析日本學校治理與模式變遷，其次說明學校理事會之設立與構造，接著評析學校理事會治理模式之運作，最後提出日本學校治理模式案例對我國的啟示。英文摘要：Because of the influence of educational reforms sweeping the western hemisphere and domestic political movements advocating governmental decentralization, the educational systems in Japan have been evolving for years. The most prominent change implemented in response to educational decentralization is the authority transfer, in which decision making power was transferred from the central government to county governments and, subsequently, to the schools. As a result, school management systems must be adapted to localization and decentralization movements, and the optimal operational models for schools have been extensively discussed. Numerous changes, such as strengthening the autonomy of school management, electing independents to the school board, and establishing school councils to replace traditional decision-making mechanisms, have fundamentally altered the power structures in schools.In contrast to the enthusiastic movements in Japan, the topic of school operation models has rarely been discussed in Taiwan. To address this gap, we investigated the governance history, current status of, and potential changes among Japanese schools. By analyzing the school governance evolution of Japan, the authors use the experiences of Japan to provide alternative options for school innovation in Taiwan. Therefore, this paper begins with an introduction to the concepts and changing models of school governance; subsequently, the conditions and frameworks of school councils in Japan are described, and school governance models and school council operation are analyzed. Finally, recommendations are provided for applying the educational changes implemented in Japan to the education system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：103-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(4).045篇名：兒童地球形狀概念演化樹之跨年級調查驗證並列篇名：Validating Children's Conceptual Evolution Tree of Earth in a Cross-Grade Study作者：吳育倫(Yu-Lun Wu);林靜雯(Jing-Wen Lin)關鍵字：支序分類之概念演化取向;地球形狀;概念演化樹;跨年級調查;cladistic approach in conceptual evolution;the shape of Earth;conceptual evolution tree;cross-grade study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：跨年級研究有助於課程的縱向發展，但卻耗時、費力且難以效化。而藉由電腦建立學生於不同科學主題之最適概念演化樹的「支序分類之概念演化取向」卻可克服上述限制。據此，研究者採用此取向，並以概念改變研究中已被不同學者確認心智模式類型的「地球形狀」為主題，建立了地球形狀概念演化樹之最適假說。本研究則以一、三、五年級共336位學生為研究對象，設計地球形狀概念測驗，藉此獲得學生於各認知特徵比例消長情形，以檢驗地球形狀概念演化樹之最適假說。研究結果顯示，此假說與跨年級調查結果大致相符，且藉由假說與跨年級資料之整合，本研究清楚呈現兒童地球形狀概念發展之全貌，並對支序分類之概念演化取向之可行性提供進一步的支持。英文摘要：Although a cross-grade study is helpful for designing vertical curricula, such studies require substantial time and effort and present validation concerns regarding the research results. However, a cladistic approach in conceptual evolution could be used to construct a best-fit conceptual evolution tree regarding various science topics by using a computer to overcome these limitations. Therefore, we adopted this approach and used Earth as the topic to build a best-fit conceptual evolution tree of Earth. The purpose of this study is to verify a prediction of children's conceptual evolution trees of Earth in a cross-grade study and to validate this novel approach. We adopted a diagnostic test to investigate 336 students who attended Grades one, three, and five, to obtain the percentages of various cognitive characteristics and statuses of students in different grades. The results indicated that the prediction of the best-fit conceptual evolution tree of Earth closely fit the empirical data of the cross-grade study. The results showed that children's conceptual evolution trees represent the development of their concepts of Earth clearly and that the feasibility of using a cladistic approach in conceptual evolution is supported. The results can aid researchers of science education in understanding the development of children's conceptions.起始頁-結束頁：133-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(4).056篇名：當原住民與漢人在教室相遇：不同族群背景的教師與幼兒在教室之言談並列篇名：Aboriginal and Han People in Classrooms: Discourse Styles between Teachers and Young Children with Different Ethnic Backgrounds作者：李萍娜(Pyng-Na Lee);林聖曦(Sheng-Hsi Lin)關鍵字：原住民教育;原住民教師;教室言談;跨文化;漢人教師;aboriginal education;aboriginal teacher;classroom discourse;cross-culture;Han teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探究不同族群師生之教室言談。採質性研究法進入兩個場域觀察：漢人教師與原住民幼兒、原住民教師與漢人幼兒。研究發現，漢人教師在原住民區教導的原住民幼兒，在教室之口說回答簡短、常穿插族語且在團體中交叉共構。漢人教師在原住民區之提問以封閉性問題居多，原住民幼兒被要求來前面單獨回答時則常靜默，但如有媒介物就能敘說；原住民幼兒口說日記遊走在真實和「編說」中，與漢人教師所欲討論真實事件形成雙軌平行之對答。漢人區任教之原住民教師口語表達常重複、補充說明和插入臺語；原住民教師與漢人幼兒之對話以開放性提問居多，提問的內容若為讓幼兒探索教師意圖，則常缺乏線索而造成幼兒隨意猜測；若是提問的內容為幼兒的經驗事件，則提供幼兒社會建構、同儕鷹架之對話關係。此外，在漢人區的原住民教師之言談常過度延伸或轉換主旨，以至於延宕提問結論或沒有結論。英文摘要：This study explored classroom discourses between teachers and young children with different ethnic groups, adopting an ethnographic approach as the qualitative method. Data were collected from (1) a Han teacher and aboriginal children in a Paiwan tribe; and (2) a Painanese teacher and Han children in a Han area. The results indicated that in the class of the Han teacher, the discourse styles of the aboriginal children included short sentences and interpolating Paiwanese nouns. The aboriginal children were unfamiliar with speaking alone in front of people, and multiple children spoke over each other in group situations. If the aboriginal children had varied media, such as their own drawings, they could express themselves; when they discussed their daily lives based on these drawings, other children frequently participated, generating a story that varied between reality and fabrication. However, the Han teacher tended to pull the children back to reality. By contrast, the discourse style of the aboriginal teacher in the Han area included unique syntax, a topic-associating style, and interpolated Hokenese. Most of the questions asked were open-type questions. It was unclear if those questions were meant to allow the children to explore the intentions of the teacher; little context and few hints were provided for such questions, causing the children to randomly guess the answers. If the questions related to the experiences of the children, the aboriginal teacher provided them opportunities for social construction and peer scaffolding. Moreover, the discourses of the aboriginal teacher in the Han area were frequently over-extended or tangential; thus, the answers to such questions were postponed, or no conclusions were provided.起始頁-結束頁：165-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(4).067篇名：公民科學家意象與參觀博物館對科學研究利益知覺之影響並列篇名：Influence of Citizens' Images of Scientists and Museum Visits on the Benefit Perception of Scientific Research作者：黃孝宗(Hsiao-Tsung Huang);蔡俊彥(Chun-Yen Tsai);黃台珠(Tai-Chu Huang)關鍵字：非制式學習;利益知覺;科學家意象;科學素養;博物館教育;informal Learning;benefit perception;images of scientists;scientific literacy;museum education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：科學與技術研究常伴隨著社會性科學議題的產生，公眾於這些議題中對各項科學研究利益知覺（簡稱「科學知覺」）被認為是一項科學素養的指標。本研究主要目的在於探討公民的科學家意象與有無參觀博物館對科學知覺的影響。研究工具採用「公民科學素養問卷」，以「機率比例抽樣法」抽出研究對象，並以實地訪談調查研究法完訪臺灣地區公民2,024人。分析方法採量化研究，以階層迴歸分析法檢驗。研究結果發現，科學家意象及參觀博物館對公民科學知覺有預測力，科學家意象愈無刻板印象及1年內有參觀博物館的公民，其科學知覺愈正向。以有無參觀博物館為調節變項，發現1年內沒有參觀博物館的公民，科學家意象對科學知覺的預測效果較大；1年內有參觀博物館的公民，科學家意象對科學知覺的預測效果較小。研究建議，科學教育學者應重視公民對科學家的刻板印象，以及促進公民參觀博物館，以期公民能夠有正向的科學知覺。英文摘要：Science and technology research addresses various socio-scientific issues. The benefit perception of scientific research (BPSR) is a crucial indicator of scientific literacy. The purpose of this study is to explore the effects of citizens' images of scientists and museum visits on the BPSR. Participants for this study (2,024 in total) were obtained through a probability-proportional-to-size sampling method and were interviewed using the Civic Scientific Literacy Survey. A quantitative analysis was conducted through hierarchical regression analyses. The results showed that images of scientists and museum visits revealed predictability to the BPSR among Taiwanese citizens. The fewer stereotypes that Taiwanese citizens possess about scientists, the greater is the perceived benefits of scientific research. Those who had visited museums in the past year perceived more benefits from scientific research. When museum visit was used as the moderating variable, it revealed two levels of regression. Among the citizens who had not visited museums in the past year, the effect of images of scientists on their BPSR was strong. By contrast, among people who had visited museums in the past year, the effect of images on their BPSR was weak. The research suggests that science educators emphasize citizen stereotypes of scientists and promotion of the visits to science museums. This may allow citizens to perceive the benefits of scientific research.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(3).018篇名：網路閱讀態度、網路閱讀行為及網路閱讀素養之橫斷面研究並列篇名：Cross-Sectional Study of the Relationships among E-Reading Attitude, E-Reading Behavior, and E-Reading Literacy作者：陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);洪兆祥(Chao-Hsiang Hung);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：網路閱讀行為;網路閱讀素養;網路閱讀態度;橫斷面研究;e-reading behavior;e-reading literacy;e-reading attitude;cross-sectional study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：網路閱讀是近來用以衡量一國競爭力之重要指標，因此，本研究著手探究網路閱讀態度、網路閱讀行為與網路閱讀素養之結構關係模式。本研究針對3,293位五年級至九年級學生進行橫斷式調查。經資料分析結果指出：不同年級的學生其網路閱讀行為在網路閱讀態度與網路閱讀素養間扮演中介的角色。最後，根據分析結果，本研究針對國民教育實務現場與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：E-reading may be used as an index for assessing national competitiveness. In the current study, the researchers examined e-reading, constructing a structural equation model for the relationships among e-reading attitude, e-reading behavior, and e-reading literacy. The cross-sectional survey involved 3,293 participants, who ranged from fifth-grade to ninth-grade school students. The results of data analysis indicated that e-reading behavior mediates between e-reading attitude and e-reading literacy at all grade levels. Based on these findings, several suggestions for compulsory education and future studies are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：23-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(3).029篇名：高中生海洋科學素養及迷思概念評量分析並列篇名：Marine Science Literacy and Misconceptions among Senior High School Students作者：羅綸新(Lwun-Syin Lwo);張正杰(Cheng-Chieh Chang);童元品(Yuan-Ping Tung);楊文正(Wen-Cheng Yang)關鍵字：海洋科學素養;海洋教育;迷思概念;概念圖;marine-science literacy;marine education;misconception;concept map期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在：一、應用概念圖命題模式及開放性問答評量高中生海洋科學概念與素養之現況。二、以問卷試題診斷高中生海洋科學迷思概念之情形。研究以基隆市5所公立高級中學學生為對象，共計發出361份問卷，有效樣本346份，回收率為96%。研究結果顯示：一、高中生在海洋科學概念詞彙運用前三名為暖化、地震及地球。二、高中生在海洋科學概念詞彙運用產生迷思的三大詞彙為生質能源、黑潮及親潮。三、高中生海洋概念以知識面向的概念最高。四、高中生在海洋科學迷思概念試題評量中，平均答對率只有53%。五、黑潮得名緣由為高中生在海洋科學迷思概念評量中答對率最低的題目，僅有16%。六、「瞭解冰期與間冰期海平面的升降，對全球生物與自然環境可能造成影響」為高中生最常帶有迷思概念的能力指標。研究的結果可供我國海洋教育相關人員及高中教師參考，以提升海洋教育實施之成效與國民海洋科學素養。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to examine the literacy of senior high school students regarding marine-science concepts by using the concept-map method (open-ended tasks) and an open-ended question, and to assess their misconceptions about marine science. A survey was conducted among students from five senior high schools in northern Taiwan. A total of 361 questionnaires were distributed and a validity count of 346 was returned. The results of this study were as follows:(1) The terms ”warming,” ”earthquake,” and ”earth” were most commonly used by students to express marine-science concepts.(2) The terms ”bioenergy,” ”Kuroshio Currents,” and ”Oyashio Currents” caused the most confusion among students.(3) The marine concepts described by the students were more in cognitive domain, than in attitude and affective domains.(4) The students' average correct response rate in the marine-science misconception assessment was 53%.(5) The term ”Kuroshio Currents” received the lowest score (16% correct) in the marine-science misconception assessment of students.(6) Students typically misconstrued the following marine-science competence index: ”Increases and decreases in sea levels during glacial and interglacial periods may influence global biology and the natural environment.”The results of this study can assist marine-science researchers and senior high school teachers to improve the quality and effectiveness of marine-science education and promote marine-science literacy.起始頁-結束頁：51-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(3).0310篇名：四向度成就目標對教師創意教學表現之影響：創意自我效能的中介效果與團隊學習行為的跨層級調節效果檢定並列篇名：Four-Dimensional Achievement Goal Effects on Creative Teaching Performance: Testing the Mediating Effects of Creative Self-Efficacy and the Cross-Level Moderating Effects of Team Learning Behavior作者：陳玉樹(Yu-Shu Chen);郭銘茜(Ming-Chien Kuo)關鍵字：成就目標;創意自我效能;創意教學表現;團隊學習行為;achievement goals;creative self-efficacy;creative teaching performance;team learning behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的目的在探討教學領域四向度成就目標對高中教師創意教學表現的影響，並檢定創意自我效能的中介效果與團隊學習行為的跨層級調節效果。以問卷調查法蒐集資料，研究對象為全臺高中之國文、英文及數學科教師。總計回收有效問卷1,620份，來自93所學校的218個教學研究會。以階層線性模式進行資料分析，研究結果顯示：一、成就目標會透過創意自我效能影響創意教學表現，其中學習趨向、學習逃避、表現趨向具正向中介效果，而表現逃避則是負向的中介效果；二、團隊學習行為會正向影響創意教學表現；三、團隊學習行為對學習趨向與創意教學表現之關係具有正向調節效果。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to explore the mediating effects that creative self-efficacy exerts on the relationship between achievement goals in the teaching domain and creative teaching performance, as well as the moderating effects that team learning behavior exerts on the relationships between learning-orientation goals and creative teaching performance. A survey method was used to collect the data. Participants were 1,620 teachers from 218 committees of teaching and research in 93 senior high schools. We used hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) to conduct data analysis. The results indicated that (1) creative self-efficacy mediated the relationship between achievement goals and creative teaching performance, in which the learning-approach, learning-avoidance, and performance-approach exerted positive mediating effects; however, the performance-avoidance exerted a negative mediating effect; (2) team learning behavior exerted a positive effect on creative teaching performance; and (3) team learning behavior positively moderated the relationship between learning-approach and creative teaching performance.起始頁-結束頁：85-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(3).0401篇名：編輯室手記作者：吳毓瑩期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：I-II資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：採用多元教學策略的非制式奈米課程對國中生情境興趣之促進並列篇名：Promoting Junior High Students' Situational Interests with Multiple Teaching Strategies in Informal Nanometer-Related Curricula作者：鄭瑞洲(Jui-Chou Cheng);洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung);黃台珠(Tai-Chu Huang)關鍵字：非制式奈米教學;情境興趣;教學策略;informal nanometer-related curriculum;situational interest;teaching strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：Student interest plays a vital role in science learning. In particular, junior high students in Taiwan showed higher interest in informal than formal science learning. Thus, this study investigated the relationship of junior high students' situational interest and multiple teaching strategies in informal nanometer-related curricula and the source of situational interest. Two questionnaires were administered to 110 students and semi-structured interviews of selected students were conducted. The results showed that after implementing multiple teaching strategies in informal nanometer-related curricula, the junior high school students' situational interest increased, especially for low-level interest student group. The findings suggested that the students perceived the following teaching strategies to have helped enhanced their situational interests: hands-on activity, teaching aids demonstration, providing examples from daily life, and multi-media presentation; by contrast, the ”question and discussion” teaching strategy was regarded to have a lesser effect in promoting situational interest for lower-level student group as compared to the higher-level student group. The results of the interview showed that while involving in ”hands-on laboratory work,” students felt a sense of novelty, instant enjoyment, meaningfulness, exploration, understanding, and achievement, which contributed to enhancing their situational interest. The findings suggested that teachers should adopt various teaching strategies for students with different levels to enhance student's situational interest.英文摘要：Student interest plays a vital role in science learning. In particular, junior high students in Taiwan showed higher interest in informal than formal science learning. Thus, this study investigated the relationship of junior high students' situational interest and multiple teaching strategies in informal nanometer-related curricula and the source of situational interest. Two questionnaires were administered to 110 students and semi-structured interviews of selected students were conducted. The results showed that after implementing multiple teaching strategies in informal nanometer-related curricula, the junior high school students' situational interest increased, especially for low-level interest student group. The findings suggested that the students perceived the following teaching strategies to have helped enhanced their situational interests: hands-on activity, teaching aids demonstration, providing examples from daily life, and multi-media presentation; by contrast, the ”question and discussion” teaching strategy was regarded to have a lesser effect in promoting situational interest for lower-level student group as compared to the higher-level student group. The results of the interview showed that while involving in ”hands-on laboratory work,” students felt a sense of novelty, instant enjoyment, meaningfulness, exploration, understanding, and achievement, which contributed to enhancing their situational interest. The findings suggested that teachers should adopt various teaching strategies for students with different levels to enhance student's situational interest.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：青少年線上閱讀素養評量工具之發展並列篇名：The Development of Adolescent Online Reading Literacy Assessments作者：張貴琳(Kuei-Lin Chang)關鍵字：資訊與通訊科技;線上閱讀素養;Rasch IRT模式;information and communication technology;online reading literacy;Rasch IRT model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究兼顧閱讀素養和資訊與通訊科技媒介特色，針對線上閱讀素養的可能內涵，發展兩個青少年線上閱讀素養評量工具，並針對可行性樣本，提出初步效度的檢驗，同時描述樣本的表現特徵。研究者依據PISA電子閱讀評量架構，並參酌Leu等人（2004）線上閱讀理解之內涵，進行評量工具的發展，並分別針對601位八年級學生和618位十年級學生進行施測。使用Rasch IRT模式進行題目參數與表現估計。結果顯示，兩個評量工具有良好的試題品質，難度適中，鑑別度良好，適合青少年學生。在內容效度、實質效度、結構效度、解釋性等層面有良好的效度證據支持。線上閱讀素養包含ICT成份，有別於離線閱讀。中學生的線上閱讀素養表現存在顯著的性別差異。英文摘要：By adopting the constructs of reading literacy and with the use of information and communication technology, the purpose of this study is to develop two adolescent online reading literacy assessments (ORLA) and examine the preliminary validity of ORLA. In addition, samples of online reading literacy performance are described. The design of ORLA is based on PISA electronic reading assessment framework and Leu et al. (2004)'s online reading comprehension definition. A total of 601 eighth graders from junior high schools and 618 tenth graders from senior high schools in Taiwan City participated in this study. This study uses Rasch IRT model to calibrate the item parameter and scale scores. The results indicated: the online reading literacy assessments had adequate difficulty level, reasonable validity evidences, and students' online reading literacy performance contains ICT element which is different from offline reading; the gender effect exists in the online reading environment by grades.起始頁-結束頁：29-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：來聽一首跨國交響曲：一位國中英語教師在國際專案教學的實踐與轉化歷程並列篇名：Experience and Context in the Implementation of Cross-National Projects: A Story of an English Teacher in a Junior High School作者：陳貞君(Jen-Jun Chen)關鍵字：自我敘事探究;教師轉化;國際教育;國際專案;cross-national project;international education;self-narratives;teacher change期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：國際專案學習為中小學國際教育重點推動項目之一，作者投入iEARN（International Education and Resource Network）推動的國際專案教學多年，從一開始不瞭解到全心投入其中，發現國際專案教學對學生的學習影響顯著。本文採自我敘事探究，站在詮釋性立場，以省思的角度縱貫呈現作者的國際專案教學的實踐歷程，並分析在專案實踐中，教師從國際專案的生手教師，變成靈巧、熟練實施國際專案的經驗教師之轉化過程。本研究搜集作者實施iEARN專案過程的相關紀錄，以多元資料來源、多元比較分析的方式確認國際專案實踐的階段：（1）初始階段，緩慢穩定的接觸國際專案；（2）積極投入iEARN社群核心，走向國際；（3）堅定志向，持續參與國際專案。本文以跨國交響曲為隱喻，詮釋作者的轉化是一個多元層面（包括個人、實踐、結果和外在四個層面，以及反思和制訂行動兩個中介過程）互相關聯的歷程；國際專案帶來培養全球視野與關鍵能力、創造真實學習情境和激發學習動機等多元學習效益。英文摘要：As the white paper on international education for primary and secondary schools was released in April 2011, integrating cross-national projects into current schools' curricula has been a core strategy promoted by the government for implementing international education at schools. This paper reports on my experiences and the context in which the iEARN projects is implemented in a junior high school. Using self-narratives, I discuss my own cross-national project experiences in the past ten years and my connection with the iEARN international community. At a reflective stance, I seek to discover and understand what iEARN means for my students and myself in our context, the effects of cross-national projects, and the process of teacher change. My experiences revealed that teacher change was a dynamic and interconnected process, involving multiple pathways among the personal domain, the domain of practice, the domain of consequence, and the external domain through the mediation of reflection and enactment. In addition, cross-national projects helped develop global vision and key competences, create authentic learning contexts, and motivate students to learn English.起始頁-結束頁：67-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：案例教學法結合角色扮演於土壤及地下水人才培育課程之教學設計並列篇名：The Instructional Design of Case Method Combined with Role-Playing in the Soil and Groundwater Training Courses作者：華梅英(Mei-Yin Hwa);周鴻騰(Hong-Teng Chow);王順美(Shun-Mei Wang)關鍵字：六價鉻污染;角色扮演;案例教學法;case method;hexavalent chromium pollution;role-playing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：環境污染問題大部分都是人類所造成的，未來的公害防治從業人員除了能掌握環境工程的專業理論與技術之外，更需要體會污染案例中不同利害關係人的立場，將能提升從業人員解決環境問題的能力。本研究旨在開發案例教學法結合角色扮演之教學設計，應用於土壤及地下水種子人才培育課程。以雲林縣溝皂里六價鉻污染為案例，讓81名學員分組，組內學員分別扮演皮革工廠老闆、在地農民、環保局人員、土水專業人員等4個不同角色，彼此討論與協商後，共同提出解決鉻污染的策略。本研究採單組後測實驗設計，包括滿意度分析與相關分析，研究結果發現：（1）各組學員從角色扮演中所提出的解決策略可歸納為：「相互溝通」、「建立共識」與「組成環保委員會」以共同面對鉻污染問題。（2）80%以上學員滿意案例角色扮演的教學方式，也認為在調查的知識與技能上有所收穫。學員在合作學習與角色扮演的參與程度，與學習滿意度呈現中度正相關性。最後，研究者反思教學設計與歷程，提出相關建議。英文摘要：Almost all environmental problems are caused by human. Besides being good at environmental engineering theory and technology, to enhance the ability to solve environmental problems, the environmental practitioners need a closer understanding of the stance of different stakeholders. This study is an instructional design combining both ”case method” and ”role-playing” into the ”Soil and Groundwater Talent Training Courses” in Taipei. The curriculum is based on the hexavalent chromium pollution case in Yunlin County. Each group of students is encouraged to play four roles, inculding leather factory owners, farmers, environmental officials, and soil testing professionals. Each group of students has to propose solution strategies after discussion and consultation. The study adopts a single group posttest design. The qualitative data were analyzed using content analysis. The quantitative data were analyzed through proportion and Pearson correlation. Results were as follows: (1) The solution strategies identified by the students include: ”mutual communication”, ”consensus-building”, and ”the formation of an environmental committee”. (2) More than 80% of students were satisfied with the instruction, and they found it helpful in terms of knowledge and skills in doing surveying. A moderate positive correlation exists between students' participation and learning satisfaction. A reflection concerning this instruction design along with some recommendations are provided.起始頁-結束頁：103-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：負數史與負數教學中的美感意涵並列篇名：The Aesthetic Value Embedded in the Negative Number History and the Negative Number Instruction作者：陳淑娟(Shu-Chuan Chen)關鍵字：負數教學;負數算則;數學美學;mathematics aesthetics;negative number algorithm;negative number instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從四方面說明負數史與負數教學中的美感意義和價值。首先，說明從美感角度看負數教學的理由；其次，說明什麼條件下容易產生美感；其三，從負數史及東西方處理負數特質的對比看負數之美；最後，說明以美感觀點開拓負數教學的視野，分析負數美的內涵。負數教學的視野與美感內涵包括：一、以同理寬容負數困頓的美感態度，化解負數學習的不安；二、藉美感態度欣賞負數的曲折發展，幫助學生重視負數；三、藉圖像所蘊含的直覺，促進負數運算的理解，本文以兩個圖像直觀的例子，說明：「減一負數等於加上它的相反數」及「兩個負數相乘，得到一正數」的便捷之道；四、藉負數史中前人的經驗，幫助學生面對並跨越負數學習的困難。本文認為引導學生體會負數在數學中的美感價值，是值得嘗試的教學方式。英文摘要：The purpose of this article is to interpret the meaning and the aesthetics value in the history of negative numbers and the instruction of negative numbers. The argument begins with explaining the reasons why the aesthetic approach can be recommended to inspire the instruction of negative numbers. The aesthetic contents of negative numbers are then analyzed and presented. The author further explicates the beauty embedded in negative numbers can be demonstrated through their developmental history. This article ends up with emphasizing the 4 merits of aesthetic viewpoints in broadening the visions of the negative number instruction; they are as follows: (1) to calm the restlessness of negative number learning; (2) to inspire student to pay more attention to number learning; (3) to better the understanding of negative number algorithm through the aesthetic intuition afforded by two examples of figure images showing that ”subtracting a negative number by adding its opposite” and that ”the multiplication of two negative numbers being positive”; (4) to assist student in facing and overcoming the problems in learning negative numbers. The teachers are encouraged to facilitate students to embrace the aesthetic value of negative numbers and to tackle students' problems in advanced mathematics learning by taking into consideration of their cognitive abilities and mathematic performance.起始頁-結束頁：133-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：大班到小學一年級兒童回應圖畫故事書的思考脈絡並列篇名：Two-Year Study on Children's Interpretive Contexts in Responding to Picture Story Books作者：戴芳煒(Fang-Wei Tai);蔡敏玲(Min-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：回應;共讀;兒童;圖畫故事書;children;picture story books;reading together;response期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討金門縣一群兒童從幼稚園大班到小學一年級與老師（即作者一）共讀圖畫書後，回應討論問題的思考脈絡，其兩年間的展現與轉變，以及老師在共讀活動中帶領、提問與回應兒童的方式。棒棒糖班的18位幼兒和老師每週固定進行三次圖畫書共讀；兒童進入小學一年級後，兩位作者和其中的12位兒童組成讀書會，每月共讀一次。作者從兒童大班時的61次共讀活動中選取20次，從小一15次共讀中挑選10次，將討論錄音詳細轉譯後，以議題分段，以發言輪次為單位，分別分析兒童回應討論問題的思考脈絡和教師參與方式，並描述兩年的轉變，及形成轉變的脈絡性因素。兒童的思考脈絡共有生活經驗、故事、生活常識、圖像、作者意圖，複合脈絡與其他共7種類型。本文指出，大班與小一兒童均有能力以探索文學文本的方式討論圖畫故事書。大班幼兒，最常以生活經驗思考討論問題，而小一兒童最常以故事本身為思考脈絡。從大班到小一，兒童回應更為積極，提問能力提昇，思考脈絡漸趨複雜多元，漸少仰賴生活經驗。作者指出教師導讀、提問與回應兒童的方式，以及閱讀文化的形塑，協助兒童發展多元脈絡理解與詮釋故事。最後，作者依據研究結果對圖畫書共讀活動與分析方法提出具體建議。英文摘要：This paper presents a two-year study on picture book reading process involving a teacher and a group of children in Kinmen County. The aim was to explore how children create their interpretation of the story (the interpretive contexts applied by these children) when responding to questions posed in the discussion sessions, the teacher's ways of participation, and other possible contextual influences. In the first year, two kindergarten teachers and 18 children read picture books together three times a week. In the second year, as children moved on to first grade, 12 of them continued to participate in monthly picture book reading sessions offered by the authors. A total of thirty audio-taped reading sessions were transcribed verbatim. The transcripts were devided by topics with every speaking turn coded. After a thorough inductive analysis, the authors constructed seven categories of children's interpretive contexts and sorted out teacher's ways of questioning, probing, and responding. The seven contexts in which the interpretation is drawn included life experiences, the story, common knowledge, the illustration, the author's intention, compound contexts and others. The most frequently applied interpretive context by kindergarteners was life experiences, whereas the most frequently applied interpretive context by first-graders was the story. The interpretive contexts applied by first-graders were more diversified. Based on the long term observation, it is proposed that the reading culture and the teacher's role contributed significantly to the development of these children's diversified interpretive contexts. Lastly, the authors provided some practical suggestions on picture book reading activities and the analytic method for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：原住民學童在電腦樂高機器人課程中的創造力與團隊合作能力並列篇名：On the Development of Creativity and Cooperation Skills in Indigenous Elementary School Students during a LEGO Mindstorms NXT Course作者：趙貞怡(Jen-Yi Chao)關鍵字：合作式問題解決;原住民學童;基礎機械概念;創造力;電腦樂高機器人;basic mechanical concepts;collaborative problem solving;creativity;indigenous students;LEGO Mindstorms NXT期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：我國九年一貫之課程目標在培養學生的十大基本能力，世界各國亦強調公民關鍵能力的重要性，希望透過教育提升公民素質，其中，科學、創造力與合作是各國共同重視的項目。本研究為了探討原住民學童在基礎機械概念學習及創造力與合作兩項能力的發展情形，將泰雅族原住民文化及CPS（Collaborative Problem Solving）教學策略，融入電腦樂高機器人與創造力的課程發展中，共開發9個單元，包含教材、教學活動與評量工具，利用99學年度上、下兩學期的綜合活動課程進行教學實驗。研究對象為宜蘭縣南澳鄉泰雅族部落（匿名）國小三年級24名學童，採用前、後測評量與課堂觀察等方法蒐集資料。研究結果如下：（1）從樂高機器人基礎機械概念的前、後測成績可知，學童於基礎機械概念知識上達到顯著進步；（2）陶倫斯創造思考圖形測驗結果顯示，學童在流暢、獨創、精密、開放與創造潛能能力均達到顯著進步；（3）學童於學習、合作與分工上，能各司其職；於討論、解決問題與發表上，需要教師適時從旁協助；於反思、評量與總結上，能展現高度興趣及創意表現。英文摘要：The objective of the nine-year integrated curriculum in Taiwan is to cultivate the ten basic competencies of students. Nations around the world have also accentuated the importance of key competencies in citizens, and it is hoped that through education, civic literacy can be enhanced. Among the basic competencies, many nations value the abilities to use technology, to be creative, and cooperative. This study investigated the development of two abilities, creativity and cooperation, in indigenous students while they learned basic mechanical concepts in a LEGO Mindstorms NXT course, which comprised nine units, during the 2010-2011 school year. Indigenous Atayal culture and teaching strategies involving collaborative problem solving were integrated into the course. The participants were 24 third graders from an elementary school serving the Atayal Tribes of Nan-ao, Ilan County. Data was collected through pretests, posttests, and classroom observations. The findings of this study are as follows. (1) The scores of the pretests and posttests indicate that the basic mechanical concepts of the students improved significantly. (2) The results of the figural Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking showed that the students improved significantly in fluency, originality, elaboration, openness, and creative potential. (3) In learning, cooperating, and the division of labor, the students were able to perform their respective duties; in discussion, problem-solving, and presentation, they required some guidance from the teacher; in reflection, assessment, and summary, the students displayed high levels of interest and creative performance.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學9篇名：教師合作設計課程的困難－活動理論觀點並列篇名：Addressing Challenges in Teacher Collaborative Curriculum Design: An Activity Theory Framework作者：陳斐卿(Fei-Ching Chen);林盈秀(Ying-Shiou Lin);蕭述三(Shu-San Hsiau)關鍵字：矛盾;共治;活動理論;教師合作;擾動;activity theory;collegiality;contradiction;disturbance;teacher collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著十二年國教的推動，國中面臨重大轉型，教師必須集體共事的互動模式更加確立，教師合作困難的探索研究更形重要。過去文獻多數聚焦在單一領域或科目會議的合作議題，如今，跨越單一領域或處室的合作機會大為增加，所遭逢的挑戰也更為複雜。本文以Engestrom的活動理論為架構，檢視新北市一所國中在跨領域與處室的課程模組合作設計過程中具有擾動特徵的互動、與較為內隱的系統性矛盾。資料收集期間為2009年8月至2011年5月共兩年82次的課程模組會議、領域會議、與轉變討論室會議，資料來源包括每次一至兩小時的會議逐字謄稿與觀察紀錄及45人次的訪談資料，以活動理論之介入方法學進行分析。研究發現三種有待磨合的現象：一為「教案集體擁有感的淡薄」，二為「合作接棒區的模糊」，三為「對會議所賦予意義的落差」。藉由活動理論架構進一步辨識出三種系統性矛盾：模組會議做為「工具」的有效性或疲乏性，不同位階者感受不同；集體教案的發展「規則」與內隱價值，在「個人責任感」與「集體擁有感」之間游移；以及教師之間扁平結構合作氛圍下，「分工」處境中的「明言性」與「隱諱性」的拉扯等。本文凸顯當今中學教師對十二年國教的轉型與因應過程中，集體共事表象之下更需深究的合作困境。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to identify the difficulties encountered when teacher teams collaborate in designing school-based integrative curriculum units. Conventionally, teachers are used to accomplish tasks by dividing things into subtasks instead of doing them together. Therefore, it is expected that they encounter difficulties while working on curriculum design collaboratively. Using Activity theory as a framework, this study aimed to identify disturbances and inner contradictions in teacher collaborative curriculum-making. Instead of relying merely on interview or observation data, dialogical data were collected in regular team meetings in a junior high school in New Taipei City. Two teacher teams, the green fair unit team and the classroom electricity device unit team, were examined using the framework of activity theory. Three contradictions were discovered: first, the meaning-making of team meetings: effective versus fatigue; second, individual responsibility versus collective ownership; and third, flatter hierarchical structure of division of labors: explicitness versus ambiguity. The complexity of boundary crossing among teachers in junior high school was also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：63-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學10篇名：權利與義務，孰先孰後？－亞洲價值的論證對人權教育之啟示並列篇名：Which Comes First: Rights or Obligations? A Revelation on Human Rights Education through the Argumentation of Asian Values作者：蘇鈺楠(Yu-Nan Su)關鍵字：人權教育;亞洲價值;教育哲學;儒家文化;Asian value;Confucianism;human rights education;the philosophy of education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：亞洲價值與《世界人權宣言》之對抗，在人權概念之普世性與相對性上有相當重要的啟示地位，於其中有許多的權利義務議題，是人權教育中相當重要、可進行論證的概念，然而在國內人權教育上尚未有針對亞洲價值之引介，這是本文期盼可開啟之討論窗口。身處於東亞，繼受儒家文化價值傳統涵養的臺灣，可藉由針對亞洲價值內涵的分析，更細部地思考權利與義務之優先順序、經濟發展與人權之先後價值、自由與社群主義之折衝等問題。透過亞洲價值與其中所表彰的儒家文化探究，即為人權教育本身概念之再反思與探索。英文摘要：The clash between Asian values and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights implies a crucial revelation regarding the universality and relativity of the human rights concept. Various issues on rights and obligations are notions critical to human rights education, which warrant further discussion. The concept of Asian values has not been introduced in Taiwan's human rights education and is the subject of this study. Located in East Asia and immersed in the cultural values and traditional virtues of Confucianism, the people of Taiwan may opt to analyze the connotations of Asian values to carefully consider the order of priorities between rights and obligations, the ranking of values between economic development and human rights, and the compromise between personal freedom and communitarianism. By examining Asian values and the Confucian culture commended by these values, the concept of human rights education were revisited and re-explored.起始頁-結束頁：95-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學11篇名：蘇格拉底方法在法律通識課程教學中的應用並列篇名：The Application of the Socratic Method in Teaching General Education Law Courses作者：石凌霜(Ling-Shuang Shih)關鍵字：法律教學;法律通識課程;蘇格拉底方法;蘇格拉底教學;general education of law;law teaching;Socratic method;Socratic teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在教育哲學中，蘇格拉底方法（Socratic Method）是強調經由對話、辯證的過程，讓學習者獲得知識與檢驗其信念的方法；在注重批判性思考的通識教育中，有相當的應用價值，法律通識課程之中亦然。根據不同的區分角度，蘇格拉底方法之內涵，可分類為所謂三模式：測試模式、美諾篇模式、特亞特圖篇模式；或二途徑：非專斷式途徑、威權式途徑。美國法學院的教學常使用蘇格拉底方法，從其不同的學習與教學經驗中，學者們或贊成或反對蘇格拉底方法。贊成者認為蘇格拉底方法對於教導基本法律原則是一個有實效的工具；反對者則認為蘇格拉底方法在課堂上的經驗是羞辱所有的學生。但基本上，多數學者將同意：重點在於教師如何善加操作蘇格拉底方法而發揮其優點以有助於學生。相比較地，蘇格拉底方法在法律通識課程之教學上亦有應用之可能性，即依照不同教學內容，可適當採取相關模式或途徑。依照美國法學院的經驗，係以美諾篇模式為主。此外，就法規範適用的理解上，可採威權式途徑來教學；就法規範修改的理解上，可採非專斷式的途徑來教學。最後，本文並輔以教學上所經歷的實際應用狀況來介紹與分析，顯示採用蘇格拉底方法教學對教育學生思辨有所助益。英文摘要：The Socratic Method emphasizes that students obtain knowledge and test their beliefs in the process of engaging in dialogues. As general education emphasizes critical thinking, this method has much applied value, specifically in teaching law courses in general education programs. In light of different perspectives, the Socratic Method could be classified into three models: the test model, the Meno model, and the Theaetetus model. Besides, it could be classified into two approaches: the non-autocratic approach and the authoritarian approach. The Socratic Method is often adopted in the teaching at law schools in the United States. In their different experiences of studying and teaching, scholars' views over the use of the Socratic Method in teaching the law is controversial. The approvers consider that the method is effective in teaching basic legal principles. The dissenters consider that the classroom experience is humiliating to all students. However, most scholars would agree that it depends on how well teachers implement the Socratic Method so that students may benefit from the process. Comparatively, there is also possibility that these models or approaches of the Socratic Method might be properly applied in the teaching of different law courses. In United States, the Meno model is mainly applied. Besides, for students' understanding the application of law, teachers may adopt the authoritarian approach. For students to understand the amending of law, teachers may use the non-autocratic approach. In this article, the author introduced and analyzed his teaching of law using the Socratic Method and demonstrated how useful it has been for educating students to have deliberation ability.起始頁-結束頁：119-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：微觀政治及其在學校領導之應用並列篇名：Micropolitics and Its Applications in School Leadership作者：陳幸仁(Hsin-Jen CHEN)關鍵字：微觀政治;學校領導;領導風格;微觀政治素養;micropolitics;school leadership;leadership styles;micropolitical literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：41卷1-2期出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來教育改革風氣日盛，具體成形的教育政策亦相繼推出，使得學校組織面臨前所未有的變革震撼。校長身為首席領導者，在各種社會期望下，感受到莫大壓力與挑戰。相關文獻指出，在近來的教育改革浪潮下，將微觀政治應用於學校領導的趨向愈見明顯，而台灣將國外有關微觀政治的文獻應用於學校領導之研究並不多見。本文主要探討微觀政治的主要意涵，分析其在學校領導之應用，並探究微觀政治應用在學校領導的思辯與新思維。最後本文指出，校長若將微觀政治應用在學校領導，校長應具有這些新思維：須具備微觀政治素養（包括知識面、操作面和經驗面之素養）、權衡學校內的領導情境而妥善運用微觀政治領導之各類型，並考量華人特有的社會國情（例如重視權威和階層關係），方能有助於校長有效運用微觀政治領導各類型之精意。英文摘要：Educational reform has been carried out during the latest decade whereby some educational policies have been implemented. Under these circumstances, schools face the unprecedented organizational shock. The principal, as the key leader in a school, encounter tremendous pressure and challenge under social expectation from various sources. According to related literatures, the trend of the applications of micropolitics in school leadership is becoming salient. There are few studies in Taiwan exploring micropolitics in school leadership. This article examined the major concepts of micropolitics, analyzed its applications in school leadership, and outlined possible ideas and challenges which principals may face in school leadership in terms of micropolitics. Finally, this article delineated some coping methods if principals apply the ideas of micropolitics in leadership: they should cultivate micropolitical literacy in leadership, penetrate organizational situations, and consider Chinese culture which emphasizes authority and hierarchy in order to capture the essence of micropolitical leadership styles.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：香港中學生完成綜合語文任務的困難與學習期望並列篇名：Secondary School Students' Difficulties and Learning Expectation in Integrated Chinese Language Tasks in Hong Kong作者：祝新華(Xinhua ZHU);鄔嬿妮(Yinlei WU)關鍵字：綜合語文能力;學習困難;學習期望;integrated Chinese language ability;learning difficulties;learning expectations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：41卷1-2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究透過學生問卷調查和教師訪談，探討香港中學生完成綜合語文任務（聆聽－閱讀－寫作）的困難與期望。問卷對象是11所中學的中四學生，共收回有效問卷732份；另與7位來自不同中學的中文科教師作焦點小組討論。研究主要發現，學生顯著感到綜合語文測試較獨立的聽說讀寫測試更困難；在完成綜合語文任務中，學生感到最為困難的是「觀點與論證」和「引用與整合」，兩者均與高層次思維相關；學生在完成綜合任務的時間分配及內容組織的規劃方面存在較大問題。本文亦會簡要討論如何改善綜合語文教學。英文摘要：The study explored secondary school students’ difficulties and learning expectation in integrated Chinese language tasks (listening-reading-writing) through investigating students and interviewing teachers. A total of 732 secondary 4 students from 11 secondary schools in Hong Kong completed the questionnaires that addressed their perceived difficulties and learning expectation in integrated Chinese language tasks. Meanwhile, seven teachers of Chinese language from different schools participated in a focus group interview. The study found that, compared with independent tasks (listening, speaking, reading, and writing), students felt more difficult in doing integrated Chinese language tasks. The most difficult two parts are ”opinion and argument” and ”citation and synthesis” because they are related to high-order thinking. Moreover, students had difficulties in time allocation and content organization when they did integrated tasks. Suggestions about how to improve Chinese language teaching are also discussed briefly.起始頁-結束頁：27-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：校本教研中的教師合作：中國內地一所小學的個案研究並列篇名：Teacher Collaboration in School-based Teaching and Research: A Case Study of a Primary School in the Chinese Mainland作者：喬雪峰(Xuefeng QIAO);黎萬紅(Manhong LAI)關鍵字：實踐社群;教師合作;校本教研;communities of practice;teacher collaboration;school-based teaching and research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：41卷1-2期出版年：2013中文摘要：近二十多年來，有關教師合作的研究主要關注其概念定義和測量，很少關心教師對合作過程的理解和參與。本文從實踐社群的視角切入，以中國內地校本教學研究為個案，從社群形態、溝通規範和發展定位三個維度探討教師對合作的理解和參與。研究發現，教師合作是處於結構化的組織系統及制度下，由領導教師引領，圍繞統一的教學取向展開研討。教師群體發展出家族式的社群模式，從事示範性教學模式的再生產，教師的專業對話空間受到一定限制。英文摘要：Over the past two decades, research studies about teacher collaboration has been largely focused on its conceptualization and measurement, yet relatively little explores teachers' perception and engagement in the specific interactive process. This study investigates school-based teaching and research in the Chinese mainland from the perspective of communities of practice. It interprets the dynamic nature of teacher collaboration from three dimensions: communities, norms of interaction, and orientation toward development. The findings reveal that situated in a structured organizational system, teacher collaboration is operated under a top-down approach. Guided by teacher leaders, teachers follow a unified orientation to discuss teaching practice. It shows that teachers are bonded as a clan, and engaged in the reproduction of paradigmatic teaching practice. Teachers' professional discourse is limited during the process.起始頁-結束頁：47-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：從PISA剖析家庭社會資本對學生基礎能力的影響並列篇名：Effect of Family Social Capital on Students' Literacy Performance: Insights from PISA作者：藍郁平(Terence Y. P. LAM);何瑞珠(Esther S. C. HO)關鍵字：社會資本;家長參與;家校合作;social capital;parental involvement;home-school collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：41卷1-2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採用多層線性模式（hierarchical linear modeling）進行分析，以探討家庭社會資本對學生成績的效應。樣本為參與2002年「香港學生能力國際評估計劃」正式測試的140所學校中4,405名學生。結果顯示：整體而言，家庭社會資本與閱讀、數學和科學能力有顯著關係。在兩大範疇的社會資本中，過程方面的社會資本較結構方面的社會資本更為重要。就個人層次而言，有幾項過程方面的社會資本（包括家內文化 溝通、家內一般溝通及父母對子女的教育期望）對基礎能力的效應較強。就學校層次而言，結構方面的社會資本（主要是學校堮a長網路平均值）對學生成績的正面脈絡效應頗強。總體而言，本研究結果支持Coleman的社會資本創造人力資本的理論。英文摘要：This article examines the effect of family social capital on students' literacy performance. Data of the present study come from the first cycle of the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), which was conducted in 2002 in Hong Kong. A total of 4,405 fifteen-year-old students from 140 secondary schools completed the assessment and questionnaires. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) is used to examine the effect of family social capital on students' reading, mathematical, and scientific literacy performance. Findings from the HLM analysis indicate that most measures of family social capital are consistently associated with students' reading, mathematical, and scientific literacies. At the student level, students scored higher if their parents have more cultural or social communication with them. Parents with higher educational expectation also contribute significantly to students' literacy performance. At the school level, school average level of parental network has strong positive contextual effect on students' literacy performance. Overall, evidence from this study supports Coleman's thesis of social capital in the creation of human capital.起始頁-結束頁：65-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：The ”Why” and ”What” of Curriculum Inquiry: Schwab's The Practical Revisited並列篇名：課程探究之為何與何為：施瓦布實踐取向的再認識作者：鄧宗怡(Zongyi DENG)關鍵字：curriculum inquiry;curriculum theory;the practical;curriculum practice;課程探究;課程理論;實踐取向;課程實踐期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：41卷1-2期出版年：2013中文摘要：This article examines the ”why” and ”what” of curriculum inquiry from the perspective of the practical in Schwab's (1969/1978a) paper. It critically scrutinizes the state of curriculum inquiry in China and in North America. The central argument is that curriculum inquiry is a practical undertaking centrally concerned with the practice or inner work of schooling within the societal, institutional and instructional contexts. It is a normative endeavor for its ultimate purpose is the advancement of schooling. Furthermore, this article addresses what makes curriculum inquiry curricular, and challenges contemporary curriculum theorizing (e.g., reconceptualist curriculum inquiry) as peripheral to or decoupled from the real-world practice of schooling.英文摘要：為何作課程探究？甚麼是課程探究？本文從施瓦布（Schwab, 1969/1978a）實踐取向的角度檢討這兩個問題，並對中國內地和北美課程探究的狀況作批判的審視。文章的中心論點是：課程探究主要是實踐性的探究，其最終目標是改進學校教育，而關注焦點是社會文化、教育體制、學校與課堂背景中學校內部的工作。本文進一步論述課程探究的「課程」特徵，並批判課程再概念學派與學校實踐脫節。起始頁-結束頁：85-105資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：The Oversupply of Teachers in Taiwan: Causes and Consequences並列篇名：台灣的超額教師：原因與後果作者：李曉蓉(Hsiao-Jung LI)關鍵字：primary teaching;teacher surplus;teacher training in Taiwan;小學教育;超額教師;台灣師資培育期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：41卷1-2期出版年：2013中文摘要：This article explores the causes and consequences of the oversupply of primary teaching workforce both in the teaching labor market and in the teaching workplace in Taiwan by examining the historical development of teacher training and its relationship with government policies and social contexts. It uses data from government publications, reports and official statistics, coupled with findings of local Taiwanese research and my ethnographic case study. After the enactment of Teacher Education Act in 1994, there has been expansion of teacher training and diversification of training routes. However, with Taiwan's declining fertility rate, teaching vacancies for qualified teachers have been scarce, resulting in the oversupply of teachers. This article further argues that the oversupply of primary school teachers is the result of an obvious decline in pupil enrollments, combined with low teacher turnover rates and the prevalence of young teachers among the overall teaching body.英文摘要：本文藉由分析台灣師資培育的歷史發展、教育政策變革與社會情境脈絡的關係，探究國小師資供過於求的原因與後果。本文參照官方出版物、報告與統計資料，並運用文獻資料與個案研究，分析台灣因師資培育政策鬆綁、1994年實施《教師法》後，師資培育機構增加、培育管道多元化，卻因出生率急遽下降（少子化），教師職位嚴重不足，造成教育市場師資供應過剩（這些教師稱為流浪教師）。此外，研究結果指出，台灣小學職場出現超額教師，導因於入學新生數逐年下降、教師退休率低，以及教師當中以年輕教師佔大多數。起始頁-結束頁：107-133資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：r效果量加權值的選擇對後設分析結果的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Effect Size Weight on Meta-Analytic Outcomes作者：許崇憲(Chong-Shiann Hsu)關鍵字：r值;加權值;後設分析;效果量;effect size;meta-analysis;r;weights期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討以r值作為效果量時，加權值計算方式對後設分析結果的影響。加權值的計算與樣本數有關，所以除了比較不同加權方式下的平均效果量差異外，也要分析樣本數及效果量的關聯性。研究者以「學業成敗歸因型態對學術成就及能力知覺的影響」為題，搜尋中、英文期刊論文。結果發現：第一，效果量與樣本數之間無顯著相關；第二，若未考慮樣本依賴問題，會得到偏差的平均效果量；第三，在解決樣本依賴問題上，不同方法的比較結果依平均效果量計算公式而不同。與未加權的平均效果量相較，加權方式採Hunter與Schmidt方法，可能得到較低的效果量，而Hedges與Vevea方法之下所得結果無明顯差異。根據上述結果，本文建議以r為效果量時，應顧及樣本依賴性並採用隨機效果模式。英文摘要：This study examined the impact of effect size (r) weight on meta-analytic outcomes. In the issue of ”the effect of academic attribution on academic performance and ability perception”, the author conducted searches in the electronic database and deleted inappropriate studies. The correlation coefficient between sample size and absolute value of effect size was computed. The mean of unweighted effect sizes was computed along with those by means of Hunter and Schmidt (1990) and Hedges and Vevea (1998). It was found that there was no significant correlation between effect size and sample size. Data dependency contributed to biased effect size; however, it was not stated whether the biased effect size was overestimated. For avoiding data dependency, the researchers usually averaged the effect sizes from the same samples and then computed the mean effect sizes for all studies. An alternative method was that the outcome of the weights divided by the number of effect size from the same sample was used as the new weight (O'Mara, Marsh, Craven, & Debus, 2006). It was found that these two ways of avoiding data dependency contributed to the similar averaged effect sizes in the method of Hedges and Vevea, rather than in the one of Hunter and Schmidt. Because there was no significant relationship between effect size and sample size, the unweighted effect size was reasonably valid. The methods developed by Hedges and Vevea resulted in the outcomes similar to the unweighted effect size, which was different from those estimated by the method of Hunter and Schmidt. The findings implied seemingly that the methods which could avoid data dependency and which were developed by Hedges and Vevea were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：627-648資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：Can We Rely Too Much on Testlets?-The Influence of the Number of Testlet Items on Parameter Estimation並列篇名：題組在測驗上的使用是否須謹慎？題組的題數對參數估計的影響作者：林奕宏(Yi-Hung Lin);施慶麟(Ching-Lin Shih)關鍵字：參數估計;測驗設計;題組;題組效果;羅序題組模式;parameter estimation;Rasch testlet model;test design;testlet effect;testlet期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：題組題已被廣泛應用在各種測驗情境裡，然而，研究已發現題組效果會對測驗結果產生某種程度的影響。本研究目的即在進一步探究題組的題數與整體測驗結果的關係，並聚焦在參數估計結果與測驗信度的變化。本研究包含實徵分析及模擬研究。實徵分析以台灣2007年大學入學考試英語科測驗為例，發現測驗資料中含有顯著的題組效果；接著以實徵分析所得的參數值為基礎，進行模擬研究。模擬的結果發現，測驗中題組題的數目會對受試者的能力估計值產生顯著的影響：當題組題數目減少時，與受試者能力估計值有關的偏誤、標準誤、均方差、平均絕對誤差等也會隨之降低，而測驗信度則會隨之提高，但試題難度受到的影響就相對較小。換言之，如果測驗目的是希望獲得精確的受試者能力估計值，如入學測驗等，則對題組題的使用，尤其是題組題的數目，就須特別小心控制。英文摘要：Testlet items are commonly used in test situations. However, studies have found that the testlet effects have some impact on test results. The purpose of this study is to investigate further the influence of the number of testlet items on the entire test and to observe changes in the parameter estimates as well as test reliability. This study consists of an empirical analysis and two simulation studies. The English test in Taiwan's 2007 College Entrance Examination was analyzed in this study as an example. The empirical analysis demonstrates the non-ignorable testlet effects in the dataset. The parameter estimates obtained from the empirical analysis are then used in the simulation studies. The simulation studies reveal that the total number of testlet items has a significant impact on the person ability estimate; bias, standard error, mean square error and mean absolute error drop, but the EAP test reliability rises, when fewer testlet items were included in the test. In terms of the item difficulty estimate, this impact is relatively small; only standard error shows a consistent increase when the number of testlet items increases, and this effect is not consistent for bias, mean square error and mean absolute error. In sum, it can be concluded that the testlet effects are not beneficial to ability estimation, and this influence undermines test fairness. Other suggestions for test design are provided in the conclusion.起始頁-結束頁：649-680資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：以概念結合理論為基礎的想像力測驗之編製並列篇名：Construction of an Imagination Test Based on Theory of Conceptual Combination作者：洪瑞雲(Ruey-Yun Horng);王精文(Ching-Wen Wang);拾已寰(Yi-Hwan Shyr);李泊諺(Po-Yen Lee);王愉敏(Yu-Ming Wang)關鍵字：創造力;測驗編製;想像力;概念結合;conceptual combination;creativity;imagination;test construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究擬依據概念結合理論發展一份「概念結合的想像力測驗」，每一個測驗題目由兩個完全不相關的名詞概念組合而成，其中第一個名詞的性質可能是抽象、自然物或人造物；第二個名詞的性質也可能是抽象、自然物或人造物；此3×3的組合各有兩組，共18題。受試者被要求設法想出兩者之間的關聯，並說明其聯想過程或理由。以602位大學生與研究生在此測驗上的反應，透過項目分析後，本測驗試題具有鑑別度，重測信度為.878，折半信度為.745，評分者間信度為.852；以110位設計系學生的設計專題期末成績為效標，其與想像力測驗分數的相關係數為顯著（r = .265），具有預測效度。此外，想像力測驗的分數與TTCT的獨創性有低的正相關，與TTCT其他的分歧思考能力則無相關，與創造性人格量表間也無相關，顯示此想像力測驗具有區別效度。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a test of imagination based on theory of concept combination. The test comprises eighteen items. Each test item is composed of two unrelated nouns. The ontological category of the first noun and the second noun can be either an abstract concept, a natural object, or an artifact. The combination of nouns yielded nine types of noun-noun pairs. There are two items of the same type of nounnoun pairs. For each noun-noun pair, participants were asked to report what emerged in their mind's eye when they saw these two nouns connected together. They were also asked to explain the process or reasons for the emergence of their ideas. Data from six hundred and two college and graduate students indicated that the test-retest reliability of the test was 0.878, and the split-half reliability was 0.745. The test scores from imagination test had low but positive correlation with the originality score of TTCT, but no correlation with fluency, flexibility, or elaboration scores of TTCT. The predictive validity of the test was examined with 110 design students' performance in design projects. It was found that students' performance in design was correlated with their imagination score (r = .265). Imagination score showed low but positive correlation with originality scores of TTCT, but unrelated to other divergent thinking scores in TTCT, or two measures of creative personality. The results indicated that the imagination test developed in this study is valid and imagination ability is a construct different from creativity.起始頁-結束頁：681-713資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：「大學教師教學魅力量表」之發展並列篇名：The Inventory of Teaching Charisma in the College Classroom作者：黃韞臻(Yun-Chen Huang);林淑惠(Shu-Hui Lin)關鍵字：人格修養;幽默風趣;教學技巧;教學魅力;學識涉獵;humor;knowledge;morality;teaching charisma;teaching techniques期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在發展「大學教師教學魅力量表」（Inventory of Teaching Charisma in the College Classroom，ITCCC）。發展過程首先參酌相關文獻，並彙整訪談學生意見據以編製量表，再以265名大二學生進行預試，而後以項目分析篩選題項。正式施測後共獲得1,035份有效問卷，將其隨機分為三組，分別進行探索性因素分析、驗證性因素分析，以及複核效化分析。探索性因素分析的結果共抽取出四個因素：人格修養、幽默風趣、學識涉獵，以及教學技巧；總量表的Cronbach's α係數為.962，分量表介於.898至.927之間。驗證性因素分析結果發現，ITCCC模式有合理的適配及良好的效標關聯效度，而且ITCCC的四個一階因素具有合理的組合信度與變異數平均抽取量，可見ITCCC具有良好的信度與效度。最後，經由複核效化分析顯示，量表模式具有跨樣本的穩定性。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to develop the Inventory of Teaching Charisma in the College Classroom (ITCCC). The initial items were built based on reviewing the relevant literatures and informal discussing with students. The formal scale was obtained by 265 pilot study samples of sophomores and items analysis. The valid 1,035 participants were randomly divided into 3 groups to perform exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis and criterion-related validity, and cross-validation examination, respectively. After exploratory factor analysis, four factors - morality, humor, knowledge, and teaching techniques - were extracted. The Cronbach's α coefficient for the entire scale was .962, and the coefficients of internal consistency for four subscales ranged from .898 to .927. The results from confirmatory factor analysis suggested that the ITCCC has good goodness of fit and criterion-related validity; moreover, the four factors have good composite reliability and average variance extracted. The ITCCC therefore had good reliability and validity. Finally, the cross-validation for the model was examined on the third sample set.起始頁-結束頁：715-740資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：「學前兒童社會行為量表」編製之研究並列篇名：The Development of Social Behavior Rating Scales for Preschool Children作者：趙麗華(Li-Hua Chao);王天苗(Tien-Miau Wang)關鍵字：幼兒;社會行為;問題行為;problem behavior;social behavior;young children期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在編製可評量2∼5歲幼兒的正向行為、外向問題行為，以及內向問題行為之「學前兒童社會行為量表」。量表共64題，包括人際互動、團體規範、獨立自主、破壞攻擊、過動分心、焦慮悲觀，以及退縮害羞等七個向度。以臺北縣市幼兒園所的幼兒為樣本，檢測本量表之信效度，研究結果為：（1）效度：本量表的因素模式適配情形大致良好；量表內部呈中高度相關；不同年齡、性別幼兒在量表得分上有顯著差異；發展遲緩幼兒比一般幼兒表現較少正向行為、較多問題行為；至於效標關聯效度，本量表得分與「幼兒氣質量表」、「親職壓力量表」得分有顯著相關；（2）信度：本量表的內部一致性係數介於.85∼.95；教師評量者信度介於.62∼.79；重測信度介於.74∼.92。依據研究結果，研究者針對本量表的使用提出相關之建議。英文摘要：The purposes of the study were to develop the Social Behavior Rating Scales for Preschool Children (SBRS) with ages ranged from 2 to 5 years old. Total of 652 children were selected as the sample of this study, including 573 children with typical development, and 79 children with developmental delays or suspected ones, from kindergartens in Taipei County. The SBRS contains 64 items for assessing social interaction, following rules, independence, aggressive, hyperactive/attention problems, anxiety, and social withdrawal in three subscales of Social Skills, Externalizing Problems and Internalizing Problems Behaviors based on confirmatory factor analysis. Children with typical development and those who are female or in higher age groups were found to demonstrate more positive social behaviors. The scores of SBRS were significantly associated with child temperament and parental stress. The results also indicated that SBRS has satisfactory internal consistency (α = .85-.95), inter-rater reliability (r = .62-.79), and test-retest reliability (r = .74-.92). Implications for the SBRS were discussed and suggestions were provided for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：741-766資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「大學生注意力缺失／過動疾患反應評估量表學生自陳量表繁體中文版」（C-CARE-SRI）編修及心理計量特質分析研究並列篇名：Revision and Psychometric Testing of the Traditional Chinese College ADHD Response Evaluation Student Response Inventory (C-CARE-SRI)作者：林慧麗(Hui-Li Lin);蔡政融(Cheng-Jung Tasi);顧維倫(Wei-Lun Ku);王弈升(Yi-Sheng Wang);卓淑玲(Shu-Ling Cho);陳東家(Dung-Jia Chen)關鍵字：大學生;大學生注意力缺失／過動疾患反應評估量表學生自陳量表繁體中文版;因素結構效度;注意力不足／過動疾患傾向;常模;ADHD tendency;college students;factorial construct validity;norms;Traditional Chinese College ADHD Response Evaluation Student Response Inventory (C-CARE-SRI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在將「大學生注意力缺失／過動疾患反應評估量表學生自陳量表繁體中文版」（C-CARE-SRI）進行中文化後之編修，並進行編修後版本之信效度檢驗，再建立本地的常模。本研究以分層抽樣方式取得1,950名大學生所填答之資料，結果顯示，C-CARE-SRI具良好的信效度。通過國外常模修正後切截點的人數比例，在不注意與衝動向度皆較高，顯示有建立本地常模的必要性。驗證性因素分析之結果顯示，以三因子（不注意、過動、衝動）模式適配度較佳，符合預期。文末並建議未來中文化成人ADHD量表的研究方向。英文摘要：This study aims to revise the Traditional Chinese College ADHD Response Evaluation Student Response Inventory (C-CARE-SRI), conduct analyses on its reliability and validity, and establish its local norms. A total of 1,950 local college students' data were collected with stratified sampling technique. Our findings indicated that the C-CARE-SRI has fair reliability and validity. Higher percentages of our sample students passed the modified cut-points of the original English version CARE-SRI on inattention and impulsiveness subscales, indicating that the local norm is in need. Findings from confirmatory factor analyses once again supported the three-factor (inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity) model suggested by other CARE studies. Future studies on adult ADHD research were also discussed and suggested.起始頁-結束頁：767-790資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：臺灣國中生「中文版希望感量表」之編製並列篇名：The Sense of Hope Scale in Chinese Version for Taiwan Junior High Students作者：賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai);巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu)關鍵字：心理計量特徵;希望感;結構方程模式;複核效度考驗;cross-validation;hope;psychometric characteristics;Structural Equation Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在編製一份適合臺灣國中生使用之「中文版希望感量表」，包括對量表進行嚴謹的信、效度及複核效度考驗。本量表包含目標、正向情緒、動力思考，以及路徑思考等四個分量表，共計21題。研究參與者取自北、中、南地區的六所學校，每校選取國一、二、三年級各2班，有效樣本為1,155人。結果顯示：（1）四個分量表的Cronbach's α係數介於.85∼.88之間，總量表為.94，顯示本量表具有良好的內部一致性信度；（2）效度方面，本量表具有良好的建構效度、區辨效度、聚斂效度，以及效標關聯效度；（3）複核效度考驗結果顯示，本量表具有良好的穩定性與效度延展。英文摘要：The study aims to develop a sense of hope scale in Chinese version for Taiwan junior high students, and to examine its reliability, validity, and cross validation. There are 21 items in this scale including four sub-scales, goal, positive emotion, agency thinking, and pathways thinking. There are two classes selected from each grade of each school from six schools in northern, central, and southern Taiwan, respectively. The effective participants sums up to 1,155 totally. The results are as follows: (1) the range of Cronbach's α of four sub-scales is from .85-.88, and .94 of the whole scale; (2) the results of data analysis show good construct validity, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and criterion-related validity; (3) the finding of cross-validation shows the scale has good stability and validity extension.起始頁-結束頁：429-455資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：Effects of Score Transformation on the Composite Scores under the Multivariate Proficiency Distribution Using IRT並列篇名：原始至量尺分數轉換法在多向度能力分配下對由試題反映理論模式產生量尺總分的影響作者：章舜雯(Shun-Wen Chang);滕欣(Shin Teng);盧家鋒(Chia-Feng Lu)關鍵字：多向度能力分配;原始至量尺分數轉換;測驗組合;量尺總分;試題反應理論;composite score;IRT;multivariate proficiency distribution;raw-to-scale score transformation;test battery期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討原始至量尺分數轉換法在多向度能力分配中，對使用試題反應理論模式產生量尺總分的影響；在測驗組合、各學科所測量的能力彼此互為相關的情境下，本研究建立一多向度能力分配，根據Kolen、Wang 與Lee（2012）的IRT模式、使用實徵資料，探討直線、常態化以及正弦反函數等三種不同的轉換法以試題反應理論模式產生量尺總分的效果，研究中以包含五個測驗學科的2008年國中基測第一次測驗5,000筆考生的隨機樣本進行。評鑑結果的標準是分別針對不同轉換方式，比較量尺總分在統計與測量方面的特性、分數分配圖形、總誤差量與信度值，以及測量標準誤。研究結果顯示，不同的分數轉換法所得量尺總分有著不同的分數特性，其描述統計值、分數分配圖形與測量標準誤皆有所不同。原始至量尺分數有不同的轉換形式，量尺總分又通常以各學科量尺分數分別加總而成，所以分數的轉換法在考生量尺總分上扮演著極為重要的角色。本研究應用Kolen等人的IRT模式建立多向度能力分配，探討不同分數轉換法對於應用試題反應理論模式產生量尺總分的影響，研究的結果對透過不同轉換法所得量尺總分的特性提供了有用的訊息。英文摘要：This study was designed to examine the composite scores that combine the individual components of the test battery using scale scores resulting from different raw-toscale score transformations under the multivariate proficiency distribution using IRT. The purpose was to evaluate the impact of the three conversion approaches of the linear, the normalizing, and the arcsine transformation on the composite scores obtained by using IRT with the consideration that correlations existed among the examinees' proficiencies. The effects of the transformation were explored via the special case of Kolen, Wang, and Lee's (2012) IRT modeling using empirical data. The five tests of the Basic Competence Test were employed, with a random sample of 5,000 examinees drawn from the data in 2008. The analyses included the summary statistics and frequency distributions of the composite scores, overall SEMs, reliability values and the CSEMs. The results showed that the different transformations led to diverse outcomes of the composite score attributes. Their descriptive statistics, frequency distributions as well as CSEMs were not the same among the various conversion procedures. Composite scores are often formed based on scale scores attained from different forms of conversion; the role of the transformation can be critical in influencing the test results of the examinees' composite scores. Assessing the effects of the score transformation through Kolen et al.'s modeling has helped to understand more about the characteristics of the composite scores under the multivariate environment via IRT.起始頁-結束頁：457-488資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：大型測驗等化群體不變性之探究：以2007年臺灣學生學習成就評量資料庫國中二年級數學科為例並列篇名：Exploring the Population Invariance of Equating in the Large-Scale Assessments: Using the Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement as an Example作者：王暄博(Hsuan-Po Wang);郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);呂玉如(Yu-Ju Lu)關鍵字：IRT真實分數等化;IRT觀察分數等化;群體不變性;量尺轉換方法;IRT observed score equating;IRT true score equating;population invariance;scale transformation method期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以2007年「臺灣學生學習成就評量資料庫」（TASA）國中二年級數學科的測驗資料為例，檢驗TASA測驗進行量尺程序後，其測驗分數是否有符合等化群體不變性之性質。本研究以性別進行分群，探討不同等化方法於性別受試者群體中是否保留群體不變性，包含：平均數與標準差法、平均數法、試題特徵曲線，以及測驗特徵曲線等不同量尺轉換方法，並搭配試題反應理論（IRT）真實分數與IRT觀察分數等化方法，共計八種等化方法。此外，採用Dorans與Holland（2000）提出之均方根誤差（RMSD）與均方根平均期望誤差（REMSD），以及Yang（2004）提出之均方根期望誤差（RESD）等三種方法來評估經過次群體等化後的群體不變性，並以SDTM為評估準則。研究結果顯示，TASA 2007年的數學科資料除了題本七有某些分數點超出SDTM標準值之外，其餘題本皆符合等化群體不變性。英文摘要：This study aims to use test data from the Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement (TASA) database to explore whether the test scores determined by the TASA complied with population invariance. Researchers used the TASA eighth grade mathematics data from 2007 and explored eight different equating methods to assess whether invariance was retained regarding the subjects' gender, including item response theory (IRT) true score and IRT observed score equating. This study also adopted four scale transformation methods, such as mean/mean, mean/sigma, Haebara, and Stocking-Lord procedures. Furthermore, Dorans and Hollands' (2000) RMSD and REMSD methods, as well as Yang's (2004) RESD method, were used to evaluate the population invariance after completed subpopulation equating. SDTM was the evaluation standard. The results showed that the TASA mathematics data correlated with the population invariance, except for the seventh booklet where a few points exceeded the SDTM standard.起始頁-結束頁：489-518資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：不同方法設定英文科決斷分數之實務性研究並列篇名：The Comparison of Two Standard Setting Methods on an English Test作者：謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh);謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh);林世華(Sieh-Hwa Lin)關鍵字：書籤標定法;標準設定;Yes/No Angoff;bookmark method;standard setting期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的在比較書籤標定法與Yes/No Angoff標準設定方法在設定決斷分數上的差異，並使用TASA 2009年英文科來進行比較研究，研究結果顯示，兩種標準設定方法所做出的決斷分數略有不同，標準設定成員們認為，Yes/No Angoff法執行起來較為簡單，最終決定的決斷分數也較符合預期。然而，執行此方法所需要的會議時間較長；書籤標定法執行所需之時間雖然較短，然需要克服的技術層面較多，尤其在面臨題本難度順序與成員心中期望的難度順序不一致時，往往會影響成員放置書籤的決策。最後，本研究建議，雖Yes/No Angoff法執行上比較簡單，但是在時間與人力負荷考量下，若未來想要進行Yes/No Angoff法進行標準設定時，最好能預估兩天的時間，如此才能將題目充分進行討論，然而，對於題目較多的測驗或面臨人力不足的條件下，則較適合使用書籤標定法，並搭配加強標準設定成員訓練作為配套。英文摘要：This paper presents a comparison on two prevalent method, bookmark and yes/no Angoff method, for setting cut scores on educational assessments. The comparison is presented through an application with a Grade 6 English Assessment in Taiwan. The implementations for each method are described in detail along with comparative results for the application. It is found that the resulting cutoff points from these two methods are somewhat different. Judges regarded that yes/no Angoff method is easier to implement and the resulting cutoff points are more close to their expectation. Comparatively, there are more difficulties need to be solved for the bookmark procedure, especially when the item difficulty order does not follow judges' expectation. It is found that although the implementation of Yes/No Angoff method is simple, the Bookmark method still has some promising features.起始頁-結束頁：519-544資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：問題本位學習對學生學業成就與高層次思考能力影響之後設分析並列篇名：The Effect of PBL on Student Academic Achievement and Higher-Order Thinking Ability: A Meta-Analysis作者：廖遠光(Yuen-Kuang Liao);張澄清(Cheng-Ching Chang)關鍵字：問題本位學習;問題導向學習;後設分析;學業成就;高層次思考能力;PBL;problem-based learning;meta-analysis;academic achievement;higher-order thinking ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究透過系統化的文獻分析探討問題本位學習（PBL）對學生學業成就及高層次思考能力的影響。本研究以後設分析法分析了國內PBL成效相關研究共67篇（學業成就計有45篇、高層次思考能力則為31篇），結果顯示PBL對於學生學業成就及高層次思考能力具有顯著地正向效應，整體效應量（ES）分別為0.41及0.70。本研究進一步發現，學業成就會受到兩個調節變項（學科領域及教學期間）之調節作用而呈現差異；高層次思考能力則會受到七個調節變項（學習階段、學科領域、PBL類型、數位平台與教材、教學期間、評量方式、及能力類型）之調節作用而呈現差異。英文摘要：This study examines the effects of problem-based learning (PBL) on students' academic achievement and higher-order thinking abilities through a systematic review of existing literature in Taiwan. A meta-analysis of 67 studies (45 studies for the academic achievement, and 31 for higher-order thinking abilities) indicated statistically significant positive effects of PBL on academic achievement (ES = 0.41) and higher-order thinking abilities (ES = 0.70). In addition, two moderator variables (i.e., subject area and during of treatment) selected for examining students' academic achievement, and seven moderator variables (i.e., grade level, subject area, type of PBL, digital platform and instructional materials, during of treatment, method of evaluation, and type of ability) selected for examining students' higher-order thinking abilities had a statistically significant impact on the mean ES.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2104.012篇名：影響大學生課堂主動發言的因素並列篇名：Influencing Factors of Volunteering to Speak in Class for College Students作者：徐文鈺(Wen-Yu Hsu)關鍵字：大學生;師生互動;課堂主動發言;college students;teacher-student interaction;volunteer to speak in class期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在探討影響國內大學生課堂主動發言的因素，以提供改進大學課堂師生互動的依據。研究採半結構訪談訪問27位大學生，並依開放性編碼原則分析質性資料。結果發現，大學生課堂主動發言的先決條件在於能產生問題或答案；具備先決條件後，包括個人個性或把握度、對教師回饋的預期、對同儕反應的擔憂等三項知覺因素，以及因素間的交互作用，決定了大學生主動發言的行為。而學生的知覺因素，則多來自於學習經驗與社會文化環境的影響。本文綜合研究結果，提出影響大學生課堂主動發言模式，並建議教師可由解除相關困難與顧慮著手，以激勵大學生主動發言，未來並可採問卷或教學實驗等方式進行研究，以進一步探討此模式。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the factors of volunteering to speak in class for college students and the results will be used to improve teacher-student interaction in the college classrooms. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 27 college students to explore the factors. Open coding approach was used to analyze the qualitative data. The results indicated the prerequisite of volunteering to speak for college students lies in the possibility of producing answers or questions. If the prerequisite was met, the college students' speaking behaviors were to be interactively determined by three inner perception factors: students' personality or confidence, their expectation of teacher's feedback, and the concern about peer reactions. Furthermore, most of the inner perception factors were affected by personal experiences and socio-cultural contexts. According to the results, this study proposed a model on volunteering to speak in the college classrooms. It is recommended that teachers encourage student to speak voluntarily by removing some barriers or doubts in class. For further study, questionnaire methods and teaching experiments are recommended to test the model.起始頁-結束頁：41-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2104.023篇名：依附關係、低自我控制及接觸偏差同儕與青少年偏差行為關係之研究並列篇名：The Effects of Attachment, Low Self-control and Deviant Peer Relationships on Delinquency of Junior High School Students in Taiwan作者：譚子文(Tzyy-Wen Tan);張楓明(Feng-Ming Chang)關鍵字：依附關係;低自我控制;接觸偏差同儕;青少年偏差行為;中介變項;attachment;low self-control;deviant peer;delinquency;mediators期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要依據社會控制理論、自我控制理論及社會學習理論的觀點，探討依附關係、低自我控制、接觸偏差同儕與青少年偏差行為的影響。本研究抽樣對象為台北市、新北市、台中市、高雄市、台東市及台東縣之國中學生，主要採用分層叢集隨機抽樣方式，有效分析樣本共734名學生，透過結構方程模式來檢定所搜集之數據。研究結果發現：（1）依附關係和青少年偏差行為、低自我控制、接觸偏差同儕間具有關聯。（2）間接效果分析顯示，低自我控制、接觸偏差同儕是依附關係和青少年偏差行為之中介變數。（3）而接觸偏差同儕是低自我控制和青少年偏差行為間之重要中介角色。依據研究的分析結果，文中就未來對青少年偏差行為之研究與輔導提出相關建議。英文摘要：Drawing upon the social control theory, low self-control theory and social learning theory, this study tried to find how attachment, low self-control and deviant peer would influence juvenile delinquency. Sample of the study consisted of 734 junior high school students from Taipei City, New Taipei city, Taichung City, Kaohsiung City, Taitung City, and Taitung County by a random stratified-cluster sampling. Structure equation modeling was used to test the model. The results of this study found that: (1) attachment was related to delinquency, low self-control, and association with deviant peers; (2) as the indirect effects analysis showed, low self-control and association with deviant peers were the mediators for the relationship between attachment and juvenile delinquency; (3) association with deviant peers has a central role to play in mediation between low self-control and juvenile delinquency. Based on the research results, several suggestions for guidance and further studies were also provided.起始頁-結束頁：81-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2104.034篇名：校長跨界領導對學校價值創造影響之研究－以組織合作為中介變項並列篇名：A Study of the Effects of Principal's Cross-border Leadership on Value Creation-Organizational Cooperation as an Intermediary Variable作者：謝傳崇(Chuan-Chung Hsieh);鍾雪雲(Hsuen-Yun Chung)關鍵字：跨界領導;組織合作;價值創造;cross-border leadership;organization cooperation;value creation期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的在以學校組織合作為中介變項，探討校長跨界領導對學校價值創造的影響。研究方法採用問卷調查法，以國民小學教育人員（包含校長、主任、組長、導師及科任教師）為研究對象，針對桃竹苗四縣市各國民小學，採分層隨機抽樣方式進行調查，並使用結構方程模式分析校長跨界領導、學校組織合作與價值創造的關係。研究結果顯示校長跨界領導與組織合作、學校組織合作與價值創造、校長跨界領導與學校價值創造具有顯著的正相關，校長跨界領導對學校組織合作與價值創造有正向的影響，校長跨界領導的實施有助於學校組織的共同合作與提升學校價值的創造，而且校長跨界領導亦會經由學校組織合作的中介效果間接影響價值創造。本研究建議校長善用跨界領導，提升學校的價值創造，亦可透過組織合作做橋樑，來創造學校的價值。英文摘要：By using organizational cooperation as an intermediary variable, this study aimed to investigate the effects of principal's cross-border leadership on value creation. Questionnaire survey was used. The questionnaires were given to a random sample of educators (including principals, directors, section chiefs, homeroom teachers and subject teachers) across Taoyuan County, Hsinchu County and Miaoli County. The study used structural equation modeling to verify the linear relationship among cross-border leadership, organization cooperation and value creation. The results indicate that principal's cross-border leadership has a significant positive correlation with school organization and value creation. Principal's cross-border leadership also has a significant positive correlation with school value creation. Principals can implement cross-border leadership to help organization cooperation and to enhance school value creation. In addition, principal's cross-border leadership will indirectly influence value creation. The study suggested that principals implement cross-border leadership to enhance organization value creation and to create school value via organization cooperation.起始頁-結束頁：121-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2104.045篇名：未來該如何規劃？教育的沉重使命－評《世界是平的與教育：對公平理想的承諾決定了美國的未來》一書並列篇名：Book Review: "The Flat World and Education-How America's Commitment to Equity Will Determine Our Future"作者：沈姍姍(San-San Shen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：163-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2104.056篇名：Lucian Freud作品中的身體美學及其在生命教育上的意涵並列篇名：Body Aesthetic in Lucian Freud's Work and Its Implications for Life Education作者：楊忠斌(Chung-Ping Yang)關鍵字：裸體;身體美學;生命教育;Lucian Freud;nude;body aesthetic;life education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要在探討Lucian Freud作品的內涵，並論述其對生命教育之啟示。Freud是英國著名的藝術家，繪畫主題偏愛肖像與裸體，而有「裸體畫家」的稱號。古典裸體畫呈現的是唯美的身體，是美化後的身體，Freud則表現了有些醜陋、卻真實自然的身體。Freud的畫也顯現了對人深層心理的探索，反映出人的內心生活世界，而不只是表面的美感。Freud不要人們注意其作品中的色彩，而要去關注「生命的色彩」，他的畫顯現了多元的生命意義。我們應讓學生學會反思、尊重與接納身體與生命的各種表現與價值。本文根據Freud作品所呈現的內涵，對生命教育提出了三點啟示：1.教導學生觀照與探索自己的身體特徵；2.反思被媒體規訓的身體迷思，探索多元的生命故事；3.運用呈現醜陋身體之類的繪畫，解消校園霸凌問題。英文摘要：This paper investigates Lucian Freud's paintings and its implications for life education. Freud was a famous British artist, and known as the ”nude painter” for his rich works of portraits and nudes. Classical nude paintings presented an idealized beautiful body, Freud showed ugly but ”true” natural body instead. Freud aims to explore and express deep psychology and inner world of human, not just their beautiful appearance. Freud asks people not to concentrate on colors but ”colors of life” in his works. Freud's paintings disclosure diverse meanings of life. We should lead students to learn to reflect, respect and accept different presentations of body and life. According to meanings of Freud's works, this paper indicates three implications for life education: 1. to teach students to contemplate and explore their own physical characteristics. 2. To reflect the media's discipline on body and inquire diverse life stories. 3. To use teaching of the ugly body painting to decrease problems of bullying at school.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2103.017篇名：社會階級與家長參與：一個香港的個案研究並列篇名：Social Class and Parental Involvement: A Case Study in Hong Kong作者：吳迅榮(Shun-Wing Ng)關鍵字：家長參與;學校合作;社會階級;文化資本;社會資本;parental involvement;home-school cooperation;social class;cultural capital;social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：鼓勵家長參與學校教育是近年在香港推行的學校改革之一。本文報導一個質性的個案研究，以探討社會階級如何影響家長參與學童的教育。本研究的樣本乃在香港一所小學中八位來自六個不同社經背景家庭的家長。研究員透過深度訪問，去探究和詮釋中產階級及勞工階級家長在參與子女教育過程中的感受與經驗，從而比較他們的參與如何受其階級位置所影響。從蒐集得來的質性資料中衍生了八個概念化的主題，包為子女選擇中學、家庭規條、參與分工、社會網絡、參與能力差異、親師關係、對投訴的理解和參與的目的等。研究發現，勞工階級家長在參與子女教育過程中較中產階級家長處於一個不利的形勢。英文摘要：Encouraging parental involvement in school education has been one of the educational reforms in Hong Kong in recent years. This article reports on a qualitative case study research which explores how social class differences affect parental involvement in children's education. The samples of the study include eight parents from six families of different social backgrounds in a primary school. Through in-depth interviews, the investigator explores and interprets the perceptions and experiences of both middle class and working class parents in participating in their children's schooling process so as to compare how their involvement is influenced by their social positions. Eight categories of propositions emerged from the qualitative data collected, including choosing secondary school for children, home rules, division of labor in participation, social network, capability difference in participation, parent-teacher relations, understanding of complaints and purposes of participation. The findings indicate that working class parents were in a less favorable situation than their middle-class counterpart when involving themselves in their children's schooling process.起始頁-結束頁：41-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2103.028篇名：Awareness of Orthographic Structure in Children's Learning of Chinese Characters並列篇名：學童對於漢字結構的覺識能力作者：林浩昌(Ho-Cheong Lam);徐碧美(Amy Bike-May Tsui)關鍵字：漢字結構;漢字學習;形旁表義覺識;認讀漢字;orthographic structure;learning Chinese characters;awareness of semantic radicals;recognizing characters期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：先前探討學童學習漢字的發展研究，一般只注意到學童對於「部件具有提示字義功能」的覺識能力之年齡差異，本研究則進一步探討學童對於「漢字結構」的覺識能力，並且探討其所具有的發展意義。本研究以同一部件、但因位置不同、組合方式不同所形成的不同結構之假造漢字，請425名來自三所香港小學一至四年級的學童進行辨識，結果發現這些初小學童尚無法完全正確掌握「漢字當中，只有特定位置的部件及組合方式，才具有提示字義的功能，而不能隨意準用」之要領。同時，本研究還發現，學童這種「覺識到部件的位置及組合方式，與其所具提示字義的功能有所關聯」之能力，有隨著年齡增長而提升的趨勢，而且此一趨勢達到統計上的顯著水準。這種對於漢字結構的覺識能力，是學童能夠掌握漢字部件組合的原理、進而正確理解字義的基礎，值得繼續深入研究。英文摘要：Most of the previous developmental studies on children's learning of Chinese characters focus on age difference in their awareness of the functions of components in providing a clue to the meanings of characters. The present study takes a step further to investigate children's awareness of the orthographic structures of characters and the implications of their development. This study used pseudo-characters formed by different combinations of components. There was the same component located in different positions in the orthographic structures of these pseudo-characters. 425 children in Grade 1 to 4 from 3 primary schools in Hong Kong were invited to a test to analyze these pseudo-characters. The results show that these junior children did not fully understand that a component only provides a clue to the meaning of a character when it is located in a certain position in the specific orthographic structure of the character and that the orthographic structure cannot be interpreted arbitrarily. Meanwhile, this study also found that children's awareness of the orthographic structures, regarding the function of components in providing a clue to the meanings, improved across grade levels. A developmental progression was observed with statistical significance. The awareness of the orthographic structures of characters is essential for children to fully make sense of how these characters are structured to denote their meanings and therefore, further investigation is worth more attention.起始頁-結束頁：83-111資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2103.039篇名：學業情緒為中介的自我調整學習模式：以數學領域為例並列篇名：An Examination of the Mediating Role of Academic Emotion to Self-regulated Learning Model: Taking Math as Example作者：江民瑜(Min-Yu Chiang)關鍵字：自我決定動機;自我調整學習策略;知覺教師自主支持;學業情緒;academic emotion;perception of teacher's autonomy support;self-determination motivation;self-regulated learning strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在檢驗以學業情緒為中介之自我調整學習模式與觀察資料的適配情形，並進一步分析學生所知覺教師自主支持對本模式的調節效果。樣本選取高雄市11所國小22個班級共656名學生，蒐集的資料以結構方程模式與多樣本分析進行統計分析。研究結果如下：一、自主動機對學業情緒、自我調整學習策略均有顯著的正向效果；被控制動機對學業情緒有顯著的負向效果，但對自我調整學習策略則為正向效果；學業情緒對自我調整學習策略有顯著的正向效果；二、自主動機與被控制動機皆透過學業情緒間接影響自我調整學習策略，前者透過學業情緒的中介擴增對自我調整學習策略的正向效果；後者透過學業情緒的中介負向解釋自我調整學習策略，且降低被控制動機對自我調整學習策略的效果；三、自主動機對學業情緒的正向效果在高知覺教師自主支持組顯著較高；學業情緒對自我調整學習策略的正向效果在低知覺教師自主支持組顯著較高。據此，本研究針對教學實務與未來研究提出建議與討論。英文摘要：The study aims at testing: (a) a structural model of the mediating role of academic emotion between the self-determination motivation and self-regulated learning strategy; (b) the moderating effect of students' perception of teacher's autonomy support on the self-regulated learning model. The sample consisted of 656 fifth and sixth graders represting 22 classrooms from 11 schools in Kaohsiung City. Data were analyzed using structural equation modeling and multi samples analysis. Results indicated: (a) autonomous motivation positively predicted academic emotion and self-regulated learning strategy, controlled motivation negatively predicted academic emotion but positively predicted self-regulated learning strategy, and academic emotion positively predicted self-regulated learning strategy; (b) the effects of autonomous and controlled motivation on self-regulated learning strategy were mediated by academic emotion, and academic emotion augmented the effect of autonomous motivation on self-regulated learning strategy but reduced the effect of controlled motivation on self-regulated learning strategy; (c) on the condition of high perception of teacher's autonomy support the positive effect of autonomous motivation on academic emotion was significantly higher than that on the condition of low perception of teacher's autonomy support, and on the condition of low perception of teacher's autonomy support the positive effect of academic emotion on self-regulated learning strategy起始頁-結束頁：113-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2103.0410篇名：探索教育與國家的關係－Saravanan Gopinathan論文選輯評介並列篇名：Book Review: "Educationa and the Nation State: The Selected Works of S. Gopinathan"作者：林子斌(Tzu-Bin Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：151-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2103.0501篇名：競賽數位遊戲結合學生出題運用於國小電磁教學之研究並列篇名：The Study of Digital Competitive Games and Student-Generated Questions in the Elementary Science Education: A Unit of Electromagnetics作者：楊雅婷(Ya-Ting Carolyn Yang);陳奕樺(I-Hua Chen)關鍵字：課業情感;學生出題;競賽數位遊戲;academic emotion;student-generated questions;digital competitive games期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究結合競賽數位遊戲與學生出題的教學策略，實施於北部一所國民小學六年級的自然科電磁單元教學。目的為：一、探討學生課程投入暨設備使用狀況、出題品質與可能因競賽數位遊戲產生的敵意言語等問題，以及針對這些問題，教師所採取的因應調整方式；二、分析學生於實驗教學後的課業情感。為了更能顯現實驗教學對於學生的影響，本研究加入對照班級的課業情感資料進行分析。研究結果顯示：一、學生課程投入暨設備使用狀況：學生課程投入積極，且教師應注意學生喜好的競賽數位遊戲類型，並重視學生習慣的遊戲輸入介面；二、學生出題的品質：學生出題展現主動探究的科學素養精神，但是出題的品質大多停留在可直接於課本或習作中找到答案的層次，因此仍有賴教師給予學生更多出題鷹架的導引。此外，學生面對面修正題目時，會產生因在意他人觀感而不願修正的問題；三、敵意言語：因競賽數位遊戲產生的組內敵意言語頻率已有所降低，但是組間的敵意言語仍有賴教師事前訂定的規則，與遊戲過程中的即時勸導與制止；四、課業情感：研究班級的課業情感較對照班級更具學習適應性。本研究根據結果進行討論，並提出對未來研究的建議。英文摘要：This study integrated two strategies in the science education: digital competitive games and student generated questions. The strategies were implemented in a unit on electromagnetics in a sixth grade science class. The purposes of this study were: 1. to investigate the extent to which students engage in the curriculum and the difficulties which the teacher encountered during his teaching and the way in which he regulated his teaching; 2. to analyze the academic emotion of students participating in this study. Data for academic emotion from a control group were used in order to show the effect of the instruction on the participants in the intervention class. The results suggest that: 1. students were highly participating during the curriculum and teachers should evaluate which types of games students were most engaged with. Moreover, the devices which students used to control the game were also needed to be noticed; 2. the setting of scaffolding was needed to provide and the online system of students generated questions was also suggested; 3. Words with hostility was prevented within group competition but still happened between group competition. Therefore, the rule was needed to set before games and teachers should prevent those words happening during game play; 4. the academic emotion of participating students showed greater levels of adaptation than those of the control group. Based on these result, suggestions for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20131005040012篇名：程式設計課程應用悅趣化遊戲競爭策略於學習動機與學習成效之影響並列篇名：Applying Joyful Game-based Competitive Strategy to Programming Courses to Explore the Influences of Learning Motivation and Effectiveness作者：黃國豪(Gwo-Haur Hwang);陳碧茵(Beyin Chen);曾薇方(Wei-Fang Tseng);黃筱惠(Shiau-Huei Huang)關鍵字：悅趣化學習;程式設計;遊戲競爭策略;學習成效;學習動機;joyful learning;programming;game-based competitive strategy;learning effectiveness;learning motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：程式設計對於資訊領域的初學者而言是必修課程但卻又不易學習。過去曾有研究指出，在學習程式設計時若能加入遊戲元素，能夠增加學習者的學習動機與成效，若導入競爭策略則能夠帶動學習者之間的學習風氣。為了實證競爭策略對學習動機及成效的影響，本研究在悅趣化學習環境下，加入了具有競爭特性的關卡成績與經驗值排行榜，以大學一年級新生的程式設計課程進行教學實驗。結果發現，關卡成績與經驗值會互相影響，但關卡成績較高的學生其學習成效並未較好，反而是經驗值較高的學生其學習成效比較好。在透過訪談後發現，關卡成績較高的學生比較在意關卡成績的排行榜，只想快速過關而不願再多加學習。而經驗值較高的學生則認為排行榜不重要，較注重學習過後的成效。英文摘要：Programming is a compulsory course for the beginner in the field of information, but it's not easy to learn. Past research indicated that when learning the programming course, adding the game factors can increase learner motivation and effectiveness. Moreover, importing competition strategy can promote learning atmosphere. To empirically evaluate the influence of competitive strategy to learning motivation and effectiveness, this study joined the ranking of the barrier achievements and experience which have the competition nature in the game-based learning environment. The teaching experiments were conducted for freshman on a programming course. The results showed that the barrier achievement's level and experience's level influence each other. The learning effectiveness for students with higher barrier achievements are not good, on the contrary, the higher experience students have the better learning effectiveness. Through the interviews, we found that the students with higher barrier achievements care about the ranking and only wish quick pass and do not learn more. The students with higher experience think the ranking is not important. They more emphasize on the effectiveness that learns after.起始頁-結束頁：27-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20131005040023篇名：應用DAISY電子讀本提升視覺障礙學生數學學習之探討並列篇名：The Study on Using DAISY Books to Improve the Learning of Mathematics for the Visually Impaired Students作者：王建立(Jan-Li Wang);黃博信(Po-Hsin Huang);黃雪玲(Sheue-Ling Hwang)關鍵字：使用性評量;視障生;數位無障礙資訊系統;數學學習;usability testing;visually impaired students;Digital Accessible Information System;mathematics learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：長期以來，國內視覺障礙學生（視障生）的數學程度普遍落後於明眼學生，以大學聯招為例，視障生考取數理科系的比率偏低，究其原因，可能與使用的學習資源欠缺有關。本研究將數學教科書以數位無障礙資訊系統（Digital Accessible Information SYstem, DAISY）標準製作，輔以使用Adaptive Multimedia Information System（AMIS）及非視覺化的螢幕報讀軟體（Non-Visual Desktop Access, NVDA）輔具，讓視障生能透過DAISY讀本進行數學學習，初步先藉由問卷和訪談了解視障生在數學學習時所遇到的問題，接著規劃實驗課程並進行評量DAISY讀本的學習方式對視障生的數學學習成效是否有正向幫助。本研究針對12位視障生施以實驗課程，採使用性評量方法，於課程前後藉由主觀量表蒐集受試者之心智負荷程度，並於課後進行客觀評量。實驗結果顯示，視障生使用DAISY讀本學習的心智負荷程度低於點字課本，在客觀評量中，使用DAISY讀本的答題正確率高於使用點字課本的正確率。整體而言，研究結果顯示使用DAISY讀本數位學習對視障生的數學學習確有明顯助益。英文摘要：In general, the academic performance of visually impaired students in mathematics is below average. This is due to, in part, the instructional materials, assistive tools, and teaching methods not being designed to meet the special needs of the individual student. For this study, we used questionnaires to access the learning problems of visually impaired students in their mathematics learning. With this information, we produced instructional mathematics textbooks using the Digital Accessible Information SYstem (DAISY) full-text format and the DAISY book can be played on the AMIS reader. A preliminary investigation was then carried out to investigate whether or not the DAISY mathematical textbooks enhanced the reading skills of the visually impaired students. In this research, there were 12 students, grades 7-9, who were provided four days' course using the DAISY book. The NASA-TLX subjective scales were collected from the students pre- and post-course. The time to answer each question and the percentage of correct answers (using objective assessments) was collected at the end of the course. The results showed that the DAISY textbook provided a better reading format for the visually impaired students as compared with mathematics textbooks in Braille.起始頁-結束頁：45-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20131005040034篇名：影響家長採用電子童書意願之探討並列篇名：Study on the Factors Affecting Adoptive Willingness of Parents towards Electronic Children's Books作者：楊美雪(Mei-Hsueh Yang);廖桂英(Kuei-Ying Liao)關鍵字：採用意願;家長;電子童書;整合性科技接受模式;adoptive willingness;parents;electronic children's books;unified theory of acceptance and use of technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著資訊科技的發展，數位媒體的使用早已充斥在日常生活的周遭，對於現今被稱為數位原住民的兒童而言，以電子童書作為數位化閱讀和學習的科技教育，似已成為趨勢。而身為兒童健康與學習把關的家長，對於此創新的閱讀與學習的方式，真正的想法與採用的意願，將是電子童書成為普及的閱讀和學習的重要關鍵之一。目前國內學術界對於電子童書的探討，鮮少以家長採用意願的觀點作為研究方向，故本研究以整合性科技接受模式（unified theory of acceptance a use of technology, UTAUT）的構面為基礎，加入知覺風險構面的探討，運用問卷調查法，分別以敘述性統計、皮爾森相關係數、多元迴歸等分析方式，探討影響家長採用電子童書意願及其因素。研究結果發現，績效預期、便利條件和社會影響三個因素正面影響家長採用電子童書的意願，而知覺風險則負向影響家長採用意願；但在易用預期部分，由於分析之樣本集中於都會區，教育程度較高且為資訊科技近用者，因此，易用預期在本研究中對採用電子童書的影響並不顯著。研究結果期望能補充國內電子童書在家長採用意願面向之探討，以及提供相關產業對於電子童書產品開發及行銷策略之參考。英文摘要：Digital media applications had slowly taken root in our daily lives in the broadening developments of information technology. To the digitally native children of today, adoption of electronic children's books as digital reading and learning materials has become a trend in their technology education. For parents concerned with the children's health and education, their true perceptions and adoptive willingness to this innovative reading and learning method constitute a significant key factor in the popularization of electronic children's books. Studies conducted on electronic children's books in the country today have rarely focused on the adoptive willingness of parents; hence this paper employed the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) and augment the perceived risk factors into the model to explore the subject matter. A questionnaire survey was conducted and response data were analyzed through descriptive statistics, the Pearson's correlation coefficient, and Multiple Regression Analysis to delve into the adoptive willingness of parents towards electronic children's books and the factors influencing willingness. Analysis results revealed that three factors - performance expectation, facilitating conditions, and social influence - would have positive effects on the adoptive willingness of parents towards electronic children's books, whereas the perceived risk factor posed a negative effect. Due to the analysis samples are more concentrated in the metropolitan area, higher educated and information technology access users, the effort expectancy's impact on the Children E-books is not as significant in this study. The study results aimed to supplement the domestic studies focusing on the adoptive willingness of parents and provide related industries with a reference for future electronic children's book development and marketing strategy considerations.起始頁-結束頁：67-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20131005040045篇名：以整合性科技接受理論探討屏東縣國民小學英語教師利用網路社群進行教師專業成長之研究並列篇名：A Study Based on UTAUT to Probe the Teacher's Professional Development by Participating in Online Community of Elementary School English Teachers in Pingtung County作者：林志隆(Chih-Lung Lin);楊乃靜(Nai-Ching Yang)關鍵字：國小英語教師;教師專業成長;網路社群;整合性科技接受理論;elementary school English teachers, teacher's professional development;online community;Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討屏東縣國民小學（後稱國小）英語教師利用網路社群進行教師專業成長之現況，以整合性科技接受理論為理論基礎，分析屏東縣國小英語教師之績效期望、努力期望及社會影響與行為意圖的相關性，研究結果如下：一、屏東縣國小英語教師利用網路社群進行教師專業成長之現況屬於中等以上程度；二、績效期望不因個人背景而有差異；三、努力期望會因經驗的不同而具有差異；四、社會影響會因任教學校地區和自願性之不同而呈現差異。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the condition of the teacher's professional development by participating in online community of elementary school English teachers in Pingtung County. It was based on Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) to analyze the correlation between performance expectancy and behavioral intention, effort expectancy and behavioral intention, and social influence and behavioral intention. Furthermore, it attempted to compare the diverseness among those different backgrounds in performance expectancy, effort expectancy, and social influence. The findings of this study are as follow: 1. The level of participating in online community for professional development is above moderate; 2. The background variables make no difference in performance expectancy; 3. The level of effort expectancy is above moderate, and the background variables make difference in it like experience; 4. The level of social influence is above moderate, and the background variables make difference in it like voluntariness and location.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130705030016篇名：Examining Computer Technology Acceptance by Second Language Students並列篇名：學習第二外國語言的學生對科技接受模式之探討作者：陳妍孜(Yen-Tzu Chen)關鍵字：Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL);Software Selection;Technology Acceptance Model 2 (TAM2);電腦輔助學習;軟體選擇;科技接受模式期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：Existing literatures indicate that Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) can enrich language learning as computers provide many functions to enhance lectures in a meaningful and effective manner. The Technology Acceptance Model 2 (TAM2) questionnaire was used to define students' attitudes toward the use of technology to improve second language proficiency. The results of evaluating the effectiveness of language software in terms of students' perceptions based on their interactive behavior with the CALL learning environment could help teachers integrate CALL into traditional classrooms. The data from the questionnaire were statistically analyzed to present the findings.英文摘要：現存文獻表示電腦輔助語言學習可藉由多項功能豐富並有效率的學習語言。本研究使用科技接受模式問卷來了解學生對使用語言軟體的態度來提升學生熟練第二外國語言，研究結果以統計分析呈現並透過學生感知的互動行為分析來幫助教師科技軟體融入傳統課程。起始頁-結束頁：25-37資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130705030027篇名：促進能源教育的線上井字棋遊戲系統建置與成效初探並列篇名：The Implementation and Evaluation of an Online Educational Tic-Tac-Toe Game for Energy Education作者：蔡福興(Fu-Hsing Tsai)關鍵字：井字棋;能源教育;遊戲式學習;學習成效;tic-tac-toe;energy education;game-based learning;learning effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要基於目前我國中、小學缺乏能源教育之專屬課程與教材，而數位學習正可以整合能源教育教材供學生學習，加上數位遊戲式學習較能引發學習動機，且有研究指出，線上即時制的數位遊戲較容易引發逃避學習等不適切的學習行為。有鑑於此，本研究主要透過蒐集國內、外能源教育課程之設計及整合專家座談之意見，規劃出一適合小學程度之能源教育數位教材，並利用SmartFoxServer遊戲引擎，結合本研究所規劃的能源教育教材，開發出一個回合制的線上井字棋遊戲系統，進而透過準實驗研究，將本研究所設計的遊戲進行初步成效評估，探討本研究所設計之遊戲在提升國小學生能源知識的成效，以及學生對該遊戲使用後的看法。經研究後主要獲致以下的研究成果：一、本研究開發出一可供多人連線的井字棋能源教育遊戲，該遊戲模式可供教育遊戲設計者參考；二、本研究所建置的井字棋能源教育遊戲之初步成效良好，可提升學生的能源認知成效，且多數學生對該遊持正面看法，但仍有部分可改進之處。英文摘要：This research was based on a lack of energy education curriculum in Taiwan's primary and junior high school. It was also based on previous studies indicating that the real time-based online educational game not only promoted active learning but also elicited other more negative learning behaviors such as avoiding the learning materials. Therefore, this study attempted to plan the learning contents of energy education for primary students through investigating relevant documents and consulting experts. Furthermore, based on these learning contents, this study sought to develop a turnbased educational online game, educational tic-tac-toe, using SmartFoxServer engine to facilitate primary students learning about energy knowledge. Finally, a quasi-experiment was conducted to compare students' learning effectiveness before and after primary students used this turn-based online game. A questionnaire survey was also conducted to understand the primary students' perceptions after using this game. After finishing the experiment, the following results were found: 1. This study developed an educational tic-tac-toe online game using SmartFoxServer engine to facilitate primary students learning about energy knowledge. This game provides a new game model for educational game designers. 2. This game can promote students' learning effectiveness about energy knowledge acquisition. Most students also had positive attitudes toward this game. However, further research should be done in the future.起始頁-結束頁：39-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130705030038篇名：數位學習正向個人特質之量表發展：知識管理、自我調整學習與意義建構並列篇名：The Development of Positive-trait Inventories in E-learning: Knowledge Management, Self-regulation Learning, and Meaning Making作者：葉玉珠(Yu-Chu Yeh);葉怡伶(Yi-Ling Yeh);林俊甫(Chun-Fu Lin)關鍵字：自我調整學習;知識管理;結構方程模式;意義建構;數位學習;self-regulation learning;knowledge management;Structural Equation Models;meaning making;e-learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在將正向心理學的概念與數位學習結合，發展適合評量臺灣大學校院學生之數位學習知識管理量表、數位學習自我調整學習量表及數位學習意義建構量表。本研究先以1,017位大學校院學生進行項目分析、信度分析與探索性因素分析，再以1,647位大學校院學生進行驗證性因素分析及個別差異之考驗。結果發現，本研究所發展的三份量表具有良好的信度與效度，可作為研究者與大專校院教師評量大學校院學生在進行數位學習時，其知識管理、自我調整學習及意義建構能力有效的參考工具。此外，本研究發現參與學生具有中等程度以上的數位學習知識管理、自我調整學習與意義建構能力，顯示近年來我國推動高等教育數位學習計畫有良好的成效。本研究也發現長時間使用數位學習的參與者，其數位學習知識管理、自我調整學習與意義建構能力均優於短時間使用數位學習的學生，教師可適當融入數位學習並鼓勵學生探索不同的數位學習媒介，以豐富其數位學習的經驗並增進有效學習。英文摘要：This study aimed to develop three inventories Inventory of Knowledge Management in E-learning (IKME), Inventory of Selfregulation in E-learning (ISRE), and Inventory of Meaning Making in E-learning (IMME) for evaluating university students’ knowledge management, self-regulation learning, and meaning making in e-learning based on the integration of positive psychology and e-learning. In this study, we employed 1,017 university students to conduct item analysis, reliability analysis, and exploratory factor analysis. Then, we included another 1,647 university students to conduct confirmatory factor analysis and to analyze individual differences. The findings in this study suggest that the developed inventories have good reliability and validity. The three inventories can therefore provide effective instruments for related studies. Moreover, this study found that the participants had above-average degree of knowledge management, self-regulation, and meaning making ability in e-learning, which suggests that the emphasis of e-earning in higher education in recent years is quite successful. This study also found that those who engaged in e-learning for a long period of time performed better in IKME, ISRE, and IMME than their counterparts. Teachers can integrate e-learning into their instruction and encourage students to use different e-learning interfaces to improve their learning.起始頁-結束頁：59-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130705030049篇名：「Wii太鼓達人」遊戲融入國民中學音樂節奏教學之研究並列篇名：A Study of Rhythm Teaching on Junior High School Students by Integrating with the Video Game ”Wii Taiko Drum Master”作者：蔡淑慧(Shu-Hui Tsai);沈俊毅(Chun-Yi Shen)關鍵字：Wii太鼓達人遊戲;節奏教學;數位遊戲式學習;Wii Taiko Drum Master;rhythm teaching;digital game-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採準實驗研究設計，進行「Wii太鼓達人」遊戲融入國民中學音樂節奏教學，目的為探討此教學實驗對國民中學學生節奏學習成效與音樂科學習動機提升之影響。透過音樂教學與數位遊戲式學習理論，設計三堂數位遊戲融入節奏教學課程。實驗進行前後，實驗組與控制組均實施節奏聽辨測驗與學習動機量表測驗，經由單因子共變數分析與成對樣本t檢定分析所得結論為：實驗組在節奏學習成效與學習動機提升方面均呈現顯著差異，因此可推論使用「Wii太鼓達人」遊戲於國民中學音樂節奏教學，對學生學習節奏能帶來正面的影響與成效。英文摘要：This study is to integrate the video game ”Wii Taiko Drum Master” into the rhythm learning in the music class of the junior high school and it’s based on quasi-experimentation design. The purpose of the study is to understand if this kind of game-based learning can improve the effective of rhythm learning with higher learning motivation. Research results by comparing the experimental group and the control group indicate that: 1. For the effectiveness of the rhythm learning, the experimental group is better than control group (p＜ .05). 2. For the motivation of the rhythm learning, the experimental group is higher than control group (p＜ .05). The conclusion is game-based learning can help student on rhythm learning with better effectiveness and higher motivation.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201304050200110篇名：我的寵物打字：心流式打字遊戲的設計與評估並列篇名：My-Pet-Typing: Design and Evaluation of Flow-based Typing Game作者：劉中琪(Ellen Chung-Chi Liu);廖長彥(Calvin Chang-Yan Liao);陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan)關鍵字：中文輸入;心流經驗;打字遊戲;遊戲式學習;Chinese input;flow theory;typing game;game-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的目的為探索如何在愉悅環境中讓學童以持續打字練習之方式，提升其打字技能，因此研究奠基於心流理論以設計悅趣化打字環境，稱之為「我的寵物打字」，透過遊戲中的關卡與星等機制促使學童校準自身能力與關卡難度間的平衡，尋求其達到心流狀態以持續練習。實驗活動為期1年，共205位國小二年級學生參與。研究結果指出，大多數學童的打字能力有所提升且關卡進度配合自身打字能力而自我調節。本研究亦針對此階段性成果，對於活動及系統內容提出修正建議，並討論如何以心流經驗維持學生的打字行為。研究者亦發現學童打字速度標準建立的困難，建議進一步探討打字活動有助於學生國語文能力學習之關係。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore how to immerse children in the typing behavior joyfully. The game-based typing environment was designed based on flow theory, entitled My-Pet-Typing, which contained level-and star-mechanism in order to facilitate the typing skills of children and assist students to adjust the difficult level of typing. The experiment conducted with 2nd grade elementary students (n = 205) during one year. The findings indicated that students not only can increase typing speed gradually, but also could sustain the long-term typing behaviors. This study also discussed how to sustain students' typing skills based on flow theory and further found that the difficulty of constructing the standard of typing speed. The suggestion for future study was to explore the relationship between students' the typing activity and the Chinese language learning.起始頁-結束頁：27-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201304050200201篇名：兩岸經貿開放、認同與投票選擇：2008年與2012年總統選舉的分析並列篇名：Cross-Strait Economic Openness, Identity, and Vote Choice: An Analysis of the 2008 and 2012 Presidential Elections作者：吳親恩(Chin-En Wu);林奕孜(Yi-Tzu Lin)關鍵字：經濟投票;兩岸經貿開放;政黨認同;統獨立場;總統選舉;economic voting;cross-strait economic openness;party identification;unification-independence choice;presidential election期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文使用「台灣選舉與民主化調查」（TEDS）TEDS2008P與TEDS2012的資料，觀察2008年與2012年總統選舉中，兩岸經貿開放議題對選民投票意向的影響。首先，敘述性統計部分發現，選民的兩岸經貿評估從2008到2012年之間出現兩個趨勢，首先是選民的回答趨向中立，開放前的高度期待與疑懼均大幅減少。其次，選民的兩岸經貿評估在整體經濟層級與家庭層級出現脫勾現象，即使有相當比例的選民認為整體經濟評估變好，但並不認為家庭經濟因此變好。實證結果方面，發現傳統測量選民回溯與前瞻的經濟評估題組，對於投票的影響力並不如兩岸經貿評估。其次，社會層級的兩岸經貿評估，與選民的投票意向關聯性較大，家庭層級的兩岸經貿評估，與選民投票意向的關連性較弱。最後，文中觀察包括政黨認同與統獨立場在內的認同因素，對兩岸經貿評估影響力的制約作用，結果發現，兩岸經貿評估的影響力在偏向統一或認同泛藍者中較大，在偏向獨立與認同泛綠者中較弱，這主要是當兩岸經貿開放評估所傳遞的訊息與受訪者原先信念一致時，兩岸經貿評估對投票意向的影響力較大，所傳遞的訊息與受訪者原先信念不一致時，兩岸經貿評估的影響力較小。英文摘要：This article examines across-strait trade openness and vote choices in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections. We first demonstrate two trends about economic assessments in the 2008 and 2012 elections. First, more and more people consider the economic effect of economic openness as neutral. Next, respondents decouple their assessments in the aggregate level and family level. While a substantial percentage of voters still think that economic openness has been bringing about economic prosperity for Taiwan, it has not done so at the family level. As to the effect of economic assessment, we find that the traditional economic voting battery does not exert comparable effect on voting as economic openness. Next, the socio-tropic assessment of economic openness is relatively more important than the pocket-book assessment. More importantly, we demonstrate how political identities, party identification and unification-independence choice, shape the influence of economic assessment on voting decisions. In general, economic assessments exert greater effects on pan-blue and pro-unification voters, while exert smaller effects on pan-green and pro-independence voters. This pattern is mainly associated with the extent that incoming messages are congruent with voters' existing beliefs.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.02.01-352篇名：她們改投給蔡英文嗎？2008-2012年總統大選性別差距的變動並列篇名：Do Women Transfer Their Votes to Tsai? The Change of Gender Gap from 2008 to 2012 Presidential Election作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-Ying Yang);林珮婷(Pei-Ting Lin)關鍵字：性別差距;女性總統候選人;政黨認同;候選人因素;議題投票;gender gap;female presidential candidate;party identification;candidate factor;issue voting期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：2008年台灣總統大選首次出現顯著的性別差異，2012年總統大選出現第一位女性總統候選人。為比較兩次總統大選的轉變，本研究採用「台灣選舉與民主化調查」（簡稱TEDS）定群追蹤樣本（panel data, 2008P-2012），來觀察同樣的選民在兩次總統大選中，其投票抉擇的穩定與改變，以及性別差距的變化與原因。定群追蹤資料的分析顯示，女性選民較男性選民在投票上更傾向由藍轉綠，女性選票的轉移使得2008年總統大選中的性別差距在2012年縮小了。在影響投票流動的因素上，我們比較了政黨認同、候選人的評價、以及議題的影響，此三者雖對於投票流動具有不同程度的影響，但在解釋投票流動的性別差異上，只有候選人評價的變動對於投票的轉移有顯著的性別差異。在這些因素中，投票流動出現性別差異主要是在政黨認同穩定的選民。投票由藍轉投綠的女性，一部分來自於穩定的泛綠支持者，在2008年跨黨投給馬英九，但在2012年時回流投給了民進黨的候選人蔡英文；另一部分則來自於穩定的泛藍支持者，因為對蔡英文較正面的評價，而跨黨投給了民進黨的候選人。比較兩次選舉的投票行為，可以發現政黨認同對兩性投票的影響有所不同，男性的政黨認同對於投票行為具有決定性影響；女性的政黨認同和投票行為的關係較會受到其他因素的影響，特別是對女性選民具有吸引力的候選人（女性總統候選人蔡英文）出現時，女性更可能轉移其投票對象。英文摘要：In 2008 presidential election, Taiwan for the first time appeared a significant gender gap in voting; in 2012 presidential election, the first female presidential candidate arose to challenge the incumbent. To compare the changes between these two elections, this study uses ”Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS)” panel data (2008P-2012) to observe the stability/change and the patterns of gender gap among the same set of voters. The analysis shows that women voters are more likely than men to change their votes from the KMT candidate to the DPP candidate. The transferring pattern of women voters accounts for the shrink of the voting gender gap comparing to the last election. In terms of the explanation for the voting change, we compare three factors, the party identification, candidate evaluation and issue effect. All of these three factors affect voting decisions to different extent, but in explaining gender difference of the voting change, only the candidate factor is significant. Voting change is mainly due to the female voters with stable party identification, transferring their votes from the KMT to DPP candidate. Among those female voters, some of them are stable DPP supporters who voted for Ma in the 2008 election and returned to vote for DPP candidate Tsai, and still some are stable KMT supporters who cross their party line to vote for their preferred DPP candidate Tsai. Comparing these two presidential elections with panel data, we can conclude that men are more likely to stick to their party identification in casting their ballots, whereas women are more likely to be influenced by other factors besides party identification. And this time, the other factor is the candidate. For those female voters who give the DPP candidate higher evaluation, voting transfer is a natural result.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.02.37-713篇名：選民如何看待副總統候選人角色？2012年總統選舉的實證分析並列篇名：How Important Is the Identity of the Vice Presidential Candidate for Voters? An Analysis of the 2012 Presidential Election in Taiwan作者：林長志(Chang-Chih Lin)關鍵字：副總統候選人;憲政與選舉重要性;選舉效應;投票選擇;vice presidential candidate;constitutional and electoral importance;electoral effect;voting choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的主要研究問題在於探究選民對副總統角色的認知，以及對副總統候選人的偏好評價對其總統投票選擇的影響。研究發現指出，民眾對於副總統一職角色的重要性認知，存在著憲政規範層次與選舉投票實務的差異與矛盾，肯定副總統人選有其憲政角色重要性的選民，不必然在選舉投票時會考量副總統候選人的因素，總統候選人才是主導他們投票選擇的關鍵。而選民對總統與副總統候選人評價所構成的不同偏好組合類型，與其大選投票選擇之間的關係，藉由個體資料的分析，大致符合總統候選人因素優先於副總統候選人、但副總統人選仍舊有其影響兩大論述，顯示選民對於副總統候選人的偏好評價，其所產生的潛在選票影響力其實是存在且不容忽視的。在二元勝算對數模型的分析中，同樣證實了選民對副總統人選的喜好評價，對其總統投票選擇具有顯著性的影響，而對兩黨正副總統候選人間的偏好差異更是重要的因素，且考量總統候選人的因素之後，副總統人選的影響效應並未因此而消失。副總統人選評價對投票選擇之影響，在不同藍綠認同的選民群體間則存在有不同程度的效果。最後，本文認為副總統人選因素對選民之總統投票具有一定程度之影響，應是可以肯定的結論，同時此一研究主題應得到學界更高的重視。英文摘要：This paper focuses on voters' assessment of the role of the vice president and the effect of voter preference for vice presidential candidate (VPC) on voting in the presidential election. Taking the 2012 presidential election in Taiwan as an example, the paper uses individual-level data for analysis. The survey results show differences between voters' assessment of the constitutional role of the vice president and their actual voting behavior. Over 30% of respondents who believe that the vice president plays an important constitutional role do not take into account the VPC when voting in the presidential election. Moreover, voters' assessment of the presidential and vice presidential candidate can be divided into nine categories. The relationship between these categories and voting choice in the election demonstrates the following two hypotheses. First, the presidential candidate (PC) is a more important factor than the VPC in the presidential election, and, second, the VPC still has an effect on voters. The data shows that the effect of the voters' evaluation/preference of VPC on their voting choice is nontrivial and significant. Finally, the binary logit model shows a similar result for influence of the VPC on voting choice and furthermore indicates that the gap between the evaluations to the presidential and vice presidential candidates of the two major parties is a more important factor on voter choice than the specific evaluation toward a single candidate. In the model, the influence of the VPC does not fall away when we take into account the PC and has differential effect on blue-camp and green-camp supporters.起始頁-結束頁：73-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.02.73-1024篇名：台灣原住民立法委員代表行為之研究：2002-2012之質詢內容分析並列篇名：Representative Behavior of Indigenous Legislator in Taiwan: A Content Analysis of the Floor Questions between 2002 and 2012作者：包正豪(Cheng-Hao Pao)關鍵字：原住民;描述性代表;實質性代表;代表行為;indigenous people;descriptive representation;substantive representation;representative behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以2002到2012年原住民籍立委的質詢發言內容為分析資料，來分析其問政內容是否代表其所認知選民的利益，從而驗證規範性之描述性代表理論的主張是否成立。同時也嘗試透過對質詢議題次數與內容取向的變遷分析，尋找影響變遷的可能原因。研究結果顯示，「族群代表性不足會影響沒有國會代表之原住民族的權益」的情形，並未發生。現行制度雖無法徹底保障原住民族的「描述性代表」，卻有「實質性代表」的現實。所選出的原住民代表並無狹隘的族群意識，而以「泛原住民代表」自居，在質詢問政行為上呈現關照全體原住民利益的趨勢。同時，本文也發現，原住民立委所關注的議題取向會受到選區與政黨的影響，而有所不同，但原則上都與「被代表者」（原住民）的利益相關，而也具體回應了被代表者需求。英文摘要：This study offers a novel empirical account of the representative behavior of the indigenous legislators in the 2002 to 2012 Legislative Yuan. Based on behavioral data, the analysis seeks first to know whether the lack of descriptive representation leads to the harm of substantive representation or not, and then second to illustrate the change and continuity of the issues which indigenous legislators pay attention to. The research findings indicates that although dedicated indigenous seats are always occupied by Amis, Atayal, and Paiwan, the interests of other indigenous peoples do not be harmed. In other words, the current electoral system does not guarantee descriptive representation of all indigenous peoples but provide a substantive representation to them. Basically, the elected indigenous legislators regard themselves as representatives of all indigenous peoples. Furthermore, although the issues concerned by indigenous legislators may be influenced by constituency and party affiliation, they are still highly related to indigenous interests. Indigenous legislators in Taiwan do response to the needs of the represented.起始頁-結束頁：103-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.02.103-1365篇名：日本政治獻金的規制與侷限：論《政治資金規正法》之沿革與意涵並列篇名：The Norm of Japanese Political Funds and Its Limit: The Analysis of the Development and Meaning about Japanese "Political Funds Control Act"作者：鄭子真(Tzu-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：《政治資金規正法》;政治獻金;鐵三角;日本政治;"Political Funds Control Act";contribution;iron triangle;Japanese politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：為鼓勵民眾參與政治，日本於1948年通過《政治資金規正法》（Political Funds Control Act）明訂政治與金錢的關係。鑒於日益嚴重的金權政治，該法歷經數次修法，卻出現政治資金逐年暴增的窘狀。為此，本文分析制度與行為者的互動關係，以及依據政治資金收支報告書的實證數據，說明制度變動後的成效。本文發現該法越是嚴格規範，越是出現政治資金總額不降反升的現象，以及獻金規則變更後，企業和團體獻金途徑的改變。英文摘要：In order to encourage citizens to participate in politics, Japan adopted the ”Political Funds Control Act” in 1948 to regulate political finance. Due to prevailing pork-barrel politics, the ”Political Funds Control Act” has been modified several times. However, it still fails to ameliorate the situation of growing political funds. As a result, this study attempts to examine the interactive relationship between institutions and actors. And provide empirical evidence for the effect of institutional change on regulation of political finance using data from the political fund financial report. This study finds that the more restrictive regulation of political funds contributes to increase, rather than decrease, of political finance. Furthermore, the modification of the ”Political Funds Control Act” also changes the way that enterprises and organizations use for political donations.起始頁-結束頁：137-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.02.137-1756篇名：三合一選舉中之一致與分裂投票：以2010年高雄市選舉為例並列篇名：Analysis of Straight- and Split-Ticket Voting in Three-in-One Election: The Case of 2010 Kaohsiung Metropolitan Elections作者：黃紀(Chi Huang);林長志(Chang-Chih Lin);王宏忠(Hung-Chung Wang)關鍵字：三合一選舉;一致與分裂投票;策略投票;區位迴歸;政黨競爭;three-in-one election;straight- and split-ticket voting;strategic voting;ecological regression;party competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：2010年11月27日舉行的三合一選舉，是我國地方自治史上首次的「五都直轄市」選舉，選民同時擁有市長、市議員與里長選舉的三張選票。本文的目的，即是針對當選民擁有兩張以上之選票，且每項公職選舉又有兩位以上之候選人，指出幾種初探與分析選民「一致投票」（straight-ticket voting）與「分裂投票」（split-ticket voting）模式的方法，並以2010年的高雄市三合一選舉為例來說明。大體而言，由於選舉制度特性以及選舉層級差異，不同公職選舉的政黨競爭程度也有所差異。單一選區特性將導致兩強的競爭，複數選區SNTV制度則較有利於兩大黨以外的政黨獲取席次。在這次高雄市長選舉，脫黨參選之楊秋興取代國民黨黃昭順，成為在選舉中與民進黨陳菊競爭的主要候選人，其票源從分析中證實部分來自泛藍陣營認同的選民，換言之的確存在「棄黃保楊」的選民策略投票。在市長選舉採策略投票支持楊秋興的藍營選民，多半在市議員選舉中則回歸國民黨或投給親民黨候選人，形成一種分裂投票的形式。而綠營選民則在市長與市議員兩票呈現較高程度的一致投票。至於里長選舉，選民的里長黨派投票選擇，似乎與其市長與市議員兩票間並無顯著的關係，此亦凸顯里長選舉與其他兩者在競爭特性上的差異。英文摘要：Three-in-one election held on November 27th 2010 is the first five metropolitan elections in the history of Taiwan's local elections. Voters in this election could cast three ballots for different political positions: mayor, city councilor, and head of li. This study focuses on the Kaohsiung city and analyzes voters' straight- and split-ticket voting in the 2010 three-in-one election.In general, the character of electoral competition is shaped by electoral systems and the level of election. Single-member district with plurality system is considered to contribute to a competition between two major parties, whereas minor parties are more likely to survive under the SNTVMMD system. In the 2010 Kaohsiung mayoral election, then DPP incumbent Kaohsiung County Magistrate Chiu-hsing Yang ran for mayoral election as an independent candidate and replaced the KMT candidate, Chao-shun Huang, as the major competitor of incumbent mayor, Chu Chen. Our study finds that indeed some pan-blue partisans voted for Yang strategically in the mayoral election. This finding to an extent confirms the rumor of ”dump Huang and save Yang” before the election.Meanwhile, most of those pan-blue partisans who voted Yang for mayor remained to support pan-blue candidates in the city councilor election, showing a split-ticket voting pattern. In contrast, pan-green partisans demonstrated a high degree of loyalty to the DPP mayoral candidate, Chu Chen, and the pan-green candidates in the city councilor elections.As for the lowest-level election of head of li, our study shows that there is no significant relationship between vote choice of head of li and that of mayor and city councilor. This finding indicates that the character of the election of head of li is quite different from that of mayor and councilor election.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.01.01-457篇名：解析台灣民眾的反政黨情緒並列篇名：Analyzing Anti-Party Sentiment in Taiwan作者：林聰吉(Tsong-Jyi Lin)關鍵字：反政黨情緒;政治參與;政黨正當性;民主支持;民主滿意;anti-party sentiment;political participation;party legitimacy;democratic support;democratic satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：民眾對國民黨、民進黨兩個主流政黨的不滿，一直是台灣社會長期以來的政治現象。本文以反政黨情緒為研究主題，嘗試探討此一政治態度在我國的分布情形、人口特徵，以及可能造成的政治後果。參酌相關文獻與盱衡我國政治情況，本文設計了政治清廉、選舉公平、執政能力、民意反映等四道題目，以測量台灣民眾的反政黨情緒。研究主要採用電話訪問法，針對年滿20歲的台灣民眾為調查母體，共計成功訪問1,208個有效樣本。本文主要研究發現分述如下。第一、在四道測量反政黨情緒的題目中，僅在執政能力一題，多數民眾對政黨呈現正面的評價；相對地，在政治清廉、選舉公平、民意反映等三題，多數民意皆對政黨表現持負面看法。第二、關於反政黨情緒者的人口特徵，研究顯示，年紀輕、教育程度高、白領階級、居住於城市者，會傾向具有較高的反政黨情緒。第三、反政黨情緒在政治參與、政治支持兩個層面呈現不一的效果。在政治參與的層面，反政黨情緒愈強的民眾，愈對政黨所舉辦的各項活動沒有興趣，愈不會去投票，投票時也愈不會以政黨為投票對象的參考。在政治支持的層面，反政黨情緒對民主滿意呈現顯著的負面效果；不過，反政黨情緒對於政黨正當性、民主支持的影響皆未達統計上的顯著水準。此一結果與現今多數西方民主所呈現的情況類似，亦即反政黨情緒雖已是一個值得注意的政治現象，但其存在仍不至於動搖現有政黨政治與民主政治的運作。英文摘要：Popular dissatisfaction with two mainstream parties has been a significant phenomenon in Taiwan. By applying the concept of anti-party sentiment, this study attempts to explore the following questions: (1) what is the percentage of anti-party sentiment? (2) who are the citizens with anti-party sentiment? (3) what are political consequences led by antiparty sentiment? To measure anti-party sentiment, the author designs four variables concerning political corruption, election fairness, leadership, and representation. Totally 1,208 samples are collected from the telephone interview.There are several findings. First, most people are dissatisfied with the performances of political parties, except for leadership. Second, demographic characteristics for people with anti-party sentiment include young age, high education, white collar, and city inhabitant. Third, anti-party sentiment exerts negative effect on political participation and democratic satisfaction. On the contrary, anti-party sentiment doesn't show significant effect on party legitimacy and democratic support. Above findings imply that the case of Taiwan is similar with most western democracies. Although anti-party sentiment could be treatedas an important phenomenon in Taiwan, it might not jeopardize Taiwan democracy.起始頁-結束頁：47-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.01.47-728篇名：選舉制度與立法者競選政見及立法表現：臺灣立法院第六屆及第七屆區域立委之比較並列篇名：The Effects of Electoral Rules upon Legislators' Campaign Promises and Legislative Performance: To Compare the District Legislators of Taiwan Legislative Yuan between Its Sixth Term and Seventh Term作者：廖達琪(Da-Chi Liao);李承訓(Cheng-Hsun Li);陳柏宇(Bo-Yu Chen)關鍵字：比例代表制;單一選區相對多數制;複數選區單記不可讓渡投票制;競選政見;立法表現;PR;SMP;SNTV;campaign promise;legislative performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文目的在於探討選舉制度的改變對國會議員競選政見，和其實踐政見之立法表現的影響。本文提出兩個假設：第一，單一選區相對多數制（SMP）下產生的國會議員，會比比例代表制（PR）下的更傾向提出地方性的政見，但不會增加社福政見；第二，SMP制下選出的議員，也會比PR制下的更努力將政見落實於立法表現的各項行為中。本研究以臺灣立法院為對象，進行準實驗設計比較。立法院第六屆（2005－2008）及第七屆（2008－2012）所使用的選舉方式，分別是以接近PR制的SNTV制為主的混合制，以及以SMP為主的兩票並立混合制。透過登錄第六屆與第七屆區域立法委員的公報政見及立法表現相關資料，探討比較選舉制度變遷對國會議員競選政見和其實踐政見之立法表現的影響。本文的發現基本肯定兩項假設，也就是SMP確實促使區域立委提出較多與地方選區有關的政見，但不增加社福政見；也驅動區域立委以較正式、可被觀察紀錄的立法行為，如法律提案及臨時提案，來實踐其政見。本文針對這些發現，更進一步探討以SMP和PR兩種制度所產生之代表的回應性和課責性，以及對社福政策之影響，來反思目前民主憲政設計較推崇PR制的趨勢。英文摘要：This paper explores the impact of alterations to electoral systems on legislator campaign promises and to what extent legislators keep these promises in later legislative performance. We advance 2 hypotheses: 1. Legislators elected in single member plurality (SMP) system have a greater tendency to propose locally oriented campaign promises than those elected through proportional representation (PR), but will not be more likely to advance social welfare campaign promises; 2. Legislators chosen through SMP will put forth greater effort to actualize campaign promises in various legislative activities.This research performs a quasi-experimental comparison on Taiwan's Legislative Yuan. The 6th Legislative Yuan (2005-2008) utilized a single non-transferable vote system (SNTV), which was a hybrid system similar to PR, while the 7th Legislative Yuan elections were primarily an SMP hybrid two ballot system. We record data for the campaign promises district legislative candidates officially announced during the 6th and 7th term elections to explore the influence of electoral system alterations on national legislators' campaign promises and legislative activities aimed at realizing these promises.Our study essentially verifies the two hypotheses. SMP leads legislators to advance larger numbers of locally oriented campaign promises, while there is no difference between SMP and PR with respect to social welfare campaign promises. SMP system also spurs district legislators to utilize official and observable legislative activities, such as legislative proposals and interim proposals, in adhering to campaign promises. With respect to these findings, we further explore responsiveness and accountability in the SMP and PR systems, as well as its impact on social welfare policy, in order to further reflect on the present trend toward greater respect for PR system in democratic constitutional design.起始頁-結束頁：73-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.01.73-1199篇名：Partisan and Personal Voting in SNTV: A Mixed Logit Model並列篇名：單記非讓渡投票選舉制度下的個人與政黨取向：一個混合洛基模型作者：鮑彤(Nathan F. Batto)關鍵字：單記非讓渡投票選制;混合洛基模型;投票抉擇;Single non-transferable vote (SNTV);mixed logit;vote choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去選舉制度的研究相信，在複數選區單記非讓渡投票選制（SNTV）的選舉，政黨與個人因素對選民的投票抉擇「應該」相當重要。然而，現有選舉行為的文獻並未就此一信念予以嚴格檢驗。本文證據顯示，雖然這兩類因素都有顯著影響，「政黨」因素遠比「個人」因素更強而有力。概括來看，在選民的投票抉擇當中，政黨因素最為關鍵；在同黨候選人之間，個人因素可用以決勝負。再者，政黨因素與個人因素也有交互作用。不同的政黨脈絡下，選民對個人因素重要與否的判斷有所不同，表面上看似屬於候選人的個人投票，其實政黨因素的考量可能影響很大。研究方法上，本文提出混合洛基模型（mixed logit），作為SNTV投票抉擇模型的適當統計工具，所檢驗的民調資料係針對1992年至2004年台灣五次立委選舉的調查。英文摘要：There are reasons to believe that both partisan and personal factors should be important in the voting decision in SNTV elections, but this has not been rigorously tested in previous literature. This paper presents evidence that both types of factors have significant impacts, but partisan factors are much more powerful than personal factors. In general, partisan factors dominate the candidate vote choice, and personal factors serve primarily as tiebreakers among candidates from the same party. Moreover, the importance that voters place on personal factors varies in different partisan contexts, and there is generally a partisan logic to these varying weights.Methodologically, this paper proposes mixed logit as an appropriate tool for modeling voting choices in SNTV and examines data from the five legislative elections in Taiwan from 1992 to 2004.起始頁-結束頁：121-153資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2013.20.01.121-15301篇名：親子關係與母親安適感之關聯性研究：以臺灣青少年及成年自閉症個案之母親為例並列篇名：Mother-Child Relationship Quality and its Association with Maternal Well-Being: A Study of Adolescents and Adults with Autism in Taiwan作者：廖淑廷(Shu-Ting Liao);林玲伊(Ling-Yi Lin)關鍵字：自閉症;母親安適感;親子關係;autism;maternal well-being;mother-child relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：自閉症個案的社交互動行為一直以來為國內外許多學者的研究重點，其對親子關係發展的影響也一併受到重視。相關的研究在國外行之有年，許多文獻均證實正向的情感表達有助於親子關係的建立，而良善的親子關係同時也對照顧者的情緒及心理／生理安適感產生正面的影響。有感於國內自閉症親子關係研究多數著重於孩童個案的現況，本研究將研究範疇擴大至青少年以上的自閉症個案及其照顧者。研究參與者為60位台灣地區10至31歲青少年和成年自閉症個案的母親，以自填式問卷的方式了解母親與個案的互動情感模式，及可能影響到親子關係和母親安適感的個人特質等因子。研究結果顯示，青少年和成年自閉症個案對母親的信任感及母親對他們的喜愛在親子的互動情感模式中扮演著極為重要的角色，個案的年齡和日常生活功能獨立程度與親子關係品質呈現顯著相關。另外照顧者的情緒狀態，對孩子的擔心、憂鬱程度及照顧負擔等心理安適感，也都與親子關係品質有顯著的關聯。本研究結果有助於瞭解影響親子關係的潛在因子，並支持親子關係品質和母親安適感間的關聯性，未來可再深入了解其他相關之核心因子，以期能更全面的了解自閉症個案與照顧者的親子關係。英文摘要：Individuals with autism typically have impairments in social interaction; thus, their social relationships in adolescent and adulthood with parents may be impacted. In past years, many Western researchers have reported that expression of positive affects mother-child relationships and also relateds to caregivers' physical and psychosocial well-being. However, less research has focused on experiences of Taiwanese mother's caring for an adolescent or adult with autism. A sample of 60 adolescents and adults (mean age = 16.8 years, age ranged from 10 to 31 years) with autistic disorder and their mothers in Taiwan were recruited for this study. To investigate the mother-child relationship and its underlying causes, the participants' co-residing mothers were asked to complete a self-report questionnaire about mother and child interactions and the factors related to mother and child relationships. The results showed that children's feeling of trust toward their mothers and mothers' affection for children played an important role in mother-child relationships. The quality of mother-child relationships was also significantly correlated with age and functional independence of individuals with autism. Additionally, results demonstrated that mothers' emotional status, worry about their child, levels of depression, and burden from being a caregiver were negatively associated with the quality of mother-child relationships. The findings indicated factors that may influence mother-child relationships, and also highlighted the association between the quality of parent-child relationship and mother's well-being. Practitioners can use this study's findings to implement optimal interventions for families of individuals with autistic disorder. The results from this study provide information to support the design of adequate interventions that meet the needs of adolescents and adults with autism and their caregivers in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：157-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：受苦經驗之存在現象學研究：兼論諮商與心理治療的理論視野並列篇名：An Existential-Phenomenological Inquiry on Suffering: A Discussion on the Theoretical Perspectives of Counseling and Psychotherapy作者：盧怡任(Yi-Jen Lu);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu)關鍵字：存在現象學;受苦經驗;現象學心理學;諮商與心理治療;counseling and psychotherapy;existential phenomenology;phenomenological psychology;suffering期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：人類受苦經驗一直是諮商與心理治療領域的核心議題，究竟人類受苦經驗因何而來，如何維持，又如何脫離。本文首先耙梳與整理諮商與心理治療理論對人類受苦經驗的看法，發現：（1）傳統諮商與心理治療理論視心靈為封閉實體，與外在世界相互獨立，認為受苦經驗來自於人無法符應其外在環境；（2）後現代治療取向視外在現實為個人或社會建構的結果，主流文化的壓迫才是人類受苦經驗的源頭。面對前述現代與後現代理論取向的分裂，本研究目的在於從存在現象學的觀點，理解人類的受苦經驗，並以此理解作為不同理論取向間分裂的接合點。本研究以存在現象學研究方法，透過三位受訪者的受苦經驗，進行文本分析。結果發現受訪者之受苦經驗來自對既有處境的拒絕與期望處境的落空，處於既有處境與期望處境之間的斷裂，讓受訪者處於立基的無根而受苦。本研究從存在現象學的觀點提供受苦經驗處境結構之存有學描述，並以受苦經驗處境結構做為諮商與心理治療不同理論的接合點進行理論間的討論，最後對研究限制提出說明。英文摘要：The suffering of human beings has long been the core concern in the areas of counseling and psychotherapy. This study first reviewed and summarized the perspectives that counseling and psychotherapy have had about the suffering of humans. It was discovered that (a) both conventional counseling and psychotherapy theories have conceptualized the mind as a substance of closure and independent of the outer world. They also assumed the suffering has been resulted from humans' not capable of adapting to the outer world; and (b) postmodern theories tent to regard the reality as a product of individual or social construction, and the suppression of the mainstream culture is a head of stream for humans' suffering. By discovering the discrepancy of the above mentioned orientations in modern and post-modern theories, this study aimed to realize human suffering from view of existential phenomenology. And it can be the based phenomenon to bridge up the discrepancies from different theoretical orientations. This study conducted textual analysis on the suffering of three respondents by using the methodology of existential phenomenology. It was found that the suffering of the respondents resulted from the denial of their existed situations and the disappointment toward the expected ones. Being on the breaking points of both the existed situation and the expected one made the respondents suffer from the feeling of losing the grounds of life ahead. This study applied the situational structure of suffering from the perspective of existential phenomenology to serve as a connection for different theories in both counseling and psychotherapy. Finally, limitations of this study were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：177-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會3篇名：敘事諮商中當事人自我認同轉化歷程之研究並列篇名：Transforming Clients' Self Identity in Narrative Counseling作者：林杏足(Shin-Drew Lin)關鍵字：改變歷程研究;敘事諮商;自我認同;change process research;narrative counseling self-identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在於探討當事人在敘事諮商歷程的主觀經驗，理解當事人對諮商經驗與自我認同的知覺與詮釋。研究參與者為三名女大學生，分別接受八、七及九次的敘事諮商會談，於每次諮商晤談後接受訪談，待全部諮商結束後一個月再接受一次追蹤訪談，成為研究分析的文本。以敘事研究法的「類別內容」進行文本資料分析。研究結果如下：（1）敘說經驗的理解：透過敘說帶來清晰和理解，舊經驗新意義，重新定義問題。諮商對話的影響包括，自我整理與豐富故事；外化式對話獲致新的視野；偏好選擇問句；帶來動能與希望感；重組會員問句，邀請觀眾支持自己決定；書寫成長的宣告和見證，則帶來力量。（2）諮商經驗對自我認同的影響與詮釋：重構社會期許對自我認同的關係；當事人的自我認同由自我貶抑和否定，朝向多元面貌的自我認識，包含看見能力與自信、珍視內心感受和需要、重新找回自己、新故事帶來行動；形成一種自我反思性的生命態度。整個諮商歷程是一趟自我認同轉化的旅程。英文摘要：The study aimed to understand clients' subjective experiences in narrative counseling processes, which encompass their perception and interpretation of narrative experiences and self-identity. Three female undergraduate students were recruited. They received seven to nine sessions of narrative counseling. Then, interviews were conducted after every session as well as one month after their termination. These interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed by the method of using a categorical-content perspective of narrative research. The results were the following: 1. Participants' understanding of narrative experiences included narratives brought clarity, understanding, new meanings in the past experiences, and re-definition of problems. The influences of conversations in counseling included enriching stories, gaining different perspectives from externalizinged conversations, ”preferred questions,” agency, sense of hope, re-membering conversation, inviting the audience to support decisions, and writing statements and witness of growth brings power. 2. Influences and interpretation of self-identity from counseling experiences: participants reported that counseling helped them discover socio-culture influences on self-identity and developed self-reflective attitudes towards life. Additionally, participants' self-identity changed from belittling and denial to knowing diverse aspects of themselves (e.g., recognizing their abilities, being confident, valuing their own feelings and needs). The new stories have made them move forward actions. In summary, the entire counseling process was a journey of transforming one's self-identity.起始頁-結束頁：209-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：從系統思維探討基督徒癌婦的家庭關係與靈性經驗並列篇名：Exploring the Family Relationships and Spiritual Experiences of Christian Cancer-laden Housewives from a Systemic Framework作者：賈紅鶯(Hong-Ying Chia);陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);溫明達(Ming-Dar Woon)關鍵字：系統思維;家庭關係;基督徒;敘事研究;癌婦;靈性;cancer-laden housewives;Christian;family relationships;narrative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：37期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究針對四位基督徒癌症婦女，兩位失婚罹患大腸癌、陰道癌的慕道友，及兩位信仰多年的已婚乳癌婦女，分別進行四至八小時不等時間深度訪談，以質性敘事研究「整體－內容觀點」方法進行分析。研究結果發現癌婦的家庭關係反映性別與宗教信仰的文化脈絡，癌症引發失婚癌婦過往的婚姻創傷之慟，不下於癌症生理之痛，因而先發出靈性的需要，也帶來靈性的療癒。已婚癌婦對癌前夫妻、親子、婆媳關係予以反思，從身為沉重照顧者到返身自我照顧並經歷身心靈的「重生」。癌婦的靈性經驗呈現成長與掙扎的交織歷程，靈性掙扎與生理疼痛、心理情緒、家庭關係及教會關係等有關。研究結果顯示癌症不只是個人的身心靈問題，也是家庭系統的議題。依此，研究者參考Rolland「家庭系統－疾病模式」提出「家庭系統思維的癌婦身心靈」架構，供未來探究。英文摘要：Taking the a narrative approach with the ”whole-content analysis” method, this researcher interviewed four female Christian cancer patients. Two were breast cancer patients who had already been Christians for years, and two were divorced women (one with colon cancer and one with vaginal cancer) who were Christian seekers looking into Christianity . In-depth interviews with the subjects ranged from four to eight hours. It was found that the states of the body, mind, and spirit of cancer-laden housewives were correlated to their family relationships and reflected their socio-cultural contexts. The cancer experience inflicted further marriage trauma for the divorced women who, and encountered spirituality and spiritual healing while looking back on the hardships they endured during marriage. Through reflecting upon family relationships before becoming ill, the married women realized how they had adjusted from the role of care-giver of for the family to that of care-giver for to themselves and increased their trust in God's transcendental power, reflecting on the meaning of ”rebirth”. Their spiritual growth maintained a dialectic relationship with spiritual struggle. Spiritual struggles due to cancer induced physical pain, depression, marital relationships, conflicts with in-laws and alienation from church. Cancer is not only personal disease but also the issues of family relationship. The researcher attempted to construct a theory regarding the ”body, mind and spirit within relational context” through using a systematic framework.起始頁-結束頁：243-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會5篇名：無聲勝有聲？！－「不理」在青春期友誼中的意涵與歷程並列篇名：Silence Speaks more than Words?!-Lgnoring in Adolescent Friendship作者：賴思<U+4F03>(Szu-Yu Lai);黃<U+56C7>莉(Li-Li Huang)關鍵字：不理;內隱衝突;和諧;青春期友誼;關係攻擊;adolescent friendship;hidden conflict;ignoring;relational aggression期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：36期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討青春期好友關係中「不理」的意涵與歷程。本研究跳脫過去文獻將「不理」視為關係攻擊的觀點，而以華人文化下之「人際和諧與衝突動態模式」為理論架構，於關係脈絡下重新理解友誼間的「不理」經驗。研究方式為深度訪談13名青年參與者，年齡13－29歲，女性11位，男性2位，蒐集其青春期「不理」經驗之質性資料，共18筆。研究結果顯示，「不理」的歷程包含不理的蘊釀、關係停滯及關係轉化三階段，展現人我距離的拿捏與練習。首先，青春期好友間有了不和之後，顧全大局之下，主動方以「不理」行為讓被動方意識到其不滿，而使內隱衝突浮上檯面。接著，看似無互動的不理，實則是主動方促使關係改變的方式，雖然促使雙方從虛性和諧轉成實性和諧的機會固然存在，但大多時候雙方關係是越來越淡化。最後，由於青春期友誼具情感依附性，即使雙方實際互動已形同陌路，心裡卻不輕易認定關係已終結。「不理」的經驗可能重複於其他人際關係中，也可能給個人帶來成長的契機。這些結果均顯示，「不理」於友誼中不一定導致負面的效應。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the meaning and process of ignoring in adolescent friendship with adopting ”the dynamic model of interpersonal harmony and conflict” grounded on Chinese cultural context rather than relational aggression viewpoint. Thirteen participants (13-29 years; 11 females, 3 males) were interviewed to gather data on their past ignoring experiences. According the model, Chinese people who place importance on the relationship can not easily confront it but rather let the conflict become implicit. Instead of damaging the relationship directly, ignoring the target is one way of coping with interpersonal conflict. Ignoring passes on an unsatisfied feeling silently. The results showed that the ignoring process was a practice of how to balance the I-Thou psychological distance. If there was a chance to communicate clearly and express each other's value in the relationship, the resulting relationship entered into genuine harmony. Even after the contact between friends ceased to exist, these people did not easily accept or become aware of the end of the relationship. Findings of the study suggest that the results after ignoring are not all negative. However, from the viewpoint of relational aggression, positive results cannot be found.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會6篇名：臺灣心理劇文獻回顧1968－2011：看心理劇的發展與轉變並列篇名：A Review of the Taiwanese Psychodrama Literature from 1968 to 2011: The Development and Transformation作者：賴念華(Nien-Hwa Lai)關鍵字：文獻分析;心理劇;團體心理治療;group psychotherapy;literature review;psychodrama期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：36期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在了解心理劇在臺發展37年之相關文獻趨勢及內涵。採內容分析法進行文獻分析，藉資料庫檢索及私人蒐集方式廣羅臺灣地區已出版之心理劇文章，依發表年代、內涵、應用場域、對象及議題等分析歸納，發現：（1）文獻內涵分理論說明、實務應用及學術研究論文三大類，近三分之二為實務應用文獻且以個人經驗分享為主；（2）心理劇最早的文獻內涵多基礎理論介紹，後有個人經驗分享、期刊論文、概念運用及技巧探索、理論詮釋、取向結合等類型，近年增長以碩博士論文為主；（3）應用場域有醫療、校園、社區、企業、司法五大體系，發展順序從醫院開始，隨後進入校園、社區，近十年則興起企業與司法之應用；以及（4）臺灣心理劇常見議題包括家庭與婚姻、悲傷輔導、震災創傷、生涯諮商。研究者從學術論文了解研究方法及趨勢，發現早期偏屬醫院針對精神疾患進行成效量化研究，近年轉向質化分析社區大眾各層面之心理劇經驗。最後對臺灣心理劇未來研究及發展方向提出建議。英文摘要：This study reviewed the content and trends of the Taiwanese psychodrama literature published in the past 37 years. To conduct the literature review, psychodrama articles published in Taiwan were retrieved by database searching and personal acquisition. Retrieved articles were subsequently organized by publication dates and extracted for information, including article contents, study subjects, areas of application, and themes for application. Based on the extracted information for content analysis and article categorization, the researcher concluded that: (1) Theoretical Explanation, Practical Application and Academic Research constituted the three major categories of the Taiwanese psychodrama literature, and two thirds of all articles fell within the category of Practical Application, which was dominated by Personal Sharing. (2) Early psychodrama literature in Taiwan provided mostly Introduction to Basic Theory, but it later became more popular to write about Personal Sharing, Journal Articles, Applications of Psychodrama Concepts, Exploration of Techniques, Theoretical Interpretation and Combination of Approaches; however in recent years, an increase in master’s theses and doctorate dissertations was observed. (3) Applications of Psychodrama were found in five major arenas in Taiwan, developed in the chronological order of hospitals, campuses, communities, industries and the legal system. And (4) common themes for application included family and marriage, grief counseling, earthquake-related trauma and career counseling. The author also looked into the methodology and trends of academic research, and found that earlier work was mostly quantitative analysis on the effectiveness on psychiatric patients in hospitals, whereas recent work focused more on qualitative analysis on all aspects of psychodrama experiences with community members. Suggestions for future psychodrama research and development in Taiwan were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：33-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會7篇名：依附關係、低自我控制與青少年偏差行為關聯性之研究並列篇名：The Study of Relationships among Attachment, Low Self-control, and Juvenile Delinquency作者：譚子文(Tzyy-Wen Tan);張楓明(Feng-Ming Chang)關鍵字：台灣青少年成長歷程研究;低自我控制;依附關係;偏差行為;attachment;delinquency;low self-control;taiwan youth project期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：36期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要依據一般化犯罪理論及社會控制理論之依附關係的觀點，探討依附關係、低自我控制與青少年偏差行為的影響。本研究之資料數據使用中研院社會所之台灣青少年成長歷程研究的資料，有效分析樣本為2,110名三年級國中生。至於數據分析方面，採用迴歸分析所搜集之數據。本研究發現：（1）依附關係與低自我控制間具關聯性；（2）依附關係、低自我控制對偏差行為的發生均具有直接效果；（3）低自我控制在依附母親、依附學校對青少年偏差行為的影響具有中介效應。依據研究的分析結果，文中就未來對青少年偏差行為之研究與輔導提出相關建議。英文摘要：Based on the viewpoints of a general theory of crime and social control theory, this study was conducted to investigate how attachment and low self-control would influence juvenile delinquency. The sample consisted of 2,110 third-year junior high school students from the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP). The regression analysis was used to analyze the data. The results showed that: (1) attachment was related to low self-control; (2) attachment and low self-control had significant direct impacts on third-year junior high school students’ deviant behavior; (3) there were mediating effect of low self-control on the relationship between attachment to mother, attachment to school, and juvenile delinquency. Several suggestions for guidance and further studies are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：67-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會8篇名：青少年自尊特質、家庭型態與憤怒型式之相關研究並列篇名：A Study on Self-Esteem, Family Type and Anger Pattern of Adolescents作者：甘孟龍(Mon-Long Gan)關鍵字：自尊特質;青少年;家庭型態;憤怒型式;adolescent;self-esteem;family type;anger pattern期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：36期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討性別、自尊特質對於青少年憤怒型式之差異比較和交互作用效應；並進一步探討家庭組成型態是否會對青少年的自尊特質與憤怒型式造成影響。研究者以518位國中生為研究對象，分別施以「青少年憤怒評定量表」、「自尊量表」與「自我看法穩定量表」之問卷調查。所得資料則透過描述性統計、單因子多變量變異數、二因子多變量變異數與百分比同質性考驗進行分析處理。本研究發現如下：（1）性別、自尊特質對於青少年憤怒型式並沒有產生交互作用效應；（2）不同性別在整體憤怒型式上有所差異；其中，男性的工具型憤怒顯著高於女性；女性的控制型憤怒則顯著高於男性；（3）不同自尊特質在整體憤怒型式上有所差異；該差異主要反應於低穩定／低自尊青少年在反應型、工具型與控制型等三種憤怒型式顯著不同於其他青少年的現象；（4）不同家庭組成型態對於青少年自尊特質沒有影響；（5）不同家庭組成型態之青少年在憤怒型式沒有差異。研究者根據所得研究結果提出建議，供學校以及輔導人員和未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to compare three types of anger among adolescents of different sex, self-esteem and family type. The sample consisted of 518 junior high students who reside in Zhanghua County, Taiwan. The research tools in this study were ”Individual Basic Information Survey”, ”the Adolescent Anger Rating Scale”, ”the Rosenberg’s Self-Esteem Scale” and ”The Stability of Self Scale”. The statistical methods included descriptive statistics, one-way and two-way MANOVA. The results were as follows: (1) There was no interaction between sex and self-esteem on adolescent anger response pattern. (2)Sex differences were observed in adolescent anger pattern, in which adolescent males demonstrated higher levels of instrumental anger than females, while females showed higher levels of anger control. (3)The differences in self-esteem among adolescents with different anger pattern were observed. Adolescents with unstable and low levels of self-esteem demonstrated higher levels of reactive anger and instrumental anger than adolescents with stable and low levels of self-esteem, and adolescents with stable and high levels of self-esteem. (4)There was no significant relation between family type and self-esteem of adolescent. (5)There was no significant difference between adolescent of family types on anger pattern.起始頁-結束頁：91-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會9篇名：從「權威觀注」到「自我觀注」：從多元文化諮商觀點看台灣遊戲治療師教養概念的轉化並列篇名：From "Authoritarian-Regard" to "Self-Regard": Exploring Taiwanese Play Therapists' Transitions of Parenting Conceptions from Multicultural Perspectives作者：邱獻輝(Hsien-Huei Chiou);陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);利美萱(Meei-Shiuan Lih)關鍵字：多元文化諮商;教養概念;紮根理論;遊戲治療師;權威關注;authoritarian-regard;grounded theory;multicultural counseling;parenting conception;play therapist期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：36期出版年：2013中文摘要：遊戲治療師從事兒童諮商工作，常需與家長探討教養概念，故需釐清自己的教養概念。台灣深受傳統華人權威教養影響，因此台灣遊戲治療師可能具有權威教養成長經驗；相對的，現代教養概念富含西方個人主義特質，與華人權威教養有諸多對立之處，遊戲治療師如何在生命經驗與專業之間取捨？目前殊少文獻深究，為釐清此議題，本研究從多元文化諮商觀點切入，遵循建構主義典範，邀請九位遊戲治療師接受半結構的深度訪談，以紮根理論進行資料蒐集與分析。本研究發現受訪者大抵經歷過不同程度的「權威關注」教養經驗，但是卻都一致地反抗權威教養；這其中顯露出一個轉換的建構過程，亦即受訪者隨著年歲增長，在主動尋求或因緣際會裡，從祖輩、伴侶、師長、手足、專業同儕、治療等關係中，獲得有別於權威／順從互動的「自我關注」之修正性經驗，使其自主性提升，並且試圖將這種新的人際互動狀態帶回自己的親子互動中；惟，每位受訪者的內外在資源有別，所以修正親子權威／順從互動的程度也就不一致；但只要有所修正，就會再強化對權威教養的反抗，形成一個循環；本研究並據此結果提出討論。英文摘要：Authoritarian/compliance is an important ingredient of traditional Chinese parenting, so Taiwanese play therapists might own lots of experiences of ”authoritarian-regard”. However, the rationale of play therapy focused on ”self-regard” characters. So, how Taiwanese play therapists identify a set of parenting conceptions is the focus of this study. From the cultural perspective, the present research, following the constructivism paradigm, collected and analyzed data based on grounded theory. Nine Taiwanese play therapists were recruited to be interviewees for semi-structured interviews. The results showed a transition for the interviewees that although the interviewees all experienced different levels of ”authoritarian regard” parenting when they were young, they all consistently opposed to authoritarian parenting. This transition happened when interviewees gradually grew up and got the ”corrected experiences” purposely or by chance from the interactions of grandparents, couples, teachers, siblings, professional peers, or therapists. These corrected experiences were different from ”authoritarian-regard” and increased their autonomy. Interviewees all tried to incorporate this new experience in the interactions with their own parents and children. Not every interviewee successfully modified their own authoritarian interactions because different interviewees owned different internal and external resources. Basically, if interviewees can change their parent-child interactions, then this transition would likely reinforce the disagreement with authoritarian parenting. Suggestions based on the finding of this study were highlighted that it is better for Taiwanese play therapists to culturally coordinate their life experiences and therapeutic rationales concerned to practice.起始頁-結束頁：117-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會10篇名：酒酣耳熟與酬酢：原住民酒癮相關因子之探討並列篇名：Merrily Drunk and Friendly Interchange: Factors Associated with Alcoholism in an Aboriginal Community作者：賴力行(Li-Hsing Lai);龍紀萱(Chi-Hsuan Lung);李依霙(I-Ying Lee);盧煜煬(Louis Y. Y. Lu);施勝烽(Sheng-Feng Shih)關鍵字：自覺健康狀況;原住民;酒癮;aboriginal community;alcoholism;self-conscious health condition期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：36期出版年：2013中文摘要：飲酒行為一直是原住民生活中重要的議題，本研究旨在探討影響原住民酒癮行為的相關影響因素。本研究為量化橫斷性研究，採用立意取樣，運用研究者設計之自填式問卷，以原住民部落具有飲酒行為之493位原住民為研究對象。以原住民的基本特質、健康狀況、嗜好習慣此三方面進行分析。「基本特質」，族群別、性別、年齡、教育、婚姻與酒癮呈顯著性差異；「健康狀況」，自覺健康狀況與酒癮呈顯著性差異；「嗜好習慣」，抽煙量、嚼檳榔、喜愛的酒類、開始飲酒年齡、常和誰飲酒、飲酒動機、飲酒時刻、飲酒量、是否瞭解飲酒壞處、飲酒後反應、自覺飲酒害處、節制飲酒意願與酒癮呈顯著性差異。「酒癮者之危險因子」，健康狀況、抽菸量、飲酒量、飲酒時刻為酒癮者之危險預測變項。酒癮者與非酒癮者之基本特質、健康狀況、嗜好習慣等因子呈顯著性差異，建議注意有飲酒行為者之飲酒時間、飲酒量與節制飲酒意願，將有助於控制原住民酒癮之危險因子。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the factors that were hypothesized to correlate with the development of alcohol dependence in aboriginal communities. This study used a cross-sectional design and purposive sampling. We modified the questionnaire CAGE for the survey of alcoholism. Data were collected from 493 aborigines who had drinking behavior in aboriginal communities. Data were analyzed based on fundamental characteristics, health status, and habits. The results showed that there were significant difference in occurrence of alcoholism among factors such as ethnic groups, gender, age, education level and marriage. Alcoholism occurred more frequently among individuals who were male, younger, with lower education level and unmarried. Individuals with better health status were less likely to become alcoholics. There are several habitual factors that affected the development of alcoholism. Factors that were associated with alcoholism included smoking, chewing betel nut, starting to drink in younger age, having drinking buddies, day-time drinker, drinking in a great amount of alcohol, having certain kinds of alcohol-containing drink, and realizing the bad effects of drinking. Among the risk factors that affected the person’s alcoholism, self-conscious health condition, smoking, the amount of drinking, and drinking time during the day were critical elements. Because alcoholics showed significant difference to nonalcoholic ones distinguished by fundamental characteristics, habitual factors and health status, this study recommended that attention should be paid to the drinking time during a day, the quantity of drinking and self-control capability to effectively reduce the ratio of alcoholics in an aboriginal community with drinking culture.起始頁-結束頁：155-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：311核災後德國核能政策之研究－兼論德國核能治理之公民參與並列篇名：German Nuclear Policy after the 311 Nuclear Disaster and a Simultaneous Review of Public Participation of German Nuclear Governance作者：劉書彬(Shu-Pin Liu)關鍵字：德國核能政策;梅克爾;能源轉向;German nuclear policy;Merkel;energy transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要探討2011年東日本311核災前後，梅克爾政府如何在2010秋天至2011年中，不到一年期間，透過兩次修訂原子能法：先修訂核反應爐延役案，後設定於2022年無核能的狀況下，將達成2050年既定的能源目標。本文試圖解釋德國此一時期核能政策改變的原因，尤其將探討核能與再生能源結合其它節能措施的能源發展路徑之爭。研究結果顯示：核能政策的利害關係人決策時之環境意識，與風險意識認知變化，是影響德國核能決策的關鍵，而形成的能源產業差異亦深深影響該國生活型態與生態環境。本文藉此評估德國核能治理體系所具備的民主治理程度，其所展現的善治經驗，頗值得使用核能、且是個人排碳大國的我國，思考核電出路時的參考。英文摘要：This article focuses on the development of the German nuclear policy before and after the 311 nuclear disaster. Above all to analyze in the autumn of 2010 to middle of 2011, how Merkel's government amended twice the Atomic Energy Act, the previous concerned to extend nuclear using periods; the last was to abolish nuclear reactors until 2022, then to achieve the goal of energy policy for 2050. This Article will explain why the German nuclear policies in this period changed was, particular by comparison with different approaches from nuclear energy or renewable energy and saving energy.The result shows: the change of the environmental value and risk awareness of the stakeholders, they concern about German energy policy, are the key factors to impact the nuclear policy. These lead to German started to develop different energy industry, life style and biological environment. At last the author tries to evaluate German nuclear governance and German experience will be a reference for Taiwan, which also is a country, using nuclear energy, and with huge amount of personal carbon emissions.起始頁-結束頁：131-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：書評：國家為什麼會失敗－權利、富裕與貧困的根源並列篇名：Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty作者：周繼祥(Jih-Shine Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：181-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：台灣民眾政治課責觀之初探－認知、評價與影響並列篇名：The Perception, Evaluation, and Impact of Political Accountability in Taiwan作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao)關鍵字：政治課責;民主品質;民意調查;political accountability;democratic quality;public opinion survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：政治課責是民主政治運作的要件之一，也是提升民主品質、達成民主鞏固不可或缺要素。當一國民眾多具備政治課責觀，且對政治課責的落實給予正向評價，即有利提升該國民主運作的品質。本文藉由民意調查的資料蒐集途徑，從學理上政治課責的不同面向，測量台灣民眾對政治課責的認知，以及對政治課責落實與否的評價，並進一步檢視對政治課責的認知，是否在選舉課責的落實及民主實行滿意度的評價上具備加乘效果。研究發現，在台灣實際政治運作下，民眾多具備政治課責的認知，在政策制訂說明、媒體監督及社團參與上，課責認知的比例皆達六成以上，僅在議會制衡認知比例不及五成。在政治課責的落實評價上，民眾對媒體監督與社團參與給予較正向的評價，但對政策制訂說明及議會制衡則給予較負面的評價。此外，本文也證實台灣民眾確實具備選舉課責的作為，對於民主實行的滿意度評價，亦會從政治課責的落實程度來思考。尤其，民眾所關切之課責面向的認知，會對選舉課責及民主滿意度評價給予加乘效果，突顯出政治課責觀的重要影響力。英文摘要：Political accountability is one of the crucial factors adopted by political scientists to determine whether a country is a consolidated democracy. Furthermore, political accountability is closely related to democratic quality, which is increased when citizens not only perceive political accountability but also have a positive view on it. The purpose of this article is to analyze survey data to examine how citizens in Taiwan perceive and evaluate political accountability. In addition, this article also explores its effect on citizens' vote choice and their satisfaction with democracy.The results indicate that the majority of Taiwanese citizens perceive various dimensions of political accountability with the only exception of ”check and balance” dimension. While people showed positive evaluations on ”media supervising” and ”social group participating,” they took a negative view on the two dimensions of ”policy explanation” and ”checks and balances”. It is also worth noticing that citizens have the perception of electoral accountability. In addition, it is found that citizen's perception of political accountability accounts for their satisfaction with democracy in Taiwan. These findings indicate an optimistic view of Taiwan's further democratic development.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：誰能容忍貪腐？並列篇名：Who Can Afford to Tolerate Corruption?作者：蘇毓昌(Yu-Chang Su);胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu)關鍵字：反貪腐;廉能政府;公民社會;公民結構;人口特徵;anti-corruption;government integrity and effectiveness;civil society;citizen composition;demographic characteristics期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：我國在民主轉型過程中，黑金與貪腐情事層出不窮，影響政府整體施政效能與民眾對政府的信賴。在過往反貪腐過程中，大多仰賴政府公權力單方面的執行，致使改革成效不甚凸顯、阻力重重，改革與執行的面向皆存在許多待克服的問題。隨著公民意識的抬頭，民眾對於貪腐的容忍度日益降低。如何適時在反貪腐政策推動過程中導入公民社會的力量，將是未來不容忽視的重要課題之一。其中，若能深入瞭解那一類型與屬性的民眾較為無法容忍貪腐情事，那一類型與屬性的民眾對於貪腐具有較高的寬容度，則將有助於反貪運動的社會動員與政策倡導之策略擬定。然而，可惜的是，檢閱相關文獻，吾人卻未能對我國公民社會在反貪腐議題中的人口組成與結構有一清楚的輪廓與瞭解。爰此，本文以法務部2007年所進行我國廉政民意調查為基礎，針對受訪者之社會人口特徵進行實證分析，發現屬貪腐高容忍群者，具有以下特質：男性、年齡在40－49歲之間、具高中／職的教育程度、擔任高、中階白領；相對於此，在貪腐低容忍群中，其主要公民結構與特徵則為：女性、年齡在20－29歲、具高中／職教育程度、擔任高、中階白領。本文期待在此瞭解基礎上，我國未來之反貪運動得以依不同人口特質，進一步引進公民社會力量以強化公民在反貪腐議題中之力量與廣度。英文摘要：Frequent political corruption scandals have not only destroyed people's trust in government, but also undermined the government's legitimacy and effectiveness since Taiwan's democratic transformation that has begun more than two decades ago. Combating corruption is clearly no longer the sole responsibility of the public sector; rather, both the private sector and the society at large must now do their parts in order to create synergistic anti-corruption partnerships. Fundamentally, it has long been known that a vibrant civil society and citizen participation in politics are critical to the success of anti-corruption movement. However, it seems that we still do not have a clear idea of who can and who cannot tolerate corruption in Taiwan. This crucial question is often ignored while it is the key challenge for civil society organizations to mobilize the right people to join the anti-corruption campaigns. This article attempts to fill in this theoretical and practical gap by differentiating citizens based on their demographic characteristics and determines their level of corruption tolerance. The empirical findings indicate that the high tolerant group consists of individuals with the following features: they are men, between 40 and 49 years of age, have the education level of high-school, and work in high/mid-level white-collar jobs. By contrast, the low tolerant group has the characteristics of being female, between 20 and 29 years of age, high-school educated, and a high/mid-level white-collar professional. Given these results, this study suggests that future anti-corruption campaigns should be developed based on citizen composition in mind, as different campaigns attract different groups of citizens to participate.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：臺灣縣市政府貪腐現象之空間自相關分析並列篇名：A Spatial Autocorrelation Analysis for the Corruption of Counties in Taiwan作者：廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao);呂佩安(Pei-An Lu)關鍵字：貪腐傳染研究;地理資訊系統;空間自相關分析;corruption contagion studies;geographical information system;spatial autocorrelation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以過去貪腐傳染的研究為基礎，利用地理資訊系統（Geographic Information System）的空間分析與統計功能，針對行政院法務部2006年至2011年所統計之地方公務人員被起訴比率進行全域及區域空間自相關分析（global and local spatial autocorrelation）。本研究發現不論從全域或區域自相關的角度進行分析，臺灣地方政府行政人員因貪瀆被起訴的比率，在2006至2011年臺灣各縣市政府之間並沒有形成顯著的空間自相關（空間群聚）現象。此外，透過疊圖分析的結果顯示，臺灣地方政府貪腐群聚的區域，某種程度也與那些相關的社會經濟指標，包括地方政府規模、失業率與教育程度等指標有關。英文摘要：Based on previous corruption contagion studies, this study uses spatial autocorrelation in geographic information system (GIS) to analyze the prosecution for corruption in the local government over 2006-2011, weighted by number of civil servant. Results from analysis based on global and local autocorrelation statistic show no significant corruption contagion effects among local governments. In terms of the results of map overlapping, this study also finds that the cluster of corruption are somehow related with socioeconomic variables (government size, unemployment rate, and education).起始頁-結束頁：39-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：民主化、派系政治與公民社會－以嘉義縣的社區營造與「終結派系」為例並列篇名：Democratization, Faction Politics, and Civil Society: The Case of Community-Building and the "Termination of Faction" in Chia-yi County作者：湯京平(Ching-Ping Tang);陳冠吾(Kuan-Wu Chen)關鍵字：侍從主義;非正式政治;社會運動;民主轉型;clientelism;informal politics;social movements;democratic transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：在政治市場的開放、司法獨立、公共政策資訊透明化、法治傳統鞏固，以及公民力量崛起等條件下，台灣民主的運作日趨成熟，理論上應可期待威權時代地方政治的弊端獲得改善。但在現實上，不論是地方政治運作所強調的人際網絡，還是山頭化的政治角力，或尋租競爭的基本生態結構，民主化之後其實都沒有太大的改變。因此，民主化是否能改變地方政治的風貌？政黨政治是否能夠終結派系？本研究以嘉義縣為例，透過田野調查，檢視派系競爭在引進政黨政治元素後將如何演變，並探討公民社會如何能夠在派系盤據之下，藉由社區營造而興起，悄悄地為地方政治，注入更多公益的性質。英文摘要：The maladies associated with faction politics are supposed to be controlled in the progress of democratization manifested in free competition in political markets, judicial independency, transparency in public policy making, consolidation of the rule of law, and the rise of civil society. In reality, however, the situation did not change too much regarding the dependency on personal network in political mobilization, the rent-seeking among faction leaders. How democratic institutions can actually change local political practices? Will party politics replace faction politics? Via intensive field studies this paper examines the case of Chiayi to demonstrate how civil society might be empowered through community-building policies and eventually infuse more concerns on public interests in local politics.起始頁-結束頁：105-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：書評：Achieving Ethical Competency for Public Service Leadership〔實踐公共服務領導力所需的德行能力〕edited by Terry L. Cooper and Donald C. Menzel〔泰力．庫柏與唐納．曼佐（編）〕（M.E. Sharp, Inc., 2013, Paperback, 297pp., ISBN 9780765632456）作者：傅凱若期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：177-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：換了位置就換了腦袋嗎？—探索台灣總統大選的選舉輸家並列篇名：Does a Change of Position Mean a Change of Mind? Exploring Political Attitudes of Losers in Taiwanese Presidential Elections作者：林聰吉(Tsong-Jyi Lin)關鍵字：輸家同意;選舉輸家;選舉公平性;民主支持;民主滿意;民主鞏固;多數統治;loser's consent;election losers;election fairness;support for democracy;satisfaction with democracy;democratic consolidation;majority rule期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在現有研究民主政治的廣泛文獻中，輸家同意理論認為，相對於其他選民，選舉輸家普遍會對選舉公平性有所質疑，同時也不可避免地會對選後由敵對政黨所主導的政局，持續抱持負面的態度。論者也因而指出，輸家在選後至下次大選舉行前的不服輸、不滿，甚至行為的不服從，將會對一國民主的穩定有關鍵性的影響。本文聚焦於選舉輸家的政治態度，嘗試以台灣為案例，以驗證上述理論。具體研究問題有二：第一、無論敗選的政黨為何，輸家對選舉公平性的質疑，是否已是台灣政治的普遍現象？第二、選舉輸家對於民主政治的態度（包括民主支持、民主滿意）會呈現何種趨勢？藉由這些態度的長期走向，如何進一步解讀我國民主政治的發展？有別於以往文獻的研究方法，本文採用跨年的長期性縱斷面資料，以2000-2012年經歷過兩次政黨輪替的總統選舉為研究素材。此外，除了選舉輸家與贏家，同時又納入未投票者為分析對象。研究結果顯示，以往認為選民一旦成為選舉輸家之後，必然會「換了位置就換了腦袋」的論點，並未完全符合我國案例的研究發現。首先，在選舉公平性評價方面，確實如理論所預期，無論敗選的政黨為何，輸家皆會認為選舉過程不公；相對地，贏家則會傾向認可選舉的公平性。其次，有別於過去文獻，輸家／贏家的分野並未被證實是左右台灣民眾支持民主與否的顯著因素。本文的跨年研究指出，政黨支持才是解釋民主支持的一個有效變項；無論選舉輸贏，歷次總統選舉的選後調查都顯示，泛綠支持者皆傾向支持民主政治。綜合過去研究台灣民主化的相關文獻與本研究的發現，本文認為，上述結果可能與戒嚴時期以來的政治傳統有關。最後，選舉輸家必然會對民主不滿的論點，也未在本研究得到證實。不過，本文發現，選舉贏家會對民主政治較為滿意的傾向，在多數年度的模型皆達到統計上的顯著水準。英文摘要：Among large literature of democratic theories, theorists of loser's consent argue that election losers tend to evaluate the election as an unfair game and hold negative attitudes toward future politics. Therefore, political attitudes and actions of losers would be key factors deciding stability of democracy. Focusing on the case of Taiwan, this study attempts to explore two questions: (1) whether losers treat the election as a unfair game is the common case for either KMT or DPP supporters? (2) what are losers' attitudes toward democracy? Different from the previous literature, this study examines several surveys which collected in 2000-2012 presidential elections. In addition to losers and winners, absent voters are included in the analysis.Findings of this work indicate that ”different position, different mindset” thesis could not be completely applied to the case of Taiwan. First, as the literature expect, losers always view the election as a unfair game. On the contrary, in eyes of winners, election is fair. Second, loser/winner distinction does not show significant effect on support for democracy. Instead, party support is proved to be an influential factor. The DPP supporters are inclined to support democracy in each survey. The author asserts that the above result might be owing to Taiwan's political tradition. Third, losers do not exert effect on satisfaction with democracy. However, winner factor is statistically significant in most surveys.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：台灣總統大選與經濟成長的政治景氣循環—1996-2012並列篇名：Political Business Cycles in Taiwan Presidential Elections, 1996-2012作者：蔡昕俞(Hsin-Yu Tsai)關鍵字：政治景氣循環;選舉週期;台灣總統大選;political business cycles;electoral cycles;Taiwan presidential elections期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的目的在於以全國性的總統選舉來探討台灣政治景氣循環的現象。從1996年第一屆民選總統以來，先後經歷了四次總統大選與兩次政黨輪替。這個轉變正好提供本文討論投機性政治景氣循環與黨派性政治景氣循環這兩種選舉週期對於景氣波動的可能影響。即便考慮進台灣小型開放經濟體的特性，本文的實證分析顯示經濟成長確實會受到投機性政治景氣循環的影響。經濟成長率會在選前半年、約兩季的時間有加速上升的趨勢。但是，黨派性政治景氣循環的現象並不明顯。對此，本文認為台灣黨派性政治景氣循環現象是與政治分歧的發展有關。國家認同議題為台灣現在政治分歧的主流，也為兩個主要政黨的最大差異。當國內主要政黨在政治光譜與經濟政策的差異上並不明顯，則便難以從經濟實質面觀察到黨派性政治景氣循環的現象。英文摘要：This paper uses four electoral cycles since 1996 direct presidential election to investigate political business cycles in Taiwan. Since the direct presidential election hold in 1996, there are two regime changes occurred in Taiwan. The first time of regime change came in 2000 for Democratic Progressive Party to win the presidential election and the second time of regime change happened in 2008 for Kuomintang to get the ruling power. We, therefore, can examine whether the presidential elections in Taiwan can have opportunistic effects and partisan effects on real GDP growth. Even controlling for the properties of small open economy, opportunistic political business cycles can be observed in quarterly real GDP growth. During each electoral cycle, increases in output growth can be seen by the raw data and confirmed by the statistical analysis in two quarters before the last election. However, partisan political business cycles do not have significant effects. We consider that main possible reason for this unobserved effect in Taiwan can be related with the development in Taiwan's political cleavages. National identity issues are the most stressed and main differences between two major political parties in Taiwan. Therefore, our empirical results indicate that no significant differences in either political spectrum or economic policies can make partisan political business cycles hard to be observed.起始頁-結束頁：36-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：2010年台中市長選舉中泛藍選票流失之分析並列篇名：An Analysis of the Decline in Support for Pan-Blue in the 2010 Taichung Municipal Election作者：張傳賢(Alex Chuan-Hsien Chang);黃信達(Hsin-Ta Huang)關鍵字：施政評價;選舉動員;社會網絡同質性;地方派系;投票傾向轉換;evaluation of government performance;electoral mobilization;homogeneity of social network;local factions;vote switching期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：2010年台中市長選舉，國民黨在得票率上從2005年的60%大幅滑落至51%。在其長期佔有選舉優勢的原台中縣，更是輸給對手近一萬三千餘票。為了理解何以選民曾經在2005年支持胡志強，但是在本屆直轄市長選舉時支持敵對的民進黨候選人蘇嘉全，我們利用TEDS 2010C台中市長選舉的調查研究資料進行分析。分析結果顯示，除了中央與地方政府的施政不彰引起人民不滿，導致得票率滑落之外，台中縣市也呈現顯著的不同。由於胡志強與派系脫鉤並不倚賴派系的傳統動員機制，改以推銷個人形象為主的競選策略，不但給蘇嘉全在台中縣收割國民黨傳統支持者的機會，也使得民進黨得以拉近和國民黨之間得票率的差距。英文摘要：In the 2010 Taichung Municipal Election, the KMT experienced a dramatic decline in its vote share (from 60% to 51%). In the original Taichung country, where the KMT had consistently enjoyed electoral advantages, it even lost 13000 votes to the DPP and almost risked the incumbent Jason Hu's reelection. To investigate why voters who used to vote for the KMT in 2005, but decided not to vote or even to switch to the opposite DPP, we incorporated the TEDS 2010C data with an ordered probit model. The analytical result not only demonstrates that the poor performance of the local and central KMT governments matter, but also shows significant differences in original Taichung Country and City. Instead of relying on personal mobilization and traditional social networks, the incumbent Hu promoted his personal traits and disentangled from the local faction. Such a campaign strategy provides the DPP a chance to reap traditional KMT voters in the Taichung country and to reduce the difference between KMT and DPP in vote shares.起始頁-結束頁：71-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：Dual Transitions in Reformed China: Property Rights and the Case of Zhongguancun並列篇名：中國大陸的雙重轉型：財產權與中關村的案例作者：劉致賢(Chih-Shian Liou)關鍵字：政治經濟學;產權;雙重轉型;中關村;中國;political economy;property rights;dual transitions;Zhongguancun;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在雙重轉型的研究中，中國大陸政權的韌性一直是個謎。藉由檢驗中國大陸高科技部門中的產權制度，本文認為中國大陸在沒有政治自由化的情況下卻能達成非凡的經濟增長，應歸結於產權的再分配過程。高科技分拆企業的創建及相應而生的混合產權制度給予面臨財政困難的國家機構一線生機，然而此一安排卻也讓舊有政治權力結構得以保存。更重要的是這些分拆企業從未剪斷與國家相連的紐帶。該策略雖已被證明能在市場轉型的過程中有效地防範國家的掠奪行為，但同時卻也保障了國家對企業的持續控制。英文摘要：The resilience of the communist regime in China has been a puzzle in the study of dual transitions. By examining the property rights regime in China's high-tech sector, this article argues that the reason for China's extraordinary economic growth without political liberalization lies in the process of the reassignment of property rights. With a view to helping state agencies avoid financial difficulty, high-tech spin-off enterprises and their associated hybrid property rights regimes created space for the old authority structure to remain in place. In particular, these spin-off enterprises never cut their ties with the state. While such a strategy has proved effective in discouraging the state's predatory behavior in the course of market transition, it is the cause of the enduring influence of the Chinese state on these enterprises. Given the nature of state-market interactions in technology-related industries, the study of high-tech spin-offs in Zhongguancun serves as a critical case to understand the change in power structure associated with the reassignment of property rights. Most importantly, the findings of this article carry implications for understanding the politics of dual transitions in China.起始頁-結束頁：227-258資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201306.17(1).227-25801篇名：「臉書選舉」？2012年台灣總統大選社群媒體對政治參與行為的影響並列篇名：Facebook Election?-The Impact of Social Media on Political Participation in Taiwan's 2012 Presidential Elections作者：王泰俐(Tai-Li Wang)關鍵字：社群媒體;政治參與行為;投票行為;使用與滿足;網路媒體;social media;political participation behavior;voting behavior;uses and gratifications;Internet media期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：Web2.0時代來臨後，社群媒體成為選戰期間政治傳播的重要管道。本研究探討在2012年台灣總統大選期間，社群媒體「臉書」的使用對選民的政治參與行為，特別是投票行為，究竟會產生什麼樣的影響？使用社群媒體的動機與政治參與行為是什麼樣的關係？而不同的使用動機將會如何影響選民的投票行為？研究結果發現，社群媒體使用率越高、越關注社群媒體選舉訊息的選民，無論是透過候選人的社群媒體或者是個人社群媒體，皆越有可能參與線上或線下的政治活動，如參與線上選舉議題討論、連署或捐款、遊行等。而個人社群媒體的選舉訊息使用率越高，投票可能性也越高，但候選人社群媒體的使用率或關注程度，卻與投票可能性無關。而社群示好行為則證實與投票可能性呈現正相關。在社群媒體盛行的時代中，選民越常在社群媒體上與候選人為友、加入其粉絲團或者按讚，表現出類「政治迷文化」的行為，越有可能去投票。此外，社群媒體表達自我或互動動機、政治資訊需求動機以及娛樂需求動機，皆與政治參與行為有正相關，不過三種動機與投票可能性均無相關。而政治傾向為泛藍的社群媒體使用者在此次選舉中較有可能去投票。英文摘要：In the Web2.0 era, social media have become important channels of political communication during elections. Using Facebook as a case study, this study intends to investigate the impacts of uses of social media on voters' political participation, especially voting likelihood, during the 2012 Taiwan presidential election. Moreover, this study considers whether the motivations of using social media would affect social media's effects on political participation. Results confirmed the positive relationship between uses of social media and voters' political participation. The more voters use and pay attention to social media, the higher the frequency of their political participation behaviors, such as online discussion on campaign issues, online petitions, and offline protests, and donations. Regarding voting likelihood in political participation, the uses of personal social media for campaigning information do increase the voting possibility. Voters' befriending behaviors towards candidates are also found to be related to their voting likelihood. However, among all the variables, only voters' political inclinations are able to predict voting likelihood.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：立委選制改變對指定用途補助款分配之影響：第五屆與第六屆的比較並列篇名：The Impact of Legislative Electoral System Changes on Earmarks Distribution: Comparisons between the Fifth and the Sixth Legislative Yuan in Taiwan作者：賴映潔(Ying-Chieh Lai);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：分配政策;指定用途補助款;立委選制改革;城鄉新風貌計畫;赫芬達爾指數;distributive policy;earmarks;legislative electoral system changes;townscape renaissance project;Herfindahl index期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：2005年我國將立法委員選舉制度由「複數選區單記非讓渡 選票制」改為「單一選區制兩票制」，同時重新劃分選區，並確定於2008年選舉第七屆立法委員時開始實施。第六屆立委及政黨領袖在面臨新選制及新選區，並為了最大化其連任機率和最大化政黨席次，他們會如何改變指定用途補助之分配行為是本研究的主要研究目的。本研究以「創造城鄉新風貌計畫」在第五屆及第六屆立委任期內分配至各選區的補助金額為分析對象，從選區個人及政黨選票集中度的角度切入，研究結果顯示選區立委個人選票集中度越高者，該選區所獲得的人均補助款也較多，這可能是因為有立委在該選區較具優勢，因此選民對立委有較高的期待、監督、與課責，使立委爭取肉桶之動機較強，本研究也發現立委個人選票集中度較高的選區，第六屆會比第五屆獲得更多的補助款。此外，選區政黨選票集中度對第五屆立委任期內之補助款分配的影響很小，且不顯著；但對第六屆立委任期內之補助款分配則具有顯著的影響，甚至超越個人選票集中度的影響，這可能是因為政治人物已預期到政黨競爭將是第七屆立委選舉的主要面向，且希望以補助款的分配來鞏固政黨既有的地盤。英文摘要：Taiwan's new single-district, two vote legislative electoral system replaced the SNTV in 2005, and was first followed in the 7^(th) legislative election in 2008. Based on distributive policy theory, this paper tries to explore how 6^(th) Yuan's legislators and party leaders changed their pork barrel behaviors in order to maximize re-election probabilities and seats when facing the coming electoral rule changes. By analyzing the ”Creating Townscape Renaissance Project” data during the 5^(th) and 6^(th) legislative terms, this study has two major findings. First, the results show that the more concentrated the legislators' personal votes in an electoral district is, the more earmarks it gets. This may be because that when the legislators' votes in an electoral district are more concentrated, there exists a dominant representative, who has greater accountability to voters. As a result, the representative has a stronger motivation to bring the pork home. The results also show that when other things hold constant, legislators' personal vote concentration had more positive impacts on grants in the 6^(th) legislative term than in 5^(th) term. In addition, a party's political power in an electoral district shows much more positive impacts on earmarks distribution in 6^(th) term. This may be because the party competition is anticipated to be the major issue in new electoral system, and thus earmarks were distributed based on a party's dominance.起始頁-結束頁：53-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：影響地方政府創新產出量的因素並列篇名：Factors Affecting Local Government Innovation作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：政府創新;創新數量;創新能力;地方政府;定群分析模型;government innovation;innovativeness;amount of innovation;local government;panel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：31卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：政府創新是受到什麼因素的影響而產生？哪些條件的地方政府比較會有創新的力道？這問題在我國過去的政府創新研究當中，從未在實證資料的支持下被有系統地回答。本研究先透過文獻的整理，建構出可能影響政府創新產生的因素，提出影響政府創新的架構模型；再以新聞資料庫的搜尋，建立出我國地方政府1999-2010年間的創新個案資料庫；最後，以地方政府為分析單位，創新數量為依變數，運用結合橫斷面與縱貫面的資料分析，探討什麼因素影響地方創新的產生。結果發現，過去12年之間，我國地方政府的創新總共有695個，而這些創新大多集中在台北市、台北縣與高雄市。模型分析結果則顯示，影響創新量的因素則包含公務人員的教育程度、組織因素中的財政支出與資源寬鬆度、以及環境因素中的比鄰縣市創新量。本研究的結果，在實務上，將提供各政府提升政府創新能量的政策建議，在學術上，本研究將提供建構完整政府創新發展模型的重要基礎。英文摘要：Why have some local governments initiated more innovative policies than others? Since government innovation is increasingly seen as the key to governing efficiently and effectively in difficult economic times, this question has drawn considerable interest for many decades in the field of public administration. Nonetheless, most prior studies focus only on either a single case of innovation or on modeling the diffusion or adoption of innovation; very few studies have looked at the factors affecting the capacity and frequency of innovation initiation in the public sector. Through an analysis of seven hundred innovation cases (i.e., instances when a local government did something that had never before been done by other local governments in Taiwan) that were initiated by Taiwan's local governments from 1999 to 2010, this paper attempts to model the factors influencing local government's capacity for innovation. The findings of this paper will hopefully enhance our understanding of the innovation-initiation causal model for academics, while providing strategies for improving the capacity of policy innovation for practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：105-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：檢視政治能力與總生育率的關係：以漠南非洲1980到2011年為例並列篇名：Exploring the Link between Political Capacity and Total Fertility Rate: The Case of Sub-Saharan Africa, 1980-2011作者：張文揚(Wen-Yang Chang)關鍵字：漠南非洲;政治能力;總生育率;政府;Sub-Saharan Africa;Political Capacity;Total Fertility Rates (TFRs);Government期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：62期出版年：2014中文摘要：漠南非洲地區總生育率居高不下的現象及其對社會經濟發展的影響，向來是學者、政府與國際組織注意的焦點。實際上，根據數據顯示，漠南非洲48個國家不乏總生育率實質下降的案例。過去在解釋總生育率變化時，學者多從社會或是經濟發展角度著手。然而，這些解釋不見得適用於在前述面向發展均相對較落後的漠南非洲。本文的目的有三：第一、本文從政治角度出發，釐清漠南非洲國家之所以生育率變化差異甚大，主要是受到政治能力影響；第三、儘管目前政治能力的討論十分豐富，哪一面向的政治能力可以降低漠南非洲的生育率則仍未有定論。因此，本文也嘗試界定哪個面向的政治能力較能降低生育率。透過1980∼2011年的數據，本文發現政治能力愈強的國家愈能夠降低總生育率。至於在不同政治能力的面向中，汲取及調控能力在理論與實證的應用上較佳、至於合法化能力與強制能力無法降低生育率，且解釋力也較顯不足。英文摘要：The phenomena of high total fertility rates (TFRs) and their impact on social and economic development within the Sub-Saharan African (SSA) region have attracted the attention of scholars, governments, and international organizations. However, data from the 48 SSA countries show that some have reduced TFR significantly, while others have not. To explain why TFRs vary, scholars have focused attention on social and economic explanations. Yet these explanations may not be applicable to SSA due to its relatively low overall development status. This article serves two main purposes. First, we start from a political perspective to explore whether or not changes in TFRs of SSA countries are affected by political capacity. Second, although there has been extensive discussion on political capacity, which dimension(s) of it contribute to lower TFR in SSA are still indeterminate. This article will identify which dimension(s) of political capacity can reduce TFR. Using data from between 1980 and 2011, this article finds that SSA countries with stronger political capacity are able to reduce fertility rates. In addition, looking at the dimensions of political capacity, there is theoretical and empirical support for the effect of extractive and steering capacities in reducing fertility rates. Legitimaztion and coercive capacities, on the other hand, have a quite limited application.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.62(1-34)2篇名：總統與國會選舉制度對半總統制憲政運作的影響－法國與台灣比較並列篇名：The Effect on Constitutional Operation of Presidential and Parliamentary Electoral Systems under Semi-Presidentialism: A Comparison between France and Taiwan作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su);王業立(Yeh-Lih Wang)關鍵字：選舉制度;憲政體制;半總統制;總理總統制;總統議會制;Electoral System;Constitutional System;Semi-presidentialism;Premier Presidentialism;President Parliamentarism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：62期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以我國與法國這兩個半總統制國家為研究案例，探討國會與總統選制對半總統制憲政運作的影響。本文以「總統選制」、「國會選制」、「國會政黨體系」、「憲政體制（半總統制）」、「政府型態」等變項所構成的分析架構對此議題進行分析。由於總統選制與國會選制會共同塑造一國的國會政黨體系，不同的國會政黨體系與半總統制此一憲政體制相互搭配，會組成各種不同的政府型態，不同的政府型態則會展現出不同的政治效應，是故不同總統選制與國會選制對於半總統制憲政運作的影響，便可藉由這樣的分析架構來加以掌握。透過此一分析架構，本文得到以下發現：首先，法國2002年總統任期改為五年之前，法國的總統與國會選制共同塑造兩大聯盟的多黨制;我國2005年立委選制改革之前，我國的總統與國會選制亦共同塑造兩大陣營的多黨制。其次，儘管兩國的政黨體系看似相近，但由於政黨體系中政黨凝聚力的差異，法國的國會選制與政黨體系將憲政體制塑造為總理總統制，我國的國會選制與政黨體系則將憲政體制塑造為總統議會制。第三，在兩國政黨體系與憲政體制的組合下，法國呈現換軌式的憲政運作模式，並形成「一致政府且聯合內閣」或「分立政府且聯合政府」（亦即共治）的政府型態；我國則呈現未曾換軌的憲政運作模式，並形成「一致政府且一黨內閣」或「分立政府且少數內閣」的政府型態。第四，在法國於2002年與我國2005年進行制度調整後，兩國的憲政運作模式逐漸趨同化，都將趨向形成總統、國會與內閣三者一致而由總統主政的局面，但由於兩國半總統制次類型的差異，一旦例外地出現總統與國會多數不一致的情況，兩國的憲政運作仍將有很大的差異。英文摘要：This study explores how the parliamentary and presidential electoral systems affect the constitutional operation of semi-presidentialism by analyzing the cases of Taiwan and France. Our analytical framework is built upon the variables ”presidential electoral system,” ”parliamentary electoral system,” ”political party system in the parliament,” ”constitutional system (semi-presidentialism)” and ”government type.” Within this framework, the political party system in the parliament is produced by the presidential and parliamentary electoral systems. Different political party systems, when combined with semi-presidentialism, will contribute to different government types that demonstrate different political effects. Therefore, the effect of parliamentary and presidential electoral systems on the constitutional operation of semi-presidentialism can be well grasped with this analytical framework. Our approach generated the following findings. Firstly, in France before the president’s term in office was changed to five years in 2002, the presidential and parliamentary electoral systems together formed a multi-party, two-bloc system in the parliament; in Taiwan before the reform of the legislative electoral system in 2005, the presidential and parliamentary electoral systems also together formed a similar party system in the parliament. Secondly, while Taiwan and France appear to have a similar party system, due to the difference in party solidarity, France's parliamentary electoral system and political party system shaped its constitutional system into premier presidentialism, while Taiwan's was shaped into president parliamentarism. Thirdly, in France, the combination of the political party system and constitutional system contributed to an alternating model of constitutional operation, and formed an ”unified government with coalition cabinet” or ”divided government with coalition cabinet” (so called cohabitation), in Taiwan, the combination of the political party system and constitutional system contributed to a non-alternating mode of constitutional operation, and formed a ”unified government with single-party cabinet” or ”divided government with minority cabinet.” Lastly, after France's reforms in 2002 and Taiwan's reforms in 2005, their models of constitutional operation gradually became similar, with the president, parliament and cabinet tending to be unified, and the president acting as the major leader. However, owing to the different subtypes of semi-presidentialism adopted by these two countries, there is still a great difference between their constitutional operation when the president faces an opposing majority in the parliament.起始頁-結束頁：35-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.62(35-78)3篇名：聯合國「主權保護責任」與「人道軍事干預」規範的社會建構：建構主義的觀點並列篇名：The Social Construction of the Norms of ”Responsibility to Protect” and ”Humanitarian Inventions” under the United Nations: A Constructivist Perspective作者：郭雪真(Hsueh-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：國際關係理論;建構主義;國際規範;人道干預;主權保護責任;International Relations Theory;Constructivism;International Norms;Humanitarian Intervention;Responsibility to Protect期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：62期出版年：2014中文摘要：國際關係建構主義學者認為國際規範具有社會本體論的特性，即規範是杜會事實（social fact）而非自然事實，國際規範如何普遍運作有效則是國際成員相互建構而成，是一種社會建構（social construction）。國家主權正是一種國際規範、社會建構，其正當性原是奠基於領土疆域的不干涉原則，但由於歷經歷史的情勢發展，由不同成員相互所建構而成。建構主義學者質疑主權是固定、永久不變的本質，具有自然客觀存在的基礎，而認為主權是一種社會建構或人類建構，是隨歷史時空變遷的國際規範與政治論述。國家主權原則是歷史偶發的原則，以往的領土內外與認同異同的區分主權，既不自然也不必要，而是若干歷史的先前意外事件的結果。國家現已相互建構奠基於人道的國家（主權）保護（人民）責任（The Responsibility to Protect）原則，此原則闡述了國家主權意含了責任，首要責任是保護國內人民；以及保護因種族屠殺、內戰、叛亂、壓迫或國家失靈，還有國家遭質疑無意或無能力終止或扭轉此苦難而受苦的人們，不干涉原則不及於國際保護責任。隨著學者提出各種補充的理論基礎及批判，促進了此國際規範的擴散與國際社會化，以及後續在聯合國安理會的決議下，依據此規範而人道軍事干預利比亞、南蘇丹、馬利、中非共和國等國，更說明此原則已經成為具體的國際規範。在此國際規範的社會建構過程中，建構主義理論的描述與解釋顯示出其優點所在。英文摘要：Constructivists have argued that international norms have a social ontological character, that is, they are a social fact, not a natural fact. The application of international norms is a social construction co-constituted by the members of international society. Therefore, state sovereignty is both an international norm and a social construction, with its legitimacy based on the principle of non-intervention of territory which arose in a particular historical context through the actions of the members of international society. Constructivists problematize the claim that sovereignty is constant, permanent, and with a natural foundation in objective existence, and instead claim that sovereignty is a social or human construction, an international norm, and a political discourse that emerged with historical change of time and space. The principle of state sovereignty is a principle of historical contingences; the division of sovereignty by territory (internal or external) and by identity (similar or different) is neither natural nor necessary. Sovereignty is instead the result of several historical accidents. State actors have also jointly constructed the principle of ”the responsibility to protect” which defines state sovereignty, meaning a primary responsibility to protect their population from genocide, civil war, insurgency, oppression, or state failure. In states where populations suffer from these ills, the willingness and ability of the state to end or reverse this suffering has been questioned. Therefore, the principle of non-intervention is subject to ”the responsibility to protect” norm. Scholars have proposed a new theoretical basis for the diffusion and international socialization of this norm. Furthermore, UN Security Council resolutions on humanitarian intervention in countries such as Libya, South Sudan, Mali, and the Central African Republic have accorded to this norm. Therefore, constructivism has emerged as a useful way to explain the social construction process of this international norm.起始頁-結束頁：79-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.62(79-114)4篇名：歐洲原子能共同體及其會員國權力的競合：以國際用過核燃料及放射性廢物管理建制為例並列篇名：Power Competition and Cooperation between the EURATOM and Its Member States: The Case of the International Spent Fuel and Radioactive Waste Management Regime作者：曾雅真(Yea-Jen Tseng)關鍵字：用過核燃料;國際核安全;國際建制;歐洲原子能共同體;Spent Fuel;International Nuclear Safety;International Regimes;EURATOM期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：62期出版年：2014中文摘要：回顧國際用過核燃料與放射性廢物管理建制的創建歷程，以及此種建制轉換至歐洲區域整合的過程發現，作為一個具有國際法律人格（internationallegalpersonality）的歐洲原子能共同體（EURATOM），與其會員國存在明顯的競合關係。兩者或可在國際場域共同合作，促成互利的國際建制，但會員國於國際核安全談判過程中，處心積慮弱化EURATOM，最大化本國利益之作為，屢見不鮮。過去研究成果多呈現，歐洲整合系超國家主義與政府間主義相互拉扯下的產物，但EURATOM及其會員在國際場域及內部造法歷程的權力競合關係顯示，歐洲在原子能領域的整合過程，呈現明顯的自由政府間主義色彩。英文摘要：This study is concerned with the construction of the international spent fuel and radioactive waste management regime, and the process of integrating this regime into the process of European integration. As an international legal personality, the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) has faced both cooperation and competition in its relations with its member states. EURATOM might cooperate with members to promote an international regime with which both have shared interests. Nevertheless, on occasions member states have deliberately weakened EURATOM's presence in international negotiations to serve their own national interests. Therefore, the relationship of cooperation and competition between EURATOM and member states demonstrates liberalintergovernmentalism in the field of nuclear regimes in the context of European integration.起始頁-結束頁：115-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.62(115-154)5篇名：立法院黨團協商：少數霸凌多數亦或是多數主場優勢並列篇名：The Party Negotiation Mechanism in the Legislative Yuan: Minority Dominance or Majority Strength?作者：邱訪義(Fang-Yi Chiou);鄭元毓(Yuan-Yu Cheng)關鍵字：黨團;談判模型;多數聯盟;多數黨;Party Caucus;Bargaining Model;Majority Coalition;Majority Party期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：62期出版年：2014中文摘要：立法院黨團協商制度在1999年時正式法制化，此舉被視為是增進立法效率的重要變革。先前的研究大多假定此制度使大小黨團權力均等化，甚至不少輿論及政治評論認為是讓少數霸凌多數。這些斷言不但從未被檢驗且常常被視為理所當然，此外其有效性對於多數黨議程設定能力也有深層的意涵。為了處理此重要的議題，我們依照立法院（第三次國會改革後）制度建立黨團協商賽局模型，從模型中我們導出3個假設並蒐集第五至七屆（2002~2011）的法案資料進行經驗分析。我們主要的理論發現是多數聯盟控制黨團協商的事後程序（即程委會及院長），使得多數聯盟在推動自己偏好法案通過黨團協商階段的優勢，高於主要少數黨。而另一發現是當多數聯盟內協調成本越高（低），多數聯盟在黨團協商階段優勢越弱（強）。我們資料分析結果十分支持本文研究假設，這不但推翻了過去認為黨團協商中各黨團權力均等或少數霸凌多數的觀點，並提供多數聯盟在立法中控制議程設定的更有力證據。英文摘要：The party negotiation mechanism (PNM), which was formally institutionalized in 1999 in Taiwan's legislature, has been viewed as a crucial step for boosting legislative efficiency by granting veto power to every party caucus in exchange for less obstruction. It is commonly assumed that this institution has equalized the influence of party caucuses with varying sizes or even caused minority dominance. More importantly, its validity has profound implications for the agenda power of majority coalitions or parties in the legislature. To tackle this critical issue, we model the legislative process, derive three hypotheses from the model, and test them with newly collected data spanning from the fifth through seventh term. Our principal theoretical finding is that the control of majority coalitions over ex post procedure of the PNM (i.e., the Rules Committee and the Speaker) gives rise to their comparative advantage in party negotiation on bills that they push, with this edge diminishing (increasing) with higher (lower) coordination costs within a majority coalition. Our empirical analysis demonstrates strong support for our hypotheses, rejecting the assertion of equal power among party caucuses and offering further evidence for majority coalitions' agenda setting control in the legislature.起始頁-結束頁：155-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.62(155-194)6篇名：喜獲籤王？初探我國選舉中的排序效應：以2002縣市議員選舉為例並列篇名：Does the Position Effect Exist in Taiwan? The Case of the 2002 Local Council Election作者：王宏恩(Austin Horng-En Wang)關鍵字：排序效應;縣市議員選舉;選舉制度;自然實驗法;Position Effect;Local Council Election;Electoral Rule;Natural Experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：62期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國選舉中候選人總希望抽到較前面的號次，1號更被稱為籤王，被候選人、中選會選務人員及媒體相信可幫助選戰宣傳、提高候選人得票率，但我國相關實證研究付之闕如。選票上的排序影響得票率，稱為排序效應（position effect），在許多國家或地區，法院判決需透過排序輪轉制或隨機分派制等方式來降低潛在的選舉不公，故測量排序效應不只是對選舉風氣的實證，更具政策意涵。本文使用歷年參選人最多的2002年縣市議員選舉進行觀察，以不同參候選人數選區分群，中選會於選前號次抽籤形成自然實驗（Natural Experiment）。本文將排序效應分成籤王優勢、籤尾劣勢及排序優勢三種次類型，透過Beta Regression控制共變數並估計之。結果顯示此次選舉並不存在明顯的排序效應，無論全體樣本、或區分各政黨內，都不因選舉號次而有得票率上的差異。縣市議員選舉排序效應不顯著的原因，可能來自單張選票不欲浪費、選票上資訊足夠協助決定投票意向、政黨配票等，待未來進一步之實證研究。英文摘要：In Taiwan, the candidate's position on the ballot is decided by in a public draw before campaign period. Candidates, election officials and even news media, believe that a higher place on the ballot is an advantage which can translate into a greater vote share. This belief is called the ”position effect” in electoral studies, in which the order of candidate on the ballot may influence vote share. This potential threat to electoral integrity has led to courts in some countries to require reforms to ballot design such as position randomization and order rotation. Therefore, this study on the ballot position effect in Taiwan not only falsifies this wide-spread belief, but also has policy implications. This article classifies three forms of position effect: the ”top position advantage,” the ”last position disadvantage,” and ”order effect.” These three hypotheses are falsified through the 2002 local council election, which was conducted using a single non-transferable vote (SNTV) system. Beta regression reveals that position effect does not exist in analysis of the full sample nor within candidates of same party. Explanations for its non-existence include the SNTV system, the voluntary voting rule, adequate information provided on the ballot, party identification, and vote equalization.起始頁-結束頁：195-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.62(195-220)7篇名：總統選舉、國家認同與侍從主義的消失？－2000年後雲林縣的個案研究並列篇名：Presidential Elections, National Identity, and the Decline of Clientelism in Yunlin County after 2000作者：張佑宗(Yu-Tzung Chang);盧信宏(Hsin-Hung Lu)關鍵字：侍從主義;總統選舉;國家認同;民主轉型;雲林縣;Clientelism;Presidential Elections;National Identity;Democratic Transition;Yunlin County期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：61期出版年：2014中文摘要：臺灣在民主轉型後，侍從主義是否會消失？本文主張侍從主義在臺灣社會不會消失而是在調適。很多研究發現過去以「縣」為單位的「派系政治」，已逐步轉型以立委選區或是鄉鎮長、縣市議員為單位的派系政治，但沒有提出一套解釋的理論。本文從兩個方面來解釋這個變遷過程:首先，臺灣的總統選舉，有效產生全國化的政治，亦即以國、民兩黨為主的全國性競爭體系。但是，國家認同分歧是總統選舉結果最大的解釋因素，國家認同不像盛行在歐美或拉丁美洲國家左、右兩派意識型態的分歧，無法具體落實到公共政策。因此，總統候選人在當選後，仍需以特定的資源分配模式，也就是用利益交換結合各種地方力量。侍從主義在臺灣杜會並不會消失，只是比以前更「零碎化」、「個人化」與「山頭化」而已，政策綱領式的政黨體系短期內在臺灣仍無法形成。本文以雲林縣的個案作為基礎，透過數十位地方政治菁英的深度訪談、投開票資料分析與政治酬庸等方法，論證本文的看法。英文摘要：What has happened to the clientelism closely associated with the authoritarian regime following Taiwan's democratization? This paper argues that while clientelism in Taiwan will not disappear, it is facing transformative pressures. The clientelism of the authoritarian era focused around factional politics at the county level has gradually evolved into factional politics centered on legislative districts and city or county councilors. While a nationalization of party systems has already emerged, clientelist forms of politics continue to influence Taiwan's democracy. This paper explains this process of change on two dimensions. First, presidential elections have led to the emergence of a competitive nationalization of party systems centered on two major parties-the Kuomintang (KMT) and Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). However, the paper also points out that aside from presidential elections, the transformation of clientelism in Taiwan is affected by the island's political cleavages. The national identity cleavage in Taiwan is unlike the left-right ideological cleavages found in both the West and Latin America and cannot be reflected in concrete public policy. Therefore, the winning candidate for the presidency, thinking rationally, will use resource allocation and interest exchange to effectively link up with local political forces and increase his own or his party's re-election chances. Therefore, clientelism in Taiwan will not disappear. However, it will be more fragmentary and individualized that in the past. A party system centered on policy manifestos has not developed in Taiwan. This paper is based on the cases of Yunlin County, and uses in-depth interviews with local elites to describe, analyze, and demonstrate this process of clientelist transformation.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.61(1-40)8篇名：日本民主黨權力結構對2010年〈防衛計畫大綱〉制定之影響並列篇名：The Power Structure of the Democratic Party of Japan and the Making of the 2010 National Defense Program Guidelines作者：郭育仁(Yu-Jen Kuo)關鍵字：日本民主黨;防衛計畫大綱;日本防衛政策;Democratic Party of Japan;National Defense Program Guidelines;Japan's Defense Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：61期出版年：2014中文摘要：民主黨執政初期強調「政治主導」原則，刻意排除執政黨與官僚的政策影響力，以集中決策權於內閣與省廳、大臣。然而在缺乏明確黨內權力運作結構、黨與內閣互動模式、以及與官僚體系的權責分工，反倒使得2010年〈防衛計畫大綱〉的制定過程產生更多政治參與，防衛官僚的專業政策意見也意外有更大影響力。此外民主黨首次執政，對防衛政策沒有既定意識型態與政策意見，在沒有內閣與執政黨高度介入下，新安保懇與防衛官僚較能根據日本現實安全環境變化討論應有的防衛政策因應。最後出現戰後日本防衛政策最大戰略思維轉折的國防文件。英文摘要：The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) intentionally emphasized ”political leadership” in office in order to concentrate policymaking power in cabinet ministers as opposed to the ruling party and the bureaucracy. However, the absence of a clear power structure within the party, as well as between the party, cabinet, and bureaucracy meant that while DPJ widely participated in the making of the National Defense Program Guidelines (NDPG), defense bureaucrats ultimately exercised much greater influence. In addition, the DPJ's lack of a firm ideology and policy preferences on defense issues left the space for more realistic discussions based on Japan's security environment between the New Advisory Panel on National Security and Defense Capabilities (shin anbokon) and the defense bureaucrats, which resulted in the most significant shift in Japan's national defense strategy since the end of the Second World War.起始頁-結束頁：41-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.61(41-70)9篇名：臺灣綜所稅改革之稅負公平性探討並列篇名：Personal Income Tax Reform and Tax Burden Distribution Analysis in Taiwan作者：孫克難(Keh-Nan Sun);羅時萬(Shi-Wan Lou)關鍵字：稅負分配;租稅漏洞;特別扣除額;設算扣抵法;Gini係數;Tax-burden Distribution;Tax Loopholes;Special Deductions;Dividend Exemption System;Gini Coefficients期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：61期出版年：2014中文摘要：臺灣實施20年的〈促進產業升級條例〉於2009年底屆滿，政府已將相關租稅減免多予取消，且一併進行所得稅制改革，其內容包括稅率與扣除額等的調整，除影響企業經營外，更關係到家計稅負輕重與社會公平正義，在所得分配日趨惡化的臺灣，值得深入評析。本文首先透過稅制改革前2009年〈統計專冊〉資料分析得知:（1）綜所稅之合法租稅減免浮濫，造成課稅所得之稅基嚴重侵蝕，且非法逃漏稅普遍存在；（2）各種扣除額因執行問題，形成「累進享用」的不合理現象；（3）享有稅額扣抵的股利所得，高度集中在最富有階層。本文據此規劃不同改革方案，並以2011年所得稅報稅資料進行實證分析，主要結果發現：（1）綜所稅稅率的調降，在累進稅率下，多使得高所得者獲得較大的減稅實益，反而不利於家計稅負分配的公平性；（2）高所得階層實際享有教育學費特別扣除額與殘障特別扣除額的比率過高，故提高此兩項扣除額，會使得全體社會之稅負分配惡化，與一般認知能改善租稅公平有相當大的差異；（3）標準扣除額的調高，因僅能讓中低所得者享受減稅實益，故不但政府稅收損失相對較少，且可改善社會稅負分配的公平性；（4）股利所得的租稅處理若改為27萬元限額兔稅法，將使全體社會之稅負分配明顯改善，且可增加政府稅收。英文摘要：In Taiwan, the tax deductions and allowances saved following the expiry of the Statute for Upgrading Industries on December 31, 2009 have generated additional revenues for reforming the personal income tax system. Aside from the effects on business operations and industrial development, the impact on household tax-burden and income distribution requires careful consideration in the context of Taiwan's worsening income inequality. Based on personal income tax return data collected by the Ministry of Finance, our analysis leads to the following results. First, according to our progressive tax system, lowering the personal income tax rates tends to benefit the rich more than the poor and is thus harmful to household tax equity. Second, since the rates for the special deductions in regard to education and the physically and mentally challenged are high for the high income group, increasing their deduction rates will hurt overall tax equity. Third, raising the standard deduction can benefit the middle and lower income groups more, by not only improving the tax-burden distribution but also minimizing the loss in tax revenues. Finally, since dividend income is highly concentrated in the top decile, if the tax treatment were modified and the income deduction method adopted, income distribution would improve significantly and tax revenue would increase.起始頁-結束頁：71-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.61(71-108)10篇名：韓非論禪讓：淵源與融合並列篇名：Han Fei on the Abdication of the Throne: Sources and Synthesis作者：詹康(Kang Chan)關鍵字：韓非;禪讓;世襲;堯舜;Han Fei;Abdication of the Throne;Hereditary Rule;Yao and Shun期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：60期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文藉韓非為眼，梳理了戰國時代對禪讓的諸學說，以見韓非對於當時流行見解有抄錄、接受、共鳴、反駁等不同態度，做了異常豐富的討論。韓非雖反對禪讓而贊成世襲，然而他贊成世襲也只是權宜後的選擇。本文提出改良世襲制和君主指定死後繼任者制做為符合韓非理想的更好制度。英文摘要：I employ Han Fei as a key to map out various ideas about the abdication of the throne during the Warring States period. Along the way, I identify the ideas that Han Fei transmits, accepts, concurs, and refutes during his extensive discussions on this topic. While he dismisses the abdication of the throne as the wrong way and approves of hereditary succession, his approval of the latter is based on an assessment of its pros and cons. I therefore offer modifications to the principles of hereditary succession and appointing a Legalist official as heir as two proposals that better meet the ideals of Han Fei.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.60(1-42)01篇名：Text Coherence, Reading Ability, and Children's Scientific Understanding並列篇名：文章連貫性、閱讀能力與兒童科學理解表徵之研究作者：連啟舜(Chi-Shun Lien)關鍵字：文章連貫性、閱讀能力、閱讀理解;reading ability;reading comprehension;text coherence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的有三：（1）探討文章連貫性的改寫原則是否能有助於改善學童的文本；（2）文章連貫性的編寫原則是否有助於修改科學性的文本；（3）探討讀者閱讀能力和文章連貫性是否有交互作用存在。本研究選取兩篇科學性文章的自然文本，依據四個文章編修原則（論詞重複原則、概念清晰化原則、改變句子和段落順序原則及增加鉅觀結構）來進行改寫。受試者為91名國小六年級學生，依其閱讀能力分為高能力和低能力兩組，並隨機分派閱讀「原始版本」或「改編版本」。所有的受試者均接受「自由回憶」、「文本理解」和「推論理解」的測量。結果顯示：閱讀改編版本（連貫性高）學童的理解表現優於原始版本的學童。高能力的學童表現的較低能力的學童佳。閱讀能力和文章連貫性的交互作用效果發生於其中一篇文章推論層次的理解。此交互作用代表低能力的讀者在回答推論層次的問題時，獲益於文章連貫性的操弄，而高能力的讀者並沒有這樣的現象。本文最後就此一發現探討其教育上的應用。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were (1) to examine whether principles of revision that improve the coherence of text, which have been used successfully on texts for advanced readers, can also be used in revising young readers' texts; (2) to investigate whether the principles used to revise history texts can be applied to scientific texts and (3) to look at the interaction between text coherence and reading ability. Two authentic scientific texts (on diabetes and on pain) were revised according to four revision principles, providing argument-overlap, making implicit concepts explicit, changing order of sentences and paragraphs, and adding macro-structure to the text. Ninety-one 6^th-grade students were divided into low-ability and high-ability groups and randomly assigned to read either the original texts or the revised texts. Participants' comprehension was measured by free recall, questions assessing knowledge of the textbase (which assessed a shallow level of comprehension), and inference questions (which assessed a deep level of comprehension). Results indicated that young readers' comprehension was superior when the coherent version of the texts was read. High-ability readers performed better than low-ability readers. A significant interaction between text coherence and reading ability emerged on the inference questions for one of the texts. That is, low-ability readers' performance on the inference questions was better when the text was coherent, whereas high ability readers' performance was not improved by making the text coherent. Thus the text coherence affected the deep comprehension level of these low-ability readers. This finding is discussed in terms of its educational implications.起始頁-結束頁：875-904資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系2篇名：從情緒平和與止觀探討心理位移日記書寫方法的療癒機制並列篇名：Exploring the Mechanism of Psychological Displacement Paradigm in Diary-Writing: The Effects of Emotion Peacefulness and Mindfulness作者：張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang);黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：心理位移日記書寫;止觀;情緒平和;emotional peacefulness;mindfulness;paradigm in diary-writing;PDPD;psychological displacement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：以往心理位移書寫的研究主要聚焦於療癒效果跟位格特性的檢驗，探討其療癒效果機制的實徵研究仍付之闕如。本研究回顧相關文獻，並從情緒平和與心理學中的止觀概念切入探討其心理機制。本研究招募65名受試者，進行兩週共四次的心理位移書寫。結果顯示心理位移書寫能促進個體的情緒平和，並增加止觀程度，與心理適應指標的提升。多元迴歸分析也發現，藉由心理位移書寫所提升的止觀改變量，能有效預測個體心理適應指標的改變量。此結果支持心理位移藉由止觀的提升，促進心理適應的主張。文末針對心理位移書寫與止觀進行理論延伸與應用的討論英文摘要：Previous studies on psychological displacement paradigm in diary-writing (PDPD) mainly focused on its' pronoun characteristics and healing effects. However, the underlying psychological mechanisms of PDPD's healing effects remained mostly unexplored. Therefore, the present stud y aimed to investigate PDPD's healing effect from the perspectives of emotion peacefulness and mindfulness. Sixty-five participants wrote about their recent negative life experiences two times a week for two weeks. The results showed that participants promoted their emotion peacefulness, mindfulness, and psychological adjustments. Multiple regression analyses revealed that changes in psychological adjustments were significantly predicted by correspondent changes in mindfulness. The theoretical and practical implications of these results are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：589-607資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201204073篇名：正向情緒課程對國中生生活適應及情感狀態效果之研究並列篇名：Examining an Experimental Emotional Training Course for Junior High School Students作者：羅婉娥(Wan-E Lo);古明峰(Ming-Feng Guu);曾文志(Wen-Chih Tseng)關鍵字：正向情緒;生活適應;情緒教育;國中生;emotional education;junior high school students;life adjustment;positive emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：現今青少年情緒困擾與行為問題嚴重，一項重要因素為經驗較多的負向情緒，造成負向系統的活化，進而對生活各層面產生負向影響。本研究旨在設計一套提升正向情緒技巧的實驗課程，並檢視其對國中生生活適應的成效。研究對象為桃園縣某國中九年級8個班144名學生，採不等組（實驗組、對照組）前、後及追蹤測之準實驗設計，並以中學生生活適應量表及正向與負向情感量表作為課程成效的評估工具。研究結果顯示，接受過為期六週的正向情緒課程之實驗組學生，在生活適應的後測得分上顯著優於接受一般綜合活動課程的對照組學生；且在教學結束後三週所進行的追蹤測上，實驗組的生活適應仍優於對照組。但情感量表的分析結果顯示，正向情緒課程與一般綜合活動課程對於正向情感的影響並沒有顯著差異，不過實驗組與對照組的情感平衡得分（正向情感減負向情感），則在後測與追蹤測上均有顯著差異。本研究文末提出正向情緒課程在教育上的應用價值與對未來研究的建議。英文摘要：Emotional disturbances have become a serious problem among adolescents in recent years. Negative emotional patterns generated by negative experiences influence various aspects of the youths' life. In this study, we developed a six-week experimental course using techniques to enhance positive emotions and then measured its effectiveness in improving the emotional intelligence and life-skills of junior high school students. Participants were 144 ninth-grade students at a junior high school in Taoyuan County, Taiwan. They were divided into an experimental group and a control group with pre- and post-tests administered, along with a follow-up test. The effectiveness of the course was evaluated through measures of life adaptability and positive/negative emotions.The students in the experimental group participated in a six-week positive-emotion course, while those in the control group participated in a course with integrated Common activities. Students in the experimental group had higher scores on the life-adaptability post-test than did students in the control group. This pattern of results was similar for the follow-up test three weeks after the conclusion of the courses. However, no significant difference was found on positive emotions measured by the positive/negative emotional scale. Yet, in both the post- and follow-up tests, those in the experimental group had higher scores on emotional balance (positive emotions minus negative emotions). This paper concludes with a discussion of the value this emotional training course has in contemporary education, and offers suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：609-627資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201204114篇名：從幽谷邁向巔峰：教師的心理健康狀態類型與促進因子之探索並列篇名：From Languishing to Flourishing: Exploration of the Types of Teachers' Mental Health Statuses and Predictors of Teachers' Mental Health作者：鐘珮純(Pei-Chun Chung);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);許嘉家(Jia-Jia Syu);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);趙珮晴(Pei-Ching Chao)關鍵字：心理健康狀態類型;教師生活瑣事;影響領域特定性假說;domain-specific effects hypothesis;teachers' daily hassles and uplifts;types of mental health status期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在瞭解目前中小學教師的心理健康狀態類型之分佈情形，並探索教師心理健康之促進因子。本研究以正向心理學為理論基礎，提出心理健康狀態理論模型，並以影響領域特定性假說為理論基礎，探索教師從幽谷邁向巔峰的心理健康狀態之促進因子。本研究以分層隨機抽樣方式抽取樣本，共獲得1020位有效樣本，分別以主觀幸福感量表、台灣憂鬱症量表、及教師生活瑣事量表進行測量。研究結果發現：1. 大多數教師的心理疾病程度偏低，但仍有21.4％的中小學教師群，係屬於幽谷型的心理健康狀態類型；2. 教師從幽谷邁向巔峰的心理健康狀態之促進因子為正向生活瑣事。文末並針對實務工作及未來研究，提出各項具體相關建議。英文摘要：The main purposes of this study were to explore the distribution of the teachers' mental health statuses, and to explore the facilitators that would facilitate teachers' mental health status from languishing to flourishing based on domain-specific effects hypothesis. Survey data were collected from 1020 teachers in Taiwan with stratified random sampling by Subjective Well-being Scale, Taiwan Depression Scale, and Teacher's Daily Hassles and Uplifts Scale. Results indicated that (a) most teachers did not exhibit mental illness symptoms, however, 21.4% of the teachers were classified into the languishing mental health status; (b) developing uplifts in daily life was a predictor of teachers transitioning from languishing to flourishing mental health statuses. Finally, suggestions for counseling interventions and future research were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：629-646資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201204025篇名：家族系統排列應用於督導情境的受督者學習經驗之研究並列篇名：Learning Experiences of Counselors Supervised with a Family Constellation作者：吳珍梅(Jen-Mei Wu);越淑珠(Shu-Chu Cho)關鍵字：受督經驗;家族系統;家族系統排列;Family Constellation;Family System;Supervised Experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究運用伯特．海寧格（Bert Hellinger）所創立的家族系統排列方式，來探究諮商師學習家族系統觀的受督經驗。研究中邀請3名駐地實習諮商師接受6週18場次的團體家族系統排列督導，蒐集每一場次督導後受督者的深度訪談資料，進行質性分析。研究結果顯示，一、受督者學習家族系統觀的經驗與內涵包括：納入家族系統下的個案概念化、體驗家族系統排列的場景與功能、覺察諮商互動與家庭動力、轉化諮商行動與實踐學習四大類別。二、在家族系統排列督導下的學習歷程包括：（一）初期為發展以個案為焦點的系統思維；（二）中期為以諮商師為焦點的專業敏察；（三）後期為以諮商關係為焦點的系統實踐。最後，本研究從後設認知的系統學習，從受督者自我的家庭經驗覺察，從行動實踐的督導模式等議題進行討論，提出未來研究建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to understand individual counselor's learning experiences of being supervised with the family system constellations founded by Bert Hellinger. Three intern counselors were supervised with the group family system framework for 18 times in six weeks. Using a qualitative research method, data of the 18 in-depth interviews with the supervisees were collected for content analysis.Results showed that the counseling interns learned the following contents from the family system framework: 1. applying the family system framework in case conceptualization; 2. experiencing the scenes and functions of the family constellations; 3. awareness of the counseling interactions and family dynamics; and 4. transforming actions into practices. Moreover, the learning process of family systems approach started with focusing on the client at the beginning, then the counselor, and then the counseling relationship at the end. Finally, we provided suggestions for future research around systematic learning of meta-cognition, supervisees' awareness of family of origin experiences, and supervision models of actions and practices.起始頁-結束頁：647-668資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201204176篇名：幼教人員對資訊科技接受態度之調查研究並列篇名：The Survey Study of Early Childhood Educators' Attitudes toward Information Technology Acceptance作者：陳儒晰(Ru-Si Chen)關鍵字：幼教人員;接受態度;資訊科技;acceptance attitudes;early childhood educators;information technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以新竹市、新竹縣與苗栗縣幼教人員為研究對象進行問卷調查，探討其對資訊科技融入幼教活動的科技接受態度之認知意向。研究者自編「資訊科技接受態度量表」問卷，包括「易用性」、「有用性」、「使用意向」、「使用行為」與「專業合作」等5個層面，運用結構方程模式分析幼教人員對此議題之想法。研究結果顯示，問卷的假設因素構念之測量模式檢定具合理適配，結構模式的路徑關係證明研究假設之成立。研究發現指出幼教人員對資訊科技融入幼兒教學活動與行政管理作為的使用容易程度和工作實務效益之態度，正向影響其在幼教場域應用資訊科技的使用意向與應用行為，且有助於發展資訊專業的協同合作態度。最後，研究者針對研究發現進行討論並提出未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the early childhood educators' cognitive attitudes towards information technology acceptance in HsinChu City, HsinChu County, and MiaoLi County through a questionnaire survey. For this survey, the researcher developed a questionnaire that consisted of five factors, including ease of use, usefulness, attitudes toward usage, usage behaviors, and professional collaboration. The survey data were analyzed through structural equation modeling. The results conformed that this measurement model expresses reasonable quality by confirmatory factory analysis. The structural model analysis was used to investigate the study hypotheses in latent constructs. The results indicated that early childhood educators' perception of the ease and usefulness of information technology being integrated into instructions and managements positively influenced their usage attitudes and behaviors. Their attitude toward information technology was positively associated with developing educational professional collaboration using information technology with colleagues. Finally, implications of the findings are also discussed in the study.起始頁-結束頁：669-689資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201205157篇名：害怕被嘲笑對國中生迎接挑戰傾向的影響：智力自我理論的調節效果並列篇名：The Influence of the Fear of Being Laughed at on Challenge-Confronting Tendencies among Junior High School Students: The Moderating Effect of Self-Theories of Intelligence作者：劉政宏(Cheng-Hong Liu);李依齡(Yi-Ling Lee);李維光(Wei-Kuang Lee);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang)關鍵字：迎接挑戰;能力實存觀;能力增長觀;害怕失敗;害怕被嘲笑;智力自我理論;challenge-confronting tendency;entity view of ability;fear of failure;gelotophobia;incremental view of ability;self-theories of intelligence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：積極迎接挑戰是國內學生普遍缺乏但又相當重要的態度。為了對學生此態度的瞭解與培養有所助益，本研究針對害怕被嘲笑對迎接挑戰傾向的影響與歷程進行探討，並檢驗學生所持的智力自我理論（能力增長觀）能否提升其迎接挑戰傾向，及緩衝怕被笑對迎接挑戰的負向效果。308位國中生的調查結果顯示：一、在迎接挑戰的「價值信念」、「一般接受與尋求」及「公開接受」三個向度上，怕被笑皆具有負向的預測效果。二、在檢驗「害怕失敗」是否是怕被笑對迎接挑戰負向效果的中介變項時，僅在公開接受向度發現部分中介效果。三、增長觀可提升迎接挑戰傾向。四、相較於持實存觀者而言，怕被笑對持增長觀者迎接挑戰的負向影響，反而有加劇的趨勢。英文摘要：To confront challenges actively is a very important attitude for students in Taiwan who tend to avoid challenges. To advance the understanding of the root causes and to help students confront challenges, we examined the negative relationship and mechanism between the fear of being laughed at (gelotophobia) and challenge-confronting tendencies. We also explored whether the incremental view of ability held by students would help them confront challenges and buffer the negative effect. The results of this study with 308 junior high school students were: (1) The fear of being laughed at actually exerted negative influences on all the three dimensions of the challenge-confronting tendencies, which included value belief, general accepting and seeking tendency, and public accepting tendency. (2) Fear of failure partially mediated the negative effect of gelotophobia on the public accepting tendency dimension, but did not show mediating effects in the other two dimensions. (3) Incremental view of ability increased students' challenge-confronting tendencies in all the three dimensions. (4) Relative to entity view of ability, incremental view of ability did not buffer the negative effect of gelotophobia on challenge-confronting tendencies, but instead intensified the negative effect.起始頁-結束頁：691-711資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201205228篇名：環境目標結構、自我決定動機與學業情緒之關係並列篇名：The Relation of Environmental Goal Structure, Self-determined Motivation and Academic Emotions作者：簡嘉菱(Chia-Ling Chien);程炳林(Bing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：心理需求;自我決定動機;學業情緒;環境目標結構;academic emotion;environmental goal structure;psychological need;self-determined motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究試圖結合環境目標結構、自我決定理論與學業情緒的認知-動機模式建構自我決定動機歷程模式，目的在驗證此模式是否與觀察資料適配，並分析環境目標結構、自我決定動機與學業情緒之關係。為達研究目的，本研究抽取台灣地區11所學校共707名八年級國中生為研究樣本。本研究的發現如下：一、自我決定動機歷程模式可用來解釋國內國中生的觀察資料；二、就兩種環境目標結構對於自我決定動機歷程、學業情緒歷程及學業成就的效果值而言，精熟目標結構比表現目標結構有較大的影響；三、在自我決定動機歷程中，勝任感對自主動機的全體效果最大；四、自主動機對學業情緒、認知—動機變項、學業成就有正向的全體效果；五、學業情緒對認知-動機變項、學業成就有正向的全體效果；而認知—動機變項對學業成就亦有正向的全體效果。本研究根據研究結果提出建議，以提供未來研究及國中教學輔導之參考。英文摘要：This present study included environmental goal structure, self-determination theory and the model of academic emotions cognitive-motivational that constructed the self-determined motivation process model. The aims of this study were to test if the data-model fit the data observed and to examine the relationships among environmental goal structure, self-determined motivation and academic emotions. In order to fulfill the goal, participants included 707 eighth grade junior high school students from 11 schools in Taiwan. The results of this study were: (a) The self-determined motivation process model constructed in this study could be used to well explain the empirically observed data in this sample of students in Taiwan. (b) The data analyses showed that Mastery goal structure, compared to performance goal structure, had more positive total effects on the self-determination motivation process, the process of academic emotion process, and academic outcomes than Performance goal structure. (c) Students' sense of competence had the strongest effect on the autonomous motivation. (d) The Autonomous motivation had positive total effect on the academic emotions, cognitive-motivational variables, and academic outcomes. (e) The Academic emotions had positive total effect on cognitive-motivational variables and academic outcomes, and cognitive-motivational variables had positive total effect on academic outcomes. Based on the findings of this study, suggestions were made for future research, as well as implications for junior high school teaching and educational guidance.起始頁-結束頁：713-733資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201206149篇名：台灣諮商心理師能力指標建構之共識研究並列篇名：Development of Competency Benchmarks for Counseling Psychologists in Taiwan作者：林家興(Chia-Hsin Lin);黃佩娟(Pei-Chuan Huang)關鍵字：能力指標;能力立方模型;諮商心理師;competency benchmark;competency cube model;counseling psychologist期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在研擬臺灣諮商心理師能力指標作為諮商心理系所和臨床督導訓練與評量的依據。研究者採用德懷術問卷調查法進行專家意見資料收集和分析，以尋求專家對於臺灣諮商心理師能力指標的共識。研究對象為資深諮商心理師和擔任諮商實務課程的諮商心理系所教師，共計29人。研究者根據Rodolfa等人（2005）的「能力立方模型」和Fouad等人（2009）的能力指標，編製一份諮商心理師能力指標問卷作為本研究工具。研究結果：1. 確定諮商心理師專業能力包括六個能力構面，共計13個能力次構面與60個能力指標。六個專業能力構面是：（1）衡鑑診斷與概念化能力；（2）介入能力；（3）諮詢能力；（4）研究與評鑑能力；（5）督導能力；以及（6）管理能力。2. 德懷小組專家對研究者所編製諮商心理師能力指標的共識程度相當高（QD均小於0.6），僅撰寫研究計畫的能力一項為中度共識（QD=0.75）。德懷小組專家評量60個能力指標的重要性，有50項能力指標為「非常重要程度」（83.3%），另有10項為「重要程度」（16.7%）。最後針對研究結果進行討論和建議。英文摘要：Competency-based approach to education and training has become a high priority in the field of professional psychology. However, few research studies have been conducted on this topic in Taiwan. This study attempts to develop competency benchmarks for counseling psychologists in Taiwan. The competency benchmarks could be useful in training and evaluating counseling psychologists across different training levels. The Delphi technique was used to collect counseling experts' criticality consensus of the competency benchmarks. A group of 29 seasoned counseling psychologists and faculty of counseling psychology were invited to participate in the study. For this study, we developed a competency questionnaire based on Rodolfa et al.'s (2005) competency cube model and Fouad et al.'s (2009) competency benchmarks. Results: (1) The 6 functional competency domains for the counseling psychologist consisted of 13 sub-domains and 60 competency benchmarks. The 6 domains are: assessment, diagnosis and conceptualization, intervention, consultation, research and evaluation, supervision, and management. (2) The Delphi experts had a high criticality consensus on all but one competency benchmark (research proposal writing ability). Among the 60 competency benchmarks, 50 (83.3%) were rated as very critical and 10 (16.7%) as critical by the Delphi experts. lmplications of the study and suggestions were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：735-750資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012100310篇名：大學生對男同志和女同志人際關係態度之調查研究並列篇名：University Students' Attitudes toward Interpersonal Relationships with Gay and Lesbian Peers作者：張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);游家盛(Chia-Sheng You);王采薇(Tsai-Wei Wang)關鍵字：人際關係;大學生;女同志;男同志;gay and lesbian;interpersonal relationships;university students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學生對男同志與女同志人際關係態度情形，並比較男女生之間的差異。研究對象為494位大學生，含男生197人，女生297人。研究工具有二，分別是「大學生對男同志人際關係態度」量表以及「大學生對女同志人際關係態度」量表。每一量表各有三個層面，分別是「友情接受度」、「愛情態度」與「同情程度」。本研究發現男女大學生對男同志與女同志的態度因人際關係情誼的不同而有所差異。男生對女同志友情接受度高於對男同志友情接受度；而女生對男同志或女同志的友情接受度則無顯著差異，但是都比男生高。在愛情態度方面和友情程度二方面，男女學生對男同志和女同志的交互作用都未達顯著。男生對同志的愛情態度分數顯著低於女生；男女學生對男同志的愛情態度分數顯著低於對女同志的分數。在同情程度方面，亦然。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate university students' attitudes toward interpersonal relationships with gay and lesbian peers and to compare attitudinal differences between male and female students. The sample consisted of 494 (197 male and 297 female) university students. Two research instruments were used: ”University Student Attitudes Toward Interpersonal Relationships with Gay Peers” and ”University Student Attitudes Toward Interpersonal Relationships with Lesbian Peers.” Each instrument measures three dimensions: ”Friendship Acceptance, ”Attitudes Toward Gay/Lesbian Love,” and ”Sympathy.” Male students reported more negative attitudes toward gay peers than lesbian peers in Friendship dimension. Female students indicated no different attitudes toward gay peers and lesbian peers in Friendship. Male students reported more negative attitudes towards gay peers and lesbian peers in Love and Sympathy dimensions than female students. Both male and female students indicated more negative attitudes toward gay peers than lesbian peers in Love and Sympathy dimensions. Implications of these findings for future research, programming, institutional support systems, and institutional policies as they affect gay and lesbian students are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：411-431資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011052411篇名：罕見疾患的家庭壓力因應與需求－以高雄市為例並列篇名：Stressors Coping and Needs of the Families with Rare Disorders作者：鄭芬蘭(Fin-Land Cheng);蔡孟芬(Meng-Fan Tsai);蔡惠玲(Agnes Huei-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：罕見疾患;社會比較;家庭壓力;喘息服務;family stress;rare disorders;respite service;social comparison期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採質性研究，進行半結構訪談，以設籍於高雄市，且領有罕病身心障礙手冊及其家人為對象，共21個罕病家庭36人完成訪談，旨在探討罕見疾病家庭的壓力因應與需求。研究過程，研究團隊維持中立並遵守研究倫理，以維護受訪者權益與確保訪談資料的真實性。資料分析依序進行編碼、概念化、建構類別、信度分析與效度檢核等，獲致研究的重要結論包括：首先，罕病家庭最大壓力來自照護患者，期望社福制度放寬照護限制，並提供臨時托育的喘息服務。其次，影響家庭生態系統，如生育計畫、經濟平衡與家人關係，若家庭成員能夠互相扶持與共同分擔，不僅可以維繫家庭和諧，亦能共同解決問題。第三，適當的社會比較有助於罕病家庭的壓力紓解，若能透過媒體報導，增進社會大眾的瞭解程度，應有助於罕病家庭建立正向的社會互動。第四，罕見疾病的異質性高、診療不易，常伴隨復健需求，故罕病家庭期待得到更好的醫療服務品質，希望政府鼓勵專業研發來提升醫療效果，並在診治過程受到尊重。另外，期望在教育、就業與安養，能獲得整合服務，並呼籲政府「建立有尊嚴的照護制度」。總之，罕病家庭亟需社會大眾、社會福利、醫療與教育等單位及政策規劃者的深層同理與關懷，妥善規劃罕病家庭支持系統並能提供整合性的安置服務，應是最迫切需求。英文摘要：This current study aims to survey the stress coping and needs of families with rare disorder patients. Using qualitative methodology, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 36 family and patients from 21 families with rare disorder patients in Kaohsiung City. The research team maintains neutrality and adheres to the ethical standard during the data collecting process to protect the interviewees' rights and confidentiality while ensuring the authenticity of the content. Interview data were coded, conceptualized, categorized, and checked for reliability and validity. The study concluded that the biggest stressor of the families with rare disorder patients comes from caring for the patient. Families hope that social welfare policy can be more adaptable and can provide respite services, such as temporary care release, for the family. Second, family ecological system was impacted. Family burden from caring would be lessened if family events, such as having new baby, balancing family finances, and maintaining family relationships, could be shared among family members. Third, increasing social acceptance and acknowledgl11ent of rare disorders through education via mass media would help relieve family stress. Fourth, patients with rare disorders often need alternative treatment and rehabilitative needs. These families hope for improved neath care quality, more government resources for research to enhance treatment efficacy, and more respect and empathy in the treatment process. In all, families with rare disorder patients expect a more coordinated plan that addresses patients ' education, career, and health care needs. They call for the government to establish a more respectful health care system as these patients need more social acceptance as well as more empathic care from people and policy makers in the social welfare, education, and medical systems.起始頁-結束頁：433-458資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011082912篇名：科學表現的兩性差異縮小了嗎？－國際科學表現評量資料之探究並列篇名：Is Gender Gap in Science Performance Closer? Investigating Data from International Science Study作者：張郁雯(Yu-Wen Chang);林文瑛(Wen-Ying Lin);王震武(Jens-Wu Wang)關鍵字：性別差異;科學表現;國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查;學生能力國際評量計畫;gender difference;PISA;science performance;TIMSS期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究分析TIMSS 1999、2003、2007以及PISA 2006台灣男女學生在科學表現上之性別差異。所有學生依照科學表現之分數分成四個人數相等的能力群組。檢視四組學生在平均值、標準差以及人數比例上的性別差異。結果發現，雖然整體男女生在科學表現的平均值差異不大，然而，男生分數的標準差一致的高於女生。高分組與低分組平均值差異、標準差比值以及人數比例上大部分有顯著差異。在低分組，女生平均分數高於男生，在高分組，則是男生平均分數高於女生。兩組的標準差都呈現男生大於女生，而高分組男生人數明顯多於女生。TIMSS與PISA在兩性差異上的結果並不一致。八年級的兩性差異似乎比四年級稍微大些。未來研究須注意樣本能力水準並採用多元的統計量數。英文摘要：TIMSS 1999, 2003, 2007 and PISA 2006 data were used to investigate gender differences in the science performance. Each student was assigned to one quartile group (i.e.Q1 to Q4) based on his or her science performance. For each group, gender differences in mean scores, standard deviations, and numbers were examined. Results indicate that gender differences in mean scores are generally small. However, variances for males are higher than those for females. Most of gender differences in mean, standard deviation ratio, and male-to-female sample ratio from groups below Q1 and above Q3 are significant. Females outperform males in the group below Q1, while males outperform females among high-scoring group. In those two groups, the scores of male have larger variance. Males outnumber females substantially among high performance group. The patterns for gender differences from TIMSS and PISA are not the same. Gender gap in science performance score is slightly larger in grade 8 than in grade 4. It is suggested that in future research. The sample be better specified in terms of ability levels and gender differences be examined by multiple statistical indicators.起始頁-結束頁：459-476資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2011102813篇名：基督徒的靈性掙扎與靈性因應並列篇名：Spiritual Struggle and Coping among Christians作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);程玲玲(Lin-Lin Cheng);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan);莊雅婷(Ya-Ting Juang)關鍵字：靈性因應;靈性掙扎;spiritual coping;spiritual struggle期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的目的是在探討基督徒在靈性掙扎中的靈性因應歷程及所帶出的結果。研究採用質性研究個別訪談法，探討近五年內曾有過重大壓力事件、並有靈性掙扎經驗的17位基督徒之靈性因應經驗。17位研究參與者中有13位為女性，4位為男性；14位為基督徒，3位為天主教徒；年齡分佈於24-58歲，平均年齡為42.06歲。研究資料採用紮根理論的分析方法。研究結果發現重大壓力事件下，研究參與者都出現對身心的衝擊及靈性的掙扎；他們也都經過一個靈性因應的動態過程，其中靈性與心理詮釋、經歷神的主觀經驗、資源的使用、靈性的因應行為都是在靈性因應中的要件，受訪者在靈性掙扎與因應後，都出現了與神、與人、與己關係的改變與成長。本文末也進一步針對研究結果提出討論和結論。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to explore the spiritual coping process and the outcomes for those Taiwanese Christians who encountered spiritual struggles. The present study interviewed 17 research participants (13 were females and 4 were males, 14 were Christians and 3 were Catholics; the age ranged from 24-58, and the mean age was 42.06). They all encountered major life events in past five years and experienced the spiritual struggles. The grounded theory method was adopted to analyze the data. The study found that psycho-spiritual attribution, the experience of experiencing God, the use of spiritual and non-spiritual resources, and the spiritual coping response were all important to the spiritual coping process. The results also indicated that all research participants showed the change and growth in relations to God, self, and others after the spiritual struggle and coping. The discussions and conclusions were addressed in the end.起始頁-結束頁：477-498資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012050414篇名：喚醒他們的愛：親子遊戲治療對於提升施虐父母的親職功能及改善受虐兒童情緒困擾之成效並列篇名：Awakening love in family: The Effect of Filial Therapy on Elevating Parent Education of Abusive Parents and Improving Emotional Disturbances of Abused Children作者：張高賓(Kao-Pin Chang)關鍵字：依附關係;情緒困擾;強制性親職教育;親子遊戲治療;親職功能;attachment relationship;emotional disturbances;filial therapy;mandated parenting;parental function期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究乃以單一受試多基準線實驗設計，藉由親子遊戲治療方案之介入，透過方案進行以提升施虐者親職功能，增進親子互動關係，改善兒童情緒困擾問題。本研究共有三戶家庭參與。三位母親，平均年齡39歲。三位兒童分別為二男一女，平均年齡9歲。研究工具包括修訂個別運用之親子遊戲治療方案、親子遊戲治療技巧檢核表、親子遊戲互動關係量表及阿肯巴克實證衡鑑系統。並以視覺分析、統計分析及社會效度獲得研究結果。研究發現修訂過的親子遊戲治療方案對於增進二位施虐者的親職功能、依附關係及減輕二位兒童的情緒問題有顯著的效果。英文摘要：The objects of study are mainly the abusive parents who need to take mandated parenting. Using single-case multiple design, this study examines the interventon effects of filial therapy on enhancing parenting functions of abusive parents, enhancing parent-child interactive relationships, and improving emotional disturbance of abused children. There were three mothers with an average age of 39 years, and three children (2 boys and 1 girl) with an average of 9 years. Research instruments used in the study include the revised edition of Landreth 10-Week Filial Therapy Model, Filial Therapy Skill Checklist, Parent-Child Play Interaction Relationship Checklist, and the Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment. Visual analysis, statistical analysis, and social validity are used to assess the effects of intervention. Results indicated that the revised filial therapy model had significant effects on enhancing the parenting functions and attachment relationships of two mothers, and on lessening emotional disturbance of the children.起始頁-結束頁：499-519資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012082715篇名：台灣簡明版世界衛生組織生活品質問卷（WHOQOL-BREF）應用於重度視障成人樣本之信、效度考驗研究並列篇名：A Study on the Test of Validity and Reliability of WHOQOL-BREF When It Was Applied to Adults with Severe Visual Impairments作者：張千惠(Sophie Chien-Huey Chang);鄭永福(Yung-Fu Cheng);金慧珍(Hui-Chen Chin);李昕寧(Hsing-Ning Lee)關鍵字：台灣簡明版生活品質問卷;信、效度;重度視覺障礙;adults with severe visual impairments;WHOQOL-BREF;reliability and validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在應用台灣簡明版生活品質問卷（WHOQOL-BREF台灣版）測量重度視障成人之生活品質，以評估本問卷應用於台灣視障成人的信、效度。資料蒐集方式採用電話訪談。研究對象為全國重度視障成人，使用分層隨機抽樣法取樣。完成問卷之樣本人數共491人。研究結果：（一）項目分析結果顯示本問卷題目為測量重度視障成人生活品質之良好問卷。（二）信度結果顯示，在各範疇中的Cronbach's α 值為0.68∼0.80；折半信度值為0.57∼0.80。（三）效度方面，內容效度顯示，各題目與所屬範疇之相關值皆達中度相關程度；建構效度以驗證性因素分析評估，比較適合度指標（Comparative Fitness Index）為0.916；性別、年齡及教育程度三個變項皆存在生活品質差異，此結果與一般成人之生活品質的研究結果類似，顯示問卷具有良好建構效度。根據信度與效度的結果，本問卷具有可接受的信度及良好的效度。WHOQOL-BREF台灣版可適用於測量視障成人之生活品質。英文摘要：This study examined the validity and reliability of WHOQOL-BREF when it was applied to adults with severe visual impairments. Telephone interviews were used for data collection. WHOQOL-BREF was administered to 491 adults with severe visual impairments using telephone interviews. Participants were selected using stratified random sampling method. A total of 491 participants finished the questionnaire. Results of item analysis indicated that the WHOQOL-BREF is a suitable questionnaire to evaluate the quality of life in adults with severe visual impairments. For reliability, the Cronbach's α value is 0.68 ~0.80, and split-half reliability is 0.57~0.80. For validity, content validity was indicated by medium correlations between items and their respective domains. Construct validity is examined by factor analysis and the CFI (Comparative Fitness Index) is 0.916. Results indicated differences in gender, age and education level. Results were similar to that of WHOQOL-BREF applied to adults without disabilities, which indicated structural validity. In conclusion, Results indicated that WHOQOL-BREF has acceptable reliaibllity and adequate validity when applied to assessing the quality of life of Taiwanese adults with severe visual impairments.起始頁-結束頁：521-536資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012091416篇名：「親密關係團體諮商」對促進乳癌患者及配偶之夫妻親密關係成效研究並列篇名：The Effects of Group Counseling on Couples' Intimacy Relationship among Breast Cancer Patients and Partners作者：李玉嬋(Yu-Chan Li);王雪蓮(Shueh-Lien Wang);梁惠君(Hui-Chun Liang);李佩怡(Pei-Yi Li)關鍵字：成效研究;乳癌;團體諮商;親密關係;breast cancer;effect research;group counseling;intimacy relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在探討「親密關係團體諮商」對乳癌患者及配偶親密關係促進的成效，並分析不同親密程度、性別的成員在親密關係成效的差異情形，作為檢視團體諮商方案的適切性。研究方法採用解釋式混合研究法之追蹤的解釋模式，以質性資料解釋與擴展量性結果。量化研究採用單組前後測準實驗設計，針對11對完成團體諮商的乳癌患者及配偶，以「婚姻親密量表」作為成效評估工具，所得資料以無母數魏克遜符號等級檢定法進行考驗。質性研究採分析歸納法，分析11對夫妻團體後訪談內容。研究結果：一、本團體諮商內容有助於提昇乳癌患者及配偶整體親密關係，尤其顯著在「精神的親密」、「身體的親密」與「情感的親密」的成效。二、若將團體成員作不同背景變項區分，發現本團體諮商對「低婚姻親密度」、「配偶」、「男性」在親密關係促進上具有顯著成效。三、本團體諮商顯著提昇「低婚姻親密度」成員之「性親密」，顯示性議題在團體諮商仍有其必要性。四、不同性別的成員在親密關係改變成效上有差異，表示乳癌夫妻在親密關係的需求不同。本研究結論為本團體諮商方案確實能提昇乳癌患者及配偶的親密關係，可供實務工作推廣續用，因而提出使用之建議以供參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to evaluate the effects of ”Intimacy group counseling” on enhancing the couples' intimacy relationship of breast cancer patients and their partners. This study used mixed methods in data collection and analysis. Follow-up explanations model was adopted to explain quantitative data gathered through one group pretest-posttest quasi-experimental design. Participants were 11 couples each consisted of patient, with breast cancer and their partners Marital Intimacy Inventory (MII) was used to evaluate the effect of group therapy. All data were analyzed by nonparametric test, including Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test. Qualitative data were gathered from interviewing 11 couples after they finished the intimacy group counseling. Inductive analysis of data was conducted. The following findings were obtaineds: (1) Posttest scores on intimacy were significantly higher than the pretest scores, which indicated that the content of ”Intimacy group counseling” was highly effective in enhancing the levels of intimacy for the breast cancer patients and partners, especially in ”spiritual intimacy”, ”physical intimacy”, and ”emotion intimacy”. (2) Group counseling significantly enhanced intimacy of ”low marital intimacy”, ”partner”, and ”male” groups. (3) Group counseling enhanced sexual intimacy on breast cancer patients and partners in ”low marital intimacy” group, indicating the topic of ”sexual intimacy” is still necessary in group counseling. (4) Group counseling improved intimate efficacy in different ways between male and female, which showed the breast cancer couples had different intimacy needs. Overall, results indicated that ”Intimacy group counseling” effectively enhanced intimate relationship between breast cancer patients and partners. Limitations of the study and implications for practice and future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：537-559資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012100117篇名：偏遠地區漢族與泰雅族國中生識讀能力及相關因素的探討並列篇名：Chinese Reading Literacy of Remote Junior High Students: A Study of Han and Atayal Students作者：孔淑萱(Shu-Hsuan Kung);吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu);蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung)關鍵字：中文識讀能力;泰雅族學生;閱讀理解;識字量;聽覺理解;aboriginal students;Chinese reading literacy;listening comprehension;reading comprehension;size of Chinese characters期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：44卷S期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的在於瞭解不同弱勢族群學生在中文識讀能力的表現，包含探討閱讀理解、聽覺理解及識字量之差異，以及造成差異的相關變項因素。本研究以偏遠地區的漢族及泰雅族國中一年級學生為對象，選取宜蘭縣、桃園縣六所偏遠國民中學，共計901位學生，其中偏遠漢族學生769人，泰雅族學生132人。結果發現，泰雅族學生在各項識讀能力的表現不僅低於全國常模，更顯著低於偏遠漢族學生。不論泰雅族或偏遠漢族學生，其閱讀理解能力與識字量、聽覺理解能力均有中度以上的相關。此外，識字量越多、聽覺理解越佳、父親學歷越高，學生的閱讀理解表現越佳，但族群因素在同時迴歸分析中不具影響力。本研究根據分析結果提出數項結論，並對提升識讀能力落後學生的學習以及未來的研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study investigated Chinese reading literacy performance (i.e., reading comprehension, listening comprehension, size of Chinese characters) of students in remote areas and possible factors that influenced students' reading comprehension. Nine hundred and one seventh graders, including 769 Han and 132 Atayal students, were selected from 6 remote junior high schools in Ilan and Taoyuan. Results showed that Chinese reading literacy performance of Atayal students was significantly poorer than Han students. Moreover, moderate correlations were found among measures of reading comprehension, listening comprehension and size of Chinese characters literacy for both groups. The analysis also revealed that size of Chinese characters listening comprehension, and father's educational degree were significantly associated with student performance on reading comprehension. Implications for remedial instruction and suggestions for future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：561-578資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2012111201篇名：英教育家F. Clarke民主教育理念之探究並列篇名：F. Clarke's Ideas of Democratic Education作者：顧曉雲(Hsiao- Yuh Ku)關鍵字：自由主義式的民主;民主教育;F. Clarke;liberal democracy;democratic education;F. Clarke期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在探究英國教育家F. Clarke（1880-1952）之民主教育理念，主要闡述Clarke民主理念之三大要點，亦即「平等與選擇」、「國家與社群」及「自由與責任」，以及此三大要點分別在中等教育、教育行政及公民素養教育等三方面的意涵。首先，Clarke主張有機的平等概念，並呼籲根據學生不同的性向和能力提供適當的中等教育。其次，Clarke堅持國家和社群不能等同，並劃定國家教育功能的範圍，同時提倡由中央、地方和教師專業組織組成之「三方夥伴關係」。最後，Clarke強調「負責任的自由」，並重視培養公民對於社群的責任。Clarke此三大方面的民主教育理念不僅體現了「自由主義式的民主」（liberal democracy）的精神，更極具英式民主的特徵。透過對於Clarke之民主教育理念的研究，本文不僅揭示了英國於1930至1940年代民主教育的主流論述，更有助於深化吾人對於英國從19世紀初到20世紀中葉之民主理論發展的瞭解。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine Fred Clarke's ideas of democratic education. Clarke (1880-1952) was a well-known English educationist in the mid-twentieth century. Throughout his life, he was concerned about the development of democratic education and contributed himself to the establishment of a democratic social order. Although Clarke's ideas of democratic education were scattered throughout his essays, speech notes and lecture notes rather than concentrated in one or two major works, three of his key themes are discussed in this paper: ”equality and selection,” ”the State and the community,” and ”freedom and responsibility.” The ideas are all embodied in the ideals of liberal democracy and the essence of British democracy. Moreover, these three themes are elaborated in this paper in relation to secondary education, educational administration and citizenship education respectively. Through the study on Clarke's ideas, this paper not only reveals the predominant discourses of democratic education in the 1930s and 1940s in Britain, but also sheds some light on the historical development of democratic theories from the nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century.起始頁-結束頁：89-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130659020032篇名：The Effects of Genre-based Writing Instruction on College English Academic Literacy並列篇名：文類本位寫作教學對大學生學術英語讀寫能力之影響作者：鄒文莉(Wenli Tsou);林愛恩(Vivien Lin)關鍵字：moves;genre-based instruction;text types;abstract writing;文步;文類本位教學;文體類型;摘要寫作期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:2期出版年：2013中文摘要：This study first investigates the current level of awareness towards genres of academic writing among students at a public university in Taiwan, and then measures the effect of genre-based writing instruction on the students' genre awareness and the quality of their writing for the argumentative text type. Eighty-six sophomores enrolled in an English for Academic Purposes (EAP) course were randomly divided into control and experimental groups, and completed tests on genre awareness and argumentative writing before and after the genre-based writing instruction courses. Over seven weeks, the experimental group received weekly training sessions on the relationship between text and context, rhetorical structure, and lexico-grammatical features of eight key academic text types. Through small group activities, they analyzed and practiced writing the text types. Finally, both groups were measured on their writing abilities. Results showed that although both groups displayed a low level of genre awareness, after instruction, the experimental group increased their genre awareness significantly. Furthermore, the experimental group showed significant improvement in their textual organization and coherence based on analytical scoring. Genre-based training also resulted in significant improvements in text development, structure, and cohesion. The study proved the effectiveness of academic literacy training sessions on improving academic writing at the university level.英文摘要：本文首先探討當前臺灣某國立大學學生的學術英文文體類型認知水平，並衡量以文類本位寫作教學對於習得論說文體（argumentative）類型的認知與學術英文寫作品質的影響。86名能讀學術英語（EAP）課程的大二學生隨機編入成控制與實驗兩組，並在課程前、後分別予以英文文體類型認知及寫作測試。針對上下文、修辭結構及語彙文法特點間的關聯性，實驗組接受八大關鍵學術文章類型之訓練課程共七週。透過小組活動，學生們分析並練習寫作不同文體類型。最後，再針對兩組學生寫作的能力給予評鑑。結果顯示，實驗組的文體類型認知水平於七週後顯著提升。再者，實驗組在寫作組織度與連貫性方面之得分亦大幅進步。以文體類型為本的寫作教學針對文體結構、發展與內文連貫性的寫作訓練成效顯著。因此，本文驗證了以文體類型為本的讀寫訓練課程有助於提升臺灣大學生的學術英文寫作能力。起始頁-結束頁：115-151資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130659020043篇名：C. Taylor靈性倫理思想對「道德主義」之批判暨其德育蘊義並列篇名：C. Taylor's Criticism of Moralism and the Implications of His Spiritual Ethics for Moral Education作者：林京霈(Chinf-Pey Lin)關鍵字：道德主義;排他性人文主義;道德根源;倫理學;C. Taylor;moralism;exclusive humanism;moral source;ethics;C. Taylor期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:1期出版年：2013中文摘要：現代民主社會的道德哲學多關注個體的義務行為及規則遵守，並重視個體自由平等權利的保障。當代重要哲學家C. Taylor（1931-）稱這樣的道德哲學為「道德主義」（moralism），相對於以「善」為探究核心的「倫理學」（ethics）。Taylor認為，道德主義缺少對善之實質內涵的認識及其道德根源的不穩定，可能造成「自許正義」的偏狹態度，甚至是暴力的表現。而Taylor肯定超越性道德根源的倫理學思想，能提供吾人對於自我與善、與他人、與更高力量之關係的新理解，並給予有力的實踐動機。最後，藉由Taylor的倫理思想指出道德教育應回歸對「善」的重視，及其作為引導美善及智慧生活的重要性。英文摘要：The focus of moral philosophy in modern democratic societies is more concerned with an individual's obligatory actions and his or her rights to freedom and to equality than what is considered morally good. C. Taylor (1931-), a significant contemporary philosopher, has deemed the aforementioned moral philosophy ”moralism,” which opposes ”ethics,” because ethical discourse places the highest priority on defining goodness and love. Taylor contends that the sources of moralism are vulnerable, lack stability, and fail to consider the good. The ability for people to express compassion and love toward each other is easily eclipsed by moralism, and this induces the expression of ”righteousness.” Taylor's ethics specifically identifies the transcendent as the greater moral source and provides a new understanding of the relationships between the self and the good, the self and the other, and the self and the transcendent, as well as a more powerful motivation to behave morally. Based on Taylor's ethics, this study highlights the significance of moral education that should reinstate the weight of the good, thereby assisting in the cultivation of students' wisdom and spirituality.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130359010014篇名：《道德教育期刊》創刊40年之研究趨勢及其對我國教育啟示並列篇名：The 40-year Research Trends of the Journal of Moral Education and Its Implications on Taiwanese Education作者：李琪明(Chi-Ming (Angela) Lee)關鍵字：研究趨勢;道德教育;道德教育期刊;臺灣教育;Journal of Moral Education;moral education;research trends;Taiwanese education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:1期出版年：2013中文摘要：《道德教育期刊》（The Journal of Moral Education, JME）是國際間道德教育研究與發展的重要交流平台，自1971年於英國創刊並逐步成為全球性刊物，迄今恰逢40年餘。本文藉由檢視該期刊1971至2011年間，共計945篇研究論文，希冀對於道德教育研究的重點及其趨勢有所了解，同時將此成果轉化為對於我國道德教育研究與發展的啟示。本研究目的乃針對JME 40年間內容：一是探究其研究內容的理論重點；二是探究其研究內容的主題焦點；三是探究其研究內容的研究方法；四是探究其研究內容的理論重點本身及其與研究方法之間的關係；五是藉由其研究重點與趨勢，對我國道德教育研究與發展有所啟發與建議。本研究主要採用內容分析法，透過團隊合作進行類目表的編碼評分與統計分析，並將各項研究結果加以詮釋與批判，且與數十年來我國道德教育研究與實踐經驗相互對照，最後提出若干反思與建議。英文摘要：The Journal of Moral Education (JME) plays a central role in the research and development of moral education all over the world. Starting in England in 1971, the JME has been in publication for over 40 years and enjoys international readership. This study analyzed 945 articles published in the JME from 1971 to 2011 in order to understand the research trends of moral education and their implications on Taiwanese education. The purposes of this paper were: 1) to understand theoretical bases of the JME articles over the past 40 years; 2) to understand key topics of the JME articles over the past 40 years; 3) to understand the research methodology of the JME articles over the past 40 years; 4) to understand the relationship between theoretical bases and research methodology of the JME articles over the past 40 years; and 5) to provide reflections on and suggestions for Taiwanese education based on the Ofindings of this paper. The method of content analysis was employed to identify the aforementioned themes and implications and suggestions for research and development of moral education are offered.起始頁-結束頁：35-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130359010025篇名：大學生課堂筆記策略教學方案之成效並列篇名：The Effectiveness of an Integrated Lecture Note-taking Intervention Program作者：陳品華(Pin-Hwa Chen)關鍵字：課堂筆記策略;做筆記教學;融入式策略教學;lecture note-taking;note-taking instruction;integrated strategy instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在設計一個融入式課堂筆記策略教學方案，並透過實驗了解方案的成效。實驗採用不等組前測—後測—追蹤後測設計，對象為某大學修習普通心理學的三班學生91人，隨機分派三班為策略教學組、要求做筆記組和控制組，實驗中策略教學組接受本方案，要求做筆記組被要求自行做筆記，控制組未接受策略介入。實驗前後測量三組學生的自我調整學習和學習表現，並蒐集其課堂筆記；實驗後請策略教學組學生填寫教學回饋問卷。資料分析採用共變數分析及次數百分比分析，結果發現：一、策略教學組與要求做筆記組在筆記數量和品質的追蹤後測上優於控制組，且策略教學組的筆記品質優於要求做筆記組。二、策略教學組在能力信念的後測及追蹤後測上均優於要求做筆記組與控制組，而策略教學組與要求做筆記組在認知策略的後測及追蹤後測上均優於控制組。三、策略教學組在學習表現的後測上優於要求做筆記組與控制組，且在追蹤後測上優於控制組。四、接受本方案的學生對課堂筆記策略與教學抱持正向的看法。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the effectiveness of an integrated lecture note-taking intervention program. This study adopted a quasi-experimental design with a pretest, posttest, and retention-posttest. Ninety-one undergraduates from three psychology classes were recruited as participants. Each class was randomly assigned to one of three groups: a note-taking instruction group, a note-taking only group, and a control group. During the experiment, students in the note-taking instruction group received the intervention program. Meanwhile, students in the note-taking only group were asked to take lecture notes. Students in the control group received no treatment. Before and after the experiment, students’ lecture notes were collected and their self-regulated learning and learning performance were measured. Additionally, students in the note-taking instruction group Ofilled in the Teaching Feedback Questionnaire after the experiment. Analysis of covariance and frequencies were conducted. The results showed that: (1) the note-taking instruction group and the note-taking only group did better than the control group on the note quantity and quality retention-posttest, and the note-taking instruction group did better than the note-taking only group on note quality; (2) the note-taking instruction group did better than the note-taking only group and the control group on the ability belief posttest and retention-posttest, and the note-taking instruction group and the note-taking only group did better than the control group on the cognitive strategy posttest and retention-posttest; (3) the note-taking instruction group and the note-taking only group did better than the control group on the learning performance posttest, and the note-taking instruction group did better than the control group on the learning performance retention-posttest; (4) students who received the intervention program had a positive attitude toward lecture note-taking and strategy instruction.起始頁-結束頁：73-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820130359010036篇名：我國私立技術校院財務運作之研究並列篇名：Financial Management of Taiwan's Private Institutes of Technology作者：林宜樺(Yi-Hua Lin);許添明(Tian-Ming Sheu)關鍵字：私立科技大學;私立技術學院;少子女化;高等教育財政;private university of technology;private technical college;low birth rate;revenue streams of universities期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：59:1期出版年：2013中文摘要：對於國立大專校院及一般私立大學，我國私立科技大學及技術學院在學校規模或政府資源分配都明顯處於劣勢，尤其近年受少子女化影響，生源逐年減少，對於高度依賴學生繳交學雜費以維持正常運作的私立技術校院而言，財務收入更顯嚴峻，招生不佳的學校甚至可能面臨退場困境；因此，如何維持最佳財務狀況以提供豐裕的教育資源，提升辦學品質，吸引學生就讀，遂成為這群爭取高教經費最弱勢且擔負照顧最多弱勢學生的私立技術校院最重要的工作。本文目的即在了解2006至2008這三年期間我國私立技術校院財務運作狀況，並以招生良窳學校進行彼此與整體相互比較，期望該分析結果可以有效改善我國私立技術校院的財務運作策略，提升對弱勢學生的就學照顧。本文發現學雜費確實為私立技術校院最主要之收入來源，占其總收入的七成，但在面對少子女化的挑戰，其財務開源與節流策略仍明顯不足；招生情況良好的學校因為其他收入來源相對豐厚，對學雜費收入依賴程度較低，但仍致力於辦學品質的提升與學生就學條件的改善；招生情況較差的學校卻未用心於改善財務運作及辦學條件。根據上述發現，本文分別對私立技術校院、招生情況前段與後段學校提供建議。英文摘要：Compared with public higher education institutions and private universities, private institutes of technology in Taiwan encounter more disadvantages. Due to the low birthrate in recent years, private institutes of technology, highly dependent on tuition, have experienced financial difficulties, and some institutions lacking sufficient enrollments have been forced to shut down. The purpose of this paper was to describe the Ofinancial structure of private institutes of technology from 2006 to 2008 and then it compares the institutes with good recruitment records with those with bad records. The results show that tuition is the most important source of income for private institutes of technology. Yet when facing the challenge of the low birthrate, increasing sources of Ofinancial revenue and cutting expenditures will still be inadequate. Institutes with other sources of income and relatively less dependent on tuition revenue are committed to the improvement of the quality of education and learning conditions. On the contrary, institutes with poor recruitment records have been unable to improve their financial performance and teaching environments. This paper ends by offering advice for private institutes of technology with good and poor records of recruiting students.起始頁-結束頁：113-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201303590100401篇名：我國教育實習制度設計之結構邏輯分析並列篇名：Structual Logic Analysis on the Education Practicum Institution Design in Taiwan作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)關鍵字：教育實習;難解問題;結構邏輯;制度設計;educational practicum;wicked problem;structural logics;institution design期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文為探究我國教育實習制度所產生的問題，從制度設計的角度，運用結構邏輯方法分析我國教育實習制度設計，以達精進我國教育實習制度設計之目的。首先，本文從歷史發展的角度，分析教育實習制度在實際運作中的問題屬性，而必須採用結構性分析制度方式解決；其次，本文藉結構邏輯（structural logics）架構共兩層面七項目，分析教育實習制度設計上的要素；復次，本文提出教育實習制度設計精進之道；最後，本文獲致教育實習問題實屬難解問題、結構邏輯分析教育實習制度的設計有部份要素需納入考量，以及精進教育實習制度設計之道，包括應然與實然層面以及制度設計者的能力等結果。英文摘要：This paper aims at systemic analyzing the problems of educational practicum internship institution in Taiwan by questioning construction methods and structural logic of institution design. Firstly, this paper clarifies the context of internship institution via historical analysis and policy texts review in order to define the nature of internship problems and the concept of wicked problems. Secondly, this paper formulates the structural logic of institutions design to be the base for further analysis of the educational practicum institution design in Taiwan. Finally, this paper delivers conclusions on the above study, including the wicked problem of educational practicum and the way to solve is by structural analysis; there are some elements that have to be included into institution design; ”what ought to be”, ”what can be done” and the capacity of institution designer are ways to advance the institution design.起始頁-結束頁：115-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130909030052篇名：校長教練式領導相關概念、研究與啟示並列篇名：The Concept and Research of Principal Coaching-Based Leadership and Its Implications作者：丁一顧(Yi-Ku Ting)關鍵字：教練式領導;中小學校長;專業發展;coaching-based leadership;elementary and secondary school principals;professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在闡述校長教練式領導的相關概念、以及分析國內外有關校長教練式領導的相關研究。首先，教練式領導源自成人學習理論與正向心理學理論，其具有特質性、策略性、與目的性三大意義，教練式領導的實施可循「目標、探究、行動、支持、結果」之「GLASS」歷程模式加以進行，而實施教練式領導之際，領導者所採用教練力包括：個人素養、關係建立、溝通合作、激勵學習、回饋支持等。其次，實施教練式領導將對組織、領導者、員工、以及顧客，會產生不錯的正向效益，當然，亦有些許的困境。另外，目前有關教練式領導之相關研究仍有待探討與開發的空間。最後，本文根據研究結果與討論，提出教練式領導未來實施與研究的建議：(1)推廣校長教練式領導，促發個人與組織學習；(2)進行教練式實施歷程實驗，建構具體可行模式；(3)糾合理論與實務專家，解決實施問題與困境；(4)發展領導行為量表，有效評估校長之教練力；(5)進行相關實徵研究，發展教練式領導知識體；(6)兼採不同研究方法學，有效檢證實施成效。英文摘要：The aims of this study are as follows: first, to review the related knowledge body of coaching-based leadership, second, to analyze the related empirical research of coaching-based leadership. After discussing the literature and related empirical research about coaching-based leadership, this study provides several suggestions for the implementation of coaching leadership of elementary and secondary school principals, and further study respectively: (1) to popularize the concept of coaching-based leadership in order to promote learning, (2) to establish feasible model by bringing coaching-based leadership into practice, (3) to integrate theoretical and practical professionals’ suggestions when solving implementing difficulties, (4) to develop a scale which is used for evaluating behaviors of coaching-based leadership of school principals, (5) to construct the knowledge body of coaching-based leadership through empirical studies, and (6) to adopt multiple methodologies for evaluating the implementing effect upon coaching-based leadership.起始頁-結束頁：143-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130909030063篇名：美國國家課程時代的來臨：各州共同核心標準之探究並列篇名：The Era of American National Curriculum: Inquiry on the Common Core State Standards作者：張佳琳(Chia-Lin Chang)關鍵字：各州共同核心標準;共同評量;國家課程;大學與職涯準備度;定錨標準;Common Core State Standards;common assessment;national curriculum;college and career readiness;anchor standard期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：美國前所未有的各州共同核心標準於2010年6月2日公布，迄今已有46個州、華盛頓特區、4個領地及國防部教育處採用，影響幾乎遍及全美。本文探討發現，各州共同核心標準推展之重要因素有三：關鍵團體的倡議與背書、聯邦競爭性策略的運用、各州的採納與行動；本文並分析該英語文標準與數學標準架構與內涵及共同評量規劃方向，其中，英語文標準係以大學與職涯準備度定錨標準為聽、說、讀、寫標準定位，重視文本複雜度、非小說類文學與資訊文本，並強調不同學科教師均有提升學生讀寫能力之共享責任；數學標準分為數學實踐標準及數學內容標準二層次，強調聚焦、一貫與嚴謹三原則，兼重概念理解與實作應用；對應於該共同標準之共同評量則預計於2014年正式實施，將採線上測驗。各州共同核心標準改革之影響包括：挑戰國家課程的可能性、鬆動聯邦與地方教育權限、建立標準管理之績效責任系統、帶動非營利組織教育參與、標舉大學與職涯準備度作為各級教育核心；而其足供我借鑑之處在於：學前至高中課程的一貫與嚴謹、大學與職涯準備度的目標與定錨、評量及標準的同步校準與改革、不同學科教師提升讀寫能力的共享責任與合作、非營利組織凝聚中央與地方教育資源與網絡。英文摘要：The first ever Common Core State Standards have been adopted by forty-six states, the District of Columbia, four territories, and the Department of Defense. The standards will affect most of K-12 students in the United States. According to the findings of this research the making factors for the CCSS include the initiative and endorsement of key groups, competitive strategies from Federal government and adopting action from the individual states. Basically, the Standards use College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards to anchor the Standards for Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening. The Standards emphasize the importance of text complexity, nonfiction and information text and view that not only language teachers but also content areas’ teachers have shared responsibility for literacy. As for the Math Standards, which are comprised in Standards for Mathematical Practice and Standards for Mathematical Content, they emphasize the principles of Focus, Coherence and Rigor, highlight the importance of both concept understanding and process, and practical application. The Common Assessment will be implemented in 2014 through computer online testing. The influences of the Common Core include: challenging the possibility of National Curriculum, blurring the boundary of education authority between Federal government and the states, emphasizing the accountability of standard management, encouraging education engagement among nonprofit organization, integrating the goal of education system through college and career readiness. The lessons we can draw from CCSS include: the coherence and rigor of K-12 standards, the goals and anchors of college and career readiness, alignment reform with standards and assessment, shared-responsibility for literacy, the model of state/federal cooperation through nonprofit engagement.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130609020014篇名：國中小學生學習策略使用之分析並列篇名：Analysis on the Use of Learning Strategies in Children and Adolescents作者：梁雲霞(Yun-Hsia Liang);陳芸珊(Yun-Shan Chen)關鍵字：學習策略;國中小學生;策略使用;learning strategies;elementary and secondary students;strategy use期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討發展關鍵時期的國中小學生在學習策略上的使用情形。本研究首先修訂學習策略量表，進而以國小四、六與國中八年級學生（共797人）為樣本，並針對性別和學習成就上的不同，進一步分析策略使用上的現象。結果發現：中小學生的策略使用，隨著年級升高卻趨於下降，且「自我監控」策略在各年級中使用最低。其次，女生使用較多的「自我鼓勵與堅持」策略，但在其他層面的策略使用上無顯著差異。另一個重要的發現是：高學業成就的學生在不同年級均使用較多的學習策略，但低成就組學生隨著年級升高，策略使用越來越少，即使在「尋求協助」策略上也呈現下降。本文針對研究發現加以討論並提出建議。英文摘要：The aims of this study were to investigate the use of learning strategies in children and adolescents, and to analyze the effect of gender and academic achievement on strategy use. Participants were 797 students from grades 4, 6, and 8. The results showed that students' use of learning strategies tended to decline as the grade level go up; moreover, the use of ”self-monitoring” strategy was the lowest in all grades. Female students used more ”self-encouragement and persistence” strategy than male students, but no significant differences were found in other categories. Students with higher academic achievement used more learning strategies; however, lower-achievement group of students used learning strategies less and less as they moved from elementary to secondary school, even the use of ”seeking help” strategy showed decline. Based on the results of this study, suggestions for educators and future research were provided in the article.起始頁-結束頁：33-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130609020025篇名：香港中國語文教師對於給予學生「回饋」的認識與實施現況之研究並列篇名：Research on Hong Kong Chinese Language Teachers' Understanding of the Aims and Practice of Giving Students Feedback作者：廖佩莉(Pui-Lee Liu)關鍵字：促進學習的評估;回饋;香港;中國語文;學習理論;assessment for learning;feedback;Hong Kong;Chinese language;learning theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討香港中國語文教師對給予學生回饋目的的認識和實施情況。研究採用定量研究和定性研究兩種調查方式。研究對象是香港中小學中文科教師。研究發現香港大部分教師是從學生角度去理解給予回饋的目的，但卻缺乏從教師和師生互動的觀點來探究。研究又發現中文科教師給予學生出的回饋是「質」「量」（指書面／口頭，分數／等級的回饋）並重的，但在實踐上卻出現理念與實踐的三個弔詭現象：1.教師認同給予學生回饋的重要性，但是教師卻不懂得怎樣給予學生有素質的口頭和書面回饋；2. 大多數教師認同他們給予學生回饋能指導學習方向的重要性，也能向學生提供具體的改善方法，但有四成多教師給予學生回饋後，很少再作跟進；3.教師認同回饋能提升學生的反思能力，但教師在寫作範疇上給予學生的書面回饋卻是由教師主導。本研究最後提出一些建議。英文摘要：This study helps to explore Hong Kong teachers' understanding the aims of giving students' feedback and how they practice it. The study employed a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, with data being collected through questionnaires and interviews. Findings indicate that most Chinese language teachers have the students' perspectives to understand of the aims of giving feedback to students, but lack of exploring the perspectives of teachers, teacher and students interaction of giving feedback. It is shown that many teachers have done in giving both oral/written feedback, marks/ grades feedback for students. However, some paradoxes exists: 1. teachers recognize the importance of giving feedback, but they do not know how to give good quality of oral and written feedback to students; 2. most teachers can give students feedback with suggestions for improving their work, but more than 40% teachers do not follow up how students improve; 3. teachers recognize that students should develop their self-reflection abilities, but teachers' written feedback for students in their compositions are teacher-centered. Then students have less opportunity to reflect what they learn. Some suggestions are made at the end of the paper.起始頁-結束頁：65-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130609020036篇名：分享式閱讀教學對國小二年級學童閱讀態度及理解之成效研究並列篇名：A Study of Shared-Book Reading Instruction on Reading Attitude and Reading Comprehension of the Elementary Second Grade Students作者：呂淑華(Shu-Hua Lu);張芬芬(Fen-Fen Chang)關鍵字：分享式閱讀教學;閱讀態度;閱讀理解;shared-book reading instruction;reading attitude;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究想了解「分享式閱讀教學」（SRI）是否適用於國小二年級，期盼掌握閱讀學習重要時期，為國小低年級找到有效的閱讀教學法。SRI係源自家庭，後延伸於幼稚園與特教生的閱讀教學法，強調師生分享、同儕分享、趣味分享、共學分享、自願分享、說談分享。國內將此教學法用於低年級者尚不多見，且研究結果分歧。而本研究目的即在探究SRI究竟對小二學童閱讀態度與閱讀理解是否具成效。採較能確認因果的準實驗設計，以北部某國小二年級的兩班學生為研究對象，一為實驗組，一為控制組。研究證實SRI有助於提升小二一般生的閱讀態度與閱讀理解，值得推廣。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the effects of shared-book reading instruction (SRI) on reading attitude and reading comprehension of the second grade students. Quasi-experimental design was adopted in the study. The participants were 2 classes of second grade students in an elementary school. The experiment lasted 8 weeks including 16 lessons in each class. Research tools include ”Reading Attitude Scale” and ”Test of Reading Comprehension”, the students were tested twice, before and right after the experiment. The major findings of this study were as the following: 1) SRI contributed to elevate the reading attitude of second grade students. 2) SRI contributed to elevate the reading comprehension of second grade students. Based on these findings, suggestions are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：91-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130609020047篇名：家長背景、家長參與學校教育與子女學業成就之關聯性：以北北宜三縣市國中學生為例並列篇名：Study on Relationship between Parental Background, Parental Involvement and Children's Academic Achievement: Examples of Junior High School Students in Taipei City, Taipei County and Yilan County作者：張芳華(Fang-Hua Chang)關鍵字：家長參與;學業成績;台灣青少年成長歷程研究;parental involvement;academic achievement;Taiwan Youth Project期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：鼓勵家長參與學校教育一直是先進國家的重要教育政策，我國也於2000年後開始訂定法規保障家長參與學校教育的權利，本研究欲探討在此一脈絡下國中家長參與的情況、家長參與的階層化和其影響。更重要的是，高社經背景的家長如何透過家長參與方式來提昇子女學業成就，這些都是值得探究的問題。本文使用台灣青少年成長歷程研究的貫時性資料進行量化分析，有以下發現：一、觀察過去以學校為主的家長參與行為，並比較目前家長參與的情況，證實家長參與並未隨法令的實施而有所提昇。國一家長的學校參與率較高，國二參與率則明顯減少。二、親子關係、親師電話聯繫與參與班級家長會皆對學業成就具有獨立影響力，其中以參與班級家長會的效益最大。三、在班級家長會參與上有著階層化現象，這不利於教育資訊的傳播。四、透過路徑分析發現由於法規的保障，高社經地位家長，積極參與班級家長會，影響了子女的學業成就。英文摘要：Encouraging parents' involvement in schooling had been the important goal of educational policy in advanced countries. In Taiwan, laws were enacted to protect parental rights on involvement since 2000. In the context of law protection, this study aimed to explore the parental involvement's phenomenon, parental involvement's stratification and its effects on children's academic achievement at junior high schools. Furthermore, this study intended to understand how parents of higher-socioeconomic status were involved in schooling to enhance their children' academic achievement, which caused the uneven opportunity of entering public senior high schools. The study used longitudinal data from Taiwan Youth Project in 2000 to conduct a quantitative analysis and its results were as follows. First, comparing the frequency of school-based parental involvement in recent study, the study confirmed that enacted laws did not enhance the frequency of parental involvement. Moreover, the frequency of school participation declined from first grade to second grade at junior high school. Second, parent-child relationship, teachers contact with parents by telephone, and attending parent-teacher meetings had independent influences on children's academic performance. Among these variables, attendance at the parent-teacher meetings had the strongest effect on academic achievement. Third, participation in parent-teacher meetings reflected the phenomenon of social stratification, which was detrimental to the dissemination of educational information. Finally, the result of path analysis showed that owing to the legal protection, parents of higher-socioeconomic status influenced their children's academic achievement by means of active involvement in parent-teacher meetings.起始頁-結束頁：117-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130609020058篇名：專業學習社群在教師專業發展評鑑中介下的發展－一所國中個案研究並列篇名：The Development of Professional Learning Communities Mediated by Teacher Evaluation for Professional Development: A Case Study of One Junior High School作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Pan);張素貞(Su-Chen Chang);沈靜濤(Ching-Tao Shen)關鍵字：專業學習社群;教師專業發展評鑑;個案研究;professional learning community;teacher evaluation for professional development;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以一所國中為個案，探討專業學習社群（professional learning communities）在教師專業發展評鑑此項人造物（artifact）結構的中介下，所歷經的發展歷程及其展現的特徵。透過觀察、訪談及文件分析，研究發現教師專業發展評鑑提供了累積社會資本及進行任務導向協同學習的機制，促發學習社群的生成。在個案學校中，有五個學習領域以積極行動者角色，呈顯學習社群特徵，進入「對話與分享資訊」的初始階段或進而達臻「行動與實現願景」的執行階段。在兩階段中，均可看到分享性領導、共同價值與願景、以及集體學習與實務分享，只是隨著階段之發展而愈趨成熟。另行政支持、信任與合作夥伴關係是跨越不同階段，社群得以運作的支持性條件，而行動者的積極性，累積學習社群形構所需之社會資本，亦是關鍵。歸結本研究所得，除可提供吾人瞭解專業學習社群在教師專業發展評鑑實施歷程中的運作情形，對於社群在有效推動教師專業發展評鑑中的重要性，亦具啟示作用。英文摘要：A case study was conducted, using one junior high school, to explore the development of professional learning communities (PLC) mediated by Teacher Evaluation for Professional Development (TEPD). Through the methods of observation, interview and document analysis, it was indicated that TEPD, as a school artifact, propelled the development of PLC through the accumulation of social capital and the task-oriented collaborative learning. In the case school, five learning areas as active actors exhibited characteristics of PLC. Two stages can be distinguished, including the initiating dialogue and information sharing as well as the implementing action and vision materialization. Shared leadership, common values and vision, and collective learning and practices sharing were observed in the two stages, with higher maturity when PLC proceeding from stage one to stage two. Besides, supportive conditions of administrative support and the partnership of trust and collaboration among teachers were found across the stages. Actors' agency to accumulate needed social capital for learning community also plays a significant role. The study brings us the understanding with regard to how PLC operates while launching TEPD and pinpoints the significance of PLC for the success of TEPD policy.起始頁-結束頁：145-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130609020069篇名：大學研發活動中的師生關係：研究生助理觀點並列篇名：Advisee-Advisor Relationship in R&D Activities of University: A Perspective from Graduate Assistant作者：劉曉芬(Hsiao-Fen Liu);林佑宣(You-Syuan Lin)關鍵字：師生關係;代理人理論;師徒功能制;研究所教育;advisee-advisor relationship;principal-agent theory;mentoring function;graduate education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來我國高等教育機構的擴充十分快速，以研究所數量來看，自2000年迄今總計增加1,697所，且除了量的擴張，校園生態似也產生了質變，隨著教師承攬研究計畫與日俱增，研究生擔任指導教授兼任助理之機會亦隨之增加，彼此關係與互動樣貌有何改變值得深入了解。本研究目的聚焦於大學研發活動之研究生助理面向，採取半結構式訪談，以公／私立、一般／科技大學32位碩、博士班在學學生為研究對象，探討渠等在參與指導教授研究計畫的知覺情形，包括初始的投入承諾、執行歷程之互動以及最終的學習回饋。本研究主要發現有：1.研究生對於擔任指導教授計畫助理之意願與認知有學門上的差異；2.研究生助理傾向認定自己的身分為「學生」，同時會將助理工作視為研究所學習的一部分；3.研究生助理稱指導教授為「老闆」多戲謔用語，未必意識到彼此有僱傭關係；4.博士生比碩士生和指導教授關係密切，且較易發展亦師亦友的情誼；5.參與研究案的經驗對研究生助理的職涯發展有加分效果；6.部分教師有違反學術倫理或負面言行影響學生的潛在學習。最後本研究根據訪談結果提出數點思考方向以供未來研究所教育政策規劃之參考，並期待研究結果能有助於大學深入了解研究生教育問題進而提升其學習品質。英文摘要：The enrollment of graduate school has rapidly increased in Taiwan. There were 1,697 graduate schools established during the 2000-2013. Not only a dynamic quantitative growth occurred, but it also led to quality change. Especially when the industry-university cooperation has become the new mission for universities, As a result, the more projects the advisor undertakes, the more opportunities graduate students have to serve as adviser's research assistant (RA). Has the relationship between the adviser and advisees changed? In this study, 32 graduate students were interviewed with semi-structural interview which was based on Principal-agent Theory and Mentoring Function Theory consisting of the initial engagement and commitment, interaction and feedback. According to research findings, six conclusions were offered. First, graduate student assistants from different departments show a variety of motivations. Secondly, the assistants tend to see themselves as students, instead of research assistants, and take the research job as a part of their learning experience at university. Thirdly, graduate students are used to call their advisors the boss but they do not take it seriously. Next, doctoral students have better connections with their advisors than master students. Finally, academic advisors' unethical behavior can potentially affect advisees. Last but not least, we intended to provoke more ideas of graduate education policies to authorities and it is also expected to give university some suggestions to improve the quality of graduate student learning.起始頁-結束頁：175-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201306090200710篇名：師資培育大學與小學合作推動臨床教學之個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study of Clinical Teaching Promoted by Universities with Teacher Education Programs Collaborating with Elementary Schools作者：楊智穎(Jyh-Yiing Yang)關鍵字：師資培育;臨床教學;夥伴協作;teacher education;clinical teaching;collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著師資培育大學的紛紛轉型，導致整體師資培育者之教學實務知能的逐漸弱化，為解決此一問題，近年一些師資培育大學開始推動臨床教學制度，鼓勵擔任師資培育課程的大學教師到小學現場進行臨床教學，以充實本身的實務教學職能，然而與這領域相關的學理基礎與實徵研究卻仍相當缺乏。因此本研究乃以師資培育中的臨床教學為主軸，一方面透過相關文獻的分析，建構師資培育大學與小學合作推動臨床教學的學理基礎；另一方面，本研究選擇一所個案大學作為研究對象，探討該校推動臨床教學的歷程，可能遭遇到的問題及影響因素。為達上述研究目的，本研究採個案研究法，同時透過個別訪談法、焦點團體訪談法和文件分析法等進行資料的收集。經由相關資料的分析與討論，本研究提出結論，以及未來師資培育大學與小學合作推動臨床教學的五點建議如下：(1)臨床教學實施宜立基於彼此互惠的基礎；(2)課室中的臨床教學實施宜重視反思與回饋的過程；(3)臨床教學實施宜建立具支持性的組織系統；(4)臨床教學實施可結合師資生的培育；(5)針對不同情境發展多元的臨床教學運作模式。英文摘要：Some universities with teacher education programs in Taiwan began to implement clinical teaching systems, but there is still lack of theories and empirical studies in this field. For the aforementioned reasons, this study aimed to establish the theory based on clinical teaching through the analysis of relevant literature. One specific university was selected for this study as the subject for research and the process, strategy, influence factors and problems of clinical teaching implementation were explored. The case study was used for primary research approach, and the data were collected via personal interview, focus group interview, and document analysis. Within an analysis and discussion of relevant theories and cases, this study comes to some conclusions and provides several suggestions for the promotion of clinical teaching in teacher education in the future, which include: 1. The design of clinical teaching should be based on the collaboration between universities and elementary schools as well as it should be beneficial for both sides; 2. The clinical teaching should include reflection and feedback in the classroom; 3. Some supportive systems should be established, 4. The clinical teaching should be combined with education of pre-service teachers; 5. The working model of the clinical teaching should be developed depending on different situations.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201303090100101篇名：影片案例導向學習系統對於實習生科技知能發展影響之研究並列篇名：Effects of a Video-Based Case Learning System on Developing Technology Integration Competencies of Student Teachers作者：張雅芳(Ya-Fung Chang);徐加玲(Chia-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：科技融入教學;案例導向學習;實習教師;影片案例;technology integration;case-based learning;student teachers;video cases期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：為探究影片案例導向學習（video-based case learning，VBL）系統對於實習生科技融入教學知能發展的影響，本研究將57位實習生分為實驗組與對照組，實驗組使用VBL系統並且參與線上討論，對照組則沒有。實習生在實習開始與結束時接受科技知能問卷調查，實習結束後，實驗組另外接受焦點訪談。結果有如下發現：一是實習生認為學科教學知識在實習期間有顯著的成長，反映在學科教學科技知識上也有成長；二是實驗組與控制組在科技知能成長上並沒有顯著的差異；三是電腦技能自評較好的實習生比起較差者有顯著的科技知能成長；四是實習生肯定VBL系統在教學實務上的價值。最後本研究針對VBL系統的設計與實施、科技知能的發展途徑，以及未來的研究提供相關建議，庶幾有助於實習生持續發展科技知能。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of a video-based case learning (VBL) system on developing technology integration competencies of student teachers. Overall, 52 student teachers were divided into 2 groups, (i.e., experimental and control groups). The experimental group was assigned to use the VBL system and participated in on-line discussion forums; the control group followed a regular schedule without using the VBL system. All student teachers completed questionnaires regarding their technology integration competencies at both the beginning and end of the course. At the end of the course, focus group sessions were arranged for the experimental group to discuss their personal experiences and gains from using the VBL system. The main results of this study are as follows: (1) student teachers' pedagogical content knowledge grew substantially during their internships, which resulted in improved technological pedagogical content knowledge; (2) no significant difference was exhibited in the improvement of technology competencies between the experimental and control groups; (3) student teachers who possessed high computer-skill ratings exhibited a significantly higher growth in technology competencies than did students who possessed low computer-skill ratings; and (4) student teachers appreciated using the VBL system for improving their teaching practices. Finally, this study provides relevant suggestions regarding upgrading and implementing a VBL system, strategies for developing technology competencies, and future research directions that might help continuously develop the technology competencies of student teachers.起始頁-結束頁：121-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(3).052篇名：以TIMSS資料檢視能力信念與任務價值對臺灣八年級學生數學成就之影響並列篇名：Using Trends in Mathematics and Science Study to Investigate the Effects of Ability Beliefs and Task Values on Eighth-Grader Mathematics Achievements in Taiwan作者：陳敏瑜(Min-Yu Chen);游錦雲(Ching-Yun Yu)關鍵字：多群組結構方程模型;次級資料分析;國際數學與科學成就趨勢調查;期望價值理論;數學成就;multiple-group structural equation modeling;secondary data analysis;TIMSS;expectancy-value theory;mathematical achievements期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究使用國際數學與科學成就趨勢調查（Trends in International Mathematics and ScienceStudy，TIMSS）2007年臺灣八年級學生的資料，以期望價值理論為架構，先進行能力信念與價值相關構面及題項的信度與效度分析，接續探討這些構面對數學成就之影響，並以多群組結構方程模型分析男、女生模型之差異。研究發現，數學能力信念、實用與內在價值三構面及其對應的題項都有良好的信度與效度，三構面中以能力信念的預測力最高，能解釋數學成就約三成六的變異量。男、女生模型在因素負荷量、題項截距、路徑係數及因素變異數／共變異數上皆具跨性別不變性，不過，在構面平均數上，男生的數學能力信念、實用與內在價值的平均數都顯著較女生高，且以在能力信念的差異最大。最後依據結果提出實務應用及未來研究上的建議。英文摘要：Based on expectancy-value theory, we applied trends in mathematics and science study (TIMSS) data to investigate the reliability and validity of items relating to ability beliefs and task values, examine their effects on mathematical achievements, and test gender invariance in the proposed models by using multiple-group structural equation modeling. The results supported a three-factor solution reflecting ability beliefs, utility values, and intrinsic values. These factors and corresponding items all possessed strong reliability and validity. Among the three factors, ability beliefs exerted the strongest effect on mathematical achievements, explaining 36% of the variance of mathematical achievements. Gender invariance evidence was exhibited in the factor loadings, item intercepts, path coefficients, and factor variance/covariance. However, comparisons of latent factor means suggested that boys had significantly high mean scores regarding ability beliefs, utility values, and intrinsic values. Finally, suggestions for practical applications and future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：153-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2013.58(3).063篇名：社區大學課程規劃與實施的新觀點：以成人教育課程理論作為分析架構並列篇名：New Perspectives on Curriculum Planning for the Community Colleges in Taiwan: Following an Adult Education Theory Approach作者：張德永(Te-Yung Chang)關鍵字：成人教育;社區大學;課程規劃;adult education;community college;curriculum planning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣地區的社區大學已經愈發蓬勃，各社區大學雖以三大類課程為其發展重心，但部分主事者卻對其核心理念、實踐策略以及課程規劃的價值內涵不甚瞭解，或出現認知與執行上的歧見，以致於在推展其課程方面，產生不少理想與現實面的落差，更呈顯當前成人教育課程在理論和實踐上的矛盾，值得加以深入分析與探討。本研究目的有三：一、探究社區大學課程規劃的現況與問題；二、從成人教育課程理論與模式，分析社區大學課程規劃與推動的問題根源與改善之道；三、提出社區大學課程改善之建議，以供相關單位參考。本研究採取論述分析取向的個案分析，並以文件分析法、參與觀察法、訪談法與理論詮釋分析法等研究方法，深入分析社區大學課程規劃與實施的問題及其成因，並透過成人教育課程理論的詮釋與分析，提出課程改革的新觀點與改善策略。英文摘要：Recently, the numbers of community colleges of Taiwan have been growing rapidly. Their curricula fall into three categories: academic, civil group activity, and living skills courses. Certain staff and educators in community colleges did not clearly understand the core ideals of community colleges and faced difficulties or conflicts when they planned their curricula programs. The purpose of this research was to explore the reality and the paradoxes of the curriculum planning of community colleges in Taiwan. Based on adult education theories, issues regarding community colleges' curriculum planning, design, implementation, and evaluation were discussed. Conclusions and suggestions were also proposed to improve the curriculum planning of community colleges in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學4篇名：應用診斷測驗結合答題信心探究跨年級學生簡單暨串聯電路之理解及影響來源並列篇名：Application of a Diagnostic Instrument with Item Confidence to Explore across Graders' Understanding of Simple and Series Circuits and Their Sources作者：林靜雯(Jing-Wen Lin);吳育倫(Yu-Lun Wu)關鍵字：答題信心;答題類型;電路;影響答題類型的來源;item confidence;answering type;circuit;source of an answer期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以量化調查輔以部分質性晤談，運用診斷測驗結合答題信心及影響概念來源之自評，診斷331位接受電路教學前之三年級生，與335位教學後之五年級生於簡單暨串聯電路一主題中真正理解、猜答及知識缺乏、另有答題類型之情形，並進一步探究其中正確及典型另有答題類型的影響來源。結果發現，整體學生之正確答案多屬真正理解，錯誤答案多屬另有答題類型。其中，跨年級學生皆有之另有答題類型，為較難因教學而概念改變者，包括「電池體積大小影響電流多寡與燈泡亮度」等三種。此外，影響三年級生典型另有答題類型的來源為「直覺」，而五年級生則為「實驗」及「直覺」。據此，研究者建議於教學時可考慮以認知衝突情境及電路系統化基模，重建學生的直覺推理。英文摘要：This study is a quantitative survey with several qualitative interviews of participants. A diagnostic test with item confidence and source of an answer was used to diagnose 331 third graders' and 335 fifth graders' adequate understanding, guessing, knowledge deficiency, or alternative answering type in the topic of simple and series circuits. Moreover, the sources of the correct answers and alternative answering types were further examined. The results show that students' correct answers are mostly adequate in understanding, but incorrect answers are alternative answering types. The alternative answering types that both third and fifth graders have are difficult to conceptual change by informal teaching. They are ”the volume of a battery influences the strength of current and the light degree of a bulb” and two other answering types. Furthermore, the source of the third graders' typical alternative types is ”intuition,” and those of the fifth graders are ”experiment” and ”intuition.” This study suggests using cognitive conflict and a system schema of a circuit to reconstruct students' intuitive reasoning.起始頁-結束頁：25-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學5篇名：資優生科學自我概念與科學成就之縱貫研究並列篇名：Longitudinal Study of Gifted Students' Science Self-Concept and Science Achievement作者：侯雅齡(Ya-Ling Hou)關鍵字：交互延宕模式;多變量潛在成長模式;科學成就;科學自我概念;資優生;cross-lagged panel model;multivariate latent growth curve model;science achievement;science self-concept;gifted students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的主要在探討資優生學業自我概念與學業成就的發展，以及兩者之間的關係，研究對象為高雄市16所國中381名資優生，由八年級至九年級每半年蒐集一次資料，採固定樣本四波次的追蹤調查。在資料分析部分，使用了多變量潛在成長模式及交互延宕模式，來瞭解資優生科學自我概念與科學成就之間的關係。結果發現，資優生科學自我概念的發展呈現非線性的下降，科學成就的發展呈現線性成長；科學自我概念與科學成就之間有顯著的中度正相關，但是科學自我概念的發展與科學成就的發展並無顯著關聯；從交互延宕模式中，資優生科學自我概念與科學成就的因果關係，呈現科學自我概念顯著影響科學成就的自我彰顯（self-enhancement）關係；在性別的差異部分，男生與女生在科學成就表現與發展情形，皆無明顯差異，但是在科學自我概念上，資優女生顯著低於資優男生。最後本研究亦根據研究結果提出在教育實務與未來繼續研究的建議。英文摘要：This study investigated the development of the science self-concept and science achievement of 381 gifted adolescent students in 16 junior high schools in Kaohsiung who were enrolled in classes ranging from Grade eight, first semester, to Grade nine, second semester, through repeated assessments. Structural equation modeling with latent growth curve models and a cross-lagged panel model were used to analyze the four waves of gifted students' data. The results of this study showed that the gifted students experience an increase in science achievement during the junior high school period. Furthermore, students were shown to have a declining science self-concept in middle years, followed by an increase that began in and continued beyond Grade nine, second semester. A positive relationship was found between the students' science self-concept and their science achievement. The multivariate multilevel growth curve model suggested that the development of the science self-concept was not related to the development of science achievement. A cross-lagged panel correlation analysis showed that the science self-concept to predict the subsequent science achievement was statistically significant. No significant difference was found between genders in science achievement; however, the gifted girls' score on the science self-concept was lower than the boys'. Finally, conclusions and suggestions for the practical application of and future research on the science self-concept and science achievement are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：57-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學6篇名：PBL融入師資培育教學實習課程之個案研究並列篇名：Case Study on Applying Problem-Based Learning to the Student Teaching Curriculum作者：徐靜嫻(Ching-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：師資培育;問題導向學習;教學實習;student teaching;problem-based learning (PBL);teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：能力導向的教育模式已逐漸成為世界各國培育專業人才的重要方式。在此理念下所強調的「問題導向學習」（problem-based learning, PBL），在醫學、護理、科學等領域上的應用，都顯示對於實務人員面對錯綜複雜實務問題的解決能力培養上，有相當不錯的成效。借鏡於這些領域的經驗，本研究目的在探討問題導向學習融入教學實習課程對學生產生之具體學習成效，以及PBL融入教學實習課程之適切性。本研究以三種量化問卷，蒐集學生對案例問題、PBL教練行為的適切性，及其在教學知識與技能、學習能力與興趣和專業互動能力等三面向提升的感受。此外，亦藉由上課實錄、學生學習文件、訪談與研究日誌等質性方式，瞭解PBL運作之情形。研究顯示，師資生在教學專業知識與技能、學習能力與興趣，以及專業互動等能力上均有極正向之學習成效；同時，PBL融入教學實習能提升學生未來面對教學問題的解決能力。英文摘要：Ability-orientation has become a critical educational model for educating professionals working in many fields across the world. Featuring an ability-orientation approach, the problem-based learning (PBL) approach been successfully applied in medical, nursing, and scientific areas. Studies in these areas also show that PBL can effectively provide people with the problem-solving abilities that they require in their professions. In light of these results, this study explores whether PBL can be effectively applied to early-stage teacher programs. The purpose of this research is to apply PBL to the student teaching curriculum to explore its effects. We discovered how PBL can be effectively applied to a curriculum design and what teaching outcomes can be achieved. This study shows that positive effects were observed in the disciplinary knowledge and skills, learning abilities, interests, and interaction skills of students. It also demonstrates that adopting a PBL approach in the curriculum of student teaching is feasible.起始頁-結束頁：91-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學7篇名：選什麼？如何選？為何而選？高中教師選擇歷史教科書之研究並列篇名：What, How, and Why? A Study on Senior High School Teachers' Selection of Textbooks作者：卯靜儒(Chin-Ju Mao)關鍵字：高中歷史教師;教科書;教科書開放政策;教科書選擇;high school history teachers;textbooks;open textbook policy;textbook selection期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以高中歷史為例，探究高中教師教科書版本選擇的情形與選擇理由背後所代表的教育意義與政策啟示。本研究調查全國高中歷史教科書選用版本的情形，電話訪問218所學校的高中歷史教師「選什麼？誰選？如何選？為什麼？」的問題，並以紮根理論的概念分析電話訪談內容。研究發現，高中歷史教科書選擇程序，以民主與專業為主要原則。教師選書的考量除教科書文本、學生學習、教師教學的關鍵核心因素外，書商服務與配套的關聯性因素，以及課綱與考試的結構性因素，在在都影響教師的選擇與判斷。其中，結構性因素無所不在地滲透日常教學，使得不管是以國編本作為選書參照標準、或是強調教科書講重點、或是偏好條列重點的寫作方式等，都反映潛在結構性因素對教師選書的影響，也凸顯教師教學的困境。英文摘要：In this study, I first uncover the procedures adopted in selecting the history textbooks used in high schools and the teachers' reasons for choosing the textbooks. Second, I analyze the implicit meanings of such a phenomenon. In this study, 218 high school history teachers were interviewed by phone; four open-ended questions were asked: What editions of the history textbooks were chosen in your school, and by whom? Through what type of process, and why? The collected data are analyzed by employing the grounded theory. This study discovered that textbook selection considerations can be coded into six categories: (1) the structure and content of the textbooks; (2) the student level and their manner of learning; (3) the teachers' habits and enough time for delivering the texts; (4) the services offered by the publishers and related materials for teaching and learning; (5) curriculum guidelines; and (6) satisfying exam requirements. The first three categories can be considered ”core factors,” the fourth category is a ”related factor,” and the last two categories are ”structural factors.” Among them, the structural factors permeated the daily practices of teaching. Whether using traditional NICT-style textbooks as criteria for comparing and selecting textbooks or for emphasizing the importance of covering critical points in textbooks, they reflect the impact of hidden structural factors on the teachers' choice of textbooks. This situation also indicates the dilemmas that teachers face in their teaching practice.起始頁-結束頁：123-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學8篇名：Plato《理想國》與Gilman《她鄉》烏托邦主張及教育思想比較研究並列篇名：Comparative Study of Utopian and Educational Thoughts between Plato's "Republic" and C. P. Gilman's "Herland"作者：方永泉(Yung-Chuan Fang)關鍵字：母職;《她鄉》;烏托邦;教育思想;《理想國》;motherhood;"Herland';utopia;educational thought;"Republic"期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要以Plato《理想國》與二十世紀C. P. Gilman《她鄉》作為探究對象，並比較分析兩者烏托邦主張及教育思想之異同。兩者均為歷史中重要的烏托邦及教育思想文獻，也有類似共產社會的觀點，然而，兩者設定烏托邦之基本原則及所呈現出來的教育風貌卻大相逕庭。本研究採文獻分析方法，探討並比較了兩人的烏托邦教育思想，並且闡發了烏托邦在現代社會中教育的重要性。研究結論如下：一、在現代社會中，具備「反偶像崇拜傳統」精神的烏托邦主義，可能才是烏托邦真正精神之所在；二、比起理念論式的「靜態烏托邦」，現代社會中吾人需對演化論式的「動態烏托邦」投以更多關注；三、Plato與Gilman欲培養之女性形象可說幾無二致，但兩者最大不同之處在於對於「母性」或「母職」的看法。Plato並未正視「母職」的重要性，但Gilman卻賦予「母職」最崇高地位。此一差異對我們重思教育定義可說極有意義。英文摘要：For this article, we mainly compare and analyze two important writings regarding ”utopian” educational proposals: Plato's ”Republic” and C. P. Gilman's feminist utopian novel ”Herland”. They both are utopian and educational classics, and their ideal societies are both communist societies, but the basic organizing principles and educational proposals vary in numerous ways.After reviewing the above-mentioned two utopian writings and other related studies, we summarize the study's conclusion: (1) The utopian spirit of modern society should be utopianism consistent with the ”iconoclastic utopian tradition”; (2) we require placing more attention on an evolutionary ”dynamic utopia” than a theoretically ”static utopia”; and (3) the female images that Plato and Gilman attempted to cultivate are similar, but their emphases on ”motherhood” are of different degrees. Plato did not consider motherhood, but Gilman honored it as the most important social value, and we argue that such a difference is significant for people to reconsider the meaning of education.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學9篇名：國民中學教師課程領導相關問題之探究：以學習領域召集人為例並列篇名：Related Issues on Teacher Curriculum Leadership in Junior High Schools: Taking Teacher Leaders of Disciplinary Areas as Examples作者：王秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Wang);康瀚文(Han-Wen Kang)關鍵字：九年一貫課程;課程領導;學習領域召集人;the Grade 1-9 curriculum;curriculum leadership;teacher leaders of discipline areas期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要探討九年一貫課程實施後，國中各學習領域召集人進行課程領導時所遭遇的問題。藉由問卷調查得知目前國中各領域召集人課程領導的相關問題，再輔以焦點團體座談及深度訪談以深入追蹤問題的來源與成因。本研究的問卷調查共抽取203校，有效問卷共1,121份，召開焦點團體座談共9場次，邀請48名領域召集人與會，之後並訪談了5位領域召集人，以獲得對問卷結果更深入的理解。經統計分析與結果討論後，獲致四項結論：一、現階段國中領域召集人課程領導相關問題之嚴重情形大致為稍微嚴重；二、召集人在課程領導過程所遇到的特殊議題，其問題往往來自於領域的劃分與制度的設計；三、時間不夠、經費不足與職權不明是召集人課程領導問題產生的主因；四、不同背景的召集人對於課程領導相關問題之看法有所差異。英文摘要：This study examines the related issues that teacher leaders of various disciplinary areas encountered in junior high schools after the Grade 1-9 curriculum was performed. We discovered related issues by using a questionnaire, and tracked the sources and causes of the issues through a focus group and individual interviews. Several teachers from 203 schools participated in the survey study and contributed 1,121 sets of valid data. Moreover, we conducted nine focus group interviews in which 48 teacher leaders of various disciplinary areas attended. Thereafter, we interviewed five teachers to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the survey's results. Four conclusions were obtained through statistical analyses and discussions of the results. First, the severity of the issues that teacher leaders of various disciplinary areas encountered in junior high schools at the current stage was defined as low to moderate. Second, the issues often resulted from a disciplinary division and the design of the school system. Third, a lack of time, shortage of funds, and undefined responsibility and power were the main causes of the issues. Fourth, the teacher leaders with different backgrounds had diverse views on the related issues of curriculum leadership.起始頁-結束頁：29-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學10篇名：國小六年級學生運用一般化基模進行圖形規律問題解題之研究並列篇名：Application of Generalization Schemas to Solve Figural Pattern Problems on Sixth Graders作者：陳嘉皇(Chia-Huang Chen)關鍵字：一般化;代數思考;基模;圖形規律問題;generalization;algebraic thinking;schema;figural pattern problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探索學生對圖形規律問題一般化歷程產出的基模，以掌握學生一般化認知結構，理解其一般化運作情形；並探討學生一般化歷程基模的轉換，建構一般化解題模式，以提升代數思考教學的成效。研究樣本為小學3名六年級學生，參與研究者設計之三十二項圖形規律問題，並從學生對作業的操作與訪談蒐集資料，資料分析與說明則採質性方法呈現。綜合研究發現，獲得以下三階段結果：學生在發想階段利用「整體圖形關係」和「部分結構要素」概念基模計畫解題，在連結階段則運用「圖形特徵與圖次比對」與「物件計數與圖次比對」概念基模進行圖形與圖次關係的連結，在歸納階段採用「單位組合」與「圖形結構」概念基模，協助其進行解題。在一般化歷程上，也利用「加法」、「乘法」與「實用」等運算基模協助整合規則或算式。學生因圖形結構的性質與一般化解題經驗與知識，讓其在一般化歷程上產生基模與解題策略的改變與轉換，使其朝向更精細代數思考心智模式的運用與圖形整體結構關係之整合。以一般化基模運作與發展作為基礎，可建構出「利用圖形結構」與「利用數字序列」兩種一般化解題模式。研究者根據發現結果提出學生解題模式與建議，提供未來代數思考教學與研究參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to enhance our understanding of the generalization process by examining the generalization schemas of figural pattern problems and capturing the cognitive structure of generalization, and by examining the ways in which to improve the generalization schema transformation to construct models for solving generalization problems and promote the effects of algebraic thinking. Three Grade six students in a teaching activity setting completed 32 tasks related to figural pattern problems, and the worksheets and interviews data were collected. The data were analyzed qualitatively, and three stages were considered: (1) Students used both the ”relationship of whole figure” and ”elements of part structure” concept schemas for problem-solving planning in the abductive stage; (2) both schemas were applied during the connection stage on the ”figural characterizes contrast with figural terms” and ”objects count contrast with figural terms” to combine the relationship between figures and terms; (3) students used both the ”unit combined” and ”figural structure” concept schemas to solve the figural pattern problems during the generalized stage. Students used ”addition,” ”multiplication,” and ”practical” operation schemas to integrate the rules and expressions for resolving the figural pattern problems. The change and transformation of the schemas during generalization were influenced by student knowledge, experiences, and characteristics of the figural structure. Researchers constructed both the ”utilize the figural structure” and ”utilize the number alley” models for problem-solving generalization learning based on students' generalization schema operation and development. The findings such as the models of problem-solving generalization support teachers' instruction, engaging students in algebraic thinking and implementing algebraic teaching with figural pattern problem solving.起始頁-結束頁：59-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：The Study of the Accuracy and Consistency of a Series of IRT Observed Score Equatings Using Various Scale Transformation Methods並列篇名：使用不同量尺轉換法下IRT觀察分數等化法的精確性和一致性研究作者：曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：IRT觀察分數等化;直接等化;連鎖等百分比等化;部分同時校準;間接等化;chained equipercentile equating;direct equating;indirect equating;IRT observed score equating;partial concurrent calibration期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：為了評估等化法的精確性和一致性，本研究使用模擬資料，探討不同量尺轉換法下IRT觀察分數等化法的比較。本研究檢視分開和部分同時（concurrent）試題參數估計、特徵曲線（characteristic curve）和動差量尺（moment scale）轉換法及連鎖等百分比（chained equipercentile, CE）方法等一系列等化方法的結果。此外，研究也比較直接等化（direct equating）〔新卷直接等化到基準卷（base form）〕與間接等化（indirect equating）〔新卷透過一些中介卷（intermediated forms）等化到基準卷〕的等化結果。研究結果顯示：（1）在不同試題參數與量尺轉換方法中，IRT觀察分數等化法是一致的；（2）直接等化函數和間接等化函數具有相同的精確性與一致性；（3）除了在接近底層與上層的分數外，CE等化和IRT觀察分數之等化函數具有相同的精確性與一致性。英文摘要：In order to evaluate equating accuracy and consistency, a chain of IRT observed score equatings were compared over different scale transformation approaches using simulated data. The study examined a series of equating results from separate and partial concurrent item parameter estimation, the results from the characteristic curve and the moment scale transformation methods, and the results from the chained equipercentile (CE) method. In addition, the study also compared the results from equating a new form directly to the base form (direct equating) to the results from equating the new form indirectly to the base form through some intermediated forms (indirect equating). The study showed: (i) IRT observed score equatings were consistent over different approaches to item parameter estimation and scale transformation; (ii) Direct equating functions were as accurate and consistent as indirect equating functions; (iii) The CE equating functions were as accurate and consistent as the IRT observed score equating functions at most score levels except the scores near the bottom and top levels.起始頁-結束頁：545-567資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：單一受試者研究分析中應用C統計量之適切性探討並列篇名：The Inappropriateness for Applying C Statistic in the Analysis of Single-subject Research作者：林冠群(Guan-Chyun Lin);林惠賢(Huey-Shyan Lin)關鍵字：C統計量;一階自相關;分段迴歸;單一受試者研究;斷裂時間系列分析;C-statistic;first-order autocorrelation;interrupted time series analysis;segment regression;single-subject research期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：C統計量是目前在分析單一受試者研究資料時，使用較多的統計分析方法。由理論探討與虛擬案例分析可知，C統計量主要在衡量小樣本序列資料的一階自相關趨勢，但仍需注意首尾兩筆資料的偏離對C統計量的影響。如果研究者不只是想要知道，單一受試者觀察資料是否具有一階自相關趨勢時，還想要知道某種介入是否會造成水準或斜率的改變，此時應用C統計量便不適切。因此，建議研究者日後在單一受試者研究中，應避免採用C統計量，而改採其他適當分析方法，諸如斷裂時間系列分析，或在能捕捉誤差系列相關之模式中執行分段迴歸法等，才能更適切與深入地探討單一受試者的觀察資料。英文摘要：Currently, C statistic is the statistical analysis method often used for analyzing the single-subject research data. C statistic mainly measures the first-order autocorrelation trend of the small-sample series of data by theory study and simulation case analysis, but it still needs to pay attention to the influence on C statistic due to deviation of the two data in the initial and the last points. If in a single-subject study the researchers want to know not only whether the first-order autocorrelation trend of the observed data exists, but also whether the intervention causes a change of a level or slope, applying C statistic will be inappropriate. Therefore it suggested that in future single-subject studies the researchers use other appropriate methods, such as interrupted time series analysis or segment regression analysis executed in a model that can catch the serial correlation of errors, rather than C statistic to more appropriately and deeply explore the observed data of a single-subject.起始頁-結束頁：569-598資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：「青少年感恩量表」之編製與驗證並列篇名：The Development and Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the "Inventory of Adolescents' Gratitude" in Taiwan作者：陳馨怡(Hsin-Yi Chen);吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chin Chen);徐芝君(Chih-Chun Hsu);邱發忠(Fa-Chung Chiu)關鍵字：青少年;量表發展;感恩;adolescent;gratitude;inventory development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在發展「青少年感恩量表」，內容分為三個分量表，包括：知足感（a sense of abundance）、欣賞簡單事物（simple appreciation）、感激他人（appreciation for other）。首先，以立意取樣抽取237人，經過預試、項目分析、探索性因素分析，以及信度分析後，形成正式量表24題；接著，以分層便利取樣，樣本涵蓋全臺灣北、中、南、東四區域國中一到三年級共1,206位學生。在信、效度部分，本量表重測信度為.82∼.83，Cronbach's α係數為.80∼.83，顯示本量表具有良好信度；建構效度部分，整體適配度指標均達標準，顯示整體模式適配情形頗為理想；再以「兒童樂觀－悲觀雙因子量表」與「貝克兒童及青少年量表」（BYIII）為效標，發現具良好之同時效度。在背景變項部分，結果發現國中女生的感恩 表現優於男生；有宗教信仰的國中生感恩表現優於無宗教信仰者。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop and construct validity of the ”Inventory of Adolescents' Gratitude” that included three subscales: a sense of abundance, simple appreciation and appreciation for others. First, three factor were derived from the final 24-item through item analysis and exploratory factor analysis, and reliability analysis via 237 participants by using purposive sampling in the pretest. Then, the researchers used another 1,206 participants by using stratified convenience sampling method to conduct confirmatory factor analysis and criterion-related validity. Results indicated that the inventory's construct validity and reliability are acceptable. The Cronbach's α was from .80 to .83, and test-retest reliability coefficient was from .82 to .83. The study also employed Children's Optimism-Pessimism Inventory and BYI-II, which were criterions. The results of concurrent validity revealed good. In the background variables, it was shown that girls outperformed boys on gratitude; moreover, the students who have religious belief outperformed the ones who don't.起始頁-結束頁：599-626資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：當測驗碰上情境：情境判斷測驗與自陳量表在量表發展上之比較並列篇名：When Test Met Scenario: The Comparison between Situational Judgment Test and Self-Report Scale on Scale Development作者：歐宗霖(Tsung-Lin Ou);邱皓政(Haw-Jeng Chiou);孫國勛(Kuo-Shun Sun)關鍵字：自陳量表;情境判斷測驗;量表發展;scale development;self-report scale;situational judgment test期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：情境判斷測驗（situational judgment test，以下簡稱SJT）係模擬真實工作場域的各種問題情境，要求受測者從不同的選項中進行作答，從而反應出受測者所具備的知識、能力，或是人格特質或態度傾向的一種測驗形式，其主要特色在於擬真情境的試題設計與生態效度。然而，SJT的本質卻有別於自陳量表，導致難以符合傳統量表發展所規範的條件。儘管如此，學者仍致力發展出一套適合SJT的試題建構方式。因此，本研究從量表發展的試題產生、項目分析與建構效度之三階段觀點，比較SJT與傳統自陳量表的異同，並於比較過程中根據相關文獻，釐清SJT的設計要求並探討相關之議題，最後總結本文的比較與討論結果，以提供研究與實務上的建議。英文摘要：Situational judgment test (SJT) is designed to measure examinee's knowledge, ability, or personality by providing the stimulated occasions collected from real settings along with options for response. The main features of situational judgment test (SJT) are ecological validity and scenario design for items. As result of the nature of SJT different from self-report scale, SJT is hard to meet the standard of traditional scale development. Nonetheless, scholars are still devoted to develop suitable approaches for SJT construction. Therefore, the purpose of the article is to compare the difference between SJT and traditional self-report scale based on three development viewpoints including item generation, item analysis and construct validity. On the basis of literature review, the related issues were discussed in the article to clarify the demands for SJT design. Finally, the article concluded the result of comparison and discussion about SJT and provided practical and methodological suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：239-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：「Rosenberg自尊量表」之試題衡鑑：評等量尺模型的應用並列篇名：Evaluation of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale Using the Rating Scale Model作者：巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu);賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai);施慶麟(Ching-Lin Shih)關鍵字：Rasch測量模型;客觀測量;差異試題功能;評等量尺模式;量表發展;Rasch measurement model;objective measurement;differential item functioning (DIF);rating scale model;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：「Rosenberg自尊量表」旨在測量個人的自尊狀態，為一廣受歡迎與使用的自陳式測量工具。本研究的目的旨在透過Rasch測量家族的評等量尺模式，檢視「Rosenberg自尊量表」的心理計量特性。本研究採用ConQuest 2.0套裝軟體進行評等量尺模式分析，研究樣本計有1,155名臺灣國中生。研究結果顯示，「Rosenberg自尊量表」較適合用來精確區分出中等程度自尊的受試者，但對於自尊特質量尺兩端的受試者，其測量精確度較低。本研究除針對評等量尺模式在量表發展上的應用予以探討外，並依據結果進行討論，以提出後續研究之相關建議。英文摘要：The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES) is a most popular self-report instrument for evaluating self-esteem and is widely used in many fields. This study examined the psychometric properties of items in RSES with rating scale model (RSM). A sample of 1,155 students in Taiwan was used. By using the software ConQuest 2.0, item and step parameters and their corresponding infit statistics were provided. The results showed that RSES can discriminated the examinees with moderate self-esteem, rather than that in the upper and lower end of the continuum. Psychometric properties and norm values based on the representative sample are reported. Implications of using rating scale model for scale development and evaluation, as well as suggestions for future research, are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：263-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「中學生考試壓力量表」之編製及其信度與效度之分析並列篇名：The Development of Examination Stress Scale for Junior High School Students作者：宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);王雅鈴(Ya-Ling Wang);黃瓅瑩(Li-Ying Huang);陳佳蓉(Chia-Jung Chen);曾芬蘭(Fen-Lan Tseng)關鍵字：中學生考試壓力量表;考試焦慮;考試壓力;性別差異;測量模式;examination stress;examination stress scale;gender difference;measurement model;test anxiety期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：考試壓力（examination stress）是全球的共同現象。然而，本研究發現以往的測量工具只將一般考試視為壓力源，並只將焦慮反應視為個人面對壓力時的反應。因此，本研究擬擴充考試壓力概念之下的壓力源以及個人反應，並編製「中學生考試壓力量表」。本研究將考試壓力分為「生理焦慮反應」、「認知及行為反應」，以及「社會期待及社會比較知覺」等三個向度，進行考試壓力量表之編製。經由922位學生的預試以及2,291位學生的正式施測，三個分量表之內部一致性信度係數Cronbach's α分別為.90、.87以及.88，整份量表信度為.93，具有良好的信度。在效度方面，以驗證式因素分析檢視考試壓力的概念，結果顯示三個次向度的模式是可接受的模式，且比單向度模式佳。同時，在測量不變性的分析之中，本量表在不同性別之下具有測量不變性，此結果為本量表提供建構效度的證據。最後，本研究將針對考試壓力理論進行討論，並對未來研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：Examination stress is a common phenomenon in the world. However, previous measurement tools of examination stress had three limitations: limited perspective on stressors of and responses to examination stress; neglect of high school students as an important population suffering from examination stress; limited sample sizes for validating the psychometrical properties of the scales. Therefore, this present study proposed the Examination Stress Framework (ESF) to expand the construct of examination stress. In additionally, we constructed the Examination Stress Scale (ESS) for high school students. We defined three dimensions to develop subscales of examination stress: physiological anxiety, cognitive and behavioral responses, and perceived social expectation and social comparison. After administrating prior test to 922 junior high school students, we completed a revised version consisted of 27 items. Then we collected 2,261 junior high school students' responses of ESS to estimate scale reliability and to examine the construct validity. The Cronbach's α reliability of ”physiological responses” was .90, .87 for ”cognitive and behavioral responses”, .88 for ”perceived social expectation and social comparison”, and .93 for total score. And it was found that three dimensions model of ESS was acceptable and better than one dimension model. The result was also support invariance of measurement by splitting sample by gender.起始頁-結束頁：291-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：納入背景變項對群體參數估計之影響的模擬與實徵研究並列篇名：A Simulation and Empirical Study on Incorporating Background Variables in Population Parameters Estimation作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);曾筱倩(Hsiao-Chien Tseng);吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：大型測驗;可能值方法;背景變項;參數估計;background variables;large-scale assessment;parameter estimate;plausible values method期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：大型測驗（NAEP、TIMSS和PISA）是透過「可能值方法」了解母群的學習成效或不同背景造成的影響。可能值方法是以潛在迴歸模式，加入學生背景變項計算後驗分布，並抽取可能值，以利於次級資料分析者使用。本研究分別使用模擬與實徵資料，探討常用的點估計方法以及使用可能值方法對於群體參數估計的影響，並探討不同相關程度的背景變項對於群體參數估計之成效，以及不同模式下群體參數回復性。研究結果顯示，最大概似估計法（MLE）、期望後驗法（EAP），以及可能值（PV）等三種方法，在回復群體平均數時，三種方法並無太大的差異，但在回復群體變異數時，使用可能值（PV）的方法有較好的回復性。此外，當背景變項以原始資料形式納入，或利用主成分分析進行轉換後納入潛在迴歸模式中，這兩者模式對於群體參數回復性並無太大差異，顯示利用主成分進行轉換的背景變項也可以達到與原始資料形式納入相同的效果。當所欲探討的背景變項群體參數被納入潛在迴歸模式中，則對於此背景變項群體參數有較佳的回復性，舉例來說：欲探討「性別」這個背景變項的群體參數時，則當「性別」這個背景變項被納入潛在迴歸模式中，會有較佳的回復性，且當所納入的背景變項與能力值間的相關程度較高時，對於背景變項群體參數的估計值有較好的回復性。英文摘要：In the large-scale assessment programs such as NAEP, TIMSS and PISA use plausible value (PV) method to estimate the population statistics and to explore the effects upon the achievement of the different background variables such as gender. In the plausible value method, the background variables of examinees are incorporated into the latent regression model to estimate the posterior distributions of the abilities. Plausible values that provided for secondary analysts are random draws from the posterior distributions. In this paper, the performances on estimating population statistics between plausible value method and traditional IRT ability estimations (ex. MLE or EAP) are evaluated. The influences of the different correlation degrees between background variables and abilities and different regression models on estimating population statistics are also explored.The results show that the mean of population ability is estimated well whether MLE, EAP or PV is used. The PV has the best performance on recovering the variance of population ability. Two models, principle component analysis are applied to compress most of the background variables and raw background variables forms, have the same performances on recovery of population statistics. If there is an interest in estimating for specific sub-groups (ex. Gender), the incorporation of the related background variables get better recoveries on the statistics of these sub-groups. The higher correlation between background variables and abilities can lead to increased precision of population statistics.起始頁-結束頁：319-350資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：「網路調查風險知覺量表」編製之研究並列篇名：Development and Validation of the Perceived Risk of Web Survey Questionnaire (PRWSQ)作者：許獻元(Hsuen-Yuan Hsu);賴怡樺(Yi-Hua Lai);金忻瑩(Hsin-Ying Chin)關鍵字：風險知覺理論;量表發展;填答率;網路調查;measurement development;perceived risk theory;response rate;web surveys期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：相較於傳統的紙本或電話訪問等調查方式，網路調查面臨更嚴重的低回收率問題，回收率過低可能會威脅網路調查之品質，故如何有效提升受訪者網路問卷之填答意願實為重要課題。本研究擬發展的「網路調查風險知覺量表」，係以風險知覺理論為依據，並從中挑選出兩個重要的構面：隱私風險與時間風險，每個構面各有五個題項。本研究以609位大學生為研究對象，以紙本問卷蒐集資料後進行交叉效度驗證，EFA的分析結果支持有兩個因素可被萃取，而CFA的結果則是進一步確認二因子的測量模型能合理地適配資料，結果顯示量表具有良好的建構效度。該量表各個構面的題目所測得分數之內部一致性分別為0.78（隱私風險）以及0.72（時間風險），總量表之內部一致性為0.80，結果數值為合理範圍。基於本研究所編製之量表，未來研究可繼續探討隱私、時間風險與網路問卷填答率之間的關係。英文摘要：Compared to other self-administered survey modes (e.g. mail, telephone), web surveys encounter more difficulties with low response rates. It is not surprising then that increasing participants' willingness to respond to web surveys has became the most important issue in survey methodology. In the current study, the Perceived Risk of Web Survey Questionnaire (PRWSQ) was developed based on Perceived Risk Theory. PRWSQ comprised two constructs (privacy and time risks) that were measured by 5 items, respectively. Survey data consisting of 609 college students' responses to PRWSQ were analyzed for cross validation of score validity (EFA and CFA). Results indicated that a two-factor measurement model was validated. Moreover, the internal consistency reliabilities for privacy risk subscale, time risk subscale, and overall PRWSQ were 0.78, 0.72, and 0.80, respectively. Future studies are encouraged to investigate the relationship between response rates of web surveys and privacy and time risks.起始頁-結束頁：351-368資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：「中學生領導表現觀察量表」之編製並列篇名：The Development of Observational Scales to Assess Leadership for Junior High School Students作者：鄭聖敏(Sheng-Min Cheng)關鍵字：人際能力;家長版領導表現觀察量表;教師版領導表現觀察量表;概念能力;領導;conceptual abilities;interpersonal abilities;leadership;parent version of the observational scales for leadership;teacher version of the observational scales for leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的在編製可供國中教師及學生家長從不同情境脈絡來評估學生領導表現的「中學生領導表現觀察量表」。首先，根據相關文獻擬訂量表架構及試題，並經專家審查及國中教師、學生家長試答，發展預試量表。其次，透過219名國中學生之班級導師及家長建立預試資料，進行教師版與家長版量表之項目分析及探索性因素分析，再以大臺北地區284名國中學生為觀察對象，以結構方程模式進行教師版及家長版「中學生領導表現觀察量表」測量模式之適配度考驗。結果顯示，教師版和家長版「中學生領導表現觀察量表」各含15道題目，包括四個因素，可形成「概念能力」和「人際能力」二個向度分數，且量表模式具良好的適配度。教師版全量表Cronbach’s α係數為.938，「概念能力」向度為.941、「人際能力」向度為.888，其餘因素為.846∼.924。家長版全量表Cronbach’s α係數為.879，「概念能力」向度為.813、「人際能力」向度為.823，其餘因素為.602∼.819。本研究亦發現，教師與家長的觀察有助於了解學生更多元、豐富的領導表現。最後，根據研究結果，研究者對學生領導評量及未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to develop teacher and parent versions of observational scales to assess leadership for junior high school students in different contexts.After literature reviewed and experts consulted, the initial scales were developed and field-tested by 219 eighth grade students' teachers and their parent. Items analysis and exploratory factor analysis were used respectively to establish the measurement models of the two versions of the observational scales for leadership of junior high school students. Then, the follow-up study used the confirmatory factor analysis to test the measurement models' goodness of fit. There were 284 eighth grade students' teachers and their parent participated in this study in Taipei-Keelung metropolitan area.The results showed: (1) the confirmatory factor analysis indicated that the measurement models of the two observational scales fitted the observed data; (2) both the teacher version and parent version of the observational scales composed of four factors, 15 items, which could be divided into two dimensions-conceptual abilities and interpersonal abilities; (3) the coefficients of internal consistency of total scale, two dimensions, and four factors were .846- .941 for teacher version, and .602- .879 for parent version of the observational scales. The study also found that the observation of teachers and parent in different contexts provided more information about students' leadership.Furthermore, some suggestions for students' leadership assessment and future research were provided.起始頁-結束頁：369-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：「教師職能量表」之發展並列篇名：The Development of the Teacher Competencies Inventory作者：吳淑禎(Shu-Chen Wu)關鍵字：中等學校;教師專業標準;教師職能;secondary school;teacher competencies;teacher professional standards期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在發展「教師職能量表」，內容係以Spencer與Spencer的冰山模型以及教師專業標準為架構，輔以焦點訪談。本研究以中等學校教師（含實習教師）及師資生為對象，以250名樣本進行探索性因素分析與信度分析，再以158名樣本，進行新增因素結構檢驗，確立正式量表，共包含九個因素：教學規劃、教學傳遞、溝通表達、情緒管理、學生輔導、教學評量、教師認同、專業態度，以及群己關係，計有63題。正式施測以北、中、南、東四區進行分層抽樣，計有1,712人。結果顯示：(1)全量表之Cronbach's α為.97，間隔二週的再測信度為.80；(2)驗證性因素分析所得組合信度介於.87∼90，平均變異解釋量介於.50∼.57，且有良好之效標關聯效度，顯示發展之量表具有良好的信效度；(3)針對正式施測樣本，建立性別、身分、學校屬性以及地區常模；(4)不同背景變項的受試者，其在教師職能的表現具有顯著差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop the Teacher Competencies Inventory (TCI), based on Spencer and Spencer's Competence Models and teacher professional standard- based, also integrated focus interview. Secondary school teacher and pre-service teacher as sample, 250 participants are included in the pretest to perform exploratory factor analysis and reliability analysis. Furthermore, 158 participants are used to test added factor concept, and established formal inventory as 63 items, nine factors which are the teaching planning, teaching transfer, communication and expression, student guidance, teaching evaluation, teacher identify, professional attitude, and human relationship. 1,712 stratification selection participants located in the north, central, south and east part of Taiwan. The results show that: Firstly, the Cronbach's α of the TCI is .97, retest reliability that interval 2 weeks is .80. Secondly, confirmatory factor analysis showed the composite reliability between .87- .90, average variance between .50- .57, and good criterion-related validity. Diversity of norm is developed, included: gender, identity, school attribute, and area. Finally, there are significant differences in the nine factors among the different demographic participants. Suggestions are provided for future research and teacher professional growth.起始頁-結束頁：397-428資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：父母教導子女宗教信仰是否違反其自主性？T. H. McLaughlin與E.Callan及P. Gardner論辯之評析並列篇名：DO PARENTS VIOLATE THEIR CHILDREN'S AUTONOMY BY UPBRINGING THEIR CHILDREN RELIGIOUS BELIEF? AN ANALYSIS OF THE ARGUMENTS OF T. H. MCLAUGHLIN, E. CALLAN AND P. GARDNER作者：簡成熙(Cheng-Hsi Chien)關鍵字：宗教教育;自主性;父權主義;父母權;religious education;autonomy;paternalism;parents' rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：西方自由主義認為價值多元，政府必須站在價值中立的立場，教育理想不能預設特定的美好生活型態，而是要培養學生的自主性。對有宗教信仰的人而言，則是把幸福依託於神。父母教導子女宗教信仰是否違反其自主性，就成為重要的學術議題。本研究即擬針對此一議題加以探究，並提出對臺灣教育的啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑：本文屬哲學研究，研究者針對英國倫敦路線學者T. H. McLaughlin父母教導子女宗教信仰並不違反子女自主性的主張，以及E. Callan與P. Gardner認為會淪為灌輸之質疑，兼及McLaughlin的回應，探究其相互論辯的效力。研究發現或結論：T. H. McLaughlin以父母兒女共同隸屬的原生文化、家庭成員的有機統一及宗教參與有助於理解宗教等理由，企圖證成父母對子女進行宗教教育，不違反自由主義的教育自主性理想。E. Callan以及P. Gardner則擔心這難逃灌輸之嫌，在子女幼小階段，其思想未定型，過早進行宗教教育，會造成根深蒂固，不利子女爾後的自主發展。筆者檢視他們之間的論辯，同意McLaughlin的主張，只要父母持守自由主義的精神來教導子女宗教信仰，是可以回應其他學者質疑。研究原創性／價值：臺灣對於宗教教育的研究不多，現有的研究有從宗教教義著手，也有研究討論美國重要宗教教育判例。教育哲學可以對教育進行綜合反省，分析的教育哲學更期許能對教育實務問題作概念分析與論證。鑑於臺灣教育政策論述，很少有嚴格哲學論證，更遑論分析哲學的論證。本研究將能為臺灣學界探索宗教教育時，提供分析哲學的論證範例。教育政策或實務意涵：經由本文論證，家長有為子女提供宗教教育的權利，學校也無須以價值中立之名，嚴禁宗教涉入。但無論家長還是學校，仍應秉自由主義精神，慎防宗教灌輸。英文摘要：Purpose: Western liberalism believes that values are diversified, and the government must stand on the position of value neutrality. The educational ideal should not presuppose a specific good life style, but cultivate students' autonomy. For people with religious beliefs, it is to rely on God for their happiness. Whether parents teach their children religious beliefs violates their autonomy has become an important academic issue. This study intends to explore this topic, and puts forward the implications for Taiwan education. Design/methodology/approach: This article is a philosophical study. T. H. McLaughlin, the scholar of London Line, tried to justify that parents have the rights to educate their children for religion which would not transgress the ideal of liberalism - educational autonomy. However, E. Callan and P. Gardner worried that it could be suspected of indoctrination. And McLaughlin responded to their challenges. The author investigates the validity of their mutual claims by philosophical arguments. Findings/results: McLaughlin tried to justify that parents have the rights to educate their children for religion which would not violate the ideal of personal autonomy of liberalism, on the grounds of primary culture parents and children both attach to, the organic unity of family members, and contributions of religious participation to understand religion. However, E. Callan and P. Gardner worried that it could be suspected of indoctrination. When children are young, their thoughts are not fixed and religious education is carried out too early, which will result in persistence beliefs to harm their development of autonomy in the future. The author examines the arguments on both sides and stands by McLaughlin's points. As long as parents adhere to the spirit of liberalism for their children on religious upbringing. they can defend the challenges from other opposed scholars. Originality/value: There are few studies on religious education in Taiwan. Some of the existing studies start from religious doctrines, and some studies discuss important court cases of religious education in the United States. The philosophy of education can reflect on education comprehensively, and the analytical philosophy of education is expected to make conceptual analysis and arguments on the practical issues of education. In view of the educational policy discourse in Taiwan, there are few rigorous philosophical arguments, let alone analytical philosophical arguments. This study will provide an argument example of analytical philosophy to explore religious education for Taiwan academic circles. Suggestions/implications: This paper argues that parents have a right to religious upbringing for their children, and schools do not need to ban religious materials involving to campus in the name of value-neutrality. But both parents and schools should embody liberal spirit and must guard against religious indoctrination.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00012篇名：馬來西亞高等校院的停課不停學－大學在COVID-19行動管制令下的結構與行動並列篇名：”SUSPENDING CLASSES WITHOUT SUSPENDING LEARNING” IN MALAYSIA HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS: OBSERVING STRUCTURE AND AGENCY UNDER COVID-19 MOVEMENT CONTROL ORDERS作者：陳鏗任(Ken-Zen Chen);林炳洲(Peng-Crew Lim);王子華(Tzu-Hua Wang)關鍵字：結構化理論;COVID-19;馬來西亞高等教育;行動管制令;Structuration;COVID-19;Higher Education in Malaysia;Movement Control Orders期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究以多重資料，梳理在2020年8月底前，馬來西亞行動管制令下所影響的高等教育活動；特別是以微觀角度，檢視馬來西亞的大學生在因應防疫所遭遇的挑戰。研究者從行動者與結構互動的理論框架，歸納發展中的大馬防疫案例對我國高等教育的啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採取兩種資料蒐集方式：線上田野觀察與線上訪談。研究者追蹤馬來西亞高等教育，含政府紀錄與大學官方網站、新聞媒體、WhatsApp學生社群、記者會影像等；線上訪談則邀請四位大學生分享行動管制令之前的學習樣態、校園中的疫情、行動管制令後的個人經歷、以及線上學習經驗。研究者亦邀請他們扮演深度報導人的角色，請其提供可能有助於本研究的訊息。研究發現或結論：本研究從行動者，也從結構，提出兩個角度的發現。行動者在防疫行動中與結構互動，他們雖充分展現了自己的認識力，但仍然有其侷限；線上教學從倉促上路到漸入佳境是師生共創的新常規；大學生除了受疫情影響，也積極行動貢獻。高教中的一些結構，例如成績是不可動搖的；雖然線上學習是結構快速在各大學複製的新常規，但行動者除了適應也可能撼動；面對謠言透過結構中流傳，系統會吸納行動者發展的溝通常規來加強自己身為防疫權威的結構正當性。研究原創性／價值：COVID-19的社會科學研究雖然受到諸多踏入現場的限制，但透過網路訪談與研究參與者的協助，仍可蒐集到寶貴的資訊。本研究之創新點除了議題本身，也把焦點主要放在了大學在政府的防疫運作框架下的制度回應，以及身在其中的大學生的感受與行動，讓在疫情中較無機會被聽到的聲音能呈現在學術界的討論。教育政策建議或實務意涵：從本研究之結論出發，研究者提出三個對我國高等教育的建議：一、防疫社會的系統應有危機治理的思維；二、防疫社會的線上學習強化大學應對災變的韌性；三、防疫社會的校園重建需理情兼顧。英文摘要：Purpose: This research studied reactions of Malaysia higher education under the Movement Control Order (MCO) before August, 2020. Specifically, it used theoretical lenses of agency and structuration and investigated collegiate challenges regarding epidemic prevention at he micro level. We present lessons learned from the developing case of epidemic prevention in Malaysia's higher education institutions (HEIs). Design/methodology/approach: Two data collection methods were used: online field observation and online interview. We collected government reports, news releases, social media discussions (e.g. WhatsApp and Facebook), press conferences, and so forth. We conducted online interviews with four college students, who shared their learning before and after the MCOs, the COVID-19 outbreaks within campuses, and their experiences of learning online. Four interviewees were invited as research facilitators who provided insights and additional observations about college teaching and learning under MCOs. Findings/results: Findings from the aspects of both agency and structure under MCO were established in the research. From the agency aspects, college students expressed limited knowledgeability. Moreover, students and faculty co-constructed and improved online learning practices over time. In addition, students contributed to epidemic prevention and reflected on their actions. From the structural aspects, grades remained unchallenged. Furthermore, colleges stabilized online instruction to be a formal medium of learning whereby students might be able to influence how it was practiced. Lastly, the colleges learned to leverage the communication channels that students used to maintain the authority of epidemic prevention. Originality/value: Stepping in the fields under COVID-19 outbreaks can be risky for social scientists. However, online research may still reveal critical and timely findings. This research was novel both for the issue itself, as well as its focus on how HEIs reacted to the governmental public health policies for epidemic prevention and how college students perceived and acted in the system. Suggestions/implications: Several implications for Taiwan's higher education were drawn from the research. First of all, crisis management is critical for epidemic prevention among HEIs. Moreover, we need to see the positive value of online learning and assessments under epidemic conditions. Online learning may increase the resilience of HEIs under crisis. Lastly, both rational and affective considerations should be taken into account in the reconstruction of students' residential experience after the COVID-19 outbreaks.起始頁-結束頁：35-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00023篇名：學業退學制度是否合理妥適？實證研究的證據並列篇名：ARE UNIVERSITIES' ACADEMIC DISMISSAL POLICIES REASONABLE AND APPROPRIATE? EVIDENCE FROM AN EMPIRICAL STUDY作者：何萬順(One-Soon Her);蔡介文(Jie-Wen Tsai);林俊儒(Jun-Ru Lin);葉佳明(Jia-Ming Yeh)關鍵字：學業退學;合理妥適;釋字第563號;academic dismissal;reasonable and appropriate;Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 56期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本文研究目的在於從實證研究的證據，探討現行大學學業退學制度的設計是否符合釋字第563號「合理妥適」原則的規範。研究設計／方法／取徑：本文首先從釋字第563號對於退學的規範，檢視學業退學的制度內涵，並經由與品行退學的對照，探討學業退學制度在設計思維上是否「合理妥適」。接著以國立政治大學於96-106學年間入學之學士班學生學業成績、學分數、不及格學分數等資料為基礎，證實學業退學制度作為淘汰學生的工具並不符合「合理妥適」的原則。研究發現或結論：在國立政治大學96-106學年間三種逐次放寬的制度之實證研究上，從百分制之成績平均績點（Grade Point Average, GPA）與學分及格率（Credit Pass Rate, CPR）的數項指標上所得到的數據顯示：成績表現相對較佳的學生反遭退學。此實證研究的結果證實了學業退學制度違背釋字第563號「使成績未符一定標準之學生予以退學處分」的要求，與「確保學位之授予具備一定之水準」之目的牴觸；更值得關注是，制度越寬鬆其不合理程度卻越為嚴重。研究原創性／價值：近年學界已有廢除大學學業退學制度的聲浪，但多偏向法律及教育面向的探討，未有從實證數據的角度對此制度進行研究。本文補足此研究空缺，以實證數據說明學業退學制度與釋字第563號的齟齬關係，以及該制度的不合理之處。教育政策建議或實務意涵：從制度的實證數據出發，回顧相關校務研究，說明在學習問題上，身心健康、經濟情形、教學品質、學習環境等都是重要因子，不應完全究責於學生而給予退學的終極處分；進而指出退學制度在教師與學生互動關係的負面效應。建議大學應以積極妥適的預警、輔導與諮商機制取代學業退學制度。英文摘要：Purpose: The purpose of this paper is to investigate whether Taiwan universities' academic dismissal policies comply with the constitutional requirement of being reasonable and appropriate, specified in Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563, from the evidence of an empirical study. Design/methodology/approach: This paper first critically examines the content and design of universities' academic dismissal policies from the perspective of Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563, and then discusses whether such academic dismissal policies are reasonable and appropriate via a comparison with the policies of dismissal due to misconducts. Then, based on the academic achievements, academic scores, and failing grades of the National Chengchi University undergraduate students during the 2007-2017 academic years, this paper explores whether the academic dismissal policies as a tool for dismissing students from universities are reasonable and appropriate. Findings/results: An empirical study of the three different dismissal policies of National Chengchi University during the 2007-2017 academic years proves that, under several indexes of GPA (Grade Point Average) based on numerical grades and CPR (Credit Pass Rate), students with relatively better academic performances have been dismissed. Such policies thus seriously violate the constitutional requirement of Interpretation No. 563, that the punishment of dismissal be applied to 'students whose grades are below a certain standard' and contradict the required goal 'to guarantee that the conferment of a degree upholds a certain standard'. More importantly, the more lenient the policy, the more unfair dismissals there are. Originality/value: Recent voices advocating the abolition of universities' dismissal polices are mostly from the theoretical perspectives of law and education, none based on evidence from empirical findings. The research reported in this paper fills this important research gap. The empirical evidence obtained clearly demonstrates the unreasonable consequences of these academic dismissal policies, and thus their conflict with Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563. Suggestions/implications: Starting from the empirical evidence regarding the dismissal policies, this paper reviews several studies of university institutional research to illustrate the multiple factors behind a student's academic performance, including the student's physical and mental health, and the student's financial circumstances, the teaching quality, the learning environment, etc; thus, a student alone should not bear all the blame and receive the ultimate punishment. We also demonstrate the negative effects of academic dismissals on the interaction between teachers and students. Universities should replace the academic dismissal policies with active and appropriate mechanisms of early warning and consultation.起始頁-結束頁：81-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00034篇名：評介《「教育與陶冶科學」這個學術學門》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”ERZIEHUNGS- UND BILDUNGSWISSENSCHAFT ALS WISSENSCHAFTSDISZIPLIN”作者：陳濼翔(Luo-Xiang Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：121-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00045篇名：科技教學內容知識融入師資培育課程「班級經營」的教學實踐研究並列篇名：TEACHING PRACTICE AND STUDY OF TECHNOLOGICAL PEDAGOGICAL CONTENT KNOWLEDGE IN THE TEACHER EDUCATION COURSE ”CLASS MANAGEMENT”作者：陳碧祺(Pi-Chi Chen)關鍵字：師資培育;班級經營;科技教學內容知識;透明化科技融入教學;自我研究;teacher education;class management;technological pedagogical content knowledge;transparent technology integration into teaching;self-study期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究者任教於臺灣南部一所同時培育師資生與產業人才的師範大學。本研究旨在探討：（1）如何在師資培育課程「班級經營」中實踐「TPACK（科技教學內容知識）」教學理念，以及（2）如何以「透明化科技」融入教學的方式，協助師資生在此課程中同時培養「班級經營」知能並體驗TPACK的學習情境。研究者應用「自我研究」的回溯、前瞻、分析以及整合四步驟，分析、探究以TPACK理論為基礎的「班級經營」課程設計、教學策略應用、教學實施效益與檢討改進歷程。為評估此課程的教學效益，研究者整理103至106共四學年度來自文學院、教育學院、科技學院和理學院不同院系共429位師資生的教學評量量化評分，並依據以下素養面向做為學生質性文字回饋的檢核架構：（1）教育部所公布的師資職前教育階段的五項「教師專業素養」、（2）十二年國教新課綱的三項「核心素養」、以及（3）資訊科技融入教學等三大面向。結果顯示，學生對教師教學表現有高度的評價，對於教學內容、教材教法、作業設計以及課程中的資訊科技運用也都有正向的體驗與感受。然而如何提高課程中所運用的多元質性評量的公平性和公信度，仍有待研究者深思並克服。研究者最後提出三點的後續教學研究改進省思與規劃，作為日後課程設計與教學研究的改進方向。英文摘要：The researcher teaches at a normal university, located in southern Taiwan, known for cultivating pre-service teachers and professionals for industry and commerce. This study aims to investigate: (1) how to implement the teaching concept of TPACK (technological pedagogical content knowledge) in the teacher education course ”Class Management”, and (2) how to integrate ”transparent technology” in assisting pre-services teachers to obtain class management knowledge and to build the skills, as well as experience the learning environment of TPACK. By following the self-study procedure, namely retrospection, foresight, analysis, and integration, the researcher was able to design and develop TPACK-based Class Management curriculum and teaching strategies for the course. The researcher went on to implement and subsequently investigate the course based on teaching effectiveness, and then to review and improve the teaching process. The study summarized the teaching evaluations of a total of 429 pre-service teachers from different departments, covering from 103 to 106 four academic years. Evaluation of the course effectiveness was based on the following criteria: (1) the five categories of ”Teacher Professional Qualities” for the pre-service teachers' education; (2) the three major ”Core Literacy” of the 12-year Basic Education; and (3) the content of integration of information technology into teaching. The teaching evaluation and student feedback showed that the teaching content, teaching materials, teaching methods, homework design, and cloud-based course operation generated positive experiences and feelings from the students. However, the question of improving the credibility of multiple qualitative assessments used in the course remains to be considered and addressed. In conclusion, the researcher put forward three points of reflection for follow-up teaching research improvement and planning with regard the direction of improvement for future curriculum design and teaching research.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00016篇名：新制師資培育課程基準下的課程發展：「合作教學」與「教師專業社群」融入「教育實踐課程」設計並列篇名：THE DEVELOPMENT OF TEACHER EDUCATION COURSES UNDER THE NEW CURRICULUM GUIDELINES: THE INTEGRATION OF 'CO-TEACHING' AND 'PROFESSIONAL LEARNING COMMUNITY' IN EDUCATIONAL PRACTICE COURSES DESIGN作者：洪承宇(Cheng-Yu Hung);王淳瑩(Chun-Ying Wang)關鍵字：師資培育;合作教學;教師社群;教育實踐;補救教學;Teacher education;Co-teaching;Professional learning community;Teaching practicum;Remedial instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：新頒《中華民國教師專業素養指引－師資職前教育階段暨師資職前教育課程基準》（簡稱《課程基準》）於108學年度正式施行後，師培課程除了教育基礎學與方法學外，增加了「教育實踐課程」比重，期許職前階段能與教學現場有更豐富的連結。為實現《課程基準》中師資生應培養「團隊合作」與「持續專業成長」之素養，本研究藉由北部某師培大學開設的教育實踐課程帶領師資生至鄰近社區高中進行8週英文課後補救教學為例，運用精熟學習法架構，採「三人一組」的入班合作教學模式，探討此課程設計能否為準教師奠定教師專業素養之基礎。研究設計／方法／取徑：師資生團隊入班之設計，在人力充足的情況下，能在課堂中將中學生分流進行更細緻的差異化教學，運用師培課程中習得之理論於真實情境。三位師資生同時搭配師培教授與現職教師進行共備、觀課與議課，除了激發教學創意，也模擬現今教學現場的公開課活動、教師社群討論等，將中小學教師共學的氛圍向前延伸至職前教育階段。本研究訪談了18位修習本課程之英文科師資生與1位指導教師，並搭配師資生期末「教學歷程檔案」中的課堂記錄與反思，進行訪談與文件分析。研究發現或結論：此實踐課程設計可作為師資生們於未來成為教師獨立授課與班級管理之中介課程。團隊入班減緩師資生的教學焦慮，在集體腦力激盪的團隊合作下，能相互觀摩與成長；師資生透過形成性評量將學生進行差異化分組，輔導高、中、低不同程度之同學，增益自身基礎概念與加深加廣內容之教學技巧。同時，連續8週的短期帶班經驗彌補了師培課程中欠缺的班級經營實務，能作為橋接理論與實務之課程，逐步培養獨當一面之能力。此外，師資生與指導教師在過程中彼此給予支持與回饋，展現教師社群共備、觀課、議課之氛圍。研究原創性／價值：《課程基準》強調「團隊合作」素養之重要性，然而師培課程中較少將此項素養實際運用於現場教學之設計。「三人一組」於實務現場的合作教學是本實踐課程之特色，師資生能在同儕支持下嘗試不同的教學策略，並體會共備社群之助益；師培教授與中學指導老師的加入，也確保入班授課品質，而非將合作學校作為實踐的白老鼠，肩負大學之社會責任；此研究最後提出三項針對教育實踐課程設計之建議：師培機構應連結實務現場作為師資生「探究與實作」的場域、鼓勵師培課程加強「合作教學」的素養培育、「教師社群」氛圍應融入於日常的師培課程之中。英文摘要：Purpose: After the introduction of a new teacher education curriculum structure in 2019, the proportion of practice courses, vis-a-vis the traditional foundation and methodology courses, has been significantly increased. Closely linked to schools, practice courses are expected to give pre-service teachers preliminary teaching experience. This research examines a newly designed practice course, which aims to enhance course-takers' techniques of co-teaching and to encourage the formation of professional learning communities, and this example may provide valuable ideas and inspiration for other teacher education institutes to learn from. Design/methodology/approach: This practice course, implemented in a teacher education center in Taipei, established a partnership with a senior high school for an eight-week teaching practicum. Three English pre-service teachers were grouped as a team to help students experiencing difficulty keeping up with peers. A teacher educator and an experienced high school teacher were also involved in lesson preparation, classroom observation, post-course discussion and the setting up of a professional learning community. This research interviewed 18 pre-service teachers who participated in this course as well as their guiding mentors. In addition, their teaching portfolios were also analyzed to examine any actual enhancement in classroom practice. Findings/results: The gathered data demonstrated that 'co-teaching' reduced anxiety among pre-service teachers and collective effort not only improved lesson planning, but also fostered an atmosphere of professional development. Pre-service teachers employed formative assessments to divide students into groups of high, medium and low ability levels. In class, they can practice teaching basic core knowledge as well as more advanced content, which exhibited the feature of a differentiated class. Moreover, this course offered a rare opportunity for pre-service teachers to experience leading a class of students for eight consecutive weeks. The intensity of this teaching practice can be seen as a bridging course closing the gap between pre-service training and a full teaching load in an actual school setting. Originality/value: The guidelines of the new teacher education curriculum put emphasis on pre-service teachers gaining competence in teamwork, a goal rarely stressed in such courses. This design provides a real context for course-takers to explore co-teaching and experiment with the pedagogies and strategies they can deliver together in class. As part of this process, professional learning communities work as a platform and catalyst for young teachers to explore fresh ideas and accustom themselves to this cooperative culture for future lifelong teaching professional development.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00027篇名：《教師專業素養指引與師資職前教育課程基準》實施之影響、挑戰與因應：中等師資培育機構之觀點並列篇名：THE INFLUENCE, CHALLENGES AND COPING STRATEGIES OF THE ”STANDARD FOR PRE-SERVICE TEACHER EDUCATION CURRICULUM” FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS作者：湯家偉(Chia-Wei Tang);王俐淳(Li-Chun Wang)關鍵字：中等學校師資培育;教師專業素養;課程基準;因應策略;secondary school teacher education;teacher professional standards;curriculum baseline;coping strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在探討《中華民國教師專業素養指引—師資職前教育階段暨師資職前教育課程基準》實施後，師培機構在師資職前課程是否做出相對應的改變及變革過程中所面臨的挑戰、問題與因應策略。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採立意取樣方式，依學校所在區域、學校類型就40所中等師資培育機構抽取一半，並以其機構主管及課程承辦人員為對象，合計40位，進行半結構式訪談。研究發現或結論：1.師培機構的課程改革投入程度有落差，而主管的領導、教師的投入、學生的引導以及甄選的配套是課程變革落實與否的關鍵。2.師培機構對《教師專業素養暨課程基準》中的「各專業課程類別最低學分數的增減」特別是實踐課程的學分數規定以及「實地服務時數取消」較有異議。3.師培機構在實施《教師專業素養暨課程基準》的過程中面臨「行政端」、「教師端」、「學生端」的困境與挑戰，部分機構亦發展出因應策略。4.師培機構面臨之困境體現於行政、教師與學生三個部分，且部分存在機構屬性之差異。研究原創性／價值：1.目前相關研究仍多為單一學校為個案進行個案經驗分享或學者意見評論，雖有一篇實證研究，但缺乏以師資培育機構觀點之實證文獻。2.本研究以20所中等師資培育機構之觀點，探討各師培機構的實施作法、問題以及因應策略，有助於檢討此次變革的實施現況，並彙整相關因應策略與建議供師培機構端或是主管機關政策修正之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examines whether teacher education institutions have made curriculum changes conforming to Taiwan (R.O.C.)'s policy document ”Guidance for R.O.C. teacher professional competence- Standard for pre-service teacher education curriculum”. This study also investigates the challenges, and coping strategies experienced by institutions in the process of implementing the policy. Design/methodology/approach: Through a purposive sampling, we selected 20 secondary school teacher education institutions (out of the 40 institutions in Taiwan) based on the regions and the characteristics of the institutions. Accordingly, 20 directors and 20 administrative staff from these institutions were interviewed in a semi-structured manner. Findings/results: 1. There were varying levels of commitment to the curriculum reform in the teacher education institutions. The keys to the full implementation of the curriculum change were the leadership of supervisors, the commitment of teachers, the guidance for students, and the supplementary measures for screening and selection. 2. The teacher education institutions generally disagreed an element of the policy, that of an ”increase or decrease of the minimum number of credits for each professional course category”, most notably the requirement of the number of credits for practical courses and the elimination of field service hours. 3. In the process of implementing the policy, teacher education institutions experienced challenges and difficulties at administration, teacher, and student levels. We observed that some institutions developed their own coping strategies. 4. These challenges at administration, teacher, and student levels forced challenges for each institution that varied depending on their characteristics. Originality/value: 1. Previous studies investigated single-school cases in terms of experience sharing and scholarly critique. Although there is one empirical study, there is still a lack of empirical literature from the perspective of teacher education institutions. 2. This study examines the implementation methods, problems, and coping strategies from the perspectives of 20 secondary school teacher education institutions, which gives a broader perspective of the status of the implementation of this curriculum reform, and compiles relevant strategies and suggestions as a reference for teacher education institutions and government authorities for policy revision.起始頁-結束頁：61-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00038篇名：評介《教師能動性：生態取向》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”TEACHER AGENCY: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH.”作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：95-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00049篇名：COVID-19下臺師大的遠距教學經驗與省思並列篇名：COVID-19: A DISTANCE LEARNING EXPERIENCE AND REFLECTION AT NTNU作者：陳昭珍(Chao-Chen Chen);徐芝君(Chih-Chun Hsu);洪嘉馡(Jia-Fei Hong);胡衍南(Yan-Nan Hu)關鍵字：高等教育;遠距教學;數位學習;新冠肺炎;higher education;distance learning;digital learning;COVID-19期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：因為COVID-19疫情爆發，全球高等教育機構在2020年面臨前所未有的挑戰；很多學校關閉校園，暫停教學與學習活動，也有很多學校轉而改採遠距教學，讓學習不中斷。本研究之目的，主要在探討全球高等教育在COVID-19下所面臨的學習問題，以及臺師大在疫情間實施全校遠距教學的經驗與省思。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究蒐集2020年聯合國教科文組織UNESCO（2020）、全球大學學會（International Association of Universities, IAU）、UNESCO-IESALC等國際組織的調查報告重點整理，以掌握疫情期間國際高等教育現況；其次，本研究設計問卷，調查校內學生與教師對遠距教學的反應。研究發現或結論：研究發現，學生在疫情期間以在家中上網比例最高，對於學校採用遠距教學大多能支持，且認為自己有學到新科技，此外認為遠距教學最需改善的是教師使用的視訊平台太多、網速，以及教師的教學法；而在教師調查方面，多數教師認為經過這次的挑戰已能掌握遠距教學，但未來仍將以實體教學為主。研究原創性／價值：由於臺師大是臺灣在109學年度第二學期疫情緊繃期間，唯一短期關閉實體教室，全校採遠距教學三週的大學，因此臺師大的案例，非常值得臺灣高等教育未來發展及因應疫情之參考。教育政策建議或實務意涵當全球多數國家都已經因疫情嚴峻而全面轉為數位教學的同時，臺灣因疫情相對緩和，大學未全面實施遠距教學，因此可能成為全球大學數位能力最不足的國家，無法面對高等教育的數位競爭以及隨時可能再來疫情，建議大學及教育當局對於高等教育數位學程有更積極的規劃。英文摘要：Purpose: Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, higher education institutions around the world are facing unprecedented challenges in the year 2020; many schools have closed their campuses and suspended teaching and learning activities, while others have switched to distance learning to keep learning going. The purpose of this study is to explore the learning problems faced by higher education worldwide in the face of COVID-19, as well as NTNU's experiences with and reflections on the implementation of whole-campus distance learning. Design/methodology/approach: This study first collects survey reports from UNESCO (2020), the International Association of Universities (IAU), UNESCO-IESALC, and other international organizations to understand the current situation of international higher education during the pandemic. Second, this study designed a questionnaire to investigate the responses of students and teachers to distance learning at NTNU. Findings/results: The study found that students had the highest percentage of Internet access at home during the pandemic, were supportive of the school's adoption of distance learning, and believed they had learned new learning technologies. Other than this, the things that they felt most needed improvement were the excessive number of video platforms used by teachers, internet speeds, and teachers' pedagogical methods. In the teacher survey, most of the teachers felt that they had mastered distance teaching after this challenge, but that they would focus on physical teaching in the future. Originality/value: Since NTNU was the only university in Taiwan that closed its classrooms for a short period of time and taught by distance learning for three weeks during the pandemic crisis in the second semester of the 2020 academic year, with the entire school moving to distance learning for three weeks, the NTNU case is a valuable reference for the future development of higher education in Taiwan and pandemic responses. Implications for Policy/Practice: While most countries around the world have already switched to strict, complete digital learning due to the severity of the pandemic, Taiwan has not yet fully implemented distance learning due to the relatively mild pandemic, and thus may become the country with the least university digital capacity in the world. Unable to face the digital competition in higher education and the possibility of a renewed pandemic that could strike at any time, it is recommended that universities and education authorities plan more proactively for digital programs in higher education.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202103_29(1).000110篇名：遇見與看見－校園防疫中高等教育學務工作的淬煉並列篇名：FACING AND FORESEEING CHALLENGES IN STUDENT AFFAIRS-THE REFINEMENT OF STUDENT AFFAIRS IN CAMPUS EPIDEMIC PREVENTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION作者：林玫君(Mei-Chun Lin);李立旻(Li-Min Lee);劉若蘭(Ruo-Lan Liu);李育齊(Yu-Chi Li)關鍵字：新冠肺炎;防疫工作;學務工作;高等教育;COVID-19;epidemic prevention;student affairs;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究聚焦疫情對高教機構的影響，探討一所學校學務處防疫經驗與歷程，從大學學務工作的角度切入，探討本次COVID-19疫情對推展學務工作的困難與挑戰及因應策略與措施，並探究學務處組織功能轉變、理念落實，及疫情對學務人員的角色與功能影響等議題，展現創新防疫的積極作為與成果，具有提供高等教育機構參考提升防疫措施與學務專業的價值。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以個案研究法彙整分析學務人員執行防疫工作的經驗，研究對象包含個案學校5位學務處中階主管及7位職員，其中中階主管運用深度訪談法、職員則使用焦點團體法蒐集資料。此外並參照31次防疫會議紀錄進行交叉驗證，確立本研究信實度。研究發現或結論：本研究依據質性資料分析結果，歸納「覺知：展現學務人的敏感度」、「實踐：凸顯學務工作的重要性」、「跨越：探索學務工作的著力點」、「看見：找回學務人心中的價值」等四項主題，及項下22個分析項目，透過學務人員展現對於疫情的敏感度及超前佈署的覺知與行動，全面聚焦從學生輔導、活動調整以及社區關懷三方面研擬方案；此外在政府主管機關及學務領導者引導下，確立校園防疫著力點，學務人員亦發揮專業並提高科技使用度，規劃疫情安心就學等具體措施，凸顯學務工作的重要性，同時更認同身為學務人員的價值且以學生為中心、重視團隊合作以及超前部署的核心理念。研究原創性／價值：新冠肺炎（COVID-19）疫情影響全球，臺灣防疫措施受到國際關注，為兼顧疫情控制與維持學習生活，規劃合宜的防疫措施是各級學校2020年的重要挑戰。遺憾的是，個案學校於3月底、4月初共有兩名學生確診新冠肺炎，此意外的衝擊造成學校師生的恐慌以及執行防疫工作的危機，同時考驗學務主管的行政作為與學務人員的危機處理與反應能力。個案學校亦從狀況不明的情況下，透過經驗的累積，發展嶄新學務工作處遇流程，校園防疫經驗值得與其他高等教育機構分享與交流。本研究蒐集防疫期間站在第一線人員內在經驗與實際作為，並透過質性分析建構學務人員在疫情衝擊中，專業成長的轉化模式，具有研究創新的價值。教育政策建議或實務意涵：針對研究分析結果，本研究提出對學務人員及校園防疫之建議，包含學務人員應針對科技與網路社群經營能力提升專業，另在校園防疫期間應針對學生需求規劃創新且彈性之學生服務與輔導方案，最後，建議學校進一步推動與社區的緊密連結、持續凝聚共識、建立學校與社區友善關係，共同為臺灣社區防疫而努力。英文摘要：Purpose: This research aims to explore a university's experience and processes in epidemic preventions. This research looks into the effects of COVID-19 on higher education institutes-how the structure of the Office of Student Affairs changed, how ideas are implemented, and how the role of student affair personnel is affected. This research also displays the creativity and proactive measures along with epidemic prevention results in attempt to share with other higher education institutions in Taiwan the preventative measures and the value of Student Affairs. Design/methodology/approach: Through the qualitative research of narrative inquiry, this research gathers the experiences of student affairs personnel in epidemic prevention through case study. Student affairs personnel include five managers that went through in-depth interviews and seven staff members that was put in focus groups. Other than that, thirty-one meeting minutes were used for cross examination to establish the validity of this research. Findings/results: According to the qualitative analysis of the transcript, the results of this study are divided into the following four themes-Awareness: The Sensitivity of the Student Affair Personnel; Realization: The Importance of Student Affairs; Connection: The Search for a Focus; Vision: Redefining the Core Value of Student Affairs. Within the four themes there are also twenty-two items for analysis. With advance preparation, the student affairs personnel have been sensitive in actively integrating different roles-focusing on student advising, activity rearrangement, and community care. Additionally, with the guidance of the government and student affairs professionals, the university was able to provide long-distance learning and other preventative measures with the help of technology. This increased the value of student affairs by confirming the core values of being student centered, embracing team work, and advance preparation. Originality/value: With the COVID-19 epidemic affecting the world, Taiwan's precautionary measures against COVID-19 aroused much global attention. In order to control the spread of COVID-19 while maintaining student learning at the same time, taking appropriate precautions is key to all schools in 2020. Unfortunately, the university learned of two confirmed COVID-19 cases late March and early April. The news brought panic throughout the school and created epidemic prevention crisis for the university. As the university was able to implement new interventions, the gained experiences are worth sharing amongst other higher education institutes. Implications for Policy/Practice: According to the research results, suggestions for student affairs personnel and campus epidemic prevention is provided-including the how student affairs personnel should increase literacy in technology and social media and professional ability. Finally, it is suggested that universities step forward to connect closely with the community. Creating consensus and building a friendly relationship between universities and communities enables teamwork to better Taiwan's epidemic prevention.起始頁-結束頁：25-27+29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202103_29(1).000211篇名：COVID-19疫情下同步與非同步資訊科技輔助的大學遠距英語文教學並列篇名：TECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED SYNCHRONOUS AND ASYNCHRONOUS COLLEGE DISTANCE ENGLISH TEACHING AMID COVID-19作者：羅方吟(Fang-ying Riva Lo);陳政煥(Cheng-Huan Chen)關鍵字：科技輔助語文教學;遠距教學;同步教學;非同步教學;COVID-19;technology-enhanced language learning;distance learning;synchronous learning;asynchronous learning;COVID-19期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在探討臺灣大學生由於COVID-19疫情影響使得學習模式被迫由原傳統課室的實體課程改為遠距課程，其同時參與同步與非同步資訊科技輔助通識英語文課程的學習成就、學習態度、學習觀點、及未來教學的反思及挑戰。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以兩班大一通識英語文課程90位同學作為研究對象，透過英語文學習成就測驗與因應疫情設計的課程學習問卷調查，探討學生在疫情下遠距課程的學習成就、學習態度等面向，同時搭配半結構深度訪談瞭解學生的觀點，透過紮根理論反覆閱讀分析逐字稿，探究大學生的質性回饋。本研究以混合研究法收集並分析量化及質性資料，經交叉分析比對，冀望達到質量相輔之研究結果。研究發現或結論：修課學生在疫情中非自願情況下參與8週遠距課程後，英語文學習成就前後測的進步值達到顯著差異，對於疫情下的遠距教學在易用性、有用性、互動性等面向持較為正面的學習態度。另外，曾重複觀看教學影片的學生，對於每週線上小考的形成性評量持較為認同的態度；低英語文學習成就的學生，對於「線上聊天室留言互動功能」持高度認同。學生的學習觀點可歸納出以下五點：（1）線上課程會放大實體課程中相同、常見的學習問題；（2）線上教學能促進學生適性學習的發展；（3）疫情會加速無所不在的學習需求及接受度；（4）疫情提升自主學習為未來關鍵能力的意識；（5）疫情下的學習反應出實體校園無法被完全取代。研究原創性／價值：2020年之前的遠距教學文獻，鮮少探討因應重大疫情所採用的教學模式；再者，臺灣受疫情影響相對較低，為全球少數仍能維持常態教學的國家，但這也意味著另一個可能的挑戰：當全球積極發展遠距教學的同時，臺灣因無長時間全面施行線上課程之壓力，在與全球相比迫切性較低的情況下，累積的經驗和相關的探討可能不如其他全面施行遠距教學之國家的進展。此研究於短時間內，因應疫情調整原實體課程為遠距教學，並完整施行8週以上之大學遠距英語文課程，希冀透過實證研究，提供後疫情時代英語文遠距教學設計之參考。另外，本研究學生來自各院系，研究結果呈現出大學學生對於遠距英語文課程綜觀的縮影。教育政策建議或實務意涵：本研究對未來後疫情時代英語文教學設計，提出以下幾點建議：第一，線上及實體英語文課程均有其不可取代之優勢，建議採用混成式學習，強化各教學模式之正向學習成效；第二，語言教師應思考如何提升線上互動，進而形成緊密的學習社群；第三，教導學生自我導向學習的能力，培養學生未來自主學習的終身學習能力；第四，善用教育科技強化教學穿透力，提升學生學習動機和興趣。英文摘要：Purpose: This study aims to explore the English learning achievement, learning attitudes, perceptions, and challenges faced by college students experiencing both synchronous and asynchronous distance English teaching in Taiwan during the COVID-19 pandemic. Design/methodology/approach: Ninety freshman students in two General English classes of a university in central Taiwan participated in this study. Quantitative data of pre- and post-English achievement tests and a learning attitude questionnaire designed for the pandemic were collected to analyze the learning achievement and learning attitudes of the students. In-depth semi-structured interviews were also conducted and analyzed through Grounded Theory to probe into the perceptions of students pertaining to distance English teaching amid the COVID-19 pandemic. This study adopted a mixed-method research strategy to cross-validate both qualitative and quantitative data in order to further strengthen its findings. Findings/results: Upon completing an eight-week course of involuntary distance learning, the difference between the pre- and post-English achievement test results of the participating students was significant. The learning attitude of the students was relatively positive for the constructs of ease of use, usefulness, and level of interaction. Moreover, students who re-visited teaching videos developed a more positive attitude toward their online weekly formative assessments. Low achievers with regard to their English ability held a highly positive attitude toward the text-based message function on the synchronous meeting software. Other qualitative findings include the following: (1) online courses could amplify some existing problems occurring within physical classrooms, (2) online learning will facilitate the adaptive learning experience, (3) the pandemic will expedite the need for, and acceptance of, ubiquitous learning, (4) the pandemic raises awareness of the reality that autonomous learning will be key for future learning, and (5) the physical campus cannot 100% be replaced by online learning, as reflected in the learning experience deriving from the pandemic. Originality/value: Distance learning has long been available. However, prior to the year 2020, very little research had been conducted on distance learning during pandemics. Furthermore, due to the low number of cases of COVID-19 in Taiwan, Taiwan has been one of the few countries worldwide that could maintain physical classroom teaching. This phenomenon, in the meantime, could also potentially lead to the level of digital learning related experience and research in Taiwan falling behind that of other countries in the long term due to a relatively lower need for executing distance learning. This empirical research attempts to provide evidence-based results for future reference on pedagogy design of distance English teaching in the post-pandemic era. The group of participants involved in this study was composed of students from various colleges, consequently revealing more comprehensive perceptions of college students toward distance education. Implications for Policy/Practice: The implications of this study include the following. First, both online and physical learning have their merits. Thus, blended learning could be an ideal mode for retaining the essence of both online and onsite teaching. Second, language instructors should strengthen online interactions to build an active learning community. Third, students need to be taught self-directed learning skills so that they can become autonomous, independent life-long learners. Fourth, educational technology should be employed to enhance teaching impact and intensify learning motivation and interests.起始頁-結束頁：69-71+73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202103_29(1).000312篇名：評介《民主專業主義：公民參與與專業倫理、認同與實作的再建構》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”DEMOCRATIC PROFESSIONALISM: CITIZEN PARTICIPATION AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS, IDENTITY, AND PRACTICE”作者：陳佩英(Pei-Ying Chen);柯喬元(Chiao-Yuan Ko)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：115-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202103_29(1).000401篇名：大專院校學生的行動載具使用態度研究並列篇名：An Investigation of College Students' Attitude toward the Usage of Mobile Devices作者：姜則維(Tse-Wei Chiang);陳昭秀(Chao-Hsiu Chen)關鍵字：大專院校生;行動學習;行動載具;態度;college students;mobile learning;mobile devices;attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著行動載具的快速普及，行動學習成為教育的熱門議題。本研究旨在了解不同性別大專院校學生，以及大學生與研究生在行動載具使用態度的差異。本研究透過網路社群發放問卷，共回收141份有效問卷，利用描述性統計、探索性因素分析及單因子變異數分析來分析資料。結果發現：一、本研究問卷歸納出三項因素：社群應用（如通訊與分享功能）、工具應用（如利用載具軟體存取檔案資訊以便瀏覽）及日常應用（如使用行事曆排定個人行程）；二、不同性別的大專院校生在行動載具使用的態度並無明顯差異；三、研究生與大學生在行動載具使用的態度則有明顯差異。英文摘要：Owing to the rapid development of mobile technology, mobile / ubiquitous learning has become an important educational research topic. This study investigates whether college students of different genders and of different grade levels present different attitudes toward the mobile-device use. Questionnaires were distributed on various social-network sites, and 141 valid responses were obtained. Methods including descriptive statistics, exploratory factor analysis (EFA), and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to analyze the collected data. The findings are as follows: 1. the EFA specifies three factors (i.e. social network, tools, and routine use); 2. college students of different genders show no significant difference in attitudes toward the mobile-device use; and 3. graduate students and undergraduate students present significant differences in mobile-device attitudes.起始頁-結束頁：45-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130405020032篇名：國民小學代數動態評量的發展與應用並列篇名：Development of an Algebra Dynamic Assessment System作者：孫慧茹(Hui-Ju Sun);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung)關鍵字：代數;成長斜率;動態評量;試算表;algebra;growth slope;dynamic assessment;spreadsheets期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：代數概念的學習是孩童學習數學歷程中非常關鍵的一環，也是基礎數學教育的核心，而試算表融入數學課程對協助中、小學生了解數學樣式及函數頗具潛力。本研究採準實驗研究設計，利用試算表多重表徵與函數計算等功能，設計以試算表為輔具的系列代數作業，發展國民小學代數動態評量系統（Algebra Dynamic Assessment System, ALDAS），以探討試算表融入代數動態評量系統的介入效益。實驗介入以線上解題的循序回饋，支援學生適切應用試算表的多重表徵和運算功能，實驗研究樣本為動態評量組（33人）與一般教學組（26人）共59位六年級學生，在介入前、中、後共進行三次數學自律策略覺察與數量關係能力評量，資料分析採HLM組別模式檢驗實驗處理對於實驗組學生的介入效益。結果顯示，實驗組學生數量關係能力成長顯著高於控制組（0.2個標準差），組別可解釋成長斜率36%的變異量，呈現試算表融入中、小學代數學習的積極潛力。英文摘要：Algebra is the core of mathematics education because it can help students to integrate the mathematics content of school. Spreadsheet is a powerful tool to explore, particularly on algebra. The purpose of this study was to develop an algebra dynamic assessment system (ALDAS). The ALDAS integrated spreadsheets into algebra learning process for 6th graders. Thirty-three participants were assigned to the experimental group and the other twenty-six were the control group. The experimental group worked on algebra with spreadsheet. The criterion variable for detecting the effects of ALDAS was the growth slope on mathematics performance in a 3 months interval. The results indicated that students' mathematical ability were effectively promoted, through the ALDAS. The implications of the results were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130405020043篇名：體感語音式操控學習策略對提升英文影片理解之研究並列篇名：A Gesture-speech Navigated Learning Strategy for Improving the Comprehension of English Videos作者：許殷嘉(Yin-Chia Hsu);洪逸群(I-Chun Hung);陳年興(Nian-Shing Chen)關鍵字：自然人機介面;認知負荷;語言學習策略;學習成效;體感操作;natural user interface;cognitive load;language learning strategies;learning performance;gesture-based oper期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：由於自然人機介面技術的成熟，學習者得以利用體感操作方式進行以肢體活動為媒介之學習應用，藉此讓學習者使用更直覺、自然的方式與學習系統互動。在英文影片學習中，目前仍以鍵盤與滑鼠操作為主，雖然此類操作介面已被廣泛應用，對於多媒體學習而言，直覺性與操作性依然有改善空間。因此，本研究將自然人機介面與語言學習策略進行結合，進而提出「體感語音式操控學習策略」用以促進學習者於觀看英文學習影片時對內容之理解。本研究招募75位大學生與碩士生為實驗對象，結果顯示，在單純改變操作介面的體感操作學習方式下，能改善學習者於學習過程中之認知負荷。學習者在體感語音式操控學習策略的輔助下，學習成效獲得顯著地提升；相較於僅改變操作介面之體感操作學習方式，認知負荷並無顯著地增加。英文摘要：Learners now can use gestures and speech to intuitively interact with learning system because of the spectacular progress of natural user interface (NUI) technology. Compared with keyboard / mouse, NUI make the interaction between learners and learning system more naturally. Although keyboard / mouse has been widely adopted for a long time, there still has room for improving intuition and operational experience in a multimedia learning environment. This study therefore explores and proposes a new approach by integrating language learning strategies into a gesture-speech navigated learning system for improving learners' comprehension of English videos content. An experiment was conducted with 75 undergraduate and postgraduate students. The result showed that the gesture-speech navigated learning strategy can significantly improve learners' comprehension of English videos. Meanwhile, the cognitive load is also under control and acceptable without significant increase.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130105010014篇名：國民小學高年級學生對互動式電子白板教學之學習動機與滿意度研究並列篇名：Senior Students' Learning Motivation and Satisfaction of Using Interactive Whiteboards in Elementary Schools作者：洪淑芬(Shu-Fen Hung);楊崇宏(Chorng-Horng Yang);周照偉(Chao-Wei Chou);林建宏(Jiann-Horng Lin);蔡賢亮(Hsien-Leing Tsai)關鍵字：互動式電子白板;數位學習;學習動機;學習滿意度;interactive whiteboard;digital learning;learning motivation;learning satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國民小學（下稱國小）高年級學生在採用電子白板於教學活動時，對其學習動機及學習滿意度之影響與關聯，並分析學生的不同背景變項，對電子白板教學的學習動機與學習滿意度的差異及影響。本研究採用問卷調查法進行資料蒐集，以「電子白板融入教學對國小高年級學童學習動機及學習滿意度問卷」為研究工具。並選定高雄縣公立國小之高年級學生為研究對象，採分層叢集抽樣方式，取得有效樣本共720份。所得資料以描述性統計、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、相關分析、逐步多元迴歸分析等統計方法加以分析，研究結論如下：一、電子白板融入教學對國小高年級學生之學習動機與學習滿意度是趨於正向，因此電子白板對教學具有明顯的助益；二、國小高年級學生的背景變項中，不同使用電子白板的經驗及不同使用電腦資訊科技能力之學生，其學習動機與學習滿意度具有顯著的差異，因此學生資訊科技能力的建立與提升，是有效導入電子白板教學的重要因素；三、整體的學習動機與學習滿意度之間呈現高度正相關；四、使用電子白板教學時，學生的學習動機對其學習滿意度具有明顯的預測力。本研究的研究結果對教育相關單位提供許多建設性的建議，並指出多項未來值得深入探討的研究議題，可供後續研究者參考。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the fifth and sixth grade students' learning motivation and satisfaction with respect to the students' background factors as the interactive whiteboard (IWB) is adopted into teaching activities in elementary schools. The correlation between learning motivation and learning satisfaction of the students who learn with interactive whiteboards is also explored. In order to collect the required data for this study, a questionnaire was developed, and the population of the questionnaire is the whole senior students in the public elementary schools in Kaohsiung County. By making use of stratified random sampling, 720 valid samples were drawn from the population for this study. We analyzed the collected data by descriptive statistics, t-test, ANOVA, correlation analysis, stepwise multiple regression analysis and other statistical methods. The results of this study include: 1. Using interactive whiteboard in teaching activities can definitely improve students' learning motivation and learning satisfaction; 2. The students' experience of using IWB and ability of using computers are two dominate background factors, which strongly affect their learning motivation and satisfaction. Thus, enhancing the student's ability of using computers can facilitate the successful introduction of IWB into elementary schools; 3. For the fifth and sixth grade students who use IWB, our findings revealed that there was positive correlation between learning motivation and learning satisfaction; 4. The learning motivation is a significant predictor for learning satisfaction for the students using IWB in teaching activities. The results of this study may help administrators and teachers in elementary schools successfully introduce the IWBs into teaching activities, and also provide researchers with valuable experience and several interesting topics for their future studies.起始頁-結束頁：29-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130105010025篇名：昆蟲知識學習之虛擬實境教材設計與ARCS探究並列篇名：Investigation on Materials Design of Virtual Reality and ARCS for Understanding Insects作者：陳勇全(Yung-Chuan Chen);廖冠智(Guan-Ze Liao)關鍵字：ARCS;昆蟲學習;教材設計;虛擬實境;學習動機;ARCS;understanding insects;materials design;virtual Reality;learning motivations期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在臺灣的國小自然科課程中，認識與昆蟲知識學習方式多以蟲體標本、影像圖片和觀察記錄為主，本研究以Unity3D實作虛擬實境之認識昆蟲教材，結合挑戰任務、背景故事及知識問答方式，分兩階段施測共引導73名學童學習，最後探究ARCS學習動機之表現與深入觀察其操作歷程。研究結果發現，結合虛擬實境易於輔助學童認識昆蟲構造和生長過程，遊戲操作能引發學童探索樂趣與學習動機，期望能將虛擬實境的互動學習設計運用於不同學科參考。英文摘要：Generally speaking, insect education is mainly insect specimens, videos, pictures and observations as a means of understanding insect in Natural Science in Elementary School of Taiwan. The study is aimed at implementing the learning materials of understanding insects with virtual reality by Unity3D, and leading 73 elementary school students into game-based learning via learning challenges, background stories, and knowledge quizzes. The study had investigated the effect of ARCS learning motivation, and in-depth observed on the circumstance in operative process. Research findings are following as VR learning of the insects knowledge content enables students to clearly distinguish between the different of them, and providing the actual operation can cause the interest of the students. The authors hope that the research findings could be regarded as the design references for virtual reality learning in the variety of disciplines.起始頁-結束頁：51-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20130105010036篇名：應用自我調節學習於英語寫作成效之研究並列篇名：Investigate Learning Effectiveness by Applying Self-regulated Learning on English Writing作者：黃鈺晴(Anna Yu-Qing Huang);楊鎮華(Stephen Jen-Hua Yang);黃正旭(Jeff Cheng-Hus Huang);黃星雅(Sing-Ya Huang)關鍵字：自我調節學習;評量準則;後設認知;數位學習歷程檔;學習成效;self-regulated learning;rubric;meta-cognition;ePortfolios;learning effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：5卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探究自我調節學習應用在大學生英語寫作之動機與成效。在數位學習歷程檔（ePortfolio）透過自我調節學習引導學生學習英語寫作，藉此觀察學生學習動機與成效。本研究的實驗對象共有22位大學生，分實驗組與控制組進行，實驗組導入自我調節學習歷程，控制組採用一般寫作觀摩模式。實驗結果顯示，實驗組的學習成效與動機皆顯著優於控制組之表現。英文摘要：This research investigates the learning effectiveness and learning motivation of English writing by applying self-regulated learning. In order to observe the learning effectiveness and learning motivation of students, we are using self-regulated learning to guide the students' learning of English writing in ePortfolio platform. The participants of this research have twenty-three college students which were divided into experimental group and control group. The ePortfolio platform used by experimental group students introduces self-regulated learning. The ePortfolio platform used by control group students applies observation learning. The experimental results have shown that the learning effectiveness and learning motivations of experimental group students have significant progress than control group students.起始頁-結束頁：69-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201301050100401篇名：艾利風災中國中原住民學生的創傷、因應與復原歷程分析－以學校為基礎的災後心理復原工作並列篇名：Junior High School Students' Psychological Recovery after Ay-Li Typhoon: A School-Based Case Study作者：謝淑敏(Shu-Ming Hsieh)關鍵字：天然災難;心理創傷經驗;災後心理輔導;復原力;disaster;PTSD;rehabilitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：35期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採質性研究法，探討艾莉風災中國中原住民學生的創傷、因應與復原歷程。研究者於民國93年八月參與艾莉風災的災後心理輔導工作，並於風災20個月後重回災區，了解在風災中有創傷經驗的原住民學生因應與復原歷程。本研究欲回答以下問題：（1）風災後國中學生對風災的傷害和困境的主觀經驗為何；（2）風災後學生的身心復原狀況及得到的協助為何；（3）災後原住民學生的因應與調適歷程為何？原住民文化與族群的影響為何？研究對象為7名經歷家屋毀損、親人死亡的國中學生及2名陪伴學生走過風災的國中教師，經半結構訪談後，以架構取向（Framework Approach）質的分析方式進行資料分析，研究結果依土石流造成的災難、當時的身心反應、逃難與暫時安置；災後的心理創傷與復原、安置整修與重建、他人協助；個人的因應與調適、原住民文化的解釋與處理，族群與宗教的影響加以分析。透過以學校為基礎的災後心理重建工作，有助於學生從創傷中復原與成長。未來並可針對此一災後復原模式作進一步實徵研究。英文摘要：This study was based on a damaged junior high school in Taiwan after the aftermath of Ay-Li Typhoon. The aim of this study was to explore how victims of the Ay-Li Typhoon faced and experienced during the recovery process in 2004-2006. The author wants to know how the school-based interventions were during after-disaster crisis management and the recovery process. Seven aboriginal students who were living in the damaged area and two of students’ teachers were interviewed. Qualitative research approach was adopted, with interviews and documentary analysis as data collection methods. The researcher interviewed seven students who meet the criteria for in-depth interviews in June 2006. All student interviewees lost family members in Ay-Li Typhoon, and their houses were damaged, and the roads of their houses were damaged and covered by mudflows and landslides. They experienced post-traumatic stress syndromes. The researchers also interviewed two teachers who accompanied the students during the disaster. Results reveal students’ traumatic and resilient experiences. The results are divided into nine parts, namely: the disaster caused by the typhoon, psychological reactions during the disaster; the traumas after the disaster, resettlement and reconstructions after the disaster, personal coping and adaptation, others’ assistance, the interpretation and coping of the disaster from the aboriginal cultural context, use of indigenous cultural ceremonies in the treatment of trauma, and how the students’ aboriginal identity helps them. A detailed descriptions and illustrative quotations from the participants were presented and discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：脊髓損傷者之就業歷程探討並列篇名：Employment Process of People with Spinal Injury作者：張千惠(Sophie Chien-Huey Chang);吳佩霖(Pei-Lin Wu);梁忠詔(Chung-Chao Liang)關鍵字：脊髓損傷者;就業歷程;穩定就業;employment process;people with spinal injury;stable employment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：35期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的是探究：在職中的脊髓損傷者之就業歷程。就業對於脊髓損傷者的重要性就如同對所有非身心障礙者一樣，因此本研究針對三位穩定就業的研究參與者之生命故事萃取具特別意義的經驗內涵，並進行跨個案分析，以了解其就業歷程。除呈現脊髓損傷者的就業歷程分析，研究者也試著與相關文獻結果進行呼應與討論，藉此連結相關學術資料與本次研究場域所見，希望針對這些生命故事與知識進行統整與探索。訪談大綱、訪談日誌及觀察筆記為主要的資料蒐集工具。並以多方資料的核對、同儕的檢定、研究者與參與者的友善關係，以及研究參與者的檢核等四種方法建立研究信實度。本研究結果發現：每個參與者在受傷前，原本各自處於不同的生涯發展階段，因為傷害而產生一個循環，開始新的成長、探索與建立階段。依據編碼結果，本研究發現：脊髓損傷的受訪者之就業歷程，可分為七個階段，分別為「 受傷前的個人狀況與未來規劃」、「受傷的衝擊」、「心理調適階段」、「就業前調適，邁向獨立生活」、「就業探索」、「就業定向」，與「受傷對人生影響及未來規劃」。最後，研究者亦提出未來研究方向及本研究限制。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the employment process of people with spinal injury who are currently employed. It is as important for people with spinal injury to be employed as non-disabled ones. In this study, three participants with stable employment were selected to explore their meaningful life stories and experiences. The cross-case analysis was performed to understand their employment process. In addition to the analysis of employment process, this study attempted to discuss the findings by incorporating and linking relevant literatures with what was observed in the field. The semi-structured interview guide, the reflective journals and observation notes were major sources of data. To ensure the reliabilities among the researchers, triangulation, peer examination, positive relationship with the participants, and participants’ review of transcripts were used. The findings showed that (a) every participant was originally at different career development stage before the occurrence of spinal injury, and (b) their spinal injury resulted in a new cycle, including the stages of initiation of new growth, exploration, and establishment. According to the coded data, the employment process of participants with spinal injury can be divided into 7 phases: Pre-injury personal status and future planning, impact of injury, psychological adjustment, pre-employment adjustment and stepping towards independent living, employment exploration, employment orientation, and impact of injury on life and future planning. The limitations and future directions of the study were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：39-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會3篇名：一位資深心理師的受苦生命經驗轉化與實踐之敘說研究並列篇名：A Senior Psychotherapist's Transformation and Practice of Suffering Life Experiences: A Narrative Analysis作者：陳增穎(Tseng-Ying Cheng);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Tien)關鍵字：心理師;受苦生命經驗;敘說;轉化;narrative analysis;senior psychotherapist;suffering life experiences;transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：35期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究的目的在瞭解資深心理師的受苦生命經驗內容、從受苦到轉化的歷程、經歷受苦生命經驗後的轉化，以及受苦生命經驗如何影響其在專業中的理念與行動。本研究採用敘說研究法，訪談一位資深心理師，讓故事反應受訪者的經驗，採用「整體—內容」資料分析方式，並就受訪心理師的敘說故事，針對四個研究問題提出主題整理與研究者的詮釋。從研究結果得知心理師遇到先生外遇、與幼女被迫分離、好友中傷，以及成為新主管的眼中釘。從受苦到轉化的歷程中，心理師放棄挽回先生的期待，對女兒的愛讓苦不再是苦，加上正向思考，做自己能做的事，更在朋友的幫助下重拾對人性的信心，不隨他人之惡起舞，即使外在受苦環境不變，內心仍可過喜悅自由的人生。經歷受苦生命經驗後，心理師得到的轉化是：用經歷過的苦難來幫助自己，走出受苦的速度越來越快，以及悟出生命與人際的智慧在「善了」。在實務應用方面，則真的懂得並接受個案的苦，對嚴重問題個案的敏銳度增加，處理個案的方式更多元，跨出單一角色的界限，涵容個案對心理師的傷害，掌握療癒的歷程，以更多的耐心、信心和希望陪個案走過痛苦。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was focused on a senior psychotherapist's suffering life experiences. It aimed to explore the psychotherapist’s transforming process and outcomes, and how the psychotherapist utilized these experiences into her clinical work. Based on the narrative analysis, the psychotherapist's three suffering life events were identified. The psychotherapist went through these suffering life experiences by abandoning old belief, doing what she could do, thinking positively, re-believing the good human nature. The transformations identified by the psychotherapist include: having more wisdom to cope with suffering experiences and keeping a harmonious relationship with life and others. The results showed that after having transformed from suffering life experiences, the psychotherapist (a) had more empathy, compassion, sensitivity and tolerance toward her clients, (b) used multiple methods and skills to help clients, and (c) served as a patient companion during the long process of psychotherapy.起始頁-結束頁：65-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：青少年外展工作成效指標之研究：以台北市少年服務中心外展社工員觀點為例並列篇名：Performance Indicators of Outreach Work with Adolescents: Social Workers’ Viewpoint in Taipei Adolescents Service Centers作者：胡中宜(Chung-Yi Hu)關鍵字：外展工作;成效指標;高危機青少年;at-risk adolescents;outreach work;performance indicators期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：35期出版年：2013中文摘要：青少年外展工作在台灣始於1978年主要透過非營利組織辦理，迄今已發展出不同的實務模式，但實務工作者一直苦無具體的指標可以呈現實際的服務成效，加上青少年的行為改變並非立竿見影，使得外展工作績效受到嚴峻挑戰。本研究目的旨在建立具體的外展工作成效指標，透過焦點團體進行資料收集，總計邀集四家少年服務中心19位外展社工員。結果建議未來輔導成效指標的訂定應考慮外展工作的不同方法，兼顧個案輔導與社區倡導；除重視服務個案人數外，更應包括青少年個案與其生態系統對象改變的成果。英文摘要：Since 1978, the non-profit organizations in Taiwan have started the outreach work for at-risk adolescents. Although the practitioners have built different outreach work models, there was lack of concrete indicators to evaluate the effectiveness of the work. In addition, the adolescents’ behavioral changes do not show up immediately. Taken together, this makes the evaluation rather challenging. The purpose of this study was to build performance indicators for the outreach work. A focus group with 19 outreach workers was formed. The results suggest several recommendations for future practice. First, the government should develop good indicators of guidance performance based on different strategies of outreach work. Secondly, individual intervention is as important as community advocacy. Lastly, the indicators should include not only the amount of service, but also positive changes of the clients and their ecosystems.起始頁-結束頁：95-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會5篇名：收入對婚姻權力及婚姻暴力的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Income on Marital Power and Marital Violence作者：楊連謙(Lien-Chien Yang);董秀珠(Hsiu-Chu Tung)關鍵字：收入;婚姻暴力;婚姻衝突;婚姻權力;精神分裂症;精神病;income;marital conflict;marital power;marital violence;mental illness;schizophrenia期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：35期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討夫妻的收入對婚姻暴力及權力的影響。研究者依夫妻之相對收入將70 對丈夫為施暴者的夫妻分為「夫收入高」（n = 25）、「收入相當」（n = 20）和「妻收入高」（n = 25）三組。研究者回溯參與者初次暴力發生前的衝突情景，用由事務、情感及資源三個權力維度組成的婚姻權力臨床量表評量其婚姻權力。研究者以統計方式比較這三組，描述其暴力特徵，並探討收入對婚姻權力的影響。統計結果可證實「在三個權力維度中，收入與資源權力最相關，且為正相關，而與情感權力相關性最低」的假設，並發現：（1）妻子的收入較高，尤其是貧窮與丈夫罹患精神病的夫妻，婚姻暴力較嚴重；（2）收入較高的妻子，婚姻權力也較大，但只有與資源維度是正相關；（3）「夫收入高」組的丈夫在三個權力維度上都是優勢，「妻收入高」組沒有任一維度為妻優勢；（4）「收入相當」的夫妻最平權；（5）不論妻子的收入高低，丈夫都情感權力優勢。本研究的發現可佐證「施權宰制」、「無權反撲」及「性別矯飾」等現象，並討論四個臨床處遇的要點：（1）處理婚姻權力結構的變動：揭露／面對舊結構、共構／適應新結構；（2）面對問題、修補關係；（3）喚醒女性關係權力潛能、教導男性獲得關係權力的能力；（4）更有意識地與配偶共同建構平權關係。英文摘要：This study explores the influence of spousal income on marital violence and marital power. Seventy couples with husband-to-wife aggression were recruited from a psychiatric center and were divided into three groups based on spousal income: (a) husbands higher in income (n = 25), (b) equal in income (n = 20), and (c) wives higher in income (n = 25). The authors tracked participant's marital conflicts which occurred before the first violent episode, and measured couple's marital power by the Marital Power Clinical Rating Scale, consisting of matter, affection, and resources subscales. Results supported the hypothesis that, among three components of marital power, spousal income positively correlated with resources power the most, yet correlated with affection power the least. The results also revealed that: (a) couples with wives higher in income suffered severer marital violence, especially when the couples were poor or the husbands had mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia, anxiety disorder); (b) the more the wife's income, the greater the marital power, but only the resources power positively correlated with her income; (c) couples with husbands higher in income were husband-dominant in all the three marital power dimensions, yet couples with wives higher in income were wife-dominant in none of the marital power dimensions; (d) couples with equal in income were the most egalitarian ones; (e) no matter how high the wife's income was, her husband had greater affection power. The clinical implications were discussed in four areas: (a) help couples deal with the changes in marital power structure; (b) help couples confront their problems and mend their marital relations; (c) develop wives' relational power, and teach husbands to obtain relational power; and (d) help couples coconstruct egalitarian relations in a conscious manner.起始頁-結束頁：121-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會6篇名：大學生人際挫折容忍力量表之發展並列篇名：Development of Interpersonal Frustration Tolerance Scale for College Students作者：黃韞臻(Yun-Chen Huang);林淑惠(Shu-Hui Lin)關鍵字：人際挫折容忍力;探索性因素分析;複核效化;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;cross-validation;exploratory factor analysis;interpersonal frustration tolerance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：35期出版年：2013中文摘要：若能透過一份有效研究工具，預先對於國內大學生的挫折忍受力進行瞭解，而後設法針對個體的狀況予以關切與協助，除能避免偏差行為的產生，亦能幫助其適應生活環境的刺激。因此，本研究主要目的在發展「大學生人際挫折容忍力量表」，以提供教育工作者做為評量大學生人際挫折容忍力之運用。在預試方面，以321名大學生為對象，經項目分析篩選題目；在正式樣本方面，採立意取樣方式以班級為單位，於中部地區11所大專院校進行量表的施測，共得有效樣本1,800名，隨機將之分為三組獨立樣本。先以第一組樣本進行探索性因素分析，瞭解量表的因素結構，共抽出三個因素，分別為行動取向、人際冒險，以及情緒感受，全量表的Cronbach's α係數達.88，各分量表信度則介於.75∼.83之間。再以第二組樣本進行驗證性因素分析，架構量表模式並確立整體契合度，以及考驗內在結構；最後以第三組為效度樣本，以複核效化檢驗量表之穩定性。研究結果發現，所編製之人際挫折容忍力量表模式具有良好之契合度、信度、建構效度及效標關聯效度，經複核效化檢驗亦顯示量表模式具有穩定性，是一個符合實證的測量工具，可供後續研究者利用以進行相關研究，或供諮商輔導機構作為實務上之應用。英文摘要：If students' frustration tolerance can be evaluated in advance, we can offer them the care and help in time. This can also help students avoid deviant behaviors and adapt to the new environment. The purpose of this study was to develop an interpersonal frustration tolerance scale for college students. The scale can help educators evaluate college students' interpersonal frustration tolerance. The pretest sample consisted of 321 college students. All items were screened via item analysis. Later, using purposive sampling method, a sample of 1,800 participants was collected from 11 colleges in central Taiwan. The sample was randomly divided into three sets. The first set was used to generate the factors through exploratory factor analysis. Three factors were extracted from the scale: action approach, interpersonal risk, and emotional feeling. The Cronbach's coefficient alpha for the entire scale was .88, and the alphas of three subscales ranged from .75 to .83. The second set was used for confirmatory factor analysis to examine the fit of the overall model and its internal structure. The third set was used for cross-validation. The study found that the developed new scale had a good model-data fit along with good reliability, construct validity, criterion-related validity, and stability based on cross-validation. We concluded that the ”Interpersonal Frustration Tolerance Scale for College Students” is an empirically-valid measure. It can be used for future research and practice in counseling and guidance-related institutions.起始頁-結束頁：147-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：書評：Election Promises, Party Behaviour and Voter Perceptions〔選舉承諾、政黨行為與選民感知〕作者：劉從葦期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：125-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：書評：The Disappearing Center: Engaged Citizens, Polarization, and American Democracy〔正在消失的中間—涉入政治的公民、極化與美國民主〕作者：蕭怡靖期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：131-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：教師社群互動對職場希望感與創新教學關係之探究：以幼教師觀點為例並列篇名：The Exploration of the Relationship between Teachers' Community Interaction for Workplace Promisingness and Innovative Teaching: The Example of Kindergarten Teachers Perception作者：劉秀枝(Hsiu-Chih Liu);黃秀霜(Hsiu-Shuang Huang)關鍵字：幼教師;教師社群互動;職場希望感;創新教學;kindergarten teachers;teacher community interaction;workplace promisingness;innovative teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在了解幼兒園教師參與園內教師社群互動對職場希望感與創新教學之關係。本研究以全國北、中、南、東立案之幼兒園教師為研究對象，針對11位幼教師進行訪談，研究結果發現：1.沒有參與社群，乃因園內沒有成立教師社群或規劃課程內容不同與時間點不能配合。2.參與教師社群互動可提升專業能力與聯絡感情。3.教師社群互動有助於學習區情境布置、教案設計與班級經營。4.教師社群互動可凝聚團體向心力。5.社群互動中認知與情感互動可以提升教師社群互動品質。6.教師社群互動能提升職場希望感與創新教學。7.教師社群互動、職場希望感及創新教學之關係是相輔相成、互為鷹架的。根據研究發現，提出後續相關研究建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to understand the relationship between kindergarten teachers participating community interaction for workplace promisingness and innovative teaching. Eleven kindergarten teachers from northern, middle, southern and eastern regions of Taiwan were assessed for studying and discussing (all from licensed kindergartens). The main findings are as follows:(1) Kindergartens not establishing their own teacher community or dissimilarity of curriculum contents and time constraints are the main factors for teachers not participating in a community. (2) Teacher community interaction can promote professional competence and build friendship between kindergarten teachers.(3) Teacher community interaction can help design learning area situations and teaching plans as well as assist with classroom management.(4) Teacher community interaction can condense into centripetal force. (5) The perceptional and emotional interactions can improve the interactive quality of the community.(6) The interactions among teacher communities can enhance workplace promisingness and innovative teaching.(7) Teacher community interactions, workplace promisingness and innovative teaching are complement to each other, building an inseparable relationship. Based on these results, suggestions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：25-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130309010022篇名：學習領域召集人的教師領導與學生學習表現關係之探究並列篇名：A Study of the Relationship between Subject Leaders' Teacher Leadership and Students' Learning Performance作者：康瀚文(Han-Wen Kang)關鍵字：教師領導;學習領域召集人;學生學習表現;九年一貫課程;teacher leadership;subject leader;students' learning performance;Grade 1-9 Curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探究國中小學習領域召集人的教師領導角色，以及與學生學習表現間的可能關係。首先，本文從教師領導的理論做出發，探析近年來教師領導的內涵、策略與任務；其次，整理目前學習領域召集人在國中小裡的角色與任務，並以教師領導的理念，分析學習領域召集人做為一位教師領導者的責任。最後，從國內外教師領導的相關實徵研究結果，探討教師領導與學生學習表現間的可能關係。本文發現教師領導是目前學校組織變革與教學成效提升的一種策略，但教師領導者必須透過學校情境的改善與促進教師專業的成長，才有可能增進學生學習表現。因此，應當賦予學習領域召集人明確的法定職權，使其充分地發揮其影響力，並透過課程教學的發展與教師專業成長等的相關策略，才能有助於學校教育的改革與學生學習表現的提升。英文摘要：This study is to explore the relationship between the roles of subject leaders' teacher leadership in elementary/junior high school and students' learning performance. First, the literature on teacher leadership is reviewed to analyze the relevant contents, strategies, and assignments. Secondly, based on the concept of teacher leadership, subject leaders' duties of teacher leadership are analyzed. Last, the empirical research results are reviewed to investigate the potential relationship between teacher leadership and students' learning performance. The result shows that teacher leadership is a strategy for reforming school and enhancing teaching effectiveness. Nevertheless, only through improving school's learning conditions and pursuing teachers' professional growth, teacher leaders can enhance students' learning performance. Consequently, subject leaders should be empowered to take charge of the implementation. Furthermore, in order to improve school education and students' learning performance, subject leaders should develop effective curriculum and teaching strategies as well as enhance teachers' professional growth.起始頁-結束頁：59-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130309010033篇名：幼兒教師多元智能表現、教育信念與班級實務之相關研究並列篇名：The Relationship among Multiple Intelligences Performance, Educational Belief and Classroom Practices of Preschool Teachers作者：鄭博<U+771E>(Bor-Jen Jeng)關鍵字：多元智能表現;多元智能教育信念;多元智能班級實務幼兒教師;multiple intelligences;multiple intelligences educational belief;multiple intelligences classroom practices;preschool teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討幼兒教師多元智能表現、教育信念與班級實務之概況、背景差異，以及關聯性。研究者以臺灣地區727位幼兒教師為研究對象，使用「幼兒教師多元智能量表」、「幼兒教師多元智能教育信念量表」、「幼兒教師多元智能班級實務量表」等工具蒐集實證資料，再透過變異數分析及結構方程模式等進行統計處理。研究發現：幼兒教師的多元智能表現、教育信念及班級實務均在中高程度。參加多元智能研習經驗是影響幼兒教師多元智能表現、教育信念及班級實務的重要變項。幼兒教師的多元智能表現顯著影響其教育信念與班級實務。根據研究結果，本研究提出幾點建議，供幼教實務及未來研究作參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to explore the status, backgrounds differences and correlations among multiple intelligences, multiple intelligences educational belief and classroom practices of preschool teachers. The participants were 727 preschool teachers in Taiwan. The scales of multiple intelligences, multiple intelligences educational belief and classroom practices were designed before collecting empirical data. The data were analyzed by multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) and structural equation modeling (SEM). The major findings were as follows: (a) the multiple intelligences, multiple intelligences educational belief and classroom practices performances of the preschool teachers were middle-high level; (b) experience of participating in multiple intelligences workshops was an important variable which influenced preschool teachers' multiple intelligences, multiple intelligences educational belief and classroom practices; (c) the multiple intelligences educational belief and classroom practices of the preschool teachers were significantly influenced by multiple intelligences. Based on the findings, suggestions for early childhood education practices and further research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：81-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420130309010044篇名：學前教師特教工作勝任感與工作滿意度的影響機制：學歷、年資與專業訓練的作用並列篇名：The Influential Mechanism of Job Competence and Job Satisfaction among Preschool Teachers Providing Special Education: The Impact of Education Degree, Seniority and Professional Training作者：林俊瑩(Chunn-Ying Lin);林玟秀(Wen-Hsiu Lin);陳佑任(Yu-Jen Chen)關鍵字：工作勝任感與工作滿意度;特殊教育;專業訓練;學前教師;學歷;年資;education degree;job competence and job satisfaction;preschool teacher;professional training;special education;seniority期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究建立一個理論模式，以探究臺灣地區學前教師的學歷、年資與專業訓練，對其教導特殊幼兒工作勝任程度與工作滿意度的影響，及其影響途徑。分析資料為「特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫」96學年度學前教師調查中，有任教特殊幼兒的普通班與特教班學前教師，並運用結構方程模式進行分析。研究發現：學前教師教導特殊幼兒時，工作勝任感並不算高，不過其工作滿意度則頗高。進一步分析顯示：特殊幼兒教導能力，與對身心障礙教育的正面看法，有助於提升學前教師工作勝任感與工作滿意度。幼教與特教的年資與所接受相關專業訓練越多，會提高學前教師對特殊幼兒進行適性教導的專業能力、班級管理能力會越強，或對身心障礙教育有越正面的看法，都會使學前教師的工作勝任感或工作滿意度提高。至於教師取得越高學歷，並無助於教導特殊幼兒專業能力之提升，也與其教導特殊幼兒工作勝任感、工作滿意度沒有顯著關聯。依上述結果，本研究對當前學前幼教師資培育之特殊教育專業訓練政策與措施提出檢討與建議。英文摘要：Based on related literature, this study proposes a theoretic model to investigate the effects of education degree, seniority and professional training on job competence and job satisfaction among preschool teachers providing special education in Taiwan. From the database of Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study, SNELS, 1,351 preschool teachers who taught children with special needs in inclusive setting or in special education classroom during the academic year of 2007 were extracted as object of this study. The data were analyzed by using structural equation modeling SEM. Results indicated that preschool teachers in Taiwan did not feel a strong sense of job competence when providing education to children with special needs, but most of them had a high level of job satisfaction. In further analysis, it was found that those preschool teachers equipped with better competencies for teaching exceptional children and a positive attitude toward special education, earn a higher sense of job competence and job satisfaction. According to preschool teachers who had both the more seniority of teaching and professional training in preschool and special education, have shown higher level of professional competence in providing adaptive instructions, better class management, and more positive attitude toward special education.. However, school teachers' education degree was not significantly related to their professional competencies in education for children with special needs, sense of job competence, job competence, or job satisfaction. Based on these findings, this study also proposed some suggestions on policies regarding early childhood teacher training in special education.起始頁-結束頁：117-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201303090100501篇名：以學生評鑑教師量表決定教師的開課或去留可行嗎？混合IRT分析取向並列篇名：Is Using a SRI to Determine the Fate of Teachers or Commencement of Work Suitable?-A Mixture IRT Analysis作者：曾明基(Ming-Ci Tseng);邱皓政(Haw-Jeng Chiou);張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);羅寶鳳(Pao-Feng Lo)關鍵字：學生評鑑教師教學;混合IRT分析;student ratings of instruction;mixture IRT analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要探討以學生評鑑教師教學量表決定大學教師開課或去留的可行性。研究對象為東部某大學大學部學生，總樣本數為6,111人。有別於過往學生評鑑教師教學的實證研究皆建構在古典測驗理論，本研究為了更嚴謹地回應學生評鑑教師教學的評鑑結果，因此使用近代測驗理論進行分析，並進一步考量學生的潛在異質差異對學生評鑑教師教學的影響。研究結果顯示，在未考慮評鑑教師的學生潛在異質差異時，教師可輕易通過學校所訂定在學生評鑑教師教學量表的效標門檻。但進一步考慮學生潛在異質性發現，不同潛在類別的學生評鑑教師教學的方式差異頗大。針對上述結果，本研究對大學教師及學生評鑑教師教學提出相關的建議。英文摘要：This study examines the effects of variability in student ratings regarding instruction on decision-making for faculty teaching evaluation. A total of 6,111 undergraduate students from 173 classes in a university on the east coast of Taiwan were included in the research sample.This study is different from previous studies regarding student ratings for instruction that are constructed in classical test theory. We use item response theory to analyze the heterogeneity of students, to rigorously examine the effects on student ratings regarding instruction. The results show that teachers may easily exceed the teaching criterion score set by the university when not considering the heterogeneity of the student ratings. However, the different latent types of the variability of student ratings may be important for interpreting the results of different student rating scores. The recommendations for university teaching and student ratings regarding instruction are created based on the results from this study.起始頁-結束頁：91-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學2篇名：校長道德發展及其品德校園營造之質性探究並列篇名：Qualitative Inquiry on Principals' Moral Development and Their Building of Morality and Character in Schools作者：李琪明(Angela Chi-Ming Lee)關鍵字：中小學校長;品德校園;道德發展;道德領導;elementary and secondary school principals;morality-and-character-based school;moral development;moral leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究結合品德教育與校長領導理念，聚焦中小學校長之道德發展及其校園營造關鍵角色，希冀達致具體研究目的有三：一為瞭解中小學校長的道德發展意涵；二為瞭解中小學校長營造品德校園的策略；三為對於校長道德發展及其品德校園營造提出反省與建議。研究者透過親訪19所中小學校園，以半結構式深度訪談其校長，並以質性探究之詮釋學方法進行訪談內容的剖析，歸納出研究結果的四個主軸：校長對於品德教育的觀點、校長面臨的道德兩難議題及其考量因素、校長的德育信念與道德核心價值，以及校長的品德校園營造策略等面向的特點。藉由理念基礎與實徵文獻對於研究結果的辯證與批判，提出對於校長領導、品德教育及進一步研究之建議。英文摘要：This study focuses on the moral development of principals and their central role in school culture building based on connections between moral dimension and principal leadership in this study. The three purposes of this study are as follows: (1) Understanding principals' moral development; (2) understanding principals' strategies for building morality and character in schools; and (3) providing a reflection and suggestions regarding principals' moral development and the building of morality and character in schools. We held a semistructured interview with 19 elementary and high school principals in Taiwan and visited each of their campuses. Using hermeneutics as a methodological approach in qualitative research, we reached four aspects of findings: perspectives on morality and character education, moral dilemma and influential factors, moral belief and core ethical values, and strategies for building morality and character in schools from principals' self-reflections. This study offers implications and suggestions on morality and character education, and principal leadership through a discussion and critical thinking regarding the gaps between findings and literature reviews.起始頁-結束頁：117-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學01篇名：《測驗學刊》輝煌一甲子回首來路砥礪新未來－《測驗學刊》六十週年採訪專文並列篇名：Six Glorious Decades of Psychological Testing: A Look Back at the Origins and Forward to a Promising Future- Six Decades of Interviews and Articles on Psychological Testing作者：陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);黃逸杉(Yi-Shan Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：台灣心理與測驗領域六十年之回顧與展望：《測驗年刊》與《測驗學刊》內容分析並列篇名：The 60 Years Retrospect and Prospect of Psychology and Testing: The Content Analysis of Psychological Testing作者：楊諮燕(Tze-Yen Yang);巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：內容分析;測驗年刊;測驗學刊;content analysis;Psychological Testing期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：領域發展之探討，可使研究者了解過去相關研究狀況，亦可藉此看見未來投入方向，所以本研究採內容分析法，針對《測驗年刊》與《測驗學刊》在1953至2011年間之歷史與發展架構進行深入了解，盼透過期刊分析，為台灣心理與測驗領域帶來更多成長契機。研究結果指出，期刊具備許多符合國際研究潮流的優勢：1.研究篇數增加，且文章被引用率及五年影響係數於近幾年有所成長。2.文章性質以實徵性研究為主軸。3.研究群體朝多樣性、特殊性發展。4.文章作者多採合作模式進行研究。5.研究類別及收錄文章所採用的研究方法，兼具領域之獨特性與開創性。另外，英文文章撰寫比例則為未來應該努力修正的方向。最後，筆者亦針對本研究之研究方法，以及《測驗學刊》相關評比提出建議，希冀能於期刊發展及研究品質上有所助益。英文摘要：The study of domain development analysis helps scientists figure out the future challenges of their researches. Therefore, we conducted a content analysis of articles published in Psychological Testing from 1953 to 2011, trying to demonstrate the important trends and developments of psychological testing domain in Taiwan over the past five decades. Results of research pointed that, the journal has many superiorities fitting in with the international trends: 1. Psychological Testing is a journal with steadily rising numbers of articles and impact factor. 2. The main character of this journal is empirical research. 3. The subjects of investigation trend to be diversified and featured. 4. More authors studied collaboratively over time. 5. The categories and research methods of articles are mainly original and creative. Additionally, we had also pointed out the strengths and weakness of this journal: being to bring in line with international practice, the number of English writing articles should be increased in the future. Finally, we had aimed at the research methods and the comparison of Psychological Testing to provide research suggestions, hoping to promote the development of journal, and enhance the quality of research methods.起始頁-結束頁：11-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：「中學生解釋型態量表」之編製並列篇名：The Development of Secondary School Students' Explanatory Style Questionnaire作者：王蕾雁(Lei-Yan Wang);陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen);曾文志(Wen-Chih Tseng)關鍵字：正向心理衡鑑;解釋型態;樂觀;explanatory style;optimism;positive psychological assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：樂觀是正向心理學訴求的重點之一，而樂觀的條件乃是架構於對事件的解釋型態，樂觀解釋型態能讓個體健康地檢視生活事件的原因，並保持前進的動力與希望。本研究以中學生表述之生活經驗為基底，編製「中學生解釋型態量表」；量表之解釋型態採多向度構念，包含正向事件永久普遍性／個別性，負向事件永久普遍性／個別性等四個分量尺，全量表共30題，作答方式採二選一強迫選擇題。參與本研究量表發展之樣本取自全國29所國高中職學生，其中264名為推導樣本，2,760名為複製樣本。本量表信效度方面，內部一致性係數介於.384∼.587之間，驗證性因素分析顯示模型整體與概念模型適配度良好，因素負荷量均達顯著水準。英文摘要：Optimism is one of the key points in positive psychology. The basic element of optimism is the reformulated explanatory style for events. The optimistic explanatory style can help people to view events healthily and keep the power to go forward. The purpose of this study is to develop Secondary School Students' Explanatory Style Questionnaire based on the experience of life with secondary school students. The concept of the explanatory style in the study is multi-dimensional. The explanatory styles of the questionnaire includes four subscales. The four subscales are ”good events to permanent-pervasive cause”, ”good events to personal cause”, ”bad events to permanent- pervasive cause”, and ”bad events to personal cause”. The questionnaire has 30 items, each of which consists of a hypothetical good or bad event and two possible causes of the event. Respondents pick the cause from the pair that better describes why the event occurred. The students selected as participants are from 29 secondary schools. The participants includes 264 derivation samples and 2,760 replication samples. Cronbach's alpha coefficients of the questionnaire range from .384 to .587. In the confirmatory factor analysis, the Goodness-of-Fit of the questionnaire is good. The factor loadings are significant.起始頁-結束頁：43-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：「CEEC興趣量表」簡版之編製並列篇名：Construction of a Short Form of the CEEC Interest Inventory in Taiwan作者：區雅倫(Ya-Lun Ou);翁儷禎(Li-Jen Weng);李庚霖(Keng-Lin Lee)關鍵字：Holland環狀結構;興趣量表;簡版;Holland's circumplex model;interest inventory;short form期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：「大學入學考試中心興趣量表」（簡稱「CEEC興趣量表」）建構於Holland的類型論，題數198題，需時30分鐘，本研究編製此量表之簡版以提高受測者的作答意願。簡版之編製考量題目結構、題型比例、題間相關、因素負荷量等，以2007年受測原版興趣量表的3,362位臺灣高一學生之資料進行分析後，選取126題，並以測驗分數的信度、效度、適合度與環狀結構假設檢視簡版的特性。結果發現簡版分數信度良好，因素結構符合理論預期，其分布與原版相近並有高相關，兩版六型間相關矩陣相似，且二者測出之興趣第一碼相似度高達98%，多向度量尺法（Multidimensional Scaling）、隨機化檢驗（randomization test）支持簡版之環狀結構假設。研究結果顯示，「CEEC興趣量表」簡版分數具有良好的信度與建構效度，與原版特性相似，未來宜探究此簡版在實務應用上之效能。英文摘要：CEEC Interest Inventory is based on Holland's RIASEC model and consists of 198 items. It takes approximately 30 minutes to complete the inventory. The purpose of this study is to construct a short form of the CEEC Interest Inventory in order to facilitate the respondent's willingness to complete the test. The construction of this short form considered item structure, item type, inter-item correlation, and factor loading. A sample of 3,362 high school students in Taiwan completed the CEEC Interest Inventory in 2007. Out of the original 198 items, 126 items were selected to form a short form. The psychometric properties of this short form including reliability and construct validity of test scores and the fitting of Holland’s circular hypothesis were examined using the randomization test of hypothesized order relations. Several results were found. First, the short form maintained the original content structure. Second, it shared similar psychometric properties with the original inventory. Third, its scores highly correlated with those of the original form. Fourth, Holland’s model fitted the short form data well and no structural differences were found between the two forms. Finally, The short form of the CEEC Interest Inventory can be considered as a reliable and valid measure of interest among high school students in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：67-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：飛行員「飛行壓力內隱聯結測驗」的發展並列篇名：Development of Implicit Association Test for Flight Stress toward Pilots作者：邱發忠(Fa-Chung Chiu);徐芝君(Chih-Chun Hsu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：內隱聯結測驗;飛行壓力;膚電反應;壓力;flight stress;Galvanic Skin Response;Implicit Association Test;stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在發展測量飛行員飛行壓力的「內隱聯結測驗」（Implicit Association Test, IAT），並以一般壓力IAT作為參照。在研究一部分，將36位飛行員隨機分派至壓力與非壓力組，壓力組以十張飛行失事圖片誘發壓力狀態，而非壓力組則僅呈現中性圖片。之後，進行飛行壓力與一般壓力IAT的測量。結果發現，壓力狀況飛行員在飛行壓力IAT的量數高於非壓力狀況者，而一般壓力IAT則無區辨效度，即飛行壓力IAT可以區辨高、低壓力狀態的飛行員。在研究二中，以30位飛行員為參與者，要求參與者觀看研究一的十張壓力圖片，同時也測量其膚電反應（Galvanic Skin Response, GSR），此外，也施測飛行壓力與一般壓力IAT，以及外顯自陳飛行壓力與一般壓力狀態。結果發現，兩個IAT均與GSR呈現顯著相關（r分別為.48與.53）、外顯的一般壓力測量與GSR的r = -.24^n.s，以及外顯飛行壓力測量與GSR的r = -.32。由此顯示，IAT具有效標關聯效度。綜合上述，本研究所編製的壓力IAT具有效度，可以有效測量飛行員的內隱壓力狀態。英文摘要：This study aims to develop the flight stress Implicit Association Test(IAT)by taking the general stress IAT as reference. In Experiment 1, 36 pilots were randomly assigned to the stress group and the non-stress group. Ten aircraft accident pictures were shown to the pilots in the stress group to induce their stress state, and ten neutral pictures were shown to the pilots in the non-stress group. Afterward, the flight stress IAT and the general stress IAT were performed. The results showed that the score of IAT for the pilots in the stress group was higher than those in the non-stress group. In Experiment 2, 30 pilots were required to watch the same stress pictures as those in Experiment 1, and their Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) were measured at the same time. In addition, the flight stress IAT and the general stress IAT were performed, and the explicit self-repot flight stress and general stress statuses were measured. The results revealed that two IATs and GSR were significantly related (r = .48 and .53, accordingly), the correlation between the explicit general stress measurement and GRS was not significant (r = .24), and the correlation between the explicit flight stress measurement and GRS was not significant either (r = -.32). The results indicated that the flight stress IAT has criterion-related validity. In sum, the flight stress IAT edited in this study is proven to be a valid instrument which can measure pilot’s implicit stress sate.起始頁-結束頁：97-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「主動拖延量表」之因素組成及檢測並列篇名：The Factor Composition and Evaluation of Active Procrastination Scale作者：李介至(Jie-Zhi Lee);林益永(Yi-Yong Lin)關鍵字：主動拖延;時間控制;被動拖延;壓力因應;active procrastinator;passive procrastinator;pressure coping;time control ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究目的在驗證「主動拖延量表」之因素組成，檢測量表是否需要包含「結果滿意」此因素，並進一步抽取主動拖延者以考驗主動拖延者及被動拖延者在時間控制及壓力因應等行為之差異。本研究第一階段抽取557名技專校院學生進行為期二週之施測，量表施測後以驗證性因素分析比較三因素模型及四因素模型之競爭效果、適配度及複核效化。其次再抽取542名學生，透過差異考驗檢定主動拖延者及被動拖延者在時間控制及壓力因應之差異。研究結果顯示：(1)「主動拖延量表」中以三因素測量模型會比四因素模型具有較佳之競爭效果；(2)差異考驗顯示，主動拖延者比被動拖延者具有較佳之時間控制能力，並以問題解決策略及情緒尋求策略因應任務壓力。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to confirm the factor components of active procrastination scale. This study sampled 557 subjects to confirm the items of active procrastination scale by using CFA. This study further sampled 542 subjects to discriminate active procrastinators and passive procrastinators, and tested the differences on the time control ability and coping strategies of active / passive procrastinators. The results of this study were as follows: (1) three-factors model had better competition than fourfactors model. (2) t-test demonstrated active / passive procrastinators had statistical differences on time control ability and coping strategies. Implications for theory, practice and research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：117-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：「國民中學學生基本學力測驗寫作測驗」信度與效度分析研究並列篇名：The Reliability and Validity ofWriting Assessment of Basic Competence Test for Junior High School Students作者：王德蕙(Te-Hui Wang);李奕璇(Yi-Hsuan Lee);曾芬蘭(Fen-Lan Tseng);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：信度;效度;國民中學學生基本學力測驗;寫作測驗;basic competence test for junior high school students;reliability;validity;writing assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：「國民中學學生基本學力測驗」自2007年正式加考寫作測驗以來，外界對於寫作測驗的評分者一致性，以及每次只考一個題目是否足以評量到考生的寫作能力，始終非常的關心。加上國中基測屬於高風險測驗，考生人數眾多，影響極鉅，以及國內外在寫作測驗信效度研究上的不足，因此實有必要進行寫作測驗信效度之研究。本研究之研究目的有二：首先為探討「國民中學學生基本學力測驗寫作測驗」（簡稱「國中基測寫作測驗」）的信度，以類推性理論為主，輔以評分者一致率與評分者間相關等數據，作為驗證信度的依據；其次，蒐集命題設計、評分流程、寫作分數與其他效標的關聯等各種效度證據，以驗證寫作測驗之效度。期望透過本研究結果，一方面能提供測驗實務界關於高風險考試中如何監控與提升寫作測驗信度與效度的作法，另一方面可以讓社會相關人士了解「國中基測寫作測驗」的信度、效度之實徵證據。而研究結果也顯示「國中基測寫作測驗」確實具有良好之信度與效度。英文摘要：Since writing assessment of Basic Competence Test for Junior High School Students (BCTEST-WA) has been implemented from 2007, its reliability and validity has been one of the most concerning issues to public. Due to the reason that BCTEST-WA is a large-scale high-stake exam, but existing researches on reliability and validity of writing assessment are insufficient, the purpose of this study is to validate the reliability and validity of BCTEST-WA. Three approaches to validate the reliability include generalizability theory, raters’ consensus, and raters’ consistency. The exam validity was illustrated through collecting evidences based on test content, responses processes, and relations to other variables. The results show that BCTEST-WA, as a large-scale highstake exam, has high reliability and validity. This paper does not only present the evidences on the good reliability and validity of BCTEST-WA, but it also provides references on how to monitor and improve reliability and validity of high-stake writing assessments.起始頁-結束頁：151-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：How Student's Expectation on Rating of Teachers Influences Their Rating Behaviours?並列篇名：學生對教學評鑑之知覺影響其評定行為的研究作者：鄭夙珍(Nellie S. Cheng);林邦傑(Pang-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：教學評鑑;評鑑知覺與行為;預期理論;實質效度期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：雖然題目內容與執行形式各異，由學生評等教師之「學生教學評鑑」已是無分中外高等教育學府每學期必然實施之重要評鑑工作。教學評鑑由學生填答，學生對教學評鑑的知覺與行為影響評鑑結果之效度與應用價值。本研究主要從實質效度（substantive validity）和期待理論建立學生對教師評鑑的知覺對其在評鑑過程中投入程度的因果模式。在驗證模式時，先對16位大學生進行焦點團體訪談，蒐集大學生對教師評鑑的知覺與行為，再以結構式問卷蒐集1,235位大學生的反應資料，並以線性結構方程模式驗證本研究因果模式之適配度。研究發現，學生對評鑑影響力之知覺和上課出席率會影響其在評鑑過程中的投入度與不投入度，也會透過前述兩者間接影響學生評定教師時考量學習因素（課程內容和教師）和其他因素（班級課業負荷與及格率）的程度。本研究也發現，學生在投入評鑑過程的準備（如對評鑑重要性的強調、價值的澄清及結果之處理），對於評鑑結果之價值雖有明確影響，卻常在執行過程中被忽視；本研究提醒教學評鑑執行者，將教學評鑑執行宣導視為與評鑑工具之心理計量特徵同等重要之評鑑重要一環。起始頁-結束頁：186-210資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：中文版「環境關懷量表」之分析並列篇名：Psychometric Properties of the Chinese Translation of Environmental Concern作者：張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang);陳淑萍(Shu-Ping Chen);陳柏融(Po-Jung Chen);黃柏僩(Po-Hsien Huang);林子堯(Tzu-Yao Lin);趙軒甫(Hsuan-Fu Chao)關鍵字：中文版「環境關懷量表」;利環境行為;氣候變遷;climate change;pro-environmental behaviors;The Chinese version of Environmental Concern期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：60卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：全球氣候變遷是個日益嚴重的議題。Stern（1992a, 1992b）由價值觀切入，從個別差異的層面歸納出三大價值觀以探討利環境行為的產生；這三大價值觀分別為利己、利他和利自然。其後，Schultz（2000, 2001）以此概念進行工具編製，即為「環境關懷量表」（Environmental Concern）。此量表已被高度應用，並被翻譯成不同語言，且在跨文化研究中顯示出穩定的效度。因此，本研究將此量表翻譯成中文，並且分別在三個不同樣本（總人數為720人）藉由探索性與驗證性因素分析，均得到雷同的三因素結構，並可以預測相關利環境行為，顯示中文版「環境關懷量表」具有良好的信效度。結論亦針對環境關懷的研究與應用進行討論。英文摘要：Global climate change is an important issue. Stern (1992a, 1992b) firstly investigated the climate change problem via value system and then focused on the three main values that related to pro-environmental behaviors. The three values are egoistic, altruistic, and biospheric. Based on Stern’s theory, Schlutz (2000, 2001) constructed the Environmental Concern scale with the three values as the main factors. The importance of this scale has been shown in a variety of cultures. The main purpose of the present research was to establish the Chinese version of the Environmental Concern. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses confirmed the three factors solution by three samples (total sample size = 720). Good internal consistency and the relationships between environmental concerns and other pro-environmental behaviors indices were significant as expected. Potential theoretical and practical applications of the Chinese version of Environmental Concern were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：211-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：領導效能研究的回顧與展望：1985－2012並列篇名：A Review of Leadership Outcomes Studies: 1985-2012作者：楊美玉(Mei-Yu Yang);劉佳雄(Chia-Hsiung Liu);柯旻秀(Min-Hsiu Ko);陳映潔(Ying-Jie Chen);柯佑宗(Yu-Tsung Ke)關鍵字：領導;領導效能;領導理論;領導驗證;回顧型研究;leadership;leadership outcomes;leadership theory;leadership theory testing;research review期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究回顧了1985－2012年間，管理、教育及心理類等推薦期刊之領導效能的文獻。主要目的在了解國內有關領導效能的研究狀況，以提供國內研究者了解目前領導效能研究的脈絡與研究缺口。透過文獻蒐集、過濾、編碼等步驟，合計樣本文獻219篇，其中121篇收錄於TSSCI。回顧這些研究發現，台灣有關領導效能的研究在最近十年有明顯的成長。在效標方面，研究者偏愛以態度類為領導研究的結果變項；在理論方面，研究者偏好驗證轉換型領導；在領導理論的驗證上，中階主管是較少被驗證的對象，評量領導的觀點大多以部屬的角度，領導與結果的測量多以同一時間點居多，研究者十分倚賴調查法，而領導的研究層次觀念已逐漸受到重視。本文針對效標、理論、及驗證做深入的回顧分析與討論，以期呈現國內期刊有關領導效能文獻的樣貌，並提出未來可能的研究方向。英文摘要：This review includes empirical leadership research in four categories of peer-reviewed journals in Taiwan from 1985 to 2012. The purposes of this study are to provide a thorough understanding of current status of leadership research, as well as to explore future needs for leadership research. We collected 219 empirical studies, and we coded them by criteria, theory, and theory testing settings. The results showed that the research of leadership has bloomed in the last 10 years. Regarding criteria, most of the studies adopted attitudes as outcome variables. In terms of leadership theory, researchers preferred to investigate transformational leadership than other leadership styles. From the theory testing point of view, few studies tested leadership theory in middle level managers. Most studies conducted field surveys, collected cross-sectional data, and measured subordinate point of view of leadership. The level of research in leadership has caught much attention in the recent decade. This review provides the whole picture of research on leadership effectiveness in domestic journals and outlines several directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1304.012篇名：Evolution of the Intellectual Structure of Expatriate Studies in the Last Five Decades: Themes and Relationships並列篇名：過去50年外派研究智慧結構之演變─理論與關係作者：王堂亭(Tang-Ting Wang);李元墩(Yuan-Duen Lee);李元德(Yender McLee)關鍵字：外派管理;智慧結構;知識網絡;書目計量學;社會網絡分析;expatriate management;intellectual structure;network of knowledge;bibliometric techniques;social network analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究之目的為呈現內含在外派研究文獻知識結構之演變。研究方法係採用書目計量學和社會網絡分析技術，主要以1959年至2008年發表在SCI與SSCI期刊有關外派研究議題的研究文獻為對象，總計分析840篇文獻及22,487筆參考文獻資料。本研究將過去50年外派研究分成三個階段，分別是初創期（1959－1989）、形成期（1990－1999）及發展期（2000－2008）。研究結果顯示當代外派研究呈現四個主要研究趨勢：外派適應的新結構、外派適應的動態程序、回任議題與全球任用；未來在外派領域的研究將持續上述之研究趨勢，特別是跨文化管理、全球化管理與全球化經理人應扮演之角色。本研究提出一個可以讓學術界及實務界更了解外派研究發展趨勢之方法；此方法可描繪出外派研究領域的智慧結構及闡明其研究領域的發展及變化。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to identify the evolution of the intellectual structure of expatriate. Bibliometric techniques and social network analysis were used to trace the development path of expatriate research. By analyzing 22,487 citations of 840 articles published in SCI and SSCI journals in the expatriate field between 1959 and 2008, this study maps the intellectual structure of expatriate studies. This study divided the development of research on expatriate management into three stages: initializing stage (1959-1989), forming stage (1990-1999), and development stage (2000-2008). The results of this study suggest that future expatriate research will be organized into four different areas of interest: a new construct of expatriate adjustment, the dynamic process of expatriate adjustment, repatriation issues, and global staffing. Future expatriate studies will probably continue to center on these topics; specifically, studies on cross-cultural adjustment, global management, and the role of global managers. This study provides researchers with a new way of profiling key themes and their relationships in expatriate studies and to provide important insights and implications with regard to current and future research paradigms for management scholars and practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：41-78資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1304.023篇名：台灣工作家庭衝突研究之回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and Prospection of Studies on Work-Family Conflict in Taiwan作者：陳文良(Wen-Liang Chen);王怡涵(Yi-Han Wang);邱雅萍(Ya-Ping Chiu)關鍵字：工作家庭衝突;職家衝突;文獻回顧;整合模式;Work-Family Conflict;WFC;Literature Review;Integrated Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：雙薪家庭在現代社會已成為主流的家庭結構，面對同時來自工作與家庭的角色要求日益增加，使得許多人經歷了比以前更多的工作家庭衝突。雖然國外對於工作家庭衝突的議題已經累積了相當豐富的研究成果，國內對於工作家庭衝突的研究尚在起步階段。本研究首先回顧國內工作家庭衝突的相關文獻，整理相關理論觀點，並將工作家庭衝突定義與分類，整合影響工作家庭衝突之前因與後果以及調節與中介變項，建構出工作家庭衝突的整合模型。最後，本研究提出台灣在工作家庭衝突領域未來的研究方向。英文摘要：Double-income family has become a dominating trend in our modern societies. Facing an increasing demand to balance responsibilities at work and at home, many individuals have experienced more work-family conflict than before. Although research on work-family conflict has existed in the Western literature for decades, there is a dearth of research on this topic in the Chinese literature, regarding people in Taiwan, in particular. In this article, we review the relevant research on work-family conflict in Taiwan; provide a brief overview of the theoretical lenses; examine various definitions, measurements, and classifications; integrate antecedents, consequences, as well as mediators and moderators of this important construct; and propose an integrated theoretical model of work-family conflict. This article also highlights future research directions on work-family conflict in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：79-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1304.034篇名：再探組織認同之本質：2002－2012之研究回顧與前瞻並列篇名：Revisiting to the Nature and Theory of Organizational Identification: A Review and Redirection from 2002 to 2012作者：王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang);胡昌亞(Chang-Ya Hu)關鍵字：組織認同;自我概念;認定;自尊;organizational identification;self-concept;identity;self-esteem期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：在組織行為研究中，組織認同是相當基本的構念，由於組織認同會廣泛地影響成員態度及行為，因此相關研究議題非常豐富多元。然而台灣人力資源管理與組織行為的研究，並未完全與目前的研究趨勢接軌，而常過分簡化組織認同的內涵，或將組織認同與其他類似概念相互混淆。本文的主要目的，是回顧近十年來關鍵性的研究結果，從研究構念的對象、類別、維度、及動態性等角度，再次釐清組織認同的概念本質，並說明目前衡量工具的發展。其次，本文參考過往研究中組織認同主要的前因與後果，彙整出此構念之概念關係網絡（nomological network），以點出過往研究結果的矛盾與不足之處。最後，本文也提供組織認同議題的研究建議，做為未來研究者參考之用。英文摘要：Organizational identification, which is a ”root construct” in organizational research, widely influences members' attitudes and behaviors. However, in Taiwan, we have noticed that many OB/HR researchers oversimplified the content of organizational identification and confused it with other similar constructs. The main purpose of this review paper is to integrate the results of the important research in past ten years. We revisited the definition of nature of organizational identification by distinguishing its foci, categories, dimensions, and dynamics. Nevertheless, we refer to previous research to identify the nomological network of organizational identification. Finally, we offered some recommendations for future directions as well.起始頁-結束頁：107-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1304.045篇名：Achieving Organizational Effectiveness through Human Capital Acquisition Practices-The Moderating Effects of Environment Turbulence and Knowledge Sharing Climate並列篇名：向外求才人資活動對組織績效的影響－環境變遷程度及知識分享氣候之干擾效果作者：劉念琪(Nien-Chi Liu);周淑儀(Shu-Yi Chou);王志袁(Chih-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：人力資源管理活動;知識基礎觀點;知識分享氣候;組織績效;人力資本;human capital acquisition;human resource management practices;knowledge-based view;knowledge-sharing climate;organizational performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：除了由內部自行培育人才外，向外求取人才以強化競爭優勢，已成為現代企業重要的管理課題。隨著企業面對的外部環境變動愈形劇烈，這樣向外求才的必要性也愈加重要。同時當外來人才進入企業，組織也應具備宜於知識分享的氣候，如此方能順暢地傳遞知識並提升組織績效。因此，本研究將探討向外求才之人力資源管理活動對組織績效的影響，並檢驗環境變遷程度、知識分享氣候，此二個變項之干擾效果。本研究結果顯示，能審慎甄選並留任外在人才的組織，不但組織績效較好、資本市場的價值也較高；而且當環境變遷愈劇烈、組織知識分享氣候愈強時，上述效果愈強。因此組織應該強化向外求才之人力資源活動，並提升知識分享氣候，使外來人才之知識得以為組織所用，尤以處於環境變遷程度較高的企業為然。英文摘要：To acquire talents from outside to enhance competitive advantage has become a leading issue in modern business organizations. When firms face constantly changing environments, build talents purely from inside may be inefficiency. However, new talents recruited from outside can only deliver their well-prepared knowhow smoothly in knowledge-sharing climate. This study then aimed to explore the impacts of a group of external human capital acquisition (EHCA) practices on organizational performance and to examine the moderating effects of two contingencies, environmental turbulence and the knowledge-sharing climate, on the effectiveness of these EHCA practices. Our findings imply that organizational abilities to attract and acquire human capital become a key competence for high performance companies. After successfully selecting and retaining external intelligence from outside, a firm can expect to accumulate, diversify, and then utilize its knowledge stores to promote operational efficiency and earn a positive expectation from the stock market. While typical strategic HRM models encourage building an internal labor market to gain an un-imitated advantage, paying skilled employees to reap profit promptly is still essential. However, talented employees from outside who join an organization must learn the shared language, fit in the social context, and embed themselves in the network composed by the original members before they can contribute to the firm's performance.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1303.016篇名：鞠躬盡瘁？勉強出勤之跨文化理論模式建構並列篇名：Presenteeism in Workplace: Constructing a Cross-cultural Framework作者：林惠彥(Hui-Yen Lin);陸洛(Luo Lu)關鍵字：勉強出勤;職場健康;工作態度;工作行為;presenteeism;employees' health;work attitudes;work behaviors期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：「勉強出勤」（presenteeism）係描述儘管身體疾病造成不適，或長時間工作造成疲倦，工作者仍出勤或持續工作的行為。本文以勉強出勤的發軔為起點，將發展階段分為漠視期與萌芽期，及至目前的初步探索階段。我們回顧學者對勉強出勤的定義與測量，彙整實徵研究以窺探勉強出勤的前因與後果。勉強出勤現有的文獻數量不多且來自不同領域，主要為醫療、護理與心理健康等，少有學者從組織與人力資源管理的觀點來進行相關研究。在綜觀文獻後，本文針對西方研究進行反思與批判，認為其主要有三大缺陷：定義混淆、缺乏測量工具、及缺乏統整性的理論架構。本文最後提出了未來可能的研究發展方向與建議，包含研究方法的突破與多元觀點的整合，並以華人文化脈絡為視框，審視在重視關係與追求人際和諧的文化薰陶下，華人對勤勉敬業的讚許，對工作者勉強出勤行為的影響，據此建議未來研究方向與本土管理意涵，希冀有助勉強出勤研究在台灣的開展與深化。英文摘要：In the current climate of global economic depression, presenteeism, the opposite of absenteeism, is becoming more prevalent in the workplace. Although some definitional confusion persists, the most recent scholarly conception of presenteeism involves showing up for work when one is ill. The purpose of this paper is to review the presenteeism literature and to trace the latest development of presenteeism research. Based on existing empirical research from different disciplines, such as medical, nursing and health psychology fields, we delineated antecedents and consequences of presenteeism. We also identified some challenges and limitations in this research area, including confusions in definition, lack of reliable scales and adequate theoretical frameworks. Finally, we proposed several directions for future research, including integrating different theoretical perspectives and research methodologies. Moreover, we focused on the future directions for research on presenteeism in Taiwan to delineate its cultural relevance. It is hoped that the continuous interaction between the management practice and theoretical development of research on presenteeism would help to build a healthy work environment.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1303.027篇名：主管與部屬互動中情緒勞動：回顧、釐清、及前瞻並列篇名：Emotional Labor in the Interaction between Supervisors and Subordinates: Review, Clarification, and Prospect作者：吳宗祐(Tsung-Yu Wu)關鍵字：情緒勞動;領導;表層演出;深層演出;emotional labor;leadership;surface acting;deep acting期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：情緒勞動議題與領導研究之結合，是邇來情緒勞動研究之新趨勢，也累積了許多研究成果。本論文首先將針對主管與部屬間情緒勞動的研究，進行系統性的回顧。其次，本論文提出「情緒勞動之概念是否適用於主管與部屬互動中」的爭議問題，予以釐清，以利界定主管與部屬間情緒勞動的構念，並比較其與類似概念的異同。最後，本論文將提出若干未來研究方向，包含測量工具與研究方法的精進、實證研究的深化、主管與部屬情緒勞動的整合、主管之情緒勞動分擔、及華人組織中主管與部屬的情緒勞動。英文摘要：The linkage between emotional labor and leadership is a new trend of emotional labor research, and a large amount of related research publications have accumulated. Accordingly, the first purpose of the paper tends to systematically review the existent literature on emotional labor in supervisor-subordinate interaction. Following the review, the second purpose of the paper tries to address a controversial issue, ”Can the construct of emotional labor be applied to supervisor-subordinate interaction?”, and to clarify this issue, so as to define the construct of emotional in emotional labor in supervisor-subordinate interaction as well as compare it with other similar constructs. Finally, the third purpose of the paper identifies several future research directions, including the refinement of measurement and research design, the elaboration of empirical research, the integration between supervisors' and subordinates' emotional labor, supervisors' shared emotional labor, and emotional labor between supervisor and subordinate in Chinese organization.起始頁-結束頁：57-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1303.038篇名：職業倦怠研究在台灣之回顧與前瞻並列篇名：Studies on Burnout in Taiwan: A Critical Review作者：洪瑞斌(Jui-Ping Hung)關鍵字：職業倦怠;情緒耗竭;去人性化;降低成就感;馬氏職業倦怠量表;burnout;emotion exhaustion;depersonalization;reduced personal accomplishment;Maslach Burnout Inventory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以台灣二個重要電子期刊資料庫進行職業倦怠相關論文之搜尋，經歸納整理後得到165篇研究論文。進一步分析與檢視後發現：以研究類型而言，因果關聯性研究比例最高，其他質性研究及方案介入評估僅佔少數。而使用測量工具之量化研究中，還是使用MBI及其架構者最多，而CBI也被引進台灣，逐漸受相關研究使用。檢視相關論文之研究對象，以教師及學校行政人員、服務人員、醫事人員及助人工作者所佔比例最高。就發表時間及數量來看，從最早1983年出現第一篇概念介紹文章，而後職業倦怠研究發表數量即穩定增加，至近十年突然以倍數增長，顯見職業倦怠議題仍受到相關領域之熱切關注。本文最後嘗試提出職業倦怠未來之研究發展方向以供後續研究做參考。英文摘要：This study collected 165 papers concerning burnout from the two major electronic journal databases in Taiwan. After conducting literature review and analysis, the present study found that in terms of research method, most of the burnout studies preferred to use the causal design and quantitative approach; only a small part of them adopted the qualitative approach and the evaluation of intervention programs. Among the measurements in quantitative research, MBI (Maslach Burnout Inventory) and its schema were the most often employed, but CBI (Copenhagen Burnout Inventory) was also gradually adopted by the researchers in Taiwan. Teachers, school administrators, service personnel, medical staff and helping workers accounted for the highest proportion of research subjects. The first article introducing the concept of burnout appeared in 1983. Since then, the articles on burnout have increased stably. The burnout literature has multiplied in the last decade. This suggests that issues related to burnout have drawn more and more attention in academia. Lastly, this study attempted to explore the possible direction in research regarding burnout.起始頁-結束頁：107-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1303.049篇名：The Roles of Mentor Humor and Protege Core-Self-Evaluations in Supervisory Mentoring Relationships並列篇名：師父幽默與徒弟核心自我評價在主管型師徒關係中的角色作者：楊君琦(Chun-Chi Yang)關鍵字：師徒功能支持;社會支持資源理論;幽默;核心自我評價;mentoring;social support resource theory;humor;core self-evaluations期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究運用社會支持資源理論（Social Support Resource Theory）瞭解師父的幽默、徒弟的核心自我評價在師徒關係的角色，並分析師徒功能提供的支持對徒弟職涯滿意度、情緒耗竭及離職傾向的影響。本研究採兩階段調查，調查間隔兩個月，共收集186名徒弟樣本，運用迴歸分析發現：師父幽默與徒弟核心自我評價對徒弟接收之師徒支持呈現顯著正向關係，但兩者並無交互作用，也就是說，徒弟核心自我評價對師父幽默與徒弟接收之師徒支持並無調節效果；師徒支持顯著影響日後的徒弟心理產出，分別為：正向影響徒弟之職涯滿意、負向影響徒弟之情緒耗竭與離職傾向。最後，本研究針對研究發現提供理論與實務未來發展的建議。英文摘要：Using the social support resource theory as the foundation, this research highlights antecedents and outcomes of mentoring support that protege received in supervisory mentoring relationships. Specifically, this study examined two antecedents of mentoring support (mentors' humor, proteges' core self-evaluations; CSE) and three protege outcomes (career commitment, emotional exhaustion, intention to quit). Using data collected from 186 employees at two time points (two months apart), the regression analyses results indicated that mentors' humor and proteges' CSE, but not their interaction, related positively to mentoring support that proteges received. Furthermore, mentoring support related positively to career commitment whereas it negatively related to intention to quit, and emotional exhaustion. A discussion of the theoretical and practical implications of these findings is offered.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1302.0110篇名：獎酬誘因、成員信任與知識分享之關聯－部門做為調節效果並列篇名：The Relationships of Reward Incentive and Members' Trust on Knowledge Sharing: The Moderation Effects of Department作者：邱漢誠(Han-Cheng Chiu)關鍵字：獎酬誘因;成員信任;知識分享;社會交換理論;reward incentive;members' trust;knowledge sharing;social exchange theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究檢視獎酬誘因與成員信任對知識分享過程中的關聯性，並檢視部門在此一關係中是否扮演調節的角色。研究過程中抽取不同企業的302位員工進行問卷調查，所有問卷通過信效度檢驗，並採用階層線性模式進行假設檢定。研究結果發現獎酬誘因並未與知識分享產生顯著關聯，部門也未能呈現調節效果。相對的，成員信任對知識分享則存在顯著正向關聯，部門在此關係中則具有調節效果，尤其研發部門比非研發部門更具解釋力。本研究認為，當部門成員形成一種緊密互動的關係，員工彼此信任會使知識在部門內產生快速流動擴散，形成知識網絡，促進知識積累，而這種情形在重視團隊合作的研發部門最為常見。英文摘要：This study examines the relationships between reward incentives and members' trust on knowledge sharing processes. It also explores whether the department plays the role of moderation. 302 employees from different companies were participated. This study examined the validity and reliability of the questionnaires and used hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) to test the hypotheses. Results indicated reward incentives were not related to knowledge sharing, nor moderated by department. On the contrary, members' trust was positively related to knowledge sharing and the department moderated the relationships of members' trust and knowledge sharing. In particular, R & D departments had more explanatory power than non R & D departments. This paper identified when members had close relationship, their trust provided knowledge diffusion and formed a knowledge network in the department which fostered knowledge accumulation. This is often seen in R & D departments where team cooperation is emphasized.起始頁-結束頁：21-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1302.0211篇名：知覺屈就（高才低就、才非所用）與轉職行為之研究並列篇名：Study of Perceived Overqualification (Perceived Overeducated and Perceived Mismatch) and Job Mobility作者：李俊賢(Chun-Hsien Lee);許惠媚(Hui-Mei Hsu);黃芳銘(Fang-Ming Hwang)關鍵字：知覺屈就;異動渴望;工作滿意;轉職行為;perceived overqualification;desire of movement;job satisfaction;job mobility期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討工作者知覺屈就（包含「知覺高才低就」與「知覺才非所用」）對轉職行為的影響。以某人力銀行電子資訊、製造與一般服務業人才資料庫，採兩階段進行網路問卷調查。在838份完成兩階段有效樣本的分析發現，知覺才非所用會透過異動渴望、知覺高才低就會透過工作滿意而影響轉職行為。以工作年資的跨群體（職場菜鳥〔未滿三年〕、職場老鳥〔超過六年〕）分析指出，職場菜鳥在「知覺高才低就正向影響異動渴望」及「知覺才非所用負向影響工作滿意」此兩關係顯著高於職場老鳥，知覺高才低就透過異動渴望完全中介轉職行為則僅在職場菜鳥顯著成立，而職場老鳥則否。最後也對研究發現與未來研究提出相關說明與建議。英文摘要：We examined the effects of job incumbent's perceived overqualified, including perceived overeducated and perceived mismatch, on his/her job mobility. Data were collected 838 participants using the two wave online survey from a job bank database, including electronics, manufacturing and general service industries job holders. The results of structural equation modeling show that the perceived overeducated and the perceived mismatch would have influence on job mobility fully mediated by desire of movement and job satisfaction respectively. The results of multi group invariance tests reveal some path coefficients between two job seniority groups (old hand vs. green hand) are different significantly. For green hand group, the positive effect of perceived overeducated on desire of movement and the negative effect of perceived mismatch on job satisfaction were stronger than old hand group. In addition, the impact of perceived overeducated on job mobility fully mediated by desire of movement was displayed in green hand group only. Finally, we also discuss the study results and make suggestions for further study.起始頁-結束頁：45-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1302.0312篇名：提升工作團體認同：探討轉換型領導與部屬性格之角色並列篇名：Increasing Group Identification: Exploring the Roles of Transformational Leadership and Followers' Personality作者：陳彥君(Yen-Chun Chen);許含笑(Han-Hsiao Hsu)關鍵字：性格;轉換型領導;團體認同;personality;transformational leadership;group identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：提高員工對所屬團體的認同有助於工作績效，因此工作團體認同在學術與實務界都是持續關注的課題。過去研究多半從情境因素探討如何提高團體認同，較少探討個人特質如何影響認同的過程，而且探討轉換型領導與團體認同關係的研究也忽略了部屬的個別差異。因此本研究主要探討五大人格特質與團體認同的關係，並檢驗轉換型領導對上述關係之調節效果。本研究分兩個時間點收集資料，共取得來自35個工作團體的432份樣本，並且以階層線性模式（HLM）進行假設驗證。結果發現，部屬的勤勉正直和親和性與其團體認同為正向關係。在調節效果方面，轉換型領導會正向調節開放性與團體認同之關係；轉換型領導會負向調節外向性和神經質與團體認同之關係。最後，本研究提出研究意涵與未來建議之討論。英文摘要：It is suggested that group identification has positive impact on job performance. The issue of increasing group identification is a lasting concern in academic and practical field. Past research focused on situational factors, which can enhance group identification, but far less research has explored the effect of personality on identification. Studies on transformational leadership and group identification also neglected the individual differences among group members. Thus, the present study aims to investigate the relationship between followers' big five personality traits and group identification, and the moderating effect of transformational leadership on the above relationship. We collected data in two waves and the final sample included 432 employees from 35 work groups, and we used hierarchical linear models to examine all hypotheses. The results showed that follower's conscientiousness and agreeableness were positively related to group identification. Moreover, transformational leadership moderated the relationship between three traits (i.e., openness, extraversion, and neuroticism) and group identification. Finally, the implication and suggestion was discussed.起始頁-結束頁：73-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1302.0413篇名：工作與組織特性與求職者人格特質之交互作用對組織人才吸引力的影響並列篇名：The Interactive Effects between Applicant Personality Traits and Job and Organizational Attributes on Organizational Attractiveness作者：錢國倫(Kuo-Lun Chien);陳怡靜(Mavis Yi-Ching Chen);陳建丞(Chien-Cheng Chen)關鍵字：工作與組織特性;求職者人格特質;組織人才吸引力;個人與環境適配理論;job and organizational characteristics;applicant personality traits;organizational attractiveness;person-environment fit theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以個人與環境適配理論為理論基礎，探討求職者外向性與勤勉正直性兩項人格特質對於工作與組織特性—組織人才吸引力兩者關係的調節效果。本研究基於策略攫取取向，衡量受試者的人格特質，並針對工作挑戰性、同事支持、薪資組合、企業聲望與工作地點五項工作與組織特性進行全受試者內實驗設計。施測樣本為主修組織行為、人力資源管理、行銷管理與財務管理等相關商管系所之大四、碩二等即將步入職場的應屆畢業生。研究結果發現，外向傾向的求職者偏好提供具挑戰性工作、高度同事支持與變動薪資較高的企業，而勤勉正直傾向的求職者則偏好聲望較佳的企業。英文摘要：On the basis of Person-Environment Fit theory, this study aims to investigate how the interactive effects between two applicant personality traits (i.e., Extraversion and Conscientiousness) and job and organizational characteristics influence organizational attractiveness. These job and organizational characteristics include challenging work, coworker support, pay mix, company reputation, and location. A 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 within-subject experimental design which contained 32 scenarios was administrated to undergraduate and graduate students from seven universities. Inter- individual differences based on personality traits were also assessed. The results showed that Extraversion applicants prefer organizations with more challenging work, higher level of coworker support and higher level of variable pay. Applicants with Conscientiousness were attracted by organizations with better reputation.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1301.0114篇名：The Moderating Roles of Loneliness and Perceived Supervisor Support in the Relationship between Cultural Intelligence and Overseas Work Adjustment並列篇名：孤獨感與主管支持對文化智商與海外工作適應關係之影響作者：陳心懿(Angela Shin-Yih Chen);林怡君(Yi-Chun Lin);蔡逸婷(Yi-Ting Tsai)關鍵字：文化智商;孤獨感;主管支持;海外工作適應;cultural intelligence;loneliness;supervisor support;overseas work adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究透過台灣中部地區之307位菲律賓外籍勞工樣本，進行文化智商、孤獨感及主管支持三元交互效果對海外工作適應之驗證。結果發現主管支持正向調節文化智商與海外工作適應之關係；文化智商、孤獨感、主管支持之三因子交互作用對於海外工作適應的結果亦為顯著，其中以高孤獨感—高主管支持者效果最為顯著。因此，當個體在海外產生孤寂感受之際，若主管能適時提供情緒性鼓勵與實質性協助，將促進個人對於海外任務的心理調適程度，此研究結果可做為企業提升員工海外調適情況之參考依據。英文摘要：The present study was focused on providing insight into the adjustment made by foreign contracted laborers working overseas. We investigated how cultural intelligence, loneliness, and supervisor support can influence overseas work adjustment. Data were collected from 307 Philippine contracted laborers in Taiwan via paper-based questionnaires. The results showed that supervisor support moderated the relationship between cultural intelligence (CQ) and overseas work adjustment, and the three-way interaction among CQ, loneliness and supervisor support had a significant impact on overseas work adjustment. This paper includes discussion, implications and limitations.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1301.0215篇名：Knowledge Sharing as a Means to Relationship Building: The Role of Expected Relationship Improvement in Knowledge Sharing並列篇名：知識分享做為一種建立關係的途徑：知識分享中預期關係改善的角色作者：姜定宇(Ding-Yu Jiang);林沛樺(Pei-Hua Lin)關鍵字：知識分享意願;知識分享行為;預期關係改善;社會交換理論;計畫行為理論;knowledge-sharing intention;knowledge-sharing behavior;expected relationship improvement;social exchange theory;theory of planned behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：知識分享是組織競爭優勢的重要影響因素，然而，個人的知識分享行為卻會削弱個人的競爭優勢。而從社會交換理論的觀點來說，知識分享可以被視為是展現個人友誼與支持的行動，而能夠增進人際關係。於是我們假設預期關係改善將會增進知識分享意願與知識分享行為之間的關係。本研究蒐集23個團隊中252筆對偶資料，結果發現預期關係改善會調節知識分享意願與知識分享行為之間的關係。當個人愈是認為分享知識給同事是能夠增進彼此的關係時，知識分享意願與知識分享行為之間的正向關聯愈強。本研究並指出未來有關知識分享的未來研究方向與實務意涵。英文摘要：Knowledge sharing is critical to an organization's competitive advantage, yet an individual's knowledge-sharing behavior indicates a loss of personal competitive advantage. From a social exchange perspective, knowledge sharing may be considered an expression of friendship and support that strengthens interpersonal relationships. Thus, we hypothesized that expected relationship improvement increases the relationship between knowledge-sharing intention and knowledge-sharing behavior. Using 252 sets of dyadic data collected from 23 teams, we found that expected relationship improvement moderated the relationship between knowledge-sharing intention and knowledge-sharing behavior. That is, the relationship between knowledge-sharing intention and knowledge-sharing behavior was stronger when individuals perceived that sharing knowledge with coworkers could result in higher personal gain by improving their relationship with the coworker. Implications for future knowledge-sharing research and managerial practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：61-79資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1301.0316篇名：「罵」有用嗎？以資源保存理論看不當督導對部屬的影響並列篇名：The Relationship among Abusive Supervision, Subordinates' Job Attitudes and Personality Hardiness: A Conservation of Resource Theory Perspective作者：許境頤(Chin-Yi Hsu);江彧慈(Yu-Tzu Chiang)關鍵字：不當督導;工作倦怠;工作投入;人格韌性;abusive supervision;burnout;job involvement;hardiness期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：13卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採資源保存理論的觀點，探討不當督導對個體的影響歷程。本研究視不當督導為狀態資源與外在資源，人格韌性為個人特徵資源，探討在不當督導的環境下，個人的工作倦怠與人格韌性對其工作投入之影響。本研究以10家科技業中在職且有直屬主管之工程師和技術員為對象，分兩階段進行資料收集，共獲得300筆有效資料。研究結果顯示，在控制共事年資、與主管性別相同與否和社會期許等變項後，工作倦怠對不當督導及工作投入具中介效果，而人格韌性則可調節不當督導與工作倦怠之關係。英文摘要：Taking the perspective of Conservation of Resource Theory (COR), we investigated the impact of abusive supervision on subordinates' burnout and job involvement. We also examined the moderating role of subordinates' personality hardness in the above relationship. Data was collected at two time periods from 300 participants, separated by a one month interval, to avoid common method variance. Results suggested that abusive supervision was negatively related to subordinates' job involvement and subordinates' burnout mediated this relationship. Subordinates' personality hardiness moderated the positive relationship between abusive supervision and burnout, such that the relationship was weaker in individuals with high personality hardiness. The theoretical and practical implications of this study were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：81-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2013.1301.0401篇名：乾淨空氣何處尋？空氣汙染暴險之人口及地理不均等分佈並列篇名：Spatial Distribution and Socio-Demographic Characteristics of the Population with High Exposure to Traffic-Related Pollution in Taipei作者：李崇睿(Chung-Rui Lee);龍世俊(Candice Shih-Chun Lung);吳治達(Chih-Da Wu)關鍵字：空氣污染暴險;人口分佈;地理統計空間分析;空間聚集性;air pollution exposure;population distribution;geospatial analysis;spatial autocorrelation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：交通排放是都市中重要的空氣污染來源，對健康也有不良影響。污染物濃度依離馬路遠近之不同，在小尺度空間分佈上實有顯著的差異，民眾也因而遭受到不同暴險程度。本研究利用新發展並完成驗證的「三維數位地理分析法」，結合了地理資訊系統以及高解析度的數值地形模式，來探討大臺北地區（包含臺北市及新北市）各村里之交通污染「高暴險社群人口比」以及「高暴險人口密度」，並探討「高暴險社群」（定義為住在離市區馬路5公尺內一、二樓之民眾）之人口社經特徵及空間分佈。研究結果顯示，大臺北地區平均各村里有14%的人口居住在離市區馬路5公尺範圍內之一、二樓，屬於「高暴險社群」。分析這些居住著高密度「高暴險社群」之各村里人口特徵顯示，女性、15至65歲間之民眾、教育程度高、及申報所得較高者傾向居住於較高「高暴險人口密度」之村里，他們有著相對較高的暴險程度。空間分析則指出，「高暴險社群人口比」與「高暴險人口密度」皆具空間聚集分佈，此外，在去除極端值後，「高暴險人口密度」平均值為3,771人／km^2，標準差為4,006人／km^2，最高達38,519人／km^2，充分顯示大臺北地區存在交通暴露不均等現象，高暴險人口密度區大都位於市中心之老舊社區。「局部空間指標關聯分析（LISA）」結果則指出大臺北地區之人口社經特徵之空間不均等及交通暴露不均等同時發生，與都市發展歷程及早期人口分佈相關。然而社會經濟不均等並未連帶影響社經弱勢族群遭受到加重的交通暴險，反而是教育程度高的社群，由於自我選擇造成其高度聚集於高交通暴險區。本研究顯示，使用新發展之「三維數位地理分析法」可較精確地找出高交通暴險區及其人口特徵，未來，此創新方法可推廣應用在其它任何著重於三維人口分佈特性之研究。英文摘要：In urban areas, traffic emissions are a major source of air pollution, which results in health effects. Traffic-related pollutant concentrations vary both horizontally and vertically with distances from major roads, resulting in different exposure levels for urban dwellers. The objectives of this study are (1) to assess the three-dimensional distribution of the population with high exposure to traffic emissions at the district level with an innovative approach, Three-Dimensional digital Geography methodology (3DIG), and (2) to explore the socio-demographic characteristics of the high exposure population in Taipei. The results show that on average 14% of people live within 5 m of municipal roads on the first and second floors in each township in the studied area. High Exposure Population Density (HEPD) represents the number of people within the high exposure areas per square kilometer. After excluding one extreme value, the average HEPD is 3,771 persons/km^2 with a standard deviation of 4,006 persons/km^2; the maximum is 38,519 persons/km^2. This clearly shows the spatial inequality of traffic exposure in Taipei. Additionally, a correlational analysis indicates that females aged 15 to 64, and those with higher income and higher education tend to live in the higher HEPD areas. Furthermore, geospatial analysis shows that the population with high traffic-related pollution exposure is highly clustered, resulting from the expansion of metropolitan Taipei. However, the socio-demographic spatial inequality does not coincident with spatial inequality of traffic exposure. It turns out that residents with higher education levels living in downtown areas have relatively high traffic pollution exposure in Taipei. This study demonstrates that 3DIG is a versatile methodology which can be used in any research focusing on three-dimensional population distribution.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2013.47.012篇名：從兒子偏好與家庭資源探討手足結構對生育決策的影響並列篇名：The Effects of Sibling Structure on Fertility Decisions in Taiwan作者：謝志龍(Chih-Lung Hsieh)關鍵字：手足結構;生育決策;兒子偏好;家庭資源;sibling structure;fertility decision;son preference;family resource期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文根據兒子偏好與家庭資源的理論基礎，嘗試建立一個連續性生育決策的模型，藉由前幾胎子女所組成的手足結構來分析繼續生育下一胎的機率，釐清一系列社會人口等因素的作用。本文分析的資料取自華人家庭動態資料庫（PSFD），樣本出生年涵蓋1934－1986年，藉由這群受訪樣本的資料將能夠獲知其父母親進行生育決策時所考量的因素。本研究的主要發現如下：第一，手足結構的效力獲得證實，影響生育決策的因素不是單個手足成員的效果，而是由各胎子女的性別與出生序組成的手足結構扮演重要角色。第二，性別均衡假設未成立，兒子偏好假設獲支持。在面臨生育第三或第四胎的抉擇時，都是女兒的手足結構，比起都是兒子的手足結構，父母親有較高的機率選擇繼續生育。第三，「偏好生育兒子」與「偏好投資兒子」對生育決策具有相反的影響，隨著生育兒子數目的增加將減緩父母親繼續生育的機率。第四，社會階層假設不成立，不同社經地位的手足結構對生育決策影響力並沒有差異。第五，世代假設同樣不成立，年長與年輕世代的手足結構對生育決策影響力也沒有分別。最後，本研究的結果發現手足結構確實會影響繼續生育的機率，顯示臺灣家庭的生育決策是一種連續性的決策過程。英文摘要：Drawing from theories of son preference and family resources, this paper attempts to construct a sequential fertility model, and then uses it to estimate the probability of parents' fertility decisions for their first few children by the sibling structure and to elaborate the effects of various socio-demographic factors. The data used in the analysis come from the PSFD, in which respondents were born between 1934 and 1986. The main findings are as follows. Firstly, the sibling structure has a significant effect on fertility decisions. Secondly, the gender-balance hypothesis is rejected, whereas the son-preference hypothesis is supported. Parents with daughters in their first two or three births have a greater likelihood to have a next child. Thirdly, son preference and son investment have opposite effects on fertility decisions. The number of sons tends to reduce the likelihood of parents having another child. Fourthly, the hypothesis of social stratification is rejected. Parents of different status groups make similar fertility decisions. Fifthly, the data didn't support the cohort hypothesis, because the patterns of fertility decisions by different cohorts appear the same. Finally, the significant effect of sibling structure indicates that fertility decisions are made in a sequential decision-making process.起始頁-結束頁：35-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2013.47.023篇名：影響長期看護保險需求因素之探討並列篇名：Factors Affecting Demand for Long-Term Care Insurance作者：曾妙慧(Miao-Huei Tsen);繆震宇(Jerry C. Y. Miao)關鍵字：長期看護保險;家庭照顧;正式照顧;保險需求;long-term care insurance;home care;formal care;demand for insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：長期照顧服務可以分為非正式照顧與正式照顧，在臺灣非正式的庭照顧相較於正式的機構照顧不但較為普遍，也是老人較偏好的模式。根據國外的研究發現，家庭照顧的偏好有可能影響長期看護保險的需求。本研究探討家庭照顧的偏好以及其他因素是否會影響臺灣民眾購買長期看護保險。研究結果發現：第一、家庭照顧的偏好並不會影響臺灣民眾商業長期看護保險的需求，同時是否有家庭照顧的可能也與保險需求無關。第二、中年人對於長期看護保險的需求較高。第三、收入少於每月8萬元的受訪者，雖然保費支付的能力有限，對於長期看護保險卻有較高的需求。第四、中等所得者有較高的長期看護保險需求，資產保護的價值提供了投保的誘因。最後，長期照顧議題的瞭解程度、教育程度也會影響商業長期看護保險的需求。英文摘要：Long-term care services can be divided into informal care and formal care. Family care, the informal one, is not only more common, but also the preferred mode for elderly people in Taiwan. According to the literature, preference for family care may affect the demand for long-term care insurance. This study investigated the family care preference, as well as other factors that affect the demand for long-term care insurance in Taiwan. The results are as follows: 1. Preference for family care did not affect the demand for long-term care insurance, and the availability of family care such as children and spouse had no statistically significant effect on the demand for long-term care insurance. 2. Middle-aged people had higher demand for long-term care insurance. 3. Respondents who earned less than NT80,000 per month had higher demand for long-term care insurance, although they had limited ability to pay premiums. 4. Middle-income respondents had higher demand for long-term care insurance, as long-term care insurance acts as an asset protection instrument. 5. The perception of the long-term care issues and education also affected the demand for long-term care insurance.起始頁-結束頁：87-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2013.47.034篇名：人口聚集型態與經濟成長並列篇名：Population Agglomeration Patterns and Economic Growth作者：陳心蘋(Hsin-Ping Chen);曹書豪(Shu-Hao Tsao)關鍵字：都市化;等級規模係數;urbanization;rank-size coefficient期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：47期出版年：2013中文摘要：經濟活動的聚集對經濟成長的影響，可能隨著經濟成長的階段與型態的不同而改變。傳統的都市化人口比率呈現整體聚集經濟的程度，無法反映聚集經濟的差異。本文以估計的等級規模係數衡量都市間人口的差異程度，實證分析不同的聚集變數（都市化人口比例與都市人口差異程度），是否因國民所得與開放程度的不同，對經濟成長有不同的影響。主要貢獻為：（一）以都市化人口比率衡量聚集變數時，本文較Brulhart and Sbergami（2009）多採用2000－2010年資料，估計的門檻值較低，約7,100美元。（二）初探都市間規模差距對經濟成長的影響，較都市化人口比率變數更為顯著且結果不同。所得成長率可能隨著都市規模差異的縮減而降低，而其降低的幅度會隨著所得水準的增加而增加。都市政策宜考慮都市絕對規模與都市間相對規模。英文摘要：The effect of spatial concentration and hierarchy of economic activity on national growth is investigated using cross-section OLS and dynamic panel GMM estimation. Agglomeration patterns are measured by urbanization shares and level of urban hierarchy, which is measured through rank-size coefficient. We find evidence supports the ”Williamson hypothesis”; however, the critical level is estimated at USD 7,100 lower than that of previous work. The impact of the level of urban hierarchy on country level growth is significant and positively related to national income. This result implies that not only the degree of absolute agglomeration effect but also the relative size of agglomerations among cities is worth considering.起始頁-結束頁：127-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2013.47.045篇名：從虛擬到現實的身分認同：以東莞與華東臺商學校的畢業生為例並列篇名：Memories of a Future Home: Teenagers from Taiwanese Schools in China作者：林平(Ping Lin)關鍵字：移民;青少年;認同;臺灣;中國大陸;Migration;adolescent;identity;Taiwan;Mainland China期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：大部分針對青少年移居者的研究是以境內少數族群的青少年為對象，認為他們在當地國生活與教育的經驗，會使他們在一定程度上融入主流社會，形成一個雖同時包含兩地，但以當地社會為主的身分認同。本文則是針對一群特殊的青少年，他們移居海外後並沒有進入當地的教育體系，而是在當地就讀依循母國教育體系的海外學校，進而討論這樣特殊的經驗對他們身分認同的影響。本文資料來自筆者2004－2005年於「東莞臺商子弟學校」與「華東臺商子女學校」兩地擔任兼任教師期間的觀察，以及2008－2012年期間持續資料收集，來討論當事人在兩校就學期間及畢業後身分認同的轉變。筆者發現，臺商學校成功發揮了臺灣「替代品」的角色，使當事人在就學期間都明顯表示認同臺灣。但是這種缺乏在臺灣實際生活經驗的身分認同，使他們在畢業後不論是返臺升學，或是留在中國大陸升學但短暫返臺，都很快的感到不適應，彷彿「僑生」般的失落與疏離。另一方面，他們在臺商學校及中國大陸的生活經驗，使他們原先以臺灣為標的之身分認同，逐漸轉變成一個以「臺商學校」（或臺商社群）為核心，第二圈是「臺灣」，第三圈是「中國大陸」，形成一個超越「臺灣」或「中國」二分法的身分認同。英文摘要：Most research on the identity of immigrant adolescents concentrates on the 1.5- and second-generation minorities. Because they are living and educated in the host country, their identity with the home country is limited. This paper focuses on a special group of adolescents. Although they have moved abroad, they do not study at schools provided for the local students. These adolescents enter schools which follow the curriculum of their home country. By analyzing their experiences at these schools and life after they graduate, we may know how this type of ”overseas education” affects the identity formation of these adolescents.The data of this paper is based on the author’s participant observation in two Taiwanese Schools (Dongguan and Huadong) in Mainland China in 2004-2005, and informal interviews with graduates in 2008-2012. All of the respondents clearly claimed their Taiwanese identity while they were students. However, this Taiwanese identity was based not on respondents’ experiences in Taiwan but on their life at these two schools, which functioned as ”surrogates” of Taiwan. Because this Taiwanese identity was not built upon real experiences in Taiwan, they felt alienated as outsiders when they returned to and associated with people in Taiwan. After moving back and forth across the Strait for several years, they developed a new sense of Taiwanese identity. Although these graduates still identified themselves as Taiwanese, they gradually came to perceive the Taiwanese community in Mainland China as the core, surrounded by Taiwan and Mainland China as the periphery, of this target of identity. In this multi-layer form of Taiwanese identity, these graduates gradually came to regard the Taiwanese communities overseas, rather than Taiwan or Mainland China, to build up their memories of a future home.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2013.16篇名：人口遷徙、性別結構及其社會文化變遷：從僑鄉到戰地的金門並列篇名：Population Movement, Gender Structure and Social-Cultural Change: A Case Study of the Modern History of Quemoy作者：江柏煒(Bo-Wei Chiang)關鍵字：華僑;移民;冷戰;性別研究;overseas Chinese;migration;cold war;gender studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：19至20世紀的金門歷經劇烈的歷史變遷，其中一個關鍵因素是人口遷徙。1840年代以後，大量青壯人口出洋謀生，其中東南亞各埠、日本長崎及神戶為主要的僑居地。人口的跨境流動對地方社會產生幾個層面的影響：一是部分累積財富的華僑除了贍養家眷外，亦挾其資本返鄉建屋以光耀門楣，且參與地方事務以貢獻桑梓；二是出洋人口多為男性，僑鄉社會性別比例不均，婦女「母代父職、妻代夫職」，角色吃重。1949年以後，金門成為兩岸熱戰、國際冷戰的軍事前線，大量軍隊進駐金門的結果：一是軍人消費經濟的興起，一改前期仰賴僑匯的支助；二是性別結構完全翻轉，成為一個以男性為主的封閉社會。本文在地方史料與田野調查的基礎上，以19世紀中葉至20世紀後期的金門為例，探究因人口流動所衍生之社會文化變遷。首先，分析在1840年代至1949年間金門做為僑鄉的歷史情境，包括男性人口外流、華僑商紳階層的興起、僑匯網絡的建立、僑鄉婦女的處境等。再者，探討1949-1992年間金門做為兩岸對峙、世界冷戰的前線，戰地體制如何維持有效性、海外華僑網絡如何賡續、華僑如何代替地方社會發聲的史實，以及男性軍人移入所造成的性別結構不均所衍生的社會危機與對策等。最後進一步指出，20世紀的金門從人口流出、外來僑匯、開放流動的僑鄉變成人口流入、內需產業、封閉禁錮的戰地，其實是歷經了一種關乎人口遷徙、性別的社會文化變遷。英文摘要：Quemoy (Kinmen) is an island close to Quanzhou (Zaitun) and Xiamen (Amoy) port. A large of number of its residents immigrated to Southeast Asia as well as Nagasaki and Kobe in Japan in search of a living after the 1860s. After they eventually accumulated wealth, these transnational overseas Chinese brought their capital back to Quemoy to participate in family, clan or public affairs. In addition, the gender proportion of the population of Quemoy became unbalanced, so women played a major role in local society. After 1949, Quemoy became a battlefront between the KMT and the CCP, as well as the frontline in the confrontation between Cold War blocs. Under military administration, the power of traditional lineages was suppressed and their connections with their fellow countrymen living abroad were severed. For forty-three long years, until 1992, Quemoy was transformed from an open hometown of overseas Chinese into a closed battlefield and forbidden zone.This paper tries to discuss the relationship between social-cultural change and population flow in the modern history of Quemoy. First, I will analyze the historical situation in the society there, including emigration of its young men, the rise of an overseas merchant-gentry class, economics of remittance and its cultural landscape, women's life histories etc. Secondly, I deal with the social reality of Quemoy as a battlefield, including immigration of soldiers, the impact of military governance, the influence of soldiers' consumption, and the social crisis due to the gender imbalance and the military authority's response. Finally, I will generalize from two different social-cultural changes for population flow and gender politics in modern Quemoy.起始頁-結束頁：47-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2013.27篇名：巴西招徠臺灣人移民－1960年代我國政府的態度與人民的反應並列篇名：Migration from Taiwan to Brazil: Attitude of Taiwan's Government and Reactions of Its People作者：湯熙勇(Shi-Yeoung Tang)關鍵字：臺灣人;巴西;聖保羅;移民;南美洲;Taiwan;Taiwanese;Brazil;Sao Paulo;immigrant期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：1950年代，巴西政府為了開發其廣大的土地資源，向臺灣政府建議自臺灣移民至巴西，成為臺灣輿論討論的議題。對於巴西政府的建議，臺灣政府的態度與臺灣人民的反應為何，這是本文探討的目的。臺灣政府對臺灣人移民巴西的態度保守，但是臺灣人為了尋求良好的生活環境，移民巴西的意願很高。臺灣人民以家庭為移民單位，搭船或飛機抵達聖保羅或海息飛等城市；但是也有臺灣人經由巴拿馬或巴拉圭，非法進入巴西，其後，還是獲得巴西政府提供居留許可。移民巴西的臺灣人中，有農夫、退伍軍人、商人等，在巴西的鄉村從事農業種植，或在城市經營小型貿易或開餐館。移民巴西的臺灣人，以從事提包生意作為開始。為了推銷生意，他們必須克服說葡萄牙語的障礙，努力地在巴西尋求較好地生活。臺灣人移民巴西的故事，已經成為臺灣移民史的一部分。英文摘要：This paper focuses on the attitude of Taiwan's government toward the immigration of Taiwanese people to Brazil and their reactions. In the 1950's, the Brazil government arranged with the Taiwan government for Taiwanese people to immigrate to Brazil to promote the development of agriculture, but after several years, the government of Taiwan halted this out of fear that young Taiwanese immigrants would not return, and would thus not be available to help fight against military attacks from mainland China. However, in order to look for better living conditions, in the 1960s a number of Taiwanese families emigrated to Brazil, arriving by ship or by airplane at the port city in Sao Paulo. Also, many Taiwanese entered Brazil via Panama and Paraguay illegally, later obtaining legal resident status.Early Taiwanese immigrants were mainly farmers. Later groups of retired military veterans and small merchants either farmed or started small commercial activities. During the following years, most immigrants abandoned their agricultural activities and established stores specializing in Taiwan's products or Chinese restaurants, and stayed in the city of Sao Paulo. Taiwanese immigrants endeavored to make a better living in Brazil. Many devoted themselves to the handbag business, as it required only a small amount of start-up money. In order to do business with customers and to sell their goods, Taiwanese immigrants also worked hard to overcome the language barrier. In fact, the story of Taiwanese migration to Brazil has been a major part of the history of Taiwanese immigrants.起始頁-結束頁：87-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2013.38篇名：移動之民：一點五代年輕移民在臺澳之間的適應與流動並列篇名："Returning Migrants": The Movement and Adaptation of Taiwanese One and a Half Generation Migrants between Taiwan and Australia作者：徐榮崇(Richard Jung-Chung Hsu)關鍵字：回流;澳洲;遷移;適應;迴圈移民;return migration;Australia;migration;adaptation;circular migration期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：46期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要透過跨國主義的概念，探索臺灣一點五代年輕移民在臺、澳兩地間的適應情形對回臺決策的影響。在方法上，針對22位曾居住於布里斯本、雪梨和墨爾本的年輕移民進行深度訪談，並將訪談結果加以群聚歸類，從「在澳洲的適應」、「回流過程」與「回臺後的適應」三動態移動過程，用矩陣將影響因素進行交叉分析，並以此建構一個關係樹狀圖，得以分析各影響因素之間的關係。發現影響年輕移民移動的因素包括社會環境、家庭與個人等不同尺度因素。因素間交互影響讓決策成為一個動態的過程，不但具有跨國性思維也受到社會網絡影響，而這樣的決策情形挑戰了傳統對回流定義的觀點。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to explore the adaptation and movement of 1.5-generation Taiwanese immigrants between Australia and Taiwan under the concept of transnationalism.A variety of research methods are used in this study to explore the research questions. These are followed by a series of in-depth interviews of twenty-two young Taiwanese immigrants who have settled in Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne to investigate in detail the factors of decision making in the process of ”return.” The relationship among the factors is analysed by cross matrix, and the relation tree is formed to conclude the scenario.This paper has explored the adaptation experience of the 1.5-generation Taiwanese migrants in Australia and Taiwan. These migrants mainly interworked by different scale factors of ”Social,” ”Family” and ”Individual” and constructed in the dynamic process of moving decision while engaging in transnationalism. They also need to construct the social network for the home and host countries. The dynamic strategies of the young migrants behind the transnational movement challenge the traditional notion of ”return migration.”起始頁-結束頁：121-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2013.49篇名：Immigrant Adaptation in Multi-Ethnic Societies Canada, Taiwan, and the United States新書發表會紀實作者：廖明中;黃佳媛期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：46期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：163-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2013.510篇名：Book Reviews並列篇名：書評期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：46期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：175-179+181-193資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/jps.2013.601篇名：愛錢來做伙並列篇名：The Purchase of Lesbian Intimacy: Managing ”Female Homosexuality” in Taiwan Literature in the 1970s作者：紀大偉(Ta-Wei Chi)關鍵字：女同性戀;T婆;郭良蕙;玄小佛;李昂;瓊瑤;朱天心;Lesbianism;T-Po;butch/femme;Liang-hui Kuo;Hsiao-fo Hsuan;Li Ang;Qiong Yao;Tian-hsin Chu;homosexuality期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：33期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣文學中的第一波「男同性戀」在1960年代密集出現，第一波的「女同性戀」則在1970年代大放異彩。當時台灣進入「經濟起飛」階段，女性大量離開家戶（離開家長監控）並投入工廠或學校，開始有一點談戀愛的餘錢和餘暇。在瓊瑤愛情王國已經矗立的商品時代，不同社經位置（含勞工地位）的作家紛紛生產女子的各種愛情敘事。本文研討的多種文本，不約而同仰賴「愛錢來作伙」的邏輯：兩個女生能夠作伙，是建立在物質（錢，或其他有形無形的資本）基礎上；如果拆夥，往往就是因為物質利益不再。這個邏輯也區隔了文學中的男同性戀和女同性戀。當時文學中的男同性戀「者」各自獨立追逐色慾而不特別看重錢，「女同性戀『關係』」（並非各自獨立的「者」）則在乎（撮合雙方的）經濟而非（一人獨享的）肉慾。本文所指的「女同性戀」並不限「T婆關係」；要到1970年代末，明確描寫T婆的長篇小說才出現。本文第一節以1960年代末尾的歐陽子、白先勇短篇小說為例，指出經濟的考量決定了女女聚散；第二節以1970年代上半期的李昂短篇小說為例，強調「性知識」形同人際關係中的本錢；第三節主張1970年代下半期通俗小說家玄小佛、郭良蕙的長篇小說（都比白先勇的《孽子》還早出版）不但展現了「T婆」的配對，也凸顯了「人我」（異性戀主流社會vs同性戀我）的差別；第四節藉著討論蕭麗紅、朱天心等人的作品，思考怎麼樣的「女同性戀」才「值得」（有價值）被紀念、被納入文學史。英文摘要：By ”the purchase of lesbian intimacy,” this article identifies in the 1970s literature the scenario that female homosexual couples in Taiwan are shown to be motivated more by financial security (with the help of capital either monetary or cultural) than by satisfaction of desire. Once the financial inducements end, such couples are subject to collapse. This connection of economy with intimacy is almost absent in the 1960s and 1970s literature on male homosexuality but highly visible in the 1970s literature on female homosexuality. Gay men (qua independent individuals) seek immediate sexual gratification rather than money whereas female homosexual couples (qua mutually dependent pairs) prefer long-term relationships, which require relationship-maintaining capital, to carnal satisfaction. This article focuses on the first wave of literary representations of female homosexuality in the 1970s. The advent of this first wave may be partially owing to the 1970s economic boom in Taiwan, which finally enabled women to leave home and escape parental control by working as laborers or by receiving middle and higher education. Equipped with pocket money and/or cultural capital, women, either in real life or in literature, were able to produce and consume narratives of romantic love, the luxuries not imaginable in the relatively more impoverished 1960s society. ”Butch” and ”femme” roughly correspond to ”T” and ”Po” in Taiwan. Contrary to common belief, the ”T-Po” model does not monopolize the 1970s literary representations of female homosexuality. Many women in the texts creatively establish non-normative relationships with women, which do not necessarily exclude the possibility of bisexuality. It is noteworthy that many female characters interact with men (sexually or not) in order to procure capital to maintain their relationships with other women. Heterosexuality thus happens to take a part in the reproduction of female homosexuality as the texts under discussion suggest.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.33.12篇名：愛滋、同性戀與婚家想像並列篇名：AIDS, Gay Men, and Aspirations to Marriage: The Politics of the Disabled and the Queer in Chen Ruoxi's Paper Marriage作者：蔡孟哲(Meng-Che Tsai)關鍵字：愛滋;同性戀;身心障礙（殘障）;酷兒;陳若曦;描述性閱讀;AIDS;homosexuality;disability;queer;Paper Marriage;descriptive reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：33期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文討論《紙婚》（陳若曦，1986），回望愛滋在1980年代蔓延的種種影響，試圖分析小說如何再現所謂「幸福婚家」和「不幸疾病」之間的辯證。透過探問愛滋病和同性戀對於敘事的作用與效果，本文認為小說展現出一種「殘（障）／酷（兒）」的政治性，可以用來質疑以婚家慾望為基礎的「同志幸福政治」。本文的問題意識在於：殘／酷議題（特別是愛滋情節）被嵌入小說敘事中，對於小說敘事產生什麼作用？亦即，關於殘／酷的想像如何推動敘事情節的展開？而小說中的殘／酷又如何能連結到小說所處的社會脈絡？本文採用「描述性閱讀」的觀點來分析《紙婚》，將小說視為「紀實美學」的展現，藉由這樣的閱讀徑路，凸顯《紙婚》所描繪的污名現實，推展本文所要呈現的殘／酷政治。本文強調小說觀察並描述美國社會如何面對同性戀和愛滋，透過小說技藝和文學手法再現那段歷史，看見1981年愛滋出現後，體現於全球男同性戀身體的「殘／酷」政治，回望有關疾病、殘障、污名、歧視、死亡、失落的歷史。英文摘要：This article discusses Chen Ruoxi's Paper Marriage written in 1986. By viewing the various impacts brought by the AIDS epidemic that are depicted in this work of fiction, it also attempts to analyze the dialectical interplay between the epitomized ”happy marriage and family” and ”misfortune of disease” represented in this novel. After inquiring how AIDS and homosexuality have influenced the narrative, this paper argues that Paper Marriage shows the politics of disability/queerness in order to question the politics of gay happiness which is usually depicted as based on desire for marriage and family. Through a lens of ”descriptive reading” in analyzing this novel, this paper takes Paper Marriage as an expression of ”documentary aesthetics,” and it focuses on its narrative of how American society viewed the historical events surrounding homosexuality and AIDS that are represented and recorded in the art of novels and form of literature. It enables ”AIDS remains AIDS and homosexuality remains homosexuality.” To visualize the embodied politics of disability/queerness against the background of global male homosexuality-since the first case of AIDS was reported in 1981-is to look backwards at the history of disease, disability, stigma, discrimination, death and loss.起始頁-結束頁：47-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.33.473篇名：階級．性．變態－舒暢小說中的分斷情感並列篇名：Class, Sexuality, Perversion: The Affection in ”Division” in Shu Chang's Novels作者：宋玉雯(Yu-Wen Sung)關鍵字：舒暢;分斷;階級;性／別;婚家;性交易;底層外省人;Shu Chang;division;class;sexuality;family-state system;sex trade;lower class waishengren期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：33期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文擬採用「分斷」作為閱讀舒暢小說的另種分析進路，以把握小說中展現的「寫實性」，特別是舒暢筆下涉及「隔絕」與「等待」的作品。本文認為這些關於「隔絕」與「等待」的故事，都或隱或現地回應了分斷的歷史現實。舒暢依稀寫出了一種或可名之為「隔絕－等待」的分斷體驗情感結構，而在這些分斷下的隔絕與等待的故事裡，舒暢又特別關注底層外省男性的流離狀態，透過描寫這樣一種性與性／別都不在家國打造的生存位置，顯示出婚家狀態和性的買賣與幽閉的複雜度－事實上，舒暢的多則小說都置疑了構築家國體制基礎的婚姻家庭連續體，這也正是舒暢小說之「寫實性」的關鍵切口：族群、階級、性／別……的經驗從來不是可以被切割開來分別對待的「議題」，而總是作為個體複雜的身分位置顯示出所謂的「差異」。本文認為，唯有從性／別切入，將舒暢的小說放歸「分斷」的歷史現實，並置於族群、性／別與階級的視野中「整體地去思考」，方能把握舒暢小說的特點，也才能理解其長年受到文學史忽視之於我們所意謂的損失。英文摘要：In this essay I choose to analyze Shu Chang's novels from an alternative perspective of ”division,” a perspective adopted in order to grasp the realism in his works-especially those involved with ”isolation” and ”waiting” which, in explicit and implicit ways, reflected the historical reality of ”division.” Through these works Shu expresses an ”isolation/waiting affective structure in the experience of division,” focusing particularly on the male lower class waishengren's experiences of drifting through life in Taiwan lacking family ties. Through depicting such a strategy of survival in which both the subject's sex and sexuality are not located in a proper position as constructed by the family and the state, these stories show us the complexity of the conditions of marriage and family, trade in sex, and isolation. In fact, in many of his works, Shu queries the ”marriage and family continuum” that constructed the basis of the family-state system. This is exactly the breakthrough achieved through the realism in Shu's novels: the experiences of ethnicity, class, sexuality, and so on, have never been ”issues” that can be treated separately on their own; rather, these have always been intrinsic to the human being that exists with complex identities and thus displays ”difference.” Only through the perspective of sexuality, while situating Shu's novels back in the historical reality of ”division” and looking at them as parts of a whole picture that consists of ethnicity, sexuality and class, can we grasp the characteristics of Shu's novels, and so understand what literary scholars have missed by ignoring these works for so many years.起始頁-結束頁：79-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.33.794篇名：還是不平等－婦運修法改造父權家庭的困境與未竟之業並列篇名：Still Unequal: The Difficulties and Unfinished Business of Feminist Legal Reform of the Patriarchal Family作者：陳昭如(Chao-Ju Chen)關鍵字：婦運;法律改革;形式平等;實質平等;多元交織性;婚姻與家庭;women's movement;legal reform;formal equality;substantive equality;intersectionality;marriage and family期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：33期出版年：2013中文摘要：近二十年來，婦運的法律改革大幅改寫了法律上的婚姻與家庭關係圖像。長年以來受到批評挑戰的夫／父權獨大的惡法，多已被男女相同待遇的新法取代。這是否表示，法律上的婚姻家庭制度已經趨於自由且平等，婚姻家庭已不再是父權的桎梏，而成為可自由選擇的平等關係？觀諸台灣的社會現實，女性在婚姻家庭中的處境仍然不平等，這是否證明了法律與社會之間存在重大落差、因此法律無能改變社會？本文藉由回顧婦運法律改革的軌跡、考察社會現實，來檢討婦運法律改革的成果與困境，論證法律與社會之間的落差並非此困境的適當解釋，主張實質平等的轉向才是關鍵所在。本文首先分析民主化之後，婦運改造父權婚姻家庭的法律改革特色：「中性化」與「私化」，亦即以中性待遇取代男女差別待遇、以私人的自由協商來取代國家強制，而婚生推定與結婚年齡則是殘存的差別待遇之例。婚生推定制度與結婚年齡制度的設計，都預設了男性標準：母職的義務性與婚姻作為義務性母職的機制，並可用以說明「以差別待遇說明性別歧視」的不足之處。在中性法律之下的不平等現實：多數小孩仍從父姓，多數妻子仍從夫居，多數外國妻子歸化我國國籍，則顯示「法定從父姓」與「約定從父姓」、「法定從夫居」與「協議夫妻住所」、「法定從夫之國籍」與「自由選擇歸化」的結果並無太大不同：女人仍從屬於男人。因此，壓迫並未成為過去式，只是轉型：不平等變成人們「自由選擇」的結果，「私化」更讓國家得以隱身在維繫不平等的中性法律背後。法律與社會之間的「落差」並不足以解釋不平等的現象，反而可能讓我們錯失開展不同法律想像的可能。婦運也面臨對抗多元交織壓迫的困境，而身障、原住民反歧視法中展現的實質平等精神，則是婦運可汲取養分之處。最後，本文主張，性別的現狀仍是不平等，而實質平等的轉向將可讓我們更清楚地揭露形式平等的隱形牢籠，並且撼動多元交織的高牆。英文摘要：In the past twenty years, legal reform has significantly reformulated the legal regulation of marriage and family, which has long been under contestation from feminist critics. Gender-neutral laws have replaced gender-specific laws which privileged sons, husbands and fathers. Does this suggest that marriage and family are free and equal institutions in law, that marriage and family have stopped being patriarchal institutions, and that they begin to be equal relationships that are freely-chosen? In reality, this does not seem to be the case. Does the fact that women remain unequal in marriage and family indicate a huge gap between law and society, and therefore suggest that we cannot change society through law? This article offers a review of feminist legal reform and a reality check. It argues that the gap between law and society cannot adequately explain the difficulties of this reform, and suggests that a turn to substantive equality is the key to real change. It begins by identifying two trends of feminist legal reform: neutralization and domesticization, that is, to replace gender-specific treatments with gender-neutral treatments, and to replace state intervention with private decisions. Two of the remaining gender-specific legal treatments are marriage-presumption of paternity and marriageable ages. Both of these legal treatments presume a male standard, that is, mandatory motherhood and marriage as an institution of mandatory motherhood. Aside from this, the reality under neutral laws is an unequal one: most children adopt their fathers' surnames, most wives live in their husbands' domiciles, and most foreign wives naturalize. There is little difference between legal patronymy and parents' choice, legal patrilocality and a couple's choice, marital expatriation and a wife's choice. Women are still subordinate to men. Oppressions have been transformed rather than abolished: inequality becomes the result of free choice, and privatization exempts the state from its anti-discrimination responsibility. The gap between law-in-books and law-in-action does not offer satisfactory explanations, and it might lead us away from an alternative imagination of the law. The women's movement also has difficulties in dealing with intersectional oppressions. Lessons can be learned from legislations on disability and aboriginal rights, which embrace substantive equality. It is concluded that the status quo is unequal, and a turn to substantive equality will enable us to reveal the invisible cage of formal equality and combat interlocking oppressions.起始頁-結束頁：119-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.33.1195篇名：重探性別融入教學之「融入」意涵並列篇名：The Incorporation of Gender Perspectives into Curriculum and Instruction in Taiwan: Issues Revisited作者：王儷靜(Li-Ching Wang)關鍵字：性別平等教育;性別融入教學;融入式教學;融入式課程;gender equity education;integration of gender equity into curriculum and instruction;integrated instruction;integrated curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：32期出版年：2013中文摘要：目前關於性別融入教學的文獻，多著重在性別與學科領域的轉化式課程，較少觸及融入一詞的意義與實務工作者對於融入概念的理解和實際作為。本研究旨在探究「融入」概念在性別融入教學中的意涵及運作方式，期能提昇對於性別議題在教學現場中的實施樣態與融入多元性之瞭解。研究發現：性別概念既融入課程亦融入教學；性別平等議題可被計畫性或隨機式地帶入教學現場；而教師對於性別社會建構觀點的瞭解，是性別平等教育的關鍵。轉化課程內涵中性別不平等的訊息、建構具性別平等概念的文本，是融入課程或計畫性融入的首要工作；檢視教學環境中以性別為基礎的不平等、實施具性別敏感度的班級經營，是融入教學或隨機式融入的核心。另有三個性別融入的議題亦於文中討論：性別教育實作的層次性概念、融入為教學策略或知識形構的區別，以及女性主義教育學和性別融入教學的關聯。英文摘要：Gender equity education is one of the major issues in Taiwan's educational reform movement. Plenty of discussions have been centered on how to integrate gender equity education with discipline-based instruction. Nevertheless, the concept and practice of the incorporation of gender perspectives into discipline-based instruction have not been thoroughly explored yet. The aim of this study is to understand how researchers and teachers conceptualize its meaning and practice.Teachers' understanding of the construction of gender within historical, cultural and socio-economic contexts is essential for gender equity education. Examining gender discriminative content inherent in curricular texts and developing gender-sensitive teaching materials are the ways to integrate gender equity with curriculum development. To be aware of gender biases in the schooling work, to develop gender-inclusive teaching strategies, and to create gender-sensitive learning environments are the ways to bring gender equity into instruction. Three issues that may extend the current framework are discussed. First, the levels of implementation need to be distinguished, rather than considering gender equity practice as all-or-none. Second, it is argued that the incorporation of gender equity into curriculum and instruction is not only an issue of teaching, but also an issue of knowing. And third, feminist pedagogy may enrich the practice of gender equity education.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.32.16篇名：男女廁之外的「其他」－世新大學「無性別廁所」之經驗評估與省思並列篇名："Other" than Men's and Women's Toilets: Reflection on the Unisex Restroom Experience of Shih Hsin University作者：彭渰雯(Yen-Wen Peng);林書<U+4F03>(Shu-Yu Lin);畢恆達(Herng-Dar Bih)關鍵字：無性別廁所;女廁;跨性別者;變性慾者;性別與空間;unisex restroom;women's restroom;transgender;transsexual;gender and space期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：32期出版年：2013中文摘要：世新大學於2011年將兩間既有男廁改建為無分性別的「性別友善」廁所，以回應多元性別平等的趨勢，受到各界注意。但是從使用者角度來看，此一設施所得到的評價為何，則值得深入探究，以進一步思考無性別廁所的定位與功能。本研究同時採問卷調查、觀察與訪談等方法，瞭解世新大學師生與職員對性別友善廁所的認知、態度和使用經驗。其中問卷調查部分一共蒐集到340份世新師生、職員的意見，訪談則是特別針對5位跨性別的學生與職員，瞭解其想法。不論從問卷統計或是訪談結果，都可發現無性別廁所出現「叫好不叫座」的現象，例如有81.6 %受訪者支持學校設置更多無性別廁所，但是曾使用無性別廁所的人僅有65.7 %，其中女性更僅有26.6 %。透過觀察記錄也發現無性別廁所仍多被當成男廁使用。許多（特別是女性）受訪者對如廁隱私界線的態度與使用行為，仍延續原有性別角色養成的偏好。即使是5位跨性別特質的受訪者，雖都支持無性別廁所的理念，但也不一定想親身使用。本文認為「叫好不叫座」是可以預期的反應，也正好讓我們深思廁所空間的性別改革是否只有「去除男女二分」一途。為此，本文呼應學者Jerry Kogan的主張：未來的公廁在男廁、女廁之外，另外增加一處「其他」（Other）廁所空間，一方面讓不同的性別認同和如廁需要，皆可在公廁空間內得到包容與回應，另一方面也可能鬆動性別二元主義下的空間想像，讓民眾對廁所、身體、隱私的感受與認知，能因為「其他」選擇的存在而有機會改變。至於這個「其他」空間的提案，是性別解放運動的階段性策略，還是值得所有性別化空間改革參考的典範，實與整體社會在多元性別平等議題上的辯證思考息息相關，有待更多時間、實踐與研究來回答。英文摘要：Shih Hsin University in Taipei launched a pioneering project to promote a gender-friendly campus by reconstructing two existing men's restrooms into unisex restrooms in 2011, which drew public attention. How do the potential and actual users evaluate this new facility, however, needs more exploration, so as to allow further reflection on the function and role of unisex restrooms. This study applied multiple methods, including surveys, observation, and interviews, to explore the student, faculty and staff's recognition, attitudes, and experiences on/with the unisex toilets. There were 340 questionnaires collected in the survey, and five transgender students and staff were interviewed.The surveys result showed that 92.0% of the respondents knew about the existence of the two unisex toilets in the campus, and 81.6 % endorsed the idea of installing them. Those who had used the unisex toilets, however, were only 65.7 % on average, with only 26.6 % of female respondents ever using them. The survey also found significant differences in terms of the psychological burdens and uneasiness regarding using unisex restrooms between male and female respondents. How to react to these worries and habits is a challenge that should be dealt with in promoting unisex restrooms.The interviews further revealed that the perceptions of unisex restrooms among transgender users are heterogeneous as a result of their different urinary experiences as well as different gender identities. In conclusion, the authors echo Jerry Kogan's argument for an extra toilet space termed ”Other” in addition to the existing ”Men” and ”Women” spaces. This should be an inclusive and flexible approach to accommodate all users with different gender identities and urinary needs, and at the same time still challenge the traditional, dichotomous approach of segregated restrooms.起始頁-結束頁：43-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.32.437篇名：從「BL妄想」看另類情慾建構－以台灣腐女在「執事喫茶」中的妄想實踐為例並列篇名：The Construction of Sexuality in "BL Fantasy": A Case Study of Taiwanese Fujoshi's Fantasy Practices in "Butler Cafes"作者：張瑋容(Wei-Jung Chang)關鍵字：情慾;台灣;腐女;妄想;同性社交;sexuality;Taiwan;Fujoshi;fantasy;homosociality期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：32期出版年：2013中文摘要：BL（Boys' Love）是日本少女漫畫界於1970年代逐漸發展起來的次領域，專指描繪男男愛戀／性愛關係的文本。過去國內的BL相關研究傾向將BL視為一種挑戰既有性別秩序的酷兒式閱讀與情慾實踐；然而本文則聚焦於BL最重要的元素「妄想」，強調腐女（BL愛好者）的妄想實踐之動態面向，藉由分析BL妄想的基本架構與妄想實踐的過程，探討腐女如何透過將男性情誼解讀為BL配對，來實踐另類的情慾建構。筆者挑選日本及台灣的「執事喫茶」，對於男性服務員扮演執事進行服務的過程作參與觀察，並訪談台灣腐女消費者的妄想實踐，得出以下結論：一方面，腐女與妄想對象之間保持距離，使腐女得以自由地對男男關係進行各種解讀；另一方面，BL妄想之所以成立，是因為它填補了男男同性情慾與同性社交之間看似連續的斷裂。透過BL妄想，腐女得以跳脫「女性讀者→男角」這種異性戀式的單向投射，去進行更抽象的對理想戀愛關係的共鳴。而考察「執事喫茶」的例子，則更能凸顯妄想實踐的動態過程，即腐女與執事雙方的演繹與互動，不但實現了妄想的情境，亦使腐女實際經歷如何在主體與妄想對象之交互關係不斷改變的狀況下，調整主體之自我位置與妄想客體之間的距離，以確保BL妄想的建構空間，並從中創造適切的歡愉。英文摘要：BL (Boys' Love) is a subgenre of Shojyo Manga (Girls' Cartoon Books) in Japan; these describe male homosexual stories and have been popular since the 1970s. Research into BL in Taiwan tends to consider reading BL as a kind of Queer reading or sexual practice because it challenges the gender structure. However, in this paper, I focus on ”fantasy,” the most important element of reading BL texts, and emphasize the dynamics of the fantasy practice of Fujoshi (girls who love BL). Through analyzing the structure of BL fantasy, I try to explain how Fujoshi practices yield specific meanings of pleasure and sexuality in the process of constructing BL fantasy: these depend on rereading male relationships into BL coupling.I did participant observation in Japanese and Taiwanese ”Butler Cafes” to observe the role playing of the butlers and waiters-these imitate the behavior in the cartoon books-and did interviews with Taiwanese Fujoshi about their experiences and fantasies as customers in ”Butler Cafes,” to reach the following conclusion. On the one hand, a Fujoshi makes distance between the object of fantasy and herself, in order to freely reread or arrange her imagination of the male relationships into BL coupling. On the other, a Fujoshi uses BL fantasy to fill up the ”distance” or discontinuity between male homoeroticism and homosociality, which otherwise might seem to be continuous. It is through BL fantasy that a Fujoshi makes herself free from the rigid one-way heterosexual mode of projection of ”female reader vs. male character,” so she can imagine her own resonance with the abstract pleasure of an ideal romantic relationship. The field study of ”Butler Cafes” emphasizes the dynamic process of fantasy practice. That is, the role playing and interaction between Fujoshi and butlers not only realize fantasy, but also make a Fujoshi adjust her position and the distance between herself and the object of fantasy under a situation where the relationship of subject and object changes frequently, with the effect of constructing pleasure through BL fantasy.起始頁-結束頁：97-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.32.978篇名：台灣重要民俗文化資產的性別平等檢視並列篇名：A Gender Equality Review of Taiwan's Cultural Heritages作者：陳金燕(Chin-Yen Chen)關鍵字：文化資產;性別平等;cultural heritage;gender equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：32期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文目的在於：以聯合國「消除一切對婦女歧視公約」（簡稱CEDAW）相關條文為準，據以檢視經文化部審議通過之七項指定重要民俗文化資產的核心儀式內涵，有無違反性別平等項目，並提出適切調整建議。由文化部文化資產局提供七項指定民俗之核心儀式書面資料及相關影音資料，作為書面檢視之主要依據；由計畫主持人透過訪談保存團體及諮詢民俗與性別相關專家學者，針對指定民俗核心儀式對性別是否仍存有禁忌等事宜進行檢視，同時闡述其演繹變遷；進而根據前述檢視提出適切調整建議方案，所有的檢視與調整建議均以CEDAW之規範為參考標準。本文之檢視與分析分別從「性別平等對待」及「性別歧視」兩大面向呈現；最後，針對指定民俗現存之性別不平等現象提出調整建議。英文摘要：This article aims to review the core rituals and their connotations for seven state-recognized cultural heritages as registered under the Ministry of Culture, in accordance with the gender equality principle of the ”Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women” (CEDAW). The core rituals recorded in written, audio and video forms as preserved by the Bureau of Cultural Heritage, Ministry of Culture, were carefully examined. Then the project team conducted interviews with seven preservation groups as well as experts on cultural heritage and gender issues for examining gender related practices and taboos. The interviews often ended with participants offering suggestions for future adjustments. This two-tier review process was analyzed along the dimensions of ”gender equality” and ”gender discrimination.” Finally, specific suggestions were made to eliminate gender inequalities and discrimination.起始頁-結束頁：135-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2013.32.13501篇名：沒有唐山媽？－拓墾時期臺灣原漢通婚之研究並列篇名：No Grandmother from Mainland China? Intermarriage between Han and Indigene during the Settlement Era of Taiwan作者：黃樹仁(Su-Jen Huang)關鍵字：原住民;漢人;通婚;人口;族群;Indigenes;Han;Intermarriage;population;ethnicity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013中文摘要：原漢通婚到底普及至何程度，是臺灣社會史上重要但少被研究的議題。本文指出，臺灣開發史上確有原漢通婚，但只有少數漢人男性得與原住民女性通婚。理由有六。首先，史料僅記載拓墾初期漢人男多於女，男性婚配困難，以及某些原漢通婚，但從未同時記載原漢大量通婚。離臺返鄉、婚後來臺、返鄉結婚及來回兩岸等可能才是初期移民的普遍選擇。其次，臺灣漢人男多於女的記載僅出現在荷領至清初之間。乾隆初期以後不復有此等記載。原因是雍正乾隆朝已屢屢開放搬眷入臺。男多於女現象在乾隆朝已經緩解。再其次，臺灣原住民人口偏少，可婚配女性遠少於突然大量湧入的漢人男性。多數漢人男性不可能有機會與原住民女性婚配。第四，原住民部落有其族群意識與團結。不可能允許原住民女性多數與漢人通婚而導致原住民滅族的慘劇。漢人之族群歧視也使雙方多數人不願通婚。清朝法律更長期禁止原漢通婚。第五，日治時期多數平埔部落仍然健在。顯示其女性過去並未大批嫁與漢人而剝奪本族男性結婚繁衍的機會。日治時期戶籍記載也顯示原漢通婚僅佔平埔族女性婚姻之少數。第六．晚近基因研究顯示，原住民基因佔臺灣漢人基因平均比例很低。顯示歷史上原漢通婚佔漢人婚姻比例不高。我們推論，臺灣漢人家族在臺歷代母系祖先中，確實可能包含原住民，但原住民女性並非漢人在臺母系祖先的多數。英文摘要：The scope of intermarriage between Han and indigene during the settlement era is a significant but understudied issue in Taiwanese social history. This paper argues that intermarriage did occur, but involved only a tiny minority of Han men. First, historical sources reported only Han men's outnumbering women and difficulty in spouse-finding, and certain cases of intermarriage, but not massive intermarriage. Historical accounts indicated that most Han men went back to mainland for marriage. Second, the reports of Han men outnumbering women appeared only no later than early Qing era. Spouses were intermittently permitted into Taiwan since later Yon-Zhung period and the shortage of Han women had been alleviated since then. Third, the rapid and massive immigration of Han to Taiwan during Qing means that Han vastly outnumbered indigene in a few decades, and there were simply not enough indigenous women to meet the demand of Han men for wives. Most Han men had had to find spouse back in mainland after all. Fourth, with their tribal consciousness and solidarity, indigenes were unlikely to allow their women to marry Hans in massive scope that would lead to the extinction of their tribes. Ethnic discrimination by Hans also discouraged intermarriage. And Qing laws in fact prohibited intermarriage. Fifth, the very survival of most plain indigenous tribes up to Japanese colonial era indicated that their women hadn't married Hans in massive scope and deprived their own men of marriage in the past. Sixth, recent genetic studies indeed find that the average proportion of indigenous genes in Taiwanese is quite moderate, indicating only limited scope of intermarriage in the past. We conclude that indigenous grandmothers do not constitute the majority of female ancestors of current Taiwanese.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：跳過中繼直達永久？－探討莫拉克災後永久屋政策的形成並列篇名：Skip to Permanence without Transition? Policy-making in Post-Morakot Reconstruction作者：謝志誠(Jyh-Cherng Shieh);陳竹上(Jwu-Shang Chen);林萬億(Wan-I Lin)關鍵字：異地重建;莫拉克颱風;災害;永久屋;非政府組織;relocation;typhoon Morakot;disaster;permanent housing;non-governmental organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013中文摘要：2009年8月8日發生莫拉克風災，重創南臺灣，7成以上的受災戶為原住民族。莫拉克災後重建之初，政府本標舉「離災不離村、離村不離鄉」的原鄉重建原則，嗣後短短不到20天，重建方向卻有別於921地震與日、中等國的救災經驗，確立了「一次到位」，略過中繼階段，直接選擇永久屋為主的安置政策，並配合立法院制訂《莫拉克颱風災後重建特別條例》第20條作為啟動強制遷村機制的依據。在接受永久屋安置的3,096戶中，2,746戶都屬於「離鄉」的異地安置，占88.7%。當政府數度為重建進度慶賀之際，場外的原住民族卻高喊著「原鄉零重建、迫遷達九成」、「我們不要普羅旺斯、我們要原鄉重建」等標語。災後已近4年，歌頌與批判聲均仍持續。本文透過文獻與檔案分析，期望回顧與探討此一「沒有中繼的永久」政策當時究竟如何形成？藉由呈現其間重要的事件與脈絡轉折，為此一在臺灣災後重建史，乃至於原住民族遷徙史上飽受爭議的一頁，留下記錄。文中並適時比對921地震、日本311地震、中國汶川地震，及世界銀行所彙集關於異地安置的重建經驗，發現對於異地安置的高風險，各國多有體認，故縱使納入考量，亦非主要選項並相當尊重住民自決，且審慎為之。然而莫拉克災後非政府組織在政策形成過程中的主張與主導能量，與當時政府災後力圖修補國家治理正當性的壓力，一拍即合。為了滿足一次到位的重建目的，組合屋的問題被擴大論述，政府與NGOs聯手發展與執行永久屋政策，表面上雖達成亮麗的重建速率，但實際上卻建造了不適切的居住硬體與生活環境。異地安置崩解了部落族人與村民共同議事及原鄉生活的機制，此等問題必須被正視，以作為下一次災後重建的借鏡。英文摘要：This article examines the reconstruction in relocated site after the strike of Typhoon Morakot. The important events and the transition process of policy in the phases of relocation (including the formulating policy, the follow-up assessment and consultation phase, etc.) are discussed through the archive analysis and the field interview. For this purpose, this study focuses on: (1) identifying the position of relocation within the whole reconstruction, (2) the forming process of relocation, (3) the assertion and the canvass during the formation of NGO's policy, and (4) how permanent housing substitutes transitional resettlement after agency-driven reconstruction in relocated sites becomes the major gateway of reconstruction. Thirdly, by cutting to the chase from ”Village Relocation Clause” under ”The Special Law of Reconstruction After Morakot Typhoon Disaster” Art. 20, discusses scopes of assessment, procedures of assessment, the report of assessment, etc. And also explores the issues of safety assessment phase in practice and the inadequate institutional regulation in the original settlement. Additionally, the paper also explains the rebound and the cause which were brought about in the consultation process. To respond to original residents' opinion and avoid the annoyance resulting from reaching a consultative agreement, the government adopts the strategy of ”breaking the whole into parts.” The remaining aftereffects are discussed. Finally, address the completion of forming the reconstruction in relocated site, the assessment, and the suggestion of consultative phase.起始頁-結束頁：49-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：邊緣公民的公民主體建構：臺灣妓權運動中性工作者的公民操演並列篇名：The Construction of Marginal Citizens' Civic Subjectivity-Sex Workers Doing Citizenship in the Taiwanese Prostitutes' Rights Movement作者：陳素秋(Su-Chiu Chen)關鍵字：公民主體性;妓權運動;做公民;身體空間;故事性敘說;性商品化;civic subjectivity;prostitute movement;doing citizenship;body-space;story-telling narrative;commodification of sex期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013中文摘要：為了探究弱勢公民如何克服既有權力結構與壓迫，並得以自我增能賦權，本研究嘗試分析臺灣妓權運動中，作為邊緣公民之性工作者的參與歷程，以及探索他們如何透過其行動建立公民主體性。藉由與參與者以及與社運組織者的深度訪談，以及運動歷程的參與觀察，本研究的發現如下：性工作者的公民行動明顯受到污名、階級與性別等社會結構力量所影響。污名框構著性工作者的公民認同與行動，在污名結構下，性工作者體現出污名的凝視，但也反擊著污名，因此性工作者的公民身分不是一種理所當然的資格承受，而是持續不斷、充滿縫隙的做公民歷程。而其反擊污名的做公民歷程中，突顯出公民哲學研究應納入慣習身體空間的討論。在如何建構運動正當性上，儘管性交易常被視為一種性別歧視的表徵，但參與者傾向於以階級論述而非性別論述表述自己的訴求。然而，他們在運動中的主體位置仍是性別化的。而參與者對從娼經驗的反思，也對基進女性主義所批判的性商品化提出重要補充，提醒我們在以性商品化取徑看待性交易時，應考量進行協商性商品內容的性能動者。在參與過程中，運動組織者扮演媒介角色，協助性工作者重組他們對於性產業的默會知識，而得以進行公共溝通，此協助為邊緣公民進行公共參與的重要助力。然而，儘管性工作者感受到透過與組織者合作，提升了論述能力，但也肯定自己的經驗才是運動核心。而性工作者的倡議行動也啟發我們重新思考，故事性敘說在審議式民主之公共溝通所扮演的角色。歸納而言，性工作者透過參與運動所建立的公民主體性，主要表現在提升了自身的公共性、重思公民與國家的應有關係，以及建立公民效能三方面。英文摘要：To explore how marginal citizens overcome established power structures and oppression while empowering themselves via this process, the current research aims to investigate the Taiwanese prostitution rights movement and how participant sex workers, as marginal citizens, engage and foster civic subjectivities through civic actions. Based on in-depth interviews and participatory observation, this paper reaches the following conclusions: First, the stigma surrounding prostitution frames sex workers' identity and civic action. Sex workers are subject to the gaze of stigma through pervasive discrimination towards prostitution, yet at the same time also clearly attempt to combat it. For sex workers, therefore, citizenship is not so much a fixed status as it is a continuing, porous process of ”doing” citizenship. The process of their doing citizenship highlights the significance of the construction of habitual body-spaces in civic action, which has been ignored by traditional philosophy of citizenship. Second, in terms of creating the legitimacy of the prostitute movement, sex workers tend to adopt class discourses to legitimate their action instead of gender discourses, although prostitution has traditionally been identified with men's domination of women. Yet sex workers’ positions are still gendered in the movement. Their experience in prostitution complements radical feminist criticisms of the commodification of sex-the existence of sex agents being able to negotiate the content of the commodity. Considering how the sex workers as prostitution rights organization members cooperate with other members, this paper finds that activists play the role of conversational intermediaries between sex workers and their audience, helping sex workers rearticulate their tacit knowledge about the sex industry in order to effectively communicate with the public. At the same time, although perceiving cooperation with activists as helpful to civic action, sex workers still recognize themselves as the core of the prostitute movement and their advocacy action inspires us to rethink how story-telling narratives work in deliberative democracy. In summary, through taking political action, the sex worker participants demonstrate their civic subjectivity in three aspects: (1) cultivating the sense of community and the sense of publicness, (2) actively redefining the relationship between citizen and state, and (3) developing the sense of civic efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：87-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：香港基督教右派運動的論述建構與發展軌跡：以明光社及香港性文化學會為案例並列篇名：The Hong Kong ”Christian Right”-Discursive Formation of The Society for Truth and Light and Hong Kong Sex Culture Society作者：游靜(Ching Yau)關鍵字：香港;基右;論述;同性戀;置換;Hong Kong;Christian Right;discourses;homosexuality;displacement期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去十多年間，一股主打性傾向議題的基督新教勢力在香港崛起，他們道德立場保守及政治策略進取，並挪用了大量美國基督右派的論述及擴張模式，故被稱為香港基右。本文著重探討這陣營中兩個主要團體—明光社與香港性文化學會—的論述脈絡、動機與發展，拆解他們的社會意涵及被置換掉的情緒與心理，以此作為理解今天香港文化的一個新方向。英文摘要：Throughout the past decade, the mainstream forces of Hong Kong Christianity have been articulating its morally conservative politics through importing the discourses from the US Religious Right, especially its aggressive opposition against democratized sexualities. This paper studies the cases of two frontline organizations of this movement, The Society for Truth and Light and Hong Kong Sex Culture Society to investigate the socio-political implications and displaced affects of this unprecedented formation, as a strategy for rethinking Hong Kong culture today.起始頁-結束頁：131-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：後社會主義國家體操：禮儀小姐與超級女性化並列篇名：Post-socialist State Gymnastics-Ceremonial Hostesses and Their Hyper-femininity作者：胡嘉明(Ka-Ming Wu)關鍵字：性別;身體規訓;體操;後社會主義;當代中國;gender;body discipline;gymnastics;post-socialism;contemporary Chinese society期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文透過分析禮儀小姐，指出當代中國的性別現象並不是一種簡　單的中國婦女「再」女性化（re-feminization）。禮儀小姐作為被凝視的性　別對象，是一個由國家專門透過極為嚴謹的身體操訓打造出來的代表，她既是展示國家形象的主體，又是被凝視的客體。本文的論據為禮儀小姐那接近軍訓的、非一般的身體操練達到的並不是一般的女性氣質，而是一種超級女性化（hyper feminization）。我認為禮儀小姐的超級女性化表演，是一種體操表演，是共產國家的體操傳統以新形式的再現，所體現的是一種集合市場話語、共產主義民族美學、軍事化國力展示和黨父權新的欲望投射。禮儀小姐並沒有象徵「中國婦女」的「西化，自由化」，也不是簡單的女性身體的物化、性化、商品化。作為後毛時代的國家象徵，禮儀小姐非常複雜地反映著市場經濟放大兩性差異，商品化、性化女性氣質的社會文化，也明確顯示著國家軍事的指導規訓作用。英文摘要：This essay looks at ceremonial hostess or Miss Etiquette (liyi xiaojie), a recent phenomenon of having young and attractive women serve at major national events and ceremonies, such as holding flags, placards or standing by for medal presentation at the Beijing Olympics, the Shanghai Expo or the Guangzhou Asian Games in China. This essay argues that the ceremonial hostess represents not a simple”re-feminization” of Chinese mainland gender culture, but a state engineered gender performance in the new era. My arguments are (1) the ceremonial hostesses, even though they display desirable feminine qualities, are actually performing a set of exercise requiring extraordinary physical strength, flexibility, coordination and balance (2) the ceremonial hostess' performance is a new kind of socialist gymnastic, following the communist revolutionary state tradition of gymnastics' aesthetics; (3) such post-socialist gymnastics figures the contradictory forces of market reform, socialist state aesthetics, military discipline, and the party-state patriarchal gaze in post-socialist China.起始頁-結束頁：183-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：中國歷史的「向量」：《溝口雄三集》代譯序並列篇名：The Vector of Chinese History-Preface to the Selected Works of Mizoguchi Y<U+016B>z<U+014D>作者：孫歌(Ge Sun)關鍵字：溝口雄三;天理;天人合一;鄉里空間;長時段歷史;Mizoguchi Y<U+016B>z<U+014D>;Heavenly principle;Heaven and Man are One;Village space;History in the Long Duree期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013中文摘要：溝口雄三先生終其一生，有信服力地打造出了關於中國思想史內在理路的結構性解釋，同時，他在社會史視野中把這個思想史的結構性論述轉化為關於中國歷史動力的假說。以經驗事實作為形而下之理的載體，通過對於思想史的一手資料進行富有理論想像力的精準細讀，溝口建構了一個富有色彩和生命的中國思想世界。本文作為代譯序，試圖從溝口中國思想史基本結構的角度接近他建構的這個富有魅力的思想世界。英文摘要：Throughout his life Mizoguchi Y<U+016B>z<U+014D> devoted himself completely to explaining the internal structure of Chinese intellectual history. At the same time, he turned this structural explanation intellectual history into a hypothesis using a social historical framework. Using experience as the embodiment of concrete principles and through imaginatively reading primary sources of intellectual history, Mizoguchi constructed a vivid and colorful world of Chinese intellectual history. As a preface for this book of translations, this essay attempt to approach Mizoguchi's sublime world of intellectual history through interrogating the basic structure of his Chinese intellectual history.起始頁-結束頁：209-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：《橙紅的早星》趙剛新書發表會/陳映真與台灣的階級認同和民族認同並列篇名：”The Evening Star in A Tint of Red”-A Symposium for Chao Kang's Recent Study on the Literature and Thought of Chen Yingzhen/Chen Yingzhen and the Struggle for Class and National Identities in Taiwan作者：邱士杰(Shi-Jie Qiu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：245-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：當革命退潮後的老靈魂遇上虛無的先知者：讀趙剛《橙紅的早星》並列篇名：When the Revolutionary Ebb Tide Old Soul Encounters the Nihilistic Prophet-A Review of ”The Evening Star in A Tint of Red” by Chao Kang作者：黃琪椿(Chi-Chun Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：261-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：初讀陳映真並列篇名：A Rough Reading of Chen Yingzhen作者：陳柏偉(Bo-Wei Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：265-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：象徵或現實：對趙剛新書的幾點看法並列篇名：Symbolic Representation or Reality-A Response to Chao Kang's New Book作者：翁柏川(Peh-Chuan Ong)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：273-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：高學費問題．今昔與未來：從工農子女教育補助到反高學費運動/編按並列篇名：From Education Subsidies for Lower Class Youths to the Against-Tuition-Hykes Movement in Taiwan -A Historical Critique/Editorial Introduction作者：何東洪(Tung-Hung Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：281-283資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：臺灣高等教育的假羅盤與真迷行並列篇名：False Compass and True Aberrant of Higher Education in Taiwan作者：陳竹上(Jwu-Shang Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：285-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：反高學費運動的階級鬥爭：課徵企業紅利稅，專款專用於教育並列篇名：Class Struggle through the Against-Tuition-Hykes Movement-Taxing Business Bonuses, Reserving Funds for Designated Educational Purposes作者：簡淑慧(Shu-Huei Chien)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：291-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：從反對成大法人化談反教育商品化的實踐並列篇名：Against the Commercialization of Education-A View from the Action against the Corporatization of National Cheng Kung University作者：謝芮娣(Jui-Ti Hsieh);張皓鈞(Hao-Jun Zhang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：297-301資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：反高學費的背後：一份左翼思路筆記並列篇名：Behind the Anti-Tuition-Hikes Movement- A Leftist Note作者：林柏儀(Por-Yee Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：303-320資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：階級語言、分析視角與教育內容的抗爭：高學費問題的觀察與省思並列篇名：Reflections on the Class Discourse-Perspective Analysis and Ideological Struggle in Education作者：董泓志(Hung-Chih Tung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：321-336資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：現今學費運動的困境與方向－身為參與者的反省並列篇名：Difficulties and Directions for Tuition Movements Today-Reflections from the Activists作者：謝慧霆(Hui-Ting Hsieh);謝易澄(Yi-Cheng Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：93期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：337-343資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：為何要建廟？從廟宇興建的物質化過程探討馬祖社群再造並列篇名：Why Build a Temple? The Materialization of New Community Ideals in the Demilitarized Islands between China and Taiwan作者：林瑋嬪(Wei-Ping Lin)關鍵字：社群;宗教;物質文化;社區總體營造;馬祖;religion;community;materialization;community building project;the Mazu islands期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文透過兩次「社造」的進行來探討社群、宗教、與物質文化的關係。馬祖在1992年解除戰地政務後，頓時失去過去做為「反共前線」與「台海堡壘」的軍事重要性。如何找出自己新的定位是當地亟待解決的問題。1990年間當地菁英引入台灣社造，開始進行閩東傳統聚落保存。這一波社造當時在馬祖確實引起地方相當的關注，成果也吸引了台灣媒體爭相報導。但是，在未能獲得地方多數人支持的情形下，進行幾年後便草草結束。之後，一直到社造菁英們瞭解到地方宗教的力量，與當地人合力興建廟宇後，真正由下而上的「社造」才逐漸成形。本文從物質文化的觀點切入，探討廟宇興建的物質化過程，如何提供我們重新認識社群與宗教的關係。英文摘要：Since the early 20th century, religion has been seen by the Chinese stateand intellectuals as an obstacle to modernization and has thus been devalued. This article points out how this pejorative view of religion has latently persistedin contemporary Taiwan in the formulation of an important policy ofcommunity development. The author draws on ethnography from the Mazuislands, a former frontier military base, to investigate the predicaments andbreakthroughs of community projects carried out there. This paper aims toshow that a consensus of new community began to emerge only when the localelites recognized the importance of religion and began to participate in buildingthe village temple-an architecture held in great esteem by residents. This paperdemonstrates that religion and, in particular, the process of its materializationinto a temple, serve as a basis for the formation of a new community.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：都市自然的治理與轉化 新北市二重疏洪道並列篇名：The Governance and Transformation of Urban Natures-The Case of Erchong Floodway in New Taipei City作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang);林純秀(Chun-Hsiu Lin)關鍵字：自然;自然治理;疏洪道;綠地;水岸;nature;nature governance;floodway;green area;waterfront期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013中文摘要：都市自然治理模式的轉化，與都市轉型關係密切。以新北市二重疏洪道為例，本文秉持城市與自然共變的觀點，追溯這片地景如何於1980年代初期，從都市周邊的馴化農業自然，轉變為控制災害自然的疏洪道，又成為邊緣的荒僻自然，以及中下階層庶民休憩去處。隨著治安憂慮升高，以及全球城市競爭驅動了都市轉型，二重疏洪道成為新式綠色治理的對象，以河濱公園和遊憩設施的潔淨綠地面貌出現，也將民間保育組織的生態自然想像納入規劃。晚近，捷運和快速道路興建、重劃區開發及都市更新驅動的房地產熱潮，更將二重疏洪道轉化為大台北都會公園，以及水岸住宅的商品化景觀，自然成了縉紳化要素。都市自然地景在集體消費需求、地域縉紳化，以及都市環境主義崛起等結構力量下，疊覆了多重意義和功能，挾其吸納與排除機制，構成呼應當前都市轉型的綠色治理場域。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the relationship between the governance of urban natures and the urban transformation. Using Erchong Floodway in New Taipei City as an example, this paper adopts the perspective of urban political ecology which focuses on the co-evolution of city and nature to delineate how this landscape changed from agricultural nature to a floodway that controls floods. The landscape later turned into peripheral wilderness where lower class used for recreation. However, as middle class residents concerned the safety issue and the competition among cities accelerated the renewal of Taipei metropolis, Erchong Floodway started to become the object of new green governance. It appeared as a purified recreational area with riverside parks, sports facilities and bike paths. It also materialized the ecological-nature ideal of environmentalist groups. Recently, the construction of the MRT and expressways and real estate development resulted from the readjustment of lands and urban renewal have helped to transform Erchong Floodway into the Taipei Metropolitan Central Park which has contributed to the gentrification of nearby area. In short, the landscape changed its meaning and function with the demands for collective consumption, gentrification, and the emergence of urban environmentalism. And the mechanism of inclusion/exclusion that resides in the transformation demands us to critically examine the new green governance.起始頁-結束頁：35-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：遵／不遵醫囑？國家偏遠醫療治理與達悟族精神失序者的「混亂敘事」並列篇名：To Comply or Not to Comply? State Medical Governance and the ”Chaos Narrative” of Tao Mentally-Disordered People作者：蔡友月(Yu-Yueh Tsai)關鍵字：混亂敘事;生物精神醫療;遵醫囑;療癒;國家治理;Chaos Narrative;Biopsychiatry;Compliance Behavior;Healing;State Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：92期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣為了解決山地離島偏遠地區「有保險、無醫療」的困境，國家提供經費、人力支援偏遠醫療的醫療給付效益提昇計畫，但就實際執行層面來看，達悟人精神失序者不遵醫囑的比例極高，這樣的落差反映相當值得探討的問題。全文從病人敘事的理論分析策略出發，以社會學家Arthur W. Frank「混亂敘事」（chaos narrative）的概念，反省實證醫學的醫療式歸因、健康信念的取徑探討遵醫囑行為的限制。透過田野中蘭嶼達悟族精神失序者的敘事，探究做為少數族群的原住民在國家醫療治理下的特殊病痛經驗。文章分析指出時空限制下的儀式化醫療處置與不平等的醫病關係，以及文化隔閡中對現代精神醫療的不信任，所導致不遵醫囑的普遍現象，呈現國家透過現代精神醫療對原住民社會進行理性治理時的基本困境。不同世代達悟精神失序者分歧、多元的敘事，啟發了我們對疾病、健康、療癒概念的重新思考，有助於我們思考現代精神醫學朝向生物醫學知識典範的霸權，並擴展我們對遵／不遵醫囑現象的認識。本文結論也強調要拉近精神醫療專業與達悟生活世界的差距，必須貼近達悟精神失序者的混亂敘事，深入瞭解達悟社會文化與日常生活脈絡，否則國家提出的醫療方針將會偏離醫療照護的主體，難以實踐醫療照護的真正目標。英文摘要：In Taiwan, in order to solve the difficult situation of ”medical insurance without medical service” in remote areas, including the mountain-lands and outlying islands, the state provides fund and manpower to support ”The Integrated Delivery System (IDS).” However, judging from the practical aspects of implementation of IDS, a high rate of mentally-disordered Tao people fails to comply with medical advice. In the light of a discrepancy between State Medical Governance and illness experience of Tao mentally-disordered people, some issues are worth exploring. Drawing on the method of narrative analysis, especially Arthur W. Frank's concept of ”chaos narrative,” my article points out the limitations of two approaches-1) evidence-based medicine approach and 2) health belief approach-in understanding the compliance behavior of mentally disordered people. Based on my fieldwork on Orchid Island, this study aims to explore the special illness experiences of Tao mentally-disordered people-as an ethnic minority group in Taiwan-under the medical governance of the state. The analysis of this study will indicate that non-compliance behavior is a widespread phenomenon caused by ritualized medical management under time and space constraints, the inequalities between the Han's psychiatrists and the Tao patients, as well as the distrust among Tao people toward the modern biopsychiatry, revealing some dilemmas faced by the rational governance of modern bio-psychiatry of state implemented in Tao community. The divided and diverse narratives of three generations of the mentally-disordered Tao people can inspire us to reflect on concepts of illness, health and healing, helping us critique the current trends of psychiatry toward a hegemonic biomedical-knowledge paradigm, and expanding our understanding about the compliance and non-compliance behavior. In conclusion, this article emphasizes dealing with the gap between the psychiatric profession and the life world of the Tao patient, the need to closely attend to the chaos narratives of Tao people, and an in-depth understanding of the social-cultural contexts in which the Tao patients are situated. Otherwise the IDS proposed by the state will not accomplish its objectives, making it the more difficult for the psychiatric care to be put into practice.起始頁-結束頁：73-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：主編的話作者：傅仰止期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：2-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.i2篇名：幻象與共謀：布赫迪厄論秩序的自我持存並列篇名：Illusio and Complicity: Bourdieu on the Self-perpetuation of Order作者：賴曉黎(Shau-Lee Lai)關鍵字：禮物交換;象徵權力;象徵暴力;幻象;共謀;gift exchange;symbolic power;symbolic violence;illusion;complicity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文聚焦於布赫迪厄對秩序問題的再問題化：歷史中，專斷永恆化以及秩序自我持存的可能性條件，通過誤認與委婉，我們區別了禮物與債務，進入以禮物交換為原型的象徵交換理法，並在象徵交換理法中，確立了不同於物質利益的象征利益。布赫迪厄進一步將這種利益的複數性運用到社會生活的所有面向，並呈現出場域(遊戲)的多樣性。遊戲通過幻象的作用，得到聖化並具有正當性，同時正當性也讓幻象得到神聖性。因此，作為聖化的構成性權力，通過強加與自然化的過程，象徵權力生產出某種專斷性的正當化；而象徵暴力則是將構成了的權力，內化為宿命性的信念式順從，亦即，象徵暴力讓社會位置的偶然性被誤認為必然性，並將象徵權力強加的專斷的正當，性認作自己的限制乃至宿命。如此，在共謀關係中被支配者的展現出兩面真理:專斷的正當化與強加的自然化，以及從順從的反抗到怨恨的辯證。然而，在幻象的共謀與共謀的幻象這種無限循環裡，我們面對的是被支配者的信念式順從。這就是專斷永恆化以及秩序自我持存的可能性條件。英文摘要：This research focuses on Bourdieu's re-problematization of the problem of order: in history, the conditions of possibility for ”eternalizing the arbitrary” and ”self-perpetuating order.” Through misrecognition and euphemism, we can distinguish the gift from the debt; besides, we enter the economy of symbolic exchanges, which is based on the gift exchange as the archetype. Then, we establish firmly the symbolic interest that differs from the material interest in the economy of symbolic exchanges. Further, Bourdieu applied the plurality of interests to all aspects of social life and displayed the multiplicity of fields (games). By the effects of iIIusio, games are consecrated and legitimated; meanwhile, iIIusio are consecrated also. Therefore, as the power of constituting consecration, symbolic power produces the arbitrary legitimately by the processes of imposition and naturalization. Symbolic violence that internalizes power is constituted as fatalistic doxic submission. Namely, symbolic violence misrecognizes not only the contingency of social position as necessity, but also the legitimacy of the arbitrary imposed by symbolic power as self-limitation or even destiny. For that reason, the twofold truth appearing by the dominated in the complicit relation is ”legitimatization of the arbitrary and imposed naturalization” and ”from the submissive revolt to dialectic of resentment.” In the infinite cycle of iIIusio-complicit and complicit-illusio, however, what we confront is the doxic submission of the dominated, and this is the condition of possibility for eternalizing the arbitrary and self-perpetuating order.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.13篇名：朝向積極勞動市場政策(1996-2011)：台灣政黨的差異與趨同並列篇名：Toward Active Labor Market Policies (1996-2011): The Divergence and Convergence of Partisan Preferences in Taiwan作者：陳盈方(Ying-Fang Chen);呂建德(Jen-Der Lue);葉秀珍(Hsiu-Jen Yeh)關鍵字：失業給付;消極／積極勞動市場政策;政黨效應;勞動市場改革;unemployment insurance;passive and active labor market policy;partisan preferences;labor market reforms期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文試圖從意識形態和選舉競爭的動態觀點，探討台灣在1996年之後的消極／積極勞動市場政策改革路徑。本文發現國民黨在第一階段執政時期，失業給付支出呈現限縮的現象，僅針對最弱勢者提供有限的支持；積極勞動市場政策(ALMP)亦僅針對關廠歇業之失業者，並消極地補貼雇主和勞工。但國民黨在第三階段執政時期，受到核心支持者(大財團)式微，以及政黨競爭等影響，必須調整其既有的策略，以獲得最多數的跨階級聯盟。因此，該階段的改革逐漸向左發展，但這些改革仍建構在最弱勢者的介入，並回應了國民黨早期的生產主義式思維。其次，民進黨在第二階段執政時期的改革，為拉攏勞工階級和中小企業以創造政治多數聯盟，必須逐漸向右靠攏；如在給付條件上加重失業者的義務，並減緩中小企業主的福利負擔，ALMP也趨近於國民黨的方針，但更為重視就業服務與技能提升。最後，兩黨的改革路徑雖有趨同的現象，但似乎僅存在工具性的聚合，尚未達到理念或意識形態的根本變革。英文摘要：Unlike the western literature, which contends that a ruling party's policies are ”statically” shaped by its ideology, this article argues that policy differences between political parties are ”dynamic.” Ideology and political competition compelthe ruling party to modify its policy strategies and attract different classes' votes. This article examines Taiwan's partisan influences on social policies, with respect to passive and active labor-market policies since 1996. The findings of our study indicate that the policy preferences of the KMT and the DPP are converging, though incrementally. The KMT's labor policy reforms were characterized by productivism in the first phase. The reforms of unemployment benefits and ALMP were limited to the most disadvantaged groups. As the KMT came back to power in 2008, however, it modified its productivist strategy and moved to the left in response to fierce electoral competition in order to attract more votes from different classes. Thus, in the third phase, the KMT expanded unemployment benefits and the expenditure of ALMP. But these changes still concentrated on targeting groups, as did the KMT's productivist ideology. Conversely, the DPP government (2000-2008) was characterized by a social democratic ideology. In addition, the DPP endeavored toforge a majority political coalition by including their core constituencies, such as the working class and SMEs. Thus, they expanded unemployment benefits to cover more of the working class, butmeanwhile reinforced the unemployed's obligations to reduce welfare dependency. Furthermore, most of the DPP's ALMP programs concentrated on work incentive strategies and employers subsidies, just like the KMT. The OPP, however, tried to enhance employment assistance and human capital development gradually in order to follow its social democratic ideology. Nevertheless, the scope of these strategies was very limited.起始頁-結束頁：37-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.374篇名：友誼網絡中誰的獲益更多：青少年友誼網絡與學業成就的動態分析並列篇名：Who Benefits More from Friendship? Dynamics of Adolescent Friendship Networks and Academic Performance作者：張明宜(Ming-Yi Chang);吳齊殷(Chyi-In Wu)關鍵字：友誼選擇;同儕影響;網絡內生性;鞏固;台灣青少年成長歷程研究;Friendship Selection;Peer Influence;Social Network Endogeneity;Consolidation;Taiwan Youth Project期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去研究指出友誼能提供規範、資訊與資源，為青少年的學業成就帶來正向影響，且此影響在低學業成就的青少年身上更加彰顯(Frank et al., 2008)，由此觀點，友誼應有助於縮減青少年因家庭背景不同帶來的學業成就差距。然而，相似性原則卻指出，若家庭背景或學業成就是青少年據以選擇朋友的關鍵因素，那<U+9EBD>友誼反而可能因此擴大不同背景青少年既有的學業成就差距。為驗證此二對立競爭之研究假設，本研究使用「台灣青少年成長歷程研究計畫」資料中台北縣、台北市及宜蘭縣共72個班級、2,527位青少年的資料，利用二階段多層次動態社會網絡分析探究青少年的家庭社經背景、友誼網絡與學業成就在國中三年期間的動態改變歷程，研究結果顯示，家庭社經背景、教育期望與學業成就是青少年據以選擇友誼的重要因素，這樣的相似性選擇使得正向同儕影響在高成就的青少年身上更為彰顯。亦即，背景好、成績好的青少年在某種程度上透過相似性選擇鞏固其既有的學業成就優勢，階層式的友誼配對使得背景好的青少年從友誼網絡中獲益更多，兩者加乘，青少年的友誼網絡最終很可能是擴大而非縮小既有的教育成就差距。英文摘要：Friendship is documented to have positive peer effects on adolescent academic performance by providing norms, information, and resources, and these kinds of peer effects are even more significant on low-achieving students if they can nest in a high-achieving student group (Frank et aI., 2008). The homophily principle that dominates the adolescent-friendship mixing pattern, however, indicates that adolescent friendship might be sorted by student family background and achievements, which implies that friendship might not be able to reduce the achievement gap and could even make the gap wider. To test these two competing hypotheses, we conduct a dynamic network analysis to investigate how family background influences the co-evolution process of students' friendship networks and academic performance by using data from the Taiwan Youth Project, which includes a research sample of 2,527 students nested in 72 classes. Findings from a series of two-step multilevel network analyses demonstrate that students might self-segregate by selecting homophilious friends. This segregation makes low-SES and low-performing students less likely to be nominated by high-SES or high-performing students; differences in probabilities hence exist for different achievement students to improve their academic performance. As a result, adolescent friendship networks in the junior-high-school years may eventually help high-performing students maintain and exacerbate their achievement advantages.起始頁-結束頁：97-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.975篇名：遇見另一半：教育婚配過程中的介紹人與接觸場合並列篇名：Meeting the Other Half: Matchmakers and Settings of Contact in Educational Assortative Mating作者：巫麗雪(Li-Hsueh Wu);葉秀珍(Hsiu-Jen Yeh);蔡瑞明(Ruey-Ming Tsay)關鍵字：婚姻;教育婚配;擇偶方式;接觸場合;介紹人;marriage;educational assortative mating;ways of meeting;social settings of contact;matchmakers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013中文摘要：從媒妁之言到自由戀愛，雖然象徵婚姻當事人擁有選擇配偶的自主權，但配偶選擇並不是隨意選擇的過程，仍然受限於文化規範與人口結構共同型塑的機會結構。我們探討個人的擇偶行為如何受到擇偶過程中擇偶方式、介紹人與接觸場合的作用，嘗試以較完整的理論取向與更細緻的資料，重新檢視婚姻配對研究。本文主要探討介紹人與接觸場合如何影響教育婚姻配對模式的形成，我們檢驗介紹人在擇偶過程中的中介角色，以及其特質來連結結構與文化的關係；同時也探討接觸場合所展現的同類相聚現象的作用。本文使用台灣地區社會意向調查1991年6月專題調查計畫、台灣社會變遷基本調查計畫第五期二次家庭組的資料，進行多類別邏輯迴歸模型分析。本文的分析顯示，介紹人比較容易媒合教育上男高女低的婚姻，尤其當介紹人與擇偶者之間的關係強度越強時越明顯，不過介紹人所維繫的主流配對文化規範已有些微變動。另外，我們發現介紹人的教育地位對於擇偶者透過婚姻取得較佳的社會位置具有影響力。最後，學校是鞏固教育界限最重要的場合，其為未婚男女創造的教育同質性的擇偶環境會隨著教育層級而增加，更難突破教育藩籬而結婚。英文摘要：Free choice is the major type of mate selection in modern society, but free choice is not as free as one might expect. The freedom to choose a spouse is, to a certain extent, restricted by the opportunity structure. This paper takes a comprehensive perspective to examine classical assortative mating studies based on more refined measures. We investigate how an individual's mating opportunity is embedded in the social structure, which in turn affects his/her choice of potential mate. The major aim of this study is to examine the roles of matchmakers and social occasions in the marriage market, a part of the process of social stratification. We examine the bridging role of matchmakers in the mating process and their characteristics in the linkage between social structure and culture, we also assess the social settings of contacts and their effect on homophily in the mating process. The data analyzed come from two surveys: the General Survey of Social Attitudes in Taiwan and Taiwan Social Change Survey. Multinomial logit models were applied to test a series of hypotheses. The results show that involvement of matchmakers in the mating process is positively associated with hypergamy and that the effect becomes even more significant when the matchmaker and the mate seeker have a stronger relationship. Nevertheless, the influence of matchmakers has loosened slightly in preserving mainstream cultural norms. Our findings demonstrate that the matchmaker's social status plays a crucial role in bridging a match with associated higher status during the mating process. The results also illustrate that the educational system is the most important institution that reinforces educational boundaries. Educational institutions have created a mating environment for educational homophily, which is likely to increase with education, and reinforces the educational boundary in the mating process.起始頁-結束頁：147-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.1476篇名：評《台灣的社會變遷1985-2005：家庭與婚姻》作者：陳肇男期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：191-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.1917篇名：評《台灣的社會變遷1985-2005：心理、價值與宗教》作者：丁仁傑期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：204-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.2048篇名：延續與創新：評《台灣的社會變遷1985-2005：社會階層與勞動市場》作者：蔡瑞明期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：222-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.2229篇名：調查研究方法的侷限與貢獻：回應《台灣的社會變遷1985-2005：傳播與政治行為》作者：廖達琪期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：26期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：228-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.26.22810篇名：主編的話作者：傅仰止期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：2-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.i11篇名：藝術的社會學啟蒙：以身體技藝為建構基礎的社會美學並列篇名：Sociological Enlightenment of Art: Bodily Technique as the Constructive Foundation of Social Aesthetics作者：齊偉先(Wei-Hsian Chi)關鍵字：藝術;公共藝術;社會美學;身體技藝;慶典;art;public art;social aesthetics;bodily technique;festival期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013中文摘要：自1990 年代以來，歐美社會出現了新一波的公共藝術論述，它將現代藝術引入一個新的對話主題︰藝術的公共性。公共藝術看似不過是現代藝術多元發展中的其中一支，但事實上它卻透露出美學領域的一項重要內涵，亦即美學實作與政治性的權力論述兩者之間存在著一種共棲共存的生產模式。本文藉由探索「藝術」在近代歐美社會發展的系譜，說明近代社會理解「藝術」與藝術公共性的方式有何變遷，藉此試圖說明作為一種美學實作的藝術與政治性的權力論述兩者之間所存在的內在關聯。此外，文中以台灣社會為例進一步說明，在藝術專業領域之外還存在著其他領域的美學實作，如民間的文化及廟會慶典活動。它們雖以不同的方式進行社會美學的建構，但也展現出與政治性的權力論述共棲共存的相同運作邏輯。本文考察藝術的公共性內涵所獲得的啟發，不僅僅讓我們瞭解到美學實作與權力論述之間所存在的相互建構模式，也讓我們瞭解到有關社會美學的討論必須回歸到身體技藝這個更基礎的面向來考察，如此才能掌握社會美學在現代社會中所扮演的角色。英文摘要：A new genre of public art started appearing in western modern countries in the 1990s. This forced modern art to face a new issue: artistic publicity. Public art is more than a new form of art, and it leads us to see that there is a specific reciprocal relation between aesthetic practices and political as well as religious discourses. By examining the semantic lineage of ”art” in western modern societies, this paper shows how modern societies understand ”art” and construct artistic publicity. In addition, this paper takes Taiwan society as an example for showing that there is still another kind of aesthetic practice in modern society. They are various forms of cultural festivals that are run in a different way than professional art, but both have the same constructive function in social aesthetics. This theoretical discourse contributes to the viewpoint that bodily technique shall be seen as the basic operative medium of social aesthetics.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.112篇名：權力的技術與技術的權力：台灣疫苗採用的歷程分析並列篇名：Technology of Power and Power of Technology: An Analysis of the History of Vaccine Adoption in Taiwan作者：陳宗文(Tzung-Wen Chen)關鍵字：生命權力;生命政治;疫苗;治理性;技術物的政治性;biopower;biopolitics;vaccines;governmentality;politics of artifact期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013中文摘要：本論文從疫苗的生命權力和疫苗使用對社會中的權力關係產生的效果，來理解如台灣的後進社會中，疫苗防疫制度如何被建立起來，又何以產生各樣的問題。本論文將台灣疫苗採用的歷史分為兩階段，以疫苗技術物為中心，分別就疫苗的治理性、疫苗的政治性，以及其相互的關係進行分析。本論文發現疫苗治理在台灣的建立與發展，是透過不同時代疫苗技術物的引進，配合當時在地的決策條件，經由疫苗採用的真理論述，決定出採用的模式，而呈現不同階段的治理現象。另外，一旦疫苗被採用之後，會進一步確立專家的位置、制度的形式，以及與國內外相關行動者的權力網絡關係，以致於影響到次一階段的治理合理性，而呈現路徑依賴效果。本論文亦指出二十一世紀以後新興疫苗所發生的治理性危機，是源於分裂的真理論述、分權化的干預策略及分散的治理現象。英文摘要：By connecting biopolitics and the politics of vaccines, this article explains how, in a latecomer society such as Taiwan, an immunization system is established and why various problems are thus produced. The analysis is based on an artifact-centered perspective, in which the governmentality and political effects of vaccines are considered in the history of immunization in Taiwan. The article argues that the governmentality of vaccines results from the acceptance of imported technologies in a domestic regime of truth in accordance with local networks of truth-telling. Domestic implications of the technology further enforce or reshape the network for the acceptance of new vaccines, thus showing the effect of path-dependence. A governmentality crisis is envisaged for the early 21th century, however, because of disintegrated discourses, decentralized strategies, and dispersed governance of emerging high-valued vaccines.起始頁-結束頁：45-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.4513篇名：高中生選組行為的原因與結果：性別、信念、教師角色與能力發展並列篇名：Causes and Consequences of High School Curriculum- Track Selection: Gender, Belief, Teacher's Gender, and Cognitive Development作者：陳婉琪(Wan-Chi Chen)關鍵字：高中選組;能力發展;性別刻板印象;教師性別;教育性別隔離;high school curriculum track;cognitive development;gender stereotype;teacher gender;sex segregation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013中文摘要：對照早期與近年的文獻可發現，台灣高中生性別影響選組的現象，長期穩定幾無變遷。本文利用TEPS 的追蹤樣本資料，分析高中選組的前因與後果，得到數項結論：一、高中選組顯著影響個人能力發展。在先備能力及成就動機相同的情況下，選讀自然組的學生，各方面的能力測驗分數比社會組學生提升更多，男女皆然。二、由於性別影響選組，自然組效應也導致高中男生能力的進步幅度比女生更大。三、2005 年的高二生當中，約有32%的學生同意「男生比女生更適合念自然科學」。四、個人信念顯著影響日後選組行為。五、過去接觸過的教師之性別會影響學生日後的選組行為。女性數學老師乃「違反大眾普遍信念」的實例，相較於「總是被男老師教數學」，國中女生若接觸過女性數學教師，更有可能做出突破普遍信念的選擇（自然組）；相反地，「總是碰到男數學老師」讓男生更傾向做出傳統的選擇（自然組）。以上結論間接顯示，二擇一之僵固選組制度，在性別刻板印象普遍流傳的社會脈絡裡，有可能扮演性別位階關係之強力維護者的角色。英文摘要：Among high-school students in Taiwan, the majority of those enrolling in the math- and natural-science-oriented curriculum track are boys. In contrast, girls are crowded in humanity-oriented programs, where mathematics courses are less rigorous. The persistent gender imbalance in high school programs did not receive adequate attention, however. Analyzing the core panel from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS), this study investigates the causes and consequences of curriculum-track selection for high school students. There are four major findings. First, there was a significant positive effect of choosing ”natural science program” on basic achievement tests, controlling for previous test scores. The size of this ”natural science program effect” was about the same for both genders. Second, this ”natural science program effect” explained boys' more rapid cognitive development, compared with girls. Third, about one third of high-school students believed the statement that ”it would be better fit if boys choose to study natural science rather than girls.” Fourth, among 9th graders who believed the above statement, boys were more likely to choose ”natural science program” later at the senior-high-school stage and, in contrast, girls tended to choose the ”social science program,” controlling for previous test scores. Fifth, teacher's gender had an impact on student's choice. When girls had ever been taught by a female math teacher during junior high school, they were more likely to select the ”natural science program.” In contrast, when math teachers were predominantly male, boys were less likely to choose ”social science program.” The results suggest that the dual-track curriculum system in Taiwan's high schools may exploit students' opportunity for enhancing important problem-solving skills. In contexts where such belief (”natural science is a male domain”) is prevalent, female students' development could be severely suppressed.起始頁-結束頁：89-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.8914篇名：結構穩定性對動態新關係形成之影響：局部結構的網絡分析方法並列篇名：The Influence of Structural Stability on Dynamic New Tie Formation: A Local-Based Network Analytic Approach作者：楊坤修(Kuen-Shiou Yang);吳齊殷(Chyi-In Wu);趙義隆(Yi-Long Jaw)關鍵字：結構平衡;結構不平衡;動態新關係形成;結構穩定性;structural balance;structural imbalance;dynamic new tie formation;structural stability期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以社會網絡理論中的結構平衡觀點，並以行動者整體網絡之局部結構穩定性的有無與強弱程度，探討對動態新關係形成之影響。藉由驗證與比較經濟性之聯盟關係與社會性之友誼關係，本研究發現，在「一致性的潛在結構平衡」狀態下：夥伴的夥伴（經濟性關係）與朋友的朋友（社會性關係），會是未來的新夥伴與新朋友之可能性，遠比「一致性的結構不平衡」的狀態下來得高。在「衝突性的潛在結構平衡」狀態下，在經濟性的聯盟關係形成方面，競爭者的競爭者，很有可能會成為未來的新合作夥伴；但此可能性並未比「衝突性的潛在結構不平衡」的狀態下來得高。在社會性的友誼關係形成方面，在「衝突性的潛在結構平衡」的狀態下，敵人的敵人並不會是未來的新朋友，且此可能性在平衡狀態下與不平衡的狀態下，並無顯著差異。最後，在「潛在結構平衡的差異性比較」中，一致性的潛在結構平衡，相較於衝突性的潛在結構平衡，在未來新聯盟關係形成上，有較高的可能性；然而，在友誼關係中，並未有類似的結果發現。英文摘要：In this study, we adopt a structural balance perspective to examine how the extent of structural stability influences a dynamic new tie formation based on a local-based network analytic approach. By comparing structures of alliance (economic relation) and friendship (social relation), this study yields two major findings. First, under the agreed-upon potential-structural-balance situation, a partner's partner (i.e., economic relation) and a friend's friend (i.e., social relation) have a higher probability of being new mutual partners and friends in the future than a partner's partner and a friend's friend in unbalanced situations. Second, under the conflicting potential-structural-balance situation, a competitor's competitor (economic relation) could be a new partner in the future. The possibility of being a new future partner in this situation, however, is not significantly higher than such a possibility in an unbalanced situation. In contrast, under the conflicting potential-structural- balance situation, an enemy's enemy (social relation) probably would not be a new friend in the future and there is no significant difference, in terms of possibility, between conflicting potential-structural-balanced and unbalanced situations. Last but not least, for comparing the difference between agreed-upon and conflicting potential-structural-balance cases, the possibility of a dynamic alliance formation in the agreed-upon potential-structure- balance situation is higher than that in a conflicting one, while the possibility of a difference between agreed-upon and conflicting situations for dynamic friendship formation is not found at all.起始頁-結束頁：125-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.12515篇名：剩餘價值或是不對等交換？幾點質疑作者：許甘霖期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：163-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.16316篇名：資本主義、文化運作與性別認同：《港都百工圖》的未竟之業作者：藍佩嘉期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：167-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.16717篇名：在反思性斷裂與批判性回歸的辯證路徑上，探尋新知識的可能：評述《港都百工圖》作者：鄭瑋寧期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：171-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.17118篇名：勞動現場的反身寫實與在地範疇的存在感作者：楊弘任期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：182-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.18219篇名：資本主義、台灣社會與社會現象之建構：總結與回應作者：謝國雄期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：25期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：192-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2013.25.19201篇名：台灣家戶住宅面積需求變化：條件分配觀點之分析並列篇名：Housing Space Demand Changes of Taiwan's Households: Analysis of the Conditional Distribution Aspects作者：陳建良(Chien-Liang Chen);李巧琳(Chiao-Liang Lee)關鍵字：住宅需求;住宅面積;分配觀點;分量迴歸;經濟發展;人均住宅坪數;housing demand;housing space;distributional aspect;quantile regression;economic development;per capita housing space期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：以台灣資料為對象的住宅需求相關文獻並不少，但是大多關注住宅支出與租擁選擇，對於住宅面積的討論有限；相關分析多為平均趨勢，分配觀點的討論相對缺乏。本研究採用1985至2005年台灣家庭收支調查個體資料，透過分量迴歸與均數迴歸的比較，討論台灣家戶人均住宅坪數需求行為，及其在經濟成長過程的演進。在考量所得和價格內生性及租擁選擇性之下，發現人均住宅坪數需求受到所得、房價、家戶人口與經濟特性的顯著影響，並且在條件分配區間展現明顯的異質性；此異質性也隨經濟發展程度而有不同。本研究以分量迴歸估計住宅人均面積需求函數，強調平均趨勢觀點的不足，並由此引申政策建議，對住宅需求文獻有所補充。英文摘要：There is no lack of studies on housing demand using Taiwanese data. Most studies, however, focus on housing expenditure and tenure choice. Less attention has been paid to the analysis of the demand for housing space. Furthermore, most existing studies tend to be based on conditional mean regressions while conditional distribution investigations are fairly limited. This study employs household survey micro data to discuss the housing space demand behavior of Taiwanese households over the period from 1985 to 2005. By accounting for income and price endogeneities and tenure choice selectivity, the regression results suggest that per capita housing space demand is significantly determined by income, the housing price, household size and location attributes. The marginal effects of the covariates estimated from the quantile regression demonstrate the existence of heterogeneities across the conditional distribution as well as the process of economic development. By applying quantile regression to the demand for housing space, this study provides complementary evidence on the housing demand literature and derives insightful policy suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：中繼屋居住環境滿意度、家庭功能、社會支持與生活品質關係之研究並列篇名：The Relationship between Satisfaction with Living Environment, Family Functions, Social Support and Quality of Life in Interim Housing作者：劉立凡(Li-Fan Liu);陳柏宗(Po-Tsung Chen);姚昭智(George C. Yao);溫如慧(Ju-Huey Wen);黃肇新(Chao-Hsing Huang);姚慧萍(Hui-Ping Yao)關鍵字：中繼屋;環境滿意度;家庭功能;社會支持;生活品質;interim housing;environmental satisfaction;family functions;social support;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：大型複合性災害常造成災民住居與生存上的破壞，並直接影響災民的生活，需要在災後盡速安置災民的住居並藉由外部資源的介入，減輕災民生活壓力，乃刻不容緩的議題。本研究藉由探究忠誠營區中期安置中心的實際運作，結合環境評估、家庭功能、社會支持與生活品質等量表進行問卷調查，共回收91份有效問卷進行分析。結果顯示，住民對於居住環境、家庭功能、社會支持與生活品質均呈現中等以上的滿意度。住民對於環境滿意度與其性別及居住來源地顯著相關；同時也與家庭功能中適應度、合作度與情感度顯著相關。另外，生活品質環境範疇的影響因子有住宅型態與對社區環境的滿意度，因此提供良好的住宅設施並導入社區規劃與運作將會直接影響住民的生活品質。英文摘要：Catastrophic disasters often lead to severe pressure on the living arrangements and psychological well-being of disaster victims and their survival. It is imperative that interim housing be provided in the aftermath of such calamities so as to resolve the victims' living issues including linking resources appropriately to alleviate their living stress. This study aims to investigate whether the functions of the interim housing could be implemented through social support and community empowerment in helping to maintain and enhance the victims' quality of life. This research investigates the operational context of the interim resettlement center at Chungcheng Camp in southern Taiwan after victims moved in for one year. A survey was conducted to evaluate the living environment, family functions, social support and quality of life of the victims. In total, 91 family representatives were interviewed and the findings analyzed. The results showed that residents expressed a moderate to high degree of satisfaction with their living environment, family functions, social support, and quality of life in the interim housing, suggesting that the implementation of interim housing positively contributed to the original goal of stabilizing the victims' lives. The residents' degree of satisfaction with their living environment was found to be correlated with their gender and original living location. The satisfaction was also significantly correlated with their family functions. Moreover, from the victims' point of view, the influential factors of the environmental aspects of the quality of life included both the type of residence and satisfaction with the community environment of the interim housing. In conclusion, establishing a quality interim housing environment and initiating a caring community have a direct impact on the residents' quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：35-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：不動產抵押貸款擔保品估價行為之研究並列篇名：An Investigation into the Factors Influencing the Appraisal Behavior for Real Estate Mortgage Collateral作者：陳淑美(Shu-Mei Chen);黃麗燕(Li-Yan Huang);陳彥仲(Yen-Jong Chen)關鍵字：不動產抵押貸款擔保品;估價行為;道德風險;real estate mortgage collateral;appraisal behavior;moral hazard期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：當不動產抵押貸款擔保品的估值不合理，超額貸款將會引起銀行的損失，對估價師也有道德風險，因此估價師的估價工作十分重要。本文透過深度訪談了解不動產估價師與放款業務員的互動關係；其次，參考過去文獻提出影響不動產估價師修改估價結果的假說。本研究利用問卷蒐集估價師個人屬性、市場資訊來源、修改估值情境及估價師事務所與銀行之間依存關係等資訊，運用次序羅吉特模式進行實證分析。研究結果顯示估價師估價年資較長者與以個人經驗為重要的資訊來源者較不容易大幅度修改估值。當銀行對估價師事務所收入影響大者或銀行與估價師事務所案件依存度大者，估價師會大幅度的調整估值。年資經驗與收入壓力是影響估價師對擔保品估價行為的重要因素。英文摘要：If the value of real estate mortgage collateral is estimated improperly, the bank will incur costs and the appraiser will suffer from moral hazard. In this respect, rational appraisal behavior is considered to be extremely important. This study explores the interaction relationships between appraisers and mortgage brokers by means of qualitative interviews and advances some hypotheses regarding the factors influencing the appraisal behavior related to real estate collateral. Furthermore, we conducted a quantitative questionnaire survey where all the licensed appraisers in Taiwan were invited to participate, and the response rate was 53.125%; through the survey, we collected data on the appraisers' characteristics, their market information sources, the situations or conditions which affected the ways in which the appraisers adjusted the estimated values and the dependent relationships between the banks and appraisal firms. In the current research, the Ordinal Logit Model was adopted to analyze the factors that influenced the appraiser's determination of the range of adjustment for the estimated valuations. There are at least three findings obtained from this study: (1) if senior appraisers have richer experiences and determine the valuations based mainly on their own experiences, they are unlikely to greatly adjust the valuations of real estate mortgage collateral; (2) when the valuation cases significantly influence the appraisal firms' revenues, there is a higher probability that the appraisers will adjust the estimated valuations; and (3) the higher that the degree of dependence between the appraisal firms and the banks is, the more probable it is that the appraisers will greatly adjust the estimated valuations. Apparently, the appraisal experience and the pressure to generate revenues are the most significant factors which affect the appraisal behavior in relation to real estate mortgage collateral.起始頁-結束頁：59-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：老人是否持有不動產與獨居之聯合決策分析－並由居住滿意度分析老人獨居之性質並列篇名：The Joint Decision Making of Holding Real Assets and Living Alone among Elderly People in Taiwan-And Understanding the Nature of Living Alone through the Satisfaction Level of Elderly People作者：薛立敏(Li-Min Hsueh);張日青(Rih-Cing Jhang)關鍵字：老人;獨居;持有不動產;居住安排滿意度;雙變量常態機率模型;elderly;living alone;real assets;level of satisfaction with living arrangements;bivariate probit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣老年人口比例已超過10%，其中獨居老人的日益增加是整個社會關注的焦點。本研究建立一個概念性模型用以說明老人是否持有不動產、是否獨居以及居住安排滿意度三個變數之間的因果關係。在實證部分利用行政院衛生署的「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查研究」民國85年與民國96年資料。首先藉由雙變量常態機率模型同時估計老人是否持有不動產與是否獨居的決策。接著以排序性邏輯特模型進一步分析老人的居住滿意度。連結三個模型的估計結果可以發現台灣老人持有不動產會使老人獨居機率增加，其原因可能是老人較難適應新環境而不得不選擇留在原來的地方獨居，而由於老人是被動選擇獨居而使得居住滿意度較低。然而此種情形已經在改變之中，民國96年老人仍是被動選擇獨居，但是不滿意的程度已略有降低。英文摘要：Elderly people account for more than 10% of the total population in Taiwan. Among the issues related to elderly people, the increasing probability of living alone is attracting more and more attention from the whole of society. In this paper, we first establish a conceptual model to explain the causal relationships among holding assets, living alone and the level of satisfaction with living arrangements of elderly people. The data used in the empirical study are obtained from ”The Survey of Health and Living Status of the Near Elderly and Elderly in Taiwan” for 1996 and 2007, which is conducted by the Department of Health. In the empirical study, a bivariate probit model is used first to estimate the joint decision making of holding assets and living alone. Then an ordered logistic regression is used for the satisfaction with living model. By combining the different findings from the empirical results, we note that aged people who hold real assets have a higher probability of living alone relative to those not holding any real assets. This is probably owing to the fact that they are not able to adapt to a new environment and decide to stay in their original residence alone. In other words, they live alone involuntarily, and hence have a lower level of satisfaction than those who hold assets and do not live alone.起始頁-結束頁：87-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：遷移與居住地點的性別選擇性並列篇名：Gender Selection in Destination Choices of Labor Migration作者：張慈佳(Tzu-Chia Chang)關鍵字：性別選擇性;遷移與居住地點選擇;勞工流動;條件羅吉特模式;gender selection;destination choices;labor migration;conditional logit models期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文期望了解遷移與居住地點的性別選擇性，以釐清女性的偏好與考量，以及在女性經濟機會逐年增加與兩性平權意識逐漸提升的情況下，此類性別選擇性的變遷。同時，也想了解已婚女性的決策，是否會受限於性別角色信念，而與未婚女性不同。本文採用1992年與2007年「國內遷徙調查」的原始資料，經由條件羅吉特模式的估計結果發現，遷移與居住地點的決策，確實存在性別選擇現象：在1992年時，台灣女性為了抗衡勞力市場上可能存在的性別歧視，比男性更為積極的遷移到薪資較高、居住成本較低，甚或升職機會較大的地區。到了2007年，由於台灣女性無論在教育程度、勞動參與率，以及社會與政治參與程度，均已逐年提升，此時，兩性對於地區屬性差異的反應，並無顯著的差異。至於性別角色信念對於已婚女性的限制，實證結果顯示，台灣女性似乎沒有因為婚姻而受到更大的束縛。英文摘要：Internal migration has long been recognized as an effective means of advancing individual and household income and socioeconomic status. This study explores the gender selection in destination choices of labor migration in Taiwan and clarifies the structural changes in such gender selection owing to the increase in job opportunities and greater public participation of women over the past several years. Moreover, the study attempts to probe into the destination choices of married women in view of gender role beliefs. By comparing Taiwan's domestic migration survey data for 1992 with those for 2007, the results of the conditional logit models reveal that females tended to be more favorable to regions with high wages, low living costs, and more high-ranking jobs than males in 1992. This finding may suggest that migration can be used as a compensation mechanism for gender bias in the labor market. Such gender selection is, however, not found in the 2007 data due to the increasing economic opportunities for women at present. In addition, marriage does not seem to affect women's decisions since the propensity to move is just the same for single or married women.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：Spatial and Temporal Effects of High-speed Rail on House Prices-The Case of Kaohsiung City並列篇名：高速鐵路的時空效應對房屋價格的影響－以高雄市為例作者：廖四郎(Szu-Lang Liao);陳靜宜(Jing-Yi Chen)關鍵字：房屋價格;時空效應;spline迴歸;高速鐵路;克利金;house prices;temporal and spatial effects;spline regression;High-speed Rail;Kriging期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文針對交通運輸對房地產價值的影響，提供一個實證的分析。研究的主要目的在於闡述交通運輸的存在對於周邊房地產價值在時間與空間路徑上的變化，了解房屋與高速鐵路的距離及高速鐵路在完成時效上對於房價的影響。先前的研究已針對交通可及性的空間分布或是時間效應對於房地產及土地價值的影響，時間與空間對於房屋價格的二維影響尚未被有系統性的研究。我們使用高雄市在高速鐵路完成時期前後的房屋交易數據，並結合特徵價格法與spline迴歸分析探究房價隨時間與空間二維度的非線性變化。透過空間插值技術－克利金，有效處理空間相關性問題，合理分析房價之動態轉變。最後，本文總結分析在不同距離與時間條件下，追蹤房屋價格對於高鐵影響的變化。英文摘要：This paper presents an analysis of empirical studies on the effects of transportation facilities on property values. The primary purpose of this study is to address the effects of the presence of transportation facilities on the value of surrounding properties under time and spatial domains. Both the effect of distance from the High-speed Rail (HSR) and the effect of time relative to the completion of the HSR segment contribute to the non-linearity of house prices. While previous studies of the effects of transport accessibility on property and land values have focused on either cross-sectional spatial or temporal patterns, the joint analysis of these two dimensions has not been systematically investigated. We use home transaction data from a period around the completion of the HSR in Kaohsiung City and combine a standard hedonic price model with a spline regression technique to verify non-linear variations of the effect along the temporal and spatial dimensions. The dynamic changes in the house price are analyzed by spatial interpolation techniques (Kriging), which benefit from explicitly dealing with spatial dependence effects. Finally, we estimate the model for a regular series of distances from the HSR, and for time points both before and after the opening of the rail in order to track price effects across various distances and over time.起始頁-結束頁：25-54資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：老人居住安排滿意與否之改變並列篇名：Changes in Satisfaction with Living Arrangements among the Elderly作者：張桂霖(Guey-Lin Chang)關鍵字：居住安排滿意;居住安排轉換;老人住宅;人與環境一致;satisfaction with living arrangements;living arrangements transitions;senior housing;person-environment congruence期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：居住安排滿意關係老人幸福甚鉅，本文為檢視究竟何因素影響老人居住安排滿意與否之改變，使用縱斷面調查資料，應用人與環境一致和基本生活需求滿足之理論基礎，以動態的變數－相關變數前後期的改變－為自變項，檢視其影響。結果發現：以人與環境一致或基本生活需求滿足，解釋居住安排滿意與否之改變，都獲得部分支持，同時，「愛屋及烏」假說亦獲得支持。本文顯示居住安排滿意與否之改變，主要歸因於環境與個體間之一致及合適與否。實證發現對現住屋從不喜歡變為喜歡者、找醫生看病從不方便變為方便者，其居住安排從不滿意變為滿意的機率較大，從滿意變為不滿意的機率較小；從非僅與配偶同住轉為僅與配偶同住者、經濟狀況由差變佳者，其居住安排從不滿意變為滿意的機率較大；反之，經濟狀況由佳變差者，其居住安排從滿意變為不滿意的機率較大。此外，老人隨著年齡增長，越來越多人不滿意其居住安排，尤其年齡較高者，其居住安排從滿意變為不滿意的機率較大，所幸，改善居住環境可以增加從不滿意居住安排變為滿意的機率，信仰宗教可降低從滿意居住安排變為不滿意的機率。英文摘要：Satisfaction with living arrangements is critical to the welfare of the elderly. This article uses a longitudinal data source, applies a theoretical basis of person-environment congruence and basic-needs content, and takes the dynamic variables, the changes in related variables between the baseline and followup, as independent variables to examine the determinants of changes in satisfaction with living arrangements among the elderly. The results indicate that both person-environment congruence and basic-needs content partially cause changes in satisfaction with living arrangements, and the ”love me, love my dog” hypothesis is also fulfilled. This study suggests that changes in satisfaction with living arrangements are mainly attributed to the congruence or fit between the environment and the individual. The empirical results also show that those who like the current housing as opposed to disliking it, and find it convenient to see a doctor as opposed to finding it inconvenient, are more likely to be satisfied with living arrangements than dissatisfied, and less likely to be dissatisfied with living arrangements than satisfied. Satisfaction with living arrangements as opposed to dissatisfaction with them is more likely to occur when a senior transits to live only with a spouse or his or her financial situation improves. On the contrary, dissatisfaction with living arrangements as opposed to satisfaction with them is more likely to occur when a senior's financial situation worsens. The proportion of dissatisfaction with living arrangements increases as age increases, and those more advanced in age are more likely to be dissatisfied with living arrangements as opposed to being satisfied with them. Fortunately, improving the living environment may increase the probability of satisfaction with living arrangements from dissatisfaction with them, and having a religious belief may reduce the probability of dissatisfaction with living arrangements as opposed to satisfaction with them.起始頁-結束頁：55-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：住宅標籤化與社區意識及維護績效路徑分析－結構方程模型應用並列篇名：Path Analysis among Housing Labeling, Community Consciousness, and Maintaining Performance-An Application of the Structural Equation Model作者：胡志平(Chich-Ping Hu);林帝佑(Di-Yo Lin)關鍵字：弱勢群體;貧窮次文化;外部成本;標籤化;結構方程模型;the disadvantaged groups;poverty subculture;external cost;labeling;structural equation model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：政府為幫助弱勢群體推出「國民住宅」，由於大量聚集弱勢同質居民造成貧窮次文化、犯罪問題等，對附近社區造成外部成本。城市中的隔離現象越演越烈，聚集弱勢同質人群的地方甚至被標籤化、汙名化。本文將標籤化視為外衍變數討論它對社區管理維護績效的影響，並藉由社區意識、社區參與兩個中介變數，透過結構方程模型（structural equation model）了解彼此間的因果關係。建商在產品定位時最常採取面積混合策略，即「主力坪數」和「非主力坪數」策略，本文也針對兩者在社區管理維護績效的差異進行分析。操作結果發現，主力坪數住戶社區意識確實較高，且標籤化程度越高，隔離程度相對較高，意味居民背景集中趨於一致，有助社區意識凝聚；居民背景相當，社區活動也較能得到認同，參與狀況隨之熱絡。維護績效也因社區認同程度高，居民能集結起來參與社區事務而提高。英文摘要：The government has assisted disadvantaged groups that cannot afford housing with ”public housing” projects. However, the poverty subculture and increasing crimes around the community where the disadvantaged groups have gathered has led to an increase in the external cost for the city. Residential segregation in the city grows in intensity due to labeling and stigmatization in places where the disadvantaged groups with homogeneous characteristics are gathered. In this paper, housing labeling is imported as an exogenous variable to investigate what can influence the performance of property management in the community. In order to investigate the interrelationships between community consciousness and maintained performance on the basis of the labeling level, two intervening variables including community consciousness and community participation are also introduced into the theoretical framework by the structural equation model. Investors often adopt a strategy of mix in size whenever they make a decision on a project on either the ”main floor” or ”non-main floor” in product positioning. This paper attempts to investigate the differences in community maintained performance between the ”main floor” and ”non-main floor” and the demonstrative results show that residents in the ”main floor” have a high level in community consciousness. Moreover this paper shows that the higher the level in housing labeling is, the more segregated the community will be. This implies that consistency in families' backgrounds is contributing to coherence in community consciousness, and that community activities can then be accepted by families easily as well as participation proportions consequentially increased. Therefore, the community maintained performance level becomes high due to overall participation in activities with residents in the community.起始頁-結束頁：81-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會9篇名：建立購屋負擔風險指數再檢視家戶住宅之購屋能力－台北與高雄地區購屋家戶之比較並列篇名：Reexamining Housing Affordability by Using the Affordable Risk Index-Empirical Comparison of Home Buyers in Taipei and Kaohsiung作者：陳彥仲(Yen-Jong Chen);呂昭宏(Chao-Hong Lu)關鍵字：購屋負擔;負擔風險指數;住宅價格;家戶所得;購屋;housing affordability;affordable risk index;housing price;household income;home buyer期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在探討有關住宅負擔能力的研究中，一般使用價格所得比（price to income ratio, PIR）作為指標。然而家戶的購屋能力不只是與住宅價格和家戶所得有關，而且也與當時之住宅融資乃至住宅補貼政策有關。本研究延伸Gan & Hill（2009）所提出購屋可負擔極限值之概念，推估台北及高雄各樣本家戶最高之購屋負擔能力的極值，並將所推估之購屋極值與實際購屋價格加以比較。再經由對價格之機率分配的設定，推估其價格差距之發生概率。本研究稱此概率為「購屋負擔風險指數」，其值域介於0%到100%之間。當風險指數趨近於0%，則購屋負擔風險小；反之，當趨近於100%，則購屋負擔風險大。本研究進而應用此一風險指數探討不同所得層級家戶之購屋負擔風險。以2008年高雄與台北地區首次購屋或換屋之家戶為實證對象，且依家戶所得高低分為三組家戶層級以進行比較分析。實證結果發現，高雄地區之購屋負擔風險隨家戶所得之增加而下降；但是，台北地區則以高所得之家戶具有最大之購屋風險，其次是低所得與中所得家戶。透過敏感度分析，本研究發現隨著貸款比例的增加，低所得家戶則相對快速提升其購屋風險。英文摘要：In measuring housing affordability, the price-to-income ratio(PIR) is the index in the literature that is mostly used to measure the 'pressure' of the real housing price on household income. However, the application of the PIR index is limited. Gan & Hill(2009) provide a concept of estimating the housing affordable limit and compute the affordability of individual households. In this study, the housing affordable price for a given household income is empirically estimated based on the assumptions of the ratio of living expenses and mortgage parameters. The estimated affordable price is then compared with the real price for the current housing unit to calculate the price gap. The cumulative probability of the price gap for each household is estimated according to the probability distribution of all collected individual housing prices. The cumulative probability, referred to as the ”affordability risk index”, has a percentage ranging from 0% to 100%. The household has less housing affordability risk when the index approaches 0% and, conversely, the risk is high when the index approaches 100%. We adopt empirical data for the cities of Taipei and Kaohsiung in 2008, and compute the affordable risk index for households based on different income levels. Our findings show that the household with the lowest-income level has the highest affordable risk as expected in both cities. Yet, in Taipei city, households at the highest-income level are found to have an affordable risk that is higher than that for the households at other income levels.起始頁-結束頁：107-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：非營利組織決策者認知的法規障礙：遊說法與倡導行動的研究並列篇名：How Decision-Makers Perceived Legal Barriers: Lobbying Act and Advocacy of Nonprofit Organizations作者：韓意慈(Yih-Tsu Hahn)關鍵字：非營利組織;倡導;倡議;遊說法;社會政策過程;nonprofit organizations;advocacy;Lobbying Act;process of social policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：我國於2008年8月實施遊說法，因攸關非營利組織政策倡導行動而引發關注。本研究針對11個曾實際進行申報、或社會福利相關領域之非營利組織之決策者進行質性研究訪談，藉由組織中的代表，探討其進行遊說登錄的執行經驗及因應方式。研究結果顯示受訪組織申報或不願申報之經驗，及其因應此法之方式。本文並呈現遊說法對於組織之設限，除了具體的行政負擔與成本，組織決策者所認知之法規障礙（perceived legal barriers）亦是持續影響當今非營利組織倡導行動的關鍵因素。結論中指出未來更進一步的影響將在於爭議性高之遊說議題，或當非營利組織與資源豐富的利益團體交鋒時，遊說法將形成倡導行動中實質的障礙。英文摘要：Implemented in 2008, the Lobbying Act has affected advocate actions of nonprofit organizations and caused for attention. Nonprofit organizations argue the requirements of the act would increase considerable costs for organizations working for public interest. This study interviewed decision-makers from 11 small nonprofit organizations who have and have not file applications on lobbying according the law. In addition to the costs came from the new law that may pose pressure on small organizations, this study find the decision-makers of nonprofit organizations perceived legal barriers regarding political lobbying behaviors. Their perceived legal barriers of nonprofit organizations would impact the advocacy actions of the nonprofit organizations. Implications to research and practices are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201312_17(2).00012篇名：媒合婚姻，媒合適應？！在臺跨國（境）婚姻媒合協會之服務內涵探究並列篇名：Matchmaking Marriage, Mediating Adaption!? Exploring the Matchmaking Services of Non-Profit Transnational Marriage Agents in Taiwan作者：王翊涵(Yi-Han Wang)關鍵字：跨國（境）婚姻媒合;新移民女性;公益化協會;婚姻仲介;transnational marriage matchmaking;immigrant wives;non-profit matchmaking agent;profit-pursuing marriage brokerage期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣在1990年代後期成為接待大量女性婚姻移民的客居地，這些女性多數來自大陸與東南亞國家，且主要由營利性質之婚姻仲介媒合而來。隨著愈來愈多仲介業者的出現以及日增的跨國（境）婚姻仲介糾紛，政府於2007年確定以公益化政策管理跨國（境）婚姻媒合者的方針，並輔導既存之仲介業者轉型為非營利性質之跨國（境）婚姻媒合協會。協會與新移民女性在臺生活福祉息息相關，但探究協會功能與角色的研究甚少，本文因此形成，探究協會之媒合服務內涵以及形塑此服務內涵的機制。依據訪談結果，可以發現協會所提供的媒合服務內容繁複多樣，不單僅是提供跨國（境）相親的平台而已。相親之前，協會會「教導」臺灣男性「正確」的結婚心態、「調查」男方當事人的身家背景，並以「好女人」標準「篩選待嫁新娘」；相親過程中強調「毀婚契約」的簽訂，並以符合男尊女卑的性別規範來「培訓新嫁娘」；新娘來臺以後，協會繼續提供「婚後輔導」以協助適應。觀看這些媒合服務，本文進一步指出協會的營利需求、道德考量、其持有的男尊女卑性別觀念與種族化的意識形態偏見，是築基此媒合服務地景的重要機制，其中營利與道德又是共存共生的，而新移民女性在此媒合服務中將可能感受保護，同時又受到箝制。本文最後針對政府治理跨國（境）婚姻媒合協會以能增進新移民女性在臺生活福祉的面向來提出建議。英文摘要：The prevalence of transnational marriage can be witnessed in Taiwan in the late twentieth century where Chinese women and Southeast Asian women dominate numerically. Most immigrant wives married Taiwanese through the operation of profit-pursuing marriage brokerages (i.e. Zhongjie) that had been transformed into non-profit marriage agents (i.e. Xiehui) by Immigration Act amended in 2007. It is clear that Xiehuis play a key role on immigrant wives' migrating process and living experiences in Taiwan. Concerned with these women's welfare, this paper thus aims to explore the content of matchmaking services of Xiehuis. Based on in-depth interviews with 14 interviewees working in 12 Xiehuis, I show that the matchmaking services offered by Xiehuis are diverse, including ”teaching” Taiwanese clients ”correct” marriage attitude, ”researching” Taiwanese clients' background, ”sifting” ”good” bride-candidates, signing a conditional marriage contract, ”training” newlywed brides, and providing material assistance. I further found that these diverse matchmaking services, underpinned by profit-pursuing motivation, professional ethics, traditional family gender division and racialization, may protect immigrant wives from swindle, but may also restrict them to be empowered. To respond to the research findings and to improve immigrant wives' well-being in Taiwan, this paper concludes by proposing recommendations for policy-making and enhancing programs and further research.起始頁-結束頁：39-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201312_17(2).00023篇名：建構國民年金保險監理指標之研究並列篇名：A Study of National Pension Supervisory Indicators作者：陳琇惠(Hsiu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：國民年金保險;國民年金監理制度;監理指標;national pension;national pension supervision;supervisory indicators期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：我國國民年金法，業於2008年10月1日正式施行，此制度的建立，對於完整年金制度的建構具有重大的意義。如何使國民年金保險制度永續運作，不能忽略「風險的管理」。關於國民年金保險的風險管理機制，國民年金法並沒有明確的規範，但設有國民年金監理會，擔負監督與管理責任。惟現行國民年金保險的監理機制，易流於形式監督，難顯其具體成效。有鑑於國內並無有關年金監理指標的研究，且該項指標的研訂，對及早掌握國民年金保險潛在風險，能發揮一定的預警揭露效能，對國民年金保險制度的永續發展，擔負關鍵性任務。本研究將以探討國民年金保險監理指標為研究主題，研析國內外相關文獻，透過焦點座談、菁英問卷法等研究方法，對國民年金保險業務與財務之構面，建立監理的指標，以期提升監理效能，並達到年金保險風險預警功能。英文摘要：Taiwan has implemented the National Pension (NP) since Oct 1, 2008. The National Pension Supervisory Commission was set up simultaneously for the supervision of its administrative and financial affairs. The effectiveness of the scheme will have a direct impact on people's confidence and trust toward the NP, which is an important scheme for the protection of un-employee economic security. Therefore, figuring out how to sustain operation the program is very importance. The concept of sustainable operations should be oriented toward ”risk-based supervision” therefore developing supervisory indicators for academic research is necessary. The study includes the following dimensions: (1) Overview of the NP system and NP supervision system. (2) Analyzing risk factors of NP system (3) Developing risk-based NP supervisory indicators. (4) Several suggestions based on the findings.起始頁-結束頁：109-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201312_17(2).00034篇名：看見萬華的協力作用力並列篇名：Practice-Based Research on Community Collaboration in Wanhwa District of Taipei City作者：羅秀華(Rosa Shiow-Hwa Luo)關鍵字：福利部門;社區團隊;社區協力;聯合行動;welfare sectors;community groups;community collaboration;action together期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣社會工作二、三十年來的蓬勃發展中，福利服務部門的數量快速成長，此現象促動著不同服務部門之間的協力合作。本文針對北市萬華區內諸多的服務部門，如何透過平素的工作對話與分工合作，9年來共同形成「萬華社區協力聯盟」的聯合。研究者運用實務為本的研究取徑與行動研究方法，不間斷地參與協力行動，本文探析參與部門與參與能量之外，就聯合行動中的聯合送餐、志願服務、網站與福利地圖、以及連續6年的歲末踩街活動作一鋪陳。進而，在諸多部門的參與所發展而來的老人與兒少服務小協力，充分與各部門的服務內涵融合。本文所據以分析的協力運作機轉，是以協力聯盟發展合作方案，由社區團隊擔綱第一線的服務與關懷，福利部門則作為社區團隊的重要支撐。英文摘要：The rapid growth of both social work and welfare sectors in Taiwan is tremendous for the past thirty years. We social work practitioners are involved in collaboration, network and partnership with staff of other sectors. We had nine years' experience in implementing collaboration in Wanhwa area. The Lishin Charity Foundation initiated coordination for the project. Totally 2,361 persons participated in the project, and more than 120 times meetings were held. We collaborated on volunteers' learning courses and joint endeavors, website and facebook settings, and the year-end festival for publicity of social welfare services in Wanhwa for consecutive six years. We team members extended the collaboration towards the subgrouping for elders and youngsters via community care settings. It is a valuable practice in Taiwan to promote community collaboration with support from the local welfare service network. The community groups are responsible for the frontline care for those vulnerable people, and the welfare sectors give hands to the following referrals. This collaboration is helpful for community growth in welfare services.起始頁-結束頁：157-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201312_17(2).00045篇名：臺灣原鄉弱勢教育與教育福利議題之初探：原住民校長的角度並列篇名：A Preliminary Investigation on Disadvantaged Education and Education Welfare Issues in Indigenous Villages in Taiwan: From the Perspective of Indigenous Principals作者：賴秦瑩(Chin-Ying Lai);吳惠如(Norene H. Wu);郭俊巖(Chun-Yen Kuo);王德睦(Te-Mu Wang)關鍵字：原住民;貧窮;弱勢教育;社會福利;全球化;indigenous;poverty;disadvantaged education;social welfare;globalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在探討臺灣原鄉的弱勢教育與教育福利議題，以及部落發展限制之問題癥結，為達此目的，本文採用訪談法針對信義鄉3位布農族校長進行質性資料的蒐集及分析。研究發現，至今信義鄉產業發展有限，部落工作機會不足，居民謀生不易，許多部落族人長期面臨家庭教育資源缺乏和教養功能薄弱的難題，加上偏遠山地學校各項學習資源相對不足，種種因素的影響，造成部落原住民學生的學業成就普遍低落，即令透過加分優待，升學競爭力也抵不過都市原住民學生，更遑論與漢人學生競爭。循此，本文依研究結果，提出幾項改善原鄉生活機會和部落學生學習成效的思考方針：1.擴增原民會權責，落實原鄉發展計畫；2.加分優待有必要，但族語認證需檢討；3.加強原鄉學校與民間社會福利機構合作；4.推展寄宿學校與課後輔導的補救教學策略；5.增加原鄉原住民師資與培植原住民治校人才。英文摘要：The main purposes of this study are to investigate the disadvantaged educational and education welfare issues in the indigenous villages in Taiwan, and to identify the causes to the limitation of tribe development. Using interviews with three Bunun principals in Xinyi Township for qualitative data collection and analysis, the results show that Xinyi Township faces many difficult issues, including limited industrial development and work opportunities in the tribes, difficulties to make a living, lack of resources for extra training after school, weak parenting skills in many tribes, and lack of various learning resources at schools in the remote mountain areas. The aforementioned outcomes lead to low academic achievement among indigenous students in tribes. Even provided with extra points for the college entrance examinations, the indigenous students in tribes cannot compete with the indigenous students living in urban areas academically, letting alone Han students. Based on the results, researchers of this study proposed several guidelines for improving living opportunities in the indigenous villages and the learning effectiveness of the students living in tribes: 1) to expand the power and responsibilities of Council of Indigenous Peoples and to put the indigenous village development plan into practice; 2) to keep the extra points policy and to review the ethnic language certification system; 3) to strengthen the collaboration between schools in indigenous villages and non-governmental social welfare institutions; 4) to promote remedial education strategies of boarding school and after-school tutoring; 5) to increase the number of indigenous teachers in indigenous villages and, systemically, train youths for academic leadership.起始頁-結束頁：213-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201312_17(2).00056篇名：生育津貼對我國生育率的影響：以1998－2010年為例並列篇名：Maternity Allowance and Total Fertility: Evidence from Taiwan 1998 to 2010作者：林妏蓁(Wen-Chen Lin);陳國樑(Joe Chen);黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang)關鍵字：生育率;生育津貼;Panel迴歸模型;內生性問題;total fertility rate;maternity allowance;Panel regression model;endogeneity problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來整體生育率持續下跌，少子化問題已成為社會關注的焦點，也是諸多社會安全相關政策改革時的重要變數。針對少子化問題，直至2012年止，政府尚無提出完整的應對及配套方案。在中央政府方面，主要的作法有2011年啟動之「5歲幼兒免學費教育計畫」以及2012年起適用之「幼兒學前特別扣除額」。各地方政府雖然陸續提出相對較多元的生育政策，主要的作法是以一次性之「生育津貼」現金補助，期能刺激民眾生育意願、提升各地生育率。然而，生育津貼是否真能提高民眾的生育意願，達成提升生育率的政策目標，並沒有相關研究成果可供參考。本研究根據Panel迴歸模型的計量方法，探討1998－2010年間各縣市政府生育津貼的發放與育齡婦女總生育率之關聯性。實證估計上最大的問題在於處理縮減式（reduced-form）迴歸估計所面臨的內生性問題。由於縣市政府會因其財源決定是否發放生育津貼，但縣市財政狀況一般而言與生育率無關。故本研究選取歲入作為工具變數，來處理以生育津貼發放作為解釋變數所存在的內生性問題。研究結果發現，生育津貼與生育率之間雖是正向關係，但是效果並不大。對於本來就想生育的育齡婦女來說，地方政府每發放生育津貼新台幣1,000元，將有提前懷孕的刺激效果，但也僅增加整體生育率0.0057。此外，其他國家的經驗也鮮少僅靠生育津貼就能提升生育率之案例；因此，臺灣若要有效解決少子化問題，各級政府應積極思考更完整的應對方案。英文摘要：The decreasing total fertility rate has been a major public concern in Taiwan. Except the ”5-year-old Children Education Subsidy” (starting from 2011) and the ”Special Deduction for Preschool Children” (starting from 2012), the central government has failed to provide a complete and effective measure to boost the dropping birth numbers. On the other hand, local governments, however, promote child births with policies of a wider variety. Among them, the most popular and welcome policy is to distribute cash maternity allowance to child births in the jurisdictional area. Nonetheless, the effectiveness of using one-time-allowance to promote birth rate has never been seriously studied. With data from 23 jurisdictional area of Taiwan in the period from 1998 to 2010, panel regressions are used to investigate the relationship between total fertility rate and the distribution of cash maternity allowance by local governments. In order to resolve the potential endogeneity problem in the regressions, local government revenue is used as an instrument. The regression results suggest that there is positive correlation between total fertility rate and the amount of cash maternity allowance, but the effect is small. For women who want to have children in the first place, each NT$1,000 cash allowance raises total fertility rate by 0.0057.起始頁-結束頁：259-297資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201312_17(2).00067篇名：社區議題與社區自主性關聯之探討並列篇名：A Study of Association between Community Issues and the Autonomy of Community作者：郭瑞坤(Jui-Kun Kuo);徐依鈴(Yi-Ling Hsu);張秦瑞(Chang-Jui Chang);沈逸晴(Yi-Ching Shen)關鍵字：社區自主;社區議題;社區參與程度;民間團體;community autonomy;community issues;community participation;civil society期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著台灣目前不斷發展的情況，社區議題也隨之擴張，愈來愈多的民間團體介入社區，但居民才是社區主體，外來民問團體僅是促成社區自主的一種催化劑，故其涉入社區事務程度的多寡，將是本研究探討的重點。本研究目的為瞭解社區意識與社區參與程度對社區自主性之關聯性、不同社區議題的居民其社區意識是否有所差異、不同社區議題的居民在社區參與程度上的差異及不同社區議題的居民自主性是否受到民間團體影響。本研究有關社區居民自主性的研究變項，包括「社區議題」、「社區意識」、「社區參與程度」和「社區自主性」四個構面，並以曾經參與過2003－2010年間「高雄市公共事務管理學會」培力中心的社區為抽樣對象，合計共64個社區，隨機抽取4個社區進行研究調查；另外特殊社區以美濃「吉洋人工湖」及中科三期的「中興新村高等科學園區」為研究對象，並利用問卷調查研究，進行SPSS軟體的統計分析。分析結果發現，本研究所檢驗的五項假設中有三項獲得支持，而有二項並未成立。成立的假設說明社區意識、社區參與程度皆會影響社區自主性，而社區議題的不同也會影響到社區居民參與的程度。在不成立的假設中，發現當地居民社區意識的凝聚，並不會因不同的社區議題而受影響;而不論為何種社區議題的類型，民間團體對於社區居民皆有一定程度的影響。本研究提出三層面的建議，包含社區意識觀點、社區參與程度、社區自主性觀點，以期提供政府組織或社區相關組織參考，並給予後續更為嚴謹的研究建議。英文摘要：With the rapid social and economic developments of Taiwan, many important community issues are raised. The growing of citizen's organizations participating in the community movements and activities has made the community issues more complicated. Certainly, the residents are the major stakeholder of the community issues. The empowerment of citizens and their organizations may be able to stimulate and strengthen the autonomy of communities. This study is to explore the association between community issues and the autonomy of the community. The variables related to community residents' autonomy was classified into four different types. They are as followed: ”community issues”, ”community awareness”, ”community participation” and ”community autonomy”. Residents of six sampled community organizations were chosen to completed questionnaires. The results showed that the awareness of community residents and the degree of community participation are related to the autonomy of community. In addition, the community issues would affect the community participation. However, no matter what kinds of community issues, the outside groups of citizen's organizations would play an important role.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201306_17(1).00018篇名：衛生福利與勞政漏接：男性口腔癌存活者重返工作之分析並列篇名：The Negligence of Health and Welfare and Labor Institutions: Analysis of Return to Work of Male Oral Cancer Survivors作者：林東龍(Dong-Long Lin)關鍵字：男性口腔癌存活者;重返工作;福利變成工作;紮根理論;male oral cancer survivor;return to work;from welfare to work;grounded theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：癌症存活者重返工作的需求，無法在衛生福利和勞政體制中獲得回應。由於口腔癌存活者未重返工作的比率較其他類型癌症存活者高，且口腔癌以男性居多、傳統男性又被賦予養家活口的責任，因此，本研究以深度訪談法收集12位男性口腔癌存活者重返工作經驗，並檢視福利體系疏漏之處。主要研究發現有三：一、男性口腔癌存活者重返工作的利基與障礙，與工作職務、罹癌期別、工作環境支持程度，以及社會階層等社會條件有關；二、癌症醫療照顧政策的隱藏缺失，使身體無法負荷而遭遇重返工作困難被視為個人問題；三、勞工政策提供的經濟安全、病假規定，以及就業服務等，仍有所疏漏。本研究建議有三：第一，癌症醫療政策應跳脫疾病視框，重視職業復健重要性；第二，建立衛生福利和勞政的跨部門合作，讓福利變成工作；第三，落實法律保障，避免工作歧視。英文摘要：The needs of return to work of cancer survivors were not satisfied by the institutions of health and welfare and labor. Because the rate of return to work of oral cancer survivors is higher than the other types of cancer survivors and the male who take the responsibility of breadwinner are the major subjects of suffering from oral cancer. As a result, this study collected data from 12 male oral cancer survivors for their returns to work with in-depth interview method and examine the negligence of welfare institutions. There were three major findings. First, the advantages and barriers of return to work of male oral cancer survivors were correlated with the social conditions such as the job positions, the stage of suffering cancer, the level of support from work environment, and social class. Second, the problems that the interviewees can't afford the workload and facing the difficulties on return to work was deemed as the individual problem, were caused by the invisible deficiency of health care policy of medical services for cancer. Third, some defects still exist in the labor policy about the economic security, sick leave and employment service. This study made three suggestions: first  the health care policy for cancer should not be restricted from the disease-focused framework of view, while stress more on the occupational rehabilitation. Second, establish interdisciplinary cooperation between the departments of health and welfare and labor to shift welfare to work. Third, ascertain the protection from the related laws and to avoid job discrimination.起始頁-結束頁：41-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201306_17(1).00029篇名：南投縣日間照顧中心老人生活品質影響因素之研究並列篇名：Factors Influencing Quality of Life among the Aged in Nantou County Day Service Centers作者：蕭文高(Wen-Kao Hsiao)關鍵字：日間照顧;群體意識;服務滿意度;生活品質;day service;sense of community;service satisfaction;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著人口老化速度加快，政府陸續開辦各種長期照顧以降低家屬照顧負荷，增進長者生活品質，有關照顧服務品質與責信議題亦日趨受到重視。老人日開照顧服務是改善其生活品質的重要措施，但是目前在學理與量化研究上仍相對不足，為此，本文主要目的在於分析日開照顧中心老人生活品質及其影響因素。在檢閱日間照顧及生活品質文獻後，本文以集群抽樣方式針對「南投縣老人日間照顧中心實施方案」參與者進行訪問調查，並獲得226份樣本資料。經探討群體意識、服務滿意度及生活品質等變項之因素結構後，本研究建立變項間之結構方程模式，研究結果顯示年齡、服務滿意度及群體意識影響長者之生活品質，其中更以群體意識為最重要解釋變項。研究結果在學理及實務面的意涵並於文後深入討論。英文摘要：With the population of older adults growing steadily, numerous long term care had been proposed by government to reduce family burden and improve the quality of life (QoL) of the aged. Issues of quality and accountability in care services for older people are of increasing importance. Elderly day services is one means to improve QoL, however, theoretical and quantitative discussion about this topic are rare. For this reason, this study aims to investigate QoL and its affecting factors. Through a review of the literature on day services and QoL, 226 older people who participate in Nantou County Elderly Day Service Center Project were selected by cluster sampling method. With examining the factor structure of sense of community (SoC), service satisfaction, and QoL, this study developed structural equation models among variables. Results indicate that age, services satisfaction, and SoC are potential effectives on QoL. In addition, SoC is the most important affecting factor. Finally, implications for academic and practice were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：89-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201306_17(1).000310篇名：國小孩童的福祉衡量指標初探：一群10歲兒童的主觀經驗分析並列篇名：Measurement and Analysis of Child Well-being in Primary School作者：鄭清霞(Ching-Hsia Cheng);呂朝賢(Chao-Hsien Leu)關鍵字：兒童福祉;攝影;兒童觀點;child wellbeing;photographs;children's perspectives期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：研究源起與目的：經濟發展指標無法全然反映福祉概念，必須有其他指標存在。1989年聯合國兒童權利公約明訂兒童應該受到基本權益保障，本研究選取兒童作為研究對象。建構福祉指數，需在衡量對象、福祉面向、度量方法等項目上做選擇。兒童福祉的概念與定義相當多面向且複雜。文獻上多是透過成人定義而非兒童自身的觀點。本研究主要目的在呈現由兒童自身經驗與觀點出發的兒童福祉樣貌。本研究採取探索性研究，選取10歲左右兒童，6位以拍照、畫圖、敘述等方式呈現其所認為的兒童福祉，亦即能夠使其快樂、提升生活滿意度的事項。另一組3位兒童則對這些照片與圖畫進行分類並建構分類之間的關係。主要研究結果：1.蒐集340個照片或卡片，區分為39個類目、15個構面。2.「促進便利的生活用品」、「食物」、「興趣、休閒、娛樂」是構成兒童福祉的主要構面。3.兒童觀點的兒童福祉異於成人觀點的兒童福祉。4.越具體、接觸機會多的事物，學童較容易建立事物與自我幸福感間的關係。5.構成兒童福祉之元素間具有階序性差別、重要性差別、影響力差別等三項特徵。6.本研究結果呈現兒童自身觀點的兒童福祉，研究結果將可做為未來相似研究、相關社會福利政策與措施規劃的參考。英文摘要：The indexes of economic growth (GNP and GDP per capita) cannot reflect totally the substantial well-being of people, and the alternative indexes are necessitated. The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) was adopted by the United Nations in 1989 which epitomized the centrality of wellbeing in the lives of children. Our understanding of children's wellbeing are usually constructed by adults, rather than expressed directly by children's own perspectives. The purpose of this paper is to understand children's well-being from where they stand, starts from involving children as participants and is driven by their experiences and opinions. Children aged 10 years took photographs and drew pictures representing wellbeing, defined as ”feeling good, being happy, and able to live your life to the full.” Another panel of 3 children grouped the photographs and pictures into categories, then organizing these categories, schematizing the pattern of relationships among these categories and constructing model of well-being. Our main Findings are summaried as follows (1) A total of 340 photographs and cards were collected. 39 categories and 15 components have been constructed. (2) Daily facilities, food and amusement are major components of children's well-being. (3) Children's well-being from children's perspectives and understandings are distinct from adults'. (4) When their life experiences get richer and more concrete, children can percept more easily the connection between life experiences and the conception of self wellbeing. (5)The components which constructed children's wel1-being are Distinction of importance, sequence and influence.6.The findings in this paper show that how and what children express and construct their own perspectives on wellbeing. The research outcomes will be the suggestions for the future relevant researches and social welfare policy designs.起始頁-結束頁：131-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201306_17(1).000411篇名：影響家暴防治社工身心安全之風險因素分析並列篇名：Risk Factors That Impact the Well-being of Social Workers in the Area of Domestic Violence Prevention作者：汪淑媛(Shu-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：家庭暴力防治;社工身心安全;風險因素分析;domestic violence prevention;social worker well-being;risk factors analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣社工專業社群積極參與家庭暴力防治工作將近二十年，然而第一線社會工作者的身心安全仍未得到足夠的重視。本研究運用焦點團體以及參考文獻發現影響家暴社會工作者身心安全之潛在因子共21項，編制Likert問卷量表，邀請所有臺灣公部門家暴防治中心以及有參與家暴防治工作非營利機構之社工員協助填答，共寄出509份問卷，回收301份有效問卷，回收率達59% 。因素分析結果產出六因素，依平均數高低順序排列為：1.低劣勞動條件；2.學術界對實務工作的介入與權力；3.社工專業地位低；4.服務對家與工作內容繁雜；5.機構主管／督導與組織氛圍；以及6.社工個人因素。低劣勞動條件位居首要因素與之前研究結果一致，然而，讓人驚訝的是學術界對實務工作的參與以及權控竟然排列第二。提醒學術工作者對於家暴實務工作者應給予更多的支持，以合作的關係取代權威的態度。另一個有意義的發現是社工的年資越久，越不受社工專業地位低的影響力，表示長期的工作歷練能讓社工員由衷欣賞認同自身的工作，比較不需要外界的認可。此外，擁有社工碩士學位的家暴社工比大學華業者更有專業自信，也比較不受「個人議題」的負面影響，顯示臺灣社會工作高等教育的價值與貢獻。英文摘要：During the past two decades, as social workers in Taiwan involved themselves increasingly in preventing domestic violence, the well-being of front line social workers in this area has not received sufficient attention. In this study, a survey of the literature combined with new data from focus groups yields 21 factors that negatively impact their well being. The 21 were designed into a Likert scale questionnaire. 509 of these were sent to employees in public domestic violence prevention centers and NPOs involved in domestic violence prevention. 301 valid questionnaires were returned. A statistical analysis collapsed the 21 items into these 6 factors, in decreasing order of importance: (1) Poor working conditions and low pay, (2) The power academics wield in this area, (3) A general lack of respect for social workers as professionals, (4) The c1ients they are called upon to deal with and the complexity of the situations they face, (5) Organizational and supervisor issues, and (6) Personal issues. That poor working condition and low pay rank highest is consistent with previous studies. However, what stands out as surprising in this study is that the involvement of academic social work professionals should be viewed so negatively by workers in the domestic violence field. Obviously, it is incumbent upon academics in this area to set aside their stance of superior authority, adapt a more collaborative attitude, and take a more supportive stance towards workers in this field. Also surprising is the finding that the longer professionals have worked in the domestic violence field, the less importance they give to the factor ”lack of respect as professionals.” Experience evidently gives them an intrinsic appreciation of the good that they do, which outweighs the need for extrinsic approval. The data also showed that workers with an MSW degree display more confidence in their profession and are less negatively impacted by ”personal issues” than mere college graduates-which shouldn't be surprising.起始頁-結束頁：175-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201306_17(1).000501篇名：產業地理與市場集中度之相關性：台灣製造業之分析並列篇名：The Relationship between Geographic and Market Concentration in Taiwan's Manufacturing Sector作者：詹立宇(Li-Yu Chan);林惠玲(Hui-Lin Lin)關鍵字：市場集中度;產業地理集中;製造業;Market Concentration;Geographic Concentration;Manufacturing Industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：有別於大多數文獻研究產業地理集中對績效的影響，本文依產業經濟理論深入的探討產業地理集中與產業結構（市場集中度）的相關。利用各種不同級別的資料，我們發現產業的地理集中與市場集中度呈現負向關係；也就是說，產業地理越集中或聚集程度越高，市場的競爭程度也越高。此外，利用空間相關分析我們觀察到，地理集中提高週遭區域競爭程度的外部擴散效果。最後，在跨期資料的分析中，我們發現地理集中程度的變動與市場集中的變動為負相關；若從產業動態與時間動態的角度來看，則指出大部分新進廠商會選擇地理集中程度較高的區域，作為其設廠的區位。英文摘要：Unlike many papers discussing the relationship between industry geographic concentration and performance, we focus on market and geographic concentration. Using three types of 1991 to 2001 census data, we find a negative correlation between market and geographic concentration. Through spatial correlation analysis, this paper also presents the externality effects of geographic concentration that increase the competition among neighborhood regions. Finally, we find that most firms choose to establish in a higher geographic concentration region by simultaneously considering the industry dynamic and time.起始頁-結束頁：167-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：台灣製造業不同廠商規模生產技術差異之分量迴歸分析並列篇名：Investigating Productivity Differentials between Large and Small-Medium Manufacturers Using Quantile Regression Techniques作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);李起銓(Chi-Chuan Lee);郭肇軒(Chao-Hsuan Kuo)關鍵字：生產技術;分量迴歸法;差異分解法;Production Techniques;Quantile Regression;Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文選取資訊電子業和食品業為代表，利用分量迴歸模型，估計大企業和中小企業勞動與資本的偏產量彈性與邊際產量、規模彈性、技術進步率、替代彈性等指標，再以 Blinder-Oaxaca方法分解兩種規模廠商間生產技術的差異，做為分析與比較之基礎，盼能提供企業改進方向，增進整體產業之生產效率。實證結果發現，兩產業之勞動偏產量彈性皆大於資本偏產量彈性，且規模彈性值皆大於1，顯示應持續擴大生產規模，藉以降低長期平均成本。另外，大企業替代彈性高於中小企業，表示台灣製造業大企業調整要素投入的能力較好。在生產技術的差異上，高科技產業的大企業，生產力優於中小企業；傳統產業差異則不明顯。英文摘要：This paper studies the productivity differentials between large and small-medium Taiwanese manufacturing firms during 1992-2005. We apply a quantile regression technique to characterize the production processes of the manufacturers under consideration at various quantiles of conditional distribution. We then employ the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition method to measure the difference in productivity between the two types of firms. Evidence shows that the output elasticity of labor is greater than that of capital and increasing returns to scale prevail, indicating that the sample firms should extend their production scale further to lower their long-run average cost. The elasticities of substitution for large firms exceed those of small-medium firms, implying that it is easier to substitute one input for another in large firms than it would be in small-medium firms. Large firms exhibit higher productivities than small-medium firms especially in the hightech industry.起始頁-結束頁：207-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：健保保費改制對養育兒童家戶財務負擔公平性之影響並列篇名：Assessing Redistributional Effects of a New Financing Mechanism for Households Raising Children作者：韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han);徐偉初(Steve Tsui);鄭文輝(Wen-Hui Cheng)關鍵字：全民健保;財務負擔;公平性;National Health Insurance;Financial Burdens;Equity期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文比較保費現制（含補充保費）以及二代健保規劃小組提出保費新制方案，觀察保費新制是否使得養育兒童家戶健保財務負擔公平性獲得具體改善。本研究使用1999年綜合所得稅核定檔、承保檔（ID檔）， 以及門診及住院醫療費用檔等資料，並利用Aronson et al.（1994）模型評估健保財務負擔公平性。結果發現在新制保費計徵方式可大幅減輕養育兒童家戶健保財務負擔，且有效提升其公平性，此結果可供主管機關改革時之參考。英文摘要：This study aims to evaluate the changes in redistributional effects of current (including supplementary premium) and new financing mechanisms for raising children households. We use 1999 personal income tax files data and National Health Insurance Data as well as utilize the framework of Aronson et al. (1994) to decompose the total redistributional effects of health care financing into vertical, horizontal, and re-ranking effects. The analysis shows that the health care financial burdens and the regressivity of the premium distribution for households raising children would decrease under the proposed new financing mechanism.起始頁-結束頁：253-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：二因子實質消費資本資產訂價模型並列篇名：A Two-Factor Real Consumption CAPM作者：張俊評(Chun-Pin Chang);徐燕山(Yen-Shan Hsu)關鍵字：實質消費;共同基金定理;完全規避通膨風險債券資產;Real Consumption;Mutual Fund Theorem;Inflation-indexed Securities期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以抗通膨資產做為實質投資人評價實質超額報酬的基礎，推導出二因子實質消費資本資產訂價模型，均衡模型中的二個因子分別是通膨風險因子與消費成長風險因子。實證結果顯示，二因子實質消費資本資產訂價模型可以解釋30.23% 橫斷面股票報酬之變異。在本文架構下，本文導出S+2共同基金定理，這些基金可能為（1） 完全規避通膨風險債券資產；（2） 市場投資組合；（3） S個有高度相關性的投資組合。英文摘要：This paper derives an inter-temporal asset pricing model in a real-term, continuous-time framework. When inflation-indexed securities are available, we are able to derive a two-factor asset pricing model in terms of consumption growth, and inflation rate change. Under the framework of this paper, we demonstrate that the theorem of S+2 funds separation applies. These funds may be chosen to be: (1) an instantaneously inflation-indexed bond, (2) a market portfolio, and (3) S portfolios having the highest correlations, respectively, with the S state variables.起始頁-結束頁：297-356資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：環保支出、通貨膨脹和經濟成長之間的關聯並列篇名：The Relationship between Public Abatement Expenditure, Inflation and Economic Growth作者：阮俊英(Chun-Ying Juan);孫鈺<U+5CEF>(Yu-Fong Sun)關鍵字：經濟成長;勞動供給決策內生;公共環保支出;通貨膨脹;Economics Growth;Elastic Labor Supply;Public Abatement Expenditures;Inflation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文建立一個貨幣內生成長模型，探討勞動休閒決策內生下，環保支出、通貨膨脹率與經濟成長率的關係。本文發現，環保支出規模擴大，有助於提升經濟成長率，但降低了消費佔資本的比例。其次，本文獲得環保支出對於通貨膨脹率之影響不確定的結論，正符合實際資料顯示之趨勢。另外，擴張環保支出，對於社會福利水準的衝擊亦不明確，須視環保舒適價值效果和經濟成長效果對福利的提升程度，與資源變動效果和勞動負效用效果對福利的減損程度而定。英文摘要：This paper constructs a monetary growth model with elastic labor supply to investigate the policy effect of public abatement expenditures on the inflation rate and on economic growth. One main result is that an extension of public abatement expenditure is conducive to economic growth, but it tends to decrease the consumption-physical capital ratio. Second, the relationship between abatement expenditures and the inflation rate is ambiguous, and most importantly this result could fit in with the empirical data. We also find that the impact of abatement expenditures on social welfare is doubtful, depending on two forces. One force is the social welfare improving effect, including the environmental amenity value effect and the economic growth effect, while the other force is the social welfare deteriorating effect, including the resource mobilization effect and the labor disutility effect.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：臺灣時間序列與橫斷面股票報酬之研究：不同模型設定、投資組合建構以及樣本選擇下之再檢測並列篇名：The Time-Series and Cross-Sectional Stock Returns in Taiwan: A Reexamination under Different Model Specification, Portfolio Construction, and Sample Selection作者：張眾卓(Chong-Chuo Chang);王祝三(C. Edward Wang)關鍵字：定價模型;時間序列股票報酬;橫斷面股票報酬;特徵模式;因子模式;Asset Pricing Model;Time-Series Stock Returns;Cross-Sectional Stock Returns;Characteristic Model;Factor Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：有鑑於過去研究臺灣股票報酬決定變數之文獻結果分歧，本文除了審慎決定參數估計方法、樣本選擇、投資組合建構以及影響股票報酬的相關變數之外，尚將找出影響時間序列與橫斷面股票報酬的因素，並同時探討過去文獻分歧的原因。本研究的實證結果顯示，當使用不同公司特徵建構投資組合、不同投資組合分組數以及樣本差異時，時間序列與橫斷面的迴歸結果皆會受到影響，故後續研究應採用不同的方法進行穩健性檢測，以避免實證推論產生偏誤。此外，本文亦發現，Nelson四因子模式對時間序列股票報酬具有不錯的解釋力；而情緒指標、波動性風險因子、權益帳面對市值比、益本比、營收市值比、個股週轉率、個股成交量、6個月期之動能與股票報酬標準差皆能解釋臺灣橫斷面股票報酬。英文摘要：In order to clarify the inconsistent findings in the Taiwanese asset pricing literature, this study cautiously determines the adequate methodologies used for parametric estimation, sample selection, portfolio construction, and model specification. The main purposes of this study are to explore what factors can better explain the time-series and cross-sectional stock returns in Taiwan and to propose some possible reasons for the inconsistent findings in prior studies. Our empirical evidence indicates that the factors that explain time-series or cross-sectional stock returns will change when firm's characteristics used to build portfolios, the number of portfolios used in grouping stocks, or sample selection rules are different. Therefore, in order to avoid biases in making empirical conclusions, a robustness check is indispensable for any asset pricing study in Taiwan. The evidence herein shows that the Nelson four-factor model is more powerful in explaining the time-series stock returns. In contrast, the sentiment index, volatility risk factor, book-to-market ratio, earnings-to-price ratio, sales-to-price ratio, stock turnover, trading volume, six-month momentum, and standard deviation of stock returns can all well explain the cross-sectional stock returns.起始頁-結束頁：31-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：台灣上市櫃證券商經營績效分析－一般化Malmquist生產力指數之應用並列篇名：Operational Performance of Listed Securities Firms in Taiwan: An Application of a Generalized Malmquist Productivity Index作者：李文福(Wen-Fu Lee);張佩茹(Pei-Ju Chang)關鍵字：證券商;隨機邊界分析法;一般化Malmquist生產力指數;規模彈性;Securities Firms;Stochastic Frontier Approach;Generalized Malmquist Productivity Index;Scale Elasticity期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文採用多元投入多元產出距離函數與一階段隨機邊界法分析2004年至2008年台灣上市櫃證券商的經營管理效率，並利用Diewert（1976）二次式恆等輔理，將Orea（2002）的產出導向一般化Malmquist生產力指數改寫成投入導向模式，分析證券商總要素生產力變動（total factor productivity change, TFPC）之來源。實證結果顯示：（1）整體上市櫃證券商季平均管理效率值為0.8931；（2）資產規模、股價指數、產品集中度是三項有利之經營環境因素，而營業據點數、金控制度、資本適足性是三項不利之環境因素；（3）TFP的表現與總體經濟成長率變動關係密切，整體TFP微幅退步（每季-0.0016），歸因於技術效率退步（-0.0098），規模效果成長（0.0035），和技術進步（0.0047）；若不計金融海嘯大環境惡化的2008年，則TFP是有成長的；（4）金控證券商是技術進步的引領者，但其管理效率不如獨立證券商。英文摘要：This paper adopts a multi-input, multi-output distance function and a one-stage stochastic frontier approach to measure managerial efficiency of listed securities firms in Taiwan from 2004 to 2008. Inspired by the output oriented model of Orea (2002), this paper applies the quadratic identity (Diewert, 1976) to derive an input orientated generalized Malmquist productivity index to measure and analyze the economic drivers of productivity change. The empirical findings are as follows. First, for the whole sample firms, on average, the managerial efficiency score is 0.8931 per quarter. Second, there are 3 favorable operating environmental variables (asset scale, stock price index, and concentration of business lines), and 3 unfavorable environmental variables (number of branch offices, FHC securities subsidiary, and capital adequacy). Third, the performance of TFP is significantly and positively related to macroeconomic growth. Within the sample periods, on average, the TFP drops by 0.16% each quarter. The sources of TFP change are the deterioration in technical efficiency (-0.98%), the improvements in scale efficiency (0.35%), and technical change (0.47%). If we exclude the financial crisis year of 2008, then TFP improves. Fourth, the FHC securities subsidiaries outperform in technical innovation, while independent securities firms perform better in managerial efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：88-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系8篇名：台灣地區中老年人肥胖相關疾病之改善效益－兩階段估計法之應用並列篇名：Evaluating the Benefits of Ameliorating Obesity Relevant Diseases on Middle and Older Aged People in Taiwan-A Two-Stage Approach作者：李杰憲(Chieh-Hsien Lee)關鍵字：身體質量指數;總醫療支出;兩階段估計法;Body Mass Index;Medical Expenditure;Two-Stage Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從影響因素著手，使用「竹東及朴子地區心血管疾病長期追蹤研究」問卷與健保資料庫的資料，估計中老年人肥胖相關疾病之改善效益。另外，分析罹病者全部的總醫療支出有其政策涵義，因此我們增加非特定疾病的分析與肥胖相關疾病加以比較。結論顯示，若能改善台閩地區罹患肥胖相關疾病之中老年肥胖及過重罹病者的身體質量指數至正常水準，約可以減少總醫療支出57.1億元及10.2億元。若考量的是非特定疾病，約可以減少71.3億元及24.9億元。英文摘要：This paper uses the impact factors to evaluate the benefits of ameliorating obesity relevant diseases among middle-aged and elderly people in Taiwan. Data from the ”Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors: A Two Township Study” project and National Health Insurance (NHI) are used for the empirical analysis. Moreover, because realizing the total medical expenditure of the sample has policy implications, we also investigate the non-specific diseases and compare them with obesity relevant diseases. The results show that if we can ameliorate obesity among middle-aged and elderly people and reduce the body mass index of ill and overweight persons to the standard level, the costs of our medical services would decrease NT $5.71 billions and NT$1.02 billions, respectively. If the non-specific diseases are counted in as well, then the medical costs for corresponding groups would cut NT $7.13 billions and NT$2.49 billions respectively.起始頁-結束頁：135-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：Message from the Editor並列篇名：編者的話作者：王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：234-234資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會2篇名：The School-Based Lived Experiences of Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes並列篇名：第一型糖尿病青少年校園生活經驗作者：王月伶(Yueh-Ling Wang);Sharon A. Brown;Sharon D. Horner關鍵字：青少年;現象學;學校;第一型糖尿病;adolescent;phenomenology;school;type 1 diabetes mellitus期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景　學校在第一型糖尿病青少年的健康、安全、發展與安適上扮演重要角色，然而至今探討糖尿病青少年校園生活經驗的研究卻極少。目的　本研究目的在於探討台灣第一型糖尿病青少年之校園生活經驗。方法　海德格詮釋現象學為本研究之研究方法與哲學基礎，以滾雪球方式目標取樣14位罹有第一型糖尿病的青少年，以半結構訪談指引為工具，進行錄音深度訪談直到資料達到飽和為止。資料分析乃透過詮釋循環，並佐以質性分析軟體NVivo協助。過程中利用反思日誌、同儕驗證、摘要記錄、與個案檢視增加研究可信度。結果　研究發現，第一型糖尿病青少年校園生活經驗中的主要要素有：（1）相同卻也不同、（2）隱瞞及公開、（3）限制及自由、（4）獨立及依賴、（5）守序及脫軌、以及（6）疾病認同及否定。許多因素諸如：疾病認同、社交焦慮與壓力、學校工作人員及同學的無知、獨立自我照顧的過渡等，皆威脅著糖尿病青少年在校時的健康與安適。結論／實務應用　要協助糖尿病青少年擁有正向校園生活經驗尚有極大發展空間，未來研究宜針對提升這些青少年疾病照護的自主性與自我效能、糖尿病知識、疾病認同、以及情境障礙的因應繼續努力。此外，提升學校老師與同學對於第一型糖尿病的認識，以及學校護理人員的主動參與，也是未來有待加強之處。英文摘要：Background: School plays a critical role in influencing the health, safety, development, and well-being of adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). However, scant research has been conducted to understand the lived experiences of these adolescents in school settings.Purpose: This study investigates the school-based lived experiences of Taiwanese adolescents with T1DM.Method: A Heidegger's hermeneutic phenomenological approach was used, and 14 Taiwanese adolescents with T1DM were enrolled through purposive snowball sampling until data saturation was reached. Data were collected using audio-recorded, semistructured interviews and analyzed using the hermeneutic circle supported by qualitative analysis software NVivo 9.0. Reflective journaling, peer debriefing, memo writing, and member checking were performed to enhance the trustworthiness of the findings.Results: Six interrelated themes were identified: (a) the same yet different, (b) covert and overt, (c) limitations and freedom, (d) independent and dependent, (e) derailing and being on track, and (f) disease identity and denial. Multiple factors, including disease identity, social anxiety and pressure, ignorance of school personnel and classmates, and transition to independent self-management threatened the at-school health and well-being of participants.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Much work remains to be done to adequately improve the school-life experiences of adolescents with T1DM. Interventions to facilitate their autonomy, self-efficacy, diabetes knowledge, disease identity, and handling of situational obstacles are suggested as well as improving the understanding of T1DM for teachers and classmates and facilitating more proactive care by school nurses.起始頁-結束頁：235-243資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000033篇名：Establishing a Model to Assess the Effects of School Support and Self-Care Behaviors on Life Satisfaction in Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣第一型糖尿病青少年學校支持及自我照顧對生活滿意度影響之模式建構作者：唐善美(Shan-Mei Tang);陳淑雯(Shu-Wen Chen);王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang)關鍵字：第一型糖尿病;自我照顧;學校支持;生活滿意度;type 1 diabetes;self-management behaviors;school support;life satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景　生活滿意度與青少年的正向發展相關，了解影響第一型糖尿病青少年生活滿意度的徑路模式，有助於專業人員設計策略提高其正向發展。目的　本研究是建構學校支持及自我照顧對台灣第一型糖尿病青少年生活滿意度影響之模式。方法　本研究設計為橫斷面設計，共收案139位10－18歲被診斷為第一型糖尿病個案，個案完成包含個人屬性資料、學校支持、自我照顧行為及生活滿意度之問卷，以結構方程模式驗證假設之模式。結果　學校支持分別對自我照顧行為（β = .46, p = .022）及生活滿意度（β = .39, p = .034）具顯著直接影響，且自我照顧行為對生活滿意度（β = .56, p = .048）亦具顯著直接影響作用，而學校支持亦透過自我照顧行為顯著間接影響生活滿意度（β = .26, p = .015）。模式的適配度指標分別為x^2 = 8.141，df = 11；p = .701；goodness of fit index = .984；normed fit index = .949；root mean square error of approximation = .001，整體模式對生活滿意度的總解釋變異為66.1%。結論　糖尿病自我照顧行為及學校支持影響第一型糖尿病青少年之生活滿意度，健康專業人員可運用策略，提升第一型糖尿病青少年的自我照顧行為及學校支持，以提升其生活滿意度。英文摘要：Background: Life satisfaction is associated with positive development in adolescents. Understanding a path model of life satisfaction can help healthcare providers design interventions to improve positive development in adolescents with type 1 diabetes.Purpose: The aim of this study was to construct a model that assesses the effects of school support and self-care behaviors on life satisfaction in adolescents with type 1 diabetes in Taiwan.Methods: This study used a cross-sectional design. One hundred and thirty-nine adolescents aged 10-18 years and diagnosed with type 1 diabetes were recruited. Participants completed questionnaires that assessed perceived school support, self-care behaviors, and life satisfaction. The hypothesized model was tested using structural equation modeling.Results: School support significantly and directly affected self-care behaviors (β= .46, p = .022) and life satisfaction (β= .39, p = .034), self-care behaviors directly affected life satisfaction (β= .56, p = .048), and school support indirectly affected life satisfaction (β= .26, p = .015) through the mediation of self-care behaviors. The fix indices were as follows: x^2 = 8.141, df = 11, p = .701, goodness of fit index = .984, normed fit index = .949, and root mean square residual = .001. The model explained 66.1% of total life satisfaction variance.Conclusions: School support and self-care behaviors positively influence the life satisfaction of adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Improvements in school support and self-care behaviors are necessary to improve life satisfaction in this vulnerable group.起始頁-結束頁：244-251資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000084篇名：Parental Knowledge, Concerns, and Management of Childhood Fever in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣父母對兒童發燒的知識、擔憂與處置作者：張麗娟(Li-Chuan Chang);劉清泉(Ching-Chuan Liu);黃美智(Mei-Chih Huang)關鍵字：發燒;發燒恐懼症;健康照護;父母;fever;fever phobia;healthcare;parents期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景　發燒是父母帶兒童就醫常會出現的狀況，國際許多研究指出父母有發燒恐懼症。然而在台灣有關父母對兒童發燒訊息的實證研究仍不足。目的　本研究旨在探究父母對兒童發燒的概念、擔憂與處置與其相關。方法　採用橫斷式調查研究法，自填問卷的方式，於台灣台南地區的小兒科診所及幼稚園共收集649位父母的問卷。結果　部份的父母（47.2%）對醫護人員所提供的發燒資訊不完全了解，41.6%對醫護人員所提供的發燒資訊不滿意。發燒知識總分23分，父母得分中位數為10分（四分位數間距 =〔8, 12〕），父母性別、宗教信仰、教育程度、職業等影響父母的發燒知識分數。不會擔心或是有時擔心孩子發燒的父母，其知識得分顯著高於總是擔憂的父母（知識分數中位數11分，四分位數間距 =〔9, 13〕相對於10分，四分位數間距 =〔8, 11〕）。大多數的父母對發燒處置遵循西方醫學建議，但仍有31.1%併用傳統民俗方式。86.6%的父母經常或總是擔憂孩子的發燒，68.8%的父母表示因發燒而焦慮。結論／實務應用　父母對發燒相關知識的誤解，部分原因是因為不了解或不滿意現有的兒童發燒相關訊息，與其他國家比較擔憂程度較高。本研究顯示，台灣父母需要適切的發燒處置資訊，以減輕父母的擔憂並引導他們居家照護發燒的孩子。英文摘要：Background: Childhood fever is a commonly treated condition in medical settings. Many studies around the world have reported on the phenomenon of parental fever phobia. Studies of parental knowledge regarding childhood fever are lacking in Taiwan.Purpose: This study explores parental knowledge, concerns, and management of childhood fever and their correlates in Taiwan.Methods: This study used a cross-sectional survey and self-administered questionnaire. Six hundred forty-nine parents were recruited as participants from pediatric clinics and kindergartens in southern Taiwan.Results: Nearly half (47.2%) of participants incompletely understood the healthcare information about childhood fever provided by physicians and nurses. Furthermore, 41.6% of parents were dissatisfied with the information provided. The median score of parental knowledge was 10 (interquartile range [IQR] = [8, 12] out of a maximum of 23). Parent gender, religion, education level, and occupation were independent predictors of knowledge scores. Parents who were never or sometimes concerned about childhood fever had significantly higher knowledge scores than those who were always concerned about childhood fever (median knowledge score: 11, IQR = [9, 13] vs. 10, IQR = [8, 11]). Most parents followed Western medical advice to manage childhood fever; however, 31.1% of parents combined this with traditional folk treatments. Levels of concern among parents included 86.6% of parents who frequently or always worried about their children's fever. Fever-induced anxiety was reported by 68.8% of the parents.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Participants' lack of fever-related knowledge was because, in part, of either their not understanding or their dissatisfaction with provided information. The higher level of concern compared with other countries and studies indicates that parents in Taiwan need appropriate information about fever management to alleviate their concerns and guide them in caring for their febrile children.起始頁-結束頁：252-260資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000075篇名：Life-Sustaining Treatment: A Comparison of the Preferences of Taiwanese Older Adults and Their Family Caregiver並列篇名：台灣老人及其家人對維生處置的決定傾向作者：吳麗珍(Suen Lee-Jen W.);李浩銑(Hao-Hsien Lee);Diana Lynn Morris關鍵字：維生處置決定;老人;家人;life-sustaining treatment;older adults;family members期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景　在台灣，預立遺囑還不是非常普及。因此，對於病危老年患者是否進行維生處置，多數是由其家人做決定。目的　比較老人本身及其家人對於老人在不同健康情境時的維生決定傾向。方法　採橫斷式比較描述性研究，研究對象包括95對社區老人及其家人。使用修改版的Life Support Preferences Questionnaire用以測量維生處置意願傾向，所得資料以paired-sample t-test進行分析。結果　在8種不同健康情況和4種不同維生處置中（共32項），這32項家人對於維生處置的意願傾向，均高於老人對自己維生處置之意願傾向，有23項（72%）達統計顯著水準。結論／實務應用　為了使家人的決定忠於老人本身之意願，彼此有必要針對病危時是否接受維生處置進行溝通。英文摘要：Background: Written advance directives are not common practice in Taiwan; thus, when older adults are critically ill, family members are usually the ones to make decisions regarding life-sustaining treatment.Purpose: This study determined how well the preferences of the family members for the older adults match the preferences of the older adults themselves with regard to life-sustaining treatment.Methods: A cross-sectional comparative descriptive research design was used in this study. Ninety-five pairs of older adults and their families were included in the final analysis. The Life Support Preferences Questionnaire was used to measure life-sustaining preferences. Paired-sample t tests were performed to compare the mean differences between the older adults' preferences and the family members' preferences for these older adults.Results: Family members scored higher on life-sustaining treatment preferences than the older adults for all 32 examined items, with 23 (72%) of these items showing statistical significance.Conclusion/Implications for Practice: Communication between older adults and their family members regarding life-sustaining treatment may help prevent older adults from receiving unwanted treatments.起始頁-結束頁：261-269資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000066篇名：A Pilot Study of an Illness Management and Recovery Program in Discharged Patients with Schizophrenia並列篇名：疾病管理及復元方案於出院精神分裂症病患之先驅研究作者：林靜蘭(Esther Ching-Lan Lin);邵文娟(Wen-Chuan Shao);陳展航(Chin-Hong Chan);蕭淑貞(Shu-Jen Shiau);王鴻松(Hong-Song Wang);黃仕奇(Shi-Chi Huang)關鍵字：出院;疾病管理及復元方案;精神分裂症;discharge;Illness Management and Recovery model;schizophrenia期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Accumulated evidence supports the effectiveness of equipping chronically ill patients with illness management knowledge and skills. The Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) program developed by the United States government has been widely adopted for persons with mental illness. However, few studies support its effectiveness in patients with schizophrenia.Purpose: This pilot study developed a culturally adapted and abbreviated version of the IMR for Taiwanese patients with schizophrenia who were ready for discharge from the hospital. Furthermore, we investigated the impact of the program in terms of illness knowledge, drug attitude, insight, and psychopathology.Methods: The original IMR was condensed and modified for implementation during participants' preparation for hospital discharge. Using a preexperimental design, pretest and posttest assessments for a single group of 26 participants received the new IMR twice a week for 3 weeks on the four outcome indicators of illness knowledge, drug attitude, insight, and psychopathology.Results: Participants improved in terms of treatment-related illness knowledge, insight, and affective-domain psychopathology (p G .01) after intervention completion. Average participant attendance was 5.45 sessions out of 6 total sessions.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The intensive symptom and medication-focused IMR model for soon-to-be-discharged patients with schizophrenia had positive impacts on illness management. In the future, studies using a two-group randomized controlled design and extended follow-up should be conducted to determine the long-term effects of IMR.英文摘要：Background: Accumulated evidence supports the effectiveness of equipping chronically ill patients with illness management knowledge and skills. The Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) program developed by the United States government has been widely adopted for persons with mental illness. However, few studies support its effectiveness in patients with schizophrenia.Purpose: This pilot study developed a culturally adapted and abbreviated version of the IMR for Taiwanese patients with schizophrenia who were ready for discharge from the hospital. Furthermore, we investigated the impact of the program in terms of illness knowledge, drug attitude, insight, and psychopathology.Methods: The original IMR was condensed and modified for implementation during participants' preparation for hospital discharge. Using a preexperimental design, pretest and posttest assessments for a single group of 26 participants received the new IMR twice a week for 3 weeks on the four outcome indicators of illness knowledge, drug attitude, insight, and psychopathology.Results: Participants improved in terms of treatment-related illness knowledge, insight, and affective-domain psychopathology (p G .01) after intervention completion. Average participant attendance was 5.45 sessions out of 6 total sessions.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The intensive symptom and medication-focused IMR model for soon-to-be-discharged patients with schizophrenia had positive impacts on illness management. In the future, studies using a two-group randomized controlled design and extended follow-up should be conducted to determine the long-term effects of IMR.起始頁-結束頁：270-278資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000047篇名：Effectiveness of a Nursing Consultation Intervention for Older People with Functional Mobility Impairments: A Prospective, Longitudinal Study作者：Steve Strupeit;Karin Wolf-Ostermann;Arne Buβ;Theo Dassen關鍵字：nurse consulting;mobility;quality of life;older people期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013英文摘要：Background: There is a need for prevention strategies in elderly individuals with mobility impairments.Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the effects of nursing consultations on the functional abilities and quality of life of elderly individuals with mobility impairments after discharge from a rehabilitation facility.Methods: A single-site, prospective, longitudinal study with a nonequivalent control group pretest-posttest design was conducted in a geriatric rehabilitation facility and in the living environments of the patients after discharge. The intervention consisted of nurse-delivered consulting home visits and follow-up telephone calls. Patient quality of life and functional status were the primary outcomes, and self-efficacy was the secondary outcome. Data were collected at admission, at discharge, and at a 6-month follow-up visit.Results: A cohort of 124 patients participated in the study. The intervention group showed a nonsignificant improvement in functional status compared with the control group. The intervention did not affect quality of life, except for a trend toward significance in the social domain (p = .060).Conclusions: The findings of this study suggest that nursing consultations do not significantly improve functional status and have almost no effect on quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：279-288資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000018篇名：Case Management Knowledge and Preparedness among Public Health Nurses並列篇名：公共衛生護理師對個案管理的知識及準備度作者：莊宇慧(Yeu-Hui Chuang);鍾明惠(Min-Huey Chung);劉玟宜(Wen-I Liu)關鍵字：個案管理;公共衛生護理師;知識;準備度;護理繼續教育;case management;public health nurses;knowledge;preparedness;continuing nursing education期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景　臺灣公共衛生護理師逐漸運用個案管理為服務方式，但對其執行個案管理的知識及準備度瞭解甚少。目的　本文探討公共衛生護理師對個案管理之知識及執行個案管理實務之準備度。方法　採橫斷式調查臺灣公共衛生護理師之個案管理知識及實務活動的自覺準備度。招募臺北市之公共衛生護理師為研究對象，以結構式問卷於約定時間收集資料。問卷內容包括：第一部分為20題個案管理知識之選擇題；第二部分為個案管理角色活動及基本資料。結果　178位公共衛生護理師完成問卷調查，問卷回收率達99%。個案管理知識答對率為49%，此分數低於一般可接受60%之標準；個案管理實務活動的自評準備程度為中等，平均3.2分。另發現高達82%護理師未曾接受個案管理繼續教育；知識高分群之年紀顯著比低分群年輕。結論／實務應用　本結果顯示，臺灣公共衛生護理師對個案管理知識及實務準備度不足，急需提供繼續教育，強化知識缺失項目及較低準備度之實務活動。英文摘要：Background: Taiwanese public health nurses are increasingly required to act as case managers. However, little is known about nurses' knowledge and preparedness levels in assuming the responsibilities of case management.Purpose: This article explores the knowledge and preparedness levels of experienced public health nurses related to case management.Methods: A cross-sectional survey of Taiwanese public health nurses was conducted. A structured questionnaire was used to collect data on participants' knowledge of case management and perceived preparedness levels in performing role activities. The questionnaire consisted of three sections: Section One featured 20 multiple-choice items, Section Two included case manager role activities, and Section Three gathered demographic information.Results: One hundred seventy-eight public health nurses were recruited from 10 health offices, with a 99% valid response rate. The overall average correct response rate for case management knowledge was 49%, which fell significantly below the minimum acceptable average score of 60%. Participants held neutral opinions regarding their preparedness levels for performing case management role activities, with a mean score of 3.2 (SD = 0.5, range = 1-5). In addition, this study unexpectedly found that the higher knowledge level group was significantly younger on average than the lower knowledge group. More than three quarters (82%) of participants had no prior education in case management.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results reflect substantial gaps in Taiwanese public health nurses' knowledge and preparation for the practice of case management. There is an urgent need to strengthen case management continuing education for public health nurses and address knowledge deficits and the role activities identified with lower preparedness levels.起始頁-結束頁：289-297資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000000059篇名：The Development of Nursing Workforce Allocation Standards for Acute Care General Wards in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣急性病房護理人力配置標準之建構作者：林秋芬(Chiou-Fen Lin);黃秀英(Hsiu-Ying Huang);盧美秀(Meei-Shiow Lu)關鍵字：各層級醫院;急性一般病房;護理人力配置;護病比;hospital tiers;acute care general wards;nursing workforce allocation;nurse-to-patient ratios期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景　合理的護理人力配置能增進病人安全，減少異常事件發生。目的　本研究旨在瞭解和比較目前各層級醫院急性一般病房之護理人力配置，進而研擬各層級醫院急性一般病房合理護理人力配置標準和三班護病比。方法　本研究採用多元研究法，包括：文獻探究法、問卷調查法、專家焦點團體座談法，最後再以公聽會和問卷調查等方式達成共識。結果　各層級醫院因病人疾病嚴重度不同，所以護理人力配置有差異，計算合理護理人力配置標準建議採用人床比和護理時數。建議現階段人床比／護理時數分別為：醫學中心0.53：1/2.8小時、區域醫院為0.49：1/2.6小時、地區醫院為0.40：1/2.1小時；3年後人床比／護理時數分別為：醫學中心0.57：1/3.0小時、區域醫院0.53：1/2.8小時、地區醫院0.44：1/2.3小時；5年後人床比／護理時數分別為：醫學中心0.61：1/3.2小時、區域醫院0.57：1/3.0小時、地區醫院0.48：1/2.5小時。結論　本研究結果能提供各層級醫院、醫策會醫院評鑑標準訂定和行政院衛生福利部推估護理人力需求之參考。英文摘要：Background: Adequate nursing workforce is critical to ensure patient safety and reduce the incidence of adverse events.Purpose: This study explores and compares the nursing workforce allocation situation in the acute care general wards of Taiwan's three hospital tiers and, based on findings, develops standards for adequate nursing workforce allocation and nurse-to-patient ratios in acute care general wards at each tier.Methods: This study uses multiple research methods, including literature review, questionnaire survey, and expert focus group discussion. Final consensus is achieved using a public hearing and questionnaire survey.Results: The severity of patient conditions differs among hospital tiers. Therefore, each tier requires a nursing workforce allocation standard appropriate to its situation. Study findings indicate that nurse-to-bed ratios and nursing hours are valid indicators of nursing workforce allocation needs. The results of expert discussions and public hearings recommend 0.53 nurses per bed and 2.8 nursing hours for academic medical centers, 0.49 nurses per bed and 2.6 nursing hours for metropolitan hospitals, and 0.40 nurses per bed and 2.1 nursing hours for local community hospitals for the current stage of healthcare development; 0.57 nurses per bed and 3.0 nursing hours for academic medical centers, 0.53 nurses per bed and 2.8 nursing hours for metropolitan hospitals, and 0.44 nurses per bed and 2.3 nursing hours for local community hospitals in 3 years; and 0.61 nurses per bed and 3.2 nursing hours for academic medical centers, 0.57 nurses per bed and 3.0 nursing hours for metropolitan hospitals, and 0.48 nurses per bed and 2.5 nursing hours for local community hospitals in 5 years.Conclusions: Study results may provide a basis for better allocating nursing workforce in hospitals, setting formal standards for minimum nurse-to-patient ratios, and assessing nursing workforce needs at the national level.起始頁-結束頁：298-306資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.000000000000000210篇名：The Experience of Presence Among Telehealth Nurses作者：Janis S. Tuxbury關鍵字：presence;telehealth;telenursing;nursing presence期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013英文摘要：Background: Telehealth technology allows for the provision of nursing care even when the patient and nurse are physically separated from each other. Telehealth has shown positive effects on healthcare costs and healthcare access. Although it can increase healthcare access and decrease healthcare costs, the use of telehealth has altered the typical pattern of nurseY patient proximity. It is unknown how the physical separation related to telehealth use may affect the experience of presence among nurses during nurseYpatient interactions.Purpose: The purpose of the research was to gain knowledge about the ways that nurses experience presence during interactions with patients using telehealth technology.Methods: A qualitative descriptive design with convenience sampling was used for this study. Sample inclusion criteria included being a registered nurse with at least 1 year of experience using telehealth technology and working in telehealth at the time of the study. Institutional review board approval was received before beginning data collection. Participants (n = 6) provided informed consent. Qualitative data were obtained by individual, audiotaped, semistructured interviews. The data were transcribed and analyzed deductively for the existence of presence. Ethnograph version 6.0 software was used to assist in organizing and analyzing the data.Results: Two examples of presence during telehealth nurseYpatient interactions were described by participants.Conclusion: This study documented for the first time the experience of presence among nurses who interact with their patients using only nonvideo telehealth technology.起始頁-結束頁：155-161資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0b02811篇名：Relationships among Self-Efficacy, Depression, Life Satisfaction, and Adaptation among Older Korean Adults Residing in For-Profit Professional Nursing Facilities作者：Ae-Kyung Chang;James Park;Sohyune R. Sok關鍵字：aged;adaptation;nursing home期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013英文摘要：Background: Adapting to a new environment is especially difficult for older adults relocating into professional nursing facilities or other specialized care centers. This relocation is a prominent life stressor in older adults.Purpose: This study examined the self-efficacy, depression, life satisfaction, and adaptation and the relationships among these four variables of older Korean adults residing in for-profit professional nursing facilities to provide preliminary information necessary to improve nursing interventions.Methods: This was a cross-sectional and descriptive correlation study. The 322 participants were all over the age of 65 years and resided in one of three different for-profit professional nursing facilities in Seoul and Gyeonggi-do, South Korea. Measures used included a demographic characteristics form, Self-Efficacy Instrument, Korean Simple Depression Scale, Standard Life Satisfaction Instrument, and Facility Adaption Scale.Results: Results found positive self-efficacy, depression, life satisfaction, and adaptation among participants. We found significant positive correlations among self-efficacy, life satisfaction, and adaptation and significant negative correlations among depression, life satisfaction, and adaptation.Moreover,we found noticeable differences in the degree of adaptation to professional nursing facility placement in several variables, including gender, age, level of education, religious background, perceived health status, presence of a spouse, presence of a nonprofessional caregiver(s), and decision maker.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This cross-sectional study provides preliminary evidence that older Korean adults in for-profit professional nursing facilities generally maintain a healthy level of well-being. However, nursing interventions to improve self-efficacy and life satisfaction and decrease depression in older adult residents are needed to help these older adults adapt to life in such facilities.起始頁-結束頁：162-169資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/01.jnr.0000432047.93802.df12篇名：Personal Resource Questionnaire: A Systematic Review作者：Loai I. Tawalbeh;Muayyad M. Ahmad關鍵字：personal resource questionnaire;social support;review;measurement期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013英文摘要：Background: Social support is a key nursing variable. No review has yet systematically assessed the effectiveness of the personal resource questionnaire (PRQ) as a measure of perceived social support.Purpose: This article reviewed nine previous studies that used the PRQ (Brandt & Weinert, 1981).Methods: Completed studies were identified through searches of indexes that included PubMed, the Cumulative Index for Nursing and EBSCO host, and Ovid. Studies that reported PRQ scores, sample descriptions, and sample sizes and that tested the relationship between the PRQ and study variables were included in the present review. Three other studieswere included that did not report on PRQ correlations with other health variables. The included studies addressed a variety of health problems and different population in different settings.Results: Cronbach’s alphas for the included studies ranged from. 87 to. 93, supporting the internal consistency of the PRQ. Hypothesized relationships between the PRQ and study variables including health promotion behavior, self-care behavior, self-efficacy, self-esteem, stress, depression, loneliness, pain, and disability were supported, providing positive evidence for PRQ construct validity. Included studies used the PRQ to address disparate populations in terms of age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and educational background.Conclusion: This review found the PRQ to be a reliable and valid tool for measuring perceived social support across a wide range of populations. Further studies are necessary to examine the relationship between social support and selected demographics among populations with different cultural backgrounds.起始頁-結束頁：170-177資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/01.jnr.0000432049.31921.ab13篇名：Effectiveness of Integrated Body-Mind-Spirit Group Intervention on the Well-Being of Indian Patients with Depression: A Pilot Study作者：Rentala Sreevani;Konduru Reddemma;Cecilia L. W. Chan;Pamela Pui Yu Leung;Venus Wong;Celia Hoi-Yan Chan關鍵字：depression;integrated body-mind-spirit group intervention;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013英文摘要：Background: Depression is a leading cause of disability worldwide. There is a need to develop effective strategies to treat depression and prevent recurrence. Treatments that combine pharmacological and psychotherapeutic approaches are preferred for treating severe forms of depression.Purpose: The study assesses the effect of an integrated body-mind-spirit group intervention in patients with depression.Methods: This pilot study was a pretest-posttest design study. Thirty adult patients diagnosed with depression attending the psychiatric outpatient department at a district hospital were randomly assigned to either the intervention group or comparison group. Each group had 15 patients. The intervention group received both the intervention and routine hospital treatment and underwent four group integrated body-mind-spirit group intervention therapy sessions. These sessions were held once per week on either Saturday or Sunday, with each session lasting more than 3 hours. Comparison group participants received routine hospital treatment only. Outcome measures, including level of depression, well-being, and work and social adjustment, were measured using the Beck Depression Inventory-II, body-mind-spirit well-being scale, and work and social adjustment scale. Both groups were evaluated at baseline, 1 month, 2 months, and 3 months.Results: Results showed that both groups had significant reductions in the level of depression, improvements in wellbeing, and work and social adjustment at 3-month follow-up compared with baseline. In addition, the intervention group showed significant mean differences in levels of depression, well-being, and work and social adjustment compared with the comparison group.Conclusion: The integrated body-mind-spirit group intervention model appears to reduce depressive symptoms and improve well-being in patients with depression.起始頁-結束頁：178-185資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0b04114篇名：Comparing the Antiswelling and Analgesic Effects of Three Different Ice Pack Therapy Durations: A Randomized Controlled Trial on Cases with Soft Tissue Injuries並列篇名：不同冰敷時間對軟組織傷害個案之致種與止痛效果：隨機控制試驗作者：郭嘉琪(Chia-Chi Kuo);林秋菊(Chiu-Chu Lin);李維鈞(Wei-Jing Lee);黃威達(Wei-Ta Huang)關鍵字：軟組織傷害;冰敷;制腫;止痛;隨機控制試驗;soft tissue injuries;ice pack therapy;antiswelling;analgesic;randomized controlled trial期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：冰敷已被普遍運用於局部軟組織傷害的治療，但卻缺乏一致性冰敷時間與效應探討。目的本研究旨在探討，不同冰敷時間對軟組織傷害病人的局部制腫、止痛效果與冰敷不適感的影響。方法：研究採前測及三次後測之三組實驗設計；方便取樣南部某醫學中心急診之軟組織傷害個案，以隨機區集(randomized block)方式分派至冰敷10分鐘組、20分鐘組、30分鐘組各33人，比較各組受試者冰敷部位的體表溫度、腫脹、疼痛、不適感指數的前後測差異。結果：研究結果發現，不同冰敷時間，對局部組織的體表溫度、腫脹、疼痛、不適感指數的前後測變化，三組之間未達顯著差異，但三組各自組內前後測的比較，在體表溫度、疼痛、麻與紅之不適感均達顯著差異。結論／實務應用：研究結果顯示，三種冰敷時間均可達到降低體表溫度、減少局部疼痛之效果；三種冰敷時間均有相近的麻與紅之不適感發生率；每次冰敷10分鐘便可達到有效的局部制腫與止痛效果。據此實證結果，吾人建議對局部軟組織傷害最佳的冰敷時間為10分鐘，但可依據個案之需求及舒適情況作調整。英文摘要：Background: Ice pack therapy has been widely used in treatment for soft tissue injuries. However, no studies have yet explored the most appropriate and effective duration for ice therapy with ice packs.Purpose: This study explored the antiswelling and analgesic effects of different ice pack therapy durations on soft tissue injuries as well as patient discomfort.Methods: An experimental design including pretest and three posttests with three groups was used in this study. Using convenience sampling and randomized block assignment, 99 participants with soft tissue injuries from the emergency department of a medical center in southern Taiwan were included in this study. With 33 participants in each group, three groups with ice pack therapy for 10, 20, and 30 minutes were indicated to compare skin temperature, swelling, and pain differences in ice treated areas as well as participant discomfort.Results: This study found no significant differences in the effect of different ice pack therapy durations among the three groups. However, this study identified significant differences between pretest and each posttest in terms of changes in skin temperature, pain, and numbness and rash-related discomfort in each group.Conclusion/Implications for Practice: Research results found that the three different ice pack therapy durations could lower skin temperature and reduce partial pain. The different ice pack therapy durations would cause similar discomfort incidence rates in the three groups. Ice pack therapy for 10 minutes could reduce partial swelling and pain effectively. Accordingly, we suggest that 10 minutes is the optimal ice pack therapy duration for persons with soft tissue injuries. However, the ice pack therapy duration should be adjusted according to individual needs and situation.起始頁-結束頁：186-194資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0af1215篇名：Relationship between Media Viewing and Obesity in School-Aged Children in Taipei, Taiwan並列篇名：探討傳媒使用與台北市學齡期兒童肥胖的關係作者：黃秀玫(Hsiu-Mei Huang);簡莉盈(Li-Yin Chien);葉庭吉(Ting-Chi Yeh);李碧霞(Pi-Hsia Lee);張碧真(Pi-Chen Chang)關鍵字：學齡期兒童;傳媒使用;看電視;全身型肥胖;中央型肥胖;school-aged children;media viewing;watching television;total obesity;central obesity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Increased media viewing such as watching television and videos and playing on/using computers has been associated with childhood obesity. Guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend limiting children’s total media time to no more than 2 hours per day. Information about media usage and school-aged obesity in Taiwan is lacking.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether media viewing after school is associated with the total and central obesity in school-aged children in Taipei, Taiwan’s capital and largest city.Methods: A case-control study was designed, and a control approach was used to recruit participants. Two hundred seventyfive obese and 275 normal-weight children currently in the fourth grade were enrolled from 29 elementary schools in Taipei City. Media viewing after school was measured using a 3-day selfreported physical activity log and the daily sedentary activity component of the National Health Interview Survey in Taiwan. The latter was completed by the participants’ parents.Results: Participants with total obesity had significantly more television watching time (60.24 minutes vs. 43.50 minutes, p G .05) and total media watching time (73.61 minutes vs. 52.67 minutes, p G .001) than normal-weight participants. Similar results were found for participants with central obesity. Total television and total media watching durations greater than 2 hours a day correlated significantly with total and central obesity. Time spent using computers did not differ significantly between obese and normalweight control participants on weekdays.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Childhood obesity may be multifactorial in origin. Excessive sedentary activity such as watching television may have a variety of consequences beyond the putative effect on body habitus. School nurses should promote health programs targeted to prevent excessiveweight and obesity in children, recommend reducing media viewing, and encourage patient participation in extracurricular outdoor activities.英文摘要：Background: Increased media viewing such as watching television and videos and playing on/using computers has been associated with childhood obesity. Guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend limiting children’s total media time to no more than 2 hours per day. Information about media usage and school-aged obesity in Taiwan is lacking.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether media viewing after school is associated with the total and central obesity in school-aged children in Taipei, Taiwan’s capital and largest city.Methods: A case-control study was designed, and a control approach was used to recruit participants. Two hundred seventyfive obese and 275 normal-weight children currently in the fourth grade were enrolled from 29 elementary schools in Taipei City. Media viewing after school was measured using a 3-day selfreported physical activity log and the daily sedentary activity component of the National Health Interview Survey in Taiwan. The latter was completed by the participants’ parents.Results: Participants with total obesity had significantly more television watching time (60.24 minutes vs. 43.50 minutes, p G .05) and total media watching time (73.61 minutes vs. 52.67 minutes, p G .001) than normal-weight participants. Similar results were found for participants with central obesity. Total television and total media watching durations greater than 2 hours a day correlated significantly with total and central obesity. Time spent using computers did not differ significantly between obese and normalweight control participants on weekdays.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Childhood obesity may be multifactorial in origin. Excessive sedentary activity such as watching television may have a variety of consequences beyond the putative effect on body habitus. School nurses should promote health programs targeted to prevent excessiveweight and obesity in children, recommend reducing media viewing, and encourage patient participation in extracurricular outdoor activities.起始頁-結束頁：195-203資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0afac16篇名：Identifying Critical Thinking Indicators and Critical Thinker Attributes in Nursing Practice並列篇名：護理實務中的批判思考指標與批判思考者特質作者：趙淑員(Shu-Yuan Chao);劉杏元(Hsing-Yuan Liu);巫銘昌(Ming-Chang Wu);Mary Jo Clark;譚蓉瑩(Jung-Ying Tan)關鍵字：指引;特質;批判思考;護理教育;德爾菲研究法;indicator;attribute;critical thinking;nursing education;Delphi research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：批判思考是運用護理過程主要的能力之一。文獻上有關批判思考能力的評值雖已多有討論，但是，有關護理過程所需具備之批判思考能力的指標及工具仍舊相當有限。目的：本研究從護理的角度，探討批判思考的可能指標，以及批判思考者的特質。這些指標將有助臨床教學中，評量護生批判思考能力工具之發展。方法：本研究進行時間從2009年9月至2010年8月。分為兩階段進行，第一階段，先進行文獻探討及進行4次焦點團體，以初步發展在護理架構下批判思考的指標，以及批判思考者之特徵。第二階段，邀請30位護理專家參與修正式德爾菲研究法，以取得在第一階段所發展之指標與特質之適用性的共識。結果：共發展出37項批判思考指標與10項批判思考者特質。這些指標於護理過程之架構下，包括五大項：（1）評估－16項，係應用專業知識，分析與解釋個案的情形；（2）診斷－5項，對問題推論並提出假設；（3）計畫－5項，提出解決問題的策略及說明其理由；（4）執行－5項，有關計畫的執行；以及（5）評值－6項，為自我評值與反思。結論／實務應用：本研究將批判思考轉化為可操作的實用指標，以適用於護理情境中解決臨床問題之需。此外，所發展的指標與特質，可幫助臨床指導者評量學生批判思考的能力，並作為教師臨床指導教學策略之發展。英文摘要：Background: Critical thinking is an essential skill in the nursing process. Although several studies have evaluated the critical thinking skills of nurses, there is limited information related to the indicators of critical thinking or evaluation of critical thinking in the context of the nursing process.Purpose: This study investigated the potential indicators of critical thinking and the attributes of critical thinkers in clinical nursing practice. Knowledge of these indicators can aid the development of tools to assess nursing students’ critical thinking skills.Methods: The study was conducted between September 2009 and August 2010. In phase 1, a literature review and four focus groups were conducted to identify the indicators of critical thinking in the context of nursing and the attributes of critical thinkers. In phase 2, 30 nursing professionals participated in a modified Delphi research survey to establish consensus and the appropriateness of each indicator and attribute identified in phase 1.Results: We identified 37 indicators of critical thinking and 10 attributes of critical thinkers. The indicators were categorized into five subscales within the context of the nursing process to reflect nursing clinical practice: assessment, 16 indicators of ability to apply professional knowledge and skills to analyze and interpret patient problems; diagnosis, five indicators of ability to propose preliminary suppositions; planning, five indicators of ability to develop problem-solving strategies; implementation, five indicators of ability to implement planning; and evaluation, six indicators of ability to self-assess and reflect.Conclusion/Implications for Practice: The study operationalized critical thinking into a practical indicator suitable for nursing contexts in which critical thinking is required for clinical problem solving. Identified indicators and attributes can assist clinical instructors to evaluate student critical thought skills and development-related teaching strategies.起始頁-結束頁：204-211資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0aee917篇名：Developing and Psychometric Testing of a Short-Form Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale in Chinese Patients並列篇名：台灣簡版糖尿病問題量表發展及信、效度檢測作者：徐慧君(Hui-Chun Hsu);張毓泓(Yu-Hung Chang);李佩儒(Pei-Ju Lee);陳思羽(Shi-Yu Chen);謝昌勳(Chang-Hsun Hsieh);李洮俊(Yau-Jiunn Lee);王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang)關鍵字：糖尿病;糖尿病問題量表;情緒困擾;diabetes;Problem Areas in Diabetes;emotional distress期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: The 20-item Problem Areas in Diabetes (PAID) scale is widely used to measure diabetes-related emotional distress. The short-form PAID scale is helpful for the rapid screening of diabetes-related emotional distress in clinical settings.Purpose: This study developed and examined the psychometric properties of a short-form Chinese-version PAID (SFPAID-C) scale.Methods: The Chinese-version 20-item PAID (PAID-C) scale was administered to 855 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and confirmatory factor analysis were then applied to develop the SF-PAID-C and evaluate its construct validity. The correlations between SFPAID-C and the latest HbA1c close to the measurement of PAID-C (baseline HbA1c) 3 months and 12 months later were used to examine the concurrent and predictive validity of the SF-PAID-C. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysiswas used to examine the sensitivity and specificity of the SF-PAID-C. Cronbach's alpha was used to assess internal consistency. Test-retest on 24 patients was used to examine the stability of the SF-PAID-C.Results: An 8-item SF-PAID-C was developed. The SF-PAIDC significantly correlated with the PAID-C (r = .941, p G .001), baseline HbA1c (r = .148, p G .001), 3-month HbA1c (r = .147, p G .001), and 12-month HbA1c (r = .142, p G .001). The sensitivity and specificity of the SF-PAID-C were 93.2% and 94.2%, respectively. The Cronbach's α and test-retest reliability of the SF-PAID-C were .85 and .93, respectively.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The SF-PAID-C is a reliable and valid scale that can be used to screen for diabetes-related emotional problem in Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in clinical settings.英文摘要：Background: The 20-item Problem Areas in Diabetes (PAID) scale is widely used to measure diabetes-related emotional distress. The short-form PAID scale is helpful for the rapid screening of diabetes-related emotional distress in clinical settings.Purpose: This study developed and examined the psychometric properties of a short-form Chinese-version PAID (SFPAID-C) scale.Methods: The Chinese-version 20-item PAID (PAID-C) scale was administered to 855 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and confirmatory factor analysis were then applied to develop the SF-PAID-C and evaluate its construct validity. The correlations between SFPAID-C and the latest HbA1c close to the measurement of PAID-C (baseline HbA1c) 3 months and 12 months later were used to examine the concurrent and predictive validity of the SF-PAID-C. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysiswas used to examine the sensitivity and specificity of the SF-PAID-C. Cronbach's alpha was used to assess internal consistency. Test-retest on 24 patients was used to examine the stability of the SF-PAID-C.Results: An 8-item SF-PAID-C was developed. The SF-PAIDC significantly correlated with the PAID-C (r = .941, p G .001), baseline HbA1c (r = .148, p G .001), 3-month HbA1c (r = .147, p G .001), and 12-month HbA1c (r = .142, p G .001). The sensitivity and specificity of the SF-PAID-C were 93.2% and 94.2%, respectively. The Cronbach's α and test-retest reliability of the SF-PAID-C were .85 and .93, respectively.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The SF-PAID-C is a reliable and valid scale that can be used to screen for diabetes-related emotional problem in Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in clinical settings.起始頁-結束頁：212-218資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/01.jnr.0000432048.31921.e218篇名：Preliminary Study: Taiwanese Mothers' Experiences of Children with Sensory Processing Disorder並列篇名：初步探討台灣母親照顧感覺統合失調孩童之經驗作者：邱恩琦(En-Chi Chiu)關鍵字：感覺統合失調;以家庭為中心之服務模式;台灣母親;民族誌研究;sensory processing disorder;family-centered service approach;Taiwanese mothers;ethnographic research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：對於養育失能孩童，不同的文化背景和家長經驗，會影響父母的教養方式和態度。以家庭為中心之服務模式下，家長照顧失能孩童的經驗應列入考量，特別是母親（為孩童的主要照顧者）。目的：探討台灣母親對感覺統合失調孩童的經驗。方法：使用質性民族誌研究設計，透過半結構訪談方法，收集台灣母親照顧感覺統合失調孩童的經驗，分析並統整其口述資料以歸納出主題。結果：共三位台灣母親參與訪談，於訪談結果中分析出三項主題：（一）失能與文化共享之間的關係；（二）日常生活中的挑戰與期望；（三）接受專業服務之機會。三位台灣母親表達出被責備教養技巧不足及對其孩童失能而感到羞恥之壓力，這些壓力源自老師、朋友、其他家庭成員不瞭解感覺統合失調孩童之不適切行為。台灣母親對孩童應表現之行為和態度有所期待，當其孩童於日常事務中碰到困難時，此情況造成母親和孩童雙方之壓力。這些台灣母親需要立即及長期的醫療服務，但現實狀況為醫院之職能治療師人手不足，因此有特殊需求之孩童必須輪流以獲得治療服務。結論：台灣母親所體會之壓力源自於自身、孩童與他人。醫療人員應提供以家庭為中心之服務模式，以符合母親和孩童的需求。再者應推廣感覺統合失調及其治療方式的概念，以增進社會大眾對這些孩童之接受度。英文摘要：Background: Different cultural backgrounds and parental experiences influence parenting styles and approaches to raising children with disabilities. Family-centered care should consider parental, especially main caregivers, experiences with their disabled children. In Taiwan, in most of homes, mothers are the main caregivers.Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore Taiwanese mothers' experiences with their children who have sensory processing disorder.Methods: This study used a qualitative ethnographic design and semistructured interview format. Transcripts were analyzed and synthesized into themes.Results: Three mothers were interviewed. The following three themes emerged: (a) relationships within the shared worlds of disability and culture, (b) daily life challenges and expectations, and (c) opportunity to receive professional services. These Taiwanese mothers expressed that they experienced stress from being blamed for insufficient skills and from the shame of their children's disabilities that reflected lack of teacher, friend, and other family members' understanding of the cause of their children's inappropriate behaviors. Their children experienced difficulties performing daily activities, which resulted in stresses on both the mother and her child. The interviewed mothers needed to receive timely, long-term services from healthcare professionals. However, hospitals are inadequately staffed with occupational therapists, which delays care for children with special needs.Conclusion: Taiwanese mothers experience stresses from themselves, their child, and others. Healthcare professionals should apply a family-centered service approach to fulfill the needs of mothers and their disabled children. Moreover, healthcare professionals should promote greater awareness of sensory processing disorder symptoms and interventions to increase public awareness and acceptance of these children.起始頁-結束頁：219-224資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0afd419篇名：The Effects of Contextual and Structural Factors on Patient Safety in Nursing Units並列篇名：護理單位背景及結構對病人安全的影響作者：洪嫦巧(Chang-Chiao Hung);許素珍(Su-Chen Hsu);李來涼(Lai-Liang Lee);黃秋綿(Chiu-Mien Huang)關鍵字：病人安全;結構權變理論;給藥錯誤;病人跌倒;tailored design method;patient safety;structural contingency theory;medication errors;patient falls;tailored design method期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：目前探討造成病人安全的原因，仍多著重於個人層級的探討而非組織層級。目的：本研究以一組織理論為基礎，探討組織的鉅觀因素對病人安全的影響。方法：本研究以「結構權變理論」為基礎，採橫斷性、自填問卷方式，以64個住院單位的護理長及護理人員為收案對象，以Tailored Design Method方式收集資料，收案期間為2010年12月至2011年2月。問卷進行資料集縮（data aggregation）之後，以AMOS軟體進行路徑分析並完成整體模式的估計。結果：本研究共計回收62份有效護理長問卷（98%）及977份護理人員問卷（72%）。資料集縮結果顯示，個人層級量表適用於單位層級之分析。路徑分析結果顯示，高專業自主程度、高護理專家比率、及具重症加護特性的護理單位，其給藥錯誤率也高。此外，單位技術性複雜的護理單位，也間接的造成高給藥錯誤率和病人跌倒率。結論與應用：研究結果顯示，組織鉅觀因素（包括組織背景及結構因素）確實對護理單位病人安全有影響。依據組織背景及結構因素的影響，調整在職教育內容、鼓勵護理人員參與病患安全訓練、及瞭解單位組織特性等，為建議提升病患安全的策略。英文摘要：Background: Because of limited research on patient safety from a macrolevel perspective, our understanding of how to reduce the risk of system failures that impact patient safety outcomes in Taiwanese healthcare organizations is limited.Purpose: We conducted this study to explore the relationships between macrolevel factors and patient safety outcomes.Methods: Structural contingency theory was used as the framework for the study. A cross-sectional design was used, and data were collected from self-administered questionnaires. Head nurses and registered nurses working in 64 in-patient nursing units at three hospitals participated in the study. A tailored design method was used for data collation, and the data collection lasted 3 weeks during the winter of 2010. Data were aggregated from the individual to the unit level, and path analysis was used to examine the hypothesized model.Results: Sixty-two head nurses (96.8%) and 977 staff nurses (72%) completed and returned the questionnaire. Eta-squared coefficient (<U+014B>^2), interitem consistency (rwg), and F ratio results showed that data at the individual level are appropriate for aggregating to the unit level. These findings show that nursing units with high degrees of professional autonomy, comparatively higher proportions of nursing experts, and relatively large unit sizes tend to have higher rates of medication errors. In addition, we found high degrees of unit technology associated with higher rates of medication errors and patient falls.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: These findings suggest a link between macrolevel factors and patient safety outcomes. This study shows that redesigning continuing education programs encourages nurses to participate in patient safety training and understand the nursing unit characteristics that enhance patient safety outcomes to improve the patient safety of nursing units.起始頁-結束頁：225-234資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182a0b00420篇名：The Relationship between Geriatric Depression and Health-Promoting Behaviors among Community-Dwelling Seniors並列篇名：社區長者憂鬱與健康促進行為之相關性探討作者：張瓊方(Chyong-Fang Chang);林梅香(Mei-Hsiang Lin);王琤(Jeng Wang);范君瑜(Jun-Yu Fan);周利娜(Li-Na Chou);陳美燕(Mei-Yen Chen)關鍵字：社區健康照護;憂鬱;長者;健康促進;community health nursing;depression;elderly;health promotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：統計顯示，我國65歲以上長者人口比率為10.9%，長者憂鬱的盛行率亦高。護理人員是推動社區健康促進重要的成員，了解影響社區長者健康促進行為與憂鬱的相關性，是推動社區衛生政策的依據，而推動健康老化需透過健康促進策略之規劃。目的：了解社區長者健康促進行為，並探討偏遠地區社區長者憂鬱與健康促進行為之相關性。方法：採橫斷式、描述性研究設計，所有參與本計劃的研究對象為樣本。以人口學資料、本計畫所初步發展及使用的長者健康促進量表、簡式老年憂鬱量表為研究工具。結果：共有427位長者參與本研究，多數為女性、平均年齡75.8歲，不識字者佔多數；近半數個案執行健康促進行為之頻率偏低。憂鬱與整體健康促進行為分數呈負相關，與次量表之社會參與、健康責任、自我保護、活躍生活之得分皆達統計上有意義之關係；多變量分析顯示，控制干擾因素後，憂鬱分數與身體不適，是影響長者執行健康促進行 為之重要預測因子。結論／實務應用：本研究發現，長者健康促進行為之執行情況普遍不理想。憂鬱分數較低者，其健康促進行為也越高。此結果可作為社區推行健康老化的實證依據，特別是提供憂鬱長者更多社會參與及活躍生活層面之策略。英文摘要：Background: People older than 65 years old account for about 10.9% of Taiwan's total population; it is also known that the older adults experience a higher incidence of depression. Public health nurses play an important role in promoting community health. Policymaking for community healthcare should reflect the relationship between health-promoting behavior and depression in community-dwelling seniors. Therefore, the encouragement of healthy aging requires strategic planning by those who provide health promotion services. Objective: This study was designed to elicit the health-promoting behaviors of community seniors and investigate the relationship between geriatric depression and health-promoting behaviors among seniors who live in rural communities. Methods: We used a cross-sectional, descriptive design and collected data using a demographic information datasheet, the Health Promotion for Seniors and Geriatric Depression Scale short forms. Results: The study included 427 participants. Most were women; mean age was 75.8 years. Most were illiterate; roughly half engaged in a limited number of health-promoting activities. The Geriatric Depression Scale score was negatively associated with health-promoting behavior. Social participation, health responsibility, self-protection, active lifestyle, and total Health Promotion for Seniors score all reached statistical significance. Multivariate analysis indicated that geriatric depression and physical discomfort were independent predictors of health promoting behavior after controlling the confounding factors. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Participants practiced less than the recommended level of health-promoting behaviors. We found a negative correlation between the geriatric depression score and health-promoting behavior. Results can be referenced to develop strategies to promote healthy aging in the community, especially with regard to promoting greater social participation and increased activity for community-dwelling older adults experiencing depression.起始頁-結束頁：75-82資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921fc901篇名：Disability Assessment: The Efficacy of Multimedia Interactive Nurse Education並列篇名：多媒體互動式光碟對護理人員執行失能評估之成效作者：江蕙娟(Hui-Chaun Chiang);林豐裕(Feng-Yu Lin);胡月娟(Yueh-Juen Hwu)關鍵字：多媒體;失能評估;multimedia;disability assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：失能者約佔臺灣人口的3%，失能者功能評估，攸關長期照護品質及資源分配。目的：探討多媒體互動式光碟教學方案，對護理人員執行失能評估知識與技能之成效。方法：採類實驗設計，實驗組接受多媒體互動式光碟教學方案，對照組採課室教學。以失能評估問卷，在多媒體互動式光碟介入前，與之後第2週、第4週，評值二組護理人員執行失能評估知識與案例評估技能之正確性。此外，佐以深入訪談，了解實驗組護理人員對多媒體教學方案之感受。結果：接受多媒體教學方案之護理人員，其失能評估知識程度、案例評估準確度，皆高於對照組，且達統計學上的顯著差異；此外，成效可長達一個月。訪談資料顯示，護理人員認為多媒體互動式光碟，在學習上具彈性，能提升其臨床評估的自信心。結論／實務應用：多媒體互動式光碟能提升護理人員執行失能評估的知能，可運用至長期照護實務，以作為長期照護從業人員繼續教育之參酌。英文摘要：Background: Nearly 3% of the population in Taiwan is classified as disabled. Disability assessment directly relates to long-term care quality and resource allocation. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of a multimedia interactive DVD on enhancing nurse knowledge and disability assessment skills. Methods: The study was a quasi-experimental design. The experimental group received multimedia interactive DVD, and the control group received conventional classroom education. The study gathered data using scales assessing knowledge related to disability assessment and case studies. Scales were implemented before and after multimedia interactive DVD interventions at weeks 2 and 4. In-depth interviews with voice recording were used to collect qualitative data to elicit differences in perception between the experimental and control groups. Results: This study found significant improvements in the experimental group in terms of disability assessment knowledge and case study assessment skills. These improvements lasted through at least 1-month posttest. Analysis of interview data for the experimental group showed that the multimedia interactive DVD provided a more flexible approach to learning than classroom education and improved participant self-confidence to conduct disability assessments. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The study showed the effectiveness of the developed multimedia interactive DVD in significantly improving the disability assessment confidences of nurses. Study findings can be used as a reference guide for continuing educational efforts in long-term care settings.起始頁-結束頁：83-93資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921f5a2篇名：Quality of Life Patterns and Survival among Older People並列篇名：老人生活品質型態與生存作者：李志平(Chih-Ping Li)關鍵字：生活品質型態;老人;死亡風險;quality of life patterns;elderly people;mortality hazards期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：全球人口老化現象逐漸增加，老人生活品質一直是研究的重點。跨國研究比較不同國家老人的生活品質型態，可以增進對老人的瞭解。目的：本研究主要的目的在探討英國與台灣老人的生活品質型態，以及生活品質型態與死亡風險的關係。方法：資料來源包括英國1989年的諾丁漢老人活動縱貫性研究，以及台灣地區1989年中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查。本研究使用集群分析觀察英國及台灣老人的生活品質型態和特性，然後以存活分析比較英國及台灣老人生活品質型態與死亡風險之間的關係。結果：集群分析出英國老人樣本15個分群，台灣老人樣本20個分群。以英國的15個分群及台灣的20個分群進行存活分析結果，老人生活品質的型態與14年的死亡風險有明顯的關係。結論：本研究使用集群分析認定英國及台灣老人在生活品質上的不同層級及特性，最重要的是探索老人在生活品質上的不同層級及特性與存活率之間的關係，因為從生活品質上的不同層級及特性，可以發現生活品質的某些因素會增加死亡風險。英文摘要：Background: As the numbers and proportions of elderly people in the global population increase, quality of life (QOL) within this group becomes an important research issue. Undertaking cross national comparisons of elderly people can provide a better understanding of QOL patterns. Purpose: This study examines QOL patterns using a harmonization data set from two longitudinal studies of the older people in the United Kingdom (UK) and Taiwan and explores the relationship between clusters of older people and mortality hazards in these countries. Methods: Data were derived from the 1989 wave of the Nottingham Longitudinal Study of Activity and Ageing and the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan. Cluster analysis was used to observe QOL patterns in the older people and their profiles. Cox regression analysis was used to test for the presence of clusters associated with mortality hazards. Result: Fifteen subgroups were extracted from cluster analysis of the Nottingham Longitudinal Study of Activity and Ageing sample (n = 690), and 20 groups were generated from cluster analysis of the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan data set (n = 1,438). Cox regression analyses revealed a relationship between mortality risk and certain clusters over a 14-year period in the UK and Taiwan. Conclusions: Using cluster analyses to group the older people according to shared characteristics identified different QOL levels across these profiles both in the UK and Taiwan. The author also identified differences in the same profile levels between the two countries. It is important to explore the relationship between clusters and mortality hazards because clusters reflect important QOL factors affecting mortality risk.起始頁-結束頁：94-109資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921f9d3篇名：The Impacts of Widowhood, Chronic Disease, and Physical Function on Mortality among Older People並列篇名：寡居、慢性病和身體功能對老人死亡率的衝擊作者：何淑熙(Shu-Hsi Ho);洪文夏(Wen-Shai Hung)關鍵字：鰥夫;寡婦;慢性病;身體功能;widower;widow;chronic disease;physical function期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：隨著台灣年齡老化與喪偶人數的逐漸增加，喪偶老人存活率的議題值得關心。目的：旨在探討台灣地區寡居、慢性病與身體功能等因素對老人死亡風險之衝擊。方法：以長期追蹤資料來評估台灣老人死亡風險率的情形。資料來自2003年「台灣地區中老年人保健與居住狀況調查」，並配合2003到2007年間相同受訪者的官方死亡紀錄，設定觀察期間。以Cox風險比例模型分析鰥夫、寡婦、慢性病、身體功能障礙與老人存活率的關係。結果：在控制其他變數後，存活分析顯示喪偶者呈現出較高的死亡風險。其中，鰥夫的死亡風險又高於寡婦。另外，慢性病中的惡性腫瘤與中風（腦溢血）顯著的威脅已婚男、女的生命。但是，支氣管炎、肺氣腫、肺病與其他呼吸性疾病則只對男性有影響。再者，身體活動功能對死亡產生顯著的預測效果，特別是工具性日常生活活動功能。結論／實務應用：本研究確認寡居、慢性病、身體功能等與老人死亡風險息息相關。所以，本文建議應該多關心老人的這些課題，並制訂相關福利政策，以提高老人的存活率。英文摘要：Background: Age-related physical and mental health is well documented. The numbers of widows and widowers are rising in Taiwan. Thus, it is worthwhile to consider factors affecting survival rates after the death of a spouse. Purpose: This study examined the impacts of widowhood, chronic disease, and physical function on mortality risk among the older people in Taiwan. Methods: A panel data design was applied to investigate the hazard ratio of mortality among the older people. Subject data were obtained from the 2003 Survey of Health and Living Status of the Middle Aged and Elderly in Taiwan and linked to the 2003Y2007 national death registry data. Cox proportional hazard models were used to examine the relationships between survival rates and factors including status as a widower or widow, chronic disease, and physical function disability. Results: After controlling for potentially confounding variables, survival analysis indicated a relatively higher mortality risk among the widowed compared with those whose spouses were still alive. Of these, widowers showed a higher mortality risk than widows. In addition, incidence of tumor and stroke significantly influenced mortality among both married men and women. Bronchitis, pneumonia, and other respiratory disease significantly raised the risk of mortality for married men but not for married women. Moreover, physical function variables were significant predictive factors related to mortality hazard, with instrumental activities of daily living showing the strongest predictive relationship. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The study confirmed that widowhood, chronic disease, and physical function were strongly associated with mortality hazard in older people. Therefore, greater attention should be paid to these factors to reduce elderly mortality risk. Research results should be useful in developing welfare strategies for this group.起始頁-結束頁：110-119資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921ff64篇名：Illness Representations and Coping Processes of Taiwanese Patients with Early-Stage Chronic Kidney Disease並列篇名：早期慢性腎臟疾病病患之疾病詮釋與因應過程作者：林秋菊(Chiu-Chu Lin);陳玫君(Mei-Chun Chen);謝秀芳(Hsiu-Fang Hsieh);張淑真(Shu-Chen Chang)關鍵字：慢性腎臟疾病;因應過程;疾病詮釋;質性研究;chronic kidney disease;coping;illness representation;qualitative study期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：慢性腎臟疾病（chronic kidney disease, CKD）之盛行率及發生率不斷增加，醫療花費亦高，已是普遍存有的公共衛生議題。個人對於疾病的詮釋會影響其健康相關的行為，然早期慢性腎臟疾病病患對其疾病的感受表現卻鮮少受到關注。目的：本質性研究旨在描述台灣的早期CKD病患疾病詮釋與因應過程之經驗。方法：本研究以立意取樣，從台灣兩家醫學中心腎臟科門診中，招募15位確診為早期CKD之病患為研究對象。採半結構、開放式之一對一、面對面訪談，訪談結果以質性內容分析方法進行分析，並以Lincoln與Guba所提的嚴謹度之四個準則進行評核。結果：從質性分析中得出以下六大主題：經歷到早期症狀、自我解釋其罹患CKD之原因、體認CKD是一種長期性疾病、相信遵從醫囑就可以控制CKD、預料罹患CKD的後果、以及採取因應策略來延緩CKD之病程。結論／臨床應用：本研究發現，健康照護專業人員對於患有腎臟疾病此族群病患，對其疾病的解讀與因應有更進一步的瞭解。相較於過去所發表之研究結果顯示，個人的疾病詮釋可以透過教育改變，繼而改善個人的因應行為。此發現使健康專業人員更體認到，進行衛生教育前，必須先評估個案對其疾病的解讀為何，如此方能提供具文化敏感性的介入措施。英文摘要：Background: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a public health problem worldwide with an increasing incidence and prevalence and high cost. The role of illness perceptions in understanding health-related behavior has received little attention in patients with early-stage CKD. Purpose: This qualitative study aimed to describe the illness representation and coping process experience of patients with early-stage CKD in Taiwan. Methods: A qualitative content analysis approach was used to analyze semistructured, open-ended, one-on-one interviews with 15 patients with early-stage CKD. Purposive sampling was used to recruit patients diagnosed with early-stage CKD from the nephrology departments of two medical centers in Taiwan. Trustworthiness of the study was evaluated using four criteria suggested by Lincoln and Guba. Results: Six themes emerged from the analysis: experiencing early symptoms, self-interpreting the causes of having CKD, realizing CKD as a long-term disease, believing CKD could be controlled by following doctors' orders, anticipating the consequences of having CKD, and adopting coping strategies to delay the progress of CKD. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings from this study compared with previous studies reveal that education can effectively change patient illness representations as an approach to improve coping behavior. This finding offers healthcare professionals insight into the health education necessary to assess patient illness representation to provide culturally sensitive interventions.起始頁-結束頁：120-128資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921fb85篇名：Correlations among Social Support, Depression, and Anxiety in Patients with Type-2 Diabetes並列篇名：第二型糖尿病患者社會支持與憂鬱、焦慮之相關作者：吳淑芳(Vivienne Shu-Fang Wu);楊麗瑟(Li-Sei Young);葉芳枝(Fang-Chih Yeh);簡鈺玫(Yu-Mei Jian);鄭貴真(Kuei-Chen Cheng);李梅琛(Mei-Chen Lee)關鍵字：第二型糖尿病;社會支持;憂鬱;焦慮;轉介;type-2 diabetes;social support;depression;anxiety;referral期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Social support is related to patient self-care and health status. Patients' psychosocial issues play an important role in diabetes care. Purpose: This study investigates correlations among social support, depression, and anxiety in patients with diabetes. Methods: A cross-sectional study design and purposive sampling were used. One hundred eleven patients with type-2 diabetes were recruited from three regional teaching hospitals in northern, central, and southern Taiwan, respectively. Questionnaires used included the social support and psychological referral inventory, Beck depression inventory, and Beck anxiety inventory. Results: Approximately 12.6% of the study population had depression, and 27.0% had anxiety. Depression and anxiety were positively correlated (r = .65, p ＜ .01), whereas depression was negatively correlated with the sum of disease control types (r = -0.26, p ＜ .01) and social support (r = -0.27, p ＜ .01). The sum of disease control types and social support were the most important explanatory factors for depression in patients, explaining 45.5% of variance. Anxiety was correlated positively with age (r = .26, p ＜ .01), total number of complications (r = .31, p ＜ .01), and depression (r = .65, p ＜ .01). Anxiety correlated negatively with weight (r = -0.20, p ＜ .05) and sum of disease control types (r = -0.25, p ＜ .05). The above variables were important explanatory factors for anxiety, accounting for 15.2% of variance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Psychological factors, such as depression and anxiety, are common symptoms in patients with diabetes. If social support can be strengthened in these patients, then psychological factors can be improved. Professional care providers should focus on reducing the patient depression and anxiety levels, strengthening social support, and providing referrals to psychology-related professionals.英文摘要：Background: Social support is related to patient self-care and health status. Patients' psychosocial issues play an important role in diabetes care. Purpose: This study investigates correlations among social support, depression, and anxiety in patients with diabetes. Methods: A cross-sectional study design and purposive sampling were used. One hundred eleven patients with type-2 diabetes were recruited from three regional teaching hospitals in northern, central, and southern Taiwan, respectively. Questionnaires used included the social support and psychological referral inventory, Beck depression inventory, and Beck anxiety inventory. Results: Approximately 12.6% of the study population had depression, and 27.0% had anxiety. Depression and anxiety were positively correlated (r = .65, p ＜ .01), whereas depression was negatively correlated with the sum of disease control types (r = -0.26, p ＜ .01) and social support (r = -0.27, p ＜ .01). The sum of disease control types and social support were the most important explanatory factors for depression in patients, explaining 45.5% of variance. Anxiety was correlated positively with age (r = .26, p ＜ .01), total number of complications (r = .31, p ＜ .01), and depression (r = .65, p ＜ .01). Anxiety correlated negatively with weight (r = -0.20, p ＜ .05) and sum of disease control types (r = -0.25, p ＜ .05). The above variables were important explanatory factors for anxiety, accounting for 15.2% of variance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Psychological factors, such as depression and anxiety, are common symptoms in patients with diabetes. If social support can be strengthened in these patients, then psychological factors can be improved. Professional care providers should focus on reducing the patient depression and anxiety levels, strengthening social support, and providing referrals to psychology-related professionals.起始頁-結束頁：129-138資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921fe16篇名：Smoking in Korean-Chinese Middle School Students: Prevalence and Risk Factors並列篇名：韓裔中國籍中學生吸菸之盛行率及其危險因子作者：Soon-Bok E. Park;Soon-Nyung Yun;Wen-Ying Cui;Hyang Kim關鍵字：吸菸;青少年;韓裔中國籍;中學生;危險因數;smoking;adolescent;Korean-Chinese;middle school student;risk factor期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Cigarette smoking is rising among Chinese adolescents, and adolescent smoking is a crucial public health issue. Despite the number of studies that have explored the prevalence and various aspects of adolescent smoking in China, we know of no data currently available on smoking behavior among Korean-Chinese adolescents. Purpose: This article studies the prevalence of smoking and factors affecting smoking behavior among Korean-Chinese adolescents. Methods: Data were collected from six Korean-Chinese middle schools in the Yanbian region of Jilin, China. The differences in data from three groups (never-smokers, ever-smokers, and current smokers) were analyzed using χ^2 tests and analysis of variance. Logistic regression was used to analyze the factors affecting smoking behavior. Results: Among the 2,116 participants, 7.3% of the boys and 3.7% of the girls were ever-smokers, and 7.2% of the boys and 0.8% of the girls were current smokers. Differences among groups in terms of gender, number of friends currently smoking, parental smoking behavior, academic performance, alcohol consumption, and intention not to smoke were all significant (p ＜ .001, .05). Compared with never-smoking and ever-smoking students, currently smoking students perceived a significantly less antismoking environment (p = .000). The smoking rate was 2.24 times higher in boys than girls and was 11.57 times higher in students who had three smoking friends compared with those who had no smoking friends. Conclusion: The findings may help develop more effective intervention approaches to prevent adolescent smoking. Preventive programs should involve smoking parents by increasing the value they place on their children' nonsmoking behavior and equipping them to help deter adolescent smoking.英文摘要：Background: Cigarette smoking is rising among Chinese adolescents, and adolescent smoking is a crucial public health issue. Despite the number of studies that have explored the prevalence and various aspects of adolescent smoking in China, we know of no data currently available on smoking behavior among Korean-Chinese adolescents. Purpose: This article studies the prevalence of smoking and factors affecting smoking behavior among Korean-Chinese adolescents. Methods: Data were collected from six Korean-Chinese middle schools in the Yanbian region of Jilin, China. The differences in data from three groups (never-smokers, ever-smokers, and current smokers) were analyzed using χ^2 tests and analysis of variance. Logistic regression was used to analyze the factors affecting smoking behavior. Results: Among the 2,116 participants, 7.3% of the boys and 3.7% of the girls were ever-smokers, and 7.2% of the boys and 0.8% of the girls were current smokers. Differences among groups in terms of gender, number of friends currently smoking, parental smoking behavior, academic performance, alcohol consumption, and intention not to smoke were all significant (p ＜ .001, .05). Compared with never-smoking and ever-smoking students, currently smoking students perceived a significantly less antismoking environment (p = .000). The smoking rate was 2.24 times higher in boys than girls and was 11.57 times higher in students who had three smoking friends compared with those who had no smoking friends. Conclusion: The findings may help develop more effective intervention approaches to prevent adolescent smoking. Preventive programs should involve smoking parents by increasing the value they place on their children' nonsmoking behavior and equipping them to help deter adolescent smoking.起始頁-結束頁：139-147資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921f357篇名：Development and Validation of the Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale並列篇名：產後睡眠品質量表之發展與驗證作者：楊秋鈴(Chiu-Ling Yang);游振祥(Chen-Hsiang Yu);陳彰惠(Chung-Hey Chen)關鍵字：婦女健康;產後照顧;睡眠品質;women's health;postnatal care;sleep quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：產後睡眠困擾是產後婦女所要面對的重要課題；雖然產後婦女睡眠困擾的相關因素已被探討，但都使用一般性睡眠品質量表，目前缺乏針對產婦睡眠品質特殊性而設計的測量工具。目的：本研究目的是發展一份「產後睡眠品質量表」，並驗證其信度和效度。方法：本研究依據臨床經驗、文獻查證和專家意見編製一份16題「產後睡眠品質量表」，檢定其內部一致性、再測信度、建構效度和收斂效度。樣本來源為南部地區某一醫學中心和一婦產科診所之產後門診，共收集有效樣本202位產後婦女，收案時間為2010年至2011年。結果：「產後睡眠品質量表」經項目分析後，由16題減為14題，其內部一致性為α = .81，5天再測信度為r = .81。進行因素分析萃取出二個因素，分別是「夜晚照顧嬰兒睡眠中斷相關之白天功能障礙」和「身體症狀相關之睡眠無效率」，可解釋44.49%的總變異量，每題因素負荷量介於.43和.76之間。本量表與匹茲堡睡眠品質量表有顯著相關r = .67，顯示其收斂效度。結論：14題「產後睡眠品質量表」經由驗證後，針對測量婦女產後睡眠品質是一份可信、有效與實用的量表，且本量表可作為未來有睡眠困擾的產後婦女介入措施之成效測量工具。英文摘要：Background: Postpartum sleep disorders are a significant problem for postnatal women. Although factors predisposing postnatal women to sleep disorders have been identified, few sleep quality assessment instruments adequately address these factors. Purpose: This study aimed to develop a Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale (PSQS) and test its psychometric properties. Methods: Sixteen PSQS items were generated from clinical practice, a literature review, and expert recommendations. Two hundred two postpartum women were recruited from a medical center and an obstetric clinic in southern Taiwan in 2010-2011 to assess the internal consistency, test-retest reliability, construct validity, and convergent validity of the developed PSQS. Results: Item analysis removed two of the initial PSQS items. The resultant 14-item PSQS showed good internal consistency (α = .81) and acceptable 5-day test-retest reliability (r = .81). Construct validity was confirmed using exploratory factor analysis, which extracted and defined ”Infant night care-related daytime dysfunction” and ”Physical symptoms related sleep inefficiency” as the two main categories of postpartum sleep quality. These two factors explained 44.49% of total variance, with factor loadings between .43 and .76. Significant correlation (r = .67) with the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index showed convergent validity. Conclusion: The 14-item PSQS is a reliable, valid, and useful scale for measuring postpartum sleep quality and examining intervention protocols in Taiwanese postpartum women with sleep disturbance.起始頁-結束頁：148-154資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182921f808篇名：A Qualitative Study of Psychosocial Factors Affecting Expecting Mothers Who Choose to Continue a Cleft Lip and/or Palate Pregnancy to Term並列篇名：胎兒唇顎裂之孕婦選擇繼續<U+59D9>娠的心理社會衝擊之質性研究作者：謝月慈(Yueh-Tzu Hsieh);余玉眉(Yu-Mei Yu Chao);蕭淑銖(Judith Shu-Chu Shiao)關鍵字：先天缺陷;唇顎裂;進退兩難;社會心理影響;現象學;birth defect;cleft lip/palate;dilemma;psychosocial consequences;phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：進步的產前診斷技術，可以早期發現絕大多數的唇顎裂個案，但也導致許多中止懷孕的決定。然而在臺灣針對此間孕婦所承受的社會心理影響經驗的討論卻相當少見。目的：探討孕婦在胎兒被診斷為唇顎裂後，仍決定繼續<U+59D9>娠的心理社會衝擊。方法：本研究立意取樣六位胎兒被診斷為唇顎裂後仍決定繼續<U+59D9>娠的孕婦，於被診斷後兩周 內進行深度訪談。資料收集地點為北部某醫學中心產科門診，期間為2000年5月至2002年3月。研究者在訪問開始之前，均先給予充分的口頭與書面說明，再請受訪者簽署研究同意書。結果：研究結果出現五個主題：（一）失去自我價值的母親、（二）被責備的母親、（三）是否終止<U+59D9>娠的決策衝突、（四）資訊不足引發的焦慮、（五）照護負擔與不利於小孩的情境。結論：懷孕期被診斷出小孩有唇顎裂，對孕婦的社會心理影響是相當大的。令人欣慰的，無論小孩的健康情況為何，所有的受訪者都不後悔當初的決定。英文摘要：Background: Prenatal detection of cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) leads to high rates of induced termination of pregnancy. There has been little research in Taiwan done on the psychosocial factors affecting those who decide to continue their CL/P pregnancy. Purpose: This study identified the principal psychosocial factors that affect expecting mothers who chose to continue their CL/P pregnancy to term. Methods: Purposive sampling recruited expecting mothers with CL/P-diagnosed fetuses. Recruiting took place between May 2000 and March 2002 at a tertiary referral hospital in Taipei, Taiwan. Those who had decided to continue their pregnancy to term were asked to participate. Researchers obtained oral informed consent to be interviewed during the week following CL/P diagnosis. Interviews for each participant were completed within a 2-week period. All information was given to the interviewees in written and verbal forms before providing their written informed consent to participate. Results: The five major themes central to participant experiences included (1) loss of self-value as a mother, (2) blaming the mother, (3) indecision about whether to continue the pregnancy, (4) anxiety triggered by insufficient information, and (5) burden of care and concerns about potential disadvantaged status. Conclusions: Significant psychological distress was identified among participants following their fetus' CL/P diagnosis. It was encouraging to learn that all participants told researchers in postpartum interviews that they did not regret the decision to take their child to term.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182828dbd9篇名：Menarche and Menstruation through the Eyes of Pubescent Students in Eastern Taiwan: Implications in Sociocultural Influence and Gender Differences Issues並列篇名：台灣東部青春期學生之初經與月經觀點－社會文化與性別觀點作者：張玉婷(Yu-Ting Chang);林美玲(Mei-Ling Lin)關鍵字：月經;青春期;質性研究;社會文化觀點;性別差異;menstruation;pubescent;qualitative research;sociocultural perspectives;gender differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：月經相關文獻指出，月經涵蓋生理發展、心理變化、性別差異及社會文化內涵等多層面的概念。目的：本研究目的在瞭解在台灣東部的社會文化脈絡下，青春期學生如何建構個人之月經觀點。方法：本研究為質性設計，以焦點團體訪談進行資料收集。以花蓮地區二所國小高年級學生為對象，共20位女生與27位男生參與訪談，組成9個焦點團體，總計進行19次焦點團體討論。訪談過程經錄音與觀察紀錄後，以質性分析軟體Altas V 5.0版進行編碼、分類和歸納分析。結果：本研究顯示，在台灣東部地區之社會文化架構影響下，青春期學生對月經之詮釋雖呈現明顯性別差異，卻建構出「在矛盾中努力成長」之主題。初經與月經觀點於社會、學校和家庭氛圍中，被青少年（女）解釋為「含糊不清的」、「被忽略的」、「骯髒的」、「私人的」和「成長的」事件。結論／實務應用：本研究結果具體呈現在台灣東部的社會文化影響下，青春期學生面對月經事件的矛盾與掙扎。建議未來在月經教育針對不同性別，擬定有效之月經諮詢、學校性教育以及健康促進策略。英文摘要：Background: Menstruation is a significant part of women's lives. It has been studied from many perspectives to draw various conclusions about biological and physiological development, gender differences, and sociocultural environments. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore how male and female pubescent students perceive and interpret menarche and menstruation and how their perceptions reflect gender differences and the sociocultural environment in eastern Taiwan. Methods: This was an exploratory qualitative study that employed focus group interviews. Data were collected from 20 girls and 27 boys, aged 10-12 years, who were recruited from two elementary schools. Participants engaged in 19 focus group discussions, which lasted 45-60 minutes each. Discussion transcripts were collected, encoded, categorized, and analyzed using the Atlas V 5.0 software. Results: The central theme in menarche and menstruation experiences among pubescent students in eastern Taiwan can be summarized as, ”Struggling to grow up amidst contradictions,” an attitude that reflects gender divisions and sociocultural representations and practices. Generally, participants' views on menstruation fell within five subthemes: ”Ambiguous,” ”Disregarded,” ”Dirty,” ”Personal,” and ”Transitional.” These themes were analyzed within the contexts of society, school, and family. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In line with previous research, this study shows the need for more individual reproductive health consultations, reliable sex education, and well-planned health policies to assist pubescent students manage menstruation. In addition, this study suggests that the subjugation of girls and women remains a critical issue that must be addressed and challenged.起始頁-結束頁：10-18資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182829b2610篇名：Development and Validation of a Diabetes Foot Self-Care Behavior Scale並列篇名：糖尿病足部照護行為量表之發展及測試作者：靳燕芬(Yen-Fan Chin);黃子庭(Tzu-Ting Huang)關鍵字：糖尿病足;自我照顧;量表發展;diabetic foot;self-care;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Foot self-care practice is one of the most important self-management behaviors to prevent the occurrence of diabetic foot ulcers. A tool that measures all aspects of daily foot care routines and demonstrates good reliability and validity is essential to pinpointing specific foot ulcer problems and evaluating intervention outcomes. There is currently no such tool available.Purpose: This study developed a diabetes foot self-care behavior scale (DFSBS) and tested its psychometric properties. Methods: The researchers reviewed the literature to generate the initial item pool. After expert confirmation of final draft scale content validity, we used convenience sampling to recruit 295 patients with diabetes and peripheral neuropathy who completed the scale. We analyzed results to determine the scale's psychometric properties, including construct validity, internal consistency, and test-retest reliability. Results: The final scale consisted of a one-factor structure with seven items. The analysis of the scale indicated the DFSBS score as significantly correlated with the foot care subscale score of the Chinese version of the summary of diabetes self-care activity questionnaire (rho = .87, p ＜ .001) and the Chinese version of the diabetes self-care scale (γ = .45, p ＜ .001). Importantly, the DFSBS was found to differentiate between participants with and without a history of foot ulcers (Mann-Whitney Z = j3.09, p ＜ .01). Internal consistency was acceptable (Cronbach's alpha = .73), and intraclass correlation coefficient for test-retest reliability over a 2-week period was .92. Conclusion/Implications for Practice: This study provides evidence of the DFSBS validity and reliability. Clinicians may use the DFSBS to screen patients' foot self-care behavior, and researchers can use it to elucidate foot self-care issues.英文摘要：Background: Foot self-care practice is one of the most important self-management behaviors to prevent the occurrence of diabetic foot ulcers. A tool that measures all aspects of daily foot care routines and demonstrates good reliability and validity is essential to pinpointing specific foot ulcer problems and evaluating intervention outcomes. There is currently no such tool available.Purpose: This study developed a diabetes foot self-care behavior scale (DFSBS) and tested its psychometric properties. Methods: The researchers reviewed the literature to generate the initial item pool. After expert confirmation of final draft scale content validity, we used convenience sampling to recruit 295 patients with diabetes and peripheral neuropathy who completed the scale. We analyzed results to determine the scale's psychometric properties, including construct validity, internal consistency, and test-retest reliability. Results: The final scale consisted of a one-factor structure with seven items. The analysis of the scale indicated the DFSBS score as significantly correlated with the foot care subscale score of the Chinese version of the summary of diabetes self-care activity questionnaire (rho = .87, p ＜ .001) and the Chinese version of the diabetes self-care scale (γ = .45, p ＜ .001). Importantly, the DFSBS was found to differentiate between participants with and without a history of foot ulcers (Mann-Whitney Z = j3.09, p ＜ .01). Internal consistency was acceptable (Cronbach's alpha = .73), and intraclass correlation coefficient for test-retest reliability over a 2-week period was .92. Conclusion/Implications for Practice: This study provides evidence of the DFSBS validity and reliability. Clinicians may use the DFSBS to screen patients' foot self-care behavior, and researchers can use it to elucidate foot self-care issues.起始頁-結束頁：19-25資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182828e5911篇名：Life Satisfaction as a Predictor of Mortality Hazard among Elderly People in the United Kingdom and Taiwan並列篇名：老人生活滿意度預測死亡風險：以英國與臺灣為例作者：李志平(Chih-Ping Li)關鍵字：老人;生活滿意度;死亡風險;elderly people;life satisfaction;mortality hazard期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Although numerous predictors of mortality hazard in later life have been identified, the precise relationship between life satisfaction and mortality hazards among elderly people remains unclear. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the relationship between life satisfaction and mortality hazards among elderly people in the United Kingdom and Taiwan. Methods: Data were derived from the 1989 surveys of the Nottingham Longitudinal Study of Activity and Ageing (NLSAA) and the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan (SHLSET). Following data harmonization, the samples included 690 individuals from the NLSAA and 1,438 individuals from SHLSET. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to determine the relationship between life satisfaction in 1989 and 14-year mortality hazard among elderly people in the two samples, first, in unadjusted models and then adjusting covariates for demographic, physical health, psychological health, and social engagement. Results: Higher life satisfaction was significantly associated with a reduced 14-year mortality hazard in unadjusted models in both the United Kingdom (hazard ratio = 0.990; 95% confidence interval [0.986, 0.995], p ＜ .001) and Taiwan (hazard ratio = 0.994, 95% confidence interval [0.990, 0.997], p ＜ .001). After adjusting for demographic, physical health, psychological health, and social engagement variables, life satisfaction remained significantly associated with mortality hazard in the United Kingdom, but not in Taiwan. Conclusions: This research confirms previous research showing higher life satisfaction as associated with improved survival among elderly people in the United Kingdom. Contrary to expectation, life satisfaction was not a predictor for mortality outcomes in the Taiwan sample when physical, psychological, and social predictors were included, although a baseline assessment showed that life satisfaction is important to predicting long-term survival among community-dwelling elderly people in both countries. The observed association between life satisfaction and mortality hazards may be attributed to common underlying causes such as self-rated health integration and/or health problems. Improving life satisfaction by promoting agents of health or other aspects of well-being and quality of life could have important long-term benefits for elderly people.英文摘要：Background: Although numerous predictors of mortality hazard in later life have been identified, the precise relationship between life satisfaction and mortality hazards among elderly people remains unclear. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the relationship between life satisfaction and mortality hazards among elderly people in the United Kingdom and Taiwan. Methods: Data were derived from the 1989 surveys of the Nottingham Longitudinal Study of Activity and Ageing (NLSAA) and the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan (SHLSET). Following data harmonization, the samples included 690 individuals from the NLSAA and 1,438 individuals from SHLSET. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to determine the relationship between life satisfaction in 1989 and 14-year mortality hazard among elderly people in the two samples, first, in unadjusted models and then adjusting covariates for demographic, physical health, psychological health, and social engagement. Results: Higher life satisfaction was significantly associated with a reduced 14-year mortality hazard in unadjusted models in both the United Kingdom (hazard ratio = 0.990; 95% confidence interval [0.986, 0.995], p ＜ .001) and Taiwan (hazard ratio = 0.994, 95% confidence interval [0.990, 0.997], p ＜ .001). After adjusting for demographic, physical health, psychological health, and social engagement variables, life satisfaction remained significantly associated with mortality hazard in the United Kingdom, but not in Taiwan. Conclusions: This research confirms previous research showing higher life satisfaction as associated with improved survival among elderly people in the United Kingdom. Contrary to expectation, life satisfaction was not a predictor for mortality outcomes in the Taiwan sample when physical, psychological, and social predictors were included, although a baseline assessment showed that life satisfaction is important to predicting long-term survival among community-dwelling elderly people in both countries. The observed association between life satisfaction and mortality hazards may be attributed to common underlying causes such as self-rated health integration and/or health problems. Improving life satisfaction by promoting agents of health or other aspects of well-being and quality of life could have important long-term benefits for elderly people.起始頁-結束頁：26-38資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182828e9812篇名：Excessive Daytime Sleepiness in Taiwanese People with Heart Failure並列篇名：台灣心臟衰竭病患之白天過度嗜睡作者：陳幸眉(Hsing-Mei Chen);Angela P. Clark;蔡良敏(Liang-Miin Tsai);劉怡(Yi Liu);吳麗敏(Li-Min Wu);吳世忠(Shyh-Jong Wu)關鍵字：心臟衰竭;白天嗜睡;夜間睡眠品質;午睡;heart failure;daytime sleepiness;nocturnal sleep quality;daytime napping期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：過度的白天嗜睡會增加心臟衰竭病患的死亡率，導致服藥堅持度不佳及降低生活品質。辨識白天過度嗜睡對心臟衰竭處置成效可能有所助益。目的：找出台灣心臟衰竭病患的白天過度嗜睡的決定因子。方法：採橫斷性、相關性研究，以非隨機抽樣法，在一所醫學中心的心臟內科門診召募133位定期於門診追蹤的病患參與研究。研究工具包括：白天過度嗜睡量表、堪薩斯市心肌病變症狀次量表、及匹茲堡睡眠品質指標。結果：約有23.3%研究參與者有白天過度嗜睡問題，重要的白天嗜睡決定因子為白天功能缺失、身體質量指數、及心臟衰竭症狀頻率。使用血管收縮素轉化<U+9176>抑制劑雖與白天過度嗜睡有關，但並非其重要決定因子。結論／臨床應用：將近四分之一研究參與者，有主觀的白天過度嗜睡問題，此研究結果建議，應將該症狀的辨認納入心臟衰竭的處置中。介入性措施，如改善白天功能缺失、降低身體質量指數、及緩解心臟衰竭症狀等，有助於改善白天過度嗜睡。白天午睡習慣，可能可幫助台灣心臟衰竭病患在克服夜間的睡眠不佳及重新儲存能量。然而，在罹患心臟衰竭的病程中，過多的白天睡眠及午睡的時間與型態改變，都應早期發現以維持白天的功能。醫療雖有助於控制心臟衰竭症狀，但應將藥物調整至病患最合適的狀況，以降低藥物副作用，並能維持病患對治療的堅持度。英文摘要：Background: Excessive daytime sleepiness can increase heart failure (HF) mortality, cause poor medication adherence, and worsen quality of life in people with HF. Recognition of excessive daytime sleepiness can help improve HF management outcomes. Purpose: This study was designed to identify the determinants of daytime sleepiness in patients with HF in Taiwan. Methods: A cross-sectional and correlational study design was employed. We used nonprobability sampling to recruit 133 participants during their regular visits to a cardiovascular outpatient department of a medical center. Instruments used included the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Symptom Subscale of Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire, and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. Results: Excessive daytime sleepiness occurred in 23.3% of study participants. Significant determinants of excessive daytime sleepiness were daytime dysfunction, body mass index, and HF symptom frequency. Use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors was correlated with excessive daytime sleepiness but was not identified as a determinant. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Approximately one quarter of participants reported subjective excessive daytime sleepiness, suggesting that recognition of this symptom should be incorporated into HF management. Interventions for improving daytime dysfunction, decreasing body mass index, and ameliorating HF symptoms may help improve excessive daytime sleepiness. Habitual daytime napping may assist Taiwanese patients with chronic HF to overcome poor nocturnal sleep and restore energy. However, extra daytime sleep and changes in the duration and pattern of daytime napping during the HF trajectory should be recognized early to maintain daytime functioning. Medical treatments may help control HF symptoms. Optimizing medications to minimize adverse effects may help patients maintain better treatment adherence.起始頁-結束頁：39-48資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182828f2f13篇名：Moderating Effect of Psychosocial Factors for Dyspnea in Taiwanese and American Heart Failure Patients並列篇名：台灣與美國心衰竭病人的心理社會調節因子對呼吸困難之影響作者：黃翠媛(Tsuey-Yuan Huang);Debra K. Moser;謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh);高碧霞(Bih-Shya Gau);江福田(Fu-Tuein Chiang);黃秀梨(Shiow-Li Hwang)關鍵字：心衰竭;呼吸困難;調節因子;文化差異;heart failure;dyspnea;moderator;cultural difference期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Dyspnea is the most common and distressing symptom of heart failure (HF). Evidence from empirical studies has shown that multiple factors apart from pathophysiological changes may influence this symptom. Purpose: This study explored the moderating effect of psychosocial factors between clinical characteristics and dyspnea in patients with HF. To assess the potential effects of cultural background, this study also compared differences in psychosocial factor moderating effects between HF patients in Taiwan and the United States. Methods: We recruited patients with HF from outpatient clinics in Taiwan and the United States. Data were collected at clinics and research centers. Dyspnea was measured using the modified pulmonary function status and dyspnea questionnaire. Psychosocial factors considered were depression, anxiety, perceived control, and perceived social support. These factors were measured using the Brief Symptom Inventory, Revised Control Attitudes Scale, and Multidimensional Scale of Social Support Scale, respectively. Multiple regressions with interaction effect analysis tested the moderator effects across these two groups. Results: Ninety-seven Taiwanese (mean age = 66.2 ± 12.1 years; 76%male; 28% NYHA [New York Heart Association] III/IV) and 96 American (mean age = 61.6 ± 11.7 years; 74% male; 42% NYHA III/IV) patients participated. In Taiwanese patients, only perceived social support (B = .08, p = .034) moderated the relationship between clinical variables and dyspnea. In American patients, depression (B = .75, p = .028) and anxiety (B = .85, p = .041) were moderators of the relationship between clinical status and dyspnea severity. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Depression, anxiety, and perceived social support moderated the relationship of clinical characteristics with dyspnea in Taiwanese and American HF patients, respectively. Attention to these psychosocial factors may improve dyspnea status in HF patients. Symptom management should include a focus on patients' psychological distress and social perspectives.英文摘要：Background: Dyspnea is the most common and distressing symptom of heart failure (HF). Evidence from empirical studies has shown that multiple factors apart from pathophysiological changes may influence this symptom. Purpose: This study explored the moderating effect of psychosocial factors between clinical characteristics and dyspnea in patients with HF. To assess the potential effects of cultural background, this study also compared differences in psychosocial factor moderating effects between HF patients in Taiwan and the United States. Methods: We recruited patients with HF from outpatient clinics in Taiwan and the United States. Data were collected at clinics and research centers. Dyspnea was measured using the modified pulmonary function status and dyspnea questionnaire. Psychosocial factors considered were depression, anxiety, perceived control, and perceived social support. These factors were measured using the Brief Symptom Inventory, Revised Control Attitudes Scale, and Multidimensional Scale of Social Support Scale, respectively. Multiple regressions with interaction effect analysis tested the moderator effects across these two groups. Results: Ninety-seven Taiwanese (mean age = 66.2 ± 12.1 years; 76%male; 28% NYHA [New York Heart Association] III/IV) and 96 American (mean age = 61.6 ± 11.7 years; 74% male; 42% NYHA III/IV) patients participated. In Taiwanese patients, only perceived social support (B = .08, p = .034) moderated the relationship between clinical variables and dyspnea. In American patients, depression (B = .75, p = .028) and anxiety (B = .85, p = .041) were moderators of the relationship between clinical status and dyspnea severity. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Depression, anxiety, and perceived social support moderated the relationship of clinical characteristics with dyspnea in Taiwanese and American HF patients, respectively. Attention to these psychosocial factors may improve dyspnea status in HF patients. Symptom management should include a focus on patients' psychological distress and social perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：49-58資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182828d7714篇名：Effects of Hatha Yoga on Stress in Middle-Aged Women並列篇名：哈達瑜珈對中年婦女壓力之影響作者：黃復蓉(Fu-Jung Huang);簡定國(Ding-Kuo Chien);鍾聿琳(Ue-Lin Chung)關鍵字：哈達瑜珈;中年婦女;知覺壓力;心律變異性;Hatha yoga;middle-aged women;perceived stress;heart rate variability期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：Background: Stress is considered a crucial trigger for physical and mental illness. Stress reduction is a known long-term benefit of regular Hatha yoga practice. The efficacy of a single-session Hatha yoga class on stress reduction is not currently known. Purpose: This study investigated the comparative effectiveness of a single 90-minute Hatha yoga class and an 8-week, 90-minute-class-per-week course. Methods: We used a quasiexperimental design and recruited 63 female community residents in New Taipei City aged 40Y60 years. Participants were randomly divided into an experimental group (n = 30) and a control group (n = 33). The experimental group received the 8-week Hatha yoga course. The control group received no intervention. The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and heart rate variability (HRV) assessed stress reduction effectiveness. Chi-square, independent t test, paired t test, and generalized estimating equations were used for data analysis. Results: After a single 90-minute class of Hatha yoga, experimental group PSS scores were significantly less than those of the control group (p = .001). Although experimental group HRV (low-frequency norm and high-frequency norm) had improved, these changes were not statistically significant (p = .059). PSS scores for the single 90-minute class and 8-week course did not significantly differ (p = .157) and HRV of statistics is significant (p = .005). Generalized estimating equations analyzed changes in the effectiveness over time of stress reduction (HRV and PSS) after the Hatha yoga intervention. Results showed the postintervention HRV and PSS of the experimental group decreased significantly (p ＜ .001) more than the control group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Our findings support the position that regular, long-term practice of Hatha yoga provides clear and significant health benefits. Participation in a single 90-minute Hatha yoga class can significantly reduce perceived stress. Doing Hatha yoga regularly can reduce perceived stress even more significantly.英文摘要：Background: Stress is considered a crucial trigger for physical and mental illness. Stress reduction is a known long-term benefit of regular Hatha yoga practice. The efficacy of a single-session Hatha yoga class on stress reduction is not currently known. Purpose: This study investigated the comparative effectiveness of a single 90-minute Hatha yoga class and an 8-week, 90-minute-class-per-week course. Methods: We used a quasiexperimental design and recruited 63 female community residents in New Taipei City aged 40Y60 years. Participants were randomly divided into an experimental group (n = 30) and a control group (n = 33). The experimental group received the 8-week Hatha yoga course. The control group received no intervention. The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and heart rate variability (HRV) assessed stress reduction effectiveness. Chi-square, independent t test, paired t test, and generalized estimating equations were used for data analysis. Results: After a single 90-minute class of Hatha yoga, experimental group PSS scores were significantly less than those of the control group (p = .001). Although experimental group HRV (low-frequency norm and high-frequency norm) had improved, these changes were not statistically significant (p = .059). PSS scores for the single 90-minute class and 8-week course did not significantly differ (p = .157) and HRV of statistics is significant (p = .005). Generalized estimating equations analyzed changes in the effectiveness over time of stress reduction (HRV and PSS) after the Hatha yoga intervention. Results showed the postintervention HRV and PSS of the experimental group decreased significantly (p ＜ .001) more than the control group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Our findings support the position that regular, long-term practice of Hatha yoga provides clear and significant health benefits. Participation in a single 90-minute Hatha yoga class can significantly reduce perceived stress. Doing Hatha yoga regularly can reduce perceived stress even more significantly.起始頁-結束頁：59-66資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182829d6d15篇名：Cultural Sensitivity and Related Factors among Community Health Nurses並列篇名：社區衛生護理人員文化敏感度及其相關因素探討作者：張慧盈(Hui-Ying Chang);楊詠梅(Yung-Mei Yang);郭雅玲(Ya-Ling Kuo)關鍵字：新移民婦女;文化敏感度;文化照護;new immigrant women;cultural sensitivity;cultural care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：背景：社區衛生護理人員往往是在健康照護的最前線，護理人員對多元文化照護之認知與實踐，提供文化適切性的護理能力，可提昇新移民婦女及其家庭的健康照護品質。目的：本研究旨在探討護理人員文化敏感度之現況及影響社區衛生護理人員文化敏感度之相關因素。方法：本研究採橫斷式問卷調查法，以高屏社區衛生護理人員為收案對象，完成有效問卷230份。研究工具為結構式問卷，包括（1）文化敏感度量表、（2）多元文化資源量表、（3）多元文化訓練課程表、以及（4）基本資料表。資料以SPSS 14.0統計套裝軟體進行統計分析。結果：本研究結果顯示，社區衛生護理人員文化敏感度量表平均得分為49.41（SD = 7.48），指標分數為65.88分，顯示社區衛生護理人員文化敏感度低於指標分數，其中最低為互動信心。影響社區衛生護理人員文化敏感度的重要預測變項為「多元文化資源」、「自覺英文能力」、「多元文化訓練課程」、以及「有不同文化背景的朋友」，解釋變異量為34.9%。結論／實務應用：本研究結果可提供基層社區衛生護理人員在職課程與文化照護教育發展課程設計之參考，間接提高新對移民的健康照護品質。英文摘要：Background: Community health nurses are on the frontline of providing healthcare to multiethnic groups. Managing and providing effective, culture-specific healthcare can increase the health quality of Taiwan's recently immigrant women, a significant component of this country's population. Purpose: This study analyzes the cultural sensitivity of community health nurses and related factors. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was applied in this study. Participants were nurses who work at health centers in Kaohsiung City and Pingtung County. A total of 230 valid questionnaires were completed. Structure questionnaires used in this study included (a) scale of nurses' cultural sensitivity, (b) scale of multicultural sources, (c) scale of multicultural competence training programs, and (d) table of personal characteristics. Statistical software SPSS 14.0 was used for statistical analysis. Results: Survey results show an average score of community health nurse cultural sensitivity of 49.41 (SD = 7.48). The index score was 65.88. Thus, survey participants in this study earned a cultural sensitivity score below the index score. ”Interaction confidence” earned the lowest item score. ”Multicultural resources,” ”self-perceived English proficiency,” ”multicultural competence training programs,” and ”having friends with different cultural backgrounds” were significant predictor variables of cultural sensitivity and, together, explained 34.9% of total variance. Conclusions: Study results may be referenced in designing future in-service and cultural care education programs for community health nurses to improve healthcare quality for new immigrants.起始頁-結束頁：67-73資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.0b013e3182829cb901篇名：知情者的無奈：清乾隆朝縱姦賣妻諸案中的牽連致罪並列篇名：The Helplessness of Insiders: Guilt by Association in Cases of Illicit Sexual Intercourse and Wife-Selling during the Qianlong Period作者：張孟珠(Meng-Zhu Zhang)關鍵字：縱容通姦;賣妻;知情者;牽連致罪;社會控制;刑科題本;abetting or tolerating illicit sex;wife-selling;insiders;guilt by association;social control;Xingke tiben (board of punishments routine memorials)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：在傳統中國社會裡，行政執能的運作、地方秩序、治安的掌握仰賴保甲居中傳遞協調、稽查舉報。從實際刑科案例所見，肩負秩序維持使命者，不僅只社區裡的保長、甲首，尋常百姓亦在其中。清律一系列的稽查條例，促使所有窺悉他人異樣的小民男女，多少扮演著治安監守人的角色。一旦爆發人命糾紛，除了正犯主嫌之外，這些相對處在案件邊緣的鄰里、親友，甚至同行路人，往往以目擊者、關係人的身分，受到衙門傳喚、究詰。清律責賦所有人負起糾舉、報縣的治安稽查義務，立意雖在杜絕違法犯紀於未發之時，但在實踐上卻不免使原本立場清白的無辜者，捲進犯罪場景之中，難以全身而退。本文以乾隆朝刑科檔案裡的縱姦、賣妻故事為主要素材，探究一樁人命糾紛爆發時，那些無意間窺得內情的干連證佐、甚或僅僅是耳聞他人不法端倪的陌生路人，清律對他們的規範與期許、他們在案件環境中所扮演的角色、態度的轉變及其行動抉擇等等。英文摘要：In traditional Chinese society, the tithing system played an important part in administration and the preservation of social order. Cases in the Qing judicial archives provide information about the workings of the tithing system, as well as clues about how ordinary people had a degree of responsibility for the maintenance of public security. A series of statutes forced anyone aware of an illegal activity to investigate it and take appropriate action. Once a homicide case occurred, in addition to the principal suspect, additional persons such as neighbors, relatives, and even strangers could be summoned to provide depositions and be questioned before a court. The aim of the Qing statues was to prevent malfeasance by charging ordinary people with responsibility for reporting on the illicit activities of others. It even compelled innocent bystanders or witnesses to become involved. This study utilizes cases from Xingke tiben (Board of Punishments routine memorials) and other legal documents, all of which happen to deal with disputes about a husband's wife-selling and abetting or tolerating a wife's illicit intercourse, to investigate what the Qing judiciary expected bystanders to do, and how those involved responded.起始頁-結束頁：551-597資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：首次政黨輪替對檢察體系影響：以陳定南法務部長時期一、二審檢察長調動為例並列篇名：The Impact of Taiwan's First Regime Shift on the Prosecutorial System: Appointment and Transfer of Chief Prosecutors of Taiwan High and District Prosecutors Offices during the Ding-nan Chen Period作者：陳鴻章(Hung-Chang Chen);王金壽(Chin-Shou Wang)關鍵字：政黨輪替;檢察長;檢察人事;陳定南;regime shift;chief prosecutor;prosecutorial personnel;Ding-nan Chen期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：在2000年政黨輪替後，帶著掃除黑金、改革理念的陳定南擔任法務部長。檢察人事權是法務部長可以控制和影響檢察體系的重要手段之一。本論文要探討在陳定南擔任法務部長期間，檢察體系的人事變動是否和過去不同。本論文透過一、二審檢察長的量化資料以及質化的深度訪談資料，討論陳定南的人事調動是否和其他法務部長有所不同。本文將指出，陳定南是歷年來最有企圖心去改變檢察人事結構，也是有最大規模人事調動的法務部長。然後，受限於檢察體系的正式以及非正式的限制，陳定南無法全面性的改造檢察人事，而只能作局部性的突破。英文摘要：Ding-nan Chen, with strong ambition and a reform plan, became the Minister of Justice after the first regime shift in 2000. Prosecutor personnel are one of most important tools for the Minister of Justice to control and influence the prosecutorial system. We focused on the chief prosecutors of Taiwan's High Prosecutors Office and its branches, and the District Prosecutors Office. In this paper, using quantitative and qualitative data, we discussed whether Ding-nan Chen was different from other Ministers of Justice interms of prosecutorial personnel changes. We argue that Ding-nan Chen was the most eager one to change the prosecutorial personnel structure and had the largest number of appointments and transfers. However, Chen was limited by formal and informal personnel institutions. He could not radically change the prosecutorial personnel.起始頁-結束頁：599-645資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：臺灣WiMAX執照拍賣設計及其科技政策背景分析並列篇名：WiMAX License Auction in Taiwan-Technology Policy and Auction Design作者：樊沁萍(Chinn-Ping Fan)關鍵字：WiMAX頻譜執照拍賣;實驗經濟學;科技政策;產業政策;WiMAX license auction;experimental economics;technology policy;industrial policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：因應資通訊產業長期發展規劃之需要，行政院科技顧問組NICI小組於2005提出WiMAX發展藍圖。此科技政策過程展現政府單位跨部會合作的能力，包含國科會、行政院科技顧問組、NICI、經濟部、NCC等單位接續參與政策制訂及執行。當時技術尚未成熟，也還沒有確定的商業模式，故WiMAX釋照拍賣深具特殊性。為配合政府產業政策，NCC希望鼓勵新廠商加入並且標價不要過高，在此原則下NCC設計出十分特殊的拍賣設計。然而在業者競標4G門票的心態下，平均得標乘數比值高達7%，是2G執照特許費2%的3.5倍，似乎並未達成降低廠商負擔之目標。WiMAX拍賣包含許多前所未見的特殊設計，其中部分規定尚有改善空間，例如實質審查階段無法避免「選美比賽」的批評，優先執照的選取方法可能有策略操作空間，參與業者對單回合拍賣沒有一致的認知，以及最後一回合的開標方式對暫時得標者較有利等。拍賣設計應以學術理論為基礎並輔以實驗佐證，WiMAX之拍賣設計與文獻理論略有相關者是對拍賣回合數加以限制。本研究並以實驗方法檢驗外生限制回合數拍賣與國際通用SMR拍賣之差異，藉以說明拍賣設計應有的政策流程。英文摘要：The government in Taiwan promoted the WiMAX standard in 2005, and leaped boldly into an unknown future. This was a complex policy maneuver, since it required coordinating efforts from many government units. The various branches of the Executive Yuan were responsible for initiating the new technology. The main concern of the Ministry of Economic Affairs was manufacturing and exporting ICT products, and the NCC was responsible for spectrum management and awarding WiMAX licenses. At that time, there were no international standards and no business models for WiMAX technology, so the main policy goal of the license auction was to promote this new technology, and hence the auction design was quite particular.This paper analyzes the implications of the WiMAX auction design. In order to ease the burdens for new entrants, the bids were placed not in monetary amount but in percentages of sales. However, the average of winning bids was 7%, which was quite high compared with the 2% for 2G licenses. The limited-round design was also quite particular, and there was a crucial proposal review stage eliminating some bidders, so to the surprise of many, the actual auction was a single round.It is almost an international standard to test auction designs with experimental studies. In order to demonstrate the proper policy formulation procedures, we conducted experiments to compare the efficiency of a standard simultaneous multi-round auction with the limited round design of the WiMAX auction.起始頁-結束頁：647-687資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：失落的年代：臺灣民眾階級認同與意識形態的變遷並列篇名：The Lost Decade: Changing Class Identity and Ideology in Taiwan作者：林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin)關鍵字：階級;社會轉型;階級認同;意識形態;貧富差距;投票行為;social class;social change;class consciousness;ideology;income distribution;class voting期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文修正參考團體與現實互動（R&R）理論，認為經濟成長導致階級意識趨中，但經濟衰退或階級結構轉型會強化階級認同與意識形態分化。在分析2000－2010年的臺灣社會變遷調查後發現：首先，臺灣民眾每月所得持平但各階級間貧富差距惡化，自營作業者與非技術工人所得下降，導致其主觀階級地位下滑。其次，臺灣民眾相對剝奪感增強，多數認為貧富差距惡化、自己越來越追不上有錢人。第三，臺灣民眾功績主義信仰弱化，相信吃苦一定會成功的人數減少；總之，本世紀初臺灣民眾經歷了「失落的年代」。上述研究結果挑戰全球化理論中階級政治消解之觀點。英文摘要：The article reviews the theories of subjective class consciousness and ideology and revises the ”reference group and reality (R&R) interaction model”. During the last two decades, it is argued that the proletarian class consciousness, left-wing ideology, and class voting behavior may decline in the post-industrial societies during the globalization era. However, the revised R&R model implies that, in the global depression era, through the reference group and more complete information, the influence of objective class structure on subjective class consciousness can be stronger, and the ideology may turn back from the right to the left. The empirical evidence from Taiwan, a young democratic industrial country, shows that Taiwanese people's objective class location has more greatly influenced their subjective identity, their cognition of income inequality has become more serious, their meritocratic ideology has been declining, and class voting behavior has become more obvious in the last decade. The anomaly changes of class formation in a new-comer among advanced capitalist economies may challenge the understanding of class politics in the globalization era.起始頁-結束頁：689-734資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：The Role of Non-cognitive Traits in Higher Education Achievement among Economically Disadvantaged Taiwanese Youths並列篇名：人格特質對高等教育成就之影響：臺灣經濟弱勢青少年的發展作者：鄭雁馨(Alice Yen-Hsin Cheng)關鍵字：貧窮;經濟弱勢;青少年發展;非認知特質;人格特質;復原力;教育成就;poverty;economic disadvantage;youth development;non-cognitive traits;personality;resilience;educational achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：儘管貧窮與經濟弱勢對個人發展有長遠的影響，臺灣在相關議題上累積的實證研究仍相當有限。文獻普遍顯示經濟弱勢青少年的教育成就較中產階級家庭青少年為低。然而，近年有關人類發展與社會不平等的研究顯示，正面人格特質對教育成就具正向影響，甚至可帶來「扭轉命運」的保護效果。本文運用臺灣青少年成長歷程研究資料庫國一與國三兩組樣本約三千五百人，試圖檢驗一個實證問題：人格特質如何影響高等教育成就，以及其是否真真有復原力效應可扭轉經濟弱勢青少年的高等教育成就？分析結果顯示：正面人格特質確實可提高進入國立大學的機會，但其對經濟弱勢青少年的復原力效應則較有限。文末一併探討民國八十九年高中多元入學方案對加深教育不平等之可能影響。英文摘要：Despite the profound impact of poverty on individual development, empirical research on this issue has been scanty in Taiwan. Youths from economically disadvantaged families tend to have lower academic achievement than their peers from middle-class families. Yet recent studies have shown that positive non-cognitive traits often mediate and moderate the negative developmental outcomes among poor children. This study aims to use both the 7th and 9th grade samples (N=3,544) from the Taiwan Youth Project to examine how non-cognitive traits (using both subjective and objective measures) affect the higher education outcomes of youths who experienced economic hardship in adolescence. The results show that for both the younger and older cohorts, positive personality traits are positively associated with higher odds of entering a top university. However, limited evidence is found for the protective effects of personality. For the younger cohort, among youths who were exposed to late economic disadvantage, scoring high on the subjective positive self-image measure has a marginal effect on raising the likelihood of entering a good university. For the older cohort, being more conscientious has a marginal positive effect on increasing the likelihood of attending a top university for those who were exposed to chronic economic hardship, when compared to their peers who never experienced economic disadvantage. The implications of these findings and the impact of the 2000 educational reforms for the high school entrance requirements are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：735-764資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：社會正義、公民意識與貧富差距：黑格爾視角的觀察並列篇名：Social Justice, Civil Consciousness and Poverty: From the Perspective of Hegel作者：魏楚陽(Chu-Yang Wei)關鍵字：黑格爾;社會正義;公民意識;貧窮;權利;Hegel;social justice;civil consciousness;poverty;right期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的目的在於從德國政治思想家黑格爾的角度，探討社會正義概念的發展及其與公民意識之間的關係。社會正義概念的起源，可以追溯至古希臘時代哲學家對於政治生活共善追尋的理想。然而在進入現代之後，取而代之的正義概念，則是個人權利的保障。黑格爾指出，以自由經濟體系為基礎的現代國家，基於無法避免的貧窮問題，對於個人權利的保障有其難以克服的困境。欲在現代國家保障個人權利並實現社會正義，就必須建立一套以尊重個人自由為前提的社會正義價值共識，也就是黑格爾意義下的公民意識。此一公民意識並非某種無私的道德意識，而是私利與公益的對立能夠消解的信念與能力。在此公民意識下，國家方具有介入經濟體系運作的立足點，以化解在自由經濟體系下無法避免的貧富差距問題。英文摘要：In this research paper, I discuss the conceptual development of social justice and its relation to civil consciousness from the perspective of G. W. H Hegel. The conceptual origin of social justice can be found in ancient philosophy, in which the philosophers try to argue the common good of the political life in a polis. However in the modern state, the concept of social justice is the security of individual rights. According to Hegel, because of the inevitable problem of poverty in the modern economic system, the protection of individual rights is also limited. In order to secure individual rights and achieve social justice, the modern state must construct a civil consciousness, which includes not only the formal protection of rights, but also the concrete value of social justice. Only under this condition is the state in a position to intervene in the economic system, and the common good in ancient political thought can be changed into its modern form.起始頁-結束頁：393-419資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：高中職多元入學管道選擇與家庭背景及學習表現之關係－兼論多元入學的公平與效率並列篇名：A Study of the Relationship between Entrance Channels, Family Background and Test Scores-Implications for Equality and Efficiency of Entrance Channels作者：郭祐誠(Yu-Chen Kuo);陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao)關鍵字：高中職多元入學方案;公平;效率;教育改革;教育機會;multiple channel high school entrance program;equality;efficiency;educational reform;educational opportunity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：臺灣的高中聯考於2001學年正式廢除，並於同年正式實施多元入學，多元入學最常引發的質疑為公平性問題。本研究計畫之資料採用2001年開始進行的全國性樣本「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」（Taiwan Education Panel Survey，簡稱TEPS）進行分析，實證方法主要採用多元邏輯迴歸模型（multinomial logit model）。本文的實證結果並未發現家庭社經背景較佳的學生傾向以推薦甄試或申請入學管道入學而不選擇聯考，相反地，高社經背景的學生反而傾向以聯考管道入學。此外，在結合TEPS高中職第二波樣本後也發現，在控制學生的先備能力、社經背景、學校以及認真作答的潛在影響下，透過推薦甄試入學的學生測驗成績相較於聯考入學的學生表現更佳，此現象在高中尤其明顯。總結來說，在高中階段，多元入學並未製造更多的不公平，而且其中的推薦甄試提供了較聯考入學更有效率的學生與學校媒合。英文摘要：To improve the senior high school entrance system and encourage normal development of junior high school education, the old joint entrance exam was abolished, and the multiple channel entrance program was officially enacted in 2001 throughout the country. This new system, however, has been widely criticized for its bias in favor of students with better socio-economic backgrounds and may jeopardize the equality of educational opportunity. Using data from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS) and multinomial logit models, we attempt to examine the hypothesis that the socio-economically advantaged students are more likely to enter high schools by channels of school recommendation or individual application instead of the joint entrance exam. Our empirical results show no evidence to support this hypothesis. Instead, we find that students with high socioeconomic backgrounds tend to enter high school by way of the joint entrance exam. In addition, we also find that those students who enter high schools via school recommendation perform better than those entering via joint entrance exam in terms of test scores in their third year in high school. In sum, the multiple channel high school entrance program does not create inequality. In terms of match between students and schools, the channel of school recommendation is more efficient than the joint entrance exam.起始頁-結束頁：421-456資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：參與式治理和正義的永續性：比較兩岸原住民發展政策的制度創意並列篇名：Participatory Governance and Just Sustainability: Institutional Innovation and Developmental Policies in Taiwan and China作者：湯京平(Ching-Ping Tang);簡秀昭(Hsiu-Chao Chien);張華(Hua Zhang)關鍵字：異族觀光;生態旅遊;管理主義;共享資源;ethno-tourism;ecotourism;managerialism;common pool resources期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：偏遠地區的少數民族常常是經濟上的弱勢，需要高力度的經濟發展。但許多處於生態脆弱地區的少數民族，其發展經濟的努力，依賴大規模自然資源的開採，往往導致整體社會龐大的環境代價，因此陷入開發與保育的兩難。近年興起的「異族生態旅遊」（ethno-eco-tourism），似乎為這個兩難情境，找到兩全其美的辦法。兩岸許多少數民族都透過觀光來追求永續發展，但過程中如何處理利益分配的問題，讓發展的果實能夠族人共享，同時避免在發展的努力中，產生搭便車的集體行動困境，兩岸確有相當不同的作法。共產黨執政的大陸，在廣西龍勝採用了非常資本主義的方式，讓政府投資旅遊公司，協助當地村寨發展經濟。反之，臺灣則讓泰雅族在山裡實施志願的集體主義。兩邊都有相當可觀的成就，相映成趣。本研究檢視政府介入的不同模式，探討公民參與對於資源分配正義的效果與挑戰。英文摘要：Tribal minorities remote areas are usually in an inferior economic status and thus need a greater push for their development. Nevertheless, their location in ecologically sensitive regions prevents them from conducting developmental projects that usually result in heavy social costs. The dilemma can be solved by ethno-eco-tourism that has been popular in recent years. Tourism turns the natural resources to pubic goods that will not diminish with the increase of consumption. The public goods, however, might be destroyed by free-riders who maximize individual interests at the cost of collective ones. Managing collective actions in such a developmental process is therefore a critical task for these minorities. This study contrasts two alternative solutions adopted by China and Taiwan respectively. In China, the Communist regime rode on the tide of managerialism and adopted a capitalist solution by setting up a chartered company to run the tourist businesses, to provide infrastructure, and to manage the free-riding problem. Ironically, the anti-communist regime in Taiwan actually encouraged the tribal folks to develop a commune in which participants share incomes and labor in running tourism businesses. While their respective strengths and drawbacks are discussed, essential policy implications for just sustainability are the main focus of scrutiny.起始頁-結束頁：457-483資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：經濟成長與民主政治－臺灣的實證經驗並列篇名：Economic Growth and Democracy: Some Empirical Evidence in Taiwan作者：歐陽利姝(Li-Shu Ouyang);馬泰成(Tay-Cheng Ma)關鍵字：經濟成長;民主政治;全球化;人力資本;實體資本;economic growth;democracy;globalization;human capital;physical capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文利用VECM模型，探討臺灣1966－2009年經濟成長與民主化程度間之Granger因果關係，結果發現：所得、貿易、人力資本與實體資本等經濟面變數並不會Granger影響政治民主化。臺灣經驗證實了晚近Acemoglu et al.（2002；2003；2008）等新制度經濟學的看法，亦即影響政治體制的基本因素在於國家地理環境所塑造之民族性與傳統文化，而所得與全球化等經濟因素尚居於次要地位。此外，政治體制對所得變化之影響力亦不顯著。計量結果指出：真正影響經濟發展的因素還是人力資本的累積，不論是民主體制抑或是威權領導，只要政府採取正確的教育與經濟政策，即可有效推動經濟成長，此一結論與Lipset（1959）強調人力資本的主張一致。英文摘要：This article applies the VECM model to investigate the causal relationship between economic growth and democracy during 1966-2009 in Taiwan. The results obtained show that economic factors, such as income, trade, human capital and physical capital, do not Granger cause political democratization. On the other hand, democratization does not Granger cause growth, either. This evidence supports the propositions of the neo-institutional economics, such as those of Acemoglu et al. (2002, 2003, 2008), that is, it is the culture or ethnicity shaped by the geography rather than economic factors that can significantly influence the form of government. On the other hand, the form of government also cannot influence economic growth. Among the factors examined in this study, human capital accumulation is the key factor that can stimulate economic growth, implying that better education and growth-enhancing economic policy can effectively promote economic development despite the form of government. Our finding is consistent with Lipset's (1959) view that human capital plays a fundamental role in economic growth.起始頁-結束頁：485-524資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：Zipf's Law and City Size Distribution in China並列篇名：中國城市人口分布與Zipf法則作者：林俊宏(Chun-Hung A. Lin);鄭美君(Mei-Chun Cheng);楊志海(Chih-Hai Yang)關鍵字：都市分配;Zipf法則;Pareto指數;中國;city size distribution;Zipf's law;Pareto exponent;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國自1978年實施經濟改革後，經濟便開始快速成長，然而經濟改革不只為中國經濟帶來快速的發展，亦帶來了都市化現象。由於經濟改革造成快速的都市化，因此中國的都市規模分配之演進值得我們深入探討。本研究將透過中國1984年至2008年的都市人口探討其都市規模分配的變化。研究結果顯示中國都市的規模分配較Zipf法則下更為平均。本研究亦發現大都市的都市規模分配較小都市的都市規模分配更為平均，而造成此現象的主要因素為政府支出及產業結構的改變。本研究亦發現，隨著經濟的發展及較低的運輸成本，促使人口變得較為集中。英文摘要：China's experience with high economic growth has undergone dramatic change following the reforms initiated in 1978, which not only introduced economic incentives, but also encouraged urbanization. Due to the rapid urbanization that has taken place, it is particularly worth investigating the size distribution of Chinese cities. This study is thus an attempt to examine the size distribution of China's cities over the 1984-2008 period. The results indicate that the size distribution of Chinese cities is more equal than would be predicted by Zipf's law. We also find that the size distribution of cities is more even for larger cities than for smaller ones. According to our results, a possible explanation for the more even distribution of large cities relative to the smaller ones is related to China's government expenditures and industrial structure. Finally, we find that economic growth promotes population concentration, and that lower transportation costs will promote population concentration.起始頁-結束頁：525-550資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：活力老化與老年經濟安全體系：歐陸與臺灣的對話並列篇名：Active Ageing and Old-Age Security Systems: A Dialogue between Continental Europe and Taiwan作者：陳明芳(Ming-Fang Chen)關鍵字：活力老化;老年經濟安全體系;年金改革;歐陸;臺灣;active ageing;old-age income security;pension reform;continental Europe;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：人口結構發展導致之老年依賴比的增加，衝擊西方工業民主福利國家勞動市場、經濟發展，以及以保險制度為核心之社會安全體系財務健全與制度的永續性，誘發自1990年代以來密集出現於西方工業民主福利國家中之緊縮性社會政策的改革，其中以公共年金制度的改革受到最多的討論。如何維繫公民的社會權，但又不損及褔利體系財務的永續性，成為西方工業民主福利國家晚近面臨的重要難題。「活力老化」（active ageing）在此人口、社會－經濟結構下被提出，在國際組織的倡導下，成為二十一世紀回應人口結構老化的全球性公共策略。本文透過理念之梳理及歐陸與臺灣晚近制度發展的對話，呈現老年經濟安全體系與「活力老化」的關係（nexus），透過歐陸經驗的分析，提供臺灣未來褔利體系改革與發展的重要參考與借鏡。英文摘要：The increase in old age population due to population ageing has created important challenges for the labor market, economic development, and the financial and institutional sustainability of insurance-centered social security systems, and has hence caused policy reforms and retrenchments to intensify since the 1990s in the western welfare democracies. How to maintain social rights and consolidate the welfare system financially at the same time has become a dilemma for most of the welfare democracies. ”Active ageing” has been promoted in this socio-economic and demographic context, and has become established as the leading global policy strategy in response to population aging in the 21st century. Starting with a review of the framing of a specific concept and policy discourse around ”active aging” on the European stage, this paper carries on a dialogue between continental Europe and Taiwan about the nexus between the recent development of the old age security system and active aging. Lessens from continental Europe will be suggested for future policy development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：175-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：臺灣民眾的跨國經驗：2000－2010年分析並列篇名：Cross-border Experiences among Taiwanese: An Analysis of the 2000-2010 Period作者：蔡明璋(Ming-Chang Tsai)關鍵字：全球化;社會階層;普世價值;社會變遷;globalization;social stratification;cosmopolitan values;social change期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：全球化的重要性不僅在於跨國經驗與全球接觸的增加，亦包括這些接觸經驗對個人價值觀所產生的影響。本文倡議一個個人層次取向的全球化研究，描繪臺灣民眾的跨國流動與人際網絡的地理擴張和累積速度，同時檢驗這些全球經驗與普世價值觀的關係。我們使用「臺灣社會變遷基本調查」的十年資料（2000－2010），以迴歸分析方法估計個人的社會經濟地位的作用，發現在十年間，對跨國流動、人際網絡與全球接軌的廣度與深度，有正向的影響。由於資料的缺乏，在分析普世價值觀時，我們只用2008年的調查資料，發現除了跨國人際關係之外，英語能力與西方文化消費亦是應該加以考慮的因素；相對的，跨國流動對普世價值的深化並無明顯關係。本研究期望在研究設計與全球經驗的操作上，可以作為未來相關研究者的範例。英文摘要：The significance of globalization lies not merely in the global increase of individual border-crossing and transnational relationships, but also in their impact on value positions across countries. This study promotes a research approach that focuses on individual level global exposure, through which we attempt to describe the geographical expansion and speed of global exposure behaviors among Taiwanese. Our empirical analysis is based on national survey data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey during 2000-2010. The outcomes from regression estimation show that global exposure is largely determined by differential socio-economic resources. In analyzing the impacts on cosmopolitan values, it is found that besides transitional relationships, both English ability and western culture consumption also play a role. In contrast, border crossing does not generate notable influence. This study wishes to set an example for future research on individual global experiences.起始頁-結束頁：221-261資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：輸入性通貨膨脹與失業並列篇名：Imported Inflation and Unemployment作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);曹真睿(Jen-Ruey Tsaur);吳家瑋(Chia-Wei Wu)關鍵字：輸入性通貨膨脹;失業;效率工資;兩部門模型;數值模擬;imported inflation;unemployment;efficiency-wage;two-sector model;numerical simulations期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文將效率工資理論納入一個包含中間財（石油）與最終財的兩部門模型，探討進口石油國際價格上漲對小型開放經濟之實質匯率、物價水準、石油進口、勞動就業與失業以及消費者效用等相關總體變數的衝擊。在Marshall-Lerner條件成立，且進口石油的國際相對價格提高將導致經常帳惡化的假定下，本文發現：石油的國際相對價格提高將使（1）實質匯率貶值；（2）國內生產毛額下降，本國最終財的價格及一般物價皆上升（且後者漲幅較大）；（3）本國由國外輸入的石油數量減少；（4）最終財部門的勞動就業量減少而石油部門的勞動就業量增加，但因前者減少的幅度超過後者增加的幅度，故全國的失業量及失業率皆增加；（5）消費者商品效用降低。數值模擬的結果顯示：只要掌握石油替代性低及依賴度高的特性，理論模型就相當適合解釋實際現象。英文摘要：In this paper, we incorporate efficiency wages into a two-sector model (with an intermediate input such as the oil sector, and the final good sector). Under this framework, we examine the impact of an increase in the international price of an imported input (oil) on macroeconomic variables such as the real exchange rate, gross domestic product, price level, imports of oil, labor employment and unemployment, as well as consumer utility of commodities. When the Marshall-Lerner condition holds, and an increase in the international relative price of oil deteriorates the current account, then the increase of the oil price will (1) depreciate real exchange rates; (2) lower gross domestic product along with an increase in the price of the final good and a larger increase in the price level; (3) decrease the home country's import volumes of oil; (4) decrease labor employment in the final sector and increase employment in the oil sector (however, overall unemployment will be higher); and (5) decrease consumer utility of commodities. The numerical simulations characterizing low factor substitutability and heavy dependence on oil indicate that our theoretical model seems to be appropriate for explaining the empirical observations.起始頁-結束頁：263-305資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：人力資本與技術效率：臺灣製造業之實證研究並列篇名：The Impact of Human Capital on Technical Efficiency: Evidence from Taiwan's Manufacturing Industry作者：張景褔(Ching-Fu Chang);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu)關鍵字：技術效率;廠商與員工合併資料;人力資本;外籍勞工;technical efficiency;employer-employee matched data;human capital;foreign worker期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文係以1998至2003年的臺灣製造業廠商與勞工合併資料做為實證基礎，利用Battese and Coelli（1995）所提出的隨機邊界模型，估計製造業23個二欄位產業的生產函數與技術效率，並進一步探討人力資本對技術效率的影響。實證結果發現：1.各產業的平均技術效率約介於0.59∼0.83之間。當中，以皮革、毛皮及其製品製造業最高，化學製品製造業最低。2.大部分產業之廠商規模擴張，將有助於技術效率的提升。3.受僱員工之平均教育程度對廠商的技術效率有顯著的正向效果，尤以資訊及電子產業的效果更為強烈，但該效果將隨著員工平均教育程度的增加而遞減。此外，外籍勞工的僱用對所有產業廠商的技術效率有所助益。英文摘要：This paper investigates the relationship between human capital and technical efficiency using a unique employer-employee matched data set of Taiwan's manufacturing plants during 1998 to 2003. Specifically, we apply the stochastic frontier production function proposed by Battese and Coelli (1995) to estimate the level of technical efficiency and examine the determinants of technical efficiency simultaneously for 23 two-digit industries. Our results suggest that the estimates of average technical efficiency are distributed from 0.59 to 0.83, with the highest in the leather products industry and the lowest in the chemical product industry. Moreover, technical efficiency increases with the human capital index (measured by the education composition of the workforce) at a diminishing rate, especially for the electronics industry, which suggests there is a positive concave relationship between technical efficiency and human capital. Finally, for most industries in our sample, increases in plant size and employing foreign workers would both help to improve the technical efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：307-344資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：結構下的行動－高雄柴山果農面對人猴關係轉變之調適與抵抗並列篇名：Human Action in Oppressive Structure: The Adjustment and Resistance of Fruit Farmers to the Shift in Human-monkey Relationships at Chaishan in Kaohsiung作者：倪進誠(Chin-Cheng Ni);薛婷婷(Ting-Ting Hsueh)關鍵字：結構;行動;空間權力;人猴關係;柴山;structure;action;power of space;human-monkey relationships;Chaishan期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文欲探討高雄柴山野保法公布前後及近年成立壽山自然公園等事件下，果農與獼猴間關係的轉變，擬就「結構下的行動」之視角，強調具有主從的二元性思維，並以保育獼猴即是保障其空間權力之觀點，發展果農的調適與抵抗，採質性取向之文獻回顧、環境調查、參與觀察及深入訪談等方法進行。研究發現野保法公布前，人類是柴山的支配者，獼猴因可販賣遂成資源；野保法施行後，果農失去空間的支配權，獼猴反為災害，研發果園防猴策略，也產生了持續種作、棄耕、轉型等被動調適行為。果農行為乍看是由個體決定，事實上卻受土地權非自有、壽山自然公園束縛與綠色團體監督等結構力量所扞格，鑑於補救措施不如預期，持續溝通請求無效，更以抗議、訴訟等積極行動、雜以少數非法作為從事抵抗，為最終取得空間權力而奮鬥。未來將保育放在社會脈絡的規範下，應是努力的方向。英文摘要：This study discusses the shift in human-monkey relationships before and after the passage of the Wildlife Conservation Law, as well as the issue of foundation of Shoushan Natural Park in Chaishan. The researchers approach this topic from the perspective of the duality of human action in an oppressive structure, emphasizing their subordinate and principal positions in order, and adopt the point of view that conserving the monkeys is the same as protecting their spatial rights, interpreting the intention of a variety of human actions. The qualitative methods of literature review, environment investigation, participation observation and in-depth interviews were used. It was found that fruit farmers were dominant over Chaishan before the passage of the law. A program by the government to purchase Macaca cyclopis monkeys captured by the farmers did help the farmers. After passage of the law, people lost their dominance over this area. Macaca cyclopis became a hazard. The farmers' responses were to develop devices to scare the monkeys away, then to make advanced decisions including carrying on their cultivation, abandoning their planting or transforming to other land uses. In theory, the adjustment of the farmers was decided by themselves, but many restrictions for the farmers in fact remained, such as no land rights the limits of environmental laws, the intervention of green organizations, and so on. Due to these major differences between the farmers' expectation and the practical reality of compensation, the farmers presented petition, protested to the government, fought in the courts, and engaged in some illegal behaviors to resist the power from the oppressive structure. In the future, the new consideration that initiates a social context could be a possible way to mitigate such conflicts.起始頁-結束頁：345-383資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：產地國標示與臺灣消費者對國產牛肉之價格溢酬並列篇名：Country-of-origin Labeling and Price Premium of Domestic Beef in Taiwan作者：劉鋼(Ernest Kang Liu);徐瑞玲(Jui-Ling Hsu);陳文雄(Wen S. Chern)關鍵字：產地國標示;食物安全;牛肉;條件選擇法;價格溢酬;臺灣;mixed logit模型;country-of-origin labeling;food safety;beef;contingent choice method;price premium;Taiwan;mixed logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：牛肉是臺灣肉品消費的重要品項之一。由於市場上多為進口牛肉，本文利用條件選擇法來誘導、估算消費者對於有標示產地國牛肉之願付溢酬，並討論條件選擇法中問卷折數設計是否會影響願付溢酬之估計。利用2008年電話調查所蒐集的1,028筆有效資料，配合mixed logit模型的設定，本文針對臺灣、美國與澳洲等三個不同產地國牛肉進行實證分析。研究結果顯示相較於美、澳等進口牛肉，臺灣消費者會因為牛肉具有明確的產地國標示，願意對國產牛肉支付較高的溢酬；同時，偏好臺灣牛肉的消費者，其平均願付溢酬遠高於偏好進口牛肉者。對於目前合瘦肉精之美國牛肉進口爭議，本研究所估算的國產牛肉之價格溢酬，寓意深遠:臺灣牛肉的競爭力，必須依靠全面強制牛肉的產地國標示來提升；至於政府該如何執行，將是一大挑戰。英文摘要：Beef is one of the most consumed meat products in Taiwan. Since beef is mostly imported from other countries, this study employed the contingent choice method to collect data and to estimate the price premium for domestically produced beef. We also investigated the impact of varying price discounts on choice behavior in a contingent choice survey. Using a telephone survey, 1,028 observations were collected and used to estimate a mixed logit model. This study compared beef from Taiwan, the United States, and Australia. Our results show that consumers in Taiwan are willing to pay a higher premium for domestic beef than imported beef if the country-of-origin labeling (COOL) is clearly shown in the market place. Moreover, consumers who prefer domestic beef are willing to pay a higher premium than those who prefer imported beef. Our estimated high price premium for domestic beef has important implications for the current debate on the importation of American beef with ractopamine residue to Taiwan. The competitiveness for domestic beef depends critically on the enforcement of mandatory COOL for beef. Yet, how to implement the COOL policy remains a big challenge for the Taiwan government.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：民主、資本主義與年金體系的發展：臺灣經驗的分析並列篇名：Democracy, Capitalism and Pension Development in Taiwan作者：葉崇揚(Chung-Yang Yeh);陳盈方(Ying-Fang Chen)關鍵字：年金體系;民主化;生產體制;臺灣;pension system;democratisation;production regime;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目前有關民主化與福利國家的研究過於強調兩者間的線性或是直接關係，忽略了民主化過程中，社會政策的發展係受制於既有的制度和體制結構，特別是資本主義體系結構。過去東亞福利國家的發展脈絡中，深受發展主義意識型態所影響，社會政策被視作從屬於經濟政策底下，進而限縮了國家對社會保障體系的制度選擇能力。基此，本文嘗試從政治經濟學的觀點，透過臺灣的歷史經驗分析，重新詮釋民主化對臺灣國民年金政策的影響，並說明國民年金如何在生產體制、社會政策制度遺緒和政治制度間的互動中，最終以小整合的樣貌出現。本文發現在出口導向的發展策略下，不僅形塑了臺灣零散的勞動市場體制，並且透過不同方式分化工會，限制勞工集體行動的力量。另一方面，以中小企業為主的生產體制，需透過壓低生產成本作為國際競爭的優勢基礎，因而壓抑非薪資勞動成本即成為國家考量的核心議題之一，進而限縮國家對於社會保障體系的制度選擇能力。其次，社會政策制度遺緒和政治制度之間的互動，強化了威權體制遺緒下的階級差別待遇，使得反對勢力得以運用短期性的津貼體系深化差別待遇，並以此作為爭取選民支持的策略。而此種針對特定族群的選舉策略，主要是出自於選舉制度的設計。這些因素顯示了制度選擇的結構性限制，讓國民年金體系的制度選擇限縮在分立式的路徑下，最終以小整合的路徑出現。英文摘要：Existing studies on the correlation between democracy and the welfare state tend to emphasize their linear or direct relationship. However, these studies ignore the fact that policy development in the process of democratic transition is conditioned by the institutional context and structure. In particular, in East Asia, the process of development is deeply shaped by the developmental state. Therefore, social policy is considered subordinate to economic policy, as the latter limits the state's capacity for institutional choice of social protection. This paper aims to reinterpret how democracy has affected the institutional choice of National Pension Insurance in Taiwan through a political economic perspective. We found on the one hand, that the developmental strategies in the, era of the authoritarian regime, reinforced the decentralisation of working classes; and on the other hand, social policy in the SMEs-dominated production regime was accented to promote labour market flexibility and, in turn, the issue of non-wage labour cost was highlighted. After democratisation, the interaction of social policy legacies and political institutions reinforced class differentiation, and the design of electoral institutions prompted politicians to propose an allowance scheme to vie for electoral support. This furthered the fragmentation of the Taiwanese pension system, and eventually, resulted in the fragmented National Pension Insurance.起始頁-結束頁：45-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心18篇名：資訊不對稱下均衡概念之關聯—以網路交易分析為例並列篇名：Connecting Equilibrium Concepts in Asymmetric Information-The Market for Online Transactions作者：張碧暖(Pi-Nuan Chang)關鍵字：資訊不對稱;序列均衡;直觀準則;D1準則;信譽;網路交易;asymmetric information;sequential equilibrium;intuitive criterion;criterion D1;reputation;online transactions期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在探討當交易期數與賣方型態為賣方的私有資訊時，存有詐欺誘因的一般型兩期賣方，如何付出誠實交貨的代價以維持信譽，來吸引更多買方上網交易。我們利用Kreps and Wilson發展的「信譽效果」概念，以對偶方式呈現我們的兩期模型。然而，我們的模型有別於連鎖店賽局只用直觀準則，就可完全刪除買方用不合理猜測所支撐出的均衡。我們證明此模型，必須進一步採用D1準則，甚至到策略穩定性要求，才有唯一的均衡路徑。這一部分的分析，是以往相關文獻上不需討論的，其間可清楚看出，在資訊不對稱下各均衡概念的差異。我們並應用Gambit對Nash均衡解作數值模擬，來更具體呈現上述各個均衡概念的關聯。我們的研究結果顯示，「信用評價制度」的引進，的確在鼓勵賣方採取誠實行為上有其貢獻。英文摘要：This paper builds a two-period signaling game to study whether or not the 'ordinary' long-run seller has sufficient incentive to gain credibility for his second sale by delivering the good in the first period. We assume that short-run (one-shot) buyer is uncertain about the seller's type, and whether or not the seller will be in the market in the second period is also seller's private information. This model can be viewed as a dual model of Kreps and Wilson. Contrary to the uniqueness of the results in Kreps and Wilson, we have multiple equilibrium paths passing the intuitive criterion. Hence, in order to obtain a unique equilibrium path, we must apply the criterion D1 and need strategic stability. Therefore, we can tell the discrepancy under each type of equilibrium concepts under asymmetric information. We also apply Gambit software to get a numerical simulation of all pure strategy Nash equilibria of this model. In the unique strategically stable equilibrium, when the probability of an 'ordinary' short-run seller is sufficiently low, the outcome is that the 'ordinary' long-run seller has sufficient incentive to gain credibility for his second sale by delivering the good in the first period. Hence, concern for reputation can encourage sellers to adopt honest delivery behavior, thereby benefiting the market for online transactions.起始頁-結束頁：87-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心19篇名：Cyclical Government Spending and Stabilization under a Balanced Budget Rule並列篇名：平衡預算法則下的循環性政府支出與均衡動態穩定作者：曾憲政(Shian-Jang Tzeng)關鍵字：循環性政府支出;平衡預算法則;局域（非）唯一解;穩定性;cyclical government spending;balanced budget rule;local (in)determinacy;stabilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文引進循環性政府支出至一個單部門的實質景氣循環模型，且系統地檢視財政當局執行「內生調整政府支出（或是內生調整所得稅率）的平衡預算法則」的總體經濟穩定特質。我們發現：循環性政府支出的引進可以穩定體系自我信念驅動的景氣波動。英文摘要：This paper introduces cyclical government spending into a one-sector real business cycle model and systemically examines macroeconomic (in)stability under a balanced budget rule with endogenous government spending (or an endogenous income tax rate). I find that cyclical government spending can stabilize the economy against business cycle fluctuations.起始頁-結束頁：131-144資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心20篇名：藝文活動有價、政府補助有理並列篇名：Cultural Activity Has Its "Value" and Government Subsidy is Justified作者：郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo)關鍵字：政府補助;非營利組織;藝文團體;government subsidy;nonprofit organizations;art-performing organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討政府補助藝文活動的決定因素，分析政府透過補助藝文活動可以促進其豐富且多元化的發展，更可以爭取選民的支持，有助於施政績效提升民選首長之效用，並採用臺北市政府補助729個藝文團體在2002-2009年的不平衡追蹤資料分析。實證結果顯示政府補助金額與計畫規模、申請金額、申請比率低於計畫經費的10%、年度補助次數及國際性活動呈正向關係，但與申請比率呈負向關係；其次，政府補助比率與申請比率低於計畫經費的10%、年度補助次數、國際活動性質呈正向關係，但與計畫規模、申請金額、申請比率及新聞能見度呈負向關係。實證結果顯示藝文活動的規模與政府補助程度呈正向關係，但政府在經費分配效率與普及性的考量下，對藝文團體的補助程度隨計畫規模增加而下降。英文摘要：This paper explored determining factors of government financial support on cultural activities of non-profit organizations using data from the Taipei City Department of Cultural Affairs. Government grants are a major financial resource for nonprofit art-performing organizations. Support to cultural activities can enrich cultural diversification and is also an area where government performance is assessed. Also, to garner broad support in future elections, elected officials have strong motive to widen the varieties and scale of such support. In this study, unbalanced panel data consisting of 729 art or performance organizations between 2002 and 2009 were used to investigate the factors determining government subsidies. Empirical correlation analysis indicates that there is a positive correlation between the size of government grants and several factors including the scale of projects, the application amount of grant proposals, the ratio of application amount to project size being less than 10%, the granting frequency per year, and whether it is an international project; however, a negative correlation was observed with the ratio of application amount to project size. In addition, the proportion of granted amount to project size positively correlates with the following factors: ratio of application amount to project size being less than 10%, the granting frequency per year, and if it is an international project; and is in a negative correlation with the project scale, application amount, ratio of application granting amount to project size, and press visibility. Empirical results indicate that larger projects received a greater financial support from the Government. However, when the efficiency of resource allocation and popularity were taken into consideration, the amount of governmental subsidy decreased as the project size increased.起始頁-結束頁：145-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：移動的身體與國境內外－編輯室的話並列篇名：The Moving Bodies and Borders of the State作者：劉紀蕙期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00012篇名：一方記憶之所的流變與重構：以法國國立移民歷史城創設為核心的考察並列篇名：Transformations and Reconstruction of Lieu de Memoire: A Study on the creation of la Cite nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration in France作者：陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua Chen)關鍵字：移民博物館;民族學博物館;移民再現;記憶之所;時空換喻;immigration museum;ethnographic museum;representation of immigration;lieux de memoire;metonymy between time and space期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以法國國立移民歷史城（CNHI）的設立為基點，回溯其館舍金門宮（Palais de la Porte Doree）從1931年建造以來所經歷的定位轉變，並將此一過程與21世紀初法國民族學博物館群的重整聯繫起來考察，以探究位於世界體系中的前殖民國，如何在全球化的脈絡中治理移民課題並重新界定國族認同。博物館是社群關係經過層層轉化之後凝聚而成的表徵；時空換喻：「在界定我群與他者關係時，將地理空間與歷史時間之間進行代換以定義我群與他者關係的理解方式」，則是用來詮釋社群關係轉變的概念。法國國立移民歷史城的使命在肯認移民並轉換社會大眾看待移民的視角。轉換看待移民的視角，同時也是轉換觀看法國的視野，重新理解法蘭西國族的構成基礎。從而移民博物館所要述說的不只是做為社會史一環的移民史，並且是由移民史為敘事軸線的法國史。借鑒法國國立移民歷史城的案例，本文區分了「族群博物館」和「移民博物館」的不同。族群博物館是以特定族群的延續與發展為敘事軸，而移民博物館則是以土地為敘事軸，以國家為主要敘事架構，個別族群則在移民敘事下被相對化。然而「移民博物館」的思考基點並非做為民族國家整體表現的國土，而是在不同歷史時期進到這方土地的人。對移民博物館的討論，其核心正在於認識「移民社會」是什麼。移民博物館體現了全球化時代的自我／他者關係，自我前往遠外成為他者，原本遠外的人變成我群的社會成員。移民，既是自我變成他者，也是他者逐漸變成我群的過程。英文摘要：The article aims to study how France, a former colonial empire, tries to redefine the national identity and to govern the immigration issue in the age of globalization, through the rearrangement of existed ethnographic museums and the creation of the national immigration museum(la Cite nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration, CNHI). Immigration museum and ethnographic museum are analyzed as two kinds of representations of such relationships. The concept created to interpret the transformation of such relationships is ”the metonymy between time and space”, which means a way of defining the relationship between self and others through the substitution between time and space. The mission of CNHI is to recognize immigrants and to change people's perspective towards them. Changing the perspective towards immigrants results in changing the vision about France. What is intended to be told in the immigration museum is not the immigration history as a part of social history, but the history of France based on the immigration history. Inspired by the case of CNHI, I differentiate ”the ethnic museum” from ”the immigration museum”. The narration of the ethnic museum is based on the continuity and the development of a certain ethnic group. In contrast, the narration of the immigration museum bases on the land and the nation is used as the main frame for such narration, so as to relativize each ethnic group in the narration of immigrant nation. Nevertheless, the core concern of the immigration museum is not about the territory of the nation state, but peoples who have come to live in this land in different periods of time. The key implication of discussing the immigration museum resides in understanding ”what is the immigrant society”. The migration museum incarnates the self/other relationships in the age of globalization. The ”self” goes abroad and becomes the other, while people from far land become members of our society. Migration is the process in which ”self” becomes the other, and the other gradually becomes part of us.起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00023篇名：「我感受到…父親的亡魂」：艾騰．伊格言電影中的創傷與翻譯並列篇名：”I felt... the ghost of my father”: Trauma and Translation in Atom Egoyan's A Portrait of Arshile and Ararat作者：蕭瑞莆(Juey-Fu Hsiao)關鍵字：艾騰．伊格言;《Arshile的畫像》;《A級控訴》;物／事件;黑暗房間;後遺性;（反向）傳會;翻譯;後－記憶;Atom Eyoyan;A Portrait of Arshile;Ararat;pragma;dark room;Narchtraglichkeit (after effect);(counter-)transference;translation;post-memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：人類在上一個世紀完成許多壯舉也同樣地留下一些對生靈包括人類自己都無法磨滅的傷害，例如種族大屠殺。亞美尼亞裔加拿大導演艾騰．伊格言的《A級控訴》（2002）作為首部有關發生於1915年至1923年的亞美尼亞種族大屠殺電影，至今仍引發爭議。爭議焦點多在電影作為再現歷史的媒介是否為達美學效果而犧牲了歷史真實。這個疑問其實是個古老問題，口述、文字及影像如何可能代表、詮釋、或翻譯所指物或事件。同時，在大屠殺受難者一代接著一代逐漸凋零的現在，更重要的是《A級控訴》如何處理否認種族大屠殺的後續效應，並自種族大屠殺後世代的位置（加拿大多元文化主義語境的亞美尼亞離散族裔，以及其他族群）反省歷史文化遺產的意義。伊格言與伊恩．貝福在《字幕：論電影中的外異性》指出，「每一部電影都是外國電影，外異於某處某一位觀眾，且並非僅就語言而言」。我們不禁好奇，之於伊格言什麼是翻譯？為何需要翻譯？以及參與翻譯活動如何使主體與客體對象發生轉變？本論文整理主張保持外國語陌生／外異性的翻譯觀，如班雅明、里克爾、與安竹．班哲民的語言哲學，以及他整理拉普郎虛對佛洛依德無意識的討論，亦即「無意識作為（被）翻譯」的場域，嘗試描繪伊格言的翻譯觀。進而援引賀栩的「後－記憶」以及「家人觀看／觀看家人」的觀視位置，閱讀短片《Arshile的畫像》（1995）以及《A級控訴》的重要片段。我要指出，伊格言透過拉非與希莉亞的對話場景側面提出他的翻譯觀，並回應美學相對於歷史真實的爭議。發生於黑暗房間的事件是觀影活動的寓言，歷史事件如何向我們顯現，端看是否能夠打開所謂自保的身分認同的疆界。英文摘要：Human beings in the last century have accomplished great things but we have also caused irreversible damage and harm to all forms of life. Genocide is one such example of atrocities on a scale unprecedented in previous human history. Armenian-Canadian director Atom Egoyan's Ararat (2002), since its release, has aroused debates and accusations in terms of sacrificing historical truth for the sake of aesthetic effect. As the first internationally produced and distributed full-length film about Armenian genocide (1915-1923), the critical opinions and debates are to be expected, since the anxiety and the following question is always there: Can speeches, words, and images sufficiently represent, interpret, and translate the referred object or event? On the other hand, as the survivors and people who experienced the genocide first hand gradually faded away, Ararat seems to be more concerned with the after effect caused by the denial of Armenian genocide. Thus, this film, involving Armenian Diaspora and other ethnic groups in the context of multiculturalism in Canada, launches the quest for and examines the multiple meanings of the so-called ”cultural heritage.” Egoyan and Ian Balfour in their collaborated work, Subtitles: on the Foreignness of Films, point out succinctly, ”[e]very film is a foreign film, foreign to some audience somewhere-and not simply in terms of language.” This makes us wonder what it means to Egoyan by translation, why we need translation, and how the subject and object are both changed and transformed in the process of translating. To try and figure out the answers to these questions, we need to adopt an interdisciplinary strategy to connect (1) the conception of translation that strives to preserve the foreignness of/in language (e.g. Water Benjamin and Paul Ricoeur's theory on translation), (2) Andrew Benjamin's philosophical reflections on words and meaning in relation to translation, and (3) Jean Laplanche's insistence on the unconscious as the ”a traduire” (to translate/to be translated). Finally, by invoking Marianne Hirsh's concepts of ”post-memory” and ”familial looking” as supportive argument, I will read and discuss A Portrait of Arschile and some key scenes in Ararat to highlight that the possible answers to the previous questions may lie/hide in the dialogue between Raffi and Celia when Raffi visited her at the detention center. The event in and surrounding the dark room mentioned in their dialogue may be an allegory for film-viewing and remembrance.起始頁-結束頁：45-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00034篇名：「陰性崇高」：黎．米勒的戰爭攝影並列篇名：The Feminine Sublime: Lee Miller's War Photography作者：劉瑞琪(Jui-Ch'i Liu)關鍵字：黎．米勒;戰爭攝影;廢墟;大屠殺;陰性崇高;「母體式的」觀視;Lee Miller;war photography;ruins;Holocaust;the feminine sublime;the matrixial gaze期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：黎．米勒（Lee Miller, 1907-1977）是拍攝第二次世界大戰的著名攝影家，本文主要聚焦於她在1940年捕捉英倫大轟炸的廢墟照片，以及她在1944至1945年間以《時尚》（Vogue）雜誌歐洲戰地通訊記者的身分，拍攝傷兵與大屠殺屍體的照片。在過去十五年，學者們對米勒戰地攝影的詮釋呈現兩極化的矛盾觀點，一些學者認為它們以疏離效果來強調觀者與拍攝對象之間的差異，另外一些學者宣稱它們召喚了觀者對拍攝對象的認同感，筆者則試圖化解這些學者的矛盾解讀。筆者嘗試從視覺分析出發，將佛利曼（Barbara Claire Freeman）等人探討「陰性崇高」（the feminine sublime）的女性主義文學理論與研究，以及艾婷爵（Bracha Lichtenberg Ettinger）所提議「母體式的」（matrixial）觀視理論，轉化成詮釋米勒戰爭攝影的理論架構，以創新的角度探討米勒所開拓知覺戰爭創傷的獨特方式，也就是展現「陰性崇高」的美學與倫理學。筆者將分析，米勒創傷攝影中的「陰性崇高」情境，與英國思想家柏克（Edmund Burke）在《關於崇高與優美觀念的起源之哲學探討》（A Philosophical Inquiry Into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful, 1757）中所建立的「崇高」的美感經驗不同，觀者並無法如柏克所論，超脫並主宰作為威脅來源的戰爭創傷，而是在自我與他者介於融入與超脫的動態關係中，體驗與尊重他者創傷無法化約的「他異性」。米勒所建立這種知覺創傷影像的模式，不僅是一種女性主義的觀看實踐，而且還可以召喚所有的反戰觀者，以「陰性崇高」的觀視來體悟父權與戰爭所造成的毀滅性創傷。英文摘要：Lee Miller (1907-1977) is famous for the pictures she took during World War Two. This paper concentrates on her photographs of the London Blitz in 1940 and her photographs of the damaged bodies of the soldiers and of the dead bodies of the holocaust from 1944 to 1945. In the past fifteen years, scholars have been dealing with Miller's war photography with polemic perspectives. Some scholars think that Miller attempts to highlight the difference between the spectator and the image through alienation effects. Others assert that Miller tends to evoke empathic concern of the spectator to the scene. This paper is going to reconcile these apparently contradictory points of view. My discourse, based on visual analyses, will appropriate theories of the feminine sublime established by Barbara Claire Freeman and other feminist scholars, as well as the theory of the matrixial gaze proposed by Bracha Lichtenberg Ettinger, in order to explore Miller's special way of perceiving the war traumas. My argument is that the aesthetics and ethics of the feminine sublime in Miller's photographs are different from Edmund Burke's conceptualization of the sublime in A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757). Burke cliams that the spectator, while approaching the sublime, remains a protecting distance from the awful source in order to control it. However, when the spectator experiences Miller's works, s/he is not able to celebrate the self's capacity to master the threatening war traumas through a state of detachment. The spectator, within the experience of the sublime, neither possesses nor merges with the other, but attests to a relation in-between the detachment to and the identification with the other. S/he opens herself to and show respect for the alterity of the other without an intention to domesticate it. Miller's cultivation of the aesthetics and ethics of the feminine sublime is not only a feminist practice of looking, but could also evoke all anti-war spectators to perceive the destructive traumas caused by the collusion of the patriarchy with war through beholding the feminine sublime.起始頁-結束頁：87-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00045篇名：「收拾行囊」，通關啟程：談「旅者－行李」組裝體之移動政治並列篇名：”Packing the Luggage”, Check-in for the Journey: On the Politics of Mobility of ”Traveller-Luggage”作者：賴嘉玲(Chia-Ling Lai)關鍵字：行李;流動性;物質性;日常生活;移動政治;Luggage;mobility;materiality;everydayness;politics of mobility期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：旅者－行李中必然的牽掛與負擔，看似平凡無奇，卻像旅行時暫時流動補給的家與隨行的義肢一般地複雜。因此「旅者行李」組裝體不只由旅者實踐的行程時空想像、交通路徑之選擇、攝影呈現上展演的戲碼所組構，更暗藏了旅者通過機場安檢與過秤時，與新監視社會交鋒時精密的策略心機。而「收拾行囊」，旅行流動中對物質性的處理，是旅者在驚喜愉悅旅程中，必須面對之瑣碎與重複的惱人實踐，正因其例行與瑣碎的日常性，令其成為當今豐富旅遊研究拼圖中消失的一角。本文援引厄里整合行動者網絡理論的移動研究，以及近期重視慣習、日常生活的物質性轉向之旅遊研究，討論「旅者－行李」組裝體在流動越界時之品味呈現與面對安檢的戰略實踐，並以在英跨國社群的經驗研究，探討旅者在跨國多重行程考慮下，對物質的戀與捨，如何決定短暫行程中移動的日常生活必需，以及面對機場通關時的移動政治。並分析旅者對其行囊的安排與打包，如同管理一迷你隨行的家與義肢一般，行李的安排展現了旅者的行程時空想像、與安檢監視社會對峙時的戰略操弄，流質物質性的空間拓樸學安置、主體與客體的相互組構，以及關乎速度美學的品味呈現。期望以新「旅者－行李」組裝體之研究對象，在獨特旅動的期待與平凡無奇之瑣碎日常物質性的處理交會處，在微觀的行李打包戰術實踐與巨觀跨國通關安檢的交界點，管窺當今社會的旅遊文化與移動政治。英文摘要：Luggage, the necessary attachment and burden of travellers in their journey, seems to be mundane and simply, is actually no less complicated than a temporary home and prosthetic limbs on the move. In fact, the 'traveller-luggage' assembly not only reveals the time-space imagination of traveller's itinerary, choices of transportation, plots of their performance kept in the tourist photos, but also special tactical practices to confront the border security-checking which embodied the emerging surveillance society. 'Packing the luggage', relating to how to deal with materiality in the liquid age, is an annoyingly trivial and repetitive practice every traveller must tackle with. Owing to its banal everydayness, renders it a missing jigsaw piece of tourism studies which emphasis mainly on the extra-ordinariness. Drawing upon John Urry's theories of multiple mobilities that integrated with ANT, based on the empirical research on a transnational community in England, this paper explores how travellers organize their luggage as important belongings based on the multiple consideration of their journey and the politics emerged when encountering airport security. It also analyzes how travellers organise their luggage, as to curate a little moving museum: luggage reveals travellers' imagination of their journey, tactic manipulation to confront the expected surveillance, arranging liquid materiality topographically, mutual constitution of subjects and objects, as well as the performance of the taste of travellers in terms of the aesthetics of speed. This paper thus aims to reveal the politics of mobility, through studying the practices of packing as the intersection between banal everyday practices and extraordinary experience making as well as the micro tactics when encountering the macro border-crossing security checking.起始頁-結束頁：123-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00056篇名：打造科技、打造人：後進實驗室的追趕實作文化與人材培育並列篇名：Making Technoscience and its Practitioner: The ”Fast Following” Culture of Practice and the Trainees of a Late-Comer Laboratory作者：林文源(Wen-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：實驗室;後進;研發;追趕;實作文化;laboratory studies;late-comer;Science and Technology Studies(STS);fastfollowing;culture of practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討台灣當前「人才危機論」中，被忽略的研發教育。本研究以科技與社會研究的實驗室民族誌方法，將社會學界對台灣科技產業研究，教育學界對高等教育的討論，延伸到大學中的實驗室訓練。本文指出所謂人才危機，不只與科技產業有關，更是與後進研發教育的追趕訓練過程密切相關。本文提問，大學的實驗室打造科技的過程，使學生成為哪種科技人？理論上，本研究以科技後進處境出發，帶入科技與社會研究的實作取徑，提出適合思考本地實驗室的架構。本文的「追趕型」實驗室案例顯示，其實作文化使學生成為高度服從團隊、自我規訓，致力於複製技術、解決被給定問題，卻不善創新的「能作」科技人。據此，要解決台灣的人才危機，除了深入檢討台灣產業發展，還必須同步檢視研發訓練過程，以促成研發體制的轉型。最後，本文也藉此討論社會文化研究對相關議題、實務參與，及「後進」的問題性與限制。英文摘要：This paper explores the neglected late-comer's R&D education and tries to response to the 'crisis of talent shortage' in Taiwan. This study uses the ethnography approach from science and technology studies to examine the fastfollowing training in an university laboratory team. In contrast to industrial sociology's focus on industrial and policy regimes and the education studies' normative perspective, this paper argues that such an on-site approach of laboratory studies can offer alternative implication. This paper explores what kinds of talent are made in the training process. Based on the concern of the late-comer situation in Taiwan this study constructs a framework for locating these late-comer laboratory practices. In contrast to the others, the 'fast-following' culture of training and practice makes students team-obeying and self-disciplinary practitioners, who are good at industrious replication rather than innovative exploration. Accordingly, in order to tackle the crisis we also have to transform the research and educational regime. This paper concludes with the reflection on the research agenda, practical implication and the politics of 'latecomer' framing for social and cultural studies.起始頁-結束頁：159-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00067篇名：「難民與移民：後／冷戰台灣的東南亞視野」論壇導言並列篇名：Refugees and Immigrants: The Post/Cold War Perspective on Southeast Asia in Taiwan作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：216-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00078篇名：例外之地．陌生人並列篇名：Strangers in a Place of Exception作者：劉吉雄(Asio Chi-Hsiung Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：217-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).00089篇名：冷戰下的移民與難民－以台灣為例並列篇名：Immigrants and Refugees in the Cold War Era: The Taiwanese Case作者：龔尤倩(Yu-Chien Kung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：225-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).000910篇名：越南船民：一個作家與記者的觀察並列篇名：Vietnamese Boat People: Observations of a Writer and Journalist作者：Andrew Lam期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：232-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).001011篇名：「立名探聲」：追索難民故事的倫理想像並列篇名：”Establishing their Names and Searching for their Voices”: Towards the Ethical Imagination of the Refugee Story作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：17期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：236-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201309_(17).001112篇名：歷史的肉身化與心靈的歷史化－編輯室的話並列篇名：The Corporeal Body of History and the Historicity of the Mind作者：劉紀蕙(Joyce C. H. Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000113篇名：川中島的歷史：論舞鶴《餘生》中的時間與內蘊倫理並列篇名：The History of Chuangchungdao: Time and Immanent Ethics in Wu He's Remains of Life作者：李育霖(Yu-Lin Lee)關鍵字：舞鶴;《餘生》;霧社事件;同時性;地誌書寫;事件;真實歷史;內蘊倫理;We He;”Remains of Life”;the Wushe Incident;simultaneity;topography;event;real history;immanent ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文聚焦舞鶴的著名作品《餘生》，討論書中體現的時間與生命倫理。舞鶴以其特殊的文學風格著名，而小說《餘生》一書則以相當特殊的方式書寫發生於1930年的霧社事件。作者重返川中島，探訪當時事件發生的地景以及當時事件關係人的「餘生」，作者稱之為「當代」的歷史考察。然而，作者的書寫與考察並非僅僅意圖藉由重述一段過去罕為人知的故事以辯證復振遭抹滅的歷史記憶，亦非探求歷史的「實相」以恢復族群的尊嚴與莫那魯道的榮譽，作者的書寫毋寧將此探求帶入關於事件的思考，在作者所稱的「餘生的同時性」中複雜地運作。因此，本文將深入剖析作者對於「事件」的理解，以及歷史疊層化的地誌如何展演一種餘生的「同時性」時間。同時本文也將闡明作者的書寫帶來新的歷史視野，並體現特殊的小說藝術美學與生命內蘊倫理。英文摘要：This paper focuses on the issues of time and ethics in Wu He's acclaimed novel ”Remains of life”. Wu He is known for his idiosyncratic writing. This novel, with its unique style, portrays the Wushe Incident that occurred in 1930. The narrator as one of the protagonist returns to Chuangchungdao, the resettled place of the related aborigines after the Incident, to trace its history by revisiting the landscape and investigating individuals who are associated with the Incident. The author regards this investigation as ”historical research of the present.” However, such historical research neither intends to recover the repressed historical memoires nor seeks historical ”truth”; rather, it casts rethinking of the Incident, an ethical event that operates in a complex temporal structure of ”simultaneity,” as the author understands it. Thus this paper attempts to analyze how the author understands the Wushe Incident and how power-relations have been stratified in the both the landscape and historical discourse concerning the Incident. Also, this paper explicates how the author's unique presentation of the Incident has actually reshaped the conception of history and introduced an ethics through his peculiar use of language.起始頁-結束頁：7-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000214篇名：妓女、性啟蒙與男性氣質的建構：戰後台灣文學中性政治的一個側面並列篇名：Prostitution, Sexual Initiation and Masculinity: A Peculiar Aspect of Sexual Politics in Postwar Taiwanese Literature作者：謝世宗(Elliott S. T. Shie)關鍵字：妓女;性啟蒙;王禎和;楊青矗;侯孝賢;寫實主義;prostitution;sexual initiation;Wang Zhenhe;Yang Qingchu;Hou Hsiao-hsian;realism期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：對小說家張大春而言，小說的「冒犯的力量」來自於書寫本身那多了一點點的自由，因此中規中矩的寫實主義在本質上少了冒犯禁忌的潛能。然而，寫實小說記錄了「過去」被接受的倫理價值，在歷經時空變遷，可能成了「現在」讀者的另類知識。在侯孝賢《童年往事》（1985）、王禎和〈素蘭要出嫁—終身大事〉（1985）和楊青矗〈在室男〉（1969）等寫實主義作品中，妓院是合法的社會機制，妓女扮演男性性啟蒙者或性治療師的角色，嫖客反倒是在性關係中必須承受壓力、不安與焦慮的患者。這些寫實主義的作品，一方面再現了妓女複雜、矛盾、多元的工作與生活經驗，反倒「冒犯公設禁忌」，挑戰與顛覆了主流社會對妓女所持的刻板印象；另一方面，妓女在男性性啟蒙所扮演的獨特角色與形成的社會關係，提供了另類倫理學，質疑當下社會生活中廣泛接受的倫理規範的正當性與必然性。英文摘要：According to the writer Zhang Dachun, the novel enjoys the freedom to invent alternative knowledge and challenge the social norms that have been taken for granted. From this perspective, Postwar Taiwanese literature with its realistic impulse is deemed to be conservative. Nonetheless, the social norms of the past that realistic literature has recorded could turn out to be rather alternative and challenging to the readers at the present. In Hou Hsiao-hsia's film A Time to Die A Time to Live (1985), Wang Zhenhe's ”Sulan is Getting Married” (1985), and Yang Qingchu's ”A Male Virgin” (1969) prostitution is a legitimate social institution wherein prostitutes perform the ritual of sexual initiation for male virgins while the males often suffer sexual anxiety and problems in need of experienced women's help. This conception of prostitution thus challenges the stereotype of prostitutes as either powerless victims under the rule of patriarchy or unredeemable sexual deviants with the false consciousness of consumerism. Because of their commitment to realism, these three texts ironically provide alternative knowledge to our commonsense and challenge the mainstream discourse about prostitutes.起始頁-結束頁：47-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000315篇名：章太炎的「神經病」作為生存位置與革命知識情感動能並列篇名：Zhang Tai-Yan's ”Insanity”: Affect, Survival and Revolutionary Knowledge作者：劉人鵬(Jen-Peng Liu)關鍵字：章太炎;神經病;革命;癲狂;腦病;癲癇;Zhang Tai-Yan;shenjing bing;revolutionary;insanity;brain disease;epileptic期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：1906年，章太炎（1869-1936）在日本〈東京留學生歡迎會演說辭〉中，提出「神經病」作為召喚革命感情與學問事業的重要動能。本文試圖提供一種理解章太炎生命與學術的方式，是重新思考章太炎的「神經病」作為一種經驗立場，以及經常被忽略掉的作為革命知識與感情的重要動能。本文大略追究了19世紀晚期到20世紀初期「神經病」一詞的源流與多重語義，並且從兩個脈絡閱讀章太炎的「神經病」，一是「革命者」，一是有「腦病」的人。透過這二個線索的閱讀，本文一方面試圖將「神經病」的具體血肉經驗清晰化，另一方面也將章太炎的「神經病」闡釋為一種論述位置，亦即一個說話的位置，在這個位置上，凝聚了章太炎經驗、政治、社會以及知識立場。英文摘要：This paper attempts to provide a new way to understand the life and work of radical intellectual Zhang Tai Yan (1869-1936) by rethinking ”insanity” as both an experiential standpoint and an overlooked impetus for the development of revolutionary knowledge and affect. When giving a speech in Japan in 1906, Zhang Tai-yan used the unlikely term ”shenjing bing” (literally nerve disease, but meaning insanity or, more colloquially, a person who is ”psycho”) to evoke the spirit of revolutionary knowledge and affect. This paper provides a preliminary study of the meanings of ”shenjing bing” from the late 19th to early 20th century. The paper then reads Zhang as a ”shenjing bing” in two ways, as a revolutionary and as a person with a ”brain disease” (he was epileptic). Through this double reading, the paper attempts, first, to articulate (rather than avoid) the concrete, embodied experience of ”shenjing bing.” Second, ”shenjing bing” is explored as a discursive position, a speaking site where Zhang's experiential, political and social groundings converge in an epistemological standpoint.起始頁-結束頁：81-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000416篇名：皮皮洛第．瑞斯特與女性歇斯底里藝術：病態身體、自動科技、破壞美學並列篇名：Pipilotti Rist and the Art of Female Hysteria: Morbid Body, Technical Automatism and Aesthetics of Destruction作者：余瓊宜(Chyong-Yi Yu)關鍵字：皮皮洛第．瑞斯特;歇斯底里;身體;錄像藝術;性別研究;Pipilotti Rist;hysteria;body;video art;gender study期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：皮皮洛第．瑞斯特（1962-，瑞士人）被稱為「最著名的瑞士女性藝術家」，在錄像藝術領域有非常傑出的表現，她的多媒體錄像作品從1980年代末期開始受到國際注目。瑞斯特以嘲諷幽默的藝術語言，將視覺藝術與流行文化的界限模糊化，性、性別、人體、尤其是女性的身體是她的作品常處理的主題，而她自己也常出現在其創作中。瑞斯特曾經多次談到，她的作品試圖以正面的形式表現「歇斯底里」的主題。歇斯底里在19世紀末被認為是女性特有的疾病，傑－馬丁．查寇特與西格蒙．佛洛伊德對此病症的研究不僅在醫界引發轟動，其後也在超現實主義藝術與女性主義的範疇引起廣大迴響及反彈。什麼是歇斯底里？它又如何與為何在瑞斯特的藝術中成為一種美學的形式？本文以瑞斯特自我呈現的錄像作品為研究對象，聚焦於歇斯底里的主題與瑞斯特藝術的關連性，並深入闡析瑞斯特就此一主題在表現手法和概念上與超現實主義藝術傳統的同異性，再進一步以女性主義回應精神分析理論所延伸發展出的再現觀點，審視瑞斯特為什麼以自己的身體為展演主角，並藉以對再現女性的傳統提出批判與省思。英文摘要：Pipilotti Rist(1962-, Swiss), ”the best known female artist in Swiss”, is a prominent figure in video art. Her works of multimedia video has attracted international attentions since the late 1980s. Rist uses an individual artistic language of irony and humor to blur boundaries between the visual art and the popular culture. Sex, gender and human bodies, especially women bodies, are the motifs she prefers. Even her own body appears also often in her works. She mentioned several times that her works try to show ”hysteria” in a positive light. Hysteria was thought in the 19th century as a characteristic disease of women. Jean-Martin Charcot's and Sigmund Freud's research on it caused a sensation not only in the medical domain, but also subsequently in surrealism art and feminism. What is hysteria? Why and how does hysteria become an aesthetic form in Rist's art. This paper focuses on the theme of hysteria and goes into a detailed study on the theme hysteria in Rist's works of self-presentation: their styles and concepts will be scrutinized to find out the similarities and differences between Rist's art and the tradition of the surrealism art. Based on the representation theory of the feminism, it will be analyzed why Rist uses her own body as an object in her works and what is her re-vision und re-thinking about the tradition of the women-representation.起始頁-結束頁：125-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000517篇名：「所有的惡臭都是疾病」：論迪更斯《荒涼山莊》的衛生論述與道德經濟並列篇名：”All Smell is Disease”: Narratives of Sanitation and Economy of Morality in Dickens' ”Bleak House”作者：陳重仁(Chung-Jen Chen)關鍵字：城市淨化;公共衛生;衛生;感染;貧民窟論述;道德經濟;查德維克;city cleansing;public health;sanitation;contagion;slum narratives;economy of morality;Edwin Chadwick期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013中文摘要：迪更斯擅以城市地景為寫作素材，透過描繪社會底層卑微求生的日常生活，呈現城市貧民窟的擁擠與污穢，藉此揉入他的批判與關懷。本文企圖比對迪更斯的小說《荒涼山莊》與同時期查德維克引領的衛生改造運動，分析何以公共衛生政策首重通風、明亮、乾爽的居住環境，何以迪更斯的小說揭櫫正常化政治的權力運作，又何以醫學寫實與都會醫學大量導入監視生活習慣與管理環境衛生的操作，成為國家醫學中規訓日常生活操作的監視政治。迪更斯揭示日常生活經驗中所「見」所「聞」的瑣碎細節，藉由檢視環境污染與疾病傳染，建立標準、排斥異常根絕疾病、強化健康的醫學正常化機制：日常生活中種種不潔的環境因素不再僅是建立健康城市的參照標準，也是城市居民可感之、可探之且可避之的感染源。英文摘要：This paper reads Dickens' ”Bleak House” in light of the collective resolution in sanitary reforms led by Edwin Chadwick during the Victorian period. By tracing the formation of correlation between cleanliness, lighting, good ventilation, hygiene and health in contrast to filth, staleness, dampness and illness as formulated in slum narratives, this paper proposes an economy of morality implanted in Victorian cognition of sanitation. The keen awareness of the possible intimidation to human health and public welfare is materialized and medicalized in detailed description of corruption of life habit and the degradation of the quality of living environment. Dickens' city slum becomes a place most promising for unseen and unpredicted dangers and the arena most likely for any social movement and policymaking to take place. As a result, an economy of medical realism and health normatism is thereby established in witnessing everyday life practices in urban slums and weighing the threat to public health. Health, as a result, becomes a malleable and manageable issue in safeguarding all normal and disregarding all abnormal practices in everyday life.起始頁-結束頁：173-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000618篇名：書評：評介凱薩琳．瑪拉布《意外的本體論》並列篇名：A Review of Catherine Malabou's Ontologie de L'accident: Essai sur la plasticite destructrice作者：唐慧宇(Hui-Yu Tang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：220-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000719篇名：書評：觀光思維下的文化與權力並列篇名：Thinking Through Tourism作者：張育銓(Yu-Chuan Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：16期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：226-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201303_(16).000801篇名：美國在華醫藥促進局（ABMAC）與台灣公衛和醫護發展並列篇名：ABMAC and Taiwan Pubic Health and Medical Development作者：賴慧仙;李孟智期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：517-525資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020972篇名：以家戶總所得為健保費基方案相關爭議之反思並列篇名：A Review of the Controversies over the National Health Insurance Premium Being Set on the Basis of Overall Family Income作者：韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han);梁景洋(Ching-Yang Liang)關鍵字：二代健保;三代健保;家戶總所得為費基;second-generation National Health Insurance;third-generation National Health Insurance;premium base basing on family income期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：日前衛生福利部表示「三代健保」將回歸家戶總所得為費基的改革方案，本文從公平性、中立性、行政執行性等三個角度分析現制保費收費方式（含補充保險費）與「以家戶總所得為費基」方案之優缺點；再就2010年推動以家戶總所得為費基改革方案時所衍生的相關爭議進行討論，並提出相關建議，作為政府未來三代健保政策制定時之參考。英文摘要：The Ministry of Health and Welfare in Taiwan has indicated that a new financing mechanism broadening the premium base from the payroll tax to family income will be proposed under third-generation National Health Insurance. This study compared the existing system with the new financing mechanism, analyzed the advantages and shortcomings based on considerations of equity, neutrality and administration, and reviewed the related controversies caused by enlarging the premium base. We also provide suggestions for the government in formulating third-generation National Health Insurance in the future.起始頁-結束頁：526-536資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020663篇名：糖尿病共同照護對病患糖化血色素、健康信念與健康行為之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Diabetes Shared Care on Patients' Glycated Hemoglobin, Health Beliefs, and Health Behaviors作者：吳淑靜(Shu-Ching Wu);黃俊豪(Jiun-Hau Huang)關鍵字：糖尿病共照;糖化血色素;健康行為;健康信念;類實驗;diabetes shared care;glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c);health behaviors;health beliefs;quasi-experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：探討加入糖尿病共照網之病患與未加入者之糖化血色素控制與健康行為改變是否有異，並檢視兩組病患之糖尿病相關健康行為改變，分別與何種健康信念之改變有關及其影響之程度。方法：採類實驗研究法，收案對象為第二型糖尿病病患，分成「共照組」與「非共照組」，依性別、年齡配對，以1：2比例分別收案208與421人，並於首次收案時及6個月後，進行糖化血色素與問卷資料收集。結果：自迴歸多變項分析顯示，共照組之後測糖化血色素較低（β=-0.18），後測健康行為得分亦較高（β=0.13）。共照組後測健康行為與自覺利益（β=0.29）、行動線索（β=0.15）之提升具顯著關聯，非共照組後測健康行為則與自覺罹患性（β=0.13）、自覺利益（β=0.19）之提升，以及自覺障礙（β=-0.16）、行動線索（β=-0.12）之下降具顯著關聯。結論：共照組病患之糖化血色素控制與健康行為改變均較非共照組佳，但兩組之健康行為改變係由不同健康信念所驅動，故未來糖尿病健康照護介入，可參考本研究之發現，於兩組分別針對不同之健康信念設計合適之介入策略。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to determine if patients in a diabetes shared care group had better glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) control and changes in health behaviors than did their regular care counterparts, and to explore which changes in health beliefs contributed to changes in health behaviors in these two groups. Methods: A quasi-experiment, this study recruited 208 and 421 patients with type II diabetes in the shared care and regular care groups, respectively, at a 1:2 ratio, matched by gender and age. HbA1c levels were measured and survey data about diabetes-related health behaviors and health beliefs were collected at both pre-test and 6-month post-test. Results: Multivariate linear autoregression analysis indicated that patients in the shared care group had significantly lower HbA1c levels (β=-0.18) than did those in the regular care group at post-test. Similarly, patients in the shared care group had significantly higher health behavior scores (β=0.13) than did their regular care counterparts at post-test. In the shared care group, increased health behavior scores at post-test were directly related to elevated levels of perceived benefits (β=0.29) and cues to action (β=0.15). By contrast, in the regular care group, increased health behavior scores at post-test were positively associated with increased levels of perceived susceptibility (β=0.13) and perceived benefits (β=0.19), as well as decreased levels of perceived barriers (β=-0.16) and cues to action (β=-0.12). Conclusions: Compared with diabetic patients in the regular care group, those in the shared care group had better HbA1c control and changes in health behaviors. The diabetes-related health behavior changes could be attributed to different changes in health beliefs in the two groups. These findings could inform future interventions to improve diabetes care.起始頁-結束頁：537-550資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020544篇名：運動與蔬果攝取對預防台灣中老年人新發糖尿病的組合效應並列篇名：The Combined Effect of Physical Activity and Fruit-Vegetable Consumption on New-Onset Diabetes in Older Taiwanese作者：陳奕儒(Yi-Ru Chen);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai);王俊毅(Jiun-Yi Wang)關鍵字：中老年人;糖尿病;運動;蔬果攝取;組合效應;elderly;diabetes;physical activity;fruit and vegetable intake;combined effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: Many factors impact the onset of diabetes. Higher levels of physical activity and fruit-vegetable (FV) consumption are considered to be effective in reducing the risk; however, the combined effect is largely unknown. This study attempted to determine the combined effect of a higher level of physical activity and higher FV consumption on the subsequent risk of new diabetes. Methods: Data for this analysis were taken from the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Taiwan Longitudinal Survey on Aging”. A total of 4,400 participants (<U+2265> 53 years old) completed the survey in 1999. After excluding those who had diabetes, heart disease, cancer, BMI＜18.5, or incomplete data at baseline, those who died during 1999-2003, and those who failed to complete the 2003 survey, the net N was 2,243. Multivariate binary logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the independent or combined effect of physical activity and FV consumption on the risk of new diabetes four years later. Results: When the combination of high physical activity and high FV consumption was compared to no physical activity and low FV consumption, the risk of having new diabetes four years later was reduced to 39% (OR=0.39, 95% CI=0.20-0.76, p=0.006). All other combinations were not significant. When analyzed independently, only high physical activity was significant, high FV consumption was not. Conclusions: The combination of high physical activity and high FV consumption was highly effective in reducing the risk of new-onset diabetes in older Taiwanese. High physical activity alone was significant but high FV consumption alone was not. These results highlight the importance of having both daily physical activity and FV intake. Our results could provide the basis for a national policy on diabetes prevention.英文摘要：Objectives: Many factors impact the onset of diabetes. Higher levels of physical activity and fruit-vegetable (FV) consumption are considered to be effective in reducing the risk; however, the combined effect is largely unknown. This study attempted to determine the combined effect of a higher level of physical activity and higher FV consumption on the subsequent risk of new diabetes. Methods: Data for this analysis were taken from the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Taiwan Longitudinal Survey on Aging”. A total of 4,400 participants (<U+2265> 53 years old) completed the survey in 1999. After excluding those who had diabetes, heart disease, cancer, BMI＜18.5, or incomplete data at baseline, those who died during 1999-2003, and those who failed to complete the 2003 survey, the net N was 2,243. Multivariate binary logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the independent or combined effect of physical activity and FV consumption on the risk of new diabetes four years later. Results: When the combination of high physical activity and high FV consumption was compared to no physical activity and low FV consumption, the risk of having new diabetes four years later was reduced to 39% (OR=0.39, 95% CI=0.20-0.76, p=0.006). All other combinations were not significant. When analyzed independently, only high physical activity was significant, high FV consumption was not. Conclusions: The combination of high physical activity and high FV consumption was highly effective in reducing the risk of new-onset diabetes in older Taiwanese. High physical activity alone was significant but high FV consumption alone was not. These results highlight the importance of having both daily physical activity and FV intake. Our results could provide the basis for a national policy on diabetes prevention.起始頁-結束頁：551-561資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020525篇名：台灣老人成功與活躍老化之健康餘命探討並列篇名：Healthy Life Expectancy for Successful Aging and Active Aging Elderly in Taiwan作者：林正祥(Cheng-Hsiang Lin);劉士嘉(Shih-Chia Liu)關鍵字：成功老化;活躍老化;健康餘命;馬可夫鏈;successful aging;active aging;healthy life expectancy;Markov chain期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：基於生命質的改善和量的增加同等重要，對老人健康之關注，不應侷限於以往罹病或功能障礙老人之照顧，而是積極提升其整體生活品質及安適狀態為目標，即「成功老化」與「活躍老化」的概念。不論成功老化或活躍老化，均同時涵蓋老年人身體、心理、社會三個面向。本研究旨在探討台灣老年人口在成功老化及活躍老化之變遷及可能影響因素。方法：利用國民健康署所建立之「台灣地區中老年人身心社會狀況長期追蹤研究調查」資料，依成功老化與活躍老化定義，就老人成功、活躍老化變動趨勢，以馬可夫鏈模式軟體IMaCh（interpolatedMarkov chain，IMaCh）推算60歲以上老人世代平均餘命，成功、活躍老化健康餘命及各年齡盛行率；另亦就高血壓、心臟病及糖尿病等重要慢性疾病探討其對成功、活躍老化健康餘命影響差異。結果：影響成功老化、活躍老化之各組成項目（ADL、IADL、無憂鬱症狀、認知功能正常、良好社會支持、具生產力）正常百分比大致隨著年齡增長而逐年下降，成功老化及活躍老化盛行率亦呈現相同趨勢；平均餘命方面，成功老化健康餘命佔平均餘命約四至五成間，其中活躍老化在15%∼25%間。三種慢性疾病中，糖尿病成功、活躍老化健康餘命百分比在各年齡組均較高血壓及心臟病為低。結論：提升活躍老化應是有關單位努力的理想目標；在慢性疾病上，以糖尿病的負面影響最為明顯，相對於其他慢性疾病，糖尿病的防治有極大的改善空間。英文摘要：Objectives: Improvements in the quality and quantity of life are equally important based on the concepts of successful aging and active aging. These include physical, mental and social well-being in old age. Instead of the past emphasis on improving morbidity or malfunction, the goal for health care of the elderly should focus on actively improving their comfort and overall quality of life. Methods: In order to explore the factors affecting the long term changes in the trends of successful aging and active aging of older people in Taiwan, we analyzed the data from a survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan conducted by the Health Promotion Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare. Using the interpolated Markov chain approach, we projected the prevalence and healthy life expectancy. We also investigated the effects of chronic diseases e.g. hypertension, heart disease and diabetes on the differences in healthy life expectancy, successful aging, and active aging. Results: The influence of variables which positively affected successful aging and active aging declined as age increased. Similar results were observed for prevalence. For successful aging, healthy life expectancy accounted for approximately 40-50% of all life expectancy; of this, active aging accounts for about 15-25%. For each age group, diabetes lowered the percentage of healthy life expectancy compared to hypertension and heart disease. Conclusions: Achieving a high quality of active aging is an ideal goal for the government and health institutes. Among chronic diseases, diabetes had the most serious impact on healthy life expectancy and its prevention and treatment should be emphasized.起始頁-結束頁：562-575資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020786篇名：勞工發生職業傷害後12個月復工狀況之探討並列篇名：Factors Influencing Return to Work among Workers at 12 Months after Occupational Injury作者：秦唯珊(Wei-Shan Chin);林冠含(Kuan-Han Lin);郭育良(Leon Yue-Liang Guo);蕭淑銖(Judith Shu-Chu Shiao)關鍵字：職業傷害;復工;勞工;occupational injury;return to work;worker期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：每年約有五萬名勞工發生職業災害，研究發現職傷後有一定比例的勞工會發生精神疾病，進而影響其復工。目前台灣鮮少研究探討職業傷害勞工之復工需求。期望了解勞工發生職災到順利復工的協助需求，以提供相關單位作為擬訂職災勞工照護之參考。方法：本研究以2009年02月01日至08月31日因職業傷害住院超過3天以上的職業傷害勞工（N=4,403）為研究對象，於其職業傷害發生後12個月寄發問卷。本問卷是採自填式問卷，問卷內容包括基本資料、職業傷害處理狀況、身體受傷狀況、與復工情形。結果：共有1,233人回覆，回覆率為28.0%。受傷後一年已復工者969位（78.6%），未復工者264位（21.4%）。相較於已復工者，未復工者的平均年齡較高、教育程度較低、離開原公司的比例較高、對於公司提供職災協助的滿意程度較低、覺得職災補助取得不容易、自覺受傷程度較嚴重，且身體外觀有明顯缺陷。已復工者，僅18.1%（n=175）有接受復工評估，有接受復工評估者的休養週數比未進行復工評估者長（14.3±13.1 vs. 10.7±12.0），復工主要決定者多為雇主決定（n=109，62.3%），而接受復工評估者比沒有接受復工評估的人有較高的比例發生受傷部位復發的狀況為（39.4% vs. 31.2%，p=0.03）。結論：建議政府結合社區資源，建立常設之職災服務單一窗口，普及職災個案照護，並建議職業傷病勞工的復工評估與醫療應經由各地區之職業傷病防治中心或職業病專科醫師執行，以強化職業傷病防治中心與職業病專科醫師的角色並落實復工的功能。英文摘要：Objectives: Fifty-seven thousand occupational injuries occur in Taiwan each year. Previous studies have found that a certain proportion of workers developed psychiatric symptoms after the injury and those symptoms were an important obstacle to their return to work. The aim of this study was to investigate workers' need to return to work 12 months after an occupational injury. Methods: The study population was composed of workers who were injured at work, hospitalized for 3 or more days, and later received Inpatient Hospitalization Benefits as part of Occupational Accident Medical Benefits from Labor Insurance between February 1 and August 31, 2009. The subjects were recruited consecutively 12 months after injury and assessed by a self-reported questionnaire which included demographic data, severity of injury, the process of workers compensation, and their return to work. Results: A total of 1,233 injured workers completed the self-reported questionnaire for a response rate of 28.0%. Among those who completed the questionnaire, 78.6% (n=969) returned to work while the other 21.4% (n=264) did not. Compared to subjects who returned to work, those who were unable to do so were older, received less education, had a higher proportion of leaving their original employer, had lower scores for the workers compensation process, and consider workers compensation approval difficult to obtain. Among injured workers, only 18.1% (n=175) had received an assessment for return to work. Compared to those who did not receive such an assessment, injured workers who did had longer sick leaves and returned to work later (14.3 ± 13.1 vs. 10.7 ± 12.0 weeks). In general, the assessment and decision to return to work were made mostly by employers (62.3%, n=109). Moreover, workers who received an assessment had a higher risk of relapse after returning to work compared to those who did not (39.4% vs. 31.2%, p=0.03). Conclusions: The integration and re-orientation of the existing resources for severely occupationally injured workers and strengthening single unit service for them are warranted if the government is to succeed in providing a reasonable health care system for these workers.起始頁-結束頁：576-585資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020477篇名：精神疾病社區復健使用者再入院及危險因素之探討並列篇名：Readmission and Risk Factors among Community Rehabilitation Users with Psychiatric Diseases作者：李亞璇(Ya-Hsuan Li);謝碧晴(Pi-Ching Hsieh);李中一(Chung-Yi Li);蘇慧芳(Hui-Fang Su)關鍵字：精神疾病;社區復健;再入院;Andersen醫療利用模式;Cox比例風險迴歸模式;psychiatric disease;community rehabilitation;readmission;Andersen's behavioral model of health service utilization;Cox proportional hazard model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：參考Andersen第一與第二階段醫療服務利用行為模式，擬欲探討2000至2009年精神疾病社區復健使用者之個人特質，並且分析使用精神疾病社區復健病患歷經指標出院一年期間，其往後一年內再入院風險及相關危險因子。方法：採回溯性世代設計，資料出處為國衛院所發行之全民健康保險資料庫1999至2009年「居家照護特殊需求檔」，研究對象為2000至2007年精神疾病社區復健使用者為新收個案，共25,218人。以Cox比例風險迴歸模式預測精神疾病社區復健使用者在指標出院後經歷一年期間，其往後一年內再入院之風險。結果：研究發現以Cox迴歸模式在出院後一年內精神疾病社區復健使用次數為8－14次與<U+2265>15次的再入院風險較使用1－7次者低，女性、中區分局病患、精神分裂症患者與住院小於55天等變項，再入院之風險較低。結論：精神疾病社區復健使用次數越少之個案，其爾後再入院之風險比使用次數多者還高，值得健康照護相關人員進一步思考影響其使用的因素，另外，其使用的模式及其與再入院之關係為何？亦值得未來進一步探究。英文摘要：Objectives: With reference to phase I and phase II of Andersen's behavioral model of health service utilization, the aims of this study were first to investigate the characteristics of community rehabilitation care users and then to analyze the frequency of readmission and its risk factors within one year after discharge from a hospital for the treatment of mental illness. Methods: A retrospective cohort study design was used. Data analyzed in this study were retrieved from the 'home care specific files' of the National Health Insurance Research Database issued by the National Institutes of Health between 1999 and 2009. A total of 25,218 people were new cases of community rehabilitation care between 2000 and 2007. In order to forecast these community rehabilitation care users' risk of readmission within one year after discharge, the Cox proportional hazard model was utilized. Results: We found that the adjusted hazard ratio was significantly lower for groups of 8-14 times users and 15 or more-times users of community rehabilitation care than for 1-7 times users (0.73 & 0.72 respectively) in the Cox regression model. Furthermore, the risk of readmission was lower for females, clients who were insured by sub-bureau in the middle of Taiwan, a diagnosis of schizophrenia, and a length of hospital stay less than 55 days. Conclusions: The lower the frequency of psychiatric patients' using community rehabilitation care, the higher the risk of readmission.起始頁-結束頁：586-598資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020578篇名：父母需要子女的關心：探討台灣中老年人的代間關係與主觀經濟壓力之相關性研究並列篇名：Parents Who Need Children's Care: Exploring the Association between Intergenerational Relations and subjective Economic Strain among Older Adults in Taiwan作者：林子鏞(Tzu-Yung Lin);喬芷(Chi Chiao)關鍵字：代間關係;主觀經濟壓力;中老年父母;廣義估計方程式;intergenerational relations;subjective economic strain;middle-aged and older parents;Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: In the context of Confucian culture, the main unit of support for older parents in Taiwan is the family system. This points out the important connection between intergenerational relations and subjective economic strain. We utilized the intergenerational solidarity theory to explore whether ”intergenerational emotional bond” (affection solidarity) predicted a lower level of subjective economic strain than did ”received money from children” (functional solidarity). Methods: This study used data from the Taiwan Longitudinal Study on Aging, a nationally representative sample of older adults aged 60 and above, collected between 1989 and 2003. Generalized linear modeling with GEE estimates was employed because of the repeated measures. Results: After SES and other covariates were controlled, females who felt that their children were reliable when they were sick were 0.36 points lower on the four point scale of economic strain (β=-0.36, p＜0.001) while those who received monetary support from sons were 0.09 points lower (β=-0.09, p＜0.001). Males who felt that their children were reliable when they were sick were also less likely to experience economic strain (β=-0.22, p＜0.001); however, the effect of monetary support from sons was insignificant. Conclusions: These findings suggest that ”children's care” produced a stronger and more positive effect on alleviating parents' subjective economic strain than did monetary support. Health and Welfare policy makers promoting economic well-being among older adults should take mutual emotional respect and an understanding of intergenerational relations into consideration.英文摘要：Objectives: In the context of Confucian culture, the main unit of support for older parents in Taiwan is the family system. This points out the important connection between intergenerational relations and subjective economic strain. We utilized the intergenerational solidarity theory to explore whether ”intergenerational emotional bond” (affection solidarity) predicted a lower level of subjective economic strain than did ”received money from children” (functional solidarity). Methods: This study used data from the Taiwan Longitudinal Study on Aging, a nationally representative sample of older adults aged 60 and above, collected between 1989 and 2003. Generalized linear modeling with GEE estimates was employed because of the repeated measures. Results: After SES and other covariates were controlled, females who felt that their children were reliable when they were sick were 0.36 points lower on the four point scale of economic strain (β=-0.36, p＜0.001) while those who received monetary support from sons were 0.09 points lower (β=-0.09, p＜0.001). Males who felt that their children were reliable when they were sick were also less likely to experience economic strain (β=-0.22, p＜0.001); however, the effect of monetary support from sons was insignificant. Conclusions: These findings suggest that ”children's care” produced a stronger and more positive effect on alleviating parents' subjective economic strain than did monetary support. Health and Welfare policy makers promoting economic well-being among older adults should take mutual emotional respect and an understanding of intergenerational relations into consideration.起始頁-結束頁：599-612資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020519篇名：評論：誠意呷水甜或有情飲水飽？作者：徐慧娟期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：613-613資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020510110篇名：作者回覆：誠意呷水甜或有情飲水飽？作者：林子鏞;喬芷期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：614-614資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013321020510211篇名：參與論質計酬方案對接受冠狀動脈繞道手術之糖尿病病人之預後影響並列篇名：The Impact of a Pay for Performance Program on the Outcome after a Coronary Artery Bypass Graft in Diabetic Patients作者：鍾文誠(Wen-Cheng Chong);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu);李曉伶(Hsiao-Ling Lee)關鍵字：冠狀動脈繞道手術;糖尿病;糖尿病論質計酬方案;coronary artery bypass graft surgery;diabetes;pay for performance program期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷6期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：探討接受冠狀動脈繞道手術之糖尿病病人參與論質計酬方案對術後感染及死亡情形之影響。方法：採用回溯性世代研究法，以全民健保2009－2010年間接受冠狀動脈繞道手術之成年糖尿病病人為研究對象。利用趨勢檢定參與糖尿病論質計酬方案程度對接受冠狀動脈繞道手術之糖尿病病人之預後關係。結果：未參與糖尿病論質計酬方案者佔80.92%、未連續參與者佔13.55%、連續參與者僅佔5.53%；術後30、90日感染情形，皆以連續參與組最低，分別為3.00%及3.06%；未參與組最高，為6.89%及8.88%；校正後的OR值分別為0.92及0.33。術後30、90日死亡情形，亦是連續參與組最低，分別為1.96%及3.92%；未參與組最高，為5.49%及9.24%；校正後的OR值分別為0.52及0.44，趨勢檢定達顯著差異。結論：參與糖尿病論質計酬方案之病人在接受冠狀動脈繞道手術後之感染及死亡風險皆較未參與者低，可作為衛生主管機關加強鼓勵糖尿病病人參與論質計酬方案之參考，同時鼓勵醫療院所提升糖尿病論質計酬方案之涵蓋率，以減少日後糖尿病病人之術後併發症的發生。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to explore the impact of a pay for performance program on the outcome after coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) in diabetic patients. Methods: This study employed a retrospective cohort study design, and the study subjects were adult diabetic patients who underwent CABG during 2009-2010. A trend test was used to evaluate the relationship between participation in the pay for performance program and the outcome. Results: Among the diabetic patients undergoing CABG, those who did not participate in the pay for performance program accounted for 80.92%, those with non-continuous participation accounted for 13.55%, and those with continuous participation accounted for 5.53%. Infection rates within 30 and 90 days after operation were lowest in the continuous participation group (3.00% and 3.06% respectively) compared to 6.89% and 8.88% in the non-participation group. The adjusted ORs were 0.92 and 0.33. The trend test showed significant differences. Death rates within 30 and 90 days after operation were also lowest in the continuous participation group (1.96% and 3.92% respectively) compared to 5.49% and 9.24% in the non-participation group. The adjusted ORs were 0.52 and 0.44. Conclusions: Participation in a pay for performance program lowered the postoperative infection and death risks for diabetic patients. Health authorities should make greater efforts to encourage diabetic patients to participate in a pay for performance program, and also encourage medical institutions to improve coverage for pay for performance programs. For diabetic patients in the program, medical institutions should follow-up and guide patients to receive continuous care in order to reduce or delay the occurrence of comorbid conditions and postoperative complications.起始頁-結束頁：615-625資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20133210106612篇名：以系統性文獻回顧探討台灣居家老年人跌倒之相關或危險因素並列篇名：Risk Factors Related to Falling among the Home-Dwelling Elderly in Taiwan: A Systematic Review作者：陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen);林家綾(Chia-Lin Lin);蔡宗廷(Chung-Ting Tsai);朱素鳳(Su-Feng Chu);洪淑玲(Shu-Ling Hung);顏碧汝(Bi-Ju Yen);黃國儀(Kuo-Yi Huang);蔡錦墩(Jin-Duen Tsai)關鍵字：系統性文獻回顧;老人;跌倒;systematic review;elderly;fall期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文目的是採系統性文獻回顧法，統整國內居家老年人跌倒之相關或危險因素。搜尋台灣期刊論文索引系統等七個中英文資料庫。經收案與排除條件審核後，共30篇文章符合篩選標準。結果發現有一半以上的研究指出居家老年人跌倒之相關或危險因素有（1）生物因素，包括自評健康差、跌倒危險因子數目多、疾病症狀多、疾病數目多、身體功能惡化、大小便失禁、步態不穩、活動功能差或平衡愈差、日常生活活動或工具性日常生活功能不佳、腰圍愈粗、血中白蛋白愈低、憂鬱、愈害怕跌倒、有跌倒史等。（2）行為因素，包括跌倒預防知識、行為與服用多種藥物等。（3）環境因素，包括支持性環境愈低、臥室、浴室、樓梯安全性差、雜物堆積、昏暗的燈光等。然而，只有少部分的研究發現社經因素，包括婚姻狀況、教育程度與獨居等，與跌倒相關。此結果可做為防範社區老人跌倒之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this article was to review the risk factors related to falling among the home-dwelling elderly in Taiwan. The literature search included seven medical databases in either Chinese or English, including the Periopath index to Taiwan's periodic literature. Thirty studies that met the inclusion criteria for this study were reviewed. The results showed the risk factors related to falling included: (1) Biological factors: poor self-reported health, multiple signs and symptoms of disease, a number of diseases, poor physical function, unstable of gait, poor balance, stool or urinary incontinence, dysfunction in ADLs or IADLs, higher waistline, lower albumin, depression, fear of falling, and a history of falling. (2) Behavioral factors: lack of knowledge about ways to prevent falling and taking multiple medications. (3) Environmental factors: poor supportive environment, poor location of bedrooms and the safety of bedroom bathrooms and stairs, accumulation of debris, smooth ground, and dim lighting. Only a few studies found that social and economic factors, including marital status, level of education, and living alone were significantly associated with falling. The results may serve a reference for preventing falling among the home-dwelling elderly.起始頁-結束頁：403-423資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0113篇名：醫療人員針扎之流行病學、經濟耗損與政策議題並列篇名：Needlestick Injuries among Healthcare Workers: Epidemiologic, Economic and Policy Issues作者：吳雪菁(Hsueh-Ching Wu);郭育良(Leon Yue-Liang Guo);蕭淑銖(Judith Shu-Chu Shiao)關鍵字：針扎;醫療人員;安全針具;流行病學;needlestick injury;healthcare workers;safety needle;epidemiology期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：針扎是醫療照護人員最常見的職業傷害，對醫療人員的工作安全與健康造成極大的威脅，且遭受針扎後的通報流程與追蹤處理費用，也是醫院的重要經濟成本。而預防針扎最有效的方法為使用安全針具，為了讓醫療人員有更安全的工作環境，除了衛生福利部將「安全針具」列入醫院評鑑內容及感染管制查核外，立法院亦修正「醫療法」，規定五年內醫療機構須逐步完成安全針具的全面性替換。故本文擬就醫療人員發生針扎的流行病學、針扎後造成醫療院所經營成本的經濟耗損，並針對美國於2000年通過「針扎安全及預防法案（The Needlestick Safety and Prevention Act）」後，政策對其醫療人員針扎狀況所造成的影響等相關文獻進行整理，以提供國內未來臨床執業環境改善、政策及相關研究方向的參考。英文摘要：Needlestick injury (NSI) is the most common occupational hazard among healthcare workers (HCWs). Not only do NSIs present a great threat to HCWs' safety and health, but they also result in substantial costs to hospitals as a result of subsequent tracking expenses, including blood tests and preventive treatments. The most effective measure to avoid preventable NSIs is to provide safe needles to HCWs. In order to provide a safer working environment for HCWs, the Department of Health has listed the use of safety devices as one of the criteria for hospital accreditation. The Legislature Yuan has also imposed a regulation by amending the Medical Act to require that hospitals replace conventional medical devices with ones with safety features within five years. This article reviews the epidemiologic, economic and policy aspects of NSIs. It also examines the overall situation of NSIs in the United States after the passage of the Needlestick Safety and Prevention Act of 2000.起始頁-結束頁：424-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0214篇名：醫師對愛滋病照護經驗、知識及態度的變遷：1994及2012年調查之比較並列篇名：Evolving Hiv-related Clinical Experiences, Knowledge, and Attitudes of Physicians: A Comparison of 1994 and 2012 Survey作者：丁志音(Lew Chih-Yin Ting);李芳盈(Fang-Ying Li);方啟泰(Chi-Tai Fang)關鍵字：照護意願;風險知覺;愛滋臨床知識;專業倫理;willingness to treat;risk perceptions;HIV clinical knowledge;professional ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：比較1994及2012年醫師的愛滋病照護經驗、知識與態度的差異。方法：分別於1994及2012年針對70歲以下之執業西醫師進行全國性郵寄問卷調查，並以加權分布、卡方、趨勢檢定、羅吉斯迴歸、Gamma（95％ CL）、及標準化進行年代間比較。結果：1994及2012年有效樣本各為1,702及1,590人。整體而言，曾直接照顧過HIV感染者的醫師比例大幅上升（從13.1％至45.5％），愛滋專業知識水準亦顯著提升，而臨床場域中的愛滋照護氛圍也有顯著改善，此反映在願意照護所有感染者的比例大幅提升（從26.7％至43.2％），且恐懼與憂慮顯著下降。但本研究亦發現兩個值得關注的現象，（1）感染HIV的注射藥癮者持續為醫師最不願意照顧的族群；（2）持續有極高比例的外科系醫師憂懼遭病人傳染HIV（從85.7％至84.6％）。結論：隨時間演進，整體而言，醫師對感染者的照護經驗、知識及態度皆有大幅度正向改善。然而藥癮HIV感染者的醫療照護問題及外科系醫師的職業風險仍需持續關注。在醫學繼續教育中安排藥癮者醫療照護專業課程，以及在制度面上確保外科醫師執業受傷後皆能盡快接受抗HIV病毒藥物預防性投藥是可思考的方向。英文摘要：Objectives: This study compared physicians' HIV clinical experiences, and their knowledge and attitudes toward HIV care in 1994 and 2012. Methods: National mailing surveys among practicing physicians 70 years old and younger were conducted in 1994 and 2012. Weighted distribution, Chi-Square, trend test, logistic regression, Gamma (95% CL), and standardization were employed to make between-year analyses. Results: There were 1,702 and 1,590 doctors participated in 1994 and 2012 study, respectively. The percentage of physicians who had ever provided care for HIV-positive patients increased considerably (from 13.1% to 45.5%) along with a moderately improved average knowledge on HIV diseases. The climate of HIV care delivery has been markedly improved over this time period, which can be reflected in the significantly increased willingness to treat all HIV patients (from 26.7% to 43.2%) and a substantial decline in fear and anxiety. Nonetheless, we did identify two points of concern: (1) HIV-positive injecting drug users (IDUs) continued to be the most undesirable group for whom physicians provided care; (2) there continued to be a very high percentage of surgeons expressing fear/anxiety about the risk of being infected by HIV-positive patients. Conclusions: Even with the evolving HIV epidemic in Taiwan, there has been a remarkable overall improvement in the clinical experiences, knowledge and attitudes of physicians in treating HIV patients. However, there is still a need to strengthen continuing medical education on HIV care, particularly targeting the care of IDUs. It is also necessary to ensure that all surgeons who are exposed to HIV have access to post-exposure prophylaxis with highly active antiretroviral therapy as soon as possible.起始頁-結束頁：435-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0315篇名：台灣兒童之健康平等及醫療照護利用公平性探討並列篇名：Health Equality and Equity in Health Care Utilization among Children in Taiwan作者：李昭琴(Sherina Chao-Chin Lee);盧瑞芬(Rachel Jui-Fen Lu)關鍵字：兒童健康;醫療利用公平性;集中指標;水平不公平性;健康不均度;child health;equity in health care use;concentration index;CI;Index of Horizontal Inequity;HI;health inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：由於兒童為國家未來主人翁，健康水平應格外受到重視，故本研究針對台灣兒童的健康平等及醫療使用之分布公平性和影響因素進行深入探討。方法：資料取自2001年台灣國民健康調查資料，並串連2001年健康保險資料庫，研究對象為12歲以下兒童共3,470名。採用集中指標衡量兒童健康發展情形，並以水平不公平性指標評估所得相關的醫療利用公平性，並進一步分解影響因子。結果：家戶較貧困的兒童較易有學習障礙和發展遲緩的情形。在兒童的醫療使用部分，西醫門診（非預防保健）、牙醫門診和急診的利用均呈現偏富分布，在住院醫療利用則未發現不公平性。同時發現影響兒童醫療利用偏富因素為主要照顧者的教育程度及所得因素。結論：建議政府應投入較多資源以提昇主要照顧者的健康促進觀念，同時在推動兒童醫療補助相關政策時，應考量弱勢家庭的特性，方能有效提供低收入家戶兒童適當的醫療照護。英文摘要：Objectives: As children represent the future assets of a country, their access to care to maintain their health is critical. This study assessed the distribution of health and health care uses among children. The determinants of the equity distribution were also explored. Methods: The data were taken from the 2001 Taiwan National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) linked with the 2001 National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD); 3,470 children aged 12 and younger were identified as the sample. Income-related distribution of health and health care uses were examined by adapting the concentration index and the Index of Horizontal Inequity (HI). Decomposing the concentration index facilitated the identification of factors which contributed to the unequal and inequitable distribution of health and health care uses. Results: Children in poorer households were more likely to encounter developmental problems in hearing and learning. Visits to Western doctors (excluding visits for preventive services), dentists, and emergency rooms tended to show a pro-rich distribution; however, the rich and the poor showed similar patterns of hospital admissions. In general, the educational attainment of the main care giver and household income were the two major factors contributing to the observed inequity. Conclusions: More resources should be devoted to health promotion among care givers. Family characteristics of the socially disadvantaged should be considered when devising subsidy policies targeting children to effectively provide appropriate care to children in need.起始頁-結束頁：449-461資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0416篇名：評論：台灣兒童之健康平等及醫療照護利用公平性探討作者：喬芷期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：462-462資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0517篇名：2012年台北市5歲以下兒童肺炎鏈球菌結合疫苗接種率及其影響因素研究並列篇名：Factors Influencing the Rate of Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccination of Children under 5 Years of Age in Taipei City during 2012作者：林國甯(Kuo-Ning Lin);陳政友(Cheng-Yu Chen);蔡炯青(Chiung-Ching Tsai);朱玉如(Yu-Roo Chu)關鍵字：疫苗接種;肺炎鏈球菌疫苗;健康信念;vaccination;Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine;health belief期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：本研究調查2012年台北市5歲以下兒童接種肺炎鏈球菌結合疫苗（PCV）情形及探討影響接種之因素。方法：以全國預防接種資訊管理資料庫系統（National Immunization Information System，NIIS）系統中台北市家中育有5歲以下兒童之家戶為母群，依台北市12個行政區採分層隨機抽樣，以各區家中育有5歲以下兒童之家戶數比例配置各分層樣本數，於2012年12月抽取樣本進行電話訪問調查。有效樣本707份，以卡方、點二系列相關及邏輯斯複迴歸分析兒童接種PCV之相關因素。結果：台北市家中5歲以下兒童已接種PCV者逾八成，以邏輯斯複迴歸分析顯示父親年齡、主要照顧者自覺對兒童感染肺炎鏈球菌之罹患性、自覺疫苗有效性等健康信念為影響疫苗接種之統計顯著因素。結論：為提升主要照顧者自覺兒童感染肺炎鏈球菌之罹患性及疫苗有效性等認知，建議衛生機關可於衛教宣導海報及單張，完整呈現疾病侵襲風險、疫苗成份及保護效果等資訊，供主要照顧者決策時參考。且建議未來可對台北市進行PCV疫苗接種率與群體免疫的效益研究。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the factors influencing the rate of Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV) vaccination of children under 5 years of age in Taipei City during 2012. Methods: Based on data from the National Immunization Information System (NIIS), we selected families with children under 5 years of age in Taipei City as the study population. We adopted the stratified random sampling method to sample 12 administrative districts in Taipei City and allocated samples proportionally according to the number of families in each district. In December 2012, a computer assisted telephone interview was conducted. We used chi-square tests, point-biserial correlations, and a multiple logistic regression model to analyze the 707 valid samples. Results: The PCV vaccination rate of children under 5 years of age in Taipei City exceeded 80%. After multiple logistic regression analysis, we found that the statistically significant factors influencing PCV vaccination were: father's age and primary caregiver's acknowledgement of health beliefs such as perceived susceptibility to invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD) and PCV's effectiveness. Conclusions: In order to raise primary caregivers' acknowledgement of perceived susceptibility to IPD and the effectiveness of PCV, we suggest that the health authorities provide more comprehensive information for the public. Campaign materials might include educational posters and brochures in which the severity of IPD and the ingredients and protective effects of PCV shots are explained. We also suggest further research on vaccination and herd immunity based on the PCV vaccination rate in Taipei city.起始頁-結束頁：463-475資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0618篇名：台灣地區長期照護機構女性照顧服務員工作壓力源與工作適應、離職意願之研究並列篇名：Job Stressors, Work Adjustment and Intention to Leave: A Study of Female Nursing Assistants in Long-term Care Facilities in Taiwan作者：蔡淑鳳(Shwu-Feng Tsay);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);林育秀(Yu-Hsiu Lin);梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang)關鍵字：長期照護機構;照顧服務員;工作壓力;工作適應;離職意願;long-term care facility;nursing assistant;job stressor;work adjustment;intention to leave期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：女性照顧服務員是國內長期照護工作第一線的照護提供者，直接影響照護品質。然因工作壓力高、負荷重、低社會形象等負向因素，人員招募不易且不易留任，人力長期處於不足又高流動的狀態。爰此，本研究旨在探討女性照服員工作壓力源對工作適應與離職意願的影響。方法：本研究為一橫斷性研究，以分層比例抽樣，採結構式問卷，調查450位照服員的工作壓力源、工作適應及離職意願。我們以多層次線性迴歸和多層次邏輯斯迴歸模型，分別探討工作壓力源對工作適應及離職意願的影響。結果：多層次線性迴歸分析結果顯示平均月收入、機構開業年數、機構類型、工作控制、心理負荷及社會支持顯著影響照服員的工作適應；而多層次邏輯斯迴歸分析結果顯示：婚姻狀況、工作資歷、照顧住民數、社會支持顯著影響照服員的離職意願。結論：本研究證實工作壓力源會影響照服員的工作適應及離職意願。照服員的工作適應及離職意願，可能對所照顧對象造成傷害，機構經營管理者不應輕忽此一問題所可能導致的影響。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to examine the effect of job stressors on work adjustment and intention to leave on female nursing assistants (NAs) in Taiwan's long-term care facilities. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study using a structured-questionnaire to gather information about job stressors, work adjustment, and background. Data was collected through proportional stratified random sampling of 450 female NAs serving in long-term care facilities over three months. Multi-level linear regression and multi-level logistic regression models were utilized to identify factors associated with work adjustment and intention to leave, respectively. Results: The multi-level linear regression model showed that the significant factors associated with work adjustment included salary per month, type of institution, years of operation, job control, psychological demands, and work-related social support. The multi-level logistic regression model indicated that marital status, length of employment at the current facility, care loads, and work-related social support were significantly associated with NAs' intention to leave. Conclusions: This study demonstrated that job stressors were the key determinants in female NAs' work adjustment and intention to leave. NAs' work adjustment and intention to leave may cause serious medical, social, and financial hardships to residents and their families in long-term care facilities. We suggest potential management strategies to provide assistance to female NAs in order to alleviate work strain.起始頁-結束頁：476-490資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0719篇名：菸品健康捐調升前後的需求價格彈性並列篇名：The Price Elasticity of Cigarettes after an Increase in Tobacco Health and Welfare Surcharge作者：李卓倫(Jwo-Leun Lee);林霖(Lin Lin);陳江明(Chiang-Ming Chen)關鍵字：菸品健康捐;菸品價格;菸品需求;價格彈性;品牌轉換;tobacco health and welfare surcharge;cigarettes price;cigarettes demand;price elasticity;brand switching期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：我國於2009年將菸品健康捐由10元調高為20元，本研究嘗試分析此次菸品健康捐增稅前後對菸品需求量價格彈性是否有所影響。方法：本研究結合2007年與2010年兩次全國性調查的資料，比較提高菸品健康捐前後的菸品需求是否改變；在控制人口變項的條件下，本研究分別估計2007年與2010年吸菸者的價格彈性。結果：2010年菸品需求曲線相較於2007年更為平坦，表示菸品健康捐調升後民眾對於菸品價格的敏感度增加，當菸價伴隨健康捐調升時，如果暫不考慮走私菸品的攝取因素，則菸品健康捐對於2010年吸菸者的吸菸量有較強的抑制作用；另一方面，2010年的調查顯示有20.33％的吸菸者，因為菸品健康捐之課徵而開始使用其他品牌之菸品，月收入較低之吸菸族群較容易改用其他品牌的菸品。結論：菸品政策會使菸品消費行為產生結構性改變。英文摘要：Objectives: The Health and Welfare Surcharge on Tobacco in Taiwan increased to NT$20 per pack in 2009, following two other increases of NT$5 and NT$10 in 2002 and 2006, respectively. The aim of this study was to examine whether the 2009 increase in earmarked tax created changes in the pattern of tobacco consumption. Methods: This study compared cigarette consumption before and after the surcharge increase in 2009 by examining the 2007 and 2010 Taiwan Adult Tobacco Survey data. After controlling for demographic variables, we estimated the cigarette price elasticity in the 2007 and 2010 surveys. Results: The demand curve in the 2010 survey was flatter than that in the 2007 survey; this indicated that smokers became more price-elastic after the Tobacco Health and Welfare Surcharge increase in 2009. When the price of cigarettes increased gradually, the surcharge created a stronger effect on discouraging smoking based on the 2010 observations. Moreover, 20.33% of the smokers in the 2010 panel reportedly switched their cigarette brands after the 2009 surcharge increase. Smokers with lower income were more likely to switch brands. Conclusions: A tobacco-related price strategy as part of health policy can lead to substantial quantitative and qualitative changes in tobacco consumption.起始頁-結束頁：491-501資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0820篇名：「2010台北國際花卉博覽會」疾病與外傷之流行病學並列篇名：The Epidemiology of Illness and Injury during the 2010 Taipei International Flora Exposition作者：林孟臻(Menu-Chen Lin);李欣岱(Hsin-Dai Lee);游文瑜(Wen-Yu Yu);汪世潔(Shih-Chieh Wang);林茂榮(Mau-Roung Lin)關鍵字：大型活動;緊急醫療救護;嚴重度;博覽會;mass gathering;emergency medical services;severity;exposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷5期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：瞭解「2010台北國際花卉博覽會」期間尋求醫療站協助之疾病與外傷病人人口學特性、疾病與外傷類型與原因及嚴重疾病與外傷之影響因子。方法：採橫斷式研究於博覽會活動期間收案，從2010/11/06至2011/04/25，171天共累計8,963,666參觀人次。博覽會於四個園區設置醫療站（圓山、美術、新生及大佳河濱公園區），共提供11,489醫療服務人次。測量變項為病人人口學及疾病與外傷相關特性，並用邏輯斯迴歸分析較嚴重疾病與外傷之相關因子。結果：醫療使用率為每天每百萬旅客7.5次，救護車轉送率為每天每萬名病人2.3次。疾病前三名為腸胃道疾病、頭痛、發燒／感冒，外傷前三名為擦傷／撕裂傷、拉／鈍／扭傷、燙／曬傷／起水泡。嚴重疾病發生於旅客密度低於124人／100 m^2、2010年十一、十二月與2011年一月、二月及三月；嚴重外傷發生於年齡七十歲以上、早上、雨天、旅客密度低於57人／100 m^2、2010年十一、十二月與2011年三月。結論：未來大型活動應將疾病與外傷相關資料分析並找出危險因子，進一步預防或減少疾病與外傷，讓旅客及工作人員安全更有保障。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the demographics, types and causes of illness and injury, and risk factors for serious illness and injury among visitors at the 2010 Taipei International Floral Exposition. Methods: During the 171-day period from November 6th to April 25th 2011, 8,963,666 people visited the Exposition. There were four medical stations located in parks in Yuanshan, Arts, Xinsheng, and Dajia-Riverside during the Exposition period. Of these visitors, 11,489 people received medical services, and 470 of them were sent to a hospital for further treatment. Logistic regression analysis was used to examine factors associated with serious illness and injury. Results: The medical usage rate was 7.5 per million person-days, and the rate of ambulance to hospital usage was 2.3 per 10,000 patient-days. The three most prevalent illnesses were gastrointestinal disorders, headaches, and flu, while the three most prevalent injuries were abrasions/lacerations, strained muscles/contusions/sprains, and burns/sunburns/blisters. Serious illnesses were associated with a population density of ＜ 124 persons per 100 m^2, and the time periods of November and December 2010, and January to March 2011. Serious injuries were associated with age over 70, morning sessions, rain, a population density of ＜ 57 persons per 100 m^2, and the time periods November and December, 2010 and March, 2011. Conclusions: We suggest that the occurrences and severity of illness and injury be monitored during an exposition in order to provide immediate and effective medical interventions.起始頁-結束頁：502-515資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-05-0901篇名：醫療旅遊對醫療體系的潛在衝擊作者：吳彥莉;鄭雅文期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：303-308資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-012篇名：人類乳突病毒疫苗接種政策：公共衛生倫理觀點並列篇名：Human Papillomavirus Vaccination Policy: a Public Health Ethics Perspective作者：詹明錦(Min-Chin Chan);邱勝康(Shen-Kang Chiu);吳建昌(Kevin Chien-Chang Wu);方啟泰(Chi-Tai Fang)關鍵字：人類乳突病毒;疫苗;子宮頸癌;公共衛生倫理;human papillomavirus;vaccine;cervical cancer;public health ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：人類乳突病毒（Human papillomavirus, HPV）是子宮頸癌的主要致病因子。目前已有兩種HPV疫苗，分別為四價（HPV-6, 11, 16及18）及二價（HPV-16, 18），核准於26歲以下的青少女使用。由於定價昂貴，且長期保護力及疫苗安全性有待觀察，對HPV 疫苗接種政策出現若干不同意見。本文回顧相關文獻，並從美國Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention與Public Health Leadership Society共同制定的歷史性文獻Principles of the Ethical Practice of Public Health所揭櫫的公共衛生倫理（Public health ethics）原則來剖析「是否應強制全面接種HPV疫苗」及「是否應公費補助接種HPV疫苗」兩個議題。我們認為，在目前有限之資料下，是否強制施打，仍有商榷餘地，將來更需要進行公開透明之政策討論，取得公眾之信任，以決定HPV疫苗之強制施打是否能夠通過比例原則之考量。是否公費補助則必須考量成本效益，在最佳條件之假設下，成本效益分析顯示HPV疫苗在台灣具成本效益，因此，以公費補助低收入戶少女接種HPV疫苗，應是目前適當的做法。英文摘要：Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a major factor in the etiology of cervical cancer. Two HPV vaccines, HPV4 (against HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18) and HPV2 (against HPV 16 and 18), have been approved for adolescent girls younger than age 26. Due to concerns about the price, duration of protection, and vaccine safety, opinions differ on HPV vaccination policy. We reviewed the literature, and considered two issues from the public health ethics perspective highlighted in ”Principles of the Ethical Practice of Public Health” co-issued by the United States Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention and the Public Health Leadership Society: (1) whether or not HPV vaccination should be mandatory, and (2) whether HPV vaccination should be paid for by the government. Given the limited current information, it is still debatable whether to adopt an obligatory HPV vaccination program. In the future, it will be necessary for policy makers to engage the public in open and transparent deliberation and earn the public’s trust in seeing obligatory HPV vaccination as compatible with the principle of proportionality. In the best case scenario, analysis shows that it is cost-effective for people to voluntarily receive HPV vaccination. Currently, it is appropriate for the government to provide financial support to girls from lowincome families.起始頁-結束頁：309-319資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-023篇名：區域透析資源對基層腎臟科醫師產出表現之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Regional Dialysis Resources on Primary Nephrologists' Productivity on Terms of Patient Care作者：陳怡潔(Yi-Chieh Chen);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：區域透析資源;基層腎臟科醫師人力;產出表現;regional dialysis resources;primary nephrologist labor;output performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：應用標準位置理論及環境選擇模式分析台灣各鄉鎮市區血液透析床資源與基層腎臟科醫師產出表現的關係。方法：利用國家衛生研究院全民健康保險資料庫，以回溯性世代研究探討2007年鄉鎮市區透析資源對已執業及新執業基層腎臟科醫師於2009年產出表現之影響，採piecewise迴歸及逐步複迴歸分析。結果：血液透析床資源飽和程度對已執業醫師與新執業醫師產出未達統計上顯著差異，基層腎臟科醫師之總申報金額隨血液透析床資源飽和程度僅有小幅下降。醫師產出隨都市化程度往鄉鎮市區降低而增加，2007年每萬人口醫院血液透析床越多，已執業醫師2009年總申報金額會減少0.5%，而新執業醫師總申報金額降低0.38%。結論：血液透析床資源飽和程度可能影響醫師間的競爭情形，使基層腎臟科醫師之產出增加趨勢有減緩現象，且每萬人口醫院血液透析床越多則基層腎臟科醫師之產出下降。英文摘要：Objectives: This study applied standard location theory and the environmental selection mode to examine the relationship between a township's dialysis resources and primary nephrologists' productivity in Taiwan. Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study using the National Health Insurance database. The study subjects were licensed nephrologists who had practiced dialysis services from 2007 to 2009. Piecewise regression and stepwise linear regression were applied to explore whether a township's dialysis resources in 2007 were associated with primary nephrologists' production in terms of patient care in 2009. Results: The number of hemodialysis beds per ten thousand population had no significant impact on the nephrologists' total outpatient income. The nephrologists' production in terms of patient care increased over time, but at a descending pace. Primary nephrologists who practiced in suburban townships tended to raise their production of patient care. In townships with more hemodialysis hospital beds per ten thousand population in 2007, established primary nephrologists' output decreased by 0.5% in 2009, while new primary nephrologists' output decreased by 0.38%. Conclusions: Fewer than 10 hemodialysis beds/10,000 population may have an impact on competition among primary nephrologists and lead to the descending pace of increase in productivity. In townships with more hemodialysis hospital beds per ten thousand population, practicing primary nephrologists' output decreased.起始頁-結束頁：320-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-034篇名：The Association of Household Income, Healthcare Utilization, and Survival of Catastrophic Illnesses Patients: Using ESRD and Cancer as Examples並列篇名：重大傷病患者家戶所得與醫療利用、存活狀況之相關—以末期腎臟病與癌症為例作者：魏璽倫(Shi-Lun Wei);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang)關鍵字：全民健康保險;重大傷病;家戶所得;醫療利用;存活狀況;National Health Insurance;catastrophic illness;household income;healthcare utilization;survival期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the association of household income and healthcare utilization as well as survival status of patients with catastrophic illnesses under the NHI system in Taiwan. Methods: Data from the ”Survey of Family Income and Expenditure” (2003 to 2006) and the ”Registry of patients with catastrophic illness” were first linked to identify subjects. Patients with cancer or end stage renal disease (ESRD) holding only one NHI catastrophic illness card were included in this study. Information related to healthcare utilization was obtained from NHI claims data (2002 to 2007) and survival data was obtained from the ”National Registry of Deaths” (2003 to 2009). Negative binominal regression, multiple regression, and the Cox proportional hazard model were used to analyze the relationships among healthcare utilization, survival, and socioeconomic variables. Results: Regarding the healthcare utilization, the average length of stay (ALOS) of ESRD patients in the highest income bracket was 8.987 days longer than that of patients in the lowest bracket (p＜0.05). Hemodialysis usage, the number of outpatient visits and hospitalizations presented no correlation with household income. Among cancer patients in the highest income bracket, the IRRs of outpatient visits and hospitalization were 1.18 (p＜0.05) and 2.11 (p＜0.001), respectively. The ALOS of those in the highest income bracket was 11.36 days longer than that of patients in the lowest income bracket (p＜0.001). With respect to survival status, male ESRD patients had a higher mortality than females (HR=1.82, p＜0.05). Among cancer patients, being males (HR=1.66, p＜0.05) and in the highest income bracket had higher mortality (HR=1.6, p＜0.05), those with the highest education level had lower mortality (HR=0.52, p＜0.05). Conclusions: The relationship between household income and healthcare utilization varied according to type of diseases. Income level was positively associated with healthcare utilization among cancer patients while patients in the highest income bracket had higher mortality. But the association was not significant among ESRD patients. Future researchers can conduct further analyses on other catastrophic illnesses.英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the association of household income and healthcare utilization as well as survival status of patients with catastrophic illnesses under the NHI system in Taiwan. Methods: Data from the ”Survey of Family Income and Expenditure” (2003 to 2006) and the ”Registry of patients with catastrophic illness” were first linked to identify subjects. Patients with cancer or end stage renal disease (ESRD) holding only one NHI catastrophic illness card were included in this study. Information related to healthcare utilization was obtained from NHI claims data (2002 to 2007) and survival data was obtained from the ”National Registry of Deaths” (2003 to 2009). Negative binominal regression, multiple regression, and the Cox proportional hazard model were used to analyze the relationships among healthcare utilization, survival, and socioeconomic variables. Results: Regarding the healthcare utilization, the average length of stay (ALOS) of ESRD patients in the highest income bracket was 8.987 days longer than that of patients in the lowest bracket (p＜0.05). Hemodialysis usage, the number of outpatient visits and hospitalizations presented no correlation with household income. Among cancer patients in the highest income bracket, the IRRs of outpatient visits and hospitalization were 1.18 (p＜0.05) and 2.11 (p＜0.001), respectively. The ALOS of those in the highest income bracket was 11.36 days longer than that of patients in the lowest income bracket (p＜0.001). With respect to survival status, male ESRD patients had a higher mortality than females (HR=1.82, p＜0.05). Among cancer patients, being males (HR=1.66, p＜0.05) and in the highest income bracket had higher mortality (HR=1.6, p＜0.05), those with the highest education level had lower mortality (HR=0.52, p＜0.05). Conclusions: The relationship between household income and healthcare utilization varied according to type of diseases. Income level was positively associated with healthcare utilization among cancer patients while patients in the highest income bracket had higher mortality. But the association was not significant among ESRD patients. Future researchers can conduct further analyses on other catastrophic illnesses.起始頁-結束頁：331-345資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-045篇名：長期追蹤台灣學齡前兒童二至五歲含糖飲料及糕餅點心與精製糖攝取情形並列篇名：A Long-Term Follow-Up Study of Sugar Sweetened Beverages, Snacks and Desserts, and Refined Sugar Consumption among Preschoolers Aged 2 To 5 in Taiwan作者：盧立卿(Li-Ching Lyu);楊蕓菁(Yun-Chin Yang);尤宣文(Hsuan-Wen Yu)關鍵字：學齡前兒童;含糖飲料;糕餅點心;精製糖;世代研究;Preschoolers;sugar sweetened beverages;snacks and desserts;refined sugar;prospective cohort study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study is to examine the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, snacks and desserts among pre-school children and estimate the intake of refined sugar among children aged 2 to 5 by a prospective cohort. Methods: Total 301 infants were followed up annually to the age of 5 (n=132). The intake of refined sugar is calculated by using 24-hour recalls. Estimated percentages of refined sugar in various food products are used in order to obtain the average daily intakes. Results: The consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages increased with age. ”Flavored and fermented milk” contributed to the highest percentage among children aged 2-5, while the ”whole grains drinks” and ”tea drinks” showed an increasing trend over the years and the ”tea drinks” increased its consumption sharply. For snacks and desserts, ”biscuits” contributed the highest percentage among children aged 2 to 4, while ”Chinese sweet soup” showed an upward trend over the years with the highest percentage among children aged 5. The estimated refined sugar consumption was 13 ± 12g, 19 ± 16g, 32 ± 18g, 29 ± 20g (p for trend＜0.01), energy intake from refined sugar was 5%, 6%, 9% and 8% among children aged 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively. Conclusions: Over one-third of 5-year old children had over 10% of their caloric intakes from refined sugar. The caffeine in tea may not be suitable for young children. Proper eating habits and a balanced diet could facilitate the normal growth and development of healthy children.英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study is to examine the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, snacks and desserts among pre-school children and estimate the intake of refined sugar among children aged 2 to 5 by a prospective cohort. Methods: Total 301 infants were followed up annually to the age of 5 (n=132). The intake of refined sugar is calculated by using 24-hour recalls. Estimated percentages of refined sugar in various food products are used in order to obtain the average daily intakes. Results: The consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages increased with age. ”Flavored and fermented milk” contributed to the highest percentage among children aged 2-5, while the ”whole grains drinks” and ”tea drinks” showed an increasing trend over the years and the ”tea drinks” increased its consumption sharply. For snacks and desserts, ”biscuits” contributed the highest percentage among children aged 2 to 4, while ”Chinese sweet soup” showed an upward trend over the years with the highest percentage among children aged 5. The estimated refined sugar consumption was 13 ± 12g, 19 ± 16g, 32 ± 18g, 29 ± 20g (p for trend＜0.01), energy intake from refined sugar was 5%, 6%, 9% and 8% among children aged 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively. Conclusions: Over one-third of 5-year old children had over 10% of their caloric intakes from refined sugar. The caffeine in tea may not be suitable for young children. Proper eating habits and a balanced diet could facilitate the normal growth and development of healthy children.起始頁-結束頁：346-357資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-056篇名：Application of the Modified Health Belief Model for Undergoing Oral Mucosal Examination: Comparison of Different Health Risk Groups並列篇名：運用修正型健康信念模式比較不同健康風險族群接受口腔黏膜檢查之信念與可能性—以台灣無檳社區計畫活動為例作者：吳美宜(Mei-Yi Wu);郭鐘隆(Jong-Long Guo);李明憲(Ming-Shinn Lee);沈婉平(Wang-Ping Shen)關鍵字：健康信念模式;口腔黏膜檢查;不同健康風險族群;結構方程模式;Health Belief Model;oral mucosal examination (OME);different health risk groups;Structural Equation Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：口腔黏膜檢查為偵測口腔癌之有效措施，口腔癌為台灣男性第四位之惡性腫瘤，本研究旨在探討具有酒精、檳榔及吸菸等習慣造成罹患口腔癌之不同健康風險族群接受口腔黏膜檢查的社會心理差異。方法：本研究運用修正型健康信念模式探討參與無檳社區活動計劃居民接受口腔黏膜檢查之信念，共有866位完成問卷測量，我們依據參與者是否有喝酒、嚼食檳榔、吸菸等習慣區分為罹患口腔癌之高、中與低風險組，並採用結構方程模式建立及比較三組不同健康風險族群接受口腔黏膜檢查的可能性與影響路徑之差異。結果：證明修正後的健康信念模式對高、中與低風險組模型配適度良好並可解釋三組接受口腔黏膜檢查之可能性分別為50%、37%、30%，且三組在健康信念影響接受口腔黏膜檢查可能性之直接與間接路徑上有顯著差異。結論：不同健康風險族群接受口腔黏膜檢查可能性之健康信念與影響路徑有顯著差異，建議未來教育介入針對不同健康風險族群宜採取不同介入模式以提高無檳社區計畫之有效性。英文摘要：Objectives: Oral mucosal examination (OME) is an effective measure for detecting oral cancer, which is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths among males in Taiwan. Despite this fact, there is a lack of literature concerning the likelihood of undergoing an OME among different health risk groups based on individuals’ habits of drinking alcohol, chewing betel quid, and smoking cigarettes. Methods: We applied a modified form of the Health Belief Model (HBM) to explore the likelihood that a sample of individuals participating in a ”Community Free from Betel Quid Chewing” campaign would undergo an OME. Eight-hundred and sixty-six participants completed questionnaires measuring demographic characteristics, alcohol drinking, betel quid chewing, cigarette smoking, health beliefs, cues to action, self-efficacy, and likelihood of undergoing an OME. We used structural equation modeling (SEM) to investigate the direct and indirect paths, to predict the likelihood of undergoing an OME, in three different health risk groups. Classification of participants into groups of high, moderate, and low risk of developing oral cancer was based on the whether or not the participants drank alcohol, chewed betel quid, or smoked cigarettes. Results: The modified HBM demonstrated a good fit among the high, moderate, and low-risk groups, and explained 50%, 37%, and 30% of the variance of undergoing an OME, respectively. The direct and indirect paths influencing the likelihood of undergoing an OME varied significantly among the three groups. Conclusions: Based on the findings, care must be taken when selecting responsive health education for provision to participants with different health beliefs and levels of risks.起始頁-結束頁：358-371資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-067篇名：台灣地區國中學生霸凌角色之分佈及其與個人和家庭因素之分析並列篇名：Individual and Family Correlates of Bullying Roles among Junior High School Students in Taiwan作者：吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);陸玓玲(Dih-Ling Luh);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen)關鍵字：霸凌角色;盛行率;台灣國中生;the roles of bullying;prevalence;Taiwanese junior high school students期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：霸凌事件是值得研究的公共衛生議題。本文目的乃描述台灣地區公立國中學生之霸凌角色的分佈，並探討與其相關之個人及家庭因素。方法：為獲得台灣地區具代表性之公立國中生樣本，因此先自台灣北、中、南、東各區，以系統抽樣的方式抽出五間學校，每校每年級選兩班作為研究樣本。最後共20間學校，120個班級參加調查，於2010年9至12月完訪3,441人。為考量設計效果，以抽取率的倒數作為權值，並以SAS 9.1.3之Proc Survey模組進行描述統計及多項式邏輯斯迴歸分析。結果：台灣地區國中生有8.71%為霸凌者、7.01%為被霸凌者，2.91%為雙重身份者，共18.63%為霸凌事件的涉入者。性別、衝動人格、自覺受歡迎程度、父母最高教育程度、家庭衝突頻率、口語責罵頻率及體罰頻率分別與霸凌角色有不同的關連性。結論：霸凌事件在國中盛行，建議在國中之前即可發展預防介入計畫。不同霸凌角色之相關因素不同，應針對不同角色設計介入方案。整體而言，建議家庭增加良性互動和減少衝突及過度責罰。英文摘要：Objectives: Bullying is an important public health issue. The aims of this study were to demonstrate the prevalence of bullying roles and to investigate individual and family correlates of these roles among 7th to 9th graders in Taiwan. Methods: Participants included 3,441 students from 120 classes in 20 schools via stratified, multistage, random cluster sampling. To estimate the prevalence of roles in bullying, the weighting index was calculated from the inverse of the sampling rates. Descriptive analysis and multinomial logistic regression were performed using SAS Survey Analysis PROCs software. Results: Our survey revealed that 18.63% of the students were involved in bullying with 8.71% as bullies, 7.01% as victims, and 2.91% in both roles. Gender, level of impulsiveness, self-perceived popularity, parental educational attainment, the frequency of family conflict, scolding, and corporal punishment were significantly related to the probability of being classified in one bullying role or another. Conclusions: School bullying is not uncommon in Taiwan. Our results suggested that individual characteristics and family factors associated with bullying roles should be taken into account in the development of programs to prevent bullying.起始頁-結束頁：372-381資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-078篇名：評論：台灣地區國中學生霸凌角色之分佈及其與個人和家庭因素之分析作者：李明憲期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：382-382資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-089篇名：作者回覆：台灣地區國中學生霸凌角色之分佈及其與個人和家庭因素之分析作者：吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);陸玓玲(Dih-Ling Luh);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：382-382(2)資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-0910篇名：台灣中老年人慢性期中風患者身心健康之退化狀況並列篇名：The Decline in Physical and Mental Health among Older Chronic Stroke Patients in Taiwan作者：王思涵(Szu-Han Wang);王俊毅(Jiun-Yi Wang)關鍵字：中老年人;中風;退化;心理健康;身體功能;older people;stroke;decline;mental health;physical functions期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：中風是造成老人身心障礙的主因之一。本研究旨在探討台灣中老年中風患者之身心健康退化狀況。方法：擷取「台灣中老年人身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」1999及2003二個年度資料，依二年度中風病史紀錄將個體分為「無中風病史組」（3,207人）、「新發中風個案組」（170人）及「慢性期中風個案組」（109人），分析三組中老年人身心健康狀態。身心健康指標，包括健康自評、基本／工具性日常生活功能、認知困難、憂鬱傾向及生活滿意度等測量。以成對樣本t檢定、Wilcoxon符號化等級檢定及廣義線性方程式分析三組中老年人在二年度間身心健康的退化及其差異。結果：三組中老年人自1999年其後4年的身體健康狀態均明顯退化，「新發中風個案組」身體功能退化尤其明顯；但「慢性期中風個案組」在身心健康六項指標中，有五項的退化幅度與「無中風病史組」無顯著差異。結論：中風是造成患者身心健康狀態改變的重要因素。而慢性期中風患者在多數的身心健康指標之退化並未比無中風者明顯，顯示中風患者在慢性期後身體功能的退化，雖有部分是中風後遺症導致，但老化可能是更大的影響因素。建議慢性期中風患者可透過各種健康促進活動，延遲老化所帶來的衝擊。本研究將中風對患者的影響初步量化，其結果可作為社會政策擬定及照護資源分配的部分參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Stroke is one of the main causes of physical and mental disability among the elderly. This study investigated the decline in physical and mental health among older stroke patients in Taiwan. Methods: Subjects who completed interviews as part of the Taiwan Longitudinal Study of Aging in both 1999 and 2003 were included. According to their stroke histories, subjects were grouped into three sub-groups: 3,207 never had a stroke, 170 had a stroke between 1999 and 2003, and 109 had a stroke before 1999. Several measures of physical and mental health were analyzed. These included self-rated health status, basic/instrumental activities of daily living, cognitive disability, depression and life satisfaction. Paired-t tests, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and generalized estimating equations were used to analyze the decline and the differences in physical and mental health of the three groups. Results: After 4 years of followup, all three groups of older people declined in physical health, especially those subjects who had strokes between 1999 and 2003. There was no difference in the decline in physical and mental health between those subjects who had a stroke before 1999 and those who never had a stroke. Conclusions: A stroke could have a significant impact on the physical and mental health of older people; however, on most health indicators, the decline among chronic stroke patients was not significantly different from that of those who never had a stroke. This suggests that the decline in chronic stroke patients is not only a sequel to a stroke but also a result of aging. Chronic stroke patients could participate in health promotion programs to slow down the impact of aging. This study roughly quantified the impact of strokes on older people and could serve as a reference for social welfare planning and the allocation of health care resources.起始頁-結束頁：383-392資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-1011篇名：台灣簡易七題版口腔健康衝擊量表（OHIP-7T）之發展與驗證並列篇名：Development and Validation of the Taiwanese Short-form of the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-7T)作者：郭曉菁(Hsiao-Ching Kuo);陳人豪(Jen-Hao Chen);賴辛癸(Shin-Kuei Lai);沈雅春(Ya-Chun Shen);王震乾(Jen-Chyan Wang);楊奕馨(Yi-Hsin Yang)關鍵字：口腔健康衝擊量表;生活品質;老人;<U+8D0B>復物;oral health impact profile;quality of life;elderly;prosthesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: The aim was to develop and validate the Taiwanese short-form of the Oral Health Impact Profile-an instrument used to assess oral health-related quality of life. Methods: A sevenitem short form was developed using the best subset controlled regression procedure. Two samples, one from the general elderly population (n=1,402) and the other from among patients with prostheses (n=116) were used to investigate validity and internal consistency. Responsiveness was assessed in 91 of the patients treated with prostheses. Results: Associations between (OHIP-7T) scores and self-reports of oral health status and disorders in the general elderly population and among prosthetic patients were interpreted as support for validity. The instrument's internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha: 0.79–0.83) and responsiveness (effect size: 1.51) were sufficient. Conclusions: This study developed and validated the sufficient discriminatory ability and responsiveness of the shortform OHIP-7T, and it may now be used in national surveys in Taiwan.英文摘要：Objectives: The aim was to develop and validate the Taiwanese short-form of the Oral Health Impact Profile-an instrument used to assess oral health-related quality of life. Methods: A sevenitem short form was developed using the best subset controlled regression procedure. Two samples, one from the general elderly population (n=1,402) and the other from among patients with prostheses (n=116) were used to investigate validity and internal consistency. Responsiveness was assessed in 91 of the patients treated with prostheses. Results: Associations between (OHIP-7T) scores and self-reports of oral health status and disorders in the general elderly population and among prosthetic patients were interpreted as support for validity. The instrument's internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha: 0.79–0.83) and responsiveness (effect size: 1.51) were sufficient. Conclusions: This study developed and validated the sufficient discriminatory ability and responsiveness of the shortform OHIP-7T, and it may now be used in national surveys in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：393-402資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-04-1112篇名：診斷關聯群附加支付的發展與應用並列篇名：The Development and Application of Add-On Payments in a DRG System作者：李卓倫(Jwo-Leun Lee);洪錦墩(Chin-Tun Hung);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);蔡梓鑫(Tzu-Hsin Tsai);紀駿輝(Chun-Huei Chi)關鍵字：診斷關聯群;附加支付;新興醫療科技;健康保險;DRGs;add-on payment;new medical technology;health insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：新興醫療科技通常會先應用在住院病人身上，當新科技已經上市但還未納入健保給付時，這項新科技不會在診斷關聯群的支付名單內，因此醫院比較不願意使用。理想上，經政府核准的新興醫療科技必須先經過醫療科技評估，以確定其用途、療效、及成本效果後才能正式由全民健保給付，但目前在缺乏醫療科技評估機制的情況下，新醫療科技與現有醫療科技的相對優勢，仍處於模糊的階段。在論量計酬支付制度使用新醫療科技通常會讓醫療支出上升，而導入診斷關聯群可能同時減緩醫療費用上漲和新科技的引進速度。這當中最大的挑戰，在如何透過支付制度設計，來達到一方面控制醫療支出，同時也提供足夠的誘因來促進醫療科技進步的雙重目標。本文之主要目標在描述介紹主要工業化國家對於社會健康保險或國民醫療服務為引進新興醫療科技時，在診斷關聯群支付制度上所做的誘因安排，進而提出其對台灣實施診斷關聯群支付制度的政策啟示。本文介紹的國家包括美國、德國、法國、義大利、和英國。這些國家附加支付的共同性包括制度的銜接、強調醫療自主性、以主診斷碼為依據、建構協商公式、及以科技評估為依據（義大利除外）。同時這些國家的制度也在下列方面有差異：以費用控制為目標（德、法、義）、對申請資格的限制（德、法）、以委員會議為審查機構（德、法）、建構醫療科技成本基準（美、德、英）、及強調資訊透明（美、德、英）。由這些國家實施附加支付經驗之分析，本文歸納出附加支付制度對台灣全民健保的重要啟示包括有助於支付制度的銜接、長期醫療費用控制、及控制家戶自付醫療費用占率。此外，為使附加支付制度達成其政策目的，台灣有必要建構醫療科技評估制度，及標準化客觀的醫療成本估算方式。英文摘要：New medical technologies have often been applied to inpatient care; however, when a new medical technology becomes available in the market but is not yet covered by national health insurance, such a technology is excluded from the Diagnosis-Related Group (DRG) list. Consequently, hospitals may be reluctant to use it. Ideally, once a new medical technology is approved by the government, it should undergo a health technology assessment (HTA) to ascertain its applicability, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness before it is covered by a national health system. At present, however, the lack of HTAs makes the relative advantage of a new medical technology unclear. The adoption and use of a new technology in a fee-for-service payment system usually leads to increased medical expenditure. This is where the introduction of DRG add-ons plays an important role in regulating the rates of adoption of technology and rising expenditures. The major challenge in dealing with a new medical technology is how to design a payment system that will achieve the goal of controlling expenditure while providing adequate incentives for technological improvement. The purpose of this article is to compare how several industrialized nations designed their DRG add-on payment incentives in order to regulate the adoption of new medical technologies by their national health care systems, and to provide policy implications for Taiwan. We summarized the DRG add-on payment systems implemented in the United States (U.S.), Germany, France, Italy, and the United Kingdom (U.K.). Their systems share several common features in that they are consistent with the existing payment system, emphasize professional autonomy, use primary diagnostic codes as the foundation, provide formulas for negotiation, and are based on technology assessment (except Italy). There are unique features in some countries, such as an emphasis on cost control (Germany, France and Italy), restrictions on who can apply (Germany and France), setting up review committees (Germany and France), a cost-based foundation for medical technology (U.S., Germany and U.K.), and an emphasis on transparency (U.S., Germany and U.K.). For Taiwan, the lessons we learned from these countries include the importance of DRG add-on payments in providing consistency in the payment system, control of long-term health care costs and control of household out-of-pocket payments for health care. In order for DRG add-ons to achieve policy goals, Taiwan needs to establish systems for medical technology assessment and standardized medical cost accounting.起始頁-結束頁：205-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0113篇名：台灣工時規範之法規執行度－從法律規範之「應然」到「實然」並列篇名：The Effective Regulation Index for Working Hours in Taiwan-The Gap between Regulations and Reality作者：蔡奉真(Feng-Jen Tsai)關鍵字：工作時數;健康權;勞動基準法;法規執行;全球化;working hours;decent work;labor law;effective regulation;globalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：本文就我國歷年之勞工每周平均工時、我國工時規範之法規嚴格度、法規遵守度與法規有效度進行分析與了解。方法：法規嚴格度指數係以工時規範中之每週工作時數為量測對象，法規遵守度指標則係以各國勞工實際工作時數低於每週工時標準之比例為量測對象，法規有效度指數則為法規嚴格度指標及法規遵守度指標的平均。本文以行政院主計處所發布之人力資源調查資料庫從1978年至2010年止之資料及台灣歷年工時規範之變化為材料，就台灣勞工歷年實際每周平均工時、法規嚴格度、法規遵守度及法規有效度進行分析。2004年之資料另被特別分析，以與其他國家相較。結果：我國全體工作者之每周平均工時普遍偏高，在2000年前，全體工作者每周平均工時高達46小時以上，在2000年後除於2009年時降至43小時外，其餘年份之每周平均工時均高於44小時．我國之法規嚴格度（數值範圍為0-10）於2000年時明顯自0提升至4.6，而法規遵守度（數值範圍為0－10）則從1978年的6.4緩慢上升到1999年的8.6，但在2000年時遽降到1.6，此後2001到2010年間則維持在5上下。法規有效度（數值範圍為0－10）在2000年之前大致維持在2.9到4.3之間，其後則一直維持在4.7∼5.3間。2004年時我國的法規遵守度僅有5.2，而法規有效度為4.9。結論：台灣工時規範之實然與應然間落差極大，代表我國工時規範成效不彰，本文建議增加勞工法律保障意識，並改變勞動檢查制度，以增強法規執行之成效。英文摘要：Objectives: This study was conducted to evaluate the average yearly working hours of workers, the Statutory-hour Strictness, the Observance Degree, and the Effective Regulatory Index for working-hours in Taiwan. Methods: The Effective Regulation Index was defined as the average of Statutory-hour Strictness and the Observance Degree. The dataset of the Human Resource Survey from 1978 to 2010 compiled by the Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Executive Yuan was used in the study. The changes in regulations for working hours in Taiwan were determined. Then the average yearly working hours of workers, the Statutory-hour Strictness, the Observance Degree and the Effective Regulation Index for working hours in Taiwan were calculated. Information from 2004 was further analyzed for comparison with other countries. Results: The average working hours of workers in Taiwan were comparatively high. Before 2000, the average working hours per week were above 46. After 2000, average working hours per week were still above 44, except for 43 hours in 2009. The Statutory-hour Strictness rose from 0 to 4.6 in 2000. The Observance Degree slowly increased from 6.4 in 1978 to 8.64 in 1999; although it dropped to 1.6 in 2000, it remained stable around 5 after 2000. The Effective Regulation Index for working hours in Taiwan was between 2.9 and 4.3 before 2000, but remained between 4.7 and 5.3 in the 21st century. In 2004, the Observance Degree of the working regulations was 5.2, and the Effective Regulation Index was 4.9. Conclusions: The huge gap between regulations and reality in working hours in Taiwan showed the ineffectiveness of working-hours regulation. We suggest increasing workers' awareness of regulations and strengthening enforcement of the working regulations by improving the labor inspection system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：220-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0214篇名：台灣慢性病人醫療利用之探討－以慢性腎臟病、糖尿病及高血壓為例並列篇名：Medical Utilization by Patients with Chronic Diseases in Taiwan: Chronic Kidney Disease, Diabetes and Hypertension作者：李曉伶(Hsiao-Ling Lee);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：慢性腎臟病;糖尿病;高血壓;醫療利用;chronic kidney disease;diabetes;hypertension;medical utilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：人口老化導致慢性病人及醫療利用增加，實施論量計酬導致多重疾病病人至不同專科看病，探討慢性病人之醫療利用及其照護適用情形有其重要性。方法：以健保門住診資料定義2006年底仍存活之20歲以上慢性病人（患慢性腎臟病、糖尿病、高血壓）為對象，計算2006年底慢性病盛行情形，排除2007年死亡者追蹤其2007年醫療利用，探討慢性病型態對門住診醫療利用之影響。結果：2006年底20歲以上至少罹患一種慢性病者共2,539,137人，盛行率為14.83%；合併三種慢性病者之門診及住院利用最高，平均門診次數、科別數、醫師數、院所數分別為33.20次、5.41科、8.46位、4.57所，平均住院次數、天數、院所數分別為0.71次、7.37天、0.43所；合併三種慢性病、合併慢性腎臟病及高血壓者之門診利用顯著較僅罹患高血壓者高，合併三種慢性病、合併慢性腎臟病及糖尿病者之住院利用顯著較僅罹患高血壓者高。結論：慢性病型態會影響門診和住院利用。建議衛生主管機關提供適度之支付誘因，鼓勵及引導醫師提供多重慢性病人整合性照護，給予病人較佳之治療建議。英文摘要：Objectives: An aging population has more individuals with chronic diseases and greater medical utilization. In a fee-for-service payment system, patients tend to visit different specialists for their various conditions. This study analyzed the impact of patterns of chronic disease on medical utilization. Methods: This study used the National Health Insurance database to identify patients who had been diagnosed with chronic kidney disease, diabetes or hypertension, were aged 20 or older, and were alive at the end of 2006. The study measured the prevalence of chronic diseases in 2006 after excluding the patients who died in 2007. The study then analyzed current medical utilization by patients with chronic diseases. Results: There were 2,539,137 patients with at least one chronic disease in 2006, and the prevalence rate was 14.83%. The highest medical utilization was by patients with all three chronic diseases. For outpatient care, the numbers of visits, different departments, different physicians, and different hospitals/clinics were 33.20, 5.41, 8.46 and 4.57, respectively. For inpatient care, the average numbers of visits, hospital days, and hospitals/clinics were 0.71, 7.37 and 0.43, respectively. Outpatient utilization by patients with three chronic diseases and patients with chronic kidney disease and hypertension were significantly higher than those of patients with hypertension alone. Inpatient utilization by patients with three chronic diseases and patients with chronic kidney disease and diabetes was significantly higher than that of patients with hypertension alone. Conclusions: Patterns of chronic diseases influence medical utilization. We suggest that health authorities provide appropriate financial incentives to encourage physicians to provide services and better treatment recommendations for patients with multiple chronic conditions.起始頁-結束頁：231-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0315篇名：高危險妊娠因素與出生體重對新生兒住院醫療費用的影響並列篇名：The Influence of High-Risk Pregnancy Factors and Birth Weight on Newborn Inpatient Expenditure作者：楊雅淑(Ya-Shu Yang);黃偉堯(Wei-Yao Huang)關鍵字：高危險妊娠因素;出生體重;住院醫療費用;診斷關聯群;high-risk pregnancy factors;birth weight;inpatient expenditure;diagnosis-related groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study is to investigate the influence of high-risk pregnancy factors and birth weight on newborn inpatient expenditure. Methods: The study design is that of a secondary cohort study. The subjects are admitted patients with ages of 28 days or less from the 2008 National Health Insurance Research Database. This study analyzed the influence of high-risk pregnancy factors and birth weight on newborn inpatient expenditure by t-test, ANOVA and multiple regression. Results: The multiple regression results showed that a maternal age of 35 years or more at delivery (β=0.078), alcohol consumption during pregnancy (β=1.004), diabetes mellitus (β=0.181), renal disease (β=0.761), lung disease (β=0.599), anemia (β=0.119), giving birth to three or more babies (β=0.323), undergoing prolonged labor (β=0.176), suffering from oligohydramnios or polyhydramnios (β=0.290), having meconium stained amniotic fluid (β=0.259), having a prolapsed cord (β=0.414), undergoing a caesarean section (β=0.308), having a gestational age of less than 37 weeks (β=0.354), having a birth weight of less than 1,500g (β=1.428) and having a birth weight of 1,500-2,499g (β=0.432) increases newborn inpatient expenditure significantly (p＜0.05). Conclusions: Certain risk conditions associated with highrisk pregnancies as well as low birth weight increase newborn inpatient expenditure. This study suggests that when the Bureau of National Health Insurance modifies the Taiwan Diagnosis- Related Groups classification framework of Newborns and Other Neonates with Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period (MDC 15), they should take into consideration various risk conditions that are associated with high-risk pregnancy in addition to birth weight.英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study is to investigate the influence of high-risk pregnancy factors and birth weight on newborn inpatient expenditure. Methods: The study design is that of a secondary cohort study. The subjects are admitted patients with ages of 28 days or less from the 2008 National Health Insurance Research Database. This study analyzed the influence of high-risk pregnancy factors and birth weight on newborn inpatient expenditure by t-test, ANOVA and multiple regression. Results: The multiple regression results showed that a maternal age of 35 years or more at delivery (β=0.078), alcohol consumption during pregnancy (β=1.004), diabetes mellitus (β=0.181), renal disease (β=0.761), lung disease (β=0.599), anemia (β=0.119), giving birth to three or more babies (β=0.323), undergoing prolonged labor (β=0.176), suffering from oligohydramnios or polyhydramnios (β=0.290), having meconium stained amniotic fluid (β=0.259), having a prolapsed cord (β=0.414), undergoing a caesarean section (β=0.308), having a gestational age of less than 37 weeks (β=0.354), having a birth weight of less than 1,500g (β=1.428) and having a birth weight of 1,500-2,499g (β=0.432) increases newborn inpatient expenditure significantly (p＜0.05). Conclusions: Certain risk conditions associated with highrisk pregnancies as well as low birth weight increase newborn inpatient expenditure. This study suggests that when the Bureau of National Health Insurance modifies the Taiwan Diagnosis- Related Groups classification framework of Newborns and Other Neonates with Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period (MDC 15), they should take into consideration various risk conditions that are associated with high-risk pregnancy in addition to birth weight.起始頁-結束頁：240-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0416篇名：台灣民眾對居家服務的貨幣價值評估：假設市場評價法的應用並列篇名：The Monetary Value of Home Care Service: An Application of the Contingent Valuation Method作者：曾妙慧(Miao-Huei Tseng)關鍵字：居家服務;假設市場評價法;願付價格;願接受價格;home care service;contingent valuation method;willingness to pay;willingness to accept期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：了解台灣民眾對於居家服務的貨幣價值評估，並檢視影響民眾貨幣價值評估之因素。方法：利用假設市場評價法之開放式直接詢價法，以台灣地區年滿20歲及以上之民眾為對象進行電話訪問，搜集民眾對於居家服務的貨幣價值評估，包括「願付價格」與「願接受價格」，共取得1,083份有效樣本。結果：當受訪者的家人有照顧的需求發生時，願意支付平均每小時新台幣107元（N=685）雇用照顧服務員照顧家人；當未來家人需要照顧時，受訪者願意犧牲自己的自由時間、或是辭去工作在家照顧家人，所能接受政府支付的最低補償價格，即「照顧津貼」為平均每小時新台幣144元（N=624）；做為一個居家照顧服務員提供非親屬居家服務時，受訪者願意接受的最低薪資為平均每小時新台幣166元（N=547）。結論：在政策意涵上，本研究所得的平均願付價格每小時107元可作為未來社會長期照護保險訂定部份負擔的上限參考值；社會長期照護保險制度下若設計照顧津貼，其額度設定可以低於實物給付的水準；在訂定社會長期照護保險的給付標準時，可將每小時166元做為考量定價的起始點。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate how much monetary value people in Taiwan put on home care service, and to examine the factors that affected public assessment of the monetary value of home care service. Methods: Using the open-ended contingent valuation method, this study determined the monetary values of home care service, including willingness to pay and willingness to accept, by telephone interviews. A total of 1,083 telephone interviews targeted people aged 20 and older in Taiwan. Results: If a need for home care occurred, then the respondents were willing to pay an average of NT$ 107 per hour (N= 685) to employ a care worker to take care of their family member. The minimum compensation that the respondents wanted in order to sacrifice their free time or to quit their jobs to take care of a family member at home averaged NT$ 144 per hour (N= 624). As a care worker to care for non-relatives, the minimum wage that respondents were willing to accept averaged NT$ 166 per hour (N= 547). Conclusions: These results have the following policy implications: First, the average willingness to pay, 107 NT dollars per hour, can serve as a reference value for the upper limit of the deductible in long-term care insurance. Second, if a care allowance is built into the long-term care insurance system, then it can be set at a lower level than payment in kind. Third, 166 NT dollars can be used as the starting value for long-term care insurance benefits.起始頁-結束頁：251-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0517篇名：評論：台灣民眾對居家服務的貨幣價值評估：假設市場評價法的應用作者：郎慧珠期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：264-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0618篇名：作者回覆：台灣民眾對居家服務的貨幣價值評估：假設市場評估法的應用作者：曾妙慧期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：265-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0719篇名：探討醫學中心護理人員情緒勞務對工作滿意度與工作倦怠之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Hospital Nurses' Emotional Labor on Job Satisfaction and Burnout作者：朱正一(Cheng-I Chu)關鍵字：情緒勞務;工作滿意度;工作倦怠;情緒智力;emotional labor;job satisfaction;burnout;emotional intelligence期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of nurses' emotional labor on job satisfaction and burnout. We also investigated the moderating effect of emotional intelligence in order to understand the associations among study variables. Methods: The purposive sampling method was adopted to select two medical centers in Taiwan. In each of these, 20% of the nurses were randomly selected to receive a questionnaire. A total of 236 questionnaires were distributed, and 219 valid questionnaires (92.8%) were returned. These were analyzed by using descriptive statistics, t-tests, one-way ANOVA, Pearson's correlation analysis, regression analysis, factor analysis and Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) techniques. Results: The results showed that emotional labor was positively correlated with both job satisfaction(r=0.769, p＜0.01) and burnout(r=0.413, p＜0.01); nevertheless, burnout was negatively correlated with job satisfaction(r=-0.708, p＜0.01). A moderating effect of emotional intelligence was not found. Conclusions: As hypothesized, emotional labor was positively correlated with both job satisfaction and burnout; but, burnout was negatively correlated with job satisfaction. More studies are needed to investigate other factors that may affect the overall model and to clarify the role of emotional intelligence.英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of nurses' emotional labor on job satisfaction and burnout. We also investigated the moderating effect of emotional intelligence in order to understand the associations among study variables. Methods: The purposive sampling method was adopted to select two medical centers in Taiwan. In each of these, 20% of the nurses were randomly selected to receive a questionnaire. A total of 236 questionnaires were distributed, and 219 valid questionnaires (92.8%) were returned. These were analyzed by using descriptive statistics, t-tests, one-way ANOVA, Pearson's correlation analysis, regression analysis, factor analysis and Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) techniques. Results: The results showed that emotional labor was positively correlated with both job satisfaction(r=0.769, p＜0.01) and burnout(r=0.413, p＜0.01); nevertheless, burnout was negatively correlated with job satisfaction(r=-0.708, p＜0.01). A moderating effect of emotional intelligence was not found. Conclusions: As hypothesized, emotional labor was positively correlated with both job satisfaction and burnout; but, burnout was negatively correlated with job satisfaction. More studies are needed to investigate other factors that may affect the overall model and to clarify the role of emotional intelligence.起始頁-結束頁：266-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0820篇名：台灣中高齡人口不同世代所得相關死亡率不平等之年齡變化趨勢並列篇名：Aged-Related Patterns of Income-Related Inequality in Mortality among the Middle-Aged and the Elderly in Taiwan by Different Cohorts作者：李妙純(Miaw-Chwen Lee);劉亞明(Ya-Ming Liu)關鍵字：死亡率不平等;集中指數;相對不平等指數;mortality inequalities;concentration index;relative index of inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：本研究使用「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」資料，應用集中指數（concentration index, CI）及相對不平等指數（relative index of inequality, RII）檢視中高齡人口與所得相關之死亡率不平等情形。方法：使用1999及2003年兩波資料及其2000－2003及2004－2007死亡與否為死亡情形之測量。所得測量乃受訪者及其配偶各項年所得總和，分為九組：自年所得36000元以下，至最高所得組年所得一百萬元以上。實證分析之樣本分三世代：1928年底以前、1929年初∼1946年3月底出生及1946年4月∼1953年底出生世代。結果：台灣中高齡人口與所得相關死亡率不平等集中於低所得組；例如2003及2007年年齡標準化死亡率CI為-0.1222及-0.1201；RII為-0.7496及-0.7355。相對於年長世代（1928年以前及1929－1946），年輕世代（1946－1953）之與所得相關死亡率不平等程度較大。世代內2007年之不平等比2003年小，亦說明不平等隨著年齡的增加而減少，符合「年齡平準假說」（age-as-leveler hypothesis）。結論：台灣中高齡人口呈現與所得相關之死亡率不平等，而且人口老化促使死亡率呈現年齡平準趨勢。此項趨勢雖可能是死亡選擇的結果，但也顯示若要預防老年人口之健康不平等，除要重視老年人口相關福利政策之制定，似乎亦應關注於從年輕或中年人口所衍伸之健康不平等相關議題。英文摘要：Objectives: Data from the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Middle-aged and the Elderly in Taiwan and the concentration index (CI) and relative index of inequality (RII) were used to examine inequalities in income-related mortality among the elderly in Taiwan. Methods: Survey data on the 60 and over population in 1999 and 2003 were linked to 2003-2007 data from a national death registry. Participants had been requested to provide information regarding annual income (including that of the respondent and his/her spouse). The income variable included nine categories ranging from below NTD 36000 to 1 million NTD and above. The sample was divided into three birth cohorts: before 1928, 1929-1946, and 1946-1953. Results: Results indicated that mortality was more pronounced among lower income groups of Taiwan's elderly. For example, age-adjusted CIs were -0.1222 and -0.1201 in 2003 and 2007, respectively, while age-adjusted RIIs were -0.7496 and -0.7355, respectively. In 2003, the CIs for the cohorts before 1928 and 1929-1946 were -0.1010 and -0.1301, while the RIIs were -0.6217 and -0.8023. In 2007, the CIs for the cohorts 1928, 1929-1946, and 1946-1953 were -0.0823, -0.0686 and -0.2887, respectively; while the RIIs were -0.5142, -0.4206 and -1.8061. These results indicated that the extent of inequality in mortality in the younger cohort was greater than that in the older cohorts. The decreased inequalities among the cohorts before 1928 and 1929-1946 also supported the age-as-leveler hypothesis. Conclusions: Income-related inequalities in mortality exist among the elderly in Taiwan, but health inequalities increase with age. Policy efforts are needed to reduce the social disparities in health among the elderly and in the young or middle aged as well.起始頁-結束頁：279-288資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-0901篇名：The Association between Hospital Quality of Care and Short-Term Mortality of Acute Myocardial Infarction Patients並列篇名：醫院照護過程品質與急性心肌梗塞病人死亡之相關性作者：譚家惠(Chia-Hui Tan);譚醒朝(Sing-Chew Tam);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang)關鍵字：照護品質;急性心肌梗塞;醫院照護過程;廣義階層線性模式;quality of care;acute myocardial infarction (AMI);hospital process performance;hierarchical generalized linear model (HGLM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：評估急性心肌梗塞6項醫院照護過程品質測量與病人出院後30天內死亡情形之相關性。方法：採橫斷性研究，以2007年1月至2009年11月住院主診斷為急性心肌梗塞病人（ICD-9 CM: 410.xx），排除後續治療者（ICD-9 CM: 410.x2），以廣義階層線性模式（HGLM）分析醫院層次的6項照護過程品質測量，對於病人出院後30天內死亡情形之相關性。結果：約85.5%的病人在住院期間曾接受aspirin治療、38.32%曾接受beta-blocker治療、46.75%曾接受ACE inhibitor for LVSD治療、43.91%曾接受低密度膽固醇檢查、41.37%曾接受血管再通術。經病人特質與醫院特質校正後，醫院住院期間beta-blocker使用情形（OR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.83-0.92）、ACE inhibitor for LVSD使用情形（OR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.87-0.99）、低密度膽固醇檢查執行情形（OR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.81-0.93）、血管再通術使用情形（OR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.81-0.93），以及6項品質測量的綜合分數（OR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.76-0.92），對於病人出院後30天內死亡風險有顯著影響。結論：醫院照護過程品質測量對於急性心肌梗塞病人出院後30天內死亡風險有顯著影響，且醫院層次照護過程品質測量的應用與改善，將有助於急性心肌梗塞病人照護結果。英文摘要：Objectives: To evaluate the association of six hospital-level process of care measures and the 30-day mortality. Methods: This is a cross-sectional study. Patients admitted with a principal diagnosis of AMI (ICD-9CM: 410.xx, excluding 410.x2) (n=1,416) between January 2007 and November 2009. Aspirin use during hospitalization, β-blocker use during hospitalization, ACE inhibitor for LVSD use during hospitalization, LDL-c testing, lipid lowering medication, and reperfusion therapy. Outcome included the 30-day mortality of AMI patients. Data were analysed by using a hierarchical generalized linear model (HGLM) to examine whether the 30-day mortality at the patient level varied among different hospital performance adjusted for patient and hospital characteristics. Results: Among those patients, 88.50% received aspirin therapy during hospitalization, 38.32% received β-blocker therapy, 46.75% received ACE inhibitor for LVSD, 43.91% received LDL-C testing, 41.37% received lipid lowering medication, and 40.97% received reperfusion therapy. Overall the 6 quality of care measures were 53.7% of ideal instances. After risk adjustment, β-blocker use during hospitalization (odds ratio [OR], 0.87; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83-0.92), ACE inhibitor for LVSD (OR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.87-0.99), lipid lowering medication (OR, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.86-0.96), reperfusion therapy (OR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.81-0.93) and composite score of six measures (OR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.76-0.92) were significantly correlated with 30-day mortality. Conclusions: A significant association between hospital's process performance and patient outcome was found. The outcome of AMI patients could be enhanced by improving process performance.起始頁-結束頁：289-301資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-03-102篇名：肥胖的環境與生活型態因素並列篇名：Environmental and Lifestyle Factors of Obesity作者：簡義紋(Yi-Wen Chien);吳岱穎(Tai-Yin Wu);林光洋(Kuang-Yang Lin);吳逸帆(Yi-Fan Wu);郭冠良(Kuan-Liang Kuo);季瑋珠(Wei-Chu Chie)關鍵字：肥胖;環境;生活型態;成因;obesity;environment;lifestyle;contributing factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：肥胖是全球引起死亡的第五大風險因子，並造成個人代謝相關疾病及國家醫療財政負擔。造成肥胖的因素很多，可分為遺傳及基因因素、環境因素、生活型態因素、內分泌或藥物因素，本文旨在以三個層面來探討環境及生活型態因素對台灣近年來肥胖率增加的影響。（1）家庭層面：探討家庭社經地位、家庭生活品質、父母體型、飲食習慣變遷及靜態活動增長和肥胖的關係。（2）學校層面：探討運動時間減少及升學壓力造成睡眠時間減少和肥胖的關係。（3）社會層面：探討西式速食、含糖飲料、媒體廣告影響及肥胖稅和肥胖的關係。本文回顧現有文獻及統計資料並提出可行的解決方案，以期政府能透過政策執行來改善影響國民健康甚鉅的肥胖問題。英文摘要：Obesity is the fifth leading risk factor of death globally. Obesity causes diseases related to metabolic syndrome individually and creates medical and financial burdens nationally. Many factors contribute to obesity including factors classified as hereditary or genetic, environmental, lifestyle, and endocrine or medical in nature.The aim of this paper is to explore the effects of environmental and lifestyle factors on the increasing obesity rates in Taiwan in recent years using three components. (1) Family component: to discuss the relationship between family socioeconomic status, quality of family life, parental body stature, changes in dietary habits and increased sedentary activity and obesity. (2) School component: to explore the relationship between decreased exercise and sleep deprivation due to academic pressure and obesity. (3) Societal component: to explore the relationship between Western-style fast food, sugar-sweetened beverages, the impact of mass media, fat tax and obesity. In this paper, we review existing literature and available statistics and propose potentially feasible solutions to the issue of obesity in hopes that through governmental policy implementation, this significant health problem in the people of Taiwan can be ameliorated.起始頁-結束頁：101-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-013篇名：評論：肥胖的環境與生活型態因素並列篇名：Commentary to Environmental and Lifestyle Factors of Obesity作者：吳至行(Chih-Hsing Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：114-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-024篇名：照護連續性之文獻回顧並列篇名：A Literature Review of Continuity of Care作者：陳啟禎(Chi-Chen Chen);鄭守夏(Shou-Hsia Cheng)關鍵字：照護連續性;照護結果;回顧;continuity of care;healthcare outcome;review期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：照護連續性為初級照護的重要基礎。台灣全民健保實施後，高度就醫可近性和缺乏轉診機制，可能不利於照護連續性的提升。本文回顧照護連續性的概念、測量指標的演進和照護連續性與照護結果實證研究議題。我們搜尋MEDLINE及CEPS中文電子期刊服務之資料庫於1950年至2012年之研究，同時採用逐篇審視被引用文獻的方式定義出照護連續性相關的文獻，共計納入61篇文章。整體而言，照護連續性概念的定義已漸趨一致，人際面和資訊面為照護連續性兩個核心面向；由於行政資料庫的發展，照護連續性測量多以標準量化的指標為主。相較於早期的實證研究無一致性的結論，近期多數研究支持照護連續性可帶來較佳的照護結果和較低的醫療費用。本文建議未來的相關研究在方法學上，對於研究設計與處理時序性的議題、照護連續性測量指標的選擇等，應依研究目的考量其適用性。其次，有關照護連續性對照護結果的作用機轉，以及照護連續性各面向對於照護結果的相對影響力等議題，皆值得後續研究。英文摘要：Continuity of care (COC) is an essential issue in primary healthcare. Under the national health insurance (NHI) program in Taiwan, easy access to care and lack of referral may hamper the improvement of COC. This study reviews the evolution of the concept and measurement of COC, empirical studies concerning the relationship between COC and healthcare outcomes, and methodological issues. We retrieved studies from MEDLINE and Chinese Electronic Periodical Services databases from 1950 to 2012 and completed a manual review of cited articles to identify studies related to COC. A total of 61 studies were included in this review. In summary, there is emerging consensus on the concept of COC. ”Interpersonal” and ”information” are two essential dimensions of the concept of COC. Due to the increasing availability of administrative data, quantitative measures of COC have been commonly employed in recent studies. Compared to earlier studies with no consistent findings, the majority of recent studies have reported that better COC was associated with favorable healthcare outcomes and reduced healthcare expenses. We suggest that researchers consider the study design, handle temporal relationships between COC and healthcare outcome, and choose appropriate measures for determining COC according to their research objectives. In addition, future studies might focus on the mechanism between COC and healthcare outcomes, and the relative importance of various COC dimensions on healthcare outcomes. This review may be of interest to researchers in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：116-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-035篇名：兒童與青少年長期追蹤研究之未回應趨勢及其社會人口學因素並列篇名：Factors Related to Non-Response Trajectories of Children and Adolescents in a Long Term Follow-Up Study作者：陸玓玲(Dih-Ling Luh);吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);吳其臻(Chi-Chen Wu);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen);張新儀(Hsing-Yi Chang)關鍵字：長期追蹤;未回應趨勢;群體軌跡分析;Long term follow-up study;Non-response trajectory;Group-based trajectory model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：兒童與青少年行為之長期發展研究（簡稱CABLE計畫）因面臨研究樣本隨教育階段改變（國小、國中、高中、大學）而調整資料收集方法，本研究目的為描述兒童與青少年長期追蹤未回應之趨勢及原因，並分析其相關社會人口學因素。方法：CABLE計畫自2001年起針對台北及新竹國小一年級（世代一）和四年級學童（世代二）進行追蹤，以獲有父母同意書之學童為研究樣本（分別為2,852、2,663人）。未回應係指每年追蹤調查的應施測名單中未能回收問卷者。以世代分層Group-based Trajectory Model探討未回應趨勢及相關社會人口學因素。結果：經軌跡分析，世代一、二均呈現四個未回應軌跡：持續回應（世代一、二之百分比分別為73.4%、76.0%）、後期未回應（11.2%、5.4%）、漸增持續未回應（9.3%、8.2%）、及早期未回應後期回應（6.1%、9.7%）。相對於持續回應者，居住於台北、父母教育為高中及以下、父母婚姻為非結婚者，分別有較高之機會屬於不同狀況之未回應軌跡。結論：以CABLE持續追蹤資料進行推論時宜處理未回應之社會人口學差異。英文摘要：Objectives: The Child and Adolescent Behaviors in Long-term Evolution (abbreviated as CABLE) project had to change data collection methods for these subjects as they advanced to higher level schools including elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, and college or university. The purpose of this study was to describe the trajectories of non-response during the 9 year follow-up and to analyze the socio-demographic factors related to those trajectories. Methods: CABLE commenced in 2001 and subjects were followed every year. They were 1st and 4th grade students (sample sizes were 2853 and 2663 respectively) with parental consent in Taipei City and Hsin-Chu County. Non-response was defined as not responding to a questionnaire every year. We used the Group-based Trajectory Model to find non-response trajectories and related factors as stratified by cohorts. Results: Both cohorts showed four trajectories: continuing response (percentages in cohort 1 and cohort 2 were 73.4% and 76.0%, respectively), late non-response (11.2% and 5.4%), increasing non-response (9.3% and 8.2%), and early non-response but late response (6.1% and 9.7%). With continuing response as the reference group, those who lived in Taipei City, those whose parental education was lower than senior high school, and those whose parents were not married were more likely to be non-responsive. Conclusions: Using CABLE long term data to make implication should consider these socio-demographic differences with non-response trajectories.起始頁-結束頁：129-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-046篇名：台灣天主教醫院護理人員情緒勞務及心理健康之關係並列篇名：The Relationship between Emotional Labor and Mental Health among Nurses in Catholic Hospitals in Taiwan作者：李卿雲(Ching-Youn Lee);謝碧晴(Pi-Ching Hsieh);蘇慧芳(Hui-Fang Su)關鍵字：天主教醫院;護理人員;情緒勞務;心理健康;Catholic hospitals;nursing staff;emotional labor;mental health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：探討台灣天主教醫院護理人員情緒勞務和心理健康之間的關係。方法：橫斷式、相關性研究，研究對象為6家天主教醫院。以林尚平之情緒勞務量表與世界衛生組織發展的心理健康自評問卷Self Reporting Questionnaire 20（SRQ-20），於2010年7月1日到2010年10月30日蒐集資料。結果：共有653位護理人員進入研究，其中有效問卷624份（95.56%）。以SPSS 18.0之描述性、變異數分析、相關及迴歸等統計檢測後發現：（1）護理人員情緒勞務負擔程度偏高（M±SD=5.41±1.19）；心理健康狀況不理想（M±SD=2.81±1.05），SRQ-20 50.4分；（2）情緒勞務的基 本情緒表達、表層情緒控制及心理健康會因教育程度、職務與科別之不同而呈現統計上顯著差異；（3）年齡、年資與基本情緒表達、表層情緒控制及心理健康呈顯著高度正相關；年齡與深層情緒偽裝呈顯著低度正相關；（4）基本情緒表達、表層情緒控制、互動程度、深層情緒偽裝與心理健康呈顯著高度正相關；（5）情緒勞務可解釋心理健康狀況21%變異量。結論：護理人員情緒勞務負擔程度偏高、心理健康狀況不理想。所以，醫療產業對此應加以重視。英文摘要：Objectives: The present study evaluated the relationship between emotional labor and mental health among nurses in Catholic hospitals in Taiwan. Methods: Based on a cross-sectional and correctional study design, the researcher invited nurses from six Catholic hospitals to participate between July 1 and October 30, 2010. Instruments were the Emotional Labor Scale developed by Shang Ping Lin and the Self Reporting Questionnaire 20 (SRQ-20) developed by the World Health Organization. Results: A total of 653 subjects were invited to participate, and 624 completed questionnaires were returned for an effective response rate of 95.56%. By using descriptive statistics, ANOVA, correlation, and regression analysis in SPSS 18.0, we found that: (1) Subjects had a relative higher degree of emotional labor (M ± SD = 5.41± 1.19) and poorer mental health status (M ± SD = 2.81 ±1.05) as measured by the SRQ-20; of 50.4; (2) There were significant differences in rules for emotional display, superficial acting, and mental health among different groups based on educational level, position, and working department; (3) Age and service seniority had a highly positive correlation with rules for emotional display, superficial acting, and mental health, whereas age was positively associated with deep acting; (4) Rules for emotional display rule, superficial acting, frequency and duration of interaction, and deep acting were highly correlated with mental health; (5) Emotional labor accounted for 21% of the variance in mental health. Conclusions: Nursing staff bear a high level of emotional labor with unsatisfactory mental health status. Administrators should pay close attention to these issues.起始頁-結束頁：140-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-057篇名：企業組織健康文化與組織健康促進效能之關係並列篇名：The Relationship between Organizational Health Culture and the Effectiveness of Health Promotion Activities in Organizations作者：林雅雯(Yea-Wen Lin)關鍵字：組織健康文化;健康促進效能;職場健康促進;organizational health culture;health promotion effectiveness;workplace health promotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：本研究從組織理論的角度切入，探討組織健康文化與企業主所關心之健康促進效能的關係，此效能包括健康促進規劃成效、產出、成果與品質四個面向。方法：以立意抽樣法選取了55家台灣企業，由企業中負責職場健康促進業務的人員填寫測量組織健康促進效能的組織問卷，並自每家企業中選取20位專職員工，共1,100人，填寫測量組織健康文化知覺的員工問卷。再將同一組織內員工的知覺得分透過聚合程序進行加總平均，產生各企業組織的組織健康文化得分。回收之有效問卷包含54份組織問卷與1,011份員工問卷，有效問卷回收率為91.91%。研究資料以SPSS 17.0進行描述性統計、相關分析與層級迴歸分析。結果：組織健康文化只有對健康促進規劃成效、健康促進產出等過程面指標及健康諮詢率有所影響。而對於病假率、意外事件發生率、健康促進活動出席率與滿意度等指標則無顯著影響。結論：組織健康文化對於公司的健康促進規劃與產出等成效有正向影響，表示組織健康文化是影響職場健康促進計畫成功的關鍵因素，透過組織健康文化的形塑，才能將健康促進的理念深耕於組織與部門之中。英文摘要：Objectives: From the perspective of organizational theory, this study explored the relationship between organizational health culture and the effectiveness of health promotion activities of those organizations in four areas: planning effectiveness, production, outcome, and quality. Methods: Using purposive sampling, we selected 55 enterprises across Taiwan and asked service personnel who were responsible for workplace health promotion (WHP) to fill out a questionnaire that was designed to collect information about the effectiveness of their WHP. In addition, a sample of employee surveys (filled out by 20 full-time employees) was collected from each enterprise. These contained information about personal perceptions of organizational health culture. This information was provided by individual employees and aggregated into organizational-level data. Results: The results showed that organizational health culture had a significant impact on the effectiveness of the planning for and the production of health promotion activities; however, organizational health culture had no significant impact on indicators such as the rates of sick leave and accidents or on the level of satisfaction with and attendance at health promotion activities that served to evaluated both the outcome and quality of health promotion activities. Conclusions: Organizational health culture has made a positive impact on the planning and production of health promotion activities in organizations. This suggests that organizational health culture was a critical factor in the success of WHP. If there is a positive view of health culture in an organization, then the concept of health promotion will be deeply embedded in that organization and its departments.起始頁-結束頁：155-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-068篇名：蔬果攝取頻率與中老年人認知惡化的關聯性探討並列篇名：Association of the Frequency of Fruit and Vegetable Consumption with Cognitive Status and Subsequent Cognitive Decline in Older Taiwanese作者：陳正美(Cheng-Mei Chen);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：認知惡化;蔬果攝取頻率;飲食;老人;cognitive deterioration;fruit and vegetable consumption frequency;diet;elderly期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to determine the association between the frequency of fruit and vegetable consumption and cognitive function in older Taiwanese. Methods: We analyzed the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were 4440 <U+2265>53-year-old Taiwanese men and women. The frequency of consumption of fruits and vegetables in 1999 was examined for its possible cross-sectional association with cognitive status and for a possible association with the risk of cognitive decline four years later. Cognitive status and cognitive decline were rated with the SPMSQ scale. A reduction of 2 SPMSQ points was designated as a decline. Results: In a regression model that controlled for gender, age, years of education, smoking, drinking, betel quid chewing, physical activity, leisure activity, intake of nutritional supplements (fish oil & lecithin), and illness (hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, stroke) and other possible confounders, the cross sectional analysis showed that more frequent consumption of fruits and vegetables (<U+2265>5 times/wk) was associated with a 31% reduction in cognitive impairment (OR = 0.69, 95 CI = 0.57-0.84, p = 0.001); the longitudinal analysis showed that those who consumed fruits and vegetables <U+2265>5 times/wk had a 23% reduction in cognitive decline 4-years later when compared to those who consumed fruits and vegetables <U+2264>4 times/wk (0.77, 0.59-0.99, p = 0.048). Other food categories such as meat and poultry, fish, seafood and dairy showed no significant associations. Conclusions: More frequent fruit and vegetable consumption was associated with a reduction in cognitive impairment and can protect against future cognitive decline. These results suggest that the intake of fruits and vegetables may offer protection against cognitive decline. The study also highlights the importance of diet in delaying aging-associated memory deterioration; however, these findings should be confirmed with more robust studies.英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to determine the association between the frequency of fruit and vegetable consumption and cognitive function in older Taiwanese. Methods: We analyzed the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were 4440 <U+2265>53-year-old Taiwanese men and women. The frequency of consumption of fruits and vegetables in 1999 was examined for its possible cross-sectional association with cognitive status and for a possible association with the risk of cognitive decline four years later. Cognitive status and cognitive decline were rated with the SPMSQ scale. A reduction of 2 SPMSQ points was designated as a decline. Results: In a regression model that controlled for gender, age, years of education, smoking, drinking, betel quid chewing, physical activity, leisure activity, intake of nutritional supplements (fish oil & lecithin), and illness (hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, stroke) and other possible confounders, the cross sectional analysis showed that more frequent consumption of fruits and vegetables (<U+2265>5 times/wk) was associated with a 31% reduction in cognitive impairment (OR = 0.69, 95 CI = 0.57-0.84, p = 0.001); the longitudinal analysis showed that those who consumed fruits and vegetables <U+2265>5 times/wk had a 23% reduction in cognitive decline 4-years later when compared to those who consumed fruits and vegetables <U+2264>4 times/wk (0.77, 0.59-0.99, p = 0.048). Other food categories such as meat and poultry, fish, seafood and dairy showed no significant associations. Conclusions: More frequent fruit and vegetable consumption was associated with a reduction in cognitive impairment and can protect against future cognitive decline. These results suggest that the intake of fruits and vegetables may offer protection against cognitive decline. The study also highlights the importance of diet in delaying aging-associated memory deterioration; however, these findings should be confirmed with more robust studies.起始頁-結束頁：170-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-079篇名：印尼居家看護自覺所需照顧支持之問卷發展與驗證並列篇名：Development and Validation of a Questionnaire to Measure Self-Perceived Needs for Care Supportive among Indonesian Home Care Aides作者：王琪珍(Chi-Jane Wang);楊雅萍(Ya-Ping Yang);陳俞成(Yu-Cheng Chen);王靜枝(Jing-Jy Wang)關鍵字：居家印尼籍看護;照顧支持;問卷發展;驗證性因素分析;Indonesian home care aides;care support;questionnaire development;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：發展與驗證印尼居家看護自覺所需照顧支持問卷之信效度。方法：三階段進行，第一階段為問卷發展及內容效度檢定，第二階段為印尼文翻譯及效度檢定，第三階段則邀請120位印尼籍居家看護進行印尼版問卷信效度檢定。參考House所提工具、資訊、情緒及評價等四種社會支持資源為架構，來擬定照顧支持問卷。以內在一致性檢定信度，以探索性因素分析及驗證性因素分析（結構方程模式）檢定建構效度，並以皮爾森相關係數檢定同時效度。結果：照顧支持問卷起初擬22題，經探索性因素分析縮減至11題，依題意亦歸為情緒、資訊、工具與評價支持等四個因素，各因素負荷量0.63∼0.82，總解釋變異量61.74%，經結構方程模式驗證，顯示此四個因素之模式適配度、收歛及區別效度是良好，具有效度。題數縮減後，內在一致性KR-20為0.53∼0.65，顯示具可信度。各因素與研究對象之人口學特徵達顯著相關，顯示具同時效度。結論：本研究所發展之照顧支持問卷，經檢驗具良好的信效度，並能有效供評估印尼籍居家看護照顧所需之支持參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to develop and validate a questionnaire to measure self-perceived needs for supportive care among Indonesian home care aides. Methods: This study was conducted in three phases: Phase one covered the development of the questionnaire items and the evaluation of content validity by experts. In Phase 2, the questionnaire was translated into Indonesian and the validity of the translated version was determined. In the final phase, 120 Indonesian home care aides were recruited in order to establish the reliability and validity of the questionnaire. Items on the questionnaire were designed based on House's social support model which includes four types of resources: instruments, information, emotion and evaluation. Data were analyzed using KR-20 for internal consistency of the items, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) using a structural equation model (SEM) for construct validity, and Pearson's correlation coefficient for concurrent validity. Results: Eleven of the original 22 items were retained through EFA; four factors were categorized as emotion, information, instruments, and evaluation. The factor loading of the four factors ranged from 0.63 to 0.82 and accounted for 61.74% of the total variance. The SEM approach indicated a satisfactory model-fit and convergent and discriminant validity. The item consistency reliability was 0.53- 0.65 for the 11 items, indicating good reliability. Conclusions: This measurement of self-perceived need for social support was valid and reliable. It can be an effective assessment tool with Indonesian home care aides.起始頁-結束頁：179-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-0810篇名：台灣醫院門診降血壓處方品質之多層次分析並列篇名：A Multilevel Analysis of Quality of Outpatient Prescriptions to Treat Hypertension in Taiwan Hospitals作者：汪秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Wang)關鍵字：降血壓藥物;處方品質;醫院;門診;多層次邏吉斯迴歸;anti-hypertension agents;prescriptions quality;hospital;outpatient;multi-level logistic regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: To analyze inappropriate prescriptions at the market and hospital levels by examining antihypertensive medication ordering quality in out-patient departments (OPD) in Taiwan hospitals. Methods: Our sample included 398 accredited acute hospitals located in 23 regions. Information about hospital's ownership, rank, teaching status, OPD visits and hospital number published by the Department of Health (DOH) and information from the 2009-2011 Quality Database of Medications Indicators published by National Health Insurance were collected. The population density (PD) and physician density per 10000 population (PDPP) in the 23 regions were generated from DOH data. Two inappropriate prescription indicators were defined as duplicate medications of oral blood pressure-lowering agents or hypertension patients with a history of hyperkalemia using PSD or AA. We used MLLR models to assess multilevel effects on the probability of good or bad hospital quality for medications. The market concentration in the 23 regions was calculated by Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (H) using OPD visits to measure hospital competition. Results: Our study showed that higher H and PD led to greater probability of low duplicate medications. A higher PDPP led to lower probability of low duplicate medications. When compared to hospitals located in the Eastern region, the probability of low duplicate medications in Taipei, Southern, Kaohsiung-Pingtung areas is lower. The probability of low duplicate medications in teaching hospitals is lower than non-teaching hospitals and medical centers are higher than local hospitals. The probability of appropriately treating patients with hyperkalemia in Taipei, Northern, Southern, and Kaohsiung-Pingtung areas was higher than that of Eastern areas. Overall, the variation of medication quality can be explained 10.25%-17.63% by hospital-level variables and 73.40%-82.52% by market-level variables. Conclusions: Hospital and market characteristics impacted inappropriate prescriptions of anti-hypertensive drugs in the OPD setting over the past 3 years.英文摘要：Objectives: To analyze inappropriate prescriptions at the market and hospital levels by examining antihypertensive medication ordering quality in out-patient departments (OPD) in Taiwan hospitals. Methods: Our sample included 398 accredited acute hospitals located in 23 regions. Information about hospital's ownership, rank, teaching status, OPD visits and hospital number published by the Department of Health (DOH) and information from the 2009-2011 Quality Database of Medications Indicators published by National Health Insurance were collected. The population density (PD) and physician density per 10000 population (PDPP) in the 23 regions were generated from DOH data. Two inappropriate prescription indicators were defined as duplicate medications of oral blood pressure-lowering agents or hypertension patients with a history of hyperkalemia using PSD or AA. We used MLLR models to assess multilevel effects on the probability of good or bad hospital quality for medications. The market concentration in the 23 regions was calculated by Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (H) using OPD visits to measure hospital competition. Results: Our study showed that higher H and PD led to greater probability of low duplicate medications. A higher PDPP led to lower probability of low duplicate medications. When compared to hospitals located in the Eastern region, the probability of low duplicate medications in Taipei, Southern, Kaohsiung-Pingtung areas is lower. The probability of low duplicate medications in teaching hospitals is lower than non-teaching hospitals and medical centers are higher than local hospitals. The probability of appropriately treating patients with hyperkalemia in Taipei, Northern, Southern, and Kaohsiung-Pingtung areas was higher than that of Eastern areas. Overall, the variation of medication quality can be explained 10.25%-17.63% by hospital-level variables and 73.40%-82.52% by market-level variables. Conclusions: Hospital and market characteristics impacted inappropriate prescriptions of anti-hypertensive drugs in the OPD setting over the past 3 years.起始頁-結束頁：192-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-02-0911篇名：美國海軍第二研究所與台灣公共衛生並列篇名：NAMRU-2 and Taiwan Public Health作者：李孟智期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0112篇名：從學理及行政執行面探討保險對象補充保險費課徵之問題並列篇名：A Review of the National Health Insurance Act's Supplementary Premium作者：韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han)關鍵字：公平性;中立性;充足性;穩定性;節約性;equity;neutrality;adequacy;stability;compliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：為提高健保保費負擔公平性，擴大計費基礎，2011年健保法修正案新增保險對象補充保險費，於2013年開始實施。保險對象之高頒獎金、兼職所得、執行業務收入、股利所得、利息所得及租金收入等所得項目，採就源扣繳方式課徵2%補充保險費。本文先就學理上討論補充保險費課徵方式是否符合健保財源籌措基本原則，從公平性、中立性、充足性、穩定性、節約性等五個面向分析，並由行政執行面列出未來補充保險費課徵時難以執行之處。本文希冀透過不同角度剖析課徵補充保險費可能問題，並提出相關建議，供主管機關未來擬定政策之參考。英文摘要：In 2011, an Amendment to the ”National Health Insurance Act” added a new supplementary premium by expanding the calculation base for employees. This is to be implemented on January 1, 2013. This approach will also reinforce the ability-to-pay principle and enlarge the premium base. An insured person will have to pay 2 percent of extra income, including that from interest, professional practice income, rent, stock dividends and bonuses exceeding the equivalent of four months' wages, as their supplementary premium for NHI. This study investigated the problems associated with this supplementary premium based on considerations of equity, neutrality, adequacy, stability, compliance and the administrative aspects, and provides suggestions for improvement.起始頁-結束頁：6-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0213篇名：健保居家照護使用者急診醫療利用並列篇名：Emergency Department Utilization by National Health Insurance Home-care Recipients作者：吳姿璇(Tzu-Hsuan Wu);謝碧晴(Pi-Ching Hsieh);李中一(Chung-Yi Li);蘇慧芳(Hui-Fang Su)關鍵字：居家照護;急診醫療利用;發生密度;Andersen醫療利用模式;全民健保資料庫;home care;emergency department utilization;incidence density;Andersen health care utilization model;National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：參考Andersen第一階段醫療服務利用行為模式，探討台灣地區健保居家照護使用者之急診醫療利用情形，以及預測急診就醫罹病發生之影響因素。方法：採回溯性世代追蹤研究設計，資料來源為國衛院發行之全民健康保險資料庫1999至2008年「居家照護特殊需求檔」，研究對象為2000至2008年居家照護新收案個案102,680人；使用卜瓦松迴歸模式預測影響急診就醫全病因與主要系統疾病病因別之罹病發生因素。結果：居家照護使用者急診就醫以循環系統疾病發生密度最高（441.41人次/10^3人年）。研究樣本以男性、65歲以上者、投保所在地於東區分局和大都會區、第二至四類居家護理資源耗用群、具有重大傷病和長期呼吸持依賴者，共存疾病指數3分以上、具有腫瘤、糖尿病與充血性心衰竭合併症者，其急診就醫全病因罹病風險較高。結論：研究發現健保居家照護使用者常因循環、呼吸、泌尿生殖系統等疾病而到急診就醫，特別是循環與泌尿生殖系統疾病，年長者之急診就醫相對風險倍增，值得居家照護提供者進一步檢視其照護需求。英文摘要：Objectives: With reference to Phase I of Andersen's Behavioral Model of Health Services Utilization, the researcher investigated emergency department utilization by home-care service recipients with National Health Insurance (NHI) in Taiwan, and examined the predictive factors affecting the risks of morbidity from emergency department utilization. Methods: This design was a retrospective cohort study. Data came from the ”home care specific file” in the National Health Insurance Research Database between 1999 and 2008. The subjects were 102,680 newly NHI homecare service users between 2000 and 2008. The Poisson regression model was used to predict the factors affecting emergency department utilization, morbidity from all causes, and major system classifications. Results: The NHI home-care service users experienced the highest incidence of circulatory system diseases (441.41/10^3 person-year). This study showed that a higher relative risk ratio for emergency department utilization and morbidity from all causes were found in male users, those aged 65 and older, those living in urban areas, Resources Utilization Group Category 2-4 home care consumers, major illness/injury and long-term respiratory dependent cases, cases with a Charlson Comorbidity Index score of 3 and above, and cases with tumors, diabetes and congestive heart failure complications. Conclusions: Based on the findings of this study, the top three reasons for emergency department utilization by home-care service recipients were diseases of the circulatory, respiratory, and urinary/reproductive systems. The adjusted relative risk of emergency department utilization increased dramatically among elders, especially for diseases of the circulatory and urinary/reproductive systems. Health care providers should pay close attention to the care needs of home-care service recipients.起始頁-結束頁：18-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0314篇名：台灣女同志之指險套使用盛行率與相關因素探討並列篇名：Prevalence and Associated Factors of Findom Use among Women Who have Sex with Women in Taiwan作者：梁曉藍(Hio-Lam Leung);黃俊豪(Jiun-Hau Huang)關鍵字：女同志;性健康;指險套;性傳染病;性別平等;women who have sex with women (WSW);sexual health;Findome;sexually transmitted infection(STIs);gender equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：探討台灣女同志在最近一年內進行陰道指交時使用指險套之盛行率，及其使用之相關因素，以提供實證資料作為女同志性健康之衛生教育介入參考。方法：以現居台灣、年滿18歲以上、最近一年內曾與女性進行陰道指交之女同志為研究對象，利用網路問卷的方式，於各大女同志BBS網站進行量性資料收集，有效樣本為397位。結果：本研究發現，僅18.9%女同志在過去一年進行陰道指交時會使用指險套。平均每月收入超過四萬元、過去一年曾在陰道指交行為上有多重女性性伴侶、認為指險套會降低快感、認為其使用很麻煩及對其購買管道不熟悉者，較不可能在過去一年陰道指交時使用指險套；而對於性傳染病自覺罹患性高者，則較可能在過去一年陰道指交時使用指險套。此外，10.8%（43位）女同志曾罹患性傳染病，其中以細菌性陰道炎之盛行率最高（5.3%）。在曾罹患性傳染病之女同志中，44.2%未曾與男性發生過性行為。結論：過去台灣女同志常被認為是性病的低危險群，因此其性健康亦較常被忽視。然而本研究結果顯示，即使從未與男性發生性行為之女同志，仍有罹患性傳染病之風險。再者，女同志之性行為非常多元，其與男同志以及異性戀之性行為亦有差異。在政府大力倡導性別平等之趨勢下，不應忽視性少數族群的健康，並宜儘速制訂相關政策，以促進健康上的性別平等。英文摘要：Objectives: To explore the prevalence of and factors associated with Findom use during vaginal fingering in the previous year among women who have sex with women (WSW) in Taiwan, and to provide empirical data that help inform future educational interventions to improve the sexual health of WSW. Methods: Self-administered survey data from 397 WSW were collected via the Bulletin Board System in several forums frequented by most Taiwanese WSW. WSW who were living in Taiwan and at least 18 years old at the time of the survey, and who had vaginal fingering in previous year, were included in the present study. Results: Only 18.9% of the study participants reported Findom use during vaginal fingering in the previous year. Those who had a monthly income of more than NT$40.000, who had multiple female vaginal fingering partners in the previous year, who believed that Findom use would reduce sexual pleasure and was inconvenient, and who were unfamiliar with its venue for purchase, were less likely to have reported fandom use. Those who perceived greater susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections (STIs) were more likely to have reported Findom use. Forty-three participants (10.8%) had contracted STIs, and bacterial vaginosis was the most common STI, with a prevalence estimate of 5.3%. Of those who had contracted STIs, 44.2% never had sex with men. Conclusions: WSW in Taiwan have often been regarded as a low-risk group for STIs, and hence, their sexual health has often been neglected; however, findings of this study showed that even WSW who never had sex with men were still at risk for STIs. In addition, the sexual practices among WSW are diverse and different from those among gays and heterosexuals. Therefore, as the Taiwan government strives for gender equality, the health of sexual minorities should not be ignored, and related policies are urgently needed to promote gender equality in health.起始頁-結束頁：31-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0415篇名：台灣老人營養狀況與認知衰退之關聯性探討並列篇名：The Impact of Nutritional Status on Cognitive Decline in Elderly Taiwanese作者：黃純甄(Chuen J. Huang);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：認知風險;營養狀況;老年人;cognitive decline;nutritional status;elderly期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the association of nutritional status and cognitive status and to identify a possible causal role of nutritional status in the future risk of cognitive decline in older Taiwanese. Methods: The study analyzed the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were interviewed, face-to-face, with a structured questionnaire. The Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA) was used to rate nutritional status and the Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ)、was used to rate cognitive status. This cross-sectional study included 2,672 elderly at baseline while the longitudinal analysis included the 1895 subject who survived in 2003, less those who had severe cognitive impairment at baseline and those who failed to complete the 2003 interview. Both models controlled for socio-demographic factors, lifestyle, food intake, and health and medical conditions. Results: In regression models that controlled for possible confounders, cross-sectional analysis showed a significant association between nutritional status and cognitive status (OR=2.07, 95% CI=1.57-2.75, p＜0.001); whereas the longitudinal analysis showed that poor nutrition was associated with a 43% increase (1.43, 1.01-2.04, p=0.049) in cognitive decline four years later. Conclusions: Results suggest that nutritional status can affect subsequent cognitive function. It is therefore important for the elderly to pay greater attention to their nutritional status in order to reduce the risk of the age-related cognitive decline. The MNA can predict functional decline as well as rate the nutritional status of the elderly.英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the association of nutritional status and cognitive status and to identify a possible causal role of nutritional status in the future risk of cognitive decline in older Taiwanese. Methods: The study analyzed the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”. Subjects were interviewed, face-to-face, with a structured questionnaire. The Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA) was used to rate nutritional status and the Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ)、was used to rate cognitive status. This cross-sectional study included 2,672 elderly at baseline while the longitudinal analysis included the 1895 subject who survived in 2003, less those who had severe cognitive impairment at baseline and those who failed to complete the 2003 interview. Both models controlled for socio-demographic factors, lifestyle, food intake, and health and medical conditions. Results: In regression models that controlled for possible confounders, cross-sectional analysis showed a significant association between nutritional status and cognitive status (OR=2.07, 95% CI=1.57-2.75, p＜0.001); whereas the longitudinal analysis showed that poor nutrition was associated with a 43% increase (1.43, 1.01-2.04, p=0.049) in cognitive decline four years later. Conclusions: Results suggest that nutritional status can affect subsequent cognitive function. It is therefore important for the elderly to pay greater attention to their nutritional status in order to reduce the risk of the age-related cognitive decline. The MNA can predict functional decline as well as rate the nutritional status of the elderly.起始頁-結束頁：42-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0516篇名：退休對心理健康之影響—以鎮定安眠藥之使用為指標並列篇名：The Effects of Retirement on Mental Health as Measured by the Use of Hypnotic Drugs作者：孟欣宏(Shin-Hung Meng);吳春樺(Chun-Hua Wu);林文德(Wen-Der Lin)關鍵字：退休;心理健康;鎮靜安眠藥物;傾向分數法;retirement;mental health;hypnotic drugs;propensity score期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：探討退休者與未退休者在退休者之退休日期前後鎮靜安眠藥使用之變化情形，以瞭解退休對心理健康的影響。方法：本研究利用1999年至2009年之健康保險承保歸人檔資料（LHID2005），分析50-64歲之退休與未退休年者在退休者之退休日期前三年及後六年的鎮靜安眠樂每年定義日劑量（defined daily doses, DDDs）之用量差異。藉由傾向分數配對法（propensity score, PS），依其退休前鎮靜安眠藥利用量分為高、低利用兩組，分別以1 : 1的方式配對產生對照之未退休樣本。最後以無母數的中位數比較方法，分別分析高利利用組的退休與未退休者間用藥量的差異。結果：配對前，高、低利用組分別有16,518人及14,322人，配對後，兩組分別有3,057個配對及3,282個配對，合計6,339組配對，共12,678個樣本。未配對前，退休者的鎮靜安眠藥用量均顯著高於未退休者，但配到後，兩者的用藥型態並沒有顯著差異。結論：退休者的鎮靜安眠藥用量在退休前後數年均顯著高於同年齡的未退休者，顯示退休者可能有較大的心理健康問題而使用較多的鎮靜安眠藥，而退休本身並無法改善其心理健康而減少鎮靜安眠藥的用量。英文摘要：Objectives: We investigated the impact of retirement on mental health by examining hypnotic drug use 3 years before and 6 years after retirement for retirees compared with non-retirees. Methods: We designed a retrospective cohort study to explore the association between retirement and hypnotic drug use. The data in this study were retrieved from Taiwan's 2005 Longitudinal Health Insurance Data set which contained 1 million representative samples. The hypnotic drug dosages were obtained from prescription information contained in ambulatory care claims for both retirees and non-retirees between the ages of 50 and 64. We classified the retired people into high-and low-user groups according to the dosages used before retirement. A greedy match based on propensity score (PS) for retirement was used to select comparable samples from those who were not retired. Wilcoxon's rank sum test and signed-rank test were used respectively to examine the difference in hypnotic drug use between retirees and non-retirees year by year before and after PS matching. Results: There were 3,282 and 3,057 pairs in the high- and low-user groups, respectively. Before PS matching, the annual hypnotic dosage for the retired was significantly higher than that for the non-retired samples in both groups; however, after PS matching, the annual dosage for retirees and non-retirees in both groups did not differ significantly. Conclusions: Retirees have more mental health problems as measured by the use of hypnotic drugs. Retirement per se had no positive impact on mental health.起始頁-結束頁：52-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0617篇名：拒菸廣告的恐懼訴求對年輕族群的說服效果：調控焦點與訊息框架之影響並列篇名：The Persuasive Effect of an Appeal to Fear in Anti-tobacco Advertisements: The Influences of Self-regulation and Message Framing in Young Adults作者：汪志堅(Chih-Chien Wang);楊運秀(Yun-Hsiou Yang);李明倩(Ming-Chian Lee)關鍵字：拒菸廣告;恐懼訴求;調控焦點;訊息框架;anti-tobacco advertisement;fear appeal;self-regulatory;message framing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：本論文探討恐懼訴求是否有助於提升拒菸廣告的說服效果，以及調控焦點、訊息框架對於恐懼訴求所產生說服效果的影響。方法：本論文共進行二次實證研究，研究一將閱聽人的調控焦點納入考慮，探討恐懼訴求的說服效果是否受閱聽人的調控焦點所影響，受訪者被隨機指派觀看恐懼或非恐懼訴求的拒菸廣告，並被詢問其對於廣告的態度與對於抽菸的態度，以比較恐懼與非恐懼訴求的廣告效果。研究二則將訊息框架對於恐懼訴求的影響納入考慮，採2（恐懼與非恐懼訴求）*2（正面與負面訊息框架）實驗設計，以了解調控焦點、恐懼訴求與訊息框架對於拒菸廣告效果的影響。結果：恐懼廣告的知覺效能及行為意圖高於非恐懼廣告，調控焦點有干擾恐懼訴求對於廣告態度及行為意圖的效果，且訊息框架會干擾拒菸廣告中恐懼訴求的說服效果。結論：經二次實證研究，本論文發現恐懼訴求在某些狀況下，確實能提升說服效果，但調控焦點會干擾恐懼訴求對於拒菸廣告態度行為意圖的影響，而訊息框架的配適性也會對恐懼訴求產生的廣告效果產生影響。英文摘要：Objectives: An appeal to fear may attract an audience's attention to anti-smoking advertisements that reveal tobacco to be harmful and lead to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Two empirical studies investigated the persuasive effects of advertisements with appeals to fear and the moderating effect of a self-regulatory focus. Methods: In Study 1. a paper-and-pencil questionnaire survey of 172 subjects was used to compare the persuasive effects of anti-tobacco ads with and without appeals to fear, and to examine the moderating effect of a self regulatory focus. In Study 2, a 2 (fear /non-fear) by 2 (positive /negative framed message) experimental design with 185 subjects was used to examine the moderating effect of message framing on the persuasive effect of an appeal to fear. Results: Audiences' perceived efficacy and behavioral intent were greater when the ad contains appeals to fear. Both a self-regulatory focus and message framing moderated the impact of appeals to fear on the attitudes toward ads and behavioral intent. Conclusions: According to these empirical studies, we found that an appeal to fear could enhance the persuasive effect: however, a self-regulatory focus might moderate the impact of appeals to fear on attitudes toward anti-tobacco advertisements and behavioral intent. Message framing might also moderate the persuasive effect of appeals to fear.起始頁-結束頁：62-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0718篇名：評論：拒菸廣告的恐懼訴求對年輕族群的說服效果：調控焦點與訊息框架之影響作者：陳芬苓期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：75-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0819篇名：作者回覆：拒菸廣告的恐懼訴求對年輕族群的說服效果：調控焦點與訊息框架之影響作者：楊運秀(Yun-Hsiou Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：75-75(2)資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-0920篇名：比較身體質量指數及腰圍預測台灣中老年人糖尿病風險之能力並列篇名：A Comparison of the Abilities of Body Mass Index and Waist Circumference to Predict the Risk of Diabetes in Mid- and Old-age Taiwanese作者：王琴惠(Chin-Hui Wang);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：身體質量指數;腰圍;糖尿病;中老年人;BMI;waist circumference;diabetes;older Taiwanese期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：比較台灣中老年人身體質量指紋（BMI）及腰圍與糖尿病的關聯，及其預測罹患糖尿病風險的能力。方法：分析「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活健康狀況長期追蹤調查」2003及2007年4987位<U+2265>50歲個案的資料。以邏輯斯迴歸分析BMI和腰圍與糖尿病風險的橫斷關聯，及預測2007年新罹患糖尿病的風險。又以受試者工作特徵（Receive r Operating Characteristics, ROC）曲線計算兩指標的預測切點。結果：兩指標都與糖尿病的風險呈顯著關聯，且都具預測未來罹患糖尿病的功能，但是腰圍比BMI關聯強，預測力也較強。腰圍每增加1cm，男性增加6%風險（p=0.001）；女性增加4%（p=0.005）。而兩指標判定糖尿病風險的切點因年齡及性別而異，從50-64歲到<U+2265>75歲，男性由BMI 24.52 kg/m^2 減到21.82 kg/m^2；女性由24.27 kg/m^2減到22.88 kg/m^2；而腰圍男性由84.5cm增至的89.5 cm；女性由82.5 cm增至91.5 cm。結論：BMI和腰圍皆具預測中老年人罹患糖尿病的能力，但腰圍預測力較強。而兩指標預測罹患糖尿病風險的切結則因性別、年齡而不同。此結果與現行台灣中老年人糖尿病風險的建議切點有所不同。國人的理想切點值應考量性別及年齡的差別。英文摘要：Objectives: To evaluate the association of Body Mass Index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC) with the risk for diabetes, and to examine the ability of these measures to predict new cases of diabetes in <U+2265>50-year old Taiwanese. Methods: We utilized the 2003 and 2007 ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan” datasets. We analyzed the cross-sectional associations in 4987 subjects (<U+2265>50 years old) and the ability of BMI and WC to predict new cases of diabetes in these subjects four years later. We also analyzed the cutoffs with Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC). Results: Both indicators were associated with a risk for diabetes but WC showed a stronger association. Both indicators significantly predicted the risk for new diabetes, but WC was a stronger predictor. For each 1 cm increment in WC. there was a 6% increase in the risk for new diabetes in men (p=0.001) and a 4% increase in women (p=0.005). The cutoffs for the risk of new onset diabetes differed by age and gender. The BMI cutoff was reduced from 24.52 to 21.82 kg/m^2 for men and 24.27 to 22.88 kg/m^2 for women, whereas the WC cutoff was increased from 84.5 to 89.5 cm for men and 82.5 to 91.5 cm for women. Conclusions: Both BMI and WC were significantly associated with the risk for diabetes or the risk for new diabetes, but the association was stronger with WC for both. The predicted cutoffs for diabetes varied according to age and gender and were different from the current Bureau of Health Promotion recommendations.起始頁-結束頁：76-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-1001篇名：國人使用輔助與替代醫療現況及其相關因素：2011年全國性調查分析並列篇名：Conditions for the Use of Complementary and Alternative Medicine in Taiwan: A Nationwide Survey Analysis for 2011作者：章美英(Mei-Ying Chang);劉介宇(Chieh-Yu Liu);朱美綺(Mei-Chi Chu);吳宗懋(Tsung-Mao Wu);陳美麗(Mei-Li Chen);朱梅綾(Mei-Ling Chu)關鍵字：輔助與另類醫療;全國性調查;盛行率;健康資訊來源;使用原因;Complementary and alternative medicine;Nationwide Survey;prevalence;source of health information;reason for using期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：目標：瞭解台灣民眾在過去一年內使用輔助與替代醫療（complementary and alternative medicine, CAM）之現況、健康資訊來源、使用原因及使用CAM與人口特徵、健康狀態的相關性。方法：研究對象為18歲以上台灣地區民眾，採用分層隨機抽樣，並且使用中選機率與人數等比例（probability proportional to size. PPS）方式抽樣，並以電腦輔助電話訪問系統（Computer Assisted Telephone Interview, CATI）進行問卷調查，有效樣本數為2,266位。結果：台灣民眾在過去一年內使用CAM用以促進健康或治療疾病的使用率為37.6%。使用CAM的樣式以中藥最多，並以用來治療腰酸背痛、肩頸僵硬／痠痛之肌肉骨骼系統與結締組織問題居多。CAM之健康資訊來源以親朋好友最多，而主要的使用原因是民眾認為西醫常有副作用或誤診。CAM的使用率以女性、青年及中壯年人（20-59歲）、高教育程、具醫療相關教育背景、有工作、高收入、居住高度都市化程度地區及健康狀態較差者居多。結論：台灣民眾使用CAM以促進健康或治療疾病的經驗相當多元，建議政府衛生主管機構應將CAM的相關議題納入健康政策，學校及醫療院所亦須將CAM納入必要之教育訓練，進而加強CAM之實證研究，以確保障國人使用CAM之有效性與安全性。英文摘要：Objectives: The purposes of this study were to determine the use of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), sources of health information, and reasons for using CAM among people in Taiwan in the previous year. The relationships between CAM use, demographic characteristics, and health status were examined. Methods: The participants in this study were people 18 years old or older in Taiwan. Stratified random sampling and probability proportional to size methods were employed for sampling. The Computer Assisted Telephone Interview system was used to conduct a questionnaire-based survey with a total of 2,266 valid samples. Results: The rate of CAM use for health promotion or treatment of diseases during 2011 was 37.6%. Taking Chinese herbal medicine was the most common type of CAM use and people typically utilized CAM to manage musculoskeletal and connective tissue conditions such as waist or back pain or stiff or painful neck and shoulders. Relatives and friends were the primary sources of health information for CAM use, and the primary reasons for using CAM were the beliefs that conventional medical treatments were based on misdiagnoses or often had side effects. Women, adults between 20 and 59 years of age, people with a high level of education, those with a medicine-related educational background, and those who were employed, had a high income level, lived in highly-urbanized areas, or had poor health were more likely to use CAM. Conclusions: When using CAM for health promotion or treatment of disease, people in Taiwan cited diverse experiences. We recommend that health authorities and agencies incorporate CAM-related issues as part of health policy, and schools and healthcare institutions consider CAM as required education and training. Moreover, empirical studies on CAM should be emphasized in order to ensure the effectiveness and safety of CAM use in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：85-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2013-32-01-1101篇名：「五十週年」專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：魏千<U+5CEF>(Chien-Feng Wei)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：《思與言》和臺灣人類學的發展並列篇名："Thought and Words" and Anthropology in Taiwan作者：張珣(Hsun Chang)關鍵字：人類學;漢人社會;漢人文化;社會變遷;民間信仰;anthropology;Han Chinese in Taiwan;social change;folk religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文是一篇回顧文章，所回顧的資料來源是《思與言》期刊自一九六三年創刊號至二○一二年的第五十卷期刊中，由人類學者及少數幾位相關學者撰稿的論文，給以檢視與回顧。筆者發現《思與言》對於人類學在臺灣本土學術的建立有重要貢獻。臺灣人類學的研究著作自日治時期開始，當時以日人進行的民族誌與民俗學調查為主，二次大戰後，中國大陸來臺的人類學家帶來歐陸與美國的文化人類學，兩股學術潮流在臺匯流，讓臺灣人類學兼有民俗學與文化人類學。回顧人類學者在《思與言》刊登的論文大約可以分類為四大類，1.臺灣漢人文化的研究，2.臺灣鄉村社會變遷（現代化）的研究，3.臺灣漢人民間信仰的研究，4.臺灣原住民研究。此四大類議題都是臺灣人類學朝向學術專科路途上發展的重要議題，此四大議題也顯示臺灣人類學家參與並見證了臺灣社會的現代化與民主化過程。臺灣人類學者以《思與言》為重要發表園地，豐富了《思與言》多元學科的花朵。英文摘要：This article is a review article. It starts with the review on articles written by anthropologists in the first volume in 1963 to the fiftieth volume in 2012 of the journal ”Thought and Words”. The author concludes that ”Thought and Words” have made a contribution in building anthropology in Taiwan. Taiwanese anthropologists publish their research on important issues such as 1. Han Chinese culture in Taiwan, 2. social change in Taiwan, 3. Folk religion in Taiwan, 4. Aborigines studies, in ”Thought and Words”.起始頁-結束頁：11-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：《思與言》的史學實踐並列篇名：Historical Practices of "Thought and Words": A Survey in the Context of Taiwanese Historiography作者：潘光哲(Kuang-Che Pan)關鍵字：《思與言》;史學實踐;臺灣史學;"Thought and Words";historical practices;Taiwanese Historiography期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：創刊於一九六三年的《思與言》，歷經五十年的風霜雨雪，依舊屹立不搖，它的每一道足跡，都是臺灣人文社會科學發展的見證；歷史學領域，自然也不例外。本文回歸文本，精細觀察討論《思與言》刊佈的與史學相關論著的內容，闡釋《思與言》的「史學實踐」對於一九六○年代以降臺灣史學發展的影響與意義，既可為瞭解《思與言》自身的歷史，也可為略窺臺灣史學的歷史場景與過程，提供一個觀察視角。英文摘要：This essay provides observations about the historical practices of the journal ”Thought and Words” (established in 1963), while also analyzing such practices in the context of Taiwanese historiography. The author pays close attention to the influence exerted by articles published in ”Thought and Words”, and does so from a range of different perspectives. First, these works criticized old-fashioned historical practices, and advocated that scholars strive to combine the methodologies of history and the social sciences. In addition, they helped stimulate new perspectives on academia, and supplied new ideas and materials from the world of liberal arts education for younger generations of scholars interested in interdisciplinary research. Taken as a whole, the articles that appeared in ”Thought and Word” reflect unique developments in the methods and practices of Taiwanese historiography.起始頁-結束頁：35-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：論《思與言》和臺灣哲學的發展並列篇名：Reviewing the Role of "Thought and Words" in the Development of Philosophy in Taiwan作者：林安梧(An-Wu Lin)關鍵字：存有;科學主義;生活世界;異化;治療;being;scientism;life-world;alienation;therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在論述《思與言》所隱含之哲學向度，並藉此進一步討論臺灣哲學之發展。首先，以實存之處境，指出自由主義陣營與保守主義陣營之交會，並指出《思與言》所提供者為一學術之實踐的理論向度，正因如此，所以能天長地久。再者，依其〈發刊詞〉做一總的哲學之詮釋，肯定其為五四後的啟蒙理性精神，重在經驗主義的實用性。繼而做諸多對比，指出其所重在社會科學、人類學、心理學，所涉哲學之議題亦多屬具體之實踐層面，而這帶來新一波的發展。再者，又通過上個世紀九○年代的哲學反思以為對比，看出《思與言》如何從戒嚴而解嚴，有著進一步之落實與發展。通過世紀之交的總體反思，我們發現臺灣哲學仍不免其貧困，但卻有著嶄新之可能，它指向生活世界的重新發現，以及歷史社會總體、政治經濟的全面深層反思。再者，經由「存有的連續觀」與「存有的斷裂觀」之對比，闡述了東西方之異同，並預示其融和會通之可能。英文摘要：This paper aims at investigating the philosophical dimension of the journal of Thought and Words and, based on this, discusses the development of philosophy in Taiwan. It shows that this journal has existed so long partly due to the convergence of liberal and conservative camps in Taiwan, in which this journal has suggested a theoretical direction for academic practice. It then turns to a philosophical interpretation of the ”Inaugural statement” of Thought and Words, and recognizes the journal's enlightenment spirit from the May Fourth Movement and its emphasis on the practicability of empiricism. This paper also indicates that its main concerns are social science, anthropology and psychology. Its philosophical discourses are more on concrete and practical issues. Nonetheless, this atmosphere may lead to a new wave of thought in Taiwan.A comparison of the philosophical reflections of this journal in the 1990s and the present shows its development from the period of Martial Law to that of the abolishment of Martial Law. There could still be some poverty of philosophy in Taiwan, but there are also some new possibilities since it has already directed its attention to the rediscovery of the meaning of life-world, the socio-historical totality and political-economic activities. Through the contrast between the perspectives of continuity of being and discontinuity of being, this paper presents the difference between the East and the West and suggests the potentiality of the communication of and the integration of both sides.起始頁-結束頁：117-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：《思與言》和臺灣社會學的發展並列篇名：A River of Taiwanese Sociology Running through "Thought and Words"作者：王崇名(Chung-Ming Wang)關鍵字：《思與言》;臺灣社會學;發展;"Thought and Words";Taiwanese Sociology;development期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：五十年來的《思與言》不僅是社會學新議題介紹與譯註的園地，同時也是社會學「學術新鮮人」加入學術社群的「入門期刊」。這些新鮮人在往後的社會學發展，姑且不論是否優秀，但是到目前為止大多數仍然是活躍的，充滿熱情，許多人也投入了通識教育，並以教育做為志業。除此之外，《思與言》這五十年來的發展，當然也包含著社會學本身的內部批判與反省，例如「韋伯熱」專刊。然而，隨著越來越嚴重的學術競爭工具理性化，充滿了批判性的社會學也不能豁免，這樣的趨勢嚴重影響《思與言》和當前臺灣社會學發展的關係。被莫名地冠上社會學「入門期刊」的名號，特別是歸類為「非」TSSCI的期刊之後，與真正的社會學家的投稿量之間，產生令人難以置信的關聯，鮮有真正的社會學家在此發表論文。五十年的學術資本終究敵不過工具理性化的學術競爭。所幸，至今尚有一群當年受惠於《思與言》的社會學新鮮人，如今已成為社會學家或教育工作者，依然持續支持《思與言》的編輯與經營。在工具理性化與學術熱情之間，不知不覺讓社會學應有的使命，自然顯露出來。這就是五十年來《思與言》與臺灣社會學發展的生命歷程。英文摘要：Till now, after 50 years, ”Thought and Words: Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences” never stops to introduce new subjects and issues of sociology, and to encourage ”fresh men” who would like to be a sociologist, publishing their papers by the facilitating of editors of this journal. Therefore, Thought and Word is a famous intellectual journal in Taiwanese sociological community. Right now, Most of the ”fresh man” not only really become sociologist, but also very active in general education, to share their knowledge of sociology with students, who their major are not in sociology.However, at the same time, ridiculously, Taiwanese sociological community becomes more and more instrumentalist. Even criticizing the instrumentalism has become the sociologist's second nature. Today, most of Taiwanese sociologists prefer publishing their papers in the TSSCI or SSCI, than doing in ”Thought and Words”, because the latter is not TSSCI.After 50 years, ”Thought and Words” is still living in Taiwanese sociologist community, and keeps to encourage the ”fresh man” to publish their papers. If one day Taiwanese sociologists really lost their passion and never abandon instrumentalism, maybe the dying time of Thought and Words, will be coming.Fortunately, a lot of ”fresh men”, who become sociologists or other intellectual field's professor, come back here to be the editors or general editor, and to manage this intellectual journal, which has incubated many excellent professors or intellectual researchers.起始頁-結束頁：159-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：法釋義學與法學的多元化：從《思與言》五十年所反映的臺灣法學研究發展談起並列篇名：Doctrinal Studies of Law and Legal Diversity: Taiwan's Jurisprudential Development in "Thought and Words"作者：張嘉尹(Chia-Yin Chang)關鍵字：法學;法釋義學;部門法學;法律的科際整合研究;法學的多元化;Jurisprudence;doctrinal studies of law;branched studies of law;interdisciplinary studies on law;jurisprudential diversity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文回顧《思與言》五十年來所刊登的法學論文，指出《思與言》雖然是提倡科際整合研究的學術期刊，但是前四十年所刊載的法學論文仍以作為法釋義學的部門法學為主，近十年來則出現法學多元化的趨勢，這與《思與言》的專題化發展有關，也反映臺灣法學的當代發展趨勢之一。此外，呼應《思與言》的近來發展，本文借助德國法學對於法學與法釋義學性質的研究，檢討作為臺灣法學典範的法釋義學與其侷限，主張無論是為了克服臺灣法學目前的困境，還是為了要協助作為法釋義學的法學完成其任務，臺灣法學都應朝向多元化與科際整合研究的方向發展，在這個過程中，《思與言》對待法學論文的取向，應持續目前的走向，繼續朝專題化與多元化的方向發展。英文摘要：This paper retrospectively studies academic articles that have been published on the journal, ”Thought and Words” in the past fifty years. It identifies that, although ”Thought and Words” advocates interdisciplinary studies, this journal more focused on doctrinal studies of law in the first forty years. But ”Thought and Words” has switched gears and accepted diversified articles of legal studies during the last ten years. This phenomenon is related to the fact that ”Thought and Words” has adopted the special session as its focal point and reflects Taiwan's contemporary development of jurisprudence. In parallel with this phenomenon this paper also reviews the idea of doctrinal studies of law as the paradigm of jurisprudence in Taiwanand its limitation from the perspective of works that investigate the nature of jurisprudence and doctrinal studies of law in Germany. This paper argues that legal studies in Taiwan should head for multiple developments and interdisciplinary studies on law. The attitude toward articles that ”Thought and Words” should adopt is to keep its current policyto strengthen the jurisprudential diversity and interdisciplinary studies on law.起始頁-結束頁：199-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：《思與言》和臺灣經濟學界的發展並列篇名："Thought and Words" and the Development of Taiwan's Economics Discipline作者：鄭政秉(Cheng-Ping Cheng)關鍵字：《思與言》;臺灣經濟學界;美國化;本土化;"Thought and Words";Taiwan's Economics Discipline;Americanization;Taiwanization期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在探討五十年來《思與言》雜誌和臺灣經濟學界發展的交互影響。首先，分析五十年來，參與《思與言》雜誌的經濟學家之特質以及研究議題的共同特色。接著回顧近五十年來臺灣經濟學界的發展特色，特別從全球經濟學美國化的角度，剖析蓬勃發展的臺灣經濟學界背後不足之處，尤其是本土意識之缺乏和解決經濟現實問題之貧弱。最後點出在經濟學界未必受重視的《思與言》雜誌所具有之二大特質：本土建構和跨學門對話，在未來正可補正臺灣經濟學界發展之不足。英文摘要：The paper explores the mutual influence between ”Thought and Words” and Taiwan's Economic Discipline in past 50 years. First, I analyze the common characteristics of the research topics and those economists who involved in the Journal. Second, I study the feature of the development of Taiwan's economic discipline, especially from the perspective of Americanization of Taiwan's Economics. I find that Taiwan's economists lack of the Taiwanese consciousness, in one hand, and are weak in solving the practical economic issues happened in Taiwan, on the other hand. Final, I assert that the function of Journal could be a complement of Taiwan economics discipline which has two significant weaknesses-lack of Taiwanese consciousness and poor in dialogue with other disciplines.起始頁-結束頁：233-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：思與言五十週年賀詞並列篇名：50th Anniversary Congratulatory Message期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：265-305資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：重拾「思辯」與「建言」之傳統：《思與言》過去十年政治學相關論文之回顧並列篇名：Rejuvenating the Ethos of Policy Discussion and Recommendations: Political Science Articles Published in the "Thoughts and Words" for the Past Ten Years作者：陳思賢(Sy-Shyan Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：307-317資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：被遺忘的大清與苗栗「英雄」：程峻、壽同春、鍾瑞生與苗栗義民軍並列篇名：Forgotten "Heroes" of Miaoli and the Ch'ing Dynasty: Cheng Jun, Sho Tungchun, Zhung Rueisheng and the Miaoli Yimin Paramilitaries作者：張正田(Zheng-Tian Zhang)關鍵字：壽同春;鍾瑞生;苗栗義民爺信仰;苗栗義民廟;林爽文事變;Sho Tong-Chun;Zhong Rui-sheng;The Miaoli Yimin Belief;The Miaoli Yimin Temple;Lin Shuang-Wen Incident期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：位於今日苗栗市北苗的苗栗義民廟，主祀林爽文事變時，戰死身亡的淡水廳同知程峻，與號召北臺灣諸籍貫義民的幕僚壽同春，以及苗栗義民首鍾瑞生所率領的義民軍之義塚。然兩百多年歷史演變下，今日該義民廟祭祀圈僅止於今苗栗市內北苗、上苗、清華等三里，佔全苗栗市二十八里的10.71％，為一個地方小廟。所以清中葉時期的鍾瑞生在苗栗史上，與清末吳湯興一般，是一代地方「英雄」，然其今日的歷史知名度，卻遠不如同時期，號稱是「新竹客家義民軍領袖」的「義民首」戴元玖、林先坤等人。而程峻在抵抗林爽文勢力時「兵敗殉國」，壽同春也在林爽文事變時收復淡水廳有功，並率領客家、泉、漳等籍之義民軍，反攻林爽文勢力，卻為林爽文勢力所殺，「英烈殉國」。但今日香火鼎盛的新竹枋寮義民廟，卻沒有祭祀程峻、壽同春，使這兩位先人逐漸為後人所淡忘。所以本文稱程峻與壽同春，是被遺忘的大清「英雄」，鍾瑞生與苗栗義民軍，是被遺忘的苗栗「英雄」。因此，本文基於復興地方歷史意識的考量，乃以史學方法詳細考論程峻等人的事蹟，希望記錄兩百多年前的「他們」為新竹、苗栗保鄉衛土的「英雄敘事」。英文摘要：Located in Beimiao of Miaoli City, the Miaoli Yimin Temple (Miaoli Heroes Temple) mainly enshrines heroes who were killed during the Lin Shuang-Wen Incident. Nevertheless, due to a historical evolution over the last two hundred years, the ritual sphere of this Yimin Temple now covers only three villages in Miaoli City: Beimiao, Shangmiao and Qinghua, makes it a small local temple. As for Cheng Jun, he lost his army and was killed when he was against the forces of Lin Shuang-Wen; Sho Tong-Chun, who had a merit for regaining Danshui Ting, led Yimin Paramilitaries formed by Hakka and Min-nan (originally from Quanzhou and Zhangzhou) people to counterattack forces of Lin Shuang-Wen and was unfortunately ”killed for his country heroically”. Nevertheless, in the bustling Hsinchu Fangliao Yimin Temple today, Cheng Jun and Sho Tong-Chun these two heroes are not enshrined in the temple and are gradually forgotten by the younger generations. Under the consideration of reviving the historical consciousness in local, this paper has adopted a historiographical method to make a detailed research on Cheng Jun and other people. It is expected that ”their heroic stories” of protecting the land and people of Hsinchu and Miaoli will last forever.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：《顏氏家訓》家庭教育之父職問題澄清並列篇名：Clarification on the Problems of the Paternal Role in the Family Education in "Yan Shi Jia Xun"作者：蘇嫈雰(Ying-Fen Su)關鍵字：《顏氏家訓》;父職;以教為事;說理引喻;學做人;"Yan Shi Jia Xun";paternal role;to regard educating children as the most important thing;to expound with metaphor;to learn to interact with people期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：從《顏氏家訓》一書中探討父親在家庭教育中的職分，以下幾點問題有待澄清。首先，《顏氏家訓．勉學》：「子當以養為心，父當以學為教。」宋本作「父當以教為事」，究竟父親在家庭教育中當以學為教？還是以教為事？如未能加以澄清，則父職在扮演家庭教育角色的模擬兩可（以學為教或是以教為事）情況下，勢必會造成家庭教育現場角色、關係、認知的混淆，無法充分發揮家庭教育的實質功效。因此，此文以《顏氏家訓．勉學》所論及在家庭教育扮演至關重要的角色──父職當以何為本作澄清，接續談〈序致〉及與家庭教育極相關的三個篇章〈教子〉、〈治家〉、〈勉學〉中談父當如何教子以及父當教子的內容。透過本文的探討，除了嘗試回顧顏之推撰寫此書的初衷，也希望提供現代父職在家庭教育提供經濟支柱外亦能發揮的幾點可能具體建議。英文摘要：To discuss the paternal role in the family education from the viewpoint of ”Yan Shi Jia Xun”, there are some problems to be clarified. Firstly, it is said, ”Children should take serving their parents to heart; fathers should take learning as the way to educating children.” in ”Yan Shi Jia Xun”: Encouraging Study; however, it is said, ”Fathers should regard educating children as the most important thing.” in the version of the Song Dynasty. Should the paternal role in the family education be ”to take learning as the way to educating children” or ”to regard educating children as the most important thing”? If these two things cannot be clarified, the paternal role in the family education would become ambiguous, causing confusions of roles, relations, and cognition to the family education on the spot, failing to actualize the effects of family education. Therefore, this thesis starts from clarifying on which basis the paternal role is to be established in the family education, and then proceeds to discussing how and what a father is to teach his children. Through the research in this thesis, not only do I try to reflect upon the heart of Yan Zhi Tui when he was writing ”Yan Shi Jia Xun”, but also hope to provide some possible and practical advices on the paternal role in the family education, apart from merely being the breadwinner for the family members.起始頁-結束頁：35-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：客語兒向語舒入聲調對比分析並列篇名：A Contrastive Analysis of Checked and Non-checked Tones in Hakka Infant-Directed Speech作者：鄭明中(Ming-Chung Cheng)關鍵字：客語;兒向語;聲調;入聲;Hakka;infant-directed speech;tone;checked tone期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：兒向語（infant-directed speech）是兒童語言習得早期最重要的語言輸入，然而兒向語舒入聲調對比的議題一直未獲相關文獻關注，因此本研究將透過客語對這個問題進行探討。本研究收集了六位客籍母親與嬰兒及實驗者的言語互動所發出的客語去聲調（舒）與陽入調（入）語音樣本，並利用PRAAT語音分析軟體進行基頻分析，包含均值（F0 mean）、輪廓（F0 contour）、斜率（F0 slope）及時長（F0 duration）。研究結果顯示，與成人語相比，兒向語聲調的基頻均值、基頻輪廓、基頻斜率及基頻時長均有顯著的擴張與延長。更重要的是，本研究發現兒向語中的舒入調分離現象，入聲調的基頻輪廓及基頻均值明顯高於舒聲調。本文認為這種語音現象與〔p, t, k〕韻尾在語流中因快速發音所形成的喉塞化有關。最後，本文進一步利用研究結果檢視「母嬰語音互動模式」的適切性。英文摘要：This study contrasted checked and non-checked tones in Hakka infant-directed speech (IDS). Six mothers participated in speech recordings. Tonal samples were gathered from mothers' natural verbal interaction in connected speech with their infants and the experimenter, and were analyzed by PRAAT for fundamental frequency (F0). Results displayed that F0 mean, F0 contour, F0 slope and F0 duration were all phonetically expanded and lengthened in IDS, as compared with adult-directed speech (ADS). Most important of all, checked and non-checked tones in IDS displayed tonal separability, with checked tones higher in F0 contour and F0 mean than non-checked tones. It was further argued that such tonal separability resulted from glottalization phonetically reduced from the [p, t, k] codas in the rapid production of connected speech. Finally, this study examined the appropriateness of Mother-Infant Phonetic Interaction (MIPhI) Model in terms of current research results.起始頁-結束頁：67-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：從教育中立原則檢討「靜思語教學」之合憲性並列篇名：Study on Constitutionality of "Jing Si Aphorism Instruction" by Neutrality of Education作者：薛美蓮(Mei-Lien Hsueh)關鍵字：靜思語教學;宗教自由;教育中立原則;Jing Si Aphorism instruction;freedom of religion;religious neutrality of education期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：「靜思語」是佛教慈濟功德會證嚴法師平時所說有關鼓勵或教誨的言辭，而「靜思語教學」是將慈濟證嚴法師所為的言辭加以開展，也就是國中小教師為讓學生在生活中落實「靜思語」，以「靜思語」為教學教材所進行的一種教學活動。其實，從「靜思語教學」的內容；實施「靜思語教學」的教師背景；靜思語教師研習營的研習活動觀之，其背後都有隱藏著佛教的色彩。依據《憲法》第十三條規定：「人民有信仰宗教之自由。」及《教育基本法》第六條規定：「教育應本中立原則。學校不得為特定政治團體或宗教信仰從事宣傳，主管教育行政機關及學校亦不得強迫學校行政人員、教師及學生參加任何政治團體或宗教活動。」那麼，「靜思語教學」是否已違反《憲法》第十三條信仰宗教自由及《教育基本法》第六條有關教育的宗教中立原則的規定，有必要予以釐清。故本文首先就「靜思語教學」做簡單介紹，其中包括「靜思語教學」的源起、特色、方法；其次，探究教育的宗教中立原則與信仰宗教自由的意涵；最後，再從教育的宗教中立原則及內心信仰宗教自由等兩個層面，來論述「靜思語教學」的合憲性。英文摘要：”Jing Si Aphorism” is a collection of quotations of teachings by Master Cheng Yen of Buddhist Tzu Chi Foundation to her disciples and the public. ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction” is the promotion of the citation. In order to allow the students to implement ”Jing Si Aphorism” in daily lives, junior high and elementary school teachers treat ”Jing Si Aphorism” as a kind of teaching material. In fact, the content of ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction”, background of the teachers who implement ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction” and the activities of teachers' studies in Jing Si Aphorism imply the Buddhism. Whether ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction” violate Article 13 of the Constitution (freedom in religious belief) and Article 6 of the Basic Law of Education (religious neutrality of education) should be clarified. Thus, this study first briefly introduces ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction”, including the history, characteristics and methods of ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction”. Secondly, religious neutrality of education and freedom in religious belief are explored. Finally, this paper attempts to find out if ”Jing Si Aphorism instruction” violates the students' religious freedom by the perspectives of religious neutrality of education and freedom in religious belief.起始頁-結束頁：99-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：孫應鰲事略及相關研究評議並列篇名：A Brief Biography of Sun Ying-Ao and Commentary on Related Studies作者：黃文樹(Wen-Shu Huang)關鍵字：孫應鰲;《四書近語》;《孫應鰲文集》;《孫山甫督學文集》;《學孔精舍詩鈔》;Sun Ying-Ao;"Four Books in Today's Language";"Collected Works of Sun Ying-Ao";"Collected Works of Education Inspector Sun Shan-Fu";"Learning from Written Poems at Confucius' Abode"期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：孫應鰲乃黔中王門重要人物，是明代中晚期一傑出思想家兼教育家。他舉嘉靖三十二年進士，選庶吉士；曾任戶科給事中、江西按察司僉事、陝西提學官、僉都御史（撫治鄖陽）、國子監祭酒等，卒謚文恭，在史冊上留下不朽官績和美譽。著有《四書近語》、《孫應鰲文集》、《孫山甫督學文集》、《學孔精舍詩鈔》、《淮海易談》、《幽心瑤草》等傳世。學界探討孫氏的研究論著，只有若干成果，尚在起步階段。本文先略述其人其事，再就學界對他的研究，分綜論性研究論著，以及針對其生平、哲學、易學、教育思想諸方面之專題研究等提出述評。本文發現，包括張坦、黃文樹、劉宗碧、劉漢忠、王煜、王巧儀、歐多痤奶H關於孫氏的研究，或引用原典不全，或取材欠完備，或徵引失準，或篇幅流於簡略，甚至出現亟待商榷之處。可以說，關於孫氏的研究尚有諸多值得發展的空間。英文摘要：Sun Ying-Ao was an important follower of Wang Yang-Ming in Central Guizhou, as well as an outstanding thinker and an educator in the middle and late Ming Dynasty. In history books were left with his immortal and remarkable performance of his official work and also his good reputation. As to the past scholars' studies exploring the researches and works of Sun Ying-Ao, only few of them were worthy of proper reference since this kind of studies is still at a beginning stage. First of all, the paper briefly describes the person of Sun Ying-Ao himself, and also his life story. After that, based on the academic studies of him, the paper synthetically makes comments on his researches and works. Focusing on the topics of his life, philosophy, learning of Yi Jing and educational thinking, the paper makes relevant reviews. The paper finds that the scholars who made studies of Sun Ying Ao, including Zhang Tan, Huang Wen-Shu, Liu Zong-Bi, Liu Han-Zhong, Wang Yu, Wang Qiao-Yi and Ou Duo-Heng, they either cited the original works incompletely, or took insufficient materials about him, or quoted his words inaccurately, or gave too simple or brief elaboration, or even raised some viewpoints that extremely needed to be further discussed. It can be said that there is still much room for development of the studies of Sun Ying-Ao.起始頁-結束頁：125-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：從「臺灣島史」研究到探索「臺灣特性」：布勞岱《法蘭西特性》的啟發並列篇名：From 'History of Taiwan Island' to 'Identity of Taiwan': The Inspiration of the Historiography of Fernard Braudel's "The Identity of France"作者：陳能治(Neng-Chih Chen)關鍵字：臺灣特質／特性;臺灣中心觀;臺灣島史;年鑑史學在臺灣;臺灣主體意識;Identity of Taiwan;Taiwan-centered discourse;the Historiography of Annales School in Taiwan;History of Taiwan Island;Taiwan-oriented consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：一九九○年代曹永和受年鑑學派影響，提出臺灣島史的概念，二十餘年來史學界在歷史地理、長時段、整體史及世界視野等方面，多所闡揚，但同時也陷入「建構臺灣主體論述」的思辯困局。布勞岱《法蘭西的特性》，將法國政治實體與法蘭西民族區別開來，從單元區域地理研究中深入探索法蘭西的多樣性，從長時段歷史作用力中尋找法蘭西之一致性，以從中定義法蘭西的特性；此一研究概念工具，對臺灣島史研究將具更深的啟發意義，一方面可深化臺灣島內各單元區域之研究，二方面可藉此建立島內單元區域間與科際間研究的整合平臺，在開放的邊界中進行島內外、單元區域間研究之對話，以建構臺灣特性研究的共同核心概念；三方面對臺灣島史研究擺脫國族認同取向的歷史詮釋紛擾，或有所助益。英文摘要：In 1990, Chao Yung-He issued the concept of 'History of Taiwan Island' as a part of maritime of East Asia to claim the subjectivity in research of Taiwan history. The historiography of Annales School, such as geo-history, long term, total history and global view, inspired the historiography of Taiwan research, from the concept of 'history of Taiwan Island' to the discourse of 'Taiwan identity' after 1990s. The de-national historiography of Fernard Braudel's ”The Identity of France” might give some reflections on the clarification of controversy on 'Taiwan identity' and deepen the depth of research of regional history in Taiwan . The 'Taiwan-centered' historiography and 'Taiwan identity' issued from larger timescale and space-scale to define the undefined 'identity/character of Taiwan' or 'Taiwan-ness' will be the main concern of this study.起始頁-結束頁：155-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：評介Arshin Adib-Moghaddam的”Iran in World Politics”並列篇名：Arshin Adib-Moghaddam, "Iran in World Politics: The Questions of the Islamic Republic"作者：陳立樵(Li-Chiao Chen)關鍵字：一九七九年伊斯蘭革命;伊朗伊斯蘭共和國;兩伊戰爭;美國新保守主義;The Islamic Revolution of 1979;The Islamic Republic of Iran;The Iran-Iraq War;Newconservatives of the United States期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本書作者阿迪布摩格達姆藉由討論幾個不同的議題，來改變大眾對於伊朗的負面形象。首先從文化的角度，解釋伊朗在一九七九年伊斯蘭革命後，表現出對內與對外都有追求公平正義的意圖；其次，也解釋了伊朗在國際社會上，受到兩伊戰爭時期伊拉克所強加的「波斯威脅」之罪名，以及美國新保守主義勢力單一與偏激的批判；再者，指出伊朗伊斯蘭共和國在民主發展的潮流中，國內自由的風氣已經成熟，與過往的巴勒維舊政府專制政權截然不同。本書從方法論來看，呼應了薩伊德「自我──他者」的論述，說明當今世人多是以「自我」的角度去認識或解釋伊朗這個「他者」，缺少以伊朗為出發點的觀察角度，即使是學術研究也不多見。從研究主題來看，作者筆下的伊朗，有著正面發展的內政與外交的面向，同時承受國際社會莫大的壓力，不同於多數伊朗研究集中於內政的問題或對世界的威脅。在眾多當代伊朗研究之中，此書是可讓讀者正向、多層面瞭解伊朗的佳作。英文摘要：Arshin Adib-Moghaddam provides a multidimensional perspective in this book by four parts on Iran in world politics after the Islamic Revolution of 1979. The first part analyses Iran's culture of foreign policy that inherited its spirit of the 1979 Revolution for justice. The second part asserts that Iraq utilised the myth of 'Persian-Arab' enmity and support of the international society during the Iran-Iraq War of 1980-1988. The third part claims that Iran is given a negative impression, especially its hostility to the Jewish people and nuclear weapons, by Newconservatives of the United States. The fourth part displays that Iran has been on a trend to be a liberal and democratic state since 1979. So far there are numerous organizations of human right and women right in Iran, which are more liberal and pluralistic than Iran in the Pahlavi period before 1979. In response to Edward Said's argument of 'Self-Other,' Adib-Moghaddam argues that Iran is viewed as an 'other,' and there is not actual knowledge on Iran in academic research. Topics of this book are different to other Iranian studies that mainly focus on only some issues, such as Islamic fundamentalism, anti-American, and nuclear weapons. Among various negative or unfriendly judgments on Iran, therefore, Adib-Moghaddam presents a more objective vision on Iran, which is valuable for present Iranian and Middle Eastern studies.起始頁-結束頁：205-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：「非典型僱用」專號導言作者：林佳和期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：彈性安全思維下平等與效率的兩難與妥協：歐洲聯盟《派遣勞動指令》之分析並列篇名：The Dilemma and Compromise between Equality and Efficiency in the Context of Flexicurity: An Analysis of Temporary Agency Work Directive in European Union作者：李健鴻(Chien-Hung Lee)關鍵字：彈性安全;派遣勞動;平等待遇原則;Flexicurity;Temporary Agency Work;Principle of Equal Treatment期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討歐洲聯盟根據彈性安全思維所制定的《派遣勞動指令》，在立法過程中面臨的「平等」與「效率」兩難爭論以及解決途徑。研究發現：《派遣勞動指令》是歐洲聯盟開始實踐「彈性安全」政策的首部勞動立法，具有相當重要的政策實踐意義，但是在立法的實踐過程中，面臨到「平等待遇原則」與「各國勞動市場發展差異」之間的兩難時，歐洲聯盟為了促使《派遣勞動指令》能夠順利通過，因此採取了「原則」與「例外」並存的妥協方式，賦予各會員國具有彈性認定例外情況的處理權限，此舉對於歐洲聯盟原本想要達成的「保障派遣勞工享有平等待遇」目標，可能造成政策落實上的影響。儘管如此，但是歐洲聯盟在制定派遣勞動立法時所秉持強調的「平等待遇原則」，對於臺灣未來思考如何制定派遣勞動立法，以解決派遣勞工受到的彈性剝削問題，仍然具有重要的政策激發價值。英文摘要：This paper explore the dilemma and compromise solution between 'equality' and 'efficiency' in the legislative process of the Temporary Agency Work Directive according to the idea of flexicurity by European Union. The main finding is that European Union treated the Temporary Agency Work Directive as the first labor legislation of flexicurity policy that implied important policy meaning ,but confronted dilemma between 'principle of equal treatment' and 'labor market developmental differences of Member States' in the legislative practical process. European Union adopted a compromise solution was 'principle coexist with exceptions' which empowered Member States to identify the exceptions for the purpose of the Temporary Agency Work Directive passed, although this compromise solution may resulted in negative effect on the implementation of equal treatment principle. The heuristic meanings from European Union's equal treatment principle affect Taiwan's Temporary Agency Work legislation to solve the exploitation problem of agency workers in the future.起始頁-結束頁：7-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：我國公部門勞務「外包」之爭議問題研究：以國立體育大學臨時人員（清潔工友）解僱案為引並列篇名：A Study of Dispute of the Labor "Outsourcing" of the Public Sector in Taiwan: Speaking from the Temporary Staff Dismissal Case in National Taiwan Sports University作者：林良榮(Liang-Jung Lin)關鍵字：繼續性勞動契約;外包;解僱;業務性質變更;Continuous labor contract;outsourcing;job termination;changing of job nature期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：因「業務委託民間辦理」之政策而使政府機關將行政業務大量實施「委外」，並因此造成原任職勞工因外包而受有不利益並生之爭議事件。政府機關將勞務「外包」的結果乃大量產生勞動派遣之僱用型態，原雇主之政府成為要派機構，而原任職勞工成為派遣勞工，但對勞工而言，同樣的工作內容卻轉換成完全不同的受僱身分、薪資待遇與勞動條件。基此，於公務機關於實施委外的過程中，尤其是適用《勞動基準法》之勞工，如何該當解僱終止之保護，以及，實務上法院對此類型爭議之判決見解為何，本文舉最高法院九十九年度臺上字第五五三號判決為例，評釋判決之論證，並引其他類似外包之爭議判決作為對照之比較，再輔以日本「偽裝派遣」為例，說明我國現行外包制度的「偽性」以及對受僱勞工應有之法律救濟。英文摘要：Recently, the cases of outsourcing have been pervasively practiced due to the establishment of ”Policies of Private Outsourcing” by the government. Numerous conflicts rose because the original job holders have lost their job and received unfair treatment. In reality, the result of outsourcing is a hiring model that produces a high volume of labor dispatches. The original employer, the government, becomes an agency for job distribution. The original employees have become dispatched workers. From the labors ' perspective, their job responsibilities remain the same; however, their employment status, salaries, benefits, and labor rights are under a new set of different standard. In this article, the rights of those employees who obtain an outsourcing governmental job and are under the protection of labor laws are discussed, especially when they face job termination. In addition, the judicial rulings concerning the aforementioned case is discussed as well. The case cited in this study is: National University of Physical Education v. Its Janitor S. Ct. 553 (2010). The researcher will analyze the rationales of rulings and compare the results of similar type of cases relating to outsourcing conflict.起始頁-結束頁：49-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社20篇名：勞務派遣超常發展的「堵」與「疏」並列篇名：Blockage or Dredge, the Solution towards the Abnormal Development of Labor Dispatch作者：董保華(Bao-Hua Dong)關鍵字：勞務派遣;三性規定;標本兼治;labor dispatch;legal provisions of the three attributes of labor dispatch;address both the symptoms and root causes期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國大陸勞務派遣超常發展帶來的就業歧視問題，重新引發勞務派遣的存廢之爭。中國大陸一種較為主流的看法是希望通過修改《勞動合同法》中有關勞務派遣「三性」、「同工同酬」的規定，並擴大行政處罰，以一種曲線廢除的方式將派遣用工引入正規用工。這種思維曾經是二○○八年開始實施《勞動合同法》時的基本思維，然而，恰恰是這種立法方式導致勞務派遣的大發展。一方面認為洪水滔天，一方面又希望以堵塞漏洞的思維來解決問題，中國大陸有關部門的矛盾態度只有從既是立法者，又是執法者的現實狀況才能找到答案。事實上，中國大陸勞動立法中確立的剛性化的用工機制才是勞務派遣超常發展的根本原因。當一國的立法者忽視勞動力市場發出的信號，希望通過一些表面化的措施來保護勞動者利益，能夠長驅直入的一定是「隱蔽僱用關係」。只有標本兼治，採用疏導的方式，才可能削除歧視，使勞務派遣回到正常發展的軌道上，實現勞動關係的真正和諧。英文摘要：The abnormal development of labor dispatch in china has resulted in the discrimination in employment, which triggered the dispute about the existent and abolishment of labor dispatch. One of the mainstream views is that the government should abolish the labor dispatch in an indirect way, such as amending the articles of 'three attributes' and 'equal pay for equal work' in the Labor Contract Law, expanding the scope of administrative power. This idea was the basic idea in 2008, when the Labor Contract Law came into force. However, this idea exactly led to the abnormal development of labor dispatch. As both legislator and law-executor, the departments related hold a contradictory view. On the one hand, they admit the fact of the abnormal development of labor dispatch. On the other hand, they hope to solve this problem by blockage. In fact, the root cause of the abnormal development of labor dispatch is the rigid employment mechanism established by the Labor Contract Law. The government hopes to protect the legal rights of labors by some non-fundamental measures, on the basis of ignoring the market signals. On the contrary, it will promote the development of disguised employment relationship. Only addressing both the symptoms and root causes, can we eliminate the discrimination and put the labor dispatch back on track. Accordingly the employment relations will develop harmoniously.起始頁-結束頁：97-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：非全日制用工法律規制之特點與不足並列篇名：On the Characteristics and Deficiencies of Regulations of Part-time Employment in Mainland China作者：謝德成(De-Cheng Xie)關鍵字：非全日制;規制放鬆;任意終止;比例原則;part-time employment;loosening of regulations;arbitrary termination;proportionality principle期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國大陸非全日制立法呈現出勞動者權利保護非體系化、規制放鬆，以及直接僱用為目標等特點。立法的主要目標也並非實現權利保護的體系化，而是增加用工彈性，擴大就業。直接僱用忽略了內部勞動力市場的效率。因立法導致全日制與非全日制勞動者權益嚴重扭曲。單一的時間界定標準，無法適用非全日制靈活的用工特性；對非全日制勞動者社會保險的非強制性設置，違反了憲法的平等對待原則；勞動合同的任意終止，使得勞動者工作權保護不足；加班帶薪休假等無相應的勞動基準適用等。因此，立法應以臨時性、短期性、季節性等工作作為非全日制用工適用之基礎，以此限制非全日制用工的大量濫用；依據比例性原則建構非全日制加班及帶薪休假制度；通過有關規範性檔對用人單位惡意規避法律責任的情形制定相關規則。英文摘要：The present characteristics of the regulations of part-time employees in mainland China are reflected in such phenomena as the non-systematization in the protection of employees' rights, the loosening of regulations, and the intention of irresponsible direct hire of employees and so on. The main aim of the legislation is not to achieve the systematization in the protection of the rights, but to increase the flexibility of the job and expand the amount of employment. Direct hiring ignores the efficiency of the internal labor market Due to the problems in the relevant legislation, both the full-time and part-time employees' rights and interests are severely distorted. For instance, the singular and rigid standard of working time virtually cannot be applied to the flexible time schedule of part-time work; the non-obligatory guarantee of social security for the part-time employees is against the constitution of equal treatment; the arbitrary termination of the labor contract defies the protection of the employees; no unified standardization can be applied to the overtime work and paid leave. In this paper, the author suggests that the foundation of legislation on part-time employment be based on the characteristics of temporariness, short-term, and seasonality in order to prevent from the abuse of part-time employees. Furthermore, a well-rounded system of overtime payment and paid leave for the part-time employees should be built according to the proportionality principle. Finally the author also puts forward that certain rules and regulations should be established to govern and prevent the avoidance of the employers' responsibilities.起始頁-結束頁：135-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：提倡性別正義之法：定位蘇珊˙歐肯之貢獻並列篇名：Methods for Advocating Gender Justice: Situating Susan Okin's Contribution作者：陸品妃(Pin-Fei Lu)關鍵字：女性主義;蘇珊˙歐肯;性別正義;人文自由主義;性別存有學;Feminism;Susan Moller Okin;Gender Justice;Humanist Liberalism;Ontological Accounts of Gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：當代政治哲學家蘇珊．歐肯（Susan Moller Okin）呈現自由主義進路的性別正義理論，她的分析涵蓋類如因性別所造成的男女前景差異，婚姻家庭中養兒育女的生活，應該怎樣安排才符合分配正義的要求。本文一方面提出如何理解歐肯性別正義觀及其重要性之說明，另一方面則指出其理論限制並討論其它可能。闡述主旨如下。歐肯理論為開展「性別如何得以正義」的論述理路奠基，其性別正義的要求，能夠避免實踐性別時的盲點與誤用，進而促使公民互以公平對待。公民互以公平相待，更將兌現正義的要求。然而我們若以哈斯蘭兒（Sally Haslanger）的區分架構來思考歐肯主張的性別存有觀，亦即解消論（eliminativism），將會發現，此論僅得作為回答「性別如何得以正義」提問的立場之一。另有建構論（constructivism）與自然論（naturalism）等立場，可作為有效的性別正義觀基礎。因而正義社會裡自由又平等的成員，並非一定為歐肯所倡議的無性別（genderless）者。英文摘要：This article devotes itself to critically introduce Susan Moller Okin's account of gender justice. It first demonstrates the vintage point Okin exemplified in thinking about gender, that is, gender is focused through the lens of justice. Okin's account provides a basis for theorizing in respond to the question 'how gender can be just.' Okin's arguments demand gender justice, which would awaken us avoid wrongs from gender practices and enhance fair treatments among citizens. Second, it concludes that in order to answer the question 'how gender can be just', the ontological account of gender in Okin's gender justice, eliminativism, remains one as valid as the others, constructivism and naturalism. Members in a just society, when free and equal, are not necessarily genderless, as Okin suggested.起始頁-結束頁：165-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：學習獨處禪的生活教育：犀角喻的觀點並列篇名：Learning Solitary Meditation in Life Education: The Metaphorical Perspective of the Rhino Horn作者：王寶珍(Pao-Chen Wang)關鍵字：獨處禪;犀角;文化再製;solitary meditation;rhino hom;cultural reproduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究站在布迪厄談文化再製的社會學立場，呂克爾宗教語言解釋學的觀點，再回顧歷代佛教思想家詮解佛經的精神，重新去理解與思考佛典文本中，如何用犀角喻說獨處禪者遠離種種煩惱之生活態度與行事風格，並與現存有關獨處的研究成果進行比較與反思。研究結果發現獨處禪者並非不問世事的隱居者；而是善於洞察世間萬象而提出解決方法的社會實踐者。其次，在學習獨處禪的過程中，需要有經驗者無私地幫忙分析與共同討論，協助其練習轉「瘋猴子」為「獨角犀」（離苦得樂）的社會實踐，值得今日有志於生活教育者深思。英文摘要：Based on the sociological principle of cultural reproduction by Pierre Bourdieu and the concept of hermeneutics in religious language by Paul Ricoeur, the spirit of Buddhist thinkers in their interpretations of Buddhist texts is being reviewed. A comparison study is made to reconsider the attitude and lifestyle associated with the analogy of the rhino horn, which is utilized by meditators to eradicate worries as described in the Buddhist texts.It is found that solitary meditators are not hermits but social practitioners, who have great insights into worldly phenomena and provide solutions. In addition, today advocates for life education should consider it as necessary to have experienced ones to selflessly help with analysis and discussion and to assist in practicing transforming a ”wild monkey” into a ”rhino horn” (eradicating sufferings and obtaining joy) in the process of learning solitary meditation.起始頁-結束頁：211-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：災難的社會學省思：「災難研究」專號導言作者：張維安期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：FUKUSIMA能拯救世界嗎？轉向非核社會的世界史並列篇名：Can FUKUSIMA Save the World? Toward an Nuclear Phase-Out Society作者：長谷川公一(Koichi Hasegawa)關鍵字：三一一日本東北地震;福島核電廠;FUKUSIMA;非核社會;德國非核政策;FUKUSIMA;311 T<U+014D>hoku earthquake;German nuclear policy;nuclear phase-out society期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文透過德國能源政策在日本三一一東北大震之後的轉折，指出福島事件有可能帶動世界走向全面的非核社會，因而使得FUKUSIMA（福島的英文拼音）這個名詞成為世界史一個重要轉折點。不同於車諾比事件，作者認為福島核電廠所採取的世界通用規格以及因複合型災難所引發的核災震撼，足以引起全世界對於此事件的重視，並回頭檢視反省自身的能源政策，而德國梅克爾政府在一夕之間的改弦易轍就是最好的明證。考察德國決定在二○二二年全面廢除核能電廠的經驗，作者認為FUKUSIMA促使德國從「倫理」的角度看待「能源安全供給」的問題，勢必改變傳統上以技術看待能源問題的盲點，而倫理的思考也必會帶動世界轉向非核社會可能，日本正逐漸從此角度看待問題。因此作者相信，FUKUSIMA既能改變德國的核子動力政策，日後也可能在德國的政策轉換刺激下改變日本的核能政策，進而改變臺灣及全球的核子動力政策。英文摘要：This article examines the change of the nuclear power policy in Germany to demonstrate why the FUKUSIMA nuclear disaster triggered by 311 T<U+014D>hoku earthquake of Japan might save the world. The author argues that the shocking impact of FUKUSIMA directly leads the Merkel coalition to change their nuclear policy immediately. Rethinking the ”ethics” in power policy, the Germany government decides to close all their nuclear power plants by 2022, which means Germany will be toward a nuclear phase-out society. The author believe that the demonstration effects of Germany power policy will feed back to the policy making about nuclear power in Japan and dream that the same feedback will spread out to other countries with nuclear power plants projects, such as Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：7-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：三一一後的日本：「大轉換」的科技文明作者：陳永峰期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：41-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：災難研究與救災實踐的結合：神戶大學都市安全研究中心簡介作者：李宗義期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：49-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：跨越官僚的專業線：網路力量與救災行動並列篇名：Beyond Bureaucracy: the Evolution of Disaster Relief in the Age of Web 2.0作者：張維安(Wei-An Chang);李宗義(Tsung-Yi Lee);李士傑(Ilya Eric Lee)關鍵字：災難;網路;技術典範移轉;WEB 2.0;Disaster 2.0;disaster relief;bureaucracy;web application;social media;crowdsourcing期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從九二一地震以來國際社會所發生的天災，觀察社會在「災難回應行為」中，如何透過網路工具結合實地參與、協同合作，進行傳統上被稱為救災的行動。我們的目的在於觀察「技術典範的轉移」與行動者面對災難所採取作為的共同演化關係（co-evolution），並且由下而上提出了新的行動可能，進而在傳統救災主要施行者（政府）所確立的災難回應模式之外重新定義了新的模式與改變方向。網路社會擺脫了傳統官僚體系的國家資源唯一動員機制，提供底層的民眾以人際網絡各自適切的溝通媒介，透過接駁的方式將受災的第一手資訊傳播出來；同時也讓大型災難所喚起的「志願參與者與科技社群」（V&TCs）得以藉由自我組織的方式交換訊息、調配資源與積聚力量。傳統災難回應當中很難被聽見聲音的受災者與志願參與者，在新的模式中擁有較為清晰的行為與型態浮現。災難回應的新技術典範，以即時性、互動性與自發性傳播與擴散連結的方式將大量的資料呈現出來，既帶來了新的契機、同時也呈現出「傳統角色」在歷史轉變中的侷限性。英文摘要：The emergence of the disaster relief through new web applications has challenged the traditional bureaucracy model but how it evolves has not been well examined in Taiwan. This article reviews the development of emergency responding behaviors in the first decade of the 21st century. The authors argue that although the ideas of web 2.0 has proven useful in the process of disaster management under different disaster context, the bureaucracy has no ideas how to integrate these applications into the traditional relief actions because of the bureaucratic inertia. As we can see in 2004 Tsunami and 2010 Haiti Earthquake, the emergence of the volunteers & technological communities (V&TCs) has tried to fill this gap between the bureaucracy and the new web application and bring new possibilities in disaster relief effort.起始頁-結束頁：55-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：媒體災難敘事的社會意義建構：日本福島核災的戲劇分析並列篇名：The Construction of Social Meaning in Disaster Narratives of Mass Media: Dramaturgical Analysis of Fukushima Nuclear Disaster in Japan作者：齊偉先(Wei-Hsian Chi)關鍵字：災難;敘事;戲劇分析;福島核災;大眾媒體;Disaster;Narrative;Dramaturgical Analysis;Fukushima Nuclear Disaster;Mass Media期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：現代人對災難的理解相當程度依賴大眾媒體的敘事報導，因此大眾媒體的災難報導影響了相關的社會溝通模式及內涵，也影響著民眾面對災難的態度。就這意義而言，媒體的災難敘事不僅只是訊息的告知，更是建構災難之意義圖像的社會行動。此外，媒體敘事也引發許多其他的社會行動，如民間團體及民眾捐款活動等，這些活動反過來創造出更多的敘事題材。針對這個有高度自反性的多元敘事報導，戲劇理論提供了一個很好的觀察切入點，讓我們看到現代社會面對災難時是如何建構災難圖像，又如何溝通出因應之道。本研究以二○一一年日本福島核災為例，透過分析臺灣平面媒體對此災變的報導，指出媒體相關的多元敘事交織出一齣戲劇，並應用戲劇理論說明臺灣如何建構一個發生於他處的災難圖像並賦予其社會意義。分析顯示，災難是現代社會中少數能透過媒體激發出集體「共在感」的重要因素。並且研究也由災難敘事的戲劇分析進一步說明現代媒體自身也可能是一種製造風險來源的理由。英文摘要：Disaster narratives of mass media essentially influence the ways of social communication and, thus, the public attitude toward disasters. This means that disaster narratives represent not only messages, but also social actions which construct a social meaning frame for understanding the disasters. Besides, these narratives of mass media could evoke other social actions, like those of some civil organizations or the public donation etc. These reflexively create more issues for media reports. Regarding the reflexive characteristic of disaster narratives, the theory of social dramaturgy provides us a good standpoint to understand how we could face the disasters and how we shall understand them. This study focuses on the Fukushima Nuclear Disaster in 2011 and analyses the related reports in the Taiwanese newspapers. By dramaturgical theory, I shall show how the various disaster narratives form a social drama, and how they construct a social meaning frame. It shows that disaster is one of a few issues which promote the collective existence of ”communitas”.起始頁-結束頁：103-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：社會脆弱性可解釋九二一地震死亡率分布嗎？並列篇名：Can Social Vulnerability Explain the Distribution of Mortality in the 921 Earthquake?作者：葉高華(Ko-Hua Yap)關鍵字：脆弱性;災難社會學;社會指標研究;危害;vulnerability;sociology of disaster;social indicators research;hazard期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：社會脆弱性指影響個人或團體受災機率與災後恢復能力的社會特徵。在決定誰容易遭受危害衝擊的層面上，社會因素經常扮演重要的角色。然而，社會脆弱性的評估在臺灣仍然非常罕見。少數的研究也僅止於建構指標。本研究試圖檢驗社會脆弱性是否可解釋九二一地震的死亡率分布。利用因子分析法，一九九○年各鄉鎮的十六種變數可濃縮為三個因子：因子一反映社經地位較低的特徵；因子二反映人口高齡化的特徵；因子三反映失業與不完整家庭的特徵。本研究利用迴歸分析測試三個因子與九二一地震死亡率的關連。結果顯示，在相同的地震強度之下，三個因子皆與地震死亡率呈正相關。不過，僅高齡化因子達到統計顯著水準。由於地震死亡率僅反映災害的直接衝擊，關於社會脆弱性與災害後續衝擊的關連，仍有待後續研究進一步探討。英文摘要：Social vulnerability means the social characteristics affecting the potential to loss in natural hazards and the ability to recover. In respect to determining who vulnerable to hazards, social factors usually play important roles. However, the assessment for social vulnerability in Taiwan is still rare and few studies have limit to construct indicators. This research examine whether social vulnerability can explain the distribution of mortality in the 921 Earthquakes. By means of factor analysis, 16 variables of each township of 1990 are reduced to 3 independent factors reflecting the characteristics of low social-economic status, aging, unemployment and incomplete family, respectively. The results of regression models show all 3 factors positively correlate to the mortality under the same seismic intensity. However, only the factor of aging achieves statistical significance level. Due to the mortality reflects only the direct impact of the disaster, the relationship between social vulnerability and the follow-up impacts after the disaster remains further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：135-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：未竟的蛻變：災後女性角色的開展與困頓並列篇名：Incomplete Transform: The Development and Predicament of the Role of Women in Post-Disaster Settings作者：張容嘉(Jung-Chia Chang)關鍵字：災難研究;性別;石岡媽媽劇團;disaster research;gender relation;Shigang Mama Theatre Troupe期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：災難研究在社會學界是門新興發展中的領域，性別更是尚待補充的研究議題，過往「性別」僅作為災難研究調查裡的變項，卻欠缺差異背後的解釋。性別與災難研究最富挑戰性之處即在於關注災難發生後兩性間的性別分工與權力關係變化，是否更強化既有社會的性別不平等關係？本論文將回顧災難社會學的發展，包括災難的定義以及災難研究的議題，並將性別觀點帶入災難社會學的研究；最後，筆者進一步以臺灣九二一地震災後成立石岡媽媽劇團團員們的女性生命經驗為例，作為對災難性別議題的回應與分析。英文摘要：Disaster research is an emerging field of study in sociology, with gender being one of the related research issues yet to be investigated. In the existing studies, ”gender” is mostly recognized as one variable of different statistics to predict or assume change in disaster research. With gender difference has been identified in range of studies, the configuration that render such difference has yet to be explored. In what direction would the division of labor between gender and power relations alter along the changes of family structures and even the status of women followed by disasters? Would disasters reinforce the existing gender inequality? These issues would be challenging and worthy of being observed in gender and disaster studies.In this article, the author first attempts to identify lacking aspects of gender issues by reviewing the development of disaster sociology, including the definitions of disaster and related issues. In addition, the author seeks to venture out gender perspectives by analyzing life experiences of members of Shigang Mama Theater Troupe, a mutual help and development group established after the 921 Earthquake in Taiwan, in response to the inadequacy of current disaster studies.起始頁-結束頁：155-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：老人福利機構水災撤離因應韌性分析並列篇名：Resilience of Nursing Homes in Taiwan in the Process of Flood Evacuation作者：李香潔(Hsiang-Chieh Lee);李洋寧(Yang-Ning Lee);楊惠萱(Hui-HsuanYang);莊明仁(Ming-Jen Chuang)關鍵字：因應韌性;老人福利機構;收容安置;緊急救援;撤離;Resilience;Social network;nursing homes;sheltering;emergency rescue期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究從災害因應韌性觀點，分析影響老人福利機構水災撤離行為之因素。以二○○九年莫拉克、二○一○年凡那比颱風水災撤離經驗為研究對象，本研究於二○一○年深度訪談六家老人福利機構、一個地方緊急應變中心，以及三個救難隊。研究結果如下：（1）及時撤離因應韌性之影響因素包含體系因應韌性，如政府對極端災害預警是否有標準作業程序、正式網絡救援能力是否及時到達，以及包含屬於機構因應韌性之非正式網絡是否能有效動員、是否有標準作業程序、住民行動能力與機構人力整備狀況。本文建議長期目標，正式社會支持網絡應致力於針對極端氣候研發減災及調適策略與工具，短期目標，正式社會支持網絡則應培養機構災害因應韌性（如，看河川水位）；另外，建議效法日本模式，培養以（機構）自助、（鄰里）共助為主，（正式社會支持網絡）公助為輔的文化；（2）撤離工具安排和避難收容因應韌性影響因素包含屬於機構因應韌性之機構動員非正式社會網絡能力、人力物資整備能力，以及屬於體系因應韌性之動員正式社會網絡能力。多數受訪機構認為自己處理較能了解自身需求，亦即，機構因應韌性較體系因應韌性重要。本文建議政府扮演輔助角色，包含以較強的機構為典範，建立輔導弱者之機制。英文摘要：This study uses the resilience approach to analyze flood evacuation of nursing homes in Taiwan. Besides conducting in-depth interviews of nursing homes flooded during recent extreme weather events in Taiwan, we also interviewed rescue teams and a local emergency operation center. The study identifies three capacities representing resilience: (1) Rescuing: Major influencing factors are the government's early warning SOP, nursing homes' social network, preparedness in manpower, residents' ability to move, and whether having evacuation SOP. (2) Transportation arrangement: Main causes include formal and informal social networks. (3) Sheltering: Besides formal and informal social networks, preparedness in food, power generators, etc. are also important.起始頁-結束頁：187-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：災難的永續社會學探討：後九二一地震的「恐懼修省」並列篇名：A Study of Sustainable Sociology: Reflection on 921 Earthquake Disaster作者：黃世明(Shih-Ming Huang)關鍵字：災異;災難;永續發展;公羊春秋災異說;易經震卦;disaster;sociology;sustainable development;921 earthquake;"Gongyong Chunqiu";"I Ching"期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本篇主要分成兩個單元闡述，首先是災難與災異的永續社會學思維，第一部分嘗試藉由災難社會學的概念對話，論述永續發展的主軸面向，融入哈伯馬斯與貝克對危機、風險的思維，取捨魯曼的系統觀點，以期建立理解災難的思維起點，第二部分則由永續發展的三生構面，探討災難對社會生成變化的衝擊，並以九二一地震的災難經驗為論述主題，與永續社會學進行多面向的觀照闡發，以及震災治理的行事要則。第二單元則是以《公羊春秋》與《易經》的相關理念，進行永續關懷的災難思維探討，整理《公羊春秋》對災異事況書寫，論述政道治術的利弊得失，討論災異書寫對統治者的正位批判與反身性批判，亦可視為天人批判的象徵鬥爭。另則詮釋《易經震卦》的時位繫辭與卦爻的錯綜摩盪，闡述對地震災難的行事，由卦爻的辭旨觀玩與其時位結構，綜合提出災難的治理原則。整體而言，本篇論文有再深入闡述的必要，藉由理論概念的多元反思與綜合交融，有助於災難社會學的建構開展，對於臺灣永續發展與災難治理要則，提出可參照的「恐懼修省」哲學。英文摘要：This study tries to construct sociology of disaster with concepts of sustainable development, while emphasizing the importance of local sustainable agenda and agencies which includes how to maintain the equilibrium of three dimensions of economic production, social life and ecological environment after 1999's 921 earthquake disaster. The social crisis theory of Habermas, Beck's analysis of risk society and Luhmann's ideas of system theory are also discussed in this paper.”Gongyong Chunqiu” emphasizes the responsibilities of government to undertake the shock and hurt of natural disaster. Facing abnormal and disaster phenomenon of nature, Confucianism adopted symbolic struggle and aroused structural critic and reflexive critic actions.The experience of disaster governance actions could be contemplated by thinking and interpreting the words and hexagrams of ”I Ching”. Hexagrams of ”I Ching” Zhengua were meaningful to play the fields of words combined with possible circumstances of changing conditions of disaster process. It's interesting to observe phenomena and to play meanings of words to construct sociology of disaster which can inspire other themes of sociological imagination.起始頁-結束頁：221-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：數據的災難？九二一震災社會調查資料庫的現狀與限制並列篇名：A Disaster of Data? Social Surveys' Limitations in the 921 Earthquake作者：張宜君(Yi-Chun Chang);林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin)關鍵字：調查偏誤;九二一地震;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（TEPS）;社會意向電話調查;家屋再造;survey bias;the 921 earthquake;Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS);Social Image Telephone Survey (SITS);House Reconstruction Database (HRD)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：51卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：九二一地震後臺灣學術界開始累積災難相關的調查數據，但多數研究使用有選擇性偏誤的災民樣本。因此，本文比較含括九二一相關資訊且可供量化分析之資料庫，說明其特性及其能處理的災難社會學議題，並討論各資料庫的限制與未來發展。本文發現，臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫為中學生樣本，面臨推論至全體的挑戰；社會意向電話調查為家戶電話抽樣，可能流失受災嚴重的組合屋樣本；我們自行抽樣的家屋再造資料庫為申請九二一基金會家屋再造補助的災民資料，因為補助條件與弱勢程度重合，有待與非災民資料庫合併分析。目前相關資料庫都難以全面分析災難的社會經濟影響，因此我們建議由國家相關單位著手調查，建立完整的災民資訊，以突破研究資料不足的瓶頸。英文摘要：Previous disaster studies in Taiwan are quite limited until the 921 earthquake. After the earthquake, however, most research analyzed victim-only samples suffering from selection bias. This article compares three earthquake-related surveys and illustrates their limitations. Taiwan Education Panel Survey with nationwide high school students samples is not a random sample of the national population and biased by some retrospective errors. Collected through telephone surveys, Social Image Telephone Survey may lose victims who were damaged too much to keep a household telephone. Finally, House Reconstruction Database was constructed by coding the information of the applicants for the House Reconstruction Project of the 921 Earthquake Relief Foundations. However, the requirements of the applicants may lead to the self-selection problem. These results imply that the limitations of the datasets have biased the statistics of disaster analyses. Therefore, we suggest the government and relative relief institutions shall conduct a victims' census after each disaster to support Taiwanese disaster studies in the future.起始頁-結束頁：269-311資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Risk-Shifting Behavior in Taiwan's Small and Medium-Sized Commercial Banks under Different Deposit Insurance Systems並列篇名：我國中小企業銀行之風險轉嫁行為－不同存款保險費率制度下之探討作者：張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);陳薇如(Wei-Ju Chen)關鍵字：風險轉嫁行為;風險差別費率制度;存款保險費率;最大概似估計;Risk-shifting behavior;risk-based premium system;deposit insurance premium;maximum likelihood estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢定我國中小企業銀行在存款保險風險差別費率制度實施前後的風險轉嫁行為，我們採用Duan et al.(1992)的模型進行檢定。我們的實證結果顯示，風險制約因子在風險差別費率制度實施後，制約效果反而減弱。另外，我們的實證結果也顯示我國中小企銀在單一費率期間確實存在風險轉嫁行為，而此行為並未因為風險差別費率制度實施而消失。英文摘要：This paper examines the risk-shifting behavior of Taiwan's small and medium-sized commercial banks both prior to and after the adoption of a risk-based premium system. We use the Duan et al. (1992) model to investigate the changes in their risk-shifting behavior. We find that the effects of risk-restraining measures were reduced as a result of the adoption of the risk-based system. Our results also demonstrate that risk-shifting behavior within these commercial banks was quite successful under the flat-rate premium system, and that such behavior was not mitigated as a result of the implementation of the risk-based premium system.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(4).12篇名：Asymmetric Correlation and Difference between the Volatility of Housing and Stock Price Indexes: Analysis Based on the Threshold Volatility and Cointegration Model並列篇名：房價指數與股價指數的波動性差異及不對稱相關：門檻波動性與共整合模型實證分析作者：蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai);陳明吉(Ming-Chi Chen)關鍵字：房價;股價指數;不對稱;波動性;門檻共整合;House prices;stock market index;wealth effect;threshold;cointegration期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文提出股票市場和住宅市場之間可能存在不對稱相關的假說。本文使用台灣集中市場的股價加權指數和台北市房價指數進行實證分析，結果顯示，兩者之間的共整合關係存在門檻效果，進而，續以Hansen和Seo（2002）的門檻向量誤差修正模型估計，本文發現房價趨向均衡的修正行為在其需向上修正時較為顯著。英文摘要：This study proposes that asymmetric reactions of the stock and housing markets will result in asymmetric relationship between the two markets. This study uses the Taiwan Weighted Stock Index and housing price index of Taipei city for empirical analysis. The results show that a threshold existed in the equilibrium relationship between the two indexes. Further, we employ the threshold vector error correction model (VECM) proposed by Hansen and Seo (2002) for estimation. The results show that the adjustment behavior of housing price index is indeed more significant when it is revised upward.起始頁-結束頁：25-57資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(4).23篇名：Board Training and Firm Performance: Evidence from Taiwan並列篇名：董監事進修與公司績效：台灣實證研究作者：吳貞慧(Chen-Hui Wu)關鍵字：董監事進修;財務績效;財務專業;Board training;financial performance;financial expertise期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討董監事進修是否會造成公司績效上的差異。本文採用人工蒐集資料，經實證結果發現，董監事進修對會計基礎衡量的ROA、ROE，以及現金基礎衡量的現金流量對總資產之比率，有顯著正向的影響；然而針對營收基礎的銷貨收入對權益之比率及利潤率，則未有顯著的影響。至於董監事進修對市場基礎衡量的Tobin's Q 及股票報酬，經控制相關的公司及董監事特性，仍未發現有顯著之影響。此外，董監事進修會計及財務訓練課程被發現與ROE呈現正向關係。英文摘要：Do firms with board training make a difference in firm performance? Using handcollected data, the empirical results show that board training has a significant positive impact on the accounting-based measures of ROA, ROE, and the cash-based measure of cash-flow to assets, and no eminent effect on sales-based measures of the sales-to-equity ratio and profit margin. It is also found that board training has no significant effect on the market-based measures of Tobin’s Q and stock returns after controlling for several firm and board characteristics. In addition, accounting and finance training courses undertaken by board members are positively related to ROE.起始頁-結束頁：59-89資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(4).34篇名：An Analysis of Short Selling, Margin Purchasing, and Bid-ask Spreads around Illegal Insider Trading: Evidence from Taiwan並列篇名：臺灣證券市場非法內線交易之融券、融資與買賣價差關聯性分析作者：鄭揚耀(Lee-Young Cheng);張眾卓(Chong-Chuo Chang);易道韻(Dau-Yun Yi)關鍵字：非法內線交易;融券賣出;融資買入;買賣價差;內線交易者;Illegal insider trading;short selling;margin purchasing;bid-ask spread;informed trader期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討臺灣證券市場非法內線交易案件之信用交易與買賣價差於公司訊息宣告期間的關聯性。實證結果顯示壞（好）消息宣告前具有異常高的融券賣出（融資買進），其並與宣告後之股票報酬呈負（正）相關。本研究亦發現融券賣出與融資買進會增加訊息宣告前的買賣價差，並降低市場流動性。英文摘要：This study examines margin trading activities and bid-ask spreads around companyspecific news announcements, in which insiders were convicted of illegal trading on nonpublic information in the Taiwan stock market. We find significant excess short sales (margin purchases) before bad (good) news announcements. Results indicate that abnormal short selling (margin trading) is significantly and negatively (positively) related to postannouncement stock returns. Furthermore, our results show that short selling and margin purchasing increase pre-announcement bid-ask spreads and decrease market liquidity.起始頁-結束頁：91-123資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(4).45篇名：Macroeconomic Announcements and Information Asymmetry in the Foreign Exchange Market並列篇名：總體經濟宣告與外匯市場之訊息不對稱作者：陳佑倫(Yu-Lun Chen);高櫻芬(Yin-Feng Gau);王景譽(Ching-Yu Wang)關鍵字：買賣價差;逆選擇成本;訊息不對稱;電子仲介系統;外匯市場;Bid-ask spread;adverse selection cost;information asymmetry;electronic broking system;foreign exchange market期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文使用EBS電子仲介系統上的歐元－美元逐筆匯率資料，探討訊息對於電子交易平台之即期匯率的影響。研究結果顯示，訊息不對稱的程度具有週內與日內的周期變化形態，而且在美國與歐洲地區的總體經濟宣告發布後，訊息不對稱的程度增加。英文摘要：This article studies whether and to what extent information affects the determination of spot exchange rates in an electronic limit-order foreign exchange market. Using the tick-bytick data of EUR-USD quotes and transactions on the Electronic Broking Services (EBS), the authors find evidence of intraweek and intraday variation in the level of information asymmetry. After macroeconomic announcements in the United States and Europe, the level of information asymmetry increases, which reveals that the informational role of order flow increases immediately after the release of macroeconomic announcements.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(3).16篇名：The Valuation of Employee Reload Options with Stochastic Interest Rates並列篇名：在隨機利率下具重載特質之員工選擇權的評價作者：張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);何曉緯(Hsiao-Wei Ho);何瑞鎮(Ruey-Jenn Ho);鄭濰昌(Wei-Chang Cheng)關鍵字：員工津貼;具重載特質之員工選擇權;隨機利率;Executive compensation;employee reload options;stochastic interest rates期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文將Hull and White（1993）模型一般化，並加入雙變數二元樹方法，使其能在隨機利率假設下評價具重載特質之員工選擇權。數值分析結果顯示：分別考慮隨機利率與固定利率之具重載特質員工選擇權價值，其兩者差異會隨股價與利率的相關係數增加而增加，但會隨著股票報酬波動性的增加而減少。此結果顯示利率為決定此類選擇權價值之重要因素。英文摘要：This paper proposes an adjusted binomial approach to price employee reload options (EROs) under the assumption of stochastic interest rates. We generalize Hull and White's (1993) model by incorporating the bivariate binomial approach to adapt the valuation of EROs to a stochastic interest rate economy. The numerical analysis reveals that the differences between values of EROs considering stochastic interest rates and those considering constant interest rates increase with correlations between stock prices and interest rates, but decrease as volatility of stock return increases. These results suggest that interest rates are important determinants in the valuation of EROs.起始頁-結束頁：29-62資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(3).27篇名：Testing the Cost of Capital Effects of Taiwan's First Stock Market Liberalization並列篇名：實證台灣股市首次自由化之資金成本效應作者：黃一祥(I-Hsiang Huang);黃旭輝(Hsu-Huei Huang);張志向(Chih-Hsiang Chang);楊琬如(Wan-Ru Yang)關鍵字：股市自由化;國際資產評價模式;投資者認知假說;流動性改善假說;資金成本;Stock market liberalization;international asset pricing model;investor recognition hypothesis;liquidity;cost of equity capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文整合實證台灣股市首次自由化之資金成本效應。我們發現，台股在自由化期間的每月平均股價重評價效果為1.713%，其預期報酬和波動在自由化之後亦皆顯著下降。與Errunza andLosq（1985）的國際資產評價模式和Merton（1987）的投資者認知假說一致，重評價效果與風險分散利益具正相關、與不完全資訊成本和台股beta存在負相關。但流動性無法解釋重評價效果。英文摘要：We synthetically test the cost of the capital effects for Taiwan's first stock market liberalization using firm-level data. We find that Taiwan-listed firms experience an average monthly stock price revaluation of 1.713% during liberalization and that both expected returns and volatility are decreased following liberalization. Consistent with Errunza and Losq's (1985) international asset pricing model and Merton's (1987) investor recognition hypothesis, the liberalization-induced revaluation is positively related to the potentials of diversification benefits and negatively related to the cost of incomplete information and local market beta. However, liquidity fails to explain the positive revaluation.起始頁-結束頁：63-96資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(3).38篇名：Portfolio Insurance in the Long Term Asset Management並列篇名：投資組合保險在長期資產管理中的應用作者：李懷義(Huai-I Lee);何怡滿(Emily Ho);謝宗佑(Tzung-Yuan Hsieh);許溪南(Hsi-Nan Hsu)關鍵字：投資組合保險;長期資產管理;損失趨避;風險趨避;權變制輪式要保額度投資組合保險策略;Portfolio insurance;long-term asset management;loss aversion;risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文證明以選擇權為基礎的投資組合保險對長期資產管理無效，並建議改用固定比例投資組合保險策略。同時，以損失趨避理論為基礎，提出權變制輪式要保額度投資組合保險策略。模擬與實證的結果顯示所建議的保險策略在長期資產管理上的表現要優於固定比例投資組合保險和滾動式固定比例投資組合保險策略。英文摘要：Portfolio insurance is widely applied in asset management; however, the empirical evidence demonstrates that the performance of current portfolio insurance strategies is not as useful as expected for the long-term asset management purpose. This paper proves the failure of the option based portfolio insurance (OBPI) strategy as the long-term asset management purpose, and proposes a contingent ratcheted-floor variable proportion portfolio insurance (CRF-VPPI) strategy, which is based on the implication of loss aversion, as a competing strategy for the purpose of long-term asset management. Monte Carlo simulations and empirical analysis demonstrates that the proposed CRF-VPPI outperforms the CPPI and the rolling-CPPI.起始頁-結束頁：97-123資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(3).49篇名：The Impact of Limited Attention and News on the Investment Decisions of Mutual Fund Investors並列篇名：有限注意與新聞資訊對基金投資人交易決策之影響作者：林美珍(Mei-Chen Lin);陳妙珍(Miaw-Jane Chen);陳有佾(You-Yi Chen)關鍵字：有限注意;新聞資訊;決策行為;Limited attention;news;decision behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討投資人注意力與投資決策之關係，研究結果發現投資人注意力會影響其決策行為，且於購買決策中更為明顯；各種新聞訊息對投資人決策亦不同，好消息使投資人申購與贖回意願增加，壞消息則使申購與贖回意願減少，績效類與規模類之訊息也有相同影響力。本文亦發現有新聞基金之後續績效表現與無新聞之基金並無明顯差異。英文摘要：This paper studies the relationship between the attention of investors and investment decision-making by investigating the effects of media coverage on mutual funds. It is found that investors' attention will affect their decision-making; especially in purchase decisions. Various kinds of news have different effects on decision-making: Good news leads investors to raise their inclination to purchase and redeem funds, while bad news does the contrary, ceteris paribus. In addition, performance-related information and size of funds also increase investors' tendency to purchase and redeem funds. Finally, with-or without-news funds show no significant differences in their subsequent performances.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(2).110篇名：Impact of Financing Sources on the Earnings Management of Chinese Listed Firms before and after Institutional Reforms並列篇名：融資來源在制度變革前後對中國上市公司盈餘管理的影響作者：洪榮華(Jung-Hua Hung);李易政(I-Cheng Li);王文聖(Wen-Sheng Wang);陳香如(Hsiang-Ju Chen);李尉慈(Wei-Tzu Li)關鍵字：盈餘管理;融資來源;制度改革;Earnings management;sources of financing;institutional reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究檢視融資來源在制度改革前後對中國上市公司盈餘管理行為之影響。將來源分為負債融資及權益融資，以2004年銀行業股份制改革及2001年權益融資法規調整為分界點，PanelLeast Squares模型檢視之結果，銀行業股份制改革後，負債融資企業盈餘管理行為顯著高於改革前；權益融資相關法規調整後，權益融資公司進行盈餘管理情形顯著高於調整前。英文摘要：This paper uses discretionary accruals as a proxy for earnings management to examine the impact of financing sources on the earnings management in Chinese listed firms before and after the institutional reforms. The financing sources are divided into debt and equity financing whose research periods are categorized according to the banking reform in 2004 and the securities regulation reform in 2001, respectively. Panel least squares regression is used to analyze the data. The empirical results show that, after the banking reform and the securities regulation reform, managers tend to manipulate earnings more prominently than they did before.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(2).211篇名：An Improved Least-Square Monte-Carlo Approach for Pricing American Options並列篇名：改善最小平方蒙地卡羅法對美式選擇權評價作者：絲文銘(Wen-Ming Szu);林君瀌(Jun-Biao Lin);紀凱逸(Kai-Yi Ji);趙哲雍(Je-Yung Jao)關鍵字：最小平方蒙地卡羅法;最適執行界限;員工認股權證;多資產評價;Least-Square Monte-Carlo method;optimal exercise boundary;executive stock option;multiple assets portfolios期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主旨在對最小平方蒙地卡羅模擬法提出修正。在進行評價後發現，在單一資產方面，與Choi和Song（2008）所提出之修正方法進行計算速度方面的評比，發現仍可再提升10%至14%的速度。在多資產方面，在以Anderson和Broadie（2004）之方法做為比較對象，本文所建立之95%信賴區間皆能涵蓋真實價值並節省平均94％的計算時間；當進一步結合Sobol序列，節省之時間可達99%。英文摘要：This article derives improvements to the LSMC for derivatives pricing. For single asset pricing, the results imply that our method can even raise computational speed by 10% to 14% more than that of Choi and Song (2008). We also extend our model for multi-asset pricing and make a comparison with Anderson and Broadie's (2004) approach in valuing rainbow options. The benchmark values can be exactly covered in 95% confidence intervals and the computational time is reduced by about 94%. Further, we use the Sobol' sequence to reduce 99% computational time under 0.04%~0.9% pricing errors.起始頁-結束頁：61-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(2).312篇名：Determinants of New Taiwan Dollar Interest Rate Swap Spreads並列篇名：新台幣利率交換之決定因素作者：盧陽正(Yang-Chen Lu);王佑鈞(Yu-Chun Wang);李修全(Hsiu-Chuan Lee)關鍵字：利率交換價差;利率期限結構;流動性風險;違約風險;市場狀態;Swap spreads;term structure of interest rates;liquidity risk;credit risk;market conditions期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究欲探討臺灣利率交換市場中影響交換價差的因素。實證結果指出，就全樣本期間而言，利率期限結構、流動性風險的變化與違約風險的變化均為交換價差的重要決定因素，而違約風險則為決定交換價差最重要的因素。此外，在空頭時期違約風險為決定交換價差最重要的因素，在多頭時期則依契約到期日而不同。英文摘要：This study examines the determinants of New Taiwan Dollar interest rate swap spreads. Prior literature provides evidence that the term structure of interest rates, liquidity, and credit risk comprise the swap spreads. The empirical results for the full sample period show that these factors are all important in affecting the swap spreads and that default risk is the most important factor among the five components. Furthermore, default risk plays a more important role than other factors in a bear market, but the key factor varies with the maturities of swap contracts in a bull market.起始頁-結束頁：91-120資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(2).413篇名：The Diversification Effects of Real Estate Investment Trusts: A Global Perspective並列篇名：全球不動產投資信託之風險分散效益作者：周冠男(Robin K. Chou);何耕宇(Keng-Yu Ho);盧秋玲(Chiu-Ling Lu)關鍵字：國際多角化;平均數變異數分析;不動產投資信託;夏普指數;International diversification;mean-variance analysis;real estate investment trust (REIT);Sharpe ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：我們檢視美國以及其他六個國家的投資人，是否可以藉著不動產投資信託的資產配置，來增加其投資組合的風險分散效益。實證結果顯示對各國國內的投資人而言，不動產投資信託的配置確實可以顯著的增加投資績效。另一方面，對美國投資人而言，加入其他國家的不動產投資信託亦可以提升夏普指數並降低風險。英文摘要：We examine whether investors can improve their investment opportunity sets by incorporating real estate investment trusts (REITs) into their equity portfolios for the United States and six other countries. The result indicates that the addition of a REIT portfolio leads to a statistically significant increase in the investment opportunity sets available to domestic investors in all countries. We further show that U.S. investors who include international REITs in their equity portfolios experience significant diversification benefits, which come from both an improved Sharpe ratio and an overall reduction in risk. Our study not only fills a gap in the academic literature but also provides implications to the practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(1).114篇名：Credit Bureaus and Overseas Expansion of Banking Industry並列篇名：信用報告機構與銀行業海外擴張作者：周秀霞(Hsiu-Hsia Chou);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：信用報告機構;資訊分享;銀行業海外擴張;引力模型;Credit bureaus;information sharing;foreign bank entry;gravity model期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討地主國信用報告機構發展與多國籍銀行海外擴張之關係，以引力模型分析113國多國籍銀行，在80個國家之海外擴張行為。實證顯示，地主國存在公共信用報告機構，或信用報告機構覆蓋率愈高，外國銀行在地主國設立分支機構的實體擴張愈多，隱含信用報告機構的資訊分享功能，與外國銀行在地主國的實體投資增加存在正向關係。英文摘要：This article highlights the relationships between credit bureaus and foreign bank entry. The information sharing function of credit bureaus helps banks gain access to borrowers' credit records. We collect detailed data of foreign bank offices in 80 countries and use a gravity model to test the relationship between credit bureaus and foreign expansion. Empirical results show that the existence of credit bureaus is positively correlated with foreign bank offices, i.e. foreign banks set up more offices in countries with credit bureaus. It implies that the information sharing of borrowers’ credit records encourages foreign banks to invest more in host countries.起始頁-結束頁：29-52資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(1).215篇名：Pricing Stock Options by Bivariate Binomial Lattices並列篇名：雙變數二元樹之股價選擇權評價模型作者：葉宗穎(Chung-Ying Yeh);葉仕國(Shih-Kuo Yeh);朱漢興(Hann-Shing Ju)關鍵字：二元樹;遠期利率曲線;選擇權評價;隨機利率;Binomial tree;forward rate curve;option pricing;stochastic interest rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：股價選擇權的設計，必須使用樹型圖等數值方法才能有效的進行評價。選擇權的評價必須考慮股價及市場利率兩個變數，因此在樹型圖的建構及計算上往往較單變數的樹型圖要來得複雜。本研究提出一個雙變數二元樹的作法，採用遠期利率曲線隨著時間所積分出來的面積取代擴散過程中的漂移項，精確而有效率地求出股價選擇權的價格。英文摘要：Pricing stock options by using the binomial lattice method still poses a significant challenge in the finance literature. This is particularly true for the bivariate binomial lattice method that simultaneously allows for stock prices and interest rates to be stochastic. This article introduces a more efficient bivariate binomial lattice method to price stock options. The proposed approach simply replaces the drift term of the stock price process by the integration of the forward rate curve over the horizon of the option's maturity. The numerical simulation studies as well as the theoretical justification show that the option prices computed by the proposed lattice approach can effectively and accurately converge.起始頁-結束頁：53-81資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(1).316篇名：A Concentration Analysis of Domestic Equity Mutual Funds並列篇名：國內股票型共同基金之投資集中度效果分析作者：洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung);李顯儀(Hsien-Yi Lee)關鍵字：集中投資型基金;擇股能力;擇時能力;基金特性;績效持續性;Concentrated equity funds;stock picking ability;market timing ability;fund characteristics;performance persistence期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢測集中投資型基金之擇股與擇時能力，並探討基金特性對績效之影響與績效持續性效果。集中型基金具擇股能力，且以產業集中度最能展現基金經理人擇股能力；集中型基金具規模經濟效果，且其效果大於分散型基金；集中型基金費用率對績效負向影響程度小於分散型基金；集中型基金正向績效持續性比率大於負向持續性比率。英文摘要：This study examines the stock picking and market timing abilities for concentrated equity funds. We also investigate whether the characteristics of concentrated equity funds influence fund performance and whether these funds maintain performance persistence. The major results are as follows. Concentrated equity funds have superior stock picking abilities. The concentrated equity funds usually have larger scale effect. The expense rates of concentrated equity funds positively influence the fund performance, and these funds usually have smaller expense impact on fund performance than do diversified equity funds. The concentrated equity funds have a larger proportion of positive performance persistence.起始頁-結束頁：83-122資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2013.21(1).401篇名：朱敬一院士－台灣經濟學會「2012年經濟學傑出貢獻獎」期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：473-475資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：流動性、資產與廠商投資決策並列篇名：Liquidity, Assets, and Firms' Investment Decisions作者：張德存(Te-Tsun Chang);李映萱(Ying-Syuan Li)關鍵字：淨值;資產組合;貨幣政策;搜尋模型;Net worth;Asset portfolio;Monetary policy;Search model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文建構一個具有中間財市場的貨幣搜尋模型，探討資產流動性如何影響廠商的投資與產出。人們可以完全辨識貨幣、但是難以分辨資產真偽，因而交易時會接受貨幣和少量資產。若廠商的淨值很高，但持有的貨幣數量太少或資產流動性太低，將無法購買足夠的中間財，導致投資減少、產出降低。通貨膨脹政策會降低貨幣價值，導致廠商的購買力下降，而減少中間財的購買。若央行採用量化寬鬆政策，並維持通貨膨脹率不變，向企業買進低流動性的資產、釋出高流動性的貨幣，將提高廠商資產組合的流動性，而增加經濟社會的投資與總產出。英文摘要：We construct a monetary search model with an intermediate goods market to study how asset liquidity affects firms' investment and output. Since real assets are imperfectly recognizable, people accept money and a fraction of assets in transactions. While high-net-worth firms hold less money, they will buy insufficient intermediate goods to invest and produce a small amount of final goods. Inflation reduces the value of money, lowers firms' purchasing power, and thus decreases firms' investment and output. If the central bank implements quantitative easing and maintains the inflation rate unchanged, the funds available for investment are increased, and firms produce more final goods.起始頁-結束頁：477-506資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：身高對學生綜合分析能力的影響－以「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」為例並列篇名：Effects of Height on Cognitive Ability in Adolescence: Evidence from Taiwan Education Panel Survey作者：林明仁(Ming-Jen Lin);蔡欣純(Hsin-Chun Tsai);丁心嵐(Hsin-Lan Ting)關鍵字：身高;認知能力;工具變數;月經;台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;Height;Cognitive ability;Instrumental variable;Menstruation;TEPS期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討身高對學生綜合分析能力的影響。以綜合分析能力做為認知能力的代表，OLS結果顯示身高與認知能力呈正相關，並排除身高是反映自尊、人際支配、健康、社團經驗、非認知能力等影響認知能力的假設。為修正可能因內生性問題導致的估計誤差，我們使用傾向分數法與「初經年齡」做為工具變數加以修正。我們發現女生初經年齡較早者青春期身高較高，其認知能力也較高。本文結果說明青春期的認知能力受到發育快慢的影響，越早進入青春期發育的青少年，認知能力越好。身高則是反映發育的時間點，因此可作為認知能力高低的代理變數。英文摘要：This paper investigates the relation between height and cognitive ability by using the data of the Taiwan Education Panel Survey. OLS results show there is a positive relation between teenagers' height and cognitive ability. The hypotheses of ”height are markers of one's self-esteem, interpersonal dominance, health, experience in sports and clubs, non-cognitive ability and evolutionary theory that reflects those impacts on cognitive ability” are proved to be excluded. We also use the Propensity Score Matching (PSM) and female student's menarche age as an instrument to correct the potential threats of endogeneity problems. We find girls with earlier age of menarche have greater height and better cognitive ability in the junior high school stage. Our findings suggest that cognitive ability is associated with the timing of adolescent growth spurts, such that the earlier the children hit the growth spurts, the better cognitive ability they have. Height in adolescence is a symbol of cognitive ability and reflects the timing of the adolescent growth spurts.起始頁-結束頁：507-558資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：考慮Tobin稅之通貨替代模型－實質匯率動態與匯率穩定並列篇名：Tobin Tax Effects under Currency Substitution: Real Exchange Rate Dynamics and Stability作者：吳家瑋(Chia-Wei Wu);曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur)關鍵字：通貨替代;匯率動態;Tobin稅;Currency substitution;Exchange rate dynamics;Tobin tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文沿用曹添旺（2011）的模型，並納入了Tobin稅，探討Tobin稅提高對實質匯率的長期均衡以及動態調整行為的影響，並討論Tobin稅如何與擴張性貨幣政策進行協調，以達到穩定匯率的政策目標。分析發現：（1）Tobin稅提高長期下造成實質匯率下降、產出增加、實質外國貨幣餘額（本國商品計）減少；當通貨替代下，實質本國貨幣餘額（本國商品計）會增加，通貨互補時，則須視互補程度的大小而定。（2）Tobin稅提高對實質匯率的衝擊效果，則隨其外國通貨膨脹率大小，以及各種模型的結構參數不同，呈現過度調整、調整不足或錯向跳動等多樣化走勢。Tobin稅提高瞬間，實質匯率會跳升或驟降，取決於期初外國通貨膨脹率的大小而定；而實質匯率瞬間變動幅度的大小，取決於稅率提高對外國貨幣存量（以外國商品為單位）的影響幅度大小，以及各模型參數的相對大小。（3）貨幣增長率提高的同時，Tobin稅應提高較小幅度的稅率，幅度的大小，取決於兩通貨間的成本彈性與本國民眾之國外通貨需求成本彈性的大小而定。通貨毛替代程度愈大（愈小），則Tobin稅提高的幅度愈接近（遠離）貨幣增長率提高的幅度；國外通貨需求成本彈性愈大（愈小），則Tobin稅提高的幅度愈遠離（接近）貨幣增長率提高的幅度。英文摘要：This paper extends the model of Tsaur (2011) to include a Tobin tax. It proposes to examine how the real exchange rate will be affected by an increase in the Tobin tax, and investigate how the monetary expansion and the Tobin tax coordinate to maintain the real exchange rate stability. The major findings are as follows:(1) In the long run, the rise of the Tobin tax rate would cause the real exchange rate to decrease, output to increase, and real foreign currency balances to decrease, but whether the real balances increase or decrease depends on the magnitude between the currency substitution elasticities.(2) In the short run, the magnitude of foreign inflation rates is crucial in influencing the behavior of real exchange rates, (i.e., real exchange rates may overshoot, undershoot or misjump around their equilibrium values) while the magnitude of the effect of the Tobin tax on the stock of foreign currency and other structure parameters in the model are key elements to determine the degree of real exchange rate movements.(3) The range of an increase in the rate of the Tobin tax should be smaller than monetary expansion in order to maintain real exchange rate stability. It is shown that if the degree of currency substitution is higher, the range of an increase in the rate of the Tobin tax should be bigger; if the cost elasticity of holding foreign currency is higher, the range of an increase in the rate of the Tobin tax should be smaller.起始頁-結束頁：559-596資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：Technology Licensing in Multiple Markets並列篇名：多市場之技術授權作者：張瑞雲(Ray-Yun Chang);黃鴻(Hong Hwang);彭正浩(Cheng-Hau Peng)關鍵字：技術移轉;兩部訂價授權;多市場;Technology transfer;Two-part tariff licensing;Multiple markets期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：既有之授權文獻大多假設授權廠商只能進行產業外授權或產業內授權。為了整合前述兩個極端的例子，本文建立一多市場模型，探討授權廠商之最適授權契約。此一模型之特色為被授權廠商可同時生產兩種產品一種產品與授權廠商之產品完全同質，另一種產品則與授權廠商的產品存在水平差異性。本文假設授權廠商透過兩部訂價法的授權契約將其先進技術授權給被授權廠商使用。我們發現在授權之技術為非劇烈創新且創新程度較小（大）時，最適授權契約為純粹的單位權利金契約（兩部訂價契約）；但當授權之技術為劇烈創新時，授權廠商也一定會將其先進技術授權給其競爭對手，且其最適兩部訂價授權契約中之單位權利金與固定權利金均為正。此一結果與單一市場下之結論迥異。英文摘要：Most studies which address licensing treat a licensor firm as either an insider or outsider. To integrate the two extreme cases, this paper sets up a model in which the licensee firm can produce two goods, one is homogeneous to and the other is horizontally differentiated from that produced by the licensor firm. The licensor firm licenses its superior technology to a licensee firm via a two-part tariff contract. It is found that if the innovation is non-drastic, the optimal licensing contract is composed of a pure royalty (two-part tariffs) if the innovation is small (large). On the other hand, with a drastic innovation, the licensor firm, contraposition to that in a single market case, definitely licenses its technology to its rival. Moreover, the royalty rate and the fixed fee in the optimal two-part tariff contract should both be positive.起始頁-結束頁：597-613資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：經濟學門學術期刊評比更新並列篇名：The Updated Ranking of Academic Journals in Economics作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);王泓仁(Hung-Jen Wang);林明仁(Ming-Jen Lin);陳宜廷(Yi-Ting Chen);張俊仁(Juin-Jen Chang);黃粲堯(Tsan-Yao Huang)關鍵字：期刊排序;引用次數;影響係數;Journal ranking;Citation frequency;Impact factor期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：研究成果品質的判定，在高等教育與研究機構之學術表現評鑑，及內部人事聘用與升等上，都扮演著非常重要的角色。就經濟學門而言，期刊論文是最重要的研究成果出版形式，因此期刊品質的判定對經濟學門的發展十分重要。台灣過去幾年，已有不少針對國際期刊與本國期刊評比之論著，以及根據這些結果所計算出之學術單位表現。然而，相關研究發表至今，經濟學研究領域發生不少變動，也有許多新期刊快速興起；僅以SSCI資料庫收錄之經濟期刊而言，其收錄數也在近幾年從二百多種增加到三百多種。有鑑於此，本文爰採用文獻中新近提出的客觀量化排序方法、並參考傑出學者專家的意見，重新對當前的國際及國內經濟學期刊加以評比排序，俾供參考。英文摘要：In this paper we provide an updated ranking of international as well as domestic economics journals by their quality. A journal ranking list can be useful to researchers as a publication reference and to institutions as the basis for hiring, promotion, and resource allocation decisions. The existing list of journal ranking used by many institutions in Taiwan is based on decade-old data which may be considered outdated. It is therefore important to update the ranking using the most recent data. Both quantitative and qualitative measures are used in updating the ranking. The quantitative measure is based on the impact factor of a journal, and the factor is further adjusted using an axiomatic approach to obtain a robust index. For the qualitative measure, expert meetings were held and the opinions and suggestions therein are adopted to help shape the final ranking of the journals.起始頁-結束頁：327-361資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：Financial Restraint, Capital Investment, and Economic Growth並列篇名：金融約束、資本投資與經濟成長作者：洪福聲(Fu-Sheng Hung);張文雅(Wen-Ya Chang)關鍵字：金融約束;金融發展;訊息不對稱;信貸配給;經濟成長;Financial restraint;Financial development;Asymmetric information;Credit rationing;Economic growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討政府金融約束（financial restraint）對資本投資及經濟成長的影響。為了刺激投資，傳統的凱因斯理論建議政府應採取金融約束政策，限制利率低於均衡水準。然而，近期許多國家都根據McKinnon and Shaw的學說，採取金融自由化政策。本文設計一個理論模型，納入了傳統凱因斯理論的看法及McKinnon and Shaw的學說，重新探討政府金融約束政策對資本投資、經濟成長與社會福利的影響。模型的結果發現了政府金融約束政策（管制讓利率低於均衡水準）對於資本投資有正、反兩股力量，隱含存在了一個最適的利率水準，可以極大化經濟成長。我們也發現了極大化社會福利的一個利率水準（也是低於均衡利率水準）。這些結論與最近一些實證文獻所發現的結論－溫和的政府金融約束政策有利於金融發展與經濟成長－一致。英文摘要：We examine the effects of a government policy of financial restraint on capital investment and economic growth. To promote capital investment, conventional wisdom has long suggested that the government adopts a policy of financial restraint that keeps the interest rate below the equilibrium level. In contrast, many countries have recently adopted the policy of financial liberalization according to the McKinnon-Shaw thesis. This paper re-examines the effects of financial restraint by developing a model that incorporates both the conventional wisdom and the McKinnon-Shaw thesis. We find that there are optimal levels of financial restraints measured by a lending rate ceiling below the equilibrium level which maximizes economic growth and social welfare, respectively. Our results are consistent with recent empirical evidence showing that a mild financial restraint is beneficial to capital investment and economic growth.起始頁-結束頁：363-398資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：The Impact of Offshore Production on Within-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity並列篇名：海外代工生產對產業內資源配置及整體產業生產力的影響作者：羅竹平(Chu-Ping Lo)關鍵字：國際代工;異質性廠商;產業內的篩選;Offshore production;Firm heterogeneity;Selection期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文的主要目的是要探究海外代工生產對異質性廠商是否會產生產業內的篩選作用，即生產力高的廠商更繁盛但生產力最低的廠商則退出市場。因此，我引用Melitz（2003）的動態產業模型，然後結合Antras and Helpman（2004）的海外代工結構以分析此過程。我認為這個整合模型可以產生一個內生產業內的篩選作用，使得產業內資源會趨歸於高生產力的廠商，因此提高整體產業生產力。這篇研究也希望展示海外代工生產對產品多樣性的影響。我認為，原則上，海外代工生產較密集的產業會衍生出更多差異化產品，而海外代工生產較不密集的產業會衍生出較少差異化產品。這個立論的基礎是在於，藉著海外代工生產，可以槓桿應用外國的資源（如果這個成本不高的話），因此更多的差異化產品可以用更低的成本生產，而這代表整體福利的提升。英文摘要：This paper extends Melitz's (2003) dynamic industry model by incorporating Antras and Helpman's (2004) outsourcing structure to show that a within-industry selection of heterogeneous firms can be driven by offshoring. In a North-South world, offshoring enables relatively more productive firms in the North to leverage foreign resources to expand their market shares at the expense of the relatively less productive firms. This endogenous selection enables an economy to transit to high-productivity varieties, thereby raising the aggregate industry productivity. In particular, offshore production increases the number of product varieties in offshore-intensive industries but reduces that in less offshore-intensive industries.起始頁-結束頁：399-420資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：金融機構作業與信譽風險的影響及公司治理的角色並列篇名：Effects of Operational Risk and Reputational Risk for Financial Institutions and the Role of Corporate Governance作者：劉永欽(Yong-Chin Liu);王姿若(Xi-Ruo Wang);廖美華(Mei-Hua Liao)關鍵字：作業風險;信譽風險;事件研究法;異常報酬;產業調整的盈餘;Operational risk;Reputational risk;Event study method;Abnormal return;Industry-adjusted earnings期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文檢視本國銀行1990至2011年各種作業風險事件對其股價反應、獲利力、風險及信譽損失的影響，以及公司治理能否降低此影響。就內部因素和外部因素事件分別觀察發生日、發現日與公告日的股票異常報酬（abnormal return, AR）和產業調整後盈餘（超額盈餘），並估計其中的信譽損失成份。結果發現，內部詐欺事件在公告期有顯著負AR和負超額盈餘，且有極大信譽損失；其股票風險未增加，且適度反應盈餘衰退。災害和外力造成的事件在發生期和公告期無負超額盈餘，但有顯著負AR及信譽損失，且事件後非系統風險上升、股價過度反應。迴歸分析發現公司治理機制中，資訊揭露品質和內部人持股可降低非系統風險及減輕作業和信譽損失對市值的衝擊，其餘機制則無顯著效果。英文摘要：This study examines the effects of various operational risk events for banks from 1990 to 2011 on stock price reaction, profitability, risk and reputational loss, as well as whether corporate governance can reduce the impact of operational risk. For internal-factor and external-factor events, we separately estimate both the stock abnormal returns (ARs) and industry-adjusted excess earnings, along with reputational losses within the ARs and excess earnings, for occurring, finding and announcing days, respectively. Our findings indicate that the internal fraud events face significantly negative ARs, excess earnings and reputational losses during the announcement period; the stock risks do not increase, and prices moderately reflect decreasing profitability. The serious disasters and events resulting from external factors face no negative excess earnings, but have negative ARs and reputational losses during both the occurring and announcement periods. Moreover, the post-event stock nonsystematic risks increase and stock prices have overreactions. Based on regression analyses, among corporate governance mechanisms, information disclosure and insider ownership can reduce nonsystematic risks and alleviate the impact of operational and reputational losses on market values; meanwhile, no significant effect for the other mechanisms is observed.起始頁-結束頁：421-471資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：父母親失業對新生兒體重的影響並列篇名：Effects of Parental Job Loss and Children's Health: Evidence from Taiwan's Administrative Data作者：陳妍蒨(Yen-Chien Chen);張景福(Ching-Fu Chang);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu)關鍵字：父母失業;出生體重;低出生體重;母親固定效果;Parental job loss;Birth weight;Low birth weight;Mother fixed effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：父親或母親失業是家庭資源的重大衝擊，不僅影響小孩的人力資本投資，也可能會對小孩的健康造成影響。本研究主要是在探討父親或母親經歷失業衝擊後，對於新生兒出生體重的影響。我們所採用的樣本係來自於台灣四套合併的行政資料，包含出生檔、勞保檔、失業保險給付檔以及公司關廠檔。透過這些豐富的資料，我們利用「因公司關廠」對員工外生性衝擊作為父母失業的指標；另外，我們以母親固定效果來控制家庭中「不可觀察到」的因素，藉以解決失業變數的內生性問題。研究結果發現，父親失業對小孩出生體重並無顯著的影響，但母親失業對小孩出生體重則有微小但顯著的正向影響。英文摘要：This paper investigates the impact of parental job loss on a child's birth weight, using unusual data by linking several administrative data sets from Taiwan. Taking advantage of the detailed information on job status and fertility histories in this data, we employ two strategies to capture the causal effect of parental job loss on birth weight: first, we identify parental job loss as involuntary displacement due to plant closures; second, we propose the mother fixed-effects model to control for all time-invariant unobservable family background. Our findings suggest that a mother's job loss has a significantly positive effect on a child's birth weight. However, a father's job loss does not matter.起始頁-結束頁：183-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：Comparison of the Vickrey Second-Price and Random nth-Price Auctions for Analyzing Country of Origin Labeling in Taiwan並列篇名：比較Vickrey第二高價及隨機第n高價拍賣法用來分析台灣產地國標示的影響作者：陳文雄(Wen S. Chern);洪嘉珮(Jia-Pei Hong);劉鋼(Ernest Kang Liu)關鍵字：拍賣;產地國標示;出價溢酬;台灣;中國;越南;Auction;Country of origin labeling;Tobit;Bid premium;Taiwan;China;Vietnam期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在比較隨機第n高價拍賣法和Vickrey第二高價拍賣法於實證應用上之差異。雖然理論證明兩者都能誘導出需求函數，文獻顯示Vickrey第二高價拍賣法恐怕無法誘發遠離市場結清價格的參與者出價其願付價格，此一缺點可由隨機第n高價拍賣法來加以修正。本研究應用這兩種拍賣來分析台灣推動產地國標示可能帶來的經濟效益。力用最小平方法以及Tobit模型所進行的計量分析，顯示兩種拍賣法的實證結果迴異。而拍賣結果支持隨機第n高價拍賣法較能引發參與者真實出價的意願。相較於產地國為中國和越南的烏龍茶，消費者對於台灣生產的烏龍茶確實有較高的價格溢酬：台灣烏龍茶相對於中國烏龍茶有57％的淨溢酬；相較於越南茶亦有56％的淨溢酬。這些研究結果對於台灣與中國間的農產貿易有著寓意深遠的政策意涵。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to compare the random nth-price auction with the widely used Vickrey second-price auction in an empirical application. It has been shown that the second-price auction does not induce sincere bidding for those who are off-margin of the market clearing price. The random nth-price auction can correct this drawback. These two auction methods were applied and compared for investigating the economic benefits for country of origin labeling (COOL) regulation in Taiwan. The consumer's willingness to pay (WTP) premiums for oolong tea produced in Taiwan vs. those imported from China and Vietnam were elicited using these two experimental auctions. Auction results revealed very different bidding behaviors. The random nth-price auction appeared to induce more sincere bidding than the second-price auction in this study. Tobit and the ordinary least squares (OLS) models were used to estimate the bid and premium functions. Econometric results from both auction methods all showed that participants were willing to pay very high premiums for Taiwanese oolong tea over those from China and Vietnam. The net price premiums for Taiwanese oolong tea due to COOL are estimated to be 57% over Vietnamese tea and 56% over Chinese tea. These results have important policy implications for agricultural trade between Taiwan and China.起始頁-結束頁：215-254資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：老年經濟保障對生育的排擠效果－台灣的實證分析並列篇名：The Crowding-Out Effects of Old-Age Economic Security on Fertility: Evidence from Taiwan作者：林彥伶(Yen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：生育;老年經濟保障;計數資料;卜瓦松回歸;Fertility;Old-age economic security;Count data;Poisson regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探討造成當前生育率持續下降的原因。過去半世紀以來，多數國家的生育率不斷下降，初期的下降主要歸因工業化社會轉型的結果，包括女性教育程度、薪資與勞動參與率的提升等。然而自二十世紀末期以後，高開發國家的女性社經特徵多已發展至一定程度甚至趨緩，因此，造成當前生育率仍然持續下降應有新的成因。本研究以老年經濟保障政策為研究對象，利用主計處家庭收支調查資料分析老年經濟安全程度對生育決策的影響。實證結果發現，當老年經濟安全愈強化，將愈加排擠生育意願，使生育個數下降。為了不使生育意願與老年經濟政策相互排擠，本文建議應在老年經濟政策與生育政策之間建立相輔機制。英文摘要：This study investigates the effects of old-age economic security on fertility. The fertility rate has exhibited a downward tendency in many countries following the postwar baby boom. In the early years, the fertility rate decreased due to industrialization. While various related factors, such as women’s education, wage and labor participation, were highly developed in many developed countries by the end of the 20th century, these have been insufficient to explain the current fertility rate tendency. In this research we use multiyear cross-sectional data from the Survey of Family Income and Expenditure to investigate the old-age economic security effects. Our empirical results show that the stronger the old-age economic security is, the more the number of births is crowded out. We suggest that governments should establish a mutual assistance mechanism between the old-age economic security policies and fertility policies.起始頁-結束頁：255-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：貿易成本、相對需求與生產區位選擇－創意商品之實證並列篇名：Trade Cost, Relative Demand and the Choice of Production Location: An Empirical Study of Trade in Creative Goods作者：徐則謙(Tse-Chien Hsu);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo);彭素玲(Su-Ling Peng)關鍵字：本國市場效果;重力方程式;生產區位選擇;經濟地理學;貿易形態;Home market effect;Gravity equation;Choice of production location;Economic geography;Patterns of trade期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本國市場效果指在生產規模及貿易成本的取捨下，生產者群聚在需求較大的地區，進而使該地區成為主要出口來源地的現象。本研究從理論模型中導出新的重力回歸式。增加「本國市場設定項」以體現區位選擇與貿易型態的關係。該項的重要性，從APEC創意商品貿易實證中充分顯現。省略該項，將使需求對出口的彈性之估計偏離重力方程式的預測。加入後，偏誤多被修正。這表示資料存在本國市場效果。且隨著距離縮短，本國市場效果更形強化。這些結果都是因考慮生產區位選擇影響貿易型態的傳導機制而獲得，顯然比過去未考慮該項因素的實證，更為可信。英文摘要：Exporting producers, facing a trade-off between scale economies and trade costs, tend to cluster around the countries with larger demand, the so-called ”home market effect”. Hsu et al. (2012) cast doubt on estimates in previous empirical studies on the effect using gravity regression. The potential bias comes from ignoring the important interactive effect of relative demand and trade cost on locational choice and thus on trade patterns. Using a dataset on the trade flow of creative goods from APEC countries, we find that after controlling for the interactive term, the estimated coefficients on the elasticity of demand are much corrected toward those predicted by theory. This constitutes more credible evidence for the existence of the home market effect.起始頁-結束頁：297-326資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：養雞生蛋或殺雞取卵－論期交稅之降稅效果並列篇名：Killing the Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs?-Evidence from the Reduction of the Futures Transaction Tax in Taiwan作者：黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang);林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin);連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien)關鍵字：差異中的差異;台股指數期貨;摩台指數期貨;期貨交易稅;Difference-in-differences;Taiwan stock index future;Morgan Stanley stock index future;Futures transaction tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：為活絡期貨市場、吸引外資投入，台灣政府自1998年起已三次調降期交稅。雖然過去研究認為，期交稅的調降能大幅提升期貨交易量，並有效抵銷稅收減少之衝擊；但由於降稅時間和景氣波動高度相關，若僅以降稅前後交易量評估降稅效果，常因同時期經濟環境變化而引發估計偏誤。本文針對2006年1月所實施的第二次期交稅降稅，使用台股指數期貨（台指期）及摩台指數期貨（摩台期）交易資料，以台指期為實驗組、摩台期為控制組，採「差異中的差異」方法分析，當（指數類）期交稅率從千分之0.25。調降到千分之0.1時，對台指期交易量和其稅收影響。實證結果顯示，若僅以台指期資料分析，降稅後一年內期貨交易量增幅為24.4%；但若加入摩台期為控制組，則降稅後一年內交易量增幅降為11.0%，顯示約五成五的期貨交易量增幅來自於環境因素。此外，若將資料延長為降稅前後兩年重新估計，降稅效果更下降至5.6%，顯示降稅對交易量刺激應屬短期效果，無法透過長期稅收增加彌補短期稅損。英文摘要：To energize the futures market and attract foreign investments, the Taiwan government since 1998 has reduced the transactions tax levied on futures three times. Although the existing literature overwhelmingly supports the view that a tax cut substantially increases the trading volume and thus effectively buffers the negative impact on tax revenue, almost all empirical works are conducted based on a before-and-after analysis-comparing the trading volume of Taiwan stock index futures (TSIF) before and after the tax reduction. However, such an evaluation is likely to induce endogenous bias, because of failure to account for changes in the economic environment during the same period. Using Morgan Stanley Taiwan stock index futures (MSTSIF) as the control, this paper employs the difference-in-differences method to examine how the TSIF volume increases as a result of reducing the (index) futures transaction tax from 2.5 to 1 basis point in January 2006. Our results show that this tax cut increased TSIF trading volume by 11.0% in the following year, less than half of the increase obtained from before-and-after analysis (24.4%). Moreover, the growth of trading volume of TSIF declines to 5.6% when extending our sample to two years. We conclude that the increase of TSIF volume due to tax reduction is mostly a short-term effect.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：政治權利、債權人權利與銀行風險的關係－全球實證並列篇名：Political Rights, Creditor Rights and Bank Risk Taking: A Global Perspective作者：林昆立(Kun-Li Lin)關鍵字：政治制度;法律制度;銀行風險;Political institutions;Legal institutions;Banking risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究採用2002至2009年間，全球94個國家共3,002家商業銀行為樣本，檢視國家的政治制度及法律制度對銀行風險的影響。此外，為了進一步分析如何在政治制度與法律制度間取拾，才能達到對銀行風險最適的發展結果，我們利用政治制度與法律制度的交乘項來分析。實證結果如下：第一，不管是已開發或開發中國家，較健全的政治權利，將可以有效降低銀行風險承擔的程度。第二，債權人權利對於銀行風險的關係，會因不同的經濟程度而異。在已開發國家，愈完善的債權人權利不利於降低銀行的風險，但在開發中國家，愈完善的債權人保護將有助於減少銀行風險。第三，政治制度與法律制度兩者對銀行風險的影響，在已開發國家兩者為相互獨立的關係，但在開發中國家則為替代的關係。第四，政治權利影響銀行風險的可能管道，在已開發國家中新聞自由程度是重要的決定因素；但在開發中國家則變成是企業環境的貪污程度。英文摘要：This paper empirically analyzes the impact of country-level political rights and creditor rights on banking risk taking. Using a new database covering 94 countries, we find that greater political rights are associated with a lower banking risk in developed and developing countries. Second, we also find that stronger creditor rights will help improve banking risk in developing countries, whereas they worsen it in developed countries. Third, we find evidence that political and legal institutions are independent in developed countries, but they are substitutes in developing countries. Finally, we find that freedom of the press in developed countries and corruption in developing countries are potential factors through which political rights may affect banking risk.起始頁-結束頁：39-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：時變或固定折現因子－以訊息萃取架構探討股價變動的因素並列篇名：Time-Varying or Constant Discount Factor: The Analysis of Movements of Stock Prices by Signal Extraction Framework作者：陳禮潭(Lii-Tarn Chen);呂仁廣(Ren-Guang Lue);李明煌(Ming-Huang Lee)關鍵字：訊息萃取;噪音比;時變折現因子;消費型資本資產定價模型;Signal extraction;Noise ratio;Time varying (stochastic) discount factor;Consumption capital asset pricing model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文以折現因子之資本資產定價模型做為分析基礎，來探討時變折現因子是否比風險中立設定下固定折現因子的資本資產定價模型，對股價能為擁有更佳的解釋力。在詮釋現實的資料上，我們分別將三種文獻上會用的時變折現因子模型拿來與固定折現因子模型做比較，利用Durlauf and Maccini（1995）所建構的噪音比統計量來檢視何者的表現較佳。本文以台灣的加權股價指數月資料和美國的S&P 500指數月資料，分別對兩者做出比較和分析，實證結果顯示，時變折現因子模型的噪音比，在詮釋現實資料之表現上，優於固定折現因子模型；而由於直接用噪音比做比較有統計顯著性的不足，為了彌補這個缺口，我們設計了一個輔助性的統計頑強性的檢定程序，即利用「前樣本」對每一組相對應的模型做遞迴迴歸和滾動迴歸，以產生「後樣本」的t、Wilcoxon和DM統計量，來檢定對應組間噪音比差距是否具有顯著的差異。最後證據顯示，時變折現因子模型比固定折現因子模型更接近股市投資人行為的結論具有頑強性。英文摘要：In this paper we explore the possibility that risk aversion leads to greater dispersion of stock prices than does risk neutrality based on the consumption capital asset pricing model. This is done by comparing the empirical performance of the asset pricing models with a time varying discount factor to the model with a constant discount factor. We employ the noise ratio method developed by Durlauf and Maccini (1995), to demonstrate the relative degree to which each null model approximates the data. The specification tests are applied to the data of Taiwan's stock market as well as the S&P 500, and we find evidence that the asset pricing model with a time varying discount factor is superior to that with a constant discount factor. In order to make the test robust, we design a testing procedure of the t, Wilcoxon, and DM statistics to test the magnitude of the noise ratio difference between these models using a post-sample approach, which is generated by both recursive regression and rolling regression. The results show that there do exist some time-varying discount factor models that are superior to the benchmark for both indices.起始頁-結束頁：85-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所17篇名：從生產－分配鏈探討台灣汽、柴油市場的不對稱訂價並列篇名：Asymmetric Pricing in the Gasoline and Diesel Markets of Taiwan作者：周國偉(Kuo-Wei Chou)關鍵字：油價;匯率;生產－分配鏈;誤差修正模型;不對稱訂價;Oil prices;Exchange rate;Production-distribution chain;Error correction models;Asymmetric pricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文利用門檻共整合不對稱誤差修正模型，嘗試探索台灣汽、柴油價格與國際油價的關連。本研究將油價及匯率視為煉裂汽、柴油的主要投入成本，並從生產－分配鏈區分兩階段價格傳遞機制，評估提煉及分配過程的價格不對稱。本文發現汽、柴油價格對負向成本衝擊有較明顯且迅速的反應，呈現「政治－經濟不對稱」。匯率衝擊則是主要的不對稱來源。比較不同之階段及油品的估計結果，我們推測生產與存貨調整成本、不完全競爭、及消費者搜尋等因素的確可能影響價格調整；然而，上游業者對「政治－經濟」的顧慮卻是主要支配力量。台灣汽、柴油的特殊訂價型態，其實隱含消費者可從中獲致更大利得。英文摘要：This paper applies an asymmetric error correction model with threshold cointegration to explore the links between gasoline and diesel price adjustments in Taiwan and the prices of international oil. Oil prices and the exchange rate are the major input costs involved in refining gasoline and diesel. Upon examining the petroleum production-distribution chain, we assessed price asymmetry at the refinery and distribution stages. This paper finds that gasoline and diesel price adjustments follow a politico-economic asymmetry; that is, prices adjust more quickly to cost decreases than to cost increases. Exchange rate shocks are the main source of price asymmetry. By comparing kinds of gasoline, and stages in the production-distribution chain, we infer that asymmetry is caused by production and inventory adjustment costs, imperfect competition, and consumer search behaviors. It appears, however, that price adjustments are principally dominated by the political and economic concerns of the oil companies. Finally, we show that price asymmetry has a significant effect on consumer gains in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：127-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：Employer's Reporting of Worker's Income, Incentive Contracts, and Tax Compliance並列篇名：雇主申報員工薪資制度下之誘因契約設計作者：蔡崇聖(Tsung-Sheng Tsai);楊建成(C. C. Yang)關鍵字：薪資申報;逃漏稅;誘因契約;income reporting;tax evasion;incentive contract期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文考慮員工薪資是由雇主申報給政府的情況。政府不能觀察到員工的真正薪資，必須透過稽查方能得知。由於稽查有成本，政府不會永遠稽查員工。因此雇主可以透過誘因契約的設計，幫助員工低報其應負的稅額。由此雇主可以誘使員工更加努力工作，進而提高產量。我們也發現，比起另一個現行的制度，即由員工自行申報其薪資，這個制度可能帶給雇主更高的利潤，給政府更高的稅收。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the role played by the firm in tax compliance. The IRS cannot observe the worker's income, and so the employer has to report the worker's income to the IRS. The IRS can audit the worker when there is a possibility of tax evasion. We argue that the report made by the employer can become a tool used to control the worker's incentive to work. Compared to the second-best contract, it is possible that the employer can promise to report a lower wage income and induce the worker to put forth more effort, when the IRS audits the worker less frequently. Both the employer and the worker may be better off under such a reporting system.起始頁-結束頁：339-363資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2013.414.12篇名：Durable Goods Monopoly with Network Effects並列篇名：具網路外部性之耐久財獨佔作者：吳震台(Cheng-Tai Wu)關鍵字：耐久財獨佔;網路外部性;科斯猜想;durable goods monopoly;network externality;coase conjecture期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文分析當耐久財具備非遞延網路外部性時，獨佔廠商的定價行為。當網路外部性存在時，消費者持有此耐久財的願付價格嚴格大於0，因此，交易會在有限的期間內結束。獨佔廠商在跨期價格歧視與加速交易進程之間做取捨，而非遞延網路外部性讓後者的好處增加，因此均衡的價格必定遞減。我們證明存在唯一的穩定均衡。均衡的結果滿足Coase conjecture。而且，當網路外部性夠大時，廠商會選擇一個很低的價格立即結清市場。本文也提供一些可以明確的計算出均衡價格與狀態（state）的例子。比較靜態的結果顯示：網路外部性越大，市場越快達到飽和。英文摘要：This paper examines the pricing behavior of a monopoly in a durable goods market with non-delayed network effects. Network externalities ensure that each consumer will have a strictly positive willingness to pay for holding the goods, which in turn implies that the trading process must end within a finite time. The monopolist faces a trade-off between the respective benefits of price discrimination and accelerating the trading process, and the effect of the non-delayed network effects is to increase the latter benefit; therefore, equilibrium prices must decrease over time. We show that there exists a unique stationary equilibrium, and that the Coase conjecture holds in equilibrium. Furthermore, when the network effects are sufficiently strong, the monopolist will flood the market immediately. We also provide examples in which equilibrium prices and states can be explicitly computed. The comparative statics results suggest that the stronger the network effects, the more quickly the whole market will be covered.起始頁-結束頁：365-401資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2013.414.23篇名：輸入性通貨膨脹與實質匯率動態並列篇名：Imported Inflation and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);曹真睿(Jen-Ruey Tsaur)關鍵字：輸入性通貨膨脹;通貨替代;匯率動態;局部不確定性;imported inflation;currency substitution;exchange-rate dynamics;locally indeterminacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文利用最終商品和中間要素的兩部門模型，探討進口商品及要素國際價格波動對小型開放經濟就業、所得及物價的影響；並考慮全球流行的貨幣保有多元化的現象，建構通貨替代模型，分析輸入通貨膨脹引發的實質匯率動態行為。研究發現：進口生產要素的國際價格波動對實質匯率和外國通貨實質餘額的長期效果取決於本國依賴進口中間要素的程度、進口最終商品消費佔支出的比例、通貨組合的需求彈性及商品貿易彈性等結構參數，而內生變數的動態行為也受這些參數影響。準此，一旦小型開放經濟面臨輸入性通貨膨脹衝擊，實質匯率（乃至就業、所得等相關變數）勢將發生持續而多樣的波動。本文的模型有助於詮釋晚近論著特別注意到實質匯率波動的猛烈性及持續性。英文摘要：This paper examines the effect of imported inflation in a small open economy importing intermediate inputs for production purposes under a system of flexible exchange rates. The dynamic interactions between the real and monetary sides will also be analyzed. We develop a two-sector (the intermediate input sector and the final good sector) production model into the real side, and incorporate rational expectations and currency substitution into the monetary side. Based on this framework, the effects of the increase in foreign prices of both intermediate inputs and final goods on the domestic price, output, employment and real exchange rate dynamics will be studied. The trade elasticities, the cost elasticity of holding the currency mix, the average propensity to import out of expenditure, and the degree of dependence on imported intermediate inputs are crucial in influencing the steady-state and impact effects as well as dynamic adjustment paths. When the Marshall-Lerner condition holds, the adjustment of real exchange rates exhibits saddle-path stability. When the Marshall-Lerner condition fails, the adjustment of real exchange rates may exhibit indeterminacy.起始頁-結束頁：403-441資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2013.414.34篇名：台灣高等教育政策調整對社會公平面的影響並列篇名：The Equity Effects of Three Higher Education Policies in Taiwan作者：張<U+701E>云(Jing-Jun Chang)關鍵字：聯考補習;高等教育補貼;所得不均度;跨代流動;逆所得分配;crammer for examination;higher education subsidies;income inequality;intergenerational mobility;reverse income distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文嘗試探討台灣高等教育招生名額、教育補助和學費調整對社會公平面的影響。文中根據台灣高等教育體制的特殊性，設立一個公立大學招生名額有限且排名較私立大學為前的2期疊代模型。數值分析顯示：（1）擴張公、私立大學招生名額，雖利於非技術家庭小孩考上公、私立大學的跨代向上流動，並可改善低所得非技術家庭父母，繳稅補貼高所得技術家庭小孩受高等教育的跨代逆所得分配，但將擴大工資不均度和提高吉尼係數；（2）提高公、私立大學每一學生教育補助，將使公立大學生中，來自非技術家庭的比例微降，而工資不均度和吉尼係數則微幅上升；此時，增加公立大學教育補助，將加深跨代逆所得分配，而提高私立大學每一學生教育補助，則可減緩跨代逆所得分配；（3）提高公立大學學費，雖使非技術家庭小孩考上公立大學的機會略微下降，卻可相當幅度減緩跨代逆所得分配。藉此模擬結果，我們並對近期台灣高等教育的一些討論，補充解釋。英文摘要：This paper attempts to discuss the equity effects of three higher education policies (education quotas, education subsidies and tuition fees adjustments) in Taiwan. We develop a two-period overlapping generational model where the education quota of the public university is limited and the quality of the public university is better than that of the private university. The simulations show that: (1) an increase in the education quota of the public/private university will raise intergenerational upward mobility and lessen the reverse income distribution, but at the same time will widen the wage inequality and increase the Gini coefficient; (2) an increase in the public education subsidies will raise (not decrease) the wage inequality and Gini coefficient; (3) an increase in the tuition fees of the public university will reduce the intergenerational upward mobility slightly, but will improve the reverse income distribution significantly.起始頁-結束頁：443-484資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2013.414.45篇名：貨幣政策、全球化與菲利普曲線並列篇名：Monetary Policy, Globalization and the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve作者：鄭漢亮(Han-Liang Cheng);毛慶生(Ching-Sheng Mao)關鍵字：隨機動態均衡模型;新凱因斯菲利普曲線;最大概似估計法;dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model;New-Keynesian Phillips curve;MLE期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣在1988年後歷經金融改革與貨幣政策轉變，促使其全球化程度增加並降低通貨膨脹波動，這些改變可能導致菲利普曲線產生結構性變化。為檢視此現象，本文建構一個小型開放體系之隨機動態全面均衡模型並導出新凱因斯菲利普曲線，藉由最大概似法估計模型的結構參數了解曲線變化。實證結果顯示1988年以後，除金融改革因素外，貨幣政策轉變對物價產生的穩定效果，亦是改變台灣菲利普曲線斜率的主因。為了確認上述結論，進一步使用狀態空間模型，AR(p)模型以及動差法建構縮減式菲利普曲線，檢視其斜率改變原因，發現結論與最大概似估計法一致。另外藉由變異數分解，我們發現台灣在1988年之前的景氣波動主要受到貨幣政策與技術進步的影響，1988年之後主要影響因素則為生產力與投資效率。英文摘要：Taiwan has experienced finance reform and monetary policy change since 1988 and seen an increased level of globalization and reduced volatility of inflation. These changes may lead to a structural change of the New-Keynesian Phillips curve. This paper constructs a small open stochastic general equilibrium model and derives the New-Keynesian Phillips curve to examine the effects of finance reform and monetary policy change on the slope of the curve. The results show that besides financial reform, the monetary policy change which stabilized the price level was a main factor increasing slack in the New-Keynesian Phillips curve after 1988. To confirm the conclusions above, we employ a state-space model and AR(p) to obtain expected inflation, and then estimate the slope of the reduced form Phillips curve. This supports the above conclusion. Furthermore, variance decomposition analysis shows that monetary policy shocks and technology shocks were the main contributors to the business cycle before 1988, while investment efficiency shocks and technology shocks became the main factors after 1988.起始頁-結束頁：219-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.413.16篇名：再探鐵路對於20世紀初台灣農業生產的影響並列篇名：Reinvestigating the Influence of the Railroad on Agricultural Production in Early 20th Century Taiwan作者：葉高華(Ko-Hua Yap);劉孟奇(Mon-Chi Lio)關鍵字：鐵路;農業;台灣經濟史;地理資訊系統;railroad;agriculture;Taiwan economic history;GIS期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：20世紀初台灣的鐵路建設可減少運輸成本，促進車站附近地區進行交易分工，從而增加農業產出水準。本研究利用1903年與1915年之間台灣兩千多個街庄的資料來測試此一假說。實證結果顯示，1903年以前啟用的車站在1903－1915年間對於提升其附近地區土地生產力的效果不顯著。不過，在1903－1915年間新啟用的車站附近地區，同期間之土地生產力上升幅度大於其他地區。再者，根據Cobb-Douglas農業生產函數的估計，在最靠近新啟用車站的地區，即使生產投入維持不變，1903－1915年間農業總產值仍可增加20%以上。這說明鐵路建設具有提升農業產出水準的效果。英文摘要：Railroads constructed in early 20th century Taiwan reduced transportation costs promoting trade in the surrounding areas and improving the level of agricultural output. This study aims to test this hypothesis by utilizing a detailed data set consisting of more than two thousand villages in Taiwan surveyed around 1903 and 1915. The empirical findings show the effect of established stations that opened before 1903 on land productivity was insignificant during 1903-1915. However, land productivity in villages near new stations opening during 1903-1915 increased more than that of other villages during the same period. Moreover, based on the estimation of an agricultural production function with Cobb-Douglas form, the total value of output of the villages nearest to new stations increased more than 20% during 1903-1915 while production inputs remained constant. These results indicate railroad construction improved the level of agricultural output.起始頁-結束頁：251-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.413.27篇名：平行輸入與仿冒行為的經濟分析並列篇名：The Economic Analysis of Parallel Imports and Counterfeits作者：蔡明芳(Ming-Fang Tsai);邱俊榮(Jiunn-Rong Chiou);黎婉郁(Wan-Yu Li)關鍵字：平行輸入;仿冒;垂直差異;parallel imports;counterfeiting;vertical differentiation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文利用一垂直差異化模型，討論平行輸入的發生或仿冒的出現對代理商訂價行為與利潤的影響。我們發現在給定代理商提供的服務量下，當市場同時存在代理商品與平行輸入品時，仿冒品的出現反而會使得真品代理商的訂價與利潤均提高。此一發現打破了過去討論仿冒的文獻認為仿冒一定會使正版產品的價格降低、利潤減少的結論。此外，我們也發現另一個有趣的結果，即給定代理商提供的服務量下，仿冒的出現反而會使市場的總銷售量減少。此一結論也不同於過去文獻認為競爭會使得市場總產量提高的結論。英文摘要：This paper utilizes a vertical differentiation model to investigate the impact on an agent's pricing strategy and profitability when products are subject to parallel imports and counterfeiting. We show that, given the quantity of post-sale service the agent supplies, the emergence of counterfeiting could instead increase both the price and profit of genuine products as parallel imports emerge. This finding contradicts the conclusion from earlier related literature that counterfeiting would necessarily cause both the price and profit of genuine products to fall. Furthermore, given the quantity of post-sale service the agent supplies, the appearance of counterfeits will contrarily cause the total market sales to fall, which also contrasts with previous findings.起始頁-結束頁：279-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.413.38篇名：一個盜版的社會風俗模型並列篇名：A Social Custom Model of Piracy作者：周德宇(Te-Yu Chou);林忠正(Chung-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：盜版;社會風俗模型;多重均衡解;piracy;social norm models;multiple equilibria期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：音樂產業嘗試藉由降低價格與增強著作權執法來抑制盜版風氣的蔓延，卻未能收到預期成效。本文由盜版行為具有社會文化特質的角度出發，設計一個很簡單的社會風俗模型，來呈現盜版風氣可能如何逐漸普及，而演變成一種穩定的流行文化或社會風俗。並說明當盜版已成為一種穩定的社會風氣後，音樂商品價格調降與法制提升，可能都無法消弭甚至很難減輕盜版風氣。由於盜版盛行可能對正版廠商的利潤造成難以回復的嚴重傷害，此特性會使廠商調高價格的行為趨於保守。英文摘要：Conventional economic reasoning predicts that the music industry's effort in curbing piracy through reducing price and strengthening enforcement will be effective. Recent industry trends in terms of sales and profit say otherwise. This paper models piracy as an individual's consumption decision shaped not only by economic variables such as price but also by social norms a la Akerlof (1980) to account for the music industry's failure. It is shown that, when piracy has developed as a social norm, price and enforcement adjustments may be rendered ineffective. A prevailing piracy norm also results in severe damage to the firm's profit and the firm will drastically change its price-setting behavior.起始頁-結束頁：303-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.413.49篇名：Trade Liberalization and Optimal Environmental Policy in a Vertically Related Market並列篇名：垂直相關市場下貿易自由化與最適環境政策作者：鍾<U+66B3>陵(Hui-Ling Chung);胡均立(Jin-Li Hu);林燕淑(Yan-Shu Lin)關鍵字：環境政策;垂直相關市場;貿易自由化;environmental policy;vertically related market;trade liberalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討存在中間財市場下，貿易自由化對最適環境政策、國內污染量及福利的影響。在進口模型中，當本國之環境稅率為內生下，存在中間財市場將擴大貿易自由化降低最適環境稅率的幅度；此外，貿易自由化將提高本國之污染量，可能降低本國福利。再者不論中間財市場為獨占或完全競爭，當政府課徵最適環境稅率，貿易自由化對本國污染量與本國福利的影響皆相同。相較於進口模型，在產業內貿易模型下，貿易自由化可能提高最適環境稅率。儘管貿易自由可能提高污染稅，本國環境傷害必定提高。英文摘要：This paper studies the effects of trade liberalization on the optimal environmental policy, domestic pollution, and welfare in the presence of an intermediate good market. In the import model, there is a monopoly in the domestic intermediate good market. One domestic downstream firm generates pollution during production and competes against one foreign firm in the domestic downstream market. When the domestic environmental tax is endogenous, the presence of the intermediate good market increases the reduction of the optimal environmental tax caused by trade liberalization. Moreover, trade liberalization increases the domestic pollution and may lower domestic welfare. No matter whether the intermediate good market is monopolistic or perfectly competitive, under the optimal environmental tax the effects of trade liberalization on domestic pollution and welfare stay the same. Compared to the import case, under the intra-industry trade (IIT) model the optimal environmental tax may increase after trade liberalization. Although trade liberalization may increase the pollution tax rate, it always increases the environmental damage.起始頁-結束頁：113-135資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.412.110篇名：Does a Stricter Environmental Policy Discourage Foreign Direct Investment?並列篇名：嚴格的環保政策是否為外人直接投資的障礙？作者：楊雅博(Ya-Po Yang);蔡宗秀(Tsung-Hsiu Tsai)關鍵字：污染稅;進入模式;污染防治;對外直接投資;emission tax;entry mode;emission abatement;foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文建立一個兩國模型，在模型中有一外國廠商欲選擇FDI或出口模式進入地主國市場，並與地主國之n廠商從事Cournot競爭。面對地主國實施之污染稅政策，設廠在地主國之所有廠商皆使用相同污染防治技術。本文發現，當貿易成本較高，而且污染的防治技術較有效率時，提高污染稅率可能使外國廠商到地主國FDI，此外，在某些參數條件下，提高污染稅讓外國廠商移出地主國反而會造成地主國的環境品質下降，而且也可能提高地主國之消費者剩餘。因此，污染稅率之調整與污染防治技術效率及貿易成本的交互作用對外國廠商選擇進入模式及其相關的福利效果具有關鍵性的影響。英文摘要：We set up a two-country model in which a foreign firm chooses FDI or exporting to enter the host market, and plays a Cournot competition game with 11 host firms. Facing the host country's emission tax policy, all firms located in the host country use the same abatement technology to abate emissions. The major findings are as follows. When the trade cost is high and the abatement technology is efficient, a higher emission tax rate may encourage FDI. Moreover, under plausible parameters, raising the emission tax to drive the foreign firm out of the host country will be detrimental to environmental quality but raise consumer surplus in the host country. The interaction of the abatement technological efficiency and trade cost with emission tax plays a key role in the entry mode of the foreign firm and the associate welfare of the host country.起始頁-結束頁：137-165資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.412.211篇名：Are FDI in China and Parent Firm Exports Substitutes or Complements?-An Empirical Study of Taiwanese Manufacturing Firms並列篇名：對中國大陸直接投資與母公司出口：互補關係或替代關係？台灣製造業廠商實證分析作者：馮炳萱(Loretta Fung);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu);王法閔(Fa-Min Wang)關鍵字：外人直接投資;出口;台灣;中國;foreign direct investment;exports;Taiwan;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來台商大舉至國外投資，其中以投資中國為最大宗。台商至中國投資，對母公司的營運以及供應國外市場方式的影響係一值得研究的議題。本文主要是針對台商至中國投資後對母公司外銷金額究竟是有替代或促進的效果進行探討。我們利用1992年至2006年間上市公司核准赴中國投資項目及實行金額、財務報表與公司外銷相互連結的資料進行實證分析，在這段期間上市公司至中國的投資急劇增加，我們將檢視在中國的投資對母公司在台灣的外銷是替代或互補關係。我們分別利用三種計量模型：固定效果的追蹤資料迴歸（panel regressions with fixed effects），panel Tobit與動態追蹤資料模型（dynamic panel model）。實證結果大致相同，發現上市公司至中國的投資將減少母公司的外銷金額，換言之，對中國投資與外銷金額有替代的關係。值得注意的是不論是電子業或非電子業廠商皆有類似的結果－然而電子業廠商具有密集生產網絡及近年大量投資中國之特點。此外，結果的穩健性不受實證模型選擇的影響。英文摘要：In recent years, an increasing number of Taiwanese firms have invested overseas and the foreign direct investment (FDI) has gone predominately to China. With growing importance of operations in China, it is essential to understand how FDI in China affects operation of the parent firms and their mode of serving foreign markets. This paper addresses this issue by empirically investigating whether FDI in China displaces or promotes parent firms' exports. By using a unique firm-level data set that links approved investment projects and realized amount of FDI in China to financial statements and exports data of firms listed on Taiwan Stock Exchange from 1992 to 2006, a period of sharp increase in FDI in China, we are able to examine whether FDI in China substitutes or complements exports from home. We adopt three alternative empirical models: panel regressions with fixed effects, a panel Tobit model and a dynamic panel model. We find that FDI in China reduces parent firms' exports, suggesting a substitutive relationship. Interestingly enough, the effect pertains to firms in both non-electronics industries and the electronics industry - which is characterized by dense production networks and surging investment in China in recent years. The results are robust to choice of empirical models.起始頁-結束頁：167-194資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.412.312篇名：Public Good Inputs, Housing Quality, and Locational Stratification並列篇名：公共財投入、居住品質和區隔分隔作者：彭信坤(Shin-Kun Peng);王平(Ping Wang);余朝恩(Chia-Ming Yu)關鍵字：經濟分隔;內生分類;居住品質;完全競爭空間均衡;economic segregation;endogenous sorting;housing quality;competitive spatial equilibrium期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文對經濟分隔相關文獻的貢獻在於強調對居住品質的偏好差異可以解釋區域分隔現象的產生。本文建構一內生分類（endogenous sorting）之一般均衡模型，兼以考量家戶在所得、通勤時間成本乃至於對居住品質偏好上的差異。居住品質受地方公共財投入內生影響，而地方公共財投入的規模又由所徵得的財產稅收入決定。本文找出完全競爭空間均衡的特徵條件，並進一步發現完全整合居住型態的出現需要參數滿足一測度為零的特定條件。換言之，一般而言均衡滿足區域分隔型態。當家戶在通勤成本上的差異遠大於其在居住品質偏好上的差異，均衡時所有富人居住在市中心，符合亞洲和歐洲的都會區分佈型態。反之則均衡時所有富人居住在市郊，符合美洲都會區的分佈型態。英文摘要：Our paper contributes to the literature on economic segregation by showing that heterogeneity in preferences for housing quality as a result of the location-specific provision of public goods can generate locational stratification. We develop a general equilibrium framework of endogenous sorting in which agents are allowed to differ in their incomes, opportunity costs of commuting, and preferences for housing quality. Housing quality is endogenously determined by location-specific public infrastructure that is financed by property taxes. We characterize the configuration of the competitive spatial equilibrium. We find that complete integration arises only under a set of parameters of measure zero such that the ratio of the opportunity costs of commuting facing different types of agents is in a specific homothetic relation to the ratio of the marginal valuations of housing quality. By contrast, locational stratification is generic. When the difference between agents' commuting costs is sufficiently large (resp. small) compared to the difference in their respective preferences for housing quality, the equilibrium is segregated with all rich residing in the central city (resp. suburb) as observed in Asia and Europe (resp. U.S. metropolitan areas).起始頁-結束頁：195-217資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.412.413篇名：Introduction Professor Chao-cheng Mai: A True Scholar We Admire作者：Ping Wang期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系14篇名：Technology Licensing and Entry in Vertically-Related Markets並列篇名：垂直相關市場的技術授權與進入作者：陳金盛(Chin-Sheng Chen);黃鴻(Hong Hwang);施姵全(Pei-Cyuan Shih)關鍵字：最適授權;廠商進入;中間財市場;optimal licensing;entry;intermediate good markets期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討在垂直相關市場下產業內技術授權廠商的最適授權決策。此一授權廠商生產並出售一中間財貨給予下游廠商，且可採用單位權利金（royalty licensing）或固定權利金（fixed-fee licensing）的方式將其技術授權給另一家上游的競爭廠商。本文發現技術授權廠商的最適授權方式可能為固定權利金;藉此下游的潛在廠商較可能進入最終財市場並提高中間財的衍伸性需求。此外，即使這兩種授權方式皆導致下游的潛在廠商進入市場，固定權利金仍可能優於單位權利金。其原因在於：當採用單位權利金的方式來授權時，技術授權廠商必須降低單位權利金來使下游的潛在廠商進入市場，而導致其利潤下降。英文摘要：This paper investigates the optimal licensing strategy of an insider licensor, which produces and sells an intermediate good in a vertically related market. The licensor can adopt either fixed-fee or royalty licensing. It is found that the licensor firm may prefer fixed-fee to royalty licensing as the former is more likely to induce downstream entry which expands the derived demand. Moreover, even if downstream entry takes place under both regimes, fixed-fee licensing could still be superior to royalty licensing, because the licensor, in order to make room for the entry, cannot enjoy the full cost advantage under royalty licensing.起始頁-結束頁：9-26資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.411.115篇名：Patent Licensing and Double Marginalization in Vertically-related Markets並列篇名：垂直相關市場中的技術授權與雙重邊際化作者：丁虹仁(Hong-Ren Din);高國<U+5CEF>(Kuo-Feng Kao);梁文榮(Wen-Jung Liang)關鍵字：垂直相關市場;雙重邊際化;產業外授權廠商;固定權利金與單位權利金授權;兩部授權;vertically-related markets;double marginalization;outsider patentee;fixed-fee and royalty licensing;two-part tariff期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文設立一個包括垂直相關市場的三階段賽局模型，定義中間財價格為中間財獨占價格與其邊際成本的線性組合。本文主要在探討當產業外授權廠商授權給上游廠商時，上游廠商的獨占力程度在最適授權策略的決策中所扮演的角色。本文發現當上游廠商的獨佔力相對小（大）時，無論創新程度（innovation size）為何，最適授權策略為單位權利金授權（固定權利金授權）。其次，本文發現提高雙重邊際化程度，可藉由為產業外授權廠商的授權策略由單位權利金授權變成固定權利金授權，提升社會福利水準。再者，本文証明當創新程度夠大時，即使完全消除雙重邊際化，社會福利水準仍維持不變。最後，本文也考慮了兩部授權策略下的最適授權策略與其對社會福利的影響。英文摘要：This paper develops a three-stage model in which the input price is expressed by a combination of its monopoly input price and marginal cost. The focus of this paper is on the role of the upstream firm in terms of the degree of its monopoly power in the choice of the outsider patentee's optimal licensing contract, as the outsider patentee licenses its innovation to the upstream firm. The paper shows that the outsider patentee prefers royalty (fixed-fee) licensing to fixed-fee (royalty) licensing when the degree of the upstream firm's monopoly power is small (large) regardless of the innovation size. This paper shows that a rise in the degree of double-marginalization may improve the social welfare through the outsider patentee's switching from royalty licensing to fixed-fee licensing. It also proves that social welfare remains unchanged by the elimination of double-marginalization when the innovation size is large. Finally, the paper is extended by taking into account a two-part tariff.起始頁-結束頁：27-47資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.411.216篇名：Market Competition and the Internal Structure of Firms並列篇名：市場競爭與廠商內部結構作者：陳恭平(Kong-Pin Chen);黃晏奇(Yen-Chi Huang);劉其享(Chi-Hsiang Liu)關鍵字：競爭;廠商人事結構;誘因契約;competition;firm hierarchy;incentive contracts期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在研究廠商如何調整其內部組織結構與誘因契約，以因應市場環境變化。它說明如果中級經理人的主要任務是收集市場資訊時，市場競爭程度的大小，如何影響廠商內部的層級結構及員工的契約內容。我們提出兩種可能的市場競爭程度的指標。在第一種指標下，增加競爭使得廠商進行組織扁平化，並提供管理者較強的工作誘因。這和近來的實證文獻結果相合。但若以另一種指標衡量競爭時，則會得到相反的結果。因此，本文不僅提供實證文獻所得到關於市場競爭與廠商內部結構的關係一個理論詮釋，並說明這些實證發現在理論上的真正意涵。英文摘要：This paper investigates how the firm adjusts its internal structure and alters its incentive contracts in response to the market environment. Specifically, it is concerned with the firm's optimal hierarchical structure and the corresponding incentive contracts for the managers as a function of variables which are related to the degree of market competition, when the middle manager's sole function is information-gathering. Consistent with recent empirical literature, we show that under one measure of market competitiveness, an increase in competitiveness leads the firm to flatten its hierarchy and offer stronger incentives to its agents. However, under another measure, the reverse is true. The paper therefore not only offers a theoretical rationale for some of the recent empirical findings regarding the relation between market competition and the internal structure of firms, but also provides theoretical qualifications for these findings.起始頁-結束頁：49-75資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.411.317篇名：An Analysis of the Impact of Public Capital on Cost Structure of Manufacturing Firms in China並列篇名：中國政府公共支出對於製造業成本結構影響之分析作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);張<U+701E>方(Ching-Feng Chang)關鍵字：公共資本;成本結構;中國;public capital;cost structure;china期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：1978年改革開放以來，中國政府在公共資本支出方面投入大量的金額，包括基礎建設、教育及研發。這些公共資本對於製造業的生產力會有何影響？對於他們的生產成本會有何影響？這些都是很重要的研究課題。在本研究中，我們引用中國製造業由1998到2006年的1,371,616個廠商的樣本資料，再利用傳統的成本函數及考慮企業的固定效果下，來估計公共資本對於製造業生產成本的影響；然後，再進一步推估公共資本對於企業要素投入之間的關係是替代或是互補。研究結果發現，教育支出與基礎建設對於企業的生產成本有顯著減少的效果，而且前者的效果更明顯；但是，政府研發支出對於企業成本的影響則不顯著。英文摘要：Since 1978, China government has spent a huge amount on public capital, including infrastructure, education, and R&D. It is important to know whether those expenditures on public capital have a positive impact on improving manufacturing firms' productivity and thus reducing their production cost. In this study, we applied a data set with 1,371,726 sample points from the manufacturing sector of China from 1998 to 2006 with a traditional cost function to estimate the impact of public capital on firms' production cost, with a firm-level fixed effect. Then we estimate the substitutability of public capital and private inputs. We found that both education and infrastructure have a significant impact on reducing production cost for manufacturing firms, while education expenditure has a larger effect. On the other hand, R&D expenditure has little effect on reducing production cost.起始頁-結束頁：77-110資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/ter.2013.411.418篇名：Editor's Report並列篇名：編輯委員會報告期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：111-112資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系01篇名：Effects of Interactive Product Presentation and Background Color on Online Behavior Intention並列篇名：互動式產品呈現與背景顏色對線上行為傾向之影響作者：林煜超(Yu-Chao Lin);賴建榮(Chien-Jung Lai)關鍵字：網站視覺設計;線上行為;互動式產品呈現;背景顏色;website visual design;online behavior;interactive product presentation;background color期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要在調查產品互動式呈現和背景顏色等網站視覺設計要素，對線上消費者的趨避行為傾向的影響，同時也探討知覺商店形象和情緒反應是否具有中介效果。共有72位受試者參加調查實驗。實驗設計採3×2混合設計，其中互動式產品呈現（高、中、低互動）為組內設計，而背景顏色（藍色和黃色）為組間設計。調查之依變數包括情緒反應（愉悅、亢奮和主控感）、知覺商店形象與趨避行為傾向。結果顯示，互動式產品呈現之主效應會顯著影響亢奮和主控感，而互動式產品呈現與背景顏色之交互作用會顯著影響愉悅和知覺商店形象。此外，結果也證明，愉悅和亢奮等情緒，會中介網站環境刺激（互動式產品呈現和背景顏色）與趨避行為傾向之關係。本研究同時也討論結果之意涵。英文摘要：The present study investigated the effects of visual design elements which are interactive product presentation and background color of a website on online shoppers' approach intention and the mediating role of emotional responses and perceived store image. A total of 72 subjects participated in the experiment. A 3×2 mixed design with interactive product presentation (high, median and low) as within subjects factor and background color (blue and yellow) as between subjects factor was used to investigate emotional responses (pleasure, arousal and dominance), perceived store image and approach/avoidance intention. The results show that interactive product presentation significantly affects arousal and dominance responses. In addition, the interactions of interactive product presentation and background color significantly affect pleasure and perceived store image. Furthermore, results reveal that pleasure and arousal mediate the relation between environmental stimuli (interactive product presentation and background color) and approach/avoidance intention. The implications of the results are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：435-460資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(4).012篇名：宅配產業服務品質與顧客滿意度分析－以台灣五大宅配業者為例並列篇名：Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction for Home-delivery Service Providers-Case Study of Five Providers in Taiwan作者：廖彩雲(Tsai-Yun Liao);羅元辰(Yuan-Chen Lou)關鍵字：宅配產業;服務品質;顧客滿意度;分析網路程序法;重要程度－績效水準分析;Home-delivery service providers;Service quality;Customer Satisfaction;Analytic network process;Importance performance analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來，宅配產業市場日益成長，有許多探討宅配產業服務品質與顧客滿意度的研究，但是針對結合業者、專家學者、及消費者意見進行研究者確鮮少。本研究首先依宅配產業特性及參考相關文獻，並透過產業界與學術界專家之問卷訪談資料，建立影響台灣宅配業者服務品質的評估準則，再據以進行消費者前測問卷調查，以確立符合消費者重視程度的前二十項評估準則，及其隸屬之構面。之後透過產業界與學術界專家之成對比較問卷訪談，以ANP建立服務品質構面與評估準則的相關權重，以分析台灣五大宅配業者之服務績效。此外，依據所建立之評估準則進行消費者對各項目重視程度與服務滿意度問卷調查，以IPA分析消費者對於宅配業者服務之期望與實際滿意度間的關係。研究結果顯示業者專家或消費者認為評估準則重要性愈高者，消費者的滿意程度不一定較高。業者專家最重視「安全性」服務品質構面，但消費者對業者服務品質之期望落差最大者為「賠償標準」，而統一速達在五大宅配業者中平均服務品質與顧客滿意度皆最高。本研究之評估分析結果，可以提供宅配業者制定決策與提升服務品質之參考，以提升其競爭力。英文摘要：In recent years, with the increasing growth of home-delivery service market, there are a lot of studies regarding the service quality and customer satisfaction of home-delivery service. However, only few studies focus on the integral analysis by combining survey data of service providers, specialists, and customers. This study investigates the related factors that influence the adoption of home-delivery service, and applies the analysis network process (ANP) and importance-performance analysis (IPA) to analyze the service quality and customer satisfaction of home-delivery service providers in Taiwan market. Five home-delivery service providers, including Takkyubin, Taiwan Pelican Express, HCT Transportation, T-JOIN Transportation, and Chunghwa Post, are investigated and compared. Twelve specialist questionnaires are collected to establish main factors of service quality and evaluation criteria for competitiveness, and ANP is applied to obtain the relative weights of the main factors and evaluation criteria. Customer questionnaires are then collected from the customers and IPA is conduced to analyze the importance and satisfaction degree of service evaluation criteria regarding the five home-delivery service providers. The results show that the criteria have higher weights are not necessary to have higher degree of customer satisfaction. The criterion of ”safety” gains much attention from the specialists, but the customers pay attention to most in the criterion of ”compensation”. Moreover, Takkyubin is found to be the best among the home-delivery service providers. The results can be used by home-delivery service providers to review and improve their service quality.起始頁-結束頁：461-490資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(4).023篇名：從交易成本觀點探討影響持續合購意願之因素並列篇名：Understanding Continuance Intention of Group Buying: A Perspective of Transaction Cost Theory作者：李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);顧宜錚(Yi-Cheng Ku);盧宣廷(Shiuan-Ting Lu)關鍵字：線上合購;交易成本;資訊豐富度;網路社群;價格意識;從眾;Online Group-Buying;Transaction Cost;Information Richness;Online Community;Price consciousness;Conformity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著網際網路的普及率日益升高，許多消費者也逐漸轉向電子商務平台購物，而合購也成為了一種新興的網路購物方式。本研究從社群與資訊豐富度角度，以交易成本為中介，包含搜尋成本、監督成本及執行成本，探討影響消費者線上再合購意願的因素，在資訊豐富度方面包含產品資訊與推薦資訊，社群方面包含需求外部性與互惠，此外亦探討個人因素，包含從眾與價格意識，對於交易成本與再合購意願之間的干擾效果。本研究結果顯示需求外部性、互惠及資訊豐富度對於三種交易成本均有顯著的負向影響，而三種交易成本皆顯著負向影響消費者線上再合購意願。在個人因素干擾方面，從眾對於搜尋及執行成本與再合購意願的負向關係有顯著干擾效果，當消費者個人的從眾意識較強時，會減弱兩種交易成本與再合購意願的負向關係；而價格意識僅對於監督成本與再合購意願的負向關係有顯著干擾效果，當消費者個人的價格意識較強時，會增強監督成本與再合購意願的負向關係。英文摘要：Nowadays, business models have been changed by the prevalence of Internet. Online group-buying has emerged as the advent of electronic commerce. By using online group-buying as the research context, this study investigates the influences of online community and information richness on transaction cost. Online community includes externality and mutual benefits, while information richness is composed of richness of product information, and richness of recommendation information. Transaction cost is regarded as mediator to have impacts on continuance intention. This study further explores the moderating effects of conformity and price consciousness on the relationship between transaction cost and continuance intention. The results show that externality, mutual benefits, and information richness have influences on transaction cost, including searching cost, implementing cost, and monitoring cost. Three kinds of transaction cost then have negative effects on continuance intention. With regards to personal characteristics, conformity moderatesthe relationship between searching cost and continuance intention, and the relationship between implementing cost and continuance intention. Price consciousness only moderates the relationship between monitoring cost and continuance intention.起始頁-結束頁：491-518資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(4).034篇名：基於結構相似度之惡意程式原始碼分類研究並列篇名：Malware Classification Based on Structure Similarity作者：陳嘉玫(Chia-Mei Chen);楊佳蕙(Chia-Hui Yang);賴谷鑫(Gu-Hsin Lai)關鍵字：惡意軟體分類;靜態分析;結構相似度;Malware classification;static analysis;structure similarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：面對日益複雜的進階持續性滲透攻擊（Advanced Persistent Threat），惡意軟體分類為數位鑑識中最重要的一環。正確的惡意軟體分類可以得到惡意軟體最完整的系統行為，並且簡化鑑識之分析工作。傳統的惡意軟體分類著重於執行後之動態分析或者是以逆向工程結合靜態分析的方式，試圖取得惡意軟體的系統行為資訊，但惡意軟體會透過反虛擬機器監控和混淆技術來降低分類的正確率。隨著誘捕系統愈來愈健全，誘捕系統所蒐集到的惡意軟體原始碼也日漸增加，藉由分析惡意軟體的原始碼可以得到最正確的惡意軟體分類，因此本論文提出一個自動化惡意軟體分類機制。本論文藉由誘捕系統所擷取之惡意軟體原始碼，利用惡意軟體檔案結構相似度以及原始碼檔案相似度，透過階層式分群演算法（Hierarchical Clustering Algorithmn）之方法，不但可以正確的將新捕捉到的惡意軟體分類到正確的類別也可以快速地找出新類型的惡意軟體。本論文提出的方式可以大幅度減少數位鑑識者針對同一類型的惡意軟體重複進行高成本的分析，亦可在最短時間內了解攻擊者行為以及意圖。透過實驗證明，本論文所提出的系統可以將惡意軟體原始碼做正確的分類，而本論文所提出的方法亦可應用於其他有原始碼分類需求的領域。英文摘要：In the face of APT (Advanced Persistent Threat), malware classification is one of the promising solutions in the field of digital forensics. In previous literature, researchers performed dynamic analysis or static analysis after reverse engineering. In the other hand, malware developers even use anti-VM and obfuscation techniques try to evade malware classifiers.Honeypots are increasingly deployed throughout different networks; malware source code is collected and unclassified. Source code analysis provides a better classification for forensics. In this paper, a novel classification approach is proposed, based on logic similarity and directory structure similarity. Hierarchical clustering algorithm finds the best fit classification for each testing data and creates one if none fits well. New type of malware could be identified and then analyzed further. Such classification avoids to re-analyze known malware and allocates resources for new malware. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed system can classify the malware effectively with a small mis-classification ratio.起始頁-結束頁：519-539資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(4).045篇名：參與式競爭智慧知識系統的企業決策應用並列篇名：A Knowledge-based System for Participatory Competitive Intelligence in Enterprise Decision Making作者：陳滄堯(Tsang-Yao Chen);戚玉樑(Yu-Liang Chi)關鍵字：競爭智慧;決策參與;決策模式;知識本體;語意規則;Competitive intelligence;decision model;participatory decision making;ontology;semantic rules期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：目前競爭智慧（competitive intelligence）系統仍以企業內部的資訊傳遞為主，對於提供決策支援的延伸應用明顯不足。本研究聚焦於競爭智慧在延伸應用的改良，並訂定以「參與決策」為目標，嘗試在企業的組織管理與對手的新聞中，找出事件類型、決策模式、法則經驗及部門參與等的關係，據此建立競爭智慧的知識模型及應用系統。本研究以開發知識庫方式解題，並以設計知識模型為核心，主要設計包括：（1）領域本體，建立共通性的知識概念及實例，利用is-a關係表達知識分類架構，提供溝通及標準術語；（2）任務本體，建立目標導向的知識框架，利用has-a關係表達問題的組合；及（3）語意規則，建立推論隱性知識所需的規則。由實驗結果顯示：在新聞已傳遞正確之前提下，評估「決策模式正確率」及「部門權重正確率」等二項，均已接近100%的正確率，顯見本研究提出的知識模型，確可使競爭智慧系統由資訊傳遞的角色，提升到參與決策的延伸應用。英文摘要：Existing Competitive Intelligence (CI) systems are mostly designed for CI information delivery and lack the extending application for decision support. This study focuses on the improvement of CI's application for decision and takes participatory decision support as research objective. This study seeks to build a CI knowledge model and to develop an application system by identifying concepts of and relations among the instance types, decision models, rules of thumb, and functional participation from the enterprise organization and CI news about competitors. This study uses knowledge base system development as a solution. This study uses knowledge-based system development as the approach of solving the research problem with the design of knowledge model as the core. Major research design components of this study includes: (1) a Domain Ontology for establishing common knowledge concepts and instances using is-a relations to express the knowledge categorization structure and to provide a standard terminology set for ontology communication; (2) a Task Ontology to establish an objective-oriented knowledge framework using has-a relations to express the combination of questions; and (3) Semantic Rules to develop the rules for inferring implicit knowledge. The case experiment results show that, under the condition of correct delivery of news entries, the individual news entries have achieved close to 100% correctness in Decision Model Correctness Rate and Departmental Weighting Correctness Rate. It is evidenced that the knowledge model proposed in this study has extended the application of CI from information delivery to the extended support for participatory decision.起始頁-結束頁：541-566資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(4).056篇名：Facebook社交網站使用因素之量表發展與驗證並列篇名：Facebook Motivation Scale: Development and Validation作者：汪志堅(Chih-Chien Wang);陳翔(Hsiang Chen);江義平(I-Ping Chiang);江維彬(Wei-Bin Jiang)關鍵字：社交網站;動機;社會臨場感;知覺互補性;Social network sites;motives;social presence;perceived complementary;Facebook期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以五次的實證研究來探索與驗證網路使用者使用線上社交網站的因素，藉由實證一進行43位使用者的深度訪談及實證二535份的紙筆問卷，再以實證三193份的線上調查問卷，提出七個使用線上社交網站的因素，這七個因素分別為：關係維持、拓展社交網路、尋求人氣、抒發情緒、獲取資訊、娛樂與消磨時間。根據前三次的實證研究，本研究提出一個包含21題問卷題項的社交網站使用量表，來衡量網路使用者使用線上社交網站的使用。實證四進行一個242位受訪者的線上問卷調查，以了解社會臨場感與知覺互補性對於Facebook社交網站使用之影響。結果顯示，社會臨場感的程度對於關係維持、拓展社交網路、尋求人氣、抒發情緒與消磨時間有影響。而知覺互補性對於拓展社交網路、獲取資訊、娛樂與消磨時間有影響。最後，實證五進行281份的紙筆問卷調查分析，透過多重特質多重方法矩陣（MTMM）分析五大人格量表、Facebook七個使用因素之強制排序法與李克特量表兩個統計方法的相關係數比較，以驗證七個使用Facebook因素的適當性。經過五次的實證研究，本研究所發展之線上社交網站使用因素量表具有高度的信效度。英文摘要：The paper investigates and is explored the motivation of users to use online social networking sites Facebook by five empirical studies. In the first study, 43 users have been asked what motivations you have in the Facebook as a depth interview. And those motivations were selected by three experts as the paper and pencil questionnaire for 535 participants to purify the raw scale in the second study. Then, the third study with 27 online questionnaires asked 193 participates for seven motivations of using online social networking sites Facebook. A 21 item scale developed in this study was provided to measure users' motives for using social network sites. Furthermore, the fourth study processes an online survey of 242 subjects to validate the scale and discuss the social presence and perceived complementary whether has effect on motives. The result showed that social presence has significant effect on relationship maintenance, network extension, needing for popularity, venting emotion, and passing time. The perceived complementary has significant effect on network extension, venting emotion, entertainment, and passing time. The fifth study processes a paper-and-pencil questionnaire for 281 subjects to validate the scale using different research method (MTMM). Finally, seven motives for using social network sites were proposed and validated: relationship maintenance, network extension, needing for popularity, venting emotion, entertainment, obtaining information and passing time.起始頁-結束頁：319-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(3).017篇名：面對網路商店進入下雙通路競爭之定價策略並列篇名：Optimal Pricing under Cross-Channel Competition: Internet versus Traditional Stores作者：陳振明(Jen-Ming Chen);谷春芸(Chun-Yun Ku)關鍵字：營收分享;價格競爭;電子商務;E-commerce;revenue-sharing;cross-channel competition;Stackelberg game期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究考慮單一製造商面對著傳統通路（零售商）和直接銷售通路（網路商店）的多通路結構之下，討論網路商店進入前後，對零售商與製造商定價策略的影響。網路商店尚未進入市場時，製造商及零售商間存在著Stackelberg game領導者及跟隨者的關係。在網路商店進入該市場後，網路商店成為市場的領導者，決定最適營收分享比例。製造商同時透過網路商店直接販售商品或是透過傳統零售商進行販售，此時兩通路結構的價格將交互影響。換句話說，製造商不僅供應零售商產品，也會變成競爭對手。透過Stackelberg均衡分析達到最大利潤的訂價策略，並觀察兩通路成員的價格與利潤高低，來提供決策者做決策考量。數值上驗證發現當網路商店進入競爭市場後的零售商訂價會低於網路商店未進入市場之前，而且網路售價會比實體零售價格低。在利潤方面，有網路商店下的競爭市場會有較高的整體利潤表現，而零售商利潤會降低、但是製造商卻會提高。雖然網路商店進入會使實體零售商受到壓力，但如果製造商提供一個優惠的批發價給零售商，可以讓零售商的利潤提高。製造商會有所損失但是還是會比沒有競爭環境下的利潤來的高。當消費者對於市場的價格差異敏感度高時，價格會成一定比例的下降，且有利於製造商的利潤、而不利於零售商。英文摘要：We consider the problem of one manufacturer selling one product in the market through two competing channels: a physical channel (retailer) and a direct channel (internet store). We focus our analysis to study the effect of the dual-channel pricing on the retailer and manufacturer when facing an internet store entry. We use a game-theoretical approach and the sequence of moves in the Stackelberg game. The internet store is the Stackelberg leader who provides a revenue-sharingcontract to the manufacturer. The manufacturer will decide his price of internet channel, and theretailer will decide his price of traditional retail channel. We study the profits and prices of the retailer and manufacturer when facing an internet store entry and analyze the effects of key parameters on their profits and price by numerical example. Numerical results show that the retailer and manufacturer both generate lower pricesand the manufacturer have better profit than before. The retailer's profit would be better due to the manufacturer offers a lower wholesale price. When the cross-price sensitivityis increasing, the retailer and manufacturer'sprices is decreasing and lower manufacturer's profit.起始頁-結束頁：353-365資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(3).028篇名：以期望理論及公平理論探討線上服務失誤補救並列篇名：Applying Expectation Theory and Justice Theory for Online Service Failure Recovery作者：李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);方郁惠(Yu-Hui Fang);吳柏勳(Bo-Shiun Wu)關鍵字：線上服務失誤補救;期望符合;認知公平;失誤歸因;Online service failure recovery;expectation-confirmation theory;perceived justice;failure attribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：網路購物已成為常見的消費者購物管道，在無法直接面對面的交易環境下，形成與實體通路較不一樣的服務型態。本研究以期望符合理論為基礎，納入認知公平及補救歸因，探討網路購物服務失誤型態與補救，對於顧客滿意度與再購意願的影響，並且將轉換成本之干擾效果進行探討。研究結果顯示，失誤歸因對顧客期望有正向影響，但卻不影響補救後滿意度；認知公平對補救績效及補救後滿意度有正向影響。此外，服務補救績效對期望符合有顯著影響，但顧客期望對期望符合有負向影響；期望符合會影響補救後滿意度，進而提升再購意願。再者，轉換成本會干擾補救後滿意度與再購意願間關係。英文摘要：Online shopping has become a quite popular phenomenon. Without face-to face communication, service recovery for online service providers becomes difficult. This study develops a framework which integrates expectation-confirmation theory and equity theory, and includes switching cost as a moderator for the influence of satisfaction on repurchasing intention. The results indicate that service recovery has a positive influence on expectation confirmation and perceived justice. Customer expectation has a negative impact on expectation confirmation. Service failure attribution has a positive impact on customer expectation, but does not impact satisfaction. Perceived justice and expectation confirmation have influences on satisfaction, and satisfaction in turn leads to repurchasing intention. Switching costs, moderate the relationship between satisfaction and repurchasing intention.起始頁-結束頁：367-388資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(3).039篇名：以尖點劇變模型探討旅行業發展電子商務之行銷策略並列篇名：A Cusp Catastrophe Model for Marketing Strategies of Tour Operators in E-commerce作者：謝承憲(Cheng-Hsien Hsieh);王淑美(Shu-Mei Wang)關鍵字：旅行業電子商務;滿意度;轉移成本;尖點劇變模型;E-commerce for tour operator;satisfaction;switching cost;cusp catastrophe model期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去研究雖不乏觀光業電子商務之分析，然多著重於網站內容、資訊與績效等，而鮮少針對消費者意向之非線性行為進行討論。據此，本研究建構尖點劇變模型（cusp catastrophe model）以探討消費者對旅行業電子商務服務之選擇行為，是否具有非線性現象。本研究選取「消費者忠誠度」為模型中狀態變數，而控制變數則以「轉移成本」為分裂因子、「服務滿意度」為正則因子，除進行尖點劇變模型的質化分析外，並進一步校估模型參數進行量化分析來說明尖點劇變模型的行銷意涵。模式結果顯示，「轉換別家旅遊網站未必有比較好的服務」是導致轉移成本提升的最主要原因；其次係「我覺得這家旅遊網站符合我的期待」對於服務滿意度之影響。此外，旅遊電子商務顧客忠誠度並具備發散性、滯後性與突變性等特性，滿足劇變模型特徵，故唯有透過提供具有顯著差異之服務滿意度，方使轉移成本較高之消費者改變其選擇行為，並可依據研判結果擬定旅行業者發展電子商務經營之具體可行策略。英文摘要：The various literatures in e-commerce for tour operators focused on the contents of websites, information and performance. However, the previous research lacked the nonlinear behavior of consumer intention. Accordingly, the purpose of this study is to identify whether the factors, including the satisfaction and switching cost, impacting decisions of consumers through the tourism e-commercial platform choice and to determine the relationship between the impacting factors and consumer loyalty. The cusp catastrophe model (CCM) is utilized for constructing the non-linear choice behavior and explaining the non-linear features in management implications. Along with the qualitative analyses of CCM, the quantitative parameters estimation could help tour operators examine the feasible marketing strategies for e-commerce operating. The analytical results reveal that ”the uncertainty about obtaining better service quality for switching the transaction to the other website of tourism operator” is the most critical item increasing switching costs. Moreover, the item significantly influences satisfaction represents ”the website meets my expectation of e-commerce for tour operator.” Tour operators thus should provide significantly different level of satisfaction to facilitate the switching behaviors of tourism e-commerce consumers with higher switching cost.起始頁-結束頁：389-410資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(3).0410篇名：Formulating a Business Management Strategy for E-shopping Websites Using Management Analysis並列篇名：以管理工具擬定購物網站之經營管理策略作者：李宗儒(Tzong-Ru (Jiun-Shen) Lee);李佳珊(Jia-Shan Lee);Matti Muhos關鍵字：購物網站;ICDT模式;模糊層級分析;詮釋結構模式;TRIZ理論;e-shopping website;ICDT model;fuzzy analytic hierarchy process;interpretive structural modeling;TRIZ theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著網際網絡的蓬勃發展，台灣電子商務網站如雨後春筍般冒出，電子商務也成為一個相當重要的研究議題之一。電子商務進入障礙低，資本額小，因此有許多人紛紛投入電子商務市場，但要如何做到差異化，或具有經爭優勢，則是一大挑戰。過去探討有關台灣電子商務網站的研究多注重在網站架構、顧客關係管理、網路信任與隱私等問題，而較少著墨在經營策略等議題上，故本研究為了解購物網站經營的關鍵成功因素，因此應用ICDT模式（The Information, Communication, Transaction, and Distribution model）來做為分類架構，並且使用模糊層級分析與詮釋結構模式，找出經營購物網站之關鍵因素，並且以此作為轉換成TRIZ理論核心問題的依據，進而擬定經營購物網站之策略，藉此作為業者未來經營的參考方向。英文摘要：With the rapid development of the Internet, e-shopping websites have sprung up at an increasing rate. E-commerce has thus become an important research issue. Because of the low barriers to entrance and minimal capital investment, many people have begun to run their own websites in the online shopping market. However, it is challenging to differentiate such websites to gain a competitive advantage. Prior studies in Taiwan have paid much more attention to websites' structure, customer relationship management, and privacy issues, but lack focus on business strategies. This research is an attempt to understand the key factors of e-shopping websites' success, by adopting the ICDT (Information, Communication, Transaction, and Distribution) model as a classification framework. Subsequently, we also use the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (FAHP) and the interpretive structural model to identify the key operational factors and convert these factors into the core problems according to the TRIZ theory. Therefore, this research provides operating strategies for e-shopping websites, which can guide future entrants.起始頁-結束頁：411-434資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(3).0511篇名：以期望理論及公平理論探討線上服務失誤補救並列篇名：Applying Expectation Theory and Justice Theory for Online Service Failure Recovery作者：李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);方郁惠(Yu-Hui Fang);吳柏勳(Bo-Shiun Wu)關鍵字：線上服務失誤補救;期望符合;認知公平;失誤歸因;Online service failure recovery;expectation-confirmation theory;perceived justice;failure attribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：網路購物已成為常見的消費者購物管道，在無法直接面對面的交易環境下，形成與實體通路較不一樣的服務型態。本研究以期望符合理論為基礎，納入認知公平及補救歸因，探討網路購物服務失誤型態與補救，對於顧客滿意度與再購意願的影響，並且將轉換成本之干擾效果進行探討。研究結果顯示，失誤歸因對顧客期望有正向影響，但卻不影響補救後滿意度；認知公平對補救績效及補救後滿意度有正向影響。此外，服務補救績效對期望符合有顯著影響，但顧客期望對期望符合有負向影響；期望符合會影響補救後滿意度，進而提升再購意願。再者，轉換成本會干擾補救後滿意度與再購意願間關係。英文摘要：Online shopping has become a quite popular phenomenon. Without face-to face communication, service recovery for online service providers becomes difficult. This study develops a framework which integrates expectation-confirmation theory and equity theory, and includes switching cost as a moderator for the influence of satisfaction on repurchasing intention. The results indicate that service recovery has a positive influence on expectation confirmation and perceived justice. Customer expectation has a negative impact on expectation confirmation. Service failure attribution has a positive impact on customer expectation, but does not impact satisfaction. Perceived justice and expectation confirmation have influences on satisfaction, and satisfaction in turn leads to repurchasing intention. Switching costs, moderate the relationship between satisfaction and repurchasing intention.起始頁-結束頁：2-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201308/PP.000112篇名：Effects of Interactive Product Presentation and Background Color on Online Behavior Intention並列篇名：互動式產品呈現與背景顏色對線上行為傾向之影響作者：林煜超(Yu-Chao Lin);賴建榮(Chien-Jung Lai)關鍵字：網站視覺設計;線上行為;互動式產品呈現;背景顏色;website visual design;online behavior;interactive product presentation;background color期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究主要在調查產品互動式呈現和背景顏色等網站視覺設計要素，對線上消費者的趨避行為傾向的影響，同時也探討知覺商店形象和情緒反應是否具有中介效果。共有72位受試者參加調查實驗。實驗設計採3×2混合設計，其中互動式產品呈現（高、中、低互動）為組內設計，而背景顏色（藍色和黃色）為組間設計。調查之依變數包括情緒反應（愉悅、亢奮和主控感）、知覺商店形象與趨避行為傾向。結果顯示，互動式產品呈現之主效應會顯著影響亢奮和主控感，而互動式產品呈現與背景顏色之交互作用會顯著影響愉悅和知覺商店形象。此外，結果也證明，愉悅和亢奮等情緒，會中介網站環境刺激（互動式產品呈現和背景顏色）與趨避行為傾向之關係。本研究同時也討論結果之意涵。英文摘要：The present study investigated the effects of visual design elements which are interactive product presentation and background color of a website on online shoppers' approach intention and the mediating role of emotional responses and perceived store image. A total of 72 subjects participated in the experiment. A 3×2 mixed design with interactive product presentation (high, median and low) as within subjects factor and background color (blue and yellow) as between subjects factor was used to investigate emotional responses (pleasure, arousal and dominance), perceived store image and approach/avoidance intention. The results show that interactive product presentation significantly affects arousal and dominance responses. In addition, the interactions of interactive product presentation and background color significantly affect pleasure and perceived store image. Furthermore, results reveal that pleasure and arousal mediate the relation between environmental stimuli (interactive product presentation and background color) and approach/avoidance intention. The implications of the results are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：2-27資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201311/PP.000113篇名：以尖點劇變模型探討旅行業發展電子商務之行銷策略並列篇名：A Cusp Catastrophe Model for Marketing Strategies of Tour Operators in E-Commerce作者：謝承憲(Cheng-Hsien Hsieh);王淑美(Shu-Mei Wang)關鍵字：旅行業電子商務;滿意度;轉移成本;尖點劇變模型;E-commerce for tour operator;satisfaction;switching cost;cusp catastrophe model期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：過去研究雖不乏觀光業電子商務之分析，然多著重於網站內容、資訊與績效等，而鮮少針對消費者意向之非線性行為進行討論。據此，本研究建構尖點劇變模型（cusp catastrophe model）以探討消費者對旅行業電子商務服務之選擇行為，是否具有非線性現象。本研究選取「消費者忠誠度」為模型中狀態變數，而控制變數則以「轉移成本」為分裂因子、「服務滿意度」為正則因子，除進行尖點劇變模型的質化分析外，並進一步校估模型參數進行量化分析來說明尖點劇變模型的行銷意涵。模式結果顯示，「轉換別家旅遊網站未必有比較好的服務」是導致轉移成本提升的最主要原因；其次係「我覺得這家旅遊網站符合我的期待」對於服務滿意度之影響。此外，旅遊電子商務顧客忠誠度並具備發散性、滯後性與突變性等特性，滿足劇變模型特徵，故唯有透過提供具有顯著差異之服務滿意度，方使轉移成本較高之消費者改變其選擇行為，並可依據研判結果擬定旅行業者發展電子商務經營之具體可行策略。英文摘要：The various literatures in e-commerce for tour operators focused on the contents of websites, information and performance. However, the previous research lacked the non-linear behavior of consumer intention. Accordingly, the purpose of this study is to identify whether the factors, including the satisfaction and switching cost, impacting decisions of consumers through the tourism e-commercial platform choice and to determine the relationship between the impacting factors and consumer loyalty. The cusp catastrophe model (CCM) is utilized for constructing the non-linear choice behavior and explaining the non-linear features in management implications. Along with the qualitative analyses of CCM, the quantitative parameters estimation could help tour operators examine the feasible marketing strategies for e-commerce operating. The analytical results reveal that ”the uncertainty about obtaining better service quality for switching the transaction to the other website of tourism operator” is the most critical item increasing switching costs. Moreover, the item significantly influences satisfaction represents ”the website meets my expectation of e-commerce for tour operator.” Tour operators thus should provide significantly different level of satisfaction to facilitate the switching behaviors of tourism e-commerce consumers with higher switching cost.起始頁-結束頁：24-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201308/PP.000214篇名：宅配產業服務品質與顧客滿意度分析－以台灣五大宅配業者為例並列篇名：Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction for Home-delivery Service Providers-Case Study of Five Providers in Taiwan作者：廖彩雲(Tsai-Yun Liao);羅元辰(Yuan-Chen Lou)關鍵字：宅配產業;服務品質;顧客滿意度;分析網路程序法;重要程度－績效水準分析;Home-delivery service providers;Service quality;Customer Satisfaction;Analytic network process;Importance performance analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來，宅配產業市場日益成長，有許多探討宅配產業服務品質與顧客滿意度的研究，但是針對結合業者、專家學者、及消費者意見進行研究者確鮮少。本研究首先依宅配產業特性及參考相關文獻，並透過產業界與學術界專家之問卷訪談資料，建立影響台灣宅配業者服務品質的評估準則，再據以進行消費者前測問卷調查，以確立符合消費者重視程度的前二十項評估準則，及其隸屬之構面。之後透過產業界與學術界專家之成對比較問卷訪談，以ANP建立服務品質構面與評估準則的相關權重，以分析台灣五大宅配業者之服務績效。此外，依據所建立之評估準則進行消費者對各項目重視程度與服務滿意度問卷調查，以IPA分析消費者對於宅配業者服務之期望與實際滿意度間的關係。研究結果顯示業者專家或消費者認為評估準則重要性愈高者，消費者的滿意程度不一定較高。業者專家最重視「安全性」服務品質構面，但消費者對業者服務品質之期望落差最大者為「賠償標準」，而統一速達在五大宅配業者中平均服務品質與顧客滿意度皆最高。本研究之評估分析結果，可以提供宅配業者制定決策與提升服務品質之參考，以提升其競爭力。英文摘要：In recent years, with the increasing growth of home-delivery service market, there are a lot of studies regarding the service quality and customer satisfaction of home-delivery service. However, only few studies focus on the integral analysis by combining survey data of service providers, specialists, and customers. This study investigates the related factors that influence the adoption of home-delivery service, and applies the analysis network process (ANP) and importance-performance analysis (IPA) to analyze the service quality and customer satisfaction of home-delivery service providers in Taiwan market. Five home-delivery service providers, including Takkyubin, Taiwan Pelican Express, HCT Transportation, T-JOIN Transportation, and Chunghwa Post, are investigated and compared. Twelve specialist questionnaires are collected to establish main factors of service quality and evaluation criteria for competitiveness, and ANP is applied to obtain the relative weights of the main factors and evaluation criteria. Customer questionnaires are then collected from the customers and IPA is conduced to analyze the importance and satisfaction degree of service evaluation criteria regarding the five home-delivery service providers. The results show that the criteria have higher weights are not necessary to have higher degree of customer satisfaction. The criterion of ”safety” gains much attention from the specialists, but the customers pay attention to most in the criterion of ”compensation”. Moreover, Takkyubin is found to be the best among the home-delivery service providers. The results can be used by home-delivery service providers to review and improve their service quality.起始頁-結束頁：28-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201311/PP.000215篇名：Formulating a Business Management Strategy for E-shopping Websites Using Management Analysis並列篇名：以管理工具擬定購物網站之經營管理策略作者：李宗儒(Tzong-Ru Lee);李佳珊(Jia Shan Lee);Matti Muhos關鍵字：購物網站;ICDT模式;模糊層級分析;詮釋結構模式;TRIZ理論;e-shopping website;ICDT model;fuzzy analytic hierarchy process;interpretive structural modeling;TRIZ theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著網際網絡的蓬勃發展，台灣電子商務網站如雨後春筍般冒出，電子商務也成為一個相當重要的研究議題之一。電子商務進入障礙低，資本額小，因此有許多人紛紛投入電子商務市場，但要如何做到差異化，或具有經爭優勢，則是一大挑戰。過去探討有關台灣電子商務網站的研究多注重在網站架構、顧客關係管理、網路信任與隱私等問題，而較少著墨在經營策略等議題上，故本研究為了解購物網站經營的關鍵成功因素，因此應用ICDT模式（The Information, Communication, Transaction, and Distribution model）來做為分類架構，並且使用模糊層級分析與詮釋結構模式，找出經營購物網站之關鍵因素，並且以此作為轉換成TRIZ理論核心問題的依據，進而擬定經營購物網站之策略，藉此作為業者未來經營的參考方向。英文摘要：With the rapid development of the Internet, e-shopping websites have sprung up at an increasing rate. E-commerce has thus become an important research issue. Because of the low barriers to entrance and minimal capital investment, many people have begun to run their own websites in the online shopping market. However, it is challenging to differentiate such websites to gain a competitive advantage. Prior studies in Taiwan have paid much more attention to websites' structure, customer relationship management, and privacy issues, but lack focus on business strategies. This research is an attempt to understand the key factors of e-shopping websites' success, by adopting the ICDT (Information, Communication, Transaction, and Distribution) model as a classification framework. Subsequently, we also use the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (FAHP) and the interpretive structural model to identify the key operational factors and convert these factors into the core problems according to the TRIZ theory. Therefore, this research provides operating strategies for e-shopping websites, which can guide future entrants.起始頁-結束頁：44-67資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201308/PP.000316篇名：從交易成本觀點探討影響持續合購意願之因素並列篇名：Understanding Continuance Intention of Group Buying: A Perspective of Transaction Cost Theory作者：李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);顧宜錚(Yi-Cheng Ku);盧宣廷(Shiuan-Ting Lu)關鍵字：線上合購;交易成本;資訊豐富度;網路社群;價格意識;從眾;Online Group-Buying;Transaction Cost;Information Richness;Online Community;Price consciousness;Conformity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著網際網路的普及率日益升高，許多消費者也逐漸轉向電子商務平台購物，而合購也成為了一種新興的網路購物方式。本研究從社群與資訊豐富度角度，以交易成本為中介，包含搜尋成本、監督成本及執行成本，探討影響消費者線上再合購意願的因素，在資訊豐富度方面包含產品資訊與推薦資訊，社群方面包含需求外部性與互惠，此外亦探討個人因素，包含從眾與價格意識，對於交易成本與再合購意願之間的干擾效果。本研究結果顯示需求外部性、互惠及資訊豐富度對於三種交易成本均有顯著的負向影響，而三種交易成本皆顯著負向影響消費者線上再合購意願。在個人因素干擾方面，從眾對於搜尋及執行成本與再合購意願的負向關係有顯著干擾效果，當消費者個人的從眾意識較強時，會減弱兩種交易成本與再合購意願的負向關係；而價格意識僅對於監督成本與再合購意願的負向關係有顯著干擾效果，當消費者個人的價格意識較強時，會增強監督成本與再合購意願的負向關係。英文摘要：Nowadays, business models have been changed by the prevalence of Internet. Online group-buying has emerged as the advent of electronic commerce. By using online group-buying as the research context, this study investigates the influences of online community and information richness on transaction cost. Online community includes externality and mutual benefits, while information richness is composed of richness of product information, and richness of recommendation information. Transaction cost is regarded as mediator to have impacts on continuance intention. This study further explores the moderating effects of conformity and price consciousness on the relationship between transaction cost and continuance intention. The results show that externality, mutual benefits, and information richness have influences on transaction cost, including searching cost, implementing cost, and monitoring cost. Three kinds of transaction cost then have negative effects on continuance intention. With regards to personal characteristics, conformity moderates the relationship between searching cost and continuance intention, and the relationship between implementing cost and continuance intention. Price consciousness only moderates the relationship between monitoring cost and continuance intention.起始頁-結束頁：58-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201311/PP.000317篇名：Facebook社交網站使用因素之量表發展與驗證並列篇名：Facebook Motivation Scale: Development and Validation作者：汪志堅(Chih-Chien Wang);陳翔(Hsiang Chen);江義平(I-Ping Chiang);江維彬(Wei-Bin Jiang)關鍵字：社交網站;動機;社會臨場感;知覺互補性;Social network sites;motives;social presence;perceived complementary;Facebook期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以五次的實證研究來探索與驗證網路使用者使用線上社交網站的因素，藉由實證一進行43位使用者的深度訪談及實證二535份的紙筆問卷，再以實證三193份的線上調查問卷，提出七個使用線上社交網站的因素，這七個因素分別為：關係維持、拓展社交網路、尋求人氣、抒發情緒、獲取資訊、娛樂與消磨時間。根據前三次的實證研究，本研究提出一個包含21題問卷題項的社交網站使用量表，來衡量網路使用者使用線上社交網站的使用。實證四進行一個242位受訪者的線上問卷調查，以了解社會臨場感與知覺互補性對於Facebook社交網站使用之影響。結果顯示，社會臨場感的程度對於關係維持、拓展社交網路、尋求人氣、抒發情緒與消磨時間有影響。而知覺互補性對於拓展社交網路、獲取資訊、娛樂與消磨時間有影響。最後，實證五進行281份的紙筆問卷調查分析，透過多重特質多重方法矩陣（MTMM）分析五大人格量表、Facebook七個使用因素之強制排序法與李克特量表兩個統計方法的相關係數比較，以驗證七個使用Facebook因素的適當性。經過五次的實證研究，本研究所發展之線上社交網站使用因素量表具有高度的信效度。英文摘要：The paper investigates and is explored the motivation of users to use online social networking sites Facebook by five empirical studies. In the first study, 43 users have been asked what motivations you have in the Facebook as a depth interview. And those motivations were selected by three experts as the paper and pencil questionnaire for 535 participants to purify the raw scale in the second study. Then, the third study with 27 online questionnaires asked 193 participates for seven motivations of using online social networking sites Facebook. A 21 item scale developed in this study was provided to measure users' motives for using social network sites. Furthermore, the fourth study processes an online survey of 242 subjects to validate the scale and discuss the social presence and perceived complementary whether has effect on motives. The result showed that social presence has significant effect on relationship maintenance, network extension, needing for popularity, venting emotion, and passing time. The perceived complementary has significant effect on network extension, venting emotion, entertainment, and passing time. The fifth study processes a paper-and -pencil questionnaire for 281 subjects to validate the scale using different research method (MTMM). Finally, seven motives for using social network sites were proposed and validated: relationship maintenance, network extension, needing for popularity, venting emotion, entertainment, obtaining information and passing time.起始頁-結束頁：68-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201308/PP.000418篇名：基於結構相似度之惡意程式原始碼分類研究並列篇名：Malware Classification Based on Structure Similarity作者：陳嘉玫(Chia-Mei Chen);楊佳蕙(Chia-Hui Yang);賴谷鑫(Gu-Hsin Lai)關鍵字：惡意軟體分類;靜態分析;結構相似度;Malware classification;static analysis;structure similarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：面對日益複雜的進階持續性滲透攻擊（Advanced Persistent Threat），惡意軟體分類為數位鑑識中最重要的一環。正確的惡意軟體分類可以得到惡意軟體最完整的系統行為，並且簡化鑑識之分析工作。傳統的惡意軟體分類著重於執行後之動態分析或者是以逆向工程結合靜態分析的方式，試圖取得惡意軟體的系統行為資訊，但惡意軟體會透過反虛擬機器監控和混淆技術來降低分類的正確率。隨著誘捕系統愈來愈健全，誘捕系統所蒐集到的惡意軟體原始碼也日漸增加，藉由分析惡意軟體的原始碼可以得到最正確的惡意軟體分類，因此本論文提出一個自動化惡意軟體分類機制。本論文藉由誘捕系統所擷取之惡意軟體原始碼，利用惡意軟體檔案結構相似度以及原始碼檔案相似度，透過階層式分群演算法（Hierarchical Clustering Algorithmn）之方法，不但可以正確的將新捕捉到的惡意軟體分類到正確的類別也可以快速地找出新類型的惡意軟體。本論文提出的方式可以大幅度減少數位鑑識者針對同一類型的惡意軟體重複進行高成本的分析，亦可在最短時間內了解攻擊者行為以及意圖。透過實驗證明，本論文所提出的系統可以將惡意軟體原始碼做正確的分類，而本論文所提出的方法亦可應用於其他有原始碼分類需求的領域。英文摘要：In the face of APT (Advanced Persistent Threat), malware classification is one of the promising solutions in the field of digital forensics. In previous literature, researchers performed dynamic analysis or static analysis after reverse engineering. In the other hand, malware developers even use anti-VM and obfuscation techniques try to evade malware classifiers.Honeypots are increasingly deployed throughout different networks; malware source code is collected and unclassified. Source code analysis provides a better classification for forensics. In this paper, a novel classification approach is proposed, based on logic similarity and directory structure similarity. Hierarchical clustering algorithm finds the best fit classification for each testing data and creates one if none fits well. New type of malware could be identified and then analyzed further. Such classification avoids to re-analyze known malware and allocates resources for new malware. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed system can classify the malware effectively with a small mis-classification ratio.起始頁-結束頁：85-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201311/PP.000419篇名：面對網路商店進入下雙通路競爭之定價策略並列篇名：Optimal Pricing under Cross-Channel Competition: Internet versus Traditional Stores作者：陳振明(Jen-Ming Chen);谷春芸(Chun-Yun Ku)關鍵字：營收分享;價格競爭;電子商務;E-commerce;revenue-sharing;cross-channel competition;Stackelberg game期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究考慮單一製造商面對著傳統通路（零售商）和直接銷售通路（網路商店）的多通路結構之下，討論網路商店進入前後，對零售商與製造商定價策略的影響。網路商店尚未進入市場時，製造商及零售商間存在著Stackelberg game領導者及跟隨者的關係。在網路商店進入該市場後，網路商店成為市場的領導者，決定最適營收分享比例。製造商同時透過網路商店直接販售商品或是透過傳統零售商進行販售，此時兩通路結構的價格將交互影響。換句話說，製造商不僅供應零售商產品，也會變成競爭對手。透過Stackelberg均衡分析達到最大利潤的訂價策略，並觀察兩通路成員的價格與利潤高低，來提供決策者做決策考量。數值上驗證發現當網路商店進入競爭市場後的零售商訂價會低於網路商店未進入市場之前，而且網路售價會比實體零售價格低。在利潤方面，有網路商店下的競爭市場會有較高的整體利潤表現，而零售商利潤會降低、但是製造商卻會提高。雖然網路商店進入會使實體零售商受到壓力，但如果製造商提供一個優惠的批發價給零售商，可以讓零售商的利潤提高。製造商會有所損失但是還是會比沒有競爭環境下的利潤來的高。當消費者對於市場的價格差異敏感度高時，價格會成一定比例的下降，且有利於製造商的利潤、而不利於零售商。英文摘要：We consider the problem of one manufacturer selling one product in the market through two competing channels: a physical channel (retailer) and a direct channel (internet store). We focus our analysis to study the effect of the dual-channel pricing on the retailer and manufacturer when facing an internet store entry. We use a game-theoretical approach and the sequence of moves in the Stackelberg game. The internet store is the Stackelberg leader who provides a revenue-sharing contract to the manufacturer. The manufacturer will decide his price of internet channel, and the retailer will decide his price of traditional retail channel. We study the profits and prices of the retailer and manufacturer when facing an internet store entry and analyze the effects of key parameters on their profits and price by numerical example. Numerical results show that the retailer and manufacturer both generate lower prices and the manufacturer have better profit than before. The retailer's profit would be better due to the manufacturer offers a lower wholesale price. When the cross-price sensitivity is increasing, the retailer and manufacturer's prices is decreasing and lower manufacturer's profit.起始頁-結束頁：102-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201308/PP.000520篇名：參與式競爭智慧知識系統的企業決策應用並列篇名：A Knowledge-based System for Participatory Competitive Intelligence in Enterprise Decision Making作者：陳滄堯(Tsang-Yao Chen);戚玉樑(Yu-Liang Chi)關鍵字：競爭智慧;決策參與;決策模式;知識本體;語意規則;Competitive intelligence;decision model;participatory decision making;ontology;semantic rules期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：預刊文章出版年：2013中文摘要：目前競爭智慧（competitive intelligence）系統仍以企業內部的資訊傳遞為主，對於提供決策支援的延伸應用明顯不足。本研究聚焦於競爭智慧在延伸應用的改良，並訂定以「參與決策」為目標，嘗試在企業的組織管理與對手的新聞中，找出事件類型、決策模式、法則經驗及部門參與等的關係，據此建立競爭智慧的知識模型及應用系統。本研究以開發知識庫方式解題，並以設計知識模型為核心，主要設計包括：（1）領域本體，建立共通性的知識概念及實例，利用is-a關係表達知識分類架構，提供溝通及標準術語；（2）任務本體，建立目標導向的知識框架，利用has-a關係表達問題的組合；及（3）語意規則，建立推論隱性知識所需的規則。由實驗結果顯示：在新聞已傳遞正確之前提下，評估「決策模式正確率」及「部門權重正確率」等二項，均已接近100%的正確率，顯見本研究提出的知識模型，確可使競爭智慧系統由資訊傳遞的角色，提升到參與決策的延伸應用。英文摘要：Existing Competitive Intelligence (CI) systems are mostly designed for CI information delivery and lack the extending application for decision support. This study focuses on the improvement of CI's application for decision and takes participatory decision support as research objective. This study seeks to build a CI knowledge model and to develop an application system by identifying concepts of and relations among the instance types, decision models, rules of thumb, and functional participation from the enterprise organization and CI news about competitors. This study uses knowledge base system development as a solution. This study uses knowledge-based system development as the approach of solving the research problem with the design of knowledge model as the core. Major research design components of this study includes: (1) a Domain Ontology for establishing common knowledge concepts and instances using is-a relations to express the knowledge categorization structure and to provide a standard terminology set for ontology communication; (2) a Task Ontology to establish an objective-oriented knowledge framework using has-a relations to express the combination of questions; and (3) Semantic Rules to develop the rules for inferring implicit knowledge. The case experiment results show that, under the condition of correct delivery of news entries, the individual news entries have achieved close to 100% correctness in Decision Model Correctness Rate and Departmental Weighting Correctness Rate. It is evidenced that the knowledge model proposed in this study has extended the application of CI from information delivery to the extended support for participatory decision.起始頁-結束頁：105-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201311/PP.000501篇名：Evolution of ERP Systems Implementation in Taiwan-Four Surveys in Ten Years並列篇名：ERP系統於台灣企業應用之十年演化研究－四次ERP調查作者：蔡文賢(Wen-Hsien Tsai);陳德釗(Der Chao Chen);李雅芬(Ya-Fen Lee);林欣瑾(Sin-Jin Lin);張耀中(Yao-Chung Chang);李秀梨(Hsiu-Li Lee)關鍵字：企業資源規劃導入;長期演化研究;創新擴散理論;ERP生命週期;Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) implementation;longitudinal study;Innovation diffusion theory;ERP life cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究係分別於2003、2006、2009與2012年針對台灣前5000大企業進行其ERP系統應用情況之問卷調查。本研究主要係針對已導入或正在導入ERP系統的台灣企業來探討其ERP系統應用之十年演化情況，進而檢視ERP生命週期各階段關鍵 之管理議題。本研究發現了一些台灣企業應用ERP系統之創新技術擴散現象，而本研究由調查結果所歸納的ERP生命週期各階段之一些管理議題，值得進一步加以深入探討。學術界、企業界與ERP導入顧問也可以參考本研究結果而提出與擬定有效的ERP導入方法與管理計畫，以提高成功導入ERP系統的機會。英文摘要：This paper presents the results of four cross-sectional surveys of the top 5000 largest corporations in Taiwan, undertaken in 2003, 2006, 2009 and 2012. We focus on a longitudinal study of the used or intended implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems of firms to examine the ”innovation diffusion” phenomenon and examine key management issues during the ”ERP life cycle” phases. Our initial empirical analysis provides us with a number of interesting results. We find that the implementation of an ERP project entails an innovation diffusion phenomenon. Our analysis further shows that some important management issues deserve more attention during the life cycle of ERP projects. Based on our findings, practitioners, academics and entrepreneurs will benefit from this knowledge to prepare an effective management plan to increase ERP implementation success.起始頁-結束頁：159-193資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(2).012篇名：雲端ERP系統服務品質與持續使用意圖之研究並列篇名：A Research on Service Quality & Continuous Usage Intention of Cloud ERP System作者：許麗玲(Li-Ling Hsu);陳至柔(Chih-Jou Chen);陳澔輝(Hao-Huei Chen)關鍵字：軟體即服務;服務品質;期望確認理論;持續使用意圖;Software as a service;service quality;expectation confirmation theory;continuous usage intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去以資訊系統服務品質為主的相關研究大多著重在網站品質的研究上，少有對於軟體即服務（Software as a Service, SaaS）之服務品質進行研究，因此本研究採用Alexander et al.（2012）所整理提出的SaaS-Qual量表來衡量雲端ERP系統之服務品質，並結合「期望確認理論」（Expectation Confirmation Theory, ECT），來探討雲端ERP系統之服務品質，對使用者滿意度與持續使用意向的影響，以讓此理論應用在雲端運算的情境上更臻完整。本研究以使用雲端ERP系統超過三個月之企業客戶為研究對象，共回收143份有效問卷，並使用PLS進行統計分析，結果顯示多數假說均受到支持。本研究有以下發現：（1）「雲端ERP服務品質」對於「確認程度」有正向顯著的影響；（2）「確認程度」對於「知覺有用性」有正向顯著的影響；（3）「確認程度」對「滿意度」無正向顯著的影響；（4）「雲端ERP服務品質」對「滿意度」及「信任」有正向顯著的影響；（5）「知覺有用性」及「信任」對於「滿意度」有正向顯著的影響；（6）「知覺有用性」、「信任」及「滿意度」對「雲端ERP持續使用」有正向顯著的影響。並根據研究結果，提出管理意涵及實務建議業者參考。英文摘要：Prior studies of service quality about information system were mostly focused on the quality of websites. There were few studies about service quality of SaaS. Therefore, this study adopts the SaaS-Qual scale from Alexander et al. (2012); combined with Expectation Confirmation Theory (ECT) to develop a research model that examines important factors affecting continuing use of cloud ERP system. We extended the variables of ECT to better explain the satisfaction and continuing use of cloud ERP system under cloud computing context. With corporate users continuing use of cloud ERP system for more than 3 months in Taiwan as research subjects, data analysis is conducted via PLS statistical analysis, with 143 valid questionnaires returned. This study concludes six main results with using cloud ERP system, including: (1) Perceived service quality of cloud ERP is positively related to the extent of expectation confirmation. (2) Extent of expectation confirmation positively affects the perceived usefulness of cloud ERP. (3) Extent of expectation confirmation is not positively related to the extent of satisfaction. (4) Perceived service quality of cloud ERP positively affects the extent of satisfaction and trust of cloud ERP. (5) Perceived usefulness of cloud ERP and trust positively affect the extent of satisfaction. Finally, Perceived usefulness, trust and satisfaction all positively affect the extent of continuous usage intention of cloud ERP. On the whole, most of hypotheses were supported. Implications and practical suggests are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：195-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(2).023篇名：部落格空間之核心社群探索並列篇名：An Exploration of Core Communities in the Blogosphere作者：盧能彬(Neng-Pin Lu)關鍵字：部落格;社群;社會網絡分析;核心／邊陲分析;Blog;community;social network analysis;core/periphery analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以台灣「部落格觀察」網站的排名資料為基準，於2008年至2011年之間共四個時點，分別挑選排行榜前一百名部落格為研究樣本，據以蒐集、篩選、與繪製這些樣本部落格於四個時點的朋友連結網絡，然後再遞迴運用核心／邊陲分析，依次探索這些朋友連結網絡中的核心社群，並觀察它們的變遷。分析結果發現「圖文」、「美食／旅行」、以及「資訊科技／網路應用」等三大核心社群，其中「圖文」社群為高度聯繫、低度成長的社群，「美食／旅行」社群為低度聯繫、高度成長的社群，「資訊科技／網路應用」則為中度聯繫、中度成長的社群。再與國外的部落格發展相較，則發現「資訊科技／網路應用」社群同樣是熱門的趨勢；至於「圖文」與「美食／旅行」社群則是台灣部落格空間特有的發展。英文摘要：In this research, we took the Top 100 blogs, based on the rank lists maintained by the Taiwan website ”Blog Look,” at four time points between 2008 and 2011, respectively, as our research samples. Then, we collected all the blogrolls of our samples at four time points. Therefore, we sifted and figured out four blogroll networks between our samples, respectively. Upon the four blogroll networks, we applied core/periphery analysis recursively to explore core communities and observe their changes. As a result, we found out the top three core communities: picture article, cuisine/travel, and information technology/networking application. And we observed that picture article community is highly connected and lowly growing; cuisine/travel community is lowly connected and highly growing; information technology/networking application community is medium connected and medium growing. Furthermore, compared to the blogosphere around the world, we found that the community of information technology/networking application fits in the blogging trend around the world, and the communities of picture article and cuisine/ travel are special developments of Taiwan blogosphere.起始頁-結束頁：235-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(2).034篇名：會員制網站成員黏著意圖之決定因素研究：以華人第一時尚美容網站Fashion Guide為例並列篇名：Determinants of Membership Websites' Stickiness Intentions: An Empirical Study of Fashion Guide Website作者：池文海(Wen-Hai Chih);許立群(Li-Chun Hsu)關鍵字：知覺網站品質;投資模型;承諾－信任理論;黏著意圖;知覺習慣;Perceived Website quality;investment model;commitment-trust theory;CTT;stickiness intentions;perceived habits期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：美妝網站的興起，已成為人們獲得所需保養品資訊的不可或缺工具。本研究從長期觀點，採用承諾－信任理論的關係行銷理論典範進行理論的發展，探討哪些因子是業者經營會員制網站成功的決定因素，本研究主張可將其決定因子劃分為以系統觀點的知覺網站品質及個人觀點的投資模型兩大觀點。研究對象為持續使用Fashion Guide網站至少一年以上的會員，共計409位有效樣本。本研究採用結構方程模式進行模式檢驗，其模式配適度佳。結果發現，除了知覺網站品質、替代品品質及投資規模皆會影響使用者的信任與情感性承諾及計算性承諾之外；在間接效果部分，知覺網站品質會透過信任與計算性承諾間接影響使用者的黏著意圖，而替代品品質與投資規模亦會透過計算性承諾間接影響使用者的黏著意圖。而外在因素的知覺習慣除了會直接影響使用者的黏著意圖之外，在知覺習慣上，使用者的信任對使用者的黏著意圖影響亦具有顯著正向調節效果。最後，提出結論與實務管理上意涵。英文摘要：The rise of beauty Websites has become an indispensable tool for people to obtain information of skin care products. A research model of maintaining a successful membership beauty website was developed based on the commitment-trust theory (CTT) of the relationship marketing paradigm. This study proposes two determinants, including the perceived site quality of Website interfaces (system-based) and investment models (person-based). The research sample consists of 409 members who had used Fashion Guide Website for more than a year. This research adopts Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) to test the proposed model and the structural model shows a good fit. The results indicated that perceived Website quality, quality of alternatives and investment size directly influenced the user's trust, affective commitment and calculative commitment, respectively. In the indirect effects, perceived Website quality appeared to indirectly influence stickiness intentions via trust and calculative commitment. Quality of alternatives and investment size appeared to indirectly influence stickiness intentions via calculative commitment. In addition, perceived habits directly influenced stickiness intentions and also moderated the effect of trust on stickiness intentions. This study also provides conclusions and practical implications to marketers.起始頁-結束頁：265-294資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(2).045篇名：網路品牌社群認同與投入對消費者行為之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Online Brand Community Identification and Engagement on Consumer Behaviors作者：蔡明達(Hector Ming-Ta Tsai);劉宇傑(Yu-Chieh Liu)關鍵字：網路品牌社群;品牌社群認同;社群投入;使用經驗;再購意願;Online brand community;community identification;community engagement;product experience;repurchase intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：網路品牌社群已成為維繫品牌與顧客對話，促進消費者間的品牌族群意識之重要互動平台。本研究以網路品牌社群之虛擬環境與顧客實體產品使用經驗兩種層面，來探討消費者在虛擬環境中的品牌社群認同和投入，如何影響其實體消費經驗、滿意度與產品再購意願。本研究整合虛擬社群與消費者行為理論，以實證資料分析支持消費者之品牌社群認同正向影響其品牌社群投入，同時也提昇消費者產品使用經驗。消費者品牌社群之投入程度，增加產品使用經驗與滿意度，並且影響其再購意願。而產品使用經驗會增加顧客滿意度，進而影響社群成員再購產品的意願。最後，本研究提出結論與管理意涵，以作為業者及品牌社群管理者未來經營方向及策略之參考。英文摘要：Online brand community has become the important interactive platform for dialogue between brand and customers, and promoting consumers' shared brand consciousness and identity. This research explores consumer behavior from the perspectives of virtual and physical experiences to examine the influence of brand community identification and engagement on consumer's product satisfaction and repurchase intentions. Underpinning on theories of virtual community and consumer behavior, the empirical data supports that brand community identification has a positive effect on brand community engagement, and also enhances the consumer product experience. Consumer brand community engagement increases product experience and satisfaction, and then escalates repurchase intention. Product experiences also enhance customer satisfaction and repurchase intention of the brand. Finally, implications and suggestions for marketing and future research opportunities are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：295-317資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(2).056篇名：Relationship Marketing's Impact on Relationship Quality and E-Loyalty並列篇名：關係行銷對關係品質及網路忠誠度的影響作者：林南宏(Nan-Hong Lin);鍾怡君(I-Chun Chung)關鍵字：關係行銷;關係品質;網路忠誠度;relationship marketing;relationship quality;e-loyalty期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究提出在虛擬環境中與顧客建立長期關係的方法，包括提供關係結合方式，關係品質，和網路忠誠度之間的關係，同時也決定在不同的產品類型下那種關係結合的方式會導至較高的關係品質。研究結果顯示，所有三種關係結合方式不管是在那一種產品類型下對於關係品質都有正向影響。財務性結合方式對於關係品質及網路忠誠度的影響，在搜尋型產品中會比在經驗型和信任型產品影響來得大；社會性結合對於關係品質的影響，在經驗型和信任型產品中會比在搜尋型產品影響要大；結構性結合對關係品質的影響裡，在信任型產品裡的影響，會比在經驗型和信任型產品中的影響來得大。此外，若商家能與顧客擁有較好的關係品質，將會導致較高的網路忠誠度。英文摘要：This study suggests the way to build long-term relationships with customers in a virtual environment, including providing the relationship among relational bonds, relationship quality, and e-loyalty, while determining which bonding strategies lead to higher relationship quality in different products. The results suggest that all three relational bonds have positive impacts on relationship quality across three categories while relationship quality has a positive impact on e-loyalty. Besides, financial bonds are more powerful in affecting relationship quality and e-loyalty for search goods/services than for experience and credence goods/services. Social bonds are more important for experience and credence goods/services than for search goods/services in the impact on relationship quality while structural bonds influence relationship quality more greatly for credence goods/services than for search and experience goods/services.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(1).017篇名：使用N組連結平均法的階層式自動分群並列篇名：A Novel Algorithm Using N-link Average for Hierarchical Automatic Clustering作者：李維平(Wei-Ping Lee);張加憲(Jia-Hsien Chang)關鍵字：階層式分群演算法;自動分群;單一連結法;鏈結效應;Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms;automatic clustering;Single-link;chaining effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究提出以N組連結平均法的階層式自動分群演算法，其具備任意形狀的群聚探索能力，並有效避免鏈結效應的影響而提升分群結果的正確率。與相關文獻比較，對於自動分析群聚數量能更加精確。本研究實驗採用人工合成的二維資料集，分別與分割式分群演算法（k-means and PAM）、階層式分群演算法（Single-link, Complete-link, Group average, and Centroid）與結合k-means 及階層式分群法之二階段分群演算法（HKC）比較，獲得對於任意形狀資料集有更正確的分群結果。另以CHAMELEON的資料集比較文獻在自動分群的正確性，獲得更具精確性的群數判斷。英文摘要：This study proposed a novel method of using N-link average for hierarchical automatic clustering, which has the ability to explore arbitrary shapes and can improve the accuracy of clustering to avoid chaining effect efficiently. Comparing with relevant literature, this method is more correct for the data of automatic clustering analysis. The experiment uses two-dimensional synthetic data to compare separately with Partitional Clustering Algorithm (k-means and PAM), Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms (Single-link, Complete-link, Group average, and Centroid) and a Two-Phase Clustering Algorithm based on K-means and Hierarchical Clustering with Single-Linkage Agglomerative Method and the results shows the new method we proposed can generate the clustering effect more correct for the data set of arbitrary shapes. Besides, comparison with the accuracy of automatic clustering in other relevant literature, adopting the data set of CHAMELEON can obtain more precise judgment of the number of clusters.起始頁-結束頁：35-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(1).048篇名：行動寬頻趨勢下之個人化行動廣告設計要素評選並列篇名：The Evaluation of the Design Factors of the Personalized Broadband Mobile Advertisement作者：陳芃婷(Peng-Ting Chen);謝欣蓓(Hsin-Pei Hsieh)關鍵字：個人化行動廣告;產品屬性;模糊德菲爾法;模糊多準則決策;Personalized Mobile Advertising;Product Characteristics;Fuzzy Delphi Method;Fuzzy MCDM期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：行動電信技術的發展，促使行動廣告成為重要的個人化廣告媒介。本研究探究個人化行動廣告設計要素的相對重要性、與適用的屬性產品。本研究回顧文獻與實務案例，確認個人化行動廣告設計要素的完整性。延續模糊德菲爾法（Fuzzy Delphi Method）所篩選出的重要行動廣告設計要素，進行模糊多準則決策（Fuzzy Multi-criteria decision making, Fuzzy MCDM），以確認要素的相對重要性，並評選出適用的產品屬性。本研究發現實體商品比服務更適合使用個人化行動廣告，其中，價格與促銷模式為最重要的設計要素。本研究結果可減少行動廣告相關業者之間的認知差異，並增加合作時之共識與合作之有效性，以增加資源使用之效率。英文摘要：The maturity of mobile broadband technology promotes the mobile advertising as an important personalized adverting media. This study explored the relative importance of the key factors of the personalized mobile advertisement and the suitability for product characteristics. Through literature review and practical case studies, this research identified important factors in designing a personalized mobile advertising message. This research employed the key personalized mobile advertising factors identified by fuzzy Delphi method to evaluate the relative importance of the factors and product characteristics. By using MCDM (Multi-Criteria Decision Making) research method, our research found that price and promoting are the most important factors for designing personalized mobile advertisement. Comparing with service, physical product is better suited for mobile advertising approach. This research aims to help players in the mobile advertisement value chain to enhance consensus in establishing a collaboration model.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(1).059篇名：您為什麼再傳播？視覺提示對再傳播意願之干擾並列篇名：Why Do You Re-transmit? Using Visual Cues as Moderator to Re-transmission Intention作者：呂文琴(Wen-Chin Lu);蔡瑤昇(Yau-Sheng Tsaia);曾俊凱(Chun-Kai Tseng);林聖傑(Sheng-Jie Lin)關鍵字：網路口碑資訊特性;視覺提示;再傳播意願;eWOM information characteristics;visual cues;re-transmission intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：網際網路的發展，讓網路口碑除採用文本基礎的文字傳播外，亦可因應圖像傳播時代的來臨、及真實網路環境中廣為流傳「有圖有真相」的現象，而將圖片加入，以更多元化之呈現。故本研究探究「網路口碑資訊特性」對消費者「再傳播意願」之影響；另將「視覺提示」作為干擾效果，並採2×2實驗設計法。結果顯示，網路口碑資訊特性高低，對消費者再傳播意願有顯著差異，而視覺提示在此具顯著正向干擾效果，特別是當資訊特性較低時，對消費者再傳播意願影響的干擾效果更為顯著。英文摘要：This study constructs the influence model of electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) information characteristics (vividness and interactive) on consumers' re-transmission intention (online forwarding and online chatting). Besides, this study is based on two factors experimental design and uses food products to explore the effects. We have 364 questionnaires through online questionnaire and total effective sample are 299 questionnaires. However, the results show different eWOM information characteristics will influence re-transmission intention and have the significant effect. In addition, visual cues have the moderating effect between eWOM information characteristics and re-transmission intention. Further, lower-richness eWOM information characteristics (less vividness and less interactive) on re-transmission are more significant affected by visual cues.起始頁-結束頁：89-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(1).0610篇名：Multi-category and Multi-standard Project Selection under Constrainedly Periodical Budget and Ambiguous Value-based Time Limit並列篇名：具預算限制及模糊價值期限下之多類別與多等級之專案選擇作者：何應欽(Ying-Chin Ho);徐文傑(Wen-Chieh Hsu);張正昌(Cheng-Chang Chang)關鍵字：新產品開發;專案選擇與排程;多重品質等級選擇;品牌印象;New product development;project selection and scheduling;multi-choice of quality standards;brand image期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文將新產品開發（new product development）的計畫區分為多種研發（R&D）類別。每種研發類別代表著一種可以再設計／升級（redesigning/upgrading）的特定產品。類別當中的每項專案執行品質（技術）都擁有多重的等級可供選擇。鑑此，本文提出一個多類別及其多等級的專案選擇性問題，該問題亦同時考量每期預算限制下的專案排程議題。本文的內容係由四個部分組成：（1）專案推移策略的選擇係專案排序時考量軟性因素做為專案排程的架構，（2）將消費者對產品的品牌印象引用為長期的平均獲利最大化之目標函數，（3）將週期性預算限制及模糊價值期限轉換為一可計算之模式，（4）轉換目標函數轉換為一適當格式，以使參數更容易被估計，進而使最終結果被解釋為具管理意涵的內容。英文摘要：This paper considers the differentiation of each new product development program as multiple categories. Each R&D category involves redesigning/upgrading a specific current product. Each project has multiple choices of quality/technology standards. This work propose an approach to treat the multi-category and multi-standard project selection problem in which the scheduling is also considered concurrently under constrained periodically budget. The proposed approach consists of following four components: (1) selecting a project advancement strategy to serve as a scheduling framework for taking into account soft factors in scheduling process, (2) employing the brand-image score of consumers as the objective function for ultimately increasing long-run average profitability, (3) formulating a computable model in which periodical budget constraints are involved and ambiguous value-based time limits are specified, and (4) transforming the objective function into an appropriate form in which the parameters can be estimated more easily and the objective value can be predicated as a clear managerial implication.起始頁-結束頁：111-136資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(1).0211篇名：混合複數類神經模糊與自動回歸差分平均移動方法之智慧型時間序列預測模型並列篇名：Intelligent Time Series Forecasting Model Combining Complex Neuro-Fuzzy Computing Model and ARIMA Method作者：李俊賢(Chun-Shien Li);江泰緯(Tai-Wei Chiang)關鍵字：複數模糊集合;複數模糊類神經系統;粒子群最佳化演算法;遞迴小平方估計法;時間序列預測;Complex fuzzy set (CFS);complex neuro-fuzzy system (CNFS);particle swarm optimization (PSO);recursive least square estimator (RLSE);time series forecasting期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：15卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究提出一個複數模糊類神經系統（CNFS），其結合複數模糊集合、類神經模糊系統以及差分自回歸移動平均模型（ARIMA），形成CNFS-ARIMA模型並應用於時間序列預測之研究。為了更新CNFS-ARIMA模型之參數，本研究提出一複合式進化式學習演算法，其結合粒子群最佳化演算法與遞迴最小平方估計之學習方法；其中，粒子群最佳化演算法用來調整系統的前鑑部參數，而遞迴最小平方估計用以更新系統之後鑑部參數。為了測試本研究所提出之方法的效能，使用兩個標竿時間序列資料集作為實驗範例。在實驗中，將比較並分析本研究所提出之CNFS（複數型）以及其傳統的NFS（實數型）之效能差異，並與文獻所提出之方法進行比較。由實驗結果可證實本研究所提出之系統方法可以獲得良好的效能。英文摘要：A complex neuro-fuzzy system, using complex fuzzy sets (CFSs), neuro-fuzzy theory, and autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model, is proposed to the problem of time series forecasting. The proposed computing system is denoted as CNFS-ARIMA. To update the free parameters of the proposed CNFS-ARIMA, a novel hybrid learning method is devised, combining both the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm and the recursive least squares estimator (RLSE) algorithm. The PSO is used to adjust the premise parameters of the proposed predictor, and the RLSE is used to update the consequent parameters. To test the proposed approach, two benchmark time series datasets are used. The experimental results by the proposed approach are compared with those by its neuro-fuzzy counterpart and by other approaches in literatures. The experimental results have illustrated the merits of CFSs in the proposed approach with excellent performance for the two examples of time series forecasting. Through performance comparison, the experimental results indicate that the proposed approach outperforms the compared approaches.起始頁-結束頁：137-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2013.15(1).0301篇名：編輯語作者：林月雲期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：I-I資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.4.CHI.I2篇名：引文：智慧資本研究在台灣之發展與演進作者：林月雲期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.4.CHI.13篇名：Are Underwriters and Investors Concerned Regarding Intellectual Capital? Evidence from IPOs in Taiwan並列篇名：承銷商與投資人關心智慧資本嗎？－台灣IPO公司之實證研究作者：陳薇如(Wei-Ju Chen);謝宜樺(Yi-Hua Hsieh);陳慧齡(Hui-Ling Chen)關鍵字：智慧資本;初次上市（櫃）公司;資訊不對稱;承銷價;新股折價;Intellectual Capital;Initial Public Offerings (IPOs);Information Asymmetry;Offer Price;Underpricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討智慧資本如何左右承銷商之訂價決策及新股折價之現象，本文根據Edvinsson和Malone（1997）所提出斯堪地亞（Skandia）智慧資本領航者的觀念架構，探究智慧資本對於初次上市（櫃）公司之承銷價及新股折價之影響。該智慧資本觀念架構甚為完整，其中涵括人力資本、顧客資本、流程資本與創新資本四個構面，本研究同時納入此四個構面，參酌過去文獻找出各個構面之衡量指標，並利用主成份分析法整合多項衡量代理變數，以補足過去文獻僅考量單一構面，或每一個構面僅考量單一指標之研究缺口；最後，利用複迴歸分析檢定智慧資本對初次上市（櫃）公司之承銷價與新股折價之影響。本研究實證結果指出，當公司所報導的資訊中顯示其所擁有的智慧資本愈多時，則投資人會賦予該公司較高的評價，故承銷商會訂定較高的承銷價格；另外，也會降低與投資人間的資訊不對稱程度，因此新股折價的幅度也會減少。英文摘要：This study discusses how intellectual capital (IC) influences the pricing decisions of underwriters, and the underpricing phenomenon. Based on the theoretical framework of Skandia's intellectual capital navigator, proposed by Edvinsson and Malone (1997), this research discusses the effect of IC on the offer price and underpricing of initial public offerings (IPOs). The IC concept suggested by Edvinsson and Malone (1997) is comprehensive and holistic, comprising four dimensions: human capital, customer capital, process capital, and innovation capital. Considering the four dimensions proposed, this research examines previous literature to obtain appropriate proxy variables to measure each dimension. For each dimension, we employ principal component analysis to integrate these proxy variables into a single evaluation index. This will compensate for the shortfalls of past research, which only considered a single dimension or a single variable in each dimension. Finally, we use multiple regression analysis to examine the effect of IC on the offer price and underpricing of IPOs. Results from empirical research indicate that the higher the intellectual capital reported by companies is, the better the investors evaluate the company, and subsequently, the higher the offer price set by underwriters is. In addition, a higher intellectual capital reduces information asymmetry between the company and its investors. Thus, the extent of underpricing will also subsequently decrease.起始頁-結束頁：7-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.4.CHI.74篇名：人力銀行數位資本、服務氣候與求職者滿意關聯性之研究並列篇名：The Relationships among Digital Capital, Service Climate, and Job Seekers' Satisfaction on Job Search Website Users作者：劉仲矩(Chung-Chu Liu)關鍵字：智慧資本;數位資本;人力網站;網際網路;電子商務;Intellectual Capital;Digital Capital;Job Search Website;Internet;E-Commerce期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：人力銀行是求職者找尋相關工作重要管道，對於其服務品質的要求所形成的服務氣候進而影響網站使用者滿意程度值得探討。人力網站蘊藏著豐富的內容，可以滿足求職者各式各樣的需求，透過網站的經營累積其競爭優勢，就稱之為數位資本。本研究的目的是要瞭解人力銀行數位資本與服務氣候及求職者滿意關聯性之研究。共有1,165位有效樣本，以立意抽樣來收集資料，並以階層迴歸來分析相關資料。研究結果發現人力銀行數位資本、服務氣候與求職者滿意有顯著的關聯，其中，服務氣候扮演著部分干擾與中介的角色，本研究根據上述結果提出關於理論與實務的建議。英文摘要：Job search websites are important channels for job-seekers to find their jobs. It is worth exploring the relationships among service quality, service climate and customer satisfactions. Job search websites consist of plenty of resources to satisfy job seekers' need. It is so called the digital capital that job search websites work through websites to improve their competitive advantages. The objective of this study is to understand the relationship among the digital capital, service climate and customer satisfaction of the job seekers. Also, find out the moderating and mediating effect caused by service climate variable. A total of 1,165 valid copies were returned by using purposive sampling and hierarchy regression was adopted for data analysis. The consequence surveys that the digital capital has positive relationship with service climate and customer satisfaction. Also, the service climate variable plays a role that moderates and mediates the partial relationship between digital capital and customer satisfaction exactly. According to the results, some suggestions are given to academics and practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：31-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.4.CHI.315篇名：智慧資本與動態能耐對研發團隊創新績效的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Intellectual Capital and Dynamic Capabilities on R&D Teams' Innovative Performance作者：林良陽(Liang-Yang Lin);吳思華(Se-Hwa Wu);項維欣(Wei-Hsin Hsiang);楊燕枝(Yann-Jy Yang)關鍵字：智慧資本;動態能耐;結合能耐;吸收能耐;彈性;Intellectual Capital;Dynamic Capabilities;Combinative Capabilities;Absorptive Capacity;Flexibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：在動態環境下，智慧資本觀點較無法適當解釋組織為何有能力回應快速變動的外在環境。本研究主張，研發團隊的動態能耐是「運用」智慧資本的關鍵因素，進而影響創新績效。另一方面，具信度與效度的動態能耐衡量量表尚待建構，以實證動態能耐觀點。基於上述研究缺口，本文理論貢獻包括：（1）結合智慧資本與動態能耐兩觀點進行研究，彌補智慧資本觀點之不足；（2）發展出動態能耐衡量題項；（3）實證智慧資本與動態能耐對創新績效之影響關係。本文分四階段研究：第一階段產生研究題項，並進行內容效度處理；第二與第三階段分別回收有效問卷111份與138份；第四階段則以工研院研發團隊為樣本，每個團隊至少由兩位以上員工填答，共拜訪140名主管與研究員，經兩兩配對後，有效團隊問卷共66組。13項假說有10項受到支持，研究結果驗證本研究的主要論點，亦即智慧資本對研發團隊創新績效的直接影響效果並不顯著；而研發團隊的動態能耐在智慧資本與創新績效之間扮演關鍵角色。英文摘要：This research applied the theory of intellectual capital (IC) to stable environments, but did not appropriately explain why an organization has the capability to respond to rapidly changing external environments. This research suggests that, the dynamic capabilities (DCs) of R&D teams are the key factors in utilizing IC and have further effect on innovative performance. On the other hand, tools with reliability and validity for measuring DCs remain insufficient and require construction. Based on the above research gap, this paper mainly contributed to: 1) research on the combination of IC and DCs to compensate the insufficiencies of the IC theory; 2) the development of DCs measurement items; 3) empirically demonstrate the significant effects of IC and DCs on innovative performance.There are four studies included in this research. The goal of Study 1 is to generate initial research items and address the issue of content validity. Next, 111 and 138 valid questionnaires are returned in Studies 2 and 3, respectively. Finally, Study 4 collects the samples from the R&D teams of ITRI (Industrial Technology Research Institute of Taiwan). The researchers visited each R&D team in ITRI with no less than two staff members. More than 140 supervisors and researchers were interviewed in this study. After making pairs, 66 valid teams completed the process of entire questionnaires. After hypotheses testing, ten of thirteen hypotheses are supported. The results verify the major viewpoints of this research, as follows; there is no significantly direct effect of IC on R&D team's innovative performance. However, the R&D team's DCs play key and significant roles between IC and innovative performance.起始頁-結束頁：51-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.4.CHI.516篇名：組織智慧資本的累積與互動：科技驅動型服務組織個案研究並列篇名：Accumulation and Interaction of Intellectual Capitals: A Case Study of Technology-driven Service Company作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou);許牧彥(Mu-Yen Hsu)關鍵字：智慧資本;知識創造;服務創新;Intellectual Capital;Knowledge Creation;Service Innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：現今智慧資本的相關文獻多著重於各類智慧資本的定義與評價，但是對於各類智慧資本的形成以及演變的動態過程卻較少提及。為了彌補這個研究缺口，本研究援引知識創造與組織學習等相關理論文獻，建構組織各類智慧資本動態演變的過程，並以台灣一家計程車服務組織－台灣大車隊為對象，進行個案研究。本研究採取質性研究法，說明科技驅動型服務組織如何利用科技將流動的資訊知識轉化成為組織內不同存量類型的智慧資本；並探討各類型智慧資本之間的動態演變。智慧資本基本上可以區分為存在於員工身上的人力資本以及屬於公司的組織資本兩大類；而組織資本可進一步區分為流程資本、創新資本及關係資本。本研究發現，計程車組織擷取眾多加盟司機的載客與服務行為資訊（司機的人力資本），利用衛星派遣規則設計出空中排班機制的資訊系統（流程資本），並結合司機的集體社群力量，催生出全台灣最大的品牌車隊與營運平台（關係資本），最後研發出全新的商業模式與新世代的派遣系統與硬體設備（創新資本）。本個案研究不僅提供了一個有關智慧資本動態演變的具體案例，也對知識創造、組織學習以及智慧資本等相關研究的融通提供一個新的研究脈絡。英文摘要：In knowledge economy, the market value and accounting value of companies may differ. To explain this difference, scholars propose the concept of intellectual capital. Therefore, most of the intellectual capital literatures focus on the definition and evaluation of various types of intellectual capitals, but only few has discussed the formation and dynamics of them. To fill this research gap, this study conceptually constructs the dynamic process of intellectual capitals by the theories from knowledge creation and organizational learning literatures, and provides an interpretive case study of the largest taxi franchise fleet in Taiwan. This qualitative case study will explain how this technology-driven service company transforms the flows of informational knowledge into stocks of intellectual capitals, and discuss the dynamic process of the interactions among various types of intellectual capitals. Basically, intellectual capital can be divided into human capital and organizational capital which is owned by the company and can be further divided into process capital, innovation capital, and relational capital. We find that the company will extract the behavioral information of the taxi drivers (human capital) by data mining, design the software (process capital) of on-air queuing system by the extracted information, promote the company brand (relational capital) and dispatching platform by the collective efforts of taxi drivers, and finally accumulate the capacity (innovation capital) to create an innovative dispatching system and new business model. Based on the insights from these findings, we introduce eight propositions for further examination. This case not only illustrates the dynamics of intellectual capitals, but also provides a context for the conversation among knowledge creation, organizational learning, and intellectual capital literatures.起始頁-結束頁：81-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.4.CHI.817篇名：編輯語作者：陳聖賢期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：I-II資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.3.CHI.I8篇名：第34號財務會計準則公報對盈餘與權益帳面價值的價質攸關性之影響並列篇名：The Effect of SFAS No.34 on the Value-relevance of Earnings and Equity Book Value作者：范宏書(Hung-Shu Fan);陳慶隆(Ching-Lung Chen)關鍵字：34號公報;金融商品公平價值;價值攸關性;盈餘;權益帳面價值;SFAS No.34;Fair Value of Financial Instrument;Value-Relevance;Earnings;Equity Book Value期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：我國在2006年開始適用財務會計準則第34號公報，此公報之實施是否影響投資者進行股票評價時，對盈餘與權益帳面價值變數之相對依賴程度產生改變為本文之焦點。因交易目的金融資產與金融負債之公平價值變動會隨機性影響當期盈餘，將導致當期盈餘所含暫時性成分增加，預期將降低當期盈餘對於未來盈餘之預測能力，導致盈餘資訊之價值攸關性下降。同時，此公報要求金融資產、金融負債需以公平價值來衡量，使得公司權益帳面價值更能反映真實價值，投資者在股票評價時將更依賴權益帳面價值資訊，預期權益帳面價值之價值攸關性上升。本文以我國上市（櫃）公司為研究對象進行實證測試，結果支持此項預期。本文進行若干敏感性測試證實結果具備相當穩定性。英文摘要：The fair value based recognition and measurement of financial instruments required by SFAS No.34 in Taiwan, which is effective for 2006 and latter annual reports, provides an even more interesting context for examining investor perceptions of the value-relevance changes in accounting numbers for listed firms regulated by this new standard. This study refers that the income statement impact of SFAS No.34, resulted by the fair value changes of held-for-trading financial assets and financial liabilities, would be taken as a noise impounded in the current earnings and, thus, impair earnings persistence. Alternatively, the same treatment of this standard, which is applied for financial instruments, should make equity book value approach its intrinsic value. The combination of these SFAS No.34 effects will make investors rely more (less) heavily on equity book value (earnings) in setting stock prices of firms regulated by this new standard. Based on such inference, this study predicts that SFAS No.34 adoption will make the value-relevance of equity book value (earnings) increases (decreases). The empirical results provide solid supports to this prediction. These results remain robust to the various sensitivity tests.起始頁-結束頁：1-23+117-122資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.3.CHI.19篇名：集合住宅管理維護模式及績效表現之分析：代理關係之探討並列篇名：Performance Evaluation of Condominium Management and Maintenance Modes: From a Perspective of Principal-Agent Relationship作者：朱芳妮(Fang-Ni Chu);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：集合住宅管理維護模式;代理理論;公司治理;資料包絡分析;Condominium Management Modes;Principal-Agent Theory;Corporate Governance;Data Envelopment Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：集合住宅社區管理委員會透過決策控制權及管理權不同程度的移轉方式，建構出不同代理模式，亦衍生代理問題。本文依據代理理論、公司治理機制及相關文獻，重新定義集合住宅社區的事務管理模式：所有權人控制模式、部分委託控制模式及完全委託控制模式，分析事務管理模式與管理維護效率間的關係，並進一步探討影響管理維護效率的因素。本文實證結果顯示，採所有權人控制模式的社區有較高的管理維護效率；事務管理模式、戶數規模、屋齡、住宅使用類型及社區意識凝聚度等因素對於效率有顯著影響。建議可借鏡非營利組織的獎勵機制，減輕代理問題的影響；採部分委託控制模式社區可致力於提升社區意識凝聚度，以利達成管理效率目標。英文摘要：Two types of principal-agent relationship existed in the process of condominium management in Taiwan: relationship between owners and management committees and relationship between management committees and management services providers. Condominium management and maintenance modes were redefined by the transfer degree of decision control right and management right according to the frameworks of principal-agent theory, corporate governance and related literature: owner control, partial third-party control, and fully third-party control modes. This paper mainly investigated which mode would result in good performances and what factors might account for the performance differences among these condominiums. Empirical results showed that communities using owner control mode had higher management and maintenance efficiency. Moreover, management modes, household number, building age, usage pattern and cohesiveness of sense of community were significant factors affecting management efficiency. It was suggested to refer to NGO's reward system to lessen agency problems and that communities using partial third-party control mode could make efforts in enhancing cohesiveness of sense of community in order to achieve efficient management.起始頁-結束頁：25-48+123-129資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.3.CHI.2510篇名：服務業人員之組織歸屬感、心流經驗與正向行為之關係：瘦身美容業實證研究並列篇名：The Relationships among Organizational Belonging, Flow Experience, and Positive Behaviors of Employees in a Beauty Salon Organization作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou);樊學良(Hsueh-Liang Fan)關鍵字：組織歸屬感;心流經驗;服務績效;Sense of Organizational Belonging;Flow Experience;Service Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在探討服務業人員工作中展現之正向心理狀態和工作表現的歷程。根據自我決定論，成員在組織中首先將會尋求社會需求的滿足（組織歸屬感），隨後藉由此種心理聯結為基礎，進一步激勵個人從工作中成就自我實現的需求（心流經驗），最後獲致較佳的行為表現。為驗證此一主張，本研究以服務業為實證田野，以一家瘦身美容組織內的120位美容師為研究對象，檢驗組織歸屬感與心流經驗對個人三類正向行為的直接效果（客觀的服務績效和業務績效與自我評估之創新行為），以及心流經驗之中介角色。研究發現，組織歸屬感與心流經驗是驅動員工展現正向行為的重要因素，且心流經驗扮演完全中介的角色（心流經驗與業務績效間的關係除外）。顯示成員對服務性組織的歸屬感受越高，越會對所從事的工作產生心流經驗，並因此展現較佳的服務績效與創新行為。本研究最後根據分析結果，提出學理與管理實務上的意涵和相關建議，供學術研究和經理人參考。英文摘要：This study attends to explore that how the positive behaviors of employees in a service organization setting can be triggered and also know its trajectory. By integrating the positive organizational behavior with self-determination theory, the current study hypothesizes that, in order to increase the work performance in the daily service job, service workers first need to search for internal social support and sense of belonging continually through building the employee-organizational relationships, which will consequently engage the employees’ flow experience in their service process by interacting with customers, and then this sense of flow experience will finally affect service workers’ job performances as well as innovative service behaviors. By collecting survey data from the largest beauty salon organization in Taiwan, we test those hypothesized relationships among organizational belonging, flow experience, and positive behaviors empirically. Results supports that there are some mediating effects existed between organizational belonging and two kinds of positive organizational behaviors, service performance and innovative behavior, but no mediating effect with sale performance. In the end, the paper concludes with theoretical and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：49-71+131-135資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.3.CHI.4911篇名：網站的合作機制如何增加品牌社群成員購買意圖─消費者習慣的干擾效果並列篇名：How Collaborations Increase the Purchase Intention for Brand Communities: The Moderating Effects of Consumer's Habits作者：葉淑瑜(Shu-Yu Yeh)關鍵字：合作機制;品牌社群成員間互動;品牌關係品質;品牌的購買意圖及消費者特性;Collaboration;Members' Social Interactions;Brand Relationship Quality;Purchase Intention and Customers' Habits期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以台灣品牌社群使用者為研究對象，首先根據驗證式因子分析，從網站設計角度，分析企業與社群成員的合作機制，可以將社群成員的活動納入社群的發展中。首先發展衡量合作機制的量表。合作機制共四個構念，包括提供網站客製化屬性、直接及間接（又稱互補）敏感網路外部性屬性、數位內容。其中數位內容，包括品牌社群內，隱私權及網路安全（網站使用法則）。客製化的屬性，有利成員發展自己的特質。而直接敏感網路外部性屬性，可以串連成員於網站平台上互動。互補敏感網路外部性屬性，有利企業鋪陳行銷活動於社群內。隱私權及網路安全，則有利成員的活動。本文，同時利用線性結構模式，驗證該合作機制所創造出品牌社群中成員間互動、品牌社群關係品質、該品牌購買意圖之間的關係。本研究也證明成員利用聊天室功能，和興趣相同的網友聊天，及分享各項活動訊息，即消費者播種（分享）傾向，對企業資訊及廣告有強化效果。英文摘要：For the concept of producer-user collaboration, our study first derives the scale of attributes for brand community which embeds the users' activities into its development. We use five steps to create and validate those scales in collaboration, and 16-item attributes are categorized into independent and unique subscales, as shown by its dynamic customized, digital content (encompassing security and safety), as well as interactive and complementary externality-sensitive attributes. Using those items to value the performance of brand community, the structural model employed 288 users to also show the performance by collaborative success, which ultimately entailed increased purchase intentions, due to greater social interaction and brand relationship quality. Through regression analysis, we show that the users' shared habits mostly strengthen the effect of attributes on purchase intentions. The implications present what key attributes the firm must design and release to embed the users' activities into the development of brand community.起始頁-結束頁：73-100+137-142資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.3.CHI.7312篇名：摩斯漢堡：QR Code─創新服務的祕密武器並列篇名：MOS Burger-Behind the QR Code作者：蕭瑞祥(Ruey-Shiang Shaw);傅大煜(Ta-Yu Fu);鄭哲斌(Che-Pin Cheng)關鍵字：資訊系統導入;組織變革;New Technology Adoption;QR Code;Organization Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：臉書粉絲團上出現的QR Code，乍看之下只是個行銷活動，隱含在背後的卻是引領摩斯漢堡走向組織變革的秘密武器。本個案以組織導入新興資訊系統教學重點，以摩斯漢堡在Facebook首次舉辦的QR Code行銷活動為引言，探討企業導入以QR Code為技術核心的「電子禮券智慧化系統計畫」。本個案研究以企業導入新興資訊科技（Laudon and Laudon 2009）的架構觀點，由企業發現面臨的經營問題，導入新興資訊科技的事件，觀察企業如何從組織的痛點出發，化解員工對於組織變革的抗拒，並針對導入新資訊系統相關之人、組織、科技、效益以及競爭優勢…等議題進行討論。本個案可延伸討論企業導入新興資訊系統相關的決策和規劃活動，例如：導入ERP（Enterpise Resource Planning）、CRM（Custumer Relationship Management）、KM（Knowledge Management）等在導入過程會牽涉到資訊科技與組織重整的活動。英文摘要：At first glance, the Quick Response codes (QR codes) that appear in Facebook fan groups look like simple marketing devices; however, a secret weapon hidden behind these codes actually helped lead to the organizational reform of MOS Burger. Using the implementation of emerging information systems by organizations as a teaching focus and the first QR code marketing activities by MOS Burger as an introduction, this case study discusses the system of ”Intelligence Electronic Coupon Program” implemented by enterprises using QR codes as the core technology. By adopting a conceptual framework for the implementation of emerging information systems (Laudon and Laudon 2009) and analyzing the systems implemented by enterprises facing operational problems, we explore how enterprises resolve employees' resistance to organizational changes from the point of view of organizational pain points. We further discuss the beneficial effects on people, organizations, and technology related to the implementation of new information systems, as well as their competitive advantages. This case study may also be utilized to explore decision-making and planning activities related to the implementation of new information systems in organizations, such as activities associated with information technology and organizational reconstruction during the implementation of ERP (enterprise resource planning), CRM (customer relationship management), and KM (knowledge management).起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.113篇名：服務主導之電子票券創新─盈科泛利並列篇名：An e-Ticketing Service Innovation based on the Service-Dominant Logic: The Case of Accuvally Inc.作者：戴基<U+5CEF>(Jeffrey C. F. Tai);王凱(Kai Wang);王嘉珍(Chia-Chen Wang);范錚強(Cheng-Kiang Farn)關鍵字：電子票券;服務導向邏輯;經營模式創新;e-Ticketing;QR code;Service-Dominant Logic;Business Model Innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：一次糟糕的網路購票經驗，促成了羅子文和一群好友創立盈科泛利股份有限公司。雖然盈科泛利打算運用智慧型手機提供即購即得的購票經驗，但卻在服務設計和經營模式創新上面臨許多挑戰與策略性抉擇。經過反覆腦力激盪，盈科泛利以服務導向邏輯的觀點重新思考電子票券如何為消費者和商家創造價值。藉由AccupassR活動通平台，盈科泛利扮演提供售票、金流、驗票、活動現場管理到資料整合等配套的服務供應商角色，並鎖定中小型展演活動主辦者為初期的目標客戶，以活動通驗票App滿足用戶查詢活動、買票、付款、取票到驗票等需求。儘管AccupassR服務獲得多項大獎的肯定，但如何在改善交易效率之外為消費者及商家共創價值，將是其永續經營不可迴避的挑戰。英文摘要：The foundation of Accuvally Inc. was inspired by a terrible online ticket purchasing experience of its CEO, Benjamin Lo. While Accuvally has focused on offering streamlined mobile ”on-the-go” ticket purchasing experiences, it encountered challenges in making strategic choices on service design and business model innovation. Through recurrent brainstorming sessions, Accuvally has set the goal to develop a service-dominant logic perspective that informs strategies for value creation for consumers as well as event organizers. Positioning itself as a service provider, Accuvally developed the AccupassR platform to provide e-ticketing services that have streamlined the whole process from ticket selling, payment, ticket validation, field management to data integration. Accuvally targeted small-to-medium art/culture/seminar event organizors as primary customers in its early stage. In addition, it developed the AccupassR App to allow quickly completing the tasks of event inquiry, ticket purchasing, payment, ticket delivery, and ticket validation. Although the innovation of AccupassR has won Accuvally a number of big awards, how to co-create value with consumers and event organizers, in addition to improving transaction efficiency, remains an unavoidable challenge for Accuvally to sustain and prosper in the long run.起始頁-結束頁：21-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.2114篇名：悠活兒童旅館之服務創新並列篇名：Service Innovation at the Yoho Kids Hotel作者：梁定澎(Ting-Peng Liang);盧懿娟(Debby Lu)關鍵字：服務創新;旅館經營;服務策略;服務設計;Service Innovation;Hotel management;Service Strategy;Service Design期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣的旅館業經營是高度競爭的，在觀光旅遊勝地墾丁的旅館競爭更加激烈。如何提升服務品質、凸顯旅館特色，是業者吸引旅客訂房的不二法門。2008年6月一家完全以兒童的角度出發，讓兒童發揮自主選擇渡假方式的兒童旅館，在墾丁誕生。經過四年多的營運，悠活兒童旅館已經成為集團穩定獲利的項目。本個案說明經營團隊為何決定做這樣的創新與改變，過程中克服哪些困難，新經營模式中引進那些創新的技術，以及如何滿足顧客的需求。在本個案中，曾董事長運用悠活位於墾丁的潮間帶以及靠近海生館的教育資源優勢，將原來遠離墾丁鬧區的區位劣勢轉化為優勢，搭配社會上少子化以及兒童在家中地位提升的趨勢，建構以兒童為中心的家庭度假構想，重新定位出結合教育與家庭休閒的兒童度假旅館。配合兒童中心的新策略定位，房間的34個主題以及搭配的服務與配套的設施，都經過仔細規劃設計，並透過RFID及觸控科技的運用，設計新的服務流程，為客戶建構一個全新的度假體驗。英文摘要：Hotel business is highly competitive in Taiwan, particularly in the resort area like Kenting National Park. Improving service quality and building unique features are major ways to attract customers. Yoho Kids Hotel, the first children-centered hotel, designed for children was launched in Kenting in June 2008. The hotel allows children to have high autonomy when they stay in there for vacation. After more than four years of operation, Yoho Kids Hotel has become a stable profit-earning business unit in the Yoho Group. This case shows how the innovative idea was created and why the hotel management team decided to make such an innovation, what difficulties they had experienced in the process, and the roles of information technologies in the new business model for meeting customer needs. In this case, president Tseng converted the location weakness due to distance from the main resort area of the Kenting National Park into its advantage associated with the nearby intertidal zone and the Aquarium. This advantage, along with the social trend of having fewer kids and the rising importance of kids in each family, has cultivated the idea of children-centered vacation model and re-position the hotel to combine education and family vacation. Based on this new strategic position, 34 different themes were developed for hotel rooms. All complementary services and facilities were carefully planned and designed. RFID and touch-screen technologies were used to support new service processes in order to provide a new vacation experience.起始頁-結束頁：41-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.4115篇名：你必須好特別─appWorks，之初創投並列篇名：You Must be Exceptional-appWorks作者：林芬慧(Fen-Hui Lin);蕭羽廷(Yu-Ting Hsiao)關鍵字：商業模式;網路創業;超級天使;育成中心;創業加速器;Business Model;Internet Entrepreneurship;Super Angel Investors;Incubators;Startup Accelerators期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本個案描述超級天使創投appWorks（之初創投）的創立過程，及育成新創事業的模式。林之晨與詹益鑑等合夥人，於2009 創立appWorks，培育消費性網路和行動科技領域的創業團隊。於2010年開始實施的育成模式包含：甄選團隊、六個月免費進駐接受育成輔導、以及最後的成果發表Demo Day。到2012年已經育成超過120個團隊，appWorks並從中投資了15個團隊。林之晨及合夥人皆長期投入網路，並有多次網路創業的實戰經驗；他們瞭解網路生態，秉持開放分享的原則，建立其獨特的創投育成模式。本個案藉由描述appWorks的經營歷程，提供以下兩個教學主題：（1）瞭解創業的過程，以及天使創投的育成模式。（2）以appWorks作為範例，學習商業模式的內容。英文摘要：This case makes use of the super angel investor ”appWorks” to demonstrate the startup process and the incubation model. Jamie Lin and IC Jan who have been entrepreneurs with wide experiences in the internet business founded appWorks in 2009 to help startup teams in the field of website or app development. The incubation model covered the following steps: team auditions and selection, a six-month free incubation period and the Demo day for the startup teams to demonstrate their business plans to the public as well as to the perspective investors. Up to 2012, of the 120 entrepreneurial teams that have completed the incubation stage, fifteen teams have been chosen to receive the seed fund investments from appWorks. This appWorks case is written for the two following teaching objectives: (1) for students to understand the startup process and the incubation model of angel investors. (2) by using appWorks as the exemplar discussion, the students can learn how to analyze the business model.起始頁-結束頁：63-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.6316篇名：東遠精技─以TCO的模式思考成本策略並列篇名：ATMA CHAMP ENT. CORP.-Cost Strategy of TCO Model作者：許建隆(Chien-Lung Hsu);吳佩玲(Pei-Ling Wu);劉家昌(Chia-Chang Liu)關鍵字：整體擁有成本;局部最佳化;全域最佳化;Total Cost of Ownership (TCO);Local Optimization;Global Optimization期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：東遠精技成立於1979年，是台灣最大專業網印機廠商，產品領域遍及七大產業。生產方式大部分師法日本，以乾淨、模組化、標準化為準則，堅持使高品質且有品牌的關鍵零組件，如日本的控制元件、材料，以及德國的馬達、鋼珠、導螺桿及線軌等標準規格的原料。雖然這些標準材料成本較高但因整體品質及精準度高，故仍為東遠主要使用的材料。2011年3月，東遠舉行了一場「降低成本之創意競賽」。開發部工程師小吳在設計產品時受到公司的標準化及模組化的限制，發現了一個可大幅降低成本並增進開發部門設計彈性的好主意。於是開始與各部門同事進行訪談，打算找出「究竟公司要不要置換標準化線材為彈性線材？」的決策問題答案。藉由此個案，以瞭解到局部最佳化與全域最佳化的概念，並如何利用其概念計算整體擁有成本。英文摘要：ATMA CHAMP ENT. CORP., founded in 1979, is the largest specialized screen-printing manufacturer in Taiwan with a product line spanning across seven industries. Most of the ATMA manufacturing techniques are from Japan, emphasizing cleanliness, modularity, and standardization in their plants. ATMA used high-quality and well-known brands to source its key components. These included control components and materials from Japan and German-made components such as motors, steel balls, lead screws, and line rails. Although their pieces cost more than the alternatives, ATMA continued to use these suppliers for their quality and accuracy. ATMA held a ”creative competition to reduce costs” in March 2011. Mr. Wu, a development engineer, encountered company bureaucracy and modularity when he was part of the product design team. He found a solution that would significantly lower costs and increase flexibility in the development department. Mr. Wu then began interviewing colleagues in various departments. Intent to present this proposal in the competition in June, Mr. Wu reported to the department managers and prepared for the questions he might be asked for data collection and answers. This paper aims to understand the concepts of local and global optimization by reviewing this case, applying the concepts to calculate the total cost of ownership.起始頁-結束頁：81-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.8117篇名：美食達人（85度C）─打造品牌行銷大陸並列篇名：Gourmet Master (85°C)-Branding in China作者：蔡瑤昇(Yau-Sheng Tsai);吳興蘭(Hsin-Lan Wu);邱志宏(Chi-Hung Chiu)關鍵字：服務業行銷;品牌價值;品牌管理;營業模式;品牌定位;Service Marketing;Brand Equity;Brand Management;Business Model;Brand Positioning期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：「品牌」是企業，是服務業行銷的成功關鍵因素。台灣20大國際品牌報告，85度C品牌價值，2012年達2.72億美元，排名台灣第10大國際品牌，主要歸因其品牌在中國大陸的快速成長。本個案的宗旨係探討85度C如何打造品牌行銷大陸，以維繫企業競爭優勢。2007年，吳政學董事長推動85度C品牌行銷大陸，本個案描述吳董事長在打造品牌重要關鍵時刻，自品牌登陸準備與星巴克相庭抗衡、快速成長的品牌危機、導入全面品牌管理系統至建立合乎品牌策略的直營連鎖營業模式等不同階段的品牌因應策略。另依循品牌理論包括品牌定位模型、品牌共鳴模型及品牌價值鏈模型探討分析85度C品牌在中國大陸市場勝出的關鍵因素。期使此田野個案能對企業品牌行銷中國大陸有所貢獻、激勵並了解因應採取合宜的品牌策略。英文摘要：The ”brand” is the key to a successful enterprise, especially in the food and beverage (F&B) services industry. The ”Top 20 Taiwan International Brands Report” indicated the Gourmet Master (85°C) is ranked 10th among Taiwan’s top 20 international brands, with a brand value of $272 million in 2012. This brand achievement of 85°C is credited to its high-level growth in the mainland China market. This case study explores the key issues of Gourmet Master build its brand and increase its brand competitiveness in China. In 2007, Wu Cheng-hsueh, President of 85°C, started a business in mainland China. Unfamiliar with the pitfalls of this market, his company encountered a series of brand crises. Mr. Wu then implemented the Total Brand Management (TBM) model and succeeded in establishing the 85°C brand in China. By following the branding theory, we will examine the development of the 85°C brand and try to capture its core values and the factors that contributed to its branding success in China. This study also will help students understand the new concepts of brand management models and its relationship with brand positioning, brand resonance and brand value chain. It is our sincerest hope that this study will inspire business across the Taiwan Strait to adopt better business branding strategies.起始頁-結束頁：103-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.10318篇名：清河國際股份有限公司─從貿易商轉型為專業製造代工廠之歷程並列篇名：HealthStream Co., Ltd.-Transforming from Trading Company to Original Design Manufacturer作者：李雨師(Yu-Shih Lee);陳家仁(Chia-Jen Chen);吳文傑(Wen-Chieh Wu);莊景祐(Jing-You Zhuang)關鍵字：策略變革;供應鏈協作;關係結構;供應鏈整合;Strategic Revolution;Supply Chain Collaboration;Relational Structure;Supply Chain Integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：清河國際股份有限公司（以下簡稱清河）藉由二次策略變革，從買賣轉型為設計，再從設計跨足製造，在競爭激烈的健身器材產業裡，成功地從貿易商轉型為專業製造代工廠。清河在成為專業製造代工廠後，成功地整合上、下游供應鏈，於2011年進一步開發自有產品。本個案著重於清河成功轉型的過程，分別從下列二個面向探討之。（1）清河歷經二次策略變革的原因、可能的因應做法與理由。（2）清河進行供應鏈整合以強化其經營模式與競爭地位之細緻做法，包括是否將顧客轉介的供應商納入自有供應鏈體系、是否說服顧客採用自行培養之供應商產品、如何強化與代理商的關係，以進入高階產品市場。藉由本個案，學生可瞭解健身器材產業上、中、下游廠商所扮演的角色，以及上、中、下游廠商間的關係，使其能夠體會製造商進行策略變革時，其考量因素和實際做法，並且從製造商角度思考供應鏈協作促成的原因，以及在關係結構下供應鏈整合的成功因素。英文摘要：HealthStream Co., Ltd. transformed from trading company to original design manufacturer through twice strategic revolution. HealthStream successfully integrated its supply chain, and manufactured private products in 2011. This case highiughts the transformation process of HealthStream through the following dimensions. (1)The possible reasons and actions of strategic revolution. (2)The means to integrate supply chain to strengthen competitive position, including whether HealthStream accepts the supplier that its customer refers, whether HealthStream convinces its customer to accept the supplier that HealthStream collaborates with for a long time, and how to reinforce the relationship between HealthStream and its agent. Through the case, students will realize the role each firm plays in the industry, and the relationship between each firm that locates in upstream, middle stream and downstream. Further, students will deliberate the reasons and actions of strategic revolution, the factors to facilitate supply chain collaboration, and successful factors of supply chain integration under relational structure.起始頁-結束頁：127-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.12719篇名：鬍鬚張─當「傳統」遇到「潮牌」並列篇名：Formosa Chang-An Innovative Brand Revitalization作者：葉奇峰(Chi-Feng Yeh);張四薰(Sylcien Sze-Hsun Chang)關鍵字：跨界聯名;禁忌;潮牌;協同行銷;價值導向;Crossover;Taboo;Trendy Brand;Collaborative Marketing;Value Orientation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著時代變遷，消費習慣轉變，整個企業經營的典範已由50年前的「產品導向」逐漸轉成「顧客導向」再轉成當今的「價值導向」。餐飲業亦不例外，為滿足不同世代對「吃」的需求，潮流趨勢也不斷演化中。鬍鬚張的老板張董檢視不同世代的消費習慣，發現年輕族群外食比率相對偏高，但鬍鬚張卻有客群老化，年輕人來店消費意願不高的窘境，故擬調整營運模式。在面對創意與創新興起的消費市場中，藉由「潮牌」設計師將鬍鬚張logo翻玩設計的「潮牌」專案，用以開發年輕族群市場。在親友與員工反對聲浪中，張董是否支持設計師採用年輕人喜歡，但卻是挑戰傳統民間禁忌的「骷髏頭」圖案設計，是一項艱難的決策挑戰。鬍鬚張利用「潮牌」的創新策略，與合作夥伴的「跨界聯名」方案，推出多款聯名潮T及限量周邊商品，並舉辦各項活動，在各種社交媒體形成協同行銷，以傳達「老翻新」的文化傳承感，其改變形象與表象，於價值主張上展現功能、情感與精神等不同層次之訴求。n英文摘要：With the changes of consumption habits over time, the operational paradigm of the industry have gradually transformed from ”customer-orientated” to ”values- -driven” - the catering industry is no exception. In order to satisfy the catering needs of customers at different generations, the trend of changes is continuously evolving. Mr. Chang, the president of Formosa Chang, inspected the consumption habits across different generations and found that the percentage of young people eating outside was relatively high. However, Formosa Chang was facing the plight of aging consumers plus the low consumption willingness of young people so Formosa Chang changed its business model. In the consumption market that is full of innovation and originality, the designer of ”Trendy Brand” created a special logo for Formosa Chang in order to develop the market for young people. With the opposition of relatives and employees, President Chang stood up for the designer who was attempting to attract young people, even though the new logo design challenged the traditional taboo of skeleton and skull. Formosa Chang made use of the innovation strategy of ”Trendy Brand” and the strategy of crossover to promote several associated trendy T-shirts and derivative products. In addition, Formosa Chang held activities of various kinds to form a collaborative marketing strategy that expressed the cultural heritage of ”transforming the old to the new”, changing its impression and image and embodying its functional and emotional appeal.起始頁-結束頁：147-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.2.CHI.14720篇名：編輯語作者：陳聖賢期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：I-II資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.1.CHI.I01篇名：How Personality and Environmental Concern Affect Consumer Values, Attitudes, and Behavior Formation toward Green Products: An Application of the 3M Hierarchical Model並列篇名：人格特質與環保意識對消費者綠色產品之價值、態度及行為形成之研究：3M階層模式之應用作者：吳萬益(Wann-Yih Wu);盧筱筠(Hsiao-Yun Lu);余佩穎(Pei-Ying Yu);侯鳳雄(Feng-Hsiung Hou)關鍵字：3M模式;環保意識;知覺價值;綠色購買態度;綠色購買意願;3M Model;Environmental Concern;Perceived Value;Green Purchase Attitude;Green Purchase Intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：在科技的進步及商業化下，天然資源逐漸殆盡，而自然環境也遭受惡化。本研究的主要目的在探討消費者購買綠色商品的原因和動機。本研究引申Mowen學者在2000年提出的3M模式，試圖整合購買綠色商品的一般性決定因素，以發展消費者對綠色商品的購買意願的階層模型。本研究結果顯示，消費者五大人格特質中的神經質對於環保意識有反向的影響，而勤勉正直性與經驗開放性皆對環保意識有正向關係。環保意識會直接影響消費者對綠色產品知覺價值。而購買綠色產品態度更為消費者綠色產品知覺價值及購買意願的重要中介。英文摘要：This study attempts to find out the reasons and motivations that underlie consumer purchase intentions toward green products. This study extends the concept of Mowen's (2000) Meta- theoretic Model of Motivation (aka, the 3M Model) to develop a hierarchical model of green purchase intention. The results indicate that of the Big Five personality traits, emotional instability has a negative relationship with environmental concern, whereas conscientiousness and openness to experience both positively influence it. Furthermore, environmental concern has a significantly positive relationship with perceived values toward green purchases. Green purchase attitude also serves as a critical mediator in the relationship between perceived value and green purchase intention.起始頁-結束頁：1-15+101-105資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.1.CHI.12篇名：在地運動贊助者知覺的影響因素與效益分析－以台灣職棒台南區比賽為例並列篇名：Impacting Factors and the Effects of Grassroots Sport Sponsor Awareness-A Case of Taiwan Professional Baseball Game in Tainan Area作者：葉桂珍(Quey-Jen Yeh)關鍵字：在地運動;贊助者知覺;企業形象聯想;品牌形象聯想;階層式效果;運動涉入;Grassroots Sport;Sponsor Awareness;Corporate Image Associate;Brand Image Associate;Hierarchy of Effect;Sport Involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣職棒是典型的在地運動，贊助效益為何？贊助者知覺是贊助曝光率的結果，本文主要目的，在以台南區職棒比賽為例，探討贊助者知覺的影響因素、並檢驗在地運動贊助的後續效益。由於在地運動觀眾通常有運動涉入行為，所檢驗的影響因素包括觀眾在壘棒運動上的涉入、以及台灣職棒贊助者的產業特性與廣告版位。效益模式主要是以形象移轉與階層式效果理論，建構「贊助者知覺→企業形象聯想→品牌形象聯想→購買意願」路徑，以驗證觀眾對贊助企業的活力與關懷形象、以及後續品牌形象與購買意願上的聯想。在資料分析上，本研究以現場觀眾踏出球場後，對贊助者的回想與辨識、企業與品牌形象聯想、及產品購買意願，作為變數衡量基礎；贊助者產業與廣告部位資料，則另外搜集。主要發現包括：企業形象聯想不同於品牌形象聯想；有較高贊助者知覺的觀眾，亦同時對贊助企業有較高的活力與關懷形象聯想、以及品牌上的獨特與偏好性聯想，且對贊助企業產品有較高的購買意願。贊助企業因此應審視台灣職棒形象與其產業之一致性，並應以觀眾對贊助者的辨認度，而不僅是曝光率，檢驗贊助效益。英文摘要：Taiwan Professional Baseball Game is a typical grassroots sport, and sponsor awareness is resulted by sponsorship exposure. Using games in Tainan area as an example, this paper attempts to analyze factors that influence audience's sponsor awareness and it subsequent effects. Because audiences of grassroots sports are usually highly sport involved, impacting factors comprise audience's sport involvement and sponsor's industrial sector and exposure spots. The effect model, purported to associate with sponsor's and brand images and purchase intention, is structured based on image transfer and Hierarchy of Effect theories by a path model: sponsor awareness → corporate image association → brand image association →purchase intention. Data were collected from randomly chosen audiences. Upon exiting the event venue, chosen subjects were asked to participate by completing a self-administered questionnaire, including recall and recognition of sponsors and questions of image associates and purchase intention. Data of sponsor exposure and industry were gathered separately. The main findings include: corporate image associate is different from brand image associate; through image associate, audiences of high sponsor awareness also showed high activeness and caring image, and high brand uniqueness and favor image, associated with the sponsors and purchase intention. Sponsors therefore should consider business sector-sport event fitness and assess sponsorship effect by sponsor awareness from target audience, rather than simply by exposure rate.起始頁-結束頁：17-37+107-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.1.CHI.173篇名：研發支出與總經理薪酬－公司控制與成長機會對抑止管理性投機之影響並列篇名：R&D Expenditure and CEO Compensation: The Impact of Corporate Control and Growth Opportunity on Managerial Opportunism作者：王曉雯(Hsiao-Wen Wang);陳欣妤(Hsin-Yu Chen);吳佩珊(Pei-San Wu)關鍵字：總經理薪酬;公司控制;成長機會;管理性投機;CEO Compensation;Corporate Control;Growth Opportunity;Managerial Opportunism期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要研究目的在分析公司控制型態與成長機會對於董事會抑止管理性投機之影響效果。本文發現，當總經理面臨退休以及公司面臨小額虧損或小幅度盈餘衰退時，非家族企業的研發支出變動與總經理薪酬變動間呈現正向顯著關聯性。此實證結果建議，相較於家族企業，非家族企業由於面臨較為嚴重的權益代理問題（導因於所有權與管理權分離體制），董事會因此會調整總經理薪酬誘因以抑止總經理投機性削減研發支出。此外，高成長機會之非家族企業由於存在較為嚴重的權益代理問題，董事會將會對管理者投機行為較為敏感，並採取行動因應。相較於家族企業（無論具有高或低成長機會）及低成長機會非家族企業，本文發現，高成長機會之非家族企業董事會在面臨總經理期限或/和短視問題時，將會設計總經理薪酬計畫以削弱管理性投機行為。英文摘要：This study aims to explore whether the board of directors seeks to prevent CEO opportunistic reductions in R&D investments. How corporate control (family firms or non-family firms) and growth opportunity affect the linkage of R&D spending and CEO compensation is the focus of this study. In non-family firms, we find there is a positive significant relationship between changes in R&D expenditures and changes in CEO compensation when CEOs approach retirement, or/and when firms face a small earnings decline or a small loss. Specifically, compared to family-firms, the board of directors of non-family firms tend to significantly adjust the CEO compensation schemes to deter managerial opportunism. With regards to the effect of growth opportunity, this study finds that the board of non-family firms facing higher growth opportunity has stronger incentives to adjust CEO compensation to prevent the CEO from opportunistically reducing R&D expenditures, as compared with family-firms as well as non-family firms facing lower growth opportunity.起始頁-結束頁：39-62+113-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.1.CHI.394篇名：製藥產業之動態要素及能耐互動概念化架構：建構式紮根理論的應用並列篇名：Interactive Conceptual Framework of Dynamic Elements and Capabilities in Pharmaceutical Industries: The Application of Constructing Grounded Theory作者：王弈升(Yi-Sheng Wang);徐村和(Tsuen-Ho Hsu)關鍵字：動態要素;能耐;建構式紮根理論;Dynamic Elements;Capabilities;Constructing Grounded Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：32卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去對製藥產業的研究，鮮少探索產業之間的隱性知識與動態能耐，由於製藥產業是一個較為封閉式的市場，與其他一般產業特性有很大的差異，其資源與能耐屬於該企業內部高度機密，一般都不對外公開，加上製藥創新有其技術複雜性俱備許多不為人知的隱性知識。因此本文從製藥產業中藥廠內部的資源觀點出發，進而聯結至產業環境的動態能耐脈絡情境的探索。為探索製藥產業之動態能耐的內涵，以亞太前十大製藥企業中的五家製藥廠為研究對象，運用建構式紮根理論，進行四個階段的文本分析及譯碼分析；最後建構出理論架構，並歸納出概念和理論性命題。本研究的貢獻為提出“製藥產業之動態要素及能耐互動概念化架構”，揭露製藥產業之能耐的構成因素及動態要素互動的動態關係，提供產業研究與經理人在實務運作的良好方向。英文摘要：In the past literature to pharmaceutical industry research, very few pharmaceutical industries to explore the tacit knowledge and dynamic capabilities, few studies have explored among the industry tacit knowledge and dynamic capabilities. because the pharmaceutical industry is a enclosed market, has the very big difference with in other general industry's characteristic, Their resources and capabilities are highly confidential in-house is not open to the public, coupled with a technical complexity of pharmaceutical R&D characteristics, ready tacit knowledge of many little-known. Therefore, this paper from the view of internal resource in pharmaceutical and then link to the industrial environment of dynamic capabilities to explore situational and context. In order to characterize the association of pharmaceutical industry resource and dynamic capabilities, take five pharmaceutical firms as object of study in Asia Pacific top ten pharmaceutical firms. Uses constructing grounded theory to carry on four stage the text analyses and the coding analysis. Finally the construction new theoretical framework and induces the concept and the theoretical proposition. This paper contribution to propose ”interactive conceptual framework of dynamic elements and capabilities in pharmaceutical industries”, and component factors of capabilities and dynamic elements interaction to exposition of pharmaceutical industry dynamic relation, provides the researcher and industrial manager in the operation good direction.起始頁-結束頁：63-83+117-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2013.32.1.CHI.6301篇名：Repaying a Nuo Vow in Western Hunan: A Rite of Trans-Hybridity?並列篇名：湘西還儺願儀式及其跨混性作者：康豹(Paul R. Katz)關鍵字：還儺願;湘西;苗族;跨混性;神職人員;Repaying a Nuo Vow;Western Hunan;Miao;trans-hybridity;ritual specialists期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文根據湘西苗人歷史研究與田野調查，試圖解釋「還儺願」這個漢族儀式及戲劇表演的意義。有關「還儺願」的主要文化意涵，可以從三個方面來探討：1）個案研究－在花垣縣葫蘆村於2011年11月15-16日所舉行的儀式活動；2）其他學者所收集到的有關湘西還儺願儀式的資料，其中包括了苗與土家聚落之案例；3）中國西南地區類似儀式展演的記載。文章的整體目標是檢視漢族及非漢族宗教傳統的歷史發展及連續性互動，也就是本文所謂之「跨混性」（trans-hybridity）。筆者試圖區分根深蒂固的湘西苗人在地儀式，和引進且吸收自漢族神職人員的道教儀式元素。以當地歷史發展來說，在漢族較早移入、其人口密度較高的地區，還儺願儀式保留了許多原有的漢人宗教文化特徵，特別是眾多的中文科儀本。相較之下，漢族移民較晚、其人口密度較低的地區（如花垣縣），還儺願儀式則明顯混合了苗族和漢族的多元宗教傳統。許願及還願儀式非常適合研究跨文化互動，因為向神衹許願與還願在世界各宗教文化中是一種基本元素。中國也不例外，尤其償還與報應是中國宗教文化中的一組核心。從編年式研究來看，可以發現「願」、「誓」、「盟」等詞彙的紀錄長遠而複雜。向神衹許願及還願的儀式涵蓋整個中國宗教歷史的光譜，從古老的社神（土地神）春祈秋報，到整合入中國佛教與道教的發展；此類儀式依舊活躍於現今的華人地區，包括臺灣。許願及還願儀式也長久廣存於湘西苗族文化中，例如當地祖先祭拜儀式及著名的椎牛活動。本文的重點在於思考還儺願儀式如何在過去及當代形成了苗人與漢人許願、還願儀式互動的機制。英文摘要：This paper explores the significance of a set of Han Chinese rituals and dramas known as ”Repaying a Nuo Vow” (Huan Nuoyuan 還儺願), based on the study of their performance among the Miao (苗) of Western Hunan (Xiangxi 湘西). I examine the cultural significance of the Repaying a Nuo Vow rituals from three perspectives: 1) a case study of one such rites held at Hulu (葫蘆) Village in Huayuan (花垣) County on November 15-16, 2011; 2) additional data that other scholars have collected about these rites throughout Western Hunan, including among both Miao and Tujia 土家 communities; 3) historical and ethnographic information on such rituals performed in other parts of Southwest China. The overall goal of this paper is to examine the development of and recurring interaction between Han Chinese and non-Han ritual traditions, as opposed to focusing exclusively on one community and its religious life. In doing so, I have attempted to to distinguish between deep-rooted indigenous rites and the absorption of Daoist ritual elements introduced to Western Hunan by Han Chinese ritual specialists. This paper will show that in areas settled earlier and in great density by Han migrants, the rituals and dramas performed during Repaying a Nuo Vow retained many of their original features, including numerous liturgical texts written in Chinese that survive to the present day. In areas settled later and less extensively (including Huayuan), Repaying a Nuo Vow blended features of both Miao and Han religious traditions. Vow-making and vow-repaying rituals are particularly well-suited for the study of cross-cultural interaction. This is because repaying a vow made to the gods constitutes a basic element in many religious cultures worldwide, including in China, with a central theme of Chinese religious life being repayment or retribution. If one relies on a chronological approach based on existing sources, one can uncover a long and complex record of Chinese terms for rituals referred as ”vows” (or ”oaths”) (including ”yuan” 願, ”shi” 誓, ”meng” 盟, etc.). Rituals featuring the making and then repaying of vows to the gods encompass the entire spectrum of Chinese religious history, dating back to the ancient ”spring prayer and autumn repayment” (”chunqi qiubao” 春祈秋報) rites for the god of the soil. They have played integral roles in the development of Chinese Buddhism and Daoism, and continue to flourish among Chinese communities today, including in Taiwan. Vow-making and vow-repaying rituals have long been widespread among the Western Hunan Miao as well, where they include ancestor worship rites and the renowned oxen sacrifice. In the case of the Repaying a Nuo Vow rituals and dramas, the data reveal that their development was characterized not only by the deliberate transmission of doctrine and liturgy, but also by their gradual absorption of indigenous beliefs and practices. To do justice to these complex forms of cultural reverberation and their impact on Repaying a Nuo Vow, I have chosen to combine the two key mechanisms at work into a shorthand, ”transhybridity,” which will be used throughout the paper.起始頁-結束頁：1-88資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：變動中的親屬倫理－二十世紀晚期中國山居載瓦人家屋人觀的案例並列篇名：Changing Kinship Ethics for Personhood and Relatedness in a "House Society": The Hill-Dwelling Zaiwa of Late Twentieth Century China作者：何翠萍(Ts'ui-P'ing Ho)關鍵字：整體觀;文化變遷;載瓦人;中國國家效應;Louis Dumont;holism;cultural change;the Zaiwa;Chinese state effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：近年來學者對Louis Dumont「階序」（hierarchy）觀點的討論，強調其比較研究的文化認識論立場，並開展其對涵括性的（encompassing）整體文化價值在與殖民政權與基督教等外力遭逢時的斷裂或改變之探討。本文將通過Dumont價值階序整體觀的觀點描述二十世紀晚期載瓦山居社會家屋親屬倫理的變動性；並透過它，提供一個中國國家效應下價值整體變動的個案。八十年代中國開始改革開放政策後，載瓦文化習俗呈現不少差異性。本文將以1988-2000年間在德宏潞西縣、隴川縣的載瓦人村寨間所見的差異性為重心，從行動者實踐、體驗與選擇的角度，呈現家屋人觀親屬倫理在國家化過程中的變遷；進而呈現在這個後社會主義的年代，儘管國家看似逐漸退出對人們日常生活的干預，事實上如何仍對載瓦的文化變遷發揮其效應。二十世紀晚期國家化過程中載瓦人在「價值」與「權力」間折衝、妥協，一方面對去整體化後，他們無力挽回的親屬價值的斷裂而落寞；一方面更積極地選擇不同的儀式或慶賀活動從不同方向再涵括化他們的親屬價值。Dumont整體觀的視角，可以讓我們理解這個複雜折衝過程的變動細節。反之，山居載瓦人所呈現的變動性，更突出了開放性與流動性在理解Dumont整體觀的重要性，以及不同外力－中國國家效應下的文化變遷。這個變遷是一個人觀整體價值的去整體化，以及再整體化或選擇性的再涵括化過程。英文摘要：The Post-Dumontian discussion of hierarchy highlights the relationship between Dumont’s epistemological position on the comparative study of culture against his views on holism and the concept of an encompassing hierarchy of value. The Post-Dumontains argue that Dumont’s fluid and open approach to social boundaries in holisms is especially well suited for understanding historical changes that arise from colonial contact and Christian conversion. The aim of this essay is to consider Dumont and the Post-Dumontian discussion in light of the changing kinship ethics for personhood and relatedness within the hill-dwelling Zaiwa house society during the last decades of twentieth century based on fieldwork conducted between 1988 and 2000 in Zaiwa villages in Luxi and Longchuan counties, Dehong Prefecture. With the ”opening” policies that were put into practice in China in the 1980s, the cultural practices of the hill-dwelling Zaiwa in Luxi and Longchuan became more heterogeneous as practice, experience, and choice. Surface appearances notwithstanding; state influence over people’s everyday lives did not disappear during this era. However, Zaiwa did negotiate with the state over ”value” versus ”power.” On the one hand, they were experiencing a sense of social detachment due to a loss of kinship as a value that de-totalized their cultural hierarchy of personhood. On the other hand, Zaiwa strategically chose particular rituals or celebrative activities whose intention was to re-encompass and re-totalize kinship as a value. The changes for the hill dwelling Zaiwa describe a complicated process of negotiation under the state’s gaze that differs from extant descriptions of change in the context of Christian conversion elsewhere in the world.起始頁-結束頁：89-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：建構「保育員母親身份」的掙扎：中國福利院兒童照顧者的情感勞動並列篇名：Contesting "Institute Nanny Motherhood": The Emotional Labor of Childcare Workers in a Contemporary Chinese State-run Orphanage作者：錢霖亮(Lin-Liang Qian)關鍵字：中國兒童福利院;保育員;母親身份;情感勞動;育兒體驗;Chinese Orphanage;Institute Nanny;Motherhood;Emotional Labor;Mothering Experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：中國政府和媒體通常將福利院保育員表述為一群對棄嬰兒無私奉獻的照顧者。與此相反，海外一些媒體和人權組織則指控她們缺乏愛心和道德，是中國兒童福利機構虐待兒童的直接責任人。搖擺在這兩種極端表述之間，中國福利院保育員真實的工作經歷、日常生活與情感卻被忽略了。基於對中國東南某省份H市福利院六個月的田野調查，本文考察了一群保育員在該福利院中的育兒過程，並視這一過程為亞莉．霍奇斯柴德（Arlie Hochschild）所說的「情感勞動」（emotional labor）的一種類型。本文的核心觀點是：如同其他情感勞動者，保育員們一方面控制管理著她們自身的情緒，以便更好地撫養照顧福利院兒童；但另一方面也在勞動過程中再生產著各種情緒，包括對部分孩子的依戀、對犯了錯的孩子的嚴厲、對保育員這份工作的物質利益和情感生活的矛盾心理等等，乃至生產出她們對自身「保育員母親身份」（institute nanny motherhood）的認同。這一保育員情感勞動的個案不僅展示了「保育員媽媽」這一特殊「母親身份」類型的建構過程，發掘其超越學術界既有「母親身份」類型討論在空間和工作性質上的區隔，展示一種「職場裡有薪的育兒工作」的獨特經歷；它同時也試圖拓展霍奇斯柴德「情感勞動」概念的內涵，使之更為動態化，並修正其視情感勞動過程僅為虛假表演的預設，從勞動者自身認同的角度確認職場中情感表達的真實性。英文摘要：In the domestic media and official reports, Chinese institute nannies are always being portrayed as ”loving nanny mothers” who selflessly devote all their love and care to the institutionalized children. In contrast, some Western media and human rights organizations denounce them as demoralized and inhumane caregivers who neglect and abuse institutionalized children. As these two extremist representations dominate Chinese and Western public discourses, the actual working experience, everyday life and emotions of Chinese institute nannies are largely ignored. What are their relationships with institutionalized children really like? How do these relationships affect their own life experiences? And how do these relationships affect the lives of institutionalized children? This article attempts to answer these questions. Based on my six-month fieldwork in a child welfare institute in southeast China, I argue that, like other jobs in the service sector, institute nannies’ emotional labor constrains, but also produces emotions, of and on the nannies’ bodies. These emotions include their attachment to many institutionalized children for whom they care, their serious attitude toward the children who have done wrong, their ambivalence in doing this job, and even their identification with the distinctive ”institute nanny motherhood”. While this empirically-grounded new type of ”motherhood” extends the existing academic research on motherhood studies by breaking up the traditionally assumed spatial and occupational differentiations, and illustrating a unique working experience of ”mothering as a paid job in the workplace”; the process of institute nannies’ emotional labor adds a dynamic dimension to Arlie Hochschild’s notion of ”emotional labor,” and also corrects its bias, which sees the work of emotional labor only as a false performance, by taking the self-identity of workers to justify the authenticity of their emotional expressions in the workplace. This ethnographic study first examines the institute nannies’ working conditions in my field site. It shows that the job of institute nanny is highly gendered and socially stratified in local society. These female caregivers with rural backgrounds suffer from low salary, overloaded work, delayed overtime payment as well as no public holiday or medical leave, but they are required by their work unit, the Chinese government and the public to devote themselves to childcare work by ”mothering the foundlings as their own children”. Facing such high expectations along with poor working conditions, the institute nannies become ambivalent. Refusing to be socialist model workers who have to be self-sacrificing, they complain and negotiate with the welfare institute leaders to protect their own interests, but at the same still gradually develop their attachment to the institutionalized children for whom they care through intensive childrearing practices. I provide a detailed description of the physical and emotional nurturing processes, through which the deep emotional bond between the nannies and children is built, and furthermore, the self-identity of ”institute nanny mother” based on their own definition is constructed. Still, in the course of nurturing these children, frequently intervened in by the welfare institute and the volunteers, and considering their own interests, the nannies often feel contradictory, especially regarding the issue of disciplining children. Whether or not to discipline children, when to do it, and what the rationality behind disciplinary actions is, all become problems they have to deal with. Furthermore, the intimacy between the nannies and the institutionalized children will eventually be cut off by adoptions or other kinds of separations, because the welfare institute and the public all assume that a ”normal” family will provide the children with more love and care, and therefore is a better choice for them. This causes the nannies serious emotional exhaustion. Later sections of this ethnographic study offer moving stories about how the nannies deal with the emotional challenges of working as ”institute nanny mothers.” These stories not only demonstrate the contesting experiences of these childcare workers, but also reveal the production and running of emotion and identity in a specific institution.起始頁-結束頁：147-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：Book Reviews: L'ecologie des autres: Anthropologie et la question de la nature作者：李威宜期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：202-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：Book Reviews: Digital Anthropology作者：郭佩宜期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：207-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：Book Reviews: The Lahu Minority in Southwest China: A Response to Ethnic Marginalization on the Frontier作者：劉子愷期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：212-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：書評：《「文化力」<U+306E>時代：21世紀<U+306E><U+30A2><U+30B8><U+30A2><U+3068>日本》作者：黃智慧期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：216-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：科技與文化的現代性交會／引言並列篇名：Introduction: The Interface of Technology and Culture作者：劉紹華;林文玲期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：5-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：臺灣有機農業的發展及其限制：一個技術轉變簡史並列篇名：The Development of Organic Farming in Taiwan: A History of Scientific Paradigm Shifts作者：黃樹民(Shu-Min Huang)關鍵字：有機農業;科學典範;本土知識;全球化核心區;環境保護主義;organic farming;scientific paradigm;local knowledge;global nucleated areas;environmentalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文透過討論臺灣農業發展所經歷的三個明顯變化階段，及其所隱含的歐美農業科學典範轉變（scientific paradigms shift），來看臺灣近20多年來有機農業發展的限制。這三個階段分別為：1）西元1895年以前以地方本土知識（local or indigenous knowledge）為基礎的自然農法；2）西元1895年至1986年科學主義（scientism）導向的精耕小農制；3）1986年後環境保護主義（environmentalism）影響下的有機農業（organic farming）發展。從這些變化過程，我們可以梳理出隱藏在臺灣社會發展背後複雜的社會與政治因素。更重要的是，我們可由此看出這種科學典範轉變的主要動力，並非受到本地社會發展的需求，或本地科學界實作或理論的突破性發現所影響，而是以歐美為主的全球化核心地區（global nucleated centers）橫向移植而來的整套理論、觀念與實作。這種技術的轉變與社會現實的脫節，在結構面上可能說明何以當前臺灣的有機農業發展，面臨諸多困難。最後，本文並以臺灣田野調查的實例，具體說明有機農業在結構面與社會關係上的發展困難。英文摘要：This paper uses scientific paradigm shift in Taiwan as the vantage point to understand its current development in organic farming and associated problems. The three distinct evolutionary stages of Taiwanese agriculture can be summarized as: 1) The pre-1895 natural farming regime that largely relied on local or indigenous knowledge systems; 2) The 1895-1986 period characterized by small-scale, intensive farming under the herald of scientism; and 3) The post-1986 rise of organic farming under the influence of global environmentalism. These paradigm shifts unravel the complex social and political discourses underpinning Taiwan's contorted history. Even more importantly, however, this paper argues that the main impetus of these paradigm shifts did not originate from local social needs or in response to practices or theoretical developments engineered by local scientific communities. Rather, all changes were results of gross transplanting of worldviews, ideas and practices developed in global nucleated centers of North American, Europe and Japan. The significant discrepancy between Taiwan's dominant scientific paradigms and practical societal needs can explain why the development of organic farming in Taiwan faces seemingly insurmountable structural difficulties.起始頁-結束頁：9-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：中國麻風病治理的科學主義與政治儀式並列篇名：Chinese Scientism and Political Rituals in Leprosy Control作者：劉紹華(Shao-Hua Liu)關鍵字：科學主義;國家文化特質;痲瘋病;疾病治理;中國;Scientism;national ethos;leprosy;health governance;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文試圖透過科學主義與政治動員的角度，來理解中國為何能在短暫的二十五年間，經歷門戶閉鎖政策、且經濟發展落後，卻在龐大的領土中成功地控制住年代久遠的麻風病？馬克思唯物論式的科學主義發展目標是現代中國的建國大綱。在此種意識型態下的科學客觀性，有效壓抑個人的主體性與主觀感受。在此種科學主義的實踐過程中，個體既被無機體化，又透過政治儀式被召喚其能動性，以強化對官方意識型態的信仰與實作。麻風防治則是這場建國大業中的一個公衛指標。整個國家就在這種科學主義的政治動員下，進行了一場大規模的追逐細菌與病人的衛生運動。其中充滿了對科學的信念與迷思、儀式性的道德規勸、污名恐慌。這些複雜且時而自相矛盾的現象，構築了當代中國麻風防治的形貌與內堙C中國麻風防治的例子讓我們看到，生物醫療科技的有效性常被誇大，而人與其他抽象象徵因素卻常被低估。在防疫過程中，非關科學的理念與情緒，可能才是疾病治理成功或失敗的重要關鍵。英文摘要：This article examines why and how China achieved an internationally acclaimed success in leprosy control within 25 years when this gigantic country was undergoing the close-door policy and was economically underdeveloped during its collectivization era (1950s-early 1980s). By viewing Marxist scientism as the national ethos in contemporary China's nation-building, this article reveals how the so-called scientific objectivity suppressed the involved individuals' subjectivities and emotions throughout the disease control campaign. However, in the meantime, those objectified individuals were mobilized to express their agency in internalizing and strengthening their beliefs and practices under the state-sanctioned ideological rubric. Leprosy was on the newly established socialist China's priority list of epidemics to be eliminated. The state engaged in this grand hygienic campaign in which state agents were mobilized to hunt for germs and their victims, all in the name of scientism and patriotism. This grand campaign was full of beliefs and myths surrounding science, ritualized moral persuasion and stigma, all of which were complicated and sometimes paradoxical in nature and constituted the fabric of China's leprosy control during the collectivization era. The case of China's leprosy control illustrates the fact that in evaluating disease control, we often emphasize the scientific achievement over the symbolic forces of human actors and their perceived values. This article sheds light on the non-scientific ideals and emotions in disease control that might have been the more critical factors in determining the success or failure of disease governance than we previously thought.起始頁-結束頁：35-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所11篇名：生產中的現代性：科技信仰與科技侷限的競技場並列篇名：Pursuing Modernity in Childbirth: Struggles between Technocratic Value and Technological Constraints作者：官晨怡(Chen-I Kuan)關鍵字：產檢監控;剖腹產;現代性;科技信仰;風險;prenatal surveillance;Cesarean sections;modernity;technocratic value;risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：1960年代以後，臺灣社會的生產逐漸進入醫療模式，帶著科技能有效掌控生產的現代性信念，醫療主導了臺灣當代的生產。然而，科技真的無所不能？它能在多大的程度上掌握生產？臺灣產科社群對於科技有著什麼樣的信念？與科技實際上能掌控生產的程度之間，有沒有落差？當落差發生時，醫師如何因應？如何影響臺灣婦女的生產經驗？我根據2008年與2009年於台北與桃園地區進行的民族誌研究來回答這些問題。本文分析場景為臺灣醫師因應降低剖腹產政策而採取的產檢監控，包括為了評估風險（透過測量骨盆與胎兒體重評估產婦們需要剖腹產的機率），與壓低風險（透過所謂「預防性醫療干預」降低剖腹產機率）所使用的醫療技術。一方面，本文探索隱身於這套措施背後的專業文化，呈現臺灣產科社群對於科技的高度信仰；另一方面，藉著描述這些為降低剖腹產而強化的科技監控，如何反而增加了剖腹產發生的可能性，突顯此種現代性信念本身存在著一定的矛盾與侷限。同時，以儘管崇尚自然產、卻終究選擇剖腹產的婦女為例，本文呈現儘管醫師們不斷遭遇科技本身的極限與不確定性，此種信仰科技與強調生產風險的醫療觀點仍逐漸影響婦女的生產認知。當人們急切擁抱科技與現代性、卻未能省視其中侷限，需要付出什麼代價，又是誰在承擔這些代價？本文以生產為例，探索這些問題，或許也能呈現出臺灣社會在這個特定歷史脈絡中的某種現代性經驗。英文摘要：Since the late 1960s, childbirth in Taiwan has been gradually medicalized. With the idea that technology can control childbirth, the medical model dominates childbirth in contemporary Taiwan. However, can technology perfectly control childbirth? Does technological control over childbirth ever reach its limit? What are the Taiwanese obstetric community’s beliefs about technology? How do these beliefs influence women’s birthing experiences? I answer these questions based on my ethnographic research in Taipei and Touyuan from 2008 to 2009. This article focuses on the prenatal surveillance by which Taiwanese obstetricians attempt to reduce Cesarean rates as a response to policy. The obstetricians conduct prenatal assessment on how possible it is for a woman to complete vaginal birth, mainly through measuring fetal weight and pelvic size. They implement so-called ”preventive interventions,” such as labor induction, when the possibility is low. On the one hand, I examine the professional beliefs behind these clinical practices, and show the strong technocratic values among Taiwanese obstetricians. On the other hand, I analyze how this prenatal surveillance may increase, instead of reducing, Cesarean sections. In doing so, I highlight the contradiction between the obstetricians’ beliefs in technology, and the constraints of technology itself. Meanwhile, although the obstetricians constantly face the limits of technology, their technocratic values are widespread and significantly influence women’s birthing experiences. Based on this analysis, this article is also concerned with the following questions: What prices do people have to pay when they pursue modernity without reflecting on the limits of technology? Who pays for it? This article shows how childbirth has become an arena where people struggle between their technocratic values and the limits of technology.起始頁-結束頁：65-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所12篇名：地方、認同和想像地理：高雄大眾捷運系統的文化政治並列篇名：Place, Identity, and Imagined Geography: The Cultural Politics of the Mass Rapid Transit System in Kaohsiung, Taiwan作者：李安如(An-Ru Lee)關鍵字：全球城市;國族認同;運輸系統;無所之地;層級跳躍;global city formation;national identity;transportation;non-place;jumping scales期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從人類學的角度探討高雄大眾捷運系統。本文討論的重點放在高雄捷運的文化意義和背後的認同政治。文化在此指涉的不是日常生活的細節，而是一個集體人群的世界觀，包括他們對現實此刻的認知、與奠基在現實此刻認知上的對未來可能性的想像。相應地，大眾捷運系統做為一項運輸科技的功能不在於對此時此刻生活的影響，而在於它幫助促成想像的未來可能性。在這樣的思考下，高雄捷運的重要性在於它可以被視為臺灣當下面臨的全球、國家與在地不同層級（scales）力量角力或合流的交點，高捷做為一個借喻突顯了臺灣當前重要的政治、經濟、社會、文化等問題，而不同層級力量的角力或合流也提供了不同的思考與認知的可能性。英文摘要：The Mass Rapid Transit system in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, reveals a paradox that challenges the effect of homogenization and the negative judgment of this effect embedded in the theoretical discussions of global city formation. It points to the danger of equating and privileging the local as a space of authenticity and community while associating the global with the abstract and universal. A ”non-place” like a subway system attains great meanings, to the extent that it becomes a reflection of the nation, in the Taiwanese context precisely because it is considered as devoid of any specific historiography. This ”jumping of scales” is facilitated by the recent development in both the global capitalist expansion and Taiwan’s accommodation to this expansion, under which the city emerges as the linkage between a national (or regional) economy and the global economy. This economic turn provides new possibilities for the Taiwanese to envision their collective identity.起始頁-結束頁：93-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所13篇名：台灣凍頂烏龍茶之工匠技藝、科技與現代性並列篇名：Craftsmanship, Technology and Modernity of Taiwan Dongding Oolong Tea Production作者：余舜德(Shuenn-Der Yu)關鍵字：工匠技藝;科技;現代性;凍頂茶;部分發酵茶;craftsmanship;technology;modernity;Dongding tea;partly fermented tea期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：台灣茶業界一向將台灣茶標榜為手工、遵循傳統工藝與饒富傳統風味的產品，而臺灣以做工繁複、強調師傅技術之「部分發酵茶」呈現於風味多元性與精緻化之特色，及1980年代以來以茶農家戶小製坊為主的生產規模，的確反映著業界的商業論述。不過若深究台灣從日據時代以來台灣茶產業的發展，我們也可看到顯著之現代化的痕跡，各式小型機械的使用、品種改良、配合現代科技的茶園種植管理方式及現代製茶原理的引用，都顯示台灣茶農家在農政單位長期輔導下普遍的科技化。兩者的交融，不只呈現著台灣茶產業的現狀，更展現著許多有趣的課題：（1）於現代科技全面的影響下，何謂工藝（craftsmanship）？何謂工匠的技術（skill）？（2）工匠的技術如何或是否於科技化中式微，或於新科技的引入中發展？（3）茶這個產業是否影響科技與工藝間的交融？換句話說，從「物性」（materiality）、技術、科技與現代性等人類學慣常討論的面向，我們如何檢視台灣的茶產業？筆者於台灣凍頂茶區製茶師傅的研究發現，現代科技與傳統技藝之間存在複雜的互動關係，凍頂的民族誌顯示，於新科技大量進入農戶的同時，茶農／製茶師傅也需要發展出新的感官能力與經驗，以駕馭這些科技，因而以身體技能為本的傳統工藝於現代科技逐漸受到重用之時，只可說是逐漸轉化，而未消失或被現代科技所取代。因而我們需要深入瞭解科技與傳統技藝如何於生產與消費之間複雜的互動過程中相互影響，且相互消長，而非單純地從「現代化造成傳統（技藝）式微」的觀點來瞭解這個複雜的過程。英文摘要：Taiwan’s tea industry has depicted Formosa tea as a product manufactured with traditional craftsmanship. Taiwan’s partly fermented teas, made by delicate control of diverse degrees of fermentation to produce different tastes and teas in small workshops, do mirror this portrayal. However, if we examine the development of Taiwan’s tea industry, we may find traces of modernization since the Japanese era; mechanization, adoptions of new tea breeds, modern tea farming technologies, and scientific knowledge all indicate a diverse modernization process of Taiwanese tea farming and production. The interaction between traditional craftsmanship and modernization not only reflects the current condition of Taiwan’s tea Industry but also raises a few interesting issues that this article intends to discuss. They include: (1) What is craftsmanship and skill under the influence of modern technologies? (2) Does craftsmanship decline or transform within this modernization process? (3) Does tea, as an object and commodity, influence the interaction between technology and craftsmanship? I In other words, how should we examine Taiwan’s tea industry from the perspectives of materiality, skill, technology and modernity? Based on my ethnographic research of Dongding’s tea farmers, I find that there is a sophisticated relationship between modern technology and traditional craftsmanship. Dongding ethnography demonstrates that when new technologies are being employed, tea farmers also need to develop new sensory abilities and skills to master them. At a time when modern technologies increase their weight in tea production, traditional craftsmanship is not being replaced or lost. Rather farmers ”transform” their body technique to make technologies work for their production scheme. Hence, we need to look into how technology and craftsmanship influence each other within the complex process of production and consumption, rather than stereotypically perceive the process from the perspective of ”modernization replaces traditional craftsmanship.”起始頁-結束頁：123-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所14篇名：製作「原住民」：轉換中的技術載體，轉化中的文化身份並列篇名：Manufacturing Indigeneity: Technical Carriers and Cultural Identity in Transition作者：林文玲(Wen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：原住民影片;技術載體;文化身分;轉譯;indigenous film;technical carriers;cultural identity;translation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：世界各地的原住民影像工作者，因應複雜、難解的主流社會之龐大勢力，已逐漸發展出一些對抗的姿態與策略，企圖移轉原住民族被書寫與被呈現的既定格局，進而多觸角地運用現代數位科技與管道，介入族群文化之再現與形象之製作與生產。然而，深刻烙印西方社會進程、物質條件與象徵系統的視覺科技與影像載體，是否能夠與原住民族的口傳文化進行接合並傳達口語敘說之言說力道及其題旨、意涵嗎？本文將以泰雅族比令．亞布的《彩虹的故事》以及布農族莎瓏．伊斯哈罕布德攝製的《Alis的心願》兩部原住民影片為例，審視攝影機作為現代科技的一種形式，透過原住民導演的中介、轉換，攝影機能否將傳統口傳文化之形式與內涵轉譯出來，轉化到影音的介面，讓原住民族的當代生存處境及其經驗歷程能夠以自我界定的方式呈現出來，進而營造原住民族的視覺主權。英文摘要：Responding to the complex, obscure, and enormous forces of mainstream society, indigenous filmmakers around the world have gradually developed confrontational stances and strategies in an attempt to change the established pattern of how the indigenous people are written and represented. Moreover, they deploy multiple modern digital technologiesl and channels to intervene in the representation and image production of ethnic cultures. Nonetheless, visual technology and image carriers are deeply imbricated in the Western social process, material conditions, and symbolic system. How can they articulate with the indigenous oral tradition and convey its power, objectives, and implications? Using ”The Story of Rainbow” made by the Atayal director Bilin Yabu and ”Alis’s Dreams” made by the Bunun director Salone Ishahavut as examples, this article will investigates how the camera as a form of modern technology can translate the form and content of traditional oral culture into the audio-video interface through the mediation and translation of indigenous directors. This translation enables present-day indigenous people to present their circumstances and experiences of survival in self-defined ways, and build visual sovereignty.起始頁-結束頁：155-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所15篇名：Book Reviews: Appropriation as Practice: Art and Identity in Argentina作者：張珣期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：190-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所16篇名：Book Reviews: Burning Money: The Material Spirit of the Chinese Lifeworld作者：丁仁傑期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：194-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所17篇名：Book Reviews: L' Archeologie comme discipline?作者：吳秀琪期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：199-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：勞工保險老年給付的投資報酬探討並列篇名：A Study on the Value of the Contribution in Old-Age Benefits of Labor Insurance作者：羅紀<U+743C>(Joan C. Lo)關鍵字：勞工保險;老年給付;投資報酬;Labor insurance;Old-age benefits;Contribution's value期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：勞工保險潛藏債務高達新臺幣7.3兆元，開源節流勢不可免。本研究利用勞工保險被保險人異動檔及老年給付檔為分析基礎，探討被保險人老年給付的投資報酬－保險給付與保險費現值比。綜合而言，以自付保險費計算，舊制一次給付是繳1元領3.7元，新制年金給付是繳1元領8.3元至9.6元（視未來的折現率而定）；而以總保險費計算，分別是繳1元領2.3元及繳1元領5.3元至6.1元；投資報酬相對偏高。行政院2013年元月的改革方案中以更長期間的平均月投保薪資做為給付計算基礎，並搭配投保薪資在3萬元以上部分調降給付率至1.3%的做法，每年僅可節省給付約2%。英文摘要：The potential liability of Taiwan's Labor Insurance (LI) program has reached NT$7.3 trillion, so it is imperative to generate more funding and reduce outlays. This study aims to investigate the contribution's value-the ratio of the present value of the benefits and the contributions, by utilizing the database of the insured and old-age benefit claims of the LI.In general, each dollar of the contribution is worth 2.3 dollars in the old benefit scheme. It is worth 5.3 to 6.1 dollars in the new benefit scheme, depending on the discount rate used. If the government subsidy is excluded, each dollar of the contribution of the insurees is worth 3.7 dollars in the old scheme; it is worth 8.3 to 9.6 dollars in the new scheme. The contribution's value is way too high for the system to be sustainable. Extending the benefit base to cover more past earnings, together with the redistribution feature in the reform proposal can lower the benefit 2% per annum, which amounts to 17.4% in 10 years.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：ECFA對我國勞動市場與所得分配的經濟影響評估並列篇名：An Economy-Wide Analysis of Impacts on Taiwan's Labor Market and Income Distribution of Taiwan-China Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA)作者：林國榮(Kuo-Jung Lin);許聖民(Sheng-Ming Hsu);徐世勳(Shih-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：兩岸經濟合作架構協議;可計算一般均衡模型;勞動需求;所得不均度;Economic cooperation framework agreement (ECFA);Computable general equilibrium (CGE) model;Labor demand;Income inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文採用多國與單國可計算一般均衡（CGE）模型，並編製社會會計矩陣（Social Accounting Matrix）資料庫，針對「東協加中國、東協加日本、東協加韓國」區域貿易協定成形下，兩岸推動ECFA架構協議所造成的經濟、勞動需求及所得分配的影響進行分析。研究結果顯示，實施ECFA「早期收穫計畫」（Early Harvest Program），臺灣總體勞動需求人數可望增加3萬3千人（增0.319%）；依據ECFA推動工業產品全面貿易自由化，總體勞動需求人數則將增加11萬9千人（增1.214%）。兩岸貿易自由化最大受益者為最高所得群組的家庭，吉尼係數將隨著市場開放程度擴大而提高，顯示前揭貿易自由化將會造成臺灣所得分配不均的情況愈形惡化。英文摘要：This study uses both the multi-regional and single-country computable general equilibrium (CGE) models and the social accounting matrix (SAM) database to provide an economy-wide analysis of the impacts of the cross-strait Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) on Taiwan's labor demand and income distribution, under the formation of the ”ASEAN plus China, ASEAN plus Japan, ASEAN plus Republic of Korea” regional trade agreements (RTAs). Simulation result show that, if the ECFA ”Early Harvest Program” is implemented, the amount of overall labor demand is expected to increase by 33,000 jobs (+0.319%); if a comprehensive trade liberalization of industrial products according to ECFA is put into force, the overall labor demand will increase by 119,000 jobs (+1.214%). Overall, ECFA will benefit all levels of household income. However, the biggest beneficiaries of cross-strait trade liberalization are the highest income group families. The Gini's coefficient increases with the greater market openness, indicating that the trade liberalization will worsen the economic inequality problem in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：27-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：臺灣主要貿易預測之績效評析－以中華經濟研究院、行政院主計總處與中央研究院經濟研究所為例並列篇名：Evaluating the Foreign Trade Forecasts for Taiwan Produced by CIER, DGBAS and IEAS作者：周大森(Ta-Sheng Chou);林建甫(Chien-Fu Lin);林世昌(Eric S. Lin)關鍵字：貿易預測;預測評估;預測有用性檢定;Trade forecasts;Forecast evaluation;Usefulness tests of forecasts期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：中華經濟研究院、行政院主計總處與中央研究院經濟研究所發布的貿易預測受到國內公、私部門使用者重視，本文由傳統以及晚近發展的計量方法等不同觀點，研析該三個機構1996年至2010年的貿易預測績效。實證結果顯示三個機構對隔年方向變化之預測，幾乎為統計顯著的優質狀況。根據Ashley的預測有用性指標，三個機構的當季與後一季預測頗優；此外，Lin et al.（2011）的預測有用性檢定亦支持三者的年預測均展現極佳的有用性。綜合言之，主計總處的當年預測、中研院經濟所的後一年預測，最能讓使用者安心引用；而臺灣對主要貿易夥伴的出、進口變化，中經院的當年預測，亦屬優良。英文摘要：The trade forecast for Taiwan conducted by the Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research (CIER), the Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics (DGBAS), and the Institute of Economics, Academia Sinica (lEAS) has received considerable attention from decision makers in the private and public sectors. We evaluate the forecasting performance of the three institutions in terms of the conventional criteria and the usefulness tests recently developed by Lin et al. (2011). More specifically, we analyze the samples for the annual and quarterly projections released by CIER, DGBAS and IEAS from 1996 to 2010. Our findings are as follows. First, the directional accuracy statistics show that the one-year-ahead annual projections are generally well produced. Second, Ashley's usefulness statistics indicate that the current-quarter forecasts released by those institutions perform the best. In addition, based on the tests for usefulness (Lin et al., 2011), the annual forecasts have also done a good job. Overall, the current year forecasts (prepared in the middle of the same year) produced by DGBAS and the next-year forecasts (prepared at the end of each year) produced by IEAS perform the best. Meanwhile, the current-year forecasts for the changes in trade between Taiwan and specific countries produced by CIER also provide useful information.起始頁-結束頁：81-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：廠商聚集與生產力－臺灣紡織產業的實證研究並列篇名：Agglomeration and Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence from Taiwan's Textile Industry作者：蘇偉哲(Wei-Che Su);游雅婷(Ya-Ting Yu);楊志海(Chih-Hai Yang)關鍵字：聚集;生產力;紡織業;Agglomeration;Productivity;Textile industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：新經濟地理理論認為廠商聚集存在知識外溢與提高專業化分工程度等效益，有助於廠商生產力的提升，此論點雖有許多科技產業的實證研究支持，但是否適用於成熟的傳統產業則有待驗證。本文主要目的，是在探討臺灣紡織業的聚集程度和廠商聚集對於生產力的影響。我們利用經濟部民國86至92年的工廠校正資料，首先計算臺灣紡織業的聚集指數，發現紡織產業為一個高度聚集產業，其中技術層次較高的紡織與織布業聚集度逐漸下降，但技術層次較低的成衣與服飾品業聚集程度卻上升。其次，利用實證模型來研究廠商聚集對於生產力的影響進行估計，實證結果指出，聚集程度對於生產力具正向顯著的影響，但聚集與生產力具非線性關係。也就是說，當產業過度聚集時，將產生聚集不經濟的情況。此外，雖然創新活動在紡織產業中並不普遍，但研發費用對生產力具顯著的正向影響，這顯示技術能力對於傳統產業（如紡織業）的生產力提升，仍為重要的影響因素。英文摘要：The ”New Economic Geography” theories claim that the geographical concentration can generate externalities through the advantages of knowledge spillover and specialization, thereby promoting firm productivity. This argument is widely supported in studies based on high-tech industries, while its application for traditional industries remains less examined. This paper aims to calculate the degree of agglomeration and its influences on productivity in Taiwan's textile industry. Using plant-Ievel panel data during the periods of 1997-2000 and 2002-2003, we find the textile industry has high geographic concentration. Econometric estimates show that geographic agglomeration has a positive and nonlinear relationship with firms' productivity, particularly for small firms. Moreover, R&D exhibits a significantly positive impact on productivity, suggesting that innovation remains a key factor promoting productivity for the traditional industry of textiles in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：133-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：2013年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正：2013年7月16日記者會新聞稿並列篇名：2013 Taiwan Economic Outlook Revision Press Release: July 16, 2013作者：周雨田(Ray Yeu-Tien Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：161-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：臺灣經濟最近情勢並列篇名：Current Trend作者：陳宜廷(Yi-Ting Chen);簡錦漢(Kam-Hon Kan);張靜貞(Ching-Cheng Chang);蔡文禎(Wen-Jen Tsay);林常青(Chang-Ching Lin);周雨田(Ray Yeu-Tien Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：163-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計並列篇名：Graphical and Tabulated Statistics期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：185-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：勞工保險老年給付之投保薪資誘因探討並列篇名：A Study on the Incentives in Old-Age Benefits of Taiwan's Labor Insurance System作者：羅紀<U+743C>(Joan C. Lo)關鍵字：勞工保險;老年給付;制度誘因;差異中的差異模型;Labor insurance;Old-age benefits;Incentive mechanism;Difference-in-differences model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：為探討勞工保險以被保險人退休當月起前3年的平均月投保薪資為老年一次給付計算基礎的做法，是否使被保險人有誘因在退休前3年提高投保薪資，本研究採用difference-in-differences模式，以民國96年符合退休條件且已實際退休的被保險人為實驗組；符合退休條件但當年未退休、且在未來三年內也未退休的被保險人為對照組。分析顯示，控制了其他重要影響因素後，誘因機制呈現顯著的正向效果；退休者在退休前3年其月投保薪資顯著上升，平均而言上升10.7%；而且以最高60個月的平均月投保薪資為給付計算基礎的改變，效果有限。需以更長期間為基礎，才能消除制度的不當誘因。英文摘要：Using Taiwan's Labor Insurance dataset and the difference-in-differences model, this study investigates the possible incentives of utilizing the average insured monthly earnings for the period beginning 3 years prior to retirement as the basis for old-age benefit calculations. In the study, those who had retired in 2007were categorized into the experimental group, while those who were qualified to retire but had not retired for the ensuing 3 years were categorized into the control group. The results indicate that after controlling for all influential factors such as gender and years of service, the incentive displayed a positive impact. On average, it had increased the insured earnings by 10.7%. Changing the benefit calculation formula to using the average monthly amounts of the highest 60 months of insured earning would not generate much impact. Using a much longer period as the basis for benefit calculation can help to alleviate or even eliminate the incentive impact, thus removing the extra financial burden caused by the incentive mechanism embedded in the benefit calculation formula of the labor insurance system.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：Estimating Potential Output for Taiwan with Seasonally Unadjusted Data並列篇名：推估臺灣未經季節調整之潛在產出作者：林金龍(Jin-Lung Lin);陳馨蕙(Shin-Hui Chen)關鍵字：潛在產出;產出缺口;非加速通貨膨脹失業率;季節單根;歐肯法則;菲力浦曲線;Potential GDP;Output gap;NAIRU;Seasonal unit root;Okun's law;Phillips curve期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：有效評估潛在產出與產出缺口一直是執行貨幣與財政政策的重要環節。過去文獻中用以估計潛在產出的方法大多假設在潛在產出與非加速通貨膨脹失業率（NAIRU）中存在一般單根（regular unit root）。然而，這樣的假並不適用於估計臺灣未經季節調整的潛在產出。有鑑於此，本文以Watson's（1986） decomposition與Apel and Jansson's（1999a）systemapproach為例，以季節單根取代一般單根，從而考量更多的季節波動於模型中。同時，為了驗證模型的可靠性（robustness）以及更為有效評估臺灣的潛在產出與NAIRU，我們亦嘗試對NAIRU與失業缺口（unemployment gap）作不同的模型設定。實證結果顯示在一般單根假設下，亦即模型未考量季節波動時，資料本身的季節波動嚴重干擾估計結果且無法提供有用的訊息；反之，當以季節單根取代一般單根後確實更能有效評估臺灣潛在產出與產出缺口，並提供更為攸關的訊息供臺灣政府執行政策之參考。英文摘要：Measuring potential output and the output gap have long been an important task for conducting monetary and fiscal policies. There exist several methods for this purpose and a partial list includes the univariate detrending method, the multivariate filtering approach, and the structural VAR system approach. One common feature of all these methods is assuming the existence of a unit root for the unobserved potential GDP. While this assumption is appropriate for the cases of US and most European countries where macroeconomic data are seasonally adjusted, it does not fit the Taiwanese economy. Almost all of Taiwan's macroeconomic data are seasonally unadjusted, and the seasonal unit root as well as richer dynamics have to be embedded in the model. In this paper, we analyze the impact of seasonality on various potential output measures. To check robustness and investigate how sensitive the results are to further changes in the specification of the NAIRU and the unemployment gap, distinct classes of NAIRU and unemployment gap concept are implemented. Empirical analysis confirms the importance of seasonal behavior. Switching from a regular unit root to a seasonal unit root improves the efficiency of measuring potential GDP and output gap for Taiwan and provides more relevant information in conducting monetary and fiscal policies.起始頁-結束頁：23-49資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：通膨與通縮之匯率轉嫁並列篇名：Exchange Rate Pass-Through for Inflation and Deflation作者：林柏君(Po-Chun Lin);吳中書(Chung-Shu Wu)關鍵字：匯率轉嫁;通貨緊縮;通貨膨脹;非線性估計;門檻迴歸模型;Exchange rate pass-through;Deflation;Inflation;Non-linear estimation;Threshold model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討臺灣的通膨與通縮環境對整體進口物價及各產業匯率轉嫁程度的影響。有別於既有文獻並未加入通貨緊縮對匯率轉嫁的分析，本文採用門檻迴歸模型（threshold model），並區分能源價格及非能源價格進行分析。實證結果顯示，通貨緊縮考慮與否將影響匯率轉嫁程度與通膨、通縮環境的關係。包含能源價格之礦物性燃料潤滑油及有關材料產業之匯率轉嫁程度隨通膨環境變動的變化幅度居所有產業之冠。加入通貨緊縮分析後，整體進口物價及大多數產業之匯率轉嫁效果在通貨緊縮時大於低通膨。因此，在分析上明確區分通貨緊縮的情況有其必要性，否則可能形成偏誤之推論。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the impacts of inflation and deflation on exchange rate pass-through for import prices both on the aggregate and industrial levels in Taiwan. Different from existing studies that do not specify the impact of deflation, we use the threshold model to take it into account and estimate the pass-through with general and non-oil prices. The empirical results show that the relationship of pass-through and both inflation and deflation is changed after considering the deflation impacts. The pass-through of the fuel industry varies most with inflation movements. Most industries exhibit larger pass-through in deflation than in low inflation. Hence, a clearly defined deflation regime from low inflation is necessary for avoiding a biased result when analyzing the pass-through for inflation and deflation.起始頁-結束頁：51-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：臺商對外投資在勞動成本及市場區位選擇的比較—臺灣主要製造業之驗證並列篇名：The Comparison between Labor Cost and Market Location Choice in Outward Fdi: Evidence from Taiwan's Main Manufacturing Industry作者：蔡沐學(Mu-Shiue Tsai);張國益(Kuo-I Chang)關鍵字：外人直接投資;勞動成本;區位選擇;FDI;Labor cost;Location choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究完整檢視了1998年至2008年臺商對外直接投資時，其決策在世界各國子公司所受到市場誘因、勞動成本及人力資本三個層面的影響。利用引力模型為基礎，逐步得出的實證結果顯示，臺商對外投資普遍受到市場層面因素的影響，而在勞動成本及人力資本層面的影響，則必須取決於不同產業別和市場別在相對低技術勞工及相對高技術勞工的需求差異。因而，利用敏感度分析分別比較臺商對外投資於技術密集產業、勞力密集產業、民生工業與非金屬製造業之不同產業的差異，以及中國大陸、已開發國家與開發中國家之不同市場別的差異，透過Kaitz Index所包含的最低工資、平均工資、產業雇用率及勞參率等訊息，加上其他人力因素的考量，本研究得出與一開始預期相符之實證結果，包括廠商投資於已開發國家特別著重於技術層面的需求，以及開發中國家特別著重人力成本面的考量，對中國大陸的投資決策則是同時受到其潛在市場面和人力成本面的影響，使得臺商對於中國大陸的投資，明顯超過已開發國家與開發中國家。英文摘要：This paper completely examines the market factors, labor cost factors, and human capital factors which influence the location decisions of Taiwanese outward investment from 1998 to 2008. The empirical result which is based on the gravity model shows that the outward FDI of Taiwanese multinationals is generally affected by the market factors, but the impact of labor cost and human capital depends on different industries and market location factors which are relevant to different needs for relatively low-skilled workers and relatively high-skilled workers.Our empirical results, which use sensitivity analysis to find out the variance between the industry and the market, are consistent with the predictions of our initial analysis. By the implications of the Kaitz index and information from other labor factors, we show that manufacturers will particularly emphasize technical requirements when they invest in developed countries. However, manufacturers will invest in developing countries with strong considerations of their lower labor cost. Because Mainland China has both inducements of market potential and lower-cost labor, the empirical result also shows that FDI in Mainland China is notably higher than in developed and other developing countries.起始頁-結束頁：83-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：論壇：經濟危機之研究—臺灣經濟危機期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：123-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：壹、2013年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：151-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：陳宜廷期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：155-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：183-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：Some Methodological Issues in Cross-National Educational Research-Quality and Equity in Student Achievement並列篇名：跨國教育研究中一些方法上的問題：學生學習表現的優與均作者：羅伯特˙豪瑟(Robert M. Hauser);黃敏雄關鍵字：學業成就;情境效應;國際學生能力評量計畫;學校效應;社經地位;Academic achievement;contextual effects;Programme for International Student Assessment;school effects;socio-economic status期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文探討在跨國資料中如何測量、分析及詮釋學生家庭社經背景與科學表現之間的關係，並針對2006年PISA所提出的研究報告做評論。PISA是由OECD所執行的一項跨國學生學習評量。OECD對於PISA評量結果所做的分析與詮釋言過其詞，對於學生科學成就與家庭背景之間的關係在學校之內或在學校之間的展現，和其跨國之間的差異，做過度的政策性解釋。PISA的家庭社經地位量表並沒有可詮釋的度量單位，也無法做嚴謹的跨國與跨年比較。OECD的分析未能辨別家庭社經地位量表裡各指標的獨立效果，也無法區辨這些效果在不同國家或在不同學科上的差異。OECD的分析沒有嘗試克服不同國家家庭社經背景資料的信度高低有所差異的問題，也未曾說明國與國之間在家庭社經地位差異程度上有顯著差別這其中的意涵。OCED過於粗略的分析導致我們無法正確評斷國與國之間在學生學習表現上的差異與造成這些差異的原因，為了使深富研究價值的PISA資料得到更完善的分析，本文提供一些實質建議。英文摘要：This article offers a critical review of measurement, analysis, and interpretation of international comparative data on socio-economic status and science achievement, as reported in the 2006 round of PISA, the Programme for International Student Assessment carried out by OECD, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The OECD analysis overreaches by offering highly specific policy-related interpretations of correlations among socio-economic status and science achievement within and between schools among the large number of nations participating in PISA. The PISA measure of socio-economic status has no interpretable metric, and it is not strictly comparable across nations or years. The OECD analysis failed to identify independent effects of the components of socio-economic status or differences in those effects among nations or among areas of academic achievement. There were notable failures to identify and compensate for international differences in the reliability of the socio-economic data and to address the implications of international differences in the variability of socio-economic status. A primitive analysis of socio-economic effects on academic achievement, on between- and within-school differences in achievement, and differences in those effects among nations led to unwarranted inferences about national differences in academic achievement and factors affecting those differences. The article offers practical suggestions about ways to improve the analysis of the highly valuable PISA data.起始頁-結束頁：709-752資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201312_43(4).00012篇名：Asian American Model Masculinities-Younghill Kang’s ”East Goes West: The Making of an Oriental Yankee”並列篇名：亞美模範的男性氣概：姜鏞訖的《自東徂西─一位東方美國北佬的形成》作者：郭宜欣(Karen Kuo);紀元文關鍵字：男性氣概;種族;性傾向;模範少數民族;masculinity;race;sexuality;model minority期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在閱讀姜鏞訖的《自東徂西─一位東方美國北佬的形成》（1937）所呈現的美國後大蕭條時期，男性氣概與權力的比較種族與性別分析。著者主張，在性傾向、權力、勞工與經濟的脈絡裡，姜鏞訖的小說當作移民故事閱讀，箇中美國亞裔與黑人男性多重的種族與階級形構饒富洞見。姜鏞訖的小說顯示美國黑白對立的支配性種族範式，如何取決於亞裔男性主體在黑、白與亞裔的三方種族系統內協商其種族化的身分認同。亞裔男性氣概的種族協商，繞著獲得白人菁英與知識分子之特權與恩寵的早期亞裔外國學生之形象轉動。小說中韓裔男主角瞭解其異國的亞裔外國學生身分，如何在黑人與白人間創造男性種族位置，而美國民權運動年代及其後亞裔模範少數民族的形成實已提前來到並反映於此位置中。英文摘要：This essay presents a comparative racial and gender analysis of masculinity and power during the post- Depression United States in a reading of Younghill Kang's novel, ”East Goes West: The Making of an Oriental Yankee”. I argue that Kang's novel, primarily read as an immigrant story yields insight into the multiple racial and class formations of Asian and black men in the U.S. within the context of sexuality, power, labor, and the economy. Kang's novel shows how the dominant racial paradigm of black versus white in the U.S. depends on an Asian male subject who negotiates his racialized identity within a tripartite racial system of black, white, and Asian. This racial negotiation of Asian masculinity revolves around the figure of the early Asian foreign student who receives privileges and favors by white elites and intellectuals. The Korean male protagonist in the novel understands how his status as the exotic Asian foreign student creates a masculine racial position between black and white men that predates but also mirrors the later formation of the Asian model minority during the U.S. civil rights era and beyond.起始頁-結束頁：753-783資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201312_43(4).00023篇名：十九世紀美國服飾改革運動：向性別化服飾與流行專制挑戰的社會運動並列篇名：American Dress Reform in the Nineteen Century-A Social Movement against Gendered Dress and the Dictates of Fashion作者：楊翠竹(Chui-Chu Yang)關鍵字：服飾改革;布魯摩爾裝束╱布魯摩爾裙褲裝;女權運動;水療保健;dress reform;Bloomer dress;women's rights group;hydropath期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷4期出版年：2013中文摘要：西方兩性服飾差異化於十九世紀達到最高峰。流行服飾反映時代的社會意識與文化，也是婦女角色具體化的符徵。本文旨在探討1851至1875年間美國服飾改革運動的脈絡、意涵及其與時尚流行間的關係。美國女權運動團於1851年發動服飾改革運動，期望藉由鼓吹婦女身體的解放，以利達成解放婦女的目標。與女權運動結合的服飾改革引起社會強烈的反感，女權團體並未成功達成婦女身體解放的目標。水療團體與後起的「美國服飾改革協會」持續以健康的訴求推動服飾改革。本文利用史料文獻分析法，探索參與服飾改革運動團體的訴求、互動關係，以及服飾改革運動的社會意涵。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to understand the social context of American dress reform movement, and its interrelations between the cult of womanhood and gendered fashion dress. The dress reform movement, often studied from the feminist or health reformers' point of view, was in fact a continuous social movement for women wearing pants. This study adopts a historical research method to investigate the dress reform movement between 1851 and 1875. Using historical data, the study first examines how the dress reform was promoted by the feminist and other social groups, and how a woman in a pantanloon was evaluated as a betrayer of the cult of womanhood. The study also examines how the fashion power and gender ideology impacts on women wearing or not wearing pants in the nineteen century American.起始頁-結束頁：785-827資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201312_43(4).00034篇名：U.S. Interlocal Energy Collaboration on Energy Efficiency, Sustainability and Climate Protection並列篇名：美國地方政府的能源合作模式：能源效率、永續性以及氣候防護策略作者：陳思先(Ssu-Hsien Chen)關鍵字：地方政府能源合作;制度性集體行動困境;能源效率;永續性;氣候防護;Interlocal energy collaboration;institutional collective action dilemmas;energy efficiency;sustainability;climate protection期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：地方政府的能源合作行為主要在於化解制度主義之集體行動困境，冀克服外部性、跨行政管轄以及搭便車的問題。實務上，美國地方政府的能源合作可窺見於節能減碳協定、跨域污染防治、綠色採購、增修綠能建築等，其合作模式可分為「契約合作機制」及「集體合作機制」。本研究於2010年進行全美國中型都市調查，研究結果顯示，當預期交易成本極高或極低時，地方政府傾向使用非正式口頭承諾來約定，意於保留最大地方自治空間及彈性。而當預期交易成本為中等程度時，正式管道合作較易進入政策選項，用以規範行為者，並降低不履行義務的風險。英文摘要：What factors facilitate interlocal energy collaboration? To what extent does collaboration through interlocal contractual mechanisms differ from that arising through collective mechanisms? This research attempts to answer these questions by examining the priorities of city governments with respect to energy-related issues as well as other institutional collective action (ICA) explanatory factors. Research data are drawn mainly from the 2010 national survey ”implementation of energy efficiency and sustainability program” conducted by Florida State University.The research findings indicate that cities' emphasis on common pool resources, economies of scales, and externality issues significantly affects individual choices of energy collaboration tools. When anticipated transaction costs are extremely high or low, informal contractual mechanisms are more likely to be employed to preserve local autonomy and flexibility; in other cases, written and formal tools for collaboration are the preferred means of imposing constraints on individual behavior and reducing the risks of defection.起始頁-結束頁：455-536資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201309_43(3).00015篇名：歐盟作為規範性權力：以國際刑事法秩序之建立為例並列篇名：EU as a Normative Power-Examining Its Contribution to International Criminal Justice作者：吳建輝(Chien-Huei Wu)關鍵字：羅馬規約;國際刑事法院;規範性權力;傳教原則;不移交協定;Rome Statute;International Criminal Court;normative power;missionary principle;Non-Surrender Agreement期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文從歐盟條約所楬櫫之歐盟對外行動所應追求之目標以及應遵循之原則，並藉由歐盟係一規範性權力之角度，討論歐盟在國際刑事法秩序建立過程中所扮演之角色。本文回顧歐盟在此議題權限之取得，以及自前南法庭、盧安達法庭及羅馬規約之批准過程中的歐盟角色，並探討歐盟如何藉由共同立場之整合及藉由單一發聲，確保其國際代表之單一性。本文認為歐盟在國際刑事法秩序之形塑過程中，扮演關鍵性角色。由於刑事法秩序之高度規範與倫理色彩，此貢獻具體體現了歐盟對外行動之目標與原則之實踐，並強化「歐盟作為規範性權力」之角色認同。英文摘要：In accordance with the objectives and principles of EU external actions as enshrined in the TEU, and from the perspective of ”the EU as a normative power,” this article examines the EU's role in pursuing international criminal justice. This article investigates the evolution of the EU's judicial practices and home affairs, and police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters. This article then traces the EU's contributions to the effective functioning of the ICTY and ICTR, and the universality and integrity of the ICC. It then explores the EU's response to US efforts to conclude non-surrender agreements with third countries. This article concludes that the EU has played a significant role in establishing international criminal justice systems, which underlines the importance of the objectives and principles guiding the EU's external actions and strengthens the EU's normative image.起始頁-結束頁：537-593資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201309_43(3).00026篇名：尊重生命尊嚴、墮胎權與女性人權之論述生產與社會變革：美國最高法院Gonzales v. Carhart一案評析並列篇名：Producing Discourses and Furthering Social Change in the Realms of Respect for the Dignity of Human Life, Right to Abortion and Women Rights-An Analysis on Gonzales v. Carhart作者：陳宜倩(Yi-Chien Chen)關鍵字：生育自主;墮胎罪;終止懷孕權;部分生產式墮胎;女性人權;reproductive autonomy;criminal abortion;the right to terminate pregnancy;partial-birth abortion;women rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：本論文分析美國聯邦最高法院Gonzales案之判決，焦點著重於不同陣營之論述與對特定概念爭論之知識生產，及這些論述、知識生產背後所反映的意識形態或立場所可能蘊涵及促進之變革。作者深切關心的是本案判決中許多概念之基本範疇認識論（如「胚胎╱胎兒」、「女人╱母體」之社會建構等）與世界觀，以及這些理解對女性人權的可能蘊涵。如缺乏對社會結構與平等、正義價值之解析，與對不同認識論之自覺反省，法律與公共政策易淪為政治表態與形式多數表決結果，將可能造成庶民對法律之不信任與疏離感，作者希望在此前提下重新認真看待法律與公共政策。英文摘要：This article provides analysis of the US Supreme Court decision of Gonzales v. Carhart and unpacks issues pertinent to the production and deployment of certain concepts and discourses in different camps on the abortion rights issue in the US. The author employs perspectives inspired by feminist jurisprudence and gender studies, and explores the ideologies reflected in the discourses and knowledge production, and the possible interpretations and changes that could be made in the wake of this decision. Concepts such as fetus, woman/mother, respect for the dignity of human life, and the related world views and the potential implications for the pursuit of women's rights are also examined in the article.起始頁-結束頁：595-635資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201309_43(3).00037篇名：不歧視原則之經濟社會權利保障效力：歐洲人權公約當代課題並列篇名：The Non-Discrimination Principle in the Protection of Economic and Social Rights-A Contemporary Challenge for the European Convention on Human Rights作者：翁燕菁(Vivianne Yen-Ching Weng)關鍵字：不歧視原則;經濟社會權利可裁判性;動態解釋;權利有效保障;差別待遇;Non-Discrimination Principle;Justiciability of Economic and Social Rights;Dynamic Interpretation;Effectiveness of Rights;Difference in Treatment期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷3期出版年：2013中文摘要：基於實質有效權利保障原則，經社權利滲入歐洲人權公約行之有年，而公約第14條（不歧視原則）之運用，則相對饒富新意。公約實質權利條款保障事物範圍與時俱進，第14條爰得反轉自身配件性質為救援特質，於國家積極義務範疇中，藉其「客觀且合理」之比例原則，限縮國家評斷餘地並協助排除社會政策制定之任意性。其尤與私人家庭生活及財產權相輔相成，系統性發揮經社權利保障效力。惟此救援力之開發，約以歐洲共識為界：就爭議尚巨者，宜暫藉實質權利條款之但書為被告國保留裁量權。凡此應屬歐洲人權法院對公約當代課題之務實回應。英文摘要：The cause of advancing economic and social rights via the European Convention on Human Rights has long benefited from the principle of effective rights, while the use of Article 14 (non-discrimination principle) in this regard seems to have recently come into fashion. Initially of ancillary importance, Article 14 may come to the fore when the fact at issue falls within the scope of certain substantive provisions of the Convention. For instance, in the fields of economic and social rights, State Parties normally enjoy a large margin of appreciation under the Convention. Under Article 14, the Strasbourg Court has the authority to compel State Parties to defend differential treatment on the basis of objective and reasonable grounds, even on issues of economic and social rights. That said, invoking this Article against State Parties may overreach the understood European consensus. In the absence of some minimum common denominators, the Strasbourg judges can give priority to a substantive provision that leaves greater latitude to the defending State. Such pragmatism should be considered a prudent approach to contemporary challenges to the Convention.起始頁-結束頁：637-707資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201309_43(3).00048篇名：美國最高法院對工作場所性騷擾爭議之最新判決：Crawford v. Nashville一案之評析並列篇名：The Newest Case Regarding Sexual Harassment in the Workplace as Decided by the U.S. Supreme Court-A Review of Crawford v. Nashville作者：焦興鎧(Cing-Kae Chiao)關鍵字：1964年民權法第七章;工作場所性騷擾;雇主法律責任;禁止報復條款;內部申訴機制;Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;sexual harassment in the workplace;employer liability;anti-retaliation provision;internal complaint system期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文之目的，是希望由對美國最高法院在Crawford v. Nashville一案之判決，對1964年民權法第七章之禁止報復條款作一整體之說明，並根據學術及實務界對該院此一判決結果所做之評析，來探討此一判決之優劣得失及所未能解決之爭議。此外，由於我國目前根據性別工作平等法所建構之防治工作場所性騷擾法制，大體上是師法美國之做法，加重雇主在這方面預防及處理上法律責任，且亦設有免遭報復之條款，因此，對美國經驗所能提供之啟示，亦將一併加以討論，俾便讓雇主在處理此類勞資爭議時，亦得以有所遵循。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to give a comprehensive overview of an important decision rendered by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2009, which concerns employer liability in combating sexual harassment in the workplace. In Crawford v. Nashville, the Court attempts to clarify several controversies arising from the implementation of the anti-retaliation provision contained in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This paper also analyzes the merits and shortcomings of the decision, in addition to several unresolved issues in its aftermath. Furthermore, since Taiwan's Gender Equality in Employment Act of 2002 follows the U.S. model of setting up an anti-retaliation regime in that Act to impose a similar obligation on employers when handling this type of dispute in their work places, this paper also discusses whether the American experience can provide any guidance for Taiwan to deter its local employers from adopting any retaliatory measures when they are processing these disputes.起始頁-結束頁：255-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201306_43(2).00019篇名：歐洲聯盟碳均衡系統與世界貿易組織多邊貿易規則相容性之研究：以邊境稅調整措施為例並列篇名：The European Union's Carbon Equalization System and Its Compatibility with the World Trade Organization's Multilateral Trade Rules-The Case of Border Tax Adjustments作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：氣候變遷;碳均衡系統;碳洩漏;邊境稅調整;排放交易系統;climate change;carbon equalization system;carbon leakage;border tax adjustments;Emission Trading System期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：由於國際間欠缺強而有力的國際協定以有效對抗氣候變遷的衝擊，若干國家遂自行採取單邊政策措施。歐盟的碳排放交易系統即為一例，其方案設定在歐盟碳排放量的限制。然而其他國家卻未必致力於降低溫室氣體排放，相形之下，歐盟所實施的方案可能導致歐盟能源密集產業，相較於其他國家不受類似限制之產業，處於競爭劣勢。為了解決碳洩漏與競爭力的問題，歐盟採取碳均衡系統以利公平競爭，包括實施邊境稅調整之措施。而該等措施是否符合世界貿易組織多邊貿易協定之規範，乃是本文探討之重點。英文摘要：In the absence of any robust international agreements to combat climate change, some countries and organizations have undertaken unilateral policies and measures. One such example is the European Union's emissions trading system-a program that sets limits on the quantities of authorized carbon emissions within the EU. This system places the EU's energy-intensive industries at a competitive disadvantage with respect to foreign firms not so constrained. In order to address carbon emissions and competitiveness through climate change policies, the European Union proposed leveling the playing field by implementing the Carbon Equalization System, including border tax adjustments. This paper examines whether those measures are compatible with multilateral trade agreements under the World Trade Organization.起始頁-結束頁：305-352資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201306_43(2).000210篇名：從關稅走向非關稅自由化之歐盟經貿策略：以歐韓FTA之服務貿易監管措施與技術性貿易障礙規範為例並列篇名：Beyond Tariffs-EU Trade Policy, Service Trade Regulations and TBT in the KOREU FTA作者：顏慧欣(Huai-Shing Yen)關鍵字：歐盟－韓國自由貿易協定;非關稅貿易障礙;服務貿易監管措施;技術性貿易障礙;新世代FTA;EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement;non-tariff barriers;service trade domestic regulations;technical barriers to trade;new generation FTA期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：隨著多邊與雙邊經貿活動之發展，各國貨品關稅已大幅降低。在此趨勢下，歐盟對外經貿政策，已由關稅減讓，朝向消除如服務貿易監管措施、商品與食品之檢驗檢疫、智財權等非關稅貿易障礙。在世界貿易組織對非關稅貿易障礙之規範強度偏低的情況下，雙邊自由貿易協定已成為各國推動非關稅貿易障礙自由化之主要機制。本文以「歐韓自由貿易協定」這個歐盟於2006年新經貿政策後第一個完成之「新世代」雙邊協定為例，探討歐盟透過雙邊架構，降低與消除服務貿易監管措施與技術性貿易障礙措施等非關稅貿易障礙之重點與模式。英文摘要：In light of multilateral and bilateral trade liberalization movements in recent decades, there has been a significant reduction in tariff barriers to trade between nations. Against this background, the EU's new trade policy is shifting from the traditional paradigm of tariff concessions to the reduction and elimination of non-tariff trade barriers. As the multilateral regime under the World Trade Organization provides inadequate instruments for the reduction of non-tariff barriers, bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTA) have become the preferred platform for addressing such issues. This paper takes the recently enacted EU-Korea FTA as one such example to explore the EU's strategy for reducing non-tariff barriers. There is a wide spectrum of non-tariff barrier issues, and the focus of this paper is on the use of discipline measures to reduce barriers associated with domestic regulations of service trade and technical barriers to trade (TBT) measures.起始頁-結束頁：353-413資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201306_43(2).000311篇名：《精神現象學》中的思辯命題並列篇名：The Speculative Proposition in the "Phenomenology of Spirit"作者：劉創馥(Chong-Fuk Lau)關鍵字：黑格爾;思辯命題;命題形式;精神現象學;邏輯學;Hegel;Speculative Proposition;Form of Proposition;Phenomenology of Spirit;Science of Logic期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文分析黑格爾《精神現象學》序言中的思辯命題理論。黑格爾在不同著作反覆批評命題或判斷的形式，他認為主謂詞的結構不適合表達哲學真理。黑格爾在《精神現象學》的序言討論一種另類的動態命題觀，以同一命題代表，視之為主謂詞之間的往返運動。不少黑格爾學者認為，思辯命題就是這種另類的命題形式，專門用來表述黑格爾的思辯哲學。本文批評這種解釋，指出黑格爾並非要構作任何另類的命題形式，而是以一種獨特的手法運用命題，突顯命題形式的預設和限制，從而建立真理的整體論。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the theory of speculative proposition in the Preface to Hegel's ”Phenomenology of Spirit”. Hegel repeatedly criticizes the form of proposition or judgment in his writings, maintaining that the subject-predicate structure is inadequate to express philosophical truth. In the Preface to his ”Phenomenology of Spirit”, Hegel discusses an alternative, dynamic conception of proposition, viewing the proposition of identity as a back-and-forth movement between subject and predicate. Many Hegel scholars believe that the speculative proposition is this alternative form of proposition, designed specifically for presenting Hegel's speculative philosophy. This paper argues against this interpretation, showing that Hegel does not aim to construct any alternative form of proposition, but rather employs propositions in a peculiar way to reveal the presuppositions and limitations of the propositional form in order to establish his holism of truth.起始頁-結束頁：415-453資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201306_43(2).000412篇名：「氣候變遷與歐美政策回應」專題緒論並列篇名：An Introduction to Climate Change and Policy Responses by the EU and the USA作者：洪德欽(Der-Chin Horng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201303_43(1).000113篇名：歐盟做為全球環境行為者：以其在氣候變化綱要公約之參與為例並列篇名：The EU as a Global Environment Actor-A Case Study of Its Participation in the UNFCCC作者：吳建輝(Chien-Huei Wu)關鍵字：歐盟做為全球行為者;氣候變化綱要公約;京都議定書;責任共享協議;真誠合作原則;EU as a global actor;UNFCCC;Kyoto Protocol;Burden Sharing Agreement;Principle of Sincere Cooperation期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文主要藉由歐盟環境政策之法律基礎演變，探求歐盟環境政策權限擴張的歷程，並勾勒歐盟如何藉由內部權限的取得，以支撐其在區域乃至於國際環境政治議題逐漸取得全球行為者之角色。就歐盟做為一個全球氣候變化政策之行為者而言，其成功將區域經濟整合組織納入氣候變化綱要公約之締約主體，使得共同體得以簽署該公約；歐盟並藉由經貿議題與氣候變化議題之連結，成功說服俄羅斯批准京都議定書。歐盟適時把握美國退出國際環境政治之契機，取得在氣候變化議題之領導者地位。然而，由於氣候變化議題屬歐盟與會員國之共享權限，對內與對外均可能面臨挑戰。因而，在歐盟與會員國立場之一致與各部門政策之一貫，則顯得格外重要。就此目的之達成，真誠合作原則具有高度之價值。英文摘要：This article examines the legal basis of the EU's competence in environment affairs with a view to ascertaining how the expansion of internal competence supports EU external action in international environmental policies. With respect to climate change, firstly, the EU was successful in including a ”regional economic integration organisation” in the UNFCCC, which provides a legal basis for the EU to become a Contracting Party to it; and, secondly, in assuming a leadership role in global climate change politics when the US retreated from environmental politics, and successfully persuading the Russian Federation to ratify the Kyoto Protocol with trade and environment linkages. However, given that environmental affairs are a shared competence between the EU and its Members States, as the EU seeks to lead the fight against global climate change it may confront internal challenges as well as external challenges. Therefore, the consistency of the positions of the EU and its Members States, and  coherence among different policies objectives, are key to EU success as a leading actor in the fight against global climate change. Thus, the principle of sincere cooperation plays a critical role in ensuring the consistency, coherence, and unity of EU international representation.起始頁-結束頁：27-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201303_43(1).000214篇名：全球治理與氣候變遷：評估哥本哈根會議（COP15）決策機制的衝擊與對策並列篇名：Global Governance and Climate Change-An Assessment of Challenges and Strategies Related to the COP15 Decision-Making Mechanism作者：曹俊漢(Jiun-Han Tsao)關鍵字：聯合國氣候變遷框架公約;締約方會議;哥本哈根會議;全球治理;UNFCCC;Conference of Parties;Copenhagen Conference(COP15);Global Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：近三十年來氣候變遷對人類環境的影響至鉅，且愈來愈明顯。全球治理也是大勢所趨，無法規避的課題。1994年《聯合國氣候變遷框架公約》的制定即在為要求本公約各締約方，共同承認此一地球氣候的變化因而影響人類生活的危機，同時謀求解決人類活動大幅增加大氣中溫室氣體的濃度，致而增強自然溫室效應的影響。本文以公約第7條有關「締約方會議」的機制，來觀察氣候變遷相關法規的制定、政策的擬定、規則的研究、執行的細則等掌理氣候政策的制定與執行的機構。同時以2009年在哥本哈根舉行的第十五次締約方會議做個案觀察，分析氣候政策的全球治理模式，以及其面臨決策機制的衝擊，並提出解決的對策。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to analyze the ”United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,”hereafter referred to as UNFCCC). Particular attention is paid to the organizational structure and operational mechanism of the ”Conference of Parties, COP” under Article 7 of the UNFCCC. In the 16 years between 1995 and 2010, the COP failed to carry out aims related to the objectives, principles, commitments and financial mechanisms of the UNFCCC, which are required to measure achievements regarding greater energy efficiency, and to control greenhouse gas emissions. The performance of operating mechanism for governing climate change under the UNFCCC represents a ”governance failure.” Using the case study of the Copenhagen Conference (COP15) decision-making mechanism, this study attempts to explore relevant questions regarding why well-established COPs, supported by the public sector, private sector and the third sector of the world as a whole, is failing to play a constructive role in policy planning and implementation. This study considers the design of the COP with a view to enhancing its governance capacity.起始頁-結束頁：89-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201303_43(1).000315篇名：氣候變遷與環境難民保障機制之研究：國際法規範體系與歐美國家之實踐並列篇名：Protection Measures Relating to Climate Change and Environmental Refugees-International Law Regime and the Practices of the EU and the USA作者：王震宇(Blake C. Y. Wang)關鍵字：環境難民;氣候變遷難民;國際人權法;國際難民法;國際環境法;environmental refugee;climate change refugee;International Human Rights Law;International Refugee Law;International Environmental Law期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：氣候變遷與環境難民是當代國際社會中特殊的現象，這些因受氣候變遷與環境影響而流離失所者，只能離開原居住地尋找安全處所定居，上述問題已無法以內國法有效處理。氣候變遷與環境難民在國際法上之定位仍有爭議，如何在尋求國際保護同時，又不違反國際法原則，國際社會必須密切合作，找出氣候變遷與環境難民保障機制之法律基礎，甚至制定新的氣候變遷與難民公約。本文以現有的國際難民保障體系為架構，並參酌歐美國家之實踐，提出以國際難民法、國際人權法、國際環境法等交錯競合的全新思維出發，試圖以多元思維的角度因應此複雜問題。英文摘要：Environmental Refugees constitute a unique phenomenon in the modern international community. These environmentally-displaced persons are affected by climate change or other environmental factors, such as drought, soil salinization, desertification, deforestation, which result in environmental degradation that make their homelands unsafe to inhabit. These people have no alternative but to leave home in search of more secure environments in which to live. Some environmental refugees migrate across borders, while others are internally displaced. The status and definition of environmental refugees are still controversial under international legal regimes. States and international organizations (especially the UNHCR) need to cooperate closely to build the legal foundations of a global governance regime to deal with environmental refugees.起始頁-結束頁：149-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201303_43(1).000416篇名：The Effect of Personal Religiosity on Attitudes toward Abortion, Divorce, and Gender Equality-Does Cultural Context Make a Difference?並列篇名：個人宗教觀對於墮胎、離婚及性別平權態度之影響：文化背景有關係嗎？作者：艾美•亞當契克(Amy Adamczyk)關鍵字：宗教;墮胎;離婚;性別平等;文化;religion;abortion;divorce;gender equality;culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：43卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：每個人對於墮胎、離婚以及性別平等的態度相當不同；這些差異大大地反映在各國的離婚法規、對女性進行墮胎的懲罰、及女性的政治代表性上面。儘管個人的宗教信仰常被認為能顯著地形塑每個人的態度，一國的經濟發展及政治穩定性也同樣被視為是影響性道德觀及性別平等的重要因素。本研究試圖從文化社會學及宗教社會學的角度，強調個人宗教觀與國家文化傾向的交互關係，以此解釋各國在墮胎、離婚、性別平等議題上的不同輿論觀點。本文使用世界價值觀調查的第四波資料，運用階層線性模型方法，研究結果支持「求生存或自我表現傾向」這個廣泛的文化軸線，以及個人的宗教參與程度，皆會形塑人們對於墮胎及離婚的態度。再者，相較於許多撒哈拉以南的非洲國家，在諸如美國等有較強自我表現文化傾向的國家中，個人宗教信仰對於墮胎、離婚、性別平等觀點的影響較鉅。英文摘要：Across the globe, people differ considerably in their attitudes about abortion, divorce, and gender equality. These differences are reflected in the diversity of laws regulating divorce, penalties for women obtaining abortions, and differences in women’s levels of political representation. While personal religious beliefs are often seen as having a significant role in shaping attitudes, economic development and political stability are also seen to be important predictors of attitudes about sexual morality and gender equality. This study draws on ideas from cultural sociology and the sociology of religion to address the interrelationship between personal religiosity and national cultural orientations to explain cross-national variation in public opinions about abortion, divorce, and gender equality. Using data from the fourth wave of the World Values Survey and hierarchical linear modeling techniques, support is found for a broad cultural axis of survival vs. self-expressive orientations, and personal religious involvement for shaping attitudes about abortion and divorce. Moreover, personal religious involvement appears to have a greater effect on attitudes about abortion, divorce, and gender equality in countries like the United States, which have a strong self-expressive cultural orientation, than in many Sub-Saharan African nations.起始頁-結束頁：213-253資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201303_43(1).000501篇名：訪問風格與回答品質並列篇名：Interview Style and Response Quality作者：杜素豪(Su-Hao Tu)關鍵字：訪問風格;標準化訪問;彈性化訪問;訪員回應行為;回答品質;interview style;standardized interview;flexible interview;interviewer feedback;response quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：30期出版年：2013中文摘要：標準化訪問法已行之多年，目的在降低問卷訪談中來自訪員行為造成的回答誤差。不過，針對標準化訪問法是否予以彈性調整，文獻已從訪問風格的觀點進行實驗研究。由於訪問方式彈性化的拿捏得仰賴訪員且訪談行為較不易觀察，訪問風格對問卷回答的影響在國外研究中仍存在爭議，台灣則仍無相關的研究。本研究以電話訪問進行開放標準化訪問原則中對受訪者善意回應的實驗研究，利用調查結果的量化與質化資料，選擇有道德規範暗示性的婚姻生活態度題、有個人隱私與敏感疑慮的題目以及同住家人數的事實性題目，比較標準化訪問法與彈性化訪問法間回答的有效性與正確性。描述性分析的結果顯示，標準化訪問法中適度的開放彈性後，回答的有效性有些提高，正確性則降低。兩階層波爾松迴歸模式分析的結果顯示，受訪者在婚姻態度與敏感性兩類型題目中的無效回答不會因訪問方式的不同而有明顯的差異。是否彈性開放訪員回應行為只對婚姻態度題目之回答正確性有明顯的影響。比起標準化訪問，彈性化訪問中的回答會重複錯誤的機率較高。本研究發現雖呼應個人訪問法的回答正確性較低，但與類似針對開放訪員感情性回應行為的研究結果則不一致，動機討好理論仍有待更多實驗研究加以證實。英文摘要：Standardized interviews have been adopted for several decades to reduce response bias derived from interviewer-related errors. There has been debate over the extent to which the standardized interview can be flexible in the literature. The feasibility of flexible interviews is still uncertain due to the difficulty of observing interview interaction which is mostly dependent on the interviewer. While previous studies have not come to any conclusion, there is no related study in Taiwan. This study takes interviewer feedback regulated in a standardized telephone interview as an example to examine whether flexible feedback behavior can improve response quality among factual, socially desirable and sensitive personal questions.The results integrate quantitative data with qualitative data and show that the percentage of invalid responses is lower in the interview with flexible feedback than that in the standardized interview, but the opposite trend was found in response bias. A two-level Hierarchical Poisson Regression Model shows that interview style exerts no significant effect on the occurrence of invalid responses to socially desirable and sensitive personal questions, but significantly influences whether response bias repeatedly occurs on attitudes toward marriage. The chance of having response bias is higher in flexible interviews than that in standardized interviews. The present findings are similar to previous findings on more response bias in personal interviews than in standardized interviews, but deviant from the results based on the same design of experiment in the previous studies. More experimental studies on the theory of motivation and ingratiation are needed.起始頁-結束頁：7-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：台灣高所得者所得份額之變化：1977－2010並列篇名：Distribution of Income Shares of Top Incomes in Taiwan: 1977-2010作者：洪明皇(Ming-Hwang Hong);鄭文輝(Peter Wen-Hui Cheng)關鍵字：所得不均;高所得者;柏瑞圖分配;income inequality;top incomes;Pareto distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：30期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以1977－2010年綜合所得稅統計資料搭配Pareto分配插補法，勾勒台灣高所得者的所得份額變化並與歐美及亞洲國家對照。我們發現台灣高所得者所得份額自1990年代中期到2008年間有快速增加的趨勢，而所得份額增加的源頭是「超高所得者」的所得快速累積。全球金融海嘯對台灣高所得者有明顯衝擊，但高所得者的所得份額在2010年已快速回升。本研究的貢獻在於利用綜合所得稅統計資料，描繪有別於家庭收支調查的高所得者所得分配樣貌。英文摘要：This study references Taiwan income tax statistics from 1977 to 2010 to discuss the changes in top income shares using Pareto interpolation, and to compare the changes in top incomes of Taiwan with those of western and Asian countries. The research results discover that the top income shares accumulated rapidly from the middle of 1990s to 2008, because of the dramatic increase of ”very top incomes.” Although the global financial crisis significantly influenced top incomes in Taiwan, the top income shares rebounded in 2010 and increased rapidly. The contribution of this study is the utilization of statistical data regarding individual income taxes by plotting income distributions of the top incomes that differ from that of the Survey of Family Income and Expenditure.起始頁-結束頁：47-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：台灣民眾對基因改造產品之接受度：一般化行為模式之提出及驗證並列篇名：Modelling and Examining Consumer Attitudes toward Genetically Modified Products in Taiwan Using a Generalized Behavior Framework作者：傅祖壇(Tsu-Tan Fu);盧淑芫(Su-Yuan Lu);黃美瑛(Mei-Ying Huang)關鍵字：基因改造產品;台灣;民眾接受度;中介效果;genetically modified product;Taiwan;consumer acceptance;mediating effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：30期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在探究台灣民眾對基因改造產品接受性之行為模式，文中我們提出了一個一般化模式，並利用台灣資料進行驗證。研究結果發現包含有中介變數之間接效果模式比較能解釋台灣民眾對基因改造產品之接受行為。民眾對自然與環境之態度、對基因科技之知識，及對組織與政府之信任等變數，會經由知覺風險與知覺利益變數之中介，而影響其對基因改造產品之接受度。我們亦發現：接受度之重要影響因子，會因為基因改造食品之生物體與功能上差異而不同。英文摘要：This paper intends to investigate the behavior of Taiwanese consumer attitudes toward genetically modified products. We develop a generalized framework and empirically examine such consumer behavior in Taiwan. Our results find that the indirect-effect model with mediating variables explains Taiwanese acceptance of genetically modified products better than the direct-effect model does. The mediating variables such as perceived risk and perceived benefit play a vital role in explaining the influences of consumer attitudes toward nature and the environment, knowledge of genomic technology, and trust toward institutions and governments on the acceptance of genetically modified products. We also find that the important factors underlying such acceptance behavior may vary by genetically modified product.起始頁-結束頁：97-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：多階層取樣單位異質性對科學調查之母體推論研究並列篇名：Heterogeneity of Multi-level Primary Sampling Units on Population Inference in Scientific Research作者：蔡良庭(Liang-Ting Tsai);楊志堅(Chih-Chien Yang)關鍵字：取樣設計;取樣權重;確認性因素分析;分層隨機取樣;規模等比率取樣;sampling design;sampling weight;confirmatory factor analysis;stratified random sampling;probability proportional to size期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：29期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究以Bootstrap重複取樣程序，評估分層隨機取樣（stratified random sampling）及規模等比率取樣（probability proportional to size），對於調查研究的母體推論影響。調查研究的資料常包含多層次的結構，而分析必須搭配適當的取樣權重，才能正確推論母體特性（蔡良庭、楊志堅，2008）。權重的計算又隨不同取樣設計而計算方式不同，但此權重計算的差異對於母體特性的推論，卻最常被忽略，也需更進一步驗證。本研究以數值模擬方法並搭配臺灣社會變遷調查的實徵資料分析，探討不同權重的計算對於母體推論的影響。結果顯示，若忽略了取樣單位間的樣本數差異，採用分層隨機取樣設計時，取樣數愈多，母群體特性的推論愈不精確。規模等比率的取樣設計及權重計算能提供更精準的母體推論。英文摘要：In this study, the Str. RS (stratified random sampling) and PPS (probability proportional to size) sampling procedures were used to evaluate the heterogeneity of multi-level primary sampling units on population inference in social science research. When a social science survey has complexly designed sampling frames, the Str. RS and PPS are often applied. However, the effects of different sampling weights within these two methods on the inference of population characteristics are often neglected. A numerical simulation study and a real data analysis on Taiwan Social Change Survey data with a further extension confirmatory factor analysis model based on Yang and Tsai (2008) were proposed in this study. Independent variables manipulated in this study include the sampling designs, data type (continuous or categorical), sampling size, and heterogeneity of PSU. The results suggest the PPS sampling design can provide a more precise parameter estimate of CFA models in a complexly designed sampling frame survey, whether the data type is continuous or categorical. We summarize the findings and recommend the PPS multistage procedure based on the bootstrap method that can be used in practical social science survey applications.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：民意認知、媒體報導與政府統計的一致與分歧之探究：以2010年大臺南市三合一選舉為例並列篇名：A Study of Information Consistency and Divergence among Public Perception, Media Reports and Official Statistics: A Case of a Three-in-one Election of Greater Tainan City in 2010作者：鄭敏惠(Ming-Huei Cheng);莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang)關鍵字：民意調查;媒體報導;政府統計;賄選;媒體建構;public opinion polls;media reports;official statistics;election bribery;media construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：29期出版年：2013中文摘要：民意調查是一種對個人的認知、態度與行為的主觀測量，在政治與公共政策上的應用非常廣泛；然而，對於敏感性議題（sensitive issues）或社會道德議題（moral issue）的測量，民意調查的主觀測量是否仍具有效度一直是備受質疑；再者，媒體報導是影響民眾認知的主要因素，而民意認知與媒體報導之間的一致性迄今仍無定論；最後，政府統計資訊在賄選、治安等方面常有「黑數」，與民眾的主觀認知或媒體報導之間往往出現極大的落差，常引發是否可信的爭論。就議題屬性而言，賄選實屬於敏感性和社會道德議題，多元的資訊來源之間究竟是一致或分歧，在理論與實務上均屬值得探討的議題。因之，本研究以2010年大臺南市三合一選舉為分析案例，以鄉鎮市區為分析單位，透過民意調查與台灣反賄選文獻之檢視，結合問卷調查、內容分析、次級資料分析等方法，以三角驗證法（triangulation）交叉檢證三合一選舉的民意調查、媒體報導與政府統計之間的關聯性，以探究民意調查與其他資訊來源之一致性程度，推論民意調查在敏感性議題的應用性，並根據研究發現在方法上與實務上進行討論。英文摘要：The public poll is a subjective measurement of the individual's perception, attitude and behavior, which has broadly been used in politics and public policy. It also has high credibility and reference value. For the measurement of sensitive issues or social moral issues, however, its validity has often been questioned. Evidence-based investigations of public opinion polls are few. The nature of election bribery is a sensitive issue as well as a social moral issue. Additionally, Taiwan has also been strengthening the inspection of election bribery recently. Thus, it is worthwhile to examine the consistency and divergence of information on election bribery among public opinion polls, media reports and official statistics. This paper tries to analyze the case of the three-in-one election of Greater Tainan City in 2010. This research uses the township as the analysis unit and conducts comparative analysis by the triangulation method, which includes survey, content analysis and secondary data analysis. Our results demonstrate a correlation among public opinion polls, media reports and official statistics. We discuss the methods and practice also.起始頁-結束頁：37-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：Do Consumers Really Care about Biodiversity? Large Scale Choice-Experimental Evidence of Genetically Modified Soymilk in Taiwan並列篇名：消費者是否在意生物多樣性？以臺灣基改豆漿為例作者：楊豐安(Feng-An Yang);張宏浩(Hung-Hao Chang)關鍵字：基改豆漿;願付價格;生物多樣性;臺灣;GM soymilk;willingness to pay;biodiversity;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：29期出版年：2013中文摘要：過去研究消費者基因改造食品購買行為的文獻多著重於價格及個人社經特質的分析，探討消費者購買行為與環境保護關係的文獻卻付之闕如。本研究旨在探討消費者生物多樣性認知對其基因改造食品購買行為之影響。本研究使用2011年進行的臺灣基因體意向調查面訪資料，以順序羅吉斯模型估計消費者購買基因改造食品的決策行為。研究結果顯示消費者對基因改造食品的需求不僅僅受價格的影響，環境保護亦是重要的影響因子，當消費者了解基因改造食品的生產過程會破壞自然環境後，消費者會傾向不購買基改豆漿，除此之外，我們也發現消費者對市場價格和環境保護之間的補償作用為非線性關係。英文摘要：Although there is no lack of empirical evidence on the determinants of genetically modified (GM) food purchase behavior, most of the available studies focus on the effects of market price and individual socio-economic characteristics. Far less is known about whether consumers will respond to environmental protection in their purchase decisions. This paper contributes to an enormous body of literature on the demand for GM food by taking biodiversity protection into account. In particular, we investigate a trade-off between consumers' willingness to pay and the conservation of biodiversity. Using a large scale choice-experimental survey dataset of 1,188 individuals, drawn from the Taiwan Genomic Survey conducted in 2011, we estimate a sequential logit model for the sequential decision making process. Our results show that demand for GM food is not simply determined by market price, but is also highly correlated with consumers' awareness of biodiversity conservation. Consumers would be less likely to purchase GM soymilk if the GM production process damages the environment. Moreover, the trade-off between market prices and conservation of biodiversity is found to be non-linear.起始頁-結束頁：81-103資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：區域抽樣在調查研究上的應用並列篇名：Application of Area Sampling in Surveys作者：楊宏仁(Hung-Jen Yang);楊雪華(Hsieh-Hua Yang);汪正中(Cheng-Chung Wang)關鍵字：區域抽樣設計;調查研究;系統抽樣;area sampling;survey;systematic sampling期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：29期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究應用一可替代戶籍資料取樣的區域抽樣架構，及運用系統抽樣與單一區域抽樣一人的設計，計算各鄉鎮市區的人口數，並以自行開發的程式，以確實得到區域抽樣的面訪座標點。經由實地的面訪工作後，對於有效樣本基本資料的分析，驗證其抽樣結果，性別的分佈與母群沒有差異；各縣市人口所占比例，除馬祖地區外，與母群的縣市人口比例相符；且部分年齡分層上亦接近母群的分佈。此一替代戶籍資料取樣的區域抽樣設計，希冀在未來缺乏戶籍資料情境之下，能作為全國性調查抽樣設計的參考。英文摘要：Area Sampling was applied in this study. It is an alternative to census sampling, Based on the criterion of systematic sampling, an area sampling framework was designed. Using a self-developed program, coordinate points were calculated within one area sample. The participants came from the coordinate points. Data were collected by face-to-face interviews. Age and gender of the participants were analyzed to verify the representativeness of sampling results. The results showed that area sampling is an alternative method to census sampling.起始頁-結束頁：105-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
