01篇名：部分調整行為之估價平滑－以地價基準地重估價為例並列篇名：Appraisal Smoothing of Partial Adjustment Behavior: Evidence from Revaluation of Land Value Benchmark作者：游適銘(Shih-Ming You)關鍵字：估價平滑;部分調整;重估價;地價基準地;Appraisal Smoothing;Partial Adjustment;Revaluation;Land Value Benchmark期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：相較於以往探討估價平滑之文獻，多採總體層級（aggregate level）方式探討，藉估值指數變異數小於成交價格指數變異數進行平滑之研究；本文則以個體層級為出發點，蒐集全國各直轄市、縣（市）地價基準地之重估價資料，觀察估價平滑與部分調整行為之情形。首先參考Quan and Quigley（1991）提出之理性調整模型分析市場價格參考點與當期估值之關係，探討估價人員是否因信心不足採取較保守的部分調整更新策略，以至於估價平滑現象產生。研究結果發現，整體估價之信心參數為0.59，相對大於前次估值之權重0.399，具有部分調整現象。其次，就市場信心參數較低之臺中市，不同估價方法估值標準差之比例每增加1%，信心程度將減少0.11。估價年資每提高一年，信心程度將增加0.0219。代表基準地相較於一般基準地，信心程度增加0.74。英文摘要：Opposed to past literature studying the appraisal smoothing, which discussed the reduced volatility and/or lagging in the appraisal based index compared to a contemporaneous transaction based index from aggregate level, this paper observed the appraisal smoothing caused by partial adjustment from individual level using revaluation data on land value benchmark nationwide. By reference of rational adjustment model proposed by Quan and Quigley (1991) analyzing the relationship between the market transaction reference point and contemporaneous appraisal, this paper researched whether appraisal smoothing occur or not due to partial adjustment strategy for that valuers are lack of confidence and being conservative. The empirical results showed that the overall appraisal confidence factor is 0.59, which is greater than the weight, 0.399, of the prior appraisal. The partial adjustment behavior existed. Moreover, for Taichung city, whose market confidence parameter is lower, the confidence factor decreased 0.11 when the standard deviation ratio of different appraisal from approaches increased 1%. The confidence factor increased 0.0219 if the appraisal career increased one year. The confidence factor increased 0.74 from the representative land value benchmark opposed to the base, ordinary land value benchmark.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201405_17(1).00012篇名：應用粒子群演算法改善傳統二次曲面擬合區域性大地起伏－以台中地區為例並列篇名：Applying Particle Swarm Optimization to Improve Traditional Quadratic Surface Fitting Local Geoidal Undulation Model-A Case Study in Taichung Area作者：甯方璽(Fang-Shii Ning);陳佳菱(Chia-Ling Chen)關鍵字：粒子群演算法;區域性大地起伏;Particle Swarm Optimization;Local Geoid期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究結合實驗區現有已施測一等水準點正高及水準點上GPS測得之平面坐標和橢球高，以粒子群演算法改善傳統二次曲面擬合區域性大地起伏精度，研究結果顯示，採用粒子群演算法改善傳統二次曲面所建立之區域性大地起伏模型，其檢核點的均方根誤差精度可達到± 1.02 cm，且不須計算任何參數。英文摘要：This study intends to integrate the existing 1st order leveling data, GPS coordinates and ellipsoidal height to find out the geoidal undulation model of Taichung city. The main simulation is done by adopting Particle Swarm Optimization to better fit local geoid by traditional quadratic surface. In accordance with the experiment, we propose an improved result by using the Particle Swarm Optimization and showing a computed Root Mean Square Error about ± 1.02cm without imposing any parametrical restrictions.起始頁-結束頁：23-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201405_17(1).00023篇名：土地徵收與土壤污染責任並列篇名：Taking and Soil Pollution Liabilities作者：蔡玉娟(Yu-Chuan Tsai)關鍵字：土地徵收;土壤污染;土壤及地下水污染整治法;不動產;褐地;環境;Environment;Brownfield;Real Estate;Soil pollution;Soil and Groundwater Pollution Remediation Act;Taking期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：土壤污染的形成往往透過污染物質經年累月之累積，因此具有在早期不易發覺之特性。為解決過去土壤污染之問題，台灣於2000年制定土壤及地下水污染整治法，又於2010年大幅修正土壤及地下水污染整治法，擴大責任主體與責任範圍。然而土地資源不單為公共財，其尚得依法律規定作為私有財產，並透過各項交易行為機制，移轉於各主體之間。本文以較鮮被探討之土地徵收行為為主軸，探討其土壤及地下水污染整治法上污染整治責任之歸屬。英文摘要：Soil pollution is formatted by the long years of accumulation of pollutants and not easily found in the early days. To solve past soil pollution issues, Taiwan enacted Soil and Groundwater Pollution Remediation Act in 2000. In 2010, Taiwan amended the Act to expand the areas of responsible subjects and liabilities. However, the land resource is not only the public property; it may also be the private property in accordance to the laws and transferred between the different subjects through the trading mechanism. This article selected taking issue which was less mentioned by related research materials, and analyze how to allocate soil pollution liabilities to related subjects when taking soil polluted lands for public use.起始頁-結束頁：37-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201405_17(1).00034篇名：傳統農業縣的石化課題：檢視六輕環境爭議與治理困境並列篇名：The Petrochemical Lesson for the Agricultural County: Reviewing Yunlin County's Environmental Supervision on the Sixth Naphtha Cracking Plant作者：杜文苓(Wen-Ling Tu);施佳良(Chia-Liang Shih);蔡宛儒(Wan-Ju Tsai)關鍵字：石化;六輕;雲林縣政府;地方環境治理;管制政策;Petrochemical;Six Naphtha;Yunlin County;Local Environmental Governance;Regulatory Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：台塑於1986年獲准興建第六套輕油裂解廠（六輕），尋找廠址的過程歷經宜蘭利澤、桃園觀音，最後於1991年選定雲林縣麥寮鄉，進行填海造陸與建廠計畫。六輕廠區占地面積2603公頃，包含煉油廠、輕油裂解廠、汽電共生廠等多項工程，二十多年來擴建工程不斷，已發展為世界級的石化專區。然而，六輕自興建起也常伴隨著許多健康風險、環境的爭議，近兩年來工安意外頻傳，使得台塑管理的系統性問題浮上檯面，也成為雲林縣地方環境治理的首要議題。雲林縣為台灣主要農業與花卉產地，在縣政府的規劃下，以「農業首都」作為地方的發展願景。但是其境內卻又存有著不斷產生環境爭議的石化專區。以農業為基礎的發展思維，以及農業縣的地方政府規模及人力，要如何面對龐大的石化工業園區的管理問題？地方政府如何因應頻繁發生的健康風險爭議、環境爭議，以及各樣的工安事件？地方政府在人力和專業技能如何進行培養與應變，在在都是重要的地方環境治理的議題。據此，本文從地方環境治理與管制政策的角度，分析地方政府在執行六輕管制監督上的作為與困局。透過分析地方政府人力編制培養、預算的分配運用，以及管制技術能力等問題，瞭解地方政府針對六輕管制監督的治理侷限，並提出突破困境之可能方向。英文摘要：The Formosa Petrochemical Corporation received permission to build the sixth naphtha cracking plant (Six Naphtha) in 1986. The site search for the Six Naphtha went from Yilan County to Taoyuan County, but the Mailiao Township of Yunlin County was eventually chosen as the construction site in 1991; where the land reclamation and factory building constructions commenced. The Sixth Naphtha covers an area of 2603 hectares and includes numerous construction projects such as oil refinery, naphtha cracking, and gas and electricity cogeneration plants. Under continuous expansion for two decades, the Sixth Naphtha has developed into a world-class petrochemical zone. However, the construction of Sixth Naphtha also accompanied numerous health risks and environmental disputes. Pollution and industrial safety accidents have became frequent in the past two years, allowing the systemic management problems of the Formosa Petrochemical Corporation to surface and become the primary topic of local environmental governance in Yunlin County. On the other hand, Yunlin County has been known as a major agricultural and floral production region in Taiwan where ”agricultural capital” has been the long-term vision for county government planning. In contrast to this vision of agricultural-based development, Yulin’s actual industrial pollution control struggles have inspired the questions raised in this research. How can a local government with an agriculture-based development ideology and the scale and manpower of an agricultural county face the colossal petrochemical industrial park management problems? How does this local government respond to the frequent health-risk and environmental disputes as well as a range of industrial safety events? How does the local government cultivate and adapt to the labor and professional skills for the local environmental governance? From an environmental governance and regulatory policy perspective, this paper endeavors to understand the limitations of the local government’s regulatory oversight by analyzing the local government’s manpower preparation and cultivation, budget allocation and use, and the technical capability for environmental control. Through the analysis, the research of this article proposes possible directions for breaking through the dilemma.起始頁-結束頁：59-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201405_17(1).000401篇名：展演健康、建構市場－法國肺炎鏈球菌疫苗市場的展演性分析並列篇名：Performing Health, Constructing Market-A Performativity Analysis of Pneumococcal Vaccine Markets in France作者：陳宗文(Tzung-Wen Chen)關鍵字：肺炎鏈球菌疫苗;疫苗市場;防疫政策;展演性;部署;pneumococcal vaccines;vaccine markets;immunization policy;performativity;dispositif期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014中文摘要：本論文以展演性（performativity）市場觀點，分析美商惠氏公司的7價結合型肺炎鏈球菌疫苗在法國的採用歷程。疫苗展演性意指其必須表現出對健康的促進有效，也就是透過疫苗廠商的在地社會部署、疫苗專業社群在制度相關方面的部署、以及疫苗作為主要行動者透過其獨特的技術屬性之部署，而使得各等部署可以表現出肺炎鏈球菌疫苗在法國確實是安全有效的，可以展演出健康的事實，並透過在地論述部署，建構出穩定的疫苗市場秩序。本論文主張新興疫苗的市場不純然是跨國藥廠的單方面策略作為，也不是僅靠國家政策的介入，而是一種脈絡化具體事實的社會建構。英文摘要：This article uses the concept of performativity, in accompaniment with a politico-cultural approach, to study the case of a new heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in France and to argue that markets of highly valued vaccines can be constructed without market failure. The new pneumococcal vaccine is performative only when it is proved to be effective and safe through various dispositifs around technological properties of the vaccine. Human and non-human actors realize these dispositifs, including social dispositifs from efforts of vaccines producers, institutional dispositifs created by vaccine expert groups, technological dispositifs from specific behaviors of the vaccine and other dispositifs contributed by pediatricians and infants' bodies. The performativity of the pneumococcal vaccine in health ensures domestic market orders and thus realizes market construction. The author argues that markets of emerging vaccines are created neither by mere strategies of vaccine companies nor through political intervention of state. Rather, the vaccine market is a contextual and concrete reality of social construction.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：社會疏離與勞動體制－深圳富士康新生代農民工的都市狀態初探並列篇名：Social Alienation and Labor Regime-A Primary Exploration of the New-generation Migrant Workers' Urbanism in Shenzhen's Foxconn City作者：楊友仁(Daniel You-Ren Yang)關鍵字：血汗工廠;疏離都市狀態;社會支持;打工體制;社會資本;勞動控制;sweatshop;alienated urbanism;social support;migrant labor regime;social capital;labor control期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014中文摘要：移工在異地的生活方式，也是一種都市狀態，富士康農民工的生活方式，某個程度是「疏離都市狀態」，社會互動機會匱乏。本文從社會學的角度探索，是怎樣的結構限制，讓深圳富士康的農民工，產生了社會疏離的生活狀態？透過實證研究，我們分析深圳富士康農民工基本的社會經濟狀況，發現普通工人在深圳成家落戶的經濟門檻非常高，以戶籍制度為代表的制度門檻，基本上也是經濟性的限制。本文強調，中國大陸轉型經濟所形構的打工體制，不利於新生代農民工的關係網絡拓展與社會資源累積，對他們的社會流動產生很大制約；其次，富士康諸多部門的勞動控制策略，係以行使專制權力來獲取工人的從屬性，有意識地打散工人可能的社會連帶，以利基層幹部操弄工作場所政治，更加劇打工體制對於民工社會生活的壓迫。我們認為受社會資本理論啟發、對於大陸社會網絡之資源流動功能的樂觀期待－社會網絡再建構論，在解釋新生代農民工之生活結構上，具有相當程度的限制。英文摘要：Although there have been extensive studies on Chinese urbanization, few researches focus on the migrant workers in the world factory city and contextualize their livelihoods in those neighborhoods. This paper pays attention to the new-generation migrant workers' way of life in Shenzheng's Foxconn city, understood as a relevant pattern of China's urbanism. Based on first-handed surveys and interviews, we find strong evidences to support the argument, namely, that ”social alienation” is a common experience to these workers. Moreover, this study illustrates the interplay of various institutional factors contributes to the alienated urbanism, including hukou system, urban policy, corporate strategies and labor control politics. Finally we argue the migrant labor regime squeezes the workers in developing their social support networks, both instrumental and emotional, and further compresses their opportunities of social flow. To conclude, we highlight the limitation of the ”social capital thesis” in understanding the new-generation workers' life opportunity in this case.起始頁-結束頁：57-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：塑化風險社會－塑化劑風暴背後之管制脈絡與結構分析並列篇名：Plasticized Risk Society-An Analysis on the Regulative Context and Structure behind the Plasticizer Event作者：周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou);徐健銘(Chien-Ming Hsu)關鍵字：雙重風險社會;食品風險治理;塑化劑;風險個人化;管制文化;Double risk society;Food Risk Governance;Plasticizer;Risk Individualization;Regulative Culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014中文摘要：塑化劑風暴是現代化進程下的新興風險，也為在地社會特殊的產業、管制與消費文化叢結問題。本文主要透過整理台灣社會多年來的食品問題與爭議、塑膠化學產業的結構與發展、民眾日常生活的慣習和消費，以及毒性化學物質的管制，試圖探討塑化劑事件的結構性脈絡。本文指出：政府行動傾向狹隘的實證主義管制邏輯，加上經濟發展優先思維，造成了台灣社會相當長期的遲滯、隱匿風險文化，並嚴重的埋藏環境賀爾蒙健康風險。亦即，最後我們將討論，此種制度性的忽視風險，逐步形成整個社會對風險的無知，導致塑化的經濟社會變成塑化風險社會；其結果是，一旦政府風險治理未改弦易轍，依舊維持其遲滯、隱匿的管制邏輯與文化，加上企業欠缺承擔社會責任壓力，則風險將轉為未爆彈、直接衝擊到脆弱的個體。而風險個人化的循環結構將徹底瓦解在地社會對食品安全治理的信心。英文摘要：Plasticizer event is a newly emerged risk in modernization progress, and a dilemma between particular industries, regulations, and consumer culture in local society. This study, mainly by sorting through problems and issues on food, the plastic industrial structure and development, the habits and consumption in masses' daily life, and the regulations on toxic materials in Taiwan society, attempted to address the structural context and risk governance problems behind the plasticizer event. It pointed out: governmental inclination to narrow positivism and thoughts put economic development first create a considerable long-termed delaying and hidden risk culture, and imbed the risk of endocrine disrupting chemicals seriously in Taiwan.Namely, we will discuss the institutional ignorance to risk gradually formed a societal ignorance to risk in the final section. It transformed the plasticized economic society to a plasticized risk society. And the result is, if the governmental risk governance remains its delaying and hidden regulative logic and culture, and the corporations are incapable of shouldering the social responsible pressure, which the risk turns to be a bomb impacting to fragile individuals,. In addition, the circulation of risk individualization will destroy the local society's confidence on the food safety governance completely.起始頁-結束頁：109-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：從人口政策到排他論述－內地孕婦赴港分娩與出生公民權的文化政治並列篇名：From Population Policy to Othering in Discourse-Pregnant Mainland Women and the Cultural Politics of Birthright Citizenship作者：黃宗儀(Michelle Tsung-Yi Huang);胡俊佳(Chun-Kai Woo);賴彥甫(Yen-Fu Lai)關鍵字：中港關係;出生公民權;文化公民權;排他論述;內地孕婦;Sino-Hong Kong relationship;birthright citizenship;cultural citizenship;othering in discourse;pregnant mainland women期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文聚焦內地孕婦赴港跨境生育現象，從性別、種族與階級等公民權的文化建構面向切入，批判地檢視近年香港的出生公民權爭議，從而說明內地孕婦是中港關係經濟與政治治理邏輯交互作用之處，更是公民權的論述空間與資源分配的具體場域。內地孕婦作為社會主體顯現了中港人口治理與經濟利益的跨境衝突與協商。一方面她們為香港私人醫院與相關產業帶來龐大收益，其港生子女被視為解決香港人口結構老化之生力軍，然而出生公民權衍生的跨境生育同時造成經濟利益與社會文化的衝突。在合理化或撤銷出生公民權的論述中，內地孕婦既是不受歡迎的外來客，又是醫療產業訴求的消費者；既是香港人口問題的出路，也是不道德的掠奪者；既是跨界生產的母親，亦是本土論述中確立中港分界的道德他者。本文將說明香港的內地孕婦案例顯示，中港跨境人口流動同時涉及經濟收益與公民權資源分配。夾雜在經濟利益與道德義理的論述中，內地孕婦的出現反映香港社會如何面對中港日益緊密的經貿關係中涉及的公民權問題，以及如何透過將內地孕婦他者化的過程，重新定義香港的本土性與文化歸屬。英文摘要：One prime example that showcases the complicated cross-border politics and the challenge of governance confronting Hong Kong is the controversy centering on the right of abode in 1999 and policy relating to pregnant mainland women based on the case of Chong Fung-Yuen in 2001, which continues in force to this day. To explain the implications of Hong Kong's population policy and the way discourses of citizenship contribute to understanding the conflicts between the logic of capital and that of governance during Hong Kong's integration into China, this essay attempts to focus on current debates over expectant mainland mothers and their Hong Kong born infants, prompted by an upsurge of mainland women giving birth across the border. We will look at the cultural construction of birthright citizenship from the axis of gender, class and ethnicity, so as to critically analyze how the SAR government, birth tourism industry, media coverage and discourses of localism seek to articulate birthright citizenship by orchestrating an image and a certain imagination of pregnant mainland women. On one hand, mainland pregnant women create enormous profit for private hospitals and birth-related businesses in Hong Kong; their Hong Kong born children are lauded as a solution to Hong Kong's aging society. On the other hand, the practice of cross-border births causes tension, as it prioritizes economic benefits at the price of local resources, including medical services and educational opportunities, among others. In the discourses that either endeavor to rationalize or revoke birthright citizenship, cultural identities of mainland pregnant women proliferate and contradictory images abound: non-eligible users of local services versus premium guests with deep pockets, endearing mothers-to-be versus reckless emergency room gate-crashers, a possible solution to Hong Kong's population crisis versus unethical predators on local resources. Together these representations suggest how pregnant mainland women, as emergent social subjects, embody conflict and negotiation of population governance and economic benefits. In other words, the discourses of pregnant women's bodies not only serve as the site of biopower but mark out the material and metaphorical boundaries between Hong Kong and China.起始頁-結束頁：179-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：台鐵公共性事件（下）並列篇名：The Critical Review of Taiwan Rail Public Sex-Event: Part Two作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：221-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：進入法律程序－誰在審判？並列篇名：Who Brings Us to Trial?作者：許人友(Jen-Yu Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：227-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：法律保護了誰？剝奪了什麼？並列篇名：For Whom is Law Intended and Who Does it Protect?作者：蔡育林(Alex Yu-Lin Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：239-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：性少數的基本權利－台鐵公共性事件論爭並列篇名：The Constitutional Rights of Sexual Minorities-An Argument about Taiwan Rail Public Sex Event作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei Hsu);甯應斌(Yin-Bin Ning)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：249-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：風雨台灣的未來－對太陽花運動的觀察與反思並列篇名：The Stormy Spring of Taiwan 2014-Critical Reflections on the ”Sunflower” Student Mass Campaign作者：趙剛(Kang Chao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：95期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：263-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：台灣人類學的未來？－新世紀的省思並列篇名：Is There A Future of Anthropology in Taiwan? Reflection for New Century作者：黃應貴(Ying-Kuei Huang)關鍵字：新自由主義;東埔社布農人;去脈絡化;心理學解釋之轉向;整體圖像;民族誌探討模式;多元中心的世界人類學;neoliberalism;the Bunun of Taketonpu;de-contextualization;psychology's interpretive turn;the totality of the studied socio-culture;ethnography being a mode of inquiry;world anthropologies with multiple centers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014中文摘要：這世紀以來，面對台灣新自由主義化的新發展，台灣的人類學是否能藉此新機會有所突破而避免被邊緣化？透過《「文明」之路》三卷對於東埔社布農人的個案研究成果，我們不僅可以斷定台灣地方社會與文化已有根本的改變而進入新的時代，更可以進一步確定台灣人類學在研究當代上的幾個主要困境：缺少歷史意識或時代意識的去脈絡化研究、既有現代性觀念的陷阱與包袱、被忽略的「心理學解釋之轉向」、缺少對於被研究對象的整體圖像之掌握、既成觀念的限制等等，均妨礙台灣人類學得以有效處理當代的新課題。解脫之道除了回到時代脈絡下的田野來面對現實，更需要回歸有廣度及深度且面面俱到的民族誌探討模式。另一方面，除了對於既有觀念的反省與新知識的創造外，更需要有綜合性的超越能力，以便掌握被研究對象的主要關懷，才有可能對於正在浮現中的多元中心之世界人類學有所貢獻。英文摘要：Since this century, facing new development of neoliberalization in Taiwan, whether anthropology in Taiwan would utilize this chance to avoid being periherized? By the result of a study case of Taketonpu Bunun, we are not only sure that local societies and cultures in Taiwan have had fundamental changes and entered a new age, but also sure further that anthropology in Taiwan has had some major difficulties in studying the contemporary: lacking historical consciousness or the consciousness of the times makes the study decontextualized, the traps and burdens of the concepts derived from modernity, neglected psychology's interpretive turn, without holding the totality of the studied socio-culture, the limitation of our past thoughts, etc. These prevent us from treating validly new issues in the contemporary. The solution is to go back to our fieldwork in historical context or in the context of the times for the ethnography which is a mode of inquiry. Of course, this kind of ethnography is concerned with various aspects of the studied in necessary width and depth. On the other hand, besides reflection on the past thoughts and necessary reinvention or creation of new knowledge, we need more the capability to synthsize rather than analyze the data for finding out the studied's major concerns by which we would contribute to the emerging world anthropologies with multiple centers.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：從「同性戀愛」到「走向革命」－〈我的童年〉與郭沫若日後的「自我改造」並列篇名：From Homosexuality to Revolution-On ”The Years of My Boyhood” and Kuo Mo-jo's Later-Day ”Self-Reform”作者：許維賢(Wai-Siam Hee)關鍵字：郭沫若;〈我的童年〉;同性戀愛;自我改造;革命論述;法西斯衝動;Kuo Mo-jo;The Years of my Boyhood;homosexuality;self-reformation;revolutionary discourse;facist impulses期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014中文摘要：〈我的童年〉詳實記載郭在少童時期的同性戀愛經歷。本文對照不同版本的〈我的童年〉，把同性戀置於郭沫若一系列的自敘傳、詩文和私函進行追<U+8E2A>。本文發現走向革命後的郭，縱使在日後不斷對自己進行自我改造,也大量修改自己前期的作品。諸多刪改中，唯獨對〈我的童年〉的同性戀描寫只字未刪，這足見郭對同性戀即使從未張揚，但亦不刻意避諱。只字未刪不意味著作者對同性戀毫無愧疚。同性戀記憶對郭而言，始終是他在危難期間發憤而抒懷國家衰敗與革命挫折的徵候。晚年郭跟少年陳明遠的魚雁往返，不但可被視為〈我的童年〉返老還童的極度含蓄版，亦是他對革命挫折的自我救贖。本文也指出郭一生從「同性戀愛」到「走向革命」的徵候，這些「自我改造」不是學者以為的「自我昇華」，而是郭的「個體神話」邁向「集體神話」的「自我形塑」過程中，同性情慾的性能量，被極端國族主義壓抑變形後，不幸轉化為法西斯衝動的精神能量，朝向極權領袖強大磁場靠攏的結果。那是一種自我理想化的人格賦予愛國主義的形式。郭的同性戀在「自我改造」多年後，並沒有從根本上被革命論述去除，反而成為他每次面對革命挫折後，從理想化人格撤退到個人化人格的自我想像和自我保護。每當革命的進程面臨險境，他會潛意識地通過書寫，重新召喚被壓抑的同性愛慾望，作為一種對當下精神環境的回應。同性戀成為郭一生吸納與排除革命幻滅的情感力量依據。英文摘要：The Years of my Boyhood records in detail Kuo Mo-jo's adolescent homosexual experiences. This article compares different editions of The Years of my Boyhood and tracks his homosexual desires in the context of a series of his autobiographical writings, poetry and personal letters. This article finds that after he moved towards revolution, Kuo constantly reformed himself and modified his earlier works on a large scale. In the midst of all these revisions, only the description of homosexuality in The Years of my Boyhood remains totally unchanged. This indicates that although Kuo did not proclaim homosexuality, he did not avoid it either. The fact that not one character of these passages was changed did not indicate that the author felt no regret for his homosexuality. For Kuo, his homosexual memories are a symptom of his rage and emotion in a crisis period of national decline and revolutionary setbacks. The correspondence between Kuo in his later years and the young Chen Mingyuan can not only be regarded as a highly implicit return to The Years of my Boyhood, but can also be seen as a type of self-salvation after revolutionary setbacks. This article also indicates the symptoms of Kuo's move from homosexuality to revolution over his whole life. Kuo's ”self-reformation” is not a ”self-sublimation” as some academics believe, but the ”self-fashioning” process of Kuo's ”personal myth” as it shifts towards a ”collective myth”. The sexual energy of homosexual desire was pressured and warped by ultranationalism until it became the spiritual energy of facist impulses, drawing Kuo into the powerful magnetic field of totalitarian leadership. It was an idealized self in an endowed form of patriotism. Even after many years of self-reformation, Kuo's homosexuality was never completely removed by revolutionary discourse, but rather became a means of self-imagination and self-protection every time he faced revolutionary setbacks and subsequently retreated from the idealized character to the personified character. Each time the progress of the revolution was threatened, he would subconsciously call up repressed homosexual desire through his writings as a response to the contemporary spiritual environment. Throughout Kuo's life, homosexuality became the affectionate power with which he absorbed and dispelled the broken dreams of revolution.起始頁-結束頁：51-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：列管制度下的醫療治理－「人類免疫缺乏病毒傳染防治及感染者權益保障條例」與新道德權威並列篇名：Medical Governance, Name-Based HIV Surveillance and the New Moral Authoritarianism作者：黃道明(Hans Tao-Ming Huang)關鍵字：愛滋;治理;列管;人口政治;用藥;HIV/AIDS;Governance;Name-Based HIV Surveillance;Biopolitics;Illicit Drug Use期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014中文摘要：2007年頒佈、翻修自「後天免疫缺乏症候群防治條例」的「人類免疫缺乏病毒傳染防治及感染者權益保障條例」，因民間團體參與修法及增列權益保障條文而廣被視為愛滋人權倡議的里程碑。然而諷刺的是，1990年以來的高壓公衛防治措施（如愛滋罪刑化）不僅在此法下持續運作，把感染者當嫌疑犯監控的列管制度的重心也從公衛體系逐漸轉移到現行醫療院所施行的「愛滋個案管理師計畫」，衍生諸多權力效應。本文為「愛滋個案管理師計畫」政策的初探，企圖審視列管制度的本體轉化過程及其共構效應。我將論證，此照護政策浮現於2000年代中期非法用藥被問題化的環節；它宣稱以「病人為中心」，卻以一種擴散式的醫療監控模式運作，是國家規訓感染者、打造道德公民權的新式人口政治方案，而它和民間團體連結所造就的「愛滋個管服務產業」則刻畫了此刻的官、民協同治理。我的分析將關注環繞於性和用藥的污名，揭示愛滋列管體制的新道德威權如何以自我淨化的溫馨關懷進行治療支配，同時也詰問現下先行排除愉悅的愛滋人權格局。英文摘要：iwan's HIV Prevention Act in 2007 has been lauded as the landmark of human rights advancement and NGO advocacy, chiefly because of the inclusion of equal protection for HIV positive individuals. Yet ironically, all the punitive and stigmatising measures of public health control that have been in operation since the promulgation of the Act in 1990, measures such as namebased reporting, quarterly-based tracking, mandatory testing, and above all, the criminalisation of HIV transmission, remain firmly in place. Crucially the regime of name-based HIV Surveillance has also undergone a profound transformation under the new Act, thanks to the implantation of a certain Hospital-based HIV Case Management (HCM) Program in 2007. In this essay I offer a preliminary investigation into the apparatus of Hospital-Based HCMby examining its ontological transformations and constitutive effects in neoliberal Taiwan. Tracing its emergence to a context pertaining to the problematisation of drug use and harm reduction, I demonstrate how the apparatus, despite its claim to be 'patient-centred', operates as a diffuse form of medical policing in the state's making of moral citizenship. Further, by marking out the apparatus' linkage with the NGO sector, I point to the emergence of what I term the 'AIDS case management industry' and explicate its role in the intensification of HIV control. A biopolitical assemblage, this regime of HIV control, I argue, enacts a benevolent form of therapeutic domination that is premised on the logic of moral contagion. Contesting the self-purifying culture of compassion that the new regime of HIV control fosters, my analysis attends to the stigma around sex and drug use while questioning the foreclosure of pleasure in the enactments of HIV Rights in Taiwan today.起始頁-結束頁：107-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：基因（血緣）「擴散而稀薄」是否合理？－回應黃樹仁的〈沒有唐山媽？拓墾時期台灣原漢通婚之研究〉並列篇名：Is the Idea 'Genes Spread Wide but Thin' Correct?-In Response to Huang's Critiques Entitled ”No Grandmother from Mainland China? Intermarriage between Han and Indigene during the Settlement Era of Taiwan”作者：陳叔倬(Shu-Juo Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：143-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：重返民間－從規範性論述到在地歷史解釋並列篇名：Return to ”MinJan” From Normative Prescription to Local-Historical Explanation作者：夏曉鵑(Hsiao-Chuan Hsia)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：155-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：人民民主20年後的尋思－反公民、反進步、反台灣的知識路並列篇名：Against ”Citizenship”, ”Progress” and ”Taiwan”作者：甯應斌(Yin-Bin Ning)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：157-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：研究與實踐－福利／公衛／醫療作為反抗資本主義制度的場域並列篇名：Research and Practice-Social Welfare/Public Health/Medical Care as a Platform in Resisting the Capitalist System作者：陳美霞(Meei-Shia Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：181-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：邁向「資崩世代」並列篇名：Towards the Generation that will Sublate Capitalism作者：林柏儀(Por-Yee Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：199-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：會後感：野思想的可能性並列篇名：After Forum-Possibilities in Those Undisciplined Thoughts作者：張立本(Li-Pen Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：213-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：崩世代後，「新福利國家」？－評《The Politics of the New Welfare State》並列篇名：After BOMB Generation, Toward a ”New Welfare State”? Remarks on ”The Politics of the New Welfare State”作者：王兆慶(Chao-Ching Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：94期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：227-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：阿圖塞的社會形構分析：多重決定、意識形態召喚與階級鬥爭並列篇名：Louis Althusser's Analysis of Social Formation: Overdetermination, Ideological Interpellation, and Class Struggle作者：林淑芬(Shu-Fen Lin)關鍵字：知識論斷裂;多重決定;結構因果性;意識形態;主體;召喚;階級鬥爭;epistemological break;overdetermination;structural causality;ideology;subject;class struggle期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以阿圖塞1960年代人本主義論爭到1970年代中期自我批判時期的書寫為範圍，闡述阿圖塞在這段時期所發展的歷史唯物論中，關於社會形構的發生、維持與轉變的分析架構。前言之後的第二部分藉由釐清「多重決定」、「結構因果性」、「支配性結構」、「最終層級的決定」等核心概念，說明阿圖塞如何以複雜、不均衡的總體對抗黑格爾式的簡單整體，以及後者所支撐的經濟決定論。第三部分首先探討阿圖塞在生產關係再生產的問題意識中所提出的意識形態國家機器與主體召喚問題；其次則檢視阿圖塞將「階級鬥爭」重新帶入其社會形構分析，是否及如何回應了批評者所指出的結構主義傾向。英文摘要：This essay aims at elaborating on Louis Althusser's analysis of social formation, developed in his writings during the period between the 1960s to the mid-1970s, with an emphasis on the questions of emergence, endurance and transformation. Following the foreword, the second part illustrates how Althusser manages to confront the Hegelian totality with his complex and uneven social whole via a series of categories such as overdetermination, structural causality, structure in domination, and determination in the last instance. The third part clarifies the ways in which Althusser proposes to address the question of ideology and subject within the problematic of the necessity of reproducing the relation of production in each social formation. The last part focuses on how Althusser brings ”class struggle” back into his analysis of social formation and whether/how this constitutes a response to those charges against his static structuralism.起始頁-結束頁：1-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140300480012篇名：馬克思1837年柏林法學計劃的譜系與出路並列篇名：The Genealogy and Outcome of Marx's 1837 Berlin Project of Jurisprudence作者：姚遠(Yuan Yao)關鍵字：馬克思;柏林法學計劃;法科學;薩維尼;黑格爾;Marx;Berlin project of jurisprudence;Rechtswissenschaft;Savigny;Hegel期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：馬克思1837年的柏林法學計劃，與他在波恩大學和柏林大學所修課程上習得的知識有密切關聯，秉持以薩維尼為代表的德國「法科學」觀念，總體說來沒有超出歷史法學派之羅馬法分支的思想譜系。馬克思在嘗試對其中涉及的三大方法論難題給出自己的回答時，遭遇了單純強化實定法知識無力克服的根本哲學缺陷。由於借鑒謝林哲學寫作的《克萊安泰斯》（Kleanthes）的邏輯結論，以及愛德華．甘斯的影響，馬克思轉向黑格爾法哲學和邏輯學，據此看清柏林法學計劃的死穴，並擺脫了歷史法學，靠近黑格爾主義。英文摘要：Marx's 1837 Berlin project of jurisprudence, closely connected with his learnings in Bonn and Berlin, was carried out according to the German idea of Rechtswissenschaft represented by Savigny, and generally speaking was within the Romanist branch of the Historical School of Law. While attempting to responding to the three methodological problems in his peculiar way, Marx met fundamental philosophical challenges that could not be overcome by simply solidifying his knowledge of positive law. Moreover, thanks to the logical conclusion of his Schellingian dialogue ”Kleanthes” and influences of Eduard Gans, Marx had to turn to Hegel's philosophy of law and logic. Therefore he found the imperfection of the Berlin project of jurisprudence, went beyond the Historical School of Law, and then accepted a version of Hegelianism.起始頁-結束頁：61-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140300480023篇名：Mikhail Bakhtin眾聲喧嘩的倫理與倫理困境之反思並列篇名：Reflections on Ethics and its Dilemma of Mikhail Bakhtin's Concept of Heteroglossia作者：王孝勇(Hsiao-Yung Wang)關鍵字：巴赫汀;恐同;倫理;倫理困境;眾聲喧嘩;Mikhail Bakhtin;homophobia;ethics;ethical dilemma;heteroglossia期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在藉由勾勒Bakhtin眾聲喧嘩概念的倫理立場反思其倫理困境。首先，透過Bakhtin所爬梳的話語型態變遷的社會政治史，本研究指出眾聲喧嘩的倫理立場乃是一種對於主體存在與政治民主的積極嚮往。其次，透過批判性地檢視「詩語vs.小說語言」與「向心力vs.離心力」這兩組對立性的命題，並輔以施明德質疑蔡英文性傾向的恐同論述建構作為例說，本研究主張由於眾聲喧嘩的內涵仍有進一步釐清的空間，以致於在對具體現實的批判分析上無以區辨眾聲喧嘩與多聲並存的差異，亦無法進一步辨識向心力與離心力在糾結難纏之際所體現的語言暴力和歧視。但這卻是至為重要的關鍵議題。英文摘要：This paper aims to reflect upon the ethical dilemma of Mikhail Bakhtin's concept of heteroglossia by outlining its ethics theoretically. First, it tried to clarify the ethical standpoint of heteroglossia by examining what socio-political history Bakhtin observed from the types and modifications of reported speech and how Bakhtin refracted his imagination of subject formation and the political. Second, it exposed the ethical dilemma of heteroglossia and argued its inefficiency to analyze the discourse of homophobia in Taiwan by criticizing the theoretical lacuna of two oppositional terminology, that is, poetic language vs. discourse in the novel; centripetal forces vs. centrifugal forces. Based on the research findings, this paper concluded that the difference between Bakhtinian heteroglossia and multi-voicedness should be clarified in detail. Therefore, the linguistic violence and discrimination inherent in multi-voicedness might be pinpointed for the critical analysis on life world furthermore.起始頁-結束頁：135-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201403004800301篇名：孔恩vs.STS的興起：《科學革命的結構》五十年的驀然回首並列篇名：Kuhn vs. the Rise of STS: the Fiftieth Annuversary of ”The Structure”作者：傅大為(Dai-Wie Fu)關鍵字：孔恩;STS的興起;科學革命的結構;Kuhn;the Rise of STS;”The Structure of Scientific Revolutions”;Fuller;Forman期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文起源自多年前筆者的一個迷團：為何孔恩對SSK/STS頗有意見與感到遺憾？而筆者自己卻毫無感到兩造之間在知性上的溝通障礙。筆者不同意一般的說法，如Hacking說孔恩對STS有大敵意，進而反其向去搜尋與重估許多SSK/STS與孔恩相關的思想史與學術史，其中包括孔恩的學生、敵人、回憶、論戰、與宣言等，企圖建構起一張具多重管道的思想史網絡，過程中也質疑了一些流行說法或敵意評論，如孔恩是STS的國父、孔恩對STS有倒置的Oedipus情結、孔恩對STS有很壞的影響、孔恩是個冷戰時代的保守者、孔恩甚至疏離了他自己的《結構》觀點等，同時筆者也詮釋了孔恩說《結構》不是社會學著作的意義。筆者強調孔恩是個STS重要的先行者，他與STS是個「近親的競爭者」關係。但因緣際會，他站在一個（內vs.外）科學史、科學哲學、科學社會學、科學知識的社會學等多種強大歷史軌跡的交會點上，一個非常難站得直又穩的交會點。在《結構》出版五十年的今天，筆者謙卑地希望回復孔恩一個與STS更具建設性的良性競爭關係。英文摘要：This paper originates from an old puzzle of mine: why it was so difficult for Kuhn and his SSK/STS admirers or commentators to communicate smoothly with each other. Treating as a complicated web of intellectual history the documents of his students, enemies, interviews, or declarations, I trace through them and reevaluate their multiple channels. I question the validity of the following theses raised in recent years on Kuhn; that Kuhn is the father of STS, has a reverse Oedipus complex on STS younger scholars, exerted a very bad influence on STS, is a conservative in the Cold War era, and I also explain why Kuhn later considered his Structure not a sociology work. The results of this study are that among other forrunners of STS, Kuhn is an important but often misunderstood one, and that he considered himself genealogically as a close relative of but also a serious competitor with SSK/STS. My humble hope in this paper, during the 50th anniversary of publication of Structure, is to recover or to restore Kuhn in a more constructive and fruitful relationship with STS.起始頁-結束頁：29-88+90-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：孔恩、布洛爾與對稱性原則並列篇名：Thomas Kuhn, David Bloor, and the Principle of Symmetry作者：戴東源(Dong-Yuan Tai)關鍵字：科技史;科學哲學;科學知識社會學;翼型;利益;history of technology;philosophy of science;sociology of scientific knowledge;aerofoil;interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：孔恩觀點是否符合科學知識社會學（SSK）立場並預示其對稱性原則？一般對此問題的回應論述，不是引用孔恩自己反對SSK的言論，就是以《科學革命的結構》為界區分孔恩觀點為前後期，前期孔恩符合或接近SSK，後期孔恩牴觸SSK。本文論述稍異於兩者。本文先檢視孔恩說詞，再分析孔恩內－外史的編史學觀點，然後考察對稱性原則起草人布洛爾的科技史研究。孔恩對於內、外史的定義異於一般史學家的區別，他認定的「內史」已經跨越到傳統的外史領域；而孔恩反對實證派聚焦科學知識內容的哲學觀，論述多有意凸顯科學的外在因素對於科學發展的影響，這使得孔恩的觀點有外在論傾向，看似與SSK相近但其實還遠，尤其與對稱性原則無關。本文審視布洛爾的科技史案例研究，分析其利益說明模式及對稱性原則的要求。利益說明是孔恩反對的，而對稱性原則一個鮮明的特徵（即便布洛爾和其他SSK成員沒有強調），在於刻意區別出真與假、成功與失敗理論兩邊支持群體的社會（階級、身分）特徵並對立起來。不論是前期孔恩，還是後期孔恩，都沒有這種傾向。即使一般認為最接近SSK的前期孔恩《哥白尼革命》、《科學革命的結構》，也看不出刻意區別地心－日心說或燃素－氧氣說兩邊支持群體的社會特徵的論述。不論孔恩說詞一致與否，他的論述沒有SSK那種社會決定論立場及對稱性原則始終如一。英文摘要：Is Thomas Kuhn's theory of scientific changes consistent with the Sociology of Scientific Knowledge (SSK) and the principle of symmetry? One may divide Kuhn's thought into ”early Kuhn” and ”late Kuhn”, bifurcated by the publication of The Structure of Scientific Revolutions in 1962. The early Kuhn closely resembles SSK; the late Kuhn does not. In this article I first examine Kuhn's own words regarding SSK and his viewpoint regarding internalism and externalism in the historiography of science. Then I analyze David Bloor's application of the principle of symmetry to case studies in the history of technology. It will emerge that Kuhn's idea of internalismexternalism in historiography is rather unorthodox. His own definition of ”internalism” approximates the definition of externalism accepted by most historians. This is one reason why Kuhn's thought is superficially similar to SSK but is actually very different and has nothing to do with the principle of symmetry. Whether early Kuhn or late Kuhn, my analysis reveals no adherence to the principle of symmetry used by Bloor or other SSKists to deliberately mark off two social classes or status groups into advocates of true or false, successful or failed theories.起始頁-結束頁：99-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：見微知著：從具體個案看《科學革命的結構》與「世界改變」之影響並列篇名：A Tiny Clue Reveals a General Trend: Examining the Influence of ”The Structure of Scientific Revolution” and ”World Change” via a Concrete Case Study作者：陳思廷(Szu-Ting Chen)關鍵字：孔恩;世界改變;實在論與社會建構論;真理與敘說真理;客觀性與實在性;Thomas Kuhn;World Change;Realism vs. Social Constructivism;Truth vs. Truthfulness;Objectivity vs. Reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：藉由伊恩．哈金近年來所揭示的「真理」與「敘說真理」之區分與尼可拉斯．賈汀所提出的「探究的場景」之概念的幫助，並佐之以一項經濟學案例的探討，本文試圖將孔恩極具爭議性的「世界改變」之科學哲學立場，重新詮釋為「在概念上保留其客觀性，但在實踐上<U+5374>具有相對性」的較折衷式的實在論立場。再者，藉由這項折衷式的實在論之觀點，本文進一步對自身有關孔恩科哲立場的新闡釋進行後設反析後發現：如果將這項新闡釋視為屢受前代諸多概念影響下的一項當代詮釋，則這項詮釋本身，實際上，也無法自外於孔恩《結構》一書所揭示的「歷史轉向」的影響之外。因為，不論是本文自身的論述或哈金與賈汀等的其他科學哲學家與科學史學家之論述，事實上都可被視為是《結構》一書出版後所引起的研究焦點之變遷－先是聚焦於「科學哲學」的研究，而後轉往「科史哲」的探究，以至再轉向「科技與社會研究」之探討－影響下的數項具體而微的變遷案例。英文摘要：By using Ian Hacking's distinction between ”truth” and ”truthfulness” and Nicholas Jardine's idea of ”scene of inquiry,” coupled with a case study in economics, this paper tries to reinterpret Kuhn's controversial philosophical notion of ”world change” as a middle-way realist position by maintaining that Kuhn's position is conceptually objective but is relative in practice. The paper presents a meta-analysis of its own reinterpretation of Kuhn's position and discovers that if we regard this reinterpretation as one that is strongly influenced by the ideas of previous generations of scholars, then this interpretation itself cannot escape the influence of historical turn that is revealed in Kuhn's magnum opus (”The Structure of Scientific Revolutions”). Whether one refers to the discourse in the paper or to the arguments proposed by other philosophers and historians of science such as Hacking or Jardine, one can regard them all as indicating a series of changes in the focus of research-changes triggered by the influence of Kuhn's book: initially focus on research in the philosophy of science, and then turn to explore the history and philosophy of science, and finally shift to research in the field of science, technology, and society.起始頁-結束頁：153-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：規則依循與科學知識的社會學並列篇名：Rule-Following and Sociology of Scientific Knowledge作者：鄭凱元(Kai-Yuan Cheng)關鍵字：規則依循;科學知識的社會學;孔恩;布洛爾;類詞學;Rule-Following;Sociology of Scientific Knowledge;Thomas Kuhn;David Bloor;Generics期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：後期維根斯坦的哲學論述對主張科學知識具有社會性面向的理論進路提供重要的資源與依據，從孔恩援引家族相似性的論理來支撐其典範概念，到布洛爾與林區訴諸對規則依循的不同理解來發展其各自的科學知識社會學與俗民方法論，均是其中具代表性的嘗試。有鑑於規則依循在維氏的論述裡比家族相似性概念更具基礎性與系統性，本文將聚焦於布洛爾與林區的著名爭論，透過庫許的相關討論及引進類詞學語意進路，來重估維氏哲學對科學知識本質的探討所帶來的影響。英文摘要：Philosophical considerations of the later Wittgenstein have provided important conceptual resources those who claim that scientific knowledge has a social dimension in nature. Kuhn's appeal to the notion of family resemblance in the support of his idea of paradigm, Bloor's and Lynch's divergent interpretations of what rule-following involves are among some of the representatives taking this approach. In view of the fact that Wittgenstein's discussions of rule-following are more basic and systematic than those of family resemblance, this paper will focus on the noted ”Bloor-Lynch debate”. Aided by Kusch's related discussions on this issue and by the considerations of a generic semantic analysis offered by Leslie and Cheng, this paper aims to re-evaluate the impacts brought about by the later Wittgenstein's philosophy to the inquiry concerning the nature of scientific knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：197-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：孔恩與經濟學知識的增長並列篇名：Kuhn and the Growth of Economic Knowledge作者：趙相科(Hsiang-Ke Chao)關鍵字：經濟學;經濟學方法論;科學實作;局部方法論規範;economics;economic methodology;scientific practice;local methodological prescriptions期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文藉由評價《結構》在經濟學的歷史與哲學的發展史中的地位，進而討論經濟學知識的增長。由於經濟學哲學與科學哲學有眾多相似之處，故在評論經濟哲學的發展之時亦反映了科學哲學界所關心的議題。本文藉此探討《結構》以降科學哲學、科學史、與科技研究所共同關注的科學實作。在方法論轉向下，科學哲學為科學史與科學研究提供局部性的方法論規範。英文摘要：By critically reviewing the development in the history and philosophy of economics since Kuhn, this paper provides a practice-based account for the progress of economic knowledge. This paper also argues that the philosophy of science may provide local methodological prescriptions for understanding and practicing economics.起始頁-結束頁：241-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：革命、演化與拼裝：從HPS到STS，從歐美到台灣並列篇名：Revolution, Evolution and Reassemblage: From HPS to STS and from Euro-America to Taiwan作者：陳瑞麟(Ruey-Lin Chen)關鍵字：孔恩;達爾文;科學史與科學哲學;科技與社會;拼裝;Thomas Kuhn;Charles Darwin;History and Philosophy of Science;Science;Technology and Society;Reassembling期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文討論歐美和台灣的科史哲（HPS）和科技與社會（STS）研究中的幾個理論和「達爾文演化論」的關係。從HPS與STS的共同開創者孔恩以來，科史哲和科技與社會的許多理論家都一再地指涉「演化」的概念，亦即科學理論或科技物的演變就像是生物演化一般，科技與社會的共同發展，也是一種共演化。可是，各種談及「演化和達爾文」的HPS和STS理論，未必都是達爾文主義的。本文以「理論整體類比」的比較方法來探討孔恩的科學革命論、技術的社會建構論(SCOT)、行為者網絡理論(ANT)、還有台灣的傅大為、陳瑞麟等學者的觀點與演化論的結構相似程度。本文論證歐美的SCOT、ANT其實不具達爾文演化論的意涵，孔恩的科學革命論則可以透過「間斷平衡論」聯結演化論。台灣的STS發展由於大量使用概念拼裝的策略，使得其特色其實遠離達爾文主義。英文摘要：Many theories in history and philosophy of science (HPS) and science, technology and society (STS) seem to harbor evolutionary implication in Darwinian sense. Since Thomas Kuhn, who is regarded as the founder of both HPS and STS, connected his theory of scientific revolution to Darwinian theory of evolution, many theorists in HPS and STS referred to the concept of evolution in presenting their dynamics of science and technology. Is a theory Darwinian only because it uses the concept of evolution? This question raises many other questions: What is evolutionary? How should we identify a theory with Darwinism? Is Kuhn a Darwinian in the non-biological (HPS and STS) field? Is the theory of social constructivism of technology (SCOT) a Darwinian evolutionary theory in STS? This paper argues that Kuhn may be viewed as a Darwinian in terms of the theory of Punctuated Equilibria. According to a structural analysis of Darwin's theory of evolution, SCOT and actor network theory have little implication of Darwinian evolution. Lastly, this paper shows that Taiwanese STS studies are far distant from Darwinism, because of taking the assembling strategy that is non-evolutionary.起始頁-結束頁：281-334資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：追尋「小」孔恩傳統：愛丁堡學派的孔恩理解及其在華文世界的進展並列篇名：Tracing Thomas S. Kuhn's Contribution through the Lens of Edinburgh School: A Cross-Strait Perspective作者：繆航(Miao Hang);黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：愛丁堡學派;強綱領;科學知識社會學;孔恩;Edinburgh School;Strong Programme;Sociology of Scientific Knowledge;Thomas Kuhn期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：對採取強綱領立場的研究者來說，孔恩的一系列研究，被認為是支撐起「科學知識社會學」（sociology of scientific knowledge, SSK）的重要支柱。而孔恩對科學發展及變遷的解釋，也被認為是對科學（知識）進行社會學理解時，所不可或缺的科學哲學背景。有鑑於愛丁堡學派近來在華文世界日漸受到重視，本文希望能重返強綱領論者對孔恩論著的詮釋，並在探索兩者理論交錯的基礎上，回顧愛丁堡學派引入兩岸的過程，進而解讀兩岸因學術傳統及現實需求的不同而引發的諸多討論。我們希望經由這個重返孔恩的路徑，再次發現愛丁堡學派的精髓，並藉此歸結出孔恩的當代意義。英文摘要：This article investigates the small view of Kuhn's importance by tracing its origins, its adoption in Taiwan and Mainland China, as well as the process of its shaping and reshaping in these two places. According to Barry Barnes (2003), there are two schools in understanding Kuhn's account of scientific change: the large and the small view. The former is impressed by Kuhn's grand historical vision; the late however focuses on mundane everyday practice in science. The Edinburgh School/Strong Programme where Barnes belongs is convinced that, it is actually the small view that reflects the true value and contribution of Kuhn's research. 50 years after the publication of The Structure of Scientifics Revolution, justice has already been done to the large view. It is time, we argue, to investigate the alternative perspective to Kuhn's account and to examine the small view in great detail.起始頁-結束頁：335-378+380-391資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：社會工作者之增強權能經驗：以婚暴防治場域為例並列篇名：Exploring Empowerment Experiences of Social Workers for Marital Violence作者：沈慶鴻(Ching-Hung Shen)關鍵字：去權;社會工作者;婚暴防治;增強權能;disempowered;social worker;marital violence;empowerment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：29期出版年：2014中文摘要：為了在勞動條件不佳的婚暴防治場域內，找到為社工增強權能的力量，研究者結合量表和訪談，先透過「增強權能量表」，對全國21個婚暴防治機構、101位婚暴社工進行施測，之後再邀請量表分數在100分以上的中、高權能社工進行訪談；總計在六個月的資料蒐集期限內，完成了24位婚暴社工的資料蒐集工作。研究者發現，案主、社工同儕、督導、組織、網絡成員及重要他人，是受訪者增強權能的來源，並歸納出促成社工權能的四類、11項因素，分別是來自案主的看見服務成效，來自重要他人的建構工作信念，來自機構（包括同儕、督導和管理者）的促進再建構、回饋認可、獲得指導、公開鼓勵、理解關照、授予自主、促進連結和言行一致，以及來自網絡成員的擁有資源與回饋認可等；還發現中、高權能婚暴社工會在個人、機構和網絡三層次上展現其權能，表現出自我效能、自主、意義、重要性、團隊感，以及影響力和行動力。研究者發現，機構對婚暴社工增強權能的促成相當重要，建議機構管理者應在建構增強權能的組織氛圍上有更多的作為。英文摘要：Due to the lack of ideal labor conditions for those dealing with marital violence, the researcher aimed to explore the empowerment of social workers, conducting an "empowerment scale" on 101 social workers who came from 21 marital violence intervention organizations. Twenty-four participants who received more than 100 grades in the scaling (including "mild to high level" and "highly empowered") were individually interviewed six months after completing the scale. The results show the empowerment of social workers comes from clients, significant others, peers, supervisors, administrators, and networks. In the four categories, 11 elements enhancing the empowerment of social workers were found by researchers, including recognizing service efficacy from clients, constructing beliefs of work from significant others, initiating reconstruction, recognizing feedback, acquiring guidance, being publicly encouraging, receiving empathic care, having autonomy, improving connections, matching word to deeds from organizations (including peers, supervisors and administrators), and possessing resources and recognizing feedback from networks. Moreover, social workers have mild to high levels of empowerment for three dimensions, which include the individual, organization and network, revealing self-efficacy, autonomy, meaning, competence, teamwork, impact and action, as well as commitment to marital violence interventions. The organization (including peers, supervisors and administrators) is critical for empowering social workers; the researcher suggests the administrators focus more on the empowered atmosphere of the organization.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.29.012篇名：臺灣家庭暴力防治服務方案的實施與轉變之探討並列篇名：Elucidating Service Program Responses to Domestic Violence in Taiwan作者：游美貴(Mei-Kuei Yu)關鍵字：協同合作;服務方案;家庭暴力防治;collaboration;service program;domestic violence prevention期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：29期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在探討臺灣在2007至2011年間，22個地方政府辦理家庭暴力防治相關服務方案之實施與轉變情形，並依據研究結果提出增進台灣在家庭暴力防治服務方案之建議。研究資料分成三個階段蒐集：第一階段，主要蒐集相關文獻資料，彙整出2007至2011年間的家庭暴力防治服務方案，以作為第二階段地方政府焦點座談依據。第二階段，進行22縣市的實地焦點座談，瞭解地方政府在家庭暴力防治服務方案實施與轉變的情形。第三階段，將初步研究結果，請中央及地方政府代表實施焦點團體，以確定研究的準確性。研究發現主要有，服務方案所服務對象多元且延伸服務場域、法定項目均有辦理、服務方案聚焦於三級防治處遇、服務方案仍以社政單位為推行主力、成效評估是服務方案推廣的關鍵、服務方案缺乏立基實證研究的建構等等。研究建議為，鼓勵在地特性的服務方案、定期檢視和瞭解服務方案的辦理情形、增加預防性服務方案、促進服務方案辦理採多元面向、促進立基實證研究的服務方案發展等等。英文摘要：This study examines the effectiveness of domestic violence prevention-related service programs in 22 local governments. Based on those results, the growth and decline of domestic violence prevention-related service programs in 22 local governments are categorized. Recommendations are also made on how to enhance the quality of domestic violence prevention-related service programs in Taiwan. While lasting for ten months (i.e. March to December 2011), this study consists of three stages. In stage 1, domestic violence prevention-related service programs from 2007-2011 in 22 local governments are reviewed. In stage 2, small group forums are held in 22 local governments to exchange opinions with NGOs and governmental agencies on how to more effectively implement the service programs in each local government, determine the availability of resources to these local governments, and examine the difficulties of local governments in implementing such programs. In stage 3, a focus group is conducted in which local government representatives discuss the primary evaluation results of stages 1 and 2. Analysis results indicate that domestic violence prevention-related service programs have evolved from victim assistance to a correction service of perpetrators. The programs have also evolved from social case work to group work and community work. Additionally, for instance, the muti-agency service programs have been extended from social service organizations to prisons. Moreover, the services offered previously only to individual victims have been extended to others, including children and other important family members. Results of this study provide recommendations and a valuable reference for governmental policy planners.起始頁-結束頁：53-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.29.023篇名：精神醫療團隊於莫拉克颱風災後心理重建之在地實踐經驗：兼論精神社工專業角色的省思並列篇名：The Experience of Local Service of a Psychiatric Medical Team to Execute the Project of Psychological Rehabilitation after Typhoon Morakot, and Reflection on the Role of the Psychiatric Social Worker作者：王美懿(Mei-Yi Wang);林東龍(Dong-Long Lin);陸悌(Ti Lu)關鍵字：二度災難;心理重建;心理創傷;在地服務;精神社工;secondary hazard;psychological rehabilitation;psychological trauma;local service;psychiatric social worker期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：29期出版年：2014中文摘要：衛生署以「在地服務」作為規範衛生局和醫事機構執行莫拉克颱風災後心理重建計畫工作項目的原則，然計畫中對於在地服務內涵的說明卻極為有限。本研究一方面藉由文獻耙梳災後心理重建在地服務原則的意涵，另一方面，分析某精神醫療團隊參與莫拉克風災心理重建工作之經驗，以瞭解該團隊實踐在地服務的困境，並反思精神社工扮演的角色。本研究資料分析包括：服務計畫檔案資料、醫療團隊成員和在地工作者的訪談資料。研究發現包括：第一，醫療專業者進入災區服務時，無法調整已習慣的專業視角和服務方式；第二，中央規劃的重建政策將個人創傷與集體創傷分開處理，著重提供物質和短期救助，忽視社區共同體的修補，無助平復集體創傷，更造成二度災難現象；第三，精神社工是協助醫療團隊進入社區的重要橋樑，隨著重建工作進展，在團隊中居於主導角色。本研究建議有二：一是，精神社工將生態和優勢觀點引介給醫療團隊成員，共同思索非傳統醫療場域中的團隊合作模式；二是，加強整合聯繫政府各部門的重建工作，重視集體創傷與個人創傷的關聯性。英文摘要：Following Typhoon Morakot, the Taiwan Executive Yuan regulated the Department of Health at local authority and hospital level to execute the project of psychological rehabilitation, following the principle of 'local service'. However, the concept of 'local service' was illustrated in a somewhat limited fashion. This research study has two aims: on one hand, to clarify the principle of 'local service' in the project of psychological rehabilitation after the disaster dependent on exploring the documentation; and on the other hand, to analyze the service experience of mental health work teams engaged in the project of psychological rehabilitation following the Typhoon and then recognize the difficulties of providing local services and reflect on the role of the psychiatric social worker. The documents of the service project and interviews with medical team members and local partners were utilized to conduct this research. There were three major findings: firstly, when these medical professionals entered the disaster area, they were unable to adjust their familiar vision and service model; secondly, the central government reconstruction policy treated individual and collective trauma separately, focusing on providing material and short-term assistance and neglecting to repair connections with the community, so that the policy could not in fact contribute to rehabilitation of collective trauma and resulted in a secondary hazard; and thirdly, the psychiatric social worker plays an important role in being the bridge that helps the medical team enter the community, and also take the role of team leader following the progress of reconstruction. This study makes two suggestions: firstly, psychiatric social workers could introduce the ecosystem and strength perspectives to medical team members and assist them in rethinking the teamwork model in non-traditional medical fields together; and secondly, enhance the integration between the various government departments and take the correlations between individual and collective trauma seriously.起始頁-結束頁：97-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.29.034篇名：順從有時，抵抗有時：東南亞新移民女性家庭照顧經驗中的拉鋸與選擇並列篇名：A Time to Submit and a Time to Resist: The Family Caregiving Struggle of New Immigrant Women from Southeast Asia作者：鄭詩穎(Shih-Ying Cheng);余漢儀(Hon-Yei Yu)關鍵字：父權壓迫;東南亞新移民女性;抵抗;家庭照顧者;順從;patriarchal oppression;new immigrant women from Southeast Asian;resistance;family caregiver;submission期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：29期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探索以下現象：一、東南亞新移民女性擔任家庭照顧者之經驗內涵？二、什麼機制影響移民女性順從與抵抗家庭照顧角色？三、移民女性對家庭照顧角色的協商策略？研究者透過深度訪談16位東南亞新移民女性回答上述提問，研究發現：「跨海來臺照顧的女人」勾勒東南亞新移民女性在臺灣家庭中的照顧經驗輪廓。「形塑女性順從與抵抗的機制」討論影響移民女性順從與支應其起身抵抗的因素，前者包括：「一家人」性別規訓框架、夫家關係動力、務實考量、認同母國文化積極承擔；後者則包括：臨界點與配合條件、備遭歧視後以牙還牙。至於「弱者的武器」，則耙梳移民女性對照顧角色的協商、鬥爭與抵抗策略，包括：不同場域的角力、溝通表述文化差異與主動／順勢找替代。最後，以「順從有時、抵抗有時」點出女性照顧經驗的複雜動態。結語討論父權壓迫如何結盟照顧需求、照顧政策、移民法令，迫使女性就位照顧，使「家」成為實踐父權的載體，並據以提出政策與實務建議。英文摘要：This study investigates the following topics: (1) the experiences as caregivers as new immigrant women from Southeast Asia, (2) the factors influencing these women to submit or resist the role of a caregiver, and (3) the strategies that these women used to negotiate their role. After interviewing 16 new immigrant women from Southeast Asia, four findings were conceptualized. First, these women crossed the ocean to take on the caregiver's role. Second, the factors influencing the women's acceptance of the role were: the gender frame within the "One Family" mentality, the dynamics of the women's relations with their in-laws, pragmatic concerns for their situation at home, and the women's acceptance of the family culture of their motherland. While the tactics these women used to resist the role were: laying out acceptable terms and threshold and an-eye-for-an-eye approach after discrimination. As for the strategies of the women to negotiate their roles, they were: power struggle in the domestic arena, communicating the cultural difference, and seeking for replacement caregivers. For these women, the dynamics of their family care- giving experiences were best described as "a time to submit and a time to resist." The study also discusses how the combination of patriarchal oppression, family caregiving needs, immigration acts, and family care policies forced these immigrant women to become family caregivers. The resulting family was found to be responsible for further reinforcing patriarchal oppression. The study concludes with some practical and policy-related recommendations.起始頁-結束頁：149-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.29.045篇名：德國照護保險中的國家監督管理並列篇名：State Supervision in Long Term Care Insurance in Germany作者：周怡君(Yi-Chun Chou);莊秀美(Hsiu-Mei Chuang)關鍵字：品質監督;國家監督管理;集體協商;照護保險;需求評估;quality control;state supervision;collective negotiation;long-term care insurance;needs assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：29期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著人口結構高齡化，照護走向公共化成為各國重要的社會福利議題。1970年代以來，基於促進效率、滿足廣大需求及減少政府支出，社會服務走向市場化與多元化，營利與非營利組織皆能參與社會服務的準市場。但市場化容易衍生惡性競爭與品質低落的問題，因此，國家如何進行有效的監督管理成為重要議題。德國照護保險於開辦之初即納入營利與非營利組織提供照護服務，兩者占德國照護服務市場的比例極高且存在競爭，但照護市場運作仍受國家縝密與深入地監管。本研究結果發現，德國透過聯邦政府與各邦政府在照護保險的權責分工、社會保險人具有社會與國家特質的特殊公法社團法律地位，將營利組織透過組合主義的集體協商運作的自我管理機制納入國家管理，並對非營利組織提供許多競爭優勢條件，有效避免惡性市場競爭。此外，並採用健保保險人的醫事服務管理單位作為第三者，進行照護需求者的評估及照護服務的品質監督。這些特徵能有效避免聯邦政府與各邦政府在照護保險管理事項上的重複與意見衝突、使照護保險的財務運作由社會團體自決而不被民主政治過程中的輿論與政黨所左右、市場競爭受到非營利組織具有競爭優勢與其他社會團體的合作協商的抗衡；此外，採用第三者進行照護需求評估與服務品質評鑑，使照護體系理性運作，讓德國的國家監督管理在其照護保險市場化成為可能且具成效。英文摘要：With the wave of aging populations, long-term care service is increasingly available to the public and has become the main issue of the world's states. Since the 1970's, because of services-effectiveness and the increased demand for long-term care, social services have progressed toward marketization and diversification. Private profit and non-profit organizations participate in the quasi-market of social services. However, marketization leads to problems of vicious competition and low quality. Therefore, how can the state promote effective supervision of social services market? In Germany, for profit and non-profit organizations are initially accepted as the care service providers for implementing long-term care insurance. Both profit and non-profit organizations account for a high proportion of the market of long-term care service providers, and competition exists. The results of this study showed that competition between profit and non-profit care service providers exists in the German long-term care market but is still under strict state supervision with responsibilities divided between the federal and state governments to avoid the overlap of management concerns. Participation in collective negotiation ac- cording to the role of the long-term care insurer is divided between public and private sectors to achieve the self-determination of social groups. The competitive advents for non-profit organizations; and through the health insurer as a third party to care needs are assessed and service quality is evaluated. These considerations enable the effective state supervision of care service providers in the long-term care insurance market.起始頁-結束頁：199-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.29.056篇名：找尋生命的希望：重症海洋性貧血患者疾病適應之研究並列篇名：Adaptation to Severe Illness among People with Thalassemia Major作者：童伊迪(Yi-Ti Tung)關鍵字：社會支持;社會汙名;重症海洋性貧血;疾病適應;social support;social stigma;thalassemia;adaptation to illness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：29期出版年：2014中文摘要：海洋性貧血（Thalassemia）是全世界最常見的遺傳性疾病，醫療技術與健保的開辦延長重症海洋性貧血患者的生命，海洋性貧血患者亦需要生活有品質、生命有尊嚴，生存有希望。本研究根據18位重症海洋性貧血患者的訪談資料，探究重症海洋性貧血患者自年幼階段發病至成年的疾病適應歷程及影響疾病適應的相關因素。研究發現，重症海洋性貧血患者兒少時期與成年期的生病經驗有很大的轉變，兒少階段的悲苦讓患者看不到自己的未來。然而，進入成年階段後，生命的成熟與生活的責任、穩定就業，讓海洋性貧血患者意識到自己的價值與可以期待的明天。疾病適應歷程中的社會支持、宗教信仰、醫藥進步是激發海洋性貧血患者生命期望的促進因子。疾病引起的合併症、家屬的負面態度與社會汙名是衝擊患者生存信念的風險因子。本研究針對患者家屬、社會工作者及醫療人員分別提出建議。研究結果亦可作為慢性暨重症疾患者，社會心理處遇與臨床運用之參考。英文摘要：Thalassemia is a common genetic disease in the world. Medical technology and National Health Insurance prolong the lives of patients with thalassemia major. However, the psychosocial functioning of those patients could be just as important. The purpose of this study is to explore the process of adaptation in patients with thalassemia major who have been diagnosed as children, teenagers and in adulthood. The study also analyzes the factors affecting adaptation to severe illness in thalassemia major patients. The study conducts qualitative research to collect data by in-depth interviews of 18 patients with thalassemia major. The results show patients felt suffering and hopelessness in their early stage, however, maturity and responsibilities or employment helped patients to adapt well and prove their value and future after entering adulthood. The positive factors of adaptation are social support, religious beliefs, and medical technology progress, which inspire hope for thalassemia major patients. The risk factors are complications, negative attitudes towards family and social stigma, which affect the survival beliefs of patients. Finally, several suggestions for patients' families, social workers and medical professionals are recommended. The findings of this study may be employed to cope with psychosocial adaptation among patients with chronic or severe illness in clinical practice.起始頁-結束頁：243-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.29.0601篇名：Basu（1997）盈餘不對稱及時性觀念下，盈餘落後反應對穩健性比較之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Earnings Lags on Comparing the Extent of Conservatism Based on Basu's (1997) Asymmetric Timeliness Concept作者：林純央(Chun-Yang Lin);劉啟群(Chi-Chun Liu)關鍵字：穩健性;盈餘不對稱及時性;盈餘落後反應;conservatism;asymmetric timeliness;earnings lags期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文檢視Basu（1997）盈餘不對稱及時性觀念下，盈餘落後反應對穩健性比較之影響。根據盈餘之落後反應、盈餘之不對稱反應以及兩者交互作用之結果，我們預期盈餘的不對稱及時性不僅存在好壞消息發生之當期，亦存在短暫的落後期間，因此以盈餘報酬間關係作為比較公司間穩健性之指標時，須同時考慮當期及累積期之不對稱性大小，亦須同時考慮盈餘落後反應之期間長短。本文以盈餘多期反應模型捕捉盈餘對好壞消息之落後多期反應，預期盈餘的不對稱及時性在當期及落後較短期間為正，在盈餘落後期間拉長、壞消息對盈餘的影響完全反應完後會轉為負。本文以美國74,550筆公司－年之樣本檢視上述預期，而實證結果均與預期相符。英文摘要：This paper examines the effect of earnings lags on estimating and comparing the extent of conservatism based on Basu's (1997) asymmetric timeliness concept. Based on earnings lags and earnings asymmetry, as well as the interaction between these two; we assert that any comparisons of the extent of conservatism should take the magnitude of both concurrent and cumulative asymmetric timeliness into consideration. The length of recognition lag should also be considered. In the present study, we construct a multi-period model to capture lags in earnings response to good news, as well as to bad news. We predict that positive asymmetric timeliness exists in the current period and with short lags. We also predict that asymmetric timeliness turns negative as lags increase. Using a sample of 74,550 U.S. non-financial and non-utility firm-years, empirical results are consistent with our predictions. Results are also robust to several changes in model and sample specifications.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.NOV.R110262篇名：私下募集債券之長期財富移轉效果與經營績效之研究並列篇名：Long-run Stock Returns and Operating Performance Following Private Debt Placements作者：周冠男(Robin K. Chou);陳妙珍(Miaw-Jane Chen)關鍵字：私下募集債券;長期股價報酬;長期經營績效;private debt placement;long-run stock return;long-run operating performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在探討公司私下募集債券後之長期股價與經營績效。過去研究顯示公司發行權益證券或公開發行債券，發行公司之長期股價及經營績效均表現不佳，歸因於管理者選擇證券發行時機或投資人過度自信。相反地，一般而言私下募集債券之投資人較有經驗且可有效地監督發行公司營運，長期的績效應相對較佳。然而，本研究結果發現無論研究方法採用持有期間累積異常報酬法、Fama的三因子模型或Carhart的四因子模型，發行公司私下募集債券並無一致性的證據顯示存在長期超額報酬，或發行前後的長期經營績效優於其競爭公司，故無證據顯示管理者選擇證券發行時機或投資人過度自信的現象，此結果可能是私下募集方式本身可降低資訊不對稱及有效地監督公司的特質所致。英文摘要：This study examines the long-run stock return and operating performance following private debt placements. Presumably, private debt investors are more sophisticated and can monitor the issuing firms more effectively. Prior research suggests that equity and public debt issuers underperform various stock return benchmarks in the long run. It is also found that there is significant deterioration in long-run operating performance for equity and public debt offering firms. It is generally concluded that managers time the market when issuing equity and public debt or investor over-confidence. In contrast, using the buy-and-hold method, Fama three-factor model, or Carhart four-factor model, we do not find any consistent patterns of long-run under- or over-performance in stock returns and operating measures following private debt placements. Due to tighter monitoring, the information asymmetry problems are mitigated for private debt placements.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.R120113篇名：我國上市櫃公司採行34號公報第二次修訂規定之誘因：以交易目的股票重分類為備供出售為例並列篇名：The Incentives of Listed Companies to Adopt the Second Revisions on the Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 34: An Example of Reclassification of Trading Stock Investments to Available for Sale Investments作者：張嘉文(Chia-Wen Chang);陳明進(Ming-Chin Chen)關鍵字：金融資產重分類;債務契約限制;盈餘管理;reclassification of financial assets;debt covenants restriction, earnings management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文探討我國上市櫃公司採行財務會計準則34號公報第二次修訂規定進行金融資產重分類之誘因。本文的實證分析結果顯示，債務契約限制會影響公司傾向選擇將交易目的股票投資之金融資產重分類為備供出售金融資產，且重分類前盈餘低於前期盈餘之上市櫃公司，基於避免報導盈餘減少之結果，亦較傾向採行該項重分類規定以增加當年度盈餘。其次，本文研究亦發現債務契約限制愈大及重分類前盈餘低於前期盈餘之上市櫃公司，其將交易目的股票投資金融資產重分類為備供出售金融資產之部位較大。本文的結果提供我國上市櫃公司在金融風暴時期選擇金融資產重分類誘因之實證解釋。英文摘要：This study examines the incentives of listed companies to adopt the second revisions on the reclassification of financial assets of Financial Accounting Standard No.34 (FAS 34). The second revisions on FAS 34 allow firms to reclassify trading stock investments from financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss to available-for-sale financial assets during the 2008 global financial crisis. The empirical results of this study show that debt covenants restriction is a significant factor affecting firms’ decision to reclassify trading stock investments to available-for-sale financial assets. Further, companies which would report a decline in earnings from the previous year’s before the reclassification of trading stock investments are more likely to reclassify those assets to available-for-sale financial assets. Further, the results also show that the amount of reclassified trading stock investments is related to the debt covenants restriction and the reluctance to report a decline in earnings. Our results provide evidence on the incentives of Taiwanese listed companies to reclassify financial assets that are exposed to the reporting risk of fair value accounting during a global financial crisis.起始頁-結束頁：63-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.R110124篇名：發行海外存託憑證可以放寬融資限制嗎？－台灣之實證分析並列篇名：Does Issue of Oversea Depositary Receipt Reduce Financial Constraints?-Evidence from Taiwan作者：黃志典(Jyh-Dean Hwang);管浥棠(Yi-Tang Kuan)關鍵字：融資限制;海外存託憑證;投資－內部現金流量敏感度;financial constraints;depository receipt;investment to cash flow sensitivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以1992年至2009年間首次發行海外存託憑證的台灣上市公司為樣本，使用「追蹤資料」及「橫斷面固定效應模型」，探討發行海外存託憑證對融資限制的影響，並比較發行海外存託憑證與在國內進行現金增資的融資限制放寬效果。另外，本文也分析存託憑證是否完全使用舊股發行及發行時點對融資限制的影響。本文發現發行海外存託憑證具有融資限制放寬效果，而在國內進行現金增資則無；發行存託憑證的融資限制放寬效果與發行公司是否從中取得融資無關；發行存託憑證的融資限制放寬效果可能是來自在海外掛牌使發行公司的聲譽與能見度提高，進而使其比較容易取得外部融資；即使台灣資本市場的開放程度與對公司治理的規範已經大幅提高，但是台灣上市公司仍然可以藉由發行存託憑證提高聲譽及投資人認同，使融資限制降低。英文摘要：This paper investigates if firms can ease their financial constraints by issuing oversea depositary receipts, using as sample Taiwan's listed companies that issued DRs for the first time from 1992 through 2009. Panel data and cross-section fixed-effects model are employed for empirical analysis. The effect of DR issue in easing financial constraints is compared with that of the seasoned public offerings in Taiwan's equity market. We also investigate if the effect depends on the capital influx from DR issue and the timing of DR issue. We find that Taiwan's listed companies can reduce their financial constraints by issuing DRs, but they cannot do so by undertaking the seasoned public offerings in the domestic equity market. Moreover, the effect is not caused by the capital influx from DR issue. We demonstrate that its effect is most likely driven by the prestige and visibility gain from cross-border listing, which gives the DR issuers greater and easier access to capital markets. Finally, our results suggest that Taiwan's listed companies can still garner prestige and investor recognition by issuing DRs and reduce their financial constraints as a result, despite Taiwan has liberalized its financial markets and improved its corporate governance practices substantially.起始頁-結束頁：101-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.R120095篇名：轉換型領導對工作敬業心的影響歷程：心理資本與服務氣候之跨層次中介觀點並列篇名：The Influence Mechanisms of Transformational Leadership on Job Engagement: The Role of Psychological Capital and Service Climate作者：陳淑玲(Shu-Ling Chen);黃讌茹(Yen-Ju Huang)關鍵字：心理資本;工作敬業心;轉換型領導;psychological capital;job engagement;transformational leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：由正向組織行為和正向組織學識觀點出發，本研究提出個體層次心理資本與團隊層次服務氣候，分別為連結個人與團隊轉換型領導與工作敬業心的中介機制。問卷調查台灣北部地區40家連鎖直營加油站，總計606位第一線服務人員。多層次分析結果顯示個人層次轉換型領導與團隊層次轉換型領導會分別影響工作敬業心；個人層次轉換型領導與服務氣候會透過心理資本，而團隊層次轉換型領導則透過服務氣候，進而影響工作敬業心。最後，服務氣候透過心理資本，進而影響工作敬業心。根據研究成果，我們提出討論和未來研究建議。英文摘要：Drawing on the perspective of positive organizational behavior and positive organizational scholarship, we tested meso-mediating model linking transformational leadership and job engagement. Data collected involving 606 employees at 40 chained petro-stations in north Taiwan. Results of hierarchical linear modeling indicated that individual-level transformational leadership and team-level transformational leadership were positively related to employee job engagement, separately. Furthermore, at the individual level, indicated the relationship between individual-level transformational leadership and job engagement was partially mediated by psychological capital. At team-level, we also discovered that the relationship between team-level transformational leadership and job engagement was fully mediated by service climate. Finally, we also found that the relationships between service climate and job engagement were mediated by psychological capital. The research and practice implications of the findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：129-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JAN.R110576篇名：死亡威脅下人生觀對享樂與實用消費之影響並列篇名：Under the Mortality Salience: Effects of Life Philosophy on Hedonic and Utilitarian Consumption作者：謝致慧(Chih-Hui Shieh);凌儀玲(I-Ling Ling)關鍵字：死亡威脅;人生觀;消費傾向;mortality salience;outlook on life;consumer tendency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究應用恐懼管理理論探討人們面臨死亡威脅時其消費行為之傾向。共進行兩個實驗，實驗一分析死亡威脅對享樂消費和實用消費之傾向，結果顯示當人們面臨死亡威脅時，呈現較高享樂消費傾向。實驗二採二因子混合實驗設計，加入人生觀此一個人特質，探討死亡威脅對消費行為之調節效果，結果顯示對悲觀者而言，相較於低死亡威脅，高死亡威脅會有較高的餐飲消費傾向，以及有較低的投資理財傾向，然而對樂觀者而言卻無顯著差異。有趣的是，本研究亦發現，無論面臨高死亡威脅或處於低死亡威脅，人們的壽險消費傾向無顯著差異。英文摘要：Based on the Terror Management Theory, this article examines the effects of mortality salience and outlook on life on consumer behavior. Two experiments were conducted. In experiment 1, the results indicate that individuals in the mortality salience condition allocate more money to their hedonic consumption than their utilitarian consumption; however, individuals in the control condition allocate more money to their utilitarian consumption than their hedonic consumption. In experiment 2, the results show that individuals who have a pessimistic outlook on life tend to spend more money on catering consumption, and spend less money on investment funds when they face the possibility of death. Specifically, there is no significant difference of buying life insurance between the high and low mortality salience condition.起始頁-結束頁：157-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JAN.GE477篇名：官官相護？訴訟當事人身分影響稅務訴訟結果之初步證據並列篇名：Do Judgments on Tax Litigations Show Partiality for the Government as a Litigant?-Preliminary Evidence on Tax Case Adjudicated Decisions作者：黃士洲(Shih-Chou Huang);簡銀瑩(Yin-Ying Chien);林世銘(Su-Ming Lin)關鍵字：司法管理;稅務行政訴訟;政府優勢理論;judicial management;tax litigation;government advantage theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究之實證結果顯示，當最高行政法院在決定是否受理稅務訴訟上訴案件時，若上訴人為稽徵機關，最高行政法院實體審理而不加以程序駁回的機率，顯著高於當上訴人為個人或法人時；而經最高行政法院實體審理後的判決結果，稽徵機關獲得有利判決的機率亦顯著大於個人或法人。這種稽徵機關在稅務訴訟過程中所享有的優勢，即便納稅人延聘了專業的會計師、律師作為訴訟代理人之後仍然存在，惟會計師、律師的確有助於降低納稅人被程序駁回之機率。綜合統計分析之結果，本文無法向民眾提供稅務行政訴訟沒有官官相護之證據。英文摘要：Our empirical results show that relative to the appeals launched by individuals and corporate entities, appeals lodged by the tax authorities have a significantly higher probability of being heard at the Supreme Administrative Court (SAC). Appeals lodged by individuals and corporate entities, on the other hand, are likely to be procedurally dismissed by the SAC. In addition, in the cases adjudicated by the SAC, the tax authorities have a considerably higher chance of winning than do individuals and corporate entities, even when the latter have engaged lawyers or CPAs as their legal representatives. Our univariate and probit analyses consistently indicate that case judgments adjudicated by the SAC demonstrate partiality for the tax authorities, consistent with the assumptions of government advantage theory.起始頁-結束頁：185-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JAN.R110388篇名：面試官與應徵者的性別組合對面談評價之影響：大學教師甄選面談的實證並列篇名：The Effects of Interviewer-Applicant Gender Combination on the Interview Evaluation: An Empirical Study on Interviews of University Faculty作者：羅新興(Hsin-Hsin Lo);林韶姿(Shao-Tzu Lin);劉佩玲(Pei-Ling Liu)關鍵字：女王蜂症候群;性別組合;面談評價;queen bee syndrome;gender combination;interview evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去實證研究發現性別是影響面談評價的重要因素，但有關面試官與應徵者性別組合對面談評價的影響，尚未出現一致性的研究發現。為解答此不一致，本研究指出面試官年齡對於面試官與應徵者性別組合與面談評價的關係存在干擾作用。問卷調查大學教師擔任教師聘用面談的經驗，分析218份有效問卷獲得以下發現：高於四十歲的女性面試官對女性應徵者的評價顯著低於其它性別組合，而低於四十歲的面試官則未出現上述現象。換言之，本研究結果顯示「女王蜂症候群」較存在於相對較高年齡的女性，然而此結果是否反映不同世代的差異，仍有待後續研究釐清。英文摘要：Past empirical studies found that gender is one of the important factors that influence interviewers' evaluations on interviewees. However, research findings regarding the impact of interviewer-applicant gender combination on interview evaluation have not been consistent. To resolve the inconsistency, this study proposed that the relationship between interviewer-applicant gender combination and interview evaluation is moderated by the interviewer's age level. We sampled 218 professors in universities and the results showed that female interviewers tend to give lower evaluations to female applicants as opposed to other interviewer-interviewee gender combination when the interviewer was above forty years old. Our study results evidenced the so-called ”queen bee syndrome” existing in a relatively high age group. However, whether this finding was due to differences across generations deserves further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：215-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.APR.R100259篇名：強制合夥會計師輪調當年度的審計品質分析並列篇名：Audit Quality during the First Year of Mandatory Audit-Partner Rotation作者：廖秀梅(Hsiu-Mei Liao);戚務君(Wu-Chun Chi)關鍵字：會計師輪調;客戶專屬性查核經驗;非客戶專屬性查核經驗;audit partner rotation;client-specific experience;pre-client experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文針對強制合夥會計師輪調當年度的樣本（以下簡稱首年輪調），分析繼任會計師之「過去與該客戶之專屬性查核經驗」以及「非客戶專屬性查核經驗」（包含產業經驗與一般性經驗）是否影響首年輪調的審計品質。由於首年輪調之會計師，其重新起算之任期為第一年，因此，本文所定義之客戶專屬性查核經驗係指繼任會計師過去曾經查核該客戶所累積之年數。除此之外，我們也分析該位會計師在特定產業查核年數（產業經驗）以及所有產業查核年數（一般性經驗）對首年輪調審計品質的影響。實證結果顯示，無論「過去與該客戶之專屬性查核經驗」或者「非客戶專屬性查核經驗」均有助於首年輪調審計品質的提升。這個結果意謂董事會應審慎考量會計師過去的查核經驗。英文摘要：This study examines whether auditors' client-specific and pre-client experience affect the audit quality of firms during the first year following mandatory audit-partner rotation (henceforth ”first year following rotation”). Our client-specific experience measure is the cumulative number of pre-rotation years an audit-partner holds. We use two measures for pre-client experience: industry-specific and general. We find some evidences that either client-specific experience or pre-client experience improve earnings quality of firms during the first year following mandatory audit-partner rotation. Our findings suggest that the board of corporate directors should consider prior auditor experience when rotating audit partners.起始頁-結束頁：233-257資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.APR.GE3010篇名：專業經理人職位的代理意涵：台灣電子業家族企業之實證分析並列篇名：The Agency Implication of a Professional Manager's Position: An Empirical Study of Family Businesses in Taiwan's Electronic Industry作者：李卉馨(Hui-Hsin Lee);詹淑婷(Shu-Ting Chan);蘇怡方(I-Fang Su);鍾喜梅(Hsi-Mei Chung)關鍵字：家族企業;專業經理人;家族股權結構;family business;professional manager;family ownership structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：家族式經營是華人企業普遍的治理模式，電子產業的家族集團企業由於產業競爭特性，家族勢必要依賴專業經理人協助企業經營，另外，隨著集團企業的擴張，家族透過層層股權控制鍊掌握分子企業的決策權，因此，電子產業家族企業所衍生的代理問題與治理機制受到重視。本研究從代理理論觀點，以台灣63家電子業家族上市公司為對象，嘗試從長期角度分析高階經理人擔任董事職位，對家族股權結構與績效之間關係的影響。結果顯示，家族直接持股愈高，對績效有正向影響，同時，專業經理人董事愈多，將強化家族直接持股與績效間的正向關係，以及弱化家族間接持股對績效的負向影響。研究結果對於討論專業經理人職位之代理意涵，以及電子產業家族企業治理議題，具有相當之意義。英文摘要：Family governance is a typical governance structure in publicly traded firms in Taiwan and around the world. The founding family of a firm can choose direct ownership or a pyramidal ownership structure to achieve control over a publicly traded family business or a family business group. In addressing performance issues in family businesses, the family ownership structure could generate positive or negative impacts on performance. Thus, determining the contingent condition that will moderate the relationship between family ownership and performance is a key concern in family businesses. Utilizing longitudinal data in family businesses in Taiwan's personal computer industry, this study examines the relationships between the roles of professional managers on the board, the family ownership structure, and the firm's performance from agency theory viewpoint. The results indicate that the professional manager's position on the board will moderate the relationship between the family ownership structure and performance. Specifically, the professional managers serving as directors will enhance the positive impact from family direct ownership on performance and mitigate the negative performance impact from family pyramidal ownership. This study extends the principal-agent and principal-principal agency arguments by further considering the role of the professional manager's position in family businesses.起始頁-結束頁：259-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.MAY.R1103411篇名：當我們同在一起：個人與團隊契合、情感性承諾與知識分享行為之關聯並列篇名：When We Get Together: Person-Team Fit, Affective Commitment and Knowledge Sharing Behavior作者：吳欣蓓(Hsin-Pei Wu);陸洛(Luo Lu)關鍵字：個人與團隊契合;情感性承諾;知識分享;person-team fit;affective commitment;knowledge sharing behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：根據社會認定理論，個人與團隊的高度契合可提高個人對團隊與其他成員的情感穩定度與情感鏈結，並且展現高度的利群體精神。因此，本研究在探討個人與團隊契合、情感性承諾與知識分享行為的關係。為檢驗研究假設，本研究收集68組團隊中的有效成員樣本共404份進行分析，其分別來自研發、銷售、資安等多元團隊，有效回收率為94%。結果發現，個人與團隊契合能預測情感性承諾與知識分享行為，情感性承諾也在契合與知識分享間扮演重要的中介角色。除此之外，本研究從參考認知理論提出知覺公平的干擾作用。結果發現，程序公平於情感性承諾與知識分享間存在干擾效果。英文摘要：According to social identity theory, high person-team fit (P-T fit) promotes highly emotional team stability which increases the capability of team members to engage with one another and to display a higher intention to help the group. This study explores these posited relations among P-T fit, affective commitment and knowledge sharing. To test hypotheses, data collected from 404 team members (68 teams including R&D team, sales team, MIS team, etc.) were analyzed. The response rate of our survey was 94%. We found that P-T fit positively predicted affective commitment and knowledge sharing behavior. Furthermore, affective commitment is an important mediator linking P-T fit and knowledge sharing behavior. Based on the referent cognition theory, we proposed perceived team justice as a moderator, and the results of moderated mediation analysis confirmed that perceived procedural justice moderated the relationship between affective commitment and knowledge sharing behavior.起始頁-結束頁：287-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.GE4912篇名：製造服務化發展模式之研究並列篇名：A Study on Modes of the Servitization of Manufacturing作者：余佩儒(Pei-Ju Yu);陳信宏(Shin-Horng Chen);溫蓓章(Pei-Chang Wen)關鍵字：製造服務化;（產品）服務化;製造服務發展模式;servitization/industrial service;(product) servicizing;modes of servitization in manufacturing期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：25卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著製造與服務界線模糊趨勢，製造服務化崛起，涉及公司層級策略的調整、組織內部和組織間制度關係的調整、相關能力的建立、新的定價和利潤模式。本研究探討製造服務化的定義和本質，並提出三大發展模式（產品延伸服務、產品功能性服務、整合性解決方案）。在三大模式下，本研究引入分析構面，透過案例比較分析，以探討國內外廠商在製造服務化的內涵差異：1.供應鏈層面：「供應鏈關係的再結構」相對於「新供應鏈關係的價值創造」；2.提供內容層面：「產品／服務之功能性提供」相對於「產品／服務之創新性提供」；3.複雜性層面：「技術／系統複雜性低」相對於「技術／系統複雜性高」，提出對台灣製造業往服務化發展的可能路徑與對我國政策意涵。英文摘要：With the trend towards blurred boundaries between manufacturing and services, the servitization of manufacturing (also known as industrial services, servicizing) has surged as an important thrust of transformation for a growing number of manufactures. The servitization of manufacturing may involve issues, such as strategic realignment at the corporate level, the rearrangement of intra-firm and inter-firm organizations and institutional relationships, capability-building, and new pricing and revenue models. This paper refers to the existing literature to propose three modes of the servitization of manufacturing; namely Mode 1: Product Extension Service, Mode 2: Product Function Service, and Mode 3: Integrated Solution. The paper goes further to make comparisons between a few domestic and foreign cases by referring to three dimensions, including: 1. Supply chain: the reconfiguration of the supply chain vs. the value creation of new supply chain; 2. Offering: functional offering of product/service vs. innovative offering of product/service; 3. Complexity: low technology/system complexity vs. high technology/system complexity. Based on the above dimensions, via case comparison, the study attempts to spotlight the differences in the essence and business models of servitization between a few domestic and foreign firms. Finally, the paper proposes the possible paths of servicizing and draws policy implication.起始頁-結束頁：325-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.FEB.GE113篇名：臺指選擇權非同步交易時段之資訊內涵並列篇名：Information Content of Nonsynchronous Trading for Taiwan Stock Index Options作者：莊益源(I-Yuan Chuang);賴靖宜(Jing-Yi Lai);王雅晴(Ya-Ching Wang);薛愛潔(Ai-Jie Xue)關鍵字：非同步交易;指數選擇權;隱含波動;nonsynchronous trading;index options;implied volatility期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：透過臺指選擇權市場較現貨市場提早開盤與延後收盤的非同步交易時段資訊內涵的分析，可揭露來自策略交易者的額外交易訊息。本文假設非同步交易時段的資訊內涵隱藏於選擇權隱含波動率之中，實證結果發現，選擇權市場提早開盤時段的資訊內涵與現貨隔夜報酬有顯著的負向變動關係，表示資訊交易者面對選擇權市場的私有資訊可能採取負面看法，於現貨市場開盤時操作而造成隨後開盤的現貨價格（隔夜報酬）下跌；該時段的資訊內涵會持續影響現貨市場開盤後的表現至少15分鐘，但隨交易時間遞延其影響幅度及顯著性皆會逐漸下降。而前一交易日現貨市場收盤後的選擇權資訊內涵與現貨市場報酬則無顯著關聯。英文摘要：The study investigates whether the extension of trading hours for Taiwan Stock Index Options contains information about the dynamics of future spot returns. Assuming that useful information is retrievable from the option-implied volatility, we found that the information content from the pre-open options trading is significantly negative related to the overnight returns in the spot market. This implies that a lower overnight spot return is expected because informed traders might react negatively to such private information from pre-open options trading. The pre-open option trades also contain useful information in explaining subsequent spot returns up to 15 minutes during the trading day, while the size and significance of the impacts decrease as the trade continues. No significant relationship is evident between information content in post-close options trading and spot returns on the following trading day.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.AUG.D0614篇名：台灣券商發行之權證市場品質及造市績效評比並列篇名：Market Quality and Market Making Performance: Evaluating the Issuers of Warrants in Taiwan Stock Markets作者：詹場(Chang Chan);池祥麟(Hsiang-Lin Chih)關鍵字：市場品質;買賣價差;權證;market quality;bid-ask spread;warrants期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究針對台灣各券商發行之權證的市場品質、造市機制實施後各券商發行權證之價差及深度進步幅度、以及各券商造市成效進行評比。由一年半樣本期間、20家券商、8千3百檔權證，共1千2百萬筆日內交易資料所得之評比結果為：1.發行權證之市場品質最佳的5家券商為寶來、凱基、元大、群益及統一；2.造市機制實施後價差及深度進步幅度最大的5家券商為日盛、工銀、元富、統一及兆豐；3.造市成效最佳的5家券商為寶來、工銀、元大、統一及凱基。綜合而言，實施造市機制使得台灣權證市場價差下降2/3，深度提升3倍，平均每年為權證投資人節省63億之交易成本。投資人選擇價差最高的5家券商發行之權證，其交易成本是價差最低的5家券商發行之權證的3.6倍，致使其報酬率減少11%；深度最高的5家券商發行之權證深度是深度最低的5家券商發行權證的6.5倍。英文摘要：In order to improve the liquidity of the warrant market, Taiwan Stock Exchange announced operation directions, requiring the issuer (Securities Firm) of the warrants to perform the market making obligations after 1st January, 2009, i.e., to provide liquidity for the warrants that it issues. The aim of the paper is to evaluate the issuers of the warrants. We explore the following three questions. First, we ask how the market quality of the warrants varies across issuers for our overall sample period between 1st July, 2008 and 31st December, 2009. Second, we compare the market quality of the warrants before and after 1st January, 2009 across issuers, i.e., to examine whether or not the market quality is improved due to the operation directions, and if so, to what extent this goes on across issuers. Third, we examine the performance of the market making across issuers after 1st January, 2009. Our samples consist of twenty securities firms, 8,300 warrants, and about 12,000,000 intraday transaction data. The findings show that the top five issuers with the best market quality for the overall sample period are Polaris, KGI, Yuanta, Capital, and President, respectively; the top five issuers with the biggest improvement in market quality due to the operation directions are Jihsun, IBT, Masterlink, President, and Mega, respectively; the top five issuers with the best market making performance after 1st January, 2009 are Polaris, IBT, Yuanta, President, KGI. In summary, the market making mechanism amazingly reduced the bid-ask spread of the warrant market by nearly two-thirds, increase the depth by three times, and thus save investors the transaction cost about 6.3 billions on average. The transaction cost of the top five issuers with highest bid-ask spread is 3.6 times as high as that of the top five issuers with lowest bid-ask spread. The depth of the top five issuers with highest depth is 6.5 times as high as that of the top five issuers with lowest depth.起始頁-結束頁：29-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.AUG.D1015篇名：Financial Distress, Return Volatility and Hedging並列篇名：財務危機風險、報酬波動與避險作者：賴怡洵(Yi-Hsun Lai);林霖(Lin Lin);戴維芯(Vivian W. Tai)關鍵字：避險;風險移轉;風險管理;hedge;risk-shifting;risk management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以2005年至2009年所有台灣上市櫃公司為樣本，以Tobit迴歸檢定權益波動與避險比例的關係，探討不同財務危機風險下的企業避險動機。提出三個假說，分別為高財務危機風險下的「風險移轉假說」、接近財務危機風險下的「風險管理假說」及低財務危機風險下的「風險－報酬抵換假說」。研究發現在高財務槓桿樣本群，在考量選擇性偏誤、是否處於金融風暴期間、不同的避險比例衡量方式以及不同的槓桿比例財務危機風險指標下，其權益波動與避險比例都具有顯著負向關係，故支持高財務危機風險公司具有風險移轉行為。在低財務槓桿樣本群，除在不同避險工具考量選擇性偏誤的結果外，多數的結果都呈現權益波動與避險比例具有顯著負向關係，部分支持低財務危機風險公司在風險－報酬抵換考量下會選擇高風險而少避險的決策。而高、低財務危機風險之間的群組，其權益波動與避險比例具有正向影響，但部分未達顯著，故微弱地支持風險管理假說。本研究透過實證釐清財務危機風險與權益波動以及其交互作用對企業避險行為的關係。英文摘要：We adopt Tobit Regressions to examine the hedging behavior of the listed firms in Taiwan during 2005-2009. With the concern of bankruptcy and risk-shifting motivation of the firm, the risk-shifting, risk management, and risk-return-trade-off hypotheses are then reviewed and tested. The results show that return volatility is significantly negative to hedge ratio for distressed firms, controlling for the selection biases, time period of catastrophe (i.e., the Financial Crisis started from 2008), and the model sensitivity to different definitions of financial distress. It strongly supports the risk-shifting phenomenon for distressed firms. Significant negative relationship between hedge ratio and return volatility for non-distress group can also be observed in most tests, apart from some models for the Heckman tests for controlling selection biases. These findings partly support the risk-return-trade-off hypothesis. For the firms being in-between extreme distress levels, the return volatility is positive to hedge ratio, showing a weak support to risk management hypothesis. Our empirical results clarify the impacts of financial distress, return volatility, and their interaction term on corporate hedging behavior.起始頁-結束頁：61-95資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.NOV.D0316篇名：重隨機假設下動態違約相關性之描述及其資訊內涵：以指數型信用擔保債權憑證為例並列篇名：On the Characterization and Information Contents of Dynamic Default Correlation under the Doubly Stochastic Assumption: The Case of iTraxx CDO Tranches作者：江彌修(Mi-Hsiu Chiang);邱信瑜(Hsin-Yu Chiu);王盈心(Ying-Hsin Wang)關鍵字：動態違約模型;混合卜瓦松跳躍過程;資產動態存活機率;default correlations;mixed Poisson jump processes;contagious effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文建立信用資產債權群組之動態違約相關性模型。其中，我們允許異質性信用風險事件之抵達由雙重（Autonomous）混合型卜瓦松跳躍過程（Mixed Poisson Jump Processes）所描述，且藉由跳躍幅度（Jump Sizes）反映信用事件之於信用資產池（Reference Pool）聯合存活機率（Joint Survival Probabilities）的危害程度。本文藉由提供驅動信用事件發生之頻率（Default Intensity）服從一雙參數伽瑪（Gamma）及帕雷圖分配（Pareto Distribution），以描述不同市場情境下信用事件發生之密集性。我們以市場指數型擔保債權憑證iTraxx Europe為例，驗證模型之市價擬合度，且藉由校準市價反推求得各分券之隱含相關性（Implied Correlation），進一步闡述隱含相關性於分券風險特徵及信用交易策略上所呈現的意涵。英文摘要：In this paper we present a tractable model that dynamically characterizes the correlation structure for a portfolio of credit entities. Heterogeneous credit events are modeled as the arrivals of mixed Poisson jump processes and magnitudes of jumps represent the associated impacts of credit events on the joint survival probabilities of the credit portfolio. We assume that the default intensities of both sources of risk are driven by a combination of two-parameter Gamma and Pareto distributions as to capture the clustering effects of default events under different market scenarios. We conduct calibration of the model to iTraxx Europe as an example and verify the goodness of fit between the arket spreads and the model spreads of ours. We extract the implied jump-sizes that reveal information on the correlation structure, and further explore their impacts on the risk characteristics of CDO tranches.起始頁-結束頁：97-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.APR.D0817篇名：Star Funds, Spillover Effect and Fund Advertisements: From the Viewpoint of Individual Funds and Fund Families並列篇名：明星基金、外溢效果與基金廣告關聯性之探討：個別基金觀點與基金家族觀點作者：傅英芬(Ying-Fen Fu);康信鴻(Hsin-Hong Kang);劉海清(Hai-Ching Liu)關鍵字：基金廣告;明星基金;外溢效果;fund advertisements;star funds;spillover effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文採用Panel Data Approach與Logistic Regression法，分別站在個別基金與基金家族觀點來探討基金廣告對個別基金及其家族的影響。本文的研究顯示採家族廣告對個別基金與基金家族而言都會是一個不錯的選擇。而單一基金廣告可能造成個別基金間的衝突，因為單一基金廣告佔用了家族的資源，但是只對被廣告的基金有利，卻無法創造出外溢效果。除非被單一廣告的基金是明星基金，才可得到更佳的廣告效果與外溢效果，因此明星基金被單一廣告的機率亦大為提高。此外，無論是在整體市場中或是家族內，只要能位居績效或是流量的明星或贏家地位，該基金被單一廣告的機率都將大幅提高，此點印證了符合家族利益的基金，在家族有限的資源中，將得到家族給予更多資源支持的論點（Chevalier and Ellison, 1997）。英文摘要：This study adopts the Panel Data Approach and Logistic Regression to examine the effect of fund advertisements from the viewpoint of both individual funds and fund families. Our empirical results show that adopting family advertisements is a good decision both for individual funds and their families. However, there exists a conflict between individual funds when the individual fund advertisement is executed. The individual funds do not respond well to individual fund advertisements of other funds within the same family because it consumes the resources of the family and does not have a spillover effect. One exception is star funds. The individual fund advertisement of star funds not only results in more flows but also has a spillover effect, which thus brings the star funds a higher probability of being individually advertised. As long as the funds are performance (flow) star and winner funds within the whole stock funds or only the performance (flow) star and winner funds within the family, their advertisement probability is raised. This is consistent with the argument that if the funds confirm the benefit of the family, the family may decide to distribute more limited resources to these funds (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997).起始頁-結束頁：133-174資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.OCT.R1102118篇名：中國會計師事務所經營效率分析：合併的影響並列篇名：The Operating Efficiency of Chinese CPA Firms: The Effect of Merger作者：林孝倫(Hsiao-Lun Lin);卓佳慶(Chia-Ching Cho)關鍵字：會計師事務所;合併;資料包絡分析法;CPA firms;mergers;Data Envelopment Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：中國註冊會計師協會為提升境內事務所之規模與品質，推動「會計師事務所做大做強」計畫，該計畫促使中國會計師事務所展開合併風潮。但會計師事務所透過合併擴張規模的同時，其經營效率是否亦有所提升，尚未有文獻分析。本文以資料包絡分析法分析會計師事務所之經營效率，並以麥氏生產力指數分析事務所經營效率之變化。實證結果顯示，涉及合併的事務所跨期間經營效率的提升較未涉及合併的事務所高。本文進一步將涉及合併的事務所依據合併前是否具有「證券、期貨相關業務許可證」加以區分，發現兩家以上具有證券、期貨相關業務許可證之事務所合併，對於經營效率的提升才有顯著正向的影響。此外，本文將合併前事務所總所所在地是否在同一省份加以區分，實證結果顯示，若合併前事務所總所位於不同省份，事務所間業務區域互補性高，對於事務所經營效率的提升有顯著正向的影響。綜上所述可知，中國近期涉及合併事務所的效率提升較未合併者顯著，但並非所有事務所都可以透過合併來達成做大做強的效果，在推動政策與事務所在進行合併決策時，應審慎評估事務所合併對於經營效率的影響。英文摘要：Developing larger and more competitive Chinese CPA firms is the objective of Chinese government. The Chinese government supports CPA firms to achieve scale growth through merger. This study examines the relationship between operational efficiency and the merging of CPA firms. We measure operating efficiency by applying Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Using revenue and human resource data in China for the 2004-2009 period, we find firms that are involved in mergers have significantly higher productivity growth than their peers. However, not all mergers have positive effects. Mergers occur between two (or more) CPA firms that are licensed to audit listed companies and mergers occur between two (or more) CPA firms that headquarter are in different provinces have significantly higher productivity growth. The findings of this study have policy implications for regulators in China and the Chinese CPA firms.起始頁-結束頁：175-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.DEC.R1100519篇名：Can Audit Committee Improve Earnings Quality More than the Supervisors in Taiwan?並列篇名：審計委員會是否較監察人更能提升盈餘品質作者：許文馨(Audrey Wen-Hsin Hsu)關鍵字：審計委員會;監察人;盈餘;audit committee;supervisors;earnings quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要探討從監察人制度轉換成審計委員會制度之公司，其盈餘品質是否提升。比較採用審計委員會制度的公司前、後期間之盈餘品質，相對於維持監察人制度之公司兩個時期的盈餘品質之變化，本文發現採用審計委員會制度之公司較能提升盈餘品質。此發現表示公司採用審計委員會制度者會比維持監察人制度之公司較為注重股東的權益。英文摘要：This study examines whether companies that are allowed to switch to the audit committee from the supervisors can achieve better earnings quality. I compare earnings quality for firms that switch to the audit committee between pre-adoption and post-adoption periods, relative to the corresponding change for a matched sample that retain the supervisors. I find that firms can improve earnings quality after they switch from the supervisors to audit committee. My findings suggest that firms adopting audit committee can embrace shareholder primacy to a larger extent than those that retain the supervisors.起始頁-結束頁：203-232資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JUN.R1100220篇名：Board Characteristics and the Valuation Effects of Corporate Joint Venture Investments並列篇名：董事會特徵與企業合資投資之財富效果作者：賴蓉禾(Jung-Ho Lai);陳一如(I-Ju Chen);陳麗宇(Li-Yu Chen)關鍵字：董事會;合資;公司治理;board of directors;joint venture;corporate governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在探討董事會特徵對企業合資投資財富效果之影響。儘管實務上董事普遍涉及合資決策，但現存文獻對於董事會如何影響企業合資成效依舊缺乏。因經理人可能基於自利動機追求合資，故董事在公司合資時扮演重要監控角色；而董事之資訊與資源提供可減輕合資遭遇之困難，故董事亦扮演諮詢的角色。本研究依據代理成本理論及資源依賴理論探討董事會相關變數對企業合資績效的影響。研究結果顯示董事的合資經驗對合資具有正面財富效果，此外，董事會召開次數及董事所持有股權對董事經驗與績效關係強度有正向的影響。然而，董事會大小及外部董事的比率並未具有顯著之解釋能力。因董事在合資產業所獲得之產業經驗並未能普遍提升合資績效，本研究進一步針對投資在異業的合資樣本作分析，發現在此子群中，董事之合資產業經驗對合資績效有正向顯著影響。本研究結果指出研究董事會特徵與企業投資績效之關聯性時，採取整合性觀點之重要性，此一觀點長期以來為相關董事文獻所忽視。故藉由探討董事會對合資決策之影響，本研究發現為現存文獻存在著董事不一致影響之結論有所貢獻。英文摘要：This study investigates the valuation effect of board characteristics in corporate Joint Venture (JV) investments. Despite the prevalence of a board's involvement in JV decisions in practice, extant literature is mute concerning how the board adds value to JV outcomes. Investigation into board contribution in JVs is insightful due to executives' self-serving behaviors that may underlie their JV pursuits and boards' resource provision that may mitigate critical JV challenges. The former (latter) sheds light on the board's monitoring (advisory) role in a firm's JV engagement. Drawing on agency theory and resource dependence theory, this study investigates the value of representative board characteristics underscored by these two theoretical perspectives. Our results show that the two conventional board measures, board size and outside director ratio, do not have a significant explanatory power. In contrast, director experience associated with JV decisions and gained from within relevant industries are found to positively impact JV outcomes. Moreover, both board meeting frequency and director ownership have favorable moderating effects on the strength of the experience-value relationship. However, these two variables per se do not independently determine a JV's value. Our research results indicate the importance of taking an integrative view to the investigation of board effectiveness, a perspective which has long been neglected in board research. The findings of the present study contribute to the mixed findings of extant studies on board influence from an uninvestigated domain, JV.起始頁-結束頁：233-272資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.OCT.R1201001篇名：臺灣各縣市人口結構與社會福利支出集中度之分析並列篇名：Population Structure and the Concentration of Social Welfare Spending across Cities in Taiwan作者：蔡妮娜(Nina Tsai);陳彥仲(Yen-Jong Chen);許永河(Yuan-Ho Hsu)關鍵字：人口結構;分配均等化;社會福利支出集中商數;高齡化;區位商數;Aging;Concentration quotient of social welfare spending;Distribution equalization;Location quotient;Population structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：臺灣邁入高齡化社會後，人口結構的改變逐漸成為政府政策制定的重要考量，而社會福利資源也成為政府處理區域發展失衡問題時的工具之一。此現象顯示社會福利資源在縣市間的配置狀況及相對集中度之決定因素，具有研究之必要性。本文援用區位商數之概念，根據資源總量與分配狀態，並以人口與都市計畫區面積份額為比較基礎，計算出縣市合併前之二十三縣市政府的社會福利支出集中商數後，得知縣市之間的社會福利集中度甚為不均。再依研究需求採用一般化動差法進行實證分析，探討人口結構、就業結構、財政條件等總體經濟變數對於社會福利資源配置的作用。結果顯示人口結構是影響地方政府社會福利分配集中程度的因素，尤以老年人口比率的增加，顯著提高了縣市政府社會福利集中度，而政府的財政地位則對社會福利資源配置的均等化發揮了調整的效果。英文摘要：The thesis investigates the distribution equality of local government social welfare expenditure between the 23 cities and counties in Taiwan. A location quotient is employed as an index to assess the concentration quotient of social welfare resources. And the panel data model and generalized method of moments (GMM) are adopted in the empirical studies. As the total social welfare expenditures are equalized by the population share and the share of squared measure of urban areas individually, the results show a distinct welfare sharing inequality between local governments. The empirical results also show that the population structure, especially the elderly share of the local area is the important determinants for the distribution of the social welfare spending. Moreover, the fiscal composition is the important element with regard to balancing the social welfare distribution between local governments for the cities level.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201411_17(2).00012篇名：鹿谷凍頂烏龍茶產業發展與產地認證的探討並列篇名：Exploration of Industry Development and Origin Certification of Lugu Dongding Wulong Tea作者：梁炳琨(Bang-Kuen Liang)關鍵字：另類農業食物網絡;地方鑲嵌;產地認證;Alternative agro-food networks (AAFNs);Place embeddedness;origin certification期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：產地認證是台灣地區推動農業在地食物的重要政策，而鹿谷凍頂烏龍茶是台灣第一個通過茶葉產地認證者。本文主要以地方鑲嵌、另類農業食物網絡兩個植基於在地經營與銷售的連結觀點，探討鹿谷凍頂烏龍茶的產業發展與產地認證。本文研究發現：首先茶葉品質鑲嵌於地方的自然條件（低溫高濕與土壤）以及製茶技術；而地方鑲嵌的促成，也受到外地社會建構的限制（高山茶的衝擊），不一定僅於地方的制約。其次，另類食物網絡的面對面連結，早已存在於茶葉買賣的試喝文化，含在地茶農與外地茶商、外地消費者之間，非單純的生產者與消費者的連結；另也彰顯面對面的連結除了人與人，更包含人與物（茶葉）的關係。最後，鹿谷凍頂烏龍茶產地認證的產地之名，一方面遭受高山茶的衝擊，另一方面全國性鹿谷農會茶比賽之名聲建構，補充了產地認證的地方名聲與穩住固定的消費口味。英文摘要：Origin certification is one of the important policies of Local Agro-food in Taiwan. The first tea awarded origin certification is Lugu Dongding Wulong tea. This study explores the development and the certification of tea industry in Lugu through place embeddedness and alternative agro-food networks (AAFNs) perspectives. The research has 3 conclusions. Firstly, tea quality is embedded by local natural condition (climate and soil) and tea-making skills. but the enable of place embeddedness could become constrains from external social construction rather than from the local. Secondly, Face-toface social relation construction in alternative agro-food networks exists in ”complimentary drink” tea culture between local farmers and tea dealers or external tea dealers and external consumers, instead of the pure connection between producers and consumers. Finally, Lugu tea industry and origin certification was impacted by mountain tea, but the local reputation construction of tea competition, held by Lugu farmers' association, supplements local reputation of origin certification and firms the flavor of consumers.起始頁-結束頁：29-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201411_17(2).00023篇名：旋翼型UAV影像局部重測都市區千分之一地形圖之研究並列篇名：A Study on Local Resurvey for 1/1000 Topographic Maps by Using VTOL UAV Images作者：邱式鴻(Shih-Hong Chio);顏怡和(Yi-Ho Yen);丁育群(Yuh-Chyurn Ding)關鍵字：無人飛行載具;局部重測;自率光束法;空中三角測量;立體測製;UAV;local Resurvey;Self-calibration Bundle Adjustment;Aerotriangulation;Stereo Mapping期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：無人飛行載具UAV（Unmanned Aerial Vehicle）近年來發展快速，加上自動導航技術的提升與穩定的航拍取像設備，使得UAV可以更安全、更自動化的方式取得高解析度的航拍影像，此外UAV亦能執行低空雲下自動化取像，相當適合作為地形圖局部重測的航拍取像系統，尤其是旋翼型UAV因以電池為飛行動力來源且可垂直起降、機動更強，更可安全地適用於都市地區航拍取像進行局部重測千分之一地形圖。而旋翼型UAV酬載能力比定翼型UAV更有限，因此亦僅能酬載非量測型相機航拍取像，因此取得之影像是否能夠局部重測都市區千分之一地形圖是本研究探討之重點。本研究以內政部核定之「一千分之一數值航測地形圖測製作業規定」逐一探討各重要的工作項目。實驗結果顯示於航線規劃後以旋翼型UAV航拍取得品質佳之影像，並透過自率光束法空中三角測量（簡稱空三）平差，解決以近景攝影測量程序率定之相機參數無法完全描述以UAV航拍取像時的相機參數問題之後，再透過立體模型有效立製測製範圍之概念，實證以旋翼型UAV影像局部重測都市區千分之一地形圖的可行性，本研究最後並依據實驗結果提出相關重要工作項目之建議。英文摘要：In recent years, the development of UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) is quite fast. Due to the automatic navigation technology, it makes UAVs be a stable platform to collect high-resolution aerial images much more safely and automatically. Also, UAVs can acquire the aerial images with low-altitude and under cloud, UAVs become quite suitable for aerial image collection system to resurvey locally for topographic maps. In particular, VTOL (Vertical Take Off and Landing) UAVs can take off and land vertically, therefore they are more flexible and more suitable for acquiring aerial images in urban areas for local resurvey to generate 1/1000 topographic maps. The payload capacity of VTOL UAV is more limited than the fixed-wing UAV, thus only the non-metric camera can be implemented to collect aerial images. Therefore, this study will focus on the possibility for local resurvey to generate 1/1000 topographic maps by using these collected aerial images. The individual critical processing items of mapping regulations for 1/1000 digital topographic maps, approved by Ministry of the Interior, will be investigated and discussed one by one in this study. Based on the experimental results, after planning and accruing the aerial images with good quality, self-calibration bundle adjustment for aerial triangulation is performed to overcome the imperfect camera parameters calibrated by the procedure of close-range photogrammetry. Next, by introducing the concept of effective stereo mapping in stereo model it proves that the aerial images collected by VTOL UAVs can be used for local resurvey in urban area to generate 1/1000 topographic maps. Finally, the suggestion about each critical processing item for mapping will be presented based on the experimental results.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201411_17(2).00034篇名：鄉村地區生活品質資本與發展策略之研究－八個鄉鎮的衡量與分析並列篇名：Quality of Life Capital and Rural Development: A Comparative Study of Selected Countryside in Taiwan作者：廖淑容(Shu-Jong Liau)關鍵字：生活品質資本;鄉村地區;鄉村發展;Quality of Life Capital;Rural Area;Rural Development期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：17卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：鄉村地區，在全球化趨勢和產業移轉下，面臨經濟、社會、環境和空間問題的衝擊與挑戰。鄉村地區發展競爭力的提升，必須將地區資源納入考量，充分運用鄉村地區資產的潛力和厚實度，研議具競爭優勢的策略方向。本研究從生活品質資本角度，在經濟、社會、環境、文化和知識資本等資本評量架構建立的基礎上，就台灣地區不同形態發展的八個鄉村，透過資料蒐集及問卷調查，分析生活品質資本的現況、存量、問題，並比較鄉村地區發展差異。結果除驗證生活品質資本指標體系的可操作性外，可發現環境、社會、文化三項資本是鄉村延續與再發展的重要基礎；另經濟和知識資本，則是形成發展方向與和提升競爭力的關鍵。英文摘要：The countryside strives for promoting competition to respond challenges of economy, society, environment, and land use in global context. Many strategies regarding to rural tourism, innovation of agricultural productions, and urban-rural immigrants were not precisely considered on local status and resources. This study based on an analytic framework of ”quality of life capital” tried to investigate capital factors of selected 8 rural areas in field of economy, society, environment, culture, and knowledge for comparing differences of development and conditions, stocks, and embeddness of life capital. The result not only recognized measurability of ”quality of life capital” but also highlighted capitals of environment, society, and culture being important bases of sustainability and development in rural. However, the capital of economy and knowledge should be keys to raise advantages and forms of rural development.起始頁-結束頁：89-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201411_17(2).000401篇名：審議民主與多元社會的穩定並列篇名：Deliberative Democracy and the Stability of a Pluralist Society作者：吳澤玫(Tse-Mei Wu)關鍵字：審議民主;穩定性問題;古德曼;湯普森;審議;deliberative democracy;the problem of stability;Amy Gutmann;Dennis Thompson;deliberation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：49期出版年：2014中文摘要：在自由主義民主社會裡，公民經常對社會制度和公共政策抱持歧見，因而穩定性問題對所有當代多元社會構成重要的挑戰。我們必須正視並加以解決的問題是：如何促使抱持不同道德觀和價值觀的公民，自願接受並遵守重要制度和政策的規範？本文的目的在於闡明，古德曼和湯普森的審議民主觀如何及在何種程度上能夠確保多元社會的穩定。筆者將指出，公共審議可以發揮集思廣益、轉換個人偏好、促進相互尊重、為決策結果賦予正當性的功能，故可縮小政治歧見的範圍，促使公民更願意支持並遵守最後的決議。而古德曼和湯普森的審議動態性主張亦有助於確保穩定。然而，他們的理論缺乏可行的實作機制，須輔以這類機制的設計，才能真正實現公共審議的穩定性功能。英文摘要：In a liberal democratic society, citizens frequently disagree about various social institutions and public policies. The problem of stability presents a challenge for every contemporary pluralist society. The problem we are faced with is how citizens can be motivated to accept and comply with institutions and policies voluntarily, even if they affirm different conceptions of morality and good. The purpose of this essay is to formulate how and to what extent the conception of deliberative democracy proposed by Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson can secure the stability of a pluralist society. I will point out that public deliberation can produce a brainstorming effect, transform individuals' preferences from private interests to public interests, promote mutual respect between citizens, and confer legitimacy on the results of policy-making. These effects can mitigate political disagreement and make citizens more willing to support or comply with the ultimate results. Moreover, Gutmann and Thompson argue that the deliberative process is dynamic, which is also conducive to stability. However, their theory lacks practical mechanisms, and such mechanisms should be offered as supplements in order to realize the stabilizing functions of public deliberation.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140600490012篇名：誤入迷途的紀傑克：以米蒂亞作為主體性之典範的謬誤並列篇名：Zizek Goes Astray: The Fallacy of Subjectivity Modeled on Medea作者：蔣興儀(Hsing-Yi Chiang)關鍵字：紀傑克;主體性;存有之匱乏;陰性性;米蒂亞;Slavoj Zizek;subjectivity;lack of being;femininity;Medea期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：49期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文針對紀傑克對米蒂亞的解讀，探討他的解讀如何造成對於主體性之理解的困難。主體不具有實體的充實性，而是奠基於他的存有之匱乏，主體性即是在主體之中的裂隙，顯示了主體與他自身的非同一。主體的倫理姿態就是去回溯和重複在他自身之中的存有學空無。然而，紀傑克卻悖謬地將米蒂亞的殺子行為拔擢為倫理的高度。他認為米蒂亞創造了她的匱乏、自行進入主體性，使她自己成為倫理的主體。米蒂亞的行為包含了雙重謬誤：殺子絕對是倫理的敗壞；藉由殺子而鑿空自己，也不是關聯於自身主體性的本真方式。本文包含三個主要部分。第一部分說明「假女人」附著於錯誤的同一性，用來填補她的存有之匱乏。假女人掩飾空無並逃避在她之中的主體性。第二部分指出紀傑克對米蒂亞之解讀的錯誤。他認為米蒂亞殺害親生孩子的恐怖行為，使她脫離了假女人狀態，成為值得稱頌的「真女人」。他肯定米蒂亞勇於摧毀對自己最重要的珍貴寶物，藉此鑿空她自身的存有。在這個錯誤的解釋當中，紀傑克遺忘了：根本匱乏早就已經穿透主體，並構成了他的主體性。第三部分闡述的是，必須拒絕以米蒂亞作為主體性之典範。進入主體性並不需要主體去鑿空他自己，而是需要主體去重複他的構成性匱乏。本真的倫理行動是：主體再一次地向著自身的內在裂隙而敞開。早在主體過去與大它者的創傷性遭逢時，內在裂隙就已經被構成了。重複主體的構成性匱乏，突顯了主體性的陰性結構，但紀傑克卻因為被米蒂亞迷惑而忽略了它。英文摘要：This essay focuses on Zizek's reading of Medea and explicates the difficulty that this reading caused in the understanding of subjectivity. Subject doesn't possess substantial fullness. Subject is founded on its lack of being and subjectivity is the gap within subject. Subjectivity manifests subject's non-identity to itself. The ethical posture of subject is to retrace and repeat the ontological void within itself. However, Zizek paradoxically promotes Medea's infanticide to the ethical height. He thinks that Medea creates her own lack for herself, gains access into subjectivity by herself and becomes ethical subject. Medea's act involves two fallacies: killing her children is absolutely unethical; hollowing out herself through infanticide is not the authentic mode to relate one's own subjectivity. This essay contains three parts. The first part elucidates the ”fake women” who attaches to false identity that is used to fill out her lack of being. Fake woman conceals void and eludes the subjectivity within her. The second part analyzes Zizek's misreading of Medea. Zizek emphasizes that Medea's terrible infanticide removes her illusory status of fake woman and makes her shine with the glory of the ”true woman”. Zizek praises Medea for her courage to destroy her most precious treasure and thus hollows herself out. In this erroneous interpretation, Zizek forgets the fundamental lack that already penetrated subject and constituted its subjectivity. The third part elucidates the necessity to refuse to accept the mode of subjectivity that is modeled on Medea. Gaining access to subjectivity doesn't require the subject to hollow itself out, but do require the subject to repeat its constitutive lack. The authentic act consists in the renewed openings toward the intimate gap that originated from subject's traumatic encounter with the other in the past. This repetition manifests the feminine structure of subjectivity that is omitted from Zizek's fascination with Medea.起始頁-結束頁：59-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140600490023篇名：經濟學帝國主義抑或行動理論的重建：對社會學理性選擇理論的反思並列篇名：Economics Imperialism or Reconstructing Action Theory: Reflections on the Sociological Rational Choice Theory作者：吳鴻昌(Hong-Chang Wu)關鍵字：理性選擇理論;經濟學帝國主義;社會學理論;微觀與鉅觀的連結;rational choice theory;economics imperialism;sociological theory;micro-macro link期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：49期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文試圖從社會學理論的角度，檢討理性選擇的理論方案。本文的核心論點是，理性選擇理論內部具有高度的異質性，社會學理性選擇理論，已對新古典經濟學核心假設做出了許多的修正，因而並非「經濟學帝國主義」的入侵。為了公正性地評價理性選擇理論，本文試圖脈絡性地從新古典經濟學的內部與外部批判、社會學理性選擇理論的外部與內部批判，來檢討理性選擇的理論方案。通過這樣的考察，本文發現，理性選擇理論，無論是在經驗命題的驗證上、理性的概念上、情緒與價值規範的問題上、微觀與鉅觀連結與社會秩序如何可能的問題上，都具有嚴重的理論缺陷，因而，理性選擇理論的社會學化與一統社會科學的企圖，終究是一場未竟的志業。英文摘要：This article evaluates the rational choice theories from the perspectives of sociological theory. A central argument of this article is that the rational choice programs are heterogeneous, so the sociological rational choice theories, which have revised the core assumptions of neoclassical economics, can't be regarded as ”economics imperialism.” In order to treat the rational choice theories impartially, this article evaluates them from the internal and external theoretical criticism of neoclassical economics and the sociological rational choice theories, and also argues that there are critical problems of the rational choice programs in many ways: the verification of their propositions, the concept of rationality, the inclusion of emotions and norms, the mechanisms of micro-macro link, and the emergence of social order. In conclusion, this article suggests that the proposals of ration choice theories to sociologize the rational choice theories and to unify social sciences may be defeated.起始頁-結束頁：109-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201406004900301篇名：對稱化醫療社會學：STS對健康、醫療與疾病研究的啟發並列篇名：What can STS do for Medical Sociology? A Symmetrical Inquiry into Social Studies of Health, Illness and Medicine作者：林文源(Wen-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：醫療社會學;醫療實作;對稱性方法;經驗本體論;中醫;medical sociology;medical practice;symmetrical method;empirical ontology;chinese medicine期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：健康、醫療與疾病在STS與醫療社會學領域都是重要議題。因為各自學科起源、發展與著重點不同，兩學科對這些議題有不同研究取徑與思考角度。相較於醫療社會學的悠久與龐大傳統，STS的貢獻不只在於提出新議題。本文旨在藉由STS的對稱性思考，提供新架構，定位研究取徑，並藉在地醫療現實重新釐清本地研究成果與可能發展方向。醫療社會學已有兩波類似的對稱思考。本文進一步推展第三、四波的對稱化：首先由醫療實作角度，釐清醫療實作的異質性、多重中介、知識與技術體制，以及更為反身性、整體性地反省醫療研究本身的知識治理問題。其次，本文更後設地反思、重新連結被學科化的多種疾病與健康研究區隔，以及指出本地醫療社會學被高度生物醫療化。本文以經驗本體論層次的對稱性思考，基於本地的重要中醫現實指出「我們未曾全然生物醫療化」的問題性與展望。綜合這些層次，本文認為STS有助拓展醫療社會學的知識空間，以更為彈性、開放、帶有反身警覺性地考察多變的醫療、疾病與健康。英文摘要：Health, illness and medicine are important topics both in science, technology and society studies (STS) and sociology, but they are explored with different approaches and focuses in the two disciplines. Compare to the long-established medical sociology, STS can offer more than new research topics. This paper follows the symmetrical method developed in STS and provides a framework for expanding medical sociology and mapping local studies. Based on the two similar symmetrical moves in medical sociology, this paper advances the third and fourth ones. It proposes to examine, firstly, the heterogeneity, multiple mediations, and the socio-medical regime in medical practices, and, secondly, the fact that local medical sociology is biomedicalized and it does not recognize the prevalence of Chinese medicine in Taiwan. Thus this paper applies the perspective of empirical ontology to such local medical context and proposes the problematic of ”we have never been completely biomedicalized.” It is argued that the symmetrical method and STS perspectives are useful in elaborating much more open knowledge spaces for medical sociologists while attending to the changing realities of health, illness and medicine.起始頁-結束頁：11-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：科學傳播中「確定」與「不確定」的敘事：以莫拉克風災之系列報導為例並列篇名：The Narratives of Certainty and Uncertainty in Science Communication: Morakot Typhoon Report Series as an Example作者：黃俊儒(Chun-Ju Huang)關鍵字：科學傳播;莫拉克;風險社會;不確定性;科學新聞;science communication;Morakot typhoon;risk society;uncertainty;science news期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：颱風與氣象的變化幾乎是臺灣每年都需要面對的氣候問題，但是不論從科學方法或風險社會的特性來看，氣候科學均具有某些避免不了的「不確定性」。但是氣候事件的科學報導所擔負的，卻又需要給予社會或民眾某種「確定性」的指引，那麼在這種「確定」與「不確定」之間，臺灣的媒體如何拿捏其中的分際？氣象事件之科學新聞報導所依循的敘事模式又是什麼？這些問題反應出媒體對於科學不確定性的觀點，也牽動民眾對於科技風險的認知。本文以莫拉克颱風系列報導為例，選取臺灣主要平面媒體的相關新聞，透過文本分析的方法，解析這期間的不同階段中，科學新聞報導的各種敘事模式及相關問題，並進一步提出科學傳播研究及實務工作上的建議。英文摘要：Typhoons are the most frequent types of natural disaster in Taiwan. But nowadays, atmospheric science still cannot accurately predict upcoming typhoons or their potential dangers to society. It is hard to exclude uncertain factors because of the limitations of science methodology or the features of risk society. However, weather forecasts still must attempt to provide plausible information to our society and do it with a certain level of certainty. This is a paradox. How do the media in Taiwan scrutinize and balance the tensions between certainty and uncertainty? What narrative types must be used within science news while reporting weather events? The answers to these questions will reflect the media's perspectives toward the scientific uncertainty. The outcome must also relate people with how to understand our present technological risk.This study utilizes the Morakot typhoon report series as the example to analyze narrative types and explained related questions in science news reports. We have collected science news reports from the main newspapers in Taiwan and have adopted the text analysis method to discover their true meaning. Based on the results, further suggestions for science communication researches and practices will also be discussed.起始頁-結束頁：73-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：A Third-Generation Mingei (Folk-Craft) Potter's Use of Traditional and Modern Technologies in Japan並列篇名：傳統與現代科技的交纏：以日本第三代民藝工作者為例作者：Joel Stocker關鍵字：技術;民藝運動;民藝;陶藝;傳統;柳宗悅;folk-crafts movement;mingei;pottery;tradition;Yanagi Muneyoshi期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：日本民藝運動始於1920年代，而此乃是建立在一種想像之上—即前現代東亞的鄉土工藝傳統代表著真正的過去，而純真與實用美學是其村社和諧的體現。正如其它典型的被發明的傳統，此種認為工業化前的社會與技術具有高貴特性的想像，自始即存有許多矛盾，而這是因為民藝的物質與象徵文化再生產均植基於現代技術及資本主義。民藝運動發展出三種類型的民藝：東亞「不可考」藝匠的「古老民藝」、具藝術感而兼融傳統與現代，並具類似師徒傳承的默會知識技藝的「工藝家民藝」，以及改良式的農人工匠小規模工廠製造的「新式民藝」。本文探討民藝運動及此三種民藝，並分析第三代民藝陶藝家如何在這些矛盾中進行協商。作者指出「地方」之於實現民藝技藝的意涵，及默會與明會知識在製作、鑑賞及行銷民藝的重要。英文摘要：The Japanese mingei (folk-craft) movement began in the 1920s based on the notion that the rural crafts of premodern East Asia represented an authentic past of innocent utility and beauty among communal folk. Typical of invented traditions, this romantic vision of pre-industrial community and technology was contradicted by the modern processes of its material and symbolic reproduction. Three types of mingei emerged: old mingei attributed to ”unknown” craftspeople of premodern East Asia, art-craft mingei created by individuals who used modern technology and apprentice modes of tacit learning, and new-mingei based on reforms in small-scale factory goods manufactured by farmer-potters. This article examines this movement and the three types of mingei, and then analyzes a third-generation mingei craftartist's negotiation of these. The author highlights the significance of place in materializing mingei craft, and the importance of both tacit and explicit knowledge in making, appreciating, and selling mingei.起始頁-結束頁：117-175資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：科學生態學發展歷史中的多元思維樣式並列篇名：The Thought Styles in the History of Scientific Ecology作者：陳琣w(Heng-An Chen)關鍵字：生態學史;生態哲學;公共生態學;history of ecology;philosophy of ecology;public ecology期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文嘗試先從歷史發展的角度指出，科學生態學在成為自主學科那時起，便同時接納了自然史與精確科學兩種相異的自然觀與研究方法。其次， 本文將以「生態系統」理論的發展為例， 分析群落生態學（community ecology）與系統生態學（systems ecology）中的預設。群落生態學含有自然史的色彩。系統生態學雖承繼整體（holistic）哲學，但是引入控制論的反饋迴路（feedback loops）等概念。第三，本文將略述科學生態學理論、生態哲學與環境運動之間的關係。簡單來說，強調整體的生態學容易與古老神秘主義產生聯想，與環境運動關係較為密切。群落生態學，特別是走向數學模擬族群競爭的生態學，則與環境運動似乎較無關聯。最後，本文呼籲在生態問題層出不窮的今天，應強調生態學知識的溝通，肯認「公共生態學」的重要性，並嘗試與政府推動的環境教育結合。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to show that there are different ”thought styles” in modern scientific ecology. We will begin by providing historical evidences that scientific ecology contains viewpoints and research methods both from natural history and exact sciences. Secondly, this paper is to analyze the development of two major ecological theories, i.e. community ecology and systems ecology. The former based on the studies of natural history. The latter inherited a holistic philosophical thinking on one hand, and built new theories with the concepts from cybernetics, such as ”feedback loops”, on the other hand. Thirdly, we may consider the possible relationships among ecological theories, ecological philosophy and environmental movements. Finally, in response to increasing disparities over political, social, and environmental concerns, we might pay more attention to the ”public ecology”, which exists at the interface of science and policy.起始頁-結束頁：177-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：「文化病源」的破解與重建：簡評劉紹華《我的涼山兄弟：毒品、愛滋與流動青年》並列篇名：Unraveling and Reconstructing the Epidemiology of Culture: Book Review for Passage to Manhood作者：李宜澤(Yi-Tze Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：225-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：Correspondence without Truth並列篇名：毋需真的符應作者：陳瑞麟(Ruey-Lin Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：253-264資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：Pluralism and The Scientific Realism/Antirealism Debate作者：Rong-Lin Wang期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：265-272資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館8篇名：Deflationism without Truth並列篇名：毋需真的縮簡論作者：歐陽敏(Min OuYang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：273-282資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館9篇名：The Unnatural Truths作者：Linton Wang;Richard Hou關鍵字：Unnatural Truth;Experiment;Counterfactual;Constructivism;Interventionism;Structural Equation Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：In this paper, we provide a reconstruction and elaboration of Sismondo's constructivist view on experimental truths. Some unusual features of the view are revealed. Furthermore, by indicating how to solve some potential challenges to Sismondo's constructivist view on experimental truths, we argue that this view is a natural consequence of interventionism developed from recent works on the metaphysics of structural equation modeling.起始頁-結束頁：283-298資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：劇場在社工教育的運用並列篇名：The Applications of Theater to the Social Work Education Arena作者：黃彥宜(Yen-Yi Huang)關鍵字：形象劇場;社會工作教育;教習劇場;過程劇場;藝術;image theater;social work education;theater-in-education;process drama;arts期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：30期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要探討如何運用戲劇遊戲、形象劇場、過程劇場和教習劇場於社會工作教學中，希望能激發教學者和學生的創意、好奇心和美學敏感度。劇場可以是一個工具以促發學生在行動中反思、對理論有新的理解和對自我有新的認知與鼓勵自我表達。社會工作者經常面對許多不確定和不可預期的情境，如同戲劇的即興演出，某些層面和社會工作實施是相通的。本研究主要運用學生的反思報告作為分析文本，討論重點不在於檢視教學成效，而是希望對劇場運用於社會工作教學能有新的洞察。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore how to apply drama games, image theater, process theater, and theater-in-education to the social work education arena in order to enhance both teacher and student creativity, curiosity, and aesthetic sensitivity. Theater can be used as a means to facilitate students’ reflection- in-action and improve their understanding of theories, self-understanding, and self-expression. Social workers encounter uncertain and unexpected situations very often, and this is quite similar to the improvisation of theater performances. This paper employs the students' reflection papers for analysis. It is not focused upon a discussion of the effectiveness of the teaching, but hopes to bring new insights into the applications of theater to the social work education arena.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.30.012篇名：離院青年自立生活之優勢經驗：社會工作者的觀點並列篇名：Exploring Young People's Strengths of Independent Living Experiences after Leaving Out-of-Home Care: The Viewpoint of Social Workers作者：胡中宜(Chung-Yi Hu)關鍵字：自立生活;兒童福利;家外安置;優勢觀點;離院照顧;independent living;child welfare;out-of-home care;strengths perspective;leaving care期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：30期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究嘗試透過優勢觀點的視角，觀看離院青年如何突破逆境、穩定的在社區自立生活，立意選取11位從事離院照顧的社會工作者進行焦點團體訪談，結果顯示受訪者在輔導自立生活的離院青年中，發現個人與其身處的環境中蘊含著許多的內在與外在優勢，包括：目標追尋、自我效能、自立能力、安置經驗、社會支持與環境資源。最後，研究建議：一、建立優勢觀點的自立轉銜實務；二、強化離院個案的自我效能與自立能力；三、重視安置照顧經驗與離院準備服務；四、連結社會支持網絡與環境資源；五、落實離院自立生活協助方案。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the strengths of young people who have successful independent living using a strengths perspective. The focus group method was conducted to collect data from 11 social workers. The results revealed the internal and external strengths, including: life goals, self-efficacy, independent living capacity, care experience, social support and resources. Finally, recommendations were given to future practices, including: (1) build strengths-based leaving care practice; (2) strengthen client’s self-efficacy and independent living capacity; (3) improve out-of-home care experience and leaving preparation; (4) connect social network and resources; (5) enforce independent living programs.起始頁-結束頁：45-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.30.023篇名：配偶外遇之寬恕研究：從妻子角度出發並列篇名：A Study of Forgiveness of Extramarital Affairs: The Perspective of Wives作者：王慧琦(Hui-Chi Wang)關鍵字：外遇;復原;寬恕;extramarital affairs;restoration;forgiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：30期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究係從妻子的角度瞭解丈夫外遇前後婚姻的一系列歷程，配偶外遇者如何進入復原與寬恕之路，所展現的寬恕面貌又如何。為探究研究問題，本研究採質性研究法，以詮釋現象學的哲學理念與觀點，進行研究文本的資料蒐集、分析與詮釋。透過深度抽樣的策略，本研究深度訪談了八位配偶外遇者，得出以下研究結論：一、婚姻之路充滿挑戰，外遇是出軌，也導引出另一條人生之路。二、寬恕是配偶外遇者終須面對的課題。三、寬恕有不同樣貌的呈現，假性寬恕和真實寬恕對一般人而言，都是寬恕。四、寬恕的益處可以分成個人、他人及關係的。五、配偶外遇者的寬恕受到下列因素的影響：（一）復原歷程的階段性；（二）寬恕歷程的完整性；（三）寬恕的形成因素；（四）寬恕力量的深度與強度。六、寬恕可以轉變、可以提升至更高層次。七、愛是力量，信仰中無條件永不改變的愛是力量的極致。最後，依此結論提出工作原則之建議。英文摘要：This study starts from marital union, explores the processes encompassing extramarital affairs and the path of restoration and forgiveness on the part of participants whose spouses had extramarital affairs. The study adopts the qualitative research method. According to the philosophical views of hermeneutic phenomenology, this study proceeds to collect, analyze and explain the resultant research data. By the methodology of intensity sampling, 8 participants were invited in this research for in-depth interviews. There are 7 important conclusions: 1. Marriage is full of challenges. The extramarital affairs were derailing events, but they led to another road of life. 2. The forgiveness issue must be faced by persons whose spouses had extramarital affairs. 3. There are different patterns of forgiveness. 4. The value of forgiveness includes the individual’s, the other's and mutual values. 5. The influencing factors of forgiveness include: (1) The stage of restoration; (2) The completeness of progress for forgiveness; (3) The formed factors of forgiveness; (4) The depth and strength of power for offering forgiveness. 6. We can convert low-level patterns of forgiveness (false forgiveness) into high-level patterns of forgiveness (real forgiveness). 7. Love is power. The unconditional and immutable love is the ultimate love. According to the results of this study, several suggestions are proposed to serve as reference for family social work practice.起始頁-結束頁：91-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.30.034篇名：從男子氣概分析男性口腔癌存活者的韌性形成過程並列篇名：The Resilience of Male Oral Cancer Survivors: The Masculinity Perspective作者：林東龍(Dong-Long Lin)關鍵字：男性口腔癌存活者;男子氣概;韌性;male oral cancer survivors;masculinity;resilience期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：30期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究跳脫公共衛生審視口腔癌病患的階級區隔觀點，從文本分析中找出男子氣概作為理解男性口腔癌存活者的視角，並探究男子氣概或有助於韌性形成的意涵。本研究以深度訪談法蒐集九位男性口腔癌存活者的罹病經驗，繼以主題分析法進行資料分析。研究發現，男性口腔癌存活者因罹病後工作喪失和人際關係萎縮等情形，使其原有性別認同基礎受到衝擊，轉而從家庭關係中重構其自我認同。同時，男子氣概類型從原本「霸權型」或「邊緣型」，轉變成「新好男人型」、「好爸爸型」，以及「老大哥型」等，有助於面對日常生活各方面的挑戰。相對地，亦有二位受訪者同樣面臨失業和人際互動遽減、卻又欠缺家庭支持下，而成為「落魄的男人」。本研究建議，助人專業者可以家庭為男性口腔癌存活者男子氣概轉化和韌性形成的媒介。英文摘要：This study adopted the masculinity approach to explore the experience of male oral cancer survivors, and to better understand the implications of resilience that may be related to masculinity. Nine in-depth interviews with male oral cancer survivors were conducted and the data analysis adopted a thematic approach. This study argues that male oral cancer survivors had faced unemployment as well as problematic human relationships after they got cancer, and that these events influenced their masculinity. The types of masculinity changed from 'hegemony' and 'marginalization' to 'new good man', 'good father' or 'big brother', and these changes of masculinity could improve their ability to face the challenges in their daily life. In contrast, two male oral cancer survivors turned into 'men out of luck' because of unemployment, impaired human relationship, and lack of family support. Furthermore, the acceptance of family members can help the transformation of masculinity in a positive way. This study suggests that the helping professionals could assist the family in becoming a vehicle for the transformation of masculinity and development of resilience of male oral cancer survivors.起始頁-結束頁：139-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.30.045篇名：我思故我在：論精神醫療社會工作者的知識論思辨能力並列篇名：I Think, Therefore I am: Developing the Competence for Epistemological Thinking for Psychiatric Social Workers作者：黃昱得(Yu-Te Huang)關鍵字：全人取向;批判理論;建構主義;後實證主義;精神醫療社會工作;psychiatric social work;post-positivism;constructivism;critical theory;holistic approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：30期出版年：2014中文摘要：受到專業建制化的思潮影響，精神醫療社會工作常將後實證主義當作是學術研究與臨床實務的金科玉律。但隨著社會環境日趨複雜多變，加上知識體系的多元蓬勃發展，本研究認為，精神醫療社會工作員應培養「知識論思辨能力」－即分析、批判及整合多元知識的能力，才能善盡專業職責，並取得專業主體性。知識論是從典範的層次來討論「知識的理論」，其內涵包括知識的本質、取得、應用與限制，目前西方國家的文獻多將知識論典範概略地區分為後實證主義、建構主義與批判理論，而全人取向則源自於華人文化。為具體示範如何應用知識論的思辨能力，本研究以精神醫療社會工作員協助憂鬱個案為討論脈絡，從上述四個典範來進行相關文獻的回顧後，分別從憂鬱本質、社工角色、理論觀點、實務取向，以及社工倫理原則來進行知識論分析。結論指出：上述四套知識論典範皆與精神醫療社會工作實務密切相關，社工員要多方學習知識論視角，不應偏廢或獨厚；知識論思辨能力也應成為社會工作教育的目標，如此社會工作才能在專業社群中取得獨特位置。英文摘要：Following the movement toward professional institutionalization, social work in the contemporary era tends to uncritically endorse post-positivism in research and practice with the attempt to gain societal recognition as real professionals. However, in the context of a rapidly and enormously changing society, along with an increasingly diversified practical knowledge, the author of this article argues for the building of the competence of social workers for epistemological thinking-an ability to analyze, critique, and synthesize knowledge-as essential to fully serve the mission of the profession, and, more importantly, to establish a professional distinctive space. An epistemological paradigm contains a set of statements with respect to the nature, assumptions, applications, and limitations of knowledge. Four epistemological paradigms have been delineated in the existing literature including positivism, post-positivism, constructivism, and critical theory. In addition, the holistic approach, which is rooted in Chinese philosophy, has been a widely practiced paradigm in the Chinese context. To demonstrate the competence for epistemological thinking, this article used these four paradigms to synthesize and structure the literature in relation to depression, a significant issue that has been extensively addressed by psychiatric social workers. As a summary table is made to situate knowledge within the four paradigms, it becomes evident that knowledge developed in accordance with the four epistemological paradigms is relevant for, and should be integrated into, social work practice. As such, this article suggests that rather than being sorely attached to a particular epistemological paradigm, social workers need to develop a comprehensive familiarity with the various epistemological approaches in order to be responsive to the clients' wide range of needs. By utilizing the epistemological analysis model expounded in this article, it is hoped that epistemological thinking will be incorporated into social work education and training.起始頁-結束頁：187-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2014.30.0501篇名：禮物購買需求對製造商最適產品線設計之影響並列篇名：Product Line Design with Gift Buyers作者：陳其美(Chyi-Mei Chen);周善瑜(Shan-Yu Chou);黃仕宗(Shih-Tsung Huang)關鍵字：產品線設計;禮物購買者;賽局理論;product line design;gift buyers;game-theoretical model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷S1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討製造商在面對一般購買者與禮物購買者兩種不同類型消費者下最適的產品線設計。一般購買者購買產品目的是源自於自身的需求，而禮物購買者是源自於他人的需求。本文在假設禮物購買者不清楚受贈者的偏好，且終端消費者對品質的邊際效用不同下，發現禮物購買者的出現製造商將不會以最高品質的產品項目服務禮物購買者，但可能以完整的禮品產品線、或以單一禮品產品項目服務全部禮物購買者或可能引導禮物購買者購買正規產品項目作為禮物。此外，禮物購買者的出現將影響製造商用以服務一般購買者的產品線設計與最適定價，且進而影響一般購買者的福利。另一方面，本研究的延伸模型考量存在部分禮物購買者十分在意禮物的品質是否符合受贈者預期且為無窮風險趨避的情況，結果發現，隨著無窮風險趨避禮物購買者人口的增加，製造商愈有可能專注於以相同的高端產品項目服務一般高端購買者與無窮風險趨避禮物購買者。英文摘要：This paper considers the optimal design of a product line for a manufacturer that faces gift buyers who make purchases for other consumers' consumption, and regular buyers who make purchases for their own consumption. Assuming that a gift buyer has imperfect knowledge about the gift receiver's preference and end users differ in their valuations to quality, we show that in the presence of gift buyers, (i) the manufacturer will not serve the gift buyers with the highest-quality product item; (ii) the manufacturer may offer a full line of gift items, may serve all gift buyers with one single gift item, or may simply induce gift buyers to buy regular products as gifts; (iii) the presence of gift buyers affects the manufacturer's optimal pricing and product-line decisions, which in turn affects the regular buyers' welfare. In an extended model of the paper, we also consider the case where there exist some gift buyers who are very concerned about whether the quality of gifts meets receivers' expectation and are infinitely risk averse. We find that in this case the increase in the population of infinitely risk averse makes it more likely that the firm focuses on the high-end regular buyers and the infinitely risk averse gift buyers by offering them the same high-end product.起始頁-結束頁：273-319資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.NOV.R120042篇名：台灣地區大學教授薪資待遇之合理性初探：大、中、小學教師之比較研究並列篇名：On the Equity of University Professor's Compensation: A Comparative Study on Compensations of University Professors and High/Elementary School Teachers in Taiwan作者：吳清在(C. Tsing-Zai Wu);施念恕(Nien-Su Shih);朱靜玉(Ching-Yu Chu)關鍵字：大學教授薪資;教師待遇制度;退休金;professor's compensation;teacher's compensation systems;pension期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：大學教育是國家發展之火車頭，高級人才之培育與研究發明均以是賴。然而台灣地區目前大學教授之待遇，不僅趕不上歐美先進國家，甚至亦比鄰近之香港、日本、韓國及大陸地區重點大學之實質薪資為低。台灣地區各級公立學校（包括大學、中學、小學）之教師待遇係由教育部統一按照「公立學校教師暨助教職務等級表」及大學教授與中小學教師分別之「學術研究費表」敘薪，同年齡之大學教授之月薪幾無異於中、小學老師之薪酬，但由於大學教授必須耗費長時間之教育投資以取得博士學位，因而進入職場時間較晚，退休年資較短，退休給付較少。本研究以一位欲進入教職之大學畢業生，利用「淨現值法」推算其選擇當大學、中學以及小學教師之一生所得淨現值，以探究何者為其擇職之最佳決策方案。研究結果發現，大學教授一生所得之淨現值，比同齡退休之中小學老師為低，尤以自費出國留學之大學教授其一生所得之淨現值為最低。英文摘要：Higher education is the locomotive of a country’s development. The breeding of qualified manpower and the nation’s research inventions rely on higher education. However, the compensation of university professors in Taiwan is relatively low compared to that in the developed countries in American and Europe, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea and key universities in China. In Taiwan, all public instructors (including university professors, high and elementary school teachers) are compensated in accordance with the same pay schedule called the ”Salary Rank of Public School Instructors and Teaching Assistants” and the respective ”Academic Research Stipends” made by the Ministry of Education. As a result, the compensation of a university professor is not substantially different from that of elementary and high school teachers at the same age. Nevertheless, the pension payments of professors are lower than that for elementary and high school teachers due to shorter service periods. This study simulates three scenarios for an undergraduate who plans to enter the educational industry. The decision criterion is the NPV (Net Present Value) of his/her lifetime compensations for being a university professor, high school teacher or an elementary school teacher. The results of this study show that the NPV of a university professor’s lifetime compensations is far less than that of a high or an elementary school teacher at same retirement age. Specifically, a university professor studying abroad has the lowest NPV for his life-time compensations if he/she services in a university in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JAN.R090663篇名：以樂透觀點檢視現金增資股票申購需求並列篇名：Using the Lottery View to Analyze the Subscription Fads of SEOs作者：王朝仕(Chao-Shi Wang)關鍵字：現金增資股票（SEOs）;樂透;申購;seasoned equity offerings (SEOs);lottery;subscription期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：現金增資股票（SEOs）市場有三個引起廣泛討論的課題，包括折價發行、高度資訊不對稱，以及初期績效不佳等，而這些因素令其相當適合詮釋Kumar（2009）定義的樂透股。基於SEOs可能含有樂透特徵，而本研究主要目的即係以此觀點解釋投資人需求的差異，以及後續績效表現，期望能擬定具體交易策略。實證結果顯示，當SEOs具有高度樂透特徵時，有助於引起申購熱潮；即使控制總體經濟環境與公司個別基本條件，上述關係仍獲支持。值得注意的是，本研究另發現到一些證據，指向舊股東財富卻會因為公司發行樂透SEOs而呈現較明顯的衰退，說明此政策會形成剝削效果。英文摘要：The seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) market demonstrates three significant characteristics: underpricing, high levels of information asymmetry, and low initial performance. Based on these characteristics, SEOs can be defined as lottery-type stocks described by Kumar (2009). Because SEOs can evince lottery-type characteristics, this paper investigates the relationship between SEOs similarity to the lottery and investor demand. The paper also measures SEOs performance after purchase to establish a trading strategy. Empirical results show that, along with the lottery-type characteristics, SEOs result in subscription fads. Statistical results remain significant even when a macroeconomic perspective and conditions for individual firms are introduced into the examining model. Finally, this paper analyzes evidence that the wealth of original shareholders is negatively affected when a firm issues lottery-type SEOs, in what is called an exploitation effect.起始頁-結束頁：53-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.MAR.R110444篇名：東亞地區商業銀行效率之實證分析並列篇名：The Efficiency Analysis in East Asia Commercial Bank作者：盧永祥(Yung-Hsiang Lu);王俊賢(Chun-Hsien Wang);蔡芳梅(Fang-Mei Tsai)關鍵字：商業銀行;共同邊界DEA模型;技術缺口率;commercial bank;Metafrontier DEA model;technology gap ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在衡量2004~2007年臺灣、香港、中國、日本及南韓的220家商業銀行在技術效率與生產技術之差異，並揭露各地區銀行在資源運用及生產水準之差異，以提供東亞地區銀行相互學習之標竿；為了進一步考量各地區銀行在不同生產技術之差異，本研究摒除環境變數與銀行特性之影響，以合理評估五個地區商業銀行的技術差異。實證結果顯示，經濟快速發展的中國及金融業居領導地位的日本，分別在共同技術效率及技術缺口率有較佳的表現；民營銀行及新銀行在效率表現及技術缺口率，平均優於公營銀行及舊銀行；另一方面，未摒除環境變數與銀行特性之影響，效率值及技術缺口率均呈現低估現象，且各地區在效率值及技術缺口率之排序上，亦有明顯之差異。英文摘要：The primary purpose of this paper is to measure the differences in technology and production efficiency among 220 commercial banks in Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Japan, and South Korean during 2004-2007. This will enable us to explore the differences in resource operation and production level so as to establish a mutual learning benchmark for the East Asian regional banks. To further consider the differences in the production technology of different regions, this study eliminates the impact of environment variables and banking features and examines the differences in technology efficiency and production efficiency in these regions. The empirical findings show that both the Metatechnology efficiency and the technology gap ratio are significantly well-performed take place in China and Japan. In addition, the efficiency performance and technology gap ratio in the private and new banking sectors are significantly greater than those in the public and old banking sectors. However, if the effects of environmental variables and banking features are not eliminated, we find that both efficiency values and technology gap ratio may have been underestimated and the ranking of technology efficiency and the technology gap ratio are significantly different from region to region.起始頁-結束頁：83-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.APR.R100195篇名：蓬生麻中，不扶而直：社群歸屬感和科技使用之效果並列篇名：With the Good We Become Good: The Effect of the Sense of Community Belonging on Technology Use作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou);樊學良(Hsueh-Liang Fan)關鍵字：社會基層職業;社群歸屬感;科技使用;dirty work;sense of community;technology use期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：社會一線工作是人類生活專業分工下必然存在的職業，是驅動產業發展和國家經濟的重要基礎。但是，目前文獻甚少探討此種職業從業人員之工作行為和管理意涵。本研究以計程車業為研究情境，探討計程車駕駛在加入衛星派遣車隊後，如何對所隸屬的社群、所從事的工作，和個人所使用之衛星派遣科技產生正向的態度和認知反應，以及科技使用對社群歸屬感與正向心理產出間的調節效果。研究對象為台灣大車隊107位駕駛。研究發現，成員之社群歸屬感越高越會對所隸屬的社群，和所從事的工作產生正向知覺。此外，科技使用對社群歸屬感與信任、工作滿足，和科技使用信心間之關係有調節效果。最後，根據前述分析結果，適度輔以訪談資料，討論其理論和管理意涵。英文摘要：Given the division of labor inherent to modern society, it is inevitable that some people end up doing society’s ”dirty work.” However, little research has been done to enhance our understanding of such occupational contexts. This study aims to explore how individuals working at jobs with negative or dirty associations may achieve positive psychological outcomes by joining a community. Data are collected over three time periods from 107 cabbies in Taipei; the cabbies are all affiliated with the city’s largest taxi fleet, which makes use of the Global Positioning System dispatching technology. The study helps build our understanding of the relationship between the sense of belonging to a community and the resulting positive psychological outcomes (i.e., trust on the part of individuals for the management team of the community, job satisfaction, and confidence belief in technology use). In addition, we also investigate the moderating role of technology use. The results show that the sense of belonging to a community has positive effects on trust and job satisfaction. The moderating effects exist that technology moderates the relationship between the sense of belonging to a community and trust, job satisfaction, as well as confident belief in technology use.起始頁-結束頁：115-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.MAY.R110116篇名：非營利醫院負債融通與捐贈收入的關聯性並列篇名：The Relation between Debt Financing and Not-For-Profit Hospitals' Donations作者：郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo);何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho);羅光達(Kuang-Ta Lo)關鍵字：非營利醫院;負債融通;捐贈;not-for-profit hospital;debt financing;donation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：在Magnus, Smith, and Wheeler（2003）與Yetman（2007）提出非營利組織以負債融通將對其捐贈收入會產生排擠效果的假說後。本文為首篇探討非營利組織負債融通與捐贈收入關聯性的實證研究。本文分析台灣38間醫療財團法人在2000-2006年資料。研究結果顯示，當醫療財團法人的負債比率較低時，若採用負債融通對其捐贈收入有正向的擠入效果；然而負債比率較高的法人，持續採用負債來融通資金，則對其捐贈收入出現排擠效果，指出兩者間存在非線性關係。至於負債對於醫療財團法人捐贈收入的整體影響，取決上述兩項力量互抵後的效果而定。本文發現臺灣醫療財團法人採用負債融通對其捐贈收入普遍存在擠入效果。我們認為Magnus et al.（2003）與Yetman（2007）僅考慮高負債比率對捐贈收入的排擠效果，而忽略擠入效果。英文摘要：Debt financing has been discussed extensively in corporate finance; however, previous studies seldom apply it to not-for-profit hospitals. Magnus et al. (2003) and Yetman (2007) argued that debt financing would have a negative impact on the charitable donations of not-for-profit hospitals, but they did not provide empirical evidence. This study is the first paper to investigate the relationship between debt financing and donation revenue by using 38 not-for-profit hospitals from 2000 to 2006 in Taiwan. According to our empirical results, we have proved that debt financing has both a crowd-in effect and crowd-out effect on not-for-profit hospitals' donations. The crowd-in effect tends to exist in low debt ratio hospitals, while the crowd-out effect is often found to exist in not-for-profit hospitals with higher debt ratios. We therefore conclude that Magnus et al. (2003) and Yetman (2007) only proposed the crowd-out effect of debt financing for not-for-profit hospitals; however, they did not consider the possible crowd-in effect of debt financing as we have demonstrated in this study.起始頁-結束頁：151-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.MAY.R110067篇名：台灣電子業家族經理人之外部董事會連結與公司創新：論控制家族代理問題之影響並列篇名：Family Executives' External Directorate Ties and Corporate Innovation in Taiwan's Electronics Industry: The Role of Controlling Family Agency Problems作者：蔡柳卿(Liu-Ching Tsai);楊朝旭(Chaur-Shiuh Young);許慧雯(Hui-Wen Hsu)關鍵字：外部董事連結;家族經理人;創新;external directorate ties;family executives;innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：家族經理人因為排外繼承而有異質性不足、創新觀點受限的問題。植基於資源依賴理論，家族經理人可經由外部董事會連結，俾取得多元化資訊以提升公司創新。鑑此，本研究首先檢測家族經理人外部董事連結和公司創新之關係。其次，當家族控制權與所有權愈偏離時，代理問題愈大，家族經理人從事外部董事連結可能植基於本身及其所屬控制家族的利益，使派出公司之創新成效受到負面衝擊。據此，本研究進一步檢測家族代理問題對「家族經理人外部董事會連結與公司創新關聯性」的影響。以2000到2006年台灣電子業上市家族公司之家族經理人為樣本，實證結果發現，家族經理人之外部董事會連結與公司創新呈正向關係；然而，控制家族之代理問題越嚴重時，削弱了外部董事連結對公司創新的正面效果。英文摘要：Top management teams of family firms are often characterized as having less diversity and professionalism, which could limit corporate innovation. Based on the Resource Dependence Theory, to build external directorate ties is one approach to accessing different resources and information which can benefit firms' innovation. However, controlling families' external directorships may bring two distinct effects on firms due to, on the one hand, their strong needs for heterogeneous ideas and, on the other hand, the potential agency problems related to family firms. Given the prevalence of family firms in Taiwan's information and electronics industry, we first examine the relationship between family executives' directorate ties and innovation. Next, considering the controlling families' ownership structures, we further examine how the controlling family's agency problem affects the aforementioned relationship. Using a sample of family firms in Taiwan's information and electronics industry, we predict and find a positive association between the quality of family executives' external directorate ties and firms' innovation performance. Moreover, we find this positive association to be offset by controlling families' entrenchment incentives arising from their divergence between control and cash flow rights. These results imply that family firms with greater agency problems allow their family-member executives to accept at-will external directorships while ignoring firms' overall benefits.起始頁-結束頁：181-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JUL.R090018篇名：公司治理結構與股東常會可接近性之關係並列篇名：The Relationship between Corporate Governance Structure and the Accessibility of Annual Shareholder Meetings作者：張力(Li Chang);侯啟娉(Chi-Ping Hou);林翠蓉(Tsui-Jung Lin);許蕙欣(Wen-Hsin Shu)關鍵字：公司治理結構;股東常會;可接近性;corporate governance structure;annual stockholder meeting;accessibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：股東常會是小股東行使權利及落實股東行動主義的最佳場所，因此股東會可接近性愈高（如地點之便利性愈佳），代表公司治理機制愈落實。本文依據我國公司治理機制結構，並以2001年至2007年上市上櫃公司共計6926筆觀察值，探討公司治理機制變數與公司股東常會開會可接近性之關係。實證結果顯示，外部董事比例越高以及機構法人持股比例越高之公司，其股東常會之召開愈具可接近性，而控制權與現金流量權偏離程度越高的公司，其股東常會之召開則愈不具可接近性。英文摘要：The annual shareholder meeting is the only place that minority shareholders can exercise their own rights and communicate with directors and top managers. Therefore, the easy access to a shareholder meeting (e.g., a location is easy to reach) implies that the company has a better corporate governance structure. This paper examines the relationship between corporate governance and the accessibility of annual stockholder meetings. Our samples include firms listed on the Taiwan Stock Market from 2001 to 2007. The results show that both the proportion of outside directors and the percentage of institutional ownership affect the accessibility of the annual general meeting, and they are positively related. The degree of divergence between control rights and cash flow rights also affects the accessibility of the annual general meeting; however, they are negatively related.起始頁-結束頁：213-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JUL.R100219篇名：員工每日情緒對情緒勞動之影響：情感事件理論的觀點並列篇名：The Impact of Daily Emotion on Emotional Labor: The Perspective of Affective Events Theory作者：蕭婉鎔(Wan-Jung Hsiao)關鍵字：情感事件理論;正負向情緒;情緒勞動;affective events theory;positive and negative emotion;emotional labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究從情感事件理論的觀點探討第一線服務人員每日正負向情緒對個人情緒勞動的影響，設計日記式報告，觀察受試者每日的情緒變異對工作行為的影響；並納入自我監控特質，探討其對負向情緒與情緒勞動的調節效果。本研究蒐集124位有效受試樣本，記錄25個工作天的資料，共3261筆每日記錄。研究結果發現，第一線服務人員每日情緒變化會對情緒勞動策略產生影響，且自我監控特質會干擾負向情緒與情緒。長期而言，深層偽裝策略有助於顧客導向行為的發生。根據研究結果，分別提出理論與管理上的貢獻與建議。英文摘要：The present study adopted theoretical perspective of affective events theory to explain the relationship between emotion and emotional labor. Diary reports are conducted to examine the relationships between daily positive and negative emotion (PA and NA, respectively) and emotional labor. Self-monitoring theorized at a between-subjects level would moderate the within-subjects relationships. With a sample of 124 frontline sales employees and 3,261 observations across 25 working days, results show that daily PA and NA had a significant within-subjects main effect on daily emotional labor strategy. In addition, between-subjects self-monitor moderated the relationship between NA and deep acting. The current findings shed light on the daily emotion labor consequences of daily emotion and provide important theoretical and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：249-281資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.OCT.R1200210篇名：基金績效歸屬與基金流量之關聯性並列篇名：Relationship between Fund Performance Attribution and Fund Flows作者：陳獻儀(Hsien-Yi Chen);楊淑玲(Shu-Ling Yang);張眾卓(Chong-Chuo Chang);陳婉榕(Wan-Rung Chen)關鍵字：績效歸屬;風格投資;基金流量;performance attribution;style investment;fund flows期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要探討基金之績效歸屬分析，並進而檢視基金流量對於基金經理人操作能力所造成的影響。利用1993年7月至2011年6月國內股票型共同基金為樣本，實證結果顯示，國內股票型基金在績效歸屬分析之後，具有選股能力與風格投資能力，但較不具有擇時能力。此外，基金流量對基金經理人未來的風格投資能力與未來的基金報酬具有顯著的正向影響，表示當基金規模擴大時，經理人並非尋求額外的投資標的，而是會維持其原本投資組合所設定的投資風格，並增加風格股票的投資規模，此與Pollet and Wilson（2008）和Cremers and Petajisto（2009）觀點一致。英文摘要：This paper investigates the performance attribution of mutual funds and the effects of fund flows on the operational capability of fund managers. We observed Taiwanese equity funds between July 1993 and June 2011 and found that the performance attribution analysis of Taiwanese equity funds is characterized by their stock-picking and style-investing ability, but not their timing ability. Fund flows have a significant and positive correlation with future style investing ability of fund managers and future fund performance. These findings indicate that when fund size is extended, fund managers do not seek additional investment targets. In contrast, they attempt to retain the style setting of the original portfolio and increase the investment size in style stocks. This evidence is consistent with the viewpoints of Pollet and Wilson (2008) and Cremers and Petajisto (2009).起始頁-結束頁：283-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.AUG.R1103711篇名：共同基金行銷費用對基金流量之影響：當投資者對基金績效敏感度不同時並列篇名：The Effect of Marketing and Distribution Expense on Mutual Fund Flows: In the Presence of Investors with Different Degrees of Sensitivity to Performance作者：賴慧文(Christine W. Lai);吳碧蓉(Bi-Rong Wu)關鍵字：基金行銷;基金淨流量;投資者基金報酬率敏感度;mutual fund marketing;fund flows;investors' performance sensitivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：24卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討基金公司12b-1費用與銷售手續費使用對基金淨流量產生之不同影響。進一步探討，行銷費用對基金淨流量的影響，是否會因投資者屬性不同而不同。針對後者，我們採用兩種方法：（1）以基金過去流量－報酬率之敏感度作為基金投資者經驗豐富與否之代理變數；（2）選取部份樣本－資產保留率低並最後被合併之基金，探討此類基金合併前（剩餘之投資者績效敏感度低）及合併後（投資者類型增加），行銷費用對基金淨流量影響之改變情形。結果發現，12b-1費用對於基金淨流量有顯著正向影響，但銷售手續費則否。而12b-1費用對流量的影響，會因投資者對績效敏感度較高（低）而降低（增加）；資產保留率低之基金，12b-1費用對流量的影響在合併後亦下降。研究結果支持基金市場存在策略性定價及行銷。英文摘要：This study examines the different effects of 12b-1 fees and sale loads on mutual fund flows. We also try to determine if the response of mutual fund flows to 12b-1 fees (or sale loads) is influenced by investor sophistication. We examine the latter issue by using past flow-to-performance sensitivity of a fund as the proxy variable for the fund’s investor sophistication. Alternatively, we chose a subset of funds characterized by low asset retention and subsequently being merged. The implication for funds with low asset retention is that most performance-sensitivity investors have migrated to other funds with better prospects, while the merging of funds implies a discrete shift in the fund’s investor base. We test for investor sophistication effects by analyzing the change in fund flows-to-fees relations after the merging of new shareholders. Our results indicate a positive relation between fund flows and 12b-1 fees, but no relation between flows and loads. In addition, the sensitivity of fund flows to 12b-1 fees will be lower for investors with higher performance sensitivity than for investors with the opposite attributes. Additionally, for funds with low asset retention we find a decrease in flows-to-12b-1 fees sensitivity after merging. We provide evidence to support ”strategic fee setting and marketing” in the mutual fund industry.起始頁-結束頁：309-340資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTURM2014.JUL.R1200701篇名：死刑的政治權威能否證立？並列篇名：Can the Political Authority of the Death Penalty be Justified?作者：陳嘉銘(Chia-Ming Chen)關鍵字：死刑;拉茲;權威;義務;自主性;自保;death penalty;Raz;authority;obligation;autonomy;selfpreservation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：50期出版年：2014中文摘要：本論文主張即便我們在倫理上成功證成我們社會剝奪犯法者生命的權利，死刑的完整證立還需要證成政治權威有資格行使這個權利。我以約瑟夫•拉茲（Joseph Raz）對政治權威的解釋為基礎，提出一些我的批評和補正，論證死刑的政治權威對近代個人難以證立。根據拉茲，政治權威蘊含了以下主張：國家權威的從屬者有「完整的」服從政治權威的義務，從屬者不能因為不認同法院的判決，就拒絕當事人服從法院判決的義務。我進一步分析，這個政治權威特性蘊含了權威的建立需要通過「異議檢驗」：當從屬者和權威的判斷發生異議時，從屬者必須有充分理由繼續認可權威，權威的正當性才能持續建立。我主張近代個人主義因為高度重視和自保相關的個人自主性領域，因此我們沒有理由在對法院判決有異議時，壓抑個人自主性，繼續認可我們服從死刑判決的義務。死刑的政治權威無法通過「異議檢驗」，因此難以證立。英文摘要：The essay suggests that even after we, as a society of individuals, successfully justify our ethical right to deprive an offender's life, a complete account of the death penalty nevertheless entails a further justification that the state's authority is entitled to exercise such right. Based on a revised account of political authority originally defended by Joseph Raz, I argue that modern individuals shall find themselves unable to acknowledge the political authority of the death penalty. The concept of political authority implies what I call ”the dissent test”, which states that a political authority continues to be justified, if and only if, whenever the subjects dissent from its directives, they shall find sufficient reasons to acknowledge the authority. I further argue that modern individuals demand a significant and unusual degree of autonomy in the spheres related to their self-preservation. Hence it follows that whenever we disagree with the court's decision of a death sentence, we find little reason to suppress our autonomy and therefore are unable to acknowledge our obligation to obey. The political authority of the death penalty fails the ”dissent test” and thus cannot be justified.起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140900500012篇名：霍布斯論自然法與政治義務並列篇名：Thomas Hobbes: The Laws of Nature and Political Obligation作者：周家瑜(Chia-Yu Chou)關鍵字：霍布斯;政治義務;事實政治權力;同意;自然法;Thomas Hobbes;political obligation;de facto political power;consent;the laws of nature期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：50期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文處理的是霍布斯式自然法在其政治理論中的角色與作用，霍布斯自然法向來是其政治理論中較被忽略之處，因通常認為霍布斯為證成其絕對主權而弱化傳統自然法權威，但弔詭的是霍布斯式自然法卻又似乎具相當的規範效力，而因為兩種進路均有相當文本證據支持所以形成某種「詮釋的兩難」。為探討自然法在霍布斯政治理論中的角色與功能，本文將從霍布斯政治義務觀切入，探討自然法與其政治義務之關聯。本文主要論證兩點：首先，本文對當代主流事實權威論對於霍布斯之政治義務的詮釋提出質疑，此一主流論點認為霍布斯式自然法並無重要性，本文將論證若認真考量霍布斯的自然法論述，將對其政治義務觀有更完整的理解；具體而言，藉由探討自然法的角色，本文論證霍布斯的政治義務並非僅僅建立在「事實的強力」或「同意」之上，而必須考慮到自然法所給出的限制，因此可以說政治義務建立在「理性的同意」上。英文摘要：In this essay I examine the role and function of Hobbes's account of the laws of nature in his political theory by reconsidering the basis of his concept of political obligation. This essay takes issue with common readings of Hobbes which either considers Hobbesian laws of nature is nothing but counsels from reason(which provides no obligations) or mere hypothetical imperatives(which at best justify prudential obligations). To argue against the common readings, this essay argues that Hobbesian laws of nature is essential to understanding Hobbes's concept of political obligation because they provide some kind of natural duty by which an effective ”reasonable consent” can be defined. In addition, to argue against the view of de facto theory, I argue that both ”Consent” and ”Safety” are the necessary conditions of Hobbesian conception of political obligation.起始頁-結束頁：59-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140900500023篇名：再論國家元首之權威在Schmitt理論中之意義：與〈人格權威與政治秩序的形成〉一文商榷並列篇名：On Schmitt's Conception of the Authority of the Head of State: A Different View from ”The Personal Authority and the Formation of Political Order”作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：權威;權力;國家元首;康斯坦;中立權力;憲法守護者;authority;power;head of state;Constant;neutral power;guardian of the constitution期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：50期出版年：2014中文摘要：從鍾芳樺教授〈人格權威與政治秩序的形成〉一文出發，本文試圖重新梳理Schmitt如何透過「權威」和「權力」在制度上的區分，來解釋國家元首的憲政地位與角色。Schmitt從Constant（康斯坦）的「中立權力」概念來說明議會君主制中君主作為國家元首的功能，以及19世紀德意志立憲君主制對於實權君主的主張。進一步，經由將Constant的理論轉嫁到威瑪共和帝國總統，以證成總統的權威地位及憲法守護者的角色。最終則要說明，儘管總統具有非常權限，Schmitt仍認為在常態下總統是僅具有權威的國家元首，而非具有主動權力的政治領導者。英文摘要：Beginning with Prof. Chung's essay ”The Personal Authority and the Formation of Political Order”, it is to discussin this article how Schmitt interprets the constitutional status and role of the head of state with the institutional distinction between ”authority” (Autoritat) and ”power” (Macht). Schmitt states-based on Constant's conception of the ”pouvoirneutre”-the political function of the king as head of state in a parliamentary monarchy and of the powerful king in the German constitutional monarchy in 19th Century. To interpret the President of the Weimar Republic as the ”neutral power”, Schmitt justifies the authoritative position of the President and his role as the guardian of the constitution. At last, in Schmitt's thought, the President in the ordinary status, although he possesses the extraordinary power, is declared merely as a head of state with authority, but not the political leader that has active power.起始頁-結束頁：101-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320140900500034篇名：人格權威在法秩序與民主秩序中的意義：兼論Schmitt對威瑪共和總統的看法並列篇名：On the Significance of Personal Authority for the Law Order and Democratic Order: Also on the Thinking about Reichprasident in Carl Schmitt's Theory作者：鍾芳樺(Fang-Hua Chung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：50期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：157-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201409005000401篇名：「這值多少？」「你說呢？」－Simmel的價值學說兼論Weber與Simmel一段公案的釐清並列篇名：Georg Simmel's Value Theory: A Comparative Study on Georg Simmel's and Max Weber's Value Theories作者：鄭志成(Chih-Cheng Jeng)關鍵字：價值;主觀價值;客觀價值;客觀性;有效性;value;subjective value;objective value;objectivity;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：51期出版年：2014中文摘要：本論文試圖由Max Weber批評Georg Simmel關於主觀意義的賦予及客觀意義的有效之混淆，系統地以命題形式重新梳理Simmel的價值學說。並對照Weber的行動理論、理念型的建構，以及客觀性的主張，進一步地比較Weber與Simmel兩者之間的異同。由此比較，可以發現Weber與Simmel的差異並不如Weber自己所宣稱；反而，兩者對於文化科學的主張與認識，相似性遠遠大於差異性。亦即，皆是由意義的主觀賦予，並經由相互承認的有效性，獲得客觀價值或客觀性。英文摘要：This article bases upon Max Weber's critique on the methodology Georg Simmel's. According to Weber's critique, Simmel confuses the subjectively given meaning and the validity of objective meaning. Is that so? This article tries to elaborate the value theory Simmel's with five theses. Then the article aims to highlight differences between Simmel's and Weber's theories of value. Simmel's value theory would be compared with Weber's relative propositions: the claim of social action theory, the construction of idealtypes, and the viewpoint of the objectivity of social and cultural sciences. Through the Comparison between Weber's meaning conception and Simmel's value theory, we can find, that the claims both of Weber and Simmel are so similar more than different. In other words, Weber and Simmel, they all assert, that the meaning or value is subjectively given, however, the subjective meaning or value is become objective by mutual recognitions. Namely, the objective meaning or value depends on the mutual recognized validity.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320141200510012篇名：公民身分社會學的理論企圖：規範性與經驗性研究的整合並列篇名：The Theoretical Ambition of the Sociology of Citizenship: Integrating the Normative-Empirical Research作者：蔡博方(Po-Fang Tsai)關鍵字：公民身分;權利;歷史知識論;脆弱性;規範性研究與經驗性研究;citizenship;rights;historical epistemology;vulnerability;normative and empirical research期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：51期出版年：2014中文摘要：在1980年代，英美社會學出現「公民身分」的復興趨勢，學者們嘗試修正T. H. Marshall所留下的研究典範。然而，在1990年代後期，研究者開始反思此一趨勢，以更具有理論企圖的視角看待公民身分社會學的知識旨趣。對此，本文討論三種新「公民身分社會學」的建構，它們分別以Thomas Janoski、Margaret Somers和Bryan Turner援引社會行動論、歷史知識論、身體社會學之理論基礎為代表。本文發現，三位學者的研究已經脫離「比較歷史研究取徑」框架，開始嘗試兼顧公民身分研究的規範性與經驗性兩種意涵。同時，本文也在概念重新定義、社會整體圖像的兩個面向上，說明三者研究中展現的社會理論意涵，進而討論社會學者如何重新開啟公民身分社會學與規範性論述之間的對話。英文摘要：Since the 1980s, there has been a revival of citizenship studies in American and British sociology, in which scholars' efforts mainly aiming at T. H. Marshall's legacy. However, sociologists of citizenship rethinking this academic trend since the late 1990s attempt to enhance their theoretical implications and specify the sociological interests. The paper examines this ”new sociology of citizenship” by introducing the recent works of Thomas Janoski, Margaret Somers, and Bryan Turner. Janoski's introduction of the theoretical concept, social action, is crucial to his sociology of citizenship and rights, as well as Somers' historical epistemology and Turner's vulnerability theme to theirs. The main finding of this paper is that having departed from the comparative historical approach, these new sociologists of citizenship and rights endeavor to integrate the normative and the empirical research with their distinct ways and theoretical viewpoints. Moreover, the paper compares the theoretical ambitions in terms of key-concept redefining and its social mapping, and then analyses their significances to the link of citizenship studies and social theory. Based on the new sociology of citizenship, the conclusion section of the paper tries to rethink about the relationship between the normative and the empirical research.起始頁-結束頁：43-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320141200510023篇名：作為平等的正義：德沃金平等自由主義的理路與辯護並列篇名：Justice as Equality: A Defense of Ronald Dworkin's Egalitarian Liberalism作者：陳閔翔(Min-Siang Chen)關鍵字：作為平等的正義;分配正義;平等自由主義;平等關懷與尊重;資源平等;自由;政治社群;justice as equality;distributive justice;egalitarian liberalism;equal concern and respect;equality of resources;liberty;political community期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：51期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在從德沃金平等自由主義的內在理路來探討其分配正義觀點，進而導出「作為平等的正義」（justice as equality）結論並為之辯 護。本文的主要論點認為，德沃金的自由主義，不僅把自由、平等與社群整合起來，同時藉由資源平等的制度設計－它要求把平等與責任置於同樣重要的地位，落實了「作為平等的正義」理論目標。據此，本文從德沃金平等原則基本論旨出發，依次檢視了「平等關懷與尊重」及「倫理個人主義的平等原則」論點，接著考察德沃金「資源平等」的正義制度設計，包括探討他如何論證資源平等優於福利平 等、假設性保險市場的論述，以及「敏於志向、鈍於稟賦」的正義理念。最後則針對「自由與平等是否衝突」、「自由主義能否形成政治社群」這些重要問題，為德沃金「作為平等的正義」理論進行反思與辯護。英文摘要：In this article, the author tries to clarify ”justice as equality” by exploring what distributive justice Ronald Dworkin illustrated egalitarian liberalism. I argue that he has not only integrated liberty, equality, and community into his liberalism but has also justified a principle of justice, that is, justice as equality, with an emphasis on equality and responsibility in his theory of equality. In the first place I analyze the significance of ”equal concern and respect” and ”ethical individualism”. Secondly, I investigate Dworkin's institutions of justice focused on equality of resources and point out the theoretical implications of ”ambition-sensitive, endowment-insensitive”. For defended ”justice as equality”, in conclusion this article discussed two philosophical controversies: ”Do liberty and equality conflict?” and ”How is liberal community possible?”.起始頁-結束頁：93-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320141200510034篇名：自由而平等的個體：評《政治的道德：從自由主義的觀點看》並列篇名：Free and Equal Individuals: Review of Political Morality: From a Liberal Point of View作者：葉家威(Kevin Ka-Wai Ip)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：51期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：139-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201412005100401篇名：中國因應全球氣候變遷之政策與成效評估並列篇名：Analysis and Evaluation of China's Policy toward Global Climate Change作者：曲家琪(Chia-Chi Chu);王國臣(Guo-Chen Wang);童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung)關鍵字：主成分分析法;全球氣候變遷趨勢指數;十五計畫;十一五規劃;principal component analysis;global climate change trend index;Tenth Five-Year Plan;Eleventh Five-Year Plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用主成分分析法（Principal Component Analysis），建構全球氣候變遷趨勢指數（GCCTI），並以此評估世界各國應對政策之成效。研究時間為1971年至2007年，研究對象為92個國家。實證結果顯示：在研究時間內，中國是氣候變遷惡化趨勢最為嚴重的國家，美國則是改善最多的國家。此外，從「十五計畫」開始，中國已制定氣候變遷的因應政策，但成效有限；究其原因，這些政策只是減緩影響GCCTI權重較低的因素（如人口）；但沒有大幅降低權重較高的因素（如二氧化碳的排放）。英文摘要：This study constructs a global climate change trend index based on principal component analysis. It also evaluates the effectiveness of countries' policies toward global climate change, particularly China in details. This study covers 92 countries from 1971 to 2007. There are two key findings in this study. First, China is the most deteriorated while the United States has the most improved record in contributing to global climate change during the period of the study. Second, in the Tenth Five-Year Plan and Eleventh Five-Year Plan, China proposed the establishment of legislation and promoted policy objectives for climate change, but did not restrict influential factors of climate change, such as reduction of CO_2 emission. Therefore, these policies were not effective in improving the overall climate change trend in China.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201412_57(4).00012篇名：氣候變遷與中國大陸地方政府層級之策略分析：以青海經驗與山西經驗為例並列篇名：Climate Change and Response Strategies of China's Local Governments: Examples of Qinghai and Shanxi Provinces作者：廖宗聖(Tsung-Sheng Liao);陳金哲(Chin-Cher Chen);張筵儀(Yan-Yi Chang)關鍵字：中國大陸;地方政府;氣候變遷;青海經驗;山西經驗;Climate Change;Local Government;Mainland China;Shanxi Province;Qinghai Province期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：中國大陸目前是世界上二氧化碳排放量最大的國家，相較於其他國家，中國大陸二氧化碳的排放量仍快速增加中。1998年中國大陸成立「國家氣候變遷對策協調小組」，在2007年成立「國家應對氣候變遷領導小組」，由前總理溫家寶擔任組長，負責制定國家應對氣候變遷的重大戰略、方針和對策。此後，2007年6月中國大陸提出「中國大陸應對氣候變遷國家方案」以及2008年10月、2009年11月、2010年11月以及2011年11月提出「中國大陸應對氣候變遷的政策與行動」等，都一再顯示出中國大陸對氣候變遷政策的迫切需求與重視。而氣候變遷並不只是中央政府的政策問題，中央與地方政府必須一起攜手面對氣候變遷的挑戰。從政策分析的角度來看，中國大陸應對氣候變遷的政策目標必須先界定，接著制定相關政策，而後落實，當中主要的執行者則是地方政府。英文摘要：Mainland China is currently leading the world's greenhouse gas emission, and the emission amount is rapidly increasing. As the world faces climate change challenges, China plays a critical role in the international community. In 1998, China set up a National Climate Change Coordination Committee for developing domestic climate change policies. Ten years later, China again demonstrated its attempt to combat climate change and set up a National Leading Group on Climate Change in 2007. This group, headed by Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, is responsible for laying out guidelines and strategies for dealing with climate change, and coordinating climate change issues between governmental departments. In recent years, Mainland China actively participates in international affairs in order to become a leader in the international community. Therefore, on one hand, China must put its effort on climate change mitigation and meet the expectation of the international community; meanwhile, China has to sustain domestic economic growth. Achieving both goals requires definitive objectives of China's climate change policies. This article argues that China's central government must show strong professional leadership, while local governments must assume active roles in execution of climate change policies.起始頁-結束頁：65-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201412_57(4).00023篇名：兩岸地方招商之財稅制度因素分析：桃園縣與蘇州市之比較（2000~2010）並列篇名：Comparative Analysis on Fiscal Institutions of Inward Investment Promotion: A Comparison of Taoyuan County, Taiwan and Suzhou City, China (2000~2010)作者：戴光廷(Kuang-Ting Tai);趙永茂(Yung-Mau Chao)關鍵字：地方招商;地方經濟發展;地方財稅制度;財政分權;local investment promotion;local economic development;local tax systems;fiscal decentralization期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文應用相關文獻的觀點，認為台海兩岸地方招商的過程與結果，主要受到制度面因素的影響。尤其是地方財稅制度，不論就企業投資區位選擇與地方政府政策工具的角度而言，皆具有極重要的地位。回顧當前兩岸間之相關研究，除了探討財政制度與招商政策互動性的研究相當有限之外，亦缺少實際運作個案之比較分析。因此，本文希望透過相關靜態與動態的分析，呈現兩岸地方財稅制度與對於各自經濟發展所產生之影響，並以此提出初步之政策建議。為求比較分析之客觀性，需以產業背景相似的實際地方招商案例最為分析單位。基此，本文選擇產業結構與政府層級皆相近之「桃園縣」與「蘇州市」作為比較個案，透過相關統計與文獻資料，搭配田野深度訪談進行綜合比較與分析。本文研究發現，地方稅制的設計將賦予地方政府不同程度的招商意願與招商能力，既影響地方政府稅收留成，亦決定提出優惠措施的空間。桃園地區之地方稅目多為稅基較小之土地稅種，地方政府無法基此提出具吸引力之招商優惠，且地方招商創稅亦因高比例的上繳額度而無法留存地方，故較不具招商誘因。蘇州地區則因為大型稅目為中央與地方共享，與招商創稅高度相關之營業稅與企業所得稅亦多劃歸地方，使得地方政府皆積極為之。因此，單純的政策模仿並無法扭轉整體招商體系運作形態，但仍可透過相互比較得到體系優化的方向。例如在台灣地方稅制中，便可增加地方租稅留成比例，不僅能誘使地方積極招商，亦能促進地方財政獨立，而不再仰賴中央補助。英文摘要：Following the perspectives of previous literature, the present article argues that institutional factors largely determine the development and outcomes of inward investment promotion. Particularly, local fiscal systems not only affect the ability of local governments to provide incentive policies but also influence their motivation to develop local economy. However, contemporary studies have paid less attention to the interaction between fiscal systems and the derived incentive policies; comparative analyses based on practical cases have also been scarce. In order to conceive policy implications, the present article employs methods of content analysis and indepth interview, and aims to articulate the dynamics between fiscal institution and related economic-development policies in selected cases-Taoyuan County, Taiwan and Suzhou City, China-that represent a similar industrial environment and hierarchical structure of government. Our research reveals that most local taxes in Taoyuan County are collected through land tax, which has a relatively low tax base. The local government is unable to make use of revenues from land tax to provide incentives for inward investment. In addition, a high proportion of tax revenues generated from inward investment is handed over to the central government, thereby reducing local incentives to attract investors to the area. In contrast, in Suzhou City, large taxable items are shared between the central government and local government. In particular, business tax and corporate income tax revenues are mostly retained by the local government, providing strong incentives to attract inward investment.起始頁-結束頁：99-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201412_57(4).00034篇名：多種類型的威權主義：中國政體類型的探討並列篇名：Varieties of Authoritarianism: In Search of China's Regime Type作者：高頡(Chieh Kao)關鍵字：中國;政體類型;威權政體;後極權主義;典型威權主義;China;Regime Type;Authoritarian Regimes;Post-Totalitarianism;Classical Authoritarianism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：當前中國的政體類型為何？在非民主政體的分類裡，中國的位置在那裡？在政治、經濟和社會領域，中國表現出那些整體的政權特性？相較於毛澤東時期，那些特性出現變化、那些則延續下來？本文將以Juan Linz和Alfred Stepan的分類為基礎，在不捨棄原始分類中任何一個分類標準的前提下，修正成一個結合政治、經濟和社會領域的分析框架。接著，再根據這個分析框架帶入相應的研究議題，透過大量的二手文獻，歸納整理出對當前中國政體性質的總體評估。藉由評析近150筆專書、文章、專章等文獻，本文主張當前中國揉合了前蘇東共黨國家之後極權特性（政治、社會領域）及台灣威權統治時期之典型威權特性（經濟領域）。因此，在非民主政體分類的概念系譜當中，中國既非完全的後極權主義，也不是1970~1980年代典型威權主義的再現，而是同時混合兩者核心特徵的非民主政體，表現出「多種類型的威權主義」。這個現象表示在脫離毛澤東統治的過程中，中國在「政經社」三個領域出現不同的偏離幅度，即在政治、社會領域的偏離幅度較小，而在經濟領域的偏離幅度較大。本文的研究發現提供三個研究議程。第一、未來學界應該探討是什麼因素造成中國政體出現混合特性？執政黨又是如何成為揉合這種特性的重要機制？第二、中國政體的混合性質可以為非民主政體的分類帶來重要啟示，學界應該重視長期被忽略的經濟因素對政體分類可能的影響力。第三、未來學界應該透過對少量個案的比較研究，一方面給予後極權主義明確的定義，另一方面釐清後極權主義及典型威權主義之間的概念邊界。英文摘要：What is China's current regime type? To answer this question, this paper adopted and revised the classification purposed by Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan as the analytical framework. This paper then reviewed literatures according to this revised framework, in which the paper separated it into political, economic, and societal spheres with their corresponding indicators. By reviewing nearly 150 works (including books, journal papers, and book chapters), this paper concluded that in the political and societal spheres, China is close to the former communist states in the Post-Stalin USSR (labeled as post-totalitarianism); while in the economic sphere China shares a number of similarities with authoritarian Taiwan. Thus, China is neither a post-totalitarian regime, nor a resurgence of classical authoritarianism that prevailingly existed in the 1970-1980s. Instead, China combines both post-totalitarian and classical authoritarian characteristics, dubbed as ”varieties of authoritarianism”. Three research agendas, according to the finding, merit further attention. First, students of Chinese politics should examine the factors that not only led to the hybrid features of the Chinese regime, but how could China, up to a point, successfully mix them? Second, economic factors should have more effects on the classification of non-democracies. Third, for a clear-cut definition and conceptual boundary of post-totalitarianism, scholars need to conduct more small-n analyses.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201409_57(3).00015篇名：媒體控制與產業發展的辯證：中國大陸網路傳播政策之變遷動力與影響並列篇名：The Compromise between Internet Censorship and Industrial Development: The Causes and Effects of Changing Internet Regulations in China作者：朱灼文(Cho-Wen Chu);單文婷(Wen-Ting Shan)關鍵字：網路管制;網路產業;傳播政策;中國大陸網際網路;Internet regulation;Internet industry;communications policy;Internet in China期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：面對網路資訊社會的形成，各國政府紛紛解除管制以因應通訊匯流。習於控制媒體的大陸當局在網路政策上採取行政監控與產業發展並重的策略，一方面屏蔽國外的強勢網站與其中的訊息，另一方面卻扶持本地相似的網站。如此既能收市場保護主義之效，又能維持本地網路技術與國際先進水準亦步亦趨。在監管成本與統治利益之雙重考量下，大陸當局有條件地容忍網路上的眾聲喧嘩，以確保民營網路媒體能獲益於熱門互動話題的流量和點閱率，同時官方卻仍持續掌握絕對優勢的法規與技術實力，以便對可能影響政權的網路事件立刻封殺。大陸當局理性選擇了這種兼顧媒體控制與產業發展的網路傳播政策，並在施展強制措施時保持有目的的自制，以維護網路經濟之活力於不墜。雖然這種做法帶來了資訊控制的國際惡名與大陸網友的不信任危機，但是公民社會與市場經濟的力量卻已在大陸的網際網路上逐漸茁壯。英文摘要：In response to the emerging information society via the Internet, governments all over the world have initiated a series of deregulations to pursue digital convergence. Chinese government also started to shift its strategy from strict media control to a more balanced way between regulatory administration and industrial development. Specifically, it blocked influential foreign websites and encouraged domestic dotcoms to provide similar services. Thus, in addition to the benefits of protectionism, China can still keep her Internet technology abreast of the international standards. Balancing between the regulation cost and the governance benefits, Chinese government conditionally tolerates diverse online speeches, which can usually increase network traffic and click counts, to nourish private Internet media, while ensures that its regulatory and technical capability are mighty enough to effectively suppress the Internet incidents against the regime. China's rational choice of the measurements for the regulation is to maintain both Internet censorship and industrial development. The authorities tend to purposely wield their power with self-restraint to preserve the vitality of China's Internet economics. Despite the international criticism of information control and the confidence crisis among domestic users, the civil society and market economics have been assuming power in China's cyberspace.起始頁-結束頁：39-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201409_57(3).00026篇名：中國的北極戰略與挑戰並列篇名：China's Arctic Strategies and Challenges作者：閻亢宗(Hang-Tsung Yen)關鍵字：北極航線;聯合國海洋法公約;北極理事會;外大陸架;Arctic Sea Routes;United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea;The Arctic Council;Outer Continental Shelf期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著北極冰雪加速融化，北極浮現的許多利益包括北極海上航線的開通以及潛在的自然資源等也開始受到矚目。這些利益也吸引中國的興趣，從其申請成為北極理事會永久觀察員即可看出。為了避免其他國家疑懼，中國目前採取多邊與雙邊外交等方式，強化它在北極的存在。雖然中國的北極策略已有一定成效，但仍面臨諸多挑戰，成為它進一步開拓北極的障礙。英文摘要：With the onset of an accelerated sea-ice decline in the Arctic, discussions of the interests including opening of Arctic sea routes and of potential natural resources in the Arctic have erupted. To be sure, China displays a real interest in the Arctic, as attested by its applying for permanent observer in the Arctic Council. In order not to alarm other countries, China is currently adopting approaches of bilateral and multilateral diplomacy and other tactics as ways of enhancing its presence in the Arctic area. China has made some achievements in fulfilling its Arctic strategies. However, there are many challenges ahead and obstacles for China to further explore the Arctic.起始頁-結束頁：71-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201409_57(3).00037篇名：拍賣國寶：中國大陸文物拍賣市場的興起與發展並列篇名：Auctioning National Treasures: the Formation of Chinese Antiques Auction Market作者：李玉瑛(Yu-Ying Lee)關鍵字：文物;拍賣;藝術市場;市場形成;cultural relics;antique auction;art market;market formation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：在1992年之前，中國大陸沒有文物拍賣，然而在2010年中國大陸榮登全球藝術品拍賣市場冠軍寶座。中國大陸的文物拍賣，是在缺乏藝術市場的情況下所產生的，它為探討中國大陸如何從社會主義的控制經濟逐步邁向市場經濟，提供了一個很好的案例。市場不是自然形成的，其中必須有行動者，有效的組織結構與法律規範。本論文認為國家在中國文物藝術品拍賣市場的形成佔有關鍵的治理角色。本文以國家對文物的治理方式之別，把中國大陸文物藝術品拍賣市場發展分為三個階段來討論。從管控期（1949-1978），嘗試改革期（1978-1994），到1995年之後的建立規範期。文物在社會主義中國是一種非常特殊的物品，國家對於文物的嚴格管控，也延伸到對新興文物藝術品拍賣市場的管理。在改革開放期間，一切向前／錢看的氣氛，鼓勵冒險的行動者願意成立新興的商業組織。國營企業的經理人從香港習得拍賣文物的交易模式，國營企業成為推展文物拍賣的行動者，將文物交易市場化。在經過一段衝撞體制的嘗試期之後，國家介入施行綿密的法規治理，同時還成立「中國拍賣行業協會」代理國家實際扮演監督管理的角色。中國文物藝術品拍賣市場只有20年的發展歷史，其中處處可見國家的角色，是國家支配型市場經濟的典型案例。英文摘要：This paper argues that the antique auction market in China constitutes a different route of art market formation in which the state plays a key role. This paper deals with essential questions regarding how a distinctive type of market is formed and sustained in the tradition of the sociology of market. Now, China has become the biggest antique auction market in the world, surpassing that of New York and London. The performance of the Chinese art market is worthy to be studied. In western societies, art auction is a high-end art market underpinned by a mature art world which includs collectors, antique dealers, art critics, museums, galleries, and academia. However, when China launched the first trial on artifact auction in Beijing in 1992, there was neither an art market nor art world in China. How did state-owned cultural relics go on market? Who were the key players that have brought about the antique auction market? What was the role of the government in this auction market formation? This paper mainly explores the role of the state in governing the booming antique auction market in the course of developing Chinese state-directed capitalism.起始頁-結束頁：99-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201409_57(3).00048篇名：中國大陸區域間通貨膨脹與貿易開放性之關係並列篇名：Trade Openness and Inflation: Provincial Evidence from Mainland China作者：李浩仲(Hao-Chung Li);林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin)關鍵字：貿易開放;通貨膨脹率;通貨膨脹波動;區域間差異;分量迴歸;trade openness;price inflation;price inflation volatility;regional differences;quantile regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文使用1997-2010年中國大陸31個區域（省）資料探討貿易開放對以生產者物價指數（Producer Price Index, PPI）及消費者物價指數（Consumer Price Index, CPI）計算的通貨膨脹率及通貨膨脹波動的影響。本文的實證結果發現，一省的貿易開放性和其PPI膨脹率之間呈現負向關係，然而貿易開放性和CPI膨脹率之間並無顯著的關係；此結果可以用貿易開放所帶給生產者的競爭效果來解釋。此外，本文發現一省的貿易開放性和其PPI和CPI通貨膨脹波動均呈負向關係；CPI的結果符合文獻中商品多樣化選擇能降低通貨膨脹波動的論點，PPI的結果則可說明貿易開放能增加生產者對其原料及中間財的來源選擇，故PPI通貨膨脹波動亦可能降低。英文摘要：This paper utilizes the Chinese provincial data between 1997 and 2010 to study how trade openness affects the levels and volatility of the Producer Price Index(PPI)and the Consumer Price Index(CPI). Our empirical results suggest that trade openness is negatively correlated with PPI but uncorrelated with CPI, and the former result can be explained by the competition effect brought about by international trade. In addition, our paper finds that trade openness is negatively correlated with the volatility of both PPI and CPI. The finding for the decreased CPI volatility under trade can be explained by the increase in consumption diversity, and the decrease in PPI volatility under trade suggests that producers' widening choices in material and intermediate goods also allow them to enjoy lower price volatility.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201406_57(2).00019篇名：中國大陸產業升級對廠商薪資外溢效果之影響並列篇名：Technological Upgrade of Industry and Wage Spillover in Mainland China作者：李浩仲(Hao-Chung Li);陳鎮洲(Jenn-Jou Chen)關鍵字：產業升級;薪資外溢;外人直接投資;industry technological upgrading;wage spillover effect;FDI期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文使用1998年至2006年中華人民共和國國家統計局之「中國工業企業統計數據庫」探討產業升級的過程中，產業內廠商所受到的薪資外溢效果。我們發現當一個產業內有技術升級的現象時，產業內廠商的平均薪資會有所提升，其中非內資企業及內資非國有企業會受到較大的正向薪資外溢效果，但國有企業會受到負向的效果。我們同時發現產業升級對產業內原本不同技術層級的廠商會有不同的薪資外溢效果，而其形態可用產業升級所同時帶來的正向生產力外溢效果及負向的競爭效果來解釋。英文摘要：This paper utilizes the 1998-2006 Annual Industrial Survey Database from the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics(NBS)to study the wage spillover effects of technological upgrade of industry in China. We find that technological upgrade on average will exert a positive spillover effect to firms within the industry, though this positive effect will turn negative among state-owned enterprises. We also find that spillover effects differ among firms with different initial technological levels, and these heterogenous effects can be explained by the interactions of positive productivity effects and negative competition effects.起始頁-結束頁：23-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201406_57(2).000210篇名：中國資產投機對全球石油價格泡沫化之影響並列篇名：The Impact of China's Asset Speculative on the Oil Market Bubbles作者：方中柔(Chung-Rou Fang);馬毓駿(Yu-Chun Ma)關鍵字：石油價格;石油泡沫;市場基要;狀態空間模型;Oil Price;Oil Bubbles;fundamentals;State-Space Model JEL Classification: E31, E32, Q43期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：2008年以來油價快速上升，甚至超過指數增長，使我們可能處於一個石油價格泡沫之中。當時全球石油供給已經超過需求，唯價格還繼續上升且波動劇烈，此說明影響油價的因素除了供需之外，可能包含投機行為。其中，中國原油消費量自2003年以來已超過日本，且往後對原油的需求程度仍有增無減，對油價提供支撐作用。本研究目的即在檢測中國的資產投機行為是否為石油價格泡沫的主因？而欲瞭解石油價格泡沫現象，需藉由對石油市場泡沫化的正確解讀。為達成此一研究目的，本文採用資產定價模型CAPM理論，並同時考慮GARCH效果及狀態空間模型（State-Space Model）機制來研究中國資產價格投機與石油價格泡沫的關聯性，期能提供近幾年國際油價大漲一個合理的解釋因素。研究結果顯示：在考慮中國進口需求、中國資產價格、國際金價及世界資金寬鬆環境下；中國資產價波動對世界石油價格的影響並不顯著，二者在統計上並無顯著的關聯性。可能的原因：選取的時間點不夠長，致使本文採用之變數無法掌握油價可能發生泡沫前後的差異。其次，由於中國大陸仍是屬於計畫經濟的國家，政府掌控其國內資產價格的波動仍相當強；因此與油價的連動關係受到扭曲，以致呈現統計上不顯著的結果。英文摘要：Since approximately 2008, a growing number of journalists and academics have been discussing the situation of the oil price. One key question is to explain the quicker-than-exponential quadrupling since 2003. Some attributes mainly point out that the growing demand of oil（in particular from the emergent Chinese and Indian markets）imbalanced by the increasingly apparent limits of world oil production. Others are raising the specter of rising speculation. In addition, China's asset prices have been increasing sharply as well, and many are wondering if there were increasing speculators in China's asset market. Since China accounted for one-fourth of the world's incremental oil demand over 1995-2004 and is expected to account for 12% of global oil demand in the future, we are interested in studying some relationship between China's asset market speculation and the bubble phenomenon of oil price. This study uses the GARCH and the State- Space Model to study the impact of China's asset speculative on the oil market bubbles. The result indicates that the China's speculation do not significantly impact the world's oil price, which supports the evidence for neutrality hypothesis. The possible reasons are as following: the empirical time period is not enough to identify differences before and after the occurrence of oil bubbles. In addition, possible links between China's asset speculative and the oil market bubbles are missing since China remains under a planned economy.起始頁-結束頁：43-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201406_57(2).000311篇名：中國大陸擴展中的基督教灰色市場－以城市教會的發展為例並列篇名：The Expanding Gray Market of Christianity in China: The Development of Urban Church作者：林承慧(Cheng-Hui Lin)關鍵字：中國大陸;基督教;宗教三色市場;灰市;China;christianity;triple religious markets;gray market期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：改革開放後，宗教活動再度死灰復燃，教會如雨後春筍般出現，發展至今信教群眾高達一億人，對政權及社會的影響不容小覷。即便中共對宗教組織仍有多方限制，落實到地方往往就產生極大的歧異性，看似百依百順的三自教會，和理應對黨國體制充滿叛逆的家庭教會，竟不約而同的產生灰色地帶的行為模式，而與地方政府形成一種相互依存、互利共生的局面。本研究即企圖在宗教市場理論（Theory of Religious Market）假設下，以影響教會生存的四個關鍵因素：組織成員、神學立場、宗教市場、地方政府態度作切入，探究當前三自和家庭教會在政府限制和教會間的競爭下，實際的互動、發展過程，了解促使三自和家庭教會同時往灰市移動的原因。本研究一方面能細緻化中國大陸的國家社會關係圖像，提供面對中國政教關係問題的新思考，另一方面也能提供台灣政府及宗教界未來進行兩岸宗教交流的依循管道，增加台灣宗教界在大陸宗教市場的競爭力。英文摘要：After the reform and opening up in China, religious activities resurged, churches were established, and believers have grown up to approximately one hundred million people. The impacts to the regime and the society should not be underestimated. Although there are still constraints imposed upon religious organizations from the central government, the implementation slightly deviated from the original design at the level of local governments. There are gray areas exist in the activities conducted by the Three-Self Patriotic churches and house churches in ways that are interdependent with the local governments. This study uses the Theory of Religious Market to analyze the four critical elements for churches to survive: organization members, theological position, religious market and the attitude of local governments. It also explores the reasons behind the directions that the Three-Self Patriotic churches and house churches are moving into, among vast gray areas under the current constraints imposed by the government and competitions between churches. This study portraits the relationship between the Chinese government and the society. It also provides a channel for the Taiwanese government and religions in cross-straits interactions by enhancing the competency of Taiwan in the Chinese religious market.起始頁-結束頁：63-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201406_57(2).000412篇名：區域的整合與衝突：京津冀城市區域的治理與矛盾並列篇名：Regional Integration and Conflict: The Governance and Contradiction of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei City-Region作者：楊勝群(Sheng-Chun Yang)關鍵字：京津冀;全球城市區域;國家空間戰略;空間分工;Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei;Global city-regions;State spatial strategies;spatial division of labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文探討京津冀城市區域的整合與衝突議題。隨著中國與全球經濟越來越高度連結，北京已逐漸轉型成吸引跨國公司總部聚集的全球城市，並與天津和河北逐漸形成功能分工的首都經濟圈。然而，自2006年起，區域內另一大城市－天津，在中央主導的濱海新區成長極戰略的扶持下，不只屢屢與北京競爭金融特許政策，還磁吸河北的製造業。不過，本文發現，濱海新區的開發，雖促使天津經濟與工業快速發展，但北京的首要地位目前並未因此減弱。本文將指出，既有的經濟空間分工理論或政治權力決定論，都忽略了城市區域空間本身也同時是歷史的產物，因此無法有效解釋京津冀之間的競合關係，部分受到歷史空間因素的影響。因此，計畫經濟所遺留的歷史空間結構，使北京聚集了國家級部委、國有金融與企業總部，成為所有中外資本亟欲建立總部之地，而國家濱海空間戰略雖局部改變城市間的經濟空間分工關係，卻無法再度逆轉北京的歷史－制度空間結構，導致天津的城市功能只能被迫錯位發展，並與河北競爭工業發展。英文摘要：This paper discusses the issues of regional integration and conflict of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei city-region. With increasing links to global economy, Beijing has gradually been transformed into a global city, attracting multinational companies to establish headquarters, as well as promoted as a economic capital with functional divisions of labor and economic links. However, Tianjin, another major city in the region, has undergone rapid industrial development since 2006, especially from the central government's ”Tianjin Binhai New Area” spatial strategies stimulus. Under this strategic support, Tianjin has not only competes with Beijing for central government's financial franchise polices, but also absorbs the manufacturing industries of Hebei and Beijing. However, we find that despite the rise in the Binhai New Area that prompted Tianjin's economic and industrial development, the primary position of Beijing in this region has not been weakened. This article will point out that the arguments based on the spatial division of economic labor theory or political power determinism both ignore the fact that the city-regional spatial structures are also products of history, thus are not effective in explaining the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei competitive relationships. Therefore, the historical spatial structure of planned economy determines the gathering of national ministries, state-owned financial and corporate headquarters in Beijing. Although the state's Binhai spatial strategy has partly changed the spatial division of economic relationships between cities, it cannot again reverse the historical-institutional spatial structure of Beijing. The results will be dislocated development of Tianjin city and forced competition with Hebei industrial developments.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201403_57(1).000113篇名：多層次競爭：「天津濱海新區」的發展與挑戰並列篇名：Multi-Level Competition: The Development and Challenge of "Tianjin Binhai New Area"作者：王信賢(Hsin-Hsien Wang);涂秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Tu)關鍵字：天津濱海新區;地方政府;區域發展;多層次競爭;TBNA;local government;regional development;multi-level competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：2005年10月中國將「加快濱海新區發展」寫進「十一五」規劃建議中，天津濱海新區正式納入中國國家整體發展戰略，再一次被定位為帶動「環渤海經濟圈經濟」發展的「引擎」。歸納2005年底至今的改革實驗區，以及諸多中央政策利基，主要是讓天津濱海新區可在多項管理體制上，直接報准國務院後「先試先行」，包括金融、土地與行政等三方面管理體制。就此看來，天津市與濱海新區的發展，似乎擺脫之前的沉潛命運，進入加速發展階段。然而，論地理位置、人文環境與行政層級，天津並不亞於上海，但天津新區發展遠遠落後於浦東新區。因此，本文試圖透過各種關於中國經濟運作與區域發展中的地方政府角色與競爭觀點，說明天津濱海新區的發展機會與困境。本文認為，天津濱海新區的成立、沉寂和蓬勃發展，與中國經濟體制改革模式息息相關。中國經濟體制改革模式在宏觀層次上，運用全球化機制，採取「內外聯結」邏輯，在微觀層次上，中央為最終仲裁者，開放各大大小小「區域／行政區競爭」；然而，區域間失序的競爭將是此種區域創新機制的危機所在。本文以天津濱海新區為例，說明中國區域競爭不僅出現在同級政府間，也出現在不同級別的政府間，形成多層次的競爭關係。此種「多層次競爭」的唯一解套機會是中央政府的強勢介入。英文摘要：”To accelerate the development of Binhai New Area” was written into the ”11th Five-Year Plan” which officially brought the Tianjin Binhai New Area (TBNA) into the PRC's overall national developmental strategy in October 2005. The TBNA was once again positioned to be the ”leading force” for the development of ”Bohai Economic Rim”, which accompanied a number of preferential policies. Having summarized the reform experimental zone since the end of 2005, various central policies have deregulated management systems of TBNA, implementing ”early and pilot measures” on financial, land and administrative systems. It seems that the development of TBNA had gotten rid of past depressed situation and come to an accelerating developmental phase. In terms of geographical location, human environment and administration level, Tianjin is no less than Shanghai. Nevertheless, TBAN is far less developed than the Pudong New Area. Consequently, this article explores the opportunities and dilemmas that TBNA is facing by adopting the political logic of Chinese regional development. This article argues that TBNA's establishment, stillness and prosperity are closely related to the model of Chinese economic reforms. At macro level, the reformed model makes use of globalization mechanism and adopts the logic of ”inward and outward linkage”. At micro level, the power lies with the central government to open various regional/administrative districts game competition. However, the disordered inter-regional competitions will be the crisis of the aforesaid regional innovation mechanism. Using the TBNA as a case study, this paper uses the example of Chinese regional competitions in that they exist not only between same-level governments, but also between different levels of governments. The solution for this multi-level competition relies on the central government's strong intervention, which also illustrates that the present Chinese economic reform is adhered to the logic of the party-state system.起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201403_57(1).000214篇名：戶口的政治：中國大陸與台灣戶籍制度之歷史比較並列篇名：The Politics of Hukou: A Comparative Study of the Household Registration System in China and Taiwan作者：林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin);曾惠君(Hui-Jiun Tseng)關鍵字：人口治理;政治轉型;國家建構;戶口（戶籍制度）;demographic governance;political transition;state building;Hukou (household registration system)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以中國大陸與台灣戶籍制度歷史發展為例，探討現代人口治理制度變遷的動力。我們發現，政治經濟轉型對兩岸人口治理制度的變遷與分歧有極大的影響，現代國家迫於財政需要，將人口與稅收納入官僚化治理，但是威權體制或殖民體制更傾向建構並且維持種種戶籍分類，直到民主轉型才會逐漸取消公民資格的分類差異。台灣民主化時期廢除了省籍不平等、與中國大陸戶籍制度繼續維持城鄉不平等，凸顯了政治轉型對人口治理制度的重大影響。英文摘要：The article examines the relationship among state building, political transition and ”demographic governance”, which refers to the identification, categorization and management of a population/household registration system. By comparing the similarity and differences of the development of household registration system in Taiwan and China after early twentieth century, it is illustrated that the divergence of demographic governance resulted from the early stage of modern state building. The Japanese colonial government in Taiwan from 1895 and the communist regime from 1949 established and sustained household registration systems by the police departments. Both the states in Taiwan and China developed unequal categorized system for the elites' political and economic purposes. From the 1980s, however, the democratic transition in Taiwan changed the household registration system from an unequal categorized and policed system to a registration system with more individualized characteristics and more universalized citizenship. In contrast, without democratic transition, the Chinese household registration system still is run by the public security department with the ”agricultural” and ”non-agricultural” divide. The historical comparative study shows the dynamics and decline of management and categorization of demographic governance in modern Chinese societies.起始頁-結束頁：63-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201403_57(1).000315篇名：彭真在1959年中共「反右傾」運動中的角色和作為並列篇名：Peng Zhen's Role and Activities in the Anti-Right Opportunist Campaign of 1959作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;「反右傾」運動;廬山會議;毛澤東;中共政治;Peng Zhen;Anti-Right Opportunist Campaign;Lushan Conference;Mao Zedong;Chinese Communist Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：1959年夏，毛澤東在廬山會議中發起「反右傾」，既引發黨內激烈的政治鬥爭，更讓「大躍進」益加惡性發展，造成經濟嚴重失調和大規模的饑饉死亡。當時經常參與最高決策、也負責將之落實的彭真，在「反右傾」中的關鍵角色和重要影響問題，一直未受到應有的重視。西方學者對此不甚了解，中共官方所撰的彭真傳記也刻意避重就輕。這段時期代替鄧小平主持中央書記處工作的彭真，在廬山會議期間和其後，皆竭力配合毛澤東，作為「反右傾」的主要執行者。彭真在廬山上積極響應毛對彭德懷等人展開的政治批鬥；返回北京後，他負責督導、推促中央黨政部門、軍隊、首都北京市，以及高校的「反右傾」運動。從上述的政治過程中，可以增進對彭真個人以至中共相關的政治事件和歷史的認識。英文摘要：In the summer of 1959, Mao Zedong launched the Anti-Right Opportunist Campaign in the Lushan Conference. Not only did it lead to a severe intra-Party power struggle, but also allowed the Great Leap Forward to enter its second round in 1960, further devastating the fragile economy. At that time, Peng Zhen was greatly involved in CCP decision-making and policy-implementation. However, Peng's crucial role in the Anti-Right Opportunist Campaign has received very little attention from Western publications. In addition, Peng's official biography written by the Chinese Party historians tried to downplay his role and responsibility for this notorious campaign. This study demonstrates the following: during and after the Lushan Conference, Peng followed Mao closely and he proved himself particularly active in running the campaign. In Lushan, Peng zealously responded to Mao's criticism toward Peng Dehuai; shortly, back to Beijing, he was in charge of directing and supervising the Anti-Right Opportunist Campaign in the Party and government departments, the military, the Beijing city and the institutions of higher education. This study enhances the understanding of Peng's political career and the Chinese politics during Mao era.起始頁-結束頁：97-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201403_57(1).000401篇名：社會比較情境中表現劣者的沒面子感受與情緒：臉面共享成員在場與情境公開性的影響並列篇名：Losing Face and Emotions in a Social Comparison Situation: The Effects of Face-Sharing Member and the Openness of Situation作者：韓貴香(Kuei-Hsiang Han)關鍵字：沒面子;社會比較;情境依附自尊;情緒;emotion;losing face;social comparison;social-contingent self-esteem期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：41期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以情緒「自我歸咎」vs.「他人歸咎」的認知觀點，採情境實驗法探討影響個人面子感受的兩項因素：「強迫式比較」vs.「第三者比較」。研究結果顯示：在第三者比較時，研究參與者評量的沒面子感受大於強迫式比較。而兩種情境的情緒差異主要在於：強迫式比較的情緒感受以沮喪鬱悶和困窘難堪為主；第三者比較則除了沮喪鬱悶和困窘難堪，還有受傷害和受羞辱。進一步將強迫式比較細分為個人私下知覺表現不如人時「有」vs.「沒有」臉面共享的家人在場。結果顯示有家人在場的沒面子感受大於沒有家人在場，兩種情境表現劣者都會感到困窘難堪和沮喪鬱悶，且家人在場時還會有罪惡感和懊悔的情緒。同樣將第三者比較的情境再細分為第三者（家人）提出表現不如人訊息的情境是「公開指責」vs.「私下規勸」。研究顯示公開指責的沒面子感受高於私下規勸，私下規勸情境的主要情緒是沮喪鬱悶、困窘難堪、懊悔和罪惡感；公開指責的情境則除了沮喪鬱悶和困窘難堪外，受傷害、受羞辱和生氣的感受也都明顯上升，但罪惡感反而下降。英文摘要：This study focused on the effects of ”forced comparison (the message of ”I'm worse than others” was perceived by oneself) and ”third party comparison (the same message was stated by others)” on participants' feelings of losing face and emotions. The results showed that participants rated higher degree of no face in the context of third party comparison than that of forced comparison. Participants in both contexts experienced the feelings of depression and embarrassment. When the comparison was made by the third party, participants also experienced the feelings of being humiliated and hurt. The condition of ”forced comparison” was further divided into two groups: there was vs. there was not a face-sharing member (mother) in the context. The results showed that participants experienced higher degree of losing face when there was a family member in the context. In addition to the basic feelings of depression and embarrassment, participants also experienced the feelings of regret and guilty with the presence of a family member. Similarly, the condition of ”third party comparison” was further divided into two groups: stating the message ”privately” vs. ”publicly”. The results indicated that if one's bad performance was stated publicly rather than privately, one would experience stronger feelings of losing face. As to the emotions, participants experienced depression, embarrassment, regret, and guilty feelings when in a private situation. On the contrary, if the situation was in front of others, participants would still experience the feelings of depression and embarrassment along with humiliation, hurt, and anger. To explain the results, the cognitive perspective of self-blamed vs. other-blamed for emotions was discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：大學生死亡焦慮的內涵建構與現況調查之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Construction and Survey of Death Anxiety among Undergraduate Students in Taiwan作者：蔡明昌(Ming-Chang Tsai)關鍵字：大學生;死亡焦慮;量表;death anxiety;scale;undergraduate student期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：41期出版年：2014中文摘要：有鑑於國內目前尚缺乏建構自本土化觀點的死亡焦慮量表，本研究主要目的在於以國內大學生為對象，透過實地訪談的方式，建構其死亡焦慮的內涵，藉以發展出適用於我國大學生的死亡焦慮量表，並以此為工具調查我國大學生死亡焦慮的現況。透過對大學生進行的實地訪談，研究者歸納出大學生死亡焦慮內涵的六大層面，並據此發展為「大學生死亡焦慮量表」。本研究抽取511位大學生進行調查，結果顯示國內大學生的死亡焦慮在整體表現上為中等程度（M=3.16，Likert式五點量表）。但在「關係喪失」及「無助與疼痛」二項分量表的得分偏高；另外，本研究亦發現國內大學生的死亡焦慮具有性別差異，女性較男性有更高程度的死亡焦慮之趨勢；研究者對於上述結果進行討論後，提出後續研究的具體建議。英文摘要：Due to the lack of a death anxiety scale that is constructed from the localized viewpoint, this study was designed to explore the contents of death anxiety by interviewing ten undergraduate students. Based on the interview data, the death anxiety scale was developed, and subsequently used to survey the death anxiety of undergraduate students in Taiwan. Six dimensions of death anxiety of undergraduate student were identified and used to generate items of the 'Death Anxiety Scale for undergraduate students'. A sample of 511 college students was recruited. The results showed that the death anxiety of undergraduate students in Taiwan was intermediate (M=3.16, five-point Likert response format). However, participants gave higher ratings to the dimensions of ”loss of relationship” and ”helplessness and suffering”. Gender difference was also found with female participants expressing higher death anxiety than their male counterparts. Based on the findings, practical implications and directions for future research were highlighted.起始頁-結束頁：25-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會3篇名：成人工作家庭優勢量表之發展研究並列篇名：Development of the Work-Family Strength Scale for Working Parents in Taiwan作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);吳清麟(Chi-Lin Wu);李宜玫(Yi-Mei Lee)關鍵字：工作家庭優勢;工作家庭平衡;量表編製;scale establishment;work-family balance;work-family strength期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：41期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在發展成人工作家庭優勢量表，並了解優勢經驗在相關背景因素的差異情形。適用為需兼顧家庭之全職工作者，量表分成完整和簡短兩版本，前者共有25題，後者有12題，皆包含工作對家庭之優勢及家庭對工作之優勢兩部分。以6點量表方式填答，分數愈高表示優勢程度愈明顯。量表的發展分為三階段，第一階段，先以41位每週需工作40小時以上、同時需照顧未滿18歲之雙生涯成人為對象，以焦點訪談蒐集相關經驗，以作為編製量表題目參考。第二階段透過4位專家進行檢核以提升內容效度，接著進行預試分析，將所得208份問卷進行項目分析與選題、刪題後因素分析及信效度分析等以確立題目。第三階段，以561名參與者為對象，進行正式量表之信效度驗證。結果發現，兩版本之分量表和總量表的內部一致性皆頗高，驗證性因素分析以及效標關連效度分析結果顯示本量表的效度具有不錯的水準。背景變項差異比較結果發現，女性在工作對家庭的優勢上顯著高於男性，家事時數的差異則有待更進一步的探討。最後根據研究結果進行討論，並提出未來研究及實務應用上的建議。英文摘要：The study aimed to develop and validate the full and short versions of the Work-Family Strength Scale (WFSS) for working parents in Taiwan. The full version comprises 25 items, and the short version comprises 12 items. Both versions consist of two subscales which are rated on a 6-point Likert Scale-Work to Family Strength and Family to Work Strength. In the first stage, the first author recruited 41 men and women with children under the age of 18, who worked over 40 hours per week. Focus groups were conducted to collect the data which were used to generate items of a pilot scale. In the second stage, four experts assessed content validity of the pilot scale. Then, the pilot scale was administered to 208 participants using the purposive sampling method. Using this dataset, a formal scale was developed based on the results of item analysis and factor analysis. In the third stage, 561 participants were administered the WFSS. With the collected data, the author initial psychometric evidence was gathered through validity analysis and confirmatory factor analysis. The results showed that (1) Cronbach's reliability coefficients for the two subscales of WFSS in the two versions were high; (2) Upon the structural equation modeling, the overall model fit and individual item reliability of this study was good. Meanwhile, the MFSS scores were found to be correlated with the career adaptabilities. Women scored higher than men in the Work to Family Strength subscale. The chore hours difference needed a further exploration. Suggestions for practice and future studies were provided.起始頁-結束頁：57-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：復原力增進方案在少女安置機構之應用與反思並列篇名：Application and Reflection upon a Resilience Enhancing Program for Young Girls in Residential Care作者：陳怡芳(Yi-Fang Chen);林怡君(Yi-Chun Lin);胡中宜(Chung-Yi Hu)關鍵字：安置照顧;兒童福利;復原力;輔導方案;child welfare;guidance program;residential care;resilience期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：41期出版年：2014中文摘要：復原力是創傷復原的重要心理特質，本研究主要分析2012年某安置機構「復原力增進方案」的運作，以復原力五大介入領域為方向，透過生活關係、家庭生活教育、探索體驗教育以及個案管理，藉以提升安置機構經歷創傷少女的復原力，並以復原力三要素之「我有」、「我是」、「我能」作為評估成效的觀察向度。採用焦點團體方法收集資料，共訪問7位行動中的輔導人員，據以反思輔導方案的介入策略與對安置少女復原力的影響。研究建議：（1）運用復原力的概念內涵融入安置機構的多元輔導方案之中，確認方案實施之目標與策略；（2）增強輔導工作者內在的復原力視角；（3）強化復原力方案的成效評估；（4）發現不同安置階段中復原力的轉換機制。英文摘要：Resilience is an important psychological trait needed to recover from the trauma. The purpose of this study was to analyze the Resilience Enhancing Program (REP) in a residential placement. REP enhances clients' resilience by using four strategies, including care relationships, family life education, experiential education, and case management. Moreover, this study applied the three dimensions of resilience,which are ”I have”, ”I am”, and ”I can”. The interview method was conducted to collect data from seven residential care practitioners who work in a residential home. Based on the findings, suggestions for future practice include: (a) verifying the objectives and strategies of REP; (b) enhancing residential care practitioners' viewpoints of internal resilience; (c) strengthening the effectiveness evaluation of REP; and (d) finding out the change agency of resilience in different care stages.起始頁-結束頁：93-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會5篇名：愛你恨你的背後－邊緣性人格患者的人際親密能力並列篇名：Love You or Hate You-Interpersonal Intimacy Competence in the Patients with Borderline Personality作者：辜靖淳(Ching-Chun Ku);葉在庭(Zai-Ting Yeh);劉宜釗(I-Chao Liu)關鍵字：人際親密關係能力;同理心;情緒覺察;邊緣性人格疾患;borderline personality disorder;emotional awareness scale;empathy;interpersonal competence questionnaire期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：41期出版年：2014中文摘要：邊緣性人格疾患者為臨床上最常見的人格疾患種類，其中一項明顯的臨床特徵為不良社會互動與人際關係，他們可能因過去的不安全依附關係導致有較多人際關係破裂危機，對人際關係有較多負向解讀，無法避免人際關係中較多的激烈衝突。本研究之目的為探討憂鬱情緒、同理心及情緒覺察對人際親密能力的影響程度，邊緣性人格疾患患者與正常控制組是否會有不同的影響模式，而此不同的影響模式是否正是邊緣性人格疾患患者的人際親密表現不佳的可能相關因素。本研究以30位經由醫學中心精神科醫師診斷且符合邊緣性人格量表高分之邊緣性人格疾患者與30位正常控制組配對，進行人際親密能力、憂鬱情緒、同理心和情緒覺察的評估。人際親密能力評估包括主動、負向決斷、自我坦露、情緒支持及衝突處理五個向度，而同理心包括角色置入、觀點取替、同理感受與個人受苦感四個向度。研究結果發現邊緣性人格患者在同理心、情緒覺察、憂鬱情緒和人際親密關係能力的分數均低於正常控制組。迴歸分析後結果顯示邊緣性人格患者組，與正常控制組不同，其同理心中的觀點取替對人際親密中的衝突處理具有較大解釋力，因此若能協助邊緣性人格患者從不同角度看待人際間之互動，將能有效改善其人際關係。英文摘要：Borderline personality disorder (BPD), the most common type of personality disorder encountered in clinical practice, manifests in impairment of social interactions and interpersonal relationships. Past insecure attachments may cause interpersonal relationships to break down and negative interpretations to develop, which in turn may lead to more severe conflicts. The aim of the present study is to assess the factors of depression, empathy, and emotional awareness that affect interpersonal intimacy in patients with BPD as compared to controls, and to explore whether different patterns of factors cause the impairments of interpersonal intimacy in patients with BPD. Thirty patients diagnosed with BPD by psychiatrists and thirty healthy subjects in the comparison group participated in the study. Subjects were assessed with the assessment of separation-individual inventory, interpersonal competence questionnaire (ICQ), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II), interpersonal reactivity index (IRI), and levels of emotional awareness scale (LEAS). The ICQ includes five subscales: initiation, negative assertion, disclosure, emotional support, and conflict management. The IRI includes four subscales: perspective taking (PT), fantasy (FS), personal distress (PD), and empathic concern (EC). The results showed that scores on empathy, emotional awareness, depression, and interpersonal intimacy were lower in patients than in controls. Regression analysis showed that lower performance in PT may explain the impairment of interpersonal intimacy in patients with BPD. Thus, our results suggest that strengthening the ability of perspective taking may help to improve the interpersonal relationships of patients with BPD.起始頁-結束頁：123-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會6篇名：國小資優生與一般生復原力保護因子之比較研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of Gifted Elementary School Students' and Non-gifted Students' Resilience Protective Factors作者：王琡棻(Shu-Fen Wang);盧台華(Tai-Hwa Lu)關鍵字：國小一般生;國小資優生;復原力保護因子;gifted elementary school students;non-gifted elementary school students;resilience protective factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在了解國小資優生與一般生復原力保護因子之差異情形。研究者以叢集抽樣方式隨機抽取高雄市國小資優生與一般生共980名為對象，並採用王琡棻、盧台華與吳裕益（2011）編製具良好信效度的「兒童復原力保護因子量表」作為資料收集之工具。本研究主要發現有：1.國小資優生與一般生之復原力保護因子會因年級的不同而有顯著差異，且均有隨年級增長而逐漸下降之趨勢。2.在同年級之資優生與一般生之比較方面，三年級資優生在「父母資源」、「師長資源」與「自我效能」等層面之表現均顯著高於三年級一般生；然五年級一般生在「樂觀」分層面顯著高於五年級資優生；四與六年級則無顯著差異。3.就各年級資優生之比較方面，三年級資優生在「父母資源」、「師長資源」、「鄰居資源」、「自我效能」、「人際溝通能力」與「問題解決能力」等層面均顯著高於五、六年級資優生。4.就各年級一般生的復原力保護因子分析發現，三年級一般生在「鄰居資源」層面顯著高於六年級一般生；四年級一般生在「師長資源」、「鄰居資源」與「自我效能」等層面均顯著高於五年級一般生，且在「師長資源」與「鄰居資源」層面亦顯著高於六年級一般生。英文摘要：This study examined the resilience protective factors of gifted and non-gifted elementary school students in Taiwan. All 980 students from 11 elementary schools responded to the Children's Resilience Protective Factor Scale. Four main results were found. First, the results indicated that resilience protective factors showed a gradually declining trend in higher grades for both gifted and non-gifted elementary school students. Second, the gifted third graders reported greater parental resources, teacher resources, and selfefficacy than those who were non-gifted third graders. However, non-gifted fifth graders reported more optimism than those who were gifted fifth graders. There was no difference among gifted and non-gifted fourth and sixth graders. Third, among gifted students, third graders reported more parental resources, teacher resources, neighborhood resources, self-efficacy, interpersonal communication ability, and problem-solving ability than those who were the fifth and sixth graders. Fourth, among non-gifted students, third graders reported more neighborhood resources than sixth graders; fourth graders reported more teacher resources, neighborhood resources, and self-efficacy than fifth graders as well as reported more teacher resources and neighborhood resources than sixth graders.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會7篇名：青少年婚暴子女分離個體化發展及其所知覺之家庭結構並列篇名：The Development of Separation-Individuation of Adolescents Exposed to Marital Violence and Their Perceptions of Family Structures作者：吳東彥(Dong-Yann Wu);林繼偉(Chi-Wei Lin)關鍵字：分離個體化;青少年;家庭結構;家暴;婚暴;adolescent;domestic violence;family structure;marital violence;separation-individuation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在從目睹父母親婚姻暴力之青少年的觀點來探討婚暴家庭的家庭結構，以及青少年婚暴子女分離個體化的發展主題與內涵。研究者採用現象學方法進行資料分析。研究結果發現婚暴子女對家庭成員投以大量的關注與涉入。為了阻止和調解衝突，子女們時常忽略自身需求。長期的心理負荷趨使他們離開；同時，他們又因感情牽繫或照顧責任，不時萌生返家的念頭以求安心。由於目睹婚暴是個相當沉重的經驗，為了避免重蹈覆轍，他們試圖發展出與父母親不同的性格與行為，抗拒承襲現狀。也有受訪者長期目睹父母間的婚暴力，而養成自己支持弱勢的傾向。另一個重要現象則是子女們在人我關係中的矛盾。一方面他們被家庭經驗所催化早熟獨立，另一方面卻仍有依賴和親密的需求，但礙於缺乏信任而僅能與人維持表淺關係。最後，根據研究的歷程與結果，研究者提出個人省思與相關建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the family structure of marital domestic violence from the perspective of adolescents who witnessed their parents' domestic violence and to explore the themes of these adolescents' separation-individuation processes. A phenomenology research method was adopted to analyze the interview transcripts reported by 9 participants. The results of the family structure showed that the participants paid a great deal of attention to their family members. In order to prevent and mediate conflict, they were often deeply involved at the expense of ignoring their own needs. While experiencing heavy psychological burdens pushed them away from home, an emotional tie and caring responsibility pulled them back intermittently. Witnessing violence between parents was extremely painful. In order to avoid repeated failure, the participants developed characters and behavior different from their parents. They also tended to support those who were in the disadvantaged group. On one hand, they were pushed to be independent from an early age. However, on the other hand, they still had a need to rely on and have intimacy with others. However, they could only keep a shallow relationship with others due to a lack of trust with others. Finally, based the process and outcomes of this study, we speculated our own reflections on this topic and provided relevant suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：27-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會8篇名：團體諮商工作同盟量表編製研究並列篇名：Development of Group Counseling Working Alliance Scale作者：謝麗紅(Lih-Horng Hsieh);林詠昌(Yung-Chang Lin)關鍵字：工作同盟;團體氣氛;團體諮商;團體諮商工作同盟;團體凝聚力;group climate;group cohesion;group counseling;group counseling working alliance;working alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在編製團體工作同盟量表，協助領導者了解與成員之工作同盟狀態，以發展為評估團體歷程之工具。研究者翻譯與修訂Marziali、Munroe-Blum與McCleary（1997）所編製之團體治療同盟量表（GTAS），藉由反覆翻譯法以及專家效度檢核形成預試量表，題項共為36題。量表針對團體諮商成員進行預試，共獲得有效問卷274份，預試所得資料進行鑑別力分析、項目分析，以及驗證性因素分析，將不適當的題目刪除後形成正式量表32題。正式量表評估團體諮商成員對於團體的工作同盟感受程度，共獲得有效問卷318份。研究結果顯示，本量表α係數為.95，經驗證性因素分析及考驗量表之收斂效度及區辨效度，並以團體氣氛量表、團體治療性因素量表－對團體正向的感覺分量表作為效標，進行效標關聯效度考驗。本量表與團體凝聚力之積差相關係數為.725，與團體氣氛量表之投入分量表.576，逃避.182，衝突-.267，整體而言具有良好之信度及效度。本量表在內容向度因素上分為：目標、任務、聯結，在人際系統向度上分為：成員與領導者、其他成員與領導者、成員與其他成員、及整個團體與領導者的關係，為3×4之因素矩陣。最後，本研究針對量表應用，以及後續研究進行討論並提出相關建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop a group counseling working alliance scale (GCWAS), which helps the group leaders understand their working alliance with members and can be used as a measure to evaluate the group process. By the translation and back translation method and expert validity check, the authors translated and modified the Group Therapy Alliance Scale (GTAS) originally developed by Marziali, Munroe-Blum, and McCleary (1997). There are 36 items in this original scale. Through a pilot study with 274 samples, only 32 items would be used in the formal scale after a factor analysis. A total of 318 participants were involved in this study to evaluate their attitude toward the group counseling working alliance. The results revealed that the Cronbach's α of the GCWAS was.95. Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was used to examine the fitting indices for this scale and validity was evaluated by the convergent validity and discriminant validity. A significant correlation was found between GCWAS and group climate. In addition, a significant correlation was found between GCWAS and the positive feeling for the group. The correlation between GCWAS and cohesion was .73. The correlation between GCWAS and engagement, avoidance, and conflict was .58, .18, and -.27 respectively. In general, GCWAS has sound psychometric property regarding its reliability and validity. Moreover, these results identified that the three domains in the Content Dimension are (a) Goal, (b) Task, and (c) Bond; the four domains in the Interpersonal Dimension are (a) Member and Group Leader, (b) Other Members and Group Leader, (c) Member and Other Members, and (d) Group and Group Leader relationships. These two dimensions form a 3×4 matrix. Finally, the implications of this scale and future research directions were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會9篇名：大學生涯資訊系統CVHS-M1評估研究：生涯行為、輔導意涵與影響並列篇名：An Evaluation Study of CVHS-M1 Career Information System: Career Behavior, Guidance Implementation & Impact作者：王思峰(Sy-Feng Wang);吳濟聰(Ben Ji-Tsung Wu);夏侯欣鵬(Hsin-Peng Shiahhou);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);鄔榮霖(Rong-Lin Wu);周志明(Chih-Ming Chou);蔡秦倫(Chin-Lun Tsai)關鍵字：人境契合;生涯諮商與輔導;生涯資訊系統;歷程－資源模式;career counseling and guidance;career information system;P-E fit;process-resource model期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：與一般輔導與諮商領域相比較，生涯發展的促進與協助不僅需要自我資訊，更需要環境資訊，沒有生涯資訊系統，很難真正做好生涯輔導與諮商，然而，國內對於生涯資訊系統的研究卻顯得稀疏不足。本研究以輔大CVHS-M1的1425位樣本資料，聯合不同資料源，進行評估研究。CVHS-M1大抵具有提高轉系成功率之潛力，但不會顯著增加轉系人數；透過分析大學生的生涯行為與其輔導意涵，本研究亦嘗試揭露引入生涯資訊科技所引發（或可以引發）輔導工作方式與服務範疇之漣漪式變化與影響。最後，本文亦討論了教育部強力推行UCan系統之方法學問題，強調不當使用生涯資訊科技亦會帶來負面困擾與影響，並呼籲生涯學界應更加重視生涯資訊科技所帶來的影響與挑戰。英文摘要：Compared with the area of counseling psychology, career counseling requires not only knowledge about self, but also knowledge about the environment. Without a career information system (CIS), it is difficult to really do a good job in career guidance and counseling. However, studies on CIS are sparse and insufficient in Taiwan. This purpose of this paper was to evaluate the CVHS Module 1 (CVHS-M1), which is a CIS developed by Fu-Jen University. The career behaviors of 1425 samples are analyzed with multiple data sources. Results from this evaluation showed that CVHS-M1 had a potential to increase the successful rate for the transfer of a major but would not significantly increase the number of students who transfer to a different major. In addition, the results discussed the impact of CIS on the working model and the ranges of service for career counseling. Finally, the methodology problems and the negative impacts of the UCan system that is supported and promoted by the Ministry of Education are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：95-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會10篇名：駐地實習諮商心理師對諮商關係的覺察與反應歷程並列篇名：A Study on the Awareness of Counseling Relationship and the Process of Reaction for Counseling Psychology Interns作者：李明峰(Ming-Feng Li);鄭麗芬(Li-Fen Jeng)關鍵字：反應歷程;諮商關係;駐地實習諮商心理師;覺察;awareness;counseling psychology interns;the process of reaction;therapeutic relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討駐地實習諮商心理師對諮商關係的覺察及反應歷程，採現象學取向，透過半結構深度訪談對五位受訪者進行資料蒐集，並以「整體－部份－整體」的分析法，歸納、統整所蒐集到的訪談資料。研究結果發現對諮商關係的覺察與反應歷程在晤談初期有「缺乏晤談方向的關係對自己心情產生干擾」、「關係不穩定導致界線分不清」、「關係的建立需花費精神」、「關係的靠近有賴真誠」以及「關係易建立，互動美好自在」；在晤談中期有「將負面感受置心中，保持鎮靜與一致性」、「彈性拿捏及釐清與個案的界線」、「諮商關係如同鏡子般映照出彼此的人際議題」、「對關係的知覺受到議題發酵及假期的影響」、「關係停滯不前徒增內心負面感受」以及「檢視互動關係及視框改變使諮商關係轉為輕鬆自在」；在晤談末期有「諮商關係結束的方式會有不同的面貌」。意義及影響為「自我有所成長，拓展看待人事物的角度」及「學習歷程中摸索前進，啟發未來諮商專業」。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the awareness and reaction process of counseling relationships for counseling psychology interns. According to the phenomenology research approach, the data was collected by semi-structured interviews from five interviewees. In the initial stage of counseling, five themes were identified, (a) interns feel emotionally disturbed due to no clear counseling goals and directions, (b) unstable therapeutic relationships cause unclear boundaries between interns and their clients, (c) establishing therapeutic relationships require efforts and energies, (d) relationship closeness depends on genuineness, and (e) interns feel comfortable to interact with their clients when it's easy to establish the therapeutic relationship. In the middle stage of counseling, six themes were identified, (a) interns remain calm and consistent while holding negative emotional arousal during counseling sessions, (b) interns flexibly deal with therapeutic relationship and make clear their professional boundary with clients, (c) therapeutic relationships reflect clients enacting their interpersonal patterns toward interns, (d) interns increase their awareness of their client's interpersonal patterns through understanding more about their clients' issues during and between sessions, (e) interns who feel stuck in therapeutic relationships experience an increase in their negative emotions, and (f) examining their therapeutic relationship and putting emphasis on the positive character of client make their therapeutic relationship free and easy. In the final stage of counseling, interns had different aspects regarding the meaning and influences of termination. That is, (a) interns feel a sense of personal growth and broaden their perspectives toward people and things and (b) interns explore and learn from this process and become inspired to become a professional helper in the future.起始頁-結束頁：127-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：The Governance of Social Enterprise in Taiwan: An Analysis Based on 2010 Survey Findings and Four Cases並列篇名：台灣的社會企業治理研究：2010年調查資料及四個個案分析作者：官有垣(Yu-Yuan Kuan);陳錦棠(Kam-Tong Chan);王仕圖(Shu-Twu Wang)關鍵字：社會企業;治理;非營利組織;董事會;執行長;social enterprises;governance;nonprofit organization (NPO);boards of directors;chief executive officer (CEO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：47期出版年：2014中文摘要：在台灣，社會企業目前是處於成長的階段，且組織形式與活動內容愈來愈多樣化。當台灣的非營利機構設立其社會企業單位時，解決失業問題與舒緩貧窮是其兩大努力的目標。為了要對台灣的社會企業之發展有更進一步的探索，作者認為將研究焦點置於社會企業的治理相關議題乃有其重要性。因此，本文的目的在於探索台灣社會企業的治理，而分析的重點包括治理的結構與功能、董事會的組成以及執行長的角色，以及董事會與執行長角色與功能的制度性調整等動態議題。本文分析所依據的資料為作者於 2010年所從事的台灣社會企業全國性調查資料，以及台灣的四家工作整合型社會企業的領導者之深度訪談資料。四個個案的治理研究發現，第一，社會企業的社會使命的實踐很顯著地被擺放在最核心的地位；第二，社會企業的董事會的組成結構並不會因為設置產銷營運單位而有所調整；第三，多數社會企業已成立專責單位來執行特定的業務，並與組織內其他的部門合作；第四，執行長的專業程度以及產銷營運單位主管之管理或產品與服務銷售與分配經驗，與社會企業的發展的好壞具有高度的相關。英文摘要：Social enterprises in Taiwan are in a stage of growth, and are becoming more diversified. Solving the problem of unemployment and alleviating poverty seem to be two major goals pursued by NPOs when they set up a social enterprise. In order to make further inquiry into the development of social enterprises within the Taiwanese community, we consider it significant to shed light on the issues of the governance of social enterprises. As a result, this paper aims to explore the governance of social enterprises in Taiwan, including the analysis of several dimensions on issues such as the dynamics of the governance structure and function, board composition and CEO, and institutional adjustments in the board and CEO within the social enterprise sector in Taiwan. The data used for this paper come from surveys conducted in 2010. In addition, this paper will be supplemented by a collection of the qualitative data from interviews with key leaders (e.g., board members and CEOs) of four social enterprises in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201409_(47).00012篇名：影響基層官僚組織服務品質的因素：政府服務品質獎的資料分析並列篇名：Investigating the Factors Affecting the Service Quality of Street-Level Bureaucracies: An Analysis of the Applicants and Winners of Government Service Quality Award作者：曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng);趙書賢(Shu-Hsien Chao)關鍵字：基層官僚組織;服務品質改善;公共服務績效;政府服務品質獎;新公共管理;street-level bureaucracies;service quality improvement;public service performance;Government Service Quality Award;new public management期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：47期出版年：2014中文摘要：這是一篇初探性研究的論文，旨在探究為何某些基層官僚組織會比其他組織的服務績效更為卓越？新公共管理主張公共組織應該建立績效導向的文化，服務品質改善遂成為公部門改革運動的重要一環。既有文獻對於服務品質的測量與管理策略已有不少討論，卻殊少聚焦在制度系絡與組織屬性對於服務品質改善造成之潛在影響。基此，本研究主張組織領導與管理這類軟性／後天因素固然重要，但制度與結構等硬性／先天因素也不宜輕忽。方法論上，本研究以歷屆（2009-2013年）「政府服務品質獎」作為資料來源，針對曾參獎和獲獎的「第一線服務機關」自行建立研究資料庫。研究結果發現參照對象、行政區域，以及員工總數等先天因素，確實對基層組織服務品質的改善構成顯著影響。對於上述發現之意涵與限制，本研究也提出一些討論。英文摘要：This study is intended to be a preliminary investigation of the factors influencing the service performance of street-level bureaucracies. Since advocates of the New Public Management assert that public organizations have to create a performance-oriented culture, service quality improvement gradually becomes an integral part of the reform movement in the public sector. Although much attention has been paid to the measurement of service quality and the issue of managerial strategies, the relationships between institutional context and organizational attributes and service quality improvement have as yet received relatively scant attention. To bridge the potential knowledge gaps, the authors argue that soft factors (i.e., leadership and management) and hard factors (i.e., institution and organization) are both crucial factors in determining public service performance. Methodologically, the authors establish a data set in accordance with the application records related to ”the Government Service Quality Award” (2009-2013) of ”the street-level bureaucracies”. Three significant factors, including reference groups, administration regions, and the number of long-term public employees, are identified and explicated, with research limitations also being discussed.起始頁-結束頁：35-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201409_(47).00023篇名：「聞聲救苦」或「濫用靈性」？職場靈性影響組織行為之實證研究－以文官靈性為中介變項並列篇名：An Empirical Study of the Influence of Workplace Spirituality to Organizational Behavior: Spirituality of Individual Public Officials as Intermediate Variable作者：吳宗憲(Chuang-Hsien Wu)關鍵字：職場靈性;組織承諾;工作滿意度;倫理決策;個人靈性;workplace spirituality;organizational commitment;job satisfaction;decision-making ethics;individual spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：47期出版年：2014中文摘要：過往研究證實，現代企業組織引進靈性，的確能有效提升員工的正向組織行為，然而靈性對於私部門可能造成的傷害，如操控員工倫理以及強迫異己改宗等問題，卻僅有少數文獻予以正視。而揆諸政治史，無論在政治哲學或者政策執行面，原本靈性的價值便是扮演重要角色的，因此前述操控靈性與改宗的問題，會使文官在執行某些道德政策時，產生更嚴重的副作用，然而，相關學術議題在過往「政教分離」傳統下，選擇避而不談。本研究與過往研究不同者，除將檢閱靈性正向效用文獻外，也系統性整理靈性負向問題之文獻，並且將研究對象由私部門職員轉移為政府文官，並將過往由個案研究所得出的負向倫理行為論述，以量化研究進行驗證，最後，研究結果將說明靈性對文官組織行為產生的複雜兩面性關係。英文摘要：Previous studies have proven that modern enterprise organizations can effectively promote staff members' positive organizational behavior by introducing spirituality into the workplace. However, only a few studies have investigated the potential harm that spirituality can do to the private sector, such as manipulating employees' ethics and forcing infidel proselytism. When we review the history of politics, religious spirituality used to play a very critical role in both political philosophy and policy implementation. Therefore, nowadays, manipulating employees' ethics and forcing infidel proselytism may cause negative effects when public officials implement certain moral policies. Nevertheless, related academic issues are not allowed to be discussed due to the tradition of ”secularism”. Distinctive from previous investigations, this study not only reviews the positive effects of spirituality, but also systematically identifies existing literature which takes into account negative effects. In addition, public officers rather than private employees are targeted. A quantitative method is applied to validate propositions that have been extracted in previous case studies. Finally, this study characterizes the complicated two-faced relationship in demonstrating how spirituality influences public officers' organizational behavior.起始頁-結束頁：73-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201409_(47).00034篇名：全球貪腐傳染之空間分析：以世界銀行貪腐控制指數為例並列篇名：Analysis on Global Corruption Contagion: A Case Study of the Control of Corruption作者：廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao)關鍵字：貪腐研究;傳染效果;地理資訊系統;空間自相關分析;貪腐控制指數;corruption studies;contagion effects;geographical information system;spatial autocorrelation analysis;control of corruption期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：46期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去少數針對全球貪腐傳染的研究已經發現，在控制其他相關因素下，某個國家或地區的貪腐程度會與鄰近地區的貪腐程度呈現正相關。然而，目前並未有任何研究針對全球貪腐傳染可能的所在區域進行探索。因此，本研究根據貪腐具有傳染性的假定出發，利用空間統計進行經驗性的分析。使用global Moran's I與Getis-Ord's local Gi*針對世界銀行（World Bank）全球治理指標（world governance indicators, WGI）中貪腐控制指數（control of corruption），進行空間自相關分析（熱點分析），比較不同年度中世界各國貪腐現象群聚的分布狀態與變化趨勢。研究結果顯示，貪腐現象在亞洲與非洲確實產生範圍擴張且群聚增強的傳染現象。在亞洲，近十幾年來貪腐傳染擴散的範園，僅有小幅度的擴張。反之，非洲則慢慢開始傳染蔓延到北非與西非各國。至於強度方面，無論亞洲或非洲皆有貪腐群聚強度增強的總體趨勢。其次，在針對廉潔的群聚區域分析則發現，其擴散蔓延的現象在歐洲與北美洲並不明顯，甚至有群眾範圍縮小的趨勢。但是，大洋洲的澳洲與紐西蘭則形成另一個顯著的群眾。至於，廉潔群眾強度的變化是較小的。歐洲的捷克、英國與北美洲的加拿大、美國都有廉潔群聚強度轉弱的趨勢。反觀大洋洲的澳洲與紐西蘭，群眾強度則為漸增的情況。英文摘要：A small literature confirms the contagious effect of corruption, and finds that a lower national level of corruption is associated with a lower regional measure of corruption, as measured by the average level of corruption in one country's neighbors. This study assumes that corruption is contagious, and uses the spatial statistics to carry out an empirical analysis. Using the spatial autocorrelation methodologies, including global Moran's I and Getis-Ord's local Gi*, this study maps and compares spatial clusters for the control of corruption index form World Bank's global governance indicators (World Governance Indicators, WGI) in different year. The results show that the corruption is indeed having significant contagion and strong cluster in Asia and Africa. The scope of corruption cluster in Asia only expands a little during the last decade. However, the corruption cluster is slowing beginning to spread to North and West African. In general, the strength of corruption cluster in Asian and Africa is getting higher. Secondly, corruption well-control cluster is found not obvious spreading in Europe and North America, even cluster is getting narrow. However, Australia and New Zealand form another significant integrity cluster. Although the strength of integrity cluster is changing little, the strength of integrity cluster in Czech Republic, the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States is decreasing a little. On the contrary, the strength of integrity cluster in Australia and New Zealand are increasing.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201403_(46).00015篇名：台灣警務人員之工作使命感研究並列篇名：The Study of Sense of Calling in Police Officer in Taiwan作者：李芸蘋(Amber Yun-Ping Lee);陳以亨(I-Heng Chen);陳先郡(Hsien-Chun Chen);陳啟文(Chi-Wen Chen)關鍵字：使命感;工作負荷;工作滿意;警務人員;台灣;The sense of calling;Workload;Work satisfaction;Police officer;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：46期出版年：2014中文摘要：使命感的意義與重要性近年來逐漸受到重視，但相關研究卻有限。有鑒於警務人員向來被認為在工作上必須具備使命感，才能真正服務社會大眾，是故本研究透過探討警務人員使命感與工作負荷及工作滿意的關係，試圖了解使命感對工作所產生的影響，並進一步釐清使命感所代表的意義。本研究以台灣警務人員為樣本發放問卷，並利用階層迴歸進行驗證假設。研究結果發現，男性、已婚且年齡與年資較長，以及階級較高的警務人員，使命感較為強烈。此外，使命感除了能正向影響工作滿意，也會提高工作負荷，但工作負荷的高低並未顯著改變使命感與工作滿意之間的關係。最後，本研究建議從華人文化的角度重新檢視使命感所代表的意義，並針對研究結果提出理論與管理實務上的意涵。起始頁-結束頁：29-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201403_(46).00026篇名：公告土地現值制度變遷之分析及其對市價徵收政策之影響並列篇名：Institutional Change of Current Assessed Land Value and Its Impact upon the Price for Eminent Domain作者：陳建元(Simon Chien-Yuan Chen);李秀珍(Xiu-Zhen Li)關鍵字：公告土地現值;按市價徵收;新制度經濟學;公共選擇;制度變遷;Current Assessed Land Value;Market-Price basis Eminent Domain;New Institutional Economics;Public choice school;Institutional change期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：46期出版年：2014中文摘要：從民國101年9月1日起所有土地徵收將按市價補償，徵收制度正式與實施近50年的公告土地現值制度脫鉤。這新舊制度之轉軌，舊制度必遺留一些問題且伴隨新制度所產生的新問題，都將是新制度必須要克服的挑戰。因此，本文以新制度經濟學派中之公共選擇理論的觀點，探討影響公告土地現值制度變遷的制度性結構因素為何？以及其所遺留之舊問題對新制度有何可能的衝擊？為本文探討的重點。本文發現公告土地現值制度的變化，確實如公共選擇理論所認為的，乃是以政治市場的邏輯推動其制度演化的方向，尤以政治人物與官僚機構的利益為優先考量。因此，爾後接近市價的改革如兩價分離與估價比率制，不但沒有成功，反而造成一些怪象，如集中調高公告土地現值於免稅地與農地，而高都市化與新興發展潛力之地區，其地價則依然遠低於市價。因此，以政治考量與利益為優先是讓公告土地現值制度無法與市場脈動做連結的主要障礙，公告土地現值演變到最後竟使有些地區土地其加成補償高於市價，而新制之按市價徵收之價格反而可能較舊制低，其所遺留的問題對新制反而造成衝擊。基此，未來如何讓市價徵收制度之設計，其市價認定須能降低政治力之干擾，則新制度才可長久。同樣地，客觀處理舊制度遺留之問題亦是在於避免政治或行政力過度的介入，才可使新舊制度順利轉軌。英文摘要：The eminent domain system in Taiwan has been transferred to market price basis since September 2012. This significant change means that the government-led Current Assessed Land Value (CALV) system, which has been implemented almost fifty years ago, was no longer the benchmark of compensation for eminent domain. However, during the transiting period of institution change, the new institution has to tackle all problems coming from new and old systems. Thus, the main purpose of this paper intends to explore what is the driving force behind the institutional change of CALV in the perspective of public choice theory, which will let us understand how the old problems were created and how correction might be made. Findings show that the main driving forces influencing the institution changes of CALV was from politicians and bureaucrats' intervention as public choice suggests. Therefore, the CALV operated by political principle is incapable to keep pace with the fluctuation of marker price. The past institutional reforms of CALV trying to reduce the gap between market transaction prices not only never succeed but also created many unintended consequences. This consequence including the agriculture land and other counterparts were raised up their current assessed land value much more than other types of lands because these lands do not need to pay associated land tax. However, other lands where are located in high density urban area and new developing districts were not adjusted to shorten the gap between the market price. Therefore, these problems are due to the very different nature between political organization and market institution. The corrections for these old problems and new challenges are obviously based on how Market-Price basis Eminent Domain policy can create a system with less political influence but with more impartialness by adding more market practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：59-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201403_(46).000301篇名：主編的話作者：趙永茂期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：公民投票與鄰避困境－台灣低放射性廢棄物貯存場的選址經驗及南韓之啟示並列篇名：Referendum and NIMBY Dilemma: The Experience of Siting Low-Radiation Wastes in Taiwan and the Enlightenment of the South Korean Success作者：邱崇原(Chung-Yuan Chiu);湯京平(Ching-Ping Tang)關鍵字：資訊經濟學;社會學習;制度承載力;貝式法則;資訊階流;information economics;social learning;institutional capacity;Bayesian rule;information cascade期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：市民拒絕嫌惡性設施在鄰近地區設置的鄰避現象，是民主制度在本質上難以處理的困境。而在民主化的情境下，以往長期便宜行事的政府，可信賴度仍受到民眾的質疑，導致選址決策的協商更為困難。從這個角度思考，南韓2006年成功地選定低放射性核廢料永久貯存場址，則製造了一個理論上的驚奇：為什麼公投這樣的民主機制能夠解決民主化過程中的鄰避困境？本文以資訊經濟學的觀點，透過深入訪談台灣負責核廢選址的官員與台電工作人員，分析鄰避困境的根源，並解釋南韓為何能以志願的方式順利解決選址的爭議。本研究發現，這類協商在民主化情境中最大的挑戰，在於政府和社會間的信任不足，加以先驗理念的干擾，使資訊傳遞失真。透過細緻的公投制度設計，以及配合的條件，可能抑制先驗信念的影響，讓「競標賽局」得以成形，並透過社會學習的機制翻轉原先傾向於對抗的主流意見。對於台灣而言，如何讓兩個以上的地方政府志願考慮提供場址，則為競標賽局成局的關鍵。本研究並藉此分析台灣現有制度的問題。英文摘要：It is common in a democracy that the citizens tend to reject the siting plan of potentially harmful or risky facility in their backyard. Such NIMBY (not-in-mybackyard) dilemma poses an even greater challenge in a newly democratized polity in which governments fail to gain trust from the citizens because of the malpractices of their authoritarian antecessors. While many regimes have thought of using referendum to solve this problem, issues such as ”tyranny of the majority” and environmental justice are entangled to prevent this solution from being effective as indicated in the lengthy struggles in Taiwan. From this perspective, the success of South Korea is valuable in revealing possible conditions for using referendum as a means to cope with the NIMBY problem.. The study points out some game theoretical analysis of possible factors for referendum to serve as a useful mechanism and collects empirical data from both Taiwan and South Korea to substantiate its arguments.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：永續社區治理能力指標體系之建構並列篇名：Sustainable Community Indicators System-Building of Governance Capacity作者：江大樹(Ta-Shu Chiang);張力亞(Li-Ya Chang)關鍵字：永續發展;環境治理;社區營造;治理能力指標;政策德菲法;Sustainable Development;Environmental Governance;Community Empowerment;Indicators of Governance Capacity;Policy Delphi Method期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：在極端氣候變遷的時代中，植基於地方社群意識與日常生活，以社區為主體的「永續社區」治理模式，乃是實踐環境治理重要途徑之一。然而，如何精確引導並定期檢核社區實際運作過程，得以持續反省並修正環境治理的各項推動策略？「永續社區治理能力的指標建構」應是一項深具運用價值的政策工具。這類指標體系的設計與推廣，已廣泛流行於歐美各國環境治理社群之間。本文旨在探討永續社區治理能力指標體系如何建構與運用的相關課題。筆者採取文獻回顧、比較分析、政策德菲等三種研究方法，並以「治理能力建構的優位性」與「以生態為基礎的永續發展觀」兩個論點作為分析基礎，架構一個兼顧良善治理機制、生態環境保護、社區經濟發展、社區生活網絡、社區文化保存等5個面向、43項次級要素的永續社區治理能力指標系統。吾人殷切地期盼藉由這項指標體系的建構，能為環境治理與社區營造的學理及實務，注入若干嶄新的討論題材。英文摘要：In the age of climate change, sustainable community is an important lifestyle to promote environmental governance. However, it must be measured precisely, those community organizations would recognize their daily life situations, and review the capacity of community governance. Now, the sustainable community indicators system-building of governance capacity had been a popular policy tool in the Europe and America. The aims of this study are to highlight why and how to build an indicators system of governance capacity. In order to get this proposal well done, some research methods had been adapted, such as literatures review, comparative analysis and policy Delphi method. Also, we discuss two theories of governance capacity-building and eco-sustainable sense. The authors build a sustainable community indicators system of governance capacity that includes 5 dimensions and 43 indicators, such as to build the mechanism of good governance, to protect the eco-environment, to develop the community economy, to network the community life, and to conserve the community culture.起始頁-結束頁：37-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：解嚴後台灣勞動體制的發展－新竹科學園區的個案分析並列篇名：The Development of Labor Regime after Democratic Transition of 1987: A Case Study of Hsinchu Science Industrial Park作者：林倩如(Chien-Ju Lin)關鍵字：勞資關係;人力資源管理策略;新竹科學園區;industrial relations;human resource management strategies;Hsinchu Science Industrial Park期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：在台灣經歷1987年解除戒嚴之後，大部分台灣勞動體制的學者將研究焦點集中在以勞工為主體和勞工運動的討論。有趣的是，這一連串的勞工運動卻避開零工會組織的高科技產業聚集地：新竹科學園區。事實上，園區的勞資關係是相對的和諧且穩定。傳統的以勞工為主體的研究無法解釋為什麼新竹科學園區在1987年之後能夠長時間的維持一個穩定的和諧勞資關係？為什麼在長時間的工作下，新竹科學園區卻很少聽到大量的勞資糾紛？這個研究不再從以勞工為主體的角度出發，而是嘗試著從另外一個角度：管理者的角色、價值和管理策略來檢視管理者如何將員工和管理者的衝突面降到最低，並且建立起穩定的和諧勞資關係。管理者的策略主要包含兩個面向。第一個面向是建立上層的策略性決策（strategic decision making），這個上層的策略性決策是受到國家體制的支持，進而再度鞏固和強化公司內部的上層管理策略。第二個面向是制定下層的工作現場的管理策略，即是零工會的人力資源管理策略。儘管台灣零工會的人力資源管理策略是受到美國加州矽谷的影響，但是人力資源管理策略並無固定的型態和模式，並且以各種不同的形態普遍存在各個不同國家的工作現場。不同於加州矽谷透過團隊或者族群網絡來分化勞工，台灣的管理者企圖建立起個人化的勞資關係。英文摘要：Taiwan's scholars have long shown great interest in labor capacity when discussing various labor movements in Taiwan's industrial relations since the nation's democratic transition of 1987. Interestingly, the storm of labor movements skipped the Hsinchu Science Industrial Park (HSIP), which concentrated its business in the non-unionized high technology sector. In fact, industrial relations at the HSIP were largely peaceful. However, existing labor studies with their emphasis on labor capacity insufficiently explain how the HSIP escaped the series of labor movements after 1987, and why workers who had spent long careers at the HSIP offered little collective resistance. Rather than focusing on labor capacity, this paper thus employs an alternative perspective, the role of employers and management strategies, to examine how employers brought together segments of capital and labor through a diversity of human resource management strategies. This diversity of management strategies involved two aspects. First, high tech industrial managers took advantage of Taiwan-style profit sharing and stock ownership to strengthen firms' top-tier of strategic decision making with the support of national institutions. Second, this paper recognizes that human resource management strategies often differ from country to country, while Taiwan's human resource management strategies draw from the experiences of Silicon Valley. Rather than fragmenting workers into teams and ethnic networks as in Silicon Valley, Taiwanese managers established individual labor and management relations to avoid collective labor representation and labor activities.起始頁-結束頁：85-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：伊斯蘭、民主與軍人政治－以巴基斯坦為例並列篇名：Islam, Democracy, and the Military Junta: A Case Study of Pakistan作者：陳偉華(Wei-Hua Chen)關鍵字：巴基斯坦;政治伊斯蘭;伊斯蘭民主;文武關係;軍人干政;Pakistan;Islamic Democracy;Islamic Democracy;Political Islam;Civil-Military Relationship;Military Intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：民主是否相容於伊斯蘭？在「茉莉花革命」之後，再度引燃學界的爭辯火花，亦帶給世人一種盼望中的存疑。儘管近年透過民主程序取得執政權的伊斯蘭政黨並不罕見，惟政治體制與宗教勢力的實證研究仍然令人感到困惑。藉由釐清「伊斯蘭與民主」的對應關係，本文探究伊斯蘭國家中各種政治勢力的互動關係，另慮及軍人集團對於伊斯蘭民主實踐具有重要影響，繼以梳整軍人干政與文武關係的研究文獻，從既有理論和案例推究伊斯蘭民主與軍人政治的關聯構面。環顧既往，有關伊斯蘭民主討論聚焦於中東伊斯蘭國家的實踐經驗，對於南亞民主轉型的政治伊斯蘭（political Islam）研究則相對薄弱。爰此，本文嘗試構築「伊斯蘭民主分析框架」，佐以近年巴基斯坦民主發展進行案例檢視，期盼為南亞民主化研究提供另一種參照觀點。英文摘要：Is democracy compatible with Islam? Since the outbreak of the ”Jasmine Revolution,” this question once again sparked a series of debates amongst the academia and brought forth to the world a sense of doubt in such aspiration. Over recent years, it has not been uncommon to see Islamic political parties acquire their right to govern via democratic processes; however, empirical studies into political systems and religious influences remain baffling. By clarifying the correspondence between ”Islam and democracy,” the present paper probes into the interactive relations among various political forces in Islamic states, and in addition, considering that military juntas have important implications with respect to the practice of Islamic democracy, by sifting through research literature on military intervention on politics and on civil-military relations, the present paper attempts to deduce the correlative dimensions between an Islamic democracy and a military junta. Past discussions pertaining to Islamic democracy focused on the practical experiences of Islamic states in the Middle East, while studies on political Islamism in transformative democracies of South Asia are relatively lacking. For this reason, the present paper attempts to construct an ”analytic framework for Islamic democracy” and, in combination with a case study on the recent democratic developments in Pakistan, aims to provide another perspective for studies on South Asian democratization.起始頁-結束頁：111-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：霸權共享或秩序重構？一個利維坦與比蒙共處的時代作者：徐子軒期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：161-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：世界民主大事紀期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：171-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：主編的話作者：趙永茂期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：民主與環境治理－一個遴選集團理論的解釋並列篇名：Democracy and Environmental Governance: A Selectorate Theory Explanation作者：張文揚(Wen-Yang Chang)關鍵字：民主;遴選集團理論;二氧化碳;甲烷;環境治理;democracy;selectorate theory;carbon dioxide (CO_2);methane;environmental governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：民主國家是否在環境治理上的表現較佳？儘管過去的理論與實證研究發現民主國家在政治、社會與經濟方面表現較好，但在環境問題上卻仍未取得統一的見解。本文擬加入這場辯論，並以人均二氧化碳排放量與使用能源產生的甲烷兩者作為環境指標，檢驗196個政治實體在1980－2012年的環境表現。實證結果支持政治上愈民主的國家或地區愈能降低二氧化碳與甲烷排放量的假設。推究其原因，本文認為以「政治人物首要目標為政治生存」為假設的遴選集團理論，解釋了政體之間的環境表現差異。為能持續執政，民主國家需要提供包括環境品質的公共財，以滿足多數人民的需求。另一方面，非民主國家的政治人物為了持續執政，僅需要滿足少數在政權存續中扮演關鍵角色的利害關係人即可，提供公共財並無法延續其政治生命。這其中的差異部分解釋了為什麼民主國家的環境品質較非民主國家好。英文摘要：Do democracies perform better in environmental governance? Though theories and empirical studies confirm that democracies have better political, social and economic performance, whether or not this superiority applies to environmental issues is still far from consensus. This paper joins the debate by using carbon dioxide emission per head, and energy-related methane as environmental indicators, and testing 196 political entities' environmental performance during the period 1980-2012 empirically. Statistical results find that politically, more democratic entities can reduce CO_2 and methane emissions. The reason behind these findings is attributable to the selectorate theory, which is based on the assumption that ”political survival is the utmost important goal.” In order to stay in power, politicians in democracies have to provide public goods that include environmental quality. Non-democratic politicians can survive simply by satisfying stakeholders who play critical roles in regime survivability, and therefore there is no such need to focus on public goods provision. This difference explains why environmental quality in democracies is better than that in non-democracies.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：半總統制不同政府類型下的二元行政關係－臺灣與羅馬尼亞的比較研究並列篇名：Government Type and Dual Executive System under the Semi-Presidentialism: Comparative Study of Taiwan and Romania作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen)關鍵字：半總統制;內閣會議;否決權;臺灣;羅馬尼亞;semi-presidentialism;cabinet meeting;veto power;Taiwan;Romania期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：半總統制已經是世界上最多民主國家採用的憲法架構，尤其是新興民主國家。此一憲政類型最大的特徵，就是行政權的二元化設計。在理論上，因為二元行政的架構，搭配立法權的互動，可以型塑出許多不同的比較框架，尤其是依據二元行政的對抗、合作或從屬關係，來界定往總統或是往總理傾斜的可能。這些情況可以簡略稱之為總統化、議會化或是共治。探究二元行政的互動，最大的變數在於總統的憲政角色、總統的黨政權力、以及選舉後的權力消長。如果總統掌握黨政權力，作為實質領導者，則依選舉結果可能出現總統化或共治；如果總統在二元架構中僅扮演儀式性角色，則往議會制傾斜。本文旨在分析半總統制不同類型的政府型態下，總統影響政府決策、內閣會議議題設定、總統法案否決權的使用等的異同。藉由臺灣與羅馬尼亞兩個新興民主的憲政發展情況，進一步討論兩國總統的影響力與角色，並據此分析二元行政的運作方向。英文摘要：Semi-presidential constitution has been adopted by most newly democracies in the past two decades. Compare with the presidential system and the parliamentary system, a dual executive system structured by a president and a prime minister (PM) which is the most important institutional features of the semi-presidentialism. Therefore, a semi-presidentialism might be similar to a presidential system if the president is the real leader of the government and be independency from the parliament (a presidentialized semi-presidentialism). On the country, it might be similar to a parliamentary system if the PM is the real leader of the government and be supported by a parliamentary majority (a parliamentarized semi-presidentialism). Moreover, it might be also conflict between president and PM (cohabitation). These subtypes depend on the role of the president and the result of the election. This paper would like to discuss the relationship between the president and the PM. According to comparing on the institutional design and the policy making by the cabinet meetings, we can clarify the role and the influence of the president.起始頁-結束頁：41-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：日本選民政黨支持與投票抉擇：小泉執政時期參眾兩院選舉的分析並列篇名：Party Support and Voting Choices: An Analysis of Japan's House and Councilor Elections under Koizumi's Premiership作者：黃紀(Chi Huang);郭銘峰(Ming-feng Kuo);王鼎銘(Ding-Ming Wang)關鍵字：日本國會;眾議院;參議院;定群追蹤資料;混合勝算對數模型;廣義混合勝算對數模型;Japanese Diet;House of Representatives;House of Councilors;Panel Data;Mixed Logit;Generalized Mixed Logit期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：民主國家的選舉，選民的投票抉擇，長久以來都是學界研究關懷的重要課題。選民投票抉擇的動態變化，不僅攸關不同政黨勢力的起伏，也具體反映出一國政黨體系演變的軌跡。也因為這種演變的狀況對民主發展的模式與軌跡各具不同的意義，國內外學界對此皆具高度濃厚興趣，不論是從理論概念的測量界定、研究設計與分析方法的開拓，抑或是各國實證資料的廣泛蒐集，都累積相當豐碩的成果。本文聚焦於我們東亞鄰國的日本，探討21世紀初期在小泉純一郎首相領導執政時期之下，國會參眾兩院選舉之選民投票抉擇與影響要因。本文評估小泉執政時期的選民投票抉擇，透過混合勝算對數（Mixed Logit）與廣義混合勝算對數模型（Generalized Mixed Logit）等的分析比較，我們發現廣義混合勝算對數模型是較合適的模型，因為該模型能同時考量選民在偏好上的異質性、以及相同政黨偏好在投票抉擇上展現不同幅度的不確定性。該模型的分析顯示：在控制了制度的因素後，政黨情感溫度計、政黨支持、小泉魅力等，都是這期間左右選民投票穩定的關鍵要素。此外，廣義混合勝算對數模型所特有的「尺度異質」更指出，儘管政黨支持是影響日本選民投票抉擇的重要因素，但其影響力又會因人而異，例如同樣是認同自公聯盟者，有人較篤定投給該黨、但也有人較多變。這樣的結果，除了呼應既有國內外選舉文獻之觀點外，我們採用的小泉執政時期完整的跨時序定群追蹤資料，也更延伸並豐富了現有對日本選舉行為的觀察。英文摘要：Elections and voting behavior have been enduring subjects in studying democracies. Electoral stability and volatility not only shape the faith of individual political parties, but also the evolution of the party system as a whole. Hence topics related to party support and voting choices, both methodological and substantive, have attracted attention from scholars around the world. This study focuses on the voting choices in Japan's bicameral system under Junichiro Koizumi's governance in the early 21st century. By employing the panel data from the Japanese Election Study (JES III), we analyze four waves of House and Councilor elections from 2001 to 2005. By comparing Mixed Logit (MXL) and Generalized Mixed Logit (GMXL) models, we find that the GMXL model is the most appropriate tool in analyzing Japanese longitudinal voting behavior because it can simultaneously take into account the ”individual's preference heterogeneity” and ”scale heterogeneity across individuals” of party identification. The results of the GMXL model indicate the significance of the party feeling thermometer, party identification, and Koizumi's leadership in influencing Japanese voting choices while controlling the bicameral institution variable. More importantly, although the GMXL analysis confirms many findings in the previous literature on party identification in influencing voting behavior, such as how the voters behave in supporting the LDP-Koumei Coalition, the GMXL model further captures both preference and scale heterogeneity in the Japanese voters' utility function, i.e., some voters behave with greater variation while others behave more consistently. These results not only enrich the existing Japanese electoral literature, but also contribute to the methodology of studying voting choices in general.起始頁-結束頁：1-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201412.18(2).1-782篇名：台灣民眾對左右意識型態的認知：以統獨議題取代左右意識型態檢測台灣的政黨極化並列篇名：Citizens' Perceptions of the Left-Right Ideology in Taiwan: Replacing Left-Right Ideology with the Unification-Independence Issue to Measure Taiwan's Party Polarization作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao);鄭夙芬(Su-Feng Cheng)關鍵字：左右意識型態;統獨議題;政黨極化;指數建構;left-right ideology;unification-independence issue;party polarization;index construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：Dalton（2008）利用左右意識型態光譜建構「政黨極化指數」（party polarization index），有效偵測出一國政黨體系的實質運作與影響。但以該指數測量台灣政黨體系的運作時，卻發現台灣的政黨極化程度相對「穩定趨中」（stable and modest），與台灣藍綠政黨衝突對立的政治現況格格不入。之所以如此，主要在於左右意識型態雖是歐美民主國家最重要的政治分歧，但甚少在台灣的政治氛圍中出現，台灣藍綠政黨的分歧主要存在於兩岸統獨議題。因此，本研究利用認知訪談及調查資料，分析台灣民眾對左右派的認知，並調整Dalton的政黨極化指數，以統獨議題取代左右意識型態，檢測台灣的政黨極化程度。研究結果發現，大多數的台灣民眾確實不知道，甚至誤解左右派的意涵，以致Dalton的政黨極化指數無法真實反應台灣政黨競爭的現況，反之，若以統獨議題取代左右意識型態，則可適切反應出台灣政黨競爭的實際樣貌。這意味著在進行跨國比較分析時，除了追求指數建構的一致性外，仍須兼顧不同國家的實際政治氛圍，讓指數在適用上更具彈性及測量效度。英文摘要：To assess interparty competition in democratic politics, Dalton (2008) constructed the ”party polarization index” based on a left-right ideology. The partisan divide between the pan-Blue and pan-Green camps in Taiwan has been sharp and acute since the 1990s. This observed reality contradicts the stable and modest prediction based on Dalton's index. To explain the difference, it is hypothesized that public opinion in Taiwan rests not on a left-right ideological continuum but on the issue of independence versus unification. This study utilizes cognitive interviews and data from a survey conducted in Taiwan to examine its citizens' perceptions of left-right ideology in an attempt to adjust Dalton's party polarization index. This research shows that most of Taiwan's citizens are unfamiliar with, and sometimes misunderstand, the meaning of left-right ideology. The majority of the respondents cannot place themselves or identify the major parties' positions on a left-right ideological continuum. The result indicates that Dalton's party polarization index is inappropriate when it comes to examining Taiwan's interparty competition due to the validity issue in measurement. By replacing the indicator of left-right ideology with that of the respondents' positions on the unification versus independence issue, this study shows that Dalton's index can better assess interparty competition in Taiwan. The implication of the findings from this study is that the index construction needs to adapt to different political contexts.起始頁-結束頁：79-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201412.18(2).79-1383篇名：全球化了台灣的什麼？國際化與台灣的政治經濟變遷並列篇名：What Has Been Globalized? Internationalization in Taiwan作者：薛健吾(Alex Chien-Wu Hsueh);林千文(Chien-Wen Lin)關鍵字：台灣;全球化;國內補償;新自由主義;黃金緊身衣;全球治理;Taiwan;Globalization;Domestic Compensation;Neoliberalism;Golden Straitjacket;Global Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本篇文章利用Dani Rodrik（2011）的「世界經濟的不可能的三角」理論架構，透過台灣的經驗資料來檢視Geoffrey Garrett（1998）對於全球化對國內政治和經濟衝擊的經驗研究結果是否仍然能夠在近四十年來台灣面對全球化的經驗上依然成立。我們發現，台灣參與全球化的過程與OECD（Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development）國家參與全球化的經驗並不相同。在布列頓森林體系崩解之後，OECD國家在全球化的壓力下仍然維持著國內補償，並且走向了全球化不可能三角的右邊，透過國際整合與國際政策協調等「全球治理」的方式來減少市場開放所帶來的國內衝擊，其國內政策並未被全球化逼到「新自由主義」的底限。但與OECD國家不同的是，在全球化的壓力下，台灣的國內政策受到了相當大的限制：台灣在國際政治上的困境使台灣難以走向全球整合治理，台灣在國內選舉上的困境使台灣難以拋棄國家認同的議題，台灣在經濟上依賴國際貿易的困境又使台灣無法選擇有限度地加入全球化，所以在全球化的過程中，與OECD國家的腳步不同，台灣逐漸地走上了三角型左邊的「黃金緊身衣」之路，主要靠著透過削減生產成本維持經濟的成長，所犧牲的是全球化所帶來的社會衝擊。本文的研究發現也突顯出，台灣與OECD國家在全球化經驗上的不同，與中國在經濟上與國際政治上對台灣所施加的結構性限制有關。在這個國際結構的困境沒有改變的情況之下，本文的理論認為，台灣全球化的前景難以翻轉，很難透過自身單方面的國內政治或是政策上的改革來把「黃金緊身衣」的發展方向調整至「全球治理」的道路上。英文摘要：In this article we apply Rodrik's (2011) theoretical framework of ”The Political Trilemma of the World Economy” to investigate whether Garrett's (1998) finding concerning the OECD countries' experience of globalization can still hold in Taiwan. We find that Taiwan's globalization process is different from that in the OECD countries. After the collapse of the Bretton Woods System, in ”The Trilemma” framework, the OECD countries walked along the path of ”global governance,” successfully mitigating the negative impact of globalization on society through international integration and international policy coordination. Differing from the OECD countries' experience, China precluded Taiwan from joining in the global governance; Taiwan's main social cleavage has precluded politicians from paying attention to domestic compensation issues; and Taiwan's small scale domestic market has precluded the government from limiting the degree of globalization. Therefore, Taiwan is gradually walking along the path of the ”golden straightjacket.” By walking along this path, Taiwan maintains its economic growth and competitive ability mostly by reducing the costs of production and transactions in ways that include cutting down the domestic compensation and social welfare. As a result, the government sacrifices the losers due to globalization and pays the price of neglecting the negative impacts of globalization on society. This study also demonstrates that it is a structural predicament that precludes Taiwan from choosing the path of ”global governance.” Therefore, as long as the status quo remains so, it is very difficult for Taiwan to unilaterally switch from the path of the ”golden straightjacket” to that of ”global governance” simply through domestic political reform or policy change.起始頁-結束頁：139-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201412.18(2).139-2154篇名：探討氣候變遷與內戰嚴重程度的關連性：以溫度差異為例，1960∼2006年並列篇名：Climate Change and Civil Conflict Severity: The Case of Temperature Variability, 1960~2006作者：張文揚(Wen-Yang Chang)關鍵字：氣候變遷;內戰嚴重程度;全球暖化;溫度差異;climate change;civil conflict severity;global warming;temperature variability期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：氣候變遷是否會導致死傷程度更嚴重的內戰？近年來氣候變遷與衝突研究學者將氣候議題觸角伸至內戰的研究之中，並且大致同意氣候變遷（例如溫度變化與降雨型態改變）可能引發內戰。然而，目前他們的討論僅及於氣候對內戰發生的機率，但對於內戰發生後是否變得更為嚴重則仍未有進一步的討論。本文以1960<U+223C>2006年的130場內戰為對象，並以溫度差異作為氣候變遷的代理變數，探討溫度變化對內戰嚴重程度的影響。實證研究發現，當年均溫與過去半世紀的平均溫度之間差異增加時，內戰變得更為嚴重。探究其原因可能是境內團體或人民受到氣候變遷加劇，導致經濟來源變得更為不穩定；在政府與叛亂團體都必須設法取得較為穩定的經濟來源，而政治勢力更需要在資源變少的情形下鞏固政權，雙方不管是訴求推翻政府、部分領土獨立或是較大程度的自治等，都必須發動更猛烈的攻勢，但也因此導致更嚴重的死傷。本文的發現將進一步提供氣候治理與衝突預防等政策啟示。英文摘要：Will climate change lead to militarily severe civil conflicts? In recent years climate change and civil conflict scholars have extended their discussions to whether or not climate change increases the onset of civil war and a general consensus has been reached. However, it is still not clear if climate change (such as temperature and rainfall fluctuations) also leads to bloodier results if civil conflicts have begun. Using 130 civil conflicts during the 1960~2006 period, and temperature deviation as the proxy variable for climate change, this paper examines whether climate change affects the severity of civil conflict. The empirical findings confirm that when the difference between the average temperature of the year in which civil conflicts start and that of the past 50 years increases, civil conflicts become bloodier. Possible reasons are economic and political concerns triggered by resource scarcity because of climate change. This forces both the government and belligerent groups to fight harder in order to maintain or change the current situations, respectively. The final section of this paper offers policy implications and directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：217-269資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201412.18(2).217-2695篇名：The Effect of Political Campaign Activities on the Knowledge Gap in Taiwan: A Case Study on the 2008 and 2012 Presidential Elections並列篇名：政治競選活動的知識效果與對於知溝的影響：以2008年與2012年的總統大選為例作者：邱師儀(Albert Shih-Yi Chiu)關鍵字：政治知識;競選活動;教授知識;觀察知識;知溝理論;political knowledge;campaign;taught;surveillance effect;knowledge gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：政治知識做為選民的認知基礎，以進行有意義與有品質的政治參與。對於希望提升民主品質的有識之士而言，探索哪些政治知識題目較容易答對？與哪些政治知識在一段時間之後較容易學習？的確為一個重要課題。本文的問題意識在三方面：第一、在一段時間的觀察之後，是否有哪些特定的政治知識種類廣為人知？與經過一段時間之後較容易學習？第二、不同教育程度的受訪者之間是否存在著政治知識鴻溝？這些鴻溝在不同的政治知識項目上有何不同樣貌？第三、政治競選活動是否顯著地幫助低度政治知識選民去學習？長期而言，接觸政治競選活動越頻繁，是否能夠縮小低度政治知識選民與高度政治知識選民之間的知識差距？也就是所謂的知溝彌合論。本文的研究發現為：美國總統的名字與台灣行政院院長的名字皆為觀察知識。只是前者為簡單知識，後者為簡單可以學習的知識。此外，「何者為釋憲機關」因為其教科書知識的特質，而較難學習。此外，如果給予低度政治知識受測者一些時間去學習「時事知識」，則這群受測者會顯現出縮小與高度政治知識受測者之間的知識差距。最後，電視競選廣告與總統電視辯論會提供低教育程度組學習機會，也成為知溝彌合的可能因素之一。本文的研究設計採用了跨區分析與條件式固定效果邏輯斯分析雙軌並陳的方式，企圖獲取代表性與因果性的研究發現。英文摘要：For ordinary citizens, political knowledge serves as a prerequisite for meaningful political participation. Thus, types of political knowledge that are easy to know and easily learned over time among voters are of particular importance to those who long for an informed citizenry. Three research questions are asked. The first is whether or not a specific type of political knowledge is easily known and easily learned over a period of time among respondents. The second concerns the extent to which a knowledge gap exists between different population segments measured by education, and how this gap exists when it comes to different types of political knowledge. The third question is whether campaign activities have the function of helping the low educational group to improve in political knowledge and ultimately close up the knowledge gap. The research findings are such that both the U.S. president's name and the Taiwan premier's name are the surveillance fact, and the former is easy fact and the latter is the easily learned fact. On the other hand, knowledge about constitutional interpretation is relatively hard to pick up given that it has the nature of taught fact. Moreover, if given time to digest, the low educational group is likely to catch up with the high educational group when it comes to the surveillance fact. In this case, the knowledge gap tends to disappear. Last, but not least, campaign news on TV and televised presidential debates help the less educated to learn and serve as another possibility for closing up the knowledge gap. This study is based on one-shot cross-sectional analyses as well as conditional fixed-effect logistic regressions for its empirical examination.起始頁-結束頁：271-342資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201412.18(2).271-3426篇名：台灣環境運動的法律動員：從三件環境相關判決談起並列篇名：The Legal Mobilization of Taiwanese Environmental Movements作者：王金壽(Chin-Shou Wang)關鍵字：法院;社會運動;律師;社會改革;行政權;court;social movements;lawyer;social reform;executive期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文的主要目的在指出，台灣環境運動有從街頭走向法院的趨勢，但想要透過司法訴訟來促使社會變遷，則存在著侷限性。在社會運動制度化下，因環境評估的正當性危機、社會運動動員能力弱化，與確立司法獨立之下，環境運動的戰線從決戰環評拉長到決戰法院。欲以司法訴訟作為有效的社會改革途徑，除了支援體系的存在、法律動員，與司法的支持外，亦須考量立法權與行政權等政治力。在台灣，因為法院是被動角色與缺乏司法可問責性的情況下，政治力的干擾使司法更難發揮社會改革動力的作用。縱使法院判決有意促進社會變遷，關鍵卻取決於後續行政權的執行與否。倘若行政權不予支持，或消極不履行判決的話，司法作為一種改革變遷的動力，將受到相當限縮。英文摘要：There is a new trend in the Taiwanese environmental movements: using litigation to achieve their goals. There are several factors which have facilitated the new trend. They include the crisis of the legality of an Environmental Impact Assessment, the decline in the mobilization of social movements, judicial independence, and the appearance of environmental lawyers. Although environmental lawyers and social movement organizations have won several lawsuits, the impacts of victories in courts are limited. The major obstacle faced by the judiciary as a dynamic of social reform is the resistance from the executive.起始頁-結束頁：1-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201406.18(1).1-727篇名：選制變革前後立委提案的持續與變遷：一個探索性的研究並列篇名：Change and Continuity in Legislators' Bill-Introduction before and after the Reform of the Electoral System: An Exploratory Analysis作者：盛杏湲(Shing-Yuan Sheng)關鍵字：選制改革;複數選區單記不可讓渡投票制;單一選區相對多數制;混合制;立法提案;electoral reform;SNTV;single member district plural system;mixed electoral system;bill-proposing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：2005年6月我國立委選制從複數選區單記不可讓渡投票制與政黨比例代表制的混合制改為單一選區相對多數與政黨比例代表的混合制，那麼，此一選舉制度的變革，究竟對立委的立法行為是否產生改變？本篇論文以立委縱貫第五、六、七屆（自2002年2月到2012年1月）的提案為分析焦點，探討立委的提案行為在選制變革後是變遷或持續。本研究有幾個研究發現：首先，新選制下立委的提案更形踴躍，每個立委每會期的平均提案數大約是過去的三倍之多，且無論在哪一類型的提案數都有增多的趨勢，因此可以說新選制增強了立委原有的提案動機。其次，新選制下立委在提供普遍性利益的提案比例增加，而提供特殊性利益的提案比例降低，顯示在新選制下，由於立委必須去獲得選區50%以上選民的支持，因此提高了其以提供普遍性利益的立法提案，去尋求最大多數人支持的動機，此一發現支持中間選民定理，亦即在主要競爭者是兩個且在單一選區相對多數選制下，競爭者的議題立場有往中間靠攏的趨勢。然而，根據立委提案的規模與立委用在立法院的時間與資源來觀察，立委提案數的大幅提升，與提供普遍性利益的立法提案比例增加，並非意味著立委對立法問政的更加用心，也並非意味立法品質的提升。英文摘要：Taiwan's electoral system was in June 2005 reformed from a mixed system of a multi-member district single non-transferable vote (SNTV) plus a closed-listed proportional representation system to a mixed system of a single member district plural system plus a closed-listed PR system. Do legislators' representative styles and behavior change because of the electoral reform? In this article, I focus on the bills introduced by legislators from the Fifth to the Seventh Legislative Yuan (from February 2002 to January 2012) to explore whether legislators change or continue their behavior of bill introduction. Several research findings are worth highlighting. First, legislators under the new electoral system introduce even more bills than those under the old system. The number of bills is about three times that of before. This shows that the new system has reinforced the tendency for the legislators to have the incentive to pursue a personal vote. Second, legislators under the new system have a grea incentive to introduce general interest bills. This reflects the fact that legislators under the new system have a motive for attracting more than 50 percent of the voters so that they are motivated to propose general interest bills. This finding supports the median voter theorem: under a two competitor race in a single member district plural system, competitors have the incentive to take the position of the median voter. However, most bills introduced by legislators have only 1 to 2 articles and most of them are small-scale amendments so that legislators do not have to spend too much time and resources. Therefore, the increasing number of bills proposed by legislators does not mean that legislators are directing more efforts towards legislation, nor does it mean that the quality of legislation is enhanced.起始頁-結束頁：73-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201406.18(1).73-1278篇名：訪員如何影響訪問績效？一個互動式的觀點並列篇名：Discovering the Caracteristics of a Good Interviewer: Analyzing the Performance of Interviewers from Their Interaction with Respondents and the Survey Environment作者：林啟耀(Kah-Yew Lim)關鍵字：調查研究;面訪;單位無反應;項目無反應;多層分析;survey research;face-to-face interview;unit nonresponse;item nonresponse;multilevel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：訪問品質一直是調查研究者所關心的重要問題，如何維護訪問品質，降低拒訪率與降低問卷無反應率都是研究者努力的方向。以面對面訪問所進行的調查研究來說，最重要的三個元素莫過於訪員、受訪者與情境，因此這三者的特徵對於調查研究的影響正是本研究所關心的焦點之一。本研究結合上述兩類行為者特徵，再加上訪問區的情境因素，並且從互動式的觀點，探討這三者間的互動如何影響訪問的成功與否以及訪問內容的完整性。透過多層模型的建立與分析，本研究發現相對於沒有做過任何訪問的訪員而言，有做過TEDS（Taiwan's Election andDemocratization Study, TEDS）的訪員比較能取得受訪者的同意受訪，尤其是都市化程度愈高的訪區差異愈大。另外，有做過 TEDS訪問的訪員比沒有做過訪問的訪員，在低都市化地區與面對低教育程度受訪者時，問卷項目無反應率也較低。訪員的性別因素也是影響訪問績效的重要因素。相對於女性訪員，男性訪員顯然更容易被拒訪，尤其是在面對女受訪者時。但是，訪員的性別差異並沒有反映在他們的問卷完整性上。在其他的因素方面，本研究也發現受訪者的年齡愈高愈可能拒訪，且問卷無反應率也越高。男性受訪者比女性受訪者更傾向接受訪問，在問卷無反應率方面也比女性受訪者來得低。本研究所關注的訪區因素方面，都市化程度愈低的訪區，受訪者比較傾向接受訪問，但是他們提供有效答案的比例也顯著較都市化程度較高地區的受訪者低。另一個訪區因素，即訪區的犯罪率則沒有造成任何的顯著影響。本研究認為，倘若研究者愈能夠掌握訪員、受訪者與訪問區域的元素，且愈了解這些元素之間彼此的互動，則愈有利於調查研究上人力的安排。英文摘要：The quality of survey research is the researcher's main concern and he always tries to reduce the refusal rate and item nonresponse rate. The interviewer, respondent and survey environment are the most important factors affecting the result of a face-to-face interview. This article analyzes the characteristics of these factors and their interaction in deciding the result of a face-to-face interview. Using the multilevel model, the analysis reveals that the interviewer who had TEDS interview experience was significantly more successful in persuading the respondent to accept the interview, compared to those who had no experience at all. The difference is more significant when the respondent is coming from a highly-urbanized area. The experienced interviewer has a lower item nonresponse rate than one without experience, when the respondent has less education or the respondent is from an area with a low degree of urbanization. Compared to the female interviewers, the male interviewers are more likely to be refused, especially when they meet female respondents. Besides, male respondents have both a lower unit nonresponse rate and item nonresponse rate. A respondent from a highly urbanized area is more likely to refuse the interview, but a respondent from a less urbanized area has a higher item nonresponse rate. Finally, this paper suggests that those researchers who engage in survey research should obtain as much information about the interviewer, respondent and environment as they can.起始頁-結束頁：129-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201406.18(1).129-17901篇名：魯曼行政官僚系統理論之初探並列篇名：A Study on Niklas Luhmann's Administrative-Bureaucratic System Theory作者：黃鉦堤(Jeng-Ti Huang)關鍵字：魯曼;視角結構系統;自我再製;政治系統;行政官僚系統;Niklas Luhmann;functional-structural system;autopoiesis;political system;administrative-bureaucratic system期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：魯曼的兩個行政官僚系統理論不具有論證一致性。最明顯的是，魯曼前期行政官僚系統理論是以視角結構系統理論作為基礎理論，因此將行政官僚系統視為一個可被外界調控的視角結構系統。相反的，魯曼後期行政官僚系統理論是以自我再製系統理論做為基礎理論，因此將行政官僚系統視為一個不可被外界調控的自我再製系統。除此之外，這兩個理論對於將行政官僚系統定位為政治系統的核心領域這件事，有不同的處理方式。魯曼前期行政官僚系統理論採用明確的處理方式，因為它將研究重點聚焦於行政官僚系統的系統／環境－差異。然而，魯曼後期行政官僚系統理論採用含蓄的處理方式，主要理由是它將研究重點轉移至全社會系統、政治系統及其內部分化，而且只將行政官僚系統視為政治系統之內的一個次次系統而已。英文摘要：Niklas Luhmann had constructed two theories of administrative-bureaucratic system (ABS), which were lack of argumentative consistency. The first ABS-theory was based on the functional-structural system theory, and therefore the ABS was regarded as a functional-structural system, which can be steered by outsider. On the contrary, the second ABS-theory was based on the autopoiesis system theory, and therefore the ABS was regarded as an autopoietic system, which cannot be steered by outsider. In addition, the two ABS-theories had totally different approaches to position the ABS in the core field of the political system. The first ABS-theory had an explicit approach, because of its emphasis on the system/environment-difference of ABS. In contrast, the second ABS-theory had an implicit approach. The reason for that was the shift of its main focus, which was transfered into society, political system and its system-differentiation, and in the meanwhile the ABS was only a sub-subsystem in the political system.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：美牛內臟爭議的有限論理解並列篇名：What's the ”Beef”? A Finitist Analysis of the Taiwanese-US Beef Controversy作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang);黃瑞祺(Richard Ruey-Chyi Hwang)關鍵字：有限論;愛丁堡學派;科技與社會;牛肉;內臟;牛雜;finitism;the Edinburgh School;STS;beef;internal organs;offal期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：2003年美加等地相繼爆發狂牛症疫情後，我國即採取相應措施，禁止疫區相關肉製品的進口。在疫情受到控制之後，我國也開始逐步鬆綁對美國牛肉的管制，並於2009年與美國簽訂「台美牛肉議定書」。此議定書進一步放寬限制，允許帶骨牛肉與牛肉內臟輸台。消息一出，眾皆譁然。為回應民意，立法院遂於議定書簽訂後的兩個月，火速三讀修正食品衛生管理法，明令禁止頭骨、腦、眼睛、脊髓、絞肉、內臟等六項高風險部位進口。此禁令的立法意旨是希望藉由提高保護水平，來達成增進全民健康的目的，並最終收到定紛止爭之效。未料，修法過後爭議非但沒能止息，反而延伸出美牛風暴的案外案，即本文所討論的：美牛內臟爭議。不管是學界、政界和輿論界，各方對諸如牛舌、牛睪丸、牛鞭等部位，到底是不是食品衛生管理法中所明令禁止的「內臟」發生爭議。相關風險評估報告的定義欠缺與主管機關前後不一的發言，也讓美牛內臟的指涉範圍，呈現眾說紛紜的狀態。為釐清此內臟事限論的政策意涵，分析有限論對未來類似爭議的啟發。件引發的問題，本文擬採取科技與社會（Science, Technology and Society，簡稱STS）學門中愛丁堡學派（Edinburgh School）的有限論（finitism）觀點來分析此問題，希望揭示出內臟等概念及意義，本來便是不固定的；除此之外，本文也嘗試討論有限論的政策意涵，分析有限論對未來類似爭議的啟發。英文摘要：In October 2009, the Taiwanese government signed a protocol with the US. In this protocol, Taiwan agreed to lift all its BSE-related bans on the US beef. This decision however invited bitter opposition and brought increased pressure on the Legislative Yuan (the Taiwanese Parliament). Two months after the protocol signed, the Legislative Yuan amended the Act Governing Food Sanitation and reintroduced some BSE preventative measures, one of which is banned some internal organ parts from importation. This amendment however provoked an even bitter controversy: whether a cow's tongue, tail, penis, testicles, etc fall into the regulated category of internal organs or the unregulated ”offal” group. This article applies the concept of finitism to analyzing the aforementioned controversy. It argues that meanings are always under creation and recreation; therefore there are no meanings that can be taken for granted. For finitists, meanings of a word or concept, say offal, can never be ”fixed” by decisions or definitions. Given that finitism raises profound questions about the nature of knowledge and meaning, it is argued that finitism is a new departure point for refocusing our regulatory thinking.起始頁-結束頁：55-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：論跨機關管制行政之政策協調：賽局理論的觀點並列篇名：An Analysis of Policy Coordination of Cross-agency Regulatory Administration: A Game Theoretic Perspective作者：廖洲棚(Zhou-Peng Liao)關鍵字：管制行政;跨機關執行;政策協調;賽局理論;空間模型;Regulatory administration;Cross-agency implementation;Policycoordination;Game theory;Spatial model期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：管制行政為政府的核心功能之一，其透過直接的命令控制或間接的經濟誘因等方式干預民眾行為，達成預定的管制政策目標。隨著多元化社會的發展，管制政策目標多涉及數個行政機關權責，使得愈來愈多的管制行政呈現出跨機關執行的型態。本文從賽局理論的觀點，運用空間模型演繹跨機關管制行政的政策協調邏輯。作者先從管制政策的制度特徵，定義管制行政的空間結構以及參與管制行政機關的效用模型。其次透過賽局空間模型的演繹，推導出八項跨機關管制政策協調的研究命題。文末則依據研究成果提出數項具公共管理意涵的研究發現以及後續的研究建議。英文摘要：Regulatory policy is one of the government core function by which it intervenes in citizen's behaviors through direct command and control regulation or indirect economic incentives to achieve the policy goals. However, owing to the development of a plural society, a regulatory policy usually not only involves in several agencies' goals, but also involves in cross-agency implementation. This article addresses to explain the crossagency regulatory policy coordination by using a game theoretic approach. First, the author defined the space structure of regulatory implementation from the characteristics of the institutions of regulatory policy. Second, the author used the concept of utility loss to propose the utility function of an agency which implements a cross-agency regulatory policy. Third, a spatial model of game theory was used to interpret the logic of policy coordination in cross-agency regulatory administration and deduced 8 propositions. Finally, this article provided several managerial implications for public managers and suggested some research designs and methods for future study.起始頁-結束頁：89-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：另類的地方政府改革模式？從歐洲比較觀點分析法國基層政府改革之獨特性並列篇名：Alternative Reform Model of Local Governments? Analysis on Uniqueness of Reform of Basic-level Governments in France from European Comparative Perspective作者：郝培芝(Pei-Chih Hao)關鍵字：分權化改革;基層政府改革;法國地方政府;市鎮聯合體;市鎮規模;decentralization reform;basic-level government;French localgovernment;intercommunalite;scale of community期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：在歐洲分權化（decentralization）改革運動中，最基層自治組織亦歷經改革，其中最主要的問題是市鎮規模是否進行調整以及如何增進其競爭力。在擴大市鎮規模的主流思潮影響下，歐洲大部份國家主要是朝向減少市鎮數量進行改革，擴大市鎮規模，以期增加基層政府的競爭力，並承載適當的地方政府職責。然而，作為歐洲單一制國家代表的法國，在分權化的改革脈絡下，對於基層政府改革卻產生完全不同的改革模式。法國在歷經幾波分權化改革，並未複製其他歐洲國家的改革模式，市鎮數量並未減少，在不更動既有市鎮規模與數量的前提下，採取的是強化市鎮間合作，設置新的市鎮聯合體（intercommunalite），在維繫單一制國家體制設計下，依據「權力下放」（deconcentration）原則，中央將職權下放給基層地方政府組織，並透過財政手段進行分權化改革的政策工具，作為促進地方政府自願合作的誘因，改革之後，法國新的市鎮間規模已經接近其他歐洲國家的市鎮規模，間接達成另一種市鎮規模的合理化（rationalization）改革，這些政策內涵構成了獨特的法式分權化改革模式（decentralisation a la francaise）。本文透過比較觀點，從歐洲經驗的比較中分析法國獨特的基層政府改革模式。英文摘要：In the reform movement of decentralization in Europe, the fundamental autonomous organizations also underwent reform. The most critical concerns are the adjustment of scale of communities and enhancement of their competitive advantages. With the influence of mainstream thoughts to expand scale of communities, most of the countries in Europe have attempted to reduce the number of communities and expand the scale in order to improve competitiveness of basic-level governments and undertake proper responsibilities of local governments. However, France, as the representative of unitary state in Europe, with the reform of decentralization, has totally different reform model in basic-level governments.After several reforms of decentralization, France does not reproduce reform models of other European countries. The number of communities is not reduced. With the same scale and number of communities, France tries to reinforce the cooperation among communities and establish new intercommunalite. Upon the design of unitary state, according to the principle of ”deconcentration”, the central government empowers basic-level local governments. By financial measures, it practices policy of decentralization as the incentive for local governments’ voluntary cooperation. After the reform, the new scale of communities in France is similar to those in other European countries. It indirectly results in rationalization of scale of communities. The policies form unique decentralisation a la francaise. From a comparative perspective, this study analyzes unique reform model of basic-level governments in France by comparing European experiences.起始頁-結束頁：127-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：行政暨政策學報第58期勘誤表期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：59期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：167-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：好的政體與民主並列篇名：The Good Polity and Democracy作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：好的政體;民主政體;政治理論;good polity;democracy;political theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：好的政體或好的政治秩序的問題，是政治理論在其最初發源處的核心問題。但隨著政治理論探討課題的日趨多樣化以及實證研究的勃興，好的政體的問題似乎逐漸被驅趕出它應有的核心位置。然而，改善群體生活是政治理論最終的實踐目標，而對於好的政體的理論探索又係改善群體生活的前置作業，因此，忽視好的政體的問題將會是政治理論的一大危機。本文將申論探討好的政體的重要性，並試圖從近代以降政治思想的主潮歸結出，「使人活得更有尊嚴」乃是當代世界裡的較合宜的評量好的政體的判別標準。再者，做為理念型的現代民主政體，實可被視為是當代的好的政體的候選項。不過，仍存在著諸多影響民主政體之良窳的內部因素，這在最終亦將決定特定的民主政體能否繼續保有做為好的政體之候選項的資格。英文摘要：The question of good polity or good political order was the core question of political theory during its founding period in ancient Greece. As the topics that political theory endeavors to deal with have become much more diversified, and also due to the extensive development of the positivist branch within it since the last century, this question has been tremendously marginalized, if not totally ignored. However, the improvement of collective life is the ultimate goal of political theory, and the theoretical investigation of good polity is the preparatory operations for achieving that goal. Therefore, to underestimate the question of good polity will render political theory insensitive and alien to its own nature, and also make its very existence a pale one. As a proponent of reviving the discourse of good polity, a la the legacy of Plato, this author tries to formulate the criteria of modern good polity and to evaluate whether modern democracy as an ideal type can be taken as a candidate of good polity in the contemporary world.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系7篇名：風險認知與核電支持度關聯性之研究：以福島核能事故後台灣民眾對核電的認知與態度為例並列篇名：A Study of the Relationship between Risk Perceptions and Attitude toward Nuclear Power: Taiwanese Understanding of, and Attitude toward Nuclear Power after the Fukushima Nuclear Accident作者：梁世武(Shih-Wu Liang)關鍵字：風險認知;風險社會;核電支持度;核能安全;福島核能事故;Support of nuclear power;nuclear safety;risk perception;risk society;Fukushima nuclear disaster期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：科技發展提升物質文明，也帶來風險，使人類進入風險社會。民眾對於科技的風險認知，會影響到對該科技的態度與行為。2011年日本福島核能事故後，台灣反核聲浪高漲，2013年政府宣佈不排斥以公投解決核四爭議，許多媒體也公布相關民調，引起許多討論。然而，民眾對於核能發電的支持度，主要是受到什麼因素影響呢？本研究嘗試建構風險認知多元迴歸模型解析台灣核電民意，結果顯示風險認知比使用人口變項具備更良好的解釋力。國內的核電民意調查，多半僅詢問民眾是否贊成使用核能發電，並從人口變項去進行分析討論。本研究則從風險認知理論著手，分析風險認知差異對核電支持度的影響。研究結果發現性別、政黨傾向等人口變項對核電支持度雖具一定解釋力（R^2=0.18），但風險認知的解釋力更為清楚直接（R^2=0.54）。在解釋民眾對核能發電的支持度時，除了核能安全外，還應考慮環境、災害、財務、社會、功能等5種風險認知構面，綜合6個構面而成的風險認知因素，是最主要影響民眾核電支持度的因素。英文摘要：Science and technology have enhanced the development of material civilization, but they also bring increased risks. After the 2011 Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan, antinuclear sentiment in Taiwan rose. In 2013, the Taiwanese Government announced that it might use a referendum to solve the fourth nuclear power plant dispute. This study constructed a multivariate risk perceptions regression model to resolve Taiwanese public opinion about nuclear power. The results exceeded explanations using only demographic variables. Most domestic nuclear power polls have only asked respondents if they favor nuclear power use. This study further analyzed differences in risk perception and support for nuclear power, and found that gender, political party preference, and other demographic variables had some explanatory power(R^2 = 0.18), but risk perception(R^2 = 0.54)explained nuclear power's support levels more clearly and directly. This study also suggested that the interpretation of public support for nuclear power, in addition to nuclear safety, had five dimensions of risk perception (including: the environment, disaster, financial, social, functional), integrated into nuclear power's six risk dimensions and effectively enhanced explanations for nuclear power's support.起始頁-結束頁：45-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系8篇名：促參承辦人工作動機和團隊關係對其工作態度的影響研究並列篇名：The Study on How the Public Staff's Working Motivation and Team Relationship Affect Work Attitude作者：吳宗憲(Chuang-Hsien Wu);黃浩瑋(How-Wei Huang)關鍵字：促進民間參與公共建設;公共服務動機;工作投入;組織承諾;private participation in infrastructure project;public service motivation;work involvement;organizational commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：政府2000年通過「促進民間參與公共建設法」，希望透過私部門的參與，以解決政府財政困窘問題，並增進公共服務的效率，惟因促參案件不確定性極高，使得承辦人相較其他公務員，暴露在難度更高的決策環境中，因而導致負面的工作態度。惟揆諸過往研究，多是由「外部顧客」角度思考促參問題，促參承辦人員之動機及行為的分析，過去並未有經驗研究可供參考，而成為學術研究的失落連結，本文希望能將該領域予以彌縫。經實證研究發現，個別的物質誘因、團隊支持以及公共服務動機，對於承辦人員的組織承諾及工作投入，都有正面效果，但其混合效果則呈現多元的排擠效果，是故，以往的政策工具會產生某些非預期效果。據此，本文對促參政策提出幾項政策建議，希望能使未來促參業務的推動更為順利。英文摘要：The government instituted the ”Act for Promotion of Private Participation in Infrastructure Projects (PPP)” in 2000, in hopes of solving financial shortness and increasing public service efficiency. However, the public servants dealing with PPP must face uncertainty situation, so their organizational commitment and work involvement are weaken. Most of academia and practitioners are derived from perspectives of ”external customers” like citizens and entrepreneurs. But neglecting the public staffs' attitude. Apparently, motivation and behavior of ”internal customers” (the public staff) are the key point to the PPP's problems. In this article, we identify individual factors like material incentives, team support, and public service motivation have surprising influence on the staff's organizational commitment and work involvement. However, mixing of different policy instruments will result in multiple ”crowded-out”, unexpected effects. In order to control them, we carry out some policy recommendations for private participation in public infrastructure.起始頁-結束頁：87-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系9篇名：臺灣基層醫療缺乏區域界定之初探：整合空間與非空間因素的分析並列篇名：Exploring the Definition of Primary Healthcare Shortage Areas in Taiwan: Integrating Spatial and Nonspatial Factors作者：廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao)關鍵字：醫療資源可近性;地理資訊系統;進階式兩階段流動搜尋法;因素分析;Geographic information systems;Healthcare access;Spatial Accessibility;Primary healthcare shortage areas期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究透過空間因素與非空間因素的整合思考，評估有關臺灣基層醫療的可近性。空間可近性著重患者與醫生在地理空間上的阻隔因素，而非空間性因素則包含了非地理空間上的阻隔或促進因素，例如年齡、性別、種族、貧窮、教育。本研究有關人口與社會經濟資料從臺灣2013年內政部之社會經濟資料庫取得，2012年基層醫療醫師資料則是由中華民國醫師公會全國聯合會提供。首先，本研究透過地理資訊系統以進階式兩階段流動搜尋法，計算出15公里開車範圍內的空間可近性指標。其次，因素分析則用來幫助本研究將各項的社經變數重新組合成兩個主要的因素：（1）社會經濟弱勢（2）高度健康需求。最後，本研究將整合這些空間與非空間因素，界定出臺灣基層醫療可能缺乏的區域，並與目前中央健康保險署2014年「西醫醫療資源不足地區改善方案」，以及2013年「全民健康保險山地離島地區醫療給付效益提昇計畫」進行對照。英文摘要：This study considers both spatial and nonspatial factors in examining access to primary healthcare in Taiwan. Spatial access emphasizes the importance of geographic barrier between patient and physician, and nonspatial factors include nongeographic barriers or facilitators such as age, gender, race, poverty, and education. The population and socioeconomic data are from the 2013 Ministry of Interior's Socioeconomic Database, and the 2012 primary care physician data are provided by the Taiwan Medical Association. First, an enhanced two-step floating catchment area method which is implemented in Geographic Information System (GIS) is used to measure spatial accessibility based on 15 km road distance. Secondly, the factor analysis method is used to group various sociodemographic variables into two factors: (1) socioeconomic disadvantages, and (2) high healthcare needs. Finally, spatial and nonspatial factors are integrated to identify areas with poor access to primary healthcare, and the findings are used to compare with the ”2014 Improving under Served Healthcare Resources” program and ”2013 Integrated Delivery System” program of National Health Insurance Administration.起始頁-結束頁：121-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：半總統制的總統任命權與免除權對於總理任期的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Presidential Appointment and Dismissal Power on the Duration of Prime Ministerial terms in Semi-presidentialism作者：李宜芳(Yi-Fang Li);石鵬翔(Peng-Hsiang Shih)關鍵字：半總統制;總理任期;總統權力;總統任命權;總統免除權;semi-presidentialism;duration of prime minister;presidential power;presidential appoint power;presidential dismiss power期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以34個半總統制的民主國家做為分析案例，時間範圍涵蓋1945至2012年，使用事件史分析，來探討總統單邊任命權和免除權，對於總理任期產生的影響。研究發現，單邊任命權對於總理任期的影響方向，取決於總統是否擁有免除權，亦即單邊任命權和免除權，對於總理任期有交互作用的影響。在總理總統制下，總統的單邊任命權會增加總理下台的風險；反之，在總統國會制下，單邊任命權可以降低總理下台的風險。造成單邊任命權和免除權出現交互作用的原因，可能是總統可以利用單邊任命權，選擇自己偏好的人選，進一步造成總理和國會之間互動方式的改變，進而影響總理任期的長短。這個研究發現，除了可以解釋總統單邊任命權的影響外，還可以解釋先前學界對於總統任命和免除總理職務的爭論。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to explore the effects of presidential appointment power and presidential dismissal power which affects the duration of the term of the prime minister under semi-presidentialism. We use event-history analysis to estimate the different factors that impact the prime minister’s duration. The range of time used is from 1945 to 2012 and includes 34 democratic semi-presidentialism countries. We find that the effect of presidential appointment power depends on dismissal power, that is, appointment and dismissal power have an interactive effect with the duration of the prime minister. In premier-presidential systems, if the prime minister was ultimately appointed by president, the hazard of a prime minister termination will increase; and it will decrease when the president can appoint the prime minister in a president -parliamentary system. Because a president can choose anyone he or she wants to be prime minister by appointment power, further, the relationship of president, prime minister and parliament will be changed. This discovery can explain the effect and controversy of presidential appointment and dismissal power.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：空間訊息與鄰近效果：臺灣總統選舉的配適與預測分析並列篇名：The Spatial Signals Approach and Neighborhood Effect: The Model Fitting and Prediction of the Presidential Elections in Taiwan作者：林昌平(Chang-Ping Lin)關鍵字：總統選舉;選舉預測;空間訊息法;噪訊比;鄰近效果;presidential election;election forecast;spatial signals approach;noise to signal ratio;neighborhood effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：針對選舉預測研究，本文嘗試提供一項新的選舉預測分析工具─空間訊息法（spatial signals approach）以進行選舉預測分析。此項選舉預測方法為KLR訊息法的延伸，KLR訊息法原屬於貨幣危機預警的重要預測方法，本文則將此項預測方法納入空間性質的地區因素，探討鄰近地區預測因素的重要性，進而發展出空間訊息法。本文主要的研究目的，在於提出結合地理脈絡因素的空間訊息法，並對於臺灣的總統選舉結果進行檢驗，主要驗證以下兩點：第一、嘗試探討臺灣歷年來總統選舉的空間脈絡性（或稱為鄰近效果）；第二、希望驗證空間訊息法於臺灣選舉預測分析上的有效性。實證分析上，本文使用2000年至2012年臺灣總統選舉資料，進行空間訊息分析，探討鄰近村里得票率對於該村里得票率的預測能力。分析結果指出，無論是空間訊息配適方法還是預測方法，皆顯示前期鄰近村里的得票率，對於當期該村里的得票率，在空間分布上有著相當穩定的解釋與預測性。本文介紹並衡量空間訊息法對於臺灣選舉結果的預測能力，並據此驗證臺灣總統選舉村里得票率的地理脈絡性與鄰近效果。英文摘要：This paper aims to introduce a new election prediction method which is called the ”spatial signals approach”. The spatial signals approach is a direct extension of the KLR signals approach of Kaminsky et al . (1998), which was developed as an early warning system of crisis prediction. There are two research purposes of this paper; the first is to examine the neighborhood effect of presidential elections in Taiwan, and the second is to verify the effectiveness of prediction of the presidential elections in Taiwan by the spatial signals approach. Our empirical data comprised of the results of the 10th, 11th, 12th and 13th presidential elections from 2000 to 2012. The spatial units of the spatial signals approach are villages. We find that the spatial signals approach is a better fit for the outcome of the presidential election. The findings also reveal that the best forecast accuracy is almost up to 90 percent, and the other forecast accuracy is 70 percent on average. This study concludes that the prediction accuracy of the spatial signals approach is good for predicting the outcome of presidential elections in Taiwan, and shows that the presidential elections in Taiwan indeed exhibit the neighborhood effect.起始頁-結束頁：57-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：國際關係建構主義理論的國家主權觀：人道干預的挑戰與詮釋並列篇名：The Constructivism's Perspectives on State Sovereignty: The Challenges and Interpretations of Economic-Trade Globalization and Humanitarian Interventions作者：郭雪真(Hsueh-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：國家主權;主權國家;建構主義;國際規範;保護責任;state sovereignty;sovereign state;constructivism;international norm;Responsibility to Protect期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：國際關係建構主義理論將「主權」視為是「國際規範」（international norm），藉以說明主權是由國際實務或實踐（international practices）所組成的社會規範建構體。建構主義主張國際規範源自於理念與認同體，對國家行為產生組成作用，國際規範合法化了國家目標，同時界定國家身分認同體與利益的形成。國際規範是國際社會對國家適當行為的共同期待，建立在維護國際安全及秩序現狀的前提下，以符合大多數現狀國家的共同利益與期待，和國家之間的互惠與相互承諾，而能合理期待其他國家的行為與國際規範體系的運作與程序，使得國際規範與機制更加制度化，並更具有國際法律的意涵與拘束力，從而影響國際行為主體（主要是國家）的行為。建構主義認為，主權的產生源自國家間「相互主體的共享理解」的國際實務，進而發展成為國家內化或社會化的國際規範，組成與約制國家的行為。在國家遵守順從國際規範的觀點之下，國家間的互動關係形成規範、認同體與利益為其主要內涵，產生約制和組成雙重性質的國際規範約制國家的行為，國家進而藉由國際社會化或學習而內化主權為規範。換言之，在順從「國家主權」國際規範下，國家以「主權國家」的身份認同互動，形塑國家利益與各種國際規範，這些國際規範約制與組成國家的行為，經由國家間的社會化或學習，而使「國家主權」內化成主權國家需要順從的國際規範。本文嘗試以人道干預對國家主權的挑戰，作為說明建構主義的國家主權觀點如何詮釋這樣的挑戰，以強調建構主義認為主權是一個國際實務的論述，是一個社會建構體。本文論述主要為四部分，第一部分從國家主權理論的傳統論述開始，說明西方國家主權理論發展的歷史過程；第二部分再說明建構主義的國家主權論述，以呈現其強調主權為國際實務論述及社會建構體的主張；第三部分說明人道干預對國家主權理論的挑戰，以呈現國際實務對於主權理論的影響；第四部分說明建構主義如何詮釋人道干預的挑戰，並就其詮釋提出評論。英文摘要：Constructivism takes sovereignty as a discourse of international norm to explain sovereignty as a social construction of international practices. Constructivism- argued international norms come from ideas and identities, and have constitutive and regulatory effects on state's behaviors. International norms give the legitimacy to the states' objectives, and define the formations of states' identities and interests. International norms are collective expectations of international society on state's proper behaviors; their premises are based on maintaining the international security and order of existing status which to be content with the majority of states' interests and expectations. With reciprocities and mutual commitments able to reasonably expect each other's behaviors and the operational procedures, the international norms and mechanisms are more institutionalized, and more legalized implications are binds to restrain international agencies' (states are the majority) behaviors. Basically, the constructivism approach to sovereignty is based on the perspectives that sovereignty comes from the shared understanding which exist intersubjectively in international practices; states socialize and internalize it as an international norm. States' compliance to international norms, and the interactions among states form norms, identities, and interests; these social constructions produce the international norms to restrain and to constitute states' behaviors. States internalize the sovereignty as an international norm by way of international socialization and learning. This article tries to illustrate how constructivism interprets the challenges of humanitarian intervention to the state sovereignty, in order to emphasize constructivism's argument in which the sovereignty is a discourse of international practice and a social construction. This article proceeds in four sections: the first section starts from the traditional discourse of state sovereignty theories to show the historical development of Western state sovereignty theories; the second section explores the discourse of constructivism on state sovereignty to emphasis its perspectives which sovereignty is a discourse of international practice and a social construction; the third section illustrates the challenges of humanitarian intervention to express the influence on state sovereignty theory; the fourth section illustrates how the constructivism interprets the challenges, and gives my own comments on the interpretations.起始頁-結束頁：125-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：世代陵夷，正義難覓？赤柬審判法庭並列篇名：The Balance Sheet of the Khmer Rouge Trial: How Will Justice Be Reached?作者：顏永銘(Yung-Ming Yen)關鍵字：赤柬;韓森;聯合國;轉型正義;混合式法庭;Khmer Rouge;Hun Sen;United Nations;transitional justice;mixed tribunal期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：1991年所簽署的《巴黎和平協定》象徵東南亞地區冷戰對抗的結束，和平與國家重建成為柬埔寨與國際社會共同努力的目標。然而，對於赤柬（Khmer Rouge）政權主政時期所犯下重大人權侵害罪刑之究責，卻直到1990年代末期才出現嚴肅地討論與呼籲。柬埔寨法院特別法庭作為轉型正義的制度產物，自2007年以後正式開始運作。本文的主要目的，在於分析特別法庭誕生的脈絡以及迄今之運作狀況，除了檢視影響混合式法庭運作的可能因素之外，並與量化文獻中所論證的嚇阻論邏輯進行比較，以謀進一步的理論反省。英文摘要：The conviction of Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea by the Extraordinary Chamber of the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) on August 7, 2014, marked an important step of Cambodia’s enterprise for transitional justice. Nevertheless, the long overdue judgment suggests a trecherous rather than promising future facing the ECCC. Since its establishment, the ECCC has been criticized forby constant political interference and institutional defects. This article intends to offer a historical review of the creation and operation of the ECCC. Moreover, the performance of the ECCC is compared with other mixed courts to revisit the deterrence logic supported by quantitative literature. Finally, the possible approaches to continue the enterprise of transitional justice in Cambodia are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：173-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：解嚴後臺灣政黨的競爭策略：Downs理論的再檢視並列篇名：The Competitive Strategies of Political Parties in Taiwan after 1987: Downsian Theories Revisited作者：吳文程(Wen-Cheng Wu)關鍵字：理性投票;競爭空間理論;中間選民定理;向心競爭;離心競爭;sophisticated (rational) voting;spatial theory of competition;median voters theorem;centripetal competition;centrifugal competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：Downs的理論是意向研究途徑和理性抉擇模式的代表性理論。Downs所建構的兩個理論，第一個稱為「理性投票行為理論」，用來解釋選民的投票行為；第二個理論稱為「競爭空間理論」，用來解釋政黨的競爭策略。Downs認為選民和政黨都是「經濟人」，政黨從事選舉競爭，最主要的目的就是贏得選舉勝利，以取得執政的權力。政黨最主要的競爭策略就是在政治（意識形態）光譜上的移動。Downs認為在兩黨制或兩大黨競爭的情況下，因為大多數選民都在兩大黨的中間，因此兩大黨都會向中間移動，採取「向心競爭」的策略，有些學者稱之為「中間選民定理」。本文最主要就是在檢證這個定理。本文研究發現，從解嚴後到2000年政權輪替，國民黨、民進黨兩大黨確的向政治光譜的中間移動，採取「向心競爭」的策略，符合Downs的「中間選民定理」；但是從2000年以來至今，雖然大多數選民仍位居在政治光譜的中間，國、民兩黨卻呈現了「離心競爭」的狀況，特別是民進黨在2000年至2008年執政期間，向左移動的趨向特別顯著，顯然不符合Downs的理論。Downs的「競爭空間理論」主要假設，也許可以修正為：「在兩黨競爭下，兩大黨為了爭取多數中間選民的支持，在選舉前夕通常會短暫地向政治光譜中間移動，但是選後通常會很快回到原本意識形態的位置，也可能繼續朝離心的方向移動，而且執政黨移動的速率和距離通常會超越反對黨。」英文摘要：Downsian theories are the representative theories derived from the intentional approach and rational choice model. Downs constructed two theories: the first is called the ”theory of sophisticated voting” ich is used to explain the electorate's voting behavior; the second is called the ”spatial theory of competition” which is used to explain the competitive strategies of political parties. Downs assumes that both voters and parties behave like an ”economic man.” The main purpose for a party to enter into electoral competition is to win the election and ruling position. The main competitive strategies of parties are the maneuvering along the political (ideological) spectrum. In a two-party system (or under two-party competition), Downs argues that the two main parties will both move toward the center of the spectrum because most voters are located in the middle, between the two parties. This is called ”centripetal competition” or the ”median voters theorem.” The main purpose of this paper is to review and verify this theorem.Research results of this paper find out that from the lifting of martial law (1987) to the first rotation of power in 2000, both two main parties had adopted ”centripetal competition” strategies and moved toward the ”center (middle) of the spectrum” which had confirmed the ”median voters theorem” and the ”spatial theory of competition.” However, from 2000 until now, despite the fact that voters are still located in the middle, the major two parties-the KMT and the DPP-have adopted strategies of centrifugal competition. This is especially true of the Democratic Progressive Party's rule, from 2000 to 2008 where the DPP demonstrated a strong tendency to move leftward.The case after 2000 apparently disconfirms Downsian theories. The main hypothesis of Downs' ”spatial theory of competition” perhaps can be revised as the following: Under two-party competition the two major parties, in order to win the support of most median voters, usually move toward the center temporarily before the election, but will quickly move back to their previous ideological position and may continue to move centrifugally, away from the center. In addition, the ruling party's rate and distance of the centrifugal move usually exceeds the opposition party's.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：縣市合併改制議題之研究：以高雄市、臺南市及臺中市為例並列篇名：Research Issues Regarding City-county Mergers and Reorganization: the Examples of Kaohsiung, Tainan and Taichung City作者：黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);謝忠安(Chung-An Hsieh)關鍵字：組織改造;縣市合併;組織合併;合併改制;organizational reinvention;city-county consolidation;organizational merger;government merger and structuring期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：組織重組是近年來政府組織為回應治理環境的變遷與公民社會壓力所使用的策略。在地方政府改革的策略中，縣市合併被視為是提升行政效率、促進平等、增進課責，以及解決政府財政惡化等問題的主要途徑。2010年臺灣實施地方政府合併改制，可說是精省後最大的地方行政改革措施。世界各國縣市合併的行政措施已有近百年的實務經驗，而相關研究已有相當累積；反觀國內有關地方政府組織合併的相關研究，對於這個重要議題的投入及其研究成果相當有限。基於組織合併不僅是政府改革必須不斷面對的問題，也是行政改革、組織理論與行為、以及府際關係等領域核心的研究議題，因此有必要全面性地瞭解國內外縣市合併的經驗與相關研究焦點。本文首先有系統地整理並呈現，有關國內外不同地方政府或縣市合併所累積的研究成果，接續以內容分析方法，分析報章媒體中有關2009年縣市合併938篇的報導內容，並佐以縣市局處首長之訪談，以彙整國內高雄、臺南、臺中等三都，合併經驗中的重要議題。研究發現，在國內外過去的文獻中，甚少從個人與組織層次的角度，探討縣市合併的成敗因素，以及縣市合併所產生的影響，本文依據分析結果提出建議，做為未來學界研究議程的參考。希冀未來透過學界投入更多的系統性研究，為從事行政改革的實務者累積治理的智慧資產。英文摘要：Organizational reinvention has become a critical strategy for government to respond to changing environments and the pressure from [the] civil society. Among the reorganization strategies for local governments, the ”city-county merger or consolidation” has been considered as a main approach to raising administrative efficiency, increasing service quality, improving accountability and solving the problem of local financial deterioration. In 2010, [the] city-county consolidation in Taiwan local governments can be seen as the most tremendous reformation after the downsizing of Taiwan's provincial government. In Western countries, there have not only been plenty of city-county consolidation cases, but there has also been quite a lot of research into this phenomenon. In Taiwan, only a few researchers have focused on this important issue. Organizational consolation is not only a continuous problem that governments have to confront, but is also an important academic issue in the study of bureaucracy reform, organizational theory, organizational behavior, and intergovernmental relations; therefore, it is necessary to organize the overall related experiences and researches, including Taiwan in addition to other countries. This research firstly sorts out and presents systematically the research of city-county consolidation of local governments in Taiwan and other countries. By analyzing the content of 938 newspaper reports and in-depth interviews, the authors considered the essential issues of city-county consolidation from the experience of Taichung, Tainan and Kaohsiung. The results point out that there have been relatively few studies related to the factors in the success or failure of city-county consolidation and to its impact from the viewpoint of individual and organizational levels. Based on this analysis, we make recommendations for future academic agenda. We expect that in the future academia will undertake more systematic efforts to accumulate governance wisdom for those engaged in administrative reform.起始頁-結束頁：51-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：美中強權政治的悲劇宿命？米夏摩理論的探析並列篇名：The Doomed Tragedy of Sino-US Great Power Politics? A Reflection on Mearsheimer's Theory作者：楊仕樂(Shih-Yueh Yang)關鍵字：國際關係理論;現實主義;美中關係;科技與地理的互動;區域權力結構;international relationstheory;realism;Sino-US relations;interaction between technology and geography;regional power structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：依據國際關係中傳統的現實主義（realism），當一國成為強權，就會像強權一般地行事，即使強權之間並無不良的意圖，但國際體系中的「無政府狀態」（anarchy），卻使強權只因彼此所具有的能力而相互懼怕、走向衝突。當今現實主義大師米夏摩（John J. Mearsheimer）即主張，中國是一上升中的新興強權，而美國則是目前唯一碩果僅存的超強，倘若中國目前權力成長的趨勢繼續維持，美中兩國最終將無法擺脫這強權政治的悲劇宿命。然而，本文嘗試從米氏的理論中，挑戰米氏的此一論點：米氏的理論其實存有內在的不一致，他權力結構的解釋雖是基於現實主義重視物質能力（material capability）的傳統，但在這物質能力的思路上，卻是他自己所提出的科技與地理等兩項因素的互動，決定了他以區域為單位的權力結構推論。中國所在東北亞區域的地理環境，並不同於米氏所類比過去德國或蘇聯所在的歐洲，儘管當代的科技是突破了區域間的阻隔，但並不否定各區域內地理環境的差異。易言之，儘管強權是可能興起，但權力結構的變化並不是注定的悲劇，強權政治的命運是可以有所不同的。英文摘要：Realism maintains a pessimistic view on great power politics. Under international anarchy, great powers compete for security just because of the material capabilities they possess. John J. Mearsheimer, the leading realist, built his theory of great power politics on this realist logic. He suggests that, as long as China keeps rising, the future of Sino-US great power politics is a doomed tragedy. However, this article tries to challenge this pessimistic view using the theory's own terms. Mearsheimer's theory has internal inconsistencies and overlooks the interaction between technology and geography introduced by the theory itself. This article argues that, unlike the pervious examples of great power rivalries between the US and the Soviet Union or Germany, China is located in Northeast Asia, a geographically constrained region, which is very different from Europe. In addition, technologies also vary. Current technologies do overcome the obstruction between regions but cannot overrule the geographical differences of different regions. In other words, great powers surely may rise, but the power structure itself is not enough to ensure conflicts. Great power politics are not doomed.起始頁-結束頁：131-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：動態的臺海兩岸談判：雙層賽局與認知因素研究並列篇名：Changing Negotiations between the Two Sides of the Taiwan Strait-Two-Level Game and Cognitive Factors Approaches作者：袁鶴齡(Hao-Lin Yuan);沈燦宏(Tsan-Hung Shen)關鍵字：兩岸談判;雙層賽局;認知因素;戰略三角;議題連結;cross-strait negotiation;two-level game;cognitive factors;strategic triangle;issue linkage期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：從1990年代初期兩岸政府重啟談判協商以來，彼此之間的談判互動已出現愈來愈頻繁的現象。雖然兩岸至今在主權上仍存有爭議，但在其他議題的協商上，卻也出現日漸增多的趨勢。為了理解兩岸談判中的複雜性，本文嘗試在Putnam「雙層賽局」（two-level game）的基礎之上，增列國家決策者個人認知因素（decision-maker cognitive factors）以擴展其分析框架，並依據戰略三角理論將兩岸談判區分成六個時期，以討論個別時期之間的差異。研究發現，在把個人認知因素結合談判曲線，形成從國際、國內到個人層次的動態分析途徑，更能解釋兩岸談判的發展歷程及其議題連結（issue linkage）的談判特性。英文摘要：In the early 1990s, cross Taiwan Strait governments reopened the gate of negotiation. Since then, the debate of sovereignty still remains between the two sides, but the number of issues that both sides have continuously negotiated has increased. In order to understand the complication of cross-strait negotiations, we extend Putnam's two-level game framework to include cognitive factors of national decision-makers. This paper also intends to divide cross-strait negotiations into six periods on the basis of the strategic triangle theory, and distinguish differences among periods. The paper finds that cognitive factors combined with the negotiation curve shapes the dynamic approach from an international and domestic level to an individual level analysis. It has more explanatory power to explain the differences among six periods to understand the development of cross-strait negotiations. This paper also can distinguish the characteristics of issue linkage negotiations more easily.起始頁-結束頁：173-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：蜜月期選舉時程與衣尾效應：法國半總統制下總統與國會選舉之分析並列篇名：Honeymoon Election and Coattail Effect: An Analysis to Presidential and Parliamentary Elections in the French Semi-Presidential System作者：郝培芝(Pei-Chih Hao)關鍵字：半總統制;蜜月期選舉;分裂投票;體制性投票;法國第五共和體制;semi-presidentialism;coattail effect;regime voting;unified government;the Fifth French Republic期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：既有研究對於選舉時程的影響分析，基本觀點認為蜜月期選舉時程有利於新任總統所屬政黨的國會選舉，並有利於大黨，且會降低有效政黨數目，主要關鍵在於總統選舉對國會選舉具有衣尾效應，既有文獻對於衣尾效應如何產生之分析與實際驗證相對較為缺乏。本文主旨在於探討半總統制下蜜月期選舉時程的政治影響，嘗試分析衣尾效應的選票結構，以檢驗總統選舉與國會選舉之間的關係。本文將蜜月期選舉時程視為主要制度變因，認為蜜月期選舉時程會影響選民的投票行為，進而影響政黨結構，選民投票結構會導致政黨得票結構的兩大黨化，進而型塑一致性政府。並以法國為主要個案，區分法國四種選民（大黨選民，中間游離選民，體制性投票選民以及小黨選民）的投票結構，個別檢驗分析總統選舉如何影響國會選舉的關鍵因素，以及對總體選舉結果的影響，以建構衣尾效應產生的內在結構與政治影響。本文發現法國蜜月期衣尾效應主要來自於幾種選票結構的共同組合結果：（1）兩大政黨選民：忠誠度較高，在總統選舉後會因政黨認同因素繼續支持原先政黨的國會選舉，且投票率高，進而導致有利於兩大黨的選舉結果；（2）中間及游離選民：總統選舉後舉行國會選舉，會大幅降低國會投票率，國會選舉時選民棄權比例相當高，特別是中間選民及游離選民會參與總統選舉但在國會選舉時棄權不投票，且在國會選舉時個人認同因素增加，國會選舉往兩大黨候選人集中；（3）體制性投票選民：法國存有偏好一致性政府或偏好分立政府的選民，這些選民會依據其體制偏好持續地進行投票，並依據總統結果而進行策略性投票，法國體制性選民亦為中間選民但傾向支持一致性政府；（4）蜜月期選舉時程不利第三黨：第三黨總統的衣尾效應非常低，總統第一輪得票率與國會得票率落差極大，且國會當選席次大幅下滑。蜜月期選舉制度對法國政黨體制的影響主要呈現於政黨兩大黨化與集中化，政黨得票率與當選席次落差大，特別是兩大政黨當選席次往往高於當選率，特別是有利於總統獲勝之國會政黨。相對而言，第三政黨則呈現低度代表，當選席次往往低於當選率，應驗蜜月期選舉時程不利第三大黨之推論，此一結論與Shugart和Carey認為蜜月期選舉時程有利第三大黨之論證有所不同。英文摘要：According to studies on the effects of electoral cycles, the fundamental perspective argues that honeymoon elections benefit the parliamentary election to the party of the newly elected president, while lowering the effective number of parties. The key is the presidential election has a coattail effect on parliamentary elections. However, in the literature, this coattail effect has lacked analysis and empirical validation. This paper aims to probe into the political effect of electoral cycles of honeymoon election in the semi-presidential system, and analyze the ballot structure of the coattail effect, in order to validate the relationship between a presidential election and a parliamentary election. This paper uses France as a case study. The case study reveals that the coattail effect of a honeymoon election in France is mainly from the combination of several ballot structures: (1) Voters of two major parties: These voters are more loyal. After a presidential election, due to party identification, voters tend to continue supporting the parliamentary election of the original party with a high voting rate, thus positively influencing the electoral outcomes of two parties. (2) Median and swing voters: A parliamentary election held after a presidential election will significantly lower the parliamentary voting rate. Median and swing voters will participate in the presidential election, however, they abstain from parliamentary voting in parliamentary election. Individuals' identification factors increase and voting in the parliamentary election is centralized to the candidates of two major parties. (3) Regime voters: Currently, in France, there are two regime voters, voters who prefer a unified government or a divided government. They continue voting according to their preference for the regime type and undertake strategic voting according to presidential outcomes. The result indicates that French regime voters tend to support unified government. (4) Electoral cycles of a honeymoon election do not benefit minor parties: The coattail effect of the president of a minor party is extremely low. The gap between voting rates of the first round of a presidential election and a parliamentary election is significant. Parliamentary seats decrease significantly. The impacts of honeymoon elections on the French political system are mainly presented in the bipartisation and the centralization of political parties. There is a large gap between the percentage of vote obtained and elected seats rate, especially the elected seats rate of the two major political parties are often higher than the other parties. In contrast, the third largest party shows a low degree of representatives of elected seats. The honeymoon election is relatively unfavorable to the third largest party. This conclusion is also different from the argument of Shugart and Carey who think honeymoon elections are favorable to the third largest party.起始頁-結束頁：1-2+4-48+50-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系10篇名：再探選區服務與立法問政：選制改革前後的比較並列篇名：Revisiting Constituency Service and Legislative Work of Taiwan's Legislators: A Comparison before and After the Reform of Electoral System作者：盛杏湲(Shing-Yuan Sheng)關鍵字：選區服務;立法問政;選制改革;複數選區單記不可讓渡投票制;單一選區相對多數制;constituency service;legislative work;electoral reform;multi-member district single non-transferable vote system;single member district plural system期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去區域立委在複數選區單記不可讓渡投票制之下，有強烈的動機去建立個人選票，為了達到此一目標，有些立委強調選區服務，有些立委強調立法問政。在2005年6月將區域立委改為單一選區制，那麼，當選舉制度變革之後，立委的代表行為是否因為選制改變而有所調整？本研究以質化與量化為資料蒐集方法，聚焦在第五屆到第七屆區域立法委員（任期自2002年2月到2012年1月）。研究發現顯示：新選制下的立委較過去更強調選區服務，他們花更多的時間與資源在選區，且對選區服務的態度更為慎重，不僅作更多的選區服務，且服務的內容更為廣泛多元。然而，他們也不偏廢立法問政，只是在資源與時間有限的情況下，會用更策略性的方式來從事立法問政：他們將立法權委任行政機關，然後僅加以小幅度修改，提出一到兩個條文的提案，甚至於有時他們會去與其他立委共同提案，這種立法型態在舊制下就有，但是在新制下更被增強。最後，當立委真的在選區服務與立法問政無法兩全，而必須二者擇一時，立委仍會以選區服務為重。英文摘要：Under the old SNTV electoral system, Taiwan's district legislators have an intensive motivation to pursue personal vote. To attain this goal, some legislators make more efforts on the activities of constituency service, while others make more efforts on the activities in the legislative process. In June 2005, Taiwan's electoral system for district legislators had reformed to a single member district plural system. In this article, I conducted quantitative and qualitative research methods and focus on district legislators from the Fifth to the Seventh Legislative Yuan (from February 2002 to January 2012) to explore whether legislators change their behavior because of the system reform. Research findings show: legislators under the new electoral system emphasized even more on constituency service. They spent more time and resources on constituency, and their attitudes toward constituency service were even more cautious. They not only conducted more casework, but also they conducted casework much more widely diversified. At the meantime, legislators did not ignore legislative work. Owing to the limitation of time and resources, legislators engaged in the legislative process strategically. They delegated legislative power to the administrative branch. They then modified those bills proposed by the administrative branch and proposed their own version of bills with only one or two articles. Sometimes, they might co-author the bills proposed by their colleagues to save time and resources. This legislative style had appeared under the old system. It was reinforced under the new system. Finally, if they had to make a choice between constituency service and legislative work, most legislators were inclined to the constituency service.起始頁-結束頁：65-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：為什麼反對移工／移民？－利益衝突抑或文化排斥並列篇名：Who Opposes Immigration?-Interest Conflict and Cultural Exclusion Explanations作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-Ying Yang);張雅雯(Ya-Wen Chang)關鍵字：婚姻移民;外籍勞工;團體利益衝突;文化認同;團體接觸;Marriage Immigrants;Migrant Workers;Inter-group Interest Conflict;Cultural Identity;Inter-group Contact期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：60期出版年：2014中文摘要：東南亞移工與婚姻移民，兩者地緣來源相近、幾乎在同時期開始進入台灣、同樣是全球資本主義深化的結果、在國際分工體系中同樣地居於邊陲位置、同樣面對新種族主義歧視，台灣民眾對兩者的態度有何差異？相較之下，移工被視為經濟性的短期存在，擔負社會生產功能，也帶來物質性利益與衝突；婚移則被視為族群性的長期共存，被期待扮演再生產角色，對於國家既有認同與文化形成挑戰。而移工與婚移在台身份與角色處境的差異，也反映在民眾對兩種移民的接納態度之別。本文採用「2008年臺灣社會變遷調查計畫（第5期第4次）全球化組」資料，檢視民眾對這兩類移民的態度與因素。研究結果顯示：民眾對不同移民群體的態度脈絡是複雜且存在差異的。團體利益同時影響了對移工和婚移的態度，但是對移工和婚移有相反的影響，中低階層民眾會因利益衝突反對移工，但也會因利益需求而更支持婚移。文化認同與價值方面，因種族歧視而產生的文化偏見態度，並不影響民眾對移工的態度，卻影響民眾對東南亞婚移的態度。其他文化價值如多元文化和民族主義，則是同時影響民眾對這兩種移民的態度，多元文化觀有助於民眾接納包容不同移民族群；強調我群概念的民族主義則造成民眾排斥移工與婚移。透過區辨移民身分之別與不同的反移民因素，有助於未來在思考在政策上，如何緩解社會上不同群體對不同移民態度的對立性。英文摘要：Southeast Asian marriage migrants and labor migrants from the same regional origins began entering Taiwan at almost at the same time and occupy similar marginal positions in the international division of labor. What explains the attitudinal differences among native Taiwanese toward these two groups? Labor migrants are short-term residents serving productive functions which might lead to interest conflicts with existing groups. However, marriage migrants are regarded as a permanent ethnic minority serving reproductive functions. Therefore, these migrants pose challenges to the preexisting collective identity and culture. Such distinctions are reflected in the divergences of public attitudes toward these two groups. This study hypothesizes that the exclusion of migrant workers in Taiwan is mainly caused by the inter-group interest conflict; in comparison, cultural identity accounts for the social exclusion of marriage migrants. We apply the 〞Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS) 2008: Globalization〞 dataset to examine the attitudinal differences toward these two types of migrants. The data show that public attitudes toward different types of migrants are complex and varied. Intergroup interest concerns account for exclusionary attitudes toward migrant workers, but not for those toward marriage migrants. With respect to cultural identity, cultural discrimination or racism as constructed in this study is related to the rejection of increasing marriage migrants but not to that of labor migrants. In addition, attitudes toward marriage and labor migrants are both affected by multicultural and nationalist orientations, with multiculturalism conducive to and nationalism detrimental to inclusiveness toward migrants. Through distinguishing the migrants by their status, we can further our understandings of public attitudes towards different types of migrants, and help future policy making on relationships between migrants and the native population.起始頁-結束頁：43-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.60(43-84)2篇名：葡萄牙「不完全議會化的半總統制」：制度與非制度的分析並列篇名：〞Incomplete Parliamentalized Semi-Presidentialism〞 in Portugal: Institutional and Non-institutional Analysis作者：顏煌庭(Huang-Ting Yan)關鍵字：葡萄牙;芬蘭;半總統制;不完全議會化;Portugal;Finland;Semi-Presidentialism;Incomplete Parliamentarization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：60期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文透過「議會化指標」的建構，從制度因素與非制度因素分別檢驗修憲後的葡萄牙是否在這兩面向朝向議會化的方向運作，導出葡萄牙屬於「不完全議會化的半總統制」。1974年康乃馨革命，葡萄牙進入半總統制家族。1982年葡萄牙進行大幅度修憲，總統影響力下降。然而，「制度的不完全議會化」導致總統持續扮演否決者的角色。另一方面，「總理總統化」與政黨體系轉型則導致「非制度的議會化」，鞏固內閣與國會之間的關係。奠基於葡萄牙的實證經驗，本文也探討制度與非制度其中一類的議會化，對於半總統制演化的啟發。套用「議會化指標」檢驗芬蘭半總統制演化方向，透過葡萄牙與芬蘭的比較，導出「議會化的半總統制」關鍵在於制度因素。然而，「制度的不完全議會化下」，總統的實質影響力會受到「非制度的議會化」限制。本文結論對於「跨國性案例檢驗」、「總統化指標建構」、權力朝向總統、內閣還是國會運作，或半總統制國家的民主穩定研究都有重要的關聯。英文摘要：This study assesses whether Portugal moved toward institutional and non-institutional parliamentarization following constitutional change by constructing indicators of parliamentarization, showing that Portugal developed an 〞incomplete parliamentarized semi-presidentialism.〞 Due to the outbreak of Carnation Revolution at 1976, Portugal entered into the family of semi-presidentialism. After constitutional reform in 1982, the powers of the president under new constitutional framework decreased. However, 〞incomplete institutional parliamentarization〞 meant that presidents were still veto players. In addition, 〞complete non-institutional parliamentarization〞 consolidated the relationship between cabinet and parliament through prime ministerial presidentialization and the transformation of party system. Based on the experience in Portugal, the article also addresses the relationship between complete institutional or non-institutional parliamentarization and the transformation of semi-presidentialism. After applying indicators of parliamentarization to Finland and comparing with the case of Portugal, the article concludes that institutional rather than non-institutional factors contribute to 〞complete parliamentarized semi-presidentialism.〞 However, presidential effects under 〞incomplete institutional parliamentarization〞 can be restricted by 〞complete non-institutional parliamentarization.〞 For future research, these results can be applied to cross-national case studies, indicators of presidentialization, power distribution between presidents, cabinets or parliaments and democratic stability in semi-presidential countries.起始頁-結束頁：85-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.60(85-120)3篇名：結構現實主義與Wendt的理論對話：「體系－結構」觀點與「文化－邏輯」觀點的結合並列篇名：A Dialogue between Structural Realism and Wendt's Constructivism: Integrating System-Structure and Culture-Logic Approaches作者：唐豪駿(Hao-Chun Tang)關鍵字：霍布斯體系;國際體系;結構;文化;Hobbesian System;International System;Structure;Culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：60期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文接受Alexander Wendt對結構現實主義的部分批評，並從一種修正後的現實主義立場對Wendt的理論進行批判與補充，達到理論對話的效果。本文與傳統結構現實主義的顯著不同，在於主張一個體系結構從形成、穩定到崩解或轉型的不同時期中，結構與單位的影響力會有此消彼長的演變：另一方面，本文也承認體系中的「文化」會對行為者產生影響，但是現實主義強調的「能力分布」不能予以忽略，在探究體系結構的要素時，應兼顧體系的文化與能力分布。本文從現實主義角度釐清在Wendt的理論中「文化」與結構、體系的關係，並指出權力平衡體系與洛克文化的高度重疊。由於在Wendt的理論中霍布斯文化與洛克文化互斥，且廣義的文化可以當作體系的同義詞，而洛克體系又與傳統的權力平衡體系高度重疊，則根據邏輯推論應存在一個與權力平衡體系低度重疊，甚至是彼此互斥的多極體系，筆者遵循Wendt的用語，稱之為「霍布斯體系」。本文一方面援用Wendt的文化變項做為結構的要素之一，證明霍布斯體系與權力平衡體系是兩個不同的體系，並指出Wendt的理論有助於現實主義釐清霍布斯體系與權力平衡體系之區別；另一方面，本文也站在現實主義的角度反思Wendt的文化觀點在解讀現實主義傳統的霸權體系與兩極體系時會產生矛盾與侷限。最終，本文思考將現實主義的體系觀點與Wendt文化觀點全面結合的可能，透過Wendt對霍布斯文化與洛克文化的區分，嘗試將現實主義傳統的多極體系劃分為權力平衡體系與霍布斯體系，並在修正Kaplan的理論後，建立霸權體系、兩極體系、權力平衡體系、霍布斯體系四種國際體系理想型的論述。英文摘要：This article re-examines Wendt's constructivism from the perspective of revised realism. The author's perspective is different from traditional structural realists in that I argue the effects of structure to units or units to structure will change during the periods of system formation, stability, transformation and collapse. The author accepts that the 〞culture〞 of a system does affect actors, but at the same time also insists that the 〞distribution of capabilities〞 as a variable cannot be ignored. We should consider both 〞culture〞 and 〞distribution of capabilities〞 when we examine factors related to system structure. The author identifies the relations among structure, system, and culture in Wendt's constructivism from the perspective of realism, and finds that the Lockean system largely overlaps with the balance-of-power (BOP) system. Given that Hobbesian and Lockean culture are distinct from each other, and that the Lockean system is largely overlapping with the BOP system, if Wendt regards 〞culture〞 as 〞system〞 in a general way, than we can deduce that there could be a multi-polar system that is largely independent from the BOP system. Following the language of Wendt, the author names this system as the 〞Hobbesian System〞. By using Wendt's constructivism to deduce the distinctiveness of the 〞Hobbesian System〞 and the BOP system, the author analyzes the structural differences between these two systems, while also pointing out that Wendt's constructivism has its limits in interpreting the realist tradition's hierarchical system and bipolar system. Finally, author examines the possibility of integrating the system approach of realism and the cultural approach of Wendt. In distinguishing between Hobbesian culture and Lockean culture, the author also distinguishes the Hobbesian system from the BOP tradition of realism. Revising the theory of Morton Kaplan, author argues that there are four ideal types of international systems: the hierarchical system, the bipolar system, the BOP system, and the Hobbesian system.起始頁-結束頁：121-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.60(121-152)4篇名：中國無政府主義、民族主義與世界主義－探析近代中國政治思想中的一種思維模式並列篇名：Chinese Anarchism, Nationalism, and Universalism: An Inquiry into an Intellectual Approach within Modern Chinese Political Thought作者：安井伸介(Shinsuke Yasui)關鍵字：無政府主義;民族主義;世界主義;國族主義;劉師培;Anarchism;Nationalism;Universalism;Liu Shipei期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：在民族革命言論盛行的辛亥革命前夕，中國無政府主義者反對民族主義而提倡世界主義，相信這才是拯救中國和人類社會的方法。他們依據什麼樣的理論反對民族主義？民族和世界的關係如何？他們所提倡的世界主義之含義為何？這是本文的主要關懷所在。本文首先探討中國無政府主義者的民族概念，以及他們所提出的克服民族主義之方法。他們認為民族是具有民族特性的實際存在，而依據傳統中國的公私論認定民族主義是私心的表現，最終會導致民族帝國主義。其次，本文分析中國無政府主義的世界觀呈現出來的思維模式，進而指出，中國無政府主義沒有將自主性當作核心理論，由此在終極的理想世界觀當中呈現出無法維持個體多元性的一元世界觀。英文摘要：In the years before the Xinhai Revolution, Chinese anarchists rejected nationalism, and instead advocated universalism and anarchism as the only way to save China and human society as a whole. What kind of theories were used to counter nationalism? What did they have to say about relations between individual nations and the world as a whole? What did the universalism they advocated mean? These are the main questions that this article tries to answer.First, this article explores the concept of the nation and the way to overcome nationalism as argued by the Chinese anarchists. They recognized a nation as being a substantial entity with distinct characteristics, and claimed that nationalism was a reflection of egoism and was prone to induce imperialism. These arguments were made under the influence of the gongsi theory (公私) that was popular in traditional Chinese thought. Second, this article analyzes the worldview of Chinese anarchism and points out that Chinese anarchists did not take autonomy as their core theory. Therefore, their vision of the ideal society was one of uniformity, without space for individual diversity.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.59(1-26)5篇名：英國工黨政府推廣通訊投票之轉折（2000－2007）並列篇名：Postal Voting Reform under the Blair Government, 2000-2007作者：高朗(Lang Kao)關鍵字：投票制度;通訊投票;申請式通訊投票;全面通訊投票;試辦;選舉舞弊;Voting System;Postal Voting;Postal Voting on Demand;All-postal Voting;Pilot Schemes;Election Fraud期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：1997年英國工黨重新執政，隨即推動系列政治改革，改進投票方式不久成為改革的重點之一，也是這篇論文探討的主題。投票率走低的趨勢是西歐國家過去幾十年來共同的問題，工黨政府將提高投票率視為健全民主發展的目標。布萊爾政府希望藉由增加投票的便利性，以提升投票率。工黨政府於2000年取消通訊投票的條件限制，允許申請式通訊投票（postal voting on demand），即選民不需附據理由即可申請，使通訊投票成為投票方式的一種，同時也在地方選舉進行不同投票方法的測試。本文從2000年工黨政府積極推動投票改革為起點，探討其如何從申請式通訊投票，試圖逐步在地方選舉推動全面性通訊投票（all postal voting），後因2004年發生選舉舞弊事件，再轉回申請式通訊投票的過程。本文同時分析英國選民日漸喜愛通訊投票，對英國選舉的影響。英文摘要：After returning to power in 1997, the Blair government began to pursue a series of political reforms. Before long, improving the postal voting system became a key focus.Voter turnouts had been falling throughout Western Europe for several decades, and the Labour government regarded the raising of turnouts as a way to develop a healthy democracy. The Blair government hoped to achieve this by making it easier to vote. In 2000, the Labour government eliminated various restrictions on postal voting by allowing postal voting on demand. From this time forward, postal voting became one of the possible ways to vote, and pilot schemes were carried out at the local level to test different voting methods.The present article will focus on the Labour government's active efforts from the year 2000 to reform the voting system. I will examine how the government introduced postal voting on demand, and then attempted to gradually introduce all-postal voting in local elections before reverting to postal voting on demand after the occurrence of voting fraud in 2004.The present paper also analyzes how increasing public support in the UK for postal voting is affecting elections there.起始頁-結束頁：27-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.59(27-54)6篇名：解釋中國社會差序政府信任：體制形塑與績效認知的視角並列篇名：Explaining Hierarchical Government Trust in China: The Perspectives of Institutional Shaping and Perceived Performance作者：黃信豪(Hsin-Hao Huang)關鍵字：中國大陸;政治信任;差序政府信任;體制形塑;績效認知;China;Political Trust;Hierarchical Government Trust;Institutional Shaping;Perceived Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：「差序政府信任」指的是大眾政治信任如何隨不同層級政府而有所差異。中國社會是否具有「信任中央高於地方」的態度特徵，是近年學界開始關注的研究焦點。然而，文獻多以特定群體為主，這項態度的普遍性仍待更多實證研究支持。本文以2012年「世界價值調查」全國範圍的面訪資料為例，探索中國民眾差序政府信任態度樣態。分析結果顯示，約有七成五受訪者信任中央高於地方，顯示差序信任態度在中國社會應相當普遍。其次，本文從體制形塑與績效認知觀點出發，建構差序政府信任的解釋框架。經由一系列的實證分析，本文將中國社會差序信任的來源總結為上訪制度、政治動員兩形塑路徑。其中，績效認知相關因素（中央、地方政府施政評價與家戶經濟評價）對差序信任態度具重要中介影響。相較於傳統單一標的之信任感研究，差序政府信任的概念更能反映當前中國社會的民意特質。英文摘要：”Hierarchical government trust” indicates that political trust varies according to the level of government. Many scholars have argued that within Chinese society, trust in the central government is higher than trust in local governments. However, the literature is primarily focused on specific groups, and still needs to be verified with more representative surveys. Using comprehensive survey data from the 2012 World Values Survey in China, this article demonstrates that Chinese citizens have varying levels of political trust according to the level of government. The results show that approximately 75 percent of respondents had higher trust in the central government than in local governments, demonstrating that ”hierarchical government trust” is prevalent in Chinese society. Second, this article uses the perspectives of institutional shaping and perceived performance as a starting point to explain hierarchical trust in government in China. Through empirical analysis, this article identifies the petitioning system and political mobilization as two contextual factors shaping institutions. Perceived performance (central and local government performance and assessment of family economic condition) has a mediating effect on the higher trust in central government. Finally, the article argues that hierarchical government trust is a more suitable approach for understanding the nature of public opinion in China, and identifying its political implications.起始頁-結束頁：55-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.59(55-90)7篇名：重大災害資訊治理模式之交易成本分析並列篇名：Transaction Cost Analysis of Information Governance Structures for Disaster Response作者：李天申(Tien-Shen Li);周韻采(Yun-Tsai Chou)關鍵字：交易成本;層級節制;雙邊治理;三邊治理;Transaction Costs;Hierarchical Control Model;Bilateral Governance;Trilateral Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：59期出版年：2014中文摘要：在2009年莫拉克風災之前，我國是採用層級節制的模式來整合防救災資訊。但根據莫拉克風災的經驗，這套模式難以因應重大災害。當時，臺灣數位文化協會與受災縣市、中央災害應變中心合作，蒐集災民發布至網路的訊息，並透過網路揭露官方的整合性訊息，縮減政府與民間的資訊落差。本文假設，政府於重大災害發生時，要採用層級節制、雙邊治理或三邊治理模式來處理防救災資訊，會受蒐集、登錄、驗證等交易成本的影響。本文採文獻探討、深度訪談、個案研究等研究方法，運用交易成本理論，論證重大災害時，應如何選擇防救災資訊的治理模式。研究結果發現，政府在莫拉克風災時，因救災人力不足，EMIS系統設計不良，加上重大災害本身的不確定性高，大幅提升防救災資訊的交易成本。當災情達一定之規模時，三邊治理模式即比雙邊治理、層級節制模式更有效。最後，本文認為導入三邊治理模式，並將資訊科技妥善運用於防救災資訊的整合，可降低政府因應重大災害的交易成本。英文摘要：Prior to Typhoon Morakot in 2009, Taiwan applied the hierarchical control model to manage disaster response information. However, the experience of Typhoon Morakot demonstrated this approach to be inadequate for dealing with major disasters. Instead, cooperation between the Association of Digital Culture, local governments in the disaster area, and the Central Emergency Operation Center allowed the collection of messages posted online by disaster victims, which were then collated and posted on official government websites, reducing the information gap between the government and the general public. This article argues that the choice of a hierarchical control model, bilateral governance, or trilateral governance model in the event of a major disaster affects the transaction costs associated with gathering, inputting, and verifying information. The article uses a literature review, in-depth interviews, and case study research, and applies transaction cost theory to the question of which governance model to adopt for dealing with disaster response information in the event of a major disaster. According to the research findings, when Typhoon Morakot hit, a lack of disaster response manpower and poor emergency management information system design, together with the uncertainties associated with a major disaster, substantially increased the transaction costs associated with disaster reduction information. When disasters have reached a certain scale, the trilateral governance model is more effective than the bilateral governance or hierarchical control models. Finally, we argue that the trilateral governance model and the proper use of information technology to integrate disaster information can reduce the transaction costs associated with the response to major disasters.起始頁-結束頁：91-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.59(91-118)01篇名：新制度論的困境與挑戰並列篇名：The Dilemma and Challenges on New Institutionalism作者：陳嫈郁(Rene Ying-Yu Chen)關鍵字：新制度論;理念變因;社會學制度論;歷史制度論;理性選擇制度論;new institutionalism;ideational variable;sociological institutionalism;historical institutionalism;rational institutionalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：1998年美國學者Hall & Taylor與英國學者Hay & Wincott一場聚焦在三種新制度論差異的對話，開啟了學術界對制度研究「理念變因」作用與變遷動力來源的爭辯。此一波對話，藉由探討制度變遷的動力根源，試圖重新將微觀的行為者理念變項帶回制度研究。他們認為三種新制度論最大的困境在於過度強調均衡與結構作用，缺乏對於變遷動力來源的解釋，同時也忽略對制度中「行為者」角色的關照。從此，新制度論興起一股內部的更張趨勢，試圖矯正上述的缺失。本文先透過援引「系譜學」對於知識／權力的分析方法與概念從「理論後設與制度性質」、制度過程與結果「對結構與行為者的基本定義與假設」、「方法論取向的選擇、實證推論基礎」以及「理論發展的挑戰與最新議題」四個面向來解構「新制度論」內各學派，分析新制度論各學派所面臨的理論困境與限制。最後，討論近年來政治科學界新興起的「理念轉向」與「建構轉向」等趨勢，對新制度論各學派的啟發與探討可行的途徑。本文建議釐清制度分析層次與將「理念變因」進行更概念化的處理，將可能發展出得以進行驗證「理念變因」對制度的結果具有因果影響力的方法，拓展理論的深度與廣度。然而，本文亦認為「理念轉向」並非顛覆原來三種新制度論的論述，而應是一種理論的更張。英文摘要：In 1998, Hall & Taylor and Hay & Wincott initiated a debate on three new institutionalism, and provoked furthering arguments about the role of ideas in institutionalism and the resources of institutional change and dynamic. By exploring the resource of institutional change, micro-level and agent-based ideas are brought back into the studies of new institutionalism. Until 2000, across the political science, ideas are increasingly recognized as major factors in politics. There is also a radical movement on interdisciplinary methodology in political science which confidently claims the epoch of ”ideational turn” and ”constructivist turn” is coming. However, this paper argues this interdisciplinary ideational turn actually is which borrows concepts from constructivism in sociology, cognitive and social psychology. In so doing, the substantial structuralism and materialism in new institutionalism might be remedied by bringing the micro-level agency and ideas back into new institutionalism. For investigating and clarifying points mentioned above, this paper will be evolved into six sections. The first section lays conceptual foundation by defining an ideational turn in political science and distinguishing it from alternative logic of explanation. The second section provides a brief historical profile of new institutionalism in political science. The third to the fifth sections, in light of Foucault’s genealogy of knowledge, this paper anatomizes and deconstructs three new institutionalism by delving into their theoretical origins, assumptions, methodology, comments and pitfalls. The final section suggests the ideational and constructivist turn in new institutionalism will show a series of hybrid position and proliferation of inter-paradigm and inter-discipline debates within contemporary political science. However, it will not overwhelmingly turn the original new institutionalism down. The central role ideas play in shaping political outcomes have been acknowledged, nonetheless, the operationalization and verification of ideas need further valid references and evidential commitments.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.58.012篇名：歐債危機之新自由主義根源並列篇名：The Neoliberal Root Cause of European Debt Crisis作者：盧倩儀(Chien-Yi Lu)關鍵字：經濟暨貨幣聯盟;歐債危機;建構主義;新自由主義;凱因斯;EMU;European debt crisis;constructivism;neoliberalism;Keynesian期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：希臘毫無節制的財政支出、西班牙愛爾蘭的房市泡沫、義大利的巨額國債……這些是歐債危機的「近因」還是「症狀」？在並非最佳貨幣區域的歐元區建立單一貨幣、創立沒有財政聯盟支撐的貨幣聯盟、設計出只問通貨膨脹率不問經濟景氣循環的歐洲中央銀行……這一切是歐債危機的「遠因」還是「症狀」？本文以新自由主義思潮之興起解釋1980年代歐洲整合之再出發、隨之而來的歐洲單一貨幣之建立、歐洲央行以及貨幣聯盟之瑕疵設計、以及今日之歐債危機。一旦正視當時政治精英共享之新自由主義因果關係認知之全面影響，便會發現歐債危機的種子可遠溯至1980年代初。而希臘、西班牙、愛爾蘭等國近年經濟表現，甚至1990年代拍板定案的歐洲貨幣聯盟，皆只是遲早會發生的危機症狀而非原因。新自由主義不只造成歐債危機的發生，亦嚴重侵蝕了所謂的歐洲社會模式之根基。社會福利原本不以市場利潤為前提亦不以市場邏輯為依歸，如今卻依附在市場之下，社會保護資源反被拿來保護強者，弱者卻成了風險承擔者。若以本研究之發現對區域整合理論中之自由派政府間主義、新功能主義、以及社會建構主義之解釋能力進行比較，則強調知識社群共享之觀念想法的社會建構主義最能深入核心地解釋歐洲貨幣聯盟從萌芽到今日深陷危機之歷史發展軌跡；而強調各國利益與談判本錢的自由派政府間主義則僅提供了表淺觀察。英文摘要：Are the Greek profligacy, the Spanish and Irish housing bubble, and Italy's runaway debt the immediate causes or symptoms of the European debt crisis? Is the construction of the Euro area in a non-optimum currency area, the establishment of the monetary union in the absence of a fiscal union, and the design of the European Central Bank with the sole task of preventing inflation the indirect causes or symptoms of the European debt crisis? This article argues that the root cause of the European debt crisis lies in the spread of neoliberal ideology among political elites and intellectuals that occurred in the 1980s. The shared neoliberal ideas contributed to the re-launch of the European project in the 1980s, the single European currency that followed suit, the flawed-design of the ECB and the monetary union, and hence the crisis the EU is faced with today. Once the far-reaching impact of the neoliberal causal beliefs is put into perspective, it becomes clear that phenomena such as the Greek profligacy, the Spanish and Irish housing bubble, and the flawed-design of the monetary union are symptoms rather than causes of the crisis foreseen by many. The neoliberal ideology has not only caused the crisis but has severely eroded the foundation of the so-called European social model. In the pre-neoliberal era, the welfare state did not subordinate to the logic of market. In the neoliberal era, social resources are easily allocated on protecting the rich and the strong, with risks shouldered by the more disadvantaged in the society. The findings of this article show that among the mainstream integration theories, social constructivism, which stresses the importance of epistemic community and shared ideas, can provide the most in-depth explanation for the trajectory that the EU took leading up to the debt crisis. In contrast, liberal intergovernmentalism, which emphasizes national interests and negotiation power, can provide only superficial observations.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.58.023篇名：政黨結構與決策機制：比較日本自民黨與民主黨在決策過程的權力轉移並列篇名：Party Structure and Decision-Making Mechanism: The Impact of Power Transition from the LDP to the DPJ in Japan's Decision-Making Processes作者：鄭子真(Tzu-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：派閥政治;族議員;政策調查會;國會對策委員會;日本政治;habatsu politics;zokugiin;policy research committee;parliament strategy committee;Japanese politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：戰後日本政治的顯著特色為自民黨長期執政和與自民黨內部的派閥政治。在自民黨的主導之下，派閥政治不僅影響自民黨黨內的決策過程，也影響政府的資源分配。伴隨社會分工化與利益的專業化，自民黨的長期執政造就族議員現象，其專注並在特定政策領域上具有專業知識。除了這些非正式的權力結構，自民黨的決策過程主要掌控在政策調查會和國會對策委員會，其分別負責黨內協議和對外協商。在2009年政黨輪替之後，民主黨訴諸體制改革和政治主導，環境變化導致政黨協商在決策過程中日益重要。因此，本文旨在檢視政治環境的變遷是否影響政策調查會和國會對策委員會在決策過程中的重要角色。英文摘要：The most prominent characteristics of Japanese politics after World War II are the long rule of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and factional politics within the LDP. Under the dominance of the LDP, factional politics had affected not only decision-making processes within the LDP but also the distribution of public resources through the government. With the social division of labor and benefits of specialization, the long-ruling LDP had also given rise to the phenomenon of Zokugiin, in that the so-called tribal Dietmen specialized, and claimed expertise, in specific policy areas in the decision-making processes. In addition to these informal power structures, the decision-making processes of the LDP had been controlled mainly by the Policy Research Committee (PRC), and the Parliament Strategy Committee (PSC), which were respectively responsible for internal and external negotiations. After the power transfer in 2009, the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) began to implement its agenda of political structural reform that emphasized the importance of initiatives launched directly by politicians. In other words, inter-party negotiations have become more important than before. This paper aims to examine whether the change of the Japanese political context has influenced the critical role of PRC and PSC in the political decision-making processes.起始頁-結束頁：73-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.58.034篇名：民眾政黨認同、媒介選擇與紅衫軍政治運動參與並列篇名：Party Identification, Media Choice, and Popular Participation in Red-Shirts Political Movement作者：劉嘉薇(Jia-Wei Liu)關鍵字：政黨認同;媒介選擇;資訊;政治參與;紅衫軍;party identification;media choice;information;political participation;Red-Shirts political movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：58期出版年：2014中文摘要：紅衫軍反貪腐倒扁運動是臺灣近年來最大規模的政治運動，在過程中，百萬人走上街頭，民眾的政黨認同以及媒介選擇代表了民眾的政治認同以及政治資訊來源，兩者對參與政治運動有何影響是本文關注的焦點。研究發現，不論是民眾的政黨認同或媒介選擇，對於促成參與反貪腐倒扁運動皆有推波助瀾的效果，因此政治認同與政治資訊對於政治運動的參與缺一不可，也說明政治行動是政治資訊與政治預存傾向的結合。整體而言，臺灣民眾政黨認同為政治態度中重要的分歧，也幾乎劃定了位於不同政治光譜的民眾是否參與倒扁運動。然僅以政黨認同解釋對此運動的參與仍不足，傳播媒介促成的動員力道亦不可忽視。媒介對議題的討論提升民眾的政治知識，匯集公眾的意見，活絡了政治參與，成為政治動員重要的基礎。對於紅衫軍運動倡導者而言，媒介為其發聲管道，增加民眾對議題的關心，創造了運動的集體意識，聯結分散各處的個人，成為政治運動過程中的催化劑。英文摘要：The anti-corruption and Depose-Chen movement initiated by the Red-Shirts is the largest political movement in recent Taiwan. In process, party identification and media choice represent people's political identification and information sources. The main concern of this paper is how they impact the participation of this political movement. Studies indicate that party identification and media choice make an enhanced effect and push people to join the demonstration. Therefore, both political identification and information are indispensable on participation in political movements, and it also shows that political movements are a function of political information and political predispositions. In general, political attitudes of people in Taiwan are greatly shaped by their party identification, and party identification significantly determines how people of different political orientations understood the Depose-Chen movement and their participation in the movement. But it is not enough to use only party identification to explain if it affects people's participation in this movement. It cannot be neglected to observe the power of media in forcing the mobilization. Discussions of media on public issues enhance people's political knowledge, gather public opinions, activate political participation, and become the vital foundation of political mobilization. To the advocates of the Red-Shirts movement, media is their voice channel that would increase people's concerns for issues, create group consciousness, and connect individuals anywhere to become a catalyzer during the movement mobilization.起始頁-結束頁：101-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.58.045篇名：明太祖的治理思想三論－以《大明太祖高皇帝御注道德真經》為核心並列篇名：Three Theses on the Ruling Philosophy of Ming Tai Tzu-Principally on the Analysis of ”Commentary of Dao Der Zhen Jing”作者：林俊宏(Chun-Hung Lin)關鍵字：老子御注;常與變;理;氣;天命;emperor's commentary of Lao Zu;permanence versus changes;Li (the great rule);Qi (vital energy);mandate期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：57期出版年：2014中文摘要：《老子》一書，不僅是道家重要的經典，同時也是研究中國哲學或是中國政治思想重要的文本之一。歷來，有許多的注本傳世，其中，「御注」提供了我們觀察帝王統治思維的視點與文本基礎。不同時期的帝王對《老子》的不同態度，充分折射出了帝王文化與《老子》的複雜關係。明太祖，作為明代的開國者，並且是統治基調的定調者，他的政治作為高度影響了明代政治活動的走向。他的政治著作中可以找到反映政治作為的思想元素，特別是他親注的《道德經》，從中體現出他對於儒釋道三教的基本看法，也呈現出政治與宗教的充分對話，是研究明初政治的重要文本。本文以《大明太祖高皇帝御注道德真經》為核心，從「道與理、氣、欲」、「天命國家與君臣關係」與「刑政與無為」三個面向，討論太祖的政治思想。認為太祖關於御注的書寫，就權力的常規化運作與政治文化的趨於收歛而言，是一部很重要的宣示作品。同時，也反映出宋明政治社會的同一化營造趨於成熟。英文摘要：This article deals with the internal context of Ming Tai Tzu's political philosophy, principally based on the analysis of the book Commentary of Dao Der Zhen Jing written by Ming Tai Tzu (明太祖, the founder of Ming Dynasty). There are three parts in this article. The discussion of Dao or permanence reveals the first part and the relationship among Dao (the great origin), Li (the great rule) and Qi (the vital energy) will be also discussed. The second part unfolds the discussions in two dimensions the legitimacy of the Mandate State, and the interaction of the monarch and the bureaucracy (or the gentry). The last part focuses on the ruling skills and the ideal of non-action that offers a kind of platform where tri-religions may occur to dialogue. Ming Tai Tzu had shown the methodology (or kind of Aesthetics) of governance in many writings, especially in Commentary of Dao Der Zhen Jing. The purpose in the commentary is to deliver the legitimacy of state building by initiating or re-shaping a metaphysical system that not only monitors the statecraft but also embraces or orders the world. And through the activity of making commentary of the Daoist texts, Ming Tai Tzu discussed the dialectical relationship between ”classics” (經) and ”changes” (變). He emphasized that changes can be normal and have the legitimacy just under the qualification by following the great rule (Dao, Li, or permanence). There won't be any variations that should alter the ultimate. And this is valid not only in the sphere of daily living, but also in the sphere of governing. The basic understandings of body politics that come from ancient philosophers are also exemplified in Ming Tai Tzu's ruling philosophy. And through this ”scriptures postil the commentators” tradition, Ming Tai Tzu revealed his political ideas, strengthened his influence and shared or even dominated the power of discourse.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.57.016篇名：論政府管制：一個政治經濟學的觀點並列篇名：On State Regulation: A Political Economy Perspective作者：蔡中民(Chung-Min Tsai)關鍵字：政府管制;「國家－市場」關係;國有化;管制理論;獨立管制機關;state regulation;state-market relations;nationalization;regulatory theories;independent regulatory agency期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：57期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文透過分析與比較政府管制的兩種模式－法規性管制及獨立管制機關、國有化與公有財產權－說明「國家－市場」關係的變化並探索近年來前者興起的原因。本文認為後者的效率低下與權責不清是制度崩壞的主因，最終迫使國家推動民營化，並逐步採納前者的制度設計。前者的優勢在於當國家面對以私有財產為主的市場體制發展時，積極參與並扮演一個公正裁判的角色得以促進市場競爭與改善效率。建立獨立管制機關與相應的法規體系可降低政治介入市場時所造成的不確定性與強化政策的可信度，也可避免政策因政治人物的偏好與更迭而頻繁調整。獨立管制機關的自主權得以避免行政權干涉與增加政策延續性與組織專業性，所以成為較良善且實際可行的制度設計。此外，本文檢視政府管制理論的沿革與重要議題，認為其具有三個特點：一、具體制度先於理論而出現；二、理論的發展是先規範性（normative）後實證性（positive）；三、實證理論的分析層次與途徑是先宏觀的系統論而微觀的制度論。1980年代西歐的大規模民營化促成美國式的管制體系向西擴散，進而推行至全球，提供理論更豐富的實證素材。最後，本文指出目前管制體制發展的困境與未來可行的研究方向。英文摘要：By analyzing and comparing two models of state regulation: statutory regulation with independent regulatory agency and nationalization with state ownership, this article explores the rise of regulatory state in the past decades and illustrates why and how the state manages the market. It argues that the latter model was abandoned because of its low efficiency and ambiguous responsibilities. The states decided to adopt privatization and replace it with the former model, which is more applicable. When the state faces the market based on the private ownership, it plays the role of impartial referee and actively participates in the market to promote competition and improve efficiency. Setting up an autonomous regulator reduces the uncertainty caused by political intervention and strengthens policy credibility. While delegating the regulatory authority to independent regulatory agencies, the policies will not be intervened by politicians and keep stable. The autonomy of independent regulators will escape from administrative involvement and increase its expertise and policy continuity. Independent regulatory agencies are now a better and more feasible institutional design. Moreover, this article examines the development of the theories of state regulation and critical issues and proposes three distinct features. First, the empirical evidence emerged earlier than theoretical discussion. Second, the theories have shifted from normative to positive orientation. Third, the level of analysis and analytical approach have moved from macro-level systematic to micro-level institutionalist. At the end, this article points out the predicaments of the development of regulatory system and directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：31-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.57.027篇名：國際制度合作的有效性：權力、知識與理念分配？－以表決制度與國際貨幣基金之改革為例並列篇名：The Effectiveness of International Institutions: Distribution of Power, Knowledge, and Ideas? A Case Study of IMF and Voting System作者：蔡育岱(Yu-Tai Tsai)關鍵字：國際制度;國際關係理論;表決制度;國際貨幣基金;international institutions;international relations theories;voting system;IMF期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：57期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文重新審視國際合作的看法與國際制度的功能。現實主義認為，制度基本上是反映權力的分配，渠是基於強權間自我利益的計算，呈現較悲觀的國家行為分析模式。而自由制度主義則直接挑戰此一命題，主張制度可以改變國家偏好，進而形塑國家的行為，有能力使更多的國家擺脫衝突。相較之下，建構主義對制度的核心論述，是強調構成性與規則性規範將改變制度和國際體系，進而徹底改變無政府狀態為假設下的自助、自利的思維模式，使國家根據他們自己的身份認同界定利益。緣此，本研究透過國際組織之表決制度，分析合作的限制與制度有效性，其中一為表決權的分配，另為表決方式的操作，藉以解釋國際關係中合作的現象，究竟是何種理論較具有解釋力？最後將以近期國際貨幣基金表決制度與對中國份額之改革策略進行分析，說明其與理論之間的關連性。英文摘要：This paper re-examines an analysis of the prospects for international cooperation and of the capabilities of international institutions. Realists, liberal institutionalists, and Constructivists particularly disagree about whether institutions markedly affect the prospects for international stability. Realists insist that institutions are fundamentally a function of the distribution of power in the world. Their analysis is based on the self-interested calculations of the great powers, and presents a pessimistic analysis on state behavior. Liberal institutionalists directly challenge the proposition of Realism, arguing instead that institutions can alter state preferences and then change state behavior. Institutions have the capability to move states away from conflict. On the contrary, the central aim of Constructivists is to alter the constitutive and regulative norms of the international system so that states stop thinking and acting according to anarchy. States would not think in terms of self-help or self-interest, but would instead define their interests in terms of the international society. Besides, states may pursue a conditional cooperation in the face of international anarchy. Hence, this paper is to evaluate the limitation of cooperation and the effectiveness of international institutions by analyzing the voting system: voting rights and voting methods. The task involves answering questions: Which is the most causal logic that explains the effectiveness of international institutions? Are these different theories that explain how China works in ”Quota” Reform of IMF and its Voting System? Does the evidence support these theories?起始頁-結束頁：53-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.57.038篇名：中國大陸全國人大專門委員會的制度化歷程及評估並列篇名：Headway on Specialization but Deficiency on Autonomy: Institutionalization of the Permanent Committees in China's National People's Congress作者：趙建民(Chien-Min Chao);張鈞智(Chun-Chih Chang)關鍵字：全國人民代表大會;制度化;威權韌性;專門委員會;National People's Congress;institutionalization;authoritarian resilience;Permanent Committee期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：57期出版年：2014中文摘要：中國大陸的公民社會逐漸展露自主性，但立法機構是否也出現類似趨勢，引起學界關注。本文根據政治學的相關理論，佐以中國大陸的實際狀況，提出制度化的操作定義，藉以探討並評估全國人大專委會的制度化發展。本文發現，在制度化的三個指標當中，「繁複性」進展最多，「普遍規則」也有部分增長，但「周界」的維護非但未獲提升，反而有微幅下降的趨勢。在「繁複性」方面，專委會成員明顯增加、委員年輕化、知識化和專業化的程度上升，有利於立法工作的推動。專委會的功能和作用獲得更明確的法規支撐，在議案和法案審議的職能也有所強化，使得「普遍規則」的建立有所提升，不過，行政和立法部門在法案起草方面的分工，加上委員會議事規則長久未能修訂，削弱了專委會立法功能。在「周界」方面，專委會資深領導增加有助於專業立法，但中共黨員比例占有絕對優勢、專委成員平均任期大幅下降、常委會委員比例增加，這些因素都不利於人大「周界」的建立。本文結論指出，全國人大專委會的專業能力固然有所提升，但自主性仍低，此一發展符合韌性威權的說法。英文摘要：As China's society is showing signs of civil autonomy and defiance, scholars wonder whether the legislatures, once a ”rubber stamp,” are gaining a new life by becoming more autonomous vis-a-vis the resilient party-state. Employing a new operational definition of institutionalization by supplementing the concepts borrowed from existing literature in China's National People's Congress (NPC), this article tries to analyze the institutional developments of the permanent committees in the NPC. The findings suggest that the NPC committees have indeed made great headway on the issue of ”complexity” and even included some ”universal criteria” in their rules, but problems with the ”boundness” still linger. In the area of ”complexity,” the growth of committees in both size and numbers, recruitment of younger but better educated members, the emergence of seniority system in the selection of leadership and the rising trend towards specialization, have all contributed to building up capacity of the institution. While the function of law-drafting has been declining, committees have been granted more powers in the deliberation process, and hence more regularization. On the other hand, about 80% of committee members still retain CCP membership. More NPC Standing Committee members are serving in permanent committees than before, while shortened time served by committee members have added additional challenges to the consolidation of ”boundness.” In conclusion, the article substantiates the logic of ”authoritarian resilience” by pointing out that although more specialization is obviously discernible in the NPC committees, autonomy remains weak.起始頁-結束頁：77-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2014.57.0401篇名：數位學習平臺「第二生命」（Second Life）研究的知識結構與發展趨勢並列篇名：The Knowledge Structure and Development Trend of the Studies of Digital Learning Platform ”Second Life”作者：方瑀紳(Yu-Shen Fang);李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee)關鍵字：文獻計量學;共被引分析;知識圖譜;第二生命;數位學習;Bibliometrics;Co-Citation Analysis;Knowledge Map;Second Life;Digital Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：「第二生命」（Second Life, SL）已被認為是有助各種學科提升學習效果的數位學習平臺，也引發愈來愈多的研究，其研究的知識結構與發展趨勢值得透過研究文獻的回顧加以瞭解以利SL的善用。因此，本研究借重量化的文獻計量學之引文分析、文獻共被引分析及文獻社會網絡分析，以2006－2012年間在Web of Science [WoS]資料庫所收納期刊發表的SL文獻為對象，總共分析394篇文獻及所引用之13,315筆參考文獻資料。研究結果如下：1. SL研究的知識結構以商業與經濟、教育與教育研究、電腦科學、心理學、資訊與圖書科學等學科領域為重點；2. SL研究文獻主要來自美國的大學，其次為英國；3. SL前三個研究群集為「3D教育發展趨勢」、「化身對玩家的行為改變」和「虛擬環境應用的理論」；以及4. SL研究文獻共被引圖譜呈現均衡分散現象，說明SL研究領域尚未形成自身獨特的核心群集。英文摘要：Second Life (SL) has been considered to be the digital learning platform promoting a variety of disciplines to enhance learning and led to an increasing number of research studies. The knowledge structure and development trend of SL studies are worth being investigated through the research literature review to make better use of SL. Thus, this study employed quantitative bibliometric citation analysis, literature co-citation analysis and literature social network analysis to analyze the SL journal articles published between 2006 and 2012 and included in the WoS database. A total of 394 articles and 13,315 documents cited in those articles were explored. The results are as follows: (1) The knowledge structure of the SL studies focuses on business and economics, education and educational research, computer science, psychology, information science and library science; (2) The SL research literatures are mainly from universities in the United States and the United Kingdom; (3) The first three research clusters of SL studies are ”3D trends in education,” ”incarnation of the players' behavior change” and ”the theory of virtual environment applications;” (4) The SL research literature co-cited map indicates balanced dispersion phenomenon and implies that the research field of SL has not formed its own unique core cluster yet.起始頁-結束頁：331-362資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2204.012篇名：運用專業成長活動促進高職教師探究教學之覺轉變之個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study on the Transition of Vocational High-School Teachers' Perception of Inquiry Teaching through the Application of Professional Development Activities作者：張宇樑(Yu-Liang (Aldy) Chang)關鍵字：知覺;高職教師;專業成長;探究教學;Perception;Vocational High-School Teacher;Professional Development;Inquiry Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究奠基於高瞻計畫之執行，由大學端研究團隊協助一群高職教師透過專業成長課程、討論分享、和省思調整等方式擴展其專業知能，以合作方式共同進行以「跨領域機電整合智慧機器人」為主題及探究教學為核心之課程設計。據此，本文旨在探討高職教師於此專業成長過程中，對於「探究教學」知覺的轉變情形。研究者採用質化個案方法，以嘉義地區某國立高級職業學校之9名教師為研究對象，蒐集在接受為期一年專業成長過程中對探究教學知覺之轉變情形資料，並以編輯分析式策略進行分析。研究結果發現，參與之高職教師們在探究教學之知覺的兩大面向「學習觀點的定位知覺」及「課程與教學的實務知覺」上有明顯之轉變；且在接受專業成長活動後，已能明確知覺到探究教學對學生科學學習之助益，更能據以設計主題之探究教學活動。最後根據結果提出對高中職教師透過專業成長活動進行課程設計、及藉由與大學端之長期合作模式來協助教師們在探究教學知覺上轉變之兩項建議，期望能促進高中職教師理解與投入探究教學之實施。英文摘要：Based on the execution of the High Scope Project, this study aimed to group vocational highschool teachers for the purpose of professional development with the assistance of the university research team. The targeted group of teachers was equipped with appropriate professional knowledge and ability to cooperatively deign the ”interdisciplinary inquiry curriculum on 'Mechatronic' intelligence robot,” accompanied by various activities of discussion, sharing, reflection, and adjustment. Accordingly, this article was to explore the possible transition of these vocational high-school teachers' perception of ”inquiry teaching” during this one-year professional development process. A qualitative case study approach was employed in this study. Participants were nine teachers of a public vocational high-school in Chiayi area. Data were collected throughout the executive process of the professional development program and then analyzed by the editing analytic techniques for examining the transition of these teachers' perception of inquiry teaching. According to the data analyses, two themes regarding these teachers' perception of inquiry teaching were extracted to show their changes after receiving the professionaldevelopment program: ”orientated perception of learning conception” and ”practical perception of curriculum and instruction.” The findings indicated that these teachers progressively aware the advantages of inquiry teaching for their students' scientific learning, which led to a proper deign of the targeted curriculum with an emphasis of inquiry teaching. Recommendations derived from findings and discussions were proposed for assisting high-school teachers in future curriculum design tasks and= enhancing their perception transition through the support of a cooperative long-term professional development program provided by the university research team. It is also expected that more highschool teachers can comprehend the core concept of inquiry teaching and are willing to devote themselves to implementing inquiry teaching in their classrooms.起始頁-結束頁：363-388資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2204.023篇名：探討內在動機與自我效能為中介預測科學想像力的學習模式並列篇名：Learning Model of Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Efficacy as a Mediator to Predict the Scientific Imagination作者：許育齡(Yu-Ling Hsu);梁朝雲(Chao-Yun Liang);許盛貴(Sheng-Kuei Hsu)關鍵字：內在動機;自我效能;科學想像力;學習模式;Intrinsic Motivation;Self-Efficacy;Scientific Imagination;Learning Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究邀集臺灣地區修習科學領域（含理科與工科）大學生為研究對象，運用信度與效度穩定的問卷為研究工具，以結構方程模式探討心理與學習環境如何協同運作以預測學習者的科學想像力。結果顯示，心理與環境可整合為一透過內在動機與自我效能為中介的結構模式預測創始、構思與轉造等三種科學想像力。心理層面的生產認知與負向情緒，以及環境層面之文化特質對想像力有直接作用，且生產認知、正向情緒、學習資源、社會構成、文化特質還可透過程度不等的中介作用，間接預測科學想像力。本研究在探討內外在因素對想像力的直接與間接作用後，提出教師教學與學生自學之應用討論與後續研究建議。英文摘要：The current study was aimed to analyze the factors of psychology and environment that could predict the students' scientific imagination. The participants in this study were Taiwanese university students of science and technology. The results indicated that psychological and environmental factors integrated as the intrinsic motivation and self-efficacy mediating models could effectively predict the scientific imagination. It was found that the psychological factors of generative cognition and negative emotion, as well as the environmental factors of the human aggregate, had direct effects on scientific imagination. In addition, generative cognition, positive emotion, learning resources, social climate, and the human aggregate were shown to have different indirect effects on different kinds of scientific imagination. After the psychological and environmental predictive effects were explored, teaching and learning applications were also discussed, and further research suggestions were offered.起始頁-結束頁：389-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2204.034篇名：透過知識創新教學理念與學習平臺以培養國小學生自然課合作學習與翻新想法的習慣並列篇名：Elementary Students Engaging in Collaborative Idea Generation and Improvement in a Science Class through Knowledge Building and Knowledge Forum作者：洪煌堯(Huang-Yao Hong);蔡佩真(Pei-Chen Tsai);林倍伊(Pei-Yi Lin)關鍵字：合作學習;知識創新;知識論壇平臺;節能減碳;電腦支援協作學習;Collaborative Learning;Knowledge Building;Knowledge Forum;Energy Saving;Computer Collaborative Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以知識創新的教學理念為基礎，設計國小自然課程中有關「節能減碳」知識的學習活動，並經由知識論壇平臺的輔助以促進學生以翻新想法為核心的合作學習。本研究採個案研究，以臺灣國小五年級學生為研究對象。以知識創新的教學理念進行一學年有關節能減碳教育的教學，學生利用知識論壇平臺進行互動、合作與討論。結果發現，知識創新教學有助於促進學生間以「想法」為單位的合作學習，例如學生在知識論壇上的「修改他人想法的貼文」在學習第一至三階段中不斷成長，「共有作者貼文」的比例在學習階段一至四中不斷成長。透過知識論壇的合作互動，學生能夠產生許多關於節能減碳的個人想法，同時分享並不斷改進想法，使想法更具完整性與解釋力。另外，與國中教材的重要概念相比，結果亦顯示在知識創新的教學下學生能提出更豐富、多元的節能減碳的想法。證實知識創新環境中的學習有助於培養學生集體知識共構的習慣，以及豐富學生的合作學習經驗。本研究建議：鼓勵以想法為中心的合作學習與互動，以幫助學生發展知識創新的關鍵能力。英文摘要：This study aimed to help students collectively construct knowledge regarding energy saving, using an innovative pedagogical approach called knowledge building. Participants in this case study were 5th-grade students in Taiwan. They worked in Knowledge Forum-a knowledge building environment-for a complete school year. The analysis indicated that knowledge building did make students become more collaborative; as a result, they were able to engage deeply in the process of ideas generation, idea interaction, and idea improvement, rather than to engage in superficial social talk. In addition, it was found that students were able to discuss and form rich concepts of energy saving; they were not only able to share ideas, but to deepen their ideas relevant to energy-saving; it was found that there were significantly more concepts co-constructed in class than concepts covered in some official curriculum materials. In sum, knowledge building seemed to be useful for students to create collaborative knowledge in science learning. Some implications regarding teaching and collaborative learning were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：413-439資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2204.045篇名：數學建模－社會文化與集體論證的觀點並列篇名：Mathematical Modelling-A Sociocultural and Collective Argumentation Perspective作者：黃志賢(Chih-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：社會文化;集體論證;微積分;論述;數學建模能力;Sociocultural;Collective Argumentation;Calculus;Discourse;Mathematical Modeling Competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究基於社會文化與集體論證的觀點，設計嵌入微積分課程的數學建模活動培養學生的數學建模能力，在此教學介入下，逐漸發展大一微積分學生的數學建模能力。研究對象為54位科技大學微積分學生，研究方法採用數學建模教學實驗、課堂觀察及晤談。教學實驗將建模教學活動融入正規的微積分課程，以避免習慣接受傳統教學的學生的阻力，研究結果發現多數學生最缺乏的是「給定模型的變數和參數」、「圖形表徵與代數表徵的轉換」及「缺乏詮釋和效化的能力」。但經由數學建模教學，學生確實可以透過獨立作業及集體論證，逐漸發展其數學建模能力。學生的數學建模能力從「只瞭解給定的情境，但無法結構化和簡化情境或不能發現有關的數學想法」的層次，逐漸發展到「能經驗數學建模過程和效化與給定情境有關的數學解答」層次。本研究證實將教學與學習脈絡聚焦在社會文化取向與集體論證觀點，確實能幫助學生強化舊知識、發展新知識及培養數學建模能力。起始頁-結束頁：237-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2203.016篇名：Thales自然哲學思想的詮釋學重建及其在創造力教育上的應用並列篇名：The Hermeneutic Reconstruction of Thales' Cosmology and Its Application in Science Education作者：方文宗(Wen-Tsung Fang);李鴻佑(Hung-Yu Li);林財庫(Tsai-Ku Lin)關鍵字：本原;技法;純生成;詮釋學重建;詮釋學迴環;Gk. Arche;Gk. Techne;Gk. Physis;Hermeneutic-Reconstruction;Hermeneutic-Circle期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文首次形式化Heidegger的現象詮釋法，並以之重建（註1）古希臘Thales的本原論思想及其隱含的創造技法。由Thale思想的主導詞（水、神和靈魂）的詞源和詞義家族的組織來探究Thales純生成型思想和技法（註2）的詮釋學脈絡，並討論其與Nietzsche超人哲學和Heidegger存在哲學之思想和方法間的內在聯繫，及其在創造力教育上的啟發。研究顯示，這種不作任何預設，只讓思想的主導詞自身言說的新方法具有獨特性和普遍性，是一種既可獨立運作又可與現代科學方法互補的新方法。運用這種方法來重建Thales的本原論，不但產生了很多前人所未發的重要結論，也對知識如何生成和組織提供一種新視域和新路徑，對如何經由教育來培養國民之創造力提供一個具體的實踐案例。英文摘要：The Thales' cosmology has been reconstructed by means of M. Heidegger's phenomenonhermeneutic method for the first time. The hermeneutic meanings of water, Gk. theos, psyche, and thumos, which come from various organizations of their etymological family members, have been used to accomplish this reconstruction. The results of this investigation indicate that this method has several important features, e.g. it is universal, unique and a good complementary of scientific method, and should be a useful method for generating and organizing knowledge. Several new important features of Thales' cosmology have been addressed, their internal relations with Nietzsche's and Heidegger's philosophy, and the possible application in creativity education has been discussed.起始頁-結束頁：259-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2203.027篇名：科學新聞觀點對不同年齡階段女性健康決策之影響－以荷爾蒙療法為例並列篇名：The Impact of Science News Positions on Different Age Levels Women's Health Decision-An Example of Hormone-Replacement Therapy作者：林靜雯(Jing-Wen Lin);林錦鴻(Chin-Hung Lin);陳美蓉(Mei-Rong Chen)關鍵字：科學新聞;健康決策;健康相關之社會性科學議題;荷爾蒙療法;新聞觀點;Science News;Health Decision-Making;Health-Related Socio-Science Issues (H-SSI);Hormonal-Replacement Therapy (HRT);News Position期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以更年期不適是否採用荷爾蒙療法（Hormone Replace Therapy, HRT）為例，探討科學新聞之正、負觀點對不同年齡層女性健康決策之影響。研究者先分別將78名女大學生及79名更年期婦女，隨機分配至「正面新聞」或「負面新聞」兩組，接著調查其閱讀新聞前、後採用HRT之決策程度、理由的改變情形及新聞面向的覺察情形。研究發現新聞之正、負觀點會影響女大學生採用HRT之決策改變程度，但並不影響更年期婦女。而以「健康信念模式」分析受試者的決策理由則顯示不同觀點之健康新聞會影響女大學生對「自覺行動利益」與「自覺行動障礙」的覺知，但對於更年期婦女則沒有顯著影響。而以「文化鑽石」之架構分析受試者閱讀新聞的解讀面向則顯示無論哪種年齡階段皆注意新聞「文本」，而較不能體察其他面向。若女大學生與更年期婦女相較，前者對新聞「生產者」的面向較為關注，而後者則較有先入為主的看法而不需要進一步的資訊補充。文末，研究者根據研究結果對科學教學及科學新聞寫作提出建議。英文摘要：This study takes menopause hormone-replacement therapy (HRT) as an example to explore the impact of a positive or negative view of the science news on different age level women's health decisions. Seventy-eight female college students and 79 post-menopause women were randomly assigned to two groups of ”positive news” or ”negative news” respectively. Then, their decision degree, changes, reasons and awareness about news perspectives of reading hospital circulars and news were investigated. The research results show that the news of the positive or negative view influence female college students' decisions about the degree of adopting HRT, but do not affect post-menopause women. Using ”Health belief model” to analyze the reasons for the participants' decision-making, this study found different positions of news would influence female college students' awareness of ”perceived benefits of actions” and ”perceived barriers of action”. Furthermore, using the framework of the ”cultural diamond” to analyze the participants' interpretation perspectives of news, this study found either age levels pay their attention to the news ”text”, and are less able to aware of the other perspectives. Comparisons between female students and post-menopause women show the former is more concerned about the ”producers” perspective, while the latter is prejudiced by their original impressions without the need for further supplementary information. According to the findings, this study provides recommendation to teaching health-related social science issues in science education and writing science news in the end.起始頁-結束頁：281-306資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2203.038篇名：科學史教學對學生科學認識觀與概念學習的影響－不同教學順序的比較並列篇名：Does Sequence Matter? The Influence of Teaching History of Science on Students' Scientific Epistemological Views and Conceptual Learning作者：邱奕華(Yi-Hua Chiu);劉湘瑤(Shiang-Yao Liu)關鍵字：光電效應;科學史;科學認識觀;概念學習;Photoelectric Effect;History of Science;Scientific Epistemological Views;Conceptual Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解科學史融入科學教學單元對學生科學認識觀和概念學習的影響。本研究以高中一年級基礎物理「光電效應」單元設計三組教學方式：「科學史－科學概念教學」（後稱歷史概念組）、「科學概念－科學史教學」（後稱概念歷史組）以及「傳統教學」（後稱對照組），由一位物理教師在其授課班級依研究者提供的教學活動流程進行教學。參與學生有六個班級共270人，每組有兩班平均90位學生，最後約八成學生全程參與本研究。兩組實驗組所接受的教學除該單元原教科書內容之外，另加入科學史案例和科學本質的討論問題。透過科學認識觀問卷前後測結果發現，概念歷史組有最佳成效，對照組則顯著退步。另以學生課堂學習單的作答進一步分析兩個教學介入實驗組學生的科學認識觀。以該單元學習後之小考和段考成績比較三組學生該單元概念學習的表現，結果顯示三組學生並無顯著差異，至少科學史教學對學生學習光電效應這類較艱深的科學概念未產生不利影響。本研究結果顯示，先將該單元的內容知識教完後再帶入科學史教材的教學成效最佳，因此教學內容呈現的順序會影響學習效果。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of involving the history of science materials in a science unit on students' scientific epistemological views and conceptual learning outcomes. Taking the Photoelectric Effect as the subject, we designed three different combinations of teaching materials, e.g. History of Science-Scientific Concept (HOS-SC group), Scientific Concept-History of Science (SC-HOS group) and Traditional Teaching (control group), and provided these materials to one high school science teacher. This teacher followed the teaching instructions in all of her classes. 270 students in 6 classes were involved and separated into three groups, and about 80% of them retained in this study. In contrast to the control group, the two experimental groups obtained additional scientific history materials and reflective questions regarding nature of science. Comparisons of the pre- and post-tests of scientific epistemology views indicated a considerable improvement in the SC-HOS group and a notable deterioration of the control group, but no significant change in the HOS-SC group. Students' scientific epistemological views were further analyzed through their responses to the open-ended questions in the worksheets. There were no significant differences on the scores of unit quiz and midterm assessment among the three groups of students. Yet, HOS teaching did not have negative influence on students' science achievement either. Overall, the SC-HOS teaching approach demonstrated an advantage when teaching units with relatively tough concepts. This study concluded that different sequence of HOS and content knowledge presented in science instruction indeed have different effect on students' learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：307-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2203.049篇名：以視覺設計文法比較臺澳科學教科書圖像－以七年級生物分類單元為例並列篇名：Comparing the Images in Taiwanese and Australian Science Textbooks by Grammar of Visual Design: An Example of Biological Classification作者：蓋允萍(Yun-Ping Ge);鍾昌宏(Chang-Hung Chung);王國華(Kuo-Hua Wang);張惠博(Huey-Por Chang);Len Unsworth關鍵字：生物分類;科學教科書;視覺設計文法;跨國比較;圖像;Biological Classification;Science Textbook;Grammar of Visual Design;Cross-Country Comparison;Image期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：社會符號學指出科學教科書的圖像設計無法免除社會文化的影響，本研究旨在探討臺澳教科書中圖像表徵之差異，以視覺設計文法為理論架構（Kress & Van Leeuwen, 2006），從三個後設功能（概念、人際、與語篇）分析圖像所隱含的意義。本研究採內容分析法，取樣臺澳七年級教科書各三個版本，以生物分類單元的圖像作為分析對象。所分析的圖像原有325個圖組，在決定圖像最小單位後，成為990個單位圖像，依照編碼表將每個圖像編碼，分別計量後再進行質與量的比較。結果顯示，在概念後設功能方面，兩國在第一層與第二層的圖像結構分佈類似，第一層主類別皆以概念結構最多，敘述結構極少；第二層次類別多以分析與分類等結構表徵生物特徵與分類的概念。深入第三層對分類次類別的圖像分析後，發現澳版較多採用顯明分類的方式，能彰顯類別的階層關係，臺版多用的隱蔽分類方式則無此功能；在人際後設功能方面，澳版較能運用圖像在動作、參與度、社會距離與權力關係等層面的設計技巧，營造讀者與圖像間較佳的人際關係；語篇後設功能方面，臺澳在版置安排的差異潛藏著社會文化的影響。上述概念、人際、與語篇三個後設功能的分析顯示臺澳科學教科書的圖像的確存在著差異，文末並對教科書圖像編輯與教學提出建議。英文摘要：Social semiotics proposes that image design is influenced by socio-culture. Drawing on the theoretical framework from grammar of visual design (Kress & Van Leeuwen, 2006), this study compares the images in Taiwanese and Australian high school science textbooks according to three metafunctions: ideational, interpersonal, and textual. Content analysis is used to analyze the sample units of biological classification, which are shared most consistently across six textbooks: three from Taiwan and the other three from Australia. According to our coding scheme, 325 original image complexes can be analyzed into 990 basic image units. All of them are coded qualitatively and compared quantitatively. The comparison of ideational metafunction indicates that the image structures in the first and second level analysis are similar between countries. The majority of images are represented by conceptual structure. Only a few are represented by narrative structure. Both analytical and classificational structures are the most common subtypes to represent the features of living things and their taxonomy. The difference between countries is not revealed until a further analysis of analytical images. It is found that Australian versions use more representation of overt taxonomy which can explicitly represent hierarchical relationships of classification among concepts. Instead, Taiwanese versions use more representation of covert taxonomy which is short of such function. The comparison of interpersonal metafunction reveals that Australian versions skillfully use the functions of image act, involvement, and social distance to construct a closer relationship between the images and readers. The comparison of textual metafunction unfolds that the difference of image design is influenced by the factors from socio-culture. The results from these three metafunctions all confirm that there are some differences among the images in Taiwanese and Australian science textbooks. The implications for images teaching are discussed. Also, suggestions for publication of science textbooks and further research are made.起始頁-結束頁：109-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2202.0110篇名：當數學遇見原民文化－發展原民數學模組之個案研究並列篇名：When Math Meets Indigenous Culture: A Case Study of Developing Mathematics Modules for Indigenous Students作者：姚如芬(Ru-Fen Yao)關鍵字：原民數學模組;原住民學童;數學教學;Indigenous Culture-Based Mathematics Modules;Indigenous Students;MathematicsInstruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本個案研究以「設計原民數學模組」為路徑，帶領六位職前教師進入一個原住民部落為學童設計融入原民文化的數學模組，前後歷時十個月。經由「準備與規劃」、「探尋與理解」、「閱讀與設計」、「評論與修訂」、以及「實踐與反省」五階段的引導，並透過觀察、晤談、問卷與相關文件的蒐集與分析，結果發現：六位職前教師可能由於本身具備的文化底蘊厚度不同，對於「原民數學模組」的設計存有兩種不同的取向；而因為設計取向的差異，所設計出的原民數學模組樣貌亦有所不同。文末研究者從模組實踐前、後所蒐集的資料、以及多元文化教育的五個關照面向來檢視本研究所發展的原民數學模組之適切性，以提供後續製作原住民數學教材的參考依據。英文摘要：The main purpose of this case study was to investigate the development of indigenous culture-based mathematics modules. Six pre-service teachers participated to design indigenous culture-based mathematics instructional modules for students in a tribal elementary school for ten months. From analysis of observation, interview, questionnaire, and related documents, the results revealed that pre-service teachers had two different approaches of designing mathematics modules. And different design approach produced different indigenous culture-based mathematics modules. These differences might be rooted in the pre-service teachers' understanding about indigenous culture. Finally, according to comments from teachers in the tribe and the five dimension of multi-culture education, the researcher asserted indigenous culture-based mathematics modules developed in this case study were appropriate for the indigenous students.起始頁-結束頁：135-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2202.0211篇名：線上小組學習的發生處－以迷思概念為探針並列篇名：Critical Learning Events Triggered by Misconceptions in an Online Small Group Knowledge Co-construction Environment作者：張秀美(Hsiu-Mei Chang);曾仁佑(Ren-Yow Tzeng);陳斐卿(Fei-Ching Chen);鄭凱天(Kai-Tien Cheng)關鍵字：合作知識共構;迷思概念;探究式學習;電腦支援協作學習;學習過程;Knowledge Co-Construction;Misconception;Inquiry-Based Learning;Computer Supported Collaborative Learning;Learning Process期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究從迷思概念為線上小組合作的共同學習成品之觀點，分析在同儕合作共構知識下迷思概念的發展過程與消長關鍵，並藉以深入揭露線上小組合作的學習內涵。研究場域是在一個探究「大氣科學」範疇的線上討論區，其中的學習活動是以小組合作進行，同儕間一同進行長達六週的探究式學習。在研究分析上，本研究看重同儕合作的對話過程，包含了以單篇文章為單位的「迷思概念」和「探究行動」、及文章與文章之間為單位的「迷思概念發展和同儕合作互動之間的動態關係」。研究結果的發現有三：第一、除了指認出同儕間探究「大氣科學」研究範疇「地溫」專題的主要迷思概念、迷思概念座落的討論片段與主題；第二、發現在小組合作學習下引發迷思概念消長的五個關鍵，包含了參考資料驗證的釐清、同儕指認下的終止、實踐經驗下的修正、同儕認同下的延展、事過境遷下的混沌與遲滯。同儕間互為主體性的相互接應，是影響迷思概念發展的重要條件。第三、本研究企圖對線上小組合作知識共構的分析方法有一些啟發，及對於概念學習的教學提出建議。英文摘要：This study attempts to investigate the meaningful learning of online-group knowledge co-construction by identifying the misconceptions, tracking the developmental trajectories of misconceptions, and recognizing the critical moments in the trajectories of misconceptions. Instead of using the ”product” perspective that the contributions for leading a misconception are accounted by the number of their postings, we here adopt the ”contextual-process” perspective that considers the whole temporal trajectories of misconceptions taken place and focuses on the group members’ interaction. In particular, we analyze our data by identifying misconception and inquiry action of each single post, and figuring out the dynamic relationship between the developmental trajectories of the misconceptions and the group peer’s interaction. The results show that there are 56 posts involve the misconceptions and can be categorized to five themes, in which three themes are aware to have the positive learning effects after group discussions, one has negative effect, and the remained one does not cause any effect for learning. We also discovered the five critical moments: ”sharing and justification”, ”recognition”, ”practical knowledge”, ”identification”, and ”confusion and hesitation”. Finally, we further consider ”intersubjectivity” is the important key for the development of and reconsider the meaning-making of the trajectories of misconceptions in online-group knowledge co-construction. And some methodological consideration and teaching strategy about online-group knowledge co-construction was discussed.起始頁-結束頁：185-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2202.0412篇名：培養環境公民行動的大學環境教育課程－整合理性、情感、與終極關懷的學習模式並列篇名：Environmental Education Courses Promoting College Students' Environmental Civic Actions: A Model Based on Learning Processes in the Patterns of the Mind, Heart, and Soul作者：許世璋(Shih-Jang Hsu);任孟淵(Meng-Yuan Jen)關鍵字：大學環境教育;教育介入;整全式學習;環境行動;環境素養;College Level Environmental Education;Educational Intervention;Holistic Learning;Environmental Action;Environmental Literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：大學階段的環境教育對於環境公民的培養扮演關鍵性的角色，但是相關的研究與教學實務對話在臺灣一直沒受到足夠的重視。有鑑於此，本文以大學階段環境公民行動如何形塑為探索焦點，回顧並評析三個環境行動模式與相關課程研究，再以這些理論模式與實證研究為基礎，提出一建立在整全式學習觀點的環境公民行動模式。本模式強調大學環境教育的學習過程涵蓋理性、情感、與終極關懷三個面向，最後再根據此模式發展出一整學年的大學環境教育課程案例。期盼本文有助於提供臺灣未來發展大學環境教育課程的參考，並促進大學環境教育的學術對話。英文摘要：Although college level environmental education plays a crucial role in the development of an environmental citizenry, it is not given adequate attention in practice or research in the field of environmental education in Taiwan. This article reports on a review of three environmental action models and some recent empirical studies related to environmental action in environmental education. The review focuses specifically on the development of environmental civic action at the college level. This article proposes a model based on holistic learning. This model has three main learning patterns, including the mind, heart, and soul. A college level environmental course based on this model is also developed. Implications for program development and instructional practice in college level environmental education in Taiwan are presented.起始頁-結束頁：211-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2202.0513篇名：探討問題導向學習在醫學教育臨床實務能力之成效及啟示並列篇名：Efficiency and Implications of Problem-Based Learning on Clinical Competence in Medical Education作者：洪佳慧(Chia-Hui Hung);林陳涌(Chen-Yung Lin)關鍵字：情境學習理論;問題導向學習;認識論;臨床實務能力;Situated Learning Theory;Problem-Based Learning;Epistemology;Clinical Competence期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，問題導向學習（Problem-Based Learning，PBL）在醫學教育上的應用日漸普遍。一般認為，PBL讓學生在問題情境中學習知識的使用與產出問題解決的原則，但實證研究顯示，關於PBL成效沒有一致性的看法。因此，本文目的為以認識論與心理學觀點為核心，針對PBL可否促進臨床能力之議題，分析支持與反對PBL可提升臨床實務能力的立場辯證，提出良好規劃的PBL課程實務。由理論辯證中發現，PBL認識論觀點強調具實用性的做中學，以及建構學習，與醫學教育欲培育具備臨床能力的醫生相符；由情境學習理論的觀點，PBL將臨床案例融入問題情境中，模擬臨床實務，協助學習遷移，亦是符合醫學教育發展核心能力的需求。基於上述結果，本文以Skilbeck之情境模式作為課程設計的架構，建議PBL教案應提升擬真程度，促使外顯與內隱記憶發展，符合情境學習需求，並能讓學生有機會做中學；課程實施上選擇合適PBL模組實施課程；而在評量上應整合多元測驗，尤其是提供主觀性評量以檢視整體的學習成效。最後，透過本文所提出之理論與實務連結的PBL課程設計，期望可作為成功詮釋PBL成效之基礎。英文摘要：Problem-Based Learning (PBL) has been used increasingly and more widely in medical education in the recent years. PBL involves the use of context of problems that allows students to use their prior knowledge for producing principles of problem solving. However, the empirical researches show that the effectiveness of PBL is not conclusive. In concert with the outcome-based medical education, the purpose of this article was to outline the epistemological and psychological perspectives of PBL and to discuss whether PBL enhance clinical competencies. Furthermore, the argumentations of supportive and opposite opinions of PBL were analyzed to propose strategies for designing a PBL curriculum. From the perspective of theoretical dialectic, the epistemology of PBL stressed on learning by doing and constructive learning, corresponding to the medical education that fosters clinical competence of doctors. From the situated learning perspective, PBL applied clinical cases of real-life scenarios to demonstrate clinical practices and to facilitate learning transfer, which also fulfilled the needs of medical education in developing students' core knowledge. Our findings based on the Skilbeck's situational model of course design, suggested that a higher level of authentic PBL environments should be created to facilitate the learning of explicit and implicit memories and to meet the requirements of situated learning. Adaption of an appropriate PBL module would help students in learning by doing. The effectiveness of learning should be evaluated by multi assessments such as subjective evaluation. This article may be referenced to provide a theoretical basis for practice applications of developing of a well-designed, effective, and successful PBL curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2201.0114篇名：數位動畫對小六學童數常識發展之研究並列篇名：The Study of Computer Animated Activities to Students' Number Sense Performance作者：黃仕奇(Shih-Chi Huang);楊德清(Der-Ching Yang)關鍵字：科技;動畫;數常識;Technology;Animation;Number Sense期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小六年級學童在數常識數位學習動畫下其數常識能力之改變情形。採混合研究法，選取南部某公立國小六年級學生共七班，分為動畫實驗組三班（90人）、繪本實驗組三班（90人）與對照組一班（30人），進行實驗。經過5節課不同學習模式後，研究發現：（1）動畫實驗組、繪本實驗組學生之後測表現均顯著優於對照組學生的表現；（2）在數常識各向度中，向度二動畫實驗組學生表現較佳；向度四繪本實驗組學生表現較好；（3）在答題比例上，動畫實驗組學生則同時在數常識提升與錯誤下降均獲得顯著差異；繪本實驗組在數常識的表現有提升，但錯誤比例未有改變；（4）在性別上，動畫實驗組男生在數常識後測的表現顯著優於繪本實驗組男生與對照組男生；動畫實驗組女生與繪本實驗組女生在數常識後測的表現皆顯著優於對照組女生的表現。但是動畫實驗組女生與繪本實驗組女生在數常識後測的表現則無顯著差異。英文摘要：A quasi-experimental method was used to examine the effect of the use of e-learning animations to the development of sixth-graders' number sense in Taiwan. Seven classes with 210 sixth graders from southern public elementary school were selected to participate into this study. Animation experimental group has 90 students (three classes), sketchbook experimental group has 90 students (three classes), and control group has 30 students (one class). After five class periods learning, the results show that posttests of both the animation experimental group and the sketchbook experimental group were significantly better than the control group. As for the five components of number sense, the posttest of the animation experimental group was significantly better than the control group in component 2, and the posttest of the sketchbook experimental group is significantly better than the control group in component 4. As for the correct ratio, the sketchbook experimental group was significantly better than the control group on number sense. Moreover, the animation experimental group was significantly better than the control group on number sense as well as the reduction of being incorrect. As for the gender variable, the girls' achievements of number sense were significantly better than the boys in the sketchbook experimental group, and the boys and girls in the animation experimental group displayed identically.起始頁-結束頁：33-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2201.0215篇名：以實作評量方式探討引導發現式教學模式之學習成效－以「聲音」概念為例並列篇名：Exploring the Effectiveness of Guided Discovery Teaching by Performance Assessment on the Concept of Sound Wave作者：顧炳宏(Bing-Hong Ku);陳瓊森(Chyong-Sun Chen);溫媺純(Lydia Mei-Chun Wen)關鍵字：引導發現式教學;紙筆測驗;實作評量;聲音概念;Guided Discovery Teaching;Paper-and-pencil Test;Performance Assessment;Sound Wave Concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討實作評量和紙筆測驗此兩種不同評量方式對國中八年級聲音概念引導發現式教學成效之影響。本研究主要採準實驗研究法，針對三個實驗－控制組別，六個班，總人數203位的八年級學生，以質性、量化資料收集與分析方法並行的方式，探討引導發現式教學和傳統講述式教學，於不同評量情境下，對學生概念學習成效之影響之差異和成因。研究結果顯示，紙筆測驗不易測得學生真正的理解和能力，因此以聲音概念紙筆測驗作為評量工具時，無法顯現出引導發現式教學和傳統講述式教學兩者之間概念教學成效之差異；相反的，實作評量比紙筆測驗更能表現出學生真實的學習成效，因此若以聲音概念實作評量作為評量工具時，則可顯示引導發現式教學在概念學習成效上優於傳統講述式教學。此外，本研究根據研究結果亦衍申出「教學形式和評量形式應相互搭配」此一重要結論。英文摘要：The purpose of this study mainly aimed to design guided discovery teaching activities and explore their effectiveness on the sound wave concept by performance assessment. A quasi-experimental method was employed in this study to explore the effectiveness of different teaching styles-guided discovery teaching and the traditional lecture teaching-on the sound wave concept by using different assessment formats-performance assessment and the paper-pencil test. Through both quantitative and qualitative data analyses, it was firstly found that compared with the traditional lecture teaching, guided discovery teaching did not provide better concept learning achievements in the paper-pencil test because of the failure of the paper-pencil test to probe the real understanding and abilities of students. Secondly, it was found that compared with the traditional lecture teaching, guided discovery teaching provided better concept learning achievements in performance assessment, which meant that performance assessment had better effects on probing students' concept learning than the paper-pencil test. Thirdly, based on the results mentioned above, this study also revealed the crucial conclusion of aligning the assessment format with the teaching style.起始頁-結束頁：57-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2201.0316篇名：即時回饋機制對學生學習專注力影響之研究並列篇名：Using Timely Feedback to Enhance the Concentration in College Students作者：林凱胤(Kai-Yin Lin)關鍵字：即時回饋;專注力;教室回饋系統;Timely Feedback;Concentration;Classroom Response System期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：專注力為影響學習成效諸多關鍵因素之一，但學生在課室中專注力狀態之相關實徵性研究尚非足夠；故本研究運用教室回饋系統（Classroom Response System，CRS）中之即時回饋機制，並結合3A策略（arousing Attention，Asking question，Adaptive teaching strategies）來探究學生學習專注力的變化；本研究以某健康護理學院修習計算機概論的二專美容科一年級46位學生為研究樣本，以單組前後測方式進行為期五週的實驗教學，在實驗前後，分別施測「課室學習環境中學生學習專注力量表」（林玉雯、黃台珠、劉嘉茹，2010）。研究結果指出：1.即時回饋機制用於學生學習專注力的提升是一個可行的方式；2.學生在專注力整體表現後測結果也優於前測，特別是在專注力容量、意識及持續三個向度達到顯著差異；3.學生對教室回饋系統融入教學持正面評價。英文摘要：Attention is the key factor for effective learning. However, there are only a few empirical researches in this field. Therefore, this research was expected to integrate timely feedback of Classroom Response System (CRS) and 3A strategies (arousing Attention, Asking question, Adaptive teaching strategies) to explore its impact on students' attention. This study is a quasi-experimental design research. It was a five-week experimental lesson focused on computer development and the basic structure of a computer. The participants were elected by purposeful sampling. 46 students in Department of Beauty agreed to participate in this study. Before and after the experimental lesson, scales were given to measure these students' understanding on computer science issues and their attention conditions. The results suggested that: 1. It's worth doing to apply CRS in classroom teaching for promoting students' attention. 2. After applying CRS in classroom teaching, the results showed that students' attention was better than before CRS activities were carried out in many aspects. It is especially in Concentration Capacity, Concentration Consciousness, and Concentration Duration all had reached a significant level. 3. The students in the experimental group had positive views towards adopting CRS into their courses.起始頁-結束頁：87-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2014.2201.0401篇名：一般發展幼兒及輕度泛自閉症幼兒心智理論與母親心智言談並列篇名：Maternal Talk on Mental States and the Theory of Mind in Typically Developing Children and Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders作者：陳香如(Hsiang-Ru Chen);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：中文;心智理論;幼兒;泛自閉症;親子共讀;Mandarin Chinese;theory of mind;children;autism spectrum disorders;joint book reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討一般發展幼兒和輕度泛自閉症幼兒心智理論的表現，一般發展幼兒和輕度泛自閉症幼兒的母親在親子共讀活動時的心智言談方式，以及母親心智言談方式與其子女心智理論表現的關係。研究對象為兩組四歲至六歲幼兒及其母親，其中20位為輕度泛自閉症幼兒、20位為一般發展幼兒。為控制兩組幼兒的語言能力，本研究採用修訂畢保德圖畫詞彙測驗先評估幼兒的語言能力。之後安排兩組幼兒接受心智理論測驗個別施測，測驗內容包括七項作業，分別是相異欲望、相異信念、知識取得、內容錯誤相信、明確錯誤相信、信念－情緒、及真實－表面情緒。此外，並請幼兒與其母親共同閱讀一本圖畫故事書－鼠小弟捉迷藏，共讀過程加以錄音。本研究採用兒童語料交換系統所統一使用的CHAT格式，進行共讀錄音語料的轉譯和編碼。編碼分析的重點包括親子共讀圖畫書時心智言談的種類、方式及故事主題的維持度，編碼單位為語句。本研究的主要發現有三：一、輕度泛自閉症幼兒在心智理論測驗得分和一般發展幼兒相比，明顯較低。二、輕度泛自閉症幼兒母親在親子共讀時總心智言談出現的次數和頻率，以及心智言談種類的平均數都較一般發展幼兒的母親明顯較低。三、輕度泛自閉症幼兒和一般發展幼兒在心智理論測驗的得分，與其母親在親子共讀時出現的心智言談次數和頻率都達到顯著相關。本研究結果可供泛自閉症幼兒及一般發展幼兒的父母和教師參考，具有教育和臨床應用的價值。英文摘要：Purpose: This study investigated the (1) theory of mind in typically developing children and in children with autism spectrum disorders, (2) mental state discourse in mother-child conversation during joint book reading, and (3) relationship between the theory-of-mind understanding of children and mothers' talk on mental states. Methods: Forty Mandarin Chinese-speaking children aged 4 to 6 years and their mothers living in Taipei, Taiwan participated in this study. Among the children, 20 were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), 10 children with high-functioning autism and 10 children with Asperger syndrome, and 20 were typically developing children. To control the language abilities of the two groups of children, each child was first administered the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revisited (PPVT-R; Lu & Liu, 1994). No significant difference was observed in the PPVT-R scores between the two groups. The two groups of children were then tested on seven tasks from various aspects of theory-of-mind understanding: diverse desire, diverse belief, knowledge access, content false belief, explicit false belief, belief-emotion, and real-apparent emotion (Wellman & Liu, 2004). The children were also asked to read a storybook entitled The Younger Rat Plays Hide and Seek with their mothers. The mother-child conversations during joint book reading were tape-recorded, transcribed, and coded into seven categories of mental state discourse: simple cognition, cognition clarification, simple affect, affect clarification, simple perception/attention, perception/attention clarification, and false belief ending (Slaughter, Peterson, & Mackintosh, 2007). The unit of coding was utterance. A coder separately coded 8 of 40 randomly selected transcripts. Cohen's kappa statistic was used to test the interrater reliability of coding. The result of the interrater agreements for coding was 94%. Results/Findings: Three main results were obtained in this study: (1) The ASD children scored significantly lower on the theory-of-mind test compared with the typically developing children. (2) The raw frequencies and percentages of the mental state talk produced by mothers who had ASD children were significantly lower than those by mothers whose children were typically developing. (3) Significant correlations between the performance of children on the theory-of-mind test and maternal mental state talk in both groups were observed. For the typically developing children, simply describing mental states and emotional feelings without explaining the causes of those mental states and feelings in maternal utterances was not related to the performance of the children on the theory-of-mind test. Instead, elaborations on the causes or sources of mental states and emotional feelings were significantly correlated with the theory-of-mind understanding of the children. By contrast, for the ASD children, significantly positive correlations were observed between all types of mental state talk produced by their mothers and the performance of the children in the theory-of-mind tasks. Conclusions/Implications: This study investigated the relationships between the theory-of-mind understanding of children and their mothers' talk on mental states during joint book reading. The results of this study can provide educational and clinical suggestions for parents and teachers of children with ASD and typically developing children.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201411.39030012篇名：可預測性繪本教學方案對國小聽覺障礙學生閱讀理解的成效並列篇名：Effects of Predictable-Pattern-Book Instruction on Reading Comprehension for Second-and Third-Grade Students with Hearing Impairments作者：莊梅君(Mei-Jun Zhuang);劉秀丹(Hsiu-Tan Liu)關鍵字：可預測性繪本;閱讀理解;聽覺障礙學生;predictable picture books;reading comprehension;students with hearing impairment期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的在檢視可預測性繪本教學，對於提升國小聽覺障礙學生閱讀理解能力的成效。本研究對象為接受聽覺障礙教育巡迴輔導的臺北市、新北市國小二、三年級聽障生共18名，先以標準化閱讀理解困難篩選測驗以及自編繪本閱讀理解測驗來評量閱讀理解的能力，再以此閱讀能力作為配對的依據，以隨機化分派至實驗組和對照組（各九名），使兩組的閱讀能力相當。其中，實驗組進行可預測性繪本教學介入八週，最後再以相同的測驗評量成效，以了解繪本教學介入是否有效提升閱讀理解能力。本研究實驗結果如下：一、接受可預測性繪本教學介入的聽障學生，在標準化閱讀理解困難篩選測驗的前後測進步情形優於對照組。二、接受可預測性繪本教學介入的聽障學生，在自編繪本閱讀理解測驗的前後測進步情形優於對照組。結果顯示，可預測性繪本教學對於國小二、三年級聽障生的閱讀理解能力具有正面的影響。英文摘要：Studies have shown a depressing pattern: deaf students struggle to reach third or fourth-grade reading levels by age 13 or 14, when same-age peers with normal hearing typically achieve reading scores at seventh- or eighth-grade levels. Deaf students tend to plateau at these lower levels, rather than advancing further. Students with hearing impairments clearly require more effective reading instruction. Purpose: We investigated the effects of predictable-pattern-book instruction (PPBI) on reading comprehension in elementary school students with hearing impairments. Predictable pattern books are books with repetitive and predictable phrases for new readers. Methods: The research participants were 18 children with hearing impairments who received itinerant consultation services, and were second and third graders in elementary schools in Taipei City and New Taipei City. A standardized assessment tool, the Reading Comprehension Difficulty Diagnosis Test (RCDDT), and a self-designed reading comprehension test were used to evaluate the students’ pretest and posttest reading ability. The students were paired according to their reading ability and randomly assigned to the experimental group and the control group (nine subjects each). The reading ability on the pretest of RCDDT and the self-designed reading comprehension test were similar in both groups. The experimental group received PPBI for 8 weeks, after which the same tests that were previously used for reading assessment were used to determine whether the PPBI improved reading comprehension. In PPBI, the teacher used predictable pattern books and encouraged students to predict during the instruction. There are three stages in the PPBI: Stage 1, the teacher encouraged students to predict the plots through pictures on the book cover; Stage 2, the teacher led students to read aloud and looked for some clues to predict subsequent episodes according to the text and pictures they have read; Stage 3, the teacher encouraged students and helped them to retell the story to promote their reading comprehension. Because there were few participants, non-parametric testing was adopted for statistical analyses. Results/Findings: According to the Mann-Whitney U test, the students with hearing impairments who received PPBI exhibited greater improvements between the pretest and posttest scores than did the students in the control group in both the Reading Comprehension Difficulty Diagnosis Test and the self-designed reading-comprehension test. Conclusions/Implications: These results showed that the PPBI exerted positive effects on the reading comprehension of the second- and third-grade elementary-school students with hearing impairments. This study recommends that teachers and parents of students with hearing impairments use PPBI as an early intervention, which may enable avoiding the afore-mentioned plateau in reading ability in the future.起始頁-結束頁：29-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201411.39030023篇名：青少年智能障礙學生活動與參與量表之發展並列篇名：Development of the Activity and Participation Scale for Young Students with Intellectual Disabilities作者：張萬烽(Wan-Feng Chang);吳裕益(Yuh-Yih Wu);陳靜江(Ching-Chiang Chen)關鍵字：活動與參與;智能障礙;適應行為;ICF-CY;International Classification of Functioning, Disability;and Health for Children and Youth (ICF-CY);activity & participation;intellectual disabilities;adaptive behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以世界衛生組織所發展之「國際健康功能與身心障礙分類系統－兒童與青少年版」（ICF-CY）為架構，編製「青少年智能障礙學生活動與參與量表」，以12到18歲智能障礙學生為評量對象，除考驗量表各種信、效度外，亦建立常模，以供智能障礙學生鑑定與教學之用。研究者先編輯量表，再透過學者專家進行檢核，並以AiKen內容效度係數進行題目篩選，形成276題預試題目。在預試工作上，以分層叢集抽樣，針對高雄市390位國中和高中階段智能障礙學生進行評定，回收問卷後，以試題反應理論中的單參數Rasch模式進行分析，在刪除兩題適配度欠佳的題目後，再以全國中等教育階段智能障礙和一般學生為對象，進行分層叢集抽樣，分別回收1,686份和1,676份問卷。在信度方面，蒐集包括重測信度、評分者一致性信度和內部一致性等，重測信度在.84~.95間，評分者一致性則為.66~.84，內部一致性則介為.79~.98；而效度證據方面，則包括內容效度、效標效度和建構效度等三種，經分析發現，本研究具有良好信、效度證據，且在潛在構念上為一個因素，並依據樣本建立常模，同時利用ROC曲線，進行智能障礙學生切截標準之訂定。此外，透過t檢定和單因子變異數分析發現，本研究可以有效區辨不同能力的智能障礙學生。本研究根據研究結果與結論提出幾點建議，作為未來研究和實務上之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study involved compiling an activity and participation scale (APS) for students with intellectual disabilities between the ages of 12 and 18 years and assessing these students. The scale is based on the activity and participation dimension derived from the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health for Children and Youth developed by the World Health Organization. Furthermore, the study involved testing the reliability and validity of the scale and establishing a norm for its use in identifying and teaching students with intellectual disabilities. Finally, a factor analysis was conducted to explore the theoretical framework of the activity and participation dimension. Methods: Initially, a questionnaire was compiled. Thirteen scholars and experts assessed the questionnaire, and an Aiken content validity coefficient was used to modify specific questions. Subsequently, a pretest questionnaire comprising 276 questions was developed. In the pretrial stage, 390 junior and senior high school students from Kaohsiung, Taiwan with intellectual disabilities were assessed conducted. The Rasch model was applied to the pretest questionnaires to examine the psychometric properties of the APS; two questions exhibiting an inadequate fit were deleted. A formal questionnaire was established and administered to students with intellectual disabilities and students without intellectual disabilities at a junior and senior high school in Taiwan. According to various statistical analyses, the questionnaire exhibited adequate reliability and validity. Results/Findings: The reliability, including test-retest reliability (r=.84-.95) and rater consistency reliability (r=.66-.84), was acceptable. The internal consistency (α=.79-.98) was considerably high. The content validity, criterion-related validity, and construct validity were tested. The concurrent validity was satisfactory in two criterion-referenced tests (revision of the Chinese Adaptive Behavior Scale and Wechsler Intelligence Scale for children), and the construct validity was confirmed by performing exploratory factor analysis, which yielded satisfactory results and one factor. Moreover, a t test and ANOVA were performed to confirm that the scale enabled effectively distinguishing students with intellectual disabilities. The variations includes age, classes type, disabilities types, and disability degree. Conclusions/Implications: The APS exhibited acceptable reliability and validity. It appeared to be a useful tool in practical applications. Based on the findings, several suggestions were formulated regarding future research and practice in this field.起始頁-結束頁：49-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201411.39030034篇名：融合教育的績效：SNELS資料庫國中障礙學生的學校適應與滿意並列篇名：Accountability of Inclusive Education: School Adjustment and Satisfaction of Junior High School Students with Disabilities Based on the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study作者：鄭津妃(Chin-Fei Cheng);張正芬(Cheng-Feng Chang)關鍵字：特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫;滿意度;融合教育;學校適應;績效;Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study;satisfaction;inclusive education;school adjustment;accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：102學年度國民教育階段有85％的障礙學生在普通班就讀，這群障礙學生的受教成果如何？本研究旨在探討國中階段障礙學生在融合教育下學校適應與校園滿意的情形，不同背景學生在學校適應與校園滿意的差異，以及校園滿意與其適應情形的關聯。研究資料係取自特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫所釋出的97學年度國中階段問卷，包含分布於北、中、南、東地區安置在普通班與資源班的障礙學生資料，共有七年級1,213人與九年級952人，以學生問卷與教師問卷的部分題項進行描述性統計、t考驗、重複量數變異數分析、單因子變異數分析與積差相關。研究結果如下：一、學校適應中，學業是所有障礙學生最主要的適應困難，同儕關係次差，再其次是師生關係。常規適應為所有學生表現最佳的向度，自我適應為次佳，二者均在適應佳的範圍。整體校園滿意度尚佳。二、學業適應以智障生最顯困難，學障生次之。三、同儕關係以自閉症學生的困難較突出。四、常規適應中，情障生最顯弱勢，其次為智障與學障生。五、自我適應中，九年級情障與學障生較困難。六、師生關係以九年級情障與學障生較差。七、校園滿意中，九年級情障與學障生的滿意度較低。八、年級比較，顯示九年級的師生關係不如七年級生，其他各向度無顯著差異。但不同安置的比較發現，七年級除自我適應、師生關係及校園滿意外，九年級除了自我適應外，所有向度顯示安置普通班的現況均優於資源班。九、自我適應、師生關係及同儕關係的好壞，對校園滿意具有影響，但學業適應與校園滿意無顯著關聯。英文摘要：Purpose: In 2013, 85% of all students with disabilities attended regular classes in compulsory education in Taiwan. What were the educational outcomes for these students? We explored the school adjustment and campus satisfaction of students with disabilities in junior high schools; the differences of the school adjustment and the campus satisfaction of the students with disabilities from grades, placements and categories of disabilities; furthermore, the association between campus satisfaction and adjustment conditions of the students was also evaluated. Methods: The data were extracted from the junior high school questionnaires of the 2008 school year of the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study database. The questionnaires were completed by teachers and students and were analyzed using descriptive statistics, a t test, a repeated measures analysis of variance, and Pearson correlation. All student samples (1,213 students in the seventh grade and 952 students in the ninth grade) attended regular classes or received additional resource classroom programs in Northern, Central, Southern, and Eastern Taiwan. Results/Findings: (a) Regarding school adjustment, the main difficulty for all students with disabilities was in academic dimension. The second difficulty was in peer relationships, followed by teacher-student relationships. Students exhibited the most favorable performance in following regular school rules. Self-adjustment showed the second-most favorable results. Overall, campus satisfaction was adequate. (b) Regarding academic dimension, students with intellectual disability (ID) exhibited substantial difficulties, followed by students with learning disability (LD). (c) In peer relationships, the most prominent difficulties were exhibited by students with autism spectrum disorder. (d) Regarding following regular school rules, the most severe difficulties were exhibited by students with emotional and behavioral disorders (EBD), followed by students with LD and ID. (e) Regarding self-adjustment, the students with EBD and LD in the ninth grade exhibited the least favorable performance. (f) Regarding teacher-student relationships, the students with EBD and LD in the ninth grade exhibited the most difficulties. (g) Regarding campus satisfaction, the students with EBD and LD in the ninth grade showed the least satisfaction. (h) Comparing grades, the students in the ninth grade exhibited a less favorable performance than those in the seventh grade regarding teacher-student relationships, but no substantial differences in each of the other dimensions. Based on a comparison of the placements, the results demonstrated that the school adjustment and campus satisfaction of students attending regular classes was superior to that of those receiving additional resource classroom programs, in addition to self-adjustment, teacher-student relationships, and campus satisfaction in seventh grade students. Results were identical for ninth-grade students, in addition to self-adjustment. (i) Self-adjustment, teacher-student relationships, and peer relationships had a moderate impact on campus satisfaction, but no substantial association was observed between academic performance and campus satisfaction. Conclusions/Implications: The study indicated that students with disabilities were satisfied with the current situation of inclusive education.起始頁-結束頁：81-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201411.39030045篇名：「學前兒童社會行為評量系統」編製之研究並列篇名：The Construction of a Social Behavior Assessment System for Preschoolers作者：蔡明富(Ming-Fu Tsai);吳裕益(Yuh-Yih Wu);莊涵皓(Han-Hao Chuang)關鍵字：社會行為;家長評量表;教師評量表;學前兒童;social behavior;parent rating scale(PRS);teacher rating scale(TRS);preschool期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在編製一套「學前兒童社會行為評量系統」（social behavior assessment system for preschool, SBASP），以利早期發現學前兒童的情緒行為問題。此評量系統包含教師及家長評量表，兩種評量表（各111題）內容均包括兩部分：社會能力量表（56題）及問題行為量表（55題），其中，社會能力量表包括自我控制（自主行為、情緒管理）、人際互動（人際關係、溝通表達及合作同理）及學習行為（學習習慣、學習表現）等三向度七個分量表；問題行為量表包括分心過動（不專注、過動衝動）、反抗違規（憤怒反抗、攻擊違規）及焦慮退縮（焦慮害怕、退縮害羞及身心症狀）等三向度七個分量表，作答方式以Likert式五點量表。結果顯示：一、教師及家長評量表的內部一致性係數極佳，間隔兩週的重測信度結果也顯示量表的穩定性係數良好；二、教師及家長評量表對兩個效標測驗（「學前兒童提早入學能力檢核表」、「阿肯巴克實證衡鑑系統」）的同時效度也相當理想；三、教師與家長評量表均可以有效區別不同適應程度之幼兒，以及情緒行為問題個案與一般幼兒；四、驗證性因素分析結果顯示，教師及家長評量表之「社會能力量表」、「問題行為量表」均支持本研究原先建構。最後，以全國幼兒教師1,149人、幼兒家長1,162人建立全國常模。研究結果發現，「學前兒童社會行為評量系統」是一份具備不錯信度、效度的工具，可據此發現學前兒童情緒行為問題。英文摘要：Purpose: Although young children diagnosed with psychiatric disorders can overcome their problems with the assistance of their parents and teachers, their problems are often unmanageable without professional help; therefore, these children and their families must be referred to mental health and special needs education services. To adequately assist children who exhibit emotional and behavioral disorders, professionals in special needs education must use techniques to assess these problems. This study was conducted to (a) develop a social behavior assessment system for preschoolers (SBASP) suitable for children ages 4 through 6 years; and (b) evaluate the reliability and validity of this proposed scale. Methods: The initial item pool was developed based on a review of relevant literature and tools. The SBASP was used to survey preschoolers in Taiwanese kindergartens. Samples were collected using stratified random sampling. Item and factor analyses were used to delete inadequate items and establish reliabilities and validities. The SBASP comprised 2 scales: the teacher rating scale (TRS) and parent rating scale (PRS). Both the TRS and PRS comprised 111 items from the social competence and problem behavior scales. The social competence scale comprised 56 items divided into 7 subscales for measuring 3 theoretical dimensions: self-control, interpersonal interaction, and academic behavior. The problem behavior scale consisted of 55 items divided into 7 subscales for measuring 3 theoretical dimensions: inattention and hyperactivity, opposition and conduct problems, and anxiety and withdrawal. Results/Findings: The study yielded the following results: (a) regarding the internal consistency, both the TRS and PRS yielded extremely high coefficients (Cronbach's α) and acceptable retest reliabilities (2-wk inter vals); (b) the content validity was established by consulting experts and exploring documents; (c) the concurrent validity of the TRS and PRS was satisfactory in two criterionreferenced tests (the early entrance checklist for preschool and the Achenbach system of empirically based assessment); (d) the discriminant validity of TRS and PRS were found considerably satisfactory in identifying young children with different degrees of adaptivity and emotional and behavioral problems; and (e) the construct validity was established by performing a confirmatory factor analysis, which yielded satisfactory results and 7 factors for both TRS and PRS. Conclusions/Implications: Based on the results, the SBASP exhibited acceptable indicator reliability, concurrent validity, discriminant validity, and construct validity values. The psychometric findings indicated that the proposed SBASP was suitable for gathering information from teachers, parents, and students regarding emotional and behavioral problems in preschool. Therefore, percentile rank and t-score norms were developed for 1,149 items in the TRS and 1,162 items in the PRS. The SBASP appeared to be a useful tool in preschool applications; however, various suggestions are offered for future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201407.39020016篇名：不共脈絡性：輕症自閉症學生的人際互動特徵並列篇名：Contextual Incompatibility: A Communicative Feature of Interactions with Children with Mild Autism Spectrum Disorder作者：莫少依(Shao-I Mo);張正芬(Cheng-Fen Chang)關鍵字：人際互動;不共脈絡性;自閉症學生;語用;interpersonal interaction;contextual incompatibility;autism spectrum disorder;pragmatic期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探究輕症自閉症學生的人際互動表現特徵，研究對象為五位參與社會性技能教學團體的國小四、五年級男童，研究者以觀察者的身分參與全程共13次的團體歷程，針對五位參與者的人際互動表現撰寫田野筆記。研究者運用語用學工具對此人際互動田野觀察資料進行質性分析，並為每位參與者寫出一份溝通互動描述，以獲得其溝通脈絡特徵的掌握。研究結果發現：一、五位參與者的行動序列表現合於語用學規則；二、五位參與者對字詞意義的理解大致良好；三、五位參與者以不同程度但一致地表現出與交談現場脈絡的不相契合性，研究者稱之為「不共脈絡性」現象。最後，本研究結果指出，「談話現場行動」與「談話指涉脈絡」兩層次之間的落差顯現於輕症自閉症學生人際溝通活動中，從而表現出無法與人共脈絡的人際互動特徵。研究者將回答研究問題，討論研究所得，並對後續研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Although difficulties in communication have been identified as the core features of children with mild autism spectrum disorder, scholars have not been discouraged from understanding the patterns of communication of these children. The apparent opposition to observing the communicative performance of children with mild autism spectrum disorder requires further exploration. Reconsidering the predominant viewpoint of ”deviation from the norm” regarding the functional discrepancies in the communication of children with mild autism spectrum disorder, this study explored the features of interpersonal interaction of these children at the lived-experience level to reconceptualize the perceived deficits of these children. Methods: A qualitative method involving pragmatic tools was employed in analyzing the research data. The data were generated using the following steps: First, 5 fourth- and fifth-grade elementary students in a social interaction training group for children with mild autism spectrum disorder were selected as the subjects of observation. Second, the researcher attended all of the 13 group sessions and wrote field notes describing the interactions of the 5 participants with trainers and other children. Third, the interactions of each participant were described by integrating the field notes, which were verified by a co-observer together with the field videos. Fourth, the descriptions were qualitatively analyzed using 4 pragmatic tools: turn taking, adjacency pairs, speech acts, and an indexical. Finally, the interactive pragmatic features of the 5 participants were analyzed and categorized into several general patterns of communication. Results/Findings: First, no significant destruction in conversational action sequences were observed; the 5 participants engaged in conversation with others. Second, the words used during conversations were satisfactorily comprehended by all of the 5 participants, compared with the other children. In other words, no misinterpretation of word meaning by the 5 participants was observed. Finally, all 5 participants showed, although in distinct manners and at different degree, incompatible responses to the ongoing conversational contexts. This feature in communication was named ”contextual incompatibility” in this study and indicated contextual mismatch when children with mild autism spectrum disorder engaged in conversations with others. Conclusions/Implications: The perceived difficulties in communication of children with mild autism spectrum disorder resulted from a discrepancy between ”congruent conversational actions” and ”incongruent referential contexts” when the participants engaged in conversations with others. This understanding provides a new approach to conceptualizing the perceived deficits of children. Further discussion on the research results and suggestions for future study are provided.起始頁-結束頁：33-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201407.39020027篇名：二年級「持續型」與「晚發型」識字困難學童早期區辨效能之檢測並列篇名：Predicting Persistent or Late-Emerging Difficulties in Reading Chinese Characters in Grade-2 Children作者：宣崇慧(Chung-Hui Hsuan)關鍵字：快速自動唸名;注音解碼;區辨函數分析;晚發型識字困難;rapid automatized naming (RAN);Tzu-yin decoding;discriminant function analysis;late-emerging poor reader期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，有許多研究提出學前識字相關認知技能對一年級中文識字困難學童的區辨效能，但亦有研究發現，有些識字困難學童的發生時間約在習字後的二至三年，故稱之為「晚發型」（late-emerging）識字困難學童。因此，本研究縱貫分析學前到小學二年級識字發展相關資料（N=64），以探究早期識字相關技能與其後識字發展的關係，並分析「持續型」（persistent）及「晚發型」識字困難學童之早期識字相關技能的差異，進而檢測早期重要識字技能區辨二年級識字困難學童之效能。結果顯示，學前注音解碼以及快速自動唸名（Rapid Automatized Naming, RAN）與學童一至二年級識字顯著相關，聲韻覺識則隨著識字經驗的增加而愈見重要，視覺記憶的重要性則僅在習字之初。變異數分析結果顯示，在所有變項中，僅注音解碼及RAN達顯著差異，組間比較顯示，「持續型」識字困難學童之注音解碼及RAN顯著低於正常學童；「晚發型」識字困難學童的注音解碼及RAN則介於「持續型」與識字正常學童之間，但並未顯著低於正常學童。區辨分析結果則顯示，早期識字、注音解碼及RAN之組合具最佳區辨效能，分類總正確率達71.9%，其中又以早期識字的區辨效能最佳，亦能有效避免嚴重的假陰型錯誤。一般而言，「持續型」識字困難學童的識字問題較為嚴重，而此等指標對「持續型」識字困難學童的區辨效能相當穩定，但對「晚發型」識字困難學童的區辨效能則較弱。若將「持續型」與「晚發型」兩組合併，本組指標可預測全數「持續型」識字困難學童及80%的「晚發型」識字困難者。英文摘要：Purpose: Recent studies have proposed that testing for reading-related cognitive skills can identify children with difficulties in reading Chinese characters in Grade 1. Research has also suggested that some children demonstrate adequate reading achievement when they start learning to read but lagmarkedly behind their peers in subsequent grades. These children are referred to as late-emerging poor readers. This study was intended to (1) investigate the importance of a battery of reading-related skills, including phonological awareness in syllable and tone, Tzu-yin decoding, visual memory, and rapid automatized naming (RAN) in character reading from preschool to Grade 2; (2) determine the differences in reading-related skills among groups of children with or without persistent or late-emerging character-reading difficulties; and (3) examine the accuracy of predicting persistent or late-emerging difficulties in reading Chinese characters in children. Methods: This was a 3-year longitudinal study. Although 330 preschoolers were recruited, only 230 remained in the cohort at the end of the study. The participants' reading-related skills were assessed in the last semester of preschool (April to June 2008). Their progress was observed and their reading ability measured at 3 time points: the beginning of Grade 1, the end of Grade 1, and the end of Grade 2. Fifteen of the 230 students had difficultyreading characters in both Grades 1 and 2, and were deemed as having persistent difficulties. Fourteen-children who started having difficulties in Grade 2 were defined as children with late-emerging difficulties. Thirty-five children whose z score of character-reading ranged from 0to 0.5 in both grades were classified as the control group. Correlation, analysis of variances, and discriminant function analysis were employed to analyze the data. Results/ Findings: The results revealed that Tzu-yin decoding and RAN in preschool were relevant to character-reading skills in Grades 1 and 2. The importance of phonological awareness gradually increased with experience in reading, whereas visual memory was substantially associated with character reading only at the initial stage of learning to read. The analysis of variances suggested that Tzu-yin decoding and RAN differed significantly among the groups. Children with persistent difficulties in character-reading scored significantly lower than normal readers in Tzu-yin decoding and RAN. Late-emerging poor readers scored higher thanpersistent poor readers and lower than normal readers in Tzuyin decoding and RAN; however, the differences between late-emerging poor readers and normal readers were not statistically significant. The results of discriminant function analysis provided one crucial discriminant function thatrecognized early character-reading, Tzu-yin decoding, and RAN as significant identifiers of reading difficulties. The classification ratewas 71.9% accurate. Early character-reading was shown to be the most accurate identifier, and offered no false negative values. Conclusions/Implications: The most significant early predictors of reading difficulties in Grade-2 children were Tzu-yin decoding, RAN, and early character-reading. Persistent poor readers might have more difficulties in learning to read than late-emerging poor readers do, and the discriminant function of this study accurately identified persistent poor readers. Althoughthe discriminant functionhad limited success in identifying late-emerging poor readers; the discriminant function predicted 100% of children with persistent difficulties in character reading and 80% of those with late-emerging difficulties from preschool to Grade 2, when the data was analyzed by combining the persistent and late-emerging groups.起始頁-結束頁：61-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201407.39020038篇名：延宕交叉相關與潛在成長模式在創造力傾向與科技創造力關係間之分析並列篇名：Cross-lagged Panel Correlation and Latent Growth Modeling in the Relationship between Creativity Tendency and Technology Creativity作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：延宕交叉相關;科技創造力;創造力傾向;潛在成長模式;cross-lagged panel correlation;technology creativity;creativity tendency;latent growth modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：就世界各先進國家的教育改革而言，雖然其強調的重點不盡相同，但發展學生的科學或科技創造力可說是先進國家的共同趨勢。然有關創造力的相關研究卻顯少從科技創造力的縱貫性發展著手，因此，探討臺灣國小學童科技創造力成長趨勢及影響因素的重要性不言而喻。本研究採用延宕交叉相關與潛在成長模式來探討國小學童創造力傾向與科技創造力之間的因果機制，以及創造力傾向對科技創造力發展的影響。本研究採用問卷調查進行縱貫性研究，研究資料來源為488位國小五年級學童，利用兩年時間共進行四波調查。首先，在延宕交叉相關分析結果顯示，創造力傾向與科技創造力具有交互影響關係，且創造力傾向扮演啟動者的角色。其次，在潛在成長模式的分析結果顯示，國小學童的創造力傾向呈現先減少、後增加的成長趨勢，是受到第一次測量結果的影響。而在科技創造力表現的部分，是呈現先上升、後下降的趨勢。創造力傾向對於科技創造力的影響具有因果關係存在，而創造力傾向的初始狀態對科技創造力的初始狀態及成長速率有顯著正向的影響效果。此外，創造力傾向的成長速率愈快，其科技創造力成長速率也會愈陡峭。由此，本研究得出以下幾點結論：一、創造力傾向與科技創造力間具有交互影響機制與因果方向性；二、國小學童創造力傾向與科技創造力呈現不同的潛在成長變化；三、創造力傾向對於科技創造力起始狀態與成長速率具有影響。依據上述結果，本研究並分別針對教育實務及未來研究給予建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Aspects of educational reform that are emphasized in various advanced countries worldwide differ according to country; however, the development of the science or technology creativity of students is considered a common trend in advanced countries. Although a large amount of relevant research has been conducted on creativity, few studies have focused on the longitudinal development of technology creativity. The importance of exploring the growth trend of technology creativity and the factors affecting elementary school pupils in Taiwan is self-evident. Researching these issues was therefore the purpose of this study. Methods: Both cross-lagged panel correlation and latent growth modeling were used in this study to determine the causal mechanism between the creativity tendency and technology creativity of elementary school pupils in Taiwan, as well as the effects of creativity tendency on the development of technology creativity. A questionnaire survey was administered preceding longitudinal research, and data were acquired from 488 G5 pupils in an elementary school. In addition, four times of investigation are preceded in 2 years for this study. Results/Findings: The results of the analysis of cross-lagged panel correlation, creativity tendency, and technology creativity indicated a mutually influential relationship, and creativity tendency played the role of a starter. The results of latent growth modeling revealed an initially decreasing, then increasing creativity tendency growth trend for the pupils; this is considered as the effect of the first measured results. Conversely, the growth trend of technology creativity initially increased and subsequently deceased. Thus, creativity tendency revealed a causal relationship with the effects of technology creativity, whereas the initial state of creativity tendency exerted significantly positive effects on the initial state and growth rate of tech nology creativity. Furthermore, when creativity tendency exhibited a faster growth rate, the growth rate of technology creativity increased. Conclusions/Implications: First, mutual cause and effect mechanisms were observed between creativity tendency and technology creativity. Second, the creativity tendency and technology creativity of the elementary school pupils in Taiwan exhibited distinct latent growth changes. Third, creativity tendency exerted effects on the initial state and growth rate of technology creativity. Based on these results, suggestions aimed at enhancing educational practice and future research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：87-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201407.39020049篇名：國中學生學業自我概念發展之縱貫性分析並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study on the Self-concept Development of Junior High School Students作者：侯雅齡(Ya-Ling Hou)關鍵字：多群體分析;自我概念;資優生;潛在成長模式分析;縱貫研究;multigroup;self-concept;gifted students;latent growth curve model;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在了解國中生之國文、數學、英文與科學自我概念彼此的關係，以及隨時間改變，各學科自我概念發展的關聯性；同時，也比較資優生與一般生在學業及一般性自我概念之發展變化是否相同。歷時兩年，本研究取樣高雄市18所設有資優資源班的國中，共計2,242位學生，以數學、科學、國文與英文等四學科自我概念量表與一般性自我概念量表，進行重複四次的調查。在分析方法上，以多變項潛在成長模式了解各學科自我概念發展的關係，以多群體潛在成長模式比較資優生與一般生自我概念發展的差異。研究結果發現：一、數學和科學自我概念之間具中度正相關，但是，國文和英文自我概念間僅有低度正相關；二、學生的英文自我概念個別差異大；三、學生的科學自我概念最低，且降幅也最大；四、資優生與一般生在一般性自我概念上皆隨著時間呈現正向變化，但在學業自我概念，除了國文呈現持平的狀況外，其他學科皆呈現負向變化；五、兩群體在數學、科學與英文自我概念的成長模式未呈現全部恆等的現象；六、資優生的數學自我概念最高；七、一般生在科學與英文自我概念降幅大；八、男生在數學與科學自我概念高於女生，女生在國文與英文自我概念優於男生。最後，亦根據研究結果提出建議。英文摘要：Purpose: The academic self-concepts that students develop strongly influence their academic achievement, educational choices, and vocational choices. Based on the characteristics of multifaceted and a hierarchical structure, academic self-concepts can be divided into various subject-specific self-concepts, such as mathematics, English, and science self-concepts. Furthermore, the formation of self-concepts gradually develops with growth experiences and interrelationships with others and the environment. Thus, one of the research objectives was to explore the development correlations among the academic self-concepts of junior high school students regarding four subjects. Generally, gifted students have the characteristic of emotional over-excitability. This has made gifted students highly sensitive to differences. Consequently, the second objective of this study was to compare the differences between gifted students and general students according to the self-concept development model. Method: The data collected included a four wave survey through repeated assessment of 2,242 students in 18 junior high schools in Kaohsiung City, Taiwan. The instrument used was a Self Descript Questioners. A multivariate latent growth curve model and a latent growth curve model for multiple groups were used to analyze the data. Findings: (1) The math and science subject self-concepts exhibited moderately positive correlations. The correlation of the changes in self-concepts regarding these two subjects was high. Chinese and English subject self-concepts exhibited slightly positive correlations. The correlation of the changes in self-concepts regarding these two subjects was low; (2) The students' self-concepts regarding various subjects exhibited significant differences. Slight differences were observed among students regarding Chinese self-concepts, and there were clear differences among these participants regarding English self-concepts; (3) All participants had low science self-concepts, and this decreased the most in the 2-year learning process; (4) General self-concepts positively increased among the gifted and normal students; among the academic self-concepts, however, only Chinese self-concepts remained positive, whereas the other academic selfconcepts exhibited negative changes; (5) The math, science and English self-concepts involving group invariance in the multi-group latent growth curve model were not satisfied; (6) In comparison with the self-concepts of other subjects, the math self-concepts of the gifted students were the highest; (7) In comparison with the change of self-concepts in various subjects, the science and English self-concepts of the normal students decreased the most; (8) Boys' math and science self-concepts were higher than girls' self-concepts in these subjects, and girls' Chinese and English self-concepts were higher than boys' self-concepts in these subjects. However, no significant difference was observed between genders regarding general self-concepts. Conclusion/Implications: Based on the results, this paper proposes several suggestions for educators and future researchers: (1) Research should focus on effective education to promote students' self-concepts; (2) Teachers could help students to learn English by consistently adopting a positive attitude; (3) The multigroup latent growth curve model for boys and girls should be examined; (4) The grouping of gifted students and the gap between the number of participants should be addressed. This research can be used to classify gifted students into different groups in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201403.390100110篇名：印象管理面試技巧、面試內容覺察與脊髓損傷應徵者面試評價關係探討並列篇名：A Study on the Relationship of Impression Management Tactics, Perceptions on Interview Topics and Employment Interview Evaluations to an Applicant with Spinal Cord Injury作者：王敏行(Ming-Hung Wang);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：印象管理;面試內容覺察;面試技巧;面試評價;脊髓損傷者;impression management;perceptions on interview contents;interview skills;interview evaluation;persons with spinal cord injury期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在以實驗研究的方法，探討使用不同程度印象管理面試技巧之脊髓損傷應徵者，於雇主面試評價上的差異。本研究以面試中回應主試者問題中所使用的印象管理面試技巧次數之差異，發展出低（使用5次）、中（使用13次）、高（使用21次）程度應用之三個實驗組別的影碟當作實驗介入，供研究對象就影片中所呈現的應徵者面試內容，進行「面試表現」、「推薦複試」、「僱用意願」等方面的評量。本研究於多次廠商聯合徵才活動時招募之101位雇主做為研究對象，平均年齡為34.2歲（標準差7.33），女性56位，以來自私人營利製造業最多。研究對象依被訪問的順序隨機分為三組觀看不同影片，並依影片中流程指示，進行僱用職務資料、應徵者履歷表閱讀、面試過程影片觀看、面試評量表與面試內容察覺量表評分等活動。研究主要發現：一、面試技巧的應用有助於提升脊髓損傷應徵者的面試評價；二、雇主之面試技巧內容的覺察程度，對於應徵者面試內容的呈現預測雇主之面試評價具中介效果。英文摘要：Purpose: People with disabilities often lack interviewing skills and are unable to obtain strong evaluations during employment interviews. Human resources research supports the idea that impression management tactics aid interviewees in obtaining stronger interview evaluations. This study investigated the relationship between the impression management tactics used by an applicant with a spinal cord injury (SCI), and the resulting impressions of and evaluations by employers. The three primary research questions were: (a) When different frequency levels (low, medium, and high) of impression management tactics were used, was there a significant difference in hiring intention between an applicant with an SCI among the three groups of employers? (b) Was there any significant difference in the way the three groups of employers rated interview content awareness? (c) Was the association between the frequency levels of impression management tactics and hiring intention mediated by the employer's awareness of interview topics? Method: The participants were 101 employers from several large job fairs. Most of the participants (98%) were from private, for-profit manufacturing companies. They were instructed to watch one of three VCDs showing an interview of an applicant with an SCI. In the three VCDs, all of the variables and conditions (except for frequency levels of impression management tactics) that were used were controlled to maintain consistency. After watching the VCD, the participants rated the applicant on a scale of hiring intention and a scale of perceptions on interview content. An ANOVA was used to test the variance among three groups based on the results from the scale of hiring intention. Multiple regression procedures were used to test the mediating effects of employers' awareness of interview topics on hiring intention. Results: (a) A higher evaluation rating was obtained when impression management tactics were used more often in an interview. (b) The differences in scores on the scales of awareness of excellence in job skills and talents, as well as the scale of awareness of overcoming disabilities, were found to be significant among the three group levels. However, it was found non-significant in scores on awareness of opinion agreement. (c) Employer perceptions on interview topics related to the applicant's previous experiences in overcoming their disability in life or the workplace. This mediated the effects of high frequency impression management tactics on the interview evaluation. Conclusions: The impression management tactics used by people with a spinal cord injury could have positive effects on their interview evaluations from employers. Interview topics related to previous life and work experiences about overcoming their disability are also helpful in garnering more positive interview evaluations from employers. Further applications for impression management tactics in interview training courses for people with disabilities are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：35-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201403.390100211篇名：Deviant Neural Correlates of Configural Detection in the Facial Processing of People with Williams Syndrome並列篇名：威廉氏症候群整體訊息處理歧異的臉部辨識神經生理證據作者：許靜芬(Ching-Fen Hsu);陳振宇(Jenn-Yeu Chen)關鍵字：中心連貫缺損;威廉氏症候群;誘發事件相關電位;整體訊息偵測缺損;臉部處理;weak central coherence;Williams syndrome (WS);event-related potentials (ERPs);configural detection deficit;facial processing期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去研究文獻指出威廉氏症候群有見樹不見林的認知處理傾向，不僅在非語言範疇觀察到，近年來在語言範疇裡也得到證明，符合自閉症症候群中心連貫缺損認知處理模式，本研究旨在發掘威廉氏症候群臉部辨識能力是否也有中心連貫缺損情形，用誘發事件相關電位（event-related potentials，ERPs）尋找整體訊息處理歧異神經生理證據。研究方法讓受試者看連續呈現在電腦螢幕上的臉部圖片，第一張為模型臉（model face），第二張為改變臉，有特徵改變（feature-changed）及整體改變（configure-changed）兩種臉，受試者需判斷連續出現的兩張臉是否相同。研究結果顯示威廉氏症候群與正常發展控制組的行為結果相同，無歧異表現，但是在腦波表現方面，當正常發展控制組在左右腦清楚區辨特徵改變臉與整體改變臉時，威廉氏症候群無法區辨這兩種臉，且以知覺特徵方式處理臉部整體改變，研究結果以神經生理證據支持威廉氏症候群臉部辨識歧異的認知處理傾向，也提供威廉氏症候群在非語言範疇的中心連貫另一缺損證明。文章也對行為與大腦不對稱表現進行探討。英文摘要：Purpose: This study investigated the facial processing strategies of Williams syndrome (WS) patients, who exhibit genetic deficits on chromosome 7q11.23. Because of this deficit, this clinical group has been unsuccessful in detecting configural or global information in previous behavioral studies such as the standardized block design test. However, no neurophysiological evidence has been reported regarding this impairment; thus, the event-related potentials (ERPs) technique was used to address this deficit. Methods: Female faces were manipulated (changing the features or configurations) as facial stimuli. The images used to change the features (the eyes or mouth) or configurations were based on other female faces. WS patients (n=13) and their chronological-age matched controls (n=13) participated in this study. The participants assessed the similarities or differences among consecutively presented faces from a set of models, some of which had altered features (feature-changed faces) or configurations (configuration-changed faces). The faces were randomly presented and no duplicates were displayed. Findings: Regarding response latencies and accuracy rates, the behavioral results of WS patients were similar to those of the healthy controls. Both groups demonstrated rapid detection and high accuracy rates when assessing the feature-changed faces, but responded slowly and erred considerably when assessing the configuration-changed faces. However, the groups presented distinct brainwave responses to the configuration-changed faces. The healthy controls processed the configuration-changed faces differently compared with the feature-changed faces in the vertex areas of both hemispheres, whereas the clinical group failed to differentiate these 2 types of facial stimuli. Conclusion: In this study, we discovered neural evidence for a configuration detection deficit among WS patients when processing faces. The results further identified a weak central coherence among WS patients, suggesting a syndrome-general but not syndrome-specific deficit in people with developmental disabilities. Implications: WS patients demonstrated asymmetric brain and behavioral performances during facial processing. This asymmetry was reported in a verbal study that used ERPs and a false memory paradigm. WS patients exhibit genetic deficits that cause atypical development during the early stages of life. These findings were consistent with those of our previous studies pursuing contextual competence, which is defined as the ability to integrate the meanings of words into a contextual theme by using appropriate social knowledge and semantic comprehension; this has been considered a major deficiency among those with autism or right-hemisphere brain damage. Our findings confirmed a deviant central coherence among this clinical group. Neuroconstructivists claim that a small gene mutation during the initial developmental stages can yield devastating effects in long-term development. The deficient configuration detection performance of the WS group provides evidence supporting central coherence deficiency, proving that the interaction between genes and cognition is a dynamic process.起始頁-結束頁：61-84資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201403.390100312篇名：Selecting an Appropriate Pointing Device or Individuals with Cerebral Palsy by Using an Internal Evidence-based Approach並列篇名：以內在實證取向為腦性麻痺個案選擇合適點選輔具成效之研究作者：吳亭芳(Ting-Fang Wu);張芸婷(Yun-Ting Chang);陳明聰(Ming-Chung Chen);張千惠(Sophie Chien-Huey Chang)關鍵字：內在實證取向;單一受試交替處理;腦性麻痺;電腦可及性評估;電腦點選設備;internal evidence-based approach;single subject alternative treatment design;individuals with cerebral palsy;computer access assessment;computer pointing devices期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：39卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：電腦是身心障礙者進入主流社會，以及追求學業與職業目標的重要工具。然而，傳統的電腦點選設備，例如鍵盤和滑鼠，無法滿足像腦性麻痺這樣重度肢體障礙個案的需求。因此，為腦性麻痺個案選擇合適的點選輔具一直都是重要的課題，但實務上始終缺乏有系統以客觀資料來協助點選輔具選用的做法。近來實證本位介入成為關注的議題，因此如何收集內在實證以決定合適之點選輔具是值得探討的課題。因此，本文旨在探討結合單一受試設計與評估工具之內在實證資料蒐集過程對腦性麻痺個案選用點選輔具的成效。本研究以三位腦性麻痺患為對象，利用單一受試交替處理來收集以及比較個案使用不同點選設備的表現。以「肢體障礙者電腦輔具評估量表」以及「電腦化評估」兩種工具來收集資料，並以視覺分析法分析個案使用點選設備的表現。研究結果顯示，利用單一受試交替處理結合前述兩種工具的內在實證過程，三位腦性麻痺患者都獲得了合適的點選輔具。因此，本研究結果支持利用內在實證取向可以協助復健及教育專業人員收集客觀的實證資料，為腦性麻痺個案選擇合適的點選輔具。這樣的過程可作為點選輔具選用實務之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: Computers have become a crucial tool for accessing new information, maximizing human potential, and redefining power and control in the twenty-first century. Computers are essential to the successful integration of persons with disabilities into the mainstream community and for these persons to pursue academic and vocational objectives. However, standard personal computing systems, such as regular keyboards and mice, cannot meet the needs of individuals with severe disabilities, particularly individuals with physical impairments such as cerebral palsy. Assisting individuals with cerebral palsy in selecting the most appropriate device to meet their personal needs remains a challenge during rehabilitation. This study explored the effect of an internal evidence collecting procedure, which involved integrating a single subject research design and scientific tools, on selecting appropriate pointing devices for individuals suffering from cerebral palsy. Methods: To provide a concrete procedure for simulating the pointing device selection process in this study, a Computer Access Assessment framework was proposed. The Computer Access Assessment framework comprises five major steps for selecting appropriate devices: needs identification, assessment, candidate device selection, training, and follow-up. Three clients with cerebral palsy participated in this study. A single subject alternative treatment design was adopted to collect and compare the performance of pointing devices for clients with cerebral palsy. Two instruments, the Computer Access Assessment for Persons with Physical Disabilities and Computerized Assessment Tool, were used to collect data. Visual analysis was conducted to analyze the performance of each device in the experiment. The major criterion for assessing performance was accuracy. The other parameters, namely speed, ratio of path to distance, and movement units, were auxiliary when making the final decision. Findings: According to the results of the visual analysis, all three clients with cerebral palsy acquired an appropriate pointing device by using the internal evidence-based process. Conclusions/Implications: The results of the experiment indicated that the scientific tools, the Computer Access Assessment for Persons with Physical Disabilities and Computerized Assessment Tool, can be employed to collect objective evidence. The process of collecting internal evidence proposed in this study exhibited effectiveness in facilitating the selection of an appropriate pointing device for individuals with cerebral palsy. Finally, future studies are suggested to verify that the device can perform effectively in real situations.起始頁-結束頁：85-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201403.390100401篇名：正向事件解釋風格、提升式希望感與復原力之模式驗證：以學習障礙學生為例並列篇名：The Verification of Model among Explanatory Style for Good Events, Enhanced Hope, and Resilience: The Example of Students with Learning Disabilities作者：吳秉叡(Ping-Ruey Wu);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);辛怡葳(Yi-Wei Hsin)關鍵字：正向事件解釋風格;復原力;提升式希望感;學習障礙學生;explanatory style for good events;resilience;enhanced hope;students with learning disabilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究根據理論與相關研究提出國中學習障礙學生正向事件解釋風格、提升式希望感與復原力之模型，該模型假設個體的「正向事件解釋風格」會透過「提升式希望感」進而影響個體的「復原力」。因此，研究者係針對臺灣地區38所公立國中共434位學習障礙學生進行調查，並進行結構方程式模型分析，來評鑑蒐集的資料是否適配本研究所提出之理論模型。研究發現研究者所建構之理論模型得到驗證與支持，顯示正向事件解釋風格會透過提升式希望感的作用，對復原力產生影響。最後，研究者根據研究結果提出建議，以供未來研究參考。英文摘要：Based on relevant theories and earlier studies, this study proposed an ”explanatory style for good events, enhanced hope, and resilience model” on students with learning disabilities (LD) in secondary school. This model assumed that the individual's enhanced hope mediate the link between explanatory style for good events and resilience. A total of 434 secondary school students with LD in Taiwan participated in this study, and data were analyzed by structural equation modeling in order to evaluate the fit between the collected data and proposed theoretical model. The results supported the assumed model. Suggestions for further research were also proposed.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系2篇名：口吃相關議題之網路口碑分析並列篇名：A Study on Stuttering Related Issues Shared in Messages on Websites of Stuttering Taiwanese作者：楊淑蘭(Shu-Lan Yang)關鍵字：口吃;網路口碑;網路探勘技術;對應分析;stuttering;word-of-mouth;web-mining technology;correspondence analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討臺灣網路留言分享口吃相關議題的口吃族群為何？且其關心的議題為何？本研究利用網路探勘技術擷取臺灣口吃者自2005年5月1日至2010年5月1日之網頁資料，有效樣本為2,713篇，所有網頁文本資料歸納出六個構念，共24個內容特徵詞，再進行對應分析。研究結果發現社會人士是網路上最活躍的口吃者，其次是成年口吃學生，再其次是無法分辨身分的口吃者，而未成年口吃學生分享最少。再者，未成年口吃學生最常分享口吃事件時的個人負向反應；成年口吃學生和無法辨認身分之口吃者則對口吃事件的個人正向反應描述較多；而口吃社會人士則重視口吃支持團體。綜而言之，年紀是影響口吃者適應口吃的重要因素，年紀較大的口吃者對口吃的態度較正面，因而分享較多正向經驗；而描述口吃事件之個人負向反應是所有口吃者都會分享的主要內容之一，表示口吃對口吃者都曾經有過負面影響，而其對未成年口吃學生的負向影響最大。使用網路口碑分析可發現不同口吃族群關心的議題不同，背景相近者其關心的議題亦較為接近，之後，實務工作者可根據不同身份口吃者關心之議題，提供其所需之服務。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore what thestuttering related issues of stuttering Taiwanese shared in the messages on the Internet were and which groups they were identified. By web-mining technology, the stuttering related messages left on the local websites from May 1, 2005 to May 1, 2010 by the stuttering Taiwanese were collected. Two thousand seven hundred and thirteen valid samples from four stuttering groups were found. All the data were grouped into 24 feature words in six domains which related to stuttering for a correspondence analysis. The results showed that among the four stuttering groups, the worker group was most active, following by senior student and unidentifiable group. The junior students had fewest messages left on the websites. In terms of feature word, the junior students shared their negative reactions in stuttering events more often than the other issues. However, the senior students and the unidentifiable stutterers expressed their positive reactions in stuttering events more often than the others. Furthermore, the worker group valued the issue which related to self-support groups most. Conclusively, the issue of negative reactions in stuttering events was the main one shared by all the four groups who stuttered in Taiwan. It seems that stuttering negatively impacts on the stuttering individuals somehow, and age is the critical factor which influences how stuttering people cope with their stuttering. The older stuttering adults had more optimistic attitudes toward stuttering, and shared more positive experiences than the younger stuttering students did. For Taiwanese who have stuttering, word-of-mouth analysis seems helpful to understand their concerns shared in web.起始頁-結束頁：35-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系3篇名：比較採用實境訓練與角色扮演訓練的性侵害防治課程對智能障礙高職女學生自我保護能力提升成效之研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of the Effects of In-Situation and Role-Play Trainings on Self-Protection Abilities for Senior High School Female Students with Intellectual Disability作者：劉文英(Wen-Ying Liou)關鍵字：智能障礙;性侵害;實境訓練;角色扮演訓練;自我保護;性教育;intellectual disability;sexual abuse;in-situation training;roleplay training;self-protection;sexuality education期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的有二。首先在發展一套性侵害防治知識課程並探討該課程對增進高職智能障礙女學生自我保護知識之提升成效；第二為在職業課程中融入角色扮演訓練與實境訓練，用以比較二者對提升高職智能障礙女學生自我保護技巧與類化技巧之成效差異。研究方法採用不等組前後測之準實驗設計，針對15位學生進行知識課程與角色扮演訓練及15位學生進行知識課程與實境訓練的性侵害防治教學，評量方式採用測驗、角色扮演評量及實境評量，資料分析採用相依樣本t考驗及單因子共變數分析。研究結果顯示智能障礙女學生自我保護知識可由知識課程來提升，而訓練模式採用實境訓練亦或角色扮演訓練的方式對於自我保護技巧的提升並無差異，然而在類化技巧的表現上，採用實境訓練的成效顯著高於角色扮演訓練，可見得為要提升智能障礙女學生於真實情境的自我保護技巧，需考量增加實境訓練則其效果較能達成。英文摘要：The first purpose of this study was to develop a sexual-abuse prevention curriculum and examine its effects on promoting self-protection knowledge of senior high school female students with intellectual disabilities studying at special education school. The second purpose was to compare the effects of both role-play and in-situation trainings on those female students' skills and generalized skills of self-protection. The study applied a pretest- posttest nonequivalent group quasi-experimental design. Thirty female students participated in this study. Of whom, 15 students were assigned as the first experimental group and provided with knowledge curriculum and in-situation training. The other 15 students were assigned as the second experimental group and provided with knowledge curriculum and role-play training. The ability of self-protection was assessed using test, role-play, and in-situation assessment. Data analysis methods included dependent sample t-test and one way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). Results of the study showed that self-protection knowledge of participants was significantly improved and maintained. There was no difference on the performance of self-protection skills between the two groups. However, the performance of generalized self-protection skills to real situations in the group receiving in-situation training was significantly higher than the other group. It was concluded that students with intellectual disability would learn and generalize self-protection skills if the in-situation practices were implemented.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系4篇名：訓練特殊教育教師二種刺激偏好評量之成效研究並列篇名：Training Special Education Teachers to Conduct Two Common Types of Preference Assessments作者：鍾儀潔(Yi-Chieh Chung);鳳華(Hua Feng)關鍵字：教師訓練;刺激偏好評量;類化;teacher training;stimulus preference assessment;generalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的為評鑑四名特殊教育教師接受兩種刺激偏好評量訓練後，在使用兩種偏好評量之成效。訓練方式包含角色扮演、回饋教學。研究參與者為四名南部地區一所特教學校之特殊教育教師。四名特殊教育教師被隨機分派到不同訓練組別。第一組先接受配對刺激偏好評量的訓練，再進行多刺激呈現不替補選取物的偏好評量訓練；另一組則先接受多刺激呈現不替補選取物評量的教導，再進行配對刺激偏好評量訓練。每一位受訓教師會各自對該校兩名特教學生使用習得的刺激偏好評量。研究設計採用多元素探測實驗設計。結果顯示四名特教教師都能有效執行兩種偏好評量，正確率達85%-100%。社會效度亦顯示四名教師對此訓練的高度滿意，討論及建議則提供相關單位參考。英文摘要：This study evaluated the effects of role play and feedback on training four Taiwanese special education teachers to conduct two commonly used preference assessments. The four teachers were randomly assigned to two groups. One group was first taught to conduct paired-stimulus (PS) preference assessment, while the other group was first taught to conduct multiple-stimulus-without-replacement (MSWO) preference assessment. Then they would teach to conduct the other preference assessment. Each trainee performed learned skilled with two students. One is for training effect, and the other student is for generalization check. The results suggested that all trainees correctly implemented the procedures with 85-100% accuracy across subjects and assessments. Social validity data also showed favor results to support the effect of this study.起始頁-結束頁：93-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系5篇名：臺中市家長參與身心障礙幼兒轉銜服務之調查研究並列篇名：Parent Participation in Preschool Transition Services for Children with Special Needs in Taichung City作者：吳盈瑤(Ying-Yao Wu);孫淑柔(Shu-Jou Sun)關鍵字：幼小轉銜服務;家長參與;身心障礙幼兒;preschool transition services;parent participation;preschool children with special needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討臺中市身心障礙幼兒家長對幼小轉銜服務的認知情形、家長參與幼小轉銜服務的現況、及家長參與幼小轉銜服務過程遭遇的困難與所需的協助。研究者以自編「身心障礙幼兒家長參與幼小轉銜服務調查問卷」為研究工具，共寄出200份問卷，回收有效問卷173份，回收率為86.50%。所得資料以描述性統計、單因子變異數分析、皮爾斯積差相關、及簡單迴歸分析等方法進行處理。研究結果如下：（1）家長對幼小轉銜服務認知情形趨向於大部分知道，以「家長參與幼小轉銜服務的重要性」最佳；（2）不同居住地區、教育程度、及家庭收入的家長，對幼小轉銜服務的認知情形有顯著差異；（3）家長參與幼小轉銜服務的現況為中等程度以上，以「學校層面的參與」和「家庭層面的參與」最佳；（4）不同居住地區、教育程度、家庭收入及子女障礙類別的家長，對參與幼小轉銜服務的情形有顯著差異；（5）家長的幼小轉銜服務認知對參與幼小轉銜服務現況具有預測力；（6）家長參與幼小轉銜服務的困難以「自己沒有足夠的能力和技巧，在家教導子女入國小準備能力」最多，需要的協助以「學校老師都能真心接納自己的孩子」最多。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the cognition and participation of parents in the preschool transition services for children with special needs in Taichung city, and to understand the difficulties and assistance needed for parents. The research instrument is the questionnaire on ”Parent Participation in Preschool Transition Services for Children with Special Needs in Taichung City”. There were 200 copies sent out, 173 questionnaires were returned and analyzed. The data was analyzed by descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, and Pearson product-moment correlation. The results of this study were as follows: (1) Most parents had good understanding of preschool transition services, among which ”The importance of parent participation in preschool transition services” scored the highest. (2) Most parents had good participation in preschool transition services, among which ”Participation in school aspect” and ”Participation in family aspect” scored the highest. (3) Parents from different residential regions, education levels, and household income can significantly affect parent cognition and participation of the preschool transition services. (4) Parent cognition of preschool transition services can predict parent participation in preschool transition services. (5) The main difficulty for parents was lack of enough ability and skills to teach their children; the main assistance needed for parents was that the teachers really accepted their children. Based on the research results, recommendations were made in terms of administration, schools, and parents.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系6篇名：音韻覺識教學對學前聽覺障礙兒童音韻覺識與早期中文閱讀能力之影響並列篇名：Effects of Phonological Awareness Training on Phonological Awareness and Early Chinese Reading of Young Children Who are Deaf or Hard of Hearing作者：陳怡慧(Yi-Hui Chen)關鍵字：音韻覺識;早期中文閱讀;聽覺障礙兒童;phonological awareness;early Chinese reading;deaf or hard of hearing期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以準實驗研究設計探討音韻覺識教學對學前聽覺障礙兒童音韻覺識與早期閱讀能力的影響。本研究採立意取樣方式選取臺北市、臺中市及彰化市四所聽障兒童早期療育機構當中的五個班級，共20位學前聽覺障礙兒童為研究對象，並以叢集取樣分為實驗組10人與對照組10人。所有參與者在實驗前均接受前測，包括音韻覺識測驗、早期閱讀測驗、注音符號單音認讀測驗、以及托尼非語文智力測驗，實驗介入後則接受音韻覺識測驗與早期閱讀測驗。實驗處理階段，實驗組接受為期26週之「音韻覺識教學」，每週三次，每次20-25分鐘；對照組則接受原早期療育機構所訂之聽能復健課程。研究結果顯示，音韻覺識教學介入後，實驗組學童的音韻覺識後測表現顯著優於前測，且早期閱讀後測表現亦顯著優於前測表現。然而，實驗組之聽障兒童在音韻覺識後測以及早期閱讀後測分數雖都高於對照組，但並未顯著優於對照組兒童的後測表現。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to investigate the effects of phonological awareness training on phonological awareness and early Chinese reading of young children who are deaf or hard of hearing. This study adopted the quasi-experimental research using pretest-posttest design with control group to explore the effects of the phonological awareness training on phonological awareness and early Chinese reading. Twenty subjects at about 5-years-old were selected from five intact group classes of the early intervention programs for young children who are deaf or hard of hearing. Ten subjects were assigned into the experimental group receiving phonological awareness training program while the remaining 10 were assigned into the control group receiving the conventional intervention curriculum that focused on auditory training, speech, and cognitive development. The results indicated that there were no significant differences between the experimental group and control group in terms of the post performance on any dependent measurements. However, there were significant gains regarding the performance on phonological awareness and early reading within the experimental group. Therefore, the results still provide support for the assumption that children who are deaf or hard of hearing can benefit from the phonological training for their phonological awareness skills and early Chinese reading. Issues for future studies were also suggested.起始頁-結束頁：31-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系7篇名：繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生兩性交往知識與態度成效之研究並列篇名：The Effects of Picture Book Programs on Knowledge and Attitude of Sexual Interaction for Students with Moderate Intellectual Disabilities in a Vocational High School作者：程勻芳(Yun-Fang Cheng);李翠玲(Tsuey-Ling Lee)關鍵字：繪本教學;智能障礙;兩性交往;picture book programs;intellectual disabilities;sexual interaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生兩性交往知識與態度之教學成效。本研究採用單一受試跨行為多試探設計，研究對象為一所特殊教育學校之兩名高職階段中度智能障礙學生。本研究之自變項為繪本教學，依變項為兩性交往知識與態度之教學成效，教學內容分為「兩性生理心理」、「男女互動」及「兩性親密與自我保護」等三大主題。研究結果顯示：（1）繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生在「兩性生理心理」知識學習上有顯著立即與保留成效；（2）繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生在「男女互動」知識學習上有有顯著立即與保留成效，而此主題受試者之保留成效，較「兩性生理心理」與「兩性親密與自我保護」主題略低；（3）繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生在「兩性親密與自我保護」知識學習上有有顯著立即與保留成效；（4）繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生兩性交往態度具中度至高度的教學效果，態度持續朝正向改變；（5）繪本教學對高職階段中度智能障礙學生兩性交往態度保留效果良好。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of picture book programs on sexual interaction knowledge and attitude for vocational high school students with moderate intellectual disabilities. A single-subject experimental study of multiple probe design across behaviors was used to evaluate the effects on two participants who were selected from a special education high school. The independent variable was the picture book programs and the dependent variables were the effects of sexual interaction knowledge and attitude. Three main themes of instructions were included ”physical and psychologic knowledge of sexuality”, ”sexual interactions” and ”sexual intimacy and self-protection”. The findings were presented as follows: (1) Picture book programs had significantly immediate and retentive effects on increasing the rate of accuracy on ”physical and psychologic knowledge of sexuality” for two participants. (2) Picture book programs had significantly immediate and retentive effects on increasing the rate of accuracy on ”sexual interactions” for two participants. The retentive effects of this theme were found little lower than ”physical and psychologic knowledge of sexuality” and ”sexual intimacy and self-protection”. (3) Picture book programs had significantly immediate and retentive effects on increasing the rate of accuracy on ”sexual intimacy and self-protection” for 2 participants. (4) Picture book programs had the teaching effects on ”the attitude of sexual interaction” from medium to high degree for two students with moderate intellectual disabilities. And the attitude continued toward positive change. (5) Picture book programs had significantly retentive effects on ”the attitude of sexual interaction” for two participants.起始頁-結束頁：53-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系8篇名：國小一般智能資賦優異學生鑑定資料分析與探究並列篇名：The Data Analysis and Exploration of Identification in Intellectually Gifted Elementary Students作者：鄒小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Chau);王琡棻(Shu-Fen Wang)關鍵字：一般智能資賦優異學生;資優學生鑑定;性別差異;預測效度;intellectually gifted students;identification of gifted students;gender difference;predictive validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究分析A市99至101學年度國小一般智能優異學生鑑定之初試與複試概況、性別差異情形與鑑定工具的預測性。採描述統計、單因子多變量變異數分析與逐步區別分析，主要發現有四點：（1）A市資優鑑定的初試與複試通過率有逐年下降趨勢，男生在複試通過率的變異較女生明顯，男女生在初試與複試通過比例有失衡現象；（2）100與101學年度初試結果顯示男生在數量分測驗表現均優於女生，語文分測驗無性別差異；（3）各學年度之個別複試結果，乙式工具未有性別差異，甲式工具性別差異為：（a）99學年度男生在語詞概念、語詞記憶、算術概念與異同比較表現優於女生，100學年度男生在立體設計、算術概念、視覺記憶與圖形統合表現優於女生，（b）101學年度男生在立體設計與數學概念表現優於女生；女生在語詞概念與圖形比較優於男生，（c）女生僅在99與101學年度的圖形比較表現優於男生，男生則連續三年在數與量方面優於女生；（4）不同學年度通過鑑定複試之資優生有性別差異，男生佔優勢的分測驗數量多於女生；（5）A市連續三年之初試工具能預測鑑定結果正確率分別為59.48%、65.15%和64.58%，Kappa值分別為.22、.28、.24，且各分測驗區別力大小皆依序為數量、語文與圖形。英文摘要：This study analyzed the A city's database of intellectually gifted elementary students identification results from 99 to 101 academic year. This research covered situations on preliminary and secondary tests, gender differences and the predictive validity with identification tools. The main findings were as follow: (1) The pass rate of the A city's gifted identification by the preliminary and secondary test tended to decline annually. The male students' pass rate in the second test varied evidently compared to females'. The passing ratios of both tests differ in gender. (2) The male students scored better than female on quantitative subtest in the preliminary test on 100 and 101 school year. (3) The gender differences showed in A-type individual intelligence test: (a) On 99 and 100 academic year, the males scored better than females in subtests, including arithmetic conception, words-phrases conception, words-phrases memory, similarities and differences comparing, three-dimensional design, visual memory and graphics integration. (b) On 101 school year, the males in three-dimensional design and mathematical concepts scored better than females; females scored better than males in the words-phrases conception and graphical comparisons. (c) The females scored better than males only in graphical comparisons on 99 and 101 school year; the males scored better in numbers and quantities for three years in a row. (4) The predictive validities of the preliminary test tool were 59.48%, 65.15%, 64.58%. The discriminant functions of the three subtests were ordered by quantity, verbal and graphics.起始頁-結束頁：81-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系01篇名：遊戲治療對社會退縮兒童之退縮行為與自我概念之成效探討並列篇名：The Effect of Play Therapy on Socialiy Withdrawn Children's Behaviors and Self-Concept作者：鄭文媛(Wen-Yuan Cheng);蔡美香(Mei-Hsiang Tsai)關鍵字：自我概念;社會退縮兒童;兒童中心遊戲治療;child-centered play therapy;self-concept;socially withdrawn children期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以七位經導師推薦有退縮行為的國小四年級學生為研究對象，並隨機分派至實驗組與控制組，實驗組三名、控制組四名。本研究採前、後測準實驗設計，實驗組成員接受每週一次、每次四十分鐘，共計十次之一對一兒童中心遊戲治療，控制組則不接受任何介入。本研究在遊戲治療施行前、後一週，兩組成員分別實施「六歲至十八歲兒童行為檢核表」、「六歲至十八歲兒童－教師報告表」及「國小學童自我概念量表」，量表結果以SPSS建立資料庫，並以無母數統計之曼－惠尼U檢定進行資料分析。此外，在遊戲治療介入前三週、介入期間、介入後三週，分別對七位研究參與者進行每週二次、每次十分鐘，共計十六週之課堂觀察，課堂觀察之結果以直接觀察表進行紀錄，並使用視覺分析法進行資料分析。主要研究結果如下：一、遊戲治療對社會退縮兒童之退縮行為具有顯著改善；二、遊戲治療對於社會退縮兒童之自我概念，未呈現立即性的改善；三、退縮兒童在接受遊戲治療前後之歷程變化呈現正向的改變。英文摘要：The current study recruited seven 4th-grade students (9-10-year-olds) from elementary schools. The participants were referred by their teachers due to their socially withdrawing behaviors. Research participants were randomly assigned to an experimental group (n=3) or a control group (n=4). A pretest-posttest experimental design was utilized in this study. Participants in the experimental group received individual child-centered play therapy once a week for 10 weeks, while participants in the control group did not receive any intervention. All research participants were administered by three questionnaires including Child Behavior Checklist for Ages 6-18(CBCL), Teacher's Report Form for Ages 6-18(TRF), and Children's Self-Concept Questionnaire one week prior to and one week after receiving child-centered play therapy. All data was entered into SPSS and analyzed by non-parametric statistics (i.e., Mann-Whitney U test). In addition, in-class observations were conducted twice a week for sixteen weeks. Data from direct observations were examined by visual analysis. The main results of the current study included the following: (a) Child-centered play therapy significantly decreased withdrawn behaviors among socially withdrawn children; (b) Child-centered play therapy did not show instant improvement on socially withdrawn children's self-concept; and (c) Positive process changes occurred in socially withdrawn children after receiving child-centered play therapy.起始頁-結束頁：165-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201403062篇名：教養互動型態與青少年問題行為：母親與青少年知覺之探討並列篇名：Patterns of Interaction and Adolescent Problem Behaviors: An Investigation of Maternal and Adolescent Perceptions作者：林惠雅(Huey-Ya Lin)關鍵字：青少年;問題行為;教養行為;教養聯盟;adolescent;parenting alliance;parenting practice;problem behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究有二個主要目的，一是瞭解母親及其青少年子女各自知覺之教養聯盟和教養行為所組成的教養互動型態，以及不同教養互動型態在青少年問題行為的差異；二是瞭解母親與青少年配對中，教養互動型態的一致性類型以及不一致類型在青少年問題行為的差異。本研究以就讀國中7至9年級青少年與其母親為對象，共計301對。本研究工具為「教養聯盟量表」、「教養行為量表」、青少年問題行為的「憂鬱和攻擊量表」。本研究結果顯示，首先，母親知覺教養互動有「高正向合作型」、「高負向衝突型」、和「保持距離型」三種型態。青少年知覺教養互動有「高正向合作型」、「高負向衝突型」、和「低正向合作型」三種型態。其次，在母親知覺教養互動型態方面，「高負向衝突型」的青少年在憂鬱和攻擊都顯著高於「高正向合作型」。在青少年知覺教養互動型態方面，「高負向衝突型」、「低正向合作型」的青少年在憂鬱和攻擊都顯著高於「高正向合作型」。除此之外，女生的憂鬱顯著高於男生。教養互動型態的一致性類型有「正向一致型」、「負向一致型」和「不一致型」，不論青少年憂鬱或攻擊，「負向一致型」和「不一致型」都顯著高於「正向一致型」。英文摘要：There were two aims of the present study. One aim was to examine maternal and adolescent perceptions of patterns of parenting interaction which were made up of clusters of parenting alliance and parenting practices, as well as the differences in adolescent problem behaviors among various patterns of parenting interaction. The other aim was to examine consistent or inconsistent patterns based on pairs of mother and adolescent perceptions of patterns of parenting interaction, as well as the differences of adolescent problem behaviors among these patterns. The subjects of the present study were 301 pairs of junior high school students and their mothers. The instruments included the ”Parenting Alliance Scale,” ”Parenting Practices Scale,” and ”Depression and Aggression Scales.” The results showed that maternal perceptions of these three patterns were ”high positive and cooperative pattern,” ”high negative and conflict pattern,” and ”keeping-distant pattern.” Adolescent perceptions of these three patterns were ”high positive and cooperative pattern,” ”high negative and conflict pattern,” and ”low positive and low cooperative pattern.” In addition, for maternal perceptions of patterns, adolescents in the ”high negative and conflict pattern” showed significant higher levels of depression and aggression than adolescents in the ”high positive and cooperative pattern.” For adolescent perceptions of patterns, adolescents in the ”high negative and conflict pattern” and ”low positive and cooperative pattern” showed significant higher levels of depression and aggression than adolescents in ”high positive and low cooperative pattern”. Moreover, adolescent girls showed higher level of depression than adolescent boys. For both adolescent depression and aggression, ”negative and consistent patterns” and ”inconsistent patterns” showed higher levels than ”positive and consistent patterns.” The present study may improve our understanding of interactions of family subsystems and their effects on adolescent problem behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：187-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201403103篇名：海峽兩岸大學生性別角色發展的對比研究並列篇名：Comparison the Sex Roles Development of College Students between Taiwan and Mainland China作者：陳羿君(I-Jun Chen);劉電芝(Dian-Zhi Liu);朱江容(Jiang-Rong Zhu);陳翠(Cui Chen)關鍵字：大學生;性別角色;性別特質;兩岸對比;college students;gender traits;sex roles types;the comparison crosses Taiwan Strait期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來海峽兩岸交流頻繁，但因社會環境的不同，導致年輕一代在性別角色的認知上也有所差異。本研究運用量化研究方法，並以立意抽樣模式，分別調查台灣與大陸之大學生（台灣1017位，大陸1200位），以瞭解兩岸大學生性別角色的發展現況。研究結果顯示：（1）兩岸大學生女性特質高於男性特質，大陸高於臺灣；（2）男女生的性別特質兩岸差異明顯；（3）臺灣大學生未分化比例過半，兩性化與單性化比例較少；大陸則兩性化、未分化和單性化比例各約占三分之一；（4）大陸性別角色發展高於臺灣，兩岸不同背景下大學生性別角色分佈差異顯著；（5）背景因素影響大學生的性別角色發展，臺灣較大陸更具顯著性效應。英文摘要：In recent years, the frequent exchange of education and culture occurs between Taiwan and mainland China. However, the differences between these two different social environments may cause the younger generation to have the significant difference in the gender roles development. This study was conducted to examine the gender role development among 1017 college students from Taiwan and 1200 college students from mainland China. The results showed that: (a) for all participants, feminine traits are rated higher than masculine traits, and both traits scores are higher for mainland Chinese students than for students in Taiwan; (b) There are significant differences in gender role traits between Taiwan and mainland china; (c) For college students in Taiwan, the proportion of undifferentiated gender roles makes upthe majority, while the androgynous and traditional gender roles have a relatively small number of individuals. But for college students in mainland China, the distributions of androgynous, undifferentiated, and traditional gender roles (feminine and masculine) constitute about one third of the sample, respectively; (d) There are significant differences among the demographic variables in both Taiwan and mainland China; and the development of gender roles for college students in mainland China is higher than that in Taiwan; (e) The influencing factors of gender roles are numerous; Taiwanese students are more susceptible to these factors than those in mainland China.起始頁-結束頁：205-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201403204篇名：提及順位在中文兒童零代詞推論的效應並列篇名：The Effects of Order of Mention in Zero Pronoun Resolution for Young Chinese Readers作者：黃秋華(Chiu-Hua Huang);曾玉村(Yuht-Suen Tzeng);陸偉明(Wei-Ming Luh)關鍵字：首位優勢現象;提及順位;零代詞;order-of-mention;the advantage of first mention;zero pronoun resolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：由於中文文本出現零代詞的頻率相當高，兒童處理零代詞文本的推論能力對閱讀理解便具關鍵性的影響，然而目前有關兒童零代詞推論能力發展的相關研究相當匱乏，尤其是提及順位對不同發展階段的中文兒童零代詞推論的影響。本研究對象為二到五年級學童，每個年級選取43-52人，總計206人，以重覆測量二因子混合設計變異數分析（2×4）探討零代詞指涉第一和第二順位對二、三、四、五年級兒童進行零代詞推論的影響。結果顯示，隨著年級愈高進行零代詞推論的反應時間愈短，其中，五年級兒童在零代詞指涉第一順位的反應時間會快於第二順位，顯示此階段已發展出首位優勢推論的規則。但提及順位對二、三、四年級兒童進行零代詞推論並沒有顯著效果。最後根據本研究結果提出未來探討兒童代詞推論議題以及教學實務上的建議。英文摘要：Pronoun resolution is vital for building a coherent mental representation during comprehension. Yet, sentences with zero pronouns occur frequently in our elementary textbooks. Little is known about what factors and how they may affect young reader's zero pronoun resolution processing. Thus, this study aims to describe Chinese children's zero pronoun resolution development. A total of 206 2nd-5th grade students were selected with 43-52 from each grade. By adopting a two-way ANOVA mixed design, we investigated the influence of order of mention of pronoun on reaction time in the situation where gender semantic features cues were absent in the text. The results indicated that the older the students, the shorter the reaction time for zero pronoun resolution. Moreover, for the 5th graders, the reaction time for resolving the first-mentioned pronoun was faster than that for the second-mentioned. Therefore, the first-mention advantage is a stable phenomenon on zero pronoun resolution for these age groups. However, there was no significant effect on order of mention for 2nd-4th graders. We provide suggestions for future research and instruction implications based on these findings.起始頁-結束頁：233-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201403215篇名：從文字屬性檢驗小學國語課本生字之學習順序的洽當性並列篇名：Examining the Appropriateness of Teaching Sequence of Chinese Characters in Chinese Elementary School Textbooks作者：曾昱翔(Yu-Hsiang Tseng);胡志偉(Chih-Wei Hue);羅明(Ming Lo);呂明蓁(Meg Lu);呂菁菁(Ching-Ching Lu)關鍵字：CDE指標;文字屬性;生字;國語課本;教學順序;CDE index;character properties;Chinese characters;Chinese textbooks;teaching sequence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的是根據中文字的屬性，評估國語課本對生字之教學順序安排的恰當性。研究一以問卷方式，請151位國小國語科教師就「書報字頻」、「筆畫數」等九個分屬「文字應用」、「文字音義」及「文字構形」三個類別的文字屬性，評估它們對文字的教學與學習的相對重要性。研究發現，教師們認為，文字的童書字頻和構詞能力是每個年級進行文字教學與學習時，教師都應考量的重要文字屬性。文字的結構與筆畫數是低年級的重要文字屬性，而文字的作文字頻則是高年級的重要屬性。參考研究一的發現，研究二根據六種文字屬性評估三種版本的國小國語教科書，在生字之教學順序安排上的適當性。研究發現，雖然三個版本之內，對生字教學順序的安排頗符合文字屬性所蘊含的適當性，但是在版本之間，不同教科書對小學期間識字量的安排不僅高達約10%的差異，對文字的選擇更高達20~30%的不同。另外，研究也發現，約15%的課文生字學習該課文的時間點而言，應往前或往後調整。另外，為了有效的進行本研究，研究者設計了一個含有約5900個書報雜誌常用的中文字及其文字屬性的字庫，也設計了一個可以進行文章用字分析及文字屬性分析的電腦軟體；這個軟體將會放置於網路，提供讀者使用。英文摘要：An elementary school student in Taiwan is expected to learn 2500~2900 different Chinese characters from Chinese textbooks. The purpose of the present research is to evaluate the appropriateness of the arrangement of character sequences in textbooks. One hundred and fifty one experienced elementary school teachers of Chinese descent participated in Study 1. They were asked to evaluate the relative importance of 9 properties of Chinese characters, including character usage in writing, features of character orthography, and complexity of character phonology and semantics, when selecting characters to teach. The participants indicated that properties such as ”frequency of use in children's books” and ”number of words included as morpheme” are important and should be considered in every grade. They also found that, ”number of character strokes” is important for grade 1 and 2, and ”frequency of use in children's own writing” should be considered in grade 5 and 6. Based on the findings of Study 1, Study 2 evaluated how the potential characters to be learned were arranged in Chinese textbooks published by three publishers. The results showed that although the characters in the textbooks published by the same publisher were selected and arranged in accordance with the sequence indicated by character properties, there was much variation regarding the selection and learning sequence arrangement of the characters among the publishers. For example, between two publishers, there could be 20~30% difference on the characters to be learned included in the textbooks. All together, the potential characters to be learned in about 15% of the articles were misplaced in the teaching sequence. Moreover, a database containing about 5900 different characters and their properties has been built, and a computer program utilizing the database to analyze the characters in an article has also been designed. The database and program will be available on the internet.起始頁-結束頁：251-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201404026篇名：電腦化適性職涯性向測驗編製研究並列篇名：Construction of the Computerized Adaptive Career Aptitude Test for Junior High School Students作者：鄭育文(Yu-Wen Cheng);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);陳信豪(Shin-Hau Chen);蕭孟莛(Meng-Ting Hsiao)關鍵字：生涯發展;性向測驗;適性化測驗;職涯測驗;adaptive test;aptitude test;career development;career test期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：一個好的職涯測驗可讓學生瞭解自身之心理狀態，亦可作為生涯規劃與抉擇的工具，而國內現有之性向測驗大多為紙筆測驗，其題數較多且題目內容與真實職業情境差異較大，使其在施測及應用與解釋時有較大的限制。有鑑於此，本研究整合測驗、心理計量之適性化技術與多媒體技術，開創測驗內容、向度與題型，編製「電腦化適性職涯性向測驗－國中版」﹙CACAT-J﹚，共包括八個分測驗，分別為語文、數學、空間、邏輯推理、科學推理、觀察、美感和創意。此測驗可同時測量學生多面向之潛能，以作為學生與教師在進行生涯輔導與科系媒合時之有效工具。本研究預試樣本人數為3163人，正式樣本為5820人。在IRT之樣本層次信度介於.69~.81；在效度方面，與國中基本學力測驗之相關係數介於.28~.67。綜合上述，本測驗具有良好之信度及效度。在常模建置方面，因屬電腦化測驗，可定期更新常模資料。透過測驗參照團體定期更新，以確保測驗分數的可比較性。CACAT-J所提供之測驗結果，學生能瞭解其自身之優勢能力，將有助於學生探索與掌握自我，進而培養生涯決策與規劃能力。英文摘要：A qualified career test could play an important role in providing information for students' self-understanding and career decision-making. However, there are limitations and problems within the existing career aptitude tests in Taiwan. This study integrates psychological testing, adaptive techniques of psychometrics, and multimedia technology to establish a computerized adaptive career aptitude test (CACAT-J). The CACAT-J consists of brand new subject matters, dimensions and test items. Not only is the test more relevant with increased prediction power, but it also provides beneficial career counseling for students and teachers. The CACAT-J consisted of eight sub-tests: Verbal, Numerical, Spatial, Logical Reasoning, Scientific Reasoning, Observation, Aesthetics, and Creativity. There were 5820 participants in the present study. Reliability for the findings in this study ranged from .69 to .81. In terms of validity, the aptitude test scores were significantly correlated with junior high school students' basic competence tests and ranged from .28 to .67. Through this test, students were able to understand their aptitudes on different skills that would enhance their career exploration and their capacity for effective career decision-making and planning.起始頁-結束頁：271-288資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201405167篇名：Clusters of Humor Expression and Related Factors among Junior High School Students in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣地區國中生的幽默表現集群及相關因素探討作者：江宜珍(Yi-Chen Chiang);盛慧珊(Hui-Shan Sheng);吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);李蘭(Yen Lan Lee)關鍵字：台灣;青少年;幽默表現;集群;adolescent;cluster;humor expression;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目的欲瞭解台灣青少年幽默表現方式所形成的集群及相關因素。利用2007年收集之全國性資料進行分析。先自台灣北、中、南、東四區各隨機抽出一國中，於七至九年級各隨機抽出一個班；被抽中班級的全體學生均接受問卷調查（1,639人）。根據樣本之幽默表現方式執行集群分析，再以多類別邏輯斯迴歸模式探討與此集群相關的因素。結果發現樣本可分為四個集群，根據各群特色命名為廣用各類幽默方式群（16.1%）、愛用貶低式幽默方式群（26.7%）、機智風趣不傷人群（22.4%）、正經嚴肅群（34.9%）。以正經嚴肅群為對照組進行多類別邏輯斯迴歸模式分析後發現，部分個人因素（年級、排行、學業表現、自覺壓力、過敏疾病）及家庭因素（母親教育程度、父母婚姻狀況、家庭收入）與幽默表現集群有關。本研究發現分屬於各種幽默表現集群的青少年，可能與不同的因素有關。建議提早於國中時期調查青少年的幽默表現方式，並協助其建立以正向方式表現幽默，而減少使用負向的幽默表現方式。此結果可作為後續設計教育方案或介入活動之參考，即可針對不同幽默表現集群的青少年講授適切的課程內容。英文摘要：Little research has examined the aggregation of humor expression among adolescents. The purposes of this study were to understand the natural clusters of types of humor expression among youth in Taiwan and to discover any related background factors that may shape these aggregations of humor styles. A nationwide survey was conducted of 1,639 students in the seventh to ninth grades. Participating junior high schools were randomly selected in Taiwan. Cluster analysis was used to explore types of humor expression. Multinomial logistic regression modeling was used to examine factors related to types of humor expression. The sample was divided into four clusters based on humor expression and personality: (a) frequent use of various humor types (16.1%); (b) used of deprecating humor group (26.7%); (c) non-hurtful witty group (22.4%); and (d) serious or austere (or rarely use of humor) group (34.9%). Individual (e.g., grade, birth order, academic performance, perceived stress and allergy-related problems) and family factors (e.g., mother's education, parent's marital status and family income) were related to clusters of humor expression. Our study discovered that different aggregations of humor expressions exist among youth and that significant associations exist between different background factors and the natural clusters. Based on our study results, we recommend early contact with junior high school students to help establish positive ways that they can express their humor during this crucial period of time. Such insights may very well lead to educational programs or coursework that can enhance students' understanding of the proper use of humor and its overall role in society.起始頁-結束頁：289-309資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201404018篇名：大學生關懷自身之探討：3W的分析並列篇名：The Care-for-Self of Undergraduates: An Analysis via 3W作者：郭丁熒(Ding-Ying Guo)關鍵字：大學生;自身;關懷;care;self;undergraduate期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在透過大學生關心自己什麼事（What）、從何時開始關心（When）、及為何關心（Why）之探討，來了解大學生關懷自身的現況。本研究係以40位大學生為對象進行訪談，並將訪談資料進行編碼。研究結果發現：一、大學生關心在意的事項相當多元且全面，從微觀個人內在信念到鉅觀生態環境。二、大學生最關心「工作／家庭」、「休閒／環境」、「學習」等向度，並以「就業機會」一事項為最。三、大學生覺察自己關心在意事項的時間分布在各教育階段，其中大一是重要的關鍵期。四、大學生關心在意事情的原因廣泛，從事項本身到社會環境影響，其中以自我因素最為關鍵，家庭與學校的影響緊接在後。五、大學生關心在意事項的原因呈現多因盤錯及生態差異性。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the phenomenon of undergraduates' care-for-self. Forty undergraduates were interviewed to understand their care-for-self by assessing what they cared about, when they became aware of the events they cared about, and why they cared about those events. Data obtained from interviews were coded and analyzed. The findings of this study are summarized as the following. 1. The types of events undergraduates cared about were diverse, ranging from individual beliefs to environmental ecosystems. 2. The major dimensions undergraduates cared about were ”job/family, recreation/environment”, and ”learning”. Moreover, ”job-opportunity” received the highest priority. 3. The time in which undergraduates began to become aware of their self-care-events varied at each academic stage. However, ”the freshman stage” was a crucial time in which undergraduates become aware of their self-care-events. 4. The reasons why undergraduates cared about particular events varied, ranging from the nature of the event itself to its impact upon society. Specifically, ”individual factors” were crucial, while ”family” and ”school factors” were minor. 5. There were a number of reasons why undergraduates cared about particular events, which were influenced by the context undergraduates grew under.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201311139篇名：社會認知因子對澳門青少年學校滿意度影響之研究－SCCT滿意度模式驗證並列篇名：Effects of Social-Cognitive Factors on School Satisfaction: An Empirical Validation of the SCCT Satisfaction Model in Macau Adolescents作者：林蔚芳(Wei-Fung Lin);游錦雲(Ching-Yun Yu);李慧純(Hui-Chun Lee);金樹人(Shuh-Ren Jin)關鍵字：社會支持;學校滿意度;學習自我效能;SCCT滿意度模式;learning self-efficacy;SCCT satisfaction model;school satisfaction;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的在驗證Lent與Brown所提出之社會認知生涯滿意度模式，探討社會支持、學習自我效能、結果預期及學習行為等社會認知因子對澳門青少年學校滿意度的影響。研究對象為2011年就讀於澳門中學的在學生共478人，資料來自澳門青少年研究資料庫。經結構方程模式分析的結果顯示，模式與資料間具良好適配度，社會支持中的朋友支持、學校師長支持及學習自我效能三構面能正向直接影響學校滿意度，且朋友支持及學校師長支持皆透過學習自我效能對學習行為及學校滿意度產生顯著的間接影響。最後，依據研究結果提出對澳門青少年學校生活心理健康及未來研究之建議。英文摘要：Lent and Brown proposed a social cognitive model of work/education satisfaction, in which social-cognitive variables (environmental supports, self-efficacy, outcome expectations, and goal behavior) play key roles. This model was tested to examine the effect of social support, self-efficacy, outcome expectations, and learning behavior on school satisfaction. The data was obtained from the Macau Adolescent Database, and 478 Macau junior and senior high school students were analyzed by structural equation modeling. The results indicated that the social cognitive model of work/education satisfaction fit well with the data. Peer support, teacher support, and self-efficacy positively and significantly predicted adolescents' school satisfaction. In addition, peer support and teacher support significantly predicted learning behavior and school satisfaction through self-efficacy. Implications of the findings for further research and practice on school satisfaction for Macau adolescents were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013112510篇名：心理諮商研究倫理守則建置之意見調查研究並列篇名：A Survey of Counseling Research Ethics Code Building作者：王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);張勻銘(Yun-Ming Chang);鄧志平(Chi-Ping Deng);楊淳斐(Chun-Feei Yang)關鍵字：心理諮商;研究倫理;倫理守則;counseling psychology;ethical code;research ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在收集在地性的資料以推動心理諮商研究倫理守則的建置。研究方法上，先透過文獻探討與焦點團體訪談11位心理諮商研究人員，以收集心理諮商研究倫理守則之相關資訊，並參考10位專家的修正意見以編製「心理諮商研究倫理守則之必要性與執行經驗問卷」。接著，研究者對102名大專院校心理諮商相關科系教師進行問卷調查。研究資料以描述統計、t考驗、ANOVA進行分析，並輔以參與者的意見以完成本研究結果。研究發現：多數參與者對於建置研究倫理守則持正向肯定的態度；在題項納入守則必要性方面，參與者對機構核准、知後同意、實驗處理的部份題項態度較為保守；執行困難度方面，在機構核准、實驗處理的部份題項上，近20%的參與者感到有執行上的困難；背景變項分析方面，教過研究法與倫理課程者較易感到執行困難。顯示參與者雖支持研究倫理守則的建立，但設計守則時亦須考量執行的可行度。本研究建議訂定研究倫理守則以精簡、易懂為原則，並有必要向研究人員推廣研究倫理審查委員會設置之理念與說明運作方式，以減少研究人員的疑慮，而能同時兼顧研究發展與保障參與者福祉的目的。英文摘要：This study aims to establish the counseling research ethics and to explore the present situations of counseling research ethics in Taiwan. The research questionnaire was developed through literature reviews, a focus group of 11 counseling researchers, and a validation session with 10 college instructors who have taught at least one course in research methods or ethics. 102 college instructors in the counseling field completed the questionnaire. Descriptive statistics, t tests, and ANOVA were applied to examine the data. In addition, the opinions of participants were collected. The results showed that most participants held positive attitudes toward establishing research ethics codes. However, nearly 20% participants reported having difficulties following some of the research ethics guidelines, especially those regarding institutional approvals of research proposals and the procedural requirements of conducting experiments. Participants who had taught courses in both research methods and ethics reported more difficulties with implementation. The present study showed that even with strong support for having research ethics, some counseling researchers expressed hesitations and concerns about the ethics implementation regarding proposal approvals and requirements. This study highlights the importance of having easy-to-follow ethical requirements and procedures so that the ethics in counseling research are enhancement rather than become barriers that bring further complication. This study also suggests efforts to diminish researchers' hesitations.起始頁-結束頁：51-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013121911篇名：女性生氣表達與自尊、人際親密及憂鬱的關係－以北部某科大為例並列篇名：The Impact of Anger Expression on Women's Self-esteem, Interpersonal Intimacy, and Depression in a College Sample in Northern Taiwan作者：杜淑芬(Su-Fen Tu);葉安華(An-Hua Yeh);王建雅(Chien-Ya Wang)關鍵字：人際親密;女性研究;生氣表達;自尊;憂鬱;anger expression;depression;interpersonal intimacy;self-esteem;women study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探究女性的生氣表達、自尊、人際親密與憂鬱的關係。參與者為354名就讀於某科技大學的女性。研究工具包括自編的生氣表達量表、柯氏憂鬱量表、自尊量表和人際親密量表。本研究自編之生氣表達量表係依據因素分析法找出女性生氣表達的兩項重要因素，其中「肯定表達」分量表涵蓋在人際情境中能夠肯定表達自己衝突感受和想法的題目，「壓抑表達」則包括在人際情境中壓抑表達自己衝突的感受和想法，或者對於表達感到罪惡感的題目。研究分析採用AMOS進行的徑路分析，以找出女性生氣表達與自尊、人際親密和憂鬱關係的最適切模式。研究發現：（1）「肯定表達」與「壓抑表達」均對「自尊」具有直接效果；（2）生氣表達中的「肯定表達」對「人際親密」具有高而顯著的直接效果，而「壓抑表達」透過「自尊」，也對「人際親密」具有間接效果；（3）生氣表達中的「壓抑表達」對於女性「憂鬱」具有高而顯著的直接效果，「肯定表達」對於「憂鬱」也有低而顯著的直接效果；（4）「自尊」之於生氣表達對「憂鬱」具有部分中介效果。研究者針對生氣表達兩向度與自尊、人際親密和憂鬱的關係作討論，並對本研究限制與未來可能的研究方向進行建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the impact of women's anger expression on self-esteem, interpersonal intimacy, and depression. The participants were 354 female college students. Four scales were used in this study: Anger Expression Competency Scale, K's Depression Scale, Interpersonal Intimacy Scale, and Self-esteem Scale. Two factors that emerged from factor analysis in Anger Expression scale were assertive expression and suppressed expression. Path analyses were conducted with AMOS to identify the most appropriate model of the relationships between women's anger expression, self-esteem, interpersonal intimacy, and depression. Results of this study were as follows: (a) both ”assertive expression” and ”suppressed expression” had direct effects on self-esteem; (b)”assertive expression” had strong and significant direct effect on interpersonal intimacy, and ”suppressed expression” had indirect effect on interpersonal effect which was mediated via ”self-esteem” ; (c) ”suppressed expression” had strong and significant direct effect on women's depression, and ”assertive expression” had significant but weak effect on depression; (d) ”self-esteem” was a partial mediator between anger expression on women's depression. Suggestions and limitations for further research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：73-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013122612篇名：融入基督宗教靈性的諮商督導團體成果研究並列篇名：Supervisees' Perceptions of the Effectiveness of a Christian-based Spiritually Integrated Counseling Supervision Group作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan);程玲玲(Lin-Lin Cheng)關鍵字：督導團體;融入基督教靈性的諮商;Christian-based spiritually integrated counseling;group supervision期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：督導是諮商員養成教育的重要一環，在宗教與靈性這個範疇，諮商界對於將靈性融入於諮商員教育課程已經開始重視，以培養諮商員有能力回應帶著靈性議題來接受諮商的案主，但是宗教與靈性在督導中的研究仍極少被探究，台灣諮商界對此主題的探究更是缺乏。本研究之目的即為探討受督者參加融入基督教靈性的督導團體之經驗與收穫，一名資深基督徒諮商督導者為督導團體的帶領者，15名基督徒諮商心理或教牧／牧靈諮商工作者為參加此督導團體的受督者。督導團體共10次，每次3小時，共計30小時。研究者在受督者接受完團體督導後隨即進行個別訪談；亦於督導團體進行的中、末期對全體受督者進行焦點團體訪談，研究資料的分析採主題分析。研究結果發現受督者透過督導團體增加靈性觀點與靈性處遇能力、增加諮商觀點與諮商處遇能力、發展出個人靈性與諮商整合觀點與處遇方法、增加靈性敏感或特定議題處理的知能、敏覺個人靈性對從事融入靈性的諮商工作之重要性、提升融入靈性的諮商之勝任感與效能感、反思基督徒諮商員的角色定位、釐清使用融入靈性的諮商之時機與情境、肯定融入靈性的諮商效能、肯定督導團體的正向特性與功能；除此之外，受督者也提出對融入基督教靈性的諮商之困惑與面臨的挑戰。研究者根據研究結果進行討論，並於文末提出研究限制與對未來研究及督導實務的建議。英文摘要：Spirituality has been increasing recognized as an important aspect of client diversity in counseling and psychotherapy. However, little attention has been given to spirituality in counseling supervision in the literature. The purpose of this study is to investigate the perceived effectiveness of a Christian-based spiritually integrated counseling supervision group. An experienced Christian counseling psychologist served as the supervisor and fifteen Christian counselors participated as supervisees. Three-hour group supervision sessions were held one or two times per month for six months. During each group session, one or two supervisees presented their cases, followed by group discussions. Individual semi-structured interviews and focus groups were conducted after the group supervision sessions to investigate supervisees' perceptions of the effectiveness of the group supervision. Individual interviews and focus groups were recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using thematic analysis. Eleven themes emerged from the data. Supervisees reported (1) enhanced spiritual perspectives and spiritual intervention competence, (2) enhanced counseling perspectives and counseling intervention competence, (3) clearer viewpoints for integrating spirituality into counseling, (4) enhanced sensitivities to clients' specific spiritual issues, (5) stronger awareness of the relationship between their own spirituality and counseling work, (6) feelings of competence and effectiveness as spiritually integrated counselors, (7) concerns about the role of spiritually integrated counselors, (8) using spiritually integrated counseling in certain situations and contexts, (9) affirmation of the effectiveness of spiritual interventions, (10) experiencing challenges and confusion as a spiritually integrated counselor, and (11) perceptions of the charactevist: cs of the supervision group. The authors discuss the findings of this study, and offer suggestions for research and practice.起始頁-結束頁：93-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013123113篇名：超越四向度：六向度目標導向模式之驗證與分析並列篇名：Beyond 4 Dimensions: The Verification and Analysis of the 6-Dimensional Goal Orientation Model作者：林宴瑛(Yen-Ying Lin);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：目標導向;考試情緒;課室目標結構;競爭模式;classroom goal structure;competitive model;goal orientation;test emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標導向研究者新近主張以工作／自我／他人參照標準及趨向／逃避焦點建構目標導向理論，將目標導向區分為工作趨向、自我趨向、他人趨向、工作逃避、自我逃避及他人逃避六種目標。本研究目的在於考驗依據前述主張所建構的六向度目標導向模式是否更能解釋實際的觀察資料，並分析六向度目標導向與課室目標結構、考試情緒間的關係。為完成上述研究目的，本研究抽取台灣地區722名國中生，所蒐集資料以結構方程模式、模式比較法進行統計考驗。研究結果顯示六向度目標導向模式具有理想的整體適配度、內在品質、幅合與區別效度，適合用來解釋國中生的觀察資料。六種目標導向與課室目標結構、考試情緒具有不同關係。課室目標結構方面，趨向精熟目標結構最能正向預測工作趨向與自我趨向目標；逃避精熟目標結構最能正向預測工作逃避與自我逃避目標；趨向表現目標結構最能正向預測他人趨向目標；逃避表現目標結構最能正向預測他人逃避目標。考試情緒方面，趨向的目標能正向預測正向考試情緒，負向預測負向考試情緒；逃避的目標則負向預測正向考試情緒，正向預測負向考試情緒。本研究根據研究結果在理論上的涵義進行討論，並提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：A 6-dimensional goal orientation model has been recently proposed with three types of references (i.e., task/self/other) and two focuses (i.e., approach/avoidance): task-approach, self-approach, other-approach, task-avoidance, self-avoidance, and other-avoidance. This study was an attempt to test a confirmatory factor analysis model of the 6-dimensional goal orientation theory by using structural equation modeling (SEM) and model comparison approach. Furthermore, the relationships of these goal orientations with classroom goal structures and test emotions were tested. The participants were 722 junior high school students. The theoretical model fitted the observed data well, supporting the 6-dimensional goal orientation theory. The results of this study also showed that the 6 goals were associated with classroom goal structures and test emotions. In terms of classroom goal structures, the approach mastery goal structure most strongly and positively predicted the task-approach goal and self-approach goal; the avoidance mastery goal structure most strongly and positively predicted the task-avoidance goal and self-avoidance goal; the approach performance goal structure most strongly and positively predicted the other-approach goal; and the avoidance performance goal structure most strongly and positively predicted the other-avoidance goal. In terms of test emotions, approach goals positively predicted the positive test emotions and negatively predicted the negative test emotions; conversely, avoidance goals negatively predicted the positive test emotions and positively predicted the negative test emotions. The implications for this theory and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：117-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2014012014篇名：關係理論取向諮商中個案音映內在依賴衝突之分析並列篇名：The Analysis of How Clients Cope with Dependency Conflict in Relational Counseling Approaches作者：陳婉真(Wan-Chen Chen);蔡依玲(Yi-Ling Tsai);黃惠惠(Huei-Huei Huang);吳國慶(Kuo-Ching Wu)關鍵字：因應;依賴衝突;深度諮商;關係理論取向;coping;dependency conflict;in-depth counseling;relational approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：研究目的：本文從心理師的觀點，描繪在深度諮商關係中，個案對心理師產生內在依賴衝突時的反應與因應方式。研究方法：共訪談三位資深心理師，其以關係理論取向進行諮商工作，且諮商方式多以深度諮商為主。經由訪談資料的反覆閱讀與交叉比較，採內容分析法做為資料分析方式。研究結果：資料顯示個案一方面滿足被有效協助的依賴感，另一方面也會對依賴心理師產生焦慮，擔心即將重演過去被拒絕的痛苦經驗。因此，個案因應其內在依賴衝突可歸納出三類作法：「積極策略」、「消極策略」以及「形成競爭的關係」。研究結論：在深度諮商關係中，個案會出現不同的因應內在依賴衝突方式，雖然這些因應方式可能帶給心理師相當的壓力挑戰，但是抗拒行為的本質，代表個案將心理師視為重要他人，且試圖從與心理師的關係中找出解決內在核心衝突的方式、矯正原有的情緒經驗與人際模式。整個歷程對於個案的改變有著莫大的幫助。英文摘要：”Purpose”: From the psychologists' perspective, this study delineated various responses and coping strategies clients had when they developed dependency conflict toward their psychologists through in-depth counseling relationships. ”Methods”: We conducted interviews with 3 psychologists who adopted a relational approach to counseling and who primarily conducted long-term counseling. Each psychologist was interviewed twice; all interviews lasted for about an hour. The content analysis method was conducted by rereading and analyzing the narratives case by case, and repeatedly comparing the interview transcripts. ”Results”: The data showed that clients' needs for dependency were satisfied through being helped effectively. At the same time, they exhibited anxiety about depending on their psychologists due to the worry of re-enacting the painful experience of being rejected. Thus, how clients coped with their inner dependency conflict could be categorized into three types:  ”active strategies,” ”passive strategies,” and ”forming competitive relationships.” ”Conclusions”: During in-depth counseling relationship, clients adopt different ways of coping to deal with inner dependency conflict. Though these coping strategies might bring certain pressures and threats to psychologists, the nature of clients' resistance indicated that clients tried to regard psychologists as important others, and they intended to resolve their core inner conflicts while correcting their original emotional experience and interpersonal model. The whole process contributed significantly to clients' overall change.起始頁-結束頁：141-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201422515篇名：對負向刺激的注意力偏誤假設暨不同負向價性對注意力偏誤修正訓練效果的檢驗並列篇名：Examining the Phenomenon of Negative Attention Bias and Exploring the Effects of the Materials with Different Valence on Attention Bias Modification Training作者：胡毓權(Yu-Quan Hu);邱發忠(Fa-Chung Chiu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：注意力偏誤修正訓練;對負向刺激的注意力偏誤;價性;attention bias modification;negative attention bias;valence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：研究目的：檢驗對負向刺激的注意力偏誤假設，同時探討刺激的不同負向價性程度對注意力偏誤修正訓練的效果。研究方法與結果：研究一透過眼動儀觀察21名參與者在中性與負向配對刺激呈現時的眼動歷程，結果支持注意力偏誤現象，參與者傾向注視負向刺激。研究二選取51名參與者，隨機分配至高負向價性組、低負向價性組，及導向負向組中。檢視三組參與者經訓練程序後，對注意力偏誤修正的效果。結果發現，注意力偏誤修正訓練能夠減少參與者對負向刺激注意偏誤的傾向，同時降低對恐懼刺激的肌肉活動電位激發與對負向刺激反應的恐懼感受。此外，當刺激威脅性提高時，能夠提升注意力偏誤修正訓練的效果。研究結論：1.對負向刺激的注意力偏誤假設獲得支持；2.注意力偏誤修正訓練能夠降低負向刺激注意偏誤的傾向，與降低對負向刺激的恐懼情緒反應；3.高負向價性組的材料，與低負向價性組比較起來，有較佳的注意力偏誤修正效果。英文摘要：Purpose: The purpose of the present study is to examine the assumption of biased attention toward negative stimuli and to explore the influence of the materials with differential negative valences on attention bias modification (ABM) training effect. Methods and Results: In Study 1, twenty-one participants' eye movement were measured while showing paired stimuli which consisted of one negative picture and one neutral picture. Results supported the hypothesis that participants' first gaze tended to be on the negative cues, and they maintained their gaze longer on the negative cues than the neutral cues. In Study 2, fifty-one participants were randomly allocated to the three groups: High negative valence group (the paired materials consisted of higher negative pictures and neutral pictures), low negative valence group (the paired materials consisted of lower negative pictures and neutral pictures), and negative group (the paired materials consisted of higher negative and lower negative pictures paired with neutral pictures). Each group was directed differential attentional responses to emotional stimuli accordingly by using a modified dot probe task (the high negative valence group and the low negative valence group were trained to develop the tendency to selectively orient attention away from negative information, and the control group was trained to develop the tendency to selectively orient attention toward negative information). The impact of attentional manipulation on subsequent attentional bias test and emotional vulnerability was examined. Results supported the hypothesis that the attentional bias modification procedure was effective in inducing attentional avoidance of negative information. Furthermore, this attentional manipulation served to reduce fear scores and to attenuate EMG responses to a subsequent horror movie. Moreover, increasing stimulus threat enhanced alert to negative stimuli, and participants' first gaze to negative stimuli. Results suggested that higher negative materials paired with neutral materials provided greater effect of attention bias modification than lower negative materials. Conclusions: 1. The results supported the hypothesis of attention bias; 2. The attentional bias modification procedure was effective in inducing attentional avoidance of negative information; 3. The attentional bias modification procedure served to reduce fear; 4. Higher negative materials paired with neutral materials provide greater effect of attention bias modification than lower negative materials.起始頁-結束頁：435-454資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20130711.316篇名：臺灣中老年人外向性及神經質人格、社會支持與主觀幸福感關係之模型建構及其結構係數比較並列篇名：Modeling Extraversion and Neurotic Personality, Social Support, and Subjective Well-being of the Middle-Aged and Older People in Taiwan: Comparison of Structural Models作者：李仁豪(Ren-Hau Li);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：中老年人;外向性人格;主觀幸福感;社會支持;神經質人格;extraversion personality;neuroticism personality;social support;subjective well-being;the middle-aged and older people期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究針對影響臺灣中老年人主觀幸福感（SWB）的重要因素來建立模型，包括外向性及神經質人格、社會支持，進一步利用多群組結構方程式模型技術，來探討中年人與老年人在模型結構係數上的差異情形。樣本係透過便利取樣方式獲得全臺灣640位中老年人，年齡範圍在45~95歲，平均61.05歲，本研究將296位60歲以上受試者視為老年人，其餘344位視為中年人。在模型適配的情形下發現，整體而言，外向性人格對社會支持及SWB都有顯著的正向效果；神經質人格對社會支持及SWB都有顯著的負向效果；而社會支持對SWB有顯著的正向效果。老年人相對於中年人而言，社會支持對SWB的正向效果有顯著的提高；其餘4條結構係數則不顯著，包括神經質人格對社會支持及SWB的負向效果下降、外向性人格對社會支持的正向效果下降，但對SWB的正向效果上升，雖然變化不顯著，但仍然值得注意。英文摘要：This study attempted to model important factors that influence subjective well-being (SWB) of the middle-aged and older people in Taiwan, including extraversion, neurotic personality and social support. Multi-samples structural equation model technique was used to investigate the differences between the middle-aged and older people in structural model coefficients. A convenience of sample of 640 participants, 45-95 years of age with a mean age of 61.05 was recruited in Taiwan. There were 296 participants with age 60 and above who were categorized into the older people group. The remaining 344 participants were categorized into the middle-aged group. In general, extraversion personality had significant positive effects on social support and SWB; neurotic personality had significant negative effects on social support and SWB; social support had significant positive effects on SWB. In contrast to the middle-aged people, older people's social support had an increasing effect on SWB. Four structural paths were found to be non-significant, including the decreasing negative effects of neurotic personality on social support and SWB, the decreasing positive effect of extraversion personality on social support, and the increasing effect of extraversion personality on SWB. Despite the nonsignificant findings, the increasing effect of extraversion on SWB remains important for future research attention.起始頁-結束頁：455-474資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013072517篇名：幼兒對道德事件之情緒歸因解釋能力並列篇名：Young Children's Justifications of Emotion Attributions of Moral Events作者：周育如(Yu-Ju Chou)關鍵字：幼兒;情緒歸因解釋;道德推理;justifications of emotion attribution;moral reasoning;preschooler期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討學齡前幼兒的道德情緒歸因解釋能力，並呈現以此變項進行的研究為幼兒道德推理領域帶來的新發現。以77名6歲幼兒為對象，透過道德推理作業之個別訪談及父母問卷，探討道德認知和道德情緒的關係、情緒歸因解釋的情境差異與個人反應傾向，以及父母教養對情緒歸因解釋能力的影響。主要發現有三：（1）較之傳統上採用的道德判斷推理，以情緒歸因解釋能力為認知變項時，幼兒道德推理與道德情緒間呈現合邏輯的對應關係；（2）幼兒情緒歸因解釋之道德推理層次較低，但其反應因道德情境而異，且各情境之道德情緒與情緒歸因解釋傾向間有正向關連；（3）父母在幼兒犯錯時採取溫和說理的方式並對幼兒犯錯表達哀傷反應者，幼兒的道德情緒歸因解釋能力較佳。根據研究結果並提出未來幼兒道德推理研究及道德教育上的建議。英文摘要：The present study explored preschoolers' abilities to justify their moral emotion attribution and its relationship with children's moral reasoning. The sample consisted of 77 6-year-old preschoolers. Data were collected through individual interview of moral reasoning tasks and questionnaire for parents. The study examined the relationship between moral cognition and moral emotion, the roles of contextual differences and individual moral reaction tendency on justification of emotion attributions, and the influence of parenting on preschoolers' moral reasoning ability. There are three main findings: (1) In contrast to the moral judgment reasoning, variable traditionally used logical corresponding relationships between moral cognition and moral emotion were found when justification of moral emotion attribution was used as a cognitive variable; (2) The moral reasoning level of preschoolers' justifications of emotion attributions was lower, but children's responses differed by moral contexts, and there are positive. Relationships between moral emotions and the justifications within and across contexts; (3) If parents explained to the children gently and showed sadness upon children's wrongdoing, children's abilities to justify their moral emotion attribution were better. Based on these findings suggestions for future research and moral education were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：475-495資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013073018篇名：不同範例與解題組合對初學者在學習上的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Different Combinations of Examples and Problems on Novices' Learning作者：黃一泓(Yi-Hung Huang);虞翔(Xiang Yu)關鍵字：認知負荷理論;範例解題組合;遷移;問題解決;cognitive load theory;examples-based learning;problem solving;transfer;worked-example期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以認知負荷理論<U+7232>基礎，探討不同的範例與解題組合對初學者的認知負荷及學習成效之影響。本研究以72位商業管理類大學新生<U+7232>研究對象，以微積分課程中探討最佳化問題<U+7232>教學內容，採取前後測控制的真實驗設計，學習者在隨機分組後經過「同時呈現的範例與解題」、「範例-解題配對」，以及「解題－範例配對」三種學習過程，再進行近遷移及遠遷移的學習成效測試，並在學習過程中採用難度評分的自評量表收集認知負荷數據。實驗結果說明，「同時呈現的範例與解題」對初學者的認知負荷最低、「範例－解題配對」其次，而「解題－範例配對」最高。而「同時呈現的範例與解題」與「範例－解題配對」在學習成效的影響並無顯著差異，但上述兩條件組則顯著優於「解題－範例配對」。另外，不同的範例解題組合在遠遷移測試的表現則無顯著差異。英文摘要：This study investigated the effectiveness of different combinations of examples and problems, including simultaneous examples and problems, example-problem pairs, and problem-example pairs on novices' learning of optimization problems tasks in a calculus curriculum. Participants were college freshmen who major in business and management. Pretest-posttest control group design was used in this study. After pretest, learners were randomly assigned to three learning conditions Difficulty rating scale was measured in the learning phase when learning time was fixed. Results showed that in cognitive load measurement, learning from examples and problems simultaneously was more effective and efficient than example-problem pairs and problem-example pairs conditions. In posttest, there was no significant difference in effectiveness between learning from examples and problems simultaneously example-problem pairs conditions; however, they were both more effective than the problem-example pairs condition. Performance in far transfer tests had the same outcome as in near transfer tests among the three conditions. In addition, difficulty rating scale was sensitive to the measurement of cognitive load when learning time was fixed.起始頁-結束頁：497-515資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013100219篇名：短期社區諮商介入災難救援場域之初探性研究：以八八水災的心理復健工作為例並列篇名：Preliminary Study of Brief Community Counseling Services at a Disaster Rescued Location: Mental Health Interventions for Typhoon Morakot作者：趙祥和(Tey Siang Hua)關鍵字：八八水災;心理復健;社區諮商;災難救援場域;community counseling;disaster rescued location;mental health services;Typhoon Morakot期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討社區諮商介入災難救援時之服務內涵、策略、團隊合作之挑戰及面臨之文化議題，研究者採取Lofland、Snow、Anderson與Lofland（2006）所提出的社會情境分析之參與式觀察和質性分析法，於2009年8月11日至8月23日帶領7位受訓諮商師進入南部某災區救援醫療單位及收容中心提供心理復健工作，以參與式觀察、心理復健服務記錄、督導討論及焦點訪談等方式蒐集資料，並進行質性分析。研究結果顯示，在災難初期以社區諮商的介入方式提供心理復健服務時，其服務隨著災民族群文化、不同專業文化及場域的不同而變化，衍伸出不同服務內涵與策略。其中，災區之社區諮商策略與內涵共有六大主題：「外在事務與內在心理服務之銜接」、「由被動到主動服務之心理轉化」、「文化多元與策略多樣之映襯」、「專業態度依循文化脈絡之調整」、「災難經驗的共構與轉化」、「多變情境與制式專業之磨合」；團隊合作的挑戰與因應則展現五大主題：「醫療模式與整體服務模式之辯證」、「專業文化差異之消融」、「制式化與學習性服務之轉化」、「組織階層化與權力因應」與「以災民利益優先因應競合生態」。最後，研究者針對社區諮商因應災難救援場域的特殊性與複雜的文化因素，對其所使用之介入方法的變化調整、合作議題與專業方法等相關議題進行討論。英文摘要：The study explored the community counseling services, strategies, collaborative challenges, and cultural concerns encountered by professional helpers in a disaster rescued location. Situational analysis and participant observation method proposed by Lofland, Snow, Anderson and Lofland (2006) was applied in this study. Seven community counselor trainees provided services in the Typhoon Morakot disaster field in South Taiwan with the principal researcher August 11 to August 23, 2009. Data were gathered through participant observation, process notes, supervision discussion and focus group. Qualitative analysis indicated that when providing community counseling at the early phase of disaster management, service types and strategies changed according to the ethnic culture of victims, professional culture, and locations. Six themes of service strategies and content emerged from the data: (a) combining external business management and mental health interventions, (b) transforming passive attitude into active services, (c) diversifying strategies to adapt to diverse cultures, (d) adjusting professional attitudes to match the local cultural network; (e) co-constructing and transforming the disaster experiences, and (f) ”mediating standardized service protocol and changing circumstances. Five themes concern collaborative challenges and strategies encountered by the team emerged: (a) dialectic of medical and holistic service models, (b) resolving conflicts among different professional modalities, (c) transforming standardized learning into service learning, (d) coping with power struggle within organizational stratum, and (e) putting victims' needs above competitive service ecology. Finally, issues related to cultural complexity of counseling interventions, collaboration, and trainee competences in disaster rescued locations are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：517-538資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013102220篇名：高低迴避傾向嬰兒的挫折反應之比較並列篇名：A Comparison of the Reactions between Infants with High-versus Low-avoidance Tendency in Induced Frustrations作者：黃世琤(Shih-Tseng Huang);李麗雯(Li-Wen Lee)關鍵字：心跳速率;挫折;氣質;frustration;heart rate;temperament期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究共58名（6至12個月）嬰兒與母親參與，分別由陌生人與母親經實驗程序引發嬰兒挫折經驗，藉由測量嬰兒生理反應與負向行為，以瞭解高低迴避傾向嬰兒之反應差異。結果顯示，嬰兒在挫折階段之哭泣行為顯著高於餅乾餵食階段。分析心跳速率變化量則發現迴避傾向與互動對象間之顯著交互作用，面對陌生人情境時，高迴避傾向嬰兒心跳速率變化量顯著大於低迴避傾向嬰兒，面對母親情境時高低迴避傾向嬰兒間則無差異。結果亦發現迴避傾向與實驗階段間之顯著交互作用，挫折階段中，高迴避傾向嬰兒心跳速率變化量顯著大於低迴避傾向嬰兒，餅乾餵食階段中高低迴避傾向嬰兒間則無差異。高迴避傾向嬰兒於面對陌生人情境以及於挫折階段中之心跳速率變化量均顯著大於低迴避傾向嬰兒之研究發現有助於瞭解高低迴避氣質傾向嬰兒於挫折反應之差異，並對高迴避傾向嬰兒之教養具參考價值。英文摘要：The present study attempted to compare the reactions of infants with high- and low-avoidance tendency in induced-frustration conditions. Fifty-eight six- to twelve-months-old infants and their mothers participated. In the experimental procedure, half of the infants were assigned to a session where they experienced his/her mother first followed by a stranger, and the other half in a session with reverse encounter order. In each session, infants' heart rates and crying behaviors were recorded in the baseline, cookie-offering, frustration induction, and recovery phases. Results found that infants cried more during frustration phase than cookie-offering phase. For the heart rates, a significant interaction was found between the avoidance and person who induced the frustration. Compared to infants with low-avoidance, infants with high avoidance tendency had more changes changed heart rates when facing strangers. A significant interaction between the avoidance and experimental phases was found. Follow-up analysis found that infants with high avoidance tendency had greater changes in their heart rates during frustration than infants with low avoidance. These findings suggested that in a mild frustration induction procedure, infants with high avoidance tendency exhibited greater changes in heart rates than those with low-avoidance in frustration, particularly in the stranger induced frustration. Understanding the reactions of infants with high avoidance tendency in frustration situation may have important implications for parenting.起始頁-結束頁：539-554資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2013102801篇名：H. Rolston的環境美學及其在環境教育上的意涵並列篇名：H. Rolston's Environmental Aesthetics and Its Implications for Environmental Education作者：楊忠斌(Chung-Ping Yang)關鍵字：Rolston;自然科學;肯定美學;環境美學;環境教育;Rolston;natural sciences;positive aesthetics;environmental aesthetics;environmental education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:4期出版年：2014中文摘要：國內中小學環境教育的目標之一在培養學生環境覺知與欣賞自然美的能力，但學校通常多著重於資源回收與環境知識學習等方面，環境美學有助於教育工作者更加瞭解如何教導環境之美的欣賞。本文即在以文獻分析法，探討Rolston的環境美學思想，並論述其在環境教育上的意涵。Rolston認為從生態系統的角度而言，自然皆美。自然科學讓我們看到了自然環境的多樣性與豐富性之美、古老時空性之美、微美、崇高、精巧美，以及生命的奮鬥、堅毅與再生之美。自然美感並進一步涉及了奇蹟、神聖、終極的超越性與創造性。Rolston的美學建立於科學之上，但最終則走向宗教，形成了極具特色的環境美學。本文在評析Rolston的環境美學後，對環境教育提出了三點啟示：一、美學與倫理學交融的環境覺知教育；二、學習以肯定美學的角度去欣賞大自然；三、教導學生透過自然科學知識去發掘自然之美。英文摘要：In Taiwan, one of the goals of environmental education in primary and secondary school is to cultivate students' competence of environmental perceptual awareness and appreciating natural beauty. However, schools are usually more confined to recycling and learning of environmental knowledge. Environmental aesthetics can make educators understanding more about how to teach appreciation of natural beauty. This study uses literature analysis as the method to inquire Rolston's environmental aesthetics and its implications for environmental education. Rolston claims that whole natural is beautiful from the perspective of ecological system. Natural sciences allow us in finding the beauty of diversity and abundance of creature, aesthetic sense of ancient time and space, the beauty of organism's tininess, sublime and subtlety, the beauty of struggle for survival, and the beauty of endurance and regeneration. Furthermore, natural aesthetic appreciation involves miracle experience, sanctity, ultimate transcendence and creativity. Rolston's aesthetics are based on science and approach to religion finally, which form very unique environmental aesthetics. According to the result of review, this study indicates three implications on environmental education: 1. Teaching environmental perceptual awareness through integration of aesthetics and ethics. 2. Learning to appreciate natural beauty from the perspective of positive aesthetics. 3. To teach students discover natural beauty through knowledge of natural sciences.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820141260040012篇名：臺灣中小學教師職業流動表分析並列篇名：The Occupational Mobility Analysis for Elementary and Junior High School Teachers in Taiwan作者：黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：中小學教師;職業流動;階級意識;elementary and junior high school teachers;occupational mobility;class consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:4期出版年：2014中文摘要：中小學教師職業流動愈是封閉，愈有助於階級意識發展。本研究分析臺灣中小學教師流動的封閉性與可能的階級意識發展，以對數線性與對數相乘分析，結果顯示，從父職到初職、初職到現職與父職到現職的流動過程，都只用一個主要代表職業間社經地位差距愈大，相對流動機會愈小的齊一關聯參數，以及流動表對角線上六個代表不流動封閉性的參數，就使流動表適合資料。以下說明各參數所顯示的中小學教師流動封閉性：一、從初職到現職流動的封閉性，以中小學教師最高。二、從父職到初職、父職到現職的流動封閉性，中小學教師排名第二。而在以上三個流動過程中，各職業與中小學教師社經地位差距愈大，相對流動機會都愈小。英文摘要：The more closed occupational mobility the elementary and junior high school teachers in Taiwan are, more helpful to develop class consciousness it is. This study explores the closed pattern of teachers' mobility and the possible development of class consciousness. According to loglinear and multiplicative analysis, in the mobility process from father's occupation to the first occupation, and then to the current occupation, and from father's occupation to the current occupation, the uniform association parameter mainly presenting the larger the gap of socioeconomic status between occupations is, the smaller the opportunity of relative mobility is, and the six parameters on the diagonal mobility tables presenting the immobile closed pattern, make the mobility tables fitted the data. The findings indicate that the teachers' closed mobility in the process from the first occupation to the current occupation is the highest. The teachers' closed motilities in the process from father's occupation to the first occupation and to the current occupation are the second high. Finally, above three mobility tables, the larger the gap of socioeconomic status between teachers and other occupations is, the smaller the opportunity of relative mobility is.起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820141260040023篇名：我國跨國高等教育服務指標之建構並列篇名：The Construction of Taiwanese Transnationality Index for Higher Education Services作者：湯堯(Yao Tang);王嘉穗(Chia-Sui Wang);歐宏國(Hong-Kou Ou);趙學維(Hsueh-Wei Chao)關鍵字：指標建構;高等教育服務;跨國高等教育;德懷術;index construction;higher education service;transnational higher education;Delphi technique期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:4期出版年：2014中文摘要：知識經濟與全球化帶動了由美、英、澳等國大學所主導的跨國高等教育之發展，而世界貿易組織（World Trade Organization, WTO）要求會員國履行開放國內教育市場的承諾，則促使跨國高等教育服務的提供模式趨於多樣化。過去十幾年，許多先進國家的大學紛紛透過課程輸出、線上教學和設立海外分校等方式，積極開拓境外教育服務；對照之下，新加坡與馬來西亞等亞洲國家卻是積極引進跨國高等教育服務，吸引國際學生前去該國就讀，並提出延攬畢業生留在該國就業的人才策略。想要迎頭趕上亞洲鄰國在跨國高等教育方面的進展，我國的首要之務便是先明暸這些國家跨國高等教育的發展趨勢，並掌握我國大學在各種跨國高等教育服務型態的樣貌，俾做為未來發展策略之指引。本文先經由文獻探討研析出含括各類跨國高等教育服務型態的問卷內容，繼而進行兩回合德懷術問卷的調查。在統整與分析所有專家意見之後，建構出一套包含三個要素、七個構面、41個子項目的我國跨國高等教育服務型態指標系統。此外，本文建議，政府權責單位應採取適切政策引導跨國高等教育服務指標之發展，並透過本文的服務指標做為檢核工具，落實相關政策的執行，如此一來，非但可推進我國高等教育國際化之進程，同時可達成國家延攬國外優秀人才之戰略規劃。英文摘要：The recent development of transnational higher education has been driven by the forces of knowledge economy and globalization. The provision of transnational higher education also took new forms thanks to the request by WTO on its members to open up domestic education market. Universities from advanced countries have been rushing to expand their educational services abroad through the export of curriculum, online education, and overseas branch campus. Taking advantage of the expanded provision of transnational higher education from advanced countries, Singapore and Malaysia have been able to transform themselves into regional education hubs by first attracting international students to study then stay and work there after graduation. If Taiwan wants to catch up with her neighbors in the development of transnational higher education, authorities concerned should first have a comprehensive grasp of the situation of transnational higher education in Taiwan before drawing up a grand strategy. This paper tries to develop a framework of indexes for conducting such a comprehensive investigation. In order not to be constrained by existing indexes designed by domestic institutions, the authors adopt indexes used by international organizations and scholarly research to construct a Taiwanese transnationality index for higher education. After two rounds of Delphi questionnaires, the authors arrive at a framework of indexes with a total of 41 indexes for measuring transnational higher education in Taiwan. The authors suggest that the authorities should make wise use of this index, not only for the advancement of internationalization of higher education in Taiwan but also to incorporate this index into a national ”brain gain” strategy.起始頁-結束頁：63-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820141260040034篇名：臺灣科技教育學系變革下學位論文研究趨勢：以共詞分析並列篇名：Research Trends of Thesis and Dissertation in the Changing Departments of Technology Education in Taiwan: A Co-word Analysis作者：方瑀紳(Yu-Shen Fang);李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee)關鍵字：共詞分析;科技教育;科技取向人資;師資教育;組織變革;co-word analysis;technology-oriented human resource;technology education;organizational change期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:4期出版年：2014中文摘要：為因應1990年代的師資培育多元化，臺灣南北兩所科技教育學系碩博士班的任務，從提供中小學生活科技師資進修教育與培育科技師資教育人員逐漸擴張，其任務擴張是師資培育系所組織變革的典型案例，變革方向也因而受到關注。本研究採文獻計量學方法，以「臺灣博碩士論文知識加值系統」1994<U+223C>2013學年20年間，合計1,262篇碩博士學位論文的摘要做為研究對象，運用自動化內容探勘工具BICOMB配合SPSS及UCINET進行分析，以瞭解臺灣科技教育學系變革下學位論文研究趨勢。結果發現：一、1994年師培多元化影響科技教育研究主題；二、當前研究集群朝向數位學習領域；三、學系研究發展主軸還不夠嚴謹；四、共詞網絡圖譜呈現集群與節點間緊密不足。研究結果除相當程度呈現科技教育研究趨勢和科技教育學系組織變革方向外，方法也可供其他領域和學系參考。英文摘要：In response to the diversification of teacher education in the 1990s, the mission of the graduate programs in the two departments of technology education in north and south Taiwan has been expanded from both providing further education for school teaches of Living Technology and preparing technology teacher educators. This is a typical case of organizational change occurring in teacher education programs and its change direction has been concerned. This study used bibliometric methods and adopted ”department of technology education” as the main keyword to search the abstracts of theses and dissertations completed in 1994-2013 academic years from ”National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations in Taiwan.” A total of 1,262 thesis and dissertation abstracts were collected. The automated content mining tool BICOMB was used with SPSS and UCINET to conduct analyses. Four conclusions are made. In addition to the results of this study available to show research trends of technology education and organizational change directions of departments of technology education, the method is also available for other disciplines as well as departments/programs' reference.起始頁-結束頁：99-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820141260040045篇名：德國大學組織重構之邊界並列篇名：On the Border of Organizational Restructuring at German Universities作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：人事制度;教育改革;德國大學;personnel system;educational reform;German university期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文透過文件分析法探究德國大學組織重構之邊界，尤其聚焦於教授層級之探討，首先分析大學組織特性之變易，而後再依序探究德國大學之人事權、組織權與教授薪資制度的改革邊界。傳統上，大學被視為不同於企業組織與行政機構之特殊組織，但在新公共管理模式引進大學後，卻與其他組織存在著「同形趨勢」。但德國大學的組織重構仍存在著難以逾越的改革邊界；在人事權方面，相對於許多國家的大學透過正式或非正式管道建立留校任教的可能與教授內部升等制度，在德國反倒透過法律規定或潛在慣例的結合加以攔阻；在組織權方面，大學領導層所具有的制裁權，對於多數教授顯然無足輕重，因此難以形成有效領導的制度保障。再者，績效導向薪資制度的適用對象未涵蓋整體成員，且對於不同專業的教授有不同影響程度，因此難以成為有效的替代方案。英文摘要：In this paper, document analysis is used to investigate the organizational restructuring recently implemented at German universities, in particular the effects these changes have had on professors. After presenting the changes that have been implemented, I investigate how these reforms have affected organizational authority and the remuneration of professors. Although the administrative policies and procedures of universities have traditionally been rather distinct from those used in business and government, these differences have become less distinct with the adoption of the public management approach at universities. However, with regards to the authority universities have over their faculty, these reforms have had a more limited effect. Whereas in many countries universities utilize formal or informal means to establish systems for determining faculty promotions and for appointing former students to teach at the same school, due to various legal provisions and established practices, such systems have not been established in Germany. Furthermore, the relatively limited ability of German universities to impose sanctions upon faculty makes it difficult for university leaders to play a strong leadership role. Finally, it was found that the incentive-based remuneration system being implemented at German universities has not yielded substantial results, mainly because it has yet to be applied to all faculty members; it was also found that the effectiveness of such a system differs according to the faculty members' area of specialization.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140960030016篇名：國中校長服務領導與教師正向情緒、工作壓力及學校生活適應之關聯探析並列篇名：The Relationship among Principals' Service Leadership, Teachers' Positive Emotions, Work Stress, and School Life Adjustment in Junior High Schools作者：黃文三(Wen-San Huang);沈碩彬(Shuo-Pin Shen)關鍵字：工作壓力;正向情緒;校長服務領導;學校生活適應;work stress;positive emotions;principals' service leadership;school life adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討教師知覺的校長服務領導、正向情緒、工作壓力與學校生活適應之關聯。研究者以高屏地區349名國中教師及33校校長為研究對象，利用自編量表蒐集實證資料，進行現況、相關與路徑關係分析。結果顯示：一、「校長自覺」的服務領導勝過「教師知覺」的校長服務領導情形，但均達高評價；教師正向情緒中的愉悅勝過浮流；教師工作壓力以角色期望最低；教師學校生活適應以人際適應最佳。二、校長服務領導和正向情緒、學校生活適應皆有正相關，和工作壓力有負相關，其中以正向情緒和學校生活適應的相關最強。三、校長服務領導可正向預測正向情緒，而後正向情緒可直接或藉工作壓力中介而間接正向預測學校生活適應。據此，校長須強化服務領導力，裨益教師有高正向情緒、低工作壓力，以達優質學校生活適應。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the relationships among principals' service leadership, teachers' positive emotions, work stress, and school life adjustment at junior high schools. The data was collected through questionnaires from 349 junior high school teachers and 33 principals in Kaohsiung and Pingtung, with an aim to explore the current situation, correlations, and directional relationships. The following findings were revealed: 1. The principals' opinions regarding their own service leadership were better than teachers' opinions regarding their principals' service leadership, but both reached a high level. In teachers' positive emotions, pleasure was higher than their Pflow experiences. In teachers' work stress, role expectations led to the lowest stress. In teachers' school life adjustment, interpersonal relationships were seen as the best. 2. Principal service leadership was positively related with positive emotions and school life adjustment, but negatively related with work stress. Additionally, the strongest correlation was between positive emotions and school life adjustment. 3. Principal service leadership positively affected positive emotions, and positive emotions positively affected school life adjustment directly or through work stress indirectly. Accordingly, principals have to enhance service leadership to promote teachers' positive emotions and reduce their work stress, and thus help them achieve good school life adjustment.起始頁-結束頁：35-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140960030027篇名：青少年自尊成長趨勢及相關影響因素探討並列篇名：Discussion of Adolescent Self-esteem Growth and the Relevant Factors作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao);蘇嘉蓉(Chia-Jung Su)關鍵字：青少年自尊;家庭凝聚力;班級氣氛;臺灣青少年成長歷程研究;self-esteem of adolescents;family cohesion;classroom climate;Taiwan Youth Project期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究之目的在於瞭解青少年自尊的成長趨勢及其相關影響因素，運用臺灣青少年成長歷程資料庫（Taiwan Youth Project, TYP）中，2000年就讀國一之樣本（J1）所調查的資料共五波（分別於國一、國二、國三、高三及大二等時間點進行調查），以兩層次階層線性模式進行縱貫性分析，研究樣本共2,617位。研究結果發現，青少年自尊存在顯著的個體間差異，且其成長曲線從國一到大二的七年間呈現先下降後上升之趨勢。在青少年自尊的全體變異量中，來自個體間的變異量占46.1%，自尊各階段成長率中，國一到國二、國二到國三為負成長，國三到高三以及高三到大二則為正成長。本研究亦討論國一時的家庭凝聚力與班級氣氛對青少年自尊的影響，結果發現，對初階段的自尊為正向影響；另外，國一時的班級氣氛也會影響自尊的成長速率，且為正向調節的影響。英文摘要：This study aims to understand adolescent self-esteem growth and the relevant factors. Samples of G7 students in 2000 (J1) from the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP) database are investigated in Ofive waves (at grade 7, grade 8, grade 9, grade 12, and the second year of university). A total of 2617 samples went through longitudinal analyses with a two-level hierarchic linear model. The research findings show significant inter-individual difference in adolescent self-esteem, and the growth curve moves downwards and then upwards from grade 7 to university. The inter-individual variance of adolescent self-esteem accounts for 46.1% of the differences. The self-esteem growth rate appears negative at the stages of G7-G8 and G8-G9, and positive at the stages of G9-G12 and G12 to the second year of university. Meanwhile, the effects of family cohesion and classroom climate on adolescent self-esteem at G7 are also discussed, where positive effects have positive effects on self-esteem in a preliminary way. What is more, the classroom climate would also positively affect the self-esteem growth rate at G7.起始頁-結束頁：75-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140960030038篇名：再論多元文化教育的困境並列篇名：Revisiting the Multicultural Myths作者：張建成(Jason Chien-Chen Chang)關鍵字：文化差異;原住民;教育成就;族群關係;cultural diversity;aboriginal people;educational attainment and achievement;ethnic relation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文繼2007年〈獨石與巨傘〉一文後，將檢討的焦點從多元文化主義（教育）可能走偏之概念邏輯，轉為可能有失的實務運作。理論上，多元文化教育的主要任務，在於促進族群關係與提昇教育成就。可是，臺灣多元文化教育的實施，在促進族群關係方面，多半都在提振弱勢民族（如原住民）本身的族群文化認同，彷彿多元文化教育只是弱勢民族個別的事，與主流族群無關；在提升教育成就方面，臺灣的多元文化教育多半流為表面文章，非徒弱勢民族（如原住民）學業失利及中輟停學的情形，一如過往，整體教育成就的競爭力也依舊落於主流社會之後。伴隨這兩方面的分析，本文也根據相關的事實及論證，提醒不宜過度放大「文化差異」的說詞與效能，以免治絲益棼，造成紛擾。英文摘要：In 2007, I released a research note in which metaphors such as ”monolith” and ”umbrella” were used to depict the discursive predicaments of multiculturalism in education. As a sequel to it, I am going to reconsider the praxis-related predicaments of multicultural education this time. Generally speaking, the revamping programs for promoting school performance and ethnic/cultural identity of minority students, if based primarily on a micro-level analysis of cultural diversity or focused exclusively on the minority's point of view, will not do much help. It is quite often argued that the minorities will become vulnerable if they pay too much attention to the task of chasing or Ofixing up an ”ever-changing” identity, because the members of the majority group, in the meantime, are busy equipping themselves for winning the competition educationally, economically, and politically. The macro-level analysis of cultural diversity, such as theories of ”cultural ecology”.起始頁-結束頁：111-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140960030049篇名：表徵與國小學生代數思考之初探性研究並列篇名：An Exploratory Study of Mathematical Representation and Algebraic Thinking of Elementary School Students作者：陳嘉皇(Chia-Huang Chen);梁淑坤(Shuk-Kwan Leung)關鍵字：一般化;代數思考;表徵;generalization;algebraic thinking;representations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在透過不同表徵問題，檢驗理解學生一般化表現情形，依據表現顯示之難易度，解析學生一般化適用之表徵類型，並探索表徵可提供何種相關啟示來協助學生一般化。研究樣本為國小五、六年級學生，共423人，利用測驗調查及訪談方式蒐集資料，資料分析採量化與質性併陳方式進行。研究發現包括：一、六年級學生一般化的表現較五年級學生佳，且有顯著差異存在；二、學生在各問題的反應呈現以表格表徵的問題表現最佳，其次是文字與圖形表徵，再者為圖像表徵問題的表現，而數字表徵則最感困難；三、表格、圖形與文字表徵的問題可適用於學生一般化歷程發想、問題的理解、變數的辨識、結構關係的連結和發展；四、圖像與數字表徵問題可激發學生對變數關係的發展加以推理與臆測，形成規則進行解題。英文摘要：This study provided various representation problems with which to evaluate students’ performance in generalization. The types of representation appropriate for generalization were determined according to the difficulty and characteristics of the representation problems. A total of 423 fifth and sixth grade students underwent generalization tests and interviews, the results of which were subjected to both quantitative and qualitative analysis. The results showed that sixth grade students significantly outperformed fifth grade students in generalization problems. In addition, students performed most favorably in table representation problems, followed by text, graphs, and pictorial representations. The students felt that numeric representation was the most difficult. We found that representation problems adopting tables, graphs, and text are suitable for thinking in the process of generalization problems, variable recognition, and the connection and development of structural relationships. Pictorial and numeric representations were shown to stimulate students to speculate about variable relationships and form rules with which to solve problems. We believe that the results of this study provide a valuable reference for researchers in terms of algebraic thinking and instructional development.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201406600200110篇名：American Secondary School Special Educators' Interagency Collaboration and Transition Practices並列篇名：美國高中特殊教育教師之機構間合作態度於參加轉銜服務的模式探討作者：李貞儀(Jen-Yi Li)關鍵字：special education;teacher education;structural equation modeling;transition;特殊教育;教師培育;結構方程模式;轉銜期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:2期出版年：2014中文摘要：This study applied structural equation modeling to investigate perceived level of involvement in transition services among secondary school special educators, in relation to their perceptions of interagency collaboration, as well as special educators’ personal and school characteristics. Fifty-three percent of recipients who responded to the survey were special education teachers and transition coordinators/specialists in the United States. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were used to refine and validate the measurement scales applied. The evidence of reliability and validity of four measurement scales were provided first, followed by an analysis of structural relationships among four latent constructs. Results of the study distinguished the effects of personal characteristics of secondary special educators from the effects of school characteristics and educators’ perceptions of interagency collaboration. Personal characteristics of secondary school special educators are the key to educators’ perceptions of interagency collaboration and their transition involvement, and also overshadow the relationships among other factors in the model. Secondary school special educators with higher levels of professional preparation perceive a greater importance in interagency collaboration, and are more likely to be involved in interagency collaboration activities in their transition practices. Accordingly, the author of this paper provides suggestions for teacher training and preparation as well as recommendations for future studies.英文摘要：本研究以結構方程模式探討高中特殊教育教師參與轉銜服務的程度，以及此參與程度與教師對機構間合作認知、教師個人背景及學校特性之間的關聯性。在此問卷研究中，回應者中有53%是特殊教育教師和轉銜專業人員。探索和驗證的因素分析被運用來考驗測驗量表的信度和效度。在本文中，研究者先提供測驗工 具四個測驗量表的信度與效度證據，然後以結構方程模式考驗四個潛在變項之間 的關係。本研究結果區分了特殊教育教師個人特質的作用不同於學校特質和教師 本身對跨機構合作的認知的作用，肯定了特殊教育教師專業訓練背景的重要性遠大於模式中的其他因素。高中特殊教育教師有愈完整的專業訓練背景，愈會認同 跨機構間合作的重要性，也愈願意參與轉銜服務相關活動。根據本研究結果，提出高中特殊教育教師專業培訓規劃及對於進一步研究之建議。起始頁-結束頁：41-76資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201406600200201篇名：中學生正向心理健康量表之編製研究並列篇名：The Development of Positive Mental Health Scale for High School Students作者：陳李綢(Li-Chou Chen)關鍵字：自我悅納;人際關係;情緒平衡;家庭和諧;正向樂觀;self acceptance;human relationship;family harmony;emotional balance;optimistic and enterprising期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要目的在編製適合中學生使用的正向心理健康量表以探討中學生的心理健康指標，並比較不同背景（性別、國高中與年級別）中學生心理健康的差異性。以國中生180名及高中生185名進行預試，根據項目分析及探索性因素分析的結果，決定25題的正式量表。其中包含五個向度；「自我悅納」、「人際關係」、「情緒平衡」、「家庭和諧」及「正向樂觀」。再以2,578名國中生（男1,289名、女1,289名）及2,482名高中生（男1,297名、女1,185名）為研究樣本，進行正式量表的信度與效度檢驗。所有結果顯示，正向心理健康量表在國中及高中生都有高的內部一致性及穩定性驗證性因素分析結果顯示，國中及高中組所提出的五因素模式，都有不錯的適配度。另外正向心理健康與情緒智慧、個人特質及復原力都有正向關聯性。說明正向心理健康量表適合於測量中學生心理健康的良好工具。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a Positive Mental Health Scale (PMHS) to measure the index of mental health for high school students. A total of 365 junior and senior high school students participated in the pretest study. Based on the results of item analysis and exploratory factor analysis, five dimensions: Self acceptance (SA), Human relationship (HR), Family harmony (FH), Emotional balance (EB), and Optimistic and enterprising (OE) were identified in PMHS. This measure, with 25 items in total scale, is a self-report five-point Likert-type scale. 5060 students from junior and senior high school were used as samples. The results showed that: The internal consistence of the PMHS in high school was satisfactory. The construct validity of PMHS was maintained through confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). The results of CFA indicated the model fit was acceptable. In addition, the correlation results showed that PMHS was related to emotional intelligence, personal traits and resilience. Overall, psychometric evaluation demonstrated that PMHS is statistically reliable and valid.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420141210040012篇名：大學生心理資本與憂鬱之關係：以情緒幸福感為中介變項並列篇名：Emotional Well-Being as a Mediator between the Relationship of Psychological Capital and Depression in Taiwan College Students作者：陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);洪兆祥(Chao-Hsiang Hung);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：大學生;憂鬱;情緒幸福感;中介變項;心理資本;college students;depression;emotional well-being;mediator variable;psychological capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，正向心理議題的研究（如心理資本、情緒幸福感）逐漸受到重視。本研究旨在探討大學生心理資本與憂鬱的關係，以及情緒幸福感能否扮演心理資本與憂鬱傾向之間的中介角色。研究以全國1216名大學生為對象，研究工具採用「心理資本量表」、「情緒幸福感量表」與「臺灣憂鬱情緒量表」做為研究工具，透過實徵資料的蒐集，利用描述統計、結構方程式模型進行分析。研究結果發現：（1）大學生的心理資本對情緒幸福感之直接效果達到顯著，而情緒幸福感對憂鬱的效果亦達到顯著。（2）情緒幸福感在心理資本與憂鬱之間扮演完全中介變項的角色。最後，根據研究結果，針對高等教育現場與未來研究方向提出各項建議。英文摘要：Nowadays, research in the field of positive psychology issues (e.g., psychological capital, emotional well-being) is becoming increasingly significant. The main purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships between psychological capital, emotional well-being, and depression of college students. This study adopts a survey research method which comprised of three questionnaires such as: ”Psychological Capital Scale,” ”Emotional Well-Being Scale,” and ”Taiwan Depression Scale.” Participants were 1,216 college students randomly selected from colleges and universities in Taiwan. The collected data were analyzed by descriptive statistics and structural equation modeling. And the findings are summarized as follows: (1) Psychological capital could significantly and positively predict emotional well-being, and the emotional wellbeing could significantly and negatively predict for depression, too. (2) Emotional well-being plays the full mediator role for the prediction from psychological capital to depression. Based on the results, discussion and suggestions for higher education practice and future research were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：23-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420141210040023篇名：角色楷模學習輔導方案應用於科技領域大學生之成效研究並列篇名：The Effects of a Learning Guidance Intervention with Role Model on Learning Strategies and Career Self- Efficacy of College Students in Science and Technology作者：謝淑敏(Sui-Ming Hsieh)關鍵字：科技領域大學生;角色楷模學習輔導方案;學習策略;生涯自我效能;college students in science and technology;learning guidance intervention with role model;learning strategies;career self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討角色楷模學習輔導方案運用於科技領域大學生之成效，研究者設計角色楷模學習輔導方案融入性別教育課程進行實驗，並以自編之「大學生生涯自我效能量表」、「大學生學習策略調查問卷」進行施測，瞭解角色楷模學習輔導方案的介入，對科技領域大學生在學習策略及生涯自我效能上的成效為何。研究對象為中部地區某綜合大學修習性別教育課程之兩班學生，一班為實驗組，另一班為對照組。研究結果如下：（1）實施角色楷模融入性別教育課程的學生與參與一般性別教育課程的學生，在學習策略的使用上有顯著差異。（2）實施角色楷模融入性別教育課程的學生與參與一般性別教育課程的學生，在整體生涯自我效能的提升上並無顯著差異。最後並提出教育、輔導與未來研究上的建議。英文摘要：This study examined a learning guidance intervention with role model to explore its influence on learning strategies and career self-efficacy for college students in science and technology. The result will act as a guide to college educators to implement incorporated role model influences with students' development program. The purpose of this study was: (1) to compare the differences of learning strategies of students between learning guidance intervention with role model applied in gender education class and typical gender education class; and (2) to analyze the differences between career self-efficacy of students by attending learning guidance intervention with role model applied in gender education class. 30 college students (2 classes) were selected from a Comprehensive University in central Taiwan. The quasi-experimental design was implemented in this study. One class was empirical group, and the other was control group. The participants of the research were administered ”College students' learning strategies questionnaire”, and ”College students' career self-efficacy questionnaire.” The analysis was carried out through one-way ANOVA. The results were as follows: (1) there were differences in learning strategies questionnaire score between empirical group and control group, and (2) there were no differences in career self-efficacy questionnaire score between empirical group and control group. Based on the results of the study, some suggestions were provided for school educators and counselors and for further research.起始頁-結束頁：47-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420141210040034篇名：引導式筆記教學對提升國小五年級學生社會領域學習表現與學習態度之成效並列篇名：The Effects of Guided Notes in Enhancing Fifth Graders' Learning Performance and Learning Attitude in Social Studies作者：高雪瑩(Hsueh-Ying Kao);陳品華(Pin-Hwa Chen)關鍵字：引導式筆記;社會領域;學習表現;學習態度;guided notes;social studies;learning performance;learning attitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在了解於國小五年級社會領域教學中實施引導式筆記教學，對提升學生學習表現與學習態度之成效。研究採不等組「前測－後測－延宕後測」實驗設計，以高雄市某國小兩班65位五年級學生為對象，隨機分派一班為實驗組，另一班為控制組，進行八週的教學實驗。實驗中實驗組接受引導式筆記教學，控制組接受一般教學；實驗前後收集兩組學生的學習表現與學習態度，實驗後以調查表收集實驗組學生的教學反應。資料分析採單因子共變數分析及次數百分比分析，並對開放性反應作內容分析。結果發現，實驗組學生社會領域的學習表現與學習態度均優於控制組學生，具有立即及延宕的效果。此外，實驗組學生對於引導式筆記教學，普遍持有正向看法。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of guided notes on fifth-graders' learning performance and learning attitude in social studies. The study adopted a quasi-experiment design with pretest, posttest, and delayed posttest. Sixty-five students from two fifth-grade classes of an elementary school in Kaohsiung City were recruited as subjects. One class was randomly assigned as the experimental group, and the other as the control group. During the eight-week experiment, students in the experimental group received instruction with guided notes in social studies, while students in the control group received instruction without guided notes. Before, directly after, and one-month after the experiment, students' learning performance and learning attitude were measured. Additionally, students in the experimental group received a survey for providing teaching feedback after the experiment. Analysis of covariance and frequencies were conducted. The results showed that the experimental group performed better than the control group in the learning performance and learning attitude posttest and delayed posttest. Students in the experimental group had a positive attitude toward the instruction with guided notes.起始頁-結束頁：79-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420141210040045篇名：高職工業類科教師集體效能對學生學習成效影響之研究：以學習自我效能為中介變項並列篇名：The Study on the Influence of Professional Teachers Collective Efficacy and Student Learning Outcome in Industrial Vocational Senior High School-Learning Self-Efficacy as a Mediator Variable作者：胡央志(Yang-Chih Hu)關鍵字：教師集體效能;學習自我效能;學習成效;collective teacher efficacy;learning self-efficacy;learning outcome期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討高職工業類科教師集體效能對學習成效之影響及探討學生學習成效其中介效果，並驗證高職工業類科教師集體教學效能與學生學習成效模式。本研究採用調查研究法以二階驗證性因素分析驗證量表之信效度，再以結構方程模式分析之有效問卷（教師181位，學生共543位），進行資料分析與模式驗證後，四個研究假設均獲得支持，其結論為教師集體效能對學生學習自我效能、學生學習成效均具直接正向影響；學生學習自我效能對學習成效具正向影響；學生學習自我效能對學習成效具有中介效果。本結論可供高職工業類科教師提升教學效能及增進學習成效之參考。研究建議如下：一、高職教師集體效能：加強高職教師的替代性經驗、提升教師集體教學規劃的能力、資訊科技能力及教師集體教學實施。二、學習自我效能：讓學生經常體驗成功、樹立學習榜樣、溫馨和諧的班級氣氛及讓學生自我強化以提升學習自我效能。英文摘要：This article proposes that context influences collective teacher efficacy, student learning self-efficacy and student learning outcomes. Through a literature review, a model of effective teaching and learning is constructed. Using this model, we verify four hypotheses: (1) collective teacher efficacy has a positive effect on student learning self-efficacy; (2) collective teacher efficacy has a positive effect on student learning outcomes; and (3) student learning self-efficacy has a positive influence on student learning outcomes. (4) student learning self-efficacy has a mediator variable effect on student learning outcomes. We distributed 181 questionnaires to vocational high school teachers and 543 students in Taiwan. Based on the results, suggestions are as follows: First, in order to strengthen teachers' collective efficacy: 1. Strengthen the industrial teachers' vicarious experience. 2. Enhance teachers' collective teaching planning capabilities. 3. Use information technology to enhance teaching collective efficacy. 4. Enhance teachers' collective teaching implementation. Second, enhance learning self-efficacy: 1. Students often experience success. 2. To establish role models, enhance learning self-efficacy. 3. Harmonious classroom climate promotes learning self-efficacy. 4. Self-reinforcing in order to enhance learning self-efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：107-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420141210040056篇名：當代分布式領導在教育領導之發展與應用並列篇名：The Development and Application of Contemporary Distributed Leadership in the Field of Education Leadership作者：陳建志(Chien-Chih Chen);鐘巧如(Chiao-Ju Chung)關鍵字：分布式領導;領導發展;學校效能;distributed leadership;leadership development;school effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：分布式領導一詞目前在教育領導領域中廣泛的使用，透過分享權力的策略，學校領導者對學校的權力進行解構與重構，領導者觀察學校權力關係的改變、利益關係的形成以及價值信念是否因教育改革而產生改變，因此可知分布式領導確實顯著影響校園氛圍。然而，分布式領導的定義相當多元，其與教育領導發展之強力連結也有所不足。因此本研究的目標在討論分布式領導的理論性依據，及其連結到實務問題的核心，歸納出分布式領導有四種常見之應用面向，包括分布式領導的理論實踐和三個在學校中運用分布式領導提升學校效能的策略及相關爭議。最後，依據文獻評述以及四種應用面向提出相關研究建議。英文摘要：The term 'distributed leadership' is now widely used in the field of educational leadership. Through the strategies of sharing power, leaders deconstruct and reconstruct the power structure in the school. Leaders observe the changes of school's power relationship, the formation of beneficial relationships, and if the value beliefs change along with educational reform. Hence, we observe that distributed leadership can significantly affect campus atmosphere. However, there is disagreement about what distributed leadership means, and there is no strong link between distributed leadership and educational leadership theory. The goal of this research is to facilitate the debate about how to keep research around distributed leadership theoretically anchored and connected to the problems of practice. There are four common usages of the term 'distributed leadership', which include theoretical practice, three prescriptions for how implementing distributed leadership in schools can improve schools' effectiveness and the relative disputes. Finally, suggestions are offered through the literature review and the four common usages.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140910030017篇名：Analysis of the New Teaching Performance Assessment System for Private School Teaching Staff of Non-Tertiary Education in Macao並列篇名：澳門非高等教育私立學校新教學人員工作表現評核校本制度的分析作者：陳明慧(Shirley M. W. Chan)關鍵字：teaching performance assessment;professional development;Macao;教學工作表現評核;專業發展;澳門期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：This paper discusses the launch of school-based teaching performance assessment system under the new System Framework for Private School Teaching Staff of Non-tertiary Education (the Framework) in Macao on both private schools and teachers. Based on the theoretical threshold assessment framework, I analyze the potential advantages such as establishing standardized pay and rank system, and disadvantages such as unfavorable condition for teachers at the highest rank and the lowest rank. I study the new school-based teaching performance assessment system of MASS as a case study. It is designed according to the Guidelines for Establishing and Implementing a School-based Teaching Staff Performance Assessment System for Private Schools of Non-tertiary Education provided by the Education and Youth Affairs Bureau. I discuss its potential strengths, including a) has clear rubrics, b) includes triangulation approach, c) fits the purpose and d) rewards good performers; and limitations, including a) is too comprehensive, b) has central tendency error, c) is unsuitable for some subjects, d) lacks expert assessors, e) is not formative enough, f) limits chance of promotion in advance and g) has wash back effects. The findings indicate that the new school-based teaching performance assessment system has both good and bad effects, amendments should be carried out, and both school management teams and teachers need time and training to adapt to the new system.英文摘要：本文討論及分析在澳門非高等教育私立學校就新實施的《非高等教育私立學校教學人員制度框架》（簡稱私框）而建立的教學人員工作表現評核校本制度。根據升級評鑑的理論框架，分析私框潛在的優勢和劣勢，包括制定統一的職級及薪酬水平，對於最高職級及初入行的老師的不利情況。本文亦以一所私立學校，MASS，作為一個案例研究，討論其根據教育暨青年局所提供的《非高等教育私立學校教學人員工作表現評核校本制度的建立與推行參考資料》制定的新教學人員工作表現評核校本制度。分析顯示其優點包括清楚的評分規範、三角測量、切合目的、獎賞優異表現者；缺點包括評核指標太廣泛、趨中傾向、不適合個別科目、欠缺專業評核員、 形成性評價不足、提前晉升的機會有限、倒流效應。研究結果表明，新校本評核制度有好的和壞的影響，需要作出適當修改，無論是學校管理隊伍和教師均需要時間和培訓，以適應新的制度。起始頁-結束頁：25-55資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140910030028篇名：新移民與非新移民子女的家庭社經地位、家庭文化資本與家庭氣氛之縱貫性研究並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study of the Socio-Economic Status, Cultural Capital and Family Atmosphere of Immigrant and Native Students作者：張芳全(Fang-Chung Chang);王瀚(Han Wang)關鍵字：新移民子女;社經地位;文化資本;家庭氣氛;縱貫性研究;immigrant students;social economical status;cultural capital;family atmosphere;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討基隆市新移民與非新移民子女就讀國民中學學生的家庭社經地位對家庭文化資本與家庭氣氛之影響情形。研究中以張芳全（2013）建置之「國民中學學習狀況之追蹤調查第一至第五波」資料庫之1,587名追蹤樣本，運用潛在成長曲線模型進行分析。獲得以下結論：（一）新移民與非新移民子女的共同點：1.國一時的雙親教育程度對國一時的家庭文化資本與家庭氣氛有正向影響；2.國一時的家庭文化資本與家庭氣氛為正向關聯；3.國一時的家庭氣氛與國一至國三的家庭氣氛成長幅度為負向關係。（二）新移民與非新移民的差異點：1.非新移民子女的家庭氣氛與家庭互動明顯高於新移民；2.新移民子女的父母親教育程度對家庭氣氛成長幅度為負向影響；非新民為正向影響；3.非新移民子女在國一至國三的家庭文化資本與家庭氣氛成長幅度為正向關聯。英文摘要：This research used panel study to distinguish the socio-economic status, cultural capital and family atmosphere of immigrant and native students. We used the database established by Fang-Chung Chang (2013) to track the learning situation of 1,587 junior high school students and analyzed the data using Latent Growth Models. The conclusions are as follows: What immigrant and native junior high students have in common: i. The level of education of parents has a positive impact on the cultural capital and the family atmosphere initial point. ii. The cultural capital and the family atmosphere initial point have a positive correlation. iii. The initial point of family atmosphere and the growth rate have a negative correlation. Where immigrant and native students differ: i. Atmosphere and interaction in the families of immigrant and native students at the same academic year are significantly different. ii. The education background of the parents of immigrant student has a negative effect on growth rates of family atmosphere and a positive effect on native students. iii. The growth rates of nonimmigrant student's family atmosphere and cultural capital have a negative correlation.起始頁-結束頁：57-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140910030039篇名：現階段高中職餐旅群師資供需與素質之問題分析並列篇名：Analysis on the Current Issues and Problems of Supply and Demand of Qualified Teachers of Hospitality and Tourism Education at the Secondary Level作者：楊百世(Pai-Shih Yang)關鍵字：餐旅群;師資供需;師資素質;hospitality and tourism education;teacher education;qualification of teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究透過文獻分析及焦點團體法，以分析高中職餐旅教育師資供需與素質的問題，並提出具體建議供主政單位參考。主要結果如下：在高中職餐旅群師資供需的問題上，由於近年來餐旅觀光榮景乍現，高中職餐旅群學生數及班級數激增，專業教師需求擴大，過去所累積的儲備教師多數充用後，仍不敷師資需求；而現有師資培育供應源，每年產出量亦不足應用，致許多私立學校無法補充師資，呈現供不應求的現象，教學品質堪慮。而高中職餐旅群師資素質的發展上，政府制定了許多政策及法令，希望從師資供需的平衡、提高高中職學歷到碩士以上、及鼓勵在職進修上著手，塑造優質的教師，實施效果尚未彰顯；尤其當前高中職餐旅群師資呈供不應求狀態，師資素質難以掌控；餐旅群教師學歷在職業類群中排名較後；且餐旅群在職進修雖提供教師多元進修，惟參與面仍有成長空間。最後根據研究結果提具體建議供相關單位參考。英文摘要：This study adopted documentary analysis and focus group to address the issues and problems of supply and demand of qualified teachers of hospitality and tourism programs at secondary level. The major findings of this study include the fact that there is an urgent demand of qualified teachers of hospitality and tourism programs due to the expeditious development of such programs in Taiwan. The existing teacher training programs produce far insufficient numbers of qualified teachers for private high schools; therefore, a concern about the quality of education has been discussed in the recent years. According to a governmental report, the qualification of teachers of H & T program at secondary level is in the lowest ranks. In order to alleviate this critical issue, the government decided to take action through legislation on the qualification of certified teachers. Moreover, current teachers are encouraged to go back to university to receive in-service trainings However, effects of such initiatives are limited due to low enrollment. The results of the study will provide the related departments with information how to increase effectiveness of the training.起始頁-結束頁：95-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201409100300410篇名：跨越語言疆界的教育：盧森堡多語教育實踐及其啟示並列篇名：Education Crossing Linguistic Boundaries: The Study of the Case of the Multilingual Education of Luxembourg and Its Implications作者：洪如玉(Ruyu Hung)關鍵字：盧森堡;教育制度;多語教育;三語教育;國際化;Educational institutionalization;Luxembourg;multilingual education;trilingual education;internationalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主旨在於探討歐洲小國盧森堡大公國的多語教育制度、實施現況、特色與歷史文化背景，提供我國發展國際化與全球化教育的參考。盧森堡官方語言有三種，本文將說明盧森堡多語教育（multilingualism）或三語教育（trilingualism）的實施狀況，並探討其特殊的文化社會歷史背景，做為我國推動教育國際化與全球化之參照。本文提出四點結論如下：一、盧森堡母語確立盧森堡民族之語言文化獨特性；二、盧森堡語為建立盧森堡公民之民族國家認同之基礎；三、多語教育之環境營造盧森堡作為歐洲聯盟核心成員的重要基礎。四、盧森堡多語教育造就語言多元的包容社會文化。並根據上述結論提出五點建議作為我國推動外語教育之參考：一、本土化與國際化為兼容並蓄之辯證性教育方向；二、外語教育之教學方式應加強以外語做為媒介之教學；三、外語課程內容與教學方式彈性化；四、教育國際化所推動之外語教育可加強英語之外的外國語言；五、我國教育應加強鄰近各國之語言教育，以促進對鄰近國家之文化理解。英文摘要：Luxembourg is a very small country but has a very international and extremely wealthy society. The country has a very special trilingual school-system, in which most students are educated to master three languages including Luxembourgish, German and French. This paper aims to describe the current language education situation in Luxembourg and to reveal social and historical contexts. There is a close relationship between the multi- or trilingual educational situation and high level of internationalization of Luxembourg. It may not be appropriate to simply transplant the Luxembourgish model on Taiwan. However, the understanding of the context and the current implementation of the Luxembourgish multilingual education may provide great insights for the enhancement of internationalization of education in Taiwan. Overall this paper proposes four conclusions: 1) Luxembourgish is taken as the fortress of identity of Luxembourg culturally, linguistically and politically; 2) Luxembourgish is the basis of the national identity; 3) the multilingual environment makes Luxembourg a core member of the EU; and 4) the multilingual environment makes Luxembourg an inclusive lingual-cultural society. Based on the above, the author makes five suggestions for improving our foreign language education: 1) localization and internationalization should be seen as complementary dialectics; 2) foreign language education should put more attention on the aspect of language as a medium; 3) the curriculum and pedagogy of foreign language education can be more flexible; 4) foreign language education should introduce languages other than English; and 5) languages of neighboring countries should be included in the field of foreign language education to enrich cultural understanding of our students.起始頁-結束頁：125-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201409100300501篇名：讀報結合閱讀理解策略教學對國小四年級學童學習成效之研究並列篇名：Teaching Comprehension Strategy Combined with Newspaper Reading to Grade-4 Students作者：洪月女(Yueh-Nu Hung);楊雅斯(Ya-Szu Yang)關鍵字：閱讀理解能力;閱讀理解策略;讀報教育;reading comprehension;reading comprehension strategy;newspaper reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究結合讀報，採用責任逐漸轉移模式進行為期10週的閱讀理解策略教學，並探討學童接受該實驗教學後的學習成效。研究對象為新竹市某公立國民小學四年級三個班，實驗組1接受閱讀理解策略教學，也進行讀報活動；實驗組2接受成語教學與讀報活動，但不接受閱讀理解策略教學；控制組僅接受國語課教學，不進行讀報活動，也不接受閱讀理解策略教學。本研究發現：一、接受讀報結合閱讀理解策略教學後，實驗組1的閱讀理解能力有所提升。二、教學實驗後，三組學童的閱讀理解能力在說明文上有顯著差異，實驗組1優於實驗組2，也優於控制組。三、實驗組1對讀報結合閱讀理解策略的教學反應佳。最後根據研究結果提出教學與研究的建議。英文摘要：This study investigated the effectiveness of reading comprehension strategy instruction combined with newspaper reading. A quasi-experimental research design was adopted and students were recruited from three integrated grade-4 classes in a public elementary school in Hsin-Chu City, Taiwan. Group 1 received comprehension strategy instruction combined with newspaper reading. Group 2 read newspapers and learned Chinese idioms. The control group received only Chinese language arts instruction. The experimental instruction lasted for 10 weeks with two 40-min classes per week. Statistical analyses were conducted to examine the participants' changes in reading comprehension and the reaction of Group 1 to the instructional innovation. According to the results, (1) the reading comprehension of the students in Group 1 improved; (2) the expository text reading comprehension of the students in Group 1 was significantly higher than that of the students in Group 2 and the control group; and (3) the students in Group 1 responded to the experimental instruction positively. On the basis of these results, this study discussed classroom implications and suggested future research directions.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(4).012篇名：運用資訊科技於學校關鍵績效指標評鑑：網路績效管理平台建置之研究並列篇名：Application of Information Technology for Key Performance Indicators: Construction of a Digitized Performance Evaluation Platform作者：鄭新輝(Hsin-Hui Cheng);鍾廣翰(Guang-Han Chung);王怡芳(I-Fang Wang)關鍵字：資訊科技;網路管理平台;績效管理;關鍵績效指標;information technology;digitized evaluation platform;performance management;key performance indicators (KPIs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在運用資訊科技建構學校績效管理的網路平台，以協助管理者、評鑑者與個人進行有效的績效管理。研究對象採立意取樣，選擇願意參與本研究之3所學校，調查對象之有效樣本為3所學校74位使用者（8位評鑑委員、13位教師、3位校長及50位行政人員）。參與者以一學期的時間進行評鑑指標資料之上傳與管理，上傳資料以word 檔居多（82%），其次為PDF（15%）、影音檔及其他（3%）。績效指標是以鄭新輝（2010）所建構之「整合性學校績效管理關鍵績效指標」為架構，共分成三大類、十六個層面、八十個指標。先透過焦點團體座談、網路管理平台建置、資料上傳、專家評鑑、問卷調查等歷程，再以描述性統計、獨立樣本t檢定與單因子變異數等統計方法進行分析。研究結果顯示：一、以行為錨定法可明確化各績效指標的檢證標準、方式與證據來源。二、績效管理平台的「介面親和度」、「運作功能性」、「使用滿意度」與「推廣可行性」等四大面向，在五等量表中平均達3.82~3.89分，顯示以網路管理平台進行學校績效管理，具良好的可行性及效益性。有六成二以上的使用者，同意使用本系統以輔助個人進行績效管理與評鑑。三、教育程度與上網時間的長短，會影響使用者對網路管理平台運用的效益性及滿意度看法。綜而言之，本研究開創學校績效管理與評鑑數位化的先機，將學校績效指標以行為錨定法，系統化地建構客觀檢證標準、檢證方式與證據來源，並據以規劃可提供管理者、評鑑者與個人進行績效管理的網路管理平台，可有效強化學校與個人定期進行自我管理，以提升學校整體的經營品質。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop specific rating standards, data collection methods, and sources for various key performance indicators (KPIs) to establish a digitized performance management platform that can increase the effectiveness of school management and evaluation. The sample was recruited from elementary schools in Tainan and Kaohsiung. A total of 74 participants from three schools (including eight evaluation committee members, 13 teachers, three principals, and 50 faculty members) uploaded KPI data over a period of one semester. The indicators were developed by the researcher; three categories, 16 levels, and 80 indicators were produced. By using focus groups and information technology, a digitized performance management platform was established, the reference material for the evaluation indicators was uploaded, and expert rating and questionnaire survey were conducted; the descriptive statistics and quantitative data were analyzed using the independent-samples t test and one-way analysis of variance. The findings provided a guideline for examining the indicators and source of the reference material Moreover, the user survey of the digitized evaluation platform can be divided into four parts: the user friendliness of the interface, system functions, user satisfaction, and feasibility of promoting the system. The result indicated that the system exhibited high feasibility and efficiency (mean=3.82-3.89). Positive feedback regarding user satisfaction and the feasibility of promoting the system was received from 62.1% of the users. In addition, the educational level and time spent using the Internet affected respondents' opinions on the efficiency and user satisfaction. In conclusion, this was the first study to combine performance indicators with a digitized platform to facilitate web management and systemize KPIs. The proposed digitized platform can enable schools and individuals to periodically conduct self-management and improve school administrative effectiveness.起始頁-結束頁：27-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(4).023篇名：Facebook的使用對成人混成式學習之影響並列篇名：Impact of Facebook on Blended Learning for Adult Learners作者：賴素純(Su-Chun Lai);莊雅茹(Yea-Ru Chuang);顏春煌(Cheng-Huang Yen)關鍵字：合作學習;成人學習;社會臨場感;混成式學習;collaborative learning;adult learning;social presence;blended learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討導入Facebook輔助以數位學習為主的成人學習者學習，是否可增加互動機會、降低因時空分隔產生的學習孤立感，進而提升學習滿意度？採用實驗設計法，以兩班64位成人學習者為研究對象，使用混成式學習模式並參考Salmon（2003）的五階段模型設計非同步教學活動。研究發現：一、採用Facebook可增加學習者之社會臨場感與學習滿意度，但對合作學習態度及學習成績則沒有顯著影響；二、社會臨場感、合作學習態度、學習滿意度及學習成績彼此具有顯著正向關係；三、社會臨場感會正向影響學習滿意度；四、社會臨場感為學習滿意度的重要影響因素。本研究成果可作為成人教學者在教學策略及方法的設計參考。英文摘要：This study explored the possibility of using Facebook in online instruction as an auxiliary tool for promoting interaction. The goal was to increase interaction and intimacy among learners to reduce the feeling of isolation and increase learner satisfaction. This research adopted an empirical design and recruited a total of 64 students from two classes. The classes were taught using a blended learning mode. Asynchronous instructional activities were designed according to the five-stage model proposed by Salmon (2003). We collected data from both Facebook and the online learning platform. According to the research findings, social presence, attitude toward collaborative learning, learning satisfaction, and learning outcomes were positively related with statistical significance. In addition, the use of Facebook promoted learners' social presence and learning satisfaction. The impact of social presence on the attitude toward collaborative learning and learning outcome was not significant. However, social presence had a positive impact on learning satisfaction. The results of this research can be used to develop instructional designs and strategies for online adult learners.起始頁-結束頁：65-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(4).034篇名：應用多媒體行動學習系統輔助大學生情緒管理學習成效與評量之探究並列篇名：Exploration of Learning Effectiveness and Assessment of Emotion Management for College Students by Using a Multimedia Mobile Learning System作者：張菀珍(Wan-Jen Chang);葉榮木(Zong-Mu Yeh)關鍵字：多媒體學習;行動學習;情境反思;情緒管理;multimedia learning;mobile learning;situational reflection;emotion management期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的主要在分析運用多媒體行動學習系統結合課堂教學，以輔助大學生情緒管理的學習成效。多媒體行動學習系統是以Moodle平台連結Android智慧型手機，加上多媒體教材、即時簡訊、學習教材及Facebook互動論壇等功能模組所發展的情緒管理學習系統；同時，以多級模糊推論系統輔助大學生對情緒管理情境學習各階段的質性反思之學習評量。本研究採用準實驗設計法，對實驗組及對照組共72位大學生進行教學實驗，並進行學習成效、系統滿意度及反思學習成效問卷的統計，研究結果發現：一、多媒體行動學習系統結合課堂教學能有效提升大學生情緒管理的學習成效；二、大學生對多媒體情緒管理行動學習系統的評價介於滿意和非常滿意之間；三、採用多級模糊推論系統輔助教師以彈性比例評量學生反思學習成績，可以減輕評量負擔。英文摘要：This study analyzed the learning effectiveness of emotion management for college students through the application of a multimedia mobile learning system combined with classroom teaching. We used the Moodle platform, which is compatible with the Android operating system, and added several functional modules to the platform to enable students to learn effectively. The modules that constituted the emotion-management learning system comprised multimedia, instant messaging, learning materials, and a Facebook discussion forum. A multistage fuzzy system was used to assess students' qualitative reflections at various stages of the emotion-management learning process. A quasi-experimental design was used to investigate 72 college students. They were divided into an experimental group and a control group. The questionnaires on learning effectiveness and the students' satisfaction with the multimedia mobile learning system were statistically analyzed. According to the results: (1) the proposed multimedia mobile learning system combined with classroom teaching effectively improved the learning of emotion management; (2) the overall satisfaction of college students with the multimedia mobile learning system was between satisfied and very satisfied; and (3) we develop a multistage fuzzy system to reduce the burden of elasticity proportion assessment of the students learning emotion management through situational reflection.起始頁-結束頁：99-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(4).045篇名：如魚得水？科技女性成功論述之研究並列篇名：The Discourse of Success by Women Scientists and Technologists作者：王雅玄(Ya-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：成功論述;科技女性;科技性別化;陽剛女性;the discourse of success;women scientists and technologist;gendered technology;masculine woman期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究問題意識起於科技性別化社會中，科技女性如何形塑性別氣質、或從其家庭、學校、社會脈絡中獲致其性別化主體。茲以12位國立綜合大學科技女教授為研究對象，探索高等教育中性別與科技的複雜關係，藉由回顧科技女性個人特質、家庭社經地位與父母教養方式、學校教育、社會文化因素對其科技學習心路歷程的影響，以探討成功論述與性別氣質之關聯。結果發現，科技女性如魚得水的成功論述整合了陽剛個人、平權家庭、女校教育與融入主流社會等四個優勢因素。其最基本的成功論述是以濃厚的科技興趣作為生涯發展的基礎，進而能一路抵抗眾多父權體制下的性別不平等條件。科技女性具有陽剛特質，喜愛閱讀、探索、操作與挑戰；享有平權家庭充足教育資源並受家族科技楷模啟發；在學校受女性科技教師楷模影響並獲益於男女分校與高中文理分流制度；在社會得利於大學聯考分數決定熱門科系並融入主流社會享有母校與同儕的社會資源。本研究呼應Wells（1980）陽剛女性在現代社會中較具發展優勢，此提供科技女性成功論述之參照，然其科技專業發展仍受限於科研領域的父權心態，反映出科技性別化的結構問題。科學教師宜批判察覺社會文化中的性別符碼與規範，實踐性別平等教學，增加女性主體性以利科技領域中的性別平衡發展。英文摘要：This study is focused on how women scientist and technologists shape their gender subjectivity in the social context of gendered technology. Individual interviews were conducted with 12 women scientists and technologists from 3 national universities in Taiwan. Situating them back to their life experiences of individuality, family, schooling and society, this paper explores their gender role construction and how they articulated the formation of gendered technology. In conclusion, women scientists and technologists simultaneously co-constructed and deconstructed gendered technology and this construction subtly corresponded to changing schooling and societal expectation. The discourse of success by women scientists and technologists was exemplified by gender boundary crossings and self empowerment instigated by personal interest, masculinity, family support, women role models in single-sex schools, and social support from universities. This research corresponded to Wells' (1980) theory that masculine women have developed favorably in modern society. However, gender mobility of elite women has been enabled by patriarchal men, allowing women to survive in social structures with a strict gender boundary.起始頁-結束頁：137-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(4).056篇名：代間學習策略融入社會老年學之學習歷程與成效研究並列篇名：Learning Process and Effects of Incorporating Intergenerational Learning in a Social Gerontology Course作者：陳毓璟(Stephanie Yu-Ching Chen)關鍵字：代間學習;老化知識;老化態度;服務老人意向;高齡教育學;intergenerational learning;aging knowledge;attitude toward older adults;inclination to serve seniors;educational gerontology期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討代間學習策略融入「社會老年學」課程之學習歷程與成效，採質量並重的混合研究。透過不等組前後測準實驗設計和對照質性資料之交叉檢視，來探究課程中代間互動與學習歷程，以及代間學習的成效。研究對象為48位大學生，22位實驗組與15位隨班附讀的高齡者，進行18週的共同學習。結果發現，不同世代的學習者從原本敬老尊賢的尊卑態度逐步發展為學習夥伴的平等關係，透過不斷地互動與對話，學生逐步瞭解高齡者，並且提升溝通能力與同理心。雖然代間學習策略無法顯著提升學生的老化知識，但顯著改善學生對老人的態度與提升服務老人的意願。本研究依據教學過程歸納出七點代間學習教學設計參考原則，並針對未來課程設計與研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study investigated the learning process and effects of incorporating intergenerational learning in a social gerontology course. The nonequivalent quasiexperimental research design, which involved combining qualitative and quantity methods, was adopted and co-inspected using qualitative data to explore the learning process and effects of intergenerational interaction. A total of 48 participants were included in this study. We invited 15 older adults to study together freely with 22 students in the experimental group for 18 weeks. The results showed that, through continual interaction and dialogue, the intergenerational relationship gradually developed from originally hierarchical, respecting the older adults, to the equal attitudes of the learning partners. The students understood the older adults, improved the communication skills, and developed empathy gradually. Although intergenerational learning did not substantially improve the knowledge of the students on aging, the attitudes of the students toward the older adults and willingness to serve elderly people markedly improved. Finally, seven principles of intergenerational learning instructional design, based on the instructional process, and recommendations for future courses and research design were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(3).017篇名：臺灣地區大專院校教師對學校評價的影響機制：學校屬性與教師分級的區隔作用並列篇名：Taiwanese College Instructors' Evaluation of Their Schools: The Differences Among School Attributes and Instructor Ranks作者：林俊瑩(Chunn-Ying Lin);謝亞恆(Ya-Heng Hsieh);陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen)關鍵字：工作環境;高等教育;教師分級;學校評價;學校屬性;work environment;higher education;instructor ranks;evaluations of the school;school attributes期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：在高等教育經營環境日趨嚴苛的情形下，如何讓所屬教職員能認同於學校，並給予高評價，願意努力付出，增進學校榮譽，提高競爭力，當是高等教育經營管理重要的課題。然而，在如何促進大專院校教師對任教學校有高度正面評價的重要問題上，卻仍少有研究關注於不同職場屬性（如公／私立、綜合／科技），與教師分級制度所可能導致的差異性，並深入探討造成差異性的因素。基於此，本研究以臺灣高等教育整合資料庫的大專教師調查資料，對上述重要的研究議題進行分析。研究結果顯示：相較於私立技職院校，公立大學教師在教師聘用、專業發展、待遇福利，職場氛圍等工作環境之滿意度較低，而使其對所任教的學校評價較低。其次，公立技職教師，對於教師任用、專業發展、待遇福利等方面的滿意度都低於私立技職院校，因而對所任教學校的評價也就明顯較低。另外，教授與副教授對學校設備、人力資源、教師任用、專業發展、待遇福利與職場氛圍等，明顯比助理教授有較高的滿意度，因而對所任教的學校也就有較高的評價，而助理教授覺得學校較不夠友善，給的評價也就最低。英文摘要：Managing higher education is becoming increasingly difficult. How to strengthen the identifications, evaluations, and dedications of faculties to the reputation and competitiveness of their institutions is a critical issue in managing higher education. Little research on how to promote the identification of college instructors with their institutions has focused on differences among job attributes (e.g., public/private, general/technological, and science) and instructor ranks as well as the factors contributing to the differences. This study attempted to answer these questions by using a sample of college instructors obtained from the Taiwan Integrated Postsecondary Education Database. The results showed that compared with instructors at private vocational colleges, instructors at public universities were less satisfied with employment, professional development, salary and benefits, and workplace atmosphere of their institutions and tended to assign relatively lower ratings to their schools. In addition, instructors at public vocational colleges were less satisfied with employment, professional development, and the salary and benefits of their institutions compared with their counterparts at private vocational colleges, which lead to the low rating of their institutions. Analysis of differences according to rank revealed that professors and associate professors were significantly more satisfied than assistant professors with their schools in the aspects of facilities, human resources, employment, professional development, salary and benefits, and workplace atmosphere. Thus, they assigned higher ratings to their schools. Associate professors tended to identify their schools as insufficiently friendly, and thus, their ratings of their schools were the lowest.起始頁-結束頁：29-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(3).028篇名：以多群組結構方程模式檢驗成就目標理論模式的測量恆等性並列篇名：Verifying the Invariance of a Measurement Model for Achievement Goals Theory by Using the Multiple Group Structural Equation作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin Wu)關鍵字：目標導向;成就目標;多群組結構方程模式分析;goal orientation;achievement goals;multiple group structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：成就目標測量存在著測量內容、理論再概念化以及理論模式類推適用等問題，尚未受到研究的重視及實徵的檢驗。本研究之主要目的在於：一、修正成就目標測量的問題，編製六向度成就目標量表，透過競爭模式選擇適配度最佳且最具簡效性之模式；二、針對理論模式進行跨群組恆等性的檢驗；三、探討性別與教育階段對六向度成就目標的影響。研究結果顯示：一、六向度成就目標測量具有良好的信度與建構效度，為適配度最佳且最具簡效性之理論模式；二、測量具良好的跨性別群組恆等性及適中的跨教育階段測量的恆等性；三、普遍而言，男生抱持了較高的趨向導向與逃避導向目標，顯示出成就目標的複雜性。根據本研究發現，於文末提出相應之建議。英文摘要：The appropriateness of measure content, ambiguity of theoretical concepts, and interferences of theoretical measure are three problems in achievement goal research. These problems have yet to receive comprehensive attention or empirical examinations. The purposes of this study were (1) to revise the problems caused by achievement goal measures and to compile a Mandarin version of a 3×2 achievement goal measure (the best fit and most parsimonious model was chosen based on model comparisons), (2) to examine the multiple group invariance of the theoretical model by utilizing multiple group structural equation modeling, and (3) to investigate the influences of gender and the educational phase on each of the 3×2 achievement goals. The results are summarized as follows: (1) the measurement of 3×2 achievement goals yielded favorable reliability and construct validity. Moreover, this model is regarded as the best fit and the most parsimonious model. (2) The measurement presents favorable validity between gender and moderate validity between the educational phase. (3) In general, boys pursued higher approach- and avoidance-oriented goals than girls, indicating the complexity of achievement goals. Suggestions are proposed based on these findings presented at the end of the article.起始頁-結束頁：59-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(3).039篇名：地方政府教育課責系統現況與成效探究並列篇名：Educational Accountability System in Local Government: Current Conditions and Impact作者：賴彥全(Yen-Chywan Lai);王麗雲(Li-Yun Wang)關鍵字：地方治理;活化課程;教育治理;教育課責;local governance;language enrichment curriculum;educational governance;educational accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：受新右派主義與新公共管理思潮影響，政治治理（governance）納入績效回應等觀念，對於公部門課責（accountability）需求高漲，以確保官僚組織的高績效與高回應性。本研究以地方縣市政府課責系統為焦點，以活化課程為研究對象，探討地方教育課責系統之運作途徑、效果以及影響因素。先由文獻歸納課責五大機制－科層課責、法律課責、政治課責、專業課責、社會課責，再透過個案研究，以臺北縣（現為新北市）活化課程為例，透過文件分析、訪談，探討縣市政府之課責系統。結果發現，科層課責因法制及政治因素成效不彰，法律課責以經費掌控為主政治性強，政治課責具影響力但與選舉連結有限，專業課責受文化因素影響並不顯著，社會課責力道強但受壓力團體影響。各課責機制間存在相互影響，以及政治考量介入之情形。英文摘要：The emerging influences of the ”New Right” and the ”New Public Management” have prompted the government to incorporate additional ideas of market principles and responsiveness in their management. A public accountability system is established when the demands for efficiency and answerability increase. Because local governments are currently the major providers of education, examining how the educational accountability system functions in local government is crucial. The concepts, types, and operations of accountability systems in local governments were examined. Five types of accountability system, namely hierarchical accountability, legal accountability, political accountability, professional accountability, and social accountability, were considered. Language Enrichment Curriculum of Taipei County (now New Taipei City) was used as the case for study. Document analysis and interviews were used to collect information on how the five types of accountability system functioned in this case. Hierarchical accountability lacks the coercive power it is intended to exert. Legal accountability relies mainly on financial control and is often subjected to political intervention. Political accountability has limited influence because of its poor connection with elections. Professional accountability is weak for cultural reasons. Social accountability is vigorous but mainly dominated by interest groups. Conflicts among different accountability systems are often observed and political interventions are common. In addition, suggestions are provided.起始頁-結束頁：97-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(3).0410篇名：Developing an Instrument for Capturing High School Teachers' Mathematics Knowledge for Teaching: An Exploratory Study並列篇名：發展高中教師教數學所需的知識之問卷：探索性研究作者：林勇吉(Yung-Chi Lin);金鈐(Chien Chin)關鍵字：高中數學;評量工具;問卷發展;教數學所需的知識;教師知識;high school mathematics;instrument;item development;mathematics knowledge for teaching (MKT);teacher knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在描述如何發展高中教師「教數學所需的知識」（MKT）問卷。研究結果以一個具代表性的問題為例。呈現這個代表性問題如何發展與不斷精緻，最後報導本問卷的前導測驗結果。本研究發現三個有效的創造問卷的策略：一、使用具有「關鍵」教學知識的數學問題（教導這個數學問題，需要一個基礎、重要且不能忽略的核心知識）。二、使用學生非例行性解法。三、使用教師在實際教學上的錯誤。本研究希望提供相關領域研究者，如何設計MKT問卷的參考依據。英文摘要：This paper addresses an effort to design and test a set of items for assessing the mathematics knowledge for teaching. The paper begins by describing how a representative item was developed based on three experienced high school teachers' analyzing classroom instruction. Subsequently, item refinement by two experts is documented. Finally, the initial results of a pilot-test of a focus group of 11 high school mathematics teachers are reported. This study revealed three useful methods for creating items for assessment: (1) using mathematics problems containing certain key mathematical ideas; (2) using nonstandard approaches of students that are unfamiliar to the teachers; and (3) using the errors of teachers.起始頁-結束頁：133-160資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(3).0501篇名：這一頁不用讀？：幼兒與成人共讀對圖畫書近文本的回應與理解並列篇名：Young Children's Understanding and Response to Picture Book Peritext During Adult-Child Shared Reading作者：周婉湘(Wan-Hsiang Chou)關鍵字：近文本;視覺素養;圖畫書;蝴蝶頁;讀者反應;endpaper;peritext;picture book;reader response;visual literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的為探索幼兒如何看待及解讀台灣圖畫書的近文本設計（peritext）。過去研究發現包括了封面、封底、前後蝴蝶頁、書名頁、版權頁等頁面的近文本，經常有豐富的文學及美學意涵，值得讀者閱讀與詮釋，然而近文本的閱讀在台灣幼兒園裡卻經常被忽略。因此，本研究從195本得獎台灣圖畫書中，挑選出四本不同類型近文本設計的圖畫書，與十位大班幼兒共讀。每本書與幼兒共讀兩次，一次為一對一，一次為團討。閱讀故事內文前，帶讀者請幼兒根據近文本預測故事，閱讀後則請幼兒幫圖畫書設計新的封面、封底、前後蝴蝶頁等。本研究共收集了四類型的資料，除了上述共讀時的記錄，以及共讀後幼兒的繪畫作品之外，另外也收集家長問卷，了解幼兒家中共讀習慣，以及觀察教師在教室裡朗讀圖畫書的方式。研究發現當成人帶領幼兒瀏覽及討論近文本的內容，並選擇多元類型近文本設計的書籍共讀，多數幼兒開始發展出閱讀近文本的策略，如延續、累加、推翻，或創作延伸的故事。此外，幼兒在閱讀故事後多能將近文本與故事內容連結，例如尋找相同圖像、物品、發生事件、角色的姿勢，或將位於書本前後的近文本納入故事前後的時間軸。整體而言，幼兒能以細膩的觀察和推理填補近文本與正文間未明說的縫隙。英文摘要：This study explores young Taiwanese children's understanding and interpretation of the peritext in picture books, which are the pages often overlooked by adults when reading aloud to children. Research has revealed that peritext, such as the cover, endpapers, title page, or copyright page, is often a rich resource for literary and aesthetic interpretation. Ten 5- to 6-year-old children participated in our study and read four Taiwanese picture books with the guidance of a qualified kindergarten teacher. The books were chosen from 195 Taiwanese picture books according to their diverse peritextual designs. Each book was read twice: the first time was one-on-one reading; the second time a group discussion was held with all ten children. The children were asked to predict the story when reading the front matter, and after finishing the book, they were again asked to interpret the meaning of the front and back matter. The children were also asked to create their own front and back covers or endpapers after each reading. The results showed that the children might extend, add, or revise their predictions as they found more and more clues on the front matter. After finishing the story, the children often found connections between the images in the peritext and text, and some created new episodes of the story based on the images on the peritext. The children's designs also showed their understanding of the meaning and function of the peritext. Finally, pedagogical and research suggestions were made.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：國小學童參與科展的歷程、內在動機與科技創造力成長的縱貫性分析並列篇名：The Longitudinal Analysis of Elementary School Pupils' Science Competition Experience, Intrinsic Motivation and Creativity Growth作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：科學展覽;動機;創造力;階層線性模式;縱貫性分析;creativity;hierarchical linear modeling;longitudinal analysis;motivation;science fair期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究分別以參加科展及未參加科展的學生為研究對象，目的在於了解經過相關科展訓練的參加科展學生，以及未有任何相關訓練的未參加科展學生，在經過四次長期追蹤調查之後的創造力成長歷程；除此之外，更進一步探討內在動機分別對兩組學生科技創造力發展的影響。樣本來源是國立臺灣科學教育館第41至50屆參展資料中選取自願參與的教師，透過教師尋找對應指導的學生，其中參展學生為208名，非參展學生為871名，使用的工具則為科技創造力測驗及內在動機量表。利用階層線性模式的成長模型分析後發現，有無參加科展學生的科技創造力在開始階段就呈現個別差異且成長趨勢呈現不同發展。其中有參加科展的學生為先下後上的發展趨勢，然無參加科展的學生則為先上後下的發展趨勢，而且參加科展訓練的學生科技創造力低於初始點。而在內在動機方面，有參加科展學生的內在動機對開始階段的創造力為正向影響，且對科技創造力的成長加速度有正向調節效果；反之，內在動機則對未參加科展的學生無任何影響。依據上述研究結果，本研究進一步提出相關建議。英文摘要：Comparing students who have participated in Taiwan International Science Fair and those who have not, this study aims to understand the creativity development between the ones with creativity trainings for participating in the Fair and the ones who did not participate in science fair and did not receive any related trainings. Furthermore, this study intends to investigate the effects of intrinsic motivation on the development of creativity between the two groups. From National Taiwan Science Education Center, 208 student participants of the 41^(st)-50^(th) Fair and 871 non-participants were sampled through their teachers who voluntarily participated in this study. With growth model analysis in Hierarchical Linear Modeling, individual differences in scientific creativity between science fair participants and non-participants were found and its growth was developed distinctively. Students who participated in Taiwan International Science Fair presented downward development in scientific creativity and then upward, while the non-participants revealed upward then downward development. In regard to intrinsic motivation, science fair participants showed positive effects of Self-efficacy and Internal value on creativity, while their intrinsic motivation presents moderating effects on the rapid growth of creativity. Contrarily, intrinsic motivation did not appear to have any effects on non-participants. Based on the research outcomes, relevant suggestions are further proposed.起始頁-結束頁：33-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：台灣地區出身背景、國中學業成績與高中階段教育分流之關聯並列篇名：Correlation Among Students' Family Background, Academic Performance in Junior High School, and Senior High School Tracking in Taiwan作者：黃銘福(Ming-Fu Huang);黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：出身背景;台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（TEPS）;教育分流;教育機會不均等有效維持（EMI）;教育機會不均等最大維持（MMI）;教育機會均等;educational tracking;Effectively Maintained Inequality of educational opportunity;equality of educational opportunity;family background;Maximally Maintained Inequality of educational opportunity;Taiwan Education Panel Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去對於教育分流所做的研究很多，不過所使用的樣本大多距今已十幾年，而且年齡往往包括20-64歲民眾，其中有許多年紀較大的樣本是在早年接受高中階段的分流教育。本研究主要根據台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（簡稱TEPS）第三波2005年之學生與家長資料做路徑分析，探討近年學生出身背景對高中階段教育分流影響所涉及的機會不均等性。研究結果顯示：雖然國中學生整體升學率已接近100%，不同出身背景者幾乎都能升學而無多少差異，可是影響所升上高中階段教育分流中，國中學業成績最具關鍵。家庭社經地位越佳、兄弟姊妹數越少，其國中學業成績較高者，有較高的比例升上出路較佳之公立高中。這充分顯示出量的機會不均等性雖趨近於0，但質的機會不均等性仍維持著，表示「教育機會不均等最大維持」（MMI）的假設未獲得支持，而支持「教育機會不均等（EMI）有效維持」的假設。英文摘要：There were numerous previous studies on educational tracking. However, most of the data adopted in these studies were collected a decade ago, involving sample population 20-64 years of age. Among them, many elderly samples had undergone senior high school tracking in the early years. The present study used the data of students and parents from the 3rd wave (2005) of the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS). A path analysis was conducted to investigate the inequality of opportunities involved in the influence of student family background on educational tracking at the senior high school stage. The results show: although the overall percentage of junior high school graduates entering advanced levels was approximately 100% and almost all students of different family backgrounds entered advanced levels, the most crucial factor among those affecting educational tracking of senior high school stage was students' academic performance during junior high school. Students with higher family socioeconomic status and fewer siblings showed better academic performance in junior high schools, and consequently had higher possibilities of entering public senior high schools leading to a more promising future. This indicates that though the inequality in the quantity of opportunities approached 0, the inequality in the quality of opportunities still remained, which fails to support the hypothesis of the maximally maintained inequality of educational opportunity (MMI); however, the result supports the hypothesis of the effectively maintained inequality of educational opportunity (EMI).起始頁-結束頁：67-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：高中職學生社會能力量表之編製與有效化並列篇名：The Development of Social Competence Scale for Adolescent作者：蔡明富(Ming-Fu Tsai)關鍵字：社會行為;社會能力量表;高中職學生;adolescent;social behavior;social competence scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在編製適用於評量高中職學生社會行為的工具。「高中職學生社會行為評量系統」包含教師、家長及學生評量表，三種評量表（各110題）內容均包括兩部分：社會能力量表（48題）及問題行為量表（62題）。本研究主要在發展社會能力量表，包括自我控制（自主行為、情緒管理）、人際互動（人際關係、溝通表達及合作同理）及學習行為（學習習慣、學習表現）等三向度七個分量表，作答方式以Likert式五點量表。效度證據之結果如下：（1）在內容上的證據顯示獲得文獻支持及專家的肯定；（2）在信度上，教師、家長及學生評量表之社會能力量表的內部一致性係數良好，間隔四週重測信度結果也顯示量表的穩定性係數尚可，三種評量表之社會能力量表的評量者間一致性則出現低度至中度相關；（3）在效標關聯上的證據顯示教師及家長評量表之社會能力量表與「行為情緒評量表」，以及學生評量表之社會能力量表與「貝克兒童及青少年量表第二版」的相關皆達顯著；（4）區辨性證據顯示教師評量表之社會能力量表可以有效區別情障個案與一般學生；（5）構念的內部結構之證據顯示驗證性因素分析結果發現教師、家長及學生評量表之「社會能力量表」均與原先構念的結構相符。最後，以高中職教師607人、家長1,168人及學生1,246人分別建立全國常模。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were 1) to develop a social behavior assessment system for adolescent - social competence scale; and 2) to evaluate the reliability and validity of this proposed scale. The social behavior assessment system for adolescent comprised three scales: the teacher rating scale (TRS), parent rating scale (PRS), and self-report scale (SRS). TRS, PRS, and SRS all included 110 items in two scales: social competence scale (SCS) and problem behavior scale (PBS). The social competence scale consisted of 48 items divided into seven subscales for measuring three theoretical dimensions: self-control, interpersonal interaction, and academic behavior. The development of social competence scale yielded the following results regarding validity: 1) evidence based on test content was established and supported by exploring literature and expert validity; 2) TRS-SCS, PRS-SCS, and SRS-SCS all have high internal consistency reliability and 4-week-interval re-test reliability. Besides, the inter-rater reliability between teachers, parents and students were lower to moderate; 3) the concurrent criterion related evidence of the TRS-SCS and PRS-SCS to the behavioral and emotional rating scale and the SRS-SCS to the Beck youth inventories were all significant; 4) the discriminant evidence of TRS-SCS was found to be considerably satisfactory in discriminating children with emotional and behavioral problems from those without; 5) evidence based on internal structure indicates that the results of confirmatory factory analysis were found considerably satisfactory in TRS-SCS, PRS-SCS, and SRS-SCS. In general, the reliability and validity of the study were satisfactory. Finally, the percentile rank and t-score norms were developed for 607 subjects in TRS-SCS, 1,168 subjects in PRS-SCS and 1,246 subjects in SRS-SCS.起始頁-結束頁：99-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：以「生涯興趣小六碼」建置多元生涯發展路徑並列篇名：Construct Interdisciplinary Curriculum by Career Interest Code Within Major for Multiple Career Paths作者：黃素菲(Su-Fei Huang)關鍵字：生涯興趣;生涯興趣小六碼;多元生涯;跨學科課程;career interest;career interest code within major;interdisciplinary curriculum;multiple career paths期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的是：（1）探討教師與學生對於生涯出路需具備課程學習的雙方觀點；（2）分析生涯興趣測驗結果，以驗證「生涯興趣小六碼」（Career interest code within major）模式；（3）根據研究結果建議跨學科課程的生涯路徑。研究者從三種途徑獲得研究資料，以自行設計之「課程與未來出路之調查問卷」收集到13位教師問卷，以三、四年級14位學生為對象舉行兩次焦點團體，並以生涯興趣量表對全系162位學生施測。結果發現：（1）教師定位在基因科學學術發展，學生卻認為視野無法擴展希望能增加課程的多元性；（2）性別在生涯興趣測驗中的R、I、A的得分達顯著差異，其中R、I碼是男顯著高於女，而A則是女顯著高於男。年級與生涯興趣何倫碼的單因子變異數分析，一年級與四年級學生的一致性分數達顯著差異，可能大一仍留著比較多社會期望的科系定位，而大四比較顯現出自己的興趣；（3）從生涯興趣測驗探索全體學生的生涯興趣的分布光譜，可以驗證「生涯興趣小六碼」模式。根據研究結果，建議以四種跨學科課程設計生涯路徑：（1）專業生涯路徑（theoretic bio-science career path）；（2）應用生涯路徑（applying bio-science career path）；（3）跨學科生涯路徑（interdisciplinary career path）；（4）轉領域生涯路徑（transformation career path）。上述多元生涯發展理念，拓展科系場域內的生涯興趣與職業範疇，回應「生涯興趣小六碼」之結構模式，以期提供一種院系本位（department based）的解決途徑之想像或圖像。最後建議以「職業興趣、課程學習、生涯出路整合架構概念圖」，來協助大學生生涯定錨。英文摘要：The purposes of this research were 1) to explore both teachers' and students' points of view of what courses students should take with regard to future occupation, 2) to investigate ”Career Interest Code within Major”, and 3) to establish a more comprehensive curriculum path. For data collection, a curriculum- occupation questionnaire was designed and administered to 13 faculties, the career interest inventory was administered to 162 students, and two focus group interviews were held with 14 student participants. The results showed that 1) teachers emphasized the importance of basic professional, while students wished for a more diversified curriculum to enrich their career visions. 2) Gender difference was found in Holland Codes (RIASEC) by Career Interest Inventory (CII). Students scored highest in Investigative (I), second highest code in Artistic (A), and the third highest in Social (S). Male's Holland code was significantly higher than female's in Realistic (R) and Investigative (I) types, while the female's Holland code was significantly higher than male's in the Artist (A) type. There were also significant differences between grades by ANOVA in Investigative (I), Enterprising (E), and Conventional (C) types. The results showed that the freshman's Holland codes were most congruent with the department codes. The senior students showed the most career interest differentiation. And 3) all Holland codes among sampled subjects have scattered around Holland's Hexagon Codes-RIASEC; therefore, the ”Career Interest Code within Major” model is well supported. According to the findings above, a more comprehensive curriculum following four pathways is recommended: 1) theoretic bio-science career path, 2) applying bio-science career path, 3) interdisciplinary career path, and 4) transformation career path.起始頁-結束頁：133-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：「亂流理論」與「多元架構領導」在學校領導與變革的整合運用並列篇名：A Study on Integrated Use of Turbulence Theory and Multi-Frame Leadership in School Leadership and Change作者：陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen)關鍵字：多元架構領導;亂流理論;學校領導與變革;multi-frame leadership;school leadership and change;turbulence theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究基於「亂流理論」與「多元架構領導」兩者對於變革與領導的正向觀點，提出雙方「合則兩利，功能升級」的假定，藉由瞭解學校領導者對於兩種理論整合運用的看法和感想，據以進行研究假定的實徵檢證。本研究採行質性的個案研究途徑，從研究者所授課之學校行政在職碩士專班的畢業學員中，立意邀請五位主任、三位校長共八位現職國小學校行政人員，借助其豐富的學校行政領導經驗，以工作坊與焦點團體形式，進行兩種理論的交叉配對反思與討論，進而整理歸納參與者的觀點和意見。根據實徵文本資料分析，兩種理論的整合運用具有三項優勢和特色，包括「兩者彼此前呼後擁、相輔相成」、「兩者論述貼近學校領導與變革的真實脈絡」以及「兩者配對矩陣可做為學校領導者的決策檢核表」；而關於兩種理論的整合運用有待修正及補強之處，計有「亂流理論的區分、定義與衡量仍可再精緻化」與「亂流層級的主客觀認定議題」等二項。本研究最後提出結論和相關啟示，並以一具體案例之分析供予學校領導與變革之理論與實務的參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to engage in an empirical investigation on school leaders' comprehensive perspectives of adopting both turbulence theory and multi-frame leadership model on change and leadership within school settings. Applying the qualitative case study approach, workshops and focus group interviews were held involving five directors and three principals from different elementary schools, who graduated from the master program in school administration where the researcher serves, to discuss and reflect upon the cross match of two theories as they may be applied to change and leadership. Accordingly, both theories' practical application encompassed three advantages: ”both theories interactively match with each other,” ”both theories correspond to the authentic context of school leadership and change,” and ”the matching matrix of both theories could serve as school leaders' decision check list;” meanwhile, there were two issues that needed to be noticed and examined, including ”the differentiation, definition and measurement of turbulence levels,” and ”the subjective identification of turbulence levels.” This study concluded by proposing practical implications of applying theory into practice of school leadership and change.起始頁-結束頁：167-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：目睹婚姻暴力兒童之遊戲治療歷程並列篇名：The Play Therapy Process of Sibling-Witnesses of Marital Violenc作者：林妙容(Miao-Jung Lin)關鍵字：目睹婚姻暴力兒童;遊戲主題;遊戲治療歷程;children witness of marital violence;play themes;play therapy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主旨在於探討目睹婚姻暴力兒童的遊戲階段、遊戲主題與遊戲行為。研究者以個案填寫之回饋單與遊戲治療札記為資料分析文本，並採用共識質化研究方法分析一對來自同一家庭之目睹婚姻暴力兄弟之遊戲治療歷程。研究結果顯示，目睹婚姻暴力兒童的遊戲階段包含探索、創傷、轉化與結束四個階段。在四個階段之遊戲主題的部分，哥哥與弟弟出現相同主題的是，在探索階段中的「探索性」、在創傷階段的「破壞／毀滅性」、及在結束階段的「祝福」主題。而不同的是，在探索階段中，只有哥哥出現「互動性」主題；在創傷階段，哥哥呈現不同主題是「空洞」、「混亂」、「防禦性」，弟弟則是「威脅性」、「對立性」、「暴力／攻擊性」、「重複性」及「宣洩性」；在轉化階段，哥哥出現的是「醫療性」、「撫育／照顧性」、「生產性」、及「連結性」，而弟弟出現的是「救援性」、「保護性」、「建設性」與「創造性」；在結束階段，不同的是弟弟還出現「分離」與「思念」兩個主題。最後，研究者依據研究結果提出相關建議，提供未來的研究者與實務工作者參考的依據。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore play phases, play themes, and play behaviors in the play therapy processes of two siblings who were child witnesses of marital violence. Consensus qualitative research method was adopted to analyze the data. The results showed four phases in the siblings’ play therapies: the exploratory phase, the trauma phase, the transformation phase, and the ending phase. Within the four phases, same themes that were identified for both siblings were ”exploration” in the exploratory phase, ”destruction” in the trauma phase, and ”blessing” in the ending phase. Differences in play themes were also identified to include ”interaction”, ”chaos”, ”defensiveness”, ”threatening” for the older brother during the trauma phase, while the younger of the two displayed ”hostility”, ”violence/aggression”, and ”repetition”. In the transformation phase, the older brother displayed themes of ”healing”, ”nurturing/tending”, while the younger brother displayed themes of ”protection”, ”construction”, and ”creation”. For the ending phase, the younger brother also displayed themes of ”separation” and ”wistfulness”. Some recommendations for practitioners and further research in play therapy are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：運用SOLO分類法探討科展活動之建模的類型－以八年及物理科展為例並列篇名：Using SOLO Taxonomy to Explore the Levels of Representation Models in Scientific Inquiry Activities: An exploration based on 8th Grade Physics Fair作者：鐘建坪(Jing-Ping Jong);邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu)關鍵字：事後回溯法;建模;科學展覽;模型;SOLO分類法;ex post facto method;modeling;science fair;SOLO taxonomy;typology of model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：模型與建模為科學實務的中心工作，而中小學科學展覽為最近似科學家的建模活動。本研究採用事後回溯法（Ex Post Facto Study）探討2位立意取樣之八年級學生歷經物理科展建模活動後所建構的模型表徵類型與其表徵模型階層。研究工具主要整合自模型表徵類型（Boulter & Buckley, 2000）與觀察學習表現架構（Structure of the Observed Learning Outcome, SOLO）（Biggs & Collis, 1982）分類階層形成模型種類與階層表。研究結果顯示學生在實驗室情境下建構模型的類型與其發展順序，包括：（1）在相同探究時期，學生可以建構出具體、動作、視覺、語彙與數學等多種具有目的性的模型；而在不同探究時期，學生主要從具體與動作表徵模型開始，接著建構視覺、語彙與數學模型的動態建模歷程，並依據先前建構的表徵模型從單一結構逐漸提升至延伸抽象結構；（2）學生經由不同的探究階段逐漸掌握科展主題探索的變因，包括纏繞物的種類、纏繞圈數、懸掛重量以及摩擦力等而形成自身對於科展主題的概念架構，並向外發展形成各種表徵模型。最後文末依據學生表徵模型建構次序，建議教師在設計實驗為主的探究相關活動時，應著重在具體與動作表徵模型的介紹，再逐步形成視覺與語彙模型表徵模型，最後形成數學模型。英文摘要：Models play a core role in science. Engaging students in science exhibitions is a way to involve them in modeling activities similar to those practiced by scientists. This study adopted the ex post facto method to investigate the types and hierarchical levels of modeling processes which were present in the scientific inquiry activities of eighth grade students. The authors integrated a typology of models proposed by Boulter and Buckley (2000) and Structure of the Observed Learning Outcome (SOLO) taxonomy by Biggs and Collis (1982) to evaluate the typology of models used. The results revealed that (1) within the same inquiry phase, students constructed different types of representational models, including concrete, gestural, visual, verbal, and mathematical, each with a specific purpose. In other phases they constructed the same types from models that are uni-structural to ones that are extended and abstract. (2) Through various inquiry phases, the students gradually understood the variables of the project they worked on in order to develop a variety of corresponding representation models. Accordingly, school teachers are recommended to provide a progression of inquiry-based science activities that emphasize on introducing concrete and gestural representational models, forming visual and verbal models, and constructing mathematical models.起始頁-結束頁：31-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學9篇名：幼兒教師個人品牌量表之建構並列篇名：The Construction of a Personal Brand Scale for Preschool Teachers作者：黃義良(Yi-Lian Huang)關鍵字：幼兒教師;個人品牌;量表;personal brand;preschool teachers;scales期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在建構幼兒教師的個人品牌量表，採McNally與Speak（2002）提出的能力、標準及風格三構面為基礎，經由標準化程序來建立一份具有信效度的量表。研究採用問卷調查相關利益關係人（含園長、幼兒教師與家長）的看法，以分層隨機方式抽取臺灣地區60所幼兒園，有效回收問卷379份。競爭模式的比較，發現以五因素的一階模式較佳。建構完成的量表包括五構面：能力構面的「照護輔導能力」與「教保知能素養」、風格構面的「個人特質」與「儀容形象」以及標準構面的「處事做事準則」。量表共計34題，具有良好的信度與效度，可做為幼兒教師發展個人品牌之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to construct a personal brand scale for preschool teachers. Based on the three dimensions ability, standard, and style, proposed by McNally and Speak (2002), a scale with good reliability and validity was established through standard procedures. Viewpoints of stakeholders from different sources, including administrators, preschool teachers, and parents, were investigated by questionnaire survey. Kindergartens in Taiwan were selected via stratified random sampling, and 379 valid questionnaire responses were retrieved. After comparing two competing models, the five-factor model was found to be a better fit. The five dimensions are ”capacity of caring and guidance”, ”professional knowledge,” ”personal traits”, ”image and deportment,” and ”standards of dealing with things”. The first two dimensions are concerning capabilities, the next two dimensions are styles, and the last one is concerning standards. The questionnaire comprises a total of 34 items. This scale, given its good reliability and validity, may be a useful reference for preschool teachers interested in creating their personal brands.起始頁-結束頁：65-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學10篇名：公私立學校教師解聘、停聘或不續聘之法律性質與救濟程序並列篇名：The Decision of Dismissal, Suspension, or Discontinuation of Employment of Public/Private School Teachers作者：吳瑞哲(Jui-Che Wu)關鍵字：申訴;行政契約;教師;解聘;停聘或不續聘;administrative contract;appeal;dismissal;suspension;or discontinuation of employment;teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：有關公、私立學校對教師解聘、停聘或不續聘行為之法律性質屢有爭議。最高行政法院為統一法院實務見解，於98年7月份第1次庭長法官聯席會議決議中，先認公立學校與教師間屬行政契約，又將公立學校對教師解聘、停聘或不續聘行為之法律性質定性為行政處分；且在經主管教育行政機關核准前，該等行為屬尚未生效之行政處分，教師得預行提起訴願救濟。如此結論，反造成救濟程序之紊亂。本文嘗試先定性公、私立學校與教師間之法律關係，再探討公、私立學校對教師解聘、停聘或不續聘行為之法律性質，進而以此基礎討論其應循之救濟程序。本文立場為公私立學校與教師間之法律關係應分別定性為行政契約及私法契約，學校對教師解聘、停聘或不續聘行為，亦應本於原行政契約及私法契約之性質，認定為終止行政契約及私法契約之意思表示之。教師如有不服，除原有教師法所定之教師申訴、再申訴途徑外，應逕向行政法院或民事法院提起確認契約關係存在之訴，方符合本決議所稱「使個案救濟程序不致逾趨複雜，以符有效法律保護之法治國家基本原則」之精神。英文摘要：There have been controversies over the legal attribute of the decision of dismissal, suspension, or discontinuation of employment of public and private school teachers. The Supreme Administrative Court passed a resolution in July, 2009. In this resolution, the legal relationship between public schools and their teachers was regarded as administrative contracts while the legal attribute of the decision of dismissal, suspension, or discontinuation of employment was categorized into administrative dispositions. Besides, the administrative disposition will not take effect until it obtains approval from the competent educational authorities, and teachers can seek administrative appeal as remedy first, which makes remedy procedure complicated. Therefore, this study first attempts to categorize the legal relationship between the public and private schools and their teachers. Then, the legal attribute of the decision of dismissal, suspension, or discontinuation of employment and the remedy procedure are discussed. It is concluded in this study that the legal relationships between public/private schools and their teachers fall into the categories of administrative/civic contract respectively. Any decision of dismissal, suspension, or discontinuation of employment should be based on this categorization, and the remedy procedure can thus be reduced. Besides teacher's appeal and re-appeal system being in accordance with Teacher's Act, the appeal of declaratory judgment on contractual relationship to either the Administrative Court or the Civic Court can also be filed. As a result, the remedy procedure can be simplified to an extent to follow the basic principles stated in the resolution.起始頁-結束頁：95-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學11篇名：教育與社會秩序：解析升學主義並列篇名：Education and Social Order: An Analysis of the Entrance Examination作者：顏學誠(Hsueh-Cheng Yen)關鍵字：文明;升學主義;社會流動;社會秩序;教育改革;academic elitism;civilization;education reform;social mobility;social order期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文探討教育在中國文明所扮演的功能。文明是一種由陌生人所組成的大規模複雜社會，如何在陌生人之間建立起穩定的互動是必須解決的問題。本文指出先秦諸子已意識到這種問題，並提出尚賢的階梯架構作為建立文明秩序的基礎。透過將人擺放在高低不同的階梯位置，提供陌生人之間分配權力與財富的框架。相對於印度種姓與歐洲封建社會，尚賢強調人可透過自身的努力而改變階梯位置。教育的重要在於提供了評價階梯位置的標準以及資源分配的準則，並指導與鼓勵人們攀爬階梯。尚賢的階梯架構強調社會流動性，但允許下層階級翻身，也意味著當權者的地位可能下降。先秦諸子尚賢的理念，不必然會被當權者所實踐。本文透過科舉制度，說明給予老百姓晉身的機會對君主權威所產生的助益，並指出順暢的階梯流動是帝國得以整合地方社會的重要手段。經過一千多年的薰陶，透過教育翻身成為中國文化的重要成分，也是現今升學主義的源頭。教育改革為解決升學主義所帶來之弊病，一方面試圖瓦解階梯式的評比，另一方面強調每個人皆有不可改變的內在本質，而教育之目的是要針對此本質適性揚才，並非建立起普同的評比來衡量學生的高低。然本文認為，教改當前所面臨的困境正在於人們仍希望透過教育來做為翻身的機制。英文摘要：The article discusses two issues in Chinese education mobility: The emergence of the meritocracy ideal and its realization through the civil service examination. I propose that a theory of civilization contending a complex society must transcend the concentric model of kinship distance calculation in order to incorporate non-kin strangers into the enlarged social unit. The pre-Qin philosophers saw the problem when they argued against guanxi relationalism for it is ill-suited for organizing a complex society filled with strangers. In its stead, they proposed a ladder structure whereby strangers could be comparatively evaluated based on absolute standards and that one's position on the ladder should be the basis for the distribution of political power and material wealth. However, the upward mobility assumed in meritocracy was a threat to the privileged position of the dominant class. I argue the threat was transformed into an asset to the Chinese emperors through the civil service examination. By recruiting commoners to supplant the old guards in the court, the examination consolidated the power of the ruler at the expense of the reigning bureaucrats. Moreover, by encouraging commoners to compete in the examination, it also provided a low-cost means for the -integration of local societies. Contrary to the view that education mobility is a facade to disguise class reproduction, I argue it was an integral part of the Chinese political system which shaped the Chinese understanding of education.起始頁-結束頁：121-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：中國政府間財政轉移支付對縣級地方教育財政支出水平與差異的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers on the Level and Disparity of Educational Expenditure at the County Level in China作者：黃斌(Bin HUANG);董雲霞(Yunxia DONG);苗晶晶(Jingjing MIAO)關鍵字：財政轉移支付;教育財政支出;漏損;縣域間差異;fiscal transfers;public education expenditure;fungibility;inter-county disparity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用中國2007年全國縣與縣級市數據，採用分位數回歸方法，就不同類型財政轉移支付對縣級地方教育財政支出的影響效果進行了實證研究，<U+7740>重分析了農村義務教育補助的資金漏損狀況及其在改善縣域間教育財政支出差異方面所可能具有的作用。本文發現，大多數類型的轉移支付對地方教育財政支出都只具有替代性影響，農村義務教育補助對地方自有財力的教育投入具有擠出效應。從全國範圍來看，農村義務教育補助的資金漏損率在50%以上；雖然補助對縣域間教育支出差異具有一定改善作用，但從地區比較來看，該補助的表現差別較大。在東部和中部地區，該補助資金漏損率高達69%以上，令教育支出差異情況惡化；而在西部地區，該補助具有刺激性影響，能改善教育支出差異情況。英文摘要：Based on data collected from 1,985 counties in 2007 and using quantile regression method, this article examines the impact of different types of intergovernmental fiscal transfers on local public educational expenditure at the county level in China. Special attention has been paid to the fungibility of the subsidy for rural compulsory education and the potential influence from such a subsidy on inter-county disparity of educational expenditure. Results show that most intergovernmental fiscal transfers have a substitutive effect on local educational expenditure while the subsidy for rural compulsory education from the central government has a crowding-out effect on educational expenditure of local governments. The percentage of fungibility of fiscal subsidy for rural compulsory education has reached beyond 50% nationwide. Although the fiscal subsidy ameliorates the inter-county disparity of educational expenditure in the whole, patterns of the influence are different among areas. To be specific, Middle and East China have seen over 69% fungibility of the subsidy and a deteriorated effect from the subsidy on the inter-county diaparity. West China, nonetheless, has experienced not only the growth of local educational expenditure but also an improvement of inter-county disparity of educational expenditure after receiving the subsidy for rural compulsory education from the central government.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：認知策略、心情沉靜狀態、課室專注力與學業成就之關聯：以台灣一所高級職業學校為例並列篇名：Examining the Relationship Between Cognitive Strategies, Calmness, Classroom Concentration, and Academic Achievement: Taking a Vocational School in Taiwan as an Example作者：楊雅婷(Ya-Ting YANG);陳奕樺(I-Hua CHAN)關鍵字：認知策略;心情沉靜狀態;課室專注力;學業成就;心率變異性;cognitive strategies;calmness;classroom concentration;academic achievement;heart rate variability期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：課室專注力是學生理解教學訊息的基礎，現今科技聲光媒體充斥，學生課室專注力不佳的問題急待解決。本研究從過往文獻歸納出與課室專注力關聯密切的變項，建構認知策略、心情沉靜狀態、課室專注力與學業成就關聯的解釋模型，並檢驗課室專注力在其中扮演的中介角色。研究者以台灣一所高級職業學校254名一年級學生為對象，並以心電訊號進行心率變異性分析，測得學生於三堂物理課中的心情沉靜狀態。本研究經過模型比較，選擇出最佳的模型架構進行後續的模型適配度考驗，結果顯示關係模型與實徵資料適配情況良好，模型的路徑顯示：學生認知策略運用得愈多，課室專注力愈高；心情愈為沉靜，課室專注力愈高；學生的課室專注力愈高，學業成就愈高；課室專注力在認知策略與心情沉靜狀態對學業成就的影響中，均具有中介效果。綜合而論，本研究除驗證了認知策略與心情沉靜狀態對於課室專注力具正向影響外，更發現認知策略對於課室專注力的效果大於心情沉靜狀態帶來的影響，亦確認課室專注力的中介效果。根據結果，研究者提出三點未來研究建議：（1）心率變異性分析的擴大應用；（2）認知策略的測量時間要更為即時；（3）調整模型，納入學習動機與學業成就組別變項。英文摘要：Students' concentration in the classroom is fundamental to understanding what teachers instruct. However, in this era of too much audiovisual stimulus, low classroom concentration of students is an urgent problem to be resolved. After reviewing the literature of attention training, this study proposed a model to explain the relationship between cognitive strategies, calmness, classroom concentration, and academic achievement. Also the mediation effect of classroom concentration was examined. A total of 254 senior vocational students in one vocational high school in Kaohsiung participated in this study. To measure students' calmness, heart rate variability analysis was used in three classes of physics. After model comparison, one model that had better fit index (Akaike information criterion) was chosen and was further examined. Results showed that the model fit well with empirical data and all hypotheses were supported: (a) the more cognitive strategies were used, the higher classroom concentration; (b) the more calmness, the higher classroom concentration; (c) the higher classroom concentration, the higher academic achievement; (d) the mediation effect of classroom concentration was found in both the relationship between cognitive strategies and academic achievement as well as between calmness and academic achievement. This study not only suggested that cognitive strategies and calmness positively influence classroom concentration, but also found that the effect of the former is larger than the latter. Suggestions for future studies were also provided.起始頁-結束頁：23-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：論香港教師教育的發展與殖民管治並列篇名：Colonialism and the Development of Teacher Education in Hong Kong作者：羅慧燕(Wai-Yin LO)關鍵字：教師教育;殖民管治;香港教育史;teacher education;colonialism;history of education in Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：香港曾經是個很特別的殖民地，英國佔領香港非因掠奪資源，而是因地理上接近中國的優勢。香港的政治主權，並不是古典殖民主義描述的一對一關係，而是結連與中國、英國的多邊關係。本文以三個階段分析香港的教師教育：即（1）從中央書院至1945年第二次世界大戰結束；（2）戰後至1984年中英談判；（3）過渡時期至高等教育急速發展的20世紀90年代，探討殖民管治與香港教師教育的關係。回歸之前，教師教育在中、英互動的政經脈絡中發展，政策源於回應中國社會變遷的權衡之計。教師教育政策響應社會需求，有效保持香港社會穩定，長久以來是個失落的教育議程。本文從歷史探索香港教師教育的發展。英文摘要：Hong Kong was not an ordinary colony. The British acquired Hong Kong not for the purpose of economic exploitation, but for its geographic proximity to the Chinese mainland. The political landscape of colonial Hong Kong was not that of a country-to-country occupation, but represented a multi-faceted relationship between Britain and China. This article examines the interplay between Hong Kong's colonial governance and the development of teacher education in three stages: (a) the very beginning, from the Central School to 1945; (b) from just after the Second World War until the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984; (c) the transitional period leading to the massive expansion of tertiary education during the 1990s. Teacher education developed in a political and social context in which both British and Chinese factors were intertwined, and in which policies were really only reactive strategies to the social changes taking place in China. Thus, for quite a long time, very little attention has been paid to teacher education, even though it contributes to the stability of the government. Teacher education is still a missing agenda in Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：51-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：康有為《大同書》的嬰幼兒公養公教思想並列篇名：Infant Public Nursing and Public Teaching Ideology of Kang Youwei's The Book of the Great Unity作者：黃文樹(Wen-Shu HUANG)關鍵字：康有為;《大同書》;嬰幼兒;公養公教;Kang Youwei;The Book of the Great Unity;infant;public nursing and public teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：康有為天資瑰異，蒙光緒帝賞識，延統籌維新變法運動。著有《新學偽經考》、《孔子改制考》、《大同書》、《長興學記》、《康南海先生自編年譜》、《春秋董氏學》、《七次上書彙編》、《戊戌奏稿》等書傳世。他常開風氣之先，史家把他定位為「大教育家」。其《大同書》思想根源於儒家《春秋》三世說、〈禮運〉篇大同觀、西方空想社會主義，以及佛教思想。書中論述了破除家庭制度、提倡男女平等和婦女解放、廢除私有財產、改革教養制度等主張，嬰幼兒公養公教構想，便是改革教養制度的重要環節。該書設計公養公教的嬰幼兒教養機構－育嬰院，並針對其院址選擇、教養宗旨、建築設備、教養人員、教養工作、教學方法、管控制度等，提出諸多規範，涉及嬰幼兒照顧與教育的方方面面。雖然其可行性受到質疑，但這套清末民初的幼兒教育思維，與同時代中、外幼兒教育觀比較，實具有新穎性、超前性和理想性。英文摘要：Kang Youwei has marvelous talent. Thanks to the appreciation of Emperor Guangxu, he continued to coordinate the Reform Movement of 1898. He wrote The New Study of Wei Jing, The Study of Confucius's Reform, The Book of the Great Unity, Self-compiled Chronicle of Kang Youwei, The Study of Dong Zhongshu' Chunqiu fanlu, Compilation of Seven Letters, Documents Drafts in 1898 and other. He was an opinion leader and historians praised him as the ”great educator.” The concept of The Book of the Great Unity originates from Three Generations Theory in Chunqiu, Great Unity view in ”Evolutions of Rites,” Western utopian socialism and Buddhist thought. The book describes the views on eradication of family system, promotion of gender equality and women emancipation, abolishment of private property, and reform of education system. Infant public nursing and public teaching is an important section in reforming education system. The book advocates the establishment of an Infant Institute for public nursing and public teaching, with various requirements on aspects of infant care and education, including its location selection, education purpose, construction equipment, education officers, education work, teaching methods and control system. Though its feasibility is a query, this set of infant education thought in Late Qing and Early Republic of China, when compared with domestic and foreign infant education views in the same period of time, is really novel, advanced and ideal.起始頁-結束頁：73-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：二十一世紀的香港幼兒教育課程改革：回顧與前瞻並列篇名：The Hong Kong Early Childhood Curriculum Reform for the 21st Century: A Retrospective and Prospective Analysis作者：馮潔皓(Kit-Ho FUNG)關鍵字：課程改革;課程指引;課程取向;幼兒教育;香港;education reform;curriculum guide;curriculum orientation;pre-primary education;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：提升幼兒教育（下稱幼教）質素長久以來是個全球關注的議題，在香港亦然。自20世紀80年代，香港政府開始為幼教機構編印課程指引。直至現在，當局已先後為幼教界印發了五本課程指引。雖然這些課程指引於不同時期編印，但它們所傳遞的都是與提升幼教機構服務相關的元素。本文以香港教育改革為背景，在幼教教師（下稱幼師）提升資歷的里程上，探討這五本課程指引在課程取向上的轉變。本文嘗試透過優化幼教綜合課程、強化幼師的觀察力以提升幼教課程評估的真確程度，以及幼師教育專業化三個層面，討論幼教界可以如何落實香港幼教課程改革的目標。英文摘要：How best to improve pre-primary education (PPE) has been a longstanding issue worldwide. It is no exception in Hong Kong. The government of Hong Kong has been publishing curriculum guides since the 1980s to support PPE institutions to develop their curriculum. Five curriculum guides have been published since then. Despite that the curriculum guides were published in different times, each guide spelt out similar curricular elements that deemed as crucial for PPE institutions to enhance their service quality. An in-depth review of these curriculum guides reveals a hidden shift of curriculum orientations adopted by the government over the past three decades. In this article, changes in the orientations underpinning the five official PPE curriculum guides will be discussed against the Hong Kong education reform, in conjunction with the advancing professional qualifications of the Hong Kong PPE teachers. The article will also discuss directions that could facilitate the actualization of the curriculum reform aims set for the PPE sector. These directions include, but are not limited to, refining the integrated PPE curriculum, reinforcing PPE teachers' observation skills to promote authentic assessment of young children's learning, and professionalizing the pre-primary teacher education.起始頁-結束頁：95-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：The Effects of Digital Game-based Learning Task in English as a Foreign Language Contexts: A Meta-analysis並列篇名：英語為外語環境下數位遊戲式學習任務效益之後設分析作者：高千文(Chian-Wen KAO)關鍵字：digital game-based learning;meta-analysis;English as a Foreign Language;數位遊戲式學習;後設分析;英語為外語期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：A meta-analysis was conducted to investigate the effects of digital game-based learning (DGBL) in English as a foreign language (EFL) contexts. Twenty-five studies were included and they yielded a medium positive effect size (d = 0.695, p ＜ .05 under the fixed-effect model; d = 0.777, p ＜ .05 under the random-effects model), suggesting DGBL to be more effective than traditional instruction such as grammar translation methods or audio-lingual methods in EFL contexts. A coding scheme was developed based on the relationship between task-based language learning and DGBL. Six potential moderating variables in three task characteristics were analyzed to further investigate the DGBL effectiveness. Among these potential moderating variables, the treatment duration and linguistic knowledge in task involvement characteristics were found to be influential in DGBL effectiveness. This meta-analysis suggests that digital games should be effective for the acquisition of procedural knowledge of EFL learners who receive the long treatment duration of DGBL. Future research should explore further distinctions in other potential moderating variables in order to provide a more detailed picture of what sorts of variables are influential and what sorts are not.英文摘要：本研究採用後設分析，探討數位遊戲式學習在英語為外語環境下之效益為何。針對25篇研究進行分析後，發現中度且正面的效果量（固定效果模式：d = 0.695, p ＜ .05；隨機效果模式：d = 0.777, p ＜ .05）。其結果顯示，在英語為外語環境堙A數位遊戲式學習相較於傳統教學（如：文法翻譯法或聽說教學法）有效。本研究根據任務導向語言學習與數位遊戲式學習的關係發展一套編碼系統，進一步分析數位遊戲式學習的效益為何。該編碼系統包含三種任務特徵，而這三種特徵共有六項潛在調節變項。在這些潛在調節變項中，任務投入特徵堛犒篘蝞伅﹞弇y言知識對數位遊戲式學習最有顯著效果。根據結果，本後設分析研究建議，以英語為外語學習者接受較長時間的數位遊戲式學習，對其程序性語言知識的發展助益較大。未來研究應探討其他潛在調節變項對數位遊戲式學習有何效益，得以更深入了解該領域的全貌。起始頁-結束頁：113-141資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：香港推行自主學習的探索並列篇名：Orientations for Facilitating Self-directed Learning in Hong Kong Schools作者：趙志成(Chi-Shing CHIU)關鍵字：學校改進;自主學習;照顧學習差異;教學策略;school improvement;self-directed learning;learning diversity;teaching strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年，香港學校多以「自主學習」為旗幟，爭相模仿推行，甚至把自主學習看成是一種教學方式，以進行教學改進，可是對此中涉及的很多學習概念及策略，卻未有準確理解。本文嘗試分析各地推行的自主學習，大致歸納為三個取向，以作學校改進的參考：（1）源於西方認知發展理論中人在自我調適過程（self-regulated process）的角色；（2）中國內地在「還課堂給孩子」的觀念下，於課堂上進行不同形式的學生學習活動，並以「預習」及「導學案」來配合；（3）香港利用資訊科技發揮電子及網上學習的優勢，鼓勵學生主動學習。本文亦因應香港學校的實況，探索在學校層面制訂推行自主學習的策略及有效推動的關鍵。英文摘要：Self-directed learning (SDL) has become a prevalent focus of development in Hong Kong schools in recent years. However, a more thorough discussion on the concepts and strategies related to SDL is anticipated to clarify its core essence and understand its impact. Based on the analysis of different initiatives to facilitate SDL across countries/regions, three orientations are consolidated in this article to provide insight into facilitating SDL: (1) the metacognition orientation, developed in Western countries, which emphasizes the role of self-regulatory process in human development; (2) the instruction model orientation, prevailing on the Chinese mainland, which emphasizes students' autonomy in learning and is supported by students' effort in ”preparation” and ”pre-lesson enquiry”; and (3) the learning enrichment orientation in Hong Kong which encourages SDL through the support of information technology (e.g., e-learning, Web teaching, flipped classroom). This article identifies the essence of encouraging SDL and discusses the conditions for facilitating SDL effectively in the context of Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：143-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：幸福感教學對促進大學生正向心理的改變並列篇名：The Influences of Well-being Instruction on College Students' Positive Thinking作者：余民寧(Min-Ning YU);陳柏霖(Po-Lin CHEN)關鍵字：正向心理;幸福心理學;幸福感教學;positive thinking;psychology of well-being;well-being instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討透過幸福感教學後，學生對於幸福感的認知。研究以個案大學選修「幸福心理學」課程的63位學生為對象，探討在實施幸福感教學後，對其正向心理的改變。藉由本課程幸福感教學與介入方案的記載，學生在「主觀幸福感」、「用心」及「情緒狀態」（包括快樂、不快樂）上均有顯著進步；其次，學生的心理健康狀態，從學期初的「愁善型、幽谷型與滿足型」改變為學期末的「幽谷型、大眾型與滿足型」，說明透過本課程學習，有助於促進學生正向心理的發展。另外，藉由學生所撰寫學期末報告的回饋，本課程有助提升整體學生生活評價及正向未來期待。據此，本研究針對高等教育與未來研究提出建議，以供相關研究者參考與應用。英文摘要：This study explored the influences of well-being instruction on college students' positive thinking. The participants of this study were 63 college students who took the course of ”Psychology of Well-Being” in the case university. Results showed that after the intervention, the posttest scores of the participants were significantly higher than their pretest scores in such variables as ”subjective well-being,” ”mindfulness,” and ”emotional state.” Also, students' mental health status has changed from ”sentimental type, languishing type, and contented type” to ”languishing type, popular type, and contented type.” Based on the results, directions of higher education and future research were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：解析個人層次的教師集體效能感、組織層次的教師集體效能感與教師自我效能感的關係並列篇名：The Relationships of Individual-level Collective Teacher Efficacy and Organizational-level Collective Teacher Efficacy With Teacher Self-Efficacy作者：陳俊瑋(Chun-Wei CHEN);吳璧如(Pi-Ju WU)關鍵字：個人層次的教師集體效能感;組織層次的教師集體效能感;教師自我效能感;階層線性模式;individual-level collective teacher efficacy;organizational-level collective teacher efficacy;teacher self-efficacy;hierarchical linear modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討個人層次的教師集體效能感與組織層次的教師集體效能感兩者與教師自我效能感的關係。為達研究目的，本研究向台灣72所國中707位國中教師進行問卷調查，採用俄亥俄州教師效能感量表與教師集體效能信念量表為測量工具，藉由階層線性模式分析資料。研究結果發現，個人層次的教師集體效能感與組織層次的教師集體效能感皆可顯著正向地預測教師自我效能感。英文摘要：This study aimed to analyze the relationships of individual-level collective teacher efficacy and organizational-level collective teacher efficacy with teacher self-efficacy among junior high school teachers in Taiwan. A total of 707 teachers from 72 Taiwanese junior high schools responded to the Ohio State Teacher Efficacy Scale and the Collective Teacher Beliefs Scale. Hierarchical linear modeling was used to analyze the data. Results showed that the individual-level collective teacher efficacy and the organizational-level collective teacher efficacy both could predict teacher self-efficacy significantly.起始頁-結束頁：27-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：台灣所需優先解決的科學教育問題－科學與科學教育學者的觀點並列篇名：Prioritizing Major Science Education Problems in Taiwan - Views of Scientists and Science Educators作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin CHIN)關鍵字：科學教育;科學教育問題;科學素養;德懷術;science education;science education problems;scientific literacy;Delphi method期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究採用德懷術（Delphi method），探討在台灣亟需處理的科學教育問題，其迫切性及其現況滿意度；亦探討實踐科學教育目標的障礙，以及未來能夠改善的期望程度。參與連續兩次調查的專家群包括27位科學專家和33位科學教育學者。研究發現，最需投入解決的前三項問題為「重視教師的科學素養養成」、「將科學學習與生活相互結合」與「在學校教育中融入有利國民科學素養養成之內涵」；滿意度最高的項目為「鼓勵並吸引科學家參與科學普及的任務」；至於提升國民科學素養的主要障礙為「台灣社會中的媒體環境惡劣」、「升學主義的魔咒，使科學素養的養成成效大打折扣」和「社會上普遍以功利與實用主義的觀點看待科學學習」；「與科學有關的教材常與生活經驗脫節」則被視為未來最可能改善的障礙。惟本研究發現，媒體文化與民眾社會信念的褊狹最令人擔憂。另在若干項目上，科學專家與科學教育學者間的觀點有顯著差異。根據所得結果，本文並提出省思與後續之建議。英文摘要：This research aimed to investigate the views of scientists and science educators about the tasks promoting scientific literacy in Taiwan for the past decade. The Delphi method was used and two back-to-back surveys were conducted. The participants were 60 college professors (27 in fields of science and 33 in science education). Results showed that the three most urgent tasks for science education were ”promoting teacher’s scientific literacy levels,” ”making science learning part of everyday life,” and ”incorporation of scientific literacy into schools.” Second, ”promotion of scientists’ participation for popular science” received the highest satisfactory level of all tasks. Third, the main obstacles to promoting of scientific literacy were ”media environment,” ”credentialism mindset in school,” and ”utilitarianism and pragmatic views of scientific learning.” Fourth, ”disconnection between real life and science teaching materials” was considered to be overcome most likely in the future. This research revealed that media culture and the biased conception of the general public on science learning were of great concern. In addition, significantly different views on several survey items between scientists and science educators were also worth noticing. Suggestions for future research and policymaking were raised.起始頁-結束頁：53-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：Incorporating Response Time to Analyze Test Data with Mixture Structural Equation Modeling並列篇名：利用結構方程混合模型分析具反應時間的測驗資料作者：詹淑貞(Shu-Chen Chan);呂翠珊(Tsui-Shan Lu);蔡蓉青(Rung-Ching Tsai)關鍵字：結構方程混合模型;Rasch模型;反應時間;mixture structural equation model;Rasch model;response time期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去的研究顯示，試題作答的反應時間可以幫助了解考生們不同的測驗作答行為，特別是考慮反應時間所建構的Rasch混合模型（MRM-RT），利用兩個潛在類別來刻劃及區辨快速猜測或真實作答之受試者，比起單純只考慮認真作答的受試者模型，更符合實際的測驗資料。本研究將此MRM-RT模型放在結構方程混合模型的架構下，同時對試題的反應時間及測驗作答反應的資料進行分析，如此一來可以很容易地增加MRM-RT模型中的潛在類別個數，並且對此模型做參數估計。由模擬結果顯示，MRM-RT在試題的參數估計及描述受試者的應試行為上，表現皆優於Rasch混合模型。也發現使用穩健標準誤之最大概似估計所花費的時間，遠少於使用蒙特卡羅馬爾可夫鏈的貝氏估計。因此，採用此架構之作法對研究者來說，將可以更容易地獲得MRM-RT的參數估計。英文摘要：Item response time has been shown valuable in identifying different test behavior of the test takers. In particular, the mixture Rasch model with response time components (MRM-RT) has suggested that a two-class solution representing rapid-guessers and solution behavior examinees could empirically fit the test data better than a one-class solution. In this study, we embed such a simultaneous analysis of item responses and response time into the mixture structural equation model framework, which in turn facilitates the estimation of the model with another additional class. Our simulation results indicate that the MRM-RT outperforms the mixture Rasch model in yielding more accurate item parameter estimates as well as describing better the test-taking behavior. The study shows that maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard errors takes much less time than using Monte Carlo Markov Chains for Bayesian estimation. Therefore, the estimation of MRM-RT is more accessible to researchers.起始頁-結束頁：463-488資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：國小同學詞素覺識、聲韻覺識、字形處理能力與中文字詞認讀能力之相關研究並列篇名：Morphological Awareness, Phonological Awareness, and Orthographic Skills in Reading Accuracy and Reading Fluency among Chinese Elementary School Children作者：廖晨惠(Chen-Huei Liao);李<U+754A>緯(Keng-Wei Lee);曹傑如(Chieh-Ju Tsao);白鎧誌(Kai-Chih Pai)關鍵字：中文;字形處理能力;詞素覺識;聲韻覺識;Chinese;morphological awareness;orthographic skills;phonological awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討國小學童閱讀相關認知能力與中文字詞認讀能力之關係，以及在不同年級間之表現情形。本研究應用結構方程模式（StructuralEquationModeling,SEM）分析詞素覺識、聲韻覺識、字形處理能力對中文字詞認讀能力的預測力。研究對象為國小一、三、五年級共469位學生，其研究結果主要發現如下：1.一、三、五年級學童之詞素覺識、聲韻覺識、字形處理能力對中文認字及語詞閱讀流暢性皆有顯著的預測力。2.ANOVA檢定結果發現，詞素覺識與字形處理能力在不同年級之間達顯著差異（五年級＞三年級＞一年級），顯示詞素覺識與字形處理能力隨著年齡增長有顯著性的進步；聲韻覺識之聲母覺識隨著年齡增長有些微的進步，韻母覺識則無明顯進步。3.詞素覺識在一、三、五年級中文字詞認讀能力預測模型中的解釋量均高於聲韻覺識與字形處理能力，顯示詞素覺識對中文閱讀歷程是一項重要的認知因素。英文摘要：The present study examined the roles of three reading-related cognitive skills for reading accuracy (character recognition) and reading fluency (word reading speed) in Chinese. Four hundred and sixty-nine 1st, 3rd, and 5th graders in Taiwan were tested on morphological awareness, phonological awareness, orthographic, and literacy skills. The results of structural equation modeling (SEM) showed that three reading-related cognitive skills significantly predicted character recognition and word reading fluency, and morphological awareness skills emerged as the strongest predictor. The results of analysis of variance (ANOVA) further revealed that older children performed significantly better on morphological awareness and orthographic skills (G5 ＞ G3 ＞ G1) while the same was not found for phonological awareness. The findings suggest that morphological awareness is uniquely important for reading Chinese.起始頁-結束頁：489-508資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：國小學生「線上閱讀素養測驗」之編製與線上閱讀能力表現之初探並列篇名：Developing Online Reading Skill Test to Assess Elementary Students' Online Reading Performance作者：劉宜芳(I-Fang Liu);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko)關鍵字：新素養;線上閱讀;new literacies;online reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的為發展一份中文版「線上閱讀素養測驗」，並測量國小學童的能力表現。測驗發展指標之建構，乃基於線上閱讀行為的研究與專家生手間的比較研究。指標分為線上閱讀能力與線上環境操控兩面向，架構線上閱讀中之搜尋、評估、整合等三項認知歷程的能力成分。施測對象為台灣北部與中部地區的國小四至六年級學童，共計167位。試題以項目反應理論進行分析，所有試題之鑑別度介於0.33∼2.05之間，平均鑑別度為0.76。試題難度介於-3.03∼2.79之間，平均難度為-0.23。信度考驗結果顯示，測驗之實徵信度達0.75，傳統K-R信度值達0.66。測驗與國語和資訊成績效標間之相關亦達顯著，最精確之能力測量範圍介於-2.00∼-0.13之間，適合作為區辨基礎能力的工具。學生能力表現分析則發現，六年級學生的表現顯著優於四年級。學生在整合能力試題的答對率最低，最需要教學上的支持。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a measurement tool of online reading skills (ORS), which evaluated elementary students' performance. Research that considered online reading behaviors and studies comparing expert -novice performance were used to construct the test. In the test, there were two dimensions, online reading and online operations, which include four abilities: searching skills, evaluating skills, integration skills and navigation skills. A sample of 167 fourth to sixth grade students, which recruited from 5 schools, participated in this study. Test items were analyzed by the IRT, 2PL model. The mean of discrimination parameter, which range from 0.33 to 2.05, was 0.76. The mean of difficulty parameter, which range from-3.03 to 2.79, was-0.22. The KR-20 and empirical reliability of the test was 0.66 and 0.75, respectively. Moreover, criterion validity has significantly positive correlation with students' Chinese and technology score in the school. The ORS can efficiently measure students' online reading skills with fair reliability and validity specifically when the skill score is located between-2.00 to-0.13. The results indicate that the score of sixth grade significant better than fourth grade. All students perform poorly in hypertexts integration, which need more guiding support.起始頁-結束頁：509-532資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：中小學生「數學知識信念量表」之發展與信效度考驗並列篇名：An Evaluation of the Reliability and Validity of the Epistemological Beliefs towards Mathematics Scale作者：<U+51C3>金堂(Chin-Tang Tu)關鍵字：知識信念;測量恆等性;驗證性因素分析;epistemological beliefs;measurement invariance;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在發展適用數學學習領域的中小學生「數學知識信念量表」（Epistemological Beliefs towardsMathematics Scale, EBMS）。本研究分預試與正式施測兩階段，兩階段皆採用分層抽樣方式，各抽取中小學生457人與861人。以預試資料進行探索性與驗證性因素分析，結果獲得四個因素：天生能力、快速學習、簡單知識、確定知識，其內部一致性Cronbach's係數分別為.81、.79、.76、.77，16題的總量表Cronbach's係數為.86，顯示本量表具有良好的信度。再以正式施測資料進行測量恆等性考驗，考驗結果發現不同年級具測量恆等性，顯示本研究發展的「數學知識信念量表」具有良好的建構效度。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to develop the Epistemological Beliefs towards Mathematics Scale (EBMS) on the 5th-8th graders in elementary and high school who study mathematics. The present study included two phases: pretest and test. By adopting stratified sampling in both phases, 457 and 861 students were selected for the pretest and the test, respectively. After the data collected from the pretest were conducted with exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis, four factors including fixed ability, quick learning, simple knowledge, certain knowledge were extracted. The internal consistency of the Cronbach's alpha of the EBMS were .81, .79, .76, .77, and .86 for total score. This shows the EMBS has good reliability. The measurement invariance was conducted to the test and the results discover that the students from different grades have invariance of measurement. Therefore, it shows that the EBMS has good construct validity.起始頁-結束頁：533-556資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：企業工作者行動化知識分享行為評量工具之建構並列篇名：The Construction of Mobilization Knowledge Sharing Behavior Assessment Scale for Enterprise Workers作者：戴建耘(Chien-Yun Dai);陳宛非(Wan-Fei Chen);袁宇熙(Yu-Hsi Yuan);高曼婷(Man-Ting Kao);韓長澤(Charng-Tzer Harn)關鍵字：企業工作者;行動資訊載具;知識分享行為;科技接受模式;量表建構;enterprise worker;instrument development;knowledge sharing behavior;mobile information device;technology acceptance model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：鑑於行動資訊載具的進步改變了人類資訊處理行為，更促進知識分享而強化企業組織的智慧資本與創新能力，故研究者擬建構適合企業應用之「企業工作者行動化知識分享行為量表」，俾利企業導入行動資訊載具進行企業流程再造，或進行知識創新時的決策參考所用。本研究透過認知心理學、科技接受模式、知識分享等理論觀點，配合量表建構理論，發展評估企業工作者的知識分享行為之量表。研究對象以臺灣中小型企業在職人士為母群，經施測後得到779份有效樣本。經結構方程模式進行驗證式因素分析檢定，顯示本量表9個構面共35題，其組合信度、平均變異數抽取量檢定，與收斂效度、區辨效度、一階因素模式適配度評估、複核效化等檢驗結果，均支持本量表具有良好的信效度。英文摘要：Due to the progression of mobile information devices, the information processing behaviors among human beings have changed. Therefore, it has driven enterprises and organizations to enhance its intellectual capital and innovative capability through knowledge sharing. Hence, it is necessary to construct an appropriate assessment for enterprises and organizations to apply in such purpose, to support the decision making that including business process reengineering or knowledge innovation while mobile device implementation. This thesis is based on theoretical foundational point of view such as Cognitive Psychology, Technology Acceptance Model, and Knowledge Sharing. Besides, the instruments development principle was also followed accordingly in this study. 799 valid samples were collected from small and medium enterprises (SME) workers in Taiwan. Conformity Factor Analysis was employed as statistical approach to examine the reliability and validity of ”Mobilization Knowledge Sharing Behavior Scale for Enterprise Workers (MKSBS-EW)” through Structural Equation Modeling process. The instrument consisted of 35 items with 9 dimensions. The results supported stable reliability and validity of MKSBS-EW by composite reliability, average variance extracted, convergent validity, discriminate validity, first order confirmatory factor analysis, and cross-validity test.起始頁-結束頁：557-585資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：以SIBTEST改進隨機效果對檢測題組DIF之影響並列篇名：A Modification of SIBTEST to Reduce the Influence of Random Effects in Detection of Testlet DIF作者：李信宏(Hsin-Hung Li);張嚶尹(Ying-Yin Chang)關鍵字：題組;題組反應模式;bootstrap;DIF;SIBTEST;testlet;testlet response model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：題組反應模式中的隨機效果會影響受試者的答對機率，而導致題組DIF無法被正確的檢測出來。本文即是以SIBTEST為對象，提出調整方法來減少隨機效果的干擾。此方法是在隨機效果保持不變與設定為零的兩種情況下，依照SIBTEST所得配對子測驗分數的差異進行迴歸分析，再以迴歸係數重新計算題組DIF估計值，接著應用bootstrap推導估計誤差及檢定統計量。模擬研究因素包括：隨機效果變異量、題組數、DIF試題數、受試者人數和能力差異等。結果顯示：調整方法不會受到隨機效果的影響，其型一錯誤率大都接近顯著水準0.05；而檢定力也都優於SIBTEST所得。此方法的確可以作為測驗分析者檢視題組DIF的參考。英文摘要：Random effects usually affect the probability of a correct answer to testlet items. Therefore, the potential testlet DIF may not be identified appropriately. This study proposes a modification of SIBTEST to reduce the influence of random effects. The method applies the linear regression to calculate DIF estimates as well as the bootstrap to derive the test statistic. Factors used in the simulation study are the variance of random effects, the number of DIF items, the sample size, and the group ability difference. Results indicate that the refined method is able to detect testlet DIF with good powers while the type I error rates are approximated to the significant level of 0.05.起始頁-結束頁：311-335資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：「科學創造性問題解決測驗」之發展並列篇名：Development of the Children Scientific Creative Problem Solving Test作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);何曉琪(Hsiao-Chi Ho);鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng)關鍵字：Rasch部分給分模式;科學創造性問題解決;創意問題解決;creative problem solving;Rasch partial credit model;scientific creative problem solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究根據Parnes（1977）所提出的創意問題解決模式（creative problem solving, CPS），重新修訂一份適用於國小五、六年級學童的「科學創造性問題解決測驗」，旨在了解學童於日常生活情境中，以科學知識為基礎，運用觀察、分析與高層次思考，進而解決問題的能力。研究對象包含預試樣本487位學生，正式樣本717位學生。本測驗以情境題組的方式，分別從觀察問題、界定問題、分析問題與解決問題等四個歷程編擬，每個歷程各編寫8個項目，分三個部分（看圖說故事、整理筆記、腦筋急轉彎），共計32題。經以Rasch部分給分模式分析，修訂後之量表具有良好的模式資料適配度。所有的題目在男、女生並無明顯的差異試題功能（differential item functioning, DIF），且觀察問題、界定問題、分析問題與解決問題的信度分別是.70、.75、.78與.76。最後，針對「科學創造性問題解決測驗」的發展與應用，提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：Based on the model of creative problem solving (Parnes, 1977), this study revised the Children Scientific Creative Problem Solving (CS-CPS) Test for 5th and 6th graders. A total of 1,204 students completed the CS-CPS contained sample one (n = 487) and sample two (n = 717). The test was designed to measure pupils' creativity in real-life problem solving. The test covered 4 major processes, problem-observation, problemdefinition, problem-analysis, and problem-solution. The test contained 8 testlets, each with 4 items. These 32 items can be classified into 3 parts: story telling, note making, and fun puzzle. The Rasch partial credit model was used to assess model-data fit. A differential item functioning (DIF) analysis was conducted to assess the consistency of the ratings provided by males and females. The results revealed that the four dimensions of the CS-CPS showed good model-data fit and supported the four-factor classification. It was found that the 4 subtests (processes) had person separate reliabilities of .70, .75, .78, and .76. Finally, suggestions for future research to revise and apply the CS-CPS were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：337-360資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：LVQ與多變數反覆加權法於測驗效度檢驗影響並列篇名：The Weighting Effects of LVQ and Raking on Measurement Validity作者：蔡良庭(Liang-Ting Tsai);楊志堅(Chih-Chien Yang)關鍵字：多變數反覆加權法;效度;學習向量量化網路;權重校正;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;learning vector quantization;Raking;validity;weighting adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的探討學習向量量化網路（learning vector quantization, LVQ）與多變數反覆加權法（Raking）的權重校正對於測驗效度檢驗結果之影響。楊志堅、蔡良庭、楊志強（2009）以及Tsai與Yang（2012）指出，利用驗證性因素分析（confirmatoryfactor analysis, CFA）進行量表編製的效度檢驗時，若忽略權重的計算，將導致參數估計偏誤（bias）。然而上述相關的研究，都侷限於單一變數的分群權重插補。然實際的測驗調查中，背景變數往往同時考量兩個或兩個以上（例如：性別、種族），而導致整份測驗中的分群設計需同時考量多個變數。因此，本研究利用數值模擬方式，在考量兩個變數的分群時，探討LVQ權重校正及多變數反覆加權法對於測驗效度檢驗的影響。本研究設計兩個背景變數，每個背景變數各包含兩個分群，合計共有四個不同的群體。另外的實驗設計包含：取樣數大小、樣本的遺失比例、四個分群的異質性及取樣不均勻程度。研究顯示，當分群間的異質性愈大、且因遺失樣本而導致嚴重的取樣不均勻時，利用多變數反覆加權法的權重校正，將導致參數估算的正確率降低，而相對的，LVQ的權重校正則能提供穩定且正確的測驗效度檢驗結果。英文摘要：The study proposes learning vector quantization networks (LVQ) and Raking approaches of sample weightings on measurement validity. Ignoring sampling weights can lead to severe bias in parameter estimation of confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) (Tsai & Yang, 2012; Yang, Tsai, & Yang, 2009). This study extends Yang et al. (2009) to include multiple weighting factors (e.g., gender and ethnic group) simultaneously in large validity research. The study design incorporated two auxiliary variables. Each auxiliary variable included two categories resulting in a total of four groups. Experimental factors, including missing proportions, sampling sizes, disproportionate, and heterogeneousity of groups, are designed to examine performances of LVQ weighting adjustment. Results show that accuracies and stabilities of LVQ are much better than the raking method as disproportionate sampling is severe, sampling size is 2,000, heterogeneousity of groups is 0.4, and missing rate is 20%. When a survey research has several auxiliary variables, LVQ weighting adjustment can remove the nonresponse bias when using CFA model to conduct measurement validity.起始頁-結束頁：361-384資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：「國小句型理解測驗」之編製及其信、效度研究報告並列篇名：The Reliability and Validity of Sentence Comprehension Test for Elementary School Students作者：張祐瑄(You-Hsuan Chang);蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su)關鍵字：句型理解;信度;效度;複句;關聯詞語;complex sentences;connectives;reliability;sentence comprehension;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在編製「國小句型理解測驗」，以提供了解國小學生關聯詞語與複句能力發展的工具。本測驗參考劉蘭英、孫全洲(2002)的複句類型，以九種複句句型為主要架構，依據受試對象與施測目的，提供三個版本：版本一（A版）以國小二年級至三年級學生為對象，共計54題；版本二（B版）以國小四年級至六年級學生為對象，共計72題；版本三（C版）為A、B版本之重複題目，難度居於兩個版本之間，以國小二年級至六年級學生為對象，共計36題。其中，A、B版的題數較多，適用於了解學生在哪一類句型的理解表現較弱，以提供補救教學；而C版的題數較少，施測時間較短，適用於初步篩選，或檢測句型理解補救教學的效果。本研究之對象選自全國北、中、南、東區12所國小，A、B、C版的樣本人數分別為1,467人、2,091人和3,558人。綜合信、效度之考驗結果可知，「國小句型理解測驗」能有效測量句型理解能力。最後，本研究針對不同年級學生在各種複句句型之發展，提出相關的教學建議。英文摘要：In order to understand the development of sentence comprehension ability of elementary students in Taiwan, this study was to develop the Sentence Comprehension Test of school students know from G2 to G6. The test included nine types of connectives and were made of three forms for different grades and purposes: The A form for G2 to G3 students, the B form for G4 to G6 students, and the C form for G2 to G6 students. The A, B form are long form, which are applied to check which type is students' weakness of sentence comprehension for remedial teaching, and the C form are short form, which are applied for screening. The participants of A, B, C form are 1,467, 2,091, 3,558 students who are selected from 12 elementary schools of northern, middle, southern, and eastern Taiwan. The Cronbach's of the Sentence Comprehension Test in each form were all over .91. The construct validity showed a developmental trend of sentence comprehension among different grades, that is, the older students know more connectives than the younger ones. The concurrent validities between the Sentence Comprehension Test and reading comprehension in each form were from .66 to .68. Totally speaking, the Sentence Comprehension Test can effectively measure elementary students' sentence comprehension ability with fair reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：385-408資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：史羅二氏「工作狂量表」短版之性別測量恆等性分析並列篇名：Analyses of Measurement Equivalence Across Gender in the Shorten Version of the Spence and Robbins' Workaholism Battery (WorkBAT-15)作者：黃瑞傑(Jui-Chieh Huang);王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：工作狂;性別;測量恆等性;量表發展;Workaholism;gender;measurement equivalence/invariance;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：為提升工作狂研究的發展，本研究針對Spence 與Robbins（1992）提出的三因子模式，檢驗其「工作狂量表」短版（WorkBAT-15）是否具有跨性別之測量恆等性（measurement equivalence/invariance,ME/I）。遵循Vandenberg與Lance(2000)所建議的檢驗程序，本研究以臺灣的519位全職員工為樣本，進行一系列多群組驗證性因素分析（multi-group confirmatory analysis, MGCFAs），依序檢驗不同性別之間是否具有因素構造恆等性、因素量尺恆等性、因素純量恆等性、測量誤差恆等性、因素變異數－共變數矩陣恆等性，以及因素平均數恆等性。依據上述指標分析之研究結果顯示，Spence與Robbins的「工作狂量表」短版在不同性別間具有高度恆等性，可進行性別間潛在變數平均數、構念變異與共變數，以及未標準化之路徑係數的比較。英文摘要：To improve the research development of workaholism, the present study examined whether measures of the shorten version of Workaholism Battery (WorkBAT-15) in Spence and Robbins (1992) three factors model research are equivalent across gender. According the analysis process suggested by Vandenberg and Lance (2000), we conducted a series of multi-group confirmatory factor analyses (MGCFAs) to investigate the crossgender measurement equivalence/invariance (ME/I). Data collected from 519 full-time employees is used in the present study. Configural invariance, metric invariance, scalar invariance, uniqueness invariance, factor variance-covariance invariance and factor mean invariance were established, suggesting that WorkBAT-15 is applicable to crossgender comparisons in latent means, construct variance, construct covariance, and unstandardized path coefficients with the caution.起始頁-結束頁：409-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：父母教導子女宗教信仰是否違反其自主性？T. H. McLaughlin與E.Callan及P. Gardner論辯之評析並列篇名：DO PARENTS VIOLATE THEIR CHILDREN'S AUTONOMY BY UPBRINGING THEIR CHILDREN RELIGIOUS BELIEF? AN ANALYSIS OF THE ARGUMENTS OF T. H. MCLAUGHLIN, E. CALLAN AND P. GARDNER作者：簡成熙(Cheng-Hsi Chien)關鍵字：宗教教育;自主性;父權主義;父母權;religious education;autonomy;paternalism;parents' rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：西方自由主義認為價值多元，政府必須站在價值中立的立場，教育理想不能預設特定的美好生活型態，而是要培養學生的自主性。對有宗教信仰的人而言，則是把幸福依託於神。父母教導子女宗教信仰是否違反其自主性，就成為重要的學術議題。本研究即擬針對此一議題加以探究，並提出對臺灣教育的啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑：本文屬哲學研究，研究者針對英國倫敦路線學者T. H. McLaughlin父母教導子女宗教信仰並不違反子女自主性的主張，以及E. Callan與P. Gardner認為會淪為灌輸之質疑，兼及McLaughlin的回應，探究其相互論辯的效力。研究發現或結論：T. H. McLaughlin以父母兒女共同隸屬的原生文化、家庭成員的有機統一及宗教參與有助於理解宗教等理由，企圖證成父母對子女進行宗教教育，不違反自由主義的教育自主性理想。E. Callan以及P. Gardner則擔心這難逃灌輸之嫌，在子女幼小階段，其思想未定型，過早進行宗教教育，會造成根深蒂固，不利子女爾後的自主發展。筆者檢視他們之間的論辯，同意McLaughlin的主張，只要父母持守自由主義的精神來教導子女宗教信仰，是可以回應其他學者質疑。研究原創性／價值：臺灣對於宗教教育的研究不多，現有的研究有從宗教教義著手，也有研究討論美國重要宗教教育判例。教育哲學可以對教育進行綜合反省，分析的教育哲學更期許能對教育實務問題作概念分析與論證。鑑於臺灣教育政策論述，很少有嚴格哲學論證，更遑論分析哲學的論證。本研究將能為臺灣學界探索宗教教育時，提供分析哲學的論證範例。教育政策或實務意涵：經由本文論證，家長有為子女提供宗教教育的權利，學校也無須以價值中立之名，嚴禁宗教涉入。但無論家長還是學校，仍應秉自由主義精神，慎防宗教灌輸。英文摘要：Purpose: Western liberalism believes that values are diversified, and the government must stand on the position of value neutrality. The educational ideal should not presuppose a specific good life style, but cultivate students' autonomy. For people with religious beliefs, it is to rely on God for their happiness. Whether parents teach their children religious beliefs violates their autonomy has become an important academic issue. This study intends to explore this topic, and puts forward the implications for Taiwan education. Design/methodology/approach: This article is a philosophical study. T. H. McLaughlin, the scholar of London Line, tried to justify that parents have the rights to educate their children for religion which would not transgress the ideal of liberalism - educational autonomy. However, E. Callan and P. Gardner worried that it could be suspected of indoctrination. And McLaughlin responded to their challenges. The author investigates the validity of their mutual claims by philosophical arguments. Findings/results: McLaughlin tried to justify that parents have the rights to educate their children for religion which would not violate the ideal of personal autonomy of liberalism, on the grounds of primary culture parents and children both attach to, the organic unity of family members, and contributions of religious participation to understand religion. However, E. Callan and P. Gardner worried that it could be suspected of indoctrination. When children are young, their thoughts are not fixed and religious education is carried out too early, which will result in persistence beliefs to harm their development of autonomy in the future. The author examines the arguments on both sides and stands by McLaughlin's points. As long as parents adhere to the spirit of liberalism for their children on religious upbringing. they can defend the challenges from other opposed scholars. Originality/value: There are few studies on religious education in Taiwan. Some of the existing studies start from religious doctrines, and some studies discuss important court cases of religious education in the United States. The philosophy of education can reflect on education comprehensively, and the analytical philosophy of education is expected to make conceptual analysis and arguments on the practical issues of education. In view of the educational policy discourse in Taiwan, there are few rigorous philosophical arguments, let alone analytical philosophical arguments. This study will provide an argument example of analytical philosophy to explore religious education for Taiwan academic circles. Suggestions/implications: This paper argues that parents have a right to religious upbringing for their children, and schools do not need to ban religious materials involving to campus in the name of value-neutrality. But both parents and schools should embody liberal spirit and must guard against religious indoctrination.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00012篇名：馬來西亞高等校院的停課不停學－大學在COVID-19行動管制令下的結構與行動並列篇名：”SUSPENDING CLASSES WITHOUT SUSPENDING LEARNING” IN MALAYSIA HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS: OBSERVING STRUCTURE AND AGENCY UNDER COVID-19 MOVEMENT CONTROL ORDERS作者：陳鏗任(Ken-Zen Chen);林炳洲(Peng-Crew Lim);王子華(Tzu-Hua Wang)關鍵字：結構化理論;COVID-19;馬來西亞高等教育;行動管制令;Structuration;COVID-19;Higher Education in Malaysia;Movement Control Orders期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究以多重資料，梳理在2020年8月底前，馬來西亞行動管制令下所影響的高等教育活動；特別是以微觀角度，檢視馬來西亞的大學生在因應防疫所遭遇的挑戰。研究者從行動者與結構互動的理論框架，歸納發展中的大馬防疫案例對我國高等教育的啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採取兩種資料蒐集方式：線上田野觀察與線上訪談。研究者追蹤馬來西亞高等教育，含政府紀錄與大學官方網站、新聞媒體、WhatsApp學生社群、記者會影像等；線上訪談則邀請四位大學生分享行動管制令之前的學習樣態、校園中的疫情、行動管制令後的個人經歷、以及線上學習經驗。研究者亦邀請他們扮演深度報導人的角色，請其提供可能有助於本研究的訊息。研究發現或結論：本研究從行動者，也從結構，提出兩個角度的發現。行動者在防疫行動中與結構互動，他們雖充分展現了自己的認識力，但仍然有其侷限；線上教學從倉促上路到漸入佳境是師生共創的新常規；大學生除了受疫情影響，也積極行動貢獻。高教中的一些結構，例如成績是不可動搖的；雖然線上學習是結構快速在各大學複製的新常規，但行動者除了適應也可能撼動；面對謠言透過結構中流傳，系統會吸納行動者發展的溝通常規來加強自己身為防疫權威的結構正當性。研究原創性／價值：COVID-19的社會科學研究雖然受到諸多踏入現場的限制，但透過網路訪談與研究參與者的協助，仍可蒐集到寶貴的資訊。本研究之創新點除了議題本身，也把焦點主要放在了大學在政府的防疫運作框架下的制度回應，以及身在其中的大學生的感受與行動，讓在疫情中較無機會被聽到的聲音能呈現在學術界的討論。教育政策建議或實務意涵：從本研究之結論出發，研究者提出三個對我國高等教育的建議：一、防疫社會的系統應有危機治理的思維；二、防疫社會的線上學習強化大學應對災變的韌性；三、防疫社會的校園重建需理情兼顧。英文摘要：Purpose: This research studied reactions of Malaysia higher education under the Movement Control Order (MCO) before August, 2020. Specifically, it used theoretical lenses of agency and structuration and investigated collegiate challenges regarding epidemic prevention at he micro level. We present lessons learned from the developing case of epidemic prevention in Malaysia's higher education institutions (HEIs). Design/methodology/approach: Two data collection methods were used: online field observation and online interview. We collected government reports, news releases, social media discussions (e.g. WhatsApp and Facebook), press conferences, and so forth. We conducted online interviews with four college students, who shared their learning before and after the MCOs, the COVID-19 outbreaks within campuses, and their experiences of learning online. Four interviewees were invited as research facilitators who provided insights and additional observations about college teaching and learning under MCOs. Findings/results: Findings from the aspects of both agency and structure under MCO were established in the research. From the agency aspects, college students expressed limited knowledgeability. Moreover, students and faculty co-constructed and improved online learning practices over time. In addition, students contributed to epidemic prevention and reflected on their actions. From the structural aspects, grades remained unchallenged. Furthermore, colleges stabilized online instruction to be a formal medium of learning whereby students might be able to influence how it was practiced. Lastly, the colleges learned to leverage the communication channels that students used to maintain the authority of epidemic prevention. Originality/value: Stepping in the fields under COVID-19 outbreaks can be risky for social scientists. However, online research may still reveal critical and timely findings. This research was novel both for the issue itself, as well as its focus on how HEIs reacted to the governmental public health policies for epidemic prevention and how college students perceived and acted in the system. Suggestions/implications: Several implications for Taiwan's higher education were drawn from the research. First of all, crisis management is critical for epidemic prevention among HEIs. Moreover, we need to see the positive value of online learning and assessments under epidemic conditions. Online learning may increase the resilience of HEIs under crisis. Lastly, both rational and affective considerations should be taken into account in the reconstruction of students' residential experience after the COVID-19 outbreaks.起始頁-結束頁：35-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00023篇名：學業退學制度是否合理妥適？實證研究的證據並列篇名：ARE UNIVERSITIES' ACADEMIC DISMISSAL POLICIES REASONABLE AND APPROPRIATE? EVIDENCE FROM AN EMPIRICAL STUDY作者：何萬順(One-Soon Her);蔡介文(Jie-Wen Tsai);林俊儒(Jun-Ru Lin);葉佳明(Jia-Ming Yeh)關鍵字：學業退學;合理妥適;釋字第563號;academic dismissal;reasonable and appropriate;Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 56期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本文研究目的在於從實證研究的證據，探討現行大學學業退學制度的設計是否符合釋字第563號「合理妥適」原則的規範。研究設計／方法／取徑：本文首先從釋字第563號對於退學的規範，檢視學業退學的制度內涵，並經由與品行退學的對照，探討學業退學制度在設計思維上是否「合理妥適」。接著以國立政治大學於96-106學年間入學之學士班學生學業成績、學分數、不及格學分數等資料為基礎，證實學業退學制度作為淘汰學生的工具並不符合「合理妥適」的原則。研究發現或結論：在國立政治大學96-106學年間三種逐次放寬的制度之實證研究上，從百分制之成績平均績點（Grade Point Average, GPA）與學分及格率（Credit Pass Rate, CPR）的數項指標上所得到的數據顯示：成績表現相對較佳的學生反遭退學。此實證研究的結果證實了學業退學制度違背釋字第563號「使成績未符一定標準之學生予以退學處分」的要求，與「確保學位之授予具備一定之水準」之目的牴觸；更值得關注是，制度越寬鬆其不合理程度卻越為嚴重。研究原創性／價值：近年學界已有廢除大學學業退學制度的聲浪，但多偏向法律及教育面向的探討，未有從實證數據的角度對此制度進行研究。本文補足此研究空缺，以實證數據說明學業退學制度與釋字第563號的齟齬關係，以及該制度的不合理之處。教育政策建議或實務意涵：從制度的實證數據出發，回顧相關校務研究，說明在學習問題上，身心健康、經濟情形、教學品質、學習環境等都是重要因子，不應完全究責於學生而給予退學的終極處分；進而指出退學制度在教師與學生互動關係的負面效應。建議大學應以積極妥適的預警、輔導與諮商機制取代學業退學制度。英文摘要：Purpose: The purpose of this paper is to investigate whether Taiwan universities' academic dismissal policies comply with the constitutional requirement of being reasonable and appropriate, specified in Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563, from the evidence of an empirical study. Design/methodology/approach: This paper first critically examines the content and design of universities' academic dismissal policies from the perspective of Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563, and then discusses whether such academic dismissal policies are reasonable and appropriate via a comparison with the policies of dismissal due to misconducts. Then, based on the academic achievements, academic scores, and failing grades of the National Chengchi University undergraduate students during the 2007-2017 academic years, this paper explores whether the academic dismissal policies as a tool for dismissing students from universities are reasonable and appropriate. Findings/results: An empirical study of the three different dismissal policies of National Chengchi University during the 2007-2017 academic years proves that, under several indexes of GPA (Grade Point Average) based on numerical grades and CPR (Credit Pass Rate), students with relatively better academic performances have been dismissed. Such policies thus seriously violate the constitutional requirement of Interpretation No. 563, that the punishment of dismissal be applied to 'students whose grades are below a certain standard' and contradict the required goal 'to guarantee that the conferment of a degree upholds a certain standard'. More importantly, the more lenient the policy, the more unfair dismissals there are. Originality/value: Recent voices advocating the abolition of universities' dismissal polices are mostly from the theoretical perspectives of law and education, none based on evidence from empirical findings. The research reported in this paper fills this important research gap. The empirical evidence obtained clearly demonstrates the unreasonable consequences of these academic dismissal policies, and thus their conflict with Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563. Suggestions/implications: Starting from the empirical evidence regarding the dismissal policies, this paper reviews several studies of university institutional research to illustrate the multiple factors behind a student's academic performance, including the student's physical and mental health, and the student's financial circumstances, the teaching quality, the learning environment, etc; thus, a student alone should not bear all the blame and receive the ultimate punishment. We also demonstrate the negative effects of academic dismissals on the interaction between teachers and students. Universities should replace the academic dismissal policies with active and appropriate mechanisms of early warning and consultation.起始頁-結束頁：81-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00034篇名：評介《「教育與陶冶科學」這個學術學門》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”ERZIEHUNGS- UND BILDUNGSWISSENSCHAFT ALS WISSENSCHAFTSDISZIPLIN”作者：陳濼翔(Luo-Xiang Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：121-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202109_29(3).00045篇名：科技教學內容知識融入師資培育課程「班級經營」的教學實踐研究並列篇名：TEACHING PRACTICE AND STUDY OF TECHNOLOGICAL PEDAGOGICAL CONTENT KNOWLEDGE IN THE TEACHER EDUCATION COURSE ”CLASS MANAGEMENT”作者：陳碧祺(Pi-Chi Chen)關鍵字：師資培育;班級經營;科技教學內容知識;透明化科技融入教學;自我研究;teacher education;class management;technological pedagogical content knowledge;transparent technology integration into teaching;self-study期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究者任教於臺灣南部一所同時培育師資生與產業人才的師範大學。本研究旨在探討：（1）如何在師資培育課程「班級經營」中實踐「TPACK（科技教學內容知識）」教學理念，以及（2）如何以「透明化科技」融入教學的方式，協助師資生在此課程中同時培養「班級經營」知能並體驗TPACK的學習情境。研究者應用「自我研究」的回溯、前瞻、分析以及整合四步驟，分析、探究以TPACK理論為基礎的「班級經營」課程設計、教學策略應用、教學實施效益與檢討改進歷程。為評估此課程的教學效益，研究者整理103至106共四學年度來自文學院、教育學院、科技學院和理學院不同院系共429位師資生的教學評量量化評分，並依據以下素養面向做為學生質性文字回饋的檢核架構：（1）教育部所公布的師資職前教育階段的五項「教師專業素養」、（2）十二年國教新課綱的三項「核心素養」、以及（3）資訊科技融入教學等三大面向。結果顯示，學生對教師教學表現有高度的評價，對於教學內容、教材教法、作業設計以及課程中的資訊科技運用也都有正向的體驗與感受。然而如何提高課程中所運用的多元質性評量的公平性和公信度，仍有待研究者深思並克服。研究者最後提出三點的後續教學研究改進省思與規劃，作為日後課程設計與教學研究的改進方向。英文摘要：The researcher teaches at a normal university, located in southern Taiwan, known for cultivating pre-service teachers and professionals for industry and commerce. This study aims to investigate: (1) how to implement the teaching concept of TPACK (technological pedagogical content knowledge) in the teacher education course ”Class Management”, and (2) how to integrate ”transparent technology” in assisting pre-services teachers to obtain class management knowledge and to build the skills, as well as experience the learning environment of TPACK. By following the self-study procedure, namely retrospection, foresight, analysis, and integration, the researcher was able to design and develop TPACK-based Class Management curriculum and teaching strategies for the course. The researcher went on to implement and subsequently investigate the course based on teaching effectiveness, and then to review and improve the teaching process. The study summarized the teaching evaluations of a total of 429 pre-service teachers from different departments, covering from 103 to 106 four academic years. Evaluation of the course effectiveness was based on the following criteria: (1) the five categories of ”Teacher Professional Qualities” for the pre-service teachers' education; (2) the three major ”Core Literacy” of the 12-year Basic Education; and (3) the content of integration of information technology into teaching. The teaching evaluation and student feedback showed that the teaching content, teaching materials, teaching methods, homework design, and cloud-based course operation generated positive experiences and feelings from the students. However, the question of improving the credibility of multiple qualitative assessments used in the course remains to be considered and addressed. In conclusion, the researcher put forward three points of reflection for follow-up teaching research improvement and planning with regard the direction of improvement for future curriculum design and teaching research.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00016篇名：新制師資培育課程基準下的課程發展：「合作教學」與「教師專業社群」融入「教育實踐課程」設計並列篇名：THE DEVELOPMENT OF TEACHER EDUCATION COURSES UNDER THE NEW CURRICULUM GUIDELINES: THE INTEGRATION OF 'CO-TEACHING' AND 'PROFESSIONAL LEARNING COMMUNITY' IN EDUCATIONAL PRACTICE COURSES DESIGN作者：洪承宇(Cheng-Yu Hung);王淳瑩(Chun-Ying Wang)關鍵字：師資培育;合作教學;教師社群;教育實踐;補救教學;Teacher education;Co-teaching;Professional learning community;Teaching practicum;Remedial instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：新頒《中華民國教師專業素養指引－師資職前教育階段暨師資職前教育課程基準》（簡稱《課程基準》）於108學年度正式施行後，師培課程除了教育基礎學與方法學外，增加了「教育實踐課程」比重，期許職前階段能與教學現場有更豐富的連結。為實現《課程基準》中師資生應培養「團隊合作」與「持續專業成長」之素養，本研究藉由北部某師培大學開設的教育實踐課程帶領師資生至鄰近社區高中進行8週英文課後補救教學為例，運用精熟學習法架構，採「三人一組」的入班合作教學模式，探討此課程設計能否為準教師奠定教師專業素養之基礎。研究設計／方法／取徑：師資生團隊入班之設計，在人力充足的情況下，能在課堂中將中學生分流進行更細緻的差異化教學，運用師培課程中習得之理論於真實情境。三位師資生同時搭配師培教授與現職教師進行共備、觀課與議課，除了激發教學創意，也模擬現今教學現場的公開課活動、教師社群討論等，將中小學教師共學的氛圍向前延伸至職前教育階段。本研究訪談了18位修習本課程之英文科師資生與1位指導教師，並搭配師資生期末「教學歷程檔案」中的課堂記錄與反思，進行訪談與文件分析。研究發現或結論：此實踐課程設計可作為師資生們於未來成為教師獨立授課與班級管理之中介課程。團隊入班減緩師資生的教學焦慮，在集體腦力激盪的團隊合作下，能相互觀摩與成長；師資生透過形成性評量將學生進行差異化分組，輔導高、中、低不同程度之同學，增益自身基礎概念與加深加廣內容之教學技巧。同時，連續8週的短期帶班經驗彌補了師培課程中欠缺的班級經營實務，能作為橋接理論與實務之課程，逐步培養獨當一面之能力。此外，師資生與指導教師在過程中彼此給予支持與回饋，展現教師社群共備、觀課、議課之氛圍。研究原創性／價值：《課程基準》強調「團隊合作」素養之重要性，然而師培課程中較少將此項素養實際運用於現場教學之設計。「三人一組」於實務現場的合作教學是本實踐課程之特色，師資生能在同儕支持下嘗試不同的教學策略，並體會共備社群之助益；師培教授與中學指導老師的加入，也確保入班授課品質，而非將合作學校作為實踐的白老鼠，肩負大學之社會責任；此研究最後提出三項針對教育實踐課程設計之建議：師培機構應連結實務現場作為師資生「探究與實作」的場域、鼓勵師培課程加強「合作教學」的素養培育、「教師社群」氛圍應融入於日常的師培課程之中。英文摘要：Purpose: After the introduction of a new teacher education curriculum structure in 2019, the proportion of practice courses, vis-a-vis the traditional foundation and methodology courses, has been significantly increased. Closely linked to schools, practice courses are expected to give pre-service teachers preliminary teaching experience. This research examines a newly designed practice course, which aims to enhance course-takers' techniques of co-teaching and to encourage the formation of professional learning communities, and this example may provide valuable ideas and inspiration for other teacher education institutes to learn from. Design/methodology/approach: This practice course, implemented in a teacher education center in Taipei, established a partnership with a senior high school for an eight-week teaching practicum. Three English pre-service teachers were grouped as a team to help students experiencing difficulty keeping up with peers. A teacher educator and an experienced high school teacher were also involved in lesson preparation, classroom observation, post-course discussion and the setting up of a professional learning community. This research interviewed 18 pre-service teachers who participated in this course as well as their guiding mentors. In addition, their teaching portfolios were also analyzed to examine any actual enhancement in classroom practice. Findings/results: The gathered data demonstrated that 'co-teaching' reduced anxiety among pre-service teachers and collective effort not only improved lesson planning, but also fostered an atmosphere of professional development. Pre-service teachers employed formative assessments to divide students into groups of high, medium and low ability levels. In class, they can practice teaching basic core knowledge as well as more advanced content, which exhibited the feature of a differentiated class. Moreover, this course offered a rare opportunity for pre-service teachers to experience leading a class of students for eight consecutive weeks. The intensity of this teaching practice can be seen as a bridging course closing the gap between pre-service training and a full teaching load in an actual school setting. Originality/value: The guidelines of the new teacher education curriculum put emphasis on pre-service teachers gaining competence in teamwork, a goal rarely stressed in such courses. This design provides a real context for course-takers to explore co-teaching and experiment with the pedagogies and strategies they can deliver together in class. As part of this process, professional learning communities work as a platform and catalyst for young teachers to explore fresh ideas and accustom themselves to this cooperative culture for future lifelong teaching professional development.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00027篇名：《教師專業素養指引與師資職前教育課程基準》實施之影響、挑戰與因應：中等師資培育機構之觀點並列篇名：THE INFLUENCE, CHALLENGES AND COPING STRATEGIES OF THE ”STANDARD FOR PRE-SERVICE TEACHER EDUCATION CURRICULUM” FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS作者：湯家偉(Chia-Wei Tang);王俐淳(Li-Chun Wang)關鍵字：中等學校師資培育;教師專業素養;課程基準;因應策略;secondary school teacher education;teacher professional standards;curriculum baseline;coping strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在探討《中華民國教師專業素養指引—師資職前教育階段暨師資職前教育課程基準》實施後，師培機構在師資職前課程是否做出相對應的改變及變革過程中所面臨的挑戰、問題與因應策略。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採立意取樣方式，依學校所在區域、學校類型就40所中等師資培育機構抽取一半，並以其機構主管及課程承辦人員為對象，合計40位，進行半結構式訪談。研究發現或結論：1.師培機構的課程改革投入程度有落差，而主管的領導、教師的投入、學生的引導以及甄選的配套是課程變革落實與否的關鍵。2.師培機構對《教師專業素養暨課程基準》中的「各專業課程類別最低學分數的增減」特別是實踐課程的學分數規定以及「實地服務時數取消」較有異議。3.師培機構在實施《教師專業素養暨課程基準》的過程中面臨「行政端」、「教師端」、「學生端」的困境與挑戰，部分機構亦發展出因應策略。4.師培機構面臨之困境體現於行政、教師與學生三個部分，且部分存在機構屬性之差異。研究原創性／價值：1.目前相關研究仍多為單一學校為個案進行個案經驗分享或學者意見評論，雖有一篇實證研究，但缺乏以師資培育機構觀點之實證文獻。2.本研究以20所中等師資培育機構之觀點，探討各師培機構的實施作法、問題以及因應策略，有助於檢討此次變革的實施現況，並彙整相關因應策略與建議供師培機構端或是主管機關政策修正之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examines whether teacher education institutions have made curriculum changes conforming to Taiwan (R.O.C.)'s policy document ”Guidance for R.O.C. teacher professional competence- Standard for pre-service teacher education curriculum”. This study also investigates the challenges, and coping strategies experienced by institutions in the process of implementing the policy. Design/methodology/approach: Through a purposive sampling, we selected 20 secondary school teacher education institutions (out of the 40 institutions in Taiwan) based on the regions and the characteristics of the institutions. Accordingly, 20 directors and 20 administrative staff from these institutions were interviewed in a semi-structured manner. Findings/results: 1. There were varying levels of commitment to the curriculum reform in the teacher education institutions. The keys to the full implementation of the curriculum change were the leadership of supervisors, the commitment of teachers, the guidance for students, and the supplementary measures for screening and selection. 2. The teacher education institutions generally disagreed an element of the policy, that of an ”increase or decrease of the minimum number of credits for each professional course category”, most notably the requirement of the number of credits for practical courses and the elimination of field service hours. 3. In the process of implementing the policy, teacher education institutions experienced challenges and difficulties at administration, teacher, and student levels. We observed that some institutions developed their own coping strategies. 4. These challenges at administration, teacher, and student levels forced challenges for each institution that varied depending on their characteristics. Originality/value: 1. Previous studies investigated single-school cases in terms of experience sharing and scholarly critique. Although there is one empirical study, there is still a lack of empirical literature from the perspective of teacher education institutions. 2. This study examines the implementation methods, problems, and coping strategies from the perspectives of 20 secondary school teacher education institutions, which gives a broader perspective of the status of the implementation of this curriculum reform, and compiles relevant strategies and suggestions as a reference for teacher education institutions and government authorities for policy revision.起始頁-結束頁：61-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00038篇名：評介《教師能動性：生態取向》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”TEACHER AGENCY: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH.”作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：95-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202106_29(2).00049篇名：COVID-19下臺師大的遠距教學經驗與省思並列篇名：COVID-19: A DISTANCE LEARNING EXPERIENCE AND REFLECTION AT NTNU作者：陳昭珍(Chao-Chen Chen);徐芝君(Chih-Chun Hsu);洪嘉馡(Jia-Fei Hong);胡衍南(Yan-Nan Hu)關鍵字：高等教育;遠距教學;數位學習;新冠肺炎;higher education;distance learning;digital learning;COVID-19期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：因為COVID-19疫情爆發，全球高等教育機構在2020年面臨前所未有的挑戰；很多學校關閉校園，暫停教學與學習活動，也有很多學校轉而改採遠距教學，讓學習不中斷。本研究之目的，主要在探討全球高等教育在COVID-19下所面臨的學習問題，以及臺師大在疫情間實施全校遠距教學的經驗與省思。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究蒐集2020年聯合國教科文組織UNESCO（2020）、全球大學學會（International Association of Universities, IAU）、UNESCO-IESALC等國際組織的調查報告重點整理，以掌握疫情期間國際高等教育現況；其次，本研究設計問卷，調查校內學生與教師對遠距教學的反應。研究發現或結論：研究發現，學生在疫情期間以在家中上網比例最高，對於學校採用遠距教學大多能支持，且認為自己有學到新科技，此外認為遠距教學最需改善的是教師使用的視訊平台太多、網速，以及教師的教學法；而在教師調查方面，多數教師認為經過這次的挑戰已能掌握遠距教學，但未來仍將以實體教學為主。研究原創性／價值：由於臺師大是臺灣在109學年度第二學期疫情緊繃期間，唯一短期關閉實體教室，全校採遠距教學三週的大學，因此臺師大的案例，非常值得臺灣高等教育未來發展及因應疫情之參考。教育政策建議或實務意涵當全球多數國家都已經因疫情嚴峻而全面轉為數位教學的同時，臺灣因疫情相對緩和，大學未全面實施遠距教學，因此可能成為全球大學數位能力最不足的國家，無法面對高等教育的數位競爭以及隨時可能再來疫情，建議大學及教育當局對於高等教育數位學程有更積極的規劃。英文摘要：Purpose: Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, higher education institutions around the world are facing unprecedented challenges in the year 2020; many schools have closed their campuses and suspended teaching and learning activities, while others have switched to distance learning to keep learning going. The purpose of this study is to explore the learning problems faced by higher education worldwide in the face of COVID-19, as well as NTNU's experiences with and reflections on the implementation of whole-campus distance learning. Design/methodology/approach: This study first collects survey reports from UNESCO (2020), the International Association of Universities (IAU), UNESCO-IESALC, and other international organizations to understand the current situation of international higher education during the pandemic. Second, this study designed a questionnaire to investigate the responses of students and teachers to distance learning at NTNU. Findings/results: The study found that students had the highest percentage of Internet access at home during the pandemic, were supportive of the school's adoption of distance learning, and believed they had learned new learning technologies. Other than this, the things that they felt most needed improvement were the excessive number of video platforms used by teachers, internet speeds, and teachers' pedagogical methods. In the teacher survey, most of the teachers felt that they had mastered distance teaching after this challenge, but that they would focus on physical teaching in the future. Originality/value: Since NTNU was the only university in Taiwan that closed its classrooms for a short period of time and taught by distance learning for three weeks during the pandemic crisis in the second semester of the 2020 academic year, with the entire school moving to distance learning for three weeks, the NTNU case is a valuable reference for the future development of higher education in Taiwan and pandemic responses. Implications for Policy/Practice: While most countries around the world have already switched to strict, complete digital learning due to the severity of the pandemic, Taiwan has not yet fully implemented distance learning due to the relatively mild pandemic, and thus may become the country with the least university digital capacity in the world. Unable to face the digital competition in higher education and the possibility of a renewed pandemic that could strike at any time, it is recommended that universities and education authorities plan more proactively for digital programs in higher education.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202103_29(1).000110篇名：遇見與看見－校園防疫中高等教育學務工作的淬煉並列篇名：FACING AND FORESEEING CHALLENGES IN STUDENT AFFAIRS-THE REFINEMENT OF STUDENT AFFAIRS IN CAMPUS EPIDEMIC PREVENTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION作者：林玫君(Mei-Chun Lin);李立旻(Li-Min Lee);劉若蘭(Ruo-Lan Liu);李育齊(Yu-Chi Li)關鍵字：新冠肺炎;防疫工作;學務工作;高等教育;COVID-19;epidemic prevention;student affairs;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究聚焦疫情對高教機構的影響，探討一所學校學務處防疫經驗與歷程，從大學學務工作的角度切入，探討本次COVID-19疫情對推展學務工作的困難與挑戰及因應策略與措施，並探究學務處組織功能轉變、理念落實，及疫情對學務人員的角色與功能影響等議題，展現創新防疫的積極作為與成果，具有提供高等教育機構參考提升防疫措施與學務專業的價值。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以個案研究法彙整分析學務人員執行防疫工作的經驗，研究對象包含個案學校5位學務處中階主管及7位職員，其中中階主管運用深度訪談法、職員則使用焦點團體法蒐集資料。此外並參照31次防疫會議紀錄進行交叉驗證，確立本研究信實度。研究發現或結論：本研究依據質性資料分析結果，歸納「覺知：展現學務人的敏感度」、「實踐：凸顯學務工作的重要性」、「跨越：探索學務工作的著力點」、「看見：找回學務人心中的價值」等四項主題，及項下22個分析項目，透過學務人員展現對於疫情的敏感度及超前佈署的覺知與行動，全面聚焦從學生輔導、活動調整以及社區關懷三方面研擬方案；此外在政府主管機關及學務領導者引導下，確立校園防疫著力點，學務人員亦發揮專業並提高科技使用度，規劃疫情安心就學等具體措施，凸顯學務工作的重要性，同時更認同身為學務人員的價值且以學生為中心、重視團隊合作以及超前部署的核心理念。研究原創性／價值：新冠肺炎（COVID-19）疫情影響全球，臺灣防疫措施受到國際關注，為兼顧疫情控制與維持學習生活，規劃合宜的防疫措施是各級學校2020年的重要挑戰。遺憾的是，個案學校於3月底、4月初共有兩名學生確診新冠肺炎，此意外的衝擊造成學校師生的恐慌以及執行防疫工作的危機，同時考驗學務主管的行政作為與學務人員的危機處理與反應能力。個案學校亦從狀況不明的情況下，透過經驗的累積，發展嶄新學務工作處遇流程，校園防疫經驗值得與其他高等教育機構分享與交流。本研究蒐集防疫期間站在第一線人員內在經驗與實際作為，並透過質性分析建構學務人員在疫情衝擊中，專業成長的轉化模式，具有研究創新的價值。教育政策建議或實務意涵：針對研究分析結果，本研究提出對學務人員及校園防疫之建議，包含學務人員應針對科技與網路社群經營能力提升專業，另在校園防疫期間應針對學生需求規劃創新且彈性之學生服務與輔導方案，最後，建議學校進一步推動與社區的緊密連結、持續凝聚共識、建立學校與社區友善關係，共同為臺灣社區防疫而努力。英文摘要：Purpose: This research aims to explore a university's experience and processes in epidemic preventions. This research looks into the effects of COVID-19 on higher education institutes-how the structure of the Office of Student Affairs changed, how ideas are implemented, and how the role of student affair personnel is affected. This research also displays the creativity and proactive measures along with epidemic prevention results in attempt to share with other higher education institutions in Taiwan the preventative measures and the value of Student Affairs. Design/methodology/approach: Through the qualitative research of narrative inquiry, this research gathers the experiences of student affairs personnel in epidemic prevention through case study. Student affairs personnel include five managers that went through in-depth interviews and seven staff members that was put in focus groups. Other than that, thirty-one meeting minutes were used for cross examination to establish the validity of this research. Findings/results: According to the qualitative analysis of the transcript, the results of this study are divided into the following four themes-Awareness: The Sensitivity of the Student Affair Personnel; Realization: The Importance of Student Affairs; Connection: The Search for a Focus; Vision: Redefining the Core Value of Student Affairs. Within the four themes there are also twenty-two items for analysis. With advance preparation, the student affairs personnel have been sensitive in actively integrating different roles-focusing on student advising, activity rearrangement, and community care. Additionally, with the guidance of the government and student affairs professionals, the university was able to provide long-distance learning and other preventative measures with the help of technology. This increased the value of student affairs by confirming the core values of being student centered, embracing team work, and advance preparation. Originality/value: With the COVID-19 epidemic affecting the world, Taiwan's precautionary measures against COVID-19 aroused much global attention. In order to control the spread of COVID-19 while maintaining student learning at the same time, taking appropriate precautions is key to all schools in 2020. Unfortunately, the university learned of two confirmed COVID-19 cases late March and early April. The news brought panic throughout the school and created epidemic prevention crisis for the university. As the university was able to implement new interventions, the gained experiences are worth sharing amongst other higher education institutes. Implications for Policy/Practice: According to the research results, suggestions for student affairs personnel and campus epidemic prevention is provided-including the how student affairs personnel should increase literacy in technology and social media and professional ability. Finally, it is suggested that universities step forward to connect closely with the community. Creating consensus and building a friendly relationship between universities and communities enables teamwork to better Taiwan's epidemic prevention.起始頁-結束頁：25-27+29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202103_29(1).000201篇名：樂高機器人輔助程式學習之探討並列篇名：Using Lego Robotics in Program Learning作者：翁楊絲茜(Cathy Weng);夏至賢(Chih-Hsien Hsia);王湄雁(Mei-Yen Wang)關鍵字：合作學習;程式設計;樂高機器人;學習成效;學習興趣;cooperative learning;computer programming;Lego robotics;learning effect;learning interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：數位科技的進步幫助人們生活變得便利且多元，在教學上，亦可透過數位教學輔具的技術協助學習者學習並提高其學習成效。近年來，透過機器人在數位學習領域的應用愈來愈廣泛，其中樂高機器人所具有的高重組性、邏輯性及可攜性讓教學不再受時空限制、學習不再禁錮在只有一個正確答案的選擇題裡，而是具有更多組合與變化。有鑑於此，本研究以學習程式設計融入樂高機器人作為平臺，並以新北市某大學之機器人研究社為對象，提出透過合作學習的方式，讓寫程式由個人擴展到團隊合作，以培養學生問題解決與團隊溝通能力。最後，透過實驗後之問卷調查方式，發現學生學習程式語言時可利用樂高機器人的多樣性來引發學生的學習興趣並提高其學習成效。英文摘要：Since the advances in digital technology change people’s life, we have more and more teaching aids to help improve learning in different ways. In recent years, the Lego NXT has been adopted in computer science courses more frequently because Lego robotics is high reconfigurable, logical, and mobile which allow the students to develop very different combinations in projects. The study here attempts to investigate how Lego NXT can be used as a learning platform to teach computer-programing languages in groups. The experimental result shows that student have gained learning motivation and learning effect via the Lego NXT systems.起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20141006040012篇名：國民小學高年級普通班學生使用基模化影片系統解代數多步驟文字題成效之研究並列篇名：The Effects of 5th and 6th Grade Students Using Schematic Video System to Solve Algebraic Multiple Step Word Problems作者：朱經明(Jing-Ming Ju);陳瑞芬(Re-Fen Chen);陳韻如(Uen-Ru Chen)關鍵字：文字題;代數;基模化影片;word problems;algebra;schematic video期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究之目的有二：一為對尚未學習代數或剛開始學習代數的五年級學生，提供一個生動有效的代數教學軟體；另一為對已經學代數但學習困難或學習失敗的六年級學生，提供良好的代數補救教學軟體。本研究之貢獻為結合影片與基模，為研究者多年構思所得，國外並無結合影片與基模之類似教學研究。基模為人類基本認知結構，基模化影片將原本無結構之影片加以結構化以建立學生解題基模。本研究之多步驟文字題包括中間數未知及原數未知，此類題目因需逆向思考，學生通常較感困難。為評估學習類化效果，只對中間數未知之多步驟文字題進行基模化影片教學，原數未知多步驟文字題作為類化題之用。主要研究結果為：一、實驗組與控制組比較，實驗組後測成績優於控制組後測成績；二、實驗組本身前、後測比較，後測成績優於前測成績，並具類化效果；三、六年級數學學習困難學生，代數文字題前測平均正確率只有10.42%，類化題進步至93.75%並具維持效果。本研究並以學生問卷調查及教學者觀察心得說明「基模化影片代數多步驟文字題解題系統」為一生動有效的代數教學軟體。英文摘要：This study aims to help students solve multiple-step algebraic word problems by using schematic video. The goals are to develop software helping students learn algebra in an interesting and effective way, and serving the purpose of remedial instruction. The middle and start unknown problems were used, as these problems need retrospective thinking and may be more difficult for students. The experiment used only the middle unknown and the start unknown problems were used in transfer test. The major findings were 1. 5th graders of the experimental group outperformed the control group, 2. the posttest results were better than the pretest results for the experiment group, and 3. 6th graders with math difficulty improved significantly from pretest to posttest and transferred and maintained the results. A questionnaire survey and observation were conducted to confirm the validity of the software.起始頁-結束頁：13-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20141006040023篇名：由失敗經驗探討數位遊戲式學習系統設計的考量因素並列篇名：Lessons Learned from the Development of a Digital Game-Based Learning System作者：楊善媛(Shan-Yuan Yang);高錦瑗(Chin-Yuan Kao);黃國禎(Gwo-Jen Hwang)關鍵字：情境式遊戲;數位遊戲;學習成就;學習態度;雙碼理論;contextual game;digital games;learning achievement;learning attitude;dualcoding theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：資訊科技的進步，數位遊戲式的學習模式已受到廣泛地重視；許多學者希望透過數位遊戲，可以促進學生的學習動機，甚至於學習成就。在本研究中，嘗試建立一個情境式數位遊戲，以高中二年級英文單字學習為內容，探討對學生學習成就與態度的影響。經由實驗設計，比較情境式數位遊戲與傳統使用MP3搭配紙本教材的學習模式，發現兩組學生在學習態度上並沒有顯著差異，而在單字學習成就方面，傳統的學習方式反而比情境式數位遊戲的效果更佳。經由進一步的分析，發現遊戲中的對話及解說方式，可能是影響學習成就的主要原因，也說明在設計情境式遊戲時，應參考媒體設計理論及語言教學原理。英文摘要：Due to the recent advances in technology, digital learning project has been widely discussed around the world. In this paper, we use two different media tools to teach the frequently used English vocabulary and examine their effectiveness in enhancing high school sudents’ learning attitude and efficacy. A pre-test and a post-test was conducted and analyzed using t-test to compare the learning outcomes of the students who learned with the contextual game and those who learned with MP3 for English vocabulary. From the experimental results, it was found that the MP3 group had better learning achievement than the contextual game group in terms of learning achievements, while their learning attitudes were not significantly different. The findings imply that the media design principles and language learning theories need to be taken into account for developing effective contextual games.起始頁-結束頁：37-51資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20141006040034篇名：運用電子書學習系統於問題導向學習在護理實習課程之探討並列篇名：Application of Problem-Based Learning with E-Book Learning System in Nursing Practice Course作者：黃淑賢(Shu-Hsien Huang);吳婷婷(Ting-Ting Wu);黃悅民(Yueh-Min Huang)關鍵字：公共衛生護理實習課程;問題導向學習;家庭訪視;電子書;public health nursing practice course;problem-based learning;home visit;E-book期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：行動科技的進步，不僅成為生活中不可或缺的部分，也在教學上占有一席之地。在醫療、護理及衛生教育等教學領域，也產生許多對教學有效益的研究議題。由於問題導向學習（problem-based learning, PBL）是以學習者為中心的教學方法，且最早也被運用於醫學教學方面。有鑑於此，在本研究中運用PBL教學策略之電子書學習系統於公共衛生護理實習課程中，藉由家庭訪視前置作業的個案方析，運用PBL教學問答之策略，討論與彙整該個案之家庭訪視資料，希望藉由導入此新穎的教學方式，能有效提升護校生在公共衛生護理實習課程的學習成效，也能藉由詳盡的實習課程資料分析，在實際個案家庭訪視時發揮最大的效用。英文摘要：Development of learning science is assisted by technologies. Technology is crucial that the nowadays people need to use in their life. Compact and slim of learning device with advantages, like is PDA, Tablet PC, E-book... et al., has become mainstream of learning instruction. In addition, medicine, nursing, public health and others subject, a lot of related issues has been carried out in recent years. Problem-based learning (PBL) is not only a learner-centered instruction, but also the earliest applies to medicine education. For this reason, in this study apply PBL strategy into the E-book learning system for public health nursing practice course. In the learning process, learners need to organize and prepare the health knowledge before home visit. Home visit data have been collected and arrange through case study and PBL Q/A. Based on those data, this study not only provide learning achievement of public health nursing practicum, but also guidance related public health knowledge (e.g. Information about Colorectal cancer) to each participant before home visits.起始頁-結束頁：53-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20141006040045篇名：探索數位遊戲類型與學習風格之關係：以感官－直覺風格為例並列篇名：Exploring the Relation between Digital Game Styles and Learning Style: Focus on Sensing-intuitive Dimension作者：葉慶鴻(Ching-Hung Yeh);洪秀燕(Hsiu-Yen Hung);朱柏穎(Po-Ying Chu)關鍵字：感官—直覺;數位遊戲;學習風格;sensing-intuition;digital game;learning styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：由於資訊科技及網路技術的發展，現在的學生使用電子產品，如電腦與智慧型手機，從事於學業、工作、休閒與社交，已成為生活中的主要環節。藉由傳統的紙本教材與課堂授課來激勵學生學習已難有成效。數位遊戲豐富的互動效果，在數位學習領域中，已成為增進學習效果的重要元素，這也是數位遊戲在教學過程中逐漸占有一席之地的原因。學習風格除認知外，更包括情緒與心理層面的風格，其與數位遊戲的關聯仍較少被觸及。本研究以52位大學生為研究對象，採用益智型的數位遊戲，進行為期16週的測試觀察，主要著重於感官－直覺之風格構面，探討數位遊戲類型與學習風格的關聯。由於挑選的數位遊戲，分別具有記憶與思考反應的特性，因此，藉由數位遊戲的體驗，可降低學習者對仰賴其相對弱傾向的感官－直覺學習風格課程的排斥。由研究的實驗數據與問卷顯示，藉由接觸特定類型的數位遊戲，可有效提升學習者在感官型／直覺型相對弱勢面的學習能力；另外，選擇適當的數位遊戲與管理，對激發學生的學習興趣，更具潛移默化的效果。英文摘要：Due to the development of information technology and network technology, the students now have grown up using electronic products such as computers and smart phones, engaged in studies, work, entertainment, and social networking has become a major part of life. Motivating them with traditional textbooks and classroom instruction becomes more difficult. Because the diverse interactions of digital games, it in the field of game based learning has become more and more considered to have an important role in enhancing the learning effects. Learning style is not only cognitive, but also including the emotional and psychological aspects, and its association with digital games are still less to be studied. In this paper, we conducted a study among 52 university students; they use digital puzzle-type games, in a period of 16 weeks, mainly focused on the sensing-intuitive dimension to explore the relation between digital games and learning styles. Since the selection of digital games, with characteristics of memory or thinking reactions individually, it is expected that by the digital gaming experience, learners can reduce their courses exclusion of relatively weak tendency on sensing-intuitive learning style. From the empirical evidence and the questionnaire to support that using different types of digital games, which can effectively enhance the weaker learning ability in sensing-intuitive learning style; also, selecting the appropriate digital games and management have more subtle effect to stimulate students' interest in learning.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140706030016篇名：國民中學學生接受不同電腦模擬融入論證式探究的教學模式之學習成效探討──以遺傳單元為例並列篇名：The Effect of Different Models of Integrating Computer Simulation in Argument-based Inquiry on Student Science Learning-Learning Genetics as an Example作者：鍾昌宏(Chang-Hung Chung);王國華(Kuo-Hua Wang)關鍵字：探究;電腦模擬;論證;學習環境;遺傳;inquiry;computer simulation;argumentation;learning environment;genetics期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究比較不同電腦模擬融入論證式探究教學模式，對於178名七年級學生的學習環境感受與遺傳單元概念學習之影響。對照組採傳統講述教學（T組），實驗組共有三組，皆實施資訊融入論證式探究教學，且依不同電腦模擬融入教學的模式分為：教師展示Power Point（PA組）、教師展示模擬軟體（TA組）與學生操作模擬軟體（SA組）。結果顯示，採用資訊融入論證式教學的PA、TA及SA組學生對學習環境的感受都顯著優於對照組；採用電腦模擬融入論證式探究教學的TA與SA組學生，其遺傳概念的認知理解顯著提升，且優於未使用電腦模擬軟體的T與PA組；另外，比較不同學業成就學生的學習狀況，高學業成就學生在四種教學模式皆有良好的表現，中、低學業成就學生在電腦模擬融入論證式探究教學的認知概念理解顯著高於傳統講述。英文摘要：The aim of study is to compare the effect of different models of integrating computer simulation in Argumentation-Based Inquiry on student science learning. The subjects consist of 178 seventh grade students assigned into four groups including traditional lecture teaching group (T), integrating Power Point in Argumentation-Based Inquiry teaching group (PA), integrating Teacher's Simulation in Argumentation-Based Inquiry teaching group (TA), and integrating Students' Simulation in Argumentation-Based Inquiry teaching group (SA). The results reveal that students in SA, TA and PA group perceived significantly higher than the traditional group on the learning environment. In addition, students in SA and TA groups performed significant higher than students in PA and T groups on achievement test of genetics. Finally, comparing students at different achievement levels, high achievers had good learning performance in all the teaching models, middle and low achievers only perform better by the teaching models of integrating computer simulation in Argumentation-based inquiry than traditional lecture teaching.起始頁-結束頁：19-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140706030027篇名：應用情境模擬系統於課業輔導志工訓練之研究：以國民小學三年級數學減法為例並列篇名：Using a Simulated Training System for Volunteer Tutors: A Case Study of Subtraction Instruction for Third Graders作者：謝蟬薇(Chan-Wei Hsieh);時文中(Wen-Chung Shih)關鍵字：志工訓練;知識擷取;迷思概念;補救教學;模擬訓練;volunteer training;knowledge acquisition;misconceptions;remedial instruction;simulated training期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，許多課後家教輔導計畫為提升低成就學童的學習成效應運而生。而大學生在擔任課業輔導（後稱課輔）志工的服務過程，也可藉由反思來體驗所學。然而，課輔志工需要相關的教學訓練以具備處理課輔過程中可能發生的狀況。如何在短時間內透過志工行前訓練，提升非專業課輔志工的輔導能力是重要關鍵。行前訓練主要學習以基本流程、常見問題解決方法與判斷數學減法迷思概念。本研究提出互動式情境模擬訓練系統開發方法及製作的訓練環境作為課輔志工行前訓練系統。採個案研究法訪談三位受試者，透過課輔志工為期兩週、每週3小時的學習經驗，對三大學習內容進行互動式操作學習，學習結束時給予成效評量試卷以了解課輔志工行前訓練之成效是否提升。由訪談內容中得知，此互動式情境模擬訓練系統之開發方法能根據專業領域人員彙整的相關知識，進而擷取專業的知識手冊；互動式情境模擬訓練系統開發方法所製作的訓練環境能提升課輔志工行前訓練成效。英文摘要：These days, many after-school tutoring programs have been initiated to promote the learning effect of low-achievement students. Also, college students can experience what they have learnt by serving as voluntary tutors, through reflection in tutoring services. However, voluntary tutors need educational training to be able to handle various situations during the tutoring process. Therefore, how to conduct effective training for voluntary tutors has become a research problem. This study proposed a developing method of the interactive simulated training system and implemented a training environment for the training of volunteer tutors. This study consists of case studies from interviews with 3 subjects. The interview reveals whether the interactive simulated training system can be developed according to the collective knowledge of experts, allowing one to obtain a professional guide. The training environment provided by the interactive simulated training system seeks to strengthen and improve the effectiveness of the volunteers' previous training. The volunteers experienced 2 weeks of interactive learning about the 3 major methods through the tutorial for 3 hours a week, and were evaluated at the end of the program as to whether the interactive learning has improved the effectiveness of the previous training.起始頁-結束頁：41-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140706030038篇名：國民中學自然科個案教師網路探究教學的學習進程並列篇名：An In-service Secondary Science Teacher's Learning Progression of Adapting a Web-based Inquiry Science Environment作者：羅慶璋(Ching-Jang Lo);張欣怡(Hsin-Yi Chang);洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung)關鍵字：科技學科教學知識;網路探究教學;學習進程;technological pedagogical content knowledge;web-based inquiry;learning progression期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的為針對個案教師具備之科技學科教學知識進行編碼，分析出個案教師進行網路探究教學課程過程中的教師學習進程。個案為現職國民中學自然科教師，3年持續投入網路探究單元的教學實務工作，檢核與提高信賴度方面則採長期投入的方式來增加研究之可信度，資料包括3年課程前、後的訪談逐字稿共六份，配合教學觀察之內容分析，進行三角校正。本研究進行「溫度與熱」單元課程教學的內容分析，從學習者、評量、教材、科技優勢及教學活動五類別，發現教師透過網路探究單元的教學實務過程，最初注重評估教材的適合度與學生的學習特性及可能遭遇的困難，到轉化成重視教學評量的部分，透過批改與分析，應用評量結果來改進教學，選擇並強化教材的運用。教師關注學生學習特性的比重，則逐年遞增。英文摘要：In this study we analyzed an in-service teacher's Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) and identified his learning progression as the teacher adapted a web-based inquiry science environment for his teaching. The case provided data including six interviews during three years. We used five categories to code the teacher's TPACK demonstrated during the interviews, including knowledge of learners, assessment, instructional materials, technological affordance, and instructional activities. The results showed that the teacher first paid major attention to materials, then students' learning characteristics and difficulties. Continuing to analyzing assessment and using it to improve teaching, the teacher finally focused on choosing and strengthening instructional materials. The more times he implemented the curriculum, the more he cared about students' learning characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：65-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140706030049篇名：手持載具之英文字版連線遊戲系統設計以增強國民小學英文字彙學習投入與成效之研究並列篇名：Implementation of a Game-Based Learning Environment on Handheld Devices to Facilitate Elementary Students' Engagement and English Vocabulary Learning作者：洪暉鈞(Hui-Chun Hung);楊叔卿(Shelley Shwu-Ching Young)關鍵字：一對一數位學習;行動學習;英文字彙學習;悅趣化數位學習;one-to-one technology-enhanced learning;mobile learning;English vocabulary acquisition;game-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以悅趣化合作競爭式遊戲結合手持載具開發英文字版連線遊戲系統，並融入實際教學情境。以臺灣T國民小學30位學童為實驗對象，實驗組使用本系統結合可攜式載具，對照組使用一般教室上課模式，針對系統介面與系統接受度、學習成效及投入與專注程度進行分析。結果發現學童肯定本遊戲系統介面設計，悅趣化數位學習情境較傳統教室上課方式更有助於學習，且顯著地提升低成就學童之學習成效，而使用英文字版連線遊戲的小組更能主動投入於學習活動，促進更多自發性討論與專注學習。本研究證明結合遊戲以設計小組的異質合作與資源互賴，輔以一對一手持載具帶來的即時互動與平等參與，可增進學習的樂趣與挑戰，使學童專注在學以致用的沉浸經驗，達到寓教於樂的學習新趨勢。英文摘要：Game-based learning has gained much attention in the past years. This study developed a competitive and collaborative English vocabulary acquisition game system, called English World Board Game, which utilized the handheld technology and was applied in educational settings. The purpose of this study was to integrate the English learning theories and portable technology to explore the learning outcome, attitude of the target users after using the game system. One class of 30 students in the 6th grade in the T elementary school of northern Taiwan participated in this study. The experimental group adopted the system with handheld device as an assisted English vocabulary learning tool, while the control group used the conventional approach. Students' learning outcome and attitude in two groups were collected and analyzed. The research findings indicate that students strongly agreed the interface and system implementation of English World Board Game. Adopting the English World Board Game could improve the learning outcome, and it is particularly significantly benefit for lower-achievement learners. Moreover, using English World Board Game had positive enhancements of learning engagement. This study identify the advantages of game and one-to-one technology, such as heterogeneous collaboration, resource interdependence, equal participation and immediate interaction, could increase students' engagement and facilitate effective joyful learning.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201404060200110篇名：品德素養數位敘事之迷宮多路徑設計研究並列篇名：A Study of Labyrinth Multipath Design on Digital Storytelling for Moral Literacy作者：廖冠智(Guan-Ze Liao);吳昕縈(Shing-Ying Wu)關鍵字：品德素養;迷宮多路徑;尋路概念;數位敘事;moral literacy;labyrinth multipath;wayfinding;digital storytelling期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：品德素養是重要的人格養成之一，亦是從小扎根的重要課題。本研究嘗試以多路徑數位敘事的發展概念，透過敘事工作坊的媒材刺激活動，探究迷宮圖解與敘事內容之間的發展方式，不同數位敘事角度對應故事發展脈絡，發展品德素養敘事內容及互動介面設計。研究對象以新北市某國民小學一年級共27名學童，採現場教學方式進行實驗，後以ARCS學習動機探究教學活動表現情形。研究成果得知，故事主軸發展出不同分支的故事結構，學童可從不同分支的故事發展來進行探索及思考，多能喜好迷宮多路徑融入品德素養之數位敘事教材，現場檢測有良好的表現情形外，亦能激發學童對敘事內容發展的好奇，且在ARCS檢測中普遍呈正向反應，期望藉由迷宮多路徑發展品德素養教學的數位敘事，能推廣應用在教育現場及作為學童品德素養的輔助數位教材之設計參考。英文摘要：Moral literacy is important to develop one's personality and also an important issue rooted in childhood. This study attempts to investigate the multipath development via the concept of digital narrative, and adopts a maze of common graphical mode, through the narrative workshops to stimulate the diagrams in order to understand the relationships between the narrative content and maze structures. The study also presents the interface design of labyrinth multipath for the demonstrations of narrative content with moral literacy. The participants of study were 27 first grade students in elementary school of the Xinbei city. The experiment conducted the teaching method to guide the students to discuss through the labyrinth multipath of narrative content, and investigated the ARCS motivation from teaching activity performance situations. Research findings that different branches of the story can help students to explore the predesigned moral qualities, and they like the labyrinth multipath design for presenting the narrative content with moral literacy. The result of experiment presents that testing situations have not only good performance, it can also enhance the students' willing to explore the narrative content. The ARCS investigations also present the positive reaction in general. The study hope that the design methods of labyrinth multipath develop the variety of narrative content with moral literacy, and promote the application in the education field.起始頁-結束頁：25-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201404060200201篇名：從政黨情感溫度計解析台灣民眾的政治極化並列篇名：Political Polarization in Taiwan: An Analysis on Mass Feeling Thermometer toward Political Parties作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao)關鍵字：政治極化;情感溫度計;政黨競爭;political polarization;feeling thermometer;party competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來台灣藍綠對立衝突不斷，是否意味台灣的政治競爭已出現兩極化的現象？本文將從民眾的政治態度出發，藉由1996至2012年五次總統選舉選後的民意調查資料，建構台灣民眾政治極化的測量方式，同時檢視政治極化的程度與趨勢。研究發現，即便兩岸統獨議題是台灣最主要的政治分歧，但台灣民眾的政治極化並非是狹義的在統獨立場上呈現兩極分布，而是廣義的在藍綠黨性之間存在相互敵視與對立。這種極化態勢自2000年首次政黨輪替後開始升高，於民進黨執政期間最為嚴峻，2008年二次政黨輪替後則出現緩和的趨勢。至於在形塑民眾政治極化的原因上，民眾的黨性及其政治涉入程度具顯著的影響力，當民眾的黨性愈強、政治涉入的程度愈高，其藍綠對立的政治極化態勢愈明顯。此外，民眾的年齡愈長、教育程度愈低，也因其政治態度愈穩固，或較傾向情緒性的政治思考，以致有顯著偏高的政治極化結果。至於選舉輸家是否比選舉贏家有更強烈的藍綠對立極化心理，則有待後續藉由更長期的民意調查資料進行檢證。本文的研究發現也意味著，要緩和台灣藍綠對立的政治極化，並非政治菁英或民眾調整其議題立場，而是政黨、政治人物或媒體應避免以煽動或渲染方式動員群眾，民眾更應提高公民素養，以理性取代激情來進行政治思考。英文摘要：Political conflicts between the pan-blue camp and the pan-green camp have been increasingly severe since the 1990's. Whether Taiwanese politics has become more polarized hence is an important issue on research agenda. This study analyzes survey data collected after 1996-2012 presidential elections, exploring the degree of political polarization and the factors affecting political polarization in Taiwan. It is found that political polarization appeared in Taiwan since 2000 and then continuously increased until 2008. The polarization was the product of the clash of partisanship, instead of mass attitude of ”U shaped distribution” on unification-independence issues. Regarding the causes of political polarization, people's partisanship and political involvement are main factors. People who have strong partisanship and high level of political involvement are more likely to become political polarized. In addition, the elder and the less educated people are also more possible to become polarized. As to the effect of election results on political polarization, longitudinal survey data are needed to do further analysis. In conclusion, the author suggests that efforts of political elites and the citizens to adjust their issue positions might not diminish political polarization. For a better solution, party elites and mass media in Taiwan should adopt rational communication instead of emotional mobilization.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.02.01-422篇名：利已或利他：民眾於2012年總統選舉中重分配議題的立場並列篇名：Egoism or Altruism: Citizens' Attitude toward Redistribution in the 2012 Presidential Election作者：張傳賢(Alex C. H. Chang)關鍵字：重分配;貧富不均;理性選擇;政黨認同;公共財供給;redistribution;income inequality;rational choice;party identification;public goods provision期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：有別於以往選舉中以族群、統獨及經濟發展為選舉競爭的主軸，在2012年總統選舉中，社會正義與貧富不均的議題成為藍綠的主要政見與政策攻防的焦點。本文同時從政治經濟學理論與政黨功能的角度出發，解讀民眾在縮小貧富差距立場上的差異。利用TEDS2012的資料，我們發現人們對於家庭與總體經濟的展望、公共財提供意願與政黨認同的方向與強度，對於其重分配的立場都有顯著的影響。本文進一步利用結構方程式模型發現，兩岸交流雖然不致於直接影響人們在縮小貧富差距的立場，但是藉由影響民眾對於未來經濟狀況的展望，也使其間接左右了民眾在重分配議題上的立場。英文摘要：Unlike conventional presidential elections in which ethnic identity, unification and independence, and economic development were the core issues of political competitions, in the 2012 presidential election, the issue of social justice and redistribution firstly was included in the candidates' platforms. This article investigates the question of redistribution from the theoretical perspectives and political competition, and explains the variation in the voters' opinions on this issue. By incorporating the TEDS 2012 data with structural equation modeling, we find that the theories of classical political economy, the supply theory of public goods, and party identity all provide explanations for this issue. In addition, we also find that although the cross-strait economic and trade exchange does not directly influence people's opinions toward redistribution, nevertheless, it impacts their attitudes toward their future household income, and indirectly affects their standpoints on the redistributive issues.起始頁-結束頁：43-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.02.43-803篇名：男女有別？社會資本使用於政治場域的類型初探並列篇名：Gender Difference? A Preliminary Study of the Typology of Utilization of Social Capital in Politics作者：林珮婷(Pei-Ting Lin)關鍵字：社會資本;社團參與;性別分工;政治參與;公民參與;social capital;community participation;gender division;political engagement;civic engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：社會資本被認為有利於民主運作，就個體層次來說，個人的政治興趣、對政治事務的瞭解、政治參與的技能，都可在社團參與過程中培養。但由性別角度觀之，社會資本是否有助女性提升政治意識和參與，學界尚未有共識。本研究試圖透過觀察兩性社團參與，檢視台灣社會資本性別化的現象，及社團參與和政治參與之間的關係。本研究首先由1990至2012年男女社團參與趨勢，發現性別差距長期存在，但日益縮減。再由2012單年度資料檢視兩性社團參與和廣義／狹義政治參與間的關係，研究結果顯示無論男女，參與社團者的廣義和狹義政治參與程度明顯較高。本研究進一步試著建構社會資本使用於政治場域的類型，依據社會位置（高／低）與主要生活圈（公／私領域），將民眾分為四類，研究發現：個人藉由社團參與累積社會資本有助於提升各類民眾的公民參與；使用於傳統政治場域的情形雖然看似男女有別，社團參與僅有助於提升以男性為主的兩類民眾（公／高；公／低）的傳統政治參與程度，但細究四類民眾內部的參與性別差異，發現除了公／高者之外，此分類確實可解釋社會資本與廣義／狹義政治參與的關係，相同類型的男女有著對應其所屬類型相似的參與情形。換言之，性別並非解釋社會資本使用差異的主要因素。英文摘要：Most of the studies indicate that one of the advantages for social capital is it can stimulate democratic development. At the individual level, one's political interest, political knowledge and citizen skill can be brought up through participating in the communities. However, there is no consensus on whether women use their social capital in the same way as men. This study thus attempts to focus on the relationship between community participation and political engagement for the gendering social capital in Taiwan. With the empirical data analysis used in this study, we have two findings as the follows. First, regardless of the gender, people who involve in a community will engage more positively in civic and traditional political activities. Secondly, by classifying the observations according to the social status (high/ low) and their main living area (public/private sphere), we found that people, except those who have high social status and live in the public sphere, will have the same pattern of spending social capital in political engagement when they possess the same social status and have the same main living area. In other words, gender is not the main explanation of the difference in using social capital within the traditional political engagement.起始頁-結束頁：81-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.02.81-1124篇名：指數或量表？以TEDS的政治知識測量為例並列篇名：An Index or a Scale? Measuring Political Knowledge in TEDS作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);林美榕(Mei-Rong Lin)關鍵字：政治知識;測量;項目反應理論;指數;Guttman量表;political knowledge;measurement;item response theory;index;Guttman scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：公民的政治知識被認為是探討民主政治品質的重要面向，當公民對政治事務具備基本認識，將有助於民主政治的發展。雖然已有不少學者從理論觀點探索政治知識的來源或解釋因素，在經驗層次也發展出若干測量政治知識的方式，但迄今仍缺乏強健的證據證明其測量方式的有效性。換言之，從研究方法觀點析論政治知識測量之信效度的研究仍不多見，更遑論採取複合性測量方式所設計的題目，其難易度是否足以區辨不同政治知識水準的民眾？及該題組究竟是屬於指數或量表的型態？本研究以2012年TEDS的政治知識題組為例進行效度分析，並檢證這些題目是否符合Guttman量表結構。本研究的發現如下：首先，這七個題目涵蓋了政治知識的不同面向，但有關政治人物的測量偏多。其次，影響公民之政治知識高低的個人背景變數與過去研究幾乎一致，顯示測量效度不錯。第三，題目的難易度雖符合應介於0.1和0.9之間的經驗法則，但題目的難易區隔仍有改善空間。第四，此一題組也符合Guttman量表的邏輯結構，具有累加性質。最後，從量表建構的效度與精簡性觀點，此一測量題組仍有精簡空間，未來可設計一些有關政府本質、施政作為或政治環境的題目，從中選擇難易度適中的題目納入量表組合，以提高量表的鑑別力。英文摘要：Citizens' political knowledge has always been believed as an important dimension of the quality of democracy. A citizenry that possesses basic knowledge of political affairs is helpful for the development of democracy. Although many political scientists have theoretically explored the origins and determinants of political knowledge, as well as empirically developed a number of measurement techniques to gauge the level of citizens’ political knowledge and in turn analyze its relationship with other concepts, at present the evidence for the effectiveness of these techniques is still lacking. That is, from a methodological perspective, discussion about the reliability and validity of political knowledge measures is rare, let alone an analysis of whether the degree of difficulty of questionnaire items that were created by using a composite measurement method is sufficient in distinguishing citizens with different levels of political knowledge. In fact, whether in the end these composite measurement items should be considered as an index or a scale currently draws little scholarly interest. The study's objective is to examine the validity of political knowledge items found in the 2012 TEDS, and to verify whether or not the questions, in addition of possessing the form of an index, also fit the special structure of a Guttman scale. The study has obtained the following research findings. First, TEDS has seven questions that cover different aspects of political knowledge, but there seems to be too many measures focusing on political figures. Second, level of political knowledge is found to have a statistically significant and consistent relationship with individual background variables which founded in past research, thus indicating that the measurement validity is satisfactory. Third, although the seven questions’ degrees of difficulty are within the range (between 0.1 and 0.9) set by convention, there remains room for improvement in the difficulty levels between questions. Fourth, the survey questionnaire items measuring political knowledge fit the logical structure of a Guttman scale, and are cumulative in nature. Last, from standpoint of scale construction, items measuring political knowledge can be simplified further, although future surveys may also consider designing - and incorporating - questions of appropriate difficulty level that are related to the role of government, policy accomplishments, or political environment, thereby increasing the item discrimination power of the political knowledge scale.起始頁-結束頁：113-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.02.113-1455篇名：以電訪樣本資料庫作為解決原住民調查研究難題之可行性的再討論並列篇名：Using Telephone Survey Sample Data as a Feasible Resolution to the Difficulty of Indigenous Survey作者：包正豪(Cheng-Hao Pao);周應龍(Ying-Lung Chou)關鍵字：民意調查;雙重抽樣;電話訪問;原住民;poll;double sampling;telephone interview;indigenous people期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：國內以原住民為對象之調查研究較為缺乏，且普遍為附屬於全國抽樣當中的小樣本分析，其主因在於台灣原住民人口數量較少，約僅占全國總人口數的2%，輔以其地理分布相當不均勻，以及相當數量的原住民因為生計因素而有工作／居住地與戶籍所在地不同的情形，致使傳統調查方式，無論面訪或電訪，都有難以解決的抽樣困難。然而近年來，國內民意調查日益普遍，學術與民間調查機構已經累積數量極為龐大的電話調查成功樣本，其中包含大量的漢人樣本與一定比例的原住民樣本。若能取得這些「原本不是以原住民為母體，卻包含原住民的成功樣本」，將混雜埋藏於大量「無用」資料當中的「有價值資料」給挖掘出來，應能直接發掘篩選出所需要的原住民樣本，節約成本而解決前述抽樣困難。有鑑於此，研究團隊與全國公信力民意調查股份有限公司合作，合併2007年迄今（2013年3月）該公司所執行抽樣範圍為全國的原住民電話訪問成功樣本成為原住民電話資料庫，以為調查之用。初步研究結果顯示，使用雙重抽樣方法所整併的電訪樣本資料庫進行電話調查，所獲得之成功樣本特徵與官方人口統計中的原住民母體特徵近似。同時，納入跨年度的原住民電話資料，能夠更有效地提升前述原住民電話資料庫的蒐集範圍，並降低樣本取得成本。英文摘要：There is a lack of indigenous object research inside the nation, and the research is usually attached to national sample as one of the small sample analysis. The main reason is that with only about 2% of the country's total population, indigenous population is rather few in Taiwan. Besides, uneven geographic distribution and the factor that a considerable number of workplace/residence and domicile difference due to livelihood are other reasons which cause difficulty to traditional method of investigation. Both face-to-face interview or telephone interview have handicap on sampling. However, public opinion polls had become more universal in recent years. Academic and private investigation agency all has accumulated a large number of successful phone survey samples, which contained numerous Han samples and certain proportion of indigenous samples. If there is a possibility to get these samples which were ”not originally using indigenous population as statistic population, but contain successful indigenous samples,” and apply data mining technology to dig the ”valuable mineral” out from a large amount of ”useless” information, then it will be probable to directly filter out the indigenous samples that were needed, and solve the problems mentioned above in the context of saving cost. In this view, the research team and Taiwan Real Survey Co. had cooperated and merged the successful indigenous population phone interview samples, which are from national samplings that were executed by the company since 2007 so far (March 2013), as indigenous telephone database. Preliminary research result shows, by using telephone interview sample database that was consolidated by data mining and double sampling, the characteristics of successful samples which got from the telephone interview are similar to the indigenous statistic population in the official population statistics. Other than that, including multi-year indigenous population phone data could enhance the collection range of the indigenous telephone database, and reduces the cost of sample acquisition.起始頁-結束頁：147-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.02.147-1756篇名：「92共識」對2012年台灣總統大選的議題效果：「傾向分數配對法」的應用與實證估算並列篇名：The Issue Effect of the ”92 Consensus” on 2012 Taiwan Presidential Election: An Application and Empirical Assessment of Propensity Score Matching作者：蒙志成(Chih-Cheng Meng)關鍵字：92共識;2012總統選舉;議題投票;傾向分數配對;兩岸關係;92 consensus;2012 Taiwan presidential election;issue voting;propensity score matching;cross-strait relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：2012年總統大選後，許多輿論均評論此次的大選結果與「92共識」此一有關兩岸關係的議題，有莫大關係。本文旨在探究92共識對2012選民投票抉擇的影響程度。本文重新疏理了「議題投票」理論的核心定義、適用範圍與分析方法，以92共識的議題效果為研究焦點，依其議題性質假定了「議題內生於政黨認同」的關係，且準於「由因視果」的分析途徑，根據「2012台灣選舉與民主化調查」的電訪（TEDS2012-T）與面訪（TEDS2012）資料，運用「傾向分數配對法」，來估算92共識對台灣選民投票抉擇的影響。本文研究發現：在競選期間，92共識對馬吳配的支持度約有2成的影響，對蔡蘇配約有1.3成；至選後，92共識對馬吳配的議題效果大幅降至約1成的影響，對蔡蘇配則略降為1.2成。這項控制「內在選因」後的實證發現，有效且精確地估算出2012競選期間，92共識對選民投票行為的議題影響效果。此外，透過不同時間點的估算，資料亦證明了，92共識的確在競選期間成功地被轉化為藍綠選民所注意的顯著性議題，對選舉結果具有一定程度的影響。英文摘要：News and many public comments indicate that the ”92 consensus” was the crucial issue to affect the result of Taiwan 2012 presidential election. This paper aims to study the effect of the 92 consensus on voters' choices in 2012. This paper reviews the core assumptions, boundary of application and analytical methods of the ”issue voting” theory. Moreover, it focus on studying the impacts of the 92 consensus that are presumed to be endogenously correlated with party identification. Based on the approach of ”studying the effects of a cause”, as well as using the ”2012 Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study” dataset (TEDS2012-T and TEDS2012), this paper applies ”propensity score matching” (PSM) method to investigate the issue effect of the ”92 consensus” on voting choices during 2012 election. The results from the data analysis demonstrate that positions supportive of the ”92 consensus” account for about twenty percent of supporting rates to pro-Ma voters in the period of the electoral campaign; meanwhile, positions oppositional to the ”92 consensus” would contribute about thirteen percent of supporting rates for pro-Tsai voters. After the election the influential probability of the ”92 consensus” was dramatically downsized to ten percent of supporting rates to pro-Ma voters; however, the percentage for pro-Tsai voters was slightly reduced to twelve percent. These findings provide more valid and credible estimates toward the influential probability of the ”92 consensus” issue during the 2012 elections. Moreover, the statistical findings over various time-points also verify the successful transformation of the ”92 consensus” to be identified as a salient issue across pro-Ma and pro-Tsai voters. It indeed achieved substantial influences toward the processes and result of 2012 presidential election.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.01.01-457篇名：總統大選電視辯論對於首投族之政治傳播效果：以2012年台灣總統選舉為例並列篇名：The Political-Communication Effects of Televised Presidential Debates on First-Time Voters: The Example of 2012 Taiwan President Election作者：林正士(Cheng-Shih Lin);周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou)關鍵字：電視辯論;政治傳播;選舉參與;首投族;televised debates;political communications;election participations;first-time voters期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在探討電視公民辯論會在選舉的情境中，對於選民造成的政治傳播效果。電視辯論在台灣仍屬新興的政治傳播工具，相關的研究仍屬少見，其是否會增加選民投票意願以及其他形式的政治參與為本文最主要的研究問題，且相較於僅聚焦於不同媒介使用對選舉參與影響的過去研究，本文還進一步討論閱聽人對電視辯論效果的評價和主辦電視辯論媒體的認同。具體而言，本文針對首投族，以實驗法就曾經觀看2012年總統大選電視辯論者與未曾觀看者，比較所造成的政治傳播效果。研究結果發現：在政治效果上，電視辯論可以提高選民的議題性選舉知識，且觀看者比未觀看者，有較高的比率會改變投票的支持意向；在媒體評估效果方面，有觀看電視辯論的選民，會產生較佳的媒體效果評價、對於主辦辯論的媒體也有較高的認同；最後，選民長期的政治興趣、政治參與度、媒體依賴程度、電視使用習慣，皆會干擾電視辯論對選民的政治傳播效果。研究結果肯定電視辯論在政治選舉所扮演的正面角色，並提供相關的理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the political-communication effects of televised debates on voters in election contexts. In Taiwan, televised debates are still an emerging political-communication tool and an underresearched topic. The major research question in this paper is does televised debates increases voters' turnout intentions and other forms of political participations. Additionally, compared with previous studies which only focused on the impact of the use of different media on election participations, the current papers further discuss the audience's effectiveness evaluations on televised debates and identification with the medium through which the debates are held. Specifically, this paper focuses on first-time voters and conducts an experiment to compare the political-communication effects between voters who watched televised debates of the 2012 presidential election and voters who did not. Results show that watching televised debates can increase voters' issue-related election knowledge. Furthermore, there is a higher possibility for voters who watched televised debates to change their voting target. For medium-evaluation effects, voters who watched debates generate more favorable impact on medium-effectiveness evaluations and medium identification. Finally, voters' long-term political interests, political participation, medium dependence, and TV usage habits moderate the political-communication effects of televised debates. The research findings affirm the positive role of televised debates in political elections and provide related theoretical and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：47-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.01.47-878篇名：政治知識的測量並列篇名：The Measurement of Political Knowledge作者：黃秀端(Shiow-Duan Hawang);徐永明(Yuan-Ming Hsu);林瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Lin)關鍵字：政治知識;開放式問卷;封閉式問卷;實驗設計;political knowledge;open-ended question;closed-ended question;experimental design期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要針對政治知識的測量方式及其測量結果進行分析討論，比較不同題型的測量方式是否影響受訪者答題時的行為，進而影響到該概念測量的信度與效度。本文分析的資料來源包括台灣選舉與民主化調查小組針對2012年總統與立委選舉進行的面訪調查資料（TEDS2012），以及作者以實驗設計方式針對東吳大學學生為實驗對象所獲致的資料進行分析。本文根據TEDS2012的資料分析，初步發現開放題設計的政治知識對選舉參與的影響力，比選擇題設計題型來得佳，再根據實驗設計所獲致的資料進一步分析，發現選擇題型提供受訪者「猜猜看」的機會，不僅提高回答率，也的確增加受訪者政治知識的分數，是以不同方式的測量，確實影響政治知識測量的效度與信度問題，更會影響政治知識在解釋其他政治行為與認知能力的解釋力。然而，受訪者政治知識增長的原因，是內在的知識推動，還是外在的猜題空間增加，則有待未來適合的資料做進一步探討。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine the measurement of political knowledge and its consequences via different formats of question designs. Would using different formats of questions, elicit different response behaviours from the respondents? We argue that different types of questions affect the reliability and validity of the concept. The data used in this paper was collected by the Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS) which was designed to study electoral behaviour in the 2012 presidential and legislative election. Another data was collected by an experimental design survey carried out on students of Soochow University. Based on the preliminary analysis from the TEDS data, open-ended formats of political knowledge exert more influence in explaining electoral participation than closed-ended. The results from the experimental design survey further shows that closed-ended questions provide the respondents with opportunity to ”guess” the answers, thus respondents turn out to have a higher score of political knowledge. This shows that different formats of questions truly affect the validity and reliability of the concept of political knowledge. This issue also plays a role in showing how political knowledge serves as an independent variable in explaining political attitudes and behaviour. Whether a higher score is due to the respondents' ”true” knowledge or the chance to guess, however, needs further data to explore in the near future.起始頁-結束頁：89-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.01.89-1269篇名：小泉執政時期眾參兩院選舉之定群追蹤分析：固定與隨機效果並用法之應用並列篇名：A Panel Study for Japanese Bicameral System under Koizumi's Governance: An Application of Hybrid Method of Fixed and Random Effect Models作者：郭銘峰(Ming-Feng Kuo);王鼎銘(Ding-Ming Wang)關鍵字：日本國會選舉;兩院制;選舉穩定與變遷;定群追蹤資料;固定與隨機效果並用法;Japanese Diet Elections;bicameral system;electoral stability and change;panel data;hybrid method of fixed and random effect models期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：當代民主國家的立法機構組成與選舉制度設計，為推行民主政治的兩大核心要素，它們不僅攸關社會民意代表性、立法政策制定，更牽動各股政治勢力的消長。饒富旨趣的是，各民主國家基於不同歷史、政治、與社會脈絡的考量，會有不同形式的設計組合，這些迥異的制度結構，也直接牽動各國民主政治的成效。本文以日本國會選舉為例，觀察該國在兩院制及其選制下的政治效應，特別是小泉執政時期2003年、2004年眾參院選舉的投票動態變化。透由日本選舉研究（JES）定群追蹤資料的輔助，本文檢視兩院制衡設計下相關因素（如施政課責）對投票決策的影響；此外，小泉執政時期其領導魅力備受矚目，本文也探討其對選票支持的影響。固定與隨機效果並用法的分析結果顯示：日本選民在眾參兩院確實產生相當程度的選票流動現象，並賦予在野黨派若干生存與制衡課責空間，符合制度設計預期；惟小泉獨特的領導魅力，也在其執政時期內對支持者轉投其他在野黨派產生若干壓抑效果，此凸顯小泉領導魅力的實質作用。此外，分析結果亦顯示在野黨派政黨認同的影響不僅因選民個體間的差異而異，也因個體政黨認同意識本身跨時序的變化而不同，這也反映出日本政黨政治的發展在這兩屆選舉中，在野勢力已漸成氣候。英文摘要：The framework of legislative institution and electoral systems have played a significant role in modern democracies. Every Countries based on the differents of historical, political, and social backgrounds, that adopted different legislative and electoral systems that usually result in particular political consequences. For examples, the representation of public opinions, the policy-making process, the competition between different political camps, and most importantly the formation of party systems. This study, by applying Japan as an example, tries to analyze the political and electoral influences made by its legislative framework and electoral system; especially the 2003 and 2004 Japanese Diet Elections under Junichiro Koizumi's governance. The importance of Japanese Diet relies not simply on the bicameral system regulated by its post-war Constitution, but also the various electoral systems for House of Councilors and House of Representatives. Because of the unique institutional establishment, the check and balance between two Houses has increased and become an importance issue in Japanese politics. With the assistance of individual panel data from Japanese Election Study (JES), and take advantage of hybrid method of fixed and random effect model, we observe this important institutional conflict empirically and effectively during the period of Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi. Although the results reveal the substantial vote-flows between the ruling and the opposition parties in the House of Representatives and Councilors elections, which support the institution effect of check and balance, we also find that Koisumi charisma makes a considerable influence to offset the vote-flows from the ruling party to the opposition. In addition, we also find the factor of party identification influence the voters' decisions not only exist between subjects, but also within subjects over time; especially support toward the main opposition party DPJ. Most importantly, the result also reveals that the opposite party may become full-fledged during these elections.起始頁-結束頁：127-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2014.21.01.127-16701篇名：溺愛教養之親子歸因探究並列篇名：Attributions to Permissive Parenting: Parents' vs. Children's Perceptions作者：李容蓉(Jung-Jung Lee);陳富美(Fu-Mei Chen)關鍵字：溺愛教養;親子關係;歸因;學齡兒童;attributions;parent-child relationship;permissive parenting;school-aged children期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：40期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究檢視親子雙方對於溺愛教養的歸因，並藉由分析其與親子關係的關聯性，解析歸因之意涵。研究分為情境訪談與問卷調查兩個部分。情境訪談之對象為9對國小高年級學童及其母親；問卷調查則有258對親子，共計516位。依據情境訪談及文獻編製出溺愛教養歸因題項，再進行因素分析。結果發現，親方只有一個歸因因素，命名為「未盡職責」，而子方則有「教養不力」及「情感涉入」兩個歸因因素。母親的未盡職責歸因與親子關係呈顯著負相關；在子方的部分，教養不力歸因與親子關係同樣呈現顯著負相關，情感涉入歸因與親子關係的關聯則未達顯著水準。從為人母親的角度來看，溺愛教養是屬於負面的教養狀態，無論施行原因為何，皆有未盡教養之責的意涵；而子女則除了此種歸因外，多了情感解讀的空間。英文摘要：This study examined mothers' and children's attributions to permissive parenting practices, and the relations between attributions and parent-child relationship. There were two parts in this study: Scenario interview and questionnaires method. Nine pairs of mothers and their 5th or 6th grade children were interviewed. Questionnaires were completed by 258 pairs of mothers and children. Factor analyses identified one factor ”Irresponsibility” for mothers, and two factors ”Incapable of parenting” and ”Involving with love” for children. Mother's ”Irresponsibility” attributional tendency was negatively correlated with parent-child relationship. Children's ”Incapable of parenting” attributional tendency was also negatively correlated with parent-child relationship. However, children's ”Involving with love” attributional tendency was not correlated with parent-child relationship significantly. In sum, mothers view permissive parenting as negative. No matter the reason of the practices, parents who practice permissive parenting are not responsible. However, children can see the ”love” components, other than irresponsibility in their parents' permissive parenting.起始頁-結束頁：157-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：大學校園自殺防治工作之挑戰：以諮商中心的經驗為本並列篇名：Challenges to Suicide Prevention and Intervention: From the Perspectives of College Counseling Centers作者：賴念華(Nien-Hwa Lai);鄭鈴諭(Lin-Yu Cheng);許維素(Wei-Su Hsu);王雨薇(Yu-Wei Wang)關鍵字：大學諮商中心;自殺;危機介入;挑戰;challenge;college counseling center;crisis intervention;suicide期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探究國內大學校園自殺防治工作，從諮商中心的視角來檢視所面臨之挑戰。本研究邀請十三位服務於大學諮商中心之現職專業助人工作者，透過半結構式訪談蒐集研究資料，並參酌紮根理論取向進行質性分析；分析步驟主要採開放性編碼、主軸編碼及選擇編碼的程序，進行資料的層次處理及分析，然後提取核心主題作為研究結果。研究結果發現，國內大學諮商中心在處理校園自殺危機案例時所面臨之挑戰，可歸結成五大項目：（一）「助人者缺乏專業培訓、需直接進入現場處遇」的挑戰；（二）「諮商中心多元預防宣導，自殺者仍難以辨識」的挑戰；（三）「自殺預防及處遇時，跨單位系統形成合作共識」的挑戰；（四）「危機應變機制中，校園執行溝通與實踐歷程」的挑戰；以及（五）「三級預防中後續處遇之相關知能」的挑戰。最後，研究者將結果進一步歸納成助人者個人專業、諮商中心倡議、校園整合的三個層面，進行討論並提出建議。英文摘要：The present study aimed to investigate the challenges encountered in suicide prevention and intervention programs by examining the perspectives of professional counselors in different college counseling centers. To collect data, semi-structured interviews were conducted with thirteen professionals. Data were analyzed based on grounded theory and processed by the sequential extractions of open coding, axial coding and selective coding, which produced five major challenges. First, the challenge came from a lack of sufficient professional training and practical experience. Second, counseling centers faced the challenge to identify suicidal students, in spite of the centers' diverse promotional activities for crisis prevention. Third, there was the challenge of establishing consensual understanding in school-based cross-divisional collaboration on suicide prevention and intervention. Fourth, the challenge came from the communication and actual operation of a school-based crisis-responding procedure. Lastly, the challenge lied in the promotion of concepts and practice about postvention. Based on the findings, the researchers offered suggestions on three major areas to counteract: training for helping professionals, promotions by counseling centers, and integration of on-campus collaboration.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會3篇名：我你他的轉變：以字詞分析探討大學生心理位移書寫文本之位格特性並列篇名：From I to You to He/She: Exploring Psychological Properties of the Psychological Displacement Paradigm Diary-Writing with Word-Frequency Analysis作者：黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang);張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang);程威銓(Wei-Chuan Chen);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：文本分析;心理位移日記書寫法;心理距離;字詞分析;linguistic analysis;LIWC psychological displacement paradigm in diary-writing;psychological distance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：金樹人（2005，2010）從東方禪學的視角與西方心理治療的觀點提出「心理位移日記書寫法」，目前已有質性及量化的實徵研究支持其對短期的負向情緒調節及長期的正向心理適應之提升具有相當良好的效果。過去雖有質性研究就書寫文本檢證其位格特性，但相對而言，質性研究較難針對特定的理論與假設提出具有信效度的穩定指標。本研究採取量化取向，以字詞分析軟體LIWC2007（Pennebaker, Booth; & Francis;2007）針對心理位移日記書寫法中的三種書寫位格（我位格、你位格及他位格）進行文本分析。本研究結果大致支持金樹人（2005，2010）所主張的心理位移觀點。文末針對心理位移日記書寫之理論及其應用進行討論。英文摘要：In his effort to improve the traditional expressive writing method, Jin (2005, 2010) developed the Psychological Displacement Paradigm of Diary-writing (PDPD) that is based on the wisdom of Zen and Buddhism, and integrated with Western psychotherapy theory. Existing research has supported PDPD's short term effect of reducing negative emotions and long term effect of promoting psychological wellbeing. Although there have been some qualitative studies that examine the psychological properties corresponding to each writing phases in great detail, reliable quantitative indices have not been proposed. The purpose of this study is to explore the psychological properties of PDPD using Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC2007; Pennebaker, Booth, & Francis, 2007) analysis, which uses word usage to index psychological processes. With a recently developed Chinese LIWC dictionary, the current study examined the linguistic and psychological characteristics of the three phases in PDPD. The results mostly supported Jin's (2005, 2010) arguments. Related mechanisms and applications were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：35-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：冒險治療培訓工作坊對高中職輔導教師自我覺察之影響－以「99年度高級中等學校冒險輔導種子教師培訓工作坊」為例並列篇名：The Impacts of Adventure Therapy Training Workshops on High School Counselors' Self-Awareness作者：謝智謀(Chih-Mou Hsieh);洪瑋蔓(Wei-Man Hung)關鍵字：自我覺察;冒險治療;adventure therapy;self-awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討高中職教師於冒險治療培訓中的學習經驗、自我覺察及影響。以質性研究方式針對高中職輔導教師冒險治療四梯次培訓工作坊中的七位受訪者，作兩次深入訪談及分區迷你焦點訪談共三階段訪談，得研究結果如下：受訪者在培訓中所引發的自我覺察包含了「個人的覺察」以及「在工作與工作關係上的覺察」兩大面向。本研究建議後續研究可進一步增加男性研究對象數量、擴大研究對象工作性質或專業背景多樣性及縮小研究資料收集範圍。實務方面，本研究建議未來教育當局能積極推廣此類教師研習，以期為學校輔導工作注入新的輔導與教學模式。英文摘要：This study examined how the adventure therapy training workshops could improve high school counselors' self-awareness and learning experience The objectives of this study are seven female high school counselors who attended the four adventure therapy training workshops, led the practice of students' adventure therapy groups, and attended a supervision meeting Through two in-depth interviews and a mini focus group, the results of this study were as bellow: Through the training workshops, the participants developed awareness about themselves, their job and the relationship with students of their work. Results of this study suggested that future research should include more male participants and participants who have different professional and training backgrounds, or narrowing the scope of research data collection. In addition, the government should promote this kind of training workshop for teachers/counselors as it may help teachers/counselors develop new counseling or teaching mode.起始頁-結束頁：59-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會5篇名：異性戀高中職生對異性戀、男同志和女同志人際關係態度之研究並列篇名：Heterosexual High School Students' Attitudes toward Heterosexual, Gay, and Lesbian Peers作者：張德勝(Te-Sheng Chang);游家盛(Chia-Sheng You);呂宗晉(Tsung-Chin Lu)關鍵字：人際關係態度;女同志;男同志;異性戀;高中生;gay and lesbian peers;heterosexual high school students;interpersonal relationship attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以花蓮地區498位高中職生（男295；女203）為研究對象。研究工具有三：（一）高中職生對異性戀人際關係量表；（二）對男同志人際關係量表；（三）對女同志的人際關係量表，包含友情接受度、愛情認同程度、與關懷同情度三個向度，每一量表各10題。研究結果發現，友情接受度方面，男女學生對異性戀、男同志和女同志的分數達顯著的交互作用，學生對友情接受度高低依序為異性戀、女同志、男同志；女生在男同志友情接受度高於男生。在愛情認同程度方面，男女生對異性戀、男同志和女同志的分數達顯著交互作用，學生對愛情認同程度高低依序為異性戀、女同志、男同志；女生對男同志和女同志的愛情認同程度皆高於男生，男女生對於異性戀的愛情認同程度則無顯著差異。在關懷同情度方面，男女學生對異性戀、男同志和女同志的分數達顯著交互作用，男生的關懷同情程度高低依序為異性戀、女同志、男同志，女生對異性戀分數顯著高於男同志與女同志；女生在異性戀、男同志與女同志的分數皆高於男生。本研究依據研究結果，針對高中職生性別教育、同志支持系統提出實務與研究方面的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate gender differences on heterosexual high school students' interpersonal relationship attitudes toward heterosexual, gay, and lesbian peers. A sample of 295 male and 203 female heterosexual high school students in Hualien city was recruited for the study. Results indicated that the interaction effects of students' gender and their attitudes toward the sexual orientation of the target were significant across the Friendship, Love, and Sympathy dimensions. Both male and female students reported the higher scores for accepting heterosexual peers and the lower scores for accepting gay peers across these three dimensions. Male students reported more negative attitudes toward gay peers in Friendship, Love, and Sympathy than did female students. Implications for programming, institutional support systems, and institutional policies were discussed. Directions for future research on gay and lesbian students were also highlighted.起始頁-結束頁：91-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會6篇名：學校心理師服務實務與模式建構初探：困境因應與專業發展期待分析並列篇名：Preliminary Exploration for the Practice Essence and Service Model of the School Psychologist: Analysis through the Difficulties Copying and Profession Expectation作者：刑志彬(Chih-Pin Hsing);許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)關鍵字：學校心理師;學校心理學;學校輔導;專業合作;專業發展;professions collaboration;professional development;school counseling;school psychologist;school psychology期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在透過訪談分析初探，邀請十位實際服務學校場域滿兩年以上之臨床或諮商心理師，探討學校心理師的實務困境與因應，並了解對於專業發展之期待。研究顯示學校心理師在協助學校輔導工作之困境和因應包括：行政與工作流程、專業定位模糊、與其他專業人員合作、以及家庭連結與工作介入等四個層面，而對於未來工作之專業展望則包括：自我專業省思與期待、服務模式評價與期待、對輔導體系之評價與展望等三個方向的期待。研究整合上述結果，從實務內涵與服務模式等兩個角度進行探討；發現在學校心理服務模式與行政運作方面，學校心理師之服務模式宜採「駐區巡迴」方式規劃，且在接案流程與行政運作上應更清晰；而學校心理師實務內涵方面，則建議在直接服務上應朝向個案服務實務之擴展與深化，在間接服務的生態介入上，應包含個案家長或教師諮詢等系統工作，以及學校行政與專業合作等組織工作。研究亦針對學校心理師之實務內涵、未來培育、服務體制建構，以及後續研究發展提出相關建議。英文摘要：Due to the increasing needs of campus mental health in the elementary and junior high schools, psychologists have offered mental health services to students for many years. The profession development issue of school psychologist in Taiwan was highly necessary to investigate. For the purposes to explore the difficulties, coping strategies, and profession expectations of the psychologists who served in the school system, ten clinical or counseling psychologists, who had more than two years of experiences, were interviewed. The results indicated four categories of difficulties and coping: (a) the operation of administration and case management, (b) indistinct position in professional service, (c) division and collaboration in the system, and (d) the family intervention and resource linkage The three types of expectations of further professional service were reflection of practice and training, evaluation of the service model, and the prospect on system building of school guidance. Discussion were integrated from the results, which focus on the two dimensions of practice essence and service model. First, the ”mobile psychological service” of responsible region could be an appropriate service model for school psychologists to provide interventions. Second, at the direct service level of professional practice, student interventions should expend and enhance their depth. At the indirect level of ecological intervention, both of consultation with parent and teacher consultation and the organization work of administration and professional collaboration should be included. Recommendations of practice essence, training, service model building, and further research were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：117-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會7篇名：雙生涯成人工作家庭角色衝突與優勢經驗之探究並列篇名：Work-Family Conflict and Enrichment: An Exploratory Study of Dual-Career Adults' Experience作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang)關鍵字：工作家庭衝突;工作家庭優勢;工作家庭平衡;雙生涯成人;dual career adults;work-family balance;work-family conflict;work-family enrichment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：39期出版年：2014中文摘要：研究目的為探究工作家庭衝突與優勢經驗，參與者為每週工作40小時以上及未滿18歲以下孩子需照顧之雙生涯成人，共41位，平均年齡為38.4歲（標準差為6.81）。研究者設計訪談大綱，以焦點團體訪談進行資料蒐集，所得資料以質性研究紮根方法進行分析。研究結果分為三部分，第一、工作家庭衝突經驗分為背景因素、衝突內涵以及因應調適等部分。背景因素是工作型態與制度、家庭結構、社會文化影響以及資源系統協助。衝突內涵分為工作對家庭之衝突及家庭對工作之衝突，前者歸納為外在層面及自我內在層面，後者分為工作投入／表現、職涯發展以及自我內在層面。工作家庭衝突之因應方法，包括技能因應與內在調適。第二、工作家庭優勢經驗結果中，工作對家庭的優勢及家庭對工作的優勢，可分別歸納為資源利益和心靈意義層面。工作對自我的優勢為成就感、自尊與自信的提升，與社會的連結及自我成長。家庭對個人的優勢為個人心智走向成熟穩定、生活充實意義及幸福滿足。第三，衝突、優勢及自我三方面為相互影響的互動關係。根據上述研究結果進行討論，提出對諮商實務與研究上的建議。英文摘要：The study aimed to explore the work-family conflict and enrichment experience of dual-career adults. The participants were 41 adults who worked over 40 hours per week and lived with their children under 18 years old. Participants' age ranged from 28 to 55 (M = 38.4 years; SD = 6.81 years). Data were collected from nine focus groups and were analyzed using the grounded theory. The results were divided into experience of work-family conflict and experience of work-family enrichment. The experience of work-family conflict was induced into background, conflict experience, and coping strategies. The background consisted of job type and system, family structure, the influence of society and culture, and the resources system. The conflict experience was divided into work to family conflict experience and family to work conflict experience. The former included the conflict in the external family and the conflict within the inner self, whereas the latter was comprised of the conflicts of work involvement and performance, the conflict of career development, and the conflict within the inner self. The coping strategies were skills/abilities and cognitive adaptation. The experience of work-family enrichment entered into work-family enrichment, family-work enrichment, work experience enrichment for the self and family experience enrichment for the self. Both work-family enrichment and family-work enrichment were related to resources/benefits, and spiritual meaning. The work experience enrichment for the self included enhancing the sense of achievement, self-esteem, confidence, self-growth and the connection to society. The family experience enrichment for the self included the balance being maintained in life, and providing a more fulfilling life. In dual-career adults' experience, conflict, enrichment and self interacted and were closely correlated to each other. A discussion based on the results and suggestions for practice and future studies were provided.起始頁-結束頁：151-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：移民權利、移民管制與整合－入出國及移民法在立法院修法過程的分析並列篇名：Immigrant Rights, Immigrant Regulation and Integration: A Scrutiny of the Legislative Process作者：黃秀端(Shiow-Duan Hawang);林政楠(Nick C. N. Lin)關鍵字：移民權利;移民政策;移民整合;入出國及移民法;顧客型政治;Immigrant rights;immigration policy;immigrant integration;the Immigrant Act;client politics model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著全球化的腳步，台灣已由人口移出國家變為人口移入國家，為因應此種變化，行政院在2005年提出對《入出國及移民法》的大幅修正。經過立法院審查後，該法之最終內容與行政院版本有明顯不同，為什麼這個一向由行政院主導的移民立法，卻在立法院遭到相當多的修正？而修正案由最初的強調國家權力與移民管制，到最後加入諸多強調移民整合的內容？本文檢視《入出國及移民法》第四次修正在立法院的審查過程，發現Freeman的顧客型政治可以用來解釋此種轉變。顧客型政治的議題之受益對象集中於少數特定的個人或團體，但成本通常為社會大眾所共同承擔。受益者有強烈之動機進行動員，分擔者由於感受輕微，因此通常不會關心，使得這類團體往往能在該類議題上取得一定程度的成功。移民政策便是屬於此一類的議題，移盟所代表的十五個團體有動機結盟與動員，他們將焦點放在對立法委員的遊說，立委感受到移盟一面倒的強烈壓力，加上缺乏反對力量的遊說，使得最後的政策往移盟的主張方向傾斜。行政院版草案中，明顯的以國境管制與移民管理為核心，並未對移民權利及移民整合著墨太多。在移盟的推波助瀾下，確實帶給立委相當的壓力，該法最後的通過，對移民權利的保障帶來許多進展。英文摘要：In order to respond to the changing role as a recipient country of international immigrants, in 2005 the Taiwanese government proposed to modify the Immigrant Act. Yet, the amendment to the Immigrant Act proposed by the Executive Yuan underwent a substantial scrutiny in the Legislative Yuan and the final outcome was significantly different from the Executive Yuan's proposal. What causes the differences between the executive and the legislative branch? What are these differences? And why did the Legislative Yuan successfully change the direction of the immigrant policy? To answer our inquiries, we focus on the legislative review process of the 4th amendment to the Immigrant Act and interviewed several legislators as well as non-legislative actors who participated in this process. We also reviewed the legislative debates and discussions, treating them as additional evidence in order to unriddle the puzzle. Our analysis shows that the executive branch, as a gate keeper, prefers immigration control/regulation over integration since it concerns issues such as national security as well as the protection of ”we-group” from ”they-group”. On the contrary, legislators and social groups are more willing to give civil and social rights to immigrants. They prefer immigrant policies that help to integrate immigrants to our society, instead of simply managing them in certain ways. Moreover, we believe that the legislative process of the amendment of the Immigrant Act can be well explained by the ”Client Politics Model” proposed by Freeman. Specifically, since immigration policy lacks for public attention, small and well-organized groups intensely interested in the policy may develop close working relationships with officials and may ultimately impact the policy outputs.起始頁-結束頁：83-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：論政治獻金之言論表達與政治平等－以日本《政治資金規正法》為例並列篇名：Analysis of Freedom of Speech and Equal Political Rights: Case Study of the Political Funds Control Act in Japan作者：鄭子真(Tzu-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：政治獻金;《政治資金規正法》;政黨補助款;言論表達;政治平等;political contribution;Political Funds Control Act;political party subsidies;freedom of speech;equal political right期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：奉個人自由和平等為圭臬的民主政治，透過政黨政治和代議制形式得以實現。然而如何擴大民眾參與政治，也是民主政治的重要課題。當中政治獻金是表達方式之一，含括有意見自由、政治平等的實質意涵。本文取日本《政治資金規正法》之例，試圖剖析該法內容蘊藏的意見表達和政治自由邏輯。《政治資金規正法》主要規範黨費、政治獻金、募款餐會等，本文依據公共性和排他性區分類型，進行比較作為黨私有財的黨費、集體財的政治獻金和募款餐會，以及1994年通過《政黨助成法》之公共財的政黨補助款。當中政治獻金和募款餐會的集資，最容易引發競合性和對價關係的爭辯，而現行的政黨補助款也屢屢被質疑其正當性。英文摘要：Democracy is based on freedom and equality, and is realized by political parties and representative systems of the government, and through them by ordinary citizens. One of the ways of participating in a democracy is through political contribution. This paper tries to analyze the Political Funds Control Act in Japan, and explores the logics of freedom of speech and equal political rights. This act mainly regulates the activities of political party such as membership fee, political contribution and fundraising parties etc. Based on the principles of publicity and exclusivity, this paper distinguishes and compares three types of political party capital, the private goods of political parties, the collective goods of political contribution and the fundraising functions as well as the Political Party Subsidies Act in allot the public goods of political party subsidies. This study argues the political contributions and fundraising parties could easily result in the dispute of the competitive and rewarding relationship. In addition, the current political party subsidies also undermine the legitimacy of them.起始頁-結束頁：135-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：書評：流動的城市治理－全球時代的都市與政策制定並列篇名：Mobile Urbanism: Cities and Policymaking in the Global Age作者：王鼎傑期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：167-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：世界民主大事紀2014年4-6月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：175-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：主編的話作者：趙永茂期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：影響台灣民眾對現任總統信任度的因素探討並列篇名：Exploring the Factors Affecting Taiwan Citizens' Trust in the Incumbent President作者：王中天(Jong-Tian Wang);陳欽春(Chin-Chun Chen)關鍵字：政治信任;制度途徑;政治態度;政策績效;political trust;institutional approach;political attitude;policy performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以台灣地區民眾對現任總統個人的信任度為主題，企圖找尋影響民眾評估現任總統是否值得信賴的因素，進而區辨其個別影響力的高低。主要研究問題有二：首先，文獻對於政治信任所提出的理性因素（或制度因素）是否可以進一步從政策的角度加以區辨？不同政策領域的績效又如何影響民眾對現任總統的信任？第二，民眾對總統個人的能力與動機之信任是否受到施政滿意度與政黨認同兩種因素的影響？若答案是肯定，則兩類因素的重要性是否可以加以比較？其結果又有何意涵？本文採用多元迴歸為主要分析方法。研究發現如下：首先，相對於民眾最期待解決問題或是總體滿意度最高的政策領域，最能讓民眾感受到的政策領域之滿意度，對其評估現任總統信任度會產生最強的影響力；其次，台灣民眾對現任總統的信任同時受到施政滿意度與政黨認同的影響，在控制其他變數後，對現任總統施政滿意度比政黨認同更強地影響民眾對總統的信任。英文摘要：This article attempts to identify the factors affecting Taiwanese people's trust in the incumbent President and further differentiate their respective significance. Two research questions are asked in this article: first, regarding the rational interpretation of political trust, can we further explore its argument from the perspective of policies? In other words, would different policy domains exert the same power in helping citizens to make their judgment on the President's trustworthiness? Second, are people really inspired by both the so-called satisfaction of performance and party identification in deciding whether the incumbent President can be trusted or not? If the answer is positive, can we compare the relative magnitude between the two kinds of factors? In addition, what does this comparison imply? With the help of regression analysis, we come to the following findings. First, when we further break the notion of policy performance into three categories, the satisfaction with the most felt policy area of the individuals stands out as the single best predictor of people's trust in the incumbent President. Second, the factors determining Taiwanese people's trust in the incumbent President are both rational and affective. Nevertheless, when controlling for other variables, we found that people's satisfaction with the incumbent President's performance outweighs their party identification in accounting for their trust in the President.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：副總統候選人的選票效應－2004∼2012年總統選舉的比較分析並列篇名：The Electoral Effects of Vice-Presidential Candidates in Taiwan, 2004-2012作者：林長志(Chang-Chih Lin);蔡宗漢(Tsung-Han Tsai)關鍵字：副總統候選人;選票效應;投票選擇;二元勝算對數模型;vice-presidential candidates;voting behavior;feeling thermometer;binary logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要的研究問題，乃探究副總統候選人於總統大選中的選票效應及其影響模式，以臺灣2004、2008，及2012年三次的總統大選為分析對象，進行系統性的比較研究。本研究使用TEDS三個年度之選後民意調查資料，以其中關於選民對正副總統候選人的情感溫度計測量，建構選民對於不同正副總統候選人的偏好組合類型，並操作化相關變數，建立以實際投票對象為依變數的二元勝算對數模型，來解析副總統候選人產生的選票效應。研究結果顯示，不論是從調查資料的描述性統計、或由學理邏輯所建構的偏好組合型態分析，皆證實了在總統大選中，儘管選民對總統候選人的偏好評價仍居於影響其投票選擇的關鍵，然而選民對副總統候選人的好惡程度，同樣也會對其最終的投票決策產生影響。同時，當選民對於同黨之正副總統候選人的評價產生落差，亦即包裹交易中的心理矛盾時，副總統候選人的偏好評價仍然具有影響力，只是該選票效應的主要影響範圍，乃發生在當選民對同黨正副總統候選人的評價不至於太過懸殊時，當此種心理矛盾差距越大時，將削弱個別副總統候選人的選票效應。而副總統候選人評價的選票效應，對於不同藍綠認同群體的選民亦有不同程度的效果，且隨著不同年度的副手人格特質、形象等各種條件的差異，其選票效應的程度亦會有所不同。英文摘要：This article focuses on the role of vice-presidential candidates in electoral campaigns and examines whether and how voters' evaluations on vice-presidential candidates affect their voting decisions in presidential elections of Taiwan in 2004, 2008, and 2012 from a comparative perspective. Analyzing survey data from the Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS) project, we show that, first, voters' voting decisions are influenced by how they feel about vice-presidential candidates even though the effects of their evaluations on vice-presidential candidates are not as critical as their feelings toward presidential candidates. Second, the effects of vice-presidential candidates on voting behavior are conditional on voters' feelings toward both presidential and vice-presidential candidates. Finally, the electoral effects of vice-presidential candidates differ across voters with different party identifications.起始頁-結束頁：39-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：環評知識的政治角色－檢視六輕健康風險評估爭議並列篇名：The Political Role of Scientific Knowledge in the Environmental Impact Assessment: Examining the Health Risk Assessment Disputes of the 6th Naphtha作者：杜文苓(Wen-Ling Tu);施佳良(Chia-Liang Shih)關鍵字：環境影響評估;風險評估;環境知識建構;社會健全知識;石化;六輕;台塑;Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA);risk assessment;environmental knowledge construction;social robust knowledge;petrochemical;the 6th naphtha;Formosa Plastic Corporation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：台塑六輕於1989年設廠於雲林麥寮，迄今運作約20年。六輕運作初期尚無環評法的規範，但台塑於1991年提出「六輕環境影響評估報告書」，作為回應社會對於六輕環境污染問題的評估與承諾，1994年環境影響評估法實施後，也曾對六輕進行包含經濟與環境的評估報告。六輕在二十年間不斷擴廠，通過多次環差分析與擴廠計畫的環評審查，至今已有54家工廠設立，成為世界數一數二之石化專區，並持續提出六輕五期的擴廠計畫。然而，自2010年起，六輕火災不斷，爆發多起工安與公害事件，引起社會高度關注，六輕設廠所造成的環境影響與健康風險問題，受到社會高度檢視。從後續發生諸多問題看來，環境決策體系內的審查評估，似乎未能達到環境預警與減緩損害之目的。本文因而想要探究，六輕環境影響評估決策所憑藉之知識基礎究竟為何？這些政策相關之環境知識如何被產出與運用？何以環評審查所生產之專業建議無法有效控制在地的環境損害與健康風險？本研究從政策過程中環境知識建構的探索出發，分析目前環評過程中的知識建構問題，在眾多六輕環評議題中，聚焦於健康風險評估相關爭議。透過多重資料來源的蒐集，包括六輕環境影響說明書、相關之會議紀錄與剪報資料、各單位委託相關之健康風險評估報告、非環評審查會議（包括環保監督小組以及六輕總體檢）之會議紀錄，相關人士的訪談，以及相關會議的參與觀察紀錄，本文將呈現環評過程中的知識建構圖像，並嘗試說明現行制度設計對環境知識生產多元性與在地性的侷限，從而指出環評制度設計改善之方向。英文摘要：The Sixth Naphtha Cracking Project (6th naphtha) of Formosa Petrochemical Corporation has been in operation for approximately 20 years. The Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) standards did not exist during the initial operation period of the 6th naphtha. However, the Formosa Petrochemical Corporation has proposed to publish 〞the 6th naphtha EIA Report〞 as an evaluation commitment in response to the public's concerns for the pollution problems caused by the 6th naphtha. After the implementation of the EIA Act in 1994, the government has also conducted and approved several EIA reviews on the 6th naphtha expansion projects. The 6th naphtha has been expending continuously for the last 20 years; it now has 54 factories, has become one of the largest petrochemical production zones in the world, and has also promoted its expansion plan continually. However, the 6th naphtha has experienced a series of fire disasters since 2010, which aroused great work and environmental safety concern from the public. The public has committed tremendous efforts to monitor the environmental impacts and health risks of the 6th naphtha. Considering the numerous problems that occurred in the 6th naphtha, it appears that the EIA system has failed to achieve the goals of early environmental disaster warning and damage mitigation. Thus, the objective of this paper is to investigate: (1) what knowledge influenced the EIA review decision-making process for the 6th naphtha, (2) how were the policy related environmental knowledge produced and employed, and (3) why were the expert recommendations produced in the EIA review process unable to manage local environmental damage and health risks effectively. By exploring the construction of environmental knowledge during the policy making process, this study analyzes the knowledge construction problems faced by the present EIA process, and especially focuses on the health risk assessment related controversies among the numerous 6th naphtha related EIA topics. This paper presents a portrait of environmental knowledge construction during the EIA process and aims to demonstrate how the design of the existing policy system limits diversified ways of knowledge production and discriminates against local knowledge and wisdom. Finally, based on the results of this study, the researchers make recommendations on the directions of improvement for the EIA system.起始頁-結束頁：91-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：政府推動雲端運算之服務角色與功能並列篇名：The Role and Function for e-Government to Realize Cloud Computing Services作者：蔣麗君(Li-Chun Chiang);張其祿(Chyi-Lu Jang)關鍵字：雲端服務;服務課責;層級分析法;cloud computing;service accountability;analytic hierarchy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：為將政府行政運作與政策制定開放給民眾參與，政府在資通科技轉型中試圖採用雲端運算知識與技術，增加民眾參與政事之管道與興趣。本研究計畫目的在於瞭解政府成為簡單且有效能的雲端政府時，作為服務提供者所應擔負服務角色與功能，以利瞭解影響政府在雲端運算中，扮演服務提供者角色時之重要決定因素。依政府與雲端運算關係之相關文獻分析，影響政府成為雲端服務提供者因素可分為三個主要面向：第一是雲端技術層面，即受到「基礎建設」（infrastructure）、「可利用性」（availability）與「信心」（confidence）三個主要因素影響；第二是雲端資訊能力，包含政府人員的資訊科技技術與知識（IT skills/knowledge）與IT訓練（IT training），如對服務項目與介面之認知；第三是組織制度面向（institution），包含信任（trust）、確認（assurance）與整合（integration）等因素影響。本研究方法採「深度訪談法」，並配合「層級分析法」（Analytic Hierarchy Process，簡稱AHP）探析建構政府做為雲端服務提供 者所需具備功能與影響因素。英文摘要：The reasons for government to explore cloud computing in IT transformation are included 〞to open up the government to its citizens,〞 〞bring government into the 21st century,〞 and 〞spur innovation〞. The proposed research aims to understand the influential factors for the government to play a role as a service provider in cloud environment, and further to build a simple and available model of service accountability to evaluate the government as a service provider in cloud computing. Upon the literature review regarding the relationship between the government and cloud computing, there are three important dimensions to influence the government as a cloud service provider: first, the perspective of cloud technology is involved infrastructure, availability and confidence; secondly, the dimension of cloud technology abilities are included IT skills/knowledge, IT training; thirdly, the dimension of institution is involved trust, assurance and integration. This project expects to take two consecutive years to establish an evaluation approach of governmental service accountability as a cloud service provider. The in-depth interviewing method is used as research method to build research variables for evaluating service accountabilities of cloud government.起始頁-結束頁：139-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：書評：數位媒體與政治參與－一個跨國比較分析並列篇名：Book Reviews: Digital Media and Political Engagement Worldwide: A Comparative Study作者：陳柏宇期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：171-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：選舉預測市場之選前鑑別模型：以最高價準則為門檻並列篇名：The Discrimination Models of Accuracy for Election Prediction Markets Prior to the Elections: Based on the Highest-Price Criterion作者：林鴻文(Hung-Wen Lin);童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung);葉家興(Jason Yeh)關鍵字：臺灣選舉預測;選舉預測市場;鑑別模型;預測準確率;邊際交易者;election predictions in Taiwan;election prediction markets;discrimination model;prediction accuracy;marginal trader期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：根據預測市場（prediction market）的文獻，預測選舉已有良好預測準確率，但該準確率是事後的、總體的，而非更有實際價值的事前、個別選舉合約預測的鑒別準確率。本文建構四個鑑別選舉預測市場準確度的模型，在選前針對每個選舉合約的預測準確度進行鑑別。根據預測市場在選前一天提供選舉合約的40個原始變數資訊，Logit模型最能精準判斷那些選舉合約會符合最高價準則的準確預測合約。本文以「2008年總統選舉」、「2009年縣市長選舉」及「2010年五都市長選舉」做為樣本外測試的樣本，使用原始變數的Logit模型之預測力均高於其他模型。Logit模型的樣本外鑑別正確準確率均為100%，但是，Logit模型對於鑑別未正確預測組的預測能力仍須改善。英文摘要：According to the literature, election prediction markets have excellent accuracy rates of prediction. However, one can only acknowledge the prediction results after the elections and cannot discriminate the accuracy rates of particular election predictions prior to the elections. This paper constructs four models to discriminate the accuracy rate of each election contract prior to the election. According to the information of forty original variables collected from the election contracts in the prediction markets, the Logit model can precisely discriminate which election contracts with the highest price criteria of predictions will be likely correct. In addition to the complete sample model, this paper uses election contracts of the 2008 presidential election, the 2009 magistrate and mayoral elections, and the 2010 five-metropolis mayoral elections as out-of-sample tests. In terms of prediction accuracy, the Logit model using forty original variables is the best among the four discrimination models. The accuracy rates of discrimination of the Logit model for correct predictions are all 100%. Nevertheless, the Logit model's prediction ability for discriminating incorrect prediction groups needs to be improved.起始頁-結束頁：117-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：民主化後台灣與韓國檢察獨立的差異：權力結構與競爭度變化的解釋並列篇名：Explaining the Difference in Prosecutorial Independence between Taiwan and South Korea: The Perspectives of Political Power Structure and Political Competition作者：陳鴻章(Hung-Chang Chen)關鍵字：權力分散理論;保險理論;代理人理論;檢察獨立;政治民主化;power fragmentation theory;insurance theory;principle-agent theory;prosecutorial independence;political democratization期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：為了探究台灣與韓國，在政治民主化之後，所呈現的檢察獨立差異性。本文建構了檢察獨立的動態分析架構，並比較台灣與韓國，檢察體系、政治制度，以及歷年來政治結構與競爭程度的變化。本文認為檢察體系的獨立性是動態的。此外，政黨輪替並不能保證，檢察體系就會更為獨立。最後，我們認為司法檢察人員的身分與職務保障，也並非是促成檢察體系持續維持獨立的保證。然而更重要的是，一個不過度讓政治力分配，呈現高度傾斜，而強調分權制衡重要性的民主運作，才是檢察體系能否持續維持獨立的關鍵。英文摘要：The purpose of this article is to explain the difference in prosecutorial independence between Taiwan and South Korea. In this article, we carry out a dynamic analysis framework of the prosecutorial independence. In terms of the prosecutorial system, political institutions, political structure, and political competition, we also mark the difference between Taiwan and South Korea, following the political democratization in the late 1980s. With a thorough analysis of the empirical data, we find that political power turnover, the prosecutor's salary safeguard, and position protection cannot lead to prosecutorial independence. In conclusion, we think checks and balances as well as separation of power, can ensure prosecutorial independence.起始頁-結束頁：173-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：原子化社會下的民主化與憲政運作：以羅馬尼亞半總統制為例並列篇名：Democratization and Constitutional Operation under an Atomized Civil Society: Semi-presidentialism of Romania作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen)關鍵字：民主化;半總統制;原子化社會;政黨體系;羅馬尼亞;democratization;semi-presidentialism;atomized society;party system;Romania期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：多數後共國家從上個世紀末展開民主轉型，迄今已經將近20餘年。在轉型初期，首要的議題之一就是憲政工程的搭建，多數後共國家在類似的背景下設計了半總統制的憲法架構。由於半總統制是一個權力容易擺盪的體制，因此實際的憲政運作仍舊存在多變的可能。這段時期以來，有些後共國家已經運作出準議會制的憲政秩序，有些仍然在總統與國會的二元架構中進行權力競逐。影響憲政運作的原因很多，例如政黨體系、制度設計、政治菁英的選擇等。追根究底，轉型初期的社會結構是不能被忽略的上游因素。本文以羅馬尼亞為例，討論原子化社會下的民主轉型，對於菁英延續、政黨體系建立的影響，並以此解釋憲法設計乃至於憲政運作的特性。本文認為，原子化的社會使得舊有政治勢力容易延續，強勢總統搭配分歧國會是民主化後憲政運作的起點。若要進行體制的轉型，政黨體系的變遷以及制度的修改，是必須相互搭配的條件。英文摘要：Most post-communist countries have experienced democratization since the past two decades. And to start democratization, many of them have adopted a semi-presidential constitution. However, in the practice of semi-presidentialism, we often observe that the operation of semi-presidential system in these new democracies were unstable and variable. For example, some post-communist countries have become the quasi-parliamentary democracies; the others are caught in the dual executive between the president and the parliament. Their experiences show that the orientations of semi-presidentialism are conditioned by party system, the design of the constitution, and also by the political elites. In other words, the key of the orientations lies in the social structure of one country. This paper will focus on the constitutional design of Romania and discuss how democratization in the atomized society influences the ecology of the political elites and the construction of the party system in Romania. Furthermore, this paper hopes that such discussions can enrich our understanding of constitutional institutions and operations. This paper intends to argue that the atomization of society enables the old establishments and powers from communism to continue, creating powerful president conditioned by divided parliament. And to alter such unbalanced relationship, Romania not only needs to change its own party system but also to revise the constitutional institution.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：香港區議會與社區發展之研究並列篇名：A Study of District Council and Community Development in Hong Kong作者：張峻豪(Chun-Hao Chang)關鍵字：香港;區議會;區議員;社區發展;基層民主;Hong Kong;District Council;District Council members;community development;grassroots democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文從制度規範和運作的比較，進行香港區議會與社區發展之研究，並輔以訪談資料釐清區議會在香港基層政治運作的定位。本文企圖論證，對於區議會之存在，不應僅由法律層面進行理解，區議員雖不具實權，但政治實務面的各個面向，交織成區議會在香港基層民主運作當中的意涵。另外，在社區權力和公權力的競合關係中，香港的社區發展常是由許多細微層面出發，區議會的存在，伴隨民眾情感走向，以及香港人民對政府之態度，使得基層人民如何參與、為何參與，不但成為社區發展的核心課題，也是香港未來民主發展的重要關鍵。英文摘要：This paper studies the District Councils and community development in Hong Kong by comparing institutional regulations and practical operations. Interview data is included to contextualize what role the District Councils play in grassroots politics. This paper intends to prove that though District Council members do not have real power, the importance of District Councils manifest itself in other realms of political practice, which makes the District Councils a feature of grassroots democracy in Hong Kong. Also, concerning the co-opetition relation between communities and the government, District Councils play an important role in community development since they represent not only the population's feelings and attitudes toward the government, but also affect how and why local residents participate in political activities in Hong Kong. In short, the District Councils are key to understanding the future development of Hong Kong's democracy.起始頁-結束頁：53-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：從四分之一到三分之一？婦女保障席次的選舉效應評估並列篇名：From One Fourth to One Third: The Electoral Effects of Reserved Female Seats作者：鮑彤(Nathan F. Batto);莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);林瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Lin)關鍵字：女性參政;婦女保障名額;選舉制度;選舉效應;性別差距;female political participation;female reserved seats;electoral systems;electoral effects;gender gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：民主政治的基本原則之一即是實踐政治平等，性別平等即是其一，時至今日，雖然有不少國家已經出現女性的政治領袖，國會中的女性議員亦不在少數，但絕大多數國家的政治權力依然掌握在男性的手上，是以，如何提升女性的政治代表性和政治參與度，也就深為相關團體和各國政府所關注。有鑑於此，為了提高女性參與政治的意願與機會，各國在推展民主化的政治工程中往往會設計不同的制度性誘因，期能達到一定的成效，如婦女保障名額制度即是箇中一例。不過，任何制度的誘因效果不能僅從制度本身加以檢視，尚需考量制度運作的環境系絡，否則可能出現「名不符實」或「忘梅止渴」的現象。另外，任何的制度設計都可能出現「天花板效應」或「地板效應」，效益變化的幅度明顯減緩，此時即是制度趨疲的跡象，需要再次進行制度變革，重新發揮誘因效果。本研究以臺灣縣市議員選舉為例，利用1998年至2010年的選舉資料，以選區為單位，分析婦女保障名額制度的誘因機制是否產生效果的探討，企圖回答幾個理論層次的問題：（1）此一制度是否激勵了女性參選的意願？（2）此一制度是否影響政黨提名的策略？（3）此一制度是否提高了女性當選的機會？（4）此一制度的變革（提高保障席次比例）對女性的參選和當選是否會造成影響？並從中獲得一些正面結論與反思，有助於吾人思考婦女保障名額制度變革所可能衍生的相關效應。英文摘要：Political equality is one of the core values of democracy, and one facet of this is gender equality. While women are no longer rare in national legislatures and have ascended to leadership positions in many countries, it is still true that most political power is wielded by men. As such, democrats around the world seek to further increase the presence of women in politics. One common strategy is to build incentives into the institutional structure, and Taiwan's electoral system of SNTV with reserved female seats is one such example. There are concerns that this system has not been effective in promoting gender equality. Some worry that it has only created a ”floor effect,” merely guaranteeing a minimum number of women, or, even worse, a ”ceiling effect.” However, there is little empirical evidence supporting these fears. In this paper, we examine city and county council elections from 1998 to 2010, with the electoral district as the unit of analysis. We consider the incentives created by the reserved seat system and look at whether reserved seats have in fact produced (1) more overall female candidate, (2) large parties nominating more female candidates, and (3) more female winners. Finally, we examine a previous reform in the number of quota seats to determine whether (4) increasing the number of reserved seats would increase the number of women elected. In all instances, we find the reserved seat system to be a very powerful spur, and this has important implications for future institutional reforms.起始頁-結束頁：99-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：潘恩與邁斯特：革命年代裡的政治理論時刻並列篇名：Paine and Maistre: Moment of Political Theory in the Revolutionary Era作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：革命;潘恩;邁斯特;政治理論;revolution;Paine;Maistre;political theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：32卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：十八世紀末葉發生於大西洋兩岸的兩場革命，即美國獨立革命和法國大革命，乃是影響近代政治進程的重大事件，亦是新舊政治秩序更迭的關鍵轉折點。而潘恩和邁斯特可謂是曾親身經歷此一革命年代，並對其發表相互對立的系統性論述之論者。潘恩和邁斯特的對峙立場，既反映了他們對歷史遞變的不同期望，也凸顯了與之相對應的政治理論的內在歧異。本文先勾勒潘恩和邁斯特政治主張的基本輪廓與根本對立，繼而從其中所呈示的線索，進一步考察理性與政治理論的革新、傳統與變革、宗教及其相關問題等議題。要言之，革命年代裡的特定的政治理論的面貌，往往是在與歷史現實的激昂對話中得到更清晰的展現。而在潘恩式的看向未來的政治論述與邁斯特式的回望過去的政治論述的迅猛踫撞中，一種與歷史現實有著即時關連的、罕見且獨特的政治理論時刻（the moment of political theory），正形塑著當時的人以及後來的人的政治命運。英文摘要：The American Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 1789 were major events that tremendously affected subsequent shifts of political and social order in modern history. The American Revolution and the constitutional experiments that followed created a new political scene with totally novel contents. The French Revolution that erupted in the core of the old world lamented the death of the old regime and paved the way for the coming of modern political mechanisms. Besides Edmund Burke, the most representative of those who had lived through this revolutionary era and had reacted to it by systematic political discourse were, without doubt, Thomas Paine and Joseph de Maistre. Taking Paine and Maistre as prototypes of radicalism and reactionism respectively, this essay aims to offer a comparative interpretation and analysis of their reactions to those revolutions and attempts to explore the characteristics and theoretical intents of political discourse in the revolutionary era. Finally, through the clues presented by Paine and Maistre, this essay also examines the modern implications of the status of reason in political theory, the interplay of tradition and reform, and the related problems of religion.起始頁-結束頁：143-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：羅爾斯論多元社會政治共識的證成並列篇名：Rawls on the Justification of Political Consensus in a Pluralistic Society作者：王冠生(Kuan-Sheng Wang)關鍵字：羅爾斯;政治自由主義;公共理性;交疊共識;羅爾斯式審議理論;John Rawls;Political Liberalism;Public Reason;Overlapping Consensus;Rawlsian Deliberative Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：66期出版年：2015中文摘要：本文探討羅爾斯對於多元社會政治共識的證成。羅爾斯主張在面對憲政核心爭議與基本正義問題時，講理的公民能夠擱置具爭議性的整全性學說，遵循公共理性的理念，根據同一套政治性正義觀所提供的政治價值與正義原則來解決爭議、凝聚共識、證成決策。不過，羅爾斯的公共理性論至少面臨「完備性」、「公平性」、「單一性」「公共性」四方面的質疑，針對這些挑戰，羅爾斯對其理論進行了三項主要修正：第一，以「寬觀點公共理性」與「包含式公共理性」補充「排除式公共理性」。第二，公共理性的內容是由一整套「自由主義政治性正義觀之族系」所給定，「作為公平的正義」也只是諸多合理的政治性正義觀之一。第三，羅爾斯承認公共理性的侷限，然而在必要時，得以「基於公共理性的投票」做出決策。根據這些修正，筆者認為羅爾斯的公共理性論能夠回應「完備性」、「公平性」、「單一性」三方面的挑戰，但是仍無法完全解決「完備性」的問題。因此在本文中，筆者試圖以「寬觀點公共理性」與「廣泛的反思均衡」證成「羅爾斯式審議理論」，以突破公共理性的限制。筆者認為，以公共審議詮釋公共理性，將有助於強化羅爾斯公共理性論的功能，也有助於多元社會中政治共識的證成。英文摘要：This paper explores Rawls’s justification for political consensus in a pluralistic society. Rawls argues that although value diversity is the fact of a modern democratic society, reasonable citizens would follow a political conception of justice endorsed by the overlapping consensus between different kinds of comprehensive doctrines to resolve fundamental constitutional conflicts and conflicts about basic justice. However, his idea of public reason could be challenged from four aspects, namely completeness, fairness, uniqueness and publicity. Facing these criticisms, Rawls has revised his theory in three aspects. First, he supplemented his idea of exclusive view of public reason with an inclusive view of public reason and a wide view of public reason. Secondly, he argued that public reason is determined by a family of liberal political conceptions of justice, and fairness is just one of them. Finally, in accordance with the idea of public reason, he asserted that we can make a political decision by voting if it is necessary. By reviewing the challenges to and revisions of Rawls’s public reason theory, this paper argues that Rawlsian deliberative theory, justified by the wide view of public reason and the wide reflective equilibrium, could further amend Rawls’ revisions. It could enhance the capability of Rawls’s public reason theory and the justification of public consensus in a pluralistic society by interpreting public reason through public deliberation.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.66(1-40)2篇名：自由主義式公民教育理念及其問題：以國家中立與多元文化論為分析焦點並列篇名：Liberal Civic Education and Its Limits: A Critical Examination of State Neutrality and Multiculturalism作者：莊國銘(Kuo-Ming Chuang)關鍵字：自由主義;公民教育;國家中立;「高級文化」;多元文化論;Liberalism;Civic Education;State Neutrality;”High Culture”;Multiculturalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：66期出版年：2015中文摘要：本文旨在梳理自由主義式公民教育之理念，並分析其可能蘊含之問題。就政治思想史的發展過程來看，自由主義式公民教育理念乃奠基於歐洲宗教改革以來無可通約的價值歧異之事實、以及對政治專制之省思;當代自由主義者所倡議之國家於各種倫理觀點保持中立，即是源自此一大傳統。自由主義嘗試在公民教育中培養某些非特定倫理立場之德性，以憲政制度、寬容、人權等等理念安置各種價值爭議。本文除了試圖釐清自由主義式公民教育理念之外，並將嘗試說明，此一奠基於宗教與政治問題所發展出之中立教育理念與模式，並無法妥善處理當代因族群政治運動所發展出之文化群體權爭議;因為自由主義對「政治性文化/非政治性文化」、「制度性文化/特定具體文化」所做的分類，忽略了工業化社會中作為知識平台的「標準化的高級文化」之特殊屬性與作用，從而也忽略了它的深遠影響。因此，自由主義勢必需要發展新的理論論述以回應此社會需求。本文認為，各文化群體針對教育內容作進一步的民主對話與協商，可能會是比較妥適的安置爭議之道。英文摘要：This paper explores the concept of civic education in liberal thought and identifies problems inherent in this concept with respect to state neutrality and multiculturalism. A product of the history of Western political thought, the liberal philosophy of civic education reflects Europe’s struggle with sectarian conflict and monarchical despotism. Modern liberals’ advocacy of state neutrality with respect to moral and ethical norms is rooted in this struggle. Liberal civic education attempts to cultivate a type of morality that favors no particular normative position, emphasizing the concepts of constitutional government, tolerance and human rights to resolve value-based conflict. This paper argues that the liberal notion of state neutrality is incapable of meeting challenges posed by contemporary ethnic political movements, particularly those involving power inequality among ethnic groups. Liberalism’s categorization of political vs. non-political culture and institutional vs. ethnic/religion-specific culture neglects the important function a standardized high culture serves in industrial society. The paper suggests the need for a further democratic dialogue amongst various ethnic groups regarding the content of civic education.起始頁-結束頁：41-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.66(41-80)3篇名：修憲實質界限是否可能？論Sieyes 1795年熱月演說中的憲政制度設計與制憲權學說的修正並列篇名：Are Substantive Limitations on Constitutional Amendments possible? On the Constitutional System in the Thermidor-Speechs of Sieyes in 1795 and the Modification of His Own Theory of Pouvoir Constituant作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：熱月演說;權力分立;憲法委員會;制憲權;修憲有界限說;Sieyes;Thermidor-Speech;Separation of Powers;Jury Constitutionnaire;Pouvoir Constituant;Theory of Limitaions on Constitutional Amendments期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：66期出版年：2015中文摘要：本文將把焦點集中在Sieyes於1795年所做的兩篇熱月演說，試圖梳理出Sieyes在雅各賓獨裁後的思想轉折。與之相對應的，Sieyes他提出了特殊的「相互合作」式分權設計以及憲法委員會兩種制度設計，以節制立法機關、防止權力集中。本文並將指出，儘管Sieyes後期的理論漸趨溫和，但因為在其論證中，修憲權仍然與制憲權同一，因此即使可以導出修憲的形式性限制，但仍無法真正導向修憲有界限說的結論。只有在Schmitt對Sieyes的制憲權理論進行轉化後，才能導出修憲有界限說。英文摘要：This article focuses on two speeches that Sieyes held in Thermidor 1795, aiming to represent the transition of his thought after the Jacobin dictatorship. At that time, to impose a limit to the legislature and to avoid the concentration of powers, Sieyes projected two specific institutions in his constitutional draft, a separation-of-powers system with the principle of ”concours” and the ”Jury constitutionnaire”. Furthermore, despite the fact that his thinking later tended to become more moderate, this article also points out that only procedural limits, but not the theory of limitations on constitutional amendments, was derived from Sieyes’ later thought. This was mainly because pouvoir constituant and pouvoir constitue were still regarded as equal in rank in his argumentation. The theory of limitations on constitutional amendments arose only after Schmitt reinterpreted Sieyes’ concept of pouvoir constituant.起始頁-結束頁：81-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.66(81-110)4篇名：制度因素與非制度因素對民主崩潰的影響：46個半總統制國家的經驗研究並列篇名：The Impact of Institutional and Non-institutional Factors on Democratic Breakdowns: An Empirical Study of 46 Semi-Presidential Countries作者：張芳華(Fang-Hua Jhang)關鍵字：民主崩潰;半總統制;政變論;存活分析;Democratic Breakdown;Semi-Presidentialism;Coup Theory;Survival Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：66期出版年：2015中文摘要：本文主要探討在半總統制下，影響民主崩潰的制度與非制度因素，並提出影響民主崩潰的可能機制。結合委任代理人、否決者與政變論點，本研究認為總統議會制相較於總理總統制易產生組閣爭議與政策僵局，提高了政變介入與行政獨裁的機會，易於發生民主崩潰。透過存活分析結果顯示因為總統議會制有著制度設計上的缺失，其民主崩潰的風險高於總理總統制。經濟因素中，僅GDP成長率對民主崩潰有負向且顯著的影響。先前成功政變經驗愈多，由於可降低軍方官員從事政變的風險並形成政變的牢籠，故提高民主崩潰的機率。變項間交互作用分析結果顯示總統議會制結合不佳的經濟發展或是先前成功政變經驗並不會顯著提高民主崩潰的可能性。英文摘要：This study aims to explore both the institutional and non-institutional factors under semi-presidentialism that may lead to the collapse of democracy, and to study the mechanisms of these democratic crises. Utilizing the principal-agent theory, veto player theory and coup theory, this research argues that compared with premier-presidentialism, president-parliamentary constitutions are more probable to create disputes regarding the formation of the government as well as policy paralysis between the assembly and the elected president, thereby increasing the likelihood of coup intervention and administrative dictatorship, both being detrimental to democratic survival. The results of survival analysis are as follows. Firstly, owing to the institutional drawbacks of president-parliamentarism, its chance to experience a democratic breakdown is higher than the other subtype of semi-presidentialism. Secondly, of all the economic factors, GDP growth rate is the only significant variable and has a negative impact on the dependent variable. Thirdly, countries that had historically experienced more successful coups will have a higher likelihood to suffer from democratic collapse, due to lower risk faced by their military officials engaged in the coup and the coup trap. Finally, our results also show that president-parliamentarism, combined with poor economic development and possible coup threats, does not necessarily generate a high possibility of ending in a democratic collapse.起始頁-結束頁：111-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.66(111-146)5篇名：半總統制如何實現共識民主？並列篇名：How is Consensus Democracy Realized under Semi-Presidentialism?作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su)關鍵字：共識民主;多數民主;憲政體制;半總統制;Consensus Democracy;Majoritarian Democracy;Constitutional System;Semi-presidentialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：65期出版年：2015中文摘要：Arend Lijphart將民主政治分為「多數民主」與「共識民主」兩種模式，將當代民主國家許多不同層面的政治制度加以串連。但Lijphart的民主模式分析明顯忽略半總統制，本文試圖填補Lijphart探討民主模式時忽視半總統制的闕漏，擬探討半總統制在何種制度安排下，能夠充分地實現共識民主的精神。本文認為，在半總統制的總統、國會與內閣三角關係中，若能在總統與國會之間建構權力平衡的關係；在總統與總理之間建立權力分享的關係；國會與內閣之間確立由國會各黨共組聯合內閣的憲政運作，將能充分實現共識民主的精神。而要建構這樣的總統、國會與內閣三角關係，須要透過以下的具體制度安排：國會選制採行比例代表制或聯立制、總統選制採行兩輪決選制或選擇投票制、賦予國會對閣揆的人事同意權、排除總統對國會的主動解散國會權與對閣揆的免職權、賦予閣揆廣泛的副署權、明確劃分總統與閣揆的權限範圍。英文摘要：Arend Lijphart divides democracy into two patterns, majoritarian democracy and consensus democracy, and sorts out the different kinds of political institutions into these two patterns. Lijphart's analysis is highly valued and praised by scholars of comparative politics; however, semi-presidentialism was unfortunately omitted in his analysis. This paper tries to fill the gaps in Lijphart's analysis where semi-presidentialism is neglected, studying how to fully embody the spirit of consensus democracy under semi-presidentialism. This paper argues that consensus democracy will be adequately realized under semi-presidentialism if the president's and parliament's powers can be balanced, the president's and prime minister's powers can be shared, and the coalition cabinet formed by each and every major party in the parliament can be established. Such triangular relationship between the president, parliament and cabinet can be built through the following institutional arrangements. Proportional representation or mixed-member proportional system should be adopted for the parliamentary election. The presidential electoral system should be a runoff vote or an alternative vote. The parliament should have the power of consent over the appointment of the prime minister, and the president should not have the power to proactively dissolve the parliament or the power to remove the prime minister. Furthermore, the prime minister should be provided with the comprehensive power of countersignature, and the scope of authority for the president and prime minister should also be clearly defined.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.65(1-30)6篇名：影響大國簽訂雙邊投資協定關鍵因素：政治壓力還是經濟利益並列篇名：Key Factors for Bilateral Investment Treaties Signed between Major Countries: Political Pressure or Economic Interests?作者：郭建中(Jiann-Jong Guo);王國臣(Guo-Chen Wang)關鍵字：大國競爭;大國經濟外交;追蹤資料邏輯模型;新古典現實主義;雙邊投資協定;Major Country's Competition;Major Country's Economic Diplomacy;Panel Data Logit Model;Neoclassical Realism;Bilateral Investment Treaties期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：65期出版年：2015中文摘要：本文利用追蹤資料邏輯模型，檢證大國對102個開發中國家簽署雙邊投資協定（BITs）的政經動機。研究對象為中國大陸、法國、德國、日本、英國與美國；研究時間1987至2012年。研究發現：第一，大國簽署BITs的關鍵因素依序是，競爭壓力、地主國的經濟資源，以及保障海外直接投資的安全。很顯然，大國簽署BITs的首要考量為政治壓力，其次才是經濟利益。第二，大國競簽的壓力來源為：決策者對於國際體系權力分配的認知。例如：美國旨在爭取BITs標準設定的制高點，維繫其國際影響力。因此，BITs數量並非其競簽壓力來源。反之，中國大陸擔心BITs產生的投資移轉效果，造成永續發展的國內能源供給斷鏈問題。所以，即使中國大陸的BITs數量高居世界第二，但其競簽壓力依舊沈重。英文摘要：This paper applied the panel data logit model (PDLM) to determine the key political and economic motivations for major countries to sign bilateral investment treaties (BITs) with 102 developing countries. The research objects cover six major countries, namely China, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States; the study period is from 1987 to 2012. Some of the major findings are listed below. Firstly, competitive pressure is the number one reason why major countries are motivated to sign BITs with developing countries, followed by the host countries' economic resources as well as ensuring the safety of their outward foreign direct investment. Obviously, political pressure outweighs economic interests and is the primary consideration for a major country to sign BITs with developing countries. Secondly, major powers are competing in the signing of BITs due to their self-aware position in the international. For example, by singing BITs, the United States aims at setting a standard on the BITs, in order to maintain its international influence. Thus, the number of BITs is not the main factor that compel the U.S. to sign BITs. On the contrary, China fears that BITs inked by other major countries would generate an investment diversion effect, which would interrupt its energy supply chain and essentially its sustainable development. So, even though the number of BIT that China has inked is already the second highest in the world, China still has pressure to sign BITs, especially with most of the oil-producing countries.起始頁-結束頁：31-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.65(31-70)7篇名：摩根索的國際關係規範論述及其道德觀爭論並列篇名：Hans Morgenthau's Normative Discourses and the Controversies over His Moral Views作者：林炫向(Hsuan-Hsiang Lin)關鍵字：現實主義;規範論述;摩根索;亞里斯多德;韋伯;International Relations;Realism;Morgenthau;Normative Discourse;Aristotle;Weber期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：65期出版年：2015中文摘要：近年來國際關係的規範理論開始復興，現實主義學派內部也出現了恢復現實主義倫理維度的呼聲。本文以影響美國當代國際關係至為巨大的理論家摩根索為研究的對象，對其規範論述加以梳理，辨認他的思想淵源，並稍做詮釋。摩根索的思想淵源涵蓋範圍十分廣，已有眾多學者予以論述。本文只挑選其中對摩根索思想影響最大的兩位思想家－亞里斯多德與韋伯，探討他們的思想如何反映在摩根索的規範論述中。此一研究的目的在於展示，現實主義並非只能與追求價值中立的科學主義相結合；相反地，它的規範立場其實有深厚的歷史淵源，其思想深度也不容批評者低估。吾人如欲客觀地評價現實主義的規範立場，仍需對歷史上的大思想家的規範思想做出回應。英文摘要：Normative theories in International Relations (IR) have long been marginalized after WWII. In recent years, however, the enterprise is now undergoing a revival. Various schools of thought in IR have begun to explore the normative dimensions of their respective approaches. Under this new current there also emerges within the camp of realism the call for reexamining the moral implications as well as the normative discourses of realism. Echoing with this call, this paper addresses Hans Morgenthau's normative discourses first by identifying their origins in the long lineage of realism. But since his thought is derived from various different origins, such as Aristotle, St. Augustine, Friedrich Nietzsche, Max Weber, Carl Schmitt, to name just a few, it requires further interpretations to clarify his ”real meaning”. Obviously, it is impossible to decipher with precision the thought of a giant which covers such a broad range of origins. Therefore, the author opts for selecting two thinkers who impact most strongly on Morgenthau's normative thinking, namely Aristotle and Weber, and showing how Morgenthau's normative discourses reflect their influences. The purpose of this study is to show that realism should not be bound by scientism, which is value-free; instead, it can be normatively laden, with its normative stance derived from a long lineage that simply cannot be undervalued. If we are to evaluate the normative stance of realism without prejudice, we will have to take on the thoughts of the giants from this lineage seriously.起始頁-結束頁：71-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.65(71-102)8篇名：論外大陸礁層的自然延伸原則：以2012年ITLOS孟加拉v.緬甸海域劃界案為中心並列篇名：On the Natural Prolongation Principle of Outer Continental Shelf作者：蔡季廷(Chi-Ting Tsai)關鍵字：大陸礁層;自然延伸原則;大陸礁層界限委員會;區域制度;Continental Shelf;Natural Prolongation Principle;Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf;Area期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：65期出版年：2015中文摘要：國際海洋法庭於2012年孟加拉／緬甸案中，就海洋法公約第76條外大陸礁層自然延伸原則的解釋，在國際法學界引起了辯論。部分學者認為自然延伸原則在本判決後，在海洋法公約中僅是政治迷思，部分認為其重要性被肯認。又，自然延伸原則究應為自然地貌或地質延伸原則，也在本案中引發不同意見。本文檢視國際法院判決與大陸礁層界限委員會的建議案後，主要有三個研究發現。首先，孟加拉／緬甸案應被視為透過條約約定的特殊情況，而得以地質證據作為自然延伸原則的標準。又，自然延伸原則仍然是認定外大陸礁層的法律要件而非政治迷思。最後，為維持自然延伸原則與區域制度的穩定，自然地貌沿伸原則具有重要的證據說服功能，但未排除自然的地質延伸原則。英文摘要：In 2012, International Tribunal of Law of the Sea (”ITLOS”) issued its first maritime delimitation judgment on Bangladesh v. Myanmar. The said judgment raised a very important debate among both the academics and the judges about how to interpret the natural prolongation principle of continental shelf extended over 200 nautical miles provided in Article 76 of United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea (”UNCLOS”). Some scholars argue that the natural prolongation principle has become only a political myth in UNCLOS after the said judgment, whereas some scholars argue that the importance of the principle is actually reconfirmed. Moreover, whether the natural prolongation principle is a natural ”geomorphological” or ”geological” principle also raised different opinions in the said judgment. This article aims to respond to this debate by analyzing various International Court of Justice's judgments and outer continental shelf recommendations issued by the UN Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf in the recent years. There are three key research findings. Firstly, the concept of natural ”geological” prolongation principle adopted in Bangladesh v. Myanmar case should be regarded as an exceptional situation, a result of the special circumstance of the Bay of Bengal provided by UNCLOS. Secondly, the natural prolongation principle is still an indispensable legal element provided in UNCLOS and not just a political myth. Third, geomorphological evidence plays an important probative function in the regime of outer continental shelf, which does not exclude geological evidence to be used in the natural prolongation principle and also preserves the stability of the common heritage of mankind in the area.起始頁-結束頁：103-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.65(103-150)9篇名：正統論、中國性與中國認同並列篇名：Orthodoxy, Chineseness and Chinese Identity作者：張其賢(Chi-Shen Chang)關鍵字：正統論;中國性;中國認同;楊衒之;王通;Orthodoxy;Legitimacy;Essence of China;Chinese Identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：64期出版年：2015中文摘要：正統論是中國史學與政治思想的重要議題。本文企圖指出一種解讀歷代正統論述的新方式，亦即分析正統性與中國性之關係。本文指出，所謂正統性，其實就是某一政權作為地理意義「中國」之唯一政治代表的資格。此資格之要件，可歸納為三種「中國性」。從各個思想家所標舉之正統性要件，可以看出某思想家所重視之「中國性」為何。而該思想家所重視之「中國性」，其實反映出其心目中的「中國」認同為何。因此，由某時代之某思想家所提出之正統性要件，可以看出此時代此思想家所重之「中國性」為何，以及其所抱持之「中國」認同的內涵為何。本文以北魏到中唐為例，分析當時思想家所主張的正統性要件有哪些，由此觀察此一時期思想家所抱持的「中國」認同為何。本文顯示，歷代正統論述作為思想史史料，或許為關於「中國」認同的思想史研究，提供了一把意想不到的鑰匙。英文摘要：This article aims to present a new way of analyzing the abundant documents in Chinese intellectual history regarding the issue of orthodoxy. I argue that the criteria of orthodoxy upheld by thinkers of various ages could be interpreted as proposing three elements of Chineseness, namely the cultural, the geographical and the ethnic. Based on these elements, thinkers in each age constructed their respective ideas about the essence of China, thus forming their own versions of Chinese identity. Statements by thinkers from the fifth to eighth centuries are presented as examples for analysis. In the modern context of the political rivalry between the ROC and the PRC, the intertwining relationship between orthodoxy, Chineseness and political legitimacy still has its effects on both players, as the concluding section suggests.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.64(1-44)10篇名：鼓勵外資政策與國家間衝突之分析（1970－2001）並列篇名：Analysis of Foreign Direct Investment Promotion Policy and Interstate Militarized Conflict (1970-2001)作者：邱奕宏(Eric Yi-Hung Chiou)關鍵字：鼓勵外資政策;國家間軍事衝突;外來直接投資;衝突開啟;Pro-FDI Policy;Interstate Conflict;Foreign Direct Investment (FDI);Conflict Initiation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：64期出版年：2015中文摘要：鼓勵外來直接投資政策是否隱含國家不願意運用武力來解決國家間衝突的意涵？本文之目的在檢驗國家的提倡外資政策與其主動開啟軍事衝突間的關聯。透過檢視國家的提倡外資政策與其主動開啟軍事衝突間的關聯。透過檢視國家的意向，本文認為鼓勵外資政策隱含國家傾向和平的意涵，這是由於下列兩點因素：首先、一國的鼓勵外資政策與其主動開啟軍事衝突無相容，因為後者將對國家吸引外資的作為帶來負面影響。其次，鼓勵外資政策通常標誌著國家對跨國企業之較為可信的承諾，以維繫和平的環境。由此，採行鼓勵外資政策的國家較少會主動開啟軍事衝突。本研究透過1970年至2001年期間的統計資料，分析鼓勵外資政策與國家開啟衝突間的關聯。研究結果顯示，鼓勵外資的總體政策與國家發動衝突有統計顯著性的負面相關。換言之，提倡外資政策具有減少國家主動開啟軍事衝突的促和效果，亦可知鼓勵外資政策隱含國家具有較低衝突意願的傾向。英文摘要：Are states with pro-FDI policies less conflict-prone? This paper examines plausible linkages between a state's FDI promotion policy and its desire to initiate conflicts. By focusing on the willingness of the state, I argue that pro-FDI policy may reveal the state's propensity to preserve peace for two reasons. First, pro-FDI policy is incompatible with conflict initiation since the negative effects of the latter offset the state's efforts to increase FDI inflow by the former. Second, pro-FDI policy tends to be credible when it explicitly addresses the state's commitments to multinationals. Hence, states undertaking pro-FDI policies are less likely to initiate conflict in general. By employing various pro-FDI policy indicators, I test the FDI-conflict initiation relationship at the monadic level from 1970 to 2001. Statistical results show that while macro-pro-FDI policies are negatively associated with conflict initiation, treaty-pro-FDI policies do not have the same effect. At both theoretical and empirical levels, this study advances the understanding of the FDI-conflict relationship by demonstrating the possible pacifying effects that pro-FDI policy might have on conflict initiation, and reveals that states with pro-FDI policy tend to be less conflict-prone.起始頁-結束頁：45-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.64(45-84)01篇名：中文兒童代名詞推論能力的發展研究：提及順位與性別語義特徵的影響並列篇名：The Development of Pronoun Resolution for Chinese Young Readers: The Effects of Order of Mention and Gender Semantic Features作者：黃秋華(Chiu-Hua Huang);陸偉明(Wei-Ming Luh);曾玉村(Yuh-Tsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：代名詞推論;性別語義特徵;首位優勢現象;提及順位;gender semantic features;order-of-mention;pronoun resolution;the advantage of first mention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：代名詞推論對讀者建構連貫性的心理表徵具關鍵影響力，但中文的實徵研究相當有限，在兒童的發展性研究更是缺乏。本研究旨為探討中文兒童在不同性別語義特徵代名詞的推論時是否有首位優勢（即第一順位）或時近效應（即第二順位）之現象。共206位兒童參與，以重覆測量三因子混合設計（2 × 2 × 4）探討代名詞指涉第一和第二順位以及「他」和「她」性別語義特徵對二、三、四、五年級兒童在代名詞句閱讀時間的效果。結果顯示，兒童代名詞推論的答對率會隨著年級的增加而提升；且代名詞句的閱讀時間會隨著年級的增加而減少，但這個趨勢主要發生在相差一個年級以上才會出現顯著差異。四、五年級兒童進行代名詞「他」和「她」推論的答對率都高於.90，顯示他們會利用性別語義的線索，但從閱讀時間上來看沒有提及順位上的差異。此外，提及順位和性別語義特徵有交互作用，三年級兒童進行代名詞「他」推論時出現首位優勢現象。而二、三年級兒童進行代名詞「她」的推論則出現時近效應。文末對此發現進行討論並進一步提出教學上的應用。英文摘要：Pronoun resolution is important for readers to build a coherent mental representation. However, earlier studies were limited to European languages. Not much is known about the process in Chinese language and even little about the developmental trajectories among Chinese readers. We investigate how the order of mention and gender semantic features may affect Chinese readers' pronoun resolution and explore their development through a 3-way ANOVA mixed design. The effects of order of mention (first/second-mention) and gender semantic features (he/she) on pronoun resolution for 2nd to 5th graders were examined. A total of 206 participants participated. The results indicate that children in higher grades have higher rate of correct answer in pronoun resolution. Moreover, the higher the children's grades, the less time they need to read sentence with pronouns. This pattern only appears, however, when the grade-groups are two or more years apart. In addition, the reading times of the first-mentioned were shorter than those of the second-mentioned when ”he” referred to the first-mentioned protagonist for the 3rd graders; hence, first mention advantage is observed. Furthermore, for 2nd and 3rd graders, a recency effect appeared when children tried to resolve ”she”. For 4th and 5th graders, their accuracy rates were usually above 90%, indicating that they have mastered the use of gender semantic features for this age, and there were no significant effects on order of mention or gender semantic features.起始頁-結束頁：555-576資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201312252篇名：臺灣諮商心理師執業現況與執業意見之調查研究並列篇名：Practice and Opinion Survey of Counseling Psychologists in Taiwan作者：林家興(Chia-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：執業調查;諮商心理師;counseling psychologist;practice survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的在於調查諮商心理師的執業現況和對執業相關問題的看法，作為諮商心理師專業發展的參考。主要探討的問題包括：諮商心理師在哪些場所執業？心理諮商實際和合理收費是多少？主要的工作內容和時數為何？平均每月收入是多少？對於收費標準的訂定單位、公會常年會費的合理額度、諮商心理師是否納入健保，以及諮商心理師人力是否足夠等的看法為何？研究工具為自編的「諮商心理師執業現況問卷」，以全體執業登記的諮商心理師為研究母群，回收有效問卷共計325份。主要研究結果：1.有64.4%的諮商心理師在學校執業；2.專兼任比例為57.62%和42.38%；3.專兼任諮商心理師的平均月收入為44,809元和54,133元；4.專職諮商心理師每週工作時間的三成從事諮商實務工作，將近六成從事行政工作；5.心理諮商每次平均收費為1,268元，諮商心理師認為每次心理諮商的合理收費標準是1,425元；6.諮商心理師的個案來源有74.3%是靠機構安排；7.諮商心理師的專長主要在青少年、大學生和成人，以及一般發展性問題和生涯與職業問題，以及學校諮商；8.諮商心理師的主要工作內容是：個別諮商、上課演講與工作坊、心理測驗與衡鑑，以及團體輔導；9.諮商心理師服務對象主要是成人，其次是青少年，再其次是兒童；10.有82.5%的諮商心理師執業時會使用心理測驗，有8.9%會使用生理回饋；11.多數諮商心理師認為心理諮商所收費標準應由諮商心理師公會全聯會訂定；12.有76.3%的受訪者贊成將諮商心理師納入執行全民健保給付項目的醫事人員；13.有81.6%的諮商心理師未來五年的生涯規劃是在機構專職或兼職執業；14.對於諮商心理師人力的估計，有50.8%的受訪者認為不足，有34.8%認為過剩。最後，本研究針對研究結果進行討論，並提出專業發展與未來研究的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to investigate the current practice patterns of counseling psychologists in Taiwan and their opinions of practice-related issues. The research questions included practice locations, fee schedule, professional activities, working hour allocation, monthly incomes, fee setting authority, annual fee for association membership, participation in the National Health Insurance Plan, and counseling psychologist manpower. A total of 325 licensed counseling psychologists completed a questionnaire constructed by the researcher. The results of the study indicate that out of the 325 counseling psychologists: (a) 64.4% of them work in school settings; (b) 57.6% of them work full-time with an average monthly income of NT$44,809; (c) 42.4% of them work part-time with an average monthly income of NT$54,133; (d) Full-time counseling psychologists spent 30% of their work hours in direct service and almost 60% in administrative activities; (e) The averaged hour fee for counseling service is NT$1,268 and the reasonable hour fee according to the participants is NT$1,425; (f) 74.3% of the clients were assigned by the agency; (g) The majority of the counseling psychologists are specialized in counseling adolescents, college students, and adults with developmental and career issues in school settings; (h) Counseling psychologists' major professional activities are: individual counseling, classroom teaching, lecture and workshop, psychological testing and assessment, and group counseling; (i) Counseling psychologists served mostly adults, followed by adolescents, and then children; (j) Among the 325 respondents, 82.5% use psychological testing and 8.9% use biofeedback in their practice; (k) Relative majority of the respondents agreed that the counseling psychological association should set the fee schedule; (l) 76.3% of them agreed that counseling psychologists should join the National Health Insurance Plan as service providers; (m) 81.6% of the respondents plan to work full-time or part-time in professional organizations within the next 5 years; (n) 50.8% of the respondents believe there is a manpower shortage while 34.8% believe there is a manpower oversupply of counseling psychologists. Discussion of the research findings and suggestions for professional development and future research are presented in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：279-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201302273篇名：應用決策樹探討中學生學習成就的相關因素並列篇名：Applying Decision Tree to Investigate High School Students' Learning Achievement Factors作者：江羿臻(Yi-Chen Chiang);林正昌(Cheng-Chang Lin)關鍵字：分類與迴歸樹;學習成就;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;classification and regression trees (CART);learning achievement;Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要的目的在透過分類與迴歸樹（CART）分析方法，探討中學生在不同學習階段的學習成就情形及其相關因素，比較不同學習階段中學生之學習成就相關因素的差異，並進一步建立不同學習階段學習成就高低的分類預測模型。本研究以臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（TEPS）為資料來源，採用第一波國中樣本和第三波高中／高職／五專追蹤樣本學生和家長問卷，樣本數為3022人。研究發現：（1）中學生於不同學習階段的學習成就有顯著差異，高中／高職／五專階段的學習成就表現高於國中階段；（2）中學生於不同學習階段的學習成就相關因素是有差異的。國中階段的CART分類模型包括11個變項，涵括了個人、家庭和社會網絡三個因素，高中／高職／五專階段的CART分類模型，包括課程類別和學校公私立別兩個變項，包括了個人和學校兩個因素；（3）中學生於不同學習階段，用來區分學習成就高低的因素有差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to, through Classification and Regression Trees (CART) analysis, investigate and compare leaning achievements and relevant factors among high school students at different academic levels, and then establish a classification model that can predict different levels of learning achievement with different academic levels of high school students. This longitudinal study utilized the database of Taiwan Education Panel Survey, adopting waveⅠand wave Ⅲ questionnaires filled out by one selected group of students and their parents. The total sample consisted of 3022 students who were in junior high school at waveⅠand followed up when they were senior high school/vocational high school/junior college students at wave Ⅲ. The three major findings of this study are: (a) The learning achievements of high school student at different academic levels were significantly different. The learning achievements of senior high school/vocational high school/junior college students were better than that of junior high school students; (b) The factors related to learning achievement at different academic levels of high school students were different. The CART classification model for junior high school stage included three factors-individual, family, and social network, within which 11 variables emerged. Another model for senior high school/vocational high school/junior college stage included two factors-individual and school, in which were two variables, course type and public or private school; (c) The factors that discriminated levels of learning achievement at different academic levels of high school students varied.起始頁-結束頁：303-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201305284篇名：產科病房心理支持方案之可行性研究：以某醫學中心為例並列篇名：The Feasibility of an Obstetric Psychological Support Project at a Medical Center作者：謝珮玲(Pey-Ling Shieh);應宗和(Tsung-Ho Ying);張孝純(Hsiao-Chun Chang);曾英珍(Ying-Chen Tseng)關鍵字：心理支持;心理學人員;孕產期心理衛生;家庭中心;質性典範;family-based;perinatal mental health;psychology professionals;psychology support project;qualitative paradigm期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：女性在孕產期間的心理健康狀況應受到關注，而國內醫療機構在產婦生產過程中所實施的心理支持方案相當有限，並且未曾由受過心理學訓練之人員所執行，因此本研究以先驅研究的方式，探討心理學人員在產科實施心理支持方案之可行性。研究以質性典範進行，依據「聆聽式訪視」與「親嬰治療」之非指導式諮商、觀察、詮釋等方法，於中部某醫學中心產科病房執行共十週之「心理支持方案」，由五名心理系師生擔任會談者，共接觸68名產婦。會談者於執行期間撰寫紀錄，並對紀錄內容進行分析。分析結果發現，在人時地狀況方面，產婦的生理狀況、會談者性別、住院生活步調、病室環境等對於心理支持方案之實施均有影響。在產婦與家屬的反應方面，產婦對方案的接受程度、投入狀況各異。產婦所關心的心理社會議題包括作息與坐月子方式、情緒、教養、夫妻與婆媳關係等；先生關心的是生活忙亂、教養；娘家在意的是產婦是否被妥善地照顧，婆婆則對產婦的坐月子方式有著複雜的情緒。依據研究結果，研究者建議未來的產科心理支持，在實務上可朝孕期宣導、設計會談主題、以家庭為中心、依據產科特性訓練心理學人員、加強醫護與心理人員之合作等方向著手。在研究上，則應發展孕產期心理衛生之評量工具，並對心理支持方案進行效果評估。英文摘要：Perinatal mental health of women is an important issue that deserves attention. However, few psychological support projects have been adopted in obstetric units and few psychology professionals have been involved in such projects. The purpose of this study was to preliminarily explore the feasibility of an obstetric psychological support project led by psychology professionals. Based on a qualitative paradigm, a ten-week psychological support project was implemented at a medical center in Central Taiwan. Based on the principles of Listening Visit and parent-infant psychotherapy, strategies of nondirective counseling, observation, and interpretation were used in this project. Five psychology professionals (one professor, four undergraduates) and sixty-eight women participated in this project. Content analysis was conducted to analyze the psychology professionals' process records. In the person, time, and space aspects, several factors that influenced the implementation of the project emerged. Those factors included: women's physical wellbeing, the gender of interviewers, the pace during hospital stay, and the room environment. According to reactions of the participants, obstetric women showed different degrees of acceptance and involvement. For women, the most frequently raised psychosocial issues were postpartum living style, the way of ”doing-the-month.” emotions, child-rearing problems, and relationships with partner and mother-in-law. Chaotic states of life and child-rearing challenges were psychosocial issues that husbands were concerned with. As for the obstetric women's family of origin, they were most concerned about whether their daughters were appropriately taken cared of. For the mothers-in-law, they have mixed feelings about the ways for which ”doing-the-month” were carried out. Based on the results, we suggest an early implementation of educational programs of the psychological support project for pregnant women and their families. We also address the importance of the structured, family-based counseling approach, further training for psychology professionals, and their collaboration with medical staffs. The development of measures to assess perinatal mental health and the outcome of psychological support project are needed.起始頁-結束頁：329-348資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20130603.25篇名：家庭分化與家庭暴力經驗對愛情依戀的預測並列篇名：Prediction of Romantic Attachment from Family Differentiation and Family Violence作者：孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun)關鍵字：家庭分化;家庭暴力;愛情依戀;family differentiation;family violence;romantic attachment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在探討愛情關係中的依戀反應與過去家庭情緒經驗的關聯，而本研究所指的而家庭經驗包括家庭分化與家庭暴力等兩類經驗，家庭分化又分成父子間、母子間與知覺父母間的情感共振與干涉侵犯，家庭暴力包括父子間、母子間與知覺父母間暴力；採多元階層逐步迴歸分析，探討這些家庭情緒經驗對愛情關係中焦慮與逃避依戀向度的活化反應之預測，同時也比較性別差異。有效研究樣本共計480人，其中男性168人、女性312人，皆為正在某段戀情關係中的大學生。研究結果發現：1.整體而言，愛情中焦慮依戀反應最能被親子暴力預測，但僅具有低度預測力，並具有性別差異。2.整體而言，愛情中逃避依戀反應最能被知覺父母間情感共振所預測。3.對男性而言，知覺父母間情感共振最能預測其愛情中的逃避依戀反應，並具有中低度的預測力。整體而言，親子間暴力經驗愈少，個體在愛情關係中的焦慮依戀反應可能愈少，而知覺父母間情感連結愈多，個體的逃避依戀反應可能也愈少。最後進行討論與探討研究限制。英文摘要：This research study explores the association between attachment in a romantic relationship and past familial emotional experiences. Familial emotional experiences included family differentiation and family violence; and family differentiation included the experience of affective involvement and intrusiveness. Stepwise multiple regression analysis was adopted. In addition, the different relationships between father and son, mother and son, and perceived parents were explored separately, and gender differences were also compared through regression analysis. The research sample included 480 participants (168 males and 312 females) who were in a relationship at that time. The research results yielded three conclusions: (1) overall, offspring-parent violence best predicted anxiety attachment in a romantic relationship, however the predictive power was low and varied by gender; (2) in general, perceived parents affective involvement best predicted avoidance attachment in a relationship; (3) for men, affective involvement on the part of perceived parents best predicted avoidance attachment in a relationship with low to medium levels of predictive power. Generally speaking, the fewer violent experiences in an offspring-parent relationship, the less anxiety attachment an individual would likely experience in a romantic relationship. Also, the more emotional connections between perceived parents, the less avoidance attachment an individual would likely have. In closing, the paper included additional discussions and addressed research limitations.起始頁-結束頁：349-366資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201306286篇名：兒時目睹家暴之受暴婦女在諮商中所知覺重要事件之研究並列篇名：An Analysis of Significant Events in Counseling with a Battered Woman Who Witnessed Domestic Violence during Childhood作者：戴谷霖(Ku-Lin Tai);陳慶福(Ching-Fu Chen);黃素雲(Su-Yun Huang)關鍵字：受暴婦女;重要事件;諮商歷程;IPR人際歷程回憶;battered woman;counseling process;significant events期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討某社區諮商中心一位兒時目睹家暴之受暴婦女，接受八次諮商過程中所關注的主要議題及內容，其所知覺及認定的重要事件及內涵。本研究採諮商歷程研究，於當事人每次接受諮商後，立即以人際歷程回憶（IPR）進行重要事件的訪談，整理成訪談逐字稿，研究者透過與協同分析者及專家共同歸類分析與討論，進行資料分析，研究主要發現：（一）當事人於八次諮商過程中關注的主要議題共有：當事人眼中的案夫、與案夫及夫家人的溝通與互動、家庭經濟分擔、家事分擔、親子關係與教養、對目前處境及關係的抉擇、夫妻關係、自我揭露與探索、兒時目睹家暴的影響、自我照顧，以及婚姻暴力的重新理解與因應方式；（二）當事人所認定的正、負重要事件可分為十類。本研究針對研究發現進行討論，並對未來研究及諮商實務提出具體建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to investigate the concerning issues and perception of significant events in the counseling process of a battered woman who witnessed domestic violence in childhood. This study used the counseling process research design. The counselor-client dyad had eight counseling sessions. After each session, the client was interviewed through Interpersonal Process Recall. The records of counseling and interview were all transformed into transcripts for data analysis. The major findings were as follows: (1) The concerning issues in the whole course of counseling were the client's perception of her husband, the communication and interaction with her husband and his family, shared finances, division of housework duties, parenting, decisions about relationships and circumstances, marital relationship, self-disclosure and exploration, the influence of witnessing domestic violence in childhood, self-care, and the reframing and coping of marital violence. (2) There were ten categories of positive and negative significant events perceived by the client. Suggestions are offered for counselors working with battered women, counseling practice, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：367-391資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201307017篇名：敵視女性態度、強暴迷思、與強暴行為並列篇名：Hostility toward Women, the Rape Myth, and Rape作者：黃軍義(Jiun-Yih Huang)關鍵字：強暴行為;強暴迷思;敵視女性態度;hostility toward women;rape;rape myth期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討敵視女性態度影響強暴行為的機制，提出強暴迷思是敵視女性態度與強暴及多元強暴行為中介變項的假設。本研究以無記名自陳式問卷調查法蒐集資料，針對具有全國代表性的大專學生樣本進行調查，共計得到大專男生有效樣本數七百三十二位。研究結果顯示，敵視女性態度對強暴及多元強暴行為的影響須透過強暴迷思，強暴迷思是敵視女性態度及強暴與多元強暴行為的完全中介變項。研究結果支持假設。最後就研究對象及測量工具、敵視女性態度的形成、研究結果的應用、以及未來研究方向，提出討論。英文摘要：This study investigates the mechanisms of how hostility toward women affects rape. It was hypothesized that the rape myth mediates the association between hostility toward women and rape. We used an anonymous self-reporting questionnaire to conduct a survey and collect data. A representative national sample of college students was selected through a random sampling procedure, and had a valid sample of 732 male college students. The results showed that hostility toward women affected rape through rape myth; in addition, rape myth fully mediated the association between hostility toward women and rape, which supported the hypothesis of this study. Finally, the research samples and measurements, formation of hostility toward women, implications of the findings, and future research directions were addressed.起始頁-結束頁：393-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20130711.18篇名：受苦轉變經驗之存在現象學探究：存在現象學和諮商與心理治療理論的對話並列篇名：An Existential-Phenomenological Study on the Transitional Experience of Suffering: Dialogues between Existential Phenomenology and Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy作者：盧怡任(Yi-Jen Lu);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu)關鍵字：存在現象學;受苦轉變歷程;現象學心理學;諮商與心理治療;counseling and psychotherapy;existential phenomenology;phenomenological psychology;transitional process of suffering期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：45卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：對於人類受苦與離苦經驗的關注是諮商與心理治療的核心議題，本研究透過諮商理論的爬梳提出相關問題並從存在現象學出發進行受苦轉變經驗之探究，以達理論間對話之目的。本研究以存在現象學研究法，透過三位訪談者在二年中的三次訪談文本，分析參與者在二年之中的受苦轉變經驗，結果發現：（1）受苦者以情緒與身體做為工具，反思原有籌劃之可行性以及世界所呈現之意義；（2）受苦者將轉變經驗視為「學習」的過程，關鍵在「修正」原有籌劃以及「接受」被視為威脅的世界；（3）在被視為「學習」的轉變經驗中，受苦者在痛苦的身體與情緒中，發現其所面對之不熟悉的處境其實和過去不同，並展開解決現在與過去矛盾的過程，包括期望解決問題、重新理解與接受自身的過去、在現在力求解決過去與未來的矛盾；（4）在痛苦的學習過程後，呈現在受苦者面前的是新的處境或新的可能性，因而受苦者開始可以將自己投入新的未來。本研究除了從諮商理論與存在現象學進行理論對話之外，並對諮商實務工作者與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The human experience of suffering and the process of change have always been core issues in counseling and psychotherapy. This article reviewed theories of counseling and psychotherapy to address the paradox of each theory, and then explored the transitional experience of suffering from the perspectives of existential phenomenology. Based on such understanding, the experience-based connecting points in various theories were found. This study used an existential-phenomenology approach to carry out interviews with three interviewees under suffering. The second interview was conducted one and a half years after the first one; the third one was a half year after the second one. The three interviews expanded over two years, and was used to analyze the interviewees' transitional experience of suffering. The results showed that: (1) sufferers used bodies and emotions as tools to reflect upon the feasibility of their original projects and worldviews; (2) the key to sufferers' transitional experience included ”revising” their original project, and ”accepting” of the world considered a threat by them which are viewed as a learning process; (3) during the learning process, sufferers identified the paradox between past and present experience through psychological and embodied pain, and then started to find the solution. The learning process involved: (a) wishing to solve the problems; (b) re-understanding and accepting their past; (c) trying to solve the conflicts between the past and the present; (d) after the painful learning process, new situation or new possibility for sufferers appeared. This study discussed the existing descriptions of existential phenomenology on transitional experience of suffering from the viewpoint of counseling and psychotherapy, and made suggestions for counseling practitioners and future research. Limitations of this study were also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：413-433資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.20130711.201篇名：黃遵憲對晚清引介日本教育制度及建立西式教育的貢獻並列篇名：Huang Zunxian's Contribution to the Introduction of Aspects of the Japanese Education System and the Establishment of Western-style Education in Late Qing China作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：日本國志;日本教育;明治維新;晚清學制;黃遵憲;a general history of Japan;Japan educational system;Meiji reform;school systems;Huang Zunxian期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:2期出版年：2014中文摘要：晚清兩學制係仿日制，而黃遵憲最先完整介紹並建議仿日。他使日時親身經歷明治維新，藉蒐集文獻、代譯書籍、訪談友人及實地參訪等法撰成《日本雜事詩》與《日本國志》，開研究日本先河，提倡設學興教，鼓勵清仿日變法。後書 於甲午戰敗後問世，戊戌維新時，皇帝及變法重臣都讀過。梁啟超將《國志》列為時務學堂必讀之書，倡辦師範教育；盛宣懷創南洋公學，首建師範齋及附設小學；戊戌時康梁議設各級學堂及京師大學堂以統各省學堂等，均當受黃氏啟迪。但因日持續變革，故不易掌握新況。當制定學制時，他雖未參與但擬藉書喚起朝野正視日本之崛起，對引介日制及建立西式教育實有貢獻。可惜主政者未重視，再派員赴日短期考察，歸國後未參與規劃，報告僅供參考，遂無法設計符合國情的新學制。本文旨在探討黃遵憲對引介日本教育及建立新學制的貢獻。英文摘要：Huang Zunxian was the first Chinese to compile a description of the Japanese education system and to suggest that China should learn from it. While serving as a Chinese diplomat in Japan, Huang witnessed the Meiji Restoration reforms at first hand. The research and investigations that Huang undertook while in Japan provided the basis for his Poems on Japan and General History of Japan; Huang urged the Qing government to implement educational reforms along Japanese lines. The aim of the present study is to examine the contribution made by Huang Zunxian to the introduction of aspects of the Japanese education system into China during the last years of the Qing Dynasty. Huang’s writings influenced other educational reformers such as Sheng Xuanhuai, Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao. However, the Japanese education system itself continued to evolve during this period, which made it difficult for China to keep upto- date with the latest developments. When the Qing government did finally begin to establish a new education system, Huang Zunxian was not directly involved. Nevertheless, Huang Zunxian can be said to have made a significant contribution towards the introduction into China of aspects of the Japanese education system and towards the establishment of Western-style education in China. Unfortunately, the authorities did not recognize the full value of Huang’s recommendations. As a result, the new education system that was eventually designed was not fully suited to China’s real needs.起始頁-結束頁：77-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140660020032篇名：評析德國改革教育學者H. Lietz鄉村教育之家的理念與實踐並列篇名：An Analysis of the Theory and Practice of the Landerziehungsheime School System Developed by the German Educational Reformer Hermann Lietz作者：張淑媚(Shu-Mei Cha)關鍵字：Lietz;鄉村教育之家;德國改革教育學;H. Lietz;home of country education;German reform pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究在於引介並評析H. Lietz鄉村教育之家的教育理念與實踐。Hietz是德國鄉村教育之家的創始人，在十九世紀末到二十世紀初德國的教育改革上具有指標性的意義。在評析部分，本文指出Lietz思想內部的兩項矛盾，包括：一、現代化的改革教育學，卻又隱含反現代的思維；二、Lietz強調學生的自主性，但是其改革理念中卻又內含國家至上的意識型態。英文摘要：The present study examines the educational philosophy o f t h e Landerzeihungsheime school system developed by Hermann Lietz, and analyses how the system worked in practice. As the founder of the Landerzeihungsheime school system, Lietz was a key figure in educational reform in Germany in the late 19^(th) and early 20^(th) centuries. The study discusses two internal contradictions in Lietz's thought: Firstly, there are paradoxically anti-modern ideas in his modern, reformist mode of thinking, and secondly, there is a strong national ideology embedded in his thinking, along with his emphasis on students' individuality.起始頁-結束頁：115-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140660020043篇名：「幼兒數學教材教法」教學方案對職前學前教師數學教學知識的影響並列篇名：The Teaching Plan ”Methods and Materials of Teaching Early Childhood Mathematics” and Its Effects on Prejob/Preschool Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching作者：張麗芬(Li-Fen Chang)關鍵字：教學方法知識;數學教學知識;學科內容知識;學習者認知的知識;pedagogical knowledge;mathematical knowledge for teaching;content knowledge;knowledge of learners' cognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在探討「幼兒數學教材教法」教學方案介入對職前學前教師數學教學知識的影響，教學方案中並加入晤談幼兒的現場經驗。研究者以影片分析方式蒐集37位職前學前教師在教學方案介入之前與之後對教學影片的評論，並將這些評論依數學教學知識的三個向度—學科內容知識、學習者認知的知識、教學方法知識—加以分析後，於學期末蒐集研究對象對整個教學方案的反省短文、對教材的討論與活動評析進行分析。結果發現，教學方案介入對職前學前教師數學教學知識有產生效果，後測時，職前教師在學科內容知識及教學方法知識兩個向度的教學知識層次有進步的比率顯著多於退步比率；而在學習者認知的知識向度，後測教學知識層次有變化的比率差異僅接近顯著水準。其次，職前教師對方案中的晤談幼兒經驗大多抱持正面態度，他們實際體驗幼兒的數學思考，並覺得晤談經驗對未來的學習與教學有幫助。英文摘要：This study aims to how the teaching plan ”Methods and Materials of Teaching Early Childhood Mathematics” has exerted its influence on prejob/preschool teacher's mathematical knowledge for. A task-based interview is also adopted. Thirty-seven prospective early childhood teachers enrolled in a mathematics methods course were required to view video clips of realistic classroom instruction. They then provided two written comments, respectively at the beginning and at the end of the 18-week course program. Teachers' written responses are coded from three perspectives, content knowledge, knowledge of learners' cognition, and pedagogical knowledge; each of them was on a 4-point scale. The prospective teachers' reflections on the whole program, their discussion, and evaluation of mathematics activities were at the end of the program collected for further analysis. The results show that the program had a positive effect. The prospective teachers' content knowledge and pedagogical knowledge were enhanced; their knowledge of learners' cognition, however, was not significantly improved. Secondly, the prospective teachers' reflections show that they appreciated the interview with the kids, which granted them a chance to actually experience young children's mode of mathematical thinking. They believed that the interview would be a great help for their learning and teaching in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140360010014篇名：參與教師社群教師知識信念、目標設定及教學意志力之研究：以新北市國小為例並列篇名：A Study of Teachers' Epistemological Beliefs, Goal Setting, and Teaching Volition in the Teachers' Professional Learning Communities: The Cases of Primary School in New Taipei City作者：黃儒傑(Ju-Chieh Huang)關鍵字：目標設定;知識信念;教師專業社群;教學意志力;teachers' professional learning communities (PLC);epistemological beliefs;goal setting;teaching volition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究實施問卷調查，以瞭解參與教師社群和未參與教師社群教師在知識信念、目標設定與教學意志力的差異情形，並分析參與教師社群教師的知識信念與目標設定對其教學意志力的關係。本研究針對新北市國小進行問卷調查，共回收參與教師社群教師問卷266份及未參與教師社群教師問卷273份，回收率為60.7%與62.3%。問卷資料經採多變量變異數分析、結構方程模式分析後，發現一些重要結論。首先，參與教師社群教師具有較佳的知識信念觀點、目標設定與教學意志力。其次，本研究所提出之「參與教師社群教師之知識信念與目標設定對教學意志力關係」的假設模式，具理想適配度。最後，優質的知識信念與目標設定，有助於增進社群教師的教學意志力，且優質的知識信念還能促進優質的目標設定，進而更提高教學意志力。依據前述研究結論，本研究並提出一些相關建議。英文摘要：This study used questionnaires to analyze the differences between Professional Learning Communities (PLC) teachers and non-PLC teachers in terms of epistemological beliefs, goal setting, and teaching volition, and to analyze LC teachers' relationships with the epistemological beliefs, goal setting, and teaching volition of teachers. Questionnaires were administered to PLC teachers as well as non-PLC teachers in New Taipei City. PLC teachers returned 266 questionnaires and non- PLC teachers returned 273 questionnaires. Factor analysis, MANOVA, and structural equation models were used to analyze the questionnaire data and several valuable results were found. First, the LC teachers showed better epistemological beliefs, higher goal setting, and higher level of teaching volition than non-PLC teachers. Second, the result of the goodness-of-fit was satisfactory when it was used to test the hypothetical structural relationships between epistemological beliefs, goal setting, and teaching volition. Finally, epistemological beliefs and goal setting were found to have a considerable impact on the teaching volition or PLC teachers. Based on these findings, several suggestions for the PLC teachers and for future research are offered.起始頁-結束頁：39-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140360010025篇名：東南亞裔新移民女性之子女的學業成就真的比較差嗎？與本地對照組比較之三年追蹤探究並列篇名：Are They Really Lagging Behind?: A Three-Year Longitudinal Comparison of Academic Performance Between the Southeast Asian Female Immigrants' Children and the Local Children作者：吳毓瑩(Yuh-Yin Wu);蔡振州(Chen-Chou Tsai)關鍵字：東南亞裔新移民女性;追蹤調查;國語學業成就;新移民子女;數學學業成就;Southeast Asian female immigrants;longitudinal study;academic performance in mathematics;children of immigrants;academic performance in Chinese期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在探究東南亞裔新移民女性子女學業成就三年追蹤狀況，並蒐集類似父親教育背景的同班、同性別之本地同學做為對照組，以瞭解控制了父親教育背景後，學業成就表現是否與母親為新移民女性有關？抑或因居住地區而不同？研究樣本取自都會區及非都會區共六縣市，自2005年起追蹤三年，包括一、二、三、四、五共五個年級的新移民子女422人、本地對照組400人。結果顯示，第一年時，新移民子女學業成就落後本地組，但在第三年時已無差異。都會區中，兩組學生表現類似，漸次升上高年級，乃至於國中時，國語名次持續下滑，落後同儕。非都會區中，兩組學生亦有類似狀況，國語學業成就在剛升上新年段（如二升三年級、四升五年級）時明顯退步。新移民子女與本地對照組困境型態類似，都會區之學習困境不同於非都會地區，顯見母親是否為新移民非關鍵因素，居住地區為一潛藏因子。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the academic performance of children of Southeast Asian female immigrants through three-year longitudinal survey. The local contrast groups were defined as children who were of the same gender, from the same homeroom class, and had fathers with similar educational backgrounds. Samples were collected from metropolitan areas of New Taipei City, Taoyuan County, and Taichung City (riginally, Taichung County), and from non-metropolitan areas such as Yunlin County, Pingtung County, and Penghu County. There were a total of 422 immigrants' children and 400 local contrast samples, from first grade to fifth grade in elementary school. Subjects were followed from 2005 to 2007. The results indicated that immigrants' children's performance in Chinese and Mathematics generally fell behind the average. In metropolitan areas, for Chinese learning, the fifth graders displayed decline in academic performance during the three years; in non-metropolitan areas, the sign of decline appeared when children were at the third and fifth grade. No significant differences were shown in students' math performance. Furthermore, at the third year after follow-up, there were no ethnic differences. These results suggest that since these students were capable of getting higher grades, their mothers' ethnic background was not the key factor to achievement differences between immigrant groups and local groups. However, the area of residence may be a key difference.起始頁-結束頁：77-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820140360010036篇名：教科書審定委員對教科書設計的關注焦點探討：以國小中年級社會學習領域為例並列篇名：Study on Textbook Reviewers' Concerns on Textbook Design: Taking the 3rd and 4th Grade Elementary Social Studies as Examples作者：塗宥騏(Yu-Chi Tu);陳麗華(Li-Hua Chen)關鍵字：社會學習領域;教科書設計;教科書審查;social studies;textbook design;textbook review期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：60:1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小社會教科書審定委員對教科書設計的關注焦點。研究對象及方法有二：一是以內容分析法，探討2010至2011年國小中年級社會教科書審查意見所呈現的對教科書設計的關注焦點，總共分析翰林、康軒、南一等三個版本，每個版本有四冊、共計12冊的審查意見。其二是訪談法，對象為2010至2011年的國小中年級社會領域審定委員五位，探討其在執行審查工作時，在教科書設計方面的關注焦點、原因、背後的審查原則，以及影響其對教科書關注面向的因素。本研究發現，審查意見及審定委員對教科書設計的關注焦點具一致性，大抵上最關注教科書的文本設計及圖表設計，最不關注版式設計。此外，檢視其關注焦點的共通思維發現，其背後的審查原則為重視教材的正確性、文句易懂流暢、提升高層次思考，以及多元且平衡的觀點。英文摘要：The study aims to explore the major concerns on textbook design shown by the review committee on elementary school social studies textbooks. The research design included content analysis and an interview approach. A total of 12 textbooks from 3 publishers were involved in this study, each textbook with one set of Textbook Review Comments. Quantitative content analysis was employed to examine the committee's concerns based on the 12 sets of Textbook Review Comments. A semi-structured interview was conducted with five committee members to explore their concerns on textbook design. The major findings of the content analysis and interview were coherent: the most important concerns on textbook design were text and graphs/charts; the least important concern was the layout. The key underlying principles expressed in the reviews were the accuracy of the materials, the fluency of the text design, high-ordered thinking, and multiple and balanced perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：115-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201403600100401篇名：小一學童的基礎閱讀表現與幼兒園閱讀素養環境的關聯並列篇名：Kindergarten Literacy Environment and First Graders' Reading Performance作者：林珮<U+4F03>(Pei-Yu Lin);蔡邑庭(Yi-Ting Tsai)關鍵字：中文識字;幼兒語文發展;注音符號;閱讀理解;閱讀素養環境;Chinese reading comprehension;Chinese word reading;early literacy development;literacy environment;phonetic symbols期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究檢視小一學童的閱讀能力與幼兒園所經歷的閱讀素養環境有何關聯，研究對象共290位小一學童，來自臺灣非都會區的一所小學。本研究除了蒐集研究對象在閱讀理解、注音、識字，三項測驗的表現，兩位研究者並且進入研究對象就讀的13所幼兒園，實地觀察、訪問，蒐集文本資料，發展幼兒園閱讀素養環境評量表，並依據觀察、訪談和文件資料，評量幼兒園閱讀素養環境五面向的特徵，包括：課室環境、語文材料、語文活動舉行的慣例性、音韻經驗，以及各類語文活動五面向。本研究採集群分析，區分出幼兒園閱讀素養環境的潛在型態，結果顯示小一學童的閱讀表現，會依其家庭社經地位而有差異，控制社經地位的影響後，小一學童在三項基礎閱讀技能的表現，仍依幼兒園閱讀素養環境的不同型態，而有差異，顯示幼兒園閱讀素養環境對於非都會區幼兒語文發展的重要性。英文摘要：This study presents the latent patterns of kindergarten literacy environment and examines the relationships of these patterns to the first graders' basic reading skills. The participants were 290 first graders from one elementary school in a non-metropolitan area of Taiwan. The evaluation of 13 kindergartens which the participants attended was conducted via the self-developed Kindergarten Literacy Environment Scale. The items of the scale reflected the phenomena perceived by the researchers through triangulating their observations, interviews and collection of artifacts in the field. Five aspects of the literacy environment were evaluated, including physical environment, text materials, literacy routines, literacy activities, and phonological activities. A cluster analysis was conducted to display the latent patterns of the literacy environment. The findings indicate the differences of SES in the three test scores of phonetic symbols, Chinese word recognition, and reading comprehension. After the SES was controlled as a covariate, the differences of the latent patterns of kindergarten literacy environment in the three reading tests were still found. The results underscore the importance of kindergarten literacy environment in Chinese early literacy development.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140610020012篇名：生活課程教學方案發展：一個國小二年級班級之實踐探究並列篇名：Developing and Implementing a Teaching Project of the Life Curriculum: A Study in the Second Grade Classroom作者：吳璧純(Pichun Wu);王玉程(Yu-Cheng Wang);董蕙萍(Hui-Ping Tung);鄧婷尹(Ting-Yin Teng)關鍵字：生活課程;統整課程;教學方案;能力發展;行動研究;Life Curriculum;integrated curriculum;teaching project;competence development;action research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究為基隆市一個國小二年級的教室協同行動研究方案，班級中共有33位學生。本研究的主要目的在於藉由生活課程教學方案的發展與實踐，提升班上所有學生（包括五位特殊學生）的表達、溝通以及合作的能力。依循生活課程「統整課程」設計與實踐的三大準則：「以兒童為學習的主體」、「培養兒童的生活能力」、「拓展兒童對人、事、物多面向的意義」，本研究群以學童在地經驗為主軸，發展出「海洋嘉年華」主題課程。研究中除了呈現教師教學方案的發展與教學實踐的心得以及驗證生活課程的特性之外，並指出生活課程因為尊重與看見學生發展及學習的個別差異，不但能提升學生在互助合作、多種表達能力，以及相關知識的能力，更有助於達成特殊學生在普通班發揮潛能且能與同儕順利互動學習的融合教育目標。英文摘要：This study presents an action research regarding a primary second grade Life Curriculum in Keelung city. Thirty-three pupils participated in the class, including five special needs students. The purposes of the study are to develop and conduct a teaching project of the Life Curriculum, and to see if the instruction enhances students' expressive, communicating and collaborative abilities. Based on the three principles of instructional design in the Life Curriculum-(1) the child as an active learner, (2) cultivating students' competencies, (3) extending students' meanings of connecting to people, objects, and events--the researchers developed a theme of integrated curriculum named 'Ocean Carnival.' The results show teachers' reflections and growth, characteristics of the Life Curriculum, and pupils' progress in communication, cooperation, several kinds of expressive skills, and knowledge of related learning topics. Besides, the results reveal that Life Curriculum can reach the aims of inclusive education, and help special needs students grow in a general classroom.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140610020023篇名：班級族群組成與學生心理幸福並列篇名：Classroom Ethnic Composition and Students' Well-Being作者：林俊瑩(Chunn-Ying Lin);陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen);黃章健(Cheang Kiang Ng)關鍵字：心理幸福;中學生;族群組成;階層線性模式;well-being;junior high school students;classroom ethnic composition;hierarchical linear modeling (HLM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：在臺灣地區，原住民學生與同部落的學生一起受教時，心理會比較幸福？還是與漢人融合在同一教室學習時，心理比較幸福？受教於漢人教師，心理比較幸福？還是由原住民教師教，心理比較幸福？這些問題的回答，不但有學術理論的價值，更可做為未來教育決策與學生輔導的重要參考。因此，本研究以2005年臺東地區的國中學生調查資料，並且運用階層線性模式來分析原漢師生族群配對、班級原住民學生比例是否對學生心理幸福有所影響。分析結果發現：師生族群配對情形對學生心理幸福都沒有顯著影響；不過，班級原住民學生比例越高，對學生的成就感這個心理幸福指標則有顯著的正面影響，即班級原住民學生比例越高，學生成就感也就越高。進一步的分析更發現：班級原住民學生比例越高，對漢人學生之成就感沒有顯著影響，卻有利於原住民學生的成就感之提升。英文摘要：In Taiwan, do aboriginal students experience more well-being when studying in a class composed of entirely students of the same ethnicity or in an integrated class? Do they experience more well-being when instructed by aboriginal teachers or non-aboriginal teachers? Answers to these important issues are academically valuable and can be of important reference for future educational decisions and student guidance, but they are rarely explored in domestic studies. In this study a survey was conducted on junior high school students in Taitung in 2005. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) was adopted to test the impact of different ethnic compositions on students' well-being. Results show that students' well-being was not significantly affected by class of ethnic mix of teachers and students, but high ratios of aboriginal students in a class are more advantageous to students' sense of achievement in that class. Further analysis indicates that high ratio of aboriginal students in a class is not significantly influential to non-aboriginal students' sense of achievement but advantageous to the well-being of aboriginal students in the class.起始頁-結束頁：61-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140610020034篇名：實踐社群理論下之多元文化師資培育探究並列篇名：The Study of Preparing Preservice Teachers to Teach for Diversity and Equity as a Community of Practice in Teacher Education Programs作者：陳淑美(Shwu-Meei Chen)關鍵字：實踐社群;多元與平等;師培教育;多元文化教育;Community of practice;diversity and equity;teacher education;multicultural education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：教育改革之際，以提升教師教學品質保證學生的學習成效，為重要之努力方向。本文透過Wenger實踐社群之概念，探究美國中西部一所大學師資培育學程如何培育師資生為公平與多元性教學的計畫，作為提供我國師資培育機構因應12年國民基本教育改革，促進師資生對教育機會均等，落實有教無類、因材施教學習之參考。本研究為該師培機構評鑑研究案的一部分，對象為便利取抽樣該師培機構之畢業生以及該師培機構之教師，資料來自於個別訪談、焦點團體訪談、問卷資料、及師培機構文件資料。經資料分析結果瞭解師培機構規劃可參與的各項多元文化教育學習活動，使得該師培機構社群成員間能透過共同的參與投入，逐漸辨識多元與平等相關議題的共同願景，並進而培養反思多元觀點、及互相支持合作的共享智庫。依據研究結果，研究者對臺灣師培教育及後續研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：The demand of high quality teachers for all students has become a trend in education. This paper uses Wenger's concept of ”communities of practice” as a framework to understand how a master of education program prepares the preservice teachers to teach with concern for the issues of equity and diversity. The data were collected by exit interviews upon graduation, survey, case studies, and focus group interviews after graduation. The findings reveal complexities in the graduates' understanding of the issues of equity and diversity evolving through various learning paths developed in the program. By negotiating through doing things together, the joint goal and shared repertoires for multicultural education were built and developed. The paper discusses the contextual factors and the learning needs behind the complexities and provides suggestions for future research and teacher education programs.起始頁-結束頁：87-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140610020045篇名：數位時代「翻轉教室」的意義與批判性議題並列篇名：The Significance and Critical Issues in the 'Flipped Classroom' in the Digital Age作者：蔡瑞君(Jui-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：翻轉教室;批判教育學;賦權增能教室;數位時代課程與教學;Flipped Classroom;critical pedagogy;Empowering Classroom;curriculum and instruction in the digital age期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：數位時代「翻轉教室」概念的出現，凸顯學校教育正隨著數位時代的來臨而產生轉變。然而，在「翻轉教室」蔚為一股學習的風潮之際，其中所可能隱含的批判性議題卻甚少受到關注。本文先探討「翻轉教室」出現的意義，其次探究「翻轉教室」何以可作為實踐批判教育學「賦權增能教室」的契機，最後則省思「翻轉教室」推動過程中所潛藏的批判性議題。研究發現，「翻轉教室」的出現雖具有劃時代的意義，但仍有著教師進行數位課程轉化的挑戰、落入強化追求標準化教育目標的可能、忽略影響個體學習成效因素之複雜性、以及教育與商業過度緊密結合的潛在危機等問題待釐清與克服。研究建議，教師是否具有批判意識，才是成功翻轉傳統教育的關鍵。政府除了相關硬體設施的改善外，應提供職前與在職教師在數位時代課程與教學方面有效增能的活動。英文摘要：The emergence of the 'Flipped Classroom' signifies how school education is transformed under the digital age. Although the concept of the 'Flipped Classroom' is flourishing, people seldom reflect on the critical issues it poses. In this article, the author first discusses the significance of the 'Flipped Classroom'. Second, the author investigates how the 'Flipped Classroom' could be a turning point for implementing the ideal 'Empowering Classroom' that is proposed in critical pedagogy. Finally, the author reflects on the critical issues in the implementation of the 'Flipped Classroom'. The research findings indicate that the emergence of 'Flipped Classroom' is epoch-making. However, there are still four critical issues that remain to be clarified and solved, such as the challenges of transforming curriculum into digital form, the possibilities of strengthening the value of standardized education goals, the neglects of the complexities of students' learning, and the dangers of tight relationship between education and business. The author suggests that teachers' critical consciousness is the key to transform traditional education. In addition to the hardware improvement, the government should provide both pre-service and in-service teachers with workshops that empower them to respond to the changes of curriculum and instruction in the digital age.起始頁-結束頁：115-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140610020056篇名：Collaborative Effects of Cooperating Teachers, University Supervisors, and Peer Coaches in Preservice Teachers' Field Experiences並列篇名：學校合作老師，大學視導員與相互觀察的師資生協同輔助實習生學習的影響研究作者：呂秀蓮(Hsiu-Lien Lu)關鍵字：peer coaching;peer coach;cooperating teachers;university supervisors;student teaching;同儕視導員;合作老師;大學視導員;同儕視導;實習經驗期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：A preservice field experience supported by three supervisory components, namely the cooperating teacher, the university supervisor, and the peer coach; is scarcely documented in initial teacher preparation, a phenomenon that may result from a missing of empirical evidence indicating the collaborative effects of the three roles. This paper reports the results of a survey study with 114 participants, including cooperating teachers (n=50), university supervisors (n=12), and preservice teachers (n=52), to investigate the effects of the three roles in the student teaching experience. Specifically, this study examines (a) whether there are significant differences in the effects of the three roles in the areas of learning to teach, clinical supervision, and emotional needs; and (b) whether there are significant differences in the ratings of the three participants on the effects of the three roles in the three areas. This study used ANOVA testing and Tukey paired-wise comparisons to analyze data and respond to the first question and MANOVA testing and Scheffe paired-wise comparisons to find the answer to the second question. The results indicate that each player has a distinct role in supporting student teachers and that the inclusion of all three players benefits the overall experience of student teachers. More implications are discussed.英文摘要：文獻上，少有針對職前教師實習經驗，同時搭配三種人員協同合作輔助的報導。這三種輔助人員包括學校合作老師，大學視導員，和同儕互導的師資生。這種現象，可能是源於文獻上缺乏研究的證據，來支持這三種角色協同合作輔助實習生學習的影響。針對文獻上的需要，這篇文章，目的在報導一項針對這三種角色協同合作影響的研究。這項問卷研究有114位有效的參與者，包括了三個群組：學校合作老師（n=50），大學視導員（n=12），和同儕互導的師資生（n=52） 。具體地說，這研究探討了兩個問題：（一）在教學學習，臨床視導，和情緒支持三方面，這三種角色在成效上有沒有重大的差別？（二）這三個群組，對三種角色成效的評量，有否重大差別？針對第一項問題，本研究使用單因子變異數分析（ANOVA，Tukey，p ＜ .05）來測試資料。第二個問題，則用多因子變異數分析（MANOVA，Sheffe，p ＜ .05） 來檢視資料。研究結果顯示，每一種角色，在幫助職前教師實習的經驗上，有其獨特的貢獻。本研究的結論是，這三種輔助角色的協同合作，有利於職前教師的實習學習和經驗。文中，針對研究建議，有深入探討。起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140310010017篇名：教師彰權益能的現況、歷程、成效與困境之研究：以八位國小資深優良教師為例並列篇名：The Study of Current Situation, Development Process, and Effects and Predicaments of Teacher Empowerment: Taking Eight Experienced Elementary School Teachers as Example作者：張德銳(Derray Chang);王淑珍(Shu-Chen Wang);何嘉惠(Chia-Hui Ho)關鍵字：教師彰權益能;教師專業發展;教師領導;teacher empowerment;teacher professional development;teacher leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以八位資深優良國民小學教師為例，探究教師彰權益能的現況、發展歷程與成效困境。本研究採質性研究取向，藉由深度訪談及文件分析方式蒐集資料，並進行資料的三角檢證。依據研究發現，歸納出下列結論：（1）教師在彰權益能各層面的發展皆有良好的表現；（2）教師彰權益能的發展歷程包含懵懂摸索、覺察仿效及蓄積開展三階段；（3）教師發展彰權益能對於教師創新教學，開展自我效能；提升學生學習成效；合作與分享及拓展校外交流等方面有所助益；（4）教師在發展彰權益能的歷程中，可能遭遇時間限制、科層體制影響、負面互動文化、學生家庭因素以及政策制度層面侷限等困境阻礙。研究者最後根據研究結果提出建議，作為相關單位及後續研究的參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to probe the current situation, development process, and effects and predicaments of teacher empowerment of eight experienced teachers in elementary schools. Document analysis and in-depth interview were used as methods in this study. Based on the results of data analysis, the main findings of this study are as follows: (1) Teachers have a good performance in empowerment. (2) The development of teacher empowerment includes three stages: initial exploration, awareness and imitation, and maturity development. (3) Teacher empowerment is beneficial for teacher innovative teaching, professional development, students' learning, peer interactions, and interschool exchange. (4) The predicaments of teacher empowerment are mainly shown in five aspects: limited time, the effects of bureaucracy, negative peer interactions, student's family factors, and the impact of policies. According to the findings, the study proposes several suggestions for educational administration agencies, schools, teachers, and further study.起始頁-結束頁：23-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140310010028篇名：臺灣地區學前階段教師心理契約違犯對工作行為的影響並列篇名：A Study on the Impact of Psychological Contract Breach on Preschool Teachers' Job Behavior in Taiwan作者：林俊瑩(Chunn-Ying Lin);謝宛伶(Wan-Ling Hsieh);謝亞恆(Ya-Heng Hsieh)關鍵字：心理契約違犯;負向情緒;組織承諾;工作行為;學前教師;psychological contract breach;negative emotion;organizational commitment;job behavior;preschool teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：許多研究關注於如何促進組織成員出現更多有利組織的行為，但如何降低員工組織退卻行為，避免對組織發展的負面影響，卻沒有受到太大的關注，特別是對於啟蒙階段的學前教育，相關研究更少見。本研究根據相關文獻與實證研究，要探討心理契約違犯對學前教師工作行為的影響機制，這包括了組織公民行為與組織退卻行為，並納入了「負向情緒」、「組織承諾」等變項，更細緻地來解釋其中的關聯性。本研究於2010年針對全臺灣地區公私立幼稚園與托兒所的學前教師進行問卷調查，資料統計分析上使用了描述性統計和結構方程模式等方法。研究結果顯示：學前教師的心理契約違犯程度頗為嚴重。另外，組織公民行為還算是積極，不過，學前教師也常常會有另謀工作的念頭，工作怠惰的情形也不算低。進一步分析發現：學前教師心理契約違犯的程度越高，越會產生負面情緒，會降低其組織承諾，進而有損其組織公民行為的積極度，並且會提高學前老師離職的傾向。而心理契約違犯程度越高，負面情緒也越嚴重，也會使老師容易產生工作不努力的狀況，這樣的路徑影響則不需透過組織承諾的中介作用即可產生。由此來看，園所若沒有提供給學前教師好的工作條件與環境，就必需付出相當大的代價，為園所的發展帶來不利的影響。英文摘要：A large amount of research has documented how to induce employees' pro-organizational behavior. However, there is relatively little research on how to reduce employees' organizational withdrawal behavior and avoid its negative impact on the organization, especially with a focus on employees engaged in preschool education. Through literature review and empirical research, this paper investigated how psychological contract breach influences preschool teachers' job behavior, including organizational citizenship behavior and organizational withdrawal behavior. Variables including ”negative emotions” and ”organizational commitment” were also included in the model to better capture the relationship among them. A questionnaire survey was administered to preschool teachers from both public and private kindergartens in Taiwan during 2010, and the statistical methods, consisting of descriptive statistics and structural equation modeling, were adopted to analyze the research data. Results showed: The degree of psychological contract breach of preschool teachers was serious. Despite being dedicated to organizational citizenship behavior, most preschool teachers had switching intentions and withheld efforts from time to time. Further analysis found: the higher the degree of preschool teachers' psychological contract breach, the more negative emotions are produced, finally reducing the organizational commitment, resulting in less dedication to organizational citizenship behavior and higher turnover intention. In addition, higher psychological contract breach also caused more negative emotions and effort-withholding behavior. This influence path existed even without moderation of organizational commitment. Hence, the cost of not providing teachers with good work conditions and environment as promised is considerable for preschools.起始頁-結束頁：53-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420140310010039篇名：大學實施教師教學諮詢專業發展策略之探討並列篇名：The Study of Implementing Teaching Consultation as Professional Development Strategy in University作者：陳琦媛(Chi-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：教學諮詢;高等教育;教學評鑑;teaching consultation;higher education;teaching evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在了解我國大學實施教學諮詢之現況，蒐集分析國內外大學執行教學諮詢之經驗，以提出我國未來發展教學諮詢此項教學專業發展策略之建議。為達此研究目的，本研究以文件分析法分析我國118所大學實施教學諮詢之現況，並訪談3位美國大學教學發展單位主管和4位國內大學參與教學諮詢之主管或教師。研究結果發現我國有52所（44％）大學實施有教學諮詢服務，各大學多遴選校內教學表現優異之資深優良教師兼任諮詢人員，諮詢過程偏重於經驗分享和講座研習。雖開放給所有教師使用，但多數大學規定教學評鑑不佳教師需義務性接受教學諮詢，導致教師為免被誤認為教學不力教師而鮮少主動參與。如何提升教師使用意願，並正向看待且接納教學諮詢為實施此項教學專業發展策略較大挑戰。基於上述結論本研究提出若干研究建議供我國發展教學諮詢專業發展策略之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to explore and understand the experience of implementing teaching consultation programs in higher education institutions in Taiwan. To achieve this aim, the websites of all 118 universities in Taiwan were searched and the documents related to teaching consultation were collected and analyzed. The directors of three centers of teaching development at universities in the United States and four faculties which are involved in teaching consultation at universities in Taiwan were interviewed. The results show that: fifty-two universities (44% of all universities studied) offered the consultation service for their teachers in Taiwan; and the teaching consultants in the university were selected from the faculty body. The consultants were all full-time professors, served as part-time teaching consultants, and were paid by the hour for the time they spent on consultation. The process of teaching consultation includes sharing experiences and attending speeches. The teaching consultation service is always combined with teaching evaluation. If teachers receive negative teaching evaluation results, they are required to use the teaching consultation service. This policy makes teachers reluctant to use the consultation service in case they might be misjudged by their peers as poor teachers. It is a challenge to increase teachers' willingness to use this service and have a more positive attitude about using consultation services. Based on the findings of this study, several suggestions are proposed on how to improve this service in universities in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：87-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201403100100410篇名：An Investigation of Taiwanese Non-English Major Freshmen's Perception of Learning English through Online Edutainment Games並列篇名：臺灣大學生對透過寓教於樂型遊戲學習英文之意見作者：李多耕(To-Ken Lee)關鍵字：computer assisted instruction;edutainment games;game-based learning;電腦輔助教學;寓教於樂型遊戲;遊戲教學期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：This study aims to investigate how non-English major freshmen in Taiwan perceive their English learning through task-based online interactive negotiation games. A large body of evidence suggests that limited time for English learning and a lack of effective learning strategy have caused inadequate and ineffective English learning of non-English major students in Taiwan. Therefore, this research attempts to draw upon an online edutainment game website to provide 30 non-English major freshmen with remedial instruction. With a qualitative approach, this study was executed during one academic year to investigate students' perception of instructional uses of edutainment games. Student participants showed that simulation and interactivity of online edutainment games address a need for alternative learning in remediation of vocabulary deficits. The online negotiation games can model complex worlds where players can witness how targeted words are used by game characters and experiment with those words. Participants agree that online edutainment games add interaction to their learning and provide them with authentic contexts to learn new vocabularies. In addition, prompt feedbacks and risk-free conversation options of online negotiation games engage students in learning vivid word and sentence examples.英文摘要：本研究旨在探究臺灣非主修英語系之大一學生，對於透過網路互動之協商型遊戲來學習英文的看法。眾多文獻指出，臺灣非英語系大學生英語學習成效不彰，肇因於英語學習時間的有限和英語學習策略的匱乏。因此，本研究主要調查一個由三十名非英語系主修的大一學生所參與的補救教學課程。在課程中，研究者使用網路互動式之寓教於樂型遊戲並佐以教學計畫。本研究使用質性分析方法，來探討學生對於以寓教於樂型遊戲為英語教學策略的認知。結果顯示，線上寓教於樂型遊戲中的虛擬性和互動性，能夠補足現行英語教學成效不彰之處。線上寓教於樂型遊戲可以以生動之介面，讓學生觀看英語單字可以如何應用於實際生活中。調查結果發現，參與者認為寓教於樂型的遊戲，能為英語學習增添互動性。除此之外，該類遊戲所提供的擬真環境，亦有助於單字的學習。結論指出，遊戲的即時回饋和無風險性對話的兩個特色，能使得英語單詞和句子變得生動有趣，並進而激發學生投注於單詞和句子的學習。起始頁-結束頁：119-151資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201403100100501篇名：「國中校長多元型模領導力量表」的編製及分析並列篇名：The Development of a Multi-frame Leadership Scale for Junior High Principals作者：黃文三(Wen-San Huang);沈碩彬(Shou-Pin Shen)關鍵字：二階單因素模式;多元型模領導力;國中校長;second-order factor model;multi-frame leadership;junior high principal期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究依據L. G. Bolman和T. E. Deal的理論，並參酌國情，建構一份創新且具有信度與效度的「國中校長多元型模領導力量表」，再分析國中校長多元型模領導力的現況。研究採用分層隨機抽樣，第一階段取樣132位教師進行項目分析、探索性因素分析與信度分析，第二階段取樣646位教師，並隨機分成兩組獨立樣本，分別進行驗證性因素分析與簡效模式的複核效化；最後，根據調查結果進行現況分析及討論。所得結論包括：一、國中校長多元型模領導力可分為教學領導、象徵領導、政治領導及結構領導等四個構面；二、二階單因素模式為一最簡效模式，量表同時具有良好的穩定度及預測力；三、國中校長多元型模領導力現況大致良好，且不論何種型模的領導力，各校校長自評程度總是優於教師評量程度，但兩者呈現正相關。根據研究結果，提出建議供國中校長、教師及未來研究參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the current status of junior high school principals’ multi-frame leadership and to construct an innovative, reliable, and valid scale according to Bolman and Deal’s theory and national conditions. The scale is named the ”Junior High Principal Multi-frame Leadership Scale”. Through stratified random sampling, 132 teachers were examined using item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and reliability analysis. A target sample of 646 teachers was then randomly divided into two groups to perform confirmatory factor analysis and cross-validation. A situational analysis of the survey results was conducted. The major findings and conclusions are as follows: Junior high principals’ multi-frame leadership can be divided into four aspects, comprising instructional leadership, symbolic leadership, political leadership, and structural leadership; a second-order factor model is the most efficient model because of its stability and predictive power; and the current situation of principals’ multi-frame leadership is robust. The principals’ self-perception of their performance in each aspect was consistently higher than the teachers’ perception of them; nevertheless, both were positively correlated. Based on the results, recommendations are offered for junior high principals, teachers, and future researchers.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(2).012篇名：鷹架具體程度對創意發想的影響並列篇名：A Discussion on Scaffolding Theory and Online Game Design Task Creativity作者：于文正(Wen-Cheng Yu)關鍵字：創意教學;網路遊戲;鷹架;creative teaching;online game;scaffolding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究採準實驗設計，研究教學鷹架對於學生創意作業的影響。參與研究的是119位北部某技術學院選修「創造力與生活」課程的學生，學生依選課班級被隨機分派為實驗組與控制組。前測顯示兩班學生在對教師的教學反應、修課前的興趣與課程專注力上均無差異。實驗處置是創意作業指導上不同程度的具體性，實驗組須嚴格依照明確、具體的鷹架指導刺激創意發想，之後完成創意作業，控制組則採用鬆散的教學鷹架，擁有充分自由度去發揮。創意作業由3位創造力教育專家針對「獨特性」、「豐富性」及設計概念的「整體性」三項指標評分，雖然t檢定的結果顯示兩組並無差異，但若以各組創意作業得分等第的分布進行比較，則實驗組的創意作業在獨特性與豐富性上均比控制組好，控制組僅在創意作業的整體性上與實驗組表現接近。英文摘要：In this study, a quasi-experimental design was applied to understand the influence of scaffolding instructions on student performance in executing a creative online gaming task. A total of 119 students enrolled in the ”Creativity and Living” course at a technology college in Northern Taiwan participated in this study. The students were randomly divided into experimental and control groups based on their optional classes. An investigation conducted prior to the experiment indicated that the students in the two groups did not display differences in their reactions to teachers’ instructions, their interest in the course before it commenced, or in their level of attention during the courses. The experimental intervention involved following various instructions for performing a creativity task titled ”Online Gaming Concept Design.” Because the scaffolding instructions for the control group were more lenient than those for the experimental group were, the students in the control group had a comparatively higher degree of freedom when working on the creative task. Conversely, the experimental group strictly adopted specific and detailed scaffolding rules to achieve their goal. Their creativity operation performance was evaluated using three creativity education specialists on the basis of three indices: uniqueness, diversity, and the integrity of the design concept. The results of the t test indicated no difference in the two groups, but the distribution of their scores was compared. Ranking the creative tasks revealed that the performance of students in the control group was limited by their capacity for imagination, and the diversity and details were lacking, but the experimental group demonstrated excellent innovation, high diversity, and presented a degree of integrity.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(2).023篇名：教師手勢對幼兒故事詞彙理解影響之研究並列篇名：Effect of the Gestures of Teachers during Storytelling on the Vocabulary Understanding of Kindergarteners作者：簡馨瑩(Hsin-Ying Chien);連啟舜(Chi-Shun Lien)關鍵字：手勢;教學策略;詞彙理解;圖解;錄影分析;gesture;instructive strategy;vocabulary comprehension;iconic;video analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究分別以兩個研究解析不同年資教師於說故事時，手勢表徵的意義類別，以及手勢教學影片對幼兒在詞彙理解的影響。研究一以錄影分析的方法，探討8位新手教師與8位資深教師說故事時的手勢行為。結果發現，教師說故事時的手勢以描述故事內容、詞彙的語意提取性質居多；不同年資的教師於表徵故事內容的手勢次數並未有顯著差異的存在；於師生互動的手勢次數，則有顯著的差異存在。研究二分析不同年資教師的教學影片對幼兒詞彙理解的效果研究，以臺東3所公立幼兒園大班67位幼兒為對象進行實驗。結果顯示，資深教師的手勢教學影片對幼兒理解衍生性質的詞彙有顯著的效果。文中對未來相關研究及教師的教學手勢提出討論與建議。英文摘要：This study examined the types and levels of gestures that teachers with different levels of experience used during storytelling, and investigated how these gestures affected the vocabulary understanding of children. In Study 1, the gestures of eight junior and eight senior teachers during storytelling were recorded and evaluated using the method of video analysis. The results showed that the gestures of teachers carried descriptive or semantic information related to the story. No frequency differences on gesture use were observed between junior and senior teachers to represent the story content. However, substantial differences between junior and senior teachers were observed regarding teacher-student interaction. The purpose of Study 2 was to determine whether children who watched different video clips, recorded by teachers with different levels of experience, exhibited different levels of vocabulary understanding. Sixty-seven kindergarteners in Taitung, Taiwan participated in the experiment. The results indicated that children who watched the video clip that was recorded by the senior teachers outperformed those who watched the video clip that was recorded by the junior teachers. This paper discusses implications for future research and education.起始頁-結束頁：61-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(2).034篇名：Freire對話行動理論的主體觀點及五個規準並列篇名：Educational Implications of Paulo Freire's Theory of Dialogic Action Based on a Subjective Perspective and Five Criteria作者：蘇鈺楠(Yu-Nan Su)關鍵字：批判教育學;教育倫理;對話理論;critical pedagogy;ethics of education;theory of dialogic action期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：面對著包括意識形態在內的宰制結構，批判教育學秉持著動態文化觀，相信主體間互動所產生的能量可以帶動結構的更新與主體的解放，而此種互動的開始便是P. Freire所提出的對話行動理論。本研究旨從主體觀點來探究Freire對話行動理論，發掘在交互肯認的基礎上其對話理論深受G. W. F. Hegel和K. Marx之影響，且其先前假定係以倫理關懷做出發，在內容上包括了愛、謙遜、信心、希望及批判等五個部分，最後則據此提出在教育上之涵義。英文摘要：Under a hegemonic structure, critical pedagogy creates the dynamic cultures concept. The interaction of mutual relationships is believed to produce energy, and thereby promote structural evolution and subject emancipation. This initiated relationship and interaction is represents the concept of dialogic action proposed in Freire's theory. This study focused on Freire's theory of dialogic action to identify an interrecognized foundation of dialogic theory, which was influenced by Hegel and Marx, and his previous assumption was based on moral concerns. This study addressed five topics: (1) love, (2) humility, (3) confidence, (4) expectations, and (5) criticism. Finally, the methods of applying this theory in education were analyzed by conducting follow-up research.起始頁-結束頁：89-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(2).045篇名：檔案評量於國中英語教學應用之個案研究並列篇名：Applying a Portfolio Assessment of English Teaching in a Junior High School: A Case Study作者：林素卿(Su-Ching Lin);葉順宜(Shun-I Yeh)關鍵字：英語教學;個案研究;檔案評量;English teaching;case study;portfolio assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討檔案評量於國中英語教學應用之情形，其目的在瞭解學生對檔案評量的看法與分析檔案評量對學生英語學習態度與成就之影響。本研究以七年級30位學生為研究對象，設計10個單元的檔案評量，進行為期12週的研究，透過課堂觀察、訪談與師生對談、教師省思札記、文件分析、檔案評量回饋問卷、英語學習態度量表等方法蒐集資料。研究發現包括：一、學生對檔案評量持肯定的態度，認同檔案評量可提升自我之英文應用能力、自省及自主學習能力。二、檔案評量能提升學生的學習態度和學習成就。根據研究發現，本研究提出有關檔案的項目、學習單的設計、反省與回饋、評分方式與規準、評量人數等方面建議，作為實施檔案評量及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：This study explored the effectiveness of applying a portfolio assessment to English teaching in a junior high school. The participants consisted of 30 seventh-grade students. Based on teaching units, the authors designed 10 unit assessment worksheets, and implemented them for 12 weeks. The objectives of this study were to investigate effective ways to apply the portfolio assessment to English teaching, to understand the attitudes and responses of students regarding the portfolio assessment, and to analyze the effects of the learning attitudes of students on their English learning performance. During the research period, the data were collected through classroom observations, teaching reflection journals, student worksheets, student learning reflections, interviews and teacher-student dialogues, documents, and questionnaires. Data analyses included both qualitative and quantitative methods. The results were as follows: (1) The students exhibited positive attitudes and responses regarding the portfolio assessment; they indicated that the portfolio assessment provided them with opportunities to apply English, and promoted their abilities of self-reflection and independent study; (2) The portfolio assessment enhanced the learning attitudes and performance of the students. Based on these findings, suggestions for teachers and future education researchers are provided in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：111-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(2).056篇名：十二年國民基本教育的入學考試與評量變革並列篇名：Standards-Based Assessments for 12-Year Basic Education in Taiwan作者：宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);周業太(Yeh-Tai Chou);曾芬蘭(Feng-Lan Tseng)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;班級評量;國中教育會考;國民中學學生學習成就評量標準;標準本位評量;12-Year Basic Education;classroom assessment;comprehensive assessment program for junior high school students;standards-based assessment of student achievement;standards-based assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：十二年國民基本教育已正式啟動，入學考試和班級評量的變革，是影響十二年國民基本教育成敗的關鍵之一，如何達成所提出的願景，格外引人關注。以標準為本位的評量為近年來的教育評量改革趨勢，許多先進國家已將標準本位評量分別應用在教育會考與班級評量，以達到學力監控、提升教師教學與評量專業，並促進學生學習成果的目標。本研究介紹標準本位評量之意涵，並以國中教育會考與國民中學學生學習成就評量標準為例，說明標準本位評量如何為實施十二年國民基本教育創造有利環境，進而達成多元學習、確保學力、舒緩升學壓力、活化教學等目標。英文摘要：Taiwan officially implemented 12-Year Basic Education. Entrance examinations and classroom assessments are one of the keys to the success of this new program. Because thousands of Taiwanese children will be affected, how to help the program succeed deserves scrutiny. In recent years, many developed nations have used standards-based assessment to enhance their educational programs. Standards-based assessment, therefore, could potentially be advantageous for Taiwan as well. In this study, the implications of broadly applying standards-based assessment were investigated by exploring its effect on knowledge diversity, scholastic ability, and academic pressure among junior high school students.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).017篇名：高雄市國中教師對樂學計畫合理性評估之研究：方案理論評鑑的觀點並列篇名：Reasonableness of the Happy Learning Program Assessed by Junior High School Teachers in Kaohsiung: A Program Theory Evaluation作者：張炳煌(Ping-Huang Chang);蔡清華(Ching-Hwa Tsai);陳盈傑(Ying-Chieh Chen)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;方案理論評鑑;免試入學方案;樂學計畫;12-Year Basic Education;theory program evaluation;admission without entrance examinations;Happy Learning Program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在運用方案理論評鑑取徑，檢視高雄市國中教師對於樂學計畫合理性之評定，除探討政策形成背景與實施情形外，也關切政策本身的理論假設與規劃邏輯是否周延。本研究提出樂學計畫之方案理論架構為，以「多元適性、就近入學、開創均質」為基礎理論假設，開展出三條理論路徑，分別以「避免單一入學標準」、「引進對應學校概念」、「不進行跨校比較」為子目標，並依其規劃邏輯擬訂方案措施。此方案理論架構為本研究之評鑑架構，據此進行問卷調查，共有426位教師參與研究。研究結果如下：一、樂學計畫具合理性，但各規劃邏輯合理性高低有別；二、樂學計畫基礎理論假設可解釋規劃邏輯之合理性，有助釐清方案成敗關鍵；三、不同區域國中教師對於樂學計畫合理性之評定並無差異。最後本研究提出政策上的建議。英文摘要：Admission to senior high school without entrance examinations has been proposed and conducted by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. In view of unprecedented changes and challenges, it is valuable to examine some pilot projects that have been implemented by local governments. Considering that program theory evaluation has been used increasingly in recent decades, and its firmly established ability to provide suggestions on how a program can be improved, it was employed in this study to assess the reasonableness of the Happy Learning Program.Based on the principles of Multiple Adaptive Education, Nearby-Enrolment, and Creating Homogeneity, this study reconstructed the program theories underlying the Happy Learning Program. A questionnaire survey was administered to 426 teachers who were drawn from 46 junior high schools in Kaohsiung. The main conclusions were as follows: the Happy Learning Program is reasonable, but its degree of reasonableness varies with planning logic; the reasonableness degree of planning logic can be explained using fundamental theories, enabling identification of crucial elements in the program; no significant differences were observed among districts regarding the reasonableness of the Happy Learning Program. Based on the aforementioned findings, this study provides implications for policy making.起始頁-結束頁：33-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).028篇名：十二年國民基本教育財務規劃的虛與實並列篇名：Rhetoric and Reality of 12-Year Basic Education Financing in Taiwan作者：許添明(Tian-Ming Sheu);張熒書(Ying-Shu Chang)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;教育財政;義務教育;學前教育;12-Year Basic Education;school finance;compulsory education;preschool education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：九年國民教育業於1968年施行，迄今將屆46年。為提升整體國民素質，近二十餘年更進一步推動延長國民基本教育至12年，且於2014年正式實施。本研究試從教育財政角度，析論十二年國民基本教育的財務規劃是否足以撐起此一世紀大業，並得出以下結論：一、義務教育最大特質在普及、強迫與免費，我國九年國民教育雖也免收學費，但囿於財政收支相關法令，地方教育經費至今仍患寡，國中小仍收取代收代辦費，有違義務教育完全免費的精神，十二年國民基本教育財務規劃並未處理該議題。二、十二年國民基本教育揭櫫「成就每一個孩子」的教育願景，教育部也針對偏鄉及弱勢學生推動多項補助方案；然國中小學生學習成就依舊存在城鄉差距，十二年國民基本教育也未增加經費以達成該願景。三、我國高中職每生支出只是已開發國家的七成，十二年國民基本教育計畫將八成新增經費用於高中職，有其必要；然超過半數的經費用於推動高中職免學費，只是將原來的家戶支出改由政府支出，對於提高後中經費並無助益，也造成經費排擠無法做更有效的用途。四、學前教育雖也實施免學費方案，但理論與實證研究都證實學前教育應比高中職優先義務化。根據上述發現，研究者據以提出教育財政相關建議，以利十二年國民基本教育順利推動。英文摘要：Nearly 46 years have passed since a 9-year national education system was implemented in Taiwan in 1968. The 9-year system will now be extended to 12 years and renamed ”12-Year Basic Education.” From the perspective of school finance, we analyzed and discussed whether the government can afford this tremendous change. It was summarized that (1) primary education should be compulsory, free, and accessible to all. However, because of fiscal regulations and structures, the 9-year national education system has been suffering from an insufficient budget at local levels and has not been entirely free of charge for every student until now. (2) Although several programs for socioeconomically disadvantaged students have been implemented by the Ministry of Education, achievement gaps between rural and nonrural areas, even among students within rural circumstances, remain remarkably wide. The new education plan appears to neglect these two problems. (3) Because expenditure per pupil on postsecondary education in Taiwan is only 70% of the OECD's average, it is reasonable to spend 80% of the new budget at the postsecondary stage. However, more than half of the overall budgets are set to eliminate tuition fees for postsecondary and 5-year-old preschool students, without further increasing any public inputs and simply transferring accounts from private to public. With such a small budget, the zero-tuition policy means to require money to be diverted from other more comprehensive initiatives. (4) Preschool education should be planned as compulsory prior to the postsecondary stage, both theoretically and practically. Four recommendations on school finance are provided for future implementations of 12-Year Basic Education.起始頁-結束頁：69-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).039篇名：國中教師以學習共同體啟動新學習型態之研究並列篇名：Adopting a Learning Community in a Junior High School under the 12-Year Basic Education System作者：薛雅慈(Selena Ya-Ci Hsueh)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;合作學習;協同學習;課程教學革新;學習共同體;12-Year Basic Education;cooperative learning;collaborative learning;curriculum revolution;learning community期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：近來，佐藤學「學習共同體」的課堂改革論述，在許多亞洲國家（如日本、韓國、中國大陸）掀起了學習革命。而臺灣正因應十二年國民基本教育，學校現場展開了課程教學轉化的實踐。若干縣市已啟動學習共同體的教育政策，鼓勵學校因應十二年國民基本教育啟動教室中的學習革命，為下一代學習開展了轉化的新契機。本研究首先闡述佐藤學「學習共同體」在課堂教學與學習的重要論述；其次探討過去國中生長久以來在升學競爭下形成的被動學習與逃離學習的現象；最後採質性研究的方式，以任教於不同國中的五科專任教師（國文、英文、數學、自然、社會）為訪談對象，探究其以學習共同體啟動課程教學革新的經驗。研究者由訪談結果發現了其教學方式的改變，這些教師也看到了學生學習的改變。本研究的重要發現有六：一、當前國中教師是以較綜合多元的方式推動課堂學習共同體。二、以佐藤學的學習三部曲而言，當前國中教師實踐較多的是「協同學習」。三、當前國中教師的「協同學習」方式，較傾向以「合作學習」的小組討論與表達，而非佐藤學的聆聽、串聯與回歸。四、對國中生而言，學習共同體帶來最大的改變是學習動機的提升及群性的陶冶。五、學業低成就學生因學習共同體的啟動不再當教室中的客人。六、教師因學習共同體而活化自身的教學，也看到課堂風氣的正向改變。英文摘要：The 12-Year Basic Education policy in Taiwan was unveiled in 2014. Because of the forthcoming implementation of the new policy and the increasingly high ratio of open enrollment, test-oriented teaching is no longer considered to be the primary goal for junior high schools and, therefore, the curriculum must be revised considerably. The government proposed the practice of learning through a learning community, and numerous schools have participated in this learning community program. The traditional learning style of speaking while students listen is expected to change. In this qualitative study, student experiences and how they changed under the guidance of a learning community were investigated by conducting interviews, and potential problems in the learning method were identified. Five teachers from a junior high school, in which the learning community method was adopted in their classes, participated in this study. The results of positivist analysis indicate that the implementation of a learning community is expected to be a valuable educational method under the 12-Year Basic Education system.Both the researcher and the teachers observed changes in student learning caused by the use of various teaching strategies.Six crucial findings were derived from this research.(1) The methods used by junior high school teachers for promoting collaborative learning in their classes are comprehensive and diversified.(2) Based on the learning community proposed by Professor Manabu Sato, the most widely used method in practice among junior high school teachers is collaborative learning.(3) The collaborative learning technique used by junior high school teachers is typically cooperative learning, which focuses on group discussion and expression rather than on listening, connecting, and referring to the text, as argued by Sato.(4) Regarding junior high school students, the greatest benefit produced by collaborative learning is the cultivation of motivation and teamwork.(5) Inferior students who were previously unacquainted with their classmates attained achievements through collaborative learning.(6) Overall, the teachers enhanced student learning, and changed the learning style of the students in a positive manner.起始頁-結束頁：101-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).0410篇名：日本高級中等教育的「多樣化政策」分析：特色學校的教改理念與實施並列篇名：Policies for the Diversification of Upper Secondary Education in Japan: Educational Reform Concepts and Their Implementation in Featured High Schools作者：劉語霏(Yu-Fei Liu)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;日本高級中等教育;多樣化政策;特色學校;教育改革;12-Year Basic Education;upper secondary education in Japan;diversification policies;featured high schools;educational reforms期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討日本高級中等教育「多樣化政策」之發展沿革，並分析該政策下成立之特色學校所象徵的教育改革理念與辦學意義。進而，剖析其實施狀況、影響與課題，以供國人借鏡參考。「多樣化政策」乃指學校型態、類科與教育課程的多元化政策，而特色學校則為實施有特色的教育課程之學校，不分公私立、高中職學校。本研究使用M. Trow的高等教育模式分析「多樣化政策」之歷史發展沿革，並同時採取質性與量化調查研究法，進行長期研究調查。研究發現，日本第二階段的「多樣化政策」，其教育改革的理念在於讓多元且具特色之高級中等教育的學校型態與教育課程來因應各式各樣的學生之特質與學習需求。而特色學校的建立也確實符合「普及化高級中等教育階段」下，高級中等教育所應有的「多樣性」姿態。據此提出建議「十二年國民基本教育」中應融入學校本位的改革精神，讓辦學自主權與獨立招生制回歸學校本身。設置多元且有特色的教育課程之特色學校既能有效因應學生素質與需求的多樣性，也才能真正達到適才適所、因材施教、適性揚才的目標。英文摘要：After 30 years spent planning and designing a 12-Year Basic Education policy, the Ministry of Education finally announced in 2011 that the policy would be implemented in 2014. However, despite the government's promotion of the policy for three years, it is still inducing intense disputes and controversy. The public is primarily concerned about the arrangement of the entrance examinations, outnumbered-applicant ranking criteria, and featured high schools; these three controversial points are related to enrollment and school administration.In particular, the public tends to directly link featured high schools with traditional, so-called ”elite” high schools. Thus, the public has focused on school enrollment while overlooking the importance of school administration. In the postwar period, Japan implemented diversification policies for upper secondary education twice: in the 1960s and the 1990s. In the first phase, general education and vocational education were separated. In the second phase, featured high schools were promoted. Following the emergence of the comprehensive course in the 1990s, the government of Japan aggressively promoted special designations among high schools regardless of whether they were public, private, general, or specialized, including the Super Science High School, Super English Language High School, Becoming a Specialist, and Japanese Dual System designations. These designations were intended to develop schools' characteristics, innovation, localization, and diversification, as well as to help schools implement featured curricula to become featured schools. The implementation of the featured high schools policy released teachers and students from existing curricula, leading them to develop creative teaching materials; it also provided junior high school students with multiple choices for secondary school. Moreover, it facilitated cooperation between local enterprises and high schools, and balanced development between urban and rural areas.This study suggests that for the 12-Year Basic Education policy, building featured high schools is not the same as eliminating elite high schools. Furthermore, it should not be confined to academic features. Although the enrollment strategy specified in the 12-Year Basic Education policy must be modified, the reform direction of the 12-Year Basic Education policy is in line with that implemented in Japan, and deserves recognition. Therefore, this study analyzed the development of policies for the diversification of upper secondary education in Japan through a literature review and a field survey. This study examined education reform concepts and their implementation in featured high schools, as well as school administrations. This study is intended as a reference for the implementation of the 12-Year Basic Education policy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：141-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).0501篇名：Exploring the Sales Force Competency in Taiwan: The Iceberg Model Perspective並列篇名：臺灣銷售人員職能模式之初探：冰山模式觀點作者：陳心懿(Angela Shin-Yin Chen);范凱棠(Kai-Tang Fan);林怡君(Yi-Chun Lin)關鍵字：冰山模型;銷售人員;職能;competency;iceberg model;sales force期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，職能模型的發展已逐漸受到重視。有鑑於企業實務上對於有效發展員工工作能力的需求，本研究試圖根據職能冰山模型，以發展出銷售人員之關鍵職能模式。「冰山模型」基本上可分為冰山上部，屬於較容易觀察與辨識的外顯特質（例如：知識與技術）；至於冰山下部屬於較難以觀察，卻可用來區別員工表現優劣的內隱特質（例如：動機、價值體系、以及人格特質）。一個有效的職能模型應同時包含冰山上外顯特質與冰山下內隱特質兩部分；然而直至今日，並未有太多研究特別強調此概念。準此，本研究首要目的在於根據職能冰山模型概念提出有效的職能模型；另一個目的則在於以臺灣某產業中經營績效優良的企業銷售人員為研究對象，試圖提出一個較嚴謹的建構職能模型程序供後續使用參考。為了辨識出對於銷售人員工作成功與否具有重要影響力的關鍵職能，本研究藉由文獻回顧、廣泛的工作分析與深度訪談，以蒐集工作相關行為面資訊。本研究針對該個案公司分布於臺灣之14個子公司進行大規模資料蒐集，以驗證本研究提出的職能模型。經探索性因素分析與驗證性因素分析進行本研究模型之信、效度確認，分析結果證實，銷售人員職能可分為五大職能群組，包括17項職能項目，並可進一步透過79個職能行為要素子項目來衡量。未來希冀能有更多研究者能運用此職能發展模式來蒐集更多證據，以求得此職能模型之通用性。英文摘要：In recent years, more and more attention has been paid to the development of competency model. Due to the great need for effective business practice model from corporations and enterprises in Taiwan, this paper attempts to point out the importance of developing competency based on the competency iceberg model. Accordingly, competencies belonging to the above surface (i.e., knowledge and skills) are easy to be observed while competencies of the below surface (i.e., motives, value systems, and personal traits) are obscure but are possible to distinguish superior performers from average ones. It is suggested that a valid competency model should include both of the upper and lower parts of the competency iceberg; nonetheless, there have been few studies emphasizing this notion. Therefore, this paper aims to (1) present an efficient competency model with the notion of the competency iceberg model and (2) provide Taiwan corporations and enterprises with a rigorous model-building process through utilizing data from the best practice business in this region. In order to identify key competencies that are vital to the success of sales force, thorough literature review, extensive job analysis, and in-depth personal interviews were conducted to collect job-related behavior information. A large-scale validation survey was carried out to finalize the competency model through the distribution to the 14 subsidiaries of the F-group in Taiwan. Data were tested for reliability and validity using reliability test and factor analysis approaches. The achieved results effectively provide clear evidence for the practical utility of five competency groups with 17 essential competencies and 79 sub-competency items for sales force in Taiwan. More researches using this measure in Asian countries are called for better finding generalization.起始頁-結束頁：435-462資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：「幼兒工作記憶測驗」之編製並列篇名：The Development of Chinese Working Memory Test for Young Children作者：簡馨瑩(Hsin-Ying Chien);趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);王繼伶(Ji-Ling Wang)關鍵字：工作記憶;年齡;詞彙理解;聽覺理解;age;listening comprehension;vocabulary comprehension;working memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在編製「幼兒工作記憶測驗」，使其得以使用於學齡前幼兒工作記憶的測量，一方面補充先前工具的缺乏，另一方面也幫助幼兒閱讀發展理論的檢驗。測驗編製的理論基礎來自Baddeley與Hitch（1974）的工作記憶理論。全測驗分甲、乙兩式複本，各12題，並採取一對一的施測方式，以208名5~7歲幼兒為施測對象。項目分析以及Rasch模式分析指出，本測驗的試題難度及鑑別度適中，且試題與Rasch模式的適配程度良好。在信度方面，內部一致性Cronbach's係數在甲、乙式分別為.78及.75；再測信度（N = 20）則分別為.75及.85。在效度方面，本研究提供同時效度及區辨效度等建構效度的證據，顯示本測驗可有效測量學齡前幼兒的工作記憶。此測驗將有助於未來幼兒閱讀發展、教學診斷與介入之研究。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to develop a standardized Chinese working memory test for young children and to explore the development of memory and comprehension for preschool children in Taiwan. The development of this test was theoretically originated from Baddeley & Hitch's (1974) working memory model. There are 12 items in two parallel forms of the test, respectively. All the items were individually administered to two hundred and eight 5-to-7-year-old children. Based on the results of item analysis, the difficulty and discrimination of the test is medium. In addition, an extension of the Rasch model was applied to analyze the data. The results show that items have model-data fit. There were a reasonable and stable reliability (Cronbach's coefficient were .78 and .75, test-retest reliability after three weeks were .75 and .85). For the validity, the results indicated that there were solid evidence concurrent validity and discriminative validity. Finally, further implication for reading research, difficulties diagnose and intervention were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：159-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：結合學習迷思學生區與迷思次序演算法的提案並列篇名：Combined Misconceptions' Domain for Students with Misconceptions' Order Algorithm Proposal作者：蔡清斌(Ching-Pin Tsai);許天維(Tian-Wei Sheu);曾建維(Jian-Wei Tzeng);永井正武(Nagai Masatake)關鍵字：GSP表;S-P表;迷思序;學習迷思;GRA;GSP chart;learning misconceptions;misconception order;S-P chart期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，學習迷思廣泛地在學術界上運用，且已獲得相當好的成果，本研究擬對學生迷思區結合迷思次序演算法做出提案。本研究以GRA（灰關聯分析法）結合S-P表（Student-Problem Chart）所建立之GSP表（grey student-problem chart），選取GSP表之學生Gamma值為0.5附近的學生，定義為學習迷思學生區（misconceptions' domain for students），並對迷思學生的答題狀況進行分析，選取迷思學生不同時答對與不同時答錯的題目，表示為其易產生迷思之問題，並將之定義為學習迷思問題區（misconceptions' domain for problems），透過教師所建立之問題概念表（problem-concept chart），可對照出迷思概念表（misconception chart），即可定義出迷思率與迷思序，此種方法加上有效迷思半徑的選取，可預測學生概念迷思之所在，並可將之應用於排除學習迷思上。英文摘要：In recent years, the learning misconceptions are widely applied in academic community, and it have obtained good results. This paper makes a proposal to the misconception's domain for students district binding misconceptions' order algorithm. This study proposes GSP Chart (grey student-problem chart) which combines misconceptions' domain for students with misconceptions' order. This study proposes GSP Chart which combines S-P Chart (Student-Problem Chart) with GRA (Grey Relational Analysis). This paper selects the students whose gamma value is near 0.5 from the GSP chart. Those students are defined as the learning misconceptions' domain for students. Then the study analyze those students' answers and select the right and wrong answers created by those Misconceptions' Students at the different time. It is said that the misconceptions' questions are defined as the learning misconceptions' domain for problems. Through the problem-concept chart conducted by teachers, the study can define the misconceptions' rate and the misconceptions' order by comparing the misconception chart. Combined the effective misconceptions' radius of selection, this method can not only predict where students' misconception is, but also apply to the remedial instruction.起始頁-結束頁：183-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：「國小學童霸凌經驗量表」之編製與應用並列篇名：The Development and Application of Bullying Experiences Scale for Elementary Students作者：羅品欣(Pin-Hsin Lo);陳李綢(Lee-Chou Chen)關鍵字：城鄉別;霸凌經驗;bullying experiences;residence期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究之目的是編製適用於評估國小學童霸凌經驗的量表，並探討性別與城鄉別在國小學童霸凌經驗上的差異。研究對象為臺灣地區1,108名高年級學童，結果顯示：（1）該量表具有可接受的內部一致性信度與重測信度；此外，量表的理論架構可獲實徵資料的支持，故建構效度良好；（2）在性別差異上，國小高年級男童的霸凌經驗多於女童，且以「肢體霸凌」、「口語霸凌」、「性霸凌」為主要的傷人手法；而以「肢體霸凌」、「性霸凌」為主要的受害內涵；（3）在城鄉別方面，居住於鄉鎮地區的國小學童，比都市的學童展現出較多的霸凌加害行為，並反映在「口語霸凌」與「性霸凌」等層面上。英文摘要：The aims of this research are to develop the scale that can be used to evaluate children's bullying experiences, and then to explore relationships between children's bullying experiences and their gender and residence. Data were gathered from 1,108 senior elementary-school students in Taiwan. The major findings were as follows: (1) The scale had receptible coefficient of internal consistency reliability and stability. Besides, confirmatory factor analysis showed that the scale had acceptable construct validity. (2) Boys suffered more from bullying experiences than girls. Boy perpetrators bullied their schoolmates physically and sexually, while boy victims were bullied physically, orally, and sexually. (3) Rural children bullied their schoolmates orally and sexually more than urban children.起始頁-結束頁：213-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：「父母心理控制量表」之編製研究並列篇名：The Development of Parental Psychological Control Questionnaire作者：程景琳(Ching-Ling Cheng)關鍵字：父親心理控制;母親心理控制;青少年;adolescents;maternal psychological control;paternal psychological control期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：心理控制是一種相對隱伏性的父母控制行為，藉由限制及操縱子女的心理與情緒經驗，而影響了孩子的心理自主性。本研究旨在發展多向度的「父母心理控制量表」，並以父親版本及母親版本分別測量青少年子女知覺其父親及母親，在親子互動中對子女進行心理控制的程度。本研究先以554名國中生進行量表的預試，根據項目分析及探索性因素分析的結果，決定12題的正式量表，其中包含四個分向度：削弱想法、引發愧感、貶抑個人、收回關愛。再以226名國中生及883名國小高年級學生為二組研究樣本，進行正式量表之信度與效度檢驗。信度分析結果顯示，「父親心理控制量表」與「母親心理控制量表」在國中與國小組都具有良好的內部一致性。驗證性因素分析結果顯示，二組觀察資料與所提出的四因素模式，都有不錯的適配度。另外，父母心理控制與正向的親子互動（即民主權威、信任、溝通）有負向關聯、與負向的親子互動（即獨斷專權、忽視冷漠、疏離）有正向關聯，與青少年子女的關係攻擊、關係受害及社交焦慮呈現正相關，但與子女的同儕受歡迎度為負相關。綜而言之，本量表之信度與效度皆獲得支持。英文摘要：Psychological control refers to a type of insidious parental control. It is a kind of parenting behavior that constrains and manipulates children's psychological and emotional experiences, thus it could invade psychological autonomy of children. The purpose of this study was to develop a multi-dimensional Parental Psychological Control Questionnaire (PPCQ) to measure the degree of paternal and maternal psychological control that adolescents perceived from parenting behaviors. A total of 554 junior-high-school students participated in the pretest study. Based on the results of item analysis and exploratory factor analysis, four dimensions were identified in PPCQ. This measure, with 3 items in each dimension, is a self-report four-point Likert-type scale. Two samples of students, representing pre- and early adolescence, were used for examining the psychometric quality of PPCQ. One sample was 226 junior-high-school students and the other sample was 883 senior-graders of primary school. The internal consistency of the Father and Mother version of PPCQ in two samples was satisfactory. The construct validity of PPCQ was inspected through confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), concurrent validity and discriminant validity. The results of CFA indicated the model fit was acceptable. In addition, the correlation results showed that parental psychological control was related in expected ways to parenting style and parent-child attachment, as well as children's social and psychological adjustment. Overall, psychometric evaluation demonstrated that PPCQ is statistically reliable and valid.起始頁-結束頁：239-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「大一新生學校生活適應量表」之發展並列篇名：An Inventory of School Adaptation for College Freshmen作者：黃韞臻(Yun-Chen Huang);林淑惠(Shu-Hui Lin)關鍵字：大一新生;常模;複核效化;學校生活適應;cross-validation;freshmen;norm;school adaptation期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的主要目的為發展「大一新生學校生活適應量表」，研究者先參酌相關文獻確立量表架構，據以發展測量題項，再利用預試結果進行項目分析，正式施測對象之有效樣本為1,260位大一新生，將其隨機分為三組獨立樣本。以第一組進行探索性因素分析，了解量表的因素結構，再以第二組進行驗證性因素分析，考驗所架構量表模式之契合度，以及內在結構；而後以第三組為效度樣本，檢驗測量模式之複核效化；最後，利用全體樣本建立學校生活適應各分量表之百分等級常模。研究發現：（1）「大一新生學校生活適應量表」包含五個構面，分別為同儕關係、學習適應、自我接納、師生關係，以及時間管理等因素；（2）量表模式的適配度佳，同時具有良好的信度與效度；（3）模式具有跨樣本的穩定性。英文摘要：This study describes a newly-developed inventory for measuring school adaptation among college freshmen. A preliminary inventory was developed based on a review of the relevant literature, and the formal inventory was established after performing items analysis. 1,260 valid responses were collected and randomly divided into 3 independent groups. The first group was used to perform exploratory factor analysis in order to investigate the factor structure; the second group was used for confirmatory factor analysis for checking the model fitness; the cross-validation of the model was conducted on the third group. Finally, its scoring norm was established. The major findings support the stability and validity of this inventory: (1) The results from the exploratory factor analysis showed the constructed scale is comprised of 5 factors, including peer relationship, learning adaptation, self acceptance, teacher-student relationship, and time management. (2) The results from the confirmatory factor analysis showed that not only the fitness of the model is good, but the constructed scale also has good reliability and validity. (3) The cross-validation results showed that the proposed model has stability.起始頁-結束頁：259-281資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：「中學生考試壓力因應量表」之編製與應用並列篇名：The Development and Application of Coping with Examination Stress Scale for High School Students作者：趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);王雅鈴(Ya-Ling Wang)關鍵字：考試壓力;逃避;問題焦點;情緒焦點;壓力因應;avoidance;emotion-focused;examination stress;problem-focused;stress coping期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：個體在面對不同的壓力情境時，會引發個體使用不同的因應策略，然而過去研究多以一般壓力因應量表來測量個體對不同壓力情境的因應方式，並未針對情境特定下之壓力因應策略的使用作深入探討。本研究旨在編製一份壓力情境特定的「中學生考試壓力因應量表」，以供相關研究與教學實務使用。本量表包括問題焦點因應、情緒焦點因應及逃避因應等三個分量表，一共17題。本研究蒐集臺灣地區國三學生之預試與正式樣本共1,699名為研究對象，研究發現三個分量表的內部一致性信度分別為.90、.79、.83，具有良好的信度。效度方面，本研究採取探索性與驗證性因素分析檢視其考試壓力因應的概念結構，結果各題目測量之因素符合理論，顯示本量表的理論架構可得到實徵性資料支持，具有適當的構念效度。英文摘要：Individuals may use different coping strategies to cope with different stressful situations. However, previous studies mostly assess the use of coping strategies in stressful situations without focusing on a specific stressful situation through the use of general stress coping measures. Thus, this study aims to develop a situation specific, test stress coping scale for related research and education applications. This scale is comprised 17 items in three subscales: problem-focused coping, emotion-focused coping, and avoidance coping. A total of 1,699 Taiwanese ninth grade junior high school students were included. The results revealed that the coefficients of internal consistency reliability and stability were .90, .79, and .83, respectively, indicating reasonable reliability. As for validity, exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis showed that each item conformed to our theoretical structure, demonstrating acceptable construct validity. Also, the criterion-related validity seems to be good when taking the grades as the criterion.起始頁-結束頁：283-310資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：心理健康構念的後設分析與測量模式檢證並列篇名：Meta Analysis for Mental Health Constructs and Measurement Models Verification作者：曾柔鳴(Jou-Ming Tseng);黃財尉(Tsai-Wei Huang);盧奐均(Huan-Chun Lu);林佩蓉(Pei-Jung Lin);李美遠(Mei-Yuan Lee)關鍵字：心理健康;後設分析;測量模式;Measurement model;Mental health;Meta analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究蒐集國內1998~2008年共82篇心理健康相關研究報告，在刪除資訊不完全者後，最後以36篇具完整相關數值資料的文稿進行後設分析，並以結構方程模式檢證心理健康測量模式的適配性。研究結果顯示：（1）心理健康量表的內涵包含軀體化、焦慮、社會困擾、憂鬱與正向心理等五向度，且各向度皆具有高度的合併信度；（2）以心理（焦慮、憂鬱與正向心理）、生理（軀體化），以及社會（社會困擾）等三層面所架構的理論模式較能適配心理健康量測。英文摘要：This study collected 82 mental health research studies with reliability information from 1998 to 2008 in Taiwan and final 36 valid studies with additional complete correlation coefficients were used. Approaches of meta-analysis and structural equation modeling were implemented to integrate major constructs of mental health and to verify the goodness of fits between possible mental health measurement models and the synthesized data. Results showed that the main contents of mental health comprised five major constructs and were all with high combined coefficients of reliability; they were somatic symptom (SM), anxiety (AN), social undermining (SO), depression (DE), and positive mentality (PO). A model based on the framework of physical (SM), psychological (AN, DE and PO), and social (SO) factors were most fitting the synthesized data.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：探究想像力內涵暨評測量表研發並列篇名：The Study of Imaginative Capabilities and Imaginative Capability Scale Development作者：梁朝雲(Chao-Yun Liang);許育齡(Yu-Ling Hsu);林威聖(Wei-Sheng Ling)關鍵字：Rasch模式;想像力;想像力量表;imaginative capability;imaginative capability scale;Rasch model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：想像力是人類與生俱來，並引導個體從事創造思考與表現的重要能力。本文內含兩個研究：一為探究想像力的組合樣態；二則運用Rasch測量模型檢測「想像力量表」的客觀與等距特性。研究結果顯示，想像力主要由三向度能力組成，分別為：創始想像、構思想像、轉造想像。同時，創始想像內含探索、新穎、生產等三項特徵；構思想像內含有效、辯證、感受、直覺、專注等五項特徵；轉造想像則內含具象與轉用等兩項特徵。本研究開發之想像力量表凝鍊了眾多想像力特徵，具嚴謹驗證、易於施測之特性，其當可做為教師評估學習者想像力，亦可用於學習者自我引導之參考。英文摘要：Imagination is an important human capability which inspires individuals to engage in creative thinking and performance. Two studies were combined to examine the imaginative capability and to test an instrument regarding this capability by using the Rasch modeling analysis. The results indicated that imaginative capabilities consisted of three components, namely initiating imagination, conceiving imagination, and transforming imagination. ”Initiating imagination” consisted of three characteristics: exploration, novelty, and productivity. ”Conceiving imagination” consisted of five characteristics: effectiveness, dialectics, sensibility, intuition, and concentration. ”Transforming imagination” consisted of two characteristics: crystallization and transformation. The current study provided intriguing insights into the characteristics and categories of human imagination. The imaginative capability scale was developed to be both empirically valid and easy to administer in diverse domains. The results seem productive enough to warrant further inquires and to be used in both teachers’ instructional evaluation and students’ self assessment.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：「國小教師數學教學知識（MPCK）知覺量表」發展之探究並列篇名：Developing a Perception Instrument of Mathematics Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Elementary School Teachers作者：陳彥廷(Yen-Ting Chen)關鍵字：知覺量表;國小教師;數學教學知識;elementary school teacher;mathematics pedagogical content knowledge;perception instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在建構「國小教師數學教學知識（MPCK）知覺量表」，並將建構之量表進行抽樣調查，以驗證、分析量表具有良好之信、效度。研究共分三階段進行：第一階段，文獻整合與分析，建立量表之面向與各面向之題項內涵初稿；第二階段，邀請專家進行焦點座談，修正量表內容；第三階段，將量表製作成預試問卷，以立意取樣進行預試施測，回收有效樣本131份，經項目分析、探索性因素分析檢驗、修訂，保留知覺量表共17題，再將修訂之量表進行正式問卷施測，回收有效樣本194份，再以結構方程模式進行驗證性因素分析，檢驗量表的構念效度。研究結果顯示，本研究所建構之量表的測量模式與觀察資料適配度大致良好；該量表整體信度（Cronbach's alpha值）為.919，各分量表的信度介於.644~.837之間，具有良好的信度與效度。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to construct perception instrument of Mathematics Pedagogical Content Knowledge (MPCK) for elementary school teachers and then test in the validity and reliability through a questionnaire. The process consisted of three stages. First, the researcher reviewed a wide range of literature related to PCK to compile factors associated with the MPCK. Secondly, seven experts were assembled for a focus group to examine the factors and the items of each factor. Two other experts evaluated the questionnaire for content validity before drafting a preliminary version of the questionnaire. Finally, the revised version was trial-tested and revised as the final version to test the indicators. The proposed questionnaire was found to have acceptable reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：51-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：師資培育的創新－MOOCs補救教學師資培育課程之初探並列篇名：INNOVATIVE TEACHER PREPARATION FOR REMEDIAL INSTRUCTION: A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF THE APPLICATION OF MOOCS TO REMEDIAL INSTRUCTION TEACHER PREPARATION作者：洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung);袁銀娟(Yin-Juan Yuan)關鍵字：MOOCs;補救教學;師資培育;教師進修;MOOCs;remedial instruction;teacher preparation;teacher development program期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：補救教學開始走向專業化師資，教育部於100年推出師資基本資格，但近年來傳統實體研習的補救教學師資培育面臨瓶頸，補救教師師資缺口持續存在。本研究旨在透過對學習者學習背景、歷程與經驗的分析，探討以MOOCs途徑作為擴充型補救教學師資培育途徑之可行性。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以一門依據教育部規定之補救教學師資研習課程架構所設計的MOOCs國中階段補救教學師資培育課程為研究平台。該課程共13單元，包括教學影片、隨堂作業、議題討論、大作業、課程簡報和參考資料等6項學習項目。以第一期開課期間註冊的421名學員為研究對象，全體學員在學習平臺的學習歷程資料以及課後調查問卷回應的部分學員（N=65名）兩筆不同資料分析，綜合多元資料回應研究問題。研究發現或結論：（1）所有註冊學員約一成完成者，其他未完成課程學員依據其線上參與行為分未出席者、中輟和潛水學員等三類。根據整體參與情形發現前兩個單元是學員退出課程的最高峰，隨課程陸續上線各單元瀏覽量大體呈逐步下降趨勢。MOOCs的學習項目中以隨堂作業總體瀏覽量最高，議題討論次之；觀看過八成共同科目影片學員僅佔9.4%。（2）課後問卷調查所得學員背景以在職教師和職前教師為主，但有少量社會人士；學員註冊課程的主要動機包括對補救教學師培課程內容本身、以及對MOOCs學習方式感興趣；持續修課的主要原因有本課程能增進其對補救教學的認識和經驗，另外可能由於本課程架構符合教育部規定，期待獲得完成修課證明為持續修課的次要原因。（3）本研究綜合學員背景、滿意度和參與者在線上學習的表現等資料，支持MOOCs作為教師研習之擴充形式的可行性。回應問卷之學員普遍肯定本課程內容與形式，以及自身學習收穫；能開放研習對象包括在職教師、社會人士等多元背景，且不限時空、進度的研習方式滿足學員個別化的專業發展需求，一期完成的人數和學習表現不亞於一般實體研習，且具重複運用等優勢。研究原創性／價值：本研究將教育部規定之補救教學師資培育課程首創採MOOCs方式，試圖以MOOCs的優勢探討補充補救教學師資培育之可行性，並在首次實作經驗採多元資料獲得本土運用成效，對臺灣學習者對師資培育的線上課程提供本土的樣貌。教育政策建議或實務意涵：本研究之結果反映出臺灣對於MOOCs途徑運用在補救教學師資培育或推廣補救教學專業知能之真實結果，採用MOOCs補充不易補足的教師專業知能確實可行，本研究發現線上學習的不同類型、學習者對MOOCs線上活動的反應，所得之結果均可作為未來MOOCs運用在其他教師進修課程之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: Massive open online courses (MOOCs) offer open courses to the public. The professional knowledge of remediation received attention when the 18-hour basic course was made a requirement for teacher preparation by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. There is a shortage of professional development resources for remedial teachers. This study aimed to investigate the feasibility of the application of MOOCs to the required Remediation Teacher Preparation program. Design/methodology/approach: ”Every Student Can Succeed: Effective Remediation” was designed as an xMOOC and was opened to the public to meet the demand for professional development. Six types of learning activities were designed: video, homework, issue-discussion, project, PowerPoint slide, and reference. There were 421 students registered for the online course. Students' learning behavior data and a post-course online survey were collected from 65 participants. The data were analyzed to answer the research questions. Findings/results: 1. Approximately 10% of enrolled students completed the course requirements. Three types of participants were found on the basis of participation behavior: the no-show, drop-out, and lurker. They showed significantly different behavior online. Participation decreased as the units advanced and the most significant decrease occurred after the second unit. The ”homework” was the learning activity that received the most visits, followed by ”issue-discussion”. 2. The survey found that the highest proportion of participants were teachers or teacher trainees. Some of the participants did not work in schools or study education but enrolled for personal interests. Most participants reported positive attitudes toward MOOCs and considered MOOCs as a potential way to provide professional development for remediation. 3. The varied backgrounds of the participants, the positive feedback from them, and the number of participants, all supported the feasibility of the MOOC for remediation teacher training. Originality/value: The application of MOOCs to remediation teacher training is in the trial stages in Taiwan. The results and suggestions of this study provide information for further consideration for online teacher development programs. Suggestions/implications: The results of this study reflect the actual outcome of the application of MOOCs in remedial instruction and teacher training in Taiwan. The study also supports the feasibility of using MOOCs to supply remedial teacher professional development which is difficult to meet the needs. The study also unveils different modes of learning and participants' responses to online learning activities. The aforementioned results provide a reference for future teacher development programs based on MOOCs.起始頁-結束頁：65-67+69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202006_28(2).00032篇名：評介《菲律賓高等教育政策與東協整合：需求與挑戰》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”HIGHER EDUCATION POLICY IN THE PHILIPPINES AND ASEAN INTEGRATION: DEMANDS AND CHALLENGES.”作者：陳怡如(I-Ru Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：107-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202006_28(2).00043篇名：創意教學信念與創意教學行為關聯之研究：以參與專業學習社群的動機與情形為中介變項並列篇名：A STUDY ON THE CORRELATION BETWEEN CREATIVE TEACHING BELIEF AND CREATIVE TEACHING BEHAVIOR: PROFESSIONAL LEARNING COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT MOTIVATION AND PARTICIPATION AS MEDIATING VARIABLES作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：參與專業學習社群動機;參與專業學習社群情形;創意教學行為;創意教學信念;involvement motivation of professional learning community;participation of professional learning community;creative teaching behavior;creative teaching belief期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：在教育改革之際，創意教學扮演著極重要的角色，配合12年國教的推動與新課綱的頒布，教師專業學習社群的成立也更加受到重視。尤其，教師在參加了專業學習社群之後，對於自己創意教學行為的程度影響、創意教學信念對於教師參與專業學習社群的動機與影響情形、教師參與專業學習社群的動機與情形的中介效果，以上這些都是本研究想要探討的問題與目的。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究藉由臺南市281位參與專業學習社群的國小教師進行問卷調查，使用的工具分別為創意教學信念量表、創意教學行為量表、參與專業學習社群動機、參與專業學習社群情形量表，採用立意抽樣方式進行調查，以及透過結構方程模式進行分析。研究發現或結論：經由分析結果得知，創意教學信念對創意教學行為並未有直接影響；但是，創意教學信念分別可以透過參與專業學習社群動機、參加專業學習社群情形的中介對創意教學行為產生間接影響；最後，創意教學信念可以透過參與專業學習社群動機，再透過參與專業學習社群情形的中介對創意教學行為產生間接影響，換句話說，參與專業學習社群的動機與情形在創意教學信念與創意教學行為間的中介角色，獲得本研究的支持。研究原創性／價值：當討論到創意教學時，教師的信念應聚焦於「創意教學信念」，而創意教學信念可透過那些因素影響創意教學行為，缺乏相關研究討論，由此凸顯本研究的價值。此外，過去研究也少討論教師參與專業學習社群的動機與情形的中介歷程，藉由本研究的進行，可以具體討論四個變項之間的結構關係。教育政策建議或實務意涵：針對分析結果，本研究也提出相關建議如積極強化並提升教師的參與專業學習社群的動機，同時鼓勵教師參加專業學習社群，以促進教師創意教學行為的展現，以做為相關教育政策之建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Creative teaching plays a critical role in educational reform. The promotion and the issue of the 12-Year Basic Education Curricula have the establishment of teachers' professional learning community be more emphasized. Especially, how much do teachers reflect on the creative teaching after involving in professional learning community? Would teaching belief affect the motivation and degree of teachers' involvement in professional learning community? Do the motivation and participation of teachers involving in professional learning community play the role of mediating variables? These are the questions and objectives discussed in this study. Design/methodology/approach: Total 281 elementary school teachers involving in professional learning community in Tainan City are preceded the questionnaire survey in this study. The creative teaching belief scale, creative teaching behavior scale, motivation for involving in professional learning community, and participation of involving in professional learning community scale are used as the tools, purposive sampling is applied to the survey, and structural equation model is utilized for the analysis. Findings/results: The analysis results reveal direct effects of creative teaching belief on creative teaching behavior. However, creative teaching belief would indirectly affect creative teaching behavior through the mediating of involvement motivation and participation in professional learning community. Finally, creative teaching belief could indirectly affect creative teaching behavior through involvement motivation and the participation of professional learning community. In other words, the mediating roles of involvement motivation and participation of professional learning community between creative teaching belief and creative teaching behavior are proven in this study. Originality/value: Teachers' belief should focus on ”creative teaching belief” when discussing creative teaching. However, it is lack of research discussions related to through what factors creative teaching belief could affect creative teaching behavior. It would highlight the value of this study. Moreover, past research seldom discussed the intervening process of the motivation and situation of teachers involving in professional learning community. This study specifically discusses the structural relationship among four variables. Suggestions/implications: Aiming at the analysis results, relevant suggestions, e.g. promotion of teachers' involvement motivation, and encouragement in teachers' involvement in professional learning community to promote the presentation of creative teaching behavior, are proposed in this study for relevant education policies.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202003_28(1).00014篇名：為弱勢者發聲：高中生之偏見察覺力與旁觀者介入知能課程探究並列篇名：SPEAKING UP FOR THE DISADVANTAGED: EMPOWERMENT OF SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS' PREJUDICE AWARENESS AND BYSTANDER INTERVENTION BEHAVIOR作者：李佩珊(Pei-Shan Lee);謝百淇(Paichi Pat Shein)關鍵字：多元文化;多元文化素養;旁觀者介入;偏見察覺;性別刻板印象;multiculturalism;multicultural literacy;bystander intervention;prejudice awareness;gender stereotypes期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：隨著社會民主與多元發展，弱勢者的教育權益逐受重視，但隱性的弱勢族群仍倍受忽略。為了能培養學生對不同文化及隱性弱勢群體發展正向且積極態度，本研究整合多元文化教育學家Banks的「減少偏見」構念和社會心理學家Darley和Latane的「旁觀者介入模式」，設計「為弱勢者發聲」課程，目的在探討參與者對於偏見覺察力與旁觀者介入知能的學習內涵與歷程。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究取向為詮釋現象學，採立意取樣邀請10位高中生接受6個課程模組共12小時的「為弱勢者發聲」課程，並蒐集課堂討論、作業文本和訪談資料。研究發現或結論：本研究發現旁觀者介入模式當中的「注意」與「衡量」適合運用偏見察覺方法來進行培力，其後才能啟動旁觀者介入之「承擔」、「方法」和「行動」。而本研究設計「為弱勢者發聲」課程的學習內涵包括：洞悉日常生活的偏見、破除刻板印象、偏見覺察力、旁觀者介入行動的知與行；課程的學習歷程包括：發展旁觀者介入的思維、建構旁觀者介入的策略、維持旁觀者介入的作為。研究原創性／價值：本研究發現性別、外貌、身材、個性等因素經常造成青少年在同儕團體中的弱勢處境，此種隱性弱勢在教育領域當中的資源少於族群或身心障礙等多元文化群體，值得教育者與研究者關注。最後，本研究提出教育實踐之建議，並提出未來研究方向之建議。英文摘要：Purpose: With the recent increase in social support for democracy and diversity, the educational rights of disadvantaged groups have received more attention, but there are other groups that are still marginalized in the society. To cultivate positive and proactive attitudes in students towards diverse cultures and multicultural groups, this study designed the ”Speaking Up for the Disadvantaged (SUD)” course by integrating the ”prejudice reduction” concept proposed by Banks, a multicultural education researcher, and the ”bystander intervention model” proposed by Darley and Latane, social psychologists. The purpose of the study is to explore the learning processes and outcomes of participants' prejudice awareness and bystander intervention. Design/methodology/approach: This study adopted the approach of interpreting phenomenology. Ten high school students were selected via convenient sampling to take 12 hours of the SUD course that consisted of 6 units. Classroom discussions, homework and interview data were collected. Findings/results: The study found that the learning outcomes of the SUD course included understanding of everyday prejudice, stereotype deconstruction, prejudice awareness, and the knowing and doing of bystander intervention. The learning processes included developing the perspectives of bystanders, formulating the strategies of bystander intervention, and maintaining the willingness to act as bystanders. Originality/value: This study found that factors such as gender, appearance, physique, and personality often position adolescents at a disadvantage by their peers. Some of these factors are often overlooked in the field of education and require more attention to ensure educational equity for all. This study also proposes educational practices and directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：39-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202003_28(1).00025篇名：國小教師對綜合活動領域課綱之釋意研究並列篇名：SENSEMAKING OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEACHERS IN THE CURRICULUM GUIDELINES OF THE INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES LEARNING AREA作者：王為國(Wei-Kuo Wang)關鍵字：釋意;綜合活動領域;國小教師;課綱;sensemaking;integrative activities learning area;elementary school teacher;curriculum guidelines期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究的研究目的在於瞭解國小教師對於臺灣的綜合活動領域課綱的釋意內容、來源、脈絡與行動。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究藉由深度訪談來瞭解現職國小教師對於綜合活動領域課綱與實踐的內心世界與想法，進而建構出現職國小教師對於課綱解讀與實踐的釋意過程。本研究選取研究參與者為在J國民小學（化名）三年年資以上的教師，且擔任綜合活動具有三年經驗以上之教師六名。研究發現或結論：教師在師資培育階段的學習、參與教學實務的活動、認同的教育理念等對釋意的影響較多，校內專業成長活動與同儕互動的影響較少。在教師擁有課程實施自主性及教師專業互動少的學校脈絡下，教師的似真性想法與行動較少獲得同儕的回饋。教師對於綜合活動領域課綱的釋意內容，大部分符合課綱的理念，少部分是似真性想法。學校活動及其他領域課程占用綜合活動上課時數的釋意行動，造成綜合活動領域主體性模糊的現象。研究原創性／價值：過去研究對於國小教師如何詮釋綜合活動領域課綱並未有深入探討，因此本研究採用釋意理論，探究國小教師對於綜合活動領域課綱的釋意來源、脈絡、內容與行動。教育政策建議或實務意涵：建議可強化教師在綜合活動領域的課程意識、反思與教學策略。安排研習前，事先調查教師們綜合活動領域所遇到的問題，然後據以安排研習內容與方式。另外，新課綱在推廣時，應該善用多元管道，包含研習、工作坊、網路課程、線上討論區、教師專業社群、校長與主任課程領導等。英文摘要：Purpose: This study investigated the content, sources, contexts, and actions pertaining to elementary school teachers' sensemaking for the learning area of integrative activities in curriculum guidelines in Taiwan. Design/methodology/approach: In this study, in-depth interviews were conducted to procure elementary school teachers' perceptions regarding the curriculum guidelines of the integrative activities learning area and their interpretation of the curriculum guidelines during the curriculum implementation were analyzed. The participants were six teachers who worked at the J elementary school(pseudonym) for over 3 years, and also taught in the integrative activities learning area for 3 years or more. Data were collected through interviews. Coding categories of the study were accomplished after repetitively reading interview transcripts. The study data were coded and analyzed, and the study conclusions were formed. Findings/results: This research investigated learning in the teacher education stage, involved participation in teaching practices, and identified the educational concepts that have a high influence on teachers' sensemaking. Professional growth activities and peer interactions within a school had less influence on teachers' sensemaking. As a consequence of teachers' curriculum autonomy and limited professional interactions between teachers, peers could only provide little feedback pertaining to the teachers' actions and the ideas of plausibility. Most of the teachers' sensemaking content of the integrative activities learning area curriculum was in accordance with the curriculum guidelines, and a minor part of their sensemaking pertained to the ideas of plausibility. The school's activities and other curriculum-related tasks occupied the hours allocated for the integrative activities learning area. This sensemaking action led to ambiguity concerning the subjectivity of the curriculum. Originality/value: Studies have not conducted detailed analyses regarding elementary school teachers' interpretations of the curriculum guidelines of integrative activities learning area. Therefore, this study applied the sensemaking theory to investigate the content, sources, contexts, and actions related to elementary school teachers' sensemaking for the curriculum guidelines of integrative activities learning area. Suggestions/implications: To increase teachers' curriculum awareness, reflection, and teaching strategies in the integrative activities area, a seminar sponsor should analyze teachers' problems related to the integrative activities learning area before arranging the content and methods used in the seminar. Schools and teachers' professional development seminar programs should use diversified channels, such as seminars, workshops, online courses, online forums, teachers' organizations, and school leadership to promote the curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：75-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202003_28(1).00036篇名：評介《動盪時代中的美國大學教師》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”THE FACULTY FACTOR: REASSESSING THE AMERICAN ACADEMY IN A TURBULENT ERA.”作者：張意翎(Yi-Ling Chang);單文經(Wen-Jing Shen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：109-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202003_28(1).000401篇名：擴增實境月相觀測系統對於提升月相概念之研究並列篇名：A Study of Learning Effectiveness on the Augmented Reality Moon Observation System作者：劉馨韓(Hsin-Han Liou);楊鎮華(Stephen Jenn-Hwa Yang);唐文華(Wernhuar Tarng);蔡旻諺(Min-Yen Tsai)關鍵字：月相;行動學習;探究式教學;擴增實境;lunar phase;mobile learning;inquiry learning;augmented reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：虛擬實境技術讓使用者能從各種不同的角度觀察科學現象，亦可簡化實驗的變因，縮短科學現象的演變過程，讓學生在有限的時間內專注於某些特定的主題，因此有助於概念的改變。隨著科技的進展，由虛擬實境發展而來的擴增實境技術能將各種環境資訊以文字、圖片、影像、聲音和立體模型等形式疊加在真實情境中，讓使用者進行各式各樣的學習活動。近年來，隨著手持載具的普及和感測器功能的強化，讓擴增實境的應用不再局限於個人電腦前面，而是可以隨時、隨地進行；儘管擴增實境應用在教學的案例不少，但擴增實境的特性對於天文探究活動的影響仍很少被研究。本論文採用探究式教學法、準實驗設計之不等組前、後測，比較兩款手持載具上的月相觀測軟體（Moon Sky與Sky Map）應用在國民小學四年級月相單元。研究結果發現，實驗組的學習成效顯著優於控制組，特別是在「由月形可以得知農曆日期」、「一天的月亮變化」、「月形是否有順序」等概念的答對率比控制組高。由觀察和訪談中得知，學生會透過擴增實境「疊加背景」的特性將螢幕中的真實景物作為月亮位置的參考座標，有助於將月形、方位角和高度角與真實情境作連結，促進月亮相關概念的建構。英文摘要：Virtual reality technology allows users to observe scientific phenomena from various angles, and it also simplifies the experiment and shortens the evolution time of scientific phenomena so that students can focus on certain themes in the limited time to help conceptual change. With the progress of ICT, all kinds of information about the environment such as text, images, video, sound and three-dimensional models can be overlaid on real scene by augmented reality technology, which allows learners to engage in various activities in real situations. With the popularity of the handheld devices and the development of the sensors allows augmented reality applications no longer confined to the front of the computer. This study compared two kinds of lunar phase observation software on handheld devices. A quasi-experimental research was conducted to explore the learning effectiveness for the fourth grade students to learn the concepts of lunar phase. The results showed that the learning effectiveness of experimental group who used augmented reality moon observation system was significantly better than the control group who used Sky Map. Especially, the correct rate of some items of experimental group were higher than those of the control group, such as the concepts of ”we can know the moon shape from the lunar date,” ”moon shape in one day,” and ”whether there is a order of moon shape.” The interview results show that students could use real objects as the moon’s reference coordinates through the feature of ”overlaying background” by augmented reality. They could easily establish connection between the lunar phase and its direction and elevation angle in real environments.起始頁-結束頁：51-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140406020032篇名：輕度學習或智能障礙學生使用電腦繪圖軟體記錄生活事件之研究並列篇名：A Study of Utilizing Graphics Software to Record Life Events by Mild Learning Disability or Mental Retardation Students作者：羅家駿(Jia-Jiunn Lo);林慧茵(Hui-Yin Lin)關鍵字：回憶;智能障礙;電腦繪圖;學習障礙;豐富度;recall;mental retardation;computer graphics;learning disability;degree of richness期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以彰化縣某國民小學資源班兩位輕度學習障礙學生與4位輕度智能障礙學生為對象，探討他們使用電腦繪圖軟體進行生活事件記錄時的相關表現與事後觀看繪圖作品時對事件的回憶程度。實驗歷時三個月進行21次電腦繪圖活動、1次事後受試者個別訪談與兩次事件回憶記錄。並將受試者作品內容、全螢幕錄影、訪談紀錄與口述事件回憶的錄音檔等資料，進行量化與質性分析。研究結果顯示，輕度學習或智能障礙學生最常使用復原與顏色等兩項電腦繪圖功能。他們普遍喜愛使用電腦繪圖軟體記錄生活事件，並認為這比文字書寫與傳統繪圖媒材更容易完成生活事件的記錄。大多數受試者的作品畫面豐富度與使用天數呈現顯著正相關，且軟體精熟度也隨之提高。受試者在一∼一個半月後觀看電腦繪圖作品，可喚起至少一半的回憶，而回憶程度與受試者之生活豐富性與能力相關。此外，作品畫面豐富度對智能障礙學生的回憶程度影響較高，但對學習障礙學生則未有顯著影響。從研究結果得知，電腦繪圖軟體可幫助輕度學習或智能障礙學生記錄生活事件，對他們之繪圖有所助益，且能提高學習興趣。期望此結果能作為特教教師教學之參考，將電腦繪圖融入教學中，作為幫助學習或智能障礙學生表達想法的一項工具。英文摘要：Taking two mild learning disability and four mild mental retardation students who studied in an elementary school in Changhua, Taiwan as subjects, this study investigated their behaviors, attitudes, and performances of utilizing computer graphics to record life events. Their later recall levels of life events by reviewing the graphics were also evaluated. Twenty one computer graphic drawing activities were conducted during three months. The experimental data included one after-experiment subject interview, two oral descriptions of life events, full screen recording videos, and the graphics drawn by these subjects. Both quantitative and qualitative analyses were conducted. The results showed that the most frequently used functions of computer graphics were ”undo” and ”coloring.” The subjects liked to use computer graphics to record life events more than traditional media, such as writing and paper-based drawings, in that they think it was easier to use computer graphics to record life events. The degree of drawing richness and fluency of software were getting better as the experiment going for most subjects. At least half contents of life events could be recalled by reviewing the graphics after one to one and half months of drawing activities. There were no significant relationships between the recall level and degree of drawing richness for mild learning disability students. On the other hand, the recall levels were more related to the drawing richness for mild mental retardation students. This study revealed that utilizing computer graphics can be helpful to mild learning disability or mental retardation students to record life events and enhance their learning motivation. It is expected that this study can provide references for teachers to integrate computer graphics into special education as a tool for students to express their thoughts.起始頁-結束頁：67-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140406020043篇名：具有語音與影像辨識之電腦輔助英語訓練系統建置與應用並列篇名：Developing and Applying of Computer-Assisted English Tutor Training System with Speech and Image Technologies作者：沈敬堯(Jing-Yau Shen);劉明洲(Ming-Chou Liu);高韓英(Han-Ying Kao);汪冠宏(Kuan-Hung Wang)關鍵字：文字轉語音;英語學習;語音辨識;嘴唇追蹤;Text-to-Speech;English learning;speech recognition;lip tracking期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究結合現有的語音辨識引擎和語音合成引擎，再結合即時的影像追蹤功能，建置一套「電腦輔助英語訓練系統」，以增進國小學童英語聽、說能力。該系統的主要架構對於師生皆有輔助的功能，學童可根據自己的進度學習英語聽說能力，系統可發音讓學童學習，也可與學童模擬對話，並對學童的語音是否正確進行辨識，也可進行口說英語翻譯或中文翻譯。教師可透過系統視覺化的介面，進行教材內容之編輯，以及篩選學童的學習歷程資料，了解學童的學習進度與學習行為。實驗結果顯示，參與師生對系統的各項功能皆有正面的評價，本系統確實有效地增強學童在英語口說的能力，甚至在評鑑檢核學童的英語口說能力上，其正確性可作為英語學習護照認證的檢測評量工具。原本低成就的學童或對自己的英語口說較無自信的學童，大都能建立信心並通過英語學習護照認證。此外，對於專注力較差的學童也有激勵、督促的功效。教師有了系統的輔助，藉由學習歷程的紀錄分析，可輕易了解學童的學習狀況，有助於調整教學策略或個別補救教學，也減輕教師的負擔。本研究所提出之電腦輔助英語訓練系統之建置與應用模式，希望提供相關英語教學系統研發、教學應用實務及研究等之參考。英文摘要：The study adopted the techniques of speech synthesis and speech recognition to improve English learning of elementary school students, assisted with computer vision lip recognition to observe and record the learning behavior of students. In order to develop an efficient learning system of English listening, speaking, reading, and translating, each module of learning system and learning behavior monitoring system was designed, implemented and experimented. From the verification of teaching and the findings of the experiment, the system is beneficial to improve students’ listening and speaking skills. In evaluating their speaking skills, it is more accurate than teachers. In assisting data analysis for teachers and supervising the learning progress and learning behavior of students, it also achieves the expected results.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140106010014篇名：應用情緒管理遊戲於國中生自傷預防教育之評量並列篇名：Applying Emotion Management Games to the Assessment of Self-Harm Prevention Education for Junior High School Students作者：張家瑋(Chia-Wi Chang);時文中(Wen-Chung Shih);翁瑞鋒(Rui-Feng Weng);曾憲雄(Shian-Shyong Tseng)關鍵字：互動式遊戲;自傷預防;決策樹;情緒管理;認知偏誤;interactive games;self-harm prevention;decision trees;emotional management;cognitive bias期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要是將國中生自傷預防教育的情緒管理能力評量，利用遊戲情境導引與模擬的特性，設計至遊戲式評量活動中。然而，要將課程評量導入至遊戲設計，對教師有很大的困難度。為了解決以上的問題，本研究提出基於決策樹的知識結構，以評量情緒管理能力為例，輔助設計評量學生不同的操作順序與操作歷程所對應之各個能力面向，並套用不同情境來製作各個遊戲關卡。實驗設計驗證使用情境式遊戲學習是否能夠比傳統講授式自傷預防教育提高學生情緒管理能力。實驗組學生情緒管理行為呈現四種不同的情緒管理行為模式，此四種行為模式分別為「會有認知偏誤且採取負向行為」、「能夠分析事實並直接採取正向行為」、「會反思並調整情緒管理路徑」與「未能分析事實而採取正向行為」。英文摘要：This research focused on the self-harm prevention education using emotion management games as learning platform. The simulated scenario of the game can reveal the emotion management of students and attract them. However, designing and developing an educational emotion management game is not easy for teachers. In this paper, the Emotion Management Tree method is proposed to assist teachers to design the game for assessment. In the experiment evaluation, two groups of students participated as control group and experimental group. In the experiment results, the posttest showed that the learning achievement of experimental group is better than the control group. The experimental group performed four types of emotion management behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：27-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140106010025篇名：應用科技接受模式探討護校學生對衛教註記系統之接受度並列篇名：Applying Technology Acceptance Model to Investigate Nursing Students Acceptance of Annotation System作者：蒲盈宏(Ying-Hung Pu);吳婷婷(Ting-Ting Wu);黃悅民(Yueh-Min Huang)關鍵字：行動載具;科技接受模式;衛教註記系統;護校學生;護理實習課程;mobile devices;technology acceptance model (TAM);annotation system;nursing students;nursing practice course期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：綜觀過去資訊科技應用於護理相關領域的研究中，大多數是探討使用者對資訊科技的接受度和使用行為，很少提及使用者的工作內容是否與資訊科技應用的適配度。有鑑於此，本研究以地區性衛生所中的實習護校學生為研究（pilot study）對象，輔以本研究所開發建置符合公共衛生護理實習課程之衛教註記系統，並以科技接受模式（technology acceptance model）為主要研究架構，將任務特性擴充至外部變數，以用來探討實習護校學生是否認為「衛教註記系統」所提供的功能符合工作上的需求，並進一步檢驗對「衛教註記系統」的接受度及使用意願等相關因素。由本研究所得數據得知，其整體解釋力R2值為 .68，顯示護校學生對衛教註記系統的滿意程度具有正向相關性之意願，意指本系統符合護校學生在工作上所需，且未來亦願意繼續使用本系統在衛教實習課程上。英文摘要：There were a lot of researches about applying information technology into nursing field in the past. Most of researches have focused on the large-sized medical institution, however, there are a few studies about nursing students who practice in a regional medical unit, and then it cannot further understand the nursing students' acceptance of information technology. Therefore, participants in this pilot study were nursing students using proposed annotation system which meet the goal of public health nursing practice course in regional public health center. In addition, this study takes Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) as the main theory structure and extends task characteristic to external variables, which was investigated whether the functions of annotation system meets work requirements for nursing students and further test annotation system' acceptance, their behavioral intentions and relationships among these factors. According to the results of experiment, the predictive power is .68, which revealed nursing students are showing positive continuance intention towards this annotation system, and continuously using again in nursing practice course in the future.起始頁-結束頁：43-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20140106010036篇名：透過塗鴉寫作促進學童的語言與溝通發展：一個實踐應用觀點並列篇名：From Drawing to Writing to Promote Children's Development of Language and Communication Skills: An Applied Perspective作者：施智元(Chih-Yuan Shih);廖長彥(Calvin Chang-Yen Liao);李依倩(Yi-Chien Lee);陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan)關鍵字：資訊融入教學;塗鴉寫作;語言學習;information technology integrated into instruction;drawing to writing;language learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：6卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究聚焦於數位科技輔助低年級學童語言與溝通發展學習活動，提供教學現場上的整合應用與實踐。本研究採行動研究，協同3位國小帶班導師，設計為期八週的教學方案，共有87位學童使用塗鴉寫作系統，進行個人和小組合作的學習活動。資料蒐集與分析方面，以協同編製之語言多元知能教學評量、事後訪談9位學童、3位家長的回饋及3位教師省思筆記為主。研究結果指出，學童在故事結構面向上進步幅度較高；其次，依序為口語表達、肢體表達與空間構圖，而以積極聆聽面向上的進步幅度較小；再次，以跨個案分析，依現象可分練習熟悉、調適轉化及相對成長三個時期進行詮釋。最後，研究團隊針對研究發現提出一些建議，以供教育工作者與研究上的參考。英文摘要：The study focus on integrating digital technologies into improve the language development and communication of children through drawing to writing process on crazy brush system. An instructional plan for eight weeks was conducted in primary schools for 87 the first grade students from three classes. This study gathered data including observation of three parents, instruction and reflection journals of three teachers, writing materials and feedback of nine students at interactive classroom activities, and observational reports of the research team. The resulted found that mostly students have positive change about oral language, learning behavior, and interpersonal interactions. On the other hand, through the cross-case analysis, group confirmation and clarification, five stages were appeared. Finally, based on reflection and suggestions of action research, we also provided implications to practitioners or teachers.起始頁-結束頁：61-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201401060100401篇名：世界民主大事紀2014年1－3月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：179-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：主編的話作者：趙永茂期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：科學民主化與水資源開發爭議－高屏大湖之個案研究並列篇名：Democratization of Science and Water Resource Development: The Case of the KaoPing Great Lakes Project作者：蔡旻霈(Min-Pei Tsai);范玫芳(Mei-Fang Fan)關鍵字：科學民主化;環境影響評估;公民參與;水資源政策;高屏大湖;democratizing of science;citizen science;environmental impact assessment;public participation;water resources policy;the KaoPing Great Lakes期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：八八風災後，越域引水工程停擺，南化、曾文水庫嚴重淤積，水利署於2010年提出高屏大湖計畫試圖減緩未來高屏地區缺水危機，引起諸多爭議。本研究旨在檢視高屏大湖開發案爭議，探討在地居民如何感知開發案的潛在危害、地方知識論述如何挑戰官方與專家知識可信度、公民行動如何影響環評審查以及在科學民主化的意涵。在地居民質疑興建人工湖可能引發並惡化當地淹水、搶奪地下水及農業灌溉用水、衝擊當地農業發展與自然生態，以及人工湖設計對地下水文的潛在影響。地方居民基於長年的生活經驗與對地下水位的觀察，提供地方脈絡與處境的專業知識，透過與環保團體、研究當地水文的水利專家結盟，長期交流合作下形構出緊密的互動網絡，進而對開發單位及主張大型水利發開的專家論述提出挑戰，提倡地下水補注工法作為未來水資源開發的可行方向，並在環境影響評估與決策過程中發揮關鍵性的影響力。英文摘要：After Typhoon Morakot, the water diversion project was shut down, and the Water Resources Agency proposed the KaoPing Great Lakes project. This study examines the controversy on the KaoPing Great Lakes project, and explores local residents' knowledge claims, citizen action and its implication for democratization of science. Local residents, environmental groups and civic water conservancy experts, built alliances and configured a close interaction network through long-term exchanges and cooperation. They challenged the large-scale water conservancy development discourses and proposed a groundwater recharge program as a potential and feasible future water resource development project. Local activism has contributed to the knowledge production of environmental impact assessment and plays a crucial role in decision-making processes.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：治理與公民參與－淡水河流域治理之Q方法論分析並列篇名：Governance and Citizen Participation: A Q Methodology Study on the Governance of Tamsui River Basin作者：方凱弘(Kai-Hung Fang);陳宏興(Hung-Hsing Chen)關鍵字：治理;公民參與;地方治理;流域治理;Q方法論;governance;citizen participation;local governance;governance of river basin;Q methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國自從解嚴開啟了民主化的浪潮，在短短的20年間，政治上先後歷經國會全面改選、總統直選與政黨輪替等巨變，使得原本以國民黨為中心的威權黨國體制瓦解，也造成政府對於公民社會的控制弱化。幾乎同一時期，在公共行政的研究領域中，「治理」的概念也逐漸盛行，主張國家機關不應該再是主導公共服務提供的最主要行為者，然而，當越來越多的公民社會行為者參與治理過程的同時，是否也意味著治理的模式，也將從傳統的國家機關中心轉變為公民社會中心？在治理的邏輯下，Pierre與Peters（2005）根據國家機關在現代治理過程中所扮演的角色，將治理的模式分為國家主義模式、自由民主模式、國家中心模式、荷蘭治理學派模式與無政府治理模式等五種模式，而這五種模式事實上也分別代表了五種不同國家機關與公民社會間的關係。我國政府在這兩股力量的驅使下，國家機關與公民社會間的關係也勢必調整。在我國的政策系絡中，環境治理為民眾最關心的政策領域之一，也因此本文選擇淡水河流域治理的經驗為個案，透過Q方法論進行研究，希望了解此一政策領域之利害關係人，對於淡水河治理過程中國家機關與公民社會間關係的認知。本研究分析政策利害關係人對於淡水河流域治理之認知類型後發現，各認知類型仍以國家機關為治理過程中主要的行為者，治理過程中更多公民社會行為者的參與，並不意味著這些行為者就應該分享決策的權力，換句話說，在政策利害關係人間，治理模式應該由國家機關中心轉變為公民社會中心的認知並沒有形成。英文摘要：The process of democratization began after the martial law was lifted in 1987. Within 20 years, Taiwan experienced major political changes such as the first reelection of the congress, the first direct election of the president, and the first time of party alternation in power. These changes demolished the old Kuomintang centered political system, and weakened governmental control over civil society. Almost at the same time, the concept of ”governance” has emerged and become popular in the field of public administration. It is argued that government is no longer the only dominant actor in providing public services. However, when more and more actors of civil society participate in the governing process, does it mean that the model of governance will be transformed from a traditional state-centered model to a civil society-centered model? Based on the role of government played in the process of governance, Pierre and Peters (2005) developed five models of governance, including the etatiste governance model, the liberal-democratic state governance model, the state-centric governance model, the Dutch governance school, and governance without government. In fact, these five models represent five different relationships between government and civil society during the process of governing. Because of the two practical and theoretical developments discussed above, the old relationship between government and civil society in Taiwan has to be changed as well. In Taiwan's policy context, environment governance is one of the policy areas that people care about most. Therefore, this research utilizes Q methodology to conduct a case study on the governance model of Tamsui River Basin. It intends to reveal different patterns of policy stakeholders' perceptions on the relationship between state and civil society in the Tamsui River Basin's governing process. By analyzing policy stakeholders' different patterns of perceptions, this research finds that state is still deemed as the main actor in the governing process. In addition, when more civil society actors participate in the governing process, it does not mean that these actors should share the power of making policy decisions. In other words, among policy stakeholders, the perception that the model of governance should be transformed from state-centered to civil society-centered has not emerged.起始頁-結束頁：41-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：候選人因素與投票抉擇－以2012年臺灣總統選舉為例並列篇名：Candidate Factor and Vote Choice: The Case of 2012 Presidential Election作者：鄭夙芬(Su-Feng Cheng)關鍵字：候選人形象;情感溫度計;回溯性評估;總統施政滿意度;政黨支持;candidate image;feeling thermometer;retrospective evaluation;presidential approval rating;party support期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究同時運用質量化資料，探討2012年總統選舉時，候選人因素中的形象及表現與選民投票抉擇的關係。研究發現：候選人形象與表現，是這次選舉中，民眾投票時重要的考慮。來自調查的量化資料顯示在候選人形象方面，在整個競選過程，馬英九都較蔡英文受到民眾的欣賞；質性的資料則發現，民眾對候選人形象最在意的是廉正與能力二個面向。在候選人過去表現方面，馬英九總統第一任任期的表現雖然差強人意，但馬英九的兩岸政策，尤其是處理兩岸關係的表現及簽署ECFA後為台灣經濟所帶來的助益，符合民眾對總統在追求和平與繁榮方面的要求；質性資料也確認民眾肯定馬英九的兩岸政策，使臺灣在經濟及社會安定等方面得到改善；至於蔡英文除了仍然背負民進黨貪腐形象的包袱，但最受到質疑的還是她的行政歷練及治理能力。再者，不論質量化資料，都顯示候選人因素，與政黨支持有密切的關聯性。英文摘要：This study utilizes both quantitative and qualitative data to explore the relationship between candidate image and voting decision as well as candidate's past performance in the 2012 Taiwan presidential election. The research finding confirms that candidate factor that combines both candidate image and candidates' past performances are important concerns of vote choice. Regarding candidate image, the empirical data confirms that people like Ma Ying-jeou better than Tsai Ing-wen during campaign. Qualitative data indicates that people place importance on integrity and effectiveness. Regarding candidate's past performance, although people were not very satisfied with Ma Ying-jeou's overall performance in his first term, the survey data indicates that people approve his significant policy regarding cross-strait relations. His efforts on improving cross-strait relations and using ECFA to bring about economic benefits, met the expectation of ”peace and prosperity” among the general public. Qualitative data also shows that people agree with Ma's cross-strait policy that improves Taiwan's economy and social stability. On the other hand, Tasi Ing-wen struggles with the corruption image of her party, and was criticized primarily by her ruling experience and ability. Additionally, both quantitative and qualitative date indicate that candidate factor is closely related to party support.起始頁-結束頁：103-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：再探台灣民眾的政治信任－檢驗「批判性公民」解釋並列篇名：The Origins of Political Trust in Taiwan Revisited: A Test of the 'Critical Citizens' Explanation作者：黃信豪(Hsin-Hao Huang)關鍵字：政治信任;批判性公民;民主態度;political trust;critical citizens;democratic attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來西方興起的「批判性公民」概念為大眾政治不信任帶來新的理論意涵。本文以2012年總統大選後的全國性面訪調查（TEDS）資料為基礎，檢驗「批判性公民」解釋於台灣民眾政治信任的適用性。分析結果顯示，民主態度為「民主批評者」的政治信任的確顯著低於「民主滿意者」與「民主順從者」，其與「民主離異者」皆傾向較不信任執政當局。民主態度與政治信任的穩定關聯性，顯示考量「批判性公民」因素將能為台灣民眾政治信任開創新的解釋來源。此外，透過不同理論途徑的引導，本文發現民主態度對政治信任的解釋與省籍、政黨認同等社會心理因素相似，屬較為長期、穩定的來源，這表示批判性公民的理論概念應得以適用於台灣政治脈絡。以此，考量批判性公民解釋對理解台灣民眾政治信任有根本的重要性。英文摘要：It is recently that the idea of 'Critical Citizens' has brought political distrust additional theoretical implications that differ from conventional wisdom. This article tests whether the 'Critical Citizens' explanation is compatible for political trust in Taiwan, by examining the TEDS survey data conducted after the 2012 presidential election. The results show that, first of all, 'democratic critics' have a considerably lower level of political trust than people who are categorized as 'democratic satisfaction' and 'democratic subjects', and both of 'democratic critics' and 'democratic alienators' tend to distrust the political authority. The robust effect of democratic attitudes on political trust means that the idea of 'Critical Citizens' can provide a new explanation for political trust in Taiwan. Second, this article also reveals that the factor of critical citizens, similar with socio-psychological variables, can be identified as the long-term and accumulated origins of political trust, meaning the idea applicable to Taiwan's political context. Accordingly, taking the 'Critical Citizens' explanation into account should be substantially important for understanding political trust in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：153-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：書評：Deficits, Debt, and Democracy: Wrestling with Tragedy on the Fiscal Commons〔赤字、負債與民主政治—與財政共同體的悲劇搏鬥〕by Richard E. Wagner〔理察．瓦格納〕作者：劉華宗期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：195-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：世界民主大事紀　2013年10－12月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：201-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：策劃學校發展的資料運用：一所高中個案研究並列篇名：Data Use in School Development Planning: A High School Case Study作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Pan);張淑涵(Shu-Han Chang)關鍵字：資料運用;資料驅動決定;塑義理論;data use;data-driven decision making;sensemaking theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：二十一世紀在國際評比的推波助瀾下，學生學習成效再度成為各國教改的重要議題，而資料驅動決定（data-driven decision making）在原本講求績效責任的教育脈絡中，更成為協助學校謀求改進發展以提升學生學習的重要作法。惟國內對此尚屬陌生，故為拓展國內資料運用（data use）之學校實務與學術探究，本研究試圖透過大學與高中之協作計畫，探討資料運用在一所個案高中現場之操作情形。在採用觀察、訪談與文件分析方法蒐集本個案研究所需資料後，發現個案學校經由不同資料之結合，解讀與診斷學校問題，進而研訂改進之行動方案。其中也呈顯了學校成員從懷疑到覺得受用的塑義（sensemaking）過程。而校長領導、成員的時間、能力與認同度是影響學校資料運用之關鍵性條件。英文摘要：Propelled by the international comparison of student achievement in the twenty first century, student learning caught the world's attention and became critical to the agenda of education reform. Data-driven decision making plays a crucial role in assisting school improvement and enhancing student achievement; however, data use remains a relatively new concept for audiences in Taiwan. To enrich school practices and academic data use, this case study explored how a high school used data through collaboration with a university. Observation, interview, and document analysis were employed to collect data. The results indicated that the school had integrated different data to diagnose its weaknesses and problems. An improvement action plan was developed based on the data. It was also observed that school members who were initially suspicious gradually changed their attitude, finding the use of data to be meaningful in their sensemaking process. Effective principal leadership, as well as the time, capacity, and willingness of school members, were critical conditions for the successful use of data within schools.起始頁-結束頁：171-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).062篇名：我國大專院校資訊科系之資訊倫理相關課程開設現況研究並列篇名：Ethics Curricula of the Information Science Departments in Taiwanese Universities and Colleges作者：林建宏(Chien-Hung Lin);周倩(Chien Chou)關鍵字：大專院校資訊科系;倫理相關課程;資訊倫理;資訊專業倫理;information departments in higher education;ethics-related courses;information ethics;professional information ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：為瞭解國內大專院校資訊科系教授資訊倫理相關課程之實施情形，本研究透過內容分析法進行研究。結果發現，在99至100學年度，國內199個大專院校資訊科系中，有74個科系開設資訊倫理相關課程，共計78門課；另根據蒐集之72份課程綱要分析授課內容，結果顯示，課程主題多包含資訊法律、資訊社會發展、資訊倫理概論與資訊隱私等；授課方式有七成以講授方式為主。本研究進一步檢視7 門資訊專業倫理課程之授課內容，發現課程主題多以探討倫理學為主，其次為對專業技術、對客戶與同業之責任，然而，未屬於資訊專業倫理範疇之教學內容亦為數甚多，因此，本研究亦於文末提出未來資訊倫理相關課程授課內容與方式之建議。英文摘要：With the advent of modern technology, the ability to access information in our daily lives has increased exponentially. In these circumstances, the role of information professional has become increasingly critical. For Computer Information Science (CIS) majors, the information professionals of the future, the need of understanding information ethics is crucial; an investigation of the ethics curricula offered in Taiwanese higher education is necessary. To investigate the ethics-related curricula offered by the information departments of Taiwanese universities, this study applied content analysis to categorize the included topics. The results indicated that of the 199 departments investigated, 74 departments offered a total of 78 courses related to information ethics in school years 2010-2012. Most of the topics covered in the curricula were information laws or regulations, the development of an information society, general information ethics, and information privacy; in addition, the most commonly used teaching method in such classes is lecturing. Among the courses investigated, seven courses were named ”professional information ethics” or worded similarly; their syllabi in particular were examined. The results indicated that moral philosophy (ethics) is commonly covered in these courses, and that a variety of topics not typically included in the theoretical aspects of professional information ethics are also taught.起始頁-結束頁：197-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2014.59(1).0701篇名：「保存－資源善用」環境態度量表之編製研究並列篇名：Preservation and Resource Conservation Worldview: The Development of a Measure作者：林新沛(San-Pui Lam);黃馨蕙(Hsin-Hwai Huang);余麗樺(Li-Fa Yu)關鍵字：土地開發;保存;保育;資源善用;環境態度;environmental attitude;land development;preservation;resource conservation期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在編製一個可以忠實反映保存觀點（preservation）與資源善用觀點（resource conservation）的環境態度量表，並實際探討這兩種觀點是否和填答者支持開發自然環境的態度有關。首先，本研究根據環境倫理學家對於保存觀點以及資源善用觀點的定義撰寫量表題目，並經專家效度評定和訪談目標填答者之後，刪除或修改題目內容，共保留60題。之後對預試樣本299人施測，從中挑選出鑑別度較佳的36題形成正式量表，施測於正式受測樣本302人，以建立本量表的信效度資料。研究結果顯示，本研究編製的「保存－資源善用」環境態度量表具有理想的信效度。此外，愈認同保存觀點的填答者愈反對開發；愈認同資源善用觀點的填答者則愈支持開發。本研究另發展一個題數減半的簡短版本，以提高本量表的實用價值。最後，有關本量表的限制與未來可能的應用方向於文末討論。英文摘要：This study aims to develop a scale for assessing two sets of environmental worldviews: Resource conservation and preservation, and further investigate their relationship to the support of development projects. At the first stage of scale construction, initial items were derived from environmental ethics theories and reviewed by three experts, and were pretested on five college students to form a preliminary scale of 60 items. Based on data from 299 college students, good items were selected by their item-total correlations, factor loadings, and the t values of difference between extreme groups. The 36 items that performed best on the above criteria formed the final scale. To assess the reliability and validity of this scale, we administered it to another group of 302 college students. Results showed that both the reliability and validity were satisfactory. Participants who scored high on preservation objected development projects more. In contrast, participants who scored high on resource conservation supported the projects more. Furthermore, the scale was simplified by reducing the total number of items by half. This new, shorten version also had internal consistency and validity evidence as good as those for the full-length scale. Finally, the limitations and applications of this scale were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：79-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：建構大學教師因應社會發展趨勢的有效能教學模式：探究教學歷程的雙中介效果並列篇名：To Construct an Effective Instruction Model for University Faculty to Accommodate Social Development Trends: Exploring Double Mediated Effect of Teaching Processes作者：鄭芬蘭(Fin-Lang Cheng);陳鳳如(Feng-Ru Chen);張景媛(Ching-Yuan Chang)關鍵字：大學教師;中介效果;有效能教學模式;高等教育;教學歷程;effective instructional model;higher education;mediated effect;teaching process;university faculty期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在發展大學教師的有效能教學模式，並分析教學歷程的雙中介效果。本研究採取量化研究設計與結構方程模式之統計分析來分析。受試者來自南臺灣的兩所科技大學405名大學生填答的實證資料，來檢視研究模式。結果顯示，研究模式在界定、違犯估計、Bollen-Stine bootstrap估計法，以及統計檢定力等結果，符合模式的基本統計假定。其次，模式的整體評鑑符合適配標準，故理論模式與觀察實證資料能夠適配。第三，本研究屬於「完全雙中介效果模式」，整體的間接效果以及個別的特定間接效果均達顯著。因此，教學歷程的教學方法與學習評量對於學生的積極學習，具有雙中介效果。簡言之，大學教師的有效能教學模式，獲實證資料支持。另外，對於將社會發展因素融入既有的教學理論而言，也是教育界學者專家需要深耕的任務，持續研議更適用於整體高等教育的教學歷程模式。總之，當代高等教育之技職大學教師，需要整合業界的人才需求、專業教學並輔導學生積極學習，藉以實踐為社會企業培育菁英專業人才的教學使命。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is twofold: one is to construct an effective instructional model for university faculty, and the other is to analyze the double mediated effect of the teaching process. Quantitative research design, questionnaire survey, and structural equation model (SEM) were employed in this study. Survey responses from 405 college students of two science and technology universities in southern Taiwan were used to verify the teaching model. The results of this study show that the research model conforms to basic statistical hypotheses, including specification, offending estimate, Bollen-Stine bootstrap estimation, and statistical power. In addition, the model’s overall evaluation conforms to fit standards, thus there is fit between the theoretical model and observed empirical data. Therefore, this study is a ”complete double mediated effect model.” From the analysis of the overall effect values. Also, the indirect effect of the whole and individual specific indirect effect have reached statist ical significance. That is, the teaching process and the teaching assessment have a double mediated effect on the students’ positive learning. In other words, ”the effective instructional model for university faculty” is empirically supported. Moreover, educators and experts ought to integrate social development factors into teaching theories and to explore a better and sound teaching model for higher education. Finally, technological university teachers need to integrate the manpower needs of the industry and professional teaching with guiding the students’ active learning in order to put the mission of cultivating professional manpower for the society and corporations into practice.起始頁-結束頁：105-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：中文版公共服務動機量表之信效度驗證並列篇名：The Validation of Chinese Version of Public Service Motivation Inventory作者：潘瑛如(Ying-Ju Pan);李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee)關鍵字：公共服務;公共服務動機;公務人員;信度;效度;civil servant;public service;public service motivation;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著全球化、資通科技發展及政經社會環境重大變遷的影響，政府部門必須轉化成為具備主動性和預應力的治理機關，方能有效因應環境的挑戰。公務人員的公共服務動機（public service motivation, PSM）為公務人力資源發展的重要基礎，PSM已逐漸成為公共行政領域的重要議題，PSM量表亦廣泛應用於公共人力資源 相關研究。然而，不同國家的歷史和體制可能會造成對PSM解釋的差異，以致PSM量表在非美國背景的實證研究中，其信效度表現不佳。有鑑於此，本研究以Perry的PSM量表進行跨文化翻譯程序，針對2011年地方特考及委升薦訓練學員進行二次預試，修正量表題項；再就2011年高考基礎訓練受訓學員施以問卷調查結果，確認PSM量表之信效度。研究結果顯示，「公共利益承諾」、「同情心」及「自我犧牲」等三構面的中文版PSM量表適用於我國文化背景，且信效度表現良好。英文摘要：Along with the globalization, development of information and communication technology (ICT), as well as drastic changes in politic, economic and social environments, the government has to transform itself into an active and proactive organization to cope with the challenges from its context. Public service motivation (PSM) is the fundamental of human resource development in public sectors and has increasingly become an important issue in the field of public administration. Although the PSM inventory has been extensively applied in investigations related to public human resource, the differences in history and systems in different countries may result in distinctions in PSM explanation. As a result, empirical investigations which used the PSM inventory in the countries other than US have demonstrated that the reliability and validity of this instrument were poor. Accordingly, this study used the transcultural translation processes to translate Perry's PSM inventory into Chinese version. Two pilot studies were conducted among those who passed the local special and promotion examinations in 2011 to modify items in the Chinese inventory. Then, the main study, using the modified inventory, was conducted among new mid-level public servants who received the fundamental training program in 2011 to verify the validity and reliability of the inventory. The results demonstrate that the dimensions of commitment to public interest, compassion, and self-sacrifice in the Chinese PSM are applicable in Taiwanese cultural context with acceptable validity and reliability.起始頁-結束頁：135-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：自動化語音分析於華語研究之應用：運用語言環境分析系統（LENA system）研究之啟示與建議並列篇名：APPLYING AUTOMATED SPEECH ANALYSIS TO CHINESE LANGUAGE STUDIES: INSPIRATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FROM STUDIES WITH THE LANGUAGE ENVIRONMENT ANALYSIS SYSTEM作者：何文君(Wen-Chun Ho);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：語言環境分析系統;華語;兒童語言;語音信號處理;Language ENvironment Analysis System;Chinese;child language;speech signal processing期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：語言環境分析系統（Language ENvironment Analysis System, LENA system）是一套結合穿戴式錄音裝置和自動化語音處理科技的新研究工具，美國學者應用此工具於兒童語言研究已多年，並獲得一些研究成果。這些研究成果證實了自動化語音處理科技，對兒童語言研究領域的貢獻。然而，應用語言環境分析系統於兒童華語的研究尚在起步中。本文目的在提供語言環境分析系統相關資訊，並為未來研發華語自動化語音分析工具，及採用語言環境分析系統之研究提供建議。文中主要內容如下：（1）語言環境分析系統之簡介。（2）研發華語自動化語音分析工具之啟示。（3）應用語言環境分析系統於華語研究之建議。希冀本文能為華語語言研究引發新觀點及新突破。英文摘要：The Language ENvironment Analysis (LENA) System is a new research tool that combines a wearable digital recorder and automated speech signal processing technology. The LENA system has been employed by US researchers in the field of child language development for many years. Studies using the LENA system have confirmed the contribution of automated speech signal processing technology to language research; however, the LENA system has infrequently been applied in Chinese language research. This article introduces the LENA system and provides suggestions for its use in future Chinese language research. This article comprises three parts: (1) introduction to the LENA system; (2) inspiration for the developing Chinese automated speech analysis tool; (3) suggestions for Chinese language studies using the LENA system. It is hoped that this article can bring up some new viewpoints and breakthroughs for Chinese language research.起始頁-結束頁：1+3+5-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202012_28(4).00012篇名：Urmson超義務理念評析及其品德教育蘊義並列篇名：COMMENTARY ON URMSON'S IDEA OF SUPEREROGATION AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR CHARACTER AND MORAL EDUCATION作者：陳伊琳(Chen, Yi-Lin)關鍵字：品德教育;超義務;義務;道德楷模;德行;moral and character education;moral exemplar;obligation;supererogation;virtue期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在運用心理學者有關道德楷模的研究結果，以及A. M. Flescher與B. Williams的觀點，評論J. O. Urmson針對道德聖人與道德英雄「故做謙虛」評斷的適當性，再據以提出對我國品德教育的蘊義。研究設計／方法／取徑：本文採用文獻分析與理論分析，綜整道德楷模的重要說法，據以檢證Urmson「故做謙虛」評論的適當性。研究發現或結論：研究發現道德楷模的道德心理有兩大特點：一是感到「非做不可，不做會良心不安」，此即Williams「實踐必要性」與「道德不能」捕捉的心理現象。二是經常表示「我還可以做且應做得更多」。W. Damon與A. Colby解釋，這與他們對於道德理想的高度認同感，繼而感到強烈的個人責任感有關，道德承諾與作為因應而生。據此，本文主張道德英雄／聖人是真心相信自己「有義務」要做他所做的行為，而非如Urmson所言是「故做謙虛」－「假裝」低估自己所為的價值，將明知的超義務行為講成是義務。筆者借用Flescher「三類義務」的分析指出，隨著個人變得愈是有德，其主觀義務感將逐步提升，此即「義務與德行的共變」。道德楷模非但不是「故做謙虛」，反而愈清楚自己是「比『上』（道德理想）不足」。其感於自己仍舊未臻理想，因此「還可以做且應做得更多」，此即L. L. Fuller所稱「抱負性道德」的特點。研究原創性／價值：本研究價值有二：一方面闡明道德楷模主觀的道德心理，揭示其道德義務感實與德行發展呈現共變關係，以此駁斥Urmson「故做謙虛」的評斷。另一方面闡明「抱負性道德」充分顯現在道德主體對於道德理想的高度認同感，感於自己比「上」不足，驅使其持續致力於理想的追求。教育政策建議或實務意涵：這對品德教育的啟示包括：一、學生品德發展軌跡與現下狀態的掌握，有賴親師生三方合作，尤其是學生持續的自我省察。二、鑑於道德認同係一發展歷程，將「品德核心價值」納為跨教育階段共通的學習主題是於理有據的。惟需指明不同教育階段的任務究屬「局部德行」的陶養，抑或「將局部德行轉變成全面德行」。三、為提升個人的道德認同感，道德楷模的生動敘事，將有助於激發受教者省察自己「與善的距離」以及「有為者亦若是」的意念。英文摘要：Purpose: This paper draws on psychological research findings regarding moral exemplars and the related notions of A. M. Flescher and B. Williams to investigate the adequacy of J. O. Urmson's ”false modesty” comment on moral saints and heroes. Some crucial implications for character and moral education are discovered. Design/methodology/approach: Documentary and theoretical analysis are used to distill certain critical perspectives of moral exemplars with the aim of scrutinizing the adequacy of Urmson's ”false modesty” comment. Findings/results: Moral exemplars' psychology is discovered to be characterized by two features. First, these moral exemplars frequently state ”I have to do this or I would feel uneasy.” This is well captured by a pair of concepts from Williams: practical necessity and moral incapacity. Second, they often remark ”I could do more and I should (have) do(ne) more.” According to W. Damon and A. Colby, this statement relates to their strong identification with their moral ideals, resulting in a strongly felt personal responsibility and subsequent moral commitment and actions. In sum, the author contends that moral saints and heroes sincerely feel obliged to do what they have done. This is in contradistinction to Urmson's ”false modesty” comment-namely, that they ”pretend” to have a low opinion of their accomplishments. Moral exemplars' subjective sense of duty is starkly different from that of ordinary people. Drawing on Flescher's analysis of ”three sorts of ought and three kinds of duty,” the author concludes that as an individual matures morally and becomes more virtuous, his or her subjective sense of duty accordingly expands and strengthens. A judged-to-be supererogatory action is then extremely likely to become an action that he or she now feels obliged to perform. This is termed the ”covariance of duty with virtue.” At this point, such people are by no means being falsely modest. Quite the contrary, their true modesty comes from their clear awareness that they still fall (far) short of the moral ideal. Additionally, they genuinely feel ”I could and I must do more” to attempt to approximate the ideal. This favorably characterizes ”the morality of aspiration” in L. L. Fuller's term. Originality/value: The originality of this paper is its attempt to bridge the conversation among speculative philosophers and empirical psychologists on morality. The contributions may be illustrated in two respects. First, an investigation into moral exemplars' subjective moral psychology reveals that an individual's subjective sense of duty covaries with his state of virtue. This idea is employed to refute Urmson's ”false modesty” comment. Second, the morality of aspiration is illustrated in terms of the moral agent's strong identification with the moral ideal, which in turn motivates him or her to be committed to the continuous pursuit of the ideal and accordingly the feeling of falling short of said ideal. Implications for Policy/Practice: Three major educational implications can be drawn from this investigation. First, it is incumbent upon the partnership among the parent, teacher, and student to have good knowledge of the developmental trajectory and status of the student's moral character. In particular, the student's faithfulness manifest in constantly facing up to his or her real state of moral character is especially critical. Second, given that the shaping of moral identity is a developmental process, the core values of moral character can be reasonably taken to be common learning topics across the various educational stages. However, it must be stressed that educational tasks are different for differing stages. Whether the task in question achieves the inculcation of local virtues or conversion of local virtues to more global ones must be specified. Third, the storytelling of the lively and rich narratives of moral exemplars helps enhance the student's moral identification with the manifested moral values. In doing so, the students are provided an opportunity to faithfully reflect on their own character, confronting their distance from the moral, and are subsequently motivated to emulate the moral exemplars.起始頁-結束頁：29-33+35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202012_28(4).00023篇名：父母心理支持／控制與國中生心理需求、動機涉入關係之分析並列篇名：THE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG PARENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT/CONTROL, PSYCHOLOGICAL NEEDS, AND MOTIVATIONAL ENGAGEMENT IN JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：心理支持;心理控制;心理需求;自我決定;動機涉入;motivational engagement;psychological control;psychological needs;psychological support;self-determination期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：過去研究依自我決定理論多探討心理支持透過心理需求滿足預測適應性動機涉入之適應性路徑，少著墨其不適應性層面。近期研究發現心理支持／控制為不同向度，心理需求滿足／挫敗為不同向度，不能相互推論，故本研究採變項、個人中心分析父母心理支持／控制、心理需求滿足／挫敗、適應性／不適應性動機涉入之關係。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以國二833名學生為樣本，以結構方程模式、集群與變異數分析。研究發現或結論：（1）心理支持／控制、心理需求、動機涉入關係模式適配；（2）父母心理支持正向預測心理需求滿足較強，負向預測心理需求挫敗較弱或無預測力；父母心理控制正向預測心理需求挫敗較強，負向預測心理需求滿足較弱或無預測力；（3）心理需求滿足正向預測適應性動機涉入較強，負向預測不適應性動機涉入較弱或無預測力；心理需求挫敗正向預測不適應性動機涉入較強，負向預測適應性動機涉入較弱或無預測力；（4）父母心理支持／控制組型分低質、低量、高質組，高質組為最適應，較支持「質」的觀點。研究原創性／價值：（1）發現父母心理支持、控制對孩子適應性、不適應性變項不同強弱的預測效果，顯示其背後運作機制不同。（2）了解真實情境中父母心理支持／控制組型狀況，父母需留意教養品質（質觀點），非僅是涉入越多越好（量觀點）。教育政策建議或實務意涵：父母欲提升孩子適應性狀態，減少對孩子的心理控制效果不大，增加對孩子的心理支持效果才強；父母欲降低孩子不適應性狀態，增加對孩子的心理支持效果不強，減少對孩子的心理控制效果才大。英文摘要：Purpose: Past studies based on self-determination theory have mostly focused on adaptive path analyses (rather than maladaptive path analyses) by exploring the predictive effect of psychological support on adaptive motivational engagement through psychological need satisfaction. Recent studies, however, have found that psychological support and control are distinct dimensions, and that psychological need satisfaction and thwarting are as well. In this study, variable centered and person-centered analyses were adopted to explore the relationships among parental psychological support/control, psychological need satisfaction/thwarting, and adaptive/maladaptive motivational engagement. Design/methodology/approach: The participants were 833 junior high school students. Structural equation modeling, cluster analyses, and analyses of variance were used. Findings/results: The following results were obtained: (a) The model of psychological support/control, psychological needs, and motivational engagement fitted the observed data well; (b) parental psychological support as compared to parental psychological control was a stronger predictor of psychological need satisfaction; parental psychological control as compared to parental psychological support was a stronger predictor of psychological need thwarting; (c) psychological need satisfaction as compared to psychological need thwarting was a stronger predictor of adaptive motivational engagement; psychological need thwarting as compared to psychological need satisfaction was a stronger predictor of maladaptive motivational engagement, and (d) the cluster analyses of the psychological support/control profiles revealed three parenting profiles: a poor quality group, a low quantity group, and a good quality group. The good quality group was found to be the most adaptive, and the findings generally supported that the quality of parenting matters. Originality/value: Parental psychological support and control had different effects on children' level of adaption and maladaptation. The quality of psychological support/control profiles was more important than the quantity of psychological support/control profiles. Implications for Policy/Practice: Increasing parental psychological support is a better way to increase children's level of adaption than reducing parental psychological control; reducing parental psychological control is a better way to decrease children's level of maladaptation than increasing parental psychological support.起始頁-結束頁：61-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202012_28(4).00034篇名：評介《大學社會責任與生活品質》並列篇名：REVIEW OF ”UNIVERSITY SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND QUALITY OF LIFE: A GLOBAL SURVEY OF CONCEPTS AND EXPERIENCES.”作者：詹盛如(Sheng-Ju Chan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：97-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202012_28(4).00045篇名：藝術教師實施新媒體藝術教學之知覺態度探究並列篇名：ATTITUDES OF ART TEACHERS TOWARD IMPLEMENTING NEW MEDIA ART TEACHING作者：陳育祥(Yu-Hsiang Chen)關鍵字：科技接受模式;新媒體藝術教學;藝術教育;路徑分析;驗證性因素分析;art education;new media art teaching;technology acceptance model;path analysis;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究之目的是從藝術教師內在知覺的觀點，探討藝術教師從事新媒體藝術教學之潛在知覺態度，並建構藝術教師對新媒體藝術教學接受態度與行為意願之模式。研究設計／方法／取徑：研究以結構方程模式對多變數間之關係進行定量研究，以科技接受模式作為基礎理論架構，發展藝術教師從事新媒體藝術教學知覺態度構面模型，針對後期中等教育階段藝術教師為對象，透過驗證性因素分析檢驗測量指標信效度與潛在變項間之因果路徑關係，潛在變項包括新媒體藝術教學易操作性、新媒體藝術教學有用性、從事新媒體藝術教學態度、從事新媒體藝術教學意願與支持條件。研究運用最大概似估計法分析測量模式參數與模型適配度指標，以檢證模式之合理性。研究發現或結論：研究模型之測量模式檢定具合理適配，結構模式的路徑關係證明研究假設成立。研究結果發現藝術教學場域之相關支持條件對新媒體教學易操作程度及新媒體藝術教學效益有正向之影響。藝術教師知覺從事新媒體藝術教學易操作性及新媒體藝術教學有用性，正向影響實施新媒體藝術教學態度與運用之意向，特別是教師知覺從事新媒體藝術教學之實用效益具關鍵影響力。研究原創性／價值：本研究指出從事新媒體藝術教學之支持條件不僅能夠影響藝術教師知覺新媒體藝術教學之易操作性與成效性，且研究發現藝術教師知覺從事新媒體藝術教學的有用性，對其實施新媒體藝術教學的態度與意願具有關鍵性的影響，而對此結果本研究亦進行深入的討論，並據以提出理論與實務面向之建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This study explored art teachers' latent attitudes toward implementing new media art teaching by investigating their cognition, and build model of art teachers' acceptance attitude toward implementing new media art teaching. Design/methodology/approach: A technology acceptance model was used as the theoretical basis, and external variables were expanded to construct a questionnaire on art teachers' perceptions regarding implementing new media art teaching. The questionnaire comprised six latent construct domains, including the ease of implementing new media art teaching, the effectiveness of implementing new media art teaching, attitudes toward implementing new media art teaching, the intention to implement new media art teaching, and facilitating conditions thereof. The maximum likelihood estimation of the structural equation model was used to analyze the relevant parameters and fitness index of the measurement mode to verify the rationality of the model. Findings/results: The model used to verify the hypothesis factor displayed a reasonably good fit, and the path of the structural model demonstrated that the research hypothesis was correct. The research results indicated that the facilitating conditions of teaching positively affect the ease and effectiveness of the implementation of new media art teaching. The attitude toward implementing new media art teaching, the ease of implementing new media art teaching, and the effectiveness of implementing new media art teaching positively affect the intention to implement new media art teaching. In particular, the effectiveness of implementing new media art teaching has a crucial effect on the intention to implement new media art teaching. Originality/value: Studies that have addressed factors contributing to the difficulty art teachers face when implementing new media art teaching have principally focused on teachers' psychological disposition and resistance factors from the external environment. The present study revealed that facilitating conditions significantly affect the ease and effectiveness of implementing new media art teaching. In addition, the present study differs from previous research in that it more thoroughly investigated and discussed art teachers' perception of the effectiveness of implementing new media art teaching with respect to overall attitudes and intentions to implement new media art teaching. This theory and practice-based study can be applied to explore other topics related to art education.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202009_28(3).00016篇名：體驗教育培養大專生帶得走的品格信念指標之建構並列篇名：EXPERIENTIAL EDUCATION TO TRAIN THE CONSTRUCTION OF CHARACTER BELIEF INDEX作者：廖珮妏(Pei-Wen Liao)關鍵字：體驗教育;品格信念指標;經驗學習圈;大專生;experience education;character belief index;experiential learning circle;college student期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：體驗教育在臺灣近幾年已形成教育活動的趨勢，各大專校院已將體驗教育開設於學分課程中，更加確切體驗教育在教育實務與學術上的應用之廣，也是本文探討的體驗教育。透過體驗提升學生的品格也是相關教育組織在實務上正在運作的模式，藉由體驗遊戲教案分享，從中啟發學生們的品格教育。因體驗教育提供正向的教學策略，學習者透過親身體驗的過程，進行對生活與環境的反思，從中學習知識累積的教育訓練方式，提升自我成長之能力。主體從親身經歷和反思過程中所獲得的認識和情感，因為生活經驗經過反思學習過程的轉換後，提供知識的再運用，形成生活經驗，再次地經過反思學習過程轉換，提升了知識運用的層次，並且再次形成生活經驗，有效的教學應鼓勵學習者進行反思，共同建構出學習的環境。特別是大專校院學生畢業後即將邁入職場工作，因此更需要培育這群未來國家棟樑們，如何擁有面對未來環境變動所具備的品格信念是本研究主要的核心理念。本研究將以體驗教育培養大專生帶得走的品格信念指標建構為焦點，透過體驗教育能培養大專生帶得走的品格信念指標之研究工具，對其指標之內涵與類型進行釐清與瞭解為本研究主要目的。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究首先回顧相關文獻，主旨在於建構體驗教育培養學生帶得走的品格信念指標量表，主要參考大學生基本素養測驗的情意態度內涵、冒險教育生活效能量表（life effectiveness questionnaire, LEQ）、教育部發展品德教育促進方案提出六大品格支柱（The six pillars of character），由以文獻回顧整理指標量表，先後以深度訪談、專家學者問卷諮詢修正以及問卷調查方式加以建構。研究發現或結論：建構提出的體驗教育培養大專生帶得走的品格信念指標六種類包括：主動助人、任務領導、溝通合作、自我管理、成就動機、自我信念。主動助人指標是能幫助有需要的人；任務領導指標則是能有效地組織一個團隊給予適當任務；溝通合作則是能有能力進行有效的社交互動；自我管理包括自我時間與感知情緒管理；成就動機則是個人被驅使完成卓越的程度；自我信念指對自己能力的信念以及這些能力如何有助於個人成功。其六大品格信念指標除了成就動機與自我信念各三題，其他指標各五題，共26題。研究原創性／價值：本研究建構出臺灣在推廣體驗教育課程所培養大專生帶得走的品格信念能力六大指標，是以臺灣社會情境下所發展之工具，可運用後續在體驗式學習課程成效評估，且亦能做為後續發展體驗教育相關課程教案所考量的指標，參考這些元素加以設計體驗情境於課程活動，更能有效以體驗教育方式培養大專生帶得走的品格信念能力，進而一輩子都能受用無窮時，即是其評量擁有最大成效。英文摘要：Purpose: Experience learning has become a trend in educational activities in Taiwan. All colleges and universities offer experiential learning in for-credit courses, and have applied it in educational practice and academics. This study is an exploration of experiential education. Enhancing students' character through experience is a mode in which educational organizations are operating. The sharing of game teaching plans is an inspiration for students' character education. Because experiential learning provides a positive teaching strategy, learners can reflect on life and the environment through the personal experience, learn the educational training methods accumulated by knowledge, and improve their ability. The learners understanding and emotions gained from personal experience and reflection, because the life experience is transformed after the reflection of the learning process, providing the re-use of knowledge, forming a life experience, and re-reflecting the transformation of the learning process, and improving the level of knowledge application. And once again form a life experience for learners. Effective teaching should encourage learners to reflect experience and build a learning environment. College graduates are about to enter the workplace. Therefore, it is necessary to cultivate this group of future leaders. How to give students have the conviction to face the changes in the future environment is the core concept of this research. This study will focus on the construction of a character belief index in vocational education. Through experiential education for teaching method, teachers cultivate the research tools of the character belief index that the college students can take, and clarify the connotation and type of its indicators. Further clarify and understand the connotation and type of indicators for the main purpose of this study. Design/methodology/approach: This study first reviews the literature. The purpose of this study is to construct experiential education to train students to take the character conviction scale. This study mainly refer to the basic literacy test for college students, the life effectiveness questionnaire (LEQ), and the development of moral education for the Ministry of Education the six pillars of character. The index scale was compiled by literature review and was constructed by in-depth interviews, expert and scholar questionnaires recommendations, and pretest, formal questionnaire surveys. Findings/results: Six indicators of character belief capacity are proposed in this research: (1) Active assistance, task leadership, communication and cooperation, self-management, achievement motivation, self-belief. In the active help indicator is to help those in need; (2) The task leader indicator is to effectively organize a team to give appropriate tasks; (3) Communication and cooperation is capable of effective social interaction; (4) Self-management includes self-time and perceived emotional management; (5) Achievement motivation is the degree to which an individual is driven to achieve excellence; (6) Self-belief refers to beliefs about one's abilities and how these abilities contribute to individual success. In addition to the three questions of achievement motivation and self-belief, the six major indicators of character belief have five questions and 26 questions. Originality/value: This study constructs six indicators of character belief that Taiwan colleges and universities can take in the promotion of experiential education courses. It's a tool developed under the social situation in Taiwan. This research uses the evaluation of the effectiveness of experiential learning courses, and can also be used as indicators for the follow-up development of experience education related curriculum lesson plans. This study refer to these elements to design experience scenarios for course activities. It is more effective to use the experience education method to cultivate the character belief in junior college students. In the end, it can be used for a lifetime.起始頁-結束頁：29-33+35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202009_28(3).00027篇名：行動學習對臺灣學生學業成就影響之後設分析並列篇名：A META-ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTS OF MOBILE LEARNING ON STUDENTS' ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT IN TAIWAN作者：廖遠光(Yuen-Kuang Liao);陳政煥(Cheng-Huan Chen);楊永慈(Yong-Cih Yang)關鍵字：行動學習;無所不在學習;學業成就;後設分析;臺灣學生;mobile learning;ubiquitous learning;academic achievement;meta-analysis;Taiwanese students期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究統整國內2005－2019年間以國人為研究對象之學位論文、期刊論文（包含發表於國外期刊之論文）、以及研討會論文，透過後設分析法探討行動學習對學生學業成就之整體影響，並進而分析可能影響學習成效的因素。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以行動學習、無所不在學習、mobile learning、m-learning、ubiquitous learning、u-learning為關鍵詞，至臺灣博碩士論文知識加值系統、華藝線上圖書館、臺灣期刊論文索引系統、Scopus、EBSCOhost、ProQuest、ScienceDirect及Web of Science等資料庫檢索相關文獻，最終採納81篇論文進行後設分析。研究發現或結論：整體而言，行動學習對學生之學業成就具有正向且顯著的效應，整體效果量為0.75（隨機效果模式），換言之，行動學習對學生學業成就的提升，顯著優於其它教學法（如：傳統講述式教學法），且達接近高度的效果。此外，透過調節變項的分析，發現學生之學業成就會受到「學科領域」及「實驗組分組方式」兩變項之調節作用而呈現差異。研究原創性／價值：本研究以後設分析統整了國內2005－2019年間的實徵研究，針對行動學習學生學業成就的影響提出具體結果。本研究也是國內第一篇以此為主題的後設分析，研究發現對教育政策制定者、教學者以及未來研究者應可提供相當之參考價值。英文摘要：Purpose: In this study, a meta-analysis was performed to synthesize research investigating the effects of mobile learning on students' academic achievement in Taiwan. The research data were extracted from theses, peer review journals, and conference papers published between 2005 and 2019. Factors potentially moderating the overall effects were also examined. Design/methodology/approach: This study adopted mobile learning, m-learning, ubiquitous learning, u-learning as keywords searched from the National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations in Taiwan, Airiti Library, Index to Taiwan Periodical Literature System, Scopus, EBSCOhost, ProQuest, ScienceDirect, and Web of Science. As a result, 81 studies were located and included in the meta-analysis. Findings/results: The results showed that mobile learning had a significantly greater effect than other types of learning (e.g., traditional instruction) on students' academic achievement (g+ = 0.75). In addition, 2 out of 10 moderator variables selected for this study (i.e., subject area and group size for the experimental group), had statistically significant impacts on the mean ES. Originality/value: This meta-analysis concerns empirical studies published between 2005 and 2019 in Taiwan and presents the overall results of the effects of mobile learning on student achievement. The study is also the first meta-analysis in Taiwan to specifically focus on this topic. The findings of this study could provide valuable suggestions for education decision makers, teachers, and future researchers.起始頁-結束頁：67-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202009_28(3).00038篇名：評介《品格教育在英國的崛起：英雄、魔龍與品格迷思》並列篇名：REVIEW OF LEE JEROME AND BEN KISBY'S ”THE RISE OF CHARACTER EDUCATION IN BRITAIN: HEROES, DRAGONS AND THE MYTHS OF CHARACTER”作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：103-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202009_28(3).00049篇名：在十二年國教課綱「總綱」中遇見杜威並列篇名：MEETING JOHN DEWEY IN THE DIRECTIONS FOR CURRICULUM GUIDELINES OF 12- YEAR BASIC EDUCATION作者：單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)關鍵字：十二年國教課綱總綱;杜威;核心素養;Directions for Curriculum Guidelines of 12- Year Basic Education;John Dewey;core competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：為何會在十二年國教課綱「總綱」中遇見杜威？當然，這絕非一般的相遇或會面，而是取用「遇見」一詞所具發問與省思的意涵，藉杜威哲學與教育思想，闡釋十二年國教課綱總綱的核心理念，俾便尋繹其為課程及教學實務所帶來的啟示。本文係就十二年國教課綱總綱，以杜威著作的一手文獻為主要依據，配合有關的研究文獻，針對其中課程理念與杜威思想的關聯性，進行學理的分析與詮釋，以及實務的推衍與闡釋。本文依據解析與衍釋的五個要項，邀請讀者發問與省思，我們在多大的程度上，做到了以下的要求：以廣義課程理念的履行，發揚全人教育的基本精神；在兼顧學習者與課程兩端的前提下，帶動學習者導向課程範式的轉變；以間接施行與態度為重的教育作法，充實學生的核心素養；以擴增學習益趣，進而豐富人生經驗，達成連結生活情境的目的；以真教育帶領真學生，真實明智地做中學，確保實踐力行的成果。文末，於反思本文的性質與目的，並總結大要後，提出四個未來研究的方向。英文摘要：How could one meet Dewey in the Directions for Curriculum Guidelines of 12-Year Basic Education? Evidently, it is not to encounter or meet in common sense. It is questioning and pondering: interpret the Directions at its core; and elaborate his inspiration for the practice of curriculum and instruction based on Dewey's philosophy and educational ideas. Anchoring at the Directions for Curriculum Guidelines of 12-Year Basic Education and first-hand literature of Dewey's works and related literature, this article gives theoretical analysis and practical reasoning on the connections between his thoughts and the curriculum ideals of the Directions. Based on the five essential elements of analysis and interpretation, this article invites readers to ask and reflect to what extent we have fulfilled the following requirements: to carry forward the essence of whole-person education with the implementation of the broad-sense curriculum concept; to make a paradigm shift towards a learner-oriented education while taking into account both learners and curriculum; to employ in-depth indirect implementation and attitude-oriented educational practices to enhance students' core competency; to raise students' interest of learning and thereby to enrich their life experience and to connect to real-life situation; to lead real learners with real learning experience and to enable learning by doing while aiming at solid results. Finally, the article makes four suggestions for future research after a reflection on its nature and purposes and a summary.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202006_28(2).000110篇名：幼兒成就目標向度的涵蓋性、特定性與普遍性的初探並列篇名：PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION INTO THE DIMENSIONAL COVERAGE, SPECIFICITY, AND GENERALITY OF ACHIEVEMENT GOAL FOR YOUNG CHILDREN作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin Wu)關鍵字：目標導向;幼兒;成就目標;特定性;普遍性;achievement goal;generality;goal orientation;preschooler;specificity期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究主要目的在於，透過觀察來檢視學習區中，幼兒可能抱持的幼兒成就目標向度，並進一步分析幼兒成就目標的特定性與普遍性。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以南部地區幼兒園8個班級的4－6歲幼兒為對象，採用幼兒六向度成就目標檢核表，分別在各班的積木區與益智區觀察了367與348人次。扣掉無效觀察結果後，以積木區的271筆和益智區的286筆有效觀察資料，進行質化描述與卡方適合度檢定。研究發現或結論：研究結果顯示，在積木區與益智區皆觀察到幼兒表現出與六向度成就目標有關的語言和行為表現。進一步進行卡方檢定的結果顯示，在積木區與益智區中，幼兒六向度成就目標的比例有所不同，其中，在積木區，趨向任務目標、趨向自我目標與趨向他人目標的比例較高。相反的，在益智區，逃避任務目標、逃避自我目標與逃避他人目標的比例較高。結果可能意謂著，整體而言，幼兒六向度成就目標具有普遍性，但部份成就目標向度則有其特定性。研究原創性／價值：國、內外相關研究皆缺乏對幼兒成就目標的討論。極為有限的國外研究顯示，幼兒可能僅抱持四向度成就目標，但幼兒成就目標的特定性或普遍性仍不清楚。本研究透過深度觀察發現，不論是在積木區或益智區，皆可從幼兒的語言和行為表現中，發現幼兒抱持六向度成就目標的證據。關於幼兒成就目標普遍性與特定性的發現，為國內、外相關研究首見，可作為未來研究者覆驗或設計幼兒成就目標量表的參考，甚至可作為未來進行幼兒成就目標長期追蹤研究分析的基礎。英文摘要：Purpose: The main purpose of this study was to understand possible dimensionalities of achievement goals that preschoolers perceived through observation. Further, the specificity and generality of achievement goals were examined through statistical analysis. Design/methodology/approach: Young children aged between 4 and 6 years were recruited from the same class in eight public and private kindergartens in Southern Taiwan. In total, 367 and 348 observations in the brick and intellect areas, respectively, were obtained for preschoolers by using six-dimensional achievement goal checklist. After removing invalid observations, 271 and 286 observations were qualitatively described and analyzed using chi-square appropriateness analysis. Findings/results: The results revealed that the observed conversations and behaviors were related to six-dimensional achievement goals in both areas. Furthermore, the proportions of approach-task goals, approach-self goals, and approach-others goals were higher in the brick area than in the intellect area. By contrast, the proportions of avoid-task goals, avoid-self goals, and avoid-others goals were higher in the intellect area. In general, preschoolers' six-dimensional achievement goals featured generality as well as specificity to a certain extent. Originality/value: Few studies have discussed preschoolers' achievement goals. Limited research has demonstrated that preschoolers may posit four-dimensional achievement goals, but the specificity and generality of these achievement goals remain unclear. The present study found evidence supporting six-dimensional achievement goals among preschoolers through in-depth observation of their language and behaviors in both brick and intellect areas. The specificity and generality of preschoolers' achievement goal have not been proposed in other studies. The results of the present study may serve as a reference for examining and designing a scale for preschoolers' achievement goals. Moreover, the results may form the basis of future longitudinal studies.起始頁-結束頁：31-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.202006_28(2).000201篇名：團隊中的差別對待：角色分化下的分隔與激勵效果並列篇名：Differential Treatments in a Team: The Role Differentiation on Separation and Encouragement作者：周婉茹(Wan-Ju Chou);鄭伯壎(Bor-Shiuan Cheng)關鍵字：威權領導;仁慈領導;差別對待;角色分化;隱性／外顯規範;authoritarian leadership;benevolent leadership;differential treatment;role differentiation;implicit/explicit norm期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：家長式領導是一種在人治氛圍下，所顯現出類似父權的作風。然而，過去研究卻未能突顯出人治色彩下所隱含的差別對待，及其在群體層次的效果。為了補足此一缺口，本研究針對威權領導與仁慈領導兩個次向度，探討主管的「差序立威」與「差序施恩」對團隊效能的影響，並檢視「領導行為中心趨勢」與「團隊任務標準化」的調節作用。以軍事組織的營隊為單位，分析122個團隊資料後發現：（1）在施恩行為中心趨勢低時，差序施恩與團隊認同、團隊績效具有正向關聯性。（2）在團隊任務標準化高時，差序立威與團隊認同具有負向關聯性；而在團隊任務標準化低時，差序立威與團隊績效具有正向關聯性。最後，就研究發現、研究限制及未來研究方向進行討論，並說明理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：Paternalistic leadership is a patriarchal-like leadership style emerged in a personalistic atmosphere. However, previous studies neglected the nature of differential treatments, and failed to examine them at group level, where is proposed to reveal their true effects. To bridge the gap, in this study we examined authoritarian leadership (AL) and benevolent leadership (BL) differentiations on team effectiveness. We also examined the moderating effects of AL and BL central tendencies and team task standardization. Data from 122 battalion teams in military revealed that BL differentiation was positively related to both team identification and team performance only when BL central tendency was low. Additionally, AL differentiation was negatively related to team identification only when team task standardization was high. AL differentiation was positively related to team performance in teams with low team task standardization only. Finally, research findings, limitations and suggestions for future research are discussed, and contributions and implications are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1404.012篇名：威權領導與情緒勞務之關聯研究並列篇名：Investigating the Relationship between Authoritarian Leadership and Subordinate's Emotional Labor作者：許境頤(Chin-Yi Shu);詹介云(Jie-Yun Jhan)關鍵字：情緒勞務;威權領導風格;情緒耗竭;敬業貢獻;個人傳統性;emotional labor;authoritarian leadership;emotional exhaustion;work engagement;individual traditionality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以情緒調節模型（Grandey, 2000）探討直屬主管的威權領導風格對部屬所採的情緒勞務策略及其後續工作態度的影響。此外，本研究亦認為，部屬個人傳統性具調節部屬表層演出與深層演出之情緒勞務策略採用的效果。本研究以台北地區某家公立醫院之286位在職且有直屬主管之員工為發放對象。研究結果證實表層演出與深層演出對威權領導風格與部屬工作態度的中介效果，威權領導風格使部屬傾向採取表層演出進而導致情緒耗竭，也會使部屬較少採用深層演出策略而使得其敬業貢獻較不會產生。不過，本研究亦發現，部屬的個人傳統性會增加其在面對威權領導風格的主管時深層演出策略的採用，減少表層演出採用的情形。本研究結果不僅對於威權領導風格如何影響部屬的情緒勞務之問題，提供了可能的解釋，亦提供可能的因應和建議。英文摘要：Base on the suggestion from Grandey (2000), individuals regulate their emotions through deep acting or surface acting which will affect their job attitude. The aim of this research is to investigate how individuals regulate their emotions when interacting with their authoritarian leader and its effect on their job attitude. A questionnaire survey was conducted in the greater Taipei area. Data was collected from 286 employees, working in public hospitals, who are under supervision from their direct supervisor. Findings of the research suggest that controlling the number of respondents interacting with their supervisors, authoritarian style of leadership enhances an employee's emotional labor of surface acting which would cause an employee's emotional exhaustion; however if an employee values one's traditionality then it would moderate the relationship between authoritarian leadership and surface acting. On the other hand, authoritarian style of leadership will less likely stimulate an employee's emotional labor of deep acting which would then lessen an employee's work engagement; however when employees values one's traditionality then it would moderate the relationship between authoritarian leadership and deep acting. This study not only offers possible explanation on how authoritarian leaders affect an employee's emotional labor and its effect on job attitude but also provides practical suggestions to organizations.起始頁-結束頁：31-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1404.023篇名：The Compensatory Effects of Non-Pecuniary Attributes and the Moderating Effects of Applicant Dispositions on Applicants' Acceptance of Lower-Pay Jobs並列篇名：非財務面工作特性對於求職者接受較低薪工作的補償效果作者：巫敘竹(Hsu-Chu Wu);蔡維奇(Wei-Chi Tsai);黃嘉雄(Chia-Hsiung Huang);康嘉玲(Chia-Ling Kang)關鍵字：職缺選擇;職缺接受意圖;親和需求;成長需求;自我決定理論;job choice;job-acceptance intention;need for affiliation;need for growth;selfdetermination theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：求職者的工作選擇受職缺的薪資水準及非財務面特性所影響，但未有研究針對後者的補償效果提供證據。根據自我決定理論，求職者會接受較低薪但具較佳關係與成長屬性的職缺以滿足基本心理需求。而此補償效果，亦可能取決於求職者的特質。因此本研究欲檢驗高低薪職缺在關係與成長屬性上的差距，是否會影響求職者對較低薪職缺的接受度，以及求職者的親和與成長需求，對上述關係的調節效果。本研究針對151位畢業生，以2×2的受試者間設計來模擬職缺選擇情境。結果顯示：相對於兩份職缺在成長與關係屬性上差異不大的情況，當低薪職缺有較佳的成長或關係屬性時，求職者有較高意願接受低薪職缺。而成長需求較高的求職者，則較可能接受成長屬性較佳的低薪職缺。英文摘要：Applicants' job choices are influenced by pay level as well as non-pecuniary attributes, but no research has presented evidence regarding the compensatory effects of non-pecuniary attribute. According to selfdetermination theory, applicants would accept lower-pay jobs with favorable relatedness and growth attributes in order to fulfill basic psychological needs. In addition, the occurrence of this compensatory effect may depend on applicants' dispositions. Thus, the aim of the present study is to examine the effects of the difference in relatedness attributes and growth attributes between lower-pay jobs and higher-pay jobs on applicants' acceptance intention and choice for lower-pay jobs, and the moderating effects of applicant dispositions such as need for affiliation and need for growth. A2 × 2 between-subjects experimental design was conducted with 151 graduating students in Taiwan, and written scenarios were used to simulate a jobchoice setting. Results show that applicants (1) had greater intention of accepting and (2) were more likely to choose a lower-pay job when only the lower-pay job possessed favorable growth or relatedness attributes than when both jobs possessed favorable growth or relatedness attributes. In addition, applicants with a relatively high need for growth were more likely than participants with relatively low need for growth to accept the lower-pay job with favorable growth attributes when large growth-attribute differences were present between the two jobs.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1404.034篇名：The Moderating Impact of TMT Behavioral Integration on the Relationship between TMT Perceptions of HR Value and Firm Adoption of High-Performance Work Systems並列篇名：高階管理團隊對人資的價值觀感與高績效工作系統：探討高階管理團隊成員間行為整合的干擾效果作者：曹瓊文(Chiung-Wen Tsao);王議賢(Yi-Hsien Wang)關鍵字：高階理論;高階管理團隊;高績效工作系統;團隊行為整合;upper-echelons (UE) theory;top management team (TMT);high performance work system (HPWS);team behavioral integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探究高階管理團隊對人資的價值觀感對於企業實施高績效工作系統之影響，並探討高階管理團隊成員間行為整合對上述關係的干擾效果。本研究從「高層理論」（upper echelons theory）觀點，以111家台灣上市櫃企業為研究對象，採用高階經理人（CEO或總經理）與人資經理配對問卷調查的方式取得高階管理團隊對人資的價值觀感、團隊行為整合及企業施行高績效工作系統措施等資料，並分析各變項間之關係，同時以層級迴歸驗證高階管理團隊對人資的價值觀感與團隊行為整合交互作用對企業實施高績效工作系統之影響。實證研究結果顯示，高階管理團隊對人資的價值觀感與團隊成員行為整合交互作用顯著正向影響企業實施高績效工作系統；最後進行結果討論並提出理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：A substantial number of studies have indicated a significant positive relationship between high performance work system (HPWS) and firm performance. However, a consideration of the potential effects of top management teams (TMT) in firm adoption of HPWS is largely absent from the literature studying antecedents of HPWS adoption. Using a sample of 111 Taiwanese publicly-listed firms, we draw on upper echelons theory to investigate the linkages between TMT<U+0092>s perceptions of HR value, team behavioral integration, and firm adoption of HPWS. We found that TMT's perceptions of HR value positively affects the firm's adoption of HPWS. Additionally, when the level of TMT behavioral integration was accounted for, the results show that the relationship between TMT's perceptions of HR value and HPWS is significantly positive for TMT with higher degree of team behavioral integration. The contributions and implications of this study are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：89-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1404.045篇名：團隊層次轉換型領導與調適性銷售行為之跨層次分析：心理資本與團隊凝聚力中介角色並列篇名：A Multilevel Examination on Team-Level Transformational Leadership and Adaptive Selling Behavior: The Mediating Role of Psychological Capital and Team Cohesion作者：陳淑玲(Shu-Ling Chen);陳威達(Wei-Dar Chen)關鍵字：轉換型領導;心理資本;團隊凝聚力;調適性銷售行為;transformational leadership;psychological capital;team cohesion;adaptive selling behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以跨層次觀點，探討團隊層次轉換型領導對調適性銷售行為的影響，並提出個體層次心理資本與團隊層次凝聚力，為連結團隊層次轉換型領導與調適性銷售行為中介機制。本研究以36個壽險業務團隊（334位銷售業務人員）為研究樣本，研究結果發現，團隊層次轉換型領導與銷售人員調適性銷售行為呈正相關；團隊層次轉換型領導會透過影響追隨者心理資本，進而影響其調適性銷售行為；最後，團隊層次轉換型領導有助於提升團隊凝聚力；團隊凝聚力也會正向影響追隨者調適性銷售行為。根據本研究結果，我們提出討論、實務意涵與未來研究建議。英文摘要：This study examined how transformational leadership (TFL) influences adaptive selling behavior by both psychological capital (at the individual-level) and team cohesion (at the team-level). This multilevel study includes 334 individual members from 36 teams. Hierarchical Linear Modeling revealed that teamlevel TFL was positively related to follower adaptive selling behavior, with this relationship mediated by follower psychology capital. Furthermore, team-level TFL was positively associated with team cohesion, and team cohesion further enhanced follower adaptive selling behavior. We discuss implications of these findings, limitations, and directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1403.016篇名：任用管理的研究與實務落差：文獻觀點、人資工作者認知與台灣企業實務三者之比較並列篇名：The Gap between Staffing Research and Practice: Comparing Research Findings, HR Professionals Beliefs, and Staffing Practices in Taiwan作者：黃敦群(Tun-Chun Huang);羅玉娟(Yu-Chuan Lo)關鍵字：研究與實務落差;甄選;招募;任用;循證管理;practice-research gap;selection;recruitment;staffing;evidence-based management期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究透過問卷調查234位人資工作者，試圖瞭解在企業進行任用管理時可能出現的研究與實務落差。結果指出：（1）人資工作者對於智力測驗、非結構式面談及商業招募網頁等招募甄選工具有效性的認知與文獻觀點間具有最大的落差；（2）人資工作者對於評鑑中心法、筆跡測驗、誠信測驗、工作經驗、人才博覽會及公立就業服務機構等招募甄選工具有效性的認知也並未反應在任用實務作法上；（3）企業在制定雇用決策時大多會參考二至三項甄選工具的分數，在決定最終錄取名單時則是透過主管所做的綜合判斷。整體而言，本研究不僅有助於回答任用領域中研究與實務落差可能存在的面向，也提供了初步的建議以強化管理研究、人資工作者認知及任用實務三方面的連結，進而達到落實循證管理的目標。英文摘要：Gaps between scientific evidence and human resource (HR) practices have received considerable attention over the years. However, especially in Taiwan, empirical evidence regarding practice-research gap is still scant. Hence, the present study is designed to evaluate practice-research gaps in the area of staffing management in Taiwan. Questionnaires filled by 234 HR professionals indicated that there are considerable knowing gaps concerning the effectiveness of intelligence tests, unstructured interviews and employment websites. As for the knowing-doing gaps, practitioners' beliefs and actual staffing practices were not compatible with issues such as assessment centers, handwriting tests, integrity tests, work experience, job fairs, and public employment service agencies. Results also showed that companies in Taiwan typically employ two to three selection methods in selecting job candidates and rely primarily on supervisors' subjective judgments in making final employment decisions. Taken together, the present study not only contributes to identify the practice-research gaps in staffing management but also provide suggestions for both research communities and practitioners to reduce these gaps. Strengthening the linkages among scientific evidence, practitioners' beliefs and staffing practices employed in organizations could improve the effectiveness of business operations. Accordingly, organizations are advised to adopt the perspective of evidence-based management in making management decisions.起始頁-結束頁：25-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1403.027篇名：海外留學跨文化經驗對自我效能與未來機會展望的影響：人格特質的調節效果並列篇名：The Effect of Cross-Cultural Experiences in Study Abroad on Individual's Self-Efficacy and Focus on Opportunity: Personality Traits as a Moderator作者：許金田(Chin-Tien Hsu);曹文瑜(Wen-Yu Tsao)關鍵字：海外留學跨文化經驗;自我效能;未來機會展望;開放性;外向性期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要是以社會認知理論為基礎，探討海外留學跨文化經驗對大學生未來機會展望的影響歷程，因此，本研究有四個目的：首先，探究大學生的海外留學跨文化經驗對其未來機會展望的影響，其次，解析大學生的海外留學跨文化經驗對自我效能的影響；第三，瞭解自我效能對海外留學跨文化經驗與未來機會展望之間所扮演的中介角色；最後，探討人格特質對上述關係的調節效果。本研究以台灣地區曾經赴海外留學的大學生為對象共獲356份有效樣本。結果發現：（1）大學生海外留學跨文化經驗越豐富，其未來機會展望信念越高；（2）海外留學跨文化經驗與自我效能之關係具有正向關聯性；（3）大學生海外留學跨文化經驗會透過自我效能進而影響其未來機會展望；（4）大學生之外向性人格特質對海外留學跨文化經驗與自我效能之間關係具有弱化的調節效果。英文摘要：Drawing from the social cognitive theory, this study has four objectives: first, to assess the effect of undergraduate student's Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad on their focus on opportunities and self-efficacy, respectively. Second, to test the mediating effect of undergraduate student's self-efficacy on the relationship between their Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad and focus on opportunities. Finally, to explore the moderating effect of undergraduate student's personality (openness to experience, extraversion) on the relationship between their Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad and self-efficacy. This research involved a survey, comprised of questionnaires concerning Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad from 375 undergraduates. Results indicated that undergraduate student's Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad was positively related to focus on opportunities and self-efficacy, respectively, and self-efficacy partially mediated the relationship between Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad and focus on opportunities. Furthermore, extraversion moderates the relationship between Cross-cultural Experiences in Study Abroad and self-efficacy, such that the relationship is stronger when undergraduate student with the lower extraversion. Finally, the limitations of the research are discussed and suggestions for further research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：63-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1403.038篇名：情緒勞動的前因、後果與潛在干擾變數：統合分析法之探討並列篇名：Antecedents, Consequences, and Potential Moderators of Emotional Labor: A Meta-Analytic Investigation作者：黃敦群(Tun-Chun Huang);紀乃文(Nai-Wen Chi);張雅婷(Ya-Ting Chang);郭洧岑(Wei-Tsen Kuo)關鍵字：情緒勞動;表層演出;深層演出;統合分析;emotional labor;surface acting;deep acting;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：情緒勞動意指「員工為符合組織情緒要求，對情緒所作的調整與管理」，且包括兩種情緒調節策略：表層演出與深層演出。學者們雖發現兩種策略各有不同的前因與後果變數，但既有研究的成果仍欠缺系統性的整合。基於前述，本研究試圖透過統合分析法（meta-analysis）以整合既有發現，並釐清不同情緒勞動策略的前因、後果、以及潛在的干擾變數。統合分析的結果指出，表層與深層演出策略會受到工作特性、情緒智力與服務情境所影響（研究一）；此外，表層演出與情緒耗竭，以及深層演出與工作滿意度、組織承諾、服務績效之間具有顯著的正向關係（研究二），最後，研究結果也發現前述關係會受到服務互動類別的干擾。英文摘要：Emotional labor consists of two main ways for actors to manage emotions: surface acting and deep acting. We report the findings of a meta-analytic review of empirical studies conducted in Taiwan concerned with the causes and consequences of service workers' uses of surface and deep acting. Results showed that, with some exceptions, job characteristics, emotional intelligence, and service context positively associated with both surface and deep acting (Study 1). In addition, surface acting positively predicted burnout, while deep acting positively predicted job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and service performance (Study 2). Additional analyses indicated that the mode of service interaction moderated the relationships mentioned above. Implications of these findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：93-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1403.049篇名：客觀談判結果與主觀談判滿意度的關係：談目標設定以及談判行為的角色並列篇名：The Relationships between Objective Negotiation Outcomes and Subjective Negotiation Satisfaction: The Roles of Goal-Setting and Negotiation Behaviors作者：陳淑貞(Shu-Chen Chen);汪志勇(Chih-Yung Wang);高薏婷(I-Ting Kao)關鍵字：目標設定;客觀談判結果;談判滿意度;首次出價行為;價格讓步行為;goal-setting;objective negotiation outcome;negotiation satisfaction;first offer behavior;concession behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的係以目標設定理論為基礎，探討談判的目標設定對談判者之談判行為、客觀談判結果（價格）以及主觀談判結果（滿意度）的影響。以136位MBA學生為樣本，採實驗設計之方式進行。研究結果發現：（1）目標設定的不同，會影響他們首次出價行為。（2）極端首次出價以及價格讓步行為均與客觀談判結果存在顯著關係。（3）談判目標會影響客觀談判結果。（4）可否達成協商的機率會因雙方目標組合的不同而有所差異。（5）目標設定會調節客觀談判結果與談判滿意度的關係。當目標設定為底限價時，客觀談判結果（談判價格）愈佳，則其談判滿意度越高。反之，客觀談判結果（談判價格）愈佳，其談判滿意度反而愈低。最後，根據研究發現進行討論，並提出管理 意涵與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effect of negotiation goals on negotiation behaviors, objective negotiation outcomes (i.e. pric) and subjective negotiation outcomes (i.e. satisfaction) based on goal-setting theory. Samples of 136 MBA students were asked to involve a scenario experiments. Empirical findings were: (1) Goal-setting would apparently affect the extreme first offer behaviors. (2) Both of extreme first offer and concession behavior were significantly related to the final negotiation price. (3) The negotiation goal would affect final price. (4) The agreement of the negotiation would be affected by the difference of dual goal-setting. (5) The relationship between the negotiation outcome and the satisfaction was moderated by negotiation goals. Whenever the negotiation goal was the reservation price, the relationship between negotiation outcome and negotiation satisfaction was stronger. Whenever the negotiation goal was the ideal price, the relationship between negotiation outcome and negotiation satisfaction was weaker. Finally, according to the empirical findings, managerial implications and suggestions would be provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1402.0110篇名：情緒勞動對服務品質之影響：團隊服務氣候及情緒能力之調節角色並列篇名：The Effects of Emotional Labor on Service Quality: The Moderating Roles of Teams Service Climate and Emotional Competence作者：陳淑玲(Shu-Ling Chen);鄭雅任(Ya-Jen Cheng);陳文惠(Wen-Hui Chen)關鍵字：情緒勞動;服務氣候;情緒能力;服務品質;emotional labor;service climate;emotional competence;service quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：根據工作要求－資源模型，本研究主要在探討團隊服務氣候與個人情緒能力在情緒勞動與服務品質之間的調節效果。本研究主要研究對象為台灣地區服務業第一線服務人員，採問卷調查方式，共計回收145份團隊資料，562份員工樣本。階層線性模式（HLM）分析之結果顯示，服務氣候與情緒能力在淺層演出與服務品質關係間具顯著調節效果。最後，依據本研究結果，提出討論及研究建議與限制。英文摘要：Based on job demands-resources model, the present study proposed differential relationships between surface acting and deep acting and service quality, which were expected to be moderated by teams' service climate and emotional competence .Using data from surveys of 145 service teams (562 frontline employees) and the hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) approach, we find that both service climate and emotional competence moderated the relationships between surface acting and service quality in different ways. Accordingly, restricts of research and suggestion, managerial implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：27-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1402.0211篇名：領導者的團隊情緒領導行為與團隊效能：團隊社會交換關係與知覺風險程度的干擾效果並列篇名：Leader's Emotional Leading Behaviors on Team Performance: The Moderating Effects of Coworker Exchange and Perceived Work Risk作者：沈其泰(Chi-Tai Shen);黃涓容(Chuan-Jung Huang);姜定宇(Din-Yu Jiang)關鍵字：情緒領導行為;鼓舞安慰;威嚴冷峻;成員社會交換關係;知覺風險程度;emotional leading behaviors;encouraging;majesty;coworker exchange;work risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的在探討團隊領導者的情緒領導行為對團隊績效的影響，並分析團隊成員社會交換關係品質和團隊知覺風險程度的調節效果。首先以三種主要涉及到情緒領導的領導風格（轉換型領導、魅力型領導、以及家長式領導）為基礎，建構出以行為層面為核心的兩種情緒領導行為－鼓舞安慰（增加正向情緒、降低負向情緒）與威嚴冷峻（降低正向情緒、增加負向情緒），並透過46個團隊、222位成員的樣本資料，進行團隊層次的分析。研究結果顯示：（1）領導者的鼓舞安慰領導行為和團隊績效表現之間存在顯著的正向關係，而威嚴冷峻領導行為則和團隊績效表現之間存在顯著的負向關係；（2）團隊成員彼此間的社會交換關係和團隊知覺的風險程度，對於情緒領導行為和團隊績效之間關係存在干擾的效果。最後，則對於本研究結果與貢獻、研究限制、未來研究方向、以及實務上的管理意涵進行討論。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate how the team leader's emotional leading behaviors can have influences on team performance. It also aims to examine how the relationship between team leader's emotional leading behaviors and team performance can be moderated by coworker exchange and perceived work risk. We based on transformational, charismatic, and paternalistic leadership in order to construct emotional leading behaviors-Encouraging (increase positive emotions, reduce negative emotions) and Majesty (reduce positive emotions, increase negative emotions). Totally 222 samples from 44 teams were collected. Results show that: (1) Encouraging leading behavior has positive effect on team performance, and majesty leadership behavior has negative effect on team performance. (2) Coworker exchange and perceived work risk moderates the relationship between emotional leading behaviors and team performance. Theoretical contributions, limitations, future research, and managerial implications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：55-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1402.0312篇名：員工每日工作情緒及其對工作結果之影響並列篇名：Intraindividual Variability in Affect and the Effect on Workplace作者：蕭婉鎔(Wan-Jung Hsiao)關鍵字：正負向情緒;情緒波動;工作結果;縱貫研究;positive and negative emotion;affect variability;workplace effect;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以動態觀點，探討組織中員工情緒如何影響例行工作以及工作表現。為驗證此觀點，本研究採縱貫研究，有效回收124位受試樣本，記錄其20個工作天之每日正負向情緒狀態，以分析情緒狀態變化、員工正負向情緒特質對個人工作行為的影響效果。研究結果發現：個人情緒波動會影響其每日正向情緒狀態，且員工正負向情緒特質會影響其工作表現。長期而言，若員工正向情緒特質較高，則工作滿意度、工作績效較佳，且情緒耗竭程度較低；若員工負向情緒特質較高，則情緒耗竭程度較高，工作滿意低。除此之外，本研究亦發現，員工每週情緒變化存在某種模式，情緒波動較低的員工，愈接近週末，其負向情緒愈低。相關理論與管理意涵於文末亦進行討論。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to explore these dynamic components of emotion, with an emphasis on changes in daily affective states and routine work. These ideas were examined with 124 employees who provided daily ratings of affect for 20 days. The results showed that individuals in low in affect spin will be positively related to daily PA. In addition, the dynamic processes of positive/negative emotion can alter routine work. In the long time, positive emotion affectivity is positive to job performance and job satisfaction. Some day-of-weed mood patterns also founded. Discussion focused on the theoretical and practical implications of these findings.起始頁-結束頁：81-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1402.0413篇名：壓力源與積極顧客服務表現：角色寬度自我效能及社會交換知覺之調節式中介模型並列篇名：Stressors and Proactive Customer Service Performance: A Moderated Mediation Model of Role Breadth Self-efficacy and Perception of Social Exchange作者：黃品全(Pin-Chyuan Hwang);韓明娟(Ming-Chuan Han)關鍵字：挑戰型壓力源;妨礙型壓力源;角色寬度自我效能;社會交換知覺;積極顧客服務表現;challenge stressors;hindrance stressors;role breadth self-efficacy;perception of socialexchange;proactive customer service performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討角色寬度自我效能在挑戰、妨礙型壓力源與積極顧客服務表現之間關係的中介角色，並檢視社會交換知覺對此中介機制的調節意涵。經由調節式中介效果之檢驗步驟，本研究從237位航空公司地勤服務人員與主管之配對資料中發現，角色寬度自我效能可中介挑戰型壓力源與積極顧客服務表現之間的正向關係。再者，調節式中介分析結果也顯示，社會交換知覺可調節挑戰型壓力源經由角色寬度自我效能對顧客服務表現的的間接效果；亦即，相較於低社會交換知覺，當社會交換知覺高時，此間接效果較強。研究結果顯示，在討論壓力源、角色寬度自我效能以及積極顧客服務表現的關係時，將社會交換知覺納入考量的重要性。研究結果，也提供了進一步的理論及實務意涵。英文摘要：This study investigates the mediating role of role breadth self-efficacy in linking challenge and hindrance stressors with proactive customer service performance, and further examines the moderating role of perceived social exchange in influencing the mediating mechanisms. Through the analyses of moderated mediation, this study tested the model with matched data from 237 airline ground service employees and their supervisors. Results showed that role breadth self-efficacy mediated the positive relationships between challenge stressors and proactive customer service performance. Moderated mediation analyses further demonstrated that social exchange moderated the strength of the mediated relationships between challenge stressors and proactive customer service performance via role breadth self-efficacy; specifically, the mediated relationship will be stronger under high social exchange than under low social exchange. Results underscore the importance of accounting for the moderating role of social exchange in the examination of the relationships among stressors, role breadth self-efficacy, and proactive customer service performance. Accordingly, further theoretical and practical implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1401.0114篇名：主管支持如何造就滿意員工？不確定管理理論的觀點並列篇名：How Does Supervisor Support Lead to Employee Satisfaction? The Perspective of Uncertainty Management Theory作者：廖紘億(Hung-Yi Liao);郭洧棋(Wei-Chi Guo);吳宗祐(Tsung-Yu Wu)關鍵字：主管支持;工作滿意度;程序公平;情緒不確定性;不確定管理理論;supervisor support;job satisfaction;procedural justice;emotional uncertainty;uncertainty management theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：儘管過去文獻已證實主管支持容易造就滿意員工，但主管支持究竟是「如何」以及「何時」影響員工的工作滿意度，其中的心理歷程並不清楚。本研究試圖運用「不確定管理理論」，探討程序公平在主管支持與工作滿意度之間的中介效果，以及員工情緒不確定性在此中介歷程中的調節效果。透過問卷調查，本研究在兩個時間點蒐集台灣企業組織在職員工之資料，共計回收106份有效問卷。迴歸分析結果顯示，主管支持確實會透過程序公平以預測員工的工作滿意度。此外，在情緒不確定性高（高不確定性）時，程序公平對於主管支持與員工的工作滿意度才有顯著的中介效果；而在情緒不確定性低（低不確定性）時，程序公平的中介效果不顯著。最後提出研究結果之意涵、研究限制、未來研究方向及實務運用。英文摘要：Although past research has showed that supervisor support may lead to employee satisfaction, the psychological process regarding ”how” and ”when” supervisor support is associated with employee job satisfaction is not clear. Drawing on ”uncertainty management theory,” we explored the mediation effect of procedural justice on the relationship between supervisor support and employee job satisfaction, and we also examined the moderated effect of employees' emotional uncertainty on this mediation process. Using questionnaire survey, we collected data at two time-points and obtained 106 usable observations for hypothesis testing. The results of regression analyses showed that supervisor support predict employee job satisfaction through procedural justice. Moreover, the mediation effect of procedural justice on the relationship between the supervisor support and employee job satisfaction was significant only for employee with high emotional uncertainty (high uncertainty), not for employee with low emotional uncertainty (low uncertainty). We discussed the implications of the findings, limitations, future research directions, and managerial implications at the end of this paper.起始頁-結束頁：23-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1401.0215篇名：The Effects of Supervisory Mentoring Functions on Leader-Member Exchange (LMX)並列篇名：上級師父指導功能對領導－成員交換關係的影響研究作者：陳誠(Cheng Chen);文鵬(Peng Wen);邵康華(Kang-Hwa Shaw)關鍵字：上級師父指導功能;領導－成員交換關係品質;回饋尋求行為;傳統性;supervisory mentoring functions;LMX quality;Feedback seeking behavior;traditionality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去幾十年，上級師父指導功能對徒弟職業成功的影響已經被廣泛證明。然而，很少有研究從對偶關係的角度，探討上級師父指導功能的效用，如其是否能形成高質量的領導－成員交換關係呢？基於此，本研究主要檢驗上級師父指導功能對領導－成員關係交換的影響及其作用機制。通過對208對直屬關係的師徒對子的調查發現，上級師父指導功能與師徒領導－成員交換關係呈現顯著正相關，且徒弟回饋尋求行為和徒弟傳統性在上述關係中扮演者仲介變數和調節變數。最後，本文也針對研究發現提供理論與實踐未來發展的建議。英文摘要：The benefits of supervisory mentoring functions on proteges' career success have been confirmed over the past decades. However, little research has examined the consequences of supervisory mentoring functions from a dyadic relationship perspective, such as leader-member exchange (LMX). To narrow this gap, the current study is to investigate whether, how and when supervisory mentoring functions influence the quality of leader-member exchange (LMX). Drawing on 208 mentor- protege (supervisor-subordinate) dyads from the People's Republic of China, the results indicated that the extent of supervisory mentoring functions has a positive association with LMX quality. Furthermore, proteges' feedback seeking behavior mediated the relationship between the extent of supervisory mentoring functions and LMX. Additionally, protege's traditionality significant moderated the above relationship. Finally, theoretical and practical implications of these findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：53-73資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1401.0316篇名：職場工作壓力：回顧與展望並列篇名：Job Stress in Workplace: Review and Extension作者：高鳳霞(Feng-Hsia Kao);鄭伯壎(Bor-Shiuan Cheng)關鍵字：壓力;工作壓力;壓力理論;stress;job stress;stress theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：14卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：工作壓力研究在近20年間快速發展，已成為組織行為研究高度重視的議題。工作壓力的影響不僅深具學術意義，也有實務管理的迫切需要。本文目的將對工作壓力研究進行回顧與評論，系統性分析多年來的工作壓力相關研究。首先將回顧工作壓力之發展與定義，討論理論模式的重要觀點。接著對台灣工作壓力研究進行評論性分析，建立工作壓力之概念關聯網。藉由了解當代研究現況，釐清過去知識的困境，提出未來研究方向，並納入正向心理學觀點，考量文化本位議題，以期對工作壓力研究有更進一步的啟發。英文摘要：Job stress has become an important topic and accumulated massive research results in the past 20 years. There are both theoretical and practical needs to explore stress management topics. The main purpose of this paper is to review job stress literature systematically. We first clarified the definition of job stress, discussed different theoretical perspectives, reviewed and criticized job stress research in Taiwan, which helped audience to capture the nomological network of job stress. Through understanding of the current research approaches, we highlight important research questions and propose future research directions. Last but not least, we also comprised positive psychology and culture issue in our review to further inspire future research.起始頁-結束頁：77-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2014.1401.0401篇名：世代規模、教育制度變革與教育機會競爭激烈性並列篇名：Cohort Size, Educational Reform and Competition for Educational Opportunity in Taiwan作者：黃美玲(Mei-Ling Huang);謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：世代規模;教育制度變革;教育進階;教育機會競爭激烈性;cohort size;educational reform;educational progression process;the competition of educational opportunity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：49期出版年：2014中文摘要：臺灣的教育機會競爭激烈性與教育世代的出生規模有關嗎？其關係是否與教育制度變革有所關聯呢？為了回答這兩個研究問題，本研究探討臺灣1940-1992年間，同一年出生者（即同一個出生世代）在教育歷程中的教育機會競爭激烈性之變化，並分析出生世代規模對其不同教育進階的教育機會競爭激烈性之影響。同時，探究出生世代規模對其教育機會競爭激烈性的影響，如何因不同的教育制度變革而變化。分析資料為1940-1992年共53個單年出生世代的世代規模，以及其三個教育進階（國初中進階、高中進階和大專進階）的教育機會競爭激烈性和世代所經歷的教育制度變革等變項。以多層次成長曲線模型分析每個出生世代在不同教育進階的教育機會競爭激烈性。分析結果顯示：同時考慮世代規模與教育制度變革對教育機會競爭激烈性的影響時，世代規模對於國（初）中進階教育競爭激烈性為負向的影響，對於高中進階教育競爭激烈性沒有影響，然而，世代規模愈大，則其大專進階教育競爭激烈性愈高。另外，出生世代規模對其各教育進階教育機會競爭激烈性的影響效應，的確因出生世代所經歷的教育制度變革而有所不同。換言之，臺灣教育制度變革的確調節了出生世代規模，對於教育機會競爭激烈性的影響效應。英文摘要：This paper explores the trend of educational opportunity competition at different educational levels over different birth cohorts, examines the effect of cohort size on the competition for educational opportunity at different educational level, and tests whether the effect of cohort size on competition for educational opportunity differs by educational reform stages. With data from Education Statistics of the Republic of China, 1958-2010, a multilevel growth curve analysis is employed to analyze the relationships between birth cohort size and competition for educational opportunity at different educational levels, and to assess whether its relationship changes across educational reform stages. The results reveal that birth cohort size has a negative effect on the competition for educational opportunity at the junior high school level, no significant effect at the senior high school level, and a positive effect at the college level when holding the effect of educational reform constant. Moreover, the effect of birth cohort size on the competition for educational opportunity differs by the stage for educational reform. In other words, educational reform does moderate the magnitude of the effect of cohort size on the competition for educational opportunity.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.49.012篇名：量化專家意見與人口推估並列篇名：Combining Expert Opinions with Stochastic Forecast作者：鄭宇庭(Yu-Ting Cheng);李政豫(Chen-Yu Lee);余清祥(Jack C. Yue)關鍵字：人口推估;隨機推估;專家意見;德菲法;電腦模擬;population projection;stochastic projection;expert opinion;Delphi method;simulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：49期出版年：2014中文摘要：人口推估通常使用人口變動要素合成法，通常根據現有人口總數及結構，加上對未來生育、死亡、遷移三要素的預期（或情境），推估未來的人口數及其結構；三要素中的生育和遷移變動趨勢較大，較不容易以歷史資料找出趨勢，大多倚賴專家訂定情境假設。但專家意見也有蒐集上的疑慮，例如意見沒有固定的形成格式，推估結果也難以機率角度詮釋發生可能性。為了彌補專家意見的不足，近年不少國家的人口推估使用隨機方法（stochastic methods），這些方法大多與專家意見組合使用，使得推估結果可兼具兩種方法的特色。英文摘要：Population projections are important in estimating the population for future dates used by the government for policy planning. The cohort component method is the most popular population projection method, and requires information on future fertility, mortality, and migration. These three factors are usually decided by expert opinions as well as historical data. However, there are concerns in using expert opinions. For example, it is not easy to quantify the expert opinions, the expert opinions do not have the meaning in probability, and the projection results based on expert opinion usually have small variance. In recent years, stochastic methods combined with expert opinions have been widely applied in order to improve the quality of population projections. The data format of quantification also plays a crucial role in quantifying the expert opinion, and in this study we explore the estimation methods for various data formats. We first review some popular methods for quantifying expert opinions, including the focused group interview and Delphi method. Then, we use computer simulation to evaluate the influence of data format on the analysis methods. It seems that, if the expert opinion is quantified in the form of payment card or binary data, the results are not very reliable. Therefore, we propose a sequential design to collect expert opinion and the simulation study shows promising results.起始頁-結束頁：41-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.49.023篇名：Young Global Talents on the Move: Taiwanese in Singapore and Hong Kong並列篇名：全球青年人才的移動：以在新加坡與香港的臺灣人為例作者：姜蘭虹(Nora Lan-Hung Chiang);黃佳媛(Chia-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：全球青年人才;年輕移民;再遷移;新加坡;香港;young global talent;youth migration;re-migrant;Singapore;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：49期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文所探討的是工作、求學、或家庭因素遷移到新加坡及香港的臺灣年輕人。以2011-2014年在新加坡、香港及臺灣所進行的40個深度訪談為基礎，進一步獲得對受訪者及當地環境的詳細資訊與深入瞭解。本文首先回顧年輕移民、青年人才、及從臺灣移出的1.5代移民的相關文獻，隨後，本文將新加坡與香港的臺灣年輕人依以下幾個重點分類，並且進行訪談分析：（1）遷移到新加坡或香港的原因、（2）移動類型與移動軌跡、（3）社會與文化適應、（4）返回臺灣的意願。除了更高的薪資與福利之外，新加坡與香港提供給他們的是一個與全球接軌的國際化環境與個人發展的舞臺。然而，居住在新加坡與香港也有一些缺點，例如：語言、氣候、文化差異、生活成本高、生活品質等。這群臺灣年輕人的流動不僅對新加坡與香港所競逐的全球人才有所貢獻，海外的經驗也有助於他們發展適應不同社會文化環境的能力。在這關鍵時刻，臺灣有關招募全球青年人才的政策，仍然處於岌岌可危的情況。我們迫切需要相關政策的制訂，為的是防止接受過良好教育的專業人才離開臺灣，並且透過更完善有效率的政策，吸引這群人才有意願返回臺灣。由於臺灣年輕人在移動上的暫時性質，臺灣政府可以開發這類人力資源，作為競逐全球人才的一種策略，並且作為人口政策與社會轉型的重要一環。英文摘要：This paper studies young Taiwanese who migrated to Singapore and Hong Kong for work, study or family reasons. It is based mainly on 40 in-depth interviews conducted in Singapore, Hong Kong, and Taiwan in 2011-2014, thus obtaining narratives that contain detailed information to render nuanced understanding of the interviewees and the environment. The paper begins with a review of pertinent literature that includes youth migration and global talent, and the 1.5 generation migrants from Taiwan. It is followed by an analysis of major types of young Taiwanese in Singapore and Hong Kong with regard to: (1) their reasons for moving to Singapore or Hong Kong, (2) the types and trajectories of movement, (3) their social and cultural adaptation, and (4) prospects of returning to Taiwan. Apart from the higher pay and fringe benefits, both Singapore and Hong Kong provide them with a cosmopolitan environment for global pursuits to which their education applies. However, there are disadvantages of living in Singapore and Hong Kong, such as climate, social and cultural differences, high cost of living, and quality of life. Being highly educated, they have contributed to the pool of global talents that both states compete for, while gaining overseas experiences in enhancing their skills and exposure to new social and cultural environments. At this juncture, Taiwan's policy to recruit young global talents remains at stake, and the urgent need is to prevent its well educated professionals from leaving, as well as to attract them back with more vigorous and effective polices. Due to the impermanent nature of young Taiwanese on the move, Taiwan may want to tap this human resource as a strategy to compete for global talents, as a critical aspect of population policy and social transformation.起始頁-結束頁：69-117資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.49.034篇名：亞洲的結婚趨勢與生育問題－新加坡大學Gavin Jones主任演講紀實作者：謝銘逢期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：49期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：119-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press5篇名：年輪生育率分佈改變對時期生育率的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Cohort Fertility Schedule Changes on Period Fertility作者：王德睦(Te-Mu Wang);董宜禎(Yi-Jhen Dong)關鍵字：完成生育率;時期總生育率;步調效果;時期性效果;時間效果;completed fertility rate;total fertility rate;tempo effect;period effect;timing effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：臺灣的時期總生育率（total fertility rate）於2011年已降至1.06，僅及人口替換水準的一半。事實上，除了實質生育率下降外，延後生育也是造成生育率如此低的重要因素，文獻稱為步調效果（tempo effect）。然而婦女生育年齡有限，生育不可能無限延宕，當生育不再延後，時期生育率就會回升。為了去除生育延後對時期生育率的影響，Bongaarts and Feeney（1998）提出校正方法，他們僅考慮平均生育年齡的改變，忽略生育年齡變異數的效果；Kohler and Philipov（2001）納入變異數的變動以補足其缺失，目的均止於步調去除後的生育水準。本文乃進一步使用臺灣婦女的生育資料，由模擬方式分別估計年輪平均生育年齡改變與年輪生育年齡分配型態改變各自對時期總生育率的影響。首先設定各年輪完成生育率均維持觀察到的量，生育年齡分佈則維持「比較基準年輪」之型態，比較歷年時期總生育率的模擬值與觀察值之差異，得出年輪生育率分佈改變的總效果。再設定年輪的平均生育年齡為觀察的平均年齡，分配型態同於「比較基準年輪」，其與第一個模擬之時期總生育率相較後，即為一般所稱的步調效果；其與歷年觀察的總生育率之差異，則為分配型態改變的效果。藉此釐清年輪的平均生育年齡改變與生育年齡分配型態改變各自對時期總生育率的效果，用以補足過去文獻的缺失，乃具有人口學應用及學術參考價值。英文摘要：The total fertility rate in Taiwan has declined since 1951, reaching half of the replacement level in 2011. The secular decline is obviously real, but a ”tempo effect” has also worked to bring it down. Since fertility cannot shift indefinitely to later ages of childbearing, the total fertility rate can be expected to rise once the shift has become saturated. Bongaarts and Feeney (1998) proposed a model to correct this terminating effect of shifting age pattern on total fertility, but it appears to address only the shifting mean age of childbearing. The model neglected the effect of shifting variance of the age distribution on total fertility rate. To redress the problem, Kohler and Philipov (2001) developed a way to assess the effect of removing variance on total fertility rate. The remedy appears to focus on the outcome of the tempo effect, but pays little attention to the shifts in the age pattern of fertility itself. This study employs a simulation approach to capture both the effects of shifting mean age and variance of the age distribution on total fertility rate simultaneously. We first compute cohort completed fertility rate based on the observed age-specific fertility rates. We then adjust the age pattern of cohort fertility assuming a certain age pattern, and simulate the total fertility rates accordingly. The differences between the simulated total fertility rates and the actual total fertility rates over time are then considered as the results of shifting age pattern. We further adjust the cohort fertility to the averaged mean ages of childbearing while keeping the age pattern constant; the comparison between this new simulation and the earlier one amounts to the well-documented tempo effect.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.48.016篇名：從在臺外籍生之學習選擇看留學生遷移決策之社會建構並列篇名：Understanding the Social Construction of International Students' Migration Decisions through the Study Choices of Foreign Students in Taiwan作者：馬藹萱(Sandra Ai-Hsuan Ma)關鍵字：高等教育國際化;教育移民;國際學生;外籍生;遷移決策;internationalization of higher education;educational migrant;international student;foreign student;migration decision making期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來全球留學生的大量增加，反映出全球高等教育市場的擴張與日趨多元的教育選項。臺灣政府近十年來在推動高等教育國際化發展下，積極招募外籍學生來臺求學，在臺外籍生人數也快速成長。儘管Kight與de Wit所建立的概念性架構有助於我們理解留學生選擇跨界學習背後的決策理據（rationales），但實證上仍須檢視這些理據對留學生進行相關決定時彼此間的相對重要性，以及影響其相對重要性的主要因子。推拉模型中對於遷移決策者透過搜尋最佳遷移選項以追求最大效益的微觀假設，也亟待被進一步地驗證。本文以全臺外籍生調查資料及在七所大學舉行之外籍生焦點團體訪談資料為據，分析外籍生來臺求學之主要動機，與影響其選擇留學目的國與就讀學校之因素。結果顯示，外籍生選擇來臺求學的決策多立基於學術文化及經濟性理據。同時，決策理據之間呈現出高度的交錯性，彼此相互影響。外籍生在選擇求學目的國與就讀學校的考量上，會因來源國別、語言能力、在臺期間之經濟來源與就學階段的不同而產生差異。留學目的地在國際高等教育市場的能見度、移入國與原生國的教育資源與政策，國際關係和區域化發展等因素，也會影響留學生的學習選擇。這些發現，凸顯了遷移決策背後的條件脈絡對決策形成的影響力，也形塑了留學決策當中有限理性的特質。研究結果也指出，決定出國留學，和選擇留學目的國與就讀學校的各項決策之間不必然呈現垂直線性的關係，而多呈現迴遞互動式的關係。最後，本文就研究結果對臺灣現行外籍生招募政策提出建議。英文摘要：The rapid increase in international students worldwide in recent years has reflected the fast expansion of the global higher education market and the gradual diversification of educational options. In the recent decade, the Taiwanese government has launched policies to internationalize higher education and to actively attract foreign students to study in Taiwan, and the number of foreign students in Taiwan has been rapidly rising. Although the conceptual framework proposed by Knight and de Wit is helpful in understanding the rationales of international students' transnational education choices, substantial empirical evidence is needed to examine the relative significance of these rationales and the factors generating the differentiation. There also remains to be tested the micro-level hypothesis of the push-pull model conceptualizing a migration decision as the result of a rational choice seeking the best option with the maximum utility. This paper analyzes foreign students' motives to study in Taiwan and the factors shaping their destination choices with a national foreign student survey data and focus-group interviews with foreign students at seven Taiwanese universities. The results show that foreign students' study choices were based mainly on academic, cultural and economic rationales. The weighting of rationales varied by students' countries of origin, language skills, economic sources, and levels of study. The visibility of the study countries and institutions on the global market of higher education, education resources and policies of sending and receiving countries, international relations and regionalization all take part in shaping the study choices of student migrants. These findings highlight the contextualization of study choices of international students and the characteristic of bounded rationality in migration decision making. The study further discovers that the decision to study abroad and the choices of destination country and institution are not necessarily tied in a vertical and lineal relation but are often coordinated in a recursive fashion. It lastly provides suggestions to Taiwan's current foreign student recruitment policy.起始頁-結束頁：43-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.48.027篇名：Systematic Correlations between Demographic Transition and Epidemiologic Transition並列篇名：人口轉型與疾病轉型系統性的相關聯作者：陳正和(Jeng-Her Chen)關鍵字：人口健康有利條件;人口轉型;疾病轉型;favorable conditions for population health;demographic transition;epidemiologic transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：目的：有鑒於目前理論與經驗研究在探討人口轉型與疾病轉型系統性相關聯的不足，本研究以人口轉型理論提出人口轉型所帶來的人口健康有利條件如何在理論上與研究上解釋疾病轉型。方法：運用OLS迴歸分析與交叉表列方法，針對開發中國家可得資料進行跨國資料分析。發現：以全球生育與文化轉型所量度的人口轉型不僅影響人口健康有利條件的發生，二者並同時帶動疾病轉型有系統性的循序進展，從傳染性疾病轉型為非傳染性疾病，以及從傳染性疾病轉型為傷害為主的死亡成因。結論：本研究有助於理論發展與跨學科研究連結人口學與流行病學，結論並討論理論、研究，與政策上的涵義及對未來研究的具體建議。英文摘要：Objective: Because of the insufficiencies of the current theoretical and empirical endeavors for explaining the systematic relationship between demographic transition and epidemiologic transition, this study is an attempt to theorize and empirically test a demographic transition thesis for explaining favorable conditions for population health and subsequent epidemiologic transition outcomes in less developed countries. Methods: OLS regression and cross-tabulation methods were used to conduct a cross-national analysis of all available data from less developed countries. Findings: Demographic transition, as measured by global fertility and cultural transition, exerts robust positive effects on the index of favorable conditions for population health and subsequent epidemiologic transition outcomes regarding the communicable- to non-communicable diseases transition and communicable diseases- to- injuries transition. Conclusions: Theorizing and testing a demographic transition thesis of epidemiologic transition contributed to theory development and interdisciplinary research for bridging demography and epidemiology.Theory, research, policy implications and suggestions for future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：95-139資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.48.038篇名：臺灣事故傷害對潛在生命年數、工作年數及社會經濟損失影響探討並列篇名：The Effect of Accidents on Potential Life Lost, Working Life Lost and Social Economic Loss in Taiwan作者：林正祥(Cheng-Hsiang Lin);劉士嘉(Shih-Chia Liu);劉于琪(Yu-Chyi Liu)關鍵字：事故傷害;Lee-Carter模式;ARIMA模式;潛在生命年數損失;工作年數損失;accident;Lee-Carter model;ARIMA model;years of potential life lost;working life lost期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：48期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究利用衛生福利部所提供的「死因資料」，以事故傷害為例，就其影響潛在生命年數及社會經濟損失長期趨勢進行分析探討。除利用Lee-Carter模式探討1985-2009年事故傷害死亡率變化及預測未來趨勢外，並利用該模式求得之各年死亡率高低趨勢以非線性模式配適，並預測未來數年各年齡層事故傷害死亡率。另，針對事故傷害影響推算各年預期生命年數損失，以人力資本法算出其在各年所造成的工作年數社會經濟損失，最後利用時間序列ARIMA模式探討並預測事故傷害經濟損失變動趨勢。研究結果發現自1985－2009年，25年來事故傷害死亡率呈現上升再下降趨勢且在1989年達最高，每10萬人口就有70.04人死於事故傷害，若排除1999年因921大地震及2009年的莫拉克風災年份，在1989年後呈下降趨勢，另Lee-Carter模式所求得之各年死亡率高低趨勢以時間序列及非線性模式預測2010及2011年之事故傷害死亡率均得到良好的配適。就社會經濟損失方面，以2000年臺灣地區年中人口數為基準，在事故傷害方面所造成的每千人口潛在生命年數損失於1989年、1999年及2009年分別為31.13、21.44及10.06年；每千人口潛在工作年數損失為29.56、17.55及7.34年。另外，事故傷害死亡的社會經濟損失經2009年「消費者物價指數」（Consumer Price Index, 簡稱CPI）調整後，以1993年為最高490.37億元，而1999年經濟損失為410.15億元，在1999年後呈下降趨勢且在2009年經濟損失為165.79億元，25年來事故傷害造成的經濟損失減少37.52%。另外，以時間序列模式進行預測，事故傷害其未來3年的每千人口生命年數損失分別為8.86年、8.05年及7.23年；每千人口工作年數損失則為6.32年、5.52年及4.72年；經濟損失分別為147.55億元、127.89億元與108.23億元。英文摘要：Accidents are always the most important problem related to the safety of people. In this study, we attempt to explore the trend of the effects of accidents in terms of years of potential life lost and economic loss in the past 25 years. The Lee-Carter Model is used for exploring the trend of death rate. The time-varying mortality index from the Lee-Carter model is fitted by a time series model and nonlinear model to predict future accident mortality rate. The years of potential life lost is calculated based on information about life expectancy, and the Human Capital Method is used to figure out the economic loss caused by accidents. Finally, a time series ARIMA model is applied to predict the economic loss caused by accidents. The results show that accident mortality rate has trended upward, then downward in the past 25 years; it peaked at 70.04 deaths per 100,000 population in 1989, then declined after 1989 (1999 and 2009 are excluded due to the extraordinary events of the 921 earthquake and Morak typhoon). In addition, a time series model and nonlinear model are used for fitting a time-varying mortality index k(t), providing good results for predicting accident mortality rates from 2010 to 2011. Using the population of Taiwan in 2000 as a standard, the years of potential life lost per 1,000 population caused by accidents were 31.13, 21.44, and 10.06 in 1989, 1999, and 2009 respectively; the years of working life lost per 1,000 population were 29.56, 17.55, and 7.34 in those same years. The economic loss caused by accidents after adjusting for 2009 CPI peaked at 490.37 billion NT dollars in 1993, then began falling after 1999's 410.15 billion NT dollars, reaching 165.79 billion NT dollars in 2009. From 1985 to 2009, the economic losses caused by accidents declined 37.52%. In addition, the predictions of time series models show that, due to accidents, the years of potential life lost per 1,000 population were 8.86, 8.05, and 7.23; the working life years lost per 1,000 were 6.32, 5.52, and 4.72; and the economic losses were 147.55, 127.89, and 108.23 billion NT dollars from 2010 to 2012 respectively.起始頁-結束頁：141-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2014.48.0401篇名：眼見為真－戰後台灣婦女驗孕史（1945-1990s）並列篇名：Seeing is Believing: A History of Pregnancy Testing in Taiwan (1945-1990s)作者：吳燕秋(Yan-Chiou Wu)關鍵字：驗孕;家用驗孕劑;產檢;月經規則術;墮胎;pregnancy testing;home pregnancy test;prenatal checkup;menstrual regulation;abortion期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：35期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究擬從婦女的驗孕觀、驗孕技術之發展引進與應用，及技術背後的性別意涵等方面入手，說明戰後婦女如何成為積極的驗孕者，以及家用驗孕劑引進台灣後呈現的性別政治。本文發現戰後婦女的教育程度、生育自主性、產檢意識和消費能力均提升，並與醫普知識的傳播及產檢、驗孕技術之改善等因素交互作用，促成了驗孕觀的改變。戰後到1960年代晚期，婦女多從身體反應確認懷孕。雖然仍有人基於不同理由去醫院診所驗孕，但對打算正常生產、無特殊需求的婦女，驗孕是不必要的選項與家庭支出。1960年代晚期，婦女教育程度提升，益加仰賴衛教書籍和醫學權威，消費能力也提高，對於驗孕的態度已與先前不同。1980年代晚期，家用驗孕劑市場日益興盛，其普及使婦女提早進入醫療體系，加速生產的醫療化。在醫師叮嚀和媒體宣傳下，重複檢驗及驗後找醫師確認成為婦女驗孕的金科玉律。檢驗結果中「可見」「客觀」的陽性標記與胚胎影像，成為最具說服力的懷孕依據。過早驗孕也使婦女更早陷入懷孕的焦慮與流產的傷感中。方便婦女使用的家用驗孕劑，並未挑戰傳統性別規範下的使用腳本。社會認可的驗孕者仍以符合婚姻規範、為求傳宗接代的婦女為主，未婚、未成年女性則易被貼上性污名。英文摘要：This research explores how women became active users of pregnancy tests in Taiwan from 1945 to the 1990s. Women's attitudes toward pregnancy testing were influenced and changed by many factors, including education, reproductive rights, consumption capacity, popular medical knowledge, and the technologies of prenatal checking and pregnancy testing. In the early period after WWII, most women judged for themselves whether they were pregnant based on bodily changes, without any extra testing. In the late 1960s, because of their higher educational level and greater consumption capacity, women trusted medical authorities and popular medical books more, and were willing to spend more money on prenatal care. Moreover, the ease and convenience of pregnancy tests and the need for prenatal checkups pushed women to take tests in order to confirm pregnancy early. Since the late 1980s, the market for home pregnancy tests has thrived, and such testing has gotten women into hospitals earlier than ever before. However, women who took tests too early became aware of miscarriages, which often happen early in pregnancy, and were saddened at the pregnancy loss even when it occurred earlier than bodily changes. That is, without the pregnancy tests, they would not have been aware of those pregnancies, and so, would not have been saddened by their termination. Due to not trusting women's ability to administer the pregnancy test, doctors and the media persuaded women to take tests repeatedly, which resulted in women overspending on pregnancy tests, or visiting doctors afterwards. Instead of pregnancy tests, doctors used screening technologies to see inside the female body, to prove the existence of the fetus convincingly. 'Seeing is believing' became the golden rule for women, and thus women's perception of their bodies lost its former priority role in creating awareness of their pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2014.35.12篇名：「非法」情境下的酷兒生殖－台灣女同志的人工生殖科技實作並列篇名：Queering Reproduction in a Prohibited Context: Assisted Reproductive Technologies as Utilized by Taiwan's Lesbians作者：何思瑩(Szu-Ying Ho)關鍵字：酷兒生殖;女同志;人工協助生殖;自助滴精;台灣;Queering reproduction;queer;lesbians;Assisted Reproductive Technologies;self-insemination;ROPA (reception of oocytes from partner);Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：35期出版年：2014中文摘要：目前酷兒家庭論述仍多以美國與其他西方國家為研究對象，本研究首度探討西方國家脈絡以外、特別是「非法」情境下的女同志生殖科技實作。透過長達七年的田野觀察，本文訪查14位台灣女同志本身或伴侶實際使用人工生殖的經驗。依照歷史時期與行動類型的區隔，本研究發現台灣女同志的生殖科技實作可分為三種不同階段。第一是零星游擊戰時期，時間約為1990年代至2000年代初期。整體同志社群仍缺乏對人工生殖之想像，亦缺少支持或鼓勵同志親職之論述。因此，當時的女同志多以單打獨鬥的自力救濟方式，透過「偷渡」設法進入既有的醫療體制。第二，自從女同志媽媽聯盟於2006年開始發行《拉媽報》之後，集體的同志親職渴望逐漸浮現，女同志亦透過此網絡分享資訊，嘗試自助滴精的方法。第三，自2012年起，台灣女同志生殖科技實作進入海外人工生殖時期，女同志媽媽聯盟不再是單一的人工生殖資訊傳播來源，許多曾赴海外進行人工生殖的女同志，主動在網路上分享自身親驗，大幅增進了國外人工生殖的親近性與便利性。女同志也開始採用更多樣的人工生殖技術，例如ROPA（reception of oocytes from partner）實作。本文呈現台灣女同志在不同時期運用既有的網絡與社會資源，進行不同形式的生殖科技實作。酷兒生殖，指的正是不同的使用者偷渡並挪用此一科技，鬆動了助孕科技原本欲達成的社會效果，也產生了新形態的同志親屬關係。英文摘要：While most queer family literature focuses on experiences in Western countries, this paper explores how lesbians in Taiwan have appropriated Assisted Reproduction Technologies (ARTs) in a context in which this technology is denied to them. Through more than seven years' field work, participation and observation in Taiwan LGBT parenting groups, the author explains how 14 Taiwan lesbians have negotiated and navigated their ways to get access to ARTs in spite of the legal restrictions. In the first period (1990s through early 2000s), due to the lack of lesbian parenting discourses and images in the lesbian community, most lesbians who wanted to be parents tried to misrepresent themselves to the existing medical system to get access to ARTs as individuals. Some lesbians contracted pseudo-marriages with gay men to get legal access to ARTs, and some lesbians disguised themselves as single women (letting physicians assume they were heterosexuals) in order to meet the physicians' moral concerns. In the second phase (beginning about 2006), lesbian mothers' associations used multiple channels to disseminate knowledge about selfinsemination. However, the lack of a long history of a feminist health movement as well as appropriate sperm sources in Taiwan were crucial barriers to the practice of self-insemination in Taiwan. In the third phase (beginning about 2012), more and more lesbians pursued access to ARTs abroad and actively shared their experiences on the internet and on websites. Now, besides lesbian mother associations, there are many different information resources to help lesbians find appropriate ARTs. Also, some lesbian have utilized ROPA (reception of oocytes from partner) in this period, since this provides sharing in the reproductive process as well as legal standing for both partners as parents of the child. ”Queering” reproduction means lesbian actors not only embody new biomedical modalities by appropriating ARTs-they also create new kinship and family formations that can provide normative images for the wider society.起始頁-結束頁：53-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2014.35.533篇名：同性戀者的親密關係與家庭功能之剖析並列篇名：An Overview of Intimate Relationships and Family Functions of Lesbians and Gay Men作者：李怡青(I-Ching Lee)關鍵字：心理學研究;同性戀;親密關係;家庭經營;子女表現;psychological research;homosexuality;intimate relationships;family;children期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：35期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來，台灣社會有越來越多對同性戀者婚姻權與子女撫養權的公眾討論，本紀要整理國內外研究發現，針對同性戀者關係經營與家庭型態的研究統整說明，期能增進一般社會大眾與學者對於同性戀族群的正確認識。本文分從三個層面切入，總結為以下三點：第一、耕耘長期關係和經營家庭的意願與性取向無關。同性戀伴侶與家庭面臨的最大壓力來自於社會對同性戀者的敵意與恐懼。然而即使在這樣的劣勢下，仍有許多同性戀者願意耕耘長期關係並努力地經營家庭。第二、同性戀家庭教養的孩子，無論在自我認知、能力表現或親子關係品質上，都與異性戀家庭教養的孩子一樣好。兩類家庭比較顯著的差別在於，同性戀家庭的孩子性別刻板印象較少，這或許是因為許多同性戀者的親身經歷，使他們在教養孩子時，比較不會以性別框架限制孩子。第三、通過對同性戀者基本權益的保障，社會可以彰顯重要的正向價值，例如鼓勵經營長期關係、教養子女。更積極的意義在於，當同性戀者與同性戀家庭不再承受偏見與歧視，人們或許可以學習更具彈性的性別概念，甚至可以撼動男尊女卑的傳統文化觀點。英文摘要：In recent years, there has been increasing public debate regarding marriage and adoption rights for lesbians and gay men. With this concern, this article reviews research findings on lesbians' and gay men's intimate relationships and family functions in Taiwan and abroad. The purpose of this review is to increase understanding of lesbians and gay men both for the general public and for scholars. The current article targets three issues. First of all, lesbians and gay men are as willing and capable of establishing and maintaining long-term relationships and families as are heterosexuals. The tremendous pressures faced by lesbian and gay couples originate in the general public's hostility and homophobia. Despite this, lesbian and gay couples are able to adopt flexible gender schemas in maintaining relationships and families. Secondly, children raised by lesbian and gay couples are as well-functioning as children raised by heterosexual couples (e.g., in self-knowledge, abilities, and performance, as well as parent-child relationship quality). Moreover, children raised by lesbian and gay couples are more flexible in terms of adopting gender roles, and are less likely to be limited by gender stereotypes. Thirdly, allowing lesbians and gay men rights to marry and to raise children could facilitate important Taiwanese values, such as maintaining long-term relationships and establishing families. More optimistically, when lesbian and gay families are viewed without prejudice, we may have the chance to learn more flexible gender schema, and to question the legitimacy of the old-fashioned male superiority over women rooted in the traditional Chinese culture.起始頁-結束頁：123-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2014.35.1234篇名：墮落夏娃－廖輝英的妓女論述與國家資本主義的矛盾並列篇名：Fallen Eve: Liao Huiying's Discourse on Prostitution and the Contradiction of State Capitalism作者：謝世宗(Elliott S.T. Shie)關鍵字：廖輝英;妓女;國家資本主義;意識形態;論述分析;Liao Huiying;Taiwan;prostitution;state capitalism;ideology;discourse analysis;working girls;women's economic independence期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：34期出版年：2014中文摘要：性別研究與文學批評的結合已非新鮮事，然而文學中的妓女角色卻為研究性別的學者提供一個便利的切入點，以探討特定時空下，由性別、情慾、國家、階級、種族交錯而成的權力網絡。本文選擇廖輝英的妓女故事〈失去的月光〉（1983）為討論焦點，援用馬克思／意識形態的分析，將它放置在台灣戰後國家資本主義的發展及其衍生的矛盾中來理解。一方面，中產階級女性獲得經濟獨立，性也脫離家庭的管制，另一方面，家庭作為經濟基本單位，仍被強調為國家發展的基礎；在這種情況下，廖輝英筆下的職業婦女成了走鋼索的人，戰戰兢兢地走在「走向婚姻」的鋼索上，不得有所偏離，否則就會成為墮落者（如妓女）。廖輝英扮演了糾察者的角色，在小說中詳細列出墮落者所犯的錯誤，以作為剛剛離開伊甸園的夏娃們的借鏡。本文第二部分則援用論述分析的方法，首先強調小說將「妓女」建構為知識客體的權力，並指出小說與現實中關於妓女的公共論述互相鞏固的關係。雖然妓女作為她者的聲音在小說中被壓抑，但小說本身眾聲喧嘩的特質，在權力網絡中創造出矛盾或縫隙，而使另類的主體性可以被建構，另類的政治空間得以開展。英文摘要：The combination of gender studies and literary criticism is nothing new, but the role of prostitutes in literature provides a productive perspective for investigating the intertwined network of gender, sexuality, class, race, and the role of the family and nation. Through reading Liao Huiying's short story ”The Lost Moonlight,” this paper first employs a Marxist method of analysis of ideology, contextualizing the work within the development of national capitalism and its contradictions. In the 1980s, middle-class women in Taiwan started to gain economic independence and freed themselves from the regulation of family, especially in terms of sexuality. On the other hand, family units were still taken as the foundation of the nation's growth, and traditional familial ethics was reinforced. Following this ideology, working girls were walking on a wire: while remaining independent, they were compelled to move towards marriage. If these innocent Eves missed a step, they would become fallen women-among those most condemned, prostitutes. Liao's prostitute story thus serves as a warning, policing the behavior of newly independent and innocent Eves. The second part of this paper, based on discourse analysis, suggests that the novel has the power of constructing reality, by reifying the social category of prostitutes and by reinforcing popular discourses on prostitution. Although the voices of prostitutes have been marginalized and censored, the novel, as a genre of heteroglossia, preserves their dissonant voices through which a new political space is opened for alternative subjectivities.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2014.34.15篇名：世界的聲響：日治時期台灣女性雜誌的女性主義閱讀（1919-1939）並列篇名：The Voices of the World: A Feminist Reading of Women's Magazines in Colonial Taiwan (1919-1939)作者：王琬葶(Wan-Ting Wang)關鍵字：女性雜誌;婦人與家庭;臺灣婦人界;新女性;摩登女郎;黃寶桃;Colonial Taiwan;women's magazines;”Fujin to katei”;”Taiwan Fujinkai”;new women;modern girl;Huang Pao-tao期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：34期出版年：2014中文摘要：1920至1930年代，日本統治下的台灣經歷現代化的洗禮。殖民地女性遭逢賢妻良母主義的現代轉型、女性自覺思潮的湧現、以及資本主義經濟對生活的衝擊。日治時期兩部女性雜誌《婦人與家庭》（婦人<U+3068>家庭）和《臺灣婦人界》，作為殖民地女性現代生活的指南及提供資源的窗口，揭示了提升女性社會地位、打造新女性的目標。世界的聲響，是現代性對女性的召喚，代表一種普遍的文明女性理想。受到世界第一波女性主義運動以來自由主義和個人主義的感召，女性追求自覺與解放，擁抱現代物質文明，傳達走出家屋、進入社會、展望世界的期許。現代教養的訓練為不同階層出身的女性打造了文明階梯，鼓吹女性進入公領域成為典範。但這訴諸普遍標準的典範化過程，卻建立在對底層女性的凝視、差異化與排除之上。筆者藉女性主義學者Susan Stanford Friedman 的「身分地理」（geography of identity）概念，解析兩部雜誌的女性創作富含階級、地緣、文化差異的多重主體位置。在北野里子、大野倭文子、黃寶桃等女作家筆下，世界的聲響為女性帶來啟蒙的信念與自由的想像，但自由主義女性主義的理想卻也依文明優劣程度強化了他我之分，甚而突顯主流對邊緣群體的挪用和排除。現代性之於殖民地女性既是資源也是掠奪、既是解放又是壓迫的雙重面向，於此彰顯。英文摘要：From the 1920s to the 1930s, Taiwan under Japanese rule faced a whirlwind of modernization. Women in colonial Taiwan experienced the modern transformation of the ”ry<U+014D>saikenbo” (good wives and wise mothers) system, the influence of the first wave of feminism and the impact of capitalist economy. This paper aims to investigate how women writers in ”Fujin to katei” (1919-1920) and ”Taiwan Fujinkai” (1934-1939) responded to these transitions. ”The voice of the world” was a compelling call for modernity, one which lifted up women's self-consciousness, praised the imagined sisterhood, encouraged women to join in public spaces, and formed a universal paradigm for civilized modern women. However, this ”universalizing” process was founded on the gaze upon subaltern women and the elimination of differences. With Susan Stanford Friedman's concept of ”geography of identity,” I will examine the dialectical encounters between different female subjects in women's literary writings in the two magazines. In Kitano Satoko, <U+014C>no Shizuko, Huang Pao-tao and other women's works, the voice of the world brought about belief in enlightenment and the imagination of liberty, but this liberalist ideology also intensified the division between the majority and minority. This contrast manifests the double sides of emancipation and exploitation of modernity in colonial Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：37-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2014.34.376篇名：從娜拉到毛夫人－圖像、生活扮演和性別論述並列篇名：From Nora to Madam Mao: Pictures, Daily Performance and Gender Discourse作者：林雯玲(Wen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：娜拉;性別展演;新女性論述;江青;圖像;玩偶之家;Nora;gender performance;New Woman discourse;Jiang Qing;pictorial images;A Doll House期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：34期出版年：2014中文摘要：1935年在中國被藝文界稱為「娜拉年」，因為數個大城市都有劇團製作演出易卜生的名劇《玩偶之家》（往往被重新命名為《娜拉》）。當時沒沒無聞的女演員李雲鶴，初到上海改名為藍蘋，應一左翼劇團之邀首度扮演女主角娜拉。該演出非常成功，藍蘋一夕成名，更因此踏入在中國開始發展的電影業。幾年後她改名為江青，並成為毛夫人，以另一個角色為世人所記憶。從1935到1937年，報紙的影劇版和電影雜誌經常刊登有關藍蘋的報導和照片。藍蘋的圖像和文章總是呈現一個現代女性的形貌，自信又吸引人─象徵著中國的娜拉。這樣的形象與江青後來在延安時期、50年代和文革期間的照片迥然不同。本文藉由追循從藍蘋作為娜拉到江青作為毛夫人的圖像形變，審視近代中國銘刻於女性身體的各種不同理想女性的論述，不管是五四知識份子、左翼人士或中國共產黨的國族和現代性想像，都建立在女性的身體上，並進一步規範標示性別的服裝髮型，「怎麼穿，穿什麼」成為一種進步與否的指標和意識形態的展現，不斷被監督與訓誡。除了探討藍蘋／江青不同階段的性別扮演，本文也審視她們服膺新女性的生活扮演，在爭議時所遭受的批評，卻往往弔詭地根植於其女性性別，曝露出由男性主導的性別建構與現實生活實踐的矛盾和折衝。最後，本文討論藍蘋／江青與新女性論述的不同關係，她並非被動的知識客體，又如何在不同程度上參與、操縱這些論述建構。英文摘要：In China 1935 was known as 'the year of Nora' with Ibsen's A Doll House (often re-titled as Nora) being produced in major cities throughout the country. An unknown actress, Li Yunhe, who had come to Shanghai and changed her name to Lan Ping, played the title character, Nora, at the invitation of a left-wing theatre company. The success of Nora not only launched Lan Ping from obscurity to fame overnight, but enabled her to explore the new territory of the film industry. Several years later, she changed her name again, this time to Jiang Qing and shortly became Madam Mao, a role that most people remember her. From 1935 to 1937 , reports about Lan Ping, often accompanied by photographs, frequently appeared in the theatre sections of newspapers and film magazines. The photographs of Lan Ping as herself invariably present a modern woman, confident and yet attractive, a symbolic Chinese Nora. This image of Jiang may surprise those who know her only as Madam Mao through the photos taken of her in the Yan'an period (1937-1947 ), in the 1950s, and during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976). By tracing Lan Ping/Jiang Qing's photographic metamorphosis, this article examines different discourses of ideal womanhood as conveyed by presentations of the female body in the pre-Mao period and in Mao's China. Be they the May-Fourth intellectuals, Left-wing intellectuals, or leaders in the Chinese Communist Party, Chinese thinkers of all stripes imagined modernity and their new nation through the female body, and thus set out to become arbiters of women's public style, in such matters as hairstyle and clothes. What to wear and how to wear could demonstrate whether a woman was advanced in thinking and embodied a proper attitude towards new gender role. In addition to examining the gender performance of Lan Ping/Jiang Qing in three important periods, this article exposes the paradox of the male-constructed gender discourses by exploring how the criticism she met with is deeply rooted in patriarchal conceptions of gender. Finally, this article looks at how Lan Ping/Jiang Qing, rather than being a passive object of gender discourses, to varying degrees participated in and manipulated the construction of contemporary gender discourses.起始頁-結束頁：77-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2014.34.7701篇名：傳播拉丁美洲「社會主義」－委內瑞拉承先啟後並列篇名：Communicating Latin American 'Socialism' Venezuela's Inheritance and Extension作者：馮建三(Chien-San Feng)關鍵字：委內瑞拉;社會主義;古巴;拉丁美洲;大眾媒體;紐約時報;Venezuela;socialism;Cuba;Latin America;mass media;The New York Times期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014中文摘要：委內瑞拉率拉丁美洲政治之先，1999年向左轉，2005年首度宣告其建設綱領是「二十一世紀社會主義」，智利之後，議會社會主義再次出現；古巴之外，拉美社會主義重新得到發展的機會。本文首先勾勒拉美的六十年左翼政權梗概，尤其是查維茲崛起後迄今的拉美路徑。其次，作者鋪陳這些國家的表現，凸顯最能彰顯社會主義特徵的經濟成果之分配及其成長，古巴而特別是委內瑞拉得到較多介紹與討論，並對委內瑞拉在草根參與政治及其國際視野與實踐，亦予重點提示，藉以表明左翼的建設並不只是以經濟為斷。惟古、委與拉美左翼所突出的社會主義路線，僅只是資本主義海洋的島嶼，拉美進步政權的在野保守集團多有美國作為奧援，致使拉美左翼的發展除了必須面對選舉考驗，另得防範與還擊內外右翼路線的肆意攻訐與破壞，特別是委內瑞拉反對勢力與傳媒（曾有的密切）結合程度，世所罕見。就此理解，紐約時報為主的海外傳媒對委內瑞拉的再現，不只涉及傳媒報導真實或評論公正與否，亦且展現了跨國力量對於新興社會主義的火苗之態度。文末總結並提問中國與委內瑞拉等國的關係。英文摘要：With Hugo Chavez's winning the Presidential election in late 1998, Venezuela made the first left-turn politics in Latin America and has since joined by many a countries in this region. In 2005 Chavez proclaimed that '21stcentury socialism' is the ideal guiding his politics. For the first time after Chile's coup, 'socialism' is again put back into the political agenda and has created new spaces for Latin Americans to develop her visions of socialism in addition to Cuba's. Having outlined the checkered path that Ibero-American socialists have undergone during the past six decades, this essay turns to evaluate current left regimes' performances. The author emphasizes in particular Venezuela's economic records and her social programmes in this century, in the meantime her participatory politics and internationalism practices are noted so that socialism will not be unduly interpreted in restricted economic ascepts. Though by no means satisfactory, Venezuela has nonetheless had commendable achievements. And yet, Venezuela is just an island moving toward socialism, the capitalist ocean will take and manufacture every opportunity to flood and drown these efforts. To challenge and sabotage the Bolivarian Revolution, Venezuela's opposition forces have aligned themselves to wage media and economic wars agains Chavistas, with substantial support provided by the US. As such, Venezuela's revolution as portrayed in the international media, the New York Times as one key example analysed, must have significant political implications. It demonstrates how transnational capitalist forces perceive or wish to put out this emerging socialist flame. The author summarizes and concludes the paper by raising a question relating China to Venezuela.起始頁-結束頁：1-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：地方文化資產保存運動的共識動員分析－以苗栗護窯運動為借鏡並列篇名：A Consensus Mobilization Analysis of Local Cultural Heritage Preservation Movement-A Case Study of the Protection Movement of the Brick Kilns in Miao Li作者：吳翠松(Tsui-Sung Wu);吳季昕(Chi-Hsin Wu)關鍵字：護窯運動;共識動員;地方文化資產保存運動;地方社會運動;構框;苗栗縣政府;the protection movement of the Brick Kilns;consensus mobilization;local cultural heritage preservation movement;local social movement;framing;MiaoLi County Government期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文欲以苗栗護窯運動為釋例，探討目前台灣文化情境下，地方文資保存運動者在建構認同的過程中，通常提出什麼論述、行動及儀式以形成集體共識？地方政府又是透過何種機制與論述去消解社運者欲喚起的共識認同？窯盟的共識動員過程，又在哪些地方出了問題？研究結果發現，在拆除古窯前的論述構框交鋒部分，窯盟主打三座窯（包仔窯、四方窯和八卦窯）的稀有性，並籲請苗栗縣政府在原預定的高鐵興建區內成立古窯人文生態博物館，以創造文化觀光雙贏局面。縣府則以審議委員會決議「窯不具稀有性」與辦理都市計畫變更將嚴重影響高鐵苗栗站的「開發」時程反應；在拆窯後，窯盟將論述構框在地方與中央相關官員的究責與質疑文資審議機制的缺失，並要求「原址保留」地下煙道，重建古窯；縣府則強調一切「依法行政」，並依事後補正的審議委員會議決議，將地下煙道「移地」保存。綜觀來看，窯盟共識動員過於強調理性認知層次，缺乏感性情緒層次，難創造動員潛力，另過於重視拆除古窯的究責，缺乏在地互動與議題結合，致使在地民眾投入度不高，再加上文化保存議題本身的理想性，難以製造一般民眾利益參與的誘因，而縣府拆窯迅速，造成後續目標變動與無專業解決方案，亦是造成此文化保存運動難以動員的原因之一。英文摘要：This article tried to use the Protection Movement of the Brick Kilns in MiaoLi to be an example to explore the respective consensus mobilization process for actor of local cultural heritage preservation movement and Local Government in contemporary Taiwan situation. In this study, we adopt text analysis and interview to be research methods. We analyze 50 news reports, relative government documents and interview 13 participamts of the Protection Movement of Brick Kilins. For analyzing convenience, the whole protection movement of the Brick Kilns was divided into two different phase-before and after demolition. The results showed that before the demolition of the Kilns, the discourse framing of the association for the Protection Movement of the Brick Kilns was focused on the rarity of the Kiln, and call on government to establish the Kiln Museum of human ecology in order to create a win-win situation; then MioLi County Government stressed the Kiln is not a rare cultural heritage through Resolution of the of Cultural Heritage Committee, and the changes of urban planning process will seriously affect the ”developmental” schedule of highspeed rail MiaoLi station. After demolition of the kiln, kiln Association's discourse framed on the illegal and responsibility of the local and central government and appealed to reserve the underground flue pipes according their original place; MioLi County Government stressed that they are the ”administration according to law”, and moved the underground flue pipes to other place. In short, it is too emphasized the rational cognitive level and lacked of emotional level of discourse framing for the Kiln Association in mobilizing consensus to difficult to attract participants; and lack in interactive or combination of issues with local affair , resulting in the low sense of involvement for local people; in addition that kiln body was demolition too quickly by the MioLi County Government to react immediately, all of these were the reasons of failure for this cultural preservation movement.起始頁-結束頁：63-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：民主作為一種治理的藝術－知識、技藝與主體化並列篇名：Democracy as an Art of Government-Knowledge, Technique and Subjectification作者：吳彥明(Yen-Ming Wu)關鍵字：民主;治理性;知識;技藝;主體化;democracy;governmentality;knowledge;technique;subjectification期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014中文摘要：傅柯一系列的權力概念，例如知識、規訓、維安、佈署、治理性、主體化，不應僅侷限於性／別、醫學、軍事、殖民體制等這些形式上比較負面的討論，權力經常狡猾地介入與隱藏於我們標示為正面意義的人事物之中，「民主」就是一個免疫的例子。我將著重於「民主作為一種治理的藝術」這個面向，將民主視為一種由知識、技藝與主體化所構成「民主複合體」（democratic complex）：首先，民主不只是一種政治菁英擘劃的政治議程，它更是一種確立、劃界與定義如何思考民主的專家／知識體系。其次，民主不只是一種文化，更是一種由治理技藝打造的技術物，它既是治理的手段也是治理的目的。最後，與其說民主的正當性基礎是公民，我們必須將民主視為一種將人民轉化為民主主體的權力投資。英文摘要：The critical concepts in Foucault's oeuvre, like savoir, discipline, police, deployment, governmentality and subjectification, are usually applied to the analysis of gender, medicine, military or colonial apparatus. Inevitably, however, power insinuate into a variety of fields we labeled as positive. Democracy is indeed the example. In this article, the author tries to elaborate democracy as an art of government, which means democracy is a democratic complex constitued by knowledge, technique and subjectification. First, rather than as the political agenda set by political elites, we should take democracy as the forms of knowledge formulated by expertise that valorize, delimit and certificate the problematics of democracy. Second, more than delineates it as culture, we suppose democracy as an artifact fabricated by governmental techniques. Last, but not least, citizens are more as the democratic subjects invested by democracy than as the legitimacy of democracy.起始頁-結束頁：111-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：自我，尋繹與民族誌並列篇名：Self, Inquiry and Ethnography作者：張少強(Siu-Keung Cheung)關鍵字：知識;身體;理解;反省性;田野研究;Knowledge;body;understanding;reflexivity;fieldwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014中文摘要：追隨反省性的知識論理念，重檢民族誌的尋繹基礎，本文將以自述方式把筆者的民族誌研究經歷變成研究主題來加以探討。透過自我省思，本文嘗試穿過昔日實證主義的客觀迷思和當今後現代主義的虛無轉向，指出自我可以成為切要的研究主動力（agency），田野研究實屬研究者得以跨越「我－他」差異的有效途徑，既以心省思，也以四肢五官，進行有真實體會的社會探尋。英文摘要：This article offers a self-reflection upon a field research in order to advance epistemological and methodological insights for ethnographic practice. Beginning with a critical review of the positivist legacy and postmodern turn, the discussion points to the making of ethnographic self into a pertinent agent in conducting social inquiry. This article at the end demonstrates that field research is of a unique strength for researcher to transcend the self-other dichotomy in understanding culture not only by dialogical communication, but also vicariously empathy from mind and body experience.起始頁-結束頁：175-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：原住民族健康問題的形成－建構新批判論述並列篇名：The Making of the Health Problem of Indigenous Peoples Constructing New Critical Discourse作者：陳美霞(Meei-Shia Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：203-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：世界及台灣原住民族健康問題－歷史及政治經濟學的視野並列篇名：The Health Problem of Indigenous Peoples in the World and in Taiwan-A Historical and Political-economy Perspective作者：陳美霞(Meei-Shia Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：209-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：台灣原住民族飲酒相關健康問題的政治經濟分析並列篇名：The Political Economy of the Indigenous People's Drinking-related Health Problems in Taiwan作者：陳慈立(Tzu-Li Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：247-282資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：台灣原住民族結核病問題的歷史分析並列篇名：A Historical Analysis of the Tuberculosis Problem among the Indigenous People in Taiwan作者：高瑋蘋(Wei-Ping Kao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：97期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：283-314資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：跨國草根移工運動的形成：香港「亞洲移工協調會」案例研究並列篇名：The Making of a Transnational Grassroots Migrant Movement-A Case Study of Hong Kong's Asian Migrants' Coordinating Body作者：夏曉鵑(Hsiao-Chuan Hsia)關鍵字：跨國主義;移工運動;草根組織;草工移工運動;亞洲移工協調會;transnationalism;migrant movement;grassroots organizations;grassroots migrant movement;Asian Migrants Coordinating Body期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014中文摘要：近幾年來，資本主義全球化快速擴張，國際移工的相關學術研究也顯得日形重要。這些研究除了呈現出全球化如何增強勞工遷徙的程度之外，也描述了移工們的生活是如何受到全球化的劇烈影響。然而，少有研究紀錄移工如何彼此結合對抗資本主義全球化。藉由不同國家草根移工組織的連結，移工已經創造出一種由下而上的跨國主義，積極地挑戰資本主義全球化。本文鎖定香港的「亞洲移工協調會」（Asian Migrants' Coordinating Body, AMCB），分析草根移工組織如何跨越國族的疆界，共同對抗資本主義全球化。大部分將香港視為「跨國行動主義據點」（site of transnational activism）的研究都忽略了草根移工組織的重要性，以及他們與其他移工NGO組織的區隔。「亞洲移工協調會」之所以特別有趣而重要，因為它不僅是第一個來自亞洲不同國家移工的結盟，更是不同亞洲國家的「草根」移工組織的結盟。藉由研究「亞洲移工協調會」，本文分析來自包括菲律賓、印尼、泰國、尼泊爾與斯里蘭卡等不同亞洲國家的移工是如何跨越國族、種族和性別的藩籬而一起工作。也將探討「亞洲移工協調會」如何形成？已達成哪些重要成果？是由哪些因素促成？與其它NGO的關係為何？對於草根跨國主義的推展又具有什麼樣的啟示？英文摘要：As capitalist globalization has intensified in recent years, academic studies of international labor migration have gained significance. Studies have shown how globalization has increased the extent of labor migration and how the lives of migrant workers have been greatly affected by globalization. However, few studies have documented how migrant workers collectively resist capitalist globalization. By collaborating with migrants from different countries, migrant workers have created transnationalism from below, vehemently challenging capitalist globalization. This article focuses on the development of the Asia Migrants Coordinating Body (AMCB) in Hong Kong to illustrate how grassroots migrant organizations resist capitalist globalization. Most studies of Hong Kong as a ”site of transnational activism” overlook the unique importance of grassroots migrant organizations and their distinctions from migrant NGOs. The AMCB is particularly interesting and important not only because it is the first coalition of migrants from different Asian countries but also because it is a coalition of grassroots migrant organizations from different nationalities. By focusing on the Asian Migrants Coordinating Body, this article analyzes how migrant workers from different Asian countries, including the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, Nepal and Sri Lanka, have worked together across nation-state, racial, and gender boundaries. This article asks how AMCB originated; what AMCB has achieved; what makes AMCB possible; and what are the lessons of grassroots transnationalism demonstrated by AMCB and its relationship with NGOS.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：門裡門外誰照顧、平價普及路迢迢？臺灣嬰兒照顧政策之體制內涵分析並列篇名：The Analysis of Infant Care Policies and Debates in Taiwan作者：王舒芸(Shu-Yung Wang)關鍵字：兒童照顧;去家庭化;育嬰假;育兒津貼;托育政策;child care;de-familialization;parental leave;child care subsidies;child care policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014中文摘要：福利國家在發展的黃金時期，主要透過所得移轉與再分配的策略，達到去商品化與去階層化的目標。但在過去兩個世紀裡，各國經歷重要的社會與人口變遷，無疑帶來新的挑戰，其中低生育率不僅深化高扶養比的社會風險，也對勞動市場產生質變。父母親的「養家者」角色及「照顧者」角色，成為重要分析與介入面向。據此，在討論「兒童照顧責任去家庭化」時，必須清楚區分「兒童照顧責任」並非單一面向，金錢（兒童津貼制度）、時間（親職假）、及服務（托育體系），構成三大軸心內涵。但各國對不同政策之偏好與組合，呈現了「去」家庭化與「再」家庭化兩種截然不同的影響方向。因此各國採取了不同比重的政策組合，於焉其適用對象、所得替代水準、給付期限、財務可負擔性、服務品質與可近性，均有相當的差異存在。台灣嬰兒照顧政策歷經幾番轉折，在2001年前幾乎被視為家庭責任，殘補是主要精神，因此補助對象均為中低收入戶，是典型「隱含的家庭主義」；直到2001年保母系統成立、2002年育嬰假立法通過，政府才開始分擔一般家庭的照顧責任，且去／再家庭化的路徑在此階段同時萌芽，但因缺乏財務補貼，因此受益人口有限；直到2008年至2011年，保母托育費用補助及育嬰留職津貼上路，正式邁向「選擇性家庭主義」，兩者均強調工作福利的特色，家長可在勞動參與及家庭照顧間較自由的移動。但這特色在2012年因未就業家長育兒津貼、及去管制化的保母補助新制，轉向為「明顯的家庭主義」。整體而言台灣0－未滿兩歲的照顧制度在2012年塵埃落定，在受益對象上看似從殘補擴張到每種照顧者都有國家政策支持，在體制建構上踏出重要的一步，且給付金額也在各方案中力求等值均一，看似重視公平與支持家庭選擇。但本文指出，因制度設計及文化價值的限制，使得普及平價的公共性目標看來路迢迢：在制度層次，雖去／再家庭化的策略並存，但過於倚賴提倡消費者自主的津貼，給付水準又低，無法保障實際照顧者的經濟自主，缺乏去商品化的效果；家外照顧的收費仍奉行自由市場邏輯，未實施定價機制，削弱去家庭化的誘因強度。再者，文化層次上，受限於競爭論述、對政府提供的服務不夠信任、未處理密集母職的迷思、與家戶內性別分工不均等文化與價值議題，也阻礙了制度分擔家庭照顧責任的程度。英文摘要：East Asian countries present as exemplary cases of male breadwinner welfare model in the sense that childcare is always considered as family responsibility. However, an increase in female labor force participation as well as dramatic declining fertility rate simultaneous occurred during the past decades, thus posed challenges in most East Asian countries in general, and specifically for Taiwan, as the fertility rate is one of the lowest in the world recently. As a result, childcare policies have been undergone transformation and reconfiguration. Accordingly, whether these newly policy developments represent the ideal and institutional break with the male breadwinner model becomes the heated debate. This paper aims to identify what are the major features of childcare expansion? What are the policy discourses and debates regarding the ideal role of state in terms of governing, funding, and provision? And what kinds of strategies government actually or intends to implement in order to creating a conducive environment for childbearing? The preliminary results shows that, though with more financial investment and regulation from government, the structure of care provision, and caring ideology still remains unchanged. However, the core feature of infant care is strong re-familiailsm and limited liberal de-familialism. In terms of the changing role of government, though increasing intervention and investment in childcare, major strategy is subsidy-oriented, in the discourse of market mechanism and parental choice.起始頁-結束頁：49-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：中國學的軌跡和批判性中國研究：以韓國為例並列篇名：Trajectories in Chinese Studies and Critical Research on China in Korea作者：白永瑞(Youngseo Baik)關鍵字：北學;支那學;漢學;中國學;作為運動;制度的學問;全球本土學;Bukhak;Sinagaku;Sinology;Chinese studies as an institution/a movement ”Glocalogy”期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文試圖展望以「作為運動的中國學」為動力而貫通學術制度內外的批判性中國研究的（不）可能性。批判性中國研究應該具備以下幾個條件：第一，具有分科橫斷性指向；第二，要超越將古典中國與現實中國進行分離的二分法；第三，在與當代的中國現實和主流思維體系保持批判性距離的同時，還將它當作重構我們對現實生活社會認識的契機；最後，要解構中國中心主義。為了找到具備以上條件的中國學的可能性，本文主要考察了人文學領域中的韓國中國學的譜系。結果發現「作為制度的中國學」和「作為運動的中國學」經過相互競爭、相互滲透的動態性過程，積累了我們對中國的認識，而且作為其一部分，批判性中國研究應對著時代的變化，斷斷續續地延續著。朝鮮王朝的學者們在生產現實中國相關知識的同時，重新解釋中國古典並重構既有價值觀和世界觀；日本殖民時期，學者們在用科學方法將古典中國進行系統化的同時，並著眼於現代中國的文學運動，重新發現中國且將之視為借鏡自主解析朝鮮；冷戰時期的學者們也在制度內外辛苦積累了探索中國的經驗。進行批判性中國研究就是讓這些人文學遺產、成果和經驗得以新貌重新復活。最後，本文在展望批判性中國研究的方向時，提出了它該具備的條件及作為其基礎的認識框架的兩個方向（雙重性周邊的視角和全球本土學）。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the (im)possibility of conducting critical Chinese studies and research which fully encompass the requirements inside and outside an academic institution when driven by the concept of ”Chinese studies as a movement”. Critical Chinese studies need to fulfill the following requirements:(1) be transdisciplinary; (2) overcome the dividing dichotomy of the subject into classical China and modern China; (3) keep some critical distance from the mainstream way of thinking and the reality of modern China while reconstructing the perception of the society we live in; and (4) deconstruct the Sinocentrism. To find if such studies are viable, the history of Chinese studies in Korea was examined with a focus on the humanities. As a result, we examined the accumulation of our knowledge of China during the dynamic process in which ”Chinese studies as an institution” and ”Chinese studies as a movement” competed with and affected each other. As part of this, it was also discovered that the critical Chinese studies was sustained, albeit intermittently, in response to the changes of time. There are three main points to consider. The heritage left behind by the scholars of Joseon who produced the knowledge on contemporary China and re-interpreted classical China to reconstruct the existing values and viewpoints of the world; the experience of systematically organizing classical China using a scientific approach under the rule of colonial Japan while, inspired by the literary movement of contemporary China, rediscovering China and using that perspective as a mirror to look at Korea; and the experience that our forerunners toiled to gain inside and outside the institution in the Cold War era-all of these come together to make up today's critical Chinese studies. Lastly, the paper looked at the future direction that critical Chinese studies should take and proposed two directions (a dual peripheral perspective and ”Glocalogy”) that should form the basis of the epistemic framework of our critical Chinese studies.起始頁-結束頁：95-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：台灣兒少保護的變革：兼論高風險家庭服務方案的影響並列篇名：Changing Child Protection in Taiwan-The Impacts of Project for Families at High-Risk作者：余漢儀(Annie Hon-Yei Yu)關鍵字：次級預防;委託非營利機構;兒童保護;高風險家庭方案;secondary prevention;contracted NPO;child protection;project for Families at High-Risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014中文摘要：理解在2004年年底開始的連串創新家庭服務方案（例如高風險家庭關懷服務、弱勢家庭兒少緊急生活扶助、及兒少保人力補充等）的執行動態，對台灣兒少保護運動的走向具有政策及實務意涵。研究提問有三：（1）初期是那些非營利組織受委託執行「高風險家庭處遇」？機構數量又有何變化？它們與政府互動的經驗如何？（2）中央、縣市政府、及受委託民間機構三方對方案目標解讀有否不同？又是透過怎樣的機制建立服務共識？（3）高風險家庭服務與其他方案互動，如何影響既有的兒少保護體系？透過各縣市政府及民間單位承辦人員的問卷填寫、及六場焦點座談的資料分析，發現高風險家庭方案除了讓台灣三大兒福機構在服務版圖有所變化外，也門戶大開寧爛毋缺，打破實務界「沒有三兩下不敢做兒保」的傳統。中央利多但核銷不易，有縣市政府自編預算支付民間單位必要成本，合約單位雖可新聘社工人力開拓服務，但較具專業規模之機構為維護品質，得自行吸納進用資深人員及加聘督導的額外成本。高風險方案究屬兒少保預防或後送服務？公私部門各自表述，部分縣市政府為出清兒少保舊案將之混為一談，以致高風險方案與「家庭維繫」、「追蹤輔導」服務界線模糊成為替代。分區巡迴督導不失為架構服務共識的機制，也有利於中央取回界定方案的主導權，而縣市的聯繫會報平台或有利於各民間委託機構的同儕督導。很難預測它對兒少保護次級預防體系的發展是否有利。做為中央主管機構，最後既能重掌方案界定權、又能讓縣市政府額外自編預算配合、也結合民間資源，所以兒童局應為此番兒少保服務變革風潮的最大贏家。英文摘要：To understand the implementation dynamics of some innovative projects since 2004-Project for Families at High-Risk, the Emergency Relief Project, and the Child Protection Manpower Enhancement, has practice as well as policy implications for child protection in Taiwan. Three research questions have been raised: (1) What kind of NPOs would get contracts to carry out the High-risk Family project? What were their experiences and numbers of growth? (2)Have the Child Welfare Bureau, county governments, and the local contracted agencies perceived the goals of the High-Risk Family Project differently? And if it was so, why? (3) How did the project for high-risk families have impacts on the existing child protection system? Through e-mailed questionnaire and focus groups part-taken by the representatives from the contracted NPOs and local authorities, it was found that many new players had joined in the High-risk Family Projects beside the service territory changes of three privileged child welfare agencies. With major funding from the Child Welfare Bureau, some NPOs also got compensation from the local governments, and paid extra personnel salaries at their own cost when necessary. It was concluded that the High-Risk Family Project has substituted for the existing child protection services which was basically a tertiary preventive model, while the former, as a secondary preventive service, was originally designed for families with child care concerns. Regional supervision meetings served as a mechanism to construct service consensus among different contracted NPOs helped the Child Welfare Bureau redefine the Project for Families at High-Risk. The administrative coordination meetings held regularly by the local authorities provided peer supervision opportunities for the contracted agencies. It's hard to predict the contribution of the High-Risk Family Project to the secondary prevention of child protection. As the head of national child welfare, by inducing the local governmental budgets plus resources from the contracted NPOs, the Child Welfare Bureau also had the final say about the Project for Families at High- Risk, no doubt the winner in this child protection service ethos.起始頁-結束頁：137-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：基因當然可能擴散而稀薄分布：回應陳叔倬對〈沒有唐山媽？拓墾時期臺灣原漢通婚之研究〉的評論並列篇名：A Rejoinder to Shu-Juo Chen's-Is the Idea 'Genes Spread Wide but Thin' Correct? In Response to Huang's Critiques Entitled ”No Grandmother from Mainland China? Intermarriage between Han and Indigene during the Settlement Era of Taiwan作者：黃樹仁(Su-Jen Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：175-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：血緣可能擴散而稀薄，基因不可能：再回應黃樹仁〈基因當然可能擴散而稀薄分佈〉並列篇名：Blood Can Spread Wide and Thin, Genes Cannot-In Response to Huang's Rejoinder作者：陳叔倬(Shu-Juo Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：185-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：「原」源不絕：反思原住民青年組織與行動並列篇名：Reflections on Indigenous Youth Organizing and Action作者：夏曉鵑(Hsiao-Chuan Hsia)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：201-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：我參與原住民青年組織與行動的經驗並列篇名：A Self-reflection of My Experience of Indigenous Youth Organization and Social Participation作者：官大偉(Da-Wei Kuan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：205-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：部落共同經營與青年組織並列篇名：Co-management of the Indigenous Tribe and the Youth Organization作者：吳明季(Falahan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：215-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：社會運動與在地培力並列篇名：Societal Movement and Local Empowerment作者：方喜恩(Besu Piyas)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：225-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：一輩子的尋根之旅：一個排灣族青年學子的運動與組織反省並列篇名：Root-seeking Tour of My Life-The Self-reflection of a Paiwan Tribe Student作者：目尼．杜達利茂(Muni Dodalimau)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：237-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：最最遙遠的路並列篇名：Journey Home作者：潘宗儒(Zong-Ru Pan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：96期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：247-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：主編的話作者：蘇國賢期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：2-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.i2篇名：基因科學與認同政治：原住民DNA、台灣人起源與生物多元文化主義的興起並列篇名：Genetic Science and Identity Politics: Indigenous DNA, the Origin of the Taiwanese, and the Emergence of Bio-multiculturalism作者：蔡友月(Yu-Yueh Tsai)關鍵字：基因;認同政治;起源;原住民;生物醫學化;genetic origin;identity politics;indigenous blood;biomedicalization;co-production期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014中文摘要：在全球化過程中，當代基因科技、知識與在地的認同政治之間，經常形成所謂「生物政治典範」的發展。台灣的生物政治典範，不僅牽涉種族／族群的爭議，也與國族認同緊密相連。九○年代解嚴之後，台灣祖先起源與台灣人基因組成的科學研究逐漸浮現，其知識旨趣在於指出台灣人血源上的多樣混雜，以及擁有原本被鄙視的原住民血統的可貴，這也展現了二十世紀末全球認同政治的普遍特色之一，亦即一種企圖去殖民的「反論述」性質。本文採用「共構」(co-production)的取徑，進一步從科學知識生產的「內滲」與「外溢」兩面向分析，內文指出台灣祖先起源與組成的科學知識生產，以及在實驗室外被消費及造成的社會後果，都鑲嵌在台灣社會認同政治（四大族群、多元文化主義與台灣民族主義的出現）中，深受其中人群分類認同與差異形構過程的影響。實驗室內生產的科學知識以及科學家之間的爭議，透過九年代以來的族群學術研討會、科學專業期刊、媒體報導、公共輿論等社會機制，逐漸從科學專業圈外溢而持續發酵，造成相當的社會後果，是「生物醫學的族群化」與「族群的生物醫學化」的重要現象之一。最後，本文從「反身性的生物社會性」立場，強調社會學家應探究當代社會認同「生物醫學化」的科學知識生產過程，科學家也必須對這種過程進行方法論上的反省。英文摘要：In the global age, the close connection of genetic knowledge and technology with local identity politics has stimulated the development of a ”biopolitical paradigm.” In Taiwan, the biopolitical paradigm shaped by the intimate relationship between the development of biomedicine and identity politics has involved not only racial/ethnic issues but also national identity. Scientific research regarding the ancestral origins and genetic attributes of the Taiwanese emerged in the early 1990s after the rule by martial law ended. This research has focused on mixed-blood hybridity of the Taiwanese and the percentage of indigenous blood in their genes. This research interest represents a common feature of global identity politics since the late twentieth century: a counter-discourse shaped by de-colonialism. Based on Sheila Jasanoff's idea of ”co-production,” this article explores the ”inward invasion” of social factors into the production of scientific knowledge and the ”outward spillover” of scientific knowledge to the society. It analyzes how the production and consumption of scientific knowledge about the ancestral origins and genetic attributes of the Taiwanese have been embedded in local identity politics, including the emergence of the ”four great ethnic groups” categorization, multiculturalism, and Taiwanese nationalism, and shaped by the identity and difference based on specific human classification. The article also examines how the scientific knowledge produced in the lab has spilled over to the Taiwanese society in general through conferences, journals, media, and the like since the 1990s and brought about significant social impacts as part of the phenomena of the ”ethnicization of biomedicine” and the ”biomedicalization of ethnicity.” Taking the perspective of ”reflexive biosociality,” the article concludes with the suggestion that it is necessary for sociologists to investigate the contemporary production of biomedicalized knowledge about identity and that scientists themselves should take a reflexive view of this production methodologically.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.13篇名：彈性病況：失智家庭的照顧軌跡並列篇名：Flexible Patienthood: Care Trajectory in Family Living with Dementia作者：洪晨碩(Chen-Shuo Hong)關鍵字：失智症;照顧;不確定性;軌跡;dementia;care;uncertainty;trajectory期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014中文摘要：作為一個有診斷類別，卻無有效治療方法的病症類型，失智症如何影響失智家庭的日常生活？本研究利用家屬訪談與家庭參與觀察，以及相關檔案資料，分析失智家庭的照顧軌跡，探索醫療與照顧的不確定性如何影響失智家庭的照顧生活，以及家庭成員如何因應這些不確定性。本文發現，失智家庭會利用多樣化的照顧工作，管理失智照顧軌跡中的隨遇性與協商失智者的多重身分。這種彈性變動的協商狀態，本文稱作「彈性病況」。此概念除了強調不確定性的多樣化，凸顯出時間軸中各種照顧工作與病人身分的安排與調整，更嘗試連結既有的社會結構，如藥物補助政策、對成年人的角色期待與疾病污名。相較過去失智研究把失智者與家屬當成疾病的受害者，本文從照顧軌跡的角度，呈現患者與家屬的積極行動，同時挑戰將失智者化約為疾病載體與無行為能力者的童稚化策略。英文摘要：This study explores the effects of dementia on its care trajectory in the family setting. Based on in-depth interviews of family caregivers, naturalistic observations, and archival data, the present study examines uncertainty in medical care and how people with dementia and their family caregivers deal with it. This study finds that patients and caregivers tend to adopt various strategies to deal with the contingencies incurred by dementia and negotiate between the patient's multiple identities at different stages of care trajectories. I refer to this dynamic process of on-going negotiation as ”flexible patienthood,” which provides a unique lens for analyzing the handling of contingency with regards to work arrangements and identity shifts. Flexible patienthood is constrained by social structures, such as the drug reimbursement system, socially assigned roles, and the stigmatization of dementia. In contrast to previous studies, which regard people with dementia and their family caregivers as ”victims of dementia,” this study highlights their proactive participation and challenges the infantilization of people with dementia.起始頁-結束頁：59-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.594篇名：文化中介者的中介與介入：出版產業創意生產的內在矛盾並列篇名：The Mediation and Intervention of the Cultural Intermediaries: The Contradiction in the Creativity Production of the Publishing Industry作者：李令儀(Ling-Yee Lee)關鍵字：圖書出版產業;創意產業;文化中介者;不確定性;publishing industry;creative industry;cultural intermediaries;uncertainty期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文視圖書出版業為創意產業的一環，探討文化中介者(cultural intermediaries)在出版場域中實作的多重面向。文化中介者連結了原創作者和消費者，並因所處的把關位置，和創作者有不對稱的權力關係；但其串連文化生產與市場的中介位置，也讓他們不時須在文化使命與市場獲利間有所權衡。本文運用田野調查資料，探究文化中介者在創意產出的創作及後製兩階段所扮演的角色，並嘗試建構「編輯類型學」，做為研究台灣出版業文化中介者的理念型。本研究發現，這一文化生產場域出現「典範轉移」現象：文化中介者和創作者的合作關係，從發掘、篩選創意的守門人模型，逐漸轉變為參與創意發想的介入模式，甚而有中介者取代創作者成為創意發想主體，形成反客為主的內在矛盾。英文摘要：Cultural intermediaries are cultural workers mediating cultural production and consuming public. This article explores the multiplicity of practices of the cultural intermediaries in publishing industry in Taiwan. As gatekeepers in the publishing field, publishers and editors have antagonistic cooperation with authors; as mediators between creativity production and book market, they have to make trade-off between cultural value and market profit. Based on field work and interviews, the paper investigated the roles of cultural intermediaries in creation and reproduction stages of book production, and constructed a typology of editors in Taiwan. I found that the role model of the editors has been transforming from ”gatekeeper model” selecting and filtering creative works to the ”producer model” involving and intervening in the creative stage. There contains a contradiction in the latter model as the intermediaries substituted authors and became creative subjects.起始頁-結束頁：97-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.975篇名：Hollowing Out or Sustaining? Taiwan's SME Network-based Production System Reconsidered, 1996-2011並列篇名：台灣奇蹟的幻滅？重探台灣中小企業的網絡式生產體系，1996-2011作者：謝斐宇(Michelle Fei-Yu Hsieh)關鍵字：網絡式生產組織;經濟發展;附加價值;代工;產業升級;SME network production;decentralized industrial structure;flexible specialization;innovation;industrial transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014中文摘要：關於台灣的產業轉型，目前的主流論述是：台灣產業結構正轉向以集中化與大公司支配為特徵的現代資本主義形式，過去創造台灣奇蹟的中小企業網絡生產體系將式微。為檢驗上述命題，本文使用1996年到2011 年的工商普查資料檔，分析製造業各部門後發現：(1)大企業主宰台灣產業的命題是根據資訊工業的發展經驗所提出，其關注生產最終產品的廠商，卻忽略了對附加價值有相當貢獻的各式零件廠商。(2)以附加價值而論，以中小企業網絡生產模式為主的機械與金屬部門對台灣經濟的貢獻，實際上與資訊產業部門（扣除半導體產業）相去無幾。(3)中小企業並沒有因為資訊產業（高科技產業）的興起而空洞化。本文接著討論驅動中小企業體系的機制，包括零件廠商跨部門的技術交流與學習；公共研發機構在分散化生產體系中扮演協調的角色。最後，本文修正產業發展模式的概念，並討論相關政策意涵。英文摘要：The dominant view of Taiwan's industrial transformation suggests scaling up and growing concentration as the strategies for surviving global competition, thus implying the demise of the SME system. Through a detailed sectoral analysis of Taiwan's manufacturing industries during the 1996-2011 period, using industrial and commerce census data, this article examines two competing questions (1) whether a SME network-based production system is still viable in Taiwan, and (2) whether Taiwan's industrial structure is headed towards the modern industrial capitalism associated with increasing concentration and dominance by large corporations. The detailed breakdown by sectoral analysis suggests the following. (1) The Information Technology (IT) sector may have skewed our understanding of the overall performance of Taiwan's manufacturing sector. The growth-driven approach, which centers on the performance of individual firms making the final product, has overlooked the value-added by independent parts makers. (2) The contribution of the machinery and metal sector (mostly SMEs) to Taiwan's economy, measured by value-added, is similar to that of the IT sector (with the exception of the semiconductor industry) on which current generalizations on the rise of large firms draw. (3) Lastly, contrary to the claim of the hollowing out of SMEs with the rise of the IT sector and that Chandlerian modern large corporations prevail, the findings reveal that the decentralized production system in which a system of SMEs and the networks among them for coordinating economic activities continues to thrive. The article then discusses the mechanisms that drive the SME system, namely, the overlooked role of parts makers and their cross-sectoral, skills- based learning, and the role of para-public institutions in coordinating a decentralized industrial system. It concludes with a reconceptualization of the paths to prosperity and policy implications.起始頁-結束頁：149-191資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.1496篇名：一本呈現主體運動經驗的後解嚴民主民族誌：評《民主台灣：後威權時代的社會運動與文化政治》作者：陳瑞樺期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：193-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.1937篇名：告別戰爭，或告別革命？：評《戰爭與社會：理論、歷史、主體經驗》作者：萬毓澤期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：205-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.2058篇名：回應萬毓澤教授的評論（一）作者：朱元鴻期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：215-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.2159篇名：回應萬毓澤教授的評論（二）作者：汪宏倫期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：28期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：223-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.28.22310篇名：主編的話作者：蘇國賢期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：27期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：2-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.27.i11篇名：審議的不平等：台灣公民會議的言說互動並列篇名：Deliberative Inequality: Discursive Interactions in Taiwan's Citizen Conferences作者：林國明(Kuo-Ming Lin)關鍵字：審議民主;公民會議;公共領域;參與式民主;內容分析法;deliberative democracy;publicdeliberation;publicsphere;citizenparticipation;content analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：27期出版年：2014中文摘要：很多批評者認為，審議民主崇尚理性的言說模式，使得不擅說理社會弱勢群體無法平等、有效地參與審議的過程，批評者所指出的審議不平等是否真的存在？本文以台灣舉辦過的六場公民會議為案例，進行量化與質化分析，來檢證審議不平等的論題。本文根據審議民主理論，使用「發言時間」、「發言頻率」<U+4E36>「開啟議題」、「對話能力」、「說理」和「成為結論」六大面向來測量審議的不平等，並認為，由於程序主義的作用，不同背景的公民，進入公民會議這種程序引導的審議情境，大抵都能說理和影響結論。也就是說，審議不平等只存在於「發言時間」、「發言頻率」、「開啟議題」、「對話能力」四個面向。我進一步指出，這四個面向的不平等程度，是視議題性質而定的，本文認為，審議能力受到「情境知識」所影響；行動者的社會位置，塑造他們的生活經驗，使他們對特定的議題，有不同程度的了解和感受。因此，公民們的情境知識，會因議<U+9898>性質而不同；他們的審議能力，也就會因為議<U+9898>性質的不同而有所差異。英文摘要：Critics have said that the practice of deliberative democracy has not lived up to the normative standards of political equality, because members of socially disadvantaged groups often do not have opportunities toeffectively participate in deliberations. The paper uses data from six citizen conferences in Taiwan to empirically examine the thesis of deliberativeinequalities. I use six dimensions in discursiveinteractions to measure deliberativeinequalities: frequency and time of speech, dialogic capacity, initiating new topics, making rational arguments and influencingconclusions. I argue that because of procedural factors instituted to create the ideal situation of speech, deliberative inequalities are not significant in the dimensions of making rational arguments and influencing conclusions. In addition,inequities in four other dimensions of discursive interaction depend on the nature of issues under discussion. For less complex issues that have greater impacts on citizens' daily lives, most citizens have the situated knowledge needed to participate in discursive interactions. Thus, deliberative inequalities are not significant for these kinds of issues. The analyticresults confirm the arguments.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.27.112篇名：從「大陳義胞」到「大陳人」：社會類屬的生成、轉變與意義並列篇名：From ”Dachen Righteous Compatriots” to ”Dachen People”: The Formation and Transformation of a Social Category and Its Meaning作者：陳緯華(Wei-Hua Chen);張茂桂(Mau-Kuei Chang)關鍵字：大陳義胞;身分認同;類別化;認同化;象徵;Dachen Yibao;identity;categorization;identification;symbol;ritual期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：27期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以「類屬生成的辯證觀」為基礎，借用「社會類別化／群體認同化」這組分析性概念，討論歷史過程、文化與行動對於形塑身分認同的作用。本文首先說明1955年經由大陳撤退來台的大陳島居民先是回應了國家賦予的「大陳義胞」這一類屬，呼應1950年代至1970年代的國家戰爭體制，並在蔣中正生前與逝世後自發建立固定的「蔣公崇拜」儀式與象徵。接著解釋為何到1980年代後期，出現了大陳地區傳統信仰復興，以及「蔣公崇拜」至2000年開始退位的現象此種象徵意義的轉變，對應於「大陳義胞」類別從公共領域逐漸淡出，被「大陳人」的群體稱謂所取代的過程。透過「蔣公」與「大陳神明」這兩個有集體象徵意義的符號，本文分析了不同身分類屬對大陳人所具有的生存利益、社會尊嚴與生命意義上的意義。本文認為國家具有建構社會類屬的主宰性力量，而人群則透過儀式以及符號進行認同的建構來面對它，身分認同是一個持續建構的過程，大陳人先是努力將這種外部類屬建構成為自我認同的一部分，接著隨著外部認同環境的變遷，在其本身特殊的生存條件下，透過宗教與社群的集體力持續發展與追尋其身分認同。英文摘要：Based on the ”dialectical view of categorization and identification, and adopting a ”social categorization/group identification” set of concepts the article discusses the importance of historical process, culture, and agency in shaping people's identities through their traditions and making collective symbols. We suggest that residents of Da-chen islands, who were withdrawn and resettled in Taiwan in 1955 because of military operations responded favorably and positively to the war regime and the category of ”Dachen Yibao” (Dachen Righteous Compatriots) given by the State and the public in the 1950s and the 1970s. They even formed their own symbol for ”Chiang Lord Worship” and practice. We explain why there was a revival of collective interest in traditional Dachen beliefs in the mid-1980s, and why the Chiang Kai-shek Worship receded, especially after the year 2000. In the meantime we observe a gradualfading of the category of Dachen Yibao and its replacement with ”Dachen Ren (Dachen people) Through analyzing changing symbols-from the collective symbol of Chang Lord Worship to traditional symbols of hen belief we interpret the meanings, interests, and social dignities of different social categories and identifications. We submit that the state, as an external force, can easily create social categories, and it is the people who give meanings to the categories and develop their own identities through rituals and symbols recreating their own identities with religion and other social collective forces in relation to the external category because of environment and institutional changes that affect their existence and living conditions.起始頁-結束頁：51-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.27.5113篇名：做父母、做階級：親職敘事、教養實作與階級不平等並列篇名：Being Parents, Doing Class: Parenting Narratives, Childrearing Practice, and Class Inequality in Taiwan作者：藍佩嘉(Pei-Chia Lan)關鍵字：親職;教養;階級;慣習;教育;childrearing;childhood;social class;habitus;education期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：27期出版年：2014中文摘要：台灣的主流親職論述在西方理念影響下，近二十年來衍生明顯轉變。然而，不同階級位置的父母在近用文化資源時管道有所不均，不僅形塑他們教養方式的差異，也影響孩子在改革中教育體制裡的生命機會。透過對中產階級與勞工階級父母的深度訪談與家庭觀察，本文分析親職敘事與教養實作的階級差異。我贊同先前學者視教養為階級再生產機制的觀點，但反對將階級化約為給定的結構位置，或預設階級慣習的跨代延續。台灣個案凸顯了父母承自原生家庭的慣習可能透過反思而轉變，以及親職作為一個協商階級界線的社會場域。親職日常實作充滿了不確定與矛盾，包括教養腳本與親子互動之間的落差，以及家庭生活與學校期待之間的衝突。我也強調，中產階級與勞工階級父母都不是同質群體，在教養策略與實作上存在內部分歧。透過父母資本總量高低（含經濟、文化、社會與象徵資本），以及追求益品傾向（偏重競爭流動或自然發展）等兩條軸線，我建構出一個「親職場域」來分析做父母、同時也在做階級的劃界過程。英文摘要：The dominant repertoire of childrearing in Taiwan has greatly transformed under Western influences over the last two decades. Parents of different class backgrounds, however, have uneven access to relevant cultural resources; this not only shapes their varied styles of childrearing but also impacts their children's life chances in the changing educational environment. Through in-depth interviews and household observations, this paper compares middle-class and working-class parents in terms of their narratives of parenthood, parent-child interactive styles, and educational strategies. I criticize the literature on childrearing and class reproduction for reducing social class to dichotomous categories determined by economic structure; I also contest the assumption that class habitus continues across generations. The case of Taiwan shows that parents may change the habitus inherited from the family of origin through deliberate reflection and that parenting constitutes a social field of negotiating class boundaries. My research demonstrates ambiguities and contradictions in the everyday practice of parenting, including a gap between cultural scripts and parent- child interactions, and a clash between family life and school expectation. Neither the middle class nor the working class is a homogenous group without internal divides. Based on two coordinates-parents' volumes and composition of capitals (economic, cultural, social, and symbolic capitals) and their orientation toward the pursuit of ”goods” (prioritizing competitive mobility or natural development), I map a ”field of parenting” to analyze the process of boundary-making, in which parents are ”doing class” in everyday family life.起始頁-結束頁：97-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.27.9714篇名：新自由主義是什麼？三種理論觀點的比較研究並列篇名：What is Neoliberalism? A Comparative Analysis of Three Theoretical Perspectives作者：夏傳位(Chuan-Wei Hsia)關鍵字：新自由主義;調節學派;新制度主義;地理尺度;展演性;neoliberalism;Regulation School;neo-institutionalism;geographic scale;performativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：27期出版年：2014中文摘要：新自由主義引發許多學術爭議的一個主要來源，或許是因為它「千變萬化」：一方面不同立場與傳統的學術論述從各種角度去定義它；另一方面新自由主義在各個地區展現出完全不同的形式，甚至指涉迥異的對象。如果一個詞彙可以無節制地擴散指涉所有事物，那麼這個詞彙被認為用處不大，也是可以理解的。本文以「多樣性」(variety)作為問題意識，聚焦在三條主軸：馬克思主義政治經濟學、新制度主義(neo-institutionalism)以及晚近受到MichelCallon啟發從STS進路對市場的見解，既探討各種不同學術論述對新自由主義的不同理解，也探討如何理解新自由主義在世界各地不同的表現形式。本文認為一個較周全的新自由主義研究綱領必須掌握結構、制度、過程及行動四個面向。總體來看，我們或許可以將新自由主義看作是一種為了挽救積累危機而建構的規則體系或技術物，就實質內涵而言，包含了霸權計畫、市場制度、國家形式與市場展演性(performativity)等諸元素。英文摘要：One of the main controversies that surrounds academic discussions about neoliberalism may originate from its variegation. On the one hand, many conflicting theoretical perspectives have been mobilized to analyze it, on the other hand, neoliberalism denotes different things and embodies different forms in different places. So, it is understandable that many people feel this term carries little analytical weight. This article focuses on ”variety” as a problematic, tracing three main traditions: Marxian political economy, neo-institutionalism, and a Science and Technology Studies (STS) approach inspired by Michel Callon. While each tradition may penetrate some important facets of neoliberalization as a process, they fail to capture others. How can the ”varieties of neoliberalization” be understood? This article suggests that it is possible to attain a better understanding of neoliberalism if we grasp its four facets at the same time: structure, institution, process, and action. In sum, we may regard neoliberalism as an artifact that reacts to the crisis of world capitalism's accumulation, and its contents include hegemonic projects market institutions state forms, and market performativity.起始頁-結束頁：141-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.27.14115篇名：台灣及東亞青少年的成長歷程：評The Psychological Well-being of East Asian Youth作者：關秉寅期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：27期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：167-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2014.27.16701篇名：不動產特銷稅有效性之實證研究：對短期交易與所得的衝擊並列篇名：The Effectiveness of the Excise Tax on Real Estate Trades: Impact on Short-Term Trades and Income作者：屠美亞(Mia Twu);黃耀輝(Yo-Phy Huang)關鍵字：特銷稅;不動產短期交易;所得;財富;量能課稅;excise tax;short-term trade;income;wealth;ability to pay期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：台灣房市供過於求，但是房價自2003年起持續上漲，原因之一是台灣不動產交易的稅負太輕，以致於投資人在房市短進短出；持有的稅負也偏低，造成民眾囤房囤地。特銷稅自2011年6月實施後，各界所關注的重點之一，即特銷稅是否抑制了房屋投資（投機）的需求，以及特銷稅的納稅人是否是屬於高所得或高財富者。本研究實證結果發現房市的短期交易確實增加投資人的所得與財富，而特銷稅的實施明顯減少了短期交易與其交易所得，對高短期交易頻率者影響尤其顯著，同時特銷稅的繳納者的所得與財富也相對較高，因此特銷稅確實有達到量能課稅的目的，但是由於特銷稅的閉鎖期只有兩年，一戶多屋者仍可延長持有期間規避稅負，相對地影響了特銷稅抑制房價的效果。英文摘要：In Taiwan, the housing price has been escalating quickly since 2003 in spite of there being an over-supply of housing. One of the main reasons for this phenomenon is the serious underestimation of real estate prices by the government. This results in the taxes either on short-term trades or on holding real estate being very low. Since the inauguration of the new excise tax on short-term real estate trades in June 2011 by the Taiwan government, an inquiry has been made into the effectiveness of this new tax. This paper answers the question by examining the impact of the new tax on short-term real estate trades and income (or wealth). The empirical results show that, first, short-term real estate trades have significantly contributed to the income and wealth of their traders. Second, the new excise tax has significantly reduced short-term real estate trades and their gains, especially for high frequency traders. Third, those traders who are paying the new excise tax have higher income and are wealthier. This implies that the new excise tax complies with the principle of taxing based on the ability to pay. Finally, because the tax is applicable only to trades with a holding period of less than two years, wealthier traders have become better at prolonging their holding period to evade the tax. This has curtailed the effectiveness of the new excise tax.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：經濟波動與房地產交易之價量關係：搜索模型之應用並列篇名：Economic Fluctuations, Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Markets: An Application of a Search Model作者：高慈敏(Tzu-Min Kao)關鍵字：搜索模型;隨機優勢;媒合模型;均數固定變異擴張;核函數;search model;stochastic dominance;match model;mean-preserving spreads;kernel density function期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文嘗試建構一個搜索媒合模型，討論房地產交易之價量關係。研究發現經濟不穩定，會影響買賣雙方進入市場決策，使市場交易趨於冷清，造成交易量萎縮。價格變動則視起始條件而定，若供給（需求）意願對交易量衝擊彈性小，供給（需求）意願下降，會使價格出現漲（跌）勢；反之供給（需求）意願對交易量衝擊彈性大，供給（需求）意願下降，反而會使價格出現跌（漲）勢。以上現象可以解釋房地產市場，逢經濟不穩定，市場交易冷清；經濟穩定，市場轉趨熱絡現象。經濟穩定有助於創造交易量，縮短買方、賣方搜索期限。訊息成本下降，有助於降低買賣雙方房價差距，使價格趨於基礎價格。英文摘要：This paper constructs a search matching model to discuss the trading volume and price in relation to real estate transactions. We find that economic instability will affect the decisionmaking of buyers (sellers), and their willingness to trade in the market. Economic fluctuations will result in a shrinking trading volume. The price effect on the sell or buy decision depends on the initial condition. If the trading volume elasticity of intention to sell (buy) is less than 1, sellers (buyers) exiting the market will induce prices to increase (decrease). On the contrary, if the trading volume elasticity of intention to sell (buy) is greater than 1, sellers (buyers) exiting the market will induce prices to decrease (increase). These correlations can help explain why the real estate markets will become thick (thin) markets during an economic boom (bust). Economic stability will help create trading volume and shorten the search duration of buyers and sellers. A decrease in transaction costs will help reduce the price gap between buyers and sellers, and the prices will tend to be fundamental values.起始頁-結束頁：21-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：投資不動產之行為探討－以財務槓桿程度分析並列篇名：An Analysis of the Behavior of Investment in Real Estate-To the Degree of Financial Leverage作者：洪志興(Chih-Hsing Hung);陳勤明(Chin-Ming Chen)關鍵字：財務槓桿;租金收益;投資行為;不動產價格;financial leverage;rental income;investment behaviors;property prices期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要是在探討投資人槓桿租金純益率，如何受到毛租金收益與投資人財務槓桿結構的影響，並且進一步探討投資人的行為。根據模型可以得知，雖然增加毛租金收益會使投資人槓桿租金純益率上升，但是投資人透過調整財務槓桿程度，也會影響投資人租金純益率，所以調整財務槓桿程度與毛租金收益皆會影響槓桿租金純益率。從數值可以發現，在借貸利率比較低的市場，投資人透過調整財務槓桿比率，會使槓桿租金純益率上升，所以投資人可以忍受較低的毛租金收益或較高的不動產價格；但是在借貸利率較高時，投資人會要求較高的毛租金收益或較低的不動產價格。根據本研究模型，在不一樣的毛租金收益變動，則可以提供如何調整財務槓桿比率，進一步提高其槓桿租金純益率。或是在不一樣的財務槓桿比率變動，可以提供如何調整毛租金收益，進一步提高其槓桿租金純益率。英文摘要：The paper tries to explore the degree to which the realized rate of return from rentals is affected by the gross rental income and financial leverage of investors. The paper finds that the realized rate of return from rentals will not just increase due to higher gross rental income, but will be affected by the level of the financial leverage of investors. The model presented in the paper can explain why the investors are willing to accept lower rental income or higher property prices. The paper further shows that when the mortgage rate is high, investors tend to demand higher gross rental income or lower property prices. In addition, under different levels of gross rental income and financial leverage, investors can increase their expected leveraged rate of return from rentals.起始頁-結束頁：57-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：集合住宅面積混合對社區管理維護影響之線性結構分析並列篇名：A Linear Structural Analysis of the Influence of a Mixture of Houses with Different Floor Area Measures in a Condominium Community on Community Management and Maintenance作者：陳妍如(Yen-Ju Chen);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang);陳淑美(Shu-Mei Chen)關鍵字：住宅混合;社會混合;管理維護;線性結構方程式;housing mix;social mix;community management;linear structural modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國集合住宅社區常見一建築開發案有數種面積產品混合之現象，住宅混合隱含購屋者其生活水平及背景之異質性之社會混合，將可能造成社區管理維護上之不易。本研究採台北市建管處公寓大廈科已報備管理組織之公寓大廈社區為研究對象，建立「面積混合度」指標，探討住宅社區的面積混合是否透過社區衝突、社區意識和社區參與進而影響管理維護的績效和滿意度。實證結果顯示，建商之面積混合策略對於住宅社區管理維護是間接且負面影響，面積混合後不但沒有解決社區意識與社會參與之社會問題，反而不利於管理維護，可見國內建商坪數混合之規劃對於後續管理維護之影響很大。英文摘要：The following phenomenon is common in the condominium communities in Taiwan: a building development project includes different products (i.e., buildings or houses) with a variety of floor area measures. This housing mix implies a social mix where homebuyers' living standards and backgrounds are different. The heterogeneous social characteristics of the residents might lead to difficulties in managing and maintaining a community. The present study has selected the condominium communities in Taipei, which are governed by the Taipei City Construction Management Office, as the research subject. Through the analysis of the communities, this study has attempted to build the ”housing mix index” and has explored whether the housing mix would affect the performance and satisfaction of the community management and maintenance from the perspectives of community conflict, community consciousness and community involvement. The results of this study show that the builders' strategy regarding the housing mix has had an indirect and negative impact on community management and maintenance. This implies that the housing mix has neither resolved social problems, such as community consciousness and community involvement, nor benefited community management and maintenance. Consequently, builders' building plans regarding the housing mix have greatly influenced community management and maintenance.起始頁-結束頁：77-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：住宅市場訊息開放對搜尋效率之影響－資料包絡分析法之應用並列篇名：Effects of Real Estate Information Opening on the Homebuyer's Search Efficiency-The Application of Data Envelopment Analysis作者：周美伶(Mei-Ling Chou);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen)關鍵字：市場訊息;購屋搜尋;資料包絡分析法;完全訊息效率指標;market information;homebuyer's search;DEA model;full information efficiency index期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用二階段資料包絡分析方法，探討住宅市場訊息開放對搜尋效率的影響，以及影響完全訊息開放對搜尋效率的因素。本文第一階段先以產出導向的CCR模型估計完全訊息效率指標，並以拔靴法建構完全訊息效率指標的95%信賴區間，藉以證實開放訊息確實有助於提升購屋者搜尋效率；而第二階段採用對稱截斷最小平方法模型，探討完全訊息開放對搜尋效率之影響因素。其實證結果顯示購屋者的個人特性（如：年齡、性別、教育程度、家庭月所得）、購屋目的、知覺風險、財務與時間壓力以及搜尋管道（如：搜尋管道數量、人員銷售）等，為影響完全訊息開放，對搜尋效率高低的主要因素。本研究的政策面貢獻在於證實住宅市場資訊開放，確實有其必要性，且讓有意提供購屋訊息服務的業者，作為尋找利基市場之參考。英文摘要：This study utilizes the two-stage Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) method to explore the impact of market information opening on searching efficiency, and some factors influencing full market information opening on searching efficiency in the real estate market. In the first stage, we estimate the full information indices based on the output-oriented CCR model, and 95% confidence intervals of these indices were constructed to justify that full market information opening can increase searching efficiency for house buyers. In the second stage, the symmetrically-trimmed least squares (STLS) model was used to investigate factors influencing the searching efficiency due to full market information opening. The empirical results show that personal characteristics (such as age, sex, education, household monthly income), purpose of house purchase, perceived risks, financial and time pressure, and search channels (such as the number of channels and face-to-face sales) are significant factors influencing the searching efficiency due to full market information opening. The study makes a contribution to housing policy in terms of verifying the importance of full market information opening in the real estate market, and providing information for the providers of housing information services to find their niche markets.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：不動產買賣與拍賣次級市場流動性影響因素並列篇名：Determinants of Liquidity in Secondary Real Estate Market作者：張鼎煥(Ting-Huan Chang);邱建良(Chien-Liang Chiu);黃健銘(Chien-Ming Huang)關鍵字：不動產;流動性;次級市場;拍賣市場;縱橫資料;real estate;liquidity;secondary market;auction market;panel data期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究利用縱橫資料模型區分市場、需求、供給與金融等四類指標變數，探討不動產買賣與拍賣次級市場流動性影響因素，實證發現市場指標之不動產拍賣市場價格上升與供給指標之核發住宅使用執照樓地板面積增加等皆顯著增加兩次級市場流動性，而供給指標之住宅存量宅數增加則顯著減少兩次級市場流動性。需求指標皆未能增加兩次級市場流動性，而金融指標雖影響不動產買賣市場流動性，但不動產拍賣市場住宅金融需求較低，故不影響不動產拍賣市場流動性，是以政府得經由信用寬鬆或緊縮政策之貸款成數，控制不動產買賣市場流動性，藉此助長或抑制不動產景氣，惟貨幣緊縮之利率政策，反而產生通貨膨脹預期之避險需求，增加不動產買賣市場流動性。英文摘要：This study presents an analysis of panel data on market, demand, supply, and financial indicators to investigate the determinants of liquidity in the trading and auction markets. The empirical results confirm that the liquidities of the two secondary markets are positively correlated with auction prices, as proxy market indicators, and with the floor area of occupancy permits, as proxy supply indicators. However, the effects of the housing stock on the two real estate markets are negatively and significantly correlated and significant outcomes are absent in relation to housing demand. Moreover, although housing finance affects the liquidity of the trading market, because the cash settlement system in the auction market produces a low level of loan demand, it does not affect the liquidity of the auction market. Therefore, the authority can effectively influence the liquidity of the real estate market through loose and tight credit policies, and further control the real estate business cycle. In particular, the hedging demand for the expected inflation risk increases the liquidity of the real estate trading market when the economic environment is restricted.起始頁-結束頁：19-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：逆房貸抵押品的處置時間對保險費率的影響並列篇名：The Impact of the Disposition Time of Reverse Mortgage Collaterals on Insurance Premiums作者：楊屯山(Jerry T. Yang);蔡錦堂(Jing-Tang Tsay);林哲群(Che-Chun Lin)關鍵字：不動產逆向抵押型房貸;預期索賠損失;預期保險費率;處置（抵押品）時間;保險費率;reverse mortgage;expected claim losses;expected insurance premium;disposition time (of collateral);insurance premium rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：「不動產逆向抵押型房貸方案」，讓年長者的自有住宅，轉換為提供生活所需現金流之房產權益，發揮居住和融資的雙重功能。本文考慮當事人的平均餘壽、房價波動、折舊率、及市場利率等隨機因素，推導出當事人（借方）的最大可貸額度與銀行（貸方）每月須支付的金額。契約到期時，當貸款餘額大於當時房價，銀行可向保險公司索賠。本文以保險公司的「預期索賠損失的現值」等於「預期抵押貸款保險費之現值」損益兩平為前提，建議（保險公司）保險費率之設定。並針對（銀行）處置抵押品平均所花費的時間，探討處置時間點與保險費率的關聯性，希望藉由保險機制的引入，增加參與此方案的誘因，擴大其實施效能，並為設計與修訂此方案，提供關鍵資訊。英文摘要：Reverse mortgage plans (RM) allow the elderly (borrowers) to employ their own real estate as both housing and a financing instrument throughout their life span. As the RM expires, the bank (lender) is entitled to lodge a claim on the discrepancy if the loan balance is greater than the house value with the insurance company (IC). Our contribution is threefold. First of all, we use the Taiwan Life Expectancy Database and simulated house prices and interest rates from stochastic processes to estimate the constant annuity and the maximum loan to value. Secondly, we build a simulation model for insurance premium rates, which are charged by the IC to the lender and determined under the condition where the present value of expected claim losses is equal to that of the insurance premiums. Finally, we analyze the impact of the disposition time of RM collateral on insurance premiums based on our simulation results. Our paper can shed light on the implementation and further development of reverse mortgage plans in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：35-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：嫌惡性風水對商用不動產價格影響之研究並列篇名：An Estimation of the Impact of Unwanted Fengshui on the Prices of Commercial Real Estate in Taiwan作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);黃麗蓉(Li-Jung Huang)關鍵字：商用不動產;風水;分量迴歸;commercial property;fengshui;quantile regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的主要是希望能夠找出不同的風水因子對商用不動產價格產生的影響。與以往不同的是，本文是針對風水對商用不動產價格的影響，其中包括路沖、鄰近高架橋、鄰近神壇或廟宇和無尾巷等。本研究依據分量迴歸模型以及特徵價格理論，並採用台灣某民營銀行所提供2002年2月到2007年12月台灣實際的交易價格資料，實証結果發現，四項風水因子皆對商用不動產價格產生負面影響，其中路沖、鄰近神壇或廟宇以及無尾巷等對高價位的商用不動產負面影響程度較大。其次，與對一般住宅價格影響相比較，相同的四項風水因子對於商用型態的負面影響程度較大。最後，路沖對於店面、辦公室、住辦合用價格都會產生負面影響，而且隨房價越高，折扣幅度越大。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to estimate the impacts of some key fengshui factors, including luchung, being near a viaduct, being near a shrine or a temple, or being located in a dead-end road, on the prices of commercial real estate in Taiwan. We applied a quantile regression to estimate the different impacts of fengshui on commercial real estate with different prices. Using a data set from one of the largest private banks in Taiwan with the transaction prices for 10,993 units of commercial real estate, we found that each of the four types of fengshui has a negative impact on the price of commercial real estate in Taiwan, where luchung, being near a shrine or a temple, or located in a dead-end road each have a greater impact on commercial real estate as reflected by higher prices. Compared to the impact for residential buildings, the impact on commercial real estate is more pronounced. Finally, luchung, a factor that some businessmen might like owing to the real estate's superior location, still has a negative impact on commercial real estate in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：51-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：環境議題在社會工作觀點的移轉：對社會工作教育的意含並列篇名：Shifting Perspectives on Environmental Issues in Social Work and Some Implications for Social Work Education作者：黃彥宜(Yen-Yi Huang)關鍵字：人在環境中;氣候變遷;災難;社會工作教育;綠色社會工作;person-in-the-environment;green social work;climate change;disaster;social work education期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著氣候劇烈變遷所造成的種種議題再加上各國天然和人為災害的頻傳，國際社會工作社群也開始關注社會工作實施和教育如何回應氣候變遷和天災人禍所造成環境危機及對弱勢者和邊緣人口的負面影響，並反思社會工作可以扮演的角色。生態和物理環境（physicalenvironment）的破壞是面對氣候變遷、環境惡化與災害所面臨的主要問題。「人在環境中」（person in the environment）向來是社會工作的主流論述，然而社會工作主要關照社會環境，有關生態和物理環境的討論極為缺乏，也引發社群開始重新檢視「環境」在社會工作中的意含與定位。本文主要檢視因應氣候變遷和環境惡化近年國際社會工作學術社群所發展對環境議題的相關論述與觀點，以及對當前社會工作教育如何因應新興議題的經驗，期能對國內社會工作教育提出一些新的思考方向。英文摘要：Natural or human-made disasters linked to climate change give rise to multiple ecological, physical, and social problems. The international social work community has voiced concern about the negative impacts of environmental crisis on disadvantaged and marginal populations, and believes that social workers can and should play an active role in helping to shape a more sustainable environment. The ‘person-in-environment’ approach in social work is a mainstream perspective emphasizing the relationship between individuals, their behavior, and the environment. Very often however, such interventions have tended to focus on the social rather than the physical environment. The degradation and disaster caused by climate change create the context for a new paradigm of social work, with greater emphasis on physical environmental issues and concerns. This article reviews shifting perspectives within the international social work community on environment, and considers the implications of new theories and practices for the education and professional development of social workers. In particular, it is hoped that the experiences and insights reported here may help to enrich the scope and diversity of social work education in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201412_18(2).00012篇名：少小離家，老大胡不歸？遷居原住民的老年返鄉回流議題並列篇名：The Issue of Return Migration in the Elderly Indigenous作者：詹宜璋(Yi-Chang Chan)關鍵字：原住民;返鄉回流;認同;依附;indigenous;return migration;identity;attachment期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：1990年代之後，「移民回流」形成了新興的移民研究議題，關注到這些在假期、季節與人生階段間往復移動的遷移現象，其中，老年人口的跨境退休遷移（International Retirement Migration, IRM）之返鄉回流（return migration）現象也是一項研究重點。本文透過中高齡外移原住民之訪談資料與文獻之對話，歸納原住民老年退休回流之抉擇，一如相關理論所預測，親屬（家族）網絡所在區位是影響退休居住選擇之判準指標；此外，原鄉部落中是否保有足以安身立命的「土地」以及對於部落現行生活模式與規範變遷之「認同」是重要的影響因素；個人的經濟條件與健康狀況也會影響老年居處的選擇。最後，跳脫定居一處的靜態想像，來往二地間之老年居住型態則是不少曾經外移或子女在外地生活者的務實策略。誠如所言「家是根源」，而家之概念又可概分為家人、家園與家鄉此三類意涵。我們相信「返鄉議題」的核心是「回家」而非「返回原鄉」；涉及的實踐行動不單是交通與移動，更是一種生活方式的打造與價值規範的回歸。英文摘要：Return migration becomes a new research issue in the 1990s, which concerns about round of migration in vacations, seasons and life span. Return migration about the elderly international retirement migration (IRM)is a research point as well. The research investigates the factors in return migration of the retired indigenous emigrant by interviewing the middle-aged and elderly and analyzing document, then generalizes the decision of retirement migration. The research founds the relatives attachment is one of factors. The ownership of land and 'identity' on current tribal lifestyle and changing norm are important factors. Besides, individual economic and health conditions are important as well. Round trip living is an alternative way for the elderly who used emigration or have children living outside tribe. 'Home is root', the idea of home divides into family, homeland and hometown. The corn of return issue is returning home, not hometown, It is not only about transport but also building a lifestyle and restoring traditional norm.起始頁-結束頁：37-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201412_18(2).00023篇名：隱沒的追求正義論述：1987—2007年報紙再現社工員實務行動的框架分析並列篇名：Pursuing Justice Became an Overshadowed Discourse: News Framing of Social Workers in Taiwan, 1987-2007作者：鄭怡世(Yi-Shih Cheng)關鍵字：新聞論述;媒體再現;社會工作;框架分析;news discourse;media representation;social work;framing analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的主要目的是探討臺灣解嚴後的廿年，也是〈社工師法〉通過的前、後十年間，媒體再現社工員實務行動的框架及其演變。本研究針對《中國時報》以及《聯合報》兩大報共3,249則新聞文本進行框架分析。研究結果發現，兩大報在1987-2007年間，主要是以「特定社會問題或議題的發現者／教育者」、「特定邊緣／弱勢個人或群體的協助者」、「法令執行者」，以及「資源的中介或募集者」這四個框架來報導社工員平日所從事的工作。而在1997年後的十年間，社工員是「特定邊緣／弱勢個人或群體的協助者」成為兩大報再現社工員實務行動的主要框架，顯示主流報紙媒體視社工員是社會中有問題、偏差、邊緣、弱勢個人或群體的照顧者、協助者這樣的論述，在〈社會工作師法〉通過後更被突顯。若與解嚴後社工員多元且豐富的實務行動相對照，這兩大主流報紙媒體觀看與理解社工員實務行動的框架，完全隱沒了社工員透過草根、集體行動為弱勢者發聲、追求社會正義這樣的角色與作為。據此，本研究進一步討論及反思分析結果，並就社會工作社群如何更具主體性地呈現自己以及與社會大眾溝通進行討論。英文摘要：This study aims to analyze the status change of social workers in the media during the last two decades. We explore how the news media were representing and reconstructing social workers' day-to-day jobs. The findings are from an analysis of 3,249 news stories from the two mainstream print media, United Daily and China Times from January 1987 to December 2007, that is, from the decade before the passing of Social Worker Act until the decade following the passing. The Social Worker Act of Taiwan was promulgated in 1997, enabled social workers to acquire professional statuses similar to those in other fields (e.g., medicine, law, and accounting) by undergoing a national examination. The findings indicate that followed the promulgation of the Act the media have frequently reported social workers in playing the roles of social control and caretakers for the less attractive, more problematic, deviant, dangerous, or deficient groups in our society. It however overshadowed or weakened the role of social workers as spokespeople for the socially vulnerable and their pursuit of social justice through grassroots and collective forces. The result indicates that the pursuing justice has become an overshadowed discourse by the mainstream media. Based on the findings we go further to discuss the action strategies that social work community of Taiwan could employ in communicating with the populace from social workers' own perspective.起始頁-結束頁：73-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201412_18(2).00034篇名：社會投資國家的青年轉銜與生命歷程政策：以瑞典和英國相關社會政策改革為例並列篇名：Youth Transition and Life Course Policy in Social Investment States: An Exploration of Related Social Policy Reforms in Sweden and UK作者：黃志隆(Chih-Lung Huang)關鍵字：青年轉銜;社會政策;社會投資國家;積極勞動市場政策;生命歷程政策;youth transition;social policy;social investment state;active labour market policy;life course policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：如何在經濟與社會結構快速變遷中，解決日益嚴重的青年失業問題，已成了各國關注的焦點。近年來歐盟提出相關的策略，都將提升失業青年之人力資本視為主要的政策工具。而這種以國家集體力量強化勞動市場供給面為主的社會投資國家理念，是如何與各國既有的制度脈絡相結合，從而形成具體的生命歷程政策？本文擬從歐洲社會投資國家的兩個代表－瑞典與英國出發，探討兩國從教育到就業相關社會政策所欲形塑的青年轉銜歷程。藉由生命歷程政策觀點的分析，我們試圖抽離出兩國在相關社會政策的改革上所代表的不同政策意涵，以作為未來在進行相關研究的參考。英文摘要：It is one of the most important issues to resolve youth unemployment problem for every country during the era of rapid economic and social-structural transformation. Related strategies of the European Union stressed the policy instruments of prompting human capital for unemployed youth. How does the social investment state idea strengthen labor supply through state power and combine with different institutional context of state? What is the specific life course policy for these states? In this article I try to trace the two representatives of social investment state in European Union-Sweden and UK, especially about youth transition from the related social policies. Through the analysis of youth transition policies, I detached the implications of life course policy of the two states for future research, especially comparative analysis.起始頁-結束頁：121-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201412_18(2).00045篇名：烽火餘生下的金門：虛幻或真實的福利天堂並列篇名：An Illusory or Real Paradise: Rethinking the Rationale of Social Welfare Development in Kinmen作者：王篤強(Duu-Chiang Wang)關鍵字：金門;社會福利;社會補償;社會分紅;公民收入;Kinmen;social welfare;social compensation;social dividend;citizens' income期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：在福利緊縮的今天，金門社會福利給付的擴張似乎是個異例。這個異例，就如同過去中國大陸與臺灣軍事對峙下，它飽受戰火蹂躪，被連續砲擊長達二十一年般，受人矚目。本文試圖從表層到內裡揭開當前金門社會福利擴張有其競爭合法性、期待社會補償、和要求自主性的理路。指出金門酒廠實業股份有限公司所挹注的高額盈餘，只是金門社會福利增長的充分條件而非必要條件。此外，面對這種擴張，我們以為除了引發華人心目中福利意涵的省思之外，也帶出了福利病的隱憂；以及藉由社會分紅、保障公民收入打造另個理想社會的契機。英文摘要：It looks like an abnormal case; the expansion of welfare spending is rarely seen like it before. This case is also noted as a battlefield for twenty one long years to her cause until 1979. Kinmen islanders used to live in bombardment and were devastated by the war. We attempts to uncover the reasons why Kinmen welfare has developed rapidly from the surface to the inside. The profits of Kinmen Kaoliang Liquor Inc. is just a sufficient condition for her welfare growth. The development can be caused by competing for legitimacy, asking for social compensation, expressing for their autonomy, etc. We are interested in these phenomena such as the meaning of welfare in Chinese, unintended consequences of welfare, and the opportunities about social dividend or citizens' income.起始頁-結束頁：163-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201412_18(2).00056篇名：居家服務使用對老人家庭照顧者照顧負荷之緩衝性影響研究並列篇名：The Moderating Impacts of In-Home Services Utilization on Informal Caregiver's Burden of Dependent Elders作者：黃志忠(Chih-Chung Huang)關鍵字：居家服務;家庭照顧者;照顧負荷;調節效果;長期照顧服務;home care services;family caregivers;caregiving burden;moderating variables;long-term care期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景與目的：本研究參考壓力過程模式架構來檢視社區內失能老人所使用的正式照顧服務，對家庭照顧者的照顧負面效應是否產生緩衝性影響。此一模式將正式照顧服務定義為一種正式社會支持的形式，藉以降低因照顧各種失能程度被照顧者所產生的照顧壓力與負荷。研究方法：本研究對家以中部某縣市接受居家服務之家庭照顧者為抽樣對象，經分層隨機抽樣，共計300人參與本研究；資料蒐集方法為問卷訪談，研究架構則以階層迴歸模式分析之。研究結果：被照顧者所使用的居家服務對於其干擾行為所造成的照顧負荷有降低的效果；此外，本研究也發現居家服務能有效緩衝家庭照顧者的照顧負面效應，在解釋家庭照顧者的照顧負荷具顯著性的預測效果與調節效果。研究結論：本研究資料顯示，以壓力過程模式檢視失能老人所使用的正式照顧服務對家庭照顧者的照顧負面效應產生緩衝性影響的確認，有著理論與實證資料的支持。本文也針對台灣長期照顧服務策略與方向之建議進行更進一步的討論。英文摘要：Purpose: This investigation adopts the stress process conceptual framework to examine the moderating influence of formal services use by impaired elders on the negative consequences of caregiving for informal caregivers. The model is modified by defining formal services as a type of formal social support that can counteract the stress associated with various care recipient impairments. Methods: Using stratified random sampling, 300 caregivers receiving home care services were selected for the study. Data were compiled through self-administered questionnaires. Hierarchical regressions were used to test the hypothesized models. Results: The findings indicate home care service for care recipients can reduce the adverse effects of certain impairments on informal caregivers. Disruptive behaviors of the elders are significantly lowered. In addition, this study also confirms the moderating effects of formal services use by impaired elders on caregiving burden for informal caregivers. Conclusions: According to the results of this study, the application of a stress process conceptual perspective to identify the moderating effects of formal services use by impaired elders on the negative consequences of caregiving for informal caregivers are with theoretical and empirical data supported. Further discussions and suggestions on long-term care policies and strategies in Taiwan are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201406_18(1).00017篇名：「後」現代李爾王並列篇名：A Postmodern Lear作者：張英陣(Ying-Chen Chang)關鍵字：珍．亞當斯;社會工作;職場抗拒;新自由主義;Jane Addams;social work;workplace resistance;neoliberalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：1894年5月美國芝加哥爆發了影響往後全球勞工運動甚深的普爾曼罷工事件。社會工作先驅珍．亞當斯曾參與這次罷工事件的仲裁工作，事後她於1896年引用莎士比亞的著名悲劇《李爾王》中的情節來比喻該事件，寫了一篇評論名之為〈現代李爾王〉。她這篇文章內容與表達形式具有爭議性，直到1912年年底才正式出版。該篇文章最主要的目的是從社會倫理的角度討論工業化社會中的勞資關係。亞當斯所批評的李爾王和罷工事件中的資本家普爾曼，都帶有濃厚個人主義與家長式作風，著重追求自己的權力與商業利益，而不尊重女兒與員工的想法。而亞當斯所強調的社會倫理是以同情的理解與社會民主促成社會全面性的進步。本文從亞當斯的社會倫理哲學出發，檢視當今社會工作受到新自由主義與新管理主義的影響，以市場導向與預算導向為原則，而使得社會工作逐漸忘卻其追求社會改革的使命。雖然社會工作者也曾發動有組織性的抗拒，但平時仍舊是採取低咖啡因的抗拒居多。以低咖啡因的抗拒來面對新自由主義，顯然它的社會轉型效果不彰。固然採用阿Q精神與什維克主義是有些無奈，但畢竟還是比較安全的方式。雖然社會工作所處的環境是一個市場化與商品化的社會，它的價值與社會工作的使命有明顯的對立衝突。當前社會工作的工作條件仍是工時長、負荷高、薪資不合理，但是社會工作者所要爭取的不只是社工員的權益，更重要的是弱勢族群的福祉與社會工作使命的實踐。我們也願意相信，以現況而言能阻止進一步的新自由主義化都是值得慶賀的發展。社會工作面對新自由主義的戰鬥是一場理念、道德與政治的戰爭，明知這是難以致勝的戰爭，但社會工作仍值得我們再奮戰。雖然新自由主義一再灌輸我們，市場「是一條別無選擇的道路」。由於社會工作保有古典的悲劇情愫，我們堅信除了新自由主義之外的「另一個世界是可能的，也是必須的」。英文摘要：The Pullman Strike of 1894, possibly the most famous strike in American labour history, influenced the global labour movement afterward. Jane Addams was involved in negotiation between the employer and employees of Pullman Company but failed. Addams wrote a critique on the Pullman Strike titled 'A Modern Lear' in 1886. The controversial message of 'A Modern Lear' finally published until 1912. The most developed part of her analysis compared George Pullman with Shakespeare's King Lear. At the heart of that comparison laid her belief that both Lear and Pullman held individualistic and patriarchal mentality. They both used power on their own but could not acknowledge that his daughters and his workers were capable of assessing their needs and making right decisions. Addams makes a clear statement about the connections between sympathetic understanding and social democracy. Under the influence of Neoliberalism and New Public Management, social work practice was driven by the free market and strict budget control. Social work has lost its mission on social reform. Even though social workers have initiated organized resistance in every part most social workers usually adopt routine resistance in their workplaces. Routine and covert resistance is kind of decaf resistance. Decaf, because it threatens nobody and changes very little. Such forms of resistance serve a therapeutic rather than transformative function. Svejkism is not open protest, its style ironical and cynical. It is a weapon of the oppressed, but does not necessarily to change the status quo. The radical changes in social work were marked by the encapsulation of marketisation and commodification which contradict the very essence of social work value. Under hegemonic Neoliberalism, social workers still fight not for their benefits only, but for the well-being of the disadvantages and for mission of social justice. In the current context, even just checking further neoliberalisation would be a welcome development. Fighting Neoliberalism is a holy war for ideals, morality and democracy. The defenders of Neoliberalism always remind us that ' there in no alternatives'. However, with the pathos of classical tragedy in social work, we assuredly believe that 'another world is possible and necessary.'起始頁-結束頁：45-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201406_18(1).00028篇名：探究弱勢新移民家庭兒童面臨空間排除的風險：質化GIS的應用並列篇名：Exploring Risks of Spatial Exclusion on Children Living in Vulnerable New Immigrant Families: The Application of GIS作者：張菁芬(Chin-Fen Chang);黃映翎(Yin-Ling Huang)關鍵字：弱勢群體;新移民家庭;兒童;空間排除;地理資訊系統;vulnerable group;new immigrant family;children;spatial exclusion;GIS期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：傳統上，針對弱勢兒童的研究較缺乏以弱勢兒童主體脈絡進行論述。本研究強調兒童本身才是最瞭解自己生活及經驗的人，透過弱勢兒童的論述以獲取兒童自己認知的生活空間與日常生活經驗。因此，本研究目的在結合兒童主體的論述與質化GIS來探究弱勢新移民家庭兒童所面臨空間排除的風險。研究者除了運用兒童團體蒐集兒童所陳述的居住空間及行走路徑的相關資料，接著進入田野實地理解兒童居位區域的議題，以更貼近兒童所論述的狀況，使研究者在進行質化GIS繪圖及論述空間議題時更具有真實觀。研究發現首先論述兒童因為居住區域而影響到弱勢新移民家庭兒童主動參與社會活動的機會，甚至限縮活動範圍，因而面臨空間排除風險。其次，透過兒童論述的生活空間及在生活場域上可能面臨鄰里對新移民家庭不接納，以及生活路徑的侷限性，凸顯出空間排除風險中所論述的「缺乏生活資源取得的機會」。最後，本研究針對兒童做為研究的主體以及質化GIS運用在弱勢族群的生活空間議題進行討論，並對後續相關研究提出建言。英文摘要：This research employs the concept of children as a social actor who is the one understanding their own living experiences best. The research conducted 29 children under 2 children's groups from vulnerable new immigrant families. The main theme of the research tried to explore how far children living in vulnerable new immigrant families faced risks of social exclusion under the usage of children's groups and qualitative GIS. Researchers used children's groups and filed-work to collect data and through GIS analysis presented in how vulnerable children's daily life and walking range to find out the deprivations of living resources and opportunities under the consideration of social exclusion. There are some findings: first, we learned that the second-generation identity of the new immigrant brought many restrictions, affected the opportunities to take the initiative, to participate in social activities, the limitation of walking range and even formatting the spatial exclusion under the narrowly living space and experiences. Second, the discussion of research method one is mainly on the issue of the ethics on working with vulnerable children. The other is focus on qualitative GIS research approach which is not for emphasizing difficult techniques, but for using GIS to clarify the real situation and raising the penitential issues in social work field and changing policy makings.起始頁-結束頁：89-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201406_18(1).00039篇名：Mental Health Policy Reform and Service Delivery in England並列篇名：英國精神衛生政策改革與服務輸送作者：王金永(Jin-Yong Wang)關鍵字：精神衛生政策;社區精神衛生團隊;服務個別化;服務責信;mental health policy;community mental health teams;personalisation of services;service accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：雖然已經有許多文獻論述英國精神衛生政策的改變，相對地僅有少數的研究主現精神衛生實務人員於政策執行與服務輸送的第一手經驗。透過質性訪談，本文試圖以質性資料主現當前英國精神衛生照顧的細節及其運作實況。本研究主要發現可歸納為三項主題：第一，在政府經費與夥伴關係的面向上，英國政府試圖提供整合的服務，但實際上精神衛生服務仍然過度強調疾病治療，相對地忽視服務使用者的社會需求。第二，就精神衛生團隊及專業人員的角色而言，跨專業的工作同時帶來了正向與負向的結果。第三，研究參與者認為，英國精神衛生照顧的未來願景在於服務的個別化與服務責信。根據研究發現，作者認為權力的移轉與資源的重分配是兩個重要的關鍵因素，足以實質影響政策改革的結果，並且根本地改變英國服務系統運作的方式。最後，本文也提出四點對臺灣的政策建議。英文摘要：Although there have been much literature arguing the transformation of mental health policy in England, relatively few studies present mental health practitioners' firsthand accounts of policy implementation and service delivery. Using qualitative interviews, this article intends to qualitatively disclose the details of contemporary mental health care in England and how it actually works in practice. The main findings of the research can be summarised into three themes. Firstly, in the aspect of government funding and partnership, the British government tried to provide integrated services, but it was found that mental health services have over-emphasised illness treatment and relatively ignored service users' social needs. Secondly, in terms of mental health teams and professionals' roles, there are positive and negative sides of interdisciplinary working. Thirdly, visions of mental health care that research participants propose are personalisation of services and service accountability. Based up the research findings, the author argues that power shift and resource redistribution are two critical factors that can substantially influence the result of policy reform and fundamentally change the way the service system operates in England. Finally, four policy implications are also proposed for Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：143-180資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201406_18(1).000410篇名：臺北市獨居老人社會融入之階層化迴歸分析並列篇名：Hierarchical Regression Analysis of Social Inclusion among the Elderly Living Alone: An Example of Taipei City作者：謝美娥(Mei-O Hsieh)關鍵字：社會融入;社會排除;獨居老人;階層化迴歸分析;social inclusion;social exclusion;elder living alone;hierarchical regression analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：研究嘗試從社會融入觀點瞭解臺北市獨居老人的境況，並且從下列四個面向：（一）個人特質；（二）健康狀況；（三）獨居環境情形；以及（四）社區資源去預測社會融入。以臺北市社會局列冊之獨居老人為母體，依行政區以及性別比例分層隨機抽樣，再以面對面訪談方法完成結構化之自陳問卷，總計328人。社會融入面向係以英國社會排除單位所做貫時性研究的7個面向為參考架構並參考國情自行設計，另分別採因素分析重構量表涵蓋12個次面向。量表整體信度高達0.911。最後本研究採階層化多元迴歸模式分析前述四大類變項預測力整體社會融入之效果。研究結果發現四類變項共可解釋高達49.2%的變異量。本研究確認四類變項對於獨居老人社會融入的預測力，最後並提出實務與政策上的建議。英文摘要：Purpose: The study intends to predict social inclusion among the elderly living alone from four dimensions: the individual characteristics of the elderly, the health status and condition, environmental condition of living alone situation, and community resources. Method: The subjects were selected by gender and administrative district from enrolled list of elderly living alone in Taipei City. Three hundred and twenty eight subjects were collected by using face to face interviews with a structured questionnaire. The research is the first one which use individual report as the data source. Items were configured and redesigned from seven dimensions of social exclusion/inclusion report of an English study. Twelve restructured subdimensions are created using factor analysis. The overall reliability is .911. The hierarchical regression analysis is used to predict social inclusion. Results: The individual characteristics of the elderly could predict 29.6% of the variance. Adding the health status and condition variables, the total variance explained is 44%. The third model by adding variables of living alone situation explains 47.5% of the total variance. Entering all variables of four levels, the total variance explained is 49.2%. Conclusion: This study provides an understanding of social inclusion and its prediction. The practice and policy implications are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：181-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201406_18(1).000501篇名：評估具厚尾分配風險之避險效果並列篇名：Hedging and Value at Risk with a Heavy Tailed Distribution作者：朱香蕙(Hsiang-Hui Chu);張榮顯(Jung-Hsien Chang);林玉森(Yu-Sen Lin)關鍵字：極小化變異數;t分配風險值;避險比率;回溯測試;Minimum-Variance Model;Student-t Value at Risk;Hedge Ratio;Backtesting期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文探討金融資產報酬為非常態分配時，在最適避險策略的效果。我們首度採用極小化student-t分配之風險值及條件風險值來估算避險比率。以英國金融時報100指數、台灣加權股價指數、黃金與西德州原油為現貨及其對應之期貨為避險工具，探討極小化Student-t風險值與極小化Student-t條件風險值之避險效果，是否較極小化變異數、極小化Cornish-Fisher（Cornish and Fisher, 1937）風險值、極小化Cornish-Fisher條件風險值模型等研究方法，提供較佳之避險績效。實證結果顯示，極小化Student-t風險值與極小化Student-t條件風險值避險法亦使避險組合分配產生高狹峰，但在風險值與條件風險值減少程度上優於其他方法。最後，利用回溯測試檢視各模型評估市場風險的能力。結果顯示只有極小化Student-t風險值法與極小化Student-t條件風險值通過檢驗。代表極小化Student-t風險值與極小化Student-t條件風險值法不但在避險績效上優於其他方法並且能精準地預測風險值。英文摘要：This paper evaluates the non-normality effect of financial asset returns on the optimal hedge ratio. We adopt a new method of estimating the minimum value at risk and the minimum conditional value at risk hedge ratios based on the student-t distribution. Using spot and futures returns for the FTSE 100, Taiwan Weighted Stock Indices, Gold, and WTI Crude Oil, we examine whether the new approach works better than the minimum-variance hedging, minimum value at risk, and minimum conditional value at risk approaches based on the Cornish- Fisher expansion. Among the various models, the empirical results show that the minimum student-t value at risk and the minimum student-t conditional value at risk techniques present more efficient results. Moreover, through backtesting, the empirical results offer evidence that the new approaches accurately evaluate the market risk of hedging portfolios.起始頁-結束頁：141-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：Zipf法則之驗證：以臺灣地區城市人口分布為例並列篇名：Zipf's Law and City Size Distributions in Taiwan作者：林俊宏(Chun-Hung Lin);鄭美君(Mei-Chun Cheng);徐慶柏(Ching-Po Hsu)關鍵字：臺灣人口分布;Zipf法則;Pareto指數;都市規模;Population Distributions in Taiwan;Zipf's Law;Pareto Exponent;City Size Distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去研究指出Pareto分配對於都市的規模分配具有良好的解釋力，且透過Pareto指數可衡量人口的集中度。因此本研究將透過臺灣1971年至2010年以人口數衡量的前50大都市，探討臺灣都市規模分配的變化，並檢驗是否符合Zipf法則。研究結果顯示臺灣1971年至2010年皆不符合Zipf法則，且臺灣都市的規模分配較Zipf法則下更為平均。本研究進一步研究發現政府支出、工業化程度、平均每人國內生產毛額、都市化程度及全球化程度為影響臺灣都市規模分配的主要因素。英文摘要：Several studies have suggested that city size distribution follows a Pareto distribution, and the Pareto exponent can serve as a concise measure of population concentration. We examine Taiwan’s city size distributions over the period of 1971 to 2010, using Zipf's law. The results show that Zipf's law for the size distribution of cities in Taiwan is rejected for each year in the sample period, indicating that city size distribution is more equal than what is predicted by Zipf's law. Moreover, we investigate the explanations of the variation in the Pareto exponent. We find that government expenditure, degree of industrialization, per capita GDP, degree of urbanization, and degree of globalization are the main determinants of the cities' size distribution in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：175-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：流動性共變影響因子之研究：資金流動性與機構投資人交易行為觀點並列篇名：The Determinants of Commonality in Liquidity: The Viewpoint of Funding Liquidity and Institutional Investors Trading Behavior作者：邱臙珍(Yen-Chen Chiu)關鍵字：流動性;流動性共變;機構投資者持股;Liquidity;Systematic Liquidity;Institutional Ownership期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在探討大小型股公司流動性共變如何受到金融中介機構資金流動性供給面與機構投資者交易行為、投資者情緒等需求面因素影響。實證結果顯示，資金流動性供給面對小型股公司流動性共變影響幅度較大；而機構投資者持股需求面則對大型股公司相對影響較大；機構投資者持股比率之交易活動對小型股公司流動性共變的影響差異較高。而情緒指標對大小型股公司流動性共變呈現顯著的效果，投資者情緒上揚時會對大型股公司的流動性共變產生影響，而小型股公司流動性共變則在投資者情緒下降時受到影響。英文摘要：This paper explores how commonality in liquidity varies across sizecap firms over time as influenced by supply-side forces related to the funding liquidity of financial intermediaries and demand-side forces related to the trading behavior of institutional investors and the change in investor sentiment. Empirical results show that small-cap firms have a stronger impact on the supply-side sources of commonality in liquidity. Large-cap firms tend to exhibit more significant commonality in liquidity for stocks with higher institutional ownership. However, the difference in the impact of institutional investors’ trading on commonality in liquidity is greater for small-cap firms. We further find that commonality is related to changes in investor sentiment. Specifically, commonality in liquidity of large-cap firms increases with investor sentiment, while that of small-cap firms decreases with investor sentiment.起始頁-結束頁：211-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：Corporate Social Responsibility and Profitability-Cost of Debt as the Mediator並列篇名：企業社會責任與公司獲利－兼論債務資金成本的中介角色作者：張元(Yuan Chang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：企業社會責任;債務資金成本;信用評等;中介;Corporate Social Responsibility;Cost of Debt;Credit Ratings;Mediator期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究檢驗關於企業社會責任與公司債務資金成本之間關聯性（以信用評等作為代理變數）的兩個問題。第一、我們檢驗公司承擔社會責任是否對於信用評等具有增進的作用，並因此減少了公司的債務資金成本。第二、我們考慮並檢驗信用評等是否可作為企業社會責任和公司的盈利能力之間的中介。這裡的中介是指，當信用評等存在於迴歸式中時，相對於不存在時，企業社會責任對公司績效的影響較不明顯。根據2005年至2009年期間之台灣證券交易所上市公司的資料，實證結果顯示，承擔企業社會責任的公司往往有較佳的信用評等，也因此有較低的債務資金成本；此外，在控制信用評等後，社會責任對公司盈利能力的影響降低，從而顯示信用評等可作為企業社會責任和公司獲利之間的中介。英文摘要：This study examines two issues related to corporate social responsibility (CSR) and the firm's cost of debt as, proxied by credit ratings. First, we investigate whether CSR has a positive effect on credit ratings and therefore reduces the cost of debt. Second, we consider the credit ratings as the mediator between CSR and the firm's profitability. The mediator here means that, given the presence of credit ratings, the impacts of CSR on the firm's performance will be lower than in those cases where credit ratings are not considered in the regression analysis. By employing companies listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE) during 2005~2009, our results show that CSR firms tend to have higher creditworthiness and therefore a lower cost of debt. In addition, after controlling for credit ratings, the impact of CSR on the firm's profitability is reduced, thereby showing that credit ratings serve as the mediator between CSR and performance.起始頁-結束頁：291-357資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：以分量迴歸探討中國廠商研發與外溢效果對內銷比例之影響並列篇名：The Effects of R&D and Spillovers on the Domestic Sales Ratio-A Case Study of Manufacturing Firms Operating in China作者：劉碧珍(Bih-Jane Liu);康廷嶽(Ting-Yueh Kang)關鍵字：分量迴歸;內銷比例;研發密度;外溢效果;Quantile Regression;Domestic Sales Ratio;R&D Intensity;Spillover Effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文使用中國製造業廠商資料，並採取分量迴歸法探究研發活動、研發外溢與內銷外溢對內銷比例之影響。本文發現，傳統文獻之主張「研發創新活動有助於廠商出口（Posner，1961；Vernon，1966；Barrios et al.，2003）」的論點，並不適用於在中國的製造商；相反的，廠商提高研發密度有助於提升其內銷比例，且此研發效果隨著內銷傾向之提高而遞減。此外，本文亦發現，研發外溢效果與內銷外溢效果皆為正，但中資企業在低內銷傾向時所擷取之外溢效果較外資企業為大；反之，外資企業則在中、高內銷傾向時擷取較大之外溢效果。英文摘要：This paper studies how firms' R&D intensity and two types of spillovers, i.e. R&D spillovers and domestic sales spillovers, affect their domestic sales ratios (the proportion of goods sold domestically). By using survey data of manufacturing firms in China for the period 2001-2006 and applying the quantile regression, we show that R&D intensity has a positive effect on the domestic sales ratio, and the effect declines as the quantile of the domestic sales ratio increases. This is in contrast to traditional wisdom, in which R&D intensity tends to increase export intensity (e.g. Posner, 1961; Vernon, 1966; Barrios et al., 2003). In addition, we show that R&D spillovers and domestic sales spillovers are positive for both local and foreign firms, but their effects vary with quantiles.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：隱含處份效果之價值函數並列篇名：A Revised Value Function to Connote the Disposition Effect作者：郭志安(Zion Guo);陳銘凱(Ming-Kai Chen)關鍵字：展望理論;價值函數;處份效果;Prospect Theory;Value Function;Disposition Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：處份效果係指人們在從事證券交易時，傾向於實現獲利的股票卻又不願處份損失的部位。由於Tversky and Kahneman (1992)所提出的價值函數無法解釋處份效果，因此，本文在展望理論的基本精神之下，建構出一個tanh (x)型態的價值函數，除了可以解釋處份效果，也解決了財富變動量趨近於零時風險偏好不合理的現象。英文摘要：The definition of the disposition effect is when investors tend to realize profit gains, but are reluctant to realize losses. Because the value function proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992) cannot explain the disposition effect, we develop a tanh (x)-form value function by using the essence of the prospect theory. This explains the disposition effect and solves for the phenomenon of unreasonable risk attitudes when the change of wealth approaches zero.起始頁-結束頁：49-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：健康風險認知、減重需求與其願付價值並列篇名：Health Risk Perception, Demand, and Willingness to Pay for Weight Reduction作者：傅祖壇(Tsu-Tan Fu);林億明(Yih-Ming Lin)關鍵字：肥胖;假設市場評估法;身體質量指數;雙界二分選擇模型;Obesity;Contingent Valuation Method;BMI;Doubled-Bound Dichotomous Choice Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在建立一兩階段模型探討影響國人肥胖減重需求之因素，並衡量在三個月內減重五公斤之新減重療程的願付價值。在第一階段模型，將個人健康風險認知納入模型內，並探討影響國人減重需求之因素。本文利用「台灣地區心臟血管疾病風險因子研究之社區型追蹤整合調查」（CVDFACTS）資料進行實證研究，並利用聯立模型加以估計，估計結果顯示，肥胖的風險認知對減重之需求有顯著影響，就社會經濟變數方面，性別、年齡、所得與工作狀態對減重之需求有顯著影響。除此之外，肥胖程度增加會使得對減重的需求機率將增加，而家族埵酗H曾罹患與肥胖相關之疾病，亦會增加對減重的需求。其次，利用雙界二分選擇模型估計減重之願付價值，結果指出每人願意支付價格大約為3,388至4,689元，女性之願付價值高於男性，其中願付價值之影響因子為年齡，所得多寡，肥胖程度外，還受肥胖是否影響工作之升遷之認知、是否曾經控制過體重所影響。模擬分析的結果指出，女性、身體質量指數（body mass index，BMI）高者、高所得與高肥胖風險認知等願付較高價格減重。英文摘要：This study investigates factors that affect sample respondents' demand for weight reduction, incorporating the obesity health risk perception, and further develops a means to estimate their willingness to pay (WTP) for a therapy of obesity prevention using survey data of CVDFACTS. As for the decision to participate in an obesity prevention therapy, we find that gender, age, income and job status, BMI, and family illness history are important and significant determinants for respondents. In addition, the results also present that the concerns on social and martial relations as affected by obesity are important and significant determinants. The doubled-bound dichotomous choice model estimates the respondents' WTP. The model estimates that the average willingness to pay for an obesity prevention therapy, which could reduce weight by 5 kilograms in 3 months, is NT$3,388 for the male and NT$4,689 for the female sample respondents, respectively. Furthermore, this study notes that age, income, the concern that work achievement is affected by obesity, and those who have tried to control their weight are important and significant determinants of the WTP. The results of the profile analysis suggest that obese females with high income, high health risk perception, and who have tried to control their weight are the most likely to be willing to pay the greatest amount for the weight-reduction therapy.起始頁-結束頁：69-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系8篇名：應用隨機邊界模型探討收斂假說－兼論人力資本、金融發展與經濟成長之關係並列篇名：Applying the Stochastic Frontier Model to Test the Convergence Hypothesis: The Interrelationships among Human Capital, Financial Development, and Economic Growth作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);陳盈秀(Ying-Hsiu Chen);鍾銘泰(Ming-Tai Chung);林延霖(Yen-Lin Lin)關鍵字：收斂假說;邊際生產力;技術效率;總要素生產力;隨機邊界法;Convergence Hypothesis;Marginal Productivity;Technical Efficiency;Total Factor Productivity;Stochastic Frontier Approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在建立隨機邊界產出成長率函數，在變動規模報酬的假設下，探討起始所得水準、實體資本、金融發展、人力資本與勞動力對各國經濟成長之影響，進而重新檢視收斂假說，並進行國家技術效率與總要素生產力分解之跨國分析。蒐集1980年至2000年74個樣本國家之平衡縱橫資料，實證分析主要發現有四：（i）實體資本與人力資本具有互補關係，金融發展與實體資本具替代性，但與人力資本呈互補關係；（ii）低、中所得國家皆呈現所得收斂現象，且低所得國家之收斂速度較快，而高所得國家則無所得收斂情形；（iii）高所得國家享有較高的資本邊際生產力，低所得國家則以勞動與人力資本的邊際貢獻較大，並享有規模經濟；（iv）全體國家之總要素生產力平均以每年3.52%的速度成長，其中以中所得國家速度最快；中、高所得國家主要成長來源皆為技術進步，低所得國家則為規模效果。英文摘要：This study applies the stochastic translog production frontier under variable returns to scale to investigate the effects of initial income, capital stock, financial development, human capital, and labor on a country's economic growth, in which each variable is transformed by taking the first difference in order to delete any inherent non-stationarity. This modeling tests the convergence hypothesis and decomposes productivity change into various elements. We collect data from 74 countries, covering 1980-2000, and find evidence that capital stock and human capital are complements, and that financial development is a substitute for human capital, but a complement for human capital. This study supports the convergence hypothesis through low and middle-income countries, whereby the speed of convergence in low-income countries is faster than in middle-income countries, while this study rejects the hypothesis for high-income countries. We note that the marginal productivity of capital of high-income countries is the highest, and that the marginal productivities of labor and human capital of low-income countries are the highest. Moreover, the average growth rate of total factor productivity for the sample states is equal to 3.52% per annum.起始頁-結束頁：101-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：Achieving Knowledge Translation in Nursing Care: The Need for Greater Rigor in Applying Evidence to Practice作者：Mei-Ling Yeh期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1136/bmj.312.7023.712篇名：Effectiveness of Propolis on Oral Health: A Meta-Analysis並列篇名：蜂膠對口腔健康的成效：統合分析作者：胡月娟(Yueh-Juen Hwu);林豐裕(Feng-Yu Lin)關鍵字：蜂膠;口腔感染;牙斑;口內炎;propolis;oral infection;dental plaque;stomatitis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　過去十年，以蜂膠漱口液或凝膠做為輔助療法，在台灣已日漸增多。然而，蜂膠對口腔健康的成效，人們尚未熟知。目的　本統合分析旨在蒐集最佳實證，以呈現蜂膠對人口腔健康的成效，包括口腔感染、牙菌斑、與口內炎。方法　搜尋七個電子資料庫，於1969-2012年出版之研究論文，依納入及排除條件篩選後，繼而以Joanna Briggs Institute的量性文章評讀工具做文獻品質評值。結果　八篇在1997-2011年出版，共194位受試者有數值可供分析。統合分析顯示，蜂膠對減少牙菌斑量有成效，但未達統計學上的顯著差異；口腔感染或口內炎也未見統計學上的差異。結論／實務應用　雖然略見蜂膠成效，但限於研究數量與品質之不足，研究間的變異性大。本統合分析建議需有更佳設計的試驗，以取得較周全的結論。英文摘要：Background: The use of propolis mouth rinse or gel as a supplementary intervention has increased during the last decade in Taiwan.However, the effect of propolis on oral health is notwell understood. Purpose: The purpose of thismeta-analysis was to present the best available evidence regarding the effects of propolis use on oral health, including oral infection, dental plaque, and stomatitis. Methods: Researchers searched seven electronic databases for relevant articles published between 1969 and 2012. Data were collected using inclusion and exclusion criteria. The Joanna Briggs Institute Meta Analysis of Statistics Assessment and Review Instrumentwas used to evaluate the quality of the identified articles. Results: Eight trials published from 1997 to 2011 with 194 participants had extractable data. The result of the meta-analysis indicated that, although propolis had an effect on reducing dental plaque, this effect was not statistically significant. The resultswere not statistically significant for oral infection or stomatitis. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Although there are a number of promising indications, in view of the limited number and quality of studies and the variation in results among studies, this review highlights the need for additional well-designed trials to draw conclusions that are more robust.起始頁-結束頁：221-230資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000543篇名：Diabetes Self-Care Behaviors and Disease Control in Support Group Attenders and Nonattenders並列篇名：參加與未參加糖尿病支持團體糖友的自我照顧行為與疾病控制作者：邱啟潤(Chii-Jun Chiou)關鍵字：糖尿病支持團體;自我照顧行為;疾病控制;diabetes support groups;self-care behavior;disease control期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　糖尿病的盛行率與死亡率皆在逐年增加中，若控制不佳會帶來洗腎、截肢、心臟病、中風、視網膜病變、血管病變等併發症，對個人、家庭、國家的影響甚鉅。目的　比較有無參加糖尿病支持團體之糖友，其糖尿病的自我照顧行為與疾病控制。方法　本研究利用具信、效度的問卷進行橫斷性調查，由全國已成立兩年之糖尿病支持團體名冊進行隨機抽樣，請團體之輔導員收集該機構「參加」與「未參加」糖尿病支持團體糖友的問卷。實際可配合的團體共10家，回收糖友有效問卷於「參加」支持團體有147位，「未參加」支持團體有93位。結果　「參加」與「未參加」支持團體糖友的年齡、教育程度、罹病年數等變項皆無顯著差異，兩組是可比較的同質性團體。在「參加」支持團體糖友之自我照顧行為、疾病控制分數與糖尿病護照使用比率，皆高於「未參加」支持團體的糖友，兩組皆具統計上顯著差異。結論／實務應用　「參加」糖尿病支持團體糖友，較「未參加」者之糖尿病自我照顧行為和疾病控制是較理想的，建議政府應積極推動糖尿病支持團體的政策。英文摘要：Background: The prevalence rate and mortality rate of diabetes continue to increase annually. Complications associated with poor control of diabetes include renal dialysis, amputation, heart disease, stroke, retinopathy, and vascular disease, all of which have an impact at the individual, family, and national level. Purpose: This study compares diabetes self-care behavior and disease control efficacy between attenders and nonattenders of a diabetes support group. Methods: We used a questionnaire with good validity and reliability to conduct a cross-sectional survey. Diabetes support groups have been established throughout Taiwan for around 2 years. Participants for this study were recruited randomly from a register of support group participants. Support group instructors were asked to collect questionnaires from those attending and not attending their support groups. Ten groups volunteered to participate in this study. We received 147 valid questionnaires from participants attending support groups (attenders) and 93 questionnaires from participants who did not (nonattenders). Results: There were no statistically significant differences between support group attenders and nonattenders in terms of age, educational level, or time since diagnosis of diabetes. Thus, we assumed these two groups as adequately similar to conduct statistical comparisons. Scores for diabetes self-care behavior, disease control, and use of the diabetes passport were all significantly higher among support group attenders than their nonattender peers. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Results indicate that people attending diabetes support groups are more likely to have better self-care behavior and disease control than nonattenders. Therefore, we suggest that the government actively promote policies supportive of diabetes support groups.起始頁-結束頁：231-241資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000534篇名：The Exercise Patterns of Pregnant Women in Taiwan並列篇名：婦女於懷孕期間規律運動型態及其相關因素作者：董政達(Chen-Ta Tung);李靜芳(Ching-Fang Lee);林淑珊(Shu-Shan Lin);林顯明(Hsien-Ming Lin)關鍵字：規律運動;懷孕;主動生活型態;regular exercise;pregnancy;active lifestyle期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　沒有內外科疾病的孕婦，應每天至少有30分鐘以上的中等強度之運動，但大多數的孕婦並未達到建議。目的　欲瞭解孕婦規律運動之相關因素，及從懷孕前至懷孕期間運動型態及持續時間的改變。方法　共有692位孕婦完成問卷調查，分為規律運動組（105位，15.2％）及未規律運動組（587位，84.8%）共兩組。瞭解社會人口學、運動有關變項與孕期運動的關係。結果　孕期規律運動的顯著預測因子為工作狀態、懷孕前運動、妊娠階段。孕婦常見的運動型態為走路、爬樓梯及瑜珈。近八成（526位佔76%）的婦女於懷孕前未規律運動。有42.9%的婦女會從孕前持續運動至懷孕；有10.1%者於孕前無運動，但懷孕後才開始運動；有57.1%於懷孕後停止運動。整體而言，婦女於懷孕後會減少每週運動的時間。結論　走路和爬樓梯為台灣孕婦最常見的規律運動型態，規律運動有益懷孕婦女的健康。應該鼓勵婦女於懷孕期間積極的生活型態。本研究結果可提供醫護人員於促進孕婦規律運動和採取主動生活型態之參考。英文摘要：Background: Unless advised otherwise by their doctor, pregnant women should get approximately 30minutes of moderate exercise on most days. However, most pregnant women do not exercise regularly and do not meet the American College of Obstetricians Gynecology's standard for the minimumamount of exercise needed to stay healthy during pregnancy. Purpose: We investigate the factors related to regular exercise among pregnantwomenand describe the type, duration, and change in regular exercise from prepregnancy to pregnancy in Taiwan. Methods: Pregnant women (N=692) completed a questionnaire on exercise habits and were then grouped into regular exercise (105, 15.2%) and nonregular exercise (587, 84.8%) groups. Demographic and exercise-related variables were then investigated for their association with exercise during pregnancy. Results: Work status, prepregnancy exercise, and trimester were significant predictors of regular exercise during pregnancy. The most commonly reported exercise types were walking, climbing stairs, and yoga.Nearly four fifths (n = 526, 76.0%) of participants did not exercise regularly before pregnancy, whereas 42.9%of participants continued exercising regularly after becoming pregnant. Among thosewho were inactive before pregnancy, 10.1% began exercising after becoming pregnant. In contrast, 57.1% of participants who had beenmore active before pregnancy stopped exercising regularly after becoming pregnant. Overall, itwas found that participants decreased their amount (minutes×times/week) of exercise compared with their prepregnancy amount. Conclusions: Results suggest that walking and climbing stairs, each beneficial to the health of pregnant women, are the most common types of regular exercise engaged in by pregnantwomen in Taiwan.Regular exercise benefits the health of pregnantwomen. The findings of this study may be useful to doctors and nurses responsible to counsel pregnant women to exercise regularly and to have a reasonably active lifestyle during pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：242-249資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000565篇名：Predictors of Hyperphagia in Institutionalized Patients with Dementia並列篇名：機構失智住民過度進食之預測因子作者：吳樺姍(Hua-Shan Wu)關鍵字：失智症;機構化;過度進食行為;預測因子;dementia;institutionalized;hyperphagic behavior;predictor期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　過度進食是失智患者常見之進食行為改變，且是被安置於機構的危險因子之一。截至目前，並無機構失智住民之過度進食行為研究。失智患者之過度進食行為、躁動行為、認知功能與人口學特性間的關係目前仍無共識。目的　探討機構失智住民過度進食行為之盛行率及預測因子。方法　此研究採橫斷性及相關性研究設計。個案招募自台灣七所失智症照護專區及養護機構，共179位個案同意參與此研究。由兩位受過訓練之研究助理測量失智住民之過度進食行為子量表、Cohen-Mansfi eld躁動量表（Cohen-Mansfi eld Agitation Inventory）、知能篩檢測驗（Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument）及人口學特性。結果　機構失智住民過度進食行為之盛行率為50.8%（91/179）。在排除長期記憶、短期記憶、注意力、抽象思考與判斷力，以及語言的非侵略性行為子量表分數等變數後發現，性別、機構化時間、身體的非侵略性行為及類別流暢度子量表分數為有意義地過度進食行為預測因子（p ＜ .05）。結論／實務應用　本研究發現，男性、機構化較久、類別流暢度任務分數較低、或身體的非侵略性行為頻率較高之失智住民，有較高的風險出現過度進食行為。一旦發現失智住民有過度進食行為，應舉行跨專業的個案討論會擬定飲食管理計劃，並轉介神經內科或精神科醫師做進一步鑑定與治療。英文摘要：Background: Hyperphagia, a common eating behavioral change in patientswith dementia, is one of the risk factors for institutional placement. No study of hyperphagia has yet been conducted on institutionalized patients with dementia. There is currently no academic consensus over the correlations among hyperphagic behaviors, agitated behaviors, cognitive function, and demographic characteristics in this patient group. Purpose: This study explores the prevalence and predictors of hyperphagic behaviors in institutionalized patients with dementia. Methods: A cross-sectional and correlational design was used. The participants were recruited from seven dementia special care units and assisted living facilities in Taiwan. One hundred seventynine patients with dementia agreed to participate. Two research assistants were trained to collect data using the subscale for hyperphagic behaviors, the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory, the Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument, and a dementia patient demographic characteristics datasheet. Results: The prevalence of hyperphagic behaviors in institutionalized patients with dementia was 50.8% (91/179). After excluding the variables fromthe long-termmemory, short-termmemory, attention, abstraction and judgment, and verbally nonaggressive behavior subscales scores, we found gender, length of institutionalization, category fluency, and physically nonaggressive behavior subscale scores to be significant predictors of hyperphagic behaviors (p ＜ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings suggest that institutionalized male patients with dementia with longer institutionalizationwho have either a relatively low-fluency task score or a relatively high frequency of physically nonaggressive behaviors are at greater risk for exhibiting hyperphagic behaviors. Once hyperphagic behaviors are found in a patient, a transdisciplinary case meeting should be held to develop an appropriate dietary management plan, and further identification and treatment should be done by a neurologist or a psychiatrist.起始頁-結束頁：250-258資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000516篇名：Psychometric Properties of the Persian Version of the Critical Care Family Needs Inventory作者：Razieh Bandari;Majideh Heravi-Karimooi;Nahid Rejeh;Ali Montazeri;Farid Zayeri;Majid Mirmohammadkhani;Mojtaba Vaismoradi關鍵字：family;needs assessment;intensive care units;questionnaire;psychometrics;Iran.期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: Life-threatening illnesses and subsequent hospitalization in the intensive care unit (ICU) often occur unexpectedly. In many cases, this event is devastating for families and may lead to emotional stress, anxiety, and fear. To offer comprehensive and high-quality nursing care, critical care nurses not only provide critical care to patients but also attend to the psychological and social needs of patients and their families. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to assess the psychometric properties of the Persian version of the Critical Care Family Needs Inventory (CCFNI-P). Methods: This was a cross-sectional methodological research study. ForwardYbackward translation was used to develop the instrument. The first version was pretested with 10 families to assess face validity. The main sample consisted of 720 family members of hospitalized patients, composed of 360 admitted to ICUs and 360 admitted to general wards of hospitals in Tehran, Iran. Participants were selected randomly to evaluate the instrument in terms of known-groups, construct, and convergent validities. The internal consistency of the translated instrument was assessed using Cronbach's alpha coefficient. Results: A significant difference was found between the scores of participantswith patients in ICUs and participants with patients in the general wards (p G .001). In agreement with the original instrument, five distinct components were extracted from the CCFNI-P, which accounted for more than 52% of the total variance. The correlation between the total score for the instrument and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory criterion was positive and significant (r=.23, p G .04). The Cronbach's alpha coefficient for the entire instrument was .89 andmore than .70 for all dimensions. Conclusions: This study confirmed the validity of the CCFNI-P in terms of face, construct, convergent, and known groups and showed acceptable internal consistency. The CCFNI-P is valid for investigating the needs of Iranians who have a family member hospitalized in an ICU.起始頁-結束頁：259-267資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000577篇名：Iranian Families' Experience of Receiving Support During Their Patients' Surgical Process: Qualitative Study作者：Tabandeh Sadeghi;Nahid Dehghan Nayeri;Abbas Abbaszadeh關鍵字：family;qualitative study;support;surgery;waiting期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: The time spent waiting through the surgery of a loved one is stressful for family members because of their worries regarding the procedure and potential outcomes. In Iran, the attention and support of healthcare professionals focus almost exclusively on the patient. No studies have explored the related support experiences of familymembers. Understanding these experiences may facilitate the development by healthcare professionals of support strategies to alleviate the surgeryrelated stresses of patients' family members. Purpose: This study elucidates the support experiences of the Iranian families of patients undergoing surgery. Methods: A qualitative design using a content analysis approach was used to gather and analyze the support experiences of 16 Iranian families awaiting the conclusion of their relative's surgical operation. The study was conducted at a universitymedical center hospital in an urban area in Iran. After employing a purposive sampling method to select participants, semistructured interviews were used to collect data. Results: Data analysis led to the development of two main themes: ”interaction:” and ”physical proximity.” One significant finding was the role of productive interactions among family members to facilitate the passing of time and to provide a buffer. These interactions may take place among family members as well as among other companions. Conclusions: The findings of this study may be used to guide nursing practices and may help change nursing attitudes toward the familymembers of surgical patients. By better understanding the experience of families, nursesmay improve their professional actions and reduce the stress experienced by family members while waiting for the conclusion of surgery.起始頁-結束頁：268-274資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000558篇名：Confronting the Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis: A Qualitative Study of Patient Experiences作者：Masoud Fallahi-Khoshknab;Somayeh Ghafari;Kian Nourozi;Eesa Mohammadi關鍵字：diagnosis of multiple sclerosis;confronting;lived experiences;content analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: Multiple sclerosis (MS) involves complex physical and mental disabilities and often results in family, occupational, and social problems that cause difficulties in confronting the diagnosis of MS, which may delay or deny acceptance of the disease. Therefore, it is important to understand the experiences of patients in facing this disease to help and support families, communities, and healthcare teams more effectively. Purpose: This study explores the experiences of patients in confronting their diagnosis of MS. Methods: A qualitative content analysis method was used in this study. The study participants were 25 people with MS chosen via purposeful sampling from the MS associations in Isfahan and Tehran (Iran). Data were collected using unstructured interviews and analyzed using content analysis. Results: The analysis resulted in the emergence of four themes and 11 subthemes. The main themes were knowledge deficit, concealing the disease, religiosity, and emotional reactions. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings highlight the principal means bywhich patients confront a diagnosis ofMS and the needs and challenges involved in transiting successfully to acceptance and treatment. The authors hope the findings of this study will increase the information available to families and nurses regarding the reaction of patients to an MS diagnosis and have a positive impact on support programs designed to help patients confront and adapt to MS. Furthermore, these findings may serve to create a framework for developing related nursing care processes and establishing counseling and support programs that are sensitive to the religious, ideological, and cultural backgrounds of patients.起始頁-結束頁：275-282資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000589篇名：Experiences of Newly Graduated Nurses on Strategies of Gaining Self-Confidence During Their Initial Work: A Qualitative Study作者：Vahid Zamanzadeh;Fariborz Roshangar;Eskandar Fathi-Azar;Leila Valizadeh;Jodyanne Kirkwood關鍵字：newly graduated nurse;self-confidence;strategy;qualitative content analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: The presence of newly graduated nurses (NGNs) in clinical settings increases the rates of clinical errors and patient injury. In addition, the turnover rate for NGN staffs is significantly higher than the average turnover rate. Therefore, familiarizing NGNs with their workplace and increasing their professional selfconfidence increase their empowerment and efficiency. Purpose: This article elicits the strategies used by NGNs to gain self-confidence during their early career. Methods: This qualitative study was conducted using the purposive sampling method and was based on the data saturation principle. Data were collected using in-depth, semistructured interviews from 30 NGNs working at teaching hospitals in four northwest provinces of Iran during 2012 and 2013. Data were collected by means of in-depth semistructured interviews. Qualitative content analysis was used to analyze the data. Results: The interviews elicited eight coping strategies that participants used to form self-confidence during the first 6 months of their career. These strategies included familiarity, knowledge enhancement, clinical skills learning, self-exploration, validation, responsibility, mutual interaction, and personal creativity. In addition, participants used these strategies to reinforce their self-confidence during their first 2 years at work. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this research increase the understanding of NGNs, managers, and healthcare professionals regarding the strategies used by NGNs to gain self-confidence. This knowledge may be applied in programs designed to increase the empowerment and efficacy of nurses to improve the quality of patient care and reduce nurse turnover.起始頁-結束頁：283-291資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000005010篇名：Message from the Editor並列篇名：編者的話作者：陳美伶(Mei-Ling Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會11篇名：The Association Between Prenatal Sleep Quality and Obstetric Outcome並列篇名：孕期睡眠品質與生產結果之關係作者：洪瑄曼(Hsuan-Man Hung);柯淑華(Shu-Hua Ko);陳彰惠(Chung-Hey Chen)關鍵字：睡眠品質;懷孕;生產結果;sleep quality;pregnancy;obstetric outcome.期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　最近國際睡眠障礙分類中新增孕期睡眠障礙項目，可見孕期睡眠障礙是重要的婦女健康議題之一。目的　本研究旨在探討第二孕期和第三孕期睡眠品質和產科－新生兒健康指標之相關性。方法　本研究採前瞻性的研究設計，樣本來源為南部地區兩家教學醫院之產前門診，共收集有效樣本128位第二孕期和120位第三孕期婦女，完成填寫匹茲堡睡眠品質量表，並於產後從病歷追蹤其分娩及新生兒出生紀錄。資料收集時間為2007年10月至2008年06月。結果　孕期睡眠障礙（匹茲堡睡眠品質量表得分 ＞ 5）的盛行率：第二孕期58%，第三孕期66%；未上班之孕婦比職業婦女有較高之睡眠障礙盛行率。產後追蹤孕婦的分娩生產紀錄和其新生兒的出生紀錄發現，第三孕期有睡眠障礙的孕婦於生產時，使用真空吸引協助分娩的比率顯著較高。結論／實務應用　本研究發現，第三孕期有睡眠障礙的孕婦於生產時，使用真空吸引協助分娩的比率顯著較高，故建議產前照護宜包括偵測睡眠品質，提供前瞻性睡眠諮商，以協助孕婦在母性角色過渡時期有順利的身心調適。英文摘要：Background: Pregnancy-associated sleep disorder is a new category on the latest version of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders. It is a significant problem for pregnant women. Purpose: The present follow-up study assesses the association between sleep quality during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy and obstetric-neonatal outcomes. Methods: A prospective follow-up study design was used. Follow-up examination of the obstetric birth records in the immediate postpartum period were carried out on 128 second-trimester and 120 third-trimester women and their newborns in two hospitals in Taiwan. Poor sleep quality was identified using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. Data were collected from October 2007 to June 2008. Results: The prevalence of poor sleepers (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index score 9 5) was 58% for second-trimester participants and 66% for third-trimester participants; participants who were unemployed reported a significantly higher prevalence of poor sleep quality than those who were employed. Subsequent review of the participant’s obstetric birth records revealed that third-trimester poor sleepers were more likely to have had a vacuum-assisted delivery. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study identified poor sleep quality during the third trimester as a novel risk factor for vacuum-assisted delivery. We suggest that prenatal healthcare providers focus greater attention to the sleep disturbance condition of pregnant women and provide proactive sleep counseling to facilitate pregnant women’s adjustment to the new psychosocial and physiological demands of motherhood.起始頁-結束頁：147-154資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000003912篇名：The Effect of Yoga Exercise on Improving Depression, Anxiety, and Fatigue in Women with Breast Cancer: A Randomized Controlled Trial並列篇名：瑜珈運動對乳癌病人憂鬱、焦慮及疲憊改善之成效：隨機控制試驗作者：曹朝榮(Chao-Jung Taso);林惠賢(Huey-Shyan Lin);林紋麗(Wen-Li Lin);陳淑銘(Shu-Ming Chen);黃文聰(Wen-Tsung Huang);陳尚文(Shang-Wen Chen)關鍵字：瑜珈;乳癌;憂鬱;焦慮;疲憊;yoga;breast cancer;depression;anxiety;fatigue期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　憂鬱、焦慮及疲憊是乳癌病人於化學治療期間最困擾的症狀，影響病人的生活品質，實證顯示瑜珈可緩解癌症病人的焦慮、憂鬱及疲憊。然而，鮮少有關瑜珈於乳癌族群之成效研究。因此，應該測試瑜珈的介入措施以提昇乳癌婦女的身心健康。目的　測試8週瑜珈運動對化學治療期間乳癌婦女身心健康，特別是憂鬱、焦慮及疲憊之成效。方法　收案未轉移乳癌病人共60位，隨機分派至實驗組（30位）與對照組（30位）。實驗組接受每週2次，每次60分鐘，共計8週瑜珈介入措施，對照組接受常規照護。結果　詹森內曼程序的分析顯示，瑜珈介入滿4週，對於前測值較小（疲憊程度前測值單項平均＜ 3.31，疲憊影響日常生活程度前測值單項平均＜ 3.22）的病人有降低疲憊和疲憊影響日常生活程度之效果。介入滿8週，則對於具適當前測值（疲憊程度前測值單項平均＜ 7.30，及疲憊影響日常生活程度前測值單項平均＜ 5.34）的更多病人（約佔75%）有降低疲憊和疲憊影響日常生活程度之效果。然而，8週的瑜珈介入無法顯著的改善參與者的憂鬱（F = 1.29, p ＞ .05）及焦慮（F = 2.7, p ＞ .05）。結論／實務　應用本研究所發展的8週瑜珈運動計畫，可有效的降低乳癌病人之疲憊，但未能有效的降低憂鬱及焦慮。腫瘤護理人員可強化臨床衛生教育，應用瑜珈協助改善乳癌病人於化學治療期間之疲憊。英文摘要：Background: Depression, anxiety, and fatigue are among the most significant problems that influence the quality of life of patients with breast cancer who receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Although evidence has shown yoga to decrease anxiety, depression, and fatigue in patients with cancer, few studies on the effects of yoga have targeted patients with breast cancer. Yoga interventions should be tested to promote the psychological and physical health of women with breast cancer. Purpose: This study examines the effectiveness of an 8-week yoga exercise program in promoting the psychological and physical health of women with breast cancer undergoing adjuvant chemotherapy in terms of depression, anxiety, and fatigue. Methods: A sample of 60 women with nonmetastatic breast cancer was recruited. Participants were randomly assigned into either the experimental group (n = 30) or the control group (n = 30). A 60-minute, twice-per-week yoga exercise was implemented for 8 weeks as the intervention for the participants in the experimental group. The control group received standard care only. Results: Analysis using the Johnson-Neyman procedure found that the yoga exercise reduced overall fatigue and the interference of fatigue in everyday life for the experimental group participants. Significant reductions were obtained after 4 weeks of intervention participation for those experimental group patients with relatively low starting baseline values (baseline item mean value G 3.31 and 3.22, respectively) and after 8 weeks for most patients (approximately 75%) with moderate starting baseline values (baseline item mean value G 7.30 and 5.34, respectively). The 8-week intervention did not significantly improve the levels of depression (F = 1.29, p 9 .05) or anxiety (F = 2.7, p 9 .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The 8-week yoga exercise program developed in this study effectively reduced fatigue in patients with breast cancer but did not reduce depression or anxiety. Oncology nurses should strengthen their clinical health education and apply yoga to reduce the fatigue experienced by patients with breast cancer who undergo adjuvant chemotherapy.起始頁-結束頁：155-164資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004413篇名：Factors Affecting Perceptions of Family Function in Caregivers of Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorders並列篇名：注意力不足過動症兒童之照顧者知覺家庭功能的影響因素作者：陳季員(Jih-Yuan Chen);Mary-Jo Clark;張永源(Yong-Yuan Chang);劉雅瑛(Yea-Ying Liu );張瓊櫻(Chiung-Ying Chang)關鍵字：家庭耐受力;家庭支持;杜克健康量表;家庭評估量表;注意力不足過動症;family hardiness;family APGAR;Duke Health Profile;family assessment device;attention deficit hyperactivity disorder期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　注意力不足過動症（attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder, ADHD）是兒童神經行為障礙最常見的疾病，30-70%的病例其病症可能會持續至成人。ADHD長期持續增加的特徵，如過動和攻擊致影響學業成績及社會互動，因而增加家庭的負荷。另影響ADHD兒童家庭功能因子的訊息也較缺乏。目的　本研究目的是檢測家庭人口學變項、特質、及家庭因素如支持、耐受力、和照顧者健康，與家庭功能結果關係間之理論性的衍生。方法　應用橫斷性研究及結構程式模式的分析，取122位注意力不足過動症兒童之家庭主要照顧者自我填寫有關人口學、收入、職業、照顧者健康、家庭支持、家庭耐受力及家庭功能的問卷，即決定應用杜克健康量表、家庭關懷度指數、家庭耐受力量表及家庭評估量表之評量。結果　利用AMOS軟體之路經及結構方程模式分析發現，模型適配度良好（χ^2 = .249, df =1, p = .613, minimum discrepancy C = .249），基準化適合度指標（goodness-of-fit index）= .999，調整基準化適合度指標（adjusted goodness of fit index）= .990，標準適合度指標（normed fit index）=.999，比較適合度指標（comparative fit index） = 1.0，平方均值估計殘差（rootmean square error of approximation）= .000：家庭功能和主要照顧者健康是透過家庭耐受力及家庭支持的直接影響力，而家庭支持即是家庭耐受力及家庭功能之間的中介變項，也是家庭耐受力及主要照顧者健康之間的中介變項。此結構模式形成的機率是55.6%。結論／實務應用　本研究發現，經由增加家庭支持、促進家庭耐受力及主要照顧者健康以增進家庭功能，可幫助護理人員提昇對注意力不足過動症兒童的評估和介入策略。英文摘要：Background: Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common neurobehavioral disorder of childhood. ADHD has been shown to persist into adulthood in 30%-70% of cases. The long-term and escalating nature of ADHD creates an increasing burden on families because of the influence of hyperactivity and impulsivity on academic achievement and social interaction. There is a lack of information on factors influencing function in the families of children with ADHD. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to test theoretically derived relationships among family demographic characteristics; family factors such as support, hardiness, and caregiver health; and family-functioning outcomes. Methods: This study used a cross-sectional study and structural equation modeling approach. A self-report questionnaire collected information from 122 caregivers on demographics, income, employment, and marital status data as well as on personal health, family support, family hardiness, and family function statuses as determined, respectively, using the Duke Health Profile, Family APGAR score, Family Hardiness Index, and Family Assessment Device. Results: Structural equation modeling provided a reasonable fit to the data using AMOS (χ^2 = .249, df = 1, p = .613, minimum discrepancy C = .249), goodness-of-fit index (.999), adjusted goodness of fit index (.990), normed fit index (.999), comparative fit index (1.0), and root mean square error of approximation (.000). Results indicated a 55.6% probability of becoming the construct model, with family hardiness and family support directly affecting family function and caregiver health. Family support functioned as a mediator in the relationship between family hardiness and family function. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study help nurses improve professional assessments and interventions for families of children with ADHD by highlighting the importance of increased family support, promoting family hardiness, and promoting caregivers' health to improved family function.起始頁-結束頁：165-175資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004214篇名：Exploring the Relationship Between Personality Features and Teaching Self-Efficacy in Clinical Nursing Preceptors並列篇名：護理臨床教師之人格特質與教學自我效能之相關分析作者：李藹慈(Ai-Tzu Li);蘇鈺雯(Yu-Wen Su)關鍵字：人格特質;教學自我效能;護理臨床教師;護理教育;personality traits;teaching self-efficacy;nursing preceptors;nursing education期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　護理臨床教師制度的目的，在於透過有經驗的指導者，為新進臨床工作的護理師，提供工作指引及角色模範。目的　本研究在探索護理臨床教師之人格特質與教學自我效能之間的關聯性。方法　本研究採取問卷調查法，2009年6月於台灣某區域教學醫院，邀請116位護理臨床教師參加本研究（平均年齡31.2歲）。問卷分為三個部份：（一）個人基本資料；（二）艾桑克人格量表（四個向度：外向、神經質、精神質和掩飾性）；（三）教學自我效能量表（六個向度：成熟的人格特質、教學自我效能信念、充分的專業能力、有效的教學策略、和諧的人際關係以及客觀的教學評量）。並使用廣義線性迴歸模式來統計兩份量表多個向度之間的相關性。結果　分析發現，外向與成熟的人格特質、教學自我效能信念、專業能力、有效的教學策略及客觀的教學評量成正相關。神經質與成熟的人格特質成負相關。精神質與教學自我效能量表各向度均無關聯性。而掩飾性分數較高時，充分的專業能力和有效的教學策略的得分較低。結論　本研究顯示，人格特質與教學自我效能之間的相關性，藉由對於護理臨床教師之人格特質的了解，有助於形塑稱職的護理臨床教師。英文摘要：Background: The clinical nursing preceptor system, first introduced in the 1960s, is a one-on-one education and practice model. Preceptorship programs assign experienced registered nurses (preceptors) as mentors or role models for new clinical nurses (preceptees). Purpose: The objective of this study was to delineate the relationship between personality features and teaching self-efficacy in clinical nursing preceptors. Methods: In June 2009, clinical nursing preceptors at a county hospital in Taiwan were asked to complete three questionnaires, including (a) background demographics, (b) Eysenck Personality Questionnaire, and (c) the teaching self-efficacy evaluation. A generalized linear model was applied to determine the associations between the six dimensions of teaching self-efficacy (maturity, teaching self-efficacy beliefs, professional skill, teaching strategy effectiveness, quality of interpersonal relationships, and objective teaching evaluation) and four dimensions related to personality features (extraversion, neuroticism, psychoticism, and the lie scale), adjusted for baseline characteristics. Results: One hundred sixteen nurse preceptors (mean age = 31.2 years, range = 25Y54 years) participated in this survey. Analysis showed that extraversion was related to higher scores for maturity, teaching self-efficacy beliefs, professional skill, teaching strategy effectiveness, and objective teaching evaluation. A higher neuroticism score was negatively associated with maturity. The psychoticism score had no significant associations. A higher score on the lie scale was related to lower professional skill and less teaching strategy effectiveness. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Personality features relate significantly to teaching self-efficacy in nursing preceptors. This study identified personality features that may influence the success of nurses in becoming competent clinical preceptors.起始頁-結束頁：176-182資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004115篇名：Psychosocial Correlates of Parenting a Child with Autistic Disorder作者：Latefa Ali Dardas;Muayyad M. Ahmad關鍵字：autistic disorder;parenting;psychosocial correlates;canonical correlation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: The lifelong experience of raising a child with a complex developmental disability such as autistic disorder is considered one of the most significant parenting stressors, with the potential to spill over into various areas of the life of parents. Therefore, studying the psychological functioning for parents of children with developmental disabilities requires the consideration of multiple factors acting and interacting concurrently. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between two sets of variables in a sample of parents of children with autistic disorder. The first set was composed of the parents' characteristics and the coping strategies used. The second set was composed of three stress subscales-parental distress (PD), parent-child dysfunctional interaction (PCDI), and difficult child (DC)-and the parental quality of life (QOL). Methods: Canonical correlation multivariate analysis was used to examine the relationship between the sets of variables in 184 Jordanian parents of children with autistic disorder. Results: The analyses revealed that the parents who have higher incomes, use diverse problem-solving strategies, exhibit less escape-avoidance, and exhibit less responsibility acceptance behavior tended to report lower PD, PCDI, and DC scores and a higher QOL score. The analyses also revealed that being an older parent, having more time since the child's autistic diagnosis, and using more distancing coping strategies were associated with lower PD scores, higher PCDI and DC scores, and better QOL. Conclusions: This study is the first to investigate a wide range of parental psychosocial impacts as well as several sociodemo-graphic factors that are possibly associated with raising a child with autistic disorder. The results indicate that health professionals working with parents of children with autistic disorder need to consider holistically the factors that can potentially affect the parents' health and well-being and provide care that focuses on the parents as both clients and caregivers.起始頁-結束頁：183-191資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000002316篇名：A Rehabilitation Program for Alzheimer's Disease作者：Bernat-Carles Serda i Ferrer;Arantza Del Valle關鍵字：Alzheimer's;quality of life;physical condition;exercise;rehabilitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: We present the design and implementation of a rehabilitation program (RP) adapted for people diagnosed with various phases of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The RP is a cognitive stimulation program that integrates the recommendations of the American College of Sports Medicine for aerobic, resistance, and balance exercises. Purpose: The aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of the RP on the physical and functional capacities, cognitive functions, and quality of life (QOL) of patients with AD. Methods: We enrolled 64 participants with AD for an RP intervention lasting 12 months. The research used a quasiexper-imental approach. Assessed variables included cognitive ability (Mini-Mental State Examination), fitness (Chair Stand Test), level of independence (Barthel Index), and QOL (the 12-item Short Form Health Survey). Statistical analyses used the Student's t test, Mann-Whitney U test, and the chi-squared test. The statistical significance level was set at 5%. Results: The results indicate the effectiveness of the RP in improving the physical fitness and the QOL of participants with mild- to moderate-phase AD. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The RP has a positive effect on patients with mild- to moderate-phase AD. However, we identified no effect for the RP on cognitive ability. These findings provide empirical evidence to support the use of RP as an effective complementary therapy. Improving the physical capacity and the QOL may have important long-term benefits for the older adults and their caregivers. The results of this study should be helpful to decision makers and geriatric health centers in planning and implementing RPs for elderly people with AD.起始頁-結束頁：192-199資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004617篇名：Work-Family Conflict and Job Performance in Nurses: The Moderating Effects of Social Support並列篇名：醫院護理人員的工作家庭衝突與工作績效－社會支持之干擾效果作者：王美玲(Mei-Ling Wang);蔡麗珍(Li-Jane Tsai)關鍵字：工作－家庭衝突;工作績效;社會支持;work-family conflict;job performance;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　近來大量女性投入勞動市場，傳統全職工作的父親、全職家庭主婦的母親之家庭模式漸漸式微，取代的是雙職家庭型態。護理人員通常在家庭與工作中扮演雙重角色，且希望能在兩者中取得平衡，故有「工作—家庭衝突」問題。目的　本研究旨在檢測護理工作情境中，工作—家庭衝突與工作績效間關係，並探討不同社會支持來源對其干擾之效果。方法　本研究使用自評式問卷，為避免共同方法變異問題，研究資料分兩個不同時間點收集。研究對象為台灣五家醫院護理人員，共發出520份問卷，回收501份，有效問卷495份。統計分析則主要使用階層迴歸方法。結果　（一）護理人員「家庭衝突工作」程度對其工作績效具負向影響；（一）「工作衝突家庭」程度對其工作績效則無顯著影響；（三）朋友支持將強化「家庭衝突工作」對工作績效的負向影響；（四）同事支持將弱化「工作衝突家庭」與工作績效間之關係。結論／實務應用　研究結果希望對於護理管理者、醫院組織與未來研究有所幫助。醫院組織、護理部門應建立工作家庭平衡的組織文化，且制訂符合護理人員所需的人力資源管理策略，以降低工作家庭之衝突。英文摘要：Background: A large number of women are employed in the labor market. This phenomenon has widely supplanted the traditional family model of full-time working fathers and full-time housewives with the dual-income family model. Most nurses have both family and work responsibilities and hope to balance these two aspects of their lives. Work-family conflict (WFC) is thus a significant issue faced by professional nurses. Purposes: This study examines the relationship between WFC and job performance in the nursing context and explores the moderating effects of different sources of social support. Methods: This study questionnaire used a self-reporting scale. To avoid common method variance, research data were collected at two time points. Five hundred twenty questionnaires were sent to nurses working at five hospitals in Taiwan, and 501 were returned, of which 495 were valid and used in analysis. Hierarchical regression analysis was used to test study hypotheses. Results: Study findings were (a) degree of family-to-work conflict influenced job performance negatively, (b) level of WFC did not significantly affect job performance, (c) support from friends strengthened the negative effect of family-to-work conflict on job performance, and (d) support from coworkers weakened the relationship between WFC and job performance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: It is hoped that the findings of this study will be useful for nursing managers, organizations, and future research. Hospital organizations and nursing departments have a positive role to play in fostering an organizational culture that helps its staffs balance work and family responsibilities. A strategy of human resource management that is consistent with the demands of nurses may help reduce WFC.起始頁-結束頁：200-207資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004018篇名：The Link of Sexual Sensation Seeking to Acceptance of Cybersex, Multiple Sexual Partners, and One-Night Stands Among Taiwanese College Students並列篇名：台灣地區大學生的性刺激尋求與網路性愛、多重性伴侶及一夜情接受度之間的關聯性研究作者：盧鴻毅(Hung-Yi Lu);馬立君(Li-Chun Ma);李彩歆(Tsai-Shin Lee);侯心雅(Hsin-Ya Hou);廖慧燕(Hui-Yen Liao)關鍵字：性刺激尋求;網路性行為;多重性伴侶;一夜情;sexual sensation seeking;cybersex;multiple sexual partners;one-night stands期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　台灣地區的年輕人對於性這件事所抱持的態度愈來愈開放，性行為也愈來愈活躍；儘管投入大量金錢及時間於性教育，但效果卻有限。目的　本研究欲探討台灣地區大學生的性刺激尋求與其對網路性行為、多重性伴侶及一夜情之間是否存在顯著的關聯性。方法　此一橫斷面研究採用多階集群抽樣，最後共有來自8所大學的516位大學生參與研究，當中507位完成問卷調查，有效回收率為98.26%。結果　研究結果發現，相較於低性刺激尋求者，高性刺激尋求者比較能接受網路性行為、多重性伴侶及一夜情。結論／實務應用　本研究建議，大學校園健康促進活動規劃人員（例如校園護理人員）進行性教育時，應先鎖定高刺激尋求者，性教育的內容也應採用較新奇、刺激及較多元的訊息，藉此吸引目標對象的注意力，以提高性教育的效果。英文摘要：Background: Young people in Taiwan have become more liberal and active toward sex. Despite heavy investments of money, time, and effort, sexual education programs have generally lagged expectations. Purpose: Personality traits such as sexual sensation seeking are found to be significantly associated with risky sexual behaviors. This study, therefore, attempts to explore the link of sexual sensation seeking to acceptance by Taiwanese college students of cybersex, multiple sexual partners, and one-night stands. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted using the multistage cluster sampling method. Five hundred sixteen students recruited from eight universities/colleges in Taiwan participated in this study, and 507 completed the self-report questionnaire. The valid response rate was 98.26%. Results: The results reveal that high-sexual-sensation seekers were more likely than low-sexual-sensation seekers to accept cybersex, multiple sexual partners, and one-night stands. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study suggests that the designers of campus-based health prevention campaigns should target campaign messages on high-sexual-sensation seekers using novel, thrilling, and complex messages to achieve safe sex educational campaign goals.起始頁-結束頁：208-215資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004319篇名：Do Randomized Controlled Nursing Trials Have a Pragmatic or Explanatory Attitude? Findings from the Pragmatic-Explanatory Continuum Indicator Summary (PRECIS) Tool Exercise作者：Alvisa Palese;Maria Grazia Bevilacqua;Angelo Dante關鍵字：explanatory;pragmatic;PRECIS tool;nursing discipline;randomized controlled trials期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)may be categorized as either effectiveness trials or efficacy trials, which may be categorized by the Pragmatic-Explanatory Continuum Indicator Summary (PRECIS) tool. However, no data regarding the application of the PRECIS tool in a cluster of RCTs belonging to a specific discipline such as nursing are available. Purpose: The principal aim of this study was to assess the prevailing nature (pragmatic vs. explanatory) of a cluster of clinical nursing RCTs. Evaluating the suitability of the PRECIS in the analysis of nursing RCTs was the secondary aim. Methods: All nursing RCTs published in 2010 were identified through a systematic review and extracted in full-text form. An explanatory-pragmatic (E-P) group consisting of 11 researchers trained in the use of the PRECIS tool evaluated each RCT in terms of 10 domains, respectively scored on a scale ranging from 5 (pragmatic) to 1 (explanatory). The E-P group further scored the feasibility of the PRECIS tool using a numerical rating scale (0 = not at all, 10 = entirely feasible). Results: Along the pragmatic-explanatory continuum, assuming 50 as the highest degree of pragmatism and 10 as the highest degree of explanatory, the evaluation of nursing RCTs returned an average of 31.1 (median = 31, SD = 7.18, range = 13Y44). On the pragmatic-explanatory continuum, the evaluated nursing RCTs ended to be pragmatic, which seems to be consistent with the purposes of the nursing discipline. The feasibility of the PRECIS tool in the evaluation of nursing trials as perceived by the EYP Group was, on average, 7.09 (SD = 1.09, 95% CI [6.35, 7.82]). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Applying the PRECIS tool is perceived to be highly feasible in the critical appraisal of a cluster of RCTs in a specific discipline such as nursing.起始頁-結束頁：216-220資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000004520篇名：Message from the Editor並列篇名：編者的話作者：蔡佩珊(Pei-Shan Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會01篇名：Parenting Style of Women Who Conceived Using In Vitro Fertilization: A Meta-Analysis並列篇名：使用試管嬰兒協助受孕之母親的教養形態：統合分析研究作者：王郁茗(Yu-Ming Wang);徐畢卿(Bih-Ching Shu);Susan Fetzer;張瑩如(Ying-Ju Chang)關鍵字：教養型態;教養行為;試管嬰兒;人工生殖技術;統合分析;parenting style;parenting behavior;in vitro fertilization;assisted reproduction technology;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　婦女心理健康有助於教養型態，但試管嬰兒是否影響婦女教養型態仍未知。目的　比較試管嬰兒協助受孕母親與自然懷孕母親教養型態之差異。方法　採統合分析，以教養、為人母、親子關係、養育、不孕、人工生殖技術、試管嬰兒、單一精子卵質內顯微注射為關鍵字，搜尋1978~2011年醫學、心理學、護理學文獻資料庫。選入標準為英文發表於同儕審查期刊、教養型態量化，可歸納為溫暖和控制、個案對照研究、可計算效果量。排除標準為以受贈精卵進行試管嬰兒、代理孕母、同性戀。14份研究符合標準，以The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale評價研究品質，統計方法為效果量與同質性檢定。結果　試管嬰兒協助受孕母親的控制教養行為高於自然懷孕母親（d = 0.148, p ＜ .01），溫暖、拒絕、尊重自主教養行為則無差異。結論／實務應用　本研究之試管嬰兒協助受孕母親的控制教養行為高於自然懷孕母親，此結果有助於醫療照護專業人員了解試管嬰兒協助受孕母親的教養型態，進一步發展介入方法，協助降低為人母焦慮及提升其心理健康。英文摘要：Background: Research has shown that the mental health of women contributes to their parenting style. However, it remains unclear whether the experience of in vitro fertilization (IVF) affects parenting style. Purpose: This study was designed to assess whether there is a difference in parenting styles between women who conceived using IVF and those who conceived naturally. Methods: This meta-analysis searched three electronic databases (MEDLINE, PsychInfo, and CINAHL) for relevant articles published between 1978 and 2011. Key words used included parenting, mothering, parent-child relations, childrearing, infertility, assisted reproductive technique, IVF, and intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Study inclusion criteria were as follows: published in an English-language peer-reviewed journal, with the definition of parenting style categorized as one of two dimensions: warmth and control; quantification of the parenting behaviors; use of a case-controlled study design to compare IVF and natural conceptions; and reported data sufficient to calculate the effect sizes. Studies that included women who conceived using a donor egg or sperm for IVF and those that included women who were either surrogates or in homosexual relationships were excluded. Three hundred ninety studies were identified. Fourteen studies met the inclusion criteria. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale was used to appraise the quality of the data. Results: The IVF participants used significantly greater controlling parenting behaviors than their natural conception participant peers (d = 0.148, p ＜ .01). There was no difference between the two groups in terms of parenting behaviors related to warmth, rejection, or respect for autonomy. The homogeneity test for the effect size of warmth and controlling parenting behavior achieved significance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Women who conceive using IVF have slightly but still significantly greater controlling parenting behaviors than women who conceive naturally. The results of this study may help professionals to better understand the parenting style of IVF women and develop appropriate interventions to reduce parenting anxiety and promote the mental health of IVF women.起始頁-結束頁：69-80資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000252篇名：Development and Psychometric Evaluation of the Psychological Cigarette Dependence Scale for Male Smokers in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣男性吸菸者之吸菸心理依賴量表的發展及信、效度檢測作者：黃芷苓(Chih-Ling Huang);鄭中平(Chung-Ping Cheng);王秀紅(Hsiu-Hung Wang)關鍵字：心理層面;吸菸依賴;效度;信度;psychological domain;cigarette dependence;validity;reliability期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　吸菸者心理層面之吸菸依賴的影響，通常比菸草中尼古丁本身的作用更大，然而目前對於心理層面之吸菸依賴概念的研究仍未有定論。目的　發展及檢測本土之吸菸心理依賴量表。方法　本研究的過程包括概念的構面確立，透過吸菸者的訪談內容產生量表題庫，專家審查題目，進行量表的同時效標及建構效度和信度的檢測。初步量表建立後，在台灣南部的社區中招募256位男性成人吸菸者進行量表的信效度檢測。結果　因素分析的結果得到37題吸菸心理依賴量表，包括2個因素，命名為吸菸的生活連結和吸菸的健康關注。本量表與尼古丁依賴量表正相關（r = .54, p ＜ .01），內在一致性（Cronbach’s alpha）.94，二週再測穩定性為.77（N = 28）。結論／實務應用　本研究的初步結果，吸菸心理依賴量表具有良好的信、效度，護理人員可以運用此量表評估吸菸者心理層面之吸菸依賴情形，並且依評估內容進行適當的介入措施。英文摘要：Background: The influence of psychological factors on cigarette dependence often surpasses the direct effects of the nicotine itself. Researcher opinions on the nature and extent of psychological contributors to cigarette dependence vary widely. Purpose: This study develops and psychometrically tests the Psychological Cigarette Dependence Scale (PCDS) for male smokers in Taiwan. Methods: The PCDS was developed using domain identification, individual interviews for item generation, expert reviews, and testing for construct validity and instrument stability. After initial item analysis, the PCDS was tested for concurrent and construct validity and reliability on 256 adult male smokers recruited from community centers, trade and business organizations, private companies, and factories in southern Taiwan. Participants were limited to adult men because female smokers are a small (4.1%) proportion of the female population in Taiwan and thus are difficult to recruit in statistically significant numbers. Results: Exploratory factor analysis showed that lifelong binding and health concerns are the two predominating factors addressed by the 37-item PCDS. The PCDS correlated positively with the Fagerstrom questionnaire (r = .54, p G .01). Cronbach’s alpha was .94, and test-retest reliability (intraclass coefficient) was .77 (N = 28). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Preliminary evidence suggests that this scale is a valid measure of psychological cigarette dependence. Assessment results may help nursing professionals focus on smoking cessation interventions that are tailored to the patterns and severity of patients’ psychological cigarette dependence.起始頁-結束頁：81-89資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000323篇名：Validation of Self-Directed Learning Instrument and Establishment of Normative Data for Nursing Students in Taiwan: Using Polytomous Item Response Theory並列篇名：驗證自我導向學習量表及建置台灣護理學生自我導向學習常模－運用多元化試題反應理論作者：鄭夙芬(Su-Fen Cheng);李皎正(Jane Lee-Hsieh);Michael A. Turton;林寬佳(Kuan-Chia Lin)關鍵字：自我導向學習;試題反應理論;量表發展;常模;self-directed learning;item response theory;scale development;norm期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　自我導向學習是護理人員應具備之重要能力，然而很少有研究針對護理學生的自我導向學習能力建立常模。本研究採用試題反應理論模式有效建立台灣不同護理學制學生之自我導向學習能力常模。目的　本研究之目的為：（一）運用試題反應理論之等級反應模式再次驗證本研究團隊以驗證性因素分析發展之自我導向學習量表；（二）建立台灣四個護理學制學生之自我導向學習能力常模。方法　採分層隨機取樣方式合併等比率等機率抽樣原則，選取每個學制至少15%學生參與本研究，合計參與之護理院校為13所，護生人數為7,879人。本研究使用之測量工具為鄭、郭、林及李（2010）發展之20 題自我導向學習量表（self directed learning instrument, SDLI）。運用試題反應理論之等級反應模式中之二參數對數型模式（鑑別度及難易度），併以MULTILOG統計軟體進行資料分析，再以百分等級建立常模。結果　從分析每一試題訊息之分數顯示，SDLI中有18題呈現極高度之鑑別度，2題呈現高度之鑑別度，分數越高，表示SDLI在預測護生自我導向學習具有高鑑別度。SDLI各向度及整體量表之信度介於.80<U+223C>.94。從分析整體試題訊息功能之分數顯示，除了頂尖2.5%之學生外，SDLI量表適用於台灣全部護理學生，且本研究建立之自我導向學習能力常模，亦適用於台灣四個護理學制之全部護生。結論　試題反應理論是一種強有力、有效益的評鑑量表之方法。本研究建立之自我導向學習 能力常模，可提供台灣護理教育者及護理學生做為評估自我導向學習能力之參考標準。英文摘要：Background: Little research has investigated the establishment of norms for nursing students' self-directed learning (SDL) ability, recognized as an important capability for professional nurses. An item response theory (IRT) approach was used to establish norms for SDL abilities valid for the different nursing programs in Taiwan. Purposes: The purposes of this study were (a) to use IRT with a graded response model to reexamine the SDL instrument, or the SDLI, originally developed by this research team using confirmatory factor analysis and (b) to establish SDL ability norms for the four different nursing education programs in Taiwan. Methods: Stratified random sampling with probability proportional to size was used. A minimum of 15% of students from the four different nursing education degree programs across Taiwan was selected. A total of 7,879 nursing students from 13 schools were recruited. The research instrument was the 20-item SDLI developed by Cheng, Kuo, Lin, and Lee-Hsieh (2010). IRT with the graded response model was used with a two-parameter logistic model (discrimination and difficulty) for the data analysis, calculated using MULTILOG. Norms were established using percentile rank. Results: Analysis of item information and test information functions revealed that 18 items exhibited very high discrimination and two items had high discrimination. The test information function was higher in this range of scores, indicating greater precision in the estimate of nursing student SDL. Reliability fell between .80 and .94 for each domain and the SDLI as a whole. The total information function shows that the SDLI is appropriate for all nursing students, except for the top 2.5%. SDL ability norms were established for each nursing education program and for the nation as a whole. Conclusions: IRT is shown to be a potent and useful methodology for scale evaluation. The norms for SDL established in this research will provide practical standards for nursing educators and students in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：90-100資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000274篇名：Determinants of Intentions among Taiwanese Women to Seek Information Regarding Cervical Cancer並列篇名：影響台灣地區婦女尋求子宮頸癌相關資訊意願的因素作者：盧鴻毅(Hung-Yi Lu)關鍵字：子宮頸癌;主觀規範;態度;感知的行為控制;感知的風險;cervical cancer;subjective norms;attitude;perceived behavioral control;perceived risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　愈來愈多的台灣婦女面對子宮頸癌的威脅，但過往研究對於那些因素會影響台灣地區婦女尋求子宮頸癌相關資訊的意願，討論並不多。目的　基於計畫行為理論及風險感知概念，本研究欲探討影響台灣地區婦女尋求子宮頸癌相關資訊的意願之因素。方法　此一橫斷面研究於2010年4月13日至27日之間進行，針對台灣地區三十五歲以上的婦女進行調查，透過系統性抽樣，總共有1,001位受訪者成功地完成本研究所進行的調查。結果　研究結果發現，主觀規範、態度及感知的行為控制皆正向地預測受訪者尋求子宮頸癌相關資訊的意願。此外，感覺自身比較可能罹患子宮頸癌的受訪者，尋求子宮頸癌相關資訊的意願比較高；感覺他人比較可能罹患子宮頸癌的受訪者，其尋求子宮頸癌相關資訊的意願相較之下比較低。結論／實務應用　此研究加入風險感知的概念，不但拓展了計畫行為理論相關研究的範疇，也提供對健康傳播與資訊尋求感興趣的學者參考依據，以進一步瞭解子宮頸癌相關資訊尋求行為。英文摘要：Background: Women in Taiwan are at increasing risk of cervical cancer. The determinants of intentions to seek information about cervical cancer among women have not been adequately addressed in previous studies. Purpose: This study uses the theory of planned behavior and the concept of perceived risk to explore the determinants of intentions to seek information about cervical cancer among Taiwanese women. Methods: This cross-sectional study surveyed Taiwanese women aged 35 years and over. Systematic sampling was adopted to identify potential participants from the public telephone directory. A nationwide sample of 1,001 female adults aged 35 years and over completed the telephone-based survey questionnaire from April 13 to 27 of 2010. Results: The results of this study showed that subjective norms, attitude, and perceived behavioral control positively and significantly predicted the information-seeking intentions about cervical cancer of participants. In addition, those seeking information regarding cervical cancer were more concerned about risks to themselves than about risks to others. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This investigation contributes to the literature on theory of planned behavior by documenting perceived personal risks to the patient and risks to others regarding a diagnosis of cervical cancer. It is hoped that this investigation assists scholars of health communication and information seeking behavior to better understand and positively address the determinants of the intentions of women to seek information about cervical cancer.起始頁-結束頁：101-110資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000305篇名：Depression in Older Residents with Stroke Living in Long-Term Care Facilities並列篇名：長期照護機構中風老人憂鬱之探討作者：黃惠子(Hui-Tzu Huang);莊宇慧(Yeu-Hui Chuang);薛逸華(Yi-Hua Hsueh);藺寶珍(Pao-Chen Lin);李碧娥(Bih-O Lee);陳清惠(Ching-Huey Chen)關鍵字：日常生活功能;憂鬱;長期照護機構;老年住民;中風;activity of daily living;depression;long-term care facility;older resident;stroke期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　在台灣腦中風為死亡原因之第三位，中風後老人由於失能或照顧之需要而入住長期機構。中風與機構安置此兩種生活事件之衝擊，可能使中風存活者傾向憂鬱。然而目前缺乏長期照護機構中風老人憂鬱之研究。目的　探討長期照護機構中風老年住民憂鬱的相關因素。方法　採橫斷式研究，於南台灣共23家長期照護機構參與本研究，包含7間護理之家、11間養護中心及5間安養機構。以立意取樣，選取65歲以上有中風病史之住民，排除認知及溝通障礙者。資料收集包含社會人口學資料、巴氏量表及台灣老人憂鬱量表。結果　共111位中風老年住民參與本研究，結果36.9%（n = 41）之中風老年住民有憂鬱情形。憂鬱比率分別是護理之家45.7%、養護中心36.2%、安養中心22.2%。護理之家及養護機構、不識字及低巴氏分數的老年中風住民顯示較多的憂鬱症狀。結論／實務應用　健康照護者需針對中風老人入住機構時進行憂鬱篩選，並定期評估及監測老人的憂鬱狀況，特別是低教育、身體功能差、及居住於護理之家及養護中心的老年住民，需特別關注憂鬱的適當照護。英文摘要：Background: Stroke is the third leading cause of death in Taiwan. Poststroke older adults are often admitted to long-term care facilities. The impacts of the two concurrent life events of stroke and relocation may increase the risk of depression in stroke survivors. Depression in elderly stroke survivor residents of long-term care facilities has not been studied. Purpose: This study explores the factors associated with depression in older residents with stroke living in long-term care facilities. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used. Twenty-three institutions in southern Taiwan participated in this study, including seven nursing homes, 11 intermediate-care facilities, and five domiciliary-care facilities. Purposive sampling enrolled 111 participants who met the following inclusion criteria: 65 years or older, experienced a stroke that did not cause cognitive defects, and capable of verbal communication. Data were collected using a sociodemographic data questionnaire, Barthel's Index, and the Taiwan Geriatric Depression Scale. Results: Depression was experienced by 41 of the 111 participants (36.9%). Prevalence of depression was 45.7% in nursing homes, 36.2% in intermediate-care facilities, and 22.2% in domiciliary-care facilities. Participants living in nursing homes and intermediate-care facilities and illiterate participants with low Barthel's Index scores showed more depressive symptoms. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Healthcare providers should conduct depression screening for elderly residents with stroke on admission to long-term care facilities. Regular assessment and monitoring of depressive symptoms, especially in residents with less formal education and limited physical functions, are important in nursing homes and intermediate-care facilities.起始頁-結束頁：111-118資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000286篇名：An Investigation into the Attitudes of Nursing Students toward Technology作者：Ahmad Tubaishat關鍵字：attitude;nursing students;technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: Attitudes toward technology may impact the levels of technology acceptance and training willingness among nursing students. Nurse acceptance and effective utilization of technology are critical to improving patient care and safety. Purpose: The aims of this cross-sectional study were to measure the attitude of nursing students toward technology and to determine if demographic characteristics affect their attitudinal measures. Furthermore, the amount of formal education provided on the use of technology applications is explored. Methods: A convenience sample of nursing students attending a public university in Jordan was recruited, and a technology attitude scale designed to measure the attitude of nursing students toward technology was used. Scales designed to gather data on participant demographics, self-reported technology skills, and level of formal technology education were also used. Results: The results showed that participants held a positive attitude toward technology. Students who reported a high level of technology skill had the most positive attitude toward technology. The impact years of formal education on the use of technology applications were low, whereas academic level had a significant impact on technology attitudes. Senior student participants had the highest level of technology education, likely because of their exposure to relatively more educational opportunities, and the most positive attitude toward technology. Conclusions: Despite the positive attitude of nursing students toward technology, the problem of minimal technology education should be addressed in future nursing programs to further enhance positive attitudes toward technology.起始頁-結束頁：119-125資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000297篇名：A Comparison of the Quality of Life of Patients with Schizophrenia in Daycare and Homecare Settings並列篇名：日間留院與居家照顧精神分裂病個案生活品質之比較研究作者：高家常(Chia-Chan Kao);黃惠滿(Hui-Man Huang)關鍵字：生活品質;精神分裂病個案;日間留院;居家照護;精神病理;quality of life;schizophrenia patients;daycare setting;homecare setting;psychopathology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　台灣自1984年推動慢性精神病個案去機構化運動以來，生活品質成為瞭解慢性精神病個案照顧成果的重要指標。目的　本研究比較接受日間留院與居家照護之精神分裂病個案在生活品質各層面上之差異。方法　採橫斷式相關性研究設計，以方便取樣方式選取45位日間留院與25位居家照護之精神分裂病個案共70位參與本研究。以個人基本屬性問卷、精神疾病生活品質量表、正性及負性精神症狀量表三份問卷，收集個案的基本屬性、生活品質及精神症狀資料。結果　本研究結果發現，在較多工作機會及較少出現嚴重正向病徵二方面，日間留院之精神分裂病個案，其生活品質比居家照護個案佳。結論／實務應用　增加工作機會及控制精神病理程度，應能提升精神分裂病個案之生活品質。臨床精神照護人員可鼓勵慢性精神分裂病個案參與日間留院或居家照護方案。英文摘要：Background: Deinstitutionalization has been a social movement in Taiwan since 1984. This practice emphasizes quality of life as an important outcome in the treatment of patients with chronic mental illness. Purpose: This study compares the quality of life of patients with schizophrenia between daycare and homecare settings in Taiwan. Methods: A cross-sectional comparison design was used. A convenience sample of 70 participants was drawn from daycare (n = 45) and homecare (n = 25) settings. Three structured questionnaires, a personal characteristics questionnaire, the Quality of Life Scale for Psychiatric Patients, and the Positive and Negative Syndromes Scale, were used to collect personal characteristics, quality of life, and psychopathological status information on participants. Results: Compared with homecare participants, daycare participants had higher quality of life in several domains, more work opportunities, and less severe positive symptoms. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Providing work opportunities and proper psychopathology care to patients with schizophrenia may further enhance their quality of life. Practitioners should encourage people with chronic schizophrenia to receive regular care in either a daycare setting or a homecare setting.起始頁-結束頁：126-135資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000268篇名：A Correlational Study of Illness Knowledge, Self-Care Behaviors, and Quality of Life in Elderly Patients with Heart Failure並列篇名：以問卷調查老年心臟衰竭疾病知識、自我照顧行為與生活品質之相關性研究作者：劉敏慧(Min-Hui Liu);王兆弘(Chao-Hung Wang);黃于晏(Yu-Yen Huang);程文俊(Wen-Jin Cherng);王凱微(Katherine Kai-Wei Wang)關鍵字：老年;心臟衰竭;疾病知識;自我照顧行為;生活品質;elderly;heart failure;illness knowledge;self-care behaviors;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　醫療進步使慢性病得以控制，相形之下心臟衰竭病人日趨增加，此病是無法治癒的慢性病，病人生活歷程中活動功能受到疾病限制，嚴重影響生活品質。目的　本研究主要探討心臟衰竭病人知識、自我照顧行為與生活品質之相關性。方法　採橫斷性研究法，結構問卷為工具，研究對象為北部教學醫院門診心臟衰竭病人，共計141位心臟衰竭個案，研究時間從2008年1月到6月。結果　本研究以男性（51.8%）且年長者為主（約49.6%超過70歲），教育程度多為未受教育或 國小（69.5%）。結果顯示：<U+2474>心臟衰竭病人疾病知識不足（正確率僅29.3%）、自我照 顧行為執行率低；<U+2475>疾病知識與自我照顧行為、疾病生活品質具顯著相關（r = -.22, p ＜ 0.01）；<U+2476>自我照顧行為顯著的影響因素是疾病知識與年齡（R^2 = .22）；活動功能、獨立 自理與年齡是生活品質重要影響因子（R^2 = .41）。結論／實務應用　本研究發現，較年輕的老人疾病知識、自我照顧行為與生活品質較佳；活動功能與生活獨立能力對生活品質具有顯著影響。照護實務面應強化老年心臟衰竭病患之疾病症狀管理的知識，且提升老人身體活動能力與生活獨立性，可顯著改善其生活品質。英文摘要：Background: Patients with heart failure experience adverse physical symptoms that affect quality of life. The number of patients with heart failure in Taiwan has been growing in recent years. Purpose: This article examines correlations among illness knowledge, self-care behaviors, and quality of life in elderly patients with heart failure. Methods: A cross-sectional research design using three questionnaires was adopted. The study was undertaken in an outpatient department of a teaching hospital in Taiwan from January to June 2008. Potential participants aged 65 years or older were selected by a physician based on several diagnostic findings of heart failure that included an International Classification of Diseases’ code 4280 or 4289. Patients who were bedridden or had a prognosis of less than 6 months were excluded from consideration. Results: One hundred forty-one patients with heart failure were recruited. Most participants were men (51.8%), older adults (49.6% older than 71 years old), and either educated to an elementary school level or illiterate (69.5%) and have New York Heart Association class II (61.0%). Participants had an average left ventricular ejection fraction of 41.1%. The illness knowledge of participants was poor (accuracy rate: 29.3%), and most were unaware of the significance of self-care. Illness knowledge correlated with both self-care behaviors (r = -.42, p ＜ .01) and quality of life (r = -.22, p ＜ .01). Illness knowledge and age were identified as significant correlated factors of self-care behaviors (R^2 = .22); and functional class, living independently, and age were identified as significant correlated factors of quality of life (R^2 = .41). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Participants in this study with higher self-reported self-care behaviors and quality of life were younger in age and had better illness knowledge. Furthermore, physical function and independence in daily living significantly affected quality of life. Care for patients with heart failure, particularly older adults, should focus on teaching these patients about heart failure illness and symptom management. Assisting elderly patients with heart failure to promote and maintain physical functions to handle activities of daily living independently is critical to improving patient quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：136-145資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000249篇名：Message from the Editor並列篇名：編者的話作者：周桂如(Kuei-Ru Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：0-0資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會10篇名：Person-Organization Fit and Turnover Intention: Exploring the Mediating Effect of Work Engagement and the Moderating Effect of Demand-Ability Fit並列篇名：個人－組織適配與離職意圖－敬業貢獻的中介效果與需求－能力適配的干擾效果作者：彭瑞振(Jui-Chen Peng);李吟玲(Yin-Ling Lee);曾美屘(Mei-Man Tseng)關鍵字：個人－組織適配;敬業貢獻;離職意圖;需求－能力適配;person-organization fit;demand-ability fit;work engagement;turnover intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　在醫療體系中，個人－組織適配愈來愈被視為與護理師的意圖和態度有所關連。作者從激勵機制的觀點，提出以護理師的敬業貢獻為中介因子、需求－能力適配為干擾因子的模式，來瞭解個人－組織適配與離職意圖之關係。目的　探討護理師的敬業貢獻是否為個人－組織適配與離職意圖關係之中介因子；及探討需求－能力適配是否為個人－組織適配與離職意圖關係之干擾因子。方法　以宜蘭地區兩家醫院之349位護理師為樣本，採用線性回歸模型來驗證假設模型。結果　研究結果顯示，個人－組織適配會負向影響離職意圖。護理師的敬業貢獻會中介個人－組織適配與離職意圖之關係。需求－能力適配則是個人－組織適配與離職意圖之干擾因子。結論／實務應用　護理師的敬業貢獻在適配理論中已引起愈來愈多的關注，尤其是在探討個人－組織適配與離職意圖的連結。此外，本研究也增進瞭解個人－組織適配與需求－能力適配的交互作用。護理師的離職是造成台灣護理師短缺的主因。因此，醫院的價值體系如能使得護理師的認知價值與組織文化趨於一致，這種共同價值觀的認知，將使得護理師擁有較高水平的敬業貢獻，進而降低離職意圖。此外，醫院如能透過招募、甄選的程序，以選取具有高需求－能力適配的員工，將可強化個人－組織適配與護理師離職意圖的負向關係。英文摘要：Background: Person-organization (P-O) fit is an important influencing factor on the intentions and attitudes of hospital nurses. The authors used a motivation-mechanism approach to conceptualize work engagement as a mediator and demand-ability (D-A) fit as a moderator to elicit the role of P-O fit in the turnover intention of nurses.Purpose: This article explores whether the work engagement of nurses mediates the relationship between P-O fit and turnover intention and examines whether D-A fit moderates this relationship.Methods: The sample comprised 349 nurses working for two regional hospitals in Yilan County, Taiwan. Linear regression modeling analysis was conducted to test the proposed hypotheses.Results: Results indicate that P-O fit has a negative effect on participant turnover intention. In addition, the work engagement of participants was found to mediate the impact of P-O fit on turnover intention. A new significant interactive relationship was discovered such that high D-A fit strengthened the negative relationship between P-O fit and turnover intention.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The work engagement of professional nurses has attracted increasing attention in the literature on fit, particularly with regard to the linkage between P-O and fit-turnover intention. This study enhances the understanding of the function of P-O fit by considering perceived D-A fit. Nurse turnover is the main reason for the current shortage of nurses in Taiwan. Therefore, if the cognitive values of nurses and the organizational culture fit with hospital value systems, common values may facilitate a higher degree of nurse work engagement and, in turn, decrease turnover intention. In addition, recruiting employees with high D-A fit may help hospitals enhance the negative relationship between P-O fit and nurse turnover intention.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000001911篇名：The Smoking Behaviors of Indigenous Taiwanese: Individual and Family/Community Factors of Influence並列篇名：台灣原住民個人和家庭／社區吸菸行為的預測作者：陳杏雯(Hsing-Wen Chen);祝年豐(Nain-Feng Chu);陳興夏(Hsing-Hsia Chen);葉美玲(Mei-Ling Yeh)關鍵字：原住民;吸菸;個人;家庭;社區;indigenous Taiwanese;smoking;individual;family;community期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　吸菸雖為全球之第六大死亡原因，但它是可以預防的。而對原住民族群的吸菸問題，應付出更多的關注與相關影響因素的澄清。目的　本研究旨在檢視台灣原住民吸菸行為與其個人和家庭／社區因素間之關係。方法　使用台灣中部家訪資料進行二手資料分析。對562位20歲至50歲的成年原住民資料採用卡方檢定和階層邏輯斯回歸分析，以確認原住民個人和家庭／社區的吸菸行為相關因素。結果　總體之吸菸率為57.48%（男性39.15%，女性18.33%）。男性的吸菸勝算比明顯高於女性。吸菸者有固定性伴侶者是沒有的0.45倍，吸菸者家中具吸菸成員者是沒有的2.68倍，而吸菸者居住山區者是非居住的7.03倍。結論　原住民的吸菸議題仍然需持續多加關切。當提供煙草有害影響的介入措施時，可以多專注於居住山區年輕原住民，也可以自其固定伴侶著手。除此，還需同時著重男性、女性成年人和戶長的吸菸行為，從而改善他們及其家庭成員的吸菸狀況。英文摘要：Background: Smoking, a self-selected behavior, is the sixth leading cause of death worldwide. Factors related to smoking in Taiwan's indigenous Malayo-Polynesian population should be elicited and addressed.Purpose: This study examined the relationship between smoking behavior and individual and family/community factors in indigenous Taiwanese.Methods: This study was a secondary analysis of data obtained from household visits in central Taiwan that included a population of 562 indigenous adults aged 20-50 years. Data were analyzed using the chi-square test and hierarchical logistic regression to determine individual and family/community relevant factors of smoking behaviors.Results: The smoking rate in the population studied was 57.48% (39.15% men, 18.33% women). The odds ratio for smoking was markedly higher in men than in women. Smokers were 0.45 times more likely to have fixed sexual partners. The OR for smoking was 2.68 times in households with smokers and 7.03 times in people living in mountainous areas.Conclusions: The issue of smoking in indigenous Taiwanese deserves further attention and concern. Further interventions for the harmful effects of tobacco can focus on younger indigenous people living in mountain regions and on smokers' sexual partners. In addition, male adults, female adults, and heads of households should take a greater role in changing the smoking behaviors of smokers and their family members.起始頁-結束頁：12-19資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000001412篇名：Sleep Quality in Postpartum Women: Exploring Correlation with Childbirth Experience and Household Work並列篇名：生產經驗和操持家務是產後婦女睡眠品質的相關因子作者：洪瑄曼(Hsuan-Man Hung);陳彰惠(Chung-Hey Chen)關鍵字：睡眠品質;生產經驗;產後;sleep quality;childbirth experience;postpartum期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　婦女在產後三個月內常經歷睡眠剝奪與睡眠困擾。瞭解影響產後睡眠的相關因素，可以提供更多的訊息以利研擬促進產後睡眠品質的相關措施。目的　本研究旨在探討人口學、產科學等因素與產後婦女主觀睡眠品質的相關性。方法　本研究採橫斷面、相關性研究設計，以方便取樣在台灣南部兩家醫院進行收案，共有202位產後四至六週之婦女參與本研究。資料收集採結構性問卷，包含人口學、產科學基本資料表和產後睡眠品質量表。結果　產後睡眠品質量表的平均得分為22.82（SD=8.16），顯示產後婦女有中等程度的睡眠困擾。生產經驗不愉快的婦女比生產經驗愉快者其產後睡眠品質較差，產後睡眠障礙的程度與每日操持家務時數呈正相關。分娩及生產過程之疼痛、不適、與恐懼害怕是構成不愉快生產經驗的主要層面。結論／實務應用　依據研究結果，建議健康專業照護人員宜採人性化產科照護，減少婦女生產時的疼痛、不適與害怕。以實證為基礎的產後教育內容，可包括減輕產後婦女操持家務之負荷程度，將有助於她們的睡眠品質。英文摘要：Background: New mothers commonly report sleep deprivation and sleep disturbances during the first 3 postpartum months. A better understanding of factors related to postpartum sleep quality is necessary to develop interventions to improve sleep quality in postpartum women.Purpose: This study explored the impact of specific demographic and obstetric factors on the subjective sleep quality of postpartum women.Methods: We used a cross-sectional, correlational study design. A convenience sample of 202 women in their fourth to sixth postpartum week was recruited from two hospitals in southern Taiwan. A demographic data form and the Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale were used to collect data.Results: The mean Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale score of participants was 22.82 (SD=8.16), indicating a mild level of sleep disturbance. We found that better sleep quality correlated positively with a satisfactory childbirth experience and correlated negatively with daily time spent on household work. Pain, discomfort, and fear were the main dimensions associated with unsatisfactory childbirth experiences.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Study results recommend that health professionals should improve current protocols to help women better confront and manage childbirth-related pain, discomfort, and fear. Evidence-based postnatal education for parents should highlight the positive relationship between reduced daily household workloads and sleep quality for new mothers.起始頁-結束頁：20-27資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000001513篇名：The Struggle against Fat: Weight Loss Experiences of Overweight Adolescent Girls in Taiwan並列篇名：對抗肥胖的掙扎過程－探討台灣體重過重青少女之減重經驗作者：蘇美禎(Mei-Chen Su);周輝政(Hei-Jen Jou);曹麗英(Lee-Ing Tsao)關鍵字：青少女;紮根理論;體重過重;減重;adolescent girls;grounded theory;overweight;weight loss期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　「減肥」對體重超重的青少女是一個重要的健康議題。了解減肥的主觀感受和經驗，有助於建立正確的減重策略。然而，少有研究探討體重過重青少女之減重經驗。目的　建立台灣體重過重青少女減重經驗的描述性理論。方法　採紮根理論研究法，深度訪談20位體重過重青少女，以持續比較法進行內容分析。結果　「對抗肥胖的掙扎歷程」為核心類屬，「肥胖是恥辱」為先驅條件。過程中，有以下四個互動類屬：嘗試節食撇步（捷徑）、放縱自己、面對弱點及展開新生活。青少女徘徊在選擇健康新生活或恢復以前不良習慣的掙扎中。最後，有些人獲得支持激勵，逐漸控制體重。而有些人受不了誘惑或壓力，重回不良生活型態，體重逐日上升，陷入對抗肥胖的惡性循環中。結論／實務應用　肥胖會帶給體重過重之青少女恥辱的感受，健康照護者應敏銳察覺其照護需求。提供了解青少女在此期的減重行為與需求，透過合宜的減重諮詢及激勵，支持青少女成功減重。英文摘要：Background: Weight loss is an important health issue for overweight girls. Understanding their subjective feelings and experiences regarding weight loss may help healthcare professionals and hospitals develop an appropriate intervention for this population. However, there have been few studies done on the subjective weight loss experiences of overweight adolescent girls.Purpose: This study developed a descriptive theory framework to elicit the weight loss experiences of overweight adolescent girls in Taiwan.Methods: This qualitative study used grounded theory to conduct in-depth interviews with 20 overweight adolescent girls aged 16-20 years. Data were analyzed using the constant comparative method.Results: ”Struggle against fat” was the core theme that described and guided the process of weight loss for participants. During this process, ”obesity as a stigma” was identified as the antecedent condition with the subcategories: being teased, being blamed, being bullied, and lack of personal attractiveness. Participants struggled to practice a new lifestyle while continuing their previous lifestyle during the weight loss process. This process was categorized as ”trying dieting shortcuts,” ”self-sabotage,” ”confronting weakness,” and ”adhere to a new life.” During this process, some participants adhered to a new life by perceiving peer/family support, using incentive slogans, and sharing experiences. Finally, participants either continued to maintain their new lifestyle and gradually lost weight or resumed their previous lifestyle and regained weight by entering into a vicious cycle of combating fat through dieting shortcuts while practicing self-sabotage.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Weight loss is a difficult issue for most overweight and obese adolescent girls. Health providers should better understand adolescent psychology to provide this population with effective incentives to modify their lifestyles for health purposes. It is crucial that healthcare providers be good coaches to guide and positively support these girls in their struggle against fat.起始頁-結束頁：28-36資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000001714篇名：Determinants of Preference for Home Death among Terminally Ill Patients with Cancer in Taiwan: A Cross-Sectional Survey Study並列篇名：台灣癌症末期病人死亡地點喜好之決定因素－橫斷性研究作者：陳貞秀(Chen-Hsiu Chen);林玉娟(Yu-Chuan Lin);劉莉妮(Li-Ni Liu);唐秀治(Siew-Tzuh Tang)關鍵字：家中死亡的喜好;死亡地點的喜好;生命終期的照護;癌症末期病人;preference for home death;preferred place of death;end-of-life care;terminally ill patients with cancer期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：Background: Studies worldwide have shown that most patients with cancer prefer to die at home. Few studies have directly explored the determinants of preference for home death in patients with cancer living in Asia, and none has been conducted in Taiwan.Objectives: This study was designed to identify determinants of home-death preference among terminally ill patients with cancer in Taiwan.Methods: A convenience sample of 2,188 terminally ill patients with cancer from 24 hospitals nationwide was surveyed. This study used multivariate logistic regression analysis to identify the determinants of preference for home death in the realms of patient demographics and disease characteristics, awareness of prognosis, and family support.Results: Slightly more than half of the participants expressed the preference to die at home (n=1,114, 54.7%). The adjusted odds of preferring to die at home were greater for participants described by one or more of the following: (1) family members knew the participant's preference for place of death (p＜.001), (2) participant knew his or her prognosis (p=.032), (3) participant had greater functional dependency (p＜.001), (4) participant was diagnosed with either liver/pancreatic (p=.028) or head/neck (p=.012) cancer, and (5) participant had less than a junior high school education (p＜.001).Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study supports the argument that most terminally ill patients with cancer in Taiwan prefer to die at home. To achieve patient preferences for home death, healthcare professionals should provide prognostic information and initiate end-of-life care discussions among patients and their family to facilitate family understanding of their ill relative's place-of-death preference. Developing clinical interventions to alleviate physical symptoms and providing hospice homecare services for terminally ill patients with cancer, especially those with lung cancer and greater functional dependency, may facilitate a preference for and actualization of home death.英文摘要：Background: Studies worldwide have shown that most patients with cancer prefer to die at home. Few studies have directly explored the determinants of preference for home death in patients with cancer living in Asia, and none has been conducted in Taiwan.Objectives: This study was designed to identify determinants of home-death preference among terminally ill patients with cancer in Taiwan.Methods: A convenience sample of 2,188 terminally ill patients with cancer from 24 hospitals nationwide was surveyed. This study used multivariate logistic regression analysis to identify the determinants of preference for home death in the realms of patient demographics and disease characteristics, awareness of prognosis, and family support.Results: Slightly more than half of the participants expressed the preference to die at home (n=1,114, 54.7%). The adjusted odds of preferring to die at home were greater for participants described by one or more of the following: (1) family members knew the participant's preference for place of death (p＜.001), (2) participant knew his or her prognosis (p=.032), (3) participant had greater functional dependency (p＜.001), (4) participant was diagnosed with either liver/pancreatic (p=.028) or head/neck (p=.012) cancer, and (5) participant had less than a junior high school education (p＜.001).Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study supports the argument that most terminally ill patients with cancer in Taiwan prefer to die at home. To achieve patient preferences for home death, healthcare professionals should provide prognostic information and initiate end-of-life care discussions among patients and their family to facilitate family understanding of their ill relative's place-of-death preference. Developing clinical interventions to alleviate physical symptoms and providing hospice homecare services for terminally ill patients with cancer, especially those with lung cancer and greater functional dependency, may facilitate a preference for and actualization of home death.起始頁-結束頁：37-44資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000001615篇名：Effect of Positioning on Patient Outcomes after Coronary Angiography: A Single-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Fateme Bakhshi;Zahra Namjou;Abbas Andishmand;Aliasghar Panabadi關鍵字：back pain;positioning;coronary angiography;nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014英文摘要：Background: Restoring patient homeostasis after coronary angiography, the gold standard diagnostic test for coronary heart disease is usually achieved by manual compression of the puncture site using a sandbag and prolonged bed rest. However, this process frequently results in patient complaints of back pain and discomfort.Purpose: The aim of study was to assess the effect of positioning on patient outcomes after coronary angiography.Methods: This study used a single-blind randomized control trial approach. The sample consisted of 80 patients who had undergone a nonemergency coronary angiography via the femoral artery. Balanced block randomization was used to allocate participants into intervention and control groups. Routine care for the intervention group (n=40) was adjusted to include the following: (1) intermittent changes to patient body and head position in bed during first 6 hours after catheterization, (2) reduction of sandbag compression time on the puncture site to 1 hour, and (3) regular examination for bleeding during the first 6 hours after catheterization. Intervention group participants were allowed to ambulate without restriction 6 hours after catheterization. Patients in the control group (n=40) received routine care, consisting of (1) 6-24 hours of bed rest in the supine position with the affected leg fixed straight and immobilized and (2) sandbag compression on the puncture site for 6 hours. The main outcomes used in this study were level of back pain, discomfort, foot pain, bleeding, and hematoma.Results: Intervention group patients had significantly less back pain and foot pain and higher comfort than the control group at the second, third, and sixth hour after catheterization (p=.00). There was no significant difference between the two groups in terms of amount of bleeding and hematoma (p＞.05).Conclusions: Findings suggest that changes in patient position may be safer in the early period of postcatheterization bed rest than currently indicated in standard practice protocols. Furthermore, limiting sandbag compression to 1 hour has no measurable effect on the incidence and severity of vascular complications.起始頁-結束頁：45-50資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000002016篇名：Interaction Effect of Work Excitement and Work Frustration on the Professional Commitment of Nurses in Taiwan並列篇名：護理人員工作愉悅與工作挫折對專業承諾之交互作用效果作者：張遠萍(Yuan-Ping Chang);王秀紅(Hsiu-Hung Wang);黃珊(Shan Huang);王凰伊(Huang-I Wang)關鍵字：專業承諾;工作愉悅;工作挫折;professional commitment;work excitement;work frustration期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：Background: The current shortage of professional nurses in Taiwan both undermines hospital quality of care and raises hospitals' human resource management costs. Few studies have concurrently investigated the interaction effect between professional commitment and, respectively, the positive and negative work attitudes of nurses. Results of this investigation may help improve strategies designed to raise nurse retention rates.Purpose: This study used the interaction effects of work excitement and work frustration to assess their influence on the professional commitment of nurses.Methods: This study was conducted at one hospital in southern Taiwan and used a cross-sectional design with self-administrated questionnaires. Seven hundred thirty-five nurses completed and submitted valid questionnaires (valid response rate: 68.5%). Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis confirmed the reliability and validity of the three measurement models of work excitement, work frustration, and professional commitment. Correlation and hierarchical regression analysis verified the direct and interaction effects with the correlations among the three measured variables.Results: Work frustration was higher than work excitement among participants (M=2.72, SD=0.71 vs. M=2.26, SD=0.62). The mean participant score for professional commitment was 2.72 (SD=0.45) on a 4-point Likert scale. There was a significant and positive correlation between work excitement and professional commitment and a significant and negative correlation between work frustration and professional commitment. High work frustration had a negative effect on professional commitment, whereas high work excitement had a higher positive effect on professional commitment. The two-way interaction between work excitement and frustration was statistically significant in explaining the effects of professional commitment (p＜.01).Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Nurses often work in conditions that are highly frustrating. Although work excitement has been shown as having a greater influence on professional commitment when nurses experienced the dual work affects simultaneously, work frustration significantly reduces the professional commitment effect of nurses. This study suggests that managers should not only construct a positive and exciting work environment but also work to mitigate the causes of work frustration to promote professional commitment and retention among nurses.英文摘要：Background: The current shortage of professional nurses in Taiwan both undermines hospital quality of care and raises hospitals' human resource management costs. Few studies have concurrently investigated the interaction effect between professional commitment and, respectively, the positive and negative work attitudes of nurses. Results of this investigation may help improve strategies designed to raise nurse retention rates.Purpose: This study used the interaction effects of work excitement and work frustration to assess their influence on the professional commitment of nurses.Methods: This study was conducted at one hospital in southern Taiwan and used a cross-sectional design with self-administrated questionnaires. Seven hundred thirty-five nurses completed and submitted valid questionnaires (valid response rate: 68.5%). Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis confirmed the reliability and validity of the three measurement models of work excitement, work frustration, and professional commitment. Correlation and hierarchical regression analysis verified the direct and interaction effects with the correlations among the three measured variables.Results: Work frustration was higher than work excitement among participants (M=2.72, SD=0.71 vs. M=2.26, SD=0.62). The mean participant score for professional commitment was 2.72 (SD=0.45) on a 4-point Likert scale. There was a significant and positive correlation between work excitement and professional commitment and a significant and negative correlation between work frustration and professional commitment. High work frustration had a negative effect on professional commitment, whereas high work excitement had a higher positive effect on professional commitment. The two-way interaction between work excitement and frustration was statistically significant in explaining the effects of professional commitment (p＜.01).Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Nurses often work in conditions that are highly frustrating. Although work excitement has been shown as having a greater influence on professional commitment when nurses experienced the dual work affects simultaneously, work frustration significantly reduces the professional commitment effect of nurses. This study suggests that managers should not only construct a positive and exciting work environment but also work to mitigate the causes of work frustration to promote professional commitment and retention among nurses.起始頁-結束頁：51-60資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000002117篇名：Translation and Validation of an Instrument for Measuring the Suitability of Health Educational Materials in Taiwan: Suitability Assessment of Materials並列篇名：台灣衛教教材適用性測量工具的翻譯及效度測試－教材適用性評估作者：張美娟(Mei-Chuan Chang);陳月枝(Yueh-Chih Chen);高碧霞(Bih-Shya Gau);曾于芬(Yu-Fen Tzeng)關鍵字：適用性;衛教教材;反向翻譯;效度;信度;suitability;health education materials;back-translation;validity;reliability期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：背景　提供民眾可理解的健康訊息，確保健康的行為以及健康結果是重要的醫護職責。英語系的國家已發展許多工具，進行衛教教材的適用性評值，但在中文系的國家中很缺乏。目的　本研究主要進行教材適用性評估（Suitability Assessment of Materials [SAM]）的中文翻譯，利用嚴謹的翻譯及檢測過程，提供有效的工具評值中文書面衛教教材的適用性。方法　翻譯過程包括：前向翻譯、反向翻譯以及翻譯等義測驗，用以評值語義與內容的對等性。舉行專家小組討論原英文版與反向翻譯英文版之間的差異。以內容效度指數呈現SAM中文版的內容效度。兩位評分者分別以SAM中文版進行7份衛教教材的適用性評值，計算Cohen's Kappa係數以估計評分者間的一致性；計算Cronbach's α值測試工具的內在一致性。結果　SAM英文版與中文版間存在許多不一致性，專家小組針對兩個版本22個評值項目中存在差異者，一一交互討論確認。中文版總量表內容效度指數達.99，Cohen's Kappa同意係數為.25，以及Cronbach's α值為.91。結論／實務應用　本研究發現，SAM中文版是一有效且可信的工具，可用於臨床評值中文書面衛教教材的適用性。英文摘要：Background: It is essential to provide readily comprehensible health information to the public to increase healthy behaviors and improve outcomes. Researchers in English-speaking countries possess well-developed instruments to evaluate the suitability of health education materials. However, few of these instruments are available for use in Chinese-language environments.Purpose: This study aimed to translate the Suitability Assessment of Materials (SAM) into Chinese. Researchers used a rigorous translation and testing process to provide a valid instrument to evaluate the suitability of health education materials written in Chinese.Methods: The translation process included forward- and back-translations and a test for translation equivalence that evaluated semantic and content equivalence. A panel discussion was held on the discrepancies between the original English and back-translated English versions. The content validity index was calculated to confirm the validity of the SAM Chinese version. Two raters used the Chinese-version SAM to evaluate seven health education handouts. A Cohen's kappa coefficient was calculated to estimate interrater agreement, and Cronbach's alpha assessed the internal consistency of the instrument.Results: Discussions on the differences between the original English and initially translated Chinese versions of the SAM resulted in a final 22-item SAM Chinese version. The content validity index of the final Chinese-language SAM scale was .99, the Cohen's kappa coefficient of agreement was .25, and the Cronbach's alpha value was .91.Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The SAM Chinese version is a valid and reliable instrument with potential use in evaluating the suitability of health education materials written in Chinese.起始頁-結束頁：61-68資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000001801篇名：中國農民工與城鎮勞工之薪資差異與歧視並列篇名：Wage Differential and Discrimination between Urban and Migrant Workers in China作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);楊孟嘉(Meng-Chia Yang)關鍵字：流動人口;農民工;戶口制度;薪資差距;歧視;floating population;migrant worker;Hukou system;wage differential;discrimination期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：中國自1978年經濟改革開放以來，由於戶口管理制度限制了農民工的身分與權利，使得城鎮地區的勞動市場產生了二元化的區隔，本文運用2008年「中國農民工研究」的資料，探討中國城鎮地區的勞動市場中，城鎮居民與農民工之間的薪資差異和可能的歧視。不同於一般文獻，本研究將薪資差異分解為樣本選擇性偏誤的差異、個體稟賦的差異、對城鎮勞工族群有利的歧視與對農民工不利的歧視等來源。實證結果顯示，兩者薪資差異只有30-34%是可經由稟賦因素差異所解釋，存在不可解釋部份高達66-70%，其中約有46%是對城鎮居民有利的歧視，54%是對農民工不利的歧視。英文摘要：Since the economic reform in 1978, China's rapid economic growth was mainly driven by mobilizing rural surplus labor to the urban sector for the process of industrialization and urbanization. However, the implementation of the HuKou (household resgistration) system in 1958 restricted labor mobility across sectors, particularly from the rural to the urban sector, leading to a dualistic development phenomenon in China. This paper adopts data from the 2008 RUMiCI survey to investigate wage differential and discrimination between urban and migrant workers in China using the Oaxaca decomposition method with Heckman's sample selection correction. Our estimation results show that after correction for sample selection, the real wage differential is greater than the observed one. Among the wage differential, 30-40% can be attributed to endowment effects and 66-70% is left unexplained as discrimination effects, of which 46% is in favor of urban labor and 54% is at the disadvantage of migrant labor. However, we also find that the reward for human capital variables such as health, work experience , and education is higher for migrant workers, while on the basis of gender, marital status, job contract, ways to find a job, occupation and industry choice, there exist severe institutional barriers for and discrimination against migrant workers.起始頁-結束頁：525-553資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：臺灣經濟學術單位近五年學術績效評估－前瞻式評比並列篇名：The Research Performance of Taiwan's Economic Institutes over the Past Five Years-A Forward-Looking Evaluation作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);王泓仁(Hung-Jen Wang);吳俊彥(Chun-Yen Wu);黃粲堯(Tsan-Yao Huang)關鍵字：學術績效;期刊排名;前瞻式評比;academic performance evaluation;journal ranking;forwardlooking evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用文獻中最新的期刊排序成果及本國經濟學術單位教研人員名冊，衡量2008至2012年間國內31個經濟相關學術單位的學術表現。與先前文獻曹添旺等（2006）比較，本文除了考量學術文章的數量之外，亦強調文章品質在學術評比時的重要。我們從期刊排序的相關文獻中，得到期刊的品質權數，而利用此權數計算期刊發表的質量指數。研究結果發現，就整體質量指數而言，中研院經濟所及臺大經濟系依舊大幅領先其它單位，清大經濟系、政大經濟系以及淡江經濟系亦有很好的表現。若由每人每年的質量指數來看，則成大經濟系、中研院人社中心、中央產經所及中山經研所，亦有出色的表現。英文摘要：In this paper we evaluate the research performance of 31 economics departments/institutes in Taiwan in the period of 2008 to 2012. The evaluation is based on journal publications, using the latest journal ranking results in evaluating the performance. Compared to previous studies including Tsaur et al. (2006), the current study puts an emphasis on the quality of research in addition to the quantity. To this end, we use results of journal rankings to construct a quality index which is used to weigh the publication. The results show that when evaluating the unit as a whole, the Institute of Economics at Academia Sinica and the Economics Department of National Taiwan University are ahead of others by a large margin. The economics departments of National Tsing Hua University, National Chengchi University, and Tamkang University also have good performance. If evaluating by per capita output, then the Economics Department of National Cheng Kung University, Research Center for Humanities and Social Sciences of Academia Sinica, Graduate Institute of Industrial Economics of National Central University, and the Institute of Economics of National Sun Yat-sen University also perform well.起始頁-結束頁：555-582資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：銀行進入公司董事會、代理問題與資訊不對稱之關聯性研究並列篇名：The Association between Bankers on Boards, Agency Problems and Information Asymmetry作者：廖益興(Yi-Hsing Liao);陳昭蓉(Chao-Jung Chen)關鍵字：銀行進入公司董事會;資訊不對稱;代理問題;內生性;bankers on boards;information asymmetry;agency problems;endogeneity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討銀行進入公司董事會與企業資訊不對稱程度之關聯，並進一步分析此關聯性是否因不同型態代理問題而有所不同？實證結果顯示，經由一般兩階段估計法控制銀行進入董事會變數內生性的特徵下，銀行進入公司董事會確實可以降低資訊不對稱程度，且相較於存在傳統代理問題的樣本，存在核心代理問題的樣本，一旦銀行進入公司蓋事會所反應出減緩資訊不對稱的效果更為明顯。本研究所傳遞的政策意涵厲，銀行藉由涉入公司董事會所產生的監督功能，將會影響借款企業資訊不對稱的水準，支持銀行有效扮演公司治理機制的論點。英文摘要：This study examines the association between bankers on boards and information asymmetry. In addition, this study further explores how various types of agency problems influence the relationship between bankers on boards and the level of information asymmetry. Using the two-stage estimation method to control for the endogeneity of bankers on boards, the empirical results show that bankers' involvement can reduce the level of information asymmetry. This paper further indicates that the decrease is more significant in firms with a central agency problem than those with a traditional agency problem. The implication for policy is that bank supervision in board representation actually can reduce the level of a firm's information asymmetry. That supports the viewpoint of bankers' role as an efficient governing mechanism.起始頁-結束頁：583-619資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：盧梭、康德與永久和平並列篇名：Rousseau, Kant and Perpetual Peace作者：周家瑜(Chia-Yu Chou)關鍵字：永久和平;自由國際聯盟;憲政共和主義;民主共和主義;共和主義;perpetual peace;federation of free states;constitutional republicanism;democratic republicanism;republicanism期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：在當代國際政治理論中，康德對國際政治的看法是經常被引用之權威，然而對此一文本本身的解讀仍有不少爭議，其中一個最主要爭議，就是要如何去理解康德所提出的國際問題的解答一一即「自由國家聯盟」（Federation of Free States），這樣的一個解答讓許多康德的追隨者相當困惑，認為是康德之理論對現實的妥協，但筆者以為康德所提出的這個論點背後有更深意涵，並非出於經驗考畫，本文藉由與盧梭所整理出版的法國聖皮耶教士原初永久和平計畫的文本之比較，為康德對國際關係問題所提出的解答提出一個可能的詮釋。英文摘要：While Immanuel Kant's influential essay on his plan for perpetual peace has been an important resource for contemporary studies on international relations, due to the obscurity of the text itself there still remain some unresolved interpretive difficulties. One main difficulty lies in understanding the solution that Kant proposed in his plan for perpetual peace, namely the federation of free states. Since what Kant proposed is a federation which member states are allowed to join or withdraw from freely, it leads to the criticism that lack of coercive force is very likely to lead to the collapse of the federation. Moreover, to contemporary cosmopolitans, Kant 's proposal also seems to fail to go beyond the limits of national states, and therefore can be considered outdated. The main aim of this essay is to re-interpret Kant's proposal of free federation by comparing Kant's theory of international relations with J.J. Rousseau's revision of Abbe Saint-Pierre 's well-known project for perpetual peace. I argue that by putting Kant's proposal into the context of Rousseau's revision of Abbe Saint-Pierre's project, it can be seen that rather than being outdated, Kant further develops and completes Rousseau's unfinished revision by transforming Rousseau's democratic republicanism into constitutional republicanism.起始頁-結束頁：621-657資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：開放經濟總體政策的三難困境並列篇名：Macroeconomic Policies' Trilemma作者：李秀雲(Hsiu-Yun Lee)關鍵字：開放經濟;總體政策;三難困境;三難指標;貨幣自主性指標;open economy;macroeconomic policy;trilemma;trilemma index;monetary autonomy index期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：開放體系總體政策的目標常互相衝突，貨幣政策自主性、國際資金的自由移動、與匯率穩定往往難以兼顧，稱「三難困境假說」。但Aizenman et al. (2010)認為外匯存底累積可使三難箝制放寬，這對執政者施政無疑是一大利多。但要較嚴謹地檢驗三難假說，首先要有各政策目標的具體度量。本研究回顧文獻上各式政策指標的建構原因與優缺點，也提出自己的修正指標，並透過檢定均數與變異數相對大小來支持三難困境之存在。此外，本文以動態追蹤資料模型估計，發現三難困境會因外匯累積而放寬的假說並無法頑強地獲得支持。英文摘要：The Macroeconomic policy ”trilemma”, with trade-offs pursuing monetary autonomy, exchange rate stability, and international financial integration, has not been tested formally due to both difficulty in measuring these policy intentions practically and lack of a clear, mathematical implication of the three policy goals in theory. This paper surveys previous metrics for measuring these policy goals, introduces a new ”monetary autonomy index”, and constructs trilemma indices by adding three individual policy indices. Herein, we consider two measures for exchange rate stability, two for monetary autonomy, and one for financial integration as the individual policy indices. Panel data are collected on over 120 economies since 1974 and catalogued into three groups: developed economies, emerging markets, and other developing economies. We compare different measures for a specific policy goal and show, except for Aizenman et al. (2010) ”monetary independence index”, how these indices vary across countries in a group. Because the trilemma implies that for any period the trilemma index cannot achieve a very high level like individual policy indices can, and that three individual indices in one time span cannot increase together, we further test hypotheses for the indices' means and variances for countries at different development stages. Finally, we employ GMM dynamic panel data models to test the hypothesis in Aizenman et al. (2010) about relaxing the trilemma via amassing large foreign reserves. Only weak and unrobust evidence is found supporting their hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：341-385資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：五Ｏ年代臺灣自由觀念的系譜：張佛泉、《自由中國》與新儒家並列篇名：A Genealogy of the Idea of Liberty in Taiwan: Fo-chuan Chang, ”Free China”, and Neo-Confucianism作者：蕭高彥(Carl K. Y. Shaw)關鍵字：張佛泉;自由;消極自由;積極自由;新儒家;英國觀念論;Fo-chuan Chang;liberty;negative freedom;positive freedom;neo-Confucianism;British Idealism期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文運用系譜學以及脈絡主義的分析取向，以《自由與人權》成書過程為主軸，闡釋五Ｏ年代臺灣自由主義者以及新儒家對於自由的不同觀念。張佛泉的原始計畫乃是「諸權利即諸自由」的經驗主義式論述。這個觀點引起了徐復觀的批判，導致張佛泉修正其計畫，區分自由的兩個意義系統: 人權保障與內心自由，並且運用觀念論來闡釋內心自由。本文同時分析殷海光對於張氏的修正有所保留，並檢視同時期牟宗三的「民主開出論」。通過系譜學的爬梳，本文呈現五Ｏ年代臺灣自由觀念的多樣面貌，去除「自由主義者主張消極自由、新儒家主張積極自由」的定見。英文摘要：This article examines the formation and receptions of Fo-chuan Chang's classic ”Liberties and Human Rights” from the historiographical perspective. Deploying the methodologies of genealogy and contextualism, I reconstruct the different ideas of liberty in the political discourses in Taiwan in the 1950s. Contrary to the dominant interpretation, which is inspired by Isaiah Berlin's distinction between negative and positive freedom, this article demonstrates that the early liberals in Taiwan construct an idea of negative freedom based on moral autonomy. The influence of British Idealism is also examined. Moreover, new light is shed on the well-known debates between liberals and the neo-Confucians at the time.起始頁-結束頁：387-425資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：新竹科學園區政策過程的重新檢視並列篇名：A Review of the Policy Process about the Hsinchu Science Park作者：蔡偉銑(Wei-Hsien Tsai)關鍵字：政策執行;科學園區政策;新竹科學園區;技術官僚;policy implementation;Science Park policy;Hsinchu Science Park;technocrats期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：相較於一般認為新竹科學園區是源於蔣經國政府由上而下政策規劃而成的觀點，本文發現竹科園區的發展，實際乃是由下而上的政策執行過程所形塑而成，期間受到既有電子工業升級的影響，致使竹科從追求科技研發的科技政策，轉為偏重順應既有電子工業升級的產業政策，從而強化臺灣經濟成長過度依賴資訊電子製造業的經濟結構。其中，技術官僚因應政策環境變化所致的機會、限制與問題，從而調整竹科目標的政策執行能力，是形塑竹科政策的關鍵因素。最後，若僅是「複製」竹科而不考慮支撐園區運作之產業的支援能力與比較優勢，園區政策將不足以促進地區的發展。英文摘要：Compared to the common notion that the Hsinchu Science Park (HSP) was developed through top-down government policy planning, by reexamining the political and economic context, this article points out that in fact, a bottom-up process of HSP policy implementation shaped the current appearance of the HSP, while being affected and supported by the technological upgrading of the electronics industry. First, the upgrading of the electronics industry converted HSP policy from an R & D policy to an industrial production policy. This caused Taiwan's economic growth to be overly reliant on the industrial structure of information and electronic manufacturing. Second, technocrats were a key factor in shaping the HSP policy to cope with the globalization of the technology industry. Finally, if further development of science parks is only a copy of the HSP model in spite of their industrial supporting functions and comparative advantages, the establishment of science parks will not be enough to promote development in the region. In addition, the government needs more information and knowledge management of the technocrats to improve policy making in the context of globalization.起始頁-結束頁：427-481資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：臉面在教唆殺妻歷程的心理意涵：華人臉面理論的應用並列篇名：The Psychological Meaning of Face within the Instigation of Intimate Partner Femicide: Application of Chinese Face Theory作者：邱獻輝(Hsien-Huei Chiou);葉光輝(Kuang-Hui Yeh)關鍵字：文化;生命敘說;面子;親密暴力;culture;life narrative;face;intimate partner violence期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：國內殺妻犯行可能涉及華人臉面議題，但其意涵仍待探究。本研究遵循建構主義典範進行敘說探究，邀請一位情境型殺妻犯B進行七次訪談；研究結果將其生命歷程分成外遇曝光前、教唆殺妻、期待東山再起等三階段。推測華人臉面思維應深植其自我認同的核心，當B妻以外遇報復B的婚外情，B為了子女而勉力維持家庭結構，以致長期苦於妻子不貞的「性道德臉」損傷;最後的夫妻公開嚴重衝突致其個人顏面盡失，家族臉面亦瞬間崩解，加上友人火上添油，促其憤恨教唆殺妻。B殺妻因素複雜，雖不宜將臉面崩解視為單一原因，但多處關鍵歷程可見其作用。英文摘要：”Face belief” in Chinese society may play a role in intimate partner femicide. However, a fair understanding of its mechanics is lacking. To clarify this, we focused on a perpetrator of Situational Couple Violence (SCV) as research target. We followed constructivism and adopted a narrative method to collect and analyze data. A male perpetrator of homicide with stable mental personality and without any previous criminal record other than this homicide was interviewed seven times. The results were presented in 3 stages of life themes related to the homicide: ”pursuit of 'achievement face' and protecting one's 'sexual face' before exposure of infidelity”, ”face collapse leading to the femicide” and ”the rise in expectations for reinstating face”. With regard to the above 3 perspectives, the narrative analysis of the interviewee's life shows that Chinese face is planted in his core self-identity. Yet, when his wife committed infidelity to avenge the interviewee's extra-marital affairs, his ”sexual moral face” was seriously hurt. However, for the sake of their children's welfare, he maintained their marriage, which resulted in continual loss of face due to his wife's infidelity. At the end, a terrible conflict in public caused the collapse of not only his ”personal face” but also his ”family face”, and finally resulted in the femicide. Although intimate partner femicide is a complex phenomenon which involves other conditions running parallel, Chinese face was one of the important factors in the interviewee's homicide action.起始頁-結束頁：483-523資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：「創造出公民，要什麼就都有了」？論盧梭的自由、愛國主義和實現共和的弔詭並列篇名：'Create Citizens, and You Have Everything You Need'? On Rousseau's Freedom, Patriotism and the Paradox of Actualizing Republic作者：陳嘉銘(Chia-Ming Chen)關鍵字：盧梭;自由;愛國主義;民族主義;德行;Rousseau;freedom;patriotism;nationalism;virtue期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文從盧梭論述的自由和愛國主義的關係切入，解釋盧梭寫作中的族裔民族主義元素。我首先提出新的分析，在盧梭的政治計畫中，兩種基本自由概念最為根本，一是控制環境的力量，二是免於支配關係的自由。要實現這兩種自由，需要公民已經具備共和愛國主義，可是唯有良好運作的共和國，才能產生共和愛國主義。因此，實現共和的弔詭是：尚未實現理想共和的國家，人民還沒有共和德行，共和國制度無法良好運作。然而，制度無法良好運作，也就無法產生共和德行。如此共和將永遠無法實現。族裔民族主義的功用，在於解開這個弔詭，但是它的成功卻必須危險地單方面仰賴好的立法家或行政權。或許公民參與運動在當代社會可以提供另一個可靠路徑。英文摘要：The essay explains Rousseau's puzzling employment of ethic nationalism from the perspective of his discourse on the relations between freedom and patriotism. My analysis shows that his political project consists of two fundamental concepts of freedom, namely the power of environmental control and freedom as non-domination. To actualize those two ideas of freedom, the citizen must be equipped with republican patriotism. Nevertheless, only a well-ordered republic is able to produce the requisite republican patriotism. Hence, the paradox of actualizing a republic: without republican virtues, the republic cannot function well; without a well-functioning republic, there will be no republican virtues. Either the republic already exists or the republic can never come into being. However, Rousseau's rendering of ethnic nationalism surprisingly solves this paradox. But its success dangerously depends on the good Lawgiver and executive power. In the end I suggest that civic participation may provide a more reliable solution in contemporary society.起始頁-結束頁：175-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：「既可怕又謬誤」卻「公正且真確」－論盧梭對霍布斯宗教理論的評斷並列篇名：'Horrible and False' Yet 'Just and True': On Rousseau's Conception of Hobbes' Religious Theory作者：梁裕康(Yu-Kang Liang)關鍵字：霍布斯;盧梭;宗教;公民宗教;Thomas Hobbes;Jean-Jacques Rousseau;religion;civil religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：在《社會契約論》當中，盧梭一方面讚許霍布斯是唯一一位看出政教分離流弊的基督教哲學家，另一方面又認為他的宗教理論存在著基本的錯誤。這樣的見解帶來一個詮釋霍布斯的問題：為什麼霍布斯會採取政教合一這種為盧梭所接受的主張？盧梭又是基於何種立場，反對霍布斯對宗教的看法？本文嘗試從盧梭對於公民宗教（civil religion）的看法出發，比較二者的差異之處。本文將指出，雖然盧梭基於自己的公民宗教觀點，同意霍布斯政教合一的論點。然而出於對基督教的不同詮釋，他認為真正的政教合一應該是將宗教置於政治之下，而霍布斯雖然扭轉了宗教指導政治的趨勢，卻沒有正確認識宗教的本質應該是協助鎔鑄共同體意志。在這種政教合一的體系中，盧梭認為霍布斯並沒有徹底解決宗教與政治間的衝突。英文摘要：In his 'Of Social Contract', Jean-Jacques Rousseau described Thomas Hobbes as the only person who clearly saw the evil of and the remedy for the separation of church and the state. Rousseau, however, also criticised Hobbes for his misjudgement that the spirit of Christianity could be compatible with politics. In this article I argue that Rousseau made such a judgement out of his idea of civil religion. According to his understanding of civil religion, Rousseau agreed with Hobbes that religion and politics should be united. But in Rousseau's point of view, Hobbes was wrong in the sense that the way he united religion and politics ignored the fact that the essence of religion is a supplement to forge a political community.起始頁-結束頁：219-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：彭真在1957年整風、「反右派」運動中的角色與作為並列篇名：Peng Zhen's Roles and Activities in the Rectification and the Anti-Rightist Campaign of 1957作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;整風運動;反右派鬥爭;毛澤東;中共黨史;Peng Zhen;Rectification Campaign;Anti-Rightist Struggle;Mao Zedong;Chinese Communist Party History期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：1957年春，毛澤東發起整風運動，其原先規劃對黨內進行整頓與革新，但是到後來卻加入了「反右派」的議程，使得運動演變成對黨內外敢言人士的大肆討伐和追查。當時擔任中共中央政治局委員、中央書記處書記兼北京市委第一書記、市長的彭真，在其中的政治角色和影響問題，西方學者雖早已注意，但研究過淺並認識有誤；中國大陸官方史家則對之不敢細談和深究。本文以近年蒐集的各類文獻資料為基礎，經過考察後指出：彭真雖非中央政治局常委會的成員，但他深受層峰信賴而參與運動各階段的政策制定。彭真因身任中央書記處第二號書記，直接肩挑運動相關政策如「引蛇出洞」的執行，他對自身分工負責的領域如統戰和政法部門的「反右」操作上，更是獨當一面。與此同時，彭真又因擔任首都北京市的最高黨政負責人，直接掌控當地的運動發展。在他的努力下，北京市的運動作法和經驗，常成為其他省市參照模仿的對象。彭真對運動所作的兩層次（中央和北京市）、多面向的參與，使之成為運動的實際操辦者和運動激化發展的重要關係人。在運動中的高層菁英互動方面，除了可見彭真對毛澤東的悉心跟隨和力爭表現，也可觀察彭真和鄧小平為貫徹運動決策的緊密合作。最後，透過彭真的此一個案研究，還可有助於進一步地認識和了解中共的政治運動，特別是藉之檢視在運動過程中承上啟下、職司執行的「督導人」的相關角色。英文摘要：In the spring of 1957, Mao Zedong launched the Rectification Campaign. Initially, this campaign aimed at rectifying certain shortcomings of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). However, it soon became a political purge in which outspoken individuals were hunted out and labeled Rightists. During this notorious campaign, Peng Zhen was one of the most influential political figures. As a senior member of the Politburo of the CCP and the second-ranking leader of the Central Secretariat, Peng Zhen actively participated in decision-making and zealously assisted Deng Xiaoping in carrying out the campaign policies such as ”luring out the snakes.” As the Central leader who took charge of political-legal affairs and united front works, Peng was responsible for the radical campaign development in these two fields. Furthermore, Peng concurrently served as the Party Secretary of the Beijing Municipal Committee. He was in charge of directing and supervising the campaign of Beijing city, and was eager to promote the campaign experiences of the nation’s capital as an example for emulation throughout the rest of the country. To sum up, Peng contributed much to escalating and radicalizing the campaign, and driving it forward excessively. Regarding the elite politics during the campaign, Peng was Mao’s trusted follower to implement his political initiatives, and he cooperated well with Deng to accomplish the campaign. This study also enhances the understanding of the political campaigns led by the CCP, and particularly the crucial role of the campaign executor.起始頁-結束頁：247-292資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：中國大陸城鎮男性薪資所得在1993年與2006年的跨期變化並列篇名：The Earnings Difference of Male Workers in Urban China between 1993 and 2006作者：唐正道(Cheng-Tao Tang);徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：中國大陸;薪資函數;分量迴歸;Oaxaca-Blinder分解;擬真分配;China;earning function;quantile regression;Oaxace-Blinder decompositions counterfactual analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：不同於目前研究中國大陸薪資所得相關文獻的範疇與設定，本文以1993年與2006年兩個年度「城市住戶調查」中男性勞動者的薪資及相關特徵變數進行分析。我們採用傳統的Mincer方程式以及Oaxaca-Blinder分解進行分析，結果顯示相較於1993年積極改革開放之初，2006年時中國大陸的勞動市場已因為一連串主動與被動改革開放政策而更具彈性，其勞動者薪資報酬率與工作經驗及教育有更為正向的連結。此外，藉由Oaxaca-Blinder分解中的「特徵效果」與「係數效果」可發現，股權結構的變化都解釋了極大比例的變動。藉由擬真所得分配的建構，我們更清楚1993年與2006年整個薪資所得分配的差異主要來自於這兩年度報酬率係數的大幅變動，而勞動者特徵分配的改變僅能解釋約莫10%的所得分配差異。綜合這些結果，我們認為中國大陸從1993年以來政策與環境的變遷，除了改變勞動者的因素特徵分配外，報酬率能適度反映不同勞動者特徵間的差異才是對勞動市場薪資結構最主要的影響。英文摘要：Using urban household surveys in 1986 and 2006, this paper studies the change of men's earnings in urban China. We make use of the standard Mincer equation to perform Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions of the mean wage difference as well as recently developed quantile decompositions. We examine the extent to which earnings difference in different periods can be explained by workers' characteristics and returns to these characteristics both on average and for the whole earnings distribution. We find that earnings are positively correlated to experience and education across time, and the ownership type plays an important role in explaining earnings difference. In addition, the wage structure, in term of coefficients effect, exhibits a great shift in urban China's labor market as we perform a counterfactual analysis.起始頁-結束頁：293-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：民主和平論與非民主和平論之經驗檢證：政治制度相似性的關鍵作用並列篇名：An Empirical Analysis of the Democratic Peace and Non-democratic Peace Theses: The Critical Effects of Political Institutional Similarity作者：張文揚(Wen-Yang Chang)關鍵字：民主和平;非民主和平;制度相似性;制度研究;democratic peace;non-democratic peace;institutional similarity;institutional studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：自「民主國家之間比較不會發生戰爭」的論述經由理論與實證研究確認以來，民主和平論受到西方國際關係學界，特別是衝突研究社群以及政策實踐者的歡迎，並成為西方國家外交政策的一部分。然而，自1990年代中期以來，「非民主國家之間也有可能和平」的說法也獲得學者驗證，這讓衝突研究社群在探討政治制度與軍事衝突的連結上，無法統一看法與提供政策建議。本文認為，過去對「政治體制－軍事衝突」的研究，過度強調與比較民主和非民主政體的優劣以及這些體制特徵對於國際和平的影響，進而忽略了國內政治制度本身如何直接影響國際關係。本文主張，由於制度相似性提供區別敵我、加強溝通以及傳遞訊息的作用，讓制度類似的國家面臨軍事衝突前，提高解決衝突的效率以避免外交危機升級或國際摩擦，並進一步解釋為何民主國家之間與非民主國家之間發生衝突的機率不高。利用1950年到2001年的數據資料，本文透過實證的方式確認這個關係。英文摘要：The popularity of the democratic peace theory-democracies rarely fight against each other-is derived from its theoretical and empirical support. However, since the 1990s the ”dictatorial peace” argument, proposing that non-democracies are also less likely to engage in militarized disputes with each other, has emerged. Failing to provide a unified approach to explain why both regime types account for peace prevents us from advancing a unified explanation for the polity-conflict nexus. This paper proposes that it is the institutional characteristics, rather than regime characteristics, that determine the likelihood of conflict onset among institutionally similar states in political terms. Institutional similarity helps states identify friends or adversaries, provides information for behavior prediction, and reduces communication costs. Using the data of the period spanning 1950-2001, this paper confirms that political institutional similarity reduces the incidence of conflict.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：「虛擬」的悖論－從解構哲學觀點探討網路空間並列篇名：The Virtual Paradox: A Deconstruction Perspective on Cyberspace作者：洪世謙(Shih-Chian Hung)關鍵字：解構;虛擬;悖論;網路空間;幽靈;deconstruction;virtual;paradox;cyberspace;ghost期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文將從解構哲學所具有的悖論特質，探索我們該如何面對網路世界的虛擬性。解構哲學以悖論的策略造成了三個效果，無從判定、無法化約、未（到）來的幽靈學。以解構哲學的角度來說，虛擬僅是相對於「現實」的「不可能性」，一種與「現實」之間的差異，一種對「現實」越界的他異性，一種遲到而尚未出現的「實在」，它以不在場的方式，懸置了一切「在場」，卻也為「在場」提供了更多可能性。實在與虛擬的問題，是由於以往我們將「實在」定義在可見、可理解的「現實」、「真實」脈絡下，以此把不可見或無法歸納的事物當成假或虛擬。這說明了若要討論虛擬網路空間，必然涉及對實在論（realism）的重探。「現實」、「真實」是否就是實在？我們對於「真實」是否該有不同的理解？是否該繼續停留在可見性「現實」的暴政下，順從者稱之為「真實」，不服（符）者統稱為「虛擬」？抑或是，我們不該如此簡化地區分真實與虛擬，而是必須將這兩個概念視為一個無法輕易化約的複雜概念？抑或是，虛擬與真實，是一種相互的外在性，彼此相互補充又相互交雜？本文最後想指出，面對網路空間，問題不在於區別虛擬還是真實，而是這個包含了虛擬空間的現實空間中，我們如何重新面對這個新的世界。面對虛擬性，我們要問的或許不是真假的問題，而是更徹底的「人是什麼」的問題？藉由解構，我們最終所面對的既非真實與虛擬的問題，亦非意識與身體的問題，更絕非是科技與創新的問題，而是活的問題，一個關於何謂生存意義的問題。如同德希達說：「我們最終要學會生活。」若虛擬實在是一種新的全然不同的事物，它作為我們所正遭逢的他者、另一種不可能性。我們的工作便是去遭逢它，並且重新與它展開新的生存與世界意義。英文摘要：Through the means of paradox that characterizes deconstruction philosophy, this paper seeks to discuss how we deal with the virtuality of the Internet. Three effects stemming from deconstruction philosophy are (1) the undecidability, (2) the irreducibility, and (3) hauntology of the future (avenir/a venir). From the deconstructive perspective, the virtual is only the impossible of the actual, a difference between the actuals, an alterity that transgresses the actual. It is a belated reality to come, and it suspends the presence in an absent manner. Yet, by so doing, such a manner provides more possibilities for ”presence”.The problem between the virtual and the real is grounded on the fact that both of them are defined in terms of our ability to see and understand, through which the invisible and the irreducible are contended as unreal or virtual. This explains that a reexamination of realism is necessary if we intend to discuss the virtual space of the Internet. Do the actual and the real imply reality? Should we have an alternative understanding concerning the real? Should we continue to stay under the despotism of the actual? That is, should we continue to call those who are reconciled under the despotism of the actual the real, and those who are not the virtual? In other words, should we not simply try to distinguish between the virtual and the real, but rather conceptualize the two notions as a notion too irreducible and complicated to determine? Or does it suggest that a relation between the virtual and the real implies a self-referring exteriority, supplementing and referring to each other?Finally, the paper notes that the problem, in the face of cyberspace, relies not on the attempt to distinguish between the virtual and the real, but on the actual space underlying the virtual space. How can we face the new world again? In the face of the virtual, the question we tend to ask concerns not the one between true and false, but a rather radical one-what is human? Through deconstruction, the question we finally face is no longer the one that concerns the virtual and the real, nor one of conscious and body, let alone a question of technology and creation. Rather, it is a question about living, a question about raison d'etre, as Derrida emphatically argues, ”We finally have to learn to live.” If virtual reality is a new different thing, it serves as an Other we encounter, or an impossibility. Our task, then, is to encounter it, and recompose a new form of existence and world meaning with the Other.起始頁-結束頁：41-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：不能停的競賽：暑期活動對中學生學業成就的影響並列篇名：A Non-stopping Competition: The Effects of Summer Activities on High School Students' Educational Achievements作者：張宜君(Yi-Chun Chang)關鍵字：水龍頭理論;夏季失落;暑期活動;固定效果模型;the faucet theory;summer loss;summer activities;fixed effects model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究在臺灣升學主義脈絡下，討論家庭在暑假期間提供學生系統性的暑期活動，是否能夠有效提升中學生的各項分析能力及其階級差異；並檢視過去暑期活動相關研究在方法論上的爭議，採用固定效果模型（fixed effects model）解決學生暑期活動安排可能存在的自我篩選的內生性問題，為理論提供更細緻的實證分析。本研究採用台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（TEPS）第一波至第三波國中樣本，分析結果發現高社經地位家庭能夠提供子女更多參與結構性暑期活動的機會；再者，結構性暑期活動的影響效果依分析能力類型而異，除了才藝課程的負向影響之外，大多有助於學生各項分析能力的提升，但影響效果十分有限。最後，非勞動階級背景的學生參與學業相關課程及閱讀課外書籍獲益的程度高於勞動階級背景的學生；而參與語言及電腦相關課程則對非勞動階級的學生較有益。本文結果在理論及方法論層次上，回應並補充過去研究觀點，並於文末討論教育制度的變化可能如何影響暑期活動的效果與方向，及其對於學生的衝擊。英文摘要：In the Taiwanese context of credentialism, this study aims to examine the effects of summer activities on high school students' educational achievements and to illustrate how selection biases impact the estimates. Using data from the first three waves of the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS), this study finds that students from higher socioeconomic status (SES) families have more opportunities to participate in summer activities than those from lower SES families. Moreover, the fixed effects model analyses reveal that participating in academic related activities and reading extra-curricular books have positive influence on students' achievements, whereas taking extra-curricular activities, such as music or painting courses, is not beneficial for their achievements. Nevertheless, these effects are quite small. Finally, the positive effects of participating in academic related activities and reading books are greater for the students with higher-class parents than those with working-class parents, while participating in language and computer-related activities is more beneficial for the students with working-class parents than those with higher-class parents. The implications of these findings for changes in the educational system are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：63-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：臺灣反傾銷控訴傷害了下游廠商？並列篇名：Are Antidumping Suits Hurting Taiwan's Downstream Industries?作者：林家慶(Chia-Ching Lin)關鍵字：反傾銷;下游廠商;廠商利潤;事件研究法;antidumping;downstream industries;firms' profits;event study期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：關於上游反傾銷控訴對下游廠商之影響，目前臺灣仍缺乏一整體性之研究。本研究以1992∼2011年21件臺灣反傾銷案例共83家廠商為研究對象，其中包括了18種不同的下游產業。研究結果指出，臺灣反傾銷控訴對國內下游廠商不一定都是負面影響，平均而言，反而使下游廠商超額報酬增加約2%。而影響下游廠商超額報酬之主要因素為產業特性，例如，市場結構、涉案產品進口滲透率及關稅稅率等。英文摘要：In Taiwan, there is not yet sufficient and integrated research on how antidumping suits filed by upstream vendors impact the downstream industries. In this paper, we have studied a total of 21 antidumping cases in Taiwan during the period of 1992 to 2011, involving 83 companies from 18 different downstream industries. The result suggests that the antidumping suits in Taiwan may not necessarily lead to negative influences on the downstream industries in the country. Rather, they have resulted in, on average, a 2% increase in the abnormal return of the downstream industries. The main factors influencing the abnormal returns are industry-specific, for example, the market structure, the import penetration ratio of the products in question, and the tariff rate, among others.起始頁-結束頁：103-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：科學知識與水政治：旗山溪治水爭議之個案研究並列篇名：Scientific Knowledge and the Politics of Water: The Controversy on the Cishan River Flood Control作者：范玫芳(Mei-Fang Fan);張簡妙琳(Miao-Lin Zhang Jian)關鍵字：科學知識;治水;在地知識;公民參與;公民科學;scientific knowledge;flooding control;local knowledge;citizen participation;citizen science期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：當前在極端氣候與環境變遷的挑戰下，水患治理成為具高度爭議與複雜性的重要課題。本文旨在探討旗山溪治水爭議中，政府與相關組織之間的權力運作以及科學知識生產的動態互動過程。剷除高莖作物的知識論戰突顯了權力與資源的不對等、既有法規標準的僵化，以及治水政策的盲點。地方公民團體以在地經驗與知識挑戰官方的治水論述和知識宣稱，透過學習學科領域專業知識與諮詢水利專家，積極參與水患的治理。個案除了突顯治水場域中不同知識的相互競逐，更展現了以在地知識脈絡為基礎，並結合治水知識，以發展適當的治水良方。英文摘要：In the context of the challenges of extreme climate and environmental changes, flooding governance has become highly controversial and complex. This article addresses the exercise of power between the government and related organizations, as well as the dynamics of the scientific knowledge production process in the Cishan River flood control dispute. The dispute concerning the eradication of high-stem crops highlights the problematic asymmetries of power and resources, rigid regulations and standards, and a flood control policy blind spot. Local citizen groups have challenged the official discourse and experts' knowledge claims based on local knowledge. Civic groups have acquired disciplinary expertise, consulted flood control experts, and actively participated in the governance of the flooding. The case highlights different types of knowledge which compete with each other in the flood control arena, and civic groups' using context-based local knowledge combined with flood control expertise to develop an appropriate flood control approach.起始頁-結束頁：133-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：如何重新理解「中國」？或者，如何詮釋文明的治理與暴力？並列篇名：What is china? Or, How to Understand the Governance and the Violence of a Civilization?作者：劉紀蕙期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00012篇名：編按作者：李卓穎期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：8-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00023篇名：「明清中國與全球史的連結」專題導論並列篇名：Introduction to the Special Issue: ”Patterns of Historical Change in Late Imperial China: A Global and Comparative Perspective”作者：邱澎生(Peng-sheng Chiu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：9-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00034篇名：近代早期到近現代的中國：比較並連結歐洲和全球歷史變遷模式並列篇名：From Early Modern to Modern China: Comparisons and Connections to European and Global Patterns of Historical Change作者：王國斌(R. Bin Wong);李立凡(Li-fan Lee);胡芷嫣(Chih-yen Hu);廖晏顥(Yen-Hao Liao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：18-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00045篇名：與談王國斌並列篇名：Response to R. Bin Wong作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：58-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00056篇名：回應王國斌並列篇名：Response to R. Bin Wong作者：鐘月岑(Yuehtsen Juliette Chung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：64-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00067篇名：回應王國斌並列篇名：Response to R. Bin Wong作者：何漢威(Hon-Wai Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：68-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00078篇名：回應王國斌並列篇名：Response to R. Bin Wong作者：和文凱(Wenkai He)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：74-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).00089篇名：回應王國斌並列篇名：Response to R. Bin Wong作者：黃克武(Max K. W. Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：79-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).000910篇名：王國斌回應並列篇名：Reply to the commentaries作者：王國斌(R. Bin Wong);李立凡(Li-fan Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：85-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001011篇名：文明與暴力共存的弔詭︰從蹴鞠、擊鞠與捶丸的興衰管窺華夏文明的文明化歷程並列篇名：The Paradoxical Coexistence of Civilization and Violence: An Exploratory Study of the Chinese Civilizing Process Illustrated with the Rise and Fall of the Ball Games作者：湯志傑(Chih-Chieh Tang)關鍵字：文明;暴力;文人化;陰陽二元結構;比較文明研究;civilization;violence;literatization;yin/yang dual structure;comparative study of civilizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文旨在研究華人社會的文明化過程，進而藉與西方的現代文明化歷程對照，嘗試從比較文明研究的視角對兩者不同的軌跡進行探討與反省。秉持暴力係社會建構的觀念為指引，本文採取結構類型學的進路，探究暴力的各種表現形態及組合如何與社會結構有關，釐清暴力係與文明共生的弔詭事實，反駁愈文明就愈不暴力的迷思。藉由探討蹴鞠、擊鞠與捶丸等球戲的興衰，本文從社會分化模式的轉變來釐清華人社會文明化的關鍵轉折，將其定性為文人化，並解釋這與習稱的唐宋變革有何關連。在彰顯仕紳社會的世界史意義後，本文將分析在此為陰陽二元結構支配下的特定社會形態裡，文明與暴力表現出怎樣的共存樣貌，說明為何在文化上向來重視和諧、譴責暴力的華人，在日常生活中卻不時地流露出暴力的言行。英文摘要：This article aims at studying the civilizing process in the Chinese society. By contrasting it with the modern civilizing process in the West, I will discuss what the different paths means from the perspective of comparative study of civilizations. Guided by the idea that violence is socially constructed, this research adopts the approach of structural typology to investigate the relevance between the performances of violence and the societal structures, to clarify the paradox of the coexistence of civilization and violence, and to refute the myth that civilization will dispel violence. By way of exploring the rise and fall of the ball games of jiju, cuji and chuiwan, I will identify a decisive shift in the civilizing process in the Chinese society and call it literatization. I will explain why this shift had to do with the so called Tang-Song transition. I argue that this shift resulted from the change of the forms of societal differentiation. Then, I will highlight the world history's significance of the gentry society that was governed by a yin/yang dual structure, and explain why the coexistence of violence and civilization expressed such a particular configuration under this specific social formation to give a persuasive answer to the following puzzle: why do the Chinese that have a culture of condemning violence and emphasizing harmony display so frequently violent sayings and behaviors in daily life.起始頁-結束頁：91-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001112篇名：新自由主義國家霸權與邊境暴富主體的交逢：福建平潭綜合實驗區的案例並列篇名：When Neoliberal State Hegemony Encounters Wealth Followers: A Case Study of Fujian-Pingtan Comprehensive Pilot Zone作者：趙彥寧(Yen-Ning Chao)關鍵字：海西特區;福建平潭綜合實驗區;兩岸共同家園;Economic Special Zone to the West Coast of Taiwan Strait;Fu-Jian Pingtan Comprehensive Pilot Zone;cross-strait common homeland期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文探究閩北國境邊區在2010年海西特區和福建平潭綜合實驗區成立之後，為求建設與台灣「五個共同」（「共同規劃、共同開發、共同經營、共同管理、共同受益」）的「兩岸共同家園」，中國中央與地方政府針對該島居民而設計與施展的治理手段、以及底層公民的日常生活生命政治狀態。本文的結論為，新自由主義市場邏輯的金錢幻術治理模式，已然成為此刻的道德經濟衡量準則，在此情境之中，常民也日益喪失社會能動性（更遑論反抗既存威權體制）的施展能力。英文摘要：The PRC central government's institution of the Economic Special Zone to the West Coast of Taiwan Strait along southeastern China, in particular the Pingtan Comprehensive Pilot Zone, in the year of 2010 calls officially for building up a ”Cross-Strait Common Homeland” together with Taiwanese entrepreneurs that would be characterized by ”the Five Commons” (”Common Planning, Common Development, Common Organizing, Common Management, Common Profiting”). This paper examines the means by which both the central and local government manage to govern the residents of Pingtan, as well as the bio-political condition the local underclass are experiencing on a dailylife basis. It concludes with the argument that neoliberal market logic in the form of money-fetish value has become the overriding principle of moral economy, which renders local people increasingly powerless in the face of the authoritarian political regime.起始頁-結束頁：153-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001213篇名：理解當代中國民族主義：制度、情感結構與認識框架並列篇名：Understanding Contemporary Chinese Nationalism: Institutions, Structures of Feeling, and Cognitive Frames作者：汪宏倫(Horng-Luen Wang)關鍵字：共產主義與民族主義;怨恨心態;戰爭之框;制度論;價值觀;communism and nationalism;ressentiment;frames of war;institutionalism;sense of value期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文針對1990年代以來興起的中國民族主義風潮，探討下列三組相互關連的問題：（1）在當代中國，官方民族主義與大眾民族主義之間的關連為何？我們如何解釋，中國民族主義在1949年「著陸」之後，相隔四十餘載又重新「起飛」？（2）1990年代「新民族主義」的興起，與中國涉入全球化的程度，幾乎可以說是同時並進的；這個看似弔詭的現象，該如何解釋？（3）這波民族主義流露了豐富的情感與強烈的情緒，應當如何理解？反映的又是什麼？本研究採取現象學的理論立場，透過對制度、情感結構與認識框架的考察來回答上述問題。研究發現：1949年之後，中國民族主義並沒有「暫時缺席」，而是轉成「維護政體的民族主義」，透過「日常國族主義」的運作而存在。共產主義與民族主義，既不是互斥關係也不是替代關係，而是以更微妙的關係聯繫著。在毛澤東時期的「戰爭共產主義」下，新中國的政治體制打造出一種新主體（藉由統一戰線「戰爭／鬥爭之框」鍛造出來的「人民」），這種新主體的情感結構與認識框架，儘管在不同時期歷經各種轉折與演變，但透過官方愛國主義教育等日常實踐再生產，至今仍框構著許多人對世界的看法。這也解釋了，為什麼進入全球化的時代，大眾民族主義的情感會特別高漲，而戰爭的訴求與修辭，依然經常可見。情感與情緒不該被視為是「非理性的因素」而加以排除或貶抑；相反地，情感結構形塑了民族主義者的價值觀與世界觀，而這也是理解當代中國民族主義的一把重要鎖鑰。英文摘要：This paper aims to tackle the following three connected questions regarding nationalism in contemporary China: (1) What are the relations between official and popular nationalisms? How do we explain nationalism's ”take-off” after more than forty years of its ”touch-down” in 1949? (2) The rise of the so-called ”new nationalism” in the 1990s coincided with China's increasing involvement in the globalization process; how can we explain this seemingly paradoxical phenomenon? (3) How can we make sense of strong emotions and abundant feelings that have been the characteristics of this wave of nationalism? Adopting a phenomenological approach, this study examines institutions, structures of feeling, as well as cognitive frames to answer the above questions. It is found that Chinese nationalism was not ”tentatively absent” after 1949; rather, it was transformed into ”polity-based nationalism” and functioned as ”banal nationalism” in daily routines. Communism and nationalism are neither mutually exclusive nor substitutive; instead, they are implicated with each other in a much subtler way. The ”war communism” during Mao's period has constructed a new kind of subject, namely, the ”people” [renmin] forged by the ”frames of war/frames of struggle” of the united fronts. The structures of feeling, as well as the cognitive frames (namely, frames of war), of such new subjects, reproduced through official patriotic education and daily practice, have been framing the worldview of a majority of people even up until today. This also explains why popular nationalism arises and the rhetoric of war is frequently observed in this so-called global era. Last but not the least, this paper argues that feelings and emotions should not be dismissed as merely ”irrational factors” to be excluded from our analysis. On the contrary, structures of feeling, which have profoundly shaped nationalists' value and their worldviews, have provided us an important key to the understanding of contemporary Chinese nationalism.起始頁-結束頁：189-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001314篇名：流離在領土內、飄蕩在領土外？泰緬邊境克倫難民民族運動的空間爭奪並列篇名：Displaced within and Exiled outside Territory: Karen Refugees' Nationalist Movement and Spatial Struggle at the Thai-Burma Border作者：趙中麒(Chung-Chi Chao)關鍵字：難民;民族主義;空間爭奪;默會共識;非領土性領地;Refugee;Nationalist Movement;Spatial Struggle;Tacit Consensus;Non-territorial Territory期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：就物理而言，民族領土是一個客觀存在的空間，在其中，我們可以發現民族社群的所有活動。當某個民族社群成員在特定空間內代代進行各種文化、經濟與政治活動時，這些活動就與該空間共同形塑了該民族社群的集體記憶與生命經驗。為了讓此世界能不受干擾地維持，民族社群需要透過某些政治行動將此空間「領土化」。由於沒有那麼多的物理空間可讓每一個民族社群都能擁有此一獨特又具有詩意的領土。因此，歷史總是目擊兩個或數個民族社群透過民族主義爭奪某一特定空間。如果兩個敵對的社群同時宣稱他們擁有某塊土地，並透過武裝行動爭奪該空間，無可避免會引發大規模難民潮，而此種爭奪行動，不會因為民族社群成員淪為難民而結束，緬甸克倫難民即是一例。克倫族與緬族，由於對其民族空間的不同認知與期待，乃各自發動武裝民族運動，以控制他們所認為的領土。經過60年內戰，數十萬人流離失所，但克倫族的民族運動並未因此停止，甚至仍在難民營內進行著。由於克倫族在某方面得以自我管理難民營事務，使難民營轉變為非領土性領地，讓克倫難民不再是純粹的無根難民，相反地，由於此一非領土性領地，他們以流離失所的民族此一狀態存在於泰緬邊境。英文摘要：A space, physically, is an arena where battles, rituals and ceremonies, the essential economic activities, and daily interactions take place within. However, when rituals, ceremonies, and activities are practiced for generations by a national community within the space, it slowly transforms into a landscape with meanings, a landscape unique to a nation. Nevertheless, there are not enough ”rooms” physically available for all national communities. History thus has witnessed many instances where two or more communities simultaneously claim the same plot of land as theirs. Consequently, national space has always been a site of contestation for political controls. If the conflicting claims cannot be solved, rival communities often resort to armed contestation in the name of nationalism, and such contestations frequently result in displacement. The Karen and the Burman, due to different understandings of history and expectations of their national spaces, have each launched their respective nationalist movements. However, the nationalist movement does not end with the flow of refugees crossing the national border into the other country. Rather, the nationalist movement usually extends to the country receiving refugees. Karen people's nationalism also exists in refugee camps and leads to the transformation of refugee camps into a Karen non-territorial territory that turns the Karen people into a recognizable displaced nation as opposed to a group of rootless refugees.起始頁-結束頁：251-290資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001415篇名：傳教士子女在中國：內地會與十九世紀芝罘學校的創立並列篇名：Missionary Children in China: China Inland Mission and the Foundation of the Chefoo Schools in Late of Nineteenth Century作者：張勤瑩(Ching-Yin Chang)關鍵字：內地會;芝罘學校;傳教士子女;戴德生;蘭大弼;China Inland Mission;the Chefoo Schools;missionary children;James Hudson Taylor (1832-1905);David Landsborough Ⅳ(1914-2010)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014中文摘要：中外學界對於基督教在華傳播史的討論，鮮少關注傳教士子女在中國的成長歷程；其中，關於教育事業的課題，更聚焦在教授中國學生的機構，對於過往曾設立專門招收傳教士子女及外僑子弟的學校，往往略而不談。由於傳教士子女的教育問題，與傳教士家庭在中國的日常生活密不可分，更牽涉當時傳教士父母看待子女在中國長大的心態。究竟他們是將自己對於中國的想像，與信仰福音的期待，附加到孩子們的童年上？抑或採行一種截然不同於中國文化的教導方式？本文藉由在十九世紀後期，內地會為其傳教士子女設立芝罘學校的教育及活動為研究主題，探索傳教士家庭的育兒問題，及其子女在中國接受英制教育的養成過程。並從芝罘學校在近代中國設立的歷史緣由，深入追蹤內地會傳教士家庭在中國生活期間，面臨的子女教養需求，以及內地會設校的考量，與其在中國發展的關連性。英文摘要：The issue about how missionary children grew up in the country where their parents worked particularly in Modern China has been long neglected in the missionary history either in Chinese or English literature. How missionary children were educated during their childhood and youth? What did they learn in Chinese surroundings when they were young? How did those missionaries also as parents look at the education of their children? This article is primarily concerned with the education and activities in the Chefoo School which was established in late nineteenth-century China. In considering the childhood of the missionary children, some following questions were arisen, such as how missionary parents raised children in China, what kind of courses were offered for these children, educated in the Chefoo Schools. It is hoped that this article may lead to understanding of the historical reasons of the Chefoo Schools that was established in the North China by James H. Taylor in 1881 and the history of western children educated in China. In addition, the findings of this research would contribute to realize educational problems troubled those missionary parents in inland provinces of China and the development of the China Inland Mission.起始頁-結束頁：291-332資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001516篇名：不需對話的族群分類－寮國北部的「人民」與「國家」並列篇名：Separated Ethnic Classifications without Dialogue: On the ”People” and ”Nation” in Northern Laos作者：謝世忠(Shih-Chung Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：19期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：333-367資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201409_(19).001617篇名：結構與開放：主體實踐的困境與契機－編輯室的話並列篇名：The Structure versus the Open: The Dilemma and the Chance for Subjective Practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).000118篇名：現代性與台灣當代舞蹈映像：由迷戀「中國」到迷戀「福爾摩莎」並列篇名：Modernity and Contemporary Dance in Taiwan: From Obsession with ”China” to Obsession with ”Formosa”作者：盧玉珍(Yuh-Jen Lu)關鍵字：宣傳紀錄片;符號中國;福爾摩莎;原住民樂舞;現代性;propaganda documentary;China signifier;Formosa signi fier;indigenous song and dance;modernity期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文係針對前「新聞局」出版的《中國舞蹈》(1968)及《舞宴》(1995)兩部宣傳紀錄片，作音像比較與歷史分析，目的旨在釐清舞蹈如何再現官方政績，並試圖解讀兩部影片背後所扣連的台灣當代社會意識、現代性與族群身分政治的變遷等。紀錄片號稱是紀實電影，本身即為一種社會文本，記錄觀點更是檢驗拍攝當下的政治、社會指標。那麼在台灣特殊的時空下，舞蹈如何被動員來催化民族－國家的宣傳？從舞蹈紀錄片中，現代性在台灣的兩階段顯影，其所呈現的時代面貌、社會變遷與族群關係為何？當舞蹈成為官方宣傳主題時，即便是以正向方式來呈現「社會現實」，然而影片在模仿(mimesis)與敘事(diegesis)的框架之間，其兀自逸出的訊息是什麼？藉由「現代中國舞」(Modern Chinese Dance)與「原住民樂舞」的呈現方式，以及Agnes Heller的現代性邏輯分析，本研究發現，鏡頭在移轉之間所揭示的是，「黃昏的民族」意象與外省族群由權力位置移往邊緣的「同時共代」(Fabian, 1983)性，而促使台灣社會的族群關係躍然於銀幕之上者，其實是主體斷裂與扣連的能量，由迷戀符號「中國」轉向迷戀符號「福爾摩莎」的現代性追求。英文摘要：Dance documentaries often refer to works of realistic, genuine, and already past performance events, perhaps to inform the viewers for various purposes, whereas propaganda aims at social engineering for the government’s own benefit. Prior to the 1970s, dance in Taiwan was rarely documented in film, except in political propaganda. Until the 1990s, the most comprehensive documentaries on contemporary dance in Taiwan were still for the purpose of political propaganda. This essay examines two propaganda dance documentaries, entitled ”Three Faces of Chinese Dance” (1968) and ”A Dancing Feast: A Documentary on Taiwan Choreography” (1995). Since the lifting of the 38-year long period of Martial Law in 1987 happened to be the defining event that separated the earlier documentary from the later one, it is assumed to have had different impacts on the two films, despite both being issued by the same ROC Government Information Office. Thus, under these particular situations in Taiwan, how was dance mobilized to reinforce the concept of the nation-state? What eidetic imagery marking the social changes, ethnic relations, and appearances of modernity in Taiwan can be seen from these two dance documentaries? When dance is playing the role of propaganda, what information is revealed through these two documentaries by means of mimesis and diegesis? In terms of these two ideological states, pre and post-martial law, dance artists seem to continue to take their cues from a nationstate point of view. Whether to resist, dodge, or follow the censored clues, they have only considered ”serious” choreography as their subjects. Through Agnes Heller’s ”logics of modernity” and the filmed presences of modern Chinese dance as well as indigenous song and dance within the respective two dance documentaries, I argue that ideologies derived from a search for modernity in Taiwan's contemporary dance works have moved from an obsession with ”China” signifier to an obsession with ”Formosa” signifier.起始頁-結束頁：7-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).000219篇名：論開放性資料庫藝術的動態特質並列篇名：The Dynamics of Open Database Art作者：許雯婷(Wen-Ting Hsu);賴雯淑(Wen-Shu Lai)關鍵字：網路藝術;開放性作品;資料庫藝術;互文性;動態;Net art;Open work;Database art;Intertextuality;Dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著數位科技及網路的普遍化，我們可以觀察到當今使用數位科技、網路或程式編碼等來進行創作的藝術家，經常僅為作品編定程序(program)，或利用數據資料混合各種形式來創作，此論文的研究對象「開放性資料庫藝術」（open database art，以下簡稱ODA），即是其中的一種，它沒有既成的作品內容，而是應用資料庫技術大量地從網際網路的資料或從參與者貢獻的資料中擷取資料，以之作為內容。這類型的作品，不僅反映出資料庫技術與其藝術的面貌，更體現了數位時代朝向群眾的創造性協作的趨勢。本文的重要性和目的是在提供理解ODA作品的脈絡與觀點，除了就作品的現象層和技術層進行適切的描述和分類外，也更深一層地耙梳和凝聚出ODA作品的特質。因此，本文側重在討論ODA作品的「動態」重要特質，逐一就「作品中的文本相互關係」、「文本意義的變化情形」及其這些外部文本的移動對ODA作品或外部文本自身所引發或形成的「動態和意義」進行討論，以作為後續相關研究之參考。本研究結論有四：(1)待填入的內容本身是ODA作者的主要創造，而召喚外部文本、邀請觀者的參與和創造也是ODA作品最具特徵的手法，(2)在理解ODA作品時，需考慮文本之間的互文性，即審視作品生產過程中的文本交互關係與意義變動的過程。(3)持續待填入的內容造就了ODA作品的意義及其可能性，也形成作品中重要的動態：「視覺呈現的變動」、「不穩定的文本相互關係」、「文本意義的變動」和「不斷重構的作品結構」。(4)ODA作品是在事件中實踐的藝術，是一個連續性的歷程，而非恆定的藝術事件，也可視其為一件動態、歷時性事件的多重樣態之一，故在理解作品本身時，必須同時關注其發展歷程與其作品特定的歷史脈絡。英文摘要：With the pervasion of digital technology and the Internet, artists today can create artwork by programming and inputting external data. The subject of this paper, open database art (ODA), is one such type of artwork. Open database artwork, unlike other artwork, does not consist of fixed, preset, and stable content, because it is made by retrieving external data in different sociocultural contexts or by participants’ contributions, and the retrieved data is combined to form content. This type of artwork reflects both the application of database technology and the tendency toward collective creation in the digital age. With the continual input of external data, open database artworks create moving content, changing visual appearance, and overarching relationships. These characteristics of ODA result in a dynamic relationship between the external data and the open database artwork, the transformation of the meaning of the external data, and the reconfiguration of the artwork. Four conclusions can be drawn from this study: (1) The continual open input of content is the main concept from the artist. The most characteristic approach of ODA is to involve external texts and viewer participation. (2) To better address the creation of ODA, the intertextuality in and between texts must be considered. (3) Along with the continual open input of content, a changing visual appearance, a moving textual relationship, the transformation of the meaning of the external data, and the reconfiguration of the artwork are also produced. (4) ODA is an ongoing event of art praxis. The artwork itself is a continual process, not a fixed object. Therefore, ODA must be understood through its developmental process and its particular historical context.起始頁-結束頁：53-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).000320篇名：共謀式對抗的快感新陳代謝並列篇名：The Enjoyment Metabolism of Paralleocomplicit Antagonism作者：張維元(Wei-Yuan Chang)關鍵字：Lacan;Lacalu;Zizek;基進民主;快感;對抗;衝突;Jacques Lacan;Ernesto Lacalu;Slavoj Zizek;radical democracy;enjoyment;antagonism期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文將引介「平行共謀式對抗」(paralleocomplicit antagonism)這一概念，並從「快感(enjoyment)分析」的角度來釐清其組建機制。「平行共謀式對抗」指涉的是以下這種並非不常見的情況：我們可以清楚的感知到在許多的政治對抗中，對抗的雙方似乎奇異地對相互抗爭這件本該是相當痛苦惱人的事情「上癮」了！交戰的雙方激情的擁抱對抗，一種難以理解的快感在此被持續生產出來，並供對抗雙方的人民汲取，用俗語來說，這是一種「酣戰」或「越打越難以罷手」的狀況。在此，「對抗」奇異地成為快感生產的基址。在這種類型的對抗中，弔詭地，對抗的雙方似乎在快感的層次上是「共謀的」(complicit)。本研究將以Jacques Lacan的快感分析理論為基礎來說明這種共謀對抗的快感組構機制。研究論述將分為以下幾個部份：第一部份檢視「平行共謀式」對抗在現有理論與研究文獻中的現身痕跡；第二部份則通過挪用與延伸Lacan的快感分析理論中的邪僻快感(perverse enjoyment)概念來詮釋性分析「共謀的對抗」的組建機制；第三部份將以上的分析置入精神分析理論與後結構主義基進民主(radical democracy)理論的概念脈絡中以突顯「共謀的對抗」此一概念的位置，此一「位置的突顯」將同時涉及此一概念的獨特性、它與當代政治狀況的相關性與此一概念在使用時應有的限制性。英文摘要：In the light of Lacanian psychoanalysis, this article introduces the notion of ‘paralleocomplicit antagonism.’ The notion of paralleocomplicit antagonism refers to the form of antagonism in which both of the antagonistic sides draw enjoyment from conspiring to prolong and escalate the antagonistic situation. I consider this notion as particularly important for analysing political antagonism because this notion can make salient the role of enjoyment in political antagonism. This article will firstly give a brief review of the analytical observations of paralleocomplicit antagonism in scholarly literature. I will then provide a Lacanian interpretation to the circulation of enjoyment in paralleocomplicit antagonism. Finally, I will put my analysis in the context of the recent post-structuralist debates on the notion of ‘antagonism’ to show the contributions and the limits of this notion.起始頁-結束頁：91-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).000401篇名：A Research on Chen Yingzhen’s Theological Thought through His Literary and Political Expressions並列篇名：從陳映真的文學創作與政治作為透視其神學思想作者：張孝慧(Hsiao-Hui Chang)關鍵字：陳映真;馬克斯主義;基督教現實主義;屬世／屬天;Chen Yingzhen;Marxism;Christian Realism;Earthly/Heavenly期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014中文摘要：陳映真是台灣文壇上少數直接將基督宗教寫入作品的作家，更是熱切關懷社會的知識分子。他的作品中不但充滿聖經歷史與基督教義，還有承襲自新約使徒的書寫技巧以及舊約先知的警世精神。即便逐步成為馬克斯主義的支持者，陳映真卻始終沒有完全棄絕基督信仰，神學思維一直圍繞於他的筆桿。事實上，耶穌關懷老弱殘疾的愛心是吸引陳映真走入社會的關鍵因素。對上帝的求問與對政治的批判則是陳映真的創作動能之所在－陳期望在書寫的過程中找到解答。即或沒有得到一個讓他滿意的結果，寫作至少讓他抒發了不明白的焦慮、不認同的憤怒以及不得知音的孤獨。大多數學者著重剖析陳映真的文學與政治作為，相對忽略影響陳映真甚巨的家族信仰。筆者嘗試加入宗教這一向度來解讀陳映真的思想與作品，說明對於基督徒而言，左翼思想與基督信仰實無物質上的矛盾，因為前者的目標在地上，後者的盼望在天上。在有限的今生，陳想同時貫徹二者，因而經歷許多痛苦的掙扎；這份掙扎卻剛好足以證明陳始終不願意放棄其中任何一者。經由三個向度的立體分析，我們得以明白陳映真的思想轉折與複雜的生命張力。英文摘要：Chen Yingzhen’s works show a serious concern over social issues in Taiwan, as is revealed by his theological thoughts. In his fiction as well as essays, one finds not only biblical history and Christian doctrines, but also his views on the narrative styles of the New Testament and his feeling about the Old Testament prophets' passion and urgency in bringing back a wayward people to God -- all showing Chen's familiarity with the Bible. Though he is a Marxist, Chen never entirely rejects Christian faith. In fact, Jesus’ love for the sick and disabled inspires him to work hard on behalf of his fellow people. Chen questions God, criticizes the government, and expresses his anxiety, indignation and loneliness in his writings, although such expressions of sentiments often meet with silence. Many scholars have analyzed Chen’s personality and identity as embodied in his literary works and his life, but have overlooked his religious experiences. Reading the Bible and joining Sunday school (though he quit it early in life), however, has had a great influence on Chen. For a Christian, politics belongs to the secular world, while faith belongs to the Heavenly Kingdom. Since Chen wants to concurrently materialize the goals of these two realms, he is constantly engaged in the tug-of-war between the earthly pursuits and the spiritual aspirations. A close reading of Chen’s works will shed more light on the depth of theological influence on his literary creations as well as his political behavior.起始頁-結束頁：121-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00052篇名：「殖民體制下的民主困境：台灣與香港之比較」專題引言並列篇名：Introduction to ”Democratic Predicaments Under Colonial Regimes: Taiwan and Hong Kong”作者：李丁讚(Ding-Tzann Lii)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：150-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00063篇名：民主政制與半民主制度並列篇名：Democratic and Semi-Democratic Institution作者：成名(Ming Sing)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：159-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00074篇名：港台的抵抗運動為何呈現趨同性？並列篇名：Why are the Resistance Movements in Hong Kong and Taiwan Converging?作者：吳介民(Jieh-Min Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：170-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00085篇名：中國效應：台灣與香港民眾政治滿意度的比較並列篇名：In the Shadow of China: A Survey of Political Evaluation in Taiwan and Hong Kong作者：林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：178-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00096篇名：香港的土地正義運動：保衛家園與保衛國族是不相容的並列篇名：Land Justice Movement in Hong Kong: Why Defending the Community is Incompatible with Defending the Nation作者：陳允中(Yun-Chung Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：188-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00107篇名：經濟依賴、民主防禦與服貿協議並列篇名：Economic Dependence, Democratic Defense, and the Cross-Strait Services Trade Agreement作者：洪財隆(Tsai-Lung Hong)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：200-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00118篇名：被動回歸與公民社會的危機並列篇名：Passive Return and the Crisis of Civil Society作者：羅永生(Wing-Sang Law)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：210-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).00129篇名：農作為方法：「以農為本」的抵抗政治並列篇名：Farming Life, Farming Resistance作者：蔡晏霖(Yen-ling Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：217-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).001310篇名：台灣民主化的特徵並列篇名：The Particularities of Taiwan’s Democratic Transition作者：吳乃德(Nai-Teh Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：18期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：227-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201403_(18).001401篇名：高雄市石化氣爆災害對登革熱疫情之影響評析作者：陳秋美;郭宏偉;劉定萍期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：563-567資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030932篇名：老人群體居住安排變動與醫療服務使用之多面向長期研究並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study of Multi-Dimensional Interrelationships between Changes in Living-Arrangements and Medical Service Utilization by an Older Population作者：古家萍(Chia-Ping Ku);王雲東(Yun-Tung Wang);黃心苑(Nicole Huang);王鐘貴(Chung-Kwe Wang);林寬佳(Kuan-Chia Lin)關鍵字：老人居住安排動態變化;醫療服務使用;潛在成長曲線模型;changes in living arrangement;medical service utilization;latent growth curve model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：老人群體走向「僅與配偶同住」與「獨居」之比例持續上升。過去研究鮮少以動態觀點分析老人居住安排與醫療服務使用情形，因此本研究著眼於填補此知識缺口。方法：本研究以「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」1989~2003年共五波資料為研究資料，運用潛在成長曲線模型探討老人居住安排動態變化對於各醫療服務使用面向之長期風險關聯。結果：透過六種居住安排變動經驗之動態分析角度，研究結果指出累積居住安排內容變動次數越多，僅在住院天數的相對風險變化趨勢有關。居住安排內容轉變為獨居者，雖減少西醫門診與急診使用，但對於住院次數與住院日數的相對風險逐年增加；有配偶之居住內容維繫，則顯著減少住院之長期風險。結論：本文透過國家級長期追蹤資料之實證分析基礎，提出二項核心對比：第一為簡單式與複雜式之居住安排比較，第二則為有無配偶之居住安排比較。掌握此二項核心對比將有助於了解老人居住安排動態變化對於醫療服務使用長期風險的不同影響面貌。英文摘要：Objectives: It is estimated that the proportion of the elderly population ”who live only as a couple” and ”who live alone” will continue to rise. Studies which focus on the dynamic changes in living arrangements and their temporal association with the use of medical services are few. The aim of this study was to fill this gap in knowledge. Methods: The data were drawn from the ”Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan”, a population-based, longitudinal study of a nationally representative random sample of adults aged 60 years of age and older. The latent growth curve model was applied to explore the longitudinal development and interrelationships between dynamic changes in living arrangements and medical utilization. Results: The cumulative frequency of changes in living arrangements only increased the risk of additional days of hospitalization. A change in living arrangements to living alone reduced the use of outpatient and emergency services, but increased the relative risk of hospitalization and number of days of hospitalization. Remaining as a couple significantly reduced the risk of long-term hospitalization. Conclusions: This study was distinctive in two ways. First, it compared simple and complex households. Second, it focused on whether people were residing as a couple or not. Future public health strategies must take the impact of dynamic changes in living arrangements on medical service into account.起始頁-結束頁：568-581資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030633篇名：加速失敗時間模式分析新發乳癌病患併發血栓栓塞對其存活的影響並列篇名：Accelerated Failure Time Model Analysis of the Impact of Thromboembolic Events on Survival in Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer Patients作者：王南天(Nan-Ten Wang);蘇慧芳(Hui-Fang Su);李佩珍(Pei-Chen Lee);張正雄(Cheng-Shyong Chang);林寬佳(Kuan-Chia Lin);謝碧晴(Pi-Ching Hsieh)關鍵字：血栓栓塞;存活;加速失敗時間模型;thromboembolic events;survival;accelerated failure time model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：血栓栓塞併發症（TEEs）為乳癌併發症主要之一且增加死亡風險，本研究擬探討台灣新發乳癌病患併發血栓栓塞之相關因素及對其兩年存活的影響。方法：本回溯性世代研究使用1997至2010年全民健康保險研究資料庫。以Poisson分佈探討2000到2008年新發乳癌世代觀察兩年其併發TEEs的發生情形。透過propensity socre匹配後再以Accelerated Failure Time Model檢視有無併發症病患對其兩年存活之影響。結果：2000-2008年新發乳癌世代共80,598人，罹癌確診後兩年內併發TEEs之累積發生率1.78%（95% CI = 1.74-1.82），且第一個半年併發症發生密度為1.38發生事件數／每100個人年。併發TEEs危險因子有年齡（≧65歲比＜45歲adjusted incidence rate ratio [adj. IRR] = 3.87，95% CI = 3.80-3.93），共病指數（≧3分比0分adj. IRR = 1.96，95% CI = 1.93-2.00），有高血壓病史（adj. IRR = 1.43，95% CI = 1.41-1.45），有乳房手術者（adj. IRR = 1.47，95% CI = 1.45-1.49），接受放射線治療者（adj. IRR = 1.29，95% CI = 1.28-1.31），接受化學藥物治療者（adj. IRR = 1.40，95% CI = 1.38-1.42），醫院層級（地區醫院比醫學中心adj. IRR = 1.13，95% CI = 1.11-1.15）。AFT model分析顯示在控制其他變項後，有併發TEEs者比無者有較高比例的兩年死亡風險（adjusted Rate Ratio = 2.55, 95% CI  =  2.24-2.91），且風險隨時間增加而增加。結論：新發乳癌病患併發TEEs會增加其死亡風險。醫療專業人員者可針對易併發TEE之危險群（如年長、共病指數高、有高血壓、接受乳癌手術、接受化療放療），即早警覺並提供適當的預防措施以利降低併發症的發生及提升癌症照護品質。英文摘要：Objectives: Thromboembolic events (TEEs) are major complications affecting breast cancer patients, and are associated with increased mortality. The purpose of this study was to determine the incidence and risk factors for developing a new TEE in a population-based cohort of breast cancer patients, and also to determine the effect of TEEs on 2-year survival. Methods: A retrospective cohort study was conducted between 1997-2010 using the National Health Insurance Research Database in Taiwan. The incidence of TEEs amongst 2000-2008 breast cancer cohorts and the associated risk factors were determined based on the Poisson distribution. Propensity score matching was used to determine the effect of TEEs on 2-year survival through accelerated failure-time (AFT) model analysis. Results: Amongst 80,598 patients with breast cancer between 2000 and 2008, the 2-year cumulative TEE incidence was 1.78%, with a rate of 1.38 events/100 patient-years during the first 6 months. Based on a multivariate model, significant predictors of developing TEEs within 2 years were age (adjusted incidence rate ratio [aIRR] = 3.87 if ≧ 65 years vs. ＜45 years; 95% CI = 3.80-3.93), co-morbidity (aIRR = 1.96 if ≧3 vs. 0, 95% CI = 1.93-2.00), hypertension (aIRR = 1.43 if yes vs. no, 95% CI = 1.41-1.45), history of breast surgery (aIRR = 1.47 if yes vs. no, 95% CI = 1.45-1.49), history of radiotherapy (aIRR = 1.29 if yes vs. no, 95% CI = 1.28-1.31), history of chemotherapy (aIRR = 1.40 if yes vs. no, 95% CI = 1.38-1.42), and type of hospital (aIRR = 1.13 if district medical center vs. patient medical center 95% CI = 1.11-1.15). Based on AFT model analysis, and after controlling for other variables, patients with TEEs had a higher risk of 2-year death than those without TEEs (aRR = 2.55, 95% CI = 2.24-2.91) and had an increased hazard ratio over time. Conclusions: Breast cancer patients with TEEs have a higher risk of death. Early detection of risk factors of TEEs, such as older age, more co-morbidities, hypertension, and histories of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy) and appropriate preventive care should be provided by health professionals for decreasing the complications and improving the quality of cancer care.起始頁-結束頁：582-596資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030644篇名：醫院非醫務活動收益之分析－以台灣非營利醫院為例並列篇名：Analysis of Non-Patient Revenues in Non-Profit Hospitals-Evidence from Taiwan作者：陳柏瑋(Po-Wei Chen);呂昭顯(Chao-Hsien Lu);譚慧芳(Hui-Fang Tan)關鍵字：非營利組織;醫院;非醫務活動收益;nonprofit organizations;hospitals;nonpatient revenues期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討台灣非營利醫院非醫務活動收益的結構、趨勢與影響因素。方法：以2006－2012年國內醫療財團法人的財務報表資料為樣本，利用描述性統計分析醫院非醫務活動收益的結構及趨勢，並以無母數統計與迴歸模型探討影響醫院非醫務活動收益的關聯因素。結果：樣本期間國內醫療財團法人之非醫務活動收益在醫院整體總收入佔5.72~8.25%之間，其最大來源為「捐贈收入」，佔非醫務活動收益及醫院總收入之比例平均數分別為46.46%與3.23%，而在國際金融危機期間各項非醫務活動收益的來源均明顯衰退。醫院特性中宗教型醫院及醫學中心層級與非醫務活動收益呈正向關聯，而醫務活動損益金額與經濟衝擊對非醫務活動收益有負向影響。結論：非醫務活動收益對非營利醫院財務績效的重要性逐漸提升，除醫院設立屬性與醫院層級是主要影響因素外，面臨醫務活動虧損壓力愈大的醫院較有誘因積極從非醫務活動中得到揖注，以減緩財務壓力，此外，經濟的重大衰退亦會造成非醫務活動收益的波動。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to examine the magnitude, trends, and determinants of non-patient revenues in non-profit hospitals in Taiwan. Methods: Data for this study was derived from financial statements of Taiwan foundation hospitals between 2006 and 2012. Descriptive statistics were used to realize the structure and trends of hospital non-patient revenues. Non-parametric statistics and regression analysis were used to evaluate the determinants of non-patient revenues. Results: Between 2006 and 2012, non-patient revenues accounted for 5.72%~8.25% of the total revenues; on average, donations accounted for 46.46% of non-patient revenues and 3.23% of total revenues. All sources of non-patient revenues declined during the years of financial crisis. Non-patient revenues have a significant positive correlation with religionfunded hospitals and academic medical centers, and income from patient services and financial crisis are negative correlated with non-patient revenues. Conclusions: Non-patient revenues are increasingly important for non-profit hospitals. Hospitals founders and the hospital level are factors which influence non-patient revenues. In addition, hospitals which face financial losses would increase non-patient revenues to ease their financial difficulties. Finally, economic downfalls also cause fluctuations in non-patient revenues.起始頁-結束頁：597-608資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030615篇名：台灣營養師工作壓力、工作滿意度、職業倦怠和離職傾向之現況與相關性並列篇名：Work Stress, Job Satisfaction, Burnout, and Turnover Intentions of Dietitians in Taiwan: Description and Relationship作者：賴苡汝(I-Ju Lai);廖梨伶(Li-Ling Liao);謝藍琪(Lan-Chi Hsieh);李貞慧(Chen-Hui Lee)關鍵字：工作壓力;工作滿意度;職業倦怠;離職傾向;營養師;work stress;job satisfaction;burnout;turnover intention;dietitian期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在瞭解台灣營養師工作狀態和離職傾向之現況，並分析其工作狀態和離職傾向之關係。方法：採線上問卷調查，全國共有424名執業中營養師志願參與本研究，研究工具包括「職業壓力指標第二版」和「職業倦怠量表」中文版及個人資料問卷，資料分析方法為描述性統計和多元階層迴歸分析法。結果：（1）營養師工作壓力平均總分為166.3分（SD=31.37），工作滿意度平均總分為43.1分（SD=11.44），職業倦怠表現為高度情緒耗盡（Mean=29.21，SD=10.75）、中度去人格化（Mean=9.09，SD=6.83）和中度個人成就（Mean=34.06，SD=7.80），屬於職業倦怠高危險群；且僅18.9 %營養師從未有離職想法。(2)所有變項可解釋營養師離職傾向之總變異量為44.4%，背景變項、工作壓力、工作滿意度、職業倦怠各子構面在逐層控制下，單獨對營養師離職傾向之解釋力達3.6%、15.6%、23.0%及2.3%，所有預測變項中，以工作滿意度具最大預測力。結論：相較其它職業及國外營養師之研究結果，台灣營養師工作狀態表現相對較差，有鑑於其對離職傾向之重要影響，提升營養師工作滿意度，乃營養師人力資源管理之重要課題。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to determine the working status and turnover intentions of dietitians in Taiwan, and to analyze the relationship between working status and turnover intentions. Methods: An online questionnaire survey was developed to collect data. Four hundred twenty-four practicing dietitians voluntarily participated in this nationwide study. The instruments which were used included OSI-2, MBI-Chinese, and an individual information questionnaire. Descriptive statistics and multiple hierarchical regression analysis were used. Results: (1) The mean total scores of work stress and job satisfaction were 166.3 (SD = 31.37) and 43.1 (SD = 11.44), respectively. The burnout status of dietitians included a high level of emotional exhaustion (mean = 29.21, SD = 10.75), a moderate level of depersonalization (mean = 9.09, SD = 6.83), and a moderate level of personal accomplishment (mean = 34.06, SD = 7.80); thus, dietitians are at high risk for burnout. Only 18.9% of dietitians never consider leaving their current jobs. (2) Work stress, job satisfaction, and emotional exhaustion were predictors of turnover intention, accounting for 44.4% of total variation (p＜.001), while demographic variables, job location, and work setting were not significant predictors of turnover intention. Conclusions: Compared with the results of other studies involving different professionals and dietitians in other countries, the working status of Taiwanese dietitians is poor. In view of the significant impact on turnover intention, there is value in considering how to improve job satisfaction amongst dietitians when planning the responsibilities and staffing of dietitians.起始頁-結束頁：609-619資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030786篇名：評論：台灣營養師工作壓力、工作滿意度、職業倦怠和離職傾向之現況與相關性作者：陳珮蓉期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：620-620資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201433103078017篇名：乳癌病患使用部落格的疾病經驗交流之初探並列篇名：An Exploratory Study of the Use of Blogs as a Means of Communication for Breast Cancer Patients作者：郭淑珍(Shu-Chen Kuo);楊雪華(Hsieh-Hua Yang);陳怡君(Yi-Chun Chen)關鍵字：網路;疾病經驗;乳癌;部落格;Internet;illness experience;breast cancer;blog期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：近年來，癌症病患部落格已是網路傳播中不可忽視之現象，然而以癌症病友為主體的部落格研究，在健康相關領域仍是較新的議題。本研究採用深度訪談並輔以參與觀察法，針對乳癌病患使用部落格對於其疾病經驗的影響進行初步探討。方法：本研究從「抗癌同學會部落格」找出15位乳癌部落客進行深度訪談，同時也針對受訪者以部落格為媒介，與其他病友從事面對面活動，進行參與觀察。結果：乳癌病患書寫部落格的動機，是為了面對疾病以及社會連結；使用部落格對於受訪者疾病經驗的影響，包括交流治療經驗與健康知識、感受情感支持、改變生活與反思生命意義等。部落格所提供的健康資訊，是來自病患親身經歷的治療過程，對病友來說是重要訊息來源；因疾病導致的社會隔離狀態，透過部落格的創作找到相同處境的病友，可以得到心靈慰藉。然而部落格的使用，仍受到社會文化規範和意識型態的影響，對於治療的描述聚焦在西醫，死亡相關議題的討論也有限。結論：對醫療專業人員而言，從病患部落格書寫內容，能瞭解其醫療資訊需求和社會心理反應，未來可以根據疾病不同階段，提供適切的照護知識和社會資源介入，相關政府單位也可以規劃醫療資訊政策，建立友善網路平台，提供最新相關醫藥知識，促進病友間交流與互動。英文摘要：Objectives: The use of blogs as a means of internet communication is a phenomenon that cannot be ignored. Cancer patient-centered blogs have become an emerging and novel topic for health researchers to study. With in-depth interviews and participant observation, this preliminary study explored the impact of blog usage on the illness experiences of patients with breast cancer. Methods: In-depth interviews were held with 15 breast cancer bloggers from the Cancer Patient Reunion blog, a medium for meeting other breast cancer patients. Results: In order to confront their disease and stay socially connected, breast cancer patients were motivated to create the blog. The blog provided personal experiences of breast cancer treatment and related health information, served as a type of emotional catharsis and social support, and helped the participants reflect on the meaning of life. Personal experiences of the treatment process provided crucial health information for other patients with breast cancer. By writing blogs, breast cancer patients could comfort each other and alleviate the social isolation due to the illness. Nonetheless, it seemed that the illness narratives were still influenced by social/cultural regulation and ideology, and the treatments described were based mainly on Western medicine. In addition, few death-related topics were discussed on the blog. Conclusions: From the blog content, health care professionals should be able to understand the medical information needs and the psychosocial responses of cancer patients, and thus provide proper health care and social interventions based on the different stages of disease. Furthermore, based on analysis of blog content, appropriate government units can develop good medical and health information policies, create user-friendly websites, and provide updated medical information to help breast cancer patients communicate and interact with each other.起始頁-結束頁：621-636資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030558篇名：身體質量指數及日常運動預防台灣中老年人步行能力衰退之組合效應並列篇名：Combined Effect of Body Mass Index and Physical Activity on the Decline in Walking Ability amongst Older Taiwanese作者：丘幸平(Hsing-Ping Chiu);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai);王俊毅(Jiun-Yi Wang)關鍵字：運動;身體質量指數;步行能力;衰退;組合效應;physical activity;Body Mass Index;walking ability;decline;combined effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：步行能力衰退是伴隨老化常見的現象。保持身體質量指數（Body Mass Index, BMI）適中和多運動皆有助於維持步行能力，但二者合併的效應則不清楚。本研究目的在探討BMI與運動對預防台灣中老年人步行能力衰退之組合效應。方法：本研究分析「中老年調查」2003及2007年的資料庫。排除非本人作答、嚴重心智功能缺損、中風及日常生活活動失能者，共有3,380位（加權後）50歲以上中老年人納入分析。依據受訪者二年度走完200-300公尺結果，評定其步行能力是否衰退。控制基本人口學、健康狀況及健康行為，以羅吉斯迴歸分析BMI與運動對步行能力衰退的個別和組合效應。結果：以個別變項分析中，肥胖（OR=1.75, p=0.001）及少運動（OR=1.37, p=0.036）與步行能力衰退有顯著關聯。在組合變項分析中，過輕且少運動者（OR=2.38, p=0.001）及肥胖且少運動者（OR=2.23, p=0.001）步行能力衰退的風險，皆明顯高於BMI適中且多運動者。結論：本研究之組合分析可彰顯同時保持BMI適中且多運動，對預防步行能力衰退的好處。研究結果讓民眾更容易及清楚地了解維持正常體重及日常運動對保有良好步行能力的重要，也可供健康促進政策之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: A decline in walking ability is a well-known accompaniment of aging. Maintaining a healthy Body Mass Index (BMI) and a higher level of physical activity are helpful to prevent a decline in walking ability; however, the combined effect is not clear. The current study determined the combined effect of BMI and physical activity on the decline in walking ability amongst older Taiwanese. Methods: The 2003 and 2007 ”Taiwan Longitudinal Study on Aging” datasets were analyzed. After exclusion of subjects not self-reported, with severe mental disorders, stroke, and disabilities in one or more activities of daily living, there were 3,380 subjects (weighted) <U+2265>50 years of age included in the analysis. Study subjects were defined as having a decline if they exhibited negative changes in the ability to ”walk 200-300 meters” between the two years. By controlling demographic, health status, and health behaviors, logistic regression was used to analyze the independent and combined effects of BMI and physical activity on the decline in walking ability. Results: When analyzed independently, obesity (OR = 1.75, p = 0.001) and less physical activity (OR = 1.37, p = 0.036) were associated with a decline in walking ability. Based on an analysis of the combination of BMI and physical activity, subjects who were underweight and engaged in less physical activity (OR = 2.38, p = 0.001) and subjects who were obese and engaged in less physical activity (OR = 2.23, p = 0.001) were more likely to have a decline in walking ability than subjects who had a BMI in the healthy range and engaged in more physical activity. Conclusions: The combined analysis method demonstrated the advantage of maintaining a healthy BMI and a higher level of physical activity simultaneously to prevent a decline in walking ability. The results of the current study should help people more easily and clearly understand the importance of a healthy BMI and physical activity to maintain good walking ability, and provide the basis for a national policy regarding health promotion.起始頁-結束頁：637-648資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030719篇名：健康行為群聚類別與醫療利用之關係－以台灣成年初顯期族群為例並列篇名：Clustering of Health-Related Behaviors and Healthcare Services Utilization amongst Emerging Adults in Taiwan作者：葉昱佐(Yu-Tso Yeh);施淑芳(Shu-Fang Shih)關鍵字：成年初顯期;健康行為;群聚分析;醫療利用;emerging adulthood;health behaviors;cluster analysis;healthcare utilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討18∼25歲成年初顯期族群健康行為群聚類別與醫療利用之相關性。方法：本研究使用2009年國民健康訪問調查，以18∼25成年初顯期族群為研究對象，運用二階段群聚分析法依健康行為型態進行群聚分析，並使用羅吉斯迴歸及零膨脹負二項迴歸模型分析群聚類別與急診及西醫門診醫療利用與否及醫療利用次數之相關性。結果：成年初顯期族群可分為「菸酒不離族」、「飲食不均族」以及「健康保健族」三個群聚類別。相較於健康保健族，在急診醫療利用與否方面，菸酒不離族較可能使用到急診醫療（OR=1.59; 95% CI=1.14-2.21）；在急診醫療利用次數方面，飲食不均族使用較多次數的急診醫療（IRR=1.49; 95% CI=1.08-2.05）；群聚類別與西醫門診利用與否或其利用次數則無統計顯著相關。結論：成年初顯期健康行為具有群聚之現象且群聚類別與急診醫療利用之機率與急診使用次數有統計顯著相關。未來不管是學校或職場健康促進方案，可針對具有共同健康行為特性之成年初顯期族群，規劃整合及客制化之介入方案。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aims to investigate the association between clustering of healthrelated behavirs and heathcare services utilization amongst emerging adults. Methods: This study utilized a sub-sample between 18 and 25 years of age from the 2009 National Health Interview Survey. A two-step cluster analysis was used to identify groups of emerging adults with similar behavior patterns. Logistic regression and a zero-inflated negative binomial regression model were used to determine the association between groups of clustering and utilization of emergency care and outpatient healthcare services. Results: Three clusters were identified, including ”smokingalcohol,” ”unbalanced diet,” and ”healthy lifestyle.” Those who were classified in the ”smokingalcohol” cluster were more likely to use emergency care services (OR=1.59; 95% CI=1.14-2.21), and those who were in the ”unbalanced diet” cluster were more likely to use emergency care service (IRR=1.49; 95% CI=1.08-2.05) when compared to those in the ”healthy lifestyle” cluster. The current study showed no relationship between the clusters and outpatient healthcare services, whether or not use or the number of visits was considered. Conclusions: Health-related behaviors tend to cluster amongst emerging adults. In addition, health behavior clusters were shown to be associated with a higher risk of using emergency care and more visits of emergency care services. These findings suggest that whether school- or workplace-based, health promotion program could adopt an integrated approach and taior-made programs, when taking into account the common determinants across different types of health behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：649-662資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310308210篇名：資訊科技應用於改善多重慢性病人門診重複處方之分析並列篇名：Implementing Health Information Technology in an Outpatient Setting to Reduce Duplicate Prescriptions among Patients with Multiple Chronic Diseases作者：蕭淑珍(Shu-Chen Hsiao);王郁青(Lily Yu-Chin Wang);陳一伶(I-Ling Chen);李浩銓(Haw-Chyuan Lee);許茜甯(Chien-Ning Hsu)關鍵字：藥事照護;醫療資訊科技;慢性病連續處方;重複處方;門診;pharmaceutical care;health informatics;refillable chronic illnesses prescriptions;medication duplication;outpatient setting期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討醫療資訊科技運用於門診藥事照護對門診多重慢性病人重複處方的影響。方法：南部某一醫學中心門診，於2012年10月至2013年6月期間，凡持1張以上慢性病連續處方箋之成年病人皆納入分析。門診藥事服務—科技化照護模式包括：（1）利用SAS軟體進行門診用藥重複處方篩選；（2）藥師審核重複處方、確立修改必要性、建立並預存電子建議提示；（3）電子提示融入電子醫囑輸入系統，在患者回診接受診療時，醫師將接到重新評估用藥或／與修改提示。病人與重複處方特性以描述性統計進行分析。結果：研究期間藥師共建議572筆處方（483人），重複處方常見於65歲以上（59%）、就診至少3個專科（80%）且用藥品項數大於10筆者（53%）。從完成處方修改的病人與處方分析發現(284人)：(1)高修改率藥品(大於80%)為用於心血管、新陳代謝和抗帕金森症的藥品；（2）相對於處方修改前6個月，修改後6個月的每月平均藥品費用減少47,325元；門、急、住診就診人次也分別相對下降5.7%、18.3%與13.8%。結論：門診藥事科技照護模式值得擴大規模執行以驗證其對減少重複處方發生率與醫療資源浪費的效果。英文摘要：Objectives: To determine the effect of implementing health information technology in an outpatient setting on reduction of duplicate prescriptions among patients with multiple chronic diseases. Methods: Adult patients with at least 2 refillable prescriptions for multiple chronic diseases at a medical center in southern Taiwan between 1 October 2012 and 30 June 2013 were enrolled in the current study. The key design principles in the ambulatory pharmaceutical care model included (1) using the SAS Enterprise Guide to systematically screen potential duplicate prescription orders using pre-specified criteria, (2) hospital pharmacists performed medication reviews and provided electronic alerts for duplicate medications to physicians, and (3) medical alerts and recommendations were integrated into the natural workflow of practice to correct duplicate medications. Patient characteristics and patterns of duplicate medications were assessed using descriptive statistical analyses. Results: Of 572 notifications (n=483), the most common duplicate prescriptions occurred in patients ＞ 65 years of age, had ＞ 3 outpatient specialist visits, and were treated with ＞ 10 medications. The correction rate for duplicate prescriptions was high for cardiovascular diseases, endocrinopathies, and Parkinson disease. Among patients who had corrected duplicate medications (n=283), the average monthly medication cost decreased 47,325 TWD during the most recent 6 months when compared to the 6 months preceding the correction. Furthermore, the outpatient clinic, emergency room, and hospitalization person-visits decreased 5.8%, 18.3%, and 13.8%, respectively. Conclusions: Implementation of advancing health information technology in the outpatient setting for a group of patients with multiple chronic diseases revealed a high propensity to successfully reduce duplicate medications in a large population.起始頁-結束頁：663-673資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310305111篇名：台灣新生兒B型肝炎疫苗政策之直接成本分析並列篇名：Direct Cost Comparison of the Hepatitis B Immunization Policy in Taiwan作者：楊舜婷(Shun-Ting Yang);陳志成(Solomon Chih-Cheng Chen);林怡岑(Yi-Tsen Lin);林嘉玲(Chia-Ling Lin)關鍵字：B型肝炎;疫苗政策;成本分析;產婦篩檢;B肝免疫球蛋白;hepatitis B;immunization policy;cost analysis;maternal screening;hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷6期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：台灣B肝疫苗政策實施近30年，但少有成本效益研究，本文擬從成本角度來評估台灣的B肝疫苗政策。方法：整理比較台灣與其他國家的B肝疫苗政策，除了都有全面疫苗接種外，在抗原篩檢和B肝免疫球蛋白（HBIG）的使用上仍有一些差異：1.中國式策略（CH）－不做產婦抗原篩檢，也沒給嬰兒HBIG；2.美國式策略（USA）－產婦只篩檢HBsAg，給所有HBsAg陽性母親所生嬰孩HBIG；3.台灣一階段篩檢策略（TW1）－產婦同時篩檢HBsAg和HBeAg，給兩者都陽性產婦所生嬰孩HBIG；4.台灣兩階段篩檢（TW2）－產婦先篩檢HBsAg，如果HBsAg陽性再繼續篩檢HBeAg，給兩者都陽性產婦所生嬰孩HBIG。我們比較這四種策略的抗原篩檢、疫苗與HBIG等費用。結果：不管B肝帶原率多少，TW2都是最便宜，而TW1都是最昂貴的策略。隨著B肝帶原率下降，HBIG的使用需求會越來越少。從策略TW1改為TW2所節省下篩檢HBeAg的費用，足夠讓所有B肝帶原母親所生嬰孩一劑免費的HBIG。結論：台灣目前B肝防疫實務是TW1，浪費很多錢在HBeAg篩檢上。建議改為TW2，才是最經濟的策略。此外為了提供嬰兒完善的保護，建議給所有HBsAg陽性帶原母親所生嬰孩一劑免費的HBIG。英文摘要：Objectives: To study the cost-effectiveness of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) immunization policy in Taiwan after its implementation for nearly 30 years. Methods: Existing HBV immunization policies in different countries were compared. They all have universal HBV vaccination, but differ in maternal antigen screening and the use of hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG). Strategy 1: Chinese strategy (CH)-no maternal screening and no HBIG for neonates; Strategy 2: American strategy (USA)-The parturients are screened for HBsAg, and HBIG is administered to all neonates of HBsAg-positive mothers; Strategy 3: Taiwan 1-step strategy (TW1)-The parturients are simultaneously screened for HBsAg and HBeAg, and HBIG is administered to all neonates of HBeAg-positive mothers; and Strategy 4: Taiwan 2-step strategy (TW2)-The parturients are screened for HBsAg first, then screened for HBeAg if HBsAg is positive, and HBIG is administered to all neonates of HBeAg-positive mothers. Results: Regardless of the HBV carrier rate, the TW2 is always the least expensive HBV vaccination protocol and the TW1 is most expensive. As the HBV carrier rate decreases, the need for HBIG also decreases. The cost-savings realized during the change from TW1 to TW2 is enough for the government to provide one free dose of HBIG for all babies born to HBsAg-positive carrier mothers. Conclusions: The current practice of HBV immunization policy in Taiwan is the TW1, which unnecessarily consumes financial resources for maternal HBeAg testing. We suggest the TW2 replace the TW1. To provide comprehensive protection, we recommend giving free HBIG for all neonates born to HBsAg-positive mothers regardless of the HBeAg status.起始頁-結束頁：674-680資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310304412篇名：台灣醫療觀光發展困境之省思並列篇名：Reflections on Development Dilemmas of Taiwan's Medical Tourism作者：許碧峰(Pi-Fem Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：455-458資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310305413篇名：美國住院與急性後期照護之包裹式支付制度並列篇名：Bundled Payments for Inpatient and Post-Acute Care Services in the United States作者：吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu);黃姝慈(Shu-Tzu Huang);吳秋芬(Chiu-Fen Wu)關鍵字：包裹式支付制度;急性後期照護;台灣住院診斷關聯群制度;全民健康保險;bundled payment;post-acute care (PAC);Taiwan Diagnosis Related Groups (Tw-DRGs);National Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：美國老人健康保險（Medicare）在住院與急性後期照護（post-acute care, PAC）服務皆採前瞻性支付制度，但此種設計沒有提供兩者協調整合之誘因，且醫療照護支出仍持續上漲，CMS（Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services）遂於2013年實行全國性包裹式支付（bundled payment）試驗計畫，將住院與PAC包裹於同一筆定額支付，以促使醫院與PAC單位進行跨單位合作，改善移轉流程及照護品質，並降低照護成本。台灣自全民健保開辦以來，積極進行支付制度改革，雖然自2010年起實施Tw-DRGs（Taiwan Diagnosis Related Groups）支付制度，但遲未全面推動，且未在社區提供PAC服務，加上病人不願意出院，導致醫院以超長住院或再住院形式提供住院病人PAC；隨著人口快速高齡化，勢必對照護體系與健保財務造成重大衝擊。建議政府應盡快全面實施Tw-DRGs，並搭配合理之居家及社區化PAC制度及品質監控，使個案在家中或社區接受照護，以最佳價值（best value）之地點提供有效率的服務，在支付面則宜參考美國包裹式支付，將住院服務與PAC合併考慮支付。英文摘要：In the US, Medicare adopted prospective payment systems for inpatient and post-acute care (PAC) services, but there were not enough incentives to facilitate coordination of these two services and the Medicare expenditures continued to increase. Thus, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented a nationwide bundled payment program in 2013, which combined the payment of inpatient and PAC services to promote coordination and cooperation between hospitals and PAC units, improve the referral procedure and quality of care, and lower healthcare costs. Taiwan has continued to reform its payment system. In 2010, Taiwan Diagnosis Related Groups (Tw-DRGs) were implemented, but have not been completely instituted. We did not provide PAC services in communities, and patients were not willing to be discharged from hospitals; these were the main reasons that patients acquired PAC services through prolonged hospital stays or readmissions. With an aging population, this will have a great impact on the healthcare system and National Health Insurance expenditures. It is suggested that the government should comprehensively enforce Tw-DRGs with an appropriate PAC system with the best value as soon as possible. Additionally, PAC services should be provided at home or in communities in an efficient way. The payment system can be referred to the US bundled payment, which includes inpatient and PAC services with proper quality surveillance.起始頁-結束頁：459-469資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310304114篇名：戒菸方案之隨機控制試驗之系統性文獻回顧並列篇名：Randomized Controlled Trials for Smoking Cessation: A Systematic Review作者：吳昭儀(Chao-Yi Wu);王曉琳(Hsiao-Lin Wang);陳韻玲(Yun-Ling Chen);吳博儒(Bo-Ru Wu);陳詞章(Tsyr-Jang Chen);潘璦琬(Ay-Woan Pan)關鍵字：系統性文獻回顧;戒菸;介入方案;systematic review;smoking cessation;intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：吸菸對於健康有相當程度危害，戒菸一直是衛生健康單位關心的議題，然而科技媒介介入與傳統戒菸方案之成效差異的研究仍不足。本研究目的是透過系統性文獻回顧以探討現有戒菸方案之成效。本研究搜尋近三年研究，篩選後共收錄36篇文獻，其中藥物與尼古丁替代療法類23篇，科技媒介介入方式4篇及非科技媒介介入方式9篇。非尼古丁藥物於六個月與一年追蹤戒菸率分別可達47.4%和26.8%，最常使用的藥物為戒必適與威博雋。尼古丁替代療法六個月與一年追蹤戒菸率分別可達33.3%和30.0%，最常使用為尼古丁貼片及口嚼錠。科技媒介介入方式以電話簡訊最多，六個月戒菸率可達30%。非科技媒介介入方式則以包含認知行為治療的合併式療法最多，六個月追蹤戒菸率可達57.1%。藥物和尼古丁替代療法需注意其副作用和成癮問題，而科技媒介和非科技媒介介入方式則有個案順從性的考量。本研究透過系統性回顧探討不同戒菸介入方案的優點和限制，有助未來發展多元化戒菸方案之參考。英文摘要：Smoking poses a great threat to health, and smoking cessation is always a critical concern of health authorities; however, the effectiveness of smoking cessation programs has been limited. The aim of this study was to systematically review the literature related to smoking cessation programs. We searched for randomized controlled trial studies related to smoking cessation in the last 3 years, and 36 articles were reviewed. They were categorized into 3 types: 23 medication interventions (non-nicotine medicine/nicotine medicine), 9 non-technological interventions, and 4 technology-based interventions. The average cessation rate was higher with the non-nicotine medication approach than with the others. The 6-month and 1-year cessation rate were 47.4% and 26.8%, respectively. Varenicline and bupropion were the most commonly prescribed medications. The 6-month and 1-year cessation rates for nicotine replacement therapies were 33.3% and 30.0%, respectively. Nicotine patches and gum were used most frequently. Among the technology-based interventions, the telephone and text approach was used most often. The cessation rate could reach 30.0%. Of non-technological interventionss, cognitive-behavioral therapies were most common. The 6-month cessation rate could reach 57.1%. The side-effects and addiction potential of medications and nicotine replacement therapies should be noted. The results of the literature review revealed that there were strengths and limitations of the various interventions. Through the development of diverse intervention programs, we may be able to reach more people who need to cease smoking.起始頁-結束頁：470-482資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310305015篇名：社經弱勢軌跡與健康結果之關係並列篇名：Social Disadvantage Trajectories and Health Outcomes作者：李妙純(Miaw-Chwen Lee);張雅雯(Ya-Wen Chang)關鍵字：生命歷程;自評健康;憂鬱;社會流動;life-course;self-reported health;depression;social mobility期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本文旨在討論生命歷程社經位置軌跡與老人健康的關係。方法：使用2003年「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤（第五次）調查」資料，設籍台灣之50歲以上，共計5,377人為研究樣本。早、中、晚期社經位置為受訪者之教育程度、一生主要職業、老年時期之家戶收入。國小及以下教育程度、勞力職業、家戶年收入二十九萬元（含）以下定義為社經弱勢。三階段之社經位置變化歸類為八種軌跡。使用多元邏輯斯<U+5EFB>歸分析八類社經弱勢軌跡與中老年人自評不健康及憂鬱與否的關係。其他變項包括年齡、世代、性別、婚姻、獨居與否、健康行為。結果：調整人口社會及健康行為變項之後，相較於長期非社經弱勢者，長期社經弱勢者之自評不健康及憂鬱的勝算較高（OR分別為2.22及2.26）。向上或向下流動者之健康狀態比仍然留在社經弱勢者佳。結論：經歷早期社經弱勢者對健康具有長期負效果，但仍可透過提升生命後期之職業型態或老年時期的收入而減輕。因此，增加任何時期之向上社會流動應有助於消弭健康不平等。英文摘要：Objectives: To determine the relationship between social-economic status (SES) trajectory throughout the course of life and health outcomes among the middle-aged and elderly in Taiwan. Methods: Data were based on the 2003 Survey of Health and Living Status of the Middle and Old Age in Taiwan. The study sample included household registrants in Taiwan ＞ 50 years of age in 2003 (5,377 respondents). Three indicators of SES were selected to measure the SES trajectory throughout the course of life, as follows: educational attainment of the respondent; the respondent's major occupational class; and current household income. Social disadvantages were defined as respondents who only had a primary education, manual occupations, and an annual household income＜NT$ 290,000. Eight types of SES trajectories were created by categorizing the patterns of three SES changes (education→occupation→income). Controlled variables included gender, age, cohort, marital status, residential status, and health behavior. Multiple logistic regression was used to analyze the relationship between trajectory and health outcomes, as measured by self-reported poor health and depression. Results: After controlling for sociodemographic variables and health behaviors, long-term social disadvantages had a significantly higher probability of self-reported poor health (OR: 2.22) and depression (OR: 2.26) than nonsocial disadvantages. We further found that respondents with upward and downward mobility at any life stage had a lower probability to report poor health and depression than those who had persistent social disadvantages. Conclusions: The results imply that long-term adverse health consequences of disadvantaged social circumstances in early life may be mitigated by improving employment status in early adulthood and household income in old age. Increasing social mobility contributes to the management of health inequalities among older adults.起始頁-結束頁：483-496資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310304816篇名：探討醫院創新護理人員的工作表現：以區域醫院護理人員、主管與顧客之多元觀點為例並列篇名：Exploring the Work Performance of Innovative Nurses in Hospitals: the Views of Nurses, Nurse Managers and Customers作者：黃靖媛(Ching-Yuan Huang);翁瑞宏(Rhay-Hung Weng);羅筠舒(Yun-Shu Lo)關鍵字：醫療服務創新;護理人員;員工創新行為;工作成效;護理創新;health service innovation;nurses;innovative employee behavior;work performance;nursing innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：高度市場競爭下，醫療機構為永續經營須積極進行員工創新發展，然過去研究甚少深入探討在醫療服務業中創新員工之工作表現，本研究將以醫院創新護理人員為對象，分別從護理人員、護理主管與醫院顧客三個觀點，瞭解其在工作上的表現。方法：本研究採質性研究方法，針對南部某三家區域級醫院一年內獲創新相關獎項或主管推薦具高度創新之護理人員、護理主管以及醫院顧客為研究對象。結果：創新護理人員與護理主管皆認為創新對護理人員工作成效有許多正向影響，包括：良好的工作效率與照護品質、醫療資源利用成效提升、正向團隊互動、自我成長等四項核心範疇；而醫院顧客則認為創新護理人員所提供的服務有良好的服務體驗與良好的服務品質感受。結論：護理主管以及醫院顧客均認為創新護理人員有良好的工作表現，創新的好處深入護理人員個人層次、護理部團隊層次、醫院組織層次以及顧客層次；因此建議醫務管理者宜積極強化醫院員工從事創新的動機，讓員工願意積極地參與並分享創新想法，此外，完善的創新推廣制度與主管的支持也是強化員工創新行為之重要因素。英文摘要：Objectives: Health service organizations strive to develop employees' ability to innovate in order to mantain business in a highly competitive market. Few previous studies have explored the work performance of innovative employees. The aim of this study was to explore the work performance of innovative nurses from the perspectives of innovative nurses themselves, nurse managers and customers. Methods: A qualitative research method was utilized in this study; in-depth interviews were used to collect data. Samples were selected by a purposive sampling method in three accredited regional hospitals in southern Taiwan. Innovative nurses, nurse managers and hospital customers were interviewed. Results: Innovative nurses and nurse managers both agreed that employee innovation positively affected employees' work performance. The positive effects included: good work efficiency and quality care, increased utilization of healthcare resources, positive team interaction, and self-growth. Customers also thought that innovative nurses provided a higher quality of service. Conclusions: Overall, nurse managers and customers both thought that innovative nurses performed well. Advantages of nurse innovation are seen at individual, team, organizational, and customer levels. Managers should strive to enhance employees' motivation for innovative behaviors and let employees actively participate and share innovative ideas. A sound rewards system and support from managers are also important factors in strengthening employee innovation.起始頁-結束頁：497-512資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310305217篇名：山地鄉與非山地鄉子宮頸癌死亡率趨勢之探討，1986－2010年並列篇名：Trends in Cervical Cancer Mortality Rates between Aboriginal and Non-Aboriginal Areas in Taiwan, 1986-2010作者：何伊婷(Yi-Ting He);張慈桂(Tzu-Kuei Chang)關鍵字：山地鄉;子宮頸癌;標準化死亡率;aboriginal areas;cervical cancer;standardized mortality rates期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：子宮頸癌（Cervical cancer）為婦女常見的癌症之一，台灣每年約有2000名子宮頸癌新診斷病例，約800人因其而死亡。本研究目的在於探討1986－2010年山地鄉（含離島）與非山地鄉婦女子宮頸癌死亡率情形及其趨勢。方法：本研究資料源自於1986－2010年「死因資料檔」及「台閩地區人口統計檔」，以2000年全台年中人口數作為標準人口，計算標準化死亡率，並比較1995年將子抹篩檢納入健保給付實施前後的死亡率趨勢變化。結果：全台子宮頸癌死亡率從1986年每十萬人口13.18人降至2010年每十萬人口4.45人。以Joinpoint regression model檢定，可發現2個切點，1997年後的下降幅度大於之前，而以2004－2010年的死亡率下降幅度最大，每年變化百分比（Annual Percent Change, APC）為-8.7%。山地鄉死亡率於研究期間的APC為-2.3%，未見到有切點；非山地鄉死亡率於1986－2002年APC為-2.3%，2002－2010年APC為-9.2%。結論：子宮頸癌死亡率於篩檢實施後的下降幅度大於之前，但山地鄉死亡率仍高於非山地鄉，未來應加強偏鄉的社區衛教宣導與健康促進活動，以增進婦女的健康。英文摘要：Objectives: Cervical cancer is one of the most common cancers in women. In Taiwan, about 2000 new cases are diagnosed and about 800 women die each year. The objective of this study was to examine the mortality rates and their trends between aboriginal and non-aboriginal areas from 1986 to 2010. Methods: Data were accessed from the mortality registry kept by the Ministry of Health and Welfare. Demographic data were obtained from the Ministry of the Interior. We used the 5-year demographic distribution in Taiwan in 2000 as the standardized population to calculate the direct standardized mortality rates for cervical cancer. We then compared temporal changes in mortality rates that occurred during 1986-2010. Results: The standardized mortality rates for cervical cancer in Taiwan declined between 1986 and 2010, from 13.18 to 4.45 (per 100,000). Joinpoint regression analysis identified two significant inflection points and three distinct trends between 1986 and 2010. A steady decline from 1986 to 1997 (APC=-1.5, p＜.05), and then an acceleration downward after 1997 (APC=-5.3, p＜.05), were followed by the largest mortality rate decrease from 2004 to 2010 (APC=-8.7, p＜.05). Mortality rates in aboriginal areas fell consistently between 1981 and 2010 (APC=-2.3, p＜.05), but no inflection point was identified. In non-aboriginal areas, the joinpoint analysis identified one significant inflection point generating two distinct trends between 1986 and 2010. The first was a steady decline in mortality rates from 1986 to 2002 (APC=-2.3, p＜.05), and then a downward acceleration after 2002 (APC=-9.2, p＜.05). Conclusions: Standardized mortality rates for cervical cancer declined after the Papanicolaou test was implemented in 1995; however, the mortality rates in aboriginal areas were still higher than those in non-aboriginal areas. The health authorities need to focus on health education and health promotion activities to improve female health in aboriginal areas.起始頁-結束頁：513-522資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310306618篇名：新制醫院評鑑、處方警示系統、以及門診重複用藥率的相關性探討並列篇名：Medication Duplication Rates in Outpatient Clinics before and after Implementation of a Prescribing Alert System as a New Criterion for Hospital Accreditation作者：郭昱君(Yu-Chun Kuo);鄭守夏(Shou-Shia Cheng);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang)關鍵字：新制醫院評鑑;處方警示系統;重複用藥;hospital accreditation;prescribing alert system;medication duplication期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討新制醫院評鑑納入處方警示系統項目與門診重複用藥率的變化情形。方法：資料來源是2005年百萬承保抽樣歸人檔，擷取2003－08年各年有18歲以上病人西醫門診處方案件之地區級以上醫院320家。重複用藥係指病人在重疊日期接受院內不同醫師開立之處方含ATC（Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical）前四碼相同藥品，院內重複用藥處方率=（院內重複用藥處方數／院內重疊日期處方數）*100%。新制醫院評鑑處方警示系統項目施行時間分為實施前（2003－04年，T0）、試辦期（2005－06年，T1）、實施後（2007－08年，T2）；其他控制因素包括醫院層級別、權屬別、醫院所屬分局別。統計方法為描述性統計與廣義估計方程式（GEE）。結果：新制醫院評鑑實施前平均院內重複用藥處方率是46.28%，試辦期40.23%，實施後32.95%。院內重複用藥相關因素分析在控制其他變項後發現，2005－06年（T1）的院內重複用藥處方率減少6.08個百分點（p=0.0008）；而2007－08年（T2）則減少13.13個百分點（p＜0.0001）。結論：新制醫院評鑑處方警示系統和院內門診重複用藥的改善有相關。英文摘要：Objectives: To understand changes in the medication duplication rate after implementation of a prescribing alert system as a new criterion for hospital accreditation. Methods: We studied 320 general hospitals that provided prescriptions for outpatients aged 18 and older in 2003-2008 from the longitudinal NHI dataset. Medication duplication was defined as ”a patient received drugs with the same therapeutic effect (as defined by level 3 of the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical system) with different prescriptions provided by different physicians from the same hospital within one treatment period”. Medication duplication rate = (cases of medication duplication) / (total number of prescription provided in a hospital within same treatment period) x 100%. There were three observation periods: before the new criterion for hospital accreditation was implemented (years 2003-04, T0), the period of pilot implementation (years 2005-06, T1), and after the new criterion for hospital accreditation was implemented (years 2007-08, T2). The data were adjusted for accreditation status, ownership, and branch of BNHI, and descriptive statistics and GEE were used in the analysis. Results: The average rate of medication duplication in hospitals was 46.28% in years 2003-04 (T0), 40.23% in years 2005-06 (T1), and 32.95% in years 2007-08 (T2). After controlling for other factors, the medication duplication rate decreased by 6.08 percentage points (p=0.0008) in years 2005-06 (T1), and 13.13 percentage points (p＜0.0001) in years 2007-08 (T2). Conclusion: The addition of an alert system for duplicate prescriptions as a criterion for hospital accreditation was associated with improvement in the medication prescribing practices in hospital outpatient departments.起始頁-結束頁：523-529資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310300319篇名：性行為感染愛滋病毒感染者知會性伴侶之決策過程並列篇名：The Decision-Making Process of Sexual Partner Notification among Patients Acquired HIV Infections through Sexual Contacts作者：白芸慧(Yun-Hui Pai);柯乃熒(Nai-Ying Ko)關鍵字：愛滋病毒感染者;知會伴侶;紮根理論;people living with HIV/AIDS;partner notification;grounded theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：愛滋感染者可藉由知會性伴侶，協助其檢測感染情況、獲得治療並減少危險性行為發生，以降低愛滋病毒的傳播。本研究目的為了解愛滋病毒感染者知會性伴侶決策過程。方法：採紮根理論研究法，於南部某醫學中心感染科門診，以理論性抽樣選取13位於診斷前後擁有性伴侶，且曾發生危險性行為的愛滋病毒感染者進行深度訪談，並以ATLAS.ti 5.0版進行持續比較分析法分析文本。結果：知會決策理論架構中，察覺知會伴侶的重要性是愛滋感染者在知會伴侶前的先驅階段，感染者透過評估個人、伴侶層次與愛滋污名脈絡來決定「知會意願」，並擬定知會策略，包括對象、方式、內容、時間及所需協助，實際執行伴侶知會之後，再根據知會後結果評價，修改後續知會意願及策略。結論：伴侶特性及愛滋污名是影響知會意願及知會策略的關鍵。醫療人員可藉此協助感染者釐清知會過程的擔憂，並針對伴侶關係、反應及不同知會階段提供個別協助以擬定知會策略。英文摘要：Objectives: Notifying the sexual partner of a HIV-seropositive patient enables that partner to be aware of their HIV status, gain early access to treatment, reduce risky sexual behaviors, and prevent the transmission of HIV. The purpose of this study was to understand the decisionmaking process in the notification of the sexual partners of people living with HIV. Methods: Grounded theory was utilized to build the theoretical framework for the process of sexual partner notification. Theoretical sampling was applied to recruit 13 participants who had risky sexual behaviors before and after the diagnosis of HIV. In-depth semi-structured interviews were conducted with each participant and data were analyzed using the constant comparative method by ATLAS.ti 5.0. Results: Awareness of the importance of informing the partner was the first step in the decision-making process. ”Intent-to-notify” was assessed according to individuals, couples and the stigma of AIDS in the context of the relationship. Information strategies were then developed to include the recipient/ the partner to be informed, information methods, content, time and assistance needs. After the actual partners were notified, individuals with HIV re-evaluated their intent or strategies to notify according to the consequences of their experiences with partner notification. Conclusions: Characteristics of the partner and HIV-related stigma were two key issues that influenced the decision-making process of partner notification. Health professionals can assist patients in developing strategies to inform partners in accordance with their individual needs.起始頁-結束頁：530-547資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310301820篇名：評論：性行為感染愛滋病者知會性伴侶的道德難題並列篇名：Commentary: Ethical Dilemma of Sexual Partner Notification among Patients Acquired HIV Infections through Sexual Contacts作者：周愫嫻(Su-Syan Jou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：548-548資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030180101篇名：護理人員多元文化照護能力初探並列篇名：An Exploratory Analysis of Nurses' Multicultural Caring Competence作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);林育秀(Yu-Hsiu Lin);蘇湘怡(Siang-Yi Su);李明輝(Ming-Huei Lee);趙堡蕓(Pao-Yun Chao)關鍵字：護理人員;健康照護;文化;多元文化照護;nurse;health care;culture;multi-culture caring期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷5期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：來台外籍人士及聯外婚姻倍增，病人多元文化背景除影響醫療照護服務的需求、期待與就醫行為，護病關係也更形複雜。本研究旨在探討臨床護理人員多元文化照護能力現況及其影響因素，期有助提升護理人員多元文化照護能力，減少健康不均等、降低健康差異。方法：本研究為一橫斷性研究，以「護理人員多元文化能力量表」收集資料，使用驗證性因素分析及逐步迴歸，探討影響護理人員多元文化照護能力的因子。結果：護理人員整體多元文化能力中等，以不同構面的能力來看，文化知識與文化技巧構面能力，則仍有待提升。影響護理人員整體多元文化能力及其四個構面的顯著因子包含：年齡、婚姻狀態、學歷、學校屬性、護理工作資歷、護理專業能力職級、服務單位、照護外籍人士經驗、語言檢定考試、上過多元文化課程，及出國經驗。結論：護理人員多元文化能力有待提升。建議護理人員提升語言溝通能力；醫院提供多元文化照護主題教育訓練；學校教授多元文化照護課程，提升護理人員多元文化照護能力。英文摘要：Objectives: Many foreigners reside in Taiwan. Patient diversity may affect patients' needs/expectations regarding healthcare, healthy behaviors, and patient outcomes, and jeopardize the relationship between patients and healthcare personnel. The aim of this study was to explore nurses' multicultural caring competence and the factors that influence it. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study which collected data with the ”Nurses' Multicultural Caring Competence Scale” to survey nurses working in a government-owned, regional teaching hospital in centralTaiwan. Confirmatory factor analysis and stepwise regression were used to explore the factors associated with overall multicultural caring competence and its four dimensions. Results: Nurses have a middle level of multicultural caring competence, but higher levels of cultural knowledge and cultural skills need to be developed. Significant factors associated with overall multicultural caring competence and its four dimensions included age, marital status, type of school, years worked as a nurse, clinical ladders, work units, experiences in caring for foreigners, language proficiency, exposure to a multicultural curriculum, and overseas experience. Conclusions: Recommendations to promote nurses' multicultural caring competence include improving nurses' language proficiency, offering ready-to-use on-the-job training regarding culturally competent nursing care, and providing a multifaceted cultural nursing curriculum as part of nursing education.起始頁-結束頁：549-562資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030342篇名：《服貿協議》、《自經區特別條例》與「國際醫療」的衝擊評析並列篇名：A Critical Analysis on the Impacts of Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement, Free Economic Pilot Zones and Medical Tourism作者：鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng);陳怡欣(I-Shin Chen);吳彥莉(In-Lei Ng);張恆豪(Heng-Hao Chang);邊立中(Li-Chung Pien);曾育慧(Yu-Hwei Tseng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：337-348資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030423篇名：評論：《服貿協議》、《自經區特別條例》與「國際醫療」的衝擊評析並列篇名：Commentary to a Critical Analysis on the Impacts of Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement, Free Economic Pilot Zones and Medical Tourism作者：林秋芬(Chiou-Fen Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：349-349資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201433103042014篇名：評論：換新定位贏新地位∼看見台灣的醫療服務（健康產業）並列篇名：Commentary: Replace Position to Win New Status-A Vision of Taiwan's Health Care System作者：石曜堂(Yaw-Tang Shih)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：350-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201433103042025篇名：腫瘤標記的臨床應用與發展並列篇名：Clinical Application and Development of Tumor Biomarkers作者：陳星佑(Hsing-Yu Chen);吳岱穎(Tai-Yin Wu);鄭企峰(Chi-Fen Cheng);郭冠良(Kuan-Liang Kuo);陳建志(Chien-Chih Chen)關鍵字：腫瘤標記;惡性腫瘤;篩檢;診斷;tumor marker;malignancy;screening;diagnosis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：在健檢風行的今日台灣，腫瘤標記常常是各類健康檢查的熱門項目之一。惟腫瘤標記所代表的意義，多數民眾僅是一知半解。本文旨在報導近期腫瘤標記之臨床應用與發展。我們搜尋了2003至2013十年間的腫瘤標記相關回顧文獻並加以評讀、整理，依序介紹肺癌、肝癌、大腸直腸癌、乳癌、攝護腺癌、胰臟癌、卵巢癌與其對應的腫瘤標記之定義與分類，特性與臨床上之角色。本文也報導近期研究中發展之新興腫瘤標記，雖然近一、二十年來新興腫瘤標記蓬勃發展，都仍無法取代目前常用之標記如甲型胎兒蛋白、癌抗原125（CA 125）等。且新興腫瘤標記在早期發現與診斷之應用相對局限，所以未來仍需要實驗室與臨床密切配合，追尋可廣為應用之標記來提升癌症之防治。同時，公衛領域人員在解釋這些腫瘤標記的意義時應小心謹慎，不宜過度解讀或依賴腫瘤標記。英文摘要：Periodic health examinations are common practice in Taiwan. Tumor markers are popular laboratory tests which are ordered as part of a health check-up; however, the significance of tumor markers is only partially understood by people. The purpose of this article was to report recent clinical developments and applications of tumor markers. We searched and studied relevant review articles about tumor markers published in the 10 years between 2003 and 2013. We present the definition, classification, characteristics, and clinical roles of tumor markers corresponding to lung, hepatic, colorectal, breast, prostatic, pancreatic, and ovarian cancers. We also report newly developed tumor markers. Although novel tumor markers have flourished in the recent 10-20 years, novel tumor markers cannot replace the well-established tumor markers, such as α-fetoprotein and cancer antigen 125. Studies focusing on the application of novel tumor markers in early disease detection and diagnosis are limited. There is still a need for close collaboration between bench and bedside to search for more widely applicable markers and to improve cancer prevention. Thus, public health workers should exercise caution in explaining the meaning of these tumor markers and avoid over-interpretation or over-reliance on novel tumor markers.起始頁-結束頁：352-359資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030306篇名：風力發電機組產生之低頻噪音與健康風險的展望並列篇名：Perspectives of Health Risk from Exposure to Low-Frequency Noise Generated by Wind Turbines作者：許惠悰(Hui-Tsung Hsu)關鍵字：風力發電機組;低頻噪音;聲壓水準;擾人噪音;健康風險評估;wind turbines;low-frequency noise;sound pressure level;noise annoyance;health risk assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：風力發電在全球的永續能源發展中，是一個重要的再生性能源。但是，許多的文獻指出，風力發電機組周邊的居民感受到風力發電機組所產生的低頻噪音，導致居民的生活品質下降、誘發身心受損，進而出現健康上的負面效應。在此發展趨勢下，風力發電機組的興建，成為眾所關注的焦點。為了能夠讓此公眾的議題之發展有較為正面的結局，我們特別蒐集發表在國際性學術期刊上的相關論文，綜合整理，以探討風力發電機組產生的噪音來源、彙整噪音的監測結果、分析風力發電與健康的流行病學研究資料、說明健康影響的生物標記研究，檢討這些研究的限制及需要再確認的議題。根據本研究對於風車所產生的低頻噪音之科學文獻的回顧整理，我們認為風車的低頻噪音對人體存在潛在性的危害。因此，我們建議需要配合健康檢查進行長期性的追蹤，特別建議心血管疾病的追蹤列為必須觀察的重點，以確實掌握其影響的程度和範圍。英文摘要：Wind turbines (WTs) are an indispensable component of sustainable energy development, providing one of the most important renewable energy resources; however, studies have shown that WTs generate unpleasant low-frequency noise, which may have adverse physical and mental effects and diminish the quality of human life. Thus, noise emitted from the rotor blades of WTs is a public health concern. The aim of the current study was to conduct a review of the relevant peer-reviewed scientific literature. Our effort focused on the sources of noise generated from WTs, sound pressure levels in the vicinity of WTs, epidemiologic studies on health status and quality of life among the residents in close proximity of wind farms, and biomarkers used to identify stress-related disorders. Based on well-documented findings, it is scientifically feasible that low-frequency noise generated by WTs may have adverse effects on human health. To confirm that health impairment is related to low-frequency noise exposure, it is suggested that a long-term epidemiologic study can be conducted based on physical examinations for residents in the vicinity of wind farms, with a focus on cardiovascular disease.起始頁-結束頁：360-376資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030247篇名：論美國之醫療改革與醫療財務政策並列篇名：Healthcare Reform and Healthcare Financing Policy in the United States作者：林翠芳(Tsui-Fang Lin)關鍵字：病患保護及可負擔醫療法案;醫療改革;醫療財務政策;美國;Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA);healthcare reform;healthcare financing policy;United States期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：美國總統歐巴馬先生於2010年的3月簽署了病患保護及可負擔醫療法案（Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, PPACA），此重要改革改寫了美國的醫療保險歷史，使得數千萬尚無醫療保險的民眾也能擁有可負擔之醫療保障。本研究的主要目的在於介紹美國醫療保險改革歷史、說明病患保護及可負擔醫療法案的內容，討論美國醫療改革相關財務政策及其產生之衝擊。參考美國此次結構性的醫療改革經驗，我們認為政府可以考慮評估降低醫療支出的租稅政策、將更多的資源投注在家庭醫學科與疾病管理、推展健康生活型態，並結合支付制度改革鼓勵提升醫療品質的醫療服務。此外，我們建議未來進行醫療改革討論時，政府應詳盡評估目前二代健保相關政策的影響，在強調收支平衡的同時，也重視財務改革政策對勞動市場、經濟行為與醫療品質各層面可能產生的衝擊。英文摘要：The President of the United States, Barack Obama, signed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) in March 2010. Passage of the PPACA has enabled the uninsured to purchase affordable healthcare insurance and access medical services. The main purpose of this paper was to introduce the history of American healthcare reform, explore PPACA, discuss relevant healthcare financing policies, and investigate the impact of PPACA. Learning from the USA experience, the government may consider using tax policies to curb healthcare expenditures. In addition, we suggest that the government devote more resources to primary care, disease management, and policies promoting a healthy lifestyle. Furthermore, the government can reform payment systems to pay providers based on health outcomes. Finally, we suggest that the government evaluate second-generation National Health Insurance policies thoroughly when formulating further healthcare reform proposals. In addition to achieving a balanced budget, the government should focus on the impact of healthcare financing policies on the labor market, economic behavior, and the quality of medical services.起始頁-結束頁：377-385資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030138篇名：台灣醫院性病愛滋匿篩執行現況與心理健康服務之需求性評估並列篇名：The Current Status of Anonymous Voluntary STD/HIV Counseling and Testing in Hospitals in Taiwan and an Assessment of the Need for Integrated Mental Health Services作者：蘇柏文(Po-Wen Su);黃俊豪(Jiun-Hau Huang)關鍵字：性病;愛滋;性病愛滋匿名篩檢;心理健康服務;sexually transmitted disease (STD);AIDS;anonymous voluntary STD/HIV counseling and testing (VCT);mental health services期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究針對我國自1999年起推動之性病愛滋匿名篩檢（以下簡稱匿篩），調查不同地區和層級規模匿篩醫院，呈現其服務現況與困境，並評估心理健康服務之需求性。方法：針對國內匿篩醫院之主要業務承辦人進行深度訪談。結果：本研究共訪談15家匿篩醫院，發現匿篩多由感染科或家醫科提供服務，各院匿篩服務會提供基本之衛教與情緒支持，但衛教效率不佳、篩檢空間與時間有限、心理健康服務資源缺乏；其中12家認為需要心理健康服務資源介入，以增進篩檢服務效能；亦有開始嘗試跨團隊合作服務者，卻又表示擔憂個案不慎感染時之追蹤與管理。結論：匿篩存在心理健康服務之需求性，除了解篩檢者次文化差異、邀請同儕志工參與、加強匿篩之軟硬體設備，防疫措施應結合心理健康服務資源，以了解民眾篩檢動機與情緒狀態，並在院內推廣跨團隊合作照護，以篩檢者為中心，運用適合疾病預防與健康促進之健康信念模式或社會認知理論，提供適性之衛教內容，讓愛滋匿篩兼具初級預防之功效。英文摘要：Objectives: Anonymous voluntary STD/HIV counseling and testing (VCT) was first implemented in Taiwan in 1999. The aims of this study were to investigate its current status and the challenges for various levels of hospitals offering VCT in different areas, and to assess the need for integrated mental health services. Methods: In-depth interviews were conducted with VCT counselors in 15 hospitals. Results: VCT was administered primarily via Divisions of Infectious Diseases and Family Medicine with the provision of STD/HIV education and emotional support. Among the major challenges were ineffective health education, limited VCT resources, inadequate private space, and lack of mental health services. Of the 15 interviewees, 12 suggested that VCT integrated with mental health services would optimize program effectiveness. Inter-professional practices have been introduced in some hospitals offering VCT, but some interviewees raised concerns about subsequent follow-up in the context of inter-professional practice if VCT participants seroconverted. Conclusions: There is a need for mental health services along with the provision of VCT. To improve the VCT program, it is important to understand the subculture among VCT participants, to involve peer volunteers and multidisciplinary counselors, and to enhance privacy during VCT. Disease control measures should be combined with mental health services to further our understanding of people's motives for VCT and their psychosocial state. Therefore, it is necessary to develop patient-oriented cooperative VCT programs which offer tailored and theory-driven health education interventions based on such theories as the Health Belief Model and Social Cognitive Theory, thereby making VCT a part of primary prevention efforts.起始頁-結束頁：386-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331030219篇名：台灣國中生班級社會網絡指標及位置與被霸凌經驗之關係並列篇名：Effects of Social Network Indicators and Positions in Class on Bullied Experiences among Junior High School Students in Taiwan作者：林妤容(Yu-Jung Lin);吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);李均揚(Chun-Yang Lee);林岱嬋(Dai-Chan Lin);江宜珍(Yi-Chen Chiang)關鍵字：中心性;社會網絡位置;被凌者;被凌經驗;centrality;social network position;victimization;bullied experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：了解台灣國中生被凌經驗之分佈，並探討其於班級內的社會網絡指標及位置與被凌經驗之關係。方法：使用國科會計畫「台灣國中生欺凌行為的類型與角色及其與健康的關係」之部分資料進行分析。樣本自北中南東各隨機抽出五所國中，於7~9年級各隨機抽出兩班，有效樣本共2,474人。社會網絡位置採提名法，每人提名至多3位同學，以UCINET軟體進行社會網絡分析，依據被提名總數（向內中心性）及提名他人總數（向外中心性），將研究樣本分類於身處班級內不同之社會網絡位置，共分為孤鳥型、一廂情願型、自我孤立者、小團體成員、大團體成員等四類。被凌經驗分為肢體式、口語式及關係式被凌，應用SAS軟體進行邏輯斯迴歸分析，探討班級社會網絡指標及位置與被凌經驗的關係。結果：男生、向內中心性較低者及一廂情願型的學生較常肢體／口語式被凌；女生較易關係式被凌；孤鳥型易肢體／關係式被凌；小團體成員則較少關係式被凌。結論：不同社會網絡位置與學生被凌經驗有關，建議可觀察其所屬社會網絡位置，及早偵測學生被凌情形以預防被凌後產生之負向影響。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to realize the rate of being bullied among junior high school students in Taiwan and to investigate the effect of social network indicators and positions on bullied experiences. Methods: Part of the data from the National Science Council research project ”The relationship of health and characters of Taiwan junior high school students in School violence” was obtained in this study for analysis purpose. The sample involved 2,474 seventh to ninth graders in northern, central, southern and eastern Taiwan via stratified, multistage, random cluster sampling. UCINET software was utilized to generate the social network indicators. Social network positions were obtained using peer nomination (nominated up to three classmates). The sample was classified into the isolates, sources, sinks, clique members and liaisons based on the numbers of indegree and outdegree. Bullied behaviors could be classified into three types as the physical, verbal and relational. Logistic regression models were analyzed by SAS software. Results: Boys of lower indegree and source were more likely to be physical/verbal bullied (compared to girls of outdegree and clique members, respectively); girls were more likely to be relationally bullied than boys; isolated students was associated with the experience of physical/relational bullied; and liaisons were more likely to be relationally bullied. Conclusions: Social network positions were significantly associated with bullied experiences. Teachers and school facilitators should recognize the association in advance for school bullying prevention.起始頁-結束頁：397-409資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310302810篇名：影響癌友生活品質因素的研究：檢視增權條件的調節效果並列篇名：An Examination of the Direct and Mediating Effects of Empowerment Factors on the Quality of Life among Cancer Survivors作者：陳君儀(Chun-Yi Chen);鄭麗珍(Li-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：癌友;生活品質;增權;調節效果;cancer survivor;quality of life;empowerment;moderating effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：在存活率提升的趨勢下，癌症逐漸成為一種慢性疾病，也延長了患者與癌症共存的時間，癌友的中長期生活品質成為全人醫療照顧的工作焦點之一。本研究旨在探討癌友生活品質的影響因素，以及因素間的交互作用，以期找尋有效介入的工作取向。方法：本研究利用結構式問卷，探討罹癌一年以上、結束急性治療之癌友的生活品質。運用台灣簡明版世界衛生組織生活品質量表來蒐集生活品質資訊，用中文化增權量表、社會支持多面向量表來測量癌友生活品質的增權條件。最後，採用階層式複迴歸和組間差異調節檢驗模型來檢視影響生活品質的各個因素，以及因素之間的交互作用。結果：研究發現經濟狀況與增權條件是影響癌友生活品質的主要因素，其中增權條件對於癌友的生活品質具有直接的正向作用，也可調節經濟狀況對於環境範疇生活品質的影響力。結論：既然增權為促進癌友生活品質的重要因素，而增權條件的效果又立基於癌友的經濟安全基礎上，未來癌友的中長期生活品質之維護，除了增權的方法外，也應同時考量癌友的經濟風險對於增權策略的影響。英文摘要：Objectives: In recent years the cancer survival rate has followed a steady upward curve. Indeed, a cancer diagnosis is no longer a death sentence. Rather, cancer is a chronic disease for which patients are in need of long-term care. With respect to whole person care, the quality of life amongst cancer survivors has become one of the major intervention targets to promote wellbeing. The current study determined how empowerment dynamics impact cancer survivor quality of life. Methods: A structured questionnaire was used to determine the relationship between empowerment and quality of life amongst cancer survivors. Three scales (the Chinese version of the WHOQOL-BREF, empowerment scale, and MSPSS) were used to measure the main variables. Cancer survivors at least 1 year post-treatment were invited to participate in the interview. Block regression and simultaneous regions of significance methods were used to test the specification model and mediating effect on the variable relationship. Results: The economic status of cancer survivors and empowerment were shown to be two main predictors of the quality of life among the other variables. The level of survivor empowerment has a positive and direct effect on promoting the quality of life in all domains. Moreover, the level of survivor empowerment can moderate the economic effect on the quality of life within the environment domain. Conclusions: These results suggest that empowerment is a key factor for better quality of life amongst cancer survivors. The empowerment effect had a greater impact on patients who had a better economic status. Therefore, a powerful total cancer care strategy should be based on the empowerment plan, while taking long-term economic risks of cancer survivors and social disparities into consideration. Not only should empowerment-oriented services be offered, but additional financial care should be arranged for the vulnerable population.起始頁-結束頁：410-427資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310302011篇名：從鄰避效應與認知失調解析台灣民眾的核電風險認知與態度並列篇名：Risk Perceptions and Attitudes of Taiwan Citizens Regarding Nuclear Power Generation Based on NIMBY and Cognitive Dissonance Theory作者：梁世武(Shih-Wu Liang);李均揚(Chun-Yang Lee)關鍵字：鄰避;認知失調;風險認知;核電支持度;核電廠鄰近居民;NIMBY;cognitive dissonance;support of nuclear power generation;citizens living near nuclear power station期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：運用鄰避與認知失調理論的觀點，探討核電廠鄰近地區、潛在影響地區以及遠離地區居民之核能風險認知與核電支持度。方法：以2010年與2011年對台灣民眾進行電話抽樣調查的資料，運用結構方程模式比較三類地區樣本之模式差異性。結果：本研究發現，福島核災前居住在核電廠潛在影響地區的居民，其核能發電缺點論述與核電安全性的負向關係為三地區中最強，而鄰近地區的居民卻弱於前者。福島核災後各地區民眾對核電安全性與支持度的平均值均降低，但兩者間之相關係數則提昇。結論：影響核能風險認知的主要論點為環境與健康等考量，包括了破壞生態、核廢料隱憂以及特殊災害的威脅等，可用鄰避效應解釋。然而，當核電設施建置完成，若長期未發生重大災害，並配合良好的安全管制措施，當地居民會降低認知失調，核能發電缺點論述對風險知覺之影響會因而減低。但福島核災後，民眾對核能發電可能產生整體性的認知失調，建議相關單位宜擬定因應策略以減輕民眾之認知失調。英文摘要：Objectives: Based on ”not in my back yard” (NIMBY) and cognitive dissonance theory, we examined the nuclear risk perceptions and support of nuclear power generation for citizens who lived in ”neighborhood,” ”potentially affected,” and ”distant” areas. Methods: We conducted a randomized telephone survey among Taiwan citizens in 2010 and 2011, and used structural equation modeling to compare the different result patterns among the three areas. Results: Before the Fukushima nuclear disaster occurred, the relationship between arguments purporting the disadvantages of nuclear power generation and risk perceptions for citizens in potentially affected areas was the strongest among the three areas, and the relationship for citizens in neighborhood areas was weaker than citizens in potentially affected areas. After the Fukushima nuclear disaster, however, the mean values of risk perceptions and support of nuclear power generation decreased, while the correlation between the risk perceptions and support of nuclear power generation increased. Conclusions: The major arguments purporting the disadvantages of nuclear power generation, which affected risk perceptions, were based on environment- and health-related concerns, such as ecologic damage, nuclear waste, and the threat of special disasters. After the nuclear power facilities were installed, local citizens had little cognitive dissonance if there were no serious disasters over a long period of time and the government conducted appropriate safety control measures. Therefore, arguments purporting the disadvantages of nuclear power generation had little influence on risk perceptions. Authorities should implement corresponding strategies to alleviate cognitive dissonance amongst the citizens.起始頁-結束頁：428-444資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310302612篇名：比較風險群組成本效益－以急性呼吸窘迫症候群（ARDS）為例並列篇名：Cost-Effectiveness Comparison of Risk Groups: A Case Study Involving Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)作者：任立中(Li-Chung Jen);李淑玉(Shu-Yu Li);高國晉(Kuo-Chin Kao)關鍵字：急性呼吸窘迫症侯群（ARDS）;疾病成本;增加成本效益比;人力資本法;acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS);cost of illness;incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER);human capital approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究針對存活機率風險群組進行疾病成本探究，期望提供未來醫療政策及相關研究參考。方法：採回溯性病歷研究藉由研究變項建立預測存活機率風險群組，進而審視各群組未來健保署及增加一個生活品質調整後存活人年（1QALY）所需的醫療資源。結果：直接成本占全民健保醫療保健支出住院給付0.087%，在個人醫療保健支出則高出10倍，間接成本（中位數）占人均GDP12%，每增加一位高風險、中風險、低風險患者，健保署則需支付874,104元、1,420,035元、3,488,272元，而健保DRGs相對權重無法呈現資源耗用程度差異性。結論：整體而言，醫療資源耗用影響與DRGs健保支付制度應考慮診斷碼正確性與疾病嚴重度、共病症概念，而從醫療經濟決策點本研究樣本群組均達世界衛生組織建議成本效益評估標準，亦符合成本效果閾值的經濟性，提供未來研擬成本投入與效用措施評估的參考依據。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored the healthcare costs of various risk groups based on survival probability. Our findings can serve as a reference for healthcare policymakers and researchers. Methods: Using a retrospective study of patient records, we identified variables to forecast the probability of survival in risk groups in an effort to analyze the resources required from the National Health Insurance (NHI) Administration to add one quality-adjusted life year (1QALY) to each group. Results: Direct costs were shown to account for 0.087% of NHI expenditures on hospital care subsidies, and increased 10-fold when reimbursed by private health insurance. Indirect costs (median) were shown to account for GDP12% per capita. Each additional high-, moderate, or low-risk patient cost the NHI Administration NTD 874,104, NTD 1,420,035 and NTD 3,488,272, respectively. Notably, the relative weights of diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) did not exhibit any differences in the level of resource consumption. Conclusions: Important issues to consider in the consumption of medical resources and NHI spending on DRGs include the accuracy of diagnostic coding, the severity of illnesses, and co-morbidities. From an economic healthcare perspective, the sample groups in this study all met the evaluation criteria for cost-effectiveness recommended by the World Health Organization, and surpassed the economic threshold for cost-effectiveness. Our results can serve as a reference for future assessment of cost input and usage effectiveness.起始頁-結束頁：445-453資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310304013篇名：千禧年發展目標：背景、進度與挑戰並列篇名：Millennium Development Goals: Background, Progress and Challenges作者：曾育慧(Yu-Hwei Tseng);江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)關鍵字：千禧年發展目標;後2015年;全球衛生;永續發展目標;Millennium Development Goals;post-2015;global health;sustainable development goals期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：西元2000年聯合國發表「千禧年宣言」，隔年再提出「千禧年發展目標」：希望在2015年達到消除貧窮、普及基礎教育、性別平等、降低兒童死亡率、改善孕產婦健康、控制重大傳染病、環境永續發展，及全球合作共八大目標。千禧年發展目標深具公共衛生意涵，每項均為已知的健康決定因素，影響全球健康政策制定、實務工作與學術研究的方向。隨著2015年期限將屆，全球一方面檢討進度，另一方面則熱烈討論可能接續的永續發展目標。本文回顧千禧年發展目標的背景、進度及挑戰，指出台灣有待彌補的知識與發展落差，最後強調台灣應關心千禧年發展目標運動，以及參與後2015年議程的國際活動。英文摘要：Following the Millennium Declaration in 2000, the United Nations introduced eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to: 1) eradicate poverty, 2) achieve universal primary education, 3) promote gender equality, 4) reduce child mortality, 5) improve maternal health, 6) combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases, 7) ensure environmental sustainability, and 8) establish global partnerships for development. MDGs as a whole have profound implications for public health since each goal is a proven health determinant. From policy to research, these goals shape the landscape of global health. As the 2015 deadline approaches, the international community shows intensified interest in assessing progress and setting a new set of goals in the framework of sustainable development. This article traces the socio-political context of the emergence of MDGs, reviews current progress and emerging issues, and identifies Taiwan's gaps in knowledge and action. It concludes by urging Taiwan to pay closer attention to global development issues and to participate in the post-2015 forum.起始頁-結束頁：221-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310301714篇名：Misunderstanding of Medication Labels: Results of a National Survey in Taiwan並列篇名：誤解藥袋標示：一項台灣全國性調查結果作者：蔡慈儀(Tzu-I Tsai);李守義(D. Shoou-Yih Lee);張苙雲(Ly-Yun Chang)關鍵字：藥袋標示;功能性健康識能;溝通性健康識能;medication label;functional health literacy;communicative health literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究是以全國性樣本調查台灣成年民眾誤解藥袋標示及其功能性和溝通性健康識能之相關性。方法：本研究透過2011年台灣社會變遷調查收集研究資料，共有2003位具全國代表性的樣本。誤解藥袋標示是測量受訪者是否能正確回答「用法」、「劑量」、「數量」、「作用」、「適應症」、「警語」、「副作用」、「藥物外觀」這八項藥袋上的標示。受訪者的健康識能程度則以四題篩檢問題測量。結果：研究結果發現有1,127（56.3%）受訪者誤解一題或一題以上的藥袋標示，邏輯斯回歸分析結果顯示四種健康識能中，僅有閱讀能力與藥袋標示誤解有顯著關係。受訪者的年齡、教育程度、職業、居住地都市化程度都與誤解藥袋標示有顯著關係。結論：本研究顯示誤解藥袋標示對於台灣民眾仍是一個問題。藥袋明示化並不足以確保民眾使用處方藥物的安全，未來還需改善藥袋標示的設計及使用圖片輔助說明藥袋上重要的訊息。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate, in a national sample of Taiwanese adults, the extent to which adults misunderstand medication labels and the relationships between misunderstanding and functional and communicative health literacy. Methods: We partnered with the Taiwan Social Change Survey in 2011 to collect data for this study. Misunderstanding of the medication label was measured by survey respondents' inability to correctly answer 8 questions regarding the route of administration, dosing time, next dosing schedule, individual dosage instructions, indications, warnings, side effects, and physical features of the drug. Respondents' health literacy levels were measured with four screening questions. Results: Of the 2,003 respondents, 1,127 (56.3%) misunderstood one or more elements of the medication label. Logistic regression models showed that among the four health literacy skills, only reading was significantly associated with misunderstanding of the medication label. Age, educational level, occupation, and urbanization of the residential area were significantly associated with misunderstanding of the medication label. Conclusions: This study demonstrates that misunderstanding of medication labels is a problem in the general population of adults in Taiwan. Clear medication labels may be insufficient to ensure the public's safe use of prescription drugs. Additional efforts may be needed to improve the design of medication labels, such as using pictorial presentations to convey the key information of medications.起始頁-結束頁：238-250資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310208015篇名：台灣學童健康素養測驗之發展與測量並列篇名：Development and Implementation of Taiwan's Child Health Literacy Test作者：劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu);廖梨伶(Li-Ling Liao);施淑芳(Shu-Fang Shih);張子超(Tzu-Chau Chang);紀雪雲(Hsueh-Yun Chi);Richard H Osborne關鍵字：健康素養;學童;課程本位;health literacy;student children;curriculum-based期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究目的在於以國小六年級學童為對象，發展台灣學童健康素養測驗及進行全國性的調查，以呈現台灣學童健康素養之現況，以及瞭解健康素養、健康行為與健康狀態之相關性。方法：本研究所發展的學童健康素養測驗乃經由釐清學童健康素養的概念、建立測驗架構、經由實務教師觀點與學童焦點團體訪談發展測量題目、進行預試分析，並經正式測試後確認定稿。在正式測試中，全國共2,235所學校參與填答（83.3%），共計162,609位學童（56.9%）；在該調查中也同時收集學童的出生日、BMI（身高、體重）、自我健康認知與健康行為表現。結果：本測驗經共計32題，依據試題反應理論，其鑑別度介於0.55~1.89，而難度則介於-1.7~0.41，內部一致性信度Cronbach’s α值為0.87，適合用於測量學童基本健康素養能力之表現與篩檢，此外，全國六年級學童健康素養平均分數為23.97分（滿分32分），答對率為74.9%。有“好”的自我健康認知的學童具有較好的健康素養，其得分（M = 24.94）都顯著高於其他自我健康認知低的學童，且健康素養與良好健康行為有顯著正相關（r = .25，p ＜ .05），與不良健康行為則有顯著負相關（r = -.28，p ＜ .05）。結論：本研究為全國首創以教師與學童觀點為依據之課程本位學童健康素養測驗，透過嚴謹的程序發展，其全國性的調查結果可提供國家健康教育之決策單位做參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to develop Taiwan’s Child Health Literacy Test and to undertake a nation-wide survey in order to determine the current status of Taiwanese sixth graders’ health literacy, and to understand the association between health literacy, healthy behavior, and health status. Methods: Taiwan’s Child Health Literacy Test was developed through the process of concept clarification, a qualitative pilot, a development pilot, and a field test. In the field test, 162,609 sixth graders (56.9%) from 2,235 schools (83.3%) nationwide completed the questionnaire. We also collected the students’ dates of birth, BMIs, self-reported health and healthy behaviors. Results: The final test consisted of 32 questions with item discrimination of 0.55~1.89 and item difficulty of -1.7~0.41 according to IRT; Cronbach’s α was 0.87. Based on this information, the test was deemed appropriate for basic health literacy screening among children. Nation-wide, the average score for sixth graders’ health literacy was 23.97 points (total score 32 points), with a correct rate of 74.9%. Those who were ”good” in self-reported health scored highest in health literacy (M = 24.29). Health literacy was significantly positively related to healthy behavior (r = .25, p ＜ .05), and negatively to risky behavior (r = -.28, p ＜ .05). Conclusions: This study was the first curriculum-based child health literacy test developed from the viewpoints of both teachers and pupils in Taiwan through a rigorous procedure. The nationwide survey results may serve as a reference for decision-makers at the national health education level.起始頁-結束頁：251-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310210516篇名：Team Climate, Emotional Labor and Burnout of Physicians: A Multilevel Model並列篇名：團隊氣氛、情緒勞務與醫師職業倦怠之關係：多層次研究模式作者：林雅雯(Yea-Wen Lin);黃鈺雯(Yu-Wen Huang)關鍵字：職業倦怠;情緒勞務;團隊氣氛;多層次研究;burnout;emotional labor;team climate;multilevel research期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究採用多層次分析來驗證團隊氣氛、情緒勞務和醫師職業倦怠的關係。方法：以問卷調查法針對台灣醫院的醫師團隊進行調查以蒐集研究資料。總計有30個醫師團隊共530位醫師為有效樣本。統計分析主要是採用階層獻性模式（Hierarchical linear modeling, HLM）來進行多層次研究假設的驗證。結果：（1）情緒勞務之深層行為與職業倦怠之三個面向存在顯著統計相關，但表層行為只與職業倦怠中的情緒耗竭有顯著統計相關；（2）隊氣氛和職業倦怠的三個面向有顯著的相關（情緒耗竭，γ_(01) = -.651, p ＜ .001；去人性化，γ_(01) = -.491, p ＜ .01；個人成就感低落，γ_(01) =-.795, p ＜ .001）；及（3）團隊氣氛只對於表層行為和情緒耗竭之間的關係有顯著調節作用（γ_(11) = -.446, p ＜ .05）。結論：本研究結果顯示團隊氣氛和情緒勞務會影響醫師的職業倦怠，此發現提醒醫院管理者，醫師正向的團隊氣氛有助於減輕醫生的職業焦崩。此外，本研究結果亦有助於澄清醫師的情緒面向的影響，以提高醫療服務的品質。英文摘要：Objectives: This study applied a multilevel analysis to verify the relationships among team climate, emotional labor, and physician burnout. Methods: We conducted a questionnaire survey for the physicians in Taiwanese hospitals. A total number of 530 physicians from 30 physician teams participated in this study. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) was used to test the multilevel hypotheses. Results: (1) deep acting of emotional labor was significantly associated with three components of burnout, while surface acting was only significantly associated with emotional exhaustion; (2) highly significant association between team climate and burnout for three components (emotional exhaustion, γ_(01) = -.651, p ＜ .001; depersonalization, γ_(01) = -.491, p ＜ .01; reduced personal accomplishment, γ_(01) = -.795, p ＜ .001); and (3) team climate only has a significant moderating effect on the relationship between surface acting of emotional labor and emotional exhaustion (γ_(11) = -.446, p ＜ .05). Conclusions: The results support the hypothesis that team climate and emotional labor have impacts on physician burnout. The findings remind hospital executives that climate of physician team help to mitigate physician burnout. In addition, the findings could help to clarify some aspects of the emotional dimensions of physicians with a view to improving the quality of service.起始頁-結束頁：271-289資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310301217篇名：健康促進國小建立家庭夥伴關係影響因素研究並列篇名：Influential Factors of School Involvement in Family Partnership of Health-Promoting Primary Schools in Taiwan作者：牛玉珍(Yu-Zhen Niu);劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu);邱詩揚(Shy-Yang Chiou);陳政友(Cheng-Yu Chen)關鍵字：階層迴歸分析;國小建立家庭夥伴關係;PRECEDE-PROCEED模式;hierarchy regression;involvement in school-family partnership;PRECEDE-PROCEED model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究目的為瞭解台灣健康促進國民小學能成功建立家庭夥伴關係的影響因素。方法：本研究以99學年度全國2,675個國民小學健康促進國小主要承辦人為研究對象，按各縣市國小數比例算出抽樣的校數，再依國小班級數大小進行分層隨機抽樣，共抽出584個國小（含74個議題中心及行動研究學校），最後有效問卷共391份，回收率為67%。本研究係參考PRECEDE-PROCEED理論模式擬定研究架構，自變項包含背景變項、素質因素、增強因素、及使能因素；依變項則為國小建立家庭夥伴關係。以描述性、階層迴歸分析進行統計分析。結果：所有變項可以解釋國小建立家庭夥伴關係46.4%的總變異量，背景變項、使能因素、增強因素及素質因素能在逐層的控制下，單獨的對國小家庭夥伴關係達到4.4%、13.2%、20.3%及8.6%的解釋力，所有影響的變項中，建構夥伴關係的效能有最大的影響力（β = .389）。結論：足夠的資源、政府主管的重視度、校長及同仁的支持、建構家庭夥伴關係的效能，能使國小成功的與家庭建立夥伴關係。英文摘要：Objectives: This paper explores the factors influencing the involvement of health-promoting Taiwanese elementary schools in school-family partnership. Methods: The study design was cross-sectional. A stratified random sample was used, according to the size of the districts and individual schools, to select participants from 2,675 primary schools in Taiwan. A total of 584 participants were recruited and the response rate was 67% (n = 391). Structured questionnaires including items on demographics, predisposing factors, reinforcing factors, enabling factors, and involvement in school-family partnership, were used to collect data. The data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and hierarchy regression, and p ＜ .05 was considered statistically significant. The research framework was based on the PRECEDE-PROCEED model. Results: The demographics, predisposing factors, reinforcing factors, and enabling factors were the major factors affecting school involvement in school-family partnership, accounting for 46.4% of the total variance for involvement in school-family partnership. The demographics, predisposing factors, reinforcing factors, and enabling factors can divided for 4.4%, 13.2%, 20.3% & 8.6% of the total variances. Conclusions: The availability of helpful resources, supportive policymaking, supportive principal, colleagues, and perceived efficacy of school-family partnership, can successfully enhanced school involvement in school-family partnership.起始頁-結束頁：290-303資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310302218篇名：南台灣某區域醫院台籍與外籍產婦B肝帶原狀況與嬰兒接種B肝免疫球蛋白之情形並列篇名：Hepatitis B Markers in Taiwanese and New Immigrant Mothers and the Results of Their Babies Receiving Hepatitis B Immunoglobulin at a District Hospital in Southern Taiwan作者：陳秋妏(Chiou-Wen Chen);陳志成(Solomon Chih-Cheng Chen);陳博憲(Bor-Shyen Chen)關鍵字：B型肝炎;疫苗;免疫球蛋白;外籍母親;hepatitis B;vaccine;immunoglobulin;new immigrant mother期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：了解台籍和外籍產婦之B肝帶原率及其嬰兒施打B肝疫苗與免疫球蛋白（HBIG）之情形。方法：本研究為回溯性病歷研究。在南台灣某區域醫院嬰兒室，回顧從2008年7月至2011年12月在該院出生嬰兒的B肝疫苗接種登錄本。在此期間產婦總數為7,931人，分別為台灣籍產婦7,205人與外籍產婦726人。如果母親是B型肝炎帶原者，就收集母親與嬰兒接種B肝疫苗和HBIG的情形。統計分析分別使用卡方檢定、t檢定和羅吉斯迴歸。結果：有720（9.1%）位母親是B型肝炎帶原，台籍與外籍母親人數分別為653（9.1%）及67（9.2%）人。HBeAg陽性人數與比率在台籍與外籍帶原母親分別為138人（21.1%）與31人（46.3%），HBeAg陽性的外籍母親主要為大陸籍24人（77.4%）與越南籍7人（22.6%）。多變項羅吉斯迴歸分析發現母親生育年齡每增長一歲，HBeAg陽性的風險降為0.87（95%信賴區間0.82-0.91，p = 0.001）；外籍母親比台籍母親有2.59倍的風險會是HBeAg陽性（95%信賴區間1.51-4.44，p ＜ 0.001）。追蹤HBeAg陽性母親所生的187位嬰兒，僅有三成嬰兒在出生滿一歲時回門診檢驗B肝血清標誌。其中有三位嬰兒HBsAg呈陽性，另有四位嬰孩的B肝表面抗原和抗體均為陰性，其中兩人追加一劑B肝疫苗後，B肝抗體轉為陽性。結論：目前外籍母親和台籍母親的B肝帶原率相當。母親生育年齡越低和外籍是母親HBeAg陽性的重要危險因子。我們建議加強衛教B肝帶原母親應帶嬰兒回診追蹤B肝血清標誌，以早期發現B肝感染情形和補接種疫苗。英文摘要：Objectives: To understand the hepatitis B virus (HBV) carrier rates among Taiwanese mothers and new immigrant mothers (NIM) as well as the results of their newborns receiving hepatitis B vaccine and immunoglobulin (HBIG). Methods: This was a retrospective chart-review study of the HBV vaccination records of all babies delivered at a district hospital in southern Taiwan from July 2008 to December 2011. There were a total of 7,931 mothers of whom 7,205 were Taiwanese and 726 were NIM. If mothers were HBsAg-positive, then information about maternal HBV markers, and the use of HBIG and HBV vaccines for newborns was collected. Chisquared test, t-test and logistic regression were used for statistical analysis. Results: A total of 720 women (9.1%) were HBV carriers, and the carrier rates were 9.1% (653 mothers) for Taiwanese mothers and 9.2% (67 mothers) for NIM. Among carrier mothers, the HBeAg-positive rates were 21.1% (138) for Taiwanese mothers and 46.3% (31) for NIM including 24 from China and 7 from Vietnam. The multivariate logistic regression model found the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) for every increased year of maternal age was 0.87 (0.82-0.91, p = 0.001). The OR and 95%CI for NIM mothers was 2.59 (95%CI, 1.51-4.44, p ＜ 0.001) compared to Taiwanese mothers. We followed 187 babies born to HBeAg-positive HBV carrier mothers, but found that only 30% had taken their babies to have their HBV status checked. Three of these were HBsAg-positive and another 4 were negative for both HBsAg and HBeAg. Two developed a positive antibody for HBsAg after receiving one dose of HBV vaccine. Conclusions: Among HBV carrier mothers, NIM had a twofold rate of being HBeAg-positive compared to Taiwanese mothers. The younger age and NIM were two significant risk factors for mothers to be HBeAg-positive. We suggest more education and encouragement for HBV carrier mothers to have their babies checked for HBV markers in order to find HBV infections earlier and to get another booster vaccine if there is no antibody.起始頁-結束頁：304-311資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310300919篇名：台灣中老年人憂鬱症狀與新發糖尿病關聯之探討並列篇名：The Association of Depressive Symptoms with New-Onset Diabetes in Taiwanese Aged Over 53 Years作者：李淑惠(Shu-Hui Lee);蔡仲弘(Alan C. Tsai)關鍵字：糖尿病;新發糖尿病;憂鬱症狀;中老年人;diabetes;new onset diabetes;depression;older adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：憂鬱與糖尿病都是中老年人常見的健康議題，且相互影響，但憂鬱症狀對老年人新發糖尿病的影響則研究較少。因此，本研究探討台灣中老人憂鬱症狀與新發糖尿病的關聯。方法：分析「台灣中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」1999及2003年的資料庫。以邏輯斯迴歸分析基準點憂鬱症狀（依CES-D分數分無（0分）、輕（1-5分）、中（6-9分）、和重（<U+2265> 10分）四組）與4年後（2,937人）新發糖尿病的縱性關聯（先排除於1999年患糖尿病者），及憂鬱症狀與糖尿病於1999年（4,214人，<U+2265> 53歲）的橫斷關聯。結果：在控制性別、年齡、教育年數、運動、抽菸、喝酒、嚼檳榔、BMI、行動依賴、高血壓、心臟病、腎臟病、痛風、及各類食物攝取頻率的狀況下，發現憂鬱症狀與新發糖尿病呈縱性正關聯（重度症狀增加新發糖尿病76%（OR = 1.76, 95%CI = 1.11-2.80, p = 0.016），中度症狀增加89%（1.89, 1.24-2.91, p = 0.003）。憂鬱症狀與糖尿病也呈橫斷正關聯。結論：結果顯示憂鬱症狀，甚至只具中度症狀都會增高新發糖尿病的風險。憂鬱症狀篩檢應為中老年人糖尿病防治重要的一環。英文摘要：Objectives: Depression and diabetes mellitus are two major geriatric health issues. The two diseases also share a bidirectional relationship. However, the association between depressive symptoms and new-onset diabetes in older adults has not yet been well investigated. Thus, the present study was aimed to determine the association between depressive symptoms and new-onset diabetes in older Taiwanese. Methods: The study analyzed the 1999 and 2003 datasets of the ”Taiwan Longitudinal Survey on Aging” (TLSA). Logistic regression analyses were performed to determine the longitudinal association of depressive symptoms (classified into four levels according to CES-D score: 0 = no, 1-5 = low, 6-9 = moderate, and <U+2265> 10 = high) with newonset diabetes four years later (N=2,937) after excluding those who had diabetes at baseline, and the cross-sectional association of depressive symptoms with diabetes at baseline (N = 4,214, <U+2265> 53 years old). Results: Under the control of the potential confounders (including sociodemographic, lifestyle, and health) and disease-related factors, depressive symptoms were significantly associated with new-onset diabetes during the subsequent four years (OR = 1.76, 95%CI = 1.11-2.80, p = 0.016 for high symptoms). The association also existed in those with moderate (CES-D score 6-9) symptoms (1.89, 1.24-2.91, p = 0.003). There was also a significant cross-sectional association between depressive symptoms and diabetes at baseline. Conclusions: The presence of high or moderate depressive symptoms significantly increased subsequent new-onset diabetes in older Taiwanese. These findings highlight the importance of routine screening and timely intervention to reduce the risk of new-onset diabetes in older adults.起始頁-結束頁：312-322資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310301620篇名：台灣地區阿米巴相關疾病分析並列篇名：Amoebiasis-Related Diseases in Taiwan作者：林楚雲(Chu-Yun Lin);張靜文(Ching-Wen Chang)關鍵字：阿米巴原蟲;阿米巴病;阿米巴痢疾;致病性自營阿米巴;amoebae;amoebiasis;amebic dysentery;pathogenic free-living amoeba期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討台灣各種阿米巴病發生情形與傳染病情形。方法：採用2008-2010年全民健保門診處方治療明細檔，依ICD-9-CM篩選4,275例阿米巴病相關病例，逐年分析患者性別、年齡、就診地區及就醫情形，並與傳染病通報管理系統之阿米巴痢疾病例進行比較。結果：阿米巴病相關病例好發於男性及25-44歲者，其中以阿米巴皮膚膿瘍病例數最高，且2008-2010年無膿瘍阿米巴痢疾、阿米巴肺膿瘍及其他膿瘍等阿米巴病之病例數具逐年上升趨勢（p ＜ 0.0001）。地理分佈上，阿米巴病病例分布以台北市居冠，惟阿米巴性皮膚膿瘍86%集中於桃園縣。阿米巴痢疾境外移入病例佔總病例之42%。結論：阿米巴性皮膚膿瘍為罕見之阿米巴病，但本研究發現其病例數為阿米巴病之冠且集中於桃園縣，待未來輔以社會人口變項以進一步釐清造成此地理分布之原因。因應阿米巴痢疾之境外移入及地理分布情形，應落實旅遊返國者及外籍勞工健康篩檢，並督促相關機構進行例行檢查及環境消毒，以預防阿米巴痢疾群聚事件；並可針對高病例數之地區或易感族群進行流行病學調查。英文摘要：Objectives: To analyze the current status of amoebiasis-related diseases and amoebic dysentery in the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System (NNDSS) in Taiwan. Methods: Using 2008-2010 Details of Ambulatory Care Orders data and categorizing amoebiasis-related diseases by ICD-9-CM diagnoses, we analyzed the gender, age, and geographical distribution of the 4,275 cases we identified. Related cases were also compared with the amoebic dysentery cases obtained from the NNDSS. Results: Amoebiasis-related diseases were more common in men than in women. Most cases occurred in the 25-44 age group. Amoebic skin ulcerations were the most common amoebiasis-related diseases. A comparison of the number of cases of amoebic dysentery without abscess, amoebic lung abscess and other amoebiasis-related diseases in 2008-2010 showed a significantly increasing trend. Geographically, most amoebiasis cases were found in Taipei City with the exception of amoebic skin ulcerations, which were concentrated in Taoyuan County. Forty-two percent of the amoebic dysentery cases identified in the NNDSS were imported. Conclusions: Although amoebic skin ulceration is a rare amoebic disease, our study found a high number of cases concentrated in Taoyuan County. Future studies that consider social and demographic variables may clarify the reasons for such a geographic distribution. To address the importation of amoebic dysentery and its geographic distribution, health screening of returning travelers and foreign workers as well as routine inspection and environmental disinfection to prevent cluster infections should be considered. Further epidemiological studies are suggested to investigate areas with a higher proportion of cases and susceptible populations.起始頁-結束頁：323-336資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310302701篇名：某醫學中心護理人員之輪班工作與代謝症候群相關參數並列篇名：A Study Relating Shift Work to the Parameters of Metabolic Syndrome among Nurses in a Medical Center作者：蔡淑美(Shu-Mei Tsai);翁瑞宏(Ruey-Hong Wong);黃秀梨(Shiow-Li Hwang);楊惠真(Hui-Chen Yang);林豔辰(Yen-Chen Lin);廖玟君(Wen-Chun Liao)關鍵字：護理人員;輪班工作;健康行為;代謝症候群;nursing staff;shift work;health behavior;metabolic syndrome期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：Objectives: For nursing staff, shift work is inevitable, and it may change related health behaviors. The effects of these factors on the occurrence of metabolic syndrome is still unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of shift work and related health behaviors with the parameters of metabolic syndrome among nursing staffs. Methods: In this cross-sectional study, a total of 129 healthy nursing staffs were recruited. Questionnaires were administered to obtain the subjects' demographic characteristics and health behaviors. Parameters of metabolic syndrome were also measured. Results: After adjustment for the effects of covariates, a linear regression model showed independent positive associations between rotating shift work and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level (p＜0.01), and fixed-night shift work and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level (p＜0.01), respectively. In addition, nursing staffs with body mass index <U+2265> 24 Kg/m^2 also had an independent positive association with waist circumference (p＜0.01) and triglyceride (p=0.04), and an independent negative association with high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level (p＜0.01). Sleep quality index score <U+2265> 5 also had an independent positive association with triglyceride (p=0.05). There was no relationship between behaviors including daily refined sugar consumption from tea drinks and parameters of metabolic syndrome in nursing staffs. Conclusions: Increased body mass index and poor sleep quality is associated with higher triglyceride. Shift work, especially rotating shift work and fixed-night shift work, may result in an elevated risk of parameters of metabolic syndrome among nursing staffs.英文摘要：Objectives: For nursing staff, shift work is inevitable, and it may change related health behaviors. The effects of these factors on the occurrence of metabolic syndrome is still unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of shift work and related health behaviors with the parameters of metabolic syndrome among nursing staffs. Methods: In this cross-sectional study, a total of 129 healthy nursing staffs were recruited. Questionnaires were administered to obtain the subjects' demographic characteristics and health behaviors. Parameters of metabolic syndrome were also measured. Results: After adjustment for the effects of covariates, a linear regression model showed independent positive associations between rotating shift work and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level (p＜0.01), and fixed-night shift work and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level (p＜0.01), respectively. In addition, nursing staffs with body mass index <U+2265> 24 Kg/m^2 also had an independent positive association with waist circumference (p＜0.01) and triglyceride (p=0.04), and an independent negative association with high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level (p＜0.01). Sleep quality index score <U+2265> 5 also had an independent positive association with triglyceride (p=0.05). There was no relationship between behaviors including daily refined sugar consumption from tea drinks and parameters of metabolic syndrome in nursing staffs. Conclusions: Increased body mass index and poor sleep quality is associated with higher triglyceride. Shift work, especially rotating shift work and fixed-night shift work, may result in an elevated risk of parameters of metabolic syndrome among nursing staffs.起始頁-結束頁：119-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331021102篇名：資訊揭露透明度與醫院治理效能：一代健保與二代健保比較研究並列篇名：Transparency of Information Disclosure and Effectiveness of Hospital Governance: A Comparative Study of the First and Second Generations of Nation Health Insurance作者：嚴玉華(Yu-Hua Yan);方世杰(Shih-Chieh Fang)關鍵字：資訊揭露;醫院治理;醫院治理效能;information disclosure;hospital governance;hospital governance effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：資訊揭露透明度為醫院治理能效能否發揮之關鍵要素，本研究試圖比較醫院強制性資訊揭露（二代健保）與自願性資訊揭露（一代健保）對於醫院治理效能之關聯性。方法：本研究採用問卷調查，以全國各醫院高階主管為填卷對象，有效問卷196份，以卡方檢定、T檢定、複迴歸及鄒檢定進行研究分析。結果：資訊揭露透明度會影響醫院治理效能，在目前健保制度下，醫院有關違規資訊愈不揭露，則顧客效能愈好；醫療品質及財務報表揭露度愈高，則醫院之學習成長效能愈好。在差異比較分析結果方面，一代健保醫療品質揭露對社會責任效能達到顯著正向效果；二代健保則醫療處置流程透明度愈低，則財務效能愈好。最後，無論是在一代或二代健保，就醫流程揭露及財務報表揭露，皆能正向影響醫院社會責任效能。結論：醫院治理效能顯示願意傳達揭露資訊給利害關係人，則醫院治理效能會較高。提供消費者醫療揭露資訊時，應提高其應用性，以減少處理相關資訊的負擔。英文摘要：Objectives: Transparent information disclosure is a key factor affecting the effectiveness of hospital governance. This study compared the association between mandatory disclosure (Second Generation National Health Insurance (NHI)) and voluntary disclosure (First Generation NHI) in relation to the effectiveness of hospital governance. Methods: This research was conducted through the questionnaire survey method and the research subjects included senior executives from hospitals nationwide. A total of 196 valid questionnaires were returned. Data collected from the survey were analyzed by the chi-square test, T-test, multiple regression analysis, and Chow Test. Results: The transparency of information disclosure affected the effectiveness of hospital governance. Lower levels of disclosure regarding hospital violations corresponded to greater effectiveness in terms of the management of customer relationships. Higher levels of disclosure about the quality of medical services and hospital financial reports corresponded to greater effectiveness in hospital learning and development. In First Generation NHI, disclosure of the quality of medical services has a significant positive effect on social responsibility, but in Second Generation NHI, lower transparency about the processes of medical management corresponded to greater financial effectiveness. Finally, in both First and Second Generation NHI, disclosure of medical treatment processes and hospital financial reports had a positive effect on the hospital's effectiveness in terms of social responsibility. Conclusions: Hospitals conveying a willingness to disclose information to stakeholders generally had greater effectiveness in hospital governance. When disclosing medical information to consumers, practicality should be monitored, so that the burden of processing the related information is minimized.起始頁-結束頁：131-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331020953篇名：評論：資訊揭露透明度與醫院治理效能：一代健保與二代健保比較研究並列篇名：Commentary to Transparency of Information Disclosure and Effectiveness of Hospital Governance: A Comparative Study of the First and Second Generations of Nation Health Insurance作者：黃國哲(Kuo-Cherh Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：148-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201433102095014篇名：作者回覆：資訊揭露透明度與醫院治理效能：一代健保與二代健保比較研究並列篇名：Authors' Response to Commentary: Transparency of Information Disclosure and Effectiveness of Hospital Governance: A Comparative Study of the First and Second Generations of Nation Health Insurance作者：嚴玉華(Yu-Hua Yan);方世杰(Shih-Chieh Fang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：149-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201433102095025篇名：精神疾病患者出院後門診追蹤與轉介精神復健機構治療之成本效益分析並列篇名：A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Psychiatric Patients after Discharge from Hospitals and Followed-up as Outpatients or Transferred to Institutions for Psychiatric Rehabilitation作者：蔡毓瑄(Yu-Hsuan Tsai);秦文鎮(Wen-Cheng Chin);張永源(Yong-Yuan Chang)關鍵字：精神疾病患者;精神復健機構;成本效益分析;傾向分數配對;psychiatric patients;institution of psychiatric rehabilitation;cost-benefit analysis;propensity score matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：針對精神病患出院後門診追蹤與轉介精神復健機構治療之成本效益進行探討。方法：採全民健保資料庫2000年百萬歸人檔資料，篩選2004年1月1日至2008年12月31日期間，首次於精神科出院之病患，將出院病患分為門診追蹤治療組與精神復健治療組，針對病患出院後2年期間之醫療資源使用，以卡方檢定、獨立樣本t檢定、二項對數迴歸分析及成本效益評估指標，進行成本效益分析。結果：本研究以健康保險支付者為觀點，採醫療直接成本，以申報點數加以計算，經傾向分數配對，兩組各取326人為研究樣本，結果發現，門診追蹤治療的成本效益優於精神復健治療。結論：精神復健治療與門診追蹤治療相較，雖未有明顯的成本效益之優勢，但由精神科住院醫療費用統計資料發現，門診追蹤治療組不論在平均醫療費用或總醫療費用部分，第二年均較第一年增加，因此，建議拉長追蹤年數，以瞭解兩組成本效益之趨勢變化。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the cost-benefit analysis of psychiatric patients discharged from hospitals and either followed-up in outpatient departments or transferred to institutions for psychiatric rehabilitation. Methods: The data were obtained from the Normalized Million People File on 2000, National Health Insurance Research Database. We selected psychiatric in-patients who were discharged from 2004.1.1 ~ 2008.12.31. The cases were divided into a group that received outpatient follow-up and a group which had psychiatric rehabilitation. We investigated the cost-benefit analysis of these two groups within 2 years after discharge, using chi-square t-tests, independent t-tests, binary logistic regression analysis, and the indicators of cost-benefit analysis. Results: From the point of view of health insurance payers, the costs were direct and analyzed by reporting points of NHI. By using propensity score matching, we selected 326 cases from each group for study. From the indicators of cost-benefit analysis, we found that the cost-benefit of the group with outpatient follow-up was better than that of psychiatric rehabilitation group. Conclusions: There was no advantage in cost-benefit for the group with psychiatric rehabilitation compared with the group with outpatient follow-up. But for the group in outpatient follow-up, average and total medical expenses in the second year were higher than the expenses in the first year. A future study that prolonged the years of follow-up may clarify the trends in these two groups.起始頁-結束頁：150-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331020946篇名：醫師與非醫師對於電子病歷隱私保護行為意圖之比較研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of the Intention to Protect the Privacy of the Electronic Medical Record by Physicians and Non-Physician Staff作者：郭光明(Kuang-Ming Kuo);馬震中(Chen-Chung Ma);吳鑫瞬(Hsin-Shun Wu)關鍵字：電子病歷;隱私保護;倫理教育訓練;群組分析;Electronic Medical Records (EMRs);privacy protection;ethics training;multi-group analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究主要目的為探討醫院員工保護電子病歷隱私之影響因素，並進一步比較醫師以及醫院其他員工對於保護電子病歷隱私的認知。方法：以計畫行為理論為研究理論基礎，採橫斷性研究，並透過問卷調查法針對南部某大型軍醫院之員工進行立意調查。結果：共蒐集129份有效問卷，資料分析結果顯示態度（AT）、主觀規範（SN）與知覺行為控制（PBC）三個變數和電子病歷隱私保護行為意圖（I）間均呈現顯著正向相關；此外，醫師和醫院其他員工在態度（AT→I）、主觀規範（SN→I）與知覺行為控制（PBC→I）三個變數和保護電子病歷隱私行為意圖之關係呈現顯著差異，醫師在主觀規範（SN→I）和知覺行為控制（PBC→I）兩個變數與保護電子病歷隱私行為意圖之間的關係強度顯著高於其他員工。結論：依據分析結果，本研究建議醫院須積極舉辦電子病歷隱私保護相關教育訓練，並加強醫師的參與度；此外，亦可透過醫院中各單位主管或同儕的影響，並提供員工足夠的電子病歷隱私保護軟硬體，提高員工保護電子病歷隱私的行為意圖，藉由相關措施保護電子病歷隱私，降低民眾的隱私顧慮，將有益於電子病歷之推展。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to explore the factors that influenced hospital staff in protecting the privacy of the electronic medical record (EMR) and to conduct a multi-group analysis comparing perceptions about EMR privacy protection by physicians and other hospital staff. Methods: Based on the Theory of Planned Behavior, a cross-sectional survey was conducted to collect data from one military hospital in southern Taiwan. The study subjects were all hospital staff and were recruited via convenience sampling. Results: A total of 129 valid questionnaires was collected. Attitude (AT), subjective norm (SN), and perceived behavioral control (PBC) were positively related to hospital staffs' intention (I) to protect EMR privacy. Moreover, the relationships of AT→I, SN→I, and PBC→I varied significantly between physicians and other hospital staff. Physicians had stronger beliefs about the relationships between SN→I and PBC→I. Conclusions: This study suggested that the subject hospital should offer more training programs pertinent to the protection of EMR privacy. Physicians should also be reminded to engage in these training programs. The hospital could improve staff intention to protect EMR privacy through the influence of the director or their colleagues and also by providing sufficient software and hardware to protect EMR privacy. These measures could decrease patients' concerns about privacy of the EMR and be beneficial to the promotion of the EMR in the future.起始頁-結束頁：162-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331021027篇名：系統性個別護理指導方案對裝置永久性心律調節器病患自我照顧知識、態度及行為之成效並列篇名：The Effectiveness of a Systematic Patient Education Intervention on Knowledge, Attitudes and Behavior about Self Care in Patients with Permanent Pacemakers作者：黃麗月(Li-Yueh Huang);郭素娥(Su-Er Guo);蔡青青(Ching-Ching Tsai);黃翠媛(Tsuey-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：永久性心臟節律器;護理指導方案;自我照顧知識;態度;行為;permanent cardiac pacemakers;education programs;knowledge;attitudes;behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：Objectives: Although a permanent pacemaker (PPM) is the treatment of choice for patients with symptomatic bradycardia, little is understood about the effectiveness of a patient education intervention for this population. Methods: A quasi-experimental design was utilized to determine the effects of a systematic patient education intervention on PPM self-care knowledge, attitudes and behavior among patients with permanent pacemakers. Two groups were randomly assigned interventions: the PPM education group (n=37), received one-on-one lessons, and the control group (n=35), received usual care on the ward. Pre-test data were collected one day before implantation of the PPM, while post-test of questionnaires that includes PPM self-care knowledge, attitudes and behaviors were collected one week after discharge. The intervention effect was evaluated using one way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). Results: A systematic patient education intervention significantly increased patients' self-care knowledge (F=16.99; p＜0.001). Improvement was also observed in self-care attitudes and behavior but the differences were not statistically significant. Conclusions: Systematic patient education intervention can significantly increase patients' self-care knowledge about PPMs. Instructional materials can be provided to support patient education in clinical settings.英文摘要：Objectives: Although a permanent pacemaker (PPM) is the treatment of choice for patients with symptomatic bradycardia, little is understood about the effectiveness of a patient education intervention for this population. Methods: A quasi-experimental design was utilized to determine the effects of a systematic patient education intervention on PPM self-care knowledge, attitudes and behavior among patients with permanent pacemakers. Two groups were randomly assigned interventions: the PPM education group (n=37), received one-on-one lessons, and the control group (n=35), received usual care on the ward. Pre-test data were collected one day before implantation of the PPM, while post-test of questionnaires that includes PPM self-care knowledge, attitudes and behaviors were collected one week after discharge. The intervention effect was evaluated using one way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). Results: A systematic patient education intervention significantly increased patients' self-care knowledge (F=16.99; p＜0.001). Improvement was also observed in self-care attitudes and behavior but the differences were not statistically significant. Conclusions: Systematic patient education intervention can significantly increase patients' self-care knowledge about PPMs. Instructional materials can be provided to support patient education in clinical settings.起始頁-結束頁：174-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331021068篇名：民眾如何理解接連而來的新興流感？並列篇名：How Lay People Make Sense of Successively Emerging Influenzas?作者：楊惠茹(Hui-Ju Yang);丁志音(Chih-Yin Lew-Ting)關鍵字：新興流感;常民知識;命名;病毒;健康傳播;emerging influenza;lay knowledge;naming;virus;health communication期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究探索一般民眾對陸續出現之新興流感的認知反應。方法：透過最大變異原則，選取25位民眾以深入訪談法收集質性資料，採用跨個案的取向進行分析並歸納出特定主題。結果：共歸納出望名生義、超越名稱的內蘊知識、及密集流行下的資訊衝擊等三大主題。民眾初識以病毒類別及其亞型命名的新興流感後，有的以整體的集群視之，有的則根據英文字母H與N及相應的數字，發展出感染源、嚴重程度、新舊程度（出現順序）等不同面向的區辨。人畜共通傳染的想法逐漸浮現。會過度外推地將新興呼吸道傳染病如SARS等都歸於流感家族中。而在暴露於多波的新興流感流行之下，民眾開始感知不同於細菌的另一種病原體－病毒的存在。值得重視的是，有的受訪者開始對宣導訊息因資訊超載而導致對預防的疲乏。結論：民眾對新流感的認知與理解始於其名稱。他們個別化的知識再建構不能單純以當代科學知識來評斷其正確與否。相反的，我們應該儘可能掌握這些逐漸形成的常民知識與行為反應，來發展更有效的流感防疫介入計畫。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored lay persons' cognitive responses to emergent influenzas. Methods: Using a maximum variation sampling design, 25 participants were selected and subjected to in-depth interviews. Qualitative data were analyzed following a cross-case approach through which the main themes were extracted inductively. Results: We identified three main themes from the analysis: meanings derived from flu names, connotative knowledge beyond names, and information impact during intensive epidemics. After coming into contact with several ”new” influenzas named for flu viruses and subtypes, some participants considered them to be one single undifferentiated disease entity. Others assigned meaning to each name designated by the form of HxNy, and considered them distinctive in terms of source of infection, severity, and time of emergence. Zoonotic transfer has gradually become recognized as a source of disease transmission. Participants also had a tendency to generalize other emerging respiratory infectious diseases such as SARS as members of a big flu family. Of greater importance, as a result of successive contacts with several flu epidemics, these participants became aware of the existence of a type of germ other than bacteria-viruses. Parallel to recurrent epidemics are prevention fatigue and information overload caused by intensive exposure to flu-related communications. Conclusions: Lay people's initial grasp of new influenzas came from ”seeing” their names. This idiosyncratic re-construction of knowledge cannot be judged simply by contemporary scientific standards. The gradually shaped lay knowledge and behavioral reactions in response to emergent influenzas should be closely investigated. Only by doing so can we develop effective programs for influenza control.起始頁-結束頁：185-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331021019篇名：台灣地區酒精使用型態與醫療使用行為之關係探討並列篇名：The Relationship between the Pattern of Alcohol Consumption and Healthcare Utilization in Taiwan作者：林忠潁(Chung-Ying Lin);陳光宏(Kuang-Hung Chen);張新儀(Hsing-Yi Chang);曾芳儀(Fang-Yi Tseng);陳娟瑜(Chuan-Yu Chen)關鍵字：醫療利用;酒癮;狂飲;每天飲酒;healthcare utilization;alcoholism;binge drinking;daily drinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在評估台灣地區不同的問題飲酒型態與醫療利用的關係。方法：此研究設計為一橫斷性研究，以2009年國民健康訪問調查資料（National Health Interview Survey，NHIS）中，青壯年（18－39歲）及中年族群（40－64歲）的受訪者（n=16,881）為研究對象。問題飲酒型態包括狂飲（binge drinking）與酒癮，醫療利用含括西醫門診利用次數、急診與住院的使用情形。統計分析按年齡分層，並以調查統計分析方式，卜瓦松與邏輯斯迴歸模式評估飲酒型態與醫療利用的相關性。結果：受訪時間過去一年中，青壯年及中年族群每天喝酒的盛行率為1.82%與4.82%，可能酒癮則分別為2.40%及2.27%。在調整相關干擾因素後，相較於未飲酒者，中年族群可能酒癮者過去一年急診（aOR=2.06，95% CI: 1.21-3.52）及住院（aOR=1.68，95% CI: 0.95-2.96）醫療利用的機會偏高；青壯年族群的近期門診使用次數增加（aRR=1.78，95% CI: 1.11-2.85）。結論：問題飲酒形態與西醫門診、急診與住院利用的關係，因年齡族群而異。為避免問題飲酒型態造成的健康傷害，未來可考慮於醫療院所（尤其是基層醫療與急診）與職場，進行問題飲酒的篩檢及提供酒癮問題諮商介入。英文摘要：Objectives: The problematic drinking of alcohol may not only elevate the risk of health problems but also increase healthcare utilization. The aim of this study was to explore the relationship between different patterns of problematic alcohol consumption and healthcare utilization in Taiwan. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study design. The data source was the 2009 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The study population (n=16,881) included young (aged 18-39 years) and middle-aged (aged 40-64 years) adults. Problematic drinking of alcohol was defined as binge drinking and probable alcoholism. Healthcare utilization covered outpatient, emergency and inpatient medical services. Complex survey analyses in poisson and logit distribution were used to assess estimates of the association with stratification by age. Results: During the year preceding the survey, approximately 1.82% of the young adults and 4.82% of the middle-aged adults drank alcohol on a daily basis; the corresponding estimates for probable alcoholism were 2.40% and 2.27%. After adjustment for socio-demographic characteristics, health behaviors, and other medical diseases, middle-aged probable alcoholics were more likely to use emergency room services (adjusted Odds Ratio [aOR]=2.06, 95% CI: 1.21-3.52) and inpatient services (aOR=1.68, 95% CI: 0.95-2.96) as compared with those who never drank. For young adults, having problems with alcohol was associated with increased utilization of outpatient services (aRR=1.78, 95% CI: 1.11-2.85). Conclusions: There was a relationship between problematic drinking and healthcare utilization, and such links differed slightly by age group. To reduce the healthcare burden associated with problematic drinking, screening and behavioral counseling interventions in primary care and the workplace should be considered.起始頁-結束頁：197-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310210910篇名：資訊需求與暴露的族群間差異：對男男間性行為者進行愛滋防治的啟示並列篇名：Group Differences in the Need for Messages and Exposure to Messages: Implications for HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control among Men Who Have Sex with Men作者：李芳盈(Fang-Ying Li);簡子翔(Tirian Tzu-Hsiang Chien);蕭惠心(Hui-Hsin Hsiao);林雪蓉(Sheue-Rong Lin);李佳琪(Chia-Chi Lee);丁志音(Chih-Yin Lew-Ting)關鍵字：男男間性行為者;愛滋防治宣導;使用與滿足理論;未滿足需求;men who have sex with men (MSM);HIV/AIDS prevention campaign;Uses and Gratifications Theory;unmet needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討三個男男間性行為次族群對性健康、心理健康、及娛樂與健康宣導訊息的需求與暴露情形，並比較暴露與期望間的落差。方法：透過立意及滾雪球取樣招募受訪者，以自填式問卷調查收集資料。根據藥物使用及對男男間性行為者次文化參與的差異，將研究對象分為風險、同志認同資淺、及一般族群，並以後者為比較的參考組。結果：本研究共招募558位受訪者。整體而言，各族群對所有訊息的暴露比例都低於期望。風險族群和一般族群暴露於各議題的差異不大，然前者在藥物安全及娛樂資訊之暴露－期望落差較小。特別的是，風險族群在許多議題都顯示較高的過度滿足需求。比起另外兩個族群，資淺族群對各項訊息的暴露最為貧乏，具有程度最大且最廣泛的未滿足需求。結論：不同男男間性行為者次族群在愛滋防治宣導的資訊需求與暴露情形的確存在差異。建議應根據不同族群的暴露－期望情形提供量身訂做的訊息設計，加強未滿足需求資訊的提供，並針對過度滿足需求之資訊加以轉化或包裝，以增進宣導傳播效果。英文摘要：Objectives: To examine the need for and exposure to message content related to sexual health, mental health, and entertainment and health among three groups of men who have sex with men (MSM), and compare the gaps between campaign exposure and expectations. Methods: We recruited participants through purposive and snowball sampling and collected data with a self-administered survey. Based on differences in drug use and participation in the MSM subculture, participants were further divided into risky, junior, and general MSM groups, with the latter as the reference group. Results: We recruited a total of 558 MSM in this study. Overall, for all content domains, message exposure was lower than expectation (need). Trivial differences were found between the risky and general groups in their exposure to various messages; however, the risky group had a smaller exposure-expectation gap for messages directed to ”safer drug use” and ”leisure and entertainment.” The risky MSM group had ”over-satisfied” needs in several domains. Compared with the other two groups, the junior MSM group had much poorer message exposure across a broad range of message domains' in that their unmet needs were highest in intensity and breadth. Conclusions: The need for messages and exposure to messages as part of an HIV/AIDS prevention campaign varied among different MSM subgroups. In addition to providing tailored message content and design to different groups by taking into account their exposure-expectation conditions, we should also provide more information to resolve unmet needs, and reframe and repackage messages recognized as over-satisfying needs in order to increase the effectiveness of campaigns.起始頁-結束頁：209-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310210311篇名：Taiwan's Health Aid: A Call for Transparency並列篇名：台灣的衛生援助：我們需要更透明的資訊作者：范懿熙(Victoria Y. Fan);蔡奉真(Feng-Jen Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310209912篇名：兒童肥胖預防：從家庭生活脈絡分析並列篇名：Prevention of Childhood Obesity in the Context of Family作者：林薇(Wei Lin);林佑真(Yu-Chen Lin);楊小淇(Hsiao-Chi Yang);周麗端(Li-Tuan Chou)關鍵字：肥胖;兒童;家庭;obesity;child;family期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：兒童肥胖率提高在台灣是不容忽視的問題，一旦罹患肥胖後再減重是困難的過程，因此及早預防不當的體重增加是較好的策略。家庭是影響兒童飲食行為、活動及生活習慣的重要因子，本文旨在探討家庭對兒童肥胖的影響，分成家庭物質環境及家庭社會環境兩個層面。（1）家庭物質環境：包括家庭飲食供應、在家進食／與家人共餐、身體活動及生活習慣相關器材與設施；（2）家庭社會環境：包括父母的角色典範、家人關係、教養行為等。本文回顧相關文獻後，針對兒童肥胖預防提出家庭方面的建議。英文摘要：The increasing prevalence of childhood obesity is a serious problem in Taiwan. Preventing inappropriate weight gain is a better strategy for maintaining a healthy weight than is losing weight, since it is difficult to lose weight once it is gained. The home environment has been identified as a key influence on the diet, physical activity and life style of children. This paper reviews the role of both the physical and social environment of the home on childhood obesity: (1) Physical environment: food availability, home meal/eating with family members, amenities for physical activity or life style; (2) social environment: parents' role modeling, family relationships and parenting. After reviewing the relevant literature, the author makes recommendations for preventing childhood obesity focused on the home environment.起始頁-結束頁：5-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310209113篇名：Quality of Life among Pulmonary Tuberculosis Patients under Treatment in Eastern Taiwan並列篇名：台灣東部肺結核病患治療期間生活品質的變化作者：鐘威昇(Wei-Sheng Chung);李其融(Chi-Rong Li);廖翎聿(Lin-Yu Liao);楊文達(Wen-Ta Yang)關鍵字：生活品質;肺結核病患;副作用;quality of life;TB patients;adverse reactions期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：Objectives: We evaluate the quality of life (QOL) among tuberculosis (TB) patients during different treatment periods. Methods: We conducted a population based cohort study in Eastern Taiwan. The short version of the World Health Organization quality of life (WHOQOL) questionnaire was administered to TB patients under treatment at 3 periods: during an initial treatment period, at a 2-month treatment period, and after a 6-month treatment period. Results: 140 TB patients were interviewed after approval by institutional review boards and interviewee informed consents. The average age of the patients was 48.9 years (SD=18.9 years) and more than half of them were men. Physical domain scores decreased significantly from the initial treatment to the 2-month anti-TB treatment (12.517±2.832, 11.667±3.179, p＜.001), and then increased after a 6-month treatment (12.691±2.903). Social domain scores also significantly decreased from the initial treatment to the 2-month anti-TB treatment (13.618±2.685, 12.899±2.953, p＜.05), and then increased after 6 months of treatment (13.900±2.552).While controlling probable factors affecting the 4 domain scores related to QOL, drugs related hepatitis reduced physical (β=2.3700, p＜.001), psychological (β=2.633, p＜.001), social (β=4.135, p＜.001), and environmental domain scores (β=3.449, p＜.001) and blurred vision significantly reduced physical (β=2.290, p＜.001), psychological (β=2.127, p＜.001), social (β=1.075, p＜.05), and environmental domain scores (β=1.587, p＜.01). Physical domain scores significantly decreased as age increased per 10-year (β=0.39, p＜.01). The patients employed exhibited significantly higher scores of physical, social, and environmental domains compared than those who were unemployed (β=0.959, p＜.05, β=0.815, p＜.05, and β=0.852, p＜.05 respectively). The patients with a higher income showed fewer scores of psychological domain (β=2.029, p＜.01) compared than those who having a lower income. Conclusions: TB affected individual health and QOL, although patients underwent effective treatment. Healthcare workers should be concerned regarding the adverse reactions of anti-TB drugs.英文摘要：Objectives: We evaluate the quality of life (QOL) among tuberculosis (TB) patients during different treatment periods. Methods: We conducted a population based cohort study in Eastern Taiwan. The short version of the World Health Organization quality of life (WHOQOL) questionnaire was administered to TB patients under treatment at 3 periods: during an initial treatment period, at a 2-month treatment period, and after a 6-month treatment period. Results: 140 TB patients were interviewed after approval by institutional review boards and interviewee informed consents. The average age of the patients was 48.9 years (SD=18.9 years) and more than half of them were men. Physical domain scores decreased significantly from the initial treatment to the 2-month anti-TB treatment (12.517±2.832, 11.667±3.179, p＜.001), and then increased after a 6-month treatment (12.691±2.903). Social domain scores also significantly decreased from the initial treatment to the 2-month anti-TB treatment (13.618±2.685, 12.899±2.953, p＜.05), and then increased after 6 months of treatment (13.900±2.552).While controlling probable factors affecting the 4 domain scores related to QOL, drugs related hepatitis reduced physical (β=2.3700, p＜.001), psychological (β=2.633, p＜.001), social (β=4.135, p＜.001), and environmental domain scores (β=3.449, p＜.001) and blurred vision significantly reduced physical (β=2.290, p＜.001), psychological (β=2.127, p＜.001), social (β=1.075, p＜.05), and environmental domain scores (β=1.587, p＜.01). Physical domain scores significantly decreased as age increased per 10-year (β=0.39, p＜.01). The patients employed exhibited significantly higher scores of physical, social, and environmental domains compared than those who were unemployed (β=0.959, p＜.05, β=0.815, p＜.05, and β=0.852, p＜.05 respectively). The patients with a higher income showed fewer scores of psychological domain (β=2.029, p＜.01) compared than those who having a lower income. Conclusions: TB affected individual health and QOL, although patients underwent effective treatment. Healthcare workers should be concerned regarding the adverse reactions of anti-TB drugs.起始頁-結束頁：23-35資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310208914篇名：職場暴力盛行率與受雇者健康狀況之相關並列篇名：The Prevalence of Workplace Violence and Its Association with the Health Status of Taiwanese Employees作者：邊立中(Li-Chung Pien);鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng);陳怡欣(I-Shin Chen);陳秋蓉(Chiou-Jong Chen)關鍵字：職場暴力;受僱者;職業健康;工作滿意度;workplace violence;employees;occupational health;job satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討職場暴力之分佈與工作者健康及工作滿意度之相關。方法：研究對象為男女性受僱者各9,509與7,777人；以問卷詢問過去一年是否曾遭受職場暴力，區分為肢體暴力、言語暴力、心理暴力及性騷擾四類；並測量睡眠品質、自評健康、情緒困擾以及工作滿意度。結果：男女性受僱者職場暴力盛行率分別為：言語暴力6.80%與7.48%、心理暴力3.39%與4.06%、肢體暴力0.81%與0.48%，以及性騷擾0.38%與1.70%。夜班、輪班、長工時、高工作負荷、高體力負荷高、工作缺乏保障、職場正義低落，是發生職場暴力的危險因子。在控制年齡與上述職場特質後，本研究發現曾遭受職場暴力的受僱者健康狀況較差，包括睡眠品質不佳（男性OR=2.24，女性2.54）、自評健康不佳（OR=男性1.95，女性1.97）、情緒困擾（OR=男性3.25，女性3.04）與工作不滿意（OR=男性2.63，女性3.59）。在四種暴力類型中，心理暴力與受僱者健康之相關最強。結論：夜班、輪班、長工時、高體力負荷、工作缺乏保障、職場正義低落等職場特質，可能使工作者較易面臨職場暴力，而職場暴力經驗亦是影響工作者身心健康與工作滿意度的重要因素。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to examine the distribution of workplace violence and its association with health status and job satisfaction among employees in Taiwan. Methods: Study subjects were 9,509 male and 7,777 female employees in a nation-wide survey in 2010. A standardized questionnaire was administered to obtain information regarding any experiences of workplace violence encountered over the previous 12 months; this included physical violence, verbal violence, psychological violence and sexual harassment. Self-rated health status, quality of sleep, presence of emotional distress and level of job satisfaction were also assessed. Results: The prevalence rates of workplace violence in men and women were, respectively: verbal violence 6.80% and 7.48%, psychological violence 3.39% and 4.06%, physical violence 0.81% and 0.48%, and sexual harassment 0.38% and 1.70%. Night or rotating shifts, longer working hours, greater workloads, greater physical loads, job insecurity and lower workplace justice were found to be risk factors for workplace violence. After adjustments for age and work characteristics, employees who had experienced workplace violence over the previous 12 months were found to be at a higher risk for poor sleep quality (OR men 2.24, women 2.54), poor self-rated health status (OR men 1.95, women 1.97), emotional distress (OR men 3.25, women 3.04) and low job satisfaction (OR 2.63 men, women 3.59). Among the four types of workplace violence, psychological violence appeared to have the strongest association with poor health. Conclusions: Adverse work characteristics including night shift, rotating shift, long working hours, physically demanding work, insecure employment and low workplace justice were risk factors for workplace violence, which, in turn, was associated with poor health and low levels of job satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：36-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310208815篇名：提早退休對醫療費用之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Early Retirement on Health Care Expenditure作者：吳春樺(Chun-Hua Wu);王劼(Jye Wang);林文德(Wen-Der Lin)關鍵字：退休;醫療費用;傾向分數法;重複測量;retirement;health care expenditure;propensity score;repeated measures期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討退休者與相同條件的未退休者醫療費用差異，及此差異是否因退休年齡不同而有所不同。方法：利用1997年至2009年全民健保承保歸人檔資料（LHID2005），分析50－69歲退休與未退休者在退休者退休日期前三年及後六年醫療費用差異情形。未退休者考慮個人特性與健康狀況，利用傾向分數（propensity score）與退休者進行1：1貪婪配對（Greedy Match）。退休與未退休者醫療費用差異以Wilcoxon符號序位檢定分析；隨後並控制相關影響因素而以混合模型（mixed model）分析每年醫療費用差異與退休前一年是否有所差異。結果：配對後樣本共12,262人，50－59歲者即退休者（N=4,634）退休後六年內門診醫療費用及退休後五年內的整體醫療費用均顯著高於未退休者；60－69歲退休者（N=1,497）退休後的門診或整體醫療費用與未退休者之差異並不顯著。經控制影響因素後發現，50－59歲退休與未退休者之門診及整體醫療費用差異在退休後有顯著增加的情形。結論：提早退休者醫療費用顯著高於未退休者，延遲退休者與未退休者的醫療費用則無顯著不同。因此，未來的退休政策實宜將退休年齡對於全民健保財務的不同影響納入考量。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to compare the health care expenditure between the retirees of various retirement age and non-retirees with similar characteristics. Methods: Data for this analysis came from Taiwan's Longitudinal Health Insurance Data set (LHID 2005). The health care expenditure three years before and six years after retirement were measured for people who retired at the age between 50 and 69 and compared to non-retirees during the same periods. Propensity score with greedy match method was used to select the comparison group who were not retired. The differences in health care expenditure between the matched pairs were tested using Wilcoxon's signed rank test. Mixed models with various control covariates were used to compare the difference in health care expenditure before and after retirement between the pairs. Results: The total sample consisted of 12,262 subjects. There were 9,268 subjects aged between 50 and 59. Those who retired between the age of 50 and 59 had higher outpatient health care expenditure than the comparison group within six years after their retirement. Retirees also had higher total health care expenditure than the comparison group within five years after their retirement. The differences in outpatient health care expenditure of those who retired between the age of 60 and 69 and non-retirees were non-significant. Compared to one year before their retirement, the outpatient and total health care expenditure for the retirees who retired between the age of 50 and 59 and non-retirees were significantly higher after their retirement. Conclusions: Those who retired before the age of 60 had higher health care expenditure than non-retirees. There was no difference in health care expenditure between those who retired after the age of 60 and non-retirees. The impact of retirement age on the financial viability of national health insurance system should be taken into account in future policy debate.起始頁-結束頁：51-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310205616篇名：評論：提早退休對醫療費用之影響作者：魏中仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：63-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2014331020560117篇名：台灣急重症跨區就醫之變化情形：2001－2010年並列篇名：Change in the Cross-Boundary Flow of Emergent Care in Taiwan, 2001-2010作者：李虹映(Huang-Ying Lee);黃信忠(Hsin-Tsung Huang);許怡欣(Elsa Yi-Hsin Hsu);林文德(Wen-Der Lin)關鍵字：急重症;跨區就醫;醫療次區域;emergent care visit;cross-boundary flow;medical subregions期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究以急重症就醫流向為基礎，探討過去10年間民眾急重症跨區就醫流向的變化情形。方法：本研究利用全民健康保險資料庫約200萬人的就醫及承保資料做為分析的主要檔案，首先利用保險對象基層醫療利用次數最多地區及投保地區定義其居住地，接著採美國紐約大學急診緊急分類規則將門診之急診案件依其診斷判定急重症，而住院之急診案件則直接視為急重症；接著利用50個醫療次區域做為地區單位，計算各地區在2001及2010年的急重症跨區就醫比例，並以配對t檢定比較此10年間的急重症跨區就醫比例差異，最後將跨區就醫分為低、中、高三組，分別檢定其10年間的急重症跨區就醫比例及急診能量的差異。結果：整體之急重症跨區就醫比例自2001年的43.4%降至2010年的41.2%，但差異未達顯著，而第三個四分位數和第一個四分位數的比值則由2.19降為2.13。急重症跨區就醫比例較高地區10年間的跨區就醫比例有顯著的下降，但平均仍達57.7%。地區的急重症跨區就醫比例愈高，其急診能量有愈小的趨勢。結論：整體而言，我國2001年至2010年急重症跨區就醫比例並沒有顯著的下降，區域間的跨區就醫差異亦未大幅縮小，但急重症跨區就醫比例較高地區的急診能量有顯著的改善，其跨區就醫比例亦有顯著降低，未來應將緊急醫療資源優先分配至跨區就醫比例較高的地區。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored the changes in the proportions of cross-boundary emergent care (CBEC) visits from 2001 to 2010 based on the emergent care flow among 50 subregions in Taiwan. Methods: Approximately 2 million randomly sampled representative beneficiaries from the National Health Insurance database were used as the data source for analysis. A modified New York University algorithm was applied to classify emergency department (ED) visits to emergent care, as well as ED visits resulting in hospitalization. Subsequently, 50 medical subregions were used as the analytical units to calculate the proportion of CBEC visits between 2001 and 2010 in Taiwan. Paired t tests were applied to examine the differences in CBEC flow over one decade, and the ratio of the third quartile (Q3) to the first quartile (Q1) was presented to reflect the regional variation in CBEC flow. Finally, the 50 subregions were divided into low, medium, and high groups according to their CBEC flows in 2001, and the differences in the CBEC and emergent care capacities between 2001 and 2010 were compared. Results: The average proportion of CBEC visits nonsignificantly declined from 43.4% in 2001 to 41.2% in 2010. The Q3 to Q1 ratio slightly decreased from 2.19 to 2.13 in that decade. However, the CBEC flow in the subregions in high CBEC groups significantly decreased, accompanied by a significant increase in emergent care capacity, even when the CBEC rate remained as high as 57.7% in 2010. Conclusions: The proportion of CBEC visits did not significantly decrease from 2001 to 2010 in spite of health policies dedicating to allocate emergent care resources more equitably across subregions. Nevertheless, the subregions with higher CBEC flows improved significantly as emergent care capacity was enhanced, in spite of continuously maintaining higher CBEC flow, indicating that allocating more emergent care resources into these subregions is necessary.起始頁-結束頁：64-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310205518篇名：個人及區域社經地位對血液透析病人早期轉介腎臟科之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Individual and Neighborhood Socioeconomic Status on Early Nephrology Referral for Hemodialysis Patients作者：張嘉恬(Chia-Tien Chang);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu);洪燕妮(Yen-Ni Hung);吳義勇(Yee-Yung Ng);陳慧珊(Hui-Shan Chen)關鍵字：早期轉介腎臟科;社經地位;血液透析;early nephrology referral;socioeconomic status;hemodialysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：健康不平等是公共衛生研究的重要議題，台灣在全民健保開辦後，大幅降低民眾就醫的財務障礙，早期轉介腎臟科是否存在個人及區域社經地位之差異，是值得探討的議題。方法：採回溯性世代研究法，以2009年慢性血液透析成人新個案為對象，資料來源包括全國健保門住診及相關次級資料；以病人透析前二年內首筆出現腎臟科門診之日計算，若落在透析前90日以上定義為早期轉介。以逐步邏輯斯迴歸探討個人（被保險人收入、教育程度、工作狀態）及區域(平均每戶全年經常性收入、15歲以上人口高等教育率)社經地位對早期轉介之影響，並控制人口學、共病症與轉介前最常就醫院所特質。結果：2009年慢性血液透析成人新個案有7,687位，早期轉介率為70.9%；控制其他因素後，被保險人收入較低者、無工作者早期轉介率顯著較低（OR=0.81，95%CI=0.70-0.93；OR=0.84，95%CI=0.73-0.95），區域社經地位則與早期轉介率無顯著相關。結論：我國在全民健保實施後，透析患者之早期轉介仍存在個人社經地位之差異，產生此現象之原因有待未來研究作進一步探討。英文摘要：Objectives: Tackling health inequalities is a key concern of public health policy makers. The major purpose of Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) is to reduce the financial barriers to care. It is worth ascertaining if individual and neighborhood socioeconomic inequalities exist in early nephrology referral for hemodialysis patients. Methods: This population-based retrospective cohort study examined the incidence of new hemodialysis patients in 2009 as identified from the Taiwan National Health Insurance database and relevant secondary data. Early referral was defined as patients meeting with a nephrologist more than 90 days before initial hemodialysis. Stepwise binomial logistic regression models were performed to examine the effect of individual socioeconomic status (SES) (premium-based monthly salary (NT$), level of education, and employment status) and neighborhood SES (”average family income and expenditure per household” and ”educational attainment of the population aged 15 and over-junior college and above”) on early nephrology referral after controlling for demographic characteristics, co-morbid conditions, and characteristics of major health care organizations before referral. Results: A total of 7,687 consecutive adult incident hemodialysis patients were identified, and 70.9% of them were referred early. Unemployed patients and those with a lower premium-based monthly salary had significantly lower early referral rates after controlling for other factors (OR=0.81, 95%CI=0.70-0.93; OR=0.84, 95%CI=0.73-0.95). No significant associations were found between neighborhood SES and referral pattern. Conclusions: Individual socioeconomic inequalities exist in early nephrology referral for hemodialysis patients despite universal health coverage. The causes of this finding require further investigation.起始頁-結束頁：75-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310205819篇名：2012年台灣地區幼兒園幼兒睡眠品質之調查並列篇名：A 2012 Survey of the Sleep Quality of Taiwanese Kindergarten Children作者：駱明潔(Ming-Jae Lo)關鍵字：幼兒園幼兒;主要照顧者;睡眠品質;kindergarten children;primary caretaker;sleep quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在瞭解台灣地區幼兒園幼兒睡眠品質之現況，並探討主要照顧者社會人口學變項（年齡、教育程度、家庭月收入）對幼兒睡眠品質（包括：睡眠困擾、睡眠中斷情形、夜間睡眠時數和睡眠潛伏期）的影響。方法：採橫斷式調查，以台灣地區公私立幼兒園的3－6足歲幼兒為研究對象，以分層隨機抽樣方式共回收1,204份有效樣本。研究中採用描述性統計、單因子變異數及多元迴歸進行資料分析。結果：（一）台灣地區幼兒平日的平均夜間睡眠時數為9小時26分，只有11.46%幼兒平日的夜間睡眠時數達10小時以上，於9點（含）前就寢的幼兒只有16.69%。（二）幼兒睡眠困擾的盛行率由高至低依序為說夢話、打鼾、尿床、磨牙、夜驚、夢魘、睡眠呼吸中止症、夢遊。（三）多元迴歸分析結果顯示，主要照顧者之年齡為31－40歲、教育程度為專科（含）以上、家庭月收入達80,001元（含）以上者，其教養之幼兒的睡眠品質較佳，且達統計顯著相關。結論：台灣地區幼兒園幼兒有太晚睡、睡不著和夜間睡眠時數不足的睡眠問題，主要照顧者之年齡、教育程度、家庭月收入與幼兒睡眠品質有顯著關聯性。國內公共衛生相關單位在健康促進生活型態的宣導中，可以加入適當的就寢時間與夜間睡眠時數，特別是學齡前幼兒園的幼兒。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to investigate the sleep quality of Taiwanese kindergarten children by examining the relationship between the primary caretaker's demographic characteristics (age, education, and monthly family income) and the sleep quality (sleep disturbance, sleep disruption, nocturnal sleep duration, and sleep latency) of children. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was done of children aged 3-6 years recruited from kindergartens in Taiwan. A stratified random sampling of 1,204 effective samples was collected. The data was analyzed by using descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, and multiple regression analysis. Results: (a) The average sleep duration per night on weekdays of young children in Taiwan was 9 hr and 26 min, with only 11.46% of the children getting more than 10 hr per night on weekdays. Only 16.69% of the children had a bedtime by 9 p.m. (b) The types of sleep disturbance (ranked from high to low) in young children were: sleep talking, primary snoring, enuresis, bruxism, sleep terrors, nightmares, obstructive sleep apnea, and sleep walking. (c) Multiple regression analysis revealed that those kindergarten children with better sleep quality had primary caretakers aged 31-40; caregivers with more than a college education; and families with a monthly income of more than NTD 80,001. Conclusions: The sleep problems of Taiwanese kindergarten children included going to bed late, difficulty initiating sleep, and short sleep duration. Primary caretaker age, education, and monthly family income were associated with sleep quality among kindergarten children. Our results suggest that public health strategies focused on promoting healthy lifestyles should include an innovative approach to ensure an adequate bedtime and duration of sleep at night, especially in kindergarten children.起始頁-結束頁：89-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310206320篇名：影響早期療育資訊系統使用效益之因素－以桃園縣為例並列篇名：Factors in the Utilization of an Early Intervention for Children with Developmental Delays Information System-An Example from Taoyuan County作者：詹前隆(Chien-Lung Chan);巫建錩(Jian-Chang Wu);楊南屏(Nan-Ping Yang);劉宜廉(Yi-Lien Liu);彭惠臻(Huey-Jen Perng)關鍵字：學齡前兒童;早期療育;資訊系統;早期療育資訊系統;preschool children;early intervention for children with developmental delays;information systems;ECMS期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：目標：探討桃園縣以網際網路為基礎之早期療育資訊系統使用效益與影響因素。方法：以影響早期療育資訊系統使用效益之因素結構式問卷對公共衛生、醫療及教保等單位使用人員進行量測，評估系統使用效益與影響因素，進行階層多元迴歸分析。共485個單位，總計發出970份問卷，問卷回收率32%，其中以幼稚園最多，計126份（41.0%），其次依序為托兒所80份（26.1%）、醫療單位65份（21.2%）、衛生單位36份（11.7%）。結果：發現使用人員對早期療育資訊系統使用效益認同程度高，其資訊使用（M=3.94；SD=0.61）、使用者滿意度（M=4.14；SD=0.62）、個人決策品質（M=4.16；SD=0.58）、組織生產力（M=4.15；SD=0.58）。結論：當單位使用者對系統使用效益影響因素（包括：組織內行政流程簡化程度、不同機構間發揮本身專業能力分工整合程度、對衛生法令規範之認知、對獎勵制度執行之認知）認同程度越高時，則系統使用效益（包括：資訊使用、使用者滿意度、個人決策品質、組織生產力）就越好。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to explore factors in the utilization of an early intervention for children with developmental delays information system, a web-based system accessed from the Internet, in Taoyuan County. Methods: A structured questionnaire was designed and used to survey the users of ECMS (Early Childhood Helthcare Managment Information System) and hierarchical multiple regression analysis was then conducted. A total of 970 questionnaires were sent out and 307 valid questionnaires (32%) were returned. The units that responded most were kindergartens with 126 questionnaires (41.0%), followed by nurseries, 80 (26.1%), medical units, 65 (21.2%), and public health units, 36 (11.7%). Results: Factors in the utilization of the early intervention for children with developmental delays information system were: information use (M=3.94; SD=0.61), user satisfaction (M=4.14; SD=0.62), individual decision-making quality (M=4.16; SD=0.58), and organizational productivity (M=4.15; SD=0.58). Conclusions: When users agree more with the ”degree of simplification of administrative processes within the organization”, ”degree of integration among different professional institutions”, ”knowledge about sanitary laws and norms”, and ”knowledge about reward system implementation”, they used the system more effectively.起始頁-結束頁：101-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20143310208201篇名：「治理研究的多元面貌」專號導言作者：張義東期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：戰後臺灣的環境治理進路：一個生態現代化視角的考察並列篇名：The Evolution of Taiwan's Environmental Governance after World War II: An Ecological Modernization Approach作者：黃信勳(Hsin-Hsun Huang);徐世榮(Shih-Jung Hsu)關鍵字：環境治理;生態現代化;永續發展;產業變遷;environmental governance;ecological modernization;sustainable development;industrial evolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：自然環境是人類賴以生存的基礎，惟隨著工業化與現代化之開展，人類對自然環境施加與日俱增的衝擊與壓力，其後果不但影響當代的生活品質至鉅，甚且威脅到未來世代的福祉與存續。為應對人類社會系統與自然生態系統未能和諧發展所致的環境挑戰或危機，乃有「永續發展」概念之興起。戮力於追求工業化與現代化的臺灣，儘管在戰後締造了非凡的經濟成就，卻也同樣面臨環境不永續之發展困境。隨著工業汙染與生活公害之類的環境問題的加劇與普遍化，以及1970年代臺灣內部興起的政經改革聲浪，環境議題逐漸被納入臺灣公共議程。在此等環境與社會交纏演進的過程中，臺灣的環境治理體系逐步被建構成型，而永續發展之概念亦於1990年代初期被引進，並在2000年前後為官方確立為發展之主軸。雖然永續發展已經成為國際間以及臺灣國內在環境治理上的主流論述與追求目標，惟此一以調和環境保護與經濟發展之衝突為目的之環境論述，是如何體現在臺灣的環境治理模式？其演進歷程與改革成效為何？而其限制與展望又是什麼？簡言之，本文旨在理解戰後臺灣環境治理上的變革，以及這樣的發展方向能否將臺灣導向生態永續？由於臺灣的環境治理發展脈絡與「生態現代化理論」所述，若合符節，是以採借該理論之視角進行相關的分析與批判，從而指出該等變革仍侷限於技術與制度的形式層次，尚未深及政經結構與社會價值觀的轉化，是以在環境改革上成果有限。英文摘要：Taiwan, in the pursuit of industrialization and modernization, achieved a remarkable record of economic growth after World War II while facing the predicament of environmental insustainability. With the deterioration of environmental problems as well as the rise in Taiwan's politico-economic reforms since the 1970s, environmental issues were gradually brought into Taiwan's public agenda. Taiwan's environmental governance system has been subsequently constructed, and the idea of ”sustainable development” becomes the main environmental discourse. How does the idea take shape in Taiwan? What are the process and the effects of environmental reforms? What would its prospects and limits be? This study attempts to grasp the shifts of Taiwan's environmental governance after WWII, and explores whether or not it could lead Taiwan towards ecological sustainability. Authors employ the theory of ”ecological modernization” to analyze Taiwan's development course because of the similarity between the evolution of its environmental governance and what the theory contends, and point out that related changes are mostly confined to technology and institutions in form without reaching to the transformation of political-economic structure and social value.起始頁-結束頁：5-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：文化治理的內蘊衝突與政治折衝並列篇名：The Endogenous Conflicts and Political Negotiation in Cultural Governance作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：文化治理;文化政策;衝突;文明化;奇魅化;cultural governance;cultural policy;conflict;civilizing;enchanting期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：晚近文化成為都市與區域發展的重要策略，但文化策略有難以避免的內蘊衝突。本文以文化治理體制概念來掌握文化發展的結構動態，並勾勒衝突的機制和趨勢，包括：（1）文化定義的歧義有利接軌於政治、經濟和社會而形成治理場域，卻蘊含不確定性和張力；（2）文化與政治接軌促生了文化領導權，卻激發秩序和逾越的衝突；（3）文化與經濟接軌發揮了文化調節作用，卻引起普同和特殊的爭端；（4）文化與社會接軌建立的區異階序，卻產生凝聚和分類的緊張；（5）前述衝突導向了文明化和奇魅化、除魅與返魅辯證互生的結構性趨勢。為了闡明以上觀念，本文以國立臺灣師範大學附近街區的住商混合使用爭議為例，說明其中蘊含的文化治理衝突。最後，本文檢視文化治理之內蘊衝突的解決途徑，指出各種解決之道牽涉了不同政治觀點和價值立場，而沒有單純的唯一解答。英文摘要：Cultural strategies are critical for urban and regional development, yet these strategies contain endogenous conflicts which are often overlooked. This author uses the idea of culture governance regime to conceptualize the structural dynamics of cultural development, and outlined these endogenous conflicts: (1) Although the diversity in the definition of culture is good for grafting to the political, economic and social fields of governance, it implies uncertainty and tension. (2) The grafting of culture and politics facilitates hegemony, yet it also induces conflict between order and transgression. (3) The grafting of culture and economy functions as cultural regulation, while it causes a dispute between universalism and particularism. (4) The grafting of culture and the social establishes a hierarchy of distinction, but also induced tension between solidarity and classification. (5) These conflicts imply a contradictory but coexisting structural tendency of civilization and enchantment. Finally, the author discusses the potential solution for these conflicts and finds that there is no simple way to settle them but multiple approaches with different political values.起始頁-結束頁：65-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：科學民主化下科技議題的風險治理：探討國光石化廠開發案的科技官僚風險溝通、公眾風險感知與公眾動員並列篇名：Risk Governance of Techno-science Issues in Democratization of Science: Discussing Technocratic Risk Communication, Public Perception on Risk and Public Mobilization in the Case of Kuokuang Petrochemical Development Projects作者：李明穎(Ming-Ying Lee)關鍵字：公眾動員;風險溝通;風險治理;風險感知;科學民主化;democratization of science;public mobilization;risk communication;risk governance;risk perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：科技發展如同雙面刃，一方面是經濟發展的主要動力，另一方面也為環境生態帶來許多風險。科技議題不只涉及不同行動者之間的風險溝通，還考驗著國家在風險治理的能耐。從科學民主化的三波浪潮來看，「公眾參與科學」漸成趨勢。公眾參與可以擴大科技議題的公眾動員效果。近年來國內最受爭議的科技議題以國光石化開發案最受矚目，本研究以此個案為例，探討不同行動者如何就科技議題生產論述進行風險溝通。研究發現，科技官僚對在地公眾進行風險溝通時，刻意淡化個人切身相關的風險。在地公眾並非對風險無知，只是被迫自行發展與風險共存的心理調適。研究也發現，異議行動者利用媒體與多層次的發聲行動，由外向內、全國到地方、專家到公眾，進行公眾動員，不只重新建構公眾的風險感知，還不斷捲入更多的行動者，激盪出「風險的社會強化」的漣漪效應。英文摘要：Technology development is like a knife with two-sided edges. On the one side, technology drives economic development; one the other side, technology brings about a lot of risks at the expense of ecology. In the process of decision-making on techno-science issues, risk communication can endure capability of risk governance of the states. In three waves of democratization of science, 'public engagement in science' is an emerging tendency. Public engagement will result in effects of public mobilization. In Taiwan, one of controversial techno-science issues in recent years is whether Kuokuang petrochemical projects should develop. This study draws such a case to discuss the ways of different actors dealing with risk communication on techno-science issues. This study argued that technocrat deliberately attenuated risks related to local people. However, local people were forced to adopt themselves coexisting with risks. Moreover, this study argued that dissidents made a good use of media and took multilevel actions for public mobilization. Hence, public perception on risk was reconstructed. Ripple effect on social amplification of risk was shown.起始頁-結束頁：111-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：省思「一臂之距」：論我國準政府組織的治理與課責並列篇名：Thoughts on ”Arm's-Length”: Governance and Accountability of Quasi-Governmental Organizations in Taiwan作者：李天申(Tien-Shen Li)關鍵字：一臂之距;準政府組織;政府捐助之財團法人;行政法人;課責;arm's-length;quasi-governmental organizations;Government- Funded Nonprofit Organizations (GFNPOs);Non-Departmental Public Bodies (NDPBs);accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國的準政府組織，主要分成政府捐助之財團法人、行政法人等兩種類型。本文旨在探討我國這二類準政府組織與政府部門之間的「一臂之距」。對此，本文透過文獻探討，先說明「一臂之距」之意涵、趨勢、本土脈絡，並從國會監督、主管機關／監督機關監督、董事會、人事、財務、資產、績效評鑑等面向來進行分析；繼而，從政治、法律、層級與專業課責的觀點，討論三個面向，分別是：增加國會監督的適切性、二種準政府組織法制架構的差異性、董事會治理的重要性。本文之研究發現與建議如下：第一，國會強化對政府捐助之財團法人與行政法人的外部課責是可以理解的，但如何兼顧組織自主性，值得再深思。第二，理論上，行政法人的監督密度應高於政府捐助之財團法人，關於其預算送國會審查、董監事財產申報、薪資上限等相關法規，都有檢討的空間。第三，主管部會應重視法人的董事會，引導法人提升其董事會的專業職能，以增強其內部課責。另外，本文建議加強準政府組織的資訊透明與內部稽核，以更好的「自律」來降低「他律」。最後，將公共性偏高之政府捐助之財團法人朝向行政法人來轉型，應是可考慮的方向。英文摘要：GFNPOs and NDPBs are considered quasi-governmental organizations in Taiwan. This paper begins with a broad introduction to ”arm's-length”, and discusses its local contexts. The findings are as follows. First, the strengthening of congressional oversights over GFNPOs and NDPBs is reasonable, while it is also important to maintain the balance between external accountability and autonomy. Second, presumably, the oversights over NDPBs should be more intensive then GFNPOs, and therefore the congressional budget reviews, the property declarations of board members, and the salary ceiling need to be re-examined. Third, to reinforce the internal accountability of GFNPOs and NDPBs, competent authorities should emphasize the importance of the boards and the improvements of boards' professional capacity. Fourth, this paper argues that the increases of informational transparency and internal auditing can enforce the self-discipline of these organizations. Finally, it is suggested that GFNPOs with higher publicness may be transformed to NDPBs.起始頁-結束頁：161-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：城市氣候風險治理評估指標建構之初探並列篇名：The Preliminary Study of Constructing the Indicators of City Climate Risk Governance作者：許耿銘(Keng-Ming Hsu)關鍵字：城市;氣候風險;風險治理;指標;德菲法;city;climate risk;risk governance;indicator;delphi期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：因氣候異常導致澇旱交替的場景，近來經常在世界各地出現。由於氣候變遷等因素，致使各國增加風險的機會。臺灣即屬高災害風險地區，氣候與環境變遷因素將凸顯風險與脆弱度問題的嚴重性，其中高密度發展的城市地區，更是容易發生災害的氣候敏感區位。氣候變遷的高度不確定性與大規模災害的脆弱因子，以及對應需具備防範與處置之能力，皆為氣候治理之風險要素。是故本研究為瞭解氣候變遷對於城市之衝擊，希冀建置指標系統，俾使風險評估有更具體的參考依據。由於城市氣候風險治理在國內相關研究文獻付之闕如，因此本研究之主要目的，乃係從既有之相關文獻，初步得知城市氣候風險治理的要素與指標；繼之透過德菲法、專家諮詢與層級分析等研究方法，最終彙整出包含3項構面、13項次級要素與31項指標之城市氣候風險治理評估指標體系。後續之研究工作，可以本指標體系為基礎，在「指標體系」面向上，應考量指標適用之模組、指標體系之實際應用，與指標數據之統計與公布；在「城市因應氣候風險」面向上，則需關注城市於指標項目水準之提升、適切管理與具體衡量重要的評核項目、指標受到環境結構因素影響的程度與範疇。英文摘要：Due to the climatic anomalies, the alternation between flooding and drought usually occur around the world. Because of climate change and other factors, resulting in increased opportunities for risk with countries. Taiwan is a high disaster risk area, climate and environmental change factors will highlight the seriousness of the risk and vulnerability issues. High-density development areas in cities are where is prone to disasters. High degree of uncertainty of climate change, vulnerability factors in large scale disasters and the need of having corresponding ability to prevent and the disposal are all risk factors of climate governance. Therefore, this study is to understand the impact of climate change for the city, hoping to build a system of indicators to allow risk assessments for more specific reference. For lacking of relevant urban climate governance literature in domestic academic, so the main purpose of this study is to learn elements and indicators of climate risk governance from existing relevant literature. Followed by using Delphi method, advisory specialist and the analytic hierarchy process and finally we summarize three dimensions, fourteen secondary elements and thirty-six indicators of urban climate risk governance evaluation system. This indicator system can provide the subsequent research with foundation in ”indicator system” aspect which is to consider ideal candidate, value of indicators, verification of indicators and statistics and publications of index data. Moreover, in ”coping city climate risk” aspect, we need to focus on improvement of indicators, appropriate management, critical assessment of specific projects, and the degree and scope that indicators affected by environmental structural factors.起始頁-結束頁：203-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：全球性別暴力治理的臺灣在地回應：以婚姻暴力防治為範疇的探討並列篇名：Taiwan's Response to the Global Governance of Gender Violence: To Explore the Aspects of Marital Violence Intervention作者：黃志中(Joh-Jong Huang);張可立(Ko-Li Chang);謝臥龍(Vincent Shieh)關鍵字：全球治理;婚姻暴力;父權;現代性;性別主流化;global governance;gender mainstreaming;modernity;marital violence;patriarchy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文透過全球性別治理的論述，呈現國際思潮與國家內部統治二者對於性別暴力之全球治理的滲透與衝突並存，也突顯出女性受害者的同質化意象，而形成全球性別暴力治理的國家內部影響及其合法性的不穩定。關於臺灣婚姻暴力的在地回應，本文透過對於臺灣在性別治理的建制及性別議題的倡議歷程整理，顯示全球性別治理觀念穿越國家疆界而影響到臺灣時，臺灣的在地回應並非全盤接受。導致因為運動倡議者與政策制定執行者之間對於性別治理了解與認同的明顯差異。婚姻暴力加害男性在暴力防制倡議與父權機制的交錯下，形成特定被規訓的論述。防治體系有其工作目標，父權機制也得以維持既有婚姻關係的不平等結構。家庭暴力防治法立法期程過短，在地社會並未對移植自外國制度有共識與準備。在婚姻暴力防制合法化的過程中，缺乏結合廣大女性經驗。在合法化的基礎上，社會認同差異大而造成合法性不足。整體而言，全球性別暴力治理透過國際組織運作共識與條約的簽署，在各國催化性別暴力合法性。但缺乏在地性的對話與融入，而呈現專家治理的疏離與不足。英文摘要：In the late 20^(th) century, global governance swept worldwide in accompany with international organizations and enterprises. The influence of the global governance might be rather dominant as with the legitimization of nation-states' responses to the international agreement. However, skew and incoherent values can be raised as local community responses to the global governance. Global governance of gender violence is rooted in the concern of the violation of women's right. However, gender violence is frequently intersected gender with class, ethnic, religion, culture, etc. Equality of right might compromise equity while only gender is under consideration, instead of the context and the history. Marital violence intervention in Taiwan began from the advocacy of elites and lawmakers under the influence of the global governance. Due to lack of social consensus, the law and associated policies were obviously not bottom-up. Marital violence intervention was successfully legitimized in Taiwan, but with impaired legitimacy.起始頁-結束頁：259-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：「治理研究的崛起」專號導言作者：張義東期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：莫拉克風災後高屏地區重建服務網絡之研究：災難治理的觀點並列篇名：A Study on the Service Networks of Typhoon Morakot Post-Disaster Reconstruction in the South Taiwan: A Governance Approach to Disaster作者：林珍珍(Jen-Jen Lin);林萬億(Wan-I Lin)關鍵字：莫拉克風災;災後重建;災難治理;原住民;Typhoon Morakot;disaster governance;reconstruction;indigenous people期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：莫拉克風災受災地區多為臺灣原住民居住區域。原住民在文化、宗教與就業等方面均明顯異於漢人社會，缺乏文化敏感性的災後重建服務反而讓原住民陷入困境。莫拉克災後重建政策遭遇到社運團體和災民自助組織的抗爭，例如，災民提出「八八水災暨莫拉克颱風後原鄉重建請願書」、「莫拉克災後大社遷村重建訴求」、「莫拉克災後達瓦蘭部落遷居重建重點訴求」，以及在遷村的協調會中受到災民抗議和阻擋等諸多事件。災後重建的政策決定過程是否重視公民參與和社區及個人的認同，乃是災難治理成敗的重要關鍵。本文檢視莫拉克風災後重建服務網絡，從災難治理的角度切入分析災後重建體系。英文摘要：In 2009 Typhoon Morakot caused severe damage to the southern part of Taiwan and relocated people were mostly indigenous people. Therefore significant cultural issues among different ethnic groups have been highlighted in the post-disaster reconstruction process. The purpose of this paper is to address the problem of services networks in the approach of disaster governance. The results come from a study of the reconstruction process in the affected area, Kaohsiung City and Ping Tung County. In the paper, it is examined the structure of service networks, including administrative arrangements, service networks between NGOs and traditional authority in affected village. This research is designed in particular to deepen our understanding as to how ethnic minorities, who already suffer from an inequality of the distribution of economic and political power, are excluded in the policy making process.起始頁-結束頁：5-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：脆弱性的資訊科技風險治理文化：考查病歷電子化之制度性無知並列篇名：Vulnerable Culture of Info-technological Risk Governance: Examining the Institutional Ignorance to Electronization of Medical Records作者：周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou);陳薪智(Hsin-Chih Chen)關鍵字：制度性無知;整個社會的無知;系統性風險;社會脆弱性;治理轉型困境;institutional ignorance;societal ignorance;systemic risks;social vulnerability;dilemma of governance innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要串連一系列資訊科技策略脈絡（國民卡、按捺指紋、健保IC卡、病歷電子化），論證政府的決策與治理模式問題。從整理歷年社會之反資訊風險運動與病例外洩事件，我們凸顯在地社會的系統性風險將延續影響我國病歷電子化之治理問題。我們嘗試分析線性風險評估之決策模式，往往造成制度性的忽視外溢於技術層次之社會風險與溝通，並導致民眾對病歷電子化的無知。同時，進而形成風險感知的破碎化，使民眾無法真正的意識到其對個人、家族或族群隱私權利的侵害威脅。另一方面，此種破碎的資訊風險文化，不但不利於公民與社會之反身性治理，並將提高臺灣民眾的風險感知矛盾性。亦即，從歷次的公眾資訊風險感知調查結果來看，民眾一方面擔憂資料外洩與被政府濫用，但另一方面由於對資訊風險嚴重性的無知而輕易的掉入成本效益迷思，導致高度支持行政或商業部門單面向的資訊利用效益論述。而此種系統性風險（systemic risks）（OEDC, 2003）若持續深化，將使得整個社會愈形脆弱，並造成新興科技的治理轉型面臨高度的困境。其問題在於權威的專家政治、封閉式的菁英決策模式與管制文化，隱性而劇烈的形成特殊的隱匿、遲滯風險的治理系統，因而嚴重的忽略社會的質疑與要求。其最終結果，就是社會的風險感知的破碎化、脆弱度越來越高，甚至遠高於西方社會回應新興科技衝擊的脆弱性程度。英文摘要：This article argued a series of problems in the governmental decisionmaking and governing pattern. Through sorting anti-informational risk movements and divulgence of medical records over the years, we featured the systemic risk affect the governing problems of electronization of medical records (EMR). We tried to analyze a decision-making pattern continued linear risk assessment and how it will lead to public ignorance on EMR. From results of several public information risk perception surveys, the publics worried about their data leaking or misusing, but fell into the myth of cost-efficiency analysis easily. Moreover, if the systemic risks (OECD, 2003) keep deepening, it will make the whole society more vulnerable and cause the governing transformation for newly technology facing serious struggles. The problem here is a social system hidden and delaying risk, formed by the authoritative expert politics, the closed elite decision-making pattern and the regulative culture, incapable of responding the societal requirements. Hence, the social vulnerability increases more and more, even higher than western society's to respond newly technological impacts.起始頁-結束頁：53-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：行政權運作與地方治理：臺灣與羅馬尼亞的能源案例分析並列篇名：Executive Power Operation and Local Governance: Case Studies of Energy Issues in Taiwan and in Romania作者：張峻豪(Chun-Hao Chang)關鍵字：雙元行政權;治理;共治;半總統制;能源議題;two-headed executive power;governance;cohabitation;semipresidentialism;energy issue期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文挑選臺灣與羅馬尼亞近年受到高度關注的能源議題，分析地方基層的意見主張在行政部門介入主導下，所呈現的治理型態為何。本文由治理理論之區別及探討，描繪兩國行政權內部互動與地方基層的三角關係；並且，藉由中央地方關係再界定，本文也企圖論證，在臺灣與羅馬尼亞這兩個單一制、且近年皆強調地方分權的國家中，當同時面對涉及國家利益與地方利益的議題，雙元行政權的制度框架以及行政與立法兩權互動關係，不但創造了執政者意見轉圜的空間，也成為中央如何授權地方政府之重要依據。另外，由於能源議題經常關係到「經濟發展」與「環境保護」等爭議，本文也透過臺灣與羅馬尼亞的例子，解釋在中央主導的治理過程中，為何導致這兩個面向難以相容。英文摘要：Taking the hotly debated energy issues in Taiwan and in Romania as its research focus, this paper attempts to analyze how executive powers from the central government intervene in local governance and politics. This paper firstly draws on governance theory to delineate the triangular power relation among the two executive heads, namely the president and the premier, and local grass-roots governance, in Taiwan and in Romania. It is argued that for Taiwan and Romania, as the unitary state that emphasizes decentralization, when it comes to issues concerning both national and local interests, the two-headed executive framework and executive-legislative interaction do influence the leading executive's policy, as well as the central government's instruction to the local government. Based on the cases of energy controversy in the two countries, this paper also suggests that the executive heads' power relation and their political interests are main factors which put energy issues in the dilemma of promoting economic development or advocating environmental protection.起始頁-結束頁：99-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：環境正義的治理：從美國法院判決看環境正義的自我指涉機制並列篇名：Governing EJ: Reading the First Environmental Justice Lawsuit Self-referentially作者：黃之棟(Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：環境正義;分配正義;自我指涉機制;循環論證;environmental justice;distributive justice;self-referring;circulardefinition期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文採取了「科技與社會」（Science, Technology and Society）研究中「自我指涉機制」（self-referring）的理論，來分析美國法院的首宗環境正義經典判決Bean案。研究發現，法院對環境正義的看法，構成了典型的自我指涉機制。這個機制有時甚至成了一種「正義—科學」間的循環論證（circular definitions）。具體來說，在環境正義的自我指涉機制之下，法院嘗試將判斷的基準與環境（不）正義的研究相連結。其原因在於，垃圾場的分布無法單憑直觀來認定，因此法院轉而憑藉相關研究所提供的科學證據來做判斷。而這些研究之所以被認為是與環境正義有關的，則又是出於涉入其中的各方行動者，都堅信相關研究確可偵測出社會中的正義或不義使然。本文指出，當法院與一般大眾都恪守這種自我指涉機制時，便可能限縮吾人對環境不正義的思考範圍，並導致後續相關政策也受到侷限。英文摘要：This article adopts a Barnesian self-referential approach to analyzing the first environmental justice (EJ) lawsuit, Bean v. Southwestern Waste Management, Corp.(Bean). According to Barry Barnes, a society could be understood as a self-referring knowledge system and this system is made valid only because the knowledge carriers within it has shared some common knowledge. That means, a society is everything its members know about it, make reference to each other, and act in ways which (re-) confirm their original ”knowing”. For example, a ”leader” is a leader only to the extent that one's followers regard him/her as such, and treat him/her accordingly. In this article, I argue that a similar self-referential nature can be found in Bean as well. That is, in coming to believe that Bean is somehow EJrelated, all Bean's social actors constitute the very context that makes Bean an EJ case. Seen from this angle, EJ loses its static connotations that it tends to have when conceived solely as a regime, and shows that it is itself socially constructed. If this analysis is correct, then EJ is nothing but how Bean's plaintiffs, defendants, lawyers, judges, and other social actors know about, believe in, and act on what it is. Since we are ourselves the context which makes EJ what it is, EJ is how we understand, treat, regard and measure it.起始頁-結束頁：159-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：金門國家公園發展爭議之探討：網絡管理觀點並列篇名：The Conflict of Developing Kinmen National Park: Perspective of Network Management作者：陳痗v(Hen-Chin Chen);張家齊(Chia-Chi Chang)關鍵字：網絡管理;金門國家公園;不確定性;衝突;Network Management;Kinmen National Park;Uncertainty;Conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：國家公園成立後，吸引觀光人潮，帶動當地經濟發展，理應受到當地住民的支持，然而園區範圍內的部分住民卻採取不支持的態度，甚至反對抗議，探討其因便是本文之目的。自金門國家公園成立以來，便與聚落住民具有非正式互動的關係，透過共同規範和義務關係的建立，逐漸形成網絡。然而，面對複雜問題的解決，難免存在甚多不確定因素，例如：實質內容、運作過程、制度本身、管理方式以及外部環境等，致使園區部分住民對國家公園發展目標產生歧見，造成衝突。本文以網絡理論為主，並分別運用順序式邏輯斯迴歸分析與深度訪談法，藉以瞭解這些不確定因素，如何影響園區部分住民不支持國家公園發展目標的可能性。研究結果發現，實質內容構面中的價值觀、管理方式構面中的承諾、制度本身的政策工具因素及外部環境構面中的政治環境系絡因素為不顯著。本文繼而針對假設檢定不顯著者，透過深度訪談進一步瞭解其主因為：園區內的聚落住民對管制規定缺乏瞭解、對發展目標缺乏合作共識以及管制措施過嚴。英文摘要：With the increasing democratic consciousness, various policy stakeholders affect policy outcomes. Based on that concept, this paper tries to analyze the causes of conflict between local residents within the scope of the National Park, mainly focusing on the reason why the people against the objects of the development of National Park? Since the establishment of Kinmen National Park, the interaction between Kinmen National Park and the local residents has increased, and by following the common norms and obligations, the form of policy network is formatting. However, facing the complexity problems, the cooperation collapsed. Through the questionnaire of the people in the Kinmen National Park, this paper then applies logistic regression analysis and in-depth interview to understand the various factors. The results show that the local people do not identify themselves with the National Park: (i) residents lack proper understanding of the National Park and they are taking a step back from consensus building, (ii) the problems of uneven distribution of resources still exist, and (iii) the implementation of the regulations are too strict.起始頁-結束頁：201-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：文化治理思維之轉變與文化法規之變遷並列篇名：Thinking About the Evolution of Cultural Governance and the Transformation of Cultural Laws作者：廖凰玎(Huang-Ding Liao)關鍵字：文化治理;文化法規;治理術;cultural governance;cultural laws;governmentality期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要是關於二次戰後到2013年，對臺灣文化法規發展的回顧與反思，理解如何用文化法規來進行文化治理。法律是呈現當下時代的社會背景的精神價值之選定的表徵，它並非代表是所有人的共識或認同，反而它比較是官方價值的表現，從文化研究的批判觀點，法律正是政府治理的重要工具與手段，如傅柯所觀察與描述，是一種微觀權力的展現，但凡是基於國家安全與治理為藉口的需要。在文化政策角度下，法律是政策下的執行工具之一，所謂政策性的立法觀點，然在特定文化政策的目的下，則顯現出如何利用制定文化法規來達到其目的性。以歷史時間為縱軸，於不同時期中，法律作為文化現象，切入觀察文化治理思維之轉變與文化法規之變遷，描繪出國民政府來臺後，相應於官方文化治理思維之轉變過程，所呈現出文化法規－形式與實質之變遷的軌跡。英文摘要：This article is about the review and the reflection on Taiwan's cultural laws after World War II to 2013. Thinking about the cultural laws to implement cultural governance. The laws are the symbols presenting the values and the spirits of the times. They are more the presentations of official values. From the critical viewpoint of cultural studies, the laws are exactly the important instruments and the means for the government. As the observation ant the description from Foucault, the laws are the presentations of the microcosmic power that based on the needs of the security and the governance of the country. From the viewpoint of cultural policy, the laws are one of the instruments that beneath the policies. That is the so-called ”the policy-based legislation viewpoint.” However, under the specific cultural policy, it shows us how to achieve the policy purpose by the legislation of cultural laws. Undertake historical times, the laws as the cultural symbols in different periods, see through the evolution of the thoughts of cultural governance and the transformation of cultural laws, and describes the trajectory of both the formal and the substantial transformation of cultural laws which responds to the evolution of the official thoughts on cultural governance.起始頁-結束頁：265-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：採礦助餉：18世紀初期山東的開礦熱潮與督礦調查並列篇名：Mining for Fiscal Control: Bureaucratic Negotiations over Shandong Mines in Early Eighteenth-Century China作者：唐立宗(Li-Chung Tang)關鍵字：康熙帝;李樹德;陸師;耗羨歸公;虧空;Kangxi emperor;Li Shude;Lu Shi;the return of the meltage fee to the public coffers;fiscal deficit期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：清朝康熙58至59年間（1719-1720），山東全省興起開礦的熱潮，山東巡撫李樹德奏請在濟南、兗州、青州、登州四府礦場開採，但康熙帝玄燁派員查勘採礦後，發現礦利甚微，遂下令停止開採。其實18世紀初期山東地區的採礦活動，緣起於地方發生饑荒災害，民間的訴求是希望透過採煤鉛來改善生活困境；地方官員則有感於地方財政虧損及私人開銷費用過大，也盼想投資開礦獲得鉅利，以解決財政治理與生計負擔的燃眉之急。但是開採新礦違背當時的礦冶治理政策，於是督撫官員奏摺掩飾了地方官開礦的真實意圖，進而提出開礦濟軍、充裕國課、下瞻商民等正當訴求。經歷此一開礦事件與督礦調查，清代的礦業開採重心轉移它地，山東被認為是不適合發展礦業的地區，地方官也只能另謀財源，設法解決地方財政問題。英文摘要：This article explores the fiscal bargaining between center and province through the case of mining activities in Shandong in the late Kangxi reign. Local interest in mining silver and lead ores increased due to famines. People in famine-stricken Shandong saw mining as a means to reduce their financial suffering. Provincial officials also hoped to profit from mining in order to solve their own problems such as local deficits or extravagant personal expenses.However, mining was highly regulated throughout the empire. To obtain imperial permission, the governor Li Shude argued that mining profits from Shandong could fund imperial military spending and fill the imperial coffer. Emperor Kangxi was persuaded in the beginning. But he quickly discovered the reason for local officials' vested interest in mining and decided to close mining operations in Shandong. Since then, the mining centers of the Qing were developed in other places. Shandong was considered unsuitable for mining. Local officials thus had to seek other sources for solving their deficit problems.起始頁-結束頁：1-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：對抗臭氣：以18世紀法國皇家醫學會全國衛生普查為中心（1776-1794）並列篇名：Against Odor: A Study on the National Health Surveys of the French Royal Society of Medicine in Eighteenth-Century (1776-1794)作者：陳樂元(Yueh-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：公共衛生;法國醫學史;法國皇家醫學會;臭氣;public hygiene;French medical history;French Royal Society of Medicine;odor期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：法國皇家醫學會於1776年開始所發起的全國衛生普查，象徵著公共衛生國家在法國的成形。藉由分析法國皇家醫學會的史料文獻，本文試著勾勒其所進行的全國衛生普查之輪廓，並進一步深究這個統一化的認識活動內部的組織原理。本文發現人與其環境之關係，在法國皇家醫學會的調查研究當中被緊密地連結在一起，環境被認為可以直接對人的身體健康發生作用。全國衛生普查所凸顯出來的是醫學賦予自己的新使命：認識環境以及改善環境，進而改善人類的身體健康品質。在所有影響人的身體健康的各種因素當中，尤其以空氣的作用最受到重視。法國皇家醫學會透過嗅覺架起警戒線，到處探查各種可能產生有害氣體的地方，並試圖以科學方法掌握其產生機制。他們調查在沼澤、河流、糞便處理場、公墓以及擁擠的人群中，所產生的有害氣體對人可能產生的作用。他們驚覺到似乎人類已經陷入毒氣死亡陷阱內而不自知，對抗臭氣的警鐘於是被敲響了。英文摘要：The national health surveys launched by the French Royal Society of Medicine in 1774, characterize the formation of France as a country of public hygiene. By analyzing the archives of the French Royal Society of Medicine, this paper outlines the national health surveys conducted by this institution and further studies the principle of internal organization of this unified activity of research. This paper finds that the relationship between people and their environment was closely linked together in the research performed by the French Royal Society of Medicine. The environment was deemed as a direct factor to human health. What the national health surveys highlighted was a new mission with which the Society of Medicine was endowed: knowing and improving the environment, thus improving the quality of human health. Among all factors affecting human health, the effect of air caught especially the most attention. The Society of Medicine set cordon through the sense of smell, explored any possible place at which harmful gas would appear, and tried to adopt scientific methods to grasp the mechanism of its generation. They investigated the impact on human body caused by harmful gas generated from swamps, rivers, excreta disposal sites, cemeteries, and the crowds. They were startled to realize that human beings seemed to have fallen unconsciously into the deadly trap of poison gas. The alarm against the odor was therefore awakened.起始頁-結束頁：63-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：昭和陸軍之皇道派和統制派的對外政策比較研究並列篇名：Comparative Research on the Foreign Policy of the Imperial Way Faction and the Control Faction of the Showa Army作者：楊典錕(Tien-Kun Yang)關鍵字：昭和陸軍;滿洲派;皇道派;統制派;對外政策;Showa Army;Manchurian Faction;Imperial Way Faction;Control Faction;Foreign Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：自思想層面來看，皇道派堅持日本的尊皇思想和皇道主義，統制派則是受到蘇聯的社會主義和德國的國家社會主義影響。而介於兩者之間的滿洲派，雖在革新思想上不排斥標榜皇道的「昭和維新」，但在總力戰體制的建構上卻趨近於德國和蘇聯之全體主義的統制經濟方向。在對外政策上，皇道派、滿洲派支持北進論以對抗蘇聯，滿洲派甚至還要在預想即將來到的世界最終戰爭中對抗美國。兩派的對華政策，均為拉攏中國使進入日本、滿洲國的共同防共陣營。故皇道派、滿洲派又有「對蘇派」之別稱。而統制派則支持南進論以對抗英國和美國。對華政策則是若中國拒絕與日、滿共同防蘇，或拒絕放棄親英美之傾向的話，將不排除對中國予以武力一擊。故統制派又有「對中派」之別稱。二二六事件後，對蘇派的皇道派沒落。蘆溝橋事件後，另一個對蘇派的滿洲派亦失勢。而對中、英、美派之新統制派的一枝獨秀，可說是牽動了日中戰爭、日蘇中立協定和太平洋戰爭等重大歷史事件之發生。英文摘要：In regards to foreign policy, the Imperial Way Faction and the Manchurian Faction both supported the Northern Expansion to defend against the USSR. The foreign policy of both factions aimed to entice China to join the Japan and Manchukuo joint defense camp. As a result, the Imperial Way Faction and the Manchurian Faction earned the nickname ”Soviet Opposition Faction”. The Control Faction backed the Southern Expansion in order to face the UK and the USA. A Chinese Opposition policy was in place in case China refused to join Japan and Manchukuo in opposing the USSR. Or, if China refused to give up ties to the UK and the USA, and the Control Faction wouldn't rule out using military force to attack China. Therefore, the Control Faction was also known as the ”China Opposition Faction”. After the February 26 Incident the first of the Soviet Opposition Factions, the Imperial Way Faction, declined. After the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, the other Soviet Opposition Faction, the Manchurian Faction, also began to wane. Here the New Control Faction that faced China, the UK and USA was the outstanding faction, and it can be said that it was a significant historical event that affected the Sino-Japanese War, the Soviet-Japanese Neutrality Pact, and the Pacific War.起始頁-結束頁：111-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：1960年代末期韓國的「間諜」論述與政治意涵：以李穗根、李承福事件為中心的討論作者：王恩美關鍵字：反共論述;間諜形象;反共宣傳;新聞媒體;朴正熙期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷2期出版年：2014英文摘要：1961年朴正熙以軍事政變掌握政權，1960年代末期，朴正熙政府面臨國內各種危機，因此希望透過建立強有力的「反共體制」，以穩定政權基礎。在此關鍵時期發生李穗根事件（1967年）與李承福事件（1968年）。朴正熙政權在1960年代末期，透過各種手段加強「反共體制」，以此加強韓國人民的「反共意識型態」。其中，利用民眾對於「間諜」的恐懼，強化人民的「反共意識」，更是朴正熙政權慣用的政治宣傳手法，而李穗根及李承福事件則是日後生產無數「間諜」論述的重要素材及類型，具有濃厚的政治意義。本文主要以李穗根、李承福事件為例，探討1960年代末期的「間諜」論述的內容，並說明李穗根、李承福事件所呈現出來的「間諜」論述中所包含的政治意涵。本文指涉的李穗根事件，包括1967年李穗根投奔韓國的「投誠事件」，至1969年李穗根在越南被逮捕為止。李承福事件則指1968年發生於江原道的「武裝間諜」入侵事件。另外，「間諜」論述的宣傳方面，主要分析《東亞日報》與《朝鮮日報》兩大主流媒體。此時的韓國媒體得受政府控制，媒體配合政府報導「反共議題」，因此，媒體成為散播「間諜」論述的重要管道。起始頁-結束頁：187-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：戒嚴時期傳媒「社會責任論」的引進與演變並列篇名：Introduction and Transformation: Social Responsibility of the Press in Taiwan Martial Law Period作者：楊秀菁(Hsiu-Chin Yang)關鍵字：戒嚴時期;社會責任論;新聞自由;國民黨;The Martial Law Period;Social Responsibility;Freedom of the Press;KMT期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：要求媒體自律的聲音，從現代報刊出現以來，就未曾停歇。不過，媒體責任與新聞自律在臺灣戒嚴時期有另一層的意義。在1950年代，即有一些文章提及媒體責任與新聞自律，但有一部分立基於反共的前提，其中更有言需「暫時犧牲自由，爭取生存」者。1950年代臺灣新聞界所建構的責任說，隨著1960年謝然之與胡傳厚將希伯特等學者於1956年提出的「社會責任論」引介至臺灣，有更具體的內容。而國民黨內部及陽明山第2次會談所提出，建立新聞自律體制的建議，更扮演推波助瀾的功能。在此影響下，社會責任論成為戒嚴時期傳播學界的顯學，但也帶有濃厚的「國家利益」至上的色彩。從理論出發，曾虛白、李瞻等學者從社會責任論吸取養分，建構三民主義報業藍圖。而國民黨則延續1950年代反共至上的責任論，將社會新聞，乃至於所有媒體報導與國家利益結合在一起，要求報刊雜誌負起國家興亡的重責大任。夾帶國家利益至上的社會責任論在1980年代面臨挑戰，學界開始從更高的角度來看待社會新聞的發展，進而要求政府開放新聞報導與言論自由尺度，期望報紙不要過分「自律」，而妨害臺灣民主化的前進。英文摘要：Since the emergence of the modern newspaper, the voice that claim for self-regulation of the media never relented. However, it has an another significance about the media of responsibility and the press self-regulation during the period of martial law in Taiwan. In the 1950s, some of the articles mentioned in the media responsibilities and the press self-regulation, but part of the premise of legislation based on the anti-communist. The responsibility doctrine that constructed by the Taiwan press in the 1950s, with ”the social responsibility” that put forward by Siebert and other scholars in 1956, introducing to Taiwan by Hsieh ran zhi and Hu chuan hou in 1960 that had more specific content. And put forward the establishment of press self-regulation system within the KMT and the second Discussion of Yangmingshan, it's played more in fueling. ”The social responsibility” became the famous subject of spread academia during the material law era, but also with the color of ”the supreme of national benefits”. The supreme of national benefits responsibility was confronted with challenges in 1980s, the academics asked the government to open news coverage and freedom of expression scales, and expected the newspapers not excessive ”selfdiscipline” that hindered the Taiwan's democratization forward.起始頁-結束頁：241-297資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社20篇名：Reconsidering the Halt of the Loss of Biodiversity in a Market-Based Perspective並列篇名：論以市場機制觀點解決生物多樣性喪失課題作者：劉小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Liu);石慧瑩(Huei-Ying Shih)關鍵字：生態系統功能;市場機制為主政策工具;生物多樣性;自然保育政策;Ecosystem Service;Market-based instruments;Biodiversity;Nature Conservation Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：國際性組織和國際性非營利組織如生態系統和生物多樣性之經濟（TEEB）和商業和生物多樣性補償方案（BBOP）在其研究中主張以市場機制介入生物多樣性惡化之必要性與重要性。本文對此種呼籲持另一觀點並認為行政管理對於調節自然保育和開發壓力持續高漲有其地位。首先，具有預防原則和肇事者原則的行政管制手段涵蓋開發管理、土地利用計畫和區域發展等。再者，基於以市場為誘因的管理途徑的討論中鮮少闡述如何適當評估生態價值，以及應如何與既有規劃體系相結合。因此，如果吾人透過全面性土地利用計畫來降低生物多樣性喪失做會較是有意義以及效率做法。據此，也可提供給市場機制運作適宜經營環境。英文摘要：International organizations and non-government organizations such as the Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB) and the Business and Biodiversity Offsets Program (BBOP) had published reports and studies which claimed the necessity and importance of the market mechanism to achieve the goal of halting the loss of biodiversity. Another point of consideration within this paper is an administrative management perspective on the relationship between nature conservation and increasing pressure from settlement development. Firstly, upon the arguments for the market incentive approach, the paper then discusses the other important approaches to conserving biological resources in accordance with the administrative regulations which combine settlements management, land use planning, and regional development by implementing the Preventing Principle and Cost-by Cause Principles. Based on the discussing of the market incentive approach, it is rare to declare how the values of biological resources could be recognized properly and how they could be embedded within a planning system. It would be more meaningful as well more effective, if we regulate biodiversity-loss in advance through a comprehensive land use plan, then it could offer a suitable surrounding framework for running market mechanisms afterwards.起始頁-結束頁：299-317資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：「工會行動權」專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：林佳和(Chia-Ho Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：工會行動權之法理與言論自由之界限並列篇名：Limitation on the Right to Act Collectively and the Union's Freedom of Speech作者：張鑫隆(Hsin-Lung Chang)關鍵字：工會行動權;容忍義務;言論自由;不當勞動行為;工會活動;right to act collectively;the employer's obligation not to interfere;freedom of speech;unfair labor practice;the activities of a labour union期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：工會對雇主之批評言論或企業不法之揭發言論是工會組織存續和運作的重要元素。但是工會幹部往往因此而受到雇主以妨害名譽或懲戒解僱之追究。最高法院曾認定雇主以工會幹部所為之批評或揭發言論違反勞動契約上之忠誠義務為由所為之懲戒解僱並不違法。但是在2011年不當勞動行為裁決機制起動後，裁決委員會和臺北高等行政法院相繼承認工會幹部基於全體勞動之權益，認定對雇主所為之批評言論或企業不法之揭露言論亦屬工會活動之範疇，雇主應負有容忍之義務。相對於此，日本實務和學說之間對於雇主應負容忍義務之見解並不一致。主要的差異在於爭議行為和工會活動中所為批評言論是否應有不同之正當性的評價基準。前者在勞動組合法中有明文之民刑事免責的保障，後者在無明文規定下，可能受到雇主設施管理權或企業秩序的拘束。我國未來的實務發展將不可避免發生兩者間區別的問題以及如何設定其不同正當性判斷基準之課題。英文摘要：To criticize and blow the whistle on the employers is very important to the continuation and the administration of labor unions, but union leaders are often dismissed or dealt with a disadvantage. The Supreme Court has recognized such a dismissal as breach of duty and of loyalty. However, after initiating remedies for unfair labor practices in 2011, several decisions that recognized the employer's obligation not to interfere with labor unions or its criticism and whistle-blowing by leaders have been made by Tribunal for Unfair Labor Practices and Taipei High Administrative Court. On the other hand, opinions regarding whether or not employers interfere with labor unions remain in discord between theory and practice in Japan. Determining the evaluation of employer's obligation regarding interfering with activities of labor unions and labor disputes would therefore be inevitable in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：7-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：工會會務假之規範、法律性質與雇主准駁權限：兼論我國法院判決實務之發展並列篇名：The Norm, Legal Nature of Leave for Union and Employers' Authority for Granting the Permission: Concurrently Discuss the Development of Judicial Decisions in Taiwan作者：林良榮(Liang-Jung Lin)關鍵字：會務假;不當勞動行為;工會活動;勞動基本權;Leave for Union Related Business;Unfair labor practice;Union activities;Basic labor rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國司法實務上，因工會會務假所生之爭議案例雖不多見，但在工會實際運作的實務上卻屢生困擾；尤其當勞資雙方的關係出現較為緊張的時候，工會幹部能否向雇主請公假（會務假）辦理會務，更是牽動日後勞資關係的發展。會務假的問題核心乃在於：工會會務假的法律本質為何，以及該權利行使所造成與雇主經營權之間的衝突。如就不當勞動行為保護的政策面向來看，或者應論究以下問題之疑義，亦即：工會幹部因辦理會務而請公假的權利本質為何以及該權利行使的射程範圍，同時，對於該權利之保護是否該當於不當勞動行為制度的政策目的而使雇主對於會務假之准駁有生妨礙工會團結之可能。本文將從內國法與國際（外國）的法律規範說明「會務假」的保護，並從我國法院實務見解，尤其以民事與行政訴訟事件之會務假爭議為例說明判決的立場。最後將從工會活動（行動）權的法理建構對於工會會務假的保護。英文摘要：From a practical standpoint, the legal cases related to ”Leave for Union Related Business” (LURB) are rarely seen; however, practicing such type of leaves can be a difficult challenge. When tension occurs between labors and employers, whether the union staffs can be granted with ”LURB” by employers may significantly impact their future development of relationship. The issue and essence of the ”LURB” focus on two themes: (1) the nature of this legislation; and (2) the conflict caused while employees take this leave at the expense of employers. From the perspective of preventing unfair labor practices, the following issues should be further examined and clarified. What are the rights for union staffs to take a leave while handling union business? What is the perimeter while union staffs exercise their right of ”LURB”? In the meantime, granting permission for ”LURB” from employers may affect the unity of a union. This study will examine the ”LURB” from the related international and domestic laws, as well as provide examples on the recent domestic civic court decisions and executive lawsuits. A protective mechanism of ”LURB” based on the rights and legality of union activities will be concluded.起始頁-結束頁：49-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：我國雙軌制不當勞動行為裁決制度之研究：日本法之比較為中心並列篇名：Study of Double-track of Unfair Labor Practice Ruling: Focus on Comparative to Japan Law作者：周兆昱(Chao-Yu Chou)關鍵字：不當勞動行為;裁決制度;工會法;勞資爭議處理法;Unfair Labor Practices;Decision on the Unfair Labor Practices System;Labor Union Act;the Act for Settlement of Labor-Management Disputes期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：以往我國法中欠缺有關雇主不當勞動行為之規範，以致工會活動難以發展。此一法律規定不足之問題，於新修正之勞動三法中增訂有關不當勞動行為相關規範後，得到相當程度之解決。我國工會法將雇主之不當勞動行為區分為涉及勞工私權爭議與非涉及私權爭議二類型，並於勞資爭議處理法之裁決程序中訂定了相對應之救濟途徑，使得我國不當勞動行為法制不論在實體規定及程序規定均呈現出雙軌制。然而，此一制度在法理與實務均出現爭議之處。法理上，不當勞動行為制度目的為救濟受到雇主不當侵害之工會團結權，使勞資關係能回復到正常、健全之狀態，個別勞工權益之救濟不過是附帶之效果。我國現行裁決制度卻是以救濟個別勞工權益（涉及私權之爭議）為基本規定，對於工會團結權侵害之裁決（非涉及私權之爭議）程序則是準用涉及私權爭議裁決程序之規定。實務上亦出現裁決決定書中未明確表示事件係為涉及私權之爭議或非涉及私權之爭議，以致難以區分，亦造成當事人不服裁決決定書提起訴訟時，出現事件究竟應由普通法院管轄或行政法院管轄之爭議。本文以為，此種制度設計所造成之爭議難以利用法律解釋方式得到根本之解決，應儘速修法將不當勞動行為制度回歸救濟工會團結權之本質，始能杜絕爭議。英文摘要：By lack of specification of the employer' unfair labor practices in the past, it makes difficult for the development of Union activity. The problem had been substantially resolved after updating three new labor laws which enacted the rules of employer' unfair labor practices. Taiwan's Labor Union Act divided the rules of employer' unfair labor practices into private rights and non-private rights disputes. It also enacts the way of remedies in the Act for Settlement of Labor-Management Disputes which makes unfair labor practices showing the double-track system. However, the controversy occurs with systems in theory and practice. Legally speaking, the purpose of unfair labor practices is to give relief to Union' solidarity and keep the relation between labors and employers remaining in a good way. It is not focusing on individual labor rights. Current ruling system in our country is to remedy individual labor rights (relating to private rights dispute) and the ruling of against the Union' solidarity (not involving private rights dispute) is following the same rule as the private rights dispute. In practice, it leads to distinguish disputes difficultly due to not making it clear that the incident involving the private dispute or non-private rights dispute. It is complicated in dispute whether the event should be governed by the district court or administrative court when the client is unsatisfied with the results of verdict. Therefore, it is hard to interpret this system in law. The way to put an end to disputes is to reform the system of unfair labor practices back to give relief to Union's solidarity.起始頁-結束頁：89-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：日本勞動委員會不當勞動行為救濟命令之裁量權基準法理與演進並列篇名：On the Standard and Evolution of Order-for-relief of Japanese Unfair Labor Practice Act作者：張智程(Chih-Cheng Chang)關鍵字：不當勞動行為;集體勞動法;裁決;勞動委員會;救濟命令;Unfair Labor Practice;Collective Labour Law;Labor Relationship;Labor Relations Commission;order-for-relief期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國自2011年5月1日公布施行之新集體勞動三法，導入了美日兩國施行多年的不當勞動行為制度，而開啟了集體勞資關係法秩序保障法制的新局。日本作為我國不當勞動行為制度的被繼受國，經過長達60餘年的勞動委員會實務與判例實務累積，對於救濟命令作成時之裁量權行使方法與界限，已經形成穩定且類型化的制度運作模式以及命令作成法理。本文擬嘗試在對日本不當勞動行為救濟命令的裁量權基準法理進行概觀性的考察研究後，作成總括性之研究成果提出。並且進一步嘗試分析救濟命令法理的演進過程，以解釋日本不當勞動行為制度在作為一個繼受的、準司法的行政救濟制度上，發展的難題以及演進的全貌，期待得給予臺灣甫上路實行的不當勞動行為裁決制度在比較法上之參照與啟示。英文摘要：Taiwan implemented the new collective labor law since May 1, 2011, which imported the unfair labor practice system applied many years of United States and Japan, opened a new era of the Collective Labour Relations Act. Japan, as our system of unfair labor practice successors country, accumulated up to 60 years of practice and jurisprudence of the Labor Committee of Practice, the exercise of discretion made for order-for-relief method and Boundary has been the formation of a stable type of system operation mode and command made jurisprudence. This paper try the order-for-relief discretion benchmark jurisprudence in the unfair labor practice in Japan for an overview of the research, made inclusive of research. And further attempts to analyze the evolution of jurisprudence relief command to explain the Japanese system of unfair labor practice, This paper is looking forward to Taiwan in comparison method of reference and inspiration.起始頁-結束頁：141-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：《論語》「言語」弟子志行討論：宰我並列篇名：Discussion of Disciple's Ambition in ”The Analects of Confucius” for ”Language Competence”: Zaiwo作者：吳元豐(Yuan-Feng Wu)關鍵字：宰我;言語;佞;晝寢;三年之喪;Zaiwo;language;flattery;sleep in day time;mourning for three years期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：52卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文試從三方面對宰我之人格志行作一完整的分析與評論：一是檢索《論語》中孔子對於言語所秉持的態度、及其與世俗普遍價值觀的本質差異情形。二是直接針對《論語》涉及宰我之紀錄，對其言語之才幹與聰明、及其背後所反映之心態、性格之缺失，做出一貫而深入的分析討論。最後，針對後世論者對於宰我人格之平反及其普遍之觀點，本文舉其代表性者作一評估及回應。總結而論，道在孔子，雖不必排斥人卓越之才華能力，但人是否真實與德行，始終與才能無必然之關係。人德之真實，乃在於一切平凡之事情中的微小努力、力學以更善而已。亦即從人人可能亦可為者而立而已，非以人所不能而自我凸顯以為人道真實與人生之價值意義。亦唯有如此之道，始能真正博大高明、亦且平易近人的，非超越性之真實。英文摘要：This article tries to make a complete analysis and criticism for Zaiwo's personality and ambition from three aspects. First, retrieve Confucius' attitude to language, and essential differences between his attitude and common views of value in the Analects; second, process a consistent and deep analysis and discussion for Ziwo's language competence and clever, psychology and character flaw reflected behind from the Analects concerning the records relating to Zaiwo. At the end, this article selects typical ones from the later theorists that redress Zaiwo's personality and their general concepts. General speaking, Confucius' Tao even needs not have to reject people's outstanding talents and abilities, but truth and virtue always have no inevitable relationship with talent. The Tao shows its true that minor efforts and hard-working will make every ordinary thing done much better, meaning it's possible to promote your desire to set goal as a benevolent person to others, not to show yourself off when you're better than others as if Tao's truth and the value of life. There is but one Tao showing great and true as well as approachable through this way.起始頁-結束頁：195-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Valuation of Quanto Derivatives Using Bivariate GARCH-Jump Models並列篇名：以二元GARCH跳躍模型評價匯率連動衍生性金融商品作者：何曉緯(Hsiao-Wei Ho);廖子翔(Tzu-Hsiang Liao)關鍵字：二元GARCH跳躍模型;隨機波動度;匯率連動衍生性金融商品;Bivariate GARCH-jump model;stochastic volatility;quanto derivatives期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文提出一非受限二元NGARCH跳躍模型，並用以評價匯率連動衍生性商品。模型中，跳躍發生於定價核、外國資產價格及匯率。此外，我們將此模型與以下模型進行實證比較：（1）二元離散Merton模型、（2）二元一般化Merton模型、（3）二元NGARCH常態模型，以及（4）受限二元NGARCH跳躍模型。結果顯示非線性的非對稱模型最能捕捉外國資產價格與匯率的動態過程。英文摘要：We propose an unrestricted bivariate NGARCH-jump model to value quanto derivatives. In this model, jumps take place in pricing kernel and, consequently, in returns of foreign asset prices and exchange rates. In empirical examination, we compare this model with the following four model variations: (1) a bivariate discrete-time Merton model, (2) a bivariate generalized Merton model, (3) a bivariate NGARCH-normal model, and (4) a restricted bivariate NGARCH-jump model. The results suggest that the unrestricted bivariate NGARCH-jump model outperforms the others. This implies that the nonlinear asymmetric model with jumps best captures the dynamics of foreign asset prices and exchange rates.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(4).12篇名：A Valuation Model of Financial Derivatives under the Influence of Multiple Correlated Factors with Sudden and Rare Uncertainty並列篇名：在多種相關因素影響下面臨罕見突變之衍生性金融商品估價模型作者：金淦(Gan Jin)關鍵字：狀態變數;衍生性金融商品;一般估價方程式;系統跳躍風險;State variable;derivatives;general valuation (pricing) equation;systematic jump risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：對於受多種相關不確定因素（包括交易資產價格以外因素）影響之證券市場，本文使用一種較為統一的方法，以推導出衍生性金融商品之估價模型。本文將此一方法運用於非線性標的狀態變數，在系統突變情形下推導出估價模型，並在一定條件下推導出模型之閉式解。英文摘要：The traditional pricing theory of financial derivatives focuses mostly on derivatives dependent on prices of traded assets, but seldom cares about derivatives on other state variables that are not tradable in securities markets. In this paper, we mainly introduce a unified method to discuss derivatives pricing problems under the circumstances mentioned previously and deduce a general model for the derivatives. This methodology is then extended to the situation where the underlying state variables change with systematic jump risk. We also study the pricing model for derivatives when the equations of the underlying state variables are nonlinear.起始頁-結束頁：37-53資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(4).23篇名：Monitoring the Risk of Mortgage Loans Dynamically with Survival Analysis並列篇名：以存活分析法動態監控房貸風險作者：葉玫惠(Clover M. Yeh);李存修(Tsun-Siou Lee)關鍵字：存活分析;房貸;存活表;危險比例模型;信用評分系統;Survival analysis;mortgage loan;survival table;proportional hazards model;credit scoring system期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究應用存活分析於房貸的動態風險管理，並建立一應用於房貸的存活分析表。存活分析法可估算貸款人在未來各時點發生違約或提前清償的風險，因此對房貸的風險評估與未來現金流的估算極有幫助。應用台灣知名金融機構之房貸資料所做實證研究顯示，與目前普遍運用的邏輯迴歸分析模型相比，存活分析及存活表皆有較好的表現。英文摘要：This study uses survival analysis to dynamically monitor mortgage loans because it can tell not only if a loan will default or be prepaid within the loan term but also when these events will happen. With survival analysis, financial institutions can make credit granting or risk controlling decisions based on expected profits and losses rather than on default or prepayment probability. Moreover, this study introduces a special credit score system, the survival table, whose user-friendliness simplifies the risk management of mortgage loans. Evidence from Taiwan shows that survival-based methods perform superiorly to traditional logistic models.起始頁-結束頁：55-76資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(4).34篇名：Chairman Change in Family and Non-Family Firms: The Evidence of Founder Succession from Entrepreneurial Firms並列篇名：長江後浪推前浪？家族企業與非家族企業董事長職位變動之比較作者：周淑卿(Shu-Ching Chou);徐渝雯(Wu-Wen Hsu)關鍵字：董事長替換;董事長職位傳承;家族企業;第二代;Chairman change;succession;family firms;second generation期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究分析台灣企業董事長替換因素及替換後公司績效。結果顯示，當公司經營績效愈好、董事長兼任總經理及為家族企業時，董事長替換可能性較低。發生併購及董事會人數較高的企業，董事長替換機率較高。家族企業通常選擇在績效好的時候交棒給親屬或第二代，由親屬繼任董事長的家族企業，公司績效低於未發生董事長替換之企業。英文摘要：We analyze factors that affect chairman change and succession performance of Taiwanese firms. Our results show that firms with better performance, firms with CEOchair duality, and family firms have a low probability of chairman change. On the other hand, firms that engage in mergers and acquisitions or possess a large board size have a high probability of chairman change. Chairman succession in family firms occurs when firm performance is favorable. Our results show that the performance of family firms with the chairman position taken over by relatives is lower than that of family firms without chairman replacement.起始頁-結束頁：77-113資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(4).45篇名：Investment of Foreign Financial Institutions in China Banking Sector: A Survival Model Analysis並列篇名：外資金融機構角色及其參股中國大陸銀行決策研究作者：張惠龍(Hui-Lung Chang);吳壽山(Sou-Shan Wu);廖四郎(Szu-Lang Liao)關鍵字：參股;危險函數;最大概似估計值;截斷資料;最適機率強度門檻;Acquisition of equity stakes;hazard function;maximum likelihood estimation;censored data;optimal probability hazard threshold期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文分析外資金融機構在中國大陸金融市場採行參股策略之動機與目標，並求得最適參股機率強度門檻。實證研究顯示外資金融機構採行參股策略目的主要在於創造被參股對象市場價值，及增加參股投資報酬。對於獲利能力及資產品質較佳之外資金融機構，以及資產品質較佳之中國大陸銀行，則具有較高之參股與被參股潛在動機。英文摘要：This article applies Cox's proportional-hazard survival model to analyze foreign financial institutions' strategic equity investment decision in Chinese banks and obtain the optimal probability hazard threshold as a criterion. The results confirm that the objectives of foreign strategic investments are to increase the profitability and market values of the target Chinese banks. In general, high earning and asset quality foreign financial institutions and high asset quality Chinese banks are both highly motivated to engage in strategic investment transaction.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(3).16篇名：Are Bank Capital Buffers Cyclical? Evidence of Developed and Developing Countries並列篇名：銀行資本緩衝是否有景氣循環現象？已開發國家和開發中國家之實證研究作者：陳怡凱(Yi-Kai Chen);何月芳(Amy Yueh-Fang Ho);許景嵐(Ching-Lan Hsu)關鍵字：景氣循環;抗景氣循環;順景氣循環;資本緩衝;普通股權緩衝;Business cycle;countercyclical;procyclical;capital buffer;common equity buffer期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文探討資本緩衝和景氣循環間的關係。1995至2009年全球銀行樣本顯示資本和普通股權益緩衝具順景氣循環現象，大型銀行和銀行控股公司在已開發國家和以市場為基礎的金融體系具順景氣循環的資本緩衝和抗景氣循環的普通股權益緩衝，傾向增加第二類資本以提高資本適足率。結果支持金融危機後巴塞爾協議III的抗景氣循環資本緩衝措施。英文摘要：This study examines the relationship between capital buffers and business cycle fluctuations. The results show procyclicality in both capital and common equity buffers in banks of 171 countries from 1995 to 2009. Large banks and bank holding companies in developed countries and market-based financial systems have procyclical capital buffers and countercyclical common equity buffers. These banks tend to raise Tier 2 capital to improve their capital ratio. The results of the empirical evidence are consistent with the procyclicality phenomenon that occurred in the 2008 financial crisis, and supports the Basel III requirements for countercyclical capital buffer.起始頁-結束頁：27-56資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(3).27篇名：The High-Frequency Responses of China's A-Share Market to Unexpected Monetary Policy Announcements並列篇名：中央銀行貨幣政策調整的股市價格效應研究－基於A股市場高頻數據的實證分析作者：盧新生(Xin-Sheng Lu);寇明婷(Ming-Ting Kou)關鍵字：貨幣政策;A股市場;高頻反應;事件窗口;Monetary policy;China's A-share market;high frequency responses;event windows期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文通過設計事件窗口分析A股市場對中央銀行貨幣政策調整的反應。採用高頻事件方法使本研究有效避免了貨幣政策與金融市場變量之間的內生性影響，也排除了其他宏觀政策的影響。實證結果顯示，A股市場對貨幣政策調整具有顯著反應，且反應發生在包含政策宣布的事件窗口內；A股市場對貨幣政策調整的預期效應不明顯。英文摘要：This paper examines the high-frequency responses of the China's A-share market to monetary surprises. The study contributes to the existing literature by designing a series of event windows with tick data, which enables us to solve the endogeneity problem between the financial market and monetary policy. We document a significant policy effect on the A-share market, and find that the most significant responses of the market to monetary policy occur within the event window that contains the policy announcement. Our empirical results indicate that monetary policy is not well anticipated by market participants until the policy releases.起始頁-結束頁：57-71資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(3).38篇名：Media Impacts around Earnings Announcement Dates with Consideration of Investor Types and Market Scenarios並列篇名：考量投資人類型與市場情境探討盈餘宣告前媒體報導之影響作者：盧陽正(Yang-Cheng Lu);魏裕珍(Yu-Chen Wei)關鍵字：媒體曝光度;投資人類型;盈餘宣告;市場情境;交易行為;Media coverage;investor types;earnings announcements;market scenarios;trading behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文剖析臺灣證券市場盈餘宣告前之媒體報導對投資人交易行為之影響，實證發現盈餘宣告前個股之曝光度對外國投資人交易之價格變化與波動度有正向影響，且在多頭與空頭市場有一致發現；此外曝光度與自然人交易之波動度有正向關聯，對價格變化則無顯著影響。個股在媒體之報導確實讓投資人產生不同印象，進而影響其交易行為。英文摘要：This study examines the impacts of media reports prior to earnings announcements on trading behaviors in the Taiwan stock market. The results reveal that media coverage prior to earnings announcements has positive impacts on the price changes and volatility initiated by foreign investors, with the findings being consistent in both bull and bear markets. There exists a positive relation between media coverage and trading volatility for individual traders; however, there is no significant relation between the media and price changes. We argue that a firm's media exposure leaves investors with diverse impressions, ultimately influencing their trading behavior.起始頁-結束頁：73-104資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(3).49篇名：Consumption, Labor Income, and Expected Stock Returns並列篇名：消費、勞動所得和預期股票報酬率作者：吳淑貞(Shue-Jen Wu)關鍵字：消費;勞動所得;預期報酬;可預測性;時間序列;Consumption;labor income;expected return;predictability;time series期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近期實證資料指出總體經濟變數如「消費－財富比」是預測股票報酬率的適當預測指標。本研究進一步以「消費－所得－價格比」克服財富資料取得困難性。實證結果顯示該變數在樣本內、外預測能力均優於「消費－財富比」、「股利－價格比」，和「產出－價格比」等變數。「消費－所得－價格比」套用國際資料時也有很強的預測能力。英文摘要：This paper proposes a macroeconomic variable that involves using the difference between consumption and labor income normalized according to stock prices. The results presented in this study show that the proposed variable captures more variations in future aggregate stock returns than do the dividend-price ratio proposed by Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), the output-price ratio proposed by Rangvid (2006), and the consumptionwealth ratio proposed by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). This study also shows that the proposed variable performs well for out-of-sample forecasts. Moreover, the predictive power of this variable is robust for international data.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(2).110篇名：The Information Improving Channel of Exchange Rate Intervention: How Do Official Announcements Work?並列篇名：匯率干預的資訊改善管道：官方宣告的作用作者：岩<U+58F7>健太郎(Kentaro Iwatsubo);川西諭(Satoshi Kawanishi)關鍵字：匯率;干預;宣告;隱含波動率;資訊;Exchange rate;interventions;announcements;implied volatility;information期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文指出官方匯率干預的宣告有助提升私有資訊的準確性，並讓套利活動增加，因而改善匯率的資訊內涵。與傳統訊息管道不同的是，即使中央銀行沒有資訊優勢，其匯率干預宣告仍然存在資訊提升效果。本文發現官方干預宣告在隱含波動率較高時效果較佳，符合理論預期，亦即隱含波動率較高時，交易者的資訊較不精確且匯率較易失真。英文摘要：This paper presents a new channel of foreign exchange interventions under which official announcements can improve the accuracy of private agents' information and encourage riskarbitrage, thereby enhancing the informativeness of the exchange rate. Unlike the traditional signaling channel, this effect holds even when the central bank does not possess superior information to traders. We also provide evidence that announced interventions are more effective in periods of high implied volatility, consistent with the theoretical prediction that the implied volatility of the exchange rate is positively correlated with the information inaccuracy of traders and the degree of an exchange rate misalignment.起始頁-結束頁：27-64資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(2).211篇名：Ownership Pattern and Long-Term M&A Performance並列篇名：主併者所有權與併購長期績效作者：吳菊華(Chu-Hua Wu);何俊廷(Jiun-Ting Ho)關鍵字：併購;股權比率;長期績效;M&A;stock ownership;long-term performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：大部份實證研究結果指出併購過程中被併公司獲取了絕大部份的利益，本文探討主併公司若無法獲利，為何仍進行併購活動。我們利用1992至2006年間美國之409個併購案件進行研究，發現垂直併購之主併者其所有權比例與其併購後長期股價表現間存在非線性關係，同時發現在併購後非為100%所有權之主併者其長期股價表現優於100%所有權之主併者。英文摘要：Empirical studies largely agree that while mergers create value, shareholders of the target companies reap virtually all of the benefits. We thus explore why acquirers are still engaged in M&A if they do not gain. For a sample of 409 U.S. M&A cases in the period 1992 to 2006, we find a nonlinear relationship between acquirers' ownership pattern and their long-term post-merger performance for vertical mergers, and also find that acquirers holding less than 100% will perform better than acquirers with 100% holding after mergers. Our results indicate that sharing some ownership with target firms is more lucrative to acquirers.起始頁-結束頁：65-95資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(2).312篇名：Compensation Incentives, Employment Risk and Intended Risk-Taking in the Taiwan Mutual Fund Industry並列篇名：台灣共同基金經理人意圖性風險承擔行為之研究作者：王祝三(C. Edward Wang);林美珍(Mei-Chen Lin);葉家宏(Chia-Hung Yeh)關鍵字：風險承擔行為;雇用風險;報酬動機;共同基金;Risk-taking;employment risk;compensation incentives;mutual funds期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究檢測台灣共同基金經理人的風險承擔行為是否會受到報酬動機與雇用動機之相對強度所影響。研究證實，多頭市場期間台灣共同基金經理人的風險承擔行為會受到報酬動機所影響，上半年基金績效較差的經理人，在下半年時會增加較多的風險；但在空頭市場期間，雇用風險卻會使上半年輸家在下半年時降低投資組合風險。英文摘要：This paper examines the effects of compensation incentives and employment risk on intended risk-taking of fund managers. We find that in a bull market when compensation incentives are relatively strong, midyear losers tend to increase their risk more than midyear winners in an attempt to catch up with them. In a bear market when employment risk dominates, midyear losers engage in less risk-taking.起始頁-結束頁：97-127資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(2).413篇名：General-Equilibrium Pricing of Stock Index Futures Allowing for Regular and Irregular Events Underlying the Stochastic Market Volatility並列篇名：考慮隨機波動性中的正常與異常事件後、股價指數期貨的一般均衡定價模型作者：林修葳(William Hsiou-Wei Lin);王佳真(Jai-Jen Wang);徐辜元宏(Yuan-Hung Hsuku)關鍵字：隨機波動性;跳躍事件;資訊到達的時間間隔;跨期期貨定價;一般均衡模型;Stochastic volatility;jump;information time;intertemporal futures pricing;generalequilibrium model期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文採用「資訊到達的時間間隔」（information time; Chang, Chang, Chang, and Lim（1998））以及「跳躍事件」（jump; Merton,（1976））的設定，區分標的資產價格波動性中，屬於正常或異常事件的部份，並推導出CIR（Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross（1985）；Hemler and Longstaff（1991））一般均衡架構下的股價指數期貨定價封閉解。根據比較靜態與模擬分析的結果，這種進一步的解析，有助於釐清文獻中對於經濟變數間關係的一些爭議。英文摘要：Information-time (Chang, Chang, and Lim (1998)) and jump (Merton (1976)) settings are applied to highlight the stochastic-volatility effects on futures pricing resulting from regular and irregular events and derive a general-equilibrium formula in its closed form under the CIR framework (Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985); Hemler and Longstaff (1991)). Partial differential and simulation results show that disputed relationships in literature among economic variables can be explained by further exploring different stochastic dimensions of the market volatility.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(1).114篇名：Foreign Investors, Corporate Operational Efficiency and Performance並列篇名：外資持股、公司營運效率與績效表現作者：李桐豪(Tung-Hao Lee);黃俊凱(Jiun-Kai Huang)關鍵字：外國投資者持股比率;公司營運效率;資料包絡法;外國專業投資機構;Foreign investment shareholding ratios;corporate operational efficiency;DEA;QFII期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文分析外資投資決策如何影響公司營運效率與績效表現。實證發現：外資持股與營運效率有顯著相關。營運效率扮演部份中介效果。當持股進入穩定成熟期時，外資對營運效率有較重的影響力：長期持股存量有助營運效率與績效表現；短期持股變動量則對營運造成督導效果。外資在新興市場中產生外溢效果，改善公司營運效率與績效。英文摘要：Using data envelopment analysis, this article examines the influence of foreign investors on corporate operational efficiency and performance. This study identifies a significant correlation between corporate operational efficiency and foreign investment shareholding ratios. Corporate operational efficiency plays a mediating role between foreign investors and performance. When foreign shareholdings achieve a stable and mature stage, the long-term foreign investment shareholding stock facilitates the enhancement of operational efficiency, whereas short-term shareholding variation levels create pressure or monitoring and disciplinary effects for corporate operations. Overall, in Taiwan market, foreign investors could have spillover effects on listed companies and raise their efficiency and performance.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(1).215篇名：Does the Protection of Directors' Liability Insurance Lead to Overinvestment?並列篇名：董事責任險與過度投資行為之相關性研究作者：詹家昌(Chia-Chung Chan);陳家偉(Chia-Wei Chen)關鍵字：董事責任險;過度投資;Directors' liability insurance;overinvestment期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文乃試圖探討董事責任險與企業過度投資行為的相關性；藉由觀察國內的上市櫃企業，實證結果顯示有投保董事責任險的企業似乎存在明顯的過度投資。該結果一方面透露了存在於責任險市場中的道德危險，另一方面國內投保與未投保約各半的樣本及市場特性亦佐證了主要倚賴歐美市場樣本的相關研究，並間接支持了各國近年來所推動強制企業揭露責任險投保情形的政策。英文摘要：In this study, we examine the linkage between directors' liability insurance and overinvestment behavior. Based on observations in Taiwan, our findings indicate that firms covered by this insurance tend to have a higher degree of overinvestment. This supports the notion that moral hazard seems to exist in the market of directors' liability insurance. As similar proportions of firms in Taiwan with and without this insurance, unlike observations in western countries, may enrich related studies with alternative market characteristics, revealing the dark side of this insurance also confirms the necessity for nations to disclose which firms are covered by this insurance.起始頁-結束頁：61-80資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(1).316篇名：The Information Content of the Sale of Nonperforming Loans by Taiwanese Banks: Evidence of an Affiliated-Buyer Effect並列篇名：台灣銀行業不良放款出售的資訊內涵：關聯買方效果的證據作者：劉永欽(Yong-Chin Liu);陳香如(Hsiang-Ju Chen);蔡秉原(Bing-Yuan Tsai)關鍵字：不良放款;關聯買方效果;資訊透明度;效率;利益衝突;異常報酬;Nonperforming loans;affiliated-buyer effect;information transparency;efficiency;conflict of interest;abnormal returns期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文比較效率和資訊透明假說對不良放款（NPL）出售宣告股票異常報酬（ARs）的解釋力，及檢視買、賣方有關聯時對ARs的影響。以台灣的NPL拍賣和拍定事件為樣本，發現拍賣宣告使賣方股票有負ARs，隱喻NPL的低資訊透明度比效率假說具解釋力。銀行出售NPL予其大股東成立的資產管理公司會有較低的ARs，表示投資人視此種交易是大股東牟私利的行為。英文摘要：This paper compares the explanatory power of efficiency hypothesis with information transparency hypothesis for seller's stock abnormal returns (ARs) following the sale announcement of nonperforming loans (NPLs), and examines the affiliated-buyer effect on the ARs. Using NPL auctions and closed-deal events in Taiwan as samples, we find on auctions, sellers' stocks suffer negative ARs, implying that low information transparency on NPLs, compared with efficiency, is the major reason for the ARs. Banks selling NPLs to asset management companies established by their blockholders face lower ARs, signifying that investors view the type of closed deals being motivated by blockholder's self-interest behavior.起始頁-結束頁：81-106資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2014.22(1).401篇名：Equilibrium Unemployment and Growth: The Role of Revenue Sharing and Bargaining Institutions並列篇名：均衡失業與成長－收益分紅與工會談判作者：劉嘉瀅(Chia-Ying Liu)關鍵字：工會談判;經濟成長;收益／利潤分紅;失業;Bargaining institution;Economic growth;Revenue/profit sharing;Unemployment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文建構一個內生成長模盤，其中考慮：(1)工會談判造成均衡失業，(2)勞動薪資與收益／利潤分紅有關。在這樣的設定下，本文證明，於一個包含工會且採取收益分紅的成長模型，失業與經濟成長可能呈現一正向關係，因而試圖針對實證上高失業可能伴隨高經濟成長的現象給予一理論上的解釋。同時，本文也發現，在一個採取收益分紅斜度的經濟體系中，工會與經濟成長並非存在一單調的關係，而是取決於談判的方式，這樣的結果協調了理論與實證不一致的現象。此外，本文亦分別考慮充分就業模型與包含分紅工資制度的均衡失業模塑底下，比較清費稅的成長效果。本文發現，若勞動與休閒缺少抵換關係，不論於收益或利潤分紅制度之下，消費稅的增加對經濟成長皆存在正向效果。英文摘要：This paper constructs an endogenous growth model in which (i) union wage bargaining causes equilibrium unemployment; and (ii) revenue/profit sharing is related to workers' compensation. In this setup, we prove that under a revenue sharing scheme, a growing unionized economy may be characterized by a positive relationship between unemployment and growth and, accordingly, we provide a theoretical explanation as to why in reality high unemployment can be quite compatible with high economic growth. We also find that, in an economy with revenue sharing, unionization does not exhibit a monotonic relationship with growth, but crucially depends upon the bargaining institution. This result reconciles the discrepancy between the existing theory and empirical observation. Besides, we make a comparison concerning the growth effect of a consumption tax in a full-employment economy with that in a share economy with equilibrium unemployment. It is shown that without a labor-leisure trade-off, a consumption tax has a positive effect on economic growth under either a revenue sharing scheme or a profit sharing scheme.起始頁-結束頁：485-525資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：資本結構、財政政策、貨幣政策與經濟成長並列篇名：Capital Structure, Fiscal Policy, Monetary Policy and Economic Growth作者：范志萍(Chih-Ping Fan);蕭明福(Ming-Fu Shaw)關鍵字：經濟成長;貨幣政策;財政政策;資本結構;廣義信用管道;Economic growth;Monetary policy;Fiscal policy;Capital structure;Broad credit channel期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文建構一個具債權代理成本的內生經濟成長模型，藉由理論分析可以得到：(1)提高（降低）公司債券利息所得稅率將傷害（有益）長期就業與經濟成長、長期通貨膨脹惡化（改善）、資本財市場價格下挫（上揚），但對公司長期負債權益比的影響無法確定。(2)不論是公司利潤稅率、股利所得稅率或是股利率，其對總體經濟的影響是不確定，因為政策改變資本財價格，進而誘發的資本財稅後邊際產量的變化，扮演一個重要角色。(3)提高（降低）名目利率是否對長期就業、經濟成長、通貨膨脹愈有害（有益），取決於公司債券利息所得稅率是否高於（低於）公司利潤稅率；其中，貨幣政策對外部融資貼水的影響是關鍵。數值模擬結果發現不論是緊縮財政政策、寬鬆股利政策或是單位債權代理成本的升高皆不利於就業、經濟成長和通貨膨脹率，但對公司資本結構的影響則各有不同。提高名目利率雖對就業和經濟成長有所助益，卻需要付出通貨膨脹率與負債權益比皆上揚的代價。貨幣政策下，負債權益比和經濟成長呈現順循環關係。英文摘要：This paper develops an endogenous growth model with capital structure that incorporates agency costs in the bond market. The main results from the theory analysis are as follows: (1) Increasing the tax rate imposed on the corporate bond yield reduces economic growth, employment, the inflation rate and the market price of capital. However, the impact of it on the firm’s debt-to-equity is ambiguous. (2) The impact of the corporate tax, the dividend tax, and dividend yield on economic growth, employment, inflation rate, and the debt-to-equity is ambiguous. (3) A high nominal interest rate is associated with high economic growth, employment, debt-to-equity ratio and inflation rate if the corporate tax rate is higher than the tax rate on the corporate bond yield. The numerical results are summarized in the following. The tax on the corporate tax, the corporate bond yield, and the distributed dividend is harmful to economic growth, employment, and inflation rate. Similarly, an increase in dividend yield and agency cost is harmful to macroeconomic performances. But, the impact of those policies on debt-to-equity is different. The relationship between debt-to-equity and economic growth is procyclical for monetary policy.起始頁-結束頁：527-597資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：老人醫療利用的價格效果－以921震災的自然實驗為例並列篇名：The Price Effect of Medical Care Utilization for the Elderly: A Natural Experiment of the 921 Chi-Chi Earthquake作者：蔡偉德(Wei-Der Tsai);陳芝嘉(Chih-Chia Chen);余清祥(Jack C. Yue)關鍵字：921震災;老人醫療利用;醫療價格彈性;就醫免部分負擔;非線性差異中之差異估計模型;921 Earthquake;Medical care utilization of elderly;Price elasticity of medical care demand;Copayment exemption;Nonlinear difference-in-difference期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用民國88年921震災後，政府對災民發放921震災卡之免部分負擔的優惠為一自然實驗，以災區（南投縣及台中縣）原本即享有就醫免部分負擔的榮民榮眷、並具有災民身份者為控制組，同時以非災區（彰化及雲林縣）的榮民榮眷但非災民者、以及災區領有921震災健保卡之災民為兩個實驗組。將差異中之差異分析方法應用於非線性模型（負二項分配迴歸模型及二部模型），分析65歲以上老人之健保醫療利用的價格彈性。在控制時間趨勢與族群差異後，本文研究發現在相同的震災處置效果下，921震災健保卡之價格補貼顯著提升災民的門診醫療利用3.24次（男性樣本則為3.50次），門診價格彈性為－0.05（男性樣本為－0.06），但對住院醫療利用卻無明顯地影響，政府的免部分負擔政策期滿終止後，災民的門診醫療利用不再明顯地增加。在控制價格補貼的處置效果下，震災傷害提高老人門診醫療利用4.63次（男性樣本為4.55次），災後第一年的住院機率增加10.37%（男性樣本為12.58%），災後第二年增幅降為2.66%（男性樣本為3.29%），災後第三年則無顯著的變化，顯然震災傷害對老人醫療利用的影響大於價格補貼的效果。本文對老人醫療利用的估計結果，可提供政府對天然災害醫療救助補貼及控制老人醫療支出政策參考依據。英文摘要：This study aims to analyze the effect of price changes on the medical care utilization of the elderly aged 65 and above. The 921 Chi-Chi earthquake occurred on September 21, 1999, and caused severe damage to the central part of Taiwan, especially Nantou and Taichung Counties. Immediately following the earthquake, Taiwan’s government provided medical aid to the victims via waiving the NHI copayments of ambulatory care for one year and of inpatient care for two years. We use the 921 earthquake as a natural experiment to investigate how the elderly reacted to the copayment exemption. By using the difference-in-difference in nonlinear regression specification, on one hand, we compare a group of veterans, who were victims and lived in the affected areas, with nonveteran victims, to identify the effect of price subsidization. On the other hand, we compared the victim veterans living in the affected area with the non-victim veterans living in the unaffected area to identify the impact of earthquake damage on the medical care utilization. Our empirical results show that the government copayment exemption policy increased the mean number of outpatient visits per person by 3.24 for all observations and 3.5 for the male sample, and had no effect on inpatient care either in the probability of hospitalization or length of stay after hospitalization. The earthquake resulted in an increase of 4.63 in the mean number of outpatient visits per person for all observations (4.55 for the male sample), and an increase of 10.37% and 2.66% in the likelihood of hospitalization roughly (12.58% and 3.29% for the male sample), respectively, in the first year and second year following the earthquake. The price elasticity of outpatient care for the elderly was about -0.05 for all observations and -0.06 for the male sample. Our empirical results provide some policy implications regarding the control of the growth of medical costs for the elderly.起始頁-結束頁：599-645資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：垂直產品差異與經濟整合的福利分析並列篇名：Welfare Effects of Economic Integration in the Presence of VIIT作者：林晏如(Yen-Ju Lin);林燕淑(Yan-Shu Lin);吳芝文(Zhi-Win Wu)關鍵字：垂直產業內貿易;經濟整合;垂直產品差異化;福利效果;Vertical intra-industry trade;Economic integration;Vertical product differentiation;Welfare effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用垂直產品差異化模型，探討經濟整合對不同品質產品生產國家福利的影響，以及品質差異程度在經濟整合過程中的重要性。在貿易成本的設定上我們同時考慮文獻上會用的二種型式：運費和關稅。本文發現，這二種設定的經濟整合福利效果差異甚大。在運費型式之下，無論兩國產品品質差異為何，低品質國家在經濟整合過程中必定受益；而高品質國家在品質差異程度不為大時，整合過程可能會出現福利先下降再上升的情況。此隱含在經濟整合過程中，對低品質國家有利時對高品質國家未必有利；但只要是對高品質國家有利則低品質國家也一定受惠。相反地，在關稅設定下，不論不用品質產品生產國的進口關稅稅率為相等或不等，在經濟整合過程中，遭逢傷害的則為低品質產品生產國；高品質國家的福利水準反而是隨著關稅下降持續地上升。顯示關稅型式的經濟整合在二國之間產生了利益衝突，經濟整合不易實行。英文摘要：This paper constructs a vertical intra-industry trade (VIIT) model to explore the welfare effects of economic integration with different quality products as well as the role of the degree of quality differentiation. We take into account both popular settings of trade costs in the literature-transport costs and tariffs-and find that there is a significant diversity in welfare efficacy. In the transport costs setting, no matter what the product quality differences are, the low quality country will be better off as economic integration proceeds. However, the high quality country might be better off or worse off during the process of economic integration, depending on the degree of quality differentiation. This implies that what is good for the high quality country also benefits the low quality country, but the opposite is not always true. Contrarily, in the tariffs setting, a drop in trade costs definitely benefits the high quality country, while it may harm the low quality country. This shows that a tariff reduction gives rise to a conflict between the two countries, and economic integration is not always an easy road to travel on.起始頁-結束頁：647-679資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：Does D&O Insurance Enhance Target Shareholder Wealth during M&As?並列篇名：董事暨重要職員責任險與併購宣告日被併公司之異常報酬的相關性研究作者：陳家偉(Chia-Wei Chen)關鍵字：董事暨重要職員責任險;股東財富;併購;D&O insurance;Shareholder wealth;M&As期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：伴隨著企業舞弊案件的逐年增加，保障投資人權益的相關措施近年來也因此而吸引了學術與實務界的重視；其中董事暨重要職員責任險在諸多提升公司治理的機制中更是引起了廣泛的討論，其原因不外乎該類保險鞏固了投資人、董事與經理人的財富，並改善或移轉了經理人因訴訟賠償壓力下所可能造成的過度保守行為，但卻也可能同時衍生出道德危險的誘因，並進而給予了經理人在合法情況下剝奪股東或投資人權益的動機。透過分析2008至2010年共計129家園內被併之上市種企業於併購宣告日之異常報酬，本文發現已投保該類保險之被併企業，相較於事件中未投保的企業，明顯存在較低的宣告日累計異會報酬；在實證數據與顯著性並不敏感於樣本及變數的選取或衡量方式下，本文的發現凸顯了董事暨重要職員責任險的負面價值，並呼應了近期以美國、中國及南韓等為研究樣本的實證結果，在責任險的利與弊得以釐清之際，各國推動企業揭露投保內容的政策似乎也存在著必要性與價值。英文摘要：Following the increasing number of corporate wrongdoings, directors' and officers' liability (D&O) insurance, ideally designed to protect shareholder wealth, has attracted increasing attention from both scholars and practitioners. This insurance may enhance the function of the board and reduce conservatism. However, moral hazard problems may undermine the incentive for board monitoring and hence induce managers to pursue their own interests at the expense of shareholder wealth. Analyzing 129 listed firms announced to be acquired during the period from 2008 to 2010, the empirical findings indicate that target firms carrying D&O insurance tend to suffer lower cumulative abnormal returns (CARs). Moreover, the difference remains significant when alternative approaches or subsamples are applied, suggesting that the cons of this D&O insurance seem to outweigh the pros. Since the findings provide international evidence on the role of D&O insurance, disclosure of the information on this insurance, advocated recently in several nations, is worthy of support.起始頁-結束頁：305-329資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：董監事暨重要職員責任保險對管理階層盈餘管理行為之影響並列篇名：Directors and Officers Liability Insurance, Earnings Management Behavior, Abnormal Insurance Coverage作者：湯麗芬(Li-Fen Tang);廖秀梅(Hsiu-Mei Jiao);李建然(Jan-Zan Lee)關鍵字：董監事暨重要職員責任保險;盈餘管理行為;超額投保金額;Directors and Officers Liability Insurance;Earnings Management Behavior;Abnormal Insurance Coverage期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以2008年至2010年台灣上市（櫃）公司為研究對象，探討董監事暨重要職員責任保險（簡稱D&O保險）與管理階層盈餘管理行為之關聯性。實證結果發現，相對於未購買D&O保險的公司，有購買D&O保險的公司，管理階層益餘管理的幅度較大，而且進一步分析也發現，有購買D&O保險的公司，超額投保金額愈大，管理階層益餘管理的幅度是愈大。此外，本文實證結果亦發現，當管理階層操縱盈餘增加時，有購買D&O保險的公司，會讓管理階層有較大的空間；然而，當管理階層操縱益餘減少時，則未有穩鍵的證據支持購買D&O保險對管理階層盈餘管理的行為有明顯影響。英文摘要：Using publicly-available D&O insurance data for public companies in Taiwan from 2008 to 2010, this study examines the effects of directors and officers liability insurance (D&O insurance hereafter) on earnings management behavior of managers. The empirical results show that firms with D&O insurance have greater magnitude of discretionary accruals than those without D&O insurance. In addition, we also find that firms with higher abnormal D&O insurance coverage have greater magnitude of discretionary accruals. Furthermore, we find that there exists a positive relationship between D&O insurance and discretionary accruals in firms managing earnings upward. However, we find no significant evidence on the above-mentioned relationship for firms managing earnings downward.起始頁-結束頁：331-368資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：A New Look at the Dynamic Interrelationship between Growth and Profitability in the Chinese Property Liability Insurance Industry並列篇名：成長與績效間的交互關係－以中國產險業為例作者：鄭士卿(Vivian S. C. Jeng);楊曉文(Sharon S. Yang)關鍵字：產險業;公司成長;利潤持續;Property liability insurance;Firm growth;Profit persistence期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用中國產險業自2000年至2006年的資料，探討其成長及績效間的關係。此研究之目的是希望了解在開發中國家如中國，是否吉布萊法則（Gibrat' s Law）及利潤持續假說（Persistency of Profit, POP）依然存在；而此研究也使用聯立方程式來解釋成長與績效間的關係。研究結果發現與多數已開發國家類似，小公司通會成長較快，違反吉布萊法則。另外，去年度的超額利潤在今年度仍持續存在。最後，本期與前期的利潤都將影響本期的公司成長，表示出考量本期變數之重要性。英文摘要：We examine the nexus between growth and profitability for the Chinese property liability insurance industry during the period 2000-2006. This study adopts a simultaneous equation framework to understand the link between growth and profit since they are competing and interdependent variables for managers. The inverse relationship between size and growth, found across different subsamples and time periods, provides a challenge to the Law of Proportionate Effects. Profit persistence in the overall sample disappears with the exclusion of the state-owned monopoly of the People's Insurance Company of China (PICC) and within the more competitive period 2003-2006 when growth persistence is found. Abnormal profits in the previous period prompt faster growth in the next period. Thus both contemporaneous and lagged profits are important and omitting these variables results in inconsistent parameter estimates to describe the relationships.起始頁-結束頁：369-401資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：壽險準備金風險之衡量並列篇名：On the to Estimate the Risk of Life Insurance Reserves作者：謝明華(Ming-Hua Hsieh);黃雅文(Ya-Wen Hwang);郭維裕(Wei-Yu Kuo);蔡政憲(Cheng-Hsien Tsai)關鍵字：風險管理;人壽保險;準備金;Risk management;Life insurance;Reserving期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：壽險準備金存續期間長之特性使得如何衡量準備金風險成為壽險公司首要之務。相較於傳統的P測度法與歐盟Solvency II之QIS 2所提出之Q測度法，本研究提出QPQ方法來衡量壽險準備金之風險。理論上，在P測度法下計算未來責任現值時，折現率須採用無風險利率加上風險溢酬，然而風險溢酬無客觀可行的方法來進行估計，因此，大部分精算文獻並末考量風險溢酬。在Q測度法下，是在風險中立假設下模擬市場風險因子未來可能的變化，無法描繪實際市場波動所造成準備金價值變動之風險。QPQ方法則可避免上述方法的缺點。在時點t=0時，以市場經濟狀態並在Q測度下計算最佳估計值來作為準備金之估計值。但在準備金風險衡量方面，壽險公司需先在P測度下模擬時點t=H之市場情境，再於每個模擬出來的市場情境所對應的Q測度下進行最佳估計，計算時點t=H下之準備金。重覆進行此步驟後可以得到時點t=H下準備金之分佈。再以對應於所關心的風險期間之無風險利率來折現，即可推得時點t=0下準備金之分佈。最後透過風險衡量值，如風險值或尾端風險期望值來衡量準備金之風險。本研究以生死合險、利變型年金與股票指數型基金為例進行模擬試算。數值結果發現P測度法與Q測度法所計算之準備金風險與QPQ方法的確有顯著差異。傳統P測度法可能會過度衡量風險，因其考量全段保障期間之風險。而Q測度下所計算之準備金風險低於QPQ方法所得之結果，顯示以Q測度法衡量準備金風險可能無法正確反映風險。由於準備金適足性對壽險公司清償能力有很大之影響，因此，基於保守監理考量，本研究建議壽險公司應採用QPQ方法來衡量準備金風險。英文摘要：How to measure the risk of policy reserves is important for life insurers because policy reserves are the largest liabilities with long durations. In this paper, we propose the ”QPQ” method for determining the risk of policy reserves. We compare our approach with the traditional P-measure approach and Q-measure approach proposed by QIS 2 of Solvency II. Under the P-measure approach, the discount rate should be theoretically adjusted by risk premiums. However, it is difficult to determine the risk premiums of liabilities, and thus most studies have not considered the risk premium adjustment. Under the Q-measure approach, risk factors are simulated under the assumptions of risk neutrality. The movements of the risk factors, however, do not reflect the real movements of risk factors, and thus can-not reflect the possible real-world fluctuation of the reserves. The QPQ method can avoid the drawbacks of the above approaches.Based on the QPQ method, life insurers use best estimate valuation to determine their reserves at time t = 0 under Q measure. Then they generate stochastic future economic states (risk factors) from time 0 to time T under P-measure and apply the best estimate valuation to quantify their reserves at time t = H. For each scenario of the simulated stochastic future economic states, the reserve is again computed using best estimate valuation. The distribution of the reserve at time t = H is then discounted back to time t = 0 by the risk-free rate with maturity H. At the last step, commonly used risk measures (e.g., VaR and CTE) on the reserve distribution at time t = 0 are used to quantify the risk margin of the reserves.We apply the QPQ method to calculate the risk of reserves of the endowment policy, interest sensitive annuity, and equity-indexed annuity. We find that there exist significant differences between the QPQ, P-measure, and Q-measure approaches. The risk of reserves is overestimated under P-measure. However, the risk margin under Q-measure is lower than that under the QPQ method, suggesting that the risk of reserves is underestimated under Q-measure. Since the adequacy of policy reserves is critical to the solvency of life insurers, we suggest life insurers adopt the QPQ method to estimate and manage the reserve risk.起始頁-結束頁：403-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：損失率對再保險使用之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Loss Ratio on the use of Reinsurance作者：許永明(Yung-Ming Shiu);蕭景元(Ching-Yuan Hsiao)關鍵字：再保險使用;損失率;干擾效果;Reinsurance;Loss ratio;Moderating effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以2002年至2010年我國產險財務及業務資料為樣本，探討影響再保險決策之因素。由於再保險供給及價格可能因為產險公司損失率的改變而調整，故我們著重於探討損失率對再保險使用的影響，以及損失率是否干擾舉債程度對再保險使用的影響。根據研究結果，損失率對於產險公司再保險使用有負向影響，而且損失率會弱化舉債程度對再保險使用的正向影響。此結果的發生，可能因為損失率上升，導致再保險合約價格上升且供給減少，進而降低產險公司的再保險使用。英文摘要：Using data on Taiwan non-life insurers from 2002 to 2010, this study investigates the determinants of the demand for reinsurance. We argue that the supply and price of reinsurance may adjust in accordance with the change of non-life insurers' loss ratio. The results show that loss ratio negatively affect reinsurance use. Besides, we also find that loss ratio weakens the positive relation between leverage and reinsurance use. This implies that the increase in loss ratio is associated with the shortage of reinsurance supply, leading to less use of reinsurance by non-life insurers.起始頁-結束頁：435-483資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：替代品還是互補品？汽車車體損失險與任意汽車第三人責任險的關係探究並列篇名：Substitutes or Complements? The Interaction between Automobile Physical Damage Insurance and Voluntary Liability Insurance作者：彭盛昌(Sheng-Chang Peng);利菊秀(Chu-Shiu Li);劉純之(Chwen-Chi Liu)關鍵字：替代品;互補品;汽車車體損失險;任意汽車責任險;搭售訂價;Substitutes;Complements;Automobile physical damage insurance;Voluntary liability insurance;Bundling pricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：對消費者而言，汽車車體損失險與任意汽車第三人責任險是兩種完全不同保障範圍的險種。但是，一般分析汽車保險的文獻很少討論兩者的關係，也不在意其間的區別。本文以購買新車的消費者為對象，利用兩個保單年度的縱橫資料，分析消費者同時面對汽車車體損失與第三人損失的保險保障選擇。研究發現，保單持有人在第二年的購買組合若有改變，會顯著的受到第一年購買組合的影響。特別的是，保單持有人會以兩種險種互為替代或互補的方式，調整下一期購買組合，以達到潛在的均衡。而汽車保險組合之間的替代性，提供了保險公司以搭售方式來訂價與銷售的新思維。英文摘要：For consumers, vehicle damage insurance and liability insurance are completely different regarding the objects they cover. However, there is little research associated with the purchasing relationship between these two types of insurance. Thus, this paper examines the behavior of new car owners who purchase two seemingly related automobile insurance policies that cover the first party (automobile physical damage insurance) and third party (voluntary third-party liability insurance) using a panel data set of two policy years. The results indicate that for policyholders who are likely to adjust their coverage, current portfolios of two types of automobile insurance significantly affect their insurance portfolios in the following policy year. In fact, customers purchase the two kinds of automobile insurance policies as substitutes or complements to realize equilibrium potentials. The results suggest that insurers can consider optional bundle pricing strategies.起始頁-結束頁：145-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：再探台灣車體保險之道德危險－以2005至2007年資料為證並列篇名：A Revisit for the Moral Hazard of Comprehensive Auto Insurance in Taiwan: Evidence from 2005 To 2007作者：詹芳書(Linus Fang-Shu Chan)關鍵字：車體保險;道德危險;費率自由化;Comprehensive automobile insurance;Moral hazard;Premium rate deregulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：在台灣產物保險業費率自由化之後，保險人將風險資訊反應至保費計算已有明顯的差異，而檢證道德危險是否存於台灣車體保險之實證研究多取自費率自由化前之資料，故本研究以費率自由化後之資料再次檢證此重要議題。剔除提高保障之動機最有可能來自於受到學習效果影響的保單，在切齊保單的理賠範圍後，研究發現初次投保丙式車體保險之被保險人於續保年度轉換為免自負額乙式車體保險有負面的動機效果。本文的實證結果並無法確認複次投保有自負額乙式車體保險之被保險人於續保年度轉換至免自負額乙式車體保險是否有動機效果。本文推論理賠範圍的擴展較自負額的降低使被保險人產生較強的負面動機。英文摘要：As to incorporate insured's risk information to calculate benefits premium, there was an obvious change after premium rate deregulation of property and casualty insurance in Taiwan. Since most studies of moral hazard in comprehensive automobile insurance in Taiwan used data before the premium rate deregulation, this study turns to analyze the same issue by using data after it. After eliminating policies when policyholders switched their policies to different contract form most likely due to a learning effect and to make the claim conditions of the renewal form coincide with those of the initial form, a negative incentive effect was found to exist when policyholders switched their policies from form C to non-deductible form B. But the negative incentive effect was not found when policyholders switched their policies from deductible form B to non-deductible form B. I conclude that increasing coverage items provided more negative incentives than canceling deductibles.起始頁-結束頁：173-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：銷售通路與業務品質－個人健康險損失情形之實證研究並列篇名：Distribution Systems and the Quality of Business: An Empirical Test on Individual Health Insurance作者：許文彥(Wen-Yen Hsu);林庭宇(Ting-Yu Lin);邵淑君(Sandra S. C. Shao)關鍵字：銷售通路;個人健康險;二部模型;Distribution systems;Individual health insurance;Two-part model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文從薪酬結構與考核制度、銷售過程中資訊的取得及售後服務的動機等三個方面，分析銀行保險通路、電話行銷通路與傳統保險業務員通路的異同，並據以檢驗通路的特性對保險契約損失情形的影響。實證資料以台灣一家人壽保險公司於2002年承保之12,746件終身醫療險新契約為樣本，觀察其生效後67個月的理賠情形，研究方法採用二部模塑（two-part model）檢驗。實證結果顯示通路的基本特性對損失情形之影響有顯著差異。具體而言，銀行保險通路無論在發生短期理賠、初次理賠的時間、理賠機率和理賠次數，都是三個通路中最好的；其次，電話行銷通路在發生初次理賠的時間、理賠機率和理賠次數，皆優於傳統保險業務員通路；同樣地，採用配對樣本做穩鍵性分析，實證結果仍一致，發現銀行保險通路的業務品質最佳、電話行鋪通路居次、業務員通路最差，證實通路來源會影響保險理賠之情形。英文摘要：This article investigates the effect of distribution systems on the quality of insurance policies. We will compare the similarities and dissimilarities of distribution systems among bancassurance channels, telemarketing channels, and traditional insurance salespersons channels. We analyzed the discrepancies in (1) compensation structure and performance assessment, (2) the information in the sales process, and (3) after-sales motivation for service under the distribution systems. We employ a two-part model to investigate the effect of distribution systems on the quality of insurance policies, and use 12,746 individual health insurance policies effective in 2002 from a life insurance company in Taiwan. We track the claims that occurred during the period from 2002 to 2007, and use their information as a proxy for the quality of the insurance contracts. The results show that the distribution system affects the quality of contracts. Specifically, bancassurance channels are the best of the three distribution systems, regardless of whether a claim is filed within a two-year period or for the first time, and no matter the probability of claims, and the number of claims. Secondly, telemarketing channels are better than traditional insurance salespersons channels when considering the file claimed for the first time, and no matter the probability of claims, and the number of claims. Finally, our robust test confirms that bancassurance channels provide the best business quality, followed by telemarketing channels and traditional insurance salespersons channels.起始頁-結束頁：197-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：壽險公司銀行保險通路合作策略與效率分析並列篇名：The Bancassurance Cooperation Strategy and Efficiency of Life Insurance Companies作者：彭金隆(Jin-Lung Peng);陳麗如(Lih-Ru Chen);劉文彬(Wen-Pin Liu)關鍵字：銀行保險;強連結;弱連結;資料包絡分析法;效率;Bancassurance;Strong ties;Weak ties;Data envelopment analysis;efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來銀行保險（bancassurance）通路已成為我國壽險公司最主要的行銷管道，也對公司的經營績效產生了重要的影響，為了探討壽險公司與銀行間合作策略對經營效率的影響，本研究收集我國2007年至2012年各壽險公司資料，利用資料包絡分析法（data envelopment analysis）分析壽險公司之經營效率，並進一步採用Tobit迴歸檢視與銀行間合作策略對壽險公司效率的影響。實證結果發現，壽險公司選擇採用與銀行緊密合作的強連結策略（strong ties），對成本效率、技術效率以及配置效率都有顯著正面提升的效果。本研究同時也發現，壽險公司在銀行保險業務上的比重越高，對於經營效率具有正向的影響。英文摘要：In recent years, bancassurance has become the principal marketing channel of life insurance companies in Taiwan, having also had a significant impact on the performance of these companies. To discuss the impact of a bancassurance cooperative strategy between insurance companies and bank partners on performance, we collect data on life insurance companies in Taiwan covering the period 2007-2012, and use data envelopment analysis (DEA) to analyze the relative efficiency of the insurer. We further use the Tobit model to examine the impact of the bancassurance cooperative strategy. The empirical results show that life insurance companies that opt to work closely with a small number of bank partners by means of strong ties exhibit significant and positive improvements in cost efficiency, technical efficiency and allocative efficiency. In this study, we also find that the more insurers become involved in bancassurance, the more positive is the impact on their efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：235-269資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：Pricing Mortality-Linked Securities with Transformed Gamma Distribution並列篇名：死亡率巨災債券定價－Transformed Gamma Distribution之運用作者：鄭宏文(Hung-Wen Cheng);曾祺峰(Chi-Feng Tzeng);謝旻樺(Min-Hua Hsieh);蔡子皓(Jeffrey Tzu-Hao Tsai)關鍵字：風險中立評價關係式;均衡訂價法;定價核;可轉換Gamma分配;Risk neutral valuation relationship;Equilibrium pricing model;Pricing kernel;Transform gamma distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：壽命連結商品是保險公司規避人們長壽風險或死亡率巨災風險的工具，這些商品利用證券化的手法將可能的損失移轉給資本市場上的投資人。瑞士再保險公司於2003年底推出的Swiss Re mortality bond大受市場歡迎，本文以此商品為例探討壽命連結商品之訂價問題。文章採用均衡定價模型，假設死亡率指數服從Transformed Gamma分配，且假設投資人的期末財富、邊際效用及標的資產期末價值有特定的形式下，得到一個風險資產評價關係式。此評價關係為風險中立，且壽命連結商品的價格即為其未來報酬以無風險利率折現。最終我們可以導出在Transformed Gamma分配下壽命連結商品的價格的封閉解，並以此封閉解來計算Swiss Re mortality bond的發行價格作為範例。英文摘要：Due to frequent catastrophes all over the world in recent years, insurers face a larger mortality risk than before. To reduce this risk, the insurers have innovated mortality-linked securities to transfer systematic mortality risks to capital markets. In this article, assuming the mortality rate following a transformed gamma distribution, we derive an equilibrium valuation method to price the securities in a discrete time economy. The risk neutral valuation relationship is obtained, and the price of mortality-linked security is equal to the sum of expected payoffs discounted at a risk-free rate. Under the specific settings of investors' preference, mortality rate, and wealth, the closed-form solutions for the mortality-linked security are obtained. Finally, we price the Swiss Re mortality bond issued in 2003 as a numerical example.起始頁-結束頁：271-303資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：Productivity Drivers, Firm Heterogeneity and Endogenous Nonlinearities並列篇名：生產力驅動因子，廠商異質性及其內生非線性發展作者：Orlando Gomes關鍵字：市場進出動態;廠商生產力;生產力驅動因子;內生性波動;國際貿易;外人直接投資;Entry-exit dynamics;Firm productivity;Productivity drivers;Endogenous fluctuations;International trade;Foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文採用一傳統獨佔性競爭市場環境，在廠商具有生產力的異質特性下，建構產業進出市場的完全內生化動態機制。在模型中，廠商決定是否投資加強其生產力驅動因子。而於此環境下，兩個層次的長期均衡將會產生。其一，某些生產力較低之廠商將不再投資強化其生產力驅動因子，而他們的生產力會迅速下降至零並且退出市場。其二，其它廠商將會投資強化其生產力驅動因子，而他們的生產力、利潤及產出都呈現長期內生波動。此模型將可以描述國際貿易以及外人直接投資之可能性。英文摘要：The paper takes a conventional monopolistic competition market environment, with firm heterogeneity at the productivity level, as the scenario to construct a fully endogenous dynamic mechanism of entry and exit in the industry. At each time period, firms decide whether to invest or not on the forces that determine their own productivity. The way in which the model is designed generates a twofold long-term equilibrium: some firms, with initial low levels of productivity, will never invest in productivity drivers, their productivity falls progressively to zero and they are irreversibly driven out of the market. All the other firms will find it advantageous to invest intermittently in productivity drivers; for these, productivity, profits and output will exhibit long-term endogenous fluctuations. The model is adapted, in a second stage, in order to contemplate the possibilities of international trade and foreign direct investment.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：台灣利率法則之估計－即時資料vs.修正資料並列篇名：The Interest Rate Rule in Taiwan: Real-Time Data vs. Revised Data作者：吳若瑋(Jo-Wei Wu);吳致寧(Jyh-Lin Wu)關鍵字：利率法則;即時資料;反景氣循環;利率平滑;門檻模型;Interest rate rule;Real-time data;Counter-cyclical monetary policy;Interest-rate smoothing;Threshold model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文強調央行貨幣政策行為之資料訊息問題，並探討央行之利率法則是否具不對稱性。為此本文建構可適用於估計台灣利率法則之即時資料，並估計央行之利率法則。實證結果指出，不論在名目匯率變動率大於或小於門檻值之期間下，利率自迴歸係數為正且小於1，產出缺口及通貨膨脹率對利率之影響皆顯著為正。名目匯率缺口對利率之影響在名目匯率變動率大於門檻值之期間顯著為負，然在名目匯率變動率小於門檻值之期間則顯著為正。此顯示央行之貨幣政策具平滑性，反景氣循環性及阻升助貶之特性。英文摘要：This study constructs the real-time data of Taiwan and then applies it to examine the interest rate rule of the central bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan) since 1990. Empirical results indicate that the autocorrelation coefficient of interest rates is positive but less than one, and that the impact of output gap and inflation gap on interest rates are positive regardless of exchange-rate regimes. These results indicate that the central bank adopts interest-rate smoothing and a counter-cyclical monetary policy rule. Moreover, the impact of the exchange-rate gap on interest rates is significantly negative in the depreciation regime, but significantly positive in the appreciation regime. These results indicate that the central bank's monetary policy has the property of preventing appreciation and promoting depreciation of the New Taiwan dollar.起始頁-結束頁：31-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所17篇名：國際貿易、借貸市場摩擦與所得分配不平均並列篇名：International Trade, Frictions in the Borrowing and Lending Market, and Income Inequality作者：徐則謙(Tse-Chien Hsu)關鍵字：所得分配不平均;借貸市場摩擦;產業內貿易;異質生產者;Income inequality;Frictions in the borrowing and lending market;Intra-industry trade;Heterogeneous producers期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：部份實證研究顯示所得不均度隨貿易流量增加，且此現象在開發中國家較為明顯，但Heckscher-Ohlin（H-O）模型無法解釋比現象。本文使用產業內貿易模型，結合出口具固定成本，以及借貸市場的摩擦，勾勒出開放貿易與不均度間的正向關係。事後違背借貸契約的可能，使得富有者以較低的利率融措出口的固定成本，所以只有富人出口。雖然來自外國生產者的競爭，等比例地降低國內生產者自國內市場取得的毛利潤，但富有者透過出口進入國外市場的能力，使其不但能以國外市場的毛利潤彌補國內市場的損失，相較於封閉系統，他們的淨利潤反而增加，因而加深了所得不均度。英文摘要：The positive relationship between inequality and volume of trade is more pronounced in developing countries. The Heckscher-Ohlin model fails to explain this. This research utilizes a model with intra-industry trade, frictions in the borrowing and lending market, and fixed exporting costs to establish a plausible causal link between trade and inequality. The possibility that borrowers will renege on contracts generates a gap between the lending rate and the opportunity costs of capital. Therefore, wealthy agents face lower fixed exporting costs and become exporters. Because trade reallocates market share toward exporters, it increases their profit and enlarges inequality.起始頁-結束頁：79-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所18篇名：Increasing Returns to Specialization, Business Stealing, and Optimal Government Spending並列篇名：商品多樣化規模效果、企業竊取效果與最適政府支出作者：林雪瑜(Hsieh-Yu Lin)關鍵字：商品多樣化規模效果;企業竊取效果;浪費性的政府支出;Increasing returns to specialization;Business-stealing effect;Wasteful government spending期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文採用Benassy（1996）提出的不完全競爭市場結構模型，首先，推導市場競爭與柏拉圖最適配置下的一般均衡解，並進一步透過模型校準分析方法探討最適的政府支出。我們的分析顯示，資本存量、消費量、產出及廠商家數在柏拉圖最適配置下可能高於或低於市場競爭均衡的水準，端視企業竊取效果（business stealing effect）和商品多樣化規模效果（increasing returns to specialization）相對大小而定。經由校準分析法的結果顯示，浪費性政府支出不再具有增進社會福利的效果。此結論打破了Devereux et al.（2000）的命題：認為在市場存在商品多樣化規模效果的情況下，柏拉圖最適配置下均衡解一定大於市場競爭均衡，且政府支出能促進社會福利的結論。英文摘要：By using Benassy's (1996) model setting to separate increasing returns from imperfect competition, we show there are two opposite effects, the external effects of increasing returns to specialization and of business stealing, in terms of governing the relative levels of variety in a competitive steady state and optimal steady state. By shedding light on the business-stealing effect which is absent in the analysis by Devereux et al. (2000), we show that the steady-state levels of capital, consumption, and output in the social optimum can be lower, rather than higher, than those in a monopolistically competitive equilibrium. Further, we also find that the required extent of increasing returns to specialization for a positive level of optimal wasteful government spending seems to be too high to be empirically plausible. This implies that government spending is no longer welfare improving.起始頁-結束頁：119-144資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：Welfare Effects of Tariffication on Parallel Trade並列篇名：平行輸入商品關稅化之福利效果作者：黃鴻(Hong Hwang);黃品錚(Pin-Cheng Huang);彭正浩(Cheng-Hau Peng)關鍵字：關稅化;平行輸入;研發創新;社會福利;tariffication;parallel imports;R&D;social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：關稅化是世界貿易組織（WTO）長期以來所提倡的政策，其目的在將非關稅貿易障礙轉換為關稅貿易障礙。本文以一個兩國模型探討進口國政府對平行輸入商品實施關稅化政策所產生之福利效果並進一步討論關稅化政策對於進口國製造商研發投入的影響。本文發現，無論製造商採取一部訂價或兩部訂價，關稅化政策都將使進口國福利下降。但關稅化對製造商研發投入的影響卻會因其訂價模式而有所不同。若製造商採兩部（一部）訂價法，關稅化政策將減少（不影響）其研發投入。此一結果顯示，若一國之製造商採兩部訂價法，且其政府對於平行輸入商品實施關稅化政策，長期而言將會導致該國福利惡化。英文摘要：WTO has long called for converting non-tariff barriers into tariffs. This is called tariffication. Utilizing a two-country model, this paper examines the welfare effect of tariffication on parallel trade. We also compare the R&D levels of the manufacturer before and after tariffication. It is found that tariffication is socially undesirable for the domestic country no matter whether the manufacturer adopts one-part or two-part tariff pricing. But the effects of pricing on the manufacturer's R&D are very different. If the domestic manufacturer adopts two-part (one-part) tariff pricing, tariffication discourages (has no effect on) the R&D investment of the domestic manufacturer. This implies that domestic welfare worsens in the long run under two-part tariff pricing.起始頁-結束頁：453-473資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.424.12篇名：通貨膨脹、政府交易決策與國際通貨並列篇名：Inflation, Government Transaction Policy, and International Currency作者：李映萱(Ying-Syuan Li);江嘉萍(Jia-Ping Jiang)關鍵字：政府銷售與採購;政府影響力;貨幣搜尋;訊息障礙;government sales and procurement;the influence of the government;monetary search;information frictions期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文建構一個兩國兩貨幣的搜尋模型，探討貨幣政策與政府交易策略如何影響兩國貨幣的流通價值。公部門遵循的交易策略是只能接受並持有本國貨幣。當人們接受並持有本國貨幣與外國貨幣，本國貨幣供給微幅增加，將提高公部門與民間交易的機率，本國貨幣需求增加、本國貨幣升值。隨著本國貨幣的通膨率持續攀升，本國貨幣報酬率下降的效果超過公部門與民間交易機率增加的效果，本國貨幣價值下滑。當公部門向海外採購需求很大，即使外國商家辨識本國貨幣的成本極高，他們也會接受本國貨幣，本國貨幣將成為國際通貨。英文摘要：This paper develops a two-country, two-currency search model to study how monetary policy and government transaction strategies affect the circulation values of the two currencies. Government agents follow exogenous trading policies, only accept and hold domestic currency. When domestic currency inflates slightly, increasing the trading probabilities of government and private agents, domestic currency appreciates due to increased demand for domestic currency as long as private agents accept and hold domestic and foreign currencies. As the domestic inflation rate goes up the decrease in the rate of return of domestic currency becomes the dominant effect, and thus the domestic currency value declines. When government demand for overseas goods is very large, foreign sellers accept domestic currency even if the cost of verifying this domestic currency is high. Therefore, domestic currency becomes an international currency.起始頁-結束頁：475-511資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.424.23篇名：存款準備率對銀行利率決策與福利的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Required Reserve Ratio on Interest Rate and Consumer Welfare作者：莊<U+664B>祥(Ching-Hsiang Chuang)關鍵字：存款準備率;利率;消費者福利;銀行業;required reserve ratio;interest rate;consumer welfare;banking期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文於估計存、貸款戶的需求行為與銀行的決策行為參數之後，再藉由反事實實驗（counterfactual experiments）分析探討存款準備率的調降分別對於銀行的存、貸款利率決策與存、貸款戶的存、貸款需求決策以及其福利的影響。研究結果發現準備率的調降，將會使得銀行提升存款利率以吸收更多資金與調降放款利率以增加貸放金額，前者會吸引存款戶增加存款需求，而後者亦吸引貸款戶對於貸款的需求，從而增加存款市場與貸款市場的市佔率以創造更多的流動性。此外，準備率的調降同時也會增加銀行、存款戶與貸款戶的福利水準，從而使得資金供需市場上的參與者皆享有較高的福利水準。英文摘要：This paper uses a counterfactual experiment to analyze the effects of reducing the required reserve ratio in the Taiwan banking industry in 2008. This paper finds that the decrease in the required reserve ratio led to an increase in the deposit interest rate but reduced the loan rate. In such an instance, liquidity increases since a higher deposit interest rate attracts savings and a lower loan rate increases the demand for investment. In addition, the results show that the decrease in the required reserve ratio enhanced the welfare of banks, as well as savers and borrowers.起始頁-結束頁：513-538資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.424.34篇名：投資人如何在收盤集合競價時間決定委託價、量積極度？探究資訊揭露對自然人與機構投資人之影響並列篇名：How to Determine the Order Aggressiveness in Price and Volume during the Closing Call Auction? The Influence of Information Disclosure on Individual and Institutional Investors作者：曾翊恆(Yi-Heng Tseng)關鍵字：收盤集合競價;限價簿;透明度;委託積極度;closing call auction;limit order book;transparency;order aggressiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文使用2012年2月20日「收盤前資訊揭露新制」實施前後，各約3個月的國內集中市場委託記錄、限價簿資訊等高頻日內資料，並透過兩階段sequential ordered probit（SOP）模型，分析象徵資訊弱勢、優勢方的自然人與機構投資人，如何在收盤集合競價這5分鐘時間內，擬定其委託價、量積極度決策，俾利填補這部份實證研究缺口。我們發現，資訊揭露新制實施後，兩類投資人委託價、量積極度都稍見滑落。在自然人方面，限價簿透明化降低交易訊息收集成本，從而紓緩其委託積極度；對於機構投資人，限價簿增加揭露後將降低收盤集合競價對比常規交易時間的相對吸引力，導致其委託積極度亦趨下降。倘若另將委託出價識別為四等級積極度，orderedprobit（OP）模型邊際機率估計結果暗示，新制實施後自然人（機構投資人）於收盤集合競價時間，大致偏重考量未成交風險高低（能否隱藏其交易意圖）。尤其是，機構投資人會傾向提出劣於限價簿模擬試算最佳同邊報價之委託，俾利隱藏交易資訊。英文摘要：This paper utilizes six months of high frequency intra-day data from the order and disclosure books of the Taiwan Stock Exchange surrounding the introduction on February 20, 2012, of a new mechanism for information disclosure of the limit order book. A two-stage sequential ordered probit (SOP) model is estimated in order to investigate how individual and institutional investors determine their comparative order aggressiveness in price and volume in the final five-minute closing call auction. Both groups of investors slightly decreased their order aggressiveness in price and volume after the regime transition. In particular, marginal probability under ordered probit (OP) models show that, after the new mechanism was implemented, institutional investors were more likely to deliver orders with prices strictly inferior to the same-side best simulated quotes to hide their trading intensions.起始頁-結束頁：539-599資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.424.45篇名：Incentives for Firms to Share Abatement Technology under a Proportion Liability Rule並列篇名：比例責任制下廠商防污技術移轉之誘因作者：宋玉生(Yu-Sen Sung)關鍵字：汙染排放;技術移轉;比例責任制;pollution emission;technology transfer;proportional liability期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文分析兩污染廠商間之技術移轉決策。其中擁有較先進防汙技術之廠商須決定要分享多少技術給落後的廠商，而技術落後的廠商則須決定要採納多少先進廠商所釋放出來的技術。本文和既存文獻的分析有兩點主要差異：首先，本文探討「比例責任制」的廠商汙染傷害賠償，而非文獻常假設的「嚴格責任」或「過失主義」。其次，本文模型中加入技術移轉成本，此為過去文獻所無。本文發現，廠商防汙技術之分享與接納程度均與汙染傷害之函數型式和技術移轉成本有關。只有當汙染傷害為線型，且技術移轉沒有成本時，市場均衡才具有效率性。否則，均衡下之廠商技術移轉程度皆低於社會最適。英文摘要：We analyze in this paper the technology diffusion decisions of two polluting firms. Firm 1, armed with superior pollution abatement technology, must decide on how much technology to share with firm 2. Meanwhile, firm 2 must determine how much of the available technology to adopt. Though inspired by Endres and Friehe (2011), which investigates a related issue under environmental laws of strict liability and negligence rules, this paper differs crucially in two fundamental aspects: we consider a proportional liability rule and costly technology diffusion. We find that the decision to release or adopt more advanced technology hinges on the form of external damage as well as the existence of diffusion costs. Only when external damage is linear and technology diffusion is free will the market equilibrium be efficient.起始頁-結束頁：315-331資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.423.16篇名：代工貿易與出口政策並列篇名：Subcontracting and Export Policy作者：吳世傑(Shih-Jye Wu);陳宏易(Hung-Yi Chen)關鍵字：國際代工;收尋成本;替代銷售管道;出口政策;專買;subcontracting;searching costs;outside options;export policy;monopsony期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：代工產業是台灣目前出口的主力，然而代工產品的銷售管道通常都掌控在國際知名或大廠商的手上，導致後者可以利用專買或寡買的優勢決定產品代工的價格。在這篇文章裡，我們發現代工出口國家的最適貿易政策乃是對其產品課徵出口稅。但是，只要代工業者具有開拓市場的能力，或是能夠取得其他的銷售管道時，最適的出口政策則是採用出口補貼。本文還討論了跨國企業擁有自製生產與代工的情況，我們發現上述政策建議在讓代工市場的買賣雙方都擁有替代選擇的情況下依舊成立。英文摘要：The majority of Taiwan's export industries are under contract to produce components for multinationals, which usually have established global brands and distribution channels around the world. Using their overwhelming buying-power in the world market for components, the multinationals have a dominant position and set an exploitatively lower level of prices in the international components market. In this article, we find that the government of an exporting country can use an export tax to counter the monopsony or oligopsony power of the multinationals. However, the optimal trade policy for exported components shall revert to an export subsidy once the component producers in the export country have outside options to sell their products to potential buyers, or to establish their own brands and sale channels. Meanwhile, we have extended the analytic model to a situation of bi-sourcing; that is, the multinational firms can manufacture a portion of their components in house (insourcing) and acquire the same inputs from external suppliers (outsourcing). We argue that the export tax/subsidy results still hold when the multinational firm is conducting the bi-sourcing strategy.起始頁-結束頁：333-361資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.423.27篇名：不完全訊息下受歧視的少數族群分佈之分析並列篇名：Analysis of the Demographic Distribution of the Minority Groups Facing Discrimination under Incomplete Information作者：王婉如(Wan-Ju Wang);莊委桐(Wei-Torng Juang)關鍵字：不完全訊息;網路;歧視;群聚;incomplete information;networks;discrimination;clustering期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：在多元種族的國家裡，族群群聚是很普遍的現象。一個簡單的解釋是人先天偏愛同類者，然而，這個說法並非為造成群聚的必要條件。本文說明即便多數族群僅根據少數族群的犯罪率高低決定歧視與否，而非根據外表差異，少數族群仍舊傾向聚集。就算各族群的犯罪率皆相同，在資訊不完全下，多數族群仍可能因誤判而歧視少數族群，而造成這種誤判的原因乃是因為樣本統計誤差所致。因此，少數族群適度群聚能減低被歧視的機率，從而形成特定的人口分佈型態。最後，文中也探討其他相關參數如何影響聚集的程度，並用模擬的方式驗證。英文摘要：Racial clustering is common in a multiracial society. One possible explanation is that people prefer their own kind. This paper constructs a model in which the majority group discriminates against the minority group purely based on the latter's crime rate instead of other outer characteristics such as race or skin. We find that even though the crime rates of all groups are equal ex ante, the minority group still tends to cluster. This is so because the majority group could still discriminate against the minority group due to misjudgments under incomplete information. Such misjudgments come from the high variation of crime rates in small samples. Therefore, the minority group can reduce the probability of being discriminated against by clustering to reduce the variation of its crime rate. We also illustrates the effect other relevant parameters have on the minority group's clustering behavior and test the results with simulations.起始頁-結束頁：363-404資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.423.38篇名：財富分配、社會階層結構和經濟績效－一個政治經濟學模型並列篇名：Wealth Distribution, Social Structure and Economic Performance作者：李太龍(Tai-Long Li);潘士遠(Shiy-Uan Pan)關鍵字：財富分配;政治投資;階層結構;經濟績效;wealth distribution;political investment;social structure;economic performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文採用政治經濟學視角討論為什麼財富分配不均導致經濟績效不良。如果初始財富分配很不均或政治投資成本很高或信貸市場很不完善，那麼可以進行政治投資的個體就少，政治市場的競爭就微弱。這樣，在位的政治精英就能制定經濟政策剝削其他階級（中產階級），這不僅加劇財富分配不均而且導致經濟扭曲嚴重，損害經濟發展。模型表明，（在一定條件下）財富分配格局、社會階層結構和經濟績效長期演進到穩態，該穩態取決於初始財富分配、政治投資成本和信貸市場完善程度。英文摘要：Why will an unequal wealth distribution lead to poor economic performance? This paper develops a simple model to answer this question from the perspective of political economics. It is shown that, under some conditions, the distribution of wealth, social structure and economic performance emerge as long-run steady equilibrium outcomes depending on the initial wealth distribution, the political investment cost and the credit market’s imperfection. The more unequal the initial wealth distribution or the higher the political investment cost or the greater the degree of imperfection in the credit market, the less the individuals are able to invest in political capital. Therefore, the political market is less competitive and the incumbent political elite can levy a high tax on the middle class. This not only worsens wealth inequality but also undermines economic development.起始頁-結束頁：405-451資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.423.49篇名：所得稅制與勞動供給：EITC政策之模擬研究並列篇名：Income Tax and Labor Supply: Evidence from an EITC Simulation in Taiwan作者：何志欽(Chih-Chin Ho);陳富立(Fu-Li Chen);林惠玲(Hui-Lin Lin);林世昌(Eric S. Lin )關鍵字：分段線性預算限制式;雙元誤差模型;勞動供給;所得稅;EITC;earned income tax credit;labor supply;manpower utilization survey;survey of family income and expenditure期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的目的是評估不同勞動所得租稅抵減制度（Earned Income Tax Credit, EITC）設計對勞動供給之影響。本文以雙元誤差模型（two-error model, TEM）處理勞動者面臨之分段線性預算限制式，利用95年主計處人力運用調查資料輔以95年家庭收支調查資料設算非勞動所得，分別估計20至60歲已婚夫婦的結構式勞動供給函數。接著模擬三種不同EITC方案下，分析家戶勞動供給的變化。本文實證結果發現使用最小平方法或Tobit與TEM模型的估計結果明顯不同，逕以縮減式估計勞動供給函數將可能產生內生性問題。其次，妻子工時聚集於折點處的現象較丈夫明顯，顯示妻子有較大的替代彈性。第三，在不同的EITC設計下，模擬分析發現隨著最高抵減額的增加，勞動工時選擇出現往該區段聚集的現象，且區段選擇跳動情況明顯。以最高抵減額48,000元，遞增遞減率各為40％與20％為例，將使丈夫、妻子平均分別減少6.9%、8.4%的工作時數。最後，不論最高抵減額大小，平均將使59%的無業家庭投入就業市場，雖然工作時數的增加有限。英文摘要：Nowadays Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) has become one of the most expensive and fastest growing social welfare programs in America. As a result of the success of the EITC in America, this program has also been successfully instituted in many other countries. This paper evaluates the potential effect of an EITC on labor supply in Taiwan. The traditional econometric methods estimating reduced form labor supply by a Tobit or OLS will lead to serious endogeneity problems, when labor faces a kink-point-piecewise-linear budget. We apply the Two Error Model (TEM) in Triest (1990) to overcome this issue. Our finding reveals first that wives' labor hours tend to cluster more at the kink point than husbands do, and the elasticity of substitution for wives is larger than that for husbands. Secondly, the simulation of an EITC shows that when the largest tax credit rises, workers' labor hours are likely to be in the largest tax credit region. When the largest tax credit is 48,000, phase-in and phase-out rates are 40% and 20% respectively. An EITC program could cause a husband and wife on average to reduce their labor hours 6.9% and 8.4% respectively. Finally, no matter what the largest tax credit is, on average, the EITC program will encourage about 59% of non-working family to work.起始頁-結束頁：167-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.422.110篇名：學校特徵與空間距離對周邊房價之影響分析－以台北市為例並列篇名：Analyzing the Effect of School Characteristics and Geographical Distance on Local Housing Price-The Case of Taipei City作者：林忠樑(Chung-Liang Lin);林佳慧(Jia-Huey Lin)關鍵字：額滿學區;特徵價格法;傾向分數配對法;房屋價格;full enrollment school district;hedonic pricing method;propensity score matching;housing price期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主要在探討學校特徵與空間距離對周邊房價之影響，並進一步探討在不同空間距離下，學校特徵對房價之影響程度有何異同。根據2007年到2009年的內政部「房地產交易價格」與臺北市政府「不動產數位資料庫」之房屋交易資料，本文發現額滿學校學區對周邊房屋總價具有正向顯著的影響，房屋座落地點距離學校愈遠而其房屋交易價格愈高，但學校距離對交易房價之影響效果隨著距離學校愈遠而呈現遞減的現象；另外，我們發現捷運站的交通便利性為提升房價的重要因素。針對不同空間距離討論發現，學校特徵對房價之影響效果會隨著距離學校愈遠而呈現遞減的趨勢；而交通便利性對非額滿學區的房價提升有顯著的影響效果。為了降低文獻中的樣本選擇偏誤之可能性，本文應用傾向分數配對方法，以配對後的房屋樣本進行分析亦未出現相反的證據，位於額滿學區的房價是相對高於位於非額滿學區的房價。最後，在房屋座落在共同學區的交易資料當中，我們發現額滿學校與空間距離因素對房價之影響效果並不顯著，房屋本身的特徵為主要影響房價之決定因素。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the effects of school characteristics and geographical distances on local housing prices, and further discusses these effects within different geographical areas. According to the housing price data from the years 2007 to 2009, merged together from the Department of Land Administration and Taipei Real-estate Database, we find that the housing price is higher if the house is located in a full enrollment school district and the magnitude of this effect is decreasing with geographical distance from the school. In addition, we also find that the distance from the house location to a Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) station plays an important role in increasing the local housing price. As for the analysis of the different geographical areas, the results also show that the magnitude of the effect of school characteristics on the housing price is decreasing with the distance from the house location to the school. We then find that the proximity to an MRT station raises the local housing price and the effect is only significant in the non-full enrollment school districts. Moreover, to reduce the sample selection bias, we use the Propensity Score Matching (PSM) method to analyze the impact of a full enrollment school district on the housing price by using the matching data and we do not find conflicting results. Finally, the empirical results suggest that the housing's own characteristics are the most important factors to affect the local housing price in multi-school districts.起始頁-結束頁：215-271資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.422.211篇名：垂直寡占市場結構下的最終財廠商研發誘因並列篇名：Downstream R&D in a Vertically Oligopolistic Structure作者：蔡明芳(Ming-Fang Tsai)關鍵字：垂直相關市場;自由進出;研究發展;vertically related market;free entry;R&D期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用一個垂直相關市場模型，來討論在可自由進出的上游產業下，下游市場結構對於中間財訂價以及下游廠商研發行為的影響。本文的發現如下，在上游廠商可自由進出市場的情況下，下游市場競爭程度提高，對中間財的引申需求雖會提高，但中間財價格反而會降低。此外，在可自由進出的上游產業結構下，下游市場的廠商數增加雖會減少個別下游廠商的產量，但個別下游廠商研發量反而有提高的可能，此一發現與傳統文獻的結論有很大的不同。英文摘要：This paper considers a free entry upstream industry to analyze the impact of a change of downstream market structure on the input price and on the downstream firms R&D incentives. With a free entry upstream industry, a more competitive downstream market increases the derived demand for inputs, but the input price will, instead of increasing, decrease. Furthermore, an especially noteworthy result of this paper, which is in sharp contrast to the implications of the existing literature, is that a more competitive downstream market causes each downstream firm's output to decrease, but may induce each downstream firm to increase R&D.起始頁-結束頁：273-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.422.312篇名：Gaussian Inference in AR(1) Models with Trend: A Note並列篇名：有時間趨勢之一階自我迴歸模型的常態推論作者：陳致綱(Jhih-Gang Chen);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo)關鍵字：自我迴歸模型;去除趨勢;一階差分;單根;動態追蹤資料;固定效果;AR model;detrend;first difference;unit root;dynamic panel;fixed effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文將Phillips and Han（2008）之一階差分估計式推展至有時間趨勢之一階自我迴歸模型的估計與推論上。藉由簡易的去除時間趨勢過程，一階差分估計式仍具有漸近常態分配的性質；同時，據以建構之單根檢定相較於以雙重差分估計式為基礎之單根檢定更有檢定力。本文提出的方法在固定效果動態追蹤資料模型下更具應用價值。英文摘要：This paper adapts the first-difference estimator of Phillips and Han (2008) to the estimation and inference in AR(1) models with trends. With a detrending procedure, the first-difference estimator remains applicable and is shown to retain the Gaussian asymptotics. A unit root test based on the estimator is more powerful than that based on the double-difference estimator. The proposed estimator is especially useful when applied to dynamic panels.起始頁-結束頁：297-313資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.422.413篇名：Bank Runs and Interest Rates並列篇名：銀行擠兌與利率結構作者：陳思寬(Shi-kuan Chen);高一誠(Yi-Cheng Kao)關鍵字：銀行擠兌機率;利率期限結構;對稱混合策略;probability of bank runs;term structure of interest rates;symmetric mixed strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：文獻上關於銀行擠兌與利率期限結構分別有諸多探討。本文將簡單的利率期限結構導入銀行擠兌模型，並允許存款者使用對稱之混合策略，以求出均衡時的銀行擠兌機率。模型的模擬結果顯示出，較低的短期實質利率或較高的長期實質利率，皆會提高銀行擠兌機率。此理論結果與近期的實證研究結論一致。英文摘要：The term structure of interest rates and the phenomenon of bank runs are widely but separately studied in the literature. In this paper, we introduce simple term structure of interest rates in a bank runs model. By allowing depositors to use a symmetric mixed strategy, the probability of bank runs can be derived. Our simulation shows that a low short-term real interest rate or a high long-term real interest rate would raise the probability of bank runs. This result is consistent with recent empirical findings.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.421.114篇名：存款保險對金融危機、經濟成長與社會福利的影響並列篇名：The Effects of Deposit Insurance on Financial Crisis, Economic Growth, and Social Welfare作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：存款保險;金融危機;經濟成長;社會福利;deposit insurance;financial crisis;economic growth;social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：Diamond and Dybvig (1983)發現存款保險不但可避免存戶擠兌、防堵金融危機的發生，透過採行最適的存款保險，甚至可使社會福利達到極大，不過，該文沒有考慮存款保險對經濟成長的影響。本文考慮了經濟內生成長的架構，發現存款保險將得以阻止單純由民眾預期所引發的銀行擠兌事件，最終有利於長期經濟成長。透過數值分析，我們發現：使得社會福利極大的最適存款保險為部分保障，而Diamond and Dybvig (1983)沒有考慮到存款保險提高經濟成長這項對社會福利的正面影響，導致該文低估最適的存款保險額度。英文摘要：Diamond and Dybvig (1983) discovered that deposit insurance can prevent both bank runs and financial crises. Moreover, demand deposits might achieve the equilibrium that maximizes social welfare. However, Diamond and Dybvig (1983) neglected the growth effect of deposit insurance. This paper considers endogenous growth and finds that deposit insurance can prevent bank runs due to random withdrawals, resulting in a higher rate of economic growth. Through a simulation, this paper concludes that the optimal deposit insurance to maximize social welfare only offers partial protection, and Diamond and Dybvig (1983) underestimated this optimal deposit insurance since they did not consider the growth effect of deposit insurance.起始頁-結束頁：23-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.421.215篇名：市場穩定與競價制度－台灣期貨市場之實證並列篇名：Mark Stability and Trading Mechnism: Evidence from Taiwan Futures Market作者：詹場(Chang Chan);李志宏(Jie-Huan Lee)關鍵字：集合競價;連續競價;波動性;台灣期貨市場;金融危機;call auction;continuos auction;volatility;Taiwan futures market;financial crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究藉由台灣期貨交易所由每10秒撮合1次之集合競價（call auction）改為連續競價（continuous auction）之機會，探討集合競價與連續競價之市場波動性差異的原因。我們用約500萬筆日內交易資料進行實證，結果顯示集合競價市場暫時性的價格波動較低，其主要原因有二：1. 集合競價的買賣價跳動（bid ask bounce）情形較緩和，2. 集合競價每次交易之參與者較多，成交價格偏離均衡價值之幅度較小。此外，我們發現集合競價穩定市場價格之功能優於連續競價，在下列兩種情境更顯著：1. 資訊不對稱程度較高時，2. 交易較熱絡之商品。本研究之結果提供何以世界主要股市開盤採取集合競價，以及何以在市場異常時實施暫停交易（trading halt）措施之解釋；同時提供主管機構如何藉由競價機制選擇穩定金融市場之訊息，此訊息對處於金融危機、發生重大政治經濟事件時期、以及市場較不成熟（例如以散戶為主）階段的交易機制決策，深具參考價值。英文摘要：This research investigates why the market volatility of call auctions is different from that of continuous auctions, using the shift from call auctions (one clearing every 10 seconds) to continuous auctions in the Taiwan Futures Exchange. Through an empirical study of 5,000,000 intraday transactions, we find that there is lower temporary price volatility in call auctions. The lower volatility of call auctions is due to two major reasons: first, the bid ask bounce in call auctions is moderate; second, more participants join each transaction in call auctions therefore the transaction price deviates less from the equilibrium value. Moreover, we also find that call auctions may stabilize market prices, especially under the following two circumstances: first, when information is highly asymmetric; second, when an instrument is more actively traded. The findings of this research help to explain why the major stock markets in the world adopt call auctions and why a trading halt is implemented when the market is unstable. The result also offers the governing authority a way to choose financial-market-stabilizing information. The information is important in a financial crisis, during important politico-economic events, and for immature markets (e.g., a market dominated by individual investors)起始頁-結束頁：49-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.421.316篇名：信用評等變動與高階經理人薪酬：董事會獨立性、專業性及參與度之調節效果並列篇名：Credit Rating Changes and CEO Compensation: The Moderation Effects of Board Independence, Expertise, and Attendance作者：陳昭蓉(Chao-Jung Chen)關鍵字：信用評等調降;獨立性;專業性;參與度;高階經理人薪酬;分量迴歸;credit rating downgrade;board independence;expertise attendance;CEO compensation;quantile regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：信用評等是專業團體評估公司未來財務狀況與績效的一項指標，信用評等之結果也可視為高階經理人是否善盡管理及經營責任的一項指標。本文以2006年至2010年台灣上市櫃非金融業公司為樣本，以信用評等指標作為衡量經理人績效之非財務指標，探討當公司被調降（升）信評之後，是否會影響高階經理人之薪酬，並進一步探討董事會獨立性、獨立董事專業性與參與度對此關聯性之調節效果。實證結果發現，當公司信用評等被調降（升）時，經理人薪酬會被調降（升），且由低風險等級調降至高風險等級時，其調降幅度更明顯，本文亦進一步採用分量迴歸（quantile regression）檢測，發現經理人薪酬位於高分量值時，其調降（升）幅度更明顯。當董事會獨立性愈高、獨立董事愈具專業度及參與度愈高時，愈能發揮監督功能，因此在調降信評後，薪酬被調降之幅度更高；而信用評等調降（升）之理由各有不同，實證結果亦發現當公司因為營運狀況變差（好）而被調降（升）信評時，其薪酬調降（升）幅度大於其他調降理由。英文摘要：The credit rating is an index of the firm's financial condition and performance rated by a professional institute, and it can also be considered an indicator of executives' accountability and stewardship. Using a sample of Taiwan listed companies (excluding the financial industry) from 2006 to 2010, this study examines the relation between credit rating downgrades and CEO compensation, and the moderating effects of board independence, expertise, and attendance. The empirical results show a decrease (increase) in CEO compensation following company credit rating downgrades (upgrades), and the relation becomes more significant when the credit rating changes from low to high risk. In addition, quantile regression tests find that the magnitude of the decrease (increase) grows when CEO compensation is in a high quantile. The greater the independence, expertise, and attendance of a company's board, the more efficient the company will be. After a company's credit rating is downgraded, CEO compensation is also decreased. Credit ratings are downgraded (upgrades) for various reasons and the results also show that the reduction (increasing) in the range of CEO compensation is greater when downgrades (upgrades) are due to the state of operations.起始頁-結束頁：103-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2014.421.401篇名：相信自我：探討資訊人員的創造力並列篇名：The Power of Believing You Can-A Study of Creativity among Information System Personnel作者：游佳萍(Chia-Ping Yu)關鍵字：創造力;正向心理學;主觀幸福感;正向心理資本;角色認同;Creativity;positive psychology theory;subjective well-being;positive psychological capital;role identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：回顧有關創造力的文獻，資訊人員在創作過程中常常會遇到許多困難，這些困境往往會對資訊人員的個人創造力帶來很大的衝擊，並且會影響到整個專案的成果。本研究根據正向心理學，探討創造力、正向心理資本、主觀幸福感和角色認同之關係，以訪談的方式蒐集20個案，並且輔以內容分析的方法。研究結果發現，創造力表現與正向心理資本、角色認同都具有顯著正相關。但是主觀幸福感與創造力的表現正向關係卻不顯著。本研究根據創造力與各個變數的關係，針對資訊人員創造力的提升，給予實務上的建議。除此之外，為了提升工作上的創造力與激發更多創新，正向心理的價值，應該融入日後的人力訓練中，以提升人力資源管理的成效。英文摘要：Previous studies on creativity have shown that information technology (IT) workers frequently encounter numerous difficulties during the creative process. These difficult situations frequently have a significant effect on IT workers' personal creativity. In this study, we investigate the relationships among creativity, positive psychological capital, subjective well-being, and role identity based on positive psychology. Content analysis was used to analyze the information acquired through interviews of 20 participants. In our findings, the relationships among creativity, positive psychological capital, and role identity are positive and significant. But the relationship between creativity and subjective well-being is not significant. Finally, this study offers practical suggestions based on our findings are provided to assist businesses to effectively enhance IT worker creativity. Hence, in terms of managerial implications, more value of positive psychological needs to be introduced in training programs for human resource management (HRM) to facilitate the implementation of creativity practices and enhance creative behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：387-406資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(4).012篇名：從品牌社群成員相似性觀點探討社群公民行為之研究並列篇名：From Brand Community Members' Similarity Approach to Explore Community Citizenship Behavior作者：池文海(Wen-Hai Chih);許立群(Li-Chun Hsu);林庭妤(Ting-Yu Lin)關鍵字：品牌粉絲頁;知覺相似性;社會認同理論;品牌情感承諾;社群公民行為;Brand fan page;Perceived similarity;Social identity theory;Brand affective commitment;Community citizenship behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：社交媒體平台上，消費者透過品牌社群建立社會關係是當前行銷議題主流。本研究從知覺相似性的不同切入點，探討對社群公民行為形塑的影響歷程。採用認知－情感－意欲模式進行研究模型發展，探討哪些相似性觀點是維繫社群成員與品牌關係的決定因素。研究對象為擁有Apple系列相關產品且持續參與Apple品牌粉絲頁至少一年以上的社群成員，共計427位有效樣本。本研究採用結構方程模式進行模式檢驗，八條假說路徑皆獲得支持，其理論模式配適度佳。在中介效果檢驗部分，除了品牌情感承諾在品牌認同與對社群成員幫助行為具有完全中介效果之外，在雙認同因素與社群公民行為之間亦具有部分中介效果存在。最後，提出結論與實務管理上意涵。英文摘要：Social media platforms establish social relationship between the consumer and the brand community is the current mainstream of marketing issues. This study explores how different approaches of perceived similarity affect on community citizenship behavior. Using the Cognition-Affect-Conation Model (C-A-C) to develop research model, this research explores which similarity approaches maintain the relationship determinants between consumer and the brand. The research sample consists of 427 members who have used Apple product and used Apple Fan Page for more than one year. In the mediation effect, in addition to the brand affective commitment fully mediate brand identification and community members to help other community member, brand affective commitment partially mediate dual identification factors and community citizenship behavior. This study also provides conclusions and practical implications to marketers.起始頁-結束頁：407-436資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(4).023篇名：The Effects of Moods Induced by Webpage Content on the Effectiveness of Display Ads並列篇名：網頁內容引發之情感對展示型廣告效果的影響作者：黃旭立(Shiu-Li Huang);陳思辰(Szu-Chen Chen)關鍵字：網路廣告;內容關聯廣告;心情;情感注入模式;展示型廣告;Internet advertising;contextual advertising;mood;affect infusion model;display ads期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討網頁內容所引發的消費者情感對線上展示型廣告效果的影響。經由實驗室實驗法，本研究發現當網頁內容引發消費者正向情感時，會比負向情感的消費者有較佳的廣告回想、廣告態度、購買意圖和廣告點擊率。同時，廣告類型、產品類型、廣告注意程度、產品涉入程度具有調節的作用。根據研究的發現，我們提供線上廣告服務提供者與廣告主實務上的建議。英文摘要：This study investigates the influence of customers' mood states, as elicited by webpage content, on the effectiveness of online display ads. A laboratory experiment is conducted and the results show that customers in positive moods induced by webpage content will have better recall, attitude, purchase intentions, and will be more likely to click on display ads, compared to those in negative moods. These effects are also moderated by advertisement type, product type, attention level, and product involvement. Based on these findings, this study offers guidelines for Internet advertisers and advertising service providers.起始頁-結束頁：437-459資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(4).034篇名：應用特徵分析探索有向網絡之拓撲結構並列篇名：Applying Eigen Analysis to Explore Topological Structures of Directed Networks作者：盧能彬(Neng-Pin Lu)關鍵字：社會網絡分析;特徵分析;領結結構;Social Network Analysis;Eigen Analysis;Bowtie Structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：在圖形理論中，相鄰矩陣為表示網絡的基本資料結構；而在線性代數中，一個矩陣經由特徵分析則可找出其特徵值與對應之特徵向量。因此，透過相鄰矩陣的特徵分析將可協助網絡拓撲結構的解析：若綜觀整體特徵向量，可探索整體網絡的聚合次團體；若微觀特徵向量的個別元素值，則可分別評估各個節點的中心性。由於無向網絡的相鄰矩陣為對稱、可以對角化，目前已有許多特徵分析的研究結果。然而，由於有向網絡的相鄰矩陣不一定對稱、不一定可以對角化，所以其特徵分析的研究結果仍然相當有限。因此，本研究嘗試以相鄰矩陣的特徵分析，探索有向網絡的拓撲結構，包含強連通圖形、單一領結結構、以及遞迴領結結構等，進而瞭解有向網絡的相關特徵性質，據以提出一個有向網絡特徵分析演算法，並實務應用在部落格好友網絡，探索其中的拓撲結構。英文摘要：In graph theory, the adjacency matrix is the basic data structure to represent a network; in linear algebra, the eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of a matrix can be found out via an eigen analysis. Therefore, the eigen analysis of adjacency matrix is an approach to investigating topological structures of networks. After an eigen analysis of adjacency matrix, by inspecting the eigenvectors from the macro view, we can explore cohesive subgroups of the whole network; and by inspecting the elements of eigenvectors from the micro view, we can evaluate centrality of the individual nodes. In the literature, there have been many eigen analytical results of undirected networks thanks to symmetric and diagonalizable adjacency matrices. However, adjacency matrices of direct networks may be asymmetric and not diagonalizable so that the eigen analytical results of direct networks are rare to date. Therefore, in this paper, we try to apply the eigen analysis of adjacency matrix to explore topological structures of directed networks, including the strongly connected graph, simple bowtie structure, and recursive bowtie structure, to further the understandings of eigen properties of directed networks. As a result, we propose an eigen analysis algorithm for directed networks in theory and apply the algorithm to explore topological structures of blogroll networks in practice.起始頁-結束頁：461-490資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(4).045篇名：部落客意見領袖信任轉移影響之研究：推敲可能性模式觀點並列篇名：The Studay of Trust Transference Impact of Opinion Leader (Bloggers) on Consumer's Purchase Intention: An Elaboration Likelihood Model作者：陳純德(Chun-Der Chen);陳美如(Mei-Ju Chen)關鍵字：部落客;意見領袖;認知型信任;轉移型信任;推敲可能性模式;Blogger;Opinion Leader;Cognitive-based Trust;Transference-Based Trust;Elaboration Likelihood Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來部落客網站提供大量商品或服務的評論資訊，儼然成為某領域的意見領袖，影響了消費者信任建構的過程。為了解消費者「自我認知型－對交易網站信任」及「信任轉移型－對部落客信任」兩者的前因以及對交易意圖的影響。本研究以推敲可能性模式觀點與信任轉移觀點為理論基礎，透過問卷調查方式，獲得196份有效問卷。研究結果發現：（1）消費者對交易網站的信任（自我認知型）及部落客（信任轉移型）的信任，會顯著影響其交易意圖；（2）自我認知型的前置因素（包括服務品質與品牌形象），會顯著影響消費者對交易網站的信任；（3）信任轉移型的前置因素，（包括部落格內容品質與網友推薦程度），會顯著影響消費者對部落客的信任；（4）整體而言，在對消費者交易意圖的影響程度上，信任轉移信任的影響會大於自我認知型信任。英文摘要：Recently the phenomenon of bloggers received great attentions, and thus bloggers' opinions become influential for consumer's trust evaluation toward transaction websites since bloggers act as field experts or early adopters. Drawing on the perspectives of elaboration likelihood model and trust transference, the objectives of this study aim to investigate the antecedents of ”self-perception-based trust” and ”transference-based trust” and the impacts of these two trusts on consumer's transaction intention. The proposed model was empirically evaluated using survey data collected from 196 consumers about their perception of online shopping. The results show that (1) consumers trust in website (self-perception-based trust) and trust in blogger (transference-based trust) have significant effect on his or her intention to purchase; (2) Self-perception-based trust determinants (i.e., ”service quality” and ”brand image”) are positively related to consumer trust in transaction website; (3) transference-based trust determinants (i.e., ”content quality of blog” and ”user endorsement”) are positively related to consumer trust in blogger; (4) overall, blogger (transference-based trust) present more influential than commerce website (self-perception-based trust) on consumers' intention to purchase.起始頁-結束頁：247-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(3).016篇名：機械式及有機式補救機制對補救績效之影響：以線上購物業者為例並列篇名：The Influences of Mechanistic and Organic Recovery Approach on Recovery Performance: An Empirical Validation of Online Retailer作者：李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);李國瑋(Kuo-Wei Lee);吳綾娟(Ling-Chuan Wu)關鍵字：機械式服務補救機制;有機式服務補救機制;補救效能;補救問責;補救績效;Mechanistic service recovery mechanisms;Organic service recovery mechanisms;Recovery efficiency;Recovery accountability;Recovery performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：隨著電子商務交易的日益頻繁，網路購物失誤情況也與日俱增，服務失誤可能導致消費者的負面觀感，而服務補救可視為扭轉頹勢的機會。本研究延伸Homburg and Furst（2005）的研究，以企業角度探討機械式服務補救機制對補救效能的影響，且將有機式服務補救機制視作為干擾變數納入考量。此外，本研究亦探討第一線員工執行服務補救時之補救效能與補救問責，對於補救績效之影響。研究結果顯示：機械式服務補救機制中的程序準則及補償準則對補救效能有顯著的影響，由於行為準則意謂著第一線員工必須額外付出更多情緒勞務，因此第一線服務人員並無法單靠著行為準則就達到補救效能，故需要搭配有機式服務補救機制中的獎勵制度以及培訓制度才能有效的提升補救效能。此外，補救效能及補救問責皆對補救績效有顯著的影響。英文摘要：The prevalence of online transactions increases the occurrences of service failure during online shopping. Service recovery failure is a driving factor in customers choosing to switch service providers. Service recovery can be regarded as a chance for firms to compensate and rebuild the relationship with the customers. This study applies Homburg and Furst's (2005) research by focusing on the service recovery mechanism at firm level. This study investigates the influence of mechanistic service recovery mechanism on service recovery efficacy. This study also investigates the moderating roles of organic service recovery mechanism on the relationship between mechanistic service recovery mechanism and service recovery self-efficacy. This study also explores the impacts of the frontline employees' service recovery efficacy and service recovery accountability on service recovery performance. The results indicate that the process guideline and the outcome guideline of mechanistic service recovery mechanisms significantly impact employees' service recovery efficacy. Besides, organic service recovery mechanism moderates the relationship between behavioral guidelines of mechanistic service recovery mechanism and employees' service recovery efficacy. Finally, this study confirms the interrelationship among service recovery efficacy, recovery accountability and recovery performance.起始頁-結束頁：277-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(3).027篇名：虛擬社群使用者忠誠度之實證研究：基礎人際關係導向觀點並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Users' Loyalty on Virtual Communities: The Prospective of Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation作者：陳世智(Shih-Chih Chean);邱裕賓(Yu-Bin Chiu);賴明材(Min-Tsai Lai);吳智鴻(Chih-Hung Wu);陳煇煌(Huei-Huang Chen);張馨尹(Shin-Yin Zhang)關鍵字：虛擬社群;基礎人際關係導向;社群認同;社群參與;共同願景;Virtual Communitay;Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation (FIRO);Social Identity;Social Participation;Shared Version期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：Facebook為現今最具代表性的社群網站之一。本研究基於基礎人際關係導向觀點，探討虛擬社群中的共同願景、信任、社群參與對社群認同與社群忠誠造成的影響。研究對象為國內具有使用虛擬社群之使用者為樣本，利用網路問卷方式回收有效樣本342份，並採用偏最小平方法進行分析。研究結果發現：（1）基礎人際關係導向中的歸屬感、情感、控制等構面顯著影響共同願景與社群參與；（2）透過共同願景與社群參與之中介效果，歸屬感、情感、控制構面對信任皆有顯著影響；（3）共同願景、信任、社群參與顯著影響社群認同，而社群認同也顯著影響社群忠誠。本研究發現使用社群網站能夠表達自己，建立個人連結網路，並透過它發展和維持社群關係。最後，根據本研究之分析結果，提供網路服務經營者與相關領域之研究者建構網路社群環境及管理層面之建議。英文摘要：Facebook is one of most representative social network websites nowadays. This research explored the impact of shared vision, trust, and social participation on the social identity and loyalty from the viewpoint of fundamental interpersonal relations orientation towards virtual communities. The participants are from 342 virtual community users as the sample finally via online questionnaire survey. Partial least square was applied to assess the reliability and construct validity of the outer model, and examine the proposed hypotheses of the inner model. The results showed that: (1) Fundamental interpersonal relations orientation including belonging, affection, and control significantly affect the common vision and social participation; (2) Through the mediating effect of shared vision and community involvement, the belonging, affection, and control had the significant impact on the trust towards the virtual communities; (3) Common vision, trust, community participation significantly affected community identity, and community loyalty is influenced significantly by community identity. This study found that users can express themselves, create a personal link to the network, develop and maintain social relationships via the adoption of social networking sites. Finally, managerial implications, suggestions and future works for academics researchers and social networking service providers are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：309-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(3).038篇名：探討產品模組化對供應鏈關係品質、知識分享及新產品開發績效間關係之調節作用並列篇名：Moderating Influence of Product Modularity on Relationships between Supply Chain Relationship Quality, Knowledge Sharing and NPD Performance作者：陳至柔(Chih-Jou Chen);吳如娟(Ju-Chuan Wu)關鍵字：供應鏈關係品質;外顯知識分享;內隱知識分享;新產品開發績效;產品模組化;Supply chain relationship quality;explicit knowledge sharing;tacit knowledge sharing;new product development performance;product modularity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：廠商透過有效的連接機制與上下游重要供應鏈夥伴密切合作，藉此強化夥伴間的關係，來提昇夥伴間知識分享與產品創新，進而提昇新產品開發績效。然而，較少有研究探討產品模組化對供應鏈關係品質的調節效果；鑑此，本研究深入探討在高度動態與全球競爭的環境中，供應鏈關係品質對夥伴間知識分享，及知識分享對新產品開發績效的提昇是否有顯著的影響效果，並探討是否受到產品模組化調節效果的影響。本研究所提出之研究架構及假說利用結構方程模式及SmartPLS 2.0軟體進行驗證與檢定，並以台灣製造業的實證資料來驗證上述理論架構的配適度。結果顯示多數假說均受到支持，並根據研究結果，提出管理意涵及實務建議業者參考。英文摘要：Manufacturers have been encouraged to connect key suppliers and customers, to establish strong supply chains and then to enhance new product development performance of their supply chain systems. However, few studies have focused on the moderating effect of product modularity on supply chain relationship quality. Thus, this study is to investigate the influence of supply chain relationship quality on knowledge sharing, and whether more leads to superior new product development performance of firms in a highly dynamic and competitive environment. Besides, this study is to investigate the influence of the product modularity moderates these relationships. Literature of supply chain relationship quality, knowledge sharing, product modularity and new product development performance were fully reviewed. The model and hypothesized relationship are empirically tested using the structural equation modeling (SEM) approach, supported by SmartPLS 2.0. Furthermore, we have collected empirical data of manufacturersin Taiwanto verifythe model fit of this research. On the whole, most of hypotheses are supported. Implications and practical suggests are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：339-386資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(3).049篇名：以預測市場匯聚資訊支援決策之方法：從機率預測到類別判定並列篇名：A Method to Support Decision-making Based upon the Information Aggregation of Prediction Markets: From Probabilistic Forecasting to Categorical Forecasting作者：林鴻文(Hung-Wen Lin);童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung);葉家興(Jason Yeh)關鍵字：預測市場;機率預測;類別預測;最適價格門檻;支援決策;prediction markets;probabilistic forecasting;categorical forecasting;optimal price threshold;decision-making support期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文成功建構預測市場的最適價格門檻，作為判定預測事件是否發生的依據，將事件發生的機率預測（probabilistic forecasting）轉換成事件發生與否的類別預測（categorical forecasting），作為公共政策與企業決策的重要依據。以2006-2011年的未來事件交易所7,881個預測事件樣本分析，本文透過計算所有價格的準確率尋找最適價格門檻，並且比較價格50門檻與最高價門檻準則的準確率。本文發現：全部預測事件樣本的最適價門檻為價格60，其判定預測事件的準確率比價格50門檻與最高價門檻準則都要高，具有統計上的顯著性，並且通過樣本外測試。英文摘要：We successfully construct a methodology to find optimal price thresholds for prediction markets as the basis of categorizing the occurrence of the prediction events. This method enables us to transform the probabilistic forecasting of event occurrence to the categorical forecasting, thereby creating an important reference for public policy and corporate decision-making. Based upon 7,881 samples of prediction events from the Exchange of Future Events between 2006 and 2011, we determine optimal price thresholds and compare the accuracy rates with those obtained by two benchmark rules. This paper finds that the price of 60 is the optimal price threshold for the all sample studied, which yields an accuracy rate higher than those obtained by the common threshold of 50 and the highest-price threshold. The superiority is statistically significant and is also robust in out-of-sample tests.起始頁-結束頁：127-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(2).0110篇名：（3, n）-門檻式視覺機密分享之新設計法並列篇名：Novel Design for 3 out of n Visual Secret Sharing Schemes作者：官振宇(Zen-Yu Quan);侯永昌(Young-Chong Hou);蔡志豐(Chih-Fong Tsai)關鍵字：視覺機密分享;(3, n)-門檻式視覺機密分享;組合數學;visual secret sharing;(3, n)-threshold visual secret sharing;combinatorics期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：（3, n）-門檻式視覺機密分享是（k, n）-門檻式視覺機密分享的一種特例，不過在典型的（3, n）-門檻式視覺機密分享的研究會產生設計複雜、還原影像黑白色差不佳、機密影像只適用於黑白影像、像素擴展等問題。為了解決上述幾個研究限制，本研究提出一個應用組合數學公式求解的非擴展型（3, n）-門檻式視覺機密分享。相較於其他相關研究，本研究具備下列幾項優點：（1）設計概念十分單純，易於實作。（2）還原影像的黑白色差值優於或等於其他（3, n）-門檻值機密分享的研究成果。（3）本研究所提出的分享模型適合任何型態的機密影像。（4）分享投影片的大小將與機密影像相同。英文摘要：(3, n)-threshold visual secret sharing ((3, n)-VSS) is a special case of (k, n)-threshold visual secret sharing. In previous related (3, n)-VSS researches, it has following drawbacks: complex design method, poor black-white contrast of the restored image, only suitable to binary image, and expanded pixels. In order to solve the above problems, our study proposed a novel approach to design (3, n)-VSS using combinatorics. Compared to other related studies, this study has the following advantages: (1) design concept is simple and easy to implement; (2) the black-white contrast of the restored image is better than other (3, n)-VSS researches; (3) the secret type is more suitable to grayscale and color image; (4) the transparencies (shares) are the same size as the secret image.起始頁-結束頁：149-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(2).0211篇名：為網路可達性分析之區塊模式化擴展並列篇名：An Extension of Blockmodeling for Network Reachability Analysis作者：盧能彬(Neng-Pin Lu)關鍵字：社會網絡分析;區塊模式化;可達性;social network analysis;blockmodeling;reachability期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：社會網絡分析為觀察線上網絡形成與探索虛擬社群變遷的重要工具，而在各種社會網絡分析方法中，區塊模式化則為分析網絡結構的關鍵方法，它不只可用於個別節點的位置與角色分析，也可用於發掘整體網絡的聚合次團體。傳統的區塊模式化以網絡的相鄰矩陣為操作目標，將相鄰矩陣盡量調整與分割為元素全為0或全為1的區塊，然後探討區塊之間的對應網絡結構。本研究則嘗試以相鄰矩陣經由布林運算所產生的可達矩陣作為區塊模式化擴展的操作目標，並以部落格朋友網絡為例說明此區塊模式化擴展的可能運用：藉由不同距離可達矩陣的區塊模式化，本研究可以分析各種以寬鬆聚合次團體為基礎的網絡結構；若以最長距離的可達矩陣為區塊模式化目標，則更可將網絡完美對應至領結結構，並呼應對稱無循環結構。英文摘要：Social network analysis is an important tool to observe the formations of online networks and to explore the changes of virtual communities. Amongst the various methods of social network analyses, blockmodeling is a key approach to analyzing network structures. It can be applied not only to position and role analyses of the individual nodes, but also to cohesive subgroup discoveries of the whole network. Conventional blockmodeling, operating on the adjacency matrix of the network, tries to adjust and partition the adjacency matrix into blocks that contain all 0s or all 1s approximately, and to investigate the network structure between the approximate blocks. In this research, we apply boolean matrix operation on the adjacency matrix to generate the reachability matrix as the extended target of blockmodeling. And we use a blogroll network to show the possible applications of the extended blockmodeling. Via reachability matrices of different distances, we can analyze the network structures based on a variety of loosely cohesive subgroups. Via the longest reachability matrix, we can fit the network perfectly into the bowtie structure, and the fit is also corresponding to the symmetric-acyclic structure.起始頁-結束頁：175-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(2).0312篇名：知識外化與內化過程中知識流失現象與知識流失成因之探討並列篇名：The Study of Knowledge Loss and the Determinants of Knowledge Loss between Knowledge Externalization and Internalization作者：李國瑋(Kuo-Wei Lee);李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);陳欣琪(Shin-Chi Chen)關鍵字：知識外化;知識內化;知識流失;知識管理;Knowledge externalization;knowledge internalization;knowledge loss;knowledge management期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去實證研究雖指出知識外化、內化活動對於知識管理績效有正面影響，但一旦知識從外化到內化過程中出現知識流失現象，即將對知識管理效能造成影響。本研究主要針對知識外化到內化過程中知識流失現象與知識流失成因進行探討。研究方法包括質化與量化研究。在質化方面，藉由深度訪談與內容分析法，建立起知識流失的觀點，並作為知識流失相關構面的發展基礎；在量化方面，藉由問卷調查法針對知識流失成因加以驗證。統計方法包括探索性因素分析、驗證性因素分析、成對樣本T檢定與結構方程式等。研究結果指出受測者對不同知識類型的外化／內化難度認知，以及外化／內化優先性認知有顯著差異，此外，知識的外化／內化難度認知與內化優先性認知對於知識流失有顯著影響。其結果顯示知識在外化與內化過程中，會因為困難度認知與優先性認知的影響，而出現知識流失的情況。本研究貢獻主要在於建立知識流失的觀點與探索知識流失的成因。此觀點的建立將有助於知識內化與外化觀點的進一步釐清與擴充，並為管理知識的有效傳播提供一定啟示與意涵。英文摘要：Prior researches indicated that knowledge externalization and internalization have a positive influence on KM effectiveness. However, as soon as knowledge loss occurs from knowledge externalization to internalization, it will affect KM effectiveness. The purpose of this study is to exploit the issue of knowledge loss from knowledge externalization to knowledge internalization. Research methods including qualitative and quantitative approaches were conducted in this study. In qualitativemethods, deeply interviews and content analysis were used to develop the concept of knowledge loss which serves the basis of the related dimensions. In quantitative methods, the questionnaire survey was used toexamine thedeterminants of knowledge loss. Statistical methods include exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, reliability analysis, paired-samples T-test and structural equation modeling. The research results indicate that there are significant differences in the perceived difficulty and perceived priority among different knowledge types in the process of knowledge externalization and internalization. The perceived difficulty of knowledge externalization/internalization and perceived priority of knowledge internalization have significant effect on knowledge loss. The findings imply that the knowledge loss caused by the perceived difficulty and perceived prioritywould occur in the process of knowledge externalization and internalization. The major contribution of this study lies indeveloping the concept of knowledge loss and itsdeterminants. The perspective will clarify and expand the thoughtfulnessof knowledge internalization and externalization, therefore to offer some implication for the effective diffusion of management knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：199-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(2).0413篇名：惡意域名受害族群估計－使用聯合超幾何最大似然估計法並列篇名：Estimating Population Size of Fast-Flux Domain-Using Joint Hypergeometric Maximum Likelihood Estimator Method作者：古東明(Tung-Ming Koo);張宏昌(Hung-Chang Chang)關鍵字：重複捕取法;動態惡意域名服務網路;規模估計;Capture-Recapture;Fast-Flux Service Networks;Size Estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：FFSN是目前網路世界所面臨的極大威脅，其技術可以讓攻擊者隱藏在一群代理伺服器（agent）後面，這樣的方式可以讓攻擊者來躲避偵測使資訊安全人員偵測失敗，FFSN這項技術對犯罪份子的好處是惡意網站可以受到保護，進而延長惡意網站的壽命。所以FFSN的危害日益嚴重，要規模估計FFSN-Agent也相當不容易，且Flux-Agent本身可能是Bot節點，估計FFSN的規模也可以知道其威脅程度。本研究的核心為規模估計動態惡意域名服務網路（Fast-Flux Service Network，FFSN）的族群規模大小，藉由重複捕取法（Capture-Recapture Method，CRM）中的聯合超幾何最大似然估計法（Joint hypergeometric maximum likelihood estimator，JHE）來估計Flux-Agent的群體大小，其結果發現比普查的方式可以更快速找出整個族群大小。英文摘要：FFSN is one of the enormous threats of internet. It can hide the attackers behind a group of agents and by this way the attackers can avoid being detected. The benefit of FFSN to attackers is the malicious websites can be protected and the survival time can be prolonged. The danger of FFSN is getting more serious and Flux-Agent could be a Bot note. To estimate the size of FFSN can find the danger degree but to estimate the size is not easy. The purpose of this study is to estimate the group size of Fast-Flux Service Network (FFSN.). Uses Joint hypergeometric maximum likelihood estimator (JHE) of Capture-Recapture Method (CRM) to estimate the group size of Flux-Agent. By computing the joint hypergeometric maximum likelihood estimator (JHE) of Program NOREMARK, the group size can be found. The experiment result can find the group size more quickly than census.起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(1).0114篇名：從實體銀行到網路銀行－關係慣性與滿意度的雙干擾效果並列篇名：From Physical to Online Banking-The Dual Moderating Effects of Relationship Inertia and Satisfaction作者：李國瑋(Kuo-Wei Lee)關鍵字：網路銀行;實體銀行;轉換意圖;關係慣性;滿意度;online banking;physical bank;intension towards switch;relationship inertia;satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：衡諸過去科技接受模式相關研究，雖已針對使用者對虛擬市場的採用意圖與行為加以探討，但並未將實體市場與虛擬市場的替代效果納入考量。當使用者虛擬市場的使用頻率愈高，則意謂著使用者實體市場的使用頻率將隨之減低，在此前提下，實體市場的相關因素，如實體市場的關係慣性與滿意度，即可能會對使用者虛擬市場的接受行為造成影響。本研究目的旨在針對使用者從實體銀行移轉至網路銀行的轉換意圖與轉換行為之影響因素進行探討與驗證。在問卷發放上，總計發出700份問卷，回收445份有效問卷，有效回收率為63.57%。研究結果顯示使用者從實體到虛擬市場的轉換意圖會受到移轉效益與移轉成本的影響；同時，使用者的轉換意圖會進一步影響其轉換行為；最後，當使用者對實體銀行的關係慣性程度愈高，以及對實體銀行的滿意度愈高，則將會進一步弱化使用者轉換意圖與轉換行為之間關係。英文摘要：Although previous TAM-related studies explored users' intentions and behaviors for using the virtual market, the substitution effect between the physical market and the virtual market was not considered. A higher frequency of using the virtual market usually means a lower frequency of using the physical market for users. Under the premise that these two markets have certain substitution effects, physical market-related factors, such as relationship inertia and satisfaction with the physical market, may have effects on the behavior of those using the virtual market.The primary goal of this study is to explore the factors that affect the attitude and intension towards switch from physical to visual market in the context of online banking. In total, 700 questionnaires were sent out and 445 effective questionnaires were returned with effective recovery rate of 63.57%. The results shows that first, switch benefit and switch cost have significant effects on attitude towards switch. Also, attitude towards switch has a positive effect on behavior intension towards switch. Finally, users' inertia and satisfaction to physical bank moderate the effect of attitude towards switch and behavior intension towards switch.起始頁-結束頁：17-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(1).0215篇名：線上購物服務失誤類型與補救策略、認知公平與補救後滿意度之關係並列篇名：Relationships among Online Shopping Service Failure Types, Service Recovery Strategies, Perceived Justice, and Satisfaction with Service Recovery作者：郭英峰(Ying-Feng Kuo);伍啟銘(Chi-Ming Wu);楊書成(Shu-Chen Yang);顏士庭(Shih-Ting Yen)關鍵字：服務失誤;補救策略;認知公平;補救後滿意度;線上購物涉入程度;Service failure;service recovery strategies;perceived justice;post-recovery satisfaction;online shopping involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：網路購物在日常生活中的重要性與日俱增，然而在交易過程中難免會發生服務失誤，如何利用有效的服務補救策略來進行失誤更正，成為線上經營業者非常重要的議題，然而迄今對於購物網站之服務補救的研究仍不常見。有鑒於此，本研究探討購物網站失誤類型與業者所提供補救策略的交互作用是否會影響顧客的認知公平，接著探討認知公平與補救後滿意度之關係，以及此關係是否會受到顧客在線上購物涉入程度之調節作用。本研究採用情境模擬法，依據服務失誤類型與補救策略之不同共分為二十個實驗情境。根據228份有效資料之分析結果顯示，在不同的服務失誤情境下，實質和心理補救方式各具有不同的效果，而顧客所的認知公平亦會經其涉入程度的調節，進而影響其補救後滿意度。英文摘要：The issue of service quality is getting important in the context of cyberspace. Compared with brick-and-mortar, online retail store may occur more service problems during service delivery. Due to the characteristics of service, failures are unavoidable therefore how to correct the failure and compensate customers still unclear. This study applied scenarios method to discover the effect of recovery strategies on customer perceived justice and customer satisfaction with service recovery in various failure types; further, the moderator effect of online shopping involvement on the relationship between customer perceived justice and customer satisfaction with service recovery was also investigated. Results based on 228 valid respondents indicated that the interaction of service failure type and service recovery has significant effects on customer perceived justice. Further, online shopping involvement has moderating effect on the relationship between customer perceived justice and satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：53-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(1).0316篇名：數位鑑識之無痕瀏覽器證據調查研究並列篇名：Private Browsing Evidence of Google History Investigations in Computer Forensics作者：柯博淞(Bong-Sung Ke);林曾祥(Jsen-Shung Lin);王旭正(Shiuh-Jeng Wang);左豪官(Hao-Kuan Tso)關鍵字：數位證據;數位鑑識;瀏覽器;無痕瀏覽;網頁紀錄;Digital evidence;forensics;browser;private browsing;web-page record期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：鑑識人員若要還原網路犯罪，網頁紀錄是重要的關鍵跡證。但近年設計出安全性較高的無痕瀏覽（private browsing），它讓我們在瀏覽網頁後能夠不留下痕跡，將網頁紀錄刪除。所以當鑑識人員面對無痕瀏覽時，是否還有機會萃取出網頁相關的紀錄，證實犯罪的真假。因此本篇文章提供了使用無痕瀏覽後，我們還能夠在使用者的電腦裡詳細分析網頁紀錄及在Google History（搜尋紀錄）紀錄搜尋過的關鍵字和網頁，並且也比較了無痕瀏覽與一般瀏覽刪除網頁紀錄的情形。透過我們的實驗結果可以發現遭到刪除的網頁紀錄可以使用我們提出的方法萃取出來及解釋無痕瀏覽的實現方法，我們所提供的方法可以讓鑑識人員面對無痕瀏覽的非法活動時，能夠萃取網頁紀錄並將犯人繩之以法。英文摘要：The evidence investigations on the internet, the records left in the web-site are rather critical points to unveil the truth for the investigators. With the fast progress of the high-tech on the internet applications, the choice of the private browsing model is to offer higher security when visiting the relative web-sites. It enables the evidence to get rid of recording in the computer systems so as to guarantee the user privacy in personal data usages. But the evidence is still required to extract whenever the crime-event occurs on the internet with committing the illegal activities. In this paper, we propose the observations in the Google history to keep track of the relative evidence to unveil the truth so as to support the investigations in the crime-event on the internet. It turns out that the deleted web-pages and relative records could be found out although the private browsing model is applied on visiting the internet. By the way, the extracted evidence in the forensic report could clearlyindicate the illegal activities to guarantee the commitment for a suspect.起始頁-結束頁：85-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(1).0417篇名：Effect of Website Aesthetics on Approach Intention並列篇名：網站設計美感對線上行為傾向的影響作者：林煜超(Yu-Chao Lin);陳美香(Mei-Hsiang Chen)關鍵字：網站設計;美感;情緒反應;線上行為;web design; aesthetics;emotional response;online behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：設計能夠引發特定情緒反應的購物環境，可能可以增加購物的機率，然而，過去有關網站設計美感對情緒和行為傾向的相關研究並不多見，因此，本研究的目的是調查網站的視覺設計美感對情緒和趨近行為傾向的影響，同時也調查了情緒在網站美感與趨近行為傾向間所扮演的中介效果。共有116位受試者參加研究實驗，實驗設計以重複量測實驗，調查網站設計美感的三個水準（古典美感、明示美感和低美感）對情緒和趨近行為傾向的影響。結果顯示，網站設計美感會影響情緒反應和趨近行為傾向。同時美感設計因子中能夠誘發較高愉悅或亢奮情緒者，也能誘發較高的趨近行為傾向。英文摘要：Designing purchasing environment that produce specific emotional effects in the buyer might enhance purchase probability. However, studies on effect of website aesthetics on emotion and behavior intention seem to be limited. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of visual aesthetics on approach/avoidance intention and the mediating role of emotional responses. Overall, 116 subjects participated in the experiment. A repeated measure design with three levels of website aesthetics which are classical, expressive, and low aesthetics was employed to investigate the emotional response and approach/avoidance intention. The results show that aesthetics of website affects emotional responses and that the emotions affect approach/avoidance intention. The design factors, which induce higher pleasure or arousal, will produce higher approach intention.起始頁-結束頁：107-125資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2014.16(1).0501篇名：編輯語並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃思明(Sy-Ming Hwang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.4.CHI.i2篇名：政治關係如何影響公司價值？並列篇名：How Do Political Connections Affect Firm Value?作者：沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen);朱浩民(Hau-Min Chu);王佑鈞(Yu-Chun Wang)關鍵字：政治關係;股價報酬;投資人交易;公司價值;political connections;short-term stock returns;investor trading;firm value期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：政治關係是否帶給公司價值？若是，則政治關係如何影響公司價值？我們以2008年臺灣總統選舉為研究事件，藉由分析選舉前後公司橫斷面異常報酬率，以及三種不同類型投資人的股票交易情形來探討這個議題，並且同時檢驗選舉事件對與勝選政黨或敗選政黨有關係公司之價值影響為何。首先，我們發現與敗選政黨有關係的公司股價存在負的異常報酬，而與勝選政黨有關係的公司而則無，此結果支持我們的勝選假說。其次，敗選政黨的失利對報酬所產生的負面影響，高過於勝選政黨所帶來的正面影響，支持政黨輪替假說。最後，熟知政治關係價值的內部人，其交易行為與政治關係影響公司價值的方向一致，此結果支持政治交易假說。本文研究結果顯示政治關係對公司價值的確有所影響，而對政治關係較為熟稔的投資人較容易知悉這樣的關係對公司所帶來的價值，這些發現有助於瞭解政治關係影響公司價值的過程。英文摘要：This study investigates whether and how political connections bring value to firms. One way to examine this issue is to check the responses of abnormal stock returns and investor trading for politically connected firms before and after the event of presidential election. We further examine the impacts of this event on the value of firms connected to the winning and losing parties. Data on stock price and shareholdings around the 2008 Taiwanese Presidential Election are used in this paper. First, we find that the firms connected to the losing party exhibit negative stock returns, whereas the firms connected to the winning party do not. This supports our winning party hypothesis. Moreover, the defeat of the ruling party has a greater negative impact on stock returns than the victory of the opposition party, lending credence to our party turnover hypothesis. Finally, sophisticated investors who understand the value of political connections are more likely to exhibit trading direction consistent with the value change, supporting our political trading hypothesis. Clearly, political connections bring value to firms, and the evidence helps us understand how political connections affect firm value.起始頁-結束頁：1-19+105-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.4.CHI.13篇名：股票購回計畫自評價值與操弄意圖之研究並列篇名：The Self-Evaluation from Share Repurchase Plan and Manipulation作者：王朝仕(Chao-Shi Wang)關鍵字：股票購回計畫;自評價值;操弄;低估;績效;share repurchase plan (SRP);self-evaluation;manipulation;undervalued;performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：股票購回計畫提供公司向市場傳達自評價值態度的管道。然而，一般投資人難以辨認公司宣稱本身價值訊號的真偽，故購回計畫可能潛伏操弄股價的意圖。本研究以購回計畫中揭露的訂價水準，區別出公司自認為存在較嚴重低估問題的樣本。實證結果顯示，針對自評價值過於樂觀的公司，具有三個特徵指向其安排購回計畫動機傾向為干擾市場。首先，實際購回股份結果與計畫內容差異較大。其次，回顧宣告計畫前，並未偵測到可具體支持價值被低估的證據。最後，宣告績效較佳，亦即公司自評價值訊息會促使市場產生相對應的調整，但是該表現卻僅侷限於預定執行期間。英文摘要：Share repurchase plan (SRP) provides an opportunity for the firms who try to convey their own self-evaluation attitude about the intrinsic value. However, identify the signal is a difficult task for uninformed investors, thus SRP may hide the manipulation purpose of firms. This paper investigates how the firms interfere in stock market by arranging SRP, and observes the samples that unilateral revealed existence of serious undervalued problems. The empirical results show that the firms with overoptimistic self-evaluation have three distinct features in SRP event. First, the outcomes of executing share buyback would be far from the program. Second, reviewing the theoretical return before announcement period, it detected no specific evidence to demonstrate the existence of undervalued problem. Finally, the per-formance could beat the benchmark, and consequently the market valuation would be adjusted in terms of the signal that SRP revealed. But the achievement was limited to the predetermined execution period only.起始頁-結束頁：21-43+111-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.4.CHI.214篇名：線上產品評論對消費者購買意圖之影響：認知需求與產品知識調節效果之探討並列篇名：The Influence of Online Product Reviews on Consumer Purchase Intentions: The Moderating Roles of Cognitive Need and Product Knowledge作者：莊淑惠(Shu-Hui Chuang);林鴻南(Hong-Nan Lin);吳政霈(Cheng-Pei Wu)關鍵字：線上產品評論;推敲可能性模式;認知需求;產品知識;Online Product Reviews;Elaboration Likelihood Model;Cognitive Need;Product Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：網路購物的不確定性與風險的程度較高，許多消費者在購物前會參考線上產品評論以減少網購的不確定性與風險，雖然企業界與學術界已開始意識到線上產品評論對消費者購買決策的影響力，但相關研究卻相對缺乏。本研究除探討線上產品評論的論點品質與評論數量對消費者購買決策的影響外，並以推敲可能性模式為基礎，來探討個人差異變數（包括認知需求與產品知識）於這影響的過程中可能產生的調節效果。本研究採實驗室實驗法，研究結果顯示線上產品評論的論點品質及評論數量會影響消費者對產品的認知有用性與認知價值，進而影響其購買意圖。此外，認知需求與產品知識對於論點品質與認知產品有用性間的關係具有調節效果，且產品知識並對論點品質與認知產品價值間的關係產生調節效果。本研究結果有助於瞭解線上產品評論將如何影響消費者的購買意圖，除能填補過去研究之不足，亦可提供行銷人員建議，使能適當運用線上產品評論來達到行銷的目的。英文摘要：Prior to making purchase decisions, most consumers have the tendency to read online product reviews to seek information on a product in order to reduce the uncertainty and risk in online shopping. Researchers and practitioners are aware that online produce reviews have an impact on consumer purchase decisions. However, little research has been done to investigate the potential effects of online produce reviews on purchase decisions. This study explores the relationships between online produce reviews and purchase decisions, and uses the elaboration likelihood model to explain how level of cognitive need and product knowledge moderate these relationships. Results of a laboratory experiment indicate that both the quality and quantity of online product reviews affect consumers' perceived usefulness and perceived value of the product, which in turn affect their purchase intentions. In addition, both cognitive need and product knowledge can moderate the reviews quality-perceived usefulness relationship, and product knowledge can moderate the reviews quality-perceived value relationship. These findings have implications for online sellers about how to manage online consumer reviews.起始頁-結束頁：45-65+117-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.4.CHI.455篇名：探討雲端服務創新模式與演進：中華電信為例並列篇名：Exploring Innovation Model and Evolution of Cloud Service: Case Study of Chung-Hwa Telecom作者：邱文宏(Wen-Hong Chiu);張震冬(Chen-Tong Chang);紀慧如(Hui-Ru Chi);陳世良(Shieh-Liang Chen)關鍵字：服務創新;雲端服務;服務供應鏈;service innovation;cloud service;service supply chain期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以中華電信進行個案研究，以服務供應鏈之供應商、服務設計者、服務提供者三成員觀點，建構中華電信提供顧客服務之雲端服務創新模式，並探討模式演進過程。透過蒐集2001-2011年間之個案相關次級資料，輔以專家深度訪談，共彙整1,761件服務創新事件，並以每一創新事件為分析單元。本文提出五項研究發現：1.服務供應鏈之雲端服務創新區分為三種模式；2.服務供應鏈三成員皆首重「平台即服務」；供應商另強調「基礎設施即服務」，服務設計者則強調「通信即服務」；3.雲端服務由「平台即服務」朝向「基礎設施即服務」之發展趨勢；4.雲端服務之「軟體即服務」由服務提供者與供應商協同提供軟體服務，朝向服務提供者自行開發設計之發展趨勢；5.供應商與服務設計者協同設計為發展趨勢。英文摘要：This study is a case study of Chunghwa Telecom. Based on a perspective of service supply chain consisting of three roles as supplier, service designer and service provider, this study develops an innovation model of cloud services and explores the evolution of the model. Through collecting the relevant secondary data of the case from 2001 to 2011 and in-depth interviews, this study has collected 1,761 events of service innovation. Each event is treated as an analysis unit. The findings are described as follows. First, cloud service innovations provided by service supply chain are distinguished as three models. Second, the three roles in service supply chain consistently place the most emphasis on PaaS. Moreover, suppliers emphasize IaaS and service designers emphasize CaaS. Third, the development trend of cloud service is from PaaS to IaaS. Fourth, the SaaS development trend of cloud service is from the collaborative design by suppliers and service providers to the self design of service providers. Fifth, the cloud services jointly designed by suppliers and service designers become a development trend.起始頁-結束頁：67-88+121-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.4.CHI.676篇名：編輯語並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃思明(Sy-Ming Hwang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.3.CHI.i7篇名：國安基金政策績效與期貨市場滑價並列篇名：The Policy Performance of NFSF and Slippage in Futures Markets作者：黃柏凱(Po-Kai Huang)關鍵字：國安基金;臺股期貨;滑價;鉅額交易;National Financial Stabilization Fund;TAIEX Futures;slippage;block trading期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究利用國安基金實際干預期貨的日內資料，探討國安基金干預所產生的滑價。期貨市場的滑價類似於股票市場的市場衝擊成本。藉由分析資訊效果，可以知道國安基金是否為具有訊息的交易者，能否建立投資人信心，此外，也觀察流動性效果，探討國安基金能否提供市場流動性。本研究除了使用國安基金的單筆交易（single trade）外，也將國安基金數筆連續的單筆交易視為套裝交易（trade package），避免滑價受到連續干預的影響。實證結果顯示，若以單筆交易衡量國安基金交易的滑價，可以發現國安基金的交易提供流動性，賺得流動性溢酬，而且國安基金的交易具有資訊效果。然而，若以套裝交易衡量國安基金交易的滑價，卻發現只有國安基金的賣單仍提供流動性，而且套裝交易並沒有包含資訊效果。最後，國安基金干預的交易規模愈大，不一定會造成較大的流動性與資訊效果。英文摘要：This study investigates the intervention policy effectiveness by the National Financial Stabilization Fund (NFSF) on Taiwan Stock Exchange Capitalization Weighted Index (TAIEX) Futures, using unique intraday NFSF trading data. The policy objectives of NFSF are providing liquidity and signaling positive information. We use futures slippage, which is similar to market-impact costs in stock markets, to evaluating the policy objectives of NFSF. Slippage can be decomposed to liquidity effect and information effect. We find that NFSF's single trades provide liquidity and earn liquidity premium in the sample period. NFSF's single trades also contain information. However, only NFSF's sales trade packages provide liquidity. In addition, NFSF's trade packages contain no information. Finally, the liquidity effect and information effect of NFSF's trades are not necessarily positively related to trade size.起始頁-結束頁：1-21+109-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.3.CHI.18篇名：收益多角化對銀行是光明面還是黑暗面？全球實證並列篇名：Is the Diversification of Bank Income the Bright Side or Dark Side? A Global Perspective作者：林昆立(Kun-Li Lin);黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang)關鍵字：銀行;風險;收益多角化;Banking;Diversification;Risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以2001年至2008年全球商業銀行為研究對象，探討銀行收益多角化與風險的關係。我們利用新的銀行財務數據資料，並進一步依據不同國家所得、地區與國家治理特性，以檢視銀行收益多角化對於銀行風險是符合「多角化光明面假說」或者「多角化黑暗面假說」。實證結果顯示：第一、在全體樣本或高所得、歐美地區國家的銀行，其收益多角化策略可以有效降低銀行風險，符合「多角化光明面假說」。相反地，中低所得國家收益多角化卻提高銀行破產風險及倒閉危機，符合「多角化黑暗面假說」。第二，若非利息收入比例超過最適值時，則不管所得或地區因素，隨著非利息收入比率增加都會增加獲利的不確定性或倒閉機率。第三，在探討國家特定變數，發現高所得國家可改善銀行收益多角化與風險的關係，但中低所得國家反而是惡化兩者間的關係。而非洲及中東地區亦不利於銀行收益多角化對風險的關係。最後，在國家治理方面，一個國家的法規制度及官僚體系環境愈好，將有助於改善銀行收益多角化與風險的關係。但債權人權利愈健全或銀行跨業經營限制程度愈高，反而惡化收益多角化與銀行風險的關係。英文摘要：The paper examines the effects of bank diversification on risk using a global sample from 95 countries. We find evidence that diversification will mitigate the banking risk in high-income countries, European or America region, whereas increase the likelihood of bank failures in median-low-income countries. Second, when banks have relatively excessive non-interest income, they have fewer potential diversification gains. Finally, we also find that a better country's law and bureaucracy will help improve the relationship between bank diversification and risk, but stronger creditor rights' protection and more regulatory restrictions on bank activities will worsen them.起始頁-結束頁：23-51+117-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.3.CHI.239篇名：虛擬社群涉入對於股票投資行為之影響並列篇名：The Impacts of e-Stock-Investors' Involvement in Virtual Community on Their Investment Behaviors作者：郭敏華(Min-Hua Kuo);黃柏凱(Po-Kai Huang);許碧芳(Pi-Fang Hsu)關鍵字：虛擬社群;持股分散程度;進出頻次;停損;virtual community;portfolio diversification;trading turnover;stop-loss期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討虛擬社群涉入對於股票投資行為之影響，係國內外首篇針對此議題所進行的大規模調查研究。實證結果發現，臺灣e股民的投資行為，不論是靜態的持股分散程度或是動態的投資進出頻次，均受到投資者虛擬社群的涉入程度所影響，更明確地說，個別投資人對於虛擬社群的參與深度（涉入時間）與其持股分散程度和交易頻次，都呈現顯著的正向關係。此外，本研究也發現，投資人對於虛擬社群的參與廣度（參與的社群網站數）較高者，較能積極設立停損且切實執行。此現象意味著，虛擬世界中的人際網絡並不「虛擬」，對於投資人的決策與行為已具有十分顯著的影響。本研究的成果發現，對於財務學中的投資行為與社會心理學的人際關係等議題之探討，都具有開創性的重要價值。英文摘要：This study explores the impacts of e-stock-investors' involvement in virtual community on their investment behaviors. It is the first paper, as far as we know, discussing this issue systematically by a large-scale survey. The empirical results show that individual e-investors' involvement in virtual communities significantly affects their portfolio diversification and trading turnover. Specifically, when a Taiwanese e-investor spends more time in virtual community, he/she holds a more diversified portfolio and trades more frequently. In addition, when he/she attends more social websites, he/she is more inclined to do the loss-stops. It implies that the virtual community is not ”virtual” and brings about significant influences on investment behaviors. The findings of this paper are insightful for the re-searches on the social networks analysis in Sociology, the interpersonal relationships in Social Psychology, as well as the investment behaviors in Finance.起始頁-結束頁：53-70+121-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.3.CHI.5310篇名：建構創業家失敗復原力調節機制之研究並列篇名：An Exploratory Study of Constructing Moderation Mechanisms of Business Failure and Resilience for Entrepreneur作者：陳悅琴(Yueh-Chin Chen);蔡明宏(Ming-Hong William Tsai);林明杰(Ming-Ji James Lin)關鍵字：創業失敗;復原力;自我效能;內在動機;business failure;resilience;self-efficacy;intrinsic motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：創業家東山再起議題在管理領域中很少被探討，且失敗創業家如何克服失敗打擊重返創業家行列之相關研究少之又少。本研究採用心理治療領域之復原力（resilience）觀點，探討失敗創業家復原調適歷程以重返創業場域，透過典型抽樣，進行十位「已東山再起」及四位「不再創業」之樣本分析。研究結果發現，失敗創業家因無法理解失敗為何發生、失控感、對未來的不確定性和社會身分的消失等因素，引發無力感和心力交瘁等負面情緒；逃避和輕生的不理性行為反應；以及生病和變蒼老等生理機能失調等失敗反應。透過坦誠錯誤和建構失敗意義、負責任的誠信態度和個人身分價值中啟動內在恆定作用；獲得貴人相助和重要他人鼓勵發展外在恆定作用、以及從事緩衝作為以轉移或平撫失敗壓力。然而，有些失敗創業家在調適過程中察覺資源和能力有限、或在新領域中找到新身分意義而選擇不再創業；但有些失敗創業家則受到自我效能與內在動機之驅動，願意重返創業場域開展新事業。本研究結果可作為輔導失敗創業家重回創業家行列之療程設計，並彌補過去復原力理論和創業家研究之理論缺口。英文摘要：This study mainly explore and discuss how entrepreneurs experiencing business failures (or crucible) could resilience and bounce back from the negative event. In the traditional stream for entrepreneur research, studies mostly focus on the successful entrepreneurs, analyzing from personality or business operation performance perspectives on how they could succeed, or they often focus on how entrepreneurs avoid failures. Few studies draw their attention to the processes and progress how entrepreneurs bounce back after failures/crucible. Researcher set out to fill this gap in research by investigating the following imperatives, including: how failed entrepreneur react to failure; how entrepreneur break away from demoralized states, convalesce and build confidence, and could exploit to create new business life. This study adopts case research method, searching suitable cases from multiple sources. Grounded theory approach is conducted, while we write scripts, code and propose axis concept and mainly axis thread. Then, researcher tries to build theory and propositions from those processes and data. This study expect contributions to the academia and practice by constructing entrepreneurial moderation mechanisms for resilience to fill the gap of the extant study on entrepreneur, and building a framework for entrepreneurs' resilience processes to enhance the knowledge and decisional bases for entrepreneurs when they face severe business failure.起始頁-結束頁：71-92+127-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.3.CHI.7111篇名：嘉豐海洋國際－越南合資期創雙贏並列篇名：Gallant Ocean International Inc.: Creating a Win-Win Situation by Forming a Joint Venture in Vietnam作者：陳曉蓉(Hsiao-Jung Chen);徐玥圓(Yueh-Yuan Hsu)關鍵字：擴張;合資;垂直整合;Expansion;Joint Venture;Vertical Integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：嘉豐海洋國際股份有限公司與大成長城集團百分之百持股的大成長城國際控股有限公司於2011年7月25日在越南廣義省合資成立「大成嘉豐水產有限公司」，擬共同發展吳郭魚垂直整合供應鏈，其中大成注資150萬美元，並取得50%的股權。然而，合資公司的前身其實是嘉豐公司在2010年2月24日獨資115萬美元設立的廣義廠，一開始僅從事蝦加工，後來雖看好吳郭魚事業的發展前景，但投入資金的尋找卻成了正面臨資金緊縮壓力的嘉豐公司一大挑戰，也影響其最終投資途徑的抉擇。本個案為台商在海外進行合資之實例，並著重在「合資前」出資雙方的投資分析，希望藉由問題的導引，讓學生們在討論過程中能思考與瞭解出資雙方決定進行合資的利弊得失。英文摘要：Gallant Ocean International Inc. and Great Wall International Holdings Ltd., a subsidiary of DaChan Group, formed a 50-50 joint venture (JV) under the name Gallant DaChan at Qu<U+1EA3>ng Ngai in Vietnam on July 25, 2011, and Gallant DaChan received a US $1.5 million payment from Great Wall. The two businesses planned to jointly establish vertical integration in the tilapia supply chain. On February 24, 2010, the Qu<U+1EA3>ng Ngai plant (the predecessor to the Gallant DaChan) received a US$1.15 million investment from Gallant Ocean. This plant was initially engaged in shrimp processing. Because Gallant Ocean intended to further invest the tilapia business at the Qu<U+1EA3>ng Ngai plant, the company needed to acquire external financing due to the credit line reduction, which also affected its choice of investment path. How would Gallant Ocean attract a partner if the company decided to invest by forming a JV? Why would DaChan Group form a JV with Gallant Ocean in Vietnam? Is there a win-win bargaining range for the JV investment amount and shareholding transactions? Are there any potential risks for each company to consider? This paper presents the real case of an overseas JV involving two Taiwanese businesses. It focuses on the investment analysis of both parties before entering a JV. Based on the aforementioned questions, we elucidate the advantages and disadvantages of forming a JV.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.112篇名：能耐定位與能耐行銷－太平洋自行車股份有限公司並列篇名：Competence Positioning and Competence Marketing: Pacific Cycles Inc.作者：林婷鈴(Ting-Ling Lin);謝美珍(Mei-Chen Hsieh)關鍵字：能耐定位;能耐行銷;夥伴選擇;吸納能力;Competence Positioning;Competence Marketing;Partner Selection;Absorptive Capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：太平洋成立於1980年，從大量生產經營模式起家，逐漸轉型為少量多樣化，與各國設計師合作研發與生產各式特殊自行車與摺疊車。個案描述太平洋面對越來越多的國際合作案例，如何建構以技術能耐為定位的行銷方式，並經由篩選合適的合作夥伴，進而再度強化本身的技術能力。教學目的有二，首先，個案公司如何讓潛在客戶知曉其技術能耐，並對潛在客戶溝通其技術價值？此主題有助於學員瞭解能耐定位及能耐行銷的方式。其次，當廠商處於產能受限及必須持續精鍊技術能力的情境時，如何選擇潛在顧客與放棄現有客戶，並讓客戶願意與之合作？此主題可培養學員思考，長期夥伴選擇對廠商技術能耐定位與強化的重要性，且吸納能力決定夥伴間學習對廠商能力之挹注。英文摘要：Pacific Cycles Inc. was established in 1980. It started by following the mass-production business model, but then gradually transformed into a low production of many types of specialty bike and folding bike. This case represents a company facing a growing number of international research and development cooperation projects, and demonstrates how to construct marketing methods based on technological competence positioning, and how, through proper selection of cooperative partners, to strengthen its technological capacity again. This case is reported for the two following teaching objectives: (1) How to make potential customers aware of their technological competence and how to communicate their technical value. This topic can help students understand the approach of competence positioning and marketing. (2) Bounded by production capacity limitations and technological competence refinement, how to select potential customers, abandon existing customers, and encourage potential customers to cooperate. This topic can encourage students to think about the importance of long-term partner selection in technological competence positioning and enhancement. Inter-partner learning can upgrade firm’s capabilities depends on their absorptive capacity.起始頁-結束頁：19-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.1913篇名：中國家居用品市場的開拓策略－多樣屋並列篇名：The Expanding Strategy of Tayohya in China's Home Furnishing Market作者：黃秀英(Hsiu-Ying Huang);謝明慧(Ming-Huei Hsieh);江宜芳(Yi-Fang Chiang)關鍵字：市場策略;虛擬通路;中國市場;Marketing strategy;Virtual channel;China market期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：來自台灣的潘淑真女士，以50萬元人民幣的投資，1998年在上海的太平洋百貨，成立了「多樣屋」家居用品品牌。「多樣屋」抓準中國市場機會，憑恃其獨特的品牌與通路管理能力，在眾多國內外品牌夾殺下，卻仍能一枝獨秀，深入中國各地。2012年的多樣屋「多樣屋」全中國門市已超過470家，產品項目5,000多種，員工數700餘人，年營業額超過3億人民幣。現在，「多樣屋」看好中國「十二五」計畫內需商機，準備大舉進軍虛擬通路，在資源有限的情況下，正面臨先布重兵於網路購物還是電視購物通路的決策。一旦選擇先進軍網路或電視購物後，該如何與原先的實體通路整合，與避免與實體通路衝突，也是其面臨的策略議題。英文摘要：Tayohya is a well-known China home fashion brand, founded by Mrs. Pan in Shanghai since 1998. Leveraging the branding and channel managing capabilities, Tayohya outperforms other brands and penetrates China market rapidly. By July 2012, this company had owned more than 470 shops, selling 5,000 product assortments over 180 cities. With more than 700 employees, Tayohya had annual revenues higher than 30 million renminbi. This company intends to craft consistent brand experiences for consumers with the brand philosophy ”the way to a better life.” Tayohya is currently dedicating in seizing the demand opportunities driven by the '2011 China 125 Plan' to make its way into the market. With constrained resources, it needs to decide on expanding market share via entering the online channel or the TV shopping channel first? More importantly, Tayohya has to confront another critical issue with respect to how to integrate the clicks and mortars for efficiency and prevent itself from potential risks such as multichannel conflicts or brand dilution.起始頁-結束頁：43-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.4314篇名：落實分潤的聯合行銷策略－微程式的Life+服務平台並列篇名：Affiliate Marketing Strategy with Profit Sharing-Microprogram's Life+ Service Platform作者：楊書成(Shu-Chen Yang);陳美如(Mei-Ju Chen);傅振瑞(Jen-Ruei Fu);胡昕昀(Hsin-Yun Hu);吳騰彥(Tony Wu)關鍵字：聯合行銷;分潤機制;網路外部性;適地性服務;Affiliate Marketing;Profit Sharing;Network Externality;Location-Based Service期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：微程式在經濟部商業司的經費支持下，建構了「Life+雲端生活家平台」（簡稱Life+平台），將小額消費概念帶入中小型商家或微型商家的經營模式中。雖然是個立意良好的創新營運模式，但最大的問題在於到底要先吸引消費者加入？還是先吸引商家？然而前者沒有後者加入的前提下，根本沒有使用Life+平台的動機，而後者若沒有龐大數量的前者，Life+平台也只是個沒有太大吸引力的資訊系統而已。對微程式而言，如何有效地吸引商家和消費者的加入、Life+平台如何為商家帶來業績的提升、行動科技所扮演的角色、與其他小額消費或紅利卡平台的合作與競爭等議題，乃是本個案希望探討的重點，並希望藉此帶出聯合行銷、網路外部性、分潤機制、適地性服務、QR Code等理論基礎與概念。英文摘要：Under the support of the department of commerce, MOEA, Taiwan, ”Micrprogram” constructed an online platform which was named as Life+ so that small-and-medium-sized and micro businesses can implement the service of micro payment through adopting Life+ platform. Although this is a brand-new and innovative business model, ”Microprogram” encountered a problem in deciding to attract customers or businesses first. Customers have no motivation to use Life+ platform with a small number of businesses and Life+ platform is a less attractive information system to business without a large number of customers. The purpose of this case study is to discuss several issues of how ”Microprogram” can attract customers and businesses to Life+ platform, how businesses can increase their profit through participating Life+ platform, the role of mobile technology, and how ”Microprogram” can cooperate and compete with other micro payment or loyalty program platforms. This case study also intends to introduce the concept of affiliate marketing, network externality, profit sharing, location-based service, QR code.起始頁-結束頁：65-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.6515篇名：益晴益公司－解決午餐災難並列篇名：E-King-E Co.-Get Rid of Lunch Mess作者：吳佩玲(Pei-Ling Wu);邱光輝(Kuang-Hui Chiu)關鍵字：採購管理;流程改善;供應商管理;Procurement Management;Process Improvement;Supplier Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：個案公司的櫃檯小妹總是為了應付公司混亂的午餐時刻以及同仁對訂便當系統的抱怨而心力交瘁，進而一一離職。新來的櫃檯小妹莉雅，是個積極的女生，不僅會主動提出自己的想法，且對於不合理或是可改善的事情追根究柢，以找出改善方案。首先莉雅認知公司訂便當的作業可視為供應鏈中的採購作業。因此利用在學校所學到的供應鏈中的採購管理的概念，先建立公司現行的訂便當的採購流程，找出可能發生問題的地方。為了更進一步讓整體流程更加完善，因此利用供應商管理的概念來討論改善流程。英文摘要：The wave of assistant departures hits E-King-E Co. badly just because the lunchtime chaos. Assistants in E-King-E Co. have to handle whole company's lunch order and collect the bill. This trivial but disorder daily routine job exhaust all assistants energy, so does Liya, the positive and active new assistant of E-King-E Co who try to reverse the tide. This case is about an improvement project to reduce customers' complaints and get rid of the lunch mess. Liya applied the knowledge about supply chain management. First she took the lunch ordering and bill collecting as a procurement process in supply chain management to identify the potential problem. Then Liya used the suppliers management to improve the order process. Finally, Liya proposed a new lunch order process to get rid of the lunch mess.起始頁-結束頁：81-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.8116篇名：曜越科技－打造科技潮牌　展現創新價值並列篇名：Building Multi-brand Innovation Value: Thermaltake作者：蔡瑤昇(Yau-Sheng Tsai);廖森貴(Sen-Kuei Liao);吳興蘭(Hsin-Lan Wu)關鍵字：新產品研發（NPD）;品牌定位;品牌策略;品牌行銷;創新價值;new product development (NPD);brand positioning;brand strategy;brand marketing;innovation value期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本個案係描述曜越科技，面臨ICT（Information and Communication Technology）產業變遷嚴峻考驗、社群媒體興起的潮流；林培熙董事長帶領團隊創新突破，以品牌思維打造一系列科技潮牌，創新價值行銷國際的實際案例。個案中，描述林培熙董事長產品創新三部曲，奠立Thermaltake品牌之路。在2007年受到行動通訊產業的衝擊，營收快速下滑，力圖以散熱核心能力跨入新市場，因未能符合新世代消費者的需求而宣告失敗。林董事長帶領全員學習品牌新知，重新打造品牌基礎，帶領曜越進入品牌創新的新紀元，也成功掛牌上櫃。本個案著重曜越的品牌變革，由產品思維轉向品牌思維所創造的創新價值；本個案探討在數位科技時代企業應如何打造品牌，企業內不同品牌定位的區隔；多品牌企業如何研擬新產品研發（NPD）、品牌行銷、品牌管理的策略及實務，俾在數位時代創造企業競爭優勢，強化創新價值。這些議題均是值得學生探討學習的新興課題。英文摘要：This paper describes how the president and chief executive officer of Thermaltake Technology, Kenny Lin, responded to rapid changes in the information and communications technology industry and built a series of new brands to keep pace with the latest trends in the digital and mobile industry. Based on the success of new product development (NPD), President Lin established a brand, Thermaltake, to sell products. In 2007, affected by the mobile communications industry, Thermaltake experienced a rapid decline in revenue. Therefore, President Lin attempted to enter a new market by adopting used core capability cooling technology. The mobile cooler did not succeed in the market because it did not meet the demand of a new generation of customers. Kenny Lin learned from this failure, and decided to learn brand knowledge, rebuild the brand foundation, and lead Thermaltake into a new multi-brand era, and then successfully list on OTC. This study focused on innovation value and Thermaltake's change from a product-oriented model to an innovative brand-oriented model. Brand construction, brand positioning, and segmentation are discussed based on research on Thermaltake's case of innovation. Moreover, Thermaltake's multi-brand business model provides an excellent background that enables students to understand the actions of a manager in digital times and how to create a new competitive innovation value by making several influential decisions regarding NPD, brand positioning, strategy, and marketing. These topics are interesting and worthwhile for students to explore.起始頁-結束頁：99-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.9917篇名：廣東移動客戶服務（江門）中心10086客戶滿意度管理並列篇名：Customer Satisfaction Management in Guangdong Mobile Service Center (Jiangmen)作者：杜蘭英(Lan-Ying Du);陳曉東(Xiao-Dong Chen);孫小波(Xiao-Bo Sun)關鍵字：10086;呼叫中心;客戶滿意度管理;10086 call center;customer service;customer satisfaction management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：滿意度管理是通信公司客戶服務中心的工作核心，對於廣東移動公司而言，客戶服務中心10086是負責對外客戶服務的統一管道，起著溝通公司與客戶的橋樑作用。本案例描述了廣東移動10086客戶服務中心因競逐“亞太地區最佳呼叫中心”而面臨客戶滿意度管理提升的場景。通過圍繞10086服務中心目前所面臨的定位不明確、人員流失率大、客戶滿意度狀況不清等困境，展示了新時期背景下呼叫中心在職能定位、員工管理、客戶滿意度管理等方面面臨的挑戰。英文摘要：Customer satisfaction management is the core of customer service center in communications company, for Guangdong Mobile, the customer service center 10086 is unified pipelines responsible for external customer service, and plays a role as a bridge between company with customers. This case describes the situation that Guangdong Mobile 10086 customer service center faces enhance customer satisfaction management scenarios due to compete for ”Best Asia Pacific Call Center”. Around 10,086 service centers currently facing positioning uncertainty, high staff turnover rate, unclear situation dilemma of customer satisfaction, showing the challenge that call center will face, such as functional call center function positioning, staff management, customer satisfaction management in the context of in the new era.起始頁-結束頁：123-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.2.CHI.12318篇名：編輯語並列篇名：Editorial作者：黃思明(Sy-Ming Hwang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.1.CHI.i19篇名：顧客關係管理策略發展分析模式並列篇名：An Analytic Model for Developing Strategies of Customer Relational Management作者：徐村和(Tsuen-Ho Hsu);唐嘉偉(Jia-Wei Tang)關鍵字：顧客關係利益;顧客關係連結策略;品質機能展開法;模糊分析層級程序法;Customer relational benefit;Customer relational bond strategy;Quality function deployment;Fuzzy analytic hierarch process期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：顧客關係管理的相關研究，不是在探討顧客關係利益影響關係承諾與顧客滿意度，就是在研究企業如何利用關係連結策略增加顧客忠誠度，但缺乏結合兩者的顧客關係管理工具的研究。故本研究以顧客關係利益和關係連結策略建立模糊關聯矩陣，並藉由品質機能展開法的展開過程作為模式建構概念，來建立顧客關係管理策略發展分析模式。本研究以H百貨公司為實證對象，經由模式運作結果，顯示本模式可作為公司定期追蹤與檢測顧客關係管理表現的管理工具，提供管理者在評估與選擇顧客關係管理策略時，能夠考量到顧客關係利益與企業關係連結策略的搭配性，以提昇顧客滿意度與忠誠度。英文摘要：The study of customer relationship management (CRM) used to discuss either how the relational benefit influenced the customers' promises and the customers' satisfaction, or how companies utilized relational bond strategies to increase customers' loyalty. However, an ideal CRM management tool by incorporating these two concepts has not been developed. Thus, in this study, we propose an analytical model for developing customer relationship management strategies. Based on quality function deployment, our model constructs a fuzzy relational matrix to integrate the customer relational benefit and the relational bond strategies. The H Department Store is adopted in this study as an empirical case, and the result shows that our model could serve as a managerial tool of the company to track and examine the performance of CRM systematically and regularly. Furthermore, our model also could help managers to deal with the fitness between the customer relational benefits and the relational bond strategies when evaluating and selecting CRM strategies to strengthen customers' satisfaction and loyalty.起始頁-結束頁：1-17+105-110資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.1.CHI.120篇名：贈品促銷的價格線索與語意線索評估準則之研究並列篇名：Consumer Evaluations of Price Cues and Semantic Cues in Gift Promotions作者：曾忠蕙(Chung-Hui Tseng)關鍵字：贈品促銷;價格線索;語意線索;消費者評價;Gift promotions;Price cues;Semantic cues;Consumer evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討贈品促銷情境中的價格線索與語意線索之評估機制，並在文獻探討與實證結果中比較贈品促銷與價格促銷情境，對此兩種線索評估過程的不同之處。本研究主要根據認知負荷理論的論點，分析在不同價格線索情境下，語意線索對消費者價值認知與搜尋意圖的影響，其中，本研究以贈品促銷深度探討贈品價格線索，以贈品訊息具體程度與贈品比較型式探討贈品語意線索。經實驗法實證後發現，唯有當贈品促銷深度超出消費者內在參考深度範圍時，贈品具體訊息會比抽象訊息更顯著影響消費者對贈品組合的價值認知。並且，唯有當贈品促銷深度超出消費者內在參考深度範圍時，店間的贈品比較型式會比店內的贈品比較型式更會影響消費者對贈品促銷的搜尋意圖。英文摘要：This research discussed the evaluation of price cues and semantic cues in gift promotions, and made a comparison between the context of gift promotions and price promotions. Based on cognitive load theory, the research combined price cues and semantic cues to examine the evaluation mechanism. The gift promotion depth was taken as a price cue in gift promotions, while concreteness of gift information and comparisons of gift promotion campaigns were picked up as semantic cues in this research. An experiment was conducted. Results showed that when the gift promotion depth was outside consumer internal reference range, concrete cues of the gift, rather than abstract cues, influenced consumer value perception toward the gift promotion bundle. In addition, when the gift promotion depth was outside consumer internal reference range, between-store comparison cues, rather than within-store comparison cues, affected consumer intention to search for other gift promotion campaigns.起始頁-結束頁：19-38+111-115資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.1.CHI.1901篇名：負面雙重危機效應對共品牌評價與購買意願之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Negative Double Jeopardy Effect on Co-brand Evaluation and Buying Intention作者：蕭至惠(Chih-Hui Hsiao);蔡進發(Chin-Fa Tsai)關鍵字：負面雙重危機效應;共品牌總體知覺;共品牌評價;共品牌購買意願;Negative Double Jeopardy Effect;Overall Co-brand Perception;Co-brand Evaluation;Co-brand Purchase Intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究延續Kucuk（2008）的負面雙重危機（Negative Double Jeopardy，NDJ）概念，並將之應用在共品牌經營的風險議題上，探討當夥伴品牌在反品牌網站中遭逢NDJ效應時，對共品牌評價和共品牌購買意願的影響？以及此一影響過程中，共品牌總體知覺和共品牌評價這兩個變數是否具有干擾效果？本研究採用受試者間實驗設計（between-subjects design），並以虛擬的反品牌網站來進行實驗，接著將募集的216位受試者隨機分派於不同的實驗情境中，並以單因子雙共變量共變數分析、迴歸分析與雙因子雙共變量共變數分析進行假說的驗證。主要研究結果如下：（1）當夥伴品牌遭逢NDJ效應時，將會對共品牌評價與共品牌購買意願帶來負面影響；（2）夥伴品牌的NDJ效應與共品牌總體知覺對共品牌評價的影響具有交互作用。當消費者對共品牌總體知覺高時，NDJ效應並不會影響消費者對共品牌的評價；反之，當消費者對共品牌總體知覺低時，NDJ效應將會顯著地降低消費者對共品牌的評價。（3）夥伴品牌的NDJ效應與共品牌評價對共品牌購買意願的影響具有交互作用。當消費者對共品牌的評價高時，NDJ效應並不會影響消費者對共品牌的購買意願；反之，當消費者對共品牌的評價低時，NDJ效應將會顯著地降低消費者對共品牌的購買意願。英文摘要：Using Kucuk's (2008) network NDJ (Negative Double Jeopardy) effect, we aimed to examine: (1) Whether the NDJ effect on the anti-brand website partner brand encountered will affect co-brand evaluation and co-brand purchase intention. (2) Whether overall co-brand perception and co-brand evaluation will play a moderator role in the impact process. The study constructed virtual anti-brand website and between-subjects experimental design was adopted, and then 216 subjects were randomly distributed to different experimental situations. Owo-way ANCOVA, regression analysis and two-way ANCOVA were adopted in this study. The experimental results were as follows: (1) The NDJ effect partner brand encountered on the anti-brand website had a negative impact on co-brand evaluation and co-brand purchase intention. (2) There was an interaction between NDJ effect of partner brand and overall co-brand perception when examining their influences on co-brand evaluation. In the situation of high overall co-brand perception, NDJ effect will not affect consumers' co-brand evaluation. While in the situation of low overall co-brand perception, NDJ effect will significantly lower consumers' co-brand evaluation. (3) There was an interaction between NDJ effect of partner brand and co-brand evaluation when examining their influences on co-brand purchase intention. In the situation of high co-brand evaluation, NDJ effect will not affect consumers' purchase intention of co-brand. While in the situation of low co-brand evaluation, NDJ effect will significantly lower consumers' purchase intention of co-brand.起始頁-結束頁：39-68+117-123資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.1.CHI.392篇名：比較廣告案件內容結構分析並列篇名：The Content Construction Analysis of Comparative Advertising Cases作者：施錦村(Chin-Tsun Shih)關鍵字：比較廣告;內容結構分析;公平交易法;內容分析法;Comparative Advertising;Content Construction Analysis;Fair Trade Law;Content Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：33卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究結合競爭法法理及管理概念，藉由內容分析法探討比較廣告案件內容結構，符合未來跨領域研究之趨勢，有別於過去比較廣告之研究，專注於廣告行銷或法學領域。為達此一目的，首先藉由內容分析法建構類目，廣告類型、比較原則、比較內容及法律效應及其分析單位，其次，蒐集台灣公平交易委員會1992年至2011年間比較廣告案例作為樣本，經由統計檢定後發現：廣告類型傾向採用直接比較；比較原則以「客觀性」採用比率最高、「關聯性」採用比率最低；比較內容則傾向採用非價格比較；至於法律效應，涉及虛偽不實或引人錯誤之表示違反比率最高，損害營業信譽之違反比率最低。以上研究結果可提供競爭法主管機關及實務界處理比較廣告相關案例之參考。英文摘要：This study combined the principle of Competition Law and a managerial concept to investigate the content construction of comparative advertising cases by a content analysis. It is a cross-field research and meets future research trends. Different from previous researches on comparative advertising that focus on advertising marketing or the domain of Competitive Law. It first constructs the categories using a content analysis, types of comparative advertising, comparative principle, comparative content, legal effect and the units of analysis of the categories, and then collects comparative advertising cases of Taiwan Fair Trade Commission to employ samples, from 1992 to 2011. The statistics validating results indicate that most of advertising is direct comparison; as to comparative approach, 'objectivity' is adopted the most and 'relationship' is adopted the least; and most of advertising is the non-price comparison; as to legal effects, false or misleading violation is the most common and violation of business reputation is rarely used. The finds can serve as a reference for the authority of Competition Law and businesses when dealing with comparative advertising related cases.起始頁-結束頁：69-87+125-128資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2014.33.1.CHI.6901篇名：東周時期楚國的鹽業貿易離散並列篇名：Chu Salt Trade Diaspora in the Eastern Zhou Period作者：陳伯楨(Po-Chan Chen)關鍵字：東周;楚;巴;貿易離散;移民;Eastern Zhou;Chu;Ba;trade diaspora;migration期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來考古學對於人口移動的研究逐漸由大規模人口遷徙的討論轉向小規模的人口流動，並更細緻地探討其成因及與當時社會的關係，而其中離散社群成為一個重要的研究方向。本文從探討離散社群在社會科學的概念開始，論及其對於近年考古學討論人口流動研究的影響與應用，並特別聚焦於貿易離散的討論。最後以長江三峽地區□井溝口東側的東周時期楚式墓地為例，主張該墓地的墓主應為楚國至巴國進行鹽業貿易的貿易離散商人，而非過去學者所主張的楚國派至巴國進行鹽資源掠奪的軍隊。英文摘要：In recent years, archaeological research of migration not only gradually change from large-scale to small-scale population movements, but also search for more detailed exploration of migration purposes and impacts on contemporary societies. Among these research issues, diasporic group is one of important research topics. In this artcile, I start from exploring the concept of diasporic groups in social science and then discuss its influences and applications on current archaeological research of people movement, especially research of trade diaspora. In the end, I take Eastern Zhou period Chu-style cemetery in the eastern bank of Ganjinggou River mouth in the Three Gorges as an example to argue that the burial owners in this cemetery are trade diasporic merchants for salt trades from the Chu State to the Ba State. This argument is different from previous research which treats these burial owners as Chu military troops for looting salt from the Ba State.起始頁-結束頁：2-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：宗教經驗的形塑及其意識型態：以臺灣五旬節／靈恩運動為例並列篇名：The Formation of Religious Experiences and its Ideology: The Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement in Taiwan作者：陳胤安(Yin-An Chen)關鍵字：五旬節／靈恩運動;意識形態;神聖感;聖靈充滿;身體經驗;the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement;ideology;sacredness;filling with the Holy Spirit;somatic experiences期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：過去的神學或人類學研究認為，基督教五旬節／靈恩運動是個「極端個人化」的宗教，信徒僅重視個人與上帝之間的關係、個人身體的感覺和經驗。但本文企圖指出：五旬節／靈恩運動雖然重視個人和上帝直接的關係，但並非是「個人化」的宗教，宗教經驗雖有主體性，但經驗感的「神聖性」並非僅立基於身體，信徒必須依循背後的文化象徵系統才能「正確」詮釋和感受到經驗的神聖性。五旬節／靈恩運動的文化象徵系統是套「意識型態」，而非僅是行動者共同分享的符碼。教會透過每天、每週到每年的反覆活動，灌輸信徒、操練信徒熟悉五旬節／靈恩運動的文化邏輯，當信徒面對日常生活的問題和體驗到經驗時，便習慣熟稔地依此邏輯予以詮釋，看似各自為政的身體經驗，卻是依循意識形態所提供的象徵系統，教會是真正掌握意義判決和神聖賦予的單位，而不是經驗個體。信徒個人的身體雖有其主體性，但神聖感卻是來自意識形態的賦予。五旬節／靈恩意識形態致使信徒「以為」自己有權詮釋自身的聖靈充滿經驗、獨自得到上帝的啟示。但事實不然，並非身體的感受都是神聖的，神聖性端賴五旬節／靈恩意識形態的判準。因此，五旬節／靈恩運動看似是極端個人化的宗教、信徒「誤以為」自己有權可以詮釋上帝的話語，但其邏輯卻是建立於五旬節／靈恩意識形態，信徒的身體成為意識形態控制的場域。英文摘要：According to theological and anthropological researchers, the Christian Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement is an 'extreme individualized religion' in which believers focus exclusively on their relationship with God. However, this article argues that because feeling 'the sacredness' relies not only on the body and feeling but also on the cultural symbolic system, the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement is not just an 'individualized religion' even though is emphasizes the relationship between the person and God. The Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement directs to 'rightly' interpret and to feel these sacred experiences, even though religious experiences have their own subjectivity. The cultural symbolic system of the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement is a set of 'ideologies' rather than a set of symbols that people share. The church repeats the daily, weekly and yearly activities to imbue and train believers with the cultural logic of the Pentecostal/ Charismatic Movement, which helps people to interpret their daily lives and somatic experiences though these experiences do not correlate in appearance. The true function behind the ideology is to determine the meaning and sacredness of the church rather than the person who has the experience. While the personal somatic body has its subjectivity, sacredness is rendered by religious ideology. The ideology of the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement, furthermore, deceives believers to trust that they own the right to interpret the somatic experiences of being filled by the Holy Spirit and to receive revelation from God alone. However, not all experiences are sacred; whether it is sacred or not depends on how it has been judged by the ideology of the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement. Therefore, the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement looks like an 'extreme individualized religion' which deceives believers to trust that they themselves own the right to interpret God's revelation. But, in fact, their logic follows by the ideology of the Pentecostal/Charismatic Movement and the body of the believer becomes a field for ideological control.起始頁-結束頁：55-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：「正義」美學：以所羅門群島Langalanga民族誌為例並列篇名：The Aesthetics of 'Justice' among the Langalanga, Solomon Islands作者：郭佩宜(Pei-Yi Guo)關鍵字：正義;法律;原住民文化;大洋洲;所羅門群島;justice;law;indigenous culture;Oceania;Solomon Islands期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：「正義」的概念是否有文化差異？「正義」的理想實踐方式，在不同的文化脈絡下是否有相異的圖像？當原住民傳統習慣規範與國家法制兩套體系交會時，何謂「正義」以及如何達致的思辨乃根本問題。本文透過大洋洲的民族誌案例，探討不同文化慣習下的行動者對於「正義」的理解與想像，以及在當代法律體系運作時產生的落差。例如美拉尼西亞社會處理糾紛時常見以「直」（rada, straight）為喻的正義美學，以「理直」（farada, straighten）為目標的處理模式，其中涉及不同的人觀、財產權、責任歸屬、賠償與修復協商，和殖民遺緒的司法體系運作多所隔閡，必須放在其強調社會關係網絡的整體文化思維中理解。本文透過大洋洲的跨文化比較研究，提供台灣原住民運動在當代法律情境下重新思考傳統與國家法制介面的參考。英文摘要：This paper looks into how the concept of 'justice' and its ideal practice is culturally grounded. When the indigenous customary norms encounter the contemporary state legal systems, the questions of 'what justice means' and how it could be achieved become fundamental and challenging. In the contemporary society characterized by multi-cultural composition and global connections, divergent ideas of justice and their incongruence often underlie legal and political debates. Through ethnographic studies, especially the case of Langalanga in the Solomon Islands, this paper examines the conceptualization and imagination of justice in Oceania, and its incommensurability with the formal jurisprudential domain in the (post) colonial states. Langalanga people live in coastal or artificial islet settlements in the lagoon along the central-west coast of Malaita Island, Solomon Islands. Though a relatively small group in the island state, they dominate the boat building industry, and their shell money economy thrive within the nation. Langalanga people often translate the English term 'justice' as 'radana', which means 'straightness' literally, and it also connotes the intertwined meanings of sameness, rightness, and clarity. The complex idiom of radana links to high moral value, right way to do things, and is an ideal way of social life in the community. In Langalanga, as in some other Oceanic societies, the ideal dispute settlement is often expressed using the metaphor of farada ('straighten'). Radana (farada) is not only the path to the ideal situation, but the ideal situation itself. There are several paths to farada: customary exchange and sacrificial rituals, the church way of praying together, and the 'council of chiefs'. However, the essence to its success depends on willingness of two parties to tafa (open up) and famadakwa (clarify) the disputing points. The disentangling process of achieving radana (farada), or the 'constraint of form' that radana could be perceived and reified constitutes the aesthetics of 'justice'. Justice is always situated in the context of social networks in Oceania. The specific aesthetics of 'justice' in Langalanga encompass various concepts of personhood, property, liability, compensation and restorative negotiation. The court system in the Solomon Islands operates mainly according to principles of English legal tradition; the notions of justice embedded in the 'law' and legal procedures are alien from the rada aesthetics of justice. People are discontent with the court for failing to farada; without paying attention to the ideal of radana, the court is far away from how people believe justice could be achieved. In recent years, activists and scholars of legal reforms in Taiwan have explored the incongruences and even conflicts between the state legal system and the indigenous customs. Specific courts dealing with indigenous cases have been set up in 2013, and there are plans to establish tribal courts that follow 'customary law' in the future. By looking into Oceanic ethnographies as comparative references, I point out that legal reform such as the survey and coding of indigenous custom and the installation of indigenous court should pay attention to the discrepancy in the concepts and aesthetics of justice in the context of legal pluralism.起始頁-結束頁：88-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：Book Reviews：林勳男《自然災害<U+3068>復興支援》作者：滿田彌生期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：132-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：蓋設超高壓輸電線的外部成本－以台電「南投－彰林」線路為例並列篇名：External Cost of High Voltage Overhead Transmission Lines: A Case of Taipower Company's Nantou-Changlin Line作者：賴韋廷(Wei-Ting Lai);陳文雄(Wen S. Chern);劉鋼(Ernest Kang Liu)關鍵字：台電;超高壓輸電線;社會成本;條件評估法;農地價格;兩階段最小平方法;樣本選擇模型;Taipower;High voltage overhead transmission line;Social cost;Contingent valuation method;Farmland price;2SLS;Sample selection model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：蓋設超高壓輸電線（high voltage overhead transmission line，簡稱HVOTL）可能產生巨大的外部成本。本文以台灣電力股份有限公司（簡稱台電）「南投–彰林」線路為例，應用條件評估法（contingent valuation method，簡稱CVM）所設計的問卷調查資料，建立以農地價格為自變數的計量模型，採用2SLS和Heckit等方法來估計該線路對農地價值所產生的外部成本。結果顯示：距離HVOTL愈近的農地，願付價格愈低。另外，該線路全長23.6公里、兩旁600公尺內農地價值的損失高達171億元；相較於台電建造此條線路所花費的27億元，高出6倍以上。本研究結果應可提供台電設置超高壓輸電線甚至政府從事國家建設開發案時之參考。英文摘要：Building high voltage overhead transmission lines (HVOTL)may incur huge external social cost. This study attempts to estimate such external cost using the Taipower Company's Nantou-Changlin HVOTL as a case study. This HVOTL likely affects the values of farmland. Data were collected from a field survey designed from the contingent valuation method (CVM). An econometric model using farmland price as the dependent variable was specified and estimated by two-stage least squares (2SLS) and Heckman two-step model (Heckit). The econometric results show that building this HVOTL would reduce the value of farmland within 600 meters from this line with 23.6 km on both sides. The closer to HVOTL, the lower is the farmland price. The total lost farmland value amounts to 17.1 billion NT dollars. This amount is more than six times the construction cost of 2.7 billion. These research results should be very useful to the Taipower Company and government agencies in assessing the external social cost of the construction of HVOTLs in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：臺灣陸域風力發電之成本效益分析並列篇名：Cost-Benefit Analysis of Taiwan's Onshore Wind Power Development作者：<U+6E29>珮伶(Pei-Ling Wen);林師模(Shih-Mo Lin);林晉勗(Jin-Xu Lin);馮君強(Chun-Chiang Feng);葛復光(Fu-Kuang Ko)關鍵字：陸域風力發電;成本效益分析;供給曲線;躉購費率政策;Onshore wind power;Cost-benefit analysis;Supply curve;Feed-in tariff期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：我國為鼓勵風力發電應用，訂定了推廣目標及躉購費率機制，惟目前針對政策的合理性分析仍相當缺乏。本文主要目的為針對臺灣發展陸域大型風力發電進行成本效益分析，我們根據陸域風電技術的特性及臺灣各地風場狀況，建立風電供給曲線，進而探討風力發電應用之投入成本與產出效益。具體而言，本文探討了以下幾項重要議題：（1）臺灣陸域風電應用之成本競爭性；（2）風力發電機組建置之成本與效益；及（3）政府現行推廣政策之適當性。結果顯示，我國陸域風電機組的建置仍具成本競爭性，惟若維持現行躉購費率不變，似乎將不足以提供投資人足夠的誘因，來達成所設定之推廣目標。英文摘要：To encourage wind power installation, Taiwan has set up policy goals of installation and adopted a Feed-in Tariffs (FITs) mechanism for wind power deployment. However, information on whether the goals set and the design of the FITs mechanism are reasonable is still considered insufficient by the general public. This paper aims to conduct a complete cost-benefit analysis for onshore wind turbine development in Taiwan. We use an onshore wind power supply curve to demonstrate the potential cost and benefit of wind power for Taiwan's electricity requirements. Based on this curve, we examine (1) the competitiveness of wind power installation; (2) the costs and benefits of wind power installation; and (3) the adequacy of existing promotion policies. Our results indicate that Taiwan's current FITs seem inadequate to stimulate the deployment of sufficient domestic onshore wind turbines to achieve policy targets.起始頁-結束頁：41-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：臺灣地區代謝症候群相關疾病改善之經濟效益並列篇名：Evaluating the Benefitsof Ameliorating Metabolic-Syndrome-Related Diseases in Taiwan作者：盧介祥(Chieh-Hsiang Lu);李杰憲(Chieh-Hsien Lee);盧永祥(Yung-Hsiang Lu);鍾憲瑞(Hsien-Jui Chung);莊向薰(Hsiang-Hsun Chuang)關鍵字：代謝症候群相關疾病;旅行成本法;消費者剩餘;經濟效益;Metabolic-syndrome-related diseases;Travel cost method;Consumer surplus;Economic benefits期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文應用旅行成本法的概念及迴歸模型估計臺閩地區代謝症候群相關疾病罹病者的醫療照護需求函數，並藉由觀察罹病者醫療照護需求及消費者剩餘的變化，探討改善罹病者的健康指標時所能產生的經濟效益。實證結果顯示，若能分別改善臺閩地區代謝症候群相關疾病罹病者的血壓值、膽固醇值及身體質量指數狀況至臨界值的水準，亦即消除高血壓、高膽固醇及過重之風險因子，則可減少個人醫療成本約為11.34億元、2.69億元及4.97億元；可減少總醫療成本約為33.41億元、7.94億元及14.64億元；亦可獲得健康指標改善之經濟效益約為124.54億元、29.83億元及54.89億元。英文摘要：This paper uses the travel cost method and regression model to evaluate the benefits of ameliorating metabolic-syndrome-related diseases in Taiwan. Data from the ”Ditmanson Medical Foundation Cha-Yi Christian Hospital” and National Health Insurance (NHI) are used for the empirical analysis. The results show that if we can ameliorate risk factors such as hypertension, cholesterol and overweight among metabolic-syndrome-related diseases sufferers so that the risk levels are no higher than level found in the general population, the benefits of ameliorating disease are that the cost of medical service can be reduced NT$ 3.341,$0.794 and $1.464 billion, then add economic benefits NT$12.454, $2.983 and $5.489 billion respectively in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：77-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：<U+8846>說紛紜的匯率政策作者：吳中書期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：113-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：當前物價問題之探討作者：吳中書期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：123-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：壹、2014年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：139-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：141-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：45卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：165-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：臺灣家戶所得不均長期變化趨勢之分解並列篇名：Decomposition of the Changing Income Inequality of Taiwan's Households作者：陳建良(Chien-Liang Chen)關鍵字：所得分配;非條件分配;分配區間;擬真分解;Income distribution;Unconditional distribution;Conditional distribution;Counterfactual decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究透過所得非條件分配的重建及擬真分配的估計，分解臺灣過往30年期間不均度惡化的成因。結果發現，家戶「特徵分配」與「特徵係數」的改變，分別對所得分配在各分量位置的變化造成顯著影響，且呈明顯異質性。其中，戶長年齡老化改變家戶生命週期的所得輪廓，是所得不均度持續惡化的主因，影響程度超越戶長教育程度、戶長性別、家戶規模、夫妻家戶與所得人數等因素。本研究採用近期資料及新方法，從分配型態探討長期所得不均度趨勢，提供有別於現有文獻的發現。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the deteriorating income inequality of Taiwan's households over the past three decades through estimates of unconditional distribution and counterfactual decomposition. It is found that changes in the distribution of household characteristics and the corresponding coefficients significantly affect income distribution with prevalent heterogeneities across the conditional quantiles. Aging of the household heads is the main reason to explain the worsening inequality, in addition to changes of the head's schooling and gender, household size, existence of spouse, and earner numbers. Focusing on the changing trends of the distributional pattern of income, this paper sheds new light on the decomposition of Taiwan's income distribution that are different from those presented in the existing studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：臺灣之利率轉嫁分析並列篇名：Retail Bank Interest Rate Pass-Through: Empirical Results for Taiwan作者：高崇瑋(Chung-Wei Kao);萬哲鈺(Jer-YuhWan)關鍵字：利率轉嫁;存款利率;放款利率;勾結假說;負面顧客反應假說;Interest rate pass-through;Deposit rates;Lending rates;Collusive hypothesis;Adverse customer reaction hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用臺灣中央銀行公布的存、放款利率資料，分析代表貨幣政策改變之隔夜拆款利率變化，對存、放款利率之零售利率的利率轉嫁、立即衝擊以及零售利率完成反應政策利率影響效果所需時間等議題。實證分析顯示，存款利率之利率轉嫁為不完整的，而放款利率的利率轉嫁則為完整或過度調整。而不論存款利率或放款利率，零售利率反應政策利率變化具有延遲、落後的現象。且存款利率可以在低於兩個月的時間內，完成反應政策利率變化的影響。這些實證結論對線性共整模型以及非線性門檻共整模型而言，皆可以成立，顯示文中的統計分析具有穩健性。此外，存款利率以及放款利率的利率轉嫁效果，也會因政策利率漲跌不同而出現易跌難漲的變化，此分別符合勾結假說以及負面顧客反應假說或資訊不對稱的觀點。英文摘要：This research employs data published by the Taiwan Central Bank to address the degree of pass-through, immediate impact and adjustment speed of retail bank interest rates, including deposit rates and lending rates, in response to changes in the offical rate, represented by the overnight interest rate of the interbank call-loan market. The empirical evidence from linear and threshold cointegration models suggests that the pass-through from the offical rate to de-posit rates is incomplete, and that to lending rates is complete or overshooting in the long run. For both deposit rates and lending rates, the immediate impact from changes in the offical rate is less than the magnitude of long run pass-through, indicating sluggish adjustment. And the mean adjustment lag of a complete pass-through for deposit rates is less than two months. Besides, this research also examines whether interest rate rigidity is different when the offical rate is increasing or decreasing. It is concluded that both deposit rates and lending rates are more rigid when they are rising. Evidence of rigidity of deposit rates increases supports the collusive hypothesis and the rigidity of lending rates increases coincides with the hypothesis of adverse customer reaction and asymmetric information.起始頁-結束頁：45-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：臺灣金融情勢指數與總體經濟關係並列篇名：Taiwan's Financial Conditions Index and Its Relation with the Macroeconomy作者：管中閔(Chung-Ming Kuan);徐之強(Chih-Chiang Hsu);黃裕烈(Yu-Lieh Huang);徐士勛(Yu-Lieh Huang)關鍵字：金融情勢;共同因子;總體經濟;Financial conditions;Common factor;Macroeconomic activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：金融情勢指數（Financial Conditions Index）是根據眾多金融變數所編製而成的綜合指標，可以描述整體金融市場寬鬆與緊縮的狀況，也可作為主管機構調控貨幣政策的重要參考依據。不同於以往文獻，本文以兩步驟方法建構臺灣的金融情勢指數。首先，針對股票市場、貨幣市場與外匯市場，我們以Bai and Ng（2004）提出的PANIC模型，分別估計各市場中代表價、量變動的六個主要指標。其次，我們參考德意志銀行（Deutsche Bank）的金融情勢指數建構方式，透過景氣波動與各指數的線性迴歸分析，決定前一步驟所建構的六項指標分別在建構臺灣金融情勢指數時的組合權數。此時各項指標的組合權數所對應的正、負符號，均能符合總體經濟理論的認定限制。另一方面，根據Granger因果關係檢定與初步的樣本外預估表現評估，我們發現本文所建構的金融情勢指數具有領先大多數實質面總體變數的特性，此特性應可對更為深入與廣泛的經濟預測分析有所助益。英文摘要：This paper develops a two-step approach for constructing Taiwan's financial conditions index (FCI). In the first step, by employing the Panel Analysis of Nonstationarity in Idiosyncratic and Common components (PANIC) proposed by Bai and Ng (2004), we obtain six common factors to capture the price and quantity fluctuations in the stock market, the money market and the foreign exchange market. In the second step, we construct the FCI based on these factors, with their weights determined by the method of Deutsche Bank, and find the resulting signs of these weights are consistent with the implications of macroeconomic theories. Moreover, the results of Granger causality tests and the pseudo out-of-sample experiments suggest that the FCI developed in this paper can lead the dynamics of many macroeconomic variables. This property may be helpful for improving economic forecasts.起始頁-結束頁：103-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：總體變數之領先、同時與落後性質之認定與指標構成項目之選取－LARS方法的運用並列篇名：An Evaluation of Component Series of Business Indicators: An Application of the LARS Method作者：陳淑玲(Shu-Ling Chen);黃裕烈(Shu-Ling Chen)關鍵字：景氣指標;景氣循環;Least angle regression;Business indicators;Business cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文利用Efron et al.（2004）所介紹的least angle regression（以下簡稱LARS）方法，試圖認定總體數列的領先、同時與落後性質，並依此結果從中挑選出適當的變數編製景氣指標。在實證分析中，我們先從眾多總體資訊中選出103筆與景氣循環相關的資料，再透過LARS方式進行兩階段的篩選。在第一階段的篩選過程中，我們主要是將103筆資料區分成領先、同時與落後群組（groups），而第二階段的目的則是從各個群組中挑選出重要且對基準循環數列有較佳解釋力的變數。我們發現，LARS所篩選出的結果與經建會所認定的結果大致相同，特別是同時指標的構成項目，兩造所認定的結果均一致。若就第二階段的篩選結果來分析，我們發現不同樣本期間變數的排序順位可能會改變；但也有某些變數不受樣本期間改變的影響，顯示這些變數與基準循環數列之間的關聯性具有穩健的特性。最後，我們也嘗試依據第二階段的篩選結果來編製新的領先指標，我們發現新的指標在近期的領先效果比現行公佈的領先指標還要好。英文摘要：As an alternative to the method currently used by the Council for Economic Planning and Development (CEPD), we apply the least angle regression (LARS) method proposed by Efron et al. (2004) to select the macroeconomic series used to construct composite business indicators. We use a two-step approach. First, we obtain 103 macroeconomic series and assign each of them to one of three subgroups-leading, coincident and lagging-based on their ability to predict the reference cycle series. Second, within each subgroup, we rank the assigned series based on their ability to predict the reference cycle series and construct a composite business indicator based on these rankings. Our results suggest that the macroeconomic series selected via the LARS method tend to agree with those currently used by the CEPD. However, the power of the selected macroeconomic series to predict reference cycle series varies with the size of the sample selected. Moreover, the composite leading indicator constructed from the macroeconomic series selected via the LARS method predicts turning points of the business cycle more effectively than the existing CEPD leading indicator.起始頁-結束頁：133-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：公共財與地方財政－美國底特律市破產之省思並列篇名：Public Goods and Fiscal Policy of Local Government: From the Bankruptcy of Detroit作者：彭信坤(Shin-Kun Peng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：171-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：預測與展望期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：191-193+195-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：妥協與反抗之間：尤妮絲．芮佛絲在「塔斯克基研究」中的作為與意義並列篇名：Between Accommodation and Confrontation-Eunice Rivers and the Tuskegee Syphilis Study作者：黃文齡(Wen-Ling Huang)關鍵字：尤妮絲．芮佛絲;塔斯克基研究;美肯郡;Eunice Rivers;Tuskegee Syphilis Study;Macon County期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：黑人女護士尤妮絲．芮佛絲全程參與重大醫學醜聞「塔斯克基研究：以未受過梅毒治療的黑人男性為主」。史家對她居中扮演的角色多有爭議。本文以婦女研究的角度切入，探討芮佛絲透過改變角色、適應和面對來自種族、階級、性別的層層壓力，從摸索、熟悉、掌握等階段性變化，在南丁格爾誓詞規範的掩護下，運用自己在美肯郡長久工作經驗的優勢，行醫療照顧自力救濟之實。芮佛絲在一個複雜的研究中扮演了一個忠於自己的角色。芮佛絲在現實面妥協，謹守醫護專業倫理，卻在執行上透過引介，間接協助黑人病患獲得舒緩與照顧，不僅證明黑人女性個體也能為照顧種族貢獻心力，而她在塔斯克基研究中的表現，實則是反映了當時黑人社會面對種族議題的態度。英文摘要：The story of the Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male was broken in 1972 by Associated Press reporter Jean Heller, resulting in a public uproar. Eunice Rivers, a nurse, was the only person associated with the study to have worked on it consistently for its entire forty-year span. Historians have evaluated her role in very different ways. In this article, I discuss the role she played in the Tuskegee Syphilis Study with a view to the provision of medical care during the era of segregation in America to explain why Rivers insisted that she acted correctly. First, I will show that Rivers' position within the study changed in increments during those forty years due to changes in personnel. Those changes led to her acquiring a degree of authority behind the scenes, such that she became an irreplaceable part of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Her changing position was internalized, resulting in attitudinal changes. Through face-to-face encounters, Rivers was aware of the community's needs, and knew what she could provide in terms of medical care. She provided the men who trusted her with medical directions, instead of prescriptions, and thus sought to remain true to the Nightingale Pledge by making use of the advantages that came from her long-experience in the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Viewed in this way, Rivers was not shrewd, as many historians have described her, but simply motivated to cast her role in this complex study in the best possible light.起始頁-結束頁：415-465資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201412_44(4).00012篇名：德國罷工法秩序：1950至1980年的法官造法及其形成背景分析並列篇名：German Legal Order to Strike -Analysis of the Background of Judge-Made Law 1950-1980作者：林佳和(Chia-Ho Lin)關鍵字：德國勞動法;罷工;勞動法院;工會運動;German Labor Law;Strike;Labor Court;Trade Union Movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：在沒有任何制定法存在的情形下，德國罷工法秩序完全來自法官法，但並非由法院任意依自己的法政策想像形塑，毋寧是相關的社會行動者，包括工會運動與對抗的資本力量，在社會變遷之過程中，扮演一定的共同形成力量，由法院逐步發展與建立。從戰後1955、1971、1980的三則聯邦勞動法院判決，可看到今日作為德國罷工法秩序的主要內容，也當然可以觀察到不同社會行動者留下的軌跡。在當代經濟全球化發展下，面對不同的衝擊，新的罷工法秩序是否將誕生？基於過往經驗，社會行動者之影響與交互作用，顯然扮演重要的角色。英文摘要：In the absence of any statute, the legal framework governing the legality of striking in West Germany was determined entirely from judge-made law, known of prejudication. The question was not settled through the usual give and take of social actors-including trade unions-that typically shapes legislation subsequently interpreted by the courts. Instead, the court, not the legislature, established the legal order governing the right to strike in Germany. Three important decisions by the German Federal Labor Court, in 1955, 1971, 1980, can be seen, today, as major contributors to German law on strikes, though the influences of different social actors can also be observed. As social actors, labor and capital, are likely to play an important role in shaping industrial affairs, as is the growing importance of economic globalization. Should the old legal order governing industrial action be maintained, new judge-made law be accepted, or should a new legal order be adopted through the legislature?起始頁-結束頁：467-535資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201412_44(4).00023篇名：歐美生質燃料法制與永續性標準規範之發展並列篇名：Sustainable Development Criteria of Biofuel Legislation in the European Union and the United States作者：蔡岳勳(Yueh-Hsun Tsai);陳仕偉(Shih-Wei Chen)關鍵字：再生能源;生質燃料;生質燃料永續發展標準;再生燃料使用標準量;renewable energy;biofuel;renewable fuel standard;sustainable development criteria期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：美國與歐盟作為全球最為龐大的兩大區域經濟體，對於能源之需求不言可喻。然而傳統化石能源消耗所引發的氣候變遷問題，以及供應安全疑慮之背景下，該兩大經濟體就再生能源領域積極發展，希冀藉此改善環境汙染問題、減緩溫室氣體排放，以及降低對進口化石燃料之依賴。而在消耗量龐大的交通運輸部門中，歐盟與美國不約而同側重發展生質燃料技術與推動相關政策與法規，來降低運輸用能源對傳統化石燃料的依賴，且生質燃料具有直接替代或降低進口化石燃料，直接切入能源供應體系優勢。因此，本文將聚焦於歐盟與美國聯邦所推動生質燃料之法規與政策背景，以及面對生質燃料負面環境問題，其針對生質燃料逐步推動的永續性發展規範為主要討論中心。英文摘要：As the world's two largest economies, the European Union (E.U.) and the United States (U.S.) are dependent on traditional fossil fuels for transportation, and consume more traditional fossil fuels than any other countries, or regions. Hence, for these two regions, dealing with shortages of traditional fossil fuels and battling global climate change are critically important. In recent years, bio-fuel, a much debated and controversial alternative energy source, has been proposed as a solution or a strategic policy tool, in answer to the aforementioned concerns in the transportation sectors of many other countries. The U.S. and the E.U. have developed comprehensive regulations to promote the usage of bio-fuels, such as mandates or direct/indirect subsidies, etc. This article aims to review the history and development of biofuel policies and legislation in U.S. and E.U., such as the ”Renewable Energy Directive” and ”Renewable Fuel Standard II”, and focuses on the sustainable development criteria of biofuel legislation in these regions.起始頁-結束頁：537-606資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201412_44(4).00034篇名：歐盟作為規則產生者：以其在能源憲章公約之參與為例並列篇名：EU as a Rule-Generator-A Case Study of EU's Role in the Energy Charter Treaty作者：吳建輝(Chien-Huei Wu)關鍵字：歐盟作為規則產生者;能源憲章公約;海牙會議;EU as a rule-generator;Energy Charter Treaty;Hague Conference;Eastern Sugar;Electrabel v. Hungary期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文從歐洲作為規則產生者的角度，探討在能源憲章公約自荷蘭總理Lubbers之歐盟能源網路、海牙會議之舉行，以及能源憲章公約之簽署與生效過程中，歐盟所扮演之角色。同時間，能源憲章公約之生效，與歐盟之東擴及條約修正同時進行，因而面臨歐盟內部與外部雙邊投資協定大量增加，同時間，外人直接投資因里斯本條約之生效而成為歐盟之專屬權限，此等發展造成歐盟法與能源憲章公約間之潛在衝突，因而本文以Eastern Sugar、Commission v. Austria、Electrabel v. Hungary等案件為例，探討歐盟法與能源憲章公約兩個法秩序之關係。英文摘要：This article examines the role of the European Union ”as a rule-generator” in the negotiation and conclusion of the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) by tracing the European Energy Network proposal advanced by Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers through the Hague Conference to the signing of the Energy Charter Treaty. This article unfolds the complex relationship between EU law and the ECT by looking at intra- and extra-EU BITs and the status of the ECT as both an intra- and extra-EU BIT. By analysing ”Eastern Sugar, the Commission v. Austria and Electrabel v. Hungary”, this article demonstrates how attitudes have shifted in the relationship between EU law and the ECT.起始頁-結束頁：239-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201409_44(3).00015篇名：能源憲章條約、德國廢核爭端與國際投資仲裁：Vattenfall v. Germany一案之探討並列篇名：Energy Charter Treaty, German Nuclear Phase-Out and International Investment Arbitration-An Analysis on the Case ”Vattenfall v. Germany”作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：能源憲章條約;國際投資爭端解決中心;逐步廢核;規制措施;徵收補償;Energy Charter Treaty (ECT);International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID);nuclear phase-out;regulatory measures;compensation for expropriation期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：2011年3月日本福島核災發生後，若干國家（特別是德國）改弦易轍，終結使用核能而大幅改變其能源政策。2012年5月，在德國境內擁有兩座核電廠之瑞典能源公司Vattenfall針對德國逐步廢核之決定，向國際投資爭端解決中心提出仲裁聲請。本文擬就德國採取逐步廢止核能使用之背景，以及Vattenfall公司與地主國間之衝突做一介紹。本文亦擬就本案涉及重大公共政策之層面與國際投資法核心議題所引發之爭議進行分析。英文摘要：After the Fukushima disaster in March 2011, a number of countries, most notably Germany, dramatically changed their energy policies in order to close nuclear power plants. In May 2012, the Swedish energy company Vattenfall, an investor controlling two nuclear power plants in Germany, filed a request for arbitration against Germany at the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) regarding the German nuclear phase-out. This article provides background on the introduction and phasing out of nuclear energy in Germany, as well as the conflict between Vattenfall and the host state. This article also analyzes important public policy aspects of this particular case with respect to core elements of international investment law.起始頁-結束頁：305-358資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201409_44(3).00026篇名：歐盟國際私法之發展與其對國際法秩序之影響：以歐盟於盧加諾公約與海牙國際私法會議之參與為例並列篇名：Development of European Private International Law and Its Influence on the International Legal Order-Examples of EU Participation in the Lugano Convention and the Hague Conference on Private International Law作者：許耀明(Yao-Ming Hsu)關鍵字：歐盟國際私法;里斯本條約;盧加諾公約;海牙國際私法會議;內外權限對應原則;European Private International Law;Lisbon Treaty;Lugano Convention;Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH);Principle of ”foro internoforo externo”期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：歐盟五十年來之發展，透過經濟整合，逐步邁向其他整合，其中關於民事司法合作部分，已經有長足之進展。從歐盟成員國間之國際條約，到透過歐盟條約與歐盟運作條約授權所為之規則與指令，歐盟國際私法已經在民商事管轄權與其判決承認與執行、契約與非契約準據法，以及身分法上相關管轄權與準據法整合，為全世界提供了良善之整合示範。此等整合成果，對於國際私法之發展將有何實際影響？本文透過歐盟與鄰近國家之盧加諾公約以及歐盟在海牙國際私法會議之參與，說明前述歐盟國際私法之整合成果，已然透過國際公約逐步影響其他國際間之國際私法秩序。而在歐盟法制上，此等整合與對外締約權限之問題，亦有其歐盟制度法上之意義。英文摘要：Economic integration and cooperation in the European Union has advanced remarkably since the 1950s, especially in the domain of civil judicial matters. From international treaties to the regulations and directives authorized by Treaty of the European Union and Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, European Private International Law has developed significantly in the domains of civil and commercial jurisdiction, in the mutual recognition of judgments and mutual enforcement, in the clarification of the applicable law for contractual and non-contractual obligations, and in the clarification of jurisdiction and harmonization of applicable law in family matters. These developments demonstrate something of the possibilities of harmonization in private international law globally. How have these European developments influenced other countries? This article attempts to provide an answer by considering the examples of the Lugano Convention between the European Union and other European countries, and the participation of the European Union in the Hague Conference on Private International Law. The principles and regulations of European Private International Law have deeply influenced other counties, and contested issues of competence between the European Union and its Members States have attracted research into the meaning of European Institutional Law.起始頁-結束頁：359-414資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201409_44(3).00037篇名：英國與里斯本條約的批准：自由政府間主義的分析並列篇名：The UK and the Ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon-A Liberal Intergovernmentalist Analysis作者：黃琛瑜(Chen-Yu Huang)關鍵字：里斯本條約;自由政府間主義;英國對歐政策;Treaty of Lisbon;Liberal Intergovernmentalism;UK's European policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文以自由政府間主義為理論架構，探討英國批准里斯本條約的歷程。傳統上，相較於歐盟的其他會員國，英國對歐洲統合通常抱持謹慎疑慮的態度。歐盟經過逾半個世紀的發展，在會員國自願的基礎上，已成為區域整合的重要模式之一。里斯本條約的簽訂為歐盟帶來重大變革，象徵二十一世紀初歐洲統合的重要里程碑。本文旨在探討英國通過里斯本條約的過程及其所面臨的挑戰。另一方面，自由政府間主義經過幾十年的發展，成為歐洲統合理論的一項重要理論學派。自由政府間主義著重於歐盟重大條約的協商、簽署與批准過程，為分析英國批准里斯本條約的歷程提供了適切的理論途徑。因此，本文的雙重目的在於分析英國批准里斯本條約的實證個案，並探求自由政府間主義套用英國個案所呈現的理論妥適性。英文摘要：This paper examines the process of the UK's ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon using a liberal intergovernmentalist approach. Traditionally, in contrast to other member states of the European Union, the UK has often been hesitant to pursue European integration. And yet, over the past half century, the European Union has become a significant model of voluntary regional integration. The ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon, which brought important changes to the European Union, marked a significant milestone for European integration in the early twenty-first century. This paper aims to explore the process and challenges of the UK's ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon by employing a liberal intergovernmentalist analysis. Such an approach has been developed over several decades and become a major theoretical approach to the study of European integration. Liberal intergovernmentalism, which draws special attention to the processes of negotiating, signing, and ratifying the EU's major treaties, provides a suitable theoretical approach to the analysis of the UK's passage of the Treaty of Lisbon. This paper is, therefore, designed with the dual purpose of examining the empirical case study of the UK's passage of the Treaty of Lisbon, and of examining the theoretical validity of liberal intergovernmentalism against empirical studies.起始頁-結束頁：127-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201406_44(2).00018篇名：如果，明天沒有愛：論《夜曲集》中的液態愛並列篇名：If, a Tomorrow "sans" Love-Liquid Love in "Nocturnes: Five Stories of Music and Nightfall"作者：王景智(Ching-Chih Wang)關鍵字：液態愛;液態現代性;重要他者;憂喜參半的恩賜;liquid love;liquid modernity;significant other;mixed blessings期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本論文以齊格蒙．包曼《液態之愛》為論述基礎，探討石黑一雄《夜曲集》所描繪的液態愛。根據包曼的說法，不確定的人際關係是在強調即溶且即時的現代文明中無法避免的生命經驗。液態愛是對抗不確定性的手段，或只不過是另一種直指人際紐帶脆弱的挫敗？《夜曲集》的主角們因害怕獨自面對人際紐帶鬆脫瞬間所帶來的傷害，所以得努力尋找重要他者與之為伍，但同行者卻提醒了他們亟欲壓抑的不堪與無奈。如果明天就必須鬆開此刻緊握的人際紐帶，石黑一雄筆下那些透過音樂尋得救贖的液態國度漫遊者，仍會為追求生命遠景跼隅前進。英文摘要：This paper lays emphasis on Zygmunt Bauman’s theory of ”liquid love” to analyze the frail human relations depicted in Kazuo Ishiguro’s ”Nocturnes: Five Stories of Music and Nightfall” (2009). As Bauman points out, liquid modern habitants are condemned to live in a realm of uncertainty wherein human relations are necessarily impermanent. A concluded game must be immediately left behind so as to move on directly to the next without grudges, because none of the connecting bonds can vouch for its duration in the liquid modern scenario. Before tying the knot, individuals must anticipate the moment of loosening, and the bond need be loosely tied so that it can be untied again when the situation changes. Is this freedom to relate a means of confronting uncertainty, or derivative of a failure to withstand the frailty of human bonds? The protagonists in Ishiguro’s Nocturnes do not wish to act alone when they have to untie the bonds. Finding a significant other with whom they confront the moment of untying becomes urgent and imperative, even while the significant other reminds them of whatever it is they wish to repress. If love changes because of uncertainties, Ishiguro’s musicians roaming in the liquid modern world will still choose to relate to the next human bond without any delay.起始頁-結束頁：163-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201406_44(2).00029篇名：Between Speech and Silence in Wordsworth’s ”The Prelude”-Transformation of Self in Text並列篇名：言語與靜默之間：文本裡所窺見的華茲沃斯自我作者：李佳容(Chia-Jung Lee)關鍵字：華茲沃斯;《序曲》;文字奧妙;自我呈現;語言之「反精神」;William Wordsworth;"The Prelude";mystery of words;self-representation;the "counter-spirit" of language期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文主題為華茲沃斯《序曲》裡第五部書中的自我呈現。我將研讀詩人對此書的修改過程中所塑造的「文本自我」，以探討其中的重要關聯，並觀察他如何將其複雜的情感寫入著作過程。華茲沃斯透過文本呈現的自我在寫作時消逝在語言本身。由於被語言的「反精神」束縛著，詩人描述出的自我呈現被文字「喧噪的鬨響」淹沒、又被其替換性的比喻所磨滅。然而我主張詩人在寫作時將他所意識到的文字「弱性」轉化成語言運作中的契機。相對於Paul de Man與Mary Jacobus對華茲沃斯文字運用之否定性評論，我探討詩人對於「生命與書本」之間文字組織結構的正面運用。對詩人而言，「文字奧妙」中的「想像力量」能夠洞悉其呈現的自我之「存在感」。我將特別描述詩人如何藉文字示意自我在語言本身裡的不存在性，來傳遞語言中自我的存在性。詩人巧妙地在言語與靜默之間以文字呈現自我，認可但同時抗拒「文字奧妙」中的「黑暗」與「朦朧之物」。詩人正是經由其對於語言矛盾且晦暗的運用，得以避免其「無法呈現」的自我完全被文字抹滅。英文摘要：The article focuses on William Wordsworth’s self-representation in Book V of The Prelude. I will consider Wordsworth’s ”textual self” in the draft materials and revisions of this Book in order to explore the vital relationship between Wordsworth and his text, and to observe how he writes his complicated emotions into the process of composition. Wordsworth’s represented self vanishes into language in his act of writing. Wordsworth, engaging with the ”counter-spirit” of language, represents a self overwhelmed by the ”loud blast” from writing itself and defaced by its substitutive figurations. However, I will argue that, in response to the failure of self-representation, Wordsworth transforms his vision of the ”weak [ness] of words” into an opportunity for the working of language itself. I will add to Paul de Man and Mary Jacobus’ largely negative reading of Wordsworth’s language by focusing on the positive use Wordsworth makes of the ”texture” midway between ”life and books”. For Wordsworth, the ”visionary power” in the ”mystery of words” is capable of visioning at least the ”presence” of the represented self. I show, in particular, how Wordsworth communicates a sense of self in language precisely by signaling its absence from that language. He does this by situating his self-representation midway between speech and silence, acknowledging but resisting the working of ”darkness” and ”shadowy things” in ”the mystery of words”. Through his precisely inconsistent and opaque use of language, Wordsworth’s writing avoids the total ”defacement” of the ”unrepresentable” self in words.起始頁-結束頁：193-238資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201406_44(2).000310篇名：Superhero Comics and Everyday Heroics-Michael Chabon’s ”The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay”並列篇名：超人漫畫與平民英雄：麥可．謝朋的《卡瓦利與克雷的神奇冒險》作者：張淑麗(Shu-Li Chang)關鍵字：逃逸;超人敘事;平民英雄;例外法則;escapism;superhero narrative;everyday heroics;logic of exception期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：麥可．謝朋在他獲得普立茲小說獎的小說《卡瓦利與克雷的神奇冒險》中，使用通俗的超人漫畫為敘事框架，來思索生命中自由、規訓、逃逸、救贖、創傷等與生命政治相關的課題。小說以二次大戰為時空背景，藉由超人神話來彰顯超人的獨一無二，也批判「例外法則」的排他性與潛在暴力。藉由演繹超人神話，小說彰顯面對政治對於生命的無限制制約與掌控，被動的屈服與主動的反擊都落入當代政治的例外法則的窠臼中，只有懸置例外，「自然」而「自在」地生活在當下，才能捉住由超人神話「逃」出，而成為「生活在當下」的「平民英雄」。此篇論文援引桑德勒的說法來解讀這本小說。論文大致分成三部分，第一部分先檢視隱藏於超人神話之後的「例外」邏輯，並說明此邏輯之自我矛盾。第二部分則由小說主人翁的成長故事出發，勾勒他們由英雄迷思逃逸而出的不同取徑。第三部分則討論小說如何翻轉「逃逸」為「困局」，而解構英雄迷思，並以「平民英雄」的概念取而代之，而以流變與協商回應倫理的兩難困局。英文摘要：In his Pulitzer prize-winning novel, ”The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay”, Michael Chabon uses superhero comics as a structuring principle to question what conditions lead to redemption from the biopolitical seizure of life by the logic of exception. Set in World War II, the novel dramatizes how the logic of exception places Jews in a double bind in the face of the Holocaust; it locates the possibility of redemption, and freedom from the double bind, in neither submitting to the power of the State, nor in resistance of it, but in ”living in the midst of life” and in practicing ”everyday heroics.” This essay brings together a diverse set of discourses about escapism-or lines of flight-including Eric L. Santner's notions of the ”deanimation of the undead” and the ”blessings of more life,” to propose that Chabon's novel celebrates neither escapism nor nihilism; instead, the essay suggests that only in Joe and Sam's circuitous and tango-like movement around the tensions between the repetitive cycle of life constituted by their efforts both to ”escape from” the contingencies of everyday life and to ”escape to” the surety of teleology can they be ”shocked” by love, by the miracles of the unexpected, and by the magic of what Chabon calls in the novel our ”everyday heroics.”起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201403_44(1).000111篇名：European Sovereign Debt Crisis and the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union-New Instrument of the European Union's Economic Governance並列篇名：歐洲主權債務危機與經濟暨貨幣聯盟穩定、協調與治理條約：歐洲聯盟經濟治理之新工具作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：歐元區;歐洲主權債務危機;財政條約;歐洲穩定機制;歐洲財政聯盟;euro area;European sovereign debt crisis;Fiscal Compact Treaty;European Stability Mechanism;European fiscal union期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：2011年12月，歐盟國家或政府領袖（英國除外）同意通過一項財政條約，做為處理歐元區主權債務危機整體策略的一部分。由於英國反對以歐盟條約之形式簽署，故其他會員國改以簽署政府間條約代之。2012年1月30日，25個會員國正式通過「經濟暨貨幣聯盟穩定、協調與治理條約」（以下簡稱財政條約），並於2012年3月簽署。財政條約於2012年12月21日獲得第十二國批准後，於2013年1月1日正式生效。然而，英國與捷克均非新條約之締約國。本文將檢視財政條約，以評估新條約如何強化歐盟財政治理與國家財政紀律。本文亦審視財政條約引起之若干問題，例如其法律地位、其與歐盟條約及歐盟法規之關係、歐盟機構之運用，以及財政條約是否足以構成財政聯盟之基石。英文摘要：In December 2011, the European Union heads of state or government, with the exception of the United Kingdom, agreed to adopt a ”Fiscal Compact” as part of an overall strategy to tackle the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. The United Kingdom vetoed its adoption as an EU treaty, so the other member states agreed to adopt it as an intergovernmental treaty instead. On 30 January 2012, 25 member states formally agreed to the ”Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union” (Fiscal Compact Treaty), signing it in March 2012. The Fiscal Compact Treaty entered into force on 1 January 2013, owing to its ratification on 21 December 2012 by a 12th country. However, the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic are not parties to the new treaty. This paper offers a review of the Fiscal Compact Treaty, with the aim of assessing whether and how the new treaty can be expected to strengthen EU fiscal governance and national fiscal discipline. This paper looks at some of the issues that arise, such as its legal status, its relationship with the EU treaties and EU law, the use of EU institutions, and whether the treaty could constitute a cornerstone of a fiscal union.起始頁-結束頁：41-90資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201403_44(1).000212篇名：Ethics of Writing-From Autobiography to Hetero-Thanato-Biography; a Reading of Derrida’s ”Circumfession”並列篇名：書寫的倫理：從自傳到異死書寫，以德希達《割禮告白》為例作者：吳凱書(Kai-Su Wu)關鍵字：奇異;蹤跡;署名;倖存;《割禮告白》;Singular;trace;signature;survival;"Circumfession"期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：44卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：自奧古斯丁的《懺悔錄》以降，自傳作為文類以來一直都備受爭議。本論文首先勾勒出自傳在不同時期的殊異，進而深入探究德希達如何將倫理關注帶入自我書寫之中。討論過程中將借用南西、拉庫．拉巴特以及德曼等解構主義學者對於生命、死亡、語言、共同體與書寫的思索來深化德希達的相關概念。即便自傳的詮釋史歷經了從生命到自我乃至書寫的轉變，本文欲藉由德希達的理念指出，自傳始終呈現了書寫在與生命的親緣關係之中所能展演的力道。文章的最後一部分將以德希達的《割禮告白》為例闡述何以自傳總是異死書寫這一命題。對於自我的論述終將不離以他者之名書寫他者之死的命運。與悲觀主義正相反，此般倫理書寫反倒是對生命的肯認。英文摘要：Autobiography as a genre has been the locus of debate since Saint Augustine's ”Confessions”. This paper sketches shifts of focus the term autobiography undergoes in different periods, before examining how Jacques Derrida regards the term in the light of ethics. During the discussion, thoughts on life, death, language, community and writing from certain deconstructionists, including Jean-Luc Nancy, Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe and Paul de Man will be introduced to complicate Derrida's ideas. Even though autobiographical interpretation goes through the transformation of focus from bio to auto and to graphy, this paper, with Derrida's thoughts in the foreground, contends that autobiography indicates the intense relation to bio that writing is. In the final section, Derrida's ”Circumfession” serves as an example of how autobiography is always already hetero-thanato-biographical writing with the other, for the other and by the other. Directed towards the affirmation of ethical writing, the narrative of the self is preempted by the writing of the other's death under the other's name.起始頁-結束頁：91-126資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201403_44(1).000301篇名：特刊導讀作者：傅祖壇;張宏浩期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：32期特刊出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：5-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：農村再生計畫參與對農村社區發展滿意度的影響並列篇名：Impact of Participation in Rural Regeneration Program on Satisfaction of Rural Residents with Community Development作者：李固遠(Ku-Yuan Lee);藍麗琪(Li-Chi Lan);方珍玲(Chen-Ling Fang);王俊豪(Jiun-Hao Wang)關鍵字：農村再生計畫;主觀幸福感;社區發展滿意度;處理效果;外溢效果;Rural Regeneration Program;subjective well-being;life satisfaction;treatment effect;spillover effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：32期特刊出版年：2014中文摘要：2010年公布實施的農村再生條例，為我國的農村發展法制化，建立了重要里程碑。本研究目的主要在探討農村再生計畫對社區發展滿意度的直接與間接影響效果。本研究使用農委會2012－2013年的農村幸福競爭力調查資料，有效樣本為1588位農村居民，以迴歸模型分析參與農村再生計畫對社區發展滿意度的影響。研究發現參與農村再生計畫確實可提升社區居民對社區發展滿意度，並於農村生活、生產、生態發展滿意度上，皆有顯著的處理效果。其次，居住在農村再生社區中，即使未實際參與培根訓練課程的社區居民，其社區發展滿意度亦較高於非農村再生社區的居民，存在顯著的外溢效果。綜合上述，本研究建議有關單位未來在推動農村再生計畫時，應採取深化與擴大化的施政策略，針對已通過農村再生計畫的社區，持續辦理農村再生計畫相關的進階課程；另一方面，針對未曾接觸農村再生計畫的社區居民，則應鼓勵其參與農村再生相關的培根訓練課程，以提升農村居民的主觀幸福感。英文摘要：The Rural Regeneration Act, promulgated in 2010, is a milestone in rural development policy formation in Taiwan. The main purpose of this study is to investigate the association between implementation of the rural regeneration program (RRP) and community life satisfaction of rural residents. This study used data of the Rural Subjective Well- Being Competitiveness survey, which was conducted by the Council of Agriculture, including 1,588 rural respondents. Several multiple regression models were employed to estimate the treatment and spillover effect of participating in the rural regeneration program on community life satisfaction. The results show that participation in the RRP is positively associated with the level of community life satisfaction. In addition to treatment effect of the RRP, several spillover effects are also evident in different dimensions of community life satisfaction. Those who lived in the RRP community but did not participate in the RRP-related training courses were more satisfied with their community development, compared with the non-RRP community residents. Consequently, this study suggests that the agricultural authority could strengthen advanced training courses for the RRP community, and encourage the non-RRP community residents to participate in existing RRP-related training programs.起始頁-結束頁：11-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：台灣農民對農業休耕補貼政策及農地出租之參與意願及接受金額分析並列篇名：Analysis of Farmers' Acceptance of the Fallow Land Subsidy Policy and Farmland Lease Program in Taiwan作者：陳郁蕙(Yu-Hui Chen);詹滿色(Man-Ser Jan);陳雅惠(Ya-Hui Chen)關鍵字：農業休耕補貼;農地出租;接受度;Fallow Land Subsidy;Farmland Lease;Acceptance期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：32期特刊出版年：2014中文摘要：台灣農政單位近年來採行如稻穀保價收購、休耕補貼、轉作補貼、契作獎勵、老農津貼、產銷輔導、農地銀行、小地主大佃農、休耕地活化等農業補貼措施及結構調整政策，並推動漂鳥及園丁計畫、農民學院與農場見習等措施，其目的期能提高農業生產規模及使農業勞動力年輕化等，以提高農民所得為目的。由於農民對政策的參與意願是政府施政成效的重要指標之一，然過去相關研究相對較少，亦缺乏農民對農業政策參與意願及滿意度之評量。有鑑於此，本研究以面對面的問卷調查方式，分析農民參與相關農業補貼措施之意向與滿意度，並針對參與及符合休耕條件但未參與休耕地補貼政策之農民分析影響其參與意願的顯著因子，以及農民對農地出租意願及願意接受最低租金。實證結果顯示，整體而言受訪農民對現行農業補貼措施感到滿意，尤其對小地主大佃農及老農津貼滿意度最高，稻穀保價收購措施的滿意度則為最低。另外，北部、中部及南部相對於東部、農場主65歲以上、家庭收入低的農民，其相對參加休耕補貼的機率比較高；而農場主教育程度為大學程度及以上及農業收入占家庭收入較高的農民，其相對參與休耕補貼的意願則較低。就農地出租政策而言，中部及南部、農場主為男性、耕種總面積4公頃以上，且已接受較多的政府補貼的農民，其出租農地的意願比較高；而農場主71歲以上、耕種總面積在1公頃以下且有繼承者，其農地出租之意願則較低，平均而言每期每公頃農民願意接受最低租金估計約為30,598元。英文摘要：In recent years, Taiwan's agricultural authorities have adopted numerous agricultural policies to adjust the production scale, rejuvenate the labor force and increase farmers' income, such as guaranteedprice purchasing of rice, a fallow land subsidy, land diversion program, contract farming award, elderly farmer pension, assistance for production and distribution, farmland bank (farmland lease), small-landowners big-tenants program, fallow land reactivation program, wandervogel and gardeners plan, farmers' school etc. However, the effectiveness of agricultural policies and farmers' satisfaction with them have rarely been discussed in the literature. This study attempts to use a face to face questionnaire survey to measure the effectiveness of the agricultural policies from the viewpoints of farmers' willingness to participate and their satisfaction. Special attention is paid both to finding significant factors that affect the farmers' willingness to participate in the fallow land subsidy policy and to measuring farmers' willingness to accept the farmland lease program. The empirical results show that, on average, farmers are satisfied with the agricultural subsidies program. The small-landowners big-tenants program has the highest satisfaction score, and the guaranteed-price purchasing program for rice has the lowest satisfaction score. In addition, farmers who live in northern, central and southern Taiwan, are over 65 years old, and have low family income have higher probability of participation in the set-aside subsidy program. Those farmers with a university degree or above, or higher agriculture/household income ratio have lower willingness to participate in the fallow land subsidies program. On the assessment of farmland lease policy, farmers living in central or southern Taiwan, males, those with total cultivated area of more than 4 hectares, or who received more government subsidies, are more willing to lease farmland; farmers over 71 years old, who farm total area of 1 hectare or less, or who have inherited their farmland are less willing to lease farmland. On average, farmers are willing to accept a minimum rental fee of about NT$ 30,598 each period per hectare.起始頁-結束頁：53-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：我國區域農業可行機制之研究：以雲嘉南區域為例並列篇名：A Feasible Mechanism for Regional Agriculture in Taiwan: Research in the Yun-Cha-Nan Context作者：韓宜(I Han);楊明憲(Min-Hsien Yang)關鍵字：區域農業;推動機制;雲嘉南;regional agriculture;feasible mechanism;Yun-Cha-Nan region期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：32期特刊出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討區域農業的定位，以及推動區域農業之可行機制，以利瞭解我國未來推動政策之可行機制。區域農業旨在達到農業資源流通、農業資源共享、降低對區域外與對區域內的農業交易成本、對外成為具代表性之主體等多種農業部門的經濟效益，為區域農業的目的。本研究以我國最重要農業生產的雲嘉南區域為研究對象，綜合質性田野研究訪談24家農企業，及量化問卷調查雲嘉南產銷班農漁民回收250份樣本，認為我國區域農業的推動，應擇有力的「支點」啟動區域農業的長期發展循環，串聯上層的政府單位、中層的企業（農企業、農會，產業）、基層的農民（區域農業以產銷班和合作農場具組織的農民），分層扮演各自專司的職能角色。本研究建議以下兩種最佳可行性推動之機制：（1）企業推動的機制：上與地方政府配合，推動地方農產業價值鏈的整合，以求繁榮區域之經濟發展與促進就業機會，下以農民產銷班或合作農場為生產供應者。（2）農民推動的機制：首賴農民的配合意願，以及他們對參與區域農業跨縣市合作所可能為其產品競爭力上帶來的潛在效益的認同與期待。英文摘要：This research aims to explore the policy positioning of regional agriculture and feasible execution mechanisms for a long-term sustainable approach in the context of agricultural development in the Yun-Cha-Nan region in Taiwan. This research defines regional agriculture as ”an integration of natural and human resources by geographic proximity, where clustered agricultural activities are connected to gain competitive advantages against other regions.” Regionalization of agriculture facilitates utilization and sharing of local agricultural resources, minimizes within-and cross-region transaction costs, and establishes regional agricultural reputations as an identity. By using both qualitative fieldwork and quantitative survey approaches, we interviewed 24 (agri-) businesses and collected 250 farmer-survey samples to formulate our arguments. A two-way, top-down and bottom-up approach should be the ideal mechanism for regional agriculture. The top authority level of the central government should focus on information platforms, standardization, and national land planning in the agricultural sector. Regional offices as suggested should play roles in communication and coordination across central-local and local-local governments as well as within the region. Local government should conduct security inspections and search for common regional interests. The middle market level of agribusinesses execute daily security inspections, connect value-added activities, and integrate inter-disciplinary technology and marketing. The bottom level of farmers should maximize scale economies through organizing and branding across local-bounded territories. It is highly recommended that our policy maker choose the most feasible and powerful steps to leverage resources for the benefit of agribusiness and organized farmers.起始頁-結束頁：87-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：臺灣菸農對菸權的願受價格之研究並列篇名：Empirical Analysis of Farmers' Willingness to Accept Voluntary Tobacco Conversion Programs in Taiwan作者：張景行(Ching-Hsing Chang);李佳珍(Jia-Jan Lee);盧永祥(Yung-Hsiang Lu)關鍵字：菸農;菸草種植權;願受價格;tobacco farming;willingness-to-accept;two-stage model;tobacco conversion program期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：32期特刊出版年：2014中文摘要：國內外針對菸農的相關經濟分析付之闕如；因此，本研究在全臺各菸草種植區域，針對606個菸農進行訪談，並利用兩階段模型來分析菸農願受價格之影響因素。在第一階段Probit模型的實證發現，對於菸草產業的前景愈樂觀的菸農，愈不願意接受種植權的買賣，願意接受出價的傾向會隨著種植權的增加而降低；第二階段的2SLS實證發現，實際有種植行為的菸農會要求較高的售價，而且菸農私下進行種植權租賃的成交價格對願受價格有正面的影響，而對菸草產業抱持樂觀態度的菸農也會要求較高的願受價格。英文摘要：Empirical studies on tobacco farming in Taiwan are almost nonexistent. To fill the gap, we apply a two-stage model to explore the factors that determine tobacco farmers' willingness-to-accept (WTA) value to forfeit their contracts on growing tobacco. The results from a first-step Probit model suggest that farmers who are optimistic toward the future of the tobacco industry are less likely to sell their contracts, and large farmers, in terms of scale of cultivation, are less willing to give up their farming contracts. The second stage of our analysis relies on a two-stage least squares model. We find that WTA value is positively associated with actual farming practices, and higher previous contract trading prices lead to a higher WTA value. Consistent with the rationale in the first stage, we also find that optimism regarding the future of the tobacco industry leads to a higher WTA price.起始頁-結束頁：129-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：我國農林漁牧業普查之推展與應用並列篇名：Development and Application of Agricultural, Forestry, Fishery and作者：陳惠欣;周怡伶期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：32期特刊出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：159-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：手機使用對臺灣地區電話調查涵蓋率之影響評估並列篇名：An Evaluation of the Effect of Cellphone-only Users on Telephone Survey Coverage Rates in Taiwan作者：洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hung);洪百薰(Baai-Shyun Hurng);林宇璇(Yu-Hsuan Lin);呂孟穎(Ming-Ing Lu);許勝懋(Shen-Mao Hsu);吳淑惠(Shu-Hui Wu);卓仲彥(Chung-Yen Cho);徐書儀(Shu-Yi Hsu)關鍵字：電話調查;涵蓋率;手機使用者;健康行為指標;telephone survey;coverage rate;cellphone-only;health behavior indicators期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：31期出版年：2014中文摘要：臺灣地區的電話調查一向有嚴重的涵蓋率問題，不僅如此，隨著民眾使用手機日愈普及，傳統以有線電話號碼為抽樣底冊的電話調查涵蓋率也日愈縮小。這不但在面臨眾多困境的電話調查問題上雪上加霜，也使得各種推論工作的成效受到嚴重考驗。本研究以2009-10年國民健康調查、2009年健康危害行為監測電話調查及2009年成人吸菸行為電話調查三項大致上在同時間完成的調查資料進行比較分析，藉由面訪受訪者的四種電話使用分類方式（有有線電話有手機，有有線電話無手機，無有線電話有手機，無有線電話無手機）來推估臺灣地區電話調查因涵蓋率不足而可能造成的推論偏差。分析後發現「唯手機族（cell phone only）」佔了臺灣地區18歲以上民眾的9.3%。這對一般電話調查的涵蓋率確實有影響，但是還沒有到嚴重的地步。透過吸菸率調查結果的比對，本研究證實了加權處理會改善傳統電話調查的推估偏差，不加權一定更糟。國民健康調查面訪案在對全臺灣地區進行推估時除了依照0縣市人口比例併檔外並不需要加權，至於其他的面訪案則需要投入更多的後續研究、納入多種面訪案後才能得到較穩定的評估成果。英文摘要：There have been serious coverage problems in telephone surveys in Taiwan. The situation is getting worse because of the increasing usage of cellphones, hence raising public doubt about the inferences made from traditional telephone surveys. This study uses three largescale survey databases to investigate the issues involved, namely, the 2009-10 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), the 2009 Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System Telephone Survey, and the 2009 Adult Smoking Behavior Telephone Survey. Four types of telephone usage, i.e., line phone with cellphone, line phone without cellphone, cellphone-only, and neither line phone nor cellphone, assessed from the NHIS face-to-face interviews, are used for the estimations of inference bias caused by the coverage deficiency of traditional telephone interviews. The results show that among adults aged 18 and above, 9.3% of the sample interviewed belonged to the cellphone-only group. This does show some effect on traditional telephone survey coverage, but the problem is not serious. The study uses adult smoking rate as an indicator to demonstrate the fact that a weighting scheme is a necessity to correct the bias caused by coverage and nonresponse problems for traditional landline telephone surveys. Further studies from large-scale face-to-face surveys are needed in order to reach more concrete research conclusions.起始頁-結束頁：7-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：運用網絡分析探討政策掮客在政策過程中的角色：以解嚴前後台中市都市發展為分析案例並列篇名：Using Network Analysis for Researching Brokerage Roles in Policy Processes: The Case of Taichung City's Development Domain Before and After the Lifting of Martial Law作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang);熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung)關鍵字：政策掮客;中介角色;政策企業家;社會網絡;結構洞;台中都市發展;policy broker;brokerage;policy entrepreneur;social network;structural hole;Taichung urban development期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：31期出版年：2014中文摘要：在傳統公共政策研究中，對政策掮客（policy broker）、政策企業家（policy entrepreneur）或調停者（fixer）等角色在政策產出過程的中介功能，長久以來被視為是研究政策過程的核心議題之一，就現實的政策過程而言，也無法無視於其存在的價值。然檢閱相關文獻，公共行政學界對於政策中介角色的討論大多點到為止，缺乏分析工具之故，並未將這類行動者在政策場域（policy domain）中的角色與功能進行系統化的測量。本論文以台中市1986年到1992年間與都市發展有關的重要政策事件為分析案例，採用行動體系理論（action system theory）的架構，蒐集台中市78個都市政策菁英參與8個重要都市發展事件的社會網絡資料，並透過社會網絡分析的中介中心性指標（betweenness centrality）、結構洞模型（structure hole model）與橋樑者角色模型（brokerage role model），找出影響台中市重要都市發展事件的重要中介者與其特質。在理論與分析方法上，希望能為目前相關的研究議題提出一可行的分析工具；在實務的需求上，也希望能為台中都市發展政策過程中的政治管理提供具體可行的政策建議。英文摘要：Although the recognition of policy brokers, policy entrepreneurs or fixers is a crucial determinant of policy output in the public administration and policy literature, little is known about its antecedents and how is it measured systematically. Using a unique dataset of 8 events and subsequent network relations among 78 political elites in the Taichung urban development domain before and after the lifting of martial law, this article applies social network analysis (SNA) to identify policy brokers and what their characteristics are by developing a conceptual framework about brokerage roles in policy processes. In theoretical development, this research is expected to demonstrate how the technique of SNA is helpful for not only identifying policy brokers but also showing how to measure different types of brokerage positions in policy processes. In practice, the analytical results increase the current understanding, in part, of how these political elites played their brokerage roles and enhanced their influence over policy-making and implementation in Taichung's urban development domain from 1986 to 1992.起始頁-結束頁：31-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心9篇名：面訪員的人格特質是否會影響訪問結果？臺灣面訪追蹤調查的實證研究並列篇名：Does Interviewer Personality Matter for Survey Outcomes? Evidence from a Face-to-face Panel Study in Taiwan作者：于若蓉(Ruoh-Rong Yu);劉育昇(Yu-Sheng Liu);楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang)關鍵字：訪員特質;訪員表現;單位無回應;拒訪;五大人格模型;interviewer personality;interviewer performance;unit non-response;refusal;Big-Five model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：31期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究的主要目的，在探索面訪員的人格特質對訪問結果的影響。我們以受訪者拒訪的可能性衡量訪員工作表現，並以五大人格模型（five-factor model）測量訪員的人格特徵。在調查研究領域，以訪員人格與其工作表現為題材的研究相當稀少，而相關研究多發現訪員人格與工作表現間並無顯著關係。Yang and Yu（2011）、Ja‥ckle etal.（2013）是少數的例外。本文採用社會科學研究領域廣被使用的NEO-FFI作為人格測驗工具，分析面訪員人格特質對其拒訪機率的影響效果。文中採用多階層模型（multilevel model），同時考量訪員、受訪者特性的可能影響。研究結果發現，外向性（extraversion）對樣本拒訪機率有顯著的負向影響，親和性（agreeableness）呈顯著的正向影響。審慎性（conscientiousness）、開放性（openness）與神經質（neuroticism）則無顯著的影響效果。相較以英國面訪員為分析對象的Jackle et al.（2013），及以臺灣電訪員為對象的Yang andYu（2011），本文的研究結果不盡相同。對此，文中嘗試尋求可能的解釋。另外，也就調查實務上的意涵做了討論。起始頁-結束頁：89-121資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
