01篇名：以階層線性模式探討TOD規劃效益對土地開發之影響並列篇名：Hierarchical Linear Models to Investigate the Effects of Tod Planning Effective Land Development作者：李家儂(Chia-Nung Li);謝翊楷(Yi-Kai Hsieh)關鍵字：大眾運輸導向發展;土地開發;稅金增額融資;階層線性模式;Hierarchical Linear Model;Land Development;Tax Increment Financing Transit-Oriented Development期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來，都市化現象，不僅使都會區人口密度不斷攀升，更隨著私人運具的普遍使用，而造成都市蔓延等現象，進而導致全球暖化、氣候異常與能源短缺等問題日益嚴重，且道路建設終究無法無限擴張。因此，各國將「大眾運輸導向發展（TOD）」視為因應策略，城市型大眾運輸系統除了滿足民眾機動性與可及性需求外，其所能產生的諸多效益，更使TOD成為發展潮流。但是，TOD發展至今，亦逐漸發現其諸多效益難以實現，本研究歸納出四項問題：（一）應歸責於TOD被誤解；（二）目前研究僅實證出TOD對大眾運輸旅次有正面效益，但對其餘相關效益仍缺乏實證研究；（三）在效益尚未釐清之前，即爰用稅金增額融通機制（TIF），並將車站周邊的整體發展效益全部歸於TOD的成效且進一步將其貨幣化；（四）財務挹注之費用，隨著興建成本的增加而日益高升。綜整上述現象，即導致TOD發展效益被過度預期與高漲，未來勢必成為都市發展的一大隱憂。緣此，本研究著重於探討TOD規劃關鍵脈絡與其發展效益，首先以文獻回顧方式歸納出代表變數，並應用階層線性模型（HLM），將其分為行政區範圍（總體階層）與TOD區範圍（個體階層），以此探討台北都會區TOD規劃效益與土地開發之關係，以供捷運建設TIF計畫在貢獻比例設計與位研提規劃策略時之參考。英文摘要：In recent years, the phenomenon of urbanization, population density in urban areas not only continue to rise, even with the widespread use of private vehicles, and other phenomena caused by urban sprawl, leading to global warming, energy shortages, climate anomalies and growing problem, and After all, road construction can't expand indefinitely. Therefore, countries will ”guide the development of public transportation (TOD)” depending on the response strategy, city-based mass transit system apart to satisfy the public demand for mobility and accessibility, the many benefits it can generate, the more so TOD become the development trend. However, TOD development so far, has gradually found its many benefits is difficult to achieve, the study concludes that the four questions: (a) shall be attributable misunderstood in TOD; (b) Currently, only empirical research on the public transport trips TOD positive benefits, but the rest is still a lack of empirical research related benefits; (c) has not been clarified before the benefits that tax increment financing mechanism used (TIF), the overall development effectiveness and all around the station attributed to the effectiveness of TOD and further its monetization; (d) Financial inject fee, with the increase in construction costs and increasingly soaring. Comprehensive whole phenomenon that led to the development of effective TOD is excessive expectations and rising, the future is bound to become a major worry of urban development. Edge, this study focuses on exploring the context of their development TOD planning key benefits, the first way to summarize the literature review on behalf of the variables, and applied hierarchical linear model (HLM), will be divided into administrative scope and TOD zone range, in order to explore the relationship between benefits and the price of land in Taipei metropolitan area TOD plan and develop their strategies based on the analysis results for the MRT construction TIF proportional contribution plan reference in the design and planning strategies mention bit of research.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201605_19(1).00012篇名：The Competition and Franchise Decision in Fast-Food Industry: Empirical Results in Taiwan並列篇名：連鎖速食店的競爭決策：以台灣實證結果為例作者：王信實(Shinn-Shyr Wang);李文傑(Wen-Chieh Lee);甯方璽(Fang-Shii Ning);邵建騰(Chien-Teng Shao)關鍵字：Competition;Fast-food Industry;Franchising;Location Strategy;區域策略;特許經營;速食業;競爭期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：With shares over 30% in the restaurant market, the fast-food industry has recently become one of the most influential restaurant businesses of Taiwan. The literature has discussed factors that affect the USP (Unique Selling Point) of fast-food companies such as the state of how vigorous the local competition is, furthermore some studies mentioned that a franchise system is the most common solution to the problem of asymmetric information between headquarters and restaurants for the fast-food industry. Although the competition and franchising issues are significant in the Taiwanese fast-food industry, most empirical studies are focused on cases in Europe and America. This study fills that gap by exploring empirically the unique features of this industry in Taiwan. The results show that more fast-food outlets are concentrated in more crowded districts compared to those where the population of the area is mostly the younger society. The analysis also indicate that MOS Burger tends to move away from McDonald's when the market size is large or when proportion of children in the district is high. Finally, McDonald's in Taiwan tends to franchise the outlets in districts which are less populated, but have a low correlation with the auxiliary services provided by outlets.英文摘要：速食連鎖業佔台灣餐飲市場總額已超過30%，也變成餐飲消費市場最具影響力之一類，過去已有文獻探討影響速食業獨特銷售主張的因素，像是描述在地方上的競爭力，也有研究提到特許經營是解決速食業總部和餐廳之間資訊不對稱最常見的方法，雖然競爭和特許經營的議題在台灣速食業非常重大，但是大部分的研究都著重在歐洲和美國地區；因此，本研究以探討速食業在台灣的獨特性來填補這個缺口，結果顯示速食店多集中在人口密集的區域而不是較多年輕人的地方，也指出當市場規模夠大或孩童比例高時，摩斯漢堡傾向於搬離麥當勞；而麥當勞往往開在人口較少的地區，但與分店提供的配套服務低度相關。起始頁-結束頁：39-68資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201605_19(1).00023篇名：有機農業多功能性之探究：以宜蘭縣三星鄉行健村為例並列篇名：An Investigation on Multifunctionality of Organic Farming–A Case of Xingjian Village, Sanshing Township, Yilan County作者：顏愛靜(Ai-Ching Yen);陳胤安(Yin-An Chen);吳宜庭(Yi-Ting Wu)關鍵字：生物多樣性;行健村;非商品產出;農業多功能性;Biological Diversity;Multifunctionality of Agriculture;Non-commodity Output;Xingjian Village期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：有機農業的施行，被全世界肯認具農業永續性、生物多樣性、尊重動植物內在價值，甚至是地方發展等的多功能性特質，而反映於生產過程，不僅可增加糧食生產之商品產出，亦可創造糧食安全、環境保護、文化保存、多樣地景、穩定農村等非商品產出，最終調整農業朝市場需求轉型（Lampkin, 1990）。宜蘭縣三星鄉行健村部分有心人士為推行有機農業，成立生產合作社，藉由社員互信互助，實踐不施農藥、化肥栽培，成效初具，也相當具有特色。而本文藉由文獻評析、深度訪談法，探討該村推行有機農業其農業多功能性的成效及推展遭逢的困境。然卻發現，個案地區有機農業的實施，於多功能效益上，就經濟生產功能言，可提升糧食安全及人體與環境健康的意識；藉由生產模式的轉變，在與生產環境的互動中，學習更多的農業知識及技術。就社會文化功能言，有機農民具備健康為導向的生產概念，並營造出具在地特色的農村社區文化；農民因具共同目標，關係密切，並能在技術與知識上互相交流及支援。就生態環境功能言，農民具有與自然環境和諧共處的價值觀；土地因恢復健康，地景呈現多樣化的風貌。惟行健村在實施有機的過程中，也面臨資金不足、驗證程序繁瑣、有機農田與慣行農田併立容易汙染有機產品的困擾。是以本研究認為，政府應提供推動有機友善的補貼或協助機制，以促成當地全面實施有機農業，提升整體生產環境的健康。英文摘要：Organic farming has been broadly recognized by the world that it possesses multifunctionality dimensions of agricultural sustainability, biodiversity, esteem of interior value on flora and fauna, and even local development. Such dimensions reflect the process of agricultural production, which not only increases the food value of commodity output (CO), but also creates the value of non-commodity output (NCO) of food security, environmental protection, cultural preservation, multiple landscapes, stabilization of rural area, and so on, as well as finally adjusts the agricultural orientation towards market demand (Lampkin, 1990). In order to promote organic agriculture, part of villagers of Xingjian village (in Sanshing Township, Yilan County) establish an organic cooperative. Through cooperative members’ reciprocal trust and help, they practice no pesticide and no chemical fertilizer farming which is very successful and characteristic that is worthy to do in-depth research. This study attempts to apply literature analysis and in-depth interview to realize the result of agricultural multifunctionality on promoting organic agriculture and difficulties of promoting organic farming in Xingjian Village. We find out that the practice of organic agriculture in this case, has significant increase on multifunctionality, food security, and environmental health cognition. By transformation of productive modes and the interaction between farmers and productive environment, organic farmers improve more agricultural knowledge. Besides, organic farmers has the productive concept of health orientation and also establish its particular local character and rural culture. Farmers have the same object and close relations so that they are able to gain mutual communication and support on technology and knowledge. Not only farmers possess value of harmoniously coexisting with natural environment, but also the land recovers its health so that the landscape reveals diverse features. In the process of promoting organic agriculture in Xing Jiang Village, however, farmers have to confront the difficulties of lack of subsidies, complicated in the procedure of organic certification, and easy-polluted situation when conventional farm is next to organic farm. Therefore, this study considers that the Taiwan government have to provide organic friendly subsidies or support mechanism to assist all local farmers for transformation.起始頁-結束頁：69-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201605_19(1).00034篇名：都會型休閒農場開發指標之建構並列篇名：Constructing Development Indicators of Leisure Farm in Taiwan Metropolis作者：車成緯(Cheng-Wei Che);陳欣怡(Hsin-I Chen);李青松(Ching-Sung Lee)關鍵字：休閒農場;都會核心區;農業旅遊;層級分析法;Agritourism;Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP);Leisure Farm;Taiwan Metropolis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：國內農業旅遊的快速成長發展，但鄉村區與都會核心區的特性不同，且都會核心區農業旅遊的發展困難程度較高，因此穩定發展都會核心地區農業旅遊，政府相關單位應定期針對都會核心區特性進行各項農業旅遊商品進行檢視；而以都會核心區為營運場所的農業經營者則需開發符合消費者需求的都會型休閒農場。本研究採取模糊德菲法（fuzzy Delphi technique, FDT）及層級分析法（analytic hierarchyprocess, AHP）來分析都會型休閒農場開發指標，研究結果發現在個別觀點方面，雖然各領域之農業旅遊專業人士有不同的重視指標，但主要集中在遊程服務；在整體觀點方面，遊程服務係為都會型休閒農場開發主要核心指標，因此本研究建議都會型休閒農業場開發應以遊程服務為首重指標。英文摘要：With the rapid development of agritourism industry, the domestic agritourism types vary. Due to different features between rural and metropolis, agritourism development in metropolis is relatively more difficult than in rural areas. In order to steady a sound agritourism development in Taiwan metropolis, government needs to review and evaluate agritourism products for meeting the features of Taiwan metropolis; and operators should develop more appropriate products for meeting the demands of market. The purpose of this study is to construct the development criterion on agritourism products in Taiwan metropolis. This study applied fuzzy Delphi technique and analytic hierarchy process (AHP) to construct and analyze development indices of leisure farm in Taiwan metropolis. The results finds that experts from different fields chose and valued various indices, however, the empirical study indicates that itinerary experience is the most important developmental criterion considered in overall experts. The findings of this study suggest that leisure farm investors and operators need to consider and value itinerary experience toward Taiwan metropolis.起始頁-結束頁：105-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201605_19(1).000401篇名：孝的勞動－家庭內男性長期照顧者處境的敘說與探究並列篇名：The Labor of Filial Piety: A Narrative Study of Male Caregivers作者：王行(Shane WANG)關鍵字：男性家庭照顧者;勞動處境;敘說探究;孝道思想;male caregiver;labor situation;narrative inquiry;ideas of filiality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究從「個體在群體內所敘說的生命故事中所再現的社會心理意義」為立基，以敘事研究的質性分析方法，探究當今社會家庭內男性照顧者的勞動心境，及其所凸顯的人文價值。文中將研究田野中所發生的人我互動，以及所敘說的故事，置於可與哲思文獻相應之對話中，試圖爬梳長期投身於照顧家人的苦勞中隱而未顯的反思性意義。英文摘要：This article is a narrative analysis of the life stories of men who are caring elderly family members full-time. The stories were told in the peer-group sessions held for a research project which aims at exploring the moods and thoughts of men in such hard-working situation as long-term caring labor. The article also describes significant events which happened in the group sessions, as well as carries out dialogues with philosophical thoughts, in order to highlight the implicit humanistic meanings of being a male caregiver in the traditional cultural context of patriarchal society.起始頁-結束頁：51-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：中日人民友好的悖論－以1980年代中國的「日流」為焦點並列篇名：The Paradox of Sino-Japanese People’s Solidarity-Focusing on China’s Japanese Wave during the 1980s作者：任佑卿(Wookyung IM)關鍵字：中日人民友好;冷戰;性／別;文化流動;《望鄉》;《追捕》;Sino-Japanese people’s solidarity;Cold War;sexuality;cultural mobility;Sandakan No.8;Arrest期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以日本電影《望鄉》和《追捕》在中國的接受過程為中心，分析了在冷戰時期的亞洲，作為後冷戰契機的文化流動之所以可行的歷史脈絡及其影響。新中國通過標榜區別對待日本政府和日本人民的所謂人民外交政策，而於冷戰時代亦能持續推進中日兩國的民間交流。為紀念1978年《中日和平友好條約》的締結而在中國舉辦的日本電影周，即是兩國人民睦鄰友好策略結出的果實之一。得益於人民外交，因殖民／帝國主義戰爭和冷戰而造成的敵對心被冷凍，中國觀眾幾乎沒有多大抗拒地接受了日本電影，其中的《望鄉》和《追捕》甚至成為象徵1980年代中國社會的文化標示而被狂熱地消費。可以說，因《望鄉》的色情性而發生的一系列事件和知識界對性描寫的爭議，是在通過主張對性的個人佔有權而與國家悄然對峙；而在日常生活中通過模仿廣為流行的《追捕》主人公來顛覆既有的社會主義性別規範，從而重構新的女性和男性範疇的行為，也與國家形成了潛在的張力。通過性和性別而迂迴表達的與國家的對峙，此後發展為對社會主義體制的批評。所以，在與冷戰時代相行相隨的意義上，這不僅產生出新的冷戰思維，也與提出重新審視戰爭賠償等歷史責任問題的激烈的民族主義纏繞交織。此種超越國民國家而取得成效的民間睦鄰友好，在其成功的同時卻最終陷入否定自身邏輯的悖論。《望鄉》和《追捕》的接受過程不僅暴露了中國政府的人民外交政策自身內含的國家與人民之間的代表不／可能性問題，以及冷戰邏輯和公民國家論理之間的矛盾，還促使人們去思考在亞洲因兩者交叉而生的錯綜複雜的「後／冷戰」局面。英文摘要：This essay examines China’s reception of Japanese films Sandakan No. 8 and Arrest in order to analyze the historical context which enabled Asia’s cultural communication during the Cold War era. The New China pursued a people’s diplomacy policy that separated the Japanese government from the Japanese people in order to promote relationships between the two countries. Japanese Movie Week, which was held to celebrate the Treaty of Peace and Friendship between Japan and the People's Republic of China signed in 1978, was an outcome made possible through the People’s Solidarity between the two countries. Despite Japan’s colonial and imperialist war and the animosity created by the Cold War, the Chinese audience accepted Japanese movies without any resistance because of the people’s diplomacy policy. Sandakan No. 8 and Arrest were fervently consumed as cultural icons that symbolized the Chinese society in the 1980s. However, the controversies over the profanity and sexual descriptions in Sandakan No. 8 led individuals to assert their own sexuality. The popular imitation of the main characters of Arrest in the daily lives of the Chinese overthrew the existing socialist gender norms and reconstructed a new femininity and masculinity that acted as a fight against the state. This fight was indirectly expressed through sexuality and gender but later developed into a criticique of the socialist regime, forming another Cold War logic that was different from that of the Cold War. It was also transformed into a fervent nationalism that returned to such issues as Japan’s historical responsibility and war reparations. The success of the People’s Solidarity seemed to have transcended nation-states but ultimately led people to negate its own logic. In this regard, the reception of Sandakan No. 8 and Arrest revealed the impossibility of the state in accurately representing the people and the contradiction between the state and the people under the Cold War logic. The essay also urges a contemplation of the complex structures of the Cold War and the post-Cold War that were created by their entangling forces in Asia.起始頁-結束頁：85-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：關於非洲國家社會主義道路的幾點斷想並列篇名：Some Thoughts on the History of State Socialism in Africa作者：蔣暉(Hui JIANG)關鍵字：非洲;社會主義;福山;Africa;Socialism;Fukuyama期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文從全球資本主義體系和國家關係的角度重新討論非洲國家社會主義發展史上的一些重大問題：政黨組成、階級鬥爭、經濟制度、文化價值和冷戰格局的影響，以求在反思二十世紀非洲的社會主義運動失敗的原因的同時，設想二十一世紀非洲可能有的社會主義形式。英文摘要：This paper is an effort to initiate a rethinking of the history of African socialist movements by examining certain key issues central to the formation of African socialist states, such as the nature of political parties, class struggle, economic policies, cultural values and the Cold War impact. All arguments will proceed from the perspectives of the world capitalist system and the order of nation-states. While acknowledging the failure of African socialist movements on the state level, the paper still argues for their possible continuity on the social level in the 21th century.起始頁-結束頁：113-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：保釣與海外左翼運動－林孝信訪談並列篇名：The Protect Diaoyutai Movement and Overseas Leftist Movement-An Interview with Shiaw-Shin Lin作者：林麗雲(Li-Yun LIN);陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua CHEN);蘇淑芬(Shu-Fen SU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：155-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：為終章寫序－當代「白色恐怖」的歷史記述、詮釋與失語並列篇名：Prologue to the Past-Controversies in Documenting the White Terror History in the 1950s作者：張立本(Li-Pen CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：177-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：「白色恐怖受難者二代」如何直面白色恐怖並列篇名：How Do Political Victims’ Descendants Confront the History of White Terror作者：李中(Chung LEE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：187-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：挖掘、拼湊歷史過程中遺忘「歷史」的陷阱－一個「白色恐怖」口述史入門工作者的自我意義探求並列篇名：The History Dismissed in an Effort to Bring the Missing History to Light-A Newcomer’s Reflection on the Oral History of White Terror作者：陳柏謙(Po-Chien CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：191-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：時代之輪的生命擠壓－從白色恐怖之庶民勞動者的生命經驗談起並列篇名：Choosing and Chosen-How Workers/Peasants Acted and Struggled in the 1950s’ White Terror作者：廖家敏(Chia-Min LIAO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：201-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：兩岸和解能有真相？－從「涉及情報的絕密檔案」與「事證明確不予補償」談起並列篇名：Historical Truth beneath Cross-Strait Confrontation-Revaluations Following ”Top Secret Intelligence Archives” and ”Cases Never Redressed”作者：張立本(Li-Pen CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：215-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：跟著「國界」駐紮歷史－「白色恐怖」訪調內外的折疊政治並列篇名：Speaking in-between the Border-The Politics of Making the 1950s’ White Terror Oral History作者：郭耀中(Yauzong KUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：227-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：殉道狀態－「受難－正義」迴圈裡抑失的白色恐怖話語並列篇名：State of Martyrdom-The Voicelessness of the 1950s' White Terror History within the Loop of ”Exodusical Justice”作者：吳哲良(Che-Liang WU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：237-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：美援文藝體制下的台、港、馬華文學場域　以譯書計畫《小說報》為例並列篇名：The Literary Field in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Malaysia under the U.S. Aid Literary Institution A Case Study of the Book Publication Program of Story Paper作者：王梅香(Mei-Hsiang WANG)關鍵字：文化冷戰;宣傳文學;通俗文學;三毫子小說;香港美新處;Cultural Cold War;propaganda literature;popular fiction;three-cents novel;Hong Kong USIS期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文使用美國國家檔案局的資料，探討1950年代美國在亞洲的文化冷戰，以海外華人作為主要的宣傳對象，將台灣、香港和馬來亞（新加坡）納入美援文藝體制的過程。說明美方透過通俗文學作品，塑造自由世界共同的「政治想像」。本文主要分為三個部分：首先，分析台、港、馬在美國譯書計畫中的位置：以香港為世界華文出版的中心，新加坡為英譯的重鎮，而台灣一開始在譯書上不如香港，在商業流通的管道上亦不及新加坡，位居三者之末。及至1959年，新加坡退出譯書計畫，屆此，台港儼然成為世界華文出版品的中心，但仍以香港為主。其次，以香港美新處出版的三毫子小說《小說報》的誕生為例，說明美援文藝體制在反共的大原則下，透過在地中介權力者，動員台港兩地的文化人、出版社，參與譯書計畫的生產過程，而將香港通俗文學場域「政治化」。最後，透過《小說報》作品的實際分析，說明香港作家書寫蕉風椰雨的馬來風情，結合「反共」與「愛情」的敘事潛規則，以《小說報》此類通俗文學、三毫子小說的形式，打造美方所希望的反共的、華文的，卻又具有東南亞在地色彩的想像共同體。英文摘要：This study uses data from the National Archives and Records Administration of the United States to examine the process by which Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Malaya (Singapore) were incorporated into the U.S. Aid literary institution with overseas Chinese as the main target audience. By using popular literature, the U.S. shaped the joint “political imagination” of the free world. This study is divided into three parts. The first part looks at the position of Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Malaya (Singapore) in the U.S. book translation program with Hong Kong as the world center of Chinese-language publishing and Singapore as an important center for English translation. Initially, Taiwan did not match Hong Kong for translations or Singapore for commercial distribution channels by putting itself among the three. In 1959, Singapore withdrew from the book translation program. As a result, Hong Kong and Taiwan became world centers for Chinese publications, although Hong Kong continued to dominate. Second, using the example of the emergence of the pulp fiction Story Paper published by Hong Kong USIS, we explore how under principles of anti-communism, the U.S. Aid literary institution used powerful local intermediaries to mobilize intellectuals and publishers in Hong Kong and Taiwan to participate in the book translation program and politicized the popular literary field. Finally, through an analysis of the actual content of Story Paper, we explain the Malay style of the work Malayan Affair that combined anti-communist themes and a love story narrative. Using the popular literary and pulp fiction style of Story Paper, the Chinese language anti-communist result desired by the U.S. was achieved while at the same time producing an imagined community with a Southeast Asian flavor.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：未成年者的性與禁閉矯正　道德／立法下的生命政治並列篇名：Confined Underage Sex in Correctional Institutions-- The Bio-politics of Moralistic Legislation作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei HSU)關鍵字：禁閉;無國家者;兒少保護;矯正機構;通報系統;犯罪控制;confinement;the stateless;child protection;correctional institution;the reporting system;crime control期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文試圖從傅科對「禁閉」的分析與巴特勒的「無國家者」概念，探討台灣「純淨兒少」的想像如何被用來製作出日益繁複的犯罪控制體系。國家以禁閉作為改變特定人民心理與行為的強制手段，然而，禁閉之所以能夠成為一種手段，也是因為某些人符合了特定的條件、身分、資格，以致於這些不被認可的群體，必須以特定方式看管、隔離、矯正。從1980年代以來，藉著從娼少女、不幸少女收容安置條款的立法通過，社會大眾的道德認知與救援情感持續被強化；靠著校園通報、禁閉矯正等國家力量的介入，（性）犯罪控制的前端與後端不斷延伸。然而，很少被提及的是，這種性的嚴密監控，其思考的起點與實踐的終點為何。對於那些在青少年時期就不斷探索自身的性慾望、性需求，或者在性探索中持續增強自身動能的酷兒而言，無法依循主流正統的性道德之路，可能會遭遇到什麼？藉由分析客家等郎妹的文化原型、校園通報系統的強制施行、及教養院內日常生活的管理規範，本文企圖探究未成年者的性為何變成犯罪控制的一環。英文摘要：This article uses the concepts of Foucauldian ”confinement” and Butler's ”the stateless” to study the advances of crime control on underage sex, in accompaniment of the image of innocent childhood. Toward the end of the 1980s, with an increasing interest in the sexual politics associated with child prostitutes, reforming child protection provisions pertaining to underage sex was pushed to the top of Taiwan's political agenda. With this reformation monitored and managed by middle-class women's groups, the criminal and juvenile justice systems came to severely regulate sexual behavior, targeting the ”confinement” of the underprivileged in correctional institutions and demanding a return to sexual morality. However, it has been seldom discussed why front-end and back-end processes have been amalgamated into one integrated crime control policy. By analyzing the Hakka cultural prototype, the campus reporting system, and the management of everyday life in Taiwan's correctional institutions, I will argue that these systems aim to ensure that no young homosexuals and other sexual minorities will have any future prospects.起始頁-結束頁：41-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：勞動法律的身分限制及改革　一個人權觀點的檢視並列篇名：Constraints on the Entitlement to Labor Laws in Taiwan and a Call for Reforms from the Perspective of Human Rights作者：張晉芬(Chin-Fen CHANG)關鍵字：人權;勞動權;《勞動基準法》;僱用型態;全球化資本主義;再生產勞動;《經濟社會文化權利國際公約》;human rights;labor rights;Labor Standards Act;employment status;capitalism under globalization;reproduction labor;International Covenant on Economic;Social and Cultural Rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016中文摘要：勞動法律的立法宗旨是促進勞動權益。但由於立法當時對適用對象的限制，許多勞工至今仍無法獲得基本權益的保障。以《勞動基準法》為例，該法的適用對象是限定有固定且單一雇主的典型受僱勞工，於是，包括非典型僱用工作型態的勞工階級、屬於責任制工作的受僱者、與外籍基層勞工等均被排除。由於許多其他勞動法律採行《勞動基準法》的適用規定，不適用《勞動基準法》的結果也使得被排除的勞動者喪失其他權益，如退休金或職業傷害的賠償。本文指出，《勞動基準法》制訂的背景是工業資本主義盛行的時期。如今在全球化資本主義之下，資方不斷擴大僱用彈性以降低生產成本，僱用型態趨於非典型化。許多勞工終身的職業生涯已非單一工作型態，而是流轉於典型或非典型僱用、自僱或受僱、失業或退出勞動市場之間。勞動者要面對的就業和經濟風險愈來愈高、勞動階級比從前更加弱勢，但勞動法律制度卻沒有因應轉變、以致於失去保障基本勞動權益的立法宗旨。本文進一步從人權的觀點，論證台灣的勞動法律需要超脫現有關於身分限定的架構，摒除僱用型態的限制、超脫生產性與再生產性勞動的界線、制度性地提供全體勞動者（包括全職家務工作者和受刑人在內）基本的經濟和社會保障。勞動權是權利，而不是特定身分勞工才可以獲得的利益。這既是台灣政府簽署《經濟社會文化權利國際公約》後應該要履行的責任，也是面對全球化資本主義趨勢下必須要採行的勞工保護思維。英文摘要：Due to the constraints of entitlements of worker's status, even though labor laws, such as Labor Standards Act, provide basic labor rights, many workers are not eligible to be covered by the Act in Taiwan. This paper argues that the establishment of Labor Standards Act and other affiliated laws are originally designed for the interests of full-time, formal employees hired by one employer; especially for male workers in the manufacturing industry. Under the paradigm of class relations in industrial capitalism, non-regular workers (including day labors, family business workers, dispatched workers, and part-time workers), exempted employees, and those covered by other than labor insurance are excluded from the application of Labor Standards Act. The practice of the labor laws ends serving for only part of the working class. This paper argues that labor rights are human rights and should be applied to all the employed workers, not limited by their employment status or nationalities. Under the development of global capitalism employment flexibility has been abused by capitalists in many creative ways. General working conditions of standard workers are deteriorating. Most workers can hardly stay in one position or even one employment status in their life-long career. The turnovers between standard and non-standard status, between self-employed and being employed, in job markets and unemployed or withdrawing from labor markets are becoming more frequent. Labor is facing more and more hazards in their career without institutional support for them to avoid falling into no job or no income. The state should provide basic economic and social rights to all workers regardless of their employment status, nationalities, and production or reproduction role. The results will also fulfill the commitments of Taiwanese government to sign up International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.起始頁-結束頁：75-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：文本作為探究支配關係的中介　以外籍居家看護聘僱需求評估為例並列篇名：Text as a Mediation to Explore Ruling Relations- Using the Assessment of Hiring Live-in Migrant Care Workers as an Example作者：梁莉芳(Li-Fang LIANG)關鍵字：建制民族誌;文本;支配關係;外籍看護;需求評估;Institutional ethnography;text;ruling relations;migrant care workers;needs assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016中文摘要：加拿大女性主義社會學家Dorothy Smith是當代北美重要的社會理論家之一，她所發展的建制民族誌（Institutional ethnography），不僅是一種研究方法，更是另一種社會學。不同於發展理論或修正理論的知識生產途徑，建制民族誌的探究紮根於人們每日每夜具體的、進行中的活動和經驗，進一步追溯和闡明跨地跨時協作的社會關係，如何編派和影響特定的在地經驗，以達到支配關係治理的目標。以「外籍居家看護聘僱評估研究」為例，本文討論建制民族誌的方法論與研究設計，特別是建制民族誌如何運用文本進行經驗性的探究。文本對建制民族誌的探究極為重要且關鍵。不同於其他質性研究將文本本身視為單獨分析的實證材料，建制民族誌學者關注文本如何連結個人活動和建制的社會關係。文本不僅呈現日常生活的活動如何進行和協作，更是組織和勾連不同在地場域的社會關係的中介。透過研究發現的呈現，我指出建制民族誌對社會生活的理解不是分類、詮釋或是建立理論，而是藉由對聘僱評估過程的描述，闡明以文本為中介，跨地跨時運作的建制關係，對個人在地經驗的形塑和影響。英文摘要：Institutional ethnography is not only a research method, but is an alternative sociology. Its investigation is anchored in the actual experiences of people's everyday life, and then moves further to trace how the trans-local social relations organize and impact the particular local experiences to achieve the goal of governance. Using the research on evaluation on live-in migrant care workers' employment as the example, this article discusses the methodology and research design of institutional ethnography; especially how the utilization of text as an investigative tool. Different from the other qualitative methods, which regard text itself as the analytical materials, institutional ethnographers focus on how text connects individual's activity to institutional relations. In the discussion of research findings, I point out that the goal of institutional ethnography is not to categorize and interpret individual's experiences or build upon theories. Instead, through describing the processes of evaluation, the research explicates how the textual-mediated social relations shape and influence people's lived experiences.起始頁-結束頁：115-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：關於跨域連結的反思與提問並列篇名：Some Thoughts and Inquiries about Cross-Over Interaction作者：夏曉鵑(Hsiao-Chuan HSIA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：145-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：迎接新時代……　從部落觀點反思村寨社區營造並列篇名：The New Era- Rethinking the Countryside Community's Empowerment and Engagement Strategy through a Tribal Perspective作者：謝英俊(Ying-Chun HSIEH)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：165-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：台社作為方法　反思「批判思考」並列篇名：Taishe as Method- A Critique of Critical Thinking作者：朱偉誠(Wei-Cheng CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：187-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：如何評估戰後台灣社會科學界的進展　現代化與普世性並列篇名：How to Evaluate ”Progress” in Our Local Social Science Community作者：瞿宛文(Wan-Wen CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：195-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：問題化了「學問問什麼」嗎？問了「學問為著誰去問問題」嗎？　從《台灣社會研究季刊》的史前史談起並列篇名：A Piece of Pre-history of Taiwan: A Radical Quarterly in Social Studies- International Symposium on Taiwan Studies (1985-87 at the University of Chicago) as an Act of Societal Self-Defense作者：丘延亮(Fred Y.L. CHIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：203-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：範例與例外：Giorgio Agamben的政治存有論初探並列篇名：Example and Exception: An Inquiry into Giorgio Agamben’s Political Ontology作者：林淑芬(Shu-Fen Lin)關鍵字：典範／範例;主權;例外;拓樸;無可區分;無可分離;生命─形式;paradigm/example;sovereignty;exception;topology;indistinction;inseparable;form-of-life期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：56期出版年：2016中文摘要：在目前為數可觀的研究文獻中，研究者對於義大利思想家Giorgio Agamben的政治存有論的關注，大多集中在「主權─例外」邏輯。針對Agamben同樣在存有論層次上闡述的「典範」或「範例」，在什麼意義上可以跳脫主權─例外邏輯，並且協助我們設想其所謂的「到來的共通體」與「到來的政治」之深入研究則不多見。本文希望藉由釐清Agamben的書寫中同時存在的兩種政治存有論─分別是Agamben用以分析西方社會生命政治運作之基本架構的「例外存有論」，以及支撐Agamben跳脫主權例外邏輯之基本構想的「典範存有論」─的意義，彌補此一不足。本文第二部分檢視典範／範例在Agamben的不同書寫中所被賦與的不同意義，以及典範存有論與到來的共通體的構想。第三部分分析與典範存有論並存，並且作為解釋西方社會暴力根源的主權─例外邏輯所部署的分離與拓樸運動，及其如何生產出無可區分的裸命。第四部分探究Agamben如何透過討論中世紀修道院的修行實踐，以及方濟各主義對抗生命的法律化、並致力於建立無可分離的範例性生命─形式使例外邏輯的部署失效，提供我們更進一步思考其範例性共通體的線索。英文摘要：The existing literature on Giorgio Agamben’s political writings has focused mainly on the logic of sovereignty-exception. A sophisticated reading of the relationship between exception and example/paradigm, and the latter’s implications in Agamben’s formulation of the coming community and form-of-life is largely unavailable. The purpose of this paper is to fill the gap. It contends that two political ontologies co-exist in Agamben’s work: the ontology of exception and paradigmatic ontology. The first part of the paper takes issues with the rather inconsistent ways in which paradigm/example is employed and explicated in Agamben’s work. The second part examines the logic of sovereign exception and its topological movement, elaborated in Homo Sacer and State of Exception. The third part returns to the question of the exemplary community via a discussion of Agamben’s exploration into the practices of Monasticism and an inseparable form-of-life against total legalization pursued by St. Franciscan and his followers.起始頁-結束頁：1-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160300560012篇名：從黑格爾到青年馬克思－市民社會思想史一段流行敘事的批判並列篇名：From Hegel to the Young Marx: Critique of a Prevailing Narrative in the Intellectual History of Civil Society作者：姚遠(Yuan Yao)關鍵字：黑格爾;馬克思;市民社會;政治國家;Hegel;Marx;civil society;political state期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：56期出版年：2016中文摘要：在黑格爾法哲學中，「國家」和「政治國家」有著根本差別，而混用二者的做法始於馬克思。馬克思化約了黑格爾市民社會的具體形象，並對（現代）市民社會做出批判性分析，在討論馬克思的脈絡裡不宜混淆「市民社會」和「社會」。在市民社會與政治國家的關係問題上，黑格爾和馬克思都看到二者在現實中的二元分立狀況，但黑格爾希望從學理上消解它。而馬克思讓黑格爾希望破滅，摧毀了黑格爾的理性國家構造。黑格爾和馬克思都深知在經驗世界中市民社會決定政治國家，但黑格爾輕視經驗，希望從邏輯上證明政治國家淩駕於市民社會，而馬克思再次破壞了黑格爾的理論方向，把人們的視野重新拉回歷史現實。英文摘要：Within the legal philosophy of Hegel, ”state” and ”political state” are two concepts with fundamental difference, and the first one to confuse them is Marx. Although Hegel and Marx have some connections in the definition of ”civil society” as such (not its relationship with the political state), we cannot ignore their separate characteristics, for it is Marx who reduces the concrete image of Hegelian civil society to an abstract image, something like the economic infrastructure. Marx has made significant criticism upon the (modern) civil society, and therefore puts forward his own socialist principles focusing on the concept of ”society”, so it is false to confuse ”civil society” with ”society” in the Marxian context. Last, as to the relationship between civil society and political state, both Hegel and Marx find the dualism therein; however, Hegel doesn’t establish such dualism- -he just hopes to get rid of it in his theory. But Marx disappoints Hegel, destroys the Hegelian constitution of the rational state, and presents instead the concept of ”democracy” which is said to transcend the dualism in question more effectively. Both Hegel and Marx know very well that in the world of experience, civil society determines political state, but Hegel looks down on experience and wishes to prove logically that the political state is prior to civil society, while Marx again destroys the intellectual direction of Hegel and draws us back to the historical actuality. It is inappropriate to describe the turning of the civil-society theory from Hegel to the young Marx with the phrase ”it is the (civil) society that determines the (political) state, not the (political) state that determines the (civil) society”.起始頁-結束頁：69-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160300560023篇名：純粹法學如何看待規範與現實的關係？－以司法院釋字第728號解釋之檢討為例並列篇名：The Relationship between Norm and Reality from the Perspective of the Pure Theory of Law: A Methodological Critique of J. Y. Interpretation No. 728作者：黃舒芃(Shu-Perng Hwang)關鍵字：純粹法學;應然與實然;規範與現實;祭祀公業;傳統;意識型態;Pure Theory of Law;Is and Ought;Norm and Reality;Ancestor Worship;Tradition;Ideology期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：56期出版年：2016中文摘要：純粹法學（Reine Rechtslehre; Pure Theory of Law）主張「應然與實然的區分」，眾所皆知。然而，如果進一步追問：這個主張究何所指？其重點何在？又如何在法律世界當中彰顯其意義？則恐怕不只是無法得到清楚解答，反而還可能看見各式各樣的誤會和曲解。長久以來，純粹法學因為主張應然與實然的區分，而往往被認為是一種與現實脫節，因而耽溺於形式主義的象牙塔理論。然而這樣的論斷不僅暴露出對純粹法學的嚴重誤解，也往往忽略了主張「規範與現實密切結合」本身的盲點。有鑑於此，本文透過釋字第728號解釋的案例檢討，指出在純粹法學觀點下，混淆規範與現實究竟會造成什麼樣的弊端，並藉此澄清純粹法學區分規範與現實的主旨與目的何在。英文摘要：The Pure Theory of Law has long been recognized as one of the most significant and influential legal theories in the world. Nevertheless, the way it looks at the relation between norm and reality has invited so many misunderstandings that its well-known argument for a clear distinction between norm and reality has repeatedly been criticized for isolating legal norms from the real world. Through a critical analysis of the reasoning of J. Y. Interpretation No. 728, this essay purports not only to illustrate why and how numerous misunderstandings of the Pure Theory of Law have occurred, but also to clarify the relationship between norm and reality in light of the Pure Theory of Law.起始頁-結束頁：163-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201603005600301篇名：通往「現代」的曲折軌道：臺北捷運的詮釋彈性與科技生活形式並列篇名：The Awkward Rail toward ”Modern”: Interpretive Flexibility of Taipei MRT and MRT Technology as a Form of Life作者：黃令名(Ling-Ming Huang)關鍵字：捷運人;現代化;臺北捷運;詮釋彈性;科技生活形式;Metro-men;Modernization;Taipei MRT;interpretive flexibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文從「詮釋彈性」以及「科技生活形式」觀點出發書寫臺北捷運誕生史，試圖解釋臺北捷運在物質與社會方面的現象，並以最早一批臺北市政府捷運局為核心的「捷運人」，闡述臺灣「捷運人」所具備的科技生活形式內涵。本文透過對「捷運人」的訪談結合臺北捷運初建時的史料分析，發現臺灣的「捷運人」將臺北的交通堵塞問題，定義為國家與城市的「現代化」問題，希望透過捷運工程改造臺灣社會與臺北市，具備明顯進步意識與國家意識。另外一方面，「捷運人」也希望透過打造臺北捷運的技術實踐，發展出一套自己的科技生活形式，但是面臨臺灣屬於捷運技術後進國、臺灣民主化變局以及臺灣在1980年代的國際地位等環境的影響，對捷運的技術能力不足，而使得建構自身的捷運科技生活形式呈現非預期的結果。反映在「中運量爭議」上，也讓這場科技詮釋的爭議，充滿了曲折與權力妥協的特色。英文摘要：This article examines the development of Taiwan's MRT (Mass Rapid Transit) system in the 1980s from the perspective of interpretive flexibility and technology as forms of life. It focuses on the ”Metro-men” who were primarily associated with DORTS (Department of Rapid Transit Systems) Taipei City Government, to reveal their technology as forms of life. Based on interviews with the first generation of ”Metro-men” as well as analysis of historical material, we find that the Taiwanese ”Metro-men” interpreted the problem of traffic jams in Taipei City as a problem of ”modernization” in Taipei and the whole country. They hoped to rebuild Taipei City and Taiwan by constructing the MRT system with a national and progressive vision. Moreover, the ”Metro-men” developed their own MRT technology as forms of life through the practice of building the Taipei MRT. However, they lacked sufficient technical ability to build a state-of-the- art MRT system, and the democratization and political economic situation of Taiwan in the 1980s presented further challenges. These conditions led to the MRT project leaders' expectations outstripping their technological prowess and political reach, which fundamentally shaped their MRT technology as forms of life. This phenomenon also caused political conflicts and procedural compromises with the MCT (Medium Capacity Transit) and other political powers.起始頁-結束頁：9-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：土地、社群、信仰：解析俗民環境論述並列篇名：Land, Community, and Faith: An Analytical Model of Folk Environmental Discourse作者：呂欣怡(Hsin-Yi Lu)關鍵字：地方知識;環境論述;草根環境運動;社群倫理;local knowledge;environmental discourse;grassroots environmental movement;communal ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：1980年代末期發生的高雄後勁反五輕運動，不只成為台灣環境運動史的經典個案，也牽動了在地民眾將近30年的共同生命經驗。本研究選取出生於1950年代，長期居住後勁的15位居民進行生命史訪談，探討他們如何理解工業污染、環境運動、以及與之相關的社會生態變化。廿多年前的反污染抗爭開啟了新的政治參與空間，也已成為社區的認同象徵，而義氣、公平、業報等具備地域特殊性的價值觀，則與普世性的環境主義扣連，成為環境感知的基礎。本文主張，俗民環境論述涵蓋三個層面：污染知識、人際倫理、以及宇宙觀，這套鑲嵌於地方秩序的環境構框，並不局限常民的環境關懷尺度，而是在廿多年的抗爭實作中，融合不同層次的議題，進而發展為針對台灣整體生活環境的反省。英文摘要：This research focuses on Houjin, Kaohsiung, an urban marginal community best known for its anti-pollution and anti-CPC movements of the 1980s and the 2000s. Drawing on life-story interviews with 15 Houjin residents who were born in the 1950s, I examine the ways residents living in proximity to an industrial complex conceptualize industrial pollution, environmental movement, and associated socio-ecological transformations. The historic anti-pollution movement opened up new political space for citizen participation; it also has become the symbol of community identity. Moreover, particularistic ethics of fraternity, equity, and karma are articulated with universalist ethics of environmentalism, and form the basis of environmental perception. In analyzing the environmental discourse of ordinary people, I argue that the folk model of environmentalism consists of three dimensions-local knowledge about land and pollution, interpersonal ethics, and cosmology. In dialogue with scholarly literature concerning place-based movement and community studies, this research discusses how a particularistic and community-based environmentalism was open to different levels of 〞others〞 through continuous environmental actions, and developed into a grassroots reflection over the quality of life for an entire country.起始頁-結束頁：63-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：知識辯證的微觀動態：當代生物科學期刊如何接受一篇論文並列篇名：The microscopic dynamics of dialectic in the discovery of scientific knowledge: How research papers in biomedical discoveries are accepted by modern scientific journals作者：楊倍昌(Bei-Chang Yang)關鍵字：生物學實作;認知;辯證動態;辯駁信;Practice in biosciences;Cognition;Dynamic of judgment;Rebuttal letter期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：現代科學家是一種以發現新知為目標的職業。研究者在實作過程經常會面對兩道挑戰：一、如何證成新知；二、說服別人。這些問題的辯證是極為動態的過程。綜合一般性的經驗以及投稿過程之通訊辯駁信為文本基礎，本文嘗試類比神經解剖學中「認知地圖、地標辨識、方向感」這三個思維類型作為論述架構，來定義「整體概念架構、數據評價、邏輯判斷」及其延伸之十項細則的內容，作為討論架構，來分析科學實作中，知識辯證的動態。整體概念架構的內容包括兩子項：1.研究結論的整體印象，2.產生新的觀念與新的研究方案；數據評價問題包括五子項：1.材料及技術的可信度，2.適當的控制組/合宜的實驗設計，3.明確的事實，4.比較性的觀測值差異明顯，5.論斷所需資料之有無；邏輯推論則包括三子項：1.合於常理的判讀，2.符合典範內的解釋，3.解釋清晰/不矛盾。雖然研究的議題及方法學不同，在一般性科學討論的印象中，以「材料及技術可信度」以及「實驗資料不夠」是發生率最高的兩則提問子項。若以辯駁信為檢驗文本，各子項出現的發生率則與一般性印象調查略有不同。在總共223則審查提問中，數據評價問題的提問數是155次，為每一篇文章中產生爭論最多的項目。其他爭議的發生率包括，38次是邏輯檢驗的問題，17次是整體概念架構的問題，無法歸類的議題只有13次。這種偏重在經驗的提問方式，反映出生物科學是一種實存、實證科學的特質。在回應質疑的策略中，最常出現的四種依序是：1.交代推論所需的實驗證據，2.加強說明，3.引用文獻，提供典範內的解釋，4.提供清楚，明顯的資料。總計與物質證據有關的回應策略，接近一半。總而言之，「整體概念架構、數據評價、邏輯判斷」這三個層面構成認知元素，用來分析科學家之間的對話，不只可以顯示經驗理性，納入科學社群所建構的共識(典範)，更指出，經驗下所認知的自然現象才是判斷真偽的基礎。英文摘要：Scientists today face two challenges in their daily professional activities of discovering facts and converting them into new knowledge: how to contribute solid scientific discoveries and how to convince their colleagues that they have. In analyzing this dynamic dialectic, I apply a neuroanatomy-based, three-level analytical framework of cognitive mapping, sensory landmarks (observable cues), and judgment of truth to reveal the choice underlying successful rebuttals of scientific journals in medical biology. The subcategories of cognitive mapping are the overall impression of conclusion and new insight of the study. The subcategories of sensory landmarks include reliability of materials and methods, adequate experimental design with appropriate control group, facts as such, significance of comparative results, and sufficient evidence. The subcategories of judgment of truth are fitting in the common sense interpretation of the scientific community, paradigm coherence, and clarity without contradiction. Despite differences in topics and methodology, the most frequent critiques during reviewing process are issues about sensory landmarks that consists 155 questions. 38 questions belong to judgment of truth and 17 to cognitive mapping. Only 13 of the reviewers' questions do not fit in this analytical framework. Interestingly, results in a survey of 19 academic biologists also revealed that reliability of material/methodology and insufficient data to support the conclusion are two frequent critiques. The reply strategies used by the authors in order is 1. defend the legitimacy of experimental material and methods, 2. strengthen description, 3. quote references/explain within paradigm, 4. provide clear cut evidence. Overall, most of replies are to provide solid observable facts that are acceptable for the particular scientific community. Appling this three-level analytical framework to evaluate the logic of scientific discussion, one is able to identify rationalism on sensory experience and incorporate new findings into established paradigm. Most importantly, it reveals that cognitive facts are the fundamental bases of scientific judgment.起始頁-結束頁：109-155+157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：捷運木柵線：移入的大型科技系統與在地交通建設網絡的共造並列篇名：Constructing the Taipei Metro Muzha Line: The Coproduction of Imported Large Technological System and Local Infrastructural Construction Network作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：台北捷運;木柵線;大型科技系統;交通建設;共造;Taipei Metro;Brown Line;large technological system;transportation system;infrastructural projects;co-production期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文透過科技研究的大型科技系統觀點，檢視台灣從1980年代起如何打造台北捷運系統木柵線。本文分析台灣戰後交通建設網絡與移入大型運輸科技系統間之銜接、對峙與轉變等關係，嘗試從科技解釋社會的視角，觀察台灣交通建設網絡的轉型。本文爭論由先進國移植的運輸科技系統，除影響台灣工程社群反應出素樸現代性詮釋，也造成一連串實作問題及失序現象，並以其科技動量拖動在地交通建設網絡轉變。然而，本土脈絡亦將這些轉變賦予在地特質，其中本土工程師們逐步建立專業的特定方向與內涵，培養自身成為專業業主。他們除有效「定義問題」外，並平衡與國外系統提供商之間關係，驅動國內營造業及工程設計顧問業的技術提升，更影響社會相關網絡與被移植的大型科技系統「共同解決問題」。本文木柵線案例研究，填補大型科技系統觀點未提「在地既存網絡」與「外來完備系統」間衝擊及磨合現象，未來應值投入更多此類案例跨國研究，為現有大型科技系統觀點擴展理論性知識。英文摘要：This paper applies the idea of large technological system in science and technology studies to examine the building history of the Muzha Line of the Taipei Metro System from the late 1980s to the mid-1990s. This case study fills a theoretical gap in our understanding of how foreign systems are exported into countries that have no related technology. When one of the most advanced metro technologies in the world was transplanted from France to Taiwan, its technological momentum triggered a series of deeper problems that were embedded within the context of Taiwan's developmental and authoritative state. This paper argues that Taiwanese engineers played a critical role in the mutual reshaping of the imported large technology system and local infrastructural construction network. These key players also developed localized guidelines about how to build metro systems special to Taiwan. This paper explores the meaning of their efforts in terms of the origin and evolution of the engineering profession and its identity.起始頁-結束頁：159-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：書評：李尚仁，《帝國的醫師：萬巴德與英國熱帶醫學的創建》作者：洪廣冀期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：275-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：短評施麗雯〈臺灣的道德先鋒〉一文作者：傅大為期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：285-291資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：少年受虐事件的揭露：從兒童虐待走到少年虐待並列篇名：Disclosure of Adolescent Abuse Event: From Childhood Till Adolescent作者：龔家琳(Chia-Ling Kung);趙善如(Shan-Ru Chao)關鍵字：少年;虐待;揭露;adolescents;abuse;disclosure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：33期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的是探究阻礙與促使受虐少年向正式兒少保護服務系統揭露受虐事件之原因，透過深入訪談，訪問5 位從兒童時期持續受虐到少年階段的受虐者。研究結果發現，阻礙受訪者揭露的原因是，過去與服務系統接觸的負面經驗、對揭露後果有所擔憂、認為只要忍耐就可以解決問題、缺乏明顯的傷痕證據、身邊成人宿命論的規勸。直到他們的危險評估能力提升、自我保護意識強化、對兒少保護服務系統有較多的瞭解與相信，以及有來自社會支持的作用力，方使他們願意揭露自己的受虐事實。因此，本研究建議，在兒少保護服務系統方面，應強化兒少保護通報系統工作人員對於受虐兒童少年求助行為的瞭解與敏感度；謹慎調查受虐事實，且關注兒童少年的安全保障服務；繼續強化學校系統對兒少保護服務系統的認識。在少年本身方面，要鼓勵他們面對逆境不能自我放棄、應強化自我內在之正向保護因子，以及建立屬於自己的社會支持網絡。英文摘要：The present study was aimed to investigate causes that hinder or promote the battered adolescents’ disclosure the abuse to formal child and juvenile protective service system. In-depth interviews were done with five subjects who constantly suffered abuse from childhood till adolescent. Findings of this study show that factors preventing interviewees from disclosing the abuse include previous negative experience of contacting the service system, worry about consequences after disclosure, belief in “solving problem through endurance”, lack of obvious evidence of scar, and surrounding adults’ advice of fatalism. However, they are willing to re-disclose their actual experience of being battered once they have enhanced ability of evaluating risk, strengthened consciousness of self-protection, better knowledge of and belief in child and juvenile protective service system, as well as social support. Therefore, as suggested by this study, with respect to child and juvenile protective service system, it’s necessary to reinforce staffs’ understanding of and sensitivity to abused children and adolescents’ help-seeking behaviors, prudently investigate truth of the abuse, focus on safety guarantee services for children and adolescents, and continuously enhance the school system’s awareness of child and juvenile protective service system. In terms of adolescents’, it’s necessary to encourage them to be motivated in adverse situation, strengthen internal positive protective factors and establish a social support network of their own.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.33.012篇名：社會福利界的游牧民族？非營利組織承接臺北市社區照顧關懷據點之選擇性策略並列篇名：The Nomad Phenomenon in Social Welfare? Research on the Strategies of Non-profit Organizations in the Contracting of Community Care Stations in Taipei City作者：劉昱慶(Yu-Ching Liu);陳正芬(Cheng-Fen Chen)關鍵字：社會服務契約委託;非營利組織;關懷據點;social service contracting;non-profit organizations;community care station期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：33期出版年：2016中文摘要：「社區照顧關懷據點」計畫有別「以價制量」購買服務方式，鼓勵承辦單位具多元、自主與選擇性。本研究以非營利組織申請政府委託服務的資源為主軸，以資源依賴理論分析非營利組織承辦關懷據點的動機，採用「個案研究法」分析臺北市四個非營利組織執行委託服務過程、組織經營，及辦理據點類型之選擇性策略。研究發現，非營利利組織初始之目的雖是追隨政府政策以獲取更多資源，成為社福界的「游牧民族」，確實有資源依賴現象，但探究其原因係因政府提供的服務補助十分零散，組織站在服務使用者角度，整併方案及提升服務的完整性，以提升服務使用者對組織認可，達到名利雙收效益；其次，功能型與經費型據點因臺北市公設民營規範而促使雙方產生輔導關係，辦理功能型據點的老人服務中心，藉由輔導取得建構社區服務網絡的「機會」，與經費型據點建立區域服務加盟關係。研究建議，未來據點的發展應著重提升兩類型據點互動的可行性，結合雙方優勢發揮加乘作用。英文摘要：In 2005, the Executive Yuan promoted the “Taiwan Health Community Six-Star Program” encouraging communities and non-profit organizations to establish community care stations. Compared with previous contract programs’ emphasizing price, this program encourages organizations from different sectors to join, and allows each other-sector organization to depend on its own ability and sector-related practices. This research is based on the theory of resource dependence, using case studies to analyze the strategies of non-profit organizations, and focuses on explaining how and why providers choose to become functional or budgetary community care stations. This paper includes four cases: two functional and two budgetary. We found that a nomadic social welfare phenomenon exists among non-profit organizations. The major motivation behind this nomad phenomenon is that budgetary non-profit organizations apply for the community care station program in order to acquire government resources. In addition to chasing the additional resources afforded to program participants, they also benefit in that being a community care station improves their reputations from both the government’s and service user’s perspectives. The second finding is a franchise-like relationship between functional and budgetary organizations. While the expectation behind the central government’s policy was that functional and budgetary organizations would be independent of one another, Taipei City government’s contract with elderly welfare centers required they take on the additional role of functional community care centers, forcing them to assist new budgetary community care stations in their districts to apply for the project and implement community care work. This relationship resembles a franchise in that both types of organization benefit: functional organizations get the opportunity of building a community service network, while budgetary organizations receive free knowledge and instruction as well as assistance with implementation. In conclusion, because the central government’s contract programs are rarely modified, non-profit organizations need to constantly look for more resources and supplementary programs to survive. Finding a way to integrate these different programs is an important issue for Taiwan’s community care system.起始頁-結束頁：43-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.33.023篇名：已開發國家年金自動調整機制之發展與變革並列篇名：The Development and Reform of Pension Automatic Adjustment Mechanisms in Developed Countries作者：傅從喜(Tsung-Hsi Fu);施世駿(Shih-Jiun Shi);林宏陽(Hung-Yang Lin);張秋蘭(Chiu-Lan Chang)關鍵字：年金;年金自動平衡機制;年金自動調整機制;年金改革;pension;pension automatic balance mechanism;automatic adjustment mechanism;pension reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：33期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去30 年來，在人口老化、年金制度成熟，以及勞動市場展望不佳等情況下，西方國家普遍對其年金制度進行改革。年金改革的主要挑戰，是如何同時兼顧老年經濟安全的保障，以及年金財務的永續，而這兩個面向都與年金的給付水準有直接的關聯。為了提升年金財務的永續性，許多西方國家在1990 年代以後開始建立年金自動平衡機制（automatic balance/balancing mechanism）。此種機制的運作，是依據年金的償付能力（solvency）與永續性（sustainability）指標來自動調整年金給付，以提升年金的長期財務均衡。此種新興機制的發展，讓傳統公共年金制度的發展產生了重大變化，不僅象徵著公共年金政策發展邏輯的調整，同時也根本地改變了公共年金給付水準的決定方式。本研究檢視西方國家年金自動調整機制與自動平衡機制的發展與意涵，比較主要國家年金自動平衡機制的設計，並分析此等發展對於公共年金制度的影響與衝擊。英文摘要：Due to population aging, maturation of pension schemes and unfavorable labor market conditions, Western high-income countries have all conducted pension reforms during the past 30 years. One of the main challenges to pension reform is the need to balance two major goals of pension schemes: the protection of older people’s income and the maintenance of financial sustainability. Both of these dimensions are directly linked to benefit levels. Since the 1990s, many Western countries have developed a pension automatic balance mechanism (ABM) to improve financial soundness. Its main concept involves linking pension benefits to pension solvency and sustainability. This newly developed mechanism exerts significant impacts on traditional public pension schemes. To some extent, it signals a change in the development logic of public pensions. In addition, it alters fundamental principles for determining pension benefit levels. This paper contains three major parts. The first part reviews the development of the pension automatic adjustment mechanism and pension automatic balance mechanism. The second part compares pension automatic balance mechanisms among major countries. The final part analyzes the impacts and implications of pension automatic balance for public pension systems.起始頁-結束頁：89-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.33.034篇名：從病人到人－專業關係再建構？精障會所工作者之主體生成歷程並列篇名：From Patienthood to Personhood: Clubhouse Workers’ Journey of Professional Formation作者：呂又慧(Yu-Hui Lu);梁瓊宜(Chiung-I Liang)關鍵字：主體;專業關係;會所;精神障礙;醫療化;subjectivity;professional relationship;clubhouse;mental illness;medicalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：33期出版年：2016中文摘要：服務精障者的會所模式之服務哲學，是「從病人到人」，期望工作者能視精障者為「人」，而非「病人」，與精障會員「肩並肩」工作，建立夥伴關係、並尊重會員自願性。但臺灣提供精神障礙服務的作法，向來承襲醫療化論述的助人學科思維，看重以「專業角色」處理問題。另外，在新管理主義思維的政策下，組織追求服務績效與效率，工作者仍要處理許多文書及行政事項。這些理念與大環境，使得會所中的工作者發展專業主體與建立關係的過程遭遇許多挑戰。本研究發現：在精障會所的工作者，面臨著被社會期待，需承擔「萬能精障代理人角色」，他們同時也被夾擠在會所理念發展與體制政策要求的夾縫之中；面對精障會員起伏的病程，他們有無法安放身心的掙扎等等，需要再形塑專業關係的難題。研究發現顯示出：會所中的工作者反思到，要先經歷主體生成及轉化過程，才能重新建構專業關係，發展在地的服務知識。英文摘要：The clubhouse philosophy for people with mental illness is summed up as “from patienthood to personhood.” It expects workers to treat each people with mental illness as “a person” instead of “a patient”, so that they can become partners working together “side by side”; the voluntariness of members is then respected. Besides, the organization in pursuit of efficiency and performance is influenced by the policy of “New Managerialism”, while the workers have to deal with la significant amount of office administration. The findings of this research show that clubhouse workers are confronted with the social expectation that they will play the role of “almighty agent for the mentally ill.” In the meantime, the tension between clubhouse development and policy requirements puts them under great pressure. All of the above considerations raise the issue of reconstructing the professional relationship between workers and members. Clubhouse workers reflect that: Before reconstructing the professional relationship, they have to go through the process of transforming their professional subjectivity reflectively via knowledge regarding “from patienthood to personhood” in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：129-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.33.045篇名：生物、基因和社會工作：研究方法、實務運用與未來發展並列篇名：Biology, Genes and Social Work: Research Methods, Practice Implications and Future Directions作者：陳杏容(Hsing-Jung Chen)關鍵字：大腦與神經科學;介入處遇;生理心理與社會;自然與養育;跨學科研究;brain and neuroscience;intervention;biopsychosocial;nature and nurture;transdisciplinary research期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：33期出版年：2016中文摘要：儘管社會工作長期支持生物─心理─社會的全人觀點，但缺乏系統性介紹生物層面的知識，並融入在社會工作的教育、實務工作與研究層面。當前國際社會如火如荼地發展生物─社會整合性知識，並應用在人群服務領域，臺灣社會工作幾乎沒有文獻討論這些議題，此知識缺口將有礙社會工作發揮職責與阻礙專業發展。這波新興的生物相關研究發展，可幫助社會工作細緻地認識社會與心理因素如何影響個體的生理發展；同等重要地也能深度瞭解生理因素如何形塑個體社會功能，以及環境適應的狀況，進而透過全人觀的直接服務與健全的福利政策才能促進人民的福祉。本研究介紹這波生物─社會知識的發展與相關研究方法，並透過瞭解國外社會工作的回應，以進一步探討臺灣社會工作如何及早準備或是調整以回應這波新知識潮流。英文摘要：Despite the long support for the biopsychosocial perspective in social work, knowledge of biology is still not well integrated into the building process and daily practice of social work, or in social work education. Moreover, transdisciplinary research is a developing trend among biology, genetics and social science internationally; practical implementation has begun to incorporate biology, genetics and psychosocial research findings. However, this kind of transdisciplinary research and practice is limited in the social work literature in Taiwan. This knowledge gap impedes social workers from fulfilling their professional roles. The development of biology/gene-social knowledge not only improves social workers’ understanding that bio-psycho-social factors are inextricably interlinked, but also promotes social work practice and policy to improve people’s well-being. This paper aims to fill this gap. This paper starts with a summary of the development of new biology/ gene-social knowledge, how social work in America responds to this ongoing trend, the challenges social workers face and the progress so far. The paper then introduces genetic research methods, epigenetics and neuroplasticity. Ways to apply this knowledge to inform social work practice and research are also discussed, with examples provided. Lastly, suggestions for the development of social work in Taiwan are also offered. The main emphases are to cultivate social workers’ curiosity about biology, to equip social workers with biology-related knowledge through tertiary level and continuous education, to prepare social workers with the ability and skills to engage in interdisciplinary research, and to increase social workers’ awareness of ethical and social justice issues related to this area.起始頁-結束頁：171-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.33.0501篇名：Changing Japanese Management? A Discussion of the Development of Work-Life Balance in Japan作者：Norio Kambayashi期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.Speech2篇名：Co-Production in Service-Dominant Logic: Antecedents and Consequences並列篇名：服務主導邏輯之共同生產：前置因素與結果因素作者：吳立偉(Li-Wei Wu)關鍵字：co-production;asset specificity;quality of customer interaction;decisionmaking uncertainty;relational benefits;共同生產;資產專屬性;顧客互動品質;決策不確定性;關係利益期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：This study draws upon asset specificity, quality of customer interaction, decision-making uncertainty, relational benefits, and share of wallet to develop an integrated model of co-production to investigate the antecedents and consequences of co-production. The study involves collecting and analyzing 406 questionnaires from customers in the investment services industry in Taiwan. Moreover, the hypothesized relationships in the model were tested by using a structural equation model. The results indicate that asset specificity, quality of customer interaction, and decision-making uncertainty positively affect co-production, while co-production affects special treatment as well as social and confidence benefits, such as increased share of wallet.英文摘要：本研究利用資產專屬性，顧客互動品質，決策不確定性，關係利益及荷包佔有率來發展共同生產的整合模型，並藉由此模型探討共同生產的前置因素及結果因素。受測對象是台灣投資服務業的顧客，最後蒐集406 份問卷進行實證研究。模型中的假說乃利用結構方程模式進行檢驗。研究結果顯示資產專屬性，顧客互動品質，決策不確定性會正向影響共同生產，共同生產會正向影響特殊待遇利益，社會利益和信心利益，而關係利益會提高顧客荷包佔有率。起始頁-結束頁：25-62資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.DEC.C102-0113篇名：廠商在多重市場接觸下，競爭者行動如何影響其新產品上市速度與績效的關係？並列篇名：How Competitors' Actions Affect the Relationship between New Product Launch Speed and Firm Performance in Multimarket Contact?作者：喬友慶(Yu-Ching Chiao);黃俊儒(Chun-Ju Huang);黃雨霈(Yu-Pei Huang)關鍵字：新產品上市速度;動態競爭;多重市場接觸;new product launch speed;competitive dynamics;multimarket contact期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要結合多重市場接觸與動態競爭之概念，並藉由行銷領域中創新產品的觀念，更深入探討廠商採取競爭行動背後的意涵。透過台灣四大連鎖便利商店（即統一超商、全家、萊爾富與OK）為研究樣本，自「知識贏家」(KMW) 網路新聞資料庫蒐集2005年至2012 年，共計8 年連鎖便利商店間的競爭新聞，並進一步將8 年區分成96 個月，運用結構內容分析法 (Structured Content Analysis) 擷取連鎖便利商店1,666 則新聞加以分析。實證結果發現：(1) 當焦點廠商的多重市場接觸程度愈高時，其採取新產品上市速度會愈慢；(2) 當新產品上市速度愈快，愈有利於焦點廠商的績效表現；以及 (3) 當競爭者行動數目愈多時，會強化多重市場接觸程度與新產品上市速度之負向關係。英文摘要：This study aims to combine the concept of multimarket contact with competitive dynamics and proposes the conception of a new product in the marketing domain. It further aims to examine the implication behind the competitive actions of firms. The top four Taiwanese chain convenience stores, namely, 7-ELEVEN, Family Mart, Hi-Life, and OK, are used as the samples, and the news related to competitive interactions among these companies in 2005 to 2012 are collected. News articles from the past eight years are further separated into 96 months. Data are obtained from the Knowledge Management Winner (KMW) database. Moreover, this study employs structured content analysis to construct the competitive action database of the top four chain convenience stores relative to their competitive actions. Finally, 1,666 news articles are retrieved. Empirical results indicate that (1) a negative relationship exists between the degree of multimarket contact and new product launch speed, (2) a positive relationship exists between new product launch speed and firm performance, and (3) the number of competitor actions can strengthen the negative relationship between the degree of multimarket contact and new product launch speed.起始頁-結束頁：63-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.DEC.C102-0224篇名：精品潛在顧客面對服務接觸缺失的自我修復行為研究並列篇名：A Study of the Self-Recovery Behavior of Prospects to the Provider's Service Encounter Failure in the Luxury Goods Industry作者：黃哲盛(Je-Sheng Huang);陳芃均(Peng-Chun Chen)關鍵字：服務接觸缺失;潛在顧客自我修復行為;接續關鍵事件分析;自我建構;自我聯結;service encounter failure;prospect's self-recovery behavior;sequential critical incident analysis;self-construal;self-association期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：多數探討服務補救的研究是以服務提供者的角度，而非消費者的觀點。因此，本研究即從消費者的角度，探索其面對服務缺失時可能的自我修復行為。實務上，精品潛在顧客在經歷服務接觸缺失後，不像其它產品類別消費者會將此缺失歸因於業者，以發洩其不滿的情緒，反而因為精品的特性、消費動機與價值，會將服務缺失轉而自我檢討的有趣現象。本研究在研究程序上，首先透過焦點群體法蒐集精品潛在顧客遭受服務接觸缺失的關鍵事件，並用內容分析法辨認其型態，再以接續關鍵事件分析，分別詮釋精品潛在顧客如何從找出原因、學習歷程和因應結果這三個心理轉折階段，改變自我與強化自我，最後發展出「自我修復行為」的整體構念。本研究首次結合服務接觸裡的過程相依與產出相依二元互動理論，以及尋求尊榮的消費者行為理論，建立本研究的觀念架構，並根據情緒的函數分析程序，結合了自我相關、自我建構與自我聯結等理論基礎，推論出「自我修復行為」的形塑過程及其內涵。英文摘要：This article explores why most prospects will stick to the same brand even after experiencing service encounter failure from the brand's service provider in the luxury goods industry. With an aim of understanding this paradoxical phenomenon, the authors propose a new construct, which is known as ”prospect's self-recovery behavior,” to explain the reasons why prospects do not switch and to deliberate on the underlying consumption values that they are seeking. For the research design, the authors use focus groups to collect data about service encounter failures, employ content analysis to identify critical incidents, and combine the method of sequential critical incident analysis to interpret how the prospects develop their self-recovery mechanisms so as to protect themselves from similar service failures in the next service encounter. Furthermore, this research has firstly combined related theoretical foundations from different fields into a conceptual framework to successfully address the research issue; these theories include attribution theory, process interdependency and outcome interdependency, prestige-seeking consumer behavior, and functional analysis of emotion. Based on the deduction drawn from sequential critical incident analysis and hermeneutic mode of interpretation, the finding enhances our understanding of self-recovery from the consumer's perspective and provides a useful foundation for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：99-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.FEB.C103-0385篇名：建構服務創新的制度工作並列篇名：Institutional Work in Building Service Innovation作者：涂敏芬(Min-Fen Tu);洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung)關鍵字：制度工作;制度邏輯;服務創新;個案研究;工研院;institutional work;institutional logics;service innovation;case study;ITRI期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究探討策略行動者如何帶動制度邏輯的改變，其中特別聚焦在行動者執行制度工作的理論視角。基於提問「如何」的解釋性研究問題，本文使用單一個案研究，以紮根的質性研究過程，探討台灣工研院如何在鑲嵌於製造代工邏輯的產業環境中，推動服務創新成為一個新制度邏輯的歷程。本研究發現辨識出三種不同型態的制度工作，首先是行動者透過定義問題、設定發展議題與調整組織定位等的定位工作，努力縮短現狀與理想未來的差距；其次是透過連結專業社群、前瞻未來與設計系統藍圖等的專業工作，增加本身管理新制度邏輯的可信度與影響力；最後，透過說故事、比喻與教育等的論述工作，談論關乎新制度邏輯的相關主題，透過說服的力量爭取社會大眾的認同與追隨。英文摘要：We draw on the concept of institutional work to explore how strategic actors change institutional logics. Concerned with the 'how' question, we adopt an in-depth case study to examine ITRI, a Taiwan-based statutory agency, which has successfully promoted the new institutional logics of service innovation. We identify three types of institutional work. The first is identity work in which ITRI engaged in defining the problem, developing an agenda, and restructuring organization positions. The second is professional work in which ITRI networked with professional communities, promoted foresights, and cultivated blueprints. The third type of institutional work is discourse work in which ITRI developed motivating stories, tropes, and pedagogies to promote service innovation.起始頁-結束頁：129-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.FEB.C102-0056篇名：產學合作之價值創造與交換：「教學－研究－服務」整合個案之歷程與反思並列篇名：Academia-Industry Collaboration: Reflections on a Case Study and its Research Process through the Integration of Teaching, Research, and Service作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou)關鍵字：產學合作;價值創造;價值交換;academia-industry collaboration;value creation;value exchange期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：在一般管理領域中，以實務現象為出發的產學研究，是眾多研究取向中一個相對冷門的選項，但它卻最有可能整合教師的「教學－研究－服務」不同價值活動於一體。本文嘗試從價值創造與價值交換角度，探討大學管理學院（商學院）教師如何從實務現象出發，與產業合作進行產學研究。本文以一個長達十二年的計程車產業研究歷程為個案，歸納出「以人為中心的『教學－研究－服務』價值整合模式」，提出六項產學互動準則，與學術工作者執行產學合作的「321 原則」和「4P 步驟」。最後，本文也提出產學合作過程中，學術工作者可能遭遇到的難處與挑戰，並總結本文。英文摘要：In the field of general management, academic research rarely examines the practical phenomena associated with academia-industry collaborations, despite the fact that such research is the most likely to integrate the values associated with teaching, research, and service activities. Taking a value co-creation perspective, this reflective article attempts to explore how business school faculty members can conduct academia-industry cooperative research programs proceeding from real phenomena. The article also illustrates how faculty members might effectively integrate teaching, research, and service activities in order to generate synergies between industry and academia. Finally, by highlighting the author's systematic taxi research program, this article offers reflections on how academic professionals might achieve a balance between three key roles: a teachers, researchers, and service providers.起始頁-結束頁：155-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAR.C102-0377篇名：知覺品質、知覺價值與行為意圖關係之研究－交易成本觀點並列篇名：Perceived Quality, Perceived Value, and Behavior Intention from the Perspective of Transaction Cost作者：陳冠仰(Kuan-Yang Chen);陳柏元(Po-Yuan Chen);戴有德(You-De Dai);巫立宇(Lei-Yu Wu)關鍵字：「品質－價值－行為意圖」模式;交易成本;資訊搜尋成本;道德危機成本;perceived quality-perceived value-behavior intention (Q-V-B) model;transaction cost;information searching cost;moral hazard cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：「品質－價值－行為意圖」(Q-V-B) 模式常用於解釋消費者的購買行為，然而研究上常忽略負面成本的降低是否有助於提升消費者的知覺品質與知覺價值進而提升行為意圖。由於行銷的本質是一種交換行為，而交易成本理論主張資訊搜尋成本與道德危機成本是影響交易進行的關鍵，因此本文以資訊搜尋與道德危機成本作為前因，探討降低交易成本對消費者購買知覺歷程的影響。本文以旅遊服務商品為研究情境，蒐集111 筆旅遊消費者問卷進行分析，研究結果顯示資訊搜尋成本對知覺品質有負向影響，道德危機成本對知覺品質、知覺價值之負向影響亦成立。據此，本文認為運用Q-V-B 模式解釋消費行為時，廠商除了創造正面的品質與價值認知外，更應重視交易成本對消費購買決策的影響。英文摘要：Scholars have long used the perceived quality-perceived value-behavior intention (Q-V-B) model to examine consumers' purchasing behavior. Determining the factors that affect the Q-V-B model is a critical task for consumer research. Most previous studies primarily assess positive antecedents (e.g., product image) of Q-V-B model, neglecting related negative factors (e.g., transaction cost). The main task of marketing lies in solving the problem of ”exchange”. This study assumes that transaction cost economics (TCE), which posits that information searching cost and moral hazard cost are the crucial elements that influence a transaction, can compensate for the deficiency of the Q-V-B model. Accordingly, this study proposes a research framework that integrates both the Q-V-B model and TCE. Travel service is selected as the study field to be examined. A total of 111 consumer questionnaires are collected and examined using empirical analysis. The results indicate that, in addition to supporting the hypothetical Q-V-B relationship, information searching cost negatively affects perceived quality, and moral hazard cost is negatively related to perceived quality and value.起始頁-結束頁：191-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAR.C102-0198篇名：服務創新與設計之健康照護服務設計規劃模式：以遠距照護為例並列篇名：Healthcare Service Design Planning Model for Service Innovation and Design: The Case of Tele-Health作者：余峻瑜(Jiun-Yu Yu);鄭佩怡(Pei-Yi Cheng)關鍵字：服務設計;遠距照護;營運模式;服務營運;service design;tele-health;business model;service operations期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以健康照護服務設計為主題，參考Goldstein, Johnston, Duffy, and Rao (2002) 的模式，提出健康照護服務設計規劃模式。此模式始於服務策略規劃，終至成效衡量與回饋校準，探討創新服務的設計概念建構與實務推動。此模式有幾項主要特點。一、由服務概念貫穿整體服務設計規劃的架構，同時考量服務行銷與服務營運，探討健康照護服務的內容與過程。二、突顯健康照護服務之高度接觸服務特性，強調病人感受與需求。三、統整數個領域的研究成果與實務，考量醫病關係的改變與未來發展趨勢。四、重視系統整合串接，以服務接觸三角來構思整體服務模式。五、從營運層面先行把關，降低跡近錯失的可能性。本研究並以個案分析的方式，探討健康照護服務設計規劃模式的實際成功應用。英文摘要：This study focuses on the theme of healthcare service design. Based on the framework proposed by Goldstein, Johnston, Duffy, and Rao (2002), this study develops a comprehensive healthcare service design planning model. This model integrates various viewpoints to investigate the conceptual construction of service design and the corresponding implications on practical implementation. The full process from service strategy development to outcome measurement and feedback is discussed. The main features of this proposed model are as follows. First, it investigates the ”what” and ”how” of the healthcare service model via service concept. Second, the high-contact nature of healthcare service is emphasized, taking account of patients' demands and perceptions. Third, the evolving doctor-patient relationship and its potential future development are considered. Fourth, the integration among service systems and the patient privacy issues are explicitly explored. Last, healthcare service allows minimum room for service failure. Preventions and improvements should be carefully designed to avoid life-threatening incidents. This proposed model has been successfully applied to an initiative in a Tele-Health Center of the case hospital to design its high-value-low-cost service and business model. Such an encouraging practice sheds light on the healthcare service innovation and design.起始頁-結束頁：225-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.SEP.C102-0259篇名：台灣衍生性金融商品定價、避險與套利文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and Prospects of Taiwan Derivatives Research: Pricing, Hedging, and Arbitrage作者：林丙輝(Bing-Huei Lin);張森林(San-Lin Chung);葉仕國(Shih-Kuo Yeh)關鍵字：衍生性金融商品;定價;套利;避險;derivatives;pricing;arbitrage;hedging期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文針對國內衍生性金融商品定價與避險的研究文獻進行回顧與展望，回顧的文獻範圍是西元2000 年以後發表在TSSCI 的學術期刊。在定價文獻方面，就標的資產而言，國內文獻曾探討股票、外匯、商品、利率、氣候、不動產及信用衍生性金融商品的定價。就衍生性金融商品的種類而言，除了簡單的期貨與選擇權外，國內文獻也曾探討過交換合約、混合商品（如可轉換公司債）及奇異式選擇權（如亞式選擇權）等複雜商品的定價。在定價模型方面，曾被採用的模型包含：Black-Scholes 模型、跳躍擴散模型、隨機波動度模型、GARCH 模型及Levy 模型等。在定價方法上，除了推導封閉式解或解析近似解外，國內文獻還提出樹狀圖法、蒙地卡羅模擬法、快速傅立葉轉換及動態規劃法等方法來計算選擇權的價格。在避險與套利研究方面，所避險的風險因子包含個股、股價指數、商品、外匯及利率風險等，不同的衍生性金融商品之避險策略大相逕庭，但大部分避險策略的研究都集中在GARCH 相關計量模型的延伸與翻新。在套利策略的執行方面，國內的文獻涵蓋了市場間與跨市場之套利效率相關研究，以及當出現錯誤定價時，不同市場間市價調整至理論價格的速度及資訊傳遞的效率性等相關研究。英文摘要：This paper reviews the existing literature for pricing and hedging derivatives in Taiwan. We focus on articles published in TSSCI journals after the year 2000. The underlying assets studied in Taiwan include equity, foreign currency, commodities, interest rate, real estate, weather, etc. The financial derivatives priced in Taiwan include futures, forward contract, standard options, swaps, hybrid products (such as convertible bonds), exotic options (e.g., Asian options), etc. The pricing models adopted include Black-Scholes model, jump diffusion model, stochastic volatility model, GARCH model, Levy model, etc. The prcing methods used contain lattice method, Monte Carlo simulation method, the fast Fourier method, dynamic programming, etc. Concerning the hedging and arbitrage studies in Taiwan, many risk factors are considered, e.g., equity, foreign currency, commodities, interest rate, etc. The hedging strategies studied mainly focus on proposing new or improved econometric models/methods. Finally, the arbitrage research covers the Intra- and Intermarket arbitrage strategies, information transmission efficiency, etc.起始頁-結束頁：255-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.AUG.25104-00810篇名：亞洲地區審計品質研究回顧並列篇名：Review of Studies on Audit Quality in Asia作者：林孝倫(Hsiao-Lun Lin);林嬋娟(Chan-Jane Lin)關鍵字：審計需求;審計供給;審計品質;audit demand;audit supply;audit quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文回顧2000 年到2015 年間，在科技部會計領域國際期刊A+ 級與A 級tier1 期刊所發表之亞洲各國審計品質相關實證研究。本文首先介紹亞洲主要國家資本市場與審計市場概況，其次回顧過去文獻對於審計品質之定義與常見的衡量方式，最後分別就跨國研究與個別國家之研究，討論審計需求、審計供給與外部環境對於審計品質的影響。回顧結果顯示，跨國審計研究刊載於CAR 中的篇數最多，而在個別亞洲國家審計市場的文獻中，JAPP、CAR、AJPT 以及TAR 等期刊對於亞洲審計品質研究的接受度最高，並以中國審計市場之研究為最多，臺灣審計品質研究次之。在研究議題部分，多數跨國研究探討審計需求之相關議題，而在個別國家的研究中，以探討制度政策環境改變對於審計品質影響，以及利用亞洲各國獨特之資料測試審計理論之文獻為最多。本文亦討論跨國研究之挑戰與限制，分析個別國家研究受重視與否之原因，最後並提供未來審計品質相關議題之研究方向。英文摘要：This study reviews empirical research on audit quality in Asia markets. We restrict our review to papers published in the A+ and A tier1 accounting journals, ranked by Ministry of Science and Technology, from 2000 to 2015. The first part of this study introduces major capital markets and audit markets in Asia. The second part reviews the definitions and proxies of audit quality widely used in the literature. The third and fourth parts review the cross-country and single country audit quality research from the perspectives of audit demand, audit supply as well as the effects of regulatory intervention. The results indicate that, among the papers reviewed, CAR accepted most papers for cross-country research on audit quality. Whereas the single country research on audit quality appears more often in JAPP, CAR, AJPT and TAR. In addition, among the single country research, China audit market studies are ranked number one followed by Taiwan studies. As to the research topics, most cross-countries studies focus on the topics related to audit demand. Many single country studies, however, either examine the effects of the regulation changes or take advantage of the unique data set resulting from specific requirements in a given country to test the audit theory. This study concludes by assessing the challenges and limitations of cross-country research, analyzing the factors that make single country research popular, and providing future research avenues in audit quality for Asian countries.起始頁-結束頁：305-362資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.AUG.25104-00411篇名：The Determinants of Equity Compensation for Audit Committee Members並列篇名：審計委員會權益薪酬之決定因素作者：賴運霆(Yun-Ting Lai);吳淑鈴(Shu-Ling Wu)關鍵字：corporate governance;audit committee;equity-based compensation;agency conflicts;公司治理;審計委員會;權益薪酬;代理問題期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：The controversy around the rising use of equity-based compensation for audit committee members and the enhanced responsibilities of audit committee is the basis for this study to examine the factors that affect a firm's use of stocks and stock options to remunerate audit committee members. Our results show that firms having more severe agency conflicts are less likely to give equity-based compensation to audit committee members. Furthermore, firms with more compensation committee members sitting on the audit committee are significantly more likely to compensate audit committee members with stocks and stock options. Moreover, when more audit committee members are also top managers of other companies, the probability of equity remuneration for audit committee members is lower. Given that prior studies find that equity-based compensation for audit committee members is associated with earnings management, accounting restatement, and internal control weakness, our study contributes to the literature by identifying the factors that contribute to the use of equity-based compensation for audit committee members.英文摘要：由於權益薪酬之使用漸趨廣泛，其相關討論增加，再加上審計委員會職責逐漸加重等因素，促使本研究欲找出哪些因素使得公司給予其審計委員會成員權益薪酬。研究發現代理問題較嚴重之公司傾向不給予權益薪酬。薪酬委員會中成員同時為審計委員會成員之比例則與給予權益薪酬之可能性呈顯著正向關係。而審計委員會中董事同時為其他公司之高階主管之比例越高則公司傾向不給予權益薪酬。本研究期能對審計委員會成員權益薪酬之相關議題做進一步的補充，幫助釐清採用權益薪酬之決定因素。起始頁-結束頁：363-394資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAR.D104-02512篇名：法人說明會資訊在供應鏈中之垂直資訊移轉效果：以台灣之半導體產業供應鏈為例並列篇名：The Vertical Information Transfer of Conference Calls along the Supply Chain: An Example from the Semiconductor Industry in Taiwan作者：粘凱婷(Kai-Ting Nien);金成隆(Chen-Lung Chn);周濟群(Chi-Chun Chou);汪戊安(Wu-An Wang)關鍵字：法人說明會;供應鏈;累積異常報酬;垂直資訊移轉;conference call;supply chain;accumulated abnormal return;vertical information transfer期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究分別探討台灣半導體產業法人說明會（法說會）中的財務資訊和非財務資訊在供應鏈中資訊傳遞的效果。實證發現，法說會所揭露之財務資訊與非財務資訊在供應鏈中皆存在垂直資訊移轉效果；且法說會同時揭露財務資訊與非財務資訊時，具有資訊加乘效果，具有更多資訊內涵。而供應鏈層級越遠，則該法說會之資訊愈具有資訊內涵；實證結果更進一步發現，財務資訊與非財務資訊皆因層級距離愈遠而愈具有資訊內涵，但相較於財務資訊而言，非財務資訊則需要較多的時間消化分析才能顯著反應於層級距離較遠的供應鏈公司之累積異常報酬。英文摘要：Focusing on the semiconductor industry in Taiwan, we hypothesize that the market gives a premium for firms whose upstream firms disclose favorable news through conference calls, regardless of whether it is financial or nonfinancial information. We find that firms' accumulative abnormal returns (thereafter CAR) are positively associated with both unexpected earnings forecasts and nonfinancial information contained in conference calls held by upstream firms. We further find that the CAR is positively related to the echelon distance of the firms. FINALLY, we also find that firms need more time to digest the information contained in conference calls held by their upstream firms as the echelon distance between the two firms along the supply chain becomes greater.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAY.R.1300213篇名：兩稅合一制下調降營利事業所得稅率與股利發放之研究並列篇名：Association between Corporate Income Tax Rate Reduction and Dividend Payouts in an Integrated Tax System作者：林靖傑(Ching-Chieh Lin);李文智(Wen-Chieh Lee)關鍵字：兩稅合一;股利發放;營利事業所得稅;integrated income tax system;dividend payout;corporate income tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：兩稅合一制下，為避免公司保留其盈餘不分配，就公司未分配盈餘加徵10%以之配套，然而，自申報2010年營利事業所得稅起，營利事業所得稅稅率由25%調降至17%，未分配盈餘仍維持加徵10%，如此一來，營所稅最高邊際稅率與綜所稅最高邊際稅率差距，由原7.5%擴大到14.7%。本文主要研究目的，在探討調降營所稅率後，是否造成公司為規避股東個人綜合所得稅，減少發放股利，而保留公司盈餘。研究結果顯示，不論以總股利發放率、盈餘配股發放率、或現金股利發放率衡量，公司於調降營所稅率後皆顯著減少股利發放率。此外，本研究進一步發現，股利發放穩定的公司，其總股利發放率不因是否調降營所稅率而有所不同，但盈餘配股與現金股利具替代效果。英文摘要：Taiwan has implemented an integrated income tax system, allowing income taxes paid by corporations to offset personal income taxes paid by shareholders on their dividends. However, an additional 10% surtax on undistributed retained earnings is levied to prevent corporations from retaining earnings. In 2010, a tax reform act reduced the corporate income tax rate from 25% to 17%; however, the additional 10% surtax remained unchanged. This tax amendment broadened the difference between corporate and personal income tax rate from 7.5% to 14.7%, thereby increasing the incentive to retain earnings. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether firms retained their earnings rather than distributing them to reduce the tax burden of investors. The results indicate that the payout ratios of total dividends, stock dividends, and cash dividends decreased significantly after the corporate income tax rate was reduced. In addition, the results suggest that a stable dividend policy exerts moderating effects on total dividend payout ratios. However, substitution effects are observed between stock dividends and cash dividends.起始頁-結束頁：35-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.JUN.R.1203714篇名：營運資金管理與裁決性應計數之估計並列篇名：Working Capital Management and Estimations of Discretionary Accruals作者：李啟華(Chi-Hua Li);楊炎杰(Yan-Jie Yang);鄭國枝(Kuo-Chih Cheng)關鍵字：營運資金管理;Jones模型;裁決性應計數;working capital management;Jones model;discretionary accruals期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究探討營運資金管理對採用Jones模型估計裁決性應計數之影響，並分析此影響對盈餘管理研究之意涵。當公司有營運需求而調整營運資金時，通常也涉及應計數調整；此種調整係屬正常營運決策，與盈餘管理行為有別。本研究以員工人數變動率衡量營運資金管理程度，依其大小將樣本區分為四組；實證發現，最高（低）組公司之裁決性應計數顯著大（小）於其他公司，且裁決性應計數大（小）於零之模擬測試有過度拒絕現象，顯示裁決性應計數存在估計偏誤。本研究進一步檢視現金增資公司及彌補虧損減資公司是否有明顯之裁決性應計數，發現在考量營運資金管理程度後，過去文獻宣稱該等公司有明顯盈餘管理之現象並不存在。英文摘要：This study investigated the effect of working capital management on estimated discretionary accruals and discussed the implications of this effect for future research on earnings management. Generally, a firm adjusts its working capital investment when a discrepancy exists between working capital and actual operational needs. This type of working capital management is regarded as a normal operating strategy, which means that the accruals resulting from using this strategy should be normal accruals, not discretionary accruals. This study measured the level of working capital management by the growth rate of the number of employees. Based on the level of working capital management, this study divided the entire sample into four equal-sized groups. Our results indicate that the discretionary accruals of first (fourth) quartile firms are significantly greater (smaller) than those of other firms. The results of simulation tests in which the null hypothesis of zero abnormal accruals was rejected were beyond normal rejection rate, indicating that estimation bias existed in the discretionary accruals of the sample firms. The estimation bias in discretionary accruals affected the results of further empirical study on whether firms that issued seasoned equity offerings or reduced capital to settle accumulated losses manipulated earnings.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.JUL.R.1300815篇名：製藥廠顧客利潤之決定因素：個案分析並列篇名：A Case Study of Customer Profitability Determinants of a Pharmaceutical Company作者：歐進士(Chin-Shyh Ou);李翠琴(Tsui-Chin Lee);卓佳慶(Chia-Ching Cho);林惠美(Huey-Meei Lin)關鍵字：製藥公司;顧客利潤貢獻;顧客關係管理;pharmaceutical company;customer profitability;customer relationship management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文的主要目的是探討顧客利潤貢獻之決定因素。以臺灣某大型製藥公司為對象，進行個案研究。研究結果發現，顧客平均訂單規模、顧客年購藥規模、及新產品購買率，對顧客利潤貢獻有顯著正向影響；顧客維繫成本對顧客利潤貢獻有顯著負向影響。本文的研究成果，在學術上有助補強公司利潤貢獻決定因素之相關文獻；在實務上有助公司針對顧客利潤貢獻之決定因素，調整顧客關係管理策略，提升經營績效進而創造公司價值。英文摘要：The goal of this study is to examine the determinants of customer profit contribution of a pharmaceutical company using a large Taiwanese pharmaceutical firm as an example. The empirical results show that average customer order size, total annual order amount, and new product purchase ratio are all positively and significantly associated with customer profit contribution, while customer maintenance cost is negatively and significantly associated with customer profit contribution. From an academic perspective, this study contributes to the related literature on the analysis of customer profit contribution. From a practical perspective, the result of this study suggests that a firm may adjust its customer relationship management strategy according to the determinants of customer profit contribution to improve its operating performance and firm value.起始頁-結束頁：93-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.JUL.R.1002916篇名：企業之不對稱資訊、銀行往來關係及直接與間接融資並列篇名：The Enterprises' Asymmetric Information, Banking Relationship, and Direct and Indirect Financing作者：曾昭玲(Jau-Ling Tseng)關鍵字：銀行往來關係;不對稱資訊;直接融資;間接融資;banking relationship;asymmetric information;direct financing;indirect financing期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究運用個體理論模型以期觀察企業於資訊不對稱情境下，跨期選擇銀行往來關係、直接與間接融資模式之多期利潤極大化行為。理論模型揭示，若企業的不對稱資訊問題獲致改善（惡化），其多會降低（提升）銀行往來關係的緊密程度，易言之，不對稱資訊疑慮較嚴重的企業遂需維持較緊密的銀行往來關係。此外，具顯著資訊不對稱疑慮的企業，隨其不對稱資訊問題的改善，多傾向藉由銀行借款籌資，然較無資訊不對稱疑慮的優質企業則多偏好直接金融工具籌資。其次，當景氣復甦（衰退）時，公開舉債或現金增資等直接融資工具之融資成本快速攀升（下滑），反觀銀行借款此間接融資之成本相對攀升（下滑）幅度較小，致使企業多維持更緊密（疲弱）的銀行往來關係。最後，若無顯著不對稱資訊疑慮的優質企業，當景氣復甦時多傾向藉由銀行借款籌資，而其直接融資規模多傾向下滑；惟若屬不對稱資訊疑慮較嚴重的企業，則隨景氣攀升，其多傾向依賴直接融資管道而減少銀行借款。是以，公開市場直接融資與私下銀行間接融資雖常扮演彼消我漲的融資替代角色，但渠等於完整景氣循環週期中卻共同扮演缺一不可的融資互補角色。英文摘要：This study seeks to theoretically investigate the evolution of heterogeneous firms' intertemporal banking relationship, as well as direct and indirect financing patterns mainly from the viewpoint of asymmetric information. The micro-foundation theoretical framework delineates that the improvement of enterprises' asymmetric information problem may result in a less intensive banking relationship. An enterprise with a higher (lower) extent of information asymmetry may have a more intensive (less intensive) banking relationship. An enterprise with a significant (insignificant) information asymmetry problem is more inclined to select indirect (direct) financing arrangements when its creditworthiness or asymmetric information is improved. Besides, economic expansion (depression) could contribute to a more intensive (less intensive) banking relationship due to lower (higher) financing costs from banks or indirect financing, compared to direct financing. An enterprise with a lower (higher) extent of information asymmetry is more inclined to have a higher (lower) level of indirect financing during economic expansion. Although direct and indirect financing are substitutes during a given economic state, they are complements in a complete business cycle.起始頁-結束頁：119-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.SEP.A102-05517篇名：The Information Content of Futures Open Interest and Its Relation to Trading Activities並列篇名：期貨未平倉量的資訊內涵及其交易活動之研究作者：謝文良(G. Wen-Liang Hsieh);曲靜芳(Ching-Fang Chi)關鍵字：未平倉量;資訊內涵;市場流動性;open interest;information content;market liquidity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究分析台灣股價指期貨未平倉量的資訊內涵，結果顯示未平倉量可反映市場參與程度、避險需求、與投資人意見分歧三種資訊內涵。未平倉量增加伴隨市場流動性提升，包括成交量、市場深度、與市場衝擊成本皆隨未平倉量增加而顯著改善，此發現顯示未平倉量具有詮釋市場參與程度的資訊內涵。實證也發現未平倉量與現貨波動性顯著同方向變動，代表未平倉量可反映市場風險增大時投資人的額外避險需求。此外，未平倉量之增量和減量對成交量影響不同，對買賣方市場深度之差也有不對稱的影響，此發現符合未平倉量可反映投資人意見分歧的隱含意義。英文摘要：This study investigates the information content of open interest, using the index futures traded on the Taiwan market. We find that open interest reflects market participation, hedging demand and divergences in traders' opinions. Evidence shows that increases in open interest are accompanied by greater trading volume, larger depth, and lower market impact costs, indicating that higher open interest represent more market participation, which enhances liquidity. The hedging demand hypothesis is supported by the findings of significantly positive relationships between open interest and three spot volatility proxies. We also find asymmetric effect of upward versus downward open interest to trading volume, as well as to depth imbalance between buy- and sell-side of the order book. Results are consistent with the hypothesis that a large open interest signifies divergence in traders' opinions.起始頁-結束頁：151-183資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.OCT.D0718篇名：製造商對配銷商解構行為的知覺與回應並列篇名：Manufacturer Perceptions and Responses to Destructive Behaviors of Distributors作者：趙琪(Chyi Jaw);羅<U+73CF>瑜(Jyue-Yu Lo);王海權(Hai-Chuan Wang)關鍵字：知覺解構行為;網絡結構;通路關係;perceived destructive behavior;network structure;channel relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在發展製造商知覺配銷商解構行為之模式，採個案研究和問卷調查之混合方法設計。結果顯示：（1）「網絡密度」對「知覺配銷商解構行為」有正向效果，「網絡集中度」則為負向作用；（2）「成員互賴性」和「關係規範」均能抑制「知覺配銷商解構行為」，但「制式契約」會增加；（3）「知覺配銷商解構行為」對「目標達成」和「關係品質」均有正向影響；（4）「成員互賴性」和「關係規範」的程度愈高，製造商較會採取「正面回應策略」；（5）製造商採「正面回應策略」比「負面回應策略」，更能提升「目標達成」和「關係品質」；（6）「知覺配銷商解構行為」和「回應策略」在解構過程中扮演中介角色。最後提出學術與管理意涵，以及未來研究方向。英文摘要：This study develops a model to understand perceived destructive acts of distributors from manufacturers' viewpoints. A mixed method research design including qualitative and quantitative analyses is used in this empirical study, yielding the following findings: (1) manufacturers perceive more destructive acts of distributors when there is higher network density but fewer when there is network centrality; (2) the higher the total dependence is and the more norms there are, the fewer destructive acts of distributors that occur; however, the more normative contracts there are, the more destructive acts of distributors that occur; (3) perceived destructive acts of distributors lead to a lowering of goal achievement and relationship quality; (4) as total dependence and relational norms of channel relationship increases, positive strategies of manufacturers are more favorable than negative ones, but formal contracts do not; (5) the response to positive strategies of manufacturers has more favorable effects than that to negative strategies on both goal achievement and relationship quality; and (6) the perceived destructive acts of distributors and response strategies of manufacturers exert partial mediating effects during destructive process. Finally, in this paper, both theoretical and managerial implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：185-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.DEC.R.1200519篇名：消費者線上口碑與評論研究：國內外相關文獻回顧與討論並列篇名：Electronic WOM and Online Review- A Literature Review作者：黃俊堯(Chun-Yao Huang);柳秉佑(Ping-Yu Liu)關鍵字：線上口碑;線上評論;評論者;文獻回顧;electronic word of mouth;online review;reviewer;literature review期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去十年間的Web2.0年代裡，消費者線上口碑與線上評論活動，越來越受行銷者的重視。同一段期間內，關於線上口碑與線上評論的學術研究，也在行銷與資管領域中如雨後春筍般地出現。本研究將線上口碑與線上評論的研究區分為（一）使用次級資料進行數據分析相關研究，以及（二）使用初級資料的相關研究等兩大方向。在此一區分下，本文首先回顧台灣學者迄今在上述二方向上較有代表性的中英文研究發表狀況，而後對焦於其中第一個方向，爬梳國際文獻中的相關議題與研究。文末，則針對國內學者後續從事線上口碑與評論相關議題研究，提出系列建議。英文摘要：Understanding online word of mouth (or electronic word of mouth, eWOM) and online review by consumers is an important task for marketers in the current Web 2.0 era. During the past ten years, we have seen a fast growing body of related literature developed in areas such as marketing and information management. Distinguishing research using and analyzing secondary data from research using primary data, this study first reviews representative eWOM studies by scholars in Taiwan, and then discusses issues relating to research using and analyzing secondary data in the international literature. The study concludes with a set of suggestions for Taiwanese scholars who would like to further push the frontier of eWOM studies.起始頁-結束頁：215-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAY.R.25104-00120篇名：科技管理三重奏：策略視角的分析與評論並列篇名：The Trios of Technology and Innovation Management: A Review from a Strategic Perspective作者：洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung);曾詠青(Yung-Ching Tseng);賴俊彥(Jiun-Yan Lai)關鍵字：科技管理;策略;意志論;命定論;互動論;technology and innovation management;strategy;voluntarism;determinism;interactionism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：科技管理是一門新興發展、但也是一個蓬勃擴散的學科。隨著產業結構與經濟情勢的轉變，從1980年代晚期，科技管理逐漸從策略管理領域中分流出來，形成一個有主體性的學術社群。在此，本文從三種策略分析角度：意志論、命定論、互動論，來分析與回顧台灣科技管理研究的發展。我們以八本TSSCI管理期刊為分析對象，蒐集2000<U+223C>2014年期間所出版的科技管理相關文獻，進行歸納與分析。我們指出，過去台灣的科管研究多偏重於意志論的探討，互動論的分析相對特別少。考量學術的豐富性與多元性，以及台灣的環境特殊性，互動論的科技與創新管理議題，應該是台灣學者未來可多著墨的方向。英文摘要：Technology and innovation management (TIM) is a new yet burgeoning discipline. Since the late 1980s, it has been an autonomous academic community separated from strategic management following changes in industry structures and economic conditions. In this paper, we aim to analyze and review the development of TIM studies in Taiwan through three common perspectives of strategic management-voluntarism, determinism, and interactionism. Articles on TIM published during 2000~2014 were drawn from eight TSSCI business-related journals for comparison. Our analysis shows that Taiwanese scholars tend to emphasize the voluntaristic view of TIM activities, while intentionally or unintentionally ignoring the possibility of interactionist explanations. Given the specificity of Taiwan's national contexts and richness of theoretical perspectives, there is an imperative need to bring interactionism back into the scholarly community at least in Taiwan in the future.起始頁-結束頁：257-300資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAY.R.25104-01201篇名：蘭陽平原農地轉用影響因子分析與空間規劃政策探討：系統方法之引入並列篇名：An Analysis of Agricultural Land Change Factors and Spatial Planning Policies Review for Lan-Yang Plain: The System Approach作者：陳維斌(Wei-Bin Chen);李俊霖(Chun-Lin Lee);張琪如(Chi-Ru Chang);王瓊芯(Chiung-Hsin Wang)關鍵字：系統方法;空間規劃政策;農地轉用;過程基礎;影響因子;Agricultural land change;Factors;Process-based;System approach;Spatial planning policies review期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：蘭陽平原自1991年國道五號開工，2000年農業發展條例修正通過後，因預期心理大量興建農舍，此一農地轉用不僅破壞了農地的生產功能，其對於社會經濟系統以及環境生態系統所扮演的重要文化、調節與支持功能也一併消失。為能進一步探討其農地轉用之影響因子，本研究引用系統生態學（system ecology）的「系統」方法為基礎，透過專家學者與農民之訪談，以農地尺度（farm scale）與過程基礎（process-based）觀點建立蘭陽平原農地轉用系統與假說，並以1977年、1995年至2006年的蘭陽平原的農地轉用為例，整合GIS與逐步迴歸分析方法進行多時期（multi-periods）的分析，其中主要將蘭陽平原劃分為245個網格空間（1.5×1.5公里），以進一步指認出系統中，農地本身特性與鄰域條件於蘭陽平原農地轉用的影響關係。經蘭陽平原農地轉用假說驗證結果顯示，一、農地破碎化會影響農地轉用率，以耕地（含旱作地、稻作地）具有解釋力；二、農地的單位面積土地價格確實會影響農地轉用；三、未轉用廢耕地、稻作地面積比會影響農地轉用率；四、生活機能影響對農地轉用具重要影響力；五、緊鄰住宅、商業、四米（含以上）道路、大專院校的農地，及離河流較近的農地，因周邊投資效益佳，對於農地轉用影響較為顯著；六、農地轉用受周圍的住宅數量影響，並以後期的都市地區較為明顯；七、農地轉用具有次要火車站衛星現象。最後，本研究在農地轉用因子之時間與空間交叉分析後建議，農地保育政策必須更貼近農民決策之農地轉用因子，並且能夠將非農業的潛在轉用影響因子納入整合性的考量，以針對具有空間差異性的轉用因子提出農地保育的空間策略。英文摘要：Since the construction of National Freeway No. 5 in 1991 and the amendment of the Agricultural Development Act in 2000, real estate prospects have driven a rapid bloom of housing developments in agricultural lands in the Lan-Yang Plains. Such landuse transformations have not only diminished the provisioning services of agricultural land, but also degraded their cultural, regulating, and supporting services. In this study, a systems approach is used to examine various hypotheses regarding the transformation of farms to housing developments in Lan-Yang Plains. Information gathered from interviews with farmers and experts in agricultural land-use planning are used to form a farm-scale, process-based systems model of agricultural land-use change. Land use maps from 1977, 1995, and 2006 are divided into 245 square grids (1.5 km × 1.5 km) and analyzed with GIS to derive farm, neighborhood (within same grid), and external factors. Stepwise regression models with these factors are then used to parameterize the probability of agricultural land-use change in the systems model. Empirical results suggest that the rate of agricultural land-use change is affected by: 1) fragmentation of agricultural lands; 2) unit land price; 3) the area of abandoned fields still developable under current regulations; 4) availability of shopping and services in the same grid; 5) the density of housing in the same grid; 6) proximity of grid to other housings, business districts, roads wider than 4m, university campuses, riverfronts, and other factors that enhance investment prospects; and 7) proximity of grid to secondary train stations. We suggest that agricultural land use policies should be more aligned to the factors driving the land-use decisions of individual farmers, especially because such decisions have spatial implications much larger than the space allotted to housings.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2016.19.02.001-0352篇名：物業管理服務契約對於公寓大廈管理維護之影響並列篇名：Influence of Property Management Services Contract on Apartment Building Management and Maintenance作者：郭進泰(Chin-Tai Kuo);謝博明(Bor-Ming Hsieh);周士雄(Shih-Hsiung Chou);高秉毅(Ping-Yi Kao)關鍵字：物業管理服務業;公寓大廈管理委員會;契約範本;顧問式契約;Property Management Industry;Apartment Building Management Committee;Model Contracts;Consulting Contracts期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文透過內容分析法與文本分析法，採用交易成本之擇優策略理論，從物管業者與管委會之角度，探討物管業常用的契約範本與顧問式契約對於公寓大廈在管理維護之影響。主要發現：契約範本較具明確規範、服務範圍與項目、執行業務保證、保密義務等，且要求物業管理服務人員落實執行勤務與管理考核，及必須負擔洩密或侵害業主權益的責任等；而顧問式契約僅提供執行管理維護事項的顧問諮詢、契約受理委託行政服務事項代理、管理費代收與催繳，物管業者有較低的契約義務與責任。物管業者與管委會之擇優策略，若選擇契約範本較能保障契約雙方的權利；若選擇顧問式契約，管委會則為能自行從事社區管理維護與降低費用支出，而物管業者則是為達到保留固定營業收入。採用不同契約之影響在於，管委會無法查核自行僱用物業管理服務人員安全資料，恐有僱用受有刑事宣告執行未滿人員的風險，若以契約委託給物管業者代理查核，亦恐有違反個人資料保護法之虞；而無論選擇契約範本或顧問式契約，均有代理問題存在。最後，本文另以訪談法發現使用不同契約模式在物業管理實際運作，具有業務監督、契約管制、勞基法適用、雇傭關係、人員訓練與服務內容等差異存在。因此，本文建議管委會在選擇物業管理服務契約時，須考量該公寓大廈區分所有權人是否具備高度參與、是否具備有較佳管委會組成與其會議運作能力等因素。英文摘要：In this paper, through content analysis and text analysis method, using the preferred strategy of transaction cost theory, from the perspective of the property management companies and the management committee to discuss the influence of the common model contracts and consulting contracts on apartment building management and maintenance. The main findings are as follows: the model contracts possess the more clearly specification, the service of scope and items, the assurance of business implementation, confidentiality obligations, and require the implementation of property management staff to perform service and management assessment, and must bear responsibility of divulging secrets and against the rights of property owners, etc. The consulting contracts only perform management and maintenance issues consulting, administrative services contract entrusted accepted proxy matters, management fees and collection calls. Property management companies have lower contractual obligations and responsibilities. On respect of preferential policies of property management companies and the management committees, if both choose the model contract, this contract will better capacity to protect the rights of the parties in the contract; if both choose the consulting contract, the management committees are able to engage in their own communities and reduce management and maintenance costs, but property management companies can keep a fixed revenue. If they entrusted to property management companies as the agent, they may also in danger of breach of fear Personal Data Protection Act and fined. Whether they choose the model contract or the consulting services contract, have agency problems. Finally, this paper additionally uses interviews method to find that the use of different contract models in the actual operation of property management exists the differences of professional supervision, contract control, the Labor Standards Act applies, the employment relationship, personnel training and service content. Therefore, this paper recommends that as the management committees choose the property management services contract, they should consider the factors of whether the owners of the apartment building have a high degree of participation, whether they have had a better composition of its management committee and the capacity of operational meeting.起始頁-結束頁：37-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2016.19.02.037-0773篇名：基地所有人於地上權人或典權人將房屋權源出賣時之先買權－以該先買權之有無及客體為中心並列篇名：The Right of First Refusal of the Owner of the Building Site When the Superficiary or the Dian-Holder of the Site Sells His House and His Right Together: Focus on the Acknowledgement and the Object of the Right of First Refusal作者：黃健彰(Chien-Chang Huang)關鍵字：一體處分;地上權;先買權;典權;優先承買權;優先購買權;Dian;Dispose Together;Option of First Refusal;Preemption;Right of First Refusal;Superficies期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：不動產先買權涉及不動產的有效利用，向來是實務上重要問題，但相關學說研究仍有不足。例如依土地法第一０四條規定，基地之地上權人或典權人出賣房屋時，基地所有人有先買權；不過，參酌民法第八三八條第三項及第九一七條第二項規定，基地的地上權人或典權人出賣房屋時，應一併出賣其地上權或典權（即權源），而不得僅出賣房屋。此際，基地所有人是否仍有先買權？如有，先買權的客體為何？就此二問題均有不同見解。本文先析究上開規定的規範意旨與適用上應注意之處，作為全文探討的基礎，再探討前開二問題。本文著重於相關當事人的利益衡量分析，並希冀促進不動產的有效利用；本文就既有的學說、實務見解予以回應，並提出解釋論上的建議。本文以為，基地的地上權人或典權人將其房屋連同權源一併出賣時，基地所有人仍有先買權，其行使先買權時應一併購買權源。英文摘要：The right of first refusal refers to effective utilization of the real estate and is an important issue in practice. However, the existing studies are insufficient. For example, according to Article 104 of the Land Act, the owner of the building site has a right of first refusal when the superficiary or the dian-holder of the site sells his house. However, according to the third paragraph of Article 838 and the second paragraph of Article 917 of the Civil Code, the superficiary or the dian-holder of the building site shall sell the superficies or dian at the same time when he sells his house. He cannot only sell his house. In this situation, does the owner of the site still have the right of first refusal? If so, what is the object of the right of first refusal? There are controversies over the two questions. First of all, this study analyzes the purposes and the issues we shall notice when the above provisions are applied as the foundation of this whole article. This study then explores the said questions. This study emphasizes the interests of the concerned parties and promotes effective utilization of the real estate. This study discusses the existing doctrine and practice and makes some propositions in explanation. This study holds that when the superficiary or the dian-holder of the building site sells his house and his right together, the owner of the site still have the right of first refusal. When he exercises his right of first refusal, he shall buy the superficies or dian together.起始頁-結束頁：79-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2016.19.02.079-1004篇名：荒野法對土地圈護法制的增益：美國經驗提供我國的啟示並列篇名：The Wilderness Act as a Valuable Add to the Land Preservation Law: The Lesson to Be Learned from the U.S. Experience作者：陳仲嶙(Chung-Lin Chen)關鍵字：荒野法;荒野思維;土地倫理;聯邦土地政策與管理法;國家公園法;文化資產保存法;野生動物保育法;森林法;濕地保育法;Wilderness Act;Wilderness Idea;Wilderness Philosophy;Land Ethics;Federal Land Policy and Management Act;National Park Act;Cultural Heritage Preservation Act;Wildlife Conservation Act;Forestry Act;Wetland Conservation Act期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：19卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：為回應開發案無章法蔓生的問題，採取將自然區域直接劃歸保護的策略，是法制上重要的一環。此一策略也已為我國許多法律所採取，包括國家公園法、文化資產保存法、野生動物保育法、森林法、濕地保育法等。不過，相較於美國法制，我國尚無立基於荒野思維而建構的荒野法。本文之目的，即在探索美國荒野法的制度理念、法律規範，及其對我國可能的借鏡價值。視荒野本身即為價值、視保護荒野乃是倫理應然的荒野思維，逐漸在美國的歷史文化中成形，並影響了美國法制，最終促成1964年的荒野法。此一法律建立了國家荒野保護系統，加諸行政部門系統性地審視特定地區納入荒野保護之切合性的職責。而對於納入保護的荒野地區，要求行政機關保護其荒野特質，並限制商業事業、道路、機動化運輸、建築物與設施，以期能夠永保其自然特質。對照之下，雖然我國已有多面向的保護區法制，但整體而言在圈護對象上，重視景觀、地質、生態、生存物種或文化上的特殊性、代表性或重要性，而非如美國荒野法，著眼於是否為荒野，而不要求是一塊「特別的」荒野。因此，荒野法制若進入我國法制中，預期可產生額外的保育量能。另外，美國荒野法禁止開發但開放個人接近荒野的規範架構，亦對我國深具管制政策上的啟發性。英文摘要：To respond to the sprawl of destructive developmental projects, getting natural land into a protected status is an essential strategy. Many laws in Taiwan have adopted this strategy, including the National Park Act, Cultural Heritage Preservation Act, Wildlife Conservation Act, Forestry Act, and Wetland Conservation Act. However, a wilderness law which is based on a wilderness philosophy does not exist in Taiwan. The purpose of this article is to explore the philosophy and regulation of the U.S. Wilderness Act and what Taiwan can learn from it. The wilderness philosophy, which values wilderness and regards wilderness preservation as an ethical norm, gradually emerged and influenced American law, eventually resulting in the Wilderness Act of 1964. This Act established the National Wilderness Preservation System and required agencies to systematically review specific areas as to their suitability for preservation as wilderness. For the areas that are designated as wilderness areas, the Act mandates agencies to protect their wilderness characters and prohibits or regulates commercial enterprise, roads, mechanical transports, and structures or installations for preserving the natural characters of the wilderness areas forever. Although Taiwan has had diverse land preservation laws, the U.S. Wilderness Act provides valuable insights. First, overall speaking, Taiwan's land preservation laws stress the uniqueness, representativeness, or importance of scenery, geology, ecosystem, species, and culture in terms of designation criteria and are different from the U.S. Wilderness Act, which focus only on whether an area is wilderness and does not require extra qualities. Therefore, adopting a wilderness law will bring Taiwan additional capacity of land preservation. Second, the U.S. Wilderness Act prohibits large-scale development but opens access to individuals. This regulatory strategy is also enlightening to Taiwan's land preservation laws.起始頁-結束頁：101-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2016.19.02.101-14401篇名：台社是太陽花的尖兵嗎？　給台社的一封公開信並列篇名：Taishe, A Vanguard of the Sunflower Mass Campaign? An Open Letter to Taishe作者：趙剛(Kang CHAO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：227-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：「中國作為理論」之前並列篇名：Prelogue to ”China as Theory”作者：卡維波(Yin-Bin NING)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：257-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：「萬隆／第三世界六十年」筆記並列篇名：Notes on ”Bandung/Third World 60 Years”作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：285-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：紀念保釣鬥士林孝信（1944.4.3∼2015.12.20）並列篇名：In Memory of Shiaw-Shin LIN期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：102期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：303-308資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：論平等與法治：評釋字728號解釋並列篇名：On Equality and the Rule of Law: A Critical Review of Interpretation No. 728作者：莊世同(Shih-Tung Chuang)關鍵字：平等;法治;競爭性平等觀;構成性平等觀;合法性;自由;法治觀;平等法治觀;equality;rule of law;competitive conception of equality;constitutive conception of equality;legality;liberty-based;conception of the rule of law;equality-based conception of the rule of law期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：57期出版年：2016中文摘要：釋字728號解釋的多數意見宣稱：平等僅是眾多憲政價值中的其中一個價值，必須在具體案件中與其他價值相互權衡競爭；依此，基於考量法安定性、法不溯及既往原則，以及尊重私法自治及契約自由，祭祀公業排除女系子孫擔任派下員的傳統宗族習慣，並未違反憲法平等原則。然而，持少數意見的大法官和其他批評者卻認為，平等是憲政體制最核心的構成性價值，依據憲法平等原則及增修條文促進性別平等的規定，國家不僅有消極義務去避免直接性別歧視，同時也有積極義務去消除間接性別歧視。這兩種對於平等的不同釋憲觀點，即「競爭性平等觀」與「構成性平等觀」，何者才是具有說服力的主張而可證成國家統治行為的政治正當性？本文認為，平等關懷是尊重自由的前提，缺少平等的自由，毋寧是為強凌弱、眾暴寡的弱肉強食世界提供背書。從而，多數意見聲稱，基於尊重立法及民間習慣，應容許以共同血緣為基礎的祭祀公業得自由排除女系子孫擔任派下員，此舉不但容任不平等的性別歧視文化繼續存在，同時更無異於宣告，男優於女的血緣歧視也是合理正當的；這完全背離「每個人都有同等尊嚴、國家應給予平等關懷」的憲政主義核心價值。英文摘要：In Interpretation No.728, the majority opinion claims that equality is only one of many constitutional values being balanced with other. It argues that the traditional custom of ancestor worship guilds excluding female offspring from being qualified successors does not violate the constitutional principle of equality. The minority and other critics nevertheless insist that equality is the constitutive value of our constitutional regime. The government has both a passive obligation to prevent direct gender discrimination and an active obligation to eliminate indirect discrimination. Between the two conceptions of equality, i.e. the ”competitive” and the ”constitutive”, this essay aims to explore which is the most convincing conception to justify the legitimacy of state actions. I endorse the constitutive conception by arguing that without equality liberty may lead to the law of jungle in which the weak becomes the prey of the strong. No. 728 not only tolerates the existing culture of gender discrimination but also strengthens the ”blood discrimination” which endorses the superiority of male over female. Therefore, it entirely violates our central value of constitutionalism: ”everyone has equal dignity, and the state is obligated to show equal concern for each.”起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160600570012篇名：混雜主體：科技哲學中的「後人類」並列篇名：The Hybrid Subject: The ”Post-human” in Philosophy of Technology作者：曹家榮(Chia-Rong Tsao)關鍵字：後人類;混雜主體;類主體;關係存有論;延伸心智;post-human;the hybrid subject;quasi-subject;relational ontology;extended mind期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：57期出版年：2016中文摘要：隨著科技的發展，人作為現代主體的位置已搖搖欲墜。賽伯格的增生宣告我們如今身處於「後人類」處境之中。本文試圖藉由BrunoLatour、Don Ihde 與Andy Clark等人的科技哲學理論，構連出一種可能的後人類主體形象。本文主張，隨著當代科技哲學開始重視「物」的行動，這第一重「去中心化」已開啟後人類處境的討論。然而，不論是Latour還是Ihde，雖然都已否定傳統人文主義主體，但卻未能進一步討論可能的後人類主體。因此，本文主張轉向第二重去中心化，透過Clark的「延伸心智論題」描繪出一種「混雜主體」。混雜主體既不內在於人的大腦，也不僅止於身體邊界。它茁生於每一個「人—科技物—世界」的關係之中。這樣的主體不再是所謂的「大寫之人」，而是認知到自身有限性、並尋求共同生活可能性的人。英文摘要：Since the late twentieth century, Man as the modern subject has approached his end. The proliferation of cyborgs due to the development of information and other technologies shows that we are already situated in the ”post-human” condition. This article tries to articulate a possible image of the posthuman subject by reviewing Bruno Latour's, Don Ihde's, and Andy Clark's philosophy of technology. First, this article suggests that the contemporary philosophy of technology has already opened the exploration of the posthuman condition, emphasizing the activities of ”objects” and reconsidering the dominance of ”humans”. This author call this process the first decentralization. Latour and Ihde have rejected the western humanistic subject by rearranging the relationship between humans and objects. However, they failed to depict a clear image of the posthuman subject. This article, therefore, turns to the second decentralization. By reviewing Clark's ”the extended mind thesis”, we try to depict a possible image of the posthuman subject. We call it ”the hybrid subject”. It is neither brain-bound nor inside our skin bag, but rather emerges from each ”human-technologies-world” relationship. The hybrid subject hence no longer is ”Man” of Western humanism. He/She/It becomes conscious of his/hers/its own limitations, and begins to search for possible ways to live as ”companion species”.起始頁-結束頁：47-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160600570023篇名：魯曼的「去人本主義化」轉向下之人文思考並列篇名：The Consideration of Humanity under Luhmann's De-humanistic Shift作者：郁瑞麟(Ruei-Lin Yu)關鍵字：魯曼系統理論;人本主義;去人本主義化;現代社會;Luhmann's Systems Theory;Humanism;De-humanistic;Modern Society期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：57期出版年：2016中文摘要：魯曼的系統理論，有別於傳統以「人」為主體的人本主義思想，將人解構成片段，甚至被歸為系統以外的環境部分，成為一種「去人本主義化」的理論。魯曼強調：「把人視為社會環境的一部分，而非系統；這不是代表人類相對於傳統的理論變得不重要了，如果有人如此認為，那他肯定是沒有瞭解系統理論典範轉移的真正意涵。」基此，本文嘗試從魯曼的系統理論中耙梳出相關描述，以理解此辯稱與其所造成的影響。本文認為，魯曼同時將人解構於系統內被使用的要素，與系統外的環境兩個部分；惟有後者方可對系統的演化產生影響。如此，不僅可將人從傳統人本思想的價值觀中解放，使社會自我指涉為社會；同時透過偶連性的特徵，也讓我們能重新面對現代社會的風險。英文摘要：In the highly complex and functionally differentiated modern society, Luhmann uses his systems theory to deconstruct human beings into pieces or some specific roles, but not a whole, in order to set his theory apart from classical humanism. Furthermore, human beings may belong to the part of the environment of society that makes Luhmann's systems theory a de-humanistic one. Luhmann declares his systems theory to be a paradigm change, and argues that ”If one views human beings as part of the environment of society... it does not mean that the human being is estimated as less important than traditionally. Anyone who thinks so<U+22EF>has not understood the paradigm change in systems theory.” This article will not only sort out humanistic descriptions in Luhmann's theory but also discuss its influence on humanism. We argue that in Luhmann's theory, human beings are deconstructed into both systems and their environment, but only the latter could affect systems' evolution. With this de-humanistic paradigm change, Luhmann's theory not only frees human beings from irrational and immoral behaviors, but also provides a different awareness of the risks in modern society.起始頁-結束頁：95-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160600570034篇名：平等、規範與現實性：評黃舒芃與莊世同兩篇相關論文作者：鍾芳樺期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：57期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：139-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201606005700401篇名：疾病因果網絡的重構及病人的雙重消失：DDS如何成為臺灣漢生病藥物並列篇名：Reconstitution of a Disease Causality Network and the Double Disappearance of Patients: How DDS Became a Cure for Hansen's Disease in Taiwan作者：洪意凌(Yiling Hung)關鍵字：DDS;治療藥物;病人的消失;行動者網絡;疾病因果;DDS;therapeutics;disappearance of patients;actor-network;disease causality期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：自十九世紀末醫學研究者確認漢生病的病型和自然病程以來，於二十世紀中期開始使用的diamino-diphenyl sulfone（DDS）是醫生們首次握有的能影響漢生病病程的藥物。本文從醫療工作的社會學（Sociology of Medical Work）觀點，探討這個化學物質如何藉由取得一個社會腳本而成為治療藥物。我利用這一個例子來說明，醫療社群對疾病的了解及實作如何與醫療科技物相互建構。本文主要論點是，DDS 成為漢生病治療藥物的過程，同時伴隨著漢生病醫療技術物網絡的重構以及（樂生院院民所經歷的）病人的雙重消失。我檢視DDS於台灣開始使用前後的漢生病醫療實作，及這些實作所鑲嵌於其中的台灣醫療脈絡，發現DDS所代表的疾病因果論提供了以預防為目的的漢生病醫療技術物網絡一個理論基礎。此外，DDS也提供了一個組構既有技術物及人員的方式。DDS使用方便、價格便宜，適合發放給大量患者，因此能配合大眾防治的一套基本結構（infrastructure），包括標準化的皮膚抹片檢查、巡檢隊和地方診所。如此，DDS串聯起一個以特定疾病因果論為核心的漢生病醫療技術物網絡。這個網絡促成兩個層次上病人的消失。第一，病人作為人的整體消失在醫療世界觀之中。第二，漢生病疾病歷史的消失。在此雙重消失之情形下，病人被外加一個與其疾病歷程並不相符的疾病定義，且被課予對自己疾病的責任。本文說明藥物的社會效果：DDS促使漢生病醫療技術物網絡環繞著特定的疾病因果論而重構，且課予生病的人一個特定的病人角色和義務。正是這個網絡積極向外指認病人，使疾病歷程不符合其疾病觀的病人逐漸消失在網絡之中。英文摘要：Medical researchers identified Hansen's disease (HD) in the late 19th century, but it wasn't until the mid-20th century that physicians utilized diaminodiphenyl sulphone (DDS). Drawing on the sociology of medical work, this article discusses how medical communities' understandings of and practices regarding a disease shaped and were shaped by a medical object. In becoming a cure for HD, DDS facilitated changes to the existing HD medical network and the double disappearance of a group of patients (in particular, the group living in the Losheng Sanatorium). Examining medical practices in the context of Taiwan before and after the introduction of DDS, I found that the disease causality behind the use of DDS provided a way of conceptualizing HD within a prevention framework and a way to reconfigure the medical network's technologies and personnel. Cheap and easy to use, DDS facilitated the establishment of an infrastructure that included standardized slit skin examinations, prevention outreach, and skin clinics. This network facilitated the disappearance of patients in two senses: patients as persons disappeared from the cosmology of HD medicine, and the history of HD disappeared. Under this double disappearance, patients were assigned a disease category that does not correspond with their experiences and were implicated in their own illness. The paper specifies the social effects of the adoption of DDS by illustrating that it was the same medical network that was reconfigured by DDS that marginalized patients whose experiences deviate from the medical views of the network.起始頁-結束頁：17-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：在地醫療的技術文本及其轉變－嘉南地區之藥籤並列篇名：The Local Medical Text Yaoqian and It's Contemporary Transformation in Chaiyi and Tainan作者：陳柏勳(Po-Hsun Chen);楊仕哲(Su-Tso Yang)關鍵字：藥籤;技術文本;民俗醫療;知識空間;Yaoqian;artifact text;folklore medicine;knowledge space期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：藥籤是臺灣在地重要的民俗醫療，今日仍可在民間發現其蹤影。本文使用嘉南地區資料，從技術物和在地實作的概念，分析藥籤所連結的行動者和知識空間，進一步探討以西醫為主的政策與藥籤的互動。多元行動者為因應當地疾病與醫療資源，藉由實踐生活中的歷史經驗和文化資本，使得藥籤相應而生，經由實踐一系列的求籤過程，同時再生產藥籤技術文本之社會結構，也反回影響藥籤內容。藥籤的知識空間含括宗教、道德與中醫藥，其機制不能單以生物醫學的框架來分析。臺灣現代化的過程，藥籤被政府與生物醫學邊緣化，且受生物醫學所規範，然而，民眾的生病經驗看透生物醫學的限制與不足，進而選擇藥籤作為療病方式。本研究認為藥籤的實作乃應事邏輯之結果。在西醫資源不足之地，藥籤的實作不但呈現藥籤與以西醫為主的政策之緊張關係，更指出民眾對醫療概念的多樣性，進而反思在生物醫學框架下對醫療本體的醫療化。英文摘要：Yaoqian, an important folklore medicine, is still in use in Taiwan. This article used Chaiyi-Tainan fieldwork data. From the standpoints of artifact and local practice, the actors and knowledge space connected to Yaoqian were analyzed. The interaction between Western medicine-dominant policies and Yaoqian was investigated. In response to endemic diseases and medical resources, multi-actors produced Yaoqian through historical experiences and cultural capitalism from daily practices. Through the process of Yaoqian system, they reproduced the social structure of artifact text and affect the context reciprocally. The knowledge space of Yaoqian included religion, morality and Chinese medicine. Its mechanism shouldn't be analyzed through the framework of biomedicine single-handedly. During the modernization process, Yaoqian was marginalized by the government and biomedicine community and regulated by biomedicine. However, the population looked through the limitation and deficiency of biomedicine in their illness experiences and chose Yaoqian as therapy. This study considered Yaoqian as a result of the logic of practice. In areas deficient of Western medicine resources, the practice of Yaoqian not only presented the tense relationship between Yaoqian and Western medicine-dominant policies, but indicated the diversified medical concept of the population. Furthermore, it reflected the medicalization of the medical entity in biomedical framework.起始頁-結束頁：77-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：化學物質的拼裝、風險與治理：台灣洗衣精的百滅寧防<U+87CE>爭議（2013-2014）並列篇名：The Controversy over Permethrin in Taiwan: Risk Governance of Anti-Dust Mite Laundry Detergent in 2013-2014作者：謝新誼(Hsinyi Hsieh)關鍵字：風險治理;化學物質拼裝;公民科學;管制科學;防<U+87CE>洗衣精;risk governance;assemblage;civic science;regulatory science;anti-dust mite laundry detergent期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：透過台灣於2013年間爆發的洗衣精添加農藥百滅寧爭議，本研究探討百滅寧成為解決塵<U+87CE>過敏風險化學物質的拼裝歷程，分析公民團體、洗衣精廠商及政府單位如何透過公民科學或管制科學實作，界定和治理化學物質的風險。本研究採多重研究方法，資料主要來自參與觀察及歷史檔案。本文發現，百滅寧雖具滅除<U+87CE>類的化學特性，其風險卻會隨拼裝脈絡改變，進而產生爭議。防<U+87CE>洗衣精爭議起因於公民的科學實作，由上下游新聞與主婦聯盟主動進行議題設定、產出科學證據，並藉自身的經驗知識，界定百滅寧的健康與生態風險，且期許新興科技風險的治理能更為民主。經濟部標準檢驗局作為本爭議之權責單位，其主導的管制科學實作同時涉及國家標準法規、公民科學成果、以及廠商資訊揭露程度的影響。防<U+87CE>洗衣精的案例反映出化學物質的治理與化學物質重組拼裝速度間的落差，也彰顯出台灣化學物質分立治理的特性及問題。英文摘要：During 2013-2014, debate concerning the risks of the chemical substance Permethrin focused on its changing patterns from widely used insecticide to anti-dust mite laundry detergent in Taiwan. This article investigates the changing patterns of Permethrin and examines how environmental activists, chemical manufacturers, and government officials have governed the risks of anti-dust mite laundry detergent through different scientific activities. Data collected from archives and participant observation. I argue that the anti-dust mite laundry detergent has unintentionally endangered the ecological environment, human health, and regulatory policy. The multiple risks of Permethrin, raised by environmental advocates' civic scientific practice, were reconfigured in chemicals' shifting contexts of use from insecticide to laundry detergent. This controversy reveals that the regulatory governance of chemical substances in Taiwan is segregated into various governmental agencies and highly dependent on the self-discipline of manufacturers. This study states that, in order to response public concerns about chemical risks, regulatory science has been deeply involved in governing the new risks of anti-dust mite laundry detergent by a specific governmental agency of economic administration. However, this decentralized governance framework impeded the progress in regulating both the commercial practices and the risks of the highly changing assemblage of chemical substances.起始頁-結束頁：137-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：德國與臺灣身心障礙者政策與失能者長照政策的比較分析：復健模式的觀點並列篇名：Comparison of Disability Policy Models and Long-Term Care Policies in Germany and Taiwan: A Rehabilitation-Oriented Perspective作者：周怡君(Yi-Chun Chou)關鍵字：長照保險;復健取向;障礙政策模式;德國;long-term care policies;rehabilitation-oriented policy;disability policy model;Germany期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：34期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣因人口老化推動長照政策，從「長照十年計畫」、〈長期照顧服務法〉、〈長照保險法草案〉到「長照2.0」都顯示，臺灣長照政策提供給失能者的照顧服務與〈身權法〉的障礙者服務內容相當雷同。採取長照保險來解決老人長照問題的德國，在其「復健取向」障礙政策模式下，區分障礙者與失能者的服務內容及價值。本文採用內容分析法、歷史分析及比較研究法，以M. Maschke 的障礙政策模式為架構，探討德國「復健取向」障礙政策模式對其長照保險中障礙者給付之影響，並比較分析德國與臺灣在障礙政策及長照政策中障礙者服務的差異。研究結果顯示，德國將障礙者服務定位為重返社會與勞動生活的復健服務，具有自決及參與的積極特徵，與失能者多由他人維持日常生活的服務不同。相較之下，臺灣障礙者政策模式及核心價值並不明確，而長照政策也未能區別失能者與障礙者照顧服務之差異，導致臺灣失能者與障礙者在不同的評估標準下，所獲得的服務卻高度相似的結果。英文摘要：Since 2007, the Taiwanese government has promoted associated long-term care (LTC) policies in response to demographic changes in Taiwan's aging society. According to the most recent draft of the LTC insurance law, the government Taiwan intends to provide LTC services that are almost identical to disability services. By contrast, under the rehabilitation-oriented disability policy model, LTC for elderly people is separate from the disability services in the LTC insurance program pioneered in Germany. Through a content analysis of the relevant disability laws and comparative historical analysis, the framework of Michael Maschke's disability policy model is used in this paper to explore the effect of the German disability policy model on the benefit plan for persons with disabilities, and the differences in cases of LTC insurance between Germany and Taiwan are compared. The results indicate that under Germany's rehabilitation-oriented disability policy, disability services are defined as lifelong support measures for assisting people with disabilities in resuming their work and social life. However, LTC for elderly adults depends entirely on other LTC insurance recipients and is distinct from disability support services. The disability policy in Germany prioritizes rehabilitation over LTC services, and this is because LTC imposes a financial burden on social expenditures. By contrast, the orientation and core values of the disability policy model in Taiwan are unclear, thus affecting the benefits planning of LTC insurance and leading to the absence of differences between LTC services and disability services under two distinct evaluation criteria.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.34.012篇名：家庭危險因子對少年之學業成就、偏差行為與憂鬱情緒發展的影響：累積危險指數模型探討並列篇名：The Impact of Family Risks on Youths’ Academic Performance, Delinquency and Depression: A Cumulative Risk Index Model作者：陳杏容(Hsing-Jung Chen)關鍵字：性別差異;家庭壓力;發展結果;gender difference;family stress;development outcome期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：34期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在透過累積危險指數模型探討家庭風險因子與少年學業成就、偏差行為與憂鬱情緒發展的關聯，並進一步探討性別在其中扮演的角色。運用「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」之七年級與九年級學生及其家長資料進行分析。分析結果支持線性關係，憂鬱情緒部分女生比男生嚴重，偏差行為則男生多於女生。當家庭危險因子數目增加時，女生比男生在學業上受到的影響較小，但在憂鬱情緒上更脆弱。建議服務來自多元危險因子家庭的少年時，從能改善之處著手，盡量降低危險因子的數目，強化少年的壓力因應能力，依據性別差異提供適切服務，並提供多元支持與預防性家庭服務方案。英文摘要：Aim: the aim of this study was to examine the association between cumulative family risks and youth developmental outcomes in relation to academic performance, delinquency and depression. In addition, this study tested the moderating effect of gender by using data from an ongoing nationally representative Taiwanese youth sample. Methods: The data for this study were drawn from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey. The present research used the data when students were in the 7th and 9th grades. Stata 13.0 was used for data analyses. Results: The findings support a linear model indicating that those students who experience more family risks are more likely to develop negative outcomes. Moreover, girls have higher levels of depressive symptoms than boys do, while boys have higher levels of delinquency than girls do. The effect of cumulative risk on academic performance is lower among girls, in comparison to boys. Conclusion: The findings confirm the accuracy of the linear cumulative risk model, highlight the influence of cumulative risk on youths’ de- pression, academic and behavior outcomes, and suggest potential gender-based differences, particularly in regard to academic performance. The findings suggest the need for comprehensive family prevention programs as well as stress-coping training for youths in order to reduce the influence of family risks. Secondary prevention requires professionals to assess the family systems and be aware of how the problems facing boys and girls differ, in order to provide needed services as early as is feasible.起始頁-結束頁：41-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.34.023篇名：比較中老年與非中老年智障服務使用者支持需求與生活品質並列篇名：Supportive Needs and Quality of Life Among Service Users with Intellectual Disability: Comparison of Users Above and Below the Age of 45作者：周月清(Yueh-Ching Chou);尤珮蓉(Pei-Jung Yu);張淑娟(Shu-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：中老年智能障礙者;支持強度;生活品質;POS;SIS;intellectual disability;ageing;quality of life;POS;SIS期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：34期出版年：2016中文摘要：以「支持強度量表」（Supports Intensity Scale, SIS）及「個人成果量表」（Personal Outcome Scale, POS）為評量工具，比較中老年（≧45 歲）與非中老年（＜45 歲）智障服務使用者支持強度需求（SIS）及生活品質（POS），並探討兩組SIS 與POS 影響因素。於2012 年4-7 月針對37 個單位（全日型住宿、6 人以下社區居住及其他社區服務）面對面訪談智障服務使用者本人，有效問卷784 份。以迴歸分析性別、年齡、是否有其他障別、生活活動功能量表（Activity of Daily Living, ADL）及工具式生活活動量表（Instrumental Activity of Daily Living, IADL）、服務模式（自變項）和SIS 及POS（依變項）之關係。比較非中老年者，發現中老年智障者SIS 顯著高、POS 顯著低。迴歸分析發現，中老年者有其他障別及ADL功能低者，其SIS 較無其他障別及ADL 功能高者顯著低；ADL 和IADL高、非使用全日型服務者（社區居住或日托）其POS 較ADL 和IADL 低及全日型使用者顯著高。本研究建議針對中老年智能障礙者，尤其多重障礙者、ADL 功能低者、使用全日型服務者，其支持強度需求及生活品質提升，當被優先重視。英文摘要：Using Supports Intensity Scale (SIS) and Personal Outcomes Scale (POS) as assessment tools to compare the support needs and quality of life (QoL) between two groups of service users with intellectual disability (ID), namely those aged ＜45 and ≧45, as well as to examine the impact factors of their support needs and QoL. Face-to-face interviews with adults with ID in 37 service units (institutions, community living units under 6 residents, day activity centers, etc.) between April and July in 2012; 784 adults with ID completed the interview. The regression analysis used SIS and POS as the dependent variables; gender, age, whether having multiple disabilities (MD), ADL, IADL, and service models served as the independent variables. The results indicated that the group aged ≧45 had significantly higher scores in SIS and lower scores in POS in comparison with the group aged ＜45. Regression analyses found that ageing adults (≧45) with MD and/or low ADL functioning scores had significantly lower SIS scores in comparison to those who do not have MD and/or high ADL scores. Those with high ADL and IADL scores, and residing in community living units had significantly higher POS scores than those who had low ADL and IADL scores and reside in institutions. The support needs and QoL of ageing adults with ID, particularly those living in institutions with MD and low ADL scores, should be the first priority in providing care.起始頁-結束頁：85-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.34.034篇名：同志伴侶暴力及其求助之研究並列篇名：A Study on Intimate Partner Violence Against LGB, and Help-Seeking作者：潘淑滿(Shu-Man Pan);游美貴(Mei-Kuei Yu)關鍵字：同志;求助;家庭暴力防治法;親密伴侶暴力;intimate partner violence;help-seeking;Domestic Violence Prevention Act;LGB期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：34期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究是以網路自填問卷調查法及焦點團體訪談法，探討同志遭受伴侶暴力及其求助情形之研究，反思女性主義性別權控觀點詮釋同志伴侶暴力的適切性，並提供實務工作者因應同志伴侶暴力被害人需要之實務建議。206 份有效網路自填問卷，其中曾在過去1 年內有遭受伴侶暴力經驗者占7.8%；而在過去多年來曾發生伴侶暴力經驗者，則提升至17.0%。本研究發現，受訪者過去1 年內主要遭遇的暴力類型是精神暴力，且受暴者大都未求助；有求助經驗者，也以尋求非正式社會支持的協助為主。建議未來同志伴侶暴力防治網絡，應加強實務工作者對於多元性別與無性別歧視之公民教育素養，並增進對於多元性別友善的服務輸送網絡，更應重視對於精神暴力之辨識與服務。英文摘要：Lesbians and gays who endure intimate partner violence are excluded from the civil protection order. This situation had not been changed until the amendment of DVPA in 2007. This article uses the internet self-reported questionnaire and focus group interviews with LGB group members to explore the prevalence and type of LGB's intimate partner violence, as well as the help-seeking of victims, to consider whether power control can explain LGB's intimate partner violence, and to provide suggestions for practitioners. The results, based on 206 respondents, have shown that the one-year prevalence for LGB's intimate partner violence is 7.8%, while lifetime prevalence for LGB's intimate partner violence increases up to 17.0%. Among these respondents faced with intimate partner violence, few have ever asked for help either from informal or formal resources. According to the results of this study, we suggest strengthening gender sensitivity and gender equality literacy for practitioners in recognizing psychological violence.起始頁-結束頁：129-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.34.045篇名：計算社會工作服務成本的架構：以地方政府家暴安全防護網為例並列篇名：The Cost Analysis Framework of Social Work Services: A Case Study of Safety Network Program作者：劉淑瓊(Shu-Chiung Liu);王珮玲(Pei-Ling Wang);吳敏欣(Min-Hsin Wu)關鍵字：成本分析;社會工作服務;家暴安全網;cost analysis;social work services;safety network program期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：34期出版年：2016中文摘要：公、私部門社會服務機構為了要在眾多社會需求中爭取到資源的優先配置權及獲取社會信任，有必要提出具有責信的方案。家暴防治體系長期處在社會期待與資源困窘的夾縫中，更迫切需要以具體數字呈現防治策略與方案本身的成本效益和效能，以促成資源的挹注和網絡的合作，而方案成本分析正是讓服務提供者掌握資源的流向及配置，以及計算成本效益與效能的第一步。在本土缺乏第一手、具公信力的服務成本資料的情況下，本研究以一個實施近5年，已趨穩定運作的家暴安全防護網方案為例，採由下而上分析模式，透過詳細記錄研究設計與執行的脈絡、實際操作的過程，以及運算的邏輯和模式，討論在臺灣本土脈絡下可操作的方法，並提出計算社工專業人力與服務單位成本之架構，以逐步累積方案成本計算的知識。英文摘要：To secure program resources and earn trust, social service agencies, public or private, need to demonstrate accountability in program delivery. Pressured by high societal expectations and insufficient resources, cost-efficiency and cost-effectiveness of domestic violence prevention programming are best to be supported by comprehensive cost related data. Availability of such data may promote better resource utilization and even collaboration among service providers. Cost analysis is the foundation for examining cost-efficiency and cost-effectiveness. Taiwan lacks reliable first-hand cost data in domestic violence prevention services. Using the format of ”Research Notes”, this paper attempts to take ”Safety Network Program” as an example to illustrate a framework for cost analysis for social work services, including detailed documentation of research design, implementation context, operational processes as well as arithmetic logic and pattern.起始頁-結束頁：173-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2016.34.0501篇名：審計人員之產業專精與客戶租稅規避：中國實證研究並列篇名：Auditor Industry Expertise and Clients’ Tax Avoidance: Evidence from China作者：魏春燕(Chun-Yan Wei);陳磊(Lei Chen)關鍵字：審計人員產業專精;租稅規避;公費依賴性;審計人員任期;auditor industry expertise;tax avoidance;fee dependence;auditor tenure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究使用2008至2012年上海與深圳證券交易所之A股上市公司來研究審計人員之產業專精對於客戶租稅規避行為之影響。從審計的角度來看，其產業專精可能會限制租稅規避，因為身為業內專家的審計人員更會基於風險控制的原則而制止租稅規避行為。從稅務的角度來看，其產業專精可能會鼓勵租稅規避，因為業內的專家更會利用自己的專長，提出稅務策略，使客戶受益。本研究發現審計人員之產業專精與企業較多的租稅規避有所關聯，尤其是當審計人員獨立性較低時。結果顯示，當審計人員獨立性較低時，審計人員之產業專精可能較會鼓勵客戶租稅規避，而非抑制租稅規避。本研究建議政策制定者提升審計人員之獨立性的重要性，同時也鼓勵審計人員提升產業專業知識。英文摘要：Using 2008-2012 A-share listed companies in Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchange, this paper examines the influence of auditor industry expertise on clients' tax avoidance. From an audit perspective, industry expertise may constrain tax avoidance because industry experts are more likely to find and deter tax avoidance activity based on risk control principle. From a tax perspective, industry expertise may encourage tax avoidance because industry experts can use their expertise to develop tax strategies that benefits clients. We find that auditor industry expertise is associated higher level of tax avoidance, especially when auditor independence is lower. This result indicates that in case of poor auditor independence, auditor industry expertise may encourage clients' tax avoidance instead of constraining it. Our study has implications for policy maker by reminding the importance of improve auditor independence while encourage auditor to develop industry expertise.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.SEP.01262篇名：發言或緘默：心理安全與自我效能在社會資本影響社群網站使用者知識分享行為上所扮演的中介角色並列篇名：To Say or Not to Say: The Mediating Role of Psychological Safety and Self-Efficacy on the Influence of Social Capital on Users' Knowledge Sharing Behavior in Social Network Sites作者：王仕茹(Shih-Ju Wang);黃恆獎(Heng-Chiang Huang);楊昀璇(Carolyn Yun-Shiuan Yang)關鍵字：社會資本;心理安全;知識分享自我效能;社群網站;social capital;psychological safety;knowledge sharing self-efficacy;social network site期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：隨著以電腦為媒介環境與網路的普及，社群網站紛紛出現。社群網站不僅改變人們溝通與知識分享的方式，也創造出社群經濟(Socialnomics)與社群商務(Social Commerce)，因而吸引研究者及行銷人員的興趣。過去社群網站研究聚焦於使用者行為，且大多採用探索性的研究途徑。本文提出一個整體架構，視社會資本的三個面向（結構、認知與關係）為社群網站使用者知識分享行為的影響因素，並以使用者心理安全與知識分享自我效能作為中介變數。本文使用439位Facebook使用者的問卷調查結果，以結構方程式模型驗證理論架構。結果顯示：認知社會資本對使用者在Facebook上的知識分享行為有著最高的正向影響，而且知識分享自我效能則擁有最高的中介效果。這項研究結果提供了豐富的學術洞見與行銷意涵。英文摘要：The prevalence of the computer-mediated environment and the Internet have led to the emergence of social network sites. Social network sites have not only changed the way people communicate and share knowledge with one another, but have also created socialnomics and social commerce. Previous studies on social networks have focused on user behavior and mostly adopted an exploratory approach. In contrast, this article develops a holistic model that incorporates three facets of social capital (structural, cognitive, and relational) as determinants of users' knowledge sharing behavior and examines the mediating roles of users' psychological safety and knowledge sharing self-efficacy. The proposed structural equation model is empirically tested with survey data from 439 Facebook users in Taiwan. The results show that cognitive social capital exerts the strongest positive impact on Facebook users' knowledge sharing behavior and that knowledge sharing self-efficacy indeed plays a mediating role. The findings provide important insights for both theory and practice.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.DEC.01293篇名：九尾數定價效果在不同評估模式中的侷限：分別、聯合與依序評估並列篇名：The Boundary Conditions of the Nine-Ending Pricing Effect in Different Evaluation Modes: Separate, Joint and Sequential作者：鄭尹惠(Yin-Hui Cheng);莊世杰(Shih-Chieh Chuang);張佳榮(Chia-Jung Chang);鄭為遠(Wei-Yun Cheng)關鍵字：九尾數定價效果;評估模式;捷思－系統雙元訊息處理模型;nine-ending pricing effect;evaluation modes;heuristic-systematic model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：基於捷思－系統雙元訊息處理模型，當九尾數與零尾數的價格以分別、聯合與依序進行評估時，此研究藉此確認九尾數定價效果的有限性。研究一證實九尾數定價效果會出現在分別評估模式，但不會出現於聯合評估模式。研究二增加了依序評估模式並在購買預算的條件下衡量實際購買數量。結果與研究一相符，且驗證在分別評估模式時，有不同最左端數字的九尾數與零尾數之知覺價格差異大於在聯合評估模式。研究四操弄了任務複雜度且結果發現因為較高任務複雜度造成認知能力超過人們負荷時，九尾數效果將消失。英文摘要：This paper, which is based on a heuristic-systematic dual-process model, identifies the boundary conditions of the nine-ending pricing effect when nine-ending and zero-ending prices are separately, jointly, and sequentially evaluated. Study 1 proves the occurrence of the nine-ending effect in separate, but not joint, evaluation conditions. Study 2 adds an extra sequential evaluation mode to Study 1 and measures actual quantitative estimations with a shopping budget. The results are consistent with those from Study 1. The results of Study 3 demonstrate that the perceived price difference between nine- and zero-ending digits with different leftmost digits is greater in the separate-evaluation mode than it is in the jointevaluation mode. In Study 4, task complexity is manipulated and the results show that no nine-ending effect is observed when cognitive capacity, which is induced by greater task complexity, exceeds the capabilities that people possess.起始頁-結束頁：73-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.SEP.A102-0664篇名：盈餘管理之行為意圖：代理情境、道德發展與計畫行為理論之解釋並列篇名：Behavioral Intention of Earnings Management: The Explanation of Agency Problem, Moral Development and Theory of Planned Behavior作者：顏信輝(Sin-Hui Yen);張瑀珊(Yu-Shan Chang);吳美奇(Mei-Chi Wu)關鍵字：盈餘管理;道德發展;計畫行為理論;earnings management;moral development;theory of planned behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以Ajzen (1985)提出之計畫行為理論(TPB)為研究架構，整合個人道德發展程度，考量於不同代理情境下，提出包括「態度」、「主觀規範」與「知覺行為控制」三構面的會計人員從事盈餘管理之行為意圖模式。本研究並將TPB三構面進行解構，連結盈餘管理、道德發展及代理情境進行探討，可更完整捕捉會計人員進行盈餘管理之行為意圖。研究發現計畫行為理論中僅有「態度」構面對會計人員之盈餘管理意圖具有顯著之解釋力，進一步分析顯示「利他性」之觀念灌輸最具有影響會計人員態度之能力；此外，代理情境與道德發展此二變數均會顯著影響我國會計人員從事盈餘管理之行為意圖，而且此二變數對盈餘管理意圖亦具顯著之交互作用。英文摘要：Based on Ajzen (1985) Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) and the concept of agency theory as well as moral development, this study proposes a behavioral intention model consisting of agency situation, moral development, and the three dimensions of TPB, including attitude toward the behavior, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral control. This study decomposes the above three factors into multi-dimensions in examining accountants’ behaviors with regard to earnings management, moral development and agency problem conditions to provide a comprehensive understanding of the behavioral intentions of earnings management. The main results of this study indicate that the ”attitude” dimension is the only significant variable of TPB that explains the earnings management intention of accounting practitioners. Further analysis also suggests that the accounting practitioners' ”attitude” could be more effectively influenced through inculcation of the concept of ”altruism”. In addition, the behavioral intention of accounting practitioners engaged in earnings management is significantly affected by agency situation and moral development. We found significant interaction between the two variables.起始頁-結束頁：107-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.FEB.R.120285篇名：反向房屋抵押貸款商品結構分析並列篇名：Structural Analysis of Reverse Mortgages作者：李永琮(Yung-Tsung Lee);羅玉皓(Yu-Hao Lo)關鍵字：反向房屋抵押貸款;選擇權評價;reverse mortgage;option pricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文研究目的是在分析反向房屋抵押貸款之商品結構，以幫助承作貸款金融機構了解該商品的特性，有效管理相關風險並從中獲利。在美國HECM (Home Equity ConversionMortgage)架構下，我們將房屋期初價值拆解為可貸金額、租金收益、房屋剩餘價值、貸款機構所獲得保險保障（保險成本）、保費支出（收入）以及發行貸款金融機構利潤六個部分，並且分析各個項目的價值，以瞭解金融機構發行該商品的獲利能力與相關風險。不同於過去的文獻著重於反向房屋抵押貸款保險成本方面的探討，本研究提供了一個具體的分析方式，使得金融機構能夠評估發行該商品的預期利潤以及相關風險；另一方面，也使得借款人釐清辦理反向房屋抵押貸款後，自己所保有的權益價值。英文摘要：This study analyzes the structure of reverse mortgages. For the purpose of achieving profits and effectively managing risk, it is important that financial institutions understand the structures of their products. In accordance with the HECM (Home Equity Conversion Mortgage) program, this study decomposes the collateralized property value into six components; including loan amount, rental income, remaining value (on loan termination), reverse mortgage insurance costs and expenses (premiums), and lender profits. This allows financial institutions to understand the profitability and risks associated with the issue of reverse mortgages. Previous studies on reverse mortgages focused on the analysis of reverse mortgage insurances. This study has instead provided a process that enables lenders to specifically assess profit, and effectively recognize potential risks. Borrowers can also use the proposed approach to obtain the detailed conversion value of their property and thus make more informed decisions regarding entry into a reverse mortgage.起始頁-結束頁：139-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.JUL.R.130036篇名：台灣上市公司的現金持有、現金持有價值與公司生命週期：預防性動機假說之驗證並列篇名：Cash Holding, the Value of Cash Holding, and Corporate Life Cycle in Taiwan: An Examination of the Precautionary Motive Hypothesis作者：蘇玄啟(Xuan-Qi Su);羅仙法(Alpha Lowe);施懿宸(Yi-Cheng Shih);李汶育(Summer Li)關鍵字：現金持有;現金持有價值;公司生命週期;預防性動機假說;融資限制;cash holding;value of cash holding;corporate life cycle;precautionary motive hypothesis;financial constraint期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以台灣上市公司為樣本，探討現金持有與現金持有價值如何隨著公司生命週期而變化。以公司年齡為公司生命週期代理變數，本文發現，公司現金持有比例隨著公司年齡增長而逐漸下降。而此單調遞減現象可由預防性動機來解釋：相對於成熟公司，台灣年輕公司普遍具有較大的產業平均現金流量波動度、較高的研發支出率與較嚴重的財務赤字等特性；而此等特性隱含在面對現金流量不足與財務危機的不利衝擊時，年輕公司將承受較高成本，因而傾向持有較多現金。本文另發現台灣上市公司的現金持有價值亦隨著公司年齡增長而逐漸下降，此結果支持年輕公司相較於成熟公司具有較高融資限制的理論預期。整體而言，本文研究結果與預防性動機假說的財務意涵相符。英文摘要：Building upon Keynes (1936) precautionary motive hypothesis, this paper tests how cash holding and cash value vary with corporate life cycle for firms listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE). By employing firm age as a proxy for corporate life cycle, we find that the ratio of cash holding decreases with firm age. Such a monotonic decreasing pattern in cash ratios can be explained by the precautionary motive hypothesis. Relative to mature firms, Taiwan's young firms tend to hold more precautionary-based cash due to greater industry-level volatility in cash flows, greater R&D intensity, and higher financing deficits, in which case adverse shocks and financial distress are more costly for them. Another key finding in this paper is that the value of cash holding also decreases with firm age, reflecting the fact that young firms are more financially constrained than are mature firms in Taiwan. Overall, our results are consistent with the prediction of the precautionary motive hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：173-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.FEB.R.130107篇名：社會壓力、承諾與稅務員反功能行為：實驗研究並列篇名：Social Pressures, Commitments and Tax Officials’ Dysfunctional Behaviors: An Experimental Study作者：鄭國枝(Kuo-Chih Cheng);鍾紹熙(Shao-Hsi Chung);倪豐裕(Feng-Yu Ni)關鍵字：社會壓力;承諾;反功能行為;social pressure;commitment;dysfunctional behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主張稅務稽徵單位之社會壓力（包括上司壓力與同儕壓力），會對稅務員造成租稅查核品質下降與離職傾向增加的反功能行為，並認為承諾（包括組織承諾及專業承諾）能抗拒社會壓力，降低反功能行為。本研究採實驗研究法，參與實驗的稅務員共計117人，隨機分為兩實驗組（上司壓力＋外部壓力vs.同儕壓力＋外部壓力）及一控制組（僅外部壓力）。研究結果顯示在社會壓力下，尤其是上司壓力，會造成稅務員租稅查核品質下降與離職傾向增加，而在高專業承諾與高組織承諾下，社會壓力導致稅務員反功能行為依舊存在，但高專業承諾可降低外部壓力所導致的離職傾向。本研究對此結果提出如何減少社會壓力來源的建議。英文摘要：The study proposes that social pressures (including superior pressure and peer pressure) cause dysfunctional behaviors of tax officials (i.e., low auditing quality and high turnover intention), and commitments (including organizational commitment and professional commitment) moderate the relationship between social pressures and the dysfunctional behaviors. The experimental research method was adopted. The participants consisted of 117 tax officials who were randomly divided into two experimental groups (one with superior pressure plus outside pressure and the other with peer pressure plus outside pressure) and one control group (with only outside pressure). The results showed that social pressures, especially superior pressure, caused lower auditing quality and higher turnover intention. In the presence of high professional commitment or high organizational commitment, social pressures still cause dysfunctional behaviors. However, the effect of outside pressure on turnover intention is mitigated in the presence of high professional commitment. According to these results, suggestions as to how to decrease social pressure sources were provided.起始頁-結束頁：211-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.JUN.R.080298篇名：工作要求與工作控制的交互作用對倦怠與學習努力之影響：公平知覺之干擾角色並列篇名：The Interactive Effects of Job Demand and Job Control on Burnout and Learning Efforts: The Moderating Role of Fairness Perception作者：林少龍(Shao-Lung Lin);楊濱燦(Bin-Tsann Yang);駱少康(Shao-Kang Lo)關鍵字：工作要求;工作控制;公平知覺;job demand;job control;fairness perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究檢驗工作要求（時間壓力及工作負荷）、工作控制（方法自主及目標自主）以及公平知覺對員工倦怠及學習努力的影響。以148位汽車業務人員為樣本，研究結果顯示工作要求與配適的工作控制的二階交互作用負向影響倦怠，工作負荷與目標自主的交互作用正向影響學習努力。工作要求、工作控制及公平知覺的三階交互作用結果顯示，對於高公平知覺的員工，配適的工作控制有助於減緩工作要求對倦怠的正向影響以及對學習努力的負向影響，對於低公平知覺的員工則反之。作者討論本研究發現在理論以及實務上之意涵，同時對於未來的研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：The study examines the relationships among job demand (time pressure and work overload), job control (method autonomy and criteria autonomy), fairness perception, burnout and learning effort. Data were provided by 148 car salespeople. The results reveal that two-way interactions of job demand and proper job control negatively related to burnout. The interaction of work overload and criteria autonomy positively related to leaning effort. The results of three-way interaction of job demand, proper job control and fairness perception reveal that for higher fairness perception employees, job control will reduce the worsening effects of job demand on burnout and the negative effects on learning effort. For lower fairness perception employees, these effects will be reversed. The author discussed the implications for theory and practice and suggestions for the further study.起始頁-結束頁：239-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.DEC.R120219篇名：由任務科技配適度觀點探討司法人員資訊系統使用與工作績效之影響因子並列篇名：Exploring the Influencing Factors of Judicial Personnel's Information System Usage and Job Performance from the Perspectives of Task-Technology Fit作者：王舒民(Shu-Ming Wang);林娟娟(Judy Chuan-Chuan Lin);簡子晴(Tzu-Ching Chien);鄒仁淳(Monica Ren-Chuen Tzou)關鍵字：任務科技配適度;社會認知理論;助益條件;task-technology fit;Social Cognitive Theory;facilitating conditions期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：司法院投入大量資訊經費開發各式專業應用系統，以提昇員工工作效率與品質。本研究以任務科技配適度為基礎，加入「自我效能」、「成果預期」與「助益條件」、「組織凝聚力」等構面，提出一探討影響司法人員資訊系統使用與工作績效之模型。並透過對高等法院及地方法院等9名司法人員之訪談，修正研究架構及衡量問項，後針對司法人員進行正式問卷調查，共回收138份有效問卷。結果發現：「任務科技配適度」及「成果預期」顯著影響司法人員工作績效，「任務特性」、「科技特性」、「個人適應力」、「系統自我效能」及「技術助益條件」間接影響「工作績效」。本研究依據研究結果，提出資訊系統發展建議，以供司法單位未來進行業務電腦化之參考。英文摘要：Like many other organizations, the Judicial Yuan has invested enormous amounts of capital in information technology infrastructure and information systems to boost staff job performance. To understand the relationship between individual performance and task fitness, this study incorporates Task-Technology Fit Theory and outcome expectation from Social Cognitive Theory, along with concepts of self-efficacy, condition facilitation, and organizational cohesiveness to propose a model to explore factors impacting judicial personnel’s job performance. To develop more suitable research model and questionnaires, in-depth interviews were conducted with nine High Court and District Court officers. Content analysis results were used to adjust the research model and enhance the measurement items. A questionnaire survey was then administered, resulting in 138 valid responses. Results find that task-technology fit and outcome expectation have a significant impact on judicial personnel's job performance, task characteristics, and technology characteristics, while individual characteristics (adaptability) indirectly affect job performance through task-technology fit. Meanwhile, system self-efficacy and technology facilitating conditions indirectly affect job performance through outcome expectation.起始頁-結束頁：273-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.APR.A102-08310篇名：服務體驗管理：亞洲文獻回顧與未來研究方向並列篇名：Service Experience Management in Asia: A Review and Directions for Future Research作者：林俊昇(Chris Jiun-Sheng Lin);林政佑(Cheng-Yu Lin);周恩頤(En-Yi Chou)關鍵字：服務體驗;顧客與服務人員管理;服務環境管理;顧客參與及自助服務科技;服務失誤補救與顧客忠誠度管理;service experience;customer and employee management;service environment;customer participation and self-service technologies;service recovery and customer loyalty management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：26卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：服務體驗是現今服務業最重要的議題之一，也是服務公司競爭力的主要來源，由於過去針對服務體驗有系統性的文獻甚為缺乏，學術界至今缺乏研究相關文獻回顧與未來研究方向呼籲。本研究以國內外主要期刊之亞洲服務業相關內外部行銷相關文獻為基礎，回顧以亞洲題材為主的服務接觸與服務傳遞的相關服務體驗文獻，探討七大服務體驗研究主題：顧客與服務人員情緒、服務人員管理、服務環境、顧客參與、自助服務與科技、服務失誤與補救與顧客忠誠度管理。在每個主題中，分別探討兩大研究問題：(1)我們從過去文獻學到了什麼？(2)未來研究應探討哪些議題？本研究提供了相當有用的研究洞察，並指出未來研究具有潛力的方向，提供未來研究相當完整的基礎與指引。英文摘要：Service experience is an important issue for the management of service firms in Asia, yet there lacks a thorough review of research literature in this field. In this review paper, we address two key questions from a service experience perspective: (1) what have we learned from prior research about service experience in Asia and (2) what major issues should future research in this area address. We examine these questions under seven major topics: customer/employee emotion, service employee management, service environments, customer participation, self-service technologies, service failure/recovery, and customer loyalty management. Our review offers useful insights and identifies many fruitful topics and questions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：303-352資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2016.MAR.25104-00501篇名：正視未知的風險知識資產：以知識創造為中心的風險治理架構並列篇名：Taking Seriously the Unknown Knowledge Asset of Risk: The Adaptive Risk Governance Framework of Knowledge Creation作者：歐陽瑜(Shirley Ouyang);周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou)關鍵字：風險治理;跨界風險;風險知識;知識資產;risk governance;transboundary risk;risk knowledge;knowledge asset期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：58期出版年：2016中文摘要：在全球知識經濟的時代，管理跨界風險成為全世界國家與企業領袖共同面對的難題。傳統風險管理多採量化、化約主義分析模式，將風險視為一種客體，以控制、沖抵、忽視等不同方式管理風險，對風險多採取負面的觀點，很少將風險知識視作組織的知識資產。這種客觀的風險本體論觀點，在全球風險社會已不足以協助國家與組織馴服無孔不入的跨界風險。本文採社會建構論觀點，提出新的風險本體論主張：認為風險管理就是一種組織內未知風險知識的管理。本文以作業風險管理為例，提出以知識創造理論為中心之調適性風險治理架構。在理論上，此架構有助協調風險與發展的兩極對立；在實務上，有助於協助治理者進行跨層次的風險治理與整合調適，建立後設治理網絡。英文摘要：Conventional rationalist problem solving seeks to eliminate uncertainty, ambivalence and interference from uncontrolled influences. This kind of problem solving often leads to unintended consequences, escalating problems due to transboundary risk. In this paper, we outline a social constructive perspective that deals with the problems of ignoring risks and the fallacies of risk management. We suggest that knowledge management and risk management could be two sides of the same coin. We propose a new ontological claim of risk that knowledge management could be adopted to unfold the unknown risk asset in an organization. In order to reconcile the dilemma of development and risk, we suggest a new adaptive risk governance framework in terms of knowledge creation. Theoretically, this framework provides contribution to transform the past negative risk perception as a competing concept to development. Practically, the framework also provides a second-order knowledge network in multi-layer, cross-layer organizations for the integration of organizational knowledge assets. Through a dynamic participatory risk knowledge creation process from organizations to countries, the proposed framework could facilitate the increased unfolding of embedded systemic risk.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160900580012篇名：批判種族理論的批判性反思並列篇名：Critiquing the Critical Race Theory作者：黃之棟(Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：批判種族理論;敘事方法學;利益匯集論;經驗批判種族理論;Critical Race Theory (CRT);storytelling/narrative;interest convergence;EmpiriCrit;Empirical Critical Race Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：58期出版年：2016中文摘要：「批判種族理論」（Critical Race Theory; CRT）泛指了學界、實務界及運動界對種族（race）和種族主義（racism）議題的反思與探索。三十餘年來，不管是在視角、觀點、方法，還是論證上，都對學界產生了深遠的影響。本文試圖從社會科學的角度，檢討這個源自於法學領域的理論方案。本文認為，批判種族理論提出了一套與傳統法學截然不同的觀點與方法論，並跨領域影響了教育、文化研究、公共政策等領域。惟發展二十多年以來，學派內外部都深切期待CRT 能在理論與方法上能夠有所開展，論者也紛紛尋求進一步跨界（interdisciplinary）、交錯（intersectional）的可能。對此，本研究提出「經驗批判種族理論」（EmpiriCrit; Empirical Critical Race Theory），主張未來CRT 可以和經驗研究進一步結合，以便能在理論爭辯與命題檢證上更臻完備。英文摘要：Critical Race Theory (CRT) refers to a legal and political body of scholarship that aims to examine how legal traditions and political ideologies are used to produce and maintain conditions of social injustice. Contrary to the widely held belief that the law is neutral and objective, CRT argues that race and racism are deeply embedded in our legal and political system. Given that race and racism have already become the very foundation of the system, correctly identifying and labeling it is rather difficult. To overcome these difficulties, CRT established innovative methods, theoretical frameworks, and its basic tenets. This article critically analyses CRT's groundbreaking scholarship through the lens of social sciences. It begins by highlighting CRT's internal and external critiques and then discusses how CRT has evolved and developed from these intellectual debates. It turns to argue that, with the passage of time, CRT is approaching an intellectual bottleneck. One way to move forward is to further collaborate with the social sciences and in turn to create a new synergy, namely EmpiriCrit (Empirical Critical Race Theory). The achievement of social sciences is particularly useful for providing CRT with empirical data and analytical tools to further triangulate their core claims.起始頁-結束頁：53-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320160900580023篇名：化解社會對立？海特的認知模型及其批判並列篇名：Defusing Social Conflicts? A Critical Note on Haidt's Cognitive Model作者：洪子偉(Tzu-Wei Hung)關鍵字：海特;道德直覺;策略推理;道德感測機制;心智模組論;Haidt;moral intuition;strategy reasoning;moral taste buds;modularity of mind期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：58期出版年：2016中文摘要：為何不同政黨的支持者總深信自己才是代表正義的一方？為何都認為對方昧於黑白分明的事實卻不願「覺醒」？為何美國南方的工農階級明明是共和黨主政下的經濟受害者，卻不投票支持捍衛他們權益的民主黨？面對民主國家日益嚴重的價值對立，心理學家Jonathan Haidt 研究大腦所演化的認知結構與決策程序來提出解決方案。本文目的，正是針對海特在政治與道德判斷的認知模型提出三個建設性批判。我將論證，海特的優點在指出人類判斷與決策時，心理機制中鮮少被注意的重要因素。但他對心理的「實然」描述因僅著重於部分事實，從而削弱他所提出的「應然」對策。英文摘要：Jonathan Haidt (2012) presents a socio-psychological analysis on the nature of social conflicts-the widespread disagreements on race, politics, and religion among different groups-in democratic societies. Despite Haidt's insights, this paper criticizes and complements his analysis in three ways. First, it examines the relationship between the ”intuitive dog” and its ”rational tail,” and explains how the latter affects the former. It then offers counterexamples to show that Haidt's use of the modularity of mind to justify his six fundamental moral principles may be problematic. Finally, to complement his valuable suggestions, it proposes three additional ways to defuse conflicts.起始頁-結束頁：129-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201609005800301篇名：洛克的金錢拜物教：作為財產之勞動原則與同意原則之辯證統一並列篇名：Locke's Money-Fetishism: As Dialectical Unity of the Principles of Labour and Consent of Property作者：孫善豪(Shan-Hao Sun)關鍵字：洛克;勞動原則／同意原則;財產／地產;錢;拜物教;Locke;principle of labour/principle of consent;property/property in land;money;fetishism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：59期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文論證的是：1. 財產的「勞動原則」，雖然是洛克明顯地提出的，但是它不能當作一個獨立於「同意原則」之外的財產原則；2. 洛克未必沒有察覺此一缺陷，所以，他也隱密地同意了「同意原則」。3. 這兩種原則分別適用於兩種財產：勞動財產與土地財產。4. 兩種財產，在「金錢」上獲得了統一。5. 但是，「金錢」本身的性質，卻是洛克缺乏說明的。甚至，正由於缺乏說明，所以成了「偶像」，以致「金錢拜物」其實是洛克理論的最後歸宿。英文摘要：It is argued in this article that 1. The principle of labour, though asserted as the exoteric justification of property by Locke himself, cannot be claimed as an independent principle from the consent one. 2. Locke has introduced the consent principle as an esoteric one, with or without awareness, in order to overcome the shortage of the principle of labour. 3. These two principles were respectively in two kinds of property suitable: labour property and property in land. 4. Money played the role of the unity of both kinds of property. 5. Due to Locke's want of an understanding of the essence of money, the latter became a Fetish, and the Fetishism of Money served as the last setting of Locke's theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320161200590012篇名：馴服《利維坦》？霍布斯與絕對主義並列篇名：Taming Leviathan? Hobbes and Absolutism作者：周家瑜(Chia-Yu Chou)關鍵字：霍布斯;絕對主義;布蘭豪;克拉倫登伯爵;主權理論;Thomas Hobbes;Absolutism;Bramhall;Earl of Clarendon;Sovereignty Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：59期出版年：2016中文摘要：霍布斯經常被認為是支持絕對主義（absolutism）之思想家，但是在甚麼意義下霍布斯支持「絕對主義」本身仍然是霍布斯研究中的爭論焦點，近年來研究霍布斯的學者似乎漸漸讀出了一個較具自由主義精神的霍布斯，而這個被重新詮釋的霍布斯與傳統詮釋相較，威權（authoritarian）之氣大減，自由主義氣質大增，因此塔頓（Charles D. Tarlton）在一系列的文章中對這種「馴服／解放霍布斯」（taming/liberalizing Hobbes）的詮釋傾向提出嚴厲批評，認為這樣的詮釋誤解了霍布斯的絕對主義。在這篇文章中，筆者藉由探討霍布斯當代保王派人士如Bramhall 與Earl of Clarendon 對霍布斯的批評，對塔頓的詮釋提出挑戰，也期望對霍布斯主權理論的爭議提出新線索。英文摘要：It is commonly argued that Hobbes advocates absolutism. In what sense Hobbes's sovereignty theory is absolutist, however, remains a moot question. The dispute lies in Hobbes's claims of the contractarian basis of sovereign power and also his insistence of subjects's resistance right. Therefore C.D. Tarlton argues that the history of Hobbes studies is basically the history of taming or liberalizing Hobbes's Leviathan. By so arguing, Tarlton intends to see Hobbes's Leviathan as a defense of despotical and absolute political powers by using a Lockean point of view. In this article, I intend to argue against this interpretation by investigating the criticism of his royalist contemporaries (such as Bramhall and Edward Hyde, later the 1st Earl of Clarendon).起始頁-結束頁：51-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320161200590023篇名：公民哲學的理念：從政治自由主義到公民儒學並列篇名：An Idea of Civic Philosophy: From Political Liberalism to Civic Confucianism作者：鄧育仁(Norman Y. Teng)關鍵字：民主;多元;理由;儒學;羅爾斯;Confucianism;democracy;pluralism;reason;Rawls期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：59期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文檢討羅爾斯原初位置的想法，提出何以該想法需要調整，並說明如何由儒學觀點，改良羅爾斯正義即公平的原則。在難以調和的價值衝突與深度歧見的問題上，羅爾斯的看法，雖精義迭出，但仍有其限制。確切來說，循羅爾斯的政治觀點，我們看不到，因此也無從去處理，總隱含在現代民主過程中自毀的力量。我嘗試把儒學作為一種公民哲學來發展，從而梳理出一種合宜的、能克服羅爾斯觀點限制的公民哲學的理念。英文摘要：This paper examines Rawls's idea of the original position, argues for a fine-tuning of that idea, and proposes a Confucian revision of the principles of justice as fairness. My argument also reveals a limitation of Rawls's approach to intractable value conflict and deep disagreement - namely, that it fails to detect, and thus pays no attention to, the fact that there are always self-defeating forces implicit in modern democratic processes. I argue for an idea of civic philosophy, and develop a Confucian version of civic philosophy, to overcome that limitation.起始頁-結束頁：93-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320161200590034篇名：轉型正義的政治與法律哲學論壇－加害者的過去與現在式作者：謝世民;蔡英文;蘇慧婕;陳俊宏;葉浩;陳昭如;吳乃德期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：59期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：153-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201612005900401篇名：威權環境主義流域治理之機制與限制：以中國昆明河長制度為例並列篇名：Authoritarian Environmentalism and River Leader System in Kunming, China作者：簡旭伸(Shiuh-Shen Chien)關鍵字：水污染;河長制;威權環境主義;昆明滇池;water pollution;River Leader System;authoritarian environmentalism;Kunming;Dian Lake期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：隨著高度的都市化與經濟發展，中國的水污染問題日益嚴峻。為解決此一難題，中國地方政府近年來採取一名為「河長制」的流域治理模式，即將特定河流的主流與支流，指派由領導黨政幹部做為「河長（或段長）」，負責改善河流的水質，而水污染治理的結果，會納入黨政幹部的年度政績考核評分。我們認為中國河長制之制度設計，體現威權環境主義（authoritarianenvironmentalism）的核心邏輯，將治水責任改為透過黨政體系發包流域治理責任、水質改善納入政績競賽、轄區界線設置水質監測點落實考核。本文以昆明滇池做為研究個案，探討河長制對流域治理動員地方黨政領導幹部之制度運作，說明河長制雖然短期對水質改善有所成效，然而長期卻以大量迫遷與土地貪污等高額社會與政治成本作為代價。英文摘要：Since 1978, China has witnessed rapid urbanization and economic development at the cost of environmental degradation. In recent years, the Chinese Communist Party（CCP）initiated the river leader system, through which local leading cadres are assigned to be responsible for water quality of certain rivers. In this system, results of river quality control are connected to cadres’ political promotion. I argue that the river leader system presents certain characteristics of authoritarian environmentalism under CCP, including（1）hierarchical operation through subcontracting performance, （2）inter-jurisdiction competition motivating local leaders, and（3）quotaoriented territorial management. The case of river leader for Dian Lake, Kunming of Yunnan province, is empirically examined to discuss detailed mechanisms and effectiveness of the river leaders system. Along with the improved water quality of Dian Lake is a forced displacement and production of alleged land-related corruption. I conclude that the river leader system in China may enhance better environment for the short term at the expense of social and political unsustainability in the long run.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201612_59(4).00012篇名：中國大陸公共治理與經濟發展之關係並列篇名：Public Governance and Economic Development in Mainland China作者：黃瓊如(Chiung-Ju Huang);何艷宏(Yuan-Hong Ho)關鍵字：公共治理;人均GDP;頻域;Granger因果關係檢定;Public governance;GDP per capita;frequency domain;Granger causality test期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文採用新發展的頻域Granger 因果關係檢定（frequency domain Granger causality test），檢定1996~2013年間，中國大陸的公共治理與其經濟發展之間的因果關係。實證結果顯示，在公共治理的六個指標中，「公民表達與課責」與「防治貪腐」在短期內對實質人均國內生產毛額（Gross Domestic Product, GDP）沒有顯著的影響，但分別經過7.14 年與24.17 年之後，「公民表達與課責」與「防治貪腐」對實質人均GDP 就會呈現顯著的影響。「政府效能」對實質人均GDP 的影響只有在2.74 年內才顯著。「政治穩定與杜統暴力」、「監管品質」以及「法治化程度」則在所有頻率範圍內對實質人均GDP 並沒有顯著的影響效果。此外，中國的實質人均GDP 在所有頻率範圍內對「法治化程度」有顯著的影響。英文摘要：This study utilizes the frequency domain Granger causality test to examine the causal relationship between six dimensions of governance and economic growth in China using the Worldwide Governance Indicators over the 1996~2013 period. The empirical results show that China's ”voice and accountability” and ”control of corruption” have no significant impact on real GDP per capita in the short-run. The ”voice and accountability” and ”control of corruption” Granger causes real GDP per capita with a wavelength of more than 7.14 years and 24.1 years, respectively. However, the ”government effectiveness” Granger causes real GDP per capita with a wavelength of less than 2.74 years. As to ”political stability and absence of violence”, ”regulatory quality”, and ”rule of law”, there is no evidence of Granger causality from these three dimensions to real GDP per capita at any frequency. In addition, similar to China's real GDP per capita, ”rule of law” is significantly affected by the economic growth at all frequencies.起始頁-結束頁：25-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201612_59(4).00023篇名：中共中央政治局委員菁英甄補研究：「十六大」至「十八大」實證分析並列篇名：Elite Recruitment for Politburo Members in the Chinese Communist Party: An Empirical Assessment of the 16th-18th Party Congresses作者：陳德昇(Te-Sheng Chen);王信實(Shinn-Shyr Wang);周秝宸(Li-Chen Chou)關鍵字：菁英甄補;中共中央政治局委員;中央委員;十八大;Elite Recruitment;Politburo Member;Central Committee Member;18th Party Congress of the Chinese Communist Party（18th CCP Party Congress）期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：有關中共高層政治菁英甄補的文獻研究，雖然提供研究者相當具啟發性之思維，然而這類的研究在量化分析上仍有其局限性。主要原因在於單一面向的解讀，難以掌握中共菁英政治的本質與全貌。此外，制度化因素的局限與人治色彩不確定性亦難以捉摸。因此，針對中共派系與權力的運作，建構更科學研判機制與客觀評量標準，有其必要性。此舉亦有助於解讀中共政治繼承與菁英甄補之運作和變遷趨勢。本研究系統性地蒐集中共「十六大」至「十八大」之中央委員與候補中央委員的背景與特徵，運用統計方法探討這些變因如何影響中共的幹部菁英入選中央政治局委員。實證分析顯示，派系政治運作是決定中央政治局委員人選的重要因素，中央委員與候補中央委員的幹部級別、地方歷練次數與教育程度的重要性居次。英文摘要：Studies on recruitment of high-ranking elites in the Chinese Communist Party（CCP）, despite their inspiration to researchers, are limited for quantitative analysis. The main reason stems from difficulties in comprehending the nature and complete picture of CCP elite politics. Furthermore, limitations of institutional factors and uncertainties of rule by man are also hard to capture. Therefore, there is a need to construct a more scientific mechanism of determination and an objective standard of assessment towards factions and operations within the CCP. This also promotes understanding of the operations and changes of political succession and elite recruitment. This study systematically collects backgrounds and characteristics of the Central Committee Members and Alternative Central Committee Members from the 16^(th) to 18^(th) CCP Party Congresses, and uses statistical methods to explore how these factors influence selection of elites as Politburo Members. Empirical analyses show that the operation of faction politics is one of the most important factors that determine the selection of Politburo Members while cadre rank, local experience, and education are secondary.起始頁-結束頁：49-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201612_59(4).00034篇名：Indonesia's Debate and Response to China's One Belt, One Road Initiative: Balancing between Developmental Incentives and Geopolitical Anxieties並列篇名：印尼對中國一帶一路政策之辯論與回應：發展誘因與地緣政治焦慮間的平衡作者：Vibhanshu Shekhar關鍵字：Indonesia-China Relations;One Belt One Road;Global Maritime Fulcrum;Hedging;印中關係;一帶一路;全球海上支柱;防範期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：China's One Belt, One Road（OBOR）initiative, dubbed as a grand strategy of a great power, aims at consolidating Beijing's strategic presence across both the continental Eurasia and maritime Indo-Pacific, encompassing three continents, three oceans, and various regions and sub-regions. Its Maritime component – the Maritime Silk Road Initiative – has produced a robust domestic debate in Indonesia, marked by somewhat polarized voices between those advocating active participation in the Chinese initiative given its development incentives and those suggesting caution and nonparticipation due to Beijing's assertive maritime strategy. These opposite narratives reflect multiple facets and the changing character of Indonesia's China discourse during the 21st century. As the OBOR initiative gains clarity, Indonesian responses have changed from one of indifference during the Yudhoyono presidency to active engagement under the Jokowi government. The Jokowi government's doctrine of global maritime fulcrum and the emphasis on economic diplomacy have pushed forth the narrative of complementarity and synergy between the two policy initiatives. However, the actual scale of engagement has remained limited due to various structural and operational challenges emanating from Indonesia's politico-economic structure, the troubled nature of Chinese investment in Indonesia and persistent mistrust among the policy makers against the Chinese intent in the South China Sea.英文摘要：被稱為大國戰略的一帶一路政策，中國旨在鞏固北京在歐亞大陸和印度洋/太平洋海域的戰略地位，涵蓋三大洲、三大洋、各區域和分區域。其海上絲綢之路倡議海事部分在印尼引起了強烈的國內兩極辯論：其分別是因為具有發展誘因而積極參予中國的倡議政策，和因北京具侵略性的海洋政策而謹慎不參與。這些相反的敘述反映了21 世紀印尼的中國政策論述的多面性和變化性。隨著一帶一路倡議的明確性，印尼的反應從在尤多約諾總統期間的冷漠變為在喬科威政府下積極參與。喬科威政府的全球海洋支柱政策和對經濟外交的強調，推動了兩國政策倡議之間的互補和協同。然而，由於印尼的政治經濟結構，中國投資印尼的問題，以及印尼政策制定者對中國在南中國海意圖的不信任，所產生的各種結構性和操作性挑戰，印尼實際參與一帶一路政策仍然有限。起始頁-結束頁：81-112資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201612_59(4).00045篇名：「馬習會」對兩岸政治談判的民意衝擊：一項臺灣民眾的民意調查分析並列篇名：Impact of the Ma-Xi Meeting on Taiwanese Public Opinion Regarding Cross-Strait Political Negotiation作者：楊喜慧(Hsi-Hui Yang);鄭龍水(Long-Shui Cheng);陳明通(Ming-Tong Chen)關鍵字：馬習會;兩岸政治談判;馬英九;習近平;Ma-Xi summit;cross-Strait political negotiation;Ma Ying-jeou;Xi Jinping期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本論文為一政策導向的論文，主要在探討「馬習會」後，國人何以對兩岸政治談判的支持度急速下滑？是因為馬總統在習近平面前不夠捍衛臺灣主權與尊嚴，擔心其無法勝任未來的兩岸政治談判？還是習近平的表現讓臺灣人民覺得其不可信任，未來兩岸如果走到政治深水區，臺灣不可能從習近平手中獲得什麼好處，而影響到臺灣人民對兩岸政治談判的意願？為了回答此一問題，本論文透過兩次民調，探討國人對「馬習會」的評價，並比較「馬習會」前後，臺灣民眾對兩岸政治談判的看法。研究結果發現，「馬習會」前贊成兩岸政治談判的民眾高達67.3%，不贊成13.7%；但是「馬習會」後贊成52.6%，不贊成34.2%；兩相比較，贊成兩岸政治談判下降14.7%；不贊成則提高20.5%，一來一往相差35.2%。為何如此？本論文透過「二元勝算對數模型」分析發現，主要問題出在習近平，因為對習不信任感增加，而降低兩岸政治談判的意願；也出在民眾整體感覺「馬習會」對臺灣比較不利，既然如此，進一步談判兩岸政治關係的意願當然會下降。這樣的研究結果，不僅具有學術意義，亦具有政策指導功能，是為本論文最大的貢獻。英文摘要：This policy-oriented paper examines Taiwanese public opinion regarding cross Strait political negotiation before and after the Ma-Xi Meeting and why support for negotiation dropped precipitously following the meeting. Was the drop due to public perceptions that Taiwan's president Ma Ying-jeou didn't sufficiently protect Taiwan's sovereignty and dignity in front of China's leader Xi Jinping? Or did Xi's performance at the meeting cause many Taiwanese to believe he is not trustworthy and that moving into the ”deep water zone” of political negotiation with the Xi-led regime in Beijing would bring no benefit to Taiwan? To analyze this question, this study uses public opinion surveys regarding cross-Strait political negotiation conducted before and after the Ma-Xi Meeting to assess the meeting's influence on Taiwanese attitudes toward cross-Strait political negotiation. The surveys show that prior to the summit, 67.3% of Taiwanese approved of cross-Strait political negotiation while 13.7% opposed it. After the meeting, support for political negotiation fell to 52.6% while opposition rose to 34.2%. Binary logit model analysis suggests that increased distrust of Chinese president Xi Jinping following the summit and perceptions that the leadership meeting was relatively unfavorable to Taiwan decreased support among Taiwanese for Taipei to engage in political negotiation with Beijing. These findings have important implications for policy-making on both sides regarding cross-Strait political negotiation.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201609_59(3).00016篇名：從中美與東亞間貿易的互動看中國大陸的貿易在垂直生產的角色：基於貿易數據之觀察並列篇名：China's Role in Vertical Specialization of Production and China/US’s Trade to East Asian Countries: An Observation Based on Trade Date作者：洪淑芬(Shu-Fen Hung)關鍵字：中美貿易;垂直專業化;BEC;東亞;Sino-US trade;vertical specialization;BEC;East Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究的主要目的是探討中美貿易在與東亞主要經濟體貿易互動中的特徵，並根據聯合國（United Nations）生產階段（production stages）的大類經濟類別（Broad Economic Categories; BEC）的數據及Lafay國際專業化指標探討中國大陸對東亞主要經濟體、美國以及歐盟十五國的外貿比較優勢，進而了解中國大陸貿易在東亞國際垂直生產階段的角色。結論發現，中國大陸不但在中間產品對世界與東亞的貿易已由貿易逆差轉變為貿易順差，而且中國大陸最終產品中的消費品對世界的貿易由貿易順差轉變為貿易逆差。中國大陸貿易結構與生產分工已不再是簡單的加工組裝貿易，同時中國大陸對東亞經濟體（日韓）的貿易也不再以進口中間產品再做簡單的加工裝配為主，而是有生產技術產品所需的機械設備的資本品的出口。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate characteristics of Sino-US trade and China's trade of specialization in a particular stage of production among East Asian economies. Based on data collected from the Broad Economic Categories（BEC）of the United Nations of Production Stages and the Lafay index, China trade comparative advantages among East Asian, US, and European Union-15 economies are investigated, and China's role in the trade of East Asia vertical specialization is evaluated. The findings of this study show that China's intermediate goods trade with both the world and East Asia turns into trade surplus, while China's consumer goods trade with the world also turns into trade deficit. The trade structure of China is no longer a simple processing and assembling trade. China's trade with East Asian economies（especially Japan and South Korea）is not limited to importing intermediate goods for assembling trade, but includes capital goods exports, such as mechanical equipments that are needed to produce technical products.起始頁-結束頁：39-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201609_59(3).00027篇名：Is China a Challenger? The Predicament of China's Reformist Initiatives in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank並列篇名：中國是個挑戰者嗎？中國在亞投行推動改革倡議的困境作者：陳宗巖(Ian Tsung-Yen Chen)關鍵字：Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank;international financial institutions;voting power;China;亞洲基礎建設投資銀行;國際金融組織;投票權力;中國期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：This paper assesses whether the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank（AIIB）signals China's reformist intention in the area of international development. I use both descriptive and inferential statistics to compare power distribution in the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank（ADB）, and the AIIB, and the composition of the AIIB membership. Evidence shows that there is no obvious structural difference in voting power among the three banks. The major difference between them is that China is the most powerful state in the AIIB. For the time being, at least, the AIIB does not signal Beijing's intention to reform the current system. Instead, the bank seems to be an instrument for China to compete with established international financial institutions. However, Beijing may be faced with several challenges. First, dissatisfied members of the World Bank will not find a remedy for the organization's shortcomings in the AIIB. The problem of unequal representation structure remains. Second, the AIIB is unlikely to facilitate formation of a China-led alliance, nor is it likely to adopt global best practice due to disparity of interests among its members. Third, Washington and Tokyo are probably right to refuse to join the AIIB and to devote more attention to strengthening the World Bank and the ADB instead. Greater competition among the three is likely to reduce the AIIB's influence. To sum up, it is difficult to detect any reformist intention behind the AIIB, and it is still too weak an organization to facilitate formation of a strong alliance by means of which China can carry out its international agenda.英文摘要：這篇論文檢視亞投行的成立是否透露出中國試圖在國際發展金融領域中的改革意圖，本文使用描述統計與推論統計的數據來比較各國在世界銀行、亞洲開發銀行與亞投行的權力分佈，以及分析亞投行會員國的組成結構。研究證據顯示，這三個銀行在投票權力的結構上並沒有明顯的差異，而最主要的差異在於，在亞投行當中，中國首次成為最有權力的會員國。截至目前為止，客觀條件並未能看出亞投行欲改革當今國際金融體系的意圖；反之，亞投行較像是中國用來與主要國際金融組織競爭的工具，而在此競爭下，中國可能將面臨數個挑戰。第一，對世界銀行的缺點感到不滿的會員國，將難以在亞投行找到滿意的解答；第二，由於會員國對所追求的利益可能存在著差異，亞投行將難以形成一能夠個由中國主導的聯盟，亦難以在銀行治理中採用國際最佳實踐；第三，美國與日本為了抵制亞投行而拒絕加入亞投行，並增加對世界銀行與亞洲開發銀行資源的投入，其策略可能是正確的，因為三者間更激烈的競爭，將降低亞投行的影響力。總的來看，目前尚難以看出亞投行的改革企圖，銀行目前依然虛弱，尚不足以形成一個堅強的聯盟，來配合中國實現其對外政策之目標。起始頁-結束頁：83-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201609_59(3).00038篇名：One Belt, One Road: Visions and Challenges of China's Geoeconomic Strategy並列篇名：一帶一路：中國地緣經濟戰略的願景與挑戰作者：蒲曉宇(Xiaoyu Pu)關鍵字：OBOR;China;geoeconomic strategy;grand strategy;一帶一路;中國;地緣經濟;大戰略期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：This article aims to provide a conceptual and theoretical framework to analyze motivations, dilemmas, and challenges of China's OBOR strategy. The article argues that OBOR could be viewed as China's new geoeconomic strategy. Potentially creating a new, China-led economic, diplomatic, and security system, OBOR has great potential to transform China's domestic and foreign policy. Uncertainties of OBOR are largely due to the fact that China is still uncertain about its role on the world stage. While OBOR is an ambitious plan, it faces many challenges, including security threats, geopolitical competition, and regional backlash. As political logic potentially trumps economic rationales, OBOR might worsen the policy atmosphere of China's market-driven reform. Ultimately, the future of China's economic power will shape OBOR's trajectory.英文摘要：本文提出一個概念與理論分析框架，以探討中國一帶一路戰略的動機、困境與挑戰。本文主張一帶一路可以被看成是中國新的地緣經濟戰略。一帶一路可能構造一個中國主導的經濟、外交與安全體系，從而深刻影響中國內政外交的轉型。一帶一路的不確定性在於，中國對於自己在世界舞台上應當擔負的角色有極大的不確定。雖然是一項目標遠大的戰略，一帶一路卻面臨很多挑戰，包括安全威脅、地緣競爭、區域反彈。如果政治邏輯挑戰經濟理性，一帶一路可能惡化中國市場導向的經濟改革所處的政策環境。中國未來的經濟實力將最終決定一帶一路的發展前景。起始頁-結束頁：111-132資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201609_59(3).00049篇名：一個刻板印象，兩種不同政策：比較兩岸在非洲的「神農」們並列篇名：One Stereotype, Two Diverse Policies: Comparing Taiwan and China's ”Gods of Agriculture” in Africa作者：劉曉鵬(Philip Hsiao-Pong Liu)關鍵字：農業援助;中非關係;種族主義;國際合作發展基金會;Agricultural Aid;Sino-African Relations;Racism;International Cooperation and Development Fund期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文分析兩岸援助論述中的「神農」們如何反映出政策與種族刻板印象。1980年代前，中國強調非洲人極為崇敬無私農業援助。然而，改革開放後中國混合援助與投資，不僅改善援助效率，也壯大在非洲的投資。因此，當代論述變成非洲人崇敬中國農企業。相較於中國的混合式援助政策，台灣半世紀來仍習於無利可圖的援助模式，因此論述都是非洲人極為崇敬無私援助。作者主張為改善援助效率並準備來日中國的外交挑戰，台北應考慮北京模式進行援外改革。英文摘要：This paper analyzes how ”Gods of Agriculture” in Taiwan and China's aid discourses reveal policies and racial stereotype. Before the 1980s, China emphasized on Africa's deep adoration for selfless agricultural aid. However, after the economic reform, China mixed in aid with investment, which not only improved aid efficiency, but also strengthened Chinese investment in Africa. Therefore, contemporary discourses become one of Africa's adoration of Chinese agri-businesses. In contrast to China's hybrid aid policies, Taiwan's aid still maintains a non-profit model since half century ago, so discourses in Taiwan have been all about Africa's deep adoration of selfless aid. The author argues that to improve aid efficiency and to prepare for the next diplomatic challenge from China, Taipei should consider aid reform by following Beijing's model.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201606_59(2).000110篇名：穩定壓倒一切？改革開放初期中國大陸天津市的發展模式探討並列篇名：Maintaining Stability is of Top Priority: A Pro-Stability Machine in Tianjin作者：陳蓉怡(Rung-Yi Chen)關鍵字：超穩定機器;成長機器;天津;路徑依賴;Pro-stability Machine;Growth Machine;Tianjin;Path Dependence期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：成長機器模式能否通則化解釋所有中國大陸城市的發展軌跡？奠基於分權化的背景以及預設城市的競爭性之下，成長機器概念被大量的運用於中國大陸城市研究；然而，這樣的推論必須考量到中國大陸幹部特殊的政績機會主義以及城市初始條件的限制；本文以天津為個案，提出超穩定機器的城市發展模式，研究顯示進入改革開放時期後的天津當局，更強調社會維穩甚於經濟增長，對於通貨膨脹率以及失業率的調控成為城市政治的優先議程。本文認為，天津個案可以與成長機器、發展型國家甚至是企業家型國家等中國大陸城市研究理論框架，進行有意義的對話。另兩個有趣的實務問題則是，面對全新的政治生態，地方政府的行為模式如何轉化？中共當局已然強調未來將不再以GDP論英雄，超穩定的發展思維有否可能成為未來中國大陸城市發展的另一種替代模式，值得觀察。英文摘要：This paper aims to identify patterns of urban development in China, using Tianjin as a specific case. Existing literature attempting to explore the dynamics of urban development in China have been made predominantly on the basis of the ”growth machine” model, which takes the growth of cities as a result of interaction among some internal urban-based players for pecuniary gains and property development. Yet, I argue that to directly apply the growth machine model to explain situations in a socialist society, such as China, may not lead to precise assessment. This paper seeks to fill the gap in existing literature that pays scant attention to the urban renewal experience in Tianjin as a traditionally significant developmental center in north China. This paper, therefore, will make important contributions in two aspects. First, it will shed light on the institutional reform process in Tianjin that is critical to the developmental catch-up of the city. Second, it will offer a fresh insight into the debates on the urban development models in contemporary China.起始頁-結束頁：37-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201606_59(2).000211篇名：彭真在「文革」前中共對外關係中的角色和活動（1949∼1966）並列篇名：Peng Zhen's Roles and Activities in the Foreign Relations of the People's Republic of China before the Cultural Revolution (1949~1966)作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;中蘇關係;議會外交;首都外交;Peng Zhen;Sino-Soviet Relations;Congress Diplomacy;Capital Diplomacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：關於彭真對中共早期對外關係與工作的參與程度和活動情況，現有的中、西文獻皆對之注意不夠、甚至是低估忽視。彭真在「文革」前經常出席毛澤東主持的中央高層會議（尤其是政治局常委會），直接與聞重大對外決策的形成過程；他以中央書記處第二號人物的身分，也時常過問黨和政府對外部門和事務的領導工作。彭真的對外活動主要表現在四個方面：一、協助中央處理對蘇聯的關係，多次參與中蘇高層會談，身處與蘇鬥爭和辯論的最前線，每以強硬的反「修正主義」者面貌示人。二、頻繁接見外賓，一方面介紹和辯護中共的治國政策和結果；另一方面宣傳和推銷中共反「蘇修」主張和對外政策。三、以政黨外交或議會外交為名出國訪問，力在增進邦誼和拉攏友黨，在國際上為中共爭取「反帝」、「反修」和「反殖民主義」的戰略夥伴。四、主持首都外交，既向其他共黨國家首都兜售執政經驗，也藉由與非邦交國城市的往來，拓展雙邊實質關係；同時著力發揮北京市作為中共對外窗口和講台的角色。彭真在對外關係的忠於職守和恪遵使命，可謂是毛澤東激進對外政策的一名主要幫手和得力推手。如此讓彭真聞名國際和享譽國內，中共中央在對外事務上也有對之進一步委以重任的趨勢；惟因彭真在「文革」初倒台而中斷告止。彭真在「改革開放」時期因其職權分工和年邁高齡，他在對外工作上的重要性和活躍度，已不能與「文革」以前的盛況相比。英文摘要：Peng Zhen's role in the external relations of the People's Republic of China has received little research attention, and has been underestimated. Before eruption of the Cultural Revolution, Peng often attended central meetings, especially the Politburo Standing Committee meetings, presided by Mao Zedong, and participated in decision-making of major foreign policies. Besides, as the second-ranking leader of the Central Secretariat under Deng Xiaoping, Peng had the power and authority to lead and direct works of the International Liaison Department of the Chinese Communist Party and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Peng's main roles and activities in this policy field include the following: first, Peng devotedly assisted the Mao-led Party center to deal with Sino-Soviet relations, always being the vanguard for criticizing and opposing so-called revisionists; second, Peng often received foreign guests on behalf of the central authority, zealously propagandizing the nation's domestic and foreign policies; third, Peng visited many countries in order to strengthen relationships with other socialist states or to find strategic partners in anti-imperialism, anti-revisionism and anti-colonialism; fourth, as the Party Secretary and mayor of the PRC's capital, Beijing Municipality, Peng enthusiastically pushed the capital towards capital diplomacy to support and supplement official governmental diplomacy. Consequently, Peng was one of the most fervent activists in promoting and carrying out Mao's radical foreign policies. In contrast with his active and important role in foreign relations during the pre-Cultural Revolution period, in the Reform and Opening-up period, Peng no longer played prominent roles in foreign affairs, mainly due to his advanced age and relatively limited political power and status.起始頁-結束頁：67-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201606_59(2).000312篇名：轉型策略、制度變遷與中央－地方關係：中國大陸財政轉移支付之研究並列篇名：Transitional Strategy, Institutional Changes and Central-local Relations: An Analysis of the Fiscal Transfer System in China作者：曹海濤(Hai-Tao Tsao)關鍵字：中國大陸;分權改革;財政轉移支付;中央－地方關係;China;Decentralization;Fiscal Transfer System;Institutional Changes;Central-local Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：中國大陸的財政轉移支付制度呈現反均等化的特徵，本文分析這種反均等化財政轉移支付制度背後的邏輯。我們認為，中國大陸現行財政轉移支付制度的形成及運作，是市場化轉型過程中，中央的改革策略（分權與政府退縮）、財政制度變遷（財政包乾制和分稅制）、中央與地方博弈共同作用的結果。準此，雖然分稅制改革前（1979~1993）與分稅制改革後（1994∼迄今）的財政轉移支付都沒有達成均等化目標，但兩者背後的運作機理有所不同。分稅制改革前，財政轉移支付的反均等化是因為中央政府的財政收入大幅減少，由而衍生政府退縮（減少支出）之結果；分稅制改革後，財政轉移支付的反均等化，是中央－地方博弈後制度設計（稅收返還和專項轉移支付）的結果。英文摘要：This paper attempts to shed light on institutional foundation of China's fiscal transfer system which has an anti-equalization effect on imbalanced subnational fiscal revenue and expenditure. We argue that formation and operation of China's current fiscal transfer system are interactive results of market transformation, central reform strategies (such as decentralization and government retreat) , institutional changes ( such as fiscal contract system and tax-sharing system) , and interactions between central and subnational governments. Therefore, while fiscal transfer either in fiscal contract system ( 1979~1993) or tax-sharing system ( 1994 to date) has failed in carrying out equalization targets, operation mechanisms behind the two differ. Under the fiscal contract system, anti-equalized fiscal transfer is an outcome of reduction of central government's revenue and government retreat ( reduce spending) due to decentralized reform. In contrast, anti-equalized fiscal transfer under the tax-sharing system results from institutional design ( tax rebates and specific transfer payments) formed by the dynamics of central-local relations.起始頁-結束頁：103-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201606_59(2).000413篇名：「大一統」文化與中國「大一統」：明鄭時期的案例研究並列篇名：The ”Oneness” Culture and China's ”Oneness”: A Case Study of the Koxinga Family Period作者：楊仕樂(Shih-Yueh Yang)關鍵字：層級秩序;東亞;中國;大一統;Hierarchical Order;East Asia;China;Oneness期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：當代的國際關係研究長久以來有強烈的歐洲中心傾向。近代以來的歐洲國家體系，其中總是有多個強權並列，並以權力平衡為其國際秩序的基礎。相對的，東亞體系的常態，卻是一個支配性強權的存在，與其他小國形成了上下從屬的層級關係，構成東亞國際秩序的基礎。東亞過去為何會有這樣基於大一統中國的階層式國際秩序呢？作為壓倒性支配者的中國，為何總是在分裂後重建大一統，而能一再佔居這樣支配的地位呢？對此中國的大一統本身就被認為是一種文化，是中國歷代政治菁英們認為天下必需維持大一統的共同信念。然而，這樣常見的觀點迄今仍缺乏充足的實證研究支撐。究竟這所謂的「大一統」文化，是否真是維繫中國大一統的關鍵，進而造就了東亞層級式的國際秩序？本文以明末清初明鄭對抗清朝的過程為案例，實際檢驗這所謂「大一統」文化的作用，以回答此一東亞國際秩序背後的核心問題。英文摘要：Contemporary international relations studies are largely Europe-centric. Modern European international systems are always consisted of multiple great powers, and order is based on balance of power. In contrast, hierarchical order based on a single dominant superpower is the rule of the East Asian system, built on supremacy of a unified China and its subordinate neighboring minor powers. Why does such a hierarchical order exist? The key is China. China had always been able to unify after repeated disintegrations and remained dominant. This ”oneness” of China is commonly believed by generations of Chinese political elites, who regard it necessary to maintain a ”universal unification” of the entire Chinese world. However, this notion so far still lacks sufficient empirical foundations. Is the ”oneness” culture really the key factor in maintaining China's unification and thereby creating a hierarchical order in East Asia? This study approaches the question by examining the Zheng（Koxinga）Family period in the late Ming and early Qing dynasties as a case study, and inspect in depth this so-called Chinese ”oneness” culture.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201603_59(1).000114篇名：當中國夢遇見網際網路：一種創新宣傳模式的升起？並列篇名：When China Dream Meets the Internet: The Rise of Innovative Propaganda Patterns作者：洪敬富(Chin-Fu Hung);司昕山(Xin-Shan Si)關鍵字：網際網路;中國夢;宣傳;公共文化服務產品;Internet;China Dream;propaganda;public cultural services/product期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：2012 年11 月召開之「十八大」標誌著中共第五代領導人習近平的上台。是次會議不久，作為總書記的習近平旋即提出所謂的「中國夢」一詞。此一表述，一方面代表習近平主政下，對於如何進一步建設「中國特色」社會主義所提出的實踐目標；另一方面也標誌著「習李體制」所強調之「四個全面」戰略佈局的核心，成為當下中共「馬克思主義中國化」理論道路上的重要根基。爰此，中國夢儼然成為當前中國宣傳體制下，各級相關機構與新聞媒體遂行組織動員及愛國主義宣傳報導的核心。然而伴隨著中國經濟、社會環境的變化與資訊科技水平的進步，中共宣傳政府越發承受到宣傳成效不彰的壓力。傳統主流輿論陣地的流失和社會主義核心價值觀的缺乏，令宣傳體系需要因應外部情勢的變動而有所調整和適應。在社會主義市場經濟的環境下，當前中國夢的宣傳出現了以公共文化服務產品為特徵的創新宣傳模式，此種創新模式正是中共宣傳機器在習近平主政的時代下，對其宣傳方式與時俱進進行調適的具體表現。公共文化服務產品以公益廣告和網路影片為具體形態，以更貼近中國公民與網民的方式，政治性的架接黨國與人民共享的中國夢，為政府宣傳服務。這種新模式雖以黨國思想為其最高的指導原則，並以黨國利益為其最終的依歸，但就學理和實務而言，威權體制下的中共宣傳機器已愈加隨著外部形勢和內在條件的變化而不斷調適，其宣傳工作亦在兼具傳統媒體和新媒體的多重宣傳渠道下，廣泛結合包括個人、網民在內的社會力與活躍的市場經濟力，以公共文化服務產品為其新特徵的宣傳工作於焉展開並將持續。英文摘要：The Eighteen National Congress of the Communist Party of China, held in November 2012, ushered in the fifth generation of leadership of China who is set to govern the decade ahead until the 2020s. Shortly after the Eighteen Party Congress, General Secretary Xi Jinping proposed the slogan of ”China Dream” to highlight fundamental objectives for realizing ”Socialism with Chinese Characteristics” during his reign. Effectively, China Dream serves as the core of Xi's governing ideology: Four Comprehensives. The Chinese propaganda regime has consequently launched campaigns to promote a series of renewed patriotic education via various party organizations, mainstream media outlets, government institutions at all levels, schools, and military, in the hope to restore the ever-declining political trust in the Party-State and their rhetoric. However, in the wake of deepening social and economic reforms, as well as technological innovation, the Chinese propaganda regime is now confronting insurmountable challenges and difficulties primarily from the cyberspace. The Chinese government has not yet given in. Rather, they have been learning quickly to adopt new propaganda tactics, in addition to traditionally heavy-handed Internet surveillance, regulations, and intimidations, to incorporate arguably more effective propaganda practices for traditional ideological and thought works in the information age. In this sense, the article proposes the concept of ”public cultural services/product,” amidst increased forces of globalization, market economy, and information and communications technologies, to better capture new traits and scenarios utilized by the Chinese propaganda machine. This explanatory concept is being applied to the study of the current China Dream campaign in this paper. It is argued that this updated, grassroots-oriented, and nuanced publicity techniques is now emerging as a dominant propaganda patterns in the Internet era that it will certainly bear both socioeconomic and political implications for the Chinese Party-State in the decades ahead.起始頁-結束頁：31-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201603_59(1).000215篇名：中國社會抗爭中的策略互動與類型：三層模型分析並列篇名：Strategic Interactions and Patterns of Popular Protests in China: A Perspective from Triple-Level Model作者：王信賢(Hsin-Hsien Wang);邱韋智(Wei-Chih Chiu);王信實(Shinn-Shyr Wang)關鍵字：社會抗爭;國家社會關係;策略互動;三層模型;Popular Protest;State-society Relationship;Strategic Interaction;Triple-Level Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來中國大陸社會抗爭湧現的頻率與規模都極為驚人，各地都出現政府「維穩」與民眾「維權」間的張力，也使得維護社會穩定成為考核各級政府的重要參照。不同於過往研究多將國家視為單一權威，本文強調國家權力是碎裂的，進而提出一個三層的模型架構。在此架構中，三個主要行動者分別為「上級政府」、「地方政府」和「抗爭者」，每個行動者有其各自的利益考量以及策略選擇，本文建構簡單的數學模型，進而推論出三者互動的結果將出現六種抗爭類型。此一架構不僅解釋了當前中國複雜的國家社會關係，也幫助我們理解中共威權韌性的特質。英文摘要：In recent years, there is a striking increase in both scale and frequency of popular protests in China. The mounting tension reflects a direct clash between maintenance of stability and public's desire to exercise their rights. As a result, maintaining social stability has been one of the most important considerations for the Chinese government. Unlike most current studies describing state power as a single authority, this study emphasizes that state power is fragmented and presents a framework for the triple-level analysis model. In this model, there are multilevel strategic interactions among three main actors - upper authority, local government and protesters - as well as resulting six patterns of popular protests. The present study recognizes the complicated state-society relationship in the contemporary China and explains the dynamics of Chinese Communist Party's regime reliance.起始頁-結束頁：75-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201603_59(1).000316篇名：”Enlisted Participation” in China's Public Governance: An Institutional Arrangement of the ”Authoritarian Resilience”並列篇名：中國的公共治理中的「徵召式參與」：「威權韌性」的一種制度安排作者：徐斯儉(Szu-Chien Hsu)關鍵字：威權韌性;徵召式參與;徵召式參涉;公共治理;authoritarian resilience;enlisted participation;enlisted involvement;public governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：59卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：中國研究的學者們對於中國威權政體的前景爭論不休，某些學者認為中共政權是一種韌性威權，另外一些學者質疑前者所說「韌性制度」的有效性。本文認為上述中國研究學者之間的辯論缺乏理論架構，其證據缺乏通則性。本文嘗試提出一個更有理論意涵的概念—「徵召式參與」。此概念是從菲利普．羅德所提出在列寧式政權下的「徵召式參涉」衍生而來，但與該概念有本質上的不同。本文認為「徵召式參與」能夠更精準地掌握當前中共政治制度下的政治參與的制度特徵。本文以具體的制度作為案例，來分析「徵召式參與」的不同類型。文末並以五種制度化標準來衡量辨析「徵召式參與」與列寧體制下的「徵召式參涉」及民主體制下的一般「政治參與」的不同，並指出「徵召式參與」下的「包容策略」與「回應策略」，可以視為韌性威權的兩大策略。英文摘要：Scholars of Chinese politics are debating the prospect of China's authoritarian development. One group of scholars has characterized the CCP regime as a resilient authoritarianism. Others cast doubts on the effectiveness of those ”resilient institutions.” This article finds such a debate lacks theoretical framework and the arguments too ad hoc. This article raises a more theoretically based analytical concept - ”enlisted participation.” Adapted (but different) from the Leninist-style concept of ”enlisted involvement” developed by Philip Roeder, this article raises a new concept of ”enlisted participation,” which can better grasp the institutional gist of ”authoritarian resilience.” Concrete cases are illustrated for different categories of these institutions. This article then identifies five criteria to measure the effectiveness of these ”enlisted participation” institutions. With such a framework, this article finds two major institutional strategies of ”resilient authoritarianism”: the ”inclusiveness-prone strategy” and the ”responsiveness-prone strategy.”起始頁-結束頁：101-129資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201603_59(1).000401篇名：主編室的話－細描關係中的辯證發展並列篇名：Editor's note - Describing Dialectical Development in Relationship作者：劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：47期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：中文版關愛與自我形象目標量表與心理調適及自我調節之關聯並列篇名：The Chinese Version of the Compassionate and Self-Image Goal Scale and its Relationship with Self-Regulation作者：張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang);林宣旭(Hsuan-Hsu Lin);黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：人際目標;中文版關愛與自我形象目標量表;自我形象目標;關愛目標;Chinese version of compassionate and self image goal scale;compassionate goals;interpersonal goals;self image goals期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：47期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以四個研究檢驗自我形象目標與關愛目標量表之特性。自我形象目標係指個體聚焦於自我形象的追求，關愛目標則從自我價值的追求轉入關懷他人的需求，進而促進對他人的福祉（Crocker &Canevello, 2008, 2012）。以往研究顯示兩種人際目標對於心理適應與人際關係均有預測力，但並未應用至華人社群。據此，本研究先以三個獨立樣本（研究1A 至研究1B），分別檢驗量表的信效度分析。在研究1A 以207 名參與者進行中文版量表的信、效度分析，結果顯示穩定的雙因素結構，且關愛目標能正向預測多項心理適應指標，自我形象目標則為負向預測或無預測力。研究1B 再以54名參與者進行兩週後再測，顯示穩定的再測信度。然後，研究1C 再以82 名參與者探討人際目標和自我構念之區辨，結果顯示在控制自我構念後，關愛目標與自我形象目標亦能預測心理適應相關指標。最後，研究2 以76 名參與者進行回憶挫折事件的操弄，再探討關愛目標與自我形象目標與自我調節之關聯，發現關愛目標能有效預測建設性自我批評，自我形象目標則預測情緒性自我批評。結論針對關愛與自我形象目標的研究與應用進行討論。英文摘要：Crocker and Canevello (2008) proposed the self-image goal and compassionate goal as two basic interpersonal goals in human behavior. The self-image focuses on pursuing self-image, and the compassionate goal focuses on caring for and supporting others' needs. Previous studies showed that these two interpersonal goals predicted psychological adjustment and relationship quality distinctively. Thus, study 1A recruited 207 participants for testing the psychometric properties of the Chinese version of the interpersonal goal measure. Results indicated support for the same two-factor structure as in previous studies. In addition, the compassionate goal predicted psychological adjustment positively, and the self-image goal did not predict psychological adjustment or even negatively. Study 1B recruited 54 participants to examine test-retest reliability after two weeks. Study 1C recruited 82 participants to examine the relationships between interpersonal goals and psychological adjustment, controlling for self-construal. Study 2 recruited 76 participants and asked them to recall frustrating events. Results revealed that the compassionate goal predicted constructive self-criticism, and the self-image goal predicted emotional self-criticism. Theoretical and practical implications of the research findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：3-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620161200470023篇名：女大學生網路親密友誼之發展歷程並列篇名：The Developmental Process of College Female Students' Intimate Friendships in Cyberspace作者：田瑋茵(Wei-Yin Tien);施香如(Hsiang-Ju Shih)關鍵字：女大學生;友誼;網路親密友誼;college female student;friendship;intimate friendship online期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：47期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討女大學生網路親密友誼的發展歷程，以了解她們如何在網路中認識一個全然陌生的人，從剛開始的認識，隨著關係的進展，進而發展出一段能相互關心、支持、陪伴、有親近感且能分享內心感受與想法、真實情感的交流、了解與信任彼此的網路親密友誼之歷程，並歸納出促進與阻礙親密友誼關係發展的因素，以及這樣的經驗對女大學生產生的意義。對五位女大學生進行深入訪談，透過詮釋現象學分析訪談逐字稿，探討隨著關係進展的親密友誼發展階段的變化。研究結果以「開啟交流期」、「自我表露期」、「情感投入期」、「不安考驗期」與「整合期」五個時期說明女大學生網路親密友誼之發展歷程，呈現各階段中親密友誼的可能發展路徑，並歸納出「在親密友誼中探索自我」、「對親人與現實朋友關係的調整與轉變」、「對網路友誼的重新看待」、「豐富人際與生活的經驗」四個主題，來了解網路親密友誼對女大學生產生的意義。最後，根據研究結果對網路人際關係的研究領域及諮商與輔導工作提出相關建議。英文摘要：The research explored the developmental process of college female students' intimate friendships to understand how they make friends in cyberspace. After being unfamiliar to each other in the beginning, a variety of issues emerged, such as concern, support, companionship, intimacy, sharing of feelings and ideas, and understanding and trusting each other as the relationship developed in cyberspace. We explored the factors that either promote or obstruct the intimate friendship developmental process, and what this experience means to college female students. The research interviewed 5 college female students in depth. Through hermeneutic phenomenology analysis, we explored how intimate relationships changed during the process. We found that there are five periods that make up the developmental process of college female students' online intimate friendships: ”Initial Communication,” ”Self-Disclosure,” ”Affective Involvement,” ”Relationship Testing,” and ”Relationship Integration.” There were also factors that promoted or obstructed the development of intimate friendships in each period. Additionally, we summed up four topics to understand the meaning that emerges from college female students' online intimate friendships: ”exploration of self in intimate friendships,” ”adjusting and shifting relationships of family and friends in real life,” ”renewing impressions of online friendships,” and ”enriching interpersonal and daily experiences.” Finally, according to the research results, some suggestions about interpersonal relationships in cyberspace, counseling practice, and future related research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：27-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620161200470034篇名：失智症家庭照顧者之受苦與因應經驗研究並列篇名：Suffering and Coping Experiences amongst Family Caregivers of Dementia Patients作者：蔡佳容(Chia-Jung Tsai);蔡榮順(Jung-Shun Tsai);李佩怡(Pei-Yi Li)關鍵字：失智症;因應;受苦;家庭照顧者;照顧經驗;caregiving experience;coping;dementia;family caregiver;suffering期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：47期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探究失智症家庭照顧者在照顧失智親人過程中主觀的受苦及因應經驗。採用詮釋現象學研究方法，邀請四位自願受訪者，以半結構深度訪談蒐集的文本資料來分析。結果：失智症家庭照顧者之受苦經驗內涵為：對失智症的無知和退化進展束手無策；漫長病程變數多，長期照顧的考驗層出不窮；無法由失智親人確知其需求，常處在矛盾疑惑和不安自責中；經歷關係失落的痛楚，只能持續單向地對失智親人付出；照顧者對其他家庭及工作的角色責任感到拉扯虧欠；照顧者常感孤軍奮鬥，為難於手足支持不夠或照顧意見相左。失智症家庭照顧者之因應經驗內涵為：照顧的動力來自維持與失智親人的關係連結；照顧互動是依循失智親人的生命脈絡去滿足雙方的需求；照顧的主控感在於專注此時此刻的陪伴，珍惜當下雙方的相處；照顧過程有賴專業照護系統的支援；照顧的力量來自於對失智親人不離不棄的意志力，接受承擔照顧責任；照顧的成就在於盡心盡力達成子女的角色責任，了無遺憾；照顧者從照顧經歷覺察對自己身體的照顧，體悟老化與死亡，學習愛。研究結果可為失智症家屬提供經驗借鏡，並指引出助人者對待照顧者的視角。英文摘要：The purpose of the present study was to make manifest the subjective suffering and coping experiences of family caregivers of dementia patients. A hermeneutic phenomenological approach was chosen to analyze the essential themes. Data was collected through semi-structured, in-depth interviews from four volunteer families of dementia patients. Themes revealed the suffering experiences of dementia family caregivers, which included: feeling helpless and having a lack of control with regard to the onset and progression of dementia; facing constant challenges during the long-term caregiving process; feeling skeptical and uncertain, and blaming oneself due to the inability to fulfill the patient's needs; experiencing distress from the diminishing relationship and continual offering of one-sided affection to the patient; bearing strain and guilt for taking on the responsibility of multiple roles; perceiving difficulties with insufficient sibling support or conflict, and feeling isolated while fighting a lonely battle. The themes for the coping experiences of family caregivers of dementia patients were: sustaining motivation by maintaining a relationship bond; maintaining interaction and fulfilling the needs of both sides according to the patient's life context; being autonomous and gaining control by focusing on and cherishing the here and now; relying on assistance from professional systems; empowering the self through one's own willpower and actively taking responsibility; fulfilling oneself by doing one's best to accomplish filial duty without regret; gaining self-awareness of one's health, aging, and death issues through the lessons of love. These findings could offer practical information to family caregivers of dementia patients and remind professional helpers how to communicate with family caregivers.起始頁-結束頁：59-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620161200470045篇名：當第一個孩子來報到：新手父母的親職參與和婚姻滿意度並列篇名：When the First Baby Arrives: Parental Involvement and Marital Satisfaction among New Parents作者：陳家鳳(Jia-Feng Chen);林惠雅(Huey-Ya Lin);蕭英玲(Ying-Ling Hsiao)關鍵字：夫妻親密互動;婚姻滿意度;新手父母;親職參與;couples' intimate interaction;marital satisfaction;new parents;parental involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：47期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要目的是描述新手父母生育前後婚姻滿意度的變化，及探討生育前後婚姻滿意度與親職參與和夫妻親密互動的關聯性，並檢視配偶親職參與對夫妻親密互動頻率及婚姻滿意度的影響。本研究採用台北市新婚夫妻結婚三年的縱貫性資料，包括新婚第二年成為新手父母有50 對夫妻，第三年成為新手父母有21 對夫妻，有效樣本數為71 對新手父母。研究結果顯示：（1）新手父母生育後的婚姻滿意度皆比生育前較低；（2）新手爸爸生育前的婚姻滿意度對其親職參與頻率有顯著的影響，而新手媽媽生育前的婚姻滿意度與其親職參與則無顯著關聯；（3）新手爸爸的親職參與對夫妻親密互動頻率及生育後的婚姻滿意度無顯著影響，但新手媽媽的親職參與會透過夫妻親密互動頻率而間接影響其生育後的婚姻滿意度；（4）新手媽媽的親職參與會直接影響新手爸爸生育後的婚姻滿意度；也會透過新手爸爸對夫妻親密互動的知覺，間接影響新手爸爸生育後的婚姻滿意度。從行動者效果來看，本研究支持親子系統和婚姻系統存在某種程度的溢出效應；從伴侶效果來看，新手媽媽扮演重要角色，新手媽媽親職參與對於新手爸爸知覺夫妻親密互動頻率、婚姻滿意度有所影響。英文摘要：This study investigated changes in marital satisfaction in the transition to parenthood for newlywed couples over the first 3 years of marriage. In addition, this study examined the relationships among parental involvement, couples' intimate interaction, and marital satisfaction before and after the first baby arrived, as well as spousal influences in such relationships. The sample included 71 couples, 50 who became parents during the second year of marriage and 21 who became parents during the third year. Findings showed that during the transition to parenthood, both husbands and wives experienced declines in marital satisfaction. Marital satisfaction before the first child arrived was significantly associated with husbands' involvement in child care, but not related to wives' involvement. Husbands' involvement in child care was not associated with their perceptions of intimate interaction and marital satisfaction after the birth of the child. However, wives' involvement in child care indirectly influenced their marital satisfaction after the birth of the child through intimate interaction. Not only did wives' involvement in child care directly affect husbands' marital satisfaction after the birth of the child, but it also indirectly affected husbands' marital satisfaction after the birth of the child through intimate interaction. These results showed an actor effect indicating a spillover between marital and parent-child subsystems, as well as a partner effect indicating a crossover from wives' parent-child subsystem to husbands' marital subsystem.起始頁-結束頁：91-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620161200470056篇名：台灣同志伴侶的分手調適－生命歷程的觀點並列篇名：A Study of Break-Up Adjustment in Taiwan Same-Sex Couples: A Life Course Perspective作者：謝文宜(Wen-Yi Shieh)關鍵字：分手調適;生命歷程;同志分手;同性戀;伴侶關係;break-up adjustment;life course;gay / lesbian;same sex couple relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：47期出版年：2016中文摘要：分手一直是個人生命歷程中親密關係的重大事件。本研究以深入訪談的方式蒐集32 位男同志、35位女同志分手經驗（20-29 歲21 人，30-39 歲26 人，40-59 歲20 人），嘗試瞭解同志伴侶分手後個人如何因應與調適，不同時代背景與生命階段分手調適的經驗為何。本研究發現同志分手調適的行動策略包括：轉移注意力、拓展社會支持網絡、強化自我增能、接受「緣盡緣滅」的宿命觀與選擇負向因應調適等經驗。此外，研究者進一步從生命歷程的觀點，將個人不同生命階段的分手經驗放在歷史與文化脈絡當中進行檢視，注意到華人同志「無法浮出檯面的伴侶關係」、「社會變遷與世代差異」與「個人生命發展階段」的特殊性，按著個人生命經驗與特殊的社會背景，不同世代面對分手這事情，框架起不同的分手經驗。個人分手調適經驗隨著社會外在環境的結構性變化，年齡的增長，生命經驗的累積，以及個人情緒與認知模式的轉變，交互使用不同的因應策略，為個人生命軌跡帶來新的變化與發展。英文摘要：In this study, the author examines how same-sex couples adjust when their relationship ends, and how the break-up experience varies according to different life stages and cohorts. Interviews were conducted with 32 gay men and 35 lesbians who had experienced a break-up of an intimate relationship. There were 21 participants from the age group of 20-29, 26 from the age group of 30-39, and 20 from the age group of 40-59 to represent different generation. It was found that the most commonly used adjustment strategies were displacement; seeking support from one's social network; self-empowerment; adopting the viewpoint of predestination; and choosing negative ways to adjust. In addition, the author used a life course perspective to examine break-up experiences at different life stages within a historical and cultural context. From this perspective, the author found that Chinese same-sex couples experience ”hidden couple relationships,” ”society transition and cohort differences,” and ”personal life development stages.” According to different life experiences and social backgrounds, these participants from different cohorts experienced relationship break-ups differently. Due to the structural changes of society, age differences, life experiences, and personal emotional/cognitive changes, the different strategies used brought about new transformations and development in the life path.起始頁-結束頁：113-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620161200470067篇名：兒童中心取向遊戲治療師的設限經驗初探並列篇名：The Exploration of Child-Centered Play Therapists' Limit-Setting Experiences作者：施怡菱(Yi-Ling Shih);陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen)關鍵字：設限;遊戲治療;limit-setting;play therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：46期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討兒童中心取向遊戲治療師在進行遊戲治療時的設限經驗。本研究採用質性研究的現象學方法，透過深度訪談來蒐集五位治療師的設限經驗，以及其對設限經驗的想法與因應。本研究將所蒐集的資料加以編碼及分析，所得結果如下：（1）「兒童－治療師互動」的經驗結構，包含：對需設限行為的經驗、對設限後兒童反應的經驗。以及（2）「治療師－理論對話」的經驗結構，包含：重整與反思設限、重新框架兒童情緒與行為、督導與同儕的專業協助、形塑個人設限體驗與信念。最後根據研究結果，研究者對遊戲治療實務工作及未來研究提出具體建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the limit-setting experiences of child-centered play therapists. This qualitative research study collected five experienced therapists' limit-setting experiences through in-depth interviews. The interview data was coded and analyzed through the phenomenological approach, and the results include two domains: (1) the experiential structure of ”interaction between child and therapist”; and (2) the experiential structure of ”therapists organize their own theory”. Based on the results, the researchers put forward concrete suggestions for play therapy practice work and future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：台灣地方社會服務契約委外的績效與競爭並列篇名：Performance & Competition of Local Social Services Contracting Out in Taiwan作者：孫煒(Way Sun)關鍵字：社會服務;契約委外績效;競爭;社福行政機關;社福型非營利組織;social services;contracting out performance;competition;social welfare administrative agency;social welfare nonprofit organization期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：51期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年在全球新公共管理運動下，政府採用契約委外的市場化方式，欲藉由私部門組織之間的競爭，以提升公共服務的績效。本文採用委託人－代理人理論作為分析途徑，根據台灣地方社會服務契約委外的公共管理方與民間簽約方，對於簽約過程與簽約結果的觀感，發展出以下論述：地方社福行政機關採用契約委外的主要理由，並非是經由實質性競爭而提高績效，而是配合政府再造的精簡人力員額而採取的政策工具，而且可以藉由社福型非營利組織所經營的關係網絡，爭取其支持以擴大政策層面的影響力；社福型非營利組織承接地方社會服務契約也同樣不希望面臨實質性競爭，而是期望在特定的地方社會服務領域之內，利用公共資源與權威，連結更多的民間組織與受益民眾，深化組織的使命以擴大社會層面的影響力。因此，在公共服務契約委外的績效之中，地方社福行政機關較重視節省人力成本的經濟指標，以及反映社會成本與產出之間比例的效率指標；相對而言，社福型非營利組織較著重提高受益民眾滿意程度的品質指標，以及政策目標的實現程度的效能指標。英文摘要：With the global movement in New Public Management, the Taiwanese government is adopting the market outsourcing method of contracting out in the hope of using such types of competition in the private sector to improve its public service performance. This study employs the principal-agent theory to analyze the characteristics of local social services and the institutional environment, such as the main reason that local social welfare administrative agencies contract out services is not because of improved performance as a result of material competitiveness, but because of governmental policy to streamline human resources. In addition, through the relational network offered by social welfare nonprofit organizations, the government can gain support and expand its influence on the policy level. Likewise, social welfare nonprofit organizations undertake contracts with local social services to avoid material competitiveness in a particular field. They hope to take advantage of public resources and their authority to increase their connection with a greater number of private organizations and public recipients, thereby furthering their mission and expanding their influence in society. Therefore, in terms of the performance of contracting out public services, social welfare administrative agencies emphasize the efficiency ratio between the economy of labor, and the social cost and output while social welfare nonprofit organizations emphasize the increase in the quality index of public satisfaction and the effectiveness index of fulfilling policy objectives.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201609_(51).00012篇名：我國「閱讀起步走」政策創新與擴散之研究－政策知識管理的研究途徑並列篇名：A Study of Policy Innovation and Diffusion of the Bookstart Program in Taiwan: A Policy Knowledge Management Approach作者：柯于璋(Yu-Chang Ke)關鍵字：政策創新與擴散;閱讀起步走;政策知識管理;知識應用;結構方程模式;policy innovation and diffusion;Bookstart Taiwan;policy knowledge management;knowledge utilization;SEM期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：51期出版年：2016中文摘要：「閱讀起步走」方案的政策過程涉及不同層級政府的政策創新與擴散，包括從國外到國內、從原台中縣到其他縣市的過程；該過程涉及政策資訊與知識應用等知識管理活動，需要蒐集、處理與應用各種資訊。因此，本研究將政策知識應用與管理視為重要的變數，並提出政策創新與擴散的知識管理模式，且加以驗證。本研究利用問卷調查，以「結構方程模型」（structural equation modeling, SEM）方法探討所提模式變數間的關係，並探討資訊特性、角色認知、個人特質與外部組織關係（垂直、水平）等5 項變數（自變數）的直接效果，以及該5 項自變數如何透過知識應用（中介變數）活動，影響政策之擴散決策（因變數）的間接效果。研究結果顯示，知識管理路徑與效果（包含直接與間接效果）可以解釋53.06% 的擴散決策，超過其他類型自變數之總和。由此可見，知識應用與管理是我國「閱讀起步走」政策創新與擴散決策最重要影響因素。英文摘要：The policy process of the Taiwan Bookstart program involves policy innovation and diffusion at different levels of government, which includes adapting the policy diffusion process used in foreign countries to Taiwan, and that used in Taichung County to other cities and counties. This process involves the activities of knowledge utilization and management, i.e., collecting, processing, and utilizing a variety of information. Accordingly, this study considers policy knowledge management as important variables, and proposes the knowledge management model of policy innovation and diffusion, as well as verifies the model. This study utilizes the methods of survey and SEM (structural equation modeling) to discuss the relationships among these variables. It also explores the direct effect of as well as the direction effect of seven independent variables—information characteristics, role cognitive, individual characteristics, information satisfaction, knowledge utilization, and external organizational relationships (vertical, horizontal), as well as the indirect effect of these variables through the variables of knowledge management—information satisfaction and knowledge management (two intervening variables). The research results show that the paths and effects of knowledge management account for 53.06% of the variances of the decision-making of policy diffusion, which is greater than that of non-knowledge independent variables. Accordingly, knowledge management can be considered to be the most important factors of the policy innovation and diffusion of the Bookstart program in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：35-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201609_(51).00023篇名：公共服務動機：回顧、反思與未來方向並列篇名：Public Service Motivation: Review, Reflection, and Reorientation作者：陳重安(Chung-An Chen);許成委(Cheng-Wei Xu)關鍵字：公共服務動機;公共服務行為;自我決定理論;利他動機;親社會動機;public service motivation;public service behavior;selfdetermination theory;altruistic motivation;prosocial motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：51期出版年：2016中文摘要：在上世紀末美國政府的信任危機的背景下，同時也是對公共選擇理論的反思，「公共服務動機」（public service motivation, PSM）的概念於1990年被正式提出並迅速成為公共管理研究的焦點議題。本研究回顧了過去25年快速增長的文獻，發現PSM在定義與測量方面出現了不一致的問題。現有文獻中，PSM被賦予23種以上的定義以及42種以上的測量方式，這難免對未來的研究者造成困惑。進一步分析發現，PSM常常被界定為利他動機、親社會動機或內在動機，同時被注入了價值、信念及態度等諸多要素，不只在內涵上失去獨特性，定義上更偏離了動機本身的意義。鑒於PSM在華人社群被關注程度不斷升高，華人社會的研究者應用更謹慎與批判的眼光看待這個議題；我們並認為，未來研究或許該更大膽地捨棄當代文獻中根基於Perry（1996）的定義與測量，並讓其回歸其最原始的樣貌：「驅動公共服務行為的動機」。因為公共服務行為具多樣性，公共服務動機並不應該有一個放諸四海皆準的量表，故我們建議未來的研究應該基於成熟的動機理論，如「自我決定理論」（self-determination theory, SDT），根據不同行為而發展出不同類型的測量方式，並審慎地開展未來數年的本土化研究。英文摘要：The public's trust in the US government has declined significantly since the 1960s. In 1990, Public Service Motivation (PSM) was introduced as a 'steering mechanism' and reflection of public choice theory. PSM literature has increased at a rapid pace over the last 25 years, and has become one of the hottest research topics in the field of public administration. Despite its quick growth, the conceptualization of PSM is unclear. PSM has been defined in 23 ways with 42 different measures. In addition, values, beliefs and attitudes are mixed with existing PSM definitions, making PSM less of a motivation. To study PSM in the future, scholars should focus on the literal meaning of PSM: ”motivations for public service behaviors.” As public service behaviors are not limited to a single category, scholars may want to develop multiple tools of measurement tailored for different public service behaviors. Self-determination theory (SDT), we suggest, can be more widely applied.起始頁-結束頁：69-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201609_(51).00034篇名：從哪來創新想法？地方政府創新來源與創新政策特質的分析並列篇名：Where Do Innovative Ideas Come from? The Relationship between Information Source and Quality of Innovation作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：創新;政策資訊;地方政府;資訊網絡;創新屬性;innovation;policy idea;local government;information source;policy characteristics期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：50期出版年：2016中文摘要：政府創新的過程大致可區分成創新想法的出現、想法的採用、及創新想法的執行三階段。然而目前針對政府創新所做的研究，幾乎沒有任何研究系統性地深入探討「創新」在剛開始是如何被提出來的、由誰提出來的問題，忽略上述發展過程中的第一階段。多數研究都假定創新想法的出現是一種理所當然，直接將焦點放在創新被採用之後從一個地方擴散到另外一個地方的速度，使得研究成果無法解釋原始創新資訊來源網絡的問題。本文以地方政府過去幾年所推出的43 個創新個案為例，分析這些創新的初始想法來源以及其政策特質，了解地方政府創新的資訊網絡並提出改善建議。研究結果發現，與預期不同，地方政府的創新想法大多產自政府內部，例如行政首長或其他同事，而且多數認為這些內部想法來源對於後續創新的採用與執行有較高的影響能力，相關政策特質也較明顯；在創新想法的傳遞媒介部分，除了學術性的場合外，互動性質較高之媒介所傳遞出來的創新，在各項特質上也是較為明顯，也就是被採用的機會也是較高的。本研究是第一個系統性分析政府創新來源的研究，在理論上，可為創新政策的過程理論注入更多未來研究的命題，導引出未來更多對於創新想法、創新訊息資訊網絡研究的重視，在實務上則提供健全化政府組織創新資訊來源與管道的建議。英文摘要：When viewed from the perspective of policy development, both the original sources and the quality of the channels through which policy ideas are communicated and proposed are closely related to whether a given policy can be accomplished within a short span of time. This relationship holds particularly true with regard to innovative policies, which are often characterized by their high levels of uncertainty. This study aims to (1) explore the sources of innovative ideas and (2) reveal the most valuable idea sources. The results indicate that the source for most local government innovative ideas originates from within the government itself. Most respondents also believe that internal sources of innovation are more influential on the later phases of adoption and implementation. Analysis of the different channels of innovative idea delivery reveals that innovations resulting from channels with higher levels of interaction generally score higher in all innovation characteristics, with the sole exception of academic meetings. Thus, channels with greater interactivity generate innovations that have a higher chance of being adopted. This research is the first study to systematically examine the source of government innovation. It is hoped that this research may lead to renewed interest in the area of innovation.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201603_(50).00015篇名：縣市低碳發展效率評估與其影響成因之探討並列篇名：Evaluating the Low-Carbon Efficiency of the City and Analyzing Its Influential Factors作者：沈育生(Yu-Sheng Shen);劉小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Liu)關鍵字：縣市低碳發展效率;非意欲產出;不良產出模型;低碳政策;Tobit 模型;low-carbon efficiency of city;undesirable outputs;bad Outputs model;low-carbon policy;Tobit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：50期出版年：2016中文摘要：面對全球暖化之課題與威脅，各國政府大多以低碳發展，作為發展的訴求及目標。而縣市於發展中，雖產生許多效益，卻也消耗不少資源，連帶也產生不少碳排放量與環境污染，因此，地方政府在獲得規劃管理權限後，如何在永續及低碳的框架中，<U+7EFC>合地衡量各種效益與耗損，調和並予以共存，並且落實於縣市發展政策之中，亦為一重要之課題。目前在低碳發展上的評估，多採用指標評估的方式進行分析，且甚少考慮發展所產生的負的外部性（即非意欲產出，undesirable outputs），亦多將非意欲產出忽略不計，故在評估上存在許多侷限與缺失；此外，對於影響低碳發展效率之政策或成因亦未有深入探討。故本文以台灣各縣市作為實證案例，在考量非意欲產出下（碳排放威脅、環境污染衝擊），透過「資料包絡分析」（data envelopment analysis, DEA）中的不良產出模型，評估縣市低碳發展效率，並藉由Tobit 模型，釐清低碳政策對縣市低碳發展效率之影響效果，以作為未來低碳發展或政策研擬之參考。根據不良產出模型的評估結果，顯示臺北市、新竹市、臺東縣、花蓮縣在低碳發展效率上相對具有效率，且已達最適規模水準。另外，透過Tobit 模式的實證分析，對於影響縣市低碳發展效率具顯著的變數，包括工廠家數、資源回收量、市區公車系統路線總長、具綠建築標章的建物數、綠地面積。其中，除工廠家數對縣市低碳發展效率有負向影響外，其餘變數皆呈正向影響效果。英文摘要：Facing the disasters and threats stemming from global warming and climate change, most city governments in the world have set up low-carbon development as a goal, and drawn up low-carbon policies to achieve this goal. However, the effects of those low-carbon policies are not possible to clarify. The development of the city/county has brought about economic benefits, but it also consumed significant resources and produced carbon emissions and environmental pollutants. Therefore, how to evaluate benefit and loss comprehensively and offer improvable recommendations is a key issue in the sustainable and low-carbon development of the city/county. In the past, most researchers evaluated low-carbon efficiency by indicators, and proceeded to their evaluation without considering the negative externalities arising from development, therefore, making inaccurate assessments of low-carbon efficiency evaluation. Thus, this paper assesses the low-carbon efficiency of the city by the Bad Outputs model of the DEA, and analyzes its influential policies by the Tobit model. According to the results of the Bad Outputs Model, Taipei City, Hsinchu City, Taitung County, and Hualien County are efficient, and have achieved an optimal scale level. Another result of the Tobit model indicates that the industrial unit has a negative impact on the low-carbon efficiency of the city. Moreover, resource recovery, the total length of the urban bus route, green buildings, and green areas all have a positive impact on the low-carbon efficiency of the city.起始頁-結束頁：43-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201603_(50).00026篇名：社區據點服務品質與成功老化提升程度關連性之初探：政府角色認知的調節效果並列篇名：Exploration of the Relationship between the Service Delivery Quality of Community Care Stations and Successful Aging: the Moderation of Cognition on Government Role作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang)關鍵字：成功老化;社區照顧關懷據點;服務品質;政府角色認知;在地老化;successful aging;community care station;service quality;cognition on government role;aging in place期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：50期出版年：2016中文摘要：社區照顧關懷據點為實踐在地養老的具體政策之一，但據點服務的效果究竟為何，是否有助於高齡者的成功老化，卻甚少進行系統性檢證。本研究依據文獻設計據點軟硬體服務品質觀感與成功老化提升程度問卷，以2010 年臺南市政府辦理社區據點服務績效考核50 個據點中的服務使用者作為研究母體，先從據點的考核結果分層抽樣出23 個據點，並在此樣本範圍透過面訪針對高齡服務使用者進行調查，共計回收416 份成功問卷。希望從服務使用者主觀認知，瞭解社區據點服務品質與服務使用者成功老化提升程度的關係，並以服務使用者對據點政策中政府扮演角色認知為調節變數。本研究成果簡述如下：一、服務使用者對據點服務人員服務技巧與態度的滿意度，高於對硬體環境條件的滿意度；二、對軟硬體服務品質的觀感與成功老化提升程度間有統計上正面的顯著效果，表示據點服務輸送的品質愈好，確實有利於社區高齡者的成功老化的提升程度；三、政府角色認知所傳遞的政府信任感確實會對服務品質觀感與成功老化提升程度的關係造成正向的調節效果。本文的建議是應改善據點硬體服務品質，強化社區據點為官方主導政策的印象行銷，並普及據點的設置，則能有利於高齡者的成功老化。英文摘要：In order to increase the probability of elders’ successful aging, the government has taken actions to introduce a new policy of community social welfare since 2005. The community care station policy is the most important such practice in Taiwan. This paper attempts to explore the relationship between the service delivery quality of community care stations in Tainan city and successful aging of the service users. Moreover, the moderating role of the service users’ policy cognition of the community care station policy is discussed as well. The finding indicates that (1) the satisfaction mark for the factor ”service delivers’ skills and service awareness” is higher than the one for environment and facilities of community care stations; (2) the quality of hardware and software services of community care stations is statistically significant for users’ successful aging by controlling demographic variables and social interactive variables; (3) the moderation of government role between perceived service provision quality and users’ successful aging is verified. The practical and theoretical implications of the study findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：77-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201603_(50).000301篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：周育仁(Yu-jen Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：半總統制下總統是否兼任黨主席與其黨政關係型態－比較視野下的馬英九總統任期經驗並列篇名：The President Serves as the Chairperson of Political Party or Not under Semi-presidentialism: A Comparative Analysis of President Ma's Two Terms作者：陳宏銘(Hongming Chen)關鍵字：半總統制;黨主席;黨政關係;馬英九;semi-presidentialism;chairperson;party-government relationship;Ma Ying-jeou期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：總統是否同時為執政黨的黨魁，位居台灣半總統制下黨政關係金字塔體系中的頂端，真有牽引黨政運作其他次級體系的作用。本文以馬英九總統執政時期為例，探討半總統制下總統是否兼任黨主席以及黨政關係之型態，並將其放置在跨國的半總統制經驗下來理解。進一步來看，本研究納入30個半總統制國家的經驗，並考量半總統制中「總統議會制」與「總理總統制」兩種次類型之比較。研究，顯示，前者下之總統較易兼任黨魁，以便更有效領導執政黨和政府。台灣的憲政體制傾向具有濃厚的「總統議會制」特點，確實，馬英九總統在任內多數時期是兼任國民黨黨主席。此外，由於馬總統任內同時出現兼任與未兼任黨主席狀態，故可供分析其間黨政運作機制之差異。最後，本文也將馬英九的個案與過去針對陳水扁擔任總統時期的個案進行比較研究，歸納與解釋兩者的同與異，驗證其中我國半總統制設計的制度效應。英文摘要：Under Taiwan's semi-presidentialisrn, the core dimension of party-government relationship is concerned with whether the President is also the chairperson of his (her) party. This paper tries to analyze the relationship between the President and his party and the type of party-government relationship in Taiwan during the President Ma Ying-jeou presidency under the structure of president-dominant semi-presidentialism. First, this article surveys the experiences of 32 democratic countries in order to have a global perspective of semi-presidentialism. And then it distinguished and discussed two subtypes of semi-presidentialism: president-parliamentarism and premier-presidentialism. In the former one, there is the tendency that the president will be also the chairperson of his (her) party so as to control the ruling party and government more effectively. Since Taiwan's government type is similar to the president-parliamentarism, the President Ma Ying-jeou indeed served as chairperson of KMT during most of his terms. Finally, this study compared the types of party-government relationship according to the President was the chairperson of KMT or not.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：德國漢堡市的「能源管線市有化」公投研究並列篇名：A Study of Hamburg's Referendum about Energy Networks Repurchase作者：劉書彬(Shu-pin Liu);鄭乃瑄(Nai-hsuan Cheng)關鍵字：漢堡;公投;能源管線;市有化;Hamburg;referendum;energy-networks;municipalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：德國聯邦政府近年致力推動能源轉型，城市邦的漢堡也在能源管線私有化合約到期前，討論能源管線公有化議題。2010年開始數十個公民團體共同發起「能源管線市有化」的公投連署活動。歷經三年，2013年9月22日的公投成功。此次公投在法制規範上呈現：公部門須義務提供諮詢、降低公民參與門檻、以及制定合理的公投通過門檻，和市議會對公投過程的參與等。該次公投的公民參與過程則呈現高度的包容性、影響性與行動性。而在此次公投過程和成果落實上，亦反映出能源轉型和能源民主的內涵，值得台灣未來進行電業法修訂時參考。漢堡市這次從下而上發起的公投，獲得多數公民支持能源管線市有化，除再度添增漢堡的公投經驗外；近幾年來的實施，也反轉了能源集團以核能和化石性能源的獨佔性，並推動漢堡實施再生能源為主的群眾經濟倡議計畫，讓漢堡的能源轉型更邁進一步。英文摘要：German federal government began energy transition since past years. Before the deadline of energy-nets contracts with business companies were due, many people in Hamburg started to discuss networks-municipalization. In year 2010, dozens civic groups initiated an ”energy networks-municipalization” referendum. After three years, at 22. September 2013 this referendum was successful. Its result in regal system showed as in the followings: public sector provided information and advices, citizen participation threshold was reduced, a reasonable threshold for the referendum consequence was to make, and Senat's participation in citizen's initiative. This Hamburger citizen's participation presents high tolerance, high influence and high activeness. About its consequence and practice, through this from down to up referendum, the highest participation level, majority citizen supported for net-municipalization, that evidence added not only one more case piece for Hamburger referendum's experiences, but also reversed the energy structure in Hamburg, from nuclear and fossil energies in majority transit to renewable energies, and from energy group centralism transit to energy decentralization. It's also worth for Taiwan to rethink about its ”Electricity Act”. Hamburg government even developed Clusterinitiative for renewable energy center, in order to promote energy transition actively.起始頁-結束頁：43-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：論桃園客庄型態與客家政策並列篇名：The Types of Taoyuan Hakka District and Hakka Policy作者：王保鍵(Pao-chien Wang)關鍵字：桃園客家;濱海客家;都會客家;Taoyuan Hakka;marina Hakka areas;urban Hakka areas期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：桃園市政府依各行政區之歷史人文及地理關係，將客家委員會依客家基本法第6條所指定的7個客家文化重點發展區劃分為「近山客家」（龍潭區及楊梅區）、「濱海客家」（新屋區、觀音區、大園區）、「都會客家」（中壢區及平鎮區）三類型。本文以公共政策及族群相關理論為分析基礎，運用個案研究法及參與觀察法，檢視桃園市政府的各項政策。本文的主要研究發現為：（1）桃園的濱海客家庄所呈現的海洋客家文化，有別於傳統的近山客家印象。（2）「都會客家」的概念，可分為「都市中的客家人」與「都市化的傳統客庄」兩個次類型。（3）桃園市非客家文化重點發展區內，仍有群聚的客家族群，以及客庄內日益增加的新移民及其子女，渠等客家認同，有待政府政策資源予以深化。英文摘要：According to the article six of the ”Hakka Basic Act”, the Hakka Affairs Council established 69 Major Hakka Cultural Areas. The Taoyuan city government divides its Major Hakka Cultural Areas into three types, which are mountain Hakka, marina Hakka, and urban Hakka areas. The essay discusses the Hakka policy of Taoyuan by employing the public policy and ethnic theories. The methodology of the essay is the case study and participant observation. The main finding of the essay includes three points. First, the image of the marina Hakka area is quite different from the mountain Hakka area. Second, the idea of the urban Hakka areas could be classified as two sub-types, which are ”the Hakka people immigrate to the urban city” and ”the urbanization of Hakka village”. Third, the government should make the policies to build the Hakka consciousness for those who Hakka people outside the Major Hakka Cultural Areas; also, the government should focus on the Hakka language inheritance among the children of the new immigrations.起始頁-結束頁：93-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：書評：Why Communism Did Not Collapse: Understanding Authoritarian Regime Resilience in Asia and Europe 〔為什麼共產主義沒有崩潰－理解亞洲和歐洲威權政體的韌性〕 edited by Martin K. Dimitrov 〔馬丁．迪米特洛夫〕 (Cambridge University Press, 2013, Paperback, 390 pp., ISBN 9781107651135)並列篇名：A review of Why Communism Did Not Collapse: Understanding Authoritarian Regime Resilience in Asia and Europe edited by Martin K. Dimitrov (Cambridge University Press, 2013, Paperback, 390 pp., ISBN 9781107651135)作者：薛健吾(Chienwu (Alex) Hsueh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：127-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：書評：Islamic Exceptionalism: How The Struggle Over Islam Is Reshaping The World 〔伊斯蘭例外論－伊斯蘭主義者如何形塑世界觀〕 by Shadi Hamid 〔夏地．哈密德〕 (New York: St. Martin's Press, 2016, Hardback, 306 pp., ISBN 9781250061010)並列篇名：A review of Islamic Exceptionalism: How The Struggle Over Islam Is Reshaping The World by Shadi Hamid (New York: St. Martin's Press, 2016, Hardback, 306 pp., ISBN 97812500 61010)作者：包修平(Hsiu-ping Bao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：137-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：世界民主大事紀　2016年7-9月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: July-September 2016期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：145-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：主編的話作者：周育仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：大眾民主認知與政治學習－不同政治體制的比較分析並列篇名：People's Perceptions of Democracy and Political Learning: A Comparative Study across Political Regimes作者：黃信豪(Hsin-Hao Huang)關鍵字：民主態度;民主認知;政體類型;政治學習;多層模型;democratic attitudes;democratic perceptions;regime types;political learning;multilevel models期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：依循政治文化典範，民主態度已成為比較大眾政治態度傾向的研究重點。然而，相較於情感、評價態度，民主的認知內涵則較少受到關注。本文嘗試釐清不同政體大眾民主認知的樣態，並採用Converse的社會學習模型來解釋個人如何在各政體發展對民主的理解內涵。透過分析世界價值調查第六波資料，研究發現民主的內在與工具認知差，相較情感、評價態度更可有效區辨不同政體的民主態度。其次，多層模型證實這項認知差在穩定民主國家最高，選舉式民主國家、非民主國家則較低；當個人所屬國家的民主化時間愈長，其認知差也愈高。本文也發現在穩定民主國家、非民主國家，個人民主認知差將隨著年齡愈長差距愈擴大，表示個人生命時間的政治學習效果在穩定的政治環境明顯較強。本研究結合比較視野與個體理論視角，可更動態地掌握個人隨著生命時間獲取民主認知的歷程。英文摘要：Popular attitudes toward democracy have become an important topic in political culture research. The cognitive aspect, however, has not received enough attention in contrast with the affective and evaluative ones. This paper aims to clarify people's perceptions of democracy across various types of political regimes and to explain how they can acquire their democratic understandings in different political environments by applying Converse's social learning model. Analyzing data from the 6th wave of the World Values Survey, this paper confirms that the cognitive difference, constructed by the intrinsic and instrumental dimensions, can recognize various types of political regimes more greatly than affective and evaluative attitudes. Also, our findings from multilevel models demonstrate that the average cognitive difference would be higher in old and new democracies than in electoral democracies and non-democracies (particularly in old democracies), and that respondents' cognitive difference can increase along with the more years of democratization in their countries. Moreover, both in old democracies and non-democracies, individuals' cognitive difference would enlarge as their age increases, reflecting that, in stable political environments, there is a stronger impact of individuals' lifetime learning in politics. By bringing the individual-level explanation into a comparative context, this paper can figure out the process of how individuals acquire democratic perceptions along with their life time.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：反官僚現象－以公務人員相關之頭版新聞報導為分析素材並列篇名：Bureaucracy Bashing: A Content Analysis of Newspaper Headlines about Civil Servants in Taiwan作者：洪美仁(Mei-Jen Hung);黃建實(Chien-Shih Huang)關鍵字：反官僚;媒體;公務人員;新聞報導;新聞消息來源;bureaucracy bashing;news media;civil servants;headlines;sources of headlines期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：公務人員代表國家執行政府任務，為民主政治有效運作不可或缺之一部分，卻也容易成為政治人物或媒體攻擊或批評的對象，本研究以反官僚的文獻建構四個主要觀察的面向，並採取內容分析法，針對1988年解嚴以來至2013年為止，與公務人員有關的聯合報與自由時報的頭版新聞進行分析。研究結果顯示，與公務人員有關的頭版新聞報導，在數量上呈現增加的趨勢，但對公務人員之評價，卻呈現負面下滑之狀態。其次，反官僚文獻主張政治人物試圖藉由打擊官僚以獲取政治利益的情形，在台灣的脈絡下，僅獲得部分的呼應。第三，儘管反官僚文獻中主張公務人員負面評論可能反應政黨輪替下新政府與舊官僚的緊張關係，但本研究發現兩次政黨輪替後公務人員頭版新聞評價並無顯著之下降。最後，在媒體的政治偏差上，本研究發現，兩大報在不同政黨執政時，負面新聞的數量有顯著之不同，就平均評價態度而言，聯合報的公務人員頭版新聞報導在國民黨執政時期平均評價較民進黨執政時期高，自由時報則無顯著差異。整體而言，本文做為國內公務人員新聞之初探性研究，呈現公務人員頭版新聞的圖像，研究成果提供未來研究公務人員或政府形象之基礎，並反思媒體在民主課責與政府治理中應有的角色與可能的影響。英文摘要：Civil Service plays a key role in a democratic system but is usually under close scrutiny and attack from politicians or the media. Built on the literature of ”bureaucracy bashing,” this paper identifies four dimensions of bureaucracy bashing and explores each dimension using a content analysis of headlines from two national newspapers, the United Daily and the Liberty Times, from 1988 to 2013. The content analysis shows, first, the number of newspaper headlines about civil servants has increased with Taiwan's democratization. However, the overall image of civil servants presented in headlines tends to be negative. Second, the claim that politicians seeking election tend to present more criticism of civil servants is partially supported. Third, the image of civil servants presented in headlines before and after two turnovers of political power was found not to be significantly different. Last, political bias among news media outlets is associated with the number of negative headlines about civil servants. For United Daily, the tone in headlines was more favorable to civil servants during the Kuomintang regime, compared with the time when Democratic Progressive Party controlled the government. The research presents a preliminary analysis of headlines about civil servants in Taiwan, suggests new directions for the future study and encourages discussion about the ideal role and potential impacts of the media on democratic accountability.起始頁-結束頁：45-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：牟宗三與儒家民主：一個黑格爾式的再詮釋並列篇名：Mou Tsung-san and Confucian Democracy: A Hegelian Reinterpretation作者：曾國祥(Roy Tseng)關鍵字：牟宗三;新儒家;儒家民主;康德;黑格爾;Mou Tsung-San;Neo-Confucianism;Confucian Democracy;Kant;Hegel期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：透過對牟宗三的民主理論提出一個黑格爾式的再詮釋，本文試圖論證「儒家民主」實質上可被視為一種「倫理民主」。正文分成四個主要部分：（一）就創作意圖而言，雖然牟宗三提倡「儒家民主」的目的，在於超越源自「權利論自由主義」的「程序民主」的限制，但由於他對民主道德基礎的求索徘徊在康德主義與黑格爾主義之間，其政治思想容有兩種解釋路徑。（二）就詮釋爭議而言，雖然康德主義較為盛行，但其支持者既忽略了康德的「自我立法」道德理念其實支持某種「權利論自由主義」，也無視於黑格爾的「自我實現」倫理思維在形塑所謂的「圓善論自由主義」上扮演著重要角色，並因而標示出自由主義的「倫理性轉向」。（三）就哲學精神而言，牟宗三學術志業的終極關懷與「後康德」哲學家頗為類似，志在藉著康德間架以揭示康德哲學的侷限，進而彰顯中國文化在超越康德方面的卓絕貢獻。（四）就民主思想而言，牟宗三有關道德與政治之辯證關係的理解，以及「民主開出」的解釋，明顯深受黑格爾的影響。總結地說，本文有關牟宗三民主思想的黑格爾式再詮釋及其所深刻蘊涵的倫理價值，有助於反思與延展「仁政」在當前歷史時刻的實踐意義。英文摘要：By proposing a Hegelian reinterpretation of Mou Tsung-san's theory of democracy, this paper seeks to argue that Confucian democracy may be regarded as ”ethical democracy.” The paper is organized into four major parts. First, although Mou's aim in advocating Confucian democracy is to surpass the limits of ”procedural democracy” anchored in ”rights-based liberalism,” Mou's search for the moral basis of democracy oscillates between Kantianism and Hegelianism, which indicates that there are two different approaches to interpreting his political thought. Second, while the Kantian approach is more prevalent, its defenders do not take into account that Kant's ”morality of self-determination” in fact accommodates a form of ”rights-based liberalism,” and that Hegel's ”ethics of selfrealization” plays a crucial role in formulating ”perfectionist liberalism,” which marks an ”ethical turn to liberalism.” Third, the ultimate end of Mou's philosophical enterprise actually bears striking resemblance to post- Kantian philosophers. Indeed, Mou tries to reveal both the limits of Kant and the contributions that Chinese culture can make to transcend Kant. Fourth, Mou's understanding of the dialectical relationship between morals and politics and his interpretation of the ”blossoming of democracy” clearly reflect a debt to Hegel. Ultimately, this study on Mou Tsung-san's cross-cultural reconstruction of Hegelian ”perfectionist liberalism” and its embrace of deep ethical imports can help to draw out the practical implications of the ”politics of humanity” in the modern epoch.起始頁-結束頁：1-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201612.20(2).1-642篇名：中間選民的迷思與隱性選民之政黨傾向初探並列篇名：Myth of Independent Voters and the Prediction of Closet Partisans' Party Identification in Taiwan作者：劉正山(Frank C. S.);蔡艾真(Ai-jhen Tsai)關鍵字：政黨認同;中間選民;動機推論理論;隱性選民;選舉預測;party identification;independent voters;partisan mobilized reasoning;closet voters;election forecast期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：一般來說「中間選民」指的是一群自稱不特別偏向某一個政黨或政治立場的選民。然而，選民在調查訪問中口頭所表述的「無意見」、「沒有政黨傾向」不見得是真心話。這個現象可能（已經）使一般選舉調查，就政黨支持者分布的描述出現失真的現象，甚至進一步會造成對於選情的誤判。本研究從概念釐清與「動機推論理論」（partisan-motivated reasoning）視野出發，重新檢討這個現象，並從「隱性選民」（closetpartisan）角度，觀察這些民意調查中這些政黨傾向未表態的民眾的真實意向分布。我們首先設計一組間接測量政黨傾向電訪題，並在 103年 1 月份蒐集了有全國代表性的電訪資料（受訪人數 N =1,072）。我們將這些題目的藍綠分數組成指標（index），以此得分的分布作為辨別藍綠選民的基準，用它來推判隱性選民的政營支持傾向。我們再以電話追訪，將他們在第二次受訪時所表述的真實政黨意向與我們的辨別結果作比較。我們更進一步與四位得分偏向中間點的隱性選民進行深度訪談，深入瞭解他們論述政黨的方式。透過這一系列的分析，本研究一方面提出有效間接測量黨性的電訪題，有助於降低當前政黨題項目無反應比例愈來愈高所帶來的衝擊，另一方面得以為台灣「中間選民」到底是多還是少的這個未解之謎提供線索，以及為動機推論理論的發展提供經驗證據。英文摘要：Researchers of partisan voters have been assuming that there is a solid difference between ”independent” voters and partisan voters (including leaners). This is hardly the case in the Taiwan context, a democracy with a two-party presidential system, where over 40 percent of voters are partisans, but claim to be independent in most telephone surveys. Pollsters, researchers, and journalists have been calculating the distribution of party supporters by either omitting these ”independent” voters due to the unavailability of the data, or simply applying counterintuitive formulae to guess the distribution of the respondents with missing data. This study avoid the definition of these not-so-well-defined ”independent” voters, but takes aim at these ”invisible” or ”closet” voters and attempts to the partisan orientation behind their ambivalent answers to telephone surveys. With this in mind, we took a series of steps, including qualitative and quantitative ones. First, we used a representative sample, conducted in January 2014 (N=1,072) in Taiwan via an RDD telephone survey. This survey included the conventional party identification question plus a series of theory-based alternative questions that we evaluated as triggering respondents' mobilized reasoning regarding the two major political parties, the Kuomintang (KMT) and Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). We then created an index for partisan respondents of the two political camps, and applied the score patterns to the closet respondents. In another follow up survey (March 2014) that targeted the closet respondents, we found that the correctness of prediction using the index was about 70%. We then targeted and interviewed the most ambivalent closet voters and explored how their partisan mobilized reasoning was (and failed to be) triggered by the alternative survey questions. We concluded with a few survey questions that future electoral studies can use for probing closet voters. The rich implications of the findings for improving the accuracy of predicting partisan votes, the debates about the characteristics of independent voters, and the development of partisan motivated reasoning theories are discussed起始頁-結束頁：65-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201612.20(2).65-1233篇名：老台灣人vs新台灣人：台灣人認同世代差異之初探並列篇名：Old Taiwanese vs. New Taiwanese: Exploring the Generational Difference of Taiwanese Identity作者：李冠成(Kuan-chen Lee);楊婉瑩(Wan-ying Yang)關鍵字：台灣人認同;公民式國家認同;族群認同;民族認同;世代差異;Taiwanese identity;civic national identity;ethnic identity;national identity;generational differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要探討老台灣人和新台灣人，在台灣人認同構內涵上的世代差異。具體而言，我們嘗試在省籍、歷史記憶、台灣共同體意識，及國家未來想像等認同的構成元素中，尋找不同世代之間的系統性差異。藉由分析 2013 年「中研院台灣社會變遷調查六期四次：國家認同組」的資料，1 研究結果發現年輕世代民眾相對更傾向以台灣人來稱呼自己。此外，在「省籍背景」、「二二八事件重要性」、「台灣主體意識」和「統獨態度」上，年長世代和年輕世代民眾認同的構成基礎確實呈現差異。在 40 歲以上年長世代的民眾身上，影響其台灣人認同的因素主要偏重省籍、二二八歷史記憶，和支持台灣獨立。然而，對於年輕民眾而言，其台灣人認同中，省籍、歷史悲情和台灣獨立等元素的重要性逐漸下降。取而代之的是，在成員上以台灣住民為基礎，在情感上以台灣成就為榮，在政治上以台澎金馬為疆界的認同基礎。相較於過去的研究，本文最主要的貢獻與進展，在於用比較「世代差異」的分析策略，有系統地簡化了台灣人認同概念意涵的多樣性。在調查訪問資料有限的情況下，本文建議後續研究可以民主化前後的世代為切點，來區分受訪者回答台灣人認同背後的不同意涵。英文摘要：This study aims to examine the ever-changing constitutive meaning of the Taiwanese identity from a generational perspective. We argue that the idea of identifying-as-Taiwanese has been transformed from a primordialbased ethnic identity to a civic-based national identity, which can be systematically differentiated between younger and older generations. By using data from the 2013 Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS)-National Identity module, the results reveal that youth are more likely to identify themselves as Taiwanese because of their affiliation with the political community and their objection to reunifying with China, while the elderly tend to consider themselves to be Taiwanese based on ethnic ties and historical memories. The generational differences withinthe Taiwanese identity not only explain why this identity has become more acceptable in society, but also demonstrate the formation of a new Taiwanese nation.起始頁-結束頁：125-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201612.20(2).125-1864篇名：越融合或越疏離？解析當前兩岸交流下台灣民<U+8846>身分認同的內涵與影響並列篇名：Further Integration or Drifting Apart? Uncovering the Nature and Influence of the Taiwanese People's Self-Identity under the Circumstances of the Current Cross-Strait Exchange Relationship作者：蒙志成(Chih-cheng Meng)關鍵字：身分認同;兩岸交流;國族主義;群際關係;結構方程模型;Self-Identity;Cross-Strait Relationship;Nationalism;Intergroup Relations;Structural Equation Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：從 2008 年馬政府上台以來，台灣人認同年創新高，比綠色政府執政的任何時期還高，有學者便發出「兩岸愈好，台灣認同反而高」的評論。本文旨在探究：台灣民眾身分認同的基礎是什麼？兩岸的廣泛交流，究竟對台灣民眾身分認同有何影響？本文在「國族主義式認同」之理論架構下、輔以群際關係理論，建構分析模型與測量變數。經運用「結構方程模型」、進行電話訪問資料分析後發現，國族認同的確為當前形塑台灣民眾身分認同的主要因素，而接觸會對於強調群際差異的國族認同產生修正影響，儘管這項修正仍不足以撼動原先身分認同與國族認同的基本立場。這項研究除在理論上強化傳統感性認同因素的解釋外，亦對兩岸民眾大幅交流的影響提出觀察。英文摘要：Since President Ma's inauguration in 2008, the number of people who recognize themselves to be Taiwanese has been on the increase, and it has become higher than it ever was during Chen Shui-bian's administration. Some scholars have commented that ”with the improvement in the cross-Strait relationship, the Taiwanese identity is in fact growing stronger.” The purpose of this article is to provide an in-depth investigation into the following questions: What is the basis of the Taiwanese people's self-identification? What is the actual impact on the self-identification of the Taiwanese public following the process of extensive exchange in the Taiwan Strait? The research hypothesis and variables in this paper are designed under the theoretical frameworks of ”the nationalist self-identity” and, in addition, ”intergroup relation theory” which examines group identification. Through employing the ”structural equation model” (SEM) and analyzing data obtained from telephone interviews, it was discovered that two competing national identities are important factors in shaping the Taiwanese people's self-identity. Subjects lacking previous contact or experience with Mainland China tend to feel stronger differentiation between the two identities. However, if subjects are more familiar with Mainland China, their national identity, which emphasizes the difference between Taiwanese and Chinese, will be modified. The modification will not, however, change their original national identity. This study not only strengthens the conventional approach of emotional/symbolic identity analysis, but also observes the impacts of the very comprehensive cross- Strait relationship.起始頁-結束頁：187-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201612.20(2).187-2625篇名：Sources and Implications of Malapportionment in Taiwan並列篇名：立委選制票票不等值的源由與影響作者：鮑彤(Nathan F. Batto)關鍵字：malapportionment;community of interest;electoral system;representation;Taiwan legislature;票票不等值;利益共同體;選舉制度;民主代表性;立法院期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：Malapportionment in Taiwan's legislature is above the global average, with nearly 8% of all seats apportioned to districts that would not otherwise have them. Some of this malapportionment is explicitly intended and has a normative justification based in the importance of maintaining communities of interest. However, most of the malapportionment is unintended. This paper identifies four sources of malapportionment, including the decision to distribute seats to cities, counties, and indigenous people, the size of the legislature, the process of drawing districts within cities and counties, and population growth. Of these, more than half of the total malapportionment stems from the decision to cut the size of the legislature in half. Malapportionment has several concrete political results. It slightly inflates the voice of rural areas, significantly inflates the voice of indigenous people, and dramatically inflates the voice of voters in offshore islands, especially in Lienchiang County. It also creates a normatively unjustifiable partisan bias of roughly 2.5-3.0% toward the KMT-led blue camp and against the DPP. The paper concludes by discussing possible remedies, including expanding the number of seats and changing the electoral formula.英文摘要：從全球脈絡來看，台灣立法委員選制造成票票不等值（malapportionment）的程度偏高，相較於完全等值分配，目前接近百分之八的席次被分配到不該具有這些席次的選區，較世界平均還高。某些選票不等值的情況乃刻意造成，存在重要規範性民主原則，例如保護特定利益共同體（communityof interest）。然而，台灣大部分選票不等值的情況皆非刻意設計，本文指出主要有四個來源：一、縣市與原住民選區席次的分配決議；二、立法院總席次減半；三、各縣市內選區劃分；四、人口增加。其中，立法院總席次減半最關鍵，選票不等值超過一半的情況源自於此。選票不等值引發許多具體政治後果，包括鄉村地區代表性稍微膨脹、原住民代表性明顯膨脹，而離島代表性極度膨脹，尤其連江縣。選票不等值也造成政黨競爭非中立的制度不合理偏差，泛藍陣營大略享受百分之二點五到百分之三的優勢。最後，本文討論可減少目前票票不等值程度的可能改革方向，包括增加立法委員總數和改變選舉制度在內。起始頁-結束頁：263-307資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201612.20(2).263-3076篇名：依違於大我、小我之間：解讀臺灣民眾對兩岸經貿交流的心理糾結並列篇名：Hesitating between Private Interests and Collective Interests: An Analysis of the Public's Dilemma on Cross-Strait Economic Exchanges作者：陳映男(Ying-Nan Chen);耿曙(Shu Keng);陳陸輝(Lu-Huei Chen)關鍵字：民意;兩岸關係;利益;認同;認知;public opinion;cross-strait relations;interests;identity;social cognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：人類的政治生活中，經常面臨「群體利益」與「個人利益」難以兩全的情況，面對這樣的兩難，當事人將如何抉擇？這涉及政治生活的本質，我們也希望瞭解臺灣民眾的傾向。有鑑於此，本研究乃針對臺灣民眾對於兩岸經貿的糾結，透過2008年又一波經貿開放前後所進行的三次平行民調，觀察他們如何在兩難間取捨。我們的研究顯示，臺灣民眾對經貿開放的立場，既受其所認知的整體利害，也為其所認定的個人得失所左右。兩者若有所衝突，民眾一般無所適從。但因此而有所糾結的民眾，則往往更在意整體利害：民眾認知兩岸開放若對臺灣有害，即支持緊縮；反之，則傾向贊成開放。英文摘要：Collective interests and private interests are often at odds in political life. If faced with such a dilemma, what stance would Taiwanese take? By starting from the problem, we employ cross-Strait exchanges as the case, and examine the choices of the Taiwanese people. We conduct three cross-sectional surveys to observe the dynamics of their choices both with and without dilemmas. Our research findings suggest that these people care about both collective and private interests. If the two are directly at odds with each other, these people will, however, normally be caught in between and could take a clear position on the issue. However, if they can avoid making the difficult choice, they will generally tend to stand for the collective interests. That is, if they consider cross-Strait exchanges to be good for Taiwan, they will be for such exchanges; if not, they will definitely oppose them.起始頁-結束頁：1-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201606.20(1).1-597篇名：探索中日爭霸東北亞之衝突行為：兼論權力轉移理論的適用並列篇名：Exploring Sino-Japanese Militarized Conflict Behavior in Northeast Asia: Considering the Applicability of Power Transition Theory作者：廖小娟(Hsiao-Chuan Liao)關鍵字：權力轉移理論;東北亞;軍事衝突;中國大陸;日本;Power transition theory;Northeast Asia;Militarized conflict;China;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：自1958年Organski 提出權力轉移理論（Power transitiontheory）以來，其有效地解釋了大國間的戰爭，並成功地挑戰權力平衡理論（Balance of power theory），成為解釋國際戰爭之主流理論。其主要論述為：當一國之權力與另一國相近時，若該國對另一國或現狀不滿意，則該國極有可能發動戰爭。Lemke（2002）進一步將權力轉移理論應用至區域戰爭，主張權力轉移理論不僅適用於霸權戰爭，亦能有效解釋區域戰爭的發生。然而，當本文檢視個別東北亞國家的衝突行為時，卻發現東北亞國家，尤其中國大陸與日本，有著與權力轉移理論假設不同的行為模式。具體而言，本文以量化統計和質化分析比較方式分別檢視1918年至2007年間東北亞爭霸國家相對權力與不滿意度，並聚焦於中國大陸與日本的衝突行為。結果顯示中國大陸最可能在國力佔優勢或對另一方不滿意時發動戰爭，軍事和經濟優勢則是日本發動軍事衝突的必要條件。本文並以1894年中日甲午戰爭為案例，顯示本文所推演之中國大陸和日本的衝突要件確與甲午戰爭前光景一一吻合。因此，本文認為權力轉移理論或許適用於全球性爭霸戰爭，然而權力相近此一要件卻無法充分解釋中國大陸與日本在東北亞區域內之衝突行為。另外，研究結果亦印證中國大陸對外行為仍奉行鄧小平所指示之「韜光養晦，有所作為」策略。英文摘要：Power transition theory (PTT) has effectively explained the concept of war among great-power states and has successfully competed with the balance of power theory since Organski proposed it in 1958. PTT's main argument is as follows: when one state's power approaches that of another state and it is dissatisfied, it is highly likely that the state will initiate war. Lemke (2002) further applies PTT to regional wars and argues that PTT is powerful in explaining both hegemonic wars and regional wars. This paper follows Lemke's definition of regional dyads and focuses on Northeast Asia. However, both the statistical and qualitative analyses in this paper reveal results that are distinctly different from PTT's arguments, in particular on the dyad of China and Japan. To be specific, this paper examines the power ratio and state dissatisfaction of Northeast Asian dyads from 1918-2007 and further induces the conflict behavior of Japan and China by means of Boolean algebra. The results show that the shrinking power gap is not as influential on China's and Japan's behavior as PTT argues. Instead, China will initiate war when it has greater power than another state. China will also initiate war when it is highly dissatisfied. As for Japan, although dissatisfaction will lead it to war, the superiority of its military and economic power has more of an influence on its conflictual behavior. A case study on the first Sino-Japanese war in 1894 concurs with the arguments of this paper. Finally, the results of this paper also correspond with the story that China still follows the principle of ”tao guang yang hui” proposed by Deng Xiao-ping.起始頁-結束頁：61-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201606.20(1).61-1068篇名：農業、農民與國家：中國經濟發展中的糧食價並列篇名：Agriculture, Peasants, and the State: China's Grain Price in Economic Development作者：黃騏弘(Chi-Hung Huang)關鍵字：二元經濟模型;勞動力移動;糧食價格;強迫糧食生產;經濟發展;dual-economy model;labor mobility;grain price;forced grain production;economic development期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：糧食是發展中國家的重要物資，糧食價格的波動不僅影響經濟發展的進行，也關係到農民的生計。中國的糧食價格在2004年之前的糧食雙軌制時期大起大落，2004年之後的全面市場化時期則轉為逐漸上升。此種價格波動的軌跡是奇特的，因為在經濟發展初期，如何避免糧食短缺是發展中國家主要的農業問題。即使克服了糧食短缺，在經濟發展過程中，糧食價格應該會逐漸上升，不至於發生糧食過剩使得價格連年下跌。本文運用二元經濟模型對中國糧價的變動提出解釋，並指出中國政府限制農民進城和強迫糧食生產的政策，造成糧食市場與勞動力市場的供需失衡，從而導致了糧食價格的不穩定。英文摘要：Grain is an important commodity in developing counties. Fluctuations in grain prices not only influence the process of economic development, but also have an effect on the lives of peasants. A feature of China's grain price is that it fluctuated dramatically before 2004, and has been stable and has risen gradually since then. This price change pattern is distinct. Food shortages constitute the main agricultural problem in the early stages of economic development. Even if the problem could be avoid, however, it is unlikely that grain would end up in surplus while the economy grows rapidly at the same time. I argue that the fluctuation in China’s grain price can be explained by dual-economy model, the policies of labor mobility control and forced grain production throw both the food market and labor market out of balance, hence making the price unstable.起始頁-結束頁：107-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201606.20(1).107-1679篇名：政府部門女性公務人員的代表性分析並列篇名：Analysis of Representation of Women Civil Servants in Governments作者：施能傑(Jay N. Shih)關鍵字：性別代表性文官;性別刻板印象;性別工作隔離;玻璃天花板;政府部門;women representation;gender stereotypes;gender job segregation;glass ceiling;civil service期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：政府公務人力人口特性組合和社會人口特性較為近似，稱為文官代表性，這是政治治理正當性的課題，也有助於增進經營績效。本文使用長時間統計資料，分析行政機關公務人員的女性人力狀況，提供文官性別消極代表性的系統性和趨勢性研究。分析結果可歸納成幾項重要發現。第一，台灣政府部門一般性行政機關女性公務人員已具備充分的消極代表性，代表性已超過亞洲國家，甚至和西方國家平均值也很接近。第二，行政機關不同工作的女性公務人員比例相差極大，政府部門明顯的存在性別工作隔離現象。第三，儘管女性整體消極代表性持續增長，但是各行政機關首長和高階領導性職務等的女性比例卻非常低，簡任各職等女性比例也僅約整體女性平均值的一半，代表著女性公務人員確實面臨著玻璃天花板困境。上述發現的背後意涵和成因，本文都有深入的討論，並提供可能的對策。本文認為性別工作隔離現象如繼續深化，高階女性消極代表性不足的問題就難有明顯改善。此外，政府部門的最關鍵行動方案是需要有意識地推動增進女性機關首長和高階主管的積極性培育和遴用計畫，特別是優先在幾個女性人力比例極高的工作體系上積極促成，只有女性有機會擔任領導決策職務時，女性消極代表性才有機會轉化成積極代表性。英文摘要：Representative bureaucracy is not only a political instrument for enhancing governing legitimacy but also a practical tool to increase organizational performance. This paper examines the passive representation of women civil servants in administrative agencies across all level of governments since 2000, which is one of the most politically attractive issues in Taiwan. The results show that the percentage of women has been continuously increasing to over 60% when excluding law enforcement officers. This level of passive representation is the highest among all other Asian countries and close to the mean of Western nations. Yet, there clearly exists job segregation or a glass wall between genders, on the one hand, and more importantly women have been significantly underrepresented in senior managerial or executive positions, reflecting the problem of a glass ceiling, on the other. This paper discusses some plausible reasons contributing to the trend as well as several implications for personnel policy and the issue of gender mainstreaming. It argues, among other things, that the priority task is to establish a leadership development program and selection plan for women that will enable political executives to appoint more women to higher civil servant positions.起始頁-結束頁：169-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201606.20(1).169-22710篇名：Toward an Adaptive Local State Capitalism: Revitalizing Cultural Heritage Sites to Stimulate Local Economic Development並列篇名：調適型地方政府資本主義：以文化遺址活化帶動地方經濟發展作者：薛孟琪(Meng-Chi Hsueh);張鈞智(Chun-Chih Chang)關鍵字：曲江模式;政企合作;國家資本主義;歷史遺址;文化創新;government-enterprise synergy;historic heritage site;Qujiang model;state capitalism;cultural innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：對於位處中國大陸內陸的文化城市而言，殘破的歷史遺址和財政困窘是阻礙城市化和經濟發展的重要原因。但這些文化城市如何能夠扭轉劣勢，將原為發展障礙的歷史遺址轉化為經濟發展的動力？本文提出「調適型地方政府資本主義」的概念，藉以理解文化城市推動經濟發展的可能進程。地方政府依據現實環境的條件調整自身的界限與範圍，進而培養出政企之間的互賴關係，完成活化歷史遺址和推動城市發展的雙重任務。本文以西安曲江模式為個案，透過田野調查和第一手資料，論證「調適型地方政府資本主義」運用三種策略來解決資金短缺、效率低落、部門主義等問題，促進西安的經濟發展。具體而言，曲江團隊具備有效募集資金和將文化遺產轉化為象徵資本的創新能力，因此被西安市政府選定、並賦予執行文化發展計劃的任務。其次，曲江團隊建立政企協力的合作體系、推動遺址活化和城市發展的工作，並落實以市場為導向的人力資源管理體制。再者，地方政府、開發商和銀行團在財政上相互依賴，得以促成曲江計劃的實現。綜述之，「調適型地方政府資本主義」作為國家資本主義的新型態，有助於理解二十一世紀初中國大陸各地積極建設遺址公園的熱潮、以及城市化加速的歷程。「調適型地方政府資本主義」的崛起更表明，在當今中國大陸新一輪都市化和經濟增長的競賽中，決勝的關鍵不再是金錢，而是智慧和創造力。英文摘要：For most cultural cities located in China's inner regions, not only deficient public finances but also historic heritage sites hinder the process of urbanization and economic development. How could these cities reverse the circumstantial disadvantages and turn them into exclusive merits that can possibly foster economic development? This paper argues that ”adaptive local state capitalism” may be the key to understanding this kind of development process. The local state has constantly transformed and rescaled its space and boundary according to new circumstances, through which an interdependence with enterprises can be cultivated to rehabilitate historic heritage sites and promote urban development simultaneously. Based on field work and first-hand documents regarding the Qujiang (曲江) model in Xi'an, three types of adaptive local state capitalism are demonstrated to solve problems such as capital deficiency, departmentalism, and inefficiency. First of all, for its capabilities of effectively collecting funds and innovatively manipulating cultural heritages as symbolic capital, the Qujiang Team was chosen and granted privileges to implement culturally-rendered development projects in Xi'an. Second, Qujiang's government-enterprise synergy was initiated and the system of human resources management reformed and adapted to become more market-oriented. Third, fiscal interdependence among the local state, developers, and banks was formulated to enable the materialization of Qujiang's projects. The new version of local state capitalism is therefore recommended as a means to learn how heritage parks have boomed as well as its correlation with the rapid growth of urbanization. As the rise of ”adaptive local state capitalism” indicates, it has no longer been a game of money, but a competition involving intelligence and innovation in the new race of nationwide urbanization and economic growth in contemporary China.起始頁-結束頁：229-268資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201606.20(1).229-26801篇名：臺灣不同類型之農產品地理標示制度的執行成效與影響因素並列篇名：The Implementation Performance and Influencing Factors of Different Types of Agricultural Geographical Indication Systems in Taiwan作者：王禕梵(Yi-Fan Wang);洪愷伶(Kai-Ling Hong);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：地理標示;產地證明標章;產地團體商標;政策執行;農會;geographical indications;protected designations of origin;collective trademark;policy implementation;farmer's association期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：63期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣保障產地特色農產品的方式主要有兩種，分別為產地證明標章以及產地團體商標。前者多為歐陸國家採用，而後者則多由美國選用，此兩系統在國際上常受到討論，甚至因此發生許多貿易衝突。過去研究多討論各自對於農民的收益以及福利議題，較少有研究針對這兩種地理標示方式進行比較，特別是聚焦於標示政策推動過程中，地方組織間會如何互動，及其對於地理標示政策執行狀況及成效之影響。本文採用資料分析法、個案研究法與深度訪談法，並針對三星米、池上米、公館紅棗與麻豆文旦等進行深入之研究。研究結果顯示影響地理標示政策之執行狀況與成效有四個主要因素：分別是推動者聯盟力量、市場開拓能力、產品異質性、以及市場名氣，與過去文獻大致相符，而本文的主要貢獻在於發現地方組織間的互動情形會導致各地區的利益衝突性有程度上的不同，導致地理標示政策的推動、執行、與成效有所不同。此外，研究結果顯示產地團體商標的成效較為良好，與過去研究認為產地證明標章可以較為有效地保障產地特色作物不同。主要的原因是因為農會具有較強的專業與人脈，能使地理標示政策運作與執行較為順暢。若農會與公所可以合作，亦可使產地證明標章有良好的發展。但即使農會具有較強之聯盟力量，若在地理標示政策的推動過程中，遭遇到其他利害關係人之阻礙，則衝突性變大，則地理標示之推動與效果就有可能受到負面影響。英文摘要：There are two major approaches to protect agricultural products of origin features in Taiwan, i.e. protected designation of origin (POD) and collective trademarks (CT). The former is mostly used in European countries, while the latter is mostly adopted in the United States. The two geographical indication (GI) systems have their own supporters and result in a number of trade conflicts. Most scholars studied the impact of a specific GI system on farmers' income and welfare issues. Few scholars examine the issue of how local organizations interact in different GI systems, and the implications for the implementation and effect of different GIs. The research conducts four case studies and the results show that there are four major factors, i.e. coalition strength, marketing capability, product heterogeneity, and product reputation, affecting the implementation and effectiveness of different GIs. In particular, the interaction between local organizations determine the extent of conflicts between stakeholders in the establishment of a GI, thus affecting the strength of coalitions, and the implementation and effectiveness of GIs. The results also show that the performance of CT is better than that of POD in Taiwan. This is because that farmer's association has the expertise, human resources, and better relationships with farmers, which can make the adoption processes smoother.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：Public Value Production in Cross-Sector Collaborations: Evidence from Problem Solving Cases in Taiwan並列篇名：跨部門合作過程間之公共價值產出：從台灣問題解決實案談起作者：簡赫琳(Herlin Chien)關鍵字：public value pragmatism;structuration theory;cross-sector collaboration;public-private partnership;problem solving;公共價值實用主義;結構化理論;跨部門合作;公私協力;問題解決期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：63期出版年：2016中文摘要：Public value is an emerging concept that attracts increasingly more attention in the field of public management for the past two decades. Further empirical examinations are needed to clarify its application whereas in Taiwan there is relatively fewer researches focusing on the analysis of pubic value. This paper uses a pragmatic problem solving approach with ten empirical cases from Taiwan to investigate how public value is created throughout cross-sector collaboration policy process. Two stages of the policy process are investigated: (1) the problem/solution nomination stage and (2) the solution implementation stage. A structuration approach is then applied to analyze the system of interaction between agents and the structure in which they are embedded. Four findings are generated from this study: First, the study shows the importance of the solution implementation stage in widening the scope of public value and reproduction of value in an ongoing manner. Second, this public value pragmatist approach encourages a redefinition of the role of the public sector as societal entrepreneur, sponsors or champions with a leading ”collaborative mind-set”. Third, positive ”interdependence” between sectors is found to be as the most pivotal driver among others for successful collaboration initiative. Fourth, case analyses demonstrate the adaptation or resilient potential of cross-sector partnership.英文摘要：過去二十年來，公共價值這概念逐漸在公共管理學門日漸受到關注，但學界仍需要更多的實證研究來釐清此概念的應用，且至今台灣還鮮少有專注在公共價值分析的相關研究。本研究採用一個實用主義問題解決的途徑，配合著台灣十個實證個案，期望來分析公共價值在跨部門合作政策運作過程中，究竟是如何被產出的。研究者首先將政策運作過程分成兩個階段來分析：第一為問題及解決方案提名階段；第二為解決方案執行階段，隨後再用結構化分析來理解行動者及結構的互動關係。本研究最後共提出四個研究發現：第一、研究分析顯示，在解決方案執行的階段是較可以拓展公共價值的觸及面向，及產生促進價值再生的持續動能；第二、此公共價值實用主義切入點可以鼓勵公部門角色被重新定位，成為具有帶動「協作關懷」的社會創業家、支持者或前鋒者；第三、部門間的正向「互賴關係」是推動合作成功與否的重要動力；最後、個案分析顯示跨部門夥伴模式是有潛力提升組織之應變能力與其韌性的。起始頁-結束頁：45-86資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：以理性選擇觀點論我國監察制度的存續並列篇名：The Rationale of Ombudsman System in Taiwan: The Perspective of Rational Choice作者：汪林玲(Lin-Ling Uang)關鍵字：監察制度;監察院;理性選擇;利害關係人;成本效益;ombudsman (ombudsman system);the Control Yuan;stakeholder;rational choice;cost-and-benefit期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：63期出版年：2016中文摘要：追溯近代世界各國監察制度的濫觴，因為時代與文化背景以及政治體制的不同，所以成立的原因各異。為了釐清監察制度存續的必要性，實有必要先探究其發展之淵源。故本文先以歷史制度的角度分析監察制度的發展，並植基於理性選擇當中效益最大化的觀點，將我國監察院從2008 年8 月至2014 年7 月為止，因為行使法定職權所花費的成本與獲致的財務效益予以貨幣化，並從事成本利益分析。除此之外，本文也以演繹的途徑，從利害關係人的心理取向分析監察制度當中最重要的功能─「受理人民陳情」的救濟成本。以理性選擇途徑衡量政策或制度的取捨雖然有其限制，尤其對於重視公共性的政府機關更是如此，因為理性選擇觀點無法涵蓋政府所追求的公共性價值。但是，理性選擇途徑的應用自有其一定的歷史定位與貢獻。因此，本文以理性選擇的觀點，透過成本利益分析以及利害關係人對於人民陳情成本的心理分析，嘗試論證我國監察制度存續的理由。英文摘要：After discussing the historical and institutional developments of ombudsman system around the world, this paper analyzes the performance of Control Yuan (representing the ombudsman system) in Taiwan from the perspective of rational choice. Specifically, the author estimates the monetary benefits accrued due to the investigation and corrective measures exerted by the Control Yuan from August 2008 to July 2014. Meanwhile, the costs are estimated in terms of outlay of the Control Yuan during that time period. Cost-Benefit-Analysis is then employed and the results show that benefits exceed costs, in the sense that the Control Yuan achieves desirable performance and seems legitimate to survive. In addition to conducting the Cost-Benefit-Analysis, this paper also infers, by the deductive way, that citizens would like to file petition to the Control Yuan rather than to apply other possible remedies, because the filing cost of petition is the lowest. Citizens are rational so that they choose the cheaper one. Together with the estimated results of Cost-Benefit-Analysis, the author concludes that the ombudsman system or the Control Yuan in Taiwan is legitimate to exist.起始頁-結束頁：87-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：公共政策棘手問題界定理論之研究：以我國觀光博弈產業政策與個案為例並列篇名：Defining Wicked Problems in Public Policy: Case study of the Policy of Tourism and Gambling industry in Taiwan作者：李衍儒(Yen-Ju Lee);趙永茂(Yung-Mau Chao)關鍵字：公民投票;問題界定;政策問題;政策弔詭;棘手問題;referendum;problem definition;policy problem;policy paradox;wicked problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：當代公共政策問題幾乎都是所謂的「棘手問題」，由於大家對問題是否存在沒有共識，即使有部分共識認為問題存在，但對問題的本質仍無一致的看法，這些棘手問題使問題分析在政策過程的早期階段即遭遇困難，從而凸顯政策問題本質與認定的重要性。本文嘗試從政策過程的問題認定階段，梳理棘手問題的解決之道，除就政策問題相關理論進行文獻回顧，以剖析我國觀光博弈產業政策的歷史脈絡與法制規範外，並以我國觀光博弈產業的2個公民投票個案為例，進行深度訪談與分析，最後，提出具體研究發現與研究建議。總之，作者希望本研究在理論上，能增益棘手問題、政策問題界定的理論、政府政策態度及政策弔詭等相關知識之累積；同時在實務上，能有助於未來我國整體觀光博弈產業政策的發展。英文摘要：Contemporary public policy problems tend to be what may be called ”wicked problems”. Even there may be general awareness of the existence of a problem, it is often hard to reach consensus on the nature of the problem. Such wicked problems make it more difficult to analyze the problem at the early stage of the policy process, which highlights the importance of recognizing and defining the nature of policy problems. In this article, we explore solutions for wicked problems in the stage of problem identification in the policy process. To do this, we first conduct a literature review on relevant theories, with a focus on the historical contexts and regulations of tourism and gambling industry policy in Taiwan. We then discuss in detail two cases of referendum about tourism and gambling industry policy, using in-depth interviews and analysis on the pros and cons of setting up tourist casinos. Finally, we offer research findings and advices for future studies. We also hope that this study will offer contributions to the theories of wicked problems and policy problem definition, attitudes of the government, and policy paradox. In the meantime, we hope that this article will provide practical advices on the development of overall tourism and gambling industry policy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：緊急災害管理中之協力網絡分析：以莫拉克風災災後的教育重建為例並列篇名：Understanding Collaborative Networks in Emergency Management: A Case Study of Education Reconstruction after 2009 Typhoon Morakot in Taiwan作者：謝儲鍵(Chu-Chien Hsieh);林煥笙(Huan-Sheng Lin);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen)關鍵字：協力;社會網絡;緊急災害管理;災後重建;非政府組織;collaborations;post-disaster recovery;emergency management;non-governmental organizations;networks;social network analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：當災難範圍越龐大、性質越趨複雜，非政府組織能否在傳統以政府為主的災害管理體系中，扮演關鍵角色，一直是公共行政學門理論與實務當代熱門的討論議題。基此，本文欲探究非政府組織（Non-Governmental Organizations）在緊急災害協力網絡中，組織動員與資源分配的政策執行參與情形，並且試圖了解非政府組織在救災協力的整體網絡（whole network）及個別組織互動網絡的聯接關係，以發掘現行協力網絡互動的缺失與問題可改善的途徑。本文以莫拉克風災之災後教育重建為例，嘗試應用社會網絡分析法，從非政府組織的觀點，瞭解災後重建中行動者之間協力網絡關係與互動。研究發現在治理與行政層面的協力關係，公部門依舊扮演重要角色，對於災後重建的專家、資源連結上，皆為重要行動者。在自主性、相互關係與規範等面向，國際非政府組織與行政院莫拉克颱風災後重建推動委員會，是重要的網絡節點。而慈濟基金會在自主性網絡中，呈現影響其他組織自主性的現象。此外，本文發現非政府組織在災後教育重建網絡中，各自連結不同的非正式與個人網絡。最後，僅有少數大型組織較有機會參與緊急災害管理決策，也就是說，其他小型組織的決策參與是被排除的。最後，本文建議，未來緊急災害管理網絡的理論與實務，必須朝協力行動網絡運作的理論深化邁進、藉此強化政府和非政府組織的合作關係，其中，政府在權力分享的過程中，必須以開放的態度與非政府組織構築信任關係與協調管道，並與網絡行動者做好充分的風險溝通，是災後重建協力成功與否的關鍵。英文摘要：The role NGO (non-governmental organizations) played in large-scale and complex emergency management is always a hot spot of researches and debates in the field of public administration. By using Thomson, Perry, and Miller's theoretical model of collaboration as a framework which depicts the post-disaster recovery efforts as a collaborative network organized around governance, administration, autonomy, mutuality and norm, this study intents to explore the collaborative and intermediary roles performed by non-governmental organizations in a real-world case, the education reconstruction after the 2009 Typhoon Morakot. The results indicate that: First, the public sector still plays a major role in collaborative networks, especially on the parts of resource and professional connections. Second, international NGOs and the Executive Yuan's Morakot Post-Disaster Reconstruction Council are the two critical connectors in autonomy and mutuality dimensions. The Buddhist Tzu Chi Foundation maintains an autonomous operation separated from the collaborative network and has an influence on other organizations’ autonomy. Almost every organizational participant has different informal and personal networks. Lastly, only big organizations are involved in emergency management decision-making. Finally, this paper suggests that: First, more efforts are needed to tackle the practical problems of emergency management network by exploring deeper into the theoretical and empirical aspects of the problem, especially on the part of collaborating with the NGOs. Second, one of the keys of post-disaster recovery is to enhance government's competence in collaborating with the NGO in every stage of emergency relief, among all the competences, building trust, communicating risk, and building effective coordinating channels are most critical ones.起始頁-結束頁：59-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：補助或投資？政策工具對社會企業發展之影響並列篇名：Subsidies or Social Investments? The Influence of Policy Tools on the Social Enterprise's Development作者：鄭勝分(Sheng-Fen Cheng)關鍵字：政策工具;政府補助;社會投資;公益創投;社會企業;policy tool;subsidy;social investment;venture philanthropy;social enterprise期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：為推動社會企業發展，各國政府除採取政府補助為主要政策工具外，也嘗試導入社會投資概念的公益創投，然對於政策工具如何影響社會企業發展，本文認為應回歸社會企業混合結構本質，從多元目標與多元利害關係人的視角，檢視資源變化對社會企業影響。透過文獻與深度訪談資料的分析與討論，本文歸納出幾個重要發現：首先，政府補助在社會企業創設階段扮演推動角色，但對於萌芽期之社會企業，導入社會投資性質之公益創投，以市場創新思維，強調具捐贈性質的軟性資金回收邏輯，為協助社會企業渡過死亡幽谷的可行策略；其次，雖然公益創投被視為低風險，甚至具備捐贈性質的投資工具，但一方面社會企業欠缺吸引天使投資人的誘因，另一方面社會企業對於天使基金定位認知不清而感卻步，致使實際操作上僅少數社會企業可以獲得天使基金的青睞與挹注；最後，社會企業認為公共政策應建構友善的稅務支持系統，提供公益創投及社會企業合作的誘因，並設計制度性信任機制，重建公益創投與社會企業之互信。英文摘要：In order to promote the development of social enterprise, in addition to subsidies, governments introduce the new strategy of social investment (i.e. venture philanthropy) as policy tool. But how does the latter one influence social enterprises? This paper suggests that we should employ the hybrid features of social enterprises multiple goals and multiple stakeholders to answer this question. By conducting in-depth interviews with key informants, several conclusions are reached. First of all, governmental subsidies do play the critical role in the start-up stage of social enterprises. However at budding stage, introducing venture philanthropy would be a good strategy. It implies that venture philanthropy is the feasible way keeping social enterprises survive. Second, though venture philanthropy is known with low risk, not many social enterprises received angel funds because their purposes are unclear and thus lacking adequate incentives for angel investors. Finally, public policy regarding the development of social enterprises should design a friendlier tax system and rebuild the mutual trust between social enterprises and venture philanthropy.起始頁-結束頁：127-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：哀兵訴求簡訊在競選中之廣告效果並列篇名：Advertising Effects of Portraying Candidates as Underdogs Using SMSs in Campaigns作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou);吳秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Wu);周繼祥(Jih-Shine Chou)關鍵字：哀兵訴求;領先者訴求;政治簡訊;政黨傾向;廣告效果;underdog appeal;front-runner appeal;political SMS messages;party orientation;advertising effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：「哀兵」指涉的是賽事中居於不利地位的個人或團體。近年來，在國內外的選舉過程中，常見有候選人為自己貼上哀兵的標籤，以此向選民訴求，這種候選人宣傳自身處於「劣勢」，俾引起選民注意當事人是哀兵且可能會落選的作為，究竟有何影響？而當「人人都是哀兵」的情況下，如何創造較佳的廣告效果？本研究旨在瞭解候選人透過手機傳送哀兵訴求簡訊時（相較於領先者訴求），所可能產生的利益和風險，經由兩個實驗的結果發現：(1)相較於哀兵訴求，領先者訴求會使選民產生較佳的廣告態度與候選人反應；(2)哀兵訴求會因所搭配的論點有異，而產生截然不同的廣告效果：若搭配「積極迎戰」型論點，則其效果較領先者訴求為佳，但若搭配「競選不公」或「悲情求救」型論點，則其效果不如領先者訴求；(3)選民性別與政黨傾向會干擾訴求類型的相對效果。本研究除了在學理上有助於釐清選舉活動的哀兵訴求以及政治簡訊的傳播效果外，在實務上並可提供候選人擬定選戰策略之參考。英文摘要：Underdogs are individuals or groups perceived to be at a disadvantage in a competitive situation. Political candidates in Taiwan and elsewhere are often promoted as underdogs in order to increase their appeal to voters. Why do candidates promote this apparent ”disadvantage”, which suggests an increased risk of election loss? How is advertising effectiveness affected in scenarios in which all or nearly all candidates are positioned as ”the underdog”? This study aims to understand the benefits and risks for political candidates using advertorial political Short Message Services (SMSs) to promote an underdog image rather than a front-runner image. Major findings from two experiments are: (1) Front-runner appeals improved the message recipients' ad attitudes, candidate evaluations, and candidate attitudes. (2) The persuasive arguments used in underdog appeals impacted significantly upon advertising effectiveness. Underdog appeals paired with ”face-off with enthusiasm and determination” achieved an advertising impact superior to front -runner appeals. However, underdog appeals paired with either ”unfair competition” or ”sorrowful calls for help” achieved an advertising impact inferior to front -runner appeals. (3) SMS message recipient gender and party orientation moderated the relative effects of appeal types. This research contributes to the current theoretical understanding of the effectiveness of underdog appeals in political communications and political SMS messages. Further, findings provide candidates and political marketers insights on the effective use of advertorial political SMSs that portray candidates as underdogs in election strategies.起始頁-結束頁：1-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：財政緊縮時期臺灣各級政府裁減管理策略初探並列篇名：Cutback Management Strategies in the Public Sector during Fiscal Retrenchment: The Case of Taiwan作者：蔡馨芳(Hsin-Fang Tsai)關鍵字：裁減管理;緊縮管理;財政緊縮;裁減策略;cutback management;retrenchment management;fiscal distress;cutback strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：北宋史學家司馬光在《訓儉示康》中曾以「由儉入奢易，由奢入儉難」訓誡其子，歷經九百年之後，儉樸美德由「齊家」之告誡轉變為「治國」的挑戰。鑑於過去臺灣對於裁減管理策略缺乏整合性之系統分析及評估研究，本文以台灣各級政府機關為研究對象，探索當前各級政府機關單位在財政緊縮時期裁減管理策略工具之運用情況，並進行主觀成效評價之調查，及分析一般制度環境因素與策略工具運用之關連性。研究發現當前臺灣裁減管理策略工具的運用，以「刪減支出」及「充實收入」為主，提升管理效能工具為輔。但臺灣行政機關主計人員對提升管理策略之主觀成效平均評價較高，對收入充實策略之成效主觀評價則明顯偏低；不同層級政府之間，在各項支出刪減策略工具的運用上有顯著差異，且地方政府一般不傾向運用「徵收額外使用者稅費」方式來增加財源。此外，一般制度環境因素對臺灣各級政府裁減管理策略的運用模式關連性不高，僅機關存續年度與管理提升策略之運用有微弱關連性。基於上述研究發現，本文提出下列三項政策建議：（1）強化提升管理效能之策略工具使用；（2）落實績效預算與重視績效審計結果；（3）把握推動稅賦改革的機會窗。英文摘要：Sima Guang, a Northern Song Dynasty historian, admonished his son saying that ”it is easy for the frugal to become extravagant, but very difficult to reverse the process”. This virtue of retrenchment, however, has become a severe challenge of sovereignty after nine hundred years. Due to the lack of systematic analysis and assessment research on cutback management in Taiwan, the purpose of this paper is to understand the use of strategic tools of cutback management in the public sector, to investigate the subjective evaluation of effectiveness, and to explore the causal relationship between the general context factor and the use of strategic tools. Based on surveys of all levels of selected public officials, the study found that they chose the strategies of ”expenditure cutting” and ”revenue increasing” as the mainstay policies; these were supplemented by the tools of enhancing management efficiency. The subjective evaluation of the effectiveness of strategic tools which try to enhance management efficiency is higher than those trying to increase revenue. The use of tools of expenditure cutting between local and central governments are significantly different and the measure in which additional taxes and fees are levied on users was less frequently adopted by local governments. Lastly, a weak causal relationship between the general context factor and the use of strategic tools has been verified. Based on the above research, this paper proposes the following three policy recommendations: (1) strengthen the use of tools for enhancing management; (2) implement performance budgeting especially paying attention to the reports of performance audit; (3) grasp the ”opportunity window” to promote tax reform.起始頁-結束頁：65-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：抗衡或扈從：14個歐亞國家對俄國外交政策選擇的再檢視並列篇名：To Balance or to Bandwagon? Revisiting the Fourteen Newly Independent States' (NISs) Foreign Policy Choices toward Russia, 1992~2009作者：薛健吾(Chienwu (Alex) Hsueh)關鍵字：抗衡;扈從;俄國;經濟能力;兩岸關係;Balance;Bandwagon;Russia;Economic Capacity;Cross-Strait Relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究發現，在這14個國家獨立之初，與西方關係愈接近、經濟能力愈好的國家，比較會對俄國採取抗衡的態度；反之，則比較會對俄國採取扈從的態度。然而，獨立之後至今已逾20年，這14國與俄國關係的發展如何？這兩個因素是否仍然是主導各國選擇抗衡或扈從俄國的主要因素呢？為了回答這兩個問題，本文發展出一個「抗衡或扈從」的測量，並據此發現，在冷戰結束之後，這14國與西方國家之間的關係對於選擇抗衡或是扈從俄國的重要性逐漸減低，而它們自己本身的經濟能力依然是決定其外交政策的重要因素。本文認為，根據文獻的建議，國家經濟能力對於其外交政策選擇的重要性在於：第一，經濟能力愈好的國家，代表著該國的國家機器愈有解決各種國內問題的行政能力，也代表該國愈有足夠的資源可供動用來對抗潛在的對手，也就是愈具有抗衡的「能力」；第二，經濟能力愈好的國家，也因其有能力自主發展，其國內政治行為者對於是否堅持抗衡愈有著較高度的共識，也就是愈具有抗衡的「意願」。本文的論點得到了經驗證據的支持，對於兩岸關係的發展經驗與未來走向也具有深刻的理論意涵。英文摘要：Since the collapse of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) in 1991, the interaction between Russia and the fourteen former USSR Eurasian states has been an ideal experiment field for international relations theories. Previous research has demonstrated that, among the fourteen newly independent states (NISs), those who are politically closer to the Western world and more developed tend to balance against Russia; and, those who are less close to the Western world and those who are less developed tend to bandwagon with it. However, it has been twenty years since the NISs became independent from Russia. Whether the NISs have changed their foreign policy attitudes toward Russia and whether the two factors of proximity to the West and development are still influential in affecting their Russia policy is in need of further investigation. In order to answer this question, this article develops a new measurement of ”balancing or bandwagoning,” which simultaneously concerns ”the degree of interest dissimilarity” and ”the degree of conflict” between Russia and the fourteen NISs. By applying this new measurement, I find that the NISs' relationship with the Western world has become less important in the making of their Russia policy, while their ability to maintain their economic development remains the most prominent factor that determines their balance/bandwagon foreign policy choice toward Russia. This is because, as prior research has suggested, their ability to maintain their economic development has two important effects that determine their foreign policy choices. First, it means that the NISs have enough state capacity to solve their domestic problems and that they may have a sufficient surplus of resources to support their decision to balance-that is, they have more ”capability” to balancing. Second, because they were able to develop by themselves, their domestic political elites are more likely to reach a consensus on their decision to balance-that is, they have more ”willingness” to keep balancing. Otherwise, the elites are more inclined to divide into hawks and doves, which could lead to a debate in the domestic political arena over whether their country should continue to balance against Russia. Empirical evidence of all the fourteen NISs from 1992 to 2009 supports the argument that states increase their balancing behavior against Russia with the increase of their economic capacity. The finding of this research has important policy implications with regards to the evolution of Taiwan's China policy as well as the future of the Cross-Strait relationship.起始頁-結束頁：121-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：她們不是我們？分析台灣的民族主義者反大陸移民之態度並列篇名：Aren't They Part of Us? Opposition to Chinese Migrants among Taiwan's Nationalists作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-Ying Yang);張雅雯(Ya-Wen Chang)關鍵字：民族主義;族群式國家認同;公民式國家認同;大陸移民;nationalism;ethnic national identity;civic national identity;mainland migrants期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：一、前言二、民族主義者反移民三、民族主義不一定反移民四、理論建構與研究假設五、資料分析六、結論兩岸互動日趨頻繁，大陸來台人數日增，挑戰著台灣既有族群之間的分野，更衝擊台灣國家成員的界定。過去研究普遍認為台灣民族主義者和大陸移民之間存在著緊張關係，本研究認為，台灣不同的民族主義，牽涉到對台灣和中國的認同方向的差異，更涉及到認定國家成員組成的內涵的不同，這些不同面向都影響台灣民眾對待大陸人民的態度。就認同方向而言，台灣意識越強者，越可能反對大陸移民。然而，即使是具有強烈的台灣意識者，對國家成員界定的基礎不盡相同，其對大陸移民態度便可能有所不同。國家認同的基礎中，越是強調對政治共同體的公民式認同相對於強調歷史文化的族群式認同者，越可能接納大陸移民。探究台灣民族主義和反大陸移民的關係，本文採用「台灣社會變遷基本調查第六期第四次：國家認同組」資料，區分民族主義的方向（台灣/中國）與內涵（族群/公民），並建構四種民族主義的組合，透過模型分析顯示：在不同的民族主義類型之中，族群式台灣民族主義最為排斥大陸移民，公民式中國民族主義最接納大陸移民；然而，更值得關注的是，族群式中國民族主義相較於公民式台灣民族主義，可能更為排斥陸配來台以及懷疑其認同忠誠。簡言之，研究發現台灣民族主義不一定總是排斥大陸移民，而中國民族主義也不一定總是悅納大陸移民。英文摘要：Mainlander spouses as migrant groups challenge the core ethnic composition and the boundaries of national community in Taiwan. Past studies have observed that Taiwan nationalists were often associated with negative attitudes toward mainland migrants. This study, however, argues that even for the strongest Taiwan identifiers, attitudes toward mainland migrants are deeply affected by perceptions of who are qualified to be nation members and what constitute the substances of their national identities. Those with a strong ethnic, historical and cultural national identity are more likely to oppose mainland migrants compared to those with a civic, political, and institutional national identity. This study explores the relationship between Taiwan nationalism and opposition to mainland migrants using the「Taiwan Social Change Survey: National Identity Module 2013」dataset. We classified respondents into four types of nationalists. Our models showed that ethnic-Taiwanese nationalists were most likely to oppose mainland spouses and civic-Chinese nationalists were least likely to oppose them. More notably, ethnic-Chinese nationalists were more likely to exclude mainland spouses and question their national loyalty -than Taiwanese nationalists. In short, Taiwanese nationalists are not always hostile to mainland migrants, whereas Chinese nationalists are not always accommodating to mainland migrants.起始頁-結束頁：1-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：里斯本條約架構下的歐盟安全政策合作之嘗試並列篇名：The EU's Attempt for Security Policy Cooperation under the Lisbon Treaty作者：甘逸驊(Francis Yi-Hua Kan)關鍵字：里斯本條約;共同外交與安全政策;歐洲聯盟條約;對外事務與安全政策高級代表;歐盟對外行動署;Lisbon Treaty;Common Foreign and Security Policy;Treaty on European Union;High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy;European External Action Service期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：一、前言二、從改革動力到條約規範三、從條約規範到政策實踐四、內部安全與外部安全的介面五、更為緊密的「安全」聯盟？六、結論歐洲統合是一個不斷地在理想化與務實性、進步性與妥協性之間求取平衡以朝向「更為緊密的聯盟」為長期目標的動態進程，而在歐洲聯盟架構下所簽訂的各條約即是此進程的重要產物。本文的主要目的，即在於透過對於里斯本條約在安全政策規範與實踐的檢驗，以探尋在此高度主權敏感議題的整合發展過程中，歐盟的安全政策如何在政府間主義與超國家主義之間尋求動態平衡與妥協，以及如此的平衡是否促進歐盟進一步的統合。本文首先探討，歐盟如何藉由「條約化」來試圖解決統合進程中的治理困境，並進而提供歐盟安全政策深化合作的基礎；其次，本文將探究里斯本條約產生的背景與發展，以及里約在安全政策合作的實踐；另外，里約在內部安全與外部安全之間介面的運作，亦是本文試圖瞭解歐盟如何擴大安全合作的研究焦點；之後，本文將綜合分析里約對於歐盟安全政策整合的影響，並以此檢驗里約在維持會員國主導與聯盟凝聚力平衡的擺盪位置。綜合而言，里約提供歐盟安全政策統合經由不斷實踐向「共同體方法」決策模式傾斜的機會，里約雖刻意避開超國家主義爭議，但亦已偏離傳統的政府間主義，而是朝向一個得以兼顧會員國與歐盟互享利益的「布魯塞爾化」治理模式。英文摘要：European integration is a highly dynamic process of constant balancing between idealism and pragmatism and between progress-making and compromise-seeking with a long-term aim towards ”an ever closer union.” All the treaties signed by the member states in the framework of the European Union are important outcomes of this process. The key purpose of this article is to explore how the EU's security policy seeks dynamic compromise and balance between inter-governmentalism and supra-nationalism and what impact such a balancing would have on the union's further cooperation. This is done through the examination of the highly sensitive dimension of integration process, focusing on the normalization and practice of security policy concerning the Lisbon Treaty. This article first analyses how the EU strives to solve the dilemma of governance through treaty-making whereby its security cooperation could be consolidated. It also inspects the background, development, and practice of the Lisbon Treaty concerning security policy. In addition, the interface of internal and external security provided by the Lisbon Treaty is also a focus of this research to understand the broadening of EU security integration. This article concludes with the overall review of the impact of the Lisbon Treaty on the EU's security cooperation as a whole, in conjunction with the identifying of the volatile positioning of the Lisbon Treaty in the spectrum between sovereign predominance and union coherence. To sum up, the Lisbon Treaty offers opportuni ties for the inclination towards the ”community method” of EU's security policy through persistent practice in a way that would evade the controversies of supra-nationalism while also deviating from conventional inter-governmentalism. In this sense, the Lisbon Treaty has prompted the EU security cooperation to move towards the model of ”Brusselization” that delicately maintains the mutual interests of the individual member states and the EU in general.起始頁-結束頁：61-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：桃園免費公車之擴散與延續：2001-2014並列篇名：The Diffusion and Continuation of Free Public Buses in Taoyuan County: 2001~2014作者：李有容(Yu-Jung Lee);張惠堂(Hui-Tang Chang);黃國宬(Kuo-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：免費公車;桃園縣;新公共服務;free public bus;Taoyuan County;new public service期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：一、前言二、免費公車相關討論三、桃園縣各鄉鎮市免費公車實施沿革四、桃園市免費市民公車流變五、免費公車的擴散與延續：從桃園市到桃園縣六、升格之後的免費公車七、結論近年來，臺灣的地方政府亟欲透過升格、改制以追求資源最大化。但在當前財政資源普遍有限的束縛下，如何審慎考量公共服務的廣度與深度，運用相對有限的資源，提供最佳與最適的公共服務，以獲得民眾的信任與支持，此乃當前各級地方政府極力深思的任務。本文透過桃園境內免費公車的起源、發展與演變過程，討論地方公共服務的走向；或易言之，從新公共管理到新公共服務的轉折，地方政府選擇的理由為何？文章從公共服務的角度出發，首先探討免費公車的意涵，其次簡介桃園縣各鄉鎮市免費公車的實施狀況，然後針對桃園縣內此項服務發源地桃園市[區]民代表的質詢提案中理解免費公車的流變，進而指出地方政府使用「社會福利」預算支出辦理免費公車，而非從區域與交通規劃角度著手顯有不當。最後提出當桃園縣升格為直轄市之後，對於免費公車的規劃與其對公共服務的影響，基本上，作者建議應以「排除免費公車存在的條件」為努力目標。起始頁-結束頁：109-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：歐巴馬政府的南海政策：中國的回應及對台灣的影響並列篇名：Obama’s South China Sea Policy: China’s Response and Implications for Taiwan作者：林正義(Cheng-Yi Lin)關鍵字：歐巴馬;馬英九;習近平;南海;九段線;Barack Obama;Ma Ying-jeou;Xi Jinping;South China Sea;Nine-dash Line期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：歐巴馬政府堅決維持美國在南海的航行自由，並在島礁主權歸屬爭端上採取中立的立場。2009 年起美國軍艦、軍機在南海，遭遇一連串被中國人民解放軍騷擾或攔截的對峙事件。美國國務卿希拉蕊在2010 年7 月「東協區域論壇」談話，被北京視為美國改變南海政策及執行亞太再平衡的戰略。歐巴馬政府捲入中國與東協聲索國之間的爭端，支持菲律賓提請國際仲裁，質疑中國「九段線」的合法性。中國政府批評美國將南海國際化，降低和平解決的機會，對中國海洋安全逐漸增加威脅。北京面對美國與安全的壓力，希望與台灣一起確保中國在南海的主權。然而，美國對南海日益關注，台灣與中國聯合資源開發、政策協調，卻增加了新的限制。馬英九政府對菲律賓提起國際仲裁決定不承認相關判斷，同時面對南海日益軍事化。這兩者對台灣在南海安全利益形成新的挑戰。英文摘要：The Obama administration has adamantly maintained that its interest in the South China Sea is in freedom of navigation and has indicated a neutral position on the claims of disputants to specific islands or reefs. In 2009, a series of standoffs between China and the U.S. erupted with U.S. surface ships and military fighter jets either harassed or intercepted by the Chinese People’s Liberation Army in the South China Sea. U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s remark on the South China Sea has been perceived as an indicator of the U.S. changing its South China Sea policy and implementing its rebalancing strategy. The Obama administration has also been entangled in tensions between China and ASEAN claimants in the South China Sea disputes. The U.S. supports the Philippine approach to take the dispute to international arbitration and questions the legality of China’s nine-dash line in the South China Sea. The Chinese government criticized the U.S. for internationalizing the South China Sea issue, for reducing the chance for peaceful settlement of the dispute, and posing an increasing threat to Chinese maritime security. Facing pressure from the U.S. and ASEAN, Beijing has been more eager to enlist Taiwan to jointly assert Chinese sovereignty in the South China Sea. Nevertheless, the U.S.’s growing attention on the South China Sea has created constraints for Taiwan regarding cooperation with China both in joint oil exploration and in policy coordination vis-a-vis other ASEAN claimants. The Ma Ying-jeou government decided that it will not recognize related awards of the Philippine arbitration case and faces increasing militarization of the South China Sea. Both pose new security challenges for Taiwan in the South China Sea.起始頁-結束頁：1-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：誰是搭便車者？以霸權穩定論檢證中美外援對跨國直接投資政治風險的影響並列篇名：Who Is the Free Rider? An Application of the Hegemonic Stability Theory to Test the Impacts of China’s and the United States’ Foreign Aid on the Political Risks of Outward Foreign Direct Investment作者：郭建中(Jiann-Jong Guo);王國臣(Guo-Chen Wang)關鍵字：對外援助;跨國直接投資;政治風險;霸權穩定理論;結構方程式;foreign aid;hegemonic stability theory;outward foreign direct investment;political risk;structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文利用霸權穩定理論，檢證與比較中美兩國外援對跨國直接投資的影響。研究方法為結構方程式，研究對象為2000-2013年145 個開發中國家與轉型國家。實證結果顯示：中美兩國外援都可充當國際投資公共財─降低跨國直接投資政治風險，且雙方都在搭對方的便車。具體而言，本文發現有六：第一，政治風險阻礙跨國直接投資，中資企業也不例外；這是過去文獻忽略之處。第二，中美兩國外援都有利於跨國直接投資。第三，排除政治改革的中國大陸外援，其對跨國直接投資的貢獻，明顯低於美國外援。第四，中國大陸外援旨在，為其企業走出去鋪路。第五，美國外援側重其國家安全。換言之，中美兩國提供國際公共財，都有其自利動機。最後，中美兩國跨國直接投資，都受惠於對方的外援；差別在於，中美雙方受惠程度不同而已。總體而言，霸權穩定理論對現今國際政經體系，具有高度的解釋力。唯本文的實證結果，可從三方面補充霸權穩定理論。第一，國際公共財的供給，並非霸權國專有權力；維繫國際政經秩序的意願，才是居中關鍵。第二，國際公共財的供給國，沒有意識型態限制，只要恪守市場經濟規範、不傷害受援國的治理品質亦可。第三，霸權國提供國際公共財，都不是純利他考量；反之皆為政治精算的結果。英文摘要：We adopted the hegemonic stability theory to test the impacts of China’s and the United States’ foreign aid on outward foreign direct investment (OFDI). Method of the structural equation modeling was applied to examine 145 developing countries, 2000-2013. The empirical results show both China’s and the United States’ foreign aid acted as international public goods to reduce the political risks in international investment and both simultaneously get a free ride from each other. This paper has six findings: First, political risk hinders OFDI, and Chinese companies are no exception; this was ignored by previous literature. Second, these two countries’ foreign aids are conducive to OFDI. Third, China’s foreign aid does not require political reform of the host countries, thus, its contribution to OFDI was significantly lower than the United States’ foreign aid. Fourth, the Chinese foreign aid was intended to pave the way for their enterprises to ”go out”. Fifth, the United States’ foreign aid is focused on its national security. These two countries both provided international public goods, and have motives of serving their own interests. Finally, the OFDI of these two countries is benefited from each side’s foreign aid; the difference is only of degree. Overall, the hegemonic stability theory has high explanatory power for the current international political and economic system. The empirical results of this paper compensate the hegemonic stability theory in three aspects. First, a supply of international public goods is not the prerogative of the hegemonic nation; the will of maintaining international order is the key. Second, a supply of international public goods by a country is not based on ideology, as long as the norms of a market economy are abided by and the quality of governance in the recipient countries is not harmed. Third, the hegemonic nation providing international public goods does not have altruistic considerations; it follows well political calculations.起始頁-結束頁：81-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：公共服務模式之興替：以西門商圈街道家具治理為例並列篇名：Analyzing Governance Modes and Shifts: A Case Study of the Pedestrian Sidewalk Area for Street Furniture, Ximending District, Taipei, Taiwan作者：曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng);黃玉龍(Yu-Long Huang)關鍵字：交易成本;政府治理模式;協力的分配政治;transaction cost;modes of government governance;politics of distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：政府當局為何及如何選擇特定的治理模式？政府治理模式的演進是否吻合主流文獻（如新公共服務、協力公共管理）的倡議或主張？學者們經常提到政府治理模式至少有三種比較明確的類型，並主張<U+FF62>信任導向的協力治理<U+FF63>會比<U+FF62>競爭導向的市場治理<U+FF63>與傳統的<U+FF62>權威導向的層級治理<U+FF63>更具有相對優勢。此外，根據新制度經濟學與契約管理的文獻看法，<U+FF62>交易成本<U+FF63>與<U+FF62>市場競爭<U+FF63>很可能影響到治理模式的選擇。遺憾的是，公共管理實務中欲找到這樣一個歷經<U+FF62>多元治理模式<U+FF63>的個案並不容易，以致於研究者殊難針對上述命題進行檢驗。基於理論抽樣的原則，本研究特意挑選<U+FF62>臺北市西門商圈街道家具治理模式<U+FF63>個案進行探究，有趣的研究發現主要有二：（1）主流文獻主張在某些情形下，政府<U+FF62>協力治理模式<U+FF63>的運作優於<U+FF62>市場競爭模式<U+FF63>，但本研究結果卻顯示，<U+FF62>協力治理模式<U+FF63>最終仍不敵公共管理者對<U+FF62>市場競爭模式<U+FF63>的傳統偏好。（2）主流文獻上指稱的<U+FF62>交易成本風險<U+FF63>，實務上未必是影響治理模式選擇的關鍵問題。伴隨公私協力成效卓著所衍生的<U+FF62>分配政治<U+FF63>(politics of distribution)，反而被公共管理者視為燙手山芋的難題，此乃促使原本全臺首創的協力創新之商圈自治模式，不得不走向回頭路之主因。對於上述研究發現的意涵，本文也作了一些討論，期能豐富化既有的文獻與知識體系。英文摘要：How and why do government authorities would like to choose a specific mode of governance? Whether the evolution of governance modes in the government sector corresponds with the normative assertion of mainstream perspectives (i.e. new public service, collaborative public management). Scholars often propose that there are at least three typical modes of governance, and argue that the mode of ”trust-oriented collaborative governance” is superior to those modes of ”competition-oriented market governance” and traditional ”authority-oriented hierarchical governance”. Plus, according to theories in new institutional economics and contract management, ”transaction costs” and ”market competition” will severely affect the selection of governance modes. Unfortunately, a case, characterized by multiple modes of governance, which can be provided for researchers to systematically validate the proposition mentioned above, seems hard to find. Therefore, it is difficult to discern why the modes of governance would like to change in reality. Against this background, based on theoretical sampling, the case of ”Governance Mode of the Pedestrian Sidewalk Area for Street Furniture, Ximending District in Taipei” is consciously utilized to solve the puzzles. Two interesting findings derived from the case are as follows: a) under certain contexts, public managers may prefer the mode of ”market governance” better than the mode of ”collaborative governance”; b) transaction costs are not always key factors influencing the selection of the mode of governance. Actually, ”politics of distribution” is a serious obstacle that may force public manager to cease the collaborative practice. Managerial implications are also provided at the end of the paper.起始頁-結束頁：155-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系10篇名：績效悖理之潛因探析：制度邏輯與心理帳戶觀點並列篇名：Exploring the Root Causes of Performance Paradox: Perspectives of Institutional Logics and Mental Accounting作者：胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu)關鍵字：績效悖理;制度邏輯;心理帳戶;脫勾;象徵性採納;機關施政績效評核制度;團體績效評比;performance paradox;institutional logics;mental accounting;decoupling;symbolic acceptance;agency performance assessment system;team-based performance evaluation system期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：34卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：我國現行之中央部會績效評核制度，推動至今已有十四年的實行經驗，但仍被平面媒體指出，各部會的關鍵績效指標高達八成的內容是「不K，不P，也不I」，未能發揮效果且有流於形式之嫌。是以，本文之主要目的，在於藉由我國中央部會於績效評核制度推動之實證經驗，試圖剖析其運作現況並回答以下的研究問題：公部門績效評核制度為何產生績效悖理現象？為何會流於形式？有無可能從學理上找到解釋原因？爰此，藉由四場焦點團體座談，包含11 個部會、22 人次之資料蒐集結果與分析，本文發現，現行機關施政績效評核制度確實已衍生出不少績效悖理現象，而這些悖理現象的集合，便是該項制度已漸流於形式。而本文從制度邏輯和心理帳戶觀點嘗試提出解釋，認為那些已對機關績效評核制度失去信服的機關與人員，會將此一制度與屬試辦階段之團體績效評比制度視為不同的制度或心理帳戶，並將二者予以脫勾處理。一方面在形式上象徵性地服從機關績效評核制度的要求，避免或降低該制度對機關的實質干預或影響，另一方面則是將機關內部的績效重點，與團體績效評比制度加以扣合，追求各單位在考績甲等比例分配上的最大利益；而這樣的策略性回應行為，不僅具備心理上的說服效果，亦具心理效益。英文摘要：The Taiwan central government’s agency performance assessment system, which follows the United States’ GPRA rationale and has been carried out for more than a decade, was recently criticized by the media as ineffective as having become ritualized. More specifically, it was indicated that the assessment system has produced managerial dysfunctions and the so-called performance paradox phenomenon. With four focus-group interviews which covered participants from one-third of the ministries at the cabinet level, this study aims at exploring the root causes of the performance paradox phenomenon through theoretical angles. The findings show that the agency performance assessment system cannot fully reflect governmental employees’ daily efforts and does not offer incentive rewards, as public employees confront multiple and competing evaluation systems in the field. This situation forces employees to decouple the agency performance assessment system from the team-based performance evaluation system which is tightly associated with individual employee’s appraisal results. Decoupling the external agency performance assessment system from the internal team-based performance evaluation system could be understood as a strategic response toward the pressure derived from multiple institutional logics in a given organization. Moreover, considering these performance measurement systems as different institutional or mental accounts and responding to them in a differentiated way is definitely in line with the underlying argument of mental accounting.起始頁-結束頁：209-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：美國公務員言論自由的保障與限制：聯邦最高法院判決分析及其對台灣的啟示並列篇名：Free Speech for the Public Employees in the United States: Exploring Inquiries of the U.S. Supreme Court and Their Application to Taiwan作者：楊戊龍(Wu-Lung Yang)關鍵字：公務員;言論自由;公共議題;利益衡平;Free Speech;Public Employee;Public Concern;Balancing Test期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：68期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文分析美國聯邦最高法院判決，探討美國公務員的言論自由保障與限制，然後應用該院之分析模式，分析國內事件。當公務員指控政府雇主因其言論而予紀律處分，侵犯其受憲法增修條文第1條所保障的言論自由權時，美國聯邦最高法院的分析模式為：(1)決定公務員的言論身分（第一道門檻），如果公務員發表者屬於公務職責言論，則他不是居於公民身分說話，其言論不屬於言論自由條款保護之範圍（2006年Garcetti案判決）。(2)如果公務員居於公民身分發表言論，再依公務員言論的內容、形式及情境，決定言論是否屬於公共議題（第二道門檻）（1983年Connick案判決）。如果不屬於公共議題，公務員亦無主張言論自由條款保護的訴訟理由（1968年Pickering案判決）。(3)如果公務員居於公民身分，發表屬於公共議題之言論，則再探究政府機關是否有充分正當的理由，對該公務員為與其他一般民眾不同的對待（1968年Pickering案判決），即進行利益衡平，檢視政府雇主能否提出抗衡性利益，支持其對公務員所為的紀律處分。而自1968年Pickering案開啟公務員言論公共議題受言論自由條款保護之門至今，聯邦最高法院對公務員言論自由的保護趨向嚴格、限縮的解釋。本文應用上開分析模式，討論國內郭○○（前新聞局駐外人員）案、施○○（前衛生署疾病管制局副局長）案及陳○○（郵政基層職員）案，從結果論，郭○○案及陳○○案處置適當，對施○○案則有點過度反應。英文摘要：This article discusses the decisions made by the U.S. Supreme Court regarding the free speech of public employees, and then applies the Court's Inquires to analyze three events that took place in Taiwan. In Lane v. Franks (2014), the Court applies a three-step inquiry with the principles evolved from Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), Connick v. Myers (1983), and Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006), to decide whether public employee's speech is entitled to the First Amendment protection. The first inquiry is whether the speech was pursuant to official duties. The First Amendment protection holds only when a public employee speaks as a private citizen and the speech itself must not be pursuant to his/her official duties. The second inquiry is whether the speech involved a matter of public concern. When a public employee speaks not as a citizen upon matters of public concern, he/ she is not entitled to the First Amendment protection as well. Whether public employee's speech addresses a matter of public concern depends on the content, form, and context. The final inquiry is whether the government as an employer had an adequate justification for treating the employee differently than any other member of the public. The First Amendment protection goes to public employee when the interest of his/her speech outweighs the government's interest in efficiency and effectiveness. This article applies the above three-step inquiry to three events in Taiwan and argues that the government's dispositions can be adequately justified for the cases of Kuo ○○ and Chen ○○. Kuo was the former acting director of the information division at the nation's representative office in Toronto who was removed after writing a number of articles slandering Taiwan and Taiwanese and alleged that he exercised constitutionally protected free speech, while Chen was an employee of the Taichung Post Office who suffered adverse performance appraisal for raising concern over the uncomfortable workplace to the media and later lost his re-appeal case in the Civil Service Protection and Training Commission. However, this paper argues that the authorities overreacted slightly to the case of Shih ○○. Shih was the former deputy director-general at Taiwan's Center for Disease Control and was accused of violating the Public Functionary Service Act for criticizing the US. visa-waive program and expressing his opposition about covering Chinese students under Taiwan's national health insurance program.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.68(1-36)2篇名：環境程序正義在褐地重建中的實踐條件：我國污染土地再利用實例的觀察分析並列篇名：Prerequisites for Practicing Procedural Environmental Justice: A Case Study on the Reclamation of Polluted Land in Taiwan作者：李翠萍(Tsuey-Ping Lee)關鍵字：環境治理;環境正義;環境程序正義;褐地重建政策;污染地再利用;Environmental Governance;Environmental Justice;Procedural Environmental Justice;Brownfield Redevelopment Policy;Reclamation of Polluted Land期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：68期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究利用近代正義理論的肯認與能力途徑，檢視環境程序正義在我國褐地重建實務中實踐的困境，進而探索落實環境程序正義的支持條件。有意義的民眾參與是實踐環境程序正義的核心，本研究利用我國第一個納入民眾參與機制的污染土地再利用示範計畫，藉由協助執行民眾參與過程，就近觀察民眾參與在理想與實際上的差距。研究發現肯認與能力二者交相影響著民眾參與的過程，利害關係者彼此缺乏肯認，導致民眾參與動機不足，而民眾缺乏專業能力，也因而無法實質貢獻於相關決策過程。本文最後針對民眾參與動機與參與能力兩個面向，提出幾個實踐環境程序正義於我國褐地重建實務的先決條件。分別是政府部門肯認污染受害者的損失與污染場址周邊居民的環境風險；污染場址周邊居民肯認自己的環境權；以及參與民眾需要專業知識的裝備。英文摘要：Applying the recognition and capacity approach from contemporary theories of justice, the difficulties of and prerequisites for practicing procedural environmental justice in brownfield redevelopment are explored in this paper. Meaningful public participation in the decision-making process is the core of practicing procedural environmental justice. By observing the polluted land reclamation program which intends to establish public participation mechanism for the first time in Taiwan, this paper analyzes the gap between ideal kind of public participation and the reality in practice. The major finding of this research is that the interaction between recognition and capacity affects the public participation process. A lack of recognition between stakeholders reduces participatory incentives for the neighboring residents. In addition, a lack of professional capacity impedes stakeholders' meaningful contribution to the decision-making process. This paper concludes by naming prerequisites for practicing procedural justice in brownfield redevelopment as follows. The government recognizes the losses suffered by pollution victims and the environmental risks faced by the neighboring residents; the residents recognize their right to a healthy environment; and the residents are equipped with the professional knowledge to participate in the decision-making process.起始頁-結束頁：37-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.68(37-76)3篇名：俄羅斯利益團體的形成與演進並列篇名：The Formation and Evolution of Interest Groups in the Russian Federation作者：連弘宜(Hong-Yi Lien)關鍵字：利益團體;壓力團體;俄羅斯政治發展;寡頭;Interest Groups;Pressure Groups;Russian Political Development;Oligarchs期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：68期出版年：2016中文摘要：工業革命後，除了改變了人類生產活動的過程，亦帶動西方國家的社會變遷，工業社會於焉成形。利益團體逐漸萌芽，在西方民主政治數百年的發展中，扮演著重要的角色。原本屬於社會主義國家及一黨專政的蘇聯，國內並無任何利益團體的存在。1991年底解體後，俄羅斯在政治改革方面朝向民主化發展，經濟上則採取快速邁向市場經濟的休克式療法。一時之間俄羅斯國內的利益團體快速發展，然這些利益團體不僅產生的方式不同，其作用與類型亦與西方大異其趣。本文首先要辨明俄羅斯利益團體的類型與性質，而後再就其發展加以比較，藉以了解前蘇聯國家不同類型利益團體的發展，以及其與西方國家利益團體相異之處。英文摘要：Industrial revolution not only changed the manufacturing processes, but also triggered the social changes in western countries. Throughout the last few hundred years when western democratization took place, the role of interest groups became more and more important. There was no interest group in the Soviet Union, however, due to its political system-Socialism and Communist one party rule. After the Soviet Union collapsed, the political reform in Russia tended to democratization, and the economic reform adopted shock therapy to make a quick transition to capitalist market economy. Accordingly, the development of interest groups was thriving in Russia, but the types and effects of interest groups were different from those of the western countries. First of all, this article tries to discuss the characters, types and developments of Russian interest groups, and then to explore the differences between the Russian interest groups and their counterparts in the western countries.起始頁-結束頁：77-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.68(77-102)4篇名：從德國選舉法修正論我國立委選制改革：聯立制的適用性並列篇名：An Analysis of Taiwan’s Electoral Reform in Terms of German Electoral Law Amendment: The Applicability of Mixed Member Proportional System作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su);許友芳(Yu-Fang Hsu)關鍵字：單一選區兩票制;聯立制;並立制;選制改革;超額議席;Mixed System;Mixed-member Proportional System;Mixed-member Majoritarian System;Electoral Reform;Overhang Seat期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：67期出版年：2016中文摘要：我國立委選制自2008年採行並立式單一選區兩票制（以下簡稱「並立制」）以來，一直有檢討批判的聲音。社會各界批判的主要觀點認為，並立制造成各黨得票率與席次頗不吻合（即比例性偏差的現象），且扼殺小黨的生存空間，而主張以德國聯立制取代現行的並立制，甚至有批判者認為並立制違反自由民主憲政秩序而聲請釋憲。選制改革至今仍是政壇與學界熱列討論的議題，而其中核心的議題即是：就我國整體憲政運作而言，聯立制是否真的是比並立制更適切的選舉制度？事實上，德園聯立制實施至今，在德國國內也引起了許多爭議，例如當選基數、政黨門檻、選區劃分等爭議，而期中最重要的一項爭議，即是超額議席及所衛生的選票負面效力，而近年來德國聯邦憲法法院已兩度宣告聯邦選舉法的若干規定違憲，促使德國國會條法進行選制改革。德國選舉法修正採行了「平衡議席」機制，雖然矯正了超額議席的問題，卻導致計票程序更為複雜，普使國會總席次大幅增加，德國選制改革選得治絲益芬。就此看來德國聯立制在德國人的心目中並非完全無暇的選舉製度。本文以德國選舉法修正的前因後果為基礎，探討我國立委選制改為聯立制的妥適性，並分析當前社會各界對聯立制的普遍讚揚是否是一種迷思。本文認為，若將憲政體制與選舉制度進行配套思考，在我國當前半總統制的基本格局未大幅更動的情形下，立委選制採行聯立制並不見得是一個妥適的改革方向。若要改良我國當前的立委選制，以當前的並立制為基礎進行微調，或許較為妥適。英文摘要：Ever since Taiwan’s adoption of a Mixed Member Majoritarian system (MMM) for its legislative elections in 2008, the disproportionality between the percentage of votes and actual seats, as well as the marginalization of smaller parties which has resulted from this shift, have been heavily criticized. Those opposing the system even petitioned for a constitutional interpretation which, they hoped, would find the MMM system to be in violation of liberal and democratic principles. Among the proposed solutions, a shift to a German-style Mixed Member Proportional system (MMP) has received the most attention. However, in framing the issue in terms of a clear-cut decision for either MMM or MMP, the debate about electoral reform in Taiwan lacks nuance. In particular, it tends to overlook the challenges which MMP has faced in Germany in the recent past. The problem of overhang seats and the connected problem of negative vote weights, in conjunction with changes in the party system, have all led to greater disproportionality. Bearing these in mind, this paper discusses the question of which electoral system best suits the needs of Taiwan, and concludes that the MMP system is not compatible with the current semi-presidential system of government. In short, it is rather more feasible to have minor reforms on the existing MMM system, instead of switching into the MMP one.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.67(1-50)5篇名：縣市合併後地方議會次級團體之運作：以臺中市議會為例（2010-2014）並列篇名：A Study on the Operation of Sub-Groups in the City Council after the Merger of Taichung City and Taichung County (2010-2014)作者：陳麗雅(Li-Ya Chen);王業立(Yeh-Lih Wang)關鍵字：派系;次級團體;臺中市議會;臺中縣市合併;黨團;Faction;Sub-group;The Taichung City Council;The Merger of Taichung City and Taichung County;Caucus期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：67期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺中縣市合併之前，彼此議會的運作生態截然不同。原臺中縣議會是以紅黑派系所主導的次級團體為議事運作的主體；而原臺中市議會則是以黨團運作為主。但在2010年縣市合併升格為直轄市後，原本縣市不同的議會運作生態，因合併而產生磨合，在泛藍陣營形成次級團體與黨團併行的局面。由於地方派系最重要的目標，就是要爭取公部門職位，從中汲取資源，轉化成派系的資源，以壯大派系勢力，將派系利益極大化就是派系間的行事法則。因此，本文將著重在探討臺中縣派系如何透過議會次級團體，將其「利益極大化」。基於此，本文乃以「次級團體之形成」、「次級團體與國民黨團之互動」與「次級團體運作之效果」等三個面向作為研究架構，觀察派系運用何種手段，將其「利益極大化」。此外，觀察合併後的臺中市議會可以發現，雖然目前仍維持「紅黑共治」的情況，但此種由派系決定資源如何分配的情況已有所轉變，未來資源分配的重點將由追求紅黑之間的派系平衡，轉變為追縣市之間的區域平衡。英文摘要：The Taichung City Council and Taichung County Council were governed by two contrasting political entities before the merger of the two administrative regions in 2010. Caucus is in effect in the former, while the latter was predominantly run by sub-groups consisting of the red and black factions. However, a watershed moment had been reached as the two regions merged to become a special municipality in 2010. Yet, due to the change in political ambiance, what followed was a series of skirmishes. The pan-blue camp at the end formed the sub-group parallel to the caucus. The most important aim of local factions is always to win public sector positions, extract resources which will then be converted to the resources of their factions, and finally strengthen factions’ power. Maximizing the interests of the faction, after all, is the guiding principle.. Therefore, in this study, how the factions from Taichung County maximize their interests through council sub-groups is explored. Furthermore, this paper studies how factions maximize their interests from three aspects: ”the formation of sub-groups,” ”the interaction between sub- groups and Kuomintang,” and ”the effect of sub-groups’ operation”. In addition, even though ”red-and-black co-governance” remains to be apparent in the Taichung City Council after the merge, how factions decide to allocate resources has changed. In the future, resource allocation will be done so to pursue regional balance between the old Taichung City and Taichung County, instead of pursuing a balance between the red and black factions.起始頁-結束頁：51-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.67(51-90)6篇名：地方產業永續轉型的社會資本與政府效能：屏東縣養水種電個案分析並列篇名：Social Capital and Government Effectiveness of the Transformation of Local Industries into Greater Sustainability: The Case of Aqua Solar Farms in Pingtung作者：汪志忠(Chi-Chung Wang);曾稚尹(Chih-Yin Tseng)關鍵字：社會資本;政府效能;永續性轉型;養水種電;Social Capital;Government Effectiveness;Sustainable Transformation;The Case of Aqua Solar Farm期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：67期出版年：2016中文摘要：永續發展的價值基礎與社會本有當程度的關聯性，本研究針對屏東縣成功引導地方產業脫離永續性困境的「養水種電（The Case of Aqua Solar Farm）」個案，從不同的社會資本要素與類型，透過14位利害關係人（屏東縣政府、廠商與地主）的深度訪談，以及迴歸分析33位地主的量化問卷資料，剖析此一產業永續性轉型個案所呈現的社會資本特性，以及社會資本與政府效能的連結關係。研究結果發現：第一，縣政府與廠商之間是因為共同的永續性目標以及密切的交流與資訊共享，逐漸累積出信任關係普形成夥伴關係，然而廠商與地主之間的信任關係，在計畫初期則是相當薄弱，但是在縣政府積極扮演互動平台的努力下，逐漸建立地主與太陽能廠商之間的信任關係；第二受訪者對於「養水種電」計畫多給予正面評價，也多能肯定屏東縣政府的政府效能，社會資本與政府效能之間的連結關係是存在的；第三，迴歸分析結果顯示社會資本的「信任」與「規範」是政府效能的顯著解釋變數，但是當進一步以社會資本類型區分時，則發現「地主對廠商的信任」、「地主之間的信任」與「地主對屏東縣政府之規範認知」三項社會資本是顯著的解釋變數，其中又以「地主對廠商的信任」變數最具解釋力，最後，本文提出四項治理建議，以作為地方產業永續性轉型的參考，分別是地方首長應有前瞻性治理思維、永續性政策有助於創造社會資本、應實踐新公共服務、應有回應利害關係人的有效作法。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the relationship between social capital and local government effectiveness regarding sustainable transformation of local industry. This paper is an analysis of sustainable transformation of the Aqua Solar Farm in Pingtung, Taiwan. The qualitative in-depth interview approach was used and 14 direct stakeholders, ranging from those from the public sector, private sector, as well as local residents, were interviewed to interpret the function of social capital in the transformation process of local industry where policy uncertainty and conflicting roles exist. Three elements (trust, norm, and network) and three types of social capital (bonding, bridging, and linking) were employed to explore the patterns of social capital. In addition, regression analysis was conducted to examine the real relationship between social capital and government effectiveness empirically. Results indicate that a positive and tight social capital was observed among the stakeholders, especially on trust and norm. We also find local government to be helpful in enhancing the accumulation of social capital because it provides a communication platform and acceptable regulations to solve conflicts. In addition, the relationship between social capital and government effectiveness was shown, too. The positive social capital had strengthened the local government effectiveness in this case. Regression analysis also indicates trust and norm being significant variables in explaining government effectiveness. As for the trust variable, we find that the trust of local residents to solar firms is the most explanatory social capital.起始頁-結束頁：91-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.67(91-132)01篇名：試論中美發動軍事衝突的要件：國家權力差距或不滿意並列篇名：The Necessary Conditions for China and the U.S. to Initiate Militarized Conflicts: Power Gap or Dissatisfaction作者：廖小娟(Hsiao-chuan Liao)關鍵字：權力比;國家不滿意;發動軍事衝突;權力轉移理論;權力平衡理論;Power Gap;State Dissatisfaction;Conflict Initiation;Power Transition Theory;Balance-of-Power Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：中國大陸的崛起不僅牽動東亞區域內權力重分配的態勢，也影響了全球各大國之間的互動。世界霸權─美國─如何處理與面對中國大陸的崛起和可能的爭霸，也暗示著另一次世界大戰的可能性。權力平衡理論認為只有國家間權力均衡，國際和平方能維持；權力轉移理論則提出當中國大陸的權力將要超越美國之時，中美軍事衝突亦會隨之發生，並且權力的分配雖提供了衝突發生的機會，發動軍事衝突則與國家對彼此的不滿意息息相關。本文藉由布林演算法比較中國大陸與美國在權力比、國家不滿意、地緣關係、政體、與最後發動軍事衝突間的關係，找出中國大陸與美國各自發動不同程度軍事衝突的要件。本文發現當中國大陸和美國與對手國綜合國力不相近時，更容易發動軍事衝突，尤其是綜合國力的優勢更是中國大陸發動軍事衝突的充分條件。而中國大陸發動戰爭時，除了與對手的聯盟組成不同，直接表達不滿意也是其戰爭的必要條件。另一方面，美國則是未持修正態度下，與對手聯盟組成不相似都是發動戰爭的必要條件，擁有核武則是其發動軍事衝突的充分條件。據此，本文支持權力平衡理論的看法，認為中美在優勢下較容易發動軍事衝突，同時印證聯盟的組成不相似和表達不滿意都是中美兩國可能發動軍事衝突的強烈信號。英文摘要：The rise of China has not only affected the power distribution in East Asia, but also influenced the interactions among major states. How the United States as the global hegemony deals with a rising China, and how the potential competition for dominance unfolds will dictate the likelihood of another major war. From the perspective of realism, the struggle for power among states is inevitable. The balance-of-power theory asserts that international peace results from the power balance among states, while the power transition theory argues that war happens when the gap among states' power shrinks. Furthermore, power distribution may provide only opportunities for conflict, but it is state dissatisfaction that actually triggers conflict. This article compares the impacts of power gap, state dissatisfaction together with other factors, such as geopolitics and regime, on the initiation by China and the U.S. of militarized conflicts. The comparison is methodologically based on Boolean algebra which induces the necessary conditions for them to initiate conflicts. The results show that China and the U.S. are more likely to initiate conflicts when their powers are not in parity with their opponents. In particular, power superiority is a sufficient condition for China to initiate conflicts. Dissimilarity of alliance portfolios and expression of direct dissatisfaction are two necessary conditions for China to wage wars. In contrast, the necessary conditions for war initiation by the U.S. are non-revisionism and dissimilarity of alliance portfolios. Equipping nuclear capability is sufficient for the U.S. to take militarized actions. These findings lend more support for the balance of- power theory than the power transition theory, in terms of war initiation. Moreover, the findings also demonstrate that dissimilarity of alliance portfolios and expressions of state dissatisfaction are both key to war initiation by China and the U.S.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.62.012篇名：當前東亞戰略局勢的地緣觀察：以「一帶一路」為核心的思考並列篇名：The Geostrategic Analysis of Recent Developments in East Asia: The OBOR as the Core作者：何燿光(Yao-Kuang Ho)關鍵字：一帶一路;中國崛起;地緣戰略;東亞;權力轉換;The One Belt One Road;China's Rise;Geostrategy;East Asia;Power Conversion期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：2013 年9、10 月間，中國國家主席習近平利用訪問中亞四國與印尼的機會，分別提出建設「絲綢之路經濟帶」與「21 世紀海上絲綢之路」的構想。而這樣的戰略意圖到底是如同中國外長王毅所強調的「不是地緣工具……不能用冷戰思維看待」，亦或是如解放軍少將喬良所稱「是跟美國戰略東移的一次對沖」。事實上，中國崛起在國際認知上，從來就沒有一致的認知，是否將會因經濟實力的變遷，而衝擊當前國際秩序，原本就在不同學派認知的爭議中劇烈衝撞。攤開地緣戰略地圖，如此大規模的跨區域戰略布局，不可能僅止於經濟、貿易、通商等低位階的安排，而不去調動高位階的國際政治與權力結構關係。因此，如何觀察這樣一個戰略安排的本質，如何理解其中的權力轉換，如何思考崛起中國在歐亞世界島的權力位置，而如此龐大的跨區域整合、鉅額的投資需求，複雜的權力重組，將會帶來的是無限美好的發展藍圖，亦或是新一輪冷戰的再起，基本上都是本文所關切，而亟欲思考、解決的議題。透過戰略局勢的地緣觀察，筆者認為，地緣的本質不變性與變動性，恰正可以提供超越意識形態認知的一條思維途徑。英文摘要：The One Belt, One Road (OBOR) was proposed by Xi Jinping in 2013. With a backdrop of China's rapid rise in recent years, the possible strategic vision and intention of this mega plan have been widely discussed. Nevertheless, from geostrategic perspective, it is hard for such a massive cross-regional policy initiative to move ahead without mobilizing the resources associated with international political and power relations. Thus, the strategic nature, the power dynamics in the region, and China's specific position of OBOR are the major concerns of this article. Will OBOR lead to a glorious future for the region's development or a resumption of new Cold War? This article suggests that the geospatial analysis of world politics that stresses both location immobility and geo-political variability could be an alternative to the ideological reading of OBOR.起始頁-結束頁：25-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.62.023篇名：政官菁英對和平主義規範與建制的挑戰：日本2013年〈防衛計畫大綱〉制定與內容並列篇名：Political-Bureaucratic Elites' Challenges to Norms and Institutions of Pacifism: The Making and Content of Japan's 2013 National Defense Program Guidelines作者：郭育仁(Yu-jen Kuo)關鍵字：日本防衛政策;防衛計畫大綱;建構主義;政官分工;現實主義;Japan's Defense Policy;National Defense Program Guidelines;Constructivism;Labor of Division between Political and Bureaucratic Elites;Realism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：建構主義認為規範與概念等非物質變因大幅約制戰後日本防衛政策的發展，並強調和平主義規範與建制是造成戰後日本經濟與軍事實力巨大落差，以及冷戰後仍傾向緩步調整防衛政策的主因。然而政治菁英（首相、內閣、執政黨）與官僚菁英（防衛省、外務省）的政策主動性，使得近年日本國防改革開始出現與建構主義預測不同的發展。安倍晉三內閣於2013 年12 月17日通過〈防衛計畫大綱〉，政策制定過程中，政官菁英緊密分工合作，主動運用外在安全威脅創設「國家安全保障會議」以強化首相決策權、漸進挑戰高敏感性的國防議題、以及藉和平主義之名進行國防改革之實等三大策略，順利突破戰後和平主義規範與政治建制對首相權力與防衛政策的約制，同時在政策制定模式與政策內容產生重大改變。出現戰後日本史上為因應周邊局勢改變，最具軍事操作性的國防文件。本文聚焦在三個主要議題：第一、2013年〈防衛計畫大綱〉制定過程中，政官菁英如何運用政策主動性挑戰和平主義規範與建制。第二、政官菁英扮演的政策功能、互動與分工架構，以及整體政策制定模式。第三、上述制定模式如何影響最後政策內容。英文摘要：Constructivism argues that nonmaterial factors such as norms and ideas have largely constrained the development of postwar Japan’s defense policy, and emphasizes that the Pacifism norms and institutions are the main causes for the huge gap between Japan’s economic and military powers, and for the incremental defense adjustments in the post-Cold War era. However, Japanese political elites' policy activism has led to the contradiction between Japan's defense reform in recent years and the theoretical prediction of constructivism. The Abe Cabinet released Japan's National Defense Program Guidelines (NDPG) on December 17, 2013. During the process, political (the prime minister, the cabinet, and ruling parties) and bureaucratic elites (foreign and defense ministries) utilized four major strategies in challenging the constraints from the norms and institutions of postwar Pacifism on prime ministers' power in defense reforms. The strategies include active propagation of external security threats in order to establish the National Security Council, better division of labor between the foreign and defense ministries, incremental challenge to the issues with high political sensitivities, and the resort to Pacifism in carrying out realistic defense reforms. These successful breakthroughs in the making of 2013 NDPG also resulted in the highest military operability defense document in postwar Japan in responding to the rapid changing security environment. This article will answer three major research questions: First, what are the strategies applied by the political-bureaucratic elites in actively challenging the constraints from the norms and institutions of postwar pacifism? Second, what are the political-bureaucratic elites' roles and functions in the making of 2013 NDPG, in terms of their policy interaction and division of labor? Third, what are the impacts of the aforementioned policymaking model on the final policy outcomes?起始頁-結束頁：53-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.62.034篇名：倫理國家的開展：格林對古典自由主義的哲學改造及其民主實踐意涵並列篇名：The Coming of Ethical State: Green's Philosophical Reformation of Classical Liberalism and Its Democratic Practice Implication作者：劉佳昊(Jia-Hau Liu)關鍵字：格林;自由主義;民主實踐;倫理國家;道德完善;Green;Liberalism;Democratic Practice;Ethical State;Moral Perfection期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：62期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在考察格林是如何從基督教神學的道德信條中，汲取西方民主實踐哲思的倫理內涵，以對19 世紀英國古典自由主義哲學的不足進行增補與改造之工作。關於格林的道德與政治思想對英國現代自由民主理論的發展帶來何種影響之研究，時常是從自由主義哲學的個體主義或集體主義思想立場著手解讀。但此類研究路徑，多有假定自由主義為單義，而把格林的思想主張安置在一個二元的思維框架內進行討論之傾向。不同於此傳統的解讀方式，本文將從格林對古典自由主義哲學的承繼與批判，以及他如何基於其批判，轉化基督教神學的道德實踐主張，進而開展出一套側重公民參與的倫理國家理論這兩方面著手，以指陳格林的思想論述是如何憑藉其獨特的國家概念，對其後英國知識分子的民主實踐活動帶來了深遠影響。英文摘要：This article aims to investigate how Green reformed the 19th-century classical liberalism philosophy by articulating the ethical and the democratic practice implication in Christian theological moral tenets. In the current studies concerning the impact of Green's moral and political thought on the development of British modern liberal democratic theory, the interpretations are commonly about the dualistic standing of liberal philosophy, individualism and collectivism. This approach, however, tends to assume that liberalism is unitary and confine the discussion on Green's philosophical thought to a dualistic framework. In contrast with that interpretive approach, the present article investigates Green's reformation of classical liberalism philosophy from two aspects: the intellectual connections between Green's philosophical thought and the classical liberalism philosophy, and how Green transformed and utilized Christian moral practical assertions to develop a theory of ethical state that emphasizes the significance of citizens' participation in democracy. Ultimately, this article argues that the impact of Green's philosophical thought on the democratic praxis of those British intellectuals after Green was derived from Green's unique conception of the state.起始頁-結束頁：79-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.62.045篇名：中國發展模式是否成為亞洲國家的學習對象？－一項東亞13國民眾的調查並列篇名：Is China a Model for Asia? A Survey of Public Opinion in 13 East Asian States作者：楊喜慧(Shi-Huei Yang);陳明通(Ming-Tong Chen)關鍵字：中國模式;北京共識;華盛頓共識;中國崛起;中國威脅論;The China Model;The Beijing Consensus;The Washington Consensus;China’s Rise;The China Threat Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：61期出版年：2016中文摘要：東亞民眾是否認知到中國崛起？是否肯定中國崛起對亞洲帶來正面的影響？是否覺得中國模式是該國學習的對象？Min-Hun Huang與Yun-Han Chu的文章運用第三波「亞洲民主動態調查」(Asian barometer survey, ABS)的資料，僅回答前兩個問題，殊為可惜，本論文運用同一筆資料，繼續回答第三個問題。研究結果發現，包括中國在內的亞洲13國家與地區19,434位受訪民眾中，有7.7%受訪者認為「中國模式」可以作為該國未來發展學習的對象，相對於美國的23.1%，比率可謂不高。若以國家來看，沒有一個國家優先選擇「中國模式」，卻有菲律賓、柬埔寨、韓國、中國等四個國家的受訪者，選擇美國的比率高於任何國家。菲律賓、韓國選擇美國作為學習的對象不令人意外，但是連中國自己的民眾都偏好學習美國，顯示中國雖在亞洲崛起，但「中國模式」在亞洲並不具有吸引力，美國在此地區的「軟實力」仍屬第一。進一步運用「複層次非線性模型分析」發現，傾向「中國模式」的個體層次變項有：中國是亞洲最有影響力國家的認知、中國對亞洲的影響力是正面的、對中國有較高的民主評價等；但取向於自由民主價值的受訪者，卻不認同「中國模式」。在總體層次變項上，與中國地緣政治關係愈緊張，愈不傾向「中國模式」，顯示「中國威脅論」與地緣政治有關。英文摘要：Do East Asians recognize the rise of China? Do they welcome China's rise as beneficial for the Asia region? Do they believe their countries can learn from China's development model? Research by Min-Hua Huang and Yun-Han Chu uses data from the Asia Barometer Survey to examine the first two questions. This article applies the data to look at the third question. The research shows that of 19,434 respondents in 13 East Asian countries, 7.7% view China as a model for their countries future development, compared to 23.1% who identify the United States as a model. Aggregate data for each country in the survey shows that no country's public views China as a preferred model. Moreover, in the Philippines, Cambodia, South Korea and China, more respondents identify the US as a model than China. While it is not surprising that more Filipinos and South Koreans prefer America as a model, the fact that more Chinese view the United States as a model rather than their own country shows that despite China's rise, China's development model has limited appeal in Asia and the United States continues to lead the region in terms of ”soft power.” Multi-level non-linear model statistical analysis shows that with respect to individual-level variables, respondents who see China as a model tend to perceive China as the most influential country in Asia, view China's influence in Asia as positive, and have relatively more positive assessments of China's level of democracy. However, respondents oriented toward liberal democratic values do not identify with China as a model. At the macro-level, respondents from countries with tense geopolitical relations with China show less preference for China as a model, showing that perceptions of a China threat are influenced by geopolitics.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.61.016篇名：國際規範的不完全擴散：以清日島嶼主權爭議中有效控制概念的學習成效為例並列篇名：Incomplete Diffusion of International Norms: On the Effectiveness of Learning about the Concept of Effective Control in the Sovereignty Dispute over Islands between the Qing Empire and Japan作者：曾雅真(Yea-Jen Tseng)關鍵字：牡丹社;東沙島;規範擴散;國際公法;有效控制;Mudan Incident;Pratas Island;Norm Diffusion;Public International Law;Effective Control期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：61期出版年：2016中文摘要：西方國際社會所建構的國際公法於19世紀中葉傳入東亞諸國，繼受此種國家間相互規範的大清帝國與日本，透過不同的認識歷程，對國際公法產生不同的體認與實踐。本文試圖以國際公法之有效控制(effective control)概念，觀察19世紀與20世紀初葉，大清帝國與日本政府在臺灣牡丹社與東沙島主權歸屬交涉過程的認知表現，並據以檢驗國際規範擴散的過程與成效。本文發現，國際社會共享知識的建構過程，呈現國際規範被不完整傳播、學習與內化的樣貌；國家間的互動實踐，未必會型塑完美的觀念傳遞與內化效果。如果規範的擴散是一個被削減而非增益的過程，則國際社會共享知識的內容，可能並不如社會建構理論所意識的完整；而所謂的建構過程，它所塑造的內容，也未必是原始觀念傳播者所預期的想像。英文摘要：The public international law hailing from the West spread forth to East Asia during the mid-19th century. The Qing Empire of China and Japan both came to accept the public international law, but developed divergent understanding, perceptions and practices thereof as a result of different cognitive and learning processes. This article explores the Qing Empire's and Japan's cognitive and the ensuing behavioral aspects with regard to the concept of effective control, as reflected in the dispute resolution over the MuDan Incident and Pratas Island dispute between the two countries. By doing so, this article also examines the process and effect of the international norm diffusion. This article discovers that the constructive process of shared knowledge in the international societyis incomplete in terms of norm diffusion, learning, and internationalization. The actual interactions among countries do not always guarantee a perfect diffusion or learning of norms, or complete internalization thereof. When the diffusion of norms leads to saliently shrunk instead of enriched substance of the norms in question, the extent to which the allegedly shared knowledge is adequately learned and diffused is perhaps at risk, far beyond what is posited by the social constructivism. The actual content of the allegedly shared knowledge shaped by the constructive process may also deviate much from the expectation of norm distributors.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.61.027篇名：選區分配與族群投票：從馬來西亞2013年國會大選評析馬國政黨輪替的瓶頸並列篇名：Electoral System and Ethnic Voting: The 2013 Malaysian Elections and Afterwards作者：孫采薇(Tsai-Wei Sun)關鍵字：馬來西亞;國民陣線（國陣）;人民聯盟（民聯）;族群投票;選區分配不均;Malaysia;Barisan National (BN);Pakatan Rakyat (PR);Ethnic Voting;Malapportionment期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：61期出版年：2016中文摘要：在2013年5月馬來西亞所舉行的第13屆全國大選中，執政的「國陣」政府僅得到46.7%的選民支持，創下執政聯盟自1959年以來的最難堪紀錄，但卻在國會222席中取得133席（占總席次59.9%），而得以繼續執政。族群認同、族群政黨、族群的選舉競爭與菁英共治，向來是馬來西亞政治的最大特徵，甚至其為人所詬病的選區分配制度沿革與數次選區疆界重劃，也有濃厚的族群考量。本文主要依據馬來西亞《星洲日報》在2013年第13屆國會大選過後所提 供之222個國會選區的選舉人數、各族群所占比例、以及選舉結果等原始資料，逐一登錄與整理，藉此觀察馬國此屆大選所顯現的制度與族群因素，並初步評析馬國反對陣營欲進一步挑戰「國陣」威權、並以政黨輪替作為引領該國進一步政治民主化契機所面臨的瓶頸。英文摘要：Malaysia’s thirteenth general elections, held on 5 May 2013, made a stunning blow to the incumbent Barisan Nasional (BN) regime. Although BN won 59.9% of the parliament seats and continued to rule the government, it gained only 46.7% of popular votes -- the worst record in the country’s political history. This article uses electoral and demographic data to test two important factors for these outcomes: electoral system and ethnic politics. Evidence shows that the malapportionment and the trend of ethnic voting during elections have always been, and will continue to be, the main obstacles for the opposition camp to overthrow the BN government and to move Malaysia toward a real democratic transition.起始頁-結束頁：57-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.61.038篇名：災難治政：2014年高雄石化氣爆後的尺度政治與不均地理發展並列篇名：Disaster Politics: Politics of Scale and Uneven Geographical Development after the 2014 Kaohsiung Petrochemical Explosion作者：王文誠(Wen-Cheng Wang)關鍵字：尺度政治;尺度移轉;不均地理發展;高雄氣爆;災難政治;Politics of Scale;Scale Shift;Uneven Geographical Development;Kaohsiung Gas Explosion;Disaster Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：61期出版年：2016中文摘要：2014年7月31日深夜，高雄市發生嚴重的地下石化管線氣爆事件，面對諸多批評，為什麼「這一爆」非但不像陳菊市長自己所說的「政治生涯結束」，反而在發生如此重大意外災難後，弔詭地成就她個人民意支持度的高峰？為了回答這個問題，本文試圖從災難政治學出發，就尺度政治的「施為」及不均地理發展之「結構」視角，建構一個「結構化歷程」的分析架構。研究發現，地方政府運用尺度移轉、尺度跳躍、及再尺度化等「尺度政治」策略動員的災難政治，成功地築起防火牆，避免掉政治責難，進而在政治地位上「鞏固現況」。再者，尺度政治所支持之社會背景，即臺灣經濟發展中「重南輕北」的不均地理發展結構，令地方政府在災難政治中得以強化權力。結論指出，不均地理發展是這次氣爆災難中，各級政府面對臺灣發展更需要重視的課題。英文摘要：On July 31, 2014, a series of serve gas explosions occurred at the center of Kaohsiung city. Despite public rebukes for the city government's poor performance of disaster management, the support to Mayor Chen, contrary to her own catastrophic expectation, remained strong. This study attempts to analyze the phenomenon from perspectives of disaster politics. A framework of structuration in which power is illustrated as an outcome of the interaction between the ”agency” of politics of scale and the social ”structure” of uneven geographic development is introduced. It is concluded that strategies of scale shifting, jumping and rescaling in politics of scale adopted by the city government to mobilize disaster politics have successfully built a firewall to avoid political culpability, and thus retained the political position of ”accelerated status.” Furthermore, Taiwan’s ”north-south divide” on uneven geographical development might have constituted a structural social background to enhance the power of local government in disaster politics. This explosion disaster seems to suggest that ”uneven geographical development” would be a more salient issue for the government to tackle for further economic development.起始頁-結束頁：87-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2016.61.0401篇名：編者言作者：顏瓊芬;許瑛玿期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷S期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會2篇名：臺灣學生科學素養與科學教學者研究成果表現之發展趨勢探討並列篇名：Exploring the Trend of Taiwan Students' Scientific Literacy and Science Educators' Research Performance作者：陳雅君(Ya-Chun Chen);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong);佘曉清(Hsiao-Ching She);林煥祥(Huann-shyang Lin)關鍵字：PISA;科學素養;科學教育研究成果;PISA;Scientific Literacy;Research Performance on Science Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究的目的在分析我國學生在PISA 2006及PISA 2015預試(Field Trial Test, FT)科學素養方面的表現，並進一步與該期間我國學者在科學教育研究期刊論文的發展趨勢進行比較。本研究的資料來源為臺灣PISA 2006 (N = 8,815)及PISA 2015 FT (N = 2,661)資料庫。研究結果發現我國學生在PISA 2015 FT科學能力的整體表現以及在解釋科學現象、評估與設計科學探究及詮釋科學數據及證據等三項科學能力的表現，均顯著低於PISA 2006。同時，PISA 2015 FT的學生對科學的興趣、喜愛及自我效能亦顯著低於PISA 2006的學生。此外，國內學者於此期間的科學教育研究成果雖然呈現持續成長的發展趨勢，但我國學生在PISA科學素養的表現卻反而呈現顯著退步的情形。最後討論研究結果對科學教育研究者、科學教師及教育政策行政相關人員之省思及提供相關建議以資參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the differences in Taiwan students’ scientific literacy on PISA 2006 and PISA 2015 Field Trial test (FT) and compare it with the developmental trend of Taiwan science educators’ research publication performance. The two datasets were accessed from PISA 2006 (N = 8,815) and PISA 2015 FT (N = 2,661) national databases for Taiwan. The results of data analysis reveal that PISA 2015 FT students’ science competencies of explaining phenomena scientifically, evaluating and designing scientific inquiry, and interpreting data and evidence scientifically are significantly lower than the achievement for PISA 2006 students. In addition, PISA 2015 FT students’ interest in science, enjoyment of science and self-efficacy in science are also significantly lower than the results for PISA 2006 students. The inconsistent developmental trend between the two PISA cycle students’ declining achievement and science educators’ flourishing research publication performance deserves special attention by science teachers, policy makers and administrators, and science educators.起始頁-結束頁：333-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2404.013篇名：建構國小自然科學課程之科學本質要項並列篇名：Constructing Essential Content Items of Nature of Science for Elementary Science Curriculum作者：謝州恩(Chou-En Hsieh);劉湘瑤(Shiang-Yao Liu)關鍵字：大慧法;科學本質;課程綱要;Delphi Technique;Nature of Science;Curricular Benchmark期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：有鑑於我國正值十二年國教課程綱要研修時期，本研究欲提出國小中、高年段自然科學課程中可涵蓋的科學本質內涵之建議，故從實證哲學、科學史、科學心理與科學社會學領域的文獻及若干國家科學本質課程內容，歸納出重要的科學本質項目23項，並依其內涵區分成實證、調和與後實證觀點。分別以大慧法(Delphi technique)，收集專家學者與專門教師兩群對科學本質項目以及對國小學生學習的適合程度所持有的看法和共識。從結果分析之Kendall和諧係數可知，對科學本質觀點與科學本質在國小課程的重要性，各群內兩回問卷皆達顯著的一致性，且專家學者與專門教師在兩回合大慧法問卷，也達成顯著的一致性。相較於其他同樣以大慧法進行的研究，發現本研究達共識的科學本質項目較傾向後實證的觀點。根據研究結果，本研究提出科學本質學習項目，如：科學目的之一在解決問題、有些科學知識具有持久性而有些曾被修正、科學知識帶給人們啟示、科學家需要創造力與想像力、科學由科學社群建構而成等共10項，適合納入國小自然科學課程與教學。英文摘要：This study reviewed the literature regarding positivist philosophy of science, history of science, psychology of science, sociology of science, curricular benchmarks of some countries, and articles published by Lederman and colleagues, and then generated 23 items of aspects of nature of science (NOS). Three categories representing different philosophical perspectives including positivism, post-positivism, and eclecticism were determined. By using the Delphi technique, the 23 NOS content items were inspected by scholars and teachers. Those who possessed a masters in science, science education, and science philosophy participated in the expert group, and professional elementary science teachers joined in the teacher group. There were no significant differences between experts’ and teachers’ views on the categories of philosophical perspectives and also no difference on the ranking of the importance of the NOS items according to the results of Kendall’s coefficient of concordances. As compared to other Delphi studies, the NOS aspects generated from this study comprise more post-positivist views. This study proposed 10 essential NOS aspects, such as ”the purpose of science is to solve problems,” ”scientific knowledge aims to be enduring but sometimes is subject to change,” ”science inspires people,” ”scientists use creativity and imagination,” ”science is constructed by the scientific community,” etc. These NOS items could fit into the elementary science curriculum and elementary science teaching.起始頁-結束頁：355-377資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2404.024篇名：力學能守恆理論形成的歷史探究及其在科學史融入教學上的意義並列篇名：The Investigations on the Theoretical Development of Conservation of Mechanical Energy and Its Implications on Physics Teaching作者：姚珩(Herng Yao);孫治平(Chi-Ping Sun);李秉書(Pin-Shu Lee)關鍵字：力學能;物理教學;科學史;科學方法;科學本質;Mechanical Energy;Physics Teaching;History of Science;Scientific Method;Nature of Science期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：科學史可協助學生瞭解科學知識的形成、及提升在科學本質上的素養，對科學史做進一步的研究，有助於發揮科學教育的功能。為此本文以文獻分析及歷史研究方法，探討物理學上相當重要的主題—功、動能、位能與力學能守恆律的理論發展歷程。研究發現功與動能的概念最早是由牛頓提出，他為了想瞭解物體在受向心力，而非拉力作用下，求得任意位置處的速度而引入，故功並非是出於工程的需要而發生。其想法隨後由白努利加以擴充，他除了首次寫下f = ma的數學式，還提出了力與位移內積之概念。牛頓所開啟的微小增量及累積求和的分析運算，也為力學論證方法樹立起新里程碑。1743年克來若認為當外力為一函數的正合微分，則此力所作的功與路徑無關，率先提出位能概念。最後拉格朗日統合這些，創建出力學能守恆定律。透過這些原始文獻的探討，得提供教師珍貴資料，將此結果直接融入授課教材，可消除學生常見的迷思，達到更佳的教學目標。文中並輔以扼要的教學模組，以供實務參考。這些物理學家對自然現象問題的選擇，反映出運動問題為古典物理的核心，他們將經驗知識與數學理論統合的物理學方法，亦可深化科學史在瞭解科學方法上之教學效能。英文摘要：We investigate the theoretical developments of work, kinetic energy, potential energy and the conservation of mechanical energy. Our study finds that the concepts of work and kinetic energy originally appeared in Newton’s Principia. These concepts were proposed due to the fact that Newton wanted to find the speed of an object at any position under the action of centripetal force, rather than the external force exerted by the machine. His idea subsequently was expanded by J. Bernoulli, who established the work–energy theorem for an object under the elastic force, and also wrote down the famous mathematical formula f = ma for the first time. He also proposed the concept of inner product between the force and the displacement of a body. Their analytical methods of manipulating the tiny increments and cumulative sums set up the cornerstone for the arguments in mechanics. Clairaut then found that the work done by gravity on a body around the Earth was independent of the path due to the fact that the gravity could be expressed as the differential of a state function. The state function is the so-called potential energy. Combining the work–energy theorem and the concept of potential energy, Lagrange finally established the conservation of mechanical energy. The results of the investigation on the development of mechanical energy can help students avoid the common misconception about work and energy. They may also be good references for teachers to guide students to construct deep scientific thinking, and to comprehend the essence of nature of science.起始頁-結束頁：379-416資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2404.035篇名：你說的原住民是哪一族？太魯閣、阿美與漢族學生科學學習認同之比較並列篇名：Which Tribe Are You Referring to? A Comparative Study of Truku, Amis, and Han Students’ Identity as Science Learners作者：蔣佳玲(Chia-Ling Chiang);李暉(Huei Lee)關鍵字：性別差異;科學學習認同;原漢比較;Gender Difference;Identity as Science Learners;Comparison Between Indigenous and Han Students期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：從認同的觀點探討少數族裔及女性學生的科學學習，是近年來的研究趨勢。本研究聚焦於太魯閣、阿美與漢族國小學生科學學習認同之比較，進而探討族群差異在科學學習認同中的意涵。研究採問卷調查方式進行，研究對象為花蓮縣27所國小四到六年級共1,227位學童。研究工具為自編「國小學生科學學習認同問卷」，包含有四個面向：科學參與、科學意象、對科學意象的回應、以及天生特質。研究結果顯示，國小階段原住民學童的科學學習認同並不比漢族學童差，甚至部分面向還比漢族學童高。太魯閣族學童不僅在整體總分與「科學意象」高於漢族，太魯閣與阿美族學童的「科學參與」也高於漢族學童。此外，儘管同屬原住民族，阿美族與太魯閣族學童的科學學習認同並不相同。在性別方面，女學生的科學學習認同高於男學生，阿美族女生較同族男生的科學學習認同高，其他族群的科學學習認同未見性別差異。整體而言，本研究彰顯出學生建構科學學習認同歷程中，族群文化具有的影響力與獨特性。建議未來研究在探討原住民族科學學習或進行原漢比較時，正視原住民各族文化之個殊性，避免在「原住民」的大架構之下，忽略了族群間的差異性。英文摘要：Investigating the minority and female students’ science learning from the perspectives of identity is important recently. The purpose of this study is to compare the primary students’ identity as science learners among Truku, Amis, and Han, and to explore the meaning of ethnic difference of identity as science learners. Questionnaire survey was applied, and there were 1,227 4th to 6th grade students from 27 primary schools responded to the questionnaire. The questionnaire named ”Primary Students” Identity of Science Learners’ includes four faces: engagement, imagination, alignment, and nature. The results showed that indigenous students have positive identity, even better than Han students in some faces. Truku students’ identity was higher than Han students’ in the total score and the face of ”imagination.” In the face of ”engagement,” Truku and Amis students showed higher identity than Han students. The students with different ethnicities got various identity although they are all regarded as indigenous people. Besides, the girls got higher identity than the boys. Gender difference of students’ identity existed in Amis, but not in Truku and Han. As a whole, this study reveals the cultural influence and particularity during identity construction, and it is suggested that both cultural influence and particularity should be paid highly attention in the future studies. Cultural differences should not be ignored under the big umbrella named ”indigenous people.”起始頁-結束頁：417-435資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2404.046篇名：原住民國小科學教師之多元文化專業發展並列篇名：Multi-Cultural Professional Development of Elementary Science Teachers in Indigenous Major Elementary Schools作者：李暉(Huei Lee)關鍵字：地方本位;原住民科學;教師改變;專業發展;Place-Based;Indigenous Science;Teachers' Change;Professional Development期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷S期出版年：2016中文摘要：本學習係從地方本位教育的觀點，邀請原住民部落國小教師分別組成專業學習社群，經由參與瞭解原住民地方特色與自然科學的關係，發展地方本位課程以促進學童科學學習；並藉課程發展，培養科學教師多元文化觀點之專業發展。過程採質性取向，資料收集期間歷時八年，參與教師十餘位，但只以其中三位報導。結果發現在原住民族傳統知識的探究上，無論廣度與深度都比預想困難許多；在課程設計與實施上，原住民知識確實在地方本位課程中造成影響；西方科學與原住民知識之整合課程可提高文化認同與學習效果；教師和耆老的協同授課方式有助於教師專業發展。在教師多元文化專業發展與信念改變上，經由參與、溝通進而瞭解，可促進教師信念改變，尤其在尊重多元文化的觀點上，都有明顯的改變；而教師的資深經驗是執行地方本位教學的利基，但也可能會阻礙改變。在推動教師專業發展方面，誠懇的態度、持續不斷的互動，或推動教師在職進修，會是有效的策略。英文摘要：Based on the perspective on place-based education, this study invited elementary science teachers in indigenous tribes to form professional learning communities, and develop placebased curriculum to promote students' science learning by comprehending the relationship between indigenous local culture and natural science. In the process of curriculum development, multi-cultural professional development of science teachers was also cultivated. A qualitative approach was adopted to collect data for eight years, and three participants from dozens of teachers are reported. The finding showed that: 1. The width and depth of indigenous traditional knowledge are difficult to investigate; 2. Indigenous knowledge does have an impact on placebased curriculum; 3. Curriculum integrating western science with indigenous knowledge can help students to achieve a better cultural identity as well as promote their science learning; 4. Team teaching of teachers and the elderly can also promote students' science learning. Participating, communicating as well as understanding are effective ways of changing teachers' beliefs, especially from the perspective of respecting different cultures. Teachers' senior teaching experiences are found to be advantageous or disadvantageous to their belief change. For promoting teachers' professional development, sincere attitude, continuous interaction as well as in-service teacher education are effective strategies.起始頁-結束頁：437-459資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.24S.017篇名：化零為整：科學學習生態系統取向之文化回應課程並列篇名：Part of a Whole: A Science Learning Ecosystem Perspective on Culturally Relevant Curriculum作者：謝百淇(Paichi Pat Shein);黃育真(Yu-Chen Huang);張美珍(Mei-Chen Chang);李馨慈(Tjuku Ruljigaljig)關鍵字：文化回應;自然災害與防治;非制式科學教育;科學學習生態系統;原住民族部落;Culturally Relevant Teaching;Natural Disaster and Prevention;Informal Science Education;Science Learning Ecosystem;Indigenous Community期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷S期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以「科學學習生態系統」的觀點整合博物館、大學、學校、部落(MUSIC)的資源，以「文化回應」之方法共同發展課程和進行教學。MUSIC合作模式運用高雄科學工藝博物館的非制式科學教育教學活動，與大學的科學教育研究資源，與原住民族國小的自然災害課程，並結合屏東縣原住民部落的在地資源。課程主題聚焦於對環境、自然災害和防災的認知。本研究以民族誌方式，描繪屏東縣原住民部落的社群文化，描述在部落的自然災害情境和在學校的自然災害課程，輔以研究日誌中的文字和影像紀錄，搜集的資料含有會議錄影、課程文件檔案、晤談錄影、部落踏查錄影等。結果發現：博物館、大學、學校與部落的資源可運用至科學學習生態系統，以及四者間的連結關係，透過建立的合作關係，發展和實施文化回應課程。最終以建立一套得以永續經營與推廣的合作模式為展望，使科學學習生態系統中的各項資源得以互相連結。英文摘要：This study aimed to synergize formal and informal science learning resources from museum, university, school, and indigenous community to form a ”MUSIC science learning ecosystem.” The collaboration among these stakeholders was marked by customization, coordination, and connection. The four stakeholders came together to co-construct and co-teach a curriculum on natural disaster and prevention for indigenous elementary students in a remote area in Pingtung, Taiwan. The study used an ethnography to depict how the curriculum was customized by integrating indigenous culture and knowledge Data included observations notes, video and audio recordings of meetings, interviews, and teaching activities. Findings show that the framework of ”science learning ecosystem” allowed multiple stakeholders to integrate resources in efficient and productive ways, to form collaborative relationships, and to co-construct a curriculum that reap benefits for all shareholders. This study provides implications on how to formulate a “science learning ecosystem” and ensure its sustainability and generalizability.起始頁-結束頁：461-485資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.24S.028篇名：文化情境融入「整數運算規則」之補救教學研究並列篇名：A Study of Culture-Situated Remedial Instruction on Rules of Operation作者：李健秋(Chien-Chiu Lee);姚如芬(Ru-Fen Yao)關鍵字：文化情境;補救教學;整數運算規則;Culture-Situated Learning;Remedial Instruction;Rules of Operation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷S期出版年：2016中文摘要：植基於國小五年級學童「整數運算規則」的學習困難，研究者自編「迓媽祖，學數學」文化情境融入整數運算規則之補救教學活動，嘗試瞭解補救教學成分對個案學童的助益，並從中探究個案學童的學習表現。透過學習單、訪談、前測、後測、課室觀察等方式進行資料的蒐集與分析，研究發現：一、個案學童在補救教學前的學習困境有：誤解運算的規則、算式拆解錯誤、忽略運算符號的順序改變、忽略括號、需依賴紙筆計算解題等；二、藉由師生間的問答、不同解題方式的提供、口頭或上臺發表解題等方式，可刺激學童思考，有助於整數運算規則的理解與學習；三、將真實的文化情境─「迓媽祖」活動融入整數運算規則教材中，除可使學童對生活情境中的民俗活動有更深入的瞭解、亦能有效提升學童的解題答對率。英文摘要：The main purpose of this case study was to investigate the learning performance of 5th graders in theculture-situated remedial instruction on ”operation.” Through the pretest, posttest, observation, worksheets, interview and related documents, the findings of this research were as followed: 1. Before remedial instruction, students’ difficulties in learning ”operation” included computational error and the inability to understand the laws of operation and so on; 2. The interactions between teacher and students, providing different solutions of problems and opportunities for students to present orally could stimulate and help students to think and to learn ”operation;” 3. The culture-situated activities ”Matsu Festival” could help students have a better understanding of the culture and enhance their interest in learning. And after remedial instruction, students’ performance in the post-test was better than the performance in the pre-test.起始頁-結束頁：487-509資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.24S.039篇名：國中學生數學自我概念與數學學業成就相互效果模式之縱貫研究－性別差異與城鄉差距之觀點並列篇名：The Longitudinal Reciprocal Effects Model of Junior High School Students' Mathematics Self-Concept and Mathematics Achievement: The Perspectives of Gender and Urban/Rural Differences作者：龔心怡(Hsin-Yi Kung);李靜儀(Ching-Yi Lee)關鍵字：性別差異;相互效果模式;城鄉差距;數學自我概念;數學學業成就;Gender Difference;Reciprocal Effects Model;Urban/Rural Difference;Mathematics Self-Concept;Mathematics Achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷S期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在以縱貫研究設計來探究國中學生的數學自我概念與數學學業成就的相互效果模式，再進一步從多元文化的觀點著手，分析在數學自我概念與數學學業成就變項上的性別差異與城鄉差距，及這些差距是否有縱貫的跨時間性。本研究以七年級至九年級三個波次共1,025位國中學生為研究樣本，藉由追蹤資料之結構方程模式分析後，獲致結果如下：一、整體模式所獲得的適配度指標顯示模式可被接受，數學自我概念與數學學業成就相互效果模式獲得支持；二、國中學生的數學自我概念與數學學業成就具有跨時間性的性別差異，男生在三波次的數學自我概念皆顯著地高於女生，但女生的成就表現顯著地高於男生；三、國中學生的數學自我概念與數學學業成就呈現橫跨不同年級的城鄉差距，城市地區學生在三波次的數學自我概念與數學學業成就皆顯著地高於鄉鎮地區學生。最後根據研究結果提出建議，提供數學教育及後續研究之參考。英文摘要：This study drew on the multidimensional-multifaceted theory of self-concept to examine the relations between mathematics self-concept and mathematics achievement with a three-wave longitudinal design. Using the multicultural perspectives, the study also investigated the gender and urban/rural differences on mathematics self-concept and mathematics achievement over time. Utilizing structural equation modeling, 1,025 junior high school students participated in the three-wave longitudinal study. The results revealed that: 1. A reciprocal effects model between mathematics self-concept and mathematics achievement was proposed and indicated a reasonable goodness-of-fit. 2. There were significant gender differences on mathematics self-concept and mathematics achievement over time. While boys tended to have higher mathematics self-concept, girls tended to have higher mathematics achievement. 3. Student’s mathematics self-concept and mathematics achievement had urban/rural differences over time. Urban students tended to have higher mathematics self-concept and mathematics achievement than their rural counterparts. Implications and suggestions were discussed and provided to enhance students’ mathematics learning.起始頁-結束頁：511-536資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.24S.0410篇名：比較偏遠與一般地區學生數學表現之差異：傾向分數配對法的分析並列篇名：A Comparison of Differences between Mathematics Performance of Students in Remote and General Areas: A Propensity Score Matching Analysis作者：廖錦文(Chin-Wen Liao);鄭博文(Po-Wen Cheng);江耀宗(Yao-Tsung Chiang);俞錚蓉(Cheng-Jung Yu);石宜正(Yi-Cheng Shih)關鍵字：臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;偏遠地區;傾向分數配對法;數學表現;Taiwan Education Panel Survey;Remote Areas;Propensity Score Matching;Mathematics Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷S期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以傾向分數配對法(Propensity Score Matching, PSM)估算平均處理效果值(Average Treatment Effect on the Treated, ATT)，進行偏遠與一般地區國中生數學表現之差 異比較。本研究分析資料採用臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫(Taiwan Education Panel Survey, TEPS)2001年第一波(七年級)與2003年第二波(九年級)的國中追蹤樣本資料，共計有效樣本數16,643人。研究結果發現：一、未控制個體基準線條件之差異情形時，偏遠地區國中生數學表現平均數明顯低於一般地區國中生，偏遠地區國中生與一般地區國中生在數學表現有明顯之差異現象。二、以傾向分數配對法控制個體基準線之差異性，就數學表現之整體平均效果值來看，與一般地區國中生比較，偏遠地區國中生數學表現並無太大差異。應用傾向分數配對法控制學生個體條件進行配對分析，方能得到細緻精確之比較結果。文末，根據研究結果進行討論。英文摘要：In this study, propensity score matching were used to estimate the average treatment effects of studying in junior high schools, on mathematics performance. Specifically, this study compared the differences between of junior high school students in remote areas and general areas. We used data from 16,643 junior high school students from the first wave of 2001 (7th grade) and the second wave of 2003 (9th grade) from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey Data set. The results revealed the following significant findings: 1. When the differences between individual baselines was not controlled, the mathematics performance of students in remote areas is lower than that of students in general areas. This indicates that of the mathematics performance of junior high school students in remote and general areas differ. 2. When the differences between individual baselines were controlled, the mathematics performance of students in remote areas does not differ from that of students in general areas. Propensity score matching was used, the differences between individual baselines were controlled, detailed and accurate results can be obtained. Based on the findings, the implications for research and practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：537-560資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.24S.0511篇名：從傳統數位學習到遊戲式數位學習－學習成效、心流體驗與認知負荷並列篇名：From Traditional e-Learning to Digital Game-Based Learning: Learning Performance, Flow Experience and Cognitive Load作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);林冠佑(Kun-You Lin)關鍵字：心流體驗;遊戲式數位學習;認知負荷;數位學習;學習成就;Flow Experience;Game-Based Learning;Cognitive Load;e-Learning;Learning Achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究探討遊戲式數位學習與非遊戲式數位學習之學習成就、心流體驗與認知負荷的差異。本研究以某大學選修通識教育的「生活與科技」課程之學生為實驗樣本。立意取樣兩個班級共103人，其中一班為實驗組50人為遊戲式數位學習，另外一班為對照組53人為非遊戲式數位學習。研究結果顯示遊戲式數位學習的成就測驗與心流體驗顯著高於非遊戲式數位學習，遊戲式數位學習的認知負荷顯著低於非遊戲式數位學習。成就測驗與心流體驗呈現顯著正相關，而成就測驗及心流體驗與認知負荷皆呈顯著負相關。上述結果符合心流理論、多媒體學習認知理論及與認知負荷理論。未來研究可聚焦於媒體的豐富性或遊戲的某項單一特性來探討(譬如擬真情境、趣味性、互動性、學習者控制、回饋訊息、多媒體視覺性及動畫等)，而認知負荷可分為不同種類來探討─內在、外在、及增生認知負荷。英文摘要：The study was to explore the differences in learning achievement, flow experience and cognitive load between digital game-based learning (DGBL) and non-game-based (GB) e-learning. The participants were the students who took the ”Life and Technology” course of general education program in a university. The intentional sampling approach was used to select two classes with 103 students in total. The experimental group (one class) with 50 students was assigned to DGBL and the contrast group (another class) with 53 students was assigned to non-GB e-learning. The results revealed that learning achievement and flow experience of digital game-based learning were higher than those of non-GB e-learning. Cognitive load of the DGBL group was higher than that of the non-GB e-learning group. Learning achievement was positively correlated with flow experience while learning achievement and flow experience were negatively correlated with cognitive load. The results above are consistent with the theories of flow, multimedia cognitive learning and cognitive load. Future works might focus on media richness or one characteristic of game (e.g., real-alike context, enjoyment, interaction, learner control, feedback message, multimedia vision and animation). Different types of cognitive load, such as intrinsic, extraneous and germane cognitive loads, might be explored.起始頁-結束頁：221-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2403.0112篇名：國中自然與生活科技學習參與量表的發展與相關因素之探討並列篇名：The Development and Study of the Relevant Factors of the Engagement in Science Learning Questionnaire in Junior High School作者：謝慶華(Ching-Hua Hsieh);段曉林(Hsiao-Lin Tuan);靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin);陳淑貞(Shu-Chen Chen)關鍵字：科學學習;量表發展;學習參與;驗證性因素分析;Science Learning;Questionnaire Development;Engagement in Science Learning;Confirmatory Factor Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在發展國中自然與生活科技學習參與量表。以屏東縣某國中二年級275位學生為樣本，採用方便取樣，有效樣本數為264份。研究者邀請科教專家學者及國中自然科教師進行量表的審查與修訂，再經由項目分析、因素分析及結構方程驗證性因素分析，以確認本量表之建構效度，結果顯示本量表具備行為參與、情緒參與以及認知參與三個向度，共23題，總量表的內部一致性Cronbach's α係數值為.97，各分量表的Cronbach's α係數值介於.94至.95之間，這些結果顯示本量表具備良好的信效度。此外，學習參與相關因素之研究發現：一、男生在情緒參與向度上顯著高於女生。二、在認知及行為參與方面，高成就生顯著高於中成就生及低成就生，且中成就生顯著高於低成就生；在情緒參與方面，高成就生顯著高於中成就生以及低成就生。三、自然與生活科技喜好程度不同的學生，在認知、情緒以及行為參與三方面皆達顯著性，Scheffe分析顯示，喜歡自然與生活科技的學生顯著高於喜好程度還可以的學生，喜好程度還可以的學生顯著高於不喜歡自然與生活科技的學生。利用多元迴歸分析，性別、學業成就及喜好程度對學生自然與生活科技科目學習參與有很好預測力。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a questionnaire to assess engagement in science learning for junior high school students. The questionnaire was administered to 275 eighth graders in Pingtung County through convenience sampling. After deleting incomplete questionnaires, the final valid sample size was 264. Experts of science education research and junior high school teachers were invited to review and revise the content of the questionnaire. The item analysis and exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were used to establish construct validity of the instrument. Three constructs -- behavioral engagement, emotional engagement, and cognitive engagement -- with 23 items were confirmed. Cronbach's α coefficient for the entire questionnaire was .97 and ranged from .94 to .95 for each scale, indicating high consistency and reliability of the questionnaire. The results of this study showed that: 1. Male students were significantly higher than female students on emotional engagement scale. 2. On the cognitive and behavioral engagement scales, high achievers scored significantly higher than average and low achievers, and average achievers scored significantly higher than low achievers. On emotional engagement scale, high achievers scored significantly higher than average and low achievers. 3. On behavioral engagement, emotional engagement and cognitive engagement scales, students who like science scored significantly higher than those who generally like science and students who generally like science scored significantly higher than those who dislike science. Finally, this study analyzed the prediction of influence factors of the engagement in science learning based on gender, science achievement and science preference through multiple regressions.起始頁-結束頁：249-273資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2403.0213篇名：國小奈米科技教學策略並列篇名：Nanotechnology Teaching Strategies in Elementary School作者：羅美惠(Mei-Hui Luo);張美玉(Mei-Yu Zhang);葉孟考(Meng-Kao Ye)關鍵字：奈米科技;科學教育;教學策略;教師專業成長;教師專業社群;Nanotechnology;Science Education;Instructional Strategies;Teacher Professional Growth;Teacher Professional Learning Community期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探究國小教師奈米科技教學所使用的教學策略。研究者收集並分析國小奈米科技共78份教案，以及質性訪談10位、來自五區參與奈米科技人才培育計畫的國小種子教師。研究發現，奈米科技的教學資源豐富，教學科技策略使用最多；由於奈米科技的抽象性質，教師重視操作的教學策略；且探究教學策略在近幾年的教案中有增加的趨勢。而在教師決定教學策略時，會視奈米科技概念性質而選擇教學策略、學習社群的建立與種子教師培訓課程也會支持教師變化教學策略、課後奈米科學營與社團教學更常運用探究策略與操作策略，讓學生深入探究。此外，隨著種子教師奈米科技內容知識的增進，會促進教師運用多元的教學策略。研究者建議必須有系統的介紹奈米科技以及多元的教學策略，才能有效的促進教師教學策略觀點的改變，以學生為中心的教學策略來進行奈米科技教學。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the nanotechnology instructional strategies in elementary school by analyzing the instructional strategies of 78 teaching plans and interviewing 10 teachers from five districts of the K-12 Nanotechnology Education Program. The findings indicated that there were rich teaching resources for teachers to teach nanotechnology; teachers used instructional technology strategies the most in teaching nanotechnology; besides, because of some abstract concepts of nanotechnology, teachers emphasized on manipulation strategies; and inquiry strategies increased in recent years. However, the selection of instructional strategies depended on the implementation of teaching nanotechnology concepts. Furthermore, the teachers' professional learning community and interactions with scientists and professors of education supported the teachers' adjustment of instructional strategies. In order to have students investigate deeply, teachers selected inquiry and manipulation strategies more in nanotechnology science camps and science clubs. Besides, the more content knowledge on Nanotechnology developed by teachers, the more multiple instructional strategies they used. Finally, the researcher suggests that in order to help teachers transform their ideas of instructional strategies and teach Nanotechnology with student-centered instructional strategies, Nanotechnology and multiple instructional strategies should be systematically introduced.起始頁-結束頁：275-297資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2403.0314篇名：以偏鄉國小為場域之地方本位環境教育課程省思並列篇名：An Examination of a Place-Based Environmental Education Curriculum in a Rural School Context作者：洪萱芳(Hsuan-Fang Hung);顏瓊芬(Chiung-Fen Yen);張妤萍(Yu-Ping Chang);洪韶君(Shao-Chun Hung)關鍵字：地方本位教育;偏鄉教育;學習成效;學習動機;環境教育;Place-Based Education;Rural Education;Learning Effects;Learning Motivation;Environmental Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以地方本位教育理論為基礎架構，發展出一個可協助學生連結生活經驗和課程知識的課程發展模式。研究發現，學生對於環境知識內涵的認知經過本研究之地方本位課程後，逐漸融入生活經驗與自身探索經驗所學習到的知識；且課程對於生活經驗的重視，導致學生開始透過自身經驗連結課程知識，進入自主學習歷程。整體而言，對於學生學習投入，學習動機和態度皆有正面影響。本研究主要研究場域為偏鄉地區三年級班級，共計27位學生參與本研究，課程包含三個主題課程，分別為校園植物和濱海植物、環境污染和植物生病了。其中校園植物和濱海植物使用戶外觀察法，在引導學生進入連結生活經驗和課程知識的過程中，可以觀察出學生經過課程後，學生較容易將課室外經驗連結到課程概念。另外，採用地方本位教育模式，融入在地素材，強調關心周遭生活環境與連結生活經驗，研究發現可滿足學生的多元需求，因可從各自的生活經驗切入學習。英文摘要：This research utilized place-based education theory as the framework, critical pedagogy theory's teacher-student relationship view, and diverse teaching models including outdoor teaching and project-based learning to develop a curriculum model. This model was designed to support students' capacity to connect living experiences to curriculum knowledge. Research finds that students' perspectives concerning environmental knowledge were expanded to include out of school knowledge such as living experiences and knowledge gained from their own investigation experiences. Because of valuing living experiences in class, students gradually start to connect their own living experiences to the curriculum knowledge and enter the automatic learning process. Overall, research finds that the curriculum developed from this research has positive impact on learning engagement, learning motivation, and attitudes. Research participants were 3rd grade students who were recruited from an elementary school in a rural area. A total of 27 students participated in this study. The curriculum unit includes three topics: campus and coastal strand plants, sick plants, and environmental pollution. Among all, campus and coastal strand plants unit which adopts outdoor observation as a strategy, has a significant effect on students' ability to connect living experiences to curriculum content. Additionally, this model was also found to be able to meet diverse needs of students with different backgrounds by valuing the living experiences of every learner.起始頁-結束頁：299-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2403.0415篇名：透過情境興趣教學策略促進高一學生之遺傳學學習並列篇名：Promoting 10th Grade Students’ Genetics　Learning Through Situational Interest　Teaching Strategies作者：鄭瑞洲(Jui-Chou Cheng);洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung);黃臺珠(Tai-Chu Huang)關鍵字：個人興趣;情境興趣;情境興趣教學策略;學習成就;學習動機;Individual Interest;Situational Interest;Situational Interest Teaching Strategy;Academic Achievement;Learning Motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：興趣影響學習，本研究旨以情境興趣理論基礎，開發高中生物遺傳單元之多元教學策略及動手做實驗策略模組課程，與傳統教學組比較其教學對學生情境興趣、個人興趣、學習動機及學習成就的影響，並探討教學後三組學生的情境興趣影響學習成就間之徑路關係。本研究計有高中一年級3個班級133名學生參與，分別有45位、44位與44位學生參與多元教學策略組、動手做實驗組及傳統教學組課程，歷時五週。三組教學前後，分別以量表蒐集學生的情境興趣、個人興趣、學習動機及學習成就之資料，並以單因子共變數分析、徑路分析及效果值進行統計考驗。研究結果顯示：多元教學策略組在情境興趣、個人興趣、學習動機及學習成就，優於動手做實驗組及傳統教學組；而動手做實驗組僅在情境興趣優於傳統教學組。徑路分析發現，教學後多元教學策略組學生的情境興趣藉由個人興趣及學習動機間接影響學習成就；而動手做實驗組學生的情境興趣主要直接影響及部分藉由個人興趣及學習動機間接影響學習成就；而傳統教學組學生的情境興趣無法直接或間接的影響學習成就。起始頁-結束頁：115-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2402.0116篇名：以方法目的鏈探討獵人學校傳統生態知識之價值建構並列篇名：Value Construction of Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Indigenous Hunting Schools Using a Means-End Approach作者：林慧年(Hui-Nien Lin);王俊秀(Chin-Shou Wang);台邦•撒沙勒(Sasala Taiban)關鍵字：方法目的鏈;傳統生態知識;環境教育;環境解說;獵人學校;Means-End;Traditional Ecological Knowledge;Environment Education;Interpretation;Indigenous Hunting Schools期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：聯合國多項公約皆明言原住民傳統生態知識(Traditional Ecological Knowledge, TEK)與永續發展的高度關聯性，面對TEK在原民社會的流失與瓦解，獵人學校的崛起肩負著TEK傳承的角色，在國際科聯所明列的五大永續發展研究之優先項目，其中一項就是強調「永續發展架構下的行為、文化及價值觀探討」，因此本研究旨在運用方法目的鏈的理論與分析，來瞭解原住民耆老對於獵人學校TEK的價值建構，運用立意取樣以及滾雪球抽樣法，總共訪談32位原住民耆老獵人，結果發現受訪者認為獵人學校所傳授的TEK，反映出五項價值，包含「生存」、「祖靈」、「分享」、「英雄」和「倫理」，進一步探索這些價值與永續實踐的關聯，發現除了過去文獻所強調的靈性價值之外，社會資本(social capital)也是關鍵之一，最後進一步討論本研究結果於環境教育及解說的應用。英文摘要：According to the United Nations, Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) is highly relevant to indigenous societies for resource management. Hunting schools in Taiwan play an important role to transmit TEK across generations to combat the forces of cultural erosion. One of the five research priorities of sustainable development suggested by International Council for Science (2005) was to understand the role of behavior, culture and values under the framework of sustainability. Based on this recommendation, a study was designed to explore a range of values associated with TEK which are taught in indigenous hunting schools using a meansend technique. A total of 32 elders were interviewed using purposive and snowball sampling procedures. Results indicated that hunting practices were based on five core values, including ”survival,” ”ancestral beings,” ”sharing,” ”heroism” and ”ethics.” These themes revealed, in addition to spiritual worldviews highlighted by previous studies, that social capital was an important way to promote sustainability using TEK. Applications of this study extend to environmental education and interpretation, especially for discussions on sustainability.起始頁-結束頁：139-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2402.0217篇名：如履薄冰？科技女性陷阱論述之研究並列篇名：The Discourse of Trap by Women Scientists and Technologists作者：王雅玄(Ya-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：科技女性;科技性別化;陷阱論述;陽剛女性;Women Scientists and Technologists;Gendered Technology;The Discourse of Trap;Masculine Woman期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文關懷女性在科技領域中的困境，蒐集12位女科技教授性別經驗與科技生涯的敘說資料，從個人、家庭、學校與社會等不同脈絡瞭解其性別歷程，歸納其科研生活中如履薄冰的幾個綜合因素。結果發現，科技女性在科研領域中受限於四種陷阱論述。第一，反女性自我論述：科技女性的自我侷限於傳統對女性的否定，受限於生理弱勢無法符應科技需求，陽剛女性產生自我排擠效應，身為女性產生失能恐慌與成功恐懼，自我壓抑性別意識。第二，扛女性職責論述：無論已婚或未婚者都受限於「全母職原罪、無母職污名、好女人羈絆」，女性職責乃事業成功的先備條件。第三，去女性文化論述：理工科系校園文化不利女性，男性建築無女性空間、陽剛文化黃色笑話的威脅、反陰柔特質的父權壓迫。第四，非女性社群論述：科技為男性專有，非女性專業，缺乏女性社群與交流管道。這些論述會造成女性自我設限，降低參與科技領域之動力。本研究呼應先前研究指出女性專業發展的組織阻隔已如建築般天羅地網從玻璃天花板、玻璃牆、陷阱門到泥濘地板，我們在鼓勵女性突破自我走進科技之餘，更該雙管齊下，從社會結構面減少女性在科技領域中的性別制度化藩籬，以免阻隔了女性與男性平等經營科技世界的可能性。英文摘要：Concerning the female dilemma in Taiwan's context of gendered technology, this study collected narrative data from 12 women scientists and technologists about gendered experiences in their technology career. Situating them back to different contexts among individuality, family, schooling and society, this paper explores how they articulated gender-traps during inferior treatment. In conclusion, women scientists and technologists were trapped by four discourses. First, the discourse of anti-feminine selfhood -- Feminine selfhood was constrained due to traditional denial of women's rights, the self-exclusion effect of masculine women, and the achievement phobia and incapacitating panic in women. Second, the discourse of shouldering women responsibilities -- Both married and unmarried women were trapped in terms of ”motherhood as original sin”, ”non-motherhood as stigma” and ”good woman fetters”. Woman responsibilities had to be in place prior to career pursuing. Third, the discourse of removing cultural feminization -- Male-dominant campus without women-only space was full of sexual harassment and patriarchal oppression against femininity. Fourth, the discourse of non-female community -- Science and technology is not woman's profession but a man's land that lacks women community. These above discourses caused women self-handicapping behaviors away from a science career. This research corresponded to Guy's (1994) organizational architecture theory that professional women in organizations overwhelmingly faced gendered segregation in research connections such as glass ceiling, glass walls, trap doors and sticky floors. This study gives insight to gender minority in professional development that we shall rethink the institutionalized segregation of gender in the higher education sector in order not to cut off the possibility for women entering into technology management.起始頁-結束頁：167-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2402.0318篇名：反思性實務為基礎之倫理教學研究：醫管碩專班學生的學習歷程探討並列篇名：Developing a Reflective-Practice-Learning-Based Curriculum of Professional Ethics: An Exploration of the Learning Process of the Students in Executive Master Program of Healthcare Administration作者：尤素芬(Su-Fen You)關鍵字：反思實務能力;倫理教育;碩士在職專班;醫務管理教育;Reflective Practice Capacity;Ethical Education;Executive Master of Healthcare Administration (EMHA);Healthcare Administration Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討反思性實務之教學模式使用於醫管碩專班的專業倫理課程，是否能促成學生關於倫理思辨的發展與改變。在研究方法上是透過行動研究與焦點團體之互相搭配，收集的資料類型包括反思作業、個案討論會錄音與期末課程回饋問卷。研究結果包括六大面向：從不違法到不違反倫理、從個人倫理到組織倫理、Inter Professional Education(IPE)與網絡互動知識建構、覺醒增能與自我導向學習、經驗整合與倫理反思、行動的反思。我們進一步歸納出三個主要的結論：第一，反思性實務之教學模式可以幫助學生「喚醒起初的愛」，願意成為一個倫理導向的管理者。第二，課程內容需要訓練學生具備組織倫理的觀點，能運用系統性決策的思維，深入分析倫理議題，而IPE的倫理決策訓練可以幫助學生瞭解跨專業溝通能力的重要性，並習得網絡互動的知識建構方法。第三，課程設計如能適當使用經驗學習法，可以幫助學生從經驗中反思及習得知識整合的方法，藉此提升其「反思實務能力」。總而言之，以反思性實務為基礎的倫理課程可以深化碩專班學生的倫理信念，也是一個能力發展活動的過程。另一方面，教師也在過程中透過反思、協調與修正，提升了專業知能與自我成長，並解決了倫理教學實務的問題。英文摘要：This research aims to examine the extent to which a reflective-practice-learning-based curriculum has contributed to the development of ethical reasoning for the students in an Executive Master of Healthcare Administration (EMHA) Program. It adopts both action research and focus group interviews to foster an innovative strategy for teaching professional ethics. Reflective writing, case conference and course feedback questionnaire survey were used to evaluate the students' learning process. In terms of research results, we list six points for analysis: from no breaking the law to not violating the ethics; from personal ethics to organizational ethics; Interprofessional Education (IPE) and knowledge construction of network interaction; awareness-raising, empowering and self-directed learning; experiential integration and ethical reflection; reflection in action. Furthermore, we summarize three main findings. Firstly, a reflective-practice-learning-based curriculum may help students to ”restore first love” and become ethic-based managers. Secondly, the course content needs to train students to have a view of organizational ethics and be able to conduct deep analysis of ethical issues by employing the method of systematic decision-making. Also, the method of IPE could help the students to understand the importance of inter-disciplinary communication and knowledge construction of network interaction. Thirdly, the curriculum, while experiential learning can be appropriately used, can help students enhance their capacity of reflective practice. In sum, this curriculum has helped the students to deepen their ethical beliefs, and it is just like a competence developing process. In the meantime, the teacher gains professional growth and becomes more knowledgeable to solve the problems that occur in teaching professional ethics by reflection, coordination and revision.起始頁-結束頁：195-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2402.0419篇名：玩「昆蟲大富翁」遊戲培養國小學童的科學過程技能並列篇名：Playing ”Insects Playing Board Games” to Cultivate the Scientific Process Skills of Primary School Students作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu);施慧淳(Hui-Chun Shih)關鍵字：昆蟲大富翁遊戲;昆蟲概念認知;科學過程技能;實驗效果量;Insects Playing Board Games;Insect Cognitive Comprehension;Scientific Process Skills;Effect Size (ES)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：國小自然昆蟲單元的教學現場易受天候、環境、資源所限制，不易培養學童的科學過程技能。本研究研發「昆蟲大富翁」遊戲教具為媒材，讓國小四年級學童做為課程後的延伸學習，培養科學過程技能與建立昆蟲概念認知。評量工具為昆蟲科學過程技能測驗、昆蟲概念認知測驗、訪談大綱，用來評估混合研究的學習成效。研究結果顯示：一、玩IPBG的實驗組學童，其科學過程技能、昆蟲概念認知之學習成效皆優於對照組學童，達顯著差異。二、實驗組學童的昆蟲科學過程技能測驗與昆蟲概念認知測驗實驗效果量在總人數、高、中、低分群皆高於對照組，達到中度~高度實驗效果量。三、實驗組受訪學童認為20種昆蟲卡和「教戰手冊」協助他們增進科學過程技能的各種能力。英文摘要：The teaching site of insect curriculum is often limited by weather, environment, and resources. It is hard cultivate the scientific process skills of primary school students. This study developed the ”Insects Playing Board Games” as media, allowing students to cultivate scientific process skills and enhance insect cognitive comprehension through playing. We used ”Insect Science Process Test, ISPT,” ”Insect Cognitive Comprehension Test, ICCT,” and an interview outline as research tools to evaluate the learning effect of our mixed-method research. The result showed that: 1. the experimental group students (playing the ”Insects Playing Board Games”) showed better learning effect on the ”scientific process skills” and ”insect cognitive comprehension” than the control group, reaching significant differences; 2. the ISPT and ICCT effect sizes (ES) of the experimental group students were higher than the control group in the total, as well as in the high-, medium- and low-achiever groups, reaching medium to high degree of effect size; 3. interviewed students of the experimental group thought that their capabilities of science process skills did enhance with the 20 kinds of insect cards and the ”teaching manual.”起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2401.0120篇名：小學生玩家展現的電玩實踐社群知識—以數學自由擬題為例並列篇名：Knowledge Generated in Gamer's Communities of Practice: An Example of Free Math Problem Posing in Elementary School作者：張鐵懷(Tieh-Huai Chang);陳斐卿(Fei-Ching Chen)關鍵字：自由擬題;電玩世代;電玩實踐社群知識;電玩轉移現象;數位原民;Free Problem-Posing;Games Generation;Games' Community of Practice;Game Transfer Phenomena;Digital Native期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：電玩世界的數位原民到底發展了什麼新型態的學習(new type of learning)？這是學習學(learning sciences)核心關切。電玩經驗學到什麼？看的角度不只一種：從習得典範來看，注重學習遷移(learning transfer)；從參與典範來看，注重實踐社群(community of practice)的知識。本文嘗試兼從上述兩種角度切入，分析玩家自由擬題創作的成品，搭配觀察與訪談資料，詮釋玩家在題目中自然展現電玩經驗的有趣現象。研究問題有二：第一、電玩經驗讓這些擬題者展現什麼特殊的數學擬題特徵？第二、自由擬題題目當中呈現哪些電玩實踐社群知識？研究結果有二：一、題目蘊藏著一個故事般的情境，能將電玩社群的生活經驗轉化為數學題目，呈現數學內部與外部連結的特徵，以及超出課綱教學範疇的數學素養。二、題目的布局與內涵展現三類電玩實踐社群知識，包括：「遊戲系統的設計機制」、「遊戲中的數學表徵」、「玩家角色的生命觀」。小學生玩家長時間沈浸於電玩社群累積的經驗，能在學校數學課堂中展現學習遷移的效果，也佐證了小學生擁有電玩社群成員的實踐知識。英文摘要：One of the core concerns in learning sciences is ”What new types of learning have emerged in digital natives in the gaming generation?” There are varied ways to inquire into the question of they have learned. From the perspective of the acquisition paradigm, it is a matter of learning transfer; from the perspective of participation paradigm, it is a matter of the competence which emerge from the gamers' communities of practice. This study is an attempt to present the results via both of the two perspectives. Gamers were interviewed and the free problems posed were analyzed in order to reveal gamers' experiences which emerged naturally. Two research questions: first, what characteristics about problems posed to gamers were related to gamers' experiences? Second, what knowledge in communities of practice can be identified in the problems posed by gamers? The results showed: first, the problems were stated in a story-like situation. The gamers' daily life experiences could be transferred into math problems which showed clear connection within math concepts as well as between math and other subject domains. In additions, these problems evidenced that their math literacy goes beyond what they were taught. Second, three kinds of knowledge from gamers' communities of practice were identified: 1. design mechanisms in the game system, 2. mathematical representation in the game infrastructure, and 3. gamers' views of life. The experiences gained by immersing in gamers' communities of practice showed not only the effect of learning transfer in mathematics classes in school, but also the understanding of knowledge appropriated by being a member of the game community.起始頁-結束頁：31-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2401.0201篇名：國中語文精進教材處遇精準度研究並列篇名：Treatment Fidelity in the ”Literacy First Program for Secondary Schools”作者：洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung);曾瓊禛(Chiung-Chen Tseng);孫瑜成(Yu-Cheng Sun);李思慧(Si-Hui Li);陳秀芬(Hsu-Feng Chen)關鍵字：低成就學生;國中;國中語文精進教材;國文補救教學;處遇精準度;low-achievers;secondary school;Literacy First Program for Secondary Schools;Chinese remediation;treatment fidelity期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：處遇精準度是運用方法學專業，監控介入執行歷程的準確性及一致性，用以確保整體介入執行歷程乃依原研究設計而成，它是達成「實證本位實務」、執行「介入反應」歷程的關鍵。研究者若未能檢證處遇精準度資料，則難以宣稱介入結果的正當性；實務工作者若未能檢視處遇精準度資料，則容易因介入執行歷程的不正確或不適當，致使有效介入難以產生如期效果，而最終放棄有效介入的執行。為了檢視「國中語文精進教材」於實際教學情境是否合乎原來「實證本位實務」研究設計，探討處遇精準度便有其必要性。本研究透過處遇精準度「接觸程度」、「忠實程度」、「傳遞品質」、「方案區分度」、「參與者反應」等構念面向，探討「國中語文精進教材」依研究設計執行之準確性與一致性程度。本研究以12所國中擔任國中低成就學生國文補救教學之教師和學生為研究對象，以觀察者一致性、評量者信度、內容效度與效標關聯效度，檢核處遇精準度各面向評量信、效度，並以百分比、描述統計、相關分析等統計方式分析處遇精準度各面向內涵。研究發現如下：一、不同處遇精準度構念面向，反映出不同執行精準程度；時間掌控、依學生反應調整是教師未能依研究設計執行介入步驟主因；組字策略、學生類化學習與合作學習策略是教師顯著未達執行標準的項目。二、「接觸程度」、「忠實程度」（教師執行「能力」）與介入結果具中度正相關；「接觸程度」、「忠實程度」（教師執行「能力」）、與「傳遞品質」（督導評估教師「涉入程度」）是檢驗本教材介入研究效度之重要憑藉。三、處遇精準度各面向間僅「忠實程度」（能力）與「傳遞品質」（涉入程度）存在顯著負相關；推測教師執行「意向」（涉入程度）和「行動」（能力）間可能存在不一致的心理反應。相關研究建議亦陳述於文末。英文摘要：Purpose: Treatment fidelity refers to the methodological strategies used to monitor and enhance the reliability and validity of interventions, and is defined as the degree to which a treatment is implemented as planned; it plays a crucial role in evidence-based practices (EBP) and response to intervention (RTI) approaches. If researchers fail to document treatment fidelity, they cannot legitimately claim that a particular intervention was responsible for observed changes in participants' behaviors. Moreover, if practitioners cannot collect objective data on treatment implementation, they may abandon effective interventions that are poorly or inconsistently implemented and consequently appear ineffective. For decades, a consensus has developed regarding the need for educational practitioners and researchers to address treatment fidelity concerns. Hence, this study explored the treatment fidelity of the ”Literacy First Program for Secondary Schools” (LFPSS) that was designed with components of EBP and RTI. Method: The LFPSS was implemented to remediate low-achieving Chinese students in 12 junior high schools. The level of exposure, adherence, quality of delivery, differentiation of program, and responsiveness of participants were the treatment fidelity aspects used to determine the reliability and validity of the program. The ratings from LFPSS instructional video, teachers' self-ratings regarding instruction fidelity, records of regular supervision meetings, ratings of supervisors, program manuals, and serial teacher development of the program comprised the data collected and analyzed. All data was analyzed through percentage, descriptive statistical analysis, and Pearson's product-moment correlation. Reliability was indicated by the percentage of agreement between self-rated fidelity and rating observed from videos, whereas validity consisted of content and criterion validity. Results: The major findings were as follows: (a) Various constructs of fidelity were found with different levels of fidelity; in particular, time management and adaptive instruction with students' responses were the primary items in which teachers failed to follow the standardized procedure. Orthographic strategy, facilitating students' generalizations of learning, and cooperative learning were the items teachers failed to reach. (b) A moderate positive correlation was found between treatment fidelity and level of treatment outcome. (c) Level of exposure, adherence (competence), and quality of delivery were critical to the successful implementation of LFPSS. (d) Inconsistency between the intentions and actions of teachers was noted; specifically, teachers' engagement (i.e. quality of delivery), as rated by their supervisors, was negatively correlated to the competence of teachers. Implications: According to the results of this study, we suggest that future intervention research should aim to demonstrate treatment fidelity through individual- and intervention-level aspects. Furthermore, researchers and practitioners could address the dependence of treatment fidelity on adherence (competence dimension), which is important and relatively easy to document.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201611.41030012篇名：語音異常兒童的語音區辨及聲學調整對其聽知覺的影響並列篇名：Speech Discrimination of Mandarin- Speaking Children with Speech Sound Disorders作者：鄭靜宜(Jing-yi Jeng)關鍵字：語音異常;構音／音韻異常;語音區辨;聲學調整;語音知覺;speech sound disorders;articulatory/phonological disorders;speech discrimination;acoustical modification;speech perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：語音異常（speech sound disorders, SSD）兒童常有語音區辨困難，本研究之目的在探討SSD 兒童的語音對比區辨及調整聲學線索對語音區辨的影響。本研究有102 位參與者，包括31 位六足歲的SSD 兒童和31 位年齡、性別配對無SSD 的兒童為控制組；另有40 位正常成人為控制組，作為和兒童聽辨表現比較的基礎。實驗一的刺激材料是52 對具最小音素對比的華語單音節音，含13 類語音對比。實驗二的材料是將實驗一的刺激用聲學再合成調整聲學特徵性，比較聲學調整對三組聽者區辨的影響。聲學調整方式是在摩擦噪音強度、共振峰轉折帶、VOT(voice onset time)、噪音遮蔽和梅爾倒頻（MFCC）濾波等方面做強化或減弱對比的調整。結果發現SSD 兒童的語音區辨正確率顯著低於兒童控制組，兩個兒童組的區辨正確率皆顯著低於成人組；三組反應時間(RT) 亦達顯著差異，SSD 兒童組RT 顯著慢於兒童控制組和成人組，成人組RT 最短。在實驗二無論是正確率或RT，三組聽者對於強化類刺激的反應皆顯著優於減弱類刺激。SSD組對於強化類刺激，RT 顯著較快於實驗一的原始刺激，顯現增益效果，但在正確率未見提升效果；對於減弱類刺激和實驗一原始刺激相較則有顯著降低效果。語音區辨的正確率和RT 各與兒童構音測驗分數呈中度相關（r = .50，r = -.64，p ＜ .001）。可知六歲兒童的語音區辨，無論在正確率和RT 皆不及成人，對於一些較難的語音對比區辨習得應是在六歲之後；SSD 兒童語音區辨能力較一般兒童為弱。由於聽知覺發展在學習「說」之前，推論語音區辨的困難可能是造成兒童SSD 的原因之一。英文摘要：Purpose: Preschool children with speech sound disorders (SSD), previously called ”articulatory/phonological disorders,” frequently show deficiency in speech perception, specifically in speech-sound discrimination. The purpose of this study was to investigate the speech discrimination ability of Mandarin-speaking children with SSD and to explore the effects of acoustically modified stimuli on speech discrimination. Methods: The participants consisted of 31 preschool children with SSD and two control groups. One of the control groups consisted of 31 normal preschool age-matched non-SSD children and the other control group consisted of 40 normal young adults. In Experiment I, the stimuli comprised 52 pairs of Mandarin monosyllables consisting of 13 phonetic minimal pair contrasts for speech discrimination testing. The discrimination task involved judging whether the two presented monosyllables were perceived as the same syllable sound. The children were tested individually. The speech stimuli used in Experiment II were acoustically modified from the stimuli in Experiment I. The acoustical modification involved altering the time or frequency domains of the target speech segments through resynthesis; specifically, the noise duration, VOT, and vowel transition duration were modified, and noise masking and MFCC filtering were applied. Findings: The results of Experiments I and II indicated that the SSD group exhibited significantly lower correct rates and longer reaction times (RTs) than did the child control group. Additionally, the adult group exhibited the highest correct rates and the shortest RTs. The articulation scores of the children were moderately correlated with the correct rates and RTs of the speech discrimination task (r = .50, p ＜ .001; r = -.64, p ＜ .001, respectively). Retroflex contrast, manner contrast at the alveolar place of articulation, and tone contrast were the three most difficult contrasts for the children with SSD. Aspiration contrast and fricative-affricate contrast were the two contrasts with the greatest differences between the two groups of children (SSD vs. normal). In Experiment II, the stimuli with acoustical enhancement significantly reduced the RTs in the SSD group, but exhibited no facilitating effect on the correct rates. For acoustically reduced stimuli, the two groups of children had lower correct rates than they did for the enhanced stimuli and original stimuli. The noise masking had a greater effect on the children with SSD. Conclusions/Implications: The results suggest that the ability of speech discrimination of the preschool children remains lower compared with that of adults, and that the development of speech perception is ongoing in preschool children. Difficulty in speech discrimination may be a crucial factor for SSD. Some acoustical modification can influence the discrimination of speech in children.起始頁-結束頁：35-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201611.41030023篇名：以眼動探討符號元素對發展遲緩幼兒及同儕溝通圖形符號辨識差異之研究並列篇名：Influence of Symbol Components on the Understanding of AAC Graphic Symbols from the Eye Movements of Preschool Children with and without Developmental Delays作者：黃志雄(Chih-Hsiung Huang)關鍵字：眼動;符號學習;發展遲緩;輔助溝通;eye movement;symbol learning;developmental delay;augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：運用輔助溝通系統（Augmentative and Alternative Communication, AAC）提升障礙兒童的溝通能力，已普遍獲得國內外的研究支持，但有關溝通圖形符號的閱讀和辨識問題，卻較少被客觀地探討。因此，本研究旨在以眼動技術探討符號元素數量對發展遲緩幼兒及其同儕，在閱讀溝通圖形符號時所產生的影響。研究採用準實驗研究設計和立意取樣，以18 位就讀幼兒園之發展遲緩幼兒（平均年齡5.7歲）以及36 位普通幼兒同儕（平均年齡5.4 歲）為對象，並以30 組常用動詞語彙之溝通圖形符號為研究材料，使用AAC 圖形符號學習系統和Mobile Eye 眼動儀，蒐集受試者對溝通圖形符號的辨識結果和眼動歷程。研究結果發現：一、普通幼兒同儕在溝通圖形符號辨識的表現優於發展遲緩幼兒，且符號元素數量與符號辨識度之間存在正向關係。二、發展遲緩幼兒和普通幼兒同儕在辨識溝通圖形符號的眼動閱讀時間上有顯著差異，發展遲緩幼兒需要較長的閱讀時間；此外，單元素符號亦較多元素符號需要較長的閱讀時間。三、發展遲緩幼兒在辨識多元素符號時，需要較多的圖文凝視時間，同時，普通幼兒同儕在單元素符號的圖文凝視率和圖形凝視率均顯著較高；此外，普通幼兒同儕在單元素符號的圖文凝視時間、圖文凝視率和圖形凝視率均顯著高於多元素符號。四、以眼動數據接近該組平均值之二位個案資料而論，普通幼兒的閱讀眼動軌跡有較多的掃視，能有系統地凝視每一張圖形符號，以搜尋可供作答的訊息，而發展遲緩幼兒則缺乏系統性的凝視和掃視。英文摘要：Purpose: Using Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) to improve the communication skills of children with disabilities is generally supported by both domestic and foreign scholars. Graphic symbols that represent individual words or phrases are often used in conjunction with AAC; however, research on the reading and recognition of AAC graphic symbols is scant. Therefore, this study examined the influence of symbol components on AAC graphic symbol comprehension among young children with and without developmental delays through an eye-tracking technique. Methods: A quasiexperimental design and purposive sampling were used for this study. A total of 54 participants comprising 18 children with a developmental delay (mean age 5.7 years) and 36 children without a developmental delay (mean age 5.4 years) participated in the study. The AAC Graphic Symbol Learning System and Mobile Eye eye-tracker were used to collect data. Thirty common verbs represented by AAC graphic symbols were used as the experimental material. Findings: The results of the eye-tracking experiments indicated that the symbol recognition of children without a developmental delay was significantly higher than that of children with developmental delays. Additionally, a positive correlation was identified between the number of AAC graphic symbol components and symbol recognition. The findings also revealed that a significant difference existedin the reading times for the cognition of graphic symbols between the children with and without developmental delays. Children with developmental delays required more reading time. Overall, the results demonstrated that single-element graphic symbols necessitated more reading time compared with multielement graphic symbols. Specifically, the children with developmental delays required a longer duration to fixate on the multielement graphic symbolsand achieve recognition. Conversely, the children without developmental delays tended to exhibit a favorable total fixation duration andfixation count, and a highratio of total fixation durations when using single-element graphic symbols compared with when using multielement graphic symbols. Finally, according to the average eye movement data of two subjects, eye movements among the children without developmental delays were saccadic and systematically fixated on each graphic symbol to search and determine answers. By contrast, children with developmental delays lacked systematic fixation and saccadic eye movement. Conclusions: A positive correlation exists between the number of components in AAC graphic symbols and symbol recognition. Therefore, we suggest designing multielement graphic symbols to promote recognition and symbol learning among young children with and without developmental delays. We conclude with some recommendations for further study based on these results.起始頁-結束頁：67-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201611.41030034篇名：新住民子女資優生「良師引導方案」之實踐歷程及其影響情形並列篇名：The Implementation Process of Mentorship Programs for Gifted Children of New Immigrants作者：陳昭儀(Chao-Yi Chen);李雪菱(Shiue-Ling Lee);楊尚容(Anita Shang-Jung Yang)關鍵字：新住民子女資優生;良師引導方案;Gifted Children of New Immigrants;Mentorship Programs期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目前國內與新住民子女相關的媒體或論文，大多關注弱勢關懷的層面，然盱衡事實已有不少新住民子女進入資優教育方案之中，因此本研究期能關注新住民子女的優勢能力，以正向積極的態度審思此教育議題，並實際啟動具體積極的作為，讓這些新住民子女資優生得以發揮其優勢能力與專長，這將是積極看見臺灣社會邁向多元文化發展的重要教育議題。研究參與者包括臺北市及新北市36 位新住民子女資優生及其父母與23 位良師，在多元彈性分組下進行師生互動、小組活動與大團體主題課程之多元「良師引導方案」。本方案以行動研究方式，不斷調整方案的進行。研究團隊透過觀察、深度訪談並蒐集相關文件與檔案資料，分析師生互動及學生學習成效。本研究發現在實踐歷程方面之現象包括：一、落實行動研究之精神，依據師親生之需求，彈性靈活調整方案；二、師生互動開展出多元的教學與學習方式與策略；三、新住民子女資優生的母親是教育資源積極的提供者。而影響情形則為：一、本方案開拓了資優生家庭的社交文化圈；二、本方案重視良師的增能歷程：良師的傾聽、看見、理解與分享；三、師親生的成長與回應。英文摘要：Purpose: Most of the contemporary mass media and academic theses related to the children of new immigrants have focused on the shortcomings and weaknesses of such children. However, a considerable number of these children have already participated in educational programs for the gifted. Our study thus emphasized their potentials and strengths. We believe that we can provide more positive attention to this educational agenda and encourage practical actions such as providing long-term tutors to mentor these students as well as other forms of support for developing the special abilities and skills of these students. This process is a crucial step in transforming Taiwan into a multicultural society. Methods: This study involved 23 mentors and 36 gifted students among two elementary schools; one in Taipei City, and one in New Taipei City, as well as the parents of the gifted students. We established a year-long mentorship program to observe mentors and students in three types of settings: one-on-one interactions, group activities, and large classes. We conducted action research, which involved continually adjusting the program when we discovered any obstacles in interactions between mentors and students. Through direct observation, in-depth interviews, and the collection of relevant documentary materials, the research team analyzed the interaction processes and effects of the mentorship program. The research data were extensive, which included 46 interviews and observation periods of mentors, parents, and students; 32 learning records written by students; 23 reflection records on the mentorship program; five records from workshops; email communication records; Facebook messages; and various documents. The data were analyzed in four stages. First, all data were numbered according to resources and time. Second, the keywords were numbered. Third, conversing related units and composed to subtitle. Fourth, the essence and conceptual themes of the study were formulated according to extensive data analysis. Results: (1) To meet the needs of mentors, parents, and students, we adjusted the program continually through action research techniques. (2) These mentor-student interactions involved progressive, multidimensional teaching and learning strategies. (3) The mothers of the students were positive providers of educational resources. Conclusions and Implications: (1) This program broadened the sociocultural circle of the families of gifted students. (2) We emphasized the empowerment of these mentors and their processes of listening, looking, understanding, and sharing. Most of the mentors were from nonimmigrant families and were shocked by the substantial differences between their own childhood experiences and those of their students. Their participation in this program thus reshaped their ideas on mentorship. (3) Most mentors, parents, and students responded positively to this program and were interested in continuing their participation.起始頁-結束頁：99-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201611.41030045篇名：音樂治療對改善臺北市國小特殊教育教師職業倦怠之成效並列篇名：Effect of Music Therapy in Preventing Job Burnout of Special Education Teachers at Elementary Schools in Taipei作者：陳淑瑜(Shu-Yu Chen)關鍵字：音樂治療;特殊教育教師;職業倦怠;music therapy;special education teacher;job burnout期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：特教教師因職業倦怠引發之身心問題及影響，在國外受到高度關切。而在臺灣，因重視融合教育、零拒絕與家長賦權的推展，目前仍強調特教教師的專業發展和工作職責，鮮少討論協助教師因應職業倦怠的方法。研究指出，若能有效實施使個體身心恢復或舒緩個人工作壓力的介入策略，將有助於減緩教師的職業倦怠。然而，國內十分缺乏解決職業倦怠的方法，仍有建構創新方案並取得成效證據的需求。音樂治療雖在國外已被視為因應職業倦怠的緩和性心理策略，對改變壓力狀態時的生理機制也有以實證為基礎的研究支持，但國內外皆缺乏改善特教教師職業倦怠相關的實驗研究，在實務應用或學術研究上仍深具意義，值得探討。本研究從33位報名的臺北市國小特教教師當中，依高風險程度篩選出17名參與者，隨機分派至三個小組，分別是兩個實驗組接受「音樂治療」策略、一個對照組接受「音樂放鬆」活動，藉以比較三組教師於介入前後之職業倦怠心理評測指標與腦波放鬆生理評測指標的差異情形，同時分析不同組別特教教師的背景資料、身體症狀及參與經驗。研究結果顯示，兩組實驗組在「音樂治療」策略介入後，倦怠感減少且放鬆度提升；但對照組在放鬆度提升的同時，倦怠感並未降低，即「音樂放鬆」活動在促進對照組正向放鬆介入成效的同時，並未減少其倦怠感的負面影響。整體而言，以音樂治療為介入策略，對因應特教教師的職業倦怠有顯著的成效及實務上的效果值。英文摘要：Purpose: The impact of job burnout on special education teachers through physiological and psychological stress has become a critical concern. Special educational institutions in Taiwan focus on inclusion, zero rejection, and parent empowerment, and emphasize teachers' professional development and job duties. However, the question of how to assist special education teachers in dealing with burnout is rarely discussed. Research indicates that the application of effective interventions for physiological and psychological recovery can assist teachers to reduce burnout. Nevertheless, innovative and evidence-based strategies or programs are required. Music therapy is a well-established treatment for burnout and stress, and has a strong evidence basis. The author advocates the equal use of physical and psychological assessments. Methods: A pretest-posttest equivalent-group design was employed. A total of 33 special education teachers were recruited. Seventeen teachers met the recruitment criteria and were randomly assigned to three groups. The music therapist conducted 120-minute music therapy sessions for two experimental groups, and 90-minute music relaxation activities for one control group. All groups received the intervention once a week, for 6 weeks. Data for this study were collected using a questionnaire on demographics, the Physical Symptoms Inventory, the Special Education Teacher's Burnout Inventory, NeuroSky electroencephalography, and the Participation Experience Questionnaire. Results/Findings: The results showed decreased burnout and increased relaxation in Experimental Groups 1 and 2 after the interventions. In addition, the results indicated that increased relaxation did not result in decreased burnout in the Control Group; this demonstrates that music therapy contributed to positive influences, but did not reduce negative impacts. Results from Experimental Group 1 and the Control Group showed a practical difference with a Cohen's d effect size. Furthermore, the participants' opinions supported the quantitative results. Conclusions/ Implications: Music therapy reduces burnout and increases relaxation. Regarding theoretical implications, music therapy that combines music with verbal suggestions is linked to decreased burnout and increased relaxation. The application of new technology contributes to the realization of research aims in music therapy. Regarding practical implications, the findings of the current study can promote the development of effective music therapy programs. Music therapy is an effective and appropriate intervention for assisting special education teachers in coping with their burnout. However, this study is limited in scope. The results were limited by the small number of participants. Replication studies are necessary to determine whether the results of the current study can be generalized to special education teachers in Taiwan and other countries.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201607.41020016篇名：學前識字困難高危險群幼兒之鑑別：學前教師評定搭配認知測驗兩階段篩選機制區辨效能之檢驗並列篇名：Identifying Preschool Children at Risk of Learning Difficulties in Chinese Characters Reading: An Evaluation of a Two-Stage Identification Procedure Combining Preschool Teacher Ratings and Cognitive Assessment作者：宣崇慧(Chung-Hui Hsuan);蔡建鈞(Henry J. Tsai)關鍵字：教師評定;認知評量;篩選機制;識字困難;Difficulty in word recognition;Identification Procedure;Teacher Rating;Cognitive Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：閱讀習得與早期語言理解及識字解碼發展有關（Gough & Tunmer, 1986），故語言理解及解碼技能可作為閱讀發展預測指標。本研究主要目的在於早期鑑別學前識字困難高危險群學童，如下逐步檢驗學前教師評定搭配認知測驗兩階段篩選機制，對國小一年級學童識字困難篩選之成效：一、檢驗學前預測變項與識字發展的相關；二、第一階段學前教師評定初篩的分類效果；三、第二階段搭配認知評量的區辨效能；四、分析兩階段篩選機制的整體效能。本研究採縱貫研究，在大班測量早期預測指標分數（教師評定量表、直接測量認知及識字），再追蹤國小一年級學童識字發展。以叢集抽樣篩選171名大班幼兒，第二年有139名學童繼續參與。結果顯示，學前識字與國小一年級學童識字呈高度相關，其他與國小一年級學童識字顯著相關者為教師評定之認字解碼與詞素理解兩分項、直接測量之語言理解、注音解碼、快速自動唸名與詞素理解。在階段分析方面，教師評定之識字解碼及詞素理解總分（33%以下）對國小一年級學童識字困難（25%以下）篩選的敏感度為53.33%，結果並不理想，故加入學前識字為篩選條件（教師評定及學前識字其中一項低於33%），如此使篩選敏感度提升至93.33%。以第一階段正確預測識字困難及假陽性識字困難為效標，第二階段認知評量為預測變項做區辨分析，結果顯示，語言理解、符號聲韻解碼與快速自動念名符合最佳區辨組合，整體正確性為66.7%，預測敏感度為78.6%。兩階段綜合篩選效能為73.33%，但仍有26.67%的假陰性錯誤，此與父母親社經地位及幼兒成熟度有關。英文摘要：Purpose. Reading acquisition is based on early language comprehension and word decoding (Gough & Tunmer, 1986). Therefore, language comprehension and cognitive decoding skills are applied as early predictors of reading development. This study aimed to identify preschool children at risk for learning difficulties in Chinese character reading. The identification procedure was conducted by using language comprehension and decoding skills as early predictors. The efficiency of a two-stage identification procedure that entailed combining preschool teacher ratings and cognitive assessments was evaluated for the following purposes: (1) to investigate the association between early predictors (including preschool teacher-rated scores and assessments of language comprehension, phonological Tzuyin decoding, rapid automatized naming (RAN), morphological awareness, and nonverbal IQ) and character reading ability during preschool and first grade; (2) to verify the classification accuracy of the procedure according to preschool teacher-rated scores and first grade character reading scores (i.e., the first stage of the identification procedure); (3) to examine the significance of classification prediction by applying a set of early predictors at the second stage of the identification procedure; and (4) to evaluate the combined outcome of the two-stage identification procedure. Methods. A total of 171 five-year-old preschoolers were recruited through cluster sampling. The participants' decoding skills, language comprehension, and morphological awareness were rated by their classroom teachers. Their language comprehension, reading-related cognitive skills (phonological Tzuyin decoding, RAN, and morphological awareness), and character reading skills were assessed individually. One year later, 139 children continued to participate. Their character reading skills were reassessed. Results and Conclusions. Character reading abilities in preschool and the first grade were highly correlated. The individually assessed cognitive skills and abilities that were rated by the preschool teachers, including decoding skills and morphological awareness, were significantly associated with first grade character reading. The classification adequacy recorded at the first stage of the identification procedure, using the sum of preschool teacher-rated scores (which were below 33%) as early predictors, revealed that 53.33% (n = 16) of the children were accurately classified as poor character readers (first grade character reading scores were below 25%). However, the result is not acceptable because of the high proportion of false-negative errors (46.67%; n = 14). To increase the sensitivity of the first identification stage, children's early character reading scores were used as alternative predictor. Children with either teacher-rated scores or an early character reading ability lower than 33% were identified as having a high risk of becoming poor character readers. This adjustment increased the sensitivity from 53.33% to 93.33% (n = 28). At the second identification stage, a direct discriminant function analysis was performed using three assessment variables as predictors of membership in two groups. The predictors were language comprehension, phonological Tzuyin decoding, and RAN. The groups were distinctly composed of true- and false-positive cases (n = 28 and 20, respectively) selected from the first identification stage. The predictors were significant for discriminating the groups. There was a 66.7% accurate classification rate evidenced through cross-validation of the given classification function. Among the true-positive cases, 78.6% (n = 22) were classified accurately. The combined outcome of the two-stage identification procedure revealed a 73.33% sensitivity for accurate classification of true-positive cases (22 of 30), although there was still a 26.67% false-negative error engendered by the effects of parent social economic status and age.起始頁-結束頁：27-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201607.41020027篇名：利用語音輔助溝通系統促進布洛克型失語症者語句產生之學習成效並列篇名：Learning Effect of Sentence Production by a Voice- Output Communication Aid in Patients with Broca's Aphasia作者：余鴻文(Hung-Wen Yu);吳亭芳(Ting-Fang Wu)關鍵字：布洛克型失語症;語句產生;語音輔助溝通系統;augmentative and alternative communication;Broca's aphasia;sentence production期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：鑑於中風常導致失語症，造成溝通障礙，影響生活和社會參與，有愈來愈多的輔助溝通系統應用於臨床失語症者的復健，以促進失語症者的溝通效能。然而，要能成功地使用輔助溝通系統，需要合適的輔助溝通系統設計與充足的訓練。為此，本研究利用語音輔助溝通系統訓練布洛克型失語症患者學習產生溝通語句，探討其學習及類化成效。本研究以單一受試研究法之跨受試多探試設計，招募三位布洛克型失語症患者參與。研究者利用社會溝通網絡調查搜集參與者的基本溝通需要，並以此為基礎設計語音輔助溝通系統。利用語音輔助溝通系統探討介入後參與者溝通語句產生的正確率，並用視覺分析法和C統計分析所得資料。最後並調查參與者與主要照顧者對於語音輔助溝通系統的使用滿意度。研究結果：一、經過訓練後，三位參與者利用語音輔助溝通系統產生語句的正確完成率皆有顯著增加，並有維持及類化成效。二、參與者與主要照顧者對語音輔助溝通系統的使用非常滿意。三、訓練過程中，研究者提供的提示與線索逐漸減少，顯示臨床治療環境下，使用語音輔助溝通系統可協助布洛克型失語症者完整表達溝通語句。語音輔助溝通系統的學習成效除溝通系統的設計與使用訓練外，亦會受到參與者的認知功能、上肢動作控制能力與個人動機之影響。未來研究可擴大收案對象，包括不同類型或不同認知功能的失語症個案，以探討不同族群在使用語音輔助溝通系統時溝通表現或支持策略的差異。英文摘要：Purpose: Aphasia is a common symptom in stroke patients and often leads to communicative disability. Aphasia can affect stroke patients' daily living and social participation. Applying augmentative and alternative communication systems (AACs) in clinical rehabilitation has proven effective in enhancing the communicative efficiency of stroke patients with aphasia. The successful implementation of AACs requires not only appropriate system design but also sufficient training in system operation. This study explored the learning and generalized effects on sentence production of training stroke patients with Broca's aphasia to use a voice-output communication aid. Methods: This study adopted a multiple probe across-subjects design to investigate the effect of a voice-output communication aid on the accuracy rate of sentence production. Three stroke patients with aphasia consented to participate in this study. The researchers used the Social Networks Communication Inventory to establish the basic communicative needs of the participants, and employed this information to design the communicative sentences for practice and training. The main procedures of this study entailed investigating the communicative needs of the participants, designing the communication boards of the voice-output communication aid, confirming participants' recognition of communicative symbols, training the participants to use the voice-output communication aid, and investigating the accuracy rate of sentence production in different communicative situations. In the training process, some cues and prompts were provided by the researchers to facilitate the learning outcomes. The data were illustrated and analyzed using visual analysis and the C statistical test. After the research was conducted, the satisfaction of the participants and primary caregivers with the AAC was also investigated. Results/Findings: In accordance with the basic communicative needs of the participants, the researchers designed a two-level layout for the voice-output communication aid that included 138 communicative symbols and three different communicative situations. All participants exhibited significant improvement in the percentage of communicative sentences accurately completed. The learning and generalized effects persisted in the maintenance phase. The participants and primary caregivers were satisfied with using the voice-output communication aid. The number of cues and prompts given by the researchers decreased during the training process. Conclusions/Implications: The results demonstrated, in a clinical therapeutic setting, that the voice-output communication aid training can assist stroke patients with Broca's aphasia to completely express communicative sentences. The learning effectiveness of using the voice-output communication aid was influenced by the participants' cognitive function, motor control of upper extremities, and personal traits. Additional influencing factors were the design of the communication system, and training in its use. Further research can extend this study to different severity levels of Broca's aphasia and to various neurological diseases.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201607.41020038篇名：一位星星王子的音樂特殊才能發展歷程：同儕師徒學習模式並列篇名：Development of Special Musical Talents in a Student with Autism Spectrum Disorder: Peer Mentoring Mode作者：梁斐瑜(Feei-Yu Liang)關鍵字：同儕師徒學習;自閉症;音樂特殊才能;雙重殊異學生;peer mentoring;autism spectrum disorder;special musical talent;twice-exceptional gifted students期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：雙重殊異學生一向都是被忽視的一個族群，亦因其特殊性使得特殊才能發展常處於卓越邊緣。欲滿足雙重殊異學生的特殊學習殊求，是極具挑戰性的。如何提供雙重殊異學生一個公平的教育資源使其能實現潛能，其鑑定與教育的適切性是一個重要議題。本研究採個案研究，透過觀察、訪談及文件檔案的資料，蒐集探討一名雙重殊異自閉症學生小帥在報考音樂資優班落選後，如何在一個由自閉症學生組成的同質性樂團中，透過同儕師徒學習模式發揮音樂特殊才能之優勢，以及如何藉助同儕師徒學習模式因應發展音樂特殊才能之挑戰。研究結果為：一、小帥透過同儕師徒學習模式發揮音樂特殊才能之優勢包括以唱歌優勢引導同儕跨越障礙齊聲合奏、音感佳成為樂團中的好幫手、記憶力佳幫助樂團同儕建構樂句、非線型的思考模式賦予音樂新的詮釋，以及非規範性的想法促使同儕邁向創新；二、小帥透過同儕師徒學習模式在發展音樂特殊才能之挑戰因應，包括同儕師徒學習模式的典範引導突破拍數計算困難、同儕間內隱知識的習得消除固執己見、透過同儕師徒學習模式培訓樂團程度最高的同儕作為大師兄以因應組織能力的缺乏、分部練習形成同儕師徒學習架構讓同儕一起探索以減低挫折感、透過同儕師徒的團隊學習超越他人評價，以及藉由隱性知識視覺化以強化音樂性強弱的表現。英文摘要：Purpose: Twice-exceptional gifted students have always been a neglected population. Because the characteristics of twice-exceptional gifted students that they are unable to develop special talents. To meet the special needs of twice-exceptional gifted students is challenging. This is an important issue, how to identify and placement of twice-exceptional gifted students and to provide fair and adequate educational resources so that they can development potential and achieve special talents. This study investigated the development of musical talents in Xiaoshuai, a student with autism spectrum disorder who failed a music entrance exam for gifted students. The study explored the advantages, and challenges, of the peer mentoring mode to an autistic student learning special musical talents in a homogenous orchestra. Methods: A case study methodology was employed, involving observation, file analysis, and interviews. Interviews were conducted with Xiaoshuai, his mother, his peer's mother, and the conductor of the orchestra. Results/ Findings: (1) Xiaoshuai deployed the advantages of his special musical talents in the peer mentoring mode as follows : (a) his singing influenced peers to overcome obstacles to playing together; (b) his strong sense of pitch enabled him to become a good assistant in the orchestra; (c) his retentive memory assisted peers in the orchestra in constructing musical phrases; (d) his nonlinear thinking created new interpretations of music; (e) his nonnormative thinking encouraged his peers in the orchestra to innovate. (2) Xiaoshuai responded to the challenges to his special musical talents in the peer mentoring mode as follows: (a) he overcame comprehension difficulties through peer guidance; (b) he circumvented peer unhelpfulness by acquiring tacit knowledge; (c) he trained at the highest level in the orchestra despite a lack of organizational capacity; (d) he participated in smaller peer mentoring groups during orchestra practice to reduce tensions and enable peers to explore together; (e) he surpassed others' evaluations through peer-mentored team learning; (f) he visualized tacit knowledge to enhance musical performance and musical expression. Conclusions/Implications: (1) Xiaoshuai deployed the advantages of special musical talent in the peer mentoring mode. (2) Xiaoshuai overcame the difficulties of special musical talent in the peer mentoring mode. Suggests: Special education teachers should (1) use the learning advantages of the peer mentoring mode to overcome challenges and enhance the effectiveness of learning for twice-exceptional gifted students and their peers; and (2) systematically implement the teaching steps of the peer mentoring mode to assist twice-exceptional gifted students in learning special musical talents.起始頁-結束頁：89-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201607.41020049篇名：電子白板結合心智圖寫作方案對國中學習障礙學生寫作之成效並列篇名：Effects of Integrating Interactive Whiteboard into the Mind Mapping Composition Program on Writing for Junior High School Students with Learning Disabilities作者：劉欣靄(Hsin-Ai Liu);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：心智圖;作文;電子白板;學習障礙;Mind mapping;Composition;Interactive whiteboard;Learning disabilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討電子白板結合心智圖寫作方案對提升國中學習障礙學生寫作表現之成效。採用單一受試研究法之跨受試多探試設計，研究對象為三名經雲林縣及就學輔導委員會鑑定之國中學習障礙學生，評量內容主要是以寫作文章的總字數和寫作評定量表評定寫作流暢度和文章品質，以視覺分析與C統計進行資料處理，並使用自編的寫作課程回饋調查表蒐集受試者及其師長對本研究教學方案之滿意度，本研究結果顯示：一、電子白板結合心智圖寫作教學方案對三位受試者的「文章總字數」有介入效果與保留效果，提升了個案的寫作流暢性。二、電子白板結合心智圖寫作方案對三位受試者的「寫作評定量表總分」有介入效果與保留效果，提升了個案的寫作品質。三、電子白板結合心智圖寫作方案對三位受試者在寫作評量表分項目之「結構組織、內容思想、文字修辭」皆有介入效果與保留效果。四、三位受試者中，兩位受試者、教師與家長同意電子白板結合心智圖寫作方案可提升寫作表現、寫作態度。研究者綜合上述研究結果，提出對未來研究與學習障礙學生寫作教學之相關建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This single-subject, multiple-probe experimental study primarily examined the effects of integrating the interactive whiteboard into the mind mapping composition program on improving the writing performance of junior high school students with learning disabilities. Methods: Three junior high school students, identified as having learning disabilities by the Committee of Identification, Placement and Consultation for the Special Needs Children in Yunlin County, were the study subjects. Their writing skills, including the total number of words written, were assessed, and their writing quality and writing fluency were indexed using the Writing Expression Rating Scale. All data were analyzed using visual inspection analyses and C statistics. The satisfaction of teachers and parents of the participants with this writing intervention program were evaluated using a feedback questionnaire. Results/Findings: The major findings were as follows: 1. Integrating the interactive whiteboard into the mind mapping composition program resulted in enhanced and retained effects on ”the total word-writing fluency”. Both the immediate and retained effects of the intervention program were positive and substantial for each participant. 2. The intervention program resulted in enhanced and retained effects on ”the total scores of the Writing Expression Rating Scale”. Both the immediate and retained effects were positive and substantial for each participant. 3. The intervention program resulted in enhanced and retained effects on ”organizations, contents, and rhetoric.” Both the immediate and retained effects were positive and substantial for each participant. 4. The teachers and parents of two of the three participants agreed that integrating the interactive whiteboard into the mind mapping composition program improved the writing performance and writing attitudes. They were mostly satisfied with the positive effects of this writing intervention program. Conclusions/Implications: The results show that integrating the interactive whiteboard into the mind mapping composition program on improving the writing performance of junior high school students with learning disabilities is effective. On the basis of the main findings, we propose several suggestions for future studies and composition teaching methods for junior high school students with learning disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201603.410100110篇名：初級影片示範教學教導自閉症幼兒生活自理技能之研究：以洗手為例並列篇名：Effects of Primary Tier Generic Video Modeling on Teaching Hand Washing Skill to Children with Autism作者：王慧婷(Hui-Ting Wang)關鍵字：生活自理技能;自閉症;洗手;輔助科技;影片示範教學;self-help skill;autism;hand washing;assistive technology;video modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究為以影片示範三級教學模式之初級介入，係以過去文獻為基石，奉現今研究品質指標為圭臬，結合輔助科技之趨勢，發展具社會效度之初級影片示範教學，並以洗手技能為例教導臺灣與美國自閉症幼兒生活自理技能。洗手係生活自理技能之一，亦為社會重要技能，然而，國內外相關嚴謹之研究報告付諸闕如，教學大多仰賴高資源及高支持量的密集成人提示或高科技精密儀器，社會效度多不明確，難以符合實務教學之需求。因此，本研究針對自閉症幼兒，使用最具高實證基礎的影片示範教學為唯一的介入元素，並採用三層級中所需資源和支持量最少之初級介入；研究設計採多重基準線跨研究對象設計，並參考學術界已有共識之單一受試研究品質指標、社會效度指標及影片示範教學過程特徵與影片製作要素。本研究對象分處臺灣和美國，共有五位三至六歲自閉症男性幼兒符合條件並全程參與。研究者或蒐集資料的教師記錄研究對象看完影片後洗手總步驟數與每一步驟完成情形。結果顯示，本研究具有良好的觀察者間一致性、過程效度、內在效度與外在效度，五位幼兒中有四位在介入後有顯著且穩定之行為改變，而且維持成效良好及有部分類化效果，顯示初級影片示範教學能有效教導自閉症幼兒學會洗手技能。本研究發現，此初級介入適合有功能性語言且會簡單句子，無影響學習的自我刺激功能之行為或固著物的自閉症學習者。本研究亦討論初級影片示範教學介入適合的對象、未來實施三層級影片示範教學模式應用與成本效益、社會效度等如何落實於實務之議題及未來研究方向，以供相關研究與實務專業人員參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This three-tier video modeling intervention model aimed to explore the effects of a primary tier generic video modeling to teach hand washing skill to children with autism in Taiwan and in the United States. Self-help skill, such as hand washing, is a socially important skill. However, autism literatures on teaching such skill are lack of rigor and social validity. Besides, most existing literatures relied on labor-intensive or high technology equipment which involved high resources and support. This study utilized video modeling, the most high evidence level of the autism evidence-based practices, and the least amount of resource and support involved primary tier of the Three Tier Video Modeling Intervention Model. Method: This study abided the academic consensus of single subject design quality indicators, social validity quality indicators, video modeling procedural characteristics and video components to develop a generic video for children with autism to learn hand washing. A multiple baseline across participants design was used to teach five 3 to 6 year-old male children with autism who met the inclusion criteria to independently wash their hands. The intervention protocol was rather easy to follow. The participant children were asked to view a 3-minute-video demonstrating the 9 steps of hand washing from a peer model and provided the participants the opportunity to practice the skill in 40 seconds. The total numbers and each of the independent performed steps were recorded. Results: The results showed that 4 of the 5 participants significantly and stably changed their skill behavior when and only when intervention was implemented. Maintenance and partial generalization effect were also observed. The validities (internal validity, external validity, and social validity) and reliabilities (inter-observer agreement and fidelity) of this study were high. Discussions and implications: The following themes and the implications for future research were discussed: a) the observed phenomenon of delay effects; b) a dialogue with Rosenberg’s primary tier video modeling study; c) noneresponders with self-stimulus function behavior and the absence of functional expression in sentences; d) the application of the three-tier video modeling intervention model and the cost-effectiveness analysis; and e) the social validity and its relationship to bridging the research and practice.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201603.410100211篇名：教師創意教學發展之縱貫性研究並列篇名：Longitudinal research on the development of creative teaching作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：教學玩興;創意教學;學校創新氣氛;縱貫性研究;playfulness in teaching;school climate of innovation;creative teaching;longitudinal research期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：創意教學是維繫國家發展競爭力的重要關鍵，但相當可惜的是，少有研究以縱貫性角度觀察教師創意教學的發展情形。本研究以551位國小自然與生活科技教師為對象，透過兩年四波的調查，利用階層線性模式了解教師創意教學的動態發展及教學玩興、學校創新氣氛對初始創意教學的影響以及成長速率的影響。結果顯示：創意教學中的互動討論及多元教學構面呈現線性的成長趨勢；而問題解決與自主學習則是呈現先上後下的曲線發展趨勢。在玩興動機部分，樂於嘗試會正向影響互動討論、自主學習的初始狀態，還會正向調節互動成長的線性斜率與自主學習的成長曲率；輕鬆愉悅會正向影響問題解決、多元教學、自主學習的初始狀態；主動分享會正向影響問題解決、多元教學、自主學習的初始狀態，還會正向調節互動成長的線性斜率與多元教學的成長曲率。而在學校創新氣氛方面，領導效能對於互動討論、多元教學的初始狀態具有正向影響；學習成長對於互動討論、問題解決、多元教學的初始狀態具有正向影響，且對多元教學的線性斜率以及自主學習的成長曲率具有正向調節效果；資源提供對於問題解決的初始狀態具有正向影響；團隊運作對於多元教學的初始狀態具有正向影響；而組織理念對於自主學習的成長曲率則具有正向調節效果。據上結果，本研究建議，一、教師應多加展現創意教學；二、培養教師對於教學的玩興，尤其是樂於嘗試、主動分享兩構面；三、塑造有利於創意教學的學校創新氣氛，尤其是學習成長、組織理念更為重要。英文摘要：Purpose: In knowledge economy trends, creativity determines the competitiveness of a country; therefore,advanced countries have actively invested in enhancing student creativity. Creative teaching plays a critical role in the cultivation of creative talent, and it is considered a key factor in maintaining national competitiveness. Although numerous researchers have emphasized the personal and environmental factors associated with the development of creativity, few studies have been conducted on such factors on various levels. Method: This study recruited 551 elementary school science and technology teachers as research subjects, and it involved four phases of investigation within a 2-year period. Hierarchical linear modeling was employed to examine the dynamic development of the teachers’ creative teaching as well as the effects of playfulness in teaching and school climate of innovation on the initial implementation and growth rate of creative teaching.Result/Findings: The dimensions of interactive discussion and multiple teaching in creative teaching presented linear growth trends, whereas problem solving and autonomous learning revealed upward and then downward curve development trends; open mindedness did not exhibit any growth. Regarding playfulness motivation, pleasure positively affected the initial status of interactive discussion and autonomous learning in addition to positively influencing the linear slope of interactive growth and the growth curvature of autonomous learning. Ease and pleasure positively influenced the initial status of problem solving, multiple teaching, and autonomous learning; furthermore, active sharing positively affected the initial status of problem solving, multiple teaching, and autonomous learning in addition to positively influencing the linear slope of interactive growth and the growth curvature of multiple teaching. Regarding school climate of innovation, leadership effectiveness exerted positive effects on the initial status of interactive discussion and multiple teaching; learning had positive effects on the initial status of interactive discussion, problem solving, and multiple teaching as well as positive moderating effects on the linear slope of multiple teaching and the growth curvature of autonomous learning; resource provision exerted positive effects on the initial status of problem solving; teamwork had positive effects on the initial status of multiple teaching; and organizational philosophy presented positive moderating effects on the growth curvature of autonomous learning.Conclusions/Implications: On the basis of the research results, this study proposes the following suggestions for teachers and schools:(1)Teachers should emphasize creative teaching,(2)teachers should emphasize playfulness in teaching, and (3)schools should provide specific methods and support for creative teaching.起始頁-結束頁：63-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201603.410100312篇名：Use of Phonological Representations of Taiwan Sign Language in Chinese Reading: Evidence from Deaf Signers並列篇名：中文閱讀時臺灣手語音韻之周邊預視效益作者：邱倚璿(Yi-Shiuan Chiu);吳銘達(Ming-Da Wu)關鍵字：失聰;台灣手語;音韻;眼球運動;閱讀;Deaf;Eye movement;Phonology;Reading;Taiwan Sign Language期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：41卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣失聰者可以使用中文與台灣手語來溝通，本研究欲瞭解失聰台灣手語使用者之台灣手語音韻表徵對於於中文閱讀時的影響。實驗使用眼動邊界典範與眼動誘發呈現改變技術（Rayner, 1975），研究假設若受試者若可在周邊視野擷取到詞彙相關訊息，則當眼睛通過設定邊界使得預視詞立即取代為目標詞時，眼睛凝視目標詞的處理便會受到影響。實驗操弄目標詞與預視詞的台灣手語音韻相關性（相關、無關），其中音韻相關手語之中文詞組指的是台灣手語手形相同，受試者被要求閱讀理解句子並判斷合理性，記錄其眼動指標與句子理解的正確性。此外，由於台灣手語翻譯為與中文詞時，可能為一個或兩個字的中文詞，透過於實驗一為預視詞與目標詞為一個字的中文詞，實驗二為預視詞與目標詞改為兩個字的中文詞，可以協助瞭解失聰手語者於中文閱讀時，台灣手語知識對於中文對詞的影響。結果發現：在一個字的中文詞中，手語音韻預視效果可在失聰手語者的第一凝視時間與凝視次數中顯示出來；在兩個字的中文詞中，手語音韻預視效果則是在第一凝視時間與凝視時間中發現，但在非口語失聰組中未出現；此外，由實驗一與實驗二的結果顯示，失聰手語者在閱讀中文時，無論中文詞為單字詞或雙字詞，手語音韻不僅會被自動激發，同時，中文斷詞的運作也會與一般中文閱讀者一樣，先是次詞彙，之後再整合為詞彙地進行；一般聽人組則未有任何台灣手語音韻的預視效果。簡而言之，失聰手語者於中文閱讀理解時，會激發包含台灣手語音韻的表徵。英文摘要：Purpose: Deaf people in Taiwan use Mandarin Chinese and Taiwan Sign Language (TSL) to communicate. This study explored the nature of the representations that deaf signers use during Chinese reading by using the invisible boundary and display change technique, in which a preview word is replaced by a target word when the reader’s eyes cross an invisible boundary to the left of the target word. A target word processed faster when the preview is related to the target word than when it is unrelated to the target word is considered a preview benefit effect. This study investigated the preview benefits of phonological information for Taiwan Sign Language (TSLph). Methods: This study invited 35 deaf signers and 30 hearing readers. We manipulated preview words with either phonologically related or unrelated words in TSL. Different TSL lexicons can be corresponded to either Chinese one-character or two-character words. To clarify the influence of inconsistency in translation of TSL to Chinese words on Chinese reading among deaf signers, one-character and two-character words frequently signed in TSL were used in Experiment 1 and 2, respectively. Experiment 1 had 45 reasonable sentences (30 with preview words and 15 with identical words) and 30 nonsensical sentences, and Experiment 2 had 36 reasonable sentences (24 with preview words and 12 with identical words) and 24 unreasonable sentences. The subjects were asked to decide whether a given sentence was reasonable according to their comprehension of the whole sentence. Findings: When considering the previous fixation location, the results demonstrated TSLph preview benefits among deaf signers for one-character words in the first-fixation duration (FFD) and first-run fixation count and for two-character Chinese words in FFD and gaze duration during a sentence comprehension task. The inconsistency in the translation of Chinese words to TSL did not disturb word segmentation in Chinese reading among these skilled deaf readers. Conclusions/Implications: The preview effects of words phonologically related in TSL were observed for deaf but not for hearing readers. These findings confirmed that deaf signers use TSL phonological representations during reading.起始頁-結束頁：91-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201603.410100401篇名：輕度障礙、資優以及一般國中學生因應普通班學習活動的適應現況與其影響因素並列篇名：Learning Adjustment of Junior High Schoolers with and without Special Needs in Inclusive Education: Current Situation and Its Factors作者：王文伶(Wen-Ling Wang);丁政本(Zheng-Ben Ding);鄧若瑩(Jo-Ying Teng)關鍵字：特殊學習需求學生;國中學生;融合教育;學習適應;inclusive education;junior high schoolers;learning adjustment;special needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：44期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究比較融合教育情境下特殊學習需求學生以及一般學生在普通班的學習適應狀況，總共有971位國中學生參與本研究之問卷調查與訪談，其中學術性向資優學生共419位，一般學生有314位，輕度障礙學生共238位。參與之學術性向資優學生與輕度障礙學生皆接受融合教育之普通班與資源班的兩項服務，一般學生則為他們的普通班同學。研究結果顯示三類學生在學習適應各構面上皆具有顯著差異，且學術性向資優學生的平均分數最高，輕度障礙學生的平均分數最低。再者，女生的學習適應優於男生之觀點，於本研究之學術性向資優學生的學習方法、學習習慣、學習態度、和管教與學習覺知等構面，以及一般學生的管教與學習覺知構面上，被再次驗證。而資優學生的自我調適以及一般學生的學習態度上，顯示了年級差異，且低年級優於高年級。此外，師生與親子關係，兩者皆能顯著影響三類學生的整體學習適應。但，對於資優學生而言，大致上，親子關係對學習適應的影響程度較高，而對輕度障礙以及一般學生的學習適應，大致上則以師生關係的影響程度較高。本研究之訪談資料亦呼應量化結果，顯示國中生的學習適應弱勢為不佳的學習方法與不良的學習態度，應特別注意是否會造成不利學習以及有礙進步的狀況。英文摘要：Junior high schoolers with special needs were compared to typically developing peers regarding their learning adjustment in general education settings. 971 students-314 typically developing students, 419 academically gifted students, and 238 students with mild disabilities- completed our questionnaires and interviews. These junior high schoolers with special needs accepted both resource room and general education, and typically developing peers were their classmates in general education. The results indicated that three groups differed significantly in all respects of learning adjustment, with gifted students having the highest mean scores and students with mild disabilities getting the lowest scores. Besides, gender differences in favor of girls were found for gifted students in their performances of learning habits, learning methods, learning attitudes, and discipline and learning awareness, as well as for typically developing students in their performances of discipline and learning awareness. Aside from gender differences, grade differences were also found and suggested that the lower graders were better than the upper graders in terms of gifted students' self-adaptation and typically developing students' learning attitudes. Additional analyses revealed that learning adjustment of junior high schoolers were impacted by students' teacher-student relationship and parent-child relationship. However, the impact of parent-child relationship on gifted students' learning adjustment was greater than the impact of teacher-student relationship. As for typically developing students and students with mild disabilities, their teacher-student relationship played a more important role in students' learning adjustment. The interview data also supported that students' learning adjustment weaknesses included their poorer learning methods and learning attitudes that tended to stop students from making progress or succeeding.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系2篇名：輕度認知障礙國中生乘法公式表徵與運算學習成效之探討並列篇名：The Effects of Representation and Computation of Multiplicative Identities of Middle School Students with Mild Cognitive Disabilities作者：洪雅惠(Ya-Hui Hung)關鍵字：輕度認知障礙;乘法公式;診斷式評量;mild cognitive disability;multiplicative identities;diagnostic assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：44期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在探討輕度認知障礙國中生乘法公式表徵與運算之學習成效，並深入分析研究參與者在乘法公式中和的平方公式與差的平方公式表徵與運算學習情形及錯誤類型。研究參與者為二位資源班輕度認知障礙國中生，包含一位學習障礙學生和一位輕度智能障礙學生。研究方法採「單一受試跨行為多探測設計」，研究結果以曲線圖以及目視分析法進行量的分析，並就測驗資料進行質的分析。研究結果發現：(1)二位研究參與者在和的平方公式及差的平方公式表徵與運算教學後，皆能有學習成效和維持成效；(2)二位研究參與者因個人認知特質不同，呈現錯誤類型不同，學習障礙學生出現空間對位錯誤、小數點錯位、運算錯誤等典型數學障礙行為特徵，而輕度智能障礙學生則是因對於「平方」不理解造成的錯誤。本研究採用診斷式評量，就公式表徵層面、運算程序層面和運算最終結果正確性分別計分，以明確反應研究參與者已學習與仍需學習之處。本研究亦根據研究結果對輕度認知障礙學生和的平方公式和差的平方公式教學實務及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of representation and computation of multiplicative identities of middle school students with mild cognitive disabilities. Two students with mild cognitive disabilities including one student with learning disability and the other student with mild mental retardation participated in this study. The multiple probe design across behaviors was implemented in this study. The data were analyzed using line chart and visual analysis. In addition, data were analyzed using qualitative approach. The results of this study were as follows: First, after knowledge representation of multiplicative identities instruction, two participants changed their cognitive behaviors and also maintained their cognition behaviors. Second, the errors patterns of two participants were different. The error pattern of student with learning disability was typical pattern of behavior of students with math disability. The error pattern of student with mild cognitive disability was due to limited cognitive ability. Third, diagnostic assessment was applied in this study in order to better present the learning process of research participants. In addition to discussion of results, this study also provides suggestions for teaching and future research.起始頁-結束頁：37-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系3篇名：就學與否對隔代教養學前兒童語言能力之影響探討並列篇名：Effect of School Enrollment on the Language Ability of Preschool Children in Skipped-Generation Family作者：楊麗詩(Li-Shi Yang);王秋鈴(Chiu-Ling Wang)關鍵字：隔代教養;語言能力;學前兒童;學前教育;skipped generation families;language ability;preschoolers;preschool education期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：44期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討隔代教養未就學和已就學之學前兒童在語言理解和語言表達能力上是否有差異。本研究採取方便取樣，選取新北市、雲林縣、臺南市、高雄市、花蓮縣3－4歲隔代教養未就學及已就學之學前兒童各10名進行配對。兩組兒童在年齡、性別、家庭社經水準、家中主要使用語言、家中同住兒童數等控制變項上，均未達顯著差異，但認知能力則有顯著差異。兩組兒童均接受「修訂學前兒童語言障礙評量表」、「華語兒童理解與表達詞彙測驗」及「中文色塊測驗」三項標準化語言測驗，並收集45句會話樣本及一個敘事樣本進行分析，以了解其語言理解與語言表達能力。研究結果以Wilcoxon等級和檢定方法進行統計分析，結果顯示，隔代教養未就學組兒童與隔代教養已就學組兒童在「中文色塊測驗」的表現達到統計上的顯著差異，但在「修訂學前兒童語言障礙評量表」和「華語兒童理解與表達詞彙測驗」之表現則無顯著差異。另外，兩組兒童在敘事樣本指標中的「結果」、「人稱代名詞凝聚完整率」及「敘事發展層次」亦達到統計上的顯著差異，但在會話樣本中各指標的表現則無顯著差異。英文摘要：This study investigated the differences in the language comprehension and expression abilities between preschool children who have and have not enrolled in school. Convenience sampling was adopted to select preschool children 3-4 year of age in skipped-generation family living in New Taipei City, Yunlin County, Tainan City, Kaohsiung City, and Hualien County. A total of 10 children were recruited for both the enrolled and nonenrolled groups. The two groups differed nonsignificantly in control variables such as age, sex, family socioeconomic status, primary language at home, and number of siblings at home, but they demonstrated significantly different cognitive abilities. All participating children received three standardized language tests, namely, the Revised Language Disorder Assessment for Preschoolers, the Receptive and Expressive Vocabulary Test, and the Mandarin Token Test. In addition, 45 sentences from a conversation sample and a narration samples were collected from the participants, on the basis of which an analysis was made to examine the participants' language comprehension and expression abilities. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to analyze the collected data, revealing that the two groups attained significantly different scores on the Mandarin Token Test, whereas their scores for the remaining two tests differed nonsignificantly. Concerning the narration sample indicators, the two groups demonstrated significantly different performances in consequence (a story grammar element), personal pronouns reference, and story structure levels. However, their conversation indicators differed nonsignificantly.起始頁-結束頁：69-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系4篇名：動物輔助學習對自閉症大學生學科表現成效之初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of Effects of the Animal-assisted Learning on Academic Performance in A College Student with Autism作者：鍾儀潔(Yi-Chieh Chung)關鍵字：動物輔助;自閉症;學科表現;animal-assisted;autism;academic performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：44期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以單一受試研究法結合部份質性資料探討動物輔助對一名自閉症男大學生某專業課程的學習成效，此專業課程共有三大評量項目：小考、實作報告、課堂參與。針對小考成績，研究者運用交替處理設計比較三種情境對學生小考成績的影響，第一種情境是在輔助犬的陪同下，由授課教師協助學生進行課前預習，第二種情境是只由授課教師協助學生進行課前預習，第三種情境是學生自行完成課前預習，結果發現第一種情境對學生的小考成績相對較有幫助。針對實作報告部份，研究者使用標準化的觀察與記錄方式，了解學生完成報告的情形，結果發現學生能選定與課程相關的主題，並在輔助犬的參與以及教師提供示範和回饋的過程中完成實作報告。最後，在課堂參與方面，研究者使用非正式之直接觀察和記錄的方式，了解學生平時課堂反應的情況，結果發現，動物輔助學習對提升學生在此門課程的整體學習有一定的效果。研究結束後，對個案進行非正式的訪談，經分析訪談內容後發現，學生本人對動物輔助學習抱持肯定的態度，亦期待之後還能參與類似的方案。最後，本研究針對以上發現進行相關的討論並提供建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the effects of animal-assisted intervention on academic performances for a college student with autism spectrum disorder in an elective course. The course requirement included weekly quizzes, a final report, and class participation. An alternating treatment design was used to compare the effects of three different conditions on the student's weekly quiz scores. The first condition included the researcher (i.e., instructor) helped the student with quiz preparation with an assisted canine as a companion. The second condition involved only the researcher helped the student with quiz preparation. In the third condition, the student prepared quizzes by himself. The result suggested that the first condition was a relatively effective condition. Standardized observation procedures were used to investigate the effects of animal-assisted learning procedures on the student's performance of his final project. The result indicated that the student could select a relevant topic, complete the project with some help from instructor, and finally teach the canine a novel skill. Direct observation was used to evaluate the student's class participation. The results suggested that not only could the animal-assisted learning increase the student's interaction with instructor and peers but also could improve the student's performance of oral presentation. According to an informal interview, the student had a positive attitude toward the program and showed the willingness of participating similar program in the future. Those results are discussed in terms of the strategies responsible for intervention effects and the potential future research directions起始頁-結束頁：95-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系5篇名：繪本輔導方案提升選擇性緘默兒童社會技巧之行動研究並列篇名：An Action Study on the Picture Books Guidance Program to Enhance the Social Skills of a Child with Selective Mutism作者：李依娟(I-Chuan Lee);陳儀娉(Yi-Ping Chen);王慧禎(Hui-Zhen Wang);謝倍珊(Bei-Shan Xie)關鍵字：選擇性緘默;社會技巧;繪本輔導;selective mutism;social skills;the Picture Book Guidance期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：43期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在發展一套社會技巧繪本輔導方案，並且探究繪本輔導方案，對提升選擇性緘默兒童的社會技巧能力之成效，並以一名國小選擇性緘默兒童為研究對象。根據研究結果，獲致下列結論：(1)輔導方案內容能結合實際生活情境，循序引導選擇性緘默兒童學習社會技巧；(2)實施繪本輔導方案，有助選擇性緘默兒童面對壓力與衝突之調適；(3)實施繪本輔導方案，選擇性緘默兒童的人際互動呈現正向的轉變；(4)學校團隊輔導模式能有效追蹤學生進步情形，對選擇性緘默兒童社會技巧的發展具有良好輔導成效。本研究依據上述研究結果，提出對選擇性緘默兒童輔導及未來研究的建議，以供學校輔導人員及研究者參考。英文摘要：This study aimed at developing a set of social skills picture book guidance program, and exploring the effectiveness of picture books guidance program to enhance social skills ability to selectively mutism children. The subject of this study was an elementary child with selective mutism. According to the results, the following conclusions were attainable: (a)The guidance program elements can combine into real life situations and sequentially guide selective mutism children to learn social skills. (b)The implementation of picture book guidance program helps selective mutism children adjust pressures and face conflicts. (c)The implementation of picture book guidance program improves the interpersonal skills of selective mutism children. (d)The school team coaching model can effectively track student progress in the case, and the results showed positive in the development of selective mutism children's social skills. Based on the above findings, this study proposed recommendations for selective mutism children guidance for future researches, and provided a reference for school counselors and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系6篇名：國中資優生完美主義類型、生活壓力與幸福感之相關研究並列篇名：A Related Research on Types of Perfectionism, Life Stress, and Well-being of Junior High School Gifted Students作者：陳奐妤(Huan-Yu Chen);林杏足(Shin-Drew Lin)關鍵字：國中資優生;完美主義類型;生活壓力;幸福感;the junior high school gifted students;types of perfectionism;life stress;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：43期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究調查國中資優學生完美主義類型、生活壓力感受及幸福感現況，探討背景變項、生活壓力、完美主義類型對幸福感的預測能力，並分析完美主義類型在生活壓力與幸福感之間扮演的角色。本研究採問卷調查法，分層隨機抽取臺中市國中資優生351人，以集群分析、區別分析、描述統計、卡方考驗、單因子變異數分析、階層迴歸分析與逐步迴歸分析等統計方式進行統計分析，並根據結論提出教育與研究建議。研究結果如下：(1)國中資優生完美主義類型可分為「非適應型非完美主義」、「非適應型完美主義」、「適應型完美主義」、與「適應型非完美主義」四種，生活壓力感知介於「沒有困擾」到「很少困擾」之間，整體幸福感受傾向幸福；(2)不同完美主義類型的國中資優生生活壓力感受有部分差異。「家庭生活壓力」上「非適應型非完美主義者」顯著較高，其餘壓力層面與整體壓力皆以「非適應型完美主義者」最高，其幸福感受亦有部分差異，大致適應型學生高於非適應型學生；(3)性別、年級、完美主義類型與生活壓力對國中資優生幸福感受皆有部分預測力，最有預測力者為「身心發展壓力」；(4)完美主義類型在國中資優生生活壓力與幸福感之間具有顯著調節作用。英文摘要：This study investigated types of perfectionism, life stress, and sense of well-being among junior high school students, explored the predictive power of background variables, life stress and types of perfectionism on the sense of well-being, and examined the function of types of perfectionism between life stress and sense of well-being. The sample, 351 gifted students, for conducting the questionnaire survey was randomly selected from junior high schools in Taichung City. Cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, descriptive statistics, chi-square analysis, two-factor ANOVA, single factor analysis of variance, hierarchical regression analysis and stepwise regression analysis were adopted in data analysis. Recommendations for educators and researchers are proposed. The conclusions are: (a)The types of perfectionism among junior high school gifted students can be categorized into non-adaptive non-perfectionism, non-adaptive perfectionism, adaptive perfectionism or adaptive non-perfectionism. The awareness of life stress lies between no problem and little problem. The sense of well-being tends to be happy. (b)The non-adaptive non-perfectionism students feel family life stress the most. The students of non-adaptive perfectionism scores higher in other dimensions of stress, and overall life stress than students of any other types. The adaptive perfectionism students score higher in overall sense of well-being than the non-adaptive ones. (c)The stress of physical and mental development shows the strongest predictive power, while .gender, grades, types of perfectionism, and life stress can partially predict the sense of well-being. (d)Types of perfectionism serve as a significant moderator between life stress and sense of well-being.起始頁-結束頁：29-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系7篇名：實施引導式探究教學發展國小聽障學生的科學探究技能並列篇名：Developing Scientific Inquiry Skills through Guided Inquiry Teaching on Primary School Students Who Are Deaf or Hard of Hearing作者：黃玉枝(Yu-Chih Huang)關鍵字：引導式探究教學;明示教學;科學探究技能;聽障學生;guided inquiry teaching;explicit teaching;scientific inquiry skills;Students who are deaf or hard of hearing期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：43期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究的目的在實施引導式探究教學，以發展國小聽障學生的科學探究技能。研究對象為高雄市立某國小啟聰班四、五、六年級各一位聽障學生，由該班聽障教育教師進行教學。共設計四個探究單元及學習單，教學實施一學期，每週兩節課。本研究蒐集教學過程的影音資料，分析課室中的師生對話，以了解學生在各單元的科學探究學習表現。其次，在各探究單元結束後由任課教師以科學探究技能檢核表評估學生的技能發展。並於學期末，學生經由科學探究技能紙筆測驗來展現他們的學習成效。最後，研究者晤談任課教師，進一步了解學生科學探究技能的表現與改變。研究結果發現：(1)引導式探究教學有助於提升國小聽障學生的科學探究技能；(2)國小聽障學生在操作性的科學探究技能上有較大的學習成效；(3)國小聽障學生在思考性的科學探究技能上較難有學習成效。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop scientific inquiry skills through guided inquiry teaching on primary school students who are deaf or hard of hearing. Three elementary school students who wrer deaf or hard of hearing and their teacher participated in this study. The research period was lasting one semester. The students who were deaf or hard of hearing were third, fourth, and sixth graders. The teaching materials were four science inquiry units and learning sheet. Data collection included classroom video, classroom discourse, interviews the main teacher, and students' performance in the inquiry skill checklists of four units. At the end of the semester, the researcher assessed the effectiveness of learning with the paper and pencil test of science inquiry skills. The results revealed the three students through guided inquiry teaching improve their science inquiry skills. The students who were deaf or hard of hearing in the hands-on of scientific inquiry skills had greater learning outcomes. The students who were deaf or hard of hearing in the minds-on of scientific inquiry skills had less learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系8篇名：視覺誘發電位檢查在認知功能障礙學生視力檢測之試驗性探究並列篇名：VEP Examination of Students with Cognitive Impairment作者：謝錫寶(Hsi-Pao Hsieh);陳南詩(Nancy Chen);許明木(Min-Muh Sheu);鄭靜瑩(Ching-Ying Cheng)關鍵字：視覺誘發電位;認知功能缺損;視力值;視覺障礙;visual evoked potential;cognitive impairment;visual acuity;visual disability期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：43期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在透過視覺誘發電位檢查，分析認知功能缺損學生視力檢測的可行性。除比較一般人在不同的矯正視力下，PVEP與FVEP檢查結果之差異外，同時建構VEP數值與視力值間的相關；另針對認知功能缺損學生，依VEP之檢測結果，進一步分析其VEP表現與一般人的異同。本研究分為兩個階段，第一階段取正常研究對象21人42眼，第二階段則為認知功能缺損學生5人。研究的資料包含量化的檢測資料與可判讀的圖表。第一階段(1)年齡分組在PVEP與FVEP的振幅檢測中未達顯著差異，但年輕組反應有優於年長組的趨勢；(2)不同屈光度在PVEP與FVEP的振幅檢測中未達顯著差異；然卻有屈光度愈高潛伏期愈長的表現；(3)性別在PVEP的振幅檢測中有顯著差異；而在FVEP中未達顯著，但仍出現女性反應優於男性的趨勢；(4)PVEP幅度反應隨視力值的變化而有顯著的改變，視力值越好幅度越高，尤以圖形64*64最為明顯；(5)PVEP與FVEP的相關分析顯示，在振幅的比較上仍以圖形64*64及第二次的閃光幅度之間有較高的信度。第二階段(1)認知功能障礙學生的視力值可以第一階段的迴歸公式套用，但仍須經醫療與教育人員的綜合研判；(2)特殊個案應由家長或熟悉校護陪同進行VEP檢測，避免因陌生而產生偏差；(3)VEP檢測前應由經驗光師進行屈光矯正與功能性視覺評估。最後根據本研究之研究結果與研究限制，提出對教育行政機關、學校、特教老師、特殊學生家庭、醫療相關人員及未來研究之建議。英文摘要：Purpose: The purpose of this study is to investigate and analyze the role of visual evoked potential (VEP) parameters in visual function in students with cognitive impairment (CI). Methods: In general, norm-referenced data were collected under different visual acuity conditions (uncorrected, 0.3, 0.8, 1.0). In stage one, twenty-one adults aged from 18 to 29 years with myopia and astigmatism but no ocular or systemic diseases participated in the study. In stage two, 5 students with CI identified through the educational system also entered the study. Examination included testing of visual acuity (VA), intra-ocular pressure, refraction for spherical equivalent, and both PVEP and FVEP. In addition to statistical correlation of each parameter with CI visual functions, independent t-test, ANOVA, and modulators of VA were analyzed through linear regression analysis that included cumulative adjusted R2 values. Results: Stage one: (1) No significant difference between PVEP responses as a function of age; although (2) PVEP and FVEP amplitude responses in females were both significantly higher than that in males. (3) PVEP amplitude was positively correlated with VA, especially with the 64*64 pattern (amplitude criterion indicated VA lower than 0.3: male, 3.85 or lower; female, 3.95 or lower) and a formulas could be established through linear regression analysis. In addition, (4) elevated refractive error showed slower latency, and (5) the 64*64 PVEP amplitude and the second FVEP amplitude demonstrated the highest reliability. Stage two: The VA of students with CI could be estimated through the formula acquired in experiment one. The results, however, must be examined together with clinical assessment from health practitioners or trained school faculty members. Further, in order to facilitate the examination and avoid behavioral disturbances, CI students should be accompanied by their parents, caregivers, or school nurses during examination. Conclusions: The findings can be utilized for the assessment of the VA in students with CI. The examination process itself is, however, not without limitations. A streamlined operation will require the cooperation between the examiner, school teachers/nurses, and parents.起始頁-結束頁：93-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系01篇名：閱讀之摘要歷程探究並列篇名：Exploring the Processes of Summarization作者：連啟舜(Chi-Shun Lien);陳弘輝(Hung-Hui Chen);曾玉村(Yu-Htsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：鉅觀結構;摘要歷程;閱讀理解;macrostructure;summarization process;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以Kintsch 與van Dijk（1978）的理論模式為基礎來探討不同年齡的讀者之摘要歷程。藉由實驗材料的操弄，測量兒童摘要能力以探討兒童閱讀的心理歷程，進而探討摘要能力與中文理解的關係。研究方法選取三年級及六年級受試者各34 名，每人閱讀三篇不同歷程版本之說明文後，進行自由回憶作業、摘要評量及文本理解測驗。研究結果發現：一、摘要整體表現和閱讀理解、自由回憶、文本理解皆呈現中等之相關；而在不同歷程之摘要表現上，刪除歷程和歸納、建構歷程之相關不顯著，刪除所使用到的摘要次能力不同於歸納和建構。二、不同年級讀者在閱讀後的摘要表現、自由回憶及文本理解在發展上有顯著的差異，六年級學童皆優於三年級學童。三、不同發展階段的讀者在摘要「次能力」表現有顯著差異，刪除的能力明顯優於歸納和建構的能力，其中建構能力是發展最不成熟的能力。在作答分析中顯示僅有五分之一的三年級學童和三分之一的六年級學童能正確選出文章的主題句。英文摘要：According to Kintsch and van Dijk’s (1978) theoretical model, we investigated the summarization processes of children with different ages. By manipulating three versions of texts, this study measured the process of reading comprehension and investigated the relationship between reading ability and summarization for Chinese readers. Participants were 34 third graders and 34 sixth grades. They were asked to read three different versions of texts and then performed three cognitive tasks (free recall, summarization, textbase questions). The results showed that there were moderate correlations among the measures of summarization, free recall and text comprehension, but no correlations among the measures of deletion, generalization and construction processes. Sixth graders outperformed third graders on all cognitive tasks. Readers at different developmental stages exhibited a significant difference in the sub-process of children’s summarization skills. The performance on the deletion-version was better than that on the generalization-version and construction-version. Among them, the performance on construction-version was the worst. Only one-fifth of third graders and one-third of sixth graders could select topic sentences of the text correctly.起始頁-結束頁：133-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201511242篇名：教室裡有春天：正向管教獲獎教師之情境式正向管教策略分析並列篇名：The Analysis of Situational Positive Discipline Strategies by Positive Discipline Awarded Teachers作者：盧玉燕(Yu-Yen Lu);吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);林秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Lin);張雨霖(Yu-Lin Chang)關鍵字：正向管教;正向管教策略;國中教師;管教情境;positive discipline;positive discipline strategy;junior high school teachers;discipline situation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討正向管教獲獎國中教師在困擾情境中如何採取最有效的管教策略，以達正向管教目的。研究一目的在搜集教師管教情境，以立意抽樣選取30 位國中教師為參與者，整理歸納出最令教師困擾的管教情境。結果發現，最令教師感到困擾的前三類管教情境分別為：（1）課堂上及反覆發生的違規行為；（2）學習意願低落；（3）同儕糾紛。針對研究一結果，研究二目的在搜集正向管教得獎教師在前三類困擾情境中之管教策略，針對27 位參加教育部正向管教範例徵選獲獎之國中教師進行開放性問卷調查，將所得資料進行內容分析，依照各情境回覆內容編碼成七個主類目，分別為：（1）確實有效運用規範；（2）教師充分運用輔導技巧解決問題；（3）教導學生建立責任心並接受管教；（4）教師身教運用教學技巧並進行自我反思；（5）發揮同儕的影響力；（6）善用支持系統；（7）事後追蹤。最後，整理出一套教師正向管教有效策略流程圖，提出具體建議做為相關單位與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this research was to investigate how positive discipline awarded teachers use effective strategies in disturbing discipline situations. There were two studies in this research. The first study collected discipline situations from a purposive sample of 30 teachers who teach in junior high schools with questionnaires, and identified top three disturbing discipline situations as: (a) disbehaviors in class and other repeated disbehaviors, (b) lower willingness to learn, and (c) disputements between peers. Based on the findings of the first study, the second study collected discipline strategies from 27 teachers who won the Positive Discipline Award with open-ended questionnaires. It was found that the most effective strategies in the top three disturbing discipline situations were: (a) use regulation effectively, (b) use counseling skills to solve problems, (c) instruct students to take responsibility for the consequences of their misbehaviors and accept discipline, (d) be a role model for students and use teaching skills effectively, (e) exert peer influence, (f) make good use of supporting systems, and (g) track afterward. Finally, a process chart of positive discipline was developed, concrete suggestions for teachers and education authorities were provided, and directions for future studies were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：159-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201509173篇名：國小二步驟四則混合文字題解歷程技巧學習診斷評量之編製發展與實測分析研究並列篇名：The Development and Analysis of Process Skills Diagnostic Assessment for Third Graders’ Learning on Word Problem Solving作者：許家驊(Chia-Hua Hsu)關鍵字：文字題解題學習評量;文字題解題學習診斷處方;文字題解題歷程技巧;assessment of word problem solving (WPS);diagnosis and prescription of WPS;the process skills of WPS期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究參照文字題解題歷程成份技巧並搭配各版本二步驟四則混合單元主題學習內容題型結構分析後編製評量，採合目標與叢集取樣並依各版本單元學習不同出現時間抽取嘉義縣市三四年級學生954 人，施測後分兩群並依解題技巧及題型向度分別進行分析（含信效度交叉驗證）。主成份分析、試探性與驗證性因素分析發現二因子技巧結構（基本解題及數量辨識）、二因子題型結構（二步驟四則相同及不同運算程序混合），且構念效度及效標關聯同時效度均屬良好。此外信度及鑑別力亦均良好。而不同解題表現學生之解題技巧及題型實測表現均具顯著差異，其剖面訊息亦具診斷處方功能。英文摘要：The theme of this study was to develop the Process Skills Diagnostic Assessment (PSDA) for two-step word problem of four-algorithm compounded through componential and content analyses. Subjects were composed of 954 third graders from Chiayi by convenient and cluster sampling. They were administered the PSDA. The results of analyses showed good validity, reliability, and discrimination power. Finally, it provided group comparisons, diagnostic profile and prescriptions.起始頁-結束頁：185-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201511044篇名：對的風格遇上對的人，謂之創意－人格特質、認知風格與兩類創造力之關係探討並列篇名：How creative you will be depends on who you are: The relationship between personality traits, cognitive styles and different types of creativity作者：劉珈妤(Chia-Yu Liu);林緯倫(Wei-Lun Lin);蔡秉勳(Ping-Hsun Tsai)關鍵字：人格特質;創造力;認知風格;雙系統理論;personality trait;creativity;cognitive style;dual process theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去在創造力的個別差異研究裡，少有實徵研究同時探究人格特質和認知風格對創造力的影響；此外，過去相關研究也常將不同類型的創造力作業混為一談。根據創造力的雙系統論（Lin & Lien,2013a）和雙重認知風格理論（Sadler-Smith, 2009），經驗式的認知風格與開放式的創造力有關；封閉式的創造力則涉及理性、經驗兼併的通用型認知風格。據此，本研究即區分兩類創造力（開放式／封閉式），並同時探討創造性人格特質和認知風格在兩類創造力中扮演的角色。結果發現，創造性人格特質與兩類創造力表現皆有正相關，但不同的認知風格對兩類創造力表現的關係不同。進一步分析發現，人格特質對兩類創造力作業表現的正向效果，會受到不同認知風格的影響，人格特質透過通用認知風格的中介影響封閉式創造力的表現；而開放式創造力則較受經驗認知風格影響，其中在流暢力指標裡，經驗認知風格更扮演了中介的角色。本研究結果有助於釐清人格特質、認知風格與創造力的關係，對於創意應用或教學亦具實質的意義與幫助。英文摘要：Past studies on individual differences in creativity rarely explored empirically the joint effect of personality traits and cognitive styles on creativity. Moreover, past studies often mixed different types of creative performance. According to the dual process account of creativity theory (Lin & Lien, 2013) and the duplex model of cognitive style theory (Sadler-Smith, 2009), experiential cognitive style may be associated with open-ended creativity; whereas closed-ended creativity may involve versatile cognitive style that combines experiential and rational cognitive styles. This study aimed to separate two types of creativity (open-ended and closed-ended) and investigate the role of personality traits and cognitive styles on the two types of creativity. The results showed that creative personality traits were positively correlated with both types of creativity, but different cognitive styles had different relationships with different types of creativity. Further analyses revealed that versatile cognitive style played a mediating role only on the relationship between personality traits and closed-ended creativity, but not on the relationship between personality traits and open-ended creativity. Open-ended creativity was instead more associated with experiential cognitive style. In particular, experiential cognitive style mediated the relationship between personality traits and fluency. These results clarify the relationships between personality traits, cognitive styles, and creativity, and have implication on teaching and creativity applications.起始頁-結束頁：211-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201512025篇名：影響教師生涯成功的背景變項、內外控特質及生涯人際能力並列篇名：On Teachers' Background, Internal-external Locus of Control, and Interpersonal Competencies for Career作者：楊育儀(Peter Yang)關鍵字：內外控;生涯人際能力;生涯成功;背景變項效應;教師生涯;internal-external locus of control;interpersonal competencies for career;career success;demographic effects;teaching career期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在探究現階段教師的生涯人際能力現況，以及和聚合式社會資本、和橋接式社會資本有關兩大向度生涯人際能力對於生涯成功指標之影響，同時分析背景變項和內外控特質等個別差異因素。研究對象：122 位國小教師；研究工具：內外控量表、生涯人際能力量表、生涯成功量表；研究分析方法：採用Mplus 6 進行結構方程模式分析。研究結果發現所得資料和假設模式之間的適配度高，其中和聚合式社會資本有關的生涯人際能力有助於教師生涯成功，而和橋接式社會資本有關者的影響並不顯著。有無子女、是否擔任行政主管等背景變項及內控特質的解釋力較高：有子女、內控顯著地正向影響和鞏固聚合式社會資本能力有關的生涯人際能力，同時正向影響生涯成功，外控的影響則反之；雖然是否擔任行政主管影響教師評估自身和橋接式社會資本有關的生涯人際能力，但卻未帶來生涯成功感受。根據這些結果，本研究提出賡續研究及教師生涯管理和友善校園經營之建議。英文摘要：The study examined 122 primary school teachers' career success, and its relations with background variables, internal-external locus of control, and interpersonal competencies for career (bonding and bridging social capital). Methodologically, structural equation modeling by Mplus was carried out to assess the fit of the hypothesized model. The results showed that the model fit the data well after a slight modification. Three major conclusions were drawn. Firstly, teachers' perceived career success was positively related to their interpersonal competencies for bonding social capital for career. Secondly, having a child (children) and internal locus of control positively contributed to teachers' interpersonal competencies for bonding social capital for career, while the competencies were negatively related with the external locus of control. Teachers' career success was positively related to interpersonal competencies for bonding social capital for career. Thirdly, teachers' interpersonal competencies for bridging social capital for career was positively related to the status of having a child (children) and having a managerial position, as well as to the internal locus of control. However, teachers' career success was not significantly related to their interpersonal competencies for bridging social capital. Implications for contemporary teachers' career development, career management and quality of work life were addressed.起始頁-結束頁：229-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201512246篇名：大學生消沉傾向量表之發展研究並列篇名：The Development of Self-affliction Tendency Scal作者：吳珮瑀(Pei-Yu Wu);林清文(Ching-Wen Lin);陸洛(Luo Lu)關鍵字：消沉傾向量表;複核效化;驗證性因素分析;Self-affliction Tendency Scale;cross-validation;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要依據Church 與Brooks（2009）有關隱微自殺（subtle suicide）概念編製「消沉傾向量表」。消沉傾向量表共有30 題，在信效度考驗上共進行內部一致性信度、再測信度、建構效度、複核效化及效標關聯效度等考驗。以大學生為研究對象，研究樣本來自全台10 所大專校院在學學生，總計包含2,679 位大學生。研究結果發現，消沉傾向量表具有良好信效度，在多次內部一致性信度考驗，全量表信度係數介於 .94- .96，各分量表介於 .76- .96。各分量表組合信度皆達.70以上，平均變異萃取量均在 .30 以上，題項間具有適度的共同變異，SMC（Squared MultipleCorrelations）佳。間隔2 週測量穩定係數為 .89，間隔3 週為 .72。信度考驗結果顯示消沉傾向量表具備良好一致性和穩定性。以結構方程模式統計方法進行驗證性因素分析，結果支持消沉傾向量表評量的因素結構與實徵資料間的適配度佳。複核效化分析結果，顯示建模樣本與效度樣本的指標相似度高，支持消沉傾向量表評量的跨樣本穩定性。在消沉傾向與相關概念間關係，研究結果均支持消沉傾向量表評量具備合理的聚斂效度與區分效度。依據研究結果，本研究提出消沉傾向量表運用與發展之建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to develop the Self-affliction Tendency Scale (SATS) for college students. Based on phenomenon observed and literature reviewed, the authors proposed a framework for studying the concept of “self-affliction” as a tendency of self-destruction in various aspects ranging from cognitive, emotional, behavioral, to interpersonal relationships. The SATS is comprised of 30 items in 7-point Likert-type scale and can be completed between 5 to 10 minutes. It included four dimensions: existential alienation, dysfunction, poor self-care, and contradictory relationship. The values of reliability and validity on the SATS were calculated from a sample of 2,679, all of which were Taiwanese undergraduate college students from ten universities. Accordingly, the internal consistency reliability (N = 172~1,050), test-retest reliability (N = 66 and 98), construct validity (N = 470), cross-validation (N = 519), and criterion-related validity of the developed scale (N = 172~1,050) were evaluated. Seven tests were conducted to relate the 4-dimension model to various psychological issues in the Taiwanese society. These issues included self-esteem, mental health, internet addiction, loneliness, depression, and happiness. Descriptive statistics, including means, variances, and item-total correlations, were computed for each item. The Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, one-factor repeated measures analysis of variance, and discriminant analysis were conducted to differentiate the similarity and difference between variables. Internal consistency of the scores on SES and its subscales was estimated by Cronbach’s coefficient alpha (full scale was .94~.96, subscale of existential alienation was .81~.86, subscale of dysfunction was .93~.96, subscale of poor self-care was .76~.84, and subscale of contradictory relationship was .82~.90). Stability coefficient was based on 2 test-retest procedures (an interval of 2 weeks was .89, and an interval of 3 weeks was .72). Validation of the SATS was based on a 4-dimension model, followed by cross-validation on the calibration sample (N = 470) and validation sample (N = 519). Confirmatory factor analysis indicated that the model was well supported by observed data and the stability of the model was confirmed. The result had supported the scale structure. These evidences thus generally supported the 4-dimension self-affliction model. Applications of the SATS and the suggestions of future study were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：253-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201601257篇名：臺灣原住民居住地透過教育、職業、收入與社會支持對心理健康之影響並列篇名：Influence of Residence Regions of Indigenous Peoples in Taiwan on their Mental Health through Education, Occupation, Income, and Social Support作者：游宗輝(Tsung-Hui Yu);黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：心理健康;居住地;原住民;教育;mental health;residence;indigenous peoples;education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：由於原住民樣本不足，過去研究很少針對全臺灣原住民之心理健康與居住地之關連性進行量化分析；本研究運用2007 年「臺灣原住民社會變遷及政策評估研究問卷調查之抽樣與執行」之原住民樣本資料（N = 2057），探討原住民居住地透過中介變項教育、職業、收入與社會支持對心理健康的影響。研究發現顯示：在平均教育、職業及收入上，原鄉明顯低於都市，但進一步地控制個人背景變項後，原鄉與都市間教育的差距消失了，反而更顯現出原本職業地位就最高的平地鄉鎮職業之優勢。至於中介變項對心理健康之影響，除了教育對心理健康有不小的顯著正影響外，職業、收入與社會支持影響都不顯著。在原住民心理健康表現上，三個居住地的原住民無顯著差異。英文摘要：Due to small sample sizes, previous studies on indigenous people in Taiwan seldom conducted quantitative analyses to describe the relationship between residence region and mental health of indigenous peoples in Taiwan. This study used the sample data of indigenous people (N = 2057) of “Sampling and Implementation of Questionnaire Survey on Social Changes and Policy Assessment of Indigenous Peoples in Taiwan” in 2007 to investigate the influence of residences of indigenous peoples on their mental health through intervening variables of education, occupation, income, and social support. This study found indigenous people in townships had a lower educational level, occupation status, and income than those in urban areas. However, when individual background variables were controlled, the education gap between townships and urban area disappeared, and the occupations that were advantageous in plain townships became more remarkable. While education had a highly significant positive influence on mental health, the influence of occupation, income, and social support on mental health were insignificant. Moreover, there was no significant difference in mental health among indigenous people in the three residence areas.起始頁-結束頁：279-301資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201601268篇名：培育科學教學創造力：科學教學創新要素之探究並列篇名：On Exploring Factors for Creative Science Teaching作者：林偉文(Wei-Wen Lin);劉家瑜(Chia-Yu Liu)關鍵字：科學教學;教學創新;創造力;創意教學;creative teaching;creativity;instructional innovation;science teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：教學創新是有效達成科學教學目標的重要途徑之一，若能抽繹出科學教學創新歷程中的核心要素，作為教學創新的鷹架，將能幫助更多教師發展教學創新。因此，本研究從教師思考層面，改變教師對教學之思維，抽取科學教學創新的核心要素，並將其轉化為教師創新教學設計的工具，以培育科學教師的教學創造力。本研究根據林偉文與劉家瑜（2013）訪談九位科學創意教師與科學創意教案分析所得之22 個科學教學創新要素，邀請14 位科學教育領域專家，進行兩回合德懷術問卷調查。研究結果發現，專家對於22 個要素科學教學創新要素的重要性具有共識，其中「融入生活議題」、「轉抽象為具體」、「跨領域整合＼主題統整＼科技與人文整合」、「多元評量」、「運用問題引導」與「培養觀察、獨立思考與問題解決的能力」等六項，是具最高共識之重要指標項目。冀能透過教學創新要素之建構，協助教師發展教學創新。英文摘要：Creative teaching is one of the effective ways to achieve the learning goals. If we could extract the critical factors from creative teaching process, we may offer support to teachers who desire to develop their creative teaching in a more effective way. Therefore, the main purpose of the current study is to explore the factors of creative science teaching and to improve teachers' creative teaching ability. A structured Delphi questionnaire was developed based on the interviews of nine creative science-teachers and analysis of creative science-teaching programs (Lin & Liu, 2013). A two-round Delphi questionnaire survey was conducted to collect opinions from 14 scholars and teachers of science education to explore the factors of creative science teaching. Results indicated that among all the 22 creative science teaching factors, 6 factors were regarded as the most important: connect teaching to daily life, transform abstract to concrete, adopt cross-discipline/themes, use multiple assessments, use inquiry-based learning, as well as foster the ability of observing, independent thinking independently, and problem-solving. The results can be employed as guidelines and tools for teachers who desire to develop their own creative teaching programs in their careers.起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201504229篇名：依附、因應策略和青少年生活適應困擾之中介模式分析研究並列篇名：Attachment, Coping, and Adolescent Adjustment Problems: Examining Three Competing Mediation Models作者：王櫻芬(Ying-Fen Wang);李欣潔(Hsin-Chieh Li);王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);吳若慈(Jo-Tzu Wu)關鍵字：父母依附;因應策略;青少年;生活適應困擾;adjustment problems;adolescent;attachment;coping期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討青少年的因應策略使用在依附與生活適應困擾間的中介角色，共招募519名高中／職一年級學生參與研究。研究者採用多變量分析、積差相關和結構方程模式進行統計分析，研究發現（1）男生的母親依附逃避較女生高，消極因應則較女生低，其他變項無顯著性別差異；（2）雙親依附焦慮和依附逃避與因應策略的使用之關聯，依因應策略不同而有差異；（3）雙親依附焦慮和依附逃避與青少年的適應困擾，呈顯著低度正相關；（4）消極因應策略的使用與生活適應困擾，呈顯著中度正相關，其餘因應策略則與生活適應困擾呈顯著負相關；（5）對雙親的依附逃避可以透過積極和消極因應策略，間接影響生活適應困擾；（6）對母親的依附焦慮可直接影響生活適應困擾，亦可透過積極和消極因應策略，間接影響自陳生活適應困擾；（7）對父親的依附焦慮可直接影響生活適應困擾，並透過消極因應策略，間接影響生活適應困擾；（8）父親依附焦慮無法透過積極因應，間接影響生活適應困擾。根據研究結果，研究者建議實務工作者，針對父親依附焦慮高和母親依附焦慮高的青少年，採取不同的介入方案，以降低依附焦慮對其適應的不良影響。英文摘要：The purpose of the current study was to explore the mediating effects of copingon the relation between parental attachment and adolescent adjustment problems among Taiwanese adolescents. Five hundred and nineteen 10^(th) graders participated in this study, and the structural equation modeling technique was applied to analyze the data. The results indicated that different coping strategies correlated differently to parental attachment and that passive coping was significantly and positively related to adjustment problems while other coping strategies were negatively related to adjustment problems. Most importantly, attachment avoidance toward parents had significant indirect effects on adolescent adjustment problems through active coping and passive coping. Also, maternal attachment anxiety had both direct and indirect effects on adjustment problems through active coping and passive coping. On the other hand, paternal attachment anxiety had both direct and indirect effects on adjustment problem only through passive coping, but not active coping. Based on these findings, the authors recommend that interventions should be tailored to fit different needs of adolescents with high levels of paternal attachment anxiety and those with high levels of maternal attachment anxiety.起始頁-結束頁：15-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015050810篇名：從“隱性－顯性”角度理解兒童分配正義概念的發展並列篇名：Understanding Children's Conceptual Development of Distributive Justice along the Implicit-Explicit Dimension作者：徐華女(Hua-Nu Xu);黃蘊智(Wan-Chi Wong)關鍵字：分配正義概念;兒童期;表徵重述模型;道德發展;childhood;concept of distributive justice;moral development;Representational Redescription model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究基於表徵重述模型，從“隱性–顯性”角度探討5-9 歲兒童分配正義概念的發展。受試者（N = 42）首先在7 個假設情境中完成分配任務並解釋分配理由（分配行<U+7232>反映概念掌握的隱性水平：水平I；言語解釋反映較高的顯性水平：水平E2/3），並於判斷任務中想像自己是法官來判斷他人分配的適切性（判斷表現反映顯性水平的初始形態：水平E1）。在接受關於上述情境中適切分配方案（以圖示呈現）的回饋後，受試者完成另一組分配任務並作出解釋。結果顯示，受試者在平等和公平概念的掌握水平上，分配行<U+7232>和判斷任務上的表現顯著高於言語解釋上的表現。對需要、按同理心分配和整合正義三類概念而言，含回饋後數據的分析顯示，分配行<U+7232>上的表現顯著高於言語解釋上的表現。總體上，受試者對五類分配正義子概念的掌握具有“隱性–顯性”表徵水平的差異。回饋促進了受試者對平等、需要和按同理心分配的顯性掌握。相對於5 歲組，7 歲和9 歲組在平等、公平和整合正義概念的掌握上顯著具較佳表現。英文摘要：Based on the Representational Redescription model (Karmiloff-Smith, 1992), the present study investigated children's conceptual development of distributive justice along the implicit-explicit dimension. In this microdevelopmental study, forty-two children aged 5 to 9 years were asked to complete the distribution tasks and to provide verbal explanations for seven hypothetical scenarios in the first step. They were then invited to complete the judgment task of imagining themselves as judges who had to evaluate the appropriateness of a child's distributions in the seven scenarios. After making their judgment, the children received feedback on the appropriate distributions in the seven scenarios, which was presented in visual form as decisions of a large group of judges. In the last phase, the children completed another set of distribution tasks for seven similar scenarios and provided verbal explanations. Concerning the concepts of ”equality” and ”equity”, children's performances were significantly higher on distribution behavior and judgment than on verbal explanation. Regarding the concepts of ”need” and ”integrated conception of justice”, there were no significant differences in children's performances on distribution behavior, judgment, or verbal explanation; however, analysis including the data collected after feedback revealed significantly better performances on distribution behavior than verbal explanation. The same result was attained in a similar analysis in the post-feedback stage with regard to the concept of ”distribution based on empathy”. Overall, children's mastery of each subconcept of distributive justice showed differences in their representations along the implicit-explicit dimension. It is noteworthy that the effect of feedback was supported by the improvement in children's mastery of the concepts of ”equality”, ”need”, and ”distribution based on empathy” in the explicit representation. In the analysis of developmental trends by age, the 7-and 9-year-olds performed significantly better than did the 5-year-olds in their mastery of the concepts of ”equality”, ”equity”, and ”integrated conception of justice”. By introducing a new theoretical and methodological approach to the study of children's conceptual understanding of distributive justice, we found differentiated forms of implicit and explicit representations of distributive justice. This approach also enables the refined analyses of children's developmental patterns with regard to the subconcepts of distributive justice along the implicit-explicit dimension. Taking consideration of the effects of the feedback on the development of children's concept of distributive justice, this study sheds light on the practice of moral education by reminding us that children may acquire implicit understanding without educators' explicit verbal explanation.起始頁-結束頁：37-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015070811篇名：網路成癮的診斷準則與評估工具：發展歷史與未來方向並列篇名：The Diagnostic Criteria and Assessment Tools for Internet Addiction: Historical Context and Future Directions作者：施香如(Hsiang-Ju Shih);許韶玲(Shao-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：評估工具;診斷準則;網路成癮;assessment tools;diagnostic criteria;internet addiction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在透過文獻回顧，統整近二十年來網路成癮的診斷準則與評估工具的論述與應用情形，並嘗試在此發展脈絡中提出對未來實證研究與臨床實務的具體建議。在網路成癮多元且紛歧的學術命名下，我們分別以物質依賴、衝動控制疾患及有問題的網路使用三類診斷準則來檢視其視框，並加入近期有關代償性的網路使用與腦造影／神經心理的研究發現，以整理網路成癮的診斷指標之發展現況；再針對目前常見的評估工具之心理計量實證研究進行檢視，以探討相關工具的可用性。研究結果發現：網路成癮雖與許多心理疾病有共病的現象，但不宜以精神病理指標作為診斷的唯一依歸，發展已久的評估工具雖已藉由各種方法驗證其心理計量品質，然而迄今仍未達成共識，而評估工具的應用也由單一量表轉向多元向度與方式。我們建議未來研究應納入使用者的經驗作為理解此現象的主軸概念，並據以發展出概念化模式來確認網路成癮的核心構念及發展歷程，以重新省思診斷指標與評估工具的發展與運用。在臨床實務工作上則宜全面性地理解網路成癮者的經驗，並據以針對網路成癮者的動機、需求與行為特徵，提供可行的治療方向與策略。英文摘要：This paper aimed to sort out the development and application of the diagnostic criteria and assessment tools of internet addiction through reviewing and integrating related empirical and conceptual studies. We also offer future directions for research andclinical practice on this issue. After reviewing the diagnostic criteria and related assessment tools from the threeaspects of ”substance abuse”, ”impulsive control disorder” and ”problematic internet use”,wealso included the compensatory use and neuropsychological /neuroimaging research findingsto obtain a picture of how the diagnostic indicators developed. We found that there were many psychiatric disordersassociated with internet addiction, butits diagnostic indicators cannot be developed solely based on the perspective of mental disorder. The psychometric properties of the assessment tools were validicated by many studies, but no concensus have been reached. The application of assessment tools shifted from a single scale to a package of tools with muti-dimensions and multiple assessing methods. Based onsuch findings, we recommend toinclude the experience of internet users as the foundational concepts for understanding the phenomenon of internet addiction, and propose a conceptual model to validate its constructs and formation process. Both the diagnostic criteria and assessment tools need to be reinvestigated. The clinician should obtain information from multiple perspectives of problematic internet users' life experincesto offer interventions focused on their motivation, needs, and behavioral characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：53-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015091512篇名：後悔與生活適應：自我關愛及自我批評之雙路徑中介效果檢驗並列篇名：Regret and Psychological Adjustment: An Examination of the Dual-Route Mediating Effect of Self-Compassion and Self-Judgment作者：鄭怡(Yi Cheng);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：反芻;生活適應;自我關懷;省思;後悔;psychological adjustment;reflection;regret;rumination;self-compassion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去關於後悔的研究，大多針對後悔事件的類型進行分析，或探討個體的認知特性，來解釋後悔的發生率以及如何影響正負向的適應結果。但是作者認為這些文獻忽略了個體在後悔情緒中，往往也經歷著一個自我對話的過程：個體會審視著自己所做的行為及這些行為所帶來的後果，或者反省，或者耽溺，或者勉勵，或者責備。在這樣的對話過程中，個體與自己對話著的自我究竟要以什麼樣的態度，又與自己形成怎樣的關連，這種對話的方式應該是影響適應很重要的關鍵因素。本研究嘗試以不同的自我關愛因素來描述前述自我對話的過程，並假設其為後悔與適應之間的中介因素。研究結果顯示，個體在面對後悔事件時，省思之所以能夠帶來良好的適應狀況，是以自我關愛為中介歷程；另一方面，反芻則是透過自我批評使個體困於後悔情緒進而影響生活適應。作者同時也延伸討論自我關愛在個體面對負向事件時自我整合所可能扮演的角色。英文摘要：Past research on regret mostly discussed the effects of various types of regretted events or investigated individual differences on some cognitive characteristics to explain why regret leads to psychological well-being or illness. The authors argued that the literature on regret ignored the emotional processes in which individuals often undergo a back-and-forth self-talk. An individual examines one's own behaviors and the consequences of one's own doings in the forms of reflection, rumination, encouragement, or blame. In such a dialogue, an individual establishes different types of relationship with oneself, which might be a very important key to understand the way in which regret impacts psychological adjustment. In this study, we used two factors of self-compassion to index the processes of self-talk, and hypothesized that different self-compassion factors mediated the relationships between regret and psychological adjustment. The results showed that when facing regret, decent reflections increased self-compassion, which in turn increased well-being; on the other hand, it is through self-judgment which made ruminating individuals trapped in regretful mood and in turn negatively impacted well-being. The authors also discussed the role self-compassion could play when facing negative events and how self-integration is possible.起始頁-結束頁：77-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015092513篇名：大專學生工作價值組合量表之編製及信效度研究並列篇名：The Development of the Work Value Assembly Scale for College Students作者：程姿螢(Tzu-Ying Cheng);張詠婷(Yung-Tim Chang);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：工作價值觀量表;大學生;質性研究;探索性因素分析;驗證性因素分析;college students;Exploratory Factor Analysis;Confirmatory Factor Analysis;qualitative research;work values scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在探討並建立試用於台灣大學生之工作價值組合量表（Work Value Assembly, WVA），初步量表編製採用質性研究中的焦點團體訪談法蒐集254 個和工作價值有關的描述句，逐步進行題目的編寫及修改後歸納出7 個因素，分別命名為「利他取向」、「人際互動」、「社會尊嚴」、「安定舒適」、「專業成長」、「自我實現」及「自主彈性」。研究量表預試的參與者為629 位大學生，並以探索性因素分析（Exploratory Factor Analysis, EFA）剔除不適合之題目，經篩選後，各分量表皆保留6 題，全量表共42 題，進一步的，另以592 位大學生為正式問卷施測樣本，分析結果顯示，在信度考驗上，內部一致性信度（Cronbach''''s α）介於 .84 至 .91 之間，兩週後的再測信度係數介於 .67 至 .83 之間，在效度考驗上，透過驗證性因素分析（Confirmatory Factor Analysis, CFA），各項模式適配度指標皆落在理想範圍內。根據此結果顯示，WVA 量表在量測台灣大學生其工作價值觀上，具有良好的信度與效度。最後，本研究根據研究結果進行討論，並提出對學校教育與研究上的建議。英文摘要：The aim of this study is to investigate and establish a Work Value Assembly (WVA) scale for assessing Taiwanese college students. The scale was initially constructed using qualitative research methodology, conducting focus group interviews to collect 254 descriptive sentences related to work values. Following step-by-step editing and revision, the items were categorized into seven factors: ”Prosocial,” ”Interpersonal,” ”Prestige,” ”Comfort,” ”Professional Growth,” ”Self-actualization,” and ”Autonomy.” A total of 629 college students participated in the pretest. Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) was utilized to eliminate unsuitable items. After screening, each scale factor included six items, the scale had a total of 42 reliable items. Next, another group of 592 college students participated in a formal test. Internal consistency reliability (Cronbach's α) ranged from .84 to .91. In a retest two weeks later, test-retest reliability coefficients ranged from .67 to .83. In terms of validity, Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) showed that goodness-of-fit indices all fell within an ideal range. Based on these results, the WVA scale showed good reliability and validity in measuring the work values of Taiwanese college students. Lastly, we discussed the results, made recommendations to school counselors, and offered suggestions for further research.起始頁-結束頁：91-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015102014篇名：情緒言談共讀技巧介入訓練對幼兒情緒認知及情緒調節能力之影響並列篇名：Effects of Parent-Child Emotion Talk Skills Intervention on Kindergartners' Emotional Understanding and Emotion Regulation作者：顏嘉辰(Chia-Chen Yen);翟敏如(Min-Ju Tsai)關鍵字：情緒言談;情緒認知;情緒調節;對話式情緒言談共讀技巧;dialogical reading for emotion-laden books;emotional language;emotional regulation;emotion understanding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討家長情緒言談共讀技巧介入訓練對幼兒情緒認知及情緒調節能力之影響。採準實驗研究設計，以臺南市三間公立幼兒園大班，共59名幼兒為研究對象，分為實驗組一家長接受對話式情緒言談共讀技巧介入訓練，並與幼兒共讀情緒繪本；實驗組二家長未接受對話式情緒言談共讀技巧介入訓練，但與幼兒共讀情緒繪本；控制組家長未接受對話式情緒言談共讀技巧介入訓練，並與幼兒共讀動物生態繪本。每週親子共讀2本繪本，合計16本，三組於實驗處理前後，採用一對一情緒認知測驗、幼兒情緒發展量表（內含幼兒情緒認知分量表及情緒調節分量表）（家長版）及（教師版）進行施測。本研究主要發現為：（1）於不同組別的實驗設計，分析3份量表的前後測成績，發現各組有顯著差異；（2）在所有幼兒情緒認知測驗結果分析上，均發現實驗組一顯著優於控制組，但僅在一對一情緒認知測驗和幼兒情緒認知分量表（教師版）發現實驗組一顯著優於實驗組二，並且在幼兒情緒認知分量表（教師版）上，僅發現實驗組二顯著優於控制組；（3）在兩種幼兒情緒調節量表結果分析分析上，均發現實驗組一顯著優於實驗組二和控制組，同時實驗組二亦顯著優於控制組。最後，依本研究結果給予未來研究親子情緒言談共讀技巧訓練提出具體建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of parent-child discussion skills on kindergartners' emotional understanding and emotion regulation. Fifty-ninechildren, 5 to 6 years of age, and their parents participated. A quasi-experimental method was adoptedin this study. Three classrooms of participants were divided into 3 groups: experimental group 1, who recieved training in dialogical reading skills for emotion-laden books and engaged in shared reading of emotion-laden books; experimental group 2, who engaged in shared reading of emotion-laden books without discussion training, and acontrol group who engaged in shared reading of books about animals whitout discussion training. Parents and children engaged in shared reading of two books each week, reading a total of 16 books. The 3 groups were administrated pre- and post-tests, which included the Chiniese version of Test of Emotion Comprehension (TEC)and the teacher and parent versions of Children Emotional Development Scale (CEDS). The results of the study are listed as follows: (1) there were significant differences between five measurements; (2) experimental group 1 wassignificantly better than the control group in three measurements of emotional understanding, experiment group 1 wassignificantly better than experiment 2 only on TEC and teacher version of CEDS, and experiment group 2 wassignificantly better than the control group only on the teacher version of CEDS; (3)on two measurements of emotion regulation,experiment group 1 wassignificantly better than experiment group 2 and control group, experiment group 2 wassignificantly better than the control group as well. Suggestions for parent emotional talk skills training program were provided for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：113-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015103015篇名：憂鬱症團體領導者心理位移之影響分析研究並列篇名：The Influence of Psychological Displacement Paradigm in Diary-writing on Leaders of Depression Support Groups作者：李素芬(Su-Fen Lee);金樹人(Shuh-Ren Jin)關鍵字：心理位移;心理位移書寫法;團體領導者;憂鬱症團體;depression support group;group leaders;psychological displacement;psychological displacement paradigm in diary-writing（PDPD）期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討憂鬱症團體領導者心理位移之影響。資料來源為11位憂鬱症團體領導者運用心理位移書寫法書寫團體經驗之102份文本，及其經過8-10次書寫後接受個別訪談所得之22小時逐字稿的部分資料。資料分析以現象學取向分析方法進行，結果發現團體領導者透過心理位移：（一）在自我層面產生了「自我覺察」、「自我運作」以及「自我安頓」等三個影響，且各自有其內涵；同時也發現到達「自我安頓」之三個不同影響脈絡。（二）在團體層面產生的影響，包括改變對團體的詮釋或態度、改變對團體的介入行為、改變對成員的觀點或態度、改變對團體領導者角色與功能的認定、增加對團體動力的覺察與理解、協助準備進入下次團體、減少與協同領導者風格不同之衝擊及減少對非結構性團體的焦慮；（三）發現從團體到自我，再從自我到團體或者透過自我改變帶出團體改變之影響脈絡。文末針對研究結果進行討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this research was to understand the influence of psychological displacement paradigm in diary-writing(PDPD) on leaders of depression support groups. Participants of the study included 11 non-structured depression support group leaders. Data were collected from two sources: writing-diaries of group leaders after each session using first-person pronoun first, and then narrated the same event using second-person pronoun, and finally with a third-person’s perspective; and individual interviews with participants after 8 to 10 diary-writings. A total of 102 writing diaries and 22 hours of transcripts were collected and analyzed by phenomenon-oriented methodology, and the results found that: 1） Influences on the self level: results found that PDPD influenced on the level of self-awareness, self-operation, and self-containment. Further analysis also finds that all 3 levels were inter-correlated .2）Influences on the group level: Of which includes changes towards group members, group dynamics, interpretations, attitudes, and interventions; changes the concept of the roles and functions of the group leader; help the group leader to prepare next group and reduce the impact of different styles with co-leader. Further analysis also found that the level of self and group were inter-correlated. Finally, results were discussed and suggestions were addressed.起始頁-結束頁：473-499資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015031916篇名：融入宗教／靈性的基督徒諮商員教育課程之成果評估並列篇名：Teaching a Course on Integrating Religion/Spirituality into Counseling for Christian Counselors作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan);詹杏如(Shing-Ru Chan)關鍵字：基督徒諮商員;課程評估;融入宗教／靈性的諮商員教育課程;Christian counselors;course evaluation;course on integratingreligion/spirituality into counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究的目的為對基督徒諮商員設計一個融入宗教／靈性於諮商的課程，並了解參與成員對此課程的收穫與反應。共有23名基督徒諮商員參與本課程，女性21名，男性2名。課程目標有四：1.協助基督徒諮商員對信仰與靈性的自我探索與覺察；2.增加基督徒諮商員對台灣社會文化的多樣化宗教與靈性行為的認識；3.提升基督徒諮商員對在諮商中的宗教信仰與靈性議題的敏感度、了解與接納；4.提升基督徒諮商員對案主（含基督徒與非基督徒案主）的宗教／靈性評估與介入處理的實務能力。根據課程目標共設計十個主題，每個主題三小時，全部課程共計30小時。成員的反應資料來自於期中與期末共六個焦點團體對成員的訪談。研究結果顯示成員的收穫包括：增加個人宗教／靈性覺察、體悟提升諮商師宗教／靈性有助於諮商接案、澄清融入宗教／靈性的諮商倫理、認識宗教、靈性與不同宗教的異同、改變對宗教與靈性的態度、增加宗教／靈性處遇的能力、獲得專業夥伴支持與相互學習、朝向宗教／靈性與諮商整合的學習、對基督徒與非基督徒案主之諮商實務觀點與作法的改變。研究結果也發現成員對信仰自我表露的態度與作法，及成員對非基督徒案主工作的信仰價值衝突。文末提出討論與建議作為對未來相似課程設計的參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to introduce a course incorporatingreligion/spirituality into counseling for Christian counselors and to explore their feedbacks to the course. A total of 23 Christian counselors, 2 males and 21 females, participated in the study. The course included four goals which were to enhance counselors’ spiritual awareness, to increase the understanding of multi-religions in Taiwan, to enhance the sensitivity toward clients’ religious diversity, and to enhance the competencies of spiritual assessment and intervention. In order to reach the goals, 10 themes in 30 hours were included in the course. To explore the reactions of the participants toward the course, 6 focused groups were conducted in the middle and the end of the course. Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data. Results showed positive feedbacks. Participants increased spiritual awareness, gained insight about the positive impacts of counselor’s spirituality on their spiritual works, clarified the ethics of spiritually integrated counseling, discerned about the difference of religion and spirituality, changed attitude into positive toward religion and spirituality, increased competency of spiritual intervention, obtained mutual supports and learning from each other, moved toward the integration of spirituality and counseling, andchanged the perspectives and actions toward both Christian and non-Christian clients. Results also showed participants expressed the contexts of self-disclosure on spirituality, and concerned the value conflicts toward non-Christian clients. Recommendations for future course design and research were proposed in the end.起始頁-結束頁：501-523資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015040717篇名：中學生偏差行為組型的異質性分析：社會心理學觀點的詮釋並列篇名：An Investigation of the Heterogeneity of Deviant Subgroups among High School Students: An Interpretation from Sociopsychology作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin Wu)關鍵字：台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;次群體;偏差行為;潛在類別分析;deviance;latent class analysis;subgroups;TEPS期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：青少年群體中可能存在著異質性的次群體，反映出次群體成員不同的偏差行為組型。近來，國外研究採個人取向分析，確實發現了青少年群體在偏差行為表現上的異質性，但國內仍缺乏相關研究討論。國外研究亦指出，男女生會表現出不同的偏差行為組型，但對國內青少年而言，性別對偏差行為組型的影響仍未知。本研究目的主要在於：1. 檢視青少年群體在偏差行為上的異質性；2. 探究青少年次群體所表現出的偏差行為組型；3. 瞭解性別對不同次群體的影響。同時，也進一步比較偏差行為組型與性別影響在不同教育階段的異同。研究發現，在不同教育階段中，1. 青少年群體在偏差行為上確實存在著異質的次群體。2. 次群體間呈現出不盡相同的偏差行為組型；3. 整體而言，青少年女性較可能出現非對抗性的偏差行為，在偏差行為表現上也相對單純而短暫；反之，青少年男生則較可能出現包含對抗性行為之多重偏差行為組型，在偏差行為表現上較為複雜，部分偏差行為也具相對穩定性。英文摘要：There are subcultures existed in adolescent’s population, it may be form heterogeneous subgroups, and reflect distinct deviant patterns of subgroup membership. Recently, foreign researches adopted person-centered approaches and found the heterogeneity of deviance in adolescent’s population. However, there are dearth of domestic researches to investigate about it. Foreign researches also indicated different patterns of deviance between males and females. But, it is remain unclear the effect of gender on the patterns of deviance for domestic adolescents. The main purposes of present study were as following: (1) to examine the heterogeneity of deviance in adolescent’s population. (2) to investigate the patterns of deviance performed by adolescents’ subgroups. (3) to realize the effect of gender on different subgroups. Meanwhile, the comparisons of both the patterns of deviance and the effect of gender are made among education levels. Results indicated that, among education levels, (1) there are heterogeneous subgroups on deviance existed in adolescent’s population. (2) there are distinct deviant patterns appeared from among subgroups. (3) in general, girls are more likely presented non-confrontation deviance, and it is also relatively simple and transient than boys. In contrast, boys are more likely performed multiple deviant patterns including confrontation deviance than girls. The deviance is more complex and part of deviances are relatively stable.起始頁-結束頁：525-546資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015042318篇名：多功能語句完成測驗之發展研究並列篇名：The Development of Multifunctional Sentence Completion Test.作者：黃政昌(Cheng-Chang Huang)關鍵字：主題系列;族群系列;語句完成測驗;Sentence Completion Test;series of population;series of theme期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的是發展一套經濟有效的多功能語句完成測驗。研究程序包括，透過文獻分析以形成初稿題目、焦點團體討論修正成預試題目、5位專家學者的逐題與整體審查以確立正式題目、預試填答以確立測驗的可行性。最後，修改完成「族群系列」與「主題系列」的測驗組合，其中族群系列包括：國小版、國中版、高中職版、大學/研究生版、成人版、老人版及新住民版等7個版本；主題系列則包括：家庭適應版、學習適應版、生涯適應版、感情適應版、工作適應版、軍中適應版、婚姻適應版、教養適應版及疾病適應版等9個版本。各版本專家逐題審查的合格率全數到達100%，專家整體內容評鑑方面，所有版本題目之效度平均數為4.31以上（滿分5分），CVI平均為.86以上（1.00為最大值）表示本測驗工具有良好的專家內容效度；其次，正式題目再經過31位受測者共計填寫48份測驗版本，也發現大多符合編製預期，能理解題目意義且在20分鐘左右獨立填寫完成，進一步確認本測驗工具的可行性。英文摘要：The study aimed to develop an economic and effective Multifunctional Sentence Completion Test. The research process involved following steps: establishing initial items through literature review, revising initial items to previous test items by discussing from focus group, establishing formal items after one-by-one and overall examining by five experts, firming up the feasibility of the test by analyzing the result. Finally, two sets of tests were established: ”series of population” involved 7 versions of Sentence Completion Test, included population of elementary school, junior high school, vocational/high school, university/graduate school, adults, old people, and aboriginal; ”series of theme” involved 9 versions, included theme on family accommodation, learning accommodation, career accommodation, affections accommodation, work accommodation, military accommodation, marriage accommodation, raising accommodation, and illness accommodation. Acceptability (examining item-by-item by experts) of all tests was 100%. The average number of all tests on validity was above 4.31 (5 as full marks), and on CVI was above .86 (1.00 as maximum), which mean good content validity on this test. Moreover, the result of 48 formal Sentence Completion Tests finished by 31 subjects conformed with the expectation: subjects could understand the meaning of items, and could finish test within 20 minutes independently, which showed feasibility of this test.起始頁-結束頁：547-579資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015060119篇名：兩種線段圖表徵解題策略在學習成效上的比較並列篇名：The Comparison of Two Mathematics Problem-Solving Strategies of Line-Diagram Representations on Learning Achievements作者：黃一泓(Yi-Hung Huang);謝進泰(Jin-Tai Shie)關鍵字：表徵;認知負荷理論;線段圖;cognitive load theory;line diagram;representations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究探討國小六年級學童在「基準量與比較量」單元中，使用長度線段圖與成比例線段圖表徵的解題策略時，對學童所產生的認知負荷與學習成效的影響。研究者先以Schnotz 提出的文字與圖像理解的整合模式（integrated model of text and picture comprehension）為依據，分析兩種表徵解題策略的認知過程，並以認知負荷理論為基礎，探討兩者在認知負荷上的差異。研究方法採取真實驗設計，以三階段的實驗來驗證此分析的論點，並且得到下列結論：成比例線段圖表徵的解題策略在後測成績的表現顯著優於長度線段圖表徵的解題策略。然而，當學童學習「比與比值」單元後，兩種不同表徵解題策略在延宕測驗的表現並沒有顯著差異。最後，針對研究的結果，提出線段圖表徵解題策略在教學上的意義。英文摘要：This research is to study how the two mathematics problem-solving strategies, length and proportional line-diagram representations, affect sixth grade students’ cognitive load and learning performance during they study the unit of ”baseline and comparison”. The researchers adopted Schnotz’s integrated model of text and picture comprehension to analyze the cognitive process of studying worked examples with line diagram, and compare the differences in term of cognitive load between the two methods based on cognitive load theory. Then, the researcher conducted a three phases of true-experimental design to show the effectiveness of our analysis. The experimental results show that the proportional line-diagram condition performed significantly better than the length line-diagram condition on post-tests, and after the students had learned the unit of ”ratio”, the difference between the length line-diagram condition and the proportional line-diagram condition on delay-test are not significant. Finally, the researcher will provide some implications for the educational authorities, teachers, and future researches.起始頁-結束頁：581-601資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015060320篇名：以結構方程式探討大學生校園投入與憂鬱情緒關係模式並列篇名：The Effects of Campus Involvement on the Depressive Mood of College Students in Taiwan作者：潘宜均(Yi-Jiun Pan)關鍵字：人際投入;大學生;高等教育資料庫;憂鬱情緒;學術投入;academic involvement;college students;depressive mood;interpersonal involvement;Taiwan higher educational database期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究運用校園投入理論探討大學生的校園經驗對憂鬱情緒的影響，其目的是在了解大三學生的個人因素對學術投入、人際投入以及憂鬱情緒的直接影響，以及個人因素透過學術投入、人際投入兩個中介變項對於憂鬱情緒所造成的間接影響。以臺灣高等教育資料庫之94學年度大三學生問卷，共計23,700為研究樣本，經由結構方程模式分析後，整體模式所獲得的指數顯示模式可被接受；顯示校園投入理論可被用於解釋大學生憂鬱情緒。對整體效果的分析顯示，個人因素對於學術投入、人際投入與憂鬱情緒；學術投入對於人際投入、憂鬱情緒；與人際投入對憂鬱情緒皆有顯著影響；而這些影響除了可透過直接效果之外，個人因素對憂鬱情緒的影響路徑還可透過學術投入與人際投入；學術投入對憂鬱情緒的影響路徑還可透過人際投入的中介影響而形成。最後，本研究依據研究發現進行討論，並提出相關建議以供參考。英文摘要：Involvement theory is applied in this study to explore the effects of Taiwanese junior college students' campus involvement on depressive mood. The research aims to explore the relationships among personal factors, academic involvement, interpersonal involvement and depressive mood in university. The samples are drawn from the survey of juniors of 2005 academic year in the Taiwan Integrated Postsecondary Education Database (TIPED), in which a total of 23,700 are included in the sample. By using Structural Equation Model (SEM), the results show that the influence of personal factors on academic involvement, interpersonal involvement, and depressive mood, and academic involvement on interpersonal involvement and depressive mood, and interpersonal involvement on depressive mood are evident. Furthermore, academic involvement and interpersonal involvement have a significant mediating effect on the relationship between personal factors and depressive mood; and interpersonal involvement has a significant mediating effect on the relationship between academic involvement and depressive mood. Implications for educational practices and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：603-627資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015061101篇名：以TIMSS資料檢視2003至2011年臺灣八年級學生數學成就城鄉差異並列篇名：Using TIMSS Data to Investigate Rural-Urban Differences of Taiwanese Eighth Graders’ Mathematics Achievement from 2003 to 2011作者：李哲迪(Che-Di Lee)關鍵字：城鄉差異;國中;數學成就;rural-urban gap;junior high school;mathematics achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究利用TIMSS 2003、2007與2011資料，分析臺灣八年級學生數學成就的城鎮都市間和鄉村都市間之差異。透過再中心化影響函數迴歸分析，發現城鎮都市間之成就差異從2007至2011年有顯著的擴大，此擴大是因都市學生成就提高所致。在2011年，都市低家庭教育資源後段學生成就進步，成就分布左側長尾縮短；都市高家庭教育資源中前段學生成就進步，成就分布向右拉長。在2011年，城鎮和鄉村學生平均落後都市學生0.45和0.57個標準差，約有一半是家庭教育資源城鄉差距所造成的。以TIMSS中級國際基準點作為基礎成就線，在2011年，落後人數比在都市、城鎮和鄉村分別是5%、13%和16%。家庭教育資源不足之學生，其落後人數比的城鄉差距較為嚴重。落後學生落後基礎成就線的幅度則無城鄉差異。英文摘要：This study explored Taiwanese eighth graders’ mathematics achievement differences between town and urban areas and between rural and urban areas based on the data of TIMSS 2003 to 2011. Using recentered influence function regressions, the study has found that there were significant widening differences between the achievement of town students’ and that of urban students from 2007 to 2011 due to the improvement of urban students’ achievement. In 2011, the achievement of low ranking urban students with low home-education-resources have improved and the left tail of their distribution was shortened; the achievement of middle and high ranking urban students with high home-education-resources have improved and their distribution was stretched to the right. In 2011, comparing with urban students, town and rural students fall behind academically for 0.45 and 0.57 standard deviation on average, half of which was caused by the town-urban and rural-urban differences of home-education-resources. Using the intermediate international benchmark of TIMSS as the basic achievement line, in 2011, the lagging student ratios of urban, town, and rural were 5%, 13%, and 16%. For the students with insufficient home-education-resources, the town-urban and rural-urban differences in the lagging student ratio were worse. For urban, town, and rural area, the lagging students’ achievement gaps from the basic achievement line had no significant differences.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820161262040012篇名：BBL取向體育教學對學生知識理解、問題解決能力與學習動機之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Brain-Based Learning on Students’ Knowledge Structure, Problem-Solving Capability, and Learning Motivation in Physical Education Teaching作者：陳昭宇(Chao-Yu Chen);林靜萍(Ching-Ping Lin)關鍵字：以大腦為基礎的學習;社會腦;傳統體育教學;運動教育模式;與腦相容的課程與教學;brain-based learning;social brain;traditional PE teaching, sport education model;brain-compatible curriculum and teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的旨在發展以大腦為基礎學習（brain-based learning, BBL）的體育教學方法，並探討其對學生知識理解、問題解決能力與學習動機之影響。基於研究目的與問題，本研究以量為主、質為輔的取向，採準實驗設計不等控制組設計（nonequivalent control group），研究參與者為一位體育教師及其授課班級兩班八年級50位學生，分為實驗組（實施BBL取向體育教學）與控制組（實施傳統體育教學），參與16節籃球課。研究工具為「概念構圖」、「籃球問題解決能力測驗」與「國中生體育學習動機量表」，分別進行前、後測，以了解學生知識理解、問題解決能力與學習動機的學習成效，並輔以訪談、觀察與文件分析蒐集質性資料，以共變數分析與持續比較法進行資料處理。研究結果發現：一、實驗組在概念構圖測驗明顯優於控制組，實驗組在教學介入後概念構圖成績有顯著進步。二、實驗組在問題解決能力測驗明顯優於控制組，實驗組在教學介入後問題解決能力有顯著進步。三、實驗組在學習動機測驗明顯優於控制組，實驗組在教學介入後學習動機表現有顯著進步。整體而言，BBL取向體育教學方法確實能夠促進知識理解、提升問題解決能力並激發學習動機。英文摘要：The purpose of this research was to develop a physical education (PE) teaching method based on brain-based learning (BBL) and to examine its effects on students’ knowledge structure, problem-solving capability, and learning motivation. The research used both qualitative and quantitative methods adopting an nonequivalent control group design in a quasi-experiment. The participants based on purposive sampling technique include one female PE teacher and her fifty eighth-grade students. The students were divided into two groups: one experimental group administered with BBL PE teaching, and one control group administered with traditional PE teaching, both for sixteen basketball lessons. The instruments to examine the effects of BBL PE teaching consist of personal concept mapping, the test of problem-solving capability in basketball, and learning motivation questionnaires. Interview, observation, and document analysis were also later conducted inductively. The data were analyzed with covariance and constant comparison method. There are three major results. First, there was a significant difference in the personal concept mapping between the two groups. The increased mean score for the experimental group showed that BBL PE teaching has enhanced the students’ deep understanding and has also expanded the scope of nature knowledge. Second, there was a significant difference in the test of problem-solving capability in basketball between two groups. The statistics shows that the students’ problem-solving capability in basketball has been developed during BBL PE teaching. Finally, there was a significant difference in the learning motivation questionnaires between two groups. According to the score, the learning motivation has been cultivated by BBL PE teaching. All in all, the knowledge and the problem-solving capability in basketball, as well as the learning motivation of the experimental group have all been improved.起始頁-結束頁：41-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820161262040023篇名：大學校院教師「違反聘約情節重大」案例暨相關法律問題探討並列篇名：Research on Cases and Legal Issues Involved in College and University Teachers’ Serious Violation of Employment Contracts作者：黃源銘(Yuan-Ming Huang)關鍵字：不續聘;限期升等;違反聘約情節重大;nonrenewal;deadline promotion;violating employment contract seriously期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:4期出版年：2016中文摘要：晚近愈來愈多的司法裁判顯示，教師因違反聘約而遭學校停聘、解聘或不續聘，其中包括未經核准在外兼課、兼職、未能限期升等、未通過教師評鑑，以及未於規定年限取得博士學位<U+22EF><U+22EF>等類型。《教師法》第14條第1項第14款規定：「違反聘約情節重大」構成停聘、解聘及不續聘之法律效果，上述事實雖可能「違反聘約」，但是否即屬「情節重大」不無疑問。本文首先歸納整理「違反聘約情節重大」之裁判類型；其次，就違反聘約情節重大得否由當事人於聘約中約定，以及違反聘約是否即屬情節重大等疑義，進行學說與實務之探討；再者，主管機關對違反聘約情節重大之核准權，究應採高密度之監督或低密度之審查一併進行檢討；最後，檢視司法裁判對於教師工作權保障之價值取捨並提出本文考察之心得。英文摘要：A growing number of judicial cases have revealed that the violation of employment contracts by teachers could lead to dismissal or nonrenewal of contracts, which could result from unapproved side jobs, unsuccessful faculty promotion, failed faculty evaluation, or the inability to obtain a doctoral degree within the deadline. Although in Chapter III of the Teachers’ Act, Article 14-1 stipulates that teachers seriously violating employment contracts could be suspended, dismissed, or non-renewed, it still remains debatable whether the abovementioned are to be regarded as “serious violation”. To look into this issue, this paper first summarizes the adjudication of serious employment contract violation, and then explains the major actions constituting serious employment contract violation theoretically and practically. Further, the issue regarding whether the educational administrative authorities in validating the condition of ”serious violation of employment contract” should be exercised by high-density super vision or by law-density screening is also reviewed. Based on the discussion, this paper then examines the value of judicial adjudication on university autonomy and protection of teachers’ right to work and finally proposes recommendations.起始頁-結束頁：85-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820161262040034篇名：由教科書內容看臺灣教育社會學學科架構的發展並列篇名：On the Development of the Disciplinary Framework of Sociology of Education in Taiwan: An Analysis of Textbooks Published from 1960s to 2010s作者：張建成(Jason Chien-Chen Chang)關鍵字：教育社會學;學科架構;臺灣;教科書分析;sociology of education;disciplinary framework;Taiwan;textbook analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:4期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣教育社會學的發展，至今可分為四個階段，即1960年代之萌芽期、1970年代之奠基期、1980年代中後期起始之開展期、以及2006年以降的開展後期。據此，本文分析各個階段之教科書內容，探討臺灣教育社會學學科架構之形成及演進。整體而言，自1960年代迄今，臺灣教育社會學之學科架構，大致由五個部分所構成，分別是教育社會學的學科論、教育的社會功能、教育的社會環境、教育系統的社會學分析、以及學校教育的社會學分析，至於各部分的組成元素，詳見本文之整理與歸納。英文摘要：Up to the present, development of sociology of education in Taiwan can be divided into four stages. They are: preliminary stage (the 1960s), foundation-laying stage (the 1970s), expansion stage (from mid-1980s), and late-expansion stage (2006 to date). This article analyzed contends of textbooks of each stage, exploring the formation and evolution of the disciplinary framework. On the whole, from 1960s till now, the framework has been made up of five parts: sociology of education as a discipline, social functions of education, social contexts of education, sociological analysis of education system, and sociological analysis of schooling. Further details can be found in this article.起始頁-結束頁：113-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820161262040045篇名：晚清甲午前使英人員教育見聞研究並列篇名：A Study on the Educational Experiences of Chinese Diplomats in Britain Before 1894作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：外交官;英國教育;教育借入;晚清;diplomats;British education;educational borrowing;late Ch'ing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:3期出版年：2016中文摘要：中國教育西化始於晚清，官方對主要對手英國教育的接觸，則遲至光緒朝初。本文旨在探討甲午前七位使英外交官對於英國教育的觀察，進而分析其認識程度及影響。主要史料為諸人日記或筆記，其範圍涵蓋中小學、大學、海軍學堂、女子學校、職業學校及師範學校，地區以英格蘭為主，另提及教育行政制度及學制。七人中有二人通曉英語，餘人參訪時需透過翻譯，以致產生理解差異。其所留紀錄，甲午前多已出版，數位後使英者曾看過前人之書。限於當時社會反洋的氛圍濃厚，以致諸人在英國的一手教育見聞，實難大量引介至國內，以帶動教育革新。以教育遷移理論觀之，此過程只能視為教育借入前的醞釀階段。英文摘要：The westernization of Chinese education was emerged since late Ch'ing; however the contact with the British education was not made until 1876. The aim of this paper is to inquire the educational experiences of seven Chinese diplomats in Britain before 1894. Their diaries and notebooks were analyzed. The main findings are as follows. Elementary and secondary schools, universities and colleges, naval academy, girl's school, vocational school and teacher training school were introduced, and most of them were located in England. Only two diplomats knew English, so others needed translators' help when they made school visit; therefore, different understanding of the same matter happened among them visited schools. Most records were published before 1894, and some were read by successive diplomats. Because the anti-westerners atmosphere was severe, it became difficult to introduce the diplomats' observation of the British education, not to mention any stimulation of the reform in Ch'ing China. From the viewpoint of educational transfer theory, those experiences can only be understood as the brewing stage of educational borrowing.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160962030016篇名：編輯的話作者：卯靜儒期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：iii-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系7篇名：T. J. Jones與《1916社會科委員會報告書》對社會科緣起之歷史意義探究並列篇名：Exploring the Historical Significances of T. J. Jones and the 1916 Report of Committee on Social Studies on the Origin of the Social Studies作者：鍾鴻銘(Horng-Ming Jong)關鍵字：Jones;1916社會科委員會報告書;社會科;T. J. Jones;the 1916 Report of Committee on Social Studies;social studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討社會科創建者T. J. Jones之教育理念，及其對《1916社會科委員會報告書》與社會科之緣起所產生的影響。除此之外，本文亦將概述《1916社會科委員會報告書》的主要內容、它在美國社會科課程史上的意義，以及社會科的原初意涵對當前臺灣社會科課程實踐的意義。研究指出，《1916社會科委員會報告書》體現出Jones的社會科教育理念與理想。就《1916社會科委員會報告書》的歷史意義而言，分別是：使社會科正式成為學校的一門科目；首度倡導問題本位課程；提倡社區公民教育；倡導社會效率的教育觀。本文亦根據上述歷史意義，省思其對臺灣社會科課程發展的啟示。英文摘要：The aim of this paper was to research on the educational idea of T. J. Jones, who was generally acknowledged as one the founders of social studies, and his influences on the 1916 report of the Committee on Social Studies and the origin of the social studies. Additionally, this paper also illustrated the gist of the 1916 report of the Committee on Social Studies and its implications in the historical development of the social studies, and the implications of the original connotation of the social studies for the contemporary curriculum practice of the social studies in Taiwan. The report of the Committee on Social Studies embodied Jones's educational ideas and ideals about social studies. In terms of the curriculum development, the report is historically significant because social studies became a school subject officially, initiated problem-based curriculum, promoted community civics education, and advocated education for social efficiency. Based on the above-mentioned significances, this paper also reflected on their inspiration for the social studies curriculum development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：35-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160962030028篇名：重探伯恩斯坦的教育機制理論：以新加坡華文中學的國家改革考試為例並列篇名：Reevaluating Pedagogic Device: The Case of State Examination Reforms in Singapore, from the Late-1950s to the Early-1960s作者：黃庭康(Ting-Hong Wong)關鍵字：伯恩斯坦;國家教育政策;教育機制;評核與考試;新加坡;Basil Bernstein;state education policy;pedagogic device;assessment and examination;Singapore期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:3期出版年：2016中文摘要：伯恩斯坦（Basil Bernstein）的教育機制理論假設學校主要是透過教學溝通實踐打造意識型態，進而達到社會再生產的效果。但此理論之出發點忽略了教育體系的社會篩選作用，有礙學者們思考學校的生活機會分配功能對教育機制運作的可能影響。把學校教育簡單地視為溝通傳意機制，也導致伯恩斯坦假設評估規則只是協助教學機制落實教育論述的手段，忽視了在具體的學校與教育體制中，考評往往是社會篩選與淘汰的重要機制。這些侷限引致伯恩斯坦沒有考慮到評估規則可以透過控制有價值的教育機會與社會位置的分配來左右教育機制的運作。本文試圖突破伯恩斯坦的限制，指出當考評具備社會篩選功能時，評估規則較能幫助落實教育論述。為了審視評估的社會篩選功能，筆者進一步發展伯恩斯坦的理論，提出評估規則包含了時間、後果與區辨三大次規則，並強調掌權者可透過三個評估次規則調控社會篩選的過程與結果，進而落實意識與權力再生產。筆者並以新加坡華文中學考試改革的歷史案例說明此論點。英文摘要：Bernstein's theory of the pedagogic device assumes that schools perform a reproductive function through communicative practices that shape consciousness and identity. This assumption neglects that schools also help perpetuate power relations through functioning as an apparatus of social selection. Because of this skewed emphasis, Bernstein considers evaluative rules purely as a device to help realize pedagogic discourse and overlooks that in the concrete contexts of education systems, evaluations are most often instantiated as summative assessments that function as distributors of valuable life opportunities. This theoretical blind-spot of Bernstein has prevented scholars from discovering the implications of schools' social selection functions for the operation of the pedagogic device. Using the historical example of state examination reforms on Chinese middle schools in the late-1950s to the early- 1960s, I seek to fill this gap. I contend that assessments can help actualize official pedagogic discourse more effectively when they also exert profound impacts on allocation of valued social positions and educational opportunities. My contention is illustrated by the case of postwar Singapore, where the ruling regime had more success in replacing the Sino-centric pedagogic discourse of Chinese institutions with a more Singaporean-centered one after state-run exams targeting students' futures in education and employment were imposed.起始頁-結束頁：73-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160962030039篇名：書評：黃俊傑著《大學之理念：傳統與現代》並列篇名：Book Review: Universities in Taiwan: A Review of Chun-Chieh Huang's The Idea of University: Tradition and Modernity作者：但昭偉(Jau-Wei Dan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：105-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201609620300410篇名：Aristotle幸福論觀點下的致福之道與幸福的脆弱性：幸福、運氣與品德教育並列篇名：Pursuit of Happiness and the Vulnerability of Happiness: An Aristotelian Eudaimonistic Viewpoint-Happiness, Luck, and Character Education作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：Aristotle;幸福;品德教育;運氣／機運;德行;Aristotle;eudaimonia/happiness;character education;luck/fortune;virtue期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:2期出版年：2016中文摘要：一般同意教育應該協助受教者過幸福的生活，其中涉及的概念性問題—幸福是什麼，有待釐清，而方法問題—教育如何促成受教者幸福，則需要詳細論述。尤其面對近來其他學術領域對幸福議題的研究熱潮，教育界有必要重新檢視「幸福」概念，亟思教育促成受教者幸福的可為之道。本文從Aristotle幸福論觀點切入，彰顯影響幸福的兩股力量：一方面說明「修德」與「行德」為「致福」的必要條件，對於德行潛能上未受損傷的人而言，人人皆可透過努力而追求幸福；另一方面必須承認幸福無法完全自外於命運之輪的影響力，各種運氣因子涉入個體品德型塑（修德）與德行展現（行德）的過程，這凸顯個體在致福過程中，因運氣介入而顯現的脆弱性。當代品德教育致力於「德行陶養」，可視為幸福論意義上的協助受教者的致福之道。惟教育面對各種運氣因子作用力的無力處，則尚待給予平衡性的強調。英文摘要：It is generally agreed among educators that education should assist the educated in leading a flourishing and happy life. However, this conceptual question, ”what is happiness” is in want of clarification, and ”how exactly can education help the educated lead such a fulfilling life” also needs to be expounded. In response to the recent growing interest in happiness studies in various other disciplines, the author suggests that it is necessary to re-examine the concept of happiness and to think about methods to enhance individual happiness in the context of education. An Aristotelian eudaimonistic perspective sorts out two strings of power effecting happiness. In one string, each person who is not completely maimed in terms of virtues is likely to lead a flourishing and happy life with effort, since the possession and exercise of virtues are essential for happiness. For the other string, it must be acknowledged that happiness is vulnerable to the wheel of fortune, for various factors of luck are inevitably involved in the cultivation and exercise of virtues. Hence, the vulnerability and fragility of happiness comes to the fore. For that matter, the contemporary character education generally distinguished by the inculcation of virtues is a practice of enabling the educated to lead a flourishing and happy life in a eudaimonistic sense. With regard to the influence of various factors of luck, however, the powerlessness of education also needs to be recognized and taken into account.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201606620200101篇名：國小高年級學童線上數位閱讀認知負荷量表編製並列篇名：Cognitive Load Scale of Digital Reading for Elementary School Students作者：陳新豐(Shin-Feng Chen)關鍵字：數位閱讀;認知負荷;結構方程模式;量表編制;cognitive load;digital reading;scale development;structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在編制國小高年級學童數位閱讀認知負荷量表（Digital Reading Cognitive Load Scale, DRCLS），建立信度及效度資料。研究工具採用自編「國小高年級學童數位閱讀認知負荷量表」，命題內涵依任務／環境、學習者特性（認知能力、認知風格、先備知識與經驗）、以及環境與學習者特性的交互作用等3個向度，再區分為心智的努力（mental efforts）以及心理的負荷（mental load）等2個構面，採用李克特5點量尺的設計方式，總共25題。研究分二個階段進行，第一階段先編擬試題，並商請四位學科領域專家及二位國小教師來進行題項審查，具有良好的內容效度指數（Content Validity Index, CVI），繼而就387位預試樣本進行施測與蒐集資料分析，根據預試之量表信度與效度資料進行修正。第二階段，分層比率隨機抽取35個班級，針對728位國小高年級學童進行線上量表施測。測量信度方面，具有良好的內部一致性信度，在構念效度方面，以結構方程模式對二群隨機樣本群組分別進行理論模式和複核效度的驗證，結果具良好的模式適配度以及模式穩定度，在區辨和幅合效度方面，心智的努力與心理的負荷等二個構面分量表均可接受。綜上所述，DRCLS 在相關研究以及數位閱讀實務上具有應用價值。英文摘要：This study aims to establish a Digital Reading Cognitive Load Scale (DRCLS) for elementary school high-grade students in order to form a reliable and valid database. The DRCLS consists of three components: (1) task environment, (2) learner characteristic (cognitive capability, cognitive style, prior knowledge and experience) assessment, and (3) an interactive effect component to measure learner’s engagement within the task environment. The interactive effect component measures a learner at two levels: mental effort and mental load. Twenty-five Likert-type scale items were produced for the DRCLS. The entire study was divided into two steps. Step 1 included developing the items and having them validated by four subject field experts and two elementary school teachers. Validated items were statistically analyzed using 387 pre-test samples. The 25 items were further refined according to the results from the pre-test data analysis. At the Step 2 data were collected from a stratified proportional sampling of 35 classes, which included 728 elementary school high-grade students. These students responded to the 25 items in a Web-based online environment. Analysis on data collected from these students revealed good internal consistency reliability. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was developed to measure two scale components: mental effort and mental load. The theory model was cross-validated using two random sample groups. Analysis of the SEM model to data revealed a good model fit to the data, good construct validity, and good divergent and convergent construct validity for both scales' components. The education value of using DRCLS to promote digital reading practice among students is also forwarded.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420161212040012篇名：學科補習之動態變化對學習成就族群落差的影響：以屏東縣小學生為例並列篇名：Influence of Dynamic Changes in Subject Supplementary Education on Ethnic Gap in Learning Achievement: A Case of Elementary School Students in Pingtung County作者：林俊瑩(Chunn-Ying Lin)關鍵字：追蹤普查;動態變化;潛在成長模式分析;學科補習;學習族群落差;dynamic changes;ethnic gap in learning achievement;follow-up general survey;latent growth curve modeling;subject supplementary education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：學科補習向來被認為是很重要的課後教育資源，因此就有不少研究者關注於學科補習對族群學習落差的影響。不過，學科補習資源的多寡，除了與家庭社經地位有關外，還會隨著時間而變動，因此其持續動態的變化對不同族群學生學習成就落差的影響更值得探究。基於上述，本研究運用屏東教育長期追蹤資料庫的小學生與家長三年固定樣本追蹤普查（N = 8,960），並採用潛在成長模式進行學科補習（包括時間與花費）對學習成就族群落差的動態影響分析。研究發現：一開始接受學科補習量越多的學生，往後參與補習量並沒有增加愈快的趨勢，兩者反而呈現負相關。其次，初始補習參與量對日後學習表現的影響不顯著，有顯著正影響的是補習參與量的增長趨勢。另外，原住民，或是母親為東南亞國籍之學生，起始成績差，而學科補習量增長相對較少，使其後續學習表現明顯較差。最後，母親具中國籍身分的新住民學生，學科補習供給量增加趨勢，乃至於後續的學習成就均未呈現劣勢。英文摘要：Subject supplementary education has always been regarded as a very important after school educational resource. Thus, many researchers consider the influence of subject supplementary education on the ethnic learning gap. However, the number of subject supplementary educational resources is not only associated with families' socioeconomic status, but also varies over times. Therefore, the influence of continuous dynamic changes on the learning achievements of students of different populations is worthy of investigation. Given the lack of studies that can provide answers to this issue, this study used the 3-year follow-up general survey on elementary school students and parents (N = 8,960) from Pingtung Education Longitudinal Survey (PELS), and applied latent growth curve modeling to analyze the dynamic influence of subject supplementary education (including time and cost) on the ethnic gap in learning achievements at multiple time points. The research findings show that: firstly, the subsequent amount of supplementary education received by students who had received a larger amount of initial subject supplementary education did not rapidly increase with the amount of the initial subject supplementary education. Moreover, while the amount of initial supplementary education did not have a significant influence on future learning performance, it has a significantly positive influence on the increased amount of supplementary education. Furthermore, the initial learning performance of students who are aboriginals or whose mothers are from the Southeast Asian countries was poor, and the increase in their amount of subject supplementary education was relatively small compared with that of their counterparts, as well as their future learning performance was significantly much poorer. Finally, neither the increased amount of subject supplementary education of new immigrant students whose mothers are from Mainland China, nor their future learning performance, showed inferiority.起始頁-結束頁：23-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420161212040023篇名：技職大專生學習取向及其相關因素之研究並列篇名：Learning Approaches and Its Related Factors of Undergraduate Students in a Technological University作者：鄭博真(Bor-Jen Jeng)關鍵字：表面學習取向;深度學習取向;學習取向;deep learning approaches;learning approaches;surface learning approaches期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討技職大專生的學習取向及其相關因素。研究對象為某私立科技大學日間部1,817名學生。採用「大專生學習取向量表」作為研究工具蒐集實證資料。以相依樣本及獨立樣本t檢定、獨立樣本單因子變異數分析進行統計處理。研究結果發現：技職大專生偏向採用深度學習取向及深度學習策略，然而偏向具有表面學習動機。不同性別、學制、年級、學院及學業表現的技職大專生，在學習取向的某些層面具有顯著差異。根據研究結果，本研究建議教師宜激勵學生的深度學習動機，指導學生深度學習策略，輔導學業表現較弱學生使用深度學習取向。未來可以與其他大學進行跨校研究。採用縱貫性研究追<U+8E2A>學生學習取向在不同年級的發展。亦可探究其它預示因素對學習取向的影響，以及學習取向對學習成效的影響。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the students' learning approaches and examine its related factors. There were 1,817 students participating in this study at private technological university. The scale of learning approaches was utilized for collecting empirical data. The independent-samples, dependent-samples t-test and one-way analysis of variance were used to analyze the collected data. This study found that students preferred to take a deep learning approach. Furthermore, they also tended to adopt deep learning strategy. In the aspect of motive, they showed a tendency for higher surface motives. Besides, different gender, the educational systems, grades, college, and learning performances of undergraduate students had the significant impact on their learning approaches. Based on these results, this study suggests that teachers should motivate students to deepen their learning motivation, and guide students to adopt deep learning strategies. Teachers should counsel students with weak academic performance to use a deep learning approach. In the future, the inter-institutional research can be conducted with other universities, to employ longitudinal study tracking the development of students' learning approaches in different grades as well as explore the impact of other factors on learning approaches, and the impact of learning approaches on learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：57-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420161212040034篇名：IPIP五大人格量表簡版的發展及其跨年齡層的測量不變性檢定並列篇名：The Development of a Shortened Version of IPIP Big Five Personality Scale and the Testing of Its Measurement Invariance between Middle-Aged and Older People作者：李仁豪(Ren-Hau Li);陳怡君(Yi-Chun Chen)關鍵字：IPIP五大人格量表;中老年人;測量不變性;簡版;IPIP Big Five personality scale;middle-aged and older people;measurement invariance;shortened version期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：為了減少研究成本及增加參與者配合度，並讓諮商輔導或臨床初步晤談得以便利進行，本研究乃根據Goldberg所發展之IPIP五大人格量表五十題版本進行簡版的發展工作，提供其建構效度、效標關聯效度、聚合效度及內部一致性信度等證據，並檢定中老年在此簡版上的跨年齡層測量不變性。研究樣本係來自臺灣地區的中老年人，共進行兩次橫斷面問卷調查，第一次回收之有效樣本共455人，間隔一年後，蒐集未重複的有效樣本283人，兩樣本合計共含426位未滿60歲的中年人及312位60歲以上的老年人。簡版是利用結構方程式模型的測量模型進行分析選題，建構效度是以驗證性因素分析的模型適配度及因素負荷量來確認，而效標關聯效度是以與正負向情緒量表及與自尊量表的相關來建立，聚合效度主要是以與原IPIP五大人格量表五十題版本以及TDA五大人格問卷的相關來建立。研究結果獲得的簡版IPIP五大人格量表簡稱為IPIP-15，每一人格包含3題，共15題，具有不錯的模型適配度，因素負荷量在.61-.83，內部一致性α 信度在.67-.83，效標關聯效度及聚合效度也大多符合預期，且在中老年人之間具有跨年齡層的測量不變性。整體而言，IPIP-15具有可接受的信效度。英文摘要：To reduce research cost and to increase participation, as well as to make it convenient for initial counseling guidance and clinical interview, this study developed a shortened version of Big Five personality scale on basis of Goldberg’s IPIP-50. The study presents among all its construct validity, criterion-related validity, convergent validity, internal consistent reliability, and also checks its across age-level measurement invariance for middle-aged and older people. There are two sample data surveyed from middle-aged and older people in Taiwan. The first survey had a valid sample with 455 participants, and one year later, a second survey was conducted and 283 non-duplication participants were obtained. The two samples included 426 below 60 year-old middle-aged people and 312 over 60 year-old people, respectively. The items of the shortened version were analyzed and chosen by measurement model of structural equation modeling. Its construct validity was checked by confirmatory factor analysis with model-fit indices and factor loadings. Its criterion-related validity was established by correlations with the affect balance scale and the self-esteem scale. Its convergent validity was obtained by correlations with IPIP- 50 and with another Big Five personality scale, TDA-40. The results show that a 15- item shortened version of Big Five personality, named IPIP-15, was developed, and its each personality included 3 items. The IPIP-15 has good model-fits with factor loadings ranging from .61 to .83. Its internal consistent reliability coefficients α ranged from .67 to .83, and its criterion-related validity and convergent validity are also as expected. Besides, IPIP-15 has an across age-level measurement invariance between middle-aged and older people. In general, IPIP-15 has acceptable reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：87-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420161212040045篇名：由OECD對技術人才培育之倡議談技術型高中培育職場學習力並列篇名：A Discussion on Developing Learning Ability on Workplace at Technical High Schools Based on the OECD-proposed Technician Training Program作者：許全守(Chuan-Shou Hau);李光耀(Kuang-Yao Li)關鍵字：職能;超越學校的技能;高端科技;高層次技術人力;competence;skills beyond school;high-end technologies;high-order workplace期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文基於先進科技產業高層次技術人力培育之發展取向，探討技術型高中奠定核心基礎能力與作為。基於OECD自跨世紀以來關注職場人力培育，陸續提出《為工作而學》和《超越學校的技能》的回顧報告，綜攬會員國之後期中等教育和後中等教育之特點、劣勢與建議，凸顯先進國家因應國際化和高端科技之競爭，後中等教育成為職場人力培育的平台，建構連結、銜接這一平台的進路，成為關注的焦點。本文企圖透過文件分析，綜理OECD上述報告之意涵，反思我國面臨高科技和國際化接軌之衝擊，技術型高中培育職場多元實務人才應有的思維。綜上，獲致以下結論：（一）核心職能成為VET機構培育技術人力之基礎；（二）學習力為培育高層次及異質人才之要件；（三）暢通、便捷參與VET機構之學習進路，成為厚植職場經濟實力之優先工程；（四）營造產業合作交流機制，以靈活反映產業訊息、彌補或提升多元專業師資之能量。相對地，研擬如下之建議：（一）技術型高中宜以職場導向之核心職能發展育才課程；（二）技術型高中宜對準群科之職場特質，為學生備妥職場之學習力；（三）校本位課程為技術型高中實現適性揚才、營造辦學特色之根本；（四）簡化職場人員參與VET的要件，以優化勞動人力品質。英文摘要：This study, through the document analysis, aims and intends to generalize, explain and interpret the meanings of the above-mentioned OECD reports to reflect on what we should think and do to develop, educate and train multi-merit workforce at technical high schools in Taiwan, when facing the shock or impact of high technology and international connection. In summary, the following conclusions are reached include that: (1) Core competence should be built and developed as the foundation for cultivating and developing technicians at various VET (Vocational Educational Training) organizations; (2) Learning ability on workplace should be the chief or basic requirement for developing high-level and diverse-multi-skilled talents or experts; (3) Smooth paths should be made or mapped out to access to or enter the learning programs at are reached VET organizations thus being adopted and implemented as priority strategy to advance and boost the economic power at workplace; (4) A communication mechanism of industrial cooperation and exchange should be built to acutely and flexibly reflect industrial information, to complement or make up, or raise or elevate the energy of professional multi-tasked or skilled teachers or trainers. To echo the above suggestions, it is therefore proposed for making the following recommendations: (1) Technical high schools be designed as career- or workplace-oriented with career development training as their core course; (2) Technical high schools should focus on the cluster subjects or divisions featured by workplace merits to improve or advance the learning ability on workplace of students to help prepare them ready for their future jobs; (3) School-based or focused curriculum should be so designed to reveal or show the basic characteristic trait of technical high schools for developing and training suitable talents and technicians; (4) The main requirement should be simplified for workplace personnel to be admitted to enter or attend the VET programs to heighten the quality of labor workforce.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160912030016篇名：高中（職）擴大免試入學方案目標達成情形意見調查研究並列篇名：A Study of the Efficacy of Expanding Non-exam-based Admission to Senior Secondary and Vocational High Schools作者：蘇德祥(Teh-Siang Su)關鍵字：多元入學;擴大免試入學;12年國民基本教育;multi-track school admission system;the enlargement of open admission program;12-year Basic Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究採調查研究法，分析比較相關社群對多元入學不同升學管道達成目標的滿意度，發現擴大免試入學相對於其他入學管道，是最能達成方案多項方案目標的入學方式，並進一步分析不同社群對擴大免試入學之看法差異。本項調查由研究者設計問卷，採立意取樣，樣本共分成4大社群，包括全國高中職教職員、國中教職員、高中職一年級學生及高中職學生家長。研究者依據文獻分析，歸納12項實施目標，用以詢問受試者的看法，經過卡方及列聯分析後，發現4個社群對擴大免試入學比其他入學管道更能有效達成多項目標的看法相當一致。研究者進一步以F檢定分析不同區域之相關社群對目標達成的看法差異，發現各社群對目標達成的看法不因學校所處區域不同而有差異，也就是不同區域各社群對擴大免試入學達成多項目標的看法一致。最後本文對教育行政機關提出多項實施免試入學建議。英文摘要：In order to investigate the effectiveness of the Enlargement of Open Admission Program and trace the result after the launch of this program, the study employed the survey research approach by distributing questionnaires nationwide. This study was conducted with stratified random sampling and the samples were divided into 4 groups: educational employees in senior high schools, educational employees in junior high schools, parents of senior high school students, and senior high school freshmen. Twelve objectives embedded in the program were retrieved and developed as interview questions for test-takers and were afterwards analyzed by Chi-square test and contingency table analysis. The results indicated that 4 groups displayed consistent perceptions towards the enlargement of the program. The research was then continued to analyze the discrepancies among different groups and concluded with suggestions for educational administration.起始頁-結束頁：25-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160912030027篇名：日本九年一貫型「義務教育學校」的設立與爭議：學制變革觀點並列篇名：Exploring the Organization and Debates of the ”Grade 1-9 Integrated” Type ”Compulsory Education Schools” in Japan: Perspectives of the School System Change作者：林雍智(Yung-Chih Lin)關鍵字：日本教育;九年一貫;義務教育學校;學制;學校整併;Japan education;grade 1-9 integrated;compulsory education school;school system;school consolidation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：教育制度係為在教育組織或作用上，受社會所公認之系統。其中，學制、學期制度與教育行政制度更被認為是構成整體教育系統之基礎架構制度。由於制度本身的不易變動特質，因此牽涉到制度變革的教改方案，往往會引發議論，成為要使改革成功必須突破的關鍵。本文主旨，即在於就學制變革之觀點，援引日本合併現行中小學，自2016年開始實施的九年一貫式之「義務教育學校」制度案例進行論述。本文以分析日本相關文獻，對義務教育學校之定義、導入背景、制度內涵進行探究，再經由闡述當前試辦狀況與三種實際上之實施型態，以學制變革之觀點探究並分析其引發之爭議與課題焦點。最後在研究結論上，本文提出探究學制變革、整合師資培育制度、驅動學校革新方向與確認學制變革空間之四項啟示，期能作為我國學制改革研議上的參照。英文摘要：The education institution is a recognized system by the society as its functions on educational organization or action. Among them, school system, semester system, and the system of educational administration have been considered to constitute the infrastructure of the system as fundamental frames. Since the nature of the system itself is not easy to change, educational reform projects that involve system change were often leading to debates and became the key to successful reform. Therefore, by the method of literature review, the purpose of this article is based on the viewpoint of the possibility of changing school systems, citing the Japan ”Grade 1-9 integrated type” compulsory education school case implemented by law since 2016. This article starts with the analysis of debated issues and focused subjects by exploring its definitions, implement background, institutional connotations, and ends with the discussion of possibilities of changing school system by describing the current condition and three patterns of grade 1-9 integrated schools. Finally, based on these discussed above issues, this article proposes four key revelations as a reference for Taiwan authorities to deliberate on the reform of the school system.起始頁-結束頁：53-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160912030038篇名：德國當前中等教育階段國際交流政策之分析：以語言外交政策之觀點為分析視角並列篇名：Analysis of the Current International Exchange Policies in Secondary Education in Germany: From the Perspective of the Diplomatic Language Policy作者：余曉雯(Hsiao-Wen Yu);洪雯柔(Wen-Jou Hung)關鍵字：德國教育;中等教育;國際交流;German education;secondary education;international exchange期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：在全球化的浪潮下，不管是高等教育或初、中等教育，都面臨了國際化的衝擊與需求。為此，許多國家皆透過各種措施，積極開拓不同教育階段的國際化面向。就目前中等教育階段來看，跨國間的學校與學生國際交流，是臺灣近年來所關注的焦點之一。而德國自1990年代中葉以來，與美國、法國及歐盟地區，早已建立起多樣的交流關係；並且，德國外交部自2008年開始推動「中小學校：未來的夥伴」計畫，更進一步擴展與其他國家間的交流。本研究因此聚焦在德國中等教育國際交流的政策與實際面：一方面透過重要的官方文件及相關的歷史文獻，探討德國在中等教育階段所進行的國際交流之歷史沿革、政策取向與實際作為；另一方面，有鑒於德國中等教育的國際交流政策著重於推動德語的學習，因此，本研究透過語言文化外交政策與外交理論中的新現實主義之理論視野，檢視德國近年來所推動的交流政策之內涵，並在這樣的架構下提出幾項結論：（一）德國長期以來即把語言外交政策視為是整體文化外交教育政策之重要一環；（二）德國之所以將語言之推廣視為中等教育交流之重要途徑，主要著眼於語言所帶來的種種利益；（三）德國在目前的國際情勢下，所積極追求的是影響力的發揮，因而語言之推廣成為其所選擇的利器。英文摘要：In the era of globalization, all the education systems, including higher education institutes as well as primary and secondary schools, are facing the impact of internationalization. For this reason, many countries have been actively exploring various internationalization strategies at different stages of education. In recent years, the international exchange between schools and students is one of the focuses at the secondary education stage in Taiwan. However, since the mid-1990s, Germany has already built up a variety of exchange relations with the United States, France and other nations of EU; in addition to that, German Ministry of Foreign Affairs also began to promote ”Schulen: Partner der Zukunft, PASCH” program in 2008, with the aim to expand exchanges to other countries. This study focuses on the international exchange policies and programs at secondary education stage in Germany. It describes, on one side, the historical development and the practical policies; on the other side, it tries to analyze these polices in the context of foreign policies, because the German international exchange policy aims to promote the learning of German in foreign countries. And in the light of new realism, this study puts forward three arguments: (1) It is a long tradition that the foreign language policy has been deemed as an important means of foreign culture polices; (2) The reason for this orientation is based on the fact that it brings about many profits when a language is widely and globally accepted as an international language; (3) After 1990' Germany has gained more power in the world. Its new aim is thus set to have more influence on the other countries. Promoting the statue of German school system in other countries has become its prime choice.起始頁-結束頁：77-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160912030049篇名：以全球競合力養成為目標之大學英語教育：以國立成功大學為例並列篇名：Integrate Global Competence into College English Education: Using National Cheng Kung University as an Example作者：鄒文莉(Wenli Tsou);陳慧琴(Fay Chen);高實玫(Shin-Mei Kao);蔡美玲(Mei-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：全球競合力;大學英語教育;專業英語教學;專業科目英語授課;跨文化溝通;global competence;college English education;English for Specific Purposes (ESP);English Medium Instruction (EMI);cross-cultural understanding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：因應全球化趨勢，提升大學生全球競合力已經成為高等教育的主要目標。一般來說，全球競合力的具體能力指標主要包括專業能力、語言溝通能力、跨文化認知等能力。但過去十年來，臺灣高等教育將國際化等同於英語化，並將英語畢業門檻及英檢考試畫上等號。這樣的思維限制了對全球競合力的認知與重視，更窄化了大學英語教育的內涵。本文透過文獻研究探討大學英語教育趨勢，並於研究結果中提出由全球競合力取代英語能力之大學英語教育，內容以專業英語教學（English for Specific Purposes, ESP），專業科目英語授課（English as a Medium of Instruction, EMI），輔以跨文化溝通之生活實踐為大學英語教育主體的課程建置。最後，本研究以國立成功大學的大學英語教育為例說明如何以全球競合力能力指標取代臺灣現行之英語畢業門檻，做為同性質大學校院英語教育的參考。英文摘要：In the age of globalization, preparing globally competent students is one of the main goals in higher education. Ability indices for global competence generally include professional skills, language and communicative abilities, and cross-cultural understanding. In Taiwan, English language education has been narrowly viewed as synonymous to internationalizing higher education, while English benchmarking required for obtaining a college degree is exclusively determined by proficiency test scores. This approach has limited the perceptions of college learners towards global competency, and narrowed the scope of college English education. Through literature review, this paper investigates the emerging trend of college English education and proposes that global competence should replace English proficiency as the goal of college English education. This would mean that universities provide courses of English for Specific Purposes (ESP), take the approach of English as a Medium of Instruction (EMI) for content courses, and promote intercultural communication through practice learning. Finally, using college English education of National Cheng Kung University as an example, it is suggested that instead of language proficiency scores only, English benchmarking should be redefined by ability indicators of global competency.起始頁-結束頁：107-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201609120300510篇名：國民小學校長校務經營關鍵影響因素之探究並列篇名：The Study of Key Factors in Elementary School Management in Taiwan作者：蔡明學(Ming-Hsueh Tsai);黃建翔(Chien-Hsiang Huang)關鍵字：校長專業能力;校務經營;分類與迴歸樹（決策樹）;principal professional competence;school management;Classification and Regression trees (CART)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要以國小校長專業能力探討校務經營關鍵影響因素，本研究方法採問卷調查法，研究對象為國小校長，共計有效樣本為2,066人。文獻探討得知，國小校長校務經營分析應聚焦於「規劃校務發展」、「強化行政管理」、「領導課程教學」、「學生適性輔導」與「建立公共關係」。本研究以上述因素，建構校務經營量表。另一部分，為評估校長專業表現，亦建構校長校務經營能力量表，透過決策樹分析進行校務經營關鍵影響因素探究。分析結果顯示，以決策樹進行分析後發現，國小校長校務經營共有12種不同程度的路徑。最後，本研究認為校務經營關鍵影響因素，在於學生適性輔導與領導課程教學的工作執行。英文摘要：This study analyzes the key factors impacting elementary school management in Taiwan. The research method adopts questionnaires survey. Subjects were elementary schools' principals in Taiwan, consisting of 2,066 valid samples. After review of the literature, it was found that elementary schools management analysis should focus on ”School planning”, ”administration effectiveness”, ”curriculum and teaching”, ”student counseling” and ”relationship with the community”. Based on the above-mentioned factors, the school management scale of principals in elementary school was constructed. Another part of this study was to assess the principals' professional performance. Principal operating capacity scale was constructed by CART analysis. The results show that, a total of 12 different degree paths were found in elementary school principal management. Finally, the key business factors are mainly conducting the student counseling and the leadership curriculum teaching.起始頁-結束頁：131-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201609120300601篇名：嚴肅遊戲之角色扮演與情境模擬對於學習成效之影響：以國小五年級碳足跡課程為例並列篇名：Effects of Educational Role-Playing and Simulation Games: Designing Interactive Carbon Footprint Curriculum for Primary School Students作者：陳明秀(Ming-Hsiu Mia Chen);蔡仕廷(Shih-Ting Tsai);張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang)關鍵字：多媒體遊戲教材;情境模擬;碳足跡;數位遊戲學習;嚴肅遊戲;carbon footprint;game based learning;multimedia game learning program;serious game;simulating期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在探究多媒體遊戲教材教學方案對於國小五年級學童之學習成效。本研究以「碳足跡」為主題開發設計數位多媒體遊戲教材，實驗組學童接受多媒體遊戲教材教學，對照組學童則接受紙本教科書教學，受測人數為兩班普通班級，共計60位學童。研究結果顯示：實驗組學童經遊戲教材介入課程後，整體學習成效以及在各項受測學童群組分類（高、低分組與是否經常使用3C 產品之分類組別）的數據都優於對照組，且實驗組經遊戲教材介入課程後之得分成長幅度的增加皆達到顯著水準。另一方面，透過文字轉化為圖像的多媒體遊戲教材，實驗組在後測考卷的問答題部分，應答架構與思路較使用文本教材的對照組為佳；而學童經由情境模擬與角色扮演的方式完成遊戲關卡、學習碳足跡知識，此學習方式不但能讓學童將遊戲內容對應至本身的日常生活，也能在遊戲過程中檢視自己的學習程度，得到立即的回饋與成就感；根據實驗結果顯示，本研究開發之多媒體遊戲教材教學有助於國小五年級學童之碳足跡知識的學習。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of educational role-playing and simulation games in the specific context of carbon footprint curriculum designed for primary school students. A total of 60 primary school students were classified into two groups. The participants in the experimental group (30 students) were taught using a multimedia game and the participants in the control group (30 students) were taught using a textbook. The results showed that the experimental group demonstrated a greater improvement in general carbon footprint knowledge and in each separate learning unit (Grads level and using 3C product) than the control group did. Additionally, according to the experimental process and results, the students in the experimental group displayed more favorable thinking structures and learning attitudes toward carbon footprint topics than the control group did. All results indicated that game-based learning involving role-playing and simulation was a helpful component of carbon footprint curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).012篇名：國小二至六年級朗讀流暢度篩檢準確度及切截點分析並列篇名：Assessment Accuracy and Cut-Off Points of Oral Reading Fluency for Grade 2-6 Students作者：蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su);張祐瑄(You-Hsuan Chang);李孟峰(Meng-Feng Li);黃鈺茜(Yu-Chien Huang)關鍵字：切截點;朗讀流暢度;國小學童;閱讀理解;ROC分析;cut-off points;elementary-school students;oral reading fluency;reading comprehension;receiver operating characteristic analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主要目的是以閱讀的自動化理論為基礎，為國小二至六年級朗讀流暢度做篩檢準確度及最佳切截點分析。研究中，以閱讀理解答對率作為效標變項，朗讀流暢度z 分數作為預測變項，然後採用「接受者操作特徵」（Receiver-Operating-Characteristic, ROC）分析，根據「ROC 曲線下面積」之大小，來檢測採用朗讀流暢度篩檢因認字效能不足導致閱讀理解困難之學童的準確度。此外，也根據χ2 值、命中率、敏銳度、錯誤拒絕率及錯誤接受率等數據，對朗讀流暢度做最佳切截點的分析。研究結果顯示，以朗讀流暢度來篩檢因認字效能不足導致閱讀理解困難的學童，具有中等的準確度。而且以二至六年級上下學期的資料而言，朗讀流暢度z分數最佳切截點都是-0.5。本研究也提供國小二至六年級上下學期的朗讀流暢度平均值資料，以供教育研究者及教師瞭解二至六年級學童認字效能平均成長情形之參考。英文摘要：This study evaluated the assessment accuracy of oral reading fluency. Additionally, this study focused on determining the cut-off point for identifying poor reading comprehension caused by low decoding efficiency in students of grades 2-6. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was adopted to evaluate the assessment accuracy of oral reading fluency. The area under the curve (AUC) of the ROC indicated that oral reading fluency exhibited medium accuracy in screening. Based on analyses of χ 2 , the hit rate, sensitivity, false negative rate, and false positive rate, a z score of oral reading fluency below -0.5 was identified as the optimal cut-off point for screening students with poor reading comprehension caused by low decoding efficiency. In addition, the mean scores of oral reading fluency for students in grades 2-6 are provided to inform teachers and researchers of the level of oral reading fluency in elementary-school students.起始頁-結束頁：33-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).023篇名：學校創新經營對家長選校意願影響之研究－以服務品質與學校形象為中介變項並列篇名：Impacts of School Innovation Management on School Selecting Intentions: Service Quality and School Image as Mediators作者：劉祥熹(Hsiang-Hsi Liu);陳玉娟(Yu-Chuan Chen);鄭筱慧(Hsiao-Hui Cheng)關鍵字：服務品質;創新經營;學校形象;選校意願;innovation management;school image;school selecting intentions;service quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在剖析以服務品質與學校形象為中介變項下，學校創新經營對家長選校意願的影響狀況，進而提出公立國民中學經營策略上之見解與作法，以提供公立國民中學於創新經營、服務品質與學校形象方面之策略建議。為達成研究目的，本研究利用問卷調查蒐集實證資料，並進行結構方程模式分析。研究結果發現，學校創新經營對服務品質與學校形象皆呈現正面的影響效果、服務品質與學校形象對選校意願呈現正面的影響效果、服務品質對學校形象呈現正面的影響效果，服務品質與學校形象於本研究模式中扮演重要的中介性角色；最後，研究者依本研究結果提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study tries to explore the mediatory roles of service quality and school image in the relationships between school innovation management and school-selecting intentions for public junior high schools. A survey was conducted to collect data, which were then analyzed using the structural equation model. The empirical results reveal that the school innovation management has a positive effect on service quality and school image, and that both service quality and school image positively affect school-selecting intentions. In addition, service quality has a positive effect on school image. Furthermore, both service quality and school image play effective and positive intermediary roles in the adopted research model. Suggestions are also provided on innovation management in public junior high schools in this study.起始頁-結束頁：59-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).034篇名：中小學行動學習準備度探究與分析並列篇名：Support-Object-Personnel Mobile-Learning Readiness Model for Primary and Secondary Schools作者：游雅婷(Ya-Ting Yu);劉遠楨(Yuan-Chen Liu);黃思華(Tzu-Hua Huang)關鍵字：行動學習;行動學習準備度;準備度評估;臺灣國中小;SOP行動學習準備度;mobile learning;mobile learning readiness;primary and secondary schools in Taiwan;readiness assessment;Support-Object-Personnel (SOP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：有效整合行動學習資源並在執行行動學習前完成充分準備，是學校創新並達到成功的第一步，然而，當前並無相關準備度評估工具能提供給學校參考。本研究目的在發展行動學習準備度以作為學校實施行動學習前的自我檢核評估工具，並依此分析中小學行動學習準備度現況。研究透過文獻檢閱、焦點團體座談、問卷調查等歷程，以探索性因素分析、單一樣本t檢定、弗里曼等級平均數與卡方檢定等統計方法進行分析，最後由正在進行行動學習的71 所中小學（11 所國中、60 所國小）填寫本研究編製的行動學習準備度線上問卷。研究對象有焦點團體座談4人、問卷調查198 人，以及代表學校填寫行動學習準備度問卷71人，皆為執行過資訊融入教學的教育人員。研究結果顯示：一、行動學習準備度可分為S：「支持系統」、O：「物件設備」、P：「參與人員」三大面向，以及10 個指標、30 個子指標。二、中小學行動學習準備度填寫結果，在三大面向的成績尚屬平均，其中以「領導者能力」指標成績最高、「校務平台」指標成績最低。英文摘要：Efficiently integrating mobile learning resources is an essential step in developing a successful innovative education system that can enhance perceptions and stimulate preparations for M-learning among school administrators and faculty members. Currently, tools for measuring M-learning readiness and instruments that can productively evaluate M-learning readiness are extremely limited. This study proposed the support-object-personnel (SOP) m-learning readiness model to assess the capacity for m-learning readiness in primary and secondary schools in Taiwan. Through a literature review and focus group interviews (N = 4), several standards were identified. Questionnaires (N = 198) were developed and then implemented to conduct a valid survey in 71 schools (11 secondary schools and 60 elementary schools). The data were collected online and computed in SPSS with exploratory factor analysis, a one-sample t test, Friedman’s nonparametrical variance analysis, and a chi-squared test. Most of the respondents were experienced scholars, principals, and faculty members who were familiar with emerging educational technologies. In conclusion, the results of this study consisted of 3 dimensions, 10 main indicators and 30 subindicators. Notably, leadership ability exhibited the highest score and school platform the lowest score among all criteria.起始頁-結束頁：89-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).045篇名：探討大學生空間自我效能、畫地圖能力與地圖素養之相關性與中介效果並列篇名：The Relationships and Mediated Effects of College Students' Spatial Self-Efficacy, Map-Drawing Ability and Map Literacy作者：楊登順(Teng-Shun Yang);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：大學生;地圖素養;空間自我效能;速寫地圖;畫地圖能力;college students;map-drawing ability;map literacy;sketch map;spatial self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學生畫地圖能力、空間自我效能（方向判斷力、距離估算力、位置記憶力）、地圖素養（使用地圖、估算地圖、畫記地圖）的相關性，以及畫地圖能力對於空間自我效能、地圖素養是否具有中介效果？本研究以便利取樣選取南部某大學182 位學生參與本研究，利用信度與效度良好的「回憶式速寫校園地圖」、「空間自我效能量表」及「地圖素養量表」為研究工具，蒐集大學生畫地圖能力、空間自我效能及地圖素養。本研究以t考驗、相關分析及階層迴歸分析進行資料分析，主要發現如下：一、男大學生的地圖素養顯著優於女大學生；二、大學生空間自我效能、畫地圖能力與地圖素養具有顯著正相關；三、大學生畫地圖能力在方向判斷力影響使用地圖上具有部分的中介效果。最後，針對上述評量結果提出對於提升大學生的畫地圖能力、空間自我效能及地圖素養相關議題，進行討論與建議。英文摘要：This study investigated the relationships among Taiwanese college students' map-drawing ability, spatial self-efficacy (direction judgment, distance estimation, and location memory), and map literacy (using maps, estimating maps, drawing maps). The mediated effects of students' map-drawing ability on the relationship between their spatial self-efficacy and map literacy were explored. A total of 182 undergraduates were selected from a university in Kaohsiung City through convenient sampling. Campus sketch maps as well as the spatial self-efficacy scale (SSES) and map literacy scale (MLS) were employed to measure college students' map-drawing ability, spatial self-efficacy, and map literacy. These skills were then compared and contrasted through factor analyses, t tests, correlation analyses, hierarchical regression, and theme content analyses. The results revealed that male college students possessed significantly higher map literacy than their female counterparts did. The students' spatial self-efficacy, map-drawing ability, and map literacy were significantly and positively related. In addition, this study provides evidence to support that map-drawing ability partially mediates between direction judgment and map use. The implications of the findings and recommendations for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：121-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).056篇名：國小五年級網路資源合理使用之教學設計行動研究並列篇名：Development of Instructions for Fair Use of Internet Resources for Fifth Graders: An Action Research作者：吳佩芬(Pei-Fen Wu);周倩(Chien Chou)關鍵字：行動研究;國小學童;網路資源合理使用;雙層次測驗;action research;elementary students;fair use of Internet resources;two-tier test期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究之目的為探究國小高年級學童對於「網路資源合理使用」之認知情況，並以國小五年級學童為例，發展適合之課程單元與教學策略。首先，本研究編製網路資源合理使用之雙層次測驗，以瞭解國小高年級學童對於網路資源合理使用之迷思概念，採行動研究歷程模型為研究架構，並輔以系統化教學設計模式，以第一研究者為教師，實際進行兩個循環的教學活動及修正課程單元，最後藉由學童課後意見調查表、訪談、觀課教師與研究者自我反思來評鑑其教學成效。本研究結果可提供未來相關研究、教學設計之參考。英文摘要：The current research investigated whether fifth-grade students of elementary schools possessed the cognition and a positive attitude toward ”fair use of Internet resources” and developed instructional curriculum and strategies appropriate for the students. A two-tier test involving the fair use of Internet resources was conducted to examine whether the students knew how to reference online sources appropriately and if they had any misconceptions about proper citation and fair use. The first author performed two teaching trials as an action research practitioner, with the second trial being adjusted according to the students' performance in the first trial. The outcome of the experiment was evaluated using feedback from the students, the peer teachers' in-class observations, and the researchers' self-reflection. The results of this study have practical implications for future use in generating relevant teaching curricula.起始頁-結束頁：147-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).067篇名：科學想像力圖形測驗之發展並列篇名：Development of the Scientific Imagination Test-Figural作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng);何曉琪(Hsiao-Chi Ho)關鍵字：科學想像力圖形測驗;科學想像力歷程;Rasch部分給分模式;Rasch partial credit model;scientific imagination process;Scientific Imagination Test-Figural期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在科學想像力歷程模式的基礎下，發展適用於國小五、六年級的科學想像力圖形測驗。研究對象包含預試樣本558 位學生，正式樣本698 位學生。本測驗共有A、B、C、D 四項作業，每項作業均包含科學想像力歷程中的漫想力、聯想力、奇想力等三個向度，用以測量學生之科學想像力。經以Rasch部分給分模式分析，三向度的量表具有良好的模式資料適配度。所有的作業在男、女學生並無明顯的差異試題功能，且漫想力、聯想力、奇想力之信度分別是 .88、 .88 以及 .87。最後，本研究針對「科學想像力圖形測驗」的發展與應用，提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：This study developed the Scientific Imagination Test-Figural (SIT-Figural) for 5th and 6th graders on the basis of the scientific imagination process. A total of 1,256 students who completed the SIT-Figural constituted Sample 1 (n = 558) and Sample 2 (n = 698). The SIT-Figural, which was designed to measure the students' scientific imagination, comprised four tasks, A, B, C, and D–which covered three dimensions of the scientific imagination process, namely brainstorming, association, and transformation (or elaboration). The Rasch partial credit model was used to assess the model–data fit. A differential item functioning analysis was conducted to assess the consistency of the ratings provided by male and female students. The results revealed that the three dimensions of the SIT-Figural exhibited an acceptable model–data fit. The three subtests had person separate reliabilities of .88, .88, and .87. Finally, suggestions for future revisions and applications of the SIT-Figural have been proposed in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：177-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).078篇名：家長網路管教、學校投入與青少年危險網路行為之關係：家庭凝聚力之調節效果分析並列篇名：Relationships Between Parental Internet Intervention, School Engagement, and Risky Online Behaviors Among Adolescents: The Moderatoring Role of Family Cohesion作者：林漢唐(Han-Tang Lin);陳慧娟(Huey-Jiuan Chen)關鍵字：危險網路行為;家長網路管教;家庭凝聚力;學校投入;family cohesion;parental intervention;risky online behavior;school engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解家長網路管教、家庭凝聚力、學校投入、學校不熱衷與青少年危險網路行為的關係，並探討家庭凝聚力在家長網路管教與危險網路行為之調節作用。調查對象為臺灣本島與離島地區，公私立國中七、八、九年級共1,006位學生。研究工具包括自編之「危險網路行為量表」與「家長網路管教量表」，以及編修之「家庭凝聚力量表」與「學校投入與學校不熱衷量表」。主要研究結果如下：一、在本研究樣本中，近半數青少年曾在網路上進行過一項以上的危險活動；二、年級愈高，危險網路行為比例普遍增加；三、青少年持有個人智慧型手機者，出現危險網路行為的程度高於未擁有者；四、「家長監控」、「學校行為不熱衷」和「情感不熱衷」與青少年從事危險網路活動有正相關；五、「家長限制」、「家庭凝聚力」、「學校行為投入」及「情感投入」則與青少年危險網路行為有負相關；六、「學校不熱衷」對青少年危險網路行為的預測效果最明顯，其次依序為「家長監控」、「家長限制」，以及「家庭凝聚力」；七、「家庭凝聚力」對「家長網路管教」、「學校投入」與「危險網路行為」之關係具有調節效果。具體而言，在「家庭凝聚力」非常連結的情況下，「家長限制」和「學校投入」對其「危險網路行為」具有顯著的負向解釋力。而對於知覺家庭凝聚力疏離的國中生，「家長監控」對「危險網路行為」的正向解釋力高於非常連結之國中生。針對本研究發現整理出各項具體建議，提供教育實務及未來研究的參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the relationships between risky online behaviors, parental Internet intervention, family cohesion, school engagement among adolescents. Family cohesion was also tested as a moderator in the relationship between parental Internet intervention and risky online behavior. The participants of this study were 1,006 junior high school students in Taiwan, and included participants from offshore islands. Self-made scales were used, namely the Risky Online Behavior Scale, Parental Internet Intervention Scale, Family Cohesion Scale, and School Engagement Scale. The main findings of the study are as follows: (1) Nearly half of adolescents showed at least one online risky behavior; (2) Upper grade students scored higher than lower grade students in all types of risky online behaviors; (3) Smartphone owners showed higher levels of risky online behaviors in passive cyberbullying, making Internet friends, Internet stickiness addiction, online pornography, and online privacy intrusion than nonowners did; (4) Risky online behavior was associated significantly with parental monitoring, behavioral disengagement, and emotional disaffection in school; (5) Significant and negative relationships were found between parental restriction, family cohesion, behavioral engagement and emotional engagement in school, and online risky behavior; (6) The strongest predictor for adolescent risky online behavior was school disaffection, followed by parental monitoring, restriction, and family cohesion; (7) The relationships between parental Internet intervention, school engagement, and risky online behaviors among adolescents were moderated by family cohesion. On the basis of the findings of this study, suggestions are presented for schools, families, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：205-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).089篇名：”You Don't Know What Really Matters to Me!” Examining the Gaps Between Governmental Policies and Student Perspectives in International Student Recruitment Practices in Taiwan並列篇名：「其實你不懂我的心！」檢視臺灣吸引國際學生策略與學生來臺經驗落差之研究作者：王秀槐(Hsiou-Huai Wang);張珍瑋(Chen-Wei Chang)關鍵字：higher education;international student perspectives;international student recruitment policy;Taiwan;高等教育;國際學生招生政策;國際學生觀點;臺灣期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：In the present era of competitive globalization, rethinking the ideals and rationales involved in recruiting global talent is crucial. This study used Taiwan as a case study to explore the approaches adopted by a non-English speaking country for recruiting international students. The Taiwan government believes that it should foster an English language teaching environment in universities and provide sufficient financial support to international students in order to establish and strengthen political and diplomatic relationships with the students' home countries. However, international students emphasize cultural, linguistic, social, and vocational elements in their motives for studying abroad. Gaps apparently exist between governmental policies and students' perceptions. Suggestions for bridging these gaps were provided with regard to policy clarification, system building, and niche strengthening in the age of global competition.英文摘要：在競爭激烈的全球化時代，對於招募全球人才的理念與實踐進行省思更為重要。本研究以臺灣為個案，以瞭解一個非英語系國家如何採取招募策略以吸引國際學生。臺灣政府相關政策傾向於以全英語授課環境與足夠的獎學金吸引國際學生來臺，且期待進一步與國際學生的母國建立或堅固與臺灣之間的政治與外交關係。然而，對國際學生而言，他們來臺灣求學主要是受到學習中文／文化、良好社會環境與未來工作機會等誘因所吸引。本研究透過政策分析、問卷調查、學生訪談等方式瞭解在政府政策與學生期待之間產生的落差內涵，並提出藉由重新定位政策、建立國際學生輔導系統、強化臺灣利基等建議，以供未來招募國際學生政策與實踐的實質建議。起始頁-結束頁：243-270資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(4).0910篇名：學生擬題教學對情意學習成效及學業成就影響之後設分析並列篇名：Effects of the Problem Posing Strategies of Students on Affective Learning Outcomes and Academic Achievement: A Meta-Analysis作者：廖遠光(Yuen-Kuang Liao);張澄清(Cheng-Ching Chang)關鍵字：出題;後設分析;情意學習成效;學業成就;擬題;academic achievement;affective learning outcome;meta-analysis;problem posing;question posing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究應用後設分析法探討學生擬題教學對於提升情意及學業成就之效果，並試圖探討可能影響教學成效的變數。以擬題、出題、problem posing、problem generation、problem writing、problem formulation 為關鍵詞，至「臺灣博碩士論文」、「CETD 中文碩博士論文」、「臺灣期刊論文索引」及「CEPS 中文電子期刊」等資料庫檢索相關文獻，共蒐集擬題教學成效之實驗研究31 篇，可提供情意學習17 筆及學業成就34 筆之效果量，計有2,421 個樣本納入分析。研究結果顯示，學生擬題教學對於情意及學業成就具有正向效應，整體效果量分別為0.34 及0.57。意即對於情意及學業成就的提升，皆優於傳統講述式教學法，且對於學業成就的提升效果更佳。情意學習會受到「學科領域」、「教學者偏誤」、「擬題次數」及「網路擬題」等變數之調節作用而呈現差異；學業成就的調節變數則有「學習階段」、「學科領域」、「教學者偏誤」、「課程時數」及「分組學習」等。英文摘要：A meta-analysis was performed to synthesize existing research that investigated the effects of problem-posing strategies on the affective learning outcomes and academic achievement of students in Taiwan. We adopted problem posing, problem generation, problem writing, and problem formulation as keywords and gathered 31 studies (comprising 17 comparisons for the affective domain and 34 comparisons for academic achievement), converting their quantitative data to effect size (ES). The results demonstrated that problem posing strategies provided considerable benefits than traditional instruction did on students' affective learning outcomes (ES = 0.34) and academic achievement (ES = 0.57), and the larger positive effect sizes showed the benefit is greater on academic achievement. In addition, four moderator variables were selected for investigating affective learning outcomes and five moderator variables were selected for investigating academic achievement (including subject area, instructor bias, total number of courses, and cooperative learning), all of which had statistically significant impacts on the mean ES. Finally, the noteworthy suggestions and limitations of this study were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(3).0101篇名：混齡教學於國中小階段之實施方式與支持措施－多重個案探究並列篇名：Implementation and Support Measures for Mixed-age Teaching in Elementary and Junior High Schools: A Multiple Case Study作者：林欣毅(Hsin-Yi Lin);鄭章華(Chang-Hua Chen);廖素嫻(Su-Hsien Liao)關鍵字：少子化;合作學習;協同教學;差異化教學;探究式教學法;混齡教學;cooperative learning;differentiated instruction;inquiry-based instruction;mixed-age teaching;team teaching;low birth rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：為因應少子化導致學生人數漸減的趨勢，以及有效整合、善用學校資源，提供學生適性學習的機會，實施混齡教學有其重要性。本研究進行文獻分析、課室觀察及訪談，探討現行實施混齡教學的原因、方式與支持措施，並提出具體建議。研究發現以下三點，首先，混齡教學的原因可分為：因教育理念而實施混齡教學、因現實考量而實施混齡教學；混齡教學的實施方式至少包括：探究式教學、協同教學、合作學習、差異化教學法。另外，混齡教學的支持措施則從教師專業成長、課程規畫、學校行政支持三方面進行分析與論述。整體而言，混齡教學的實施不論在師資培育、教師專業成長、課程規畫、教學實施、行政措施等方面，皆需有更多的支持與配套。關於國中小混齡教學之研究在國內仍屬於初探階段，期待未來能有更多不同面向與不同研究方法之相關研究投入，俾使教育研究社群對於混齡教學能有更多的理解與運用。英文摘要：As a result of low birth rate and population decline, mixed-age teaching is critical for accommodating the needs of classes with fewer students and for effectively integrating and utilizing school resources to provide students with adaptive learning opportunities. Through literature analysis, classroom observations, and interviews, the underlying reasons for mixed age teaching, methods of implementation and support measures employed by schools are explored. The findings of this study are as follows: 1) The justifications for mixed-age teaching are based on educational philosophy and practical considerations; 2) mixed-age teaching is implemented through four approaches; namely, inquiry-based instruction, team teaching, cooperative learning, and differentiated instruction; and 3) measures for supporting mixed-age teaching can be analyzed and discussed from three aspects: teachers’ professional development, curriculum planning, and school administration support. Overall, implementing mixed-age teaching requires further support on aspects of pre-service teacher education, professional development, curriculum planning, teaching implementation, and administrative measures. Studies on mixed-age teaching in elementary and junior high schools in Taiwan are preliminary. The results of the studies may assist the educational research community in understanding and implementing mixed-age teaching.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：科學文本中英語「or」與漢語「或」的語義類型之比較－以《觀念物理》為例並列篇名：A Comparative Analysis of the Semantic Meaning Patterns of 'OR' in Physics Texts in English and Mandarin Chinese作者：蔣佳玲(Chia-Ling Chiang)關鍵字：科學文本;科學語言;跨語言比較;語義分析;cross-language comparison;science language;science text;semantic analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在透過跨語言的比較，分析英語科學文本中「or」與漢語科學文本中「或」的語義類型，藉以釐清英語「or」及漢語「或」所指涉的連接意涵，並比較二者語義類型的異同，以及「or」所對應的漢語表徵方式。本研究分析範疇為科學文本Conceptual Physics及其中文譯本《觀念物理》有關運動與力的主題，藉由技術建置語料庫，並透過韋氏字典、中研院現代漢語平衡語料庫、教育部重編國語詞典等語料分析資源，加以分析歸類。研究發現，漢語「或」的語義類型多達七種，包括排斥、兼容、所有、等同、兼有、列舉及近似之類型。英語「or」則具有六種語義類型，與「或」相較，「or」的意涵缺少「兼有」類型，實則「or」的「兼有」類型乃是利用「and」直接表述。此外，「or」除了直譯為「或」外，還發現漢語中另有十四種表徵形式用以傳達「or」的各類語義。綜合上述「or」與「或」的分析比較，在科學語言習得、科學文本識讀及科學教學應用上，本研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：In terms of cross language comparisons, this study aims to explore the semantic meaning patterns of the logical connective 'or' between English and Mandarin Chinese. An 'OR Corpus' was constructed with the source of the texts drawn from Conceptual Physics and its Chinese translation. The texts include topics of motion and forces. The semantic meanings of related translations were mainly analyzed and categorized using Webster's College Dictionary, Revised Mandarin Chinese Dictionary compiled by the Ministry of Education and the Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus of Modern Chinese. By looking into the free translations of 'or' in Mandarin Chinese and cases of translating 'and' into 'huo', seven meaning patterns of 'huo' (or) in Mandarin Chinese were identified. The free translations of 'or' and 'and' show that 'huo' encompasses 'inclusive or', 'exclusive or', 'identity', 'all', 'enumeration', 'approximation', and 'addition' meanings in Chinese. More importantly, the word 'or' by itself in English text does not quite express the meaning of addition. Besides, 'or' in English is not only translated directly into 'huo', but there are also 14 representative forms in Chinese to express various meanings of 'or' in English without the word 'huo'. Accordingly, the implications of Chinese science text editing and science language teaching were discussed and suggested.起始頁-結束頁：33-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：學生美感經驗、創意自我效能與創造力：教師創造力教學有效嗎？並列篇名：Students' Aesthetics Experience, Creative Self-Efficacy and Creativity: Is Creativity Instruction Effective?作者：張原誠(Yuan-Cheng Chang);蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：美感經驗;創造力;創造力教學;創意自我效能;aesthetic experience;creative self-efficacy;creativity;creativity instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主旨在探討學生美感經驗及創意自我效能對創造力的影響，並以教師的創造力教學做為調節變項，以創造力成分理論、創造力系統理論及創意自我效能理論為理論基礎，建立研究模式。研究對象為大專院校設計學門的畢業專題學生與專題指導老師，取樣50組畢業專題團隊，共50位指導老師與338位學生，並運用階層線性模式（HLM）來分析教師與學生層次間各變項的影響。研究結果發現，教師的提升創造力意向教學方式有助於學生美感經驗，而學生的美感經驗會影響創造力與創意自我效能；教師增進創造力技能的教學方式會透過學生審美的態度、對美的理解力與完整經驗，提升學生創意成品信念，但是透過學生對美的快感，則會降低學生創意成品信念；教師創造力教學在學生創意自我效能與創造力之間不會產生調節效果。根據以上發現，本研究認為學校為了學生創造力的發展，應該重視學生美感經驗的培養，而且也要重新檢討教師的創造力教學方式。英文摘要：Based on creativity component theory, creativity system theory and creative self-efficacy theory, this study aims to explore the influence of college students' aesthetics experience and creative self-efficacy on their creativity and the role of creativity instruction as a mediator variable. The participants were 338 college design majors in 50 teams who were working on their graduation exhibitions, and 50 advising professors from departments related to design. Hierarchical Linear Models were applied for analysis. The result showed that instruction on enhancing students' creative intention positively affect students' aesthetics experience. Students' aesthetics experience affects their creativity and creative self-efficacy. Creativity instruction with focus on creativity skills by means of promoting aesthetic attitude, aesthetic understanding, and offering complete experiences had a moderating effect on students' perception toward creative product. However, there was a negative moderating effect of creative instruction on perceived aesthetic pleasure and students' perception toward creative product. There was no moderating effect of creative instruction on the relationship between students' creative self-efficacy and creativity. Accordingly, the study concluded that in order to enhance students' creativity, universities should stress on the development of students' aesthetics experiences and re-evaluation of approaches to creativity instruction.起始頁-結束頁：65-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：樂齡學習中心經營者在方案規劃上的經驗學習並列篇名：The Managers' Experiential Learning of Program Planning in Active Ageing Learning Centers作者：葉俊廷(Chun-Ting Yeh)關鍵字：方案規劃;高齡學習;經驗學習;樂齡學習中心;Active Ageing Learning Centers;experiential learning;older adult learning;program planning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：高齡學習方案規劃是一項複雜的工作，要能夠成為一位獨當一面的規劃者，需經歷許多不同階段的學習及經驗的累積。本研究以樂齡學習中心為研究場域，研究目的是探討高齡學習方案規劃者的經驗學習歷程。本研究以立意抽樣選取七位具備跨領域專業能力且績效良好的樂齡學習中心方案規劃人員進行半結構式訪談，以持續比較法進行分析。研究結果顯示：(1)受訪者成為方案規劃者以前的經驗學習基礎，涵蓋家庭、生活、工作及學習的經驗；(2)受訪者成為方案規劃者之後的學習歷程，聚焦在領導團隊、研究所進修、專業領域發展，以及參與高齡相關組織的經驗學習；(3)受訪者的經驗學習對方案規劃的意義，包含反思方案規劃的合適性與成就感、專業背景及理論知識的應用，以及思考未來的學習規劃及經營策略。英文摘要：Planning older adult learning programs is really a complex work. Program planners go through different learning stages and accumulate experiences to be able to undertake the task alone. This study aimed to explore the experiential learning process of older adult learning program planners who work in the Active Ageing Learning Centers (AALCs). Semi-structure interviews were conducted with seven program planners. The findings of this study were identified as follows. 1) Before being a program planner, the participants’ knowledge results from grasping and transforming experience gained from their family, their daily lives and past learning experiences; 2) after being a program planner, the participants’ experiential learning focused on leadership, training in the institute, professional development, as well as involvement in organizations for elderly people; and 3) the participants’ experiential learning outcomes in the older adult learning program planning include: their ability to reflect on the appropriateness and fulfillment of program planning, to apply theoretical knowledge and professional background in the field, and to make plans for future learning and business strategies.起始頁-結束頁：105-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：後現代的幸福生涯觀：變與不變的生涯理論與生涯諮商之整合模型並列篇名：Post-Modern Perspective of Career Happiness: An Integrated Model of Career Theory and Career Counseling for the Changing World and Steady Core作者：黃素菲(Su-Fei Huang)關鍵字：生命故事;生命設計;生涯諮商;幸福生涯;career counseling;career happiness;life design;life story期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以文獻回顧法探討國內外重要的生涯相關文獻，聚焦於實證論到建構論的轉變，討論在社會「變」局中「不變」的決策核心之生涯特徵，以整合生涯理論與實務。首先，論述後現代的幸福生涯觀，呈現三個特徵：(1)21世紀社會的生涯是應變之學，風險社會的不確定性，引發新興成人群的春季危機，年輕人延後進入成人階段；(2)多元生涯類型與風貌的時代，已取代過去集體敘事的生涯路徑；(3)幸福生涯注重獲致主觀的滿意感，而非追求成功。其次，進行新興生涯觀點與生涯個人化故事的相關研究回顧，並分別論述與變動社會的相關理論，和穩定「不變」的生涯決策主體需要的生涯諮商介入策略。最後，提出整合觀點，橫軸是迎接「變/無常」的社會局勢的生涯理論，需要學習的四種生涯理論以因應生涯挑戰：(1)持有積極不確定性態度；(2)重視計畫性機緣與機會；(3)迎接混沌現象的事實；(4)體驗共時性的直觀經驗。縱軸是面對「不變/常」的穩定決策核心，可以運用四個生涯諮商方法：(1)建立生涯願景；(2)從事自己的生活設計；(3)探索生命故事；(4)提升生涯適應力。並說明研究限制與提出建議。英文摘要：Through literature review, career theories and practices with focus on the shift from positivist to constructivist views in both domestic and international literatures are explored. At first, post-modern perspective of career happiness including three career features, are discussed: 1) The career character in the 21st century emphasizes flexible wisdom. The uncertainty of risk society has triggered young adults to take the load road to adulthood in the 21st century; 2) Multiple career types have replaced traditional collective narrative path; 3) Career happiness is gained through subjective satisfaction. Secondly, via review the frontier theories and the postmodern career personalization literatures, I discuss both related theories for changing society and counseling method for unchangeable career decision making. Then, an ”Integrated model of career counseling and career theory for changing world/anicca and steady core/ anitya” as a conceptual basis for career counseling is proposed. The horizontal axis indicates the unpredictability and uncertainty of the 21st century ”changing world” suggesting a need to learn from four career theories to meet the challenges: 1) Hold on to positive uncertainty attitude; 2) acknowledge the planned happenstance; 3) greet career chaos; and 4) experience the synchronicity intuitive experience. The vertical axis indicates a ”steady core” for subjective career decision-making. There are four paths for counseling: 1) build career vision; 2) engage in life design; 3) explore life story; and 4) increase career adaptability. Finally, suggestions are offered and limitations of the study are explained.起始頁-結束頁：137-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：大學影片鑑賞教學模式之發展與效果－以女性主義及生命教育為影片議題並列篇名：Developing and Refining Film Appreciation Instruction for Feminist and Life Education Films作者：楊馥如(Fu-Ju Yang)關鍵字：行動研究;影片鑑賞;藝術鑑賞;鑑賞教學;action research;appreciation teaching;art appreciation;film appreciation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：影片是當前大學生最常接觸的媒體，但目前影片鑑賞教學的研究仍為不足。研究者將藝術品的藝術鑑賞方法融入影片鑑賞特質，且兼顧學習者的感受與詮釋，建構大學中的影片鑑賞教學模式，希望為日後影片鑑賞教學實務與研究提供發展方向，也作為改進鑑賞相關教學之參考。本研究採行動研究方法，進行研究資料蒐集與分析。首先透過文獻探討建構影片鑑賞教學之模式，之後實施於兩屆新生的「視覺傳播概論」課程中，第一、二年班級都採用四部影片，各歷時十四週，採用觀察、訪談、文件分析、問卷等方式蒐集資料。研究結果顯示影片鑑賞教學的賞析細目需要融入影片特色而加以調整，可增列學生（觀者）感受、見解或經驗的省思。問卷資料與質性調查結果顯示學生能瞭解與分析影片的形式、技法、意涵等；藉由影片的反思，促成想法甚至行為的改變。教師可融入議題，設計相關問題讓學生思考；引導性的討論比開放性討論更有效率；且良好設計之學習單、報告可用來檢驗學生的學習成果。英文摘要：Film is a medium to which contemporary university students have the most exposure. However, little research has been conducted on teaching film appreciation. In this study, art appreciation methods are adapted for film appreciation in the attempt to establish a new teaching model for film appreciation in Taiwanese universities that enables students to express personal responses. This approach opens up new possibilities for future teaching practice and research while serving as a reference for improving film appreciation education. This study employs an action research method for data collection and analysis. A model for teaching film appreciation was established based on literature review and implemented in a freshman course titled “Introduction to Visual Communication” for two consecutive years. Four films were used over 14 weeks in both years the course was offered, and data was collected through observation, interviews, document analysis (worksheets, feedback forms, reflection notes), and questionnaires. Results show that the implementation of teaching film appreciation must be adjusted in accordance with the characteristics of films studied by addressing student (viewer) reaction, personal views and experience. Students were able to understand and analyze film formats, techniques and meaning. Their self-reflection encouraged changes in their thinking and sometimes even behavior. Guided discussions were found to be more effective than free discussion. Well-designed worksheets and both oral and written reports were useful for evaluating learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：173-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：人與食物的距離－鄉村小學食農教育課程發展之行動研究並列篇名：An Action Research on Food and Farming Education Curriculum Development in a Rural Elementary School作者：康以琳(Yi-Lin Kang);張瑋琦(Wei-Chi Chang)關鍵字：行動研究;食育;食農教育;學校本位課程;環境教育;action research;environmental education;food and farming education;food education;school-based curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：在現代化的發展下，農村結構面臨劇烈的變化，農村孩童對土地及農家認同上的傳承逐漸疏遠。針對此一現象，世界許多國家皆推行小學食農教育，例如烹飪課程及學校菜園種植，以促進孩童與食物、環境及社區的連結。本研究旨在發展一套「從土地到餐桌」的食農教育課程架構，以供小學推動參考。第一作者為小學專任老師，兩位作者於2011 年至2012 年間，擇苗栗縣一鄉村小學，帶領五、六年級學生實作「食農教育」，透過三個學期的行動研究歷程，發展出「農事課程」、「烹飪課程」及「食農知識性課程」三大課程架構。本研究發現這些課程能帶給學生多元有趣的學習經驗，並在學習者身上產生具體且正向的改變，在農地及種植知識取得容易，又易獲得社區居民協助的鄉村學校，十分適宜推動。在實務操作上，本研究提出五點建議:老師可考慮採用實作且彈性的教學方式、結合在地人力資源、運用學校的閒置空間、可組織志同道合的教師團隊相互支持或與環境教育接軌，發展成具有特色的學校本位課程。英文摘要：Rural agricultural demographics and farming structure has shown fierce changes in the modernizing society over the past years. The young generation in rural areas has distanced from the land and their families’ farmer identity. Countries worldwide has revamped their ”food & farming curriculum” to include cooking lessons and school gardens at the elementary school stage to strengthen children’s connection with food, environment and the community. This study developed a framework of ”food & farming curriculum” through action research to establish farm-to-table experience for elementary students. The framework includes ”farming experience activities”, ”cooking lessons” and ”knowledge of food and farming lessons.” The curriculum was carried out for fifth and sixth grade students for three semesters in a rural elementary school in Miaoli County, from 2011 to 2012. The study found that this curriculum brings positive changes to pupils and helps in regaining their passion to learning. The curriculum is suitable to be applied especially in rural schools because of the accessibility of land, agricultural knowledges and community support. The study proposed five suggestions to teachers who are interested in food and farming education, including hands-on and flexibility teaching; using the local human resources; applications of unused space in the school; looking for like-minded teachers to form a teaching team; and combining environmental education with school-based curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：應用Bronfenbrenner之生態系統取向探究臺灣國中學生英語學習成就之影響因素並列篇名：Factors Influencing Junior High School Students’ English Language Achievement in Taiwan: A Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological System Approach作者：龔心怡(Hsin-Yi Kung);李靜儀(Ching-Yi Lee)關鍵字：大眾傳播媒體與網際網路;父母參與;英語學習成就;教師信念／態度;Bronfenbrenner 生態系統取向;Bronfenbrenner’s ecological systems approach;English language achievement;mass media/the Internet;parental involvement;teachers’ beliefs/attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究利用Bronfenbrenner 的生態系統觀點來探究影響臺灣國中學生英語學習成就之相關因素，並以結構方程模式來探討變項間之關係，問卷調查對象為709 位臺灣中部地區國中三年級學生。研究結果發現：(1)臺灣國中學生的「英語學習成就模式」可由父母參與、教師信念／態度、親師互動、大眾傳播媒體與網際網路共同塑造。(2)大眾傳播媒體與網際網路可以顯著預測父母參與和教師信念／態度；父母參與和教師信念／態度可以顯著預測學生的英語學習成就；且父母參與和教師信念／態度彼此相關。(3)大眾傳播媒體與網際網路經由父母參與和教師信念／態度，對學生英語學習成就的完全中介效果成立，且教師信念／態度的效果大於父母參與。這些研究結果呼應Bronfenbrenner 的生態系統理論，驗證在臺灣社會大系統（macrosystem）強調英語學習重要性之文化氛圍下，外在系統（exosystem）的大眾傳播媒體與網際網路可以藉由中系統（mesosystem）的父母－教師之互動合作、小系統（microsystem）的父母參與、教師信念／態度來共同影響學生的英語學習成就。本研究最後提出具體建議與議題討論，以供英語學習之參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to construct a social profile of Taiwanese students’ English language achievement by employing Bronfenbrenner’s perspectives. Data were collected on a sample of 709 ninth graders in central Taiwan via survey questionnaires and were analyzed using structural equation modeling. The results indicated that, first, a Taiwanese Students' English Language Achievement model was constructed by parental involvement, teachers’ beliefs/attitudes, parent–teacher interaction, and mass media/the Internet. Second, mass media/the Internet significantly predicted parental involvement and teachers’ beliefs/attitudes; parental involvement and teachers’ beliefs/attitudes significantly predicted students’ English language achievement; the correlation between parental involvement and teachers’ beliefs/attitudes was significant. Third, the completely mediating effects of parental involvement and teachers’ beliefs/attitudes in predicting students’ English language achievement from mass media/the Internet were supported, and the effect of teachers’ beliefs/attitudes tended to be stronger than parental involvement. These findings were in line with Bronfenbrenner’s theory and demonstrate that the influence of the mass media/the Internet (exosystem) in students’ English language achievement conveyed the degree of parental involvement (microsystem), teachers’ beliefs/attitudes (microsystem), and the interaction between parents and teachers (mesosystem), especially within the context of the socio-cultural atmosphere in Taiwan (macrosystem). Implications and suggestions were discussed and provided to enhance students’ English language learning.起始頁-結束頁：35-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學9篇名：進修學校學生之職業認同與對進修學校功能之看法並列篇名：Vocational School Students’ Vocational Identity and Their Views on the Functions of School作者：石政言(Cheng-Yen Shih);蔣佳玲(Chia-Ling Chiang)關鍵字：進修教育;職業教育;職業認同;continuing education;vocational education;vocational identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探索學生對職業進修學校功能的看法，以及學生的職業認同與對學校功能看法之間的關係。循此理解學生認為學校對其從事之職業所具有的實質幫助，以作為規劃進修學校課程與學習目標的參考。為達研究目的，本研究以半結構式晤談與心智圖繪製為主，邀請十位年齡分布範圍在18-22 歲之間，具有現職工作的進修學校學生參與研究。研究者與每位學生個別訪談時間約六十分鐘，訪談時請學生繪製心智圖，以表達其想法。研究結果發現，學生視職業進修學校為獲得畢業文憑與考取專業證照的管道、提供交友功能的場所、以及逃避社會現實壓力的角落。職業承諾高的學生偏向深度的職業探索，為獲取高職學歷及專業證照、謀求更好的薪資待遇與自我肯定，他們積極投入學習。職業承諾低的學生則仍處於職業探索階段，不斷尋求職涯目標。他們對現職工作及學校課程有所疑惑，但若有值得認同的楷模或具有願景的目標展現在他們眼前，部分職業承諾低的學生會激發出積極的職業動機，展現生涯變化的可能性。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the students’ viewpoints on the functions of vocational schools, as well as the connection between their vocational identity and their opinions on the functions of schools. After understanding the students’ views of the practical support their schools have provided, the curricula and learning goals of vocational schools were reexamined. Ten in-service vocational school students, between the ages of 18-22, were invited to participate in this study. Each student was interviewed individually by the researchers for approximately 60 minutes and they were asked to use mind maps to express their viewpoints. The results showed that students regarded the vocational school as a means to obtain diplomas and professional licenses, a place to get to know friends, and a place to escape from the pressures of reality. Students with higher vocational commitment tended to care about their careers more deeply. In order to obtain a degree or professional licenses, a higher salary, and greater self-affirmation, these students actively engaged in learning. Students with lower vocational commitment tended to be in the stage of career exploration as they kept searching for career goals. They were confused by their current jobs and with the school curriculum; however, when an identified career role model or a hopeful vision was demonstrated to them, some students with lower vocational commitment would be stimulated to gain a positive career motivation and expressed the flexibility to have a career/life change.起始頁-結束頁：67-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學10篇名：大學生網路出題表現之內容分析與創意指標建立並列篇名：Content Analysis of Online Undergraduate Student-Generated Questions and the Development of Its Creativity Indicators作者：于富雲(Fu-Yun Yu);蘇嘉鈴(Chia-Ling Su)關鍵字：有趣性;創意指標;新奇性;適切性;學生網路出題;creativity index;interestingness;novelty;online student-generated questions;usefulness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：有鑑於目前學生網路出題研究的不足處（學生出題內容分析與創意指標建立之研究多涉及數學學習領域，選定結構性問題類型，採用紙本出題方式，甚少關注學生出題情意層面），本研究目的有二：一、採質化角度，以內容分析法解析大學生網路出題的內容、創意形式與技巧；二、發展大學生網路出題創意品質的評估指標，探討不同創意程度題目在各指標的差異，建立指標效度。研究目的一，以54 名師培生進行網路學生出題活動所編寫的792 道題目進行內容分析；研究目的二，以另一批40 名師培生於共識評量卷之回應資料，進行重複量數變異數分析與事後比較。主要研究發現：一、學生出題內容多能環繞與個人生活相關題材；二、學生多能善用電腦科技特有格式化或多彩圖案功能，達多項用途；三、學生網路出題允許多樣創意形式、技巧的展現；四、三種不同創意程度題目在新奇性與有趣性有顯著差異，此結果支持新奇性與有趣性之分類與定義具效度；然適切性未達顯著差異，此結果支持增加題目新奇、有趣成分無損適切性之論述。文末，根據研究發現，提出學生出題與創意教學以及未來研究之建議。英文摘要：In light of current research gaps in online student-generated questions (SGQ) (as most studies on the content types, forms, and performance criteria of SGQ are done in math, adopting a structured format, using a paper-and-pencil form, and paying less attention to affective aspects), the purposes of this study are: first, to analyze the content, forms, and techniques of online SGQ via content analysis; second, to develop the creative indicators for online SGQ and establish the validity of the devised indicators. For the first purpose, 792 questions generated by 54 student teachers during online SGQ activities were subjected to content analysis. For the second purpose, another group of 40 student teachers completed a consensus questionnaire, and the data were analyzed via repeated measures, followed by post-hoc comparisons. Four major findings were obtained: 1) with regard to the contents of online SGQ, connections to personal daily life and future personal goals were frequently observed; 2) most participants took advantage of the formatting, color, and graphics features afforded in computer technologies during online SGQ to suit multiple purposes; 3) participants exhibited versatile skills during SGQ; 4) questions with different levels of creativity differed significantly in terms of novelty and interestingness indicators, supporting the validity of the devised indicators. Yet, no significant differences were found in the usefulness indicator, supporting the claim that novelty and interestingness do not necessarily compromise the perceived usefulness of the generated item. Based on the findings, suggestions for SGQ, creative teaching, and future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：97-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學11篇名：臺灣與中國大陸深圳地區大學生學習動機與學習成效發展之比較：以學習模式為中介變項並列篇名：A Comparative Study on the Relationship Between Learning Motivations and Outcomes of College Students in Taiwan and Shenzhen Region of Mainland China: Learning Modes as Mediators作者：何希慧(Sophia Shi-Huei Ho);彭耀平(Yao-Ping Peng)關鍵字：兩岸大學生;高等教育;學生學習成效;學習動機;學習模式;cross-strait college students;higher education;learning modes;learning motivation;student learning outcome期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：過往西方研究多以東方文化檢視亞洲地區學生，然而，相同的文化情境卻可能因不同的社會體制，導致教與學結果的差異。本研究試圖從心理動機角度，檢視臺灣與中國大陸學生的學習動機類型，並評估其學習模式與學習成效間關係比較。樣本調查對象以兩岸大學商學院學生為主，研究變數之操作性定義改編自Li 等人（2007）、Nasir 等人（2009）、Philip 等人（2008）、Pike等人（2011）及White 等人（2008）所開發之研究量表，以李克特5 點尺度進行測量，取樣方式採立意抽樣，問卷填答者以樣本學校之二、三、四年級學生為主。臺灣有效問卷數計378 份，中國大陸為273 份，以AMOS 軟體進行結構方程模式（SEM）分析兩群組樣本在研究路徑關係之比較。研究結果顯示，臺灣學生在應用型學習的認知程度高於大陸學生，但在學業認同的認知程度則低於大陸學生。另在路徑分析部分，臺灣學生在角色認同對於探索型及應用型學習的正向影響，及應用型學習對認知獲益與非認知獲益的正向影響皆優於大陸學生。英文摘要：Previous studies in the relationship of learning motivation and outcome were mostly conducted on research samples in Asia from the perspective of oriental culture; however, under the same cultural background, different social systems might lead to different teaching and learning outcomes. Therefore, this study examines the learning motivation patterns of Taiwan and Mainland China college students from the perspectives on psychological motivation, and investigates the relationship between learning modes and learning outcomes. Adopting judgmental sampling, a total of 651 valid questionnaires were collected from cross-strait business college sophomore, junior, and senior students. The measurement scales were developed by Li et al. (2007), Nasir et al. (2009), Philip et al. (2008), Pike et al. (2011), White et al. (2008), and all measures were 5-point Likert-type scales. The path relationship of the two groups was examined through structural equation modeling (SEM) using AMOS. The results showed that exploitative learning was perceived as more effective by the college students in Taiwan as compared to those in Mainland China. In terms of academic identity, the contrary is the case. However, in path analysis, Taiwanese students were superior to Chinese students in regard to the positive influence of role identity on exploitative and explorative learning and the positive influence of exploitative learning on cognitive and non-cognitive gains.起始頁-結束頁：139-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學12篇名：Derrida解構思想之探析及其教育蘊義並列篇名：An Exploration of Derrida’s Philosophy of Deconstruction and Its Implications for Education作者：洪如玉(Ru-Yu Hung)關鍵字：延異;痕跡;解構;增補;deconstruction;Derrida;differance;supplement;trace期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文試圖探討後結構思想家Jacques Derrida 的解構思想，從四個主要解構思想概念的探討開始，分別是「解構」（deconstruction）、「延異」（differance）、「痕跡」（trace）、「增補」（supplement），進而探討其思想在教育面向上的四點蘊義：一、透過解構文本語言結構解構思想傳統；二、創造各種閱讀經典的可能性衍生無窮的教育意義；三、超越「聽、說、讀、寫」的教育想像；四、以遊戲之生命態度增補嚴肅之理論態度。其次本文以三個事例探究解構思想策略運用的效力及其限制，三個事例分別關注中國古代社會女性纏足以及印度寡婦殉夫的性別身體政治學、圖書館學與知識分類、Paul de Man 事件之倫理學含意，由上述概念與事例之剖析，指出解構對教育之最深刻的意義在於持續的自我質疑與自我挑戰，並不在於直接在現實俗務上的挪用與應用，否則解構反而可能喪失其靈動性的批判力。英文摘要：This paper aims to discuss the post-structural philosopher Jacques Derrida’s philosophy of deconstruction and its implications for education. There are four main notions to be investigated: deconstruction, differance, trace and supplement. By interrogating the four notions, the author reveals four implications for education. They are as follows: 1) The deconstruction of the textual structure is to deconstruct the traditions of thought. 2) Reading the Classics in different ways is helpful to increase educational meanings. 3) Imagination about education should go beyond the conventional way of learning by means of ”listening, speaking, reading and writing”. 4) Playfulness is able to replenish austerity in theorizing ways of life. The author, then, uses three examples concerning gender body politics, library and information science, and the Paul de Man event to explore the dynamics and limits of the deconstruction as a strategy of analyzing the discourse. At the end, the author concludes that the most profound significance of deconstruction lies in continuous self-questioning and self-challenging rather than serving as a tool of straightforward appropriation and application to reality affairs. Otherwise, the notion of deconstruction could lose its dynamical criticality.起始頁-結束頁：173-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學13篇名：數位科技時代中美國遠距大學生的學業操守問題與因應並列篇名：Distance Student and Academic Integrity in American Colleges: Challenges and Strategies作者：陳鏗任(Ken-Zen Chen)關鍵字：遠端監考;學生身份認證;學業操守;academic integrity;remote proctoring;student authentication期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：29卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：防範遠距大學生學業舞弊一直是美國大學推動線上教學時關注的焦點。本文考察了美國近二十年來對於學業操守與學業舞弊之研究文獻，訪談十八所美國大學院校，歸納目前遠距教學在確保學生學業操守所遇到的難題，分析學業舞弊的樣態與可能的科技解決方案，提供國內華文MOOCs在學習歷程認證上的階段性參考。本研究發現，在學生身份認證及遠端監考上，目前已有可行之新科技可用於協助確保大學生的學業操守。然而，運用科技方案來防杜學業舞弊問題，仍然需要學校規章、教學與評量活動、以及校園文化的整體配套方有成效。文末，本研究對開設MOOCs課程的我國大學院校，提出提升遠距學生學業操守的可行建議作為階段性參考。英文摘要：This article provides a comprehensive overview of the academic integrity of distance student at higher education institutions in the United States. The advancement of technology challenges university practices in the prevention of online academic misconducts such as financial aid fraud and online cheating. The author reviewed related research literature, governmental publications, regulatory and compliance information, and the state-of-art of new technologies that may address such concerns. Authentication and proctoring service providers within eighteen higher education institutions were interviewed to capture up-to-date practices. This article concludes the importance of positive academic culture even if new technological solutions are in place to deal with these misconducts. Finally, insightful suggestions are provided for colleges in Taiwan that are offering MOOCs.起始頁-結束頁：199-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：興趣驅動之提問式主題閱讀模式發展與評估並列篇名：Development and Evaluation of Interest-driven Theme-based Enquiry Reading Model作者：廖長彥(Calvin C. Y. LIAO);張菀真(Wan-Chen CHANG);陳秉成(Bing-Cheng CHEN);陳德懷(Tak-Wai CHAN)關鍵字：興趣驅動閱讀;主題閱讀;閱讀理解策略;K-W-L;interest-driven reading;theme-based reading;reading comprehension strategy;K-W-L期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究提出興趣驅動之「提問式主題」模式，結合K-W-L模式與閱讀理解策略。此模式分為「探奇」、「述感」與「思辨」三階段。我們基於此模式發展平台，並在教育現場實踐，進行一學期的活動，包括知識性與非知識性主題活動共四次，共有國小四年級109名學生參與；透過平台收集學生的想法與寫作成品，並實施閱讀理解測驗前、後測。結果顯示：（1）非知識性主題較知識性主題引發學生更多想法，但知識性主題能促使學生產生更多關於主題內容的想法；（2）此模式對高、中、低能力學生的閱讀理解皆有所助益；（3）在模式中，閱讀理解、產生想法與寫作表現三者呈高度正相關。而知識性主題對高能力學生產生想法與寫作字數有幫助。本研究亦針對此模式、後續工作提出建議。英文摘要：This study proposed an interest-driven theme-based enquiry reading model which incorporated K-W-L model and reading comprehension strategies. In this model, students could read and acquire knowledge from several articles related to the same theme but with different disciplines. This model consisted of three stages: triggering interest in reading theme-based articles, immersing interest via group discussion, and extending interest by new topic exploration. The participants were 109 Grade 4 students. Results showed that: (a) students generated more ideas in triggering stage than in immersing stage; (b) students generated more ideas for articles with knowledgeable theme than those without; (c) regardless of articles with or without knowledgeable theme, students of different reading ability (high, medium, low) also generated less ideas in immersing stage than in triggering stage. Finally, the effect of this model on reading, discussion, writing, and deep learning was discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：兒童讀本結合全語言閱讀教學與鷹架學習概念運用於國小國語課程之學習成效探討並列篇名：The Study of Integrating Children Books with Whole Language Reading Strategies and the Scaffolding Concept in Elementary Chinese Reading Classes作者：蘇雅珍(Ya-Chen SU)關鍵字：閱讀教學;國語文教學;全語言教學;鷹架學習;童書運用緒論;reading instruction;language teaching;whole language;scaffolding learning;children literature期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：閱讀是一切學習的主要基礎。兒童可藉由閱讀吸取知識、促進學習與成長。本研究以台灣南部某國小兩班五年級學生為研究對象，進行「童書結合全語言閱讀教學與鷹架學習概念」融入國語文課程的教學實驗，一班為「實驗組」，另一班為「對照組」。研究發現：（1）教學實驗後兩組間國語文閱讀理解能力與閱讀動機有顯著差異；（2）教學實驗前、後「實驗組」本身國語文閱讀理解能力與閱讀動機有顯著差異；（3）「實驗組」學生喜歡教師的課堂活動安排；（4）「實驗組」學生的閱讀行為變得主動積極，喜歡閱讀故事書。本研究結果期能為國小教師、專家、學者，提供對童書結合全語言閱讀教學與鷹架學習概念融入國語文課程的參考。英文摘要：Reading is fundamental to language learning. Children can also acquire knowledge through reading. This study aimed to explore the effect of integrating children literature with whole language reading strategies and the scaffolding concept into Chinese reading classes on Taiwanese students' learning motivation and attitudes. Two teachers who teach Grade 5 students agreed to participate in this study. One class of 31 students received the experimental study and was the experimental group whereas another class of 32 students served as the control group. There are four findings: (1) significant differences existed between the experimental and control group in reading comprehension proficiency and learning motivation; (2) students' reading comprehension proficiency and learning motivation in the experimental group significantly increased; (3) students in the experimental group enjoyed the teacher's class arrangement; and (4) students in the experimental group became more active and enjoyed reading books after the study. This study helps elementary teachers, educators, and specialists develop an understanding of the possibility of implementing children literature, whole language reading strategies, and the scaffolding concept into Taiwan's elementary Chinese reading classes.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：活動理論觀點下國小師資生數學課程轉化的阻力與助力並列篇名：A Study of the Resisting and Assisting Factors to the Mathematics Curriculum Transformation for Elementary School Pre-service Teachers - Drawing on Activity Theory作者：陳彥廷(Yen-Ting CHEN)關鍵字：中介物;活動理論;師資生;課程轉化;擾動;mediating artefact;Activity Theory;elementary school pre-service teachers;curriculum transformation;disturbance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以活動理論探究14位國小師資生在數學課程轉化社群運作時，於分工、規則與工具等中介物出現的擾動現象，因擾動形成的阻力，以及因應阻力形成助力的策略。資料分析是以會議對話、觀察日誌、課程教案與反思心得為依據。研究發現社群運作產生三個擾動現象：在分工面向上無法以「拼圖式」合作完成共識；在規則面向上無法針對社群形塑的「公約式」規範達成共識；在工具面向上對會議功能見解不同。研究者進一步分析擾動現象背後的阻力，進而思考化阻力為助力的策略：在分工面向，以示範取代開放、以反駁取代提問、以盡力取代應付；在規則面向，以認同取代責任；在工具面向，以專注取代外務、以平等取代學歷、以回顧鏡取代反思。英文摘要：This study drew on Activity Theory to study the ”mathematics curriculum transformation learning community” established by 14 elementary school pre-service teachers. It focused on studying the disturbance phenomenon experienced from the three mediating artefacts - division of labor, rules, and instruments - during the process of the mathematics curriculum transformation, the resistances caused by the disturbances, and the formation of assisting strategies in response to the resistances. The researcher analyzed data collected from dialogic corpora of meetings, field observation data, curriculum teaching plan, and reflective data. Three disturbance phenomena in operation of the learning community were found: (a) from the ”division of labor” perspective, members of the learning community were unsuccessful in cooperating as a ”jigsaw” to reach consensus on how to complete the curriculum transformation task; (b) from the ”rules” perspective, members were unable to reach consensus on establishing a ”conventional” norm for the learning community; (c) from the ”instruments” perspective, members were diverged on the ”function” of meeting. The researcher further analyzed the varying resistances aroused by the three different disturbances, and looked for ways to turn a stumbling block into a stepping stone: in the ”division of labor” perspective, substituting ”demonstration” for ”liberty,” ”refutation” for ”questions,” ”persistence” for ”negligence”; in the ”rules” perspective, substituting ”identification” for ”responsibility”; in the ”instruments” perspective, substituting ”concentration” for ”distraction,” ”equality” for ”prejudice,” and ”mirror” for ”reflection” - ultimately turning resistances into assistances.起始頁-結束頁：51-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：國小教育機構學習態度、網路學習社群對數學科學習成效模式之建構與驗證並列篇名：Constructing and Implementing a Conception Model of Learning Attitude, Web-based Learning Community and Learning Achievement of Mathematics for Primary Education Institutions作者：余舜基(Shun-Chi YU)關鍵字：學習態度;網路學習社群;數學科學習成效;國小教育;learning attitude;web-based learning community;learning achievement of mathematics;primary education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來，隨<U+7740>十二年國民義務教育的實施，學生在各教育階段的學習成績都受到關注，尤其是國民小學（下稱國小）學生的數學科教育更受到教育當局、學校機關及家長重視。傳統根深柢固的觀念認為，數學科學習成效屬於國家教育的重要議題，要從加強學生本身的學習態度<U+7740>手，才能有效促進數學科的學習成效。此外，無線網路發達促使國小學生網路學習社群的發展，然而這些社群除了提供各種數學補救教學平台或是大專生偏鄉遠距課輔學習活動外，仍需注意其中介影響效果，以利提升學生的數學科學習成效。研究顯示，國小學生的學習認知、情感認知及反應行為有助提升數學科的學習成效，因為在網路學習社群的影響下，愈正確的學習認知，正向影響國小學生數學科學習成效的程度亦會愈高。此外，網路學習社群對於學習態度與數學科學習成效具有正向的部分中介效果。因此，本研究針對台灣台南市國小學生的數學科學習成效進行研究，期盼相關單位或機關能重視研究的建議，據以改善國小學生的學習態度，以提高數學科學習成效。英文摘要：This study, conducted in 2014, aimed to explore web-based learning community as a mediator between learning attitude and learning achievement of mathematics in primary education institutions. The effective sample included 309 students. A research model of learning attitude, web-based learning community and learning achievement of mathematics was proposed and tested by using structural equation modeling. Results demonstrated that web-based learning community was a mediating factor in the relationship between learning attitude and learning achievement of mathematics. The findings suggest not only that it is important to consider learning attitudes in understanding students' learning achievement of mathematics, but also that web-based learning community plays an important role in this relationship. Based on the research findings, the author puts forward a number of relevant directions and implications of findings for school authorities. Finally, the author provides some suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：81-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：如果可以這樣學自然！－國小學生在社會性科學議題教學中知識、動機與合作能力的改變並列篇名：If Learning Science Is Like This - Elementary Students' Change in Knowledge, Motivation, and Cooperative Skills Through Socioscientific issues-based Learning作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin CHIN);胡芳禎(Fang-Jen HU)關鍵字：小組合作能力;社會性科學議題教學;科學教育;科學學習動機;cooperative skills;socioscientific issues-based teaching;science education;motivation of science learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以社會性科學議題（socioscientific issues，下稱SSI）本位教學，從事研究。教學設計是以「土石流」為科學學習單元，「是否開發山坡地」為SSI，發展教學模組，在一個五年級班級進行7週的教學。在教學前後與過程中，採用混合研究法，藉問卷、學習單及訪談，蒐集量性與質性資料，探討學生的自然科學習動機、小組合作技能及「土石流」的知識是否改變。經SSI教學後，學生於此三項的表現均有顯著增長。科學學習動機中的「學習環境誘因」、「成就目標」、「主動學習策略」、「科學學習價值」有顯著提升。小組合作技能中的「溝通」及「個人和團體的成長」等亦有顯著進步。學生回應喜歡SSI教學，且它有助學習；而討論、觀摩、蒐集資料、思考他人想法為學習的特色。本文並對SSI教學的實施與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study adopted socioscientific issues (SSI)-based learning to do an empirical research. The topic ”mudslide” and the issue ”whether slope of mountain was exploited for human utilization” were chosen for developing a 7-week teaching module, and then practiced in a purposely selected Grade 5 class. The mixed method was adopted, including pre- and post-test of instruments, worksheets, and interviews. Quantitative and qualitative data were collected to investigate students' changes in motivation toward learning science, skills in cooperative learning, and knowledge in the learned topic. After SSI-based learning, all these three domains were found improved significantly. In terms of motivation toward science learning, the scores in subscales ”stimuli of learning environment,” ”achievement goals,” ”active learning strategies,” and ”values of science learning” were significantly increased. In cooperative skills, the subscales of ”communication” and ”growth of individual and group” were significant increased. To sum up, discussion, emulation from peers, information gathering, and thinking of peers' opinions were viewed as the special feature of SSI learning. Based on this study, SSI teaching and its research in the future were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：101-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：「生態自我」理念及其對生態教育之意涵並列篇名：The Notion of Ecological Self and Its Implications on Ecological Education作者：王嘉陵(Chia-Ling WANG)關鍵字：生態自我;自我實現;生態教育;奈斯;ecological self;self-realization;ecological education;Naess期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：今天，生態危機重重，人們在教育上必須重新認識自我與自然的關係。本文目的在於探討挪威生態哲學家Arne Naess的「生態自我」理念，從相關詮釋與批判，分析Naess「生態自我」理念的主張與內涵，並思考「生態自我」如何達到自我實現，以及這個概念在生態教育上的意涵。研究取徑是哲學的詮釋，輔以文獻的整理、分析與 比較。研究發現，「生態自我」提醒人，成熟的自我應當放下自我意識、開放自身，學習感通自然界中的其他存有，才能體會到萬事萬物本為一體、無法分割的形上學事實。作者依據Naess的觀點，於文後提出對於生態教育的看法，分別是增進對宇宙本體論的了解、開放自身以體驗自然，以及重新界定自我與他者，認識這兩個概念的無限性。英文摘要：With ecological crisis nowadays, it is required to rethink the relationship between the self and nature in education. This study is a philosophical inquiry. The aim of this article is to explore Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess's concept of ecological self, and by drawing from its secondary literature, to analyze the significance of this concept. The approach of achieving self-realization and its implications on ecological education will also be discussed. The concept of ecological self reminds us that a mature self should give up the narrow ego and learn to open the self to nature, in order to identify the self with other beings in nature. The self and other beings are ontologically interconnected, which is the reality humans need to recognize. The more we open ourselves to others, the deeper self-realization can be achieved. This is the manner we explore ecosophy and our authentic beings. According to Naess's notion, the author suggests several possibilities for ecological education: improving understanding of cosmic ontology; guiding learners to open themselves to experiencing nature; and breaking through the limitations on the concepts of the self and others.起始頁-結束頁：127-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：官方教育研究機構之比較研究：以研究角色與類型為主並列篇名：A Comparative Study on Official Educational Research Organizations: Focus on the Research Roles and Types作者：黃柏叡(Bo-Ruey HUANG)關鍵字：官方教育研究機構;研究角色;研究類型;official educational research organizations;research roles;research types期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文運用文件分析及比較研究，針對官方教育研究機構的發展、研究角色、研究類型和成效評估等面向進行探討，以理解官方教育研究機構在學術社群中的定位。官方教育研究機構的研究角色在整體學術領域中所強調的是因應社會變遷，探討和解決各種教育問題；而官方教育研究機構的研究類型，則在指出具體教育策略的行動依據、提供解決教育問題的答案或彙整傳播全國性的教育資訊等應用型的研究。獨特的研究角色與研究類型，使得判斷官方教育研究機構的研究成效必須符合嚴謹、相關和實用等方向。英文摘要：This article used documentary analysis and comparative method to investigate the development, research roles, research types, and effectiveness evaluations of official educational research organizations, and to understand the positioning of these organizations in the academic community. Official educational research organizations with government resources conduct educational research that emphasizes the investigation and resolving of various educational problems due to social changes in the academic community. The types of research conducted by these organizations are also those that indicate specific bases for action in education policy, provide solutions to educational problems, or compile and disseminate information on education throughout their countries by conducting applied research. When assessing the effectiveness of the research conducted by these organizations, whether the organization has achieved the national objectives or whether it has solved educational problems should be considered; also, whether the research is rigorous, relevant, and utilizable should be taken into account.起始頁-結束頁：143-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：高中課程改革下的教師專業認同並列篇名：Teacher Professional Identity in the High School Curriculum Reform作者：王郁雯(Yu-Wen WANG)關鍵字：教師專業認同;課程改革;普通高中;後期中等教育;teacher professional identity;curriculum reform;high school;upper secondary education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文透過個案研究，探究外在課程改革結構與教師專業訴求對於現場教師專業認同的衝擊和教師個人專業認同的型塑，反思課程改革的真義。主要結論包括：（1）教師專業認同是教師專業的核心，經由不斷與外在課程改革的期待和結構持續協商、辯證，進而型塑和再型塑；（2）教師專業認同型塑的過程，是不斷追尋和發展成自我所界定的專業教師，進而在過程中對自身的課程與教學進行轉化。因此，政府應支持改革是由下而上、藉由溝通辯證模式而產生，重視教師是落實改革的重要推手，以實踐課程改革的願景。英文摘要：This case study aimed to explore the conflict between the expectations of teacher professionalism from society and teacher professional identities in order to reconsider the issue of the curriculum reform. The result indicated that: (1) teacher professional identity is the core of teacher professionalism, which is constantly being shaped and reshaped through negotiating with the public expectations of teacher professionalism and the system of the curriculum reform; (2) the process of shaping teacher professional identity is based on the self-defined teacher professionalism as a key of the transformation in curriculum design and teaching practice. Overall, the government should support the bottom-up curriculum reform for achieving the educational goals.起始頁-結束頁：165-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：香港新高中課程改革下的融合教育實踐困境並列篇名：Dilemmas of Inclusive Practice Under the New Senior Secondary Curriculum Reform in Hong Kong作者：余玉珍(Yuk-Chun YU);尹弘<U+98C8>(Hong-Biao YIN)關鍵字：課程改革;課程實施;融合教育實踐;困境;curriculum reform;curriculum implementation;inclusive practice;dilemma期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：2001年，香港以《學會學習：課程發展路向》文件展開了全面而根本的課程改革（下稱課改）。2009年實施「三三四」新高中課改，更掀起了學制、課程及考試評核制度的巨大改變。此外，隨<U+7740>1997年「融合教育先導計劃」實施，有特殊教育需要的學生就讀於主流學校正式開展。2008年，香港中學全面落實「全校參與」模式的融合教育，其時正值中學面臨適齡學生人數下降的「殺校」危機、排山倒海的高中課改，以及教學語言微調政策等重要改變，使得新高中課改中融合教育的實施變得極為複雜。究其本質，融合教育中欣賞多元與主流教育中追求卓越難以共融，因此在新高中課改中落實融合教育面臨重重困難。本文聚焦探究新高中課改下融合教育的實施概況及所面對困境：首先簡述普及高中教育下發展融合教育的現況與困難；其次探討新高中課改下的融合實踐困境；最後分析化解困境的取向，建議必須從全納教育革新教育制度與課程重置的理念<U+7740>眼，照顧所有學習者的不同需要。綜合而言，高中課改帶來學習差異擴大、教與學壓力倍增等問題尚待處理；加上融合生向弱勢學校傾斜、教師缺乏融合教育能力，且新高中課程並未解決融合生的不利處境等，都突顯了在高中課改中落實融合教育的困難與挑戰。英文摘要：In 2001, Hong Kong started a comprehensive and fundamental curriculum reform through introducing Learning to Learn: The Way Forward in Curriculum. In 2009, the New Senior Secondary (NSS) curriculum reform was implemented. The reform involved changes in the structure of educational system, curriculum and the examination system. In addition, integration was piloted in Hong Kong in 1997. Students with special educational needs (SEN) were given equal opportunities to access to mainstream education. In 2008, Hong Kong secondary schools began to implement the inclusive education policy with whole-school approach. At the same time, secondary schools were facing declining enrolment of school-aged children, enormous NSS curriculum reform, and the fine-tuning medium-of-instruction policy. Implementing inclusive education under NSS of Hong Kong became even more difficult. The discrepancies between ”celebrating diversity” of inclusion and the elite-based educational practices have been known to be key barriers to implementing inclusive education in Hong Kong. This article focused on the situations and dilemmas of inclusive practice under NSS curriculum reform in Hong Kong. Firstly, this article introduced the situations and problems of inclusive practice under NSS; secondly, it analyzed the dilemmas of inclusive practice under the NSS curriculum reform; finally, the article analyzed the orientation of resolving the dilemmas of inclusive practice - enhancing quality education for all by leading to wider-ranging curricula and instructional strategies that contribute to catering for learner diversity. Overall, teachers and their students are under dual pressure because the NSS curriculum reform widens individual differences in schools. Moreover, SEN students are particularly vulnerable in disadvantaged schools while teachers are incapable of teaching them. Implementing inclusive education in the NSS curriculum reform of Hong Kong is full of difficulties and challenges.起始頁-結束頁：183-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：「國中學生全球化覺知量表」編製及模式之驗證研究並列篇名：The Development and Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Global Awareness Scale for Junior High School Students作者：陳貞君(Jen-Jun CHEN);楊淑晴(Shu-Ching YANG)關鍵字：全球化覺知;探索性因素分析;驗證性因素分析;複核效化;多群組分析;global awareness;exploratory factor analysis;confirmatory factor analysis;cross-validation analysis;multi-group invariance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在發展適合台灣國民中學（下稱國中）學生使用的全球化覺知量表並進行模式驗證。量表發展第一階段以高雄市250位七、八年級學生為預試樣本，進行項目分析、探索性因素分析和內部一致性考驗；第二階段以高雄市670位七至九年級學生為正式施測樣本，進行驗證性因素分析、信效度考驗、複核效化分析及多群組分析檢定測量恆等性。量表共計10題，包含「全球關聯性」（6題）和「世界公民責任」（4題）兩個分量表。驗證性因素分析顯示，修正模式的一階驗證性因素模型與觀察資料間有良好的一致性，適配度理想。此外，量表的信效度檢驗達可接受水準。本研究亦證明量表具有穩定性，可推論至相同母群的不同樣本，對不同性別、年級的國中生具有跨群體的測量恆等性。英文摘要：This study aimed to develop a global awareness scale for junior high school students in Taiwan and to validate the scale by performing exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and multi-group invariance. The preliminary scale was developed based on the relevant literature. In the first phase, 250 valid samples collected by purposive sampling were used to perform item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and internal consistency reliability analysis. In the second sample, consisting of 670 junior high school students, confirmatory factor analysis was applied to check for model fitness and cross-validation. Finally, the different levels of multi-group invariance were examined. The results showed that the scale, containing 10 items with two factors, exhibited a good model fit after model modification and had proper composite reliability, convergent validity, and discriminant validity. Measurement invariance was confirmed for junior high school students across genders and grades.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所11篇名：海峽兩岸大學交流生的社會支持、兩岸認知對其生活適應之影響研究並列篇名：Effects of Social Support and Cross-Strait Cognition on Life Adaptation of Exchange Students from Taiwan and the Chinese Mainland作者：陳羿君(I-Jun CHEN);張正平(Cheng-Ping CHANG);陳禮<U+7AC8>(Li-Zao CHEN);張海倫(Hai-Lun ZHANG)關鍵字：生活適應;社會支持;兩岸交流生;兩岸認知;life adaptation;social support;exchange students from Taiwan and the Chinese mainland;cross-strait cognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以在台陸生（在台灣交流的中國大陸學生）和在陸台生（在中國大陸交流的台灣學生）為研究對象，運用問卷調查比較分析其社會支持、兩岸認知和生活適應情況，並建構兩岸交流生的生活適應影響因素模型。結果如下：（1）交流生的社會支持認同度與生活適應皆為中上程度；（2）在陸台生與在台陸生交流前後的兩岸認知皆存在顯著差異，交流後的認知顯著高於交流前；（3）不同背景的交流生，其生活適應間呈顯著差異，其中在台陸生、男生、研究生及認知愈正向者生活適應愈好。（4）交流生的認知類型和地區（中國大陸地區和台灣地區）交互影響其生活適應；無論是兩岸認知提高組或降低組，陸生的生活適應度皆高於台生。（5）交流生的背景因素經由社會支持和兩岸認知對生活適應產生影響，社會支持與兩岸認知起到中介效應。英文摘要：This study made use of questionnaires to investigate the current situation of social support, cross-strait cognition and life adaptation of university students who were exchanged from Taiwan to the Chinese mainland and vice versa. Path analysis was also performed to establish a relation model between life adaptation and its influencing factors. Results showed that: (1) the perception levels of all exchange students in social support and life adaptation were above average; (2) significant difference was found in cross-strait cognition before and after the exchange, with post-exchange cognition significantly higher than pre-exchange one; (3) significant differences were found among different demographic variables for life adaptation of exchange students from Taiwan to the Chinese mainland; (4) there were interactive influences of cognition types and the region that exchange students come from on life adaptation, with the life adaptation of the Chinese mainland students in Taiwan better that Taiwan students in the Chinese mainland both in ”cognition-enhanced” and ”cognition-decreased” groups; (5) the demographic variables of exchange students influenced their life adaptation through the mediating effects of their perception of social support and cross-strait cognition.起始頁-結束頁：25-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所12篇名：運用學習理論之跨層次與雙面兼具觀點分析台灣大學生最適學習路徑之研究並列篇名：A Study on Application of Cross-level and Ambidexterity Perspectives of Learning Theory to the Exploration of Optimal Learning Paths of College Students in Taiwan作者：何希慧(Shi-Huei HO);彭耀平(Yao-Ping PENG)關鍵字：高等教育;組織學習;學生學習成效;雙元學習;higher education;organizational learning;student learning outcomes;dual learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在運用學習理論，探討組織學習與學生學習間的跨層次模式，並了解學生學習方法與學習成效間的關係。過去組織學習和學生學習的相關研究指出，學習是持續的能力建構過程，會隨<U+7740>環境的變化，適時進行調適、整合並重新配置內外部知能與資源，以維持良好的組織績效與學習成效。然而，很少研究從跨層次觀點探討學校層次的組織學習與個人層次的學生學習間知識傳遞的效果，以提供校務研究者或學校主管建構組織學習氛圍的方向與建議。因此，本研究針對16所台灣高等教育機構進行抽樣調查，收集584份教師問卷和2,342份學生問卷，藉由線性階層模式分析、階層迴歸分析及結構方程模式來分析資料。研究結果發現：（1）組織學習能強化學生在探索型學習和應用型學習的知識獲取；（2）探索型及應用型學習與學生學習成效間呈現U型曲線關係；（3）學習雙面兼具情境的加入，有助於結合兩種不同的學習活動，並增強學生的學習效果；和（4）「應用型→探索型→認知獲益」與「應用型→探索型→非認知獲益」具有較佳的總路徑效果。據此，本研究針對高等教育機構和學生學習提出具體建議及未來研究方向，以供相關研究者參考。英文摘要：Based on learning theory, this study explored cross-level model between organizational learning and student learning to understand the relationship between students' learning approaches and their outcomes. Previous literatures on organizational and/or student learning have emphasized that learning refers to constant process of capability construction in appropriately adapting, integrating and reconfiguring various knowledge and resources to match changing environments, in order to maintain superior organizational performance and/or learning outcomes. However, few studies adopted a cross-level perspective to explore effects of knowledge transfer between college-level organizational learning and individual-level student learning, and to provide meaningful directions and suggestions of constructions of organizational learning climate for institutional researchers or administrators. Therefore, this study aimed to analyze a sample of 584 professors and 2,342 students from 16 Taiwanese higher education institutions by hierarchical linear modeling, hierarchical regression, and structural equation modeling. Results showed that: (a) organizational learning could increase knowledge acquisition in explorative and exploitative learning; (b) the relationship between explorative learning, exploitative learning and student learning outcomes represented U-shaped curves; (c) ambidextrous learning was helpful to facilitate combination of explorative and exploitative learning activities and to enhance student learning outcomes; and (d) ”exploitative → explorative → cognitive gains” and ”exploitative → explorative → non-cognitive gains” have higher total path effects. Based on the results, specific directions and implications for higher education institutions and student learning as well as future research were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：51-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所13篇名：國小校長推動特色學校之歷程：微觀政治領導矩陣之探究並列篇名：A Study of the Implementation of Featured School Led by the Principal: An Investigation of Micropolitical Leadership Matrix作者：陳幸仁(Hsin-Jen CHEN)關鍵字：特色學校;微觀政治;微觀政治領導矩陣;學校領導;featured school;micropolitics;micropolitical leadership matrix;school leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣近年來經歷少子化對學校經營的衝擊，為了挽救部分學校面臨關閉的困境，教育部推動中、小學發展學校特色的政策，藉以化危機為轉機。校長身為學校首席領導人，自然成為推動特色學校的主要舵手。本研究試圖從微觀政治領導矩陣的理論架構，分析校長在推動特色學校的過程中，利害關係人知覺其領導效能為何。研究發現，威權領導容易令行政人員知覺校長專斷獨裁，但在教育改革浪潮下，有時卻是不得不然的領導方式；校長採行敵對領導，傾向任用偏好或想法接近的成員擔任行政主管，容易造成教師疏離甚至對立；催化領導是說服教師推動特色學校常用的領導取向；而民主授權領導既尊重教師意見亦能提升同僚能力，又給人關懷並重視弱勢學習，堪稱最佳的領導取向。英文摘要：Recently, due to the low birth rate, a few schools are facing the situation of being ”shut down.” In order to solve this crisis, Taiwan's Ministry of Education has implemented the policy of ”featured school.” The school principal is undoubtedly the key leader in carrying out this policy. This study attempted to analyze how the principal carried out this policy of featured school under the perspective of the theoretical framework of micropolitical leadership matrix. Research findings illustrated four aspects: (a) authoritative leadership would make school administrators perceive that the principal was dominant and autocratic; however, sometimes the principal had no choice but to adopt such a leadership style for implementing the new policy required by the education authorities; (b) adversarial leadership would show the principal's favoritism toward those administrators appointed by him or her; this leadership style caused conflict or alienation among some colleagues; (c) facilitative leadership was a popular leadership style used by the principal to persuade teachers to implement the policy of featured school; (d) democratic/empowering leadership could be the best leadership style which respect teachers' opinions and capabilities, and put emphasis on the learning of disadvantaged students.起始頁-結束頁：79-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所14篇名：台灣國民中學顧客關係管理模式建構之研究並列篇名：A Study of Model Construction of Customer Relationship Management in Taiwan Junior High Schools作者：張文權(Wen-Cheng CHANG);范熾文(Chi-Wen FAN);潘文福(Wen-Fu PAN)關鍵字：國民中學;顧客關係管理;模式建構;junior high schools;customer relationship management (CRM);model construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在發展台灣國民中學（下稱國中）顧客關係管理的基本層面與內涵，以期建構適用於國中的顧客關係管理模式；先以德懷術為研究方法，採用自編國中顧客關係管理模式建構專家諮詢問卷，並由15位實務工作與專家學者組成德懷術小組，進行三回合調查研究，了解各層面的適切性與重要性，再透過焦點團體座談，以確認適切性與應用價值。研究結論如下：（1）本研究發展的模式主要包含六項層面，兼具學理基礎及實徵支持，可作不同階段學校推動的參考依據；（2）本研究發展模式的各層面內涵，對於國中教育現場具有「適切性與重要性」；（3）「顧客互動倫理」是最兼具「適切性」與「重要性」的層面，屬於學校應用顧客關係管理的核心層面。根據上述結論，本研究針對教育行政機關與國中提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the essential aspects and contents of customer relationship management (CRM) with the purpose of constructing a CRM model for the use of junior high schools in Taiwan. The study was conducted by using Delphi method; there were 15 practitioners and academics comprising an expert group for evaluating the appropriateness and importance of this CRM model. The questionnaire was conducted with the expert group for 3 times, and a focus group interview was later conducted with 5 group members to ensure the appropriateness and application of this model. The findings include: (a) this CRM model is composed of six aspects with the support of theory and empirical study, and it can be used for schools to put into practice; (b) the aspects and contents of this CRM model constructed and defined by this study are both ”appropriate and important” for junior high schools; (c) ”customer relationship ethics” is the most appropriate and important aspect defined by this model, which is also the core aspect when applying this CRM model. Some suggestions are also given for the reference of educational administration units and junior high schools.起始頁-結束頁：103-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所15篇名：The Crucial Influences of Interpersonal Relationships on Learning Motivation and Performance in a Cloud-based Collaborative Learning Platform並列篇名：雲端合作學習平台中的人際關係是影響學習動機與學習成效的重要因素作者：黃思華(Tzu-Hua HUANG);劉遠楨(Yuan-Chen LIU);余沛錞(Pei-Chun YU)關鍵字：cloud-based learning environment (CLE);offline learning environment;interpersonal relationship in the cloud;learning motivation;learning performance;雲端學習環境;單機學習環境;網路人際關係;學習動機;學習成效期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：The interactive functions and personalized services provided by cloud technologies have created new opportunities for students and teachers in learning. As the frequency of communication between teachers and students, among teachers, and among students themselves in the cloud has significantly increased, ”interpersonal relationship” emerged as a new topic in the field of e-learning. This study uses a free cloud-based collaborative learning platform of word processing software in the learning process in a computer classroom. The purpose of this study is to discuss and explore the influences of learning motivation and performance when learning in the cloud and in an offline environment. Online word processing software was used to teach a group of fifth graders in a computer class in Taoyuan County, Taiwan. This study found that students taught in a cloud-based learning environment (CLE) performed significantly better than those taught in an offline environment. It is worth mentioning that interpersonal relationships did not affect students' learning motivation in a CLE, but students with better interpersonal relationships showed significantly better learning performance. This study concludes that CLE is an alternative environment for education, in which the immediate and interactive functions benefited students' learning motivation and performance, while interpersonal relationships affected their learning performance. Hence, giving consideration to students' interpersonal relationships within a curriculum will create higher motivation and better learning performance.英文摘要：雲端科技的互動功能與個人化服務開啟了學習的新契機，使得教師與學生、教師與教師、學生與學生在雲端上溝通互動的情形愈來愈頻繁，網路人際關係因而成為數位學習的新興議題。本研究以免費雲端合作學習平台中的文書處理軟體進行電腦科教學，探討台灣桃園市某國小五年級學童經過雲端學習環境與單機學習環境的教學後，學習動機與學習成效上的差異，更進一步探討雲端學習環境中不同網路人際關係的學童在學習動機與學習成效上的差異。研究結果發現，實驗組的學童經過雲端學習環境學習後，學習動機與學習成效均顯著優於單機學習環境的學童；然而，實驗組雲端學習環境中，網路人際關係的高低對學習動機沒有影響，但是網路人際關係高分組學童的學習成效顯著優於網路人際關係低分組的學童。因此，本研究建議，教師在教學時，若能將學生網路人際關係的高、低一併納入思考，基於適性發展的原則，會使學生在學習上有更強的學習動機，進而得到更佳的學習成效。起始頁-結束頁：133-157資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所16篇名：The Fine-tuning Medium-of-instruction Policy in Hong Kong: A Case Study of the Changing School-based Test Papers in Science Subjects並列篇名：香港微調教學語言政策：科學學科校本試卷轉變的個案研究作者：陳以謙(Jim Yee-Him CHAN)關鍵字：assessment;content-based teaching;medium of instruction;fine-tuning policy;revised Bloom's taxonomy;Hong Kong;評估;學科內容語言教學;教學語言;微調政策;布盧姆教育目標分類學的修訂版;香港期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：This study examines changes in the school-based Chinese vis-a-vis English test papers in two content-area science subjects (i.e., integrated science and computer and information technology) in a secondary school in Hong Kong during the implementation of the new medium-of-instruction (MOI) initiative, in that schools were shifting to adopting content-based English-medium instruction (EMI) teaching at the junior secondary level. The analysis of the assessments was via two main stages. First, a descriptive approach was adopted to investigate any observable changes in the assessment designs and formats. Second, all the test items in the test papers were evaluated in the dimensions of cognitive and knowledge categories using the revised Bloom's taxonomy as the analytical framework. The findings reveal that there was a reallocation of question types and pedagogical foci as well as a decrease in score proportions and varieties of questions assessing higher-level cognitive processes and knowledge in the revised test papers. This article concludes by highlighting the possible effects brought about by the revised school-based assessment and the need to continue to investigate the influence of the new policy.英文摘要：本研究以一所中學為例，探討香港微調教學語言政策於實施前後，初中校本科學學科（即綜合科學科和電腦與資訊科技科）試卷的轉變。由於該校初中班別部分學術科目從母語教學轉為以英語授課，相關校本試卷亦轉以英語提問和作答。試卷的分析主要分為兩個階段：首先，研究集中描述試卷在設計和格式上的變化；其次，試卷中所有題目以修訂版布盧姆教育目標分類學來分析其認知和知識兩個範疇。研究結果顯示，新政策下試卷的問題類型、考核內容及得分比例均作重新分布，其中認知和知識範疇較高層次的題目比例相對減少。本文最後總結該初中校本試卷變化可能帶來的影響，並指出新教學語言政策的影響仍有需要繼續研究。起始頁-結束頁：159-193資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所17篇名：《全港性系統評估檢討報告》的批判：政策評鑑研究的視域並列篇名：A Critique on the Report on Review of the Territory-wide System Assessment: In the Perspective of Policy-evaluation Research作者：曾榮光(Wing-Kwong TSANG)關鍵字：全港性系統評估;進展性評估;總結性評估;質素保證機器;政策評鑑研究;Territory-wide System Assessment;formative assessment;summative assessment;quality-assurance mechanism;policy-evaluation research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：2016年2月29日，教育局在網上發布了《全港性系統評估檢討報告》（下稱《檢討報告》）。縱觀這份報告，都找不到任何政策檢討及評鑑研究應有的關於政策效果及／或後果的實徵分析及論證；然而報告卻能斷定可以「肯定系統評估的設立原意及價值」，並建議只要對實施細節稍作調整，就可以繼續「於2017年在全港實施」。本文正是要從公共政策檢討及評鑑的視域及方法出發，從三方面對《檢討報告》加以批判。第一，對《檢討報告》「肯定系統評估的設立原意及價值」是「回饋學與教」的立論加以質疑與批判。第二，從實徵角度論證實施了十年的系統評估根本就沒有實現《檢討報告》聲稱的「回饋學與教」的一種「進展性評估」應有的政策效果，即為未達標的學生提供「補底」的教學支援，相反卻對全港學校、教師、學生及家長造成巨大的應試操練壓力這種政策後果。最後，本文對《檢討報告》的主要政策建議更不表贊同，並認為根本沒有必要繼續每年強迫全港小三、小六及中三近十萬名學生參加這個評估。若單從系統性評估的角度，一個隨機抽樣的小樣本學校評估就可達到目的。英文摘要：On 29 February 2016, the Report on Review of the Territory-wide System Assessment (TSA) was released on the official website of the Education Bureau of the HKSAR government. In this report, we cannot find any empirical analysis or justification on the effects and consequences of the policy in point, as we would expect of any formal policy-review study; yet we are told to accept its conclusion that the intent and value of the TSA is worth to be ”reaffirmed” and what is needed is some tinkering on the implementation procedures. As a result, we are also told to accept the fact that the ”improved” TSA will be launched in 2017 for ”territory-wide implementation.” In this article, the Report will be examined and critiqued from the perspective of policy-evaluation research. First, the article will query and critique the basic premise assumed by the Report, that is, ”the intent and value of the establishment of TSA” is ”to provide feedback to learning and teaching.” Second, it will argue empirically that for the last ten years, the TSA policy has failed to serve as an effective formative-assessment instrument to provide relevant feedbacks and supports to learning and teaching of students, especially those who are lagging behind in the Basic Competence Assessment. On the contrary, the article will argue that the TSA policy has espoused a policy consequence of unleashing a wave of pressure of teaching for testing, which has been permeating widely among schools, especially primary schools in recent years. Finally, the article will take issue with the primary policy recommendation of the Report. It will argue that it is totally unnecessary to continue a ”territory-wide” TSA to mandate all students of Primary 3, Primary 6 and Secondary 3 to sit for the assessment annually. The article will suggest that the coverage of the TSA can be scaled down to a randomly selected sample of schools, and argue that such a scaled-down TSA could still provide reliable and valid evidence for the school performance at system level.起始頁-結束頁：195-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：利用log文檔探析PISA 2012學生解難模式及相關認知和心理因素並列篇名：Using Log File Analyses to Examine PISA 2012 Student Problem-Solving Patterns and the Associated Cognitive and Psychological Factors作者：金松麗(Song-Li Jin);張國祥(Kwok-Cheung Cheung);薛寶嫦(Pou-Seong Sit)關鍵字：log文檔;PISA 2012電子測試;表現指標;教育數據挖掘;解難能力;behavioral indicators;educational data mining;log file;PISA 2012 digital test;problem solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：解難能力是21 世紀人們需要具備的核心特質之一。20 世紀，由於研究方法的限制及缺乏合適的測評工具，較少學者會研究受試者的解難歷程。隨著資訊科技的進步，人們發展出記錄大樣本和大量解難歷程行為的方式log 文檔。本文以PISA 2012 電子解難測試之一道公開試題（機械人吸塵機）的學生log 文檔作為研究數據，探索出三個用於分析的表現指標：學生解難的時間、解難步驟的數目，以及觀看測試素材的次數，以這些指標比較七個高表現地區和三個低表現地區的狀況，發現：(1)低表現地區學生的解難時間比高表現地區長；(2)低表現地區與高表現地區相比，解難步驟較少的學生百分比和觀看素材次數較少的學生百分比均較高。之後，透過決策樹方法分析出五種學生解難模式，並進行跨地區比較和對應分析，發現：(1)高表現地區學生多為「低頻答對」或「高頻答對」型，低表現地區學生多為「低頻答錯」型；(2)學生整體解難水準和對問題解決持開放態度的水準，與這五種解難模式分別在高表現和低表現地區有不同對應關係。最後，本文根據研究結果為教育工作者提供關於解難教學，以及研究者相關後續研究的建議。英文摘要：Problem solving is one of the core skills of the 21th century. In the 20th century, due to the limitation of research methodology and adequacy of assessment tools, very few studies focused research on the students' problem-solving processes. With the rapid development of computer science and information technology, log files have been deployed to document students' behavioral processes in large-scale sample surveys. This research studied the student log files of a released item (ROBOT CLEANER) in the PISA 2012 digital problem-solving assessment. Three behavioral indicators had been developed for analyses and comparison between the seven high-performing and the three low-performing economies: response time, number of problem-solving steps, and number of times watching the simulation. The comparison results showed that: (1) the overall response time of students from the low-performing economies was longer than students from the high-performing economies; (2) Comparing between the low- and high-performing economies, the proportion of students of low-performing economies who had fewer number of problem-solving steps was higher. The same was found regarding the number of times watching the simulation. Through the use of decision tree, five problem- solving patterns were uncovered. The correspondence analysis results showed: (1) ”Low-frequency Answer-correct” and ”High-frequency Answer-correct” were the two dominant problem-solving patterns found in the seven high-performing economies, whereas it was ”Low-frequency Answer-wrong” found in low-performing economies; (2) students' levels of overall problem-solving performance and openness to problem solving were having corresponding relationships with the five problem-solving patterns. This research provided recommendations for improving problem-based teaching and learning, and suggestions for pursuing follow-up studies.起始頁-結束頁：227-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：太極八法電腦化自動評量系統並列篇名：A Computerized Automatic Assessment System for Eight Essentials of Tai Chi作者：何宗融(Tsung-Jung Ho);李政軒(Cheng-Hsuan Li);劉志勇(Zhi-Young Liu)關鍵字：Kinect;太極八法;太極拳;Eight Essentials of Tai Chi;Kinect;Tai Chi期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：太極拳為一項結合平衡、強化、伸展的物理運動，曾被《時代雜誌》譽為最完美的身心運動，也被應用於改善老年人或帕金森氏症病人的平衡能力與身體協調，對心肺功能、柔軟度、平衡、張力與微循環的改善有相當大之益處，且對於心理及精神的幫助也備受肯定，還能減緩認知功能衰退與提升免疫力，被視為是一種身心運動。因此，有愈來愈多人開始學習太極拳，但學習者卻無法隨時都有專家的指導與判定其動作之好壞。本研究將利用微軟Kinect感應器的紅外線攝影機，擷取人體骨架關節位置之三維座標，再以三維座標計算出各關節與骨架組成的距離、角度與比例，搭配專家對於各動作關鍵骨架角度之判定與評分標準，訂立出各特徵之容許範圍與評量指標，開發一套太極八法電腦化自動評量系統，即時診斷學習者之太極拳基本動作的優劣。比對電腦評量分類結果與專家評判結果，有60%的基本動作正確率達到0.7 以上，也具有不錯的敏感度與特異度，故太極八法電腦化自動評量系統能有效地區分出使用者在各太極基本動作的好壞。英文摘要：Tai Chi, a physical activity integrated balance, strengthening, and stretching, has been called the “Perfect Exercise” by TIME magazine. It has been applied to improve balance in older adults or people with Parkinson's disease. Moreover, Tai Chi movements are also helpful to mental health and spirituality, decreases the speed of the cognitive decline, and improves immune system. Hence, more and more people learn Tai Chi, now. However, most of them are learnt by watching video or films and without experts' immediate instructions. It is hard to detect the goodness of Tai Chi basic movements by learners themselves. This study used Microsoft Kinect sensor to capture the three-dimensional skeleton points of human body and computed the distances between two joints, the angles between any two skeletons, and some proportion about the center of gravity. Based on these measurements and the tolerance ranges in specific areas determined by the expert experience, a computerized automatic assessment system for Eight Essentials of Tai Chi was proposed. A learner can find the weak movements immediately from the report of the system. According to the experimental results of comparing expert's classification and the computerized classification, the developed assessment tool has good sensitivity, specificity, and classification accuracy. Therefore, the developed assessment can distinguish between good and poor basic movements efficiently.起始頁-結束頁：253-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：中文版「情境－特質焦慮量表」之多元因素效度探討並列篇名：An Investigation of Multidimensional Factorial Validity of the Chinese Version of State-Trait Anxiety Inventory作者：王國川(Kuo-Chang Wang);鍾鳳嬌(Feng-Chiao Chung)關鍵字：「情境─特質焦慮量表」;多元因素效度;等級反應模型;graded response model;multidimensional factorial validity;the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究之目的在於探討中文版「情境─特質焦慮量表」之多元因素效度，以作為衡鑑情境與特質焦慮的測量理論基礎。本研究以792 位高屏兩縣市的高中職二年級學生為研究對象，結果顯示在一階層級的因素結構下，不論從傳統或現代測驗理論，兩個量表都屬於一個多向度的因素結構，分別由情境、特質焦慮─正、反面措詞等二個因素所組成，這二個因素彼此間具良好的區辨效度，且各題項間具有很好的聚合效度；而在二階層級的因素結構下，兩個量表又都屬於一個單向度的高階因素結構，分別代表情境、特質焦慮因素。另外，在一階層級的因素結構下，「情境焦慮量表」或「特質焦慮量表」二個因素隸屬的各題項，都有三組題項因措詞相似，而造成題項測量誤差彼此有關聯；「特質焦慮量表」有一個題項因措詞模稜兩可，而有一個題項因測量不同概念導致橫跨兩個因素。等級反應模型顯示，兩個量表各題項均具有很好鑑別力。因此，除「特質焦慮量表」的二個題項外，兩個量表都具有很好的多元因素效度，由這些題項加總形成的分數，可以有效的反映這兩種焦慮抽象概念，並且背後有良好的心理計量實證支持。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the multidimensional factorial validity for the Chinese version of State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (C-STAI). Seven hundred and ninety two high school students from Kaohsiung and Pingtung Counties of southern Taiwan were invited to fill out the consent and this inventory. The findings show that each of those two scales belongs to a multidimensional factor structure which consists of two factors, state or trait anxiety - positive and negative wording in terms of the first-order level of factor structure, and there are good discriminant and convergent validity for each of those two scales. Each of those two scales is a one-dimensional second-order factor structure which represents the state or trait anxiety in terms of the second-order level of factor structure. Furthermore, there are moderate or high correlations between three pairs of the measurement errors since the wordings of those items may be very similar for those two scales. In addition, two items had cross factor loadings since one may be ambiguous wording and the other may measure different constructs for the Trait Anxiety Scale. Ignoring the controversial items above, the graded response model indicates that the remaining items have a good discrimination for each of those two scales. Therefore, the C-STAI had good multidimensional factorial validity except two items of A-Trait.起始頁-結束頁：287-313資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：透過log數據探析澳門學生的問題解決行為：以PISA 2012的公開題為例並列篇名：Analysis of Log File Data to Understand Macau's Student Problem-Solving Behavior: An Example of a Released Item from PISA 2012 Study作者：楊文佳(Man-Kai Ieong);薛寶嫦(Pou-Seong Sit);麥瑞琪(Soi-Kei Mak);張國祥(Kwok-Cheung Cheung)關鍵字：log數據;PISA電子化測驗;問題解決能力;教育數據探勘;認知和情意特徵;cognitive and motivational characteristics;educational data mining;log file data;PISA computer-based assessment;problem solving competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：問題解決能力為學生應對未來生活及工作挑戰的重要能力，然而，傳統紙筆測驗並未能探討問題解決過程的學生行為及其認知和情意特點。電子化問題解決測驗及其log數據則使解決上述困難成為可能。教育數據探勘是研究log數據等教育大數據的新興學科，該學科建基於商業數據探勘，其研究模式及方法皆有別於一般教育研究。有鑑於此，本研究首先闡述教育數據探勘的原理及技術，再使用PISA 2012之電子化問題解決能力測驗公開題的log數據進行探究。在研究方法上，本研究以PISA 2012問題解決表現最佳的十個經濟體為樣本，涉及三種典型的log數據，即解題時間、點擊次數，以及操作－回應路徑；進行預處理後，本研究使用分類和異常值檢測，及模式探勘等手法分析上述數據。結果顯示，澳門學生的解題時間及點擊次數均多於其他九個經濟體；研究樣本的操作－回應路徑則可分為六個問題解決群組，分別為：「最佳作答」、「自檢查後正確作答」、「不作答」、「誤解題意或不小心作答」、「嬉戲」，以及「其他」。其中，澳門在首兩個群組之總比例少於其他九個經濟體，缺乏解題動機或經過自檢查後仍然出錯者也多於其他經濟體。最後，研究者總結學生的問題解決特點，為教育工作者改善學生的問題解決能力提供實證依據，並為未來的教育數據探勘研究提出建議。英文摘要：Problem-solving competency is essential for students to tackle challenges in future life. However, the traditional paper-pencil problem-solving test cannot reveal student behavior, nor the cognitive and motivational processes in solving problems. Fortunately, computer-based assessment and log file data analysis may be the silver bullet. Educational data mining (EDM) is an emerging discipline that investigates large-scale educational data, such as the log file data. It is developed on the basis of data mining techniques widely employed in business domains. The analytic tools and research methods of EDM are different from those in general educational studies. Under this backdrop, this research aimed to elucidate the principles and research methods of EDM, explored and analyzed the log file data of PISA 2012 computer-based problem-solving assessment. Regarding research methods, this study looked into the top ten high-performing economies in the PISA 2012 problem-solving assessment, analyzing three typical kinds of log file data, i.e. item response time, the number of mouse clicks, and operation-response paths. After pre-processing, techniques of classification and outliner detection, and pattern mining were applied to analyze the log file data. Research results are summarized as below: Macau students' item response time was obviously longer, and their number of mouse clicks was more, than those of the other high-performing economies. The operation- response paths further illustrated six typical log file response patterns, namely: ”Perfect with High Effectiveness”, ”Correct Answer with Self-Checking”, ”No Response”, ”Misunderstanding and Carelessness”, ”Playing” and ”Others”. Macau's total proportions of the first two student groups were obviously smaller than those of the other high-performing economies, and Macau had more students who lacked motivation to solve problems, or answered incorrectly even after self-checking than the other economies. Finally, this research provided empirical evidences to enhance students' problem-solving competency and gave recommendations for further studies.起始頁-結束頁：153-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：Wed-based Chinese Character Recognition Assessment and Its Application on Distance Education of Chinese並列篇名：「中文線上識字測驗」發展及其在華語遠距教學上的應用作者：曾千芝(Chien-Chih Tseng);張瓅勻(Li-Yun Chang);張雨霖(Yu-Lin Chang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：Chinese as second/foreign language;Chinese Character Recognition Assessment;Chinese Language Testing System;中文線上測驗系統;中文識字測驗;以中文為第二語言或外語學習者期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：The study aims at establishing an efficient, valid, and computerized Chinese character recognition assessment in order to meet the increasing needs for online tests in distance education of Chinese. We constructed a Web-based Chinese Character Recognition Assessment system, compiling a test for Chinese Character Recognition Test which included 120 characters from different levels of character frequency in this system. The duration of the assessment was eight minutes. The participants were asked to report the pronunciations of each character that were shown on the screen one at a time. One-week test-retest reliability showed a strong positive correlation, and Cronbach’s Alpha and the split-half reliability demonstrated that this assessment items have good internal consistency. Moreover, a criterion-related validity estimator revealed that the scores of this assessment had significantly positive correlations with three criterions: Graded Chinese Character Recognition Test (Huang, 2001), Tests of Chinese Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing (Extension school of Continuing Education of National Taiwan Normal University, 2010), and the three groups of different levels of CEFR (below A1, A1, A2 and above). The results suggest that this online character recognition assessment is valid to evaluate overall Chinese language skills. Moreover, the assessment in this study contains two scoring methods: Tone scoring and non-tone scoring. The results indicate that the tone scoring method already possesses the function of distinguishing the level of students’ Chinese competence (because the score for the character recognition test has a significantly positive correlation with the scores for listening, speaking, reading, and writing tests), and if the non-tone scoring method is adopted (i.e. taking no account of the correctness of tone), the discrimination of items and the validity of testing scores would be enhanced. Theoretically, this study supports that character-level knowledge is one of crucial components of Chinese language knowledge. Practically, this online character recognition assessment is an efficient and valid tool to evaluate the general Chinese ability of those who take Chinese as a second/foreign language.英文摘要：本研究之主要目的為發展一套以中文為第二語言或外語學習者的線上識字測驗，以應用於華語遠距教學上。本測驗包含120個字，且是從不同頻率層次下隨機選出。本研究有兩個主要發現：第一，在信效度研究方面，結果顯示Cronbach's Alpha與折半信度相當良好，間隔一週之再測信度也具有高度相關。在效度研究結果則發現，本測驗具效標關聯效度（效標有三項：「中文認字測驗」、「華語聽說讀寫測驗」，以及不同CEFR等級的參與者），支持線上識字測驗分數作為評估整體華語能力指標的有效性。第二，本測驗包含本研究識字測驗包含兩種計分：完全計分（該字聲韻調全對則得分）與部分計分（該字聲韻全對即得分）。結果發現若採用的是部分計分，識字測驗分數與聽說讀寫測驗分測驗的相關係數一致高於完全計分，此顯示若是採部分計分，可提高題目鑑別度與測驗分數效度，且更能夠敏感反映CSL／CFL學習者的華語文能力。本研究結果顯示，理論上中文字層級是中文知識之核心成分，而在輔助華語教學實務方面，本研究發展的線上識字測驗可作為評估CSL／CFL學習者華語能力的有用工具。起始頁-結束頁：179-202資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「國民中學七至九年級識字診斷測驗」編製研究並列篇名：The Development and Study of Junior High School Literacy Diagnostic Assessments作者：孟瑛如(Ying-Ru Meng);陳志平(Chih-Ping Chen);盧玉真(Yu-Chen Lu)關鍵字：低成就;特定學習疾患;診斷測驗;學習障礙;識字;diagnostic assessments;learning disabilities;literacy and word recognition;low archievement;specific learning disorders期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在建置「國民中學七至九年級識字診斷測驗」，以協助教師評量學生之「聽音辨字」、「字形義辨別」以及「字形辨識」的能力和診斷識字障礙學生。本研究依據有效樣本1,204人建立了四個複本和常模。內容效度經過學者及資深教師共9人審查，內部一致性介於.86至.90，複本信度係數介於.61至.79，年級的平均表現差異達顯著水準。以上顯示本測驗具有良好的信效度，可用團體或個別的方式快速診斷識字障礙學生。最後根據測驗編製與應用經驗提出建議：（1）依據測驗結果與需求作進一步的測驗；（2）依據學生識字的優弱勢擬定個別化教育計畫（IEP），提供適當的介入。英文摘要：This study aims to build a simple, fast surveying groups or personal assessment tools to help teachers diagnose grade 7 to 9 junior high school students with learning disabilities in Taiwan. The assessments evaluated the students' abilities of dictation, word recognition and Chinese characters. Four parallel forms and the norms were established based on 1,204 students. The assessments have undergone expert validity verifications and internal consistency reliability test. According to the results, Pearson's correlation coefficient value was from .86 to .90, Cronbach value of internal consistency was from .61 to .79, and there were significant differences between grades. Finally, major results were: (a) can be based on assessment results demand for further tests; (b) may develop Individualized Education Program (IEP) based on the strengths and weaknesses of the student literacy and provide appropriate teaching intervention.起始頁-結束頁：203-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：臺灣國中生「數學學習情緒量表」之發展與現況分析並列篇名：The Development of the Achievement Emotions Questionnaire-Mathematics for Taiwan Junior High School Students and the Current Situation Analysis作者：賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai);巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu)關鍵字：結構方程模式;複核效度考驗;學習情緒;achievement emotions;cross-validation;structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究之目的為發展國中生「數學學習情緒量表」（Achievement EmotionsQuestionnaire-Mathematics, AEQ-M）。本研究以北、中、南、東等四個區域之國中學生為樣本進行問卷調查，研究資料分析則針對樂趣、生氣、焦慮及無聊等四個分量表，先以預試取得之304位樣本進行項目分析與探索性因素分析，再以正式施測之1,736 位樣本進行信、效度分析。研究結果顯示：(1)四個分量表的Cronbach's係數介於.91∼.95之間、再測信度介於.69∼.81之間；(2)四個一階因素具有良好的組成信度與平均變異抽取量；(3)AEQ-M 具有良好的建構效度與效標關聯效度；(4)複核效度分析顯示AEQ-M具有良好的穩定性。綜上，AEQ-M具有良好的信度與效度。此外，本研究亦探討國中生學習情緒的現況與差異分析，結果顯示性別在四種學習情緒上均達顯著差異，且男生體驗到的正向學習情緒（樂趣）顯著地高於女生，而女生所知覺到的負向學習情緒（生氣、焦慮及無聊）則明顯地高於男生。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to develop the Achievement Emotions Questionnaire- Mathematics (AEQ-M) for Taiwan junior high school students. There are 23 items in this scale including four sub-scales: enjoyment, anger, anxiety, and boredom. There are 304 participants were included in the pilot study for exploratory factor analysis and item analysis. There are 1,736 effective participants are used to assess reliability and construct validity. The results are as follows: (1) the range of Cronbach’s of four subscales is from .91 to .95, and the range of test-retest reliabilities is from .69 to .81; (2) the four factors shows good composite reliability and average variance extracted; (3) the results of data analysis show good construct validity and criterion-related validity; (4) the finding of cross-validation shows the scale has good stability. Thus, the AEQ-M is a valid and reliable instrument. The other findings of this study are as follows: there is a significant gender difference existing on academic emotions. Boys tend to perceive more positively in achievement emotion (enjoyment) and girls tend to perceive more negatively in achievement emotions (anger, anxiety, and boredom).起始頁-結束頁：83-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：「青少年偶像崇拜量表」之信度與效度考驗並列篇名：The Development and Validation of Adolescent Celebrity Worship Inventory作者：張繐<U+7920>(Hui-Tzu Chang);蔡馨沂(Hsin-I Tsai);劉奕蘭(Yih-Lan Liu)關鍵字：青少年;偶像崇拜;adolescent;celebrity worship期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究之目的為發展一份測量15∼19歲青少年的偶像崇拜量表。研究流程有三個階段。量表初擬階段：研究者先參酌相關文獻確立量表架構，據以發展量表題項，並進行團體討論、題項訪談、專家審查及修正量表內容。預試階段：樣本為臺灣中北部160位高中職學生，資料透過項目分析、探索性因素分析及內部一致性考驗來簡化量表，分析結果選出20個題項，三個分量表（情感、形象及成就取向）。正式施測階段：以447名來自相同區域的高中職學生為樣本，進行二階驗證性因素分析、效標關聯效度及性別差異考驗，目的為檢證量表的建構效度。二階驗證性因素分析結果顯示模式有良好的適配度；而效標關聯效度的考驗結果也發現量表與偶像話題互動、同儕依附焦慮、歸屬需求及自尊有正相關，且具有顯著的性別差異。總之，編擬問卷的信效度獲得支持。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop Celebrity Worship Inventory among 15-19 year-old adolescents. The process consists of three stages: (1)A primary inventory was developed based on a review of the relevant literature, and was revised through group discussion and experts' comments; (2)A preliminary study including item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and reliability tests were used to reduce the large numbers of items in the inventory. The first sample set includes 160 senior high school students from Central and Northern Taiwan. The revised inventory includes 20 items assigned to three subscales (achievement, image, and affection orientation); (3)The second sample set including 447 senior high school students from the same areas were used to examine the factor structures of the scale by using the second-order confirmatory factor analysis, criterion-related validity, and t-test for gender difference. The result of second- order CFA indicates that the model fit was acceptable. In addition, the results of criterion-related validity show that celebrity worship inventory was positively correlated with talking about celebrity, peer attachment anxiety, needs to belong, and self-esteem. Adolescent girls reported to have higher scores of celebrity worship than adolescent boys did. Overall, Adolescent Celebrity Worship Inventory displays an excellent reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：111-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：無參數加權認知診斷模式並列篇名：A Nonparametric Weighted Cognitive Diagnosis Model作者：李政軒(Cheng-Hsuan Li)關鍵字：DINA;分數乘法;加權中心;無參數認知診斷模式;認知診斷模式;cognitive diagnosis models;fraction multiplication;nonparametric CDM;DINA;weighted mean期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：認知診斷模式可以用來了解受試者在技能或概念上的精熟與否，近年來也已經被應用到不同領域中。其中，無參數認知診斷模式可透過「觀察作答反應」與「理想作答反應」之間的距離，搭配最近鄰分類器，來決定受試者的認知反應組型（技能具備與否）。因為無參數認知診斷模式不需要估計參數，故其適用於小樣本，模式判別所需要的時間也非常短暫。但是無參數認知診斷模式並未考慮到受試者在作答時可能會疏忽答錯或猜測答對，僅僅比對觀察作答反應與理想作答反應可能會受到疏忽或猜測影響，造成誤判受試者的認知反應組型。故本研究提出「無參數加權認知診斷模式」，利用疏忽權重與猜測權重，搭配理想作答反應，計算出加權中心。最後，再比對「觀察作答反應」與「加權中心的距離」來決定受試者的認知反應組型。模擬資料結果顯示，在受試者樣本數較少的情況下，無參數加權認知診斷模式的估計優於無參數認知診斷模式與DINA（Deterministic Input, Noisy “And”Gate Model）模式，特別是整體辨識率的一致性。透過「分數乘法」實證資料也驗證，無參數加權認知診斷模式可以提供較準確的認知反應組型估計，也更適用於目前小班制的教學現場。英文摘要：Cognitive Diagnosis Models (CDMs) can help teachers or researchers to understand the skills that have been mastered or those have not. Hence, some models have been applied to many areas recently. A nonparametric CDM (NCDM) was proposed to estimate the attribute profile vectors of examinees by the nearest neighborhood classifier through the distances from the observed responses to the ideal responses. Moreover, NCDM does not require the parameter estimation and is more appropriate to the small sample size problem than parametric CDMs such as DINA (Deterministic Input, Noisy ”And” Gate Model) model. In addition, it costs only a few CPU times for estimating examinees’ attribute profile vectors by applying NCDM. However, observed responses of examinees on an item are influenced by the slipping or guessing of examinees. Furthermore, NCDM does not take them into account. In this study, a nonparametric weighted CDM (NWCDM) was proposed, and it uses weighted means based on the slipping and guessing weights instead of the ideal responses of NCDM. The estimated attribute profile vectors of examinees are classified by the nearest neighborhood classifier through the distances from the observed responses to the weighted means. From the experimental results of simulated data sets, NWCDM outperforms than NCDM and DINA on estimating attribute profile vectors when the sample size is small. According to the results on a real data set, NWCDM can provide more accurate estimations, and is more suitable for recently small class teaching.起始頁-結束頁：133-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：「國中生憤怒反應量表」之發展與信效度考驗並列篇名：The Development of Anger Response Scale for Junior High School Student作者：甘孟龍(Mon-Long Gan);黃秀霜(Hsiu-Shuang Huang);劉<U+5CEF>銘(Feng-Ming Liu)關鍵字：測量恆等性;憤怒反應;複核效化;anger response;cross validation;measurement invariance期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：青少年攻擊行為通常是憤怒情緒下的產物，但不同憤怒反應所形成的攻擊行為卻可能肇因於不同的生理心理機制。Burney（2001）曾針對青少年提出三個與攻擊概念關聯的憤怒反應特質，分別是：反應性憤怒、工具性憤怒，以及憤怒控制，每一種反應型態皆源於個體認知行為能力上的差異。本研究旨在根據這些理論觀點發展一份「國中生憤怒反應量表」，而後驗證量表之信度、效度與複核效化穩定性。在過程中，研究者以292名樣本進行量表預試分析與因素結構探索，而後以1,065名正式樣本進行量表之驗證性因素分析、模式複核效化、效標關聯效度，以及性別測量恆等性等各項考驗。研究結果顯示，本量表建構的二階單因素模式具有良好的契合度，且能呼應Burney提出的理論結構，且該量表模式更具有跨樣本的穩定性，同時適用國中男、女生的分析比較。總結而言，本研究所發展之「國中生憤怒反應量表」是一個符合實證的測量工具，可以提供未來研究和教育輔導上使用。英文摘要：Aggressive behavior in adolescence often arose from angry emotion. However, there were different forms of anger response which lead to aggression may have its own physiological and psychological causes. Burney (2001) in previous research identified three specific types of anger expression as reactive, instrumental and anger control. Each expression reflected the different function of mental process. Thus the purpose of this study was to develop an Anger Response Scale for junior high school student under the concept of Burney's opinions, and then to validate the scale by adopting a series of examination for the reliability, validity and measurement invariance through 292 pretest samples and 1,065 formal samples. The mainly findings were as follows: According to the confirmatory factor analysis and comparison between two competing models, the results showed that the single second-order factor model fitted the collected data well, and this model reached a satisfactory level of internal consistency reliability. Thus corresponding with Burney's theory, this finding supported the Anger Response Scale could be divided into three sub-scales: reactive anger, instrumental anger, anger control, and the total anger could incorporate of three scales into one overall scale score. Moreover, the result was also support invariance of measurement by splitting sample by gender. Therefore we could conclude that the ”Anger Response Scale for Junior High School Students” was a practical tool with good reliability, validity, and stability. It could be a good and efficient tool to the further research and school counseling.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：脈絡因素、學業自我概念、與學習投入對學業表現的影響：臺灣國小三年級經濟弱勢與一般學生之比較並列篇名：THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL CONTEXT, ACADEMIC SELF-CONCEPT, AND LEARNING ENGAGEMENT ON ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT: A COMPARISON OF ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED AND GENERAL THIRD GRADERS IN TAIWAN作者：陳慧蓉(Karen Hui-Jung Chen);張郁雯(Yuwen Chang);薛承泰(Cherng-Tay Hsueh)關鍵字：經濟弱勢學生;脈絡因素;學業自我概念;學習投入;學校關係;學習投入的動機歷程理論;Economically Disadvantaged Students;Social Context;Academic Self-concept;Learning Engagement;School Relationship;Motivational Model of Engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：面對經濟弱勢學生的學業成就低落問題，必須釐清影響因素，才有改善的可能。本研究以<U+FF62>動機發展的自我系統模式<U+FF63>（the Self system Model of Motivational Development, SSMMD）為理論基礎，加入家庭教育資源以及家長的學習參與兩個重要的脈絡因素，提出「學習投入的動機歷程理論」（Motivational Model of Engagement ,MME），探討該理論在一般學生與經濟弱勢學生的適用性，透過對照比較以突顯經濟弱勢學生學習表現之影響因素。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採用問卷調查法，並透過分層等機率二階段抽樣法抽出國小三年級學生1,097 人，含一般學生942 人、經濟弱勢學生155 人，以AMOS 軟體進行結構方程模式（Structural Equation Model, SEM）資料分析，判別兩群學生模式的結構係數之異同性。研究發現或結論：本研究之主要研究發現，兩群學生模式的差異性為：經濟弱勢學生的學習投入對於學業表現之影響顯著高於一般學生。共同性則包括：(1) 學校關係、家長的學習參與、及家庭教育資源可以預期學業自我概念；(2) 學校關係及家庭關係對學習投入有顯著影響；(3) 學業自我概念對學習投入有顯著影響；(4) 學校關係與家庭關係有顯著的相關性；(5) 學業自我概念及學習投入為脈絡因素影響學業表現的中介因素；(6) 學業自我概念會透過學習投入影響學業表現。對經濟弱勢學生而言，脈絡因素的變項中以學校關係對於中介變項（學業自我概念及學習投入）之關係的結構係數最大，因此建議從早期加強經濟弱勢學生的學校關係以增進其學業自我概念及學習投入。研究原創性／價值：本研究的獨特性是以SSMMD 理論為基礎，在脈絡因素除了學生的社會關係之外，加入了家庭教育資源及家長的學習參與，提出學習投入的動機歷程理論。此模式可以系統性地探討一般學生與經濟弱勢學生的學業表現影響因素，進而找出影響弱勢學生學習表現的獨特因素。本研究的研究結果可作為教育實踐及政策制定中，經濟弱勢學生的社會資源投入之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: To close the achievement gap between economically disadvantaged and general students, factors affecting academic performance should be identified. Referring to the Self-System Model of Motivational Development (SSMMD), this study proposed a model called ”Motivational Model of Engagement (MME)” by adding two social context variables: home educational resources and parental involvement. The study investigated the empirical applicability of the model and identified the factors contributing to the achievement gap between economically disadvantaged students and others. Design/methodology/approach: A survey was conducted with a two-stage cluster sampling using probability proportional to size for the school selection. There were 1,097 students with 942 general students and 155 economically disadvantaged students. Structural equation model (SEM) analyses using AMOS software were performed to compare the structural coefficients for the two groups. Findings: Results of the comparison revealed that the predictive power of learning engagement on academic achievement was higher for the economically disadvantaged students. These students are similar to the general students in the following aspects: (1) school relationships, parent involvement in learning, and home education resources have significant effects on the academic self-concept, (2) positive school relationship or family relationship led to greater learning engagement, (3) academic self-concept significantly predicts learning engagement, (4) a covariant relationship exists between school relationship and family relationship, (5) academic self-concept and learning engagement positively mediated the relationship between social context and academic achievement, (6) self-concept affects academic performance through learning engagement. It is noticed that, for the economically disadvantaged students, the structural coefficients of the relationship between school relationship and the mediators (academic self-concepts and learning engagement) are larger than those between family-related context variables and the mediators. The results suggested that to enhance the academic self-concepts and learning engagement of the economically disadvantaged students, one must strengthen their school relationship in early year. Originality/value: On the basis of the SSMMD theory, this study proposed a model called ”Motivational Model of Engagement” by adding home educational resources and parental involvement as the social context factors. The model can be used systematically to identify factors affecting academic achievement for students with varied economic status. Implications for educational practices and policies are provided, especially for the allocation of social resources among economically disadvantaged students.起始頁-結束頁：73-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201806_26(2).00032篇名：《書評》：《彼時與此時的歷史教學：學校恆定與變革的故事》並列篇名：REVIEW OF LARRY CUBAN’S “TEACHING HISTORY THEN AND NOW: A STORY OF STABILITY AND CHANGE IN SCHOOLS”作者：劉哲瑋(Che-Wei Liu);單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：109-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201806_26(2).00043篇名：德國二軌並立學校制度之發展與評析並列篇名：DEVELOPMENT AND COMMENTARY ANALYSIS OF THE TWO-TIERED SCHOOL SYSTEM IN GERMANY作者：張炳煌(Ping-Huang Chang)關鍵字：德國學校制度;中等教育;比較教育;教育分流;German school system;secondary education;comparative education;educational tracking期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在探討德國二軌並立學校制度之發展，並評析改革方案之實施與影響。二軌並立學制係將文理中學以外的學校類型加以整合，形成文理中學與新的整合型學校類型並立的學校制度，近年來德國越來越多邦採用該模式改革學制，並已改變德國傳統學校制度的風貌，值得加以探究。本研究之目的為︰（1）瞭解德國學校制度由多軌分立朝向二軌並立的發展脈絡；（2）以Hamburg和Berlin為對象，探討邦層級學校制度變革的推動歷程與政策內涵；（3）評析德國二軌並立學制變革的政策目標與實施成效，及其對臺灣中等教育發展的啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採用文件分析，主要資料來源為官方文件、議案關係文書以及相關研究文獻。此外學校制度係屬各邦權力，故本研究再以Berlin與Hamburg為對象，進行個案研究之分析。研究發現或結論：1.二軌並立學制變革係為改進多軌分立學制的缺失。2.二軌並立學制是妥協的方案，是略過文理中學的局部改革。3.二軌並立學制重視學生的異質性，以期提升學生的學習成效。4.二軌並立學制仍是分流學制，仍難克服傳統學制階層化的問題。研究原創性／價值：1.本研究重視政策發展脈絡，系統性呈現德國學制的新近發展，並且由教育選擇的觀點探討分流學制的設計，豐富學制研究的內涵。2.系統性回顧相關研究成果，重視實徵性研究結果，並據以評析二軌並立學制改革的實施與影響。3.探討邦層級的學制變革，超過傳統以國家為分析單位的研究取向，深化比較教育研究。英文摘要：Purpose: This study aimed to explore the development of the two-tiered school system in Germany, and to analyze its implementation and impact. The two-tiered school system was established by building up integrated secondary schools in addition to the Gymnasium (academic high schools). This approach is becoming increasingly popular in Germany, as many Lander (states) have adopted such model. In the field of comparative education, Germany is considered the prototype of a stratified school system. Moreover, its differentiated features and early selection have been retained for decades despite various reforms. The introduction of the two-tiered school system underlines the significant change in the German school system and it is of interest to examine its development. Therefore, this study examined (1) the context of structural reform of the school system in Germany, (2) policy formulation and the components of school system reform at the state level taking Hamburg and Berlin as examples, and (3) the policy goals and implement impact of the two-tiered school system in Germany and its implication for Taiwanese secondary school system, systematically. Design/methodology/approach: This study analyzed various documents, including official records, statutes and relevant studies. In accordance with the Germany's federal structure, the key level of action was the Lander. Thus, this study further examined the prominence of Land-level action on the school system. Findings: The two-tiered school system (1) aimed to tackle the deficiencies of the multi-track school system, (2) was the result of compromise, as the distinct position of the Gymnasium was never endangered, (3) embraced the heterogeneity of learning groups, with the aim of increasing overall performance, and (4) is still a tracking system, making it difficult to overcome its stratified nature. Originality/value: 1. This study presented a systematic overview of the structural reform of the German school system, highlighting the transformation from multi-tiered to two-tiered model. Furthermore, this study scrutinized the tracking mechanism in terms of educational choice, going beyond a descriptive approach to the study of education systems. 2. A substantial part of this study was a review of recent German scholarship on structural reform of the school system. Since few such studies have been conducted in Taiwan, this work provides a foundation for researchers to develop further lines of inquiry. 3. According to the Germany's federal structure, responsibility for the school system is incumbent upon individual Land (state). Taking Hamburg and Berlin as examples, this study demonstrated the prominence of Land-level action on the school system. While the study of education systems has conventionally used countries as the principal unit of analysis, this study has explored sub-national systems.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201803_26(1).00014篇名：數理科學的學習動機有性別差異嗎？一個來自後設分析的證據並列篇名：STUDENTS' LEARNING MOTIVATION TO MATH AND SCIENCE: USING THE META-ANALYSIS TO FIND THE GENDER DIFFERENCE IN TAIWAN作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);翁雅芸(Ya-Yun Weng);張靜軒(Ching-Hsuan Chang)關鍵字：性別差異;數理科學;學習動機;後設分析;臺灣;gender difference;math and science;learning motivation;meta-analysis;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本研究統整臺灣1993年到2013年所發表的學位論文與期刊論文，透過後設分析法以釐清臺灣學生在數理科學的學習動機、學習興趣與學習態度等情意層面上，是否存在性別差異。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究以「臺灣博碩士論文知識加值系統」和「臺灣期刊論文索引系統」當作檢索工具，搜尋國內的期刊和博碩士論文，最後共採納72篇論文進行後設分析。研究發現或結論：整體來說，兩性在數理科學學習動機等因素具有顯著性別差異，呈現男學生優於女學生的現象。透過調節變項檢定發現，除樣本大小不會影響其性別差異以外，研究年代、地區、學習階段、數理科學科目、研究變項（學習動機／學習興趣／學習態度）以及變項組成因素等皆會對性別差異產生影響。雖然在國小階段性別差異未達顯著，但隨著年齡增長，性別差異逐漸擴大，到高中職階段則最為明顯；南部地區的性別差異最為顯著，中部地區的性別差異則未達統計顯著。2009年至2013年間，臺灣學生在數理科學學習動機等情意層面的性別差異較過去更為明顯，代表目前教育環境與社會環境對於女性學習數理科學或許仍不夠友善，或無法給予適切的支持。研究原創性／價值：本研究整合臺灣長達20年內所發表的學位論文與期刊論文，針對臺灣兩性學生在數理科學學習動機等因素方面提出整合後的研究結果，並反映臺灣學生在數理科學學習動機等因素上存在不同程度的性別差異，提供此重大警訊，供後續研究與教育輔導參考。英文摘要：Purpose: The meta-analysis method was used in analyzing data extracted from thesis and peer review journals from 2003 to 2013, as inputs in understanding male students or female students who have the better learning motivation, learning interest and learning attitude in math, nature science and computer science. Design/methodology/approach: This study extracted the articles of journals from ”PerioPath Index to Taiwan Periodical Literature System” and the articles of theses and dissertations form ”National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations in Taiwan.” Totally, 72 journal and these articles were collected and used in this study. Findings: Meta-analysis results showed that the male students had a significant outperformance than female students. The published times, the stage of schooling, the subjects (math, science and computer science), the variables (motivation/attitude/interest), and the subscales all had a significant impact on the gender difference. But the variable impact of sample size was not significant. In the elementary school, the gender difference was not significant, but the gap of gender difference was increasing, especially in the stage of high schooling. The gender difference was highest in the south area cities of Taiwan, however in the midland area cities of Taiwan, the gender difference was not significant. The past five years, Taiwan's students had more gender difference in the learning motivation, learning interest, and learning attitude in math, nature science, and computer science. The results meant that the society was not friendly supported for female students in studying math and science. Originality/value: This study integrates the researches from dissertation and journal in Taiwan for past 20 years. The meta-analysis was used to examine the gender differences in the learning motivation, learning interest, and learning attitude in math, nature science, and computer science. The major issue of gender difference in learning motivation in math, nature science, and computer science was found increasing in different stage of schooling. That deserved much attention and caring from government, teachers, and parents. Finally, some conclusions and suggestions for practical applications and future researches were suggested and proposed.起始頁-結束頁：45-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201803_26(1).00025篇名：普通班身心障礙學生學校支持服務模式之建構並列篇名：ESTABLISHING A MODEL OF SCHOOL SUPPORT SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES IN GENERAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM作者：孫淑柔(Shu-Jou Sun);黃澤洋(Tse-Yang Huang)關鍵字：學校支持服務;特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫;身心障礙學生;普通班教師;school support services;Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study;students with disabilities;teachers in general education classrooms期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本研究目的在建構身心障礙學生學校支持服務的預測模式、探討身心障礙學生學校支持服務的獲得現況、以及不同背景變項身心障礙學生獲得學校支持服務的差異情形。研究設計／方法／取徑：研究者選取特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫99學年度安置於普通班的小六及國三學生共1,454位參與者進行研究，並以普通班教師問卷為研究工具進行次級資料分析。研究發現或結論：一、本研究發現，身心障礙學生學校支持服務模式最大的影響因素是人力資源，其次是教學調整，教師專業知能的影響最低。二、普通班教師與特教教師合作的比例高於巡迴輔導教師及治療師；教學調整方式以調整教室環境、調整作業內容或完成時間、以及調整教學方法最普遍；身心障礙學生的支持服務以學雜費減免、獎助學金、考試評量調整最常見。三、不同居住地區的身心障礙學生在巡迴輔導教師的幫助、以及與特教教師的合作有顯著差異。四、不同障礙類別的身心障礙學生獲得學校支持服務有顯著差異。研究原創性／價值：本研究以全台特殊教育大樣本建立預測模式，結果發現特殊教育相關人力資源對身心障礙學生獲得學校支持服務的影響最大，其次則是教學調整，而普通班教師的特教專業知能對身心障礙學生獲得學校支持服務缺乏直接明顯的預測力。英文摘要：Purpose: The objectives of this study were (i) to establish a model that describes and predicts the school support services provided to students with disabilities in general education classrooms, and (ii) to understand the school support services that such students receive and explore the background factors that might influence the provision of such services. Design/methodology/approach: This study used the data from the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study (SNELS), which collected data on sixth- and ninth- grade students with disabilities who had been placed in general education classrooms in the 2010 academic year. In total, 1,454 students with disabilities were selected for the analyses. Findings: First, human resources had the greatest influence on school support services in the model, and teaching accommodations had the second greatest. By contrast, teachers' special education knowledge and competency in general education classrooms were no significant in the model. However, cooperation between teachers in general education classrooms and special education teachers was higher than that between itinerant teachers and therapists. The most commonly used teaching accommodations were classroom environment, homework content or completion time, and teaching strategies. The main support services were tuition waivers, scholarships and examination adjustments. Third, school location of students with disabilities had a significant effect on the level of help received from itinerant teachers, and collaboration with special education teachers. Fourth, disability category had a significant effect on most support services variables provided by the school. Originality/value: This study used the SNELS database, which provided a large sample size, to establish a predictive model. The major findings were that human resources in special education had the greatest influence on school support services; the second most influential factor was teaching accommodations. By contrast, teachers' special education knowledge and competency in general education classrooms did not have direct significant predictive roles in the model.起始頁-結束頁：77-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201803_26(1).00036篇名：書評：高等教育國際化的概念框架與策略發展：評《紛亂中的高等教育：改變中的世界的國際化》一書並列篇名：CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT: BOOK REVIEW ON ”HIGHER EDUCATION IN TURMOIL: THE CHANGING WORLD OF INTERNATIONALIZATION”作者：楊正誠(Jason Cheng-Cheng Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：115-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201803_26(1).000401篇名：設計與評估電腦輔助邏輯句型課程對學生句子能力與動機之影響並列篇名：Design and Evaluation of Computer Assisted Logical Sentence Composing Learning on the Students' Performance and Motivation作者：廖長彥(Calvin Chang-Yen Liao);張菀真(Wan-Chen Chang);陳玉欣(Yu-Hsin Chen);辜玉旻(Yu-Min Ku);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko);陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan)關鍵字：一對一數位學習;句型教學;句型應用;寫作;學習內容設計;one-to-one technology enhanced learning;sentence teaching;sentence application;writing;learning content design期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：建構良好句子是寫作的重要元素，然而初學作文的國小學生難以掌握此技巧。因此，本研究基於變易理論設計八種「常用邏輯句型」為電腦輔助課程，強化學生對於句型的熟練度，促使學習辨別不同句型、定義與應用。研究對象為國小四年級94位學生，其中實驗組62人，共進行11個單元的教學課程，在教學前後實施句型前後測、ARCS動機問卷及訪談；對照組32人進行傳統教學，並且只進行延後測的測驗。結果顯示，進行邏輯句型課程之學生：一、句子測驗的前／後成績與延後測達顯著進步；二、動機問卷顯示多數學生對注意力（62.19%）、相關性（60.39%）、信心度（61.83%）與滿足度（62.19%）持正面看法。此外，本研究討論如何透過句子結合的句型教學課程設計與回饋來幫助學生，最後針對教學與研究提出後續建議與限制。英文摘要：Constructing well-formed sentences is an important element of writing. However, many students struggled with this skill. The purpose of this study were to design and evaluation of computer assisted logical sentence composing learning on the students' performance and motivation. Hence, based on Variation Theory, the eight categories logical sentence composing instruction were designed. To understand the effective of this instruction, the study was conducted in an elementary and the participants were 94 4th grade students from 3 classes. The control group was conventional instruction and a delay posttest. The experiment group implemented the logical sentence composing instruction during three months and conducted the pre/post/delay-test of sentence, ARCS motivation questionnaires, and interviews. The findings show that the experiment students' logical sentence composing has significant improvement and the results of ARCS questionnaire showed students regard the instruction were position: Attention (62.19%), Relevance (60.39%), Confidence (61.83%) and Satisfaction (62.19%). Further, this study discussed how to designed the induction and adopt the feedback to help students improve the sentences proficiency and capability.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20161008040012篇名：From Reading to Writing: An English Major and Non-English Major Online Peer Learning Project並列篇名：藉讀而寫：英文系及非英文系學生線上同儕合作計畫作者：王佩玲(Pei-Ling Wang);李筱倩(Hsiao-Chien Lee)關鍵字：online peer responses;online summary writing;reading-to-write;線上同儕回饋;線上摘要寫作;藉讀而寫期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：Taiwanese university students generally display insufficient English writing skills due to their lack of reading and writing practice. This study's aim is to investigate the effects of an inter-school online reading-to-write project, on the basis that peer response promises a positive impact on student writing and the use of the Internet allows peer learning across institutions. The participants were first-year English majors and non- English majors at two Taiwanese universities. They were required to read the biographies, to post online summaries of those biographies, and to provide online peer responses within groups. The researchers explored students' writing improvements and students' perceptions of the project. The students' writings have been analyzed using the method of descriptive statistics, repeated measures ANOVA, two-way mixed ANOVA, and one-way ANOVA. Qualitative data gained from students' written reflections supplemented the findings. The results indicated that the participants' writings increased in word counts, and had fewer syntactic structural errors in their writings. The English majors improved more than the non-English majors in terms of the total number of sentences, whereas the non- English majors showed significant improvements in terms of having fewer grammatical errors. Pedagogical implications and suggestions for future research are provided in the conclusion of this study.英文摘要：學者指出，臺灣大學生英文寫作技巧欠佳是因為閱讀量不足及缺乏寫作練習，然而此論點仍需實證研究支持。基於先前研究已證實同儕回饋能提升寫作技能，且網路能促進跨校同儕互動，本研究探討跨校線上藉讀而寫合作計畫的成效。研究對象為兩校英文系及非英文系的大一學生。研究者將學生分為17個小組，然後要求學生進行名人傳記閱讀、張貼傳記摘要、回應他校組員文章等活動。研究進行一個學期，學生共閱讀4本傳記、完成4篇傳記摘要及4篇線上同儕回饋。研究問題如下：第一，學生摘要的長度是否有進步？第二，學生摘要的內容、組織、句法及文法正確性、單字、體例是否有進步？第三，兩校學生進步情況有何不同？第四，學生對此跨校合作學習觀感及面臨困難為何？研究資料包含傳記摘要、線上同儕回饋及書面心得回顧。資料分析法則包含描述統計、重複測量變異數分析、雙因子混合變異數分析、單因子變異數分析、持續比較分析法。研究結果顯示，學生作文字數及句數增加，且句法錯誤減少；英文系學生在文章長度有顯著進步，而非英文系學生則在文法的正確度有顯著進步。最後，說明研究義涵及對教學的應用，並提出對未來研究的建議。起始頁-結束頁：27-66資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20161008040023篇名：The Digital Game-based Training System of Biomedicine Relevant Spatial Ability並列篇名：用於提升生物醫學空間能力之數位遊戲系統作者：莊宗嚴(Tsung-Yen Chuang);游嘉豪(Jia-Hau You)關鍵字：spatial ability;digital game;digital-based learning;biomedicine;空間能力;數位遊戲;悅趣式學習;生物醫學期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：The concepts of spatial visualization and the geometrical calculation are important elements of the multiple-intelligence development. Especially for the 5th and 6th graders, they are on a level of concrete thinking, in which their thinking may have greater flexible alternatives and begin to develop conservation concepts, including physical and spatial ability and numerical conservation. For this reason, the training of the spatial ability is imperative for students around these ages, especially for those who have interests in biomedicine or other related fields. This study aims to investigate the possibility of utilizing a digital game to improve individual's spatial ability. The tasks of this game are designed to increase spatial ability with rotating question, visual discrimination, and visual memory with space, rotate, reverse, inference, and displacement for biomedicine related training. The experimental activities were also conducted at a primary school. The results indicate that the students' spatial ability can be improved in the spatial digital game.英文摘要：因應近年來社會發展之需求，生物醫學成為國家重要發展方向之一，然而，國內對於此領域的人才培育多是從高中才開始。本研究經由文獻探討，針對生物醫學如何從小扎根，進而選擇從空間能力之培育開始著手。主因歷來許多探討多元智能理論均會論及空間能力的重要性，因為空間能力是幫助個體適應生存的一項基本能力，且研究指出，若進一步結合觀察能力將有助於學生在自然學科方面的發展，同時，眾多空間能力訓練的研究顯示，空間能力的表現可以透過訓練與練習加以改善。因此，本研究旨在發展出一款以空間能力內涵為主的動作冒險遊戲，將針對各種空間能力，導入生物醫學相關之空間視覺內容，設計出相對應的遊戲關卡，讓玩家能夠沉浸在遊戲之中，進而提升研究生物醫學時所需的觀察及空間視覺能力。從實驗結果得知，本研究所開發之遊戲確實能夠讓使用者沉浸於遊戲中，進而增加學習成效，並透過本遊戲對空間能力有更多認識，提升對於學習生物醫學的興趣。起始頁-結束頁：67-87資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20161008040034篇名：The Application of the Moodle On-Line Teaching Platform on Mathematics Curriculum並列篇名：Moodle數位資訊平台應用於數學課程之研究作者：林雅雯(Ya-Wen Lin);曾志隆(Chih-Lung Tseng);江柏叡(Po-Jui Chiang)關鍵字：academic achievement;flipped classroom;gender difference;mathematics attitude;學習成就;翻轉教室;性別差異;數學態度期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：With the advent of the digital age, traditional didactic teaching and online learning have been modified and gradually replaced by ”flipped classroom.” The purpose of this study was to explore the influences of the application of the Moodle on-line teaching platform on the students' learning achievement and attitudes toward mathematics. Based on gender and ability with different teaching methods, students were expected to show variations in their learning attitudes and achievements in mathematics. To investigate the outcomes of Moodle online teaching platform, a quasi-experiment was conducted using a single-group pre-test-post-test design. A total of 27 seventh-grade students of a junior high school in Kaohsiung took part as respondents in the experiment for a period of eight months. Before experimental instruction, all the students took the pre-test of the summative assessment. After experimental instruction, all the students took the post-test of the summative assessment. Data of the study were analyzed by the statistical methods of t-test, two-way ANCOVA and MANCOVA analyses and the results of this survey were concluded as follows: 1. The flip classroom of the Moodle on-line learning experience benefitted students didn't make significant progress in learning achievement, and learning achievement didn't differ in the aspects of gender and ability; 2. the result showed that the performance in the experimental group by having a positive effect on their attitudes toward studying mathematics; 3. the performance of high-ability students in the Moodle on-line teaching environment on the item of ”important others' attitude to mathematics” was significantly better than medium-ability students; 4. students gave positive feedback on the use of the Moodle learning platform for mathematics after experiencing learning.英文摘要：隨著數位時代的來臨，傳統的講述教學與在線學習已被修正，並逐步被「翻轉教室」取代。本研究旨在探討應用Moodle數位資訊平台實施線上教學結合傳統教學之混合式教學方式在學習成就、數學態度之影響，並進一步探討性別與能力變項對學習成效的影響。本研究採前實驗研究法的單一實驗組前－後測設計，以高雄市某國中七年級一個班級學生，共27人為研究對象，進行為期8個月的實驗教學，教學前、後使用成就測驗與數學態度量表來評測學生的改變，所得資料以t考驗、二因子單變量共變數分析及二因子多變量共變數分析等統計方法加以分析處理。所獲致的結論如下：應用Moodle數位學習平台實施線上教學結合傳統教學之翻轉課堂對國中七年級學生數學態度具有高度正向顯著的影響效果：一、應用Moodle數位學習平台實施線上教學結合傳統教學之翻轉課堂對國中七年級學生學習成就的提升沒有顯著效果，且學習成就不會因為不同性別與不同能力學生而有所差異；二、此實驗教學法對國中七年級學生數學態度具有高度正向顯著的影響效果；三、高能力的學生在「對重要他人數學態度」後測得分顯著高於中分組；四、學生在體驗實驗學習後均給予正向積極的回饋。起始頁-結束頁：89-115資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20161008040045篇名：「看得不同」等於「表現得不同」嗎？線上空間能力遊戲的眼蹤與測驗表現並列篇名：Is Seeing Differently the Same as Moving Differently? From the Observation of Eye Tracking in Online Spatial Games and Spatial Test Performance作者：鄭海蓮(Hi-Lian Jeng);吳慧詩(Hui-Shi Wu)關鍵字：性別差異;空間能力;高等教育;眼蹤／眼動;遊戲式測驗;gender difference;spatial ability;higher education;eye tracking/ eye movement;gamed tests期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：個體眼球運動之蹤跡（眼動或眼蹤）可以反應個體的注意力、思考軌跡，以及任務的難度與複雜度，但是否可據此推論個體的終端表現差異呢？近來眼動儀實驗漸多，常用以探究個別差異或群組間的差異，而眼蹤的表現差異是否等於行為表現的差異，則是個有待釐清的有趣問題。本研究綜合模擬的線上空間遊戲測驗、實作測驗和紙筆測驗，探討眼蹤和測驗分數的性別差異。受試者為大學以上學歷，女性12位、男性18位。研究結果顯示：一、在紙筆式空間能力測驗分數上無性別差異；二、在簡單的平面任務表現上沒有眼蹤的性別差異；三、在較困難的平面任務則出現凝視時間、凝視次數與回視時間的性別差異；四、在實作的立體空間任務中，男性凝視目標物旋轉的左右側範圍較大。本研究顯示，雖然在不同的空間任務中，男女的眼動型態不盡相同，其遊戲測驗、實作與紙筆測驗的結果並無差異，亦即「看」得不同並不必然等於「表現」得不同。本研究中的高等教育男女受試者在視覺思考歷程與外顯的空間能力量測結果比較上，是相同處多於相異處，惟任務難度和眼蹤的性別差異有關。英文摘要：Individuals' thinking and attention, and task difficulty and complexity can be captured by eye movement and tracking, however is it generalizable to individuals' end performance and difference? The eye tracking experiments are getting popular in studying individual or group differences, but whether seeing differently is equal to moving differently is an interesting question deserving more exploration. The present study incorporated prototype online spatial games, a performance test and a paper-and-pencil test to investigate genders' spatial differences in eye tracking and test scores. There were 12 female and 18 male subjects with college above education. The results showed that, (1) there was no gender difference in the paper-and-pencil spatial test scores, (2) there was no gender difference of eye tracking in the simple 2D task, (3) there were significant gender differences found in total fixation time, total fixation count, and regression time in the difficult 2D task, and (4) in the 3D performance task, males were found to fixate the rotating object in a wider horizontal range. Although the genders' eye tracking patterns were not the same, there was no difference in their test scores and completing all the tasks, which showed that seeing differently was not necessarily equal to performing differently. For the Higher-Ed female and male subjects in the study, there were more similarities than differences in their comparisons of spatial thinking and outcome performance; nevertheless the task difficulty was related to the genders' differential eye tracking.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會6篇名：幼教人員對幼兒數位學習活動的社會批判與教學轉化並列篇名：The Early Childhood Educators’ Social Critique and Instructional Transformation on the Digital Learning Activities for Young Children作者：陳儒晰(Ru-Si Chen);簡宏江(Hung-Chiang Chien)關鍵字：幼兒;幼教人員;社會批判;教學轉化;數位學習活動;young children;early childhood educators;social critique;instructional transformation;digital learning activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究探究幼教人員從社會批判角度對幼兒數位學習活動的思考，轉化幼兒參與數位學習活動所面對的社會偏見或刻板印象，並據以建構與實踐教學策略。研究者透過觀察與訪談來分析幼教人員和幼兒在數位學習脈絡中的實務作為。本研究運用觀察呈現幼兒數位學習活動的資訊社會不平等學習事實，並結合訪談探討幼教人員對數位學習活動的批判思考與教學轉化等議題之想法。研究結果指出，幼教人員對幼兒數位學習活動具有基本的社會批判分析基礎，嘗試以幼教人員與幼兒為主體，省思其在數位學習活動的內容習得和社會批判之教學轉化實踐的可能性，此作為有助於幼教人員增進對幼兒數位學習活動的資訊素養、教學省思與專業實踐。最後，研究者根據研究結果進行討論，提供學術社群與幼教相關單位建構幼兒數位學習專業論述和行動革新策略之參照。英文摘要：This study explored early childhood educators’ perceptions about digital learning content for young children from the viewpoint of social critique. The researchers analyzed the practices of early childhood educators and young children in digital learning activities, and focused on the practical instructional strategies about the transformations of social bias and stereotype in digital learning activities. The observations presented the instructional information of digital learning activities and learning facts of social inequity for young children. The interviews focused on the early childhood educators’ realistic thoughts from the approaches of social critique and instructional transformations in digital learning content. The results indicated the early childhood educators had the fundamental analysis through social inequality of digital learning activities, revealing the subjectivity of early childhood educators and young children, and described their practices in the digital learning activities with the basis of social critical thoughts and instructional transformations. Finally, the researchers discussed the results from this study, and provided the academic community and the relevant early childhood education units constructing the reference of study and practices of professional discourse and practical innovation strategies in digital learning for young children.起始頁-結束頁：29-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會7篇名：應用理論建構以3D虛擬實境為特色之教育介入對高中職濫用愷他命學生的成效並列篇名：The Intervention Effectiveness of 3D Virtual Reality Animation on Senior High School Students with Ketamine Use作者：陳志哲(Chih-Che Chen);廖容瑜(Jung-Yu Liao);張萩琴(Chiu-Ching Chang);黃久美(Chiu-Mieh Huang);郭鐘隆(Jong-Long Guo)關鍵字：3D虛擬實境;高中職;解構式計畫行為理論;藥物濫用;3D virtual reality;senior high school;decomposed theory of planned behavior;drug abuse期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究應用解構計畫行為理論檢驗，以3D虛擬實境為特色之教育介入，對藥物濫用防制的成效。篩選愷他命尿液呈陽性反應個案，共32位學生，分別來自臺灣北區五所高中職，在實施3D虛擬實境影片介入後，以結構式問卷進行調查，並詢問學生對於觀看3D虛擬實境動畫之意見，採徑路分析。結果顯示，輔導員影響、資源條件分別與主觀規範、知覺行為控制有顯著相關，而主觀規範、知覺行為控制與行為意圖顯著相關，但態度與行為意圖關係不顯著。因此，輔導員影響、資源條件能透過主觀規範、知覺行為控制影響行為意圖，顯示此教育介入對學生用藥行為意圖有影響。學生對於3D虛擬實境動畫的接受度高，認同此種創新媒體教學模式，但期望動畫呈現觀感，能有如真人般的感受。本研究亦對未來的研究方向提出具體建議。英文摘要：The Decomposed Theory of Planned Behavior (DTPB) was applied to develop an education program with 3D Virtual Reality (VR) animation and test its effectiveness on senior high school students with Ketamine use. The participants were 32 students with Ketamine positive urine screening from five senior high schools in Northern Taiwan. After the implementation of the 3D VR Intervention, structured questionnaire survey was then conducted. The data was analyzed by the method of path analysis. The results showed that an education program of 3D VR animation on senior high school students with Ketamine use is effective (p＜0.001). Counselor’s infl uence and resource facilitation condition were signifi cantly associated with subjective norms and perceived behavioral control, respectively. In addition, subjective norms and perceived behavioral control were significantly associated with behavior intention. The study supported the intervention effectiveness of 3D VR animation on senior high school students with Ketamine use. Students felt satisfaction after watching the innovative 3D VR animation and recognized the teaching strategy of utilizing creative media. However, they would like to watch the animations applying immersion VR instead of desktop VR. The further study is needed to explore the intervention effectiveness on stop-use behavior. Interventions should target adolescent Ketamine users, and address the critical messages on 3D VR, especially for the specifi c situations, physical and mental response and responsive life skills.起始頁-結束頁：51-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會8篇名：海峽兩岸國民小學學生之網路學習行為比較研究並列篇名：Cross-Strait Comparative Study on Pupils’ Networked Learning Behaviors作者：林奇賢(Chi-Syan Lin);李玉順(Yushun Li)關鍵字：合作學習;兩岸教育;網路學習行為;學習分析;學習社群;collaborative learning;education in China and Taiwan;networked learning behaviors;learning analytics;learning community of practices期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：為了探究與比較兩岸國民小學學生在互聯網中學習行為的差異，本研究採用實證研究法，首先設計了一個具有主題探索學習、跨校合作學習與虛擬學習社群應用等特質的網路合作學習活動，然後邀請兩岸的國民小學學童參與這項學習活動，結果共有189位兩岸的國小學童參與了這項歷時四個月的網路合作學習活動。本研究接著應用學習分析的概念，將學生的學習歷程紀錄進行分析。分析內容包括上網次數與時間、上網時段與地點、討論區人際互動與同儕評量等四大類量化資料。在進行學習分析時，本研究除主要以行為次數進行探討之外，另根據網路學習行為模式的理論架構，進行兩岸學童的網路學習行為之質性與量化的比較與討論。研究結果顯示，臺灣小學生有較佳的網路合作學習行為，但實證數據資料同時指出了當前兩岸國民小學在信息化與現代化上的一些問題。為了提升學習量化的分析品質，本研究也指出了研究方法上應強化的方向。英文摘要：The study implements a networked collaborative learning program featuring PBL, inter-schools collaborative learning, and virtual learning community of practices with the purposes of investigating and comparing differences on networked learning behaviors among elementary school students in China and Taiwan. The duration of the learning program is four months. There are 189 students from both regions participate in the program. The learning analytics is incorporated to analyze the recorded learning portfolios of students. Data retrieved from learning portfolios are composed of four categories, which are frequencies and times of online, timeframes and locations of online, interpersonal interaction in discussion board, and peer evaluation. Although the learning analytics is based on behavioral frequencies primarily in the study, a framework of the networked learning behaviors is also utilized to explore differences of performance among students in China and Taiwan both qualitatively and quantitatively. Results of the study reveal that elementary school students of Taiwan perform better networked learning behaviors than do those of their counterparts. Whereas, the quantitative data of the study also imply that schools in both regions all fail to upscale their practices in schooling to meet the needs of digital age. As to improving the quality of learning analytics, the study suggests several directions pertaining to the research methodologies at the end of the paper.起始頁-結束頁：71-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會9篇名：手勢互動內容創作系統之開發與評估並列篇名：Development and Evaluation of Gesture-Based Interactive Content Authoring System作者：林信志(Hsin-Chih Lin);朱菀鈴(Wan-Ling Chu);朱昱融(Yu-Jung Chu)關鍵字：互動內容創作系統;手勢互動;系統可用性;使用者互動滿意度;體感互動經驗;interactive content authoring;gesture-based interaction;system usability scale;questionnaire for user interaction satisfaction;motion-sensing interactive experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以人機互動GOMS理論為基礎，結合手勢互動內容創作的理念，以OpenNI與Unity3D為開發工具，發展出一套手勢互動內容創作系統。本系統透過空間座標與九宮格辨識，整合手勢動作API與互動設計表，將內容以互動電子書的方式呈現，使用者在互動設計表中以拖曳方式，組合故事內容與相對應的手勢動作，達成手勢互動內容創作之目的。本研究先請專家進行系統原型評估，並以體感互動經驗、系統可用性及使用者互動滿意度三個量表進行實證資料蒐集與分析，結果顯示：本系統擁有良好的使用性；使用者覺得本系統手勢動作直覺易懂；互動設計表讓互動方式更多元且有趣。英文摘要：In this study, we have developed a gesture-based interactive content authoring system which integrated gesture-based motions and story contents into an interactive design table and presented the content as an e-book. Using an interactive design table, users can drag and drop their design idea according to the story contents and interesting ways. After that, we invited experts to evaluate our system by using Questionnaire for User Interaction Satisfaction (QUIS), System Usability Scale (SUS), and the scale of Motion-sensing Interactive Experience as data collection tools. Data analysis results show that our system has good usability; users consider that using gestures is intuitive and easy to understand; the interactive design table can make the interaction more interesting.起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201604080200110篇名：不同思考方式、教學方法和學習風格對行動學習使用行為之影響並列篇名：A Study for Influence of Different Ways of the Thinking, Teaching Methods and Learning Styles on Usage Behaviors in Mobile Learning作者：李坤清(Kuen-Ching Li);陳怡婷(Yi-Ting Chen)關鍵字：六頂思考帽方法;行動學習;行動學習教學方法;科技接受模式;學習風格;six thinking hats;mobile learning;mobile learning's teaching methods;technology acceptance model (TAM);VARK learning styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究的目的為探討不同思考方式對行動學習使用行為之影響，以臺北地區已實施行動學習之中、小學生為研究對象，透過專家訪談與問卷調查方式，進行樣本資料蒐集，以行為理論之科技接受模式概念為基礎，建立研究架構，加入個人背景、思考方式（六頂思考帽）、行動學習教學方法（直接引導學習法、心智工具與探究式學習法）和四種學習風格（視覺、聽覺、讀／寫及動覺）為研究變項，並建立相關研究假設。本研究共發放300份量化問卷調查，回收有效問卷237份。經統計分析結果，個人背景對使用行為與思考方式有部分顯著影響；思考方式對使用行為有部分顯著影響；教學方法對使用行為有部分顯著影響；學習風格對使用行為有非常顯著影響；教學方法與思考方式的交互作用對使用行為有顯著影響；學習風格與思考方式的交互作用對使用行為有顯著影響。本研究藉由了解學生的思考方式、學習風格、教學方法及使用行為，期望可提供作為推動行動學習相關人員之參考。英文摘要：This study proposes a model to identify the relevant factors that influence the students's mobile learning (m-learning) usage behaviors. The factors are including personal background, six thinking hats for the ways of the thinkings; mobile learning's teaching methods and VARK (visual, auditory, reading/writing, & kinesthetic) learning styles. The methodology used for this study was questionnaire survey and used expert interview to guarantee the suitability of each questionnaire in advacned. A structural model was used to analyze the data collected from two hundred and thirty-seven students. This study find out that personal background have positive influence on mobile learning's usage behavior and the ways of thinkings; The ways of the thinkings, teaching methods and learning styles have significant positive impact on usage behavior; The interaction analysis of the teaching methods and learning styles moderators have positive impact on usage behavior. Results from this study expcted to provide a reference to relevant users in mobile learning implementation.起始頁-結束頁：17-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201604080200201篇名：The Meaning of ”Taiwanese”: Conceptualizing the Components of Taiwanese National Identity並列篇名：「臺灣人」的意涵：臺灣人民族認同之概念化作者：丘偉國(Cody Wai-kwok Yau)關鍵字：social identity;Taiwanese/Chinese identity;conceptualization;Primer on Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling;社會認同;臺灣人／中國人認同;概念化;最小平方途徑之結構方程式期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：One of the problems with empirical studies of Taiwanese/Chinese identity in Taiwan is the use of over-simplified measurements based on responses to a question involving three choices: is your nationality Taiwanese, Chinese, or both? This study attempts to produce a new model with a more fine-grained conceptualization of national identity in Taiwan. The model is derived from Rawi Abdelal et al.'s idea of social identity, and applies Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) to survey data, to develop a social psychological framework using three independent latent variables: ”national norms,” ”national closeness,” and ”national purposes,” and a single dependent latent variable: ”state identity.” The results of this re-analysis show all three of the independent variables have significant positive correlations with the dependent variable ”state identity.” Of the independent variables, national norms has the highest total effect. For respondents self-identifying as Taiwanese (T respondents) and respondents self-identifying as Chinese (C respondents), there were significant differences in two dimensions: national purposes and national norms. The strength of T respondents' national purposes is higher than C respondents while the strength of C respondents' national norms is higher than T respondents. In addition, a comparison of total effect value and outer weight found that T respondents and respondents self-identifying as both Taiwanese and Chinese (B respondents) also differed. Both T and B respondents stress on ”state-building,” a component of the latent variable national purposes. For the dependent variable state identity, however, B and T respondents differ. T respondents take a pro-Taiwan and anti-unification stance. B respondents, however, take a pro-”Republic of China” and prodemocratic unification stance. Variables such as age, education, and social contacts all have moderating effects for both T and B respondents but not great enough to change the path direction.英文摘要：過去「臺灣人／中國人」的認同研究，常以受訪者認為自己是「臺灣人」、「中國人」或「兩者都是」三項擇一的答案作為測量項目，導致測量項目過度簡化的問題。因此，本研究以Rawi Abdelal等人的「社會認同(social identity)」概念，提出一個新的臺灣人民族認同測量模型，並用最小平方途徑之結構方程式(Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling, PLS-SEM)，發展以「民族規範(national norms)」、「民族親密度(national closeness)」及「民族目的(national purposes)」等三個潛在獨立變項，及「國家認同」潛在依變項的社會心理學分析架構。結果顯示，三個潛在獨立變項均與「國家認同」呈現顯著正相關；其中，「民族規範」具有最高的整體影響力(total effect)。其次，自稱為「臺灣人」受訪者比自稱「中國人」的受訪者呈現顯著差異。「臺灣人」的「民族目的」強度比「中國人」高，而「中國人」在「民族規範」強度比「臺灣人」高。再者，比較整體影響力和外權重(outer weights)過後，發現自稱「臺灣人」和「兩者都是」的受訪者亦有顯著差異。這兩群受訪者雖都強調「國家建立(state-building)」（「民族目的」之中的測量指標），但對「國家認同」的意涵是有不同。自稱「臺灣人」受訪者的立場是親臺灣，反統一；而「兩者都是」受訪者的立場則是親「中華民國」和兩岸民主統一。其他變項，例如年齡、教育和「社會接觸(social contacts)」對於自稱「臺灣人」和「兩者都是」的受訪者具有調節效應，但強度不足以改變原有因果路徑。起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.02.01-542篇名：政治情緒對兩岸經貿交流的影響：以臺灣的大學生為例並列篇名：Political Emotions and their Effects on Cross-Strait Economic Exchange: A Study of College Students in Taiwan作者：陳陸輝(Lu-huei Chen);陳映男(Ying-nan Chen)關鍵字：兩岸關係;定群追蹤;政治情緒;太陽花學運;cross-Strait relations;panel studies;political emotions;Sunflower Movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：大學生正處政治定向形塑時期，故深入分析大學生重要政治態度對臺灣選舉政治之研究與發展具重要啟示。自2014年3月18日「太陽花學運」以來，大學生對兩岸關係的態度與傾向受到社會大眾關注。本研究認為：分析大學生對兩岸議題之態度，須注意大學生政治情緒對其兩岸相關議題立場之影響。本研究運用大學生政治社會化的定群追蹤資料，檢證大學生政治情緒對其在兩岸經貿交流及兩岸服貿協議此兩項議題態度之影響。本研究聚焦於大學生分別對臺灣與中國大陸在「充滿希望」、「熱血澎湃」、「沮喪」、「難過」、「憤怒」及「擔心」等六個政治情緒之分布情況及穩定程度，並進一步分析其對兩岸議題之影響。本研究發現：大學生對臺灣「熱血澎湃」或對大陸「充滿希望」時，傾向支持兩岸經貿交流，而對臺灣感到「擔心」者則盼採取保守政策。至於大學生對大陸「充滿希望」者傾向贊成兩岸服貿協議，相對地，他們對中國大陸感到「憤怒」時，較採取反對立場。因此，大學生對中國大陸的政治情緒，是左右渠等對兩岸關係相關議題立場之重要關鍵。英文摘要：During the impressionable years of college students, their political orientations are still amenable. Therefore, exploring the political attitudes of college students sheds light on our understanding of Taiwan's electoral politics. Beginning from the Sunflower Movement in 2014, college students' attitudes toward cross-Strait relations has attracted the public's attention. This study argues that we have to take political emotions into consideration when we analyze college students' attitudes on cross-Srait relations. We employ panel studies to examine how political emotions affect their stances on cross-Strait economic exchange. We demonstrate that when college students feel enthusiasm toward Taiwan or feel hopeful toward Mainland China, they are more likely to support cross-Strait economic exchange. However, students with feelings of anxiety tend to urge the government to take strict measures on cross-Strait economic exchanges. As for students with a hopeful attitude toward Mainland China, they are willing to support the Cross-Strait Service and Trade Agreement, but those who harbor feelings of anger toward Mainland China tend to be opposed to this agreement. Therefore, this study shows that political emotions play an important role in college students' attitudes toward cross-Strait relations.起始頁-結束頁：55-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.02.55-863篇名：投票選項模糊下之檢定與分析：2010年高雄市長選舉的不確定性及投票效應並列篇名：An Analysis of Ambiguous Voting Choice: Electoral Uncertainty in the 2010 Kaohsiung Mayoral Election作者：王鼎銘(Ding-ming Wang);郭銘峰(Ming-feng Kuo)關鍵字：模糊參選人;投票不確定性;孔多塞贏家;區別性檢定;Stereotype Logit;candidate ambiguity;voting uncertainty;Condorcet winner;Distinguishability test;Stereotype Logit期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以2010年高雄市長選舉為背景，探討選舉過程中候選人的模糊性及選民面對這種不確定性下的投票反應。由於相關實證研究忽視政策立場之外的模糊效果，並囿限於從候選人的角度來解釋，本文因此另闢途徑，透過一系列的統計檢定模式─包括孔多塞贏家(Condorcet winner)的計算、多項勝算對數模型的不相關選項獨立性檢定(IIA test)、Stereotype Logit的區別性檢定(Distinguishability test)等，據以廣泛地鑑別選民投票時的選項模糊性。其中尤為特殊的是運用較少受矚目的Stereotype Logit，並提出當選舉面臨越來越多模糊性的狀況下，該模型將是投票行為研究無法避免使用的統計工具。根據不同模型及檢定數據的分析結果，關於這場選舉的模糊性本文得出幾點結論：第一，這場選戰並未產生絕對的孔多塞輸家，顯示選民對陳菊、楊秋興與黃昭順三位候選人的偏好排列並非井然有序；其次，這幾位候選人對選民而言也非完全相互獨立，檢定結果顯示選民的投票結構會因為參選組合的不同而改變；第三，選民特別無法有效區隔楊秋興與黃昭順這兩位參選人，但陳菊與其他兩人之間則沒有這種模糊定位的問題，換言之當年楊秋興退黨參選主要是影響泛藍的選票。英文摘要：This paper, based on the 2010 Kaohsiung mayoral election, explores candidate ambiguity during the campaign and the corresponding voting behavior under a veil of uncertainty. Current research limits the ambiguity to the candidate's unclear policy standpoints and disregards the notion that the ambiguity may simply reside in the voters' own uncertainty. To relieve these constraints, several statistical examinations, including estimating the Condorcet winner, the IIA test under Multinomial Logit, and the Distinguishability test under Stereotype Logit, are proposed to observe how voters directly respond to ambiguity. Among those, Stereotype Logit is especially emphasized and is anticipated to be the most fitting choice model to estimate voting behavior under uncertainty. According to the estimation results, there is couple ambiguity observed in this mayoral election: First, despite the outcome of Chen Chu as the Condorcet winner, there is no defined Condorcet loser in this campaign. It indicates that voters' preferences are not completely organized and transitive. Second, candidates in this election are not mutually independent from the voter's perspective. People are likely to respond differently if one of the candidates stops the campaign based on the test results. Third, it is especially difficult for voters to distinguish between Yang Chiu-hsing and Huang Chao-shun. Chen Chu, on the other hand, has no ambiguity concern with the other candidates. This paper substantiates that Yang Chiu-hsing, defected from the DPP, mainly to attract pan KMT ballots.起始頁-結束頁：87-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.02.87-1224篇名：Partisan Politics and Redistricting in Taiwan, 2005-2007並列篇名：政黨政治與選區重劃：臺灣經驗（2005-2007年）作者：鮑彤(Nathan F. Batto)關鍵字：選區重劃;選區劃分委員會;分立政府;選舉委員會;選舉制度改革;redistricting;boundary commission;divided government;election commission;electoral system reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文檢視臺灣在2005-2007年選區重劃過程中的政黨政治，分析國民黨、民進黨兩大黨為何無法在各縣市通過對他們最有利的重劃版本。理論上，選區重劃案的政黨色彩，某種程度取決於法令規定對決策者、決策機構的黨派組成及行動順序的限制。以本研究個案來說，選區重劃案必須經過四個階段：首先為縣市選舉委員會，其次是中選會，第三為立法院，最後是立法院長與行政院長的協商。本文於每階段一一考量有關法令約制、決策機關組成和行動順序的細節內涵與效果。此外，本文檢視彰化縣、臺中縣與屏東縣例子，以說明共識型、地方選委會優勢型、政黨衝突型等三種選區重劃常見的型態。就公共行政而言，本文的分析架構提供一種評估不同改革案的方式。就政治發展的角度來說，此分析架構推論，未來選區重劃時本文指出的關鍵因素若有所改變，尤其若臺灣出現一致政府而非分立政府，則其過程與結果或許將相當不同於2005-2007年的案例。英文摘要：This paper examines partisan politics in the redistricting process in Taiwan in 2005-2007 to explain why neither major party was able to obtain its best plan in every city or county. Theoretically, the degree of partisanship depends on the extent to which guidelines constrain decision makers, the partisan composition of decision making bodies, and the sequence of action. In this specific case, there were four stages. Redistricting plans went through local election commissions, the Central Election Commission, the legislature, and negotiations between the speaker and the premier. At each stage, the effects of the guidelines, composition, and sequence are considered in detail. In addition, three counties are examined, illustrating the three common patterns: consensus, dominance by the local election commission, and partisan conflict. From a public policy standpoint, the framework presented in this paper provides a way to assess how various reform proposals would alter the incentive and constraints facing various actors. Politically, the framework suggests how future redistricting may differ from the 2005-2007 round, especially if Taiwan has unified government.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.01.01-375篇名：Coming out of Silence: Candidates’ Stances on LGBT Rights in Taiwan’s 2014 Municipal Councilor Elections並列篇名：同志議題與政治表態：以臺灣2014年六都議員選舉為例作者：戴士展(Shih-Chan Dai)關鍵字：同志權益;政治立場表態;政治社會化;離心效應;2014年臺灣六都議員選舉;gay rights;position taking;political socialization;centrifugal effect;2014 Taiwanese municipal councilor elections期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：儘管臺灣民眾近年來在民調中對於同志議題的接受度日益提升，然而保障同志基本權益的伴侶法規仍無重大進展。此一民意與政策制定的落差乃主要源自於政治菁英對於此一議題缺乏積極表態的動機。儘管如此，已有研究顯示不同政黨的立法委員在同志權益相關議題上抱持相異的立場；依據政治學習與社會化理論，我們將預期政黨對於候選人的議題取向具有決定性的影響，是故民進黨市議員候選人，相對於國民黨候選人而言將較支持同志權益。然而，由於直轄市議員的選制為複數選區單記不可讓渡投票制，因此在離心效應的影響下，同黨候選人則應抱持相異的議題立場，意味政黨在同志權益議題立場上將不產生影響力。本文以2014年臺灣六都議員選舉為例，探究此兩種理論對於候選人在同志議題立場表態支持與否的效果。研究結果顯示政黨內部的社會化過程顯著影響地方選舉候選人支持同志議題的機率，除此之外，在人口變項上，年齡較年長的候選人顯著地較不易支持同志權益。相對而言，選舉制度以及選民組成則非候選人在此一議題表態上的主要考量。英文摘要：Although public opinion in Taiwan is increasingly in favor of gay rights, there is no corresponding trend at the elite level and no concrete policy changes have been achieved. Based on the logic of electoral competition and political socialization, this paper takes the 2014 elections for municipal councilors in Taiwan as an example and examines the factors influencing support for LGBT equality among local politicians. Theoretically, although the centrifugal effect of the SNTV system motivates candidates of the same party to differ from each other on a variety of issues, political socialization, on the contrary, encourages a more unified issue stance taken among party members. The results of multilevel models suggest that there is little linkage between the characteristics of constituents, the electoral rule, and candidates’ stances on gay rights. However, both partisanship and age play an indispensable role. Candidates who are members of the DPP or one of the liberal parties are more likely to support LGBT rights than their KMT counterparts.起始頁-結束頁：39-62資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.01.39-626篇名：選制改革對投票穩定與變遷的影響：臺灣五次立委選舉的實證分析並列篇名：Impact of Electoral Reforms on Stability and Change in Voting Behavior: Elections to the Legislative Yuan, 1998-2012作者：王國臣(Guo-Chen Wang);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：投票穩定與變遷;選舉制度改革;立法委員選舉;動態追蹤資料模型;投票行為;electoral stability and change;electoral reform;elections to the Legislative Yuan;dynamic panel data model;voting behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文利用「動態追蹤資料模型」(dynamic panel data model)中的「兩階段最小平方法」(two-stage least squares)，檢證影響臺灣投票穩定與變遷的各項因素；其中，本文特別關注，2008年第七屆立法委員選舉制度改革，對於投票行為的衝擊。觀測時間為1998年至2012年五次立委選舉，研究對象為全臺364個鄉鎮市區，樣本數為1,820筆觀察值。資料來源有二：一是中央選舉委員會建置的選舉資料庫；二是各縣市政府出版的《統計年報》。實證結果顯示，選舉制度改革、選舉制度類型、性別、教育，以及公職人員比例等五個變數，是影響「投票變動指數」(vote volatility index)的重要因素。此外，總體經濟環境、投票習慣與地理區位，也是關鍵影響因素。整體而言，本文的量化實證結果，支持「杜弗傑法則」(Duverger's Law)與「自我實現的預言」(selffulfilling prophecy)，即選制改革對投票穩定與變遷，具有長期且深遠的影響。本文的學術貢獻有三：第一，本文論證選舉制度、政黨體制，以及投票穩定與變遷三者間的互動關係。第二，測量臺灣立委選舉的投票穩定與變化度，可供政治實際運作參考。第三，迥異於既有文獻採用「質化與受限依變數模型」(qualitative and limited dependent variable model)，本文引入動態追蹤資料模型，檢證選制改革對投票穩定與變遷的具體效應。換言之，本文的研究發現可作為選舉研究的補充。英文摘要：This study uses the method of two-stage least squares of dynamic panel data models to examine the variables closely related to electoral stability and change in Taiwan, especially focusing on the impact of electoral reform of the Legislative Yuan in 2008 on voting behavior. To account for causal effects, the analysis includes 1,820 observations consisted of the 364 township and village-level units of five legislative elections from 1998 to 2012. The data sources come from the archive of election outcomes officially released by the Central Election Commission, and the statistical yearbooks published by county and city governments. The findings reveal that the variables of electoral reforms, types of electoral system, gender ratio, the level of educational attainment, and proportion of civil servants present statistically significant associations with the index of vote volatility. In addition, the factors of macroeconomic conditions, voting patterns, and geographical contexts emerge as statistically significant and in the anticipated directions. The empirical results demonstrate the Duverger's law and also the self-fulfilling prophecy; i.e., the reforms of electoral system exert a profound effect of the stability and change of voting behavior. There are at least three academic implications that can be drawn from the outcome of this study. First, this study verifies the relationship between electoral system, party system, and electoral stability and change. Second, it empirically measures the vote volatility index which might be valuable for campaign strategies. Last, different from the qualitative and limited dependent variable models in the previous studies of political participation, this study takes advantage of a dynamic panel data model to assess the impact of electoral reforms on stability and change in voting behavior. Developing an electoral model that is both concise and accurate awaits future research.起始頁-結束頁：63-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.01.63-1057篇名：2014臺灣地方選舉「柯文哲現象」的外溢效果：民進黨新竹市長候選人林智堅的個案分析並列篇名：Spill-over Effects of the ”Ko Wen-je Phenomenon” in Taiwan’s 2014 Local Elections: Case Study of Potential Coattail Effects on DPP Hsinchu City Mayoral Candidate Lin Chi-jian作者：陳明通(Ming-Tong Chen);楊喜慧(Shi-Huei Yang)關鍵字：柯文哲現象;衣擺效應;母雞帶小雞效應;2014臺灣地方選舉;Ko Wen-je phenomenon;coattail effects;bandwagon effects;2014 Taiwan local elections期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：2014年11月29日「九合一」選舉結果，國民黨遭受臺灣自有地方選舉以來最嚴重的挫敗。在全部22個地方首長中，從過去超過三分之二的15席，減少到不及三分之一的6席。最令人矚目的是代表「在野大聯盟」角逐臺北市長的柯文哲，打敗國民黨提名的連勝文，大贏連勝文將近25萬票，並中止了國民黨在臺北市長達16年的執政地位，這是前未有過的紀錄。選後國民黨的一份檢討報告指出，國民黨如此慘敗的原因之一是「首都選戰影響外溢擴及其他縣市」。換言之，「柯文哲現象」讓國民黨其他縣市選情連帶受到影響。「柯文哲現象」是否真有如此外溢效應？本文以新竹市長選情為例，透過一系列實證資料，運用「複層次結構非線性模型」結合個體與總體資料分析，驗證「柯文哲現象」對民進黨新竹市長候選人林智堅的外溢效果。研究結果顯示，在個體層次的變項上，新竹市選民對林智堅的偏好、政黨取向及年齡，顯著地影響對林智堅的支持度。在總體層次的變項上，柯文哲的支持度、媒體曝光度及電視新聞評論節目對柯文哲的正面或負面批評，都顯著地影響新竹市選民對林智堅的支持度。研究發現證實「柯文哲現象」的外溢效果，也就是所謂的「衣擺效應」(coattail effects)或「母雞帶小雞效應」存在。英文摘要：In nation-wide local elections held on November 29, 2014, the Kuomintang (KMT) suffered its worst defeat in the post-war history of local elections in Taiwan. The party saw its control of the country’s 22 local executive posts dwindle from 15 to only 6. Most notable among the KMT’s setbacks was its mayoral election defeat in the Taipei City, which had been run by a KMT mayor for 16 years. Ko Wen-je, an independent who ran under the banner of a ”grand opposition alliance,” defeated KMT candidate Sean Lien by nearly 250,000 votes. The KMT's post-election review report pointed to spill-over effects from the Taipei election to other local contests as one of the reasons for its crushing defeat nation-wide. Did the ”Ko Wen-je phenomenon” truly produce such spill-over effects? This study looks at the Hsinchu City mayoral election, using various empirical data to assess potential spill-over effects from Ko's Taipei candidacy to that of DPP Hsinchu City mayoral candidate Lin Chi-jian. Hierarachical non-linear modeling is applied to analyze a combination of individual-level and macro-level data. The data analysis shows that with respect to individual-level variables, voters' preference for Lin Chi-jian, party-orientation, and age clearly influenced the level of support for Lin's candidacy. At the macro-level, support for Lin was positively correlated with Ko Wen-je's level of support and media exposure as well as positive commentary on Ko's candidacy on television news programs. The results of the study confirm the existence of coattail effects of the Ko Wen-je phenomenon in Taiwan’s 2014 local elections.起始頁-結束頁：107-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2016.23.01.107-15101篇名：心理幸福感量表簡式中文版信效度及測量不變性：以大學生為樣本並兼論測量不變性議題並列篇名：Reliability, Validity, and Measurement Invariance of the Brief Chinese Version of Psychological Well-Being Scale among College Students作者：李仁豪(Ren-Hau Li);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：心理幸福感;交叉效度;純量不變性;測量不變性;量尺不變性;cross validation;measurement invariance;metric invariance;psychological well-being;scalar invariance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：46期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的有二，一是獲得更多有關Li（2014）18題簡式中文版心理幸福感量表的信、效度訊息，二是進行跨樣本交叉效度及跨時間測量不變性的檢定。研究樣本有三套，以大學生為對象，分別命名為樣本一、樣本二及共同樣本，人數分別為442、349、394位參與者。以結構方程式模型技術來處理資料。研究發現，符合理論架構的六因素斜交模型獲得良好的適配；在信度方面，分量表內部一致性α係數在.73~.87，總量表高達.91；分量表間隔2~3週的再測信度介於.59~.65，總量表則達到.70。在效度方面，因素負荷量在.65~.92，具有聚斂效度，而因素間的相關性在.30~.72，通過區辨效度的檢驗。另外，跨樣本的交叉效度亦獲得一定程度的支持；而測量不變性檢驗亦獲得因素負荷量及截距在跨時間上符合量尺不變性及純量不變性的要求，有利於構念在跨時間上的因素間關係比較及因素平均數比較。英文摘要：The two aims of this research were to obtain reliability and validity information of Li's (2014) 18-item brief Chinese version of the Psychological Well-Being Scale across samples, and to test its measurement invariance across time. Three samples of college students were recruited in the study. They were named as sample I, sample II, and common sample, in which 442, 349, and 394 students, respectively. Data were analyzed using structural equation modeling techniques. Results showed that theoretical framework of six-factor oblique model had good model-fits. Cronbach's α coefficients ranged from .73 to .87 for subscale scores, and was .91 for the total score; 2 ~ 3 weeks test-retest reliability coefficients of subscale scores ranged .59 ~ .65, and was .70 for the total score. Based on the 6-factor model, factor loadings were among .65 ~ .92 providing convergent validity , and interfactor correlations were ranging .30 ~ .72 offering discriminant validity . Besides, cross validation was supported. Furthermore, metric invariance and scalar invariance existed across groups in the measurement equivalence tests; therefore it ensured that the scale can be compared on its constructs across multiple measurement times , including comparisons in interfactor correlations and latent means.起始頁-結束頁：127-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會2篇名：跨性別者現身前後與家人互動之變化歷程並列篇名：A Dyadic Study on the Interaction between a Transgender and His Family Members Before and After His Coming Out作者：謝秋芳(Chew-Fang Chia);趙淑珠(Shu-Chu Zhao)關鍵字：家人互動;現身;跨性別者;coming out;interaction;transgender期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：45期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討跨性別者的性別認同、家人的理解及應對以及互動的變化歷程。本研究採敘事與對偶研究，邀請了一對姊弟（女變男）參與訪談。資料分析為敘事分析法的「整體－內容」，並以跨性別者現身前後的脈絡整理出他與姊姊互動的變化歷程。研究結果發現跨性別者在性別認同探索階段欠缺友善資訊而使其現身的過程更顯痛苦與複雜。跨性別者在轉變中面對自我接納、切割過去生活及身心議題困擾等，並需要家人的接納建立自我認同。即使家人的應對策略從僵化到彈性，跨性別者與家人仍經歷掙扎。家人的反對與迴避使彼此逐步調整溝通策略，而結盟、接納與理解等皆使彼此的互動轉為正向並強化了跨性別者的支持系統。另外，本研究也進一步對諮商實務提出建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were: (1) To discover the process of gender identity of the transgender. (2) To investigate how his family members respond and understand when they hear about his transitioning; and (3) To analyze the change of interaction patterns within his family members. Narrative and dyadic study methods were applied in this study. Participants were consisted of a transgender and his sister. Data analyzation was based on ‘holistic-content’ approach. The results showed that lack of friendly information on gender identity exploration brought more suffering to the transgender. Issues including self-acceptance, a cut-off from one’s previous life, and psychophysical distresses were affected them in the transition process. Acceptance and understanding from his significant others were important for him to build up self-identity. Although the coping strategies were changed from rigid to more flexible, the transgender and his family still go through complicated emotions. Opposition and avoidance by family members raised their conflicts, but formation of alliance, adjustment of communication strategy, and a mutual understanding between the transgender and family managed to improve their interactions and strengthen the transgenders’ support system. The recommendation for a counseling practitioner was served.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會3篇名：促進乳癌夫妻親密關係之團體工作坊方案助益性研究並列篇名：A Study on Benefits of Using a Two-Day Workshop to Facilitate Intimacy of Breast Cancer Couples作者：李佩怡(Pei-Yi Li);林蔚芳(Wei-Fang Lin);李玉嬋(Yu-Chan Li);王雪蓮(Hsueh-Lien Wang);梁惠君(Hui-Chun Liang)關鍵字：方案助益性;乳癌夫妻;混合研究法;團體工作坊;親密關係;benefits of group program;breast cancer couples;follow-up explanations model;intimacy;two-day workshop期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：45期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視乳癌夫妻親密關係團體工作坊方案之助益性。團體方案參考2008 年Sharon Manne與Hoda Badr 的「夫妻調適癌症之親密關係模式」，2010 年五對乳癌夫妻同意參與研究以13 小時團體工作坊進行，結束後進行回饋評量，兩個月後訪談。採解釋式混合研究法，以量性和質性資料探討團體方案的助益性。研究結果說明，本團體工作坊方案對促進乳癌夫妻親密關係有一定的助益。結論為：（1）本方案能增進乳癌夫妻親密關係的品質，呈現在團體後夫妻溝通時表達方式與時機的拿捏、嘗試正向肯定與讚美對方、增進彼此了解和體諒、摩擦衝突減少、自省覺察互動的疏失；（2）本方案最受成員肯定的活動是以身體互動傳遞非語言親密，及夫妻共創作品催化罹癌照顧時情緒經驗表達；（3）有助促進乳癌夫妻親密關係的團體方案著重在鼓勵罹癌和照顧經驗敘說、學習正向溝通與肯定讚美，形塑安全輕鬆的團體氣氛；（4）本團體方案僅促使成員表淺地討論乳癌夫妻性親密議題，此議題須在足夠安全信任和相互支持的團體氛圍中進行；（5）乳癌夫妻團體招募方式與活動設計，應考量性別差異，以催化男性參與動機及提升團體動力。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to examine benefits of the group program to facilitate intimate relationships of breast cancer couples through a two-day workshop. The framework of the group program was based on ”The Relationship Intimacy Model of Couple Adaptation to Cancer” proposed by Sharon Manne and Hoda Badr in 2008. 5 breast cancer couples agreed to participate in the 13-hour workshop after having read and signed the informed consents in 2010. Participants wrote the group feedback forms immediately after the workshop and were interviewed by researchers two months later. The follow-up explanations model was used to analyze quantitative and qualitative data. The results showed this group program had brought some benefits to facilitating breast cancer couples’ intimacy. The conclusions are as follows: (1) The group program enhanced the quality of couples’ intimacy. After the group program, couples showed improvements on their communication. Namely, to express themselves appropriately, to appreciate partners positively, to increase mutual understanding, to decrease conflicts, and to learn self-awareness and reflection on interactions. (2) Couples considered that using body language to communicate intimacy and creating artwork corporately were the most effective group activities. (3) Group programs facilitating couples’ intimacy encouraged couples to narrate their cancer experiences, learning to appreciate partners positively and to form a safe and cozy atmosphere. (4) Group programs slightly facilitated couples to talk about sexual intimacy. This subject should be conducted in a safe, trustworthy, and mutually supportive group atmosphere. (5) Group programs should consider sexual differentiation regarding recruitment and activities in order to enhance participation of men and the dynamics of the group.起始頁-結束頁：33-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：家庭功能對高中職學生自傷行為之影響：以述情障礙為中介變項並列篇名：The Effect of Family Function on Nonsuicidal Self-Injury among Senior High School Students: The Mediating Role of Alexithymia作者：羅文均(Wen-Chun Lo);林旻沛(Min-Pei Lin);攸佳寧(Jia-Ning You);胡薇瑄(Wei-Hsuan Hu)關鍵字：中介變項;自我傷害;述情障礙;高中職學生;家庭功能;alexithymia;family function;mediator;nonsuicidal self-injury;senior high school students期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：45期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解高中職學生自傷行為盛行率之現況，以及檢視家庭功能和述情障礙對自傷行為之預測，並檢證述情障礙在家庭功能與自傷行為間所扮演之中介角色。本研究以高中與高職學生為研究對象，採分層（高中、高職）、叢集（以班為單位）方式進行抽樣，取得 2170 名有效樣本（高中生佔51.94%；女性佔52.13%），施以「簡式家庭功能量表」、「述情障礙量表」與「自傷行為量表」進行分析。本研究發現如下：（1）20.49%（95% 信賴區間為18.79%-22.19%）的高中職學生表示在過去一年內曾有過自傷行為，且女性顯著多於男性；（2）低家庭功能可顯著預測自傷行為；（3）述情障礙能顯著預測自傷行為；（4）低家庭功能可顯著預測述情障礙；以及（5）述情障礙能部分中介低家庭功能對自傷行為之影響。研究者根據研究結果提出建議，以供學校與諮商輔導人員及未來研究參考。英文摘要：The present study aimed to understand the prevalence of nonsuicidal self-injury among senior high school students and to investigate the effect of family function and alexithymia in predicting nonsuicidal self-injury. In addition, we examined the mediating role of alexithymia in the relationship between family function and nonsuicidal self-injury. This study recruited 2170 senior high school students through stratified (high school and technical school) and clustered (class as unit) sampling (high school students: 51.94%; females 52.13%). Administered questionnaires included the short-form of Family Function Scale, 20-Item Toronto Alexithymia Scale, and Nonsuicidal Self-Injury Scale. Findings showed the following: (1) 20.49 % (95% confidence interval: 18.79%-22.19%) of the participants reported that they had nonsuicidal self-injury within twelve months; females showed significantly higher percentage than males. (2) Poor family function significantly predicted nonsuicidal self-injury. (3) Alexithymia significantly predicted nonsuicidal self-injury. (4) Poor family function significantly predicted alexithymia; and (5) Alexithymia mediated the relationship between poor family function and nonsuicidal self-injury. Findings from the present study provided suggestions and a reference for schools and guidance counselors, as well as for future research.起始頁-結束頁：67-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會5篇名：非結構式諮商團體不同歷程階段成員氣氛知覺與自我揭露因素之相關探究並列篇名：Correlation Study of Members’ Climate Perceptions and Self-Disclosure Reasons in the Different Stages of Unstructured Group Counseling作者：許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)關鍵字：自我揭露;自我揭露因素;團體氣氛;團體歷程;團體諮商;factors of self-disclosure;group climate;group counseling;group process;self-disclosure期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：45期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討非結構式諮商團體轉換階段與工作階段，成員團體氣氛知覺對於在團體中是否願意自我揭露之相關。研究採實際進行團體並進行問卷調查，以14 個非結構式、各進行十次的諮商團體之96 個成員作為研究對象，分別於每次團體聚會結束後立即填寫「自我揭露量表」與「團體氣氛量表」，並針對轉換階段（第二至四次），以及工作階段（第七至九次）之自我揭露因素進行團體氣氛之多元迴歸分析。研究結果顯示：在諮商團體轉換階段，成員衝突氣氛知覺對於因打破沉默而願意揭露、以及因自我不確定性和無法自在等因素而不願意揭露具預測性；而在團體工作階段成員衝突氣氛知覺仍會因打破沉默願意揭露，而自我貶抑、自我不確定性、以及個人步調等因素對於不願意揭露因素具預測性；工作階段投入氣氛知覺則對於因團體和領導促發、打破沉默等因素，具有負向預測性。研究根據結論進行相關實務討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the relationships of members’ perceptions of group climates and their reasons of willingness or unwillingness to self-disclose through the group process. The correlation between members’ climate perceptions and self-disclosure reasons in the transition and work stages of counseling groups was explored. Ninety-six participants from fourteen unstructured counseling groups (each ten sessions) were invited to attend this study. The questionnaires ”Self Disclosure Questionnaire” and ”Group Climate Scale” were completed immediately after each group meeting two through nine. The second through fourth sessions which identified as the transition stage and the seventh through ninth which identified as the work stage were selected to analyze the regression between members’ climate perceptions and their self-disclosure reasons. Two parts of results were presented. In the transition stage of the counseling groups, reasons of being willing to disclose included discomfort with silence. Reasons of being unwilling (i.e., feeling uncertain and feeling uncomfortable) showed predictable positive relationship with the conflict climate perception. In the work stage, reasons of being willing to disclose (i.e., others-initiated and discomfort with silence) showed predictable negative relationship with the engagement climate perception, and reasons of being unwilling (i.e., self-devaluation, feeling uncertain and personal pace) showed predictable positive relationship with the conflict. The recommendations for practice and further research were discussed and proposed.起始頁-結束頁：95-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會6篇名：幼兒教保系學生之社會支持、自我效能、結果預測及興趣對職業意向之影響並列篇名：The Relationships among Social Support, Self-Efficacy, Outcome Expectations, Interest, and Career Intention of Early Childhood Care and Education Department Students作者：江春鳳(Chun-Feng Chiang);賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai);張楓明(Feng-Ming Chang)關鍵字：自我效能;社會支持;結果預期;興趣;職業意向;career intention;interest;outcome expectations;self-efficacy;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：45期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以社會認知生涯理論為基礎，探討社會支持、自我效能、結果預期、興趣及職業意向之關係，並針對所建構之模式進行適配度考驗。本研究以叢集抽樣方式，抽取南部地區之幼兒教保系學生共597 人，作為本研究之研究樣本。結果發現：（1）本研究所建構的理論模式具有良好的適配度，可以用來解釋所蒐集之觀察資料；（2）社會支持對自我效能與結果預期具有直接的影響效果；（3）自我效能對結果預期及興趣具有直接的影響效果；（4）結果預期對興趣具有直接的影響效果；（5）興趣對職業意向具有直接的影響效果。最後，本研究針對研究結果進行討論，並提出相關建議及未來研究方向以供參考。英文摘要：The present study aimed to investigate the relationships among social support, self-efficacy, outcome expectations, interest, and career intention based on the social cognitive career theory. Cluster sampling was used to collect data consisting of 597 students in the departments of early childhood care and education from southern Taiwan. The following results were found: (1) The theoretical model proposed by the study had sound goodness of fit with the empirically observed data. (2) Social support had direct effects on self-efficacy and outcome expectations. (3) Self-efficacy had direct effects on outcome expectations and interest. (4) Outcome expectations had direct effects on interest. (5) Interest had direct effects on career intention. Finally, detailed results and suggestions for further research and implementation were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：123-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會01篇名：進擊的財界？試論日本經團連的政策評價機制與政治獻金的關連並列篇名：The Zaikai Attack? Analysis of the Relationship between the Policy-Evaluating Mechanism and Political Donations of Japan Keidanren作者：鄭子真(Tzu-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：日本經團連;政策評價機制;政治獻金;日本財界;Japan Keidanren;the policy-evaluating mechanism;political donation;Japan zaikai期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：日本經團連長久以來支持自民黨，並且以實際財力進行政治獻金。當時日本面對冷戰結束和全球化時代來臨，自民黨也歷經兩次下野，<U+5553>發了經團連在全球化經濟和政治支持的轉變。本文以團體角度和公共財理論的研究途徑分析經團連的政策評價機制，藉由公共性，搭便車問題、外部性效果等釐清政策評價機制是否成功成為一種團體公共財。進一步探討該機制是否作為經團連成員的集體選擇，以及產生的外部性效果。研究發現，經團連提出政策評價機制作為團體公共財，企圖讓團體成員積極參與政治，提出選擇性誘因，以提高政治獻金的透明度、擴大政治參與、增加團體的政治影響力等。然政策評價機制運作的結果和比照整體政治獻金的狀況，發現依舊無法克服搭便車問題，也沒有促進整體政治獻金量的成長，說明政策評價機制的失敗。同時該機制運作過程中也產生兩個負面的外部性效果。一是經團連與政黨的關係，出現關係疏離與政界強勢領導等狀況，二是政策評價機制對中小企業的影響，加大財界與中小企業的隔閡、日本經濟團體的分裂、以及民主的被破壞等。英文摘要：Japan Keidanren has supported the Liberal Democratic Party of Japan (LDP) for a long time, and has donated a lot of money to the LDP. In the post-Cold War and globalization era, LDP has lost power twice. This inspired the Keidanren to change its directions on global economy and political support. This paper tries to analyze the policy-evaluating mechanism of the Keidanren from a group perspective and approach of Public Goods Theory. By observing the public factor, free riding behavior, and externalities, the paper seeks to clarify whether the mechanism had been successfully converted into a public good. Furthermore, the paper explores whether the mechanism was the collective choice of the Keidanren, and what kind of externalities it brought. This paper finds that the Keidanren tried to offer the policy-evaluating mechanism to be a public good for the group, and attempted to make their members join politics actively by selecting incentives to increase the transparency of political donations, expand political participation, and extend the political influences of the group, etc. But comparing the results of the policy-evaluating mechanism and status of political donations, we find that the Keidanren still couldn't resolve the free rider issue and had not promoted the growth of political donations. This means that the policy-evaluating mechanism had failed. At the same time, the failure also caused two negative external effects. One is that the relationship between the Keidanren and political parties was moving apart and the status of strong leadership by political parties. The other is the influence toward small enterprises by the mechanism, which had enlarged the gap between the Zaikai and small enterprises, accelerated the separation of economic groups, and led to the destruction of Japan's democracy.起始頁-結束頁：93-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：書評：Uninformed: Why People Know So Little About Politics and What Can We Do About It〔無知大眾－為何人們對政治所知甚少，我們又能做什麼？〕by Arthur Lupia〔亞瑟．陸皮亞〕（Oxford University Press, 2016, Paperback, 343 pp., ISBN 9780190263720）作者：王宏恩(Austin Horng-En Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：133-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：書評：Against Democracy〔反民主論〕 by Jason Brennan〔傑森．布萊南〕（Princeton University Press, 2016, Hardback, 288 pp., ISBN 9780691162607）作者：葉明叡(Ming-Jui Yeh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：141-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：世界民主大事紀2016年4-6月期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：149-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：主編的話作者：周育仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：兩種不同的憲政愛國主義—Habermas與Sternberger概念的比較並列篇名：Two orientations of constitutional patriotism: A comparison between the conception of Habermas and Sternberger作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：憲政愛國主義;分裂國家;民族認同;憲政認同;constitutional patriotism;Habermas;Sternberger;divided States;national identity;constitutional identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：憲政愛國主義在漢語學界已為人所熟知，但多數學者是透過JurgenHabermas的觀點來理解此概念，而少有人處理憲政愛國主義的首創者DolfSternberger的觀點。本文將首先耙梳Habermas和Sternberger兩位思想家對於這個概念的討論，並且釐清兩者間的差異。再者，則試圖討論憲政愛國主義在兩位思想家的書寫中所帶有的兩種取向：在Habermas那裡，憲政愛國主義作為一種抽象普遍的概念，是傾向於「對外整合的」；Sternberger的憲政愛國主義則是傾向於「內部團結」：在分裂國家的脈絡下，西德藉由對於憲政體制的認同以及對東德體制的拒斥，來維持國家現狀。英文摘要：The constitutional patriotism is well-known in the Chinese academic context. However, most scholars interpret this conception according to the works of Jurgen Habermas instead of those of Dolf Sternberger, who is actually the founder of ”Constitutional Patriotism.” This article discusses the conception of constitutional patriotism from the perspectives of Habermas and Sternberger and analyzes the differences between them. In their conceptions, two different orientations can be discerned: the constitutional patriotism by Habermas is an abstract and universalistic concept whose attribute is described as ”Externally-integrating”; for Sternberger, the same term is oriented to ”internally-consolidating.” That is to say, under the circumstance of divided states, West Germany could have maintained its statehood by relying on its free democratic basic order and by rejecting the political system of East Germany.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：天然資源、政體類型與國際軍事衝突—跨「時間」與「空間」的分析並列篇名：Natural Resource, Regime Type, and Militarized Interstate Dispute: An Analysis across Time and Space作者：薛健吾(Chien-Wu Hsueh)關鍵字：天然資源;遴選集團理論;政治生存的邏輯;軍事化的國際衝突;Natural Resource;Selectorate Theory;The Logic of Political Survival;International Conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：學者McDonald根據「遴選集團理論」所推導出來的「政治領袖的財政自主性」的說法，是目前最能夠解釋為什麼擁有原油和鑽石這類天然資源的國家，捲入特別多的軍事化國際衝突的理論。但本文發現，McDonald的理論仍存在著邏輯上與實證上的不足之處。本文的目的，就是根據遴選集團理論的原始精神，對McDonald的「政治領袖的財政自主性」理論提出「時間因素」與「空間因素」上的補充。本文的理論認為，來自於天然資源的收入雖然確實增加了國家捲入軍事化國際衝突的次數，但這個增加的方式在民主國家和在非民主國家中是不一樣的，關鍵在於民主國家的政治領袖與非民主國家的政治領袖因生存邏輯的不同而有著不同的利益分配模式：在民主國家中，同一個國家捲入軍事化國際衝突的次數，隨著天然資源收入的增加而增加，但是在同一個時間點，天然資源收入高的國家卻不會比天然資源收入低的國家捲入更多的衝突；在非民主國家中，同一個國家捲入軍事化國際衝突的次數，並不會隨著天然資源收入的增加而增加，而是高天然資源收入的非民主國家比低天然資源收入的非民主國家捲入更多的衝突。來自包含146個國家與33個年度（1969~2001）跨國跨時的追蹤資料（panel data）也進一步證實了本文的論點。英文摘要：McDonald’s ”the purse strings of peace” theory based on the selectorate theory is the most advanced theory so far to account for the fact that states who possess crude oil and kimberlite diamond engage in more militarized interstate disputes (MIDs), but its inherent logic does not pass the empirical test when only the states who possess natural resources are taken into concern in the statistical models. The purpose of this article is to make a supplementary argument to McDonald’s theory by re-emphasizing the core contents of the original selectorate theory, which takes both time and space into concern. I argue that, although with the increase of natural resource revenue does increase the number of international conflict the states involve in, this effect works differently in different regimes because the logic of political survival in democracies differs from it in non-democracies: in democratic countries, increases from mean resource revenues exhibit a positive effect on the number of MIDs the state enters per year, but at the same point of time states which have overall higher levels of resource revenue do not enter in more MIDs than those whose levels of resource revenue tend to be lower; in nondemocratic countries, states which have overall higher levels of resource revenue enter in more MIDs than those whose levels of resource revenue tend to be lower, but in the same state the increase from its mean resource revenue does not affect the number of MID it enters per year. Data of 146 countries from 1969 to 2001 supports my argument.起始頁-結束頁：43-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：臺灣民眾之地方派系評價及其政治影響—以2014年直轄市選舉為例並列篇名：The Taiwanese Public's Evaluation of Local Factions and Its Political Impact: The Case of 2014 Metropolitan Elections作者：王宏忠(Hung-Chung Wang);楊凌竹(Lin-Chu Yang);吳建忠(Chien-Chung Wu)關鍵字：地方派系;政治行為;政治效能感;政治信任;政治參與;Local Factions;Political Behavior;Political Efficacy;Political Participation;Political Trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：地方派系在臺灣政治發展上扮演著相當重要的角色，乃是眾所周知之事。儘管過去已有許多學者從事地方派系相關議題之研究，然而卻鮮少將其研究聚焦於民眾如何評價地方派系以及對於地方派系的評價是否影響民眾的政治態度及政治行為上。有鑒於此，本文藉由分析TEDS 2014調查資料，嘗試探討臺中及高雄市市民對於地方派系之認知及其政治影響。研究結果顯示，多數臺中及高雄市民對於地方派系抱持著負面的評價。受訪者不僅認為地方派系造成地方政治的腐化，亦表示地方派系的存在無助於照顧民眾的利益。然而，受訪者當中卻也有相當比例認為透過地方派系可以向政府表達一般民眾的想法。影響民眾對於地方派系最為顯著的因素為政治知識，受訪者的政治知識越高，對於地方派系的認知越負面。至於地方派系評價是否影響民眾的政治態度及政治行為，根據本研究之發現，民眾的地方派系評價與其投票參與、地方政治信任以及地方政治效能感有著統計上的顯著關係，若民眾對於地方派系的評價越傾向於正面評價，則其投票參與的比例越高、對於地方政府的信任度以及地方政治的效能感越強。英文摘要：It is no doubt that local factions play a crucial role in Taiwan's politics. Although the issue of local factions has attracted scholars' attention for a long time, they rarely focus on how citizens evaluate local factions and whether this perception affects their political attitude and political behavior. By taking advantage of TEDS 2014 survey data, we, in this research, attempt to investigate Taichung and Kaohsiung citizens' evaluation of local factions and whether this evaluation makes a significant impact on their political behavior. According to our findings, a majority of Taichung and Kaohsiung citizens possess a negative impression to local factions. Respondents consider that local factions cause local government to be corrupted and deny local factions help to look out for ordinary people's interests. Nevertheless, there are numerous respondents, even they are not the majority, indicate that local factions can express opinions to the government for them. We also find that respondents' political knowledge is the factor influencing how they evaluate local factions the most. The higher political knowledge respondents possess, the more negative evaluation of local factions they hold. Regarding the political impact of local faction evaluation, our research confirms that there is a significant relationship between individuals' local faction evaluation and their political attitude and political behavior. The more positive evaluation respondents possess, the more likely they vote in local elections, have higher political trust and efficacy to city governments than their counterparts.起始頁-結束頁：93-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：批判種族理論視域下的本土狩獵政策分析—以「102年台上字第5093號判決」為檢視中心並列篇名：Hunting Out a Theory for Analyzing the Taiwanese Hunting Policy: A Critical Race Theory Approach作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：批判種族理論;原住民族;狩獵政策;critical race theory;indigenous peoples;hunting policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣原住民族基於文化、儀式乃至增加食物來源的需求，經常從事各式狩獵活動。但由於此項獨特的生活方式迥異於主流社會，致使原住民個人乃至集體往往會受到制度性的排斥。狩獵議題中最常引發爭議的部分，就是原住民被依違反「槍砲彈藥刀械管制條例」而遭到逮捕甚至判刑的案件。由於原住民族狩獵問題正好位在原住民族權利保障、槍枝管制、動物權利等多重爭點的交界處，加上法院對相關問題經常出現見解不一的狀況，近來更是引發各方的討論與抨擊。為防止判決再次出現南轅北轍的狀況，最高法院特別為此召開辯論庭統一見解，並於隨後做成了「102年台上字第5093號判決」。對於這宗眾所注目的判決，本文嘗試從「批判種族理論」（Critical Race Theory）的視角來加以檢視，並透過質化訪談的實證資料進一步反思我國原住民族狩獵政策及相關規定。本文指出，法律規範和各項制度行之多年之後，很容易就會使人們將之誤認為是理所當然。在這樣的想法下，我們也經常不自覺地就把已經嵌入在制度中的特定價值（尤其是主流價值），當成是本當如此，甚至是不得不然的選項。對此，本文採取批判種族理論提出的分析方法，嘗試從新的視角來尋求理解狩獵問題時的各種可能。我們認為唯有回到權利本位的視角與狩獵活動的原始意涵，來對現行制度做一通盤檢討，才能在原漢間取得平衡，並根本解決問題。英文摘要：Hunting has always been a topic that has sparked off considerable debate in Taiwan. It is even more contentious for indigenous hunting activities. Taiwanese aborigines hunt for food, ritual and cultural purposes. With their distinct cultures and lifestyles, it is not uncommon that indigenous peoples in Taiwan have to fight against social exclusion and cultural biases on a daily basis. Worse still, they are sometimes arrested and charged with possession of hunting rifles. After being indicted, in the end it is the court of law who has the final say. However, as indigenous hunting is situated at the very intersection where indigenous rights, gun-control, and animal welfare meet, judgments from the Taiwanese Court of Justice vary and sometimes even conflict with each other. In order to reconcile different legal interpretations, the Taiwanese Supreme Court decided to restart the process of oral arguments in a recent case and later delivered a final decision in its No. 5093 Judgment of 2013. This article critically analyses the aforementioned Judgment through the lens of critical race theory. It argues that legal reasoning shapes what we see and how we see; in turn, this received mindset tempts us to believe that the way things are is inevitable and therefore alternatives are impossible. This article challenges this mindset and attempts to provide a right-based approach to the Taiwanese hunting policy.起始頁-結束頁：135-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：性別何時才有意義？美國選舉中的女性候選人和性別刻板印象並列篇名：When Does Gender Matter? Women Candidates and Gender Stereotypes in American Elections作者：林瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：183-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：憨山德清的思想三論　以《莊子內篇注》及《觀老莊影響論》為核心並列篇名：Three Theses on The Thinking of Hanshan Deqing An Analysis of Commentary of The Inner Chapters of Zhuangzi and Observations on the Impact of Laozi and Zhuangzi作者：林俊宏(Chun-hung Lin)關鍵字：憨山德清;實學;道;天命;三教融通;Hanshan Deqing;Realism;Dao;Mandate;Three Religions;Syncretism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：74期出版年：2017中文摘要：憨山德清是晚明高僧，深通三教，對於佛道義理尤見融貫。本文從「三教融通」的視點入手，以憨山兩部重要的作品《莊子內篇注》與《觀老莊影響論》<U+7232>核心，藉由分析憨山的思想，討論晚明的思想與三教關係，指出在國家出現一種隱沒失能的同時，廣義的知識份子（包含士大夫與僧人），如何思考重建當時的秩序。憨山可以是這個跨時間、跨三教的思想交融活動的代表之一。本文試圖以憨山思想中的「性」、「知」<U+7232>核心，討論憨山對於「道」、「知」以及「治」的整體想法。本文認<U+7232>，憨山以「性」作<U+7232>體證大道的基礎，在這個意義上，擴充這個三教同時具備、卻層次不同的概念，提供了上從本體、下至治理的可能介質。此外，在知的治動中，憨山讓三教的知識形成與知的活動有所對話，進一步也提供了對於三教的內聖外王學的融通認識。本文認<U+7232>憨山代表著晚明重拾經世之學的一個例子，透過憨山的思想分析，不僅可以看到晚明三教對話的實際樣態，也可以從這樣的側面中，看到經世致用之學與安頓自在之學從來就是不離的兩面。英文摘要：Tri-religious fusion (or the syncretism of three religions), also known as the syncretism of the three teachings, was a part of statecraft from the early to late Ming dynasty. Hanshan Deqing was a famous monk during the late Ming dynasty who was actively engaged in tri-religious fusion, especially from the Buddhist dimension. This article is about the internal context of Hanshan's thinking, principally based on an analysis of his books Commentary of The Inner Chapters of Zhuangzi and Observations on the Impact of Laozi and Zhuangzi. This paper is divided into three parts. The first part is a discussion of the Dao (the great origin), and its relationship with Wu (non-being) and You (being). The second part is a discussion of nature, desire and cultivation. The final part focuses on the boundaries of political roles, political cultivation, and the ideal of non-action which offers a kind of platform for the three religions to conduct dialogue with each other. Hanshan tried to make a connection between his core ideas, which were centered around the Dao, epistemology, and the concept of rule based on human nature and knowledge. In this sense, he found that at different levels the three religions had the capacity to provide the dimension of governance with good order from the metaphysical dimension. Other than simply increasing knowledge about the three religions, the dialogue further provided a platform for understanding the tri-religious fusion. Hanshan advocated practicality when methodologically reviewing the connections between metaphysics and daily life. He explains how the principles of ”Oneness and Manifoldness” work to bring the sacred and the secular into union. This exemplifies the fact that politics is not only a craft about state-building and governing, but also about bringing order to the secular world.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.74(1-42)2篇名：《呂氏春秋》和《荀子》「類」與「染」之相應思想並列篇名：Correlative Thinking Represented by the Terms ”Lei” (類) and ”Ran” (染) Found in the Xunzi and the Lushi Chunqiu作者：佐藤將之(Masayuki Sato)關鍵字：《荀子》;《呂氏春秋》;同類相應;感應;染;福禍;Xunzi;the Lushi Chunqiu (Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals);Correlative Thinking;Lei (類) ”Kind” or ”Category”;Ran (染) ”to dye”;Fortune and Disaster期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：74期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文是筆者對《呂氏春秋》和《荀子》思想的比較研究之一環，對如下三項問題進行探討：（1）《呂》《荀》兩書中的「類」概念，尤其是以「同類相應」呈現的思維方式：（2）《呂氏春秋》「染」概念與《荀子》「漸」概念；以及（3）兩書論述中由「同類相應」的思維方式所呈現出的「禍福」觀，以及其在兩書的「天人關係」架構中的特點和思想意義。經過討論，筆者提出的論點是：第一、《呂》《荀》兩書的「同類相應」思維原來應該獨立於所謂的「感應」思想；第二、《呂》《荀》兩書由於引進「同類相應」的例子來論證他們的主張：善惡問題和禍福問題也應由「同類相應」的原則來發生及展開。不過《呂氏春秋》的重點止於敘述在「同類相應」和善惡或禍福之間的必然；而荀子則動用全部的比喻之用例來極力證實士人要學習和修身的重要。第三、《呂》《荀》兩書一方面都強調人類對善行的主動努力，但某種程度接受自然世界回應人類世界所<U+7232>之善惡結果。總而言之，在《呂》、《荀》兩者的政治哲學中，均以涵蓋全部人類、甚至宇宙的設計和「同類相應」的思維方式<U+7232>共同的思想成分，而且這樣的思想特質成<U+7232>了有助於建立之後的大一統國家並且能夠治理（超過一國的）全人類的政治理論之思想基礎。英文摘要：This article is a part of the author's comparative study of the political philosophies found in the books Xunzi and the Lushi chunqiu (LSCQ), which is also known as Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals. The author assumes that there are some key ideas that facilitated the common socio-political discourse during the unification of the Chinese world. This article focuses upon three of these ideas: (1) the way of argumentation known as ”correlative thinking”; (2) the concepts of ”lei” (類) which means ”kind” or ”category”, ”ran” (染) which means ”to dye”, and ”jian” (漸) which means ”to soak”; and (3) the idea that ”the same kinds of creatures/things/phenomena attract each other”, and ”the happenings of auspicious and inauspicious events” from the perspective of a correlative relationship between the heavenly and human spheres. From the basis of comparative conceptual analysis, this article aims to persuade readers with regard to the following three points. Firstly, in many past studies, the correlative thinking in the Xunzi and LSCQ was previously understood as a kind of mutual affection, or ”ganying” (感應). However, from the perspective of correlative thinking, the term ”gan” (感), meaning ”sense” or ”to feel”, is not used in these two texts. Secondly, these books explain the reason why there is retribution for good and bad deeds, as well as the sources of good and bad luck via the principle: ”the same kinds of creatures/things/ phenomena attract each other.” While there was no further development of this argument in the LSCQ, the Xunzi explained that self-cultivation is imperative for living a better life in a world determined by such a principle. Thirdly, although the Xunzi and the LSCQ both admit that there are situations in which individuals are prone to be affected by this principle of attraction, these two books also suppose that it is nevertheless human effort that decides whether a course of events will turn out to be good or bad. In sum, the way of thinking characterized with the principle ”the same kinds of creatures/ things/phenomena attract each other” permeates the worldview found within both of these books, and this became the foundation for the idea that human beings are all the same. It is this element that had facilitated the discourse for the construction of a ”world-wide empire” which would theoretically embrace all of humankind.起始頁-結束頁：43-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.74(43-76)3篇名：婚姻家庭，自由之蟊賊也　中國無政府主義家庭革命論的意含並列篇名：Marriage and Family are the Enemies of Liberty: Implications of the Idea of Family Revolution from Chinese Anarchism作者：安井伸介(Shinsuke Yasui)關鍵字：女性主義;權威主義;關係文化;自由戀愛;多邊戀;Feminism;Authoritarianism;Culture of Relationships;Free Love;Polyamory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：74期出版年：2017中文摘要：婚姻家庭是現代人面臨的重要議題，其討論起源於近代，無論西方還是中國，皆曾以解放女性的訴求<U+7232>起點，出現過許多相關討論。其中，中國無政府主義者主張的廢除婚姻家庭論獨樹一幟，將解放女性的議題進一步發展到結構性批判，其論點依然能帶給我們很大的<U+5553>發。本文試圖分析中國無政府主義對於婚姻家庭的相關論述，並進行適當的詮釋，以闡發它所帶給我們的意含。本文指出，中國政治文化將人類社會婚姻家庭中普遍存在的關係性進一步提升到思想層次，在建立權威主義式永久性關係網絡的同時，也進而在人際網絡中造就極大的壓迫感。<U+7232>了對抗這種永久性關係，中國無政府主義者便提出自由戀愛的人際關係論，視自由結合、自由離散<U+7232>理想的人際關係，並揭示未來社會秩序的另一種可能性。英文摘要：Originating in the modern era, marriage and family have become important topics for all of mankind. The appeal for women's liberation sparked numerous discussions in both the West and in China. Among the topics discussed was the unique argument proposed by Chinese anarchists to abolish marriage and family altogether. They took woman's liberation one step further by offering a structural criticism of both marriage and family. Their points of view can still enlighten us to some extent today. This essay aims to analyze the statements made by the Chinese anarchists about marriage and family, carefully interpreting and elucidating the implications. This essay finds that human relationships existed universally in marriage and family were promoted to an ideological level in Chinese political culture, in which authoritarian and permanent relationship networks caused massive oppression. To oppose these relationships, Chinese anarchists insisted that free love become the new model for human relationships, and regarded free union and separation as the ideal. They provided the possibility of a future order that could exist society.起始頁-結束頁：77-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.74(77-110)4篇名：政府管制任務民營化之代理人問題分析：以有機農產品驗證制度運作為例並列篇名：An Analysis of the Agency Problem When the Government Privatizes Its Regulatory Functions: A Study of the Privatization of Organic Certification作者：洪美仁(Mei-jen Hung);藍景彥(Ching-yen Lan)關鍵字：有機驗證;管制性政策;民營化;代理人問題;Organic Certification;Regulatory Policy;Privatization;Agency Problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：74期出版年：2017中文摘要：在政府財政緊縮且社會經濟問題日趨複雜的狀況下，結合民間機構的協力治理已成<U+7232>政府推動許多重大政策主要的模式，1990年代開始興起的民營化的風潮下，將原本政府自行完成的業務工作移轉到民間成<U+7232>許多國家政府相繼採取的作法，國內相關文獻大多聚焦於國營事業或公有設施的民營化，關於政府將管制任務民營化時會產生何種現象或效應，則鮮少有所關注。民間機構是否可以擔負管制者的角色，根據政府既定的規範，做出專業公正的判斷，不無疑問。本研究以有機驗證業務的民營化<U+7232>例，藉由主管機關，驗證機構與學者專家等的訪談，探討有機驗證業務從政府移轉到民間時可能產生的代理人問題，就驗證機構的隱藏行<U+7232>，獨立專業性及資訊公開等議題進行深入的分析，並檢討主管機關目前所訂定的驗證規範，以及監督管理的能量是否可以降低代理人問題的產生，並據此提出後續的建議。主要的研究發現包括有結果導向的績效指標無法確實衡量驗證的品質，驗證機構可能有投機的行<U+7232>，驗證機構的獨立專業性參差不齊，組織型態也有很大的差異，且驗證機構資訊公開的範疇與效應也非常有限，無法產生預期的淘汰效果。最後，主管機關將管理驗證機構的任務進一步交給專業的民間機構，產生了運用民間機構來管制管制者的問題，未來政府應設法強化對於兩者的監督管理，包括培養專業的人才、擴大並強化資訊公開等途徑。本研究亦提出對於委託代理人理論的反思，主張委託人本身的不當認知與政治考量對於管制政策的目標與效果可能帶來負面的影響，未來相關研究可將此議題納入分析英文摘要：Faced with increasing fiscal stress and complex social and economic problems, the government tends to work together with private entities in many areas to plan and implement major policies. Privatization, which refers to the transfer of government functions to the private sector, has been a popular approach taken since the 1990s. Most research on privatization focuses on the privatization of government assets and corporations, or of government services that are given to citizens. There is only a small amount of research that looks at what happens when the government privatizes its regulatory functions. This paper analyzes the agency problems that occured when the government transferred its responsibility for certifying organic products to private certification bodies. Interviews with government officials, managers in private certification bodies, and academic experts were conducted. Based on the current literature of principal-agent theory and outsourcing regulations, this paper builds a framework to evaluate the agency problem from two different aspects. On one side, the agency problem is thought to be related to the professional capability and independence of the private certification bodies, as well as the effect that reputation has in the market. On the other side, the design and performance measures taken by the government and their capability to monitor private certification bodies could be critical to the reduction of agency problems. Analysis of the interviews shows that there are variations between the different levels of independence and professional capability of the certification bodies, and that a lack of independence and professional capability may lead to agency problems. Moreover, the effect that reputation has in the market is not significant. It also proves difficult to dismiss low-quality certification bodies. The current regulations that use outcome-based measures to evaluate the performance of private certification bodies are not adequate for addressing agency problems. The government relies on another accreditation body in order to monitor private certification bodies, which may introduce additional agency problems. The government should think seriously about how to strengthen its oversight of both types of external bodies involved in organic certification.起始頁-結束頁：111-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.74(111-148)5篇名：都市水患風險脆弱性之初探　臺南市空間與非空間因素的分析並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of Flood Risk Vulnerability in Urban Areas: Spatial and Nonspatial Factors in Tainan作者：許耿銘(Keng-ming Hsu)關鍵字：都市水患;風險;脆弱性;自主防災社區;地理資訊系統;Urban Flood;Risk;Vulnerability;Flood Disaster Prevention Autonomous Community;Geographic Information System (GIS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：74期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，對於自然災害衝擊之脆弱性探討，逐漸重視針對社會層面所帶來的影響進行研究。具有不同社會脆弱程度的都市，在承受自然災害衝擊時，將導致不同社會後果；具有不同社會韌性能力的都市，在回應自然災害的對策行<U+7232>上，也會產生迥異於以往的模式。惟在水患頻傳的臺南市，究竟社會脆弱族群與淹水潛勢區間的實存狀況<U+7232>何？臺南市透過參與水患自主防災社區推動計畫，希冀提供面對水患的因應作<U+7232>，其實施的分佈區域是否與前述具有自然和社會脆弱的風險地區一致？本研究同時透過空間因素與非空間因素的整合思考，先以地理資訊系統，探析臺南市社會脆弱族群與淹水潛勢區間的重疊狀況，界定出臺南市水患的高風險區域；繼之，與臺南市目前實施水患自主防災社區的空間分佈情形進行對照，卻發現有非高風險區域參與自主防災社區計畫；再者，藉由地理資訊系統分析結果，透過深度訪談之研究步驟，深究參與水患自主防災社區的空間分布，存有社區內外部非空間因素之考量。英文摘要：Over the past few years, the social dimension has been increasingly emphasized when discussing the vulnerability of natural disasters. In fact, it's been found that cities with different social vulnerabilities will also have different consequences when faced with natural disasters. Additionally, cities with various levels of social resilience will produce different responses to natural disasters. This being the case, what is the current situation of the various groups that are socially vulnerable, and of the areas that face potential flooding in Tainan? We aim to find out if high risk communities in Tainan that are also part of community-based flood risk management programs have the same responses as the aforementioned areas. In this study, we first analyze the areas where vulnerable groups overlap with flood potential in Tainan. We use GIS and integrative thinking in order to define the high risk areas, and then we compare them using spatial distribution of the self-precaution communities. Finally, the spatial distribution of these self-precaution communities is explored further and the nonspatial factors are checked against the findings of the research and in-depth interviews.起始頁-結束頁：149-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.74(149-192)6篇名：戰爭的道德規範：以《荀子．議兵》為核心之探討並列篇名：Xunzi's Thoughts on Just War An Investigation of ”On Military”作者：洪巳軒(Szu-hsuan Hung)關鍵字：義戰;開戰的正義;戰時的正義;戰後的正義;政治;道德;Justice of War;Justice in War;Justice After War;Politics;Morality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：73期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究之目的在於嘗試將〈荀子〉關於義戰的論述建構出系統性的理論，主要發現如下：首先，於〈荀子〉書中正當防衛的觀念並不適用於弱小的仁義之國，一個政治共同體只有在其具備優勢力量，同時公民自願性的服從其政治權威時才可以向暴虐之國發動戰爭。其次，在荀子的相關論述中，也可以找到關於區別原則與比例原則這些戰時正義的實際主張。最後，戰後政治秩序的恢復與穩定也是荀子關心的主要內容，此即當前所謂的戰後正義的問題。如果要有一個貫穿這些議題的核心觀念，那將會是儒家思想的核心觀念，也就是道德政治。或許我們也可以這麼說，在荀子的思想中，缺乏政治指引下的戰爭是盲目的，缺乏道德規約下的政治是暴虐的。英文摘要：This research aims to construct a theory of just war from the writings of Xunzi. The key findings are discussed. First, Xunzi did not apply the concepts of justifiable defense or justice of war to countries that were considered weak when it comes to righteousness. A country cannot initiate a war against a tyrannical state unless it is powerful and its citizens voluntarily comply to political authority. In addition, the principles of differentiation and proportionality are found in Xunzi, both of which are notions about justice in war. Finally, the restoration of political order and stability, which is an issue of justice after war, also appears in Xunzi. In my view, the doctrine of politics is the key component that links all of the aforementioned concepts (justice of war, justice in war, and justice after war) together. In other words, a war without political direction is blind, and politics without moral regulation is brutal.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.73(1-30)7篇名：我國地方政府永續發展政策產出與相關因素並列篇名：Sustainable Development Policy Outputs and Correlated Factors of Local Governments in Taiwan作者：傅岳邦(Yueh-pang Fu)關鍵字：永續發展;永續都市;人口統計特性;地方資源特性;居民暨職業特性;環保傾向;Sustainable Development;Sustainable City;Demographic Characteristics;Local Resource Characteristics;Population and Employment Characteristics;Environmental Predisposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：73期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以K. E. Portney所建構的永續都市概念架構為基礎，從次級資料檢視與評估2010~2014年度我國地方政府推動的永續發展政策，藉以回答個別縣市在生態、經濟、社會面向以及整體永續發展政策的產出情況。其次，有些縣市對於永續都市的目標比起其餘縣市更為嚴肅以待，推動較多的永續發展措施而有較佳的政策產出，可能會與哪些人口統計特性、地方資源特性、居民暨職業特性以及環保傾向的地方政府特質有所關聯？整體而言，在永續發展政策的產出方面，研究發現整體平均達標比值約六成八，且台北市、新北市、桃園市、台中市、台南市、高雄市等六都比起其餘縣市並末佔有絕對優勢；各縣市的生態永續發展最為優越、社會永續發展次之，經濟永續發展的政策產出則最差。其次在地方政府特質方面，經濟導向的地方資源特性，如「失業率」、「房屋價值的中位數」、「人均政府支出」的高低，以及人口統計特性的「人口成長」、居民暨職業特性的「接受良好教育的人口」、環保傾向的「搭乘公共運輸系統上班的人口比值」等，都與我國地方政府的永續發展政策產出有統計上的顯著性。此外，地方政府的環境項目支出以及縣市長黨籍的政治因素並沒有預期中那麼重要，這顯示永續都市的目標既非金錢萬能，也不宜尋求政治選擇上的捷徑。英文摘要：Based on K. E. Portney's conceptual framework for sustainable cities, this paper evaluates sustainable development policies promoted by local governments in Taiwan from 2010 to 2014. The ecological, economic, societal and general aspects of sustainable development policy outputs are examined, respectively, for each of the local governments. Do characteristics of demographic, local resource, population and employment, as well as environmental predisposition variables, correlate with the sustainable development policy outputs of each of the local governments? First of all, according to the statistical findings, the percentage of local governments that have reached sustainable development policy output standards is about 68%. In addition, the six municipalities in Taiwan (Taipei, New Taipei, Taoyuan, Taichung, Tainan, and Kaohsiung cities) have not performed better than the other local governments. Comparatively speaking, ecological sustainability is the top priority pursued by local governments, societal sustainability comes next, and economic sustainability is their final choice. Secondly, the findings show that the unemployment rate, the median value of housing, per capita government spending, population growth, the proportion of the population that is well-educated, and the percent of commuters using public transportation are all factors that correlate significantly with sustainable development policy outputs. Unexpectedly, the factors of total government spending on the environment and party affiliation of city mayors (or county-in-chiefs) do not play key roles in determining sustainable development policy outputs, which implies that local governments cannot achieve sustainability simply by relying on money or partisan alignments.起始頁-結束頁：31-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.73(31-80)8篇名：探討以電訪資料及「入選機率調整法」修正網路調查偏誤的可行性並列篇名：Exploring the Use of Telephone Surveys and Propensity Score Adjustments to Correct Web Survey Biases作者：俞振華(Eric Chen-hua Yu);涂志揚(Chih-yang Tu)關鍵字：網路調查;非隨機樣本;Webographic變數（「網路使用者特徵」變數）;入選機率調整法;Web Survey;Non-random Samples;Webographic Variables;Propensity Score Adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：73期出版年：2017中文摘要：雖然網路調查已在我們日常生活中隨處可見，但民眾對於網路調查的結果往往半信半疑。對於網路調查最直接的批評即為，網路調查的樣本非來自隨機抽樣程序，為非隨機樣本（Non-random sample）。因此，網路調查的結果往往無法用來推論母體特徵。本研究分析多波「臺灣選舉與民主化研究」（Taiwan's Election and Democratization Studies, TEDS）計畫中的網路及電話調查平行測試資料，利用同時置於兩種不同調查方式中的所謂「Webographic」問題（或稱「網路使用者特徵」變數），來辨識網路使用者與非使用者的差異處，並藉入選機率調整法（propensity score adjustment, PSA）調整網路調查結果。換言之，本研究將電訪調查結果視為代表「正確結果」的「對照組」（參考樣本），並透過統計模型及結合電訪資料來調整網路調查結果（觀察樣本）。總之，本研究旨在從多個角度驗證PSA結合電訪與網路調查資料的可行性，並提出此項作法的優勢與限制。英文摘要：While web surveys are observed quite frequently in our day-to-day lives, scholars rarely take their results seriously. This is mainly due to the fact that the results of web surveys are the product of non-random sampling and cannot be used to draw inferences about the target populations. This paper utilizes numerous parallel waves of telephone and web survey data, from Taiwan's Election and Democratization Studies (TEDS), to explore whether or not the possible biases produced by web surveys can be corrected with a ”reference group” dataset drawn from telephone surveys. Specifically, it uses the so-called ”Webographic variables” and combines the two types of data to produce proper estimates for web surveys via the propensity score adjustment (PSA) method. Overall, this analysis examines the effectiveness of using data from telephone surveys and the PSA method when dealing with possible biases of web survey results. Additionally, this paper highlights some key pros and cons of using such methods and suggests various venues for future research.起始頁-結束頁：81-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.73(81-126)9篇名：釋憲趨勢與半總統制的制度韌性並列篇名：Constitutional Jurisprudence and Institutional Resilience of Taiwanese Semi-Presidentialism作者：陳淳文(Chwen-wen Chen)關鍵字：半總統制;制度韌性;違憲審查制度;釋憲趨勢;Semi-Presidentialism;Institutional Resilience;Constitutional Judicial Review;Constitutional Jurisprudence期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：72期出版年：2017中文摘要：半總統制表面上是一個具有彈性的制度，因為它可以在總統制與議會內閣制間擺盪換軌，故半總統制的制度韌性似乎應該比其他兩制都強。但也正是因其制度彈性所留下的解釋空間，更容易引發爭議。違憲審查制度因為可以化解解釋爭議，所以也就能強化制度韌性。我國違憲審查制度已經運作近70年，但自1997年我國進入半總統制後，其逐漸失去化解爭議，強化制度韌性的功能。本文嘗試分析其原因，並提出改革建議。英文摘要：On the surface, semi-presidentialism creates a more flexible regime as it may switch between presidentialism and parliamentarism whenever it deems necessary. It seems that the institutional resilience of semi-presidentialial system is better than that of other political layouts. However, institutional flexibility of semi-presidentialism could also create rooms for controversy. Fortunately, constitutional judicial review, in general, could strengthen the resilience of semi-presidentialism by performing its function of textual interpretation to solve political conflicts. Nonetheless, after being in place for nearly seventy years and particularly after the constitutional reform in 1997, the constitutional judicial review in the ROC has lost bit by bit its function of resolving political conflicts. The aim of this article is to analyze the reasons of its decline and to put forward some proposals for future reform.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.72(1-56)10篇名：日本郵政事業的民營化．自由化與普及服務並列篇名：Privatization, Liberalization, and Universal Service of Postal Service in Japan作者：林淑馨(Shu-hsin Lin)關鍵字：郵政事業;民營化;自由化;普及服務;普及服務基金;Postal Service;Privatization;Liberalization;Universal Service;Universal Service Fund期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：72期出版年：2017中文摘要：民營化與自由化雖始於70年代末期，但直到90年代末期，以歐盟為首的世界各國才開始著手進行郵政事業的改革，在歐盟指令的壓力下，會員國均需在一定時程內，逐步階段性地縮小獨占範圍，同時保障普及服務，以達自由化的目標。而亞洲的日本雖非歐盟成員，卻也在2003年4月將原本為行政機關的郵政事業改制為公社，進而於2007年10月移轉民營（仍由政府全部持股），最後將於2017年10月達成完全民營化的目標。研究結果發現，日本郵政改革有兩大特徵：一是保守的階段性民營化，先公社化，再藉由經營權移轉和事業的水平分離，階段性完成民營化；二是形式的自由化，表面上開放郵務市場，但一般信件領域卻因採許可制，設有嚴格的加入條件，而限制民間業者進入市場，形成實質獨占。此外，日本雖選擇使用公共性內部化方式來達到保障郵務普及服務之目的，但未來郵務市場若真正自由化，恐會影響新事業體企業性和競爭力的發揮，故有重新檢討之必要。借鏡日本經驗，未來我國郵政事業改革可以朝郵儲壽三事業分離，郵務暫時維持國營，儲匯和簡易保險民營方向進行，同時還應思考如何建構公平競爭環境與郵政普及服務制度。英文摘要：Although the global wave of privatization has begun in the late 70’s, it is not until the late 90’s that countries worldwide started their postal service reform, with the European Union being the world’s pioneer. Under the supervision of the EU, EU members were obliged to gradually reduce the scope of state-run postal service scope in order to achieve privatization while ensuring sound provision of universal postal service. Although Japan is not one of the EU members, postal reform was launched in April of 2003, and her first step was to transform the Postal Services Agency (PSA) into a public corporation. On October 1, 2007, the public corporation was privatized (in a broad sense) with the Japanese government being the sole shareholder, and it is planned to be fully privatized by 2017. Studies show that the postal reformation in Japan has 2 significant features. First, privatization was done through conservative approaches in a step-by-step fashion. Initially, the PSA was transformed into a public corporation, then in order to split up the management horizontally, it was divided into different companies. Second, market liberalization was only realized in a nominal sense. Although the postal service market was opened to all, there were significant barriers to entry for interested parties from the private sector. As a result, the public corporation maintained its monopoly within the postal service market. Moreover, Japan has chosen to internalized publicness in order to guarantee the provision of universal postal service, but if the postal service market is fully opened, the competitiveness and entrepreneurship of the new privatized company will be greatly influenced; therefore, there is a need to reflect on the postal reform process in Japan. Inspired by the postal reform experience in Japan, the author thinks that Taiwan postal service can be reorganized into 3 entities: keeping the general mail delivery as a government-owned business, while bank saving and insurance units can be transformed into private entities. At the same time, we should contemplate on how to ensure fair competition while guaranteeing the provision of a universal postal service.起始頁-結束頁：57-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.72(57-90)01篇名：翻轉教學式合作學習對生活科技實作課程學習成效影響之研究並列篇名：Cooperative Flipped Teaching Supported Living Technology Hands-On Curriculum作者：戴文雄(David W. S. Tai);王裕德(Yu-Te Wang);王瑞(Ray Wang);陳嘉苓(Jia-Ling Chen)關鍵字：生活科技實作課程;合作學習態度;科技態度;線上學習自我效能;翻轉教學;Living Technology Hands-on Curriculum;Cooperative Learning Attitude;Technology Attitude;Web-based Learning Self-efficacy;Flipped Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討翻轉教學式合作學習對高中學生在生活科技實作課程學習成就、科技態度、合作學習態度及課程滿意度之影響，本研究主要採準實驗研究法，研究對象為中部一所國立高級中學103學年度第二學期修習「生活科技」課程之高二3個班級共120位學生，隨機抽取兩班為實驗組(N = 72)，另一班為控制組(N = 48)，實驗組學生採用翻轉教學式合作學習，控制組學生採用傳統講述式合作學習，實驗組及控制組皆採取認知型態異質性分組，兩人一組，並進行為期11週(22節課)的教學實驗，本研究於教學實驗前後施測以蒐集研究所需之相關數據，研究中透過開放性問卷蒐集質性資料。研究結果顯示：一、「翻轉教學式合作學習」確實能提升學生在科技實作課程的學習成就、課程滿意度、科技態度及合作學習態度。二、「翻轉教學式合作學習」中學習參與確實會影響學生在科技實作課程的學習成就及課程滿意度，但對科技態度及合作學習態度則無顯著影響。三、「翻轉教學式合作學習」中線上學習自我效能確實會影響學生在科技實作課程的學習成就及課程滿意度，但對科技態度及合作學習態度則無顯著影響。英文摘要：The study aimed to explore the influence of flipped teaching on students' learning achievement in living technology hands-on curriculum, their technology attitude, their cooperative learning attitude and their course satisfaction. The study used a quasi-experimental design, involving 120 17-year-old students from 3 11th-grade classes for 11 weeks (22 hours in total). A pre-test and a post-test, as well as some open-ended questionnaires, were used. During the study, students were randomly assigned to 2 experimental groups (N = 72) and a control group (N = 48). Teacher adopted flipped teaching in the experimental group, while in the control group, the teacher used traditional lecture teaching. In addition, students in both the experimental groups and the control group were paired up according to their cognitive styles. The results of this study are as follows. First, significant differences were found between the experimental groups and the control group in terms of students' learning achievement in living technology hands-on curriculum, technology attitude, cooperative learning attitude and course satisfaction. Second, in the experimental groups, student's participation had a positive effect on students' learning achievement in living technology hands-on curriculum and their course satisfaction. However, there was no significant effect on students' technology attitude or their cooperative learning attitude. Third, in the experimental groups, students' web-based learning self-efficacy had a positive effect on students' learning achievement in living technology hands-on curriculum and their course satisfaction. However, there was no significant effect on students' technology attitude or their cooperative learning attitude.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2401.032篇名：國小四年級學童數常識三階段診斷測驗工具的發展與應用之研究並列篇名：The Development and Application of Number Sense Three-Tier Test for Fourth Graders作者：余明杰(Ming-Chieh Yu);李茂能(Fred Mao-Neng Li);楊德清(Der-Ching Yang)關鍵字：三階段診斷測驗;四年級;數常識;Three-Tier Diagnostic Test;Grade Four;Number Sense期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在編製「國小四年級數常識三階段診斷測驗工具」，並以此測驗工具檢驗小四學童數常識的發展情形與信心指數。166位南部某公立小學四年級學生參與本研究。研究結果顯示：一、「四年級三階段數常識診斷測驗工具」具有良好的信、效度；二、四年級學童在數常識各因素之發展具有顯著差異，且學童於數常識之表現有待加強；不同數常識程度之樣本學童在數常識各成分間的發展上具有顯著差異以及數常識能力與學童之數學學習成就具有高度正相關性；樣本學童在使用數常識方法解題之比率偏低；三、第三階段之信心指數能夠進一步探索學生回答問題之真正想法。最後，依研究發現提出建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to develop and apply the number sense three-tier test for fourth graders. One hundred and sixty six fourth graders from a public elementary school in southern Taiwan were selected to participate in this study. The findings were as follows. First, the Number Sense Three-tier Test for fourth graders has a good reliability and validity. Second, there is a significant difference among the four factors of number sense and sample students performed poorly on number sense. There is a significant difference on number sense performance among different levels of student achievement and there is a high positive relationship between mathematics achievement and number sense performance. The methods used by sample students were different for each number sense component. Third, the confidence index used in this study has important implications. Finally, the suggestions were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：89-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2016.2401.0401篇名：Reactions to Teasing and Their Relationship with Adolescent Mental Health並列篇名：青少年對嘲笑經驗的反應及其與心理健康的關係作者：吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);陳富莉(Fu-Li Chen);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen);江宜珍(Yi-Chen Chiang)關鍵字：反應;青少年心理健康;嘲笑經驗;adolescents’ mental health;teasing;reactions期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究之目的乃了解對嘲笑的反應在嘲笑經驗和青少年心理健康的關係中是否具有中介效果。本研究之資料來自於2007年時所進行的一項經由分層多階段抽樣之全國代表性調查，此調查之工具乃經由預試修正後發展而成，施測過程遵照標準化程序，最後共有1,579位七至九年級的國中生完成調查。本研究先運用因素分析來了解對嘲笑的反應之潛在因素，另外再運用結構方程模式來了解對嘲笑的反應在嘲笑經驗和心理健康的關係之間所扮演的中介角色。因素分析的結果發現被嘲笑的反應可以區分為兩個因素，即感覺威脅的反應和非攻擊式的反應。結構方程式的結果發現，對嘲笑的反應在嘲笑經驗和心理健康的關係之間具有中介效果。因此，本研究結論為，若青少年較容易對嘲笑感受到威脅的反應者，心理健康的情況較差。英文摘要：The aim of this study is to investigate the mediation effect of reactions to teasing on the relationship between teasing and in adolescentmental health. A standardized, pilot-tested survey was administered to a stratified, multistage, random sample (n = 1579) of Taiwanese 7-9 graders in 2007. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to investigate the mediation effect of reactions to teasing and their impact on mental health. Results of factor analysis indicated that reactions to teasing could be divided into feel-threatened reactions and non-defensive reactions. The results of SEM indicated that reactions to teasing mediated the relationship between experiences of being teased and mental health. Adolescents who had feel-threatened reactions to teasing are more likely to report poor mental health.起始頁-結束頁：629-649資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201506022篇名：心理位移日記書寫詞語結構與內涵之話語分析並列篇名：Research on The Word Structure and Connotation of Psychological Displacement Paradigm in Diary-Writing (PDPD): A Discourse Analysis作者：李非(Fei Li);金樹人(Shuh-Ren Jin)關鍵字：心理位移日記書寫;話語分析;詞語;diary-writing;discourse analysis;psychological displacement;words期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在應用話語分析方法分析心理位移日記書寫之詞語結構與內涵。研究資料來源於六位華人大學生（包括研究生）為期四周的二十七篇心理位移日記書寫。研究結果如下：（1）心理位移日記書寫通過位格轉換，彙整出十種不同話語模式，同一位格中之話語模式可交互組合。這十種話語模式具有普同性，係心理位移日記書寫的常規話語模式。其中，「我」位格以自我披露話語模式為主，「你」位格以安慰話語模式為主，「他」位格以審核話語模式為主，「再回到我」位格以策略話語模式和安慰話語模式為主；（2）本研究中，心理位移日記書寫產生六十九種社會角色（包括當事人自己扮演的角色以及當事人內在對話的角色），「我」位格社會角色種類比「你」「他」及「再回到我」都多，但總體出現次數要少；（3）心理位移日記書寫中包含二十種通用情景。（4）心理位移日記書寫情緒詞和具有正負情感偏向的非情緒詞句的分佈特點，表現在正向情緒詞和正偏向語句的數量較初始狀態增加，負向情緒詞和負偏向語句的數量較初始狀態減少。英文摘要：The purpose of this research was to use the method of discourse analysis to enquire the word structure and connotation of the psychological displacement paradigm in diary-writing (PDPD). The data came from six Chinese college students who participated in this research for four weeks. The research results were as follows: 1. The PDPD produced ten kinds of discourse models and any permutationandcombination about the models can be done in one pronoun. It Is worthnotingthat the ten models were universal and can exist in any PDPD. The pronoun of ”I” was mainly based on the discourse model of self-disclosure, the pronoun of ”You” was mainly based on the discourse model of consolation, the pronoun of ”He” was based on the discourse model of audit, and the pronoun of ”back to Me” focused on the discourse model of policy and consolation. 2. In this research study, the PDPD had 69 social roles (including the role-played by clients and the role that was faced by clients). 3. The PDPD included twenty general scenarios in all. 4. The language features of the emotionalwords and biased emotionalwords in PDPD: in compareison with the pronoun of ”I”, the number of positive emotional words and sentences biased towards positive emotions increased in other pronouns, while the number of the negative emotional words and sentences biased towards negative emotions decreased in other pronouns.起始頁-結束頁：305-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201501063篇名：大學生未來時間觀與自我調整學習之關係：知覺工具性中介效果檢驗並列篇名：The Relationship between Future Time Perspective, and Self-Regulated Learning among College Students: An Examination of the Mediating Role of Perceived Instrumentality作者：黃珮婷(Pei-Ting Huang);陳慧娟(Huey-Jiuan Chen)關鍵字：大學生;未來時間觀;自我調整學習;知覺工具性;college students;future time perspective;perceived instrumentality;self-regulated learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學生未來時間觀、知覺工具性與自我調整學習之相關情形及知覺工具性的中介效果，並藉由性別、年級、出生序及家庭社經地位等背景變項，檢視各向度之現況和差異情形。研究對象為臺灣北、中、南三個地區1314 位大學生，問卷調查主要包含「未來時間觀量表」、「知覺工具性量表」，以及「自我調整學習量表」。所得的資料以皮爾森積差相關、典型相關、多元迴歸、描述性統計，以及單因子多變量變異數分析進行統計考驗。有四項主要研究發現：（1）知覺工具性與自我調整學習有典型相關；（2）未來時間觀與知覺工具性，以及自我調整學習之間有顯著正相關；（3）無論內因型與外因型工具性皆對未來時間觀和自我調整學習有部分中介效果；（4）部份背景變項會影響大學生未來時間觀、知覺工具性與自我調整學習。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate the differences of future time perspective, perceived instrumentality, and self-regulated learning of college students across different demographic variables, and the correlation among each other. Furthemore, the present study examinated the mode rating effect of perceived instrumentality. Study samples were collected from 1,314 college students in Taiwan. All the participants completed the Future Time Perspective Scale, Perceived Instrumentality Scale, and Self-Regulated Learning Questionnaire. Through descriptive statistics, MANOVA, Pearson correlation analysis, canonical correlational analysis, and multiple regression analysis, the main findings of the study are as follows: (1) There was a significant canonical correlation between perceived instrumentality and self-regulated learning. (2) Future time perspective was significantly and positive correlated with self-regulated learning and perceived instrumentality. (3) both endogenous instrumentality and exogenous instrumentality partially mediate the relationship between future time perspective and self-regulated learning. (4) Future time perspective of college students varied significantly across their grade level, birth order, and social economic status. The perceived instrumentality of college students varied significantly across grade level, birth order, and social economic status.起始頁-結束頁：329-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201501304篇名：從實習心理師與督導觀點看台灣實習臨床心理師衡鑑專業能力並列篇名：An Investigation of Core Competencies in Psychological Assessment: Comparing the Evaluation between Interns and Supervisors作者：許雅涵(Ya-Han Hsu);藍玉玲(Yu-Ling Lan);陳畹蘭(Wan-Lan Chen)關鍵字：心理衡鑑;能力本位評量;實習臨床心理師;clinical psychology interns;competency-based assessment;psychological assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：心理衡鑑是心理師的核心能力，也是心理實務訓練的重要面向。本研究旨在瞭解實習臨床心理師的衡鑑能力與國內衡鑑能力的訓練現況。本研究樣本為三十對實習臨床心理師（簡稱「實習生」）與其實習機構督導之配對樣本。實習生與督導在全職實習初期與後期，使用「心理衡鑑能力評量表－全職實習版」評估實習生在「心理測驗學知識」、「衡鑑技巧」與「人際關係」的衡鑑能力，並提供他們對於國內心理衡鑑教育訓練現況的看法與建議。研究結果顯示實習生和督導皆認為實習生在「人際關係」的表現最佳，但在「心理測驗學知識」與「衡鑑技巧」則有待加強。督導們認為全職實習前實習生應具備心理測驗與病理診斷知識、衡鑑技巧，和人際互動等基本衡鑑知能，才能透過實習經驗將習得的衡鑑知能適切地應用於衡鑑實務工作中。囿於研究樣本較小且以身心醫學科為主，故研究結果較難推論至其他科別，有待後續研究進一步探討不同科別的衡鑑訓練狀況，以更完整地呈現衡鑑教育訓練的全貌。英文摘要：Psychological assessment is one of the core competencies in professional psychology and an important training domain for clinical psychologists to function well in practice. The purposes of this study were (1) to measure psychological assessment competency (PAC) for master’s level interns and (2) to investigate the current psychological assessment education and training in Taiwan. Thirty dyads of clinical psychology interns and their supervisors were recruited as participants for the study. They were assessed with a questionnaire (including the internship version of the Psychological Assessment Competency Scale (PACS-I) and other questions) at the beginning and the end of internship. The PACS-I required both interns and supervisors to evaluate the interns’ competencies in psychological assessment. The PACS-I included 15 5-point Likert scale items grouped into three domains: knowledge of psychological testing, assessment skills, and interpersonal relationship. The results indicated that interns at the beginning of the internship considered themselves having the best performance on the interpersonal relationship domain, and their performance on the other two domains would require further enhancement. At the end of the internship, interns considered themselves to have significantly improved on all three PACS-I domains. A similar pattern was shown on supervisors’ post-internship PACS-I ratings of their interns in comparison to the pre-internship ones. To maximize the internship training effects, supervisors suggest that interns meet the following four basic competencies before entering internship: three PACS-I domains and knowledge of differential diagnosis. Due to the small sample size and most participants being recruited from the division of psychiatry in the hospital, the findings of this study may not generalize to other training sites.起始頁-結束頁：355-372資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201503105篇名：運用抽象概念結合思考模式對管院學生想像力的激發並列篇名：Stimulating the Imagination of Management College Students by Concept Combination Thinking Model作者：王精文(Ching-Wen Wang);黃琬婷(Chien-Tao Li);李建道(Wan-Ting Huang)關鍵字：想像力;概念結合;concept combination;imagination期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究運用概念結合思考模式來激發想像力，並驗證抽象概念比非抽象概念更能激發想像力。以中部某大專院校管理學院的學生共180 位，經隨機分派為三組（控制組、抽象組、非抽象組），在管理學課程中助教每週以一小時進行引導訓練，以二個企業個案作為運用概念結合思考模式的討論內容。控制組不進行概念結合思考模式的討論，抽象組運用抽象概念結合的思考模式，而非抽象組則運用非抽象概念結合的思考模式，來刺激受試者對個案的聯想。三組受試者在運用課程前後均進行想像力測驗，在課程最後完成一份創業計畫書並進行專家評分。研究結果發現運用概念結合思考模式可以激發受試者的想像力，模式中抽象組、非抽象組比控制組有較高的想像力。英文摘要：This study is to apply the theory of concept combination to stimulate imagination and verify that abstractive concepts is stimulated more than non-abstractive concepts. The participants are 180 management college students froma university in central Taiwan. They were randomly assigned to three conditions: abstractive, non-abstractive, and controlled groups. We manipulated concept combination thinking models through discussion course of three groups: 1) Abstractive: with abstractive concept combined with thinking model. 2) Non-abstractive: with concrete concept combined with thinking model. 3) Control: did not utilize concept combination theory. Each group was administered two applied case discussions to simulate participants to associate in cases contexts by concept combination theory. All participants in the three groups were administered the pretest and posttest of imagination. They were all required to complete abusiness plan. Results showed that imagination was stimulated by the thinking model of concept combination. And the imagination score of the abstractive and non-abstractive groups are higher than the control group.起始頁-結束頁：373-390資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201503126篇名：文章連貫性和人稱敘寫觀點對兒童道德故事主題理解之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Text Coherence and Narrative Perspective on Children’s Moral Story Comprehension作者：連啟舜(Chi-Shun Lien);張思潔(Ssu-Chieh Chang)關鍵字：文章連貫性;主題理解;敘寫觀點;閱讀理解;narrative perspective;reading comprehension;text coherence;theme comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在探討文章連貫性和人稱敘寫觀點對不同年紀兒童道德故事主題理解之影響，以了解不同年紀兒童對道德主題理解程度，並檢驗「文章連貫性」、「人稱敘寫觀點」對兒童道德主題之影響。本研究選取三篇道德故事加以改寫，分別操弄故事的文章連貫性及人稱敘寫觀點，形成「因果順敘+第一人稱」、「因果順敘+第三人稱」、「因果倒敘+第一人稱」及「因果倒敘+第三人稱」四個實驗版本，分別由三年級和五年級學童閱讀同一版本的三篇故事，在閱讀後測量其不同層次的閱讀理解表現。結果發現在自由回憶、字面理解、推論理解部分，五年級學童表現優於三年級，且文章連貫性有顯著的影響，學童在閱讀因果順敘版本表現較佳，本研究結果支持文章連貫性對兒童道德理解的假設。但是在兒童在不同人稱敘寫版本的理解表現上並未有明顯的差異。此外道德主題理解的層次，本研究中並未得到顯著的效果。本研究結果僅支持「文章連貫性」假設，而「人稱敘寫觀點」並沒有明顯效果。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate the effects of text coherence and narrative perspective on children’s moral theme comprehension at different grade levels and to test the effects of ”text coherence” and ”narrative perspective.” Three different moral stories were adapted and rewritten into four versions: first-person with chronological version, first-person with flashback version, and third-person with chronological version, third-person with flashback version. Participants were third and fifth graders recruited from an elementary school and randomly assigned to read one of the four versions. Four different measures were used to assess students’ comprehension performance, which included free recall, text-based representation, inference representation, and theme representation. The results showed that there were reliable main effects ofgrade level and coherence on free recall, textbase, and inference measures. Fifth graders outperformed third graders, and participants who read the causal coherent version performed better than those who read the less coherent version. However, there was no reliable main effect of narrative perspective, and no effect was found on measures of theme comprehension. The results of this study only supported ”text coherent hypothesis, but did not support the hypothesis of narrative perspective.起始頁-結束頁：391-415資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201504087篇名：國中學生生涯發展組型之探討並列篇名：Career Development Patterns of Junior High School Students作者：張靖卿(Ching-Ching Chang);吳武典(Wu-Tien Wu);鄒小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Chau);張芝萱(Chih-Hsuan Chang);吳道愉(Tao-Yu Wu)關鍵字：生涯發展組型;組型分化;學涯組型;優勢組型;職涯組型;academic development patterns;career development patterns;pattern differentiation;superior patterns;vocational development patterns期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：生涯發展組型是指在某一生涯發展階段，由不同個人特質或表現相互配合而影響生涯發展行為的組合。整合學業能力、職業興趣、工作價值觀和多元智能等多面向測量的「生涯發展組型量表」，可測出高中生的六項職涯組型和二項學涯組型。本研究旨在探討「生涯發展組型量表」應用在測量國中生之適用性，以及了解國中生的生涯發展組型狀況。根據814 名國中樣本的測量結果發現：（1）「生涯發展組型量表」對測量國中生的生涯發展組型具有良好的信、效度；（2）優勢組型分析顯示，國中生的職涯組型以藝術組型人數最多，學涯組型則人文與數理組型比例相當；（3）以性別來看，男生的職涯優勢為實用組型和研究組型，學涯優勢為數理組型，女生的職涯優勢為藝術組型、社會組型和事務組型，學涯優勢則為人文組型；（4）整體而言，各組型優勢比例並未因年級或性別而有差異；（5）就組型分化程度而言，女生比男生有較明顯的學涯組型分化，國三生比國二生有較明顯的職涯組型分化。英文摘要：Career development patterns (CDPs) refer to the combination of various individual characteristics/performances that would influence one’s career development behaviors. The Career Development Patterns Scale (CDPS) is a tool for exploring high school students’ six vocational CDPs and two academic CDPs, in which students’ academic abilities, career interests, work values, and multiple intelligences were measured. The purposes of this study were to examine the appropriateness of using the CDPS to assess junior high school (JHS) students, and to explore the CDPs of JHS students. Based on a sample of 814 JHS students, the major findings were as the following: (a) The CDPS is a valid and reliable tool for measuring the CDPs of JHS students; (b) In terms of superior patterns, Artistic was identified as the superior vocational CDP of most JHS students, but there were similar percentages of students superior in Humanistic and Scientific academic CDPs; (c) With regards to gender differences, male students had superior academic CDP in Scientific and superior vocational CDPs in Investigative and Realistic, whereas female students had superior academic CDP in Humanistic and superior vocational CDPs in Artistic, Social, and Conventional; (d) No significant differences were found across grades and genders in the proportions of students with different types of superior academic CDPs and vocational CDPs; and (e) In terms of pattern differentiation, female students were more distinct than male students in academic CDPs, and 9th graders were more distinct than 8th graders in vocational CDPs.起始頁-結束頁：417-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201504168篇名：幼兒英語學習的家庭教育環境、父母效能與學習熱情之路徑模式並列篇名：The Path Model of Preschoolers' Family Educational Environment, Parental Efficacy, and Passion in Learning English作者：謝皓薇(Hao-Wei Hsieh);葉玉珠(Yu-Chu Yeh)關鍵字：父母效能;英語學習;家庭教育環境;學習熱情;family educational environment;learning English;parental efficacy;passion in learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：47卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的在探討學齡前幼兒的英語學習家庭教育環境、父母效能與熱情（強迫性熱情與和諧性熱情）的現況及相互影響的路徑模式。本研究使用問卷調查法，所使用的量表為研究者所發展之幼兒英語學習家庭教育環境量表、幼兒英語學習父母效能量表與幼兒英語學習熱情量表；研究參與者為台灣515 位幼兒園大班家長。研究發現：（一）參與幼兒的英語學習家庭教育環境、父母效能與熱情具中上程度；（二）結構方程模式分析發現：幼兒英語學習的父母效能與家庭教育環境互動後會透過父母效能影響強迫性熱情；此外，家庭教育環境與父母效能互動後會透過家庭教育環境影響和諧性熱情，且強迫性熱情會影響和諧性熱情。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the path model of preschoolers’ family educational environment, parental efficacy, and passion (obsessive passion and harmonious passion) in learning English. The participants in this study were 515 preschoolers’ parents in Taiwan. This study used a survey method that included three instruments developed by the researchers Inventory of Preschoolers’ Family Educational Environment in Learning English, Inventory of Preschoolers’ Parental Efficacy in Learning English, and Inventory of Preschoolers’ Passion in Learning English. This study found that (1) the preschoolers had good family educational environment, parental efficacy, and passion in learning English; (2) Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) found that the interaction between preschoolers’ parental efficacy and family educational environment had effects on obsessive passion via parental efficacy. Moreover, the interaction of preschoolers’ family educational environment and parental efficacy had effects on harmonious passion via family educational environment, and preschoolers’ obsessive passion had effects on their harmonious passion.起始頁-結束頁：449-472資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2015042101篇名：評析德國教育學者P. Petersen (1884-1952)耶納計畫學校的理論與實踐並列篇名：On P. Petersen's (1884-1952) Theory and Practice of Jenaplan-School作者：張淑媚(Shu-Mei Chang)關鍵字：Petersen;耶納計畫學校;德國改革教育學;Petersen;Jenaplan-School;German reform pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在重估Petersen耶納計畫學校（Jenaplan Schule）的理論與實踐，做為當前臺灣偏鄉小校進行教育改革之借鏡。本文運用詮釋學的研究方法，對耶納計畫學校之背景、理論與實踐內涵進行描述、釐清與批判。耶納計畫學校重視學生的社會性學習、強調混齡教學、改革一週學習計畫的教育原則仍然延續至今。在目前臺灣偏鄉小校的學生面臨人際互動不足、學習動機較弱，以及基本學科能力不足等困境之際，耶納計畫學校在此脈絡下恰可凸顯其適用性。研究者建議以偏鄉小校做為教育實驗的基地，以混齡的討論小組為核心，首先發展學校家庭化的模式，加強學生的社會性學習；其次，發展混齡教學；最後，提供彈性而多樣化的課程類型，以跨學科的主題式探究課程激勵學生的學習動機；並附加基礎、入學與練習課程，加強學生學科程度，提升偏鄉孩童之基本學力。英文摘要：The article aims to articulate a critique and a reassessment of P. Petersen's theory, and by doing so to provide an alternative model as well as a new way in thinking about Taiwan's school education reform in remote areas. I first give a hermeneutic account of Petersen's theory and practice in terms of Taiwan's school education reform debate and further explore what Petersen's Jenaplan can contribute to it. It shows that Jenaplan's ideas of learning in community life, mixed-age class teaching and weekly work schedule turn out to be most promising for Taiwan's situation regarding the common features of lower general scholastic abilities, learning motivation and social interaction of pupils in Taiwan's remote areas in comparison to those in urban areas. The article accordingly suggests that we can initiate in remote areas a new program which, according to the above-mentioned ideas, educates pupils in such a manner that schooling is integrated with community life and interdisciplinary, multiple and flexible learning environment, and such integration can really benefits those with special educational needs.起始頁-結束頁：35-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160662020022篇名：大學生網路言論的界線：以美國校園言論自由案例分析為例並列篇名：Boundary of University Student Cyberspeech: Reference from the Case Analysis of the Freedom of Campus Speech in the United States作者：謝紫菱(Tzu-Ling Hsieh)關鍵字：言論自由;高等教育;網路言論;freedom of speech;higher education;cyberspeech期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:2期出版年：2016中文摘要：由於大學生使用網路發表言論的比例日益增加，而大學基於教育目的需要對學生言論有所規範，但可能因此產生大學自治權與學生言論自由權衝突的情形。本文綜合分析美國法界對於校園言論自由的保護與判斷標準，以及臺灣憲法與大法官釋字對於言論自由的保障，結果發現，雖然臺灣法界對於校園言論保障上並無相關判例，但對於言論自由維護的精神與美國仍有一致性，也就是臺灣的法律規範中，亦含有美國校園言論保障所提出的「雙階理論」（Two Level Theory）、廷克測試（Tinker test）與公共論壇（public forum）的精神，且學校對於大學生的言論理應給予相對於國、高中生言論較大的容忍。惟若要將這些要點運用到網路言論上，會遭遇網路言論的跨界性，而增加了校園管轄權判斷的複雜度。本文建議，各大學應重新檢視學校對於學生網路言論的規範，並且要建立處理網路不當言論的原則與標準程序，兼顧大學自治權與學生言論權的平衡。英文摘要：With the increase of cyberspeech among university students, university administrators face challenges to regulate student speech, which may cause the conflict with values of student speech right and university autonomy. This study analyzes standards for freedom of campus speech in legal cases of the United States, and related legal interpretation in Taiwan's constitution and grand justices. This study found that there are no legal cases about university student cyberspeech in Taiwan, but both Taiwan and United States have similar spirit of free speech protection such as the rules of the two level theory and Tinker test. In addition, understand that their students have the right to enjoy more speech freedom than K-12 student speech. However, student cyberspeech is still a confused area of law, because student's cyberspeech on the Internet is not within the jurisdiction of the campus. This study suggests that university administrators have to review regulations of student cyberspeech and establish principles and processes to handle student inappropriate cyberspeech. By doing so, universities can balance university autonomy and student speech right.起始頁-結束頁：67-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160662020033篇名：教育、接觸和動員的社會資本與地位取得並列篇名：Individual Education, Accessed and Mobilized Social Capital, and Status Attainment作者：黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang);林慧敏(Hui-Min Lin)關鍵字：地位取得;動員的社會資本;接觸的社會資本;教育;status attainment;mobilized social capital;accessed social capital;education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:2期出版年：2016中文摘要：就臺灣民眾的地位取得而言，除了職業地位之外，公私部門與小老闆階級往往也很重要，這都會影響到收入。至於社會資本、教育所代表的人力資本對於職業地位、進入公私部門與小老闆階級，以及進一步的收入究竟有何影響？社會資本與人力資本影響何者較大？先前國內研究並沒有系統性的完整探討。本研究運用2004年進行調查的「社會資本的建構與效應」全國代表性大樣本資料（N = 3,281）實施路徑分析，研究結果發現，接觸的社會資本對地位取得變項大多具有顯著的正影響，只不過影響大都遠不如教育。而本人教育對收入的正向影響，看來比對接觸的社會資本與動員的社會資本整體影響還大。英文摘要：In addition to occupational status, different work sectors and petty bourgeoisies have a substantial influence on income in terms of status attainment in Taiwan. What is the impact of social capital and human capital (education) on the occupational status, the public sectors and petty bourgeoisies, and what is its influence on further income? Which is more dominant, social capital or human capital to status attainment? There has been no systematic and comprehensive research in Taiwan, so the author will explore the thesis. This research uses data from ”Social Capital Construction and Effects Survey in 2004”, which was a national survey with 3,281 samples, and conducts path analysis to answer the above questions. The results indicate that accessed social capital has many significant influences on the variables of status attainment, though its effect is not as strong as human capital's impact on education. An individual's education is likely to have a greater positive influence on income than the sum total of all social capital, inclusive of accessed social capital and mobilized social capital.起始頁-結束頁：97-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160662020044篇名：科技部教育學門研究趨勢檢視與省思：94-103學年度專題計畫分析並列篇名：Research Trends in the Discipline of Education: Analytical Review of the Funded Projects of NSC/MOST, 2005-2014作者：甄曉蘭(Hsiao-Lan Sharon Chen);余穎麒(Patricia Yu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：131-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160662020055篇名：國中讀前段班有差嗎？能力分班對學習成就影響的反事實分析並列篇名：Does It Make a Difference in Being Assigned to High-Ability Groups in Junior High? A Counterfactual Analysis of the Effects of Ability Grouping on Students' Academic Achievement in Taiwan作者：關秉寅(Ping-Yin Kuan)關鍵字：交叉分類隨機效應;能力分班;傾向分數配對;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;cross-classification random effects model;ability grouping;propensity score matching;Taiwan Education Panel Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」國中樣本兩波資料，分析八、九年級讀前段班對九年級時學習成就的影響。本研究以就讀無能力分班措施學校且自認從無分班經驗者為對照組，分別與學校無能力分班、學校只有部分年級有分班，以及學校各年級均有分班措施等三類型學校內，自認於八及九年級與只有九年級讀前段班者相比較，以評估讀前段班是否影響九年級的學習成就。分析模型包括多層次線性、單層次傾向分數配對分析，以及結合單層次傾向分數配對與多層次交叉分類隨機效應模型等。研究發現，以單層次傾向分數分析或此方法結合多層次交叉分類隨機效應模型的結果觀之，只有就讀於部分年級有分班學校，且於八及九年級讀前段班或只於九年級讀前段班會對正面影響九年級學習成就。英文摘要：The present research assesses the causal effects of being assigned to high-ability groups in junior high according to 9th graders' academic achievement in Taiwan. Using data gathered by the Taiwan Education Panel Survey in 2001 and 2003, the sample is divided into three school types: schools with no ability grouping, schools grouping students only at certain grades, and schools grouping students in all grades. Within each school type, this research focuses on estimating the average treatment effect (ATE) by comparing separately the achievement of 9th graders who have self-identified to high-ability groups in both 8th and 9th grade, or in 9th grade only, to those having no tracking experience and enrolled in schools without ability grouping. The research uses multilevel linear modeling, single-level propensity score matching (PSM), and the combination of single-level PSM and cross-classified random effects model (CCREM) to estimate the ATE of being assigned to high-ability groups. According to the analysis of the model combining PSM and CCREM, the research finds that only students assigned to high-ability groups at schools which group students at certain grades have positive impacts on their 9th grade achievement.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160362010016篇名：資訊教育系所學位論文研究趨勢與課題：2004∼2013學年的文獻計量分析並列篇名：Topical Trends and Issues of Dissertations and Theses from the Graduate Programs of Information Education in Taiwan作者：方瑀紳(Yu-Shen Fang);李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee)關鍵字：十二年國教;共詞分析;科技教育;科技領域;統合分析;12-year basic education;co-word analysis;technology education;technology learning area;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:1期出版年：2016中文摘要：教育部2014年11月發布之《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱》，已將中小學「生活科技」和「資訊科技」學科歸在新增的「科技」領域。鑑於大學教育系所的學位論文常是對應中小學教育其學科或領域的基礎或應用研究，本研究採文獻計量分析法，針對「臺灣博碩士論文知識加值系統」中資訊教育系所近10年間（2004<U+223C>2013學年），合計992篇博碩士學位論文的關鍵字詞做為研究對象，探究國內資訊教育學位論文之研究趨勢與課題，結果發現：一、數量有明顯下滑現象；二、研究主題由原本著重廣泛的數位學習朝向數位學習與教學設計；三、研究主題範圍以資訊教育為主，技術取向的資訊科技為次；四、共詞網絡圖譜呈現領域集群與節點間緊密不足，即研究重點有不夠結構化現象；五、研究主題尚未適切關注教師專業發展和資訊科技素養。英文摘要：In the ”Directions Governing for the 12-Year Basic Education Curricula” promulgated by the Ministry of Education in November 2014, the new learning area ”Technology” is comprised of courses ”Living Technology (LT)” and ”Information Technology (IT).” This study used co-word analysis of bibliometrics to analyze the evolution directions and knowledge orientation of the research topics of the dissertations and theses from the information education graduate programs in Taiwan and completed in the last decade (2004∼2013 academic years). Keywords from 992 dissertations and theses in National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations in Taiwan served as the subject of this study. The results show: (1) The number of dissertations and theses significantly declined; (2) Research topical focuses changed from universal e-learning to e-learning and its instructional design; (3) The primary research topics are information education, and secondary technical-oriented information technology; (4) The co-word network maps indicate the lack of closeness between clusters and inter-nodes, which means that it is not well-structured between research focuses; and (5) The research topics completed do not concern themselves properely with teacher's professional development and information technology literacy.起始頁-結束頁：35-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160362010027篇名：自由與紀律：Montessori的人格教育思想並列篇名：Freedom and Discipline: A Study on Montessori's Theory of Personality Education作者：李崗(Kang Lee);楊淑雅(Shu-Ya Yang)關鍵字：Montessori;人格教育;自由;紀律;Montessori;personality education;freedom;discipline期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在分析Montessori（1870-1952）的人格教育思想，主要運用詮釋學的研究方法：一方面聚焦於《吸收性心智》（The Absorbent Mind）、《童年的秘密》（The Secret of Childhood）、《發現兒童》（The Discovery of Child）及《了解你的孩子》（What You Should Know about Your Child）等文本的理解，二方面來回於個人經驗與文本脈絡之間的對話與省思。結果發現，可歸納為以下四點：一、人格是精神生命肉身化的結果，人格統整的關鍵是意志發展。二、人格教育的目標在於建立紀律，人格教育的原則是給予自由，人格教育的方法是透過工作。三、人格教育的歷程始於兒童的自由選擇，繼之以專注地自發性工作，透過意志發展逐漸樂於服從，最後形成內在紀律，表現出寧靜的心境。四、人格教育的實施，關鍵時期為零至三歲，可以運用靜默遊戲、走線練習、穿脫衣服、準備茶會、舉辦生日會等方式進行。最後，本文更針對其思想內涵，提出10點評析，以供參考。英文摘要：This study aims to analyze Maria Montessori's theory of personality education. The author adopts interpretative methodology to focus on the following texts: The Absorbent Mind, The Secret of Childhood, The Discovery of the Child, and What You Should Know about Your Child. In this paper, the conclusion can be summarized into four points: First, personality is formed in the development of body and spirit, and the will is the key to integrate the whole system of personality. Second, the goal of personality education is to establish the discipline of life, and the method is to let children work spontaneously with the sense of duty in a free situation. Third, children must have the freedom to choose, then they can learn how to exercise their will to obey the inner discipline. Fourth, there are five examples provided for the implementation of personality education.起始頁-結束頁：71-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820160362010038篇名：評《頂級學習：培育學生的創造力與創業精神》並列篇名：Book Review: World Class Learners: Educating Creative and Entrepreneurial Students作者：陳婉琪(Wan-Chi Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：62:1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：117-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201603620100401篇名：臺灣與美國工程及技術教育課程之比較研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of Engineering and Technology Curricula in Taiwan and USA作者：蕭錫錡(Hsi-Chi Hsiao);張仁家(Jen-Chia Chang);周保男(Pao-Nan Chou)關鍵字：工程及技術教育;工程教育;比較教育;科技校院;課程架構;engineering and technology education;engineering education;comparative education;technological college and university;curriculum structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來，為因應社會經濟轉變，國內技職教育不斷進行改革，其中以專科學校改制及技術學院更名為科技大學最為明顯，但審視目前國內科技校院課程制定，課程內涵與普通大學所訂定的標準相差無異，其課程發展亦不能體現技職教育所倡議之務實致用的精神。本研究以工程領域為例，旨在探討臺灣及美國在工程及技術教育課程的差異性，在文獻探討上，以美國工程及技術教育發展概念為本研究的理論基礎；在研究方法上，採用Bereday四步驟比較分析模式，就不同分析點比較臺灣與美國在工程及技術教育的課程架構。本研究針對比較結果，發現臺灣工程領域的課程發展現況與美國之間有四大差異：一、課程內容缺乏明顯的規範與標準；二、工程及工程技術教育的課程只共用一個標準；三、缺乏工程技術教育的課程發展；四、工程及技術教育的數理及專業課程不因學制的不同而有明顯的區隔。最後，提出七點建議，作為我國未來科技校院課程改革之參考。英文摘要：In recent years, due to dynamic changes of social and economic systems, technological and vocational education in Taiwan has been constantly undergoing reforms, of which the official changes in technological colleges to technological universities are obvious examples. However, by examining current curriculum planning at technological universities or colleges, curriculum content is not different from general universities. Furthermore, the curriculum development cannot exhibit the essence of technological and vocational education, namely, the importance of hands-on experiences and applied skills. By taking the engineering field as an example, this study aimed to explore the differences in curricula between engineering and technology education in Taiwan and the USA. In the literature review, the evolutionary conception of engineering and technology education in USA serves as theoretical foundation in this study. As a research method, this study adopts Bereday's four-step analysis model to compare the curriculum structure between engineering and technology education in Taiwan and the USA from different analytical perspectives. After the comparison with the USA, this study summarizes four differences that describe current curriculum development of engineering field in Taiwan. These are: (1) lack of significant curriculum norms and standards, (2) the curriculum of engineering and engineering technology education only shares the same standards, (3) lack of curriculum development in engineering technology education, (4) mathematics, sciences and professional courses without significant differences between different school systems on engineering and engineering technology education. Finally, this study proposed seven suggestions as references for future curriculum reforms at technological universities in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160612020012篇名：澳洲職業教育與訓練及其品質保證制度發展與啟示並列篇名：Discussion and Reflection on the Vocational Education and Training and It's Quality Assurance in Australia作者：于承平(Cheng-Ping Yu)關鍵字：技專校院;認可制;品質保證;教育評鑑;職能基準;vocational and technological college and university;accreditation;quality assurance;educational evaluation;occupational competency standard期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣為強化技專校院評鑑優點並改善不足之處，採認可制教育評鑑，但職業訓練機構則同時採品質保證制度，故如何使該項政策推動更為精進，並整合品質保證作法，值得進一步探討與改進。本文以文獻分析釐清澳洲職業教育與訓練及其品質保證關係，明確凸顯問題分析重點，並藉由文件分析法就澳洲縱向機關層級政策推動及橫向時間發展脈絡分析，呈現分析對象完整全貌，就研究結果提出四項具體可行建議：一、臺灣應建立職業教育與訓練統籌機關；二、臺灣應重新檢討現行技專校院人才培育制度；三、臺灣建立產業所需人才之職能基準及課程；四、臺灣建立職能評量及學習支持制度。除上述建議外，更應融入臺灣的社會文化發展脈絡，發展符合臺灣國情之職業教育與訓練及品質保證政策，期在既有優良之基礎下，發展創新的教育策略，晉升先進國家之林。英文摘要：In order to strengthen vocational and technological college and university accreditation advantage and improve deficiencies, shift to educational evaluation of accreditation in Taiwan, vocational training institutions have adopted quality assurance system at the same time. It is how to make the policy to promote a more sophisticated and integrated quality assurance practice as well as further study and improvement. In this paper document analysis to clarify the Australian vocational education, training and quality assurance relationship, clearly highlights the problem analysis focused and driven by literature analysis and document analysis. It shows a lateral longitudinal level policy in Australia, presenting a complete picture analysis of objects of the research and the results. Four feasible recommendations are offered: (1) Taiwan should establish vocational education and training institutions; (2) Taiwan should re-examine the existing cultivation of talent system of vocational and technological colleges and universities; (3) Establish occupational competency standard and curriculum; (4) Establish occupational competency assessment and learning support system in Taiwan. In addition to these recommendations, social and cultural development should be integrated into the context of Taiwan's conditions and the development of vocational education and training and its quality assurance policy, to develop innovative educational strategies.起始頁-結束頁：31-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160612020023篇名：從Freire批判教學論論教師網路媒體素養之培育並列篇名：Cultivating Teacher's Media Literacy of the Internet from Freire's Critical Pedagogy作者：許芳慈(Fang-Tzu Hsu)關鍵字：媒體素養;資訊教育;批判教學論;Paulo Freire;師資培育;media literacy;information technology education;critical pedagogy;Paulo Freire;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：在《媒體素養教育政策白皮書》頒布的十四年後，我國教育面臨的是新一波網路媒體衝擊。大量意識形態與新興問題，透過網路特有的連結性與量產性影響學習者。為因應此種情境，本研究立基於舊媒體的媒體素養之上，透過對於Freire批判教學論，及其後學建構之再現的批判教學論，與批判媒體素養教育，發展出新世代的網路媒體素養，並闡明教師如何養成批判思考，以帶領學生察覺再現中的意識形態，由自覺、解放，進而實踐社會改善。在實務方面，本研究指出，藉由調整課程綱要並配合發展網路媒體素養相關課程；並與師資培育單位配合培養教師網路媒體素養；加上整合教育網絡，持續發展教師網路媒體素養，勢必能帶動由下而上的變革，據以培養我國師生成為具備網路媒體素養的新公民。英文摘要：Fourteen years ago, White Paper of Education Policy for Media Literacy was announced to provide media literacy in Taiwan. However, different from the situation it used to be, Taiwanese now face a new impact from the Internet. Though connection and mass production of the Internet, large amounts of ideologies and related issues have been created and influenced students. To face with this situation, this study shows a Freirean educational approach to enhance teacher's critical thinking for leading students discover ideologies within media representations. Therefore, students and teachers can gain self-consciousness, liberation through this approach, and make praxis for improving social reality. Based on this theory, this study points out three practical ways to cultivate teacher's media literacy of the Internet, including the new arrangement of official Curriculum Guidelines and curriculum development, improving teaching and researching in centers for teacher education in universities, and enhance educational networks, which related to cultivating citizenship of media literacy of the Internet in the new era.起始頁-結束頁：65-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160612020034篇名：MOOCs as a Solution for High School Seniors' College Admission Problems並列篇名：磨課師作為解決高三學生升大學問題的一種方案作者：黃振豊(Chen-Li Huang)關鍵字：college admission;high school senior;MOOCs;personal application;大學入學;高三學生;磨課師;個人申請入學期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：High school seniors (HSSs) in Taiwan have encountered several college admission related problems such as uncertainty about the characteristics and learning in college departments, the high cost of the admission application process, the spare time between the General Scholastic Ability Test (GSAT) and commencement of university study, and unpreparedness for university study. However, both traditional and newly proposed solutions have shortcomings. To find a better solution, this study draws insight from the trend of MOOCs and investigates the features of MOOCs based on relevant literature to evaluate the feasibilities of MOOCs as a new solution. To verify these feasibilities, I put forward some concerning perspectives and examine them critically. The research finds reasons why MOOCs offer a better solution and infers some practical ways for HSSs to experience college learning via MOOCs: Browsing MOOCs and finding courses of interest, learning from the selected courses, thinking reflectively on one's own learning and adapting learning in high school, as well as creating online learning profiles for personal application and further learning.英文摘要：臺灣高三學生面臨一些大學入學相關問題，如不明瞭大學科系特性與學習，高額申請入學相關費用，學測後與入大學間學習空檔，以及大學學習先備能力不足的問題。然而，既有與規畫中的解決方案尚有不足之處。為了探索較好的解決方案，研究者從磨課師風潮中獲得<U+5553>示並透過相關文獻探討磨課師的特質，進而評估磨課師成為新的解決方案之合宜性。研究透過對新解決方案的合宜性進行批判性反思，從中證成磨課師做為解決方案的合宜性。研究發現數項支持磨課師是解決高三學生問題可行方案的論據，並進而推論出幾點具體做法：瀏覽磨課師相關課程並找出符合興趣的課程，學習選擇的課程，反思學習成效來調整高中學習步調，建立線上學習檔案做為個人申請入學與進一步學習的資料。起始頁-結束頁：89-117資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160612020045篇名：第一期卓越師資培育獎學金學生教學準備度之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Teaching Preparedness of Students Funded by Project for Excellent Teacher Education Scholarship (the First Phase)作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)關鍵字：教學準備度;卓越師資培育獎學金計畫;效能期待;卓獎教師;teaching preparedness;Project for Excellent Teacher Education Scholarship (PETES);efficacy expectation;Excellent Project teachers (EPTs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：為了解卓越師資培育獎學金計畫受領學生教學準備度及其任教表現，進而分析制度成效，本研究以源自Bandura效能期望概念的教學準備度，即教師評量自己教學能力的心理預期程度，調查2006-2009學年度（即第一期）畢業受領學生且擔任教師者（即卓獎教師）之教學準備度，並檢視制度成效。本研究共發出「卓獎教師教學準備度調查問卷」263份問卷，有效問卷141份，回收率為53.61%；「卓獎教師工作之雇主滿意度調查問卷」共發出153份，回收有效問卷為144份，回收率為94.11%。本研究運用描述統計、差異分析、Pearson積差相關與迴歸分析後，獲致結論如下：一、卓獎教師在自我工作表現上，工作責任、團隊合作、人際關係能力獲得高度肯定。惟行政執行、處事應變、溝通協調能力有待強化。二、卓獎教師在教學準備度上持高度自信，且學校雇主也持相同知覺。惟跨其他領域教學、自覺影響力、差異教學與班級經營都是可以強化的項目。三、卓獎教師工作表現能有效預測教學準備度，使得培養卓獎生的實務經驗，增進教學自信顯得重要。四、卓獎制度中義務課業輔導與教學實務研習是可繼續規範的條件。惟服務學習與史懷哲計畫對卓獎教師教學準備度之影響不明確。五、從卓獎教師教學準備度的調查結果可知，越關注社會認知歷程的設計，越有助於提高教學準備度。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the teaching preparedness of students receiving funding from the Project for Excellent Teacher Education Scholarship (PETES) and to analyze the effects of the PETES. The subject of the questionnaire was teaching preparedness as defined by Bandura's efficacy expectation where it is an assessment of teacher’s ability to accomplish a certain level of teaching performance. The subjects of this survey were teachers (specifically Excellent Project teachers, EPTs) graduated between the 2006 and 2009 and the opinions to EPTs from schools. A total of 141 samples of EPTs were obtained in this study, and the effective response rate was 53.61%. Moreover, 144 samples from school staff were collected, with an effective response rate of 94.11%. Descriptive statistics, t test, Pearson correlation coefficient, and regression analysis were applied to obtain the following findings: 1. In the dimension of self-working performance, EPTs have high confidence in their work responsibility, teamwork, and personal relationships but low confidence in their administrative ability, skill adaptability, and communicative and coordinative skills. 2. In the teaching preparedness dimension, EPTs and school staff have high confidence in their professional teaching competence but low confidence in their trans-subject teaching ability, self-influence, distinctive teaching style, and classroom management. 3. The self-working performance of EPTs can effectively predict their teaching preparedness. 4. The conditions for requesting free course counseling and a teaching practice seminar can be maintained continuously. However, the effects of service learning and the Schweitzer Educational Service Program on EPT teaching preparedness are unclear. 5. Greater emphasis on social cognition processes indicates that more assistance is needed in promoting EPT teaching preparedness.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160312010016篇名：臺北市教學輔導教師之教師領導發展歷程之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Process of Leadership Development of Mentor Teacher in Taipei作者：王淑麗(Shu-Li Wang);莊念青(Nien-Ching Chuang);丁一顧(Yi-Ku Ting)關鍵字：教學輔導教師;教師領導;發展歷程;mentor teacher;teacher leadership;process for mentor teacher leadership development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解臺北市教學輔導教師教師領導之發展歷程。研究採取訪談法，研究對象為6 位臺北市優良的教學輔導教師。研究工具為自編之「教師領導發展歷程之研究訪談大綱」。並運用MAXQDA 11進行質性資料的分析。研究發現包括：一、臺北市教學輔導教師教師領導的能力包括激勵學習、溝通協調、承擔創新與傳承分享等四種主要的能力；二、臺北市教學輔導教師教師領導之發展歷程都是以從教室出發為起點，而後成為領域的領頭羊，繼之擔任教師與行政溝通的橋樑，至此而後，有些教師進入行政實踐理想，發展歷程的最後則都走出校園，發揮對教育更大的影響力；三、臺北市教學輔導教師之教師領導發展歷程的影響因素包括校長的尊重授權、學校的需要時機，團隊的支持與個人勇於挑戰的精神；四、臺北市教學輔導教師之教師領導發展歷程所遭遇之困境多來自同儕因素，包括同儕的不信任、同仁的不配合與同儕的誤會。最後，研究者根據結論，提出相關建議，俾供教師領導推展以及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study is to explore the process for mentor teacher leadership development in Taipei city. The study was conducted by individual interviews with 6 mentor teachers, where the qualitative data was treated with the help of MAXQDA 11. The main findings are as follows: (1)The capacities of teacher leaders for Taipei mentor teachers include facilitating learning, coordinating communication, innovating and sharing heritage; (2)The journey for mentor teacher leadership development navigates from classroom instructor, head of professional field, coordinator between teachers and administrators, administrator, and eventually expands their leadership experiences beyond the campus; (3)The factors facilitating mentor teacher leadership development include empowerment of the principal, needs for school, support of teams and the encouragement to face challenges; (4)The mentor teachers ordinarily get frustrated by their peers' attitudes, including peers' distrust or misunderstanding. In light of the results, suggestions are made to teacher individuals, schools, and as reference for future research.起始頁-結束頁：39-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160312010027篇名：國民小學校長科技領導、教師教學創新與學生樂學態度關係之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Relationships between the Principals' Technology Leadership, Teaching Innovation and Student Academic Optimism in Elementary Schools作者：謝傳崇(Chuan-Chung Hsieh);蕭文智(Wen-Chih Hsiao);官柳延(Liu-Yen Kuan)關鍵字：科技領導;教學創新;樂學態度;國民小學;technology leadership;teaching innovation;academic optimism;elementary school期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國民小學校長科技領導、教師教學創新與學生樂學態度的現況與關係。在研究方法上採用問卷調查法，研究對象為臺灣地區國民小學教師，並使用結構方程模式驗證校長科技領導、教師教學創新與學生樂學態度的關係。研究結果顯示校長科技領導、教師教學創新與學生樂學態度良好，三者之間具相關性，且影響關係模式適配度良好。雖然校長科技領導對於學生樂學態度有顯著之直接影響效果；但是當校長科技領導透過教師教學創新之中介作用能對學生樂學態度產生更大的影響，其影響效果也相對提高許多。本研究建議校長宜運用科技領導，促使教師教學創新，進而提昇學生樂學態度。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to investigate the relationship among elementary school principals; technology leadership, teachers' teaching innovation and student academic optimism. Questionnaire survey was used to collect data. The survey objects were elementary school educators across Taiwan. This study used structural equation modeling with prospective data to test for model fit. The findings indicate that the principals' technology leadership and teachers' teaching innovation positively affects student academic optimism. Besides, principals' technology leadership will indirectly influence student academic optimism by the way of teachers' teaching innovation. The results suggest that the principals should implement principals' technology leadership to accelerate teachers' teaching innovation in order to improve student academic optimism.起始頁-結束頁：71-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160312010038篇名：華語教師自評教學效能之研究並列篇名：A Study of TCSL Teacher Self-Evaluation of Teaching Effectiveness作者：蔡喬育(Qiao-Yu Cai)關鍵字：華語教師;華語教師自評;教學效能;華語教學;華語教育政策;TCSL teacher;TCSL teacher self-evaluation;TCSL effectiveness;TCSL;TCSL education policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究利用調查法，自編華語教師自評教學效能量表以探究華語教師教學效能的現況。經單因子多變量分析，輔以訪談資料佐證，本研究結論有六：一、修過華語師資培訓課程者的教學效能顯著高於無修過相關課程者；二、華語教學經驗豐者之教學效能顯著高於資淺者；三、具海外華語教學經驗者的自我效能顯著高於無此經驗者；四、雖然外語能力是華語教師需要的條件，卻未在教學效能上產生顯著差異；五、學生年齡分布的廣度大者之教學效能顯著高於分布較小者；六、學生國籍分布的廣度大者之教學效能顯著高於分布較小者。依此對華語教育政策、教學實務及後續研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study explored TCSL teachers teaching effectiveness via survey method. The interview data were analyzed by One-Way- MANOVA and findings are as follows: (1) TCSL effectiveness of teachers participating in teacher training program of TCSL is significantly higher than that of teachers never participating in such programs; (2) TCSL effectiveness of experienced teachers is significantly higher than that of novice teachers; (3) self-effectiveness of teachers having TCFL experience is significantly higher than that of those who have no TCFL experience; (4) foreign language proficiency is necessary for TCSL teachers, but there is no significant difference in TCSL effectiveness between teachers with different foreign language proficiency; (5) TCSL effectiveness of teachers teaching in mix-age classes is higher than that of teachers teaching in single-age classes; (6) TCSL effectiveness of the teachers teaching students with a broad range of nationalities is higher than that of teachers teaching students with a small range of nationalities. Finally, this study makes several proposals regarding to TCSL education policy, teaching practice and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：105-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420160312010049篇名：大學教師參與問題導向學習之專業發展社群個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study of University Teachers' Participation in Faculty Professional Learning Community of Problem-Based Learning作者：黃志雄(Chih-Hsiung Huang);田育芬(Yu-Fen Tien)關鍵字：教師專業學習社群;問題導向學習;教學反思;教師專業發展;faculty professional learning community;problem-based learning (PBL);instructional reflection;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學教師參與專業發展社群的實施與成效，透過教師專業學習社群之教學觀摩和討論，探討問題導向學習教師專業社群之運作歷程，以及對參與社群教師的影響。研究以立意取樣方式邀請研究者服務系所之教師參與，共有12位教師參與社群，並進行了6次的社群討論。研究發現大學教師專業發展社群運作歷程可分為，組成社群與凝聚共識、聚焦前的教學觀摩與討論、和聚焦後的教學觀摩與回饋等三個階段。此外，研究結果顯示，大學教師參與專業發展社群對社群成員的影響包括：增進社群成員對問題導向學習策略實施方式的瞭解、促進社群成員使用問題導向學習策略的意願，以及促進社群教師在教學和問題導向學習策略運用上的反思。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore how professional learning community on problem-based learning (PBL) was processed by teachers, department and faculty structures, and how these structures affected teacher perception of the PBL implementation process in their classrooms. Purposive sampling was chosen as the preferred method. About 12 teachers from the department and faculty engaged as learners in the PBL faculty professional learning community, and the community held discussions six times. The findings illustrate that the operation of faculty professional learning community includes the composition of communities and the community consensus, non-focused teaching demonstration and discussion, and focused classroom observation and feedback. At the same time, the effects of faculty professional learning community include: (1) enhancement of the understanding of the community members on PBL, (2) encouragement of community members’ use of PBL, (3) strengthening of community members’ reflection into their teaching and using PBL process.起始頁-結束頁：147-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201603120100501篇名：國民中學適足教育經費：臺灣偏遠與非偏遠地區學校的比較並列篇名：Estimating Adequate Funding to Meet Performance Standards for Junior High School Students: Adequate Funding Comparisons Between Rural and Non-Rural Schools in Taiwan作者：張良丞(Liang-Cheng Zhang);許添明(Tian-Ming Sheu);吳新傑(Hsin-Chieh Wu)關鍵字：成本函數法;教育財政;數學學業成就;適足經費;隨機邊界模式;adequacy;cost function approach;math achievement;school finance;stochastic frontier analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣學生近年來在國際大型測驗表現亮眼，但如進一步檢視學校所處地區，即可明顯看出臺灣存在巨大的城鄉差距問題：偏遠地區與大城市相比，不僅數學表現較差，且出現各校數學差距相對較大的情況。不足的教育經費可能是導致此差距的原因之一，本研究因此以成本函數法來估算偏遠與非偏遠地區學校達成預期學生學業成就所需的適足經費，並以國中基測數學基礎級、平均數、精熟級來作為適足分數，以估算不同程度所需的適足經費，結果發現，無論何種適足分數，偏遠地區所需的每生適足經費皆比非偏遠地區為高，且超過半數以上的偏遠學校未達適足經費水準。本研究亦根據研究結果，提出改進建議。英文摘要：Although the mathematical ability of Taiwanese students is ranked high according to the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), Taiwan faces the problem of a gap in test scores between rural students and their non-rural counterparts, with the latter group scoring higher on average. Inadequate funding is a possible reason for this discrepancy. Therefore, this paper uses the cost function approach to compare adequate funding requirements between rural and non-rural schools. The adequate funding estimates are calculated based on the different levels of mathematics scores in the Basic Competence Test (basic, average, and proficient). The results showed that rural schools require more per student funding than do non-rural schools, irrespective of the use of score levels as references. A greater portion of rural schools were shown to operate under inadequate per student funding compared with non-rural schools. This paper provides further evidence of the urgency of increased investment in rural schools.起始頁-結束頁：43-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(3).022篇名：運用人格、心理與環境因素預測教師教學設計想像力並列篇名：Using Personality Traits and Psychological and Environmental Factors to Predict the Instructional Design Imagination of Teachers作者：許育齡(Yu-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：人格特質;心理因素;教學設計想像力;環境因素;environmental factors;instructional design imagination;personality traits;psychological factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：面對當前複雜與挑戰兼具的教學情境，本研究整合運用人格特質、心理與環境因素預測國民教育階段教師，從事教學設計想像力的結構模型。本研究運用結構方程模式進行探究，模型建構奠基於教師人格特質、心理與環境影響的相關研究，整合後提出假設進行驗證並獲得支持。研究結果顯示：一、以能力導向詮釋的教學設計想像力，包含創始、構思與轉造三種想像能力；二、開放與審慎特質對教學設計想像力主要是透過直接路徑預測，外向、親和及情緒穩定特質則是透過中介作用間接預測教學設計想像力；三、內在動機與自我效能可適切扮演中介角色，帶動部分人格特質、正向情緒、做中悟，與部分環境條件預測教學設計想像力；四、環境因素順應人格特質差異，對教學設計想像力的預測型態猶有深究的空間。綜整研究結果，本研究提出實務意涵與未來研究之建議。英文摘要：This study responded to the challenging and complex situations faced by teachers by using personality, psychological, and environmental variables to construct a predictive model of the imaginative capabilities of teachers as demonstrated in their instructional design. On the basis of previous studies of the influence of personality traits and psychological and environmental factors on imaginative capabilities, we conducted structural equation modeling to propose a predictive model and then validated it. The results revealed that: (1) the imaginative capabilities involved in instructional design included initiating imagination, conceiving imagination, and transforming imagination; (2) openness to experience and conscientiousness had strong direct effects on imaginative capabilities, whereas extraversion, emotional stability, and agreeableness indirectly predicted imaginative capabilities; (3) self-efficacy and intrinsic motivation displayed mediating roles in the personality traits and psychological and environmental factors that predicted imaginative capabilities; (4) the means by which environmental factors influence imaginative capabilities requires further exploration. Finally, this study proposed suggestions regarding the practical implications of the results and future research directions.起始頁-結束頁：69-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(3).033篇名：臺灣國小行動學習計畫的學生自評學習效益影響因素探討並列篇名：Investigating the Perceived Learning Outcomes of Elementary Students in a Mobile Learning Program in Taiwan作者：陳奕樺(I-Hua Chen);楊雅婷(Ya-Ting Yang)關鍵字：自評學習效益;行動學習計畫;教學信念;階層線性模式;學習動機;hierarchical linear modeling;learning mobile learning program;perceived learning outcomes;teacher beliefs期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：教育部推動的行動學習計畫由2009 年試辦的五所國民小學，至2014 年已推廣至全臺95所。有鑑於教育部行動學習計畫的規模日益擴大，為了能給予未來參與的學校有更多遵循的參考依據，本研究針對參與計畫的國小師生進行調查，以求能掌握影響學生計畫中學習效益的可能因素。研究者以階層線性模式進行分析，依序檢驗學生個人層級與班級層級變項群對他們自評學習效益的直接影響，以及班級層級變項群的脈絡調節效果。本研究以叢集隨機抽樣挑選57所小學，共得44 份教師問卷與1,877 份學生問卷。研究結果顯示：一、任務價值、自我效能與自覺家庭支持程度愈高，學生自評學習效益愈高。二、班級規模愈小，學生自評學習效益愈高。三、當教師認為行動學習能增強學生資訊科技能力的教學信念愈高時，低任務價值學生的學習效益比高任務價值學生的學習效益較好。當教師認為行動學習能增強學生學習效率及資訊科技能力的教學信念愈高時，高自我效能的學生會有更高的學習效益。英文摘要：In recent years, Taiwan's mobile learning program, developed by the Ministry of Education, has expanded substantially from five pilot schools in 2009 to 95 schools in 2014. This study investigates the role of underlying factors affecting elementary student learning outcomes and provides practical implications for schools joining the mobile learning program in the future. Hierarchical linear modeling was conducted for multilevel analysis of big data collected from schools participating in the mobile learning program. Two main direct effects and interaction effects from the student and class level were analyzed in terms of the dependent variable, students' perceived learning outcomes. This study used cluster sampling to randomly select 57 schools participating in the mobile learning program, with data collected from 44 teachers and 1,877 students. The results show that (1) Higher students' task-value, self-efficacy and perceived family support were associated with higher perceived learning outcomes; (2) Lower class size was associated with higher perceived learning outcomes; and (3) Lower teacher beliefs regarding students' ability to use information and communications technology (ICT) enhanced higher strength of positive relation between task-value and perceived learning outcomes, while higher teacher beliefs related to students' learning efficacy and ability to use ICT enhanced higher strength of positive relation between self-efficacy and perceived learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：99-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(3).044篇名：學童估測長度、面積與體積的表現與策略使用之探討並列篇名：Investigation of the Performance and Use of Strategy Among Elementary School Children in Estimating Measurements of Length, Area, and Volume作者：黃幸美(E. Hsin-Mei Huang)關鍵字：長度;面積;測量估測;策略;體積;area;length;measurement estimation;strategy;volume期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究發展一套估測評量以檢測學童在長度、面積與體積的估測能力與策略使用情形。研究對象為臺北市及新北市國小五∼六年級學童948 位。研究結果發現：學童的估測表現與使用策略的數量，皆受年級與測量性質影響；87%以上的學童能使用策略估測，尤以身體部位與方便使用的物件為單位做估測的人次較高。整體而言，六年級學童的估測表現優於五年級，學童在不同的估測分測驗的表現亦呈現差異，他們在估測長度的表現優於估測面積與體積的表現。此外，使用於估測體積的策略數量高於估測面積與長度的策略數量，使用於估測面積的策略數量高於估測長度的數量；但策略數量的年級差異只呈現在面積估測問題；六年級學童的策略數量也高於五年級。英文摘要：A set of measurement estimation assessments was developed to investigate the ability of elementary school children to estimate length, area, and volume measurements and their use of strategy in this context. The participants were 948 fifth- and sixth-graders who were recruited from elementary schools in Taipei and New Taipei City, Taiwan. The results showed that grade level and measurement attributes significantly influenced estimation performance and the number of strategies used in estimation. More than 87% of the children could indicate a strategy for estimating measurements. They frequently used body parts or objects that are convenient measurement units. On average, the sixth-graders outperformed the fifth-graders on the measurement estimation assessment. The students demonstrated higher performance in the subscale of length estimation than in the subscales of area and volume estimation. Multiple strategies were more commonly used for estimating volume than for estimating area and length. Participants also used a wider variety of strategies for estimating area than for estimating length. The influence of grade level on the degree of estimation strategy was observed only in the case of area estimation. Furthermore, the sixth-graders used more estimation strategies than the fifth-graders did.起始頁-結束頁：131-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(3).055篇名：文化資本的代間傳遞與轉換對國中學生教育成就的影響並列篇名：Effects of Intergenerational Transfer and Conversion of Cultural Capital on the Educational Achievements of Junior High School Students作者：謝志龍(Chih-Lung Hsieh);莊致嘉(Chih-Chia Chuang)關鍵字：文化再製;文化資本;社會階級;教育成就;culture capital;cultural reproduction;educational achievement;social class期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去相關研究探討文化資本議題時，多數僅就子代的學業成績或升學情況進行分析，這對理解文化資本在教育場域的再生產過程所扮演的角色依然缺乏具有說服力的證據。本研究認為，在解答文化資本對教育成就的效力之前，必須先釐清文化資本從親代傳承到子代的過程，才能進一步澄清文化資本對子女教育的影響。立基上述問題意識，本研究使用「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」釋出的國中學生、家長及導師資料進行分析。研究發現，父母可透過「文化資本的代間傳遞路徑」與「經濟資本的代間轉換路徑」將身體化與客體化的文化資本傳給下一代，進而展現在子代對高雅文化的善意。Bourdieu 的文化再製論點對於臺灣教育場域的文化再製現象具有解釋力。然而，子代文化善意對子代在校表現與學術分流的效果卻未如預期：子代文化善意對綜合能力分數與導師評量分數產生負面影響，對學術分流則無顯著效果。此結果可能來自臺灣教育制度過度重視智育表現，而子代文化善意的展現往往會分散學習者對智育表現的專注力與時間分配。臺灣獨特的教育環境使得子代內化後的文化資本對學業成就的效用有限。英文摘要：Most studies on cultural capital have analyzed only the academic achievements or further schooling of participants. However, these analyses have failed to provide convincing evidence elucidating the role of cultural capital in education. This study argued that the process of parent-to-progeny transfers of cultural capital must be clarified before the effects of cultural capital on the educational achievements of children can be determined. Data on junior high school students, parents, and teachers released in the Taiwan Education Panel Survey were adopted for analysis. This study determined that parents can transfer cultural capital (and converted economic capital) to their children, which is then reflected in the goodwill of their children toward high culture. Bourdieu's concept of cultural reproduction was used to explain the conditions of cultural reproduction in Taiwan. However, the cultural goodwill of children negatively influenced their comprehensive ability scores and evaluations of them conducted by teachers; furthermore, cultural goodwill did not significantly affect the entrance of these students into academic senior high schools. These results might stem from an overemphasis on intellectual performance in the Taiwanese educational system, in which the demonstration of cultural goodwill by children frequently diverts their attention and reduces the amount of time they spend in the pursuit of high intellectual performance. This study concludes that the unique educational environment in Taiwan has limited the effects of the internalized cultural capital of children on their academic achievements.起始頁-結束頁：163-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(3).066篇名：Dewey良師論與職前師培課程主張評析並列篇名：Critical Analysis of J. Dewey's Thoughts on Good Teachers and the Preservice Teacher Education Program作者：單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)關鍵字：良師;理論與實務;職前師培課程;J. Dewey;good teachers;theory and practice;preservice teacher education program;J. Dewey期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討與評論J. Dewey對於良師及如何以職前師培課程養成如此良師的看法。研究者進入有關文獻，理解其內涵、探討其意蘊，並評析其主張，藉以獲致啟示。在說明研究緣起、文獻回顧與研究問題後，本研究先由三方面解析其良師論，再據以說明其職前師培課程的理念與作法。隨後，研究者在評析Dewey主張的特點與可資商榷之處後指出，時下良師除應教導學生運用思考方法解決各種問題之外，尚須引領學生妥予面對難以解決的人生困境;而執事者有鑑於過往職前師培課程內涵有偏重理論層面之虞，乃有轉而加強實務層面的趨勢，但應注意切勿矯枉過正，輕忽了確能適切引導實務改進的理論。英文摘要：This paper critically analyzes J. Dewey’s thoughts on good teachers and preservice teacher education programs. The content, meanings, and theories of Dewey’s thoughts are reviewed from his writings and related literature to determine their implications. After explaining the background and primary research tasks, this paper explains Dewey’s thoughts on good teachers in three dimensions. Subsequently, his ideas and approaches concerning preservice teacher education programs are delineated. By describing the features and points of Dewey’s thoughts that require reconsideration, the findings show that, at present, good teachers should teach students not only how to perform problem solving, but also how to address challenges caused by unsolved predicaments. Furthermore, the author suggests that in preservice teacher education programs, teacher educators should not overemphasize practice and dismiss theories. Although theories have been overvalued in the past, they should still be used to guide teachers’ practices while teachers attempt to improve their teaching competence.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).017篇名：師資培育制度變革與師範校院轉型：社會制度論的分析與反思並列篇名：Teacher Education Reform and Its Impact on Teachers Colleges in Taiwan: An Analysis and Reflections Based on Sociological Institutionalism作者：謝卓君(Chuo-Chun Hsieh)關鍵字：師資培育;師範校院;組織社會學;新制度論;機構轉型;teacher education;teachers college;sociology of organization;new institutionalism;organizational change期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：多元化師資培育制度自1994年《師資培育法》實施至今已超過20年，這個制度的變化過程中，原本獨占師資培育管道的師範校院面臨機構轉型的壓力。本研究之目的在於從組織社會學的觀點，瞭解多元化師資培育制度變革可能對於師資培育機構造成的影響。研究以社會制度論為理論架構，採取個案研究法，透過政策文本分析與訪談，分析我國幾近兩世紀以來師資培育制度的變化，並探究師範校院在此一過程中的因應與轉型。研究結果發現，早期的師資培育制度改革聚焦制度環境忽略技術環境，個案機構採順服制度以取得組織合法性;發展至後期，制度環境與技術環境的差距逐漸縮小，個案機構需要同時考量組織合法性與增加技術效率以提升組織競爭力。為因應師資培育制度的變化，個案組織採取強制性、模仿性與規範性等多種機制，並反映出鬆散的結構特性。最後，根據研究結果對於當前師資培育制度的發展與師範校院的困境，提出批判反省。英文摘要：The 1994 Teacher Education Act marked the start of a more diversified system of teacher training in Taiwan. Subsequently, the number of teacher education providers increased substantially; consequently, the normal universities and colleges, which had been the dominant organizations participating in teacher preparation in Taiwan, were pressured to adapt. To understand how teacher colleges have adjusted to the reform of the teacher education system, this study conducted a textual analysis of relevant documents and policies released during 1994-2014 and interviewed members of a selected teacher college. Sociological institutionalism was utilized as a theoretical framework to analyze the institutional changes and organizational adaptations. The research findings showed that at the earlier stage of the teacher education reform, the prevailing trend was to focus on changing the institutional environment, and the case study college complied with this orientation in both letter and spirit to maintain its organizational legitimacy. At the later stage, however, the teacher education reform started incorporating additional changes related to the technical environment, and this caused the case study teachers college to increase its focus on technical efficiency to strengthen its organizational competitiveness. The experience of the case study college when choosing among diverse mechanisms (i.e., coercive, mimetic, and normative) to adapt to institutional change revealed that the organization in question exhibited a loosely coupled organizational structure. This paper offers reflections on the institutional reform of teacher education as well as the transformation of the case study teachers college.起始頁-結束頁：29-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).028篇名：實地學習：銜接師資培育理論與實務的藥方？並列篇名：Field-Based Experience: A Solution for the Theory-Practice Divide in Teacher Education?作者：符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu);黃源河(Robin Yuan-Her Hwang)關鍵字：師資培育;務實師資培育;理論與實務;實地學習;teacher education;realistic teacher education;theory and practice;field-based experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：教育理論與實務的落差，是師資培育長久未解的問題。我國於1995年施行《師資培育法》迄今，理論與實務間的連結，未見明顯改善。一項有15國參與的跨國評比指出，我國國中、小學實習教師認為大學所學與中、小學現場的契合度，分居倒數第三及第二名。近年來教育部推動「實地學習」，期能縮短理論與實務的落差，增加師資生實務教學能力。本研究指出「移植西方理論」及「技術理性」的師資培育模式，帶來我國師資培育理論與實務的雙重鴻溝。實地學習政策如未能對症下藥，恐難發揮效果。本研究提出「建構包含儒家文化的理論模型」及採取「務實師資培育模式」，以縮短雙重鴻溝，希望引發討論，為長久的沉痾找出解決之道。英文摘要：The theory-practice divide has been a long-standing concern in the field of teacher education. This concern has not been addressed in Taiwan since the promulgation of the Teacher Education Act in 1995. An international comparison study reported that the degree of the theory-practice divide in Taiwanese teacher education was the largest of the 15 participating countries. To narrow the divide and enhance student teachers’ practical abilities, the Taiwanese Ministry of Education has recently launched a policy of promoting field-based experience. The present paper argues that the theory-practice divide originated from the transplantation of Western theories and the teacher-training model of technical rationality. If field-based experience cannot address these causes, it is not a solution for bridging the theory-practice divide. This paper proposes establishing Confucian-culture-inclusive theory and implementing more realistic teacher education practices to narrow the divide between theory and practice. These actions are proposed to promote discussion about the solutions to this long-standing problem.起始頁-結束頁：57-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).039篇名：教師情境判斷測驗之編製並列篇名：Construction of the Teacher Situational Judgment Test作者：趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);郭蕙寧(Hui-Ning Kuo);許明輝(Ming-Huei Shiu)關鍵字：信度;效度;教師情境判斷測驗;試題反應理論;質性分析;reliability;validity;teacher situational judgment test;item response theory;qualitative analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：為提供師資培育單位在甄選師資培育學生時，更多元的參考依據，本研究建置教師情境判斷測驗，並進行信度及效度之檢驗。研究一自2010年起，進行教師情境判斷測驗的建置，並蒐集3,133位實習教師及正式教師之施測資料，以試題反應理論(item response theory, IRT)進行分析，檢驗測驗之信度及效度。研究一共建置75題試題，且試題之中有90.67%與Rasch模式適配。研究二自2014年起，進行試題的擴充，並蒐集了3,039位大學生之施測資料。經由試題分析，研究二共建置105題試題，總題數為180題。除試題分析外，研究二亦分析修習不同教育學程的學生，檢驗其在測驗分數之差異，提供已知團體差異之效度證據。此外，研究二利用資深教師團隊座談會之質性資料，進行內容分析，探討資深教師在面對教師工作上問題時，其作法判斷背後之意涵，提供更多的建構效度證據。本研究將就教師情境判斷測驗的概念、試題特性，以及編製實務等議題進行討論。英文摘要：According to the ideal of having multiple measures of teacher education, this study developed the teacher situational judgment test (TSJT) for selecting student teachers. The TSJS was based on the hypothesis that the more similar a student’s thinking is to senior and high-performing teachers, the more likely that student is to become an effective teacher. In Study 1, we collected data from 3,133 intern-teachers and teachers to determine the reliability and validity of the TSJT. On the basis of the analysis of the pilot test and formal test, we retained 75 items. Furthermore, the internal consistency reliability of three of the TSJT booklets was exceeded .7. Additionally, the Rasch model analysis showed that 90.67% of the TSJT items fit the Rasch model. In Study 2, we developed 150 new items to expand the TSJT item bank, and recruited 3,039 college students for an item analysis. Subsequently, we further retained 105 items for the TSJT item bank, totaling 180. The reliability of each booklet was between .47 and .74. For the test validity, the analysis of variances indicated that the TSJT scores of student teachers were significantly higher than those of nonstudent teachers. This provided known-group differences validity for the TSJT. Furthermore, in Study 2, we also conducted a qualitative content analysis to provide additional evidence of the construct validity. This present study discusses the development and practical applications of the TSJT.起始頁-結束頁：85-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).0410篇名：Locating Research on Physical Education Teacher Education in the Teaching and Teacher Education From 2001 to 2010並列篇名：體育師資培育研究在《教學與教師教育》中之定位：2001-2010作者：魏豐閔(Feng-Min Wei);施登堯(Deng-Yau Shy)關鍵字：內容分析;影響係數;體育教育學;研究趨勢;師資培育;content analysis;impact factor;physical education pedagogy;research trends;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：自1990年代被宣告為一門研究領域以來，師資培育始終呈現出一種多元學科而非孤立的領域樣貌。可是，究竟體育師資培育在整個師資培育領域中被放在什麼位置上呢?本研究即是為了回應這個提問而書寫的，目的在於瞭解體育師資培育研究的現況，以及10年內它在整個師資培育知識圈內的定位與趨勢。研究資料為2001-2010年間發表於《教學與教師教育》期刊的853篇研究論文，並以發表年代、教師生涯階段、研究議題及研究方法論為構面，採取量化內容分析法將之進行歸納。結果證實，體育師資培育研究正處於師資培育領域中合法的但邊緣的地位，文末將針對此種現象的涵義以及未來體育師資培育研究的建議進行討論。英文摘要：Teacher education has been considered multidisciplinary since it first became a field of inquiry in the 1990s. However, the relationship between physical education teacher education (PETE) and the larger field of teacher education remains undefined. To determine this relationship, this study aimed to understand the status quo of research on PETE (R-PETE) and its relationship with and trends within the broader knowledge base of teacher education during one decade. A total of 853 studies published in Teaching and Teacher Education from 2001 to 2010 were collected then, applying the method of quantitative content analysis, categorized by publication year, teacher's stages of life career, research issues, and research methodologies. The results confirmed that R-PETE was considered as having a legitimate but peripheral relationship with the larger teacher education field during the study period. This paper discusses the implications of this relationship found and provides recommendations for future research on PETE.起始頁-結束頁：119-151資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).0501篇名：Rasch-ZINB及其相關模式在計數資料上之應用並列篇名：Rasch-ZINB Modeling for Testing Count Data作者：洪來發(Lai-Fa Hung)關鍵字：負二項迴歸模式;試題反應理論;過度離散;零膨脹迴歸模式;item response theory;negative binomial regression model;over-dispersion;zero-inflated regression model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：在統計分析方法中，計數模式（例如：Poisson Regression Model、Negative Binomial Regression Model、Zero-inflated Regression Model）已被廣泛應用於心理學、管理學，以及其他社會科學等領域。不過，國內相關研究一直未將現代測驗理論之試題反應理論（Item Response Theory, IRT）模式與這些計數模式相結合，也就是未能以IRT的觀點：受試者潛在特質和試題難度，對於計數資料過度離散（Over-dispersion）或零膨脹（Zero-inflated）等異常現象提出解釋與處理。因此，本研究結合Rasch模式與計數模式提出Rasch-ZINB迴歸模式、Rasch-ZIG迴歸模式，以及Rasch-ZIP迴歸模式，並以某學科考試結果做為模式分析之實例。整體而言，本研究提出的結合模式，針對資料異常現象，可以藉由受試者潛在特質和試題難易度加以解釋。最後，進行模擬分析以更確認研究結果的可信度，並提出未來研究的一些建議。英文摘要：Count data models (for example, Poisson regression model, negative binomial regression model, and zero-inflated regression model) have been widely applied in psychology, management and other social science fields. However, related studies in Taiwan have been failed to make connection between item response theory (IRT) and count data models which means those studies can't propose explanation from IRT approaches under the over-dispersion and zero-inflated count data. As a result, this study integrate Rasch model with count data model in order to propose a Rasch-ZINB regression model, Rasch-ZIG regression model, and Rasch-ZIP regression model. Various statistical tests for model evaluation are illustrated through an example of statistic testing. Overall, the integration model proposed in this study can make further explanations on data's skew phenomenon by means of item psychmetric features and individual traits. Finally, some suggestions for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：31-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：「中文部件組字遠距聯想測驗」之發展與其信效度研究並列篇名：The Development of Chinese Radical Remote Associates Test作者：張雨霖(Yu-Lin Chang);吳哲源(Jhe-Yuan Wu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);吳清麟(Ching-Lin Wu)關鍵字：中文部件;頓悟性問題;遠距聯想;Chinese radicals;insight problems;remote association期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究擬發展「中文部件組字遠距聯想測驗」（Chinese Radical Remote Associates Test，以下簡稱CRRAT），期能形成華人遠距聯想創造力的完整測量系統。測驗編製者首先挑選出60組具有同樣部件之三個衍生字組，編成CRRAT預試題本，計60題。接著以196名大學生進行預試，依項目分析結果挑選出30題做為正式試題，並區分為難度、鑑別度相近的甲、乙兩式題本（各15題）。其次，甲式以173名、乙式以187名大學生進行正式施測及信效度研究。結果發現，在信度方面，甲、乙兩版本之內部一致性係數分別為.706與.685；在效度方面，兩版本皆與「中文遠距聯想測驗」（Chinese Remote Associates Test, CRAT）（任純慧、陳學志、練竑初、卓淑玲，2004）有顯著相關（r 值分別為.317與.375），與「中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」（Chinese Word Remote Associates Test, CWRAT）（黃博聖、陳學志、劉政宏，2012）有顯著相關（r值分別為.585與.350），與「頓悟性問題測驗」（邱發忠、陳學志、徐芝君、吳相儀、卓淑玲，2008）亦有顯著相關（r值分別為.417與.448）。另外，本測驗與「新編創造思考測驗」（吳靜吉，1998）各指標皆無相關存在（r介於-.103∼.151之間），顯示本測驗具有良好的聚斂效度與區辨效度。此外，不同性別大學生在甲、乙式均無顯著差異，中文相關系所與非中文相關系所大學生在乙式亦無顯著差異。本研究最終針對測驗的信效度與未來可能發展提出討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop ”Chinese Radical Remote Associates Test” (CRRAT), which is a comprehensive system to measure the cognitive ability of Chinese remote associates test for Chinese people. To develop CRRAT, firstly, we choose 60 sets of derivative characters; every set contained three characters that derived from a same radical. These 60 sets was the pretest of CRRAT, and 196 undergraduates participated. Then 30 items of them were selected into CRRAT according to the result of item analysis; in particular, two alternative forms, version A and version B, were edited based on their item difficulty and discrimination, each version was composed of 15 items. With respect to the reliability and validity of CRRAT, we recruited 173 undergraduates for version A and 187 ones for version B to join the formal test. As for the reliability, the coefficients of internal consistency for version A and version B of CRRAT were .706 and .685 respectively. With regard to the validity of CRRAT, it is significantly correlated (r = .317, r = .375) to the ”Chinese Remote Associates Test” (CRAT) (Chun-Hui Jen, Hsueh-Chih Chen, Hung-Chu Lien, & Shu-Ling Cho, 2004), and to the ”Chinese Word Remote Associates Test” (CWRAT) (Po-Sheng Huang, Hsueh-Chih Chen, & Cheng-Hong Liu, 2012) (r = .585, r = .350), and to the ”Insight Problems” (r = .417, r = .448). However, it wasn’t correlated to all the index of ”New Creativity Test” (r = -.103 to .151), it shows that CRRAT has the convergent validity and discrimination validity. Besides, there was no gender difference between the responses of two versions of CRRAT, and the response of version B was not different between the Chinese literature major and other majors undergraduates. We have the discussion and suggestion for the reliability, the validity, and the future potential development of the CRRAT.起始頁-結束頁：59-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：從聯合國《兒童權利公約》反思我國學生參與課綱審查之重要課題並列篇名：IMPORTANT ISSUES ON TAIWAN STUDENTS' PARTICIPATION IN CURRICULUM DELIBERATION COUNCIL: REFLECTING FROM UN CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD作者：陳玟樺(Wen-Hua Chen);劉美慧(Mei-Hui Liu)關鍵字：兒童權利公約;兒童權利公約施行法;高級中等教育法;課程綱要;Convention on the Rights of the Child;Implementation Act of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;Senior High School Education Act;curriculum guidelines期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：2016年，立法院通過《高級中等教育法》修法，課程審議會正式納入「學生代表」引起不小爭議。事實上，為保障兒童權利，臺灣在2014年已通過《兒童權利公約施行法》並於同年11月20日施行，《兒童權利公約》是聯合國目前獲得最迅速和廣泛批准的國際人權公約，多數國家對公約的空前接受度清楚地表明了全球對促進兒童權利的廣泛承諾。有鑑於此波爭議較少從「兒童權利」觀點出發，且為具體呼應我國自願將公約國內法化、與國際人權制度接軌之初衷，於此，本研究旨從聯合國《兒童權利公約》反思我國學生參與課綱審查之重要卻較受忽略的課題。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究先就我國自解嚴以來學生參與國家層級課程修訂之背景脈絡進行理解，主要運用法律史的研究方法；其次，就聯合國《兒童權利公約》相關內涵進行簡要分析；最後，再從聯合國《兒童權利公約》反思我國學生參與課程審議的幾個重要課題並提出幾點建議供參。研究發現或結論：依據《兒童權利公約》的主要概念，兒童與成人具有相同人權，他們並非父母的財產，亦非等待救援的客體，兒童為自己權利的主體，此對學生參與公共事務具正面意涵。公約所闡述的精神和原則要能實現，要有賴家庭、學校，以及為兒童提供服務的機構和其他所有行政單位等能對兒童權利有所認知並予以尊重方有可能，此亟需國人之共同努力。研究原創性／價值：這項研究在教育領域是初步的，期望為學生參與公共事務提供一個新的詮釋視角。它突顯了將孩子視為個人、家庭和社區成員一份子的眼光，指出兒童具有相宜於其年齡和發展階段的權利和責任。英文摘要：Purpose: In 2016, the Legislative Yuan passed amendments to the Senior High School Education Act to overhaul the review process for the curriculum guidelines, and Curriculum Deliberation Council (CDC) members formally incorporated into the students' representatives, which caused controversy among the people of the country. In fact, Taiwan passed the ”Implementation Act of the Convention on the Rights of the Child” in 2014, promulgated the Act that year and implemented it on Nov. 20 the same year. The Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) is the most rapidly and widely ratified international human rights treaty in history. The unprecedented acceptance of the Convention clearly shows a wide global commitment to advancing children's rights. With this wave of controversy rarely inspected from the perspective of ”children's rights”, coupled with the response to the domestication of the CRC, this study focuses on exploring important but suspended lessons on students' participation in CDC from the rights of the child recognized in the CRC. Design/methodology/approach: The study applied the research method of law history to trace Taiwan students' participation in national-level curriculum decision-making after the termination of martial law. It also briefly reviewed the context and content of the CRC, followed by some reflections on Taiwan students' participation in CDC from the rights of the child recognized in the CRC. Findings: According to the main concept of CRC, children have the same general human rights as adults; they are not the property of their parents nor the objects of waiting for the rescue, but the subject of their own rights. These big ideas have positive implications for students' participation in public affairs. The spirit and principles articulated in the CRC can only become a reality when they are respected by everyone-within the family, in schools and other institutions that provide services for children, in communities and at all levels of administration. Based on that, the most urgent response of our people now is to recognize and clarify the concept of human rights and take further wise action. Originality/value: This study is preliminary in the field of education and looks forward to providing a new perspective on students' participation in public affairs. It offers a vision of the child as an individual and as a member of a family and community, with rights and responsibilities appropriate to his or her age and stage of development.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201812_26(4).00012篇名：重訪德與福的關係：正向心理學的新詮釋及其對品德教育的啟示並列篇名：REVISITING THE RELATION BETWEEN VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS: A NEW POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF IT AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR CHARACTER EDUCATION作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：品德教育;正向心理學;招牌優勢;品格個殊化;德福一體;character education;positive psychology;signature strength;the individualisation of character;the unity of virtue and happiness期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：「德福一體」這個古老的爭議性學說在當前新興的正向心理學中似有復甦跡象，因正向心理學家宣稱要證明正向特質－品格優勢與德行，在促成真實的幸福中扮演不可或缺的關鍵角色。本文主張關心品德教育的人應當深入探討正向心理學關於德福關係的論證，因這將可回應「為何要有德」與「為何德行值得追求」等問題，此些根本問題鮮為當代品德教育論述所處理。據此，本文旨在分析正向心理學的德行觀與幸福觀，繼而檢視其對於德福關係的說明，最終提出由正向心理學視角重訪德福一體說對於當代品德教育的重要啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究屬於教育哲學性質，採用方法主要為概念分析、論證分析與涵義詮釋。針對正向心理學論「德福關係」所牽涉的數個關鍵概念－包含品格優勢、德行、幸福等進行概念分析，著重在探討概念內涵與彼此之間的關係。其次針對正向心理學有關德福一體的論述進行論證分析。最終闡明正向心理學有關德福一體的新詮釋對於當代品德教育的啟示。研究發現或結論：檢視完正向心理學有關德福一體的論證過後，本文指出由於正向心理學與當代品德教育所持的德行觀念有異，正向心理學宣稱要為品德教育方案的設計提供理論架構的承諾並無法實現。儘管如此，它廣義的德行觀驅使我們重新思考究竟好品格是什麼（其具體內涵為何）？以及單純從倫理意義上來設想好品格是否恰當？這狹義的品德教育正是當前所推動的。本文將指出英國伯明罕大學品德與美德銀禧中心所推行的品格教育正往正向心理學擘劃的新方向邁進。此外，正向心理學所提出的招牌優勢概念有助於闡明當代品德教育遺漏的重要課題－品格個殊化。研究原創性／價值：本研究價值在於揭示正向心理學這門新興品格科學的重要論點－培養德行以達成幸福，實與古希臘幸福論所持「德福一體」這個古老哲學學說益趣相同。重訪此重要論題揭櫫哲學智慧與科學知識皆對於德福關係同感興趣。教育政策建議或實務意涵：本研究重要建議與實務意涵主要有二。首先在品德教育教學實務上，正向心理學闡明德行培養與展現對於個人幸福之價值，有助於補足當前品德教育之證成流於工具性論證之不足。本研究指出，可從德行對於個人幸福的意義，來回應學生提出「為何要有德」、「德行為何值得追求」等提問。其次在教育政策上，正向心理學內涵豐富的品格優勢清單驅使我們重新思考「好品格」的意義，以及當前品德教育單純側重於「道德德行」之涵養是否不夠完整與適當的問題。關於此，英國伯明罕大學品德與美德銀禧中心倡導的品格教育可供對照。英文摘要：Purpose: The age-old controversial doctrine the 'unity of virtue and Happiness' (UVH) seems reviving in positive psychology (PP), when PP claims to demonstrate that positive traits, i.e. character strengths and virtues, play a decisive role in promoting authentic happiness. The author argues that people concerned with character education (CE) should inquire into PP's arguments about the relation between virtue and happiness because they can respond to the questions 'why be virtuous' and 'why is virtue worth pursuing'. These fundamental issues are seldom addressed by contemporary CE discourses. Accordingly, this paper is aimed to analyse PP's conceptions of virtue and happiness, to examine PP's elaboration on the relationship between virtue and happiness, and finally, to revisit and draw important implications the doctrine of UVH has for contemporary CE from the perspective of PP. Design/methodology/approach: This study belongs to philosophy of education in nature and the major methods applied are conceptual analysis, argument analysis, and implication interpretation. Certain core concepts involved in the relationship between virtue and happiness developed by PP are analysed by investigating their respective connotations and their relations. Next, an argument analysis is conducted on PP's argument for UVH. Finally, some important implications for contemporary CE are derived from this new interpretation of UVH. Findings: After an examination of PP's argument for UVH, it is found that, given the different conceptions of virtue held by PP and CE, PP's promise to provide a theoretical framework for design of character development programmes cannot be kept. Nonetheless, PP's conception of virtue in a broad sense urges us to reconsider what good character amounts to and whether it is appropriate to conceive of good character in a purely ethical sense, where CE is currently proceeding. The author points out that the CE proposed by The Jubilee Centre for Character & Virtues, University of Birmingham, UK, is developed in the new direction of PP. Besides, the concept of signature strength helps to illustrate a missing piece of the puzzle of contemporary CE, the idea of character individualisation. Originality/value: The distinctive value of this study lies in revealing the fact that cultivating virtue to achieve happiness, the central thesis of the new character science PP, is in actuality in tune with the philosophical doctrine of UVH proposed by ancient eudaimonism. For that matter, it is shown that both philosophical wisdom and scientific knowledge are interested in the intricate relationship between virtue and happiness. Recommendations for Educational Policy / Implications in Practice: Two important implications it has for CE are to be noted. Firstly, with regard to the teaching of CE, PP's elaboration on the value of virtue cultivation and exercise for personal happiness helps to make up for the deficient tendency to instrumental arguments that current support for contemporary CE has. In response to students' queries 'why be virtuous' and 'why is virtue worth pursuing', personal happiness is arguably an answer. Secondly, in terms of educational policy, the much richer list of character strengths made by PP compels us to reconsider what a good character amounts to and specifically whether it is complete and appropriate for contemporary CE to simply centre on inculcation of moral virtues. In this regard, the new version of CE proposed by The Jubilee Centre for Character & Virtues, University of Birmingham, UK is an important point of reference.起始頁-結束頁：47-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201812_26(4).00023篇名：ANALYSIS OF PEER-TEACHER, STUDENT, AND PARENT EXPECTATIONS OF TEACHERS AS REFLECTED IN THE KOREAN TEACHER EVALUATION FOR PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT作者：Hee-Jun Choi;Ji-Hye Park關鍵字：teacher evaluation system;teachers' professional development;expectations for teachers from multiple stakeholders;Korean teacher evaluation system;teacher evaluation policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Purpose: In this study, we thoroughly analyzed qualitative data obtained from peer-teachers, students, and students' parents with the aim of identifying the three groups' expectations of the evaluated teachers and determining the differences in their perceptions. Design/methodology/approach: To achieve these aims, we analyzed 6,000 statements made by the three groups (peer-teachers, students, and their parents) in the teacher evaluation for professional development conducted in 2015, and adopted content analysis approaches including the emergent coding method and matrix coding. To ensure the trustworthiness of the data, we rigorously followed the steps suggested by Haney, Russell, Gulek, and Fierros (1998). Findings: We found that the three groups' expectations for teachers fit into fifteen basic themes that we divided into four categories - ”teaching and learning,” ”counselling and guidance,” ”relationships with students,” and ”work attitudes.” The specific themes within these four categories were as follows: effective teaching, various learning activities, subject matter expertise, instructional media, proper assignments and tests, correcting students' behavioral issues, communicating with parents, career guidance, safety supervision, approachability and kindness, encouraging students, nondiscrimination, enthusiasm, collaborating with peer-teachers, and professional development. In addition, we identified the distinct gaps between the three groups' responses. Originality/value: Significantly, this study empirically showed that the three major primary and secondary school stakeholders (peer-teachers, students, and students' parents) have clear but distinct expectations for how teachers perform their four essential roles: teaching and learning, counselling and guidance, relationships with student, and work attitudes. These findings may have implications for teachers' instructional strategies, emerging expectations for teachers, and the current teacher evaluation for professional development.起始頁-結束頁：83-105資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201812_26(4).00034篇名：書評：《學習共同體的單元教學研究：永續性學校改革的引導》並列篇名：REVIEW OF EISUKE SAITO'S ”LESSON STUDY FOR LEARNING COMMUNITY: A GUIDE TO SUSTAINABLE SCHOOL REFORM”作者：阮孝齊(Hsiao-Chi Juan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：107-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201812_26(4).00045篇名：從自我決定理論探究社經弱勢大學生之生涯決定並列篇名：CAREER DECISIONS BY SOCIOECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED UNIVERSITY STUDENTS ACCORDING TO SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY作者：楊育儀(Peter Yang);陳秀芬(Siou-Fen Chen)關鍵字：方案發展與評估;生涯決定狀態;生涯促進方案;弱勢學生;基本心理需求;需求評估;Program development and evaluation;career decision status;career enhancement program;disadvantaged students;basic psychological needs;needs assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本研究採用自我決定理論，主要在檢視「基本心理需求滿足和挫折量表」對弱勢大學生之適用性，探討社經弱勢大學生的基本需求滿足和挫折對於生涯決定之影響，同時分析參與生涯促進方案之效應。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究針對參與釣竿自立方案的社經弱勢大學生進行問卷調查（n = 375），以結構方程模式分析「基本心理需求滿足和挫折量表」對於弱勢大學生之適用性，並探究影響生涯決定之因素。研究發現或結論：首先，驗證性因素分析結果指出，「基本心理需求滿足和挫折量表」對弱勢大學生的適用性得到支持。此外，與尚未參與方案的釣竿生相較，已參與方案的釣竿生有較佳的基本需求滿足及較低的需求挫折感受（β = .14, p ＜ .05; β = 23, p ＜ .001），但僅有需求滿足對於生涯決定之正向影響得到支持（β = .54, p ＜ .001），而需求挫折對於生涯決定之影響並未達到顯著（p ＞ .05）；關於需求挫折如何影響生涯決定，仍有待後續研究進行探究。研究原創性／價值：本研究係針對弱勢大學生生涯決定議題進行之探究，除了說明參與生涯促進方案對於他們在基本心理需求滿足、挫折和生涯決定的影響以外，同時討論基本心理需求評估在生涯輔導諮商實務及方案發展之重要性。英文摘要：Purpose: This study applied self-determination theory to investigate the applicability of the Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction and Frustration Scale (BPNSFS) to socioeconomically disadvantaged university students. Furthermore, it explored the effect of such students' basic psychological need satisfaction and frustration on their career decisions, as well as analyzed the influence of their participation in career enhancement programs on said decisions. Design/methodology/approach: A questionnaire was distributed to socioeconomically disadvantaged university students who participated in the ”Youth Capacity Building Program (n = 375).” A structural equation model was employed to examine the applicability of the BPNSFS to the disadvantaged students. Finally, the factors affecting their career decisions were analyzed. Findings: The results of a confirmatory factor analysis validated the applicability of the BPNSFS to socioeconomically disadvantaged university students. The students in the program exhibited higher basic need satisfaction and lower frustration scores than those who did not participate in the program (β = .14, p ＜ .05; β = -.23, p ＜ .001). However, whereas the positive effect of satisfaction on career decisions was significant (β = .54, p ＜ .001), the effect of frustration on career decisions was nonsignificant (p ＞ .05). The effect of basic need frustration on career decisions remains to be explored in further research. Originality/value: This investigation clarified the influence of a career enhancement program on the basic need satisfaction and frustration of socioeconomically disadvantaged university students as well as on their career decisions. In addition, the importance of basic psychological needs assessments to career counseling practice and program development was discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201809_26(3).00016篇名：以協作敘事取徑促進幼教師專業發展歷程之探究並列篇名：THE PROCESS OF APPLYING COLLABORATIVE-NARRATIVE APPROACH TO FACILITATE PRESCHOOL TEACHERS' PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT作者：張素貞(Su-Chen Chang);劉美慧(Mei-hui Liu)關鍵字：幼教師;協作敘事取徑;教師專業發展;敘事探究;preschool teachers;collaborative-narrative approach;teachers' professional development;narrative inquiry期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：研究者為師資培育工作者，長期關注教師的專業發展，企圖在現有的幼教師專業發展方案之下，以協作敘事的方式，提供另一種促進幼教師專業發展的取徑。本研究旨在透過協作敘事取徑，促進幼教師的專業發展，探究其歷程以再概念化幼教師專業發展取徑。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採敘事探究方法，邀請八位幼兒園教師，組成幼教師協作敘事成長團體，共同開展協作敘事取徑的幼教師專業發展歷程。本團體的運作兼重生命故事與教學故事的敘說，透過閱讀與敘說、教學難題的討論、團體的互動、對話與反思，共歷時一年半的協作敘事。研究者主要規劃與運作團體的議程、營造團體的氣氛、促發協作者敘說及引導協作者進行討論與對話。透過觀察、訪談與文件分析的方式蒐集運作歷程中的資料，並運用主題分析法加以分析。研究發現或結論：本研究結果發現，協作敘事取徑啟動幼教師專業發展的關鍵要素，包括教師主體性的關注、團體凝聚力的建立、幼教師身分的覺知與建構、反思性思維的運作以及協作者、研究者和專業文本三方視域的對話與交融。再概念化在職幼教師專業發展取徑的內涵為以關懷和開展生命為根基，「教師←→學習者」身分的跨越與混種，透過多重回觀、反思與解構將經驗意義化，從對話中學習，多元方法的運作方式，以及知識是藉由三重敘事發展而來，亦即不斷的反思、對話、建構與行動的循環歷程。研究原創性／價值：以協作敘事取徑促進教師專業發展的實務運作，在國外的實徵研究較多，但較少運用在臺灣的幼教師專業發展中。本研究發展出適合本土學校文化與脈絡的協作敘事教師專業發展策略，可以提供師資培育者在規劃幼教師專業發展課程，與在職的幼教師專業研習課程時另一種可行的途徑。英文摘要：Purpose: As teacher educators, we have long concerned ourselves with teachers' professional development. In this study, a collaborative-narrative approach was used to facilitate the professional development of preschool teachers. The aims were to explore the process of a collaborative-narrative approach, and to reconceptualize the preschool teachers' professional development. Design/methodology/approach: This study adopted narrative inquiry. Researchers invited eight preschool teachers to form a ”collaborative-narrative group,” which focused on the narration of life and teaching stories in a course that spanned 18 months long. The group involved reading and narration, group interactions, dialogues and reflections, and discussions of difficulties encountered during teaching. Researchers' responsibilities were to encourage and guide the collaborators' engagement in narration, dialogues, and discussions. Data involving the process of the collaborative-narrative group were collected through observations, interviews, and document analysis, followed by a thematic analysis method to examine the collected data. Findings: The study results showed that the key factors of the collaborative-narrative approach that facilitated the professional development of preschool teachers included the teachers' subjective attention, establishment of team cohesion, awareness and establishment of the teachers' identity, and reflective thinking conducted through a three-way interaction between the collaborators, researchers, course text. The approach for developing in-service preschool teachers' professional development education was reconceptualized through the idea of caring for and expanding life. This approach helped teachers develop a border-crossing identity between teacher and learner. Moreover, multiple reflections were conducted to deconstruct experience and convert it to knowledge. Finally, a diversified method was applied to acquire knowledge through triple narrative, reflections, dialogues, constructions, and actions. Originality/value: Collaborative-narrative approach was seldom applies in preschool teachers professional development in Taiwan. This study develops the strategies of collaborative-narrative approach based on local school culture and context and proposes the recommendations for teacher education programs for preschool teachers.起始頁-結束頁：35-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201809_26(3).00027篇名：學校本位課程發展：兼論理念學校與教學卓越獎之助益並列篇名：ANALYSIS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF SCHOOL-BASED CURRICULUM: THE BENEFIT FROM CHARTER SCHOOL AND TEACHING EXCELLENCE作者：陳建志(Chien-Chih Chen)關鍵字：理念學校;教學卓越;學校本位課程;環境教育;charter school;teaching excellence;school-based curriculum;environmental education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本研究之個案學校以關注環境生態議題及提升學生學習成就為其特色，研究目的為評析其學校本位課程之推展歷程及推動成效。研究設計／方法／取徑：藉由訪談參與之校長、主任、教師、社區志工與學生等成員、評析學校相關文本、觀察實際現場等方式蒐集資料，並分析執行此課程方案之成效。研究發現或結論：學校本位課程之推展歷程依序為萌芽生根準備期、磨合溝通觸動期、策略凝聚發展期、深耕豐收精進期；在其推展歷程中，各階段之關鍵性因素與作為均會成為課程發展的驅動力；以及本套課程方案能對學校親師生與當地環境永續產生助益。最後，則對個案學校未來課程發展提出建議。研究原創性／價值：個案學校因地處偏遠，校園環境生態豐富，雖過往學生學業成就不高，然教師近年來戮力於環境教育與領域學習之聯結，落實學校本位課程之推展，克服學校位處偏鄉，家長對教育關心程度不足、學生領域學習表現較弱的困境，此課程方案更在2016年獲教育部教學卓越金質獎之肯定。該校自2003年開始便有教師自發性組成社群，並將「環境教育」議題納入學校本位課程中，2014學年度下學期更以「環境之生物多樣性」學校本位課程審核通過，成為屏東縣理念學校。而經過2015學年度課發會後，學校成員將課程進行階層性的安排與規劃，其內容首重聯結實際的情境脈絡、強化學生的參與及主動學習，其推展歷程值得探究。教育政策建議或實務意涵：在2017年底偏遠地區學校教育發展條例通過後，偏鄉教育受到更多重視，個案學校之整體課程推動情形值得探究，更可成為欲推行是類課程學校之參酌依據。英文摘要：Purpose: This research of the case school focuses on environmental issues and how to improve students’ learning achievements. The goals of this research are to analyze process and the effectiveness of school-based curriculum. Design/methodology/approach: We interviewed the principal, directors, teachers, community volunteers, and students involved in the promotion of the school, collected the relative data of the program’s implementation, observed the educational field, analyzed the effectiveness of the curriculum and made the conclusions. Findings: The conclusions are as follows: 1. In this case study, the development process of school-based curriculum includes: (1) budding-root-preparatory phase, (2) running-communication-touching phase, (3) cohesive-strategies-developing phase, and (4) deep-plowing-harvest-sophisticated phase. 2. In the development process, the key factors and behaviors will be the driving force to its development. 3. This curriculum program will benefit parents, teachers, students, and local environmental development. Finally, the suggestions are offered to this case study. Originality/value The case school is located in a remote area and its campus environment is abundant in ecology. Although students’ learning achievements were not high in the past, teachers have focused on the linkage between environmental education and fields learning in recent years. In 2016, this program also won the golden award of teaching excellence by overcoming the plight of the school’s remote location, the weakness of family, and the weakness of students’ achievement. Ever since 2003, teachers have spontaneously organized the learning community and included the “environmental education” in the school-based curriculum. In the second semester of 2014, this school was selected as Pingtung's charter school due to its biological diversity curriculum. Through the curriculum development committee meeting in 2015, teachers arranged and planned the courses hierarchically. This program focused on connecting with the real situation, strengthening students' participation and active learning. Implications for policy/practice: With the implementing of the remote school’s development act in the end of 2017, people pay more attention to remote schools’ education. After we come to further understand the context of this curriculum, it can serve as a reference for schools.起始頁-結束頁：69-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201809_26(3).00038篇名：書評：評介《亞里斯多德式品格教育》（2015）並列篇名：Book Review: REVIEW OF KRISTJAN KRISTJANSSON'S ”ARISTOTELIAN CHARACTER EDUCATION”作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：107-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201806_26(3).00049篇名：論十二年國教課綱審議程序的正當行政程序要求並列篇名：A STUDY ON THE LEGITIMATE REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE DUE PROCESS OF THE DELIBERATION TO THE CURRICULUM GUIDELINES OF 12-YEAR BASIC EDUCATION作者：許育典(Yue-Dian Hsu);許文耀(Wen-Yao Hsu)關鍵字：正當行政程序;十二年國教課綱;教育基本權;課程審議委員會;Administrative due process;curriculum guidelines of 12-year Basic Education;the Fundamental education right;Curriculum committee期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本文旨在研究十二年國民基本教育課程綱要的審議程序中，需要具備的正當行政程序要求，同時也處理十二年國教課綱法律性質的爭議，試圖建構課綱審議程序的正當行政程序要求與釐清課綱的性質，達到憲法保障教育基本權的目的。研究設計／方法／取徑：本文採用文獻探討方式，透過建構十二年國教課綱的正當行政程序，檢視現行的課綱審議程序是否有達到此項要求。研究發現或結論：首先，本文認為課綱至少應屬相對法律保留事項，並將課綱的法律性質定性為法規命令。其次，本文確立正當行政程序有其憲法上的依據，並依此開展正當行政程序的內涵。最後，本文以上述理論的建構，檢討現行十二年國教課綱審議程序，認為現行十二年國教課綱的審議程序，違反公正作為義務中的組織適法、對受告知權漏未規範、違反聽證權的要求、應負說明理由的義務。研究原創性／價值：十二年國教課綱的審議，現正如火如荼地展開，針對課綱審議程序的正當行政程序要求，則較少見諸於法學文獻中，作為初步的嘗試，本文希望能對課綱的審議提供些許建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This article aims at studying the current Administrative Due Process on the deliberation of the Curriculum Guidelines of 12-year Basic Education. In the meanwhile, the requirements of the legitimate administrative process and the disputes over the legal nature of the curriculum guidelines are clarified for establishing a cornerstone of achieving the goal of Constitutional protection for the fundamental education right. Design/methodology/approach: Taking literature review as a pathway to analyze the archives of records, execution of administration, and the underlying ideology, the realization of the essences implemented in the Curriculum Guidelines of 12-year Basic Education is therefore comprehensively examined by constructing its Administrative Due Process. Findings: Overall, this study contends that the curriculum guidelines should be considered as an instance of Relative Legal-Reserved Affairs to the least extent, and its legal nature ought to belong to Legal Order. In addition, this article confirms a constitutional basis for the Administrative Due Process, and we can deploy the extension of its legal connotation accordingly. In conclusion, the deliberation of the Curriculum Guidelines of 12-year Basic Education in operation violates the duty to act fairly, the right to be informed, the right to be heard, and the duty to give reasons. Originality/value: It is witnessed that the deliberation of the Curriculum Guidelines of 12-year Basic Education is proceeding in full swing; however, it still lacks of thoughtful discussion in the field of law about the legitimate requirements for the deliberation of Administrative Due Process. As an initial attempt, this article puts forward useful advises to the deliberation of the curriculum guidelines from the perspectives of process of deliberation, Constitutional education right, and completeness of law.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201806_26(2).000110篇名：家庭生命事件與人類動力對於貧窮少年學業表現的影響：以臺灣兒童暨家庭扶助基金會經濟扶助對象為例並列篇名：EFFECTS OF FAMILY LIFE EVENTS AND HUMAN AGENCY ON THE ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT OF YOUTH IN POVERTY: A CASE STUDY ON ECONOMIC SERVICE RECEIVERS SUPPORTED BY TAIWAN FUND FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES作者：謝志龍(Chih-Lung Hsieh)關鍵字：貧窮少年;家庭生命事件;人類動力;學業表現;youth in poverty;family life events;human agency;academic achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：研究目的：本研究應用生命歷程理論探索貧窮少年的學業表現，期望回答貧窮家庭的不幸生命事件（包括人口事件與收入事件）對於貧窮少年學業排名的影響，並且也檢視貧窮少年的人類動力在這個過程中所能發揮的效果。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究藉由路徑分析檢證因果模型所涉及的理論假設，並探討當中的關聯性。分析資料來源是臺灣貧窮兒少資料庫（TDCYP）於2009、2011 與2013 年所進行的三波調查。研究發現或結論：研究結果如下：第一，貧窮家庭所發生的收入事件愈多，貧窮少年對現況滿足程度將會降低，但對未來教育期望反而提升。第二，貧窮少年的人類動力愈強，包括對生活現況的滿足程度愈大、勤學用功的程度愈高、對未來教育的期望愈好時，其學業排名將會愈佳。綜上，本文描繪出影響貧窮少年學業排名的因果路徑：收入事件會激勵貧窮少年對未來教育期望的正向期許，此正向影響將提高後續所能達成的學業排名；但收入事件同時也會促成對現況滿足程度的負向評價，此負向影響將持續發生效果而又削弱後續取得的學業排名。研究原創性／價值：本研究的意義在於證實家庭收入事件將持續累積既有的不平等而對於貧窮少年的學業表現產生影響，但貧窮少年的人類動力是縮小這個劣勢累積歷程的契機。英文摘要：Purpose This study employed life course theory to investigate the academic achievement of youth in poverty to reflect the impact of unfortunate life events (such as demographic events and income events) on the ranking of the academic performance of youth in poverty, and to examine the effect contributed by the human agency of the youth during this process. Design/methodology/approach Path analysis was adopted to examine the theories and hypotheses in the causal model and to discuss the relationship of them. Three waves of data－2009, 2011, and 2013－were obtained from the Taiwan Database of Children and Youth in Poverty (TDCYP) for analysis. Findings Results are as follows. First, when the amount of income events happening to families in poverty increased, the youth’s satisfaction with the status quo decreased, whereas their expectations regarding future education increased. Second, stronger human agency of the youth in poverty, including high satisfaction toward the status quo in life, studying hard, and positive expectation toward future education, led to higher academic achievement. From the aforementioned observations, this study depicted the causal paths affecting the academic performance rankings of youth in poverty: income events inspired youth in poverty to have positive expectations regarding future education, and this positive impact improved the rankings of their later academic performance. However, income events simultaneously decreased the youth’s satisfaction concerning the status quo, and this negative impact had a lasting effect that worsened the rankings of their later academic performance. Originality/value The study was meaningful in that it verified that family income events tend to exacerbate the existing inequality, and such exacerbation was manifested on the academic achievement of youth in poverty. However, the human agency of the youth in poverty provides an opportunity to ameliorate this accumulated disadvantage.起始頁-結束頁：25-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.201806_26(2).000201篇名：臺灣大專學生線上討論中文離題字詞之探討並列篇名：A Study on Chinese Words or Phrases Used for Online Off-Topic Discussions by College Students in Taiwan作者：吳聲毅(Sheng-Yi Wu)關鍵字：電腦支持協作學習;線上討論;離題;computer-supported collaborative learning;online discussion;off-topic期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：透過線上討論活動進行網路同儕合作學習是近幾年來備受重視的一種學習方式。然而，在一個沒有教師經常介入的線上討論環境中，離題討論訊息的數量過多是目前推動線上討論活動常遭遇的問題。雖然目前已有相關研究提出各種機制或是演算法的改進以偵測離題討論訊息的發生。然而，不管採用何種方法，如何先判定該字詞是離題討論的內容是必須先解決的問題。因此，本研究選取七篇教學實驗對象為臺灣大專生且已發表於SSCI期刊上的離題討論訊息作為分析的內容。彙整後，共計有15229個離題討論訊息，經透過德爾菲法後，從中分析出260個常被歸屬於離題討論的字詞，這些字詞將可提供後續相關研究採用。英文摘要：Online discussion has been an important method strongly valued for carrying out collaborative peer learning on the Internet in recent years. However, one of the problems appears to be the quantity of off-topic messages while engaging in the online discussion environment without teacher's intervention. Up to now, several related studies proposing various improved mechanisms or algorithms to detect the occurrence of off-topic messages. Nevertheless, the problem coming before the adoption of any method and in need of being solved is how to determine words or phrases as off-topic content. Therefore, this study covers and analyzes the content based on seven Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI) papers which explore off-topic messages used by college students who were selected as the subjects for the teaching experiments. The results show that a total of 15229 off-topic messages are found from the students' online discussions. After having a discussion with the Delphi Method, further analysis was made to determine that 260 words or phrases are classified as off-topic messages constantly appearing in online discussions. These words or phrases found in this study can be served as a reference for follow-up research.起始頁-結束頁：49-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20160408020032篇名：從心因性數位桌遊探討個人決策風格對於價值觀與生涯發展的影響並列篇名：Using Psychogenic Digital Board Game to Investigate the Influence of Personal Decision-Making Style to Value and Career Development Choice作者：許于仁(Yu-Jen Hsu);楊美娟(Mei-Chuan Yang);劉婉婷(Wan-Ting Liu);張曉洋(Hsiao-Yang Chang)關鍵字：心因性;生涯發展;決策風格;數位桌遊;價值觀;psychogenic;career development;decision-making style;digital board game;value期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：每個人於兒童期、青少年期、壯年期及老年期所遭遇的情境不盡相同，且所要追求的目標也不同，相對地，面對的決策也一定不同。現代桌上遊戲愈來愈盛行，將數位科技融入桌遊可增加趣味性與創新性。因此，本研究依據Erikson的人格發展論開發一套心因性數位桌遊，將玩家依據決策風格量表分成主動決策與被動決策類型；透過數位桌遊、青少年生涯發展量表及Schwartz的價值觀量表協助玩家生涯發展與價值觀之影響。研究結果發現，此款數位桌遊能給予青少年生涯規劃的刺激，另外，主動決策者對於「開放」價值觀與生涯態度上有顯著差異；被動決策者對於「自我增進」價值觀有顯著差異。英文摘要：Human development includes childhood, adolescence, maturity and old age. Each of these periods encounters challenging situations, and since the desired goals differ, the decisions must also differ. Modern table games have become more popular; the digital technology embedded into board games increases the fun and innovation. Therefore, this study on basic of personality development, developed by Erikson, develops a psychogenic digital board game. The players are divided according to active and passive decision-making styles by a decision-making style scale. Through the digital board game, Teenagers Career Development Scale and Schwartz Value Scale help to assist players in regard to Career Development and values. The results show that Life Choice can stimulate teenagers in their career planning. In addition, positive decision makers for the ”open” values and attitudes of career planning exhibit significant differences. Passive decision makers in relation to ”self-promotion” values show significant differences.起始頁-結束頁：65-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20160408020043篇名：Investigating Collaborative Problem-Solving Processes by Analyzing Sequential Patterns in a Synchronous Discussion Task並列篇名：網路合作問題解決歷程之探究──以線上同步討論活動為例作者：林哲立(Che-Li Lin)關鍵字：sequential analysis;online synchronous discussion;collaborative problem solving;序列分析;網路合作問題解決;線上同步討論期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：This study aims to explore the sequential patterns of the online problem solving process, and further explores the differences between high- and low-performing teams. A total of 76 high school students participated, and sequential analysis was applied to analyze their behavioral patterns. Semi-structured interviews were conducted to further understand the perceptions of the participants. The results indicated that the high performing teams exhibited significant ”Organizing and forming conclusions” in the process of online problem solving, while the low-performing teams displayed a significant sequence of ”Propose, define, and clarify problem” to ”Provide solutions or information for possible answers.” The interview data suggest several underlying reasons for the poor results of the low-performing teams including the fact that they were not used to taking part in online discussion activities.英文摘要：本研究之目的在探討網路合作問題解決之互動模式，並進一步比較高表現與低表現之小組在互動模式上的差異情形。研究對象為對臺灣地區北部兩所普通高中一年級兩班學生共76人。線上同步討論活動在電腦教室中實施共80分鐘，採取隨機分派的方式進行分組，每組約3∼4人；線上同步討論之任務為規劃一個迎新社團活動，包括行程、活動規劃以及預算等。本研究於線上討論活動後一週進行個別訪談，以了解參與者對此活動之主觀經驗與想法。線上討論互動模式之分析，採取序列分析的方法比較高表現與低表現小組在互動模式的差異情形。結果發現，高表現小組在互動模式上展現較多歸納與形成結論的行為；低表現小組在互動模式上展現初階段的序列行為；同時根據訪談資料，更進一步了解高表現與低表現小組成員的經驗與建議，例如某些低表現小組成員表示不習慣網路互動等。依據結果本研究提出未來研究與教學之建議。起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20160108010014篇名：探索明日創作活動於國小學生寫作表現的影響：從數位學校到實踐學校並列篇名：Explore the Effect of ”Tomorrow's Creation” Activity on Elementary School Students: The Experience from BYOD School to Practical School作者：張菀真(Wan-Chen Chang);廖長彥(Calvin Chang-Yen Liao);陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan)關鍵字：主題閱讀;同儕回應;自由寫;電腦支援寫作;讀寫結合;syntopical reading;peer response;free writing;computer supported writing;reading-writing connection期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：運用科技輔助學生寫作學習已行之有年，卻未能落實於大多數的學校，原因可能在於寫作大多附屬在國語文科目之下且未獲得重視，或是國小學生被認為較不具有運用科技輔助學習的能力。本研究團隊長期在一數位學校推行科技輔助學生學科學習，寫作學習也有相關的課程作為鷹架輔助學生獲得線上寫作的能力，為了解當線上寫作課程推行至實踐學校時，是否能提升學生的寫作表現，以及可能遭遇的困境，故本研究採用明日創作模式與平臺試行於一暑期寫作營，此模式包括「讀促創」與「聊促修」等活動。研究對象為國小三年級至五年級的28位學生，且其中七所小學校長輪流擔任寫作營教師，在為期三週連續15天的活動中，學生完成五篇作文。結果發現，學生寫作的字數與平均詞彙量持續提升，句子合併測驗與打字的後測表現顯著高於前測，而訪談顯示學生認為同儕回應有助於提升作文品質。與數位學校相比，學生的打字速度較落後，但整體來說學生對線上寫作方式具有正面看法。此外，本研究討論運用明日創作模式於實踐學校進行寫作學習的助益與困難，並針對教學與研究提出後續建議與限制。英文摘要：The trend of technology assisted writing learning has been followed for years; however, it cannot be practiced in most schools. The reasons may contain: 1) writing subject could not be isolated form Chinese art; 2) elementary students are considered as they don't own the ability to use technology to learning. Our research team have been conducted technology assisted learning in a digital elementary school for years and design a serial of instruction to scaffold students' online writing. This study is to investigate the effects of a writing model with an online platform which was entitled ”Tomorrow's Creation,” and to explore the benefit and difficulty of practicing this model into general schools. The study was conducted in a summer school in the period of three weeks. The subjects were 3rd to 5th grader students recruited from neighbor elementary schools in Taoyuan and the instructors of the summer school were the principals of the seven elementary schools. The results showed that the character numbers and word number of writing productions were increasing and both sentences combining posttest and typing rate posttest were significant better than pretests. According to interview, students thought they get most help from peer response, which could improve their writing quality, in contrast, the most difficulty was typing rate. But they still more like online writing than pencil-pen writing. Besides, this study discussed the benefit and difficulty of applying Tomorrow's Creation model into general schools and provided suggestion and limitation of teaching and researching.起始頁-結束頁：25-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20160108010025篇名：當「研究法」遇見數位學習：教與學翻轉的經驗談並列篇名：As Methodology Encounters Digital Learning: Experiencing Flipped Teaching作者：陳佩英(Pei-Ying Chen);黃天仕(Tien-Shih Huang);許美鈞(Mei-Chun Hsu);侯仲宸(Chung-Chen Hou)關鍵字：即時回饋系統;協作學習;近側發展區;混成學習;翻轉教室;instant response system;collaborative learning;zone of proximal development;blended learning;flipped classroom期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：為使學習者能有效掌握社會科學研究法理論與操作型定義，並提升課堂討論與學習之深度，研究團隊將翻轉教室概念融入「教育與社會科學研究法」課程設計，採用能以手機、平板與電腦操作的兩種雲端數位平臺─Zuvio和Edmodo，發展行動學習與無所不在學習之理念，延伸學習者的學習行為和擴大學習環境。本研究以數位雲端教學平臺為基礎，採用Vygotsky近側發展區的原則，以協作模式結合課堂即時回饋系統，使學習者的學習能藉由課堂討論所蘊含的群體心智發展及學習平臺的便利性，提升個人高層次思維與理論應用能力。研究團隊透過課堂觀察、學生焦點團體訪談了解學生的數位學習經驗，嘗試融合翻轉教室與協作學習的方式，使教與學的互動品質有所提升，營造教學相長的學習環境，進而提高「研究法」有效學習的可能。英文摘要：In the domain of research methodology, it is challenging but crucial for beginners to develop the understanding of the interplay between theory and practice. Therefore, based on the teaching philosophy of ”flipped classroom” and ”zone of proximal development,” the research team uses two digital teaching platforms, Zuvio and Edmodo, with the collaborative learning approach in the class of ”Research Method of Education and Social Science.” Through this way, each student’s cognition development could be promoted by the empowerment of collective mind and the convenience of digital teaching platforms. Meanwhile, it is highly possible to enhance higher order thinking and pragmatic skills of students by means of action learning and interactive learning. Through participatory observation and focus group interview of students, the research team revised the teaching and learning practices weekly in order to fulfil the idea of mobile learning and ubiquitous learning. The experimentation of this course was anticipated to create a reciprocal learning environment for both teacher and students, broadening the depth and breadth in learning to achieve the goal of effective ”learner-centered” learning.起始頁-結束頁：51-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20160108010036篇名：融入設計思考於嚴肅教育遊戲的設計歷程及對科技學科教學知識的影響：以職前教師為例並列篇名：The Integration of Design Thinking into the Process of Developing a Serious Educational Game and Its Influence on Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge: Taking the Case of a Pre-Service Teacher As an Example作者：林延諭(Yan-Yu Lin);鄭夢慈(Meng-Tzu Cheng)關鍵字：科技學科教學知識;設計思考;嚴肅教育遊戲;technological pedagogical content knowledge;design thinking;serious educational game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：8卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討一位職前教師如何融入設計思考於嚴肅教育遊戲的設計製作，並進一步探討此歷程對於職前教師的科技學科教學知識有何影響。本研究以生物科職前教師自我研究為視角，質性分析一個嚴肅教育遊戲團隊的製作歷程，研究結果發現：一、提出問題為融合設計思考於遊戲製作歷程之中心；二、隨著嚴肅教育遊戲發展階段的轉換，其設計思考的整合運用方式應隨之調整；三、對於科技學科教學知識之影響有學科理解、課程規劃及適當呈現之面向；四、推論其嚴肅教育遊戲設計歷程中，運用不同設計思考對於科技學科教學知識之影響會有所不同。英文摘要：This study had a dual purpose. One was to investigate how a pre-service teacher integrated design thinking into the development of an serious educational game (SEG) (which elements of design thinking were needed), and the other was to examine the impact of the integration of design thinking into the process of making an SEG on her technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK). A self-study approach was employed to qualitatively elicit stories on the interactions between design thinking, the process of making an SEG, and TPACK. Four findings were revealed: 1. questioning is a critical element of integrating design thinking into the development of an SEG; 2. the means to integrate design thinking should be flexibly adjusted based on the transitions between different stages of developing an SEG; 3. the integration of design thinking into the development of an SEG affected the pre-service teacher’s TPACK in three different aspects; 4. it is inferred that different elements of design thinking had different impact on the pre-service teacher’s TPACK during the whole process of developing an SEG.起始頁-結束頁：71-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201601080100401篇名：血石油—暴君、暴力及統治世界的規則並列篇名：Blood Oil: Tyrants, Violence, and the Rules that Run the World作者：林竣達(Jiun-Da Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：189-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：周育仁(Yu-Jen Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：半總統制的憲政秩序與權力轉移－臺灣與蒙古的案例研究並列篇名：The Constitutional Order and Power Transformation of Semi-presidetialism: Case Study of Taiwan and Mongolia作者：沈有忠(Yu-Chung Shen);烏凌翔(Rocky Urianghai)關鍵字：半總統制;憲政兩軌;臺灣;蒙古;Semi-presidentialism;Constitutional Bi-Track;Taiwan;Mongolia期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：半總統制已是全世界最多民主國家採用的憲法類型，其中大多數是新興民主國家。因為半總統制是一個憲政雙軌的憲政體制，對新興民主國家而言，民主化之後運作半總統制最常面臨的問題就是體制的運作是偏向總統制或是偏向議會內閣制。就實際經驗而言，這個問題容易受到政黨體系與制度設計共同影響，因此探究政黨體系與制度的特性，成為回答半總統制運作甚至轉型的關鍵變因。臺灣與蒙古是亞洲地區少數運作半總統制的新興民主國家，觀察兩國半總統制憲政體制的運作，臺灣已經大幅度偏向總統主導，而蒙古整體而言仍是憲政兩軌相互拉扯的結構。本文將從政黨體系的特性以及制度的比較，討論臺灣與蒙古在半總統制的體制中實際運作的經驗及其理論意涵。英文摘要：Semi-presidentialism is now found in a plurality of the world’s democracies, especially among the new democracies. Semi-presidentialism is a constitutional bi-track system that shares commonalities with both pure presidentialism and parliamentarism systems of government. In many new democracies, the critical question faced by semi-presidentialism is: who is the de facto head of government? Is it the popularly elected fixed-term President, or the Prime Minister responsible to the legislature? The answer to this question is influenced by both institutional design and party system, two critical independent variables that affect constitutional operations. Taiwan and Mongolia are two newly semi-presidential democracies in Asia. However, the constitutional operation in Taiwan is closer to that found under presidentialism while Mongolia switches between presidentialism and parliamentarism. This paper discusses the theory and practice of semi-presidentialism in Taiwan and Mongolia.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：影響行政部門提案三讀通過之制度性因素－總統、官僚、與政黨並列篇名：Institutional Determinants of Executive Bill Passage: Presidents, Bureaucracy, and Parties作者：邱訪義(Fang-Yi Chiou);李誌偉(Jhih-Wei Lee)關鍵字：行政部門提案;總統;立法院;Executive Bill;President;Legislative Yuan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：在台灣憲政體制下，行政部門的立法提案能否三讀通過，對政府施政表現與民主的維繫有重大影響，然而行政部門提案在審查過程中時常受阻，而其三 讀通過率在不同時期也有相當的變化。對此，本文以制度總統學文獻和邱訪義與李誌偉（2012）提出的多數聯盟立法理論為基礎，探討數個制度層面因素對行政部門提案通過的影響，並蒐集第二至第七屆（1993年到2011年）的行政部門提案資料檢驗相關假設。 經驗分析結果顯示，總統在行政部門提案審查上扮演重要角色，當總統滿意度高、公開宣示立場、兼任黨主席以及較有執政經驗後，行政部門提案有較高的通過率。在官僚運作上，本文發現政府在失業率上表現不佳，以及跨部會之間集體行動的困難，將減低行政部門提案通過率。最後，雖然行政部門整體提案通過率在一致或分立政府時期並無顯著差異，但其對上述制度因素之效果有很大影響。整體而言，本文針對總統角色、行政部門之表現與協調、一致政府等制度因素，如何共同影響行政部門提案通過，提供系統性的分析與新的洞見。英文摘要：While government bills are commonly stalled in Taiwan, with their passage likelihood varying over time, their success has huge impacts on government performance and democratic survival. Based on the institutional presidency literature and Chiou and Lee’s (2012) law-making theory developed for Taiwan’s legislature, this paper explores the effects of various political institutions on government bill passage and empirically analyzes data on government proposals that were drafted from 1993 to 2011. We find that the president plays a key role in the bill’s passage. Government proposals are more likely to be enacted by the legislature when the president is popular, makes his position on the bill known to the public, concurrently serves as party chair, or becomes more adept in governing over time. In terms of bureaucratic capacity, we uncover evidence for how unemployment rates and bureaucratic collective action can undermine the success of government bills. Finally, while there is no significant difference in the bills’ passage rates under either a unified or divided government, whether the government is unified or divided does shape the institutional effects found above. Overall, this first systematic institutional analysis of Taiwan’s executive bills sheds new light on how presidential roles, bureaucratic performance and coordination, and divided government jointly determine the propensity of executive bill passage.起始頁-結束頁：39-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：國際及區域人權公約在憲法解釋中扮演的角色並列篇名：The Role of International / Regional Human Rights Treaties in Constitutional Interpretation作者：黃舒芃(Shu-Perng Hwang)關鍵字：國際人權公約;區域人權公約;基本權;憲法解釋;一元論;框架秩序;International Human Rights Treaties;Regional Human Rights Treaties;Constitutional Rights;Constitutional Interpretation;Monism;Framework Order期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討國際及區域人權公約在憲法解釋中應該扮演的角色。透過對德國當代發展經驗及相關爭議之借鏡與檢討，本文主張：唯有從框架秩序的角度理解國際人權規範，才能在「接納國際人權法對本國基本權的影響」，以及「確保本國基本權的自主形成空間」兩者之間，找到真正的平衡。根據這個觀點，本文除了進一步分析我國憲法學界基於現實條件和理論傳統的不同，如何以乍看之下和德國主流見解大異其趣的方式，面對國際化的潮流，更指出在這樣的表面差異背後，其實蘊含了共同的基本想法，也就是都認為：國際人權規範和本國憲法的基本權規定之間，係處於「異質，因此必須擇一」的關係。然而，這樣的基本想法，不僅忽略了國際人權公約對各國憲法基本權規範的任務授權，也忽略了正是基於這種任務授權，各國憲法的基本權規定在將國際人權公約具體化的過程中，一方面仍保有相當程度的自主形成空間，另一方面也因此而能夠且有義務透過各國自己認為最適合的方式，協助實現國際人權公約所追求人權保障的目標。在這個理論基礎之上，本文以兩公約在我國的實踐脈絡為例，強調在我國特殊的國際處境背景下，少數在我國已完成批准或加入的國際人權公約，適足以作為我國憲法所依循、從而作為憲法解釋與具體化依據的框架秩序。從這個角度而言，兩公約、消除對婦女一切形式歧視公約、身心障礙者權利公約、兒童權利公約，以及在退出聯合國前即已批准的國際勞工公約，對我國憲法秩序來說，都因與我國之間的密切關係而別具特殊意義，其重要性與具體功能因此必須與絕大多數我國未完成批准或加入的國際或區域人權公約有所區分。英文摘要：This article intends to clarify the role of international as well as regional human rights treaties in constitutional interpretation especially from a comparative perspective. Through contrasting developments in Germany on one hand and in Taiwan on the other hand, it elucidates the characteristics of difficulties in Taiwan in comparison with most other countries whose international status is generally recognized by international law. Based on this presupposition, this article continues to analyze why and how the international human rights instruments become important to constitutional interpretation by the Taiwanese Constitutional Court and then criticizes its uncritical reception of all international/regional human rights treaties or conventions. It argues that, while Taiwan encounters problems that are very different from the situation in Germany, the mainstream opinions in Taiwan with regard to the role of international human rights treaties in national law and especially in constitutional interpretation show similar myths with German discussions, as they presuppose (as well) that national law and international law are two qualitatively different and therefore incompatible legal orders, so that the reception of international legal norms inevitably leads to its substitute for national law, including national constitutional law and constitutional rights. From the viewpoint of this article, though, such opinions misconstrue the relationship between international and national legal norms and thereby fail to understand the international and regional human rights treaties as a framework order, which authorizes national laws to concretize international human rights instruments and in this way binds the national legal orders at the same time. This article thus contends that the concrete role of international or regional human rights treaties in constitutional interpretation in Taiwan should depends on whether these human rights treaties have been recognized as the framework order of Taiwanese legal system, that is to say, whether they have been approved by Taiwan’s parliament and in this way incorporated into Taiwanese law.起始頁-結束頁：85-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：理性與直覺－地方多元群體的危機情境意識認知並列篇名：Ration and Intuition: The Cognition of Crisis Situational Awareness among Local Multiple Groups作者：馬群傑(Chun-Chieh Ma);張曉平(Hsiao-Ping Chang)關鍵字：理性;直覺;危機情境意識;危機管理;認知續線理論;危機認知風格矩陣;ration;intuition;crisis situational awareness;crisis management;Cognitive Continuum Theory (CCT);the Cognitive Style Matrix of crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：面臨複合式災害的挑戰，決策者除應存有重大災害降臨的情境意識、專業研判能力與掌握災區資訊外，亦需適切意識到在地群體的理性與直覺危機情境認知趨向，藉以致力於應對多元群體的不同觀點、提供危機應對政策選項。臺南市位處臺灣西部地震帶上，且基於特殊地質之因，故相較於其他縣市，歷年遭受到更多重大天然災害的衝擊。面臨複合式災害的侵襲，地方多元群體所秉持者究為理性或感性之危機情境意識以針對危機事件進行因應，乃令人關注。此外，面對複合式災害等緊急情境，公務部門乃至在地民眾群體間是否具有不同應對意識，或是否存有多元認知落差問題，也成為受人關切的危機管理議題。基於上述，本研究乃規劃在多元群體認知的探究基礎上，進行危機情境意識與危機決策認知之實證研究。進言之，研究乃採取多評準評估之認知分析觀點，透過認知續線理論的準實驗研究，藉以分析地區災害管理政策的危機決策情境認知。經研究分析，結果乃發展出危機情境意識認知續線，藉以探討在面臨複合式災害時，地方多元群體的理性與直覺危機情境認知差異。此外，研究並界定出含括四種象限的危機認知風格矩陣，從而判定出差異化的危機資訊處理模式。最後，研究乃彙整成果與結論，期由此針對臺灣的地區複合型災害應變情勢進行合理性解構，並提出切合多元社會理念的危機情境應對決策建議。英文摘要：When facing the challenges of complex disasters, it is imperative for decisionmakers to develop an overall situational awareness of the crisis, as well as figure out the rational and intuitive cognition of local multiple groups. Compared to other cities located in Taiwan, Tainan has suffered many severe disasters in past decades because it is located in the earthquake zone of western Taiwan. As such, it is a critical issue whether or not Tainan’s multiple groups can make suitable crisis situational awareness-related decisions, and whether there is a gap between the public sector and the citizens’ rational as well as intuitive cognitions. In order to recognize the modes and degrees of cognitive diversity of multiple groups in Tainan, the study proceeds by taking a rational and intuitive decision-making approach. In summary, the study first describes and illustrates the situational awareness of a crisis in Tainan. Then the Cognitive Continuum Theory (CCT) is introduced and tested by using Tainan as a quasi-experiment. Results of this study are as follows. First, studies on domestic policies of crisis situational awareness that apply the concept of CCT would be feasible, rigorous, and suitable. Second, the models of cognition and differences of preferences regarding local development policy can be determined by adopting a quasi-experiment research design via the Cognitive Style Matrix of crisis. The method and results described in this paper should be beneficial to decision-makers exploring local crisis management policy options, so as to de-structure the cognitive differences of public participation effectively, defuse conflicts between multiple decision-makers, and achieve the goal of predicting conflicts caused by various factors.起始頁-結束頁：131-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：書評：Why Elections Fail〔為什麼選舉會失靈〕by Pippa Norris〔皮帕．諾里斯〕（Cambridge University Press, 2015, Paperback, 256 pp., ISBN 97811070679023）並列篇名：A review of Why Elections Fail by Pippa Norris (Cambridge University Press, 2015, Paperback, 256 pp., ISBN 97811070679023)作者：劉正山期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：189-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：世界民主大事紀並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: October-December 2015期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：197-229資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：科技教育融入STEM課程的核心價值與實踐並列篇名：Core Value and Implementation of the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Curriculum in Technology Education作者：范斯淳(Szu-Chun Fan);游光昭(Kuang-Chao Yu)關鍵字：STEM 課程;科技教育;課程設計;STEM curriculum;technology education;curriculum design期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：發展STEM ( Science, Technology, Engineering & Mathematics) 課程是近年來美國教育界所關注的課題，亦普遍受到先進國家的重視。本研究之目的是從美國科技教育學者的觀點，探討科技教育融入STEM課程的核心價值與實踐方式，並據以提出對臺灣科技教育融入STEM課程的可行性及實施建議。本研究採深度訪談的方式訪談11位美國科技教育學者，以瞭解美國科技教育界如何闡述STEM課程之核心價值，及其課程發展與實踐方式。本研究歸納之結論如下：一、科技教育的STEM課程應是一種整合式的教學與學習途徑；二、科技教育的STEM課程應著重在實作學習(hands- on learning)以及心智學習(minds-on learning)的平衡；三、科技教育的STEM課程應以「科技與工程議題」為核心、「工程設計」歷程為架構，而「科學探究」、「數學分析」及「科技工具」羊毛知識整合與應用的要項。據此，本研究針對臺灣邁向12年國教之科技教育提出三點建議：一、國中的科技教育課程著重設計與製作的內涵，培養學生解決生活問題的能力；高中著重工程設計的內涵，培養學生整合STEM知識以解決實務問題的能力；二、臺灣科技教育的STEM課程應提供學生更多設計、探究、分析、測試與綜合評估的學習機會，以建構更完整的整合與應用能力；三、提升臺灣生活科技教師對STEM課程的理解與教學專業知識的準備，是落實STEM課程理念的關鍵課題。英文摘要：The integrative science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) curriculum has become the primary focus of American education reform, as well as a new curriculum development trend in some developed countries in recent years. This study sought to develop a holistic understanding of the core value of the STEM curriculum and its implementation regarding American technology education. This study employed a qualitative in-depth interview method to explore and describe the educational philosophy and core value, curriculum design models, and instructional approaches involved in implementing the STEM curriculum. Eleven technology education experts from the United States were interviewed individually. The results are summarized as follows: (1) From the perspective of American technology education, the STEM curriculum is an integrative teaching and learning approach. (2) The core value of the STEM curriculum is to provide a balance between hands-on learning and minds-on learning. (3) Technological and engineering concerns should be the driving force of STEM-based projects; specifically, ”engineering design” should be the foundation, and ”science inquiry” and ”mathematics analysis” should be the key capabilities for integrating and applying knowledge. From the results, three recommendations are offered for Taiwanese technology education: (1) The inclusion of ”design and make” in the Taiwanese technology education curriculum should be considered as the major content for developing students’ problem-solving abilities, whereas ”engineering design” should be the core content used in high school to develop students’ problem-solving abilities with STEM knowledge; (2) Technology education should provide students with more learning experiences in design, inquiry, analysis, testing, and evaluation; (3) The key to successfully implementing the STEM curriculum is to equip technology teachers with an understanding of the curriculum and the involved teaching approaches.起始頁-結束頁：153-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).062篇名：創意角色認定、工作動機及創造力教學技巧與創意教學行為關係之研究並列篇名：Relationships Among Creative Role Identity, Work Motivation, Instructional Skill for Creativity, and Creative Instructional Behavior作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao);王佩雯(Pei-Wen Wang)關鍵字：工作動機;創造力教學技巧;創意角色認定;創意教學行為;work motivation;instructional skill in creativity;creative role identity;creative instructional behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以臺南市國民小學教師作為研究樣本進行分析，採用問卷調查方式，總計回收34所學校，共331份有效問卷，使用結構方程模式(structural equation modeling, SEM)進行結構模式之檢測並探討各變項間的關係。根據研究結果，獲致以下主要結論：創意角色認定、工作動機以及創造力教學技巧對創意教學行為有正向的直接影響之外，創造力教學技巧在創意角色認定與創意教學行為以及工作動機與創意教學行為間具有中介效果。而工作動機在創意角色認定與創意教學行為間具有中介效果，更重要的是，創意角色認定會透過工作動機的中介，再透過創造力教學技巧的中介而對創意教學行為產生間接效果。根據上述結果，本研究提出具體建議為：直接效果中以工作動機的影響力較大，但是在間接效果中，仍是在創意角色認定、創造力教學技巧及創意教學的關係中扮演著重要的中介角色，所以，若強化教師的創意角色認定，並提升其工作動機以及增進其創造力教學技巧等能力，將可促進教師創意教學行為的展現。英文摘要：This study conducted a questionnaire survey with elementary school teachers from 34 schools in Tainan City. A total of 331 valid questionnaires were retrieved. Structural equation modeling was applied to test the structural model and investigate the relationships among the variables. According to the results, the conclusions are summarized as follows: creative role identity directly influences creative instructional behavior; work motivation directly influences creative instructional behavior; instructional skill in creativity directly influences creative instructional behavior; instructional skill in creativity moderates the relationship between creative role identity and creative instructional behavior; instructional skill in creativity moderates the relationship between work motivation and creative instructional behavior; work motivation moderates the relationship between creative role identity and creative instructional behavior; and work motivation and instructional skill in creativity moderate the relationship between creative role identity and creative instructional behavior. This paper offers a discussion on the proposed model and suggestions for teaching practices and future research.起始頁-結束頁：185-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).073篇名：大學生全球公民素養的自覺評價與結構模型分析之研究並列篇名：Undergraduates’ Self-Evaluation and Structural Equation Model Analysis of Global Citizenship Competences作者：陳淑敏(Amy Shu-Min Chen)關鍵字：大學生;公民素養;全球化;結構方程模式;undergraduate;citizenship;globalization;structural equation model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：面對全球化社會的劇烈轉變之際，大學校院是培育新一代青年具有全球公民素養的重要機構，基於此趨向，本研究運用文獻和理論論述、深度訪談與焦點會議等方法，建構研究問卷後，以全國大學校院學生為對象，進一步以平均數、多變量考驗分析、結構方程模式等統計策略，分析大學生之全球公民素養的表現與影響情形。研究發現包括：一、大學生全球公民素養之表現，在不同構面、觀察變項和個別題項上，存在強烈程度不一的情形，當涉及跨國或全球層次者，得分較為偏低；二、大學生的全球公民素養之認知、德性與行動表現，部分受到性別、學校類型、學生年級別等背景變項的影響；三、大學生的全球公民素養之認知、德性與行動表現上，存在影響路徑機制與效果。研究者提供增進大學生全球公民素養和未來研究實施的建議。英文摘要：Colleges and universities are vital organizations for cultivating the participation of future generations of youths in addressing the dramatic transformations of global society. Regarding this movement, this study employed a literature and theoretical analysis as well as in-depth interviews and focus group meetings to construct a research questionnaire. The questionnaire was administered to undergraduates. The survey data were analyzed through various statistical methods including: analysis of variance, t test, and post hoc and structural equation modeling to explore the undergraduates’ global participation achievements and performance. The research findings are as follows: (1) College students’ achievements in global citizenship competences demonstrated varying levels of performance in each studied dimension; some low scores were observed, particularly regarding global or cross-national problems. (2) The performance of some of the undergraduates in the cognition, virtue, and action dimensions of global citizenship competences were influenced by their background variables. (3) The model of the relationships among the undergraduates’ performance in the cognitive, virtue, and action dimensions of global citizenship competences revealed the significant effects in the structural equation model. This paper offers suggestions for improving undergraduates’ competencies in global citizenship attainments and for directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：213-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(2).084篇名：圓形複合圖形面積解題學習軌道之教學實驗研究並列篇名：Teaching Students How to Calculate the Area of Complex Figures With Circles by Using Learning Trajectories作者：陳嘉皇(Chia-Huang Chen);吳碧智(Bi-Tsz Wu)關鍵字：面積;圓形;複合圖形;學習軌道;area;circle;complex figure;learning trajectories期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究利用學習軌道設計圓形複合圖形面積課程進行教學實驗，檢視學生學習情形及解題表現，瞭解學生在各教學環節產生的迷思概念及困難，教師透過教學省思檢討自身教學及思索如何進行有效教學，幫助學生建立完整及系統性的圓形概念，順利解題。研究樣本為臺灣中部地區某公立小學一班六年級學生及其導師。課程內容以現行九年一貫課程綱要─六年級數學科的圓形複合圖形面積概念為主，參考數學任務及教學指引自行設計。蒐集和分析的資料包含：一、師生課室互動；二、學生數學學習單之表現；三、課後訪談紀錄。以學生作答內容統計答題正確率驗證教學效果，並以質性方式分析學生錯誤及迷思概念。研究發現：一、依據學習軌道設計圓形複合圖形面積任務，包含「認識圓形的基本組成要素」、「理解圓面積公式的由來」、「運用分割和移補的技巧來計算面積」、「理解分配律，學習用符號標記面積」和「『填補』和『其他策略』」；二、學業成就表現高、低分組的學生於「圓形複合圖形面積任務」的表現有所差異，其反應促使教師省思與修正調整學習軌道中任務的設計安排；三、經由教學實驗回溯省思後，教師對於學生概念的理解、教學方法及課程設計等方面的信念產生改變。英文摘要：A mathematics course teaching students how to calculate the area of complex figures with circles was designed using learning trajectories. We conducted a teaching experiment to examine the learning conditions and problem-solving performance of students and understand their misconceptions and difficulties in different areas of learning. Teacher journals review teaching techniques and effective teaching methods to assist students in forming complete and systematic concepts of circles and in solving problems. The subjects in this study comprised a sixth-grade class of students at a public elementary school in Central Taiwan and their homeroom teacher. The course content focused on the concepts of determining the area of complex figures with circles, as introduced in sixth-grade mathematics in the Grade 1-9 Curriculum Guidelines. We referred to math teaching materials and guidelines to design the course. The collected and analyzed data included: (1) teacher-student interactions during class, (2) the math worksheet performance of students, and (3) after-class interview records. We verified teaching effectiveness by using the worksheet scores and qualitatively analyzed the misconceptions of students. The findings of this study indicate the following: (1) the teaching materials designed using learning trajectories include the Basic Composing Elements of Circles, Understanding the Circle Area Formula, Cutting and Shifting Techniques to Calculate Area, Understanding the Distributive Law and Marking Areas with Symbols, and Filling in and Other Strategies, (2) students with different levels of cognition displayed varying performance on the area worksheets, and (3) after retrospective reflections on the teaching experiment, the teacher’s behavior changed with regard to understanding the conceptions of the students, teaching methods, and curricular design.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).015篇名：凱利方格法在科學教育研究的應用並列篇名：Application of Kelly’s Repertory Grid Technique in Research on Science Education作者：林裕仁(Yu-Ren Lin);林日宗(Jih-Tsung Lin);洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung)關鍵字：科學教育;個人建構理論;凱利方格法;science education;personal construct theory;repertory grid technique期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以文獻回顧的方法探索凱利方格法的原理與策略，再反思科學教育研究領域中可應用凱利方格法進行研究的契機與限制。凱利方格法的分析與探索主要包含下列階段：元素與構念的萃取、方格的建構與評比，以及方格的分析與解釋。這些資料分析的過程對教育研究而言具備以下優勢。首先，研究者透過凱利方格法的應用，建立有系統的資料蒐集與彙整架構，發現資料中既存的脈絡。再者，凱利方格法除了能針對單一個案所反映的方格評比進行探索與分析外，也容許跨個案的比較。在科學教育相關研究中，這些優勢適合被應用於探索學生科學學習、教師專業發展，以及評鑑科學課程與教科書等。本研究最後也說明在應用凱利方格法分析時須考量的信度與效度，以及相關的研究限制，以更明確地說明使用凱利方格法分析的策略。英文摘要：This paper discusses the possible application of the repertory grid technique (RGT) in science education through a literature review. We first describe the common strategies for using RGT in psychology and education research. We then explore the reasons for using RGT and the relationship between the aforementioned strategies and the purposes of studies in the literature. Finally, we explain whether and how using RGT can assist researchers in deeply exploring science education. Three basic strategies for using RGT are summarized according to a literature review: eliciting elements and constructs, constructing the grid, and analyzing the grid. RGT enables researchers to construct and reconstruct the qualitative data on the basis of quantitative analysis, which supports exploring subjects’ cognitive systems and comparing subjects. In science education, studies have applied RGT for various purposes, which we categorized into three types: exploring individual cognitive systems, developing principles for teachers’ professional development, and evaluating the quality of textbooks. The limitations and validations of RGT are discussed in the final section of this paper.起始頁-結束頁：43-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).026篇名：「沒有孩子落後」之後：NCLB豁免計畫的角色定位、法理基礎與實施爭議之探討並列篇名：Role, Legal Foundation, and Implementation Controversy of the NCLB Waiver作者：陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen)關鍵字：沒有孩子落後;教育政策;豁免計畫;NCLB;education policy;NCLB Waiver期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：無可諱言，《沒有孩子落後法案》（No Child Left Behind, NCLB）的實施後期疲態漸露，當初反對者的諸多憂慮逐一現形，縱使贊成者勉力提出各項數據加以辯駁，但NCLB 之宣示於2014 年達成數學與閱讀100%精熟的終極挫敗令其不得不黯然低頭。「沒有孩子落後」的政策時程至2014 年證明已然「落後」，但是其相關配套所衍生的問題仍得繼續面對與處理，B. Obama 總統受制於國會兩黨的政治角力，在《初等與中等教育法案》（Elementary and Secondary Education Act, ESEA）的再授權暫時無解之下，遂改弦易轍推出NCLB 豁免計畫（NCLB Waiver）因應。NCLB豁免計畫因有助學區學校脫離辦學不力的惡名，以及逃開隨之而來的各種懲罰措施，對於各州無疑具有極大的吸引力，至今已有多達48州進行規劃和申請交換豁免。鑑於NCLB 豁免計畫的特殊背景與重要性，以及延續近10 餘年來國內對於NCLB 的相關研究，本研究目的乃從廣受關注的NCLB 豁免計畫入手，深入探討其角色定位、法理基礎與實施爭議。根據研究結果，本研究有三點歸結：一、豁免計畫的角色定位雙重，既在為NCLB解套，亦在替「邁向巔峰」計畫（Race to the Top, RTT）配套；二、豁免計畫的法源基礎有所本亦具模糊解釋空間；三、豁免計畫的實施爭議牽涉不同面向。另本研究提出五點建議：一、精準引用與正確解釋教育變革政策的法理；二、整體考量教育變革政策的制度與地域統合問題；三、謹慎處理教育變革政策的政治干預與對立問題；四、全面規劃教育變革政策的策略配套與滑順接軌；五、正視因應教育變革政策的優質卓越與社會正義。英文摘要：The performance of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) has decreased gradually as the concerns of its opponents have been realized. Although NCLB’s advocates have painstakingly collected data for its defense, they are highly frustrated by the fact that NCLB’s ultimate goal of all students reaching 100% proficiency in reading and math in 2014 has failed. To address the problems of NCLB, President Obama proposed the NCLB Waiver in response to congressional partisanship, which has prevented the Elementary and Secondary Education Act from being reauthorized. Because the NCLB Waiver provides states the flexibility for circumventing the flawed provisions of NCLB, nearly all states would apply for the waiver for evading NCLB’s sanctions. The results of this study revealed that the dual purpose of the NCLB Waiver is releasing states from the mandates of NCLB and matching NCLB with Race to the Top; NCLB’s legal foundation is Section 9401 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act; and NCLB’s implementation controversy is multidimensional. Finally, this paper proposes five recommendations: (1) precisely citing and interpreting the legal foundation for education change policy; (2) comprehensively considering the integration of enactment and region of education change policy; (3) cautiously coping with the political intervention with and confrontation over education change policy; (4) systematically planning the strategic matching and transition in education change policy; and (5) addressing the quality and social justice of education change policy.起始頁-結束頁：69-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).037篇名：大專院校理工科系跨領域課程品質評估量表發展之研究並列篇名：Development of the Evaluative Scalogram for University Science and Engineering-Related Department Interdisciplinary Learning Quality作者：湯堯(Yao Tang);徐慧芝(Hui-Chih Hsu);蘇建洲(Chien-Chou Su)關鍵字：量表因素結構;量表發展;跨領域課程品質;scalogram factorial structure;scalogram development;interdisciplinary learning quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的主要在於建構大學校院理工科系跨領域課程品質評估量表。本研究文獻基礎乃是透過國內、外期刊探討跨領域課程品質議題，並整理出初步量表結構與題項。研究方法是以焦點團體對於文獻分析所得初步量表結構與題項進行篩選，再透過探索性因素分析對其分類純化。另以隨機方式對全國日間部理工相關科系大學生共計653 位樣本進行驗證性因素分析，並透過整體適配性、項目信度、組成信度、區別效度與收斂效度檢驗本研究提出的最適模式──多因素斜交模式，以驗證本量表的因素結構。研究結果發現，量表共有三個潛在因素與測量變項及所屬題項，證實具有穩定性的多因素斜交模式因素結構。最後依據研究發現提出教育行政與政策制定之建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to evaluate related studies on the evaluative scalogram for university science and engineering-related department interdisciplinary learning quality. Exploring interdisciplinary learning quality issues provided the foundation for the literature review in this study. According to the literature, the factorial structure and items of the preliminary scalogram were formed. The first step of the research method was to confirm the factorial structure and items of the preliminary scalogram by using a focus group, followed by reclassifying and purifying the structure and items through exploratory factor analysis. The second step was to randomly collect 653 valid samples from Taiwanese undergraduates of the science or engineering college for confirmatory factor analysis. The overall model fits, item reliability, composite reliability, discriminant validity, and convergent validity were used to confirm the factorial structure and to examine the optimal model that was identified in this study: the corrected factors model. According to the results, this study determined that three latent factors were extracted in the scalogram and that the corrected factors model was stable. Finally, suggestions for education administration and policymaking are proposed according to the findings.起始頁-結束頁：91-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).048篇名：解構哲學之探討及其對審美教育學之啟示並列篇名：Exploring Deconstruction and Its Implications for Aesthetic Education作者：洪如玉(Ruyu Hung);陳惠青(Hui-Ching Chen)關鍵字：解構;審美素養;審美教育學;藝術鑑賞教育;J. Derrida;deconstruction;aesthetic literacy;aesthetic education;art appreciation education;J. Derrida期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究欲詮釋及闡述J. Derrida 之解構思想及其所蘊含之審美教育學的意義。由於藝術鑑賞教育為思考與實踐審美教育學的重要途徑，本研究以藝術鑑賞教育之政策論述為例，說明解構取向的審美教育學之啟示。現行藝術鑑賞教育存在的問題反映出傳統審美教育學的限制，包括下述五點：一、藝術鑑賞教育尚過度依賴於西方的美學詮釋體系；二、多數藝術鑑賞教育活動之實施仍以精緻藝術為主；三、藝術鑑賞教育內容缺乏培養學生批判思考的能力；四、忽略不同文化背景學生藝術鑑賞能力之個別差異；五、藝術教育蘊含強烈工具化傾向。透過對Derrida 解構思想之探討，揭示出傳統審美教育學預設了內在理路－邏各思（logos），基於前述，本研究提出四點解構概念對於審美教育學之啟示，可作為思考審美教育學及其在藝術鑑賞教育的參照：一、顛覆精緻藝術較為優位之教育主張；二、瓦解精緻藝術和通俗藝術之間的藩籬；三、化解藝術作品中作者主體中心的霸權迷思；四、建構開放的藝術對話空間以展現他者的多元性。英文摘要：This article aims to interpret and expound on Derrida’s notion of deconstruction and reveal the implications for aesthetic education. Art appreciation education plays a crucial role in thinking and practicing aesthetic education. Hence, this paper focuses on art appreciation education and explores the implications of the deconstructive approach for aesthetic education. This paper also discusses the limits of conventional aesthetic education by identifying the problems of the current practice of art appreciation education. Five problems are identified: (1) aesthetic education still relies heavily on the Western aesthetic traditions; (2) most materials for art appreciation activities are based on fine art; (3) the content of aesthetic education instruction does not include critical thinking; (4) the individual differences based on different cultural backgrounds are neglected during teaching; (5) the strong instrumentalism tendency is implied in current art education. Exploring Derrida’s concept of deconstruction is helpful for suggesting improvements to aesthetic education by revealing the logos implied in conventional art appreciation education. This paper concludes with the following four suggestions: (1) the traditional premise that fine art is superior to popular art is questioned; (2) the conventional line between fine art and popular art is blurred; (3) the hegemonic myth of author subject-centric artwork is challenged; (4) the artistic dialogue space should be diverse and available to everyone.起始頁-結束頁：115-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).059篇名：我國九年一貫課程全民健康保險教材內容分析：以國中小健康與體育領域為例並列篇名：Analysis of Taiwan National Health Insurance Education in Elementary and Junior High School Textbooks for the Grade 1-9 Curriculum in the Health and Physical Education Field作者：張家臻(Chia-Chen Chang);施淑芳(Shu-Fang Shih);董貞吟(Chen-Yin Tung);劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu);殷蘊雯(Yun-Wen Yin);戴若蕾(Ruoh-Leei Dai)關鍵字：九年一貫課程;全民健保教育;健康與體育領域;國民中小學;教科書;grade 1-9 curriculum;NHI education;health and physical education field;elementary and junior high school;textbook期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：我國全民健保制度實施20 年，不僅為民眾高度滿意的政策，亦廣受國際社會肯定。而在過度浪費醫療資源導致保費調漲之際，學者建議需將珍惜全民健保概念從小扎根，才能使健保制度永續經營。本研究目的欲檢視現有教科書全民健保教材內容，作為教師推動健保教育參考。研究發現，國小各階段出現健保教育內容總次數為32 及20 次，篇幅比例為1.59%和0.95%，但內容偏重安全用藥或健康消費等議題，缺乏論述珍惜健保資源或向親友倡議等內涵。而國中階段雖自現有能力指標延伸，出現達47 次，篇幅比例也僅0.45%，在內容方面缺乏「認識全民健保中的急診醫療制度」、「體認國際對全民健保的肯定」及「向家人或朋友介紹全民健保的優點，鼓吹他們善用健保資源」等概念。未來建議將健保教育納入現有主題軸及能力指標，並強化「情意」及「生活技能」面向，增加正確使用醫療資源等題材，以提升學生學習成效，使全民健保制度永續經營。英文摘要：Taiwan has implemented the National Health Insurance (NHI) for over 20 years. The NHI is not only the policy that has generated the highest public satisfaction, but it has also been recognized by international communities. Nevertheless, wasted medical resources are one of the factors that have increased medical costs since the NHI was implemented. Therefore, NHI education should be valued to promote sustainable NHI operation. The purpose of this study was to provide a reference for implementing NHI education by evaluating NHI textbooks. According to the findings, NHI textbooks place more emphasis on medical safety and health consumption, and these textbooks derive well-documented and extensive evidence from various topics and capability indices but fail to value NHI resources or promote the cherish concept to friends and family. The shortage of the facets of ”affective domain” and ”life skills” should be addressed to implement the goal of NHI education. NHI education should be integrated with the current themes and capability indices to intensify the use of relevant medical curricula. Moreover, the teaching ability of instructors should be increased to incorporate the NHI into elementary and junior high school education.起始頁-結束頁：139-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).0610篇名：我如何知道我關心什麼？－不同背景大學生的自身技術之分析並列篇名：How Do I Know What I Care About?－Analysis of Technologies-of-Self for Undergraduates With Different Backgrounds作者：郭丁熒(Ding-Ying Guo)關鍵字：大學生;自身;自身技術;undergraduate;self;technologies-of-self期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：61卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學生運用自身技術之現況，並比較不同背景變項大學生的自身技術之差異情形。先根據文獻探討及40 位大學生訪談資料所編製之「大學生自身技術量表」，針對452 位大學生進行預試，再以修訂後之量表調查1,361 位大學生，調查資料經以SPSS for Windows 21.0 版套裝軟體中次數分配、單因子多變項分析、薛費事後多重比較分析法來進行資料處理與分析。研究結果發現：（一）大學生的自身技術包括鍛鍊、告解坦白、問題化、自我檢查、對話辯證、說真話、越界體驗、節制、觀察等九類，運用情形大都為中高程度；（二）大學生最常採用的自身技術是鍛鍊，而最不常採用的是告解坦白；（三）大學生採用的自身技術因其背景之不同而呈現多樣性，其中以有宗教信仰者最為多元。本研究反映出大學生可透過自身技術來治理自我之可能性，而最常使用鍛鍊可能與大學生的學習角色有關，最不常使用告解坦白則可能與教育或文化有關。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to survey the current status of undergraduates’ technologies-of-self and to analyze the differences of technologies-of-self for undergraduates with different backgrounds. The subjects were 1,361 undergraduates who participated in the survey study by using ”The Technologies-of-Self Inventory for Undergraduates” as an instrument. The protocol of this instrument was prepared according to a literature review and data obtained from interviewing 40 undergraduates, whereas the validity and reliability of the instrument were established using a subsequent pretest in which 452 undergraduates participated. The data obtained from the survey study were statistically analyzed through frequency distribution, MONOVA, and a Scheffe Post Hoc Test by using SPSS for Windows 21.0 as software. The findings of this study indicate that the undergraduates adopted nine types of technologies-of-self: exercise, confession, problematization, self-examination, dialogue, parrhesia, transgressive experience, moderation, and observation. Their use of technologies-of-self was determined to be medium-high. The exercise technology was most often adopted by the undergraduates, whereas the confession technology was the most seldom used. The frequent use of exercise technology may have occurred because learning is the salient role of undergraduates, whereas the infrequent use of confession technology may have resulted from educational or cultural differences between Taiwan and Western countries. Undergraduates with a specific religious belief adopted more technologies-of-self compared with those with no specific religious beliefs. The results of this study imply that self-discovery and self-formation can be achieved by undergraduates through technologies-of-self.起始頁-結束頁：169-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2016.61(1).0701篇名：利社會動機、建言行為與LMX之關聯性分析：探討政治技巧的調節角色並列篇名：The Relationships among Prosocial Motivation, Voice Behavior, and LMX: The Moderating Role of Political Skill作者：劉娜婷(Na-Ting Liu);蔡秉毅(Peng-Yi Chua);陳淑貞(Shu-Chen Chen);林育瑩(Yu-Ying Lin)關鍵字：利社會動機;政治技巧;建言行為;主管與部屬交換關係;prosocial motivation;political skill;voice behavior;LMX期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討利社會動機、政治技巧、建言行為和主管與部屬交換關係（LMX品質）之關係。首先，我們探討利社會動機與建言行為的關聯性。其次，探討建言行為在利社會動機與LMX品質間的中介角色。此外，亦檢驗政治技巧在利社會動機與建言行為間的調節效果。以台灣地區68家企業全職員工及其直屬主管為調查對象，總計回收68份有效主管問卷與269份員工問卷，並透過階層迴歸分析和建立調節式中介模型（moderated mediation model）來進行假說檢驗。研究結果支持本研究所有假說。結果顯示，利社會動機與建言行為呈正向關係；建言行為在利社會動機與LMX之間扮演中介角色；政治技巧亦確實在利社會動機與建言行為間具顯著正向調節效果；此外，政治技巧亦能強化利社會動機透過建言行為對LMX品質的間接效果。最後，針對研究結果，本研究提出管理意涵與後續研究建議。英文摘要：This study examined the effects of pro-social motivation, political skill, and voice behavior on leader-member exchange (LMX). First, we examined the relationships between prosocial motivation and voice behavior. Second, the study investigated the mediating role of voice behavior underpinning the relationship between prosocial motivation and LMX. In addition, political skill was tested as a moderator of prosocial motivation-voice behavior relationship. Data were collected from 269 full-time employees and their immediate supervisor in Taiwan from 68 different companies in different industries. We conducted a series of hierarchical regression and developed a moderated mediation model to test our hypotheses. Results indicated that prosocial motivation was positively related to voice behavior. In addition, voice behavior mediated the relationship between prosocial motivation and LMX. For the moderating effect, the higher political skill, the stronger the influence of prosocial motivation on voice behavior. Furthermore, political skill moderated the strength of the mediated relationship between prosocial motivation and LMX via voice behavior, such that the mediated relationship is stronger under high political skill. Some academic and managerial implications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1604.012篇名：知識性工作特徵與創新接受度關係之研究：轉換型領導與集體效能之跨層次調節效果並列篇名：A Study on the Relationship between Knowledge Work Characteristics and the Innovativeness: Exploring the Cross-Level Moderating Effect of Transformational Leadership and Collective Efficacy in Multilevel Analysis作者：高瑞新(Rui-Hsin Kao)關鍵字：稅務人員;創新接受度;階層線性模型係;IRS officer;innovativeness;hierarchical linear model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以多層次模式的觀點探討工作設計模式的動機面向（知識導向）與聚合的轉換型領導（團體層次）對於員工創新接受度的影響。本研究訪問了高雄市稅捐稽徵處47個不同單位（股）中的374位第一線稅務工作人員。以階層線性模式及階層<U+5EFB>歸分析之統計方法，檢測與驗證假設結果。研究發現，動機性工作特徵之知識特徵面向會影響員工的自我效能，且能夠透過自我效能進一步的影響員工的創新接受度；同時聚合的轉換型領導及集體效能在自我效能與創新接受度的關係間具有跨層次的調節效果。本研究並對稅務實務界與學術界提供若干建議與未來之研究方向。英文摘要：The purpose of this present study was to investigate the influences of motivational work characteristics (knowledge-oriented) and aggregated transformational leadership on the innovativeness of internal revenue service (IRS) officers by using first-line tax officers as the research objects. 374 first-line officers from 47 units of IRS Kaohsiung were sampled. Hierarchical regression analysis and hierarchical linear moderating were used to analyze and verify those hypotheses. The study showed that the knowledge characteristics will influence the self-efficacy of an IRS officer and that self-efficacy can in turn influence individual innovativeness. Additionally, there was a cross-level moderating effect from aggregated transformational leadership and collective efficacy on the relationship between self-efficacy and the individuals’ innovativeness. Conclusion was given, followed by research implications.起始頁-結束頁：27-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1604.023篇名：工作控制對認知要求與感性承諾有緩衝效果嗎？再檢驗Karasek模式並列篇名：Does Job Control Buffer the Effect of Cognitive Demand on Affective Commitment? A Re-Examination of Karasek's Model作者：繆敏志(Min-Chih Miao);林少龍(Shao-Lung Lin)關鍵字：感性承諾;認知要求;工作要求－控制模式;研發人員;affective commitment;cognitive demand;job demand-control model;R & D personnel期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探討認知要求（包括監督及問題解決要求）對感性承諾的主效果，並探討認知要求與工作控制（包括方法、排程及目標控制）對感性承諾的交互效果。應答者為241位來自新竹科學園區公司的研發人員。結果顯示監督及問題解決要求皆正向影響感性組織與職業承諾，方法、排程及目標控制會降低監督要求對感性組織承諾的正向影響。排程及目標控制會增強問題解決要求對感性職業承諾的正向影響。本研究討論研究發現在理論與管理實務上的意涵，同時提出本研究之限制。英文摘要：This study explores and examines the main effects of cognitive demand (including monitoring and problem-solving demands) on affective commitment and interactive effects of monitoring and problem-solving demands and job control (including method, scheduling and criteria control) on affective commitment. Respondents were 241 R & D personnel drawn from firms in Hsinchu Science Park. Results reveal that monitoring and problem-solving demands have positively effects on both affective organizational and occupational commitment. The method, scheduling and criteria control decrease the positive effects of monitoring demand on affective organizational commitment. The scheduling and criteria control increase the positive effects of problem-solving demand on affective occupational commitment. The authors discussed the implications for theory and managerial practices, and proposition for the research limitation.起始頁-結束頁：59-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1604.034篇名：探討不當督導對工作績效及工作家庭衝突的影響：勤勉性與合群性之干擾效果並列篇名：Exploring the Relationships between Abusive Supervision and Job Performance, Work-Family Conflict: The Moderating Roles of Conscientiousness and Agreeableness作者：王翊安(I-An Wang);廖瑞原(Ruei-Yuan Liao);林慧菁(Hui-Ching Lin)關鍵字：不當督導;勤勉性;合群性;工作家庭衝突;工作績效;abusive supervision;conscientiousness;agreeableness;work-family conflict;job performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：不當督導在實務與學術界都是相當受到重視的議題，本研究將以資源保存理論解釋並處理目前研究結果存在不一致的問題。基於不同的人格特質面對不當督導時有不同的知覺及反應，因此，在工作績效及工作─家庭衝突也會有不同的表現。本研究不同時間點衡量服務人員的知覺主管不當對待、工作家庭衝突與工作績效關係，共獲得可用的樣本數為282份，研究發現：員工勤勉性特質越高時，能減緩不當督導對工作績效與工作－家庭衝突的負向影響。再者，在員工合群性越高時，不當督導對工作績效與工作－家庭衝突的負向影響則增強。本研究基於研究發現的理論貢獻，提出具體管理意涵與未來研究方向供實務界與研究者參考。英文摘要：Based on the perspective of conservation of resource, we examined the relationships between abusive supervision and job performance, work-family conflict. In addition, we also examined the moderating effects of personality traits (i.e., conscientiousness and agreeableness) on above relationships. Among the sample from first-line service workers (n = 282), results indicated that high conscientiousness attenuated the positive relationship between abusive supervision and work-family conflict. Furthermore, high conscientiousness reduced the negative impact of abusive supervision on job performance. Moreover, high agreeableness positively moderated the relationship between abusive supervision and work-family conflict. Finally, agreeableness strengthened the negative impact of abusive supervision on job performance. Theoretical and practical implications are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：81-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1604.045篇名：主管與同事關係品質對建言行為的非線性關係：心理安全知覺的中介角色並列篇名：The Nonlinear Relationship between Leader-Member Exchange, Team-Member Exchange, and Voice: Mediating Role of Psychological Safety作者：賴鳳儀(Fong-Yi Lai);林鉦棽(Cheng-Chen Lin);陳曉玲(Hsiao-Ling Chen);李郁芩(Yu-Chin Lee);湯蕙娟(Hui-Chuan Tang)關鍵字：建言行為;關係品質;平衡理論;多項式迴歸分析法;反應區面圖示分析;voice behaviors;relationship quality;balance theory;polynomial regression analysis;response surface methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：建言行為對組織有正面的效益，但是實徵研究發現建言本身伴隨的風險，卻經常令員工身陷兩難情境。本研究以平衡理論為基礎結合心理安全觀點，分析心理安全知覺在關係品質與建言行為的關聯。由於過去研究在關係品質對員工態度或行為分析，鮮少同時考量同一單位裡與不同對象的關係品質之間對於建言所產生的作用。本研究利用不同關係品質之間的等同性程度（degree of congruence between different relationship quality） 與一致性水準（level of alignment point between different relationship quality）之非線性分析，試圖以不同角度更精確地詮釋不同關係品質對建言行為的影響。研究對象為護理長與護理人員，採兩個時間點區隔進行資料蒐集。統計分析主要透過非線性多項式迴歸與反應曲面法的運用。研究結果顯示，心理安全知覺在關係品質與建言行為的關係間存在中介機制：在全等狀態的關係品質時，員工的心理安全知覺最高；且隨著全等狀態的基準愈高，心理安全知覺隨之增強。基於研究發現，我們針對學術界與實務界提出相關意涵及建議。英文摘要：Voice behaviors have positive effects to organizations, but empirical study revealed that the risk of voice behaviors has often made employee fall into dilemma situations. Based on balance theory, the present study examines the mediation effect of psychological safety between relationship quality and voice behaviors. Further, due to limited prior studies have considered multiple relationship quality effects on employees' work attitudes or behaviors, we used polynominal regression analyses in order to be more precisely explain such effect on voice behaviors by examining the degree of congruence between different relationship quality and the level of alignment point between different relationship quality. Research data were collected from two sources (head nurse and nurse) and two points of time. The hypotheses were tested through polynomial regression analyses and response surface methodology. The results indicated that perception of psychological safety mediated the relationship between relationship quality (LMX and TMX) and voice behaviors. While LMX and TMX are congruence, the perception of psychological safety is the highest; the higher level of congruence, the higher the perception of psychological safety. Implication and suggestions are provided for both practitioners and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1603.016篇名：員工知識分享重要嗎？組織支持干擾組織信任、組織公民行為與知識分享關係之研究並列篇名：Does Knowledge Sharing Matter? Study of Organizational Support Moderating Effect on Organizational Trust, Employees' Citizenship Behavior, and Knowledge Sharing作者：許順旺(Shun-Wang Hsu);張姮燕(Heidi H. Chang);許中駿(Chung-Chun Hsu);韋孝昀(Hsiao-Yun Wei)關鍵字：組織信任;組織公民行為;知識分享;組織支持;社會交換理論;organizational trust;organizational citizenship behavior;knowledge sharing;organization support;social exchange theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以社會交換理論探討員工對組織信任、組織公民行為、知識分享與組織支持之關聯性。並以台灣地區五星級旅館員工為研究對象，以便利抽樣方式進行問卷調查，受測對象為五星級旅館工作滿六個月以上之正式員工，並請其直線主管以1比5配對方式填答員工之組織公民行為。問卷發放主管及員工各550份，回收有效配對問卷422份。研究結果顯示員工對組織信任程度越高，組織公民行為表現會越好；員工之組織公民行為表現越好，則員工的知識分享會越多；研究也發現員工對組織的信任能透過增加員工的組織公民行為，進而增加員工的知識分享；員工知覺到組織支持較佳時，組織信任與組織公民行為及組織公民行為與知識分享之間的關係將越強。英文摘要：Based on the social exchange theory, this study aimed to explore the relationship among organization trust, organizational citizenship behavior, knowledge sharing and organizational support. Research samples were full-time employees and managers who have worked more than six months in five-star hotels in Taiwan. Questionnaire surveys with convenience sampling were applied for data collection. Sample matching method was applied so that direct managers were invited to evaluate organizational citizenship behavior of their subordinate employees. Five-hundred-fifty questionnaires were sent to the manager-level and employees, while a total of 422 valid matching questionnaires were received. Research results indicated that: (1) when employees' had more organization trust, employees had better organizational citizenship behavior ; (2) when employees had better organizational citizenship behavior, they had more knowledge sharing; (3) organizational citizenship behavior had a full mediation effect on the relationships between organization trust and knowledge sharing; (4) employees' perception on organizational support moderated the effect between organization trust and organizational citizenship behavior, as well as the relationships between organization citizenship behavior and knowledge sharing.起始頁-結束頁：29-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1603.027篇名：被主管苛責，找奧客出氣？由自我控制損害與社會學習之觀點探討主管不當督導到服務人員情緒宣洩的心理機制並列篇名：Abused by Supervisor, Venting at Difficult Customer? The Perspectives of Self-Control Impairment and Social Learning on the Psychological Mechanisms between Abusive Supervision and Service Provider's Venting作者：吳宗祐(Tsung-Yu Wu);甘雅菱(Ya-Ling Kan);溫宗霖(Tsung-Lin Wen);廖紘億(Hung-Yi Liao)關鍵字：自我控制損害;社會學習;不當督導;自我耗損;情緒宣洩;self-control impairment;social learning;abusive supervision;ego depletion;venting期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究依據自我控制損害與社會學習的觀點，以預測不當督導可透過服務人員之自我耗損而影響其對難應付顧客之情緒宣洩（自我控制損害機制，間接效果），亦可直接影響情緒宣洩而不透過自我耗損（社會學習機制，直接效果）。本研究也預測服務表現之財務報酬只會調節上述間接效果，而不會調節直接效果。本研究蒐集主管與部屬（服務人員）有效對偶資料共150筆，結果發現，服務表現之財務報酬會調節不當督導透過自我耗損以預測情緒宣洩之間接效果；服務表現之財務報酬較弱時，此一間接效果才會顯著。此外，不當督導對情緒宣洩會產生直接效果，但服務表現之財務報酬對此一直接效果並無調節作用，研究結果與預測相符。本研究之理論與實務意涵，將在最後提出討論。英文摘要：Based on the perspectives of self-control impairment and social learning, we predicted that abusive supervision affects service provider's venting toward difficult customers via ego depletion (self-control impairment mechanism, indirect effect). Abusive supervisor also directly affects venting, not via ego depletion (social learning mechanism, direct effect). Also, we predicted that financial rewards for service performance moderate only the indirect effect, not the direct effect. We collected supervisor-subordinate (service provider) dyad data and obtained 150 valid pairs of data. As predicted, results showed that financial rewards for service performance moderate the indirect effect whereby abusive supervision affects venting via ego depletion, such that this indirect effect is significant when financial rewards for service performance is weak. In addition, abusive supervision affects venting directly, and financial rewards for service performance do not moderate this direct effect. We discussed the theoretical and practical implications at the end.起始頁-結束頁：61-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1603.038篇名：家長式領導與部屬工作績效之關係：探討情緒勞動演出的中介效果並列篇名：The Relationship between Paternalistic Leadership and Employee Work Performance: The Mediating Roles from Acting of Emotional Labor作者：李庭閣(Ting-Ko Lee);張珈進(Chia-Chin Chang);黃少宇(Shao-Yu Huang);嚴國晉(Kuo-Ching Yen)關鍵字：家長式領導;表層演出;深層演出;任務績效;職場偏差行為;paternalistic leadership;surface acting;deep acting;task performance;workplace deviance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：傳統華人組織中，主管領導與部屬工作績效間之關聯性，已長期受到學術與實務界的關注。本研究主要探討主管的家長式領導三元模式與部屬工作績效之間的關係，並進一步探究情緒勞動之深層演出與表層演出策略的中介機制。家長式領導包含威權、仁慈與德行領導；工作績效區分為任務績效與職場偏差行為。本研究採問卷調查法，以國軍職場第一線服務人員及其主管為樣本，共蒐集414 份有效配對資料，並運用結構方程模型（structural equation modeling, SEM）進行檢驗。研究結果發現，深層演出不但對仁慈領導與任務績效之間具有中介效果外，且對德行領導與任務績效之間亦存在中介效果；此外，表層演出對仁慈領導與職場偏差行為之間存在中介效果外，亦對德行領導與職場偏差行為之間存在中介效果。最後，本研究根據結果回應組織行為與管理之理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：In traditional Chinese society organizations, the relationship between leadership style and work performance has been concerned in the academic and practice field. Based on the emotion regulation theory, this study explores how the leadership style influences work performance, and further examines the mediating mechanism of emotional labor. Specifically, the leadership style refers to the paternalistic leadership that has three dimensions, including authoritarianism, benevolence and morality. Emotional labor is consisted of surface acting and deep acting strategies, and job performance includes task performance and workplace deviance. Base on the first-line service personnel and their leaders from the Republic of China Armed Forces, a total of 414 samples were collected and analyzed by using the structural equation modeling (SEM). The results find that deep acting not only significantly mediates the relationship between benevolence leadership and task performance but also mediates the relationship between morality leadership and task performance. Moreover, surface acting not only significantly mediates the relationship between benevolence leadership and workplace deviance but also mediates the relationship between morality leadership and workplace deviance. In the end, this study makes a response to the theoretical and practical implications of organizational behavior and management, and future suggestions are provided.起始頁-結束頁：93-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1603.049篇名：第三者對代理主管不當督導的反應行為：情感與認知機制的中介影響並列篇名：Third Parties' Reactions to the Vicarious Abusive Supervision: Mediation Effects of Affectivity and Cognition Mechanism作者：陳淑貞(Shu-Chen Chen);楊美玉(Mei-Yu Yang)關鍵字：代理主管不當督導;偏差行為;同理心;領導者─部屬交換關係;知覺組織支持;vicarious abusive supervision;deviation behavior;empathy;leader-member exchange;perceived organizational support期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的是探討非親身經歷而是聽聞或觀察到主管對同事不當督導（本研究稱之為代理主管不當督導）的第三者，對於代理主管不當督導的反應行為。更進一步，本研究探討間接經歷代理主管不當督導的第三者，會如何透過情感及認知機制，進而對他們的反應行為產生影響。本研究以專職工作者為研究對象進行兩階段的問卷調查，兩次調查的間隔時間為一個月，總計有效問卷為366份，研究結果顯示：(1)第三者的同理心是代理不當督導與第三者之主管導向偏差行為關係的中介變數。(2)第三者的同理心是代理不當督導與第三者之組織偏差行為間關係的中介變數。(3)領導者─部屬交換關係（leader-member exchange, LMX）是代理主管不當督導與第三者之主管導向偏差行為關係的中介變數。(4)知覺組織支持（perceived organizational support, POS）是代理主管不當督導與第三者之組織偏差行為關係的中介變數。研究最後根據研究結果進行討論與實務意涵建議，並提出對未來研究的若干建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the reactions of third parties who were not personally experience but had heard or observed coworker's abusive supervision (i.e., Vicarious Abusive Supervision). Moreover, this study aimed to explore how the third parties reacted to vicarious abusive supervision through emotional and cognitive mechanisms. Two-stage surveys interval one month were used and three hundred and sixty-six returned questionnaires were valid. The research findings were: (1) The third party's empathy mediated the relationships between vicarious abusive supervision and the third party's supervisor-focus deviation. (2) The third party's empathy mediated the relationships between vicarious abusive supervision and the third party's organization-focus deviation. (3) Leader-member exchange (LMX) mediated the relationships between vicarious abusive supervision and the third party's supervisor-focus deviation. (4) Perceived organizational support (POS) mediated the relationships between vicarious abusive supervision and the third party's organization-focus deviation. Finally, managerial implications and future research suggestions would be provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1602.0110篇名：人力資本蓄積：如何強化訓練投資效用並列篇名：Accumulation of Human Capital: How to Increase the Effect of Training Investment on Human Capital作者：廖婉鈞(Wan-Chun Liao)關鍵字：人力資本;企業訓練;訓練需求分析;組織學習能力;訓練評估;human capital;employee training;training needs assessment;organizational learning capability;training evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：人力資本是價值創造的關鍵，每年企業投入大筆金額提供訓練方案培養人力資本，可惜訓練投資並非總是獲得相對應的報酬，如何強化訓練投資與人力資本蓄積之間的關係是當前重要的議題，故本研究欲探討訓練投資與人力資本的關係中，(1)訓練前的訓練需求分析、(2)訓練中的組織學習能力以及(3)訓練後的訓練評估三者之干擾效果，以瞭解如何強化訓練投資效用。透過問卷調查與客觀資料配對蒐集，最終有效樣本為127家台灣上市上櫃公司，研究結果意外發現訓練投資與人力資本無顯著關係，但當訓練需求分析越高，訓練投資與人力資本之間呈正向關係，而訓練需求分析越低時，訓練投資與人力資本則呈現負向關係。此外，若反應層次的訓練評估越高，訓練投資與人力資本之間呈現負向關係，而當反應層次的訓練評估越低時，訓練投資與人力資本之間則呈現正向關係，最終根據研究結果給予提升訓練投資效用之相關建議。英文摘要：Human capital is the key resource to creating value. It costs an enterprise greatly to provide training program every year, but the investment is not always proportioned to the reward. How to increase the effect of training investment on the accumulation of human capital becomes a rather important issue. Consequently, this research would probe into whether there is a moderating effect of (1) training needs assessment before training, (2) organizational learning capability during training, and (3) training evaluation after training, on the relationship between training investment and human capital. This study conducted a questionnaire survey and objective data collection, and the final valid samples based on 127 firms in Taiwan. The results show that the relationship between training investment and human capital is surprisingly non-significant. However, when training needs assessment is high, the relationship between training investment and human capital is significantly positive significantly. When training needs assessment is low, the aforementioned relationship becomes negative. In addition, when training evaluation is high, the relationship between training investment and human capital is negative significantly which is an unexpected and interesting result. Based on the results, this study provides a conclusion and management implications for the contribution to the academic and the practical ultimately.起始頁-結束頁：25-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1602.0211篇名：工作壓力源、自我復原力與敬業貢獻對幸福感之影響：以教師為樣本並列篇名：A Study on the Relationship among Teacher's Job Stressors, Ego-Resilience, and Job Engagement on Well-Being: The Teacher as the Sample作者：謝廷豪(Ting-Hao Hsieh);廖元良(Yuan-Liang Liao);林益永(Yih-Yeong Lin);廖宜玫(Yi-Mei Liaw)關鍵字：挑戰型工作壓力源;阻礙型工作壓力源;幸福感;自我復原力;敬業貢獻;challenge job stressors;hindrance job stressors;well-being;ego-resilience;job engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以挑戰型與阻礙型工作壓力之觀點，探究不同工作壓力源與幸福感之關係，並進一步探討自我復原力是否能調節挑戰型工作壓力源與幸福感，以及阻礙型工作壓力源是否透過敬業貢獻對幸福感產生影響。研究以大台中地區國小教師實施問卷調查法，共發出600份問卷，回收有效問卷552份，回收率93.24%。透過階層迴歸分析進行干擾與中介檢驗。研究結果顯示，工作壓力源對幸福感具有負向影響；自我復原力會減緩挑戰型工作壓力源與幸福感的負向影響；以及阻礙型工作壓力源會透過敬業貢獻影響幸福感的負向效果，相關研究結論與建議於文中一併討論。起始頁-結束頁：55-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1602.0312篇名：服務業員工自我概念、正向態度與專業契合對升遷機會之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Employee's Self-Concept, Positive Attitude and Professional Fit on Promotion Opportunity in Service Industry作者：陳欽雨(Chin-Yeu Chen);蔡宜雯(Yi-Wen Tsai)關鍵字：自我概念;正向態度;專業契合;升遷機會;self-concept;positive attitude;professional fit;promotion opportunity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來，服務業越來越重視組織人才的培育及任用，並積極思考如何對內部人力注入活力與創意，以維持企業的創新能耐與競爭力。由於工作者的自我瞭解及期許，與工作態度和專業能力與工作條件配合有關，且會影響未來的升遷機會，因此有關員工自我概念、工作態度及專業契合之相關議題，逐漸被業者及學術界關注。本研究採用網路問卷調查方式，蒐集服務業員工有效樣本456份，運用階層迴歸分析方法去檢定假說，以驗證自我概念、正向態度及專業契合對升遷機會間之影響關係。研究結果發現服務業員工之自我概念對其正向態度、專業契合及升遷機會均具有顯著正向影響；而正向態度及專業契合也均對升遷機會具有顯著正向影響。此外，正向態度及專業契合在自我概念與升遷機會間影響關係具有部分中介效果；而性別對於正向態度與升遷機會間之影響則不具調節效果。最後根據研究結果，提出管理意涵及實務建議，以作為業者擬訂人力資源管理策略之參考，並協助員工個人自我實現。英文摘要：Recently, service industry has increasingly recognized the importance of nurturing talent and appointing employees, and actively reviewed its manpower to infuse the vitality and creativity keeping its innovation capability and competitive advantage. Besides, since workers' self-understanding and self-expectation is relevant to their job attitude which can advance their professionals fitting with job requirements, it has a significant impact on promotion chance in the future. Hence, the issues related to employee's self-concept, work attitude and professional fit are gradually concerned by both industry and academy. The current study conducts a web questionnaire survey, collects 456 effective samples, and uses hierarchical regression method to test the proposed hypotheses and verify the effects of self-concept, positive attitude and professional fit on promotion opportunity. The results indicate that employee's self-concept has significantly positive effects on positive attitude, professional fit, and promotion opportunity. Subsequently, both employee's positive attitude and professional fit can positively affect promotion opportunity. Moreover, there are partial mediating effects of positve attitude and professional fit on the relationship between self-concept and promotion opportunity. But, the variable of gender doesn't play significant moderating effects on the relationships between positive attitude and promotion opportunity. Based on the results, the research provides some managerial implications and suggestions to practitioners as a reference for planning human resource management strategies, and assisting employee to achieve self-actualization.起始頁-結束頁：81-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1602.0413篇名：真誠領導與員工道德行為：探討道德效能的中介效果與道德認定的調節效果並列篇名：Examining the Relationship between Authentic Leadership and Employee Ethical Behavior: The Mediating Role of Moral Efficacy and the Moderating Role of Moral Identity作者：梁欣光(Shin-Guang Liang);林政安(Jheng-An Lin)關鍵字：真誠領導;道德認定;道德效能;道德行為;authentic leadership;moral identity;moral efficacy;ethical behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究採用社會認知理論的觀點，探討主管的真誠領導行為與員工道德行為之間的關係。並探討道德效能的中介機制與道德認定的調節效果。本研究透過多個時間點與多重來源的研究設計，蒐集183 份的有效主管與部屬配對資料。經由階層迴歸分析與調節式中介分析的檢驗步驟，本研究發現真誠領導與道德行為具有正向關係，並且部屬的道德效能會中介真誠領導與道德行為之間的關係。此外，調節式中介分析結果亦顯示，員工的道德認定可調節真誠領導經由道德效能進而影響道德行為的間接效果。最後，本研究針對理論與實務意涵、研究限制、未來研究方向進行討論。英文摘要：Building on social cognitive theory, this study aims to examine the relationship between authentic leadership and ethical behavior and to explore the mediating role of moral efficacy and the moderating role of moral identity. This study tested the theoretical model with 183 supervisor-subordinate matched data through the research design of multi-waves and multi-sources. We used hierarchical regression analysis and moderated path analysis to test our hypotheses. Results showed that authentic leadership was positively related to subordinates’ ethical behavior, and moral efficacy mediated the relationship between authentic leadership and ethical behavior. Further, moderated mediation analyses demonstrated that subordinates’ moral identity moderated the strength of the indirect effect of authentic leadership and ethical behavior via moral efficacy. Accordingly, based on our findings, further theoretical and practical implications, limitations and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1601.0114篇名：關係規範與社會破壞之關係：報復恐懼之干擾角色並列篇名：The Relationship between Relational Norm and Social Undermining: The Moderated Roles of Fear of Retaliation作者：林少龍(Shao-Lung Lin)關鍵字：關係規範;社會破壞;報復恐懼;relational norm;social undermining;fear of retaliation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究發展及檢驗關係規範、主管與部屬社會破壞以及報復恐懼的關係，解釋關係規範如何以及在何種條件下影響社會破壞。採用全職員工及其同事為研究對象，共計回收有效問卷員工與同事各120 份，干擾中介模式的分析結果顯示：(1) 關係規範負向影響主管社會破壞；(2) 主管社會破壞正向影響部屬社會破壞；(3) 對於高報復恐懼的部屬，關係規範經由主管社會破壞負向影響部屬社會破壞的間接效果較強，對於低報復恐懼的部屬，此間接效果較弱，本研究討論研究發現在理論以及實務上之意涵，同時對於未來的研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：The study develops and examines the relationships among relational norm, supervisors’ and subordinates’ social undermining and fear of retaliation that explains how and when relational norm is associated with social undermining. Data were collected from 120 full time employees and their coworkers respectively. The results from examining a moderated-mediation model reveal: (1) relational norm negatively relates to supervisors’ social undermining; (2) supervisors’ social undermining positively relates to subordinates’ social undermining; (3) the strength of indirect relationship between relational norm and subordinates’ social undermining via supervisors’ social undermining is negative and stronger (weaker) when subordinates’ fear of retaliation is high (low). The study discusses the theoretical and practical implications and provides some suggestions for the future study.起始頁-結束頁：21-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1601.0215篇名：公部門人員情緒勒索認知、工作壓力與離職傾向關聯之研究並列篇名：The Relationships among Civil Servants’ Perception of Emotional Blackmail, Job Stress and Turnover Intention作者：劉仲矩(Chung-Chu Liu);周玉涵(Yu-Han Chou)關鍵字：公部門人員;情緒;情緒勒索;工作壓力;離職傾向;public servant;emotion;emotional blackmail;job stress;turnover intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：由於國內外探討公部門人員職場情緒勒索的文章較少，本研究以情緒認知理論作為核心理論，探討公部門人員認知到上司下屬或民眾之情緒勒索時，是否會產生離職傾向，而是否會因工作壓力的程度高低當成干擾與中介變數。本研究針對現職公部門人員發放實體問卷，回收有效問卷318 份，研究發現：公部門人員情緒勒索認知皆與公部門人員工作壓力皆與離職傾向具部分顯著正向關係；而工作壓力又對公部門人員情緒勒索認知與離職傾向之關係具部分干擾與中介效果。本文最後依照前述研究結果提出管理意涵與後續研究建議，希望能提供政府人事主管機關及管理階層在面對公部門人員發生職場情緒勒索時可及時做出適當的因應策略，以提升管理效果與行政效能。英文摘要：Due to less study on emotional blackmail topic of civil servants. Based on the cognitive theory of emotional, this study explores the relationships among emotional blackmail and turnover intention and adopt job stress as moderator and mediator, while offering services, civil servants in the workplace have to interact with supervisors, colleagues, and public. However, they will be inevitably faced with several emotional problems when interacting with people, and will even suffer from emotional blackmail in interpersonal relationships. They may end up experiencing the physical discomfort, mental discomfort, and turnover intention. Nevertheless, there are few discussions about emotional blackmail in the government. Therefore, the study focuses on this issue. We first explore the relationship between emotional blackmail and turnover intention by studying supervisors, colleagues, and people. Next, we further explore whether the performance is affected by job stress. The study on civil servant shows that: emotional blackmail and job stress are significantly correlated with turnover intention. While job stress plays moderating and mediating role among emotional blackmail and turnover intention. According to the results, this study provides some suggestions for government institutions and managers.起始頁-結束頁：43-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1601.0316篇名：以資源保存理論，論心理資本、幸福感與組織公民行為之關聯性並列篇名：The Relationship between Psychological Capital, Well-Being and Organizational Citizenship Behavior: Conservation of Resources Theory作者：李旭梅(Hsu-Mei Lee);林如玉(Ju-Yu Lin)關鍵字：心理資本;幸福感;組織公民行為;資源保存理論;psychological capital;well-being;organizational citizenship behavior;conservation of resources theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：16卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：多數研究指出心理資本對組織公民行為的正向預測。然而，心理資本「如何」對組織公民行為產生影響仍未受到充分的瞭解。本研究以「資源保存理論」為基礎，探討心理資本對員工的幸福感與組織公民行為的影響。藉由結構性問卷的調查，研究資料來自273 位臺灣地區全職工作者。研究結果顯示，心理資本與幸福感對組織公民行為有正向影響以及幸福感對組織公民行為有正向影響。此外，研究亦發現幸福感中介了心理資本與組織公民行為之間的關係。本研究就研究結果提出在理論及實務上的應用。英文摘要：Most studies indicate that psychological capital had a positive effect on organizational citizenship behavior. However, the effect of psychological capital on organizational citizenship behavior has not yet been fully understood. Based on the Conservation of resources theory, this study examines the effect of psychological capital on well-being and organizational citizenship behavior. Using structured questionnaires, this study collected data from a diverse sample of 273 full-time Taiwanese employees. Results showed that psychological capital and well-being have a positive effect on organizational citizenship behavior, and well-being has a positive effect on organizational citizenship behavior. Moreover, well-being mediated the relationship between psychological capital and organizational citizenship behavior. Finally, the theoretical and practical implications of the findings were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：69-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2016.1601.0401篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：53期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：臺灣多面向貧窮測量與分析並列篇名：Multidimensional Poverty Measurement and Analysis in Taiwan作者：陳柯玫(Ke-Mei Chen);呂朝賢(Chao-Hsien Leu);王德睦(Te-Mu Wang)關鍵字：多面向貧窮;計數法;剝奪;貧窮測量;FGT指數;multidimensional poverty;counting approach;deprivation;poverty measurement;FGT measures期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：53期出版年：2016中文摘要：貧窮本身具有多樣性特質，無法以單一指標或元素來衡量，近年來國際上已有越來越多研究致力於多面向貧窮的測量。然而，我國貧窮測量研究雖然相當豐沛，但大多使用和經濟資源有關的單面向貧窮做為衡量基礎。有鑑於此，本研究應用Alkire-Foster計數法，計算多面向貧窮指數（由教育、醫療、環境、健康以及生活水準等五個剝奪構面所組成），分析我國多面向貧窮的樣貌。結果發現：一、同時考慮多面向貧窮發生率和貧窮強度，可避免多面向貧窮指數被高估。二、我國縣市之間的多面向貧窮指數分布差異大，貧窮縣市主要集中在中南部。三、剝奪構面在各縣市的貢獻度皆呈現地區差異。四、貧窮組成要素之分解對辨識各類群體在多面向貧窮的嚴重程度有幫助，且剝奪構面在不同組成要素之分解，亦有助於找出對減輕多面向貧窮較有影響力的剝奪構面。英文摘要：Poverty cannot be accurately measured using a single indicator because of its multidimensional nature. In recent years, considerable research has been conducted internationally on multidimensional poverty measurement. However, most research on poverty in Taiwan has focused primarily on unidimensional poverty measurement related to economic indicators. Therefore, this study explored multidimensional poverty in Taiwan by applying the Alkire Foster method. We also used the multidimensional poverty index (MPI), a composite measure of education, medical resources, environment, health, and standard of living. We found that the MPI was not overestimated when the incidence and intensity of multidimensional poverty were accounted for. The MPI substantially varied across different cities and counties and was high in South-Central Taiwan. Regarding decomposition, the contributions of deprivation in each dimension to overall poverty varied by region. The subgroup decompositions allowed us to identify each subgroup’s multidimensional poverty and compute the contribution of each subgroup to overall poverty.起始頁-結束頁：1-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.53.013篇名：Brain Drain Issue and Health Professionals' Migration from West Africa並列篇名：西非衛生醫療專業人員的外流及遷移議題作者：Mat Lowe;陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen)關鍵字：West Africa;migration;young professionals;brain drain;health professionals;西非;遷移;年輕專業人員;人才流失;衛生專業人員期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：53期出版年：2016中文摘要：Despite being home to 25% of the global burden of disease, sub- Saharan Africa only has 3% of the global health workforce. A major contributory factor to this lack of human resources for the health workforce includes the migration of health professionals to rich countries. Using nominal, ordinal and scale items, this paper investigates the migration intentions of West African health professionals, and the factors that are likely to predict their decision to emigrate. An online survey of 118 health professionals who participated in the Young Professional Internship Program (YPIP) of the West African Health Organization (WAHO) from 2005-2013 was undertaken. The response rate was 84.7% (100/118), of which 74% were public health officers and 26% were medical doctors. The results of the descriptive analysis show that health professionals intending to emigrate will generally do so for career development related factors. These include opportunities for career development, suitable job match, job promotion, and independent control of practice. Multiple regression analysis shows that variables such as gender, marital status, working hours, previous job tenure and country of previous job tenure, and source of job information are all significant predictors in their decisions to migrate (p ＜ 0.05). The migration intentions expressed in this study suggest high emigration potential among these West African health professionals, and calls for the development of effective interventions to reduce their brain drain from the West African health sector.英文摘要：非洲的疾病負擔占全球的25%，但其衛生專業人員則只占全球的3%。缺少衛生專業人力的最主要原因在於衛生專業人員的全球遷移。本研究調查西非衛生專業人員的遷移意圖，並找出預測遷移的影響因子。利用網路問卷，收集118位曾經參與2005-2013年間世界衛生組織在西非（WAHO）成立的青年專業實習計畫（YPIP）的衛生專業人員。問卷回收率93.2%（100/118），其中公共衛生官員74%，醫療人員26%。描述性分析結果顯示出衛生專業人員的遷移受到職涯發展的相關因子影響，包括職涯發展機會（93%）、適合的工作配對（90%）、工作升遷（73%）和工作上的獨立性（72%）。多元迴歸分析顯示性別、婚姻狀況、工作時數、以前的工作資歷、以前工作的國家和工作資訊是否透過社會網絡而來，是影響遷移重要預測因子（p ＜ 0.05）。西非衛生專業人員具有全球遷移的傾向，呼籲進行有效干涉以降低西非衛生領域的潛在人才外流。起始頁-結束頁：61-96資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.53.024篇名：日治初期臺南市中區傳統金匠脈絡研究並列篇名：A Study of the Context of Traditional Goldsmiths in Tainan City's Central Region in the Early Japanese Occupation Period作者：陳怡君(I-Chun Chen);邱上嘉(Shang-Chia Chiou)關鍵字：日治時期;戶口調查簿;臺南市中區;傳統金匠;the Japanese occupation period;household registration book;Tainan City’s central region;traditional metalsmith期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：53期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺南市金工產業自清領時期已經蓬勃發展，當時金銀買賣大多匯聚於現今臺南市中區。本研究以日治初期第一次人口普查明治38年至大正3年（1905年10月-1914年）間的戶口調查簿資料為基礎，並輔以歷史研究方法探討日治初期臺南廳最繁榮商埠區域「十字大街」（現臺南市中區）的金工榮景、金匠人口脈絡、從業聚落、金匠關 係、及師承系譜等相關研究。根據研究結果，分析當時繁榮商埠、經濟、人民習慣與移民人口對金工產業的影響。研究結果顯示：一、日治初期臺南市中區從業的金匠以臺灣人最多，占當時從業金匠總人口數的93.7%。其中又以現居臺南市的金匠的比例最高，占金匠總數的85%；日本與中國金匠僅占總數的6.3%。二、日治初期臺南市中區已經形成多處金匠聚落。其中以「十字大街」附近的竹仔街區域金匠聚集比例最高，其次為元會境與三界壇區域。三、臺灣籍金匠之間的關係大多為直、旁系親屬、同居寄留或雇傭關係；臺灣籍與中國籍金匠由於職業因素在當時產生「共生寄留」的族群融合關係。金匠間的師承系譜明顯採取師徒、親屬、宗族傳承技藝的方式。貴金屬工藝之所以能歷經百年延續，除了臺灣先人的生活習慣之外，當時的商埠、經濟發展、人民奢華氣息，是造就金工產業在臺南百年基石的重要動力。英文摘要：The booming metal craft industry in Tainan dates back to the period when Taiwan was under the Qing dynasty's rule. Back then, trading activities of gold and silver mainly congregated in contemporary Tainan City's central region. This study is based on the household registration book data, as generated from the first population census in the early Japanese occupation period between October 1905 and 1914. Historical methods are employed as auxiliary methods to explore the booming metal craft industry, the demographic composition of goldsmiths, settlements of goldsmiths, relationships between goldsmiths, and the ancestry of craftsmanship in Tainan’s most populous commercial district ”Cross Avenue” (the current Tainan City's central region). Based on the research results, analysis was performed to determine the impacts of the then thriving commercial ports, the economy, people's habits, and migrants in the metal craft industry. As revealed by the research results, in the early Japanese occupation period, local Taiwanese goldsmiths were the major goldsmith group in Tainan City's central region, accounting for 93.7% of the entire goldsmith population. In particular, the largest percentage (85%) of goldsmiths resided in the modern-day Tainan City, as for the goldsmith in Japan and Mainland China, there was only 6.3%. In the early Japanese occupation period, several settlements of goldsmiths were formed in Tainan City's central region. In particular, Bamboo Street, which was neighboring ”Cross Avenue,” was the highly concentrated zone for goldsmiths, followed by the region with a plethora of temple establishments. Most goldsmiths in Taiwan were either people from lineal or collateral relatives, landlord and tenant, or owner and apprentice, and the relationship of ”coexisting” between Taiwanese and Chinese goldsmiths emerged owing to this occupation. Apparently, inheritance of the goldsmith skill was based on the bond between master and apprentice, relatives or clans. Other than Taiwanese predecessors' habits in everyday life, why the expensive metal craft industry has continued for over a century can be attributed to flourishing commercial ports, thriving economic development, and an extravagant and affluent atmosphere among residents, all of which were important sources of momentum for the metal craft industry's century-long foundations in Tainan.起始頁-結束頁：97-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.53.035篇名：學仕化與社會隔離：大學生與當地居民並列篇名：Studentification and Social Segregation: Students in Higher Education and Local Residents作者：簡博秀(Po-Hsiu Chien)關鍵字：學仕化;高等教育機構;社會隔離;見習仕紳者;社區;studentification;higher education institutes (HEIs);social segregation;apprentice gentrifier;community期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：53期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文嘗試從社區的空間尺度觀察學仕化發生所產生的影響，並且藉此說明臺灣政府對高等教育機構空間規劃上的一些迷思。這個迷思發生在政府試圖透過大學城的建設帶動地方的發展，以及連結高等教擴充的正當性給予地方發展的充分理由。延續近年來西方文獻對學仕化與社會融合的研究成果，本文發掘發生在臺灣學生地區的學仕化過程其實是產生了社會區隔的現象─發生在臺南郊區新建大學的學生與居民的社會分化主要是來自於二個不同群體對地區的身份與定位不同所形成的。在研究中發現：藉由不動產投資所形成二元地景、公共安全的漠視、喧鬧的夜間生活、以及對當地社區認同感的缺乏等方面，都形成學生與當地居民產生社會的對立，也形成了在社區中二個群體彼此冷漠的社會關係。本文認為學仕化地區社會隔離的產生與學 生的個人特質是有關的，畢竟比較仕紳者之於仕紳化，學生對於地方的歸屬感是極少的。重要的是，學生未成熟與短暫居住的特質則是對當地社區產生不少的負面影響，而這個負面影響正好否決了國家藉由設置大學帶動地方發展的脆弱假設。英文摘要：Drawing on the observation of the spatial scale of community affected by studentification, this article tried to explain a contradiction stemming from a dominant doctrine that “developing a university town will inspire local developments through state regulation.” Recently, this doctrine was supported by the expansion of higher education institutes in Taiwan, which provided a reasonable excuse to develop new university towns in many cities. Following the suggestions of empirical studies on social division emerging due to studentification, this paper found that social segregation was a condition of the country landscape in southern Taiwan, resulting from the different identity between students at the new-build universities and inhabitants of communities near the universities. This paper argues that, those conditions, including the dualistic landscape formed by real estate investment, the students’ disregard for safety in public spaces, the stirring night economy triggered by students, and the student’s failure to cultivate a sense of community identity, established a two-sided situation between university students and others in the community, and exacerbated the lack of mutual concern between the two groups in the same community. This article concludes that the social segregation in studentified areas resulted from the personal character of university students, who deeply lacked the sense of belonging to the local community. The Key findings are that the immature way of life of incoming students, and their temporary stay as migratory birds acted as negative influences, which indeed denied the weak doctrine in studentified communities.起始頁-結束頁：139-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.53.046篇名：2016年第13屆國際老年聯盟全球研討會活動紀實並列篇名：Spot Record of the 13th Global Conference of International Federation on Aging, 2016作者：徐慧娟(Hui-Chuan Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：53期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：183-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.53.057篇名：主編的話作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：52期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press8篇名：高齡死亡率模型的探討並列篇名：A Study of Elderly Mortality Models作者：王信忠(Hsin-Chung Wang);余清祥(Jack C. Yue);陳怡萱(Yi-Xuan Chen)關鍵字：長壽風險;高齡死亡模型;交叉驗證;Lee-Carter模型;折扣數列;longevity risk;elderly mortality models;cross-validation;Lee- Carter model;discount sequence期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：52期出版年：2016中文摘要：隨著醫藥科技等因素的發展，我國國民平均壽命逐年上升，高齡人口的死亡率下降尤為明顯，人口老化速度愈發明顯，國人對於退休生活、醫療需求更形殷切。為了因應老化及長壽的需求，近年政府提出不少政策都和老年人有關，包括全民健保、勞退新制、長期照護等，這些社會保險制度需要對未來人口及其結構，包括高齡人口的死亡率及其平均餘命等數值的推估，這些需求使得高齡死亡模型受到國內外各界的重視。本文探討高齡死亡模型，主要分為兩類：關係模型、隨機模型，比較哪些模型適合用於因應長壽風險，考慮的模型包括Gompertz（1825）、Coale and Kisker（1990）、Lee and Carter（1992）、Renshaw and Haberman（2006）、Cairns et al.（2006a）以及王信忠、余清祥（2011）提出的折扣數列模型（discount sequence, DS），其中後者結合工程上可靠度函數Weibull分布，另外提出折扣數列比值韋伯模型（DSW）。本文以實證資料評估兩類模型的優劣，使用臺灣、日本、美國三國五齡組及單齡組死亡率資料，除了估計效果的比較，也以交叉驗證檢驗預測結果，分析發現DSW與DS關係模型分別在配適與預測上，也能如同隨機模型一樣得到高精確的預測結果。英文摘要：A decrease in mortality among the elderly is particularly evident since the end of the 20th century. As a result, the living arrangements after retirement, including as financial planning and health needs, become more important. In recent years, Taiwan’s government has issued varies social policies and a social insurance system to face the rapid population ageing. The National Health Insurance and National Pension Insurance systems are two famous examples. However, the financial solvency of these social insurance systems depends on reliable planning and prediction of future mortality rates, in particular, those of the elderly. Hence, many studies focus on building mortality models for the elderly. The goal of this study is to evaluate popular mortality models for the elderly via empirical data. There are two types of mortality models: relational and stochastic. The former includes the Gompertz, Coale-Kisker, and Discount Sequence models (Wang and Yue 2015), and the latter includes the Lee-Carter (1992), Renshaw and Haberman (2006), and CBD models (2006). For this empirical study, we consider short-term and longterm forecasts, and the evaluation is via cross validation for 5 age groups and single age data from the Human Mortality Database. We found that the Discount Sequence model has about the same prediction accuracy as stochastic models.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.52.019篇名：縣市生育津貼政策對夫妻生育意願之影響並列篇名：The Effects of County and Municipal Baby Bonus Policies on Fertility Intentions作者：尤智儀(Chih-Yi Yu);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee)關鍵字：生育意願;生育政策;生育津貼;差異中差異法;廣義估計方程式;fertility intentions;pro-natalist policy;baby bonus;differencein- differences;generalized estimation equation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：52期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來臺灣面臨超低生育的危機，針對少子化問題，政府推出鼓勵婦女生育之政策，如「父母未就業家庭育兒津貼」、「保母托育費用補助」或社會保險的生育給付等，各地方政府則以一次性的「生育津貼」刺激民眾生育意願，目前僅部分縣市發放生育津貼，各縣市開辦的時間與發放金額也有所差異，各縣市政府生育津貼政策是否能提升民眾生育意願為本研究欲探究之目的。本研究使用2005-2011年中央研究院「華人家庭動態資料庫」長期追蹤調查，為類實驗設計之事前事後對照組比較研究法，以家戶為分析單位，排除單身及年齡43歲以上者，介入計畫為2006-2010年間縣市生育津貼政策，使用差異中差異法，比較有無生育津貼政策的縣市居民在政策介入前後生育意願是否有異，以廣義估計方程式控制重複測量樣本之自我相關與其他干擾因子。結果顯示控制妻子年齡、家戶收入、已有子女數、丈夫年齡、丈夫教育程度、妻子教育程度、妻子勞動參與、生育壓力與都市發展程度後，生育津貼政策的介入對育齡婦女之生育意願無顯著影響。以現金補助的方式提升民眾生育意願在本研究中並無顯著效果，該政策成本耗費大，建議政府應重新檢視該項政策的規劃是否適宜。英文摘要：Fertility rates have declined in most countries during these years, and Taiwan has confronted a crisis of lowest-low fertility. As a result, government authorities have proposed some policies to respond to the trend, such as maternity payment, child-care subsidy and social-insurance maternity benefit. Some counties and cities have implemented a cash payment for newborn babies (baby bonus) to encourage fertility intentions based on their financial situation and policy agenda, with implementing time and payment varying between counties. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to assess whether the implementation of baby bonus payments in counties and cities can effectively improve couples' fertility intentions. The study applied data from the Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD) in 2005- 2011, using a quasi-experimental, pre-post with non-randomized control design, and the household as the unit of analysis. We excluded singles and persons aged 43 or older. The intervention plan is the baby bonus policies implemented by counties and cities during 2006-2010. The difference-indifferences (DID) method was used to compare the differences in fertility intentions between counties implementing the baby bonus or not. The Generalized Estimation Equation (GEE) model was used to control for autocorrelation among repeated measures as well as other covariates. The results indicated that after controlling for wife's age, household income, parity, husband's age, husband's education, wife's education, wife's employment status, fertility pressure and degree of urban development, the baby bonus policies had no statistically significant effects on fertility intentions. The cash benefits may not change the fertility intentions. Therefore, it is suggested that the local government should consider whether the policy is suitable or not due to the high costs of these policies.起始頁-結束頁：43-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.52.0210篇名：「雙重劣勢」的疾病模式：糖尿病病人生活品質相關因子探討並列篇名：Disease Patterns of ”Double Jeopardy”: Factors Associated with Health-Related Quality of Life (SF-36) among Diabetes Patients作者：陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);陳佳宜(Chia-Yi Chen)關鍵字：個人社會經濟地位;地區效應;糖尿病患者;多層次分析;individual socioeconomic status;contextual effect;SF-36;diabetes patients;multilevel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：52期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解臺灣地區糖尿病成人患者（20-65歲）的健康相關生活品質（SF-36），及影響生活品質的個人及地區因素。使用2005年國民健康訪問調查資料串連全民健康保險資料庫，以確診糖尿病患者。個人變項有性別、年齡、婚姻狀況、健康行為（有無吸菸、飲酒、運動和肥胖），及社經地位（工作狀況、教育程度、家戶月收入）。健康相關生活品質分為生理層面（PCS）及心理層面（MCS）。地區變項有兩個，一、縣市層次的地區社經劣勢指標，由2004-2005年縣市的（一）失業率、（二）15歲以上未受過大學以上高等教育人口比率、（三）低收入戶比率三個指標形成的因素分數；二、縣市層次的所得極端值差距指標（index of concentration at theextremes of income, ICE）。以多階層線性模式進行分析。研究結果指出，在控制個人及地區社經變項後，糖尿病人的生理及心理健康相關生活品質，皆較沒有糖尿病的人要來得差。同時，相較於沒有糖尿病人，糖尿病人若居住在社經劣勢的縣市，或是低所得人口居多（ICE為負值）的縣市，其生理健康生活品質會更差，反映出糖尿病人雙重劣勢的疾病模式。此結果顯示出社經劣勢區域可能產生的「破窗」效應，使得居住在社經劣勢地區的糖尿病人承受更多因疾病帶來的生活負擔。相反地，居住在所得分布較為均衡的縣市（ICE接近0），不管是否有糖尿病，心理健康的生活品質會較好，而糖尿病人的心理健康生活品質則會改善更多，顯示降低社會不平等可能減少相對剝奪感，從而增加心理健康的生活品質。有別於傳統所使用的地區社經劣勢指標，所得極端值差距指標亦可做為測量社會不平等的程度，對心理生理及健康生活品質有預測功能。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to assess the effects of individual socioeconomic status and county-level variables in a sample of diabetes patients aged 20-64 in Taiwan. Methods: Data on individual-level characteristics, health behavior variables, socioeconomic status and health related quality of life (SF- 36) were obtained from National Health Interview Survey in 2005 (2005 NHIS). The health data was confirmed by National Health Insurance Research Databases. Sex, age, and marital status; health behavior variables including smoking, drinking, betel nut, sports and obesity; and individual socioeconomic status measured by employment, education attainment, and household income per month were included. Health related quality of life was calculated Physical Component Summary (PCS, SF-36) and Mental Component Summary (MCS, SF-36). Two county-level variables were used: (1) area disadvantage index; (2) index of concentration at the extremes (ICE) of income. We excluded missing data on individual information and the remaining study sample included 756 DM patients and 14,360 non- DM patients nested within 23 counties. Individual socioeconomic status such as unemployment and low household income were related to PCS and MCS. County-level variables including area disadvantages and ICE were negatively associated with PCS but not with MCS. However, near-zero ICE is positively associated with better MCS. Disadvantaged diabetes patients lived in area of concentrated disadvantages had worse health-related quality of life. The link between area-based disadvantages and individual-level poverty had created a double jeopardy effect in diabetes patients.起始頁-結束頁：81-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2016.52.0311篇名：「人口與公共政策學術研討會」學術活動紀實作者：余玥貞;朱耶綾;何子欣;王友惠期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：52期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：113-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2015.52.0401篇名：性別與專業交織的照顧工作：特殊教育助理員的建制民族誌分析並列篇名：Carework in the Division of Labor of Gender and Professionalism: An Institutional Ethnography of Teachers' Assistants in Special Education in Taiwan作者：黃<U+7D89>雯(Xiu-wen Huang);張睇(Heng-hao Chang);唐文慧(Wen-hui Anna Tang)關鍵字：特教助理員;照顧工作;建制民族誌;性別;專業主義;special education assistants in Taiwan;carework;institutional ethnography;gender;professionalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：39期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討台灣特殊教育體制中，擔負著重要照顧工作的助理員之工作內容與角色地位。我們採建制民族誌取徑，從助理員的經驗出發，收集助理員的工作知識，探討以女性為多數的助理員，做為密集接觸障礙學生身體照顧的第一線工作者，在台灣特教體制下所呈現的勞動處境。研究發現台灣建制化的特教職場存在著專業主義與性別交織的階層化分工，透過法規與工作評量表格等文本，助理員被組織編派專事學生的照顧工作；以專業為名的身心二分照顧邏輯，透過性別化分工，使助理員面臨特教資源不足的制度困境，形成特教職場中不合理的統治關係。英文摘要：This paper discusses the carework of teachers' assistants in Taiwan's special education system. Adopting an institutional ethnographic perspective and starting from these assistants' experiences, we have analyzed their work knowledge and presented their working conditions and professional status as teachers' assistants in intimate contact with their handicapped students. Our study found that Taiwan's special education system has a unique position in the government of the institutions, one which is intertwined with a division of labor according to gender and professionalism. In the name of professionalism, with the special education law and regulations as guides and mediation in the division of labor between ”mind” and ”body” work, the teachers' assistants are assigned to care for the students' bodies and to do the ”dirty work.” Teachers' assistants thus compensate for the deficit of care to support students with disabilities; and they form the lower ranks in the stratified structure of the special education system in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.39.12篇名：照顧男子氣概與男性公務人員育嬰留職經驗並列篇名：Caring Masculinity and the Experience of Parental Leave for Male Civil Servants in Taiwan作者：林東龍(Dong-Long Lin);劉蕙雯(Hui-Wen Liu)關鍵字：育嬰假;照顧男子氣概;父職角色;性別平等;父職培養;男性公務人員;parental leave;caring masculinity;fatherhood;gender equity;fostering paternity;male civil servant期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：39期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣性別工作平等法規未限定育嬰假僅能由夫妻其中一方申請，但男女申請育嬰留職人數差異極大。過去文獻指出，此根源於父職角色仍受文化和性別機制形塑。由於「男子氣概」是規範男性在各種場合展現合宜行為的重要準則，如何協助男性突破傳統男子氣概形塑的父職角色框架，提高其申請育嬰假的意願，為本研究關注焦點。因此，本研究以男子氣概為視角，分析育嬰留職男性的父職經驗，瞭解其男子氣概內涵和男子氣概與父職角色的連結關係。本研究共訪談10名高雄市政府各單位曾申請育嬰留職、且已回到職場的男性公務人員，並分析訪談文本。本研究發現有三：一、育嬰留職男性的男子氣概，是一種「照顧」男子氣概，並可分為「全力照顧型」和「兼顧工作型」兩種父職角色類型；二、職業保障和男女薪資平等，是實踐「照顧」男子氣概的社會基礎；三、當男性申請育嬰留職照顧孩子時，有助於減輕女性產後負荷，使其順利復原。因此，性別平等和父職培養是一體兩面的工作，均有助於落實男性申請育嬰留職停薪。本研究建議有三：一、正向探究和倡導「照顧」男子氣概；二、持續改革人力市場，扭轉職場性別不平等；三、提供男性有薪父職假，鼓勵夫妻共同照顧，降低女性照顧負荷。英文摘要：In Taiwan, the Act of Gender Equality in Employment allows a parent of either sex to apply for parental leave; however, the parental leave numbers differ significantly between males and females. According to the literature, the problem is that fatherhood attributes are still shaped by cultural and gender institutions. Because masculinity is the main standard proscribing male behaviors in any setting, this study has focused on how to assist males in breaking through the fatherhood framework as constricted by traditional notions of masculinity. Therefore, this study adopted a masculinity perspective to explore the experience of parental leave of male civil servants, to understand the meaning of masculinity, and to determine the relationship between masculinity and fatherhood. Ten in-depth interviews with male civil servants employed by Kaohsiung City Government who had applied for parental leave were conducted, and data analysis adopted a thematic approach. There were three major findings. Firstly, the masculinity of a male who applies for parental leave is called ”caring masculinity”, and that masculinity is connected to ”full-time fatherhood” and ”balancing family and work fatherhood”. Secondly, both work protection and gender equity in salary are the social infrastructure that makes ”caring masculinity” practicable. Thirdly, any male applying for parental leave contributes to decreasing the postnatal burden and facilitating female recovery. In other words, gender equity and fostering paternity are two sides to one coin, and both are conducive to men applying for parental leave without salary. This study makes three suggestions: firstly, a positive approach to exploring and advocating ”caring masculinity” should be adopted. Secondly, reform of the labor market and reversal of gender inequity in the workplace should be continued. Thirdly, paid paternity leave would be effective in encouraging couples to care for children collectively and thus decrease the care burden for women.起始頁-結束頁：59-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.39.593篇名：從意外到等待：台灣女性的初經經驗，1950s-2000s並列篇名：From Surprise to Anticipation: Girls' Experiences with First Menstruation in Taiwan, 1950s-2000s作者：王秀雲(Hsiu-Yun Wang)關鍵字：初經;年輕女孩;知識與性別政治;台灣衛生教育史;menarche;young girls;knowledge and gender politics;hygiene education in postwar Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：39期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討戰後至二十一世紀初台灣女人初經經驗的變遷及其歷史脈絡，即初經來臨時的感受、態度、反應與相關行動，並以「從意外、驚嚇到等待」勾勒出半世紀以來的主要歷史變化，指出此歷程蘊含著知識與性別權力的轉變。本文使用的歷史材料，包括報章雜誌和醫療、護理、心理衛生教育相關文獻，22位女性的自述文字或已出版之口述史訪談紀錄，以及38位女性的口述史訪問內容。歷史中的各種條件，尤其是相關知識，是影響女性身體經驗的重要因素，例如，女孩們是否曾被預告初經的來臨、知識與教育及其內容、初次來經時身在何處，以及月經是否為談論的話題、是否與周遭親友談論月經、身旁相關人士提供的協助，如母親、姊妹、同儕、男性友人和父親等。本文特別關注知識的多重面貌，早期女孩雖未被預告月經，但許多人透過年長女性網絡間接學習，也接受各種非正式月經教育。1970年代之後，則逐漸以醫普衛生學校教育與衛生棉廣告為主。此外，月經議題也有公共化的趨勢，除了醫學衛生知識的普及與學校教育的建制化鼓勵人們公開討論之外，父親與男性友人也逐漸被納入月經事務中。英文摘要：Drawing from oral history interviews, biographical accounts, and other sources of information on 60 women born between the 1920s and 1990s, this paper examines the changing history of young girls' experiences of menarche in Taiwan since World War II. Young girls who experienced their menarche before the 1970s were often caught by surprise and filled with fear about what was going on with their bodies. In contrast, as a result of menstruation education beginning in the 1970s, later young girls were much more likely to possess knowledge of menstruation long before its arrival. This paper pays special attention to generational differences in girls' level of knowledge about menstruation before it first occurred, where they were when they had their first period, if or when menstruation was a possible topic of conversation, and who was involved in caring for their menstruating bodies. From the 1970s, in addition to girls being educated in ”correct” menstruation knowledge as a result of industrialization and nine-year compulsory education, girls increasingly experienced their menarche in a public setting, often with much embarrassment. Medical practitioners in Taiwan, including physicians, nurses, hygiene education professionals, and public health professionals, often working with sanitary napkin companies, began to advocate health education for school girls. Menstruation education- from institutional instruction to newspaper advice columns to popular health books- also profoundly changed the ways girls experienced their period, including the possibility of open conversation about the subject and involvement by males (e.g., fathers, brothers, and male peers). I argue that the ways in which different generations of women in Taiwan experienced their menarche were shaped by the politics of the communication of gendered knowledge within shifting structures of social relations.起始頁-結束頁：111-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.39.1114篇名：性別、族群與客家研究並列篇名：Gender, Ethnicity, and Hakka Studies in Taiwan作者：蔡芬芳(Fen-fang Tsai)關鍵字：台灣客家女性與性別研究;性別與族群;性別角色;Hakka Women and Gender studies in Taiwan;gender and ethnicity;gender role期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：39期出版年：2016中文摘要：客家女性與性別研究之於客家研究的重要性，在於其有助於建構一個完整的客家特性，並讓人得以了解客家族群。然而，如此觀點並非因為客家女性鑲嵌在「美德」與「勞動」中的形象突出，而是需要理解在族群或族群研究中看見性別，其意義為何？再則，雖然在2000 年後，台灣客家女性與性別研究已有多元異質的展現，客家女性不再被束縛在本質化的族群牢籠中，也被「看見」了，但是主要問題在於「怎麼看」？本文首先從性別、族群認同與文化建構之間的關係，了解客家女性為何及如何在男性學者書寫下成為「他者」。其次，1990年代出現的批判性觀點轉化了客家女性的意義，同時呈現理解客家女性性別角色與地位的多重觀點。本文認為目前台灣客家女性與性別研究在議題、觀點與方法上已多有擴展，同質的客家女性形象因而解構，同時建構出具有能動性與主體性的客家女性形象。然而，從博物館展覽、媒體論述和一般人看法中，仍可看到客家女性被同質化的現象。因此，應再回到本文的問題意識「怎麼看」，方是認識與理解性別、族群與文化之開端。英文摘要：Hakka women and gender studies are important to Hakka studies, for complete Hakka characteristics are therewith built and the characteristics of Hakka people can be thereby recognized. However, this is not to say that the image of Hakka women which is enshrined as ”virtue” and ”hard labor” should be denied, but rather it is of significance to know why we need to comprehend how gender is visible in ethnicity or in study of ethnicity. Moreover, multiple approaches to and perspectives on Hakka women and gender studies in Taiwan have been illustrated since 2000; Hakka women are freed from a homogenized ethnic jail, and are authentically ”seen”. But the question that remains is ”how” Hakka women are seen. This study first looks at the relationships among gender, ethnic identity and construction of culture, and then attempts to understand why and how Hakka women became ”the Other” in male scholars' writings and research. Secondly, critical viewpoints which emerged in the 1990s have transformed the meaning of Hakka women; the gender roles and statuses of Hakka women have been tackled simultaneously in a variety of approaches and points of view. Essentialized pictures of Hakka women have been deconstructed. Instead, the agency and subjectivity of Hakka women have been demonstrated. Notwithstanding such a change, Hakka women are still homogenized in museum exhibitions, media representations, and general views of the public. The author thus argues that we ought to pursue the idea of ”how to” understand Hakka women, for it inaugurates our comprehension of gender, ethnicity and culture.起始頁-結束頁：165-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.39.1655篇名：與創傷同在：《紀念之外：二二八事件．創傷與性別差異的美學》書評並列篇名：Being with Trauma: Book Review on Beyond Commemoration: The 2-28 Incident, the Aesthetics of Trauma and Sexual Difference作者：關秀惠(Hsiu-Hui Kuan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：39期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：205-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.39.2056篇名：非主流新聞室的性別政治以《小世界大文山社區報》為例並列篇名：Gender Politics in a Non-Mainstream Newsroom: A Case Study of the Shih-Hsin University Publication Newsweek作者：林宇玲(Yu-Ling Lin)關鍵字：公共新聞學;性別與新聞學;性別化生存心態;新聞教育;新聞專業訓練;新聞場域;public journalism;gender and journalism;gendered habitus;journalism education;professional training in journalism;journalistic field期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：38期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究採用Lois McNay的性別化生存心態和場域的關係作為理論架構，檢視以公共為導向的《小世界》新聞室之性別政治，同時探討學生如何在此協商其性別認同和專業實踐。研究有四項發現：首先，在以女性為主的新聞室內，不會讓女記者感到女性特質是負面資本，但實際的新聞運作卻多強調人際關係，因而發生一些衝突和爭議。其次，《小世界》以女生居多，學生傾向以同班兼好友為選版依據，強化同儕關係在新聞實踐的影響力。第三，《小世界》雖然以公共為理念，但實際運作仍未脫離傳統的專業規範。學生為了上報，傾向接受並內化組織和專業規範的要求。最後，學生的性別化生存心態若不符合版面的專業屬性，在實習過程中須經歷較多的掙扎與協商。英文摘要：This study employs the theoretical framework proposed by L. McNay, based on the relationship between a gendered habitus and its location of activity. It examines the gender politics in the newsroom of Shih-Hsin University's Newsweek, which is a non-mainstream and community-oriented local publication, and explores how professional training in public journalism influences the gendered and professional identities of journalism students. The study has produced four findings. First, female reporters in the female-dominated newsroom do not feel that female characteristics are negative capital, but the actual operation of news production tends to highlight the importance of interpersonal relationships and to lead to some conflicts and controversies. Secondly, the majority of the newsroom participants are female, and they tend to choose journalistic roles based on relations with classmates and friends, and thus to reinforce the impact of peer relationships on their news practices. Thirdly, the newsroom holds ideals of dedication to the public benefit, but the actual operation follows traditional professional norms. Students tend to accept the organizational and professional norms in order to get their articles published. Finally, if a student's gendered habitus does not meet the journalistic professionalism required by the news section, she/he would likely experience more frustration and negotiation in the internship process.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.38.17篇名：原住民新聞中的性別與族群議題並列篇名：Gender Issues in Indigenous Television News作者：孫嘉穗(Chia-Sui Sun)關鍵字：性別;族群;媒體;原住民新聞;原住民記者;gender;ethnicity;media;indigenous television news;indigenous journalists期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：38期出版年：2016中文摘要：原住民媒介中的性別呈顯，牽涉到各原住民族原有的社會與文化中的性別規範與禁忌。在新聞產製中，性別因素影響著原住民新聞工作者從採訪到播報的各個環節，進而影響新聞成品中的族群性別影像。為了理解原住民新聞工作者在職場上面對的性別處遇，以及原住民媒體涉及的性別議題，本研究訪談原住民族電視台「族語新聞」的各族原住民主播、記者，以及「每日新聞」的新聞部副理與製作人，探究性別因素如何影響各族群的新聞產製，在爬梳與理解相關問題之外，整理出可著力與培力的目標，期使原住民媒體能以更具性別意識的觀點來製作族群新聞，並凸顯各族多元的性別圖像。英文摘要：This paper explores gender issues as seen in indigenous television news in Taiwan. The representation of gender in indigenous media is involved with gender norms, taboos, and cultural regulations in different ethnic groups and different indigenous societies. In the news production process, gender issues influence indigenous anchors and reporters in interview and broadcasting perspectives. Furthermore, gender bias affects the ethnic images produced and presented in indigenous news. This research was carried out in order to understand what indigenous news professionals encounter when considering gender cultural space in the news production process and what gender issues are involved in indigenous media. Interviews were conducted with different indigenous ethnic news reporters and anchors in indigenous television news. The research revealed ways gender factors influenced news production in different ethnic groups. It identifies key gender issues and also provides suggestions to facilitate indigenous news production that embraces both gender awareness and multicultural gender images.起始頁-結束頁：57-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.38.578篇名：家中斷捨離？兩種傳播科技退用的性別分析並列篇名：Communication Technology Dropout and Refusal: The Analysis of Married Women's Quitting ICTs at Home作者：方念萱(Leticia Nien-Hsuan Fang)關鍵字：性別;退用;不用;家用科技;gender;Wii;dropout;non-use;domestic technology;James Paul Gee期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：38期出版年：2016中文摘要：為促成社會含納（social inclusion）、社會公平，過往至今的公共政策以弭平數位落差為目標，相關傳播與科技的研究也常以擁有者（haves）與未擁有者（have-nots）為基本範疇，亟思將未擁有者轉為擁有者，促成全民近用資傳科技。然而，研究者、政策制訂者對於「未擁有科技」的形構、想像、與瞭解，往往停留在缺乏硬體等的功能論觀點，未能脈絡化當事者（群）之所以不（能）使用科技的原因、經驗。近年全球傳播與科技相關研究已經開始聚焦理解「不使用者」的樣態，本研究植基於2003年已婚女性退用網際網路的訪談資料，以及2011年前後另一深訪已婚女性退用家用娛樂科技Wii的資料，從退用、拒用、不使用等相關角度重新審視，並以James Paul Gee的言說分析工具分析女性退用傳播科技的社會、文化、家庭脈絡與機轉。英文摘要：This paper is a study which revisits answers from married women in Taiwan in 00 data on quitting the Internet and 011 data on dropping out of Wii-play. I revisit the data gathered from in-depth interviews in the past, and analyze women as situated non-users of domestic communication technology in Taiwan. In the past, the dominant discourse on bridging the digital divide has been geared towards the functionalistic view of nonuse, with the anticipation that the category of non-use will be diminished eventually. While failure to access the technology and lack of digital literacy may still be reasons that people remain non-users, women's dropping out of domestic technology, be it information and communication technologies or entertainment ones, can be analyzed from the perspectives of gendered roles scripted socially as well as media refusal possibly resulting from changing visions of the ideal family.起始頁-結束頁：111-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.38.1119篇名：生育旅遊的國界管理 赴美待產女性的國界規訓經驗並列篇名：Regulating Birth Tourism: The Flow from Taiwan to the United States作者：康庭瑜(Ting-Yu Kang)關鍵字：生育旅遊;國際遷移;新自由主義;性別;身體;懷孕;birth tourism;neoliberalism;border management;pregnancy;migration;gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：38期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文聚焦於台灣赴美生育旅遊，分析目的地國在出入境口的國界管理如何規範日漸盛行的跨國生育旅行，而從事跨國生育的女人又如何理解和回應這些國界規訓。本研究訪談美國國界管理者並分析相關的次級資料，包括國界管理者的受訪資料、聲明稿、政策和法規文件，以了解國界管理的政策、法律和執行；同時，本研究也與台灣赴美生育旅遊的女性進行訪談，探問她們受到國界規範的經驗。這些研究資料指出，對於生育旅遊，目的地國在出入境口的國界管理是非常新自由主義式的，即，若是你經濟自主且資本累積能力高，則國界歡迎你進來。這種新自由主義的國界邏輯看似以性別中立的語言寫成，實則有其性別面向：女人的生殖性被標誌為國家的財務風險。這些跨國生育旅遊的女人被出入境口國界管理者依年齡、婚姻狀態等分類檢查其生殖可能，高生殖可能者再依資本能力分類檢視，篩檢出好的生殖性和壞的生殖性。這個高度浮動的分類實踐，在赴美生育女性當中建構出一種特殊的法律地位主體意識，亦即指認自己的法律地位是浮動的。這種模糊的法律地位主體意識有幾種特徵：第一，它是一種高度身體化的主體意識；第二，它也是階級化的主體意識；第三，它有時也是種族化的主體意識。英文摘要：This article focuses on the context of birth tourism from Taiwan to the United States, analyzing how border regulators manage this increasingly popular phenomenon and how birth tourists experience and react to the regulations. The methods are twofold. Firstly, this research is based on interviews with border regulators and the analysis of relevant secondary materials to obtain information regarding how border regulators manage birth tourism. The analysis of secondary data mainly focuses on policy papers, public talks, and press releases by officers at Custom and Border Protection. Secondly, this study is also based on interviews with birth tourists which inquire into their experiences of border regulations. The findings suggest the regulation of birth tourism is largely governed by a neoliberal logic. That is, only financially autonomous and economically competent transnationals are considered qualified for entry. This seemingly gender-neutral border principal is in fact highly gendered, as women's reproduction is viewed as a financial threat to borders. Border regulators regularly scrutinize women's reproductive status and categorize them into ”good pregnancy” and ”bad pregnancy” according to their financial competence. This constructs an embodied subjectivity among the women that surrounds their vague and volatile legal status, leading to their constant self-surveillance of their own reproductive bodies. The process through which the women build a perception of their own legal status is racialized and classed. They construct birth tourists from other national and class backgrounds as a racial and economic Other to draw boundaries between themselves as the legitimate visitors and the have-nots as the outlawed, unwelcomed ”black sheep” in the ever expanding flow of birth tourism.起始頁-結束頁：171-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2016.38.17101篇名：客家「村姑」要進城：台灣客家男同志的認同型塑及其性／別、族群與城鄉的交織展演與政略並列篇名：Hakka Rural ”Sissies” Go to Big Cities: The Identity Formation and Intersectionality of Gender, Sexual, Ethnic and Urban-Rural Performativities and Politics among Taiwanese Hakka Male Queers作者：林純德(Dennis Chwen-der LIN)關鍵字：客家;男同志;城鄉;離散;交織性;羞恥;敢曝;Hakka;male queer;urban-rural;diaspora;intersectionality;shame;camp期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：105期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文企圖挑戰某種「同志缺席」（queer-free）的在地客家研究及「客家缺席」（Hakka-free）的在地同志研究的學術氛圍，期以再現多重繁複的性／別與族群反抗政略，並召喚一群擁有客家認同的男同志，藉由述說我們那充滿「怪胎反轉羞恥」及「敢曝樂趣」且交織著性／別、族群與城鄉的主體展演與反抗政略的故事，既「酷異化」在地客家學界內的性別研究論述，也「族群化」在地的同志研究。本文主要探究的問題可歸結為：一、何謂「客家男同志」？如何從性／別、族群及城鄉的交織視野來加以審視？二、在地客家男男情慾互動與身份認同型塑的歷史演變為何？三、家族／家庭中的親屬關係如何影響在地客家男同志的性／別及族群認同的型塑與展演？四、在地客家男同志與其他族群身份認同的男同志之間的互動關係為何？五、在地客家男同志的性／別、族群與城鄉的交織展演與政略在同志社群及客家族群內發揮何種效應？六、客家母語對於在地客家男同志的性／別及族群認同的型塑與展演的影響力為何？如何影響？本文採取質性研究的取徑，具體的研究方法則揉合了線上文本分析及線下深度訪談。英文摘要：This paper aims to disrupt both the ”queer-free” phenomenon within local Hakka studies and the ”Hakka-free” phenomenon within local queer studies. It calls for radical, yet complicated, queer politics inscribed by the intersectionality of gender, sexual, ethnic and urban-rural differences by rallying local Hakka male queers like me. By dint of telling our shameful, campy stories, we are determined to ”queer” Hakka gender studies and to ”racialize” local queer studies. The main questions looked into in this paper include: (1) How do we define Hakka male queers? (2) What is the socio-cultural context from which local Hakka queer activism arises? (3) How does kinship impinge upon gender/ sexual and ethnic identities among local Hakka male queers? (4) How do local Hakka male queers interact with those of other ethnic groups? (5) How does the intersectionality of gender, sexual, ethnic and urban-rural performativities and politics among local Hakka male queers impact upon both local queer and Hakka communities? (6) How does the Hakka language influence identity formation among local Hakka male queers? This paper employs a qualitative approach by adopting a combination of online text analysis and offline indepth interview.起始頁-結束頁：1-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：從文學革命到文化冷戰：侯健與新人文主義的兩岸軌跡並列篇名：From Literary Revolution to Cultural Cold War: Hou Chien and New Humanism across the Taiwan Strait作者：王智明(Chih-Ming WANG)關鍵字：侯健;新人文主義;民生文學說;冷戰分斷;國共內戰;Hou Chien;New Humanism;Thesis on Literature for Life;Cold War Division;the Chinese Civil War期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：105期出版年：2016中文摘要：當代中港台文學的分流與交會，與1947年後全球冷戰分斷體制的建立，有著密切的關係。然而，僅僅以美蘇對抗的歷史分期來理解冷戰，無法充份貼近兩岸三地的歷史經驗，因為國際冷戰同時疊合著國共內戰的軌跡，分斷體制實為一個至今依然穩固的雙戰構造。如何重新理解冷戰與內戰的關連，乃是東亞冷戰研究的重要課題。本文將以渡台文人侯健的文學批評為中心，透過他的文字與思想，來追索兩岸的冷戰經驗是如何在文學創作與批評的場域裡展開的。作為梁實秋的弟子與新人文主義的傳人，侯健的著作（含評論、研究與譯作），一方面反映了新人文主義的文學品味與政治脾性，另一方面則對「從文學革命到革命文學」的思想進程進行了整理與批判。他所提出的「民生文學說」正是對抗社會主義文藝思想的利器。他對文學的政治性與民族性的思考，不僅反映了文學思想如何受到冷戰意識型態的制約，更突出了一條「從文學革命到文化冷戰」的思路，至今仍在兩岸三地的文化與政治空間裡發酵和作用著。英文摘要：This article is an attempt to rethink the Cold War discourse in the West by injecting a discussion of the Chinese Civil War as its constitutive experience. It focuses on the work of Hou Chien, a Chinese literary critic in Taiwan, as an entry point for linking the Cold War and the Chinese Civil War with the aim of understanding the Division System across the Taiwan Strait and beyond. It contends that the Division System is built upon both the Cold War and the Chinese Civil War, and therefore an understanding of how the Civil War was- and still is being-fought across the Taiwan Strait is crucial to the critique of Cold War discourse in the West. More specifically, it regards Hou's New Humanist work in the 1970s as intersecting with the dual-war structure to project a ”Chinese” future that will be built upon a critical reflection of the modernity legacy in the West. Reading Hou's works in literary criticism within this geopolitical context also suggests the possibility of understanding the political character of New Humanism in the dual contexts of the Cold War cross-Taiwan Strait politics.起始頁-結束頁：61-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：解嚴後台灣社會工作者的政治參與：在社福運動歷史中消失的社聯工作室並列篇名：The Political Participation of Social Workers in Taiwan: The Case of the Council of Social Services作者：王增勇(T. Y. WANG)關鍵字：政治參與;社工專業;政策倡導;基進社工;歷史研究;political participation;social work;policy advocacy;radical social work;history research期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：105期出版年：2016中文摘要：社會工作者本身溫暖的專業形象，加上台灣的社會運動鮮少看到社工的身影，社工普遍被認為是保守且不熱衷參與政治，但社聯工作室的歷史推翻了這樣的論述。本文透過文獻歷史檔案分析與當事人訪談，試圖勾勒社聯工作室這段尚未被學界記錄的歷史，並分析社聯工作室的政治參與方式。社聯工作室的歷史反映了解嚴後的社工面對正在成形的代議民主政治，積極地透過各種政治參與方法，試圖改變國家資源分配的模式。社工文獻中所提及各種政治參與方式幾乎在社聯工作室的歷史中都曾出現，可見社聯工作室政治參與的廣度。社聯工作室對於台灣社會福利運動的影響有二：社聯工作室所催生的各種福利使用者組織與聯盟團體，奠定了現有社福倡議組織的基礎；其次，社聯工作室所發展的對預算監督與立法倡導成為後續社福組織影響政策的主要模式。但隨著社福運動的成功，個別倡議組織進入體制所獲得的政治資源造成社聯工作室所期待的合作與共享難以維繫，在1998年停止運作。英文摘要：The political participation of social workers in Taiwan is generally considered low. However, the Council of Social Services, organized by a group of social workers from the voluntary sector, challenged this assumption. The history of the Council is documented and analyzed in this essay through document analysis of the Council's publications and in-depth interviews and focused group interviews with its key participants. The history of the Council shows social workers of that time were aware of the advent of representative democracy and were actively learning various kinds of political skills to be politically effective. The Council tried to form grass-root organizations and conduct administrative lobbying, legislative advocacy and electoral campaign. The findings show that the scope and depth of political participation of the Council covered almost all the political skills of social workers that had been mentioned in social work literature. The coalition model among grass-root groups developed by the Council has laid the foundation for social welfare movements in the current representative democracy of Taiwan. The capacity to influence and monitor the budgets and legislations of the state, developed by the Council, has been proved to be the key to the effectiveness of advocacy. However, the tension between political involvements with the state and the autonomy of advocacy groups remains uneasy to balance.起始頁-結束頁：103-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：陳映真的第三世界：左翼的去殖民及其困境並列篇名：Chen Yingzhen's Third World: The Predicament of the Post/Colonial Mental Condition作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing CHEN)關鍵字：陳映真;第三世界;社會主義;去殖民;精神狀況;Chen Yingzhen;Third World;socialism;decolonization;mental condition期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：105期出版年：2016中文摘要：「社會主義」與「去殖民」存在著什麼樣的歷史關係？本文指出去殖民工作在戰後至今沒有能夠系統性地展開，關乎全球冷戰結構的出現，攔截、延宕了反思運動的契機，去殖民幾乎在歷史中僅僅等同於「獨立／建國」。但是放在東亞區域史來觀察，社會主義運動是極為關鍵的動力，在中國大陸、韓半島、越南等地取得了巨大的進展，成為區域內（外）左傾份子認識世界的基本依託。因此思考去殖民問題時勢必為國際共產運動所牽引。換句話說，我們必須重新清理：第三世界的左翼如何在歷史中看待、處理、思索去殖民問題？帶著上述的問題意識，本文重訪陳映真小說中的第三世界，試圖追溯戰後五、六十年間，作家立足於從隱晦到清晰的左翼位置，是如何書寫、面對新／後／殖民狀況。本文主要討論了〈故鄉〉、〈兀自照耀著的太陽〉、〈唐倩的喜劇〉、〈忠孝公園〉這幾篇小說，呈現的是陳映真在1960年至2005年不斷在思索這個沒完沒了的問題，他知道這是台灣與祖國重新縫合的核心障礙，最終他沒有答案，但至少是三邊得共同面對的問題。英文摘要：What is the historical connection between socialism and decolonization? This essay argues that the reason why decolonization failed to unfold in a systematic way in the postwar years had something to do with the emergence of global Cold War structure, which intercepted and postponed this crucial project, so that decolonization, historically speaking, became no more than the independence and nation-building of individual countries. However, in East Asia at the same time, socialism occupied such pivotal positions with its great successes in the Mainland China, the Korean Peninsula, and Vietnam. So much so that many leftists inside and outside the region relied upon it as their frame of reference. This juxtaposition prompts us to reexamine how the Third World leftists viewed, tackled, and faced up to decolonization. With this problematic in mind, this essay revisits the Third World in Chen Yingzhen's fiction by tracing his representations of the neo/post/colonial condition as his leftist conviction grew from vague to firm. By reading closely his short stories ”Home Country,” ”The Comedy of Tangqian,” ”The Sun That Shines On,” and ”Zhongxiao Park,” this essay hopes to demonstrate how Chen has been consistently concerned with this issue from 1960 to 2005, because he was fully aware of its being the core obstacle to the reunification of Taiwan and China. Although devoid of an answer in the end, he at foregrounded it as a problem that has to be dealt with by all sides involved.起始頁-結束頁：153-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：文明、帝國、世界體系：評趙汀陽《天下體系》並列篇名：Civilization, Empire and World-System: A Review of Zhao Tingyang's The Tianxia System作者：甯應斌(NING Yin-Bin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：105期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：221-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：想想臺灣思想史：評析《存在交涉：日治時期的臺灣哲學》並列篇名：Review of Existential Engagement: Philosophy in Taiwan, the Japanese Era作者：藍弘岳(Hung-Yueh LAN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：105期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：233-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：辨識「中國因素」，還原新聞自由　建構台灣傳媒的出路並列篇名：Qualifying ”China Factor,” Qualifying Press Freedom Constructing the Way Forward for Taiwan's Media作者：馮建三(Chien-San FENG)關鍵字：反媒體壟斷;中國因素;積極新聞自由;消極新聞自由;公共服務媒體;anti-media monopoly;China factor;positive press freedom;negative press freedom;public service media期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016中文摘要：「中國因素」對於台灣具有接近本質屬性的影響，由來已久，但其命名與對於台灣傳媒的意義，凸顯自2008年、特別是2012年以來的「反媒體壟斷運動」。回顧歷史，台灣的「國家機器」從1949年起，就一直獨佔中國因素的界定權力；1990年代以後，「資本」與「人民」相繼進場，提出有同有異的中國內涵。傳媒資本不但以中國市場作為資本增殖的想像，亦取中國作為區隔台灣新聞市場的利器之一；國家則在政治考量之外，逐漸納入資本的經濟觀點。人民社團認為中國因素威脅了台灣的新聞自由，兩度採取大規模的對抗行動，但也兩次產生行動者未曾預料的正面效應。考察國家、資本與人民的這些動向之後，本文最後指出，面對中國，台灣必須引入新的認知，還原「新聞自由」的完整面貌，不再停留於「消極自由」這個台灣已有亞洲最優表現的面向，而是必須正視台灣傳媒欠缺「積極自由」的事實，進而通過公共政策擴大公共服務媒體的規模，一舉兩得，既使其足以扮演台灣傳媒市場領導者的角色，並且也同時積極轉化中國因素，使其成為更新台灣傳媒制度的重要動力之一。英文摘要：”China factor” has always been a force making impacts upon Taiwan and her media, though its ”official” debut was in 2012 with the ascent of anti-media monopoly campaigns. The party-state in Taiwan monopolized its interpretation prior to the lift of martial law in 1987. Subsequently, the capital and the people entered to offer their versions. ”China factor” has been mostly considered as a market segmentation, as a business opportunity, or as a threat to Taiwan's sovereignty and identity. In this paper, it will be suggested that there is another ”China factor” that should be recognized or constructed for uplifting Taiwan's media. For advancing this vision, an authentic concept of press freedom is restored. While there are two aspects of press freedom, the negative aspect is emphasized to the neglect of its positive dimension. Building upon negative freedom that generations of people contested and won considerably, Taiwan has to strike hard and enriches media's positive freedom by expanding the Public Service Media (PSM). This is at once a significant strategy and an end in itself. PSM will be more accountable to Taiwan's society, less susceptible to China's market, and more resistant to the latter's economic ”briberies and seductions.”起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：第二套住房選擇與社會正義　以上海為例並列篇名：Second Home Housing Choice and Social Justice in Shanghai作者：宋郁玲(Yu-Ling SONG)關鍵字：第二套住房;住宅選擇;中產階級;社會正義;深度訪談;上海;second home;housing choice;middle class;social justice;in-depth interview;Shanghai期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016中文摘要：1998年以來，中國住宅呈現商品化現象，亦即住宅的價值超越了居住的功能，越來越多人購買二間或以上的住宅。在2010年，中國國務院頒布「新國十條」，開始對購買第二套及以上住宅者，進行貸款限制。於是，中國政府在面對住宅市場過熱、甚至引發泡沫風險之時，首波打房政策整治的對象，就瞄向了「中產階級」，使社會不正義的責備指向了這個群體，形成社會整體卸責的結果。在這樣的背景下，本文擇定上海作為研究區域，針對2009-2010年期間在上海擁有「第二套住房」的20位上海人，進行半結構式深度訪談、主題分析（thematic analysis），以及描述統計分析，探討中國在住房改革十年來的政策結構下，這些已擁有「第二套住房」或者還在籌畫購屋的中產階級，當他們選擇「第二套住房」時，會形成什麼樣的敘事？而這些敘事，能否顯現出他們差異的空間經驗，進而翻轉其社會不正義的標籤？本文更追問，最終不正義的社會責任，又將由誰承擔？最後，本研究發現，現有論述對於「第二套住房」業主的責備，並無法積極解決不正義的現狀，而社會結構所造成的壓迫恐怕才是主因，此不僅表現在弱勢階層，也同樣讓看似無罪的中產階級捲入邪惡之渦。本研究分析表明，這種集體邪惡，係由社會結構和參與者共同創造，一旦責備失焦，將造成真正涉入者得以卸責、無罪，社會結構的壓迫性無異更為嚴峻。而本文所提「集體責任」的積極觀點，將有利於導入並作為扭轉不正義的契機。英文摘要：Since 1998, along with housing commercialization, owning a second home has become more and more prevalent in China. However, the owners of second homes, generally seen as the middle class, became the target of a new wave of housing policies which aimed at curbing the estate speculation. Putting the blame of social injustice on the middle class, this resulted in the collective relief of responsibility. To critically reflect on this situation, the paper selected Shanghai as its study area, with the fieldwork carried out during the summer time in 2009-2010. Twenty interviewees who owned second homes were selected through the snowballing sampling and semi-structured in-depth interviews were undertaken with them. By using the thematic and descriptive statistics analysis to explore what kind of narratives would be constructed when second home owners made their housing choice, the paper seeks to ask what kinds of different spatial experiences could be revealed by these narratives and who should really take the social responsibility for spatial injustice. This study finds that the blame on second homes' middle class owners is incapable of actively resolving the existing injustice, for the oppression from social structure is the main reason, which not only affects the vulnerable social classes but also pulls the seemingly innocent middle class into the vortex of evil. This study shows that this collective evil of spatial injustice is co-constructed by social structure and those who participated in it. Therefore a blame which misses this point would relieve the real culprits of their responsibilities. This paper proposes the concept of ”collective responsibility” as a more effective way to reverse the injustice.起始頁-結束頁：59-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：台灣工礦公司之民營化　以分廠出售為主的討論並列篇名：The Privatization of Taiwan Industrial and Mining Company Focusing on the Selling of Individual Factories作者：洪紹洋(Sao-Yang HONG)關鍵字：土地改革;四大公司民營化;分廠出售;台灣工礦公司;新興工業;land reform;privatization of the Four Companies;selling individual factories;Taiwan Industrial and Mining Company;emerging industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016中文摘要：本論文關注省營台灣工礦公司如何在土地改革制度下實施分廠出售民營化，以及民營化政策對民間資本積累與地主資本的影響。從戰前、戰後台灣經濟的延續性而論，部分於戰時興起的新興工業，戰後初期併入台灣工礦公司。戰後這些生產部門因台灣工礦公司受限於資金與資源而停滯，直到分廠出售民營化才持續發展，部分並成為台灣較具規模的企業。台灣工礦公司採行分廠出售的民營化方式，促成民間資本可以較低的成本取得廠房，免除創廠初期的前置作業。民營化初期持有台灣工礦公司較多股份的股東，透過分廠出售的政策獲得廠礦經營權。這些取得廠礦的經營者，多數非地主階層出身。而台灣工礦公司歷經分廠出售後，至1960年代初期不但面臨經營上的虧損，股價也呈現低迷。此時持有台灣工礦公司股東的地主或投資人，因為公司營運困難，無法從持有該公司的股票獲利。透過本論文的研究結果，可知悉參與董事會為數不少的成員為非地主出身，與政府宣稱土地改革促使地主資本流入工商業之論述，似有未合之處。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the privatization of Taiwan Industrial and Mining Company under the land reform policy, with a special focus on its option to sell individual factories and how this approach impacted the accumulation of private capital, in particular that of the landowners. With an eye on the continuity of Taiwan economy from the colonial era to the postwar period, it is noticeable that some of the emerging industries established during the wartime were incorporated into the Taiwan Industrial and Mining Company after war. However, these production sectors became stagnant in the postwar years due to the company's limited funds and resources. It wasn't until its privatization through selling individual factories that they grew again and eventually became some of the most developed business groups in Taiwan. For this particular way of privatization enabled the private capital to obtain factories with lower cost of initial equipment investment. During the early stage of privatization, the shareholders who possessed most stocks of the Taiwan Industrial and Mining Company got the franchise of the factories, but most of them did not belong to the landowners' class. In the early 1960s, after the privatization and selling of individual factories were done, the Taiwan Industrial and mining Company underwent operating losses and its stock price hit an all-time low. At this point, the remaining shareholders of the company, most of them landowners and general investors, could no longer profit from the stocks. Therefore, the official version that land reform successfully channeled the landowners' capital into industrial and commercial sectors is challenged.起始頁-結束頁：103-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：中國的大豆危機　「現代化」的邏輯及話語權抗爭並列篇名：China's Soybean Crisis The Logic of Modernization and Its Discontents作者：嚴海蓉(YAN Hairong);陳義媛(CHEN Yiyuan);古學斌(KU Hok Bun)關鍵字：食品安全;轉基因安全;話語權;消費者權利;食物主權;food security;GMO safety;discursive power;consumer rights;food sovereignty期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016中文摘要：萊斯特．布朗（Lester R. Brown）在1995年發出警告：誰來養活中國？在此背景下，本文考察了中國大豆產業的巨大變遷：直到1990年代中期，中國還是一個大豆（也稱黃豆）的淨出口國，而自2000年開始，中國成為了全世界最大的轉基因大豆進口國。隨著中國大豆進口的激增，國內的大豆生產急劇下跌，導致了中國「大豆產業危機」的疾呼。本文考察了關於中國大豆進口的不同解釋話語，以及與之相關的一系列爭論和批判性反思，這些爭論和反思的焦點是中國在全球化中的地位、國家在食物安全中的作用、轉基因食品的安全性、消費者權利、何謂科學權威以及跨國企業的權力。在這些爭論中，中國的批判者對美國和南美這兩大向中國出口轉基因大豆的主要生產區有相當不同的看法。英文摘要：Lester Brown sounded an alarm in 1995: who will feed China? Against this backdrop, this article examines China's dramatic turn from having been a soybean net exporter, up until the mid-1990s, to the biggest importer of genetically- modified (GM) soybeans since 2000. With China's growing soybean imports, domestic soybean production has experienced a drastic fall, creating an outcry of ”soybean crisis” in China. This article examines competing interpretations about China's soybean imports and how a wide range of heated debates and critical reflections have emerged about China's position in globalization, the role of the state in food security, safety of GM foods, consumer rights, what constitutes scientific authority, and the power of transnational corporations. In these debates, Chinese critics have very different views about the US and South America, where significant GM soybeans are produced for export to China.起始頁-結束頁：149-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：勞動法與社會學的對話　回應張晉芬〈勞動法律的身分限制及改革〉並列篇名：Dialogues between Labor Law and Sociology Responding to Chin-Fen Chang's ”Constraints on the Entitlement to Labor Laws in Taiwan”作者：曾翔(Siang ZENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：183-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：書評《看見不潔之物：工業社會中知識權威的文化實作》並列篇名：Review of Bad Stuff in Your Food and Other Pressing Matters: Cultural Practices in Institutionalized Epistemic Authorities in the Industrial Society作者：陳瑞麟(Ruey-Lin CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：193-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：策展如何作為社會實踐　三方匯集的文化行動主義對話並列篇名：Curating as Social Praxis A Dialogue on Cultural Activism between Artists, Activists, and Social Workers作者：戴瑜慧(Yu-Hui TAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：201-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：被壓抑者的發聲　底層者與文化行動主義並列篇名：Voices of the Suppressed The Subaltern and Cultural Activism作者：戴瑜慧(Yuhui TAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：205-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：民眾戲劇與文化行動主義的行者　鍾喬對話錄並列篇名：A Walker for People's Theater and Cultural Activism Interview with Zhong Jiao作者：戴瑜慧(TAI Yuhui);鍾喬(ZHONG Jiao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：227-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：文化行動與賦權的交會　南洋姊妹劇團並列篇名：The Intersection between Cultural Activism and Empowerment TASAT Theatre作者：謝世軒(Shih-Shiuan HSIEH)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：243-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：發聲、看見　底層流動／流浪的視界並列篇名：Seeing from the Corner作者：郭盈靖(Ying-Ching KUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：257-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：另類美學的社會工作並列篇名：The A-esthetics of Social Works作者：謝佳蓉(Chia-Jung HSIEH);張岳曾(Yue-Ceng CHANG);蕭靜惠(Jing-Huei SIAO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：269-283資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：策展如何改變社會　樂施會經驗分享並列篇名：Creating Social Change Case Illustrations by Oxfam Hong Kong作者：蘇培健(Stanley SO);梁詩棋(Abbie LEUNG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：104期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：285-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：從「唱歌」到「唱自己的歌」－《很久沒有敬我了你》中現代性與原住民性的接合並列篇名：From ”Singing School Songs” to ”Singing Our Songs”-Articulations of Modernity and Aboriginality in the Musical On the Road作者：陳俊斌(Chun-Bin CHEN)關鍵字：原住民音樂現代性;卑南族;接合;混雜;客體化與建制化;musical modernity of Taiwanese Aborigines;Puyuma;articulation;hybridity;objectification and institutionalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：103期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以卑南族當代音樂為例，探討原住民音樂現代性及原住民對此現代性的回應。以音樂電影舞台劇《很久沒有敬我了你》做為個案研究的對象，我試圖探討「唱歌」教育及音樂客體化與建制化對於當代原住民音樂的影響。「唱歌」（<U+3057><U+3087><U+3046><U+304B>）這個詞指涉日本政府在十九世紀末從西方引進的音樂教育系統，它隨著日本殖民統治，成為台灣現代教育的一部份，這個殖民遺緒奠定西方音樂在台灣發展的基礎，也對當代原住民音樂的形塑產生重大影響。本文將簡述這個音樂電影舞台劇以及劇中使用的音樂，並從這部作品中使用的陸森寶作品連結到有關「唱歌」的討論。最後，我以陸森寶到陳建年等卑南族人的音樂所連結的南王部落音樂發展歷程為例，討論原住民音樂現代性與原住民性的相關議題。本研究借用「接合」模式，聚焦做為主要接合機制的「表演」之討論，藉此試圖提出有關文化意義的音樂學解讀，並進一步探討這樣的研究取徑與社會人文學科接合的可能。英文摘要：On the Road is a musical play production of the Taipei National Concert Hall performed in 2010 in collaboration with Aboriginal musicians. With combinations of various distinct elements, this musical has hybrid features. Focusing on the performance of contemporary Aboriginal songs in this musical, I examine concepts of the musical modernity of Taiwanese Aborigines and the Aborigines’ responses to modernity. I argue that beneath the simple plot of the musical about how a Han-Taiwanese musician brought the Aboriginal musicians to perform at the Hall, there is another story being narrated through the performance of the songs. This hidden story is an Aboriginal musical story spanning the time from the period of Japanese colonial rule (1895-1945), when Westernized school songs (shoka) were introduced into Aboriginal society, to recent years when Aboriginal musicians have achieved recognition in Taiwan’s music industry. This story shows not only the objectification and institutionalization of Aboriginal music enabled by Western musical techniques, but also an articulation of aboriginality as a response to modernity. I will provide a description of the musical play, and then discuss works by the Puyuma musician Baliwakes used in it. Finally, I examine issues related to musical modernity and aboriginality, and rethink methodologies in studies about music and culture. I use an ”articulation” framework in this study, and focus my discussion on the performance as the primary mechanism connecting various distinct elements. By so doing, I aim to provide a musicological reading of cultural meaning, and consider possibilities of articulating approaches of musicology and that of social sciences and humanities.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor’s Note作者：汪宏倫期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：32期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.32.i2篇名：當婦運衝撞國家：婦權會推動性別主流化的合縱連橫策略並列篇名：When the Women’s Movement Confronts the State: Multiple Strategies for Promoting Gender Mainstreaming作者：黃淑玲(Shu-ling Hwang);伍維婷(Wei-ting Wu)關鍵字：性平會;國家女性主義;社會運動;社會資本;婦女運動;Gender Equality Committee;state feminism;social movement;social capital;women’s movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：32期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣行政院自2005 年開始實施性別主流化計畫，第五屆與第六屆婦女權益促進委員會（以下簡稱婦權會）（2005 至2009 年）是主要推手。本文以這兩屆婦權會委員在國家體制內推動性別主流化的合縱連橫為例，探討婦運行動者如何藉由政治機會結構的轉變，以及運用社會資本累積和情感工作，開創新型的性別政治介入模式，促使性別主流化融入國家機制的運作中。本文研究發現，婦運者集體進駐的第五、六屆婦權委員，是一個自律性高、互信關係強、團結合作的運動團體，她們積極聯結體制內外的婦運者網絡，建立厚實的結合型資本，將婦權會營造成婦運的蹲點；另外，她們利用政治結構機會的轉變，運用多元策略，獲得總統與行政院長的支持，建立與行政院官員的制度性溝通平台；同時透過情感工作歷程，與公務體系產生信任與合作的橋接型資本，公務體系開始出現女性主義官僚。由於與政府部門之間有互信、互惠、經常性網絡的社會資本，婦權會的行動力與影響力因而提高，得以建立許多性別平等相關制度。最後，本研究的發現提供理論與實務上三項意義：(1) 打破社會運動與體制政治在策略與目標的二分想像；(2) 運用社會資本增強婦運與國家的關係以提高婦權會的治理功能；(3) 回應國家女性主義辯論，建議婦運與婦權會的理念型關係。英文摘要：Gender mainstreaming by the Taiwanese government began in 2005 under the Executive Yuan, with work spearheaded by the Committee of Women’s Rights Promotion (CWRP) during its 5th and 6th terms (2005-2009). This paper examines the alliance strategies that women’s activists in the CWRP adopted to promote gender mainstreaming within the state during that period. By exploiting changes in the political opportunity structures, creating social capital, and exercising emotion work, these activists, a group empowered by strong mutual trust and a high level of self-discipline, were able to bring about concrete institutional changes. They successfully built the CWRP into a habitat for women’s movements, reaching out to other feminist networks both inside and outside the state to create solid bonding social capital. At the same time, taking advantage of the shifting political opportunity structures, they managed to win the support of the President and the Premier and institutionalize communication channels with high-level officials in the Executive Yuan; the use of emotion work to create bridging social capital helped them earn civil servants’ trust, even leading to the emergence of femocrats. As trust, mutual benefits and regular networking between these women’s activists and government departments accumulated, the CWRP’s executive power and influence increased, leading to the establishment of many gender equality institutions. This paper discusses three theories and their significances in practice: (1) the dichotomous differentiation of social movement and institutional politics, and how it can be broken; (2) social capital, and how it can strengthen the relationship between the women’s movement and the State and increase the CWRP’s governance capacity; and (3) in response to arguments of state feminism, the suggestion of an ideal type for the relationship between women’s movement and the CWRP.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.32.013篇名：人人有機會的「公平」世界：賽鴿公平性的社會建構與效果並列篇名：Constructing Fairness: The Evolution and Effects of Pigeon Oceanic Racing in Taiwan作者：簡妤儒(Yu-ju Chien);黃亞晴(Ya-ching Huang)關鍵字：賽鴿;海翔;地下經濟;賭博;社會信任;pigeon racing;pigeon oceanic racing;underground economy;gambling;social trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：32期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣賽鴿活動自1960 年代興起，逐漸發展出有別於其他國家的「幼鴿海翔多關」賽制，結合檯面下大規模的賭金下注與分配，形成龐大的地下經濟體系。透過鴿友訪談、拍賣會參與觀察和歷史資料分析，本研究探討台灣為何發展出獨步全球的賽鴿制度，解釋賽制變遷如何逐漸塑造鴿友集體的公平認知，以及刻意降低強勢者優勢所造成的「機運式公平」，反而意外維繫了廣大鴿友的持續投入，讓參與者相信「人人有機會」，激發鴿友挑戰機運的熱情。本研究與地下經濟中風險控管與社會信任等文獻對話，指出賽鴿活動因結合「合法競技和非法博弈」、「可控的科學理性和不可控機運」，形塑了鴿會和鴿友獨特的風險控管策略，並影響社群的互動和信任關係的建立。台灣賽制的特殊性也影響賽鴿社群成員彼此與對外的互動，凸顯出經濟與社會間既相互穿透又隱含緊張的動態關係。英文摘要：This article explains the evolution of the unique pigeon oceanic racing in Taiwan by investigating racers’ shared values, winning strategies, and social interactions. Taiwan pigeon racing is known as the toughest race in the world. In this so-called ”Five-Race Championship,” juvenile pigeons have to fly over the open ocean more than five times, if they survive fierce winds and unpredictable weather. Regardless of a young bird’s competition records, its racing career finishes in one season. Prize money and associated illegal betting can add up to millions of NT dollars per race. Racers are enchanted by the enormous challenges and rewards. Previous literature tends to suggest that pigeon racers are driven by either personal affection for animals or irrational beliefs in gambling. These individualistic explanations fail to recognize how institutional regulations and social networks hold this racing/gambling industry together. By analyzing archival data, interviewing racers, and observing pigeon bids, we find that Taiwanese pigeon-racing rules gradually evolved to reinforce racers’ shared sense of fairness. Pigeonracing clubs adopted complicated gambling rules, young bird races, tough oceanic racing, and rigorous anti-cheating methods to prevent dishonesty, kidnappings, and other unfair practices.Most racers believe that these tough competitions, though increasing uncertainty, ensure everyone a fair chance of winning. Although most racers recognize that people with greater economic capital and experiences are advantaged, they admit that luck often intervenes, which makes the races fairer. Racers develop various types of tactical knowledge and cooperative strategies to manage risks. Their collective belief in ”fairness by chance” sustains this multibillion dollar gambling industry. Social trust among participants may be undermined, however, because racers tend to keep personal winning tactics a secret. This research contributes to the underground economy literature by illustrating how institutional rules, shared values, and social trust co-evolve through gambling activities.起始頁-結束頁：57-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.32.574篇名：想像未來：台灣人體生物資料庫、基因利基與國族建構並列篇名：Imagining Futurity: Taiwan Biobank, Taiwanese Genes as a Niche, and Nation-Building作者：蔡友月(Yu-yueh Tsai);李宛儒(Wan-ju Lee)關鍵字：基因;生物資料庫;想像;國族建構;生物政治典範;gene;biobank;imaginary;nation-building;bio-political paradigm期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：32期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以「想像的未來共同體」概念，分析「台灣人體生物資料庫」的建置與發展，指出生命科學及相關科學家對未來社會世界的想像，在國族建構中逐漸扮演重要的角色。首先，本文釐清九○年代台灣逐漸民主化後政府成立的科技溝通平台，成為科學家想像得以實踐的結構化條件。科學家要求國家重視基礎研究對未來全球科學競爭與醫藥產業的影響，以研發創新推動國家知識經濟的轉型目標。其次，本文分析指出，台灣解嚴後追求「台灣主體性」的政治趨勢影響人文社會與自然科學研究，實驗室外以「台灣」為範疇的人群分類想像「內滲」至科學計畫的知識想像，形成「台灣必須建立台灣人自己的實驗室」、「多元族群的台灣獨特基因組成」等論述。台灣人體生物資料庫以具有公民身分的國民人口為招募對象，以及其「台灣人一起努力為下一代台灣人健康」的宣傳，都具有「外溢」的社會作用，形塑台灣人對未來共同體的集體想像與情感。最後，本文指出科學家的想像不是實驗室內「純科學」的操作，科學論述所展現的未來想像與台灣認同政治交纏共構，具有一定的社會政治作用。英文摘要：This article analyzes the establishment and development of Taiwan Biobank in terms of the concept of an ”imagined future community.” We argue that life sciences and social imaginaries of the futurity of scientists have played an increasingly important role in nation-building in the globalization era. First, this article examines the institutional conditions under which scientists’ imaginaries are able to be practiced. Since the democratizing decade of the 1990s, the Taiwanese government has established inter-departmental/inter-ministerial dialogue platforms, where internationally reputed scientists can join in decision-making processes regarding science and technology policy and exercise their influence by promoting innovative basic research of biomedicine, with a view to upgrading the national economy in the globalizing competition of the knowledge economy. Second, the advocacy of the notion of ”Taiwanese subjectivity” in politics since the late 1980s has influenced the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. The human classification emphasizing Taiwanese identity (rather than Chinese identity) has shaped the knowledge-making of such scientific projects as Taiwan Biobank, in which the discourses of ”Taiwan must have its own laboratory” and ”Taiwanese unique genetic composition is characterized by its multiple ethnic origins” prevail. Also, the Taiwan Biobank aims to recruit national citizens and calls on ”Taiwanese to work together for a healthy future generation.” This recruitment strategy and discourse, in turn, has the potential to build common imaginaries and emotions of Taiwanese as an imagined future community. Third, we argue that imaginaries of scientists are not purely scientific. The future imaginaries involved in scientific discourses are coproduced with identity politics in Taiwan and have obvious social and political implications.起始頁-結束頁：109-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.32.1095篇名：簡介「計算社會學」：一個結合電腦與數位科技的新興社會學研究並列篇名：Computational Sociology: A New Sociological Area Empowered by Modern Computational and Digital Technology作者：江彥生(Yen-sheng Chiang);陳昇瑋(Sheng-wei Chen)關鍵字：計算社會學;電腦模擬;大數據;資訊數位科技;Computational Sociology;computer simulation;Big Data;digital and informational technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：32期出版年：2016中文摘要：在過去數十年間，電腦與數位科技有著驚人的發展與成長，不但在資料處理與運算的能力上有著長足的進步，社群媒介的蓬勃發展與普及更主導了當代人日常生活的每一個層面。這一波數位化的革命浪潮也間接對社會學界產生了衝擊，催生了一個新興的研究領域：計算社會學(computational sociology)。本文旨在透過對幾個具代表性的研究的討論，來介紹「計算社會學」的研究旨趣與特色。我們將這個領域的研究粗略分成兩大類，第一類的研究是藉助電腦來模擬一些複雜的社會（互動）行為，來解釋一些無法鉅細靡遺地考究的歷史現象或作為理論建構的工具；第二類的研究是透過新興的社群媒介來蒐集人們真實的互動資料，以進行歸納性的分析或驗證社會學理論。為便於對這兩類研究的介紹，我們將以數個具代表性的研究為例，來闡述計算社會學的風格與未來發展的潛力。文末我們將討論這兩個研究取向在方法上的分類與操作，綜評它們的優缺點，並勾勒台灣社會學界在這個新興研究領域中所潛藏的未來發展的契機。英文摘要：Recent decades have witnessed an explosive growth of modern computational and digital technology. Not only do advancements in computational power make it possible to process massive information in a split second, but the emergence of modern social media that draws on computational power also has dominated almost every economic transaction and social interaction in daily life. The article presents an introduction to a new research area in sociology that benefits from the digital revolution-computational sociology. We divide the research area in two categories: The first type of research uses computers to model or simulate complex social phenomena that are otherwise difficult to disentangle due to a lack of or limited access to real data. This kind of computational approach explains underlying mechanisms of the social phenomena in which we are interested. The second type of research, often known as the ”big data approach”, uses social media to collect data or test sociological theories. This kind of approach offers an opportunity to observe natural, real-time interactions among people in different domains of social life. In the paper, we list a few representative examples of research for each category to illustrate in more detail the characteristics and merits of computational sociology. A brief methodological discussion of the two approaches is presented, along with a note on their implications for the scholarship of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：171-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.32.1716篇名：評Global Exposure in East Asia: A Comparative Study of Microglobalization並列篇名：Book Review: Global Exposure in East Asia: A Comparative Study of Microglobalization作者：蔡宏政(Hung-jeng Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：32期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：203-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.32.2037篇名：主編的話 非英語系學術社群的期刊定位與發展策略作者：汪宏倫期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：31期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.31.i8篇名：從「殘障」到「身心障礙」：障礙標籤與論述的新聞內容分析並列篇名：From ”Handicapped” to ”Disabled”: A Content Analysis of Disability Labels and Discourse' in Taiwanese Newspapers作者：張睇(Heng-hao Chang);王靜儀(Jing-yi Wang)關鍵字：慈善;內容分析;障礙;標籤;汙名;charity;content analysis;disability;labeling;stigma期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：31期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以內容分析法比較使用「殘障」、「身心障礙」指稱障礙者的報導中的障礙者形象、新聞模型、以及新聞類別的差異，以檢視被汙名的群體，其標籤改變對公共論述內容的影響。同時分析媒體的障礙論述在不同歷史時期的差異。本研究發現：(1) 新聞用詞確實在法令修改後，逐漸使用身心障礙者取代殘障。(2) 在使用「殘障」、「身心障礙」的名稱時，新聞的論述類型與論述方式差異不大。(3) 從台灣歷史脈絡的差異發現，障礙者無助的形象在不同歷史階段有顯著的差異，而且比例越來越高。新聞類別，只有愛心慈善新聞在2008 年身心障礙者權益保障法後顯著升高；而慈善報導中，障礙者多為接受幫助的對象，報導多為宣揚主辦單位的善行而少有障礙者的發言空間。本文的結論是：由上而下的障礙者標籤正名對新聞內容的影響有限。此外，慈善論述在近年來比例反而增加，可能是台灣的障礙者正名運動，主要是由專家學者參考西方的脈絡所推動，缺乏強而有力的社會運動動員與社會共識；且在公辦民營的制度下，服務型非營利組織大量興起，慈善活動增加，也使得相關報導增加。英文摘要：Combating disability stigma and labels has been the political agenda of the disability rights movement. This research uses content analysis to explore the impact of renaming the disabled from ”can jhang” (殘障the handicapped) to ”sh n x n zhang ai” (身心障礙people with physical and mental disabilities) and the transformation of disability in Taiwanese public discourse from 1953 to 2014. We examine the images of disabled people, the model of the newspaper narrative, and the typology of newspaper content with different disabled labels and historical periods. We use systematic sampling to collect data come from the United Newspaper data base from 1953 to 2014. The results show that the change of the disability label by law did not change the model of the newspaper narrative but partly transformed the images and content of disability newspaper reports. There are more images of care burdens and more newspaper coverage on care issues under the label ”can jhang.” Comparing disability in different historical periods, there is no significant difference in the model of newspaper narrative, but there are many more images of helpless disabled people. In addition, there are significantly more disability charity events mentioned in newspapers after 2008. Finally, we discuss the content of the charity events, where disabled people are always the subject of being helped and their voices are usually unheard. We argue that the relabeling of disability in Taiwan was advocated and promoted mainly by scholars and politicians and lacked social movement mobilization and social consensus. In addition, under public-owned and private-managed social policies, the number of service-oriented non-profit organizations has increased significantly, and these organizations compete for resources. Thus, news discourses of the charity model increased after 2008.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.31.19篇名：誰來審議？台灣民眾對審議民主的支持程度和參與意願並列篇名：Who Will Be Willing to Deliberate? Civic Talk, Social Capital and Deliberative Democracy in Taiwan作者：林國明(Kuo-ming Lin)關鍵字：審議民主;公共審議;公民參與;公民社會;公民討論;deliberative democracy;civic talk;social capital;political participation;political discussion期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：31期出版年：2016中文摘要：審議民主的實踐所遇到的重大挑戰，是如何制度化地整合到決策過程並影響政策決定。公民審議的制度化，有賴社會公眾的支持和參與，但既有文獻幾乎都沒有探究一般民眾對政府所發動、意圖影響政策的公民審議的支持程度和參與意願。本文以「台灣社會變遷基本調查」2014 年的調查結果，分析台灣民眾對公民審議的支持程度和參與意願。本文發現，由於特殊的政治脈絡因素，台灣民眾普遍支持公民審議，而且，對代議制度越不信任、對政黨功能和民主體制的運作現狀越不滿，以及越支持直接民主的人，越可能支持公民審議。本文也探究公民審議的參與意願、社團參與、日常公民討論和社會不平等的關係。本文發現，社團參與，以及日常生活的公民討論，能夠養成政治效能感、政治興趣和表達能力等公民心性與能力，提高人們參加正式的公民審議的意願。因此，活絡的公民社會以及日常的公民對話，能建構審議民主的公民文化基礎，強化社會公眾參與公民審議的意願。但本文也發現，性別與教育程度會影響公民心性與能力，因此公民審議的參與意願呈現不平等的現象，這是強調平等原則的審議民主，在實踐上必須面對和克服的問題。英文摘要：Civic talk, social capital, and the practice of deliberative democracy, are said to be good for shaping active, democratic citizenship, but the relationships among the three have not been theoretically and empirically explored. This paper examines their relationships and the implications for inequality in citizen participation. Using data from a national survey conducted in Taiwan, this paper explores citizens' support for and willingness to participate in government-organized deliberation. I found that 73% of respondents agreed with the idea that governments should convene citizen deliberation before making decisions on important issues, and 53% said that they would be willing to participate in such events. What accounts for the public willingness to deliberate? The results of statistical analysis show that : (1) Civic talk, defined as engagement in conversations about social events in informal settings, influenced the willingness to deliberate through the mediating effects of civic mindedness and skills (including political efficacy, political interest, political knowledge and communicative ability); (2) The number of those joining various types of voluntary associations also affects the willingness to deliberate, largely by producing mobilization effects on civic talk; and (3) Women and the less-educated are less willing to participate because of the mediating effects of gender and educational inequality in civic mindedness and skills. This paper thus found that civic talk and social capital can help construct a civic-culture foundation for deliberation, but inequality persists and needs to be overcome in the practice of deliberative democracy proclaimed to fulfill the ideal of political equality.起始頁-結束頁：43-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.31.4310篇名：企業權力與民主：台灣企業集團2008年立委選舉的政治獻金分析並列篇名：Corporate Power and Democracy: An Analysis of Business Groups' Campaign Contribution in the 2008 Legislator Election作者：李宗榮(Zong-Rong Lee)關鍵字：政治獻金;企業集團;家族企業;campaign contribution;business group;family business期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：31期出版年：2016中文摘要：在晚近的政治社會學文獻中，企業的政治獻金分析是探討企業政治權力的一個重要取徑，然而在台灣，這類的議題仍然沒有較有系統的研究。本文以2006 年台灣最大的503 個民營企業集團為分析樣本，整合2008 年第七屆立委選舉的政治獻金帳戶資訊，並透過物質利益、階級霸權以及菁英核心圈三個主要理論觀點來檢視台灣企業集團從事政治獻金的影響因素。統計分析數據顯示，集團的規模越大、家族控制的集團以及企業家族的能見度越高者，其進行政治獻金的傾向越強。此外，相較於其他產業，資訊電子業政治捐獻的程度顯著地較低。這些發現顯示以傳統產業為主的大型家族企業集團是台灣的政治獻金活動中的主導力量，也反映了台灣的市場體制中特殊的政治經濟結構特色。英文摘要：Political sociologists have long been analyzing political donation data of businesses to evaluate the extent to which corporate power intervenes in political processes. In this paper, the campaign contribution data of business groups in the 2008 legislator election is collected and examined with three major theoretical viewpoints: the material interest, class hegemony, and the inner circle theories. Empirical evidence shows that business groups that are larger in size, of family-owned, and feature controlling families with higher in social status are more likely to contribute to legislator candidates. Moreover, business groups operating in the information technology industry are less likely to contribute. These results indicate that large domestic-oriented and family-owned business groups are the key donors to political campaigns, wich reflects the unique political-economic nature of contemporary Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：99-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.31.9911篇名：外生的中國資本主義形成：以珠江三角洲私營企業主創業過程為例並列篇名：Chinese Capitalism from Outside: A Case Study of the Emergence of Private Enterprises in the Pearl River Delta作者：鄭志鵬(Chih-peng Cheng)關鍵字：中國資本主義;新生企業家;私營企業;後社會主義經濟轉型;台商;Chinese capitalism;nascent entrepreneurs;private enterprises;post-socialist economic transition;Taiwanese investors期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：31期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文從後全球經濟衰退時期珠江三角洲地區代工模式可能面臨終結做為出發點，探討私營中資企業主的創業過程對理解改革開放後中國資本主義生成所造成的影響。以往解釋中國私營企業興起的觀點，特別是在長江三角洲以集體鄉鎮企業為主導的蘇南地區，主要是依賴由下到上的制度創新，以克服不利於私營企業發展的國家政策，並且透過工業區內人際網絡的緊密連結，進一步建立可資信賴的商業交易規範。這些多為非正式的制度安排與社會規範，不僅解決了集體行動可能出現的搭便車問題，也進一步增加私營企業在國內的競爭優勢。然而這種「資本主義來自民間」的觀點卻忽略了研究中國經濟轉型必須面對地方上制度歧異性的問題。因為在以外資企業為主的珠三角地區，中資企業主面對的組織場域全然不同於長三角，這些企業主創業所需的訂單、資金、技術、人力、管理知識及技巧等，不一定得來自民間自身社會網絡的支持，也可能是跨國資本（例如台商）引導下的結果；亦即，中國資本主義經濟制度與商業規範的建構可能是一種由外而內的產物。最後，本文希望藉由這個個案分析增進我們對外生性資本與後進國家資本主義生成的瞭解，並與現階段中國國家資本主義的發展路徑進行對話。英文摘要：This paper explores the start-up process of Chinese private manufacturing firms in the Pearl River Delta during the post-global recession. Previous studies on the emergence of private enterprises in China have emphasized the perspective of ”capitalism from below,” arguing that entrepreneurs devised institutional innovations through trial and error that enabled them to decouple from the established, unfavorable economic order. These informal institutional arrangements in the Yangzi River Delta not only resolved the free-rider problem, but also developed competitive advantages in self-organized industrial clusters. The perspective of ”capitalism from below,” however, overlooked the local institutional divergence in studying Chinese economic transition. Since local manufacturing firms in the Pearl River Delta are embedded in an organizational field controlled by transnational enterprises, Taiwanese investors in particular, these nascent private entrepreneurs may acquire capital, techniques, human resources, and management skills from transnational capitalists other than local social networks. In other words, China's capitalist economic institutions and business norms are forms of ”capitalism from outside.” This case study is intended not only to enhance our understanding of late-comers on the emergence of capitalism, but also to contribute to the dialogue with Chinese state capitalism at this stage.起始頁-結束頁：141-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.31.14112篇名：Book Review: Leverage of the Weak: Labor and Environmental Movements in Taiwan and South Korea.作者：Michelle Fei-yu Hsieh期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：31期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：193-201資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2016.31.19301篇名：住宅不均與所得不均並列篇名：Housing Inequality and Income Inequality作者：張清和(Ching-Ho Chang);李巧琳(Chiao-Ling Lee);陳建良(Chien-Liang Chen)關鍵字：住宅負擔;所得不均;聯合機率;housing affordability;income inequality;joint probability期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究關照臺灣經濟成長三十年期間所得不均與住宅不均現象，透過bivariate probit模型估計低所得(所得貧窮)和高住宅負擔(住宅貧窮)兩種狀態的聯合機率。結果發現，戶長年齡、性別、家戶規模與夫妻家戶，造成兩種貧窮機率彼此強化；戶長教育年數、有無房貸、租屋及城市家戶對兩種貧窮機率的影響各異。主要政策隱含是：一、所得與住宅貧窮現象的聯合機率增加集中在年老戶長家戶，顯示此族群屬於貧窮弱勢；二、房貸負擔造成的住宅貧窮，同時對高、低所得水準的家庭帶來威脅。本研究除了提出新觀點補充既有文獻不足，並對住宅政策與福利規劃提供建議。英文摘要：This study examines the phenomenon of income inequality and housing inequality among Taiwan's households over the past three decades by using bivariate probit models to estimate the joint probability of low income (income poverty) and high housing affordability (housing poverty). For the joint probability, the results show that the variables for the head's age, gender, household size and intact couple households reinforce each other, while the head's education, mortgage payment, renters and urban households play different roles. The policy implications derived from the findings are as follows. First, two types of poverty concentrate on households with elderly heads and thus they are the most vulnerable. Second, housing poverty induced by the mortgage payment burden could be a threat to either low or high income level households. This study not only finds new evidence on the joint outcome of income and housing inequality that is complementary to the existing literature, but also provides housing policy and welfare program suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：SVR與OLS在住宅價格預測正確率的比較並列篇名：A Comparison of the Accuracy Rates of SVR and OLS in Housing Price Prediction作者：董呈煌(Cheng-Huang Tung);李春長(Chun-Chang Lee);陳俊麟(Jun-Lin Chen);吳韻玲(Yun-Ling Wu)關鍵字：住宅價格;支撐向量機;支撐向量迴歸;特徵價格理論;普通最小平方法;housing prices;support vector machines;support vector regression;hedonic prices theory;ordinary least square期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：在多數預測住宅價格之研究中，主要運用迴歸方法進行預測並探討住宅屬性對於住宅價格之影響。近期許多研究領域應用支撐向量機(support vector machines)作為分析方法，因其可運用於分類及迴歸預測，已逐漸成為相當熱門的研究方法之一。在各種不同方法之比較上，支撐向量機具有良好之分類及預測績效。本研究運用支撐向量機中的支撐向量迴歸(supportvector regression)建立住宅價格預測模型，並與普通最小平方法進行預測績效之比較。本研究蒐集台北市2008年至2010年住宅交易資料，扣除遺漏及極端值後，資料總數為5,261筆。實證結果顯示，支撐向量迴歸之預測正確率高於普通最小平方法且預測誤差小於普通最小平方法，表示支撐向量迴歸的預測績效較佳。英文摘要：The main objective of this research was to predict the prices of residences in Taipei City. However, there are many factors that affect housing prices; hence, in this research, which is based on hedonic prices theory and the related literature, the attributes affecting housing prices are summarized for use as research variables. In numerous past studies that sought to predict housing prices, regression analysis was the primary method used to make the predictions and to investigate the influence of residence attributes on housing prices. Recently, however, the use of Support Vector Machines (SVMs) has been adopted for such analyses in a variety of research fields, including for the forecasting of housing prices. Moreover, the use of SVMs has gradually become a very popular research method because SVMs can be used in classification and regression prediction. Compared with a variety of different methods, SVMs have been shown to have better classification and forecasting performance. In this study, Support Vector Regression (SVR) was used to set up a housing price forecast model, and this model was compared with the ordinary least squares (OLS) model in terms of forecasting performance. Residence transactions data from 2008 to 2010 for Taipei City were collected, and, after removing the omitted and extreme values, the total number of data points was 5,261. According to the results of the empirical analysis, the forecasting correctness of SVR was higher than that of OLS, meaning that SVR achieved better forecasting performance.起始頁-結束頁：31-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：法拍屋次市場之競標行為研究並列篇名：Bidding Behavior in the Foreclosure Sub-Market作者：謝富順(Fu Shuen Shie)關鍵字：法拍屋;點交;分量迴歸;foreclosed houses;final walkthrough;quantile regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：法拍屋市場中，競標者的下標行為，決定於眾多的法拍屬性，因此分析各法拍屬性對於每坪價格影響將相當重要，尤其是臺灣法拍市場中特有的特徵屬性，如「點交與否」。本文之研究可解釋過去在研究房屋單價與面積之間呈現正、負相關兩種不同的現象。雖然，Zietzet al.(2008)及Shie & Chang(2010)提出分量迴歸相對於OLS的迴歸分析較為正確，本文亦同意此論點。但本研究發現，研究個別次市場的重要性比使用不同的分析方法還要來的重要，尤其是在不動產此類高差異性的市場之中，次市場的競標行為將因為在未妥善的區隔分析下而遭到扭曲，更甚而導致錯誤的競標行為，本文雖為研究拍賣市場，但亦提供了蒐尋市場在往後的分析上有更進一步的方法。英文摘要：The behavior of bidders depends on the various attributes of foreclosure. Thus, the analysis of foreclosure attributes is critical to deriving a price per floor area, especially since the market for foreclosed houses in Taiwan has unique characteristics such as ”with or without a final walkthrough”. The results of this study can explain the contradictory results of positive and negative correlations between the price per floor area and floor area in previous studies but not in a submarket for foreclosed houses without a final walkthrough. Although Zietz et al. (2008) and Shie & Chang (2010) argued that quantile regression analysis is more accurate than OLS regression, the results of this study suggest that even a good analytical model will generate erroneous outcomes without appropriate market segmentation. Therefore, the importance of investigating sub-markets is more critical than that of using different analytical methods. In particular, in high-diversity markets such as the real estate market, the lack of appropriately segmented markets could result in distorted and even erroneous bidding behavior in sub-markets.起始頁-結束頁：53-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：水平型式大型購物中心業種多樣性區位配置策略之空間型構分析並列篇名：A Space Syntax Analysis of Tenant Placement within Large-scale Horizontally-designed Shopping Centres作者：游舜德(Tony Shun-Te Yuo);林育澂(Yu-Cheng Lin);葉峻宏(Chun-Hung Yeh)關鍵字：購物環境;承租組合;空間複雜度;消費者行為;shopping environment;tenant mix;spatial complexity;consumer behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以空間型構指標，檢測水平型式大型購物中心內業種多樣性與區位特徵的關聯性，據以提供經營管理者進行配置策略上的建議依據。過去的研究建議水平型式的購物中心以同業種分散策略為基礎，但因缺乏空間區位特徵值的衡量方法，故並未提供確切的業種區位配置策略。本研究認為：過去的研究多以基本業種分類方式，直接作區位檢測，缺乏消費者行為層面的考量，故多無法在區位分析上得到顯著的結果；因此，本研究將基本業種，更進一步的以消費者購物主次要目的的核心周邊業種的萃取，以及根據消費者行為趨勢進行歸類，藉以提出業種多樣性區位配置的策略建議。本文廣泛蒐集世界各地共37場83個樓層平面的業種配置資料，並融入地理資訊系統及空間型構法為基礎的空間特徵資料表，進行四個層次的檢定，包含：(1)空間型構指標應用於購物中心內部空間複雜度的適用性檢定；(2) 28個業種的區位Logistic迴歸模型檢定；(3)以基本業種進行因素分析之核心與周邊業種之萃取；以及(4)以消費者行為的分類為基礎，進行核心型、周邊型、目的型、衝動型、比較型、便利型、娛樂型、以及服務型的業種類型區位Logistic迴歸模型檢定。結果顯示：本文所採用的空間形構指標，對大型購物中心內部空間的深度層次是有鑑別度的；而以基本業種分類的區位檢定，確實較無法產生承租組合的區位配置意涵，但若以消費者行為下的業種分類進行更深入的分析，則可以看到在總深度與便捷值上，多有依循著相關區位配置概念進行分布的顯著趨勢。英文摘要：This paper aims to examine the location and placement strategies for various shoppers' behavioral retail categories within large-scale horizontally-designed shopping centres. Although previous research has suggested that within a horizontally-designed shopping centre, retail stores of the same category should be dispersed to generate higher spillover effects, no significant placement strategies for tenant variety have been revealed. In this sense, we believe this is because previous research that used basic retail categories failed to incorporate shoppers' behavioral fundamentals. Accordingly, this paper proposes the use of consumer-based coreperiphery retail categories and behavioral-based retail categories, which should more fully explain the data. By using Geographic Information System (GIS) and space syntax techniques, this paper gathers data on over 37 cases across different countries and builds up 83 floor plans with data on spatial features and tenant characteristics. The empirical study consists of 4 steps: (1) examining the effectiveness of selected space syntax indexes applied to 3 groups of floor-plans based on complexity; (2) performing a locational logistic regression test of the 28 basic retail categories; (3) using factor analysis to extract the core and periphery retail categories; and (4) conducting a locational logistic regression test of the consumer's behavioral-based classifications: core, periphery, impulsive, purposive, comparative, convenient, leisure and services. The results show that the selected space syntax indexes are suitable for showing the differences in spatial features within shopping centres. On top of that, only a few basic retail categories have relatively weakly significant results for the locational tests, and the behaviorbased classifications give rise to stronger explanations.起始頁-結束頁：81-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：流動性對不動產投資信託風險值績效之影響並列篇名：Effect of Liquidity Risk on the Value-at-Risk Performance of Real Estate Investment Trusts作者：朱香蕙(Hsiang-Hui Chu);鄒珮綺(Pei-Chi Tsou)關鍵字：流動性風險;非常態分配;風險值;不動產投資信託;liquidity risk;non-normality;Value-at-Risk;REITs期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討納入流動性因子是否能提高評估資產下方風險的能力。以香港不動產投資信託為樣本之實證結果顯示，只考慮資產價格將低估風險。採用Bangia et al.(2001)考量相對價差經驗分配之風險值模型，雖可改善傳統風險值模型低估風險的情形，但可能造成風險值高估的現象，顯示相對價差的歷史走勢不一定適用於風險評估期間。使用Ernst et al.(2012)納入報酬率與相對價差之偏態與峰態的風險值模型，能準確地評估資產之下方風險。綜合以上，流動性在評估不動產投資信託風險上扮演重要的角色，選擇具有描述風險因子分配彈性的模型評估不動產投資信託風險的績效較佳。英文摘要：This paper examines the role of liquidity in improving the performance of the Valueat- Risk (VaR) approach on the basis of a sample of Hong Kong real estate investment trusts (REITs). Our empirical results show that the standard VaR method tends to underestimate the frequency of extreme events, resulting in the underestimation of investors’ risk exposure. The liquidity-adjusted VaR method, which incorporates the relative spread into the estimation, exhibits significant improved performance in measuring the risk of REITs. However, the liquidity-adjusted VaR method may overestimate the frequency of extreme events because it relies on historical data that might not reflect the future. Finally, we show that the Cornish-Fisher liquidity-adjusted VaR method proposed by Ernst et al. (2012) accurately measures down-side risk because it incorporates the fat-tail and skewness of return and bid-ask spread into the model. Overall, our results suggest the importance of the liquidity risk for risk management in REITs.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：從供需角度來探討豪宅買賣之關鍵成功因素－以高雄市為例並列篇名：Key Success Factors for Trading Luxury Mansions: Analyses from the Perspectives of Developers and Homebuyers-A Case Study in Kaohsiung City作者：張靜琪(Ching-Chi Chang);朱郁珊(Yu-Shan Ju);趙沛(Pei Chao)關鍵字：豪宅;住宅市場;住宅市場行銷;關鍵成功因素;mansion;housing market;residential marketing;key successful factors (KSFs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：由於購屋者購買心態轉變，建商發現豪宅高價與獲利程度後大批投入豪宅市場，找出豪宅行銷成功關鍵因素為本文目的。本文分析了供給面對豪宅買賣的重視構面、產官學對豪宅買賣重視構面的差異、購屋者面與供給面對豪宅買賣的重視構面不同處。本文供需面採用問卷調查法，供給面由層級分析法(Analytical Hierarchy Process, AHP)得到權重排序，需求面由結構方程模型(Structural Equation Modeling, SEM)及參照單位分析(Relative to an IdentifiedDistribution Unit, Ridit)得到重要性排序。本文發現：高價值且具休閒機能對豪宅買賣有決定性影響，而創意結合、置入性行銷、親友介紹、名人入住非影響豪宅買賣重要因子。建議未來推案多呈現休閒機能完整性與高價值的奢華享受將有助於豪宅買賣。英文摘要：As the purchasing mentality of homebuyers has changed, developers have begun investing in the luxury mansion market because of the high value and profits associated with this market. The objective of this study was to determine the key success factors for luxury mansion marketing. We analyzed the differences in the level of importance placed by the industry, government, and academia on factors of luxury mansion trading on both the supply and demand sides. Furthermore, we used questionnaires to evaluate factors on both the supply and demand sides of mansion marketing. Data for the supply side were sorted using the analytical hierarchy process, whereas those for the demand side were sorted in order of importance by using structural equation modeling and relative to an identified distribution unit analysis. We observed that both high value and leisure functions have a positive effect on mansion marketing. However, “creative marketing,” “placement marketing,” “friend marketing,” and “celebrity stays” were not vital factors affecting mansion marketing. We suggest incorporating additional leisure functions in future marketing strategies to enhance the promotion of high-value mansions.起始頁-結束頁：19-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：現行所謂「公益版」不動產逆向抵押貸款之設計提供多少的「社會福利」效果？並列篇名：How Much Does the Current Design of Reverse Mortgage in Taiwan Supplement the Social-Welfare Effect?作者：王健安(Chien-An Wang);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：以房養老;不動產逆向抵押貸款;售後租回;社會福利;housing endowment;reverse mortgage;sale and lease back;social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究首先架構在台灣目前推出的不動產逆向抵押純貸款方案，透過不同情境，比如老人的存活年齡與領取年限、不動產抵押物價值與貸款額度的限制，以及利率水準等設算，應用領取RM金額後可用於多種選擇的構念，使用所得替代率、支出覆蓋率等指標，推算以房養老政策對應不同社會福利政策的目標效果。接著跳脫現有方案的思維，討論納入其它設計其提升的社福效果。主要的發現如下：(1)納入售後租回等設計比現行純貸款方案，更能提升老人各種社福政策指標的水準。(2)不動產逆向抵押貸款制度係提升老年生活水準的補充品或選項，而非替代品。英文摘要：This paper investigates the extent to which the current design of reverse mortgages in Taiwan provides a supplementary social welfare effect. On the basis of the key terms of elderly people’s age, the collateral value of housing, interest rate term structure, and loan-to-value ratios, we construct proxies related to the substitution of general income before retirement and to the coverage of multi-purpose expenses in order to quantify the policy effect of social welfare. We obtain two main findings. First, the extra edition of sale-and-lease-back suggested in this paper can provide more of a supplementary effect than can the current edition of puremortgage design. Thus, we find that the policy of reverse mortgaging can be considered a complement or alternative to promoting the standard of living oxf elderly people.起始頁-結束頁：37-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：都市更新資訊透明度與報酬之關連並列篇名：Information Transparency and Return in Urban Regeneration作者：陳奉瑤(Fong-Yao Chen);沈文才(Wen-Thair Shen);梁仁旭(Jen-Hsu Liang)關鍵字：都市更新;資訊透明度;實施者報酬;分析層級程序法;資訊不對稱;urban regeneration;transparency;implementer’s return;AHP;information asymmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：25卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：在都市更新推動過程中，實施者較地主掌握更多資訊，形成資訊不對稱，影響談判協商成功的機率。本文透過文獻回顧、深度訪談及分析層級程序法，建構都市更新資訊透明度評估指標及權重；並設定都市更新財務模型，推估個案實施者之報酬率，藉以探討都市更新資訊透明度與實施者報酬的關聯性。實證結果顯示，提升資訊透明度對實施者報酬有所助益，本文並就委託實施或自組更新會階段、擬訂概要階段、擬訂事業計畫階段以及執行階段，分別提出應揭露之都市更新透明度的關鍵因素，可作為強制揭露資訊之參考，增加實施者與地主、相關權利人間、融資者等之信任，以加速都市更新推動。英文摘要：In the urban regeneration, an implementer grasps more information compared with a landowner because of low information-transparency. Such information asymmetry renders negotiation processes difficult, and consequently, the landowner does not trust the implementer and other landowners. To address this situation, we review related literature and use interviews and the analytic hierarchy process(AHP) to obtain transparency-assessment indicators and their associated weights. Moreover, we apply a questionnaire to examine the transparency in urban regeneration cases in Taipei City. In addition, we establish a financial model to estimate an implementer’s return rate. The results show that the higher the information transparency is, the higher the implementer’s return rate becomes. Finally, we suggest the transparency items required for each step of urban regeneration.起始頁-結束頁：77-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：風險管理下的社會工作督導並列篇名：Social Work Supervision under Risk Management作者：許雅惠(Yea-Huey Sheu);張英陣(Ying-Chen Chang)關鍵字：社會工作督導;外聘督導;風險管理;新管理主義;social work supervision;external supervisor;risk management;new managerialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：社會工作的督導制度係維繫社會工作服務品質的重要因素，近年來許多國內外的保護性工作案主嚴重傷亡的事件頻傳，致使社會大眾質疑社會工作的效能與督導的品質。在社會工作的歷史發展過程中，督導從早期著重於行政事務，爾後慢慢導入教育與專業發展的功能，卻又在1990年代重視風險管理之後，重回到重視管理控制的功能。一路走來，社會工作督導始終在專業支持取向與風險管理取向間搖擺。本文以風險社會概念下的風險管理為背景，探討在新管理主義影響下，社會工作督導實務之展現。特別是分析目前臺灣之保護性社會工作，於個別督導、團體督導、內部督導、外部督導，表現出哪些徵象？面臨哪些挑戰？本文的論述來自於國內關於社會工作督導制度的研究反思當今臺灣的社工督導現況，和國外關於風險管理與督導制度關係的反省，以及作者多年來擔任公部門與非營利組織的各種不同服務領域之外聘督導經驗的反思。在風險管理中為了精確評估、避免風險，督導關切績效與結果可能多於品質和過程；而人力與經費的緊縮，社工督導必須承擔更多管理責任，督導制度變成是在支持管理者，而不是支持社會工作員。因此，在風險管理下的社會工作實務變成是一種防衛性工作，此時更需要反身性的督導來協助社工反思與重建其工作意義與價值、確立其工作取向、提高專業的認同。英文摘要：As an essential practice to assure quality of social work service and professional performance, the feature of social work supervision nowadays has been largely modified by growing claims of risk management and increasingly demands for cost-efficiency evaluation. Most social work practice fields developed varied forms of supervision, from traditional internal and individual supervision to external and group supervision, to ameliorate the negative impact on social workers from their risk environment. Many academic educators and senior practitioners are recruited as external supervisors to participate in frontline practice. Most of social workers received various supervisions from internal and external supervisors, individually and collectively. What are the boundaries between internal and external supervisors? How is it designed and rationalized? Do these different forms of supervision truly response to needs of social workers, or just a risk management procedure? In the early history of social work, the function of supervision was administrative rather than educational or supportive. During the early years of twentieth century, the supervision was shifted to educational function to impart required values, professional knowledge and practice skills. From 1990s, under the influence of new managerialism and risk society, the function of supervision was heavily emphasized on administrative accountability and large demand for external supervision was developed. As a general agreement, social work supervision has three main functional elements, educational, administrative and supportive. However, it is not uncontested as a trade-off between managerial and professional concerns. The new managerialism and risk society have disrupted the stability of social work supervision. This article looks at the struggling and difficult positions social work practitioners faced in Taiwan and how social work manage, response and keep balance between various required supervisions, especially in protective social work field. The concept of 'risk management' is also introduced to analyze its development and a reflective model is proposed for good practice of social work supervision.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201612_20(2).00012篇名：臺灣婚姻暴力圖像：從父權家族系統受暴網的觀點出發並列篇名：The Image of Taiwanese Domestic Violence: From the Perspective of 'A Web in the Patriarchal Clan System'作者：戴世玫(Shih-Mei Tai)關鍵字：婚姻暴力;受暴婦女;紮根理論;父權;家族系統;domestic violence;battered woman;grounded theory;patriarchy;clan system期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：社會工作實務上慣用美國所發展的「權力控制輪」圖像來解釋女 性遭受婚姻暴力的現象，缺乏臺灣女性受暴脈絡不同於西方國家的討論。本研究藉由引進日裔美國學者Mieko Yoshihama「父權家族系統受暴網」的觀點，作為看待女性遭受婚姻暴力現象的基礎。為利進行該觀點的修改與本土圖像的討論，本研究採質性研究取向，依循紮根理論的研究方法進行，以滾雪球方式，邀請大臺北地區的婚姻暴力女性被害人，以及婚姻暴力服務社工人員，共計24人，進行5次焦點 團體訪談。經由資料分析歸納發現：臺灣女性被害人遭受婚姻暴力的過程，已經不再是兩個人（被害人與加害人）之間的事，而是如同千變萬化的「暴力陣」，以眾人的暴力合理化為核心。據此，本研究建議：未來臺灣婚姻暴力防治工作應該更為重視「社區預防性服務工作的投入」、「醫療衛生服務的主動提供」、「鄰里參與的救援機制」、「相關專業人員的養成訓練」、「開創居住及職場就業的長期支持」等議題，來阻斷加害人施暴和其他環境面加害情境的連結，從而翻轉社會輿論為正面支持，削弱父權體制對於女性在家庭和職場的影響，強化娘家的支持系統，制止婆家忽視暴力的行為，以瓦解暴力合理化的核心，協助更多的女性被害人脫離婚姻暴力。英文摘要：The Power and Control Wheel developed in the United States is often used in social work to explain the dynamics by which women are subjected to domestic violence. However, alternative (non-Western) discussions on Taiwanese domestic violence have been scant. This study adopted the concept of A Web in the Patriarchal Clan System, proposed by Japanese-American scholar Mieko Yoshihama, which took into consideration an Asian sociocultural context, as a foundation to study domestic violence against women. A qualitative approach was employed in conjunction with grounded theory to revise the perspective of A Web in the Patriarchal Clan System and discuss domestic violence in Taiwan. Snowball sampling was used to recruit female victims, as well as social workers who have directly or indirectly served the victims, in the Taipei Metro Area. A total of 24 participants were recruited to attend five focus groups. Data analysis results indicated that domestic violence against women in Taiwan is no longer a matter that is solely between the victim and the offender. Domestic violence is an ever-changing array of violence that is centered on the public's justifying of violence. According to the results of this study, the researcher provides recommendations pertaining to policy system and operational dimensions for formulating domestic violence prevention measures in Taiwan: (1) placing greater emphasis on the strategies of domestic violence prevention, such as investing in preventative service in communities; (2) ensuring accessibility to medical and health services; (3) offering community-involved rescue mechanisms; (4) training relevant professionals, and (5) developing long-term living and employment support for victims of domestic abuse. By enhancing these strategies, the connection between the offender's abusive actions and environmental factors can be severed, public opinion can be transformed into positive support, and the patriarchal influence on women in households and workplace can be mitigated. Furthermore, support provided by the women's families should be enhanced, and ignorance of violence of the husbands' families should be changed, in order to collapse the concept of 'justifying violence' and liberate female victims from domestic violence.起始頁-結束頁：43-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201612_20(2).00023篇名：我國勞保老年年金世代年金權益探討：從世代會計觀點並列篇名：The Pension Equity of the Labor Insurance Old-Age Pension Benefit in Taiwan: On Generational Accounting作者：王靜怡(Ching-Yi Wang);鄭清霞(Ching-Hsia Cheng)關鍵字：世代公平性;世代會計;公共年金;generational equity;generational accounting;public pension期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：隨著近年來勞保財務危機的浮現，政府在2013年提出勞保老年年金改革方案，來試圖減輕勞保財務負擔。本文在此引用世代會計法觀點，並擇取改革方案中的費率漸進調整、調整給付計算公式、提高平均投保薪資採計月數等三項，來分析此一改革方案對現行及未來世代勞保被保險人的年金權益影響。實證結果顯示，此次年金改革方案的確有助於強化現行世代的提撥責任並降低未來世代的提撥負擔。不過在本文所建立的推估條件下，年金改革方案的實施，並無法改變未來世代仍為淨提撥者的情況，顯示老年年金的給付設計，尚有更進一步的改善空間。英文摘要：As the emergence of financial crisis of the Labor Insurance in Taiwan, the government proposed a new reform package in 2013 to release the financial burden of the system. Adopting the concept of generational accounting, this paper explores the effects upon the pension equity of different insured generation under three measures of the reform package: (1) gradual premium rate upward adjustment, (2) pension benefit formula modification, and (3) lengthening the period of average monthly insurance salary calculation. The projections reveal that the proposed reform measures can ease the contribution burden of the future generations, but still cannot reverse their statuses of being net contributors. The empirical results show that the formula of pension benefit calculation needs to be improved further to strengthen the pension equity of future generations.起始頁-結束頁：83-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201612_20(2).00034篇名：日本「老人虐待防治暨老人照顧者支援法」之分析：對臺灣老人保護工作的啟示並列篇名：An Analysis on Japan's Elder Abuse Prevention and Caregiver Support Law: Lessons to Taiwan's Elder Protection作者：劉家勇(Hubert Chia-Yung Liu)關鍵字：老人虐待;老人保護;日本;elder abuse;elder protection;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：日本於2006年實施的「老人虐待防治暨老人照顧者支援法」（原文為「高<U+9F62>者虐待<U+306E>防止、高<U+9F62>者<U+306E>養護者<U+306B><U+5BFE><U+3059><U+308B>支援等<U+306B><U+95A2><U+3059><U+308B>法律」），是世界上第一個以國家法律形式針對老人虐待問題作出明確規範的法律。此項法律的實施，不僅針對老人虐待問題提出了新的觀點，更進一步對老人虐待的防治工作採取多元的預防策略。日本藉由「老人虐待防治暨老人照顧者支援法」，得以更為全面地預防及解決老人虐待的問題，達到「早期發現，早期介入」的政策目標。本研究採用質性研究方法中的文獻分析法，蒐集與「老人虐待防治暨老人照顧者支援法」相關的日文、英文學術期刊文章、雜誌、書籍及評論等，也包括相關的統計資料及專題研討會議之紀錄或討論，以求資料分析的完整與全面。本研究發現，首先，日本「老人虐待防治暨老人照顧者支援法」立法的過程與介護保險法的通過有關，此外社會輿論及專業團體的推動，也促成「政策機會窗」的開啟。再者，日本針對老人虐待的防治工作，不僅是重視老人受虐的通報及對施虐者的處罰，更強調政府的政策責任、受虐者的保護及施虐者的協助。最後，本研究呈現日本以「老人防虐網」的概念，進行老人虐待防治工作的輪廓，並對我國老人保護工作提出可能的建議與改進方向，以收「他人之石，可以攻錯」之效。英文摘要：The Elder Abuse Prevention and Caregiver Support Law, which is the first legislation specifically dealing with elder abuse, has been implementing since 2006 in Japan. This new perspective toward the elderly abuse sets on a milestone in which the elderly abuse is clearly defined by law, and it suggests a prevention strategy cooperating with multiple stakeholders. In this way, the Elder Abuse Prevention and Caregiver Support Law is beneficial to prevent the occurrence of elder abuse, and it is also helpful to early intervention for the elder abuse. This research adopts documentary analysis, which is a sort of qualitative research method, facilitates our analysis in depth. The analytical data include journal articles, newspaper, books, and so on. The findings include, firstly, the implementation of the Elder Abuse Prevention and Caregiver Support Law is closely related to the introduction of the Long Term Care Law in 2000. Meanwhile, the public requests and professional groups also facilitated opening the window of policy opportunities. Secondly, according to its core spirit, the prevention of the elder abuse does not only rely on the mandated report and abuser's punishment, but also focuses on the government’s policy, protection for the abused elderly, and assistances to the abusers. Finally, the author claimed that the concept of the elder abuse prevention network in Japan is a significant mechanism for the prevention of elder abuse in Taiwan. In conclusion, the Elder Abuse Prevention and Caregiver Support Law may give lessons to the development of Taiwan’s elder abuse prevention in the future.起始頁-結束頁：125-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201612_20(2).00045篇名：轉變中的社區發展：臺灣社區發展政策之歷史制度論分析並列篇名：The Community Development in Transition: A Policy Analysis for Community Development from Historical Institutionalism Perspective作者：李易駿(Yih-Jiunn Lee)關鍵字：社區發展;歷史制度論;政策分析;community development;historical institutionalism;policy analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以1968-2013年間的臺灣社區發展政策為對象，透過歷史制度論觀點進行社區發展政策之分析。作者在完成當前社區發展政策議題整理後再透過歷史制度論觀點對前諸政策議題進行分析。分析發現當前社區發展中的關鍵議題：社區劃分、社區組織的性質、指定工作項目、社區輔導、社區評鑑等議題可以在歷史脈絡中找到「歷史解答」。現有的議題乃是傳承自過去之制度思維與現代環境及任務間的不對應而致。藉由歷史性制度的澄清，期待社區發展工作的行政者及實務工作者，可以從過去的制度迷思與限制中解放出來，以利於政策規劃者、行政者及社區發展實務工作者，可以理性面對當前的環境特性及政策任務，進行適當的行動選擇。英文摘要：The Community Development Policy in Taiwan 1968-2013 was reviewed in this paper from historical institutionalism perspective. For finding the historical answer about community development issues, the author generalized the key issues about community development policy as: 'community-wide', 'nature of the community organization', 'specify community programs', 'communities coaching plan', 'community evaluation'. Then, the issues were analyzed from institutionalism perspective based on historical material. We found the 'historical answers' for the issues and the proposition of path dependence is verified. The existing issues emerge from the inherited system thinking does not suit to modern environment and tasks. This article clarifies the nature of community development policy in historical institutionalism perspective, provides further reflection and implementation for community development policy makers, administrators, and practical workers.起始頁-結束頁：175-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201612_20(2).00056篇名：柔思社會工作：理性、藝術、靈性整合的觀點並列篇名：Together Again: A Rationality, Art and Spirituality Integrated Perspective in Social Work作者：林木筆(Muh-Bi Lin)關鍵字：理性;藝術;靈性;社會工作觀點;柔思觀點;rationality;art;spirituality;integrated practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：以理性為主導的社會工作模式容易誤導社會工作者抱持偏狹的理性邏輯，擱置創意與想像，壓抑人對心靈、意義與價值的嚮往。一個有效的社會工作觀點必須建立在正確人觀的基礎上，也就是把人當成是一個由理性、藝術與靈性共同存在的整體。嘗試將藝術或靈性運用於社會工作中的討論不乏其人，然而將理性、藝術與靈性同時放在一個架構，有系統性的建構則仍然缺乏。本文將這三者整合在社會工作實務理念中，提出一個可能的社會工作觀點：柔思社會工作，取其英語RASI（Rationality, Art and Spirituality Integrated Practice）的諧音。柔思不是棄絕理性的價值與重要性，而是強調社會工作必須將其與藝術及靈性視為各自為體，但又相互為用的重要。柔思社會工作觀點包括對需求理論的檢視，強調人的創造力與追求意義與價值的本質，以靈性遭遇及欣賞式的相互探索作為評估的基礎。本文認為，如此的觀點為一個充滿彈性、個別化、貼近人本質，以及多元介入的實務帶來新的契機。英文摘要：This article charges that current social work profession has embraced a narrowly defined and destructive rationality, and that art and spirituality are neglected and largely excluded from its construction. It suggests that an effective social work perspective must faithfully reflect human being as a rationality-art-spirituality totality. The author presents a social work perspective by bringing together rationality, art and spirituality into one conceptual and practice framework. It is entitled 'Rou-Si' in Chinese language - denoting 'tender rationality', indicating a rationality that is 'tendered' by art and spirituality. The term is taken from the homonym of 'RASI'- Rationality, Art, and Spirituality Integrated Practice. It is postulated that need identification is to focus on human creativity and meaning seeking; and that spiritual encountering and mutual appreciative exploration are foundation to assessment. A multi-faceted intervention approach shall necessitate itself based on the basic assumptions and principles of this proposed social work practice perspective.起始頁-結束頁：227-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201612_20(2).00067篇名：跨越「雇」事：新移民女性微型創業經驗並列篇名：Beyond Employment: Immigrant Women's Experiences of Micro-Enterprise作者：林億玫(Yi-Mei Lin);潘淑滿(Shu-Man Pan)關鍵字：微型創業;新移民女性;飛地市場;理性抉擇理論;創業輔導方案;Micro-enterprise;immigrant women;enclave market;rationalchoice theory;entrepreneurship monitoring program期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：相較於本籍女性，新移民進入勞動市場面對較多個人與結構限制，為瞭解決家計困境、兼顧照顧需求，具有機動性微創成為突破困境與發展主體選項。本文訪問八位從事微創新移民，探討新移民在從事微創過程中，性別、階級和族群象徵的意涵，如何展現在微創抉擇、經驗、與遭遇困難時之策略因應。結果發現：新移民的微創是理性抉擇，為生活所迫、承繼家族產業或追求個人主體皆有，創業資金來自個人積蓄或夫家支持，個人擁有技術與過去生活經驗是重要人力與社會資本。創業結果不僅改善家庭經濟，更增加個人自信，和部分翻轉家庭權力關係。新移民的微創仍難擺脫性別化角色，階級對微創行動的影響有待釐清，跨國人口流動形塑另類「飛地市場」現象。根據研究結果，本文提出多項關於新移民創業輔導機制與實務策略之建議。英文摘要：Facing more personal and structural constraints for finding a job, immigrant women in Taiwan try to balance the needs of job and caring by engaging in micro-enterprise, which is more flexible and provide potential in developing a more viable career. This article, based on interviews with eight immigrant women engaging in micro-enterprise, investigates how gender, class and ethnicity impact the choices, experiences, strategies for developing micro-enterprise. The findings indicate that motivations for engaging in micro-enterprise include: Earning for living, continuing family business, and searching suitable career development. Most findings for initiating micro-enterprise are provided by personal savings and family members, but without any business loan. Ideas of developing microenterprise stems from personal skills and living and cultural experiences, micro-enterprise can also help immigrant women to achieve economic independence, to enhance self-confidence and to improve their status in the family, but micro-enterprise is still tainted by the gender division of labor. The problem of how education impacts the choice of micro-enterprise as a career need further studies to analyses. It deserves, more attention that immigrant women in Taiwan create a new image of enclave market, which is somewhat differ from the traditional enclave market founded upon whole family migration. In addition, this article also provides some suggestions for helping immigrant women to develop micro-enterprise.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201606_20(1).00018篇名：臺灣長期照顧保險的費率預測與調整規劃並列篇名：The Projecting and Adjusting for the Premium Rate of Long-term Care Insurance in Taiwan作者：鄭清霞(Ching-Hsia Cheng)關鍵字：長期照護;社會保險;部分提存準備;費率規劃;long-term care;social insurance;partial funding;projecting and adjusting of premium rates期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：社會保險的財務處理方式基本上分為三種，隨收隨付、完全提存準備、部分提存準備。相對於商業保險，社會保險因其永續經營特性，通常不需要完全提存準備。本文以臺灣規劃中的長期照顧保險為例，實際進行長期費率規劃的模擬設算，並評估各方案的可行性。本研究以臺灣規劃中的長期照顧保險為例，採取模擬分析方法，討論費率規劃的原則，並實際進行費率規劃的模擬設算。本研究根據財務處理方式、平衡期間、費率上升幅度、準備金額度、人口成長率等條件，設計七種費率規劃方案進行費率規劃、費率調升幅度、保險費水準、累積準備金等模擬分析。本研究結論：根據（一）部分提存準備、（二）費率調整頻率、（三）費率調整幅度、（四）世代公平性、（五）基金累積規模等指標評估，比較合適的費率規劃為C與F方案。C方案的主要費率規劃條件是：（一）10年平衡；（二）3年調整一次費率。F方案主要條件為（一）10年平衡；（二）3年精算一次費率；（三）精算費率與現行費率差距5%即調整費率；（四）第3年起，準備金不低於3個月。英文摘要：The financial scheme of the social insurance involves three models: pay as you go, full funding and partial funding. In contrast with the commercial insurance, the social insurance seldom takes the financial model of full funding because of its sustainable operation. This study took the 'Long-term Care Insurance' plan in Taiwan as the example, and applied the simulation analysis method to make simulative calculation programs of the premium rates in order to explore the principles underlying such these programs. Base on the dimensions of the financial model, the duration for financial balance, the premium rate growth, the funding amount, and the population growth rate, this study designed 7 simulative programs of the premium rate. Tables 1-4 showed the outcomes of programs A-G, including: the premium rate, the growth of the premium rate, the level of premium fee and the accumulated amount of funding. According to the financial model of partial funding, the frequency of premium rate adjustment, the growth of premium rate adjustment, intergenerational justice, and the accumulation of funding amount, program C and F were the more appropriate ones. The conditions of the premium rate in program C included: (1) 10 year-long duration for financial balance; (2) premium rate adjusted every 3 years. The conditions in program F included: (1) 10 year-long duration of financial balance; (2) premium rate adjusted every 3 years; (3) premium rate adjusted depending on the gap more than 5% between the calculated one and the existing one; (4) after the 3rd year, the funding amount should be able to pay more than the expenditure of 3 months.起始頁-結束頁：49-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201606_20(1).00029篇名：全民健康保險會運作效能之評估研究：健保會委員之觀點並列篇名：Evaluation Research of National Health Insurance Committee: The Perspectives of Committee Members作者：劉宜君(I-Chun Liu)關鍵字：全民健康保險;全民健康保險會;委員會;過程評估;運作效能;National Health Insurance policy;National Health Insurance committee;committee;process evaluation;operational effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：自2000年開始，政府提出二代健保的改革構想，其中在組織體制最主要的變革是將「健保監理會」與「健保費用協定會」兩會合一，成立健保會，負責審議健保費率、給付範圍、決定5,000多億健保醫療費用的分配。研究目的透過文獻資料蒐集、深度訪談法，從健保會委員觀點評估健保會實際運作過程與效能，提出改善建議。研究發現健保會雖然有少數委員對於角色認知不足、會議效率有待增進、委員專業知識不對等、委員互動仍在磨合等問題。但整體而言，健保會的確擴大社會多元化參與健保政策，並完成法定任務。研究建議衛福部可建立各類型組成團體之委員聘任原則、訂定專家學者與公正人士代表的遴選委員會設置及作業要點、衛福部提供行政資源，協助委員分析健保相關資料，促進委員的專業表達能力，強化付費者代表監督能量，以及委員之間的實質對等協商能力。英文摘要：Since 2000, the second generation National Health Insurance policy has focused on reforming its financial balancing mechanism. The key to reaching a balanced budget is to build a mechanism for 'integrating two committees governing premium revenues and medical expenses into National Health Insurance Committee (here after NHIC) to coordinate the decisions of revenues and expenses closer with each other.' A year-round procedure is established to connect global budget consultations, global budget negotiations, and premium rate negotiations under the integrated NHIC. However, this new mechanism's ability to achieve the reform goal must be evaluated. The research is an operational process evaluation that explores effectiveness and the possible NHIC problems from the committee members' perspectives. It also analyzes operational problems including the cognitive bias of committee members' roles, the loopholes in the operational processes and lack of professional knowledge of some members. The advantages of the committee include expanding participation and complete legislative missions. This research recommends that the government can present the appointees' principles, provide administrative resources to help members analyze healthcare-related information, and promote members' professional skills.起始頁-結束頁：85-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201606_20(1).000310篇名：遷徙與區域醫療資源對原住民健康不平等之影響並列篇名：Effects of Migration and Healthcare Recourse on Health Status of Aborigines作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu)關鍵字：遷徙;原住民;地區剝奪;健康不平等;migration;aborigines;area deprivation;health disparities期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：從原住民較低的平均餘命可揭露族群間健康不平等的現象，於此同時，原住民高度流動性也同樣引起關注。為釐清遷徙與健康之關聯，本文運用2007年「原住民社會變遷與政策評估調查資料」，以多元線性迴歸模型檢視遷徙、地區醫療資源與原住民健康狀況間的關聯。研究發現：（1）遷徙雖改變原住民所近用的醫療資源多寡，但區域醫療資源對於個人健康狀況的影響不大；（2）移徙前後環境異質性越高，遷徙者心理壓力越大，對健康越是不利；（3）遷徙對原住民健康的正向作用小於心理壓力所致生的負向作用。是故，（4）醫療資源差等的地區剝奪非為原住民健康不平等的主因，族群間健康不平等仍受社會與經濟因素所決定。英文摘要：The life expectancy gap between aborigines and main stream reveals the ethnic health disparity, in the mean times, the high migration rate in aborigines comes into noticed as well. Based on the data of the Taiwan Indigenous People Survey (TIPS), this paper applies multiple linear regression model to examine the health status of different migrants and to analyze the changing quantity of areal healthcare resource between original and destination. The main findings are as follows. (1) Although migration can alter the accessibility of healthcare resource, the effect of local healthcare resource on health status is not significant. The better healthcare resource in local areas does not ensure the better healthcare resource utilization for aborigines. (2) The higher cultural environment variation that migrants went through might put them under high mental stress and therefore become harmful to their health status. (3)The migrations are drive by other structure factors rather than regional healthcare resource. (4) The ethnic health disparity results in socioeconomic factors rather than area deprivation of healthcare resource.起始頁-結束頁：129-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201606_20(1).000411篇名：居家式照顧服務使用者的服務輸送經驗並列篇名：Experiences of Home-care Service Users作者：王秀燕(Hsiu-Yen Wang);徐明心(Ming-Sum Tsui);白<U+53D9>民(Michael Chui-Man Pak);王篤強(Duu-Chiang Wang)關鍵字：居家式照顧;服務使用者;服務輸送;home care;service users;service delivery期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在探究居家式照顧的服務使用者，其接受服務時對服務輸送的經驗，以提出合適的輸送體系設計，增進服務品質以及公民參與。本研究方法為質性研究，深度訪談14名服務使用者。研究結果顯示：（一）服務使用者身分常被標籤、需求評估模式過於僵化；（二）按其身分、權力行使、角色等不同，可歸納為「雙重弱勢型」、「飲水思源型」、「積極參與型」、「主流福利資訊排除型」四種類型；（三）在服務輸送體系設計方面，服務使用者對政策制定、服務類型認知貧乏；（四）認為政府委託民間提供各種服務，但彼此是不認識的夥伴；（五）認同專業與感恩在地服務人員，但無參與服務制定的權力。在服務品質方面，服務使用者認為在回應性、適當性、參與、給予選擇訊息、整合服務的指標缺乏。因此，本研究建議：1.接受服務者可稱為「服務使用者」；需求評估以「綜合評估模式」為之；依研究發現的服務使用者類型，設計不同的政策宣導方式；2.服務輸送體系方面，政策實施朝跨域合作模式；掌握需求，擴展服務項目；重視提供服務單位的合作與協調，強化專業人力培植、篩選和在職訓練；建立公民參與機制；3.服務品質方面，將服務品質六項指標納入，才可以評估服務對使用者產生什麼影響和改變。英文摘要：This study aims at understanding the dynamics between the home care service delivery system and the experiences of its users. By doing so, the authors tried to propose a design suitable for delivery systems, which may enhance quality of service and increase citizens' participation. Fourteen service users participated in in-depth qualitative interviews of this research. The results are as follows: (1) There are labels to service users, needs assessment is too rigid. (2) Based on their status, power, and roles, the users can be divided into four categories: double disadvantaged, those with gratitude, those who actively participated, and those being excluded by mainstream welfare information. (3) For the design of the service delivery system, users were ignorant of the policy-making and service type. (4) They experienced weak system link among various service projects. (5) Users showed gratitude to the service personnel, and lack of power in the development of service. Regarding service quality, it is inadequate in terms of responsiveness, appropriateness, user participation, providing service information, and service integration. This study recommends: (1) clients may be called 'service users'; service evaluation may be changed to 'integrated assessment model'. According to the research findings, design policy promotions in accordance with characteristics of different types of service users. (2) For the service delivery system, policy implementation should be coordinated among different districts, grasp the needs, expand service, value the collaboration among different service units, select and train professional manpower, and establish mechanisms for citizen's participation. (3) The six service quality indicators should be included to measure the influences and resultant changes of the service on the service users.起始頁-結束頁：163-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201606_20(1).000512篇名：把家庭找回來：臺灣、香港家庭之政治經濟學分析並列篇名：Bringing the Family Back in: The Political Economy of Family in Taiwan and Hong Kong作者：劉香蘭(Hsiang-Lan Liu);張玉芳(Yu-Fang Chang)關鍵字：政治經濟學;國家機器;照顧危機;社會科學區隔化;家庭;political economy;state apparatus;care crisis;disciples of social sciences;family期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：20卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文主要從政治經濟學的角度，討論臺灣、香港的家庭部門從80年代到現在，因少子女化、人口老化、長壽化、移民化與女性角色的轉變，所產生的「照顧危機」，引發兩地照顧責任在家庭、市場和政府三者重分配的爭論。本文認為在討論照顧責任在領域間移轉前，需將家庭帶回歷史脈絡，將家庭並列於政府與市場，勾勒家庭鑲嵌於政治經濟的位置，以克服與超越家庭位置在社會科學區隔化下，產生「家庭缺位」的遺憾，在忽略家庭位置存在政治經濟性下，政策處方不過是強化既有的體制，反導致問題的惡化。為此，本文將家庭置於政治經濟學的理論，從兩地歷史發展脈絡中，發現家庭在社會發展與變遷的歷程，一直具有政治經濟雙核心的本質，既是生產單位、也是穩定秩序的基地。「家庭被掏空」在各地有不同的意義，反映家庭部門隨著人口變遷、產業轉型和女性角色多重變動，國家和市場的交互作用導致家庭部門之脆弱，如何發展與脈絡高度鑲嵌的政策，實在先需要透視家庭、市場和國家存在的複雜與動態的三角關係，方能在促進家庭能量、鞏固家庭福祉下，把人類初級連帶的重要性找回來。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is taking the perspective of political economy to explore the family in Taiwan and Hong Kong from the 1980s to the present days, with a special focus on the divisions of care responsibilities among family, market and state, that are heated by the care crisis of low fertility, demographic ageing, extended life expectancy and the change of female roles. The authors argue that we should bring the family back in the historical context and embed it in a political economic structure. Due to traditional disciples of social sciences, the family has been long a missing part in the studies of political science, economics, and political economy, while studies on family also neglect the characteristics of political economy. As we trace back and embed the family in these areas from the process of social development, we clearly find family's dual kinds of nature of economic production and political stability. Following the reorganization of family, market and state imposed by demographic shift, industrial transformation and changing female roles, we will need an analysis of political economy that is helpful to examine the family in the dynamic and complicated historical and structural contexts. Then, the importance of family, as the primary group of human beings, can be rediscovered and recognized for fostering the capabilities and wellbeings of the family.起始頁-結束頁：207-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201606_20(1).000601篇名：Announcement Effects of Consumption Taxes並列篇名：消費稅的宣示效果作者：盧佳慧(Chia-Hui Lu)關鍵字：宣示效果;消費稅;福利損失;Announcement Effect;Consumption Tax;Welfare Cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本篇文章研究消費稅增加對總體經濟在長期恆定狀態以及傳遞動態的影響。當我們只研究長期恆定狀態時，消費稅增加只會對民眾福利有負面影響。即使我們研究傳遞動態，如果政府執行政策沒有事先宣告，消費稅也只會帶來福利損失。除此之外，若政府在執行政策前事先宣告，本篇文章可以得到當該經濟體的民眾的消費跨期替代彈性較低，福利損失會較少；但若是宣告到執行政策的間隔時間較長，福利損失會增加。本文的結果在無休閒勞動選擇，或是內生成長模型，或是不同效用函數之下皆可成立。英文摘要：This paper investigates the effect of an increase in consumption taxes both in the steady state and along the transitional dynamics. We find that a higher consumption tax always reduces the household's welfare if we only investigate the steady state. If the government implements the policy without declaring it in advance, then a higher consumption tax also has a welfare cost. In addition, if we consider an announcement effect for a change in the consumption tax, then the welfare cost drops when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for consumption is lower, but rises under a longer period of time between the policy's announcement and its implementation. The above results still hold under no leisure-labor trade-off, under an endogenous growth model, or under different utility functions.起始頁-結束頁：129-168資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：以差異中差異配對分析法檢驗雙元所得稅制度對經濟成長的影響並列篇名：Using the Method of Difference-in-Differences with Matching Analysis in Exploring the Effect of Dual Income Taxation on Economic Growth作者：毛治文(Chih-Wen Mao);吳文傑(Wen-Chieh Wu)關鍵字：雙元稅制;經濟成長;差異中差異配對分析法;Dual Income Tax;Economic Growth;Difference in Differences with Matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：傳統理論認為，對資本課徵所得稅使資本報酬降低，導致儲蓄與投資減少，進而不利於經濟成長。為促進成長，北歐國家自1990年代初期開始陸續實施雙元所得稅制改革，其最主要的特色在於對資本所得課以較低的比例稅，而勞動所得則維持累進稅制。我們採用差異中差異配對分析方法來檢驗雙元所得稅制是否較其他稅制更有益於經濟成長。我們採用全球167 個國家為研究樣本，發現實施雙元所得稅制對經濟成長有顯著之正向影響。因此，本文之實證結果對雙元稅制有助於促進經濟成長之觀點提供新的實證證據。英文摘要：The traditional theory argues that capital income taxation decreases capital returns. Therefore, such taxation results in lower savings and investments, and hence slower growth. To promote growth, Nordic countries have begun to implement the dual tax income system since the early 1990s. The dual income tax system levies a lower flat tax rate on capital income, while it maintains a progressive tax rate on labor income. We employ the difference in differences with matching model to examine if the dual income tax system is more beneficial to economic growth than other tax systems. Using data on 167 countries, the empirical results show that the effect of the dual income tax system on growth is statistically positive. Our empirical findings suggest that the dual income tax system enhances growth.起始頁-結束頁：169-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：購買力平價、Balassa-Samuelson效果與結構性變動：臺灣與美國、日本實質匯率的實證並列篇名：Purchasing Power Parity, Balassa-Samuelson Effect, and Structural Change: Evidence from Real Exchange Rates between Taiwan and the U.S. and Japan作者：賴美穎(Mei-Ying Lai);劉宗欣(Zong-Shin Liu)關鍵字：購買力平價;實質匯率;Balassa-Samuelson 效果;結構性變動;傅立葉形式檢定;Purchasing Power Parity;Real Exchange Rate;Balassa-Samuelson Effect;Structural Change;Fourier Form Tests期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：美國、日本為臺灣最密切的兩個傳統貿易國，但先前研究探討臺灣／美國與臺灣／日本購買力平價 (purchasing power parity, PPP)是否成立及其影響因素尚無明確答案。本研究使用最長可利用的新臺幣匯率資料以增進檢定力、考慮Balassa- Samuelson (BS) 效果（由Balassa (1964) 與Samuelson (1964) 提出）及結構性變動兩個影響因素、及使用晚近發展的傅立葉形式單根及定態檢定，探討臺灣／美國與臺灣／日本長期PPP 及不同匯率體制時期PPP 的成立情況與影響因素。實證結果發現，臺灣／美國與臺灣／日本實質匯率皆存在顯著的BS 效果及結構性變動，長期及各匯率體制時期PPP 都無法成立。影響臺灣／美國與臺灣／日本PPP 成立的因素不同，無論是長期或各匯率體制時期，結構性變動都是影響臺灣／美國PPP 成立的主因；BS 效果則是影響臺灣／日本長期PPP 成立的主因，只有在浮動匯率時期結構性變動及BS 效果都會影響臺灣／日本PPP 的成立。本研究的結果顯示，於PPP 的相關研究應考慮BS 效果及結構性變動；再者，即使都是貿易密切的國家影響PPP 成立的因素也可能不同，值得應用PPP 假說時留意。英文摘要：The U.S. and Japan are traditionally the two closest trading partners of Taiwan. Previous studies on Taiwan/U.S. and Taiwan/Japan purchasing power parities (PPPs) and their influence factors, however, provide unclear answers. This study explores the evidence of and the influence factors on the long-run Taiwan/U.S. and Taiwan/Japan PPPs as well as PPPs under different exchange rate regimes. We employ the longest available exchange rate data series of the New Taiwan Dollar, consider two influence factors of the Balassa-Samuelson (BS) effect and structural change, and apply the newly developed Fourier form unit-root and stationarity tests. The empirical results show no evidence of long-run Taiwan/U.S. and Taiwan/Japan PPPs as well as PPPs for different regimes. Infact, the influence factors on Taiwan/U.S. and Taiwan/Japan PPPs are different. For the long-run Taiwan/U.S. PPP and PPPs of different regimes, structural change is the main factor. In contrast, the BS effect is the main factor for the long-run Taiwan/Japan PPP, whereby only under a floating regime can both factors influence the support for PPP. The empirical findings reveal that both structural change and the BS effect should be considered in PPP-related studies. Moreover, the influence factors on PPP might be different even if all the countries explored are close trading partners, which is noteworthy for the application of the PPP hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：207-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：消費外部性、自我保險與最適租稅政策並列篇名：Consumption Externality, Self-Insurance, and Optimal Taxation作者：顏志達(Chih-Ta Yen);翁<U+5803>嵐(K. L. Glen Ueng)關鍵字：消費外部性;自我保險;最適租稅;Consumption Externality;Self-Insurance;Optimal Taxation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文建構了一個包含消費外部性的個人自我保險模型，文中有二項主要的發現。第一，當個人偏好為妒忌 (jealousy) 且為風險趨避時，個人均衡的自我保險投入會低於社會的最適水準，此一結果明顯異於Dupor and Liu (2003) 的論點。第二， 當個人均衡屬於低度（過度）自我保險時，假若政府資金的邊際成本 (marginal cost of public funds, MCPF) 等於1，則政府可透過對個人的損失課稅（扣除），或者對其自我保險投入補貼（課稅）來矯正此一扭曲。然而，當政府資金的邊際成本大於1 時，假若個人均衡屬於低度自我保險時，則政府應對個人的損失課稅；反之，當個人均衡屬於過度自我保險時，則應對個人從事自我保險的投入課稅。英文摘要：This paper constructs a self-insurance model in the presence of consumption externality. We have two major findings. First, if an individual is jealous and risk averse, then the equilibrium level of self-insurance will be lower than the social optimum. This result is significantly different from that of Dupor and Liu (2003). Second, when the marginal cost of public funds (MCPF) equals one, the government should tax (subsidize) losses or subsidize (tax) self-insurance if consumers are under- (over-) insured. However, when the MCPF is greater than one, the government should tax losses if consumers are under-insured and tax self-insurance if consumers are over-insured.起始頁-結束頁：253-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：高溫熱浪衝擊下之電力風險管理與調適因應分析並列篇名：Heat Wave Risk Management and Adaptation Action for the Taiwan's Electricity Sector作者：王京明(King-Min Wang);邱齡慧(Ling-Hui Chiu)關鍵字：氣候暖化;熱浪;調適決策;隨機成本效益分析;Global Warming;Heat Wave;Adaptation Decisions;Stochastic Cost and Benefit Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：氣候暖化為當前全球不可避免的趨勢，世界各國亦將如何因應氣候暖化列為施政重點工作之一，氣候變遷下減緩與調適亦是政府與人民的重要課題。未來氣候變遷之衝擊程度與影響於目前仍充滿不確定性，且相關數據基礎調查也曠日費時，因此在此緩不濟急之情況下，需優先建構氣候風險評估與調適管理策略，台灣電力公司扮演著能源部門電力供應者的重要角色，如何在氣候變遷下調適準備為台灣電力公司當務之急，特別是尋求氣候暖化導致熱浪衝擊所造成風險之因應，評估高溫熱浪對電力部門的風險衝擊，適時規劃好所需的調適策略與方法。本文採用預期成本效益的量化分析評估方式，探討在高溫熱浪的風險情境下，台灣電力公司面臨此氣候衝擊風險之調適決策的經濟可行性，並運用隨機成本效益分析的概念篩選出適當之調適決策，並比較所研擬出的各項調適對策在長期所產生的預期效益。藉由本文的研究，期望提供台灣電力公司或相關業者具價值的參考素材，以作為電力部門建構氣候不侵調適政策之參考。英文摘要：The rise in global mean temperature has been accompanied by changes in the extreme weather and climate variability. Implementing adaptation action plans in various sectors is currently one of the top priorities for Taiwan’s governmental policy agenda to fight the negative impacts from climate change. The electricity sector plays a key role for the energy industry's climate adaptation. A risk assessment of the impact from climate change on Taiwan's electricity system identifies that heat wave events from climate warming are the major risks. How to cope with the possible impacts of these extreme events and prepare appropriate adaptation is a necessary and urgent task for a utility company. This study identifies and analyzes the risk from heat wave events and formulates appropriate actions for heat wave risk management adaptation for this sector. We adopt the framework of decision making under risk and uncertainty and carry out a stochastic cost and benefit analysis for heat wave risk management. Current and future impacts of weather and climate change on power sectors are prioritized by a multi-criteria analysis to assess the vulnerability of Taiwan's power system. Appropriate adaptation actions for the electricity sector are presented herein. Finally, we streamline our heat wave adaptation actions into the risk management of the governmentrun utility company, Taipower. Our study contributes significantly to risk reduction on the heat wave impact of climate change and to the design of adaptation actions for Taiwan's electricity sector.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：產品特定市場界定以及價格上漲壓力測試：以好樂迪與錢櫃結合案為例並列篇名：Market Definition and Upward Pricing Pressure Test: Evidence from Taiwan's KTV Industry作者：陳嘉雯(Chia-Wen Chen);林茂廷(Mau-Ting Lin)關鍵字：移轉率;市場界定;假設性獨占者測試;臨界損失分析法;價格上漲壓力測試;KTV產業;Diversion Ratio;Market Definition;Hypothetical Monopolist Test;Critical Loss Analysis;Upward Pricing Pressure Test;KTV Industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究在經濟理論的基礎上，利用問卷方法萃取消費者的需求彈性以及產品移轉率等資料，用以界定產品特定市場並評估大型水平結合案件通過後的限制競爭效果。我們以公平交易委員會曾禁止結合的好樂迪公司及錢櫃公司結合案為例，分析消費者在不同的假設性情境下，面對候選市場產品聯合漲價時的替代選擇，在假設性獨占者的分析架構下界定產品特定市場範圍，並以價格上漲壓力測試衡量結合後的單方效果。研究結果顯示，產品特定市場範圍為錢櫃、好樂迪、星聚點三家KTV業者。此外，消費者在星聚點、好樂迪及錢櫃公司間的高移轉率可牽制好樂迪及錢櫃公司在結合後，調漲好樂迪產品價格的單方效果。英文摘要：In this paper we design survey questions that gauge demand elasticities and diversion ratios of consumers in order to delineate product markets and to analyze the competitive effects of horizontal mergers. Using information obtained from our survey data, we examine the merger between Cashbox and Holiday in Taiwan's KTV industry by performing critical loss analysis and implementing upward pricing pressure tests. We find that the relevant market for KTV products only includes those from Cashbox, Holiday, and New CB Party. We also find that the entry of New CB Party has dampened the upward pricing pressure from the proposed merger between Cashbox and Holiday.起始頁-結束頁：39-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：適應性智慧電網電力供需資源組合之動態模擬與應用並列篇名：The Dynamic Simulation and Applications of an Adaptive Smart Grid-Based Power Supply and Demand Resources Mix作者：洪紹平(Shao-Pin Hung);張四立(Ssu-Li Chang)關鍵字：演化經濟;智慧電網;電力資源組合;適應性控制;系統動力模擬;Evolutionary Economics;Smart Grid;Power Resources Mix;Adaptive Control;System Dynamics Simulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：52卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究引用演化經濟(evolutionary economics)與適應性控制理論(adaptive control theory)作為基礎，據以建構以智慧電網為核心之整合性電力供需資源組合，包括供給面之集中型電源、分散型電源、再生能源和需求面之需求面管理與需量反應，以及調節性資源包括儲能系統和電動車等，從而形塑一個兼具低碳和智慧化之電力系統，具備動態彈性調節系統電力供需之能力，以利未來氣候變遷下之減緩與調適。其次，進一步立基於此一架構下，考量相關狀態變數（包括電力供給之能量、容量和輔助服務等電力資源）、量測變數（包括可觀測之能源與永續指標）、性能變數（包括可識別之價值指標與風險指標）和控制變數（包括可控性之政策制度因素、技術因素、市場因素和營運因素）；並考量其相互間之互動與耦合關係和回饋機制，據以建構一個可以進行情境模擬分析之多元代理系統動力模型，進行實證性模擬。依據模擬結果，經由得出不同情境下各種電力資源和相關指標之發展趨勢，從而推論永續發展下︰(1)適應性之電力需求；(2)適應性路徑依賴之「非線性自組織」智慧電網電力資源組合；(3)電力規劃與資產管理演進下之適應性備用與備轉容量；(4)適應性電力價格之可能趨向，可以提供電力「規劃與管理」決策參考之用。英文摘要：Based on evolutionary economics with adaptive control theory, this research builds up a smart grid to integrate the electricity mix of power resources, including power supply-side resources such as centralized resources and distributed generation (DG) and renewable energy, demand-side resources such as demand-side management (DSM) and demand response (DR), and regulating resources such as energy storage and electric vehicles (EV). Accordingly, the research shapes a low carbon and intelligent grid based power system, with the dynamic adjustment ability to effectively balance electricity supply and demand in response to the mitigation and adaptation to future climate change. Based on this framework, the model is established through further considerations, including underlying state variables such as energy, capacity and ancillary services of the power mix, measurement variables such as the energy index and the sustainable index, performance variables such as a value index with a risk index, and control variables such as policy, institution, market, and management factors. In addition, the model also takes into account the mutual relationship and interactions from the feedback mechanism. Accordingly, a dynamic multi-agent system (MAS) model for several scenarios can be executed for empirical simulations. Under sustainable development, system dynamic simulation results are found for various scenarios: (1) adaptive electricity demand, (2) adaptive self-organized non-linear path dependence for smart grid power resources mix, (3) adaptive reserve capacity for evolutionary power planning & assets management, and (4) adaptive electricity prices. The results can be used as a reference for decision-making in electricity planning and management.起始頁-結束頁：73-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：EDITOR'S REMARKS並列篇名：編者的話作者：徐畢卿(Bih-Ching Shu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001902篇名：Evaluation of Health Information Technology- Key Elements in the Framework作者：Ting-Ting Lee期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：283-285資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001923篇名：The Relationships Among Personality, Intercultural Communication, and Cultural Self-Efficacy in Nursing Students並列篇名：護理學生之性格、不同文化間交流以及文化自我效能作者：陳頌恩(Joanne Chung-Yan Chan);施寶怡(Po-Yi Sy)關鍵字：文化自我效能;不同文化間交流;性格;護理學生;cultural self-efficacy;intercultural communication;personality;nursing students期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 護士為不同文化背景之病人提供跨文化護理的機會日增，但有關護理學生的性格、不同文化間交流及文化自我效能之關係則鮮有研究。目的 此研究探討護理學生於性格、不同文化間交流以及文化自我效能三方面的關係，亦會對一年級生和三年級生的不同文化間交流以及文化自我效能作出比較。方法 這是一個橫斷式問卷研究。總共有126名中國藉護理學生填妥問卷，問卷當中包括三方面的計量：不同文化間交流、文化自我效能（文化概念、跨文化的護理功能以及對南亞裔人士的文化知識）和性格。結果 研究結果顯示不同文化間交流與性格之親和性（r = .22, p ＜ .05）、經驗開放性（r = .20,p ＜ .05）和盡責性有正面關聯（r = .18, p ＜ .05）。文化概念的自我效能則與親和性（r = .18,p ＜ .05） 及不同文化間交流（r = .49, p ＜ .01） 有正面關聯。跨文化的護理功能的自我效能與不同文化間交流（r = .36, p ＜ .01）、親和性（r =.31, p ＜.01）、情緒穩定性（r = .25,p ＜ .01）、經驗開放性（r = .32, p ＜ .01）、外向性（r = .19, p ＜ .05）和盡責性（r = .20,p ＜ .05）有正面關聯。對南亞裔人士的文化知識的自我效能與親和性（r = .20, p ＜ .05）與不同文化間交流（r = .27, p ＜ .01）有正面關聯。一年級生和三年級生於不同文化間交流、文化概念的自我效能、跨文化的護理功能的自我效能及對南亞裔人士的文化知識的自我效能沒有顯著差別。結論／實務應用 在篩選學生進入護理系時可加入性格評估，而護理教育者應以加強學生的文化自我效能以及不同文化間交流為目標。英文摘要：Background: The demand for nurses to provide transcultural nursing care is rising. However, little is known about the relationships among the dimensions of nurse personality, intercultural communication, and cultural self-efficacy in the provision of this care. Purpose: The aims of this study were to examine the associations among personality, intercultural communication, and cultural self-efficacy in nursing students and to compare intercultural communication and cultural self-efficacy between first-year and third-year nursing students. Method: One hundred twenty-six Chinese students completed a questionnaire that consisted of three scales that were designed to measure intercultural communication, cultural self-efficacy (cultural concepts, transcultural nursing functions, and cultural knowledge related to South Asians), and personality, respectively. Results: Intercultural communication correlated positively with the three subscales of personality, agreeableness (r = .22, p G .05), openness (r = .20, p G .05), and conscientiousness (r = .18, p G .05). Self-efficacy in cultural concepts correlated positively with agreeableness (r = .18, p G .05) and intercultural communication (r = .49, p G .01). Self-efficacy in transcultural nursing functions correlated positively with intercultural communication (r = .36, p G .01), agreeableness (r = .31, p G .01), emotional stability (r = .25, p G .01), openness (r = .32, p G .01), extraversion (r = .19, p G .05), and conscientiousness (r = .20, p G .05). Self-efficacy in cultural knowledge related to South Asians correlated positively with agreeableness (r = .20, p G .05) and intercultural communication (r = .27, p G .01). No significant difference was found between first-year and third-year students in terms of intercultural communication, self-efficacy in knowledge of cultural concepts, self-efficacy in the skills needed to perform key transcultural nursing functions, or self-efficacy in the cultural knowledge related to South Asians. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Personality assessments should be included in the nursing student recruitment process. Furthermore, nurse educators should focus greater attention on enhancing the cultural self-efficacy and intercultural communication skills of their students.起始頁-結束頁：286-290資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001574篇名：The Physical Activity Patterns of Pregnant Taiwanese Women並列篇名：台灣孕婦身體活動型態作者：李靜芳(Ching-Fang Lee);黃芳銘(Fang-Ming Hwang);林顯明(Hsien-Ming Lin);季力康(Li-Kang Chi);簡莉盈(Li-Yin Chien)關鍵字：懷孕;身體活動;孕期;臺灣;physical activity;pregnancy;women;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 身體活動可以降低懷孕期間疾病的風險，然而許多孕婦於懷孕期間減少身體活動。目的 本研究目的欲探討並比較臺灣婦女於各孕期之身體活動量（總量、強度及型態）。方法 本研究為橫斷式研究，以立意取樣方式選案。共有581位孕婦完成問卷。以中文版的孕期身體活動問卷測量研究對象之身體活動情形。結果 家事／照顧及職業型態的身體活動量於三個孕期呈現顯著的差異，且為懷孕期間最主要的身體活動型態，分別佔身體總活動量的43.2-54.5% 及42.0-54.0%。經產婦之總體及家事／照顧型態之活動量較初產婦高。除了運動型態身體活動外，收入者與各種型態及總活動量呈現負相關。結論／實務應用 醫護人員應仔細評估胎次、收入對於孕婦身體活動之強度及型態影響，並且鼓勵孕婦與家人或小孩一起參加各種活動。英文摘要：Background: Physical activity reduces the risk of maternal disorders during pregnancy. However, many pregnant women reduce their levels of physical activity while pregnant. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the physical activity (total amount, intensity, type) of Taiwanese women during each trimester. Methods: This cross-sectional survey used purposive sampling to enroll 581 Taiwanese women as participants. The physical activity of participants was measured using the Mandarin version of the Pregnancy Physical Activity Questionnaire. Results: The levels of household/caregiving activity and occupational activity differed significantly across trimesters. Household/caregiving (43.2%-54.5%) and occupational activity (42.0%-54.0%) accounted for the largest percentages of total energy expenditure for all three trimesters. In terms of total and household/caregiving activities, multiparous women had significantly higher mean energy expenditures than their primiparous peers. Moreover, income had a pervasive influence on all types and amounts of physical activity and energy expenditures, respectively, with the exception of sports/exercise. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Further careful assessment of the types and intensities of physical activity that are suitable for pregnant women in different parity and income categories in Taiwan is necessary. Furthermore, healthcare providers should encourage pregnant women to use strategies that promote their more regular participation in enjoyable physical activities. One of these potential strategies is to do activities together with children, family members, or friends.起始頁-結束頁：291-299資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001585篇名：Study on the Effects of Individualized Learning Therapy on Cognitive Function and Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia in the Institutionalized Older Adults並列篇名：個別式學習療法對改善機構失智老人認知及行為精神症狀之成效探討作者：陳曉梅(Hsiao-Mei Chen);蔡麗珍(Li-Jane Tsai);趙淑員(Shu-Yuan Chao);Mary Jo Clark關鍵字：個別式學習療法;失智長者;認知功能;神經精神症狀;individualized learning therapy;cognitive function;dementia among the elderly;neuropsychiatric symptoms期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 隨著失智長者人口數的增加，失智症照護在台灣已備受關切，特別是對於行為症狀的處理，以及認知功能的促進。目的 本研究旨在檢視個別學習療法對失智症長者提升認知功能與改善神經精神症之成效。方法 採類實驗前後測研究設計，中部僅有的二所失智專科病房，隨機分派為實驗組與比較組，參與的長者分別為23 與21位。實驗組施以個別學習療法，每週兩次，每次30 分鐘，連續施行三個月。比較組僅一般的常規活動，無學習療法。於活動前及12週之後，以簡易式認知功能評量表（MMSE）評量認知情形；另以中文版神經精神病徵評量表（CNPI）每週評量長者的神經精神病徵。以獨立t檢定（或曼－惠特尼U考驗法）、卡方檢定（或費雪精確性檢定）及廣義估計方程式（GEE）進行資料分析。結果 經12 週的處置後，實驗組較比較組在認知功能得分顯著提昇（p ＜ .001），神經精神症狀總分顯著減少（p ＜ .001）；而在幻聽、奇異行為、憂鬱、表情淡漠、不安、睡眠障礙等症狀在第7 週時，表現顯著改善。結論／實務應用 個別學習療法對提升失智長者的認知功能與改善神經精神症狀有相當之成效，值得未來應用。英文摘要：Background: The increasing number of elderly people affected by dementia in Taiwan hasmade dementia care a crucial issue of concern. This issue is particularly important in terms of the proper management of behavioral symptoms and improvement of the cognitive functions of those affected by this disease. Purpose: This study examined the effects of individualized learning therapy on cognition and neuropsychiatric symptoms among elderly people with dementia. Methods: A quasi-experimental, pretest-posttest research de-sign was adopted. We recruited elderly people with dementia at the only two institutions for elderly patients with dementia in Central Taiwan. These institutions were assigned randomly as the experimental or control group, with totals of 23 and 21 participants, respectively. The participants in the experimental group received individualized learning therapy for 30 minutes twice weekly for 3 months. The comparison group received usual care only. The cognitive function and neuropsychiatric symptoms of all participants were measured using the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) before the start of and immediately after the 12-week intervention and the Chinese version of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (CNPI), which was administered once per week during the intervention. Independent t tests (or Mann- Whitney U tests), chi-square tests (or Fisher's exact tests), paired t test, and generalized estimating equations were used for data analysis. Results: Participants in the experimental group had significantly higher MMSE scores (p ＜ .01) and lower CNPI scores (p ＜ .01) than their comparison group peers after the intervention. Furthermore, the neuropsychiatric symptoms in the experimental group such as hallucinations, bizarre behavior, depression, apathetic expression, irritability, and sleep disorder had significantly improved by the seventh week. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Individualized learning therapy may be an effective approach to improve cognitive function and reduce neuropsychiatric symptoms among older people with dementia. Therefore, future clinical application is warranted.起始頁-結束頁：300-310資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001186篇名：A Study of Interpersonal Intimacy and Meaning of Life Among Elderly Institutionalized Veterans並列篇名：機構內老年榮民人際親密和生命意義之研究作者：牛貞君(Chen-Chun Niu);黃惠滿(Hui-Man Huang);洪芸櫻(Yun-Ying Hung);李秀麗(Hsiu-Li Lee)關鍵字：老年榮民;人際親密;生命意義;榮民之家;senior veterans;interpersonal intimacy;meaning of life;veterans' homes期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 臺灣機構內的老年榮民大多為單身，與他人之人際親密關係程度較低；隨著年紀增長和疾病的纏身，老年榮民對生命意義常感懷疑，對生存價值亦可能喪失信心。目的 探討機構內老年榮民之基本屬性、人際親密、生命意義及其相互關係。方法 採橫斷式相關性研究設計，以方便取樣方式選取120位機構內老年男性榮民參與本研究，以個人基本屬性問卷、人際親密量表、及生命意義量表三份問卷收集資料。結果 本研究發現機構內老年榮民：(1)不同就養方式、不同居住機構、是否有宗教信仰、是否與親友、退輔會人員接觸在人際親密感受上有顯著差異；教育程度、自覺健康狀況與人際親密感受達顯著正相關，住養時間與人際親密呈顯著負相關。(2)是否有親友關係在生命意義上有顯著差異；教育程度、自覺健康狀況與生命意義達顯著正相關，住養時間與生命意義呈顯著負相關。(3)人際親密感受和人際親密四個層面與生命意義達顯著正相關。結論／實務應用 研究結果提供退輔會專業人員和管理者照護老年榮民之參考，建議可提供治療方案以增進老年榮民之人際親密感受和生命意義，進而協助老年榮民更正向積極地面對老年生活。英文摘要：Background: Most senior veterans who live in veterans' homes in Taiwan are single and have few intimate, interpersonal relationships. Aging is often accompanied by solitude and illness, which causes senior veterans to doubt the meaning of life and to lose confidence in the value of life. Purpose: This study investigated the personal characteristics that influence interpersonal intimacy and the meaning of life as well as the relationship between interpersonal intimacy and the meaning of life among senior veterans living in veterans' homes. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used, and 120 senior male veterans were convenience sampled from three veterans' homes in southern Taiwan. Three structured questionnaires were used in this study: personal characteristics questionnaire, interpersonal intimacy scale, and purpose in life test. Results: (a) Interpersonal intimacy was influenced by source of income or funds, type of residence institution, religious affiliation, and the quality of the participant's relationships with family, friends, and fellow residents. Educational level and self-perceived health status correlated positively with interpersonal intimacy, and period of residence correlated negatively with interpersonal intimacy. (b) Meaning of life was influenced by the quality of relationships with family and friends. Educational level and self-perceived health status correlated significantly and positively with meaning of life, and period of residence correlated negatively with meaning of life. (c) Significant, positive correlations were found among interpersonal intimacy, the four domains of interpersonal intimacy, and meaning of life. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Health professionals involved in the care of senior veterans in institutions may use the results of this study to develop and implement interventions that promote a higher degree of interpersonal intimacy and a higher appreciation of the meaning of life, thus enabling senior veterans to confront old age in a more positive manner.起始頁-結束頁：311-320資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001307篇名：Validation of the Chinese Version of the Readiness for Hospital Discharge Scale on Patients Who Have Undergone Laryngectomy並列篇名：中文版出院準備度量表在喉切除術後病人中應用的信效度檢驗作者：趙會玲(Hui-Ling Zhao);馮先瓊(Xian-Qiong Feng);余蓉(Rong Yu);辜德英(De-Ying Gu);紀小琴(Xiao-Qin Ji)關鍵字：中文;出院準備度量表;喉切除術;信度;效度;Chinese;Readiness for Hospital Discharge Scale;laryngectomy;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 英文版的出院準備度量表是用來評價病人的出院準備度。它已經被證實具有良好的信度和效度，但關於中文版出院準備度量表的信效度檢測還未見相關報導。目的 將出院準備度量表翻譯為中文並應用於喉切除術後病人進行信效度的檢測。方法 將英文版的出院準備度量表用回譯、語義等價性評價等方法翻譯成中文並進行預實驗。應用內容效度、結構效度、探索性因數分析法和Pearson相關分析來評價該量表的信度和效度。結果 中文版出院準備度量表的內容效度為0.97，各條目的內容效度為0 .75-1.00。量表總的Cronbach's α 係數為 .97，探索性因數分析法得到3 個公共因數，三個因數之間呈顯著相關。量表各維度得分和維度得分與量表總分之間的Pearson 相關係數為.81- .97。結論 中文版的出院準備度量表具有良好的信度和效度，可以用於喉切除術後病人出院準備度的研究。英文摘要：Background: The Readiness for Hospital Discharge Scale (RHDS) was designed to assess the readiness of patients for discharge. The original English-language instrument has shown high degrees of reliability and validity, but no Chinese version of the scale has been verified. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to translate the RHDS into Chinese and assess the psychometric properties of this scale on laryngectomy patients in China. Methods: The RHDS was translated into Chinese using forward and back translation, semantic equivalence assessment, and pilot testing. The content and construct validity, internal consistency, and internal reliability of the translated scale were assessed using exploratory factor analysis and Pearson correlation analysis. Results: The content validity index of the developed Chinese version of the RHDS was .97, with the content validity indexes of RHDS items ranging between .75 and 1.00. The Cronbach's α coefficient for internal consistency was .97. Exploratory factor analysis revealed a three-factor structural model. All correlations among the three factor subscales were significant. Pearson's correlation coefficients between subscale factors and the total scale ranged from .81 to .97. Conclusions: The Chinese version of the RHDS is a valid and reliable instrument for assessing the discharge readiness of laryngectomy patients in China.起始頁-結束頁：321-328資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001268篇名：Regular Exercise and Depressive Symptoms in Community-Dwelling Elders in Northern Taiwan並列篇名：北台灣社區老人規律運動與憂鬱症狀之研究作者：張淑紅(Shu-Hung Chang);簡乃卉(Nai-Hui Chien);陳妙絹(Miao-Chuan Chen)關鍵字：老人;憂鬱症狀;規律運動;性別;台灣;elderly;depressive symptoms;regular exercise;gender;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 根據世界衛生組織的估計到了2020年，憂鬱疾病會變成全球疾病負擔的第二位。由於台灣老人人口愈來愈多，導致台灣高齡化社會的來臨，所以台灣老人的心理健康更值得關注。目的 本研究主要的目的，在於探討北台灣不同性別的社區老人，規律運動與憂鬱症狀之關聯。方法 本研究利用以抽取率與單位大小成比例方式（Probability Proportional to Size, PPS），抽取北台灣65歲以上的老人。利用橫斷性研究及面訪收集老人運動行為、憂鬱症狀及憂鬱相關因素。使用百分比、卡方、t 檢定及邏輯斯迴歸等方式進行統計分析。結果 共1,020位老人完成問卷調查。研究對象平均為73.5歲，男性占44.5%、女性占55.5%；有憂鬱症狀之個案共217 位（21.3%）、有規律運動之個案共585 位（57.4%）。邏輯斯迴歸結果顯示：規律運動是老人憂鬱症狀的重要預測因子（勝算比3.54，95%信賴區間為1.76-7.12），其餘如性別、慢性疾病、健康狀態等均與憂鬱症狀無顯著關聯。此外，不論男性或女性老人，規律運動是憂鬱症狀的重要預測因子（男性勝算比4.76，95%信賴區間為1.65-13.72；女性勝算比3.03，95%信賴區間為1.18-7.69），其餘因素與憂鬱症狀皆無顯著關聯。結論／實務應用 由上述研究結果顯示，不論男女老人，規律運動都是憂鬱症狀的重要預測因子。應多鼓勵老人持續性地運動，以促進心理健康。英文摘要：Background: According to World Health Organization, depressive disorder will be a Top 2 disease in the world by 2020. In light of Taiwan's rapidly increasing elderly population, elderly psychological health is expected to become an increasingly important issue in healthcare. Purpose: This study examines the association between regular exercise and depressive symptoms in community-dwelling older adults by gender in northern Taiwan. Methods: The participants were selected using a probability-proportional- to-size procedure from community-dwelling adults who were aged 65 years or older and living in northern Taiwan. A cross-sectional study and interviews were used to collect information about their exercise behaviors, depressive symptoms, and the factors influencing the depressive symptoms. Percentage, chi-square, t test, and logistic regression were used to analyze the data. Result: One thousand twenty elderly individuals completed the questionnaires. Among the participants with the average age of 73.5 years, 44.5% were men, and 55.5% were women. Two hundred seventeen of the participants (21.3%) had depressive symptoms. Five hundred eighty-five of the participants (57.4%) exercised regularly. The result of logistic regression showed that regular exercise was a significant predictor of depressive symptoms in elderly individuals (odds ratio = 3.54, 95%confidence interval [1.76, 7.12]). Other factors such as gender, chronicle diseases, and health status were not related to depressive symptoms. Moreover, both for male and female individuals, regular exercise was a significant predictor of depressive symptoms (odds ratio = 4.76, 95% confidence interval [1.65, 13.72] and odds ratio = 3.03, 95% confidence interval [1.18, 7.69], respectively). Other factors were not related to depressive symptoms. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study shows regular exercise to be a significant predictor of depressive symptoms in both men and women. Therefore, senior citizens should be encouraged to exercise regularly as away to promote good mental health.起始頁-結束頁：329-336資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001179篇名：Chinese Version of Psychometric Evaluation of Self-Reflection and Insight Scale on Taiwanese Nursing Students並列篇名：中文版自我反思與覺察量表之心理評量評估：以台灣護生為例作者：陳淑月(Shu-Yueh Chen);賴貞君(Chen-Chun Lai);張惠美(Hui-Mei Chang);徐慧真(Hui-Chen Hsu);白香菊(Hsiang-Chu Pai)關鍵字：因素結構;覺察;護生;自我反思;自我調整學習;factor structure;insight;nursing student;self-reflection;self-regulated learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 自我反思（亦稱反思）是內在歷程，不易感知和評估。自我反思量表是教師評估學生學習歷程的工具，據此，教師得以依據學生的需要調整教育方法。目的 將自我反思與覺察量表（self-reflection and insight scale, SRIS）譯成中文，評估其心理計量特性。方法 採橫斷式研究設計，分兩階段，樣本是南部兩所專科學校護生：四年級361 人（階段一），五年級703人（階段二）。護生填寫中文版自我反思與覺察量表（SRIS-C）、批判思考意向量表（Taiwan critical thinking disposition inventory, TCTDI）、以及護理師角色認同問卷，資料收集於2012 年12月及2013 年5月。以探索性因素分析階段一的資料找出自我反思與覺察量表的因素結構，再以確認性因素分析法以階段二的資料驗證模式適配度。結果 從英文版自我反思與覺察量表的20題刪除8題後的12題，分別落入兩因素，一為自我反思、另一為覺察，且具相當好的模式適配度。其總量表和兩分量表之內部一致性alpha值分別為.79、.87、.83；三星期的再測信度.74；與批判思考意向（TCTDI）、護理師角色認同的相關值達統計學上顯著水準，表示此量表具良好的聚合效度結論／實務應用 中文版自我反思與覺察量表具有相當好的心理計量特性。此量表提供護理教育者在評估學生自我反思與覺察以及進而發展能促進學生反思與覺察技巧之策略的參考。英文摘要：Background: Self-reflection (also known as reflection) is an internal process that is difficult to perceive or assess. An instrument that is able to measure self-reflection may serve as a resource for educators to assess the learning process of students and to tailor education approaches to student needs. Purpose: The aim of this study was to translate the Self- Reflection and Insight Scale (SRIS) into Chinese and evaluate its psychometric properties for use with Taiwanese nursing students. Methods: For this cross-sectional study, nursing students were recruited from two nursing schools in southern Taiwan in two phases: Phase 1, which included 361 fourth-year students, and Phase 2, which included 703 fifth-year students. Data were collected in December 2012 and May 2013 using the Chinese version of the SRIS (SRIS-C), Taiwan Critical Thinking Disposition Inventory, and the Perceived Identity as a Nurse Questionnaire, which was developed by the author. In Phase 1, exploratory factor analysis was used to explore the factor structure of the SRIS-C in the fourth-year student participants. In Phase 2, confirmatory factor analysis was used to determine the fitness of the model for the fifth-year student participants. Results: Eight items were deleted from the original SRIS to create the SRIS-C. Thus, the Chinese-version measure had 12 items and two factors (self-reflection and insight) that fit the data well. The Cronbach's alpha coefficients for the total scale and its two subscales were .79, .87, and .83, respectively. The 3-week test-retest reliability was .74. SRIS-C scores correlated significantly with scores on the Taiwan Critical Thinking Disposition Inventory and the Perceived Identity as a Nurse Questionnaire, indicating good convergent validity for the SRIS-C. Conclusions: The current study showed that the SRIS-C has sound psychometric properties. This instrument provides nurse educators with information that may be used to evaluate the self-reflection and insight of students and to develop interventions to effectively improve these skills in Chinese-language-based nursing education.起始頁-結束頁：337-346資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000013210篇名：Gender Differences in Self-Perceptions About Aging and Sleep Among Elderly Chinese Residents in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣年長者對老化和睡眠的自我感受之性別差異作者：林忠尼(Jong-Ni Lin)關鍵字：老化;性別;感受;睡眠;aging;gender;perception;sleep期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 研究發現已顯示不同族群老人的睡眠有性別差異，但在台灣性別差異的睡眠資料有限。目的 本研究目的是：<U+2474>描述年長男性和女性對老化的感受和此感受對睡眠的影響；<U+2475>探討老化感受和睡眠評價是否有性別的差異。方法 混合法的研究設計被使用。把對23位男性和27位女性深入訪談的資料與匹茲堡睡眠品質量表的資料做整合。結果 整個樣本的匹茲堡睡眠品質量表平均分數是6.1 ± 3.5 （男，4.8 ± 1.6;女，7.1 ± 4.3）。比對老化沒負面態度的研究對象，那些有負面態度的研究對象較可能陳述不良的睡眠品質、短的睡眠時間和難以入睡。女性比男性對老化有較負面的感受（像無力感）和較多的睡眠抱怨。比起男性，女性的匹茲堡睡眠品質量表分數也有顯著較差的睡眠品質（p = .02）和較低的睡眠效率（p = .03）。結論／實務應用 對老化的負面感受與不良睡眠品質的陳述有關。老化的感受和睡眠評價有性別差異。老化的過程和睡眠型態會隨時間改變，故縱貫性的研究設計被建議給未來的研究採用。英文摘要：Background: Previous research has revealed the existence of gender differences in sleep patterns among older adults from various ethnic groups. Data on how gender affects the sleep patterns of Taiwanese are limited. Purpose: The purposes of the current study were to (a) describe perceptions about aging and the influence of these perceptions on sleep in elderly men and women, respectively, and (b) determine whether there are gender differences in perceptions and appraisal of sleep. Methods: A mixed method design was used. In-depth interview data from 23 men and 27 women were integrated with data from the Chinese version of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (CPSQI). Results: The mean CPSQI score for the entire sample was 6.1 ± 3.5 (men: 4.8 ± 1.6, women: 7.1 ± 4.3). Participants who held negative attitudes about aging were more likely to report poor sleep quality, short sleep duration, and difficulty in falling asleep than those who did not hold negative attitudes. Women had more negative perceptions about aging (e.g., feelings of powerlessness) and more sleep complaints than men. Furthermore, women reported significantly poorer sleep quality (p = .02) and lower sleep efficiency (p = .03) on the CPSQI than men. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Negative perceptions about aging are associated with reports of poor sleep quality. There are gendered differences in perceptions about aging and appraisals of sleep. As the process of aging and patterns of sleep change over time, longitudinal research designs are recommended for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：347-356資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000016711篇名：Developing and Psychometrically Testing the Functions of Diabetes Peer Support Group Scale並列篇名：糖尿病支持團體功能量表之發展與測試作者：邱啟潤(Chii-Jun Chiou);黃曉靈(Hsiao-Ling Huang);林盈諄(Ying-Chun Lin);王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang)關鍵字：糖尿病;支持團體;量表發展;diabetes;peer support group;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 糖尿病支持團體漸被視為為健康照顧系統的一部分，了解糖尿病支持團體的功能有助於專業人員提供必要的協助。目的 發展與測試糖尿病支持團體功能量表。方法 方便取樣589位參與糖尿病支持團體之第2型糖尿病患者填寫包含16題之糖尿病支持團體功能量表。利用探索性及驗證性因素分析檢視量表之建構效度，並與糖尿病自我效能的相關進行同時效度檢定，以內部一致性及再測信度進行量表信度分析。結果 驗證性因素分析支持16題包含4個次量表之糖尿病支持團體功能量表之建構效度。模式適配指標值分別為：卡方值／自由度比 = 2.60，比較適配指標= .94，規範適配指標=.91，漸進誤差均方根 = .07。4個次量表分別命名為增進自我照顧的執行、獲得知識及技能、心理支持及集體認同。糖尿病支持團體功能量表得分與糖尿病自我效能得分呈顯著正相關（r = .45, p ＜ .001）。總量表及4個次量表Cronbach's α值及再測信度值皆大於.70。結論／實務應用 糖尿病支持團體功能量表具良好信效度，健康專業人員可應用此量表評估糖尿病支持團體的功能，並提供必要的協助。英文摘要：Background: Peer support groups for people with diabetes are increasingly considered a part of the healthcare system. Understanding the functions of peer support groups assist healthcare professionals to provide critical assistance. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to develop and assess the psychometric properties of the Functions of Diabetes Peer Support Group (F-DPSG) scale. Methods: This study used a cross-sectional design. A 16-item F-DPSG scale was developed and administered to 589 patients with Type 2 diabetes who were selected from34 diabetes peer support groups in Taiwan. Construct validity was evaluated using exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses and by examining the correlation with the score of the Chinese Diabetes Management Self-Efficacy Scale. Reliability was tested using internal consistency and test-retest reliability. Results: The 16-item F-DPSG scale, including four subscales, was supported by a second-order confirmatory factor analysis, with the following fit indices: χ^2/df ratio = 2.60, comparative fit index = .94, normed fit index = .91, and root mean square error of approximation = .07. The four subscales were ”enhancing self-care practice,” ”obtaining knowledge and skills,” ”psychological support,” and ”collective identification.” The score of the F-DPSG scale correlated significantly with the score of the Chinese Diabetes Management Self-Efficacy Scale (r = .45, p G .001). The Cronbach's α and test-retest reliability of the F-DPSG global scale and subscales were all above .70. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The F-DPSG scale showed satisfactory reliability and validity. Healthcare providers may use the F-DPSG scale to assess the functions of peer support groups for people with diabetes and to provide necessary assistance.起始頁-結束頁：357-364資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017912篇名：EDITOR'S REMARK並列篇名：編者的話作者：葉美玲(Mei-Ling Yeh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017513篇名：Predictors of Antenatal Psychosocial Stress in Taiwanese Women並列篇名：台灣孕婦心理社會壓力之預測因子作者：張倖綺(Hsing-Chi Chang);陳淑月(Shu-Yueh Chen);陳彰惠(Chung-Hey Chen)關鍵字：孕期壓力;憂鬱;社會支持;親子依戀關係;pregnancy stress;depression;social support;maternal-fetal attachment.期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 孕期心理社會壓力乃是對婦女和嬰兒造成後遺症的危險因子之一。然而，過去的研究鮮少關注妊娠心理壓力的導因或共存因子。目的 本研究旨在探討台灣婦女孕期心理社會壓力之相關因素與預測因子。方法 本橫斷式研究方便取樣自南部某醫學中心136位第二妊娠期和164位第三妊娠期孕婦。測量工具包括個人屬性調查、懷孕壓力量表、愛丁堡憂鬱量表、匹茲堡睡眠品質量表、孕期親子依戀量表、和社會支持量表。結果 孕期壓力和憂鬱（r = .368, p ＜ .01）、孕期親子依戀關係（r = .168, p ＜ .01）呈顯著正相關，但和孕次（r = -.137, p ＜ .05）、社會支持（r = -.266, p ＜ .01）呈顯著負相關。多元逐步複迴歸分析的結果顯示，初孕、憂鬱、孕期親子依戀關係、低社會支持可顯著預測孕婦之孕期心理社會壓力偏高，此4個預測變項共可解釋20％孕期壓力的總變異量。結論／實務應用 憂鬱、孕期親子依戀關係、社會支持、和孕次可預測婦女之孕期心理社會壓力程度，此研究結果可增進相關醫療照護者之實證知識及實踐。建議未來的研究，可將憂鬱概念納入孕期壓力管理模式之設計與驗證。英文摘要：Background: Antenatal stress has been associated with adverse outcomes in mothers and their children. However, little research has been conducted to identify the factors associated with psychosocial stress in pregnant women. Purpose: This study explored the predictors of psychosocial stress during pregnancy. Methods: A convenience sample of 136 second-trimester and 164 third-trimester pregnant women were recruited from a medical center in southern Taiwan. Data were collected using a demographic form, Pregnancy Stress Rating Scale (PSRS), Edinburgh Prenatal Depression Scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Maternal-Fetal Attachment Scale, and Interpersonal Support Evaluation List. Results: The results of this study found positive correlations between PSRS and both Edinburgh Prenatal Depression Scale (r = .368, p ＜ .01) and Maternal-Fetal Attachment Scale (r = .168, p ＜ .01) and negative correlations between PSRS and both gravidity (r = ＜.137, p ＜ .05) and Interpersonal Support Evaluation List (r = ＜.266, p ＜ .01). Higher pregnancy stress was predicted by depression, lower social support, maternal-fetal attachment, and primigravid status, which together explained 20% of the total variance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Depression, social support, maternal-fetal attachment, and gravidity are discrete predictive factors of psychosocial stress in pregnant women. These findings add to existing knowledge of the factors associated with prenatal stress. Future research should include depression in a support model of antenatal stress management起始頁-結束頁：193-200資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012214篇名：The Effects of an Empowerment Intervention on Renal Transplant Recipients: A Randomized Controlled Trial並列篇名：充能介入措施對腎臟移植接受者之成效—隨機控制試驗作者：蕭秋月(Chiu-Yueh Hsiao);林麗味(Li-Wei Lin);蘇玉文(Yu-Wen Su);葉淑惠(Shu-Hui Yeh);李麗娜(Li-Na Lee);蔡富棉(Fu-Mian Tsai)關鍵字：腎臟移植接受者;充能;自我照護;renal transplant recipients;empowerment;self-care behaviors期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 腎臟移植對腎衰竭病人是一項重要的治療方式，腎臟移植接受者須要調適技巧及自我照護行為的介入措施來協助提升生活品質；然而，許多學者討論腎臟移植術後自我照護的相關因素，僅少數研究審視介入措施對腎臟移植接受者之成效。目的 本研究主旨檢測充能團體對腎臟移植接受者的充能程度與自我照護行為之成效。方法 本研究採隨機控制先驅試驗，納入條件為過去20年曾接受腎臟移植、年齡＞18歲、具讀寫能力且願意參與本研究者；由南部兩家醫學中心召募接受腎臟移植者122位，以隨機分配分為充能組（n = 56）和對照組（n = 66）。我們發展測量工具、充能支持團體的內容及草案，並檢測其效度；亦檢測充能組和對照組之成效。介入措施為每2星期一次，每次2小時的充能團體活動共6次；充能團體主題包括目標設立、解決問題、日常壓力的調適、尋求社會支持、保持動機等。活動過程包括說明主題、團體討論、確定接受腎臟移植後自我照護行為之窘境、發展一組目標及策略來克服問題。結果 利用混合模式分析，腎臟移植接受者在時間和年齡的交互作用下（F = 9.86, p ＜ .001），充能組的腎臟移植接受者之充能程度（F = 5.29, p = .023）及自我照護行為（F = 7.15, p =.009）較控制組呈顯著地改善；年齡較長的腎臟移植接受者在參加充能團體後，其充能程度及自我照護行為亦顯著地改善。結論 腎臟移植接受者於參與充能團體後，能顯著地改善充能程度及自我照護行為，並且優於控制組；本研究結果可為未來提升腎臟移植接受者充能程度及自我照護行為的考量，並可為年齡較長的腎臟移植接受者設計介入措施之參考。英文摘要：Background: Renal transplantation is a vital treatment for end-stage renal disease. To help improve quality of life after renal transplant surgery, interventions are needed to strengthen the coping skills and self-care behaviors of patients. However, most research studies on self-care after renal transplantation have addressed related factors. Few studies have examined the effects of interventions on renal transplant recipients. Purpose: This study investigated the effects of an empowerment support group on the empowerment levels and self-care behaviors of renal transplant recipients. Methods: This study was a randomized controlled trial. Eligible participants were individuals who had undergone a renal transplant within the past 20 years, were 18 years old or older, were able to read and write in Chinese, and were willing to participate. We recruited 122 renal transplant recipients from two medical centers in southern Taiwan. The renal transplant outpatients were randomly assigned into empowerment support (n = 56) and comparison (n = 66) groups. The developed measures as well as the content, protocols, and the two groups were assessed for reliability and validity. The intervention involved one 2-hour meeting every 2 weeks for a total of six meetings. The topics included goal setting, problem solving, coping with daily stress, seeking social support, and staying motivated. The sessions consisted of introductions that highlighted the topic, group discussions, identifying areas of difficulty with self-care behaviors after renal transplant, and developing a set of goals and strategies to overcome these problems. Results: The empowerment group reported significant increases both in terms of level of empowerment (F = 5.29, p = .023) based on age and time interaction (F = 9.86, p ＜ .001) and in terms of self-care behaviors (F = 7.15, p = .009). Moreover, these increases were significantly larger than the increases recorded by the comparison group. In addition, these increases were particularly large in the older empowerment-group participants with lower pretest scores for empowerment. Conclusions: Empowerment support may be critical to improve the empowerment and self-care behaviors of renal transplant patients. The results of this study may be applied to improve patient education and empowerment programs for renal transplant patients. Furthermore, these programs may be adjusted to take into consideration the learning preferences or needs of different age groups.起始頁-結束頁：201-210資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000011515篇名：Attitudes of Turkish Nursing Students Related to Ageism作者：Ozlem Ozdemir;Naile Bilgili關鍵字：nursing student;attitudes;older people;perception of aging;education期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: The sociocultural structure of society, changes in attitude and behaviors, and individual and social perspectives on aging all affect the nature of services that are offered to elderly people. ”Ageism” is one of the problems that has an impact on the level and quality of service that is provided to the older adults. Purpose: This study was undertaken to examine the attitudes of Turkish undergraduate nursing students toward aging. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was given to 495 nursing students in four universities in Turkey. A questionnaire developed from the related literature and the Ageism Attitude Scale were used to collect data, which was analyzed using standard descriptive statistical methods. Results: The variables of school year, age, cohabitation with an elderly person (yes/no), prior experience with the older adults (yes/no), and willingness to work with the older adults after graduation all significantly influenced the attitudes of participants toward aging (p G .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results from the Ageism Attitude Scale revealed that the participants held a generally positive attitude toward aging. It is of great importance to include more lessons on the older adults and the aging process and to increase activities to develop awareness of ageism, to help students develop positive attitudes and perspectives toward the care of the older adults. Because experience caring for the older adults is important in developing a positive attitude toward the older adults, arranging relevant clinical practice, especially at institutions with an elderly population, may be an effective approach to strengthening the communication and experiences of nursing students.起始頁-結束頁：211-216資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000013116篇名：Exploring the Relationship Between Illness Perceptions and Negative Emotions in Relatives of People With Schizophrenia Within the Context of an Affiliate Stigma Model並列篇名：連帶烙印模式中思覺失調症病人家屬疾病覺知與負面情緒之相關研究作者：黃建豪(Chien-Hao Huang);黎士鳴(Shih-Ming Li);徐畢卿(Bih-Ching Shu)關鍵字：思覺失調症;家屬;疾病覺知;連帶烙印;結構方程模式;schizophrenia;relatives;illness perception;affiliate stigma;SEM期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 疾病烙印不只影響病人本身，同時也影響家屬。在連帶烙印模式中，認知因素會影響個體的情緒反應，進一步影響其照顧行為。目的 本研究主要研究目的為以連帶烙印模式為理論基礎，1.探討疾病覺知認知指標與烙印負向情緒之相關性；與2.驗證連帶烙印的理論模式。方法 本研究採描述性研究，以思覺失調症病人家屬為收案對象。收案地點在臺灣中部二家醫院進行。研究經IRB審核通過，有意願參加研究者皆填寫同意書，共62位家屬同意，並完成「基本資料調查表」、「思覺失調症疾病覺知-家屬版」及「連帶內化烙印量表」等自陳式問卷。在進行驗證模式前，先以SPSS因素分析進行疾病覺知分量表之認知題項選取。資料以STATISTICA 6.0軟體的相關分析與結構方程模式來驗證連帶烙印模式。結果 以「疾病慢性化」、「疾病可控制感」與「疾病可被治療」三項家屬疾病覺知的向度作為認知成份之指標，此認知指標與連帶烙印的負面情緒相關為.42；與經結構方程式驗證連帶烙印模式的調整配適度為.786。結論／實務應用 本研究結果顯示，可透過連帶烙印的模式，瞭解家屬的疾病覺知與負面情緒之關係，以作為未來衛教策略的基礎。英文摘要：Background: Stigma affects patients with schizophrenia and may influence perceptions of the illness, which may affect how family members interact with and care for these patients. Purpose: The aims of this study were to (a) explore the relationship between perceptions of schizophrenia and the negative emotions of family members within the context of an affiliate stigma model, and (b) validate the proposed affiliate stigma model. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used. Eligibility for participation was limited to the relatives of patients with schizophrenia. The participants were recruited from two regional psychiatric hospitals in central Taiwan. The study was approved by an Institutional Review Board, and all potential participants signed informed consent before enrollment. Sixty-two participants completed the set of self-administered questionnaires, including (a) a demographic questionnaire, (b) Affiliate Stigma Scale, and (c) the Illness Perception Questionnaire for Schizophrenia-Relatives version. Canonical correlations and structural equation modeling in STATISTICA 6.0 were used to validate the model of illness perceptions and negative emotions. Results: (a) There were three domains of perception regarding schizophrenia for the relatives of patients: disease chronicity, disease in control, and disease treatability. The correlation between these dimensions and negative emotion was r = .42. (b) The adjusted goodness of fit for the proposed affiliate stigma model was .79. Conclusions: The results of this study suggest that the affiliate stigma model is an appropriate resource for developing practical disease management strategies for the relatives of patients with schizophrenia.起始頁-結束頁：217-223資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012417篇名：The Initial Development of a Checklist for Assessing Thirst in Patients With Advanced Dementia並列篇名：評估嚴重失智症患者口渴之檢核表初步發展作者：楊雅萍(Ya-Ping Yang);王琪珍(Chi-Jane Wang);王靜枝(Jing-Jy Wang)關鍵字：口渴;精神行為症狀;失智症;工具發展;thirst;behavior and psychological symptoms;dementia;instrument development期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 嚴重失智症患者由於認知障礙導致口語表達困難會用精神行為症狀表達自己的需要。因此，了解患者因特定需要所產生的行為特徵對照顧者及醫護人員的失智症患者照護是相當重要的。目的 發展一可用來了解嚴重失智症患者之口渴需求的評核表。方法 採質性訪談與調查等混合式研究設計，初始題項的發展包括邀請10位具照顧過失智症患者經驗的長期照護機構護理人員，再邀請4位專家進行內容效度檢定。然後，邀請照護者於8家長期照護機構進行嚴重失智症患者的觀察，以完成此初構評核表的填寫並進行問卷信效度的檢定。使用專家內容鑑定分析、測試者一致分析、內在一致性信度分析與探索性因素分析等方法進行資料分析。結果 初擬18題內容效度為.96，觀察者間信度為-.33-1.00，內在一致性為.52。經探索性因素分析縮減至以下7題，依序為重複動作、坐立不安、心神不寧或焦慮、持續性或無理的要求、踱步或漫無目的遊走或來回走動、無目的重複句子或問題和反應變遲緩等7個題項，其總解釋變異量49.3%，題數縮減後的內部一致性信度為.66。結論／實務應用 期此初步發展的評核工具能協助照顧者辨識嚴重或無法清楚表達之失智症患者口渴或液體需求。英文摘要：Background: Patients with advanced dementia (PwAD) often have difficulty expressing their needs verbally because of cognitive impairments. PwAD thus often communicate these needs through behaviors and psychological symptoms. Understanding the behavioral characteristics of certain needs is critical for caregivers and clinicians when caring for PwAD. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to develop a checklist that may be used to assess the thirst status of PwAD. Methods: A mixed method design was used. The checklist was developed using qualitative interview sand surveys. The initial items were developed through interviews with 10 professional nurses who were caring for PwAD. Four experts in dementia assessed the content validity of these items. PwAD caregivers from eight facilities were then invited to complete the checklist based on their current PwAD patient care experience. Data obtained in this study were analyzed with regard to content validity, interrater reliability, internal consistency, and exploratory factor analysis. Results: The content validity of the initial 18 items was .96, interrater reliability was -.33 to 1, and internal consistency reliability was .52. Exploratory factor analysis identified seven checklist items, including repetitive movements, squirming, restlessness or anxiety, persistent or unreasonable demands, pacing back and forth, repeating a sentence or question without purpose, and slow reaction. The factor loadings of these seven items accounted for 49.3% of the total variance. The reassessed internal consistency reliability was .66. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Caregivers may use this checklist as an aid to identify the thirst or fluid needs of PwAD who are unable to communicate their needs effectively.起始頁-結束頁：224-231資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012318篇名：Predictors of the Health-Promoting Behaviors of Nepalese Migrant Workers作者：Pratibha Bhandari;Mi-Young Kim關鍵字：health-promoting behavior;migrant workers;health promotion model;self-efficacy;multicultural nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: Health-promoting behaviors assist individuals to prevent disease, promote health, increase longevity, and enjoy a better quality of life. A number of interpersonal, social, and environmental factors have been shown to influence health-promoting behaviors. Little empirical evidence exists about the predictors of health-promoting behaviors among migrant workers. Purpose: This study uses Pender's health promotion model to describe and identify the predictors of health-promoting behaviors in Nepalese migrant workers in Korea. Methods: A cross-sectional research design was used. Nepalese migrants who had been working in South Korea (n = 169) for over 6 months were surveyed between July and December 2012. Self-efficacy was measured using the Perceived Health Competence Scale, the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II was used to measure health-promoting lifestyle behaviors, and perceived health status was measured using a single-item question. Descriptive statistics, correlation analysis, and multiple regression analysis were used to analyze data. Results: Spiritual activity was the highest reported health-promoting behavior, whereas physical activity was the least practiced behavior. Self-efficacy was the only significant predictor of health-promoting behavior. Conclusions: The results of this study suggest that future health-promoting interventions should enhance the self-efficacy of target populations for individual health behaviors. Factors such as working conditions, culture, and economic background that may affect the health-promoting behaviors of migrant workers must be considered when planning nursing interventions. Multicultural nursing structures and policies are needed to reach out proactively to all adult migrant groups.起始頁-結束頁：232-239資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012019篇名：Fear of Cancer Recurrence and Its Impacts on Quality of Life in Family Caregivers of Patients With Head and Neck Cancers並列篇名：頭頸癌病人之家屬照顧者害怕癌症復發及對其生活品質的影響作者：林青蓉(Ching-Rong Lin);陳淑卿(Shu-Ching Chen);張東杰(Joseph Tung-Chien Chang);方圓媛(Yuan-Yuan Fang);賴裕和(Yeur-Hur Lai)關鍵字：癌症;照顧者;害怕癌症復發;生活品質;cancer;caregiver;fear of cancer recurrence (FCR);quality of life (QOL)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 害怕癌症復發是癌症病患之家屬照顧者主要的關注焦點之一。目的 本研究目的為：<U+2474>探討頭頸癌病患之家屬照顧者害怕復發的經驗，<U+2475>比較照顧完成癌症治療後不同期間之病患的家屬照顧者害怕復發的程度差異，及<U+2476>探討頭頸癌病患之家屬照顧者害怕復發與其生活品質的關係。方法 本研究採橫斷式研究於北台灣某醫學中心放射腫瘤門診收集資料。研究調查問卷包括：照顧者害怕癌症復發量表（FCRI-c）、SF-12健康調查問卷（SF-12）及背景資料表。統計方法採用變異數（ANOVA）及事後檢定，比較完成癌症治療後不同期間之病患的照顧者害怕復發及生活品質的差異，以Pearson's相關分析照顧者害怕復發與生活品質的關係。結果 本研究共收集250位照顧者，害怕復發的經驗中，照顧者採用多種因應策略與再確認方式來面對復發的擔心。病患完成癌症治療後期間（3至6個月或／及大於6至12個月）越短，照顧者害怕復發嚴重度及整體性的擔心，顯著高於病患已完成癌症治療後期間長達五年以上的照顧者。照顧者害怕癌症復發與其生理及心理層面的生活品質皆呈顯著負相關。結論／實務應用 本研究結果顯示，相對於完成癌症治療後期間較長之病患的照顧者，完成治療後期間較短之病患的家屬照顧者有較高的害怕復發困擾。臨床上，健康照護人員可根據癌症病患完成癌症治療後不同期間，察覺照顧者害怕病患癌症復發的情形，並提供適時的關注與適當的支持。建議未來應發展並測試幫助頭頸癌之照顧者有效因應害怕復發困擾的措施，以提升其生活品質的研究。英文摘要：Background: Fear of cancer recurrence (FCR) is a major concern for family caregivers (FCs) caring for patients with head and neck cancers (HNCs). Purpose: This study (a) investigated the FCR experience of HNC FCs, (b) compared the differences in the FCR levels of FCs while taking care of patients with different lengths of time since completing major treatments (posttreatment durations), and (c) examined the correlation between FCR and quality of life (QOL) in these FCs. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted in the radiation outpatient department of a medical center in northern Taiwan. A set of questionnaires, including the Fear of Cancer Recurrence Inventory-Caregiver version and the Medical Outcomes Short- Form Health Survey, and a background information form were employed. One-way analysis of variance was used to examine the differences in the FCR and QOL among groups of FCs taking care of patients with different posttreatment durations (typically concurrent chemoradiotherapy). Pearson’s correlation was used to identify the relationship between FCR and QOL. Results: Two hundred fifty FCs were recruited in this study. The FCs used several coping and reassurance strategies to address their FCR experiences. Those FCs who cared for patients with short posttreatment durations (3Y6 and 6Y12 months) showed significantly higher overall FCR levels and higher FCR severity levels than those who cared for patients with long posttreatment durations (more than 5 years). High FCR was negatively correlated with physical and mental QOL. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results suggest that FCs caring for patients with a relatively short posttreatment duration experience higher levels of FCR than those caring for patients with a longer posttreatment duration. In clinical settings, healthcare providers should use posttreatment duration as an indicator of risk of FCR in caregivers to address FCR and provide appropriate support. Future research should develop and examine interventions to help HNC FCs cope effectively with their FCR and improve their QOL.起始頁-結束頁：240-248資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000016920篇名：The Perceptions and Expectations Toward the Social Responsibility of Hospitals and Organizational Commitment of Nursing Staff並列篇名：醫院社會責任的感受與期待與護理人員的組織承諾作者：謝聖哲(Sheng-Che Hsieh);邱亨嘉(Herng-Chia Chiu);謝雅惠(Ya-Hui Hsieh);何佩珊(Pei-Shen Ho);陳麗琴(Li-Chin Chen);張偉洲(Wei-Chou Chang)關鍵字：社會責任;醫院;護理人員;組織承諾;social responsibility;hospital;nurse;organizational commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 近來台灣面臨醫療勞動人權爭議，勞動環境不佳及人力短缺導致嚴重的照護過勞，惡性循環下使護理人員的執業率及平均年資偏低。目的 以企業社會責任作為醫院社會責任的概念架構探究對於護理人員組織承諾（OC）之影響。方法 以匿名問卷抽樣調查南台灣某醫療體系240名護理人員，共回收227份。問卷由醫院社會責任及OC兩量表構成，以探索式因素分析確認經濟、法理、道德和慈善等四個社會責任構面，並利用階層迴歸分析各構面責任的感受與情感性、持續性及規範性等三構面OC的關係。結果 護理人員對於整體醫院社會責任實踐的感受與期待之間存在顯著落差。對於醫院社會責任感受較佳者發展出較高的組織承諾。年齡愈大及法理、道德和經濟責任等感受愈佳者的情感性承諾明顯愈強。職級愈低且道德責任感受愈佳者的持續性承諾顯著愈強。年齡愈大及法理、道德和慈善責任等感受較佳者的規範性承諾明顯較強。結論／實務應用 醫院若能積極提供友善且人性化職場並具體實踐社會責任，將不僅助益護理人員更能提升所有員工的工作績效及組織認同。英文摘要：Background: The labor rights of medical workers in hospitals in Taiwan have been a key issue of discussion and controversy in recent years. Generally, poor work conditions and manpower shortages in hospitals have resulted in a vicious circle of severely overworked medical and healthcare staff and chronically low staffing and retention rates. Purpose: This study employed corporate social responsibility as the conceptual framework of the social responsibility of hospitals to examine the perceptions and expectations of nurses toward the social responsibility practices of the hospital where they serve and to explore the relationship between these perceptions and organizational commitment (OC). Methods: The participants were all nurses who were employed by one medical group in southern Taiwan. Two hundred forty anonymous questionnaires, which included scales that were designed to measure the social responsibility of hospitals and OC, were distributed. Two hundred twenty-seven valid questionnaires were returned. Exploratory factor analysis was used to validate the dimension of the social responsibility of hospitals, and hierarchical multiregression analyses were used to verify the relationship between the perceptions of nurses with regard to the social responsibility practices of the hospital where nurses serve and OC. Results: There were considerable differences between participants_ perceptions and expectations toward the social responsibility of hospitals. The nurses with high perceptions toward the social responsibility practices of the hospital where they serve tended to have relatively high OC. Senior nurses who had high perceptions of the legal and rational, ethical, and economic dimensions of the social responsibility practices of the hospital where they serve exhibited relatively strong affective commitment. Nurses in junior positions who had high perceptions of the practices of ethical responsibilities exhibited relatively strong continuance commitment. Senior nurses who had high perceptions of the legal and rational, ethical, and discretionary dimensions of the social responsibility practices of the hospital where they serve exhibited relatively strong normative commitment. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: A friendly and humane work environment in hospital settings facilitates the implementation of social responsibility, which has been shown to foster higher levels of organizational identification and job performance among nurses and other hospital employees.起始頁-結束頁：249-261資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000013301篇名：Living With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: The Process of Self-Managing Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease並列篇名：與疾病共存：慢性阻塞性肺疾病病人自我管理過程作者：陳綱華(Kang-Hua Chen);劉劍英(Chien-Ying Liu);徐亞瑛(Lotus Yea-Ing Shyu);葉淑玲(Shu-Ling Yeh)關鍵字：慢性阻塞性肺疾病;自我管理;行為;自我調節;chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;self-management;behavior;self-regulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景 慢性阻塞性肺疾病患者疾病自我管理不似其他慢性疾病自我管理有清楚的定義與內容。本研究基於患者為中心的理念，期望以質性研究探討慢性阻塞性肺疾病患者自我管理過程，以期提升其生活品質。目的 探討慢性阻塞性肺疾病患者自我管理過程與其影響因素。方法 以質性研究進行資料收集，收案地點臺灣某醫學中心之胸腔科病房、門診與呼吸治療室。本研究採方便取樣訪談19位患者，以內容分析法分析資料。結果 與慢性阻塞性肺疾病共存是一個自我調節及選擇適合的健康照顧行為過程。健康照顧行為包括：症狀處理、運動執行、環境控制、情緒調適、維持健康生活型態和利用社區健康照顧資源。有一些因素會影響與慢性阻塞性肺疾病共存的過程，包括：患者身體和心理狀況、疾病相關認知以及社會支持。特別是患者不滿意健康照顧行為的結果，他們又會重新選擇健康照顧行為，並且開始連續的自我調節過程。結論／實務應用 經由一連串的嘗試錯誤，患者已是自己生活的專家；醫療專業人員在患者疾病自我管理過程中扮演關鍵性角色，必須幫助慢性阻塞性肺疾病患者因應生活中不同的問題。研究結果的發現可以幫助醫療專業人員發展以實證為基礎的自我管理措施以提升患者生活品質。英文摘要：Background: Disease self-management for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is less well characterized than that for patients with other chronic diseases. A patient-centered perspective calls for qualitative research to investigate the process of self-management as a means of enhancing quality of life in patients with COPD. Purpose: This study explores the process of self-management for patients with COPD and the factors that impact the efficacy of this process. Methods: A qualitative inquiry approach was used to collect data in the thoracic ward, outpatient department, and respiratory therapy room of a medical center in Taiwan. A convenience sample of 19 patients was collected. Qualitative content analysis was used to analyze data. Results: Living with COPD is a process that involves self-regulation and selecting suitable healthcare behaviors. The related healthcare behaviors identified in this study include symptom management, exercise implementation, environmental control, emotional adjustment, maintenance of a healthy life style, and utilization of community and healthcare resources. The factors that were found to influence this process include the physical and psychological conditions of the patient, his or her disease-related cognition, and the social support that he or she receives. In this study, once participants became dissatisfied with the consequences of their healthcare behaviors, they chose a new set of healthcare behaviors and continued to engage in the process of self-regulation. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Patients naturally become experts with regard to their lives through a process of trial and error. Even so, healthcare professionals play a key role in the process of self-management and help patients with COPD cope with various problems in their daily lives. The findings of this study contribute to the development of evidence-based self-management interventions that promote quality of life in patients with COPD.起始頁-結束頁：262-271資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001522篇名：A Comparison of Life Stress and Depressive Symptoms in Pregnant Taiwanese and Immigrant Women並列篇名：本國籍及新移民孕婦生活壓力與憂鬱症狀之比較研究作者：曹英(Ying Tsao);Debra K Creedy;Jenny Gamble關鍵字：產前憂鬱;生活困擾狀況;移民婦女;懷孕;社會支持;antenatal depression;difficult life circumstances;immigrant women;pregnancy;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景近年來台灣跨國婚姻與移民人口增加。「移民」與「懷孕」可能造成婦女很大的生活壓力與健康威脅，在偏鄉地區不同族群孕婦的生活壓力與憂鬱症狀如何？相關性研究顯見不足。目的探討南台灣之本國籍及新移民（越南籍）孕婦的生活壓力與憂鬱症狀。方法在南台灣（屏東）四所地區型醫院之產前門診，邀請第三孕期之本國籍及越南籍婦女進行問卷調查，包括：生活困擾量表、社會支持量表及愛丁堡憂鬱量表。結果共有236名本國籍及44名越南籍孕婦提供資料。在生活困擾上兩群樣本較多反應：夫婦關係、家務與病痛等問題。本國籍孕婦在「經濟負擔」而越南籍孕婦在「小孩學習問題」與「身體受虐」的得分較高。越南籍孕婦呈現較多的生活困擾、較少的社會支持以及較高比例的產前憂鬱。結論／實務應用護理人員應更加敏感地察覺來自不同背景、生活困擾以及缺乏社會支持的孕婦。新移民或特殊境遇的弱勢群體可能是健康受威脅的高危險群，因此對於這些準媽媽及其家人應進一步提供有效的護理措施與支持活動。英文摘要：Background: An increasing number of women from other countries, mostly Mainland China and Southeast Asia, are marrying Taiwanese husbands and settling in Taiwan. Immigration, marriage abroad, and pregnancy may be stressful and adversely affect maternal health. Relatively little research has compared the life stress and depressive symptoms of pregnant women of different ethnic groups living in nonmetropolitan areas in Taiwan. Purpose: This study investigates the levels of life stress and depressive symptoms in pregnant Taiwanese women and Vietnamese ”foreign brides” currently living in southern Taiwan. Methods: Eligible women in their last trimester of pregnancy who attended their local antenatal clinic were recruited for the study. Participants completed standardized measures, including the Difficult Life Circumstances Scale, Social Support APGAR Scale, and Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. Results: Two hundred thirty-six Taiwanese women and 44 Vietnamese women participated. Major life difficulties for both groups of women were related to their marital relationship, housing, or health problems. Taiwanese participants reported perceiving financial strain more often than their Vietnamese peers, whereas Vietnamese participants reported perceiving greater concerns regarding their children’s development and about recent physical abuse than their Taiwanese peers. Furthermore, the Vietnamese participants reported less social support and higher rates of antenatal depression than Taiwanese participants. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Clinical nurses and midwives should be sensitive to the particular difficulties and insufficient social support faced by pregnantwomenfrom different backgrounds in Taiwan. Women from foreign countries or those under unique challenging circumstances may face a particular risk of adverse outcomes. Identifying stresses informs the development of effective nursing interventions and support activities for new mothers and their families.起始頁-結束頁：272-281資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001373篇名：MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR作者：Jen-Chen Tsai期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：100-100資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001624篇名：The Lived Experience of Patients Receiving Hemodialysis Treatment for End-Stage Renal Disease: A Qualitative Study作者：Chantira Chiaranai關鍵字：end-stage renal disease;hemodialysis;lived experience;qualitative study;Thai patients期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: End-stage renal disease (ESRD), the last stage of chronic kidney disease, is the point at which the kidneys are no longer able to support the body’s needs. Thus, ESRD significantly impacts the day-to-day life of patients. To improve bodily functions and prolong life, patients with ESRD require renal replacement therapy in the form of either hemodialysis (HD) or kidney transplantation. Research has documented the impact of ESRDandHD on quality of life. There is a lack of qualitative studies that describe how ESRD sufferers in Thailand cope with daily life. Purpose: This study aimed to better understand the daily life experiences of Thai patients with ESRD who are on HD. Methods: This study used a phenomenological approach and a semistructured interviewguide. Thaimen andwomen with ESRD and on HD were purposively recruited from an HD unit at one hospital in Thailand between February andMay 2013. Inclusion criteria included (a) currently being treated for HD, (b) ability to communicate in Thai, and (c) age of over 18 years. Participants were asked to describe their problems, feelings, thoughts, and attitudes as well as how they experienced their lives. Data saturation was reached after the completion of 26 interviews. The data were analyzed using thematic analysis. Results: The following themes emerged fromthe data: (a) facing life’s limitations, (b) living with uncertainty, and (c) dependence on medical technology. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The authors hope that the findings increase the understanding of healthcare providers about the lived experience of Thai patients with ESRD on HD. Greater understanding is critical in helping healthcare providers identify the changes in practice that will be necessary to better care for and integrate the best holistic practices into standardized care for this population.起始頁-結束頁：101-108資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001005篇名：The Transformation Process in Nurses Caring for Dying Patients並列篇名：護理人員照顧臨終病人的蛻變歷程作者：黃靖淇(Ching-Chi Huang);陳季員(Jih-Yuan Chen);蔣欣欣(Hsien-Hsien Chiang)關鍵字：現象學;安寧照護;自我照護;蛻變;phenomenology;palliative care;self-care;transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　儘管最近對瀕死照護的關注增加，但探討照顧者情緒和心理蛻變之實證文獻很少。目的　本研究欲探究護理人員經歷照顧臨終病人之衝擊後，從心靈痛苦產生蛻變的歷程。方法　本研究應用現象學研究方式，調查8位（年齡27-40歲）工作於台北市某醫學中心安寧病房的護理人員，以半結構式問句深度訪談收集資料，並參考反思分析進行資料處理。結果　護理人員照顧臨終病人蛻變的歷程包括三個階段：第一階段：承受情感勞務包含面對瀕死和死亡病人苦難的痛、喚起自己喪親的痛。第二階段：學習自我照顧，從接觸治療系的病人、處理未完成的心願來學習、參加葬禮；第三階段：開展照顧他人的能力，經由解放自如的反思與關注自己、病人及家屬的責任，經由覺知需要與實踐展開照顧他人的能力，且讓衝擊成為鍛鍊自己的媒介，以轉化自我。結論／實務應用　情感勞務是導致護理人員自身間和專業上蛻變的主因。培養護理人員個人成長和貫徹倫理實踐至關重要的是適當的情感管理與其他護理人員對話和個人自我反思。當護理人員與病人共在，實踐反思的護理及尋求策略關注病人的需求，以及過去覺知的經驗有助於護理人員更好地照顧自己和他人，以學到最佳的照顧責任和對現況的自覺。英文摘要：Background: Despite the recent increase in attention to end-oflife hospice care, little empirical evidence regarding the process of emotional or mental transformation in caregivers is available. Purpose: This study explores the transformative process that occurs in nurses because of the spiritual suffering and conflict associated with after caring for dying patients. Methods: A phenomenological approach was used to investigate eight nurses (27- 40 years old)working in the hospiceward of amedical center in Taipei. Datawere collected through openended questions using semistructured interviews and were analyzed reflectively. Results: A three-stage transformation in the emotional processes of participants was observed. In the first stage, the participants experienced acute emotional suffering because of facing the death of their patients, potentially exacerbated by their own memories of losing family members. In the second stage, the participants adopted coping strategies to improve self-care. These strategies included attempting to soothe patients, helping patients face or deal with unfulfilled business, and participating in funeral or memorial services. In the third stage, the participants learned to provide better care through emancipatory reflection and a reassertion of responsibilities toward the self, patients, and patient families. After the third stage, the initial emotional impact morphed into a medium for self-strengthening, and participants became more adept at detecting patient needs and at providing care to complete the transformational process fully. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Emotional suffering was the primary factor that induced participants to transform their personal and professional selves. Adequate emotional selfmanagement, dialogue with other nurses, and personal reflection are crucial actions that nursesmay use to cultivate personal growth, implement ethical practice, interact with other nurses, and engage in personal reflection. Strategies such as caring for patients, implementing reflective nursing practices, focusing on patient needs, and utilizing past experiences enable nurses to develop a heightened sense of responsibility and awareness, thus empowering them to take better care of themselves and their patients.起始頁-結束頁：109-117資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001606篇名：Psychometric Evaluation of the Cigarette Withdrawal Scale (Chinese Version) in Male Smokers in Taiwan並列篇名：臺灣男性吸菸者之中文版吸菸戒斷症狀量表的心理計量評價作者：黃慧文(Hui-Wen Huang);薛光傑(Kuang-Chieh Hsueh);呂佳蓁(Chia-Chen Lu);黃芷苓(Chih-Ling Huang)關鍵字：尼古丁戒斷;效度;信度;量表;中文版本;cigaretteswithdrawal;validity;reliability;measure;Chinese version期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　戒斷症狀是尼古丁依賴非常重要的一個特性，一個有信效度的戒斷症狀測量工具對於了解吸菸者尼古丁依賴及發展介入治療非常有助益。目的　本研究之目的為檢測中文版吸菸戒斷症狀量表的心理計量特性。方法　本研究設計採二階段的橫斷性調查，第一階段包括探索量表的結構因素、測試效標關聯效度和信度（內在一致信及穩定度）。第二階段則驗證第一階段所得的因素結構模式，總樣本數是497。結果　中文版吸菸戒斷症 狀量表與英文版相似，具有六個因素，其解釋變異量達80.3%，大多數的次量表與尼古丁依賴量表達顯著正相關（r = .25– .50, p ＜ .05），除了體重—食慾這個次量表（r = .12, p = .09）。內在一致性（Cronbach’s alpha）.93，二週再測穩定性為.84。驗證性因素分析結果確立中文版吸菸戒斷狀量表是一個具有六個相關因素的結構模式。結論／實務應用　本研究結果顯示中文版吸菸戒斷症狀量表具有良好的信、效度。護理人員可以運用此量表評估吸菸者戒斷症狀情形，並且依評估內容進行適當的戒斷治療。英文摘要：Background: Symptoms of smoking withdrawal are a central feature of nicotine dependence. A valid and reliable measure of these symptoms is important to better understand nicotine dependence and to develop effective interventions. Purpose: The objective of this study was to examine the validity and reliability of the Chinese version of the CigaretteWithdrawal Scale (CWS-C). Methods: This study conducted cross-sectional surveys in two phases. In the first phase, exploratory factor analysis was used to test the underlying factor structure, the criterion validity, and the reliability of the CWS-C. A reliability test was conducted to assess the internal consistency and stability of the instrument. In the second phase, confirmatory factor analysis validated the factor model that had been proposed in earlier empirical research. The total sample size used in analysis was 497. Results: The CWS-C achieved a level of efficacy that was similar to the English version. Exploratory factor analysis showed that the six factors of the instrument accounted for 80.3% of the variance. The full scale and all of the subscale items, with the exception of the appetiteYweight gain subscale (r = .12, p = .09), were significantly associated with the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (r = .25-.50, p ＜ .05). The Cronbach’s alpha of the full scalewas .93, with retest coefficient of .84. Confirmatory factor analysis confirmed that the CWS-C had six correlated factors. Field testing showed that the CWS-C is a reliable and valid Chinese-language instrument for assessing the symptoms of cigarette withdrawal. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: TheCWS-C performed well in terms of reliability and validity in several tests conducted on male Taiwanese smokers. Accurate measurement is expected to help health professionals better understand smoker quitting patterns and the severity ofwithdrawal symptoms and to develop improved withdrawal-symptom treatment interventions.起始頁-結束頁：118-125資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001137篇名：Exploring the Perceptions of Core Values of Nursing in Taiwanese Nursing Students at the Baccalaureate Level並列篇名：探討臺灣大學層級護理學生對護理核心素養的認知作者：林春只(Chun-Chih Lin);韓晶彥(Chin-Yen Han);潘怡如(I-Ju Pan);林碧莉(Pi-Li Lin)關鍵字：核心素養;護理學生;認知;core value in nursing;Taiwanese nursing students;perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　護理核心素養是臺灣建構護理課程的標準要素，提供了護理教育及護生學習成效重要的規範。護生在學習過程中對核心能力的認知，是評量學生護理核心素養學習成效的關鍵。目的　本研究旨在探討大學護理系學生對護理核心素養的認知。方法　本研究為質性研究，收集109位大學護理系學生之核心素養反思報告，採內容分析法進行資料分析。結果　研究結果發現，學生的核心素養學習透過隱性課程學習多於開放性課程。學生經歷批判性思考的建構始於發問「為什麼」。一般臨床護理技能及基礎醫學科學則綜歸於照護能力，包括思考、分析及概念構思於個案健康問題的照護歷程。展現溝通及團隊合作能力被視為是接納、互動、溝通，及共同合作等執行步驟的過程。關愛被定義為具同情心、尊重自我及他人的行為表現。倫理則為道德及尊重的表現，並以個案需求為優先考量。善盡職責為盡該職位所賦予的角色功能。終身學習則展現在主動學習及積極進取的學習歷程。結論　此研究顯示護理學生有正向的護理核心素養學習歷程及成效。參與研究的護生表示，護理核心素養的認知能增強在學習護理上的理解，此結果有助於護理教育者在課綱再造時，使其更能符合護生的學習需求。在臨床照護上，護生對護理核心素養的認知將能被運用成為標準規範，用於協助護生提升臨床照護的能力。英文摘要：Background: The core values of nursing are a standard component of the nursing curriculum in Taiwan. Therefore, these values provide an essential guide for educating and evaluating the learning outcomes of nursing students. Student perceptions of those core values that relate to the process of curricula learning are key to measuring the core values of nursing. Purpose: This study explores the views on the core values of nursing of baccalaureate-level nursing students at a Taiwanese university. Methods: This qualitative study collected data from the reflection reports of 109 students and analyzed these data using thematic content analysis. Results: The results of this study identified that the learning of core values of nursing tends to utilize the latent curriculum rather than the open curriculum. Critical thinking was perceived and experienced by asking ”why.” General clinical skills and basic biomedical science were categorized collectively as care ability, which relates to the thinking, analysis, and mapping of client health problems. The value of communication and teamwork capability was defined as the sequential process of accepting, interacting, communicating, and collaborating. Caring was defined as contributing empathy with respect to one's self and to others. Ethics was defined as a moral perspective, as respecting others, and as prioritizing the needs of clients. Accountability was defined as away of observing standardswithin the role given in a position. Finally, lifelong learning is a process of learning that encourages more aggressive learning. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The progress of core values of nursing in this study reflects positive movement and achievement. The participants expressed the perception that the core values of nursing enhance understanding, which enables nursing educators to reframe the nursing curriculum to meet their learning needs. The perceptions of nursing students of core values of nursing may be used as a guide to increase clinical nursing competence in healthcare.起始頁-結束頁：126-136資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001088篇名：Health Promotion Outcomes of a Newly Developed Elastic Band Exercise Program for Older Adults in the Community: A Pilot Test並列篇名：新發展的彈力帶健身操方案對社區老人健康促進之成效：前驅性試驗作者：詹淑雅(Shu-Ya Chan);郭昶志(Chang-Chih Kuo);陳桂敏(Kuei-Min Chen);曾維璇(Wei-Shyuan Tseng);黃欣婷(Hsin-Ting Huang);李純華(Chun-Huw Li)關鍵字：社區照顧關懷據點;彈力帶;健康促進;老人;community care station;elastic band;health promotion;older adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　研究顯示65歲以上的老人若無從事身體活動，其罹病率、死亡率及醫療支出將大大提升。為了延緩老化過程對健康所造成的影響，社區老人之健康促進極為重要。目的　前驅測試新發展之「銀髮彈力帶健身操」方案對社區關懷據點老人健康促進之成效。方法　本研究採單組、前後測之類實驗性設計，以方便取樣方式選取20位社區照顧關懷據點老人參與本研究。「銀髮彈力帶健身操」介入措施包括三個階段（舒筋暖身、動態有氧、靜態伸展），每週進行3次，每次40分鐘，為期一個月。研究個案之健康測量指標含三大類（功能性體適能、自覺健康狀態及睡眠品質），共12個變項。測量時間點為介入措施執行前及完成一個月之介入措施後再度測量。結果　在為期一個月的研究結束後，研究個案的肺活量、心肺適能、肩臂柔軟度、坐姿體前彎、上肢肌力、下肢肌耐力及自覺身體健康狀態等7個項目皆有顯著改善（所有p 值 ＜.05），其餘變項皆無顯著差異。結論／實務應用　研究初步支持「銀髮彈力帶健身操」對社區關懷據點老人之健康促進有正面的效果。建議從事社區老人照護之健康照護專業人員可考量將「銀髮彈力帶健身操」納為社區老人健康促進方法之一，推廣並鼓勵社區老人規律練習。建議未來擴大測試此運動方案於大樣本之老人族群，並檢視其長時間介入之成效。英文摘要：Background: Studies indicate that the incidence of disease, the mortality rate, and medical costs are significantly higher in people aged 65 years and over who do not engage in physical activities than in their peers who do engage in these activities. Therefore, promoting appropriate physical activity among older adults in the community is essential to delaying the health implications of aging. Purpose: This pilot test was developed to assess the effectiveness of a newly developed Senior Elastic Band (SEB) exercise program on the health of older adults in community care stations. Methods: A quasiexperimental design was used. A convenience sample of 20 participants from a community care station was recruited. The SEB intervention included three phases (warm-up, aerobicmotion, and static stretching) andwas conducted three times per week, 40 minutes per session for 1 month. Twelve health indicators in three categories (functional fitness, selfperceived health status, and sleep quality) were examined before and immediately after 1 month of SEB exercises. Results: Participants showed improved performance at the end of the 1-month study for the following indicators: lung capacity, cardiopulmonary fitness, upper and lower body flexibilities, upper limb muscle power, lower limb muscle endurance, and selfperceived physical health status (all ps ＜ .05). No significant differences were identified for the other indicators. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The SEB exercise program shows preliminary and promising effects on improving the health of older adults in a community care station. Healthcare professionals who work with older adults living in the community may consider the SEB exercise program as a health promotion modality to recommend and implement with this population. However, we recommend further testing the long-term effects of this program on a larger population.起始頁-結束頁：137-144資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000999篇名：A Comparison Study of Single-Parent Families Living on Remote, Rural Islands and in Urban Settings in Japan作者：Yuko Hiratani;Naohiro Hohashi關鍵字：child rearing;family environment;family functioning;remote islands;single-parent family期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: Nursing interventions that aim to enhance the family environment are necessary to help single-parent families with children to improve family functioning. The cultural and social factors that are unique to Japan's remote islands should be considered to assess the influence of this unique setting on family functioning. Purpose: The objectives of this study were to evaluate the family functioning of child-rearing single-parent families living in different environments and to investigate the association between family demographics and family functioning. Methods: A self-administered questionnaire, the Japanese version of the Survey of Family Environment, was used to evaluate the sufficiency of family functioning. The participants were families with children enrolled in nurseries and kindergartens who were either living in remote, rural islands or in an urban city on the mainland in Japan. Results: Family functioning was significantly higher for singleparent families living on the islands than for those living in the city in terms ofmedia use, participation in community activities, and the collaboration of familymembers in child-rearing. Family functioning of single-parent families correlated significantly with household income, the parent's gender, familymembers' health, and family life cycle. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Single-parent families living on Japanese offshore islands maintained family functioning through mutual support and the effective use of information technology. Nevertheless, single-parent families require additional support to improve their healthcare and financial situations.起始頁-結束頁：145-152資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000011010篇名：The Impact of Job Involvement on Emotional Labor to Customer-Oriented Behavior: An Empirical Study of Hospital Nurses並列篇名：工作投入對於情緒勞務與顧客導向行為之影響─醫院護理人員的實證研究作者：王美玲(Mei-Ling Wang);張淑真(Shu-Chen Chang)關鍵字：情緒勞務;正向情緒表達;負向情緒克制;工作投入;顧客導向行為;emotional labor;expression of positive emotion;suppression of negative emotion;job involvement;customer-oriented behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　醫療照護屬高情緒勞務工作，護理人員亦是典型高情緒勞務工作者。護理人員在第一線服務扮演重要角色，且其服務影響病患對醫療服務品質的評價。目的　探討護理工作情境下情緒勞務、工作投入與顧客導向行為間之關係。方法　樣本來自台灣八家醫院護理人員。採自評式問卷，在兩次時間點收集問卷。問卷A收集情緒勞務、工作投入，問卷B則收集顧客導向行為資料。發出500份問卷，回收且有效為472份。統計主要使用階層迴歸方法。結果　正向情緒表達與負向情緒克制兩種情緒勞務，對顧客導向行為（病患為主）均具正向影響；正向情緒表達則對顧客導向行為（任務為主）具正向影響。當工作投入愈高，正向情緒表達愈多，顧客導向行為愈高；工作投入將弱化負向情緒克制與顧客導向行為間之關係。結論／實務應用　醫院提升員工的顧客導向行為已成為趨勢。本研究實證護理人員情緒勞務、工作投入與顧客導向行為間之關係，並使相關研究更為完整，也有助於主管瞭解情緒勞務與顧客導向行為，及做為護理人力資源管理實務設計與執行參考。英文摘要：Background: Healthcare is a profession that requires a high level of emotional labor (EL). Nurses provide frontline services in hospitals and thus typically experience high levels of EL. The quality of services that nurses provide impacts on how patients evaluate the service quality of hospitals. Purpose: The aim of this study is to explore the relationships among EL, job involvement (JI), and customer-oriented behavior (COB) in the context of the nursing profession. Methods: The participants in this study were nurses at eight hospitals, all located in Taiwan. This study used a self-reporting questionnaire. Research data were gathered at two discrete periods (A and B). Questionnaire A collected data on EL and JI, and Questionnaire B collected data on COB. Five hundred questionnaires were sent out to qualified participants, and 472 valid questionnaires were returned. Hierarchical regression analysis was used to test the hypotheses. Results: The expression of positive emotion (EPE) and the suppression of negative emotion (SNE) were found to positively affect the patient-oriented COB. Furthermore, the EPE was found to positively affect the task-oriented COB. In terms of the moderating effect of JI, JI was found to relate positively to the EPE, patient-oriented COB, and task-oriented COB. In addition, higher values of JI were found to weaken the relationship between the SNE and the task-oriented COB. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: It has become an increasingly popular practice for hospital organizations to work to promote the COB of their nursing staffs. The results of this study prove empirically that a relationship exists among EL, COB, and JI in nurses. This study contributes to the related literature, enhances the knowledge of hospital and nursing administrators with regard to EL and COB, and offers a reference for hospital managers who are responsible for designing and executing multidisciplinary programs and for managing hospital-based human resources.起始頁-結束頁：153-162資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000011411篇名：Effects of the Advanced Innovative Internet-Based Communication Education Program on Promoting Communication Between Nurses and Patients With Dementia並列篇名：愛思溝通教育方案對增進護理人員與失智患者之溝通成效探討作者：趙慧珍(Hui-Chen Chao);Merrie Kaas;蘇英華(Ying-Hwa Su);林梅鳳(Mei-Feng Lin);黃美智(Mei-Chih Huang);王靜枝(Jing-Jy Wang)關鍵字：溝通教育計畫;失智症;護理人員;長期照護機構;communication education program;dementia;nurses;long-term care facilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　與失智症患者有效的溝通可確認患者需求及降低護理人員與患者間因溝通不良而產生的衝突，進而提升照護品質。目的　本研究之目的為驗證一項以網路為平台之進階革新失智溝通教育計畫（中文簡稱直接取英文縮寫發音，命名為愛思計畫）對護理人員在面對失智個案之溝通知識、溝通態度、評估患者溝通能力及溝通表現的促進成效。此外，亦間接驗證受照顧的失智症患者的記憶與行為問題與憂鬱狀態之促進成效。方法　本研究採單組、重覆測量之類實驗法，以方便取樣招募南台灣長期照護機構護理人員參與本研究。資料分析則以廣益估計方程式（GEE）分別於參與愛思溝通教育計畫前、參與後第4週及第16週進行成效檢測；共105位護理人員參與並完成二次追蹤測量。結果　護理人員在參與愛思溝通教育計畫後第4週及第16週之溝通知識、評估患者溝通能力及溝通表現與前測比較達統計上顯著差異（p ＜ .01）；但在溝通態度部分則未達統計上顯著差異（p = .40）。在患者成效方面，護理人員在參與愛思溝通教育計畫後其所照顧的失智症患者之記憶與行為問題和憂鬱狀態成效則於參與後第16週達統計上顯著差異（p = .05）。結論　愛思溝通教育計畫可有效改善護理人員在面對失智個案之溝通知識、評估患者溝通能力及溝通表現，更進一步減緩個案記憶與行為問題與和憂鬱狀態。未來愛思溝通計畫可做為失智症溝通教育計畫指標及繼續教育之指引。英文摘要：Background: Effective communication between nurses and patients with dementia promotes the quality of patient care by improving the identification of patient needs and by reducing the miscommunication-related frustration of patients and nurses. Purpose: This study evaluates the effects of an advanced innovative Internet-based communication education (AIICE) program on nurses' communication knowledge, attitudes, frequency of assessing patient communication capacity, and communication performance in the context of care for patientswith dementia. In addition, this study attempts to evaluate the indirect effects of this program on outcomes for patients with dementia, includingmemory and behavior-related problems and depressive symptoms. Methods: A quasi-experimental research design with a one-group repeatedmeasure was conducted. Convenience sampling was used to recruit nurses from long-term care facilities in southern Taiwan. Datawere analyzed using general estimating equations to compare changes over time across three points: baseline, fourthweek posttest, and 16th-week posttest. One hundred five nurses completed the AIICE program and the posttest surveys. Results: The findings indicate that nurses' communication knowledge, frequency in assessing patients’ communication capacity, and communication performance had improved significantly over the baseline by either the 4th- or 16th-week posttest (p G .01). However, communication attitude showed no significant improvement in the posttest survey (p = .40). Furthermore, the findings indicate that the memory and behavior-related problems and the depressive symptoms of patients had decreased significantly by the 16th-week posttest (p = .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study showed that the AIICE program improves nurses' communication knowledge, frequency to assess patients' communication capacity, and communication performance and alleviates the memory and behavior-related problems and depressive symptoms of patients. The continuous communication training of nurses using the AIICE program is thus recommended.起始頁-結束頁：163-172資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000010912篇名：Sleep Patterns of Emergency Department Nurses on Workdays and Days Off作者：Jeanne S. Ruggiero;Tamara Avi-Itzhak關鍵字：sleep;emergency department;nurses;actigraphy;shift work期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: Shift workers, particularly night workers, are prone to disrupted circadian rhythms and sleep deprivation resulting in fatigue and sleepiness, thereby endangering patient safety. Little is known about the sleep patterns of emergency nurses who work highly variable around-the-clock schedules to meet the demands of fluctuating patient census and acuities throughout the 24-hour period. Purpose: The purpose of this pilot study was to determine whether there are shift-related sleep pattern differences in emergency department nurses over seven consecutive 24-hour periods that include both workdays and days off. Methods: A New Jersey mailing list (1514 members) was rented from the Emergency Nurses’ Association. Three hundred on this list were systematically sampled and invited by mail to participate. The final sample consisted of 35 emergency nurses. Participants wore actigraphs for 24 hours each day for 7 days and completed sleep diaries upon awakening from their daily main sleep periods. Queries included caffeine and hypnotics usage. The nurses also completed the Standard Shiftwork Index General Biographical Information Section for demographic and scheduling data. Participants received a $50 honorarium upon completion of the protocol. The actigraph data were downloaded into a personal computer using Act Millennium and analyzed with Action W software (Ambulatory Monitoring, Inc., Ardsley, NY, USA). Results: Sleep durations ranged from 6.6 to 8.1 hours onworkdays and from 6.2 to 8.1 hours on days off. There were no significant shift- or workday-related differences in sleep patterns. However, trends indicated that, regardless of shift, workday sleep became more disturbed and less efficient toward the end of the week. Daily caffeine usagewas reported by 85.9% of the sample. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Shift working nurses need to obtain adequate and consistent sleep on workdays and days off throughout the work week to reduce fatigue and to provide safe patient care. Understanding the sleep patterns of emergency nurses and their schedules is critical to facilitating the development of shift-specific sleep promotion interventions to enhance sleep and thereby counteract fatigue.起始頁-結束頁：173-180資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012113篇名：A Study on the Effects of a Health Education Intervention on Anxiety and Pain During Colonoscopy Procedures並列篇名：衛教介入對門診大腸鏡檢查患者的焦慮與疼痛影響之研究作者：薛鳳姬(Feng-Chi Hsueh);陳枝梅(Chih-Mei Chen);孫建安(Chien-An Sun);周雨青(Yu-Ching Chou);蕭思美(Szu-Mei Hsiao);楊燦(Tsan Yang)關鍵字：大腸鏡;焦慮;疼痛;護理;衛教介入;colonoscopy;anxiety;pain;nursing;health education intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景　大腸鏡是最佳的腸道疾病篩檢工具，但是，此項檢查常令病人感覺疼痛與不舒服，因而降低病人接受檢查的意願。目的　探討大腸鏡檢查前提供病人相關檢查訊息對降低檢查焦慮與疼痛的影響，以及確認執行大腸鏡檢查病人對疼痛與焦慮的影響因子。方法　採類實驗性研究（Quasi- experimental design），以接受非無痛麻醉之大腸鏡檢查之門診病人為研究對象。研究期間為2011 年1–4月，實際收案人數為213人，其中實驗組103人、控制組110人。所有研究對象皆接受醫院常規照護，但實驗組則需觀看「檢查過程指引」多媒體衛教光碟。結果　實驗組經由衛教介入後，情境焦慮分數由48.7 分（± 11.6），降為39.2 分（± 8.7）。實驗組的檢查疼痛分數顯著低於控制組（3.8 ± 2.5 vs. 5.0 ± 2.7）。特質焦慮、性別與教育程度是情境焦慮的主要預測因子；而情境焦慮是大腸鏡檢查疼痛的重要預測因子。結論／實務應用　經由多媒體衛教光碟提供大腸鏡檢查過程相關訊息，可有效降低病人的焦慮與疼痛。英文摘要：Background: Colonoscopy is currently considered the best screening tool in the diagnosis of colon diseases. However, this procedure often causes pain and discomfort in patients, thus reducing patient willingness to undergo and comply with this procedure. Purpose: This study explores the effects of providing procedurerelated information to patients receiving colonoscopy in terms of anxiety and pain reduction and identifies factors that influence the pain and anxiety experienced by patients during this procedure. Methods: This study adopted a quasi-experimental design that targeted colonoscopy patients in outpatient clinics. Two hundred thirteen patients were recruited, with 103 patients in the experimental group and 110 in the control group. Participants were recruited between January and April 2011. All of the participants received standard care, and only those participants who were assigned to the experimental group were asked to watch ”A Guide to the Colonoscopy Procedure,” a multimedia health informatics CD-ROM. Results: Anxiety scores of the experimental group dropped from 48.7 T 11.6 to 39.2 T 8.7 after the intervention. The average pain score of the experimental group was significantly lower than that of the control group (3.8 T 2.5 vs. 5.0 T 2.7). Furthermore, trait anxiety, gender, and educational level were identified as the main predictors for state anxiety, and state anxiety was identified as an important predictor for pain during the colonoscopy examination. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study found that using a multimedia health informatics CD-ROM to provide information on the colonoscopy procedure effectively reduced the examination-related anxiety and pain of patients.起始頁-結束頁：181-189資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000011214篇名：Perspectives on Cancer Survivorship: Care and Challenges作者：Yeur-Hur Lai期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：190-192資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000016315篇名：EDITOR’S REMARKS並列篇名：編者的話作者：徐亞瑛(Lotus Yea-Ing Shyu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/01.JNR.0000479806.24026.3516篇名：The Multidimensional Nature of Relationships: The Perceptions of Iranian Nursing Students and Educators of the Student-Educator Relationship作者：Abbas Heydari:Fariba Yaghoubinia;Robab Latifnejad Roudsari關鍵字：student-educator relationship;clinical nursing education;perception;qualitative content analysis.期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: The student-educator relationship in nursing is very important to the success of teaching and learning. The perceptions of students and educators of this relationship affect its success. Therefore, it is necessary to better understand this relationship. Purpose: The purpose of the current study was to explore Iranian nursing students’ and educators’ perceptions of student-educator relationship in clinical nursing education. Methods: In this conventional content analysis study, eight Bachelor of Nursing students and 10 clinical nursing educators from nursing and midwifery school in Mashhad (Iran) participated. Purposive sampling was used to select participants. Data were gathered using semistructured interviews. To analyze data, a conventional content analysis approach was used to identify meaning units and their condensation and to make codes and create categories. Results: Results showed that the multidimensional nature of the student-educator relationship in clinical nursing education consists of (a) dimensions related to the educator, (b) dimensions related to the student, and (c) dimensions of relationship quality. Each of these categories is composed of codes that showed the perception of participants about the nature of relationship. Conclusions: On the basis of the unique features and attributes regarding relationship perceptions in clinical nursing education identified among the participants of this study, students and educators in Iran should pay greater attention to establishing the relationship as it relates to these attributes.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000009117篇名：The Psychometric Properties and the Development of the Indicators of Quality Nursing Work Environments in Taiwan並列篇名：臺灣優質護理職場環境指標之建構作者：林秋芬(Chiou-Fen Lin);盧美秀(Meei-Shiow Lu);黃秀英(Hsiu-Ying Huang)關鍵字：護理職場環境;主成份分析;指標;護理人力短缺;nursing work environments;indicator;principal component analysis;nursing shortage期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：臺灣2012年各醫院護理人力平均缺額率9%，遠遠高於文獻所稱人力短缺的5%，造成許多醫院因此關病房或減床。但台灣領證的護理師執業率僅60.4%，相較於加拿大、美國明顯偏低，乃因台灣的護理職場環境不良，造成護理人員不願意就業。目的：建構臺灣的優質護理職場環境指標，並進行信、效度檢定。方法：採用多元研究法進行，分2階段6步驟。階段1：組織專家群、文獻查證、七次的專家座談會及六次的護理部主任焦點團體討論，以發展符合臺灣現況的優質護理職場環境指標內容初稿。階段2：進行專家效度檢測，舉辦3場公聽會及問卷調查，共發出427份，有效問卷381 份，進行表面效度、建構效度、及內部一致性信度檢測。結果：本研究所完成之臺灣優質護理職場環境指標共有8個構面、65項內容。8個構面分別為：安全執業環境（16 項）、人力質與量（4 項）、薪資與福利（7 項）、專業分工與團隊合作（7項）、工作簡化（5項）、資訊化（5項）、人才培育與專業發展（9項），以及支持與關懷（12 項）等。整體指標因素負荷量為77.57%。結論／實務應用：本研究完成之「優質護理職場環境指標」，可做為評核護理職場環境優劣之標準，未來可以進行醫院調查，了解臺灣護理職場環境的現況及作為進一步措施的結果衡量方法。英文摘要：Background: The nursing shortage in medical institutions in Taiwan averaged 9% in 2012, considerably higher than the 5% indicated in the literature. As a result, many hospitals have been forced to close wards or reduce beds. Despite the acute need, the percentage of registered nurses who are employed as nurses in Taiwan (60.4%) is considerably lower than those in Canada or the United States. This low rate may be because of the poor working environment for nurses in Taiwan. Purpose: This study aimed to develop a set of nursing work environment quality indicators for Taiwan and to test the reliability and validity of the resulting survey tool. Methods: Multiple methods were used in this study. In Phase 1, we organized an expert panel, reviewed the literature, and conducted seven rounds of expert panel discussion and six focus group discussions with nursing directors. The goal was to draft indicators representing a quality nursing work environment to fit current conditions in Taiwan. In Phase 2,we conducted an expert review for content validity, held three public hearings, and conducted a survey. Four hundred twenty-seven questionnaires were sent out, with 381 returned. The goal was to test the content validity, construct validity, and internal consistency reliability. Results: The study produced a set of indicators of a quality nursing work environment with eight dimensions and 65 items. The content validity index for importance and suitability dimensions were 1.0,whereas the internal consistency was 0.91. The eight dimensions were safe practice environment (16 items), quality and quantity of staff (four items), salary and welfare (seven items), professional specialization and teamwork (seven items), work simplification (five items), informatics (five items), career development (nine items), and support and caring (12 items). The overall load for the indicators was 77.57%. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The developed indicators may be used to evaluate the quality of nursing work environments. Furthermore, the indicators may be used in hospital surveys to establish baseline conditions and for outcome research that measures improvement in nursing work environments after interventions.起始頁-結束頁：9-20資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000010618篇名：Professional Practice Environment Scale-Chinese Version: Development and Psychometric Testing並列篇名：專業執業環境量表中文版的發展與心理計量之測試作者：鄧景宜(Ching-I Teng);張皓媛(Hao-Yuan Chang);盧瑞芬(Rachel Jui-fen Lu);周家玉(Chia-Yu Chou)關鍵字：專業執業環境;前譯;回譯;中文版本;量表發展;professional practice environment;forward translation;backward translation;Chinese version;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：專業執業環境量表（PPE）已被廣泛用於測量醫療執業環境，具有良好的信效度。然而，目前尚未有一個中文版的專業執業環境量表。目的：本研究的目的為發展Halcomb版本之PPE中文版，其內容之信效度測試。方法：本研究以Halcomb之30 題PPE量表為本，採用前譯與回譯的方式，將原著PPE進行轉譯，並檢測量表同等性及各項心理計量特性。結果：此量表與原量表間具有足夠的量表同等性，對290位護理人員的調查結果顯示此量表具有高度的信度（Cronbach's Alpha= .88）與效度。結論／實務應用：此份PPE中文版可以有效地用來評估台灣的專業執業環境。英文摘要：Background: The Professional Practice Environment (PPE) scale is widely used to assess the quality of the healthcare environment around the world. No validated Chinese-language scale that is designed to address this issue currently exists. Purpose: The present study evaluates the construct validity of the Chinese-version PPE on a sample of 290 healthcare workers in Taiwan. Methods: Forward and backward translations of the PPE scale of Halcomb et al. were used to ensure semantic equivalence. Further, multiple psychometric properties were examined. Results: The developed scale showed sufficient equivalence. The results of a survey of 290 healthcare providers demonstrated that the developed Chinese-version PPE scale had high reliability (Cronbach’s alpha = .88) and validity. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of the present study support the effectiveness and efficiency of the Chinese-version 30-item Halcomb’s PPE in assessing the professional practice environment in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：21-30資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000010719篇名：Case-Based Web Learning Versus Face-to-Face Learning: A Mixed-Method Study on University Nursing Students並列篇名：比較案例式學習於大學護理學系學生之網路及課室教學的學習經驗：混合研究法作者：陳惠嬌(Aileen Wai-Kiu Chan);車錫英(Sek-Ying Chair);薛詠紅(Janet Wing-Hung Sit);黃美玲(Eliza Mi-Ling Wong);李子芬(Diana Tze-Fun Lee);馮慧敏(Olivia Wai-Man Fung)關鍵字：案例式學習（case-based learning）;網上學習;學習經驗;香港學生;case-based learning;Web-based learning;learning experience;Hong Kong students期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：案例式學習（case-based learning, CBL）是一種有效的教育方法，可提高學生的學習和臨床推理能力。隨著電子學習技術的進步，CBL於網路教學的方式也已出現，用以補充傳統的課堂教學方法。目的：本研究旨在探討香港學生學習CBL的經驗，比較採用傳統的課堂教學及網路教學模式的差異。方法：本研究採用混合研究方法，對象為所有3 年級護理系學生。上學期CBL採用傳統課堂教學方法授課，下學期採用網路方式進行。在每學期結束時收集學生的自我評估問卷，包括本科護理教育的自學能力，臨床推理能力，和學習滿意度。焦點小組訪談則在下學期結束時進行。結果：共有122名學生交回問卷。結果顯示CBL在網路與課堂教學的學習經驗沒有差異：自學習能力（p = .947），臨床推理能力（p = .721），學習滿意度（p = .083）。而焦點小組訪談顯示五大主題反映學生的學習經驗：<U+2474>CBL的結構<U+2475>網路學習環境<U+2476>批判性思維和解決問題的能力<U+2477>文化對CBL的影響<U+2478>以學生或教師為中心的學習。結論：CBL於網絡上的學習經驗，並不優於傳統的課堂學習經驗，但中華文化對於學生於網路之學習行為和偏好有所影響。英文摘要：Background: Case-based learning (CBL) is an effective educational method for improving the learning and clinical reasoning skills of students. Advances in e-learning technology have supported the development of the Web-based CBL approach to teaching as an alternative or supplement to the traditional classroom approach. Purpose: This study aims to examine the CBL experience of Hong Kong students using both traditional classroom and Web-based approaches in undergraduate nursing education. This experience is examined in terms of the perceived self-learning ability, clinical reasoning ability, and satisfaction in learning of these students. Methods: A mixture of quantitative and qualitative approaches was adopted. All Year-3 undergraduate nursing students were recruited. CBL was conducted using the traditional classroom approach in Semester 1, and the Web-based approach was conducted in Semester 2. Student evaluations were collected at the end of each semester using a self-report questionnaire. In-depth, focus-group interviews were conducted at the end of Semester 2. Results: One hundred twenty-two students returned their questionnaires. No difference between the face-to-face and Web-based approaches was found in terms of self-learning ability (p = .947), clinical reasoning ability (p = .721), and satisfaction (p = .083). Focus group interview findings complemented survey findings and revealed five themes that reflected the CBL learning experience of Hong Kong students. These themes were (a) the structure of CBL, (b) the learning environment of Web-based CBL, (c) critical thinking and problem solving, (d) cultural influence on CBL learning experience, and (e) student-centered and teacher-centered learning. Conclusions: The Web-based CBL approach was comparable but not superior to the traditional classroom CBL approach. The Web-based CBL experience of these students sheds light on the impact of Chinese culture on student learning behavior and preferences.起始頁-結束頁：31-40資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000010420篇名：The Prevalence and Clinical Features of Hypertension in Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea Syndrome and Related Nursing Strategies並列篇名：阻塞性睡眠呼吸暫時低通氣綜合征患者高血壓的患病率、臨床特點及其護理對策作者：王彥(Yan Wang);楊慶嬋(Qing-Chan Yang);馮靖(Jing Feng);曹潔(Jie Cao);陳寶元(Bao-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：阻塞性睡眠呼吸暫停低通氣綜合征;高血壓;晝夜節律;呼吸暫停低通氣指數;護理;obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome;hypertension;circadian variation;apnea-hypopnea index (AHI);nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：阻塞性睡眠呼吸暫停低通氣綜合征（Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome, OSAHS）是常見的睡眠呼吸紊亂疾病。調查顯示OSAHS患者與高血壓相關。目的：調查OSAHS患者中高血壓的患病情況、臨床特點並探討其護理對策。方法：本研究納入3,607例患者，按呼吸暫停低通氣指數（apnea-hypopnea index, AHI）分為對照組354例、實驗組共3,253例，包括輕度組658例、中度組753例、重度組1,842 例。所有患者測量4個時點（日間、睡前、夜間、醒後）血壓值。比較四組高血壓患病率及各個時點血壓值，並計算夜晝平均血壓之比（R_(N/D)）和醒後睡前平均血壓之比（R_(M/E)）。結果：對照組與實驗組（輕度、中度、重度OSAHS）高血壓患病率分別為22.32%，實驗組（輕度、中度、重度OSAHS）各為34.65%、39.04%、55.37%。AHI與高血壓患病顯著相關。4個時點平均血壓隨著AHI升高而升高。R_(N/D) 和R_(M/E)逐漸上升。日間血壓與AHI及最低血氧飽和度顯著相關。AHI ＞ 61－65 後，日間MBP不再隨AHI的增加而升高。結論／實務應用：OSAHS是高血壓的獨立危險因素。OSAHS患者夜間及醒後血壓顯著升高，即失去了正常的血壓晝夜節律。護理人員應針對OSAHS患者高血壓的特點採取必要的護理對策，防止心腦血管意外發生。英文摘要：Background: Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) is a common sleep-related breathing disorder. Hypertension is frequently a concomitant disorder in patients with OSAHS. Purpose: This study investigates the prevalence and clinical features of hypertension in patients with OSAHS and explores the related nursing strategies. Methods: Three thousand six hundred seven patients were included in this study. Subjects were divided into four groups that were categorized according to apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) scores as follows: control group (control, n = 354) with AHI G 5, mild OSAHS (mild, n = 658) with 5 e AHI G 15, moderate OSAHS (moderate, n = 753) with 15 e AHI G 30, and severe OSAHS (severe, n = 1842) with AHI Q 30. Blood pressure (BP) values were measured at four time points (daytime, evening, nighttime, and morning). The prevalence of hypertension and BP values in the different groups were compared at four time points. Finally, the nighttime-to-daytime mean BP (MBP;R_(N/D)) and morning-to-evening MBP (R_(M/E)) ratios were calculated. Results: The prevalence of hypertension in the control group, mild group, moderate group, and severe group were 22.32%, 34.65%, 39.04%, and 55.37%, respectively. AHI positively correlated with the prevalence of hypertension (r = .191, p G .001). The daytime, nighttime, evening, and morning MBP rose as AHI increased. The ratios of nighttime-to-daytime MBP (R_(N/D)) and morning-to-evening MBP (R_(M/E)) increase with the severity of the illness (F = 9.821 and 18.957; p G .001). The daytime BP correlates significantly with AHI and lowest oxygen saturation (LSaO_2; systolic BP, r = .195 and j.206; diastolic BP, rs = .248 and j.251, p G .01). Daytime MBP increases gradually in small fluctuations concurrent with increases in AHI until 61Y65. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: OSAHS is an independent risk factor for hypertension. Patients with OSAHS have a significant increase in nighttime and morning BP, which means they lose normal BP diurnal rhythm. Therefore, nurses should take necessary measures based on the clinical features of hypertension in patients with OSAHS to minimize the risk of cardiocerebral vascular incidents.起始頁-結束頁：41-47資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000011101篇名：The Usage Behavior and Intention Stability of Nurses: An Empirical Study of a Nursing Information System並列篇名：護理人員的使用行為及意圖穩定性探討：以護理資訊系統為例作者：林怡君(I-Chun Lin);林器弘(Chi-Hung Lin);許建隆(Chien-Lung Hsu);阮金聲(Jin-Sheng Roan);葉振山(Jehn-Shan Yeh);鄭宇涵(Yu-Han Cheng)關鍵字：科技接受模式;中介變數;調節變數;中介調節效果;護理資訊系統;Technology Acceptance Model (TAM);mediator;moderator;mediated moderation;Nursing Information System (NIS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：過去科技採用的研究多以意圖作為預測行為的變數，但行為科學家證實這兩者間存在落差且單以意圖作為預測行為是不足的，學者們更指出這兩者間尚存在其他變數。目的：有鑑於相關研究短缺，本研究以TAM3為基礎，建構一個更完整的模式以探討使用者對系統的行為，並驗證意圖和行為間是否存在兩個影響變數—意圖穩定性與過去經驗。方法：台灣某醫學中心新上線的護理資訊系統為標的系統，系統的主要使用者—護理人員為研究對象。兩階段問卷發放，最後共回收245 份有效問卷，有效回收率為49%。結果：模式驗證顯示意圖與行為間存在調節中介變數—意圖穩定性與調節變數—過去經驗，並提昇意圖對行為超過13.6%的解釋力。本研究主要發現意圖與行為之間存在意圖穩定這個變數，過去在資訊科技的研究中，主要都僅僅以意圖當作行為的預測變數；另外，過去經驗會正向調節意圖與行為的關係，顯示出過去經驗會促進意圖對於行為的預測能力。結論／實務應用：研究結果可提供醫院管理者參考，管理階層可經由增加護理人員對系統的使用經驗來提昇他們對NIS的有用性認知，讓護理人員了解NIS有助於提昇工作成效。當成效提升時，護理人員可以有更多的時間專注於病患照顧或進修，且日後較會真正去使用系統，NIS的導入才能達到預期的成效與目的。英文摘要：Background: Many prior studies of technology adoption treat user intention as the single predictor of actual usage behavior. However, as many researchers of behavioral science have pointed out, multiple factors mediate the relationship between user intention and usage behavior. Purpose: The present article explores the factors that mediate the relationship between intention and actual behavior. We develop a conceptual framework that is based on the Technology Acceptance Model III and behavior theory to further elicit system usage behavior and to confirm ”intention stability” and ”past experience” as two significant mediating factors in this relationship. Methods: The target system was a nursing information system that had been recently adopted by a medical center in central Taiwan. Data were collected using a questionnaire survey conducted in two rounds. Two hundred forty-five valid questionnaires were returned (response rate: 49%). Mediated moderation was analyzed to explore the presence of mediators or moderators between intention and behavior. Results: The results support that intention stability is a mediated moderator and that prior experience is a moderator of the relationship between intention and behavior. These two factors increased by over 13.6% the explanatory power of intention on actual behavior. Furthermore, this study expanded the scope of prior research by confirming intention stability as a moderating variable between intention and behavior. Finally, this study identified the moderating effect of past experience on the intention-behavior relationship, indicating that past experience enhances the predictive power of intention on behavior. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study may assist hospital managers to better understand the nursing information system usage behaviors of nursing staff and to develop ways to enhance the intention stability of these staff. Managers may improve the familiarity of nursing staff with the system by increasing their system-related practice time. More experience should enhance staff system skills and resolve problems such as the need for extra work hours or overtime because of initial system unfamiliarity. Improved work efficiency should then allow nurses to divert more time from administrative work to patient care and training. This positive circle of support is expected to increase the willingness of nurses to accept and take advantage of the system.起始頁-結束頁：48-57資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001032篇名：Taiwanese Version of the Work-Related Quality of Life Scale for Nurses: Translation and Validation並列篇名：臺灣版工作生活品質量表－翻譯與信效度測試作者：戴宏達(Hung-Da Dai);唐福瑩(Fu-In Tang);陳怡如(I-Ju Chen);于<U+6F44>(Shu Yu)關鍵字：工作生活品質;量表翻譯;信效度檢測;scale translation;quality of work life;work-related quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：護理人員短缺是一個全球性的嚴重議題，必須藉由提升招募和留任臨床護理人員加以改善。工作生活品質被證實是一個提升招募與留任的原因，因此，正確測量臨床護理人員工作生活品質是一個重要的步驟。然而，臺灣目前使用的量表鮮少且難以進行專業間或國際比較。目的：本研究以嚴謹的過程翻譯英文版工作生活品質量表（Work-Related Quality of Life Scale, WRQoL）並進行信、效度的測試。方法：翻譯過程以專家小組進行前向翻譯並進行反向翻譯及語意檢查，評值語意與內容的對等性。第一階段以30 位護理人員進行表面效度及再測信度的檢測。第二階段以213 位護理人員檢測翻譯版與目前使用量表的同時效度，並計算Cronbach’s α 值，評估翻譯版本之內在一致性。結果：臺灣版工作生活品質量表與目前使用量表的相關係數達 .75，三週的再測信度為 .89，內在一致性為 .88，呈現合宜的信、效度。結論／實務應用：本研究發現臺灣版工作生活品質量表是一個精簡、有效且可信的工具，可用於測量臨床護理人員的工作生活品質，並具有提供專業間與國際間比較的潛力，作為人力資源管理及政策制定方向的實證基礎。英文摘要：Background: The shortage of professional nurses is a global issue of critical importance. Improving the retention and recruitment of nurses is necessary to reduce this shortage. The ability to measure the quality of work life (QWL) of nurses is important to understand the current QWL status among nurses and to develop appropriate improvement strategies. The two instruments that are currently used in Taiwan both require excessive amounts of time to complete. Furthermore, the results that these two instruments generate are not easily interdisciplinary and international comparisons. Purpose: The aims of this study were to translate into Chinese the English version of the Work-Related Quality of Life Scale (WRQoL) that was developed by Van Laar, Edwards, and Easton (2007) and then to determine the reliability and validity of this Chinese-version scale in terms of measuring the QWL of nurses in Taiwan. Methods: The WRQoL was translated from English into Chinese using forward-translation with group discussions, back-translation, and verification of conceptual equivalence. Concurrent validity, test-retest reliability, and internal consistency reliability were determined in two samples of nurses (n = 30 and n = 213 for Phases 1 and 2, respectively) from a medical center in Taiwan during September 2009. Results: The 23-item Taiwanese version of the WRQoL showed satisfactory concurrent validity with a Taiwanese QWL scale (correlation = .75). The 3-week test-retest reliability was .89, and the Cronbach's alpha was .88, indicating high internal consistency reliability. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The Taiwanese version of the WRQoL is acceptable for measuring the QWL of nurses in Taiwan. Larger scale studies are recommended for confirmatory factor analysis. This tool may be used for human resources management and policy-making applications, providing the potential to help retain and recruit nurses in Taiwan. Furthermore, the Taiwanese-version scale may be used to compare work-related quality of life between Taiwanese nurses and their counterparts overseas.起始頁-結束頁：58-67資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001423篇名：Analysis of the Issues and Needs of Parents of Children With Developmental Disabilities in Japan Using Focus Group Interviews作者：Rie Wakimizu;Hiroshi Fujioka關鍵字：developmental disability;family;parents;quality of life social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016英文摘要：Background: The number of Japanese children with developmental disabilities (DDs) has seen a steady increase in recent years. The parents and families of children with DD experience distress both at the time of DD diagnosis and afterward. Aim: This study aimed to elucidate the issues and needs of the parents of children with DD to facilitate the development of effective support strategies necessary to help the family handle the special needs of their child with DD. Methods: Japanese-speaking parents with children who were aged 3Y14 years and currently being treated in a hospital for DDs were invited to participate in one of three focus groups. A trained moderator led each 90-minute audio-recorded group using a semistructured interview guide. All transcripts were coded using thematic content analysis. Results: Six categories of parents’ significant issues were identified, with three of the categories classified as critical needs. Conclusions: The issues and needs identified in this study are useful for developing an effective family support program and a related performance framework. Key concerns include providing relevant information support, providing counseling and consultation support for parents and siblings, and providing resources to children with DD that are necessary to help them deal effectively with their disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：68-78資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000934篇名：The Efficacy of an In-Service Education Program Designed to Enhance the Effectiveness of Physical Restraints並列篇名：身體約束在職教育之效果評價作者：張瑛瑛(Yin-Yin Chang);尤琇慧(Hsiu-Hui Yu);羅爾維(El-Wui Loh);張麗銀(Li-Yin Chang)關鍵字：身體約束;在職教育;加護病房;physical restraint;in-service education;intensive care unit (ICU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：身體約束旨在維持病人安全、預防受傷，但是如果使用不當、未密切監測病人，或護理人員執行身體約束的知能不足，則身體約束反而會造成病人的傷害。目的：主要在評價在職教育的介入對提升護理人員身體約束的知識、態度、行為及技術之效果。方法：採類實驗法之二組前後測研究設計，以評價在職教育之效果。研究對象為中部某醫學中心4個成人加護病房之護理人員，共136位，4個加護病房內外科各為二，以隨機分派內外科各一個加護病房為實驗組，另外則為對照組。先收集二組身體約束知識、態度、行為及技術之前測資料，然後予實驗組2小時以實證為基礎的身體約束臨床指引，及身體約束技術之在職教育為介入方案，在職教育介入後一個月，收集二組之後測資料。以SAS統計軟體之GEE進行重複測量分析。結果：護理人員身體約束之知識及技術在介入在職教育後有顯著的進步（p ＜ .0001）；但態度和行為則無顯著性改變。結論／實務應用：在職教育可以提升護理人員身體約束的知識及技術，而藉由正確身體約束方法的執行不僅可以促進加護病房病人照顧的品質，亦可減少身體約束所造成的合併症。英文摘要：Background: Physical restraints are used to enhance the safety of patients and to avoid injury. However, physical restraints may cause injuries if improperly used or if they are used in the absence of continuous monitoring. Nursing staff who use physical restraints often lack sufficient related knowledge, which may increase the risk to patient safety. Purpose: This study investigates the impact of an in-service education program for nursing staff that is designed to improve physical-restraint-related knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and techniques. Methods: A pretest-posttest design and a quasi-experimental method were employed to evaluate the effectiveness of the in-service education program. One hundred thirty-six nursing staff from four adult intensive care units (ICUs), including two medical ICUs and two surgical ICUs, in a medical center in central Taiwan were enrolled as participants. The experimental group (EG) and the control group (CG) were composed of patients from one randomly assigned medical ICU and one randomly assigned surgical ICU each. The pretest data on physical-restraint-related knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and techniques were collected before the in-service education program. The EG received 2 hours of classroom education on guidelines and techniques related to physical restraints. The posttest data for the two groups were collected a month after implementation of the in-service education program. General Estimation Equation was used to measure and analyze the data repeatedly. Results: The posttest scores of the EG for knowledge and technique were significantly higher than the pretest scores (p G .0001). However, the posttest scores of the EG for attitudes and behaviors did not significantly differ from the pretest scores. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In-service education for physical restraints enhances relevant knowledge and techniques but does not significantly affect attitudes or behaviors. Correct implementation of physical restraints not only promotes the quality of nursing care for patients in the ICU but also reduces the risk of physical-restraint-related complications. This study highlights the importance of changing the thoughts and concepts related to the use of physical restraints within the overall caring strategy of hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：79-86資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000000925篇名：A Quality of Working Life Survey Instrument for Hospital Nurses並列篇名：醫院護理人員工作生活品質問卷作者：徐明儀(Ming-Yi Hsu)關鍵字：護理人員;工作生活品質;建構效度;問卷發展;問卷;nurses;quality of working life;construct validity;instrument development;questionnaire期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：背景：醫院護理人員的高離職率顯現出有些護理人員留任於醫院的時間只有幾個月。為了解這個問題，有必要充分了解醫院護理人員工作生活的概念和內涵。之前相關質性研究已經初步了解護理人員工作生活的定義及相關構面。故此研究目的在發展護理人員工作生活品質問卷。目的：此篇文章旨在介紹發展一個具良好信效度的護理人員工作生活品質問卷的過程。方法：本研究從台灣2家醫學中心6家區域醫院收集質性及量性資料。對象包含700名護理工作經驗兩年以上，職位為副護理長以下的內外科護理人員。結果：前一階段質性研究結果已經初步形成護理人員工作生活品質問卷的項目和構面之建構。本研究進一步確認6份量表共含33個因素可解釋護理人員工作生活的變異量為63%，顯現良好建構效度。量表分別測量護理人員工作生活的組織方面、工作方面、自我實現、人際關係、自我效能、和職業概念。各量表Cronbach’s alphas係數介於.80到.89 顯示良好的內在一致性。結論／實務應用：此問卷可以幫助醫院進行臨床工作環境的審核，其結果可幫助工作環境品質及職業健康的促進。英文摘要：Background: The high turnover rate for hospital nurses worldwide means that some nursing staff remain at their posts for only a few months. To fully understand the problem, it is necessary to evaluate the concepts, constructs, and units of the working life of professional nurses. Previous qualitative work has identified and defined an initial set of items relevant to the working life of nurses. Therefore, the aim of this research is to develop a valid questionnaire for use in further examining the working life quality of nurses. Purpose: This article reports on the development of a questionnaire that is valid and reliable for examining the quality of working life of nurses. Methods: Qualitative and quantitative data collection methods were employed within two medical centers and six regional hospitals in Taiwan. Seven hundred registered nurses in medical or surgical wardswith at least 2 years of nursing experience and a position below assistant manager in a medical or surgical ward were included as participants. Results: Previous qualitative research findings generated items for the questionnaire with content and construct. Six scales with 33 factors were identified. The scales addressed the aspects of organization, work, self-actualization, interrelationships, self-efficacy, and vocational concepts. These factors explained 63% of the total variance. The Cronbach’s alphas ranged from .80 to .89, indicating acceptable internal consistency. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The information obtained using the questionnaire may improve workplace audit outcomes, promote occupational health, and improve service quality.起始頁-結束頁：87-99資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000009801篇名：網絡社會運動時代的來臨？太陽花運動參與者的人際連帶與社群媒體因素初探並列篇名：The Coming of Networked Social Movements? Social Ties and Social Media in the Sunflower Movement作者：陳婉琪(Wan-chi Chen);張睇(Heng-hao Chang);黃樹仁(Su-jen Huang)關鍵字：太陽花運動;社會運動;人際連帶;社群媒體;公民參與;Sunflower Movement;social movement;social media;socialties期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年社群媒體興起，學者提出「網絡社會運動」、「連結行動的邏輯」等概念來理解集體行動新模式。2014 年春天，震盪臺灣社會的太陽花運動，其行動邏輯能否驗證這些新理論？本文利用〈太陽花運動參與者調查〉資料，輔以〈台灣社會變遷調查〉，分析這場社運中影響參與者高度投入之因素，研究發現，因「現實生活人際關係」而前來的現場靜坐者較不可能成為長期駐守者，投入時數最低；弱連帶（陌生網友）所帶來的投入程度反而遠高於強連帶。此外，在給定相同年齡、就業狀態的情況下，社群媒體使用者的參與程度確實比非使用者來得高。本文研究結論具有公民社會強化的重大意涵。英文摘要：The Sunflower Movement, which occurred in the spring of 2014 in Taiwan, has shaken the political kaleidoscope of Taiwan. Based on a survey of sit-in demonstrators around the Legislative Yuan during the protest, this study explores to what extent the logic of the collective (as well as perhaps connective) action reflects the current social movement discourses. Contrary to conventional wisdom, strong ties are not more effective in inducing higher levels of protest action. Among the sit-in participants, those who came on the basis of real life personal ties stayed much fewer hours than those who came spontaneously or in answer to the call of ”netizens”. However, the strong ties brought more participants, whereas the weak ties (netizens) contributed to a much smaller percentage of participants. Additionally, we found that social media users spent significantly longer hours at the protest site than traditional media users.起始頁-結束頁：467-501資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：哈伯瑪斯論德國學生運動並列篇名：Jurgen Habermas on the German Student Movement作者：魏楚陽(Chu-yang Wei)關鍵字：學生運動;公民不服從;哈伯瑪斯;康德;知識分子;正當性;student movement;civil disobedience;Jurgen Habermas;Immanuel Kant;intellectual;legitimacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：哈伯瑪斯對一九六零年代德國學生運動的論述，奠基在他對德國脈絡以及正當性與合法性之間差距的看法。德國作為法治國，擁有一部具有道德理想的基本法，但也是一個追求經濟利益的社會，因此仍有諸多未能實現其基本法所宣示的道德理想之處，此乃學生運動得以發揮的空間，同時也是哈伯瑪斯認為雖然公民不服從可以作為手段，但是仍應以憲法為訴求基礎的原因。學生作為知識分子，同時亦是社會運動者，能夠透過群眾與輿論的力量，對現行制度施加壓力，並且讓公共領域具有政治討論的功能，其目的是讓政治生活回到現代國家之中。英文摘要：Habermas' discussion about the German student movement in the 1960's is based on his understanding of the German political, social and educational context and the problematic nature between legitimacy and legality. In the age of the student movement, (West) Germany was already a constitutional state. But in aspects of political culture, legal system and decision making, the moral ideals in the Basic Law were not completely achieved. The gap between legitimacy and legality was the elbow room for the student movement. The student movement as an intellectual movement had the ideals to overcome the problems of capitalism and challenge the principle of legality on the basis of the constitution; The student movement as a social movement was able to call the attention of citizens and mass media, exert pressure on the government, and politicalize the public sphere. The aim of student movement was to bring the political discourse back to the public sphere of the modern state.起始頁-結束頁：503-539資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：行動者的失敗？或是結構的限制？－臺灣勞工退休金改革的再辯證並列篇名：Actors or Structure? —A New Explanation of the Labour Pension Reform in Taiwan作者：葉崇揚(Chung-yang Yeh)關鍵字：勞工退休金;行動—結構;比較資本主義;結構中的行動者;中小企業為核心的發展型體制;corporate pension;action-structure;comparative capitalisms;actors within structure;the SMEs-dominated developmental regime期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文企圖發展一個所謂「結構中的行動者」的分析架構，從資本主義的制度結構瞭解行動者的政策偏好以及行動者之間的策略互動與權力不對稱，進而分析臺灣勞工退休金新制為何會採取個人帳戶制。1984 年國家希望透過勞基法促進產業升級，卻造成企業年金與資本主義制度結構之間的制度性錯置。1990 年代行動者開始尋找勞退金與資本主義之間制度均衡。在民主化之後，國家必須爭取勞工支持和選票，同時也要避免過重的勞動成本負擔。因此個人帳戶制度成為主要的制度選擇；確定給付制的附加年金保險只是敷衍勞工的虛幻承諾。英文摘要：This article attempts to develop an analytical framework ”actors with structure” to understand how actors' policy preferences, strategic interactions and power asymmetries are shaped by capitalist structure, and to explain why the Individual Account was chosen in the Labour Pension Act. In 1984, the Labour Standard Act was introduced to facilitate industrial upgrading, but resulted in an institutional misfit between the SMEs-dominated developmental regime and the DB corporate pension system. From the early 1990s, actors attempted to look for a new institutional equilibrium between the corporate pension system and capitalist structure. After democratisation, the state faced a straitened challenge: on the one hand, to vie for labour's support and votes; on the other hand, to avoid huge labour costs. Therefore, the Individual Account was chosen, and the DB pension scheme was a political strategy for appeasing labour.起始頁-結束頁：541-580資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：中國大陸基層治理與社區維權：零膨脹負二項計數模型之分析並列篇名：An Exploration of Local Governance and Residents Protesting within Communities in China: An Application of the Zero-inflated Negative Binomial Model作者：郭銘峰(Ming-feng Kuo);王鼎銘(Ding-ming Wang);丁太平(Tai-ping Ding)關鍵字：中國大陸;社區治理;差序信任;維權活動;零膨脹負二項計數模型;China;communities governance;hierarchical government trust;rights protection demonstrations;zero-inflated negative binomial model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：自中國大陸改革開放以來，經濟的快速發展不僅改善民眾的生活條件，連帶的群眾自我及維權意識也逐漸上升。而社區作為中國大陸最基層的治理結構，層出不窮的社區維權事件便開始成為研究大陸社會發展不可迴避的課題。為試圖釐清大陸民眾參與這類集體行動的決策思維，本文透過中國綜合社會調查（CGSS）的全國性面訪資料，輔以零膨脹負二項計數模型的分析，得出幾點重要結論：1. 居民在所屬社區中是否擁有組織化（業委會）的依託，顯著影響是否參與這類社區維權；2. 中國特殊的央地差序政府信任態度，會深化居民參與維權的強度（次數）表現。英文摘要：Since China enacted its reform and opening policy, rapid economic growth has not only improved living standards, but also strengthened the consciousness of citizenship and civil rights. ”Community” for instance, as the essential unit of governance and policy operation under the current Chinese administrative system, has encountered enormous protests in the past few years. To understand the reasons for Chinese people participating in this type of collective community protest, we explore data collected from the China General Social Survey (CGSS) by analyzing the zero-inflated negative binomial model. The result shows that whether there is an organized property management agency (業委會) in the community has a significant impact on the occurrence of protests. Moreover, the 'hierarchical government trust' between central and local governments increases participation in such protests.起始頁-結束頁：581-622資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：主觀貧窮輪廓及其影響因素之研究並列篇名：Subjective Poverty: Profiles and Determinants作者：呂朝賢(Chao-Hsien Leu);陳柯玫(Ke-Mei Chen);陳琇惠(Hsiu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：主觀貧窮;最低可接受生活標準;剝奪;生活必需品;subjective poverty;a minimally acceptable standard of living;deprivation;essentials of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討主觀貧窮的輪廓、影響主觀貧窮的因素、影響最低生活門檻的決策因素及各因素的相對貢獻程度。結果顯示：1.主觀貧窮輪廓因方法而呈現差異，但彼此間仍具一定的正向關係。2.家庭支出、家長教育程度及家庭型態是影響主觀貧窮最大的變數，反映了家庭購買力、對必需品的識別力與投資意願、家庭資本對家庭主觀貧窮程度具有相當的解釋力。3.對最低生活門檻的決策因素及其貢獻度，若不考慮「消費支出層級」，則以需求因素影響力及貢獻度最大，其次為價格因素、參考因素、購買力因素以及偏好因素。英文摘要：The aims of this paper are the following: (1) examining the profiles of subjective poverty methods; (2) exploring the factors affecting households' subjective poverty; (3) investigating the factors determining households' subjective evaluation of their minimal standard of living and their relative contributions to the minimal standard of living. The findings show that although the profiles of subjective poverty vary with methods applied for assessing subjective poverty, they correlate positively with each other. Furthermore, family expenditure, parental education level, and family type have significant effects on subjective poverty. This implies that purchasing power, identification of daily necessities and willingness to invest, and family capital have a great impact on subjective poverty. Finally, if we do not consider the level of expenditure, need is the largest contribution to the minimal standard of living, followed by price, reference, purchasing power, and preference.起始頁-結束頁：341-376資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：平等或適足？兩種教育正義觀的比較並列篇名：Equality or Adequacy? A Comparative Perspective on Justice in Education作者：陳俊宏(Chun-Hung Chen)關鍵字：教育機會均等;教育平等;教育適足;民主適足論;equality of educational opportunity;education equality;educational adequacy;democratic adequacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來，平等論與適足論對於教育資源分配的論辯，是教育哲學討論的重要議題。平等論主張，資源必須平等分配，教育機會不應受到個人無法控制的外在因素所影響，教育的不平等若起因於這些元素，就是不正義。適足論則主張，資源的分配應以適足性為原則，只要每個人獲得最低門檻的資源，則在門檻之上的不平等，不能稱為不正義。本文試圖從兩派對於教育目的以及教育資源分配的論辯，比較兩種理論觀點的差異，以及各自遭遇的難題。本文認為，一個完整的教育正義觀，必須有效處理兩派所遭遇的難題，本文將提出一個得以解決兩派主張的規範性觀點。英文摘要：Over the past decades, there has been ongoing philosophical debate between luck egalitarians and relational egalitarians. Recently, an equivalent debate has been taking place in the sphere of education. According to the educational equality approach, justice requires prospects for educational achievement to be dependent upon a child's ability and willingness to learn, and not on factors outside of her control. Nevertheless, proponents of what can be called adequacy approach have instead argued that the state is required to ensure all children have adequate education. Once this threshold is obtained, there is no injustice in the fact that some children have better education than others. This paper tries to address this debate. It will not only lay out at conceptual level the difference between equality and adequacy but also to show what these conceptual differences mean for educational policies.起始頁-結束頁：377-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：Contextualizing Stunted Child Growth and Development within a Broader Framework of Demographic Transition and Epidemiologic Transition並列篇名：人口轉型與疾病轉型脈絡下的兒童生長遲緩發展作者：陳正和(Jeng-Her Chen)關鍵字：人口轉型;疾病轉型;兒童生長遲緩發展;demographic transition;epidemiologic transition;stunted child growth and development期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究提出以人口轉型與疾病轉型廣泛的架構解釋開發中國家兒童生長遲緩率的發展。完整的隨機效果模型涵蓋三個先前經濟力、晚近總體經濟力、時間特定效果以及區域特定效果所進行的跨國資料檢驗，強烈支持人口轉型與疾病轉型對開發中國家兒童生長遲緩發展影響的同時效果與部分時間遞延效果。本研究有其廣泛之政策涵義。英文摘要：This study proposes a broader framework of demographic and epidemiologic transition for contextualizing changes in stunted child growth and development. A complete model test using random effects modeling incorporating the influences of three economic forces, the proximate macro-economic force, time-specific effect, and region-specific effect, strongly supports the efficacy of the proposed framework for explaining the national stunted growth rates in less-developed countries. Policy implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：413-439資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：Where to Locate in a Circular City with a Foreign Market?並列篇名：與外國市場相連的圓形市場之雙占區位選擇作者：郭文忠(Wen-Chung Guo);賴孚權(Fu-Chuan Lai);余朝恩(Chia-Ming Yu)關鍵字：區位;空間Cournot模型;圓形市場;出口補貼;外國市場;locations;spatial Cournot model;circular market;export subsidies;foreign market期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究分析雙占廠商在一個具有出口點與外國市場相連的圓形市場進行數量競爭的問題。我們證明外國市場的相對大小對於廠商區位選擇具有決定性的影響。當外國市場很小時，存在一個分離的區位均衡。隨著外國市場的增大，分離的均衡區位會逐漸向出口點靠近。當外國市場很大時，兩廠商會聚集在出口點。我們的結果在混合雙占的情況下仍然適用。此外，均衡區位有可能比社會最適區位更靠近或更遠離。另外，我們也延伸探討了兩個圓形市場、出口補貼，及一家國內廠商與一家國外廠商的競爭等情境，最後我們提供了招商投資的相關經濟意涵。英文摘要：This study considers a spatial Cournot competition between duopoly firms in a circular market with an exporting point connected to a foreign market. It is shown that the relative size of the foreign market is crucial in determining the location equilibrium. Specifically, when the foreign market is small, there exists a separated location equilibrium. As the foreign market size increases, the separated equilibrium locations move closer to the exporting point. When the foreign market size is relatively large, both firms agglomerate at the exporting point. Our results are robust in the case of mixed duopoly. Moreover, the equilibrium locations are either farther apart or closer to each other than the socially optimal locations for the domestic country. In addition, we explore several extensions such as two circular markets, export subsidies, and the competition between a domestic firm and a foreign firm. Finally, implications for investment promotion are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：441-466資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：審議造就積極公民？公民審議、社會資本與政治參與並列篇名：Does Deliberation Foster Civic Activism? Public Deliberation, Social Capital and Political Engagement作者：林國明(Kuo-Ming Lin)關鍵字：審議民主;公民會議;社會資本;政治參與;公民社會;deliberative democracy;consensus conference;social capital;political participation;civil society期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文針對臺灣六場全國性公共審議的參與者，在數年後，進行追蹤調查，發現這群公民的政治參與程度長期而言並未提昇。另外，我也檢視，什麼因素，使得參與審議的公民，在審議過後，政治參與的涉入程度有所不同？我分析政治參與程度和前後變化幅度是否受到審議經驗的評價和社會資本變項的影響。研究結果顯現，審議經驗的評價沒有顯著效果，參加公益性社團可以顯著提高參與者的政治參與程度。結論指出，如果公民在日常生活和社會交往中，缺乏經常性的參與機會，一次性的審議經驗，長期而言並無法顯著提昇參與者整體的政治參與程度。英文摘要：It has long been held that public deliberation can foster the civic activism required for a healthy democracy. However, the claim has not been rigorously tested. Using a follow-up study of participants in six events of civic deliberation in Taiwan, this paper constructs objective indicators to measure the long-term effects of deliberation on political participation. It is found that the participants' levels of political engagement did not significantly increase after deliberation, and that participants who were members of public-interest associations have higher levels of political participation and are more likely to increases political engagement after deliberation. The paper concludes that it is the opportunities of participation offered by social interactions in daily life, rather than the one-time experience of deliberation, that are more likely to foster civic activism.起始頁-結束頁：133-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：政治民主之後的人道任務並列篇名：Humanitarian Missions after Political Democracy作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：民主;包容的政治;福祉的政治;democracy;politics of inclusion;politics of well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討現代國家之跨過政治民主的基本門檻之後，倘欲朝更人道之社會邁進，在社會面向及經濟面向所應承擔之改革任務，即「包容的政治」和「福祉的政治」。包容的政治關注的是使採行非主流生活方式者的權利能獲得承認及保障，而其關鍵則在於釐清民主社會所仰賴的數量優勢原則的適用範圍與界限。福祉的政治則著眼於經濟福祉的更普遍的分享，並強調一定程度的制度化的利他主義是緩解及修正市場機制之弊端的關鍵，亦是節制做為一種社會德性在經濟面向上之必要的體現。而包容的政治和福祉的政治之目標，即在於協助人類朝「人道的時代」邁進。英文摘要：Crossing the threshold of political democracy is undoubtedly an achievement for any modern society. But a society still has to face knotty and multifarious problems if it aims to attain more humanitarian social goals. And the missions ahead can be accomplished only through political means whose legitimacy and desirability must be defended by political arguments. This essay focuses on two such missions, i.e. politics of inclusion and politics of well-being, to probe into respectively the social and economic aspects that obstruct humanitarian advancement. Politics of inclusion asserts that the rights of those who practice non-mainstream ways of life are necessary consequences of the recognition and inclusion of difference. And the politics of well-being proposes a more universal sharing of economic welfare in order to reverse the inequality that contemporary capitalism has pitilessly brought about. In brief, democracy cannot achieve humanitarian goals without the politics of inclusion and politics of well-being.起始頁-結束頁：179-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：家庭關係與男子氣概的建構：一個漁村男性的遷移傳記並列篇名：Family Relations and the Construction of Masculinity: A Migration Biography of a Fishing Village Man作者：涂懿文(Yi-Wen Tu);唐文慧(Anna Wen-Hui Tang)關鍵字：男性研究;漁村;遷移;男子氣概;家庭關係;men's studies;fishing villages;migration;masculinity;family relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討中年男性高茂在不同生命歷程中的遷移經驗，分析其如何透過「離鄉╱返鄉」和「跨國」移動來協商家庭關係，展現地區型男子氣概。採「遷移民族誌」視角，作者訪談高家成員，觀察其互動關係，發現高茂有三次重要的遷移行動：「二十離鄉工作」、「三十跨海娶妻」及「四十返鄉照顧」，這些行動的背後，皆為履行父權社會所期待的「好兒子」、「好丈夫」與「好爸爸」之性別角色。作者強調，對於具有鄉村成長經驗的高茂來說，他的遷移決策與行動，鑲嵌在地區性的父權文化框架裡。其男子氣概，也依據不同生命階段及家庭關係，展現了動態的變化。英文摘要：This paper discusses the migration experiences of a middle-aged man surnamed Gao in his life course, and analyzes how he used the ”being away and returning home” and ”transnational movement” to negotiate family relationships, to show regional-type masculinity. Mining a ”migration ethnographic” perspective, the authors interview Gao's family members and observe their interactions. We have found Gao had three major migration actions: ”leaving home to work in his 20s”, ”crossing borders to take a wife in his 30s” and ”returning to care for family in his 40s,” all of wich are expected to fulfill patriarchal societal gender roles of a ”good son”, ”good husband” and ”good father”. This paper stresses how the local patriarchal culture and family relations contextually influenced Gao's dynamic migration and masculinity in his life.起始頁-結束頁：215-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：瑜亮之爭：稅務訴訟代理訴訟績效差異之研究並列篇名：Attorneys versus CPAs: A Study on Performance Difference of Tax Litigation Agents作者：林秀鳳(Hsiu-Feng Lin);陳岳鴻(Yueh-Hung Chen)關鍵字：稅務訴訟;律師;會計師;轉換模型;tax litigation;attorneys;CPAs;switching model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究探討律師與會計師在主要稅務行政事件的訴訟績效差異。結果顯示，在事實審法院，會計師代理營業稅與遺贈稅案件績效優於律師；律師則於法律審法院呈現優勢。進一步考量高案件金額的經濟誘因，除了與法院層級分析的結論一致外，事實審法院會計師的訴訟績效皆優於律師，亦與全樣本估計相同。雙方各自擅長的稅務訴訟方面：律師較不擅長營利事業所得稅；會計師的營業稅訴訟表現最佳。綜觀而論，二人各有所長，會計師擅於所得稅與營業稅案件，並於事實審法院中，較能發揮專業技能；律師則以遺贈稅訴訟績效為佳，更見長於法律審法院的案件。英文摘要：This study investigates the difference between attorneys and Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) in litigation performance. We employ the endogenous switching model to control for self-selection bias. The empirical result suggests that CPAs' litigation performance is better than attorneys' in lawsuits of income tax, business tax, and estate & gift tax. We consider both effects of court level and economic incentives. A court level analysis shows that attorneys have better litigation performance than CPAs in the supreme administrative court, while in contrast, CPAs have better litigation performance than attorneys in the high administrative court, and tests of economic incentives are consistent with court level analysis. Our within difference test shows that, attorneys perform worst in profit-seeking enterprise tax lawsuits because that is related to the accounting profession; CPAs have the best performance in business tax lawsuits. In brief, attorneys and CPAs has its own merits.起始頁-結束頁：259-298資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：Is Taiwan's Workforce Underpaid? Evidence from Marginal Product of Labor Estimates at the Company Level並列篇名：臺灣勞工是否處於低度回饋？基於企業面的勞動邊際產量估計之證據作者：侯杜比(Tobias Haepp);辛炳隆(Ping-Lung Hsin)關鍵字：勞動邊際生產力;工資;生產要素報酬;低度回饋;labor productivity;wages;factor compensation;decoupling期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：為研究臺灣勞工是否處於低度回饋狀況問題，本文運用臺灣上市櫃公司企業利潤與產值數據估計勞動邊際產量與勞動報酬之間的差距。本研究發現，無論是用利潤或產值數據進行分析，近幾年確實出現勞動邊際生產力與勞動報酬之間的落差，且三種生產要素中，惟有勞動持續處於報酬過低。相反地，資本的邊際產量與報酬之間的差異則為負值，並隨著時間而增加，尤其是在近十年之製造業樣本中。此外，我們進一步發現勞動低度回饋情形在屬於較年輕世代之大學畢業生相對嚴重，其在員工結構比較年輕的企業中更大，且該子樣本中分配給資本之租金則較高。英文摘要：We analyze whether the production factor labor is underpaid in Taiwan by estimating the gap between the marginal product of labor and factor compensation based on profit and output data from publicly listed companies. Our results show that marginal product of labor growth has outpaced remuneration growth during the past two and a half decades, implying that Taiwan's workforce is increasingly underpaid. In contrast, capital overpayment has increased, especially in the manufacturing sector. We find that the degree of underpayment is larger for workers with university education, who are predominantly from younger cohorts, while the productivity-compensation-gap is smaller and sometimes negative for workers whose highest educational attainment is a high school degree. In companies with a young workforce, the degree of underpayment is higher and rents are allocated to capital owners. Workers from the low education group are overpaid in companies with an older workforce and long tenure structure.起始頁-結束頁：299-331資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：人民幣匯率變動與通貨替代並列篇名：Renminbi’s Volatility and Currency Substitution作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);唐忠廷(Chung-Ting Tang)關鍵字：通貨替代;格萊欣法則;匯率動態;currency substitution;Gresham’s Law;exchange rate dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：近二十年來，中國出口導向的經濟成長導致貿易順差並累積外匯。人民幣國際地位因而提升，匯率變動幅度隨之擴大，臺灣民眾勢將調整人民幣的持有。有鑑於此，本文建構一個三元通貨的理論架構，據以分析小型開放經濟的民眾面臨新臺幣、人民幣與美元之間發生通貨替代現象時，如何改變通貨組合，進而影響實質匯率和通貨持有量等變數。本文也試圖探討人民幣寬鬆政策對臺灣經濟的衝擊，結果指出：貿易彈性、通貨替代程度、人民幣和美元原先的持有量，以及中國和美國原先的貨幣增長率，都會影響臺灣民眾通貨持有量和實質匯率的長期走向與動態時徑。英文摘要：China has experienced rapid economic growth in the last two decades. The large trade surplus in China in the years following 2001 offers a favorable argument for exchange rate “flexibility”. When Renminbi is expected to be volatile, currency substitution and the exchange rate of “Renminbization” might occur in Taiwanese’s portfolio allocation. The purpose of this paper is to analyze how the dynamic consequences of the currency substitution and “Renminbization” affect the volatility of exchange rates and the diversification of currency holdings. We develop a dynamic general equilibrium model of a small open economy with perfect foresight and currency substitution to explore the comparative static analysis of steady states. We then use the steady state properties of the model to investigate the behavior of relevant macroeconomic variables, including the impact effect and the dynamic adjustment path.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：訊息事件與經濟起飛並列篇名：Information Events and Economic Take-off作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：全域賽局;私人訊息;訊息事件;工業化;經濟起飛;global game;private signal;information events;industrialization;take-off期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以自我實現工業化模型為主要架構，加入訊號干擾的設定，證明訊息事件可能是啟動落後國家經濟起飛的原因之一，本文並明確定義出體系工業化的程度以及整體社會的福利，進而分析政府何時可採透明化政策以增進體系的工業化程度與整體社會的福利。英文摘要：This paper adds noise signal to the self-fulfilling industrialization model and shows that an information event can precipitate economic take-off. Furthermore, we determine the degree of industrialization and the welfare of individuals and use them to obtain the range of the economic state based on which the government should decide the transparency policy.起始頁-結束頁：29-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：建構相互主觀的想像體：剖析冷戰起源時期的國際關係研究所及其中國研究（1953–1975）並列篇名：Constructing an Inter-Subjective Imaginality: Analyzing Taiwan’s Institute of International Relations and Its China Studies during the Early Cold War (1953–1975)作者：陳至潔(Titus C. Chen)關鍵字：建構主義;反思論;知識與權力關係;冷戰;國際關係研究所;中央研究院;constructivism;reflexivism;power-knowledge relations;Cold War;Institute of International Relations;Academia Sinica期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：成立於1953年的政治大學國際關係研究中心（國研中心）是臺灣中國研究與國際研究的學術重鎮。然而在冷戰高峰期間，國研中心實為中國國民黨政府最為信任的敵情與外交智庫，更被國府統治者賦予對外宣傳的任務，以中共情報提供者的身分廣泛參與了國際冷戰的活動，竭力協助國民政府維繫中華民國作為一個相互主觀之國際想像體的的身分與地位。本文以國際關係理論中的反思式建構主義為理論架構，以1960年代臺美雙邊中國研究社群建立合作交流的協商談判過程為案例，為國研中心在冷戰時期的制度發展歷程與其國際角色提供一個更具說服力的詮釋。英文摘要：Founded in 1953, the Institute of International Relations (IIR) of National Cheng-chi University is a renowned institution of International Studies in Taiwan. During the Cold War, however, IIR was an intelligence analysis unit of the ruling Kuomintang government, maintaining intimate relations with Taiwan’s authoritarian leadership. Beginning in the mid–1960s, IIR was further tasked with conducting foreign propaganda, by providing authoritative intelligence and insightful analyses about the Communist government in mainland China to selective China specialists in the West. This article applies reflexive constructivism to critically examine the conditions, rationales, mechanisms, and intellectual implications of IIR’s institutional-functional development during the Cold War. Studying the institutional history of IIR not only lends much-needed impetus to the Cold War Studies in Taiwan, but also helps to reflect on, and further problematize, the knowledge-power relations upon which scholars of China Studies conduct research in today’s Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：61-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：康德的自由與自發性並列篇名：Kant’s Freedom and Spontaneity作者：劉創馥(Chong-Fuk Lau)關鍵字：決定論;相容論;因果律;非時間性;兩種面向詮釋;determinism;compatibilism;causality;non-temporality;twoaspect interpretation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文分析康德的自由理論，把它解釋為一種獨特的相容論。康德認為要解決自由與因果決定論的衝突，必須接受現象與物自身的區分。不少學者把這區分視為兩種不同的存有領域，然後在這基礎上討論康德的自由理論；但本文嘗試論證，把上述區分視為兩種理解或描述事物的方式，才能把握康德自由理論的精髓。本文亦將指出康德的自由概念不僅是其道德哲學，而是整個理論哲學的基礎，箇中關鍵是理解康德的「自發性」概念，視之為思想與認知能力的自由，這樣才能理解為何康德會聲稱，「自由」概念構成整個理性體系的拱頂石。英文摘要：This paper analyzes Kant’s theory of freedom, interpreting it as a peculiar form of compatibilism. Kant maintains that the distinction between appearances and things in themselves is necessary for resolving the antinomy between freedom and causal determinism. Many scholars consider it a distinction between two different ontological realms and interpret Kant’s theory of freedom based on it. However, this paper aims to show that the key point of Kant’s theory can only come to light under the two-aspect interpretation. This paper argues that the concept of freedom is not only essential for Kant’s moral philosophy, but also indispensable for his theoretical philosophy. It is crucial to understand Kant’s concept of spontaneity, which means the freedom of thinking and cognition, in order to appreciate in what sense Kant claims that the concept of freedom constitutes the keystone of the whole system of pure reason.起始頁-結束頁：105-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：思想介入：臺灣318與香港（後）殖民－編輯室的話並列篇名：Thought Intervention: Taiwan 318 and Hong Kong (Post) Colonialism作者：劉紀蕙期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：4-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00012篇名：318的概念並列篇名：The Concepts of 3/18作者：洪世謙(HUNG Shih-Chian)關鍵字：事件;德希達;巴迪悟;空;無名者;Event;Derrida;Badiou;Void;Anonymous期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：發生於2014年的318，然而，我們是否有辦法以數字為名，指稱318，抑或是318是個極其複雜的事情，以至於我們根本無法以任何可命名的方式指稱318；或者當我們用數字318指稱一場臺灣近年來發生的重大事件，它意味著什麼？不論德希達或巴迪悟皆認為，事件意味著一種現實之外，事件不在既定的理解和框架之中。也因此事件發生之際，必定是獨特的，它不同於以往所是。然而，正如同德希達所說，事件的難以理解、不可化約並不阻止我們去重新思考事件，而是必須試圖知道更多，更加緩慢地，更加不受拘束地思考「事件」。若將318視為痕跡，則它是一場既已發生卻還沒過去的事情，它所伴隨的效應正持續地發生中，於是，即便一年多了，任何對於318的描述亦僅能視為是為318留下某些刻痕，而且是與主體自身相關的刻痕。本文將從「事件」、空的本體論和無名者三個角度探討318，作為思考318的痕跡。英文摘要：More than a year has passed after the 3/18 Student Movement (or the Sunflower Student Movement). However, can we name this movement merely by the numbers such as 3/18? Or 3/18 is a thing so complicated that we cannot designate 3/18 by any means of naming? Or does this movement signify something as we attempt to designate this big event recently occurred in Taiwan by the number of 3/18? Both Jacques Derrida and Alain Badiou bear the same contention that event signifies a beyond reality, or that event does not exist within the existing understanding and framework. Hence, as the event occurs, it must be something singular, rather than what it was. As Derrida argues, the inability of understanding and reduction cannot prevent us from rethinking this event. Instead, we must try to know more, more slowly, and think this ”event” more without confinement. If we tend to regard 3/18 as trace, then it is a thing that occurred but hasn't passed yet. The effects that come after it still continue to happen. Even after a year of this movement, any description on the 3/18 movement can merely be considered traces for the 3/18 movement-traces intimately related to the subject itself. The paper attempts to discuss the 3/18 student movement from three perspectives-i.e., event, empty ontology and the anonymous-and then think the traces of the 3/18 movement.起始頁-結束頁：9-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00023篇名：事件318並列篇名：Eventum Tantum, 318作者：楊凱麟(Kailin YANG)關鍵字：事件;時間性;反實現化;越界;318運動;Event;Temporality;Counter-effectuation;Transgression;Sunflower Student Movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：在政治、歷史、經濟等諸多意義被賦予之前，2014年占領立法院的行動首先是一件確然的事件。本文從事件存有論的觀點出發，分析其「事件僅僅是事件」（eventum tantum）的三個主要面向：一、對事件的思考意謂著必須將經驗「反實現化」，指向其作為「事件場所」的時間與作為游牧分配的空間；二、內在於事件的時間性構成了被解放的時空，一個戴奧尼索斯世界；三、由越界所觸及的政治極點與思考零度，一切思考似乎僅能由此折返。318的重要性之一在於挪移了許多我們原本認定的邊界，或許應對於占領行動從事一種以時間為基礎的結晶學，考察強度在被拉長的事件時間中的衰減與增強，與此相對應的，是一門以空間語言所述說的政治地誌學(chorography)。由邊界折返所描摹的全景鏡像，或許可以賦予我們對這個重大事件另一種觀看的可能。2014年的3月占領行動對於臺灣社會的貧富階級、法律正義、中國關係、臺灣地位、民主制度……以無可迴避的正面姿態提出了另類觀看的要求。英文摘要：The occupation of the Parliament of Taiwan or The Sunflower Student Movement (Movement 318) in 2014 is primarily an event, before we can give it the political, historical or economic sense. From the ”ontology of the event,” we analyze eventum tantum of this movement, whose three dimensions are involved. First, thinking the event means the counter-effectuation of experience. This is the time as event place and space as nomad distribution. Second, it is an internal temporality of the event, which is the space-time emancipated. Finally, transgression reached a political climax that is simultaneously the zero degree of thought. One of the magnitudes of the movement 318 is that it moves the knowledge frontier. There is a crystallography of time, by analyzing the decrease and increase of the intensity of event. And there is also a political chorography, expressed by a spatial language. The border vision offers us a new opportunity to see the current situation, including the class, justice, the relationship with China, democracy, etc. This is one of the most important senses of the Movement 318.起始頁-結束頁：33-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00034篇名：太陽花運動影像作為「美學事件」並列篇名：Sunflower Movement Image as an Aesthetic Event作者：張小虹(Hsiao-hung Chang)關鍵字：太陽花運動;影像;美學;民主;攝影;手機;Sunflower Movement;Image;Aesthetics;Democracy;Phot ography;Cell phone期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：如果運動影像不只是社會運動「的」再現影像，那我們究竟可以如何思考運動的「影像性」與影像的「運動性」呢？本文以德勒茲的「運動－影像」與洪席耶的「美學政治」為主要的理論發想，聚焦於太陽花運動期間「手機媒體與網路影像串流」所啟動「攝影影像」的快速增生、連結、繁殖、流通、裂解。論文的前半部分聚焦於兩本太陽花運動的攝影書《天光》與《從我們的眼睛看到島嶼天光》，企圖鋪展「大相機美學」與「歷史事件見證」的構連；論文的後半部分以「小手機美學」的「虛擬間介」切入，探討其所牽動的當代攝影技術與物質載體的改變，以及其如何基進「介入」當前臺灣社會運動與攝影史的再現體系與感知分隔共享秩序。若太陽花運動所給出的「攝影影像」思考，不只是如何再現「318占領立法院」（反服貿運動、公民不服從運動等等）以及後續行動的小寫事件，而有可能是一場「影像的核爆」，以行動手機網路影像的即時上傳與共時海量匯流，基進改變了攝影與臺灣社會運動既有的歷史連結與對應關係，那太陽花運動作為臺灣攝影史上的「美學事件」，就不會再是「攝影美學」命題下的「美學事件」，而是「美學政治」命題下的「美學事件」，一個基進思考「影像民主」並基進挑戰臺灣社會運動史與攝影史史觀的「美學事件」。英文摘要：If the movement image points not merely to the representation of social movement, how can we think through the ”image” of the movement and the ”movement” of the image? Taking Gilles Deleuze's ”the movement-image” and Jacques Ranciere's ”the politics of the aesthetics” as major theoretical points of departure, this paper focuses on the ”photographic image” of the Sunflower Movement to highlight its fast proliferation, connection, propagation, circulation and disruption triggered by the ”the flow of cell phone media and web image.” The first half of the paper will start with two photo books-The Sunrise and The Island's Sunrise Seen from Our Eyes-in an attempt to map out the entwinement of ”the aesthetics of big camera” and ”the eyewitness of historical event.” The second half of the paper will foreground ”the aesthetics of small cell phone” and its ”virtual mediality” to explore how it is implicated in the change of contemporary photographic technology and materiality, and also how it can ”intervene” radically into the representational system and the distribution of the sensible of both social movements and the history of photography in Taiwan. If the thinking triggered by the ”photographic image” of the Sunflower Movement stands not merely as the representation of ”318 Occupy Legislative Yuan” (of Anti-Cross Strait Service Trade Agreement, of civil disobedience and so on) and the following events, it could turn out to be a ”nuclear explosion of image,” radically changing at the intersection of the mobile phone, web image and big data the traditionally established relationship between photography and social movements in Taiwan. We can only read the Sunflower Movement as ”an aesthetic event,” not in light of the traditional ”photographic aesthetics,” but in light of ”the politics of aesthetics,” an event challenging the history of social movement and photography by thinking radically through the ”democracy of the image.”起始頁-結束頁：49-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00045篇名：太陽花運動類比性的翻譯：在全球國家物流政變與共通普及的創構之間並列篇名：An Analogical Translation of The Sunflower Movement: Between the Logistical Coup in the Global State and The Creation of the Commons作者：蘇哲安(Jon Solomon)關鍵字：物流學;控制論;翻譯理論;殖民主義;現代性;國家;自由貿易協定;太陽花運動;主權;Logistics;Cybernetics;Translation theory;Colonialism;Modernity;The state;Free trade deals;The Sunflower Movement;Sovereignty期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文試圖為2014年爆發的太陽花運動提供一種另類脈絡，以便作為運動在思想領域當中類比性的延續。本文脈絡化的重點在於全球資本主義當前的蛻變所帶來的政治意義。蛻變的具體內容可以從諸如債務化、金融化、資訊化、跨國貿易架構、數位勞動、物流學與主權的改變等多種角度切入，進而總體描述本時代的巨大規模歷史轉變。根據本文的立場，這個轉變的政治意義可以涵蓋在「全球國家，財團政變」的觀點之下。換言之，本文的脈絡化嘗試可以視為兩種事件－「太陽花運動」和「全球國家政變」之間的對話。基於這樣的認知，本文試圖勾勒出太陽花運動當中相對於另一運動－「全球國家，財團政變」的緊張關係，以辨認出並凸顯哪些因素足以構成「創構即是對抗」(to create is to resist)的條件，哪些因素實質上暗中參與並建立了反民主全球國家的進一步自動運轉。這樣的區隔動作當中，本文的重大關懷就是破除殖民－帝國現代性的政治、思想架構：種類差異(species difference)。就像species一詞的定義含著物種、貨幣與分類這三種截然不同的領域，本文同樣試圖抓出種類差異架構在人口在政治組織上、知識在規訓組織上，以及勞動在積累體制組織上的重要性。為了阻擋殖民－帝國現代性基礎設施的種類差異架構，在當下的巨大歷史轉折期當中被重新動員，成為新—波的殖民化—整個生物圈(biosphere)被殖民化的基礎－本文企圖從翻譯理論與機器理論兩種領域抓出思想資源，去摧毀種類差異布置的主體科技。換言之，本文的焦點，就政治理論上的意義而言，在於對抗物流學與控制論。作為世界上可能是首度對抗物流學的大眾運動事件，太陽花學運具有值得分析並討論的全球意義。英文摘要：This essay is an exercise in contextualization, applied to the 2014 Sunflower Movement, that aims to achieve an analogical continuation of the Movement. At the center of its efforts at contextualization, the essay examines the political meaning of the current changes in global capitalism. The concrete indices of this change, which ought to be characterized as an event of Massive Historical Transformation, include debt, financialization, digitalization, algorithmic governance, transnational free trade deals, digital labor, logistics and sovereignty, etc. The working hypothesis of this paper is that the political meaning of these transformations can be summarized by the idea of a corporate coup in the emerging Global State. Hence, this essay could be understood as a dialogue between two events, the Sunflower Movement and the Corporate Coup in the Global State. As such, its main mission is to distinguish those parts of the Sunflower Movement that resist the global coup from those parts that might be complicit with it. The underlying concern in advancing this distinction is to destroy the political and intellectual apparatus of colonial-imperial modernity: the framework of species difference. Just as the word species covers three domains, biology, economy and general taxonomy, this essay aims to grasp at a macro level the importance of species difference to the political organization of populations, the disciplinary organization of knowledge, and the capitalist organization of labor. In order to prevent the infrastructure of the colonial-imperial modernity, the apparatus of species difference, from being mobilized by the new wave of colonization gathering in our era, the colonization of the biosphere, this essay attempts to find resources for resistance and creation in theories of translation and technical objects, in order to destroy the subjective technology of the apparatus of species difference. In other words, the focus of this essay's foray into political theory is to be elaborated through the question, how to resist logistics and cybernetics? As one of the first avowed movements against logistics arising in a special logistical zone, the Sunflower Movement begs for a global interpretation.起始頁-結束頁：79-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00056篇名：香港再還是不再，問題並非如此：大中國的「認同」過程與其批判挑戰並列篇名：Hong Kong No More, That is Not the Question: The Process of 'Identification' in Greater China and its Critical Challenges作者：陳奕麟(Allen Chun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：119-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00067篇名：從海盜邦到耕作村：國家主權下香港的海岸與農地敘述並列篇名：From Pirate Nation to Farming Village: Hong Kong's Maritime and Agrarian Narratives under the State Sovereignty作者：羅貴祥(Kwai-Cheung Lo)關鍵字：香港;國家;敘述;海盜;農地;Hong Kong;Nation-state;Narrative;Pirate;Agriculture期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討香港對本身社會的一些想像，可以被理解為與國家論述交涉甚至對抗的聲音。本文集中討論香港過去的海盜敘述與現在的農地敘述。稱這些為「敘述」，因為它們只能向外在環境投射一些想像，只是些模糊信念，不是統一連貫的意識形態系統。這些故事敘述的內容自相矛盾、犯駁，因為它們往往是集體經驗與想法的混合體，而不是深思熟慮的創作。在張保仔的傳奇裡，海盜組織是50年代香港難民社會的縮影。海盜故事敘述最吸引香港人的，是海盜從沒有政治意識形態的束縛。左右逢源以取得自主的求生狀態，被香港的敘述吸納，投射為在中西之間擔任買辦的殖民地故事。二十一世紀面對不斷壯大的中國主權國勢力，香港出現了另一種尚在起步的農地敘述。它不僅是關於農田耕作的，更與整體的香港土地使用有關。抗衡中國政府的霸權，香港農地故事敘述可以被視為一種本地充權、試圖重建社群的欲望。這種敘述鼓吹復興農業，並嵌入了不少當下世界的流行理念，例如生態運動、有機耕作、食物自主與安全、環保意識、文化保育等等。當代世界已經愈來愈受國家政府的控制、管治，逃離的空間似乎變得不可能，但這些敘述即使只是一種幻想，也可以讓本已被遺忘抹掉的東西若隱若現，造就看似不可能的改變。英文摘要：While historical narrative of a society has been overwhelmingly framed by the nation-state, there has been a different mode of depicting the past as well as the present in the fugitive society of Hong Kong. This essay examines how the romantic narrative of pirates in the past and the agrarian narrative at the present have captured the imagination of many Hong Kong people. Narrative in this context is understood as something yet to establish itself as a coherent ideological subjectivization but constitutes certain imaginary relations to the external conditions, or functions as a socially symbolic praxis. The content of such narrative could be conflicting in itself, revealing it is more a product of diverse collective experience and thinking than any consistent project. The essay analyzes how the maritime piracy on the southern Chinese coasts has been appropriated in the Hong Kong regional narrative to parallel Hong Kong collective imaginary as well as real situations. The pirate society was assumed as the epitome of Hong Kong refugee society of the 1950s, projecting freedom from the state control or any sovereign authority. The essay also looks at an inchoate agrarian narrative about Hong Kong facing up the looming power of the Chinese sovereign state after the 1997 handover. Such agrarian alternative seeks to secure Hong Kong community as an autonomous place by advocating the revival of farming activities in order to voice the dissent from the increasingly centralized rule by embedding sentiment for the locality within a series of modern global discourses, such as ecology movements, organic farming, food sovereignty, environmentalism, and preservation of heritage. Although these non-state narratives may be criticized as phantasy, they may effect as potential events that allow something to be reproduced under oblivion.起始頁-結束頁：127-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00078篇名：香港本土論述、文化解殖、後殖民創傷之弔詭關係：以保衛皇后碼頭運動為例並列篇名：The Paradoxical Relationship among Hong Kong Local Discourse, Cultural Decolonization and Postcolonial Trauma: The Case of Queen's Pier Preservation Movement作者：張佩思(Iris Pui-Sze Cheung)關鍵字：保衛皇后碼頭運動;香港研究;殖民主義;後殖民主義;解殖／去殖;本土論述;創傷;Queen's Pier Preservation Movement;Hong Kong studies;Colonialism;Postcolonialism;Decolonization;Local discourse;Trauma期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：「保衛皇后碼頭運動」乃2006年至2007年間發生在香港的抗爭運動，事件前後歷時九個月，終告失敗。通過此研究個案，本文試圖分析本土論述、文化解殖、後殖民創傷三者之間的弔詭關係，從而了解香港在回歸後的處境和狀態。是場抗爭運動強調本土、行動、自主自決、人民參與，並致力為香港重新寫歷史、為下一代守衛土地。本文將指出，通過多元化的抗爭手法，此運動一方面展現了抗爭者堅拒為經濟發展而放棄社區生活和人文價值的姿態，一方面則呈現出一種帶有自主和批判性的新本土精神，是本土意識的一次重要轉向。與此同時，把抗爭者和政府官員的歷史觀作對照的話，不難發現前者的思維帶有解殖語境，後者則旨在「保殖」，事件中更隱約暴露了從殖民時期延續下來的管治邏輯和權力分布圖像。是次運動的失敗，亦正好突顯了香港在回歸以後的「創傷」狀態。英文摘要：The Queen's Pier, built in 1953-1954, served as a significant structure during the colonial era in Hong Kong. Being part of the Central Reclamation Phase III project, the Queen's Pier had to be demolished to make way for the reclamation of Victoria Harbour. The demolition of Queen's Pier drew strong opposition from the public, which triggered a conflict between the government and the public. The Queen's Pier Preservation Movement refers to the movement emerged in 2006-07 in response to this demolition plan, which aimed at preserving Hong Kong's historical space and local cultures. By examining the paradoxical relationship among local discourse, cultural decolonization and postcolonial trauma, this paper seeks to examine the situation of Hong Kong after 1997. The Queen's Pier Preservation Movement emphasized localism, action, autonomy, self-determination and individual participation, aimed at rewriting Hong Kong's history and safeguarding its autonomy. It denoted a change in the attitudes and values of the young generation towards Hong Kong and governance. By analyzing the strategies employed by the protesters, I argue that the significance of this movement is twofold: first, it demonstrated a strong resistance to economic growth and urban entrepreneurialism at the expense of local cultures and histories. Second, a new sense of localism focusing on autonomy and self-determination was fostered during the movement, which clearly marked a critical turn in localism. In addition, by contrasting the viewpoints of the government and the protesters over the issues of cultural development, heritage preservation and urban renewal, it inadvertently provoked a debate on 'decolonization' and 'pro-colonization'. This ironically revealed the legacy of colonialism in post-1997 Hong Kong in terms of bureaucratic administration and distribution of power. Despite mass protests by the public, the pier was finally dismantled and completely demolished in February 2008. I conclude that the failure of this movement, in fact, exposed Hong Kong's traumatic condition after 1997.起始頁-結束頁：141-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).00089篇名：香港金紫荊廣場：身分認同爭議並列篇名：Contesting Identities: Golden Bauhinia Square in Hong Kong作者：陳蒨(Selina Ching Chan)關鍵字：身分認同;廣場;國家主義;香港;空間;地方;Identities;Square;Nationalism;Hong Kong;Space;Place期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以香港金紫荊廣場作為案例，分析空間物質性的經濟與政治，和人們對物質性空間的象徵意義的再創造、運用與消費；研究國家與民眾在廣場上的互動，探討地方的意義與身分認同的關係。本研究尤其關注1997年香港回歸中國後，政府如何通過地方建構來表述國家主義，替香港人凝造一種國家感和中國人身分認同；並且分析香港人如何挪用廣場，表述其複雜而矛盾的情緒和後殖民的身分認同的內容。英文摘要：This paper examines the economic and the political aspects of the physical construction of space, as well as how people appropriate, consume, and recreate the meanings of material space. It investigates the power dynamics between people and government in the square. It analyzes the meaning of place, and its relationship to identities. This research also investigates how the government conveys nationalism through the place-making process, and constructs a sense of nationhood within China as a whole, hence promoting the Chinese national identity for Hong Kong people. It delineates the complex yet contradictory sentiment of the postcolonial identity through the examination of how Hong Kong people appropriate the square.起始頁-結束頁：165-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).000910篇名：香港，誰的香港？並列篇名：Hong Kong, Whose Hong Kong?作者：童慶生(Q. S. Tong)關鍵字：香港;「一國兩制」;「內在種族主義」;殖民主義和本土文化;本土主義;Hong Kong;”One country two systems,”;”Internal racism,”;Colonialism and local culture;Localism期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：中港兩地矛盾，根深蒂固，由來已久，有著深刻而複雜的歷史緣由。本文認為，九七年香港回歸以後，兩地在政治和意識形態上的分歧和衝突，便是兩地深層次矛盾衝突的必然結果，而「占中運動」突出集中地反映出兩地在社會價值上的巨大落差。筆者認為，香港社會中普遍存在的「內在種族主義」是造成兩地間磨擦和衝突的一個重要的原因。之所以稱之為「內在種族主義」，是因為同一族群內，極端或近似仇恨的歧視，較之異族間的歧視和仇恨有過之而無不及。香港社會內的殖民主義的情感結構，使其「內在種族主義」常常表現為追隨西方，尤其是英國，和排斥大陸政治、語言、文化、生活習慣的傾向。本文討論香港「內在種族主義」的成因以及與香港殖民歷史的關係，認為只有充分認識到這種地域性的歧視，才有可能真正認識到中港矛盾的複雜性以及消除這種矛盾的艱難。英文摘要：This essay begins with the observation that Hong Kong's distrust of mainland China has deepened nearly two decades after its return to China. In an attempt to understand what has brought about the present difficulties in the relationship between the two places, the essay offers a reading of what it calls Hong Kong's ”internal racism” against mainlanders. That the essay chooses not to discuss in detail the territory's constitutional statues and identity or its so-called ”core values” does not mean that its author overlooks these important issues. The essay has its focus on the advancement of the following points: 1) that the convergence of Hong Kong's neoliberal capitalism and its colonial culture has played a singular role in defining Hong Kong's rejection of the mainland and 2) that its ideological and political divergence from the mainland, which has frequently been considered by commentators as the locale of tension and conflict, may be read as intensified manifestation of its deep-seated capitalistic/colonial way of life.起始頁-結束頁：187-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001011篇名：中港矛盾的表象與結構：回應〈香港，誰的香港？〉並列篇名：Manifestations and Structures of China-Hong Kong Conflicts: A Response to ”Hong Kong, whose Hong Kong?”作者：王智明(Chih-ming Wang);陳欣欣(Angelina Chin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：201-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001112篇名：對「回應」的回應並列篇名：Response to the commentary作者：童慶生(Q. S. Tong)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：207-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001213篇名：公民抗命與法治共同體：香港的可能並列篇名：Civil Disobedience and Legal Community: Hong Kong's Possibilities作者：彭麗君(Pang Laikwan)關鍵字：漢娜•鄂蘭;雨傘革命;法治;殖民主義;Hannah Arendt;Umbrella Movement;Rule of Law;Colonialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：自從香港在九七年回歸中國後，中國政府在年輕一代中的認受性每況愈下，而他們對香港主體的認同卻日益加強。2014年的雨傘運動，是反映香港市民反叛中國權力的最重要政治事件。本文旨在反思當中公民抗命的邏輯，尤其是主流香港社會一直視法治為其最重要的核心價值之一，究竟公民抗命和法治之間有何衝突？兩者的關係是制衡還是互構？本文會首先處理法治作為一種殖民管治的手段和邏輯，以理解法治在香港的意識形態運作，再以漢娜•鄂蘭對法的論述作為參考，討論如何了解法律的兩面性—它既是權力的統治工具、也是人民共同意志的具體體現；它既恆久、也常變；它建立圍棪敿_法治共同體，也同時開展群體對外的關係。也因此，人民對待自己的法律，也應該學習同時質疑和尊重。英文摘要：Since 1997, the Hong Kong people continue to challenge the legitimacy of the PRC's sovereignty in this city, and many of them also begin to identify with an independent Hong Kong identity. The 2014 Umbrella Movement is a most important political event reflecting this rebellion of Hong Kong to China. This paper aims to explore the related logic of ”civil disobedience,” particularly in view of Hong Kong's tremendous pride in its ”Rule of Law.” Are there any conflicts between rule of law and civil disobedience? Do they challenge each other, or are they mutually constituted? This essay will begin with a discussion of the ideology of law as a colonial apparatus. It then brings Hannah Arendt's theorization of law into the discussion, exploring the dialectics of law: law is both the tool of power and a representation of people's will; it is permanent, but it also changes all the time; it builds a wall to define the boundary of a legal community, but it also sets up links for the concerned community to contact the outside. Therefore, we need to learn to both respect and challenge the law we enact.起始頁-結束頁：209-229資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001314篇名：內在化的鬥爭：回應彭麗君〈公民抗命與法治共同體〉並列篇名：Struggle over Internalization: Discussion with Pang Laikwan作者：劉世鼎(Shih-Diing Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：230-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001415篇名：回應劉世鼎並列篇名：Response to the commentary作者：彭麗君(Pang Laikwan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：242-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001516篇名：以「購物」之名：從網絡集體創作看「再造香港」並列篇名：On 'Gau Wu' in Umbrement Movement: the 're-making of Hong Kong' through Internet Collective Creation by Hong Kong netizen作者：黎國威(Lai Kwok Wai)關鍵字：香港身分認同;YouTube;雨傘運動;網民;高登討論區;網絡集體創作;Hong Kong identity;YouTube;Umbrella Movement;Netiz en;Golden Forum;Internet Collective Creation期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016中文摘要：置身資訊化社會，人們於獲得媒體文本製作技術的門檻大幅降低的狀況下，怎樣以網絡集體創作方式，並將其作品上傳至網絡平台如YouTube表達其政治訴求？本文期望探討普羅市民介入政治方式的範式轉移，即從假手於文化中介人或政客，到自己親身上陣。換句話說，當社會菁英不再壟斷論述話語權，無法擔當文化身分的代言者之際，人們可以怎樣生產屬於自己的文化政治論述？這道問題於香港的語境演繹如下：「香港人」如何從下而上論述「香港」？「香港」如何由阿巴斯(Abbas 1997)眼中的「消失」，到馬傑偉(2013)聲稱的「重現」，再到本文主張於網絡世界裡「再造」？為回答以上問題，本文以雨傘運動流動占領「鳩嗚」衍生的網絡創作「日日去鳩嗚」為例，藉著追溯這系列音樂錄像如何在高登討論區被生產，以及其生產模式如何能以禮物經濟論去理解，從而探討網絡集體創作跟香港人身分認同的關係。英文摘要：Within the era of information society, the threshold of accessing new media production skills and technologies is far below than decades before, people are now much freer to voice out their opinions through making different new media creations and uploading their works to online platform like YouTube. This paper investigate the changing paradigm of political engagement of the common mass from employing cultural agencies and politicians to do it by their own. In other words, how the people make their cultural political discourses and statements without the monopoly of social elite? This question can be rephrased as follow in the context of Hong Kong: How the ”Hong Kongese” narrating Hong Kong from bottom-up? How ”Hong Kong” change from what Abbas (1997) called ”disappearance” to Eric MA's (2013) ”reappear”, and then what this paper argue, ”re-making” within the internet? To answer the above questions, this paper take the example of ”Gau Wu”, the ”fluid occupation” in the city started from the later stage of Umbrella Movement. This protest strategy made some netizens in the Golden Forum created a series of MV of ”Gau Wu Everyday”. Through investigating the production process of this kind of works, with the perspective of ”gift economy”, this paper try to figure out the relation between internet collective creation and Hong Kong identity.起始頁-結束頁：245-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001617篇名：評介阿斯特莉特•埃爾《文化中的記憶》並列篇名：A Review of Astrid Erll's Memory in Culture作者：潘博成(Bocheng Pan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：23期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：281-287資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201609_(23).001718篇名：全球化難題之下另類社會實踐的可能性－編輯室的話並列篇名：Editorial: The Aporia of Globalization and the Possibility for Alternative Societies作者：劉紀蕙(Chi-Hui Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：4-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).000119篇名：導論：農業人文的誕生並列篇名：Introduction: The Emergence of Agricultural Humanities作者：李丁讚(Ding-Tzann Lii)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：10-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).000220篇名：農藝復興：臺灣農業新浪潮並列篇名：Agricultural Renaissance in Taiwan作者：蔡晏霖(Yen-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：友善耕作;新興食農網絡;多物種民族誌;鄉城關係;宜蘭;Friendly farming;Alternative agri-food network;Multispecies ethnography;Rural-urban dynamics;Agriculture in Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣當代新農浪潮同時反抗也受惠於新自由主義全球化，也與歐美日的另類食農網絡運動及其生態優位的普世性論述對話。這篇論文以宜蘭友善耕作社群為關懷場域，指出此波新農浪潮的關鍵在於「農」在意義與功能上的整體性復興，也就是農義復興。而農意識的多元化來自異質行動者的多方轉譯，本文稱為農譯。具體而言，在消費端，藝文工作者使農進入城市中產階級的日常生活；在生產端，友善小農以跨物種協力生產的在地農法，使稻農與福壽螺的關係從對立轉為共生。農義復興於是有賴農文藝與農技藝工作者的多重農譯實作。在此過程中，農與非農、人與非人行動者形成既鬆散又連結的新農江湖，集體但不同調地拓展農在當代臺灣的時空性質、社會認同與經濟可能，並從中持續摸索突破當代生態與社會困境的多重路徑。英文摘要：Based on fieldwork among a community of sustainable smallholder farmers self-identified as ”friendly farmers”, this article deals with the promises and paradoxes of a new politics of food and agriculture in Taiwan. I argue that this politics is first and foremost about the articulation of a new rationality of agriculture, which emphasizes not only the economic value of agriculture, but also its multiple functions in fostering environmental stewardship, community livelihood, local food sovereignty, and regional biodiversity. No less impressive is the fact that humans and non-humans from all walks of live have participated in various articulations of this new rationality. On the consumer end, for example, artists and writers help to re-situate agriculture in urban settings, bringing farmers' life worlds from field to table. On the production side, friendly farmers work against the green revolution legacy by choosing not to poison and exterminate the invasive golden apple snails. Instead, they hand pick snails and learn to transform the relationship between rice farmers and snails from one of opposition to that of collaboration. In this process, the open-ended assemblage that these farmers and non-farmers, human and non-human actants create, has collectively expanded the social horizon, cultural significance, and economic viabilities of agriculture in contemporary Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：23-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).000301篇名：以農之名：臺灣戰後農運的歷史考察並列篇名：In the Name of the Farmer: A Historical Review of Agrarian Movements in Postwar Taiwan作者：陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua Chen)關鍵字：農運;農民運動;土地正義;糧食主權;社區營造;另類全球化;Agrarian movement;Farmer's movement;Land justice;Food sovereignty;Community reconstruction;Alter-globalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在考察臺灣戰後「以農之名」所發起的社會運動，透過比較不同時期農運的原因及訴求來呈現當前農運的意義。本文指出，隨著現代性的演變，農運的關注焦點逐漸從階級轉為環境；從原本對農民生產要素的保障及農業生產利益的分配，轉而關注整體國民的糧食安全及地球的環境存續。在此轉變過程中，土地在1950年代作為生產要素而被爭奪；1970年代開始因為工業污染而出現「環境」的意涵；到了1980年代後期，在臺灣試圖與新自由主義經濟全球化秩序連結的導火線引爆下，農民長期以來累積的不滿情緒，讓階級議題回返成為農運的主要課題，但在此同時，農地被理解為受到黨國體制所控制的人民財產而被要求開放自由買賣。到了2010年前後，在農地持續流失、生態環境劇變的險峻情勢下，土地被當作農民受到政商聯手掠奪的財產而被保衛，但在保障人民財產這項訴求背後，新農運的核心關懷是農地保存及農業重建。重建農業具有根本的重要性，正因為它所影響的不只是農民階級和農業部門，同時也涉及到社會關係的重建與生態環境的回復。然而這並不意味新農運將以普世價值或生態環境之名來掩蓋農民的階級利益，相反地，新農運試圖將普世價值與個殊利益整合，將生態環境與階級利益連結起來思考，以形成對抗發展主義思維及土地開發尋租的力量。英文摘要：This article aims to review the social movements launched in the name of the farmer in postwar Taiwan, as an attempt to illustrate the connotations of contemporary agrarian movements through historical comparison. By comparing causes and petitions of agrarian movements taking place in different period of times, the article argues that with the transformation of modernity, the focus of agrarian movements gradually shifted from class to environment, from securing factors crucial to the agricultural production and the distribution of agricultural profits to concerns regarding the food safety of their compatriots and the sustainability of the global environment. In such transitions, the connotation of the land shifted as well. In 1950s, the land was fought over as the essential element of production; in the 1970s, while the industrial pollutions became obvious, the land began to hold the connotation of environment; in the late 1980s, ignited by the government's attempt to corporate with the neo-liberalistic global economic order, farmers' anger that has been accumulated for a long time once again made class issue became the main concern of the agrarian movement, while at the same time, farmlands were considered as properties under the control of nation-state and were requested to be allowed to sell without restriction. At around 2010, facing the dire situation of the continuous loss of farmlands and drastic environmental changes, the agrarian movement defended farmlands as properties of farmers that had been despoiled. However, behind the petition of protecting people's property as their basic right, the core concern of the movement is the preservation of farmland and reconstructing agriculture. Reconstructing agriculture is of fundamental importance here, since it not only influences the farmer and the agrarian section, but also the reconstruction of social relations and the restoration of the ecosystem. Nevertheless, it does not mean the new agrarian movement is going to cover up or neglect the class interest of farmers in the name of universal values or eco-friendly claims. On the contrary, it tries to integrate universal value and particular interest, to incorporate environmental issue with class issue, in order to form a force to resist the prevailing developmentalistic mentality and the rent-seeking practices in land planning policies.起始頁-結束頁：75-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00042篇名：中型城市發展與城鄉新連結並列篇名：The Middle City Development and Urban-rural Reconfiguration作者：莊雅仲(Ya-Chung Chuang);陳淑容(Shu-Jung Chen)關鍵字：中型城市;城鄉關係;市場;空間;農業;Middle City;Urban-rural Relationship;Market;Space;Agriculture期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文處理一個看似不可能的關係，意即遍布臺灣非大都會地區的中型城市和臺灣農村發展與城鄉連結的關聯。從一個區域性尺度審察這些城鎮，我們發現了一個城鄉交錯的空間構成，這個不經意的歷史遺留，提供超越當前城市發展困境與思索新的城市生活的線索。引起我們注意這個空間遺產的當代意義，乃是因為過去幾年來，我們研究的中部城鎮員林的某條街道兩旁，逐漸發展成農民擺設販賣周邊農業區產品的市集，並創造出特別的城鎮生活氛圍與互動空間。追究這樣子的農產市集形成原因的過程裡，我們看到員林和其他類似規模城鎮特有的區域性城鄉交錯架構，帶給城市生活的特殊效應，因此促使我們思索中型城市在當代都市社會裡可能具有的區域農業生活意涵。英文摘要：This paper investigates a seemingly impossible relation between what we have called middle city and agricultural life in Taiwan. Examining middle city on a reginal scale, we find a spatial configuration that represents a unique way of urban-rural connection. This spatial legacy from the agrarian past provides clues to an understanding of the current urban question and the future of the city life. We began our study with a newly emergent farmers' market in the Yuanlin township at the roadsides of a particular street. The dynamism of a new street life in the evolving market brings us to observe the urban-rural reconnection in this area and its special effect on the city life. The observation also leads to rethinking the future of the city in terms of the revitalization of a regional agricultural life.起始頁-結束頁：123-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00053篇名：吳音寧臺灣農業報導文學的影音美學並列篇名：The Use of Audiovisual Aesthetic in Wu Yin-ning's Reportage about Agricultural Issues in Taiwan作者：高嘉勵(Chia-Li Kao)關鍵字：全球化;報導文學;臺灣農業;影音美學;吳音寧;Globalization;Reportage;Taiwan's agriculture;Audiovisual aesthetic;Wu Yin-ning期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：本論文以吳音寧《江湖在哪裡？─臺灣農業觀察》為焦點，探討此篇報導文學作品如何以文字的影音美學，刻畫出全球化下臺灣農業的結構性問題。第一部分將以吳音寧報導方式的繼承與開展為中心，討論作者的創作背景、左翼文學的創作理念與影音創作手法的開展。第二部分將討論作品如何藉由影像拍攝及剪接的文字美學，呈現人、事、物多層次的交叉對話，藉此提煉從土地出發的感性要素，並突顯「糧食即生命」的主題。第三部分探討以文字模擬聲音來再現歷史現場的影音美學，透過撰寫證詞、旁白、配音、音效等手法，辯證出「農地為農業根本」的核心概念，揭露全球化口號下臺灣農業政策的荒謬性。結論則提示這部反思全球化下農業問題的報導文學作品，如何以文字的影音美學激發情感和行動的力量，試圖引發讀者思考一種符合人和土地共生共存模式的可能。英文摘要：With its focus on Wu Yin-ning's Where Is Jiang-hu? - Observation of Taiwan's Agriculture , this essay examines how this reportage uses audiovisual aesthetic to depict structural problems of Taiwan's agriculture in the era of globalization. The first part emphasizes Wu Yin-ning's writing heritage and specialty, for instance, writing background, ideals of Leftist literature, and the creation of a new style combined with audiovisual effects. The second section discusses the use of visual techniques of shooting and cutting to create dialogue among different people, objects, and events. Such writing aesthetic conveys the essential feelings for the land in order to highlight the motif of ”Food is life.” The third part explores how writing imitates various voices and sounds to reproduce historical events. These audio techniques include testimony, narration, dubbing and sound effects. Debates among different perspectives together contribute to the declaration of the core idea, ”Land is the root of agriculture.” This idea reflects how ridiculous agricultural policies in Taiwan are made in accordance with ideology of globalization. The conclusion highlights the power of awakening and action in this work, which triggers readers' search for a possibility that would better suit the survival of both human and land.起始頁-結束頁：147-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00064篇名：當代臺灣小說中的後現代美學與階級意識並列篇名：Postmodern Aesthetics and Class Consciousness in Contemporary Taiwan Fiction作者：林運鴻(Yun-Hung Lin)關鍵字：階級意識;虛假意識;馬克思主義;臺灣後現代小說;臺灣文學史;Class consciousness;False consciousness;Marxism;Taiwan postmodern fiction;Taiwanese Literary History期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文主要以1980年代末期、受到後現代美學思潮影響的當代臺灣小說為討論對象，思考透過文學文本所表達出的「階級意識」。本文首先討論的是對於資本主義體制的「誤識」，也就是在當代臺灣小說中，人們為何無法理解自己真正的階級利益、為何接受自身在資本主義生產關係中被統治的現狀。其次，透過當代臺灣小說中對於生活風格、消費主義的高度嚮往，我們也能觀察到，「後現代文類」有著強烈的階級性格，後現代美學常常首肯了中產階級對於物質財富的追求。第三，本文也試著分析臺灣後現代小說中的「愛情敘事」，該文類中對於浪漫愛情的追求，同時也負載了對於階級流動的樂觀嚮往，這也能夠解釋，為何「後現代小說」常常在認知到階級分化現象的同時，卻沒有發展出對此現象的批判。最後，我們要處理的是較宏觀的「歷史」問題。當代臺灣小說那種強調後設與解構的後現代美學，其實也質疑了社會主義思想所通向的解放政治，從而合法化了以進步與發展為名的資本主義歷史過程。整體而言，臺灣小說中的後現代美學，儘管敏銳地辨認出了臺灣社會的經濟性格與階級不平等，但是後現代文類對於臺灣社會的階級關係，仍持有某種保守的態度，其觀點是：一方面，結構面的不平等還是能夠透過個體努力來克服；另一方面，階級不平等則是歷史進步的必然產物。英文摘要：This article is a meditation on the ”class consciousness” as expressed in literary texts by examining the contemporary Taiwan fiction under the influence of postmodern aesthetic movement in the late 1980. First of all, I discuss the misrecognition of capitalist institutions, namely why people fail to truly understand their class interests, as well as why they tend to accept their own status quo of being governed in the production relations in capitalism. Next, through the intense longing for consumerist lifestyles revealed in contemporary Taiwan fiction, we can make the observation that the ”postmodern genre” not only has its strong classism but postmodern aesthetics often approves of the bourgeois pursuit of material comfort and wealth. Third, this article also seeks to analyze the narratives of romantic love in Taiwan postmodern fiction, in which the pursuit of romantic love reveals the optimistic longing for social mobility. This explains why postmodern fiction, while cognizant of class division, often fails to critique this phenomenon. Last but not least, the macro issue of history will be addressed. In contemporary Taiwan fiction, the very type of postmodern aesthetics that emphasizes self-reflexivity and deconstruction also questions the emancipatory politics toward which socialist thought opens, thereby legitimatizing the historical process of capitalism in the name of progress and development. Overall, while the postmodern aesthetics in Taiwan fiction accurately identifies the economic character and class inequality of Taiwanese society, the postmodern genre still holds a certain conservative view that on one hand, structural inequity can be overcome through individual effort and, one the other, class inequality is a natural consequence of historical progress.起始頁-結束頁：177-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00075篇名：導論：該禮讚或詛咒－《1949禮讚》的反思並列篇名：Introduction: Praise or Curse? Reflections on The Salute of 1949作者：楊儒賓(Rur-Bin Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：210-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00086篇名：漢華文化的探照燈－讀《1949禮讚》並列篇名：The Search-light of New Han Wah Culture: Reading The Salute of 1949作者：吳冠宏(Kuwn-Hung Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：212-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00097篇名：艱難兄弟自相親並列篇名：Natural Fraternity in the hard time作者：秦燕春(Yan-Chun Qin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：220-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00108篇名：對話楊儒賓：1949漢朝東流與第四類新詮釋學的提出並列篇名：Dialogue with YANG RUR-BIN: the Coming of 1949 Refugees to Taiwan and Proposal for the Fourth Class of the New Hermeneutics of Han Ideas作者：江燦騰(Tsan-Teng Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：226-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).00119篇名：《1949禮讚》中的「中華」禮讚並列篇名：Chinese Praise in The Salute of 1949作者：張崑將(Kun-Chiang Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：234-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).001210篇名：納中華入臺灣的1949創傷癥候，與發明新臺灣的可能：讀《1949禮讚》並列篇名：The Trauma Symptoms of accommodating Chinese Culture in Taiwan, and the Possibility of Creating ”The New Taiwan”: The Review of The Salute of 1949作者：顏訥(Na Yen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：242-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).001311篇名：南方勞工－不再「邊陲」：對Jane Hardy的回應並列篇名：Southern labour- ”Peripheral” no longer: A reply to Jane Hardy作者：John Smith;林封良(Feng-Liang Lin);周世瑀(Shih-Yu Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：252-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).001412篇名：另一個歐洲是可能的嗎？從2015希臘歐債危機檢視歐洲作為一個整體的困境並列篇名：Is another Europe possible? Exploring the plight of Europe whole and free from Greece's Debt Crisis of 2015作者：蕭伶<U+4F03>(Agnes Ling-Yu Hsiao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：268-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).001513篇名：脫歐狂想並列篇名：Brexit Fantasia作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：22期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：285-291資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201603_(22).001601篇名：The imperative of urban-rural rebalance concerning mosquito vectored disease threats in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣應平衡城鄉防疫醫療以因應蚊媒傳染病威脅作者：Justin Cheung期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：567-569資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050502篇名：「不拋下任何人」的公平：揭露健康不平等的資料策略及挑戰作者：廖漢騰期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：570-574資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050943篇名：嘉南地區細懸浮微粒濃度與氣象因子相關性分析：2006-2014並列篇名：Correlations between atmospheric fine particulate matter and meteorological variables in the Chia-Nan Area of Taiwan, 2006-2014作者：黃淑倫(Su-Lun Hwang);林裕清(Yu-Ching Lin);郭素娥(Su-Er Guo);紀妙青(Miao-Ching Chi);林玠模(Chieh -Mo Lin);周姜廷(Chiang-Ting Chou);黃友珊(Yu-Shan Huang)關鍵字：嘉南地區;細懸浮微粒;氣象因子;Chia-Nan Area;fine particulate matter;meteorological variables期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究探討嘉南地區大氣中細懸浮微粒(fine particulate matters, PM_(2.5))濃度與氣象因子相關性分析。方法：研究蒐集並分析2006-2014年行政院環保署空氣品質監測站PM_(2.5)與氣象資料(溫度、相對濕度、降雨量及風速)。研究區域為嘉南地區共計四縣市，分別為嘉義縣市(共3個測站：新港、朴子與嘉義)，台南縣市(共4個測站：新營、善化、安南與台南)。以四分位數(25%、50%及75%)、平均值、最小值及最大值進行PM_(2.5)及氣象資料描述性資料分析。進一步以皮爾森積差相關(Pearson product correlation)，探討PM_(2.5)濃度與氣象因子之相關性。結果：嘉南地區PM_(2.5)日平均38 μg/m^3，溫度日平均24℃，相對濕度日平均75%，累積降雨量日平均12.1 mm，風速日平均2.3 m/sec。嘉南地區PM_(2.5)濃度與溫度(r = -0.446)、相對濕度(r = -0.327)、累積降雨量(r = -0.279)與風速(r = -0.173)呈現統計上顯著負相關。此外，東北季風期間，風速與PM_(2.5)濃度之相關係數絕對值最大(r = -0.371)。非東北季風期間，溫度與PM_(2.5)濃度之相關係數絕對值最大(r = -0.525)。結論：嘉南地區PM_(2.5)濃度與氣象因子之風速與溫度相關性較高。英文摘要：Objectives: This article explors corrections between the fine particulate matter (PM_(2.5)) level and meteorological variables in the Chia-Nan area of Taiwan. Methods: Data regarding PM_(2.5) and meteorological variables (i.e., temperature, relative humidity, rainfall, and wind speed) between 2006 and 2014 were obtained from Environmental Protection Administration monitoring stations. The region studied is located in 4 southwestern districts (Chiayi City, Chiayi County, Tainan City, and Tainan County) and includes 3 ambient air quality-monitoring stations in Chiayi (Chiayi, Xingan, and Puzi stations) and 4 stations in Tainan (Xinying, Shanhua, Annan, and Tainan stations). Quartiles (25%, 50%, and 75%) and mean, minimum, and maximum levels were used to describe the characteristics of PM_(2.5) and meteorological variables, respectively. The relationship between PM_(2.5) and meteorological variables was estimated using the Pearson product correlation. Results: During the study period, the overall mean daily average level of PM_(2.5), temperature, relative humidity, cumulative level of rainfall, and wind speed were 38 μg/m^3, 24°C, 75%, 12.1 mm, and 2.3 m/s, respectively. In the Chia-Nan area of Taiwan, PM_(2.5) was negatively correlated with temperature (r = -0.446), relative humidity (r = -0.327), cumulative rainfall (r = -0.279), and wind speed (r = -0.173). During the Northeast Monsoon period, the absolute value of the correlation between wind speed and PM_(2.5) level was the largest (r = -0.371). However, during the Non–Northeast Monsoon period, the absolute value of the correlation between temperature and PM_(2.5) concentrations was the largest (r = -0.525). Conclusions: Wind speed and temperature have higher correlations with PM_(2.5) levels than do relative humidity and cumulative rainfall in the Chia- Nan area of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：575-586資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050664篇名：專責外傷制度成效之初探－以台南市某醫學中心為例並列篇名：Preliminary study of the effectiveness of trauma care system at a medical center in Tainan作者：王志榮(Chih-Jung Wang);顏淑婷(Shu-Ting Yen);黃詩芳(Shih-Fang Huang);沈延盛(Yan-Shen Shan);應純哲(Jeremy C. Ying)關鍵字：專責外傷制度;重大外傷;持續性品質改善;trauma care system;major trauma;continuous quality improvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：為了解專責外傷制度成立後，執行持續性品質改善計畫(Continuous quality improvement, CQI)對於外傷病人照護品質是否持續改善。方法：本研究以病歷回溯方式，利用外傷登錄資料庫分析個案醫院成立外傷科後所收治之病人共1,619人。將其分為成立初期(2011~2013，895人)及成立近期(2014~2015，724人)，利用獨立樣本t檢定及卡方檢定檢視系統反應時間：包含接受緊急動脈栓塞(Transcatheter Arterial Embolism, TAE)與緊急胸腹手術病人在急診停留時間及緊急胸腹手術病人在鍵入刀序後至手術室時間，另對重大外傷(Injury Severity Score, ISS≧16)病人預後：包含住院天數及死亡率等變項進行差異性分析。結果：ISS在成立近期有顯著增加，由15.09增加到18.62；接受TAE病人於急診停留時間由143.52分鐘減少為117.94分鐘；另外在嚴重外傷(ISS=16~24)病人的住院天數由成立初期21.13天減少為成立近期16.27天，死亡率亦由5.34%降為1.03%，在統計上皆呈現顯著性差異。結論：專責外傷制度及持續性外傷品質改善計畫能有效提升急診處理病人的效率，且在嚴重外傷(ISS=16~24)族群可以減少住院天數及死亡率。英文摘要：Objectives: To evaluate the quality of care for trauma patients following the implementation of continuous quality improvement (CQI) in a trauma care system. Methods: This was a retrospective chart review study using the trauma registry database of a medical center in Tainan from 2011 to 2015. The patients were classified into two groups: the years 2011~2013 (early period, N=895) and 2014~2015 (late period, N=724). Chi-square and t-test analyses were used to examine the indicators: duration of stay in the emergency room (ER) for emergency transcatheter arterial embolism (TAE)/torso surgeries, waiting time after scheduled for torso surgery, and length of stay (LOS)/mortality rate of patients with an Injury Severity Score (ISS) greater than 15. Results: The average ISS of the late period group was significantly higher (18.62 vs. 15.09) and the duration of stay in the ER for emergency TAE was significantly lower (117.94 vs. 143.52) than those of the earlier period group. In addition, the LOS declined significantly (16.27 vs. 21.13), and the mortality rate was significantly reduced (1.03% vs. 5.34%) among patients with an ISS of 16~24. Conclusions: CQI in a trauma care system was effective in the ER management of trauma with significant reductions in LOS and mortality rate in patients with an ISS of 16~24.起始頁-結束頁：587-594資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050805篇名：風險校正模式於健保論人計酬制度之應用：以高屏家醫群為例並列篇名：The application of risk adjustment models to predict health expenditures under the capitation payment system in family medicine practice groups in the Kaoping Area作者：邱姵穎(Pei-Yin Chiu);張清雲(Ching-Jun Chang);蔡麗伶(Lih-Ling Tsai);張玉蓉(Yu-Jung Chang);謝慧敏(Hui-Min Hsieh)關鍵字：論人計酬支付制度;社區醫療群模式;風險校正計價模式;家庭醫師整合性照護計畫;capitation payment system;community care medical group model;risk-adjusted prediction model;primary care physician integrated care plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究結合現行的家庭醫師整合性照護計畫與論人計酬支付模式，分析高屏地區鄉村型與都市型家醫群診所就醫病患樣本，探討影響醫療費用之風險校正因子，並建構適合預測醫療費用模式。方法：本研究資料來源主要為2012-2013年全民健保申報資料，和高屏地區鄉村與都市二個區域有參加「家庭醫師整合性照護計畫」診所就診的病人資料。先隨機抽樣一個地區家醫群診所就醫病患病人作為訓練樣本，建立預測醫療費用的風險校正模型，並與其他兩組隨機抽樣家醫群診所樣本進行模型組內和組間的交叉驗證，以評估及確認風險調整模型之預測能力。結果：鄉村型與都會型家醫群驗證樣本人口學特性或醫療利用特質差異影響實際醫療資源利用。鄉村型病人六十歲以上比例和疾病嚴重度相對都會型家醫群樣本較高，反應在2013年實際醫療總費用分別為29,658點和25,087點。另外，風險校正費用預測模型隨著加入變項數而影響醫療費用的預測力，校正後預測力R^2從6.19%增加到40.20%。結論：當進行風險計價模型時，應考量適切的風險因子和合理的成長率，以增加風險計價的準確度和推估的敏感度，並且視地區費用成長特性和個別族群病人風險特質，適切地反應其醫療資源耗用狀況，以確保醫療照護就醫公平性及醫療資源有效分配與利用。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to investigate the risk factors associated with patients' health expenditures and to apply risk-adjusted medical expenditure prediction models using the primary care physician integrated care plan and the capitation payment model. Methods: Data were drawn from the 2012-2013 national health insurance (NHI) claims data and the primary care physician integrated care plan data for two primary care groups (one in a rural and the other in an urban area of the Kaoping area in southern Taiwan). We randomly selected one group of patients from one primary care group as a training set to conduct the risk-adjusted models, and compared two random samples from rural and urban primary care groups to assess the within and between group validity of the prediction models. Results: This study supported an association between patients' demographic or comorbid characteristics and health expenditures in the rural and urban primary care patient groups. Patients in the rural area were age sixty or older and their health expenditures in 2013 were greater than those in the urban group (NTD 29,658 vs. 25,087). In addition, the model's goodness-of-fit measured as adjusted R^2 increased from 6.19% to 40.20% when more risk factors were added to the risk-adjusted health expenditure models. Conclusions: When risk-adjusted models to predict medical costs are used, appropriate risk factors and reasonable growth rates need to be considered in order to increase the accuracy and sensitivity of the prediction of medical costs. Moreover, geographic variability also needs to be considered in order to reflect the consumption of medical resources in different areas and to ensure the horizontal equity and efficient allocation of medical resources across rural and urban areas.起始頁-結束頁：595-608資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050446篇名：評論：風險校正模式於健保論人計酬制度之應用：以高屏家醫群為例作者：郭年真期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：609-610資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201635105044017篇名：推估高風險手術集中化政策對照護結果影響之成效探討－以心血管處置為例並列篇名：The implementation of centralization for high-risk surgery- estimating potentially avoidable outcomes of cardiac procedures作者：陳靖怡(Ching-Yi Chen);鍾國彪(Kuo-Piao Chung);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)關鍵字：集中化政策;高風險處置;可避免不良照護結果發生人數;病人就醫可近性;醫療收入;centralization;high-risk surgery;potentially avoidable outcome;accessibility to care;medical revenue期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：探討若台灣針對經皮冠狀動脈氣球擴張術(PTCA)及冠狀動脈繞道手術(CABG)實施集中化政策，(1)對於病患處置後30日不良照護結果、(2)就醫可近性；以及(3)低服務量醫院之住院醫療收入之影響。方法：本研究對象為2010至2012年各年度第一次PTCA以及CABG之病患，以多階層羅吉斯迴歸以及G-Computation來估計可避免不良照護結果之事件發生人數，並且預測在集中化後病患需額外跨區就醫之人數。最後，瞭解醫院執行心臟處置之醫療收入占當年度住院醫療收入之比例來推測低服務量醫院在住院醫療收入的影響程度。結果：在2010年至2012年間，共有29,689人至低服務量醫院接受PTCA及4,150人接受CABG。集中化後，預估PTCA及CABG可避免死亡人數各有442人及127人，並且需額外跨區就醫的比例分別約為12%及18%。此外在低服務量醫院住院醫療收入影響上，平均各醫院每年可能將損失2%之CABG住院醫療收入；而PTCA則約損失6%。結論：集中化政策對於整體照護結果可以帶來正向影響，並對大部分病患就醫可近性及低服務量醫院財務的影響有限。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to estimate how many adverse outcomes could potentially be avoided in Taiwan if a centralization policy were implemented for Percutaneous Transluminal Coronary Angioplasty (PTCA) and/or Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG). We further examined how such a policy might affect accessibility to care as well as the potential for financial losses in low-volume hospitals. Methods: The study population included 9530 patients who underwent PTCA or CABG for the first time between 2010 and 2012. We used multilevel logistic regression and G-computation to estimate the number of potentially avoidable adverse outcomes, and we predicted how many patients would have to travel farther to access medical care as a result of a centralization policy. Finally, we predicted the impact that centralization of surgery would have on inpatient revenue in low-volume hospitals by calculating the ratio of revenue from inpatient cardiac procedures to total hospital inpatient revenue. Results: We found that 4,150 of the 9,530 patients who underwent CABG were admitted to low-volume hospitals. We estimated that centralization of PTCA and CABG could reduce the number of deaths by 442 and 127, respectively, and 12% of the patients who underwent PTCA and 18% of patients who underwent CABG would have to travel farther to access medical care. We determined that low-volume hospitals incurred financial losses of approximately 6% and 2%, respectively, by referring PTCA and CABG patients to higher-volume surgical centers. Conclusions: Centralization policies could have a positive impact on healthcare outcomes, only a minor impact on accessibility to care for patients, and minor financial consequences for low-volume hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：611-630資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050718篇名：國軍醫院免費戒菸門診成效之探討並列篇名：The effectiveness of a free smoking cessation clinic for military personnel作者：邱于容(Yu-Lung Chiu);陳劭淇(Shao-Chi Chen);江香慧(Shiang-Huei Jiang);黃姝嘉(Shu-Jia Huang);賴錦皇(Ching-Huang Lai);李善茹(Shan-Ru Li);曾雅梅(Ya-Mei Tzeng);林富宮(Fu-Gong Lin);高森永(Senyong Kao)關鍵字：戒菸門診;戒菸;經濟誘因;軍人;smoking cessation clinic;smoking cessation;financial incentives;military personnel期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：因國軍人員吸菸盛行率高於一般成年男性，國防部提供補助以增加戒菸門診的利用。本研究旨在比較軍人使用免費戒菸門診與自行戒菸者之戒菸成效，並找出影響戒菸成功的因素。方法：採觀察性研究，研究對象為吸菸軍人且有戒菸意願者，再依據研究對象的意願分為2組，免費戒菸門診組有222人，自行戒菸組405人。免費戒菸門診組會接受8週的醫師諮詢及藥物治療，而自行戒菸組不接受任何協助。研究工具為自擬結構式問卷，以電話方式追蹤一個月及三個月點戒菸率及連續戒菸率。結果：免費戒菸門診組點戒菸率顯著高於自行戒菸組(一個月23.9% vs. 11.6%, p ＜ 0.001；三個月27.9% vs. 5.7%, p ＜ 0.001)。免費戒菸門診組連續戒菸率顯著高於自行戒菸組(一個月20.3% vs. 5.9%, p ＜ 0.001；三個月27.0% vs. 5.7%, p ＜ 0.001)。三個月戒菸成效影響因素為組別(免費戒菸門診組 vs. 自行戒菸組)、教育程度(大學以上 vs. 高中職)、性別(女 vs. 男)、每月收入(＞ 5萬vs. ＜ 3萬)、工作性質(非領導職 vs. 領導職)及自覺戒菸成功的信心。結論：軍人使用免費戒菸門診者的戒菸成效高於自行戒菸者，教育程度、性別、每月收入、工作性質及自覺戒菸成功的信心為影響短期戒菸成效的因素，但本研究無法排除使用藥物之影響。英文摘要：Objectives: The prevalence of smoking by military personnel is higher than that of the general adult male population. The Ministry of National Defense provides a fee to increase the utilization of smoking cessation clinics. The purpose of the study was to compare the effectiveness of a free smoking cessation clinic and a self-help approach in order to determine the factors which influenced successful quitting by military personnel. Methods: This was an observational study in which participants who intended to quit smoking were assigned to two groups (free smoking cessation clinics and self-help) according to their choice. There were 222 and 405 participants in the free smoking cessation clinics and self-help groups, respectively. The free smoking cessation clinics group received counseling from a physician and 8 weeks of pharmacotherapy for smoking cessation. No support for smoking cessation was provided to the self-help group. Abstinence over the previous 7 days and sustained abstinence were evaluated by telephone using a self-administrated questionnaire 1 and 3 months after the first visit. Results: The 7-day point prevalence cessation rates at 1 month (23.9% vs. 11.6%) and at 3 months (27.9% vs. 5.7%) were higher in the free smoking cessation clinics than in the self-help group. The sustained abstinence rate at 1 month (20.3% vs. 5.9%) and at 3 months (27.0% vs. 5.7%) was higher in the free smoking cessation clinics than in the self-help group. Smokers who attended the free smoking cessation clinics and were more successful in sustained abstinence at 3 months, were characterized by higher education level, female gender, higher monthly income, supervisory position, and more confidence in quitting. Conclusions: Smokers who attended a free smoking cessation clinic had higher abstinence rates than those in a self-help group. Education level, gender, monthly income, job category and confidence in quitting smoking were important factors in successfully quitting; however, the influence of pharmacotherapy could not be ruled out.起始頁-結束頁：631-641資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050649篇名：台北市某行政區老人健康促進活動參與及其相關因素探討並列篇名：Participation in health promotion activities and related factors among the elderly in a selected district in Taipei City, Taiwan作者：許怡平(I-Ping Hsu);李雅欣(Ya-Hsin Lee);胡益進(Yih-Jin Hu);莊莉菁(Li-Ching Chuang);陳政友(Cheng-Yu Chen)關鍵字：老人健康促進活動參與;動機因素;阻礙因素;participation in health promotion activities;motivators;barriers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：台灣人口老化快速，老人健康促進活動在各地持續推展，本研究探討台北市某行政區老人參與健康服務中心辦理之健康促進活動情形及其動機因素、阻礙因素。方法：本研究採橫斷式問卷調查法。研究對象為設籍且居住於台北市某行政區年滿65歲(含)以上之老人，採分層隨機抽樣方式，依年齡分層為65-74歲、75-84歲及85歲以上，有效樣本共計375位。以結構式問卷進行相關資料收集，問卷內容包括個人基本變項及個人特質、健康促進活動參與動機因素及阻礙因素。結果：約有35.5%老人曾經參與健康服務中心辦理之健康促進活動；參與的活動類型以健康篩檢為最多。以多變項邏輯斯迴歸分析顯示：女性、是否擔任志工、外在誘因取向、資訊障礙、個人障礙為影響老人健康促進參與之統計顯著因素。結論：規劃老人健康促進活動時需善用資訊傳播的途徑，考量老人的體力、視力、聽力及識字程度，並鼓勵老人擔任志工。建議政府將身體活動列為重點，整合社區資源並規劃無障礙設施及交通系統，以提高老人參與之意願，維持其健康並預防及延緩失能。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated participation in health promotion activities, related motivators and barriers among the elderly in a selected district in Taipei City, Taiwan. Methods: The cross-sectional study included 375 persons over the age of 65 years. A stratified random sampling method was used, and the subjects were divided into three age groups: 65 to 74 years of age, 75 to 84 years of age, and 85 years of age and older. The data was collected by personal interviews to complete the structured questionnaires including demographics, motivators to participation in health promotion activity scale and barriers to participation in health promotion activity scale. Results: The participation rate of the health promotion activities in this study was 35.5%. The most popular activity was health screenings. Multivariable logistic regression analyses indicated that statistically significant factors influencing participation included female gender, voluntary participation, fewer barriers to information about the activity, lower degrees of individual disability, and higher external incentives for participation. Conclusions: When one is planning health promotion activities in the elderly, the channels for disseminating information should be considered. The physical, visual, hearing and literacy levels of the elderly should be taken into account, and they should be encouraged to become volunteers. We suggest that the Government focus on physical activity for the elderly, integrate community resources, and plan barrier-free facilities and transportation systems to enhance their willingness to participate in health promotion activities in order to maintain their health and prevent or delay disability.起始頁-結束頁：642-657資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510505110篇名：家庭社經對台灣北部嬰幼兒出生至二歲飲食攝取及生長發展之影響並列篇名：An examination of the effect of family socioeconomic status on dietary intakes and growth development from birth to two years of age in northern Taiwan作者：盧立卿(Li-Ching Lyu);朱卉安(Huei-An Jhu);賴又禎(Yu-Chen Lai)關鍵字：家庭社經背景;生長發展;營養素攝取;哺餵方式;family socioeconomic status;growth development;nutrient intakes;feeding patterns期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：長期追蹤世代研究，探討不同家庭社經背景之嬰幼兒營養素攝取及哺餵方式與生長發展情形。方法：依家庭社經背景分成三組，並使用24小時飲食回憶評估，分析405名出生至2歲嬰幼兒其營養素攝取及哺餵方式。結果：不同家庭社經背景分組，出生至2歲的嬰幼兒體型在三組間無顯著差異。2歲時的營養素攝取情況，三組間也無顯著差異。嬰幼兒哺餵方式，雖然在嬰幼兒第6個月時，配方奶哺餵率以高社經組最低(42%, p=0.03)，母乳哺餵率以高社經組最高(33%, p=0.06)，但2歲時不同的哺餵方式其三組間無達顯著差異。此外母乳哺餵時間、副食品開始添加之月齡，隨著社經地位增高而增加，其中高社經組母乳哺餵時間最高(約6個月)；配方奶哺餵時間則是相反。完全哺餵母乳月數與副食品開始添加月齡呈顯著正相關，與副食品開始添加月齡呈顯著負相關。結論：不同社經背景之家庭，其哺餵狀況雖然不盡相同，但在2歲時的營養素攝取無顯著的差異，並且不會造成嬰幼兒營養攝取及生長上的顯著差異。英文摘要：Objectives: We examined the effect of family socioeconomic status on nutrient intakes, feeding patterns, and the growth development of infants. Methods: Participants were divided into three groups according to the family socioeconomic status: low socioeconomic status, middle socioeconomic status, and high socioeconomic status. We analyzed the dietary intake by 24- hour recall by parents of 405 healthy infants from birth to two years of age. Results: Growth development (weight, length and head circumference) of infants in the three groups were not significantly different from age 0 to 2. The nutrient intakes of infants in the three groups were not significantly different at age 2. The proportion of formula feeding in the high socioeconomic group was significantly lowest (42%, p=0.03) at the 6th month, and the proportion of breastfeeding in the high socioeconomic group was highest (33%, p=0.06). The feeding methods for infants in the three groups were not significantly different at age 2. Family socioeconomic status was positively associated with the duration of breastfeeding and the month in which infants started to consume complementary food. The duration of exclusive breastfeeding in the high socioeconomic group was significantly highest (about 6 months). On the other hand, family socioeconomic status was negatively associated with the month in which infants started to consume complementary food. Conclusions: The family socioeconomic status of infants may affect the feeding patterns from birth to two years of age, but nutrient intakes and growth development at age 2 did not show significant differences.起始頁-結束頁：658-670資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510506911篇名：地理資訊系統應用於毒品查獲空間分布：縣市毒品查獲地點的分析並列篇名：Application of geographic information systems to the spatial distribution of illicit drug use: an analysis of the location of illicit drug seizures in a city作者：章可藍(Ko-Lan Chang);蔡煜書(Yu-Shu Tsai);詹大千(Ta-Chien Chan);束連文(Lien-Wen Su);陳娟瑜(Chuan-Yu Chen);顏正芳(Cheng-Fang Yen);余沛蓁(Pei-Jane Yu);徐睿(Jui Hsu);蔡文瑛(Wen-Ing Tsay);陳為堅(Wei J. Chen)關鍵字：地理資訊;非法藥物;毒品;空間分布型態;熱點分析;geographic information;illicit drug;narcotics;spatial pattern;hot spot analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷6期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究針對三、四級毒品查獲地點，以地理資訊系統探討毒品查獲與地域環境的關係。方法：以某縣巿A從2011至2015五年間毒品查獲案件地點，使用ArcGIS進行空間分析。先進行全域分析，再將查獲率高低以視覺化圖形呈現。然後進行區域分析，包括二種熱點分析(Getis-Ord Gi*與核密度函數)。最後畫出毒品查獲數之年變動率圖。結果：5年間的平均最近鄰指數R皆遠小於1，顯示毒品查獲地點有空間聚集性。區域分布圖從只有少數高查獲率區，逐步蔓延成多區皆屬高查獲率區。南邊行政區域之查獲率屬中高等級者，其Getis-Ord Gi*的檢定也呈顯著而可判為熱區。套疊實際街道圖，用GeoPDF的格式輸出，可研判查獲地點與街道特性之相關性。核密度分布圖也顯示核密度值較高的點皆位於西南邊與鄰近幾區內。查獲數之年變動率與查獲率分年曲線圖，呈現各區毒品查獲之變動情勢不同。結論：透過地理資訊系統的視覺化歸納，配合熱點分析及風險圖像，有助於辨識出三、四級毒品的聚集點特徵，進而落實毒品防制的在地化策略。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the relationship between the use of Category Three or Four narcotics (illicit drugs) and geographical characteristics of the locations of seizures using the Geography Information System (GIS). Methods: Using the seizure data from a city over five years (2011-2015), we conducted a series of spatial analyses using ArcGIS software. We started with global analysis, and determined the seizure rate in different districts using visualized figures. Local analysis was then performed using two kinds of hot-spot analyses: Getis-Ord Gi* and kernel density analysis. Finally, the change rates in the number of seizures over the years for individual district were determined. Results: Estimates of the average number of nearest neighbors showed that the ratio Rs were all less than 1 for the five year period, indicating a strong spatial aggregation of the seizure of illicit drugs. The district-specific seizure rate showed that ”high-rate areas” started with a few and then spread to others. Local analyses confirmed that some southwest districts could be designated as hot spots since their Getis-Ord Gi* reached statistical significance. Combining the seizure locations with street maps in Geospatial PDF helped identify street characteristics associated with the use of illicit drugs. The results of kernel density analysis also indicated that the spots with the highest densities were located within the southwest districts and their neighbors. In addition, the rates of change in the number of seizures by year differed in individual districts. Conclusions: GIS-based visual displays with hot-spot analysis provided clues to the identification of geographic characteristics associated with the seizure of illicit drugs. These may enhance location-tailored strategies to prevent the use of illicit drugs.起始頁-結束頁：671-684資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510503612篇名：醫師適用勞動基準法的爭議－以會計師、律師經驗為鏡並列篇名：Dispute about physicians being covered by the Labor Standards Act - the experience of accountants and lawyers作者：張濱璿(Brian Pin-Hsuan Chang);張耀懋(Yao-Mao Chang)關鍵字：勞基法;醫師工時;醫師勞動權益;醫師過勞;Labor Standards Act;working hours of physicians;labor rights of physicians;physician overworking期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：醫師工作過勞已是社會議題，醫師勞動權益的保障，已不能忽視。「勞動基準法」所定的規範，是勞動權益的最低標準，受僱醫師希望能獲得渴望已久的保障。其他行業適用勞基法過程上也面臨類似問題。但從社會公義角度，醫師納入勞基法究竟是對民眾醫療權益的保障或是減損？當其他排班的醫療人員均納入勞基法保障，以及當類似具有長時間工作性質的會計師、律師陸續納入勞基法保障後，醫師尚未納入的正當性為何？到底醫師適用勞基法可能遇到的問題以及解決的方法是什麼？本文將從勞動基準法上規範的勞動權益保障分析出發，並藉由會計師、律師適用的進程，觀察此二自由職業的適用經驗，進一步提出醫師適用勞基法可能的方式以及需要的配套措施，以提供未來政策規劃之參考。英文摘要：Overwork has caused strokes or death for many physicians, and is currently a widespread social controversy. The protection of working rights of physicians is an issue that cannot be neglected. The Labor Standards Act (the Act) was enacted to provide minimum standards for working conditions. Employed physicians hope to get this long-awaited protection. Problems occurred when the Act was applied to to other businesses. From the perspective of social justice, however, will having physicians covered by the Act protect public health and prevent impairment? Other medical staff are covered by the the Act, as are accountants and lawyers who have similar long working hours, so should physicians not also be covered by the Act? In the end, what problems and their solutions may we encounter when physicians are included under the Act? This article will analyze the issue in terms of the protection of labor rights by the Act, and from the observation of the application process to accountants and lawyers; finally, we propose a way for physicians to be covered by the Act along with necessary supporting measures.起始頁-結束頁：459-476資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510505513篇名：台灣死亡率與平均餘命變動速率關係趨勢－生命表熵的應用並列篇名：Trends in the relationship between the proportional rate of change in force of mortality and life expectancy: an application of life-table entropy作者：林正祥(Cheng-Hsiang Lin);謝尚儒(Shang-Ju Hsieh)關鍵字：死亡率;平均餘命;生命表熵;惡性腫瘤熵;mortality rate;life expectancy;life table entropy;cancer entropy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：熵在熱力學的領域中，指的是失去的熱量或無法利用的能量的量測，應用於人口學中，其可視為生命表中損失之人年數相對於平均餘命之比率，若喪失的人年數的比率(熵)愈小，則人們所能生存的平均餘命(功)就會愈大，反之則會愈小。本文旨在探討出生及中、老年時期生命表熵及惡性腫瘤熵之變化趨勢。方法：闡述說明生命表中平均餘命，死亡率變化速率與熵的關係及其特性，並利用台灣生命表相關資料探討生命表熵及疾病熵(惡性腫瘤)變化趨勢。結果：研究結果顯示1952年至2014年生命表熵H_0(0歲熵)男、女性皆呈平穩曲線下降，H_(40)(40歲熵)男、女性則有震盪起伏現象，H_(65)(65歲熵)是震盪起伏上升，幅度較H_(40)為大；HE係指因死亡率減少所能增加的平均餘命，其變動趨勢顯示HE_0呈現下降趨勢，而在HE_(40)與HE_(65)則是上升的；1975年至2014年惡性腫瘤熵，男、女性均呈上升趨勢，其對平均餘命的影響亦然。以2014年平均餘命推算，若當年所有死亡率悉數去除(免死一次)，則男、女性平均壽命分別為89.8年及94.92年。結論：本研究初步檢視生命表中熵的變動趨勢，發現中、老年人熵值高(特別是中年人)，意謂較少的系統能量可以轉化為功(存活的生命年數)，因此延遲老化應是未來努力的目標；惡性腫瘤熵男、女均呈上升趨勢，且男性高於女性。另外，2014年資料顯示，惡性腫瘤熵影響中年時期的減損甚鉅，顯然中年時期的預防應重於一切，至於其對老年男、女性平均餘命的影響分別為18%及10.7%，亦不容小覷。延遲衰老及癌症預防應列為政府健康促進政策要務。英文摘要：Objectives: In thermodynamics, entropy is heat loss or lack of availability of thermal energy needed for activity within a given operating system. It is viewed as the percentage of the average years of future lost by the observed deaths to the life expectancy in Demograph. If loss of person-years is less, then people will survive longer, and vice versa. This study aimed to evaluate the long-term trends in entropy and cancer entropy at birth, middle age and advanced age in Taiwan. Methods: Interpret how the life table entropy derived from the relationship between the proportional rate of progress in force of mortality and life expectancy. The Taiwan life table and cancer data set was used to explore long-term trends in entropy and cancer entropy based on number of deaths recorded at birth, middle age and older age (age 65 years and older). Results: From 1952 to 2014, trends in birth entropy for males and females declined steadily; at middle age, trends in entropy for males and females fluctuated up and down; trends in entropy among older adults was similar to middle age fluctuated up and down but with a wider margin. Mortality rates are declining in all age groups, while life expectancy is increasing for both sexes. From 1975 to 2014, trends in cancer entropy and life expectancy affected by cancer were increasing for both sexes. In 2014, life expectancy was estimated to be 89.8 and 94.92 years at birth for males and females, respectively, when the mortality rate is reduced completely (saved from death once) for the whole first year. Conclusions: This study found a high percentage of entropy in middle aged and older adults, showing that loss of person years is higher for middle-aged men and women especially. Trends in cancer entropy are rising and are higher among males than females. In 2014, cancer entropy was the major effect on middle age life expectancy. However, the effects of cancer on life expectancy among older adults (18% for males, 10.7% for females) should still not be overlooked. Results suggest that reducing senescence and cancer prevention should be the main purpose of long-term health promotion by the government in the future.起始頁-結束頁：477-486資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510504014篇名：台灣膳食暴露評估模型之電腦系統開發與應用：以有機磷農藥殘留為例並列篇名：Developments and applications of a computerized system for Taiwan diet exposure assessment model: demonstrated for organophosphate pesticides residues in food matrices作者：蔡經綸(Ching-Lun Tsai);余雅芳(Ya-Fang Yu);陳建志(Chien-Chih Chen);周詠勝(Yung-Sheng Chou);倪詩蓓(Shih-Pei Ni);張嘉津(Chia-Chin Chang);江舟峰(Chow-Feng Chiang)關鍵字：膳食暴露評估;有機磷農藥;健康風險;毒理資料;暴露情境;dietary exposure assessment;organophosphate;health risk;toxicology;exposure scenario期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：開發台灣膳食暴露評估模型，評估有機磷農藥殘留之健康風險。方法：查詢56項有機磷毒理資料，收集2014年總膳食調查及後市監測殘留資料1,235筆，聚類台灣飲食回憶資料401,551筆。採用SQL (structural query language)語言，建立毒理、濃度及攝食量三種關聯式資料庫。攝食量估算採用OIM (observed individual mean)演算法，操作介面採用GUI (graphical userinterface)技術，根據標的器官系統估算累積風險。結果：開發四種GUI雲端模組，毒理模組查詢各類危害物之毒理資料；濃度模組比較各類食品之後市監測與膳食調查濃度；攝食量及風險模組可根據族群及食品類別，估算攝食量及健康風險之各項統計值。以一般族群全部個體平均攝食為指標，顯示有機磷之累積風險為8.94%，其中普硫松之貢獻達73%，含普硫松之前三高風險食品為：芥菜類、芭樂類及莧菜類。結論：平均而言，台灣一般族群有機磷殘留之膳食暴露無潛在風險(＜10%)，建議後續開發高端風險演算模組之第二層級評估。英文摘要：Objectives: To develop a computerized system for assessing dietary exposure to residual organophosphate pesticides and to evaluate the associated potential health risk. Methods: We inquired toxicological parameters of 56 organophosphate pesticides regulated by Taiwan Food and Drug Administration, collected residue data of 1,235 samples analyzed in the total diet study and post-market surveillance of 2014, and aggregated 401,551 records obtained from the Nutritional and Health Survey. Using structural query language (SQL), we developed 3 relational databases including toxicology (TOX), residual concentration (CON), and core food consumption rate (CCR). The CCR was calculated using observed individual mean (OIM) algorithm. The user interface adopted the graphical user interface (GUI) technique. The cumulative risks were estimated by target organ systems. Results: Four internet GUI modules were developed, including TOX inquired toxicological data by exposure routes and target organ systems; CON compared residual concentrations monitored in post-market surveillance and total diet study; CCR and RSK modules calculated intake rates and risk with acceptable daily intake (ADI) by exposure group and food category. Using whole group average consumption rates of organophosphates in general population as the risk index, the cumulative %ADI was 8.94%, with 73% contributed by prothiofos, in which the food items with the highest %ADI were leaf mustard, guava, and amaranth. Conclusions: On average, the risk of exposing to dietary organophosphate residues in general population is ＜10%. An upper bound estimate module should be developed as the 2nd tier assessment.起始頁-結束頁：487-497資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510502415篇名：穀類研磨場所空氣細菌及真菌之分布特性並列篇名：Characteristics of the distribution of airborne bacteria and fungi in grain processing plants作者：徐櫻芳(Ying-Fang Hsu);楊心豪(Shin-Hao Yang);黃筱茜(Hsiao-Chien Huang);黃小林(Hsiao-Lin Huang);莊啟佑(Chi-Yu Chuang);洪粕宸(Po-Chen Hung)關鍵字：穀類研磨;職業衛生;生物氣膠;菌種;grain grinding;occupational hygiene;bioaerosol;genera期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：針對穀類研磨場所空氣中之細菌及真菌等微生物進行調查，以瞭解其濃度與菌種等特性，並且評估製程與環境對其所產生之影響。方法：3家穀類研磨依照製程劃分為原料存放區、前置作業區、加工調理區及包裝區，於各區實施空氣中細菌與真菌每日三次採樣及環境條件量測與人員計數，而後進行濃度量測與菌種鑑定。結果：在3家穀類研磨作業場所中，場1細菌平均濃度為15,879 ± 6,515 CFU/m^3；場2為21,243 ± 5,258 CFU/m^3；場3為3,672±1,741CFU/m^3。場1真菌平均濃度為8,801 ± 1,566 CFU/m^3；場2為15,909±6,406 CFU/m^3；場3為3,954±1,903 CFU/m^3。3家穀類研磨場之空氣中真菌與細菌濃度場內/場外比例則介於5-10倍之間，顯示場內確有污染來源貢獻，惟三階段採樣時段與不同製程之細菌與真菌濃度，均未有觀察到統計顯著差異。整合3場細菌中優勢菌種則發現，研磨場1以Pseudoxanthomonas (61.50%)與Brevibacterium (17.74%)；研磨場2之Thermomonas (45.24%)與Micrococcus (26.81%)；場3則以Pseudoxanthomonas (57.59%)與Micrococcus (23.19%)等細菌菌種佔大多數。另真菌菌種於3間穀類研磨作業場均以Aspergillus真菌屬佔大多數。結論：穀類研磨場所空氣中之細菌與真菌濃度顯著高於場外，建議可加強通風換氣與個人防護等職業衛生措施，以確保作業人員健康。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the characteristics of the distribution of airborne microbes in three grain processing plants. Methods: Airborne bacteria and fungi were collected three times each day in four processing areas and outdoor locations at each plant during the study period. Results: In the three grain processing plants, the average bacterial concentrations were 15,879 ± 6,515 CFU/m^3, 21,243 ± 5,258 CFU/m^3 and 3,672 ± 1,741 CFU/m^3, respectively. The average fungal concentrations were 8,801 ± 1,566 CFU/m^3, 15,909 ± 6,406 CFU/m^3 and 3,954 ± 1,903 CFU/m^3, respectively. The ratio of indoor/outdoor microbial concentration was 5-10. In grain processing plant Number1, Pseudoxanthomonas (61.50%) and Brevibacterium (17.74%) were the predominant airborne bacteria. Thermomonas (45.24%) and Micrococcus (26.81%) and Pseudoxanthomonas (57.59%) and Micrococcus (23.19%) were the predominant bacteria in plants Number 2. and 3, respectively. Aspergillus (39.47%~79.72%) was the sole dominant airborne fungus found in all three plants. Conclusions: Grain processing plants may have high concentrations of airborne microbes inside them. Improvements in the rate of ventilation and local exhaust equipment should be considered in order to control biological contamination. We also suggest that workers should wear personal protective equipment to ensure occupational health.起始頁-結束頁：498-510資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510504716篇名：從單雙環學習模式看醫療團隊執行新實務的學習成效並列篇名：Investigating the learning performance of teams adopting a new medical practice by the Single-Loop and Double-Loop Learning Models作者：黃經洲(Jin-Jun Huang)關鍵字：學習曲線;新實務;單雙環學習模式;學習成效;learning curves;new practice;Single-Loop and Double-Loop Learning Models;learning performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：健康—照護產業近年來的發展已由醫護個人經驗或獨特秘技主導的局面轉向依靠臨床驗證有效而公開發表的最佳實務。此一趨勢導致醫院必須不斷學習新實務，方能避免落後他院，進而提升醫療水準。儘管醫學文獻對於最佳實務的規範嚴謹清楚，但是醫院導入新實務後，在結果面上仍會發生醫療品質不佳的問題。對此關鍵議題，本文主張雙環學習模式有助新實務學習成效的提升。方法：本文選取兩個分屬不同醫院的同質開刀團隊，執行相同新實務，作為研究對象。以開刀團隊的學習曲線，作為衡量學習成效的指標。結果：透過對兩開刀團隊成員問卷施測及統計分析，發現兩團隊在使用單、雙環學習模式的程度上存在顯著差異，影響開刀團隊執行新實務的學習成效。結論：此研究結果顯示團隊行動效能的提升確實可透過雙環學習模式來達成，且其提升效果遠勝於單環學習模式。在實務面，建議醫院經營者不應只倚賴醫學文獻的管理和專業實務者的知識，可考慮營造有利雙環學習模式運作的情境，才是提升醫療品質理想的作法。英文摘要：Objectives: The health-care industry has recently been transformed from one emphasizing medical practitioners' personal experiences or unique skills into one that depends on new medical practices that are evidence-based. This trend has resulted in hospital staffs continuously learning and implementing new medical practices to improve the quality of health-care. In spite of the fact that the medical literature has provided clear standards for best practices, when new medical practices have been introduced in hospitals, the quality of treatment results has often been poor. The aim of this study was to determine if double-loop learning models could effectively decrease the number of problems with poor quality treatment. Methods: As subjects, the study selected two homogeneous operation teams which were required to implement new medical practices in different hospitals. Learning curves served as indicators of performance in implementing the new medical practices. Results: Based on the statistical analysis of questionnaire completed by members of the two teams, a significant difference was found between single-loop and double-loop learning models. Conclusions: In order to improve the quality of care, hospital managers should introduce double-loop learning models to stimulate interaction among team members rather than relying on documentary files and individual knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：511-523資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510500217篇名：遠距健康照護對可避免住院與醫療利用之影響並列篇名：The effect of tele-healthcare intervention on preventable hospitalizations and healthcare utilization in Taiwan作者：陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);謝輝龍(Hui-Lung Hsieh);蔡味娟(Wei-Chuan Tsai);莊碧焜(Bi-Kun Chuang);林玉惠(Yu-Hui Lin)關鍵字：遠距健康照護;可避免住院;差異中取差異;傾向分數配對;tel-healthcare;preventable hospitalizations;difference-in-differences;propensity score matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討遠距健康照護能否減少可避免住院及抑制醫療費用成長？方法：研究對象為中部某醫院遠距健康照護計畫「銀髮族U-Care計劃」之收案個案(實驗組)以及該地區未參與計畫的居民(對照組)。我們以傾向分數配對模型自健保資料庫2009-2011年的醫療利用檔擷取對照組，以住院總次數的成長平均數為中點，區分「高醫療利用成長」與「低醫療利用成長」兩族群，再以差異中取差異迴歸探討遠距健康照護對可避免住院與醫療利用之影響。結果：遠距健康照護使得高醫療利用成長族群的門診次數增加約2次、可避免住院次數減少0.052次，每次住院費用、每次門診費用與門診住院總費用分別約減少8,743、225與15,917點；遠距健康照護使得低醫療利用成長族群住院總次數減少0.036次、門診次數增加約1次。結論：遠距健康照護對高醫療利用成長族群的可避免住院次數與醫療利用有顯著的抑制效果。然而，研究個案參與此計畫無須支付任何費用，對於遠距健康照護有助於健保財務管理的正向效益推論仍須持著謹慎保留的態度。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate whether tel-healthcare intervention could reduce preventable hospitalizations and healthcare expenditures. Methods: The case group was made up of those who participated in the Senior U-Care program (a tel-healthcare intervention) administrated by a hospital in central Taiwan. We utilized the Propensity Score Matching model to create a control group from the National Health Insurance Research Database over the period from 2009 to 2011. All patients in both groups were divided into high growth utilization and low growth utilization groups based on the mean growth in the total number of hospital admissions. The difference-in-differences model was used to investigate the impact of the tel-healthcare intervention on preventable hospitalizations and healthcare utilization. Results: The tel-healthcare intervention increased outpatient visits by approximately 2 but decreased preventable hospital admissions by 0.052 in the high growth utilization group. Additionally, inpatient expenditure (per admission), outpatient expenditure (per visit), and total healthcare expenditure in the high growth utilization group decreased by 8,743, 225, and 15,917 point values respectively due to the tel-healthcare intervention. The tel-healthcare intervention decreased approximately 0.036 inpatient admissions but it increased 1 outpatient visit for the low growth utilization group. Conclusions: Tel-healthcare intervention effectively decreased preventable hospitalization and healthcare expenditures in the high growth utilization group. Nevertheless, the services provided by the tel-healthcare intervention under study were free of charge to participants. We should therefore be cautious about concluding that tel-healthcare intervention would generate a positive effect on the financial management of the national insurance system.起始頁-結束頁：524-541資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510505918篇名：老年人肺結核知識、態度和預防行為之探討：以鳳林鎮為例並列篇名：Knowledge, attitude and preventive behaviors relative to tuberculosis in the elderly - a study in Fenglin Township, Taiwan作者：黃美芳(Mei-Fang Huang);張慈桂(Tzu-Kuei Chang)關鍵字：肺結核;知識;態度;預防行為;tuberculosis;knowledge;attitude;preventive behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：結核病是台灣法定傳染病中死亡數最多的疾病。被感染後一生中有5~10%會發病，現在65歲以上老年人，在台灣結核病高盛行年代感染機率高，隨著年紀增長抵抗力下降，對老年人的健康威脅值得注視。本研究目的在瞭解鳳林鎮老年人肺結核知識、態度及預防行為情形及其相關因素，提供疾病防治建議。方法：以鳳林鎮各關懷據點65歲以上老年人為研究對象，採問卷調查進行。結果：肺結核知識答對率64.5%。在態度層面，民眾最害怕被別人知道罹患肺結核(40.9%)；並期望已經在治療且醫師也說不會傳染的肺結核病人戴口罩(73.1%)。受訪民眾的預防行為，以到醫院時戴口罩的情況最低(56.5%)。同時控制相關因素後，衛福部社家署補助之關懷據點的民眾採取預防行為勝算比是原住民委員會等單位補助的2.55倍，達統計顯著意義。結論：肺結核知識中，老年人最欠缺傳染途徑的訊息。不同關懷據點之民眾在預防行為上有所不同，未來應分別就不同關懷據點，加強老年人的肺結核知識、態度，以改善其預防行為。英文摘要：Objectives: Tuberculosis (TB) is the leading cause of death among communicable diseases in Taiwan. People infected with TB bacteria have a lifetime risk of falling ill with TB of 5-10%. The elderly have a high prevalence of TB accompanied by an increase in chronic health problems. They should be concerned about the threat from TB. The aim of this study was to understand the knowledge, attitude, and preventive behaviors with regard to TB by the elderly in Fenglin. Methods: A cross-sectional study with a structured questionnaire was designed to collect data. Results: A total of 193 seniors were included in the study; 64.5% of them knew the right answers to questions about TB. Their attitude about prejudice showed that 40.9% feared that other people would know that they or a family member was diagnosed with TB. On the preventive dimension, 73.1% expected that TB patients should wear masks. Only 56.5% believed that people visiting the hospital should wear a mask. After controlling for all associated factors, we found that those who came from care centers subsidized by the Ministry of Health and Welfare had a 2.25 times odds ratio of taking preventive measures than did those in the center subsidized by the Council of Indigenous Peoples. Conclusions: Knowledge about TB transmission was low among the participants. The elderly from different care centers displayed a significant difference in preventive behaviors. It is necessary to consider the care center as an important factor when advocating for measures to control TB in the future.起始頁-結束頁：542-551資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510504519篇名：評論：結核病防治與人權教育並列篇名：Commentary: tuberculosis control and human rights education作者：周碧瑟(Pesus Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：552-552資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050450120篇名：利用政府開放性資料建構台灣線上互動式疾病死因地圖並列篇名：Using government open data to construct a Taiwan online interactive map of disease causes of death作者：鄧詠竹(Yung-Chu Teng);郭巧玲(Chiao-Ling Kuo);陳建州(Chien-Chou Chen);葉耀鮮(Yao-Hsien Yeh);高瑞鴻(Jui-Hung Kao);林柏丞(Bo-Cheng Lin);范毅軍(I-Chun Fan);詹大千(Ta-Chien Chan)關鍵字：地理資訊系統;年齡標準化死亡率;動畫;十大死因;空間聚集分析;geographic information system (GIS);age-adjusted mortality;animation;10 leading causes of death;spatial clustering analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷5期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：死因統計是評量健康城市、探討地區疾病負擔的重要指標，隨著開放資料的浪潮，鄉鎮死因統計數據已開放給全民使用，本研究建構線上互動式死因地圖，期能讓各界更方便探索長時期鄉鎮死因的時空變化。方法：使用輕量程式語言JavaScript進行網站功能的開發，死因資料來源為政府開放平台中1991至2013年全死因統計與癌症死因統計，人口統計資料來自內政部，用以計算年齡標準化死亡率，空間統計功能使用Local Moran's I方法進行死亡率空間聚集的偵測。結果：在線上地圖中(http://mortality.geohealth.tw)使用者可以探索縣市或鄉鎮、不同年度、性別、死因的空間分佈，透過動畫方式可一次瀏覽多年度死因資料，並可透過空間統計功能找出特定死因聚集的熱區。若選定某一特定縣市或鄉鎮，互動式統計圖將會顯示該縣市或鄉鎮死亡率位於全國的排名、分性別死亡率、時間趨勢圖，亦可顯示各縣市或鄉鎮的十大死因。結論：藉此網站同時可以查詢死因統計在各地區的時空變化與各種死因的組成方式，將有利於衛生政策制訂與探討健康不平等議題。英文摘要：Objectives: Statistics on causes of death are an important indicator to measure healthy cities and their disease burdens. With the trend of increasingly accessible government data, township statistics on causes of deaths have already been made available to the public. This study constructs an online interactive map of causes of death to facilitate exploring the long-term spatiotemporal trends. Methods: We used a light programming language - JavaScript - to develop the website. The data of causes of death including all causes and cancer-specific ones during 1991- 2013 are from the platform of publicly accessible government data. The population data are from the Ministry of Interior. We utilized them to compute age-adjusted mortality rates. The spatial statistic, Local Moran's I, was used to detect spatial clusters of mortality. Results: In the online map (http://mortality.geohealth.tw/), users can explore the spatial distribution of mortality at the city or township level, for different years, genders, and causes. Through an animation function, we can compare the same cause of death in many years, and we can also use the spatial statistic to identify the hotspots of some causes. If we select one city or township, the interactive statistical chart displays the ranking of mortality among all cities or townships, gender-specific mortality, temporal trends and the top 10 leading causes of death. Conclusions: With this website, users can simultaneously elucidate spatio-temporal changes of causes of death and major components of causes at the city or township level, which can be beneficial for formulating health policy and studying the issues of health disparity.起始頁-結束頁：553-566資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510501201篇名：關心厝邊的老大人：前進社區的「3+1行動醫療」服務並列篇名：Caring for the elderly in the neighborhood: the ”3+1 mobil medical care” service作者：盧鴻毅(Hung-Yi Lu);林裕珍(Yu-Chen Lin);李雅莉(Ya-Li Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：343-350資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050062篇名：以「雙重詮釋」概念，理解質性研究之多元面貌並列篇名：Understanding the multifaceted perspectives and methods of qualitative research using the concept of ”Double Hermeneutics”作者：賴文恩(Wen-An Lai);李秉學(Ping-Hsueh Lee)關鍵字：質性研究;雙重詮釋;測不準定理;qualitative research;Double Hermeneutics;uncertainty principle期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：目前，公共衛生領域，有愈來愈多學者，採質性研究探索實務與理論問題，然而，國內較少討論質性研究科學哲學理論背景的文章。質性研究是引自社會學界之研究方法，自二十世紀初期以來，就以多元面貌出現：其理論基礎，包括後實證主義、扎根理論、建構詮釋學、批判主義、女性主義、後現代主義等；資料收集方式包括深度訪談、觀察法、民族誌法、行動研究、文獻實物分析等；不同學術背景，也有包羅萬象的研究內容。因此，對於何謂質性研究，並沒有一個明確的定義，對於背後的科學哲學理念，也沒有一致的共識，以致於不同背景的初學者，對於不同取向與方法之異同、對錯及應用時機，常常有所混淆，對於如何整合質性研究與量性研究，也不易了解。本文作者以一個寓言故事開始，嘗試以紀登斯「雙重詮釋」的概念，描繪創意、多元、互為主體的社會現象，理解質性研究的內涵、多元的面貌與共通的特徵，並說明在科學哲學的層次上，如何可能整合質性研究與量性研究的理論基礎。英文摘要：Nowadays, many researchers adopt qualitative methods to investigate practical or theoretical issues in public health; however, few articles introduced the philosophical and methodological considerations when applying qualitative approaches. Since the beginning of the 20^(th) century, qualitative research originated within the community of sociology and other related academic disciplines with multifaceted perspectives and methods. Different qualitative researchers investigate diverse sociological phenomenon or issues with various study designs in accordance with their academic backgrounds. Their studies are based on different theoretical perspectives such as post-positivism, grounded theory, constructive hermeneutics, critical theory, feminism, or postmodernism. They collect data with different methods including in-depth interviews, participant observation, ethnography, or action research. Because of the diversity of their philosophical backgrounds, there is still no clear definition of qualitative research. Novice researchers frequently lose their way in the terminology jungle of different schools of qualitative research. They also encounter difficulty in understanding how to integrate qualitative and quantitative research methods. In this article, which begins with a fable, the authors try to clarify the philosophical essence of qualitative research using the concept of ”double hermeneutics” and explore the possibility of integrating qualitative and quantitative research methodologies.起始頁-結束頁：351-358資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050293篇名：以連帶思想檢視台灣長照政策發展之挑戰與啟發並列篇名：Challenges with the long-term care policy in Taiwan: application of solidarity作者：林志遠(Chih-Yuan Lin);陳珮青(Pei-Ching Chen);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee)關鍵字：長期照護;長照政策;長照保險;連帶思想;社會保險;long term care;long term care policy;long term care insurance;solidarity;social insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：長照政策將會是我國衛生福利政策影響深遠的制度。我國長照政策發展脈絡借鑒OECD國家發展經驗，並以典型社會保險路徑國家如德國與日本為藍圖。面對未來資源有限，長照需求龐大的時代，除透過發展成熟的保險治理技術，如何以衛生與福利政策之連帶思想元素，作為長照政策發展之參考，為本文目的。本文回顧中英文資料庫有關連帶思想概念之歷史發展及運用於長照政策中之當代意涵，結果發現：可由人際間連帶、家庭連帶、世代間連帶、制度性連帶及全球連帶等概念來加以討論。最後，本文就政府、服務提供者及服務使用者等利害關係人(stakeholders)角度，依個人實務工作經驗，提出以連帶思想概念檢視我國長照政策發展可能面臨的挑戰及啟發。英文摘要：The long-term care policy in Taiwan will have an enormous impact on the health and welfare system. Historical institutionalism and path dependency have served as a blueprint for Taiwan, thus allowing policy makers in Taiwan to learn through the experiences of OECD countries, such as Japan and Germany. Moreover, historical institutionalism and path dependency have shaped the development of the long-term care policy in Taiwan. The purpose of this article was to discuss how to implement a joint concept of solidarity as a health and welfare policy at a time when resources are limited and demand is great. Thus far, the government has been successful in developing insurance management skills, but other means are necessary to implement this new element of solidarity into the current system. This article reviewed the historical development and contemporary implications of solidarity in the English and Chinese databases, and examined how interpersonal, contractual, family, intergenerational, and global factors play a role in the development of solidarity. Finally, we propose the possible challenges and applications of solidarity in the long-term care policy in Taiwan with respect to the views of the government, service providers, and service users.起始頁-結束頁：359-375資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351041004篇名：高風險手術集中化政策之探討並列篇名：A review of how centralization policies affect high-risk surgeries作者：陳靖怡(Ching-Yi Chen);鍾國彪(Kuo-Piao Chung);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)關鍵字：集中化;區域化;醫療品質;服務量與照護結果研究;centralization;regionalization;quality of healthcare;volume-outcome studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：探討醫療照護服務量與照護結果關係的研究(volume-outcome research)發展已相當成熟，也因為有大量的實證證據顯示在某些特定手術處置的服務量與不良照護結果呈現顯著的負向關係，許多國家的學者及政策制定者紛紛提出手術集中化的相關衛生政策，期望將病人導引至高服務量或高專業性的醫療機構就醫，使病人獲得最佳的照護並改善整體照護結果。本文針對手術集中化政策發展歷程、各國實施策略、實施後影響及對於我國的啟示作為探討及文獻回顧的主軸，期望能作為國內制訂改善高風險手術照護品質政策之借鏡。經由文獻探討發現，手術處置集中化政策通常著重在高風險或罕見的手術(如：心臟手術處置、癌症手術或兒童相關手術處置)，政策的介入方式主要分成兩種：「設定最低服務量閾值(Minimum volume standards)」及「指定轉診中心(Designated referral centers)」。文獻指出，多數國家實施手術集中化後對於照護結果確實有正面之影響，但同時也有降低就醫可近性之疑慮。我們建議台灣未來針對提升手術處置照護品質制訂相關政策時，可以將集中化政策納入政策規劃之中，並且進一步評估手術集中化後可能帶來之成效。英文摘要：A great deal of evidence from volume-outcome studies has indicated that surgical volume is negatively associated with adverse surgery outcomes; therefore, researchers and policymakers in many countries have advocated for the Centralization of certain surgical procedures. Centralization should improve outcomes and increase the level of care by ensuring that patients are referred to high-quality providers. This article reviews (1) the development of centralization policies and (2) centralization strategies applied in the United States, Canada, and countries in Europe and Asia. We also discuss the impacts that centralization policies have had on surgery outcomes as well as implications for the future of centralization policies in Taiwan. The vast majority of centralization policies focus on rare or high-risk surgeries, such as those performed to treat heart problems or cancer. There are currently two types of intervention: setting minimum volume standards and selecting designated referral centers. A review of relevant literature showed that, for most countries, centralization policies led to better healthcare outcomes; however, some studies noted that centralization can reduce accessibility to care. Nonetheless, we suggest that Taiwan consider adopting centralization as a policy to improve the quality of healthcare. However, future research will be required to estimate the effectiveness of centralization on high-risk surgeries.起始頁-結束頁：376-390資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050165篇名：評論：高風險手術集中化政策之探討並列篇名：Commentary: a review of how centralization policies affect high-risk surgeries作者：周穎政(Yiing-Jenq Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：391-392資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201635105016016篇名：作者回覆：高風險手術集中化政策之探討並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: a review of how centralization policies affect high-risk surgeries作者：陳靖怡(Ching-Yi Chen);鍾國彪(Kuo-Piao Chung);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：393-394資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201635105016027篇名：台灣政府衛生福利開放資料現況及利用率分析並列篇名：An analysis of the current status and utilization of government health and welfare open data in Taiwan作者：韓佩軒(Pei-Hsuen Han);李昇暾(Sheng-Tun Li);許明暉(Min-Huei Hsu);呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu)關鍵字：政府衛生福利開放資料;資料品質;資料加值分析;government health and welfare open data;data quality;value-added analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：檢視台灣政府衛生福利開放資料品質、內容與應用狀況。方法：擷取衛生福利部暨所屬附屬機構釋出在台灣政府資料開放平臺(data.gov.tw)之資料集屬性特徵進行描述性分析。結果：截至2015年12月31日衛生機構釋出890個資料集，中央健康保險署，疾病管制署，國民健康署與食品藥物管理署分別釋出249，193，178與158個資料集。約七成資料集是屬於全球資訊網協會資料格式分類三顆星或以上較佳品質等級。瀏覽次數前十名資料集分別是：死因統計，醫院病床統計，藥局基本資料，登革熱每日確定病例統計，國際醫藥品稽查協約組織有關藥品優良製造指引藥廠名單資料集，災民收容所，不符合食品資訊資料集，各醫院癌症資源中心，可供食品使用原料彙整一覽表，健保用藥品項壓縮總檔。平臺收錄52個活化應用程式，其中有25個有使用到政府衛生福利開放資料。結論：台灣衛生福利機構釋出政府衛生福利開放資料集數目雖然比其他部門機構少，但是被活化應用的比例相對較高。但是，有些衛生機構將同一主題資料集切割成太多小資料集，不符合資料完整原則：資料應該以其來源最完整型式與最精細的尺度收錄，不使用加總或修改後的格式。此外，未來應可加強政府衛生福利開放資料的加值分析質與量，主動回饋釋出機構改善釋出資料品質與內容，朝建立良好資料加值分析生態系統的方向努力。英文摘要：Objectives: To examine the current status and utilization of government health and welfare open data in Taiwan. Methods: Characteristic information from datasets released by the Ministry of Health and Welfare and related Institutions available at data.gov.tw were extracted for descriptive analyses. Results: On December 31 2015, 890 health and welfare datasets were available at data.gov.tw. The numbers of datasets released by the National Health Insurance Administration, Center for Disease Control, Health Promotion Administration, and Food and Drug Administration were 249, 193, 178, and 158, respectively. More than seventy percent of the datasets were ranked as third star or above (good quality) according to the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium) classification. The ten most frequently browsed datasets were cause of death statistics, hospital beds statistics, basic information about pharmacies, the daily number of confirmed dengue fever cases, the PIC/S GMP (Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme Guide to Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products) pharmaceutical manufactures, the list of shelters for disaster victims, the list of foods which did not meet government standards, the list of cancer treatment centers, the list of food materials for human use, and the list of drugs reimbursed by the National Health Insurance. Fifty-two applications were registered at data.gov.tw and 25 of these used government health and welfare open data. Conclusions: Although the number of datasets released by health institutions was lower than that of other sectors, the number of applications using government health and welfare open data was relatively high. Some of the datasets were divided into too many small datasets by some health institutions however, and this did not follow the primacy principle. We suggest that the quality and quantity of value-added analyses should be improved and that feedback be provided to the institutions releasing the datasets in order to establish a good value-added analyses ecosystem.起始頁-結束頁：395-405資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050358篇名：老年人口自殺與熱島效應之空間關聯分析：以2000年至2008年台北都會區生態調查研究為例並列篇名：Spatial correlation analysis of elderly suicides and Urban Heat Island Effects: an ecological study in Taipei, 2000-2008作者：陳映融(Yinq-Rong Chern);吳治達(Chih-Da Wu);潘文驥(Wen-Chi Pan);陳穆貞(Mu-Jean Chen);龍世俊(Candice Shih-Chun Lung);蘇慧貞(Huey-Jen Su);張坤城(Kun-Cheng Chang)關鍵字：熱島效應;老年人口;自殺;廣義加乘混合模型;空間資訊技術;Urban Heat Island Effect (UHIE);elderly population;suicide;Generalized Additive Mixed Model (GAMM);spatial informatics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在應用地理資訊系統與統計模型，以探討台北都會區2000至2008年間熱島效應強度與65歲以上老年人口自殺死亡率之關聯。方法：本研究利用氣象站監測資料以及克利金空間推估以量化熱島效應；其次，針對熱島效應以及老年人口之自殺死亡率進行空間以及時間趨勢分析，並進一步探討自殺死亡率在空間上的群聚情形；最後，於校正大氣溫度、雨量、平均每戶綜合所得、教育程度、65歲以上性別比以及離婚率等因子，並且考慮時間、空間自相關之情況下，利用廣義加乘混合模型，以釐清熱島強度與老年人口自殺死亡率之關聯性。結果：在考慮空間、時間自相關、隨機效應、性別比、人口結構以及各項重要之社會經濟因子等風險因子後，熱島強度對於老年人口自殺死亡率之相對風險達統計上之顯著水準(相對風險：1.0549；p ＜ 0.01)。結論：本研究發現，熱島效應之強度與老年人口自殺死亡具有統計上之顯著關聯，熱島效應強度增加1℃，可能會使得老年人口之自殺死亡率相對上升5.49%。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between Urban Heat Island Effects (UHIE) and elderly suicides in metropolitan Taipei from 2000 to 2008 using Geographic Information System (GIS) and statistical analysis. Methods: The UHIE intensity in each township was estimated based on onsite air temperature observations using Kriging interpolation. Spatial/temporal trends in UHIE and elderly suicides were examined, and the spatial clustering effect of elderly suicides was assessed. A Generalized Additive Mixed Model (GAMM) was then utilized to assess the association between UHIE and elderly suicides after adjusting for confounders including air temperature, precipitation, income tax, education level, sex ratio of the elderly population, and marital status. Results: Based on the GAMM analysis, UHIE reached the level of statistical significance (Relative Risk: 1.0549; p ＜ 0.01) while accounting for the effects of the other risk factors in the model. Conclusions: The intensity of UHIE was statistically associated with elderly suicides in Taipei.起始頁-結束頁：406-417資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040899篇名：台灣兒童燒燙傷的特性及趨勢並列篇名：Incidence and trend of child burn injury in Taiwan作者：陳楚杰(Chu-Chieh Chen);楊佳昕(Jia-Sing Yang);陳靖宜(Chin-Yi Chen);柯明中(Ming-Chung Ko);李怡真(Yi-Chen Lee)關鍵字：兒童;燒燙傷;全民健康保險;children;burn;National Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：探討台灣兒童燒燙傷發生率、變化趨勢及住院相關因素。方法：本研究使用台灣全民健康保險研究資料庫2000年、2005年及2010年百萬人歸人檔資料；依人口學特性呈現0-18歲兒童燒燙傷發生率，以卜瓦松迴歸檢定燒燙傷門急診、住院發生率趨勢，以邏輯斯迴歸探討兒童燒燙傷住院的相關因素。結果：2000年、2005年及2010年兒童門急診燒燙傷整體發生率分別是0.70%、0.74%、0.70%。門急診部分三個時段依性別、年齡標準化之總體發生率，每十萬人口分別是699.68、779.63及737.59人，整體發生率有上升趨勢，但未達統計顯著；於4-6歲兒童(806.71, 1025.62, 970.60)則有顯著上升趨勢；住院部分標準化之發生率，每十萬人口，兒童整體分別是38.03、34.07及26.04人，女童整體分別是38.37、35.65及23.41人，1-3歲兒童分別是169.64、129.49及83.83人，均有顯著下降趨勢。13-18歲兒童燒燙傷住院風險較低，南區兒童及急診就醫兒童住院風險較高。結論：兒童燒燙傷門急診發生率整體有上升趨勢，但未達統計顯著，4-6歲兒童則有顯著上升趨勢；兒童整體、女童整體及1-3歲兒童住院發生率均顯著下降，顯示兒童燒燙傷嚴重度下降。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the incidence and trends of child burn injuries and factors associated with hospitalization due to burn injuries in 2000, 2005, and 2010. Methods: Data were gathered from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2000, 2005, and 2010 subsets from the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database. All patients aged 0-18 years with claim records containing burn injuries were enrolled to analyze the incidence of these injuries according to patient characteristics. Poisson regression was applied to test the linear trend of incidence. Logistic regression was adopted to identify factors associated with hospitalization for burn injuries. Results: The overall incidences of child burn injuries in 2000, 2005, and 2010 were 0.70%, 0.74%, and 0.70%, respectively. The corresponding overall standardized incidences of child burn injuries were 699.68, 779.63, and 737.59 per 100,000 population. The trend of increase was a statistically non-significant. The corresponding figures for those aged 4-6 years were 806.71, 1025.62, and 970.60 per 100,000 population, with a significant trend of increase. The overall standardized incidence of hospitalization for child burn injuries for 2000, 2005, and 2010 were 38.03, 34.07, and 26.04 per 100,000 population, respectively. There was a statistically significant trend of decrease. The corresponding figures for girls were 38.37, 35.65, 23.41 per 100,000 population, and those for patients aged 1-3 years were169.64, 129.49, 83.83 per 100,000 population, with statistically significant decreasing trends in both groups. Patients who were living in southern Taiwan, who visited the emergency department, and who were aged 13-18 years had lower risks of hospitalization compared with other groups. Conclusions: The trend of increase in the overall incidence of child burn injuries was non-significant, whereas that for children aged 4-6 years was significant. The trends of decrease in the incidence of burn injury hospitalization for all children, girls, and patients aged 1-3 years were significant, which may imply that the severity of burn injury decreased.起始頁-結束頁：418-429資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510500110篇名：應用全民健康保險研究資料庫比較不同合併症指標對中風病患的醫療費用之預測表現並列篇名：Comparison of different comorbidity measures in predicting the medical expenditures of stroke patients by utilizing the National Health Insurance Research Database作者：林縈縈(Ying-Ying Lin);翁瑄甫(Shuen-Fu Weng);楊哲銘(Che-Ming Yang);楊長興(Chiang-Hsing Yang);黃國哲(Kuo-Cherh Huang)關鍵字：合併症指標;中風病患;醫療費用;全民健康保險研究資料庫;comorbidity indices;stroke patients;medical expenditures;National Health Insurance Research Database期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：比較不同合併症指標對中風病患的醫療費用之預測表現。方法：全民健康保險研究資料庫2005年承保抽樣歸人檔(LHID2005)為主要資料來源，以首次中風住院患者為研究對象，比較四種合併症指標[Deyo-Charlson comorbidity index(CCI)、Romano-CCI、D`Hoore-CCI及Elixhauser方法]對患者出院後一年產生高醫療費用情形之預測力。本研究的基本模式包含病患年齡、性別、首次中風住院有無手術及首次中風住院天數變項，並且擷取2005年及2008年兩個不同年度之樣本資料進行比較分析。最後使用邏輯斯蒂迴歸分析(logistic regression analysis)的c值(c-statistics)，以檢定增加不同合併症指標後對模式預測力的表現差異。結果：四種合併症指標對於基本模式的預測力均有增進效果，其中又以Romano-CCI表現最佳的預測力(c值：0.710-0.746)。結論：本研究的研究結果顯示，合併症指標為中風住院病患出院後的醫療費用之重要預測因素，而Romano-CCI的預測力表現則最佳。建議衛生主管機關在擬定有關中風病患的醫療費用等相關給付制度時，應考量病患因合併症所造成之醫療照護負擔，而採取不同程度的調整。英文摘要：Objectives: This study compared the performance of different co-morbidity measures in predicting medical expenditures of stroke patients. Methods: Data were sourced from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2005 (LHID205), and the study population comprised all patients who were hospitalized due to stroke for the first time. Four co-morbidity measures were compared regarding the performance of predicting medical expenditures of subjects within 1 year after discharge: the Deyo-Charlson comorbidity index (CCI); Romano-CCI; D`Hoore-CCI; and Elixhauser method. The baseline model included patient age and gender, whether or not surgery was undertaken when hospitalized, and the length of stay. Two target years (2005 and 2008) of data were compared. The discriminatory power of the co-morbidity measures was assessed using the c-statistics derived from multiple logistic regression models. Results: All four co-morbidity measures significantly improved the predictive capacity of the baseline model. Furthermore, the Romano-CCI performed best in predicting medical expenditures of subjects within 1 year after discharge (c: 0.710-0.746). Conclusions: This study suggested that co-morbidity measures are significant predictors of medical expenditures of stroke patients, and the Romano-CCI performed best among the four co-morbidity measures in the research. When designing the payment schemes for stroke patients, the Taiwanese health authority ought to make adjustments in accordance with the burden of health care caused by co-morbidities.起始頁-結束頁：430-445資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510411211篇名：探討醫院歷經策略聯盟與併購之經營績效差異—以南部某地區醫院為例並列篇名：Exploring the difference in operation performance between strategic alliance and acquisition: a case study of a local hospital in southern Taiwan作者：方素秋(Su-Chiu Fang);翁瑞宏(Rhay-Hung Weng);郭彥宏(Yen-Hung Kuo);劉巡宇(Hsun-Yu Liu);黃靖媛(Ching-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：策略聯盟;併購;經營績效;醫院;合作策略;strategic alliances;acquisitions;business performance;hospital;cooperation strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：近來我國中小型醫院為求永續經營，乃積極透過各種外部合作策略，來強化醫院本身之競爭力，本研究欲探討某地區醫院歷經策略聯盟與併購之經營績效差異。方法：本研究以台灣南部某地區教學醫院為研究對象，採用個案研究法，針對該醫院進行個案分析，該醫院乃國內少見同時歷經策略聯盟與購併之醫院，績效觀察期間乃分成策略聯盟與併購兩階段：以2009年9月至2011年8月為期；以2011年9月至2013年8月為期。結果：個案醫院合作類型，於策略聯盟期間為契約式書面合約關係，個案醫院的所有權與經營權並無變動；而被併購後法律形式屬新設醫院，併購後個案醫院的所有權與經營權變動。績效分析結果顯示權益基礎併購期間的投入績效、財務績效、非財務績效優於非權益基礎策略聯盟合作期間。結論：個案醫院跨組織的合作涉入程度、關係緊密及鬆散程度、以及所有權與控制權變動皆會影響醫院經營，而在策略聯盟與併購期間經營績效亦有顯著差異。英文摘要：Objectives: In order to achieve long-term survival, interorganizational cooperation is the most effective way for many small- and medium-sized hospitals to go. The aim of this study was to explore the differences in business performance between periods of strategic alliance and acquisition in one local hospital. Methods: We selected a local teaching hospital in southern Taiwan as the study subject and used the case study method to carry out our analysis. We also collected secondary data about the hospital for performance analysis. There were two periods in which performance was observed: strategic alliance from September 2009 to August 2011 as the first and acquisition from September 2011 to August 2013 as the second. Results: The strategic alliance period was a contract-based relationship. There were no changes in ownership or the management team during this period. After being acquired by a Medical Center, the case hospital became one part of a Medical Foundation system. It became a new hospital. The ownership and management team changed. The results of performance analysis showed that the case hospital had superior input performance, financial performance, and non-financial performance during the period of acquisition than that during the period of non-equity strategic alliance. Conclusions: The involvement and strengthened relationship of interorganizational cooperation and the change in ownership and control affected hospital management. There were also significant differences in business performance between the periods of strategic alliance and acquisition.起始頁-結束頁：446-458資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510408112篇名：以論人計酬制度提供矯正機關收容人之健康照護芻議並列篇名：A capitation system for providing health care service to inmates in the correctional institution in Taiwan - a proposal作者：李妙純(Miaw-Chwen Lee);吳元培(Yuan-Pei Wu);陳孝平(Michael S. Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：235-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510504313篇名：論我國生物醫學研究者利益衝突管制－以研究者利益衝突之揭露制度為中心並列篇名：Regulation of biomedical researchers' conflict of interest in Taiwan with a focus on the disclosure of conflict of interest by the researchers作者：李銘杰(Ming-Chieh Li);劉宏恩(Hung-En Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：239-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510503314篇名：從美國爽身粉訴訟判決，看台灣化妝品滑石與石綿暴露的健康風險並列篇名：From the baby power litigation in the United States to the potential health risks of talc-based cosmetic products and asbestos exposures in Taiwan作者：林恭儀(Justin Kung-Yi Lin);鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：245-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510502815篇名：以整合照護指引與文獻回顧為基礎的老年人慢性便秘非藥物照護建議並列篇名：Non-pharmacologic care for chronic constipation in the elderly based on intergraded guidelines and literature review作者：陳雅莉(Ya-Li Chen);林文絹(Wen-Chuan Lin)關鍵字：便秘;老年人;膳食纖維;益生菌;constipation;the elderly;dietary fiber;probiotics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：老年人因老化、生理功能改變、咀嚼能力減弱、罹患各種慢性疾病及用藥等多重因素影響下，使便秘成了老年人常見的健康問題，便秘的盛行率隨著年紀增長而增加。長期便秘引起腹部脹痛、食慾不振、噁心、嘔吐等不適；此外，若因便秘致使排便用力，也易誘發心肌梗塞、中風猝死等危險，影響老年人的生理及心理健康，降低生活品質，因此便秘的預防和處置是照護者均需面對的重要課題。本文整合現今國內外老年人慢性便秘非藥物照護指引與文獻，提出慢性便秘照護上的實證建議，內容包括護理人員及主要照顧者在評估老年人便秘時應留意的重點，於便秘的預防及處置上，如何適當的攝取膳食纖維、益生菌及水分等，並配合腹部按摩與活動來改善便秘問題，可適用於無特殊疾病(如慢性腎衰竭、神經性便秘)之居家、社區、機構及醫療院所有慢性便秘困擾的老年人，提供照護人員之參考，以提升老年人之生活品質。英文摘要：Constipation is a common medical disorder in the elderly, and results from aging, physiologic changes, co-existing chronic diseases, and the administration of multiple drugs. The prevalence of constipation increases with advancing age. Chronic constipation may lead to significant gastrointestinal discomfort. In addition, defecating with force induces myocardial infarction and death from stroke, which affect physiologic and psychological health, thus impairing the quality of life. It is therefore of paramount importance for caregivers to prevent and manage constipation. Herein we provide evidence-based suggestions for chronic constipation care on the basis of guidelines and a literature review pertaining to the non-pharmacologic care of chronic constipation. The themes derived from the guidelines and a literature review are intended to aid nurses and primary health caregivers focus on the prevention and the treatment of constipation, and consists of an adequate intake of dietary fiber, probiotics, and fluids, together with interventions, such as abdominal massage and physical activity, to improve constipation while taking care of these elderly patients. Evidence-based suggestions provided herein are useful for the management of chronic constipation in the elderly free of other specific diseases (e.g. chronic renal failure and neurotic constipation) dwelling at home or institutions.起始頁-結束頁：248-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510408816篇名：台灣縣市兒童貧窮與死率之關係：1980-2009年並列篇名：Region-specific child poverty and child mortality in Taiwan: 1980-2009作者：江宛霖(Wan-Lin Chiang);江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)關鍵字：兒童貧窮率;五歲以下兒童死亡率;地理差異;child poverty rates;under five mortality rates;geographical disparity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在描述過去30年來台灣縣市別兒童貧窮率的趨勢與差距，及縣市別的兒童貧窮率與五歲以下兒童死亡率之關係。方法：首先，我們採用「家庭收支調查」資料，計算1980-1989年，1990-1999年及2000-2009年三個時期的縣市別兒童貧窮率，並使用「中華民國台閩地區人口統計」計算縣市別五歲以下兒童死亡率。接著，我們以皮爾森相關分析，檢定三個時期的縣市兒童貧窮率與五歲以下兒童死亡率之關係，以及縣市兒童貧窮率改變率及兒童死亡率改變率的相關性。結果：1980年以來，台灣兒童貧窮率雖然呈現微幅下降，但縣市之間的兒童貧窮率差距卻從1980-1989年的18.2%增加為2000-2009年的21.6%。其次，縣市兒童貧窮率與五歲以下兒童死亡率呈顯著正相關，三個時期的相關係數依序為0.79(p＜0.001)，0.64(p＜0.01)及0.83(p＜0.001)，而兒童貧窮率改善幅度越大的縣市，五歲以下兒童死亡率下降幅度也越大(r=0.51, p=0.018)。結論：台灣各縣市之間的兒童貧窮率差距越來越大，且與縣市別兒童健康不平等息息相關.英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to describe the trends and the differences in region-specific child poverty rates, and the relationship between region-specific child poverty rates and underfive mortality rates in Taiwan during the past 3 decades. Methods: City or county was defined as a region in this study. We measured region-specific child poverty rates during 3 time periods (1980-1989, 1990-1999, and 2000-2009) using data from the Family Income and Expenditure Survey. Data on under-five mortality rates were obtained from the Taiwan-Fukien Demographic Fact Book. Pearson’s correlation was used to determine the associations between child poverty and child mortality for each of three time periods. Results: The overall child poverty rate in Taiwan decreased slightly from 1980, but the difference in child poverty rates between the highest and lowest regions increased from 18.2% in 1980-1989 to 21.6% in 2000-2009. The association between child poverty and the under-five mortality rates was markedly positive; the correlation coefficient for the 3 time periods was 0.79 (p＜0.001), 0.64 (p＜0.01), and 0.83 (p＜0.001), respectively. Also, a greater decline in the child poverty rate was significantly related to a more rapid improvement in the under-five mortality rates (r=0.51, p=0.018). Conclusions: The regional difference in child poverty rates has been widening in Taiwan, and has contributed to inequality in child health.起始頁-結束頁：260-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510409117篇名：實施全民健康保險住院診斷關聯群支付制度對醫療機構之影響並列篇名：Impact of DRG-based payments on health care providers作者：陳珮青(Pei-Ching Chen);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo);黃昱瞳(Yu-Tung Huang);黃光華(Kuang-Hua Huang);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee)關鍵字：全民健康保險住院診斷關聯群;醫療費用;轉院治療;結果成效;Taiwan Diagnosis Related Groups (Tw-DRGs);medical expenses;inpatient transfer rate;outcome quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：探討全民健康保險住院診斷關聯群(Taiwan Diagnosis Related Groups，簡稱Tw- DRGs)支付制度實施後，對於醫療機構申報健保醫療費用、病患轉院治療及出院成效之影響。方法：選取2008-2011年期間健保住院申報案件數，每一住院人次為一個案，排除Tw-DRGs不適用之案件後，將研究對象分成DRG組與非DRG組，以傾向分數(propensity score)進行一比一配對，配對條件為「同醫師ID」、「MDC別」、「年齡」、「性別」及「Tw-DRGs權重」等變項，配對後將兩組住院人次經由加權後歸戶至醫療機構，分為「DRG組」與「非DRG組」，以年代與組別的交互作用呈現制度實施後實驗組之影響，並以廣義估計方程式(generalized estimating equation; GEE)進行統計分析。結果：Tw-DRGs支付制度實施後，在醫療費用部分，2010年DRG組平均單次住院申報點數顯著低於非DRG組。在轉院治療部分，2010年DRG組住院轉院治療率顯著低於非DRG組。在結果成效部分，2010年DRG組180天內死亡率顯著低於非DRG組。然而，Tw-DRGs支付制度實施後，在結果成效部分，2010年DRG組180天內再住院率顯著高於非DRG組。結論：實施Tw-DRGs支付制度後，醫療院所受到影響為單次住院申報點數減少、病患轉院減少，但對於結果成效影響不同。建議仍需監控醫療機構住院病人其出院後之醫療利用與結果，以確保病患就醫之醫療品質及療效，此外，並建議重新定義結果成效指標，應採納計算同科或同診斷案件計算較具公平。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to determine the impact of the Taiwan Diagnosis Related Groups (Tw-DRGs) payment system on medical institutions with respect to medical expenses and quality of care. Methods: Inpatient-related data were obtained from the National Health Insurance research database (NHIRD) during the study period (2008-2011). Propensity score matching (PSM) was used to divide the subjects into DRG and non-DRG groups and differentiate the subjects according to the medical institutions at which they were treated. The difference-in-difference approach and the generalized estimating equation (GEE) model were used to compare the DRG and non-DRG groups with respect to changes in health care efficiency before and after the introduction of Tw-DRGs and to evaluate the impact of Tw-DRGs on medical institutions. Results: After Tw-DRGs were implemented, the DRG group had lower medical expenses, a lower inpatient transfer rate, and a lower mortality rate within 180 days after discharge compared to the non-DRG group. In contrast, after Tw-DRGs were implemented, the DRG group had a higher readmission rate within 180 days after discharge compared to the non-DRG group. Conclusions: After implementing the Tw-DRGs payment system, the medical expenses, mortality rate within 180 days after discharge, and inpatient transfer rate had decreased, but the readmission rate within 180 days after discharge had increased. We suggest that the NHI should continue monitoring medical institutions to ensure high-quality medical care, and the measurement of indicators, such as the readmission rate, should be more strictly and precisely defined.起始頁-結束頁：268-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510404318篇名：運用決策樹技術探討基層診所門診量之影響因素並列篇名：Analysis of outpatient visits to primary care clinics and its influencing factors using a decision tree model作者：許文錦(Wen-Chin Hsu);李佳桓(Jia-Huan Li);余致廷(Chih-Ting Yu)關鍵字：選址分析;基層診所;資料探勘;地理資訊系統;location analysis;primary care clinic;data mining;geographical information system期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：開業地點對醫療院所經營具有重要影響力，便利性高的地點可提高病患就診意願，更可讓醫療院所取得競爭優勢。隨著開放資料時代來臨，如何運用開放資料協助選址成為醫療機構經營重要課題。本研究旨在運用資料探勘技術分析開放資料，探勘影響基層診所門診量的關鍵分類規則，藉以協助選址決策。方法：本研究以台北市306間高門診量基層診所為對象，蒐集相關之開放資料，包括社經資料、診所門診量、地價金額、地理空間資料等19項資料，運用CART決策樹分析影響高門診量診所之成功關鍵因素。結果：研究結果顯示決策樹分析之資訊增益順序為(可支配家庭收入＞所屬行政區診所密度＞女性人口數)。迴歸分析發現65歲以上人口數(β=0.836)與離最近捷運站距離(β=-0.297)顯著影響基層診所門診量(p＜0.001)。結論：本研究所發現之選址分類規則可協助診所、藥局、醫療器材與政府衛生部門找出符合高門診量診所地理條件且尚未設立診所的位址，提供開業者選址參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The process of locating health facilities has been studied extensively using mathematical optimization (e.g., covering model); however, few researchers have applied the techniques of data mining to this problem. This study proposes a novel prediction model, based on the Geographic Information System and data mining to assist in the selection of optimum locations for medical clinics. Methods: This study examined 306 medical clinics in Taipei, focusing on those with a high number of outpatients, using 19 variables associated with location decisions. A CART decision tree was used in the development of the model based on the collected variables. Results: The decision tree model indicated that household disposable income has the strongest impact on the number of outpatients, followed by clinic density, and gender. Regression analysis identified age, and distance to the nearest Mass Rapid Transit station as the two factors with a significant effect on the number of outpatients at a given clinic (p＜0.001). Conclusions: This study constructed a novel prediction model to aide in identifying the optimal location for a clinic and evaluating options with regard to clinic relocation.起始頁-結束頁：281-293資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510405219篇名：部立醫院行政法人化之芻議並列篇名：The transition to non-departmental public bodies -- a preliminary study of hospitals affiliated with Taiwan's Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW)作者：李天申(Tien-Shen Li)關鍵字：部立醫院;署立醫院;行政法人;MOHW-affiliated hospitals;DOH-affiliated hospitals;non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究探討署立醫院改制行政法人未成功的原因，以及針對部立醫院(原署立醫院)未來行政法人化提出建議。方法：本研究採用深度訪談，對象包括5位署立醫院高階主管，5位行政院與衛生署官員，1位立法委員。結果：當年行政法人化未成功的主因為：第一，政治氛圍不利於行政法人化；第二，員工抗拒行政法人化；第三，部分醫院擔憂行政法人化後財務更困難。結論：衛生福利部應從行政、法律、政治等面向，個別評估各家部立醫院改制為行政法人的可行性。針對適合行政法人化者，衛生福利部應積極向立法院遊說推動組織法案，以及向醫院員工充份宣導行政法人化的工作權益事項。英文摘要：Objectives: This study determined the reasons for failed transformation of DOH- affiliated hospitals into non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs). Suggestions are proposed for the future transformation of MOHW-affiliated hospitals into NDPBs. Methods: Five senior officers in DOH-affiliated hospitals, five political appointees and senior officers in the Executive Yuan and the Department of Health, and one member of the Legislative Yuan were interviewed. Results: There are three main reasons for failed transformation of DOH- affiliated hospitals into NDPBs. First, the political atmosphere was unfavorable for the transformation. Second, the hospital staff declined the transformation. Third, some hospitals feared that the transformation might result in a worsening financial condition. Conclusions: We suggest that transforming MOHW-affiliated hospitals into NDPBs can be evaluated individually based on the administrative, legal, and political feasibility by the MOHW. For hospitals which are well-suited for transformation into a NDPB, the MOHW should actively lobby the Organizational Act Reform, and communicate the working benefits of the transformation to the hospital staff.起始頁-結束頁：294-303資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510410220篇名：外籍看護與家庭照顧者對接受居家照顧老人住院與死亡風險之差異並列篇名：Differences between foreign care workers and family caregivers in risk of hospitalization and mortality among home care elders in Taiwan作者：黃郁超(Yu-Chao Huang);吳建賢(Chien-Hsien Wu);張淑惠(Shu-Hui Chang);陳雅美(Ya-Mei Chen)關鍵字：長期照顧;外籍看護;家庭照顧者;居家照顧品質;long term care;foreign care worker;family caregiver;quality of home care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：為解決老人照顧人力之需求，我國從1992年開始引進外籍看護，目前已經成為長期照顧人力的主要來源。有鑑於我國開放引進外籍看護二十多年，對於其照顧品質的相關研究仍然相當缺少。因此本研究希望探討由外籍看護照顧，相較於家庭照顧者，對於居家照顧老人預後風險之影響，並分析造成老人預後差異可能的因素。方法：研究資料取自273位新北市某區域醫院附設居家護理所之居家老人護理紀錄，所涵蓋之資料日期從2003年7月至2015年5月。以收案期間死亡與住院事件進行存活分析，比較外籍看護與不同性別、不同親屬關係之家庭照顧者照顧，對居家老人死亡與住院風險之影響。結果：由女性(HR= 0.715)、女兒或媳婦(HR= 0.653)所照顧之老人，其住院風險明顯低於由外籍看護照顧。短期由子女照顧住院風險同樣低於於外籍看護(HR= 0.552)，但子女照顧時間超過1.1年之後兩者則無顯著差異。結論：本研究顯示家庭照顧者照顧之老人預後優於外籍看護照顧。政府應重新考量目前外籍看護的開放政策，並對於願意投入照顧工作的家庭照顧者提供更多的長照資源與協助。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the quality of home care provided to older adults in Taiwan whose caregivers were either family members or foreign care workers. Methods: Data from July 2003 to May 2015 was retrieved from the records of a home care agency in new Taipei city. A total of 273 older adults were included for analysis. Cox proportional hazards and recurrent event models were applied to compare the risk of mortality and hospitalization for disabled older adults with caregivers who were foreign workers or family members; in addition, the effects of gender and family roles were determined. Results: Older adults who were taken care of by female family members (HR = 0.715), such as a daughter or daughter-in-law (HR = 0.653), had a significantly lower risk of hospitalization than older adults who were taken care of by foreign care workers. Older adults who were taken care of by their children during early episodes of disability also had lower rates of hospitalization compared to older adults who were taken care of by foreign care workers (HR = 0.552). The differences between these two caregiver roles (children vs. foreign care workers) were not significant when the duration of care lasted ＞ 1.1 years. Conclusions: The study findings showed that family caregivers provided better care to older adults than foreign care workers. The government should re-evaluate the open-door policy for foreign care workers and provide more long-term care resources and support for family caregivers who are willing to take care of disabled older relatives.起始頁-結束頁：304-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510410801篇名：父母的社經地位對兒童的自覺健康、身高與BMI指數的影響並列篇名：Effects of parental socioeconomic status on child self-reported health, height, and BMI作者：尤素娟(Su-Chuan Yu);陳碩亨(Shuo-Heng Chen);蔡偉德(Wei-Der Tsai)關鍵字：兒童自評健康狀態;身高;BMI值;父母社經地位;child self-reported health status;height;BMI values;parental socioeconomic status期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：觀察台灣地區父母社經地位對子女健康之影響。方法：本研究利用2001年台灣國民健康訪問調查建立親子配對資料，分別以序列邏吉斯機率迴歸模型、線性迴歸模型與多元邏吉斯迴歸模型，分析父母社經地位(教育程度與家戶所得)對0~12歲子女健康(自評健康狀況、身高及身體質量指數)的影響。結果：在子女自評健康狀態方面，家庭所得愈高，子女自評健康狀況愈好。在子女身高與身體質量指數方面，母親的教育程度若為高中及大學以上學歷，其子女身高明顯較高，也有較低肥胖的機率；家庭所得較高的子女，體重過重的機率較高，但不致於增加肥胖的機率。另外，母親有全職工作者，其子女健康良好的機率較低，肥胖的機率較高。結論：本研究結果顯示子女健康因父母社經地位不同而有明顯地差異。鑑於父母社經地位對子女未來成年時的健康有直接或間接的影響，為防止健康階層世代移轉，政府應採取一些公共政策改善經濟弱勢兒童的健康，或保護兒童免於受家庭貧困的拖累。英文摘要：Objectives: The relationship between parental socioeconomic status (SES) and child health was determined. Methods: The relationship between parental SES and child health was empirically investigated using the 2001 National Health Interview Survey in Taiwan. ”Selfreported health,” ”height,” and ”body mass index (BMI)” were used as health indicators for children 0-12 years of age and linked to the parental SES, as indicated by household income and parent’s education via the ordered and multinomial logit models, respectively. Results: Household income was positively associated with the child’s self-reported health and the likelihood of being overweight. Maternal education had a positive effect on a child’s height and was associated with a lower probability of a child being obese. Conclusions: Our empirical results provide some evidence that a child’s health varies as a function of parental SES. Due to the existence of health gradients in children, the government should adopt policies to promote child health and hamper the transmission of low SES across generations.起始頁-結束頁：316-329資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040932篇名：評論：父母的社經地位與兒童健康指標間之非階層性效果並列篇名：Commentary: non-gradient effect between parental socioeconomic status and children's health indicators作者：吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：330-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201635104093013篇名：作者回覆：父母的社經地位與兒童健康指標間之非階層性效果並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: non-gradient effect between parental socioeconomic status and children's health indicators作者：尤素娟(Su-Chuan Yu);陳碩亨(Shuo-Heng Chen);蔡偉德(Wei-Der Tsai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：331-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201635104093024篇名：以21世紀風險矩陣評估國人DDT花茶之潛在健康風險並列篇名：A RISK21 matrix for assessing the potential health risk of DDT from flower tea in Taiwan作者：林怡君(Yi-Jun Lin);游舒涵(Shu-Han You);周韋均(Wei-Chun Chou);翁甄憶(Chen-Yi Weng);張琇惠(Hsiu-Hui Chang);詹菀菁(Wan-Ching Chan);林偉瑄(Wei-Hsuan Lin);江宏哲(Hung-Che Chiang);林嬪嬪(Pin-Pin Lin)關鍵字：21世紀風險評估;滴滴涕;花茶;健康風險評估;RISK21;DDT;flower tea;health risk assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：21世紀風險矩陣(RISK21 matrix)是一個簡單、高效能、透明化且視覺化之健康風險評估方法。本研究目的為引用RISK21結合傳統風險評估方法，評估國人不同年齡族群飲用含DDT花茶或直接食用含DDT花瓣之潛在健康風險。方法：以風險評估為基礎，整合特定年齡層DDT每日總攝取量、非致癌與致癌毒性資料，以RISK21 matrix評估國人DDT暴露之肝病變與發育毒性健康關注程度，亦以傳統風險評估方法增量終生癌症風險(incremental lifetime cancer risk, ILCR)量化肝腫瘤風險。結果：不同年齡族群之RISK21 matrix評估結果顯示飲用DDT花茶所造成之肝病變與發育毒性為低度安全疑慮，然而若直接食用花瓣則有高度關注之必要性。飲用花茶及直接食用花瓣之ILCR分別為1.14×10^(-19) - 3.40×10^(-12)及2.12×10^(-10) - 3.29×10^(-3)，顯示食用花瓣有高度潛在肝腫瘤風險。結論：儘管飲用含DDT之花茶似乎不太可能造成公共衛生安全疑慮，但從直接食入花瓣之保守觀點來看，DDT暴露之健康風險仍應提出警訊。RISK21 matrix是一個易於使用之工具，不僅增進風險評估之理解，亦促進科學家、業界、政府及社會大眾之間的風險溝通。英文摘要：Objectives: RISK21 matrix is a straightforward, efficient, transparent, and visual approach for health risk assessment. The purpose of this study was to adopt RISK21 approach combining traditional risk assessment method to assess the potential health risks of DDT (dichlorodiphe nyltrichloroethane) when flower tea is drunk or when petals are directly consumed by various age groups. Methods: Based on the principles of risk assessment, we integrated age-specific total daily intakes of DDT with non-carcinogenic toxicity data to assess the level of health concern regarding liver lesion and developmental toxicity by RISK21 matrix. We also applied the carcinogenic toxicity data to quantify the incremental lifetime cancer risk (ILCR) for liver tumor. Results: RISK21 matrix for all age groups showed that DDT in flower tea drinks posed a low health concerns of liver lesion and developmental toxicity. However, there were very significant health concerns when the DDT exposure through a direct intake of petals. The ILCRs of DDT ranged 1.14×10^(-19)-3.40×10^(-12) and 2.12×10^(-10) - 3.29×10^(-3) for drinking flower tea and directly consuming petals, respectively, indicating a high potential risk of liver tumor from consuming petals. Conclusions: Although drinking DDT-contaminated flower tea is unlikely to be a significant safety concern, the human health risks related to DDT exposure are alarming from a conservative point of view when there is direct intake of flower tea petals. RISK21 matrix is an easy-to-use tool that not only promotes an understanding of risk assessment but also helps the risk communication among scientists, industries, governments, and the public.起始頁-結束頁：332-341資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351041165篇名：陳拱北與全民健保並列篇名：Dr. Kung-Pei Chen and Taiwan's National Health Insurance作者：江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang);楊志良(Chih-Liang Yaung);張秀蓉(Hsiu-Jung Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：107-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050056篇名：台灣藥價差亂象－醫療經濟學角度之分析及建議並列篇名：Pharmaceutical market distortion under the current reimbursement policy-analyses and recommendations from a health economics’ perspective作者：施廷芳(Sophy Ting-Fang Shih);李禮君(Li-Chun Lee);陳鴻儀(Hung-Yi Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：113-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351050177篇名：以系統性文獻回顧探討護理人員職場暴力現況與影響並列篇名：A systematic review of workplace violence in nursing10.6288/TJPH201635104045作者：明金蓮(Jin-Lain Ming);黃惠美(Hui-Mei Huang);洪曉佩(Shiao-Pei Hong);曾麗華(Li-Hua Tseng);黃美淑(Mei-Shu Huang);江淑華(Su-Hua Chiang);董貞吟(Chen-Yin Tung)關鍵字：系統性文獻回顧;職場暴力;護理職場;護理人員;systematic review;workplace violence;nursing workplace;nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：為瞭解醫療機構中護理人員遭受職場暴力狀況，本文運用系統性文獻回顧，經納入與排除條件篩選後，共納入37篇符合條件之文章。分別就不同調查期間、不同臨床環境與不同地區進行探討職場暴力盛行率，測量時間以一年時期的盛行率，肢體暴力有6-74%，非肢體暴力-言語暴力15.2-97.6%，職場霸凌11.6-47.6%，性騷擾33.7-34.9%；言語暴力高於肢體暴力，肢體暴力較常發生於急診室及精神科，言語暴力與職場霸凌則普遍發生於各單位，常見施暴者依序為病人、家屬或訪客、工作人員，高風險因素可歸類為工作人員、工作環境與攻擊者，不僅對受暴者身心有負面影響，亦對機構與護理專業造成危害，結論為遭受暴力後之因應方式分為生理、心理掌控及提升自尊等。高達40-80%人員遭受暴力後未向管理者通報，主要是認為不需協助、自己能處理及認為通報是無用的。因此建議提供顧客有表達意見的管道，建構良好護理工作環境，安全有效的硬體設備，支持職場暴力零容忍政策，建立暴力事件處理通報流程，並依不同職場暴力類型、不同臨床情境，發展創新與系統性職場暴力防治課程及因應策略，藉由有效的在職教育，提升護理人員對職場暴力預防與處置技能，以期有效改善工作環境，留任第一線臨床護理人員。英文摘要：This systematic review evaluated the workplace violence in nursing. Thirty-seven studies that met the criteria were included, reviewed, and analyzed. The one-year prevalence rates of physical violence ranged from 6-74%, sexual harassment 33.7-34.9%, while nurses experienced nonphysical violence including 15.2-97.6% verbal violence and 11.6-47.6% bullying behavior. Verbal violence is more common than physical violence. The later is commonly happened in emergency room or psychiatry department. The common perpetrators of these types of violence included the patients, family members, visitors and hospital staff. The nurses were apt to affected by these type of violence not only physically and psychologically, but also damaging the nursing profession and the whole hospital organization. Workplace violence victims have several coping strategies including physical mental support and promote self dignity. Unreported violence in nursing ranged from 40-80%, because violence victims believed that they were capable to handle and solve the problems or didn’t trust the reported system. Based on these, the most priority are provide the mutual feedback and communication pathway, and In conclusion, various types of violence in nursing are prevalent. It is a great challenge to establish a safe and healthy nursing environment with zero tolerance of workplace violence. Nursing education deserves courses and strategies to enable nursing professionals in handling the workplace violence with confidence and to promote their professional contribution.起始頁-結束頁：116-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040458篇名：剖析台灣民眾的就醫流動：利用引力模式評估就醫距離與醫療資源分布的影響並列篇名：Profiling the patient flow for seeking healthcare in Taiwan: using gravity modeling to investigate the influences of travel distance and healthcare resources作者：林民浩(Min-Hau Lin);郭年真(Raymmond N. Kuo);陳威全(Benny Wei Chien Chin);溫在弘(Tzai-Hung Wen)關鍵字：引力模式;病人流動;就醫距離;醫療資源;空間分析;gravity model;patient flow;travel distance;health care resources;spatial analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：過去研究多以行政區或醫療分區的每萬人口醫療資源數作為評估就醫可近性之指標，但分區的概念簡化民眾就醫行為，與實際醫療利用情形有所落差。本研究將以實際就醫流動資料呈現各地區醫療可近性，並量化就醫距離與醫療資源分布對就醫流動的影響。方法：使用全民健康保險研究資料庫2010年承保抽樣歸人檔，依居住地與就醫地建立流動起迄矩陣，計算各鄉鎮市區加權就醫距離作為可近性指標，再以引力模式估計影響就醫流動的因素。結果：加權就醫距離呈現出花東與雲嘉沿海等地有較差的醫療可近性。引力模式分析顯示，就醫距離與醫療資源皆顯著影響民眾的就醫流動。然而，相較於急診與住院的就醫流動，就醫距離對於門診就醫流動影響更為明顯。但於鄰近地區的就醫權衡，醫療機構一般病床數對於急診與住院就醫流動的吸引力，更重於就醫距離的效果。結論：加權就醫距離更能客觀反映一地醫療可近性。求近是台灣民眾就醫的首要考量，但民眾急診與住院就醫，則傾向在鄰近地區中尋求硬體規模最大者。英文摘要：Objectives: Township-level physician-to-population and hospital bed-to-population ratios have been widely adopted as indicators of health care accessibility in Taiwan; however, these indicators cannot reflect actual healthcare-seeking behaviors of patients. Therefore, the aims of this study were to establish actual patient flow for seeking healthcare and to clarify the factors influencing preferences for seeking healthcare. Methods: We estimated the residence and collected the locations of healthcare visits for each patient from the nationwide Longitudinal Health Insurance Database in 2010 to establish an origin-destination matrix. The patient flow among townships could be conducted from the matrix. The weighted travel distance of healthcare visits was developed as a new indicator of accessibility. The gravity model was then used to analyze the patient flow and assess the influences of travel distance and healthcare resources. Results: Using the weighted travel distance, eastern Taiwan and the coastal areas of Yunlin and Chiayi were identified as the poorest accessibility for healthcare resources. The results of the gravity model showed that travel distance was the major factor correlated negatively with the volumes of outpatient and inpatient/emergency flow; however, the abundance of healthcare resources positively influenced the preference of inpatient/emergency patients from their residence to neighborhood regions for seeking healthcare. Conclusions: The weighted travel distance could properly reflect the access of healthcare. We conclude that travel distance is the major factor which influences patient flow for seeking healthcare. In contrast, people tend to choose the healthcare facilities with abundant resources for seeking inpatient/emergency healthcare.起始頁-結束頁：136-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040869篇名：照護連續性對高齡者急診與非緊急急診之影響探討並列篇名：Effects of continuity of care on emergency department use and non-urgent emergency department visits among the elderly作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);張曉鳳(Hsiao-Feng Chang)關鍵字：照護連續性;高齡者;急診;非緊急急診;continuity of care;elderly;emergency;non-urgent ED visits期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討實施全民健康保險制度下的台灣高齡者照護連續性對高齡者急診及非緊急急診的影響。方法：本研究採用縱向研究法，利用2008-2009年門診就醫資料推算照護連續性指數(COCI)做為自變項，探討高齡者之照護連續性強度對急診利用及非緊急急診之影響。統計分析方法包含負二項式迴歸分析、邏輯斯迴歸分析，及趨勢卡方檢驗。結果：研究結果顯示，照護連續性顯著影響高齡者急診利用及非緊急急診的發生。在控制其他變項後，迴歸分析結果顯示，相較於低度照護連續性高齡者，中度照護連續性及高度照護連續性的高齡者，其急診利用次數的相對風險分別減少25.17%及35.60%；中度照護連續性及高度照護連續性高齡者，非緊急急診發生風險的勝算比分別為低度照護連續性高齡者的0.87(95% C.I.=0.76-0.99)及0.81(95% C.I.=0.69-0.94)。結論：本研究證實實施全民健康保險制度但缺乏轉診制度的台灣，高齡者照護連續性仍然顯著減少高齡者的急診利用，顯示提升高齡者照護連續性，對高齡者及健康照護系統都有助益。英文摘要：Objectives: This study determined whether or not continuity of care (COC) is associated with emergency department (ED) visits and non-urgent ED visits by the elderly in Taiwan’s universal health care system. Methods: This study used a longitudinal health insurance database compiled for 2010 from the National Health Insurance Research Database in Taiwan. COC was calculated using the continuity of care index (COCI), which reflects visit concentration with individual clinicians. Negative binominal regression and multivariate logistic regression were performed to determine the effects of COC on the ED and non-urgent ED visits in 2010, respectively. Results: This study showed that lower COC was associated with increased ED and non-urgent ED visits. After adjusting for age, gender, socio-economic status, region, physician visits, Charlson index, and physician density, patients in the medium and high COC groups had 25.17% and 35.60% less ED visits, respectively. In an additional analysis of non-urgent ED visits in which we compared patients in the medium and high COC groups with patients who were in the low COC group, we further showed that the probability of having non-urgent ED visits was reduced for elderly patients with medium and high COC (adjusted odds ratio = 0.87 and 95% CI=0.76-0.99; adjusted odds ratio =0.81 and 95% CI=0.69-0.94, respectively). Conclusions: This study showed that higher COC is associated with decreased ED and non-urgent ED visits by the elderly, even in a universal health care system that lacks a referral system. We conclude that improving the COC is beneficial for patients and the health care system.起始頁-結束頁：152-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510408410篇名：台灣全民健康保險的減貧效果並列篇名：Effect of National Health Insurance on poverty reduction in Taiwan作者：江宛霖(Wan-Lin Chiang);江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)關鍵字：台灣全民健保;貧窮率;醫療財務災難;Taiwan's National Health Insurance;poverty rate;catastrophic health spending期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：全民健保的首要目標就是保障公平就醫的權利，並減少因病而貧的狀況。本研究從收入面及支出面探討全民健保的減貧效果。方法：資料來源為1993年至2012年家庭收支調查。我們以全國家戶均等可支配所得中位數的一半作為貧窮線，計算家戶、兒童與老人貧窮率，並以醫療支出佔扣除生存所需的家戶消費的25%與40%為閾值，估計家戶、兒童與老人的醫療財務災難率。結果：1995年，台灣家戶貧窮率在加計社會移轉收支後由13.7%降為7.5%，減貧效果達6.2%，其中1.1%的效果為全民健保的貢獻，到了2012年全民健保貢獻則提高為3.7%。至於對兒童貧窮率及老人貧窮率，全民健保的貢獻在同一期間亦分別由0.5%及3.3%提高為2.0%及8.0%。其次，全民健保開辦後，家戶醫療財務災難率由1993年的7.0%驟降為1998年的1.3%，而兒童與老人的醫療財務災難率，亦分別由2.3%及17.7%降為0.3%及3.7%，但是進入21世紀以後，無論家戶、兒童或老人的醫療財務災難率，皆微幅上升。結論：自從開辦以來，全民健保對於減輕台灣的貧窮現象有重要的貢獻。英文摘要：Objectives: In 1995 National Health Insurance (NHI) was launched in Taiwan to provide equal access to adequate health care for all, and to protect people from financial hardship. This study determined the effect of the NHI on poverty reduction. Methods: Data were obtained from the Family Income and Expenditure Survey (1993-2012). First, we computed the household, child, and elderly poverty rates using 50% of the national median equivalized disposable income as the poverty line. We then defined catastrophic health spending as household health expenditures exceeding a specific fraction (25% or 40%) of household consumption remaining after subsistence needs. Results: In 1995 the household poverty rate fell from 13.7% to 7.5% after social taxes and transfers (a decrease of 6.2%), of which 1.1% was contributed by the NHI transfers. In 2012 the NHI contribution increased to 3.7%. With respect to child and elderly poverty rates, the NHI contribution also increased from 0.5% and 3.3% to 2.0% and 8.0%, respectively, during the same time period. After implementation of the NHI, catastrophic health spending fell from 7.0% in 1993 to 1.3% in 1998 for households, 2.3% to 0.3% for children, and 17.7% to 3.7% for the elderly. Since the beginning of the 21st century, all three types of catastrophic health spending have increased slightly. Conclusions: The NHI in Taiwan has made a significant contribution to poverty reduction since its implementation.起始頁-結束頁：164-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510408211篇名：評論：台灣全民健康保險的減貧效果並列篇名：Commentary: effect of National Health Insurance on poverty reduction in Taiwan作者：文羽苹(Yu-Ping Wen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：172-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040820112篇名：「思覺失調症醫療給付改善方案」成效探討－以台灣北部某精神專科醫院為例並列篇名：Effects of a pay-for-performance program for schizophrenia at a psychiatric hospital in northern Taiwan作者：陳俐樺(Li-Hua Chen);張鳳琴(Fong-Ching Chang);簡以嘉(I-Chia Chien);戴桂英(Guey-Ing Day)關鍵字：思覺失調症;論質計酬;醫療利用;schizophrenia;pay-for-performance program;medical utilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在評價「思覺失調症醫療給付改善方案」介入，對有參與該方案的病人在精神科門診、住院、急診醫療利用之影響。方法：研究對象為台灣北部某精神專科醫院於2009-2013年參與「思覺失調症醫療給付改善方案」共2,236人，本研究資料來源為該醫院「醫療資訊系統」及「思覺失調症個案管理系統」等資料庫，以廣義估計方程式(Generalized Estimating Equation, GEE)方法進行成效檢定。結果：研究結果顯示：「思覺失調症醫療給付改善方案」介入顯著減少病人強制住院年發生次數、精神科急性病房年住院天數、精神科急性病房年住院次數、急診年使用次數；參與該方案的病人其門診年就診次數有稍下降然仍維持12次以上；然方案介入對病人六個月內精神科急性病房再住院次數無顯著影響。結論：建議持續推動「思覺失調症醫療給付改善方案」長期追蹤思覺失調症病人的疾病自我管理情形，以更積極提升精神醫療照護服務的品質，並預防病人疾病惡化。英文摘要：Objectives: This study determined the effects of a ”pay-for-performance program for schizophrenia” on patient utilization of the outpatient department, emergency services, and hospitalization. Methods: This study analyzed 2236 patients from a psychiatric hospital in northern Taiwan who joined the ”pay-for-performance program for schizophrenia.” Two datasets were analyzed, including the 2009-2013 Hospital Information System and the Schizophrenia Case Management System. The Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE) method was used to determine the effects of the program on patient utilization measures. Results: The ”pay-for-performance program for schizophrenia” significantly decreased the yearly incidence of compulsory hospitalization, days of acute psychiatric hospitalization, and annual emergency department visits. In addition, the number of psychiatric outpatient visits decreased significantly, but persisted at ＞ 12 times per year. The number of 6-month readmissions to the acute psychiatric ward did not change significantly after implementing the program. Conclusions: Implementing the ”pay-forperformance program for schizophrenia” enhanced self-management of schizophrenic patients, improved medical care outcomes, and prevented worsening of diseases.起始頁-結束頁：173-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510405813篇名：Exploring factors related to willingness to pay for telehealth services: a 2013 national survey in Taiwan並列篇名：國人對雲端照護服務付費意願及其相關因素的探討：2013年全國調查分析作者：梁娟娟(Chuan-Chuan Liang);章美英(Mei-Ying Chang)關鍵字：照護服務;系統品質;服務品質;資訊品質;telehealth services;system quality;service quality;information quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：探討台灣民眾對雲端照護服務願意付費使用意願與醫療服務利用行為及雲端照護需求(系統品質、服務品質和資訊品質)之相關性。方法：研究對象為20歲以上台灣民眾，樣本分配以中選機率與人數等比例方式進行抽樣，並以電腦輔助電話訪問系統(Computer Assisted Telephone Interview, CATI)進行資料收集，進行性別、年齡、教育程度與居住地區等資料統計加權後，有效樣本數為1,132位。結果：(1)願意付費者使用雲端照護服務佔68.6%，以男性、20-29歲、無婚姻、獨居、高收入和整體健康較差者意願較高。(2)願意付費者認為雲端照護服務以系統品質最重要，其次為服務品質和資訊品質。(3)願意付費者對於雲端照護服務的預測因子為婚姻狀態、都市化程度、健康狀況、教育程度以及性別，預測率為69.4%。結論：本結果有助於了解使用雲端照護服務的人的經驗和開發能滿足人們的個性化需求的服務。首應考量資料分享，如電腦化健康紀錄的機密性和安全性，未來可研究探討。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this research was to explore the correlations between the factors of Taiwanese residents’ willingness to pay for telehealth services and the factors of individuals’1 desired needs from the service (system quality, service quality, and information quality). Methods: The study sample comprised people older than 20 years who were selected using multistage cluster sampling of probability proportional to size sampling method. Surveys were conducted using computer-aided telephone interviews (Computer Assisted Telephone Interview, CATI), and valid responses were collected from a total of 1,132 people. Results: The study results are listed as follows: (a) Of the respondents, 68.6% were willing to pay for telehealth services; those who were male, aged between 20 and 29 years, were single, had a high income, and exhibited poor health demonstrated a relatively higher willingness. (b) System quality was the most crucial factor affecting Taiwanese residents’ willingness to pay for telehealth services, followed by service quality and information quality. (c) The predictors of willingness to pay for telehealth services were marital status, urbanization area, health condition, education level, and sex, which collectively yielded a predicted probability of 69.4%. Conclusions: These results can facilitate understanding the experiences of people using telehealth services and developing services that thoroughly satisfy people’s individual needs. Concerns regarding data sharing, such as the confidentiality and security of computerized health records, will be explored in future studies.起始頁-結束頁：187-198資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510410314篇名：室外空氣污染物與學齡前兒童首發氣喘之關聯，2007-2011年並列篇名：Associations between outdoor air pollutants and first occurrence of asthma in pre-school children, 2007-2011作者：鍾慧穎(Hui-Ying Chung);謝佳容(Hui-Ying Chung);曾俊傑(Chun-Chieh Tseng);尹立銘(Lih-Ming Yiin)關鍵字：全民健康保險資料庫;學齡前兒童;氣喘;空氣汙染物;交通排放;National Health Insurance Research Database;pre-school children;asthma;air pollutants;transportation exhaust期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：探討近年來全台灣0-6歲兒童氣喘首次發生率，與環境監測之空氣汙染物濃度的關係。方法：以2007年至2011年之全民健康保險研究資料庫承保抽樣歸人檔40萬人，依據國際疾病分類法第九版(ICD-9-CM)診斷碼，篩選6歲以下第一次發生氣喘兒童為研究對象，並使用2006與2011年間環保署空氣品質監測數據PM_(10)、SO_2、NO_X(NO及NO_2)、CO及O_3之濃度資料，探究首發氣喘與空氣汙染物之相關性。結果：室外的空氣汙染物，以NO_X、CO與學齡前兒童首次氣喘發病關聯性顯著(ρ ＞ 0.5)，而此二者間相關性也高於其他任何汙染物種間的關聯(ρ = 0.892)，推測NO_X及CO主要來源為交通排放。進一步以多變項邏輯斯迴歸分析，發現暴露於高濃度NOX(＞ 16.3 ppb)導致氣喘發病比低濃度具有顯著勝算比，最高可達1.45(95%CI: 1.13- 1.86)。由於並無直接證據顯示NO_X、CO可導致氣喘，因此推論台灣學齡前兒童的氣喘首發率，應與交通排放汙染物相關。結論：交通排放汙染物與氣喘發病相關性高，建議民眾做好個人防護，並時時注意空氣品質資訊，以降低學齡前兒童氣喘發病機率。英文摘要：Objectives: This study determined the incidence of the first occurrence of asthma in preschool children (0-6 years of age), and the relationship to air pollutants. Methods: Based on the Longitudinal National Health Insurance database (n=400,000) from 2007-2011, the study identified eligible asthmatic subjects in accordance with the 9th version of the international disease classification (ICD-9-CM), and used the local environmental monitoring data of PM_(10), SO_2, NO_X (NO and NO_2), CO, and O_3 from the Environmental Protection Administration (EPA) to relate to the first incidence of asthma for the eligible subjects. Results: Among the air pollutants, NO_X and CO were significantly associated with asthma, and were highly correlated with each other (ρ = 0.892), suggesting that NO_X and CO should have originated from transportation exhaust. The multivariate logistic regression analyses showed that high levels of NOX (＞ 16.3 ppb) resulted in significant odds ratios of asthma exacerbation up to 1.45 (95% CI: 1.13 - 1.86) compared to low levels. Because of no direct evidence showing that NOX or CO triggered asthma, it is suggested that the first incidence of asthma in pre-school children is related to transportation exhaust. Conclusions: Asthma in pre-school children was significantly associated with transportation exhaust. It is recommended that attention should be paid to personal care and information of air quality to lower the chances of asthma occurrence for preschool children.起始頁-結束頁：199-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510403815篇名：台灣「婦幼健康主題式資料庫」之建構與未來應用並列篇名：Set-up and future applications of the Taiwan Maternal and Child Health Database (TMCHD)作者：李中一(Chung-Yi Li);陳麗華(Lea-Hua Chen);邱孟君(Meng-Jiun Chiou);梁富文(Fu-Wen Liang);呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu)關鍵字：婦幼衛生;健康資料庫;出生登記;死因統計;生命歷程;maternal and child health;health database;birth registry;death registry;life course期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：介紹「婦幼健康主題式資料庫」之建置過程與內容。方法：本研究利用我國出生登記、出生通報、死因統計(以上之資料年代為2004-2011)、與全民健康保險(簡稱健保)(1998-2011)等行政資料，完成親代與子代之健保資料連結；並將新生兒未投保前使用父親或母親身分證字號申報健保給付之紀錄補正回新生兒之就醫紀錄中。結果：本研究建置之「婦幼健康主題式資料庫」，由4種次檔案組成，包括(1)2004-2011年台灣所有活產新生兒之健保門診與住院紀錄及其出生登記的資料，如出生體重、妊娠周數、單/多胞胎等，且每一筆新生兒的健保就醫紀錄中新增該名新生兒父親與母親的身分證字號(加密)；(2)出生通報中每名母親吸菸、飲酒，及新生兒Apgar score；(3)所有新生兒父親與母親的健保門診與住院紀錄(含醫令資料)(1998-2011)；(4)新生兒與父母親之死因統計資料(2004-2011)。結論：「婦幼健康主題式資料庫」可以作為生命歷程研究之材料，也可提供較佳的訊息作為實證衛生政策的參考依據。英文摘要：Objectives: To introduce the process of setting up the Taiwan Maternal and Child Health Database (TMCHD) and the content of the TMCHD. Methods: This project utilized the Taiwan Birth Registration Database (BRD), Birth Certificate Application (BCA), National Register of Death (NRD [2004-2011 for the BRD, BCA, and NRD]), and the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD [1998-2011]) to inter-link the medical claims of offspring and their parents. An effort was also made to restore the medical claims of a parent to his/her newborn; medical claims are usually issued to one of the parent within 60 days after birth. Results: The TMCHD includes the information derived from inpatient/outpatient claims of all infants born between 2004 and 2011, in addition to a number of variables recorded in the BRD, including birthweight, gestational age, and single/multiple births. The variables in the BCA, such as maternal smoking, alcohol consumption, and newborn Apgar scores, were identified in a separate file. The medical claims of parents retrieved from the NHIRD, including medical orders (1998-2011) and the information pertaining to mortality retrieved from the NRD (2001-2011), were arranged in separate files. Conclusions: The TMCHD can be used as material for life course studies and may provide better information for evidence-based health policy.起始頁-結束頁：209-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510405316篇名：兒童死亡率：台灣與經濟合作暨發展組織國家比較並列篇名：Child mortality: Taiwan compared with OECD countries作者：梁富文(Fu-Wen Liang);黃雅莉(Ya-Li Huang);吳美環(Mei-Hwan Wu);呂鴻基(Hung-Chi Lue);江東亮(Tung-liang Chiang);呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu)關鍵字：嬰兒死亡率;兒童死亡率;國際比較;infant mortality;child mortality;international comparison期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：瞭解台灣兒童死亡率與經濟合作暨發展組織(Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD)國家的差異。方法：OECD國家的出生數、人口數與死亡數資料來自世界衛生組織的死因統計資訊系統，台灣資料來自衛生福利部統計處網站。首先計算嬰兒(＜1歲)，新生兒(＜28天)，後新生兒(28-364天)，1-4歲，5-9歲及10-14歲的死亡率。除了排序各國兒童死亡率外，我們以台灣為基準計算死亡率比與95%信賴區間。最後再比較台灣與日本的死因組成，以及台灣1996-2013年兒童死亡率趨勢。結果：合計2011-2013年資料，台灣嬰兒，新生兒，後新生兒每千活產死亡數分別為3.9、2.4及1.5，1-4歲，5-9歲，10-14歲每十萬人口死亡數分別為25.8、13.2與14.4，與33個OECD國家比較，排名分別為第23，16，24，27，30與27名。經統計檢定死亡率顯著小於台灣的國家數目分別為19，12，21，24，26與22。在嬰兒死亡個案中，源於周產期的病況比例台灣(46%)較日本(25%)高，先天性疾病比例台灣(22%)較日本(36%)低。在1-4歲死亡個案中，台灣(28%)外因比例高於日本(16%)。關於台灣兒童死亡率趨勢，1996-2013年嬰兒死亡率的年下降率(3.4%)最小，1-4歲死亡率下降率(5.5%)最大。結論：台灣兒童死亡率相較於大多數OECD國家及文化背景相似的日本與韓國都表現不佳，尤其五歲以上兒童的死亡率排名相對較差。1-4歲死亡率雖然下降趨勢顯著，但是外因比例還是高於日本，應該是未來的優先族群。英文摘要：Objectives: To determine the child mortality rate differences between Taiwan and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries. Methods: Data on live births, population, and mortality in OECD countries were derived from the mortality database of the World Health Organization. Taiwan data were derived from the Ministry of Health and Welfare. We first calculated the child mortality rate by age, i.e., infant (＜1 year), neonate (＜28 days), post-neonate (28-364 days), 1-4 years, 5-9 years, and 10-14 years. We then computed the mortality rate ratio and 95% confidence intervals using the mortality rate of Taiwan as the reference. We also compared the pattern of cause of death between Taiwan and Japan and examined the trends in child mortality of Taiwan between 1996 and 2013. Results: Between 2011 and 2013, the infant, neonate, and post-neonate mortality rate in Taiwan was 3.9, 2.4, and 1.5 deaths per 1,000 live births, respectively. The mortality rates in the 1-4 year, 5-9 year, and 10-14 year age groups in Taiwan were 25.8, 13.2, and 14.4 deaths per 100,000 population, respectively. Compared with 33 OECD countries, the mortality rate in Taiwan ranked 23rd, 16th, 24th, 27th, 30th, and 27th for each age group, respectively. The number of countries with mortality rates significantly lower than Taiwan was 19, 12, 21, 24, 26, and 22 for each age group, respectively. For infant deaths, the proportion attributed to perinatal causes in Taiwan (46%) was greater than Japan (25%); however, the proportion of infant deaths due to congenital causes in Taiwan (22%) was less than Japan (36%). For the 1-4 year age group, the proportion of deaths resulting from external causes in Taiwan (28%) was greater than Japan (16%). The decline in the mortality rate from 1996 through 2013 was greatest amongst children 1-4 years of age (annual reduction of 5.5%) and was less significant for infants (annual reduction of 3.4%). Conclusions: The child mortality rate in Taiwan, especially children <U+2265> 5 years of age, was higher than most OECD countries, including Japan and Korea, which have a similar cultural background to Taiwan. Despite a drastic reduction in the mortality rate for children 1-4 years of age in Taiwan, the proportion of deaths attributed to external causes was greater than the corresponding children in Japan, which is a prevention priority.起始頁-結束頁：221-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510408717篇名：台灣推行家庭計畫成功經驗對公衛施政的啟示並列篇名：Lessons for public health programs from the successful experience of Taiwan Family Planning Program作者：林惠生(Hui-Sheng Lin);李孟智(Meng-Chih Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510409718篇名：我國食品香料之安全性與管理問題芻議並列篇名：An initiative on the safety and management of food flavorings in Taiwan作者：余旭勝(Hsu-Sheng Yu);江宏哲(Hung-Che Chiang);李志(Jih-Heng Li)關鍵字：食品安全;食品香料;香料及萃取物製造協會;毒性;安全性評估;food safety;food flavoring;FEMA;toxicity;safety assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：香料在食品加工及家庭烹調常用來增強食品的風味，然而隨著消費者保護意識的抬頭，香料的食用安全性已成為社會大眾所關注的民生議題。世界各國對食品香料的管理法規雖不一致，但美國香料及萃取物製造協會(Flavor and Extract Manufacturers Association, FEMA)的香料安全評價結果為重要參考，現今香料經FEMA評價為安全而列為FEMA GRAS (Generally Recognized As Safe)香料者接近3,000品項。惟目前我國表列合法的食品香料僅有90品項，雖然安全資料亦主要來自FEMA，且該些列管人工香料物質的安全性都有經過檢視，照說在合理劑量下人工香料是安全的；但是從另一個角度而言，我國現行法規並未明確訂定香料的完整品項及其使用劑量，且對香料的管理主要都是參考國外的法規，缺少國人的攝取資料進行安全風險確認，以致風險評估尚無法完全落實。為使我國標準與國際接軌，衛生福利部刻正修訂「香料品項建議清單(草案)」，研議增加香料項目。未來也建議建立香料安全評估標準，進行風險評估，落實香料單體化合物品項之即時納管及其安全性評估，以確保食品香料使用的安全性。英文摘要：Food flavorings are preparations widely used for food processing and home cooking to enhance the smell and taste of food. Because of increasing demand for consumer protection, the general population has recently paid much greater attention to the safety of food flavors. Legislation controlling the use of food flavors vary among countries. The US Flavor and Extract Manufacturers Association (FEMA) has evaluated and approved near 3,000 substances as FEMA GRAS (Generally Recognized as Safe) flavors. In Taiwan, there are only 90 items of food flavorings complying with the safety rules of the US FEMA, and Taiwan FDA has officially approved these substances for use as food flavors. Currently, many of flavors used in food businesses and industries, and home cooks remain unevaluated and not fully regulated in Taiwan. Information on daily intakes or exposures to these flavorings are yet unavailable for a risk assessment. In line with the international standards, the Ministry of Health and Welfare has started to propose an updated additive list with a greater variety of flavors. To better consolidate the safety of food flavoring use in Taiwan, it is imperative in the future to update the items of food flavorings for control and to establish the safety criteria by conducting a risk assessment for all flavoring substances.起始頁-結束頁：9-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510405919篇名：台灣校園近視防治軌跡並列篇名：Trajectory of myopia prevention in Taiwanese schools作者：張麗春(Li-Chun Chang);吳佩昌(Pei-Chang Wu);牛玉珍(Yu-Zhen Niu);陳敏麗(Min-Li Chen);廖梨伶(Li-Ling Liao)關鍵字：近視防治;校園;政策;vision care;school;policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：學童視力惡化的情形一直是台灣教育與衛生主管機關所關注的健康議題，釐清校園推動視力保健的過去以及當前遭遇的困難乃為當務之急。本文針對歷年來台灣政府單位推動校園視力保健相關的官方文件、統計資料以及重要研究報告或調查等資料的分析，系統性的呈現出校園近視防治的軌跡。本文首先呈現全國學童視力不良率的嚴峻情形，並歸納出政府單位自1980年起至今，為了應對此問題所執行的視力保健政策的五個階段歷程，而自2010年起，學校開始運用實證性戶外活動保護因子做為校園視力保健的推動主軸後，國小學童視力不良情形已有改善之趨勢。本文進一步探討全國的眼科醫療資源不足與分布不均的現象，此為未來學童控度防盲上的重要挑戰。建議由中央成立跨部會小組推動近視防治，有效處理學童視力篩檢與複診的就醫問題、建立近視治療與控制之共識、結合校園與醫療之高度近視風險個案管理、積極推動近視防治之社區宣導、大眾媒體宣導與家長教育等，唯有透過中央與地方的協助合作，學校教師、家長與學童視力保健知能的提升，方能有效遏止台灣學童近視惡化的問題。英文摘要：Worsening vision among school-age children has been a topic of concern for Taiwanese education and healthcare authorities. Hence, clarifying schools’ existing vision-care promotion strategies and their current difficulties has gained importance. This study systematically illustrates the trajectory of myopia prevention in schools based on an analysis of information on promotion of vision care polices in schools by Taiwan governmental units, including official documents, statistical data, and major research reports and surveys. This paper first presents the high prevalence rates of poor vision among school-age children across Taiwan. The measures adopted by governmental units to solve this problem since 1980 are summarized and categorized into five stages. After 2010, when schools began implementing an evidenced strategy of eye protection during outdoor activities, an improvement in poor vision among primary school children was observed. This paper further explores the nationwide phenomenon of insufficient and unevenly distributed ophthalmological medical resources that poses a significant challenge to controlling and preventing near-sightedness and blindness among school-age children. Finally, we suggest that the central government set up cross-departmental task forces to promote myopia prevention, effectively address difficulties in finding medical assistance for children’s vision problems, establish a consensus on the importance of myopia prevention, integrate school and medical myopia case management, actively promote myopia prevention in local communities, conduct outreach through mass media, and educate parents. By ensuring cooperation between the central and local governments, as well as improving the health knowledge and ability of teachers, parents and children, the increasing prevalence of myopia in Taiwanese schoolchildren can be effectively contained.起始頁-結束頁：17-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510405120篇名：仰臥起坐動作對下背痛的潛在風險並列篇名：Potential risks of sit-up exercise to low back pain作者：林政東(Jenq-Dong Lin)關鍵字：仰臥起坐;仰臥半起;起坐動作範圍;動作節奏;雙足支撐;sit-up;curl-up;range of motion;tempo;leg support期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：下背痛是世界性公衛議題之一，國際著名下背痛及脊椎專家建議，不宜以屈膝雙足支撐的仰臥起坐作為訓練或檢測腹肌肌耐力的動作。其爭議可從雙足之支撐、上半身起坐範圍及動作節奏等三方面加以修正。經過修正，建議的腹肌肌耐力檢測動作為雙足無支撐的慢速仰臥半起訓練動作，此一動作可以激活更高的腹肌肌電水準、較低的屈髖肌群肌激活水準及減緩腰椎壓力，似乎較能避開下背痛的潛在風險。修正動作除了產生較佳的預防下背痛之效度，也具有蠻高的信度水準，足以作為檢測屈腹肌耐力的動作，已廣為美、加等國體適能協會所採用。為了減少大眾曝露於下背痛的風險中，建議學校教育與國家考試不宜採仰臥起坐動作，改採仰臥半起動作。英文摘要：Low back pain is a persistent global problem in public health. World-renowned experts on low back pain and the spine suggest that it may not be suitable for people to perform sit-ups to exercise the abdominal muscles or test their endurance. However, the public, school physical education programs, and the national fitness-education examinations in Taiwan continue to use sit-ups as a means for exercising or testing the endurance of the abdominal muscles. This study proposed three recommendations to enable modifying and improving the leg support, range of upper body motion, and pace of sit-ups. The modified exercise, the curl-up, is suggested as a safer alternative to the sit-up for abdominal-muscle endurance testing. This exercise can activate high levels of myoelectric activity in the abdominal muscles while keeping the activation level of the hip flexor muscles low, thus alleviating lumbar stress and likely lowering the risk of low back pain. Therefore, to lower the risk of low back pain, this paper recommends that school organizations and the national fitness-education examinations use the curl-up to replace the conventional sit-up for abdominal-muscle endurance testing.起始頁-結束頁：31-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20163510405001篇名：系統性文獻回顧－探討太極拳在慢性阻塞性肺疾病患運動耐力、生活品質及健康狀態之成效並列篇名：Effects of Tai Chi on exercise tolerance, quality of life, and health status in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease—a systematic review作者：沈雪珍(Hsueh-Chen Shen);郭素娥(Su-Er Guo)關鍵字：太極拳;慢性阻塞性肺疾病;運動處方;運動耐力;生活品質;Tai Chi;chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;exercise prescription;exercise tolerance;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：肺部復健已是公認慢性阻塞性肺疾病(Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, COPD)有效的管理策略，但臨床使用不高。太極拳運動是國內外專業學會建議的運動，但目前資料顯示各研究對太極拳運動的運動處方、拳法招式等皆有所不同，以致對COPD病患之健康成效至今尚無定論。本系統性文獻回顧的目的旨在評估太極拳運動的成效及運動處方，以作為日後推廣肺部復健替代運動的參考。本文獻回顧使用下列太極拳(Tai Chi)、慢性阻塞性肺疾病(Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease)等關鍵字和醫學主題詞(Medical Subject Headings, MeSH)術語，搜尋9個電子資料庫成立以來至2014年12月29日止的所有出版發表的文獻，共158篇，選取符合篩選標準並排除重複出現的文獻，最後剩12篇隨機對照試驗，再針對相同的成效變項進行彙整、討論與分析。本回顧顯示最佳運動處方為50-60分鐘/次，每週5.5次，中等強度，至少運動3個月。多數研究表明太極拳組與不運動的控制組或呼吸訓練搭配步行的運動組相比，在運動耐力及生活品質有顯著改善；但在健康狀態上，則仍無一致性。太極拳運動能提升COPD病患的運動能力及生活品質，是一種有效的替代運動方案。英文摘要：Although pulmonary rehabilitation is recognized as an effective strategy for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), it remains underused. Tai Chi is recommended as an appropriate exercise by the American Thoracic Society and the European Respiratory Society. However, current evidence-based studies examining the effects of Tai Chi on health and quality of life in patients with COPD differ in exercise frequency, intensity, duration, etc.; therefore, these effects differed across studies. This systematic review evaluates the effects of Tai Chi and its exercise prescription. It is also expected to be as a reference for the development of future alternative exercise programs for pulmonary rehabilitation. This systematic review searched randomized control trials (RCTs) in nine electronic databases from their inception to December 2014, with key words and MeSH terms including “Tai Chi”, “chronic obstructive pulmonary disease” and “COPD”. Twelve RCTs were included; after screening inclusion and exclusion criteria, the outcome variables exercise tolerance, quality of life, and health status were analyzed. The best exercise prescription was found to be 50–60 min per session, moderate intensity, 5.5 times per week, and for at least 3 months. Most studies showed that the Tai Chi group had better exercise tolerance and quality of life than the non-exercise and walking exercise groups. However, the positive effect of Tai Chi on health status was inconsistent. Tai Chi significantly improves exercise tolerance and quality of life and could be an effective alternative exercise program for pulmonary rehabilitation.起始頁-結束頁：39-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040722篇名：慢性腎臟病對全髖關節置換術病患預後情形之影響並列篇名：Impact of chronic kidney disease on outcome of total hip replacement patients作者：張祺君(Chi-Chun Chang);陳威明(Wei-Ming Chen);陳正豐(Cheng-Fong Chen);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：慢性腎臟病;全髖關節置換術;醫療品質;chronic kidney disease;total hip replacement;surgery outcome期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：慢性腎臟病病患因腎性骨病變導致骨密度變低，故全髖關節置換術發生率高於常人，且慢性腎臟病病患因免疫系統失調較容易發生感染，但目前國內缺乏慢性腎臟病病患接受全髖關節置換術預後情形之相關研究，故本研究之目的為探討慢性腎臟病對全髖關節置換術預後之影響。方法：採用回溯性世代研究法，以全民健保2009年至2011年接受全髖關節置換術之成年病患為研究對象，以術前一年是否罹患慢性腎臟病，區分為慢性腎臟病組及無慢性腎臟病組。本研究使用邏輯斯迴歸計算病患罹患慢性腎臟病之傾向分數後進行配對，並以Cox proportional hazard model進行分析。結果：慢性腎臟病病患接受全髖關節置換術後90日內感染、再住院及死亡發生率與風險皆顯著高於腎功能正常者。結論：慢性腎臟病病患接受全髖關節置換術後，感染、再住院與死亡風險均較腎功能正常者高。建議醫院加強照護接受全髖關節置換術之慢性腎臟病病患，多留意易造成感染之因素；骨科醫師應於術前評估時，向慢性腎臟病病患說明其術後發生併發症之風險較高。英文摘要：Objectives: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) has been shown to cause osteoporosis because of renal bone disease, thus CKD patients are at higher risk for total hip replacement (THR) than patients without CKD; however, there are few studies which have determined whether or not the outcomes are positive or negative when CKD patients undergo THR. Therefore, the aim of this study was to explore the influence of CKD on THR patient outcomes. Methods: The study adopted a retrospective cohort study design, and the subjects were adult THR patients. Data were derived from the National Health Insurance Research Database between 2009 and 2011. According to the patients who did or did not have CKD the year prior to the THR, the patients were divided into two groups (CKD and non-CKD groups), and a propensity score was used to match subjects. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to analyze the outcomes. Results: In the CKD group, the 90-day post-operative infection, readmission, and death rates were higher than the non- CKD group. The 90-day post-operative infection (AHR=1.8), readmission (AHR=1.9), and death risk (AHR=3.5) in the CKD group were also higher than the non-CKD group. Conclusions: CKD patients have higher risks of 90-day post-operative infections, re-admission, and death than people without CKD after THR. Health authorities and medical institutions should strengthen the care for patients with CKD receiving THR to reduce the likelihood of adverse outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：53-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040663篇名：心臟衰竭病人出院後照護連續性及就醫機構層級與照護結果及費用之相關性並列篇名：Associations of continuity and level with outcomes and expenses of post-discharge care for patients with heart failure作者：邱翰憶(Han-Yi Chiu);鄭守夏(Shou-Hsia Cheng);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：心臟衰竭;照護連續性;就醫機構層級;照護結果;醫療費用;heart failure;continuity of care;level of care;outcomes of care;medical expenses期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：心臟衰竭住院治療1年內住院率、死亡率及醫療費用均很高。為改善出院後照護結果及控制費用，出院後之門診照護逐漸受重視。本研究目的係探討心臟衰竭病人出院後，門診照護連續性及層級與照護結果及費用之相關性。方法：本研究使用全民健康保險研究資料庫全國代表性樣本，總計2007年至2011年出院之2,909位心臟衰竭病患納入分析。本研究使用廣義估計方程式及群集存活分析控制病人、醫師及機構特性，以檢測出院後門診照護連續性及層級與出院後1年內照護結果及費用之相關性。結果：出院後照護連續性較高與1年內再住院次數較低有關，照護連續性高與1年內死亡率較低有關，而照護連續性較高與總費用(門診、急診及住院照護)較低有關。出院後門診照護於區域醫院、地區醫院及診所的總費用低於醫學中心。結論：出院後照護連續性較高，照護結果較佳且總費用較低；除此，出院後主要於社區醫院或診所接受門診照護之病患結果與醫學中心無差異，但總費用較低。英文摘要：Objectives: One-year readmission and mortality rates, and medical expenses after hospitalization for heart failure are very high. To improve outcomes and control costs of post-discharge care, outpatient care after discharge has been increasingly emphasized. The objective of this study was to examine the associations of continuity and level with outcomes and expenses of post-discharge outpatient care for heart failure patients. Methods: This study used data from a nationwide representative sample through the National Health Insurance Research Database. A total of 2909 heart failure patients discharged from hospitals between 2007 and 2011 were selected for analysis. Generalized estimating equation and clustered survival models were performed after adjustment for patient, physician, and institution characteristics to examine the associations of outpatient continuity and level with 1-year outcomes and expenses of post-discharge care. Results: Higher continuity of care after discharge was associated with fewer re-hospitalizations within 1 year after discharge. High continuity of care was associated with lower 1-year mortality rates. Higher continuity of care was associated with lower total expenses for ambulatory, emergency room, and inpatient care. Patients who received outpatient care in regional hospitals, district hospitals, and clinics had lower total expenses compared with patients in academic medical centers. Conclusions: Higher continuity of care after discharge is associated with better outcomes and lower total expenses. Moreover, patients who mainly receive post-discharge outpatient care in community hospitals or clinics have similar outcomes and lower total expenses compared with patients in academic medical centers.起始頁-結束頁：66-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040654篇名：花蓮縣萬榮鄉與卓溪鄉居民之飲酒型態並列篇名：Drinking patterns of residents in Wanrung and Zhuoxi townships of Hualien County作者：孫亦君(Yi-Chun Sun);朝巾玲(Chin-Ling Cha)關鍵字：飲酒行為;節制飲酒;山地鄉;原住民;drinking pattern;temperate drinking;remote area;indigenous期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：花蓮縣萬榮與卓溪鄉均長期致力於節制飲酒活動。為瞭解居民的飲酒型態及對節制飲酒的看法，我們以自編問卷針對兩鄉居民進行訪問。方法：我們依戶籍資料在兩鄉共12個村中，各隨機選取50名居民進行問卷調查。收集的600份問卷資料中，排除對問題內容不夠瞭解或未按實際情況回答的受訪者資料後，有效可供分析的資料共426份。結果：兩鄉居民的飲酒型態不同。萬榮鄉受訪者中超過六成為飲酒者，但沒有人每天喝；卓溪鄉中飲酒者僅約四成，但是約兩成飲酒者每天喝。不過，兩鄉居民的飲酒時機差異不大。在節酒議題上，多數受訪者不同意「少喝一點就是戒酒」，但是，萬榮鄉受訪者對這個陳述不同意的程度，因個人飲酒現況不同而不同；卓溪鄉受訪者間的差異未達顯著。結論：兩鄉居民飲酒型態不同，因此節酒活動的設計和重點也應不同。此外，節酒活動如果可以獲得教會團體支持，對活動成效應有很大助益。另外，深入瞭解已戒酒者的心路歷程，應可運用於強化未來的節酒活動設計。英文摘要：Objectives: Promoting temperate drinking has been an important health promotion task in the Wanrung and Zhuoxi townships of Hualien County. We conducted a survey to determine the drinking pattern of residents in these two townships and their views on temperate drinking. Methods: Fifty residents from each village in Wanrung and Zhuoxi townships were randomly selected and interviewed with a structured questionnaire. Valid data from 426 residents were analyzed. Results: The drinking patterns of these 2 townships were different. In Wanrung, more than 60% of the residents who were interviewed were drinkers, but none of the residents drank daily. In Zhuoxi, 40% of the residents who were interviewed were drinkers and nearly 20% of the residents drank every day. The majority of residents interviewed in these 2 townships disagreed “drinking less means quitting.” The extent of the disagreement was different among non-drinkers, ex-drinkers, and drinkers in Wanrung, but no differences existed in Zhuoxi. Conclusions: Due to the difference in resident drinking patterns in Wanrung and Zhuoxi, approaches to promote temperate drinking should be different in these two townships. Survey results also revealed that church is likely to be an important force in promoting temperate drinking. Further investigation of the quitting process of ex-drinkers may also be useful. The experiences of ex-drinkers may provide a different perspective in approaches to promote temperate drinking.起始頁-結束頁：80-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040715篇名：台灣中老年人閱讀與認知衰退之關聯性分析並列篇名：Association between reading and cognitive decline in older Taiwanese people作者：陳姿蓉(Tzu-Jung Chen);王俊毅(Jiun-Yi Wang)關鍵字：閱讀;認知衰退;認知儲備;休閒活動;中老年人;reading;cognitive decline;cognitive reserve;leisure activities;older adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：目標：在高齡化人口中，伴隨老化而來的認知障礙益發受到重視。如何維持中老年人認知功能是一重要課題。本研究欲藉國內大型世代資料，分析台灣中老年人閱讀與認知衰退的關聯性。方法：本研究分析「台灣地區中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查」2003及2007年資料。以2003年為基礎點，排除有認知功能缺損或不識字者，及非本人作答或資料不全者，得3,147位<U+2265>50歲之研究個案。以羅吉斯迴歸(logistic regression)控制社會人口學、健康狀況及健康行為等變項，分析高低閱讀頻率與四年後認知衰退之關聯。結果：若將閱讀活動保留在所有休閒活動(共十項)中，結果顯示高休閒參與者(<U+2265>3項/週)的認知衰退風險較低(OR=0.56, p＜0.001)。若將閱讀活動從休閒項目中個別獨立出來，結果顯示高休閒參與者的認知衰退風險雖仍較低(OR=0.73, p=0.050)，但關聯性較弱；而有高閱讀頻率者的衰退風險則明顯低於低閱讀頻率者(OR=0.51, p＜0.001)。另依教育程度分群分析，發現高休閒參與或高閱讀頻率(OR=0.57, 0.50;p＜0.01)皆對低受教育年數(0-6年)受訪者的認知衰退有延緩作用，但對高教育年數受訪者的影響則不明顯。結論：本研究凸顯閱讀對預防中老年人認知退的重要性。建議中老年人養成每週至少閱讀一次的習慣，以促進認知功能健康及延緩衰退。英文摘要：Objectives: Cognitive impairment in the aging process has become increasingly critical, especially in aging populations. Thus maintaining the cognitive function of older adults is crucial. The present study aimed to determine the association between reading and cognitive decline in older Taiwanese people by using national cohort survey data. Methods: The data sets of the Taiwan Longitudinal Survey on Aging from 2003 and 2007 were analyzed. After we excluded those who were cognitively impaired or unable to read in 2003 (baseline), in addition to proxy-reported or incomplete data, a total of 3,147 eligible participants <U+2265>50 years old remained. The logistic regression model was used to determine the association between reading and the subsequent 4-year cognitive decline, adjusted for sociodemographic variables, health status, and health behaviors. Results: When reading was included in the 10 types of leisure activities, our results showed that the likelihood of cognitive decline was lower for participants with a higher level (<U+2265>3 types/week) of leisure activities (OR=0.56, p＜0.001). When reading was excluded from the leisure activities, the results still suggested a lower likelihood of cognitive decline for participants with a higher level of leisure activities (OR= 0.73, p=0.050); however, the strength of the association was apparently lower. Nevertheless, participants exhibiting a higher frequency of reading were less likely to suffer from cognitive decline compared with those having a lower frequency of reading (OR=0.51, p＜0.001). Furthermore, our results of subgroup analysis showed that a higher level of leisure activities or reading (OR=0.57, 0.50; p＜0.01) could delay cognitive decline of participants with a lower educational level (0-6 years of formal education), while the effects were not significant for those with higher educational levels. Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate the advantage of reading to delay cognitive decline in older adults. We suggest that older adults read once a week or more to promote health and delay cognitive decline.起始頁-結束頁：94-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040606篇名：評論：學到老，活到老並列篇名：Commentary: live and learn作者：楊浩然(Hao-Jan Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：105-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016351040600101篇名：寇斯專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：鄭政秉(Cheng-Ping Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：寇斯廠商理論之精義：產權整合與公司治理並列篇名：Coase Theory of the Firm: Property Rights Integration and Corporate Governance作者：承立平(Alfred Li-Ping Cheng)關鍵字：寇斯理論;產業組織;通用汽車與費雪車體公司;契約機制;公司治理;Coase Theory of the Firm;Property Rights;General Motors and Fisher Body;Contractual Mechanism;Corporate Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文闡釋寇斯（Ronald H. Coase）所揭櫫廠商理論的精義。長期以來寇斯教授分別以不同時期的論文，細說分明美國在20世紀初期汽車產業結構，深入研究通用汽車公司（GM）和費雪兄弟車體製造公司（FB），從長期契約到垂直整合經典實例，透析美國1920年代汽車產業生產供應鏈組織與合作關係的穩定性，是因為兩造之間建立良好的契約，鞏固了供應鏈上下游的供需關係，以符合對市場和利潤的預期。契約內涵主要包括產權交易、利潤分配、控制經營權等現代公司治理的要項。本文綜論寇斯教授的產權整合案例，導引現代公司治理之濫觴，分析除了財務重心之外，產權和人才的整合亦是公司治理的重要內涵。體認寇斯教授的主張，經濟學者必須徹底揚棄不求證據而誤導研究內涵的主觀邏輯方法，不再以不疑有他的態度或純以黑板模式的論理來治學。寇斯教授呼籲經濟學的變革，應以掌握事實證據的研究基礎，將經濟學研究帶回正軌成為真正的經濟科學。本文確認：企業組織的運作與治理，企業組織的整併存在運作與治理機制；而治理的要素，就是契約內涵協議和信守的相容性誘因。與寇斯理論相結合：廠商內部的協商與調和成本，極關重要；尤其關係到具關鍵性的營運資源，這些資源的產權，在自願性的交易基礎上，可透過協商談判建立彼此信賴的契約，促使產權所有者因能合理獲致權益報酬而進入穩定的契約關係，或終至整併。英文摘要：Based on the facts of American industrial organization in the decades from 1900 to 1920, this paper, following Professor Coase, delineates the integration between General Motors (GM) and Fisher Body (FB) due to their cooperative and contractual arrangements. It is found that Coase theory of the firm has implicitly incorporated the spirit of modern corporate governance. This paper concludes in three aspects. On corporate governance, improving governance structure for conducting internal and external business relationship is the key successful factor for cooperation. The governance arrangement through negotiation and practical experience on cooperation would therefore guarantee final integration. On industrial technology, its exchange for achieving competition by business operators would enhance the core competence by understanding the complementarity between upstream and downstream firms. On market dynamism, incentives to integration always stimulate business operators to discover the market niche. Thus the corporate governance and the contractual design would be the focus for integration mechanism in business practice. In the case of GM and FB, except for the subjective appealing for the market access by FB and expansive desire by GM, both were driven by the market, technology and contractual arrangement into the arena of integration.起始頁-結束頁：3-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：交易成本基礎的創業策略分析：以信義房屋與王品集團為例並列篇名：Transaction Cost Entrepreneurship and Competitive Strategies: An Illustration Using Two Taiwanese Firms作者：陳善瑜(Shan-Yu Chen);陳瓊怜(Chyong-Ling Judy Chen);顏厚棟(Ho-Don Yan)關鍵字：交易成本創業家精神;競爭策略;信義房屋;王品集團;Transaction Cost Entrepreneurship;Competitive Strategies;Sinyi;Wowprime期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以寇斯之交易成本經濟學為基礎，結合創業家精神的概念，說明廠商如何從存在的交易成本中發現機會，研擬創業策略，並從中創造競爭優勢，因而得以吸引顧客「買而不作」。本文以信義房屋與王品集團為案例，說明兩家企業如何為顧客設想，以降低品質衡量之不確定性與治理之不確定性所引起之交易成本。值此消費者主權之時代，本文的說明可以提供一般廠商從顧客的立場出發，以降低顧客之交易成本為策略，經由管理交易成本，創造競爭優勢。英文摘要：Recounting transaction cost economics (a la Coase), this paper repositions entrepreneurship to the center stage for firms to create their competitive advantages through inducing consumers to choose to buy rather than to make. We study two firms, Sinyi and Wowprime, as two examples of different strategies to mitigate customers' external transaction costs resulting from measurement uncertainty and governance uncertainty. In the age of consumer sovereignty, strategies designing by considering what obstructs customers from buying can be rather effective, and the perspective of transaction cost theory provides a useful concept for firms to gain competitive advantage.起始頁-結束頁：41-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：科斯筆下的中國制度變革並列篇名：How New Institutional Economists Interpret China’s Great Transformation: Coase’s Book as an Example作者：鄭政秉(Cheng-Ping Cheng)關鍵字：科斯;新制度經濟學;中國經濟;制度變革;財產權;Ronald Coase;New Institutional Economics;China's Economy;Institutional Transformation;Property Right System期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來，堅拒政治轉型的中國在經濟表現上取得了驚人的成就，甚至遠遠超過1990年代在政經制度上急驟轉向的蘇聯及東歐諸國。以科斯（Ronald H. Coase）為首的新制度經濟學將會如何看待中國經濟近年的巨大成就？他們所詮釋的中國政經制度變革有何特點？他們的詮釋上有那些盲點與爭議？本文首先回顧新制度經濟學之起源及核心理論，其次再以科斯、王寧（2013a）的《變革中國》一書為藍本，檢視以科斯為主的新制度學家解釋中國崛起的特點，接著本文指出以「邊緣革命」為主概念的新制度經濟學對中國的詮釋仍存在顯著之不足及爭議。本文發現，科斯雖被視為新制度經濟學創始人之一，但他本身並沒有提出一個清晰的制度架構。而他對中國市場化的解釋其實是更接近海耶克（Friedrich Hayek）式的奧地利學派主張，而非新制度經濟學的理論。本文認為即使以最寬鬆的制度經濟學的架構來檢視，中國大陸雖意外的、蹣跚地由中央計劃經濟逐步向市場經濟轉型，但迄今為止，市場經濟的轉型尚未臻完全。若要依靠目前尚未完全的制度，中國大陸將難以支撐其未來經濟持續的成長。英文摘要：In past 10 years, China, who has been resisting to change her political system, has reached a great economic performance that is significantly better than the ones of Russia and East European counties who were dramatically switched to democracy regimes in 1990s. How do New Institutional Economists (NIEs) interpret China's great transformation since 1980s? What are the features and limitations of NIEs' perspective in interpreting China? In order to explore these issues, this paper first reviews the rising of NIEs and their main theories. Then, based on Coase and Wang (2013)'s book - How China Became Capitalist, the features of Coase's story is reviewed. However, there are some significant shortages and controversies in Coase's interpretation on China's great transformation. Especially, it is obviously that China has not yet successfully built a stable property right system and legal system through which China can persistently support her economic growth in the future. Finally, this paper figures out what should China make efforts in order to reach an efficient institutional system.起始頁-結束頁：85-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：回憶寇斯和芝大法學院：從交易成本到言論市場並列篇名：Remembering Ronald Coase and the University of Chicago Law School: From Transaction Cost to the Marketplace of Ideas作者：劉靜怡(Ching-Yi Liu)關鍵字：寇斯;法律經濟分析;交易成本;觀念市場;言論自由;Coase;Economic Analysis of Law;Transaction Cost;Marketplace of Ideas;Freedom of Speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：1991年諾貝爾經濟學獎得主羅納德．寇斯（Ronald H. Coase）對芝大法學院和法律經濟分析領域影響深遠。寇斯在維吉尼亞大學任教期間的重要論文「the Problem of Social Cost」是「交易成本」概念的革命之作，奠定了以經濟學理論和方法研究法律問題和現象的方向。至芝大法學院任教後，寇斯長年擔任重要期刊Journal of Law and Economics的主編，對法律經濟分析領域的貢獻難以計數。寇斯終其一生努力將經濟學轉化為與真實世界能夠徹底連結起來的「真正社會科學」。寇斯的另一個重要貢獻是以經濟學分析「思想觀念市場」，並挑戰美國聯邦最高法院見解，將言論自由的保護範圍拓展至「商業言論」，從而引發後代學者持續討論。晚年的寇斯談到中國的經濟發展時，仍然一再強調自由的思想觀念市場，否則長期下來不僅會造成科技創新乏力，也影響商品和服務市場的健全發展。思想觀念市場的敵人，除了政府干預外，還有人們普遍認為存在所謂顛撲不破的唯一真理這種信念和思考習慣，寇斯提醒我們，認識到世界上沒有絕對真理存在，才能維繫自由的思想觀念市場。寇斯的自由思想觀念市場理念，對任何憲政民主制度的擁護者來說都是永恆的課題。英文摘要：Ronald Coase is the most influential scholar in the history of the University of Chicago Law School and the field of economic analysis of law. Coase’s groundbreaking paper ”the Problem of Social Cost” in 1960 offered insights about the revolutionary concept of transaction cost and laid the foundation for the economic analysis of law. Coase contributed a great deal in transforming economics into a genuine social science as he made his every effort to connect economics with the real world. His scholarship fundamentally changed the way lawyers approach issues of when and how government should intervene in the market. Another intellectual impact made by Coase is his economic analysis on the marketplace of ideas, which challenged the position held by the Supreme Court of the United States and this extended the protection of freedom of speech to ”commercial speech” and also inspired consequent academic discourses for several generations of scholars. Late in his life Coase continued to emphasize ”the free marketplace of ideas” in his last book How China Became Capitalist. Arguing in the book for the central role of free marketplace of ideas in driving technological innovations and the sound development of the market of goods services. Coase reminded us of the importance of recognizing the fact that there is no absolute truth on the earth and the need for keeping a free marketplace of ideas. His enduring legacy on the free marketplace of ideas shall be the long-standing concern for anyone who believes in constitutionalism.起始頁-結束頁：115-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：ㄏㄝㄣ　ㄋㄚ．，感恩，Coase並列篇名：HENA, Appreciation, and Coase作者：干學平(Steven S. Kan)關鍵字：寇斯;對調;邊界;交易成本;財富效果;Coase;Reciprocity;Boundary;Transaction Cost;Wealth Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：對調與邊界兩概念是認識寇斯貢獻的最重要基礎。一旦偏離這兩個堅強的基礎，一位學者往往就會扭曲或誤解寇斯所發揚的交易成本概念，以及他在廠商與財產權本質問題上的洞見。本文藉由一對父女書信往返討論的對話情境，深入淺出地回顧寇斯主要貢獻。本文也針對寇斯遭受到學術界的曲解與嚴厲批評一一提出反駁。其中，在純粹的理論方面，最重要的莫過於交易成本具主觀本質以及交易成本為零下畢竟沒有財富效果。除此外，文中也說明如何正確地以寇斯的貢獻來了解台灣經濟政策上的一些謬誤。英文摘要：Reciprocity and boundary are the most important foundation to understanding Coase's contribution. Deviating from the two solid foundations will result in a misunderstanding or distortion of Coase's idea of transaction cost and his insights into the nature of the firm and property rights. This article succinctly reviews Coase's major contribution in a dialogue context of discussing mails between a father and a daughter. In addition, this article refutes harsh and distorting criticisms against Coase. In the aspect of pure theory, the most important points are the subjective nature of transaction cost and that there can be no wealth effect under the assumption of zero transaction cost. This article also demonstrates how to correctly apply Coase's insights to detect problems of some of Taiwan's recent economic policies.起始頁-結束頁：143-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：緬懷寇斯：兼談「經濟分析法學」的修行並列篇名：In Memoriam: Ronald H. Coase and My Immersion in Law and Economics作者：劉紹樑(Lawrence S. Liu)關鍵字：法律與經濟;寇斯;交易成本;經濟革新;臺灣;Law and Economics;Coase;Transaction Cost, Economic Reform;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文追憶寇斯的貢獻，包括他與芝加哥大學法學院的淵源，並兼談「經濟分析法學」（以下稱L&E）的「修行」。經濟分析法學發源於芝加哥大學，這種用經濟學（以及其他社會科學）來分析與評估法律的來源、內涵、成效、演變的方法，在過去50年來成為「顯學」，寇斯居功厥偉。本文用「修行」一詞來顯示它對作者的影響。本文先從個人留學攻讀法律的角度，追憶與L&E的接觸，以及轉學芝加哥大學法學院並接觸到寇斯相關論文，以及所受到的影響。這種研究方法打破臺灣或大陸法系傳統教學模式，作者從驚恐到因應，從接受到信服，受惠良多。本文繼而簡介寇斯主要論文的背景、意義以及對作者研究臺灣財經社會制度諸多相關議題（如公司法制、併購、私募基金、解除管制、都市更新、產權行使的協調等等）的啟發。最後，本文從寇斯晚年的研究重心探討L&E未來的發展與挑戰，包括他對經濟學界「數學化」現況的失望、對研究中國市場化進程的用心，並指出如果寇斯的理念可讓更多實務界人士成為修行者，其影響將更為廣泛。英文摘要：This paper pays tribute to Ronald H. Coase, a founder of the law and economics (L&E) movement. It traces his relationship with the University of Chicago and discusses the author's immersion in L&E. I discuss the origin, methodology, development and impact of this interdisciplinary approach in the last half century. I use the term of immersion or pilgrimage to highlight how it has affected the author's own thinking and research. This paper begins by recounting how the author became exposed to L&E around his arrival at the University of Chicago as a student, and sets forth how the work of giants like Coase first came as a shock to the uninitiated author, who later embraced it wholeheartedly. The paper contains a summary of Coase's contribution and some anecdotes surrounding the publication of his important papers. In passing, the author describes his own research in recent years, in areas like capital market reform, mergers and acquisitions, private equity, de-regulation, property right and urban renewal, and how the L&E approach has influenced his scholarship. This paper closes by describing Coase's work before passing away, and his disillusion with today's mathematics-infatuated economics profession. It argues that L&E as espoused by Coase will be more influential if it can convert practitioners like the author.起始頁-結束頁：183-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：Ronald H. Coase:一個完整的經濟學家並列篇名：Ronald H. Coase: A Wholesome Economist作者：劉瑞華(Ruey-Hua Liu)關鍵字：寇斯;交易成本;財產權;Ronald H. Coase;Transaction Cost;Property Rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：1991年諾貝爾經濟學獎得主寇斯（Ronald H. Coase）教授於2013年9月2日過世，享年102歲，為經濟學界留下獨一無二的典範。無論在其學思養成過程，或者研究主題與方法，寇斯教授都表現出特立獨行的開創性格，因此能夠建立起「交易成本」與「財產權」理論， 而且進而帶動新制度經濟學的學派發展。本文從作者個人與其有限的接觸出發，回顧學習過程中如何受其理論啟發，並且追隨其所開創的研究方向，在學術工作上努力。本文寫作於得知寇斯教授過世消息之時，謹以此向這位經濟學界少見的大師致敬。英文摘要：1991 Nobel Prize laureate in Economics Ronald H. Coase died on September 2, 2013, aged 102, leaving a unique legacy to the economics colleagues. Professor Coase established himself as a scholar of pioneering character that started from the time he graduated from the university and carried over during his entire academic career. Consequently he created the theories of transaction cost and property rights, and led the way to the development of New Institutional Economics. This paper was driven by my personal brief contact with Professor Coase and written with the content of reviewing how I was inspired by his works in school and following his academic direction later in my teaching and research career. I wrote this paper after Professor Coase’s death was announced to sincerely pay my respect to this great master in economics.起始頁-結束頁：205-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：「槁木」與「輕身」：《莊子》注疏、詩人具身認知、醫家辨證的跨界討論並列篇名：”Withered Tree” and ”Lightness of Body”: An Interdisciplinary Discussion of Zhuangzi Commentaries, the Poet’s Embodied Cognition, and the Dialectical Diagnosis of the School of Physicians作者：蔡璧名(Bi-Ming Tsai)關鍵字：莊子;形如槁木;輕身;工夫;傳統醫學;Zhuangzi;Body Like a Withered Tree;Lightness of Body;Technique;Traditional Chinese Medicine期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：民國以降，華人學界《莊子》研究多聚焦於心性論，將身體描述視為心靈論述的取譬。日本學界雖肯定《莊子》書中蘊含身體技術，卻未涉及具體樣貌、操作方法。面對人間世中種種患害，莊子提出「形如槁木」與「心如死灰」為其解方與生命追求。然而「形如槁木」體現的身體情狀是何等模樣？又需透過什麼樣的身體技術才能臻至？本文採專家與生手研究進路，首先由《莊子》文本與歷代注疏，確認書中身、心技術的存在。歷代注疏雖隱然顯示「形如槁木」作為身體技術的可能，卻難據以建構具體工夫措施。因此本研究兼採歷代詩人讀《莊》觀點暨「形如槁木」相關體會，並辨析與道家思想素有「同源」之稱的醫家文本所述之身輕與重，探究《莊子》「形如槁木」此一象徵，是如何為後世所理解、實踐操作，如何開展出為歷代詩人所體會、書寫並深植於傳統醫學論述中的「輕身」身體感與修鍊工夫傳統。倘「形如槁木」的體會與技術是與傳統醫學、詩歌交織延展、相互影響，係屬一本同株、根深蔭濃之「輕身」傳統的大樹。則一旦將這些維管束彌縫整合，許能更詳實地掌握「輕身」思想究竟為何（knowing what），並使具體操作（knowing how）莊子身體技術與心性工夫的每一環節成為可能。英文摘要：Much of Chinese scholarship on Zhuangzi since 1912 has been based upon an idealist framework, regarding the body as a metaphor for a theory of mind and spirit. This essay, however, argues that techniques of both body and mind exist in Zhuangzi, and examines Zhuangzi in light of the School of Physicians tradition of ”lightness of body.” Viewed together with traditional Chinese medicine and poetry, the technique of ”the body like a withered tree” lets us better grasp ”knowing what” such thinking of ”lightness/forgetting/loss of body” consist of, and ”knowing how” to implement the mental and bodily techniques of Zhuangzi.起始頁-結束頁：219-290資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：同化或馴化？日治時期殖民政策與臺灣的養老事業之歷史探討並列篇名：Assimilation or Domestication? Historical Analysis on the Japanese Colonial Policies and Elderly Welfare in Taiwan作者：劉家勇(Hubert Liu)關鍵字：養老事業;日治時期;臺灣;Elderly Welfare;Japanese Colonial Time;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究針對臺灣於日治時期殖民政策及其與養老事業發展作歷史回顧及分析。探討日治時期臺灣養老事業政策與日本殖民政策間之關係，分析日本殖民政府之養老事業政策脈絡，及其政策之施行。研究方法採比較與歷史研究法。研究發現包括：1.日治時期的養老事業政策受其殖民政策之影響呈現階段性的差異。日治前期官方介入較深，養老事業政策為「二重式福利體系」；中後期官方角色淡出後，則漸回復半官半民／民間主導之社會福利型態，而日治時期養老事業政策即無進一步實質發展。2.日治時期之養老事業政策有顯著的「工具性」 作用，不僅是為其殖民目的服務，更在政策目標與手段上錯位。3.日治時期的養老事業政策主要藉由「孔教」之文化影響力而施行，透過敬老活動等宣傳效應，冀求在精神面及思想面同化臺人，而當時已在日本施行之社會保險制度則未被引入。日治時期的養老事業政策直接影響了戰後臺灣的老人福利相對落後的事實，而殖民政府的若干養老事業政策作為及原則，也為威權國民黨政府所承繼，間接遲滯了臺灣的老人福利發展進程。英文摘要：This essay focuses on the elderly welfare policy in Japanese colonial Taiwan. In terms of historical review and analysis, the relationship between the elderly welfare policy and Japanese colonial policy is explored. Document analysis and comparative research method are adopted in this research. Research findings include: 1. At the beginning the Japanese colonial government involved deeply within a ”dual system” of the elderly welfare, yet colonial government's role was retrenched and the gentry took responsibility again to provide the elderly welfare later. 2. In Japanese colonial time, the elderly welfare was eminent on its ”instrumental function”, which did not only serve for Japanese colonial policy, but the aim and manner of the elderly welfare policy were tortured. 3. Japanese colonial government implemented the elderly welfare through the Confucianism to politically legitimize its rule and spiritually to assimilate Taiwanese. The Japanese colonial ruling directly effects to the backward development of the elderly welfare, and its legacies which were partly inherited by authoritarian Kuomintang government indirectly impact to the belated development of elderly welfare.起始頁-結束頁：291-343資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：「博弈」專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：鄭政秉(Cheng-Ping Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：馬祖發展國際觀光渡假中心及博弈產業之利弊分析並列篇名：The Cost and Benefit of Developing Integrated Resort and Gaming Industry in Matsu作者：王健全(Jiann-Chyuan Wang);傅清萍(Ching-Pin Fu);魏聰哲(Tsung-Che Wei)關鍵字：馬祖;國際觀光渡假中心;博弈產業;成本效益分析;Matsu;Integrated resort;Gaming Industry;Cost and Benefit Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討馬祖發展博弈產業的可行性，並嘗試包括及不包括博弈產業的國際渡假中心模式，分析其經濟效益與成本，進而探討其可行性。馬祖發展含博弈的觀光渡假中心，可帶動交通運輸、經濟、餐飲、旅遊、零售、金融等產業的發展，並可創造就業機會、增加政府稅收，且可改善馬祖交通。但也會帶來物價上升、社會價值觀改變、犯罪案件增加等經濟及社會成本。因此，未來嚴謹及完整的法令規範及監督制度以降低博弈帶來的負面衝擊，是政府未來規劃馬祖渡假中心必須優先正視的。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to explore the feasibility of developing integrated resort and gaming industry in Matsu. To achieve the aim, we attempt to analyze the cost and benefit of integrated resort center (IR) with or without gaming industry. Developing IR, with gaming industry, can not only promote the development transportation, hotel, restaurant, leisure, retail, financial service and related industries, but create job opportunity, tax revenue and improve Matsu'a transportation. However, it will also result in price inflation, ruining social value and arousing crime rate and so on. Therefore, to develop Matsu's IR, we need to design delicate and extensive regulation and social norm, as well as complete supervision system, in order to reduce the negative impact of gaming industry.起始頁-結束頁：3-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：不宜發展「博弈觀光特區」之論證與事實基礎並列篇名：The Arguments and Facts Against ”Legalizing Casino Gambling in Designated Tourism Districts”作者：葉智魁(Chih-Kuei Yeh);顏怡音(I-Yin Yen)關鍵字：地方發展;離島建設;賭博合法化;社會成本;整合式度假區;Regional Development;Off-shore Island Development;Gambling Legalization;Social Costs;Integrated Resort期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：是否應該開放「賭博業」和開設「博弈觀光特區」，自解嚴以來已數度引發朝野各界熱烈爭論的議題，歷經二十多年的爭議後，立法院雖於2009年1月12日通過了「博弈條款」，澎湖縣並於同年9月26日舉行國內首次「博弈公投」但未通過，馬祖則於2012年7月7日進行舉行公投，並通過了國內第一個「觀光賭場」的設置案，而澎湖促賭方在馬祖「博弈公投」過關後，也於2016年捲土重來，卻再次被居民否決。事實上，長期以來除了離島，大多數本島各縣市前後任首長都曾競相表態支持爭取在自家開設「觀光賭場」，然而對此議題所涉及之層面和開設「博弈觀光特區」會帶來些什麼影響，能有足夠認識的人相當欠缺。有鑑於此，本文探討的內容涵蓋：特種產業特區化發展的邏輯、「觀光賭場」的本質、「觀光賭場」的實際場景、支持開設「博弈觀光特區」者的盲點──涵蓋藉對開設「博弈觀光特區」以「興利除弊」的可能性與可行性之分析。希望能藉著對相關問題的深入剖析，並借鏡他山之石，以提供各界在思考「臺灣是否適合以『特區』的形式來發展所謂博弈觀光事業」的參考。英文摘要：This paper discusses whether Taiwan should legalize gambling and allow casinos to be operated in designated tourism districts-- issues having been discussed and debated over the past 2 decades. Various issues have been addressed in the paper including: the rationale of applying designated districts for the development of specific industries; the nature of ”Legalizing Casino Gambling in Designated Tourism Districts”; how casinos really operate; and other relevant issues including the possibility and feasibility of adopting gambling businesses to rejuvenate economically depressed regions. This paper is written with the hope that this would clarify what need to be taken into account whenever a critical public policy issue such as ”gambling legalization” has been brought up.起始頁-結束頁：35-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：小蝦米對大鯨魚：2009年澎湖博弈公投反對與贊成動員形式的比較研究並列篇名：David Versus Goliath: A Comparison on the Mobilization of Supporters and Opponents in the 2009 Penghu Casino Referendum作者：蔡依倫(I-Lun Tsai)關鍵字：澎湖博弈公投;社會運動;公民投票;動員;政策公投;Penghu Casino Referendum;Social Movement;Referendum;Mobilization;Policy Referendum期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：2009年1月離島建設條例博弈條款使賭博除罪化，並將爭議十餘年觀光賭場交付地方性公民投票決定，同年9月的澎湖博弈公投否決了賭場進駐。這是自公投法實施以來，正反雙方最激烈動員的公投案之一，觀光賭場是澎湖地方政治菁英長期爭取的經濟政策，反對方則是由地方公民團體訴諸守護家園。本研究分析贊成方與反對方各自如何進行集體動員？研究結果顯示，像博弈公投這類的政策公投，贊成方在動員過程受益於地方政府，享有較多專屬的在地資源。反觀，反對方則須自行生產資源或汲取無專屬性的文化資源與道德資源，以致於衍生出「小蝦米對大鯨魚」的不對等競爭。其次，該次公投仍受到在地政治生態的影響。澎湖博弈公投案的小蝦米固然搏倒大鯨魚，但是基於上述兩點討論，本文指出公民投票（政策公投）對公民參與政治仍有侷限。英文摘要：The enactment of Offshore Islands Development Act in January 2009 paved way for the tourist casino, which can be legalized with the positive result of a local referendum. In Penghu, where the casino dispute has lasted for nearly a decade, local people voted against the gaming industry in a referendum in September 2009. While local political elites are the proponent of tourist casino, the opponents are made up of civil-society organizations which vowed to protect hometown identity. This article researches the diverse patterns of mobilization between the two camps in the first casino referendum in Taiwan. In terms of resources, the pro-casino force outnumbered its rival. Moreover, my study reveals that local politics played an important role in affecting the referendum outcome as public participation was constrained in many ways.起始頁-結束頁：79-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：從社會變遷的角度論賭博罪之存廢並列篇名：Discuss Decriminalization of Gambling in the Social Change Perspective作者：吳佳樺(Chia-Hua Wu)關鍵字：賭博;犧牲道德觀;容忍道德觀;無被害人犯罪;除罪化;Gambling;Ethic of Sacrifice;Ethic of Tolerance;Victimless Crime;Decriminalized期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以「量化研究方法」分別從司法實務及社會民意兩個面向，探討賭博罪的犯罪現象，以及司法實務與社會大眾對於賭博罪的態度。首先，在第「貳」部分討論學說上關於賭博罪存廢之爭論。接著，在第「參」部分分析司法實務對於賭博案件的態度，第「肆」部分則說明社會大眾對於賭博的看法，最後於第「伍」部分作結。依照本文的觀察，執法機關及司法機關未將賭博罪視為重點查緝或需嚴厲處罰的重大犯罪，社會對於賭博的價值觀也已經改變，現在已是廢除賭博罪的時刻。英文摘要：This article uses quantitative research to discuss judiciary and public's attitude toward gambling. First, in Part II it provides the controversies regarding decriminalization of gambling. Then, in Part III it analyzes judiciary's attitude toward gambling. In Part IV, it explains public's opinions about gambling. In my observation, police and judiciary didn't treat gambling as severe crime, the public also change their view toward gambling, it's time to decriminalize offenses of gambling.起始頁-結束頁：119-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：給馬祖一個機會並列篇名：Offering a Developing Opportunity to Matsu作者：楊綏生(Suei-Sheng Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：173-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：馬祖博弈公投的觀察與省思並列篇名：Inspecting Matsu's Referendum on Setting Casino作者：何宗勳(Tsung-Hsun Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：177-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：「臺灣發展博弈產業之商機與危機」座談會並列篇名：The Symposium on Taiwan's Casino Industry作者：魏千<U+5CEF>(Chien-Feng Wei);簡淨華期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：185-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：從死與死亡的區分開展萊維納斯以倫理觀點對海德格存有論之批判：以《存在與時間》為例並列篇名：Levinas’ Criticism on Heidegger’s Ontology, from the Disparity of Dying and Death to Ethic: An Example on Being and Time作者：楊婉儀(Wan-I Yang)關鍵字：海德格;萊維納斯;此在;存有論;倫理;Heidegger;Levinas;Dasein;Ontology;Ethic期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：依照萊維納斯對於《存在與時間》的詮釋，雖然海德格試圖區別自身存有論於傳統哲學，但在他以存在為優先所構建的存有論中，人的意涵依然被存在模態所限制，以至於人以及倫理的問題被隱蔽。由此觀點看，萊維納斯對於海德格思想的轉譯與詮釋，所涉及的從存有 論轉向倫理的關懷，亦關乎了其回應海德格並發展自身思想的嘗試。在閱讀萊維納斯對於海德格的批判與回應中，我們發現萊維納斯嘗試從死（le mourir）與死亡（la mort）的差異，區分此在與其所關注的責任主體的差異。如果萊維納斯的責任主體是以生存（l'exister） 為承擔他人的基礎，那麼海德格思想中與死亡緊密相關的此在這一主體，又將展示為如何的生命情韻（die Stimmung/la tonalite）？英文摘要：According to Levinas' interpretation of Being and Time, although Heidegger attempts to distinguish his ontology from traditional philosophy, in Heidegger's ontology which constructed of taking Being as priority, the implication of man is still restricted to Being's mode, so that the problem of man and ethic has been concealed. From this point of view, Levinas' translation and interpretation of Heidegger's thought, refers to his concern transiting from ontology to ethic, and is also relating to his attempt to respond to Heidegger and effort to develop his own thought. When reading Levinas' criticism and response to Heidegger, we found that Levinas attempts to distinguish Dasein, from the subject of responsibility that he cares, through the difference between ”die (le mourir)” and ”death (le mort)”. If Levinas' subject of responsibility is based on existence (l'exister) so as to be responsible for others, then the subject Dasein in Heidegger's thought that is bound up tightly with the death, would demonstrate what kind of life tonality (die Stimmung/la tonalite)?起始頁-結束頁：235-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社20篇名：民主、平等與對話：博雅／住宿學院（書院）教育的理念與實踐－以政治大學國際發展書院為例並列篇名：Democracy, Equality, and Dialogue: The Ideal and Practice of Liberal Arts Education作者：劉育成(Yu-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：博雅教育;住宿學習;民主;平等;對話;Liberal Arts Education;Residential College;Democracy,Equality, Dialogue期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文將從住宿學院（書院）／博雅教育所強調的住宿學習、非專業課程學習、家族與導師制度等三個面向出發，進一步探究學生在其中的學習成效，並且嘗試理解並指出住宿學院（書院）／博雅教育的價值與未來發展的可能方向。在研究方法上，本論文將以政治大學國 際發展書院為例，透過深度訪談、焦點團體研究法等，以半結構式問卷針對住宿、家族、導師制度、書院課程等面向為主題，嘗試瞭解並架構出住宿學院（書院）／博雅教育在操作上的成效，從學生作為學習主體（student as learning subject）的觀點來理解住宿學院（書院）理念、制度與實踐上的效果，以作為將來博雅／書院教育規劃與運作上的參考。英文摘要：This article discusses the ideas of residential education, the role of residential college master, and the learning outside of the box, through which examines the learning effects of students who join the program of liberal arts education. Methodologically, this article adopts semi-structural questionnaires and open-access interviews to understand the learning effects of students and how they evaluate the program. This paper suggests three dimensions that can be used to feature liberal arts education: democracy, equality, and dialogue. They are also important universal values worth pursuing in the future of education.起始頁-結束頁：263-303資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：「臺灣民主」專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：張嘉尹(Chia-Yin Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：臺灣死刑制度之在地／全球辯證發展並列篇名：Taiwan's Death Penalty in the Local-Global Dynamics作者：李佳玟(Chia-Wen Lee)關鍵字：死刑;廢死運動;民意;國際政治;政治轉型;Death Penalty;Anti-Death Penalty Movement;Public Opinions;International Politics;Political Transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：大眾向來認為，臺灣受到應報文化的深刻影響，死刑制度因而在民意的高度支持下難以被廢除。本研究顯示，在過去六、七十年以來，臺灣死刑制度毋寧更為深刻地受到政治的左右。除了民意之外，政權的更迭、國際政治的變動、政治轉型的型態與當政者的傾向等國內與國際的政治因素，在不同時間以不同的分量，參與臺灣死刑制度的形塑。不過，這個左右臺灣死刑制度發展的政治框架，並不是單由政客所決定，國際與國內的廢死運動者的行動，亦曾成功地改變政治的內涵，為運動創造政治機會，促進廢死運動的進展。不過，自始與國際廢死運動互動頻繁的在地廢死運動，雖成功地限縮臺灣死刑的適用範圍，但因此給廢死運動「西方、外來」的形象，卻也讓臺灣社會對這個運動感覺疏離。終至在臺灣社會發生信心危機的時候，因著幾個偶發事件，讓廢死運動遭逢前所未有的反挫。本文認為，不管讀者對死刑制度有何等哲學或刑事政策的想法，都有必要知曉臺灣死刑制度的歷史與政治現實，以決定這個刑罰制度的未來。英文摘要：People generally believe that the death penalty in Taiwan has been supported by traditional retributive culture, and the public support is the main reason why this penal institution cannot be abolished. This paper intends to rebut this conventional wisdom. It shows that in the past sixty to seventy years, this penal institution been much more affected by politics. In addition to public opinions, the death penalty in Taiwan has been shaped by the interplay of regime types, international politics, pattern of transitional politics and incumbent's inclinations. While it is true that politics has played a dominant role, actions of human rights activists still managed to redefine what politics is, and thus helped the local abolitionist movement to achieve an impressive progress within a short period of time. But the intensive cooperation between global and local anti-death penalty activists since the beginning has also made the anti-death penalty movement western and alien to the Taiwanese society, which unfortunately resulted in vehement backlashes in recent years. This paper urges both supporters and opponents of the death penalty to re-evaluate this peculiar penal institution from its historical realities.起始頁-結束頁：5-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：說真話與民主，傅柯的最後一課並列篇名：Parrh<U+0113>sia and Democracy, Michel Foucault's Last Lesson作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng Chu)關鍵字：傅柯;說真話;語藝;民粹諂媚者;民主政治;Michel Foucault;Parrh<U+0113>sia;Rhetoric;K<U+03CC>λακε<U+03C2>;Democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文紀念傅柯（Michel Foucault）逝世卅週年，探討傅柯在世最後3年關注的一個議題：「說真話」。1982年元月傅柯在法蘭西學院「主體的詮釋學」課程揭櫫了這個議題，探討「說真話」和「語藝」的區辨，以及「說真話」和逢迎者「說好聽話」之間的敵對；1983、1984春季在法蘭西學院「自我與他者的治理」、「真理的勇氣」的兩年春季課程裡，在政治場域「說真話」招致危險的困境與勇氣成為他授課的主題。1983秋季傅柯在柏克萊加州大學授課，講稿英文出版的標題是《無畏的言說》。藉著剖析這3年的文獻，本文不同意「傅柯不談當代民主政治……因為對『民主』」一詞他沒興趣」這般推論與揣測；相反地，本文指出傅柯對於當代民主政治中的困境與弔詭，有著很深的瞭解與關切。這是他沉浸在西元前4世紀雅典民主危機的理由，也是他連結18世紀末普魯士啟蒙運動中康德「何謂啟蒙？」的理由。本文最後引伸傅柯的最後訓課，回顧臺灣民主政治及其當前困境。英文摘要：This article explores the problematics of Parrh<U+0113>sia, an issue that Michel Foucault concerned with in the last three years of his life. In January 1982, Foucault brought up this ancient issue in his lecture at the College de France, The Hermeneutics of the Subject, proceeded to investigate its entanglement with ”rhetoric”, and its antagonism with the sweet-talk of the flatterer (κ<U+03CC>λακε<U+03C2>). In the Spring 1983 and the Spring 1984 lectures at the College de France, as well as in the Fall 1983 lecture at the UC Berkeley, Foucault devotes himself to the predicaments of parrh<U+0113>sia in political situations, i.e., speaking truth truthfully in political circumstances that begets danger and thus demands courage. From reading these texts closely, this paper wishes to dispel the inference that, since Foucault rarely talked about ”democracy” in any contemporary contexts, he was not interested in ”democratic politics” at all. Contrary to such speculation, this article argues that Foucault has a deep understanding and concern about the plight and paradox of contemporary democratic lives. This is the reason why he immersed himself in the 4th Century BCE Athenian democratic crisis, and linked it to the Prussia Enlightenment in the last decades of the 18^(th) Century, when Kant's ”What Is Enlightenment?” rediscovered the ancient issue of parrh<U+0113>sia and redefined it with a modern context. Lastly, this article draws on Foucault's last lesson to review the contemporary democratic politics in Taiwan, its current plight and paradox.起始頁-結束頁：57-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：「差異化治理」與「民主參與」：臺灣因應貿易自由化的貿易調整協助就業政策分析並列篇名：Differential Governance and Democratic Participation: An Analysis of Trade Adjustment Assistance Employment Policies in Response to Trade Liberalization in Taiwan作者：李健鴻(Chien-Hung Lee)關鍵字：貿易調整協助;就業政策;民主參與;差異化治理;Trade Adjustment Assistance;Employment Policies;Democratic Participation;Differential Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討臺灣為因應貿易自由化而制定「貿易調整協助就業政策」的政策形成模式，並分析勞工團體與雇主團體在政策形成過程的民主參與機制以及問題。研究發現，經濟部依照「差異化治理」的原則，建構形成了「產業調整協助措施分類架構」，並且藉由「邀請雇主團體參與、排除勞工團體參與」的行政審查機制，針對產業進行分類認定的結果，依照規定卻成為勞動部實施貿易調整協助就業措施的認定依據，導致勞動部實施的貿易調整協助就業政策，其實只是一種「勞資參與不平衡」的「局部性代表制民主」政策形成模式，並不符合「政府、勞工團體、雇主團體」三方共同參與的代表制民主參與原則，因此衍生出「認定標準忽略勞工的失業情況」，以及「勞工申請就業協助措施的制度性障礙」二項制度性問題，進而造成勞動部執行貿易調整就業協助政策的就業成效不佳。研究建議，政府應訂立「因應貿易自由化協助企業與勞工專法」，在專法內建立「勞工團體與雇主資團體平衡參與」的就業協助政策形成模式，並且增訂勞工與勞工團體可以自行向勞動部申請就業協助措施的機制。英文摘要：This article explore the policies formation model of trade adjustment assistance employment policies in response to trade liberalization, article also analyze the problems of democratic participation mechanism for workers' group and employers' group in policies formation process in Taiwan. The main finding is that Ministry of Economy constructed the ”classification identification framework of industry adjustment assistance measures” were designed in accordance with the ”differential governance principle”, in the meantime, Ministry of Economy also constructed the administrative examine mechanism that invite employers' group participate but exclude workers' group. Ministry of Labor implemented the trade adjustment assistance employment policies according to the administrative examine classification identification outcomes by Ministry of Economy. As a result, Ministry of Labor implemented an imbalanced participation model between workers group and employers group, it is just the partial representative democracy which derived institutional problems of ”identification criteria ignore unemployment” and ”worker's apply barriers for employment assistance”, resulting in the low employment performance. In the future, the government should formulate a new special law for assistant affected workers and enterprises hat includes two democratic mechanisms in the new special law. Firstly, the balanced participation policies formation model between workers' group and employers group, secondly, the worker's and workers group's application mechanism for employment assistance measures in response to trade liberalization.起始頁-結束頁：93-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：民進黨兩岸經貿議題的階級訴求形成：2000-2010並列篇名：From National Identity to Social Class: Democratic Progressive Party's Shifting Discourse about Cross-Strait Trade Issues作者：吳迪(Dee Wu)關鍵字：歷史社會學;政治分歧;民主進步黨;兩岸經貿政策;貿易政治學;Historical Sociology;Political Cleavage;Democratic Progressive Party;Cross-Strait Trade Policy;Trade Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：民進黨主席蔡英文於2010年ECFA辯論會中，以貿易政策引發的階級衝突為主軸，回應執政者發展主義論述，並成為該黨2012年總統大選「公平正義」口號之濫觴。與2008年選舉民進黨訴求之重大兩岸經貿議題「一中市場」相較，此動員路線轉折貼合近年臺灣政治分歧變遷圖像。本研究旨分析為何民進黨於ECFA議題中形成顯著階級動員論述。過去文獻分析兩岸經貿的階級政治，多以貿易政治理論檢視民眾政黨認同是否受兩黨兩岸經貿政策影響。然以政黨為主要行動者而論，經貿政策與選民階級基礎的正向關係為民進黨兩岸經貿政策否定：民進黨「積極開放、有效管理」政策利益與其農工階級支持基礎相矛盾，階級因素的適切性始見於民進黨執政後期的「積極管理、有效開放」。基於主流理論詮釋本研究問題之因果推論斷裂，筆者在歷史社會學架構下，透過檔案分析以及與民進黨兩岸事務決策者的訪談，勾勒本研究核心問題：以陳水扁「兩岸關係正常化」主張為敘事起點，解構民進黨2010年的ECFA階級訴求，如何在歷史、結構、行動者與機遇事件中相互作用並形成。英文摘要：Democratic Progressive Party's (DPP) chairwoman Tsai Ing-wen raised the potential social class problem generated by the Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) in 2010. Compared to the contested ”one- China market” issue raised during the 2008 election, the shifting discourse about cross-Strait trade issues conforms to the recent changes in Taiwanese political cleavage. This research aims to trace the development of DPP's class conflict discourse about ECFA. Past literatures examine the class politics of cross- Strait trade issues primarily through trade politics theory, thus focusing on the two parties' policy positions and their relation with the supporters' class alignments. Yet, this viewpoint does not conform to cross-Strait trade policy history: DPP's ”proactive liberalization” policy is not in line with the interest of its own class alignment. Due to this misinterpretation, this research utilizes documentary analysis and semi-structured interviews under a historical sociology framework to answer the research question: How did history, structures, and agents jointly formulate DPP's discourse shift from national identity to social class in the cross-Strait trade issues.起始頁-結束頁：157-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：「診斷臺灣：民主的危機或轉機」座談會並列篇名：A Forum on Taiwan's Democracy: Does Taiwan's Democracy Face a Crisis?作者：魏千<U+5CEF>(Chien-Feng Wei);顏厥安;徐偉群;蘇彥圖;吳介民;吳豪人;黃厚銘期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：203-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：傳播賦權視角下的公民新聞實踐：以臺灣PeoPo公民新聞平臺及公民記者為例並列篇名：Practices of Citizen Journalism from the Perspective of Communication Empowerment: A Case Study on PeoPo and Citizen Reporters in Taiwan作者：陳楚潔(Chu-Jie Chen)關鍵字：傳播賦權;公民新聞;公民媒體;公民記者;Communication Empowerment;Citizen Journalism;Citizen Media;Citizen Reporter期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：現有關於公民新聞的研究沒有綜合考察公民媒體、公民記者及其互動產物－公民新聞，並且把公民新聞現象侷限於網路空間中，缺乏對線下具體過程與事件的關注。在文獻探討的基礎上，本文以「傳播賦權」為框架，從個體、社區和社會三個層次探討公民新聞賦權的過程與效果。本研究以臺灣PeoPo公民新聞平臺及其公民記者為例，通過深度訪談、參與式觀察、線上閱讀等途徑蒐集資料。總體上發現，公民媒體雖仍未從根本上改變一個社會的傳播生態，但公民媒體倡導的參與式傳播使公民的社會行動力得到了培育、集中和增強。在此過程中，公民媒體所扮演的角色不僅僅是提供一個開放的公共平臺，更體現為基於現實推廣公民新聞活動的「變革的能動者」。在個體層面，傳播賦權需經過媒介接近權的意識覺醒過程，使公民體認到個人亦能參與媒體生產並參與和影響公共生活。在社區層次，公民記者通過各種微觀參與，顯示出其作為文化生產者和政治主體來證實個人和集體的能動性。而社會運動與公民新聞的結合則使那些被大眾媒體所忽視、邊緣化的議題在「另類公共領域」獲得能見度並得以持續，甚至改變政治經濟系統的決策。此三者相互影響、動態關聯，雖過程與效果各有差異，但貫穿其中的是一種守望相助、休戚與共的社群情感。英文摘要：Previous studies on citizen journalism rarely investigated the associations among citizen media, citizen reporters, and citizen journalism practices, as well as their online-offline interactions. This paper develops a three-level analytic framework of communication empowerment to examine local practices of citizen journalism in Taiwan, as represented by the PeoPo citizen journalism platform. Qualitative data collection and analysis reveal that citizen media has not reconfigured the media ecology. Yet, as change agent, citizen media has contributed to emancipating, cultivating, and aggregating individual citizen reporters' democratic communication through mediating their cognition of media access and participatory media production. At the community level, citizen reporters are able to manifest their agency as cultural producers and political subjects both in normal and crisis situations. At the societal level, the online and offline collaborations between citizen media and social movement organizations give rise to more visibility and continuity of social movement issues in an alternative public sphere. The influences of emotional resonance among citizen journalism practitioners at different levels are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：245-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：「社區」如何被研究：1960-1970年代的研究取徑及其內容並列篇名：How Communities were Studied? Three Approaches to Community Studies in Taiwan in the 1960s and the 1970s作者：蔡嘉信(Jia-Shin Tsai)關鍵字：社區研究;社區;人類學;社會學;Community Studies;Community;Anthropology;Sociology期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文爬梳1960-1970年代期間社區研究在臺灣的三個研究取徑，從中發現每個研究取徑所承繼的學術傳統、方法論以及代表性主題。本文指認出的三個研究取徑為社會學取徑、人類學取徑以及跨學科取徑。社會學取徑的研究受人文區位學與社會調查傳統所影響，代表性主題包含社區基圖、區位結構、社區發展等；人類學取徑的社區研究，受功能論的影響並承繼中國社區研究與臺灣本土傳統，代表性主題包含社區全貌、家族、宗族、宗教、祖先崇拜、祭祀圈等；跨學科研究取徑仿效當時的新興學科行為科學且受功能理論影響，代表性主題是社區權力結構和社會態度等。作者期待這個初步的文獻整理，能提供一個認識臺灣社區研究的基本架構。英文摘要：In this article, I trace three research approaches to community studies in Taiwan in the 1960s and the 1970s, and they are sociological approach, anthropological approach, and interdisciplinary approach. I examine what academic tradition and methodology were sourced, and what issues were conducted in each approach. The first, sociological approach to community studies, drew on the discipline of human ecology and the tradition of social survey; its main issues included social base map, ecological structure, and community development. Secondly, anthropological approach, drew on functionalism, the Yenching School and the tradition of Han Chinese society studies; its main issues included a holistic community, family, lineage, religion, ancestor worship, and religious sphere. Finally, the interdisciplinary approach to community studies, drew on the discipline of behavioral science and functionalism; its main issues included the community power structure, social attitude. Overall, the article provides a picture of the first two-decade history of community studies in Taiwan since 1960 largely building on methodology of human ecology and functionalism, the tradition of social survey, Yenching School and Han Chinese society studies, and also various issues.起始頁-結束頁：291-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：「近代日本研究」專號導言並列篇名：Special Issue: Modern Japanese Studies Introduction作者：張崑將(Kun-Chiang Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：日本近代對武家女德的形像建構與物語化並列篇名：How Modern Japan Conceptualizes and Constructs Narratives of Women from Warrior Families作者：張崑將(Kun-Chiang Chang)關鍵字：日本近代;武士道;武家女德;女訓;女德形像;Modern Japan;Bushido;Warrior Families;Women of Virtue;Female Citizens期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探索日本女性從近世武家「女訓」轉向近代「女國民」修身的「女德」意識轉化中，如何被一些熱衷推動武士道的學者或政治人物，有意建構「日本人應有的女德形象」之需求，將「武士道」的忠勇愛國形象，也強加到女性身上，達到全國男女為國效忠的目的。本文首先在第二節追溯「女德」在近世多元真實的養成教育，次於第三節考察明治維新以後「女德」被建構的解釋與形像，並於第四節分析戲劇與小說涉及的「女武士」或「女德」形像與特質，企圖呈現近代知識分子如何因應「國家」的需要，轉化與利用女德形像，並深思此一課題對當今日本女性地位轉變的現代意義。英文摘要：This paper is aimed at investigating how Japanese women, who have undergone a transformation of consciousness from the ”lessons for women” in warrior families in the early modern period to ”women of virtue” as ”female citizens” in modern times, were conceptualized as ”women of virtue” by scholars and politicians advocating Bushido. Women were also forced to adhere to the tenets of loyalty and patriotism espoused by the code of Bushido in order to fulfill the goal of having every man and woman swear loyalty and devotion to the nation. Chapter II explores various ways ”women of virtue” were raised and educated in the early modern period in Japan. Chapter III investigates how ”women of virtue” were viewed and conceptualized after the Meiji Restoration. Chapter IV analyzes images and characteristics of ”female samurai” and ”women of virtue” in Japanese plays and novels. This paper intends to show how intellectuals coped with national interests to transform and manipulate the image of ”women of virtue.” Based on these findings, the modern meaning of the transformation of the status of women in Japan is explored.起始頁-結束頁：11-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：武士道與近代並列篇名：Bushido and Modern Age作者：廖欽彬(Chin-Ping Liao)關鍵字：武士道;近代;新渡戶稻造;道德教育;基督教道德;Bushido;Modern Age;Nitobe Inazou;Moral Education;Christian Moral期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：武士道這個概念，時至今日，並沒有滿足過任何一位思想家或研究者。它亦會因時因地等因素而呈現出不同風貌，因此關於武士道的研究，仍然在不斷地蓬勃發展當中。當日本傳統的價值觀遇到西方異質文化的價值觀時，產生了前所未有的巨變。武士的道德規範及生活準則，在新渡戶稻造（Nitobe Inazou, 1862-1933）的《武士道》這本書中，則有了近代化的詮釋。因而日本人在進入近代之後，也多一個道德教育的選項。本文以「武士道與近代」為題，首先透過觀察日本近代西學啟蒙思想家福澤諭吉（Hukuzawa Yukichi, 1835-1901）對德川封建體制的批判所帶出的武士形象。以此為背景，接著分析新渡戶的《武士道》中具有基督教道德觀的武士形象。最後思考日本在面對西方近代時所呈現出來的自我批判與認同觀。英文摘要：The general concept or definition of Bushido has not been satisfactory to any thinkers or scholars. And the concept or definition concerning Bushido does vary owing to different time and occasion. It is owing to this fact that the study of Bushido is far from conclusion. During its encounter with the different value system from the West, the traditional values of Japan went through unprecedented changes. The moral standard and the life principles which samurai had followed received some new and modern some interpretation and presentation in the book Bushido, The Soul of Japan by Nitobe Inazou (1862- 1933). As a result, Japanese in modern time had one more option in their moral education. This paper, taking as its subject Bushido and modern age, will examine the criticism which Hukuzawa Y<U+016B>kichi (1835-1901), a Japanese thinker devoted to promoting modern Western enlightenment, has had of feudal system of Tokugawa period. It will then proceed to analyze the samurai image equipped with the point of view of Christian morals in Nitobe Inazou's Bushido. The final part of the paper will discuss how Japan, when faced with the modern West, had its self-criticism and attempted to imitate the West.起始頁-結束頁：43-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：《<U+5742><U+306E>上<U+306E>雲》之武士精神：與明治期武士道之比較並列篇名：A Study on the Samurai Spirit of Saka no Ue no Kumo: Focus on Comparing with Bushido in Meiji Period作者：簡曉花(Shiaw-Hua Chien)關鍵字：《<U+5742><U+306E>上<U+306E>雲》;明治期;武士道;軍人敕諭;教育敕語;Saka no Ue no Kumo;Meiji period;Bushido;Gunjin Chokuyu (Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and Sailors);Kyoiku ni Kansuru Chokugo (Imperial Rescript on Education)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：《<U+5742><U+306E>上<U+306E>雲》乃日本作家司馬遼太郎之歷史小說，其內容描繪甲午、日俄戰爭時期之富國強兵氛圍中，人們奮發向上之情景，同時亦刻畫出明治期之武士精神。然而，究竟司馬氏於《<U+5742><U+306E>上<U+306E>雲》中所呈現之明治期武士精神為何？關於此，目前雖有研究零星提及，然而，關於其究竟如何呈現？以及其筆法特色為何？尚欠缺論述，有待補足。本研究為解決此問題，乃針對《<U+5742><U+306E>上<U+306E>雲》所描述之武士精神、以及實際上明治30-40 年代（1897-1912）之武士道，分別掌握，並進行比較。其結果獲知：其二者大致皆講究忠誠，重視義理，具有武勇精神，然而二者在對於「軍人敕諭」、「教育敕語」明治期忠孝武士道之論述處理上，乃有所不同；且由於此意識型態背負著戰爭宣傳之罪名，司馬氏恐為避免招惹爭議失焦，故對其採取淡化處理，以凸顯明治期武士精神作為日本傳統文化延伸之定位。此乃歷來研究所忽視看漏，亦為此小說筆法之特殊所在。英文摘要：Saka no Ue no Kumo is a historical novel .What exactly was the samurai spirit in the Meiji period as represented in Saka no Ue no Kumo? Even though there are a few studies that have been done on this subject, the question of how the samurai spirit in the Meiji period should be presented, still demand much exploration to fill in the blank. In an attempt to resolve this issue, this research seeks to compare the difference between the samurai spirit as described in Saka no Ue no Kumo and the true bushido present during Meiji 30-40 (1897-1912). After comparing the facts, It is evident that both of these two great importance to loyalty and obligation and bravery .However, it is more evident that the difference lies in between how the Chuko Bushido (Bushido of Loyalty and Filial Piety) was interpreted and handled, as mentioned in Gunjin Chokuyu (Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and Sailors) and Kyoiku ni Kansuru Chokugo (Imperial Rescript on Education). Due to the reason that this ideology is often regarded as wartime propaganda, Shiba Ryotaro may have chosen to play down this particular note in order to avoid deviation from the focus of the novel, and to emphasize on the samurai spirit in the Meiji period as the basis which traditional Japanese culture expands upon. This is the point often neglected by past studies, as well as the defining writing technique of this novel.起始頁-結束頁：59-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：近代日本漢文教育問題與「經學」之退場：以《明治漢文教科書集成》所作之考察並列篇名：Problems about Education on Chinese in Modern Japan and Confucian Classics' Retreat: Through Integrations of Textbooks of Chinese in Meiji Period作者：金培懿(Pei-Yi Chin)關鍵字：明治漢學;漢文教科書;漢文教育;經學;《明治漢文教科書集成》;Sinology in Meiji Japan;textbooks of Chinese;education on Chinese;Confucian classics;Integrations of Textbooks of Chinese in Meiji Period期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文就《編輯復刻版明治漢文教科書集成》所收漢文教科書，以論述明治日本之漢文教科書之特點與問題點，內容涉及其出版分期、所收種類、內容特色，進而分析當時漢文教育所呈現出之問題點，以及其間所蘊涵之可能意義。經由本文考察，明治漢文科教育主要特色為：1. 以明治19 年「小學校令」頒布作為分水嶺，之前原本自由編刊、採用的情況，從此轉向以文部省馬首是瞻，受制於政府意識形態。2. 當漢文學習的「初學」階段，由小學校後退至中學校時，也預告了此後漢文教育內容日形淺近平易化的發展趨勢。3. 明治初期以江戶為典範的風氣，隨著《幼學綱要》與《教育<U+52C5>語》的頒布，遂與日本主體推崇的主張結合，朝以「和」代「漢」發展，復加「小學教則大綱」頒布，明定只能收錄以和漢夾雜文體撰寫成之和文，漢文科教科書所收之文竟「非漢文」。4. 又明治10 年代以還隨著何如璋、王韜、黎庶昌等清文人訪日，與明治漢文文壇交流日盛，桐城古文遂取代先秦、兩漢、唐宋古文，成為漢文科教科書之取材內容。而此四大特色日後成為漢文科教科書審定的重要標準，但卻也因此衍生出問題；為符合淺近平易化的編書規定，連帶凸顯出「和文」與「漢文」之間的齟齬，訓讀問題因而被關注；又「脫漢」後的漢文學習目的，其實就在「藉亞入歐」與涵塑忠孝合一之皇民。最後本文指出學界歷來未曾言及的問題點，亦即明治漢文教育中「經學」的退場。而「經學」自學校教育的退場，即是日本「舊型」文化瓦解之具體形象，亦即自始至終以經書為學習對象的「儒學」學習模式被徹底否定。英文摘要：This paper analyses the problems about education on Chinese in Meiji Japan through the textbooks in Integrations of Textbooks of Chinese in Meiji Period. There are four characteristics of education on Chinese in Meiji Japan can be seen. First, it was controlled by the government's ideology. Second, the time to start learning Chinese was postponed to the period in junior high school, and it augured the trivialization of education on Chinese. Third, with Japan stood for its national prestige, only the articles that mixed up Chinese and Japanese could be collected into the textbooks. Fourth, Tong Cheng School's works displaced the classics before Song Dynasty to be collected into the textbooks. The textbooks are limited by political and academic factors. The trivialization of education on Chinese also showed the collision of Chinese and Japanese. This kind of education on Chinese was made to ”go into Europe” and let people be Japanized. The most important problem is Confucian Classics' retreat. It shows the collapse of old civilization and the negation of learning of Confucian Classics.起始頁-結束頁：91-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：孫中山「平均地權」的觀念根源探索：以歐美的學術理論與日本同好具體實踐之間的互動為中心並列篇名：The Origin of Sun Yat-sen's ”Equalization of Land Rights” Policy: The Influences from the Euro-American Theories and the Active Interactions with Japanese Comrades作者：黃自進(Tzu-Chin Huang)關鍵字：孫中山;宮崎民藏;民生主義;平均地權;Sun Yat-sen;Mizayaki Tamizou;The Principle of Minsheng;The Equalization of Land Rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：「平均地權」可說是「民生主義」最核心的概念。然此一核心概念在早年孫中山從事反清革命事業時，卻是最易遭同志非議及消極抵制之處。有鑒於此，本文首先探討孫中山土地政策的形成過程以及他的理論基礎。特別是他如何師承亞當．斯密（Adam Smith）、達爾文（Charles Robert Darwin）、馬克思（Karl Marx）、亨利．喬治（Henry George）等人的經濟論述以及參考德國在膠州灣的土地政策為線索，解析他在「平均地權」政策上的承先啟後與獨特創新之處。其次，再聚焦於他與日本友人宮崎民藏的交流，藉此釐清「民生主義」在建構過程中，為何「平均地權」或是「漲價歸公」等眾多「民生主義」的重要核心概念，皆是在日本發表的來龍去脈。尤其是宮崎民藏在日本所推動的「土地復權運動」對孫中山的「平均地權」理念漸次形塑過程所扮演的特殊角色。英文摘要：The ”Equalization of Land Rights” is the core concept of the ”Principal of Minsheng”. However, this core concept encountered opposition and passive resistance from the comrades in the early years during Sun Yat-sen's revolution. This article will first explore the formation of Sun Yat-sen's land policy and his theoretical foundation. Especially focusing on the economic theory and the foreign case studies he previously encountered to analyze the innovation of his ”Equalization of Land Rights” policy. In addition, it focuses on the exchange between Sun Yat-sen and Mizayaki Tamizou to clarify why many core concepts such as the ”Equalization of Land Rights” and the ”Land Value Increment to the Public” were all published in Japan during the construction of the ”Principal of Minsheng”起始頁-結束頁：135-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：照耀民族主義的外國月亮：細讀藤井省三〈「大東亞戰爭」時期的皇民文學〉，兼及文學史研究的一點理論性自省並列篇名：The Exotic Moon Shining Over Nationalism: a Close Reading of the Komin Literature in the Pan East Asian War Period by Fujii Shozo and Some Theoretical Reflections on Literary and Cultural History作者：林運鴻(Yun-Hong Lin)關鍵字：皇民文學;印刷資本主義;公共領域;臺灣民族主義;臺灣文學史;Komin Literature;Print Capitalism;Public Sphere;Taiwanese Nationalism;Taiwanese Literary History期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：日本學者藤井省三對於日治時期臺灣皇民文學提出一個有趣的解釋：他認為因為日語的普及、以及文學作品的風行，當時臺灣社會透過讀書市場的成熟而逐漸構成所謂「公共領域」。此外，大量流通的文學出版品刺激著臺灣民眾的集體意識，因此臺灣民族主義的雛形也在當時略見端倪。本文認為，(1) 藤井省三其實誤植了「印刷資本主義」、「公共領域」等理論概念。這些概念所欲解釋的特定歷史對象並非殖民地臺灣的情形；(2) 在擁有壓倒性力量的日本殖民政府統治下，「公共領域」的成熟有其困難；(3) 「 印刷資本主義」不足夠解釋日治時期臺灣民族主義的生成；(4) 在這樣的思路背後，藤井省三在無意中偏袒了具有普世性格的現代性理論，故而將技術面的現代性視同於文化面的現代性。最後，必須牢記，所謂「理論」在某種意義上是對於西歐社會極具限定性的描述，不能夠將本土的經驗置入無所不包的文化與歷史模型，從而僵化了對於自身獨特性的認識。英文摘要：Japanese scholar Fujii Shozo offeres an interesting explanation of the Taiwanese Komin Literature during Japanese Occupation: he holds that because of the widespread use of the Japanese Language and popularity of literary works, what is called public sphere was gradually formed in Taiwan society, while the reading market was maturing. Besides, mass-circulated literary publications stimulated the collective consciousness of the Taiwanese. Therefore, the nationalism of Taiwan in its infancy could be observed. The present paper holds that (1) Fuji Shozo actually misplaced such theoretical concepts of ”print capitalism” and ”public sphere”. These concepts are intended for specific historical circumstances, rather than those of colonial Taiwan. (2) Under the overwhelming reign of the Japanese colonial government, the maturation of the ”public sphere” faced its hardships. (3) The concept of ”print capitalism” is an inadequate explanation for the formation of Taiwanese Nationalism during Japanese Occupation. Last but not least, what is to be borne in mind is that what we call ”theory” is, in a sense, specific depiction of the society of Western Europe and cannot integrate local experiences into an all-encompassing cultural and historical model that rigidifies the knowledge of our own uniqueness.起始頁-結束頁：181-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：從「眠獅」到「睡獅」：梁啟超睡獅說淵源新論並列篇名：From ”Minshi” to ”Shuishi”: On the Origin of Liang Qichao's ”Sleeping Lion” Discourse作者：楊瑞松(Jui-sung Yang)關鍵字：梁啟超;曾紀澤;眠獅／睡獅;大澤龍;Liang Qichao;Marquis Zeng;Sleeping Lion;Osawa Ryo期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：54卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：有關於近代中國的「睡獅」意象的歷史探討分析研究工作，迄今為止的主要中英日文著作，均認為在近代中國的語境中，「睡獅」符號應是最早出現於梁啟超在1899 年間所撰寫的〈動物談〉和〈瓜分危言〉之中。但有關梁啟超何以會運用「獅子」符號來對應所謂佛蘭金仙（怪物）的原因，迄今為止仍是令學者百思不得其解的謎題。針對此謎題，本研究認為在刊行於1898 年5 月1 日的《知新報》上的翻譯文〈日人大澤龍論中國情勢〉（其中包含「往者曾紀澤嘗比支那於眠獅」行文），應是梁啟超睡獅符號的靈感來源。此外，此一新發現也表示明治日本時期的中國觀和國家動物符號想像，以及關於曾紀澤論述的種種相關評論，均和「中國為眠獅／睡獅」論述的出現有密切關連性。本文也試圖以「跨文化傳播」研究角度，對於此一符號為何在明治日本出現，提出一些初步的觀察和分析，對此議題的後續探索提供若干可能的新方向和研究視角。英文摘要：By far the studies on the ”Sleeping Lion” metaphor have reached a consensus that it was Liang Qichao, rather than Napoleon, who truly utilized the ”Sleeping Lion” as a metaphor for China in his works published in the end of the 19th century. However, the question of why Liang came to choose the image of lion to symbolize China, and also described it as a counter image of Frankenstein, remains to be unanswered. In this study, I have argued that a Japanese article on China translated into Chinese in 1898 should be the key factor inspiring Liang' use of the ”Sleeping Lion” metaphor. This article by the Japanese author, Osawa Ryo, clearly contained the passage that Marquis Zeng has ever depicted China as a sleeping lion. This new discovery shows that sleeping lion discourse was actually initiated in Meiji Japan and later elaborated by Liang Qichao. Furthermore, by examining a number of key discourses on China during the Meiji period, this study also tried to make a preliminary investigation of how the ”China as a Sleeping Lion” image was first emerged in Japan and then became enormously popular in China. My arguments will shed new light on this very significant transcultural and trans-lingual development in the modern intellectual and cultural history of East Asia.起始頁-結束頁：231-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Copula-Based Pairs Trading in Asia-Pacific Markets並列篇名：亞太市場中基於連結函數之配對交易的表現作者：Wenjun Xie;Zhao Zhi Toh;Yuan Wu關鍵字：Pairs trading;distance method;copula;dependence;Asia-Pacific markets;配對交易;距離法;關聯結構;相關性;亞太市場期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：The global standing of the Asia-Pacific market has strengthened in both market capitalization and trading volume. This paper examines a popular speculative trading strategy called pairs trading in this region, with the focus on our proposed copula approach. Compared to the conventional method which implies that stock returns follow a multivariate normal distribution, the copula approach allows flexibility in estimating the joint distribution of stock returns. This then provides a better description of the dependence between stocks. Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of this new approach in the Asia-Pacific region, with significantly higher returns compared to the conventional method.英文摘要：亞太市場在全球的地位日益提升。本文探討亞太市場中投機策略－配對交易－之表現。相較於傳統配對交易策略中股票報酬率為多元常態分配，我們提出的關聯結構配對交易策略可突破此限制，彈性預估股票報酬率之聯合分配，從而更準確描述其相關性。實證結果顯示關聯結構策略之平均報酬率明顯高於傳統策略。起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(4).12篇名：The Impact of Capital Requirement on Bank Operating Efficiency: An Application of the Bootstrapped Truncated Regression Model並列篇名：資本要求對銀行經營效率影響之研究－應用二階段拔靴法截尾迴歸模型作者：陳怡凱(Yi-Kai Chen);簡逢陞(Feng Sheng Chien);李揚(Yang Li)關鍵字：Banking industry;capital requirement;two-stage DEA;bootstrap;truncated regression model;銀行業;資本要求;二階段DEA;拔靴法;截尾迴歸模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：The Taiwan government has gradually instructed domestic banks to raise the quantity and quality of their capital adequacy ratio to meet the higher level of Basel III standard. This study employs the two-stage bootstrapped truncated regression to investigate the impacts on the efficiency of Taiwan domestic commercial banks due to the increases in required Core, Tier 1, and total capital adequacy ratios. The results show that, from 2011 to 2013, the increased Core and Tier 1 capital adequacy ratios have significant negative effects.英文摘要：為因應巴塞爾資本III規範，臺灣要求國內銀行逐步增加資本適足率之數量與品質，本研究應用二階段拔靴法截尾迴歸模型，探討增加核心資本適足率、第一類資本適足率及資本適足率對本國商業銀行經營效率影響。結果顯示34家臺灣商業銀行於2011至2013年間，要求銀行增加核心第一類資本、或第一類資本對銀行效率產生顯著負面效果。起始頁-結束頁：19-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(4).23篇名：Analysis of Risk Management Strategies for Contingent Convertible Bonds並列篇名：或有可轉債之風險管理策略分析作者：林士貴(Shih-Kuei Lin);陳亭甫(Ting-Fu Chen);林建璋(Chien-Tsang Lin)關鍵字：Contingent convertible bonds;static hedge;hedging performance;value at risk;或有可轉換債券;靜態避險;避險績效;風險值期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：The contingent convertible bond (CoCo) is a structured instrument that emerged at the end of 2009. This paper explores the CoCo risk management strategy from the standpoint of investors. Taking the Equity Derivation Law as its framework, this study analyzes the hedging performance based on the static hedging of options and then introduces jumps risk to allow sudden bank defaults, observing the changes in hedging performance. By scenario analysis, this study finds that CoCo can control its investment risks via equity derivatives and that static hedging can effectively reduce the standard deviation and value-at-risk (VaR).英文摘要：或有可轉換債券(CoCo)是新興結構式商品。本文以投資人立場出發，探討CoCo風險管理策略。以股權衍生性法為架構，本文藉由蒙地卡羅分析選擇權靜態避險的績效，隨後加入跳躍項允許銀行突然違約，並觀察避險績效的變化。透過情境分析，本研究發現CoCo可透過股權衍生性商品調控其投資風險，且靜態避險能有效降低標準差與風險值。起始頁-結束頁：47-83資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(4).34篇名：The Impact of Corporate Entity Directors and Supervisors on Enterprise Risk Management並列篇名：法人董監與企業風險管理之研究作者：魏妤珊(Yu-Sham Wei);邱敬貿(Junmao Chiu)關鍵字：Enterprise risk management;corporate entity directors and supervisors;internal control;corporate governance;企業風險管理;法人董監;內部控制;公司治理期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：This study examines the relation between corporate entity directors/supervisors and enterprise risk management in Taiwan stock market from 2007 to 2012. According to Gordon, Loeb, and Tseng (2009) and COSO (2004), we construct enterprise risk management by strategy, operation, reporting, and compliance dimensions. Our empirical results show that a higher proportion of corporate entity directors/supervisors from business group can lead to reduce enterprise risk management, especially for corporate entity directors/supervisors from family-affiliated firms. In addition, we find that increasing the proportion of independent directors and the board director to be an accounting or financial expert can enhance enterprise risk management.英文摘要：本文以2007至2012年台灣上市公司為研究對象，探討法人董監與企業風險管理(ERM)關聯性。依Gordon, Loeb, and Tseng(2009)和COSO(2004)以策略、營運、報導和遵循四構面，建置彙總性ERM指標進行驗證，結果顯示提高法人董監（集團企業法人代表董監）比率，使ERM績效下降，此情況在家族控制集團企業更加嚴重。此外，增加獨立董事比和財會專業董事比，可提高ERM績效。起始頁-結束頁：85-133資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(4).45篇名：Merging Corporatized Financial Markets並列篇名：財務市場之公司化合併作者：Kobana Abukari;Isaac Otchere關鍵字：證券交易所合併;產品市場效果;買賣價差;Stock exchange mergers;product market effects;bid-ask spread期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：因科技進步加劇同業間競爭，已使許多證券交易所以併購做為生存策略。本文探討財務市場的證券交易所合併之股票市場效果與產品市場效果，發現相同地理位置與相同發展程度之證券交易所或證券交易所合併皆使其股東產生正向股價異常報酬。更進一步發現證券交易所合併增加其市場占有率，而敵對證券交易所則面臨買賣價差增加。英文摘要：Increased competition in the stock exchange industry, exacerbated by technological advancements, has motivated many exchanges to engage in mergers and acquisitions as a strategic choice for stemming the competition tide. We examine the stock and product markets effects of financial exchange mergers and find among others that shareholders of competing exchanges from the same geographical region and competitors at the same stage of development realize significantly positive abnormal returns as those involved in the merger. We also find that the merging exchanges increase their market share and experience significant reductions in bid-ask spreads at the expense of rival exchanges.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(3).16篇名：Bank Capital Regulation and Dividend Policy並列篇名：銀行資本適足監管與股利政策作者：蕭育仁(Yu-Jen Hsiao);曾怡雯(Yi-Wen Tseng)關鍵字：股利政策;資本適足監管;巴賽爾Ⅲ;Dividend policy;bank capital regulation;Basel III期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文透過Bankscope 資料庫收集1999 到2012 年間全球83 個國家，共9,127 筆銀行資料，探討資本適足的監管程度是否會對銀行股利政策有影響。研究發現，隨著資本適足監管程度越嚴格，銀行越會減少股利的發放。此外，2008 年金融海嘯期間，資本適足監管程度對股利縮減的影響最顯著，然而在開發中國家，資本適足的監管程度對股利政策的影響相對有限。英文摘要：We examine whether bank capital requirements are relevant to bank dividend payout policies. On the basis of an unbalanced panel analysis of 9,127 observations in 83 countries over the period of 1999 to 2012, we find that higher capital requirement regulation stringency is negatively associated with bank dividend payouts. In addition, we also find that capital regulatory pressure clearly explains dividend payouts during the 2007 to 2009 financial crisis. However, capital regulatory pressure is effective only in limiting dividend payouts by undercapitalized banks in developing countries.起始頁-結束頁：45-68資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(3).27篇名：Who Actually Benefits from Proxy Contests?並列篇名：誰能真正由委託書收購中獲利？作者：楊聲勇(Sheng-Yung Yang);Jeremy Goh;陳玉芬(Yu-Fen Chen);駱美琪(Mei-Chi Lo)關鍵字：公司治理;委託書收購;宣告效果;分析師盈餘預測修正;Corporate governance;proxy contests;announcement effects;analysts' earnings forecast revision期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討不同公司治理結構下，委託書收購對股東財富之影響。研究結果證實，若公司治理制度愈民主，其股東愈能在委託書收購時獲得異常報酬。同時我們也發現，分析師亦傾向針對具民主公司治理機制的公司，在委託書收購時進行較佳的盈餘預測修正。英文摘要：This paper examines how proxy contests affect shareholder wealth as taking account of the firm's pre-existing corporate governance structure. The results indicate that only firms with the most democratic corporate governance structures benefit shareholders as a result of proxy contests. For firms with democratic corporate governance mechanisms, analysts tend to make greater-than-usual revisions in their one-year earnings forecast during proxy contests.起始頁-結束頁：69-89資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(3).38篇名：Pension Reform and Self-Employment in Hong Kong並列篇名：香港年金改革與自營就業之探討作者：莊慧玲(Hwei-Lin Chuang);蘇正偉(Cheng-Wai Sou);邱詩詠(Shih-Yung Chiu)關鍵字：自營就業;香港;年金改革;不景氣－推擠假說;景氣－吸引假說;Self-employment;Hong Kong;pension reform;recession-push hypothesis;prosperity-pull hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以香港綜合統計調查資料為研究對象，探討香港年金改革對自營就業之可能影響，運用probit 模型和考慮樣本選擇之probit 模型，進行個體實證分析結果發現：年金改革的確會提高營造業自營就業比例。根據誤差修正模型進行之總體面分析計結果顯示，「不景氣－推擠」效果假說可以部份解釋香港營造業自營作業比例與失業率之關係。英文摘要：This paper examines the big jump in the self-employment rate between 2000 and 2001 in Hong Kong caused by the effect of the 2000 pension reform on self-employment. We use General Household Survey data and apply both the probit model and the probit model with sample selection to estimating the probability of self-employment. Our findings suggest that this pension reform has a positive effect on the self-employment rate in the construction industry. We also conduct a macro analysis, with the estimation results from the error correction model, showing some evidence that supports the recession-push hypothesis, particularly in the construction industry.起始頁-結束頁：91-122資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(3).49篇名：Inside Debt and Corporate Financing Decisions並列篇名：經理人債型薪酬與公司融資決策作者：李艷榕(Yen-Jung Lee);沈信漢(Carl Hsin-Han Shen)關鍵字：經理人薪酬;債型薪酬;融資決策;財務槓桿;Executive compensation;inside debt;financing decision;leverage期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：我們發現經理人債型薪酬與財務槓桿之間的負向關係是因變數定義方式所導致。為避免此問題，本文檢驗公司融資決策並發現當公司面臨融資需求（擁有剩餘資金）時，有較高債型薪酬的公司會增加（減少）公司債務，且此傾向只在公司財務槓桿偏低時存在。因此債型薪酬確實提供經理人誘因使用低成本債務融資，不會導致過高財務槓桿。英文摘要：We find that the negative association between firm leverage and inside debt documented by prior research is driven by a mechanical association between these two variables. To circumvent this problem, we focus on the firm’s marginal financing decisions. We show that firms with higher CEO inside debt tend to issue more (retire less) debt when facing financing deficits (surpluses). This tendency is pronounced only when the firm is under-leveraged, but not when it is over-leveraged, suggesting that CEO inside debt allows firms to take advantage of the lower cost of financing, but does not lead to excessive debt.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(2).110篇名：The Valuation of Temperature Derivatives: The Case for Taiwan並列篇名：評價溫度衍生商品－以臺灣為例作者：張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);楊曉文(Sharon S. Yang);黃子毓(Tzu-Yu Huang);黃志偉(Jr-Wei Huang)關鍵字：溫度衍生性商品;均衡定價模型;日高溫度指數;日低溫度指數;Temperature derivatives;equilibrium pricing model;HDD;CDD期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文著重於溫度風險及探討何種分配最能捕捉臺灣溫度之動態行為。我們採用Campbell與Diebold (2005)模型捕捉臺灣溫度之特性及探討在不同機率分配之影響。我們發現標準Gumbel分配在樣本內外皆提供良好的配適與預測能力。此外，我們延伸Cao與Wei (2004)之評價方法並求得HDD與CDD之價格。最後，我們發現在不同機率分配假設下其對溫度衍生性商品影響十分顯著。英文摘要：This research focuses on the temperature risk and attempts to investigate which distribution is most appropriate for capturing the Taiwan's temperature dynamics. We adopt the Campbell and Diebold (2005) model to describe the temperature characteristics and examine a variety of distributions. We find that the standard Gumbel distribution provides the best fit for both in-sample and out-of-sample performance. Further, we extend Cao and Wei's (2004) approach to obtain the valuation framework for HDD and CDD contracts. Finally, we observe that the effects of different distributions on the value of the temperature derivatives are very significant.起始頁-結束頁：25-53資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(2).211篇名：Do Bank Regulation and Supervision Stabilize the Banking System? A Cross-Country Systematic Risk Analysis並列篇名：銀行監理是否能穩定銀行系統？跨國系統風險之研究作者：劉清標(Chin-Piao Liu);陳安行(An-Sing Chen);林筱鳳(Hsiao-Feng Lin)關鍵字：銀行監理;系統風險;銀行系統穩定性;Bank regulation;systematic risk;banking system stability期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文檢定銀行監理對銀行系統穩定性之影響。研究發現，於正常金融環境中，增強私部門之監督顯著降低尾端與一般貝它值，另外，更高之自有資本顯著降低一般貝它值，卻增加尾端貝它值。政府直接監理、限制銀行業務、或限制新銀行設立，均對尾端或一般貝它值無顯著影響。於金融風暴時，限制新銀行設立可顯著降底尾端貝它值。英文摘要：This paper conducts a cross-country assessment of the impacts of bank regulation and supervision on the stability of banking sectors. We find that in normal time more private monitoring of banks significantly reduces both the tail beta and the ordinary beta. Greater capital stringency reduces the ordinary beta, but increases the tail beta. Official supervision, bank activity restriction, or banking entry requirements do not have significant impacts on either of them. Finally, during the financial crises, only the restriction on the new entry of banks can significantly reduce the tail beta of the banking sectors.起始頁-結束頁：55-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(2).312篇名：Chairman Interlocking and Debt Financing: Evidence on Loan Component Analysis並列篇名：董事長兼任與負債融資：負債成份之實證分析作者：周淑卿(Shu-Ching Chou);楊慧蘭(Hui-Lan Yang)關鍵字：董事長兼任;負債融資;利息成本;財務限制;Chairman interlocking;debt financing cost of debt;financial constraint期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究分析臺灣企業董事長兼任、舉債與利息成本之關聯性。發現有董事長在外兼任的公司有較高公司債負債比率。財務限制公司有董事長在外兼任者比無董事長在外兼任者有較高公司債與非銀行借款負債比率及較低利息成本。過去文獻認為兼任對公司績效不利，本研究寓意財務限制公司可能運用董事長兼任形成有利之資本結構。英文摘要：This study examines the relation among chairman interlocking, debt financing, and cost of debt by using a sample of Taiwanese firms. We find that firms with chairman interlocking tend to have greater bond leverage. The loan component analysis further shows that constrained firms with chairman interlocking have greater public debt and non-bank private loan leverage, and a lower cost of debt, than those without chairman interlocking, The findings provide new insights into board characteristics and show that chairman interlocking helps constrained firms shape their optimal capital structure. This advantage might counteract the agency cost incurred by the chairman's outside appointments.起始頁-結束頁：89-133資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(2).413篇名：Predictive Power of Option-Implied Densities from High-Frequency Data並列篇名：高頻資料下風險中立密度之預測力作者：曾祺峰(Chi-Feng Tzeng);Stephen J. Taylor;Martin Widdicks關鍵字：風險中立密度預測;躍動動態;財務危機;Risk-neutral density (RND) prediction;jump dynamics;financial crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：以Duffie、Pan與Singleton (2000)之SVCJ模型從2005至2009年估計日頻與高頻FTSE 100指數選擇權契約。發現金融海嘯期間較金融危機前：(1)變異躍動與價格躍動的關係更為反向；(2)價格躍動平均數更負；(3)價格躍動之變異數及變異躍動之平均數更大；(4)躍動發生頻率更高。實證指出：(1)高頻資料提供較優的預測力；(2)預測期間等於選擇權到期期間時，預測力較佳。英文摘要：Duffie, Pan, and Singleton's (2000) model is used to estimate implied densities using daily and high-frequency FTSE 100 index option contracts from 2005 to 2009. The empirical results suggest the following phenomena during the financial crisis: (1) more negative relationships between variance jumps and price jumps; (2) a larger magnitude of the negative mean of price jumps; (3) a larger variance of price jumps and a larger mean of variance jumps; and (4) a higher jump intensity. Further findings are as follows: (1) high-frequency data provide superior predictive power; and (2) RNDs exhibit satisfactory predictive power for option expiration dates.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(1).114篇名：How Do Web Search Activity and Financial Media Coverage Affect Asset Pricing?並列篇名：網路搜尋活動與財經媒體曝光度如何影響資產訂價？作者：黃子倫(Tzu-Lun Huang);陳妙玲(Miao-Ling Chen);郭修仁(Hsiou-Jen Kuo);賴冠伶(Kuan-Ling Lai)關鍵字：網路搜尋活動;媒體曝光度;資產訂價;投資人注意力;Google搜尋量指數;Web search activity;media coverage;asset pricing;investor attention;Google search volume index期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究利用網路搜尋活動與財經媒體曝光度衡量投資人注意力，探討其對於資本市場中資產訂價的影響。實證結果顯示，網路搜尋活動與財經媒體曝光度對於股票報酬有正向影響，而此影響在金融危機期間較不顯著。本研究進一步利用中介分析，發現網路與財經媒體可能是不同投資族群的資訊取得工具，可衡量不同族群的投資人注意力。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the impact of the Internet and the financial media on capital markets in terms of investor attention. Evidence shows that firms receiving more investor attention from the Internet possess higher stock returns. Larger firms are covered by more news stories than are smaller firms. However, medium-sized firms are found the most sensitive to the Internet and the financial media. Both web search activity and media coverage significantly affect stock returns, but their impacts are insignificant during financial crises. The mediation analysis indicates that the Internet and the financial media capture investor attention from different groups.起始頁-結束頁：25-53資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(1).215篇名：Earnings Management, Investor Type, and Firm Performance of Private Placements並列篇名：盈餘管理、應募對象與私募發行公司之長期績效作者：湯惠雯(Hui-Wen Tang)關鍵字：應計基礎盈餘管理;應募對象;私募發行;實質盈餘管理;策略引資;Accrual-based earnings management;investor type;private placement;real earnings management;strategic private placement期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究檢測臺灣上市櫃公司私募發行前盈餘管理的決定因素及其對後續經營績效的影響。研究發現，策略引資與非策略引資公司在發行前具有顯著不同的實質盈餘管理。相較應計基礎盈餘管理，實質盈餘管理對發行後長期績效的負向影響更顯著。非策略引資公司的實質盈餘管理對長期績效具顯著負向影響，但此影響在策略引資公司不顯著。英文摘要：This study investigates the determinants of accrual-based earnings management and real earnings management (REM), and explores the influences of these earnings management activities on post-issue performance of private placements in Taiwan. The results show that investor type influences a firm’s REM activities before a private placement. Compared with discretionary current accruals, REM leads to significantly reduced long-term performance. Notably, the relationship between pre-issue REM and long-run performance is significantly negative for non-strategic private placement firms, whereas the relationship is insignificant for strategic private placement firms.起始頁-結束頁：55-102資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(1).316篇名：Do Insurers Partially Adjust Their Liquidity toward Target Levels? Evidence from the U.S. Property-Liability Insurance Industry並列篇名：保險公司會部份調整其流動性至最適水準嗎？美國產物保險公司實證分析作者：張永郎(Vincent Y. Chang);楊昕昀(Melody H. Yang)關鍵字：最適流動性;目標流動性;部份調整模型;不對稱部份調整;調整速度;Optimal liquidity;targeted liquidity;partial adjustment model;asymmetric partial adjustment;speed of adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討美國產物保險公司是否存在目標流動性及如何調整到流動性目標值。實證結果支持抵換型式的調整過程。流動性在目標值之上的公司其調整速度會比在目標值之下的快，此結果說明低報酬率的考量是比破產成本和投機動機重要的。另外，財務槓桿的替代效果與流動性偏離目標值和財務槓桿的交<U+4E49>效果對流動性的調整也是重要的。英文摘要：This article studies whether insurers operating in the U.S. have targeted liquidity levels and how this target is achieved when it exists. The evidence supports the trade-off adjustment behavior of an insurer's liquidity. Insurers that achieve liquidity above their targets adjust faster than insurers with liquidity below their targets, suggesting that low investment returns concern dominates the arguments about bankruptcy costs and speculative motivation. Additionally, the substitution effect of leverage and the combined effects of the interaction between an insurer's deviation from the target liquidity and its leverage play a substantial role in insurers' liquidity adjustments.起始頁-結束頁：103-136資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2016.24(1).401篇名：進口物價波動、資本累積與貿易條件動態並列篇名：IMPORTED PRICE FLUCTUATION, CAPITAL ACCUMULATION, AND TERMS-OF-TRADE DYNAMICS作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);曹真睿(Jen-Ruey Tsaur);廖志興(Chih-Hsing Liao)關鍵字：進口中間財;要素替代性;效率工資;資本累積;貿易條件動態;Imported intermediate input;Factor substitutability;Efficiency wages;Capital accumulation;Terms-of-trade dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在探討民眾預料到進口中間財和進口最終財之國際相對價格上漲，對於小型開放經濟貿易條件、資本累積，投資等相關總體變數的衝擊。我們建構一個包括中間財和最終財的兩部門模型，且將效率工資理論應用於中間財部門，從事動態一般均衡分析，據以研究變數的調整行為及其動態均衡的特質。結果指出：進口中間財國際相對價格上升，在長期將導致本國最終財和進口最終財的相對價格（即貿易條件）超比例的上升；而長期資本存量是增或減，則取決於貿易彈性、中間財依賴度，生產要素替代彈性及密集度等參數而定。若貿易條件夠，則民眾預料到進口中間財相對價格上漲即引發投資增加，並累積資本存量直到中間財相對價格實際上漲時；一旦相對價格實際上漲，投資是增或減，則取決於最終財生產對中間財依賴程度的高低而定。模型刻劃與量化分析的結果顯示：要素替代彈性對於進口中間財相對價格變動的效果頗為敏感。英文摘要：This paper incorporates efficiency wages into an intermediate input sector, combining with the final good sector, to construct a two-sector dynamic general equilibrium model. Under this framework, we examine the impact of an anticipated increase in the international price of an imported intermediate good and an imported final good on macroeconomic variables such as terms of trade, capital accumulation, and investment in a small open economy. We further investigate the steady state and dynamic behavior of relevant macroeconomic variables. The results indicate that: (1) an increase in the international price of an imported intermediate good, in the long run, will lead to a more than proportional increase in the relative price of a domestic final good in terms of an imported final good (i.e., the terms of trade); and (2) trade elasticity, substitution and intensity among production factors, as well as dependence of final production on the intermediate good, all determine whether the long-run capital stock will increase or decrease. If trade elasticity is large enough, then people increase their investment due to an anticipated increase in the relative price of the imported intermediate good. Once the relative price of the imported intermediate good actually rises, whether investment increases depends on the degree to which final-good production is dependent on the intermediate good. Some calibrations for the parameters of our model, and the quantitative analysis highlights the sensitivity of the effect of anticipated changes in the prices of intermediary imports and final goods imports on elasticities of factor substitutability.起始頁-結束頁：413-455資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：疊代研發模型中的最適補貼政策並列篇名：THE OPTIMAL SUBSIDY POLICIES IN THE OVERLAPPING GENERATIONS MODEL WITH R&D作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：研究發展;補貼政策;疊代模型;經濟成長;社會福利;Research and development;Subsidy policy;Overlapping generations;Endogenous growth;Social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：在研究發展（research and development, R&D.）的成長模型中，創新成功者以專利與商標的形式獲得獨占權，導致商品的售價大幅高於邊際成本，並使得商品的需求量大幅低於最適水準，進而帶來社會福利的損失。既存文獻在代表性個人的非疊代模型中，各世代持有的資產數目不同，政府的補貼措施會對各世代的財富造成不同的影響，形成跨代財富重新分配的現象。因此，本文採用世代交替的疊代模型作為分析的架構，比較利息補貼、最終財補貼、中間財補貼與研發補貼等四種補貼政策，而不同的補貼政策將形成不同的跨代財富重分配效果，進而對經濟成長與社會福利造成不同的影響。英文摘要：In the Research and Development (R&D) model of economic growth, monopoly rights are granted to successful innovators in such forms as patents and trademarks. With monopoly protection, pricing rises high above marginal costs, and the demand for goods is far below the optimal level, finally, resulting in deadweight loss. With infinitely-lived representative households in non-overlapping-generation models, various studies have compared several subsidy policies to correct the distortion of the monopoly pricing. On the other hand, in overlapping-generation models, since the assets of generations differ, subsidy policies transfer the wealth among the generations, forming intergenerational wealth redistribution. Therefore, this paper addresses several subsidy policies in an overlappinggeneration model, including subsidizing interest income, final output, intermediate goods, and R&D to further explore whether the effects of subsidy policies on economic growth and social welfare depend significantly on the subsidy policies giving rise to the intergenerational wealth redistribution.起始頁-結束頁：457-485資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：垂直整合廠商是否促成下游競爭廠商的聯合行為？並列篇名：DOES VERTICAL INTEGRATION FACILITATE DOWNSTREAM COLLUSION?作者：溫偉任(Wei-Jen Wen);李文傑(Wen-Chieh Lee);歐宜芬(Yi-Fen Ou)關鍵字：垂直整合;連續Cournot寡占;暗默勾結;不完全卡特爾;Vertical integration;Successive Cournot oligopolies;Tacit collusion;Incomplete cartel期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文運用連續Cournot寡占模型分析垂直相關市場中，垂直整合廠商的存在如何影響下游競爭廠商利用觸發策略形成暗默勾結的可能性。結果顯示，郵直整合廠商策略性買入中間財的行為會使下游競爭廠商之間的勾結變得更加困難。因為策略性買入的效果會隨下游競爭程度的上升而減弱，所以當下游競爭廠商勾結時，中間財價何會因垂直整合廠商買入較多而上升，從而降低廠商勾結的獲利；當下游競爭廠商回歸Nash均衡以懲罰背離廠商時，中間財價格隨垂直整合廠商減少策略性買入而相對下降，使得背離廠商面對的懲罰較不嚴厲。英文摘要：This paper employs a successive Cournot oligopoly model to investigate the impact of vertical integration on the sustainability of downstream tacit collusion. We find that the strategic buying by a vertically integrated firm in the intermediate good market can make tacit collusion harder to sustain. The reason is that the effectiveness of strategic buying is inversely related to the degree of competition in the downstream market. Therefore, in the collusion phase, the integrated firm disadvantages the downstream cartel with a higher intermediate good price by buying more intermediate goods strategically. On the other hand, in the phase of Nash reversion, the punishment for deviation is ameliorated by a lower intermediate good price as a consequence of reduced strategic buying.起始頁-結束頁：487-535資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：A Curve-Fitting Approach to Modeling and Projecting Global Mortality Rates並列篇名：曲線配適方法在各國死亡率曲線預測的應用作者：黃孝慈(Hsiao-Tzu Huang);宮可倫(Ko-Lun Kung);郭維裕(Weiyu Kuo);蔡政憲(Chenghsien Tsai)關鍵字：Mortality rate;Modeling;Forecasting;死亡率;模型;預測期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：We introduce a curve-fitting model to reduce the dimension of age parameters and allow additional degrees of freedom to be used for the period effect. Large-scale comparisons are carried out against the benchmark Lee-Carter model. The results reveal robust improvements in forecasting accuracy across 23 sampled countries. Our approach is superior in 96 percent of male cases and 88 percent of female cases, with an average RMSE improvement of 14.8 percent and 8.4 percent respectively. The panel Diebold-Mariano test indicates that these improvements are significant. The application in insurance pricing suggests the forecasting model has significant impact on annuity price.英文摘要：本文研究曲線配適模型在死亡率模型上的應用。我們利用曲線配適模型來減少死亡率模型參數的數目，使得在同樣的參數數目下可以更好的估計與預測死亡率曲線。在實證上我們使用23個國家的死亡率資料，與文獻上常見的Lee-Carter模型比較預測的準確性。我們所提出的模型在男性死亡率預測上在96%的比較中有較好的成績，女性則是88%；平均的RMSE改善率分別是14.8%與8.4%。Panel Diebold-Mariano統計檢定同樣顯示我們的模型具有較佳的預測能力，最後我們將死亡率曲線的預測應用在年金商品的定價上，並說明其對年金價格的影響程度。起始頁-結束頁：537-578資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：How Expert Are the Experts? A Model for Expertise Cultivation並列篇名：專家何以為專家?論專業能力之養成作者：陳奕帆(Yi-Fan Chen);蔡崇聖(Tsung-Sheng Tsai)關鍵字：專業能力;空談訊息;資訊獲取;Expertise;Cheap talk;Information acquisition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：我們考慮一個送訊者(Expert)和收訊者，(Receiver)對於真實狀態(true state)有著不同先驗信念(prior belief)的cheap talk模型。在和收訊者溝通之前，送訊者可以透過對其專業能力(expertise)的培養以強化其觀察的精確度。我們考慮兩種狀況：收訊者可以，以及收訊者無法，觀察到送訊者的專業能力。我們證明當收訊者可以觀察到送訊者的專業程度時，信念越是偏頗的送訊者反而越能夠多投資於其專業能力上。和專業程度無法被收訊者觀察到的狀況相較之下，專業程度能被收訊者觀察到的狀況促進了雙方的效用。英文摘要：We study a cheap talk model where the Expert and the Receiver have different prior beliefs regarding the true state. Before communicating with the Receiver, the Expert can cultivate his expertise at a cost in order to improve the accuracy of his observations. We consider the situations where the Receiver may and may not observe the Expert's expertise. We show that when the Receiver can observe the expertise level, the Expert with more extreme biases can indeed put forth more efforts in his expertise. In this situation, both the Expert and the Receiver are better off than when the expertise is unobservable.起始頁-結束頁：295-331資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：Brand Loyalty and Learning in Pharmaceutical Demand並列篇名：藥品需求的品牌忠誠與學習效果作者：李宗穎(Chung-Ying Lee)關鍵字：品牌忠誠;學習效果;製藥產業;Brand loyalty;Learning;Pharmaceuticals期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：慢性病藥品，例如高膽固醇、心臟病、糖尿病用藥，需要長期反覆服用。因此，消費者動態行為在此類藥品需求扮演重要角色。本文使用美國膽固醇用藥市場資料，估計包含品牌忠誠與學習效果的需求模型。估計結果顯示，在此市場中，藥品分子層級的轉換成本極高，學習效果也很強。高轉換成本增加連續選擇同一藥品的機率，學習效果則提高病患長期對一藥品分子的依賴程度。作者討論這些估計結果，對於藥廠、保險公司，以及醫療政策制訂者的意涵。英文摘要：Medicines for chronic conditions like high cholesterol, heart disease, and diabetes are repeatedly used for a long period of time. Consumer dynamics thus plays an important role in the demand for those drugs. The paper estimates a demand model with brand loyalty and learning, using data from cholesterol-lowering drug markets in the United States. The estimates suggest high switching costs and strong learning effects at the molecule level in the markets. Switching costs raise the predicted probability of choosing the same drugs successively, and learning greatly increases patient stickiness to a molecule in the long run. I discuss implications of the estimated state-dependent effects for drug manufacturers, insurance companies, and healthcare policy makers.起始頁-結束頁：333-359資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：How Does International Licensing Affect FDI?並列篇名：跨國授權如何影響外人直接投資？作者：王光正(Andy Kuang-Cheng Wang);王羿傑(Yi-Jie Wang);梁文榮(Wen-Jung Liang)關鍵字：跨國授權;進入模式;訊息優勢;跨越關稅;彈性;International licensing;Entry mode;Informational advantage;Tariff jumping;Flexibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討跨國授權對人直接投資(FDI)的策略性影響。我們考慮了廠商FDI的兩個常見的原因：取得市場訊息與跨越關稅。本文的主要結果為：第一、若廠商FDI只為了取得市場訊息，當市場不確定變異數、研發強度與FDI投資成本小時，跨國授權會促進FDI的進行；其他的情況，外國廠商會持續以出口進入本國市場。第二、當場傷FDI同時有取得市場訊息與跨越關稅優勢時，跨國授權可能會促進FDI，也可能會阻礙FDI；跨國授權是否會促進與阻礙FDI的關鍵，取決於FDI固定成本與地主國需求變異數的大小。英文摘要：We examine the strategic influence of international licensing on foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows by taking into account the informational and tariff-jumping advantages of FDI, which are the most common reasons why multinational firms undertake FDI. We obtain two main results as follows. First, provided that only the informational advantage of FDI is considered, international licensing can encourage FDI inflows if the variance of demand, innovation size, and fixed setup cost of FDI are small, while the foreign firm continues to select exporting otherwise. Second, when the two advantages of FDI are involved simultaneously, the effect of international licensing on FDI inflows is ambiguous, and depends upon the magnitudes of the fixed setup cost of FDI and the variance of demand in the domestic market.起始頁-結束頁：361-386資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：Anti-Dumping Policy and Anti-Dumping Retaliation並列篇名：反傾銷政策與反傾銷報復作者：陳金盛(Chin-Sheng Chen);高國<U+5CEF>(Kuo-Feng Kao)關鍵字：反傾銷稅;傾銷;反傾銷報復;Anti-dumping duty;Dumping;Anti-dumping retaliation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文分析存在反傾銷報復的威脅下，一國廠商提出反傾銷保護的誘因。我們檢視反傾銷報復可能發生的原因與反傾銷報復是否會阻卻面對傾銷的廠商提出反傾銷保護的誘因。本文發現本國政府的反傾銷保護有可能導致本國廠商在外國傾銷，在此一情形下，外國廠商將提出反傾銷保護進而導致反傾銷報復的發生。我們進一步地發現反傾銷的報復並不會降低廠商提出反傾銷保護的誘因。最後，我們檢視了存在反傾銷報復下，反傾銷稅的福利效果。我們發現反傾銷稅仍有可能使得本國的社會福利上升。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the incentives to petition for anti-dumping protection in the context of anti-dumping retaliation. We examine how anti-dumping retaliation may arise and whether such retaliation can be a threat that dissuades a domestic firm facing dumping from first petitioning for anti-dumping protection. The findings show that the anti-dumping duty imposed by the domestic country may result in dumping in the foreign country. Under such a circumstance, the foreign firm will petition for anti-dumping protection, and thus anti-dumping retaliation arises. We further show that firms facing foreign retaliation still have the incentive to first petition for anti-dumping protection. Finally, we investigate the welfare effects of a domestic anti-dumping duty in the context of a threat of foreign antidumping retaliation. We note that it may be socially desirable for the domestic country to implement an anti-dumping duty on a foreign dumping firm.起始頁-結束頁：387-412資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：關廠失業對個人薪資與健康的影響並列篇名：THE EFFECTS OF JOB DISPLACEMENT ON WAGE AND HEALTH作者：鄒孟文(Meng-Wen Tson);何沛娟(Pei-Chuan Ho);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu)關鍵字：失業;關廠;薪資;健康;住院;Job displacement;Plant closure;Wage;Health;Hospitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文以台灣2000年因關廠而失業者為實驗組，科用其未失業的手足為控制組，採用「差異中的差異」(difference-in-differences) 結合家庭固定效果(family fixed effect)的方法來探討失業對再就業薪資與健康的影響。本文主要的貢獻在於採用失業者及其手足的樣本來控制個人先天稟賦(基因)與後天環境(家庭、成長背景)因素，可減輕失業對薪資或健康估計時潛在的內生性問題。實證結果發現，失業的男性勞工在失業後1 -2年內的平均薪資比起未失業的兄弟明顯低了5%，這種薪資上的壓抑效果在失業後的2-5年內，仍持續存在;相反地，女性勞工若失業後立即找到工作，則對其再就業的薪資無太大的影響。整體而言，失業對薪資的負面衝擊以男性受害較深，而擁有大學以上教育程度辦有助於減緩此一衝擊。本文並無發現失業會顯著提高住院機率，但因住院像一稀少事件，非一良好的健康代理變數，未來尚待取得更好的健康指標，來全面性地驗證失業對個人健康的影響。英文摘要：Based on a sample of displaced workers and their non-displaced siblings from Taiwan, we use difference-in-differences with family fixed effect approach to examine the impacts of job loss on wages and health. The main contribution of this study is to use non-displaced siblings of displaced workers as a control group, which enables us to control for the unobserved genetic and family background characteristics and thereby mitigate the endogeneity problem of displacement. The monthly wage of displaced male workers reduces 5% within 1-2 years after plant closure, compared with that of their non-displaced brothers, and the effect is persistent within 2-5 years after displacement. In contrast, no significant wage loss is found for displaced female workers who were reemployed immediately after plant closure. Overall, the effect of wage reduction is more pronounced for men and lower-educated workers. We do not find evidence that job loss increases the probability of hospitalization. As hospitalization may not be an appropriate proxy for health, the availability of good measures of health status is needed for future research.起始頁-結束頁：127-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：Opposite Hand Advantage and the Overrepresentation of Left-Handed Players in Major League Baseball並列篇名：異手優勢與美國職棒大聯盟左手球員的比例作者：朱敬一(Cyrus C. Y. Chu);張毓天(Ted Chang);朱俊漢(Jobn Chu)關鍵字：易手優勢;固定效果模型;賽局理論;納許均衡;Opposite hand advantage;Fixed effect model;Game theory;Nash equilibrium期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：一般咸認打者面對使用與自身相異的慣用手投球的投手時，具有異手優勢。異手優勢屬於「事前」的範圍，而球員的表現則提供了「事後」的訊息，包括球員的技術、優/劣勢、以及球隊用人的策略等。就策略而言，球隊可能根據異手優勢安排不同選手的上場時間，進而影響到整個聯盟左手球員所佔的比例。本研究以西元2000年至2012年問美國大聯盟球員一百三十萬次的投打對決，提出異手優勢的量化分析及其對大聯盟左手球員比例的影響。結果顯示，異手優勢大約佔打者攻擊指數的7%至15%。其次，就上場時間而言，敵對左投手的比例對實力較差的打者影響較大，超過一般打者。最後，若純粹以球隊策略而言，大聯盟應該再多聘用7.5%的左打者。英文摘要：It is generally believed that batters have an advantage when facing opposite-handed pitchers. While this opposite hand advantage is known to be ex ante, the performance of players is ex post, which contains information about their skill, hand (dis)advantage, and teams' recruiting strategies. Based on more than 1.3 million play-by-play data points in Major League Baseball from 2000 to 2012, we provide a quantitative estimate of the opposite hand advantage to show how it can be used as a determinant of the excess supply of left-handed players. The results indicate the opposite hand advantage accounts for about 7-15% of the ex post on-base plus slugging. Second, compared to average batters, marginal batters, both right-handed and left-handed, are more affected by the proportion of left-handed pitchers. Third, in terms of strategic advantage, 7.5% more left-handed batters should be employed in Major League.起始頁-結束頁：171-205資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：多「錢」入學？從政大學生組成看多元入學並列篇名：INVESTIGATING THE EQUALITY OF TWO-TRACK COLLEGE RECRUITMENT: EVIDENCE FROM ADMINISTRATIVTE DATA OF NATIONAL CHENGCHI UNIVERSITY作者：李浩仲(Hao-Chung Li);李文傑(Wen-Chieh Lee);連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien)關鍵字：多元入學;明星高中;學生特性;Two-track college recruitment;Top ranking high schools;Student social and economic status期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣自2002年針對大學入學制度改革，「多元入學」方案至今實施已有15年之久。雖說多元入學較原有單一考試分發具彈性，卻也引發入學公平性的質疑。本研究使用1994-2012年政大學生入學資料，透過學生家庭社經地位、學生高中來源、入學學測成績三方面表現，來檢視多元入學是否會使得學生有越來越來自菁英家庭的趨勢。研究結果顯示多元入學管道的擴張對中、低社經地位家庭學生的入學具正面影響，且有助於非明星高中學生入學；另外，非考試入學的高社經地位家庭或明星高中學生，入學學測成績並沒有較低，且反而不存在成績優惠。整體來說，多元入學並沒有造成政大學生越來越傾向高社經地位家庭或明星高中。英文摘要：This paper investigates the equality issues arising from two-track college recruitment the first track relies on the personal or senior high school referral, and the second track bases on the general college entrance examination-that was implemented in 2002. The personal or high school referral admission has long been criticized for favoring students of families of high social and economic status (SES). Utilizing the administrative data of NCCU between 1994 and 2012, we examine whether students of high SES are indeed more inclined to be admitted to NCCU after the two-track college recruitment. Our empirical evidence does not support that the change of college recruitment results in favoring students of high SES families, either measured in terms of their residence towns' population density or the average household income tax of their residence town. In addition, the share of students graduated from top ranking high schools decreases modestly after the new recruitment rule. Furthermore, we find that students graduated from non-metropolitan area are more likely to be admitted to NCCU after the adoption of two-track college recruitment.起始頁-結束頁：207-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：自我控制、金融知識與不良信用貸款行為的關連性－台灣地區的驗證並列篇名：SELF-CONTROL, FINANCIAL LITERACY AND HARMFUL CONSUMER CREDIT BEHAVIOR IN TAIWAN MARKET作者：沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen);林士傑(Shih-Jie Lin);唐代彪(De-Piao Tang);蕭育仁(Yu-Jen Hsiao)關鍵字：自我控制;金融知識;過度信用貸款;信用卡預借現金;Self-control;Financial Literacy;Over-indebtness;Cash advanced期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文透過金融監督管理委員會(金管會)2011年的國民金融知識調查資料，探討自我控制、金融知識程度與不良信用債務貸款行為之關聯性。Logit實證模型發現，具備自我控制能力與金融知識程度是愈高的民眾，愈不會面臨過度信用貸款與使用信用卡預借現金的問題，代表信用管理與現金流動性管理能力較佳，而且自我控制能力與金融知識程度對民眾信用貸款行為的影響力有過之而無不及。另外，台灣民眾的性別、婚姻狀況、教育程度、家世背景與家庭年所得程度，皆為影響民眾不良信用貸款行為的重要影響因素。最後本文考慮選樣偏誤與內生性問題，再次確認本文研究結論相當穩健。英文摘要：This paper uses Probit regression model for Third Undertaken National Financial Literacy survey in 2011 by Financial Supervisory Commission in Taiwan to examine the relationship between self-control, financial literacy and harmful consumer credit behavior. Lack self-control and financial illiteracy are positively associated with consumer over-indebtness and consumer cash advance. It means that people with lack self-control or financial illiteracy are more likely to suffer consumer credit problems. In most specifications we find a stronger role for lack of self-control than financial illiteracy in explaining consumer over-indebtness. Besides, physiological characteristics, like gender, marriage status, education level, family origin and household income, are also key factors affecting the chance to suffer consumer credit problems. Finally, our results are robustness to the potentially endogeneity and selection bias issue.起始頁-結束頁：251-294資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：市場規模、廠商規模與城鄉失業並列篇名：MARKET SIZE, SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF FIRMS AND URBAN-RURAL UNEMPLOYMENT作者：黃幼宜(Yo-Yi Huang);黃登興(Deng-Shing Huang)關鍵字：城鄉失業;市場規模;廠商規模;固定成本優勢;邊際成本優勢;Urban-rural unemployment;Market size;Size distribution of firms;Fixed cost advantage;Marginal cost advantage期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：有關城鄉失業的文獻，均在固定規模報酬的設定下，證得提高最低工資率會吸引過多的勞動人口移入，反而導致都會區失業率的上升。有別於於傳統城鄉失業模型文獻，本文從現實狀況出發，在新貿易理論之規模報酬遞增與不完全競爭的架構下，進一步考量廠商的異質性(大廠與小廠並存)，探討市場擴張與提高最低工資率，對廠商規模消長，以及失業率的影響。本文主要發現如下：由於大廠在邊際成本有較低的優勢，小廠優勢則在於較低的固定成本，(1)若產品替代彈性夠大，則具邊際成本優勢的大廠將受益於市場規模的擴大，而小廠則受害而減少；(2)在既定的替代彈性下，則提高最低工資抵銷了大廠的邊際成本優勢，導致其家數萎縮，而小廠數量則增加。最後，(3)有別於傳統城鄉失業文獻之提高最低工資，將導致都會區失業人口提高的結論，本文證得在大規模經濟與大小廠並存的設定下，提高都會區的最低工資水準，將可提高就業人口、降低失業率。英文摘要：Most of the related literature on the rural-urban model, based on constant returns to scale and a perfect competition setup, proves that raising the minimum wage level will attract more migrants to an urban area’s modern sector and thus lead to a higher unemployment rate. Deviating from the traditional setup, we adopt the new trade theory of increasing returns to scale (IRTS) and imperfect competition, extend it to consider firm heterogeneity (the coexistence of big and small firms), and analyze how the market size and minimum wage level might affect the firm size distribution and the rate of unemployment in a small open economy. The major findings are as follows: With big firms’ advantage in marginal cost and small firms’ advantage in fixed cost, (1) if the substitution elasticity between the big vs. small firms’ products is large enough, then larger market size will benefit the big firms. (2) Given a level of substitution elasticity, raising the minimum wage will offset the big firms’ advantage in marginal cost. Thus, the number of big firms will decline and the small ones will increase. (3) Unlike the conventional results of increasing unemployment in a conventional rural-urban model, we prove that under IRTS with the coexistence of big vs. small firms, raising the minimum wage will increase the employment level and hence lower the rate of unemployment.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：Technological Regimes, R&D Agglomeration and R&D: Does Firm Size Matter?並列篇名：技術體制，研發聚集與研發－廠商規模有關嗎？作者：楊志海(Chih-Hai Yang);鄒孟文(Meng-Wen Tsou)關鍵字：研發;中小企業;研發聚集;研發集中度;R&D;SMEs;R&D agglomeration;R&D concentration期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文探討技術體制與研發聚集對於大企業與中小企業研發活動的影響，並以產業的廠商密度作為產業研發集中度和研發密集度的工具變數。採用2006年台灣製造業普查資料的實證結果發現，研發聚集有利於中小企業的研發活動，但對大企業無明顯改變。技術機會較多的產業，對大企業和中小企業的研發皆有利；但研發集中度對這兩類企業研發的關聯性普遍不大。此外，本文發現市場集中度與研發決策之間遞增但凹向原點的關聯性，這項關係僅出現於中小企業，而不存在於大企業。有關公司特性方面，自有資金、外銷比率和廣告密集度背對廠商的研發活動扮演重要的角色。英文摘要：This paper examines the roles of technological regimes and R&D agglomeration in determining the R&D behaviors of large firms and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). We consider the potential endogeneity of R&D concentration and industry R&D intensity by using firm density as an instrument. Based on the 2006 Census data on Taiwanese manufacturing, we find that R&D agglomeration fosters SMEs’ R&D activities, but it has no influence on large firms’ R&D decision. A technology regime fertile with technological opportunity is advantageous for both SMEs and large firms, whereas R&D concentration tends to be less relevant to R&D activity for both groups of firms. Moreover, an increasing but concave relationship between market concentration and R&D propensity is found for SMEs, but not for large firms. Regarding firm characteristics, internal finance, export ratio and advertising intensity play critical roles on financing R&D activity for all firms.起始頁-結束頁：35-62資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：An Experimental Study on the Crowding-Out Effect with Both Publicly and Privately Provided Public Goods並列篇名：公部門與私部門提供公共財同時在時的排擠效果的實驗研究作者：徐麗振(Li-Chen Hsu)關鍵字：排擠;擠入;公共財;實驗;Crowding-out;Crowding-in;Public goods;Experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：排擠效果的理論和實驗文獻通常假設租稅和自願性捐獻用來通融「同一」公共財。基於此一假設，不論是純粹利他還是不純粹麗他的理論模型皆預期租稅會排擠自願性捐獻，而無法解釋租稅會擠入(增加)自願性捐獻的結果。本實驗研究檢驗公部門和私部門提供的公共財同時存在時的排擠效果。本文發現當公部門和私部門提供的公共財對實驗參與者有同等價值時，或當公部門提供的公共財較私部門提供的公共財互有價值時，傳統的排擠效果會發生。然而當私部門提供的公共財較公部門提供的公共財有價值時，則有擠入效果，亦即租稅不僅不會降低自願性捐獻，還會增加更多的自願性捐獻。英文摘要：The theoretical and experimental literature on crowding-out usually assumes that taxes and voluntary contributions are used to fund the ”same” public good. Based on this assumption, theoretical models of both pure and impure altruism predict a result of crowding-out that is unable to explain an outcome of crowding-in. This experimental study examines the crowding-out effect when both publicly and privately provided public goods are present. It is found that when both publicly and privately provided public goods are equally valuable to subjects, or when the former is more valuable than the latter, the traditional results of crowding-out occur. However, crowding-in is present if the privately provided public good is more valuable than the publicly provided public good.起始頁-結束頁：63-91資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：The Relationship between Equity and Commodity Markets during the Credit Crisis並列篇名：金融海嘯期間股票市場及商品市場之關聯性作者：魏品揚(Ping-Yang Wei);張元晨(Yuan-Chen Chang)關鍵字：商品市場;股票市場;樣本外預測;Commodity market;Equity market;Out-of-sample forecast期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文主要是探討股票市場及商品市場的關聯性，實證結果發現澳洲、加拿大、智利、紐西蘭以及南非之股票市場的確可以預測商品市場現貨價格的走勢。除此之外，我們也發現在金融海嘯前後，股票市場之預測行為存在顯著差異。在金融海嘯之前，相比基準組模型，股票市場並無法顯著改善商品市場之預測成效。然而，在金融海嘯之後，我們發現股票市場不論在預測個別商品市場及全球商品市場之價格走勢，皆有良好的成效。英文摘要：This study explores the linkage between equity markets and commodity markets, finding that the stock price indices of Australia, Canada, Chile, New Zealand, and South Africa contain information about future movements in the commodity markets. We also show that these patterns are different before and after the recent financial crisis. In the pre-crisis period, models based on stock price indices do not outperform the benchmark model. However, in the post-crisis period we see that stock price indices help forecast the price changes of the associated commodity markets as well as aggregated commodity price movements.起始頁-結束頁：93-125資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：The Relationships Among the Demend for Reinsurance, Liquidity, and Leverage in the U.S. Property-Liability Insurance Industry並列篇名：美國財產責任保險公司再保險、流動性及財務槓桿關係之分析作者：張永郎(Vincent Y. Chang);鄭士卿(Vivian S. Jeng)關鍵字：demand for reinsurance;liquidity;leverage;capital structure;再保險;流動性;財務槓桿;資本結構期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：Using pooled time-series and cross-sectional data from 1994 to 2006, we examine the interrelations among the demand for reinsurance, liquidity, and leverage in the U.S. property-liability insurance industry. Three structural equations are simultaneously estimated on the basis of a two-stage least squares paradigm. On the one hand, the empirical results indicate that insurers’ liquidity and reinsurance demand are substitutes for each other, and the same relationship is found for liquidity and leverage. On the other hand, our empirical findings support the fact that reinsurance demand and leverage are complementary.英文摘要：本文採用1994－2006年結合時間序列與橫斷面資料分析美國財產責任保險公司再保險、流動性及財務槓桿之關係。本文採用二階段最小平方法來估計再保險需求、流動性及財務槓桿三條結構方程式。本文實證結果發現保險公司的再保險需求與流動性之間呈現替代的現象, 且流動性與財務槓桿之間亦呈現替代之關係。另外,本文亦發現再保險需求與財務槓桿之間的關係則為互補之現象。起始頁-結束頁：543-576資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.444.12篇名：失業對離婚的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Job Displacement on Divorce作者：陳妍蒨(Yen-Chien Chen);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu);王齡懋(Ling-Mao Wang)關鍵字：離婚;公司關廠失業;行政資料;divorce;displacement;firm closures;administrative data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：失業對家庭而言是一項重大的所得衝擊,其會對夫妻之間的婚姻穩定關係造成威脅。本文主要是要檢視丈夫若經歷因公司關廠所導致的失業是否會對離婚的機率有所影響。我們所採用的資料來自於不同的台灣行政資料之連結, 這套資料提供了失業的原因, 讓我們得以以公司關廠來定義外生性的失業。實證結果發現, 丈夫失業會提高離婚的機率約8.50%至9.23%;失業持續期間超過一年以及失業之後的三年內對離婚的影響尤其強烈。另外,我們也發現,丈夫結婚年齡愈大(失業年齡愈大)、教育程度較低以及收入較低的家庭, 失業對離婚的負面效果愈為強烈。英文摘要：Losing a job is an important resource shock to a family, and it may be harmful to the stability of marriage. This paper aims to investigate the impact of a husband's displacement on the possibility of divorce. The sample we analyze is based on an unusual data set which is linked with Taiwan administrative data containing detailed information on unemployment and its causes. We can identify exogenous displacement by using firm closures. We find that a husband's displacement increases the possibility of divorce by 8.50 to 9.23 percent. The impact is more manifest for those who were displaced longer than 1 year, those who were displaced within 3 years, and those who have lower social economic status (lower education, and lower income).起始頁-結束頁：577-610資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.444.23篇名：最適財政政策與經濟成長：不完全競爭模型並列篇名：The Optimal Fiscal Policies and Economic Growth in an Imperfect Competition Model作者：王韋能(Wei-Neng Wang);謝智源(Jhy-Yuan Shieh)關鍵字：不完全競爭;經濟成長;財政政策;imperfect competition;economic growth;fiscal policies期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文建構一個包含生產性政府支出與不完全競爭特性市場結構的內生成長模型，據此討論所得稅對經濟成長與社會福利的影響，同時也分析最適政府支出組合。根據本文的研究發現，(1) 政府以所得稅融通生產性政府支出時,所得稅提高對經濟成長與社會福利的影響均不確定。(2) 經濟社會存在一個同時滿足經濟成長極大與社會福利極大的最適所得稅率水準,而且最適所得稅率高於政府支出的產出彈性。(3) 政府提高具有排他性的公共服務支出對於經濟成長與社會福利的影響均不確定。(4) 經濟社會存在一個滿足同時滿足經濟成長率極大與社會福利極大的最適政府支出組合水準。英文摘要：In this paper, we analyze the effects of the income tax rate on economicgrowth and social welfare in an imperfect competition growth model. Wefind that, the growth-maximization tax rate is increasing with the degree ofsectoral externalities and the extent of the returns from specialization, butindependent of monopoly power. In addition, maximizing the economicgrowth rate is equivalent to maximizing social welfare. An increase in the excludablepublic service expenditure has an ambiguous impact on the growthrate and social welfare. Furthermore, we can find the optimal compositionof excludable government expenditure.起始頁-結束頁：611-639資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.444.34篇名：技術授權與最適貿易政策並列篇名：Technology Licensing and Optimal Trade Policy作者：蔡明芳;楊雅博關鍵字：技術授權;出口政策;製程創新;technology licensing;export policy;process innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文建立一個三國兩廠商的出口模型，在模型中，擁有創新製程技術之本國廠商，擬將其專利技術授權給另一生產同質產品之外國廠商，兩者同時將產品全數出口到第三國市場從事Cournot 競爭，技術專利出口之本國政府對其出口產品實施出口政策。本文發現，當本國廠商的原始邊際成本大於外國廠商時，若創新程度夠大，則本國政府的最適政策為對出口課稅。此外，本國也可能同時有兩個使本國福利極大的出口稅或出口補貼率。最後，本國政府對出口課稅可能使被授權之外國廠商利潤及進口國之福利皆提高,造成「三贏」的局面。英文摘要：We develop a model a la Brander and Spencer (1985) to discuss the optimal export policy of the domestic country when a domestic firm intends to license its innovated process technology to a foreign firm. The findings in this paper are as follows. First, if the reduction of the foreign firm's marginal cost due to licensing is large enough, an export tax is called for when the initial marginal production cost of the domestic firm is greater than that of the foreign firm. Second, under some parametric conditions, two different subsidy rates can achieve the same maximum welfare. Moreover, imposing an optimal tax on the domestic export may improve the welfare of all countries.起始頁-結束頁：641-658資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.444.45篇名：從貿易與產業發展看荷治時期台灣殖民地經營之績效並列篇名：A Re-valuation of the Management of Dutch Taiwan作者：吳聰敏(Tsong-Min Wu)關鍵字：荷蘭東印度公司;財政盈餘;轉口貿易;Dutch East India Company;budget surplus;entrepot trade期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：歷史學者中村孝志分析荷治時期台灣的財政盈虧, 認為荷蘭人在台灣的經營大體上是成功的, 特別是在末期, 年年均有相當利潤。不過, 1662年荷蘭人被鄭成功打敗撤離台灣之後, 荷蘭巴達維亞總部的評估是, 對公司最有利的做法不是奪回台灣, 而是另尋一地作為轉口貿易據點。這與上述的結論似乎並不一致。以往的研究已經指出, 荷蘭東印度公司帳簿上的盈虧並不能反映殖民地經營之成效。本文分析荷治時期台灣的轉口貿易與產業發展, 重新估算1630年代中期之後台灣殖民地之利潤, 並解釋為何荷蘭人無意再奪回台灣。英文摘要：From an analysis of Dutch Taiwan's budget Nakamura (1964) concluded that the VOC's colonial management of Taiwan was successful, especially during the later period. However, after Koxinga defeated the Dutch in 1662, the Dutch East India Company had no intention to recover Taiwan. This seemed to be inconsistent with Nakamura's conclusion. In this paper, I first argue that Taiwan's official budget data are not suitable for judging the successfulness of the colonial management. From a re-estimation of the trade and domestic production data, I then show that the colonial management was not profitable, and explain why the Dutch were not interested in retaking Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：379-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.443.16篇名：判定預測市場之準確度：單一與合併鑑別模型之比較並列篇名：Assessing the Accuracy of Prediction Markets: Single Versus Combined Identification Models作者：戴中擎(Chung-Ching Tai);池秉聰(Ping-Tsung Chih);林鴻文(Hung-Wen Lin);童振源(Chen-Yuan Tung)關鍵字：預測市場;合併預測;支持向量機;prediction markets;combined forecast;support vector machine期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：預測市場是近年來新發展出的預測方法,許多實證研究均證明預測市場能有效整合資訊並提出準確的預測。然而在大多數預測市場研究中, 研究者只能由過去的歷史準確率來衡量市場預測的可靠性,無法針對單一市場合約預測的正確與否進行事前的評估。本文提出一個植基於市場交易特徵的合併鑑別方法, 藉由整合迴歸模型、多變量分析、決策樹、及支持向量機等四種模型來擷取與市場預測準確率有關的潛在資訊。本文使用未來事件交易所自2006年至2011年共650個選舉合約作為資料, 經實證分析後驗證合併鑑別模型可以非常準確地於事前對任一合約預測的正確與否提出評斷。本文所提出的合併鑑別方法不但比單一鑑別模型更為可靠,而且可依決策者不同的目標函數提出不同的評斷以進行風險控管。英文摘要：In prediction markets (PM) which are being used widely in many fields, contemporary researchers and practitioners have to rely on historical accuracy to evaluate the plausibility of current events. Based on the empirical and theoretic findings concerning the accuracy of prediction markets, this paper proposes a combined identification method which can evaluate the accuracy of PM events in advance. The proposed method not only takes a variety of market features into account, but also combines the forecasts of different statistical and machine learning techniques to fully capture the patterns underneath. We test the proposed method with transaction data from 2006 to 2011. This study proves that it is possible to evaluate the accuracy of any PM event in advance with high accuracy. We also show that the combined modeling is a superior method in the sense that it not only can provide higher identification accuracy, but is also flexible enough to incorporate decision makers' goals and preferences into the identification process.起始頁-結束頁：413-474資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.443.27篇名：商品不可分割性與最適所得稅並列篇名：Consumption Indivisibility and Optimal Income Taxation作者：呂俊慧(Chun-Hui Lu);翁<U+5803>嵐(K. L. Glen Ueng)關鍵字：不可分割性;最適所得稅制;柏瑞圖效率;租稅結構;consumption indivisibility;Pareto efficient;optimal income taxation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：傳統的租稅理論忽略了商品的消費具有不可分割的性質, 有鑑於此,本文在此一背景下探討柏瑞圖效率的租稅結構。文中發現: 在滿足柏瑞圖效率的租稅結構下,高(低)能力者的邊際稅率除了與課稅後不可分割財的消費型態有關外,同時也取決於低(高)能力者的自我選擇限制式以及高(低) 能力者的工資門檻限制式是否會受限。因而在稅後高能力者會購買不可分割財的前提下,即使低能力者的自我選擇限制式不會受限, 只要高能力者的工資門檻會受限, 則高能力者面對的邊際稅率將為負, 而不是0, 其原因在於, 受限於不可分割財消費門檻之限制, 租稅組合中對高能力者固定稅額之課徵, 無法使得其所得淨社會邊際效用水準等於1; 在維持稅收不變的前提下, 相對於傳統高能力者邊際稅率為0的解, 透過高能力者的邊際稅率之降低, 並增加固定稅額的課徵, 可以放寬高能力者的門檻限制式, 讓其所得淨社會邊際效用水準更貼近於1。英文摘要：Traditional literature neglects the impact of indivisibility of goods on the design of optimal income taxation. For this reason, this paper sets up a model based on Stiglitz (1982) with two different kinds of goods: one is the traditional consumption good and the other is the so called indivisible good. It is shown that under the Pareto efficient tax structure, the marginal tax rates on the high (low) ability taxpayers depend not only on the patterns of indivisible goods, but also on whether low (high) ability taxpayers' self-selection and high (low) ability taxpayers' wage threshold constraints are binding. Under the premise that high ability taxpayers will always purchase indivisible goods and the constraints of their wage threshold are binding, the marginal tax rates should be negative rather than zero on the high ability taxpayers, even that the low ability taxpayers' self-selection constraints are not binding. This result is different from traditional models which show that the optimal marginal tax rates on high ability taxpayers are zero. The reason is: being constrained to the wage threshold, lump-sum taxation levied on high ability taxpayers cannot make the net social marginal utility level equal to 1. Hence, reducing marginal tax rates and increasing lump-sum taxes on the high ability taxpayers can make the level of net social marginal utility closer to 1 and thereby improve social efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：475-509資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.443.38篇名：複合風險之趨避－以運動視覺作業為例並列篇名：Aversion to Compound Lotteries - Lessons From Experimental Results of Visual Motion Tasks作者：劉邦容(Pang-Jung Liu);龔俊嘉(Chun-Chia Kung);曾楷涵(Kai-Han Tseng);翁明宏(Ming-Hung Weng)關鍵字：視覺實驗;機率權重函數;複合樂透轉換公理;visual task;probability weighting function;reduction of compound lottery axiom期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究以視覺實驗模擬生活中機率資訊未明確揭示下之風險情境,以探討該情境下經濟決策者之風險態度。實驗參與者被要求從兩兩一組, 等同於單一或複合經濟樂透之選項裡選擇其偏好之組合, 而其報酬為最終累積所得金額之固定比例。實驗結果顯示: (1)面對具相同機率分配之單一與複合樂透,決策者偏向趨避複合樂透, (2) 隨等值單一樂透獲最終報酬之機率提高,其愈趨避複合樂透, (3) 決策者以不同機率權重函數衡量單一與複合樂透, 且(4) 面對複合樂透時, 前後機率之差距與安排順序對決策者賦予複合樂透之評價, 未具顯著影響。英文摘要：This research uses visual task experiments to mimic a realistic environment in which risky decisions are made without explicit information regarding probabilities of happening events, and to investigate how individuals make economic decisions when facing such uncertainty. During the experiment, participants choose between pairs of economic alternatives mathematically equivalent to either simple or compound lotteries. Their final payments are a fixed proportion of the cumulative money earned from all lottery choices. The results suggest: (1) decision makers are averse to compound lotteries when choosing between simple and compound lotteries of mathematically equivalent probability distributions; (2) there is a stronger aversion to compound lotteries when facing a higher overall probability of gaining a monetary reward; (3) individuals use different probability weighting functions to evaluate probabilities in compound and simple lotteries; and (4) the order of probabilities and their differences in compound lotteries do not have significant impact on individuals' choices.起始頁-結束頁：511-541資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.443.49篇名：央行「阻升不阻貶」？－再探台灣匯率不對稱干預政策並列篇名：Does the Central Bank of Taiwan Intervene in the Foreign Exchange Market Asymmetrically?作者：陳旭昇(Shiu-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：中央銀行;外匯市場干預;阻升不阻貶;asymmetric intervention;central bank期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文的目的在於檢視台灣中央銀行是否在外匯市場執行不對稱干預政策。我們先以結構性自我向量迴歸(SVAR)模型認定出外生的結構性匯率衝擊(structural exchange rate shock)，然後將其分解成升值衝擊(appreciation shock)與貶值衝擊(depreciation shock)，藉以進一步探討央行是否在外匯市場上採用不對稱的匯率干預政策。透過檢視1989: M5- 2012: M2的月資料，實證結果發現, 如果匯率干預政策是為了因應實質匯率衝擊，央行在1998年3月前後的匯率干預政策有很大的不同。在1989年5月到1998年2月之間，央行對於外匯市場的干預較小。反之，證據顯示在1998年3月之後，央行對於實質匯率確有顯著的「阻升不阻貶」之行為。而以全樣本期間1989: M5- 2012M2的資料來看，整體而言我們亦發現央行「阻升不阻貶」的實證證據。此外，如果匯率干預政策是為了因應名目匯率衝擊，我們發現實證結論不變，央行在1998年3月前後的匯率干預政策有顯著不同：1998年3月之前，無顯著干預匯市證據，1998年3月之後，證據顯示央行執行「阻升不阻貶」政策。英文摘要：This paper investigates whether the Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan) intervenes in the foreign exchange market asymmetrically. After identifying the structural exchange rate shocks using a structural VAR model, we decompose the exchange rate shocks into positive shocks (depreciation shocks) and negative shocks (appreciation shocks). We then examine whether depreciation and appreciation shocks have asymmetric effects on official intervention in the foreign exchange market. We confirm the existence of an asymmetry in central bank foreign exchange intervention responses to currency appreciations versus depreciations in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：187-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.442.110篇名：十二年國教免試入學分發制度之賽局分析並列篇名：A Game Theoretical Analysis of Student Assignment Mechanisms Under the 12-Year Compulsory Education Program in Taiwan作者：袁國芝(Kou-Chih Yuan);王子豪(Tzn-Hao Wang);莊委桐(Wei-Toeng Juang)關鍵字：國教;分發制度;賽局;均衡;compulsory education;assignment mechanism;game;Nash equilibrium期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣於2014年開始實施十二年國教。其中分發制度的志願序設計是引發學生和家長爭議的主要焦點之一。本文建立一個十二年國教分發制度下的簡化賽局模型，比較納入志願序作為入學比序依據的新制，以及傳統填志願依成績分發的舊制。我們首先描述學生可能的因應策略，並刻劃在新舊分發制度下的純策略均衡。接著我們以一個典型的混合均衡為例，分別說明在新制下可能的長期均衡結果。我們發現, 最好的學生不受影響，然後大致上會依照成績由優至劣對學生產生由弊至利的各種影響。另外，學校錄取的學生組成會更多樣化，成績較差的學生開始有可能進入第一志願的學校，並且缺額的情況將可能出現在傳統分發制度下從來不會發生的學校。英文摘要：The government in Taiwan implemented 12-year compulsory education in 2014. Among its several measures, the newly adopted student assignment mechanism caused intense debate in Taiwan. In this paper, we construct a model in which students submit their school choices and characterize the pure Nash equilibria under both the new and the original system. We then provide an example with a typical mixed equilibrium to illustrate its welfare and efficiency outcome. We find that, under the new system, the best students are not affected while the second-tier students lose and the last-tier students gain. Under the new system, schools will be more likely to admit students from all tiers, although all schools may have vacancies now that only occurred in the least preferred schools under the old system.起始頁-結束頁：215-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.422.211篇名：銀行治理、利率及匯率衍生性金融商品與銀行利率及匯率風險：台灣實證研究並列篇名：Bank Governance, Interest-Rate and Exchange-Rate Derivatives, and Banks' Interest-Rate and Exchange-Rate Risks: Evidence from Taiwan作者：劉景中(Jin-Chung Liu)關鍵字：衍生性金融商品;銀行治理;利率風險;匯率風險;Derivative;Bank Governance;Interest-Rate Risk;Exchange- Rate Risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文目的以1998－2011年台灣銀行業為研究對象,探討衍生性金融商品對銀行風險的影響，以及進一步探討何種銀行治理機制能有效地影響衍生性金融商品對銀行風險的影響效果。本研究的衍生性金融商品強調的是利率及匯率衍生性金融商品，此外，我們也強調運用交易目的及非交易目的(避險目的)之衍生性金融商品資料。銀行風險變數強調採用會計資料所衡量的銀行利率及匯率風險變數。主要實證結果有：第一、非交易目的之利率及匯率衍生性金融商品只會降低銀行利率及匯率風險，並不會提高銀行利率及匯率風險。第二、交易目的之利率衍生性金融商品會對銀行利率風險產生提高效果。交易目的之匯率衍生性金融商品會對銀行匯率風險產生降低效果。第三、董事會規模較大的銀行、銀行為公股銀行及獨立董監事席次比率較大的銀行，較能降低交易目的之利率衍生性金融商品對銀行利率風險的提高效果。董事會規模較大的銀行，較會減緩交易目的之匯率衍生性金融商品對銀行匯率風險的降低效果。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to explore the impact of derivatives on bank risks in Taiwan’s banking industry from 1998 to 2011, and further to examine whether the impact of derivatives on bank risks is related to bank governance. In this paper, we focus on interest-rate derivatives and exchangerate derivatives. In addition, we employ the derivative data for non-trading (hedging) purposes and for trading purposes. In this study, we use accounting data to measure banks’ interest-rate and exchange-rate risks. The main results show that: (i) Higher interest-rate and exchange-rate derivatives for non-trading purposes only cause lower interest-rate and exchange-rate risks for banks, and can not cause higher interest-rate and exchange-rate risks. (ii) Banks with higher interest-rate derivatives for trading purposes have higher interest-rate risks. Banks with higher exchange-rate derivatives for trading purposes have lower exchange-rate risks. (iii) The increase in banks’ interest rate risks caused by interest-rate derivatives for trading purposes is smaller for banks with larger board size, for state-owned banks and for banks with more independent directors and supervisors. The decreasing effect of exchangerate derivatives for trading purposes on banks’ exchange-rate risks is smaller for banks with larger board size.起始頁-結束頁：257-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.442.312篇名：Does the Stock Market Favor Socially Responsible Firms? Evidence from SEOs並列篇名：市場是否偏好具有企業社會責任評比的公司？以現金增資為例作者：詹佳縈(Chia-Ying Chan);周德瑋(De-Wai Chou);賴慧文(Christine W. Lai)關鍵字：企業社會責任;長期表現;報酬率;現金增資;增資宣告;corporate social responsibility;long-term performance;rate of return;seasoned equity offerings;SEO announcements期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：文獻顯示一些學者已推論出具有企業社會責任的公司(CSR)將表現出不同於其他公司(non-CSR)的特徵，在這項研究中，我們將研究這些特徵是如何的影響市場參與者在現金增資(SEO)中的投資偏好以及如何影響現金增資宣告效應和股價的長期表現。特別是，當市場普遍對於企業社會責任的公司產生好感時，在資訊不對稱較常存在的SEO活動中，其企業社會責任的形象是否成為一種優質的「認證」，進而增進公司的價值？總體而言，我們發現在現金增資的宣告中，CSR公司相對於non-CSR公司將產生較少的負異常報酬。換句話說，CSR公司現金增資時將產生比較少的折價現象。此外，實證研究結果顯示，市場參與者偏好那些專注於環境，社會和治理方面的企業社會責任公司，因而有比較好的報酬表現。然而，CSR及non-CSR公司在股票的長期表現上基本上是相似的，在異常報酬率差異不顯著。英文摘要：Several scholars have inferred that firms following principles of corporate social responsibility (CSR) exhibit features that differ from other firms. In this study, we examine how these features might influence market participants' preferences with regard to announcement effects of seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) and long-term stock performance. Our pioneering study advances the literature by classifying socially responsible firms into seven groups based on the major category of their CSR activities. Overall, we find that socially responsible firms generate less negative announcement returns in comparison to non-CSR firms on the issuance of SEOs, which suggests that return premiums yield lower discounts for socially responsible firms during SEO events. Furthermore, our findings show that during the announcement period market participants respond favorably to socially responsible firms that focus on environment, community, and governance. Nevertheless, the long-term market performance of socially responsible firms and non-CSR firms is generally similar and differences in abnormal returns are insignificant.起始頁-結束頁：339-377資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.442.413篇名：行為財務學文獻回顧與展望：台灣市場之研究並列篇名：Review of Behavioral Finance Studies in Taiwan作者：王韻怡(Yun-Yi Wang);池祥萱(Hsiang-Hsuan Chid);周冠男(Robin K. Chou)關鍵字：行為財務學;行為投資學;行為公司理財;behavioral finance;behavioral investment;behavioral corporate finance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文回顧以台灣市場資料為樣本的行為財務學國內、外文獻，依研究方向分為行為投資學與行為公司理財。本文系統性的整理與分析以台灣資料探討行為財務學相關議題的發展與成果，進而指出未來可能的研究方向，供後續研究者參考。英文摘要：We review behavioral finance studies that use Taiwanese data and synthesize related literature in two major subfields: behavioral investment and behavioral corporate finance. We summarize the current development and shed light on potential future research topics in behavioral finance with Taiwanese data.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.441.114篇名：台灣選擇權市場交易活動之實證研究：文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：A Survey of Empirical Studies on Trading Activities in the Taiwan Index Options Market作者：張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);謝佩芳(Pei-Fang Hsieh)關鍵字：資訊內涵;行為財務學;台指選擇權;實證研究;文獻回顧;Information Content;Behavior Finance;Taiwan Index Options;Empirical Study期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣期貨交易所自2001年12月推出臺指選擇權以來，其交易量逐年增加，至2006年時，台指選擇權已成為全球前五大交易頻繁之選擇權商品，因此以台指選擇權為對象之實證研究益顯得重要。本文撰寫之目的在於有系統地彙整以台灣選擇權市場為研究對象之代表性文章，並以選擇權商品交易量之資訊內涵為主軸加以回顧整理希望能有助於國內學者了解並深化研究台灣選擇權市場之相關重要議題。英文摘要：An index option was launched in December 2001 by the Taiwan Futures Exchange, and became one of the world’s top five trading index options in terms of trading frequency in 2006. Therefore, many scholars have done empirical studies on the Taiwan index option over the past few years. The purpose of this study is to systematically investigate representative articles that focus on the Taiwan options market data. We hope that this survey article can help scholars understand and do further interesting research on the Taiwan options market.起始頁-結束頁：57-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.441.215篇名：台灣股票初次上市櫃相關研究文獻回顧並列篇名：A Review of Taiwan's IPO Research作者：姜堯民(Yao-Min Chiang);戴維芯(Vivian W. Tai)關鍵字：初次上市櫃;折價發行;長期績效;承銷;資訊不對稱;Initial public offerings;underpricing;long term performance;underwriting;information asymmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣股票初次上市櫃相關制度與規範近25年來幾經更迭，提供了充足的資料並造就了豐富的研究成果，本文針對近15年來利用台灣初次上市櫃資料所發表的文章進行回顧，試圖匯集文獻對一些重要議題的研究發現，及發掘仍未被解決的疑問。過去文獻已就初次上市櫃後長短期績效情形及原因、承銷方式選擇、投資者投標行為及績效、承銷費用等議題提出探討。未來可朝利用台灣獨特承銷特性、機構投資人行為及承銷商行為等方向進行研究。英文摘要：The regulations concerning initial public offerings in Taiwan have been revised many times during the past two decades. This provides plenty of valuable data to empirically test IPO theories. This study reviews the literature related to initial public offerings in Taiwan over the last 15 years. We discuss the empirical evidence found in this literature and try to dig out unexplained issues. In summary, Taiwan’s IPO literature provides empirical evidence on: short-run and long run performance of IPOs, the choice of underwriting method, investors’ bidding behavior and performance, and underwriting fees. In the future, we can further utilize these data to investigate the unique underwriting characteristics in Taiwan, and the behavior of institutional investors and underwriters.起始頁-結束頁：77-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.441.316篇名：Corporate Governance in Taiwan: A Survey並列篇名：台灣公司治理研究之調查作者：葉銀華(Yin-Hua Yeh);周欣宜(Hsin-I Chou)關鍵字：公司治理;股權結構;內部治理機制;外部治理機制;corporate governance;ownership;internal and external mechanisms期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：在1997年亞洲金融風暴後，亞洲經濟體開始專注在公司治理法規的改革；而在台灣，2002年以後政府亦頒布一系列的公司治理改革的措施, 藉以提高治理品質。本文首先回顧亞洲公司治理的研究,包含：股權結構、內部和外部機制以及幾個特定議題，並依此為基礎，延伸到分析台灣公司治理的架構與相關研究。本文旨在瞭解台灣公司治理環境、法規改革與目前研究成果，並且提出未來研究議題，作為讀者參考。英文摘要：Asian economies began focusing on corporate governance regulation reform following the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98. After 2002, Taiwan’s government promulgated a series of corporate governance reforms to enhance the quality of governance. In this paper, we first review the regional context of Asian corporate governance issues, namely ownership structure, internal and external mechanisms and several other specific topics. This is then extended to the Taiwanese corporate governance framework. This survey not only seeks to understand the implementation of corporate governance regulations and innovation in Taiwan; it also serves as a reference point for future studies into this and related issues.起始頁-結束頁：127-184資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2016.441.401篇名：運用服務導向架構發展中小企業之雲端碳足跡運算系統並列篇名：Development of a Cloud Carbon Footprint Computing System for Small-Median Sized Business with Service-Oriented Architecture Approach作者：項衛中(Wei-Jung Shiang);彭定國(Ting-Kuo Peng);劉偉聖(Wei-Sheng Liu)關鍵字：中小企業;碳足跡;服務導向架構;雲端運算;Small-median sized business;carbon footprint;service-oriented architecture;cloud computing期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：因應近年來氣候異常所引發的種種環保議題，各國企業為能達到永續經營，紛紛將碳排放量（碳足跡）的因素納入產品整體生命週期循環過程中。然而產品的碳足跡計算必須動員生命週期中的各個合作廠商，且台灣企業多屬中小型的經營規模，面對不同業主的多變需求增加了合作廠商的作業負擔，本研究提出依服務導向架構來建構雲端碳足跡運算系統，以支援碳足跡盤查作業中各項繁瑣的資料彙整與表單作業。依據服務導向架構的服務確認步驟，找出各階段使用者所需的服務，並將其佈署於雲端運算環境，透過雲端運算環境的高可用性、高彈性與擴充性，供應鏈夥伴可使用不同的裝置來整合異質環境中的碳足跡資料，發展降低碳排放量的方案，以達成節能減碳的目標。英文摘要：Recently, greenhouse effect has made the global climate change and seriously threatens to human survival; therefore, global warming and ”Energy Conservation and Carbon Reduction” have become global major issues. Many countries have asked companies to provide carbon footprint information of products. This research first identified services for the carbon footprint information system by utilizing the concept of service oriented architecture (SOA), and then designed the system to meet supply chain requirements for small-median sized business. This system could analyze and evaluate carbon footprint of products for the supply chain companies. The services with flexibility in the system could cope with environment changes and help enterprise to rapidly response to the changes. Google cloud environment was used in this research as the services development and deployment platform. A carbon footprint service App can be downloaded in the Google cloud; therefore supply chain partners could input carbon footprint data by the services and share information with each other in the cloud. With high availability, flexibility, and scalability of the system, this system helps supply chain partners to decrease data processing time and communication time. Supply chain partners could develop carbon reduction alternatives together more smoothly.起始頁-結束頁：141-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(2).012篇名：科技接受或轉換？科技轉換模式的初探與驗證並列篇名：Technology Acceptance or Switch? An Exploration and Examination of Technology Switch Model作者：李國瑋(Kuo-Wei Lee)關鍵字：科技接受模式;科技轉換模式;轉換成本;technology acceptance model;technology switch model;switch cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：科技接受模式主要針對使用者新科技接受度進行探討。唯對使用者而言，新科技接受可能隱含兩種情境：第一種為使用者接受新科技前並無舊科技的使用情形；第二種為使用者接受新科技前已有舊科技的使用情形。本研究的目的旨在針對科技的接受情境與科技的轉換情境進行分析與比較，並發展出科技轉換模式。實證結果顯示科技接受群與轉換群在科技接受模式的構面關連性上具顯著差異，意味著兩群體間具一定差異性。本研究進一步以科技轉換模式驗證後，亦發現新舊科技因素會對使用者新－舊科技轉換造成影響，顯見科技轉換模式對於新舊科技轉換能提供一定解釋。本研究期望此成果將有助於科技轉換模式的建立，並對使用者的科技轉換現象提供更多的理解與詮釋。英文摘要：Technology acceptance mode（l TAM）mainly focuses on user's acceptance of new technology. However, for users, the acceptance of new technology may imply two situations: one is that users never use any prior technology before they accept new technology, the other is that users had used prior technology before they accept new technology. The primary goal of this study is to analyze and compare the situations of technology acceptance and technology switch, therefore to develop a technology switch model（TSM）. Empirical results show that the relationships among the constructs of TAM model are significantly different between technology acceptance group and technology switch group. It means that the two groups are different from each other. The study further examines the TSM and finds out that the factors related to prior technology will affect the users' switch from prior to present technology. The finding implies that TSM can offer an explanation for the phenomenon of technology switch. The research result is expected to be helpful for the building of technology switch model and offer more understanding and explanation on the phenomenon of technology switch.起始頁-結束頁：183-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(2).023篇名：基於漸增式分群法之惡意程式自動分類研究並列篇名：Automatic malware classification based on incremental clustering algorithm作者：陳嘉玫(Chia-Mei Chen);賴谷鑫(Gu-Hsin Lai)關鍵字：誘捕系統;惡意程式分類;靜態分析;漸增式分群;Honeypot;Classification of Malware;Static analysis;Incremental clustering期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：近年來網路犯罪份子為了有效地躲避安全機制的檢驗，而不斷地開發惡意程式或是進行變種。現今分析方式大多數都只分析單一二進位檔案型態之惡意程式，無法適合誘捕系統所捕獲到之原始碼與二進位檔混和型態的惡意程式。目前仍然缺少一個有效且快速分析的工具針對誘捕系統所捕獲的惡意程式做分析。本研究提出一個惡意程式分類系統，此系統擷取惡意程式原始碼、以及檔案結構作為特徵值並且使用漸進式分群法分群。本研究利用漸增式的分群法改善階層式分群演算法效率並且藉由惡意程式分群可以知道新捕獲的惡意程式是否屬於已知的分類或是屬於新的類型。本研究與網路上知名病毒偵測與分類平台Virustotal比較以驗證分類準確度，實驗證明本研究所提出的分類優於Virustotal。英文摘要：In recent years, cybercriminals have developed new malware or variants in order to effectively evade inspection from security mechanisms. Most prior works focused on analyzing malware which contain only single binary file. However, most honeypot captured malware contain several binary and source files. Therefore, existing malware analysis approaches do not suitable for honeypot captured malware. In this research, a novel malware classification approach which analyzes features extracted from malware’s file structure, source code and binary files and file name is proposed. An incremental clustering algorithm is developed to replace traditional hierarchical clustering algorithm for improving efficiency. By means of proposed system, when a honeypot captures a new malware, IT security staff could know whether the new malware belongs to any existing clusters or not. To evaluate the performance of proposed system, the proposed approach is compared with Virustotal- a popular platform for malware detection and classification. The experiment result shows that the proposed approach outperforms Virustotal.起始頁-結束頁：225-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(2).034篇名：傳播隱私管理觀點探討臉書使用者之社群平台轉換意圖並列篇名：Exploring Facebook Users' Platform Switching Intentions: A Communication Privacy Management Perspective作者：王紹蓉(Sharon Shao-Jung Wang);李翊豐(Yi-Feng Li)關鍵字：臉書;傳播隱私管理;自我揭露;人格特質;社群網站;Facebook;communication privacy management;Self-disclosure;Personality;Social networking sits (SNSs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：在鼓勵用戶高度分享與互動，建立自我社交族譜的社群平台，用戶個人隱私已成近年來最受矚目的議題之一。儘管臉書的普及率日益攀升，卻也面臨用戶基於隱私考量而刪除帳戶或出走的危機，本研究從傳播隱私管理角度出發，以人格特質為前置因子，藉由用戶的自我揭露與隱私管理行為，探討以臉書為主要社群平台的使用者，將使用重心轉移至其他平台之意圖。本研究採問卷調查法，以結構方程式分析，有效解釋不同特質之使用者，在平台隱私管理、揭露行為與轉換意圖間之路徑關係，研究結果除擴大理論適用範圍之外，亦對面臨用戶流失或欲開發新功能的平台經營者，提出具體實務建議。英文摘要：While social networking sites facilitate participatory information sharing and collaboration, there has been a global trend for Facebook users to disconnect from the site due to privacy concerns. The goal of this study was to explore factors that may influence Facebook users' intention to switch between social networking sites in the context of communication privacy management. The results revealed that personality traits were significant predictors of privacy management behaviors. The complete paths from personality traits to switching intention through privacy management and self-disclosure behaviors were also found. Theoretical and practical implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：249-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(2).045篇名：雲端服務應用於半導體生產規劃之研究－以台灣半導體公司為例並列篇名：The research of cloud service application in planning semiconductor production - A case study of semiconductor corporation in Taiwan作者：周棟祥(Tung-Hsiang Chou);黃敬庭(Ching-Ting Huang)關鍵字：雲端服務運算;產業價值鏈;生產規劃;半導體產業;Cloud service computing;value chain;production planning;semiconductor industry;Google App Engine期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究的目的是探討如何應用雲端服務與運算的技術來解決目前半導體業產能規劃的運算問題，並且期望能與舊有的系統相互結合，在本研究過程中將藉由個案來探討雲端服務的應用與概括性地介紹半導體廠的製造過程和半導體生產管理目標與任務，在實作平台方面則運用Google App Engine雲端服務，並搭配Google提供的Google Web Toolkit工具進行模組設計與開發，並評估比較各種生產規劃方法，期望本研究所建構之泛用型的雲端服務模式，讓企業未來可以採用本流程，節省程式開發及撰寫的時間，藉此發展出企業本身所需的雲端系統服務及強化企業核心價值，提昇企業營運效能，進而創造出企業的競爭優勢。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to discuss ”how to use the cloud computing service to solve the computing problems in planning the productive process of semiconductor industry”. The aims of this research are not only to make the cloud computing service compatible with the legacy systems, but it also through case study to introduce the manufacturing process and productive management of semiconductor factory. The cloud services of Google App Engine and Google Web Toolkit are adopted to conduct the design and development in this research. This research is to establish a cloud service model that could be widely used in each corporation, so that the time of developing cloud service could be saved in the future. This research helps to develop the cloud service and enhance corporation’s core values, and then the corporation could be to increase its efficiency and to create its own competitive advantages.起始頁-結束頁：a2-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(1).016篇名：以社會交換理論探討社群網站互動與自我揭露前因與結果變數之研究－以Facebook為例並列篇名：The Study of the Antecedents and Consequences of Interactivity and Self-disclosure for Social Network Sites: The Empirical Study of Facebook作者：蔡宗宏(Chung-Hung Tsai);王湘茹(Shiang-Ru Wang);池文海(Wen-Hai Chih)關鍵字：社會交換理論;互動;自我揭露;持續使用意圖;沉浸;Socialexchange theory;interaction;self-disclosure;continuance intention;flow期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：採用社會交換理論作為研究框架，探討社群網站使用者互動性與自我揭露之前因與結果變數，並探討哪些因子可以成功的增加社群網站使用者之持續使用意圖。本研究共收集874位有效樣本。研究結果證實：(1)利益面因素為影響使用者互動性與自我揭露的主要前置因素；(2)影響使用者持續使用該平臺意願的決定性因素為使用者知覺人機互動、人際互動程度與自我揭露深度；(3)使用者的沉浸經驗會調節互動性與持續使用意圖的正向影響。本研究亦學術與實務管理上之結論與建議供後續學者參考。英文摘要：The Internet changes people’s interactions and the rise of social media also gives people multiple choices for personality interaction as well as become a global trend. This study uses social exchange theory as a conceptual framework to investigate the antecedents and consequences of interactivity and self-disclosure of social network site. In addition, this research explores which factor can increase continuance intention of use. This research consists of 874 samples with experience to use Facebook in a half year. This research adopts Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) to test the proposed model and the structural model shows a good fit. The results indicate that benefit variables are the most important antecedents of interactivity and self-disclosure. Besides, the critical factors of continuance intention are machine interaction, interpersonal interaction and self-disclosure depth. Furthermore, this study also indicates that user’s flow experience will moderate the positive effect of the interactivity on the continuance intention. This study also provides conclusions and practical implications to practitioners and scholars of social network sites.起始頁-結束頁：b1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(1).027篇名：電子化行銷導向之量表發展與驗證並列篇名：The Development and Validation of a Measurement Scale of Electronic Marketing Orientation作者：陳岳陽(Yue-Yang Chen);黃慧玲(Hui-Ling Huang)關鍵字：電子化行銷導向;系統建置與整合;量表發展;Electronic marketing orientation;system implementation and integration, scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：以電子化設備快速整合服務提供者與使用者，依情境衍生出不同的應用型態為當前企 業積極推動的創新營運模式。其中，電子化行銷為企業可利用的戰略方針之一，因為它不只單純的利用網際網路來進行行銷活動，亦包含了有效利用網路資訊科技，以支援企業需求。由於電子化行銷導向之衡量構面與題項尚未有一明確的衡量構面與指標，而因實務上行銷人員在電子化行銷規劃上的實用價值性，及相關理論的完整性，本研究即提出包含文化哲學、電子化行銷發展、系統建置與整合三個構面的電子化行銷導向的架構，以有效解釋其所隱喻的內涵。經由二階段的資料驗證過程，本研究提出衡量的量表共計14題，提供後續相關研究者與企業實務施行者，做為應用與推動的參考依據。英文摘要：Nowadays, firms have realized the importance of using electronic facilities for supporting services to their customers and suppliers. In this context, electronic marketing orientation is regarded as a strategic weapon for firms to support their outcomes. Given the important issue for electronic marketing orientation, this present research tried to develop an electronic marketing orientation scale. Following the rigor procedure for scale development, reliability, exploratory factor analysis, and confirmation factor analysis are used to validate the instrument. According to the empirical data collected from companies in Taiwan, finally, a revision containing 14 items for measuring electronic marketing orientation is generated. The measurement scale contains of 3 sub-constructs, namely philosophy, e-marketing initiation, and system implementation and integration. This rigorous two-stage scale development step is to provide good reliability and validity for this measurement scales. We hope this scale can provide practitioners, researchers, and marketers for understanding the characteristics of electronic marketing orientation.起始頁-結束頁：c1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(1).038篇名：雲端CRM系統持續使用意圖之實證研究：整合任務－科技適配模式與體制理論並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Continuous Usage Intention of Cloud CRM System: Integrating the Task-Technology Fit Model and Institutional Theory作者：陳至柔(Chih-JouChen);吳如娟(Ju-Chuan Wu);林松江(Sung-Chiang Lin)關鍵字：軟體即服務;雲端CRM系統;任務－科技適配模式;體制理論;體制壓力;Software as a service;cloud CRM system;task-technology fit model;institutional theory;institutional pressures期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：顧客關係管理（CRM）已成為企業重視的經營議題，根據Gartner公司的研究報告 預測，軟體即服務（SaaS）在大多數企業應用軟體市場中將變得越來越重要。過去以CRM系統為主的相關研究大多著重在系統服務品質上的研究，少有對於SaaS之任務－科技適配度及企業所面對的體制壓力與雲端CRM系統使用意圖間之關係進行深入探討，因此本研究結合此兩理論，探討雲端CRM系統之任務－科技適配度及企業客戶所面臨的體制壓力，對知覺有用性、使用滿意度與持續使用意圖的影響。本研究以使用雲端CRM系統超過三個月之企業客戶為研究對象，共回收185份有效問卷，並使用SmartPLS2.0軟體進行模式驗證與假說檢定，實證結果顯示多數假說均受到支持。根據研究結果，提出管理意涵及實務建議供相關業者參考。英文摘要：Customer Relationship Management (CRM) has been an issue of primary concern in business management. According to a study by Gartner, SaaS (Software as a Service, SaaS) is predicted to become increasingly important in most enterprise application software (EAS) markets. Prior studies of CRM systemwere mostly focused on the service quality. In the extant literature, only a few studies investigate the effects of task-technology fitand institutional pressures on firms’ SaaS adoption. Therefore, this study integratesthe Task-Technology Fit Model (TTF) and Institutional Theory to develop aresearch model that examines important factors affecting continuous usage of cloud CRM system.We extend the variables of TTF and Institutional Theory to better explain the perceived usefulness, satisfaction and continuous usage of cloud CRM system under cloud computing context. With corporate users continuing use ofcloud CRM system for more than 3 months in Taiwan as research subjects,the model and hypothesized relationship are empirically tested using the structural equation modeling (SEM) approach supported by SmartPLS2.0, with 185valid questionnaires returned. On the whole, most of hypotheses are supported. Implications and practical suggests are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：d1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2016.18(1).0401篇名：品牌、代言人熟悉度於前導廣告效果之探討並列篇名：Effects of Brand and Spokesperson Familiarity in Teaser Ads作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou);練乃華(Nai-Hwa Lien)關鍵字：前導廣告;好奇;資訊缺口;品牌熟悉度;代言人熟悉度;Teaser Ad;Curiosity;Information Gap;Brand Familiarity;Spokesperson Familiarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：廠商要推出新產品時，常會先行使用前導廣告以建立觀眾對於新產品的好奇與期待。雖然前導廣告早已被廣泛應用，但相關的學術研究仍十分欠缺。本文深入探討品牌熟悉度、代言人熟悉度在以簡訊媒介傳送的前導廣告中，如何影響消費者的「已知道」資訊量、資訊缺口和好奇反應，並考量是否需推出兩波前導廣告，以及品牌/代言人揭露時點所扮演的角色。三個實驗的結果發現：(1) 較高熟悉度的品牌、代言人會使消費者覺得「已知道」的資訊量較多、資訊缺口較小；(2) 資訊缺口大小與好奇反應呈現倒U 字型關係；(3) 在簡訊媒介上推出第二波前導廣告的好奇效果不明顯；(4) 品牌/代言人揭露時點不僅對品牌及代言人熟悉度的效果具重大影響，也同時影響消費者記憶網絡。英文摘要：Before launching a new product, companies often release teaser ads first to pique audience curiosity and expectation regarding the product. Although teaser ads are widely used, related academic research is scant. This study investigated how brand and spokesperson familiarity in short messaging service (SMS) teaser ads affect the amount of information consumers know, the size of their information gap, and their curiosity response. Furthermore, this study examined whether launching two waves of teaser ads is necessary, and assessed the effects of the revelation time points of the brand and spokesperson. Through three experiments, this study found the following results. (1) High familiarity brands and spokespeople induced consumers to perceive a greater amount of known information and smaller information gap. (2) The relationship between the size of the information gap and curiosity response was represented by an inverted-U curve. (3) A second-wave teaser ad delivered through SMS did not arouse notable curiosity. (4) The revelation time points of brand and spokesperson substantially influenced the effects of brand and spokesperson familiarity and affected consumer memory networks.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.CNI.0012篇名：台灣中小企業成長與董事會結構之關係：成長節奏之調節效果並列篇名：The Growth of SMEs in Taiwan and the Structure of the Boards of Directors: Growth Rhythm as a Moderator作者：林玟廷(Wen-Ting Lin);陳律睿(Lu-Jui Chen);姚芮安(Rui-An Yao)關鍵字：中小企業;資訊處理需求;董事會;企業成長;Small-Medium Enterprises;Information Processing Demands;Boards of Directors;Growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：台灣經濟發展過程中小企業扮演著重要角色，許多中小企業積極採行多角化及國際化等成長策略追求永續經營，營運複雜程度與資訊處理需求會隨著執行成長策略伴隨而來，此時中小企業必須適時調整結構。本研究以資訊處理觀點為基礎，台灣235 家上市櫃中小企業2005 年至2011年資料為樣本，探討台灣中小企業成長對董事會結構的影響，此外亦探討成長過程的調節效果。研究結果發現企業成長程度越高，則董事會異質性越大、董事長兼任CEO 的可能性越高，且CEO 持股率越高。最後，成長步調強化企業成長與董事長兼任CEO 間的關係，以及企業成長與CEO 持股率的關係。英文摘要：Small and medium-enterprises (SMEs) have played an important role in Taiwan's economic development. Many SMEs actively adopt diversification and internationalization strategies to pursue sustainable growth and operational complexity as well as to respond to informationprocessing demands. Based on information-processing theory and using longitudinal data from 235 small and medium-sized publicly listed companies in Taiwan over a period of seven years from 2005 and 2011, we develop several hypotheses regarding the relationship between growth and the structure of the board of directors. The results indicate that firms in which the structure of the board of directors exhibits a high degree of growth are more likely to reveal (1) great heterogeneity, (2) CEO duality, and (3) high CEO shareholding. Moreover, we find that an irregular growth pattern will strengthen the positive relationship between business growth and CEO duality as well as the positive relationship between business growth and CEO shareholding.起始頁-結束頁：31-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.CNI.0313篇名：稅制改革對企業有效稅率之影響－兼論產業特性與公司特性之調節效果並列篇名：The Effects of Tax Reform on Corporate Effective Tax Rates—Moderated by Industry and Firm-Specific Characteristics作者：黃美珠(Mei-Chu Huang);王媛慧(Yuan-Huei Wang);蔡玉琴(Yu-Chin Tsai)關鍵字：營利事業所得稅;有效稅率;稅制改革;租稅優惠;Profit-Seeking Enterprise Income Tax;Effective Tax Rates;Tax Reform;Tax Incentives期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究主在探討稅制改革對於租稅負擔分配的公平性影響。以有效稅率衡量企業的租稅負擔，就2010 年營利事業所得稅稅率調降以及「產業創新條例」的實施做為稅制改革，檢測稅制改革對於企業租稅負擔，以及對於相關的公司特性(資本密集度與研發密集度)與產業特性(高科技產業與傳統產業)租稅負擔的影響。實證結果發現，「產創條例」取消或降低大部分的租稅優惠，雖然會增加企業的租稅負擔，但也因為營所稅稅率的大幅調降，致企業在稅改之後的租稅負擔明顯降低；對資本較密集的公司以及研發密度較高的公司，產生較大的租稅負擔；產業別方面，高科技產業的有效稅率增加，傳統產業則未發現有顯著的影響。顯示，此次稅制改革有助於改善租稅減免過度集中高科技產業的現象，將有助於推動產業的均衡發展。英文摘要：The main purpose of this paper is to study the fairness of tax burden for tax reform. The effective tax rate (ETRs) is used to measure the tax burden on businesses. The study examines whether the tax reform, a reduction of profit-seeking enterprise income tax rate and the implement of the Statute for Industrial Innovation, had an effect on ETRs, and if it impacted on the associations between ETRs and variables reflecting the firm-specific characteristics (capital intensity and R & D intensity) and industry properties (high-tech industries and traditional industries). The evidence suggests that the scale-back or withdrawal of tax incentives after the Statute for Industrial Innovation in lieu of the Statute for Upgrading Industry has increased tax burdens. However, the reduction in the business income tax rate has lowered ETRs. A study on the impact of tax reforms in the context of firm specifics and industry characteristics finds that the tax burdens have increased for capital-intensive, R&D- spending-intense and high-tech companies. In other words, tax reforms can resolve the problems associated with the concentration of tax incentives to high-tech industry and ensure a fairer taxation system and a more balanced development of industries.起始頁-結束頁：51-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.CNI.0514篇名：恐懼訴求下預防調控焦點對風險知覺與因應之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Prevention Focus of Self-Regulatory on Risk Perception and Response under Fear Appeals作者：賴明政(Ming-Cheng Lai);汪志堅(Chih-Chien Wang);周峰莎(Feng-Sha Chou);楊燕枝(Yann-Jy Yang)關鍵字：自我調控焦點;預防焦點;風險知覺;社會行銷;Self-Regulatory Focus;Prevention Focus;Risk Perception;Social Marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：非營利組織與社會運動工作者往往利用廣告宣傳以影響或改變人們的行為，而恐懼訴求常被用於提高對社會運動訴求主題的關注程度。本研究以推廣子宮頸癌疫苗施打的社會行銷活動作為研究標的，探討在恐懼訴求之下，自我調控焦點中的預防焦點、涉入、知覺風險及風險因應行為意圖等各變數間的影響關係。為探討各變數之間的關係，本研究利用問卷調查法，針對216位受訪者進行調查，結果發現(1)自我調控中的預防焦點會正向影響到知覺風險；(2)知覺風險會正向影響風險因應行為意圖；(3)知覺風險會正向影響涉入；(4)涉入會正向影響風險因應行為意圖。英文摘要：Social marketing campaign influences or changes people's behavior by advertising and promotional activities. Fear appeals can successfully improve persuasion effectiveness of social marketing. This study focuses on the social marketing activities and uses cervical cancer vaccination promotion as a research object. The research aims to investigate the relationship among prevention self-regulation focus, involvement, and perceived risk and risk response behavior intentions. Prevention focus of individuals' information processing model is a considered antecedent which influences individuals' risk response behavioral intention. This study conducted a questionnaire survey of 216 female subjects. This study found that (1) prevention focus of self-regulation will positively affect the perceived risk; (2) perceived risk will positively affect risk response behavioral intention; (3) perceived risk will positively affect involvement; (4) Involvement will positively affect risk response behavioral intention. Based on the aforementioned findings, this study proposed several suggestions for social marketing practice as well as for future academic research.起始頁-結束頁：75-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.CNI.0755篇名：Effects of Brand and Spokesperson Familiarity in Teaser Ads作者：Hsuan-Yi Chou;Nai-Hwa Lien關鍵字：Teaser Ad;Curiosity;Information Gap;Brand Familiarity;Spokesperson Familiarity期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：Before launching a new product, companies often release teaser ads first to pique audience curiosity and expectation regarding the product. Although teaser ads are widely used, related academic research is scant. This study investigated how brand and spokesperson familiarity in short messaging service (SMS) teaser ads affect the amount of information consumers know, the size of their information gap, and their curiosity response. Furthermore, this study examined whether launching two waves of teaser ads is necessary, and assessed the effects of the revelation time points of the brand and spokesperson. Through three experiments, this study found the following results. (1) High familiarity brands and spokespeople induced consumers to perceive a greater amount of known information and smaller information gap. (2) The relationship between the size of the information gap and curiosity response was represented by an inverted-U curve. (3) A second-wave teaser ad delivered through SMS did not arouse notable curiosity. (4) The revelation time points of brand and spokesperson substantially influenced the effects of brand and spokesperson familiarity and affected consumer memory networks.起始頁-結束頁：111-129資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.ENG.1116篇名：The Growth of SMEs in Taiwan and the Structure of the Boards of Directors: Growth Rhythm as a Moderator作者：Wen-Ting Lin;Lu-Jui Chen;Rui-An Yao關鍵字：Small-Medium Enterprises;Information Processing Demands;Boards of Directors;Growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：Small and medium-enterprises (SMEs) have played an important role in Taiwan's economic development. Many SMEs actively adopt diversification and internationalization strategies to pursue sustainable growth and operational complexity as well as to respond to information-processing demands. Based on information-processing theory and using longitudinal data from 235 small and medium-sized publicly listed companies in Taiwan over a period of seven years from 2005 and 2011, we develop several hypotheses regarding the relationship between growth and the structure of the board of directors. The results indicate that firms in which the structure of the board of directors exhibits a high degree of growth are more likely to reveal (1) great heterogeneity, (2) CEO duality, and (3) high CEO shareholding. Moreover, we find that an irregular growth pattern will strengthen the positive relationship between business growth and CEO duality as well as the positive relationship between business growth and CEO shareholding.起始頁-結束頁：131-145資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.ENG.1317篇名：The Effects of Tax Reform on Corporate Effective Tax Rates: Moderated by Industry and Firm-Specific Characteristics作者：Mei-Chu Huang;Yuan-Huei Wang;Yu-Chin Tsai關鍵字：Profit-Seeking Enterprise Income Tax;Effective Tax Rates;Tax Reform;Tax Incentives期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：The main purpose of this paper is to study the fairness of tax burden for tax reform. The effective tax rate (ETRs) is used to measure the tax burden on businesses. The study examines whether the tax reform, a reduction of profit-seeking enterprise income tax rate and the implement of the Statute for Industrial Innovation, had an effect on ETRs, and if it impacted on the associations between ETRs and variables reflecting the firm-specific characteristics (capital intensity and R & D intensity) and industry properties (high-tech industries and traditional industries). The evidence suggests that the scale-back or withdrawal of tax incentives after the Statute for Industrial Innovation in lieu of the Statute for Upgrading Industry has increased tax burdens. However, the reduction in the business income tax rate has lowered ETRs. A study on the impact of tax reforms in the context of firm specifics and industry characteristics finds that the tax burdens have increased for capital-intensive, R&D- spending-intense and high-tech companies. In other words, tax reforms can resolve the problems associated with the concentration of tax incentives to high-tech industry and ensure a fairer taxation system and a more balanced development of industries.起始頁-結束頁：147-164資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.ENG.1478篇名：The Influence of Prevention Focus of Self-Regulatory on Risk Perception and Response under Fear Appeals作者：Ming-Cheng Lai;Chih-Chien Wang;Feng-Sha Chou;Yann-Jy Yang關鍵字：Self-Regulatory Focus;Prevention Focus;Risk Perception;Social Marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：A social marketing campaign influences or changes people's behavior by using advertising and promotional activities. Fear appeals can successfully improve the persuasion effectiveness of social marketing. This study focuses on social marketing activities and uses cervical cancer vaccination promotion as a research object. The research aims to investigate the relationship among prevention self-regulatory focus, involvement, and perceived risk and risk response behavior intentions. Prevention focus of individuals' information processing model is an antecedent that influences risk response behavioral intention. A questionnaire survey of 216 female subjects was conducted, and the results show that (1) prevention focus of self-regulation will positively affect perceived risk; (2) perceived risk will positively affect risk response behavioral intention; (3) perceived risk will positively affect involvement; and (4) involvement will positively affect risk response behavioral intention. Based on these findings, several suggestions for social marketing practice and future academic research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：165-179資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.4.ENG.1659篇名：機構投資者、盈餘平穩化與會計資訊價值攸關性並列篇名：Institutional Ownership, Income Smoothing and the Value-relevance of Accounting Numbers作者：陳慶隆(Ching-Lung Chen);翁佩瑜(Pei-Yu Weng);范宏書(Hung-Shu Fan)關鍵字：機構投資者;盈餘平穩化;價值攸關性;監督假說;短視假說;Institutional Ownership;Income Smoothing;Value-Relevance;Monitoring Hypothesis;Myopia Hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：機構投資者在公司策略性盈餘報導決策中所扮演的角色有兩種不同的觀點：(1)為精明的投資者，當機構投資者持股比例增加時，股價應會反映更多未來盈餘資訊(機構投資者監督假說)；(2)過度專注當期盈餘，當機構投資者持股比例高時，股價反映未來盈餘資訊的程度較小(機構投資者短視假說)。本研究以公司盈餘平穩化行為對會計資訊價值攸關性之影響為架構，以非平衡式追蹤資料檢測機構投資者在此架構中所可能產生之影響，以豐富此一領域之研究。實證結果在某種程度支持機構投資者監督假說，亦即公司在機構投資者持股率高時，會顯著提高公司盈餘平穩化行為對於盈餘變數及權益帳面價值變數的相對價值攸關性。若進一步考慮機構投資者的交易策略(持股波動性)，發現公司在機構投資者持股率高且持股波動性低時，顯著提高盈餘平穩化對於盈餘變數的相對價值攸關性；另一方面，公司在機構投資者持股率低且持股波動性高時，在多數情境測試下，會顯著降低盈餘平穩化對於盈餘變數的相對價值攸關性，然前述兩種類型機構投資者對盈餘平穩化公司之權益帳面價值變數之相對價值攸關性影響不明顯。本研究進行若干敏感性測試，顯示實證結果具高度穩固性。英文摘要：The active monitoring hypothesis provides evidence that firms with higher institutional ownership are less likely to manage earnings, which in turn, enhances the value-relevance of accounting numbers. Yet, recent studies also highlight the importance of explicitly considering the short-term oriented investing behavior of institutional investors (the myopia hypothesis) when investigating the association between institutional ownership and managerial earnings reporting. Thus, the role of institutional investors in managerial earnings reporting remains an open question. Based on the informative association between income smoothing and the value-relevance of financial reporting, this study uses the unbalanced-panel data regressions to examine the monitoring or myopia role of institutional investors on the association between income smoothing and the value-relevance of accounting numbers. The empirical results to some extent support the monitoring hypothesis that the higher institutional ownership is, income smoothing generates more value-relevance of both earnings and equity book value. Moreover, in the income smoothing with higher institutional ownership/lower ownership volatility case, it reveals that the increasing value-relevance of earnings is enhanced. However, in the income smoothing with lower institutional ownership/higher ownership volatility case, it is found that the increasing value-relevance of earnings is mitigated. This study also documents that the role of institutional ownership on the association between income smoothing and the value-relevance of equity book value is unobvious in the analysis, both in the high and low ownership volatility cases. We demonstrate some diagnostic checks and evidence the results are robust to the various specifications.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.CNI.00110篇名：分割目的和股權分割公司之績效並列篇名：The Motives and Performance of Equity Crave-Out Companies作者：林美珍(Mei-Chen Lin);<U+6E29>于瑩(Yu-Ying Wen)關鍵字：股權分割;公司治理;異常報酬;Equity Crave-Outs;Corporate Governance;Abnormal Returns期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究分析國內股權分割公司宣告分割後母公司之長期股票報酬表現，並探討分割績效是否與分割目的相關，最後以股權結構和董事會結構檢視公司治理機制對分割公司績效的影響。整體而言，股權分割對母公司長期的股票報酬未有顯著的影響；當中，正的異常報酬主要出現在為了開發土地資產而分割之公司和為了專業分工而將不同產業部門分割出去的公司，而其分割效益主要是來自資產使用效率的提升和財務風險的降低。大股東持股比率越高的公司，分割的長期報酬越佳，顯示公司治理結構確實會影響分割公司之績效。英文摘要：This study analyzes the long-term performance of firms that undertake equity carve-outs and investigates whether subsequent performance is relevant to the purpose of the equity carve-out. We also examine whether corporate governance mechanisms affect the performance of equity carve-out companies from the perspectives of ownership and board structure. We find that equity carve-outs have no effect on the long-term performance of parent companies. Positive abnormal returns associated with equity carve-outs are attributed to companies that carve out to exploit lands and to increase specialization. The main benefits come from the enhancement of efficiency in asset utilization and the reduction in financial risk. Long-term performance from equity carve-outs improves as the ratio of the large shareholders increases. This finding indicates that corporate governance affects the long-term performance of firms that undertake equity carve-outs.起始頁-結束頁：29-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.CNI.02911篇名：醫療服務體驗模式－以醫學美容為例並列篇名：Medical Service Experience Model for Medical Cosmetology作者：蘇子炘(Tzu-Hsin Su)關鍵字：醫療服務體驗模式(MSEM);醫學美容;結構方程模式;Medical Service Experience Model (MSEM);Medical Cosmetology;Structural Equation Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：醫療院所自1995年健保政策實施後，醫療機構市場導向的程度愈來愈高，尤其醫學美容這幾年成長十分迅速，由於醫學美容多是由消費者主動決定的醫療行為，因此對於醫療服務體驗也會特別重視。本研究目的包括：(1)探討消費者體驗、體驗價值與體驗行為之間的關係；(2)針對醫學美容建構醫療服務體驗模式(MSEM)。研究對象以具醫學美容經驗之消費者為立意抽樣之對象，共調查1,040份有效樣本，以結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果顯示醫療服務體驗模式(MSEM)可以完整地反應出消費者體驗、體驗價值與體驗行為之間的關係。實務方面的貢獻，可協助醫療院所在經營醫學美容服務時，更全面地瞭解消費者的感受，以採用適合的行銷方式來增強體驗的程度。英文摘要：With the implementation of the Nation Health Insurance in 1995, all levels of medical institutes were influenced by the constraint of government budget that resulted in a high degree market orientation. Also, medical cosmetology had grown up very fast during these years. Because medical cosmetology is mostly consumer's initiative, the importance of medical service experience must be particularly emphasized. The purposes of this research include: (1) to discuss the relationships among consumer experiences, experiential value and experiential behavior; (2) to build Medical Service Experience Model (MSEM) for medical cosmetology. We used purposed sampling to interview 1040 samples with medical cosmetology experience and used structural equation modeling to analyze data. The results showed that Medical Service Experience Model (MSEM) could explain the relationships among consumer experiences, experiential value and experiential behavior more completely. In practice, this study can help medical institutions with medical cosmetology services understanding consumers' whole feels and use appropriate marketing tools to enhance consumer experiences.起始頁-結束頁：51-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.CNI.05112篇名：綠色供應鏈中供應商管理機制對交易成本影響之探討並列篇名：How Supplier Management Practices Affect Exchange Cost when Going Green: An Empirical Study作者：羅明琇(Sonia Ming-Shiow Lo)關鍵字：綠色供應鏈;權力依賴;綠色態度;供應商管理;交換成本;Green Supply Chain Management (Gscm);Power Dependency;Green Attitude;Supplier Management;Exchange Cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究從綠色供應鏈管理的角度出發，以台灣電子製造業為研究對象，了解企業對關鍵零組件供應商的依賴程度、企業本身投入綠色活動的積極度，兩者對供應商管理方法的選擇、以及企業與供應商交易的過程中所衍生的各種交換成本，即外顯單位效益成本、資訊搜尋成本、道德危機成本與專屬資產陷入成本之影響，並進一步找出對這四個交換成本有顯著影響的供應商管理方法為何。本研究採用問卷調查的方式，以1263家的台灣電子業上市公司作為抽樣對象，並回收186份(其中可用為174份)，回收率為14.73%。有效樣本之統計分析結果顯示：企業對關鍵零組件供應商的依賴程度、以及企業本身投入綠色活動的積極度，兩者會造成企業在選擇供應商管理方法上有所不同，因而對交換成本有不同程度之影響。當企業投入綠色活動的意願愈高，愈會選擇多種的供應商管理方法來加強對供應商的控制，藉以確保供應商提供的商品能符合企業的需求，而這類型的企業在與供應商交易的過程中，總體的交換成本是相對較低的；相反地，當企業較不積極地投入綠色相關的活動時，也會較不投入於供應商管理，總體的交換成本較高，特別是在企業對供應商的依賴程度愈低時，整體的交換成本愈高。而在供應商管理方法中，最能有效降低交換成本的方法為「關係品質」，即企業與供應商之間擁有共同的目標、將品質列為優先考量、彼此之間存在信任、並且了解雙方的需求。英文摘要：This paper aims to empirically examine the relationship among firms' attitudes toward green, dependence to supplier, supplier relationship management (SRM) practices, and exchange cost. It collected quantitative data by conducting a questionnaire based survey. The main objects are firms in the high-tech industry of Taiwan. 1263 copies of the questionnaire were sent out. A total of 186 organizations (of which 174 were usable) responded to this survey at a response rate of 14.73%. The results indicate that the degree of organizations' dependence on their key component suppliers and their aggressiveness toward going green have significant influence on the adoption of SRM practices, and in turn, the exchange costs during the trading process. If organizations are aggressive toward going green, they will choose numerous supplier management practices to ensure suppliers realize their requirements. The overall exchange cost of these organizations is relatively low. In contrast, when organizations are not aggressive toward going green, they will less emphasize on managing their supplier on green issues. As a result of this is the high overall exchange cost. Moreover, among the ten supplier management practices investigated, 'relationship quality' is found to be the most effective practice in reducing the overall exchange cost. With this respect, it is suggested that organizations should set a common goal with their suppliers, take quality as first priority, and understand each other's needs on a trust basis.起始頁-結束頁：71-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.CNI.07113篇名：Institutional Ownership, Income Smoothing and the Value-relevance of Accounting Numbers並列篇名：機構投資者、盈餘平穩化與會計資訊價值攸關性作者：陳慶隆(Ching-Lung Chen);翁佩瑜(Pei-Yu Weng);范宏書(Hung-Shu Fan)關鍵字：Institutional Ownership;Income Smoothing;Value-Relevance;Monitoring Hypothesis;Myopia Hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016英文摘要：The active monitoring hypothesis provides evidence that firms with higher institutional ownership are less likely to manage earnings, which in turn, enhances the value-relevance of accounting numbers. Yet, recent studies also highlight the importance of explicitly considering the short-term oriented investing behavior of institutional investors (the myopia hypothesis) when investigating the association between institutional ownership and managerial earnings reporting. Thus, the role of institutional investors in managerial earnings reporting remains an open question. Based on the informative association between income smoothing and the value-relevance of financial reporting, this study uses the unbalanced-panel data regressions to examine the monitoring or myopia role of institutional investors on the association between income smoothing and the value-relevance of accounting numbers. The empirical results to some extent support the monitoring hypothesis that the higher institutional ownership is, income smoothing generates more value-relevance of both earnings and equity book value. Moreover, in the income smoothing with higher institutional ownership/lower ownership volatility case, it reveals that the increasing value-relevance of earnings is enhanced. However, in the income smoothing with lower institutional ownership/higher ownership volatility case, it is found that the increasing value-relevance of earnings is mitigated. This study also documents that the role of institutional ownership on the association between income smoothing and the value-relevance of equity book value is unobvious in the analysis, both in the high and low ownership volatility cases. We demonstrate some diagnostic checks and evidence the results are robust to the various specifications.起始頁-結束頁：109-134資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.ENG.10914篇名：The Motives and Performance of Equity Crave-Out Companies並列篇名：分割目的和股權分割公司之績效作者：林美珍(Mei-Chen Lin);<U+6E29>于瑩(Yu-Ying Wen)關鍵字：Equity Crave-Outs;Corporate Governance;Abnormal Returns期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016英文摘要：This study analyzes the long-term performance of firms that undertake equity carve-outs and investigates whether subsequent performance is relevant to the purpose of the equity carve-out. We also examine whether corporate governance mechanisms affect the performance of equity carve-out companies from the perspectives of ownership and board structure. We find that equity carve-outs have no effect on the long-term performance of parent companies. Positive abnormal returns associated with equity carve-outs are attributed to companies that carve out to exploit lands and to increase specialization. The main benefits come from the enhancement of efficiency in asset utilization and the reduction in financial risk. Long-term performance from equity carve-outs improves as the ratio of the large shareholders increases. This finding indicates that corporate governance affects the long-term performance of firms that undertake equity carve-outs.起始頁-結束頁：135-151資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.ENG.13515篇名：Medical Service Experience Model for Medical Cosmetology並列篇名：醫療服務體驗模式－以醫學美容為例作者：蘇子炘(Tzu-Hsin Su)關鍵字：Medical Service Experience Model (MSEM);Medical Cosmetology;Structural Equation Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016英文摘要：With the implementation of the Nation Health Insurance in 1995, all levels of medical institutes were influenced by the constraint of government budget that resulted in a high degree market orientation. Also, medical cosmetology had grown up very fast during these years. Because medical cosmetology is mostly consumer's initiative, the importance of medical service experience must be particularly emphasized. The purposes of this research include: (1) to discuss the relationships among consumer experiences, experiential value and experiential behavior; (2) to build Medical Service Experience Model (MSEM) for medical cosmetology. We used purposed sampling to interview 1040 samples with medical cosmetology experience and used structural equation modeling to analyze data. The results showed that Medical Service Experience Model (MSEM) could explain the relationships among consumer experiences, experiential value and experiential behavior more completely. In practice, this study can help medical institutions with medical cosmetology services understanding consumers' whole feels and use appropriate marketing tools to enhance consumer experiences.起始頁-結束頁：153-171資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.ENG.15316篇名：How Supplier Management Practices Affect Exchange Cost when Going Green: An Empirical Study並列篇名：綠色供應鏈中供應商管理機制對交易成本影響之探討作者：羅明琇(Sonia Ming-Shiow Lo)關鍵字：Green Supply Chain Management (Gscm);Power Dependency;Green Attitude;Supplier Management;Exchange Cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷3期出版年：2016英文摘要：This paper aims to empirically examine the relationship among firms' attitudes toward green, dependence to supplier, supplier relationship management (SRM) practices, and exchange cost. It collected quantitative data by conducting a questionnaire based survey. The main objects are firms in the high-tech industry of Taiwan. 1263 copies of the questionnaire were sent out. A total of 186 organizations (of which 174 were usable) responded to this survey at a response rate of 14.73%. The results indicate that the degree of organizations' dependence on their key component suppliers and their aggressiveness toward going green have significant influence on the adoption of SRM practices, and in turn, the exchange costs during the trading process. If organizations are aggressive toward going green, they will choose numerous supplier management practices to ensure suppliers realize their requirements. The overall exchange cost of these organizations is relatively low. In contrast, when organizations are not aggressive toward going green, they will less emphasize on managing their supplier on green issues. As a result of this is the high overall exchange cost. Moreover, among the ten supplier management practices investigated, 'relationship quality' is found to be the most effective practice in reducing the overall exchange cost. With this respect, it is suggested that organizations should set a common goal with their suppliers, take quality as first priority, and understand each other's needs on a trust basis.起始頁-結束頁：173-189資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.3.ENG.17317篇名：北歐櫥窗：虛實整合的兩難並列篇名：Nordic Flagship Design Brands in Taiwan: The Challenges of Online to Offline (O2O) Commerce作者：陳宏欣(Terry Chen);管郁君(Eugenia Y. Huang)關鍵字：電商;虛實整合;經營策略;創業;電子商務;Nordic;E-commerce;Click-and-mortar;Operation strategy;Entrepreneurship期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：北歐櫥窗2003年由網路銷售開始，引進歐洲高端設計師品牌，成為獨創銷售國外設計師品牌的網站，2005年底在誠品信義店開設第一個實體旗艦店，為擴大營業額及市占率，積極進行實體展店，過程中陸續引進設計精品，2008年更跨進時尚精品手錶品牌代理銷售。實體店面數量快速增加，公司人員擴編，由電商銷售為主，轉變為虛實整合的電商和實體店面共同銷售模式。公司內部從員工教育訓練、資訊系統整合、庫存管理、資本運用等面向，在虛實整合商業模式中遇到挑戰，增添管理難度與複雜度。個案公司10年間面臨市場急速變化，從虛擬通路跨進虛實整合通路經營，如何面臨兩種通路衝擊，在決策轉折點克服挑戰、達成營運績效，是從虛擬通路跨進實體極佳參考個案。英文摘要：This case describes the strategic transformation of an SME (Small and Medium Enterprises) in Taiwan, in which the once pure online business transitioned into a click-and-mortar operation. As its name implies, Nordic was established as an online company selling designer household items imported from Nordic region. The online operation began in 2003, and experienced an immediate success. To offer customers look-and-feel experience, Nordic opened its first physical store in 2005. The store was set up in the famous emporium, Eslite, in Taipei’s modern shopping area, Xinyi district. Nordic continued to expand the off-line operations to increase revenue and market share. Besides the new openings of physical stores, a fast growth was achieved by also seeking alliance opportunities with other brick-and-mortar businesses, which effectively increased the physical presence of Nordic’s products. Nordic was acquired by JUT Living Development Group in 2012.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.118篇名：台塑鋰鐵材料科技公司－台塑集團發展汽車產業之挑戰並列篇名：Formosa Lithium Iron Oxide Corporation: A Diversification Challenge of Formosa Plastics Group作者：詹錦宏(Chin-Horng Chan);林明薰(Ming-Hsun Lin)關鍵字：鋰鐵電池;正極材料;經營策略;利益衝突;Lithium-iron battery;Cathode material;Business strategy;Conflict of interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：生產電池正極材料的台塑長園公司成立於2008年，在連續三年虧損後，2011年一度轉虧為盈。然而在2012年擴充產能，降低生產成本後，營業收入卻未增加，虧損金額持續擴大。為了解決經營困境，台塑集團調整經營策略，更改公司名稱為台塑鋰鐵公司，並指派陳勝光擔任新總經理。陳勝光面對嚴重的設備產能過剩，積極整合集團在綠能產業的資源，開發台塑鋰鐵汽車啟動電池，希望藉由下游終端產品的銷售，增加對上游正極材料的需求，然而生產自有品牌電池，卻出現與客戶相互競爭的利益衝突。英文摘要：Formosa Lithium Iron Oxide Corporation (FLIO) produced high quality cathode materials of lithium-iron battery and its production cost was lower than other competitor’s cost. However, FLIO could not effectively increase its sales revenue and faced net loss. In order to change FLIO’s business strategies, Seiko Chen was appointed to serve as the succeeding General Manager of FLIO by FPG. Senko Chen urgently tried to increase sales revenue and built up a research team to develop a new lithium-iron battery. However, a conflict of interest with cathode material customers was appeared when FLIO sold concurrently both lithium-iron batteries and cathode materials.起始頁-結束頁：19-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.1919篇名：途中台北國際青年旅舍：從背包客的旅行到創業的旅途並列篇名：On My Way Youth Hostel: From Backpacker to Entrepreneur作者：傅大煜(Ta-Yu Fu);張德儀(Te-Yi Chang);謝金龍(Chin-Lung Hsieh)關鍵字：創業開放式創新;青年旅舍;背包客;Entrepreneur;Open Innovation;Hostel;Backpacker期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：「Hostel」(常翻譯為青年旅舍或背包客棧)提供旅行背包客以床位為主的住宿服務，在國際間非常普遍，其服務型態不同於強調私人空間的旅館(hotel)，而是保留較高比例的公共空間，營造旅客與旅客之間互動、交流的環境。在台灣，因尚未針對「hostel」營業項目訂立法規，多數懷抱hostel創業理想的創業團隊，因無力符合合法旅館或民宿的立案要求，大多屬未合法立案。本個案以國內少數「合法立案」的青年旅舍「途中台北國際青年旅舍」的創業過程為主軸，以「創業」與「開放式創新」為教學核心，解析創辦人由自己的旅行經驗出發，經歷諸多困難，以迴異於傳統企業經營的作法，成功創辦符合法令規範的青年旅舍的過程。教學設計以「創業」與「開放式創新」做為教學討論的主軸，以創業模式架構觀點(TimmonsandSpinellis2008)，討論分析創辦人以「開放式創新」(ChesbroughandGarman2009)的精神，在混沌未明的環境平衡「機會」、「團隊」、「資源」三個創業驅動元素，以不同於一般新創公司的做法，在網路平台分享創業計畫、募資、集結創業團隊，在面對動態、不斷改變、未知與風險的過程中將其夢想成真的過程。本個案教學可提供創業管理、觀光管理、服務管理、餐旅管理、行銷管理等課程使用，並可延伸討論與網路社群、創新服務、服務行銷、商業模式等議題。英文摘要：”Hostels” are accommodation services provided to backpackers mainly offering beds. Their service style differs from that of hotels, which put emphasis on private space, as they have a high proportion of public space to create an interactive and communicative environment for different customers. Due to the reality that there are no legal regulations regarding ”hostels” in Taiwan, most hostels established by entrepreneurial teams are illegal and unregistered, because they could not meet the registration demands for establishing a legal hotel. This case discusses the entrepreneurial process of one of the few ”legal and registered” hostels in Taiwan, ”On My Way Youth Hostel”. This case study utilizes ”entrepreneur” and ”open innovation” as the axis of discussion. Starting with the viewpoint of the entrepreneur model, how the founder balanced the three entrepreneurial driving elements of ”opportunity”, ”resources” and ”team” in the chaotic and unknown environment with his ”open innovative” spirit is discussed. This case study further utilizes the concept of ”open innovation” to analyze the process of how the founder, unlike ordinary start-up companies, shared his entrepreneurial project, raised funds, and gathered his team of people with open minds using online platforms while facing a dynamic, constantly changing, unknown and risky environment, until eventually his dream and passion were realized. This case study can be used as a resource for lectures on entrepreneurial management, tourism management, service management, hotel & restaurant management, marketing management, etc. Agendas such as virtual community, innovative service, service marketing, and business models can be extended and discussed.起始頁-結束頁：39-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.3920篇名：Qblinks－酷比令股份有限公司並列篇名：Qblinks Company Limited作者：林芬慧(Fen-Hui Lin)關鍵字：群眾募資;精實創業;物聯網;Crowdfunding;Lean startups;Internet of Things期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：酷比令公司由連續創業者陳紹俊於2014年創辦，創業願景是研發連結物聯網的軟硬整合消費性電子產品，進而提供物聯網雲端服務。酷比令曾以三項消費電子產品到美國知名群眾募資網站Kickstarter募資。前兩次都募資失敗，就是在限定的募資期間，沒有達到預定的募資目標。陳紹俊及團隊檢討募資失敗的經驗，包括產品特性、硬體製造開模、Kickstarter平台上的宣傳影片、產品照片、產品文案、以及透過公關公司操作媒體露出等。經過充分的準備，第三次的募資專案獲得約22萬美元的預售金額，超過目標設定兩萬美元的十倍以上。本個案的教學目標是：學員將學習到(1)群眾募資的特質，以及募資專案操作的方法；(2)從酷比令的創業過程，學習「精實創業」的意涵。英文摘要：Qblinks was established in 2014 by the serial entrepreneur Samson Chen with the business vision to develop electronic devices for the Internet of Things and also to provide cloud services. Qblinks has launched three projects on the crowdfunding website Kickstarter. Their first two projects were failures, meaning that the funding from backers (also the funders) were not up to the pledging goals during the campaign periods. Thus Chen and the team carefully examined all the aspects of the two fundraising failures, including the product design, hardware manufacturing, video filming, product photos and descriptions as well as the spending on the public relations associated with their PR strategies, etc. With more thorough preparations, Qblinks then launched their third crowdfunding project on January 2015 and obtained about two hundred and twenty thousand dollars an amount more than ten times the pledging goal of twenty thousand dollars. This case presents two teaching objectives: students can learn (1) the characteristics of crowdfunding projects as well as the campaign operations, and (2) the lean startup methodology reflecting the entrepreneurial spirit of Qblinks.起始頁-結束頁：57-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.5701篇名：水清無魚？由資訊系統促使的企業流程變革並列篇名：Can Fish Survive in Pure Water? An IT-driven Organizational Change作者：陳小芬(Jessica H.F. Chen);傅振瑞(Jen-Ruei Fu)關鍵字：ERP系統導入;組織變革;流程合理化;利潤中心;企業流程再造;ERP system implementation;organizational changes;profit center;business process reengineering期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：怪獸公司為一健身器材通路商，大環境改變、公司的成長及流程效率不彰，公司決定導入ERP並進行流程再造。最後公司藉由ERP的即時處理對銷貨流程進行優化。然而制度與流程的變革雖防止了怪獸公司的各種弊端，卻引發員工的離職潮。企業希望藉新系統的導入重新整合流程，然組織改變常導致人員反抗，因此成功的系統建置需要做好變革管理。本個案公司為改造流程，導入ERP系統，卻打擊業務人員的銷售動機，使公司面臨決策困境。東方朔提及「水至清則無魚」，制度過度追求合理化可能帶來反面的效果。藉本個案討論讓學生了解資訊系統的建置與流程變革的關係及流程合理化可能引發的負面影響，企業必須衡量正反面的衝擊，在效益與風險中取得平衡。英文摘要：Monsters, Inc. is a distributor of fitness equipment. Due to the inefficiency of business processes and external environment change, Monsters suffered serious problems. The firm decided to reengineer business process by ERP implementation. Enabled by the real-time information and synchronous process of ERP system, Monsters optimized its business processes. While organizational change prevented a variety of drawbacks in sales process, it limited the incentive of sales persons at the same time. Firms hope to reengineer business processes by introducing an information system. The change could lead to a new power structure, resulting in internal resistance to the change. Therefore a successful information system requires careful change management. Triggered by the ERP implementation, the case company rationalized its business process in the same time. The change, however, negatively impacted on the motivation of sales persons, making the company facing a dilemma. As mentioned in Dong Fang Shuo Biography, ”no fish can survive in pure water,” which means excessive pursuit of system rationalization may have negative results. This case helps students to understand why build an information system may lead to a business process change, and how the change may arise negative impacts to the organization. Firms must evaluate the pros and cons of the change and get a trade-off between risk and return.起始頁-結束頁：79-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.792篇名：丹堤咖啡的服務創新之路－行動點餐的下一步並列篇名：The Next Step of Mobile Meal Ordering in Dante Coffee: Toward the Way of Service Innovation作者：王嘉珍(Chia-Chen Wang);陳美如(Mei-Ju Chen)關鍵字：行動點餐;連鎖加盟;智慧辨識;顧客關係管理;服務創新;Mobile Meal Ordering;Chain Franchise;Intelligent Identification;Customer Relationship Management (CRM);Service Innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：丹堤咖啡是一家在全省擁有127家門市的加盟連鎖咖啡店。在投入行動點餐的建置後，對用餐時段人潮的緩解，以及眾多會員的管理上，均獲得了不錯的改善。然而，面對經營環境的日趨複雜，以及消費者喜好的快速變化，丹堤更不能滿足於現狀！因此，如何運用資訊科技持續提供創新的服務模式，來維繫舊顧客、以及招攬新客人，便成為丹堤咖啡經營的重要課題。本個案希望藉由丹堤核心團隊的腦力激盪過程，讓學生瞭解新服務模式導入可能引發的問題。包括：加盟店主的抗拒、消費者的教育以及技術方面的問題等。並藉此導引未來新服務可能衍生的方向。在此同時，再帶入顧客關係管理與顧客忠誠度、連鎖加盟體系管理，以及智慧辨識服務等理論基礎與概念。英文摘要：Dante Coffee is a chain franchise of coffee shop which has 127 branches in Taiwan. After conducting the service of mobile meal ordering, Dante Coffee not only solved the problems of large crowds in the meal time but also improved the efficiency of member’s management. However, with the gradual complexity of business environment and the fast changing of consumer preferences, Dante Coffee should not be satisfied and stop here. In order to keep regular and attract new customers, it is important for Dante Coffee to provide persistently innovative services. The purpose of this case study is to discuss issues about how Dante Coffee cope with the resistance from franchisee, how consumers learn to use the new service, and the consideration of system development. This case study also intends to introduce the concept of customer relationship management, the management of franchise chain and the services of intelligent identification.起始頁-結束頁：95-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.953篇名：板田實業公司：早餐連鎖店品牌堅持還是快速展店？並列篇名：The BanTen Industrial Company: Maintaining Brand Equity or Opening More Chain Stores?作者：游志青(Chih-Ching Yu);陳世雄(Shih-Hsiung Chen)關鍵字：連鎖加盟;品牌權益;中央廚房;食品供應鏈管理;Ansoff矩陣;Franchise;Brand Equity;Central Kitchens;Food Supply Chain Management;Ansoff Matrix期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：板田實業公司為萬佳鄉早餐連鎖店經營總部，林良田總經理對食品安全非常重視，在食材選擇、產品研製、儲存、運送等投入不遺餘力。於2005年起以免加盟金的低門檻策略，配合總部統一供貨的連鎖加盟方式讓有興趣的年青人可以輕鬆的加盟。2007年加盟店數已近500家。2010年在市場激烈競爭下，有些加盟店主為求最大利益，希望總部開放部份採購權及同意自製食品銷售，以追求個人營收最佳化。這項要求完全違反公司加盟約定及品牌發展策略，如果拒絕將會引發加盟店大規模退出。若同意如發生食安問題品牌將無法維繫。林總經理面臨加盟店數成長與品牌權益維護的抉擇，除了同意和拒絕之外，應該還有其他方法化解危機進而成為轉機。英文摘要：The operational headquarters of the BanTen Industrial Company is the Wan-Jia-Xiang breakfast chain store. Liang-Tian Lin, the General Manager of the BanTen Industrial Company, attaches great importance to food safety and spares no efforts on material selection, research and development of ingredients and products, storage, and transportation, etc. In 2005, the company offered a low investment threshold with zero franchise fees combined with a unified supply from the company’s headquarters to attract interested young people to join the company. By 2007, the number of franchised outlets was nearly 500. In 2010, against fierce competition in the market, some franchised stores, in order to maximize their own interests, hoped that the company headquarters would release partial procurement authority and agree that the franchised stores could sell their own home-made food so as to pursue optimized personal revenues. This situation completely violated the franchise agreement and the brand development strategy. However, if rejected, a wave of franchised stores would quit and food safety issues would damage the brand. General Manager Lin was faced with the issues of growth in the number of franchised stores and brand equity. In addition to an agreement or rejection, were there any other solutions that could defuse this crisis and reach a turning point?起始頁-結束頁：111-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.1114篇名：啟雲科技前奏曲－Marvin的兩難抉擇並列篇名：The Prelude of Speed 3D Inc.: Marvin’s Dilemmas作者：蘇雅惠(Yea-Huey Su);黃春興(Chun-Sin Hwang);范錚強(Cheng-Kiang Farn)關鍵字：創業家精神;創業家;創業;市場;Entrepreneurship;Entrepreneur;Start up;Market期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本教學個案的主要目標為讓學員學習何謂創業家精神。本個案屬於個人層級之真實個案，以個案主人翁丘立全(Marvin)為主軸，描述其二十多年來職場生涯中對他產生關鍵影響的人事物<U+2212>特別是創業家張明正先生，以及一些具<U+5553>發性的經歷及轉折點。Marvin曾任職一家資訊硬體公司及三家軟體公司，這些經歷讓他成為一位出色的軟體行銷與銷售的專業經理人，但他在創辦啟雲科技之前仍尚未真正領悟創業家精神。處於行動時代，Marvin 最後選擇在3D產業創業開創職場新局，但在創業之前，他面臨他人生第三個兩難抉擇。本教學個案透過他人生三個重要的兩難抉擇來啟發學員，讓學員從中領悟並釐清創業家精神、創業家、及創業的本質；進而了解創業家思維與專業經理人思維在本質上的差異。英文摘要：In this individual-level field case we pursue the objective for students to realize what entrepreneurship is. The case focuses on CEO Marvin Chiu’s three dilemmas and turning points in his professional career of software marketing for around 20 years. It also describes the key person, Steve Chang, who is an entrepreneur and has influenced Marvin immensely. Marvin has accordingly become an outstanding professional manager but not an entrepreneur yet before he starts up Speed 3D Inc. In the mobile age, the 3rd dilemma encountered when Marvin was hard to choose between starting up a company in the 3D industry and accepting the CEO position in a big famous company to develop the IoT. The case serves as a vehicle to enlighten students to clarify the natures of entrepreneurship, entrepreneur, and startup. It also offers the opportunity for students to learn what the nature differences in the mindsets between the entrepreneur and the professional manager.起始頁-結束頁：131-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.2.CHI.1315篇名：自願性財務報表重編：經理人誘因與壓力之觀點並列篇名：Voluntary Financial Restatements: The Perspectives of Management Incentives and Pressures作者：林嬋娟(Chan-Jane Lin);黃惠君(Hui-Chun Huang)關鍵字：不實表達;自行重編;揭露門檻;新任經理人;董監事獨立性;Misrepresentation;Voluntary Restatement;Threshold Level of Disclosure;New CEO;Board Independence期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：財報重編是財報不實表達(misrepresentation)的「事後」確認，依重編主導者(prompter)區分有自行重編與非自行重編(如外部機構要求)。本文以1999年至2005年間，117家樣本公司所提出162次財報重編為研究對象，採用Logistic模型探討公司自行重編財報的誘因與壓力。實證結果指出，財報不實之嚴重程度會影響公司是否自行重編的決策，即財報非屬舞弊之不實、未違反收益認列原則或低估盈餘、不實盈餘占總資產比率愈低，隱含較低的「揭露門檻」，公司經理人較可能自行重編。其次，公司新任經理人自行重編的傾向較高，以達「期望管理」或「回應授命」。最後，外部董監事比率愈高，公司自行重編的可能性較高，表示董監事獨立性有助公司治理機制於不實財報「事後」監控、偵測功能之發揮。英文摘要：The recent financial misrepresentation and accounting restatements have raised concerns regarding the reliability of financial statements. Financial restatement is the ex-post confirmation of prior poor financial statements, which may provide useful information for evaluating the credibility of present financial statements. This study investigates the incentives and pressures of firms that voluntarily restate financial statements. A sample of 162 financial restatements (117 firms) announced during 1999-2005 is examined by using a logistic regression model. We find that firms are more likely to voluntarily restate their financial statements when the severity of misrepresentation is less material (i.e., the misrepresentation is not irregularity-related, does not violate the revenue recognition principle, and is an earnings understatement or low misrepresented earnings), implying a low restatement proprietary cost and threshold level of disclosure. Next, firm CEOs with less than 1-year tenure are inclined to voluntarily restate prior misrepresented financial statements because of the incentive to respond to expectation management or mandate. Finally, firms with high ratio of outside directors and supervisors, a proxy for board independence, are more likely to restate financial statements voluntarily, suggesting that board independence plays a role in the effective implementation of governance monitoring function after misrepresented financial statements are released.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.1.CHI.16篇名：企業社會責任之策略性分析並列篇名：A Strategic Analysis of Corporate Social Responsibility作者：池祥萱(Hsiang-Hsuan Chih);池祥麟(Hsiang-Lin Chih);梁綺羚(Chi-Ling Liang)關鍵字：企業社會責任;經營績效;利害關係人;Corporate Social Responsibility;Operating Performance;Stakeholders期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文分析公司管理當局對於不同利害關係人所實行的企業社會責任(Corporate SocialResponsibility, CSR)活動對經營績效(包括總資產報酬率(ROA)和經營成本)的影響。我們的目的是提供證據使公司管理當局了解如何執行CSR活動以兼顧所有利害關係人的權益；主要實證結果如下。第一，整體而言，公司從事CSR活動確實會增進公司經營績效，而且可以持續長期。第二，正面的CSR活動會持續提高ROA；負面的CSR活動則會持續增加經營成本。第三，若以不同利害關係人的角度來看，正面的公司治理、員工關係與環境等CSR活動會持續增進公司經營績效。負面的社區、員工關係與人權等CSR活動會降低公司經營績效。英文摘要：This study examines the relation between corporate social responsibility (CSR) performance and corporate operating performance (ROA and operating costs) from stakeholders’ points of view. The purpose of this paper is to provide evidence on how to conduct CSR activities to account for stakeholders' rights. Our results are summarized as follows. First, in general, CSR activities improve operating performance in both short and long run. Second, positive CSR activities have positive impacts on ROA in the short and long run, while negative CSR activities increase operating costs. Third, positive corporate governance, employee relations, and environment activities increase operating performance. Negative community, employee relations, and human rights activities decrease the corporate financial performance.起始頁-結束頁：21-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.1.CHI.217篇名：以資源基礎觀點及動態能耐觀點檢視不同情境下廠商獲取競爭優勢的策略並列篇名：Examining Firms' Strategies for Competitive Advantages through Resource-based View and Dynamic Capability View under Different Environments作者：蔡政安(Cheng-An Tsai);廖明坤(Ming-Kung Liao)關鍵字：資源基礎;動態能耐;環境變化;個案研究;Resource-Based View;Dynamic-Capability View;Environmental Change;Case-Study期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：策略管理的核心問題是廠商如何達成並保持競爭優勢。資源基礎觀點源自李嘉圖觀點，認為廠商擁有特殊資源可以獲取競爭優勢；動態能耐觀點耐植基於熊彼得觀點，認為廠商能夠快速回應環境變化以重組特殊資源的能耐才具有競爭優勢。資源基礎與動態能耐觀點常被形容是「姊妹」，有時被認為是相互競爭，有時又被認為是互補；在策略理論的應用中，釐清兩者的環境適用條件及理解兩者間的關係是一個重要的議題。本研究把環境情境區分為技術創新性(能耐強化式v.s.能耐毀滅式)與市場變化性(靜態市場v.s.動態市場)，採用多重個案研究設計，以資源基礎觀點及動態能耐觀點檢視在不同環境下，廠商獲取競爭優的策略。本研究發現：廠商進入能耐強化式的技術創新領域及靜態市場時，是偏向資源基礎觀點的策略；廠商進入能耐毀滅式的技術創新領域或動態市場時，是偏向以動態能耐觀點的策略來發展其競爭優勢，並進一步演繹出有兩種不同類型動態能耐策略。並得出資源基礎與動態能耐此兩觀點間是為互補之結論。英文摘要：The fundamental question in the field of strategic management is how firms achieve and sustain competitive advantage. Rooted on Ricardian perspective, resource-based view advocates firms to accumulate heterogeneous resources for competitive advantages. Rooted on Schumpeterian perspective, dynamic-capability view suggests firms to redeploy unique resources and competences to quickly respond to environmental change for competitive advantages. While the resource based view and the dynamic capability approach are often portrayed as sister theories, they sometimes cited as a competing theory or as complementarytheory with respect to the others. For application of strategic management, the important issues are to clarify the applied environment and the interaction of each other. Therefore, this article divides environment into technological innovation (competenceenhanced vs. competence-destroyed) and market changes (static market vs dynamic market). Through conducting multiple case-studies, this article analyzes firms' strategic behavior to obtain competitive advantage in different environmental contexts. This research finds that when entering the context of competence-enhancing innovation and static market, firm prefers to resource-based view for developing competitive advantages; when entering the context of changed technology or market, firm prefers to dynamic-capability view for developing competitive advantages. This research further induces two different types of dynamic-capability strategy and concludes that two strategic views complement each other.起始頁-結束頁：47-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.1.CHI.478篇名：企業海外籌資策略與會計穩健政策並列篇名：Overseas Listing and Accounting Conservatism作者：許永聲(Yun-Sheng Hsu);彭詠旋(Yun-Hsuan Peng)關鍵字：海外籌資;會計穩健性;海外可轉換公司債;海外存託憑證;Overseas Listing;Accounting Conservatism;Euro Convertible Bond;Depositary Receipts期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：35卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文從資訊不對稱角度，探討企業海外籌資是否會影響其會計穩健程度，並同時考量企業海外籌資工具、發行地區是否會影響海外籌資與會計穩健性的關係。選取1992年至2011年首次赴海外籌資之上市櫃公司，分析企業首次海外籌資前後會計穩健程度的變化。實證結果發現，企業在進行海外籌資後，由於海外市場對發行公司的管制與資訊揭露要求，會提高海外籌資公司的資訊透明度，對會計穩健程度的要求會較低，因此企業海外籌資會降低會計穩健程度。此外籌資的方式及掛牌地區的差異，會影響企業海外籌資而降低的會計穩健性程度。英文摘要：The paper evaluates the impact of overseas listing on accounting conservatism of financial statements, as well as considers whether the effects of overseas listing tools and areas of distribution impact on the influence of overseas listing on accounting conservatism. Using firms' first overseas listing as the standard, listed firms who implemented overseas listing in 1992-2011 were selected as sample. The empirical results indicate that the restraints and demands placed on issuing firms by overseas market increases the overseas listing firms' information disclosure level, leading to lower level of accounting conservatism. In addition, overseas listing tools primarily include issuance of Euro convertible bonds and depository receipts. This study therefore addresses the variation in the impact of different listing tools on accounting conservatism. Finally, different listing areas are investigated to demonstrate that listing area impact on the influence of overseas listing on accounting conservatism.起始頁-結束頁：73-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2016.35.1.CHI.7301篇名：Private Collectors in Taiwan: Their Motivations for Collecting and Relations with Museums並列篇名：臺灣的私人蒐藏家：蒐藏動機及博物館的關係作者：凡德格(Paul van der Grijp)關鍵字：Collecting;collectors' motivations;material culture;museums;gift giving;Taiwan;蒐藏;蒐藏家動機;物質文化;博物館;禮物餽贈;臺灣期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：This article develops an anthropological approach to collecting as a cultural phenomenon. It considers extended case studies of both autochthonous and resident foreign collectors in Taiwan, who collect ancient maps, woodblock prints, joss money, and Aboriginal art. Private collectors' drives are analyzed in terms of the ongoing reconfiguration of psychological, sociological, economic, and educational motivations. A second focal point concerns the particular relations between collectors and museums. Narratives around precious finds not only illustrate a poetics of collecting, they also underscore how private collectors assign value to material culture.英文摘要：本文從人類學觀點探討蒐藏作為一種文化現象。分析私人蒐藏家的動力時，將之視為具有心理、社會、經濟和教育動機，為進行中的再構造，而非將動機簡化為僅只一種層面。不同的動機組合構成了一個結構上的組合，一種構造，需要理解為過程，一種進行中的再構造。本文第二個關注點是蒐藏家與博物館之間的特別關係。幾乎文中所有的蒐藏家都參與過博物館展示，有些還直接將其蒐藏的一部分捐給博物館。在所有的案例中，他們透過禮物、租借、販賣的方式與博物館合作，甚至成立自己的（私人）博物館。魏德文有一家南天書局，專門出版他自己國家的歷史，他和生於荷蘭的商人歐福曼（Paul Overmaat）都蒐集臺灣古地圖，並把其中一些捐或賣給博物館。楊永智有古籍約超過一千本、紙錢和木刻版印門神四千件。出生於法國的葛浩博（Nicolas Grevot）蒐集臺灣原住民藝術。案例研究中清楚顯示這些蒐藏家的動機是一種構造（a configuration）。自我的放大這種心理動機，在歐福曼的例子最清楚，他將蒐藏視為挑戰；葛浩博很高興能成為第一個透過網路的臺灣原住民藝術蒐藏家。另一種互補的心理動機─鄉愁，可見於魏德文發現一張故鄉小鎮老地圖時的激動。商人歐福曼選擇住在前荷蘭人以前居住的安平古堡附近，透過發掘幾世紀前他的國人在同一個地方進行商業活動留下的真實物件，感受鄉愁。楊永智受到一本童書「百寶箱」的吸引而成為一位成人蒐藏家，蒐集在大量製造出現前、已然不再的木板刻畫，塞滿超過一整箱。葛浩博的臺灣原民藝術蒐藏似乎與他的伴侶，以及他兒時與玻里尼西亞人和華人小孩在（大溪地）熱帶礁湖玩耍的記憶有關。經濟動機也在蒐藏家解釋為何將一部分賣給臺灣的博物館或其他蒐藏家時可見。歐德曼敘述了他部分賣出部分捐贈的策略。楊永智和葛浩博都提及他們的蒐藏現在比以前更昂貴。葛浩博快要變成部落藝術的經紀人了。教育動機包括有關蒐藏品的自學，到延伸至更廣的大眾。魏德文成為了與其蒐藏相關的歷史書籍的出版者。歐德曼詳述當初他學習蒐集古地圖時有一本「蒐藏家的聖經」。張益銘藉由成為紙錢的蒐藏專家，甚至還開了間私人博物館，彌補其早年失學。葛浩博將他的蒐藏看成對自己小孩的教育工具，讓他們能知道自己不只是法國人，也是臺灣人，而當個臺灣人的意義為何。私人蒐藏家不單有心理、社會、經濟和教育動機，他們也希望自己的蒐藏─由是，他們自己─能永垂不朽。他們深刻地關懷臺灣某些物質文化的存續。起始頁-結束頁：1+30-31資料語文：英文;繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：血與土：重返雅美社會制度並列篇名：Blood and Soil: Yami Social Institutions Revisited作者：高信傑(Hsin-chieh Kao)關鍵字：雅美（達悟）;社會結構;親屬;財產;社會生產與再生;Yami (Tao);social structure;kinship;property;social production and reproduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文旨在釐清雅美社會制度，以及由此衍生出的學術觀點與爭議中的諸多疑難。文中討論將從迄今未有定論的「父系性vs.雙邊觀」爭議出發，以闡明雅美社會為何同時顯現這兩種看似對立的結構特徵。筆者主張此一爭議兼具知識論與本體論的性質。一方面，分析家們各自透過血緣或地盤所觀察到的「親屬群體」很有可能截然不同，從而發展出對於當地社會結構的兩種迥異見解。另一方面，父系性與雙邊觀並非雅美人判定血緣關係的雙重標準，而是對於雅美社會內部雙軌秩序的表達方式，其中所指涉乃是對於地產與人力／生產工具與生產力分別發揮規範作用的兩套平行法則。儘管此二者看似分屬不同領域，然而它們皆起源於家戶─雅美社會結構的基本單元，並且共同服膺於社會生產與再生的終極目標。英文摘要：This article aims at explicating the social institutions of the Yami of Lanyu and re-evaluating related anthropological theories and debates of the past fifty years. My discussions begin with a somewhat old-school but unsettled debate in Yami ethnography: Is Yami society 'patrilineal' or 'bilateral'? Both ethnographers and the locals agree that Yami society reveals clear 'patrilineality' and 'bilateralism' at the same time. That is, the Yami put equal stress on patrilateral and matrilateral kin ties but also show an obvious 'patri bias', emphasizing solidarity among agnates in particular. As a result, the usual answer to this typological question is either that Yami society is structured according to patrilineality with a complementary principle of bilateralism or just the reverse. In the last wave of this long lasting debate, Yami society was said to be a bilateral society with patrilineal inclination, which operates on the basis of the social functions of zipos (relatives), a kind of bilateral kindred. However, the existence of patrilineality had been left unexplained until today. In my opinion, the 'patrilinealty vs. bilateralism' debate reflects epistemological and ontological confusions lurking in Yami ethnography and kinship studies. On the one hand, the recognition of patrilineality and 'patrilineal descent groups' is through 'the soil', based on data concerning estate and land tenure, while the recognition of bilateralism and 'kindred and kith' is through 'the blood', based on observations of the collaboration among consanguineally related persons. In other words, it was the biased selection and use of ethnographic materials that resulted in the diverging development of social theories and their contradiction. The core of the debate is not, as some researchers thought, the opposition between cultural ideals and social facts. Patrilineality is not simply a descent ideology that exists in the locals' minds, but in the practice of the inheritance of estates, a part of social institutions. Both patrilineality and bilateralism are social facts. On the other hand, patrilineality and bilateralism are not the double standard that the Yami use to recognize consanguinity. Despite the use of 'kinship' concepts on the surface, both are expressions of the local political, economic, and jural relations and refer to parallel regulations inside Yami society. Whereas patrilineality regulates the transfer of land, the major means of production, bilateralism regulates the use of manpower, the major productive force. Nevertheless, patrilineality and bilateralism are of one common origin rather than being two separate domains. Both come from the framing relations in asa ka vahay (household), i.e. filiation and conjugality, and serve the ultimate goal of the social production and reproduction of asa ka vahay. A key point of this understanding is the covert status of women, whose labour and property are of indisputable importance but are often underestimated by ethnographers, and even by the locals themselves. Patrilineality, in fact, is merely the outstanding half of the 'bilineality' in Yami society, due to the highly visible estate and its increasing scarcity. By and large, under the co-regulation of bilineality and bilateralism, the reproduction of Yami society takes the form of never-ending replication of asa ka vahay, the basic unit of Yami social structure, instead of everlasting existence of corporations such as descent groups or polities.起始頁-結束頁：33+92-93資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：自西而東：從Sherpa人與嘉絨人的比較來反思喜馬拉雅藏區的社會組織與親屬研究並列篇名：From West to East: Rethinking Social Organization and Kinship studies in the Tibetan Himalayas through a Comparison between Sherpas and rGyalrongs作者：王廷宇(Ting-yu Wang)關鍵字：喜馬拉雅藏區;亞洲結群思維;異質性;社會組織;親屬;Himalayan Tibetan area;mind of Asiatic grouping;heterogeneity;social organization;kinship期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：在研究喜馬拉雅藏區西部以及中心地區的文獻著作中，我們發現藏人社群都呈現出具有高度文化同質性的情形。不過關於此區東部現有的研究已經告訴我們，喜馬拉雅藏區東部與西部存在著一定程度的差異性。其中，關於宗教的部分，在東部的安多藏區已經有較系統性的比較研究。而關於社會組織以及親屬的部分，在東部的康巴藏區研究只提及有差異，並還沒有全面性與西部藏區進行比較。本文將會把討論的焦點放在社會組織與親屬的面向，透過喜馬拉雅藏區最東緣的卓克基嘉絨藏人與西部的Sherpa人來進行比較，試圖呼應並進一步突顯此區域東部的異質性。本文發現在東亞、南亞與內亞交界的藏區東部，在社會組織以及親屬的部分呈現出相當的異質性。除了藏傳佛教以一種由上而下，由文明和宗教中心（衛藏地區或政治上的藏區）向邊緣（喜馬拉雅藏區西部）擴散所產生的同質性之外，另外一種產生藏文化同質性的重要機制則是藏人社會結群的策略，如父系氏族、一妻多夫（polyandry）、母方交表婚以及「骨」與「肉」的概念等。這種結群策略以一種由下而上，由邊緣往中心的方向擴散。Paul K. Benedict（1942）和Claude Levi-Strauss（1969[1949]）從語言與文化作為切入點來談藏人的社會結群與再生產，試圖呈現一種「亞洲的結群思維」。儘管他們的研究給了我們一個不同層次的啟發，但就像前述喜馬拉雅藏區的研究一般，都在無意中把藏人或藏文化給固著化了。因此，本文藉由喜馬拉雅藏區最東緣的卓克基嘉絨人與西部Sherpa人的比較，試圖呈現喜馬拉雅藏區的東部，在歷史觀、社會組織與親屬婚姻等方面，與中心地區或西部有著極為不同的面貌。一方面突顯過去喜馬拉雅藏區的東部，在社會與親屬的研究文獻中因種種因素而成了「缺席的存在」；另一方面透過初步的比較研究，讓東部不再是只反映出中心或西部的特色，而是能開始重視東部自己的文化、社會、語言與歷史的特色。英文摘要：The extant literature in Himalayan Tibetan studies describes a highly unified Tibetan culture. Through this literature we can observe that Tibetans living in the western and central parts of the Himalayas present a high degree of homogeneity in history, social organization and kinship. In contrast, Tibetan communities in the eastern part display a broad heterogeneity in all these areas. In addition to Tibetan Buddhism-which produces a homogeneity that spreads from a center to the periphery in a top-down direction-another regime that produces homogeneity is the grouping strategy of Tibetan societies, whose direction is bottom-up and diffuse from periphery to center. This includes the systems of patrilineal lineage, polyandry, matrilineal cross-cousin marriage and the concepts of ”flesh” and ”bone”. In recent years, studies have begun to emerge that explore the diversity of the Tibetan culture circle's eastern regions. The diversity of religion in the Amdo Tibetan area has been systematically and comparatively discussed by Mona Schrempf (1999, 2006). And while research mentions that there is also great variation in both social organization and kinship in Eastern Khamba (Zhang Jianshi 2000), there has yet to be research that has explored this region in comparison with Tibet in a holistic way. In this paper, through a comparison between Zhuokeji rGyalrong people in the Eastern edge of the Himalayas and the Sherpa occupied Western edge. I will focus on analysis of the differences in social organization and kinship to emphasize the uniqueness of the Eastern Himalayan region. Building on the works of Paul Benedict (1942) and Claude Levi-Strauss (1969[1949]) whose research through the perspectives of language and culture lead them to conclude social groupings in Asia presented a particular ”mind of Asiatic grouping,” I will demonstrate that not only have the Eastern Himalayan areas constituted an absent presence in the entirety of the Tibetan Himalayas, but that the East also presents a distinct area with its own historical, social, linguistic and cultural characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：95-96+143-144資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：Materializing Magic Power: Chinese Popular Religion in Villages and Cities作者：呂玫鍰期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：146-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：《博物館、思想與社會行動》作者：呂欣怡期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：154-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：食物的「道地」與跨國／跨文化脈絡作者：余舜德期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：「道地」的建構：「台灣料理」在東京的生產、再現與變遷並列篇名：The Construction of ”Authenticity”: The Production, Representation and Transformation of ”Taiwanese Cuisine” in Tokyo作者：陳玉箴(Yu-Jen Chen)關鍵字：道地;台灣料理;歷史建構;異國餐廳;東京;authenticity;Taiwanese cuisine;historical construction;ethnic restaurant;Tokyo期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：什麼是「道地的台灣料理」？日本的台灣料理店如何詮釋與呈現「道地」的台灣菜？在日本，中華料理已是重要的飲食要素，中華料理與台灣料理的界線如何劃分？本文從這些問題出發，以東京的台灣料理店為研究案例，探究異國餐館中菜餚「道地性」（authenticity）此概念形構的歷史面向，包括生產者的歷史脈絡，以及「道地台灣料理」定義形塑的歷史過程與變遷。本研究發現，自日本殖民時期至二次戰後，台灣料理與中華料理循不同路徑進入日本，但一直界線模糊，1980年代後逐漸發展出以家常、小盤、小吃類的「家庭料理、小皿料理」作為「道地台灣料理」的重要特色，「自家製」的常見語言策略則同時將「道地」與「傳統手作」連結。但隨著台日觀光與媒體報導的蓬勃，「道地」的定義正產生變遷，珍珠奶茶、牛肉麵、小籠包等在台灣台菜餐廳不會出現的品項成為近年來日本台灣料理餐廳與消費者共同認定的「道地台灣料理」。從店老闆（生產者）與消費者兩端來看「道地」定義的建構，一方面，生產者歷史脈絡是影響店家對於「道地」定義的主要因素，且與認同密切相關；另一方面，當代觀光的身體經驗與媒體符號也逐漸取得「道地」的定義權。英文摘要：This article examines the production, representation, and transformation of the ”Taiwanese cuisine” in restaurants at in Tokyo, analyzing how these restaurants interpret and represent ”authentic Taiwanese cuisine.” Tracing the history of ”Taiwanese cuisine restaurants” in Tokyo from the early 20th century, when Taiwan was under the colonial rule of Japan, this article aims to explore the historical construction of the notion of ”authenticity” mainly in two aspects: the historical contexts of the producers (owners and chefs of Taiwanese restaurants in Tokyo), and the transformation of the identification and consumers’ consciousness of ”authentic Taiwanese cuisine.” This study shows that the boundary between Taiwanese cuisine and Chinese cuisine had has been vague since the notion of ”Taiwanese cuisine” appeared in the early 20th century. Although it had developed diverse local or regional dishes had developed in Taiwan during the colonial period, such as sauteed fish wuliu (literally five willow branches) and flying fish stewed with pickled mango, these dishes were not textualized and provided served in restaurants. By contrast, those the ”Taiwanese cuisine” enjoyed by the upper class in exclusive restaurants were was mainly of Chinese origins, which resulting in the vague boundary between Chinese cuisine and Taiwanese cuisine even in Taiwan. The ”Taiwanese restaurants” appeared in Tokyo during the colonial period, and the number grew mainly during the economic bubble of Japan since the second half of the late 1980s to late 1990s. Many Taiwanese migrated to Japan with the help from relatives who had studied or worked in Japan before the 1970s. As many Taiwanese restaurants were ran run by migrant families, the ”authentic Taiwanese cuisine” was gradually came to be understood as family dishes or small-plate dishes since the 1980s. There were also restaurants run by Japanese businessmen or the descendants of those Japanese who grew up in Taiwan during the colonial period. In both cases, hand-making and the maintenance of key flavors of Taiwanese dishes are important strategies to identify the ”authenticity” of Taiwanese dishes. However, with the increasing bodily experience as of tourists and media audiences particularly after the year 2000, the meaning of authentic Taiwanese food has been changed, referring to newly emerging label signature foods like beef noodles and bubble tea. As ”authenticity” is a field of contest, the consciousness and expectations of consumers keeps changing the representation of Taiwanese cuisine in Tokyo. In this context, night market foods and famous Taiwanese enterprises provide a simple way to perform ”Taiwanese cuisine” as the boundary between Taiwanese cuisine and Chinese cuisine is still vague. Based on the exploration of Taiwanese restaurants at in Tokyo, this article further argues that the ”authenticity” of cuisines in ethnic restaurants can be analyzed at three levels. The first level is the historical contexts and personal experiences of producers, which constitute construct their identification of ”authentic ethnic cuisines.” The second is the core factors of the ”authenticity” as identified by producers, such as the key flavors of food, which is are closely related to the producers' cultural identity and can be hardly are not easily changed. The third level is the supplementary factors of the ”authenticity”, which is changing change along with consumers' expectations and new trends. The analysis of the above levels in this research shows that the identification of authenticity is not only a choice between business and culture, but also the historical construction of ethnic cuisine involving the negotiation between producers and consumers of different periods and backgrounds.起始頁-結束頁：7-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：流動、聚合與區隔：台灣茶藝發展中的矛盾和動力並列篇名：Flow, Convergence, and Distinction: Paradox and Power in the Development of Taiwan’s Art of Tea作者：張靜紅(Jing-Hong Zhang)關鍵字：茶藝;台灣;傳統;文化認同;文化真實性的矛盾;art of tea;Taiwan;tradition;identity;paradox of cultural authenticity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文通過茶藝在中國和台灣之間的交流互動來探討文化傳統的歷史性發展和相對性建構。在希望重拾傳統的中國人眼中，台灣茶藝代表著正宗的中華文化傳統而成為了被渴望學習的對象。而台灣茶藝本身，則是在台灣經濟社會曲折的發展過程中匯聚了多元的文化因素才成就今天的面貌，其間融入了中國潮汕工夫茶的傳統、日本茶道的影響以及台灣茶人自成風格的創新。本文借鑒有關文化認同及文化真實性建構之矛盾性的理論，結合具體案例說 明，台灣茶藝的發展映照著台灣經濟社會的變遷以及台灣在政治及文化認同上的糾結與矛盾。這種糾結表現在不同的情境下選擇與不同的「他者」認同或區隔，此種矛盾同時也成為台灣茶藝不斷更新和改變的源泉及動力。在敘述台灣茶藝對中國大陸帶來的影響之後，本文也反過來探討正在崛起的中國經濟購買力可能對台灣茶藝的發展提出新的挑戰。英文摘要：This paper explores the historical development and mutual construction of cultural identity through looking at the interaction of art of tea between China and Taiwan. Borrowing insights from theories about cultural identity and the paradox of constructing cultural authenticity, this paper aims to show that the development of the Taiwanese art of tea offers insights into Taiwan's economic and social change in the past few decades, as well as Taiwan's paradox of political and cultural identification. It raises questions about why the Taiwanese art of tea is having a great impact on China, what aspirations are embedded in mainland Chinese demand for Taiwan's art of tea, and what are the Taiwanese reactions to this demand. Furthermore, why have there been so many constant changes and innovations in the Taiwanese art of tea, and what are the driving forces behind these changes and innovations? In addition, what are the sources and more original cultural formats that Taiwanese tea persons have incorporated and adapted from? What struggles have they experienced and how do they look at self and others in this adaptation process? Based on ethnographic participation in tea gatherings and interviews with practitioners of the art of tea in Taiwan and China, this paper shows that the Taiwanese art of tea, although seen by people from China as the authentic model of traditional Chinese culture, has gone through uneven paths along with the changes in Taiwan’s economy and society. It has incorporated multiple elements including Chao-Shan gongfu tea, the Japanese Way of Tea, as well as Taiwanese self-creations. The paradox, contained in Taiwanese politics and mirrored through the case of the art of tea, is displayed by the strategies of selecting whom to identify with or be distinct from; but at the same time the paradox also becomes the dynamic power driving the Taiwanese art of tea, as well as the whole society, towards ceaseless innovation. The paper first provides background on the aspiration for cultural authenticity by mainland Chinese, as a means of opening discussions about the mutual construction of cultural identity, as well as highlighting the context of intimate cultural interactions across the Taiwan Strait. A brief history of Taiwan follows and brings along information about how the enduring tensions across the Strait have shaped the communication of tea culture historically and in the present. Next, against the simplified saying that Taiwan 'preserves' the authentic traditional culture, the paper traces the development of the art of tea in Taiwan to show how it becomes part of Taiwanese cultural creation and reconstruction from the 1970s through the 1990s. The paper then explores how the reconstruction of the art of tea is associated with selected cultural identities, namely how Taiwanese practitioners of the art of tea choose whether to adopt a Japanese or Chinese cultural legacy under different conditions. Finally, it illustrates how Taiwanese tea persons look at the ongoing practice of the art of tea in mainland China with criticism as well as with paradoxical attitudes. The paper concludes with a discussion about how cultural authenticity in Taiwan has been constructed paradoxically yet with vitality. The paper, while showing the influence of the art of tea brought by Taiwan to China, also raises potential questions as to how the impact might be turned the other way round due to the increasing economic power of China.起始頁-結束頁：55-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：The Authentic Taste of Puer Tea and Transnational Interests並列篇名：純正的普洱茶風味與跨國利益的追逐作者：余舜德(Shuenn-Der Yu)關鍵字：純正;風味;跨國現象;普洱茶;全球化;authenticity;taste;transnationalism;Puer tea;globalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：「何為純正的普洱茶？」，一直是1990年代中期於東北及東南亞興起普洱茶風潮以來，消費者所密切關注的問題，就如同普洱茶歷經價值與市場巨大變動所呈現之豐富的歷史一樣，「什麼是普洱茶？」的爭論也未曾有定論。兩岸三地的行動者積極參與普洱茶定義之爭以控制其意涵、風味的標準與價值，並進而影響市場與未來的發展。此篇論文將深入分析「何為純正普洱？」的議題是如何牽涉著這值得探討的全球化課題與歷史過程。英文摘要：What is real Puer tea? This question has been a great concern in China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong since the mid-1990s, when Puer became a highly sought-after commodity among consumers in East Asian and Southeast Asian markets. Like Puer's fascinating history, in which enormous changes in its value and market have taken place, the debate about just what is Puer tea has shifted many times. It has involved actors at both the local and national level across Asia who try to define authentic Puer in order to control its meaning, taste, and value-and consequently its markets and future development. This paper will analyze how the ”problem of Puer” actually engages global issues and historical processes.起始頁-結束頁：89-109資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：The Resilient Landscape: Fijian Village Gardens in the Age of Commercial Agriculture並列篇名：韌性地景：商業性農業時代下的斐濟村落農田作者：林浩立(Hao-Li Lin)關鍵字：斐濟;地景;商業性農業;走動與觀看;土地制度;Fiji;landscape;commercial agriculture;land tenure;walking and seeing期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：當代商業性農業活動對環境造成的影響已經為許多研究所討論。在太平洋島嶼社會中，作物單一化、對購買食物的依賴、以及森林與土壤品質的惡化是常見的狀況。特別是斐濟有「花園之島」雅號的塔妙妮島（Taveuni），在肥沃的火山土壤與溫暖多雨的氣候的外衣下，其實已開始因大規模的商業芋頭外銷事業而出現相關的環境問題。同樣地在村落農田中，儘管耕作規模偏小，但由於芋頭與卡瓦胡椒等現金作物帶來的經濟收益，使得其中栽培的作物也開始以市場重視的品種為主。農民為各自家戶生計努力，在自己的農地上使用除草劑與化學肥料耕種、估算每棵作物能帶來的收入。 本文以島上一個村落為例，指出看似橫掃全島的商業性農業活動，其實並沒有摧毀地方的作物多樣性，也沒有將村民規訓成理性算計的獨立農人。在村落農田中，儘管市場品種的確為大宗，但對傳統儀式性品種的種植仍未間斷。而在村落各家戶旁的小菜園、邊界的沼澤區、以及山區森林河川谷地這些不明顯的地方，不同歷史過程中引入的作物或野生的品種也在各個角落生長著，持續提供村民食物的來源。在土地利用方面，以父系世系群為主的官方土地制度下，其實有許多不同名字且使用權具有相當彈性的土地區塊。村落的農田散佈在這些區塊中，接納鄉村複雜的人群移動。除此之外，傳統共作活動也還在進行。我認為這些多樣性與彈性是被當地崎嶇的地形、碎裂交錯的農田、與從村落延伸到森林的連續面所包容著，使得重視效率與一致性的商業性農業事業無法順利運作。更重要的是，本文提出這些複雜多樣的生計行為與人群移動，是由村民每日在地景中上下走動與觀看的感官活動所聯繫起來，使得一個包含過去與未來、記憶與情感的全貌環境得以浮現在村民眼前、不斷地被感知。我將之稱為一種韌性地景：它並非對全球化的反抗，而是讓村民在參與商業性農業事業之餘，仍能保持與土地、社群的連結，而這正是斐濟土地（vanua）一詞的精髓。英文摘要：Commercial agriculture in the Pacific has typically resulted in increased monoculture, reliance on purchased food, and environmental degradation. This is particularly the case on Taveuni Island, Fiji, a well-known hotspot for commercial taro enterprises. Using ethnographic data on the agricultural landscape in an indigenous Fijian community there, I demonstrate how the community maintains a degree of crop diversity and flexible land-use arrangements despite the sweeping effects of export-based farming practices. The capacity for diversity and flexibility, I argue, is sustained in a landscape consisting of hilly terrain with fragmented gardens, which enables the community to respond resiliently to the disciplining influence of commercial agriculture, even while engaging in many of its practices. I also point out that the everyday acts of walking and seeing in the rugged landscape are neglected aspects of farming that allow the villagers to maintain a profound connection to an environment filled with meaning, memories, and a sense of time. This agricultural landscape is forever a complex social space, rather than a place defined solely by commercial productivity. The results of this study show how resilience may be cultivated in indigenous agricultural systems even given the impact of globalization.起始頁-結束頁：113-148資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所11篇名：Beyond Borders: Stories of Yunnanese Chinese Migrants of Burma. Wen-Chin Chang. Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press, 2014. 278pp.作者：劉堉珊期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：150-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所12篇名：Gendered Words: Sentiments and Expression in Changing Rural China. Fei-Wen Liu. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015. 252 pp作者：簡美玲期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：156-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：臺灣生命循環不均度並列篇名：INEQUALITY OVER THE LIFE CYCLE: THE CASE OF TAIWAN作者：侯欣妙(Hsin-Miao Hou);吳朝欽(Tsaur-Chin Wu);楊建成(Cheng-Chen Yang)關鍵字：生命循環不均;世代;均等值;臺灣;Life cycle inequality;Cohort;Equivalence scale;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：Deaton and Paxon(1994)研究臺灣1976-1990年、美國1980-1990年與英國1969-1990年的家戶生命循環不均度，發現同一世代的人，其消費和所得的不均分配，隨著年齡增長，如扇形般的散開增長。後續研究，或以不同國家資料、或應用更新較長資料、或利用不同控制變數，檢視Deaton-Paxson實證發現的頑強性(robustness)。據我們所知，並沒有相關臺灣的接續研究，本文目的即是試圖補上此一缺口。我們以主計總處1976-2011年的家庭收支調查資料進行分析，檢視1990年以前和以後是否有差異，較長資料和1990年以前較短資料顯示的資訊是否有別，另外，我們也以臺灣更新較長資料的發現和英美後續研究的發現作比較。英文摘要：The seminal work of Deaton and Paxson (1994) uses Personal Income Distribution Surveys of Taiwan (1976-1990), Family Expenditure Survey of UK (1969- 1990), and Consumer Expenditure Survey of US (1980-1990) to study inequality over the life cycle. They find that within cohort inequality of earnings and of consumption fan out over time, suggesting a sizable, uninsurable random component of earnings. Later studies employ different country data, new and longer-term data, or different control variables to examine the robustness of the Deaton-Paxson finding. To our knowledge, there has been no subsequent study on Taiwan. The purpose of this paper is to fill in the void by using the same but longer data (1976-2011) on Taiwan. We compare the differences before and after 1990, short- and long-term data, and Taiwan verus UK and US.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：我國房地產價格對於經濟機會不平等的影響之研究並列篇名：THE IMPACT OF HOUSING PRICES ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN TAIWAN作者：李明軒(Ming-Hsuan Lee)關鍵字：房價;經濟機會;臺灣;Housing prices;Economic opportunity;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去十年來我國各地房價急速上漲，高漲的房價是否造成社會經濟不公平成為各界關注的議題。本研究使用2002至2014年內政部不動產資訊平臺的房價資料、以及中華民國家庭收支調查報告中的家戶所得結構資料建立一縣市級的追蹤資料庫，以實證估計房價高漲對於臺灣家戶所得結構的影響，由此結果推論房價上漲對於臺灣經濟機會平等的影響。固定效果模型的估計結果顯示房價上漲帶動較大幅度非工作所得以及私人財產所得的上漲（相對於工作所得），其中非工作所得的成長率高於工作所得的成長率19至28個百分點，私人財產所得的成長率則高於工作所得的成長率12至19個百分點。因此我們推論房價上漲賦予了高所得階層更多的經濟優勢與機會、經濟機會趨於不平等。英文摘要：Taiwan has witnessed a rapid increase in its housing prices in the last decade. A large number of studies have examined the likely impact of rising housing prices on social and economic inequality. However, as previous studies provided mostly theoretical arguments, relatively little empirical evidence has been offered. This paper establishes a county-level panel dataset consisting of 20 counties and cities in Taiwan from 2002 to 2014 and empirically examines the relationship between housing prices and household income structure, from which we infer the impact of rising housing prices on the equality of economic opportunities in Taiwan. The results show that the rising housing prices in Taiwan were associated with a greater increase in the share of ”non-labor income” and ”private property income” relative to ”labor income”, implying that economic opportunities were becoming unequal and were more in favor of the high-income class.起始頁-結束頁：37-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：臺灣現職工作期間之存續分析－兼具加速失敗時間與比例風險計量的Weibull分析並列篇名：AWEIBULL ANALYSIS OF THE CURRENT JOB TENURE IN TAIWANWITH BOTH ACCELERATED FAILURE-TIME AND PROPORTIONAL HAZARDSMETRICS作者：江豐富(Feng-Fuh Jiang)關鍵字：現職工作年資;Weibull存續分析;加速失敗時間;比例風險;Current job tenure;Weibull duration analysis;Accelerated failure-time model;Proportional hazards期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文根據人力資本理論，探討「現職工作年資」與「職涯年資」之不同及其影響變數。鑒於現職工作期間資料具有「右邊無法被觀察」和「最小極值分配」等特性，本文乃根據「Weibull有母數對數線型持續分析」設定現職工作年資持續估計模型，並解構Weibull的模型設定及其兼具的「加速時間失敗」與「比例風險」等計量機制。採用2012年5月行政院主計總處「人力資源與運用調查」的個體資料估計該模型，主要結果如下：一、現職工作年資隨教育水準、一般經驗水準、大型企業或政府部門、典型就業、全日工作、已婚且配偶存在、30–44歲壯年組等變數正向移動；但隨任職於中小型企業、非典型就業、部分時間工作、無婚姻狀態、45–65歲中高齡組等變數反向移動。二、加速失敗時間分析顯示，不具共變數之「平均參考主體」，其現職工作年資的失敗或老化速度比具有共變數之「平均主體」快約8倍。三、在所有能對現職工作期間造成加乘效果、並對現職工作期間的終止風險率和相對風險比率產生減緩效果的變數中，以正式教育年數的效果為最大。反之，在所有會對現職工作期間造成負面效果、並對現職工作期間的終止風險率及相對風險產生加乘效果的變數中，以非典型就業的效果為最大，且不容小覷。英文摘要：Relationships between current job tenure, which refers to the length of time in the current role at a specific firm, and firm-specific human capital and their determinants are examined theoretically. The approach of estimation for the survival model is explored by associating Weibull's parametric log-linear duration model with the extreme-value type-I (min.) distribution and the accelerated life model, as well as both proportional and relative hazards as embedded in Cox's proportional hazards model. By fitting the survival model to household data from the May 2012 Manpower Utilization Survey of Taiwan, the estimation results can be briefly summarized as follows: (1) Of all the covariates, for- mal schooling level imposes the greatest positive effect on the time length of current job tenure and hence has the greatest mitigating effect on the risk that the current job tenure fails (terminates); conversely, atypical employment imposes the largest negative effect on the time length of current job tenure and hence has the largest increasing effect on the failure risk of current job tenure. (2) The current job tenure of the reference subject fails around 8 times earlier (or ages around 8 times faster) than that of the subject with covariates. More interestingly, this implies that the risk that the current job tenure of the subject fails at a given survival time equals only around an eighth the risk that the current job tenure of the reference subject fails at about an eighth times earlier than the given survival time. (3) Estimation results from Weibull do have implications similar to results from both the accelerated failure-time and proportional hazards metrics.起始頁-結束頁：67-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：兩岸製造業專業分工型態變化與競爭關係之變遷並列篇名：CROSS-STRAIT PRODUCTION FRAGMENTATION AND COMPETITION IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES作者：林師模(Shih-Mo Lin);劉峰瑋(Feng-Wei Liu);林晉勗(Jin-Xu Lin)關鍵字：國際專業分工;世界投入產出表;多區域投入產出分析;兩岸;International production fragmentation;World input-output tables;Inter-regional input-output analysis;Cross-strait期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：隨著貿易自由化的持續推展，企業在面對全球化的競爭下，為爭取具競爭力之生產要素及降低成本，生產逐漸走向全球化，國際分工體系因而形成。本文採用多國產業關聯架構下之世界投入產出表，估算兩岸及亞洲主要國家製造業部門於1995至2011年的國際專業分工指數，藉以分析兩岸在不同互動區域考量下，產業競合關係之演變及未來所應重視發展之產業；此外，也利用paneldata模型，估計並分析影響製造業專業分工程度的主要因素，以提供擬定產業發展策略之參考。本文分析結果顯示，從國際專業分工角度來看，目前我國製造業國際分工程度仍較中國大陸高，也較日韓為高，不過，由計量實證估計的結果，我們也發現對已開發國家而言，通常產業附加價值率的上升會伴隨著國際專業分工程度的下降，也就是說，當經濟發展逐漸成熟，產業生產逐漸以生產及出口最終消費產品為主的時候，附加價值率反而會提升。有鑑於此，我國在邁向已開發國家的過程中，製造業面臨中國大陸競爭時應該逐漸調整，朝技術創新、升級及高附加價值的方向發展，而不是僅侷限於擔任其他已開發國家國際生產分工的一份子而沾沾自喜。英文摘要：Following the global trend of trade liberalization, firms are inevitably facing fiercer competition, and joining the international production fragmentation system has become a natural choice for them. This paper estimates the index of production fragmentation (IPF) of manufacturing for Taiwan, China and other major Asian countries for the years 1995 to 2011, using World Input-Output Tables, to examine the changing competition and cooperation relationship between Taiwan and China under different trade area considerations. In addition, a panel data model is estimated to figure out the factors contributing to the changes in IPF. Our results show that Taiwan’s manufacturing still plays amore important role in international production fragmentation than China and other Asian countries. However, our panel estimation results reveal that for developed economies, an increase in value-added ratio is accompanied by a reduction in the degree of international production fragmentation. As such, upgrading the technology and focusing on producing final goods to increase the added value will become the most important strategy for Taiwan’s manufacturing in facing the competition from China.起始頁-結束頁：107-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：壹、2016年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正－2016年6月29日記者會新聞稿作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：145-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：149-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：175-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：Technology Advantage and Home-Market Effect: A Poisson QuasiMaximum Likelihood Estimation並列篇名：技術優勢和本國市場效果：卜瓦松準最大概似估計模型作者：黃幼宜(Yo-Yi Huang);黃登興(Deng-Shing Huang)關鍵字：本國市場效果;技術優勢;引力模型;卜瓦松準最大概似估計;Home-market effect;Technology advantage;Gravity equation;Poisson quasi maximum likelihood estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：根據新貿易理論的本國市場效果(home -market effects)，自由貿易會使大國擴大其市場占有率，對小國則造成製造業萎縮，極端情況則整個產業消失。本文旨在分析和檢視技術優勢如何影響所謂的本國市場效果。技術效果可以分為兩個層次：一者為因為技術優勢使得成本較低，產出提高的直接效果；其二則是透過貿易後廠商得以存活的間接效果。據此，本文利用引力模型之卡瓦松準最大概似估計來驗證技術優勢對本國市場效果的影響，我們選定11個不同屬性的產業，即傳統勞力密集的紡織成衣業、具經濟規模的運輸機具產業，以及最技術密集的半導體產業等。我們的實證結果發現：(1)不同屬性產業所反映之本國市場效果程度不一；(2)技術密集產業愈可能出現本國市場效果被抵銷情況，而且直接和間接技術效果均有相同結果；亦即對於技術密集型產業來說，當出口國具有相對技術優勢， 將促使該國有更多的出口。英文摘要：According to the conventional home-market effect, free trade tends to shrink the market share for a small economy with differentiated manufacturing goods, and in the extreme leads to a complete hollowing-out of the industry in a small economy. This paper considers the technology difference between countries using the standard Helpman-Krugman model. We will show that the home-market effect can be offset and even reversed if the smaller economy is characterized by better technology. The effect of a technology advantage is composed of two parts: a direct effect from lower unit costs that lead to a higher output level of each firm, and an indirect effect through a change in terms of which firms survive after trade. Based on theoretical results, we derive the gravity equation to conduct empirical tests on the hypothesis of the home-market effect, and direct and indirect technology effects using the US patent stock of 2002 for eleven industries ranging from the most technology-intensive industry to the most labor-intensive apparel and clothing industry. Empirical results show that the degree of the home-market effect varies from industry to industry. The reversal of the home-market effect is more likely to occur in technology-intensive industries. Consistently, direct and indirect technology effects also occur in the industries with a reversed home-market effect.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：老年人口的消費行為—以剛退休人口進行前後配對的實證研究並列篇名：CONSUMPTION DURING RETIREMENT: EVIDENCE USING A PROPENSITY SCORE MATCHING METHOD作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(Wehn-Jyuan Tsai)關鍵字：生命週期理論;退休;消費;配對;Life cycle model;Retirement;Consumption;Matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：相對於人口老化所引發有關財政負擔的爭論，老年人口的消費行為與其福祉的變化則鮮少受到國際學者同等的關注。有鑑於此，本文使用行政院主計總處1996－2006年的「家庭收支調查」，研究老年人口的消費行為。本文以調查年度當年退休的男性戶長家庭做為實驗組；持續就業的男性戶長家庭做為向前配對的控制組、已退休的男性戶長家庭做為向後配對的控制組，且利用鄰近配對法，針對實驗組以及兩組控制組家庭進行前後配對，以藉此獲得一男性戶長特質（包括教育程度、年齡、健康狀態與投保身份等）與家庭結構相似但卻涵蓋生命週期各個階段的配對樣本。實證結果顯示居於財富分配第一等分位的家庭其「退休－消費」驟降的情形可能隱含相關家庭效用的減損。英文摘要：It is widely acknowledged that population aging will exert intense fiscal pressure on public pension and health care programs. However, a focus on these financial costs has led to an unduly negative view of population ageing that neglects the well-being of older citizens. In this paper, we use the 1996- 2006 waves of the Family Income and Expenditure Survey to study the effect of retirement on household nondurable expenditures. We construct a novel matched dataset using the nearest neighbor matching method in which the just-retired household heads serve as a treatment group, and both the employed and the retired household heads serve as a forward-matching and backward-matching control group, respectively. The empirical results suggest that there is a one-off drop in food expenditures at the time of retirement for households in the lowest wealth tertile. These results therefore imply that the quantity of food intake did deteriorate with retirement status for relatively poor households.起始頁-結束頁：45-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：從R&D看臺灣經濟發展瓶頸並列篇名：THE BOTTLENECK OF ECONOMIC GROWTH IN TAIWAN: FROMTHE R&D POINT OF VIEW作者：李高朝(Kao-Chao Lee);馮君強(Chun-Chiang Feng)關鍵字：研究與發展;產業關聯;外溢效果;R&D;Industrial linkage;Spillover effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：十多年來，臺灣之實質工資幾無增加，這呈現了經濟成長動力漸失，尤其以正確的資料，Solow的計量方法C-D (Cobb-Douglas)函數分析所得的成長趨勢，便是如此。不過Solow計量分析，方法論上低估R&D對經濟成長之貢獻，本文再以C-D函數出發，進一步做理論的推導，可求得臺灣總體經濟之資本需求與勞動需求曲線,當技術進步時，資本投資、資本報酬、工資及就業將增加，同時出口之競爭力也將提升。因此推升消費、投資與出口。從此即可了解R&D為經濟成長之原動力的真諦。若再配合產業關聯理論，發現R&D有高度的外溢效果，它是一種軟體的公共投資。若能與硬體的公共投資，直接生產設備投資有好的配合，經濟將走向最佳的成長線。英文摘要：The real wage in Taiwan has not increased for more than ten years. This indicates the economy had lost its growth momentum. For the empirical study, we use the Solow Model, which however tends to underestimate the contribution of R&Dto economic growth. Therefore we extend the theoretical analysis to derive the capital and labor demand curves of Taiwan. Increase in R&D inputs will lead to a rise in capital investments, capital returns, wage, and employment. Improvement in export competitiveness can be an indirect result as well. Consequently, it can raise consumption, investment, and export. To sum up, R&D is the main driving force of economic growth. Using input-output analysis,we found that R&D has a high spillover effect. Adequate combination of R&D inputs and infrastructure investment can push the economic growth towards the optimal path.起始頁-結束頁：87-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：法令變動對醫療財團法人從事社區公益服務的影響並列篇名：DO NON-PROFIT HOSPITALS CHANGE THE COMMUNITY BENEFIT SERVICE PROVIDED WHEN FACEDWITH LAWAMENDMENT?作者：何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho);郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo)關鍵字：醫療財團法人;社區公益服務;醫療法修法;Nonprofit hospitals;Community benefit service;Medical law amendment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：我國在2004年修改醫療法，降低醫療財團法人應提供慈善醫療等社區公益服務費用的最低提撥標準，並將社區公益服務的提撥費基準，由原先的一項改為分別針對醫療社服活動與教育研究活動兩項提撥。本研究探討此次修法對醫療財團法人從事醫療社服支出比例、教育研究支出比例及社區公益服務支出比例的衝擊。本研究以40間醫療財團法人在2001－2008年度資料，採用最小平方法迴歸進行分析。實證結果顯示，醫療法降低提撥社區公益服務費用的最低標準，平均而言，顯著地降低整體醫療財團法人之醫療社服支出比例、教育研究支出比例及社區公益服務支出比例。此外，相對於低公益支出類型法人，高公益支出類型醫療財團法人在修法後顯著的減少醫療社服支出比例、教育研究支出比例及社區公益服務支出比例。由本研究實證結果可知，代理理論比較能解釋臺灣醫療財團法人從事慈善醫療等社區公益服務的行為。英文摘要：Taiwan's Medical Care Act was amended in 2004 to lower the minimum appropriate standards for non-profit hospitals in providing community benefit services, and the standard for the total amount of community benefit services wasmodified into two independent criteria of uncompensated care services and educational research activities. This study aimed to investigate the impact of the law amendment on the non-profit hospitals in setting aside funds for uncompensated care services ex- penditure, educational research expenditure and community benefit services expenditure. The empirical results show that the amendment of the Medical Care Act in modifying the funds set aside for community benefit services has significant impact on the ratio of community benefit services expenditure on average. The amendment of theMedical Care Act in 2004 tomodify the standards for setting aside the funds for community benefit services has significantly reduced the ratio of non-profit hospitals' expenditure on community benefit services. In addition non-profit hospitals with high community benefit services expenditure significantly reduced the ratio of uncompensated care services expenditure, educational research expenditure and community benefit services expenditure following the lawamendment. The empirical results of this study showthat the agency theory can better explain Taiwan's non-profit hospitals engaging inmedical co- mmunity services activities.起始頁-結束頁：119-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：我們和未來世代之間的道德關係：跨世代正義如何可能？並列篇名：OUR MORAL RELATION TO FUTURE GENERATIONS:ON THE POSSIBILITY OF INTERGENERATIONAL JUSTICE作者：戴華(Hua Tai)關鍵字：跨世代正義;道德責任和權利;意志論vs利益論;「非同一」的問題;正義的情境;帕菲特;羅爾斯;Intergenerational justice;Moral duties and rights;The will theory vs the interest theory;The non-identity problem;The circumstances of justice;Parfit;Rawls期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：目前人類所發展出來的科技, 以古人難以想像的程度改善了人類福祉。可是, 假設幾百年後的地球上仍有人類存在。我們對於現代科技的運用若未能加以適當管制，很可能讓這些未來出現的人類存在於一個難以忍受的生活環境中。一般人相信，我們若明知故犯，不願積極地採取必要的措施去避免這樣的苦難發生在他們身上，到時候就會傷害他們，因此犯下道德上不可原諒的錯誤, 或者無論如何侵犯了他們的基本人權。根據這個信念，我們對於這些未來人類擔負著道德責任，而且這些責任乃奠基在所謂「跨世代正義」的考量上。然而，有些哲學家認為，一般人之所以會抱持這個信念，是因為他們誤用了有關「道德權利」、「傷害」、乃至於「正義」等相關概念，以致誤導了自己。在這些哲學家看來，對於那些和我們生命期不相重疊的人類未來世代，我們若要理解自己和他們之間的道德關係，這些概念其實都派不上用場。這些哲學家想堅持的立場是：即使我們確實應該關切未來人類的福祉，這樣的關切至多建立在與「慈善」相關的責任上，而無關乎「正義」或「不傷害他人」之類的道德考量。本文試圖針對這個保守立場來為上述一般人的信念進行辯護。英文摘要：We have developed technologies which have so far improved human wellbeing to an extent unimaginable to our ancestors. But suppose there will still be human beings living on earth hundreds of years from now. It is very likely that, if not properly regulated, our employment of these technologiesmay leave those future people with an environment unbearable for them to live in. Ordinary people would believe that if we knowingly don't do whatever is necessary to prevent such things from happening to them, we will harm them in an unforgivably wrongful way, or in any case violate their basic human rights when they come to exist. According to this belief, we have moral duties toward these future peoplewhich are based on considerations of so-called ”intergenerational justice”. However, some philosophers think that this belief is misguided as a result of one'smisuse of the concepts involved therein, namely, those of ”moral rights”, ”harm”, and even ”justice”. For them, these concepts have no use when it comes to understanding ourmoral relation to peoplewhose life-span does not overlap ours. They would insist that even though we ought by all means to care about the well-being of these future people, this does not stem from duties of justice or of ”do no harm”, but at most from duties of beneficence. This article seeks to defend the ordinary belief in question against such a conservative view.起始頁-結束頁：159-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：世代正義的政策意涵分析並列篇名：INTERGENERATIONAL JUSTICE AND ITS POLICY IMPLICATIONS作者：黃寄倫(Gillan Chi-Lun Huang);冷則剛(Tse-Kang Leng);林煥笙(Huan-Sheng Lin)關鍵字：世代正義;公共政策;永續發展;Intergenerational justice;Public policy;Sustainable development期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：世代正義(intergenerational justice)是當前各國社會中最重要的議題之一。本文以世代正義為理論基礎，探討世代正義在政策上的意涵。首先，在理論部分，由於後代不存在，所以無法證成未來世代擁有和現今世代具有相同的權利，故學者大多以當代對於未來世代的義務與責任作為世代正義的理論基礎。再者，本文第二部分則藉由聯合國、芬蘭、紐西蘭、以色列、以及日本與韓國的制度安排為例，探討世代正義在各國的政策意涵。本文希望能由以上討論，對我國未來在制度上與政策上保障未來世代的權利做出建言與政策建議。英文摘要：Intergenerational justice is one of the most discussed issues in the society around the globe. This paper firstly discussed the theory of intergenerational justice. Because future people do not exist (yet), the right-based theory could not justify that future people are entitled to the rights. Therefore, most scholars have turned into the obligation and duty from the present generation towards the future generation. Secondly, this paper discussed the public policy concerning the ideas of intergenerational justice in the United Nations, Finland, Hungary, New Zealand, Israel as well as institutional arrangement in Japan and Korea. The object of this paper is to offer some policy recommendations for Taiwan government on issue the intergenerational justice for future institutional arrangement.起始頁-結束頁：185-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：代際正義的法律課題：導論並列篇名：LEGAL ISSUES OF INTERGENERATIONAL EQUITY: AN INTRODUCTION作者：李建良(Chien-Liang Lee)關鍵字：代際正義;永續發展;代際法;權利;義務;正當程序;制度選擇;Intergenerational equity;Sustainable development;Intergenerational law;Rights;Obligations;Due process;Choice of institutions期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文從法規範的觀點出發，兼容國際眼界與在地視角，以觀念辯證、規範實踐、權利圖像、義務論述、正當程序、機制建置六大面向為主軸，探討不同世代之間公平正義的法律課題。本文主張：人類社會是不同世代共容並存的夥伴關係，人人應為世代永存及福祉而共同努力，在觀念定位上應捨棄「發展」，將思維集中在「永續」上。人類永續性的概念內含了世代傳承、立命繼絕的要素，永續發展作為法律課題，必然且應是一套或一門「代際法」(IntergenerationalLaw)。民主法治下永續發展的實踐，應以「世代永續」為理念圖像，形構「世代永續法」的法治框架與機制。首要之道是修改憲法，新增永續原則及國家保護世代利益條款：「國家應遵守永續原則，並保護未來世代之利益」，以發揮整合人民之規範力度，引領臺灣朝向永續國家與正義共同體之路。英文摘要：This article aims at discussing legal issues surrounding equity and justice between present and future generations, from a legal and normative perspective that incorporates both international and local outlooks. Specifically, this article discusses the principle of intergenerational equity and sustainable development in the following six dimensions: dialectical analysis of the core concepts, normative contents and their implementation, imagery of rights, discourse of obligations, due process, and construction of relevant mechanisms. This article argues that the human society at present should be seen as accommodating different generations in partnership coexistence in which everyone should work for the continuation of human generations and wellbeing, and in this light, the conceptual orientation should shifted from ”development” toward ”sustainability”. Further, because the concept of sustainability contains an element of generational continuation of life, the concept of sustainable development, as a subject of legal studies, necessarily incorporates the perspective of ”Intergenerational Law”. From the perspective of democracy and the rule of law, sustainable development should have ”generational sustainability” as the imagery ideals in guiding the formulation of its legal frameworks and mechanisms under the ”law of generational sustainability”. One task that is of paramount importance is to amend the constitution by adding a clause on the principle of sustainability and the state’s obligation in ensuring intergenerational equity- such as providing that ”The State shall observe the principle of sustainability in protection of the interest of future generations”- , so as to make a clear normative statement reflecting the consensus of people in guiding Taiwan toward a sustainable state and a community of justice.起始頁-結束頁：209-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：跨世代議題的經濟與政策意涵並列篇名：THEORIES AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS IN THE ECONOMICS OF SUSTAINABILITY AND INTERGENERATIONAL EQUITY作者：蕭代基(Dai-Gee Shaw);顧林(Lin Ku)關鍵字：跨世代公平與正義;跨世代外部性;永續性;Intergenerational equity and justice;Intergenerational externality;Sustainability期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文回顧有關永續性與跨世代議題的重要經濟學文獻之經濟理論，及根據這些理論所引導的永續性政策，並兩兩比較各理論及其政策意涵。英文摘要：This paper reviews several important papers in concerning sustainability and intergenerational equity. Theories and policy implications of these papers are reviewed and compared.起始頁-結束頁：243-257資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：氣候變遷、世代正義與永續性：概念、指標與政策並列篇名：CLIMATE CHANGE, INTERGENERATIONAL JUSTICE, AND SUSTAINABILITY: CONCEPT, INDICATORS, AND POLICY作者：許耿銘(Keng-Ming Hsu);紀駿傑(Chun-Chieh Chi);蕭新煌(Michael Hsin-Huang Hsiao)關鍵字：世代正義;環境正義;氣候正義;永續性;社會韌性;Climate justice;Environmental justice;Intergenerational justice;Sustainability;Resilience期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：世代正義議題為當前全球備受關注的倫理與政策性課題，而隨著氣候變遷為各地人群帶來的既存與潛在危害，氣候變遷所帶來的世代正義關懷，也在國際政治經濟議程上扮演愈來愈重要的角色。本文首先釐清環境正義、氣候正義、世代正義、永續性以及社會韌性等重要概念。其次，本文從氣候變遷、世代正義以及永續性的相關理論與論述，來討論如何建構世代正義這一個高度抽象性的倫理關懷之指標及其範疇。在此指標與範疇的指引之下，本文提出關於因應氣候變遷臺灣社會應建立的政策方向，這些包括：1.制訂溫室氣體減量目標與方案；2.訂定合宜的減緩氣候變遷影響的調適政策與方案；3.修訂臺灣海島永續的整體政策方向。英文摘要：Intergenerational justice is an ethical and policy issue that has attracted much global concern. Intergenerational justice concern brought about by climate change is increasingly playing an important role in international political economic agenda, as climate change has much potential to cause severe destruction to many human communities and human groups. This paper first clarifies the following important concepts: environmental justice, climate justice, intergenerational justice, sustainability, and resilience. Secondly, it discusses about how to construct measurement index of a highly abstract concept- intergenerational justice, under the theoretical guidance of climate change, international justice, and sustainability. Finally, this paper presents policy recommendations in regard to Taiwanese society's adaptation to climate change. These include: 1. Formulate greenhouse gas reduction targets and programs; 2. Establish appropriate climate change impactmitigation policy and programs; 3. Modify overall Taiwan island sustainability policy direction.起始頁-結束頁：259-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所17篇名：壹、2016年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：287-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所18篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：291-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所19篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：317-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：專號序：食品安全的法理與論證作者：洪德欽期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷4期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：443-456資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201612_46(4).00012篇名：歐盟追蹤追溯系統在食品安全體系中的功能：從風險管理到消費者知情選擇並列篇名：Functions of the EU Traceability Regulations in the Food Safety System-From Risk Management to Informed Consumer Choice作者：陳鋕雄(Chih-hsiung Chen);胡慎芝(Shen-Jhih Hu)關鍵字：追蹤追溯;食品安全;風險管理;知情選擇;traceability;food safety;risk management;informed choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：追蹤追溯係指從上游的生產到下游的銷售，追及食品及成分在整個供應鏈上的流動與傳遞。由於1990年代狂牛症等食品安全事件，歐盟意識到以追蹤追溯系統高度保護人類生命健康的重要性，於是第178/2002號規則將追蹤追溯納入食品一般性義務範疇，強化行政機關就問題食品定位及回收的風險管理能力。消費者可在充足的食品資訊下根據經濟、環境、社會與道德等因素進行選擇，故消費者的知情選擇，為歐盟追蹤追溯系統於風險管理外的另一功能。另一方面，食品業者的商業利益、食品產業的不透明性以及世貿組織SPS協定的適法性，則為追蹤追溯系統面臨的挑戰。英文摘要：Traceability refers to the ability to trace, track and follow food or food ingredients through all stages of production and distribution. Following such devastating food safety crises as mad cow disease in the 1990s, the European Union realized the importance of a traceability system to maintaining high-levels of protection of human life and health. Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 thus requires that food manufacturers, distributors, and retailers participate in the traceability system, so that targeted and accurate withdrawals can be undertaken. Meanwhile, consumers can use food information to pursue other personal goals, including economic, environmental, social and ethical ones. Informed consumer choice therefore serves as a purpose besides risk management in the EU food traceability system. On the other hand, trade secrets, transparency issues along the food supply chain, and the legality of SPS measures under the WTO framework could pose great challenges to the performance of the system.起始頁-結束頁：457-499資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201612_46(4).00023篇名：消費資訊公開法制之建構：以德國消費資訊法為借鏡並列篇名：A Study on Regulatory Schemes Governing Consumption Information Disclosure -Based on German Consumer Information Act作者：李寧修(Ning-Hsiu Lee)關鍵字：消費資訊;資訊公開請求權;德國消費資訊法;政府資訊公開法;豁免公開;法益權衡;Consumption Information;Right of Access to Information;German Consumer Information Act;The Freedom of Government Information Law;Exemptions from Disclosure;Balance of Legal Interests期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：民以食為天，消費者除了透過食品標示、媒體報導、業者廣告等來源被動接收產品訊息外，是否有機會化被動為主動，向國家請求更多消費相關資訊的揭露？借鏡德國於2008年5月施行之健康相關消費資訊促進法(簡稱德國消費資訊法)，明定每個人向行政機關請求消費資訊公開之權利，強化消費者主動請求資訊公開之面向，其立法架構與實踐經驗，對於我國目前以政府資訊公開法為主之資訊公開法制，或可作為建構消費資訊公開法制領域時之參考，亦給予總是食之而後覺的消費者，一個為自身健康與安全把關的機會。英文摘要：People have always understand that food is their primary need, but today consumers can only passively receive information, mainly through labels, media reports, and advertisements. Can consumers, by demanding that governments require the disclosure of all relevant information, gradually shift from being passive to proactive in receiving information? Take for example Germany’s Law on Improvement of Health-related Consumer Information, hereinafter the German Consumer Information Act, which explicitly gives everyone the right to request that the government disclose consumption information, and streghthens the dimention, which consumers may actively request. Currently, Taiwan’s regulatory scheme on information disclosure is based on the Freedom of Government Information Law. The German legislative framework and practical experience might capture Taiwan’s attention and provoke discussion of consumer information disclosure regulation, and allow consumers a chance to better protect their health.起始頁-結束頁：501-561資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201612_46(4).00034篇名：食品供應鏈中惡意汙染行為之防治：以美國、歐盟與國際組織的實踐為例並列篇名：Preventing and Governing Deliberate Contamination in the Food Supply Chain -Case Studies of Practices in the US, the EU and International Organizations作者：譚偉恩(Wei-En Tan)關鍵字：食品安全;食品供應鏈;食品恐怖主義;惡意的食品汙染行為;威脅評估與關鍵管制點;Food Safety;Food Supply Chain;Food Terrorism;Deliberate Food Contamination;TACCP期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文對「食品供應鏈」進行研究與分析，說明何以在供應鏈後端的惡意汙染行為較難預防，卻受害者範圍較小。反之，在供應鏈前端的汙染行為並不容易得逞，惟一旦成功則往往造成較為嚴重之損害後果。研究結果顯示，預防食品受到惡意汙染行為的治理重點應聚焦在對「威脅」的控管；操作上，威脅評估與關鍵管制點是值得考慮之治理途徑。鑑於現行全球食品貿易自由化的趨勢與結構不可逆，食安風險必然不會消失，在容許風險的概念下，建立預防威脅擴大和限縮損害結果的治理機制，將是防治惡意汙染食品行為較為務實之辦法。英文摘要：This paper discusses current issues in the global food supply chain (FSC). More specifically, it focuses on why it is difficult to prevent deliberate, criminal contamination in downstream sections of the FSC, yet only limited harm is done to consumers. The paper also investigates why it is more feasible to hamper the food contamination in the upstream of FSC while the adverse effect could be serious given the effective criminal behavior. Observing the practices of food safety governance in the US, the EU and international organizations (the WHO in particular), the key point in preventing deliberate contamination should be the management of 'threats.' It is worth noting that threat assessment and critical control points (TACCP), as an approach to governing food safety, is certainly a considerable alternative. Thanks to the irreversible structures and trends associated with global food trade liberalization, current risks of food contamination from various sources will by no means fade away. Given this, efforts to establish an institution based on the concept of acceptable risk for preventing threats while managing the spillover effects of damages are a pragmatic means of defending against deliberate food-contamination.起始頁-結束頁：563-602資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201612_46(4).00045篇名：Indifference in Sense and Sensibility並列篇名：《理性與感性》中的漠然作者：吳易道(Yih-Dau Wu)關鍵字：漠然;《理性與感性》;不關心;未言之情;indifference;Sense and Sensibility;unconcern;reserve期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：英國小說家夏綠蒂．伯朗蒂曾批評珍．奧斯汀是一位冷漠的作家，此一評論引發後世奧斯汀學者的反彈與駁斥。冷漠被認為是和奧斯汀小說無關的議題，因為它和情感似是兩個極端。本文嘗試破除此一偏見。首先，作者細究奧斯汀在《理性與感性》中如何使用冷漠(indifference)一詞，並定義冷漠為不關心(unconcern)與未言之情(reserve)。從此角度來看，冷漠主導了小說中角色發展、劇情變化甚至句型結構。奧斯汀不認為冷漠與情感乃兩對立的概念，前者可能遮掩了後者的存在，後者也可以是前者存在的必要條件。伯朗蒂提出的漠然議題能讓我們重新思考《理性與感性》的意義與價值。英文摘要：Charlotte Bronte famously criticizes Jane Austen as a cold lady writer indifferent to passions and uninterested in feelings. Modern Austen scholars have successfully refuted Bronte's arguments and confirmed Austen's familiarity with the business of the heart. This critical debate gives rise to two misconceptions about indifference: that it is irrelevant to Austen's art, and that it is irreconcilable with feeling. This essay seeks to redress both misunderstandings. I first define indifference as unconcern and reserve, before analyzing the formative role they play in the characters, plot, and sentences of Sense and Sensibility. Next, I discuss the affective core of indifference. I show that, throughout the novel, Austen frequently collapses the otherwise rigid boundaries between powerful emotions and the appearance of indifference. Just as the latter can conceal TP the former, the former may be the precondition for the latter. Sense and Sensibility, I conclude, is not about sense or sensibility. It is centrally concerned with feeling indifferent and with feelings in indifference. Bronte's criticism is certainly unjust, but the issue of emotional inadequacy raised therein can cast new light on Austen's first-published novel.起始頁-結束頁：305-336資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201609_46(3).00016篇名：宗教領域中的探究與詹姆士的〈信念意志〉並列篇名：Inquiry in the Domain of Religion and William James's ”The Will to Believe”作者：鄭喜(Hsi-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：詹姆士;巴斯卡;知識論;宗教;權利;William James;Blaise Pascal;epistemology;religion;right期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：〈信念意志〉的論述主要關涉宗教信念的知識論。許多學者認定詹姆士提出了這個有嚴重爭議的「相信權的使用判準」：「即使在缺乏智性理據的情況下，只要滿足特定條件，個人就有權利正當地使用意志與情感來決斷一個信念抉擇而獲致信念」，並且將這個判準應用到宗教信念抉擇上。但是本文指出，從其論述主旨與架構來看，〈信念意志〉旨在為個人的探究權辯護：「視某宗教信念抉擇為『真實抉擇』的個人有權利選擇遵循『獲得真理』之知識論要求，並選擇他認為可能可行的探究路徑來進行探究，且有權利相信自己經過探究後所得到的定見」。英文摘要：William James's ”The Will to Believe” is primarily concerned with the epistemology of religious belief. According to many scholars, James proposed this highly controversial criterion of believing: one has the right to decide upon a belief option via one's willing or passional nature, despite the lack of supportive intellectual grounds, so long as certain conditions are satisfied; he then argued that this criterion is applicable to religious belief options. This paper, however, reveals that ”The Will to Believe” aims to defend one's epistemic right to inquire, and claims that those who take a religious belief option as what James calls ”a genuine option,” have the right to follow the epistemological command that we must know the truth, to choose the path of inquiry they deem likely to work in their relevant inquiries, and to believe the opinion reached through such inquiry.起始頁-結束頁：337-372資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201609_46(3).00027篇名：揮別俾斯麥模式社會保險制度？從德國聯邦憲法法院幾則判決評析德國近二十年健保制度改革方向並列篇名：Far from Bismarckian Social Insurance? -An Observation of Twenty Years of German Healthcare Reforms with a Review of the Relevant Decisions of the German Federal Constitutional Court作者：孫迺翊(Nai-Yi Sun)關鍵字：德國法定健康保險;健保改革;競爭;附加保費;共同自治;German statutory health care insurance;health care reform;competition;supplementary premium;joint selfgovernment期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：德國法定健康保險制度近二十年來歷經多次重大改革，現行制度已不同於以往以保障受薪階級為主、採多元複數之社會自治組織形式、強調階級認同與社會互助等圖像，取而代之者為全民強制保險配合商業保險社會法化、導入保險人間競爭機制、聯邦層級組織單一化、一般保費費率單一化搭配附加保費由各保險人再自主決定等制度特徵。本文就此詳加介紹，並探討上述改革措施引發的憲法疑義，包括商業保險締約自由之限制、競爭機制是否弱化社會互助及醫療服務指令民主正當性不足等問題。最後，再就德國與臺灣健保制度所面臨的憲法爭議進行簡要分析。英文摘要：German statutory health care insurance (Die gesetzliche Krankenversicherung) has undergone important changes over the last twenty years. Today its framework is fairly different from the traditional Bismarckian model, which is characterized by identity and solidarity among employees and management manifested in plural self-governmental bodies. The current health care system is constructed by the following means: legal instruments, including the obligation for all citizens to be insured by public or private insurers, with free choice of public insurers-the sickness funds (Krankenkasse) for insured persons which leads to more competition among sickness funds; centralization of the plural federal self-governmental and joint self-governmental bodies; introduction of a uniform contribution rate for all sickness funds connected with supplementary premiums for individual one. This article will provide an overview of paradigmatic changes of the German health care reform over the last twenty years, and of the relevant legal issues, including the constitutionality of compulsory insurance accompanied by legal modifications of private health care insurance contracts, the consistency of competition mechanisms in the social insurance scheme with the constitutional principle of social welfare state, and the democratic legitimacy deficit of the medicinal directives issued by the Federal Joint Committee (gemeinsamer Bundesausschuss). Finally this article will conduct a comparative analysis of the constitutional debates over Taiwan's National Health Insurance and its 2011 reforms in light of the different legal frameworks and the social, economic and political challenges of each system.起始頁-結束頁：373-442資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201609_46(3).00038篇名：In Praise of the Innsmouth Look-Nautical Terror and the Specter of Atlantic History in H. P. Lovecraft’s Fiction並列篇名：歌頌印斯茅斯之貌：洛夫克拉夫特小說的航海驚駭與大西洋史幽靈作者：藍培(Lampe Evan)關鍵字：洛夫克拉夫特;大西洋史;《印斯茅斯疑雲》;水手;H. P. Lovecraft;Atlantic history;”The Shadow Over Innsmouth,” sailors期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：在洛夫克拉夫特的小說中，「印斯茅斯之貌」不僅結合了數個重要的主題：種族退化、對海洋生物的恐懼與落後地區的怪奇，同時也揭露了作者與大西洋史的關聯。本文將根據洛夫克拉夫特短篇小說《印斯茅斯疑雲》中人物的獨特生理轉變，以及他對海洋驚悚的廣泛討論來定義「印斯茅斯之貌」。在他的故事中，水手總以惡人的姿態出現，因為他們常參與古老的克蘇魯邪教活動。然而這些水手亦與大西洋史中悠久的文化抗爭傳統有關。洛夫克拉夫特也用「印斯茅斯之貌」來形容那些被排除在經濟發展之外的勞工與社區。這種排除暴力，甚至更直接的奴隸制度與解剖科學暴力，常成為勞工階級對大西洋精英不滿的根源，而洛夫克拉夫特正是這群精英的一員。更明顯的，從洛夫克拉夫特身上反映出二十世紀初期種族與文化融合論述。他雖然是種族主義者，卻不得不承認在大西洋史發展的事實下，種族純淨在美洲大陸已然變成一種神話。本文認為，在自由與暴力的張力下透過大西洋史的鏡頭來檢視「印斯茅斯之貌」時，它可被視為勞工階級抗爭的一種表徵。英文摘要：The ”Innsmouth Look” combines several important themes explored by H. P. Lovecraft in his fiction: racial degeneration, fear of unknown creatures from the sea, and backwater oddity. It also reveals Lovecraft’s people and communities excluded from economic progress. The violence of exclusion, as well as the more direct violence of slavery and the anatomical sciences, are in many ways the root causes of working class resentment against the Atlantic elite, with which Lovecraft affiliated himself. Most obviously, Lovecraft was feeding into early twentieth century discourses on race and cultural mixing. Although racist, Lovecraft faced directly the truth that Atlantic history made racial purity in the Americas a myth. A final reading of the ”Innsmouth Look” is the general fear of evils from the sea. Taken together, this article argues that the ”Innsmouth Look” is best examined in terms of the tension between freedom and violence, and therefore read through the lens of Atlantic history as an expression of working class resistance. relationship to several aspects of Atlantic history. This article will define the ”Innsmouth Look” in terms of both the specific physiological changes described in ”The Shadow Over Innsmouth” and Lovecraft’s broader exploration of the terror of the sea. Maritime workers appear in his stories as villains largely due to their participation in the heterodox cults associated with the ancient gods of the so-called ”Cthulhu Mythos.” These workers, however, are also invoking a long tradition of cultural resistance in Atlantic history. The ”Innsmouth Look” is also seen in Lovecraft’s description of working class resistance.起始頁-結束頁：165-210資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201606_46(2).00019篇名：康德論德行義務：兼論麥金泰爾對康德倫理學的批評並列篇名：Kant on the ”Duties of Virtue”-A Response to Alasdair MacIntyre’s Critique of Kant’s Ethics作者：李明輝(Ming-huei Lee)關鍵字：康德;麥金泰爾;德行義務;德行倫理學;Immanuel Kant;Alasdair MacIntyre;Duties of Virtue;Virtue Ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：英國哲學家麥金泰爾在其名著《德行之後》從德行倫理學的立場對康德倫理學提出四項批評，分別針對其「規則倫理學」、「嚴格主義」、「形式主義」，以及其「對於人類理性的貧乏概念」。英國學者歐尼爾、貝朗與阿塔納蘇里斯均指出︰麥金泰爾的批評係建立在對康德倫理學著作的片面理解之上，因為他忽略了康德晚期的《德行論之形上學根基》一書，特別是其中的「德行義務」之概念。本文闡述康德的「德行義務」之概念，藉以回應麥金泰爾對其倫理學的批判，並將康德倫理學與德行倫理學的差異相對化。英文摘要：In his masterpiece, After Virtue, Alasdair MacIntyre criticizes Kant’s ethics from a virtue ethical perspective, making reference to the ”ethic of rules,” ”rigorism,” ”formalism,” as well as his ”inadequate conception of human reason.” However, Onora O’Neill, Marcia W. Baron, and Nafsika Athanassoulis point out that Mac- Intyre’s critique of Kant’s ethics is based on a partial understanding of Kant’s ethical works and suffers from his neglect of Kant’s later work Metaphysical First Principles of the Doctrine of Virtue (1797), which misshapes his conception of the ”duties of virtue.” This paper analyzes Kant’s conception of the ”duties of virtue” with a view to responding to MacIntyre’s critique of Kant’s ethics, and thus softening the differences between Kant’s ethics and virtue ethics.起始頁-結束頁：211-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201606_46(2).000210篇名：歐盟化學品註冊、評估、授權暨限制規則之探討與借鏡：兼論我國毒性化學物質管理法最新發展並列篇名：A Review and Discussion of EU Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 Concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH)-and the Latest Developments of the Taiwan Toxic Chemical Substances Control Law作者：劉如慧(Ru-Huei Liu)關鍵字：歐盟REACH規則;化學物質;毒性化學物質管理法;毒化物釋放量資訊公開;EU REACH-Regulation;chemical substances;Toxic Chemical Substances Control Act;information disclosure concerning the release of toxic chemicals期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：歐盟於2006年12月公布化學品註冊、評估、授權暨限制規則，建立一個化學品管理的整合體系。該規則以源頭註冊登錄為基礎，要求製造商及進口商自行提供各該化學物質之安全性及風險評估資訊，以逐步建立化學物質資訊系統，並促進危險化學物質之替代，俾達成永續發展的目標。我國在民間環保團體不斷呼籲下，終於在2013年12月修改毒性化學物質管理法，引進REACH制度，並加入毒化物釋放量資訊公開規定，日前更發布新化學物質及既有化學物質資料登錄辦法。本文旨在探討歐盟REACH制度內涵，進而檢討我國新建立的REACH制度之利弊得失。英文摘要：The EU announced Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) and thereby established an integrated system for chemicals in December 2006. This regulation requires manufacturers and importers to assess the risks posed by chemical substances they manufacture or import, and to take the steps necessary to manage known risks. They are obligated to prove the safety of chemical substances. In other words, the EU REACH system is based on registration at the source, requires manufacturers and importers to provide all the safety and risk assessment information on chemical substances, and in this way builds gradually an information system of existing and new chemical substances, promotes substitutions for hazardous chemicals, and serves to achieve the goal of sustainable development. This system has already been adopted by many countries and become a new, international trend in chemicals management. Under pressure from the ongoing appeals from environmental groups, in December 2013, Taiwan modified finally the ”Toxic Chemical Substances Control Act,” introducing not only the REACH system, but also information disclosure concerning the release of toxic chemicals. Recently, the EPA further issued the ”Regulation of New and Existing Chemical Substances Registration.” This study aims to explore the contents of the EU REACH system, and then review the advantages and disadvantages of the newly established REACH System in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：243-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201606_46(2).000311篇名：Petrarch and Chaucer on Fame並列篇名：論名聲：佩特拉克與喬叟作者：宋維科(Wei-ko Sung)關鍵字：喬叟;名聲;佩特拉克;Chaucer;fame;Petrarch期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文大致分成三部分：第一部分主要檢視喬叟之前一些代表性作家如何看待因為文學創作而獲致的名聲。第二部分則爬梳佩特拉克不同的作品探討他對追求不朽名聲的看法。身為人文主義早期的鼓吹者之一，佩特拉克在不同作品中明確表達想要以文學成就獲致不朽名聲的渴望。第三部分主要探究喬叟《聲譽之宮》中對名聲的看法。類似於佩特拉克，喬叟對世俗名聲的短暫、不確定甚至荒謬有深刻的體認及生動的描繪。但即使如此，本文將指出雖然喬叟並未像佩特拉克一樣明確表達以文學創作達到不朽的渴望，然而他對於追求文學史上一席之地的期待仍在字裡行間流露出來。英文摘要：The aim of this paper is to make productive connections between Petrarch and Chaucer by exploring their conceptions of fame, particularly literary fame. The first part is a broad overview of the idea of literary fame before Chaucer’s time, focusing in particular on such writers as Homer, Hesiod, Virgil, Statius, and Dante to sketch out their different perspectives on literary immortality. The next part examines various works by Petrarch that are reflective of his attitude toward fame. As the Church held sway in his time, Petrarch was acutely aware of the emptiness of worldly fame and carried out a profound dissection of its vanity, yet he could not entirely suppress his longing for literary fame and avowed this yearning throughout his works. Chaucer’s case is trickier, mainly owing to his characteristic noncommittal attitude. Through an analysis of the House of Fame, the third part of the paper advances the argument that though Chaucer, like Petrarch, was intimately familiar with the fickleness and absurdity of worldly fame, he betrays a longing for a posthumous literary fame.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201603_46(1).000112篇名：Human Rights Protection, Democratic Deliberation, and Prevention of Violence against Women並列篇名：人權保障、民主審議與婦女暴力之防止作者：安兆驥(Steve On)關鍵字：作為人權的婦女權利;保障;審議;防止;政策;women’s rights as human rights;protection;deliberation;prevention;police期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：以強制法律來落實人權基本上涉及此一對策：透過敏銳回應在地脈絡與習俗的方式，來提供受到國際承認之人權原則所具體蘊含的保障。此一對策已然建構出主要的人權理論途徑，包括那些論及婦女暴力現象的理論途徑在內。在本文中，我試著表明：正因為採取此一對策之故，這些理論途徑大致上是無效的。尤有進者，縱使結合民主審議，如某一真實生活案例所顯示的，最後獲得落實的保障，竟是維護一夫多妻制這種固守婦女依存地位的習俗婚姻形式；在實踐上，如此的保障，因此是相當有限的。誠然我並不全盤拒絕主流途徑，但仍嘗試提出一個挽救對策，其要點是，根據作為人權的婦女權利，來重新思索婦女保障之落實所明確涉及的議論。我將揭露「執行」層面所受到的忽視。順此而進，我將把關注焦點導向一個不同的、卻時常受到漠視的婦女暴力研究策略：政策途徑。藉著逼近問題的底層，我嘗試表明，這一取代性途徑有助於達成主流途徑遠遠無法企及的目標。正如法律之先發制人與威嚇作用的最佳實踐效果，以及對此現象的預測分析所顯露的，我的提議是：前述的政策途徑存有最大潛能來對婦女暴力防止的現況，做出真正的改變。英文摘要：Implementations of human rights into enforceable laws generally involve this move: provide the protections embodied by internationally recognized human rights principles in a way that shows sensitivities to local contexts and customs. This move has come to structure major human rights approaches, including those addressing the phenomenon of violence against women. In this article, I argue that these approaches are largely ineffective because of this move. Moreover, in spite of combining with democratic deliberation, in a real-life case, what ends up being implemented is the kind of protection that preserves polygyny, which is a form of customary marriage that maintains the dependency of women. In practice, then, such protection is severely limited. While not rejecting the major approaches altogether, I attempt a rescue move by reconsidering what specifically is involved in the implementations of protections for women in terms of women’s rights as human rights. I uncover that the enforcement component has been overlooked. Furthering this finding, I draw attention to a different and neglected strategy for addressing violence against women: the policing approach. By being closer to the ground, I argue, this alternative approach can help to achieve what the major approaches have thus far fallen short. As emergent from the best legal practices of preemption, deterrence, and predictive analysis of this phenomenon, I suggest that this approach has the greatest potential to make a genuine difference in the prevention of violence against women.起始頁-結束頁：45-96資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201603_46(1).000213篇名：歐盟對於國際海洋法秩序之影響及其實踐並列篇名：The Influence and Implementation of the European Union on the International Law of the Sea作者：陳貞如(Chen-Ju Chen)關鍵字：整合性海洋政策;共同漁業政策;國際海洋法法庭;國際海床管理局;大陸礁層界限委員會;Integrated Maritime Policy;Common Fisheries Policy;International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea;International Seabed Authority;Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：46卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：歐盟藉由參與第三次聯合國海洋法會議，作為聯合國海洋法公約之締約國，透過聯合國相關專門組織與公約建立之機制，促進國際海洋法逐漸發展。此外，聯合國海洋法公約引領歐盟海洋法政之制定，是相關發展之基礎，使此一區域性實踐有顯著發展。儘管歐盟之海洋事務權限尚難以釐清，在個別海洋法領域中包含港口國管制、漁業資源管理、對外漁業合作、海洋環境保護、海事安全機制與爭端解決等領域，均可見歐盟之努力，發展出區域性海洋治理之模式。尤其透過歐盟爭端解決機制，可使會員國更加遵守聯合國海洋法公約，對於其實踐有正面影響。英文摘要：From a geographic, economic and social sense, the European Union (EU) is deeply impacted by seas and oceans. At the third United Nations (UN) Conference on the Law of the Sea, the concerns and positions presented by EU Member States were altogether heterogeneous. Such heterogeneity was due to their different maritime interests. Given the importance of the European Community (EC), it was granted observer status by the UN at the aforementioned conference, as well as signing and formally confirming the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS Convention) in 1984 and 1998, respectively. Through its participation in maritime-related UN special agencies and institutions founded under the framework of the LOS Convention, the EU has exerted greater influence on the progressive development of the international Law of the Sea. Within the EU legal regime, the LOS Convention serves as the legal basis for developing EU maritime and fisheries policies and regulations. This gives the EU a significant role in the development of regional maritime policy. While there are ambiguities regarding the competence between the EU and its Members States, the EU has made efforts in various maritime fields, such as Port State Control, fisheries management, participation of regional fisheries management organizations, marine environmental protection, maritime safety and security along with dispute settlement. Above all, given that the EU dispute settlement mechanism has binding force, it can improve its Member States’ compliance with the LOS Convention and increase the effectiveness of this set of rules.起始頁-結束頁：97-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201603_46(1).000301篇名：選項設計之調查方法差異：以生活品質測量為例並列篇名：Mode Effects on Response Design: An Example of Qualify-of-Life Measures作者：廖培珊(Pei-Shan Liao)關鍵字：方法效應;中間選項;標示語;生活品質;mode effect;mid-point response;response labels;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：36期出版年：2016中文摘要：過去研究指出數量多的選項設計在面對面訪談中較為可行，然而對於選項標示語或不平衡式量尺設計則尚無深入討論。本研究以態度量表之選項設計為主體，來分析電話訪問與面對面訪談中，不同的選項設計之結果是否有差異。資料來源包含以態度量表進行隨機分派實驗設計之2010年及2011年電訪資料，以及2010年社會變遷基本調查之面訪資料。在樣本結構部分，面訪與電訪的次樣本進行內部比較時均無差異；然而比較相同選項設計的面訪與電訪資料時，則發現個人月收入及工作狀況有明顯差別。以IRT之等級反應模型的分析發現，不同設計在面訪的表現均較電訪要佳；若整體考量題目與選項設計結合後的表現時，則以四點平衡量尺的鑑別力最佳。此外，標示語的設計效果會因資料蒐集方法的不同而有所差異，強語氣的標示語使面訪受訪者往非極端選項靠攏的情形比電訪更為明顯。進一步以人口變項對「個人生活品質」之IRT分數進行迴歸分析時，亦可看出方法效應。英文摘要：Questionnaire design often differs among various survey modes in order to obtain better data quality. Previous studies have indicated that a higher number of response categories may perform better in face-to-face surveys than in telephone surveys. Few have examined the influence of response labels and unbalanced scale design on survey answers. This study aims to compare the responses between face-to-face and telephone surveys with respect to response design of attitudinal scales. Data used for this study are drawn from the 2010 Taiwan Social Change Survey and telephone surveys collected in 2010 and 2011 using a randomized experimental design to collect data from representative samples aged 18 years or older. By measuring the construct of individual quality of life (QoL), four types of response scales with different combinations of response number and response labels were examined to distinguish both the intensity and direction of responses. Individual characteristics between the two modes indicated that the sub-samples were different in terms of monthly income and working status. Results of the graded response model suggested that the response design used in this study performed better in face-to- face surveys than in telephone surveys. Also, a balanced scale with four response categories and less intense labels had the best discriminating ability among the four designs. When compared to respondents to telephone surveys, respondents to face-to-face surveys were less likely to provide strongly-labeled answers, which can be seen a tendency of social desirability due to more interpersonal interactions. Findings of linear regression on the IRT scores of QoL, however, were in favor of telephone surveys, with higher values of chi-square. An intertwining effect of response design and data collection mode was also found. A discussion of the results is provided.起始頁-結束頁：7-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：基層農會的技術效率與總幹事特質之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Technical Efficiency of Farmers' Associations and Their Director-generals' Personality Traits作者：盧永祥(Yung-Hsiang Lu);李佳珍(Jia-Jan Lee)關鍵字：基層農會;總幹事;共同邊界模型;產出距離函數;Farmers' Association;directors-general's;metafrontier model;output distance function期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：36期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣的基層農會以信用、供銷、經濟及推廣為四大農會事業部門為主，加上農會事業部門具多產出特色及資本共享之情況，以至於不易進行農會事業部門及整體農會的效率評估；因此，本文針對農會事業部門主管及總幹事進行問卷調查，蒐集產出權重及資本使用比率等初級資料，並透過保證區域資料包絡法加總進行多產出變數之結合，再應用共同邊界模型評估農會事業部門及整體農會的技術效率；最後，再探討總幹事特質與整體農會技術效率之關聯。實證結果發現：都市型農會除了在信用部門有較佳的效率及生產技術表現外，其餘三大農會事業部門則以鄉村型農會及混合型農會表現較佳；就整體農會的效率結果中，混合型農會則有較佳的效率表現，其次依序為鄉村型農會及都市型農會；最後由迴歸結果可知，總幹事的人格特質會影響其效率的表現，而農會的獲獎次數多及考核成績高，與總幹事的服務年資短及工作年資越豐富，均明顯有助於提升整體農會的技術效率或生產技術。英文摘要：This paper constructed a model to evaluate the hierarchy efficiency in the four main subordinate departments of the Farmers' Associations (FA's). Results were obtained through a questionnaire survey, which was completed by upper-level management and the directors-general of the FA's. Through these means, primary materials were gathered regarding the output weights in all areas of operating performance, the repartition of capital, and the sources of non-performing loans. Analysis on the hierarchy efficiency of the 172 FA's and their four subordinate departments was conducted for data from 2010 through 2011. The output indicator was obtained through the AR-DEA model and expanded into the Metafrontier model. Correlations between the operating efficiency of the FA's and the personality traits of their directors-general, numbers of awards, evaluations, years of service and other experience were analyzed. The empirical results show that the credit departments of the urban FA's generally demonstrate better efficiency and production performance, whereas the three other departments demonstrate better performance in rural FA's and mixed FA's. In respect to FA's on the whole, mixed FA's show superior efficiency, followed by the rural FA's and urban FA's. Regression results indicate that a director-general's personality traits exert influence on efficiency, whilst the number of awards, evaluations, and years of service also display a close relationship with operating efficiency and production performance of such associations.起始頁-結束頁：43-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：2011年台灣人民法律紛爭面訪：設計及基本統計並列篇名：The Research Design and Methodology of the 2011 Civil Justice Survey in Taiwan作者：林常青(Chang-Ching Lin);陳恭平(Kong-Pin Chen);黃國昌(Kuo-Chang Huang);游雅婷(Ya-Ting Yu)關鍵字：可能會產生糾紛的問題;法意識;尋求諮詢;紛爭處理;調解;justiciable problems;legal consciousness;advice-seeking;dispute resolution;mediation期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：36期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文主要介紹中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心的制度與行為研究專題中心在2011年所執行的「台灣人民法律紛爭解決行為模式的實證研究調查」計畫的設計方法及基本結果。該計畫是台灣首次對人民就「可能會產生糾紛的問題」的態度及處理方式所進行的大規模面訪。雖然面訪設計和先前各國面訪類似，涵蓋了整個受訪者在紛爭處理過程及其結果的經驗，但也包含之前所忽略的一種重要面向，即受訪者的法意識。這讓我們可以研究人民的法意識如何影響紛爭處理的行為，以及紛爭經驗是否影響法意識。最後，我們探索遭遇問題者會踏出紛爭解決的第一步—尋求諮詢及協助—的主要影響因素。英文摘要：This paper summarizes the design and results of the 2011 Taiwan Civil Justice Survey, conducted by the Center for Institution and Behavior Studies of the Research Center for Humanities and Social Sciences, Academia Sinica. The survey was the first ever large-scale survey in Taiwan to investigate Taiwanese citizens' reaction towards ”justiciable problems”, how the reaction affected their actions taken, and finally, what the consequences of these actions are. Although the basic design of the questionnaire was similar to past surveys in other countries, which gathered information on the whole process and the results of disputes, the survey also investigated one aspect that had often been ignored in the past, namely, the legal consciousness of the respondents. Incorporating legal consciousness into the questionnaire enables us to investigate how people's legal consciousness affects their attitudes and actions toward disputes and, conversely, how the people's experience in disputes affects their attitudes toward the legal system.起始頁-結束頁：87-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：媒體行銷對觀光滿意度之關聯性研究－以來臺旅客為例並列篇名：A Study of the Relationship between Media Marketing and Tourism Satisfaction: Using Inbound Visitors to Taiwan as a Case Study作者：陳宇芃(Yu-Peng Chen);陳志鈞(Chih-Chun Chen);許淳雅(Chun-Ya Hsu);林豐政(Feng-Jeng Lin)關鍵字：來臺旅客;媒體行銷;觀光吸引力;觀光滿意度;foreign tourists;media marketing;tourism attraction;tourism satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：36期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文提出「媒體行銷」與「觀光吸引力」對「觀光滿意度」關係模式，並分析「旅客特性」與「旅遊特性」對模式的調節效果。其次，亦探究「觀光吸引力」與「觀光滿意度」不同分量下的變數影響性。研究顯示：關係模式具良好適配度與解釋力。「媒體行銷」有助於提高旅客「觀光吸引力」，且於旅客的觀光吸引力程度不同時，影響性皆極重要。「觀光吸引力」雖能增加旅客「觀光滿意度」，但對滿意度較高的旅客，影響性反呈有限；是否因營造過多人為吸引力，而有失景點原始自然風貌，值得省思。「媒體行銷」亦能有效提升「觀光滿意度」，然對滿意度較高的旅客，效果並不顯見；建議於台灣觀光動態宣傳廣告的呈現與描述上需多加考量與規劃，並多提供實用的旅遊資訊，以提升媒體行銷。英文摘要：In this paper, a causal model linking three factors (media marketing, tourism attraction and tourism satisfaction) was proposed and validated. Through an in-depth multi-group analysis, the study also investigated whether groups with different tourist characteristics and travel characteristics would have moderating effects on this causal model. Furthermore, quantile regression models were hired to explore the effects and influences of explanatory variables on different quantiles of tourism attraction and tourism satisfaction. The final results show that: (1) The causal model has goodness of fit and explanatory abilities. (2) Media marketing significantly affected tourism attraction for inbound visitors to Taiwan. Moreover, media marketing had a powerful effect on each quantile of tourism attraction. (3) Although tourism attraction significantly affected the tourism satisfaction for inbound visitors to Taiwan, the influential effect declined for visitors with higher satisfaction. Due to this failure to meet the interests of visitors with higher satisfaction, the issue of whether creating more artificial attractions could result in disguising their original natural outlook should be considered. (4) Media marketing could also effectively and positively promote tourism satisfaction; yet, the effect would not appear for visitors with higher satisfaction. The paper concludes by suggesting a promotion of media marketing that considers improving the dynamic advertisements on Taiwan and providing more practical tourism information to visitors.起始頁-結束頁：125-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：臺灣民眾社經地位對環境行為的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Socio-economic Status on Environmental Behavior in Taiwan作者：陳郁安(Yu-An Chen);謝雨生(Yeu-Sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：環境行為;社經地位;經濟地位;社會地位;閾限現象;environmental behavior;socioeconomic status;economic status;social status;threshold effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：35期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究目的有三：<U+2474>解析民眾的環境行為類型；<U+2475>探討民眾的社經地位與其環境行為間的關連，並釐清經濟地位和社會地位分別與環境行為的關係；<U+2476>了解民眾的社經地位對其環境行為影響是否有閾限現象。本研究使用中央研究院社會學研究所於2010 年執行之「台灣社會變遷基本調查計畫」第六期第一次環境組的資料為分析基礎，採用潛在類別模式、多類別邏輯迴歸模式和分段迴歸模式進行分析。主要的研究發現為：41.5% 的臺灣民眾屬於「規範性環境行為型」，44.3%的民眾屬於「個人性環境行為型」，14.3% 的民眾則屬於「全面性環境行為型」。臺灣民眾的社經地位與其環境行為有關，高社經地位者較傾向「個人性環境行為型」和「全面性環境行為型」。社會地位對環境行為的影響力大於經濟地位。經濟地位對環境行為的影響存在閾限現象，經濟地位低於閾限值者，其環境行為較偏向「個人性環境行為型」，而經濟地位高於閾限值者則較偏向「規範性環境行為型」。英文摘要：This article explores the environmental behavior patterns of Taiwanese and their characteristics. It also examines the association between SES and environmental behavior, and compares the differences in the effects between economic status and social status. It finally investigates whether there is a threshold effect of economic status or social status on environmental behavior. The analyzed data are from the Taiwan Social Change Survey in 2010 by the Institute of Sociology of Academia Sinica, Taiwan. Latent class models are utilized to identify latent types of environmental behavior, and multinomial logit regression and spline regression are applied to examine the effects of socioeconomic status on types of environmental behavior. Results suggest that individuals are divided into three types: regulated or normative environmental behavior (41.5%), individual environmental behavior (44.3%) and comprehensive environmental behavior (14.3%). Although overall SES has a significant effect on environmental behavior, only social status shows a significant effect on environmental behavior. Finally, the authors find support for the significant threshold effect of economic status on environmental behavior in which people with low economic status are more likely to engage in individual-type environmental behavior whereas people with high economic status are unexpectedly more likely to practice regulated or normative-type environmental behavior.起始頁-結束頁：7-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：步入成人初期之臺灣年輕人性傾向之研究並列篇名：Sexual Orientation of Youth at Early Adulthood Stage in Taiwan: Research Results from Taiwan Youth Research Project作者：楊文山(Wen-Shan Yang);李怡芳(Yi-Fang Lee)關鍵字：同性戀;雙性戀;量化研究;臺灣青少年成長歷程研究;homosexuality;bisexuals;quantitative studies;Taiwan Youth Project期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：35期出版年：2016中文摘要：臺灣既有同性戀量化研究相當稀少，以致於在討論同性戀人權或同性婚姻相關議題時，缺乏足夠的研究報告與數據供政府或民眾參考。中央研究院社會學研究所「臺灣青少年成長歷程研究」，於2011年進行青少年邁入成人初期的性傾向調查，是研究多元性傾向議題的珍貴素材，唯截至目前為止鮮少有相關命題使用此一資料進行研究。本文研究目的旨在利用該資料，精確且全面地從慾望、行為與認同三個面向，測量與估計臺灣北部成人初期的同性戀者與非異性戀者的百分比。分析結果顯示，臺灣北部24 至29 歲年輕人中，約有2.85％的男同性戀者與5.21％的女同性戀者，且不論就慾望、行為或認同面向觀察，女性同性戀傾向的人口百分比皆較男性多，與西方研究結果相似。此外，約有8.86％的男非異性戀者與27.65％的女非異性戀者，女非異性戀者百分比多達四分之一強；但其中有將近8％的女性是僅擁有同╱雙性慾望，有同╱雙性交往或同╱雙性行為的情況較少，顯示臺灣年輕女性性傾向的多元面貌。英文摘要：In Taiwan there are a limited number of quantitative studies of homosexuality and homosexual practices in the research literature. The scarcity of such research has led to confusion in the public discourse on homosexuality and civil right issues regarding same-sex marriage legislation in recent years. In 2011, the Taiwan Youth Project conducted by the Institute of Sociology at Academia Sinica deployed a self-administered questionnaire to examine sexual inclination and practices from a cohort of 24- to 29-year-old adults in northern Taiwan. The purpose of this study is to utilize the 2011 Taiwan Youth Project data to estimate the proportion of homosexuals and non-heterosexuals among the respondents, based on three dimensions of sexual orientation, namely desire, behavior, and identity. The research findings show that there are approximately 2.85 percent male homosexuals and 5.21 percent female homosexuals among the population of 24- to 29-year-old adults in northern Taiwan. Our results resonate with existing studies showing that females in early adulthood have a stronger inclination toward homosexuality in terms of these three dimensions of sexuality. In addition, there are approximately 8.86 percent male non-heterosexuals and 27.65 percent female non-heterosexuals among the population of 24- to 29-year-old adults in northern Taiwan. However, although 8 percent of female respon- dents expressed bisexual desire, only a few are involved in actual bisexual relationships or behavior. Our results underscored the diversity of females’ sexual orientation in northern Taiwan, similar to findings of many other studies in Western societies.起始頁-結束頁：47-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：台灣2012年總統選舉隨機作答模式調查探討並列篇名：Application of the Randomized Response Technique in the 2012 Presidential Election of Taiwan作者：謝淑惠(Shu-Hui Hsieh);杜素豪(Su-Hao Tu);李燊銘(Shen-Ming Lee);王千文(Chain-Wen Wang)關鍵字：隨機作答;多元類別隨機作答;敏感性問題;總統選舉;Randomized response technique;Randomized Response Technique in Multiple Categories;sensitive question;presidential election期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：35期出版年：2016中文摘要：在問卷調查中若有涉及個人隱私或非法行為的敏感性問題時，問卷的設計以直接詢問（Direct Inquiry）經常會造成拒答，或即使願意回答也難以確保內容的真實性。因此，為了減少受訪者拒絕回答、逃避回答、或不實回答等現象，可利用隨機作答方式（RandomizedResponse Technique，簡稱 RRT）蒐集正確的問卷資料，降低統計推論的誤差。RRT 可以讓受訪者在不洩露自己的身分且不知道問題的真正意圖情況下，誠實地回答敏感性問題，但目前國內學界鮮少於實地調查中使用RRT 來蒐集敏感性問題，僅有楊文山（1994）於大型面訪調查中應用不相關問題模型的隨機作答方式，估算台灣地區選舉的賄選比例。本文利用Hsieh et al.（2013）在2012 年至2013 年參與的「台灣社會變遷基本調查計畫」中所提出的多元類別隨機作答（RandomizedResponse Technique in Multi-Category），蒐集2012 年總統大選投票行為的資料，估計各候選人的得票率，並與直接詢問法及中央選舉委員會公布的總統候選人之得票率進行有效性比較。英文摘要：Direct inquiry in social surveys of sensitive questions such as personal privacy or illegal behaviors often encounters refusal or untrue response. In order to collect reliable sensitive data, reduce the unwillingness of respondents, and reduce bias in estimation, Randomized Response Technique (RRT) is one of the important methods. RRT has been commonly used to avoid biased answers in surveys on sensitive issues by ensuring respondents’ privacy, but are rarely adopted in faceto- face interview surveys in Taiwan, except for Yang (1994) in his study estimating election bribery by using the unrelated question RRT of Greenberg et al. (1969). We use Randomized Response Technique in Multiple Categories (RRTMC) developed by Hsieh et al. (2013) in the Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS) conducted in 2012 and 2013 to collect two waves of 2012 presidential election data to validate RRTMC based by comparing the estimates with the responses to direct inquiry collected in the same survey and official voting records.起始頁-結束頁：81-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：督導在面訪調查中的角色與影響：以2013年台灣選舉與民主化調查為例並列篇名：The Roles of Field Supervisors in Face-to-Face Interviews and Their Impacts on Survey Quality of Taiwan’s Election and Democratization Study, 2013作者：蔡秀惠(Hsiu-Hui Tsai);陳光輝(Kuang-Hui Chen)關鍵字：面訪;督導;台灣選舉與民主化調查;face-to-face interview;field supervisor;TEDS期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：35期出版年：2016中文摘要：調查研究工作者嘗試很多的努力，是為了避免在調查過程中產生誤差。然而，扮演監督者與守門員的督導對於資料品質有很大影響，但他們在調查過程中的角色與影響仍未被仔細地探討。本文藉由質化訪談與觀察的方式蒐集資料，檢視參與2013 年「台灣選舉與民主化調查」計畫督導，在面對面訪問過程中的角色與影響。我們發現督導對於訪員在執行調查過程中，是否願意依照標準化流程進行訪問有所影響。此外，我們認為如果督導願意善盡其職，調查資料品質將會被提升。英文摘要：While survey researchers have made efforts to avoid the occurrence of bias during each step of survey research, the roles and impact of field supervisors have not received enough attention. Field supervisors are the gatekeepers to ensure data quality since they are responsible for monitoring the conduct of interviewers. This paper examines the roles of field supervisors in the execution of survey questionnaires via face-to-face interview method by conducting qualitative interviews and observations with the field supervisors of Taiwan’s Election and Democratization Study, 2013 (TEDS 2013). It is found that the field supervisors play an important role which shapes the interviewers’ attitudes toward the standardized interview protocol. Furthermore, it is concluded that when a supervisor responsibly fulfills his or her duties, the quality of survey data is improved.起始頁-結束頁：111-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
